Lectures on Jurisprudence; or, The Philosophy of Positive Law, Vol. I (John Austin; Robert Campbell, ed., 1885)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of Campbell's 5th edition, vol. I (https://archive.org/details/lecturesonjuris02austgoog).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================


JUEISPRUDEiRGE


OE  *


.THE  PHILOSOPHY  OF  POSITIVE  LAW


By  the  late  JOHN  AUSTIN

or  THE  IHNVB  TOCPLB,  BABRI8TB]l-AT*LAW


FIFTH EDITION, REVISED AND ED|TE»D

By  EOBEET  CA*MPBELL

ADVOCATE  (scotch  BAR),  AMD  OF  LINCOLN'S  INN,  BABRISTER-AT-LAW


Fj  'IN  tWo  VOLS.-VOL.  I.


:]  -  LONDON

|{  '*>OHN  ,MU«E«RAY,  ALBEMAELE STB-EET


1885

Th4  right  of  translation  is  rtttrvtd.


^.


'library:


'l/ER


s^


/j^f/^'


PrinUdhy  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Edinburgh.


ADVEETISEMENT

TO  THIS  EDITION.


It  must  be  gratifying  to  all  who  value  and  appreciate  the
work  of  the  late  John,  Austin  to  know  that  a  new  edition
of  these  Lectures  has  been  urgently  called  for.  The  cir-
cumstance is  significant  not  only  as  a  public  recognition
of  the  merit  of  the  lectures  themselves,  but  also  as  a  proof
of  the  growing  interest  which  is  becoming  awakened  in
this  countly  towards  the  philosophical  study  of  juris-
prudence.

The  present  edition  has  been  prepared  with  the  assist-
ance of  notes  of  the  original  lectures  which  have  been
preserved  by  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill,  and  were  kindly  furnished
by  him  to  the  late  Mrs.  Austin  for  the  purpose  of  a  new
edition  which  she  meditated,  but  did  not  live  to  com-
plete. These  notes  have  now  been  collated  with  the
lectures  as  already  published,  and  are  found  so  accurate
and  full  in  the  parts  where  the  printed  lectures  are  com-
plete that  they  may  be  confidently  relied  on  for  supplying
the  lacunae  which,  owing  to  the  state  of  the  author's  MS.,
were  in  the  former  publication  inevitable.

In  revising  the  six  lectures  which  formed  the  volume
published  in  the  author's  lifetime,  care  has  been  taken  to
make  no  material  alteration  except  in  accordance  with  a
clearly  expressed  intention  of  the  author  contained  in  his
memoranda  preserved  by  the  late  editor,  and  published


vi  Advertisement  to  this  Edition.

in  the  notes  to  the  former  edition.  Where,  however,
such  intention  was  clear  upon  the  face  of  that  text  and
notes,  the  present  editor  has  chosen  rather  to  venture  on
the  attempt  to  embody  it  explicitly  in  the  text,  than  to
leave  the  task  to  each  reader  of  collecting  that  inten-
tion from  the  scattered  passages  and  fragments.  In  the
instances,  confined  to  the  matter  of  a  few  pages,  where
any  such  alteration  has  been  made,  the  nature  and  extent
of  the  alteration  is  explicitly  stated  in  the  foot-notes  by
the  present  editor,  distinguished  by  the  initials  '  R.  C

With  regard  to  the  remaining  Lectures,  free  use  has
been  made  of  the  notes  above  described  (hereafter  shortly
referred  to  as  *  J.  S.  M.'s  notes'),  both  for  purposes  of
arrangement  and  addition^  For  the  purpose  of  arrange-
ment, these  notes  have  often  furnished  the  clue  where,
for  want  of  such  a  clue,  inevitable  misplacement  of  pas-
sages had  taken  place  in  the  former  edition.  Of  the
additions  the  most  important  are  in  the  39th  and  40th
lectures.  The  latter  part  of  the  39th  lecture,  on  the
important  topic  of  *  Codification,'  formed  an  entire  lecture
in  the  course  preserved  in  J.  S.  M.'s  notes.  The  40th
lecture,  which  is  described  in  the  former  edition  as  miss-
ing, is  now  restored,  and  forms  the  leading  chapter  of
one  of  the  author's  main  divisions  of  his  subject.

Neglect  could  not  have  effaced  the  impress  which
John  Austin  and  his  work  has  stamped  upon  the  thought
of  posterity.  But  that  so  much  has  been  recorded  in
explicit  and  substantive  form,  is  due  to  the  ability  and
diligence  of  the  lady  whose  preface  heads  the  following
pages.  Mrs.  Austin  died  at  Weybridge  on  the  8th  of
August  1867,  and  it  may  be  interesting  to  the  reader,
and  can  scarcely  be  inappropriate  here,  to  supplement  the
ensuing  preface  with  a  short  account  of  her  own  life.  In
doing  so  the  editor  takes  the  liberty  of  borrowing  firom
the  pen  of  one  entitled  to  speak  from  long  and  intimate


Advertisement  to  this  Edition.  vii

acquaintance. The  Times  of  the  12th  August  1867  con-
tains the  following  notice  : —

'  It  has  already  been  announced,  in  another  part  of  these
columns,  that  Mrs.  Austin,  widow  of  the  late  John  Austin,  well
known  as  one  of  the  most  eminent  professors  of  the  science  of
jurisprudence  whom  this  country  has  produced,  expired  on  the
8th  inst  at  her  residence  at  Weybridge,  after  an  acute  attack
of  a  malady  of  the  heart,  with  which  she  had  long  been  afflicted.
Although  the  life  of  Mrs.  Austin  was  spent  in  the  active  dis-
charge of  her  private  duties,  and  although  no  one  was  less  dis-
posed to  court  celebrity,  which  she  might  have  enjoyed  in  a  far
larger  degree  had  she  cared  to  seek  it,  she  imdoubtedly  filled  so
considerable  a  place  in  society  and  in  literature  that  some  record
of  so  remarkable  a  woman  may  not  unfitly  appear  in  this  place.
To  the  attractions  of  great  personal  beauty  in  early  Ufe,  and  of
a  grace  of  manner  undiminished  by  years,  Mrs.  Austin  added  a
masculine  intellect  and  a  large  heart.  It  was  not  by  the  play
of  a  vivid  imagination,  or  by  an  habitual  display  of  what  is
termed  wit,  that  she  secured  the  affections  and  the  friendship
of  so  many  of  the  wisest  and  noblest  of  her  contemporaries.
The  power  she  exercised  in  society  was  due  to  the  sterling
qualities  of  her  judgment,  her  knowledge,  her  literary  style —
which  was  one  of  great  purity  and  excellence — and,  above  all,
to  her  cordial  readiness  to  promote  all  good  objects,  to  maintain
high  principles  of  action,  and  to  confer  benefits  on  all  who
claimed  her  aid.

'  Mrs.  Austin  was  descended  from  the  Taylors  of  Norwich,
a  family  which  has  in  several  generations  produced  men  and
women  distinguished  by  literary  and  scientific  ability.  She
was  bom  in  1793,  and  she  received  in  her  father's  house  an
education  of  more  than  common  range.  In  1820  she  married
Mr.  John  Austin,  then  a  barrister  on  the  Norfolk  Circuit,  and
came  to  reside  next  door  to  Mr.  Bentham  and  Mr.  James  Mill,
in  Queen  Square,  Westminster.  Although  that  house  could
boast  of  none  of  the  attractions  of  luxury,  for  the  fortune  of  its
owners  was  extremely  small,  it  soon  collected  within  its  walls
as  remarkable  an  assemblage  of  persons  as  ever  met  in  a  London
drawing-room.  There  might  be  seen — a  dim  and  flitting  figure
of  the  past — Mr.  Bentham  and  his  two  disciples,  James  and
John  Stuart  Mill,  the  Grotes,  the  rising  lawyers  of  that  day
whose  success  has  justified  the  promise  of  their  dawn,  Bicker-
steth,  Erie,  BomUly,  and  Senior ;  and  all  this  wisdom  and  learn-


viii  Advertisement  to  this  Edition,

ing  was  enlivened  in  later  years  by  the  wit  of  Charles  Buller,
by  the  hearty  sallies  of  Sydney  Smith,  by  the  polished  eloquence
of  Jeffrey,  by  the  courteous  amenity  of  Lord  Lansdowne,  and  by
the  varied  resources  of  foreign  visitors  who  found  a  home  by
Mrs.  Austin's  hearth.

'  Mrs.  Austin  never  aspired  to  original  literary  composition.
Except  in  some  of  the  prefaces  to  her  translations,  she  dis-
claimed all  right  to  address  the  public  in  her  own  person.  She,
therefore,  devoted  the  singular  power  of  her  pen  to  reproduce
in  English  many  of  the  best  contemporary  works  of  German
and  French  literature.  Her  translations  &om  the  German,
more  especially,  were  of  the  highest  excellence,  and  among  these
her  version  of  Eanke's  Popes  of  Borne  has  been  commended  by
the  best  judges  as  deserving  to  retain  a  place  in  English  historical
literature.

'  Much  of  Mrs.  Austin's  life  was  spent  abroad,  and  not  a
few  of  the  most  eminent  persons  in  continental  society  enjoyed
her  friendship.  She  had  inhabited  two  German  Universities
for  the  prosecution  of  her  husband's  studies,  after  he  had  quitted
the  bar  for  a  chair  of  jurisprudence  in  the  London  University.
She  had  accompanied  him  to  Malta  when  he  was  sent  as  a
commissioner  to  that  island.  She  remained  for  some  years  in
Paris,  where  her  small  scdon  had  an  intellectual  stamp  and
charm  not  inferior  to  that  of  her  London  circle.  The  revolution
of  1848  drove  the  Austins  back  to  England;  they  established
themselves  in  the  village  of  Weybridge,  and  calmly  anticipated
the  day  when  they  should  rest  side  by  side  in  Weybridge
churchyard.  Mrs.  Austin,  however,  survived  her  husband  for
several  years,  and  that  interval  was  employed  by  her  in  accom-
plishing a  task  which  to  most  women  would  have  seemed  hope-
less. The  greater  part  of  the  Lectures  delivered  by  Professor
Austin  on  the  principles  of  jurisprudence  had  remained  in
manuscript  His  ill-health  led  him  constantly  to  postpone  the
task  of  preparing  them  for  the  press.  After  his  death  his
widow,  assisted  by  one  or  two  legal  friends  on  whose  judgment
she  could  rely,  succeeded  in  completing  the  imperfect  edifice
from  the  fragments  of  it  that  remained ;  and  we  owe  to  Mrs.
Austin,  already  advanced  in  years,  and  struggling  with  a  painful
disease,  th^  production  of  a  work  on  jurisprudence,  which  is
unquestionably  the  noblest  monument  that  could  be  raised  to
the  memory  of  her  husband.'

In  pursuance  of  a  bequest  of  Mrs.  Austin's,  the  books


Advertisement  to  this  Edition.  ix

on  jurisprudence  (chiefly  of  German  authors),  which  had
been  preserved  as  those  of  her  husband's  which  he  had
chiefly  valued  and  studied,  and  many  of  which  are  filled
with  observations  and  analytical  notes  in  his  handwriting,
are  now  placed  in  the  library  of  the  Inner  Temple  in  a
separate  compartment.  As  these  are  the  volumes  which
are  chiefly  denoted  by  the  references  in  the  ensuing
Lectures,  and  as  they  are  there  sometimes  referred  to  by
their  pages,  it  is  important  to  state  the  particular  editions.
A  list  is  accordingly  here  subjoined  of  the  books  forming
the  collection  so  placed  in  the  Inner  Temple  Library.

No.  of
Vols.

Friedrich  Carl  von  Savignj,  Oeschichte  des  romischen  Sechts  im

Mittelalter,  Heidelberg,  1815-29  .  .  .5

„ Das  Becht  des  BesitzeSyGiessen,  1827 .  . 1

„ System  des  hentigen  rdmischen  Bechts  (first  volame  only)

Berlin,  1840 .  .  .1

„ Yom  BOTuf  unsrer  Zeit  fur  Gresetzgebung  and  Bechtswis-

senschaft,  Heidelberg,  1814 .  .1

„  Translation  of  the  last,  by  Abraham  Hayward.  Printed
by  Littlewood  &  Co.,  Old  BaUey,  London  (not  for
sale) .  .  .  .1

Karl  Friedrich  Eichhom,  Einleitung  in  daa  dentsche  Privatrecht,

Gottingen,  1825  .  .  .  .  .1

„ Deutsche  Staats-  und  Bechtsgeschichte,  Gottingen,  1821-23 4
Gnstavus  Hugo,  Jus  Civile  Ante  -  Justinianeum,  with  preface,

Berlin,  1815 .  .  .  .2

„ Lehrbuch  der  Geschichte  des  romischen  Bechts,  Berlin,

1826 1

„  Lehrbuch  eines  dvilistisches  Corsus ;  4  volumes  of  different
editions,  viz.  6*«  Band,  2*«'  Versuch ;  Berlin,  1818 ;  2*«
Band,  4*«  Ausgabe ;  Berlin,  1819  ;  5*«  (sonst)  7*«  Band,
3*^  Ausgabe ;  Berlin,  1820 ;  erster  Band,  7^  Ausgabe ;
Berlin,  1823 .  .  .  .  .4

Oaii  Institutionum  Commentarii  lY.,  ed.  J.  F.  L.  Goschen,  Berlin,

1823. (Full  of  analytical  notes  by  Mr.  Austin)  . 1

A.  F.  J.  Thibaut^  Theorie  der  logischen  Auslegung  des  rdmischen

Bechts,  Altona,  1806 .  .  .  .  .1

A.  F.  J.  Thibaut,  Yersuche  tlber  einzelne  Theile  der  Theorie  des

Bechts,  Jena,  1817 .  .  .  .2

„ Civilistische  Abhandlungen,  Heidelberg,  1814  . 1

„ System  des  Pandekten-Bechts,  Jena,  1828  .  . 2

Dr. Ferdinand  Mackeldey,  Lehrbuch des  heutigen  romischen

Bechts,  Giessen,  1827,  two  vols,  (bound  in  one)  . 2

I


X  Advertisement  to  this  Edition.

No.  of
Volik

Chzistiaii  Friedrich  Muhlenbrach,  Doctrina  Pandectarom,  HaUe,

1827 3

AngoBt Wilhelm Heffter Inatitationem des romischen und

deutschen  Civil-Processes,  Bonn,  1825  .  .3

D.  Christ  Grottlieb  Haubold,  Institntionum  Juris  Bomani  Privati

historico-dogmaticaram  Lineamenta,  Leipzig,  1826
„ Institutionum,  eta,  Epitome,  Leipzig,  1821
Ernst  Spangenberg,  Einleitung  in  das  Sdnusch-Justinianische

Redxtsbuch,  Hanover,  1817 .
And.  W.  Cramer,  De  Yerbonim  significatione  Tituli  Pandeetarom

et  Codicis  cum  variae  lectionibus  Apparatu,  Eoliae,  1811
Heinrich  Moritz  Chalybaus,  Historische  Entwickelung  der  specn-

lativen  Philosophie,  von  Kant  bis  Hegel,  Dresden  and

Leipzig,  1839  ......

Immanuel  Kant,  Kritik  der  reinen  Vemunft,  7th  edition,  Leipzig,

1828.
„ Prolegomena  zu  einer  jeden  kunftigen  Metaphjsik,  die  als

Wissenschaft  wird  aoftreten  konnen,  Riga,  1783
„ Znm  ewigen  Frieden,  Konigsberg,  1796 .
„ Kritik  der  practischen Vemunft, 6th edition,  Leipzig,

1827

„ Die  Metaphysik  der  Sitten,  Konigsberg,  1st  part,  1798,  2nd

part,  1803 ......

F.  Schleiermacher,  Grundlinien  einer  Kritik  der  bisherigen  Sitten-

lehre,  Berlin,  1803 .
Jeremy  Bentham,  Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and

Legislation,  London,  1789 .
„ Constitutional  Code  for  the  use  of  all  Nations  and  aU

Governments  professing  Liberal  Opinions,  voL  L,  London,

1830  .......

„ Fragment  on  Grovemment,  Dublin,  1776  .

„ Draught  of  a  New  Plan  for  the  Organisation  of  the  Judicial

Establishment  in  France,  March,  1790  .
„ Trait6s  de  Legislation  civile  et  p^nale,  publics  en  Fran^ais

par  ]^t  Dumont,  de  Geneve,  d'aprte  les  manuscrits  confi6s

par  Tauteur ......

John  James  Park,  Contre-projet  to  the  Humphreysian  Code,

London,  1828  ......

Sir  James  Mackintosh,  Dissertation  on  the  Progress  of  Ethical

Philosophy,  chiefly  during  the  17th  and  18th  centuries,

with  Pre&ce  by  Wm.  Whewell,  Edinburgh,  1836
James  Mill,  Essays  on,  1.  Government; 2.  Jurisprudence; 3.

Liberty  of  the  Press ;  4.  Prisons  and  Prison  Discipline ;

5.  Colonies ;  6.  Law  of  Nations ;  7.  Education ;  London,

printed  (not  for  sale)  by  J.  Innes,  61  WeUs  Street,

Oxford  Street ......

Friedrich  List,  Das  nationale  System  der  politischen  Oekonomie,

Stuttgart  and  Tubingen,  1841  ....
Allgemeines  Luidrecht  fiir  die  Preussischen  Staaten,  Berlin,  1828


Advertisement  to  this  Edition.


No.  ol
Vols.


AUgemeines  Criminal-Becht  fiir  die  Preussischen  Staaten,  Berlin,

1827

AUgemeine  Deposital-Ordnung  fur  die  Ober-  und  Unter-Gerichte

der  sammtlichen konigUch  -  PreussisGhen Lande, 15th

Septonber,  1783,  Berlin,  1783
AUgemeine  Gerichts-Ordnung  fur  die  Preussiachen  Staaten,  Berlin,

1822  .......

AUgemeine  Hypotheken-Ordnong  fiir  die  gesammten  konigUchen

Staaten,  20th  December,  1783,  Berlin,  1784 .
Instraction  fiir  die  Ober-  and  Untergerichte  zur  Ausfuhmog  der

koniglichen  Yerordnung vom  16**"  Juni  d.  J.  wegen

Einrichtung  des  Hjpotheken-Wesens  in  dem  mit  den

Preossischen  Staaten  vereinigten  Herzogthum  Sachsen,

Berlin,  1820 .  . ' .

Strafgeaetzbnch fur die herzoglich Holstein  -  Oldenbuigischen

Lande,  Oldenburg,  1814
J.  and  W.  Beck,  edition  of  Corpus  Juris  CiyiUs,  Leipzig,  1825-6

(2nd  YoL  in  two  parts)  ....

Joachim  Hoppe,  Commentarii  snccinta  ad  Institutiones  Justin-

ianeas,  Frankfort  and  Leipzig,  1736 .
Ant  MatthaeuB,  De  Griminibus  ad  xlviL  et  xlviii.  Dig.  comment

YesaUae,  1672  .....

J. GottL Heineccius, Bedtationes in elementa  Juris Civilis
.  secundum  ordinem  Institutionum,  Yratialayiae,  1789
„ Antiquitatum  Romanarum  Jurisprud^itiam  iUustrantium

syntagma,  ed.  Haubold,  Frankfort,  1822
John  Beddie,  Historical  Notices  of  the  Boman  Law,  Edinburgh,

1826  .......

L.  A  Wamkonig,  Yersuch  einer  Begriindung  des  Bechts  durch

eine  Yemunftidee,  Bonn,  1819 ....
Johann  Wening,  Ueber  den  Geist  des  Studiums  der  Jurisprudenz,

Landshut»  1814  .....

Eduard Puggaeus,  edition  of  Theodoeiani  Codicis  Fragmenta,

Bonn,  1825.
Angelus  Mains,  Juris  Bomani  Ante-Justinianei  Fragmenta  Yati-

cana  (e  codice  palimpsesto  eruta),  Bome  and  Berlin,  1824
D.  Christoph  Martin,  Lehrbuch  des  Teutschen  gemeinen  Criminal-
Processes,  Gottingen,  1820 ....
Corpus  Juris  Fridericanum,  erstes  Buch. Yon  der  Prozessord-

nung,  Berlin,  1781 .....
R  6.  Niebuhr  and  Eh.  A.  Brandis,  Bheinisches  Museum  fiir

Philologie,  Geschichte  und  griecbische  Philosophic,  Bonn,

1827-8  .  .  .  .  .  .2

F.  C.  von  Savigny,  C.  F.  Eichhorn,  and  T.  F.  L.  Goschen,  Zeit-

schrift  ^  geschichtlichte Bechtswissenschaft, Berlin,

1815-23  .  .  .  .5

Geo. Lud.  Boehmer,  Principia  Juris  Ganonici  speciatim  Juris

Ecclesiastici  publici  et  privati quod per  Germaniam

obtinet^  Gottingen,  1802  .  .  .  . 1


xii  Advertisement  to  this  Edition.

No.  of

VolB.

Paul  J.  Anselm,  Feuerbach,  Betrachtungen  fiber  das  Geschwomen-

Gericht,  Landshut,  1813  .  .1

„ Lehrbuch  des  gemeinen  in  Deutschland  giiltigen  peinUchen

Bechts,  Giessen,  1826.  .  .  .  . 1

M.  C.  F.  W.  Gravell,  Priifang  der  Gutachten  der  konigL Preuss.
Immediat-Justiz-CommiBsion  am  Bhein  iiber  die  dortigen
Justiz-Einrichtangen,  Leipzig,  1819 .  .  .2

Ludwig  Heinrich  Jordan,  Ueber  die  Billigkeit  bey  Entscheidong

der  Bechtsfalle,  Gottingen,  1804  .  .  .2

D.  Vincenz  August  Wagner,  Zeitscluift  fur  osterreichische  Bechts-
gelehrsamkeit  und  politische  G^setzkunde,  Wien,  1830
(12th  part) .  .  .  .  .  .1

C.  F.  Bosshirt,  Lehrbuch  des  Criminalrechts,  Heidelberg,  1821 . 1
G.  J.  A.  Mittermaier,  Ueber  die  Grundfehler  der  Behandlung  des
Criminabechts  in  Lehr-  und  Strafgesetzbiichem,  Bonn,
1819  .  .  .  .  .  .  .1

„ Grundriss  zu  Yorlesungen  iiber  das  Strafverfahren  . 1

Cesare  Beccaria  (Marchese),  Dei  DeUtti  e  delle  Pene,  London,  1 801 1
A.  R  Philippo  du  Trieu,  Manuductio  ad  Logicam,  London,  1826 1
Isaac  Watts,  D.D.,  Logick,  9th  edition,  London,  1740 .  1

Arthur Schopenhauer, Die beiden Grundprobleme  der  Ethik,

Frankfort,  1841  .1

Sir  William  Blackstone,  Commentaries  on  the  Laws  of  England,

15th  edition,  by  Edward  Christian,  London,  1809  . 4

Anonymous,  Bemarks  on  Criminal  Law,  with  a  plan  for  an  im-
proved system,  and  Observations  on  the  Prevention  of
Crime,  London,  HamOton,  Adams  &  Co.,  1834  .  . 1

A  volume  containing,  1.  An  article  from  the  '  Edinburgh  Beview,'
1817,  No.  57,  entitled  'Bentham  on  Codification;'  2.
An  article  from  the  same  Beview,  1843,  entitled  '  Cen-
tralisation,' by  Mr.  Austin;  3.  The  pamphlet  'A  Plea
for  the  Constitution,'  mentioned  in  Mra  Austin's  preface
to  these  Lectures ;  4.  An  article  from  the  '  Edinburgh
Beview,'  October  1863, '  Austin  on  Jurisprudence,'  under-
stood to  be  by  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill .  .1
A  copy  of  the  former  edition  (by  Mrs.  Austin)  of  these  Lectures  . 3
Banke's  History  of  the  Popes,  translated  from  the  German  by

Sarah  Austin,  London,  1866 .  .3

Henry  Boscoe,  Digest  of  the  Law  of  Evidence  in  Criminal  Cases,

London,  1835  .  .  .  .  .  .1

T.  R  Malthus,  Essay  on  Population,  4th  edition,  London,  1807  . 2
Additions  to  the  same,  London,  1817 .  .1

The  American's  Guide,  Philadelphia^  1813  .  .  .1

A  volume  without  a  title-page,  containing  articles  from  a  French
law  review,  the  first  (which  has  been  carefully  noted  on
the  margin  by  Mr.  Austin),  being  entitled  ^  Bemarques
sur  la  definition  et  sur  la  classification  des  choses,'  and
being  a  treatise  suggested  by  a  work  of  M  Poncet,  dated
about  1817 .  .  .  .  .1


Advertisement  to  this  Edition.  xiii

No.  of
Vols.

N.  Faick,  Juristische  Encyklopadie,  Kiel,  1825 .  .  .1

Carl  Yon  Botteck  and  Carl  Welcker,  Staats-Lexikon,  oder  Ency-
klopadie der  Staatswissenschaften,  Altona,  1842  .  1
Sobert  Eden,  Jurispnidentia  Philologica,  Oxford,  1744  .  .1
J.  B.  Sirej,  Les  cinq  Codes,  avec  notes  et  trait^s.  Pans,  1819  1
M.  Biret^  Yocabulaire  des  cinq  Codes,  Paris,  1826  .  .1
M.  Camus  and  M.  Dupin,  Lettres  sur  la  profession  d'Avocat  et

biblioth^ue  choisie,  Paris,  1818  .  .  .2

J.  A  Bogron,  Code  de  Procedure  civile  ezpliqu^,  Paris,  1826

(bound  in  4  parts) .  •  •  •  .2

M.  de  Yattel,  Droit  des  Gens,  Lyon,  1802  •  .  .3

Oeorge  Fr6d6ric  von  Martens,  Precis  du  Droit  des  Gens  modeme
de  TEurope,  fond6  sur  les  traits  et  Tusage,  Gottingen,
1821  .  ,  .  .  .  .  .1

Conrad  J.  Alex.  Baumbach,  Einleitung  in  das  Naturrecht,  Leipzig,

1823  .  .  .1


In  the  following  pages  the  notes  which  belonged  to
the  Author's  work  published  in  his  lifetime  are  dis-
tinguished by  letters  thus  ^*\  The  notes  of  the  late  editor
are  generally  marked  by  the  initials  *  S.  A.'  Those  of  the
present  editor  by  the  initials  *  R  C.


CONTENTS

OF

THE FIRST VOLUME.


Pbeface  (by  Sarah  Aostin) Page  1

OUTLIirB  07  THB  CSOUBSE  07  LEOTUBES 81

THE  PEOVINCE  OF  JURISPEUDENCE  DETERMINED.
Analysis  o7  Leotubes  I.— YI 79


LECTURE  I.

The  purpose  of  the  following  attempt  to  detennine  the  proyince  of  jnrispra-  \y
dence,  stated  or  saggested. — The  manner  of  the  following  attempt  to
detennine  the  province  of  jnrispradence. — Law :  what,  in  most  comprehen-
• sive  literal  sense. — Law  of  God. — Human  Laws. — ^Two  classes :  1st  Laws
set  by  political  superiors ;  2ndly,  Laws  set  by  men  not  political  superiors.
— Objects  improperly,  but  by  close  analogy,  termed  laws. — ^The  two  last
placed  in  one  class  under  tiie  name  positive  morality. — Objects  meta-
phorically termed  laws.— Laws  or  rules,  properly  so  called,  are  a  species
of  commands. — The  meaning  of  the  term  command. — The  meaning  of  ^
the  term  duty, — The  terms  command  and  duty  are  correlative. — The
meaning  of  the  term  aanction. — ^To  the  existence  of  a  command,  a  duty,  I
and  a  sanction,  a  viollent  motive  to  compliance  is  not  requisite. — Rewards
are  not  aandions.  — The  meaning  of  the  term  command^  briefly  re-stated.  —
The  inseparable  connection  of  the  three  terms,  command,  duty,  and  AC
wmdion. — The  manner  of  that  connection. — Lauts  or  rulea  distinguished
from  commands  which  are  occaaiondl  or  parttcutar. — ^The  definition  of  a
law  or  rule,  properly  so  called. — ^The  meaning  of  the  correlative  terms
mperior  and  vnf trior* — Laws  {improperly  so  called)  which  are  not  com-
mands.— Laws  (properly  so  called)  which  may  seem  not  imperative. —
Laws  which  are  not  commands,  enumerated 86

LECTURE  11.

The  connection  of  the  second  with  the  first  lecture. — ^The  Divine  laws,  or  the
laws  of  God. — Of  the  Divine  laws,  some  are  revealed,  and  others  are  unre-
veoM.— Such  of  the  Divine  laws  as  are  revealed. — Such  of  the  Divine
laws  as  are  unrevecUed. — ^What  is  the  index  to  such  of  the  Divine  laws  as
are  unrevealed  ?— The  hypotheses  or  theories  which  regard  the  nature  of


xvi  Contents  of  the  First  Volume.

that  index. — ^The  hypothesiB  or  theory  of  a  moral  sense,  or  innate  praeUcal
principlea  ;  of  a  praetieal  reason  ;  of  a  common  sense,  etc.  etc — ^The  theory
or  hypothesis  of  utility, — ^A  brief  smnmary  of  the  theory  of  utility. — The
following  explanations  of  that  summary  briefly  introduced. — The  true
tendency  of  a  human  action,  and  the  true  test  of  that  tendency. — According
to  the  theoTy  of  utility,  God's  commands  are  mostly  rules. — It  does  not
follow  from  the  theory  of  utility,  that  every  useful  action  is  the  object  of
a  Divine  iigunction  ;  and  every  pernicious  action,  the  object  of  a  Divine
prohibition. — ^A  current  and  specious  objection  to  the  theory  of  utility,
introduced  and  stated. — ^The  two  apt  answers  to  the  foregoing  objection
briefly  introduced. — The  first  answer  to  the  foregoing  objection  stated. —
The  second  answer  to  the  foregoing  objection  briefly  introduced.— If  our
conduct  were  truly  adjusted  to  the  principle  of  general  utility,  our  conduct
would  conform,  for  the  most  part,  to  rules;  rules  which  emanate  from  the
Deity,  and  to  which  the  tendencies  of  human  actions  are  the  guide  or
index. — Theory  snd.  practice  are  inseparable. — If  our  conduct  were  truly
adjusted  to  the  principle  of  general  utility,  our  conduct  would  be  guided,
for  the  most  part,  by  sentiments  associated  with  rules ;  rules  which  emanate
from  the  Deity,  and  to  which  the  tendencies  of  human  actions  are  the  guide
or  index. — If  our  conduct  were  truly  adjusted  to  the  principle  of  general
utility,  our  conduct  would  conform,  for  the  most  part,  to  Divine  rules,
and  would  also  be  guided,  for  the  most  part,  by  sefnlimenJLs  associated  with
those  rules.  But,  in  anomalous  and  excepted  cases  (of  comparatively
rare  occurrence),  our  conduct  would  be  fashioned  directly  on  the  principle
of  general  utility,  or  guided  by  a  coi^'ecture  and  comparison  of  spec^  or
particular  consequences. — The  second  answer  to  the  foregoing  objection,
briefly  resumed Page  lOS

LECTURE  III.

Apology  for  introducing  the  principle  of  utility. — ^The  connection  of  the  third
with  the  second  lecture.— A  second  objection  to  the  theory  of  utility,  '
stated. — An  answer  to  that  second  objection,  introduced. — ^An  objection
to  the  foregoing  answer,  stated. — ^The  foregoing  objection  to  the  foregoing
answer  solved  or  extenuated. — The  second  objection  to  the  theory  of
utility,  together  with  the  foregoing  answer  to  that  second  objection
briefly  re-stated 122


LECTURE  IV.

The  connection  of  the  fourth  with  the  third  lecture. — The  second  objection  to
the  theory  of  utility,  resumed. — A  further  answer  to  that  second  objection.
^  — The  hypothesis  of  a  moral  sense,  briefly  introduced. — 'A  moral  sense,'
*  a  common  sense,'  '  a  moral  instinct,'  '  a  principle  of  reflection  or  con-
science,' 'a  practical  reason,'  'innate  practicid  principles,'  'connate
practical  principles,'  etc.  etc,  are  various  expressions  for  one  and  the  same
hypothesis. — ^The  hypothesis  in  question  involves  two  assumptions. — The
first  of  the  two  assumptions  involved  by  the  hypothesis  in  question
stated  in  general  expressions. — The  foregoing  statement  of  the  first  as-
sumption, exemplified  and  explained  by  an  imaginaxy  case. — ^The  first  of
the  two  assumptions  involved  by  the  hypothesis  in  question,  briefly
re -stated  in  general  expressions. — The  second  of  the  two  assumptions
involved  by  the  hypothesis  in  question,  briefly  stated. — As  an  index  to
God's  commands,  a  moral  sense  were  less  fidlible  than  the  principle  of
general  utility. — But  is  there  any  evidence  to  sustain  the  hypothesis  in


Contents  of  the  First  Volume.


xvu


question  ? — The  hypothesis  in  question  is  disproved  by  the  n^gatiye  state
of  our  consciousness. — The  two  current  arguments  in  fayour  of  the
hypothesis  in  question,  briefly  stated.— The  first  aigument  in  &your  of
the  hypothesis  in  question,  examined. — ^The  second  argument  in  fayour  of
the  hypothesis  in  question,  examined. — A  brief  statement  of  the  fact
whereon  the  second  argument  in  fayour  of  the  hypothesis  in  question  is
founded.— The  fact  accords  exactly  with  the  hypothesis  or  theory  of  utility.
— A  brief  statement  of  the  intermediate  hypothesis  which  is  compounded
of  the  hypothesis  of  utility  and  the  hypothesis  of  a  moral  sense.— The
division  of  positiye  law  into  law  naJturaZ  and  law  positive,  and  the  diyision
of  jus  civile  into  jua  gentium  and  jus  civile,  suppose  or  inyolve  the  inter-
mediate hypothesis  which  is  compounded  of  the  hypothesis  of  utility  and
the  hypothesis  of  a  moral  sense.— The  foregoing  disquisitions  on  the  index
to  God's  commands,  closed  with  an  endeavour  to  clear  the  theory  of
utility  from  two  current  though  gross  misconception& — ^The  two  miscon-
ceptions stated. — The  first  misconception  examined.— The  second  mis*
conception  examined Page  140


LECTURE  V.

Laws  proper  or  properly  so  called,  and  laws  improper  or  improperly  so  called.
— Analogy  and  metaphor  as  used  in  common  parlance  defined. — Laws  im-
proper are  of  two  kiiids :  1.  Laws  closely  analogous  to  laws  proper ;  2.
Laws  metaphorical  or  figurative. -Division  of  laws  proper,  and  of  such
improper  laws  as  are  closely  analogous  to  the  proper. — Distribution  of
laws  proper,  and  of  such  improper  laws  as  are  closely  analc^us  to  the
proper,  under  three  capital  classes:  1.  The  law  of  God,  or  the  laws  of
God ;  2.  Positive  law,  or  positive  laws ;  8.  Positive  morality,  rules  of
positive  morality,  or  positive  moral  rules. — Digression  to  explain  the\
expressions  positive  law  and  positive  morality, — Explanation  of  the
following  expressions,  viz.  science  of  jurisprudence  and  science  of  positive
morality;  science  of  ethics  or  deontology,  science  of  legislation  and  science
^fiumiZff. —Meaning  of  the  epithet  good  or  bad  as  applied  to  a  human
law. — ^Meaning  of  the  epithet  good  as  applied  to  the  law  of  God. — ^The
expression  law  of  nature,  or  natural  law,  has  two  disparate  meanings.
It  signifies  the  law  of  God,  or  a  portion  of  positive  law  and  positive
morality. — The  connection  of  the  present  (the  fifth)  lecture  with  the  first,
second,  third,  fourth,  and  sixth. — The  essentials  of  a  law  properly  so  ^
called,  together  with  certain  consequences  which  those  essentials  import
— ^The  laws  of  God,  and  positive  laws,  are  laws  properly  so  called. — The
generic  character  of  positive  moral  rules. — Of  positive  moral  rules,  some
are  laws  proper,  but  others  are  laws  improper.  The  positive  moral  rules,
which  are  laws  properly  so  called,  are  commands. — Laws  set  by  men,  as
private  persons,  in  pursuance  of  legal  rights. — The  positive  moral  rules,
which  are  laws  improperly  so  called,  are  laws  set  or  imposed  by  general
opinion. — A  law  set  or  imposed  by  general  opinion,  is  merely  the  opinion
or  sentiment  of  an  indetermiruUe  body  of  persons  in  regard  to  a  kind  of
conduct — A  brief  statement  of  the  analogy  between  a  law  proper  and  a
law  set  or  imposed  by  general  opinion. — Distinction  between  a  determinate
and  an  indeterminate  body  of  single  or  individual  persons. — Laws  set  by
general  opinion,  or  opinions  or  sentiments  of  indeterminate  bodies,  are  the
only  opinions  or  sentiments  that  have  gotten  the  name  of  laws.  But  an
opinion  or  sentiment  held  or  felt  by  an  individual,  or  by  all  the  members
of  a  certain  aggregate,  may  be  as  closely  analogous  to  a  law  proper  as  the
opinion  or  sentiment  of  an  indeterminate  body. — The  foregoing  distribu-


'  I


xviii  Contents  of  the  First  Volume,

tion  of  laws  proper,  and  of  auch  improper  laws  as  the  closely  analogous  to
the  proper,  briefly  recapitulatecL — ^The  sanctions,  proper  and  improper,  by
which  those  laws  are,  respectively  enforced ;  the  duties,  proper  and  im-
proper, which  those  laws  respectively  impose ;  and  the  rights,  proper  and
improper,  which  those  laws  respectively  confer. — ^The  law  of  God,  positive
law,  and  positive  morality,  sometimes  eoincide,  sometimes  do  not  coincide,
and  sometimes  eonftieL — ^The  acts  and  forbearances,  which,  according  to
the  theory  of  utility,  are  objects  of  the  law  of  God.;  and  other  acts  and
forbearances,  which,  according  to  the  same  theory,  ought  to  be  objects
respectively  of  positive  morality  and  law. — ^The  foregoing  distribution  of
laws  proper,  and  of  such  improper  laws  as  are  closely  analogous  to  the
proper,  tallies,  in  the  main,  with  a  division  of  laws  which  is  given  inci-
dentally by  Locke  in  his  '  Essay  on  Human  Understanding.' — ^Laws  meta-
phorical or  figurative. — ^The  common  and  negative  nature  of  laws  of  the
class. — The  common  and  negative  nature  of  laws  metaphorical  or  figura-
tive, shewn  by  examples. — Laws  metaphorical  or  figurative  are  often
blended  and  confounded  with  laws  imperative  and  proper. — Ph3r8icftl  or
natural  sanctions. — In  strictness,  decluatory  law,  laws  repealing  laws,
and  laws  of  imperfect  obligation  (in  the  sense  of  the  Roman  jurists),
ought  to  be  classed  respectively  with  laws,  metaphorical  or  figurative,  and
rules  of  positive  morality. — ^Note  on  prevailing  tendency :  1st,  to  confound
positive  law  with  the  science  of  legislation,  and  positive  morality  with
deontology:  Examples  from  Blackstone,  Paley,  the  writers  on  inter-
national law :  2ndly,  to  confound  positive  law  with  positive  morality,  and
both  with  legislation  and  deontology ;  Examples  from  the  Roman  jurists
and  Lord  Mansfield Page  167


LECTURE  VI.

The  connection  of  the  sixth  lecture  with  the  first,  second,  third,  fourth,  and
y  '  fifth. — ^The  distinguishing  marks  of  sovereignty  and  independent  political
society. — ^The  relation  of  sovereignty  and  subjection. — Strictly  speaking,
the  sovereign  portion  of  the  society,  and  not  the  society  itself,  is  inde-
pendent, sovereign,  or  supreme. — In  order  that  a  given  society  may  form
a  society  political  and  independent,  the  two  distinguishing  marks  which
are  mentioned  above  must  unite. — A  society  independent  but  natural. —
Society  formed  by  the  intercourse  of  independent  political  societies.— A
society  political  but  subordinate. — ^A  society  not  political,  but  forming  a
limb  or  member  of  a  society  political  and  independent. — ^The  definition  of
,  the  abstract  term  indqsendent  polUiedl  society  (including  the  definition  of
the  correlative  term  sovereignty)  cannot  be  rendered  in  expressions  of
perfectly  precise  import,  and  is  therefore  a  fallible  test  of  specific  or
particular  cases. — In  order  that  an  independent  society  may  form  a
society  political,  it  must  not  fall  short  of  a  number  which  cannot  be
fixed  with  precision,  but  which  may  be  called  considerable,  or  not  ex-
tremely minute. — Certain  of  the  definitions  of  the  term  sovereignty,  and
of  the  implied  or  correlative  term  independent  political  society,  which
have  been  given  by  writers  of  celebrity. — The  ensuing  portion  of  the
present  lecture  is  concerned  with  the  following  topics :— 1.  The  forms  of
supreme  government ;  2.  The  limits  of  sovereign  power ;  8.  The  origin
of  government,  or  the  origin  of  political  society. — ^The  forms  of  supreme
government. — Every  supreme  government  is  a  monarchy  (properly  so
called),  or  an  aristocracy  (in  the  generic  meaning  of  the  expression).  In
other  words,  it  is  a  government  of  one,  or  a  government  of  a  number. —
Of  such  distinctions  between  aristocracies  as  are  founded  on  differences


Contents  of  the  First  Volume.  xix

between  the  proportions  which  the  number  of  the  sovereign  body  may
beax  to  the  number  of  the  community. — Of  such  distinctions  between
aiistoeracies  as  are  founded  on  differences  between  the  modes  wherein
the  soyereign  number  may  share  the  soyereign  powers. — Of  such  aristo-
cracies as  are  styled  IvmiUd  monarehies. — Various  meanings  of  the
following  terms: — 1.  The  term  'soyereign/  or  *the  sovereign;'  2.  The
term  'republic/  or  'commonwealth  /  8.  The  term  'state,*  or  *  the  state ;'
4«  The  term  'nation.' — Of.  the  exercise  of  sovereign  powers  by  a  monarch
or  sovereign  body,  through  political  subordinates  or  delegates  represent*
ing  their  sovereign  author.  Of  the  distinction  of  sovereign,  and  other
political  powers  into  such  as  are  legislative,  and  such  as  are  exeeuUve  or
administrative.  The  true  natures  of  the  communities  or  governments
which  are  styled  by  writers  on  positive  international  law  hcUf  sovereign
states. — The  nature  of  a  eomposite  state  or  a  supreme  federal  government  :
with  the  nature  of  a  system  of  confederated  states,  or  a  perTnanent  eon*
federacy  of  supreme  govemtneTUs.— The  limits  of  sovereign  power. — ^The
essential  difference  of  a  positive  law.—It  follows  from  the  essential  dif-
ference of  a  positive  law,  and  from  the  nature  of  sovereignty  and
independent  political  society,  that  the  power  of  a  monarch  properly  so
called,  or  the  power  of  a  sovereign  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign
capacity,  is  incapable  of  legal  limitation. — Attempts  of  sovereigns  to
oblige  themselves,  or  to  oblige  the  successors  to  their  sovereign  powers.
— The  meanings  of  the  epithet  uneonstUutional,  as  it  is  contradistin-
guished to  the  epithet  iUegal,  and  as  it  is  applied  to  conduct  of  a
monarch,  or  to  conduct  of  a  sovereign  number  in  its  coU^ate  and
sovereign  capacity.— The  meaning  of  Hobbes's  proposition,  that  'no  law
can  be  unjust'— JiMf  or  ui^'ust,  justice  or  vi^ustice,  is  a  term  of  relative
and  varying  import — Considered  severally,  tiie  members  of  a  sovereign
body  are  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  body,  and  may  therefore  be
l^gsdly  bound,  even  as  members  of  the  body,  by  laws  of  which  it  is  the
author.— The  nature  of  political  or  civil  liberty,  together  with  the  sup-
posed difference  between  free  and  despotic  governments. — ^Why  it  has
been  doubted,  that  the  power  of  a  sovereign  is  incapable  of  legal  limita-
tion.— ^The  proposition  is  asserted  expressly  by  renowned  political  writere
of  opposite  parties  or  sects. — A  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a
sovereign  government  of  a  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign
capacity,  has  no  legal  rights  (in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term)
against  its  own  n^'ecto. —  ' Right  is  might.'— 'Right'  as  meaning
•faculty,'  and  'right'  as  meaning  'justice.'— 'Right'  as  meaning
'faculty,'  and  'right'  as  meaning  ' law. '- From  an  appearance  of  a
sovereign  government  before  a  tribunal  of  its  own,  we  cannot  infer  that
the  government  lies  under  legal  duties,  or  has  legal  rights  against  its
own  subjects. — Though  a  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign
government  of  a  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  cannot
have  legal  rights  against  its  own  subjects,  it  may  have  a  legal  right
against  a  subject  or  subjects  of  another  sovereign  government —The
origin  or  causes  of  political  government  and  society.— The  proper  purpose
or  end  of  political  government  and  society,  or  the  purpose  or  end  for  which
they  ought  to  exist  The  position  'that  every  government  continues
through  the  people's  consent,*  and  the  position  'that  every  government
arises  through  the  people's  conseni,*  examined  and  explained. — The
hypothesis  of  the  original  covenant  or  the  fundamental  civil  p<xct.— The
distinction  of  sovereign  governments  into  governments  de  jure  and  ''
governments  de  facto.  — Gfeneral  statement  of  the  province  of  jurispru-  ^
dence  as  defined  in  the  foregoing  lectures Page  219


XX  Contents  of  the  First  Volume.


ANALYSIS  OF  PERVADING  NOTIONS.


LECrrURE  XII.

Recapitulation. — Natural  and  moral  rights,  or  rights  which  are  merely
sanctioned  religiously  or  morally. — Ideas,  the  analysis  of  which  is
inevitably  involved  in  that  of  right  Obligations  or  duties  are  positive
or  negative. — Forbearances  cannot  be  styled  with  propriety  fiegative  ser-
vices, — Obligations  are  relative  or  absolute. — Rights  imply  persons,
things^  ocfo,  and  forbearances. — Persons,  natural  or  fictitious. — Meaning
of  'physical  person,'  or  'person'  simply. — *  Person  *  frequentiy  synony-
mous with  'status'  or  'condition.* — Fictitious  or  legal  persons . Page  34S


LECTURE  XIIL

Recapitulation. — Meaning  of 'thing.' — Distinctions  between  things. — ^Things
signifying  acts  and  forbearances. — Corporeal  and  incorporeal  things.—
Distinction  between  j'tera  rerum  and  ivam  personarum  briefly  introduced  .  367


LECTURE  XIV.

Persons  and  things. — Persons  and  things  distinguished. — Events. — Events
are  simple  or  complex. — Import  of  '&ct'  and  'incident' — ^Acts  and  for-
bearances.— ^Act — Forbearance. — Introduction  to  the  distinction  between
jus  in  r^m  and  jus  in  personam, — Distinction  between  jus  in  rem  and
jus  in  personam, — Illustrations  of  the  distinction  between  jus  in  rem  and
jus  in  personam, — Property. — Servitus. — Examples  of  rights  in  personam :
— 1st.  A  right  arising  out  of  a  conttxiet ;  2ndly.  A  right  founded  on  an
iiy'ury 864


LECTURE  XV.

Further  illustrations  of  the  distinction  between  jus  in  rem  and  jus  in  per-
sonam^— Jus  in  rem  restricted  by  certain  writers  to  jus  in  rem  over  or  in
hthings. — Rights  in  rem  over  persons. — A  person  who  is  the  swbject  of  jus
'I  in  rem  is  placed  in  a  position  like  the  position  of  a  thing  which  is  the
''Subject  of  a  similar  right. And  may  be  styled  (by  analogy)  a  thing, —
Jus  realiter  personale. — Rights  in  rem,  without  determinate  subjects .  881


LECTURE  XVL

Purpose  and  order  of  the  present  lecture. — Common  nature  of  rights. — Certain
definitions  of  a  right  examined 898


LECTURE  XVII.

Import  of  'right'  in  abstract, — Duties  are  relative  or  absolute. — Absolute
duties  defined  by  exhaustive  enumeration.  Order  in  which  I  shall  con-
sider absolute  duties  in  the  present  lecture. — Self-regarding  duties  and
duties  not  regarding  man,  regard  persons  generally  in  respect  of  their


Contents  of  the  First  Volume.  xxi

remote  purpose. — Relative  duties  regard  persons  generally  in  respect  of
their  remote  purpose. — Duties  towards  persons  generally  are,  indirectly,
duties  towards  determinate  persons. — Jus  publicum  et  privatum. — Civil
iiguries  and  crimes. — Difference  between  relative  and  absolute  duties,
etc — Distinctions  between  absolute  duties Page  400


LECTURE  XVIII.

Brief  review  of  preceding  lectures. — Obligation,  injury,  and  sanction  imply
motive,  will,  intention,  negligence,  and  rashness. — ^Apology  for  inquiry
into  'motive,'  'will,*  etc.— The  will.— Dominion  of  the  will  limited  to
bodily  organs. — Dominion  of  the  will  limited  to  8<mie  bodily  organs. —
Dominion  of  the  will  extends  not  to  the  mind. — Volitions,  what  ?  Acts,
what  ?— Names  of  acts  comprise  certain  of  their  consequences. — Confusion
of  will  and  intention. — Motive  and  will. — Motives  to  volitions. — Motives
to  motives. — Why  the  will  has  attracted  so  much  attention ;  and  been
thought  mysterious 407


*  LECTURE  XIX.

Volitions  and  motives. — ^Acts. — Internal  acts. — Intention  as  regarding  present
acts,  or  the  consequences  of  present  acts. — Confusion  of  will  and  intention.
— A  consequence  of  an  act  may  not  be  intended. — An  intended  conse-
quence of  an  act  may  be  wished  or  noL — ^And  if  wished,  it  may  be  wished
as  an  end^  or  as  a  mecm, — Consequence  of  an  act  wished  as  an  efnd. — Con-
currence of  motive  and  intention. — Exemplifications  of  the  three  foregoing
suppositions. — Of  the  first  supposition. — Of  the  second  supposition. —
Of  the  third  supposition. — Forbearances  are  intended,  but  not  willed .  418


LECTURE  XX.

Acts  are  wUled  and  intended :  consequences  are  intended, — Forbearances  are
intended, — Motives  to  forbearances. — Forbearances  distinguished  from
omissions. — Ambiguities  of  the  terms  'forbearance'  and  'omission;'
commit  and  omit. — Negligence. — Heedlessness. — ^Negligence  and  heed-
lessness compared. — Rashness. — Negligence,  heedlessness,  and  rashness,
likened  and  distinguished.— Dolus.— Culpa.— Malice.— Dolus  and  culpa.
— Roman  law 425


LECTURE  XXI.

Intentions  coupled  with  volitions  and  acts. — Present  intention  to  do  a  future
act,  distinguished  from  an  act  with  a  present  volition  and  intention. —
Present  intention  to  do  a  future  act,  what  ? — DistiDguished  from  a  simple
desire  of  the  object — Present  intention  to  do  a  future  act,  re-stated. —
Confusion  of  wUl  and  intention. — Intending  a  future  forbearance. — ^An
intended  consequence  of  an  intended  future  act,  is  not  always  desired. —
Intentions  to  do  future  acts  are  certain  or  uncertain ;  are  matured  or
undigested. — A  amnlium,  or  compassing. — ^Attempts. — Intention  of  legis-
lator, etc 435


xxii  Contents  of  the  First  Volume.


LECTURE  XXII.

\  Duty. — Injury. — Sanction. — Obligation  is  obnoxiousness.  to  a  sanction. —
\  Sanction  and  obligation  distingoished. — Obligation  regards  the  future. —
Sanctions  operate  upon  the  desires, — An  obligation  to  toUl  not  impossible.
— An  obligation  to  desire  not  possible. — Supposed  conflict  of  desire  and
will. — Effect  of  obligation  in  extinguishing  desires  which  urge  to  a  breach
of  duty Page  448


LECTURE  XXIII.

/ Physical  compulsion  or  restraint  distinguished  from  that  which  is  imported
I  by  duty  or  obligation. — Obligations  to  suffer  and  not  to  suffer. — Passion

I  or  suffering,  what  t  is  the  ttUimcUe  sanction  of  every  obligation. — Suffer-

ing may  be  inflicted  without  physical  compulsion  or  restraint  .  452


LECTURE  XXIV.

Immediate  and  remote  objects  of  duties. — Forbearances,  omissions,  or  acts
which  are  inconsistent  with  the  remote  purposes  of  duties. — Import  of
the  cognate  expressions  wrong,  guilt,  imputability  =  breach  of  duty. —
Intention,  n^ligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,  is  of  the  essence  ol
injury,  guilt,  imputability,  or  breach  of  duty.— But  is  not  of  itself  injury,
guilt,  etc.-^Brief  analysis  of  negligence  and  its  modes ;  of  intention  re-
garding the  present,  and  intention  regarding  the  future. — Whether  an
intention,  neither  consummate  nor  followed  by  an  attempt,  could  be  made
the  object  of  a  negative  obligation  ? — Restriction  of  'guilt'  or  *  culpa '  to
intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,  as  the  eause  of  action,
forbearance,  or  omission. — Injury,  etc.  is  the  contradictory  of  duty. —
Corpus  delicti. — Further  remarks  on  the  import  of  the  word  '  dolus.' —
Ambiguity  of 'Schuldner,' 'Reus,' etc. 467


LECTURE  XXV.

Intention  or  inadvertence  is  of  the  essence  of  iigury. — ^An  absurdity  in  English
law  from  inattention  to  this  principle. — Morct, — Resume  the  principle,
that  intention  or  izLadvertence  is  of  the  essence  of  injury. — Grounds  of
exemption  from  liability,  mostly  reducible  to  the  principle  last  stated.
1.  Casus  or  accident. — 2.  Ignorance  or  error. — The  objection  to  ex  pott
/ado  laws  deducible  from  the  same  principle 468


LECTURE  XXVL

Recapitulation. — Consideration  of  the  exemptions  from  liability  resumed. — 8.
Infancy  and  Insanity. — Digression  on  the  different  kinds  of  prossumptiones
juris. — 4.  Drunkenness  (in  some  systems  of  law).~6.  Sudden  and  furious
anger  (in  some  systems). — An  illogical  distinction  in  Roman  law  between
delicts  and  quasi-delicts. — Grounds  of  exemption  not  depending  on  the
foregoing  principle.  1.  Physical  compulsion.— 2.  Extreme  terror.— The
so-called  exemptions  not  properly  exemptions,  but  cases  to  which  the  idea
of  obligation  does  not  apply  488


Contents  of  the  First  Volume.  xxiii


LECTURE  XXVII.

Correction  of  statements  in  last  lecture :  Anger,  p.  496,  wnlt, — Statement  as
to  acquisitive  prescription,  p.  493,  wnlt. — Sanctions  civil  and  criminaL —
Public  and  Private  wrongs. — Laws  sometimes  sanctioned  by  nullities.—
Vicarious  punishment. — ^Various  meanings  and  etymology  of  the  word
•sanction' Page  499


PREFACE.'

(By  SARAH  AUSTIN.)


It  seems  necessary  that  I  should  endeavour  to  justify  the  step
I  have  taken,  in  bringing  before  the  public  writings  of  such  a
nature  and  value  as  those  of  my  deceased  husband.  I  have  also
to  explain  why  I  have  determined  to  publish  them  in  the  incom-
plete and  unfinished  state  in  which  he  left  them.  The  latter'
decision  was,  indeed,  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  former;
since  I  could  hardly  be  guilty  of  the  irreverence  and  presump-
tion of  attempting  to  correct  or  alter  what  he  had  written.

I  respectfully  oflfer  these  explanations  to  the  few  to  whom
it  is  fit  that  any  mention  of  such  a  man  should  be  made ;  and
I  beg  them  not  to  think  me  so  careless  of  his  fame  as  to  have
lightly  and  unadvisedly  undertaken  to  do  what  might  lower  the
reputation  which  (almost  in  spite  of  himself)  he  has  left  among
them.  To  their  judgment  and  candour  I  commend  these  im-
perfect remains.  Whatever  defects  they  may  find,  let  them  be
assured  he  would  have  found  more  and  greater.

It  is  well  known  to  aU  who  are  interested  in  the  science
of  Jurisprudence,  that  the  volume  of  which  the  present  is  a
republication  has  for  many  years  been  out  of  print.  From  the
time  this  was  known,  earnest  and  flattering  entreaties  that  he
would  publish  a  second  edition  reached  him  from  various
quarters. They  were  sufl&cient  to  stimulate  any  vanity  but  his.

Unfortunately  they  came  too  late.  The  public,  or  that
small  portion  of  it  which  interests  itself  in  such  subjects,  did
not  discover  the  deep  and  clear  stream  of  legal  science  within
its  reach,  till  its  waters  had  been  diverted  into  other  channels,
or  had  disappeared  altogether.  In  proportion  as  the  demand
for  the  book  became  urgent^  more  years  and  more  occupations

^  This  preface,  ending  with  the  divi-  What  follows  the  division  on  p.  25  be-

sion  on  p.  25,  belongea  to  the  edition  longed  to  the  edition  of  the  remaining

or  reprint  published  in  1861,  of  'The  lectores,  published  in  1863,  forming  the

Province  of  Jorispradence  determined.'  sequel  to  the  volume  published  in  1861.

VOL.  I.  B


2  Preface.

were  interpcNsed  between  the  state  of  mii^d  in  which  it  was
written,  and  that  in  which  this  demand  found  him.  Above  all,
the  hope,  the  animation,  the  ardour  with  which  he  had  entered
upon  his  career  as  a  teacher  of  Jurisprudence,  had  been  blighted
by  indifference  and  neglect ;  and,  in  a  temper  so  little  sanguine
as  his,  they  could  have  no  second  spring.

It  was  not  my  intention  to  enter  into  the  particulars  of  a
life  of  which  there  is  little  but  disappointment  and  suffering  to
relate,  and  which,  from  choice  as  much  as  from  necessity,  was
passed  in  the  shade.  Nothing  could  be  more  repugnant  to  a
man  of  his  proud  humility  and  fastidious  reserve  than  the  sub-
mitting his  private  life  to  the  inspection  of  the  public ;  nor  would
it  consist  with  my  reverence  for  him  to  ask  for  the  admiration
(even  if  I  were  sure  of  obtaining  it)  of  a  world  with  which  he
had  so  little  in  common.

But  as,  influenced  by  considerations  which  have  appeared
to  me,  and  to  those  of  his  friends  best  qualified  to  advise,  con-
clusive, I  have  determined  to  republish  the  following  volume,
and  to  publish  the  rest  of  the  series  of  Lectures  of  which  those
herein  contained  form  a  part,  it  appears  necessary  to  give  some
explanation  of  the  state  in  which  he  left  them ;  to  tell  why  the
work  which  the  Author  meditated  was  never  completed ;  why
the  portion  already  in  print  was  so  long  and  so  obstinately
withheld  from  the  public ;  and,  lastly,  what  has  determined  me
to  take  upon  myself  the  arduous  task  of  preparing  these  materials
for  the  press.  In  order  to  do  this,  I  must  relate  those  passages
of  his  life  which  are  immediately  connected  with  the  course  of
his  studies;  and  also,  though  with  infinite  pain,  must  touch
upon  the  qualities,  or  the  events,  which  paralysed  his  efforts  for
the  advancement  of  legal  science  and  the  diffusion  of  important
truths.

If  I  dwell  longer  upon  his  personal  character  than  may  be
thought  absolutely  necessary  to  my  purpose,  my  apology,  or  my
justification,  will  be  found  in  the  words  of  a  writer  who  under-
stood and  appreciated  him : —

'His  personal  character  was,  or  ought  to  have  been,  more
instructive  in  these  days  than  his  intellectual  vigour.  He  lived
and  died  a  poor  man.  He  was  little  known  and  little  appre-
ciated, nor  did  he  seek  for  the  rewards  which  society  had  to
give ;  but  in  all  that  he  said  and  did  there  was  a  dignity  and
magnanimity  which  conveyed  one  of  the  most  impressive  lessons
that  can  be  conceived  as  to  ^he  true  nature  and  true  sources  of
greatness.'


Preface.  3

At  a  very  early  age  Mr.  Austin  entered  the  army,  in  which
he  served  for  five  years;  a  fact  which  would  have  no  place
here,  but  for  the  permanent  traces  it  lefb  in  his  character  and
sentiments.  Though  he  quitted  it  for  a  profession  for  which
his  talents  appeared  more  peculiarly  to  fit  him,  he  retained  to
the  end  of  his  life  a  strong  sympathy  with,  and  respect  for,  the
military  character,  as  he  conceived  it  The  high  and  punctilious
sense  of  honour,  the  chivalrous  tenderness  for  the  weak,  the
generous  ardour  mixed  with  reverence  for  authority  and  dis-
cipline, the  frankness  and  loyalty,  which  were,  he  thought,  the
distinguishing  characteristics  of  a  true  soldier,  were  also  his
own;  perhaps  even  more  pre-eminently,  than  the  intellectual
gifts  for  which  he  was  so  remarkable.

Mr.  Austin  was  called  to  the  Bar  in  1818.  If  confidence
in  his  powers  and  prospects  could  have  been  given  to  so  sensitive
and  fastidious  a  mind  by  the  testimony  and  the  predictions  of
others,  he  would  have  entered  on  his  career  with  an  undoubting
and  buoyant  spirit ;  for  every  one  of  the  eminent  lawyers  in
whose  several  chambers  he  studied,  spoke  of  his  talents  and  his
application  as  unequalled,  and  confidently  predicted  for  him  the
highest  honours  of  his  profession.

But  he  was  never  sanguine.  Even  in  the  days  when  hope
is  most  flattering,  he  never  took  a  bright  view  of  the  future ;
nor  (let  me  here  add)  did  he  ever  attempt  to  excite  brilliant
anticipations  in  the  person  whom  he  invited  to  share  that  future
with  him.  With  admirable  sincerity,  from  the  very  first,  he
made  her  the  confidante  of  his  forebodings.  Four  years  before
his  marriage,  he  concluded  a  letter  thus : — ' .  .  .  and  may  God,
above  all,  strengthen  us  to  bear  up  under  those  privations  and
disappointments  with  which  it  is  but  too  probable  we  are
destined  to  contend !'  The  person  to  whom  such  language  as
this  was  addressed  has,  therefore,  as  little  right  as  she  1^  in-
clination to  complain  of  a  destiny  distinctly  put  before  her  and
deUberately  accepted.  Nor  has  she  ever  been  able  to  imagine
one  so  consonant  to  her  ambition,  or  so  gratifying  to  her  pride,
as  that  which  rendered  her  the  sharer  in  his  honourable  poverty.

I  must  be  permitted  to  say  this,  that  he  may  not  be  thought
to  have  disappointed  expectations  he  never  raised ;  and  that  the
effect  of  what  I  have  to  relate  may  not  be  enfeebled  by  the
notion  that  it  is  the  querulous  expression  of  personal  disappoint-
ment Whatever  there  may  be  of  complaint  in  this  brief
narrative,  is  excited  by  the  recollection  of  great  qualities  un-


4  Preface.

appreciated,  great  powers  which  found  no  congenial  employment,
great  ardour  for  the  good  of  mankind,  chilled  by  indifference
and  neglect ;  by  the  recollection  of  the  struggles  and  pangs  of  an
over-scrupulous  and  over-sensitive  spirit,  vainly  trying  to  estab-
lish, alone  and  unsustained,  the  claims  of  a  science  which  he
deemed  so  important  to  mankind.  Nor  is  the  sorrow  of  an
immeasurable  private  loss  so  engrossing  as  not  to  be  enhanced
by  regrets  at  the  loss  sustained  by  the  world.

It  became  in  no  long  time  evident  to  one  who  watched  him
with  the  keenest  anxiety,  that  he  would  not  succeed  at  the  Bar.
His  health  was  delicate :  he  was  subject  to  feverish  attacks  which
left  him  in  a  state  of  extreme  debility  and  prostration ;  and  as
these  attacks  were  brought  on  by  either  physical  or  moral  causes,
nothing  could  be  worse  for  him  than  the  hurry  of  practice,  or
the  close  air  and  continuous  excitement  of  a  court  of  law.

And  if  physically  unfitted  for  the  profession  he  had  chosen,
he  was  yet  more  disqualified  by  the  constitution  of  his  mind.
Nervous  and  sensitive  in  the  highest  degree,  he  was  totally
deficient  in  readiness,  in  audacity,  in  self-complacency,  and  in
reliance  on  the  superiority  of  which  he  was  conscious^  but  which
oppressed  rather  than  animated  him.  He  felt  that  the' weapons
with  which  he  was  armed,  though  of  the  highest  possible  temper,
were  inapplicable  to  the  warfare  in  which  he  was  engaged ;  and
he  gradually  grew  more  and  more  self-exacting  and  self-distrust-
ing. He  could  do  nothing  rapidly  or  imperfectly ;  he  could  not
prevail  upon  himself  to  regard  any  portion  of  his  work  as  insig-
nificant ;  he  employed  a  degree  of  thought  and  care  out  of  all
proportion  to  the  nature  and  importance  of  the  occasion.  These
habits  of  mind  were  fatal  to  his  success  in  business.

Indeed,  even  before  his  call  to  the  Bar,  he  had  detected  in
himself  the  germ  of  the  peculiar  disposition  of  mind  which
disqualified  him  for  keeping  pace  with  the  current  of  human
affairs.  In  a  letter  addressed  to  his  future  wife,  dated  1817,
when  he  was  still  in  the  chambers  of  an  Equity  Draftsman,  he
wrote,  *  I  almost  apprehend  that  the  habit  of  drawing  will  in  no
short  time  give  me  so  exclusive  and  intolerant  a  taste  (as  far,  I
mean,  as  relates  to  my  own  productions)  for  perspicuity  and
precision,  that  I  shall  hardly  venture  on  sending  a  letter  of  much
purpose,  even  to  you,  unless  it  be  laboured  with  the  accuracy  and
circumspection  which  are  requisite  in  a  deed  of  conveyance.'

But '  the  habit  of  drawing '  did  not  create,  though  it  might
develope,  this  tendency  to  exact  from  himself  a  degree  of  per-
fection incompatible  with  promptitude  and  dispatch: He  was,


Preface,  5

as  he  says,  intolerant  of  any  imperfection ;  and  so  long  as  he
could  descry  the  smallest  error  or  ambiguity  in  a  phrase,  he
recast  it  again  and  again  till  his  accurate  mind  could  no  longer
suggest  an  objection  or  a  difficulty.  This  was  not  the  temper
which  could  accommodate  itself  to  the  imperious  demands  of
business.  After  a  vain  struggle,  in  which  his  health  and  spirits
suffered  severely,  he  gave  up  practice  in  the  year  1825.

In  the  year  1826,  the  University  of  London  (now  University
College)  was  established.  From  the  character  and  objects  of
this  institution  it  appeared  to  hold  out  a  hope,  that  not  only
classes  of  persons,  but  branches  of  science,  excluded  from  the
ancient  universities,  might  find  admittance  and  fostering  in
this.  Among  the  sciences  which  it  was  proposed  to  teach,  was
Jurisprudence,  and  Mr.  Austin  was  chosen  to  fill  that  Chair.
As  soon  as  he  was  appointed,  he  resolved  to  go  to  Germany,  in
order  to  study  on  the  spot  what  had  been  done,  and  was  doing,
by  the  great  jurists  of  that  country,  for  whom  he  had  already
conceived  a  profound  admiration.  He  immediately  set  about
learning  the  language,  and  had  already  made  some  progress
before  he  left  England.  In  the  autumn  of  1827,  after  visiting
Heidelberg,  he  established  himself  with  his  wife  and  child  at
Bonn,  which  was  then  the  residence  of  Niebuhr,  Brandis,
Schlegel,  Arndt,  Welcker,  Mackeldey,  Hefflber,  and  other  eminent
men,  from  whose  society  he  received  equal  pleasure  and  instruc-
tion. Mr.  Austin  secured  the  assistance  of  a  young  jurist,  who
had  just  entered  on  that  stage  of  the  professional  career  in
which  men  are  permitted  to  teach,  without  holding  jmy  appoint-
ment. They  are  called  PrivcUdocerUen,  and  are  a  sort  of  tutors.
By  reading  Gterman  law-books  with  this  gentleman,  Mr.  Austin,
while  pursuing  his  main  object,  speedily  acquired  the  language
with  that  precision  and  completeness  which  he  carried  into
everything  he  studied.

He  also,  as  I  find  from  some  slight  memoranda,  took  great
pains  to  inform  himself  thoroughly  of  the  discipline  and  mode
of  teaching  in  the  German  Universities.  He  often  expressed
his  earnest  desire  to  carry  home,  for  the  use  of  England,  what-
ever were  most  worthy  of  imitation  in  Germany.  He  left  Bonn
in  the  spring  of  1828,  master  of  the  German  language  and  of  a
number  of  the  greatest  works  which  it  contains.  He  always
looked  back  upon  his  residence  there  as  one  of  the  most  agree-
able portions  of  his  Kfe.  He  and  those  belonging  to  him,  who
were  then  the  only  English  established  at  Bonn,  were  received
with  cordiality  by  this  distinguished  society,  and  found  there


6  Preface,

the  qualities  most  consonant  to  their  tastes :  respect  for  know-
ledge, love  of  art,  freedom  of  thought,  and  simplicity  of  habits.
Spite  of  the  hopes,  the  projects,  and  the  acquirements  with
which  he  entered  upon  his  new  functions,  it  was  not  without
much  regret  and  some  forebodings  that  he  quitted  a  life  so  full
of  interest  and  so  free  from  care,  for  the  restraints  and  privations
which  London  imposes  on  poor  people,  and  for  the  anxieties  of
a  laborious  and  untried  career.

Yet  everything  promised  well,  excepting  always  his  health,
which  had  suffered  extremely  from  his  anxiety  before  quitting
the  Bar,  and  was  only  partially  restored  by  the  comparative
tranquillity  of  mind  which  followed  his  appointment,  and  by
his  salutary  and  agreeable  residence  on  the  Rhine.

His  Lectures  opened  with  a  class  which  exceeded  his
expectations.  It  included  several  of  the  men  who  are  now
most  eminent  in  law,  politics,  or  philosophy.  He  was  much
impressed  and  excited  by  the  spectacle  of  this  noble  band  of
young  men,  and  he  felt  with  a  sort  of  awe  the  responsibility
attaching  to  his  ofi&ce.  He  had  the  highest  possible  conception
of  the  importance  of  clear  notions  on  the  foundations  of  Law
and  Morals '  to  the  welfare  of  the  human  race ;  the  thought  of
being  the  medium  through  which  these  were  to  be  conveyed
into  so  many  of  the  minds  destined  to  exercise  a  powerful
influence  in  England,  filled  him  with  ardour  and  enthusiasm.
As  might  be  expected  from  his  susceptible  nature  and  delicate
conscience,  these  were  not  unmixed  with  anxiety  too  intense  for
his  bodily  health.

Some  notes,  which  I  find  in  a  blank  leaf  of  the  First
Lecture  delivered  at  the  London  University,  are  so  strongly
imbued  with  his  earnest  and  ardent  devotion  to  his  work,  that,
not  without  some  hesitation,  I  resolve  to  give  them  exactly  as
they  stand.  Even  the  broken  sentences  are  characteristic,  and,
to  those  who  knew  him,  inexpressibly  touching.  To  such,  they
will  vividly  recall  the  man  whose  passionate  love  of  truth  and
knowledge  is  apparent  even  in  these  hasty  words.

*  Before  we  separate,  I  wish  to  say  a  few  words.

It  is  my  purpose  to  bold  conversations  at  the  end  of  every  lecture.

[Advantages  to  myself  and  to  the  gentlemen  of  my  class — Advantages
of  extempore  lecturea

Incompleteness  of  written  lectures,  in  respect  of  the  ideas.  Waste  of
labour  in  writing ;  extempore  lectures  can  be  adapted  at  the  moment  to
the  hearer :

Dulness  of  written  lectures  :]

I  therefore  wish,  of  all  things,  to  form  a  habit  of  lecturing  extempore  :


Preface.  , 7

To  this,  I  am  at  present  not  competent,  but  by  dint  of  giving  explanations,
etc.,  I  hope  I  may  acquire  the  requisite  facility  and  composure.

Another  advantage  which  will  arise  from  these  discussions  :  Errors  in
plan  and  in  execution  will  be  pointed  out  and  corrected.

I  beg  of  you  not  to  be  restrained  by  false  delicacy :  Frankness  is  the
highest  compliment.

I  never  mydelf  acquiesce,  etc.  .  .  .

And  this  is  perfectly  consistent  with  admiration  for  genius — Monstrous,
therefore,  for  a  man,  etc.  ...

I  therefore  entreat  you,  as  the  greatest  &vour  you  can  do  me,  to  demand
explanations  and  ply  me  with  objections — turn  me  inside  out.  I  ought
not  to  stand  here,  unless,  etc

Can  bear  castigation  without  flinching,  coming  from  a  friendly  hand.

From  this  collision,  advantages  to  bo^  parties  more  advantageous  than
any  written  lecture.

Bequest  them  to  ask  questions  relative  to  studies.

In  short,  my  requests  are,  that  you  will  ply  me  with  questions,  and
that  you  wiU  attend  regularly.'

I  find  in  the  manuscript  numerous  passages  marked  v.  v.  which
he  evidently  meant  to  expand  or  analyze  extemporaneously.

He  now  appeared  to  have  attained  to  a  position  above  aU
others  the  best  suited  to  him.  TLia  peculiar  tastes  and  talents
fitted  him  for  the  business  of  a  teacher.  His  power  of
methodising  and  expounding  was  matchless;  and  he  had  a
natural  and  powerful  eloquence  (when  he  allowed  himself  to
give  way  to  it),  which  was  calculated  to  rivet  the  attention  and
fix  itself  on  the  memory.  Tlus  was  far  more  striking  in  con-
versation than  in  his  written  lectures.  As  soon  as  he  reduced
anything  to  writing,  the  severity  of  his  taste  and  his  habitual
resolution  to  sacrifice  everything  to  clearness  and  precision,  led
him  to  rescind  every  word  or  expression  that  did  not,  in  his
opinion,  subserve  these  ends.

Perhaps  no  man  was  ever  more  eminently  qualified  to  raise
extemporaneous  discourse  to  the  highest  excellence,  had  he  but
combined  with  his  other  singular  qualifications  that  of  easy
confidence  and  self-satisfaction*  His  voice  was  clear  and  har-
monious, and  his  elocution  perfect.  Nobody  ever  heard  him
talk  without  being  powerfully  struck  with  the  vigour  and
originality  of  his  discourse,  the  variety  and  extent  of  his  know-
ledge, and  the  scholarlike  accuracy  and  singular  appositeness  of
bis  language.  Classical  thoughts  and  turns  of  expression  were
so  familiar  to  him  that  they  seemed  innate  and  spontaneous.
'I  think,'  writes  a  friend  to  whom  I  have  shown  this  poor
attempt  to  describe  him,  'that  you  have  hardly  said  enough
about  his  eloquence  in  conversation.  But  the  truth  is,  that  it
is  impossible  to  describe  the  manner  in  which  one  was  carried


vX'


8  Preface.

away  and  utterly  absorbed  by  his  talk.  One  had  travelled  in
an  hour  over  such  vast  regions,  and  at  such  an  elevation  !  And
then  the  extraordinary  extent  and  exactness  of  his  memory  T
It  is  true  that  I  shrink  from  the  attempt  to  convey  an  idea  of
his  eloquence  in  common  discourse.  It  lives  in  the  remem-
brance of  a  few.  His  memory  was  most  extraordinary,  and
would  have  been  a  gift  to  dwell  on  with  wonder,  had  it  not
been  so  subordinate  to  his  higher  faxjulties.  He  never  made
any  display  of  it ;  and  as  it  was  always  under  the  control  of
his  severe  love  of  truth,  his  hearers  were  certain  that  he
hazarded  nothing,  and  that  his  statements  might  be  implicitly
relied  on.

But  those  qualities  which,  above  all  others,  smooth  the  road
to  success,  were  not  to  be  looked  for  in  a  character  like  his.
Proud,  sensitive,  trjdng  everything  by  the  lofty  standard  he
bore  within  him,  it  was  only  to  a  very  peculiar  sort  of  encour-
agement that  he  was  accessible.  The  highest  applause  or
admiration  of  ignorant  millions  would  have  failed  to  give  him
the  smallest  satisfaction.  The  approbation  of  the  few  whose
judgment  he  respected,  or  the  persuasion  that  his  labours
tended  to  general  utility,  were  the  only  stimulants  by  which  he
could  be  enabled  to  rise  above  his  constitutional  shyness  and
reserve.

It  soon  became  clear  that  he  was  as  far  as  ever  from  having
found  the  modest,  but  tranquil  and  secure  position,  in  which  he
might  continue  to  labour  for  the  advancement  of  the  sublime
science  of  which  he  knew  himself  to  be  so  consummate  a
master.

It  was  not  to  be  expected, — ^it  is  never  found,  even  in  the
coimtry  where  science  is  most  ardently  pursued  for  its  own
sake, — that  studies  which  have  no  direct  bearing  upon  what  is
called  practical  life,  can,  except  under  very  peculiar  circum-
stances, attract  numerous  audiences.  Where,  therefore,  there  is
any  serious  intention  that  the  few  who  addict  themselves  to  such
studies  should  find  competent  instructors,  funds  are  provided  fox  -
the  maintenance  of  men  who  have  obviously  nothing  to  expect
from  popular  resort.  Their  position  is  perhaps  not  brilliant,  but
it  is  secure  and  honourable,  and  affords  them  leisure  for  the
prosecution  of  their  science.  No  such  provision  was,  however,
made  for  the  Chair  to  which  Mr.  Austin  had  been  elected ;  and
as  jurisprudence  formed  no  part  of  the  necessary  or  ordinary
studies  of  a  barrister,  his  professorship  became  nearly  an  empty
title.


Preface,  9

'In  spite/  says  the  illustrious  writer  of  a  notice  of  Mr.
Austin's  death,  in  the  '  Law  Magazine/  *  of  the  brilliant  com-
mencement of  his  career  as  a  Professor,  it  soon  became  evident
that  this  country  would  not  afford  such  a  succession  of  students
of  jurisprudence  as  would  suffice  to  maintain  a  Chair ;  and  as
there  was  no  other  provision  for  the  teachers  than  the  students'
fees,  it  followed  of  necessity  that  no  man  could  continue  to  hold
that  office  unless  he  had  a  private  fortune,  or  combined  some
gainful  occupation  with  his  professorship.  Mr.  Austin,  who  had
no  fortune,  and  who  regarded  the  study  and  exposition  of  his
science  as  more  than  sufficient  to  occupy  his  whole  life,  and  who
knew  that  it  would  never  be  in  demand  amongst  that  immense
majority  of  law  students  who  regarded  their  profession  only  as
a  means  of  making  money,  found  himself  under  the  necessity  of
resigning  his  Chair.' ^

Such  was  the  end  of  his  exertions  in  a  cause  to  which  he
had  devoted  himself  with  an  ardour  and  singleness  of  purpose
of  which  few  men  are  capable.  This  was  the  real  and  irre-
mediable calamity  of  his  life — the  blow  from  which  he  never
recovered,  ffis  failure  at  the  Bar  was  nothing,  and  would  never
have  been  regretted  by  himself  or  those  who  cared  for  him.
That  was  not  his  vocation,  nor  had  he  any  peculiar  aptitude  for
it;  and  there  was  no  want  of  able  and  successful  barristers.
There  was  no  one  to  do  the  work  he  could  have  done,  as  an
expounder  of  the  philosophy  of  Law.

At  the  time  he  wrote  his  Lectures,  constructed  the  Tables
(hereafter  mentioned),  and  prepared  this  volume  for  the  press,
I  can  affirm  that  he  had  no  other  thought,  intention,  or  desire,
than  to  push  his  inquiries  and  discoveries  in  the  science  of  law
as  far,  and  to  difiuse  them  as  widely,  as  possible.  It  was  from
no  unsteadiness  of  purpose,  no  shrinking  from  labour,  no  distaste
to  a  life  of  comparative  poverty  and  obscurity  that  he  abandoned
the  pursuit  to  which  he  had  hoped  to  devote  his  life.  If  there
had  been  found  for  him  some  quiet  and  humble  nook  in  the
wide  and  rich  domains  of  learning,  it  is  my  firm  conviction  that
he  would  have  gone  on,  slowly  indeed,  as  the  nature  of  his  study
and  his  own  nature  rendered  inevitable,  and  with  occasional
interruptions  from  illness,  but  with  unbroken  tenacity  and  zeal,
to  the  end  of  his  life.

In  June,  1832,  he  gave  his  last  lecture.  In  that  year  he
published  the  volume,  of  which  the  present  is  a  reprint.  So  far
was  he  from  anticipating  for  it  any  brilliant  success,  that  he  was

'  Law  Magazine  and  Review,  for  May  1860.


10  Preface.

astonished  at  the  readiness  and  liberality  with  which  the  late
Mr.  Murray  undertook  the  publication  of  it;  and  for  years
afterwards  his  anxiety  was  extreme,  lest  it  should  have  entailed
loss  upon  that  gentleman.  When  at  length,  in  answer  to  my
inquiries,  Mr.  Murray  presented  to  me  the  last  remaining  copy,
as  a  proof  that  our  fears  were  groundless,  Mr.  Austin  expressed
perfect  satisfaction,  and  something  like  surprise,  even  at  this
very  moderate  success.  He  was  fully  aware  of  the  unpopularity
of  the  studies  to  which  he  had  devoted  himself.

'  So  few,'  says  he,  '  are  the  Binceie  inquirers  who  turn  their  attention  to
these  sciences,  and  so  difficult  is  it  for  the  multitude  to  perceive  the  worth
of  their  labours,  that  the  advancement  of  the  sciences  themselves  is  com-
paratively slow  ;  whilst  the  most  perspicuous  of  the  truths  with  which  they
are  occasionally  enriched,  are  either  rejected  by  the  many  as  worthless  or
pernicious  panidoxes,  or  win  their  laborious  way  to  general  assent  through
a  long  and  dubious  struggle  with  established  and  obstinate  errors.'

It  must  be  admitted  that  the  reception  given  to  his  book  at
first  was  not  encouraging.  Neither  of  the  Keviews  which  pro-
fess to  guide  public  opinion  on  serious  subjects  took  the  slightest
notice  of  it  Some  eulogistic  articles  appeared  in  journals  of
less  general  currency,  but  on  the  whole  it  may  be  said  to  have
been  left  to  make  its  way  by  its  own  merits.  It  was  only  at  a
later  period,  and  by  slow  degrees,  that  they  were  appreciated.

In  the  year  1833  Mr.  Austin  was  appointed  by  Lord
Brougham,  then  Lord  Chancellor,  member  of  the  Criminal  Law
Commission.  Though  this  turned  him  from  the  pursuit  to  which
he  had  hoped  to  dedicate  his  life,  and  confined  his  inquiries  to
a  narrower  and  less  inviting  field  than  that  he  had  marked  out
for  himself,  he  entered  upon  it  with  the  same  conscientious
devotion,  and  carried  into  it  the  same  profound  and  comprehen-
sive views.  But  he  soon  perceived  that  they  would  be  of  small
avail  to  himself  or  to  the  public.  The  powers  granted  to  the
Commission  did  not  authorise  the  fundamental  reforms  from
which  jalone  he  believed  any  good  could  come  ;  and  his  opinions
as  to  the  ground  to  be  marked  out,  and  the  foundations  to  be
laid,  before  any  satisfactory  structure  of  criminal  law  could  be
raised,  differed  widely  from  those  of  his  colleagues.  He  had
little  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  Conmiissions  for  constructive
purposes.  He  said  to  me,  '  If  they  would  give  me  two  hundred
a  year  for  two  years,  I  would  shut  myself  up  in  a  garret,  and  at
the  end  of  that  time  I  would  produce  a  complete  map  of  the
whole  field  of  Crime,  and  a  draft  of  a  Criminal  Code.  Th^
let  them  appoint  a  Commission  to  puU  it  in  pieces.'  He  used
to  come  home  from  every  meeting  of  the  Commission  disheartened


Preface.  1 1

and  agitated,  and  to  express  his  repugnance  to  receiving  the
public  money  for  work  from  which  he  thought  the  public  would
derive  little  or  no  advantage.  Some  blurred  and  blotted  sheets
which  I  have  found,  bear  painful  and  afifecting  marks  of  the
struggle  that  was  going  on  in  his  mind,  between  his  own  lofty
sense  of  dignity  and  duty,  and  those  more  ordinary  notions  which
subordinate  public  to  private  obligations.  I  have  also  found
the  commencement  of  a  project  of  a  Criminal  Code  drawn  up  at
that  tima

About  the  same  time,  he  had  arrived  at  the  conviction  that,
as  a  teacher  of  Jurisprudence,  he  had  nothing  to  hope.  The
insufficiency  of  the  legal  education  of  the  country  had  for  some
time  attracted  the  attention  of  the  more  enlightened  part  of  the
profession ;  and  it  was  at  length  determined,  by  the  Society  of
the  Inner  Temple,  that  some  attempt  should  be  made  to  teach
the  principles  and  history  of  jurisprudence.  Among  the  most
earnest  promoters  of  this  scheme  was  Mr.  Austin's  friend,  Mr.
Bickersteth,  afterwards  Lord  Langdale.  In  the  year  1834,  Mr.
Austin  was  accordingly  engaged  to  deliver  a  course  of  lectures
on  jurisprudence  at  the  Inner  Temple.  Had  this  appointment
been  made  under  different  conditions,  it  was  one  which  he  would
have  preferred  to  any  other,  however  distinguished  or  however
lucrative.  Unfortunately,  it  was  not  of  a  kind  to  give  him  the
security  and  confidence  he  wanted.  He  was  invited  to  under-
take the  discouraging  task  of  trying  to  establish  a  new  order  of
things,  without  the  certain,  though  distant,  prospect  which  usually
cheers  the  pioneer  in  such  an  enterprise.  His  appointment  could
only  be  regarded  as  an  experiment.  This  uncertainty  weighed
upon  him  from  the  first.  He  was,  as  I  have  said,  disqualified
by  nature  from  all  work  of  a  passing  and  temporary  sort ;  and
in  order  to  labour  with  courage  and  animation,  he  needed  to  see
before  him  a  long  period  of  persistent  study,  and  security  from
harassing  anxiety.  His  precarious  health  and  depressed  spirits
required  every  possible  support ;  and  he  was  but  too  easily  dis-
heartened at  what  he  thought  the  want  of  confidence  in  the
scheme,  or  in  him,  evinced  in  a  merely  tentative  appointment.

It  was  also  clear  that  the  same  causes  which  rendered  the
appointment  to  a  Chair  of  Jurisprudence  abortive  at  the  London
University,  were  in  operation  (perhaps  to  a  still  greater  extent)
in  the  Inns  of  Court  The  demand  for  anjrthing  like  scientific
legal  education  had  to  be  created.  The  eminent  lawyers  who
had  adorned  the  English  bar  and  bench  (of  whose  great  faculties
no  one  had  a  higher  admiration  than Mr.  Austin)  had  been


1 2  Preface,

formed  by  a  totally  diflferent  process;  and  the  young  men
entering  on  the  profession  were,  for  the  most  part,  profoundly
indifiTerent  to  any  studies  but  those  which  had  enabled  their
predecessors  to  attain  to  places  of  honour  and  profit.  Thus
depressed  by  failure ;  unsustained  by  sympathy  in  his  lofty  and
benevolent  aspirations,  or  by  recognition  of  his  value  as  a
teacher ;  agitated  by  conflicting  duties,  and  harassed  by  anxiety
about  the  means  of  subsistence,  it  is  no  wonder  that  his  health
became  sensibly  worse.  The  severe  feverish  attacks  to  which
he  had  always  been  subject,  became  more  and  more  frequent  and
violent ;  and  often,  after  preparing  a  lecture  with  great  care  and
intense  application,  he  was  compelled,  on  the  day  when  it  should
have  been  delivered,  to  send  messengers  round  to  the  gentlemen
of  his  class,  to  announce  his  inability  to  attend.  He  soon  saw
the  inutility  of  struggling  against  such  obstacles.  He  resolved
to  abandon  a  conflict  in  which  he  had  met  with  nothing  but
defeat,  and  to  seek  an  obscure  but  tranquil  retreat  on  the
Continent,  where  he  might  live  upon  the  very  small  means  at
his  disposal.

He  quitted  England  with  a  strong  feeling  of  the  disadvan-
tage at  which  a  man  like  himself,  devoted  exclusively  to  truth
and  to  the  permanent  good  of  mankind,  stood,  in  a  country
where  worldly  success  is  not  only  the  reward,  but  the  test  of
merit ;  and  where,  imless  he  advances  in  certain  beaten  tracks,
he  arrives  at  nothing,  except  neglect  and  a  sort  of  contemptuous
wonder.  He  felt  this  keenly,  and  said  to  the  one  person  to
whom  he  ever  talked  freely  of  himself, '  I  was  bom  out  of  time
and  place.  I  ought  to  have  been  a  schoolman  of  the  twelfth
century — or  a  German  professor.'  The  position  of  such  illustri-
ous and  revered  teachers  as  Hugo  and  Savigny  seemed  to  him
the  most  enviable  in  the  world.  The  pecuniary  inferiority  of
such  a  position,  compared  with  the  profits  attending  the  practice
of  law  in  this  country,  was  not  a  consideration  to  which  his
mind  could  easily  descend.

He  had  been  settled  at  Boulogne  about  a  year  and  a  half,
when  a  proposal  was  made  to  him  by  the  Colonial  OflBce,
through  his  much  esteemed  and  faithful  friend  Sir  James
Stephen,  to  go  to  Malta  as  Eoyal  Conmiissioner,  to  inquire  into
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  grievances  of  which  the  natives  of
that  island  complained.  He  accepted  an  appointment  for  which
he  was  indeed  peculiarly  fitted.  Justice  and  humanity  were
parts  of  his  nature,  and  were  fostered  by  reason  and  by  study.
He  had  no  sympathy  with  the  insolence  of  a  dominant  race,  and


Preface.  1 3

he  was  not  likely  to  view  with  indulgence,  violations  of  the
conditions  under  which  England  had  accepted  the  voluntary
cession  of  Malta  by  its  inhabitants.  On  the  other  hand,  his
sagacity,  knowledge,  and  strict  sense  of  justice  rendered  him
inaccessible  to  fantastic  schemes  or  groundless  complaints.
Aided  by  his  able  and  accomplished  colleague  Mr.  (now  Sir)
George  Comewall  Lewis,  he  rendered  to  the  island  services
which  attracted  Uttle  attention  in  England,  but  are  remembered
with  lively  and  affectionate  gratitude  in  Malta.

He  had  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  every  measure  he  recom-
mended adopted  by  the  Colonial  Office ;  and  he  always  looked
back  with  great  satisfaction  to  his  connection  with  two  men  for
whom  he  entertained  so  sincere  a  respect  as  Lord  Glenelg  and
Sir  James  Stephen.  But  here  another  disappointment  awaited
him.  After  the  reform  of  the  tariff  (which  Sir  James  long  after
called,  '  the  most  successful  legislative  experiment  he  had  seen
in  his  time'),  and  of  various  parts  of  the  administration  of  the
island,  Mr.  Lewis  having  been  recalled  to  England  to  preside
over  the  Poor  Law  Board,  Mr.  Austin  was  preparing  to  enter
upon  his  more  peculiar  province, — legal  and  judicial  reform.
Lord  Glenelg,  however,  was  no  longer  in  office,  and  the  Com-
mission was  suddenly  brought  to  a  close  by  his  successor.  No
reason  was  assigned,  nor  was  Mr.  Austin's  abrupt  dismissal
accompanied  with  a  single  word  of  recognition  of  his  services.
It  remained  for  the  Maltese  to  acknowledge  them.*

It  is  indeed  but  too  probable  that  the  state  of  his  health
would  have  incapacitated  him  for  the  work  he  projected.  But
he  frequently  said  to  me,  that  if,  as  he  presumed,  the  Colonial
Office  wished  to  put  an  end  to  the  expense  of  the  Commission,
he  would  have  continued  to  live  in  the  island  in  a  private  and
humble  manner,  till  he  had  introduced  something  like  order
into  the  heterogeneous  mass  of  laws  bequeathed  by  the  successive
masters  of  Malta.  It  was,  however,  fortunate  that  he  was  not
permitted  to  attempt  a  task  to  which  his  strength  was  so
inadequate.

In  giving  this  short  account  of  his  troubled  life  and  baffled
designs,  my  object  has only  been to show  what  were the

'  'Such  was  the  man/  says  a  Malta  the  inhabitants  of  this  island  are  greatly

journal, in  an  article  announcing  his  advanced  in  the  scale  of  civilisation,  both

death,  '  to  whom  the  Maltese  must  ever  politically  and  socially, and  rendered

feel  grateful  for  their  improved  condition  more  essentially  British  in  civil  polity

as  a  people,  and  for  the  many  privileges  and  institutions,  by  the  measures  adopted

they  now  enjoy  ;  and  most  of  all  for  the  on  the  recommendation  of  the  Commis-

liberty  of  the  press  under  which  we  are  aion  presided  over  by  Mr.  Austin.'
now  writing. It  cannot  be  disputed  that


14  Preface.

circumstances  by  which  he  was  forced  out  of  the  track  on
which  he  had  entered,  and  in  which  his  whole  mind  and  soul
were  engaged ;  and  why  it  was  that  he  seemed  to  abandon  the
science  to  which  he  had  devoted  his  singular  powers  with  so
much  ardour  and  intensity.

It  was  this  very  ardour  and  intensity,  this  entire  absorption
in  his  subject,  which  rendered  it  impossible  to  him  to  resume,
at  any  given  moment,  trains  of  thought  from  which  his  mind
had  been  forcibly  diverted.  It  belonged  to  the  nature  of  his
mind  to  grapple  with  a  question  with  diflSculty, — almost  with
reluctance.  It  seemed  as  if  he  had  a  sort  of  dread  of  the
labour  and  tension  to  which,  when  it  had  once  taken  hold  on
him,  it  would  inevitably  subject  him.  He  was  frequently  urged
to  write  on  matters  which  he  had  studied  with  an  earnestness
second  only  to  that  which  he  had  devoted  to  his  own  peculiar
science, — such  as  Philosophy,  Political  Economy,  and  Political
Science  generally.  He  usually  evaded  these  applications ;  but
to  the  person  with  whom  he  had  no  reserves,  he  used  to  say,
'  I  cannot  work  so ;  I  can  do  nothing  in  a  perfunctoiy  manner.'
He  knew  perfectly  his  strength  and  his  weakness.  He  could
work  out*  a  subject  requiring  the  utmost  stretch  of  the  human
faculties,  with  a  clearness  and  completeness  that  have  rarely
been  equalled.  But  he  had  no  mental  agility.  When  he  gave
himself  up  to  an  inquiry,  it  mastered  him  like  an  overwhelming
passion.  Even  as  early  as  the  year  1816,  he  spoke  to  me,  in  a
letter,  of '  the  difficulty  he  found  in  turning  his  faculties  from
any  object  whereon  they  have  been  long  and  intently  employed,
to  any  other  object.'  And  for  the  same  reason,  when  his  mind
had  once  loosened  its  grasp  of  a  subject,  it  could  with  difficulty
recover  its  hold.

At  the  time  when  a  second  edition  of  his  book  was  first
demanded,  he  was,  as  I  have  said,  occupied  in  the  business  of
the  public,  to  which  it  was  with  him  a  matter  of  conscience  to
consecrate  his  imdivided  attention.  To  this  reason  for  delay
was  now  added  another.  His  health  had  gradually  declined,
under  the  pressure  of  labour  and  anxiety.  After  his  return
from  Malta,  in  1838,  he  was  so  much  worse,  that  in  1840  his
medical  friends  exhorted  him  to  try  the  waters  of  Carlsbad, —
with  very  small  hope,  as  they  afterwards  confessed,  of  seeing
him  again.  From  those  wonder-working  waters  however  he
received  so  much  benefit  that  he  determined  to  return  to  them,
and  the  summers  of  1841,  1842,  and  1843  were  spent  there.
In  the  varied  and  interesting  society  assembled  in  that  place,  he


Preface.  1 5

made  the  acquaintance  of  many  eminent  persons,  from  whom  he
eagerly  sought  for  information  on  the  condition  of  their  several
countries.  The  intervening  winters  were  pleasantly  and  profit-
ably passed  at  Dresden  and  BerUn.  In  the  latter  capital  he
found  men  eminent  in  every  branch  of  science,  to  some  of  whom
he  had  long  looked  up  as  the  great  masters  of  his  own,— especi-
ally Herr  von  Savigny.  Political  questions  were  then  agitated
with  great  warmth  and  acrimony  in  Prussia.  Mr.  Austin
studied  them  with  his  usual  industry  and  impartiality;  and
several  men  who  were  themselves  engaged  in  the  discussions
of  the  day,  were  so  struck  with  the  clearness  and  justness  of
his  views,  that  they  urged  him  to  write  on  the  affairs  of  their
country.  I  have  found  memoranda  which  show  that  at  one
time  he  contemplated  some  work  of  the  kind.  It  was  at
Dresden  that  he  wrote,  for  the  '  Edinburgh  Eeview,'  his  answer
to  Dr.  list^  violent  attack  on  the  doctrine  of  Free  Trade.

In  1844  he  removed  to  Paris,  attracted  thither  by  the
society  and  friendship  of  some  of  the  distinguished  men  who
were  then  the  able  expositors  of  science,  or  the  eloquent
advocates  of  free  institutions.  Shortly  after,  he  was  elected
by  the  Institute  a  corresponding  member  of  the  Moral  and
Political  Class;  an  honour  for  which  he  was  wholly  unpre-
pared, unaccustomed  as  he  was  to  any  public  recognition  of  his
merits.  I  shall  borrow  the  words  of  an  illustrious  friend,  to
describe  the  impression  he  left  on  some  of  the  highest  minds  of
France:  I  could  add  many  such  testimonies,  but  that  of  M.
Guizot  is  sufficient  *  C'^tait  un  des  hommes  les  plus  distingu^s,
un  des  esprits  les  plus  rares,  et  un  des  coeurs  les  plus  nobles  que
j'ai  connus.  Quel  dommage,  qu'il  n'ait  pas  su  employer  tout  ce
qu'il  avait,  et  montrer  tout  ce  qu'il  valait !'

In  that  year  another  earnest  appeal  was  made  to  him  to
publish  a  second  edition  of  'The  Province  of  Jurisprudence.'
Letters  from  friends,  and  even  from  strangers,  arrived,  lament-
ing the  impossibility  of  getting  a  copy,  and  setting  forth  the
constantly  increasing  reputation  of  the  book.  But  these  flatter-
ing representations,  which  perhaps  at  an  earlier  period  would
have  spurred  him  on  to  fresh  exertions,  seemed  to  give  hini
little  pleasure,  and  he  rarely  alluded  to  them.  They  had  now
to  encounter  the  reluctance  I  have  spoken  of,  to  resume  long-
disused  labour, — a  labour  too  with  which  a  crowd  of  painful
recollections  were  associated.

To  give  a  mere  reprint  of  the  book  would  have  been  easy
enough,  and  it is  what  any  one  else  so  encouraged  would


1 6  Preface.

probably  have  done;  but  Mr.  Austin  had  discovered  defects
in  it  which  had  escaped  the  criticism  of  others ;  and  with  that
fastidious  taste  and  scrupulous  conscience  which  it  was  impos-
sible to  satisfy,  he  refused  to  republish  what  appeared  to  him
imperfections.

That  he  had  long  meditated  a  book  embracing  a  far  wider
field,  I  well  knew;  but  I  feared  that  this  great  work  would
never  be  accomplished,  and  would  have  gladly  compounded  for
something  far  less  perfect  than  his  conceptions.  But  I  saw
that  nothing  could  shake  his  resolution,  and  I  never  willingly
adverted  to  the  subject  Whenever  it  was  mentioned,  he  said,
that  the  book  must  be  entirely  recast  and  rewritten,  and  that
there  must  be  at  least  another  volume.  His  opinion  of  the
necessity  of  an  entire  refonie  of  his  book  arose,  in  great  measure,
firom  the  conviction,  which  had  continually  been  gaining  strength
in  his  mind,  that  until  the  ethical  notions  of  men*  were  more
clear  and  consistent,  no  considerable  improvement  could  be
hoped  for  in  legal  or  political  science,  nor,  consequently,  in
legal  or  political  institutions.

The  subjoined  prospectus  or  advertisement  sufficiently  proves
that  he  had  seriously  resolved  to  execute  the  great  work  he  had
planned.  I  have  found  but  one  copy  of  it,  nor  have  I  been  able
to  hear  of  the  existence  of  another.  I  cannot  find  that  it
attracted  any  attention.

Tht  Principles  and  Relations  of  Jurisprudence  and  Ethics,  By  John
Austin,  Esq.,  of  the  Inner  Temple^  Barrister-ai'Lcm,

An  Outline  of  a  Course  of  Lectures  on  General  Jurisprudence,  preceded
by  an  attempt  to  determine  the  province  of  the  science,  was  published  by
the  author  in  1832.  By  the  sale  of  the  entire  edition,  and  by  the  continued
demand  for  the  book,  he  is  encouraged  to  undertake  a  work  concerning  the
same  subject,  but  going  more  profoundly  into  the  related  subject  of  Ethics.
The  matter  is  so  vast,  and  the  task  of  digesting  and  condensing  it  so  difficult,
that  a  considerable  time  must  necessarily  elapse  before  the  intended  treatise
will  be  ready  for  publication.

A  concise  and  unequivocal  title  for  the  intended  treatise  is  not  afforded
by  established  language.  Positive  law  (or  ju8\  positive  morality  (or  mos\
together  with  the  principles  which  form  the  text  of  both,  are  the  inseparably-
connected  parts  of  a  vast  organic  whole.  To  explain  their  several  natures,
and  present  them  with  their  common  relations,  is  the  purpose  of  the  essay  on
which  the  author  is  employed.  But  positive  morality  (as  conceived  in  the
whole  of  its  extent)  has  haidly  acquired  a  distinguishing  name  ;  though  one
important  branch  of  it  has  become  the  subject  of  a  science,  and  been  styled
by  recent  writers  the  positive  law  of  nations.  For  the  variously  conceived
and  much  disputed  principles  which  form  the  measure  or  test  of  positive  law
and  morality,  established  language  has  no  name  which  will  mark  them  with-
out ambiguity. As  related  to  positive  law  (the  appropriate  subject  of  Juris-


Preface,  1 7

prudence),  they  are  styled  the  principles  of  legislation.  As  related  to  positive
morality,  they  are  styled  morals  or  ethics  ;  but  as  either  of  these  names  will
signify  positive  morality,  as  well  as  the  standard  to  which  it  ought  to  con-
form, there  is  no  current  expression  for  the  principles  in  question  which  will
denote  them  adequately  and  distinctly.  He  (author)  had  thought  of  en-
titling the  intended  essay,  the  principles  and  relations  of  law,  morals,  and
ethics :  meaning  by  law,  positive  law  ;  by  morals,  poaitwe  morals  ;  and  by
ethics^  the  principles  which  are  the  test  of  both.  But  in  consequence  of  the
difficulties  which  he  has  just  stated,  he  preferred  the  more  concise  and  not
more  equivocal  title  which  stands  at  the  head  of  the  present  notice.

For  reasons  to  appear  hereafter,  the  work  will  be  divided  into  two  parts.
The  first  will  be  given  to  General  Jurisprudence  ;  and  in  his  exposition  of
that  science  the  author  will  descend  into  the  detail  which  was  indicated  by
the  above-mentioned  outline,  as  deeply  as  may  consist  with  the  limits
assigned  to  an  institutional  treatise.  The  second  part  will  be  given  to
Ethics.  No  separate  department  will  be  given  to  positive  morals  ;  but,  so
far  as  they  are  implicated  with  jurisprudence  and  ethics,  they  will  be
noticed  in  the  departments  allotted  to  those  subjects.

He  announced  the  same  intention  in  a  letter  to  the  present
Chief  Justice  of  the  Common  Pleas,  the  companion  of  his  early
studies,  the  beloved  and  faithful  friend  of  every  period  of  his
life.  It  was  only  the  other  day  that  Sir  William  Erie  found
the  following  fragment  of  this  letter,  which  he  has  had  the
kindness  to  permit  me  to  print.  Unhappily,  the  part  containing
the  date  is  lost.  It  begins  with  a  broken  sentence,  which  must
relate  to  one  of  the  many  applications  made  to  him  for  a  second
edition :  probably  they  were  preceded  by  some  such  words  as —

[  What  Mr.  Mwrrcuy  suggests  is]  '  a  mere  reprint  of  it ;  but,  if  he  would
give  me  sufficient  time  (two  years  or  so),  I  would  do  my  best  to  produce
something  better.

'  1  shall  now  set  to  work  in  good  earnest ;  and  if  my  unlucky  stars
will  allow  me  a  little  peace,  I  hope  I  shall  turn  out  something  of
considerable  utility.

'  I  intend  to  show  the  relations  of  positive  morality  and  law  (mos  and
j%u\  and  of  both,  to  their  common  standard  or  test ;  to  show  that  there
are  principles  and  distinctions  common  to  all  systems  of  law  (or  that  law  is
the  subject  of  an  abstract  science) ;  to  show  the  possibility  and  conditions
of  cndificfifcion  ;  to  exhibit  a  short  scheme  of  a  body  of  law  arranged  in  a
natural  order  ;  and  to  show  that  the  English  Law,  in  spite  of  its  great
peculiarities,  might  be  made  to  conform  to  that  order  much  more  closely
than  la  imagined.

'  The  questions  involved  in  this  scheme  are  so  numerous  and  difficult,
that  what  I  shall  produce  will  be  very  imperfect.  I  think,  however,  that
the  subject  lb  one  which  will  necessarily  attract  attention  before  many  years
are  over  ;  and  I  believe  that  my  suggestions  will  be  of  considerable  use  to
thoee  who,  under  happier  auspices,  will  pursue  the  inquiry.

'  There  are  points  upon  which  I  shall  ask  your  advice.

*  Yours  most  truly,

'  John  Austin.'

VOL.  I.  C


1 8  Preface.

He  had  finally  established  himself  in  Pans,  when  the
Ee volution  of  1848  once  more  uprooted  him.  He  had  watched
with  intense  interest  and  anxiety  the  approach  of  the  storm
which  was  to  overthrow  all  regular  government  in  France ;  and
it  was  from  earnest  observation  of  what  passed  in  that  country,
that  he  became  confirmed  in  his  opinion  of  the  difficulty,  if  not
the  impossibility,  of  reconstructing  a  society  which  has  once  been
completely  shattered.  This  opinion,  together  with  his  ardent
and  disinterested  love  of  his  country,  found  utterance  in  the
pamphlet  which  he  published  in  1859.

He  remained  for  some  months  in  Paris  after  the  Bevolution,
watching  the  course  of  things.  As  he  became  more  and  more
convinced  that  permanent  tranquillity  was  not  to  be  looked  for
in  France,  and  that  life  there  would  be  incessantly  troubled  and
embittered  by  uncertainty  and  alarm,  he  resigned  himself  to  a
serious  pecuniary  loss,  and  returned  to  England,  determined  to
seek  tranquillity  in  a  small  retreat  in  the  country.  He  took  a
cottage  at  Weybridge,  in  Surrey,  near  enough  to  London  for
convenience,  and  for  occasional  visits  from  his  only  child,  and
far  enough  to  enable  him  to  enjoy  the  retirement  he  coveted.

Here  he  entered  upon  the  last  and  happiest  period  of  his
life ;  the  only  portion  during  which  he  was  free  from  carking
cares  and  ever- recurring  disappointments.  The  battle  of  life
was  not  only  over,  but  had  hardly  left  a  scar.  He  had  neither
vanity  nor  ambition,  nor  any  desires  beyond  what  his  small
income  sufficed  to  satisfy.  He  had  no  regrets  or  repinings  at
his  own  poverty  and  obscurity,  contrasted  with  the  successes  of
other  men.  He  was  insatiable  in  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  and
truth  for  their  own  sake;  and  during  the  long  daily  walks,
which  were  almost  the  sole  recreation  he  coveted  or  enjoyed,
his  mind  was  constantly  kept  in  a  state  of  serene  elevation  and
harmony  by  the  aspects  of  nature, — which  he  contemplated
with  ever-increasing  delight,  and  described  in  his  own  felicitous
and  picturesque  language, — and  by  meditation  on  the  subUmest
themes  that  can  occupy  the  mind  of  man.  He  wanted  no
excitement  and  no  audience.  Though  he  welcomed  the  occa-
sional visits  of  his  friends  with  affectionate  cordiality,  and
delighted  them  by  the  vigour  and  charm  of  his  conversation,  he
never  expressed  the  smallest  desire  for  society.  He  was  content
to  pour  out  the  treasures  of  his  knowledge,  wisdom,  and  genius,
to  the  companion  whose  life  was  (to  use  the  expression  of  one
who  knew  him  well)  '  enfolded  in  his.'

Thus  passed  twelve  years  of  retirement,  rarely  interrupted,


Preface.  19

and  never  uninteresting  or  wearisome.  His  health  was  greatly
improved  The  place  he  had  chosen  and  his  mode  of  life  suited
him.  The  simplicity  of  his  tastes  and  habits  would  have  ren-
dered a  more  showy  and  luxurious  way  of  living  disagreeable
and  oppressive  to  him.  Yet  none  of  the  small  pleasures  or
humble  comforts  provided  •  for  him  ever  escaped  his  grateful
notice.  He  loved  to  be  surrounded  by  homely  and  familiar
objects,  and  nothing  pleased  him  so  much  in  his  garden  as  the
flowers  he  had  gathered  in  his  childhood.  Things  new  or  rare
were  unattractive,  if  not  distasteful,  to  his  constant  and  liberal
natura  He  had  a  disinterested  hatred  of  expense,  and  of  pre-
tension, and,  though  very  generous,  and  quite  indifferent  to  gain,
he  was  habitually  frugal,  and  respected  frugality  in  others,  as
the  guardian  of  many  virtues.

One  regret  mingled  with  the  deep  thankfulness  with  which
this  comparative  fireedom  from  pain  and  care  was  regarded  by
those  who  loved  him : — ^he  showed  no  inclination  to  devote  these
years  of  improved  health  and  tranquil  leisure  to  the  work  he
had  so  long  ago  projected.  But  even  this  regret,  poignant  as  it
was,  gradually  subsided  under  the  tranquillising  influence  of  his
serene  contentment  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  person  most
sensible  of  the  immense  resources  and  powers  of  his  mind,  and
most  deeply  interested  in  seeing  them  appreciated,  could  not
resolve  to  urge  him  to  return  to  long-disused  labours.  Sufiering,
from  ill-health  and  from  other  causes,  had  pursued  him,  almost
without  intermission,  throughout  the  early  and  middle  part  of
his  life ;  and  now  that  he  had  found  comparative  ease  of  body
and  mind,  fame,  or  even  usefulness  (so  long  and  ardently  coveted
for  him),  faded  into  nothing,  compared  to  these  inestimable  bless-
ings. The  calm  evening  that  followed  on  so  cloudy  and  stormy
a  day,  was  too  precious  to  be  risked  for  the  reputation  to  which
he  was  so  indifferent,  or  for  the  advantage  of  a  world  to  which
he  owed  so  little.

But  his  generous  solicitude  for  his  country  did  what  nothing
else  could,  and  his  last  effort  was  prompted  by  benevolence  and
patriotism.

He  was,  in  his  solitude,  a  deeply -interested  observer  of
political  events.  He  viewed  with  great  anxiety  and  disapproba-
tion the  various  schemes  of  parliamentary  reform  brought  forward
during  the  later  years  of  his  life,  and  felt  deeply  the  severe  blow
they  gave  to  the  respect  he  wished  to  feel  for  eminent  public
men.

Profoundly  convinced  as  he  was  of  the  scarcity  of  great


20  Preface.

ability,  and  of  the  still  greater  scarcity  of  a  disinterested  love  of
truth,  it  may  easily  be  imagined  that  he  regarded  with  a  sort  of
horror  all  schemes  for  placing  the  business  of  legislation  in  the
hands  of  large  bodies  of  men.  He  had  followed  step  by  step
the  progress  of  the  great  minds  by  which  systems  of  law  had
been,  through  ages,  slowly  and  painfully  elaborated;  and  the
project  of  submitting  these  highest  products  of  the  human  intel-
lect, or  the  diflScult  problems  they  deal  with,  to  the  judgment
and  the  handling  of  uneducated  masses,  seemed  to  him  a  return
towards  barbarism.  He,  least  of  all  men,  was  likely  to  be
dazzled  or  attracted  by  wealth  or  rank ;  but  he  valued  them  on
public  grounds,  ajs  providing  for  their  possessors  the  highest  sort
of  education,  and  the  leisure  and  opportunity  to  apply  that
education  to  the  general  culture  of  the  human  mind, — especially
to  the  difficult  sciences  of  legislation  and  government.  The
idea  of  popular  legislation  was  to  him  as  alarming  as  it  was
absurd ;  and  it  was  precisely  on  account  of  the  disastrous  con-
sequences which  he  was  certain  must  result  fix)m  it  to  the  people
themselves,  that  he  felt  indignant  at  the  uses  made  of  their
ignorance,  and  the  unmanly  affectation  of  deference  to  their
wishes,  by  those  whose  duty  it  is  to  enlighten  and  guide  them.
Long  and  accurate  observation  of  other  countries,  and  intercourse
with  their  public  men,  had  taught  him  the  full  value  of  the
institutions  of  this  country,  and  the  importance  of  the  habit  of
obedience  to  law ;  and  he  was  too  ardent  and  sincere  a  patriot
to  see  these  imperilled  without  the  deepest  emotion.  The  work
of  Lord  Grey,  which  appeared  in  the  midst  of  the  discussions  on
reform,  excited  his  warm  and  respectful  admiration ;  and  when
it  was  suggested  to  him  that  he  should  review  it,  he  immediately
consented.  The  pamphlet  published  under  the  title  of  'A  Plea
for  the  Constitution,'  was  originally  written  for  a  quarterly
journal ;  but  being  thought  unsuitable,  it  was  published  sepa-
rately. Its  success  far  exceeded  his  very  modest  expectations,
and  gave  him  the  satisfaction  of  thinking  Ibat  he  had  contributed
something  to  the  defeat  of  pernicious  projects.  This  was  the
only  reward  he  desired.

From  the  time  that  he  abandoned  the  struggle  with  the
world  to  which  he  was  at  once  so  unequal  and  so  superior,  all
the  bitterness  excited  in  him  by  the  chilling  indifference  with
which  his  noble  and  disinterested  efforts  had  been  received,
subsided.  His  estimate  of  men  was  low,  and  his  solicitude  for
their  approbation  was  consequently  small.  But  while  he  kept
aloof  from  them,  his  sympathy  with  their  sufferings,  and  his


Preface.  2 1

anxiety  for  their  improvement,  never  abated.  For  himself,  he
coveted  nothing  they  had  to  give ;  and  he  awaited  the  judgment
of  another  tribunal  with  humility,  but  with  a  serenity  which  be-
came more  perfect  in  proportion  as  the  time  for  his  appearing
before  it  drew  nigh.

If  elevation  above  all  the  low  desires  and  poor  ambitions
which  chain  the  soul  to  earth,  if  a  life  untainted  by  a  single
unjust  or  ungenerous  action  or  thought,  a  single  concession  to
worldly  or  selfish  objects,  a  single  attempt  to  stifle  or  to  disguise
truth,  could  justify  a  serene  anticipation  of  the  world  into  which
none  of  these  things  can  enter,  he  might  be  permitted  to  feel  it


Having,  as  I  hope,  made  intelligible  to  that  portion  of  the
public,  capable  of  sympathy  with  a  character  like  Mr.  Austin's,
what  were  the  causes  which  disabled  him — or  disinclined  him —
from  entering  afresh  on  the  labour  of  reconstructing  and  greatly
enlarging  his' book,  and  of  knitting  up  all  the  threads  which
years  and  events,  care  and  sickness,  had  tangled  or  broken^  it
only  remains  for  me  to  say  what  are  the  materials  he  has  left ;
what  the  motives  that  have  induced  me  to  give  them  to  the
world ;  and  how  it  is  that  I  have  found  myself  in  a  manner
compelled  to  undertake  the  arrangement  of  them  for  the  press.

I  have  sometimes  doubted  whether  it  was  consistent  with
my  obedience  to  him  to  publish  what  he  had  refused  to  publish.
I  have  questioned  myself  strictly,  whether,  in  devoting  the  rest
of  my  life  to  an  occupation  which  seems  in  some  degree  to  con-
tinue my  intercourse  with  him,  I  was  not  rather  indulging  my-
self than  fulfilling  my  duty  to  him.  There  have  been  times,
too^  when,  in  the  bitterness  of  my  hearty  I  have  determined  that
I  would  bury  with  me  every  vestige  of  his  disinterested  and  un-
regarded labours  for  the  good  of  mankind.  But  calmer  thoughts
have  led  me  to  the  conclusion,  that  I  ought  not  to  suffer  the
fruit  of  so  much  toil  and  of  so  great  a  mind  to  perish ;  that  what
his  own  severe  and  fastidious  judgment  rejected  as  imperfect,
has  a  substantial  value  which  no  defect  of  form  or  arrangement
can  destroy ;  and  that  the  benefits  which  he  would  have  con-*
ferred  on  his  country  and  on  mankind,  may  yet  flow  through
devious  and  indirect  channels.  I  persuade  myself  that  if  his
noble  and  benevolent  spirit  can  receive  pleasure  from  anything
done  on  earth,  it  is  from  the  knowledge  that  his  labours  are  *  of
use  to  those  who,  under  happier  auspices,  pursue  the  inquiry  *
into  subjects  of  such  paramount  importance  to  human  happiness.


22  Preface.

Having  thus  come  to  the  conclusion  that  some  of  the  manu-
scripts he  left  ought  to  be  given  to  the  public,  the  next  question
was — ^in  what  fonn,  and  by  whom  ?  My  first  thought  was  to
look  about  for  an  editor,  to  whom  I  might  confide  the  redaction
of  the  whole ;  leaving  to  him  entire  discretion  as  to  the  matter
and  form  of  the  publication.  But  it  did  not  appear  that  any
such  person  could  be  found,  or  was  likely  to  be  found.  A  great
portion  of  the  manuscript  was  in  so  imperfect  and  fragmentary
a  state,  that  it  was  cleax  that  the  whole  must  be  recast  and  re-
written by  any  editor  who  aspired  to  produce  a  readable  book,
from  which  he  could  derive  reputation  or  profit  I  was  alsmned
at  the  thought  of  the  changes  the  work  might  imdergo  in  this
process.  It  was  to  be  feared  that  any  editor  who  had  not  the
self-forgetting  devofion  of  a  Dumont,  would  be  more  sensible  of
his  responsibility  towards  the  public  than  of  that  towards  his
author.  There  are  great  peculiarities  in  Mr.  Austin's  style —
not  one  of  which  was  adopted  without  mature  thought.  He
never  had  the  slightest  idea  of  rendering  his  subject  popular  or
easy.  He  demanded  from  his  hearers  or  readers  the  fall  force
of  their  attention ;  and  as  he  knew  how  lax  and  flitting  the
attention  of  most  men  is  apt  to  be,  he  adopted  every  expedient
for  fixing  or  recalling  it.  He  shrank  firom  no  repetitions  that
he  thought  necessary  to  keep  a  subject  steadily  and  distinctly
before  the  mind,  and  he  availed  himself  of  all  typographical  helps
for  the  same  purpose.  Knowing  this,  I  have  disregarded  the
advice  of  some  of  those  to  whom  I  am  most  bound,  and  most
disposed,  to  defer,  in  retaining  the  numerous  italics  with  which
his  book  is,  in  their  opinion,  deformed.  Future  editors  may,  if
they  will,  remove  this  eyesore.  They  will  not  be  boimd  by  the
deference  which  must  govern  me.

It  will  not  be  supposed  that  I  think  it  necessary  to  call  in
any  testimony  to  the  value  of  the  materials  I  have  to  produce.
But  those  whose  estimate  of  them  is  the  highest,  may  very
justly  think  they  ought  to  have  been  put  into  more  competent
hands.  This  was  my  own  opinion ;  and  it  was  not  without
much  anxious  deliberation,  or  without  consulting  those  of  Mr.
Austin's  friends  upon  whose  judgment  and  solicitude  for  his
fame  hd  would,  I  knew,  have  had  the  greatest  reliance,  that  I
determined  on  the  course  I  have  pursued.  The  opinion  and
the  advice  which  I  received  firom  all  was  essentially  the  same ;
— that  all  the  Lectures  should  be  published,  'with  only
such  revision  as  may  remove  needless  repetitions;'  and  that,
considering the  confused and  fragmentary  state  of  much  of


Preface.  23

the  manuscript,  the  safest  editor  would  be  the  person
most  deeply  interested  in  the  author's  reputation,  and  most
likely  to  bestow  patient  and  reverential  care  on  every  relic
left  by  him,

I  need  not  repeat  the  terms  in  which  Mr.  Austin's  Mends
encouraged  me  to  imdertake  the  task  of  putting  these  precious
materials  in  order,  nor  the  offers  of  advice  and  assistance  which
determined  me  to  venture  upon  it.  One  of  them,  who  spoke
with  the  authority  of  a  lifelong  friendship,  said,  after  looking
over  a  mass  of  detached  and  half-legible  papers,  '  It  will  be  a
great  and  difficult  labour ;  but  if  you  do  not  do  it,  it  will  never
be  done.' This  decided  me.

I  have  gathered  some  courage  from  the  thought  that  forty
.  years  of  the  most  intimate  communion  could  not  have  left  me
entirely  without  the  means  of  following  trains  of  thought  which
constantly  occupied  the  mind  whence  my  own  drew  light  and
truth,  as  from  a  living  fountain ;  of  guessing  at  half-expressed
meanings,  or  of  deciphering  words  illegible  to  others.  During
all  these  years  he  had  condescended  to  accept  such  small  assist-
ance as  I  could  render;  and  even  to  read  and  talk  to  me  on  the
subjects  which  engrossed  his  mind,  and  which  were,  for  that
reason,  profoundly  interesting  to  me.

Having  determined  on  the  course  to  be  pursued,  the  first
thing  to  be  done  was  obviously  to  republish  the  volume  already
in  print,  which  has  been  long  and  eagerly  demanded.  The
Author's  Preface  explains  the  matter  of  which  this  volume  con-
sists, and  his  purpose  in  publishing  it.  I  have  altered  nothing,
except  the  position  of  the  Outline,  which  is  now  placed  at  the
b^;inning,  iostead  of  at  the  end  of  the  book.  I  have  inserted
all  the  scattered  memoranda  I  have  been  able  to  find,  relating  to
alterations  and  additions  which  he  meditated.  Some  of  them
are  taken  firom  a  small  paper  marked  'Inserenda.'  All  these
things  are  manifestly  mere  suggestions  for  his  own  use, — indi-
cations of  matter  which  he  intended  to  introduce  or  to  work
out  They  are  inserted,  chiefiy  as  proofs  of  the  thought  he  had
given  to  a  more  ample  exposition  of  jurisprudence  euid  the  allied
sciences ;  but  also,  not  without  a  hope  that  some  of  them  may
serve  as  landmarks  for  the  guidance  of  future  explorers  of  the
way  he  intended  to  foUow.

The  volume  now  ^  republished  includes  the  first  ten  of  the
Lectures  read  at  the  London  University;  which,  though
divided  into  that  number  for  delivery,  were  (to  use  the  author's
^  Viz.  1861. See  note,  p.  1,  and  Adyertisement  to  this  edition.


24  Preface.

expression),  '  in  obedience  to  the  affinity  of  the  topics/  reduced
by  him  to  six.

There  remain,  unprinted,  all  the  rest  of  the  Lectures  given
at  the  London  University.  These  I  propose  to  print  exactly  as
he  left  them.  I  shall  edter  nothing,  and  shall  only  make  the
omissions  suggested  above.  This  course  is,  I  think,  fully
justified  by  the  opinions  already  cited.  There  is  also  the  short
Course,  delivered  at  the  Inner  Temple.  But  as  this  necessarily
went  in  great  measure  over  ground  which  had  been  traversed  in
the  earlier  Courses,  it  does  not  appear  to  the  friends  I  have
consulted  that  it  will  afford  matter  for  a  separate  volume.  It
is  thought  that  it  will  be  expedient  to  collate  these  with  the
earlier  and  fax  more  numerous  Lectures,  and  to  insert,  as  notes
or  appendix,  any  matter  which  is  not  found  in  those.  The  state
of  the  manuscript  seems  to  show  that  the  author  meant  to
incorporate  them  with  the  former ;  or  rather,  to  employ  both  in
the  construction  of  the  great  work  he  meditated.

When  Mr.  Austin  was  preparing  his  lectures  at  the  London
University  he  drew  out  a  set  of  Tables,  which  he  had  printed
for  distribution  to  the  gentlemen  of  his  class.  They  were  never
published  nor  sold,  and  were  consequently  imknown  to  the
public.  Nor  were  they  ever  completed.  Between  Tables  I.,
II.,  and  VIIL,  IX.,  there  is  a  chasm, — never  now  to  be  fiUed.
But  lamentably  incomplete  as  they  are,  they  are  pronoimced
by  one  eminent  lawyer  to  be  '  perhaps  the  most  extraordinary
production  of  his  mind ;'  and,  by  all  who  have  studied  them,
are  thought  to  afford  evidence  of  an  astonishing  originality  of
conception,  extent  of  learning  and  force  of  reasoning.  Each
Table  is  accompanied  by  explanatory  notes  of  great  length.  I
am  not  without  some  faint  hope  that  hints  for  the  construction
of  some  of  the  missing  Tables  may  be  found  among  the  various
scattered  notes  which  exist.^

The  nature  and  object  of  these  Tables  are  described  by  the
.author  in  his  opening  Lecture,  in  the  following  words.  After
stating  the  causes  which  rendered  an  opening  Lecture  a  useless
ceremony  in  his  case,  he  concludes  thus : —

'I  find  it  utterly  impossible  to  give  yon  the  faintest  notion  of  my
intended  Course. Nor  is  it  necessary  that  I  should.

*  I  have  been  busily  employed  in  preparing  a  small  work  which  will
answer  the  purpose  better.  It  consists  of  a  Set  of  Tables,  in  which  I  have
exhibited  the  Arrangement  intended by  the  Roman  Lawyers  in  their

^  These  tables  and  notes  were  printed contained  in  the  second  volume  of  the
in  the  last  of  the  volumes  of  these  Lee- present  edition. — R.  C.
tures,  published  in  1863,  and  are  now


Preface.  25

Institntes  or  Elementary  Treatises.  And  this  Arrangement  is  compared
with  various  others,  which  have  since  been  adopted  in  Codes,  or  proposed
by  Writers  on  Jurisprudence.  To  these  Tables  I  have  appended  notes,  in
which  I  have  endeavoured  to  show  the  raiwMilt  of  that  Arrangement,  and
to  explain  the  import  of  the  distinctions  upon  which  it  turns.

'From  these  Tables  and  from  the  Notes  which  have  been  appended
to  them,  those  who  may  do  me  the  honour  of  attending  my  Class,  will
collect  a  better  idea  of  my  general  subject  and  design  than  from  anything
that  I  could  utter  here.

'  These  Tables  are  nearly,  though  not  completely,  printed  off.  And  I
hope  they  will  appear  shortly.  I  have  been  working  day  and  night  in
order  that  I  might  have  them  ready  by  the  opening  of  my  Lectures  :  but
I  have  been  obliged  to  struggle  with  so  many  intricate  questions,  and  to
make  references  to  so  great  a  number  of  books,  that  I  found  it  impossible
to  complete  them  in  time.

*•  The  pains  which  I  have  taken  to  get  them  ready  must  serve  as  my \/
excuse  for  the  present  lame  appearance.

'  With  an  object  in  view  which  I  thought  important  I  could  not  afford
to  expend  my  labour  and  time  upon  a  mere  formality.*

Lastly,  I  find  a  considerable  mass  of  papers  on  Codifica-
tion ;  an  Essay  on  Interpretation ;  the  '  Excursus  on  Analogy,'
referred  to  at  the  beginning  of  Lecture  V.  in  the  present
volume;  and  the  commencement  of  a  project  of  a  Criminal
Code,  to  which  I  have  already  referred.

Such  are  the  materials  laboriously  brought  together  and
marvellously  wrought,  which  lie  broken  and  scattered  before  me.
The  noblest  designs,  the  highest  faculties,  the  most  unwearied
industry,  were  employed  upon  them — in  vain.  What  would
have  been  the  structure  reared  out  of  them,  had  the  Master
been  enabled  to  execute  the  plan  he  had  conceived,  is  now  left
to  melancholy  conjecture.

SAEAH  AUSTIN.

Weybridge,  1861.


In  the  preface  to  the  Second  Edition  of  the  'Province  of
Jurisprudence  determined,'  published  two  years  ago,  I  stated
what  were  the  manuscripts  remaining  in  my  possession,  in
what  condition  they  were  left  by  Mr.  Austin,  cmd  what  were
my  intentions  with  regard  to  them.  Since  that  time,  I  have
been  constantly  occupied  in  preparing  them  for  the  press,  and
I  now  give  them  to  the  world  under  those  conditions  of  incom-
pleteness which  I  announced  as  inevitable.

It  is  unnecessary  for  me  to  repeat  the  reasons  which  deter-
mined me  to  imdertake  so  arduous  a  work ;  or  to  apologise  for
the  imperfect  manner  in  which  it  is  accomplished.  I  am  now
more  than  ever  convinced  that  (however  obvious  the  objections


26  Preface.

to  it)  this  was  the  only  safe  and  practicable  mode  of  preserving
these  unfinished  but  precious  materials  in  perfect  genuineness
and  integrity.

I  have  not  attempted  to  alter  the  form  of  the  Lectures,  nor
to  disguise  the  breaks  and  chasms  in  them.

In  the  Preface  to  the  first  volimie  (p.  24),  I  spoke  of  my
intention  of  '  collating  the  Course  delivered  at  the  Inner  Temple
with  the  earlier  and  more  numerous  lectures  given  at  the  London
University,  and  inserting,  as  notes  or  appendix,  any  matter  not
found  in  these.*  Fortunately,  the  task  of  selection  and  adapta-
tion was  not  left  to  me.  On  a  nearer  examination,  I  found  that
the  author  had  marked  with  his  own  hand  the  parts  of  the  Inner
Temple  Course  which  were  to  be  added  to,  or  substituted  for,
passages  in  the  earlier  lectures.  In  several  places  he  had  even
cut  out  considerable  portions  from  the  latter,  leaving  a  reference
to  the  passages  in  the  former  which  he  intended  to  put  in  their
place.  I  had  therefore  only  to  conform  to  a  plan  which,  in  this
case,  and  I  beUeve  in  this  alone,  was  clearly  and  precisely  marked
out  The  Lectures,  as  now  printed,  are,  in  fact,  the  two  Courses,
consolidated  by  himself.

A  few  typographical  details  seem  to  require  notice.

There  are  some  passages  in  the  manuscript  through  which
the  author  had  drawn  a  light  pencil  line;  not,  I  am  sure,
signifying  that  they  were  to  be  entirely  rejected  (for  what  he
meant  to  be  erasures  are  too  complete  to  admit  of  a  doubt),  but
that  they  were  reserved  for  further  consideration,  or  were  to  be
transferred  to  some  other  placa  These  passages  I  have  generally
inserted,  distinguishing  them  by  brackets.

The  references  to  books,  which  are  extremely  numerous,  I
have  verified  in  every  case,  with  the  rare  exception  of  such-  as
were  not  within  my  reach.  In  some  cases,  where  I  have  seen
that  Mr.  Austin  had  emphatically  marked  the  passage  referred
to,  or  had  commented  upon  it  in  the  margin  of  the  book,  I  have
quoted  it.  Perhaps  this  has  been  done  rather  too  freely ;  but
the  space  so  occupied  is  not  great,  the  books  are  not  in  every-
body's hands,  and  I  thought  it  might  be  convenient  to  the  reader
to  see  the  precise  passage  to  which  the  author  referred.  Where-
ever  any  words  in  these  quotations  are  printed  in  italics,  those
words  are  underlined  in  the  book.

With  regard  to  the  use  of  italics,  capital  letters,  and  other
typographical  distinctions,  I  am  fully  aware  that  there  is  a
want  of  uniformity  and  consistency ;  and  if,  with  my  present


Preface.  27

experience,  I  had  to  begin  my  work  again,  there  are  several
things  which  I  should  do  otherwisa  But  the  mass  of  papers
was  BO  great,  the  subjects  treated  of  so  difficult,  and  the  task  of
arranging  them  so  formidable,  that  it  seemed  as  if  a  thorough
and  minute  examination  of  their  contents,  and  a  mature  deli-
beration on  the  details  of  their  arrangement,  would  defer  their
publication  almost  indefinitely.  A  still  more  urgent  motive
arose  from  the  consciousness  that  my  own  time  for  work  cannot
be  long,  and  is  extremely  precarious ;  and  the  thought  that  I
should  leave  these  remains  to  a  very  imcertain  fate,  made  me
determine  to  secure  the  most  important  part  of  them  from  the
chance  of  destruction,  with  as  Uttle  delay  as  possible ;  a  deter-
mination in  which  I  was  strengthened  by  those  of  my  husband's
friends  who  take  the  wannest  interest  in  the  advancement  of
the  science,  and  in  the  fame  of  the  writer.

The  duties  imposed  on  the  guardians  of  a  great  reputation
have  been  the  subject  of  much  discussion,  and,  to  myself,  of
much  painful  deliberation.  The  only  conclusion  I  could  arrive
at  is  this : — ^Where  a  writer  has  attached  great  value  to  form,
and  has  regarded  his  writings  as  works  of  art ;  where  any  con-
siderable portion  of  his  reputation  rests  upon  his  genius  and
skill  as  an  artist,  it  seems  an  act  of  iojustice  to  his  memory  to
publish  anything  which  had  not  undergone  the  last  and  highest
polish  of  his  own  hand.

But  where  the  great  aim  of  a  writer  has  been  to  correct
pernicious  errors,  to  throw  light  upon  obscure  truths,  to  dis-
seminate new  ideas  which  he  believed  to  be  of  the  highest  con-
cernment to  mankind ;  where  the  labour  he  bestowed  on  style
was  bestowed  solely  with  a  view  of  expressing  his  thoughts  with
the  greatest  possible  clearness  and  precision ;  where  the  depth,
gravity,  and  originality  of  the  matter  have  a  value  far  beyond
that  of  any  conceivable  perfection  of  form,  the  materials  he  had
accumulated  with  purposes  so  far  transcending  any  personal  ones,
ought  not,  however  unfinished,  to  be  consigned  to  oblivion.

In  subjecting  what  is  most  dear  and  venerable  to  me  in  the
world  to  so  severe  an  ordeal,  I  would  not  be  understood  to  be
indifferent  to  ro rm.  But  I  have  trusted  confidently  to  qualities
which  no  defects  of  form  can  destroy  or  greatly  disguise.  More-
over, these  defects  do  not  extend  to  what,  in  a  scientific  work,
is  of  supreme  importance;  namely,  arraTigeToent.  It  will  be
apparent  to  the  reader  that,  upon  whatever  new  inquiry  he
entered,  Mr.  Austin's  invariable  method  of  proceeding  was,  first
to  determine  precisely  its  limits,  and  then  to  lay  down  in  the


28  Preface.

most  accurate  manner  the  plan  of  arrangement  to  be  pursued
through  the  whole  course  of  the  investigation.  And  there  are
the  clearest  indications  in  the  manuscripts  themselves  that  this
preliminary  portion  of  his  task  was,  in  every  case,  most  carefully
and  laboriously  executed.  Unfortunately,  in  many  instances,
the  execution  was  carried  no  further ;  he  never  fiUed  up  the
outline  he  had  sketched  with  so  masterly  a  hand.  The  notes
on  Criminal  Law  and  those  of  Codification,  for  example,  are  in
so  rough  and  imperfect  a  state,  that  I  should  not  have  ventured  to
publish  them,  had  I  not  been  assured  that  they  would,  as  models
of  arrangement,  be  of  the  utmost  value  to  future  inquirers.

It  seems  hardly  necessary  to  repeat  (yet  perhaps  I  cannot
repeat  too  often),  that  this  book  shows  not  what  the  author  had
done,  but  what  he  intended  to  do,  and  (in  some  degree)  what  he
was  capable  of  doing.  I  have  therefore  allowed  various  indica-
tions of  his  intentions  to  remain.  I  have  also  preserved  the
traces  of  the  questionings  which  continually  suggested  themselves
to  his  penetrating  and  sincere  mind;  and  with  which  he  was
careful  to  qualify  and  limit  his  assertions,  so  long  as  the  shadow
of  a  doubt  remained.  All  these  are  characteristic  of  the  spirit
in  which  he  pursued  science.  To  seem  to  know,  or  to  leap  to
prompt  and  facile  conclusions,  was  impossible  to  him.  To  arrive
at  knowledge  by  ways  the  most  laborious,  the  most  mortifying
to  vanity,  and  tlie  most  irritating  to  impatience,  was  the  course
which  the  rectitude  of  his  nature  irresistibly  impelled  him  to
follow.

I  had  also  a  double  motive  in  showing  how  many  passages
were  reserved  for  reconsideration.  These  very  marks  of  doubt,
while  they  prove  the  caution  with  which  Ae  worked,  and  the
process  of  investigation  which  was  for  ever  going  on  in  his
mind,  may  perhaps  suggest  similar  caution,  and  excite  to  similar
mental  contention  in  those  who  are  to  follow  him.  Every  one
of  these  doubts,  pointing  to  further  research  and  further  reflec-
tion, may  lead  to  the  discovery  of  new  truths  or  to  the  solution
of  unsolved  problems.  Such  results  would  have  been  far  more
precious  to  him  than  any  conceivable  addition  to  his  fame  as
a  writer.  •

In  the  Preface  to  the  first  volume,  I  ventured  to  print  a  few
disjointed  sentences  which  appeared  to  me  to  throw  light  on  the
character  of  the  man,  and  on  the  nature  and  aims  of  his  teaching.
I  have  since  found  more  notes  of  the  same  kind ;  and,  broken
as  they  are,  I  give  them,  as  showing  still  more  clearly  in  what
spirit  and  with  what  views  he  entered  upon  the  duties  of  an


Preface.  29

oflSce  so  new  to  the  country  and  to  himself  as  that  of  Professor
of  Jurisprudence.

What  Lectures  of  this  kind  ought  to  be.

Great  defects  of  those  which  I  shall  actually  deliver :  particularly  as
to  the  method  and  style : — having  thought  it  better  to  gain  (as  far  as  I
could)  an  extensive  and  accurate  knowledge  of  my  subject  than — etc.

The  research,  necessary  for  this,  extremely  extensive ; — should  have
gone  on  for  ever. — New  language, — (Illness  and  debility).

In  the  course  of  a  few  years,  shall  be  able  to  produce  something  more
worth  hearing.

Shall  be  obliged  to  omit  much  of  what  I  had  intended  to  embrace.
There  is  none  of  the  details  which  will  not  need  as  much  illustration  as
the  principal  heads.  (Lord  Hale^s  illustration.)  And  if  I  descended  far
into  the  detail,  the  Lectures  would  be  endless.  I  must  therefore  content
myself  with  a  general  outline,  descending  here  and  there  into  the  detail,  so
often  as  it  is  peculiarly  interesting  and  important.

It  is  necessary  to  recollect  that  the  terms,  circumlocutions,  etc.,  used
in  these  Lectures  (so  far  as  new)  are  merely  explanatory.  In  applying
any  actual  system,  the  terms  of  that  system  must  be  observed.  So  of  its
arrangements,  etc.,  which  are  connected  with  its  terms.

The  principles  of  General  Jurisprudence  will  not  coincide  with  any
actual  system,  but  are  intended  to  facilitate  the  acquisition  of  any,  and  to
show  their  defects.

In  the  ordinary  business  of  life,  these  systems  must,  of  course,  be
applied  as  they  are.

Reconciliation  of  divorce  between  Philosophy  and  Practice.

Will  thank  my  hearers  to  attend  at  the  conclusion  of  every  Lecture,
and  to  ply  me  with  questions  and  demands  for  explanation.  This  will  not
only  enable  me  to  dear  up  obscurities,  but  to  produce  much  of  which  I
have  read,  and  upon  which  I  have  thought,  but  which  in  solitary  composition
escapes  the  recollection.

Also  to  criticise  with  unsparing  severity  ;  for  it  is  only  by  this  that  I
can  ever  learn  to  accommodate  my  future  Lectures  to  the  wants  of  students.

Uses  of  this  friendly  intercourse,  or  ^wMca  coUatio  :*  particularly  to
young  men  writing.  No  time,  that  I  shall  not  be  willing  to  give.  My
heart  in  the  subject :  nor  will  anything  be  disagreeable,  but  the  chilling
indifference  which  I  cannot  help  anticipating.

It  will  easily  be  understood  that  I  have  never  entertedned
the  project  of  rendering  such  a  book  acceptable  to  any  but  men
seriously  interested  in  the  great  questions  of  Law  and  Morals
which  lie  at  the  foundation  of  human  society.  To  the  discrim-
inating, and  therefore  indulgent,  judgment  of  that  narrow  public
which  is  constantly  tending  towards  the  ends  my  husband
pursued,  and  through  whom  his  labours  (which  to  him  seemed
barren)  may  hereafter  be  rendered  fruitful,  I  humbly  and
earnestly  commend  it.

I  must  add,  with  gratitude,  that  my  labour  has  been  cheered
by  an  ever-increasing  expression  of  interest  in  it,  from  men
eminent  in  Jurisprudence,  and  in  the  moral  sciences  generally,


30  Preface.

in  this  and  other  countries ; — strangers  to  all  but  the  mind  and
character  of  the  author  as  displayed  in  his  published  book.
They  have  exhorted  me  not  to  suffer  myself  to  be  deterred  by
want  of  completeness,  or  by  defects  of  style,  from  giving  to  the
world  '  any,  the  slightest,  intimations  of  Mr.  Austin's  opinions
on  the  subjects  to  which  he  had  devoted  himself,'  or  of  his
method  of  inquiry  and  arrangement  Such  exhortations  coming
from  men  whose  voice  is  authoritative,  it  seemed  my  duty  to
obey.

I  am  indebted  to  several  gentlemen  for  encouragement,
counsel,  and  assistance :  especially,  I  have  to  acknowledge  the
invaluable  and  persevering  aid  I  have  received  from  friends  of
Mr.  Austin,  who  found  time,  in  the  midst  of  their  own  pressing
avocations,  to  attend  to  my  doubts  and  difficulties.  Their
sanction  was  peculiarly  important,  since  they  had  been  among
the  most  assiduous  and  attentive  hearers  of  Mr.  Austin's  Lectures,
and  were  acquainted  with  his  modes  of  thinking  and  expression.
Without  such  a  sanction,  I  should  hardly  have  dared  to  publish
matter  in  which,  from  the  state  of  the  manuscripts,  some  exercise
of  discretion  w£is  inevitable.

It  would  be  impertinent  to  aflfect  to  regard  the  care  they
have  bestowed  on  the  work  in  its  passage  through  the  press,  as
an  obligation  conferred  on  me.  What  they  have  done  has  been
done  out  of  reverence  for  the  memory  of  the  author,  and  zeal
for  the  advancement  of  his  science.  Nor  should  I  venture  to
make  any  public  acknowledgment  of  it,  did  it  not  appear  to  me
necessary  for  my  own  justification,  and  for  the  satisfaction  of
the  reader.

SARAH  AUSTIN.

Weyhndgt,  Afnril,  1863.


OUTLINE  OF  THE  COURSE  OF  LECTURES.


'Dum  potentes  alind  agont,  jurisconBulti  eraditd,  pmdentes,  bene
animati,  conferant  capita  privatim,  cogitentque  de  jure  constitaendo,  ut
reddant  ceitins  quam  nunc :  posset  is  labor  prseludere  pnncipum  anctoritati.'
— Leibnitz.


[In  the  original  edition  of  *  The  Province  of  Jurisprudence  determined,'
published  in  1832,  the  following  passage  is  inserted  in  the  Preface.

In  1831  I  published  an  Outline  of  my  Course:  Which
outline,  carefully  corrected  and  somewhat  enlarged,  I  append  to
the  following  treatise.  For  the  following  treatise  is  a  detached
portion  of  the  Course :  And  unless  the  disquisitions  composing
the  treatise  be  viewed  with  their  relations  to  the  subject  and
scope  of  the  Course,  and  the  arrangement  which  I  give  to  the
subject,  their  pertinence  and  importance  can  hardly  be  seen
completely.  To  lighten  to  the  reader  the  labour  of  catching  the
arrangement,  I  have  placed,  at  the  end  of  the  Outline,  an
Abstract  of  the  Outline  itself.

Afl  the  Outline  relates  not  only  to  the  matter  of  the  original  Volume,
but  to  the  entire  Course,  it  has  been  thought  advisable  to  prefix,  instead  of
appending  it — S.  A]


PRELIMINARY  EXPLANATIONS.

I.  I  shall  determine  the  province  of  Jurisprudence.
II.  Having  determined  the  province  of  Jurisprudence,  I
shall  distinguish  general  jurisprudence,  or  the  philosophy  of
positive  law,  from  what  may  be  styled  particular  jurisprudence,
or  the  science  of  particular  law ;  that  is  to  say,  the  science  of
any  such  system  of  positive  law  as  now  actually  obtains,  or  once
actually  obtained,  in  a  specifically  determined  nation,  or  speci-
fically determined  nations.


32  Outline  of  the

Lect.I-VI  NoU, — Of  all  the  concise  expressions  which  I  have  turned  in  my  mind,

^-*^v-*^  <  the  philosophy  of  positive  law '  indicates  the  most  significantly  the  subject
and  scope  of  my  Course.  I  have  borrowed  the  expression  from  a  treatise
by  Hugo,  a  celebrated  professor  of  Jurisprudence  in  the  University  of  Got-
tingen,  and  the  author  of  an  excellent  history  of  the  Roman  Law.  Although
the  treatise  in  question  is  entitled  '  the  law  of  nature/  it  is  not  concerned
with  the  law  of  nature  in  the  usual  meaning  of  the  term.  In  the  language
of  the  author,  it  is  concerned  with  *■  the  law  of  nature  as  a  philosoj^y  of
positive  law*  But  though  this  last  expression  is  happily  chosen,  the  subject
and  scope  of  the  treatise  are  conceived  indistinctly.  Gfeneral  jurisprudence,
or  the  philosophy  of  positive  law,  is  blended  and  confounded,  from  the
beginning  to  the  end  of  the  book,  with  the  portion  of  deontology  or  ethics,
which  is  styled  the  science  of  legislation.  Now  general  jurisprudence,  or
the  philosophy  of  positive  law,  is  not  concerned  directly  with  the  science  of
legislation.  It  is  concerned  directly  with  principles  and  distinctions  which
are  common  to  various  systems  of  particular  and  positive  law  ;  and  which
each  of  those  various  systems  inevitably  involves,  let  it  be  worthy  of  praise
or  blame,  or  let  it  accord  or  not  with  an  assumed  measure  or  test  Or
(changing  the  phrase)  general  jurisprudence,  or  the  philosophy  of  positive
law,  is  concerned  with  law  as  it  necessarily  is,  rather  than  with  law  as  it
ought  to  be  ;  with  law  as  it  must  he,  be  it  good  or  bad,  rather  than  with  law
as  it  must  he,  if  it  be  good.

The  subject  and  scope  of  general  jurisprudence,  as  contradistinguished
to  particular  jurisprudence,  are  well  expressed  by  Hobbes  in  that  department
of  his  Leviathan  which  is  concerned  with  civil  (or  positive)  laws.  '  By  civil
laws  (says  he),  I  understand  the  laws  that  men  are  therefore  bound  to
observe,  because  they  are  members,  not  of  this  or  that  commonwealth  in
particular,  but  of  a  commonwealth.  For  the  knowledge  of  particular  laws
belongeth  to  them  that  profess  the  study  of  the  laws  of  their  several
countries  :  but  the  knowledge  of  civil  laws  in  general,  to  any  man.  The
ancient  law  of  Bome  was  called  their  "  civil  law "  from  the  word  civitcu,
which  signifies  a  commonwealth  :  And  those  countries  which,  having  been
under  the  Roman  empire,  and  governed  by  that  law,  still  retain  such  part
thereof  as  they  think  fit,  call  that  part  the  "  civU  law,''  to  distinguish  it
from  the  rest  of  their  own  civil  laws.  But  that  is  not  it  I  intend  to  speak
of.  My  design  is  to  show,  not  what  is  law  here  or  there,  but  what  is  law :  As
Plato,  Aristotle,  Cicero,  and  divers  others  have  done,  without  taking  upon
them  the  profession  of  the  study  of  the  law.'

Having  distinguished  general  from  particular  jurisprudence,
I  shall  show  that  the  study  of  the  former  is  a  necessary  or
useful  preparative  to  the  study  of  the  science  of  legislation.*  I
shall  also  endeavour  to  show,  that  the  study  of  general  juris-
prudence might  precede  or  accompany  with  advantage  the  study
of  particular  systems  of  positive  law.

Note, — Expounding  the  principles  and  distinctions  which  are  the  appro-
priate matter  of  general  jurisprudence,  I  shall  present  them  abstracted  or

*  The  matter  contained  in  the  above  address  himself  to  the  subject  of  general

section  of  the  Outline  does  not  appear  jurisprudence. The  subject  here  referred

to  be  further  developed  in  the  ensuing  to  will,  howe^r,  be  found  more  enlarged

lectures. The  distinction  appears  to  be  upon  in  an  essay  entitled  '  On  the  Study

assumed,  and  the  author,  in  the  lecture  of  Jurisprudence,'  printed  towards  the

marked  XII.,  immediately  proceeds  to  end  of  the  second  volume. — R  C.


Course  of  Lectures,  3  3

detached  from  every  particular  BTstem. But  when  such  a  principle  or  dis-  Legt.I-VI
tinction,  as  so  abstracted  or  detached,  may  seem  to  need  exemplification,  I '
shall  also  endeavour  to  present  it  with  one  or  both  of  the  forms  wherein  it
respectively  appears  in  the  two  particular  systems  which  I  have  studied
with  some  accuracy  :  namely,  the  Roman  Law  and  the  Law  of  England.

IIL  Having  determined  the  province  of  jurisprudence,  and  Lbot.XII-
distinguished general from  particular  jurisprudence, I shall ^^^II
analyse certain  notions  which  meet  us  at  every  step,  as  we
travel  through  the  science  of  law. Of  these  leading  notions,  or
these  leading  expressions,  the  most  important  and  remarkable
ar^  the  following : —

Person  and  Thing.  Fact  or  Event,  and  Incident  Act,
Forbearance,  and  Omission.

Legal  Duty,  relative  or  absolute.  Legal  Bight.  Legal
Rights  in  rem,  with  their  corresponding  Offices;  and  Legal
Rights  in  personam,  with  their  corresponding  Obligations.  Legal
Privilege.  Permission  (by  the  Sovereign  or  State),  and  Political
or  Civil  Liberty.

Delict  or  Injury,  civil  or  criminal

Cvipa  (in  the  largest  sense  of  the  term),  or  The  Grounds
or  Causes  of  ImptUation:  a  notion  involving  the  notions  of
Wish  or  Desire,  of  Wish  as  Motive,  and  of  Wish  as  Will ;  of
Intention,  of  Negligence,  of  Heedlessness,  and  of  Temerity  or
Rashness.  The  grounds  or  causes  of  Ifon-Impidation:  e.g.
Infancy,  Insanity,  Ignorantid  FaMi,  Ignorantia  Juris,  Casus  or
Mishap,  Vis  or  Compulsion.

Legal  Sanction,  civil  or  criminal.

NgU. — Though  every  right  implies  a  corresponding  duty,  every  duty
does  not  imply  a  corresponding  right.  I  therefore  distinguish  duties  into
relative  and  absolute.  A  relative  duty  is  implied  by  a  right  to  which  that
duty  answers.  An  absolute  duty  does  not  answer,  or  is  not  implied  by,  an
answering  right

Persons  are  capable  of  taking  rights,  and  are  also  capable  of  incurring
duties.  But  a  person,  not  nn^quently,  is  merely  the  wJbjwt  of  a  right
which  resides  in  cmoiker  person,  and  avails  against  ikird  persons.  And
considered  as  the  subject  of  a  right,  and  of  the  corresponding  duty,  a  person
is  neither  invested  wilh  a  right,  nor  subject  to  a  duty.  Considered  as  the
subject  of  a  right,  and  of  the  corresponding  duty,  a  person  occupies  a  posi-
tion analogous  to  that  of  a  thing.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  position  of
the  servant  or  apprentice,  in  respect  of  the  master's  right  to  the  servant  or
apprentice,  against  third  persons  or  strangers.

Things  are  mbjects  of  rights,  and  are  also  mbjecU  of  the  duties  to  which
those  rights  correspond.  But,  setting  aside  a  fiction  which  I  shall  state  and
explain  in  my  lectures,  things  are  incapable  of  taking  rights,  and  are  also
incapable  of  incurring  duties.

VOL.  I.  D


34  Outline  of  the

Lbot.XII-  Having  determined  the  province  of  Jurisprudence,  distin-
^  ^  ^  guished  general  from  particular  Jurisprudence,  and  analysed
certain  notions  which  pervade  the  science  of  law,  I  shall  leave
that  merely  prefatory,  though  necessary  or  inevitable  matter,
and  shall  proceed,  in  due  order,  to  the  various  departments  and
sub-departments  under  which  I  arrange  or  distribute  the  body
or  bulk  of  my  subject.

Now  the  principle  of  my  main  division,  and  the  basis  of
the  main  departments  which  result  from  that  main  division,
may  be  found  in  the  following  considerations.

First :  Subject  to  slight  correctives,  the  essential  difference
of  a  positive  law  (or  the  difference  that  severs  it  from  a  law
which  is  not  a  positive  law)  may  be  put  in  the  following
*  manner.  Every  positive  law,  or  every  law  simply  and  strictly
so  called,  is  set  by  a  sovereign  individual  or  a  sovereign  body  of
individuals,  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state  of  subjection  to
its  author.  But  some  positive  laws  are  set  by  the  sovereign
immediately :  whilst  others  are  set  immediately  by  subordinate
political  superiors,  or  by  private  persons  in  pursuance  of  legal
rights.  In  consequence  of  which  differences  between  their
imToediate  authors,  laws  are  said  to  emanate  from  different
sources  ox  fountains.

Secondly:  A  law  may  begin  or  end  in  different  mx>desy
whether  it  be  set  immediately  by  the  sovereign  one  or  number,
or  by  a  party  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  sovereign.

Thirdly:  Independently  of  the  differences  between  their
sources,  and  between  the  modes  in  which  they  begin  and  end,
laws  are  calculated  or  intended  to  accomplish  different  purposes,
and  are  also  conversant  about  different  subjects.

Being  set  or  established  by  different  immediate  atUhors,
beginning  and  ending  in  different  m^des,  being  calculated  or
intended  to  accomplish  different  purposes,  and  being  conversant
about  different  subjects,  law  may  be  viewed  from  two  distinct
aspects,  and  may  also  be  aptly  distributed  under  the  two  main
departments  which  are  sketched  or  indicated  below.

In  the  first  of  those  main  departments,  law  will  be  considered
with  reference  to  its  sources,  and  with  reference  to  the  m,odes  in
which  it  begins  and  ends.  In  the  second  of  those  main  depart-
ments, law  will  be  considered  with  reference  to  its  purposes,  and
with  reference  to  the  subjects  about  which  it  is  conversant.


Course  of  Lectures.  3  5

LAW  CONSIDERED  WITH  REFERENCE  TO  ITS  SOURCES,
AND  WITH  REFERENCE  TO  THE  MODES  IN  WHICH  IT
BEGINS  AND  ENDS.

I.  A  law  or  rule  may  be  set  immedicUely  by  the  sovereign, Lbct.
or  by  a  party  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  sovereign. Hence ^^ix"
the  distinction  between  written  and  unvnritten  law,  as  the  terms "— 'i — '
are  frequently  used  in  treatises  by  modem  civilians,  or  by
writers  on  general  jurisprudence. And  hence  the  equivalent
distinction  between  promtUged  and unpromtUged  law,  as  the
terms  are  frequently  used  in  the  same  treatises. As  the  terms
are  frequently  used  in  those  treatises,  written  law,  or  promulged
law,  is  law  of  which  the  sovereign  is  the  immediate  author ;
whilst  untorUten  law,  or  unpromulged  law,  is  law  which  flows
immediately  from  some  subordinate  source.

The  two  distinctions,  as  taken  in  that  sense,  will  be  ex-
pounded in  the  lectures:  wherein  I  shall  explain  the  widely
different  senses  which  often  are  annexed  to  the  terms.

IL  Whether  it  be  set  immediately  by  the  sovereign  one  or
number,  or  by  some  political  superior  in  a  state  of  subjection  to
the  sovereign,  a  law  or  rule  may  be  set  or  established  in  either
of  two  m^odes :  namely,  in  the  properly  legislative  mode  (or  in
the  way  of  direct  legislation),  or  in  the  improperly  legislative
mode  (or  in  the  way  o{  judicial  legislation).

A  law  established  in  the  properly  legislative  mode  is  set  by
its  author  or  maker  as  a  law.  The  direct  or  proper  purpose  of
its  author  or  maker  is  the  establishment  of  the  law  which  is
made. — ^A  rule  established  in  the  improperly  legislative  mode  is
assumed  by  its  author  or  maker  as  the  ground  of  a  judicial
decision.  The  direct  or  .proper  purpose  is  the  decision  of  a
case,  and  not  the  establishment  of^the  rule  which  is  assumed
and  applied  To  the  case.  The.,  author  or  maker  of  the  rule
legislates  as  properly  judging,  sud  not  as  properly  legidating.

As  I  have  intimated  above,  the  sovereign  one  or  number,
or  any  political  superior  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  sovereign,
may  legislate  in  either  of  these  modes.  For  example:  The
Roman  Emperors  or  Princes,  during  the  Lower  Empire,  were
avowedly,  as  well  as  substantially,  sovereign  in  the  Soman
World:  and  yet  they  established  laws  by  the  decretes  which
they  gave  judicially,  as  weU  as  by  the  edietal  constitutions  which
they  made  in  their  legislative  character.  And,  on  the  other
hand,  the  Soman  Praetors,  who  were  properly  subfed  judges,
established  laws  in  the  way  of  direct  legislation  by  the  edicts


36  Outline  of  the

Lbot. which  they  published  on  their  accession  to  office. The  rttZcs  of
XXXlx"  practice  made  by  the  English  Courts,  are  also  examples  of  laws
' * ^ established in the legislative  mode by  subordinate political
superiors.

Inasmuch  as  its  true  essentials  are  frequently  misconceived,
I  shall  endeavour  to  analyze  accurately  the  distinction  which  I
have  now  suggested :  namely^  law .  made  directly,  or  in  the
properly  legislative  manner ;  and  law  made  judidaily,  or  in  the
way  of  improper  legislation.

Having  stated  the  essential  differences  of  the  two  kinds  of
law,  I  shall  briefly  compare  their  respective  [merits  and  defects,
and  then  briefly  consider  the  related  question  of  codification.

III.  Every  positive  law,  or  rule  of  positive  law,  exists  as
such  by  the  pleasure  of  the  sovereign.  As  such,  it  is  made
immediately  by  the  sovereign,  or  by  a  party  in  a  state  of
subjection  to  the  sovereign,  in  one  of  the  two  modes  which  are
indicated  by  the  foregoing  article.  As  such,  it  flows  from  one
or  another  of  those  sources.

But  by  the  classical  Koman  jurists,  by  Sir  William  Black-
stone,  and  by  numerous  other  writers  on  particular  or  general
^ jurisprudence,  the  occqsiam  of  lawa,OT  the  motives  to  their  estab-
) lishment,  are  frequently  confounded  with  their  sources  or  fountains.
The  following  examples  will  show  the  nature  of  the  error  to
which  I  have  now  adverted.
f  The  prevalence  of  a  custom  amongst  the  governed,  may

\  determine  the  sovereign,  or  some  political  superior  in  a  state  of
J  subjection  to  the  sovereign,  to  transmute  the  custom  into  positive
I  law. Eespect  for  a  law-writer  whose  works  have  gotten  reputa-
tion, may  determine  the  legislator  or  judge  to  adopt  his  opinions,
\ or  to  turn  the  speculative  conclusions  of  a  private  man  into
/ actually  binding  rules. The  prevalence  of  a  prartice  amongst
^ private  practitioners  of  theTaw,  may  determine  the  legislator  or
^  judge  to  impart  the  force  of  law  to  the  practice  which  they

\^  \  o^.?®^^®  spontaneously. — ^Now  till  the  legislator  or  judge  impress
V A them  with  the  character  of  law,  the  custom  is  nothing  more
than  a  rule  of  positive  morality ;  the  conclusions  are  the  specu-
lative conclusions  of  a  private  or  unauthorised  writer ;  and  the
V  practice  is the  spontaneous  practice  of  private  practitioners.

\  But  the  classical  Soman  jurists.  Sir  William  Blackstone,  and  a

host  of  other  writers,  fancy  that  a  rule  of  law  made  by  judicial
decision  on  a  pre-existing  customi,  exists  as"  positive  law,  apart-
from  the  legislator  or  judge,  by  the  institution  of  the  private
persons who observed  it  in  its  customary  state. And  the


Course  of  Lectures.  37

claasical  Soman  juiists  have  the  same  or  a  like  conceit  with Iact.

XXVIII
regard  to  the  rules  of  law  which  are  fashioned  by  judicial xxxix"

decision  on  the  conclusions  or  practices  of  private  writers  or ^ y ^

practitioners. They  ascribe their existence as law to the

authority  of  the  writers  or  practitioners,  and  not  to  the  sovereign,

or  the  representatives  of  the  sovereign,  who  clothed  them  with

the  legal  sanction.

With  a  view  to  these  conceits,  and  to  others  equally  absurd,

I  shall  examine  the  natures  of  the  following  kinds  of  law.

1.  Law  fashioned  by  judicial  decision  upon  pre-existing
custom:  or  (borrowing  the  language  of  the  classical  Soman
jurists)  jvs  moribus  constUtUum.

2.  Law  fashioned  by  judicial  decision  upon  opinions  and
practices  of  private  or  unauthorised  lawyers;  or  (borrowing
the  language  of  the  classical  Soman  jurists)  fus  prvdentibus
eompositwm.

Examining  customary  law,  or  law  morilms  constittUuni,  I
shall  advert  to  the  essential  differences  between  general  customary
laws,  and  such_ customary, Jaws  as  are  local  or  particular:  or
(speaking  more  properly)  between  the  customary  laws  which  the
tribunals  know  jydiddlly,  and  the  customary  laws  which  the
tribunals  will  not  notice,  unless  their  existence  be  proved,

IV.  Natural  law,  as  the  term  is  commonly  understood  by
modem  writers  upon  jurisprudence,  has  two  disparate  meanings.
It  signifies  the  law  of  God,  or  a  portion  of  positive  law  and
positive  morality.

The  law  natural,  which  is  parcel  of  law  positive,  is  analogous
to  law  morSms  canstittUum,  and  to  law  prudefntiJbus  compositum.
For  natural  law,  considered  as  a  portion  of  positive,  is  positive
law  fashioned  by  the  legislator  or  judge  on  pre-existing  law  of
another  description :  namely,  on  the  law  of  God  truly  or  errone-
ously apprehended ;  or  on  rules  of  positive  morality  which  are
not  peculiar  to  any  nation  or  age,  but  obtain,  or  are  thought  to
obtain,  in  all  nations  and  ages.

Accordingly,  from  law  moribus  constitiUvm,  and  law  pru-
denttbus  compositum,  1  shall  pass,  by  an  obvious  and  easy
transition,  to  the  law  natural  which  is  parcel  of  law  positiva
Handling  the  topic,  I  shall  show  the  analogy  borne  by  that
natural  law  to  law  morilms  constUwtum  and  law  prudentibus
compositum.  Canvassing  the  same  topic,  I  shall  show  that  the
supposition  of  a  natural  law  (considered  as  a  portion  of  positive
law  and  morality)  involves  the  intermediate  hypothesis  which  is
compounded  of  the  theory  of  utility  and  the  hypothesis  of  a


38  Outline  of  the

TYvni ^^^  sense:  that,  assuming  the  pure  hypothesis  of  a  moral
xxxix" sense,  or  assuming  the  pure  theory  of  general  utility,  the  distinc-
' — r — ' tion  of  human  rules  into  natural  and  positive,  were  utterly
senseless,  or  utterly  purposeless.

With  a  view  to  my  subsequent  outline  of  the  jus  prcUarium,
I  shall  give  an  historical  sketch  of  the  jus  gentium,  as  it  was
understood  by  the  earlier  Eoman  lawyers.  The  jus  gentium  of
the  earlier  Boman  lawyers,  I  shall  distinguish  from  the  jus
naturcUe,  or  jus  gentium,  which  makes  so  conspicuous  a  figure
in  the  van  of  the  Institutes  and  Pandects.  I  shall  show  that
theyi^  gentium  of  the  earlier  Boman  lawyers  is  peculiar  to  the
Boman  law ;  whilst  the  latter  is  equivalent  to  naturcU  law,  as
the  term  is  commonly  understood  by  modem  writers  upon  juris-
prudence. I  shall  show  that  the  jus  gentium  of  the  earlier
Eoman  lawyers  was  a  purely  practiced  notion :  that  it  arose  from
the  peculiar  relations  borne  by  the  Urbs  Boma  to  her  dependent
allies  and  subject  provinces.  I  shall  show  that  the  latter  is  a
purely  speculative  notion:  that  it  was  stolen  by  the  jurists
styled  classical,  and  by  them  imported  into  the  Boman  Law,
from  certain  muddy  hypotheses  of  certain  Greek  philosophers,
touching  the  measure  or  test  of  positive  law  and  morality.

V,  From  the  jus  morSms  constitutum,  the  jus  prudentibus
compositum,  the  naturai  law  of  modem  writers  upon  juris-
prudence, and  the  equivalent  jus  gentium  of  the  jurists  styled
classical,  I  shall  pass  to  the  distinction  between  law  of  domestic
growth  and  law  of  foreign  original :  the  so  called  *  jus  recqptum*
For  here  also,  the  sources  or  fountains  of  laws  are  conmionly
confounded  with  their  occasions,  or  with  the  motives  to  their
establishment.  As  obtaining  in  the  nation  wherein  it  is  received,
the  so  called  jus  receptum  is  not  of  foreign  original,  but  is  law
of  domestic  manufacture  or  domestic  growth.  As  obtaining  in
the  nation  wherein  it  is  received,  it  is  law  fashioned  by  the
tribunals  of  that  nation  on  law  of  a  foreign  and  independent
commimity.  For  example :  The  Boman  Law,  as  it  obtains  in
Germany,  is  not  law  emanating  from  Boman  lawgivers.  It  is
law  made  by  Grerman  lawgivers,  but  moulded  by  its  German
authors  on  a  Boman  original  or  model

Passing  from  the  jus  receptum^  I  shall  advert  to  the  positive
law,  closely  analogous  to  the  jus  receptum,  which  is  fashioned
by  judicial  decision  on  positive  international  morality.

VI.  Equity  sometimes  signifies  a  species  of  law.  But,  as
used  in  any  of  the  significations  which  are  oftener  and  more
properly  annexed  to  it,  it  is  not  the  name  of  a  species  of  law.


Course  of  Lectures.  39

Of  the  latter  significations,  that  which  is  most  remarkable, ^ct.
and  which  I  shall  therefore  explain  with  some  particularity, yytty"
may  be  stated  briefly  thus. — Equity  often  signifies  the  anaiogy, »
proportion,  or  equality,  which  is  the  basis  of  the  spurious  inter-
pretation styled  extensive.

As  signifying  a  species  of  law,  the  term  equity  is  confined
exclusively  to  Boman  and  English  jurisprudence.  The  law,
moreover,  of  which  it  is  the  name  in  the  language  of  English
jurisprudence,  widely  differs  from  the  law  which  it  signifies  in
the  language  of  the  Soman.  Consequently,  its  import  is  not
involved  by  the  principles  of  general  jurisprudence,  but  lies  in
the  particular  histories  of  those  particular  systems.  But  since
this  talk  of  eqwity  has  obscured  the  rationale  of  law,  and  since
an  attempt  should  be  made  to  dispel  that  thick  obscurity,  I
shall  here  digress,  for  a  time,  from  the  region  of  philosophical
or  general,  to  the  peculiar  and  narrower  provinces  of  Boman
and  English  jurisprudence.  Having  sketched  an  historical
outline  of  the  fus  prcetorium  (which  is  intimately  connected
with  the  fus  gentium,  as  this  last  was  understood  by  the  earlier
Boman  lawyers),  I  shall  briefly  compare  the  equity  dispensed  by
the  Boman  Praetors  with  the  equity  administered  by  the  English
Chancellors.  From  which  brief  comparison  it  will  amply  appear,
that  the  distinction  of  positive  law  into  law  and  equity  (or  jvs
civile  and  fus  proftorium)  arose  in  the  Boman,  and  also  in  the
English  nation,  from  circumstances  purely  anomalous,  or  peculiar
to  the  particular  community.  And  from  which  brief  comparison
it  will  also  amply  appear,  that  the  distinction  is  utterly  sense-
less, when  tried  by  general  principles ;  and  is  one  prolific  source
of  the  needless  and  vicious  complexness  which  disgraces  the
systems  of  jurisprudence  wherein  the  distinction  obtains.

VIL  From  the  sources  of  law,  and  the  modes  wherein  it
begins,  I  shall  turn  to  the  modes  wherein  it  is  abrogated,  or
wherein  it  otherwise  ends.


LAW  CJONSIDERED  WITH  REFERENCE  TO  ITS  PURPOSES,
AND  WITH  REFERENCE  TO  THE  SUBJECTS  ABOUT  WHICH
IT  IS  CONVERSANT.  ^

L  There  are  certain  rights  and  chUies,  with  certain  capacities  Lsor.  X
and  incapcuyiiies  to  take  rights  and  incur  duties,  by  which  persons, *^'
as  subjects  of  law,  are  variously  determined  to  certain  classes.

The  rights,  duties,  capacities,  or  incapacities,  which  determine


40  Outline  of  the

Leot.  XL  a  given  person  to  any  of  these  classes,  constitute  a  condition  or
^  ^'  ^  statvs  which  the  person  occupies,  or  with  which  the  person  is
invested.

One  and  the  scone  person  may  belong  to  vnany  of  these
classes,  or  may  occupy,  or  he  invested  with,  vnany  conditions  or
8t(Uus,  For  example :  One  and  the  same  person,  at  one  and
the  same  time,  may  be  son,  husband,  father,  guardian,  advocate
or  trader,  member  of  a  sovereign  number,  and  minister  of  that
sovereign  body.  And  various  status,  or  various  conditions,  may
thus  meet  or  imite,  in  one  and  the  same  person,  in  infinitely
various  ways.

The  rights,  duties,  capacities  and  incapacities,  whereof  con-
ditions or  status  are  respectively  constituted  or  composed,  are  the
appropriate  matter  of  the  department  of  law  which  commonly
is  named  the  Law  of  Persons:  Jus  quod  ad  Personas  pertvaet.
Less  ambiguously  and  more  significantly,  that  department  of
law  might  be  styled  the  ' Law  of  Status*  For  though  the  term
persona  is  properly  synonymous  with  the  term  status,  such  is  not
its  usual  and  more  commodious  signification.  Taken  with  its
usual  and  more  commodious  signification,  it  denotes  homo  or
man  (including  woman  and  child),  or  it  denotes  an  aggregate  or
collection  of  men.  Taken  with  its  usual  and  more  commodious
signification,  it  does  not  denote  a  statvs  with  which  a  man  is
invested.

The  department,  then,  of  law  which  is  styled  the  Law  of
Persons,  is  conversant  about  status  or  conditions :  or  (expressing
the  same  thing  in  another  form)  it  is  conversant  about  persons
(meaning  Tneni)  as  bearing  or  invested  with  persons  (meaning
status  or  conditions).

The  department  of  law  which  is  opposed  to  the  Law  of
Persons,  is  commonly  named  the  Law  of  Things :  Jits  quod  ad
Res  pertinet  The  explanation  of  which  name  needs  a  disquisi-
tion too  long  for  the  present  outline.^

The  Law  of  Things  is  conversant  about  matter  which  may
be  described  briefly  in  the  following  manner :

It  is  conversant  about  rights  and  duties,  capacities  and
incapacities,  as  abstracted  from  the  rights  and  duties,  capacities
and  incapacities,  whereof  conditions  or  ^atus  are  respectively
constituted  or  composed:  or  (changing  the  expression)  it  is
conversant  about  rights  and  duties,  capacities  and  incapacities,

7  *  The  explanation  to  be  inserted  from Bechts,  vol.  ii.  p.  L  et  aeq." ' (MS.  note
Lecture  XL. See  Thibaut, "  Versuche by  the  Author.)
iiber  einzelne  Theile  der  Theorie des


Course  of  Lectures.  4 1

in  so  far  as  they  are  riot  constituent  or  component  elements  of  Lbct.  XL
statuR  or  conditions.  It  is  also  conversant  about  persons,  in  so  v  ^  ^
far  as  they  are  invested  with,  or  in  so  far  as  they  are  subject
to,  the  rights  and  duties,  capacities  and  incapacities,  with  which
it  is  occupied  or  concerned. — It  is  conversant  about  acts,  for-
bearances, and  things,  in  so  far  as  they  are  objects  and  subjects
of  rights  and  duties,  and  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  considered  in
the  Law  of  Persons :  for  acts,  forbearances,  and  things,  are  so
far  considered  in  the  Law  of  Persons,  as  they  are  objects  and
subjects  of  the  rights  and  duties  with  which  the  Law  of  Persons
is  occupied  or  concerned.  It  is  also  conversant  about  persons
as  subjects  of  rights  and  duties,  in  so  far  as  they  are  not  con-
sidered from  that  aspect  in  the  Law  of  Persons  or  Status.

11.  Considered  with  reference  to  its  diflferent  purposes,  and
with  reference  to  the  diflferent  subjects  about  which  it  is  con-
versant, law  may  be  divided  in  various  ways.  But  of  all  the
main  divisions  which  it  will  admit,  the  least  inconvenient  is  the
ancient  division,  the  import  whereof  I  have  now  attempteik  to
suggest  Considered  with  reference  to  its  purposes  and  subjects,
law  will  therefore  be  divided,  in  the  course  which  I  intend,
into  law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons.  In  the  institutional
or  elementary  writings  of  the  classical  Boman  jurists,  who  were
the  authors  or  inventors  of  this  celebrated  division,  the  Law  of
Persons  preceded  the  Law  of  Things.  But  for  various  reasons,
to  which  I  shall  advert  immediately,  I  begin  with  the  Law  of
Things,  and  conclude  with  the  Law  of  Persons.

But  before  I  consider  the  Law  of  Things,  or  the  Law  of
Persons,  I  shall  state  and  illustrate  the  import  and  uses  of  this
ancient  and  celebrated  division.  And  in  order  to  that  end,  I
shall  proceed  in  the  following  manner : — 1.  I  shall  try  to  define
or  determine  the  notion  of  status  or  condition :  for  that  essential
or  necessary  notion  is  the  basis  or  principle  of  the  division.

2.  I  shall  show  that  the  division  is  merely  arbitrary,  although
it  is  more  commodious  than  other  divisions,  and  although  the
notion  which  is  its  basis  or  principle,  is  essential  or  necessary.

3.  I  shall  show  the  uses  of  the  division ;  and  shall  contrast  it
with  other  divisions  which  have  been,  or  might  be,  adopted.  4.
I  shall  state  the  import  of  the  division,  as  it  was  conceived  by
its  authors,  the  classical  Boman  jurists,  in  their  institutional  or
elementary  writings.  I  shall  show  that  their  arrangement  of
the  Boman  Law  often  departs  from  the  notion  which  is  the
basis  of  the  division  in  question,  and  on  which  the  whole  of
their  arrangement  ultimately  rests. More  especially,  I  shall'


42  Outline  of  the

Leot.  XL  show  that  the  matter  of  jva  actionum,  which  they  placed  on  a
*^  line  with  Jus  persanarum  et  rerum,  should  not  be  put  into  a
department  distinct  from  the  two  last,  but  ought  to  be  dis-
tributed under  both :  that  the  main  division  of  law  ought  to  be
twofold  only,  Law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons :  and  that  the
classical  Boman  jurists  therefore  fell  into  the  error  of  co-ordinoU-
ing  certain  species  with  the  genera  of  which  they  are  members.
5.  The  division  of  law  into  Law  of  Things  and  Persons,  is
obscured  by  the  conciseness  and  ambiguity  of  the  language
wherein  it  is  commonly  expressed.  Of  that  obscurity  I  shall
endeavour  to  clear  it.  6.  I  shall  show  that  Blackstone  and
others,  probably  misled  by  that  conciseness  and  ambiguity,  have
misapprehended  grossly  the  true  import  of  the  division,  and
have  turned  that  elliptical  and  dubious  language  into  arrant
jargon.

From  the  attempt  which  I  have  made  above  to  suggest  the
import  of  the  division,  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  Law  of  Things
is  concerned  with  principles  or  rules  which  commonly  are  more
general,  or  more  abstract,  than  the  principles  or  rules  contained
in  the  Law  of  Persons :  that  the  principles  or  rules  with  which
the  former  is  concerned,  commonly  sin,  by  reason  of  that  greater
generality,  through  excess  or  defect:  and  that  the  narrower
principles  or  rules  contained  in  the  latter,  commonly  modify  the
larger  principles  or  rules  about  which  the  former  is  conversant
Now  since  a  modification  is  not  to  be  understood,  if  that  which
is  modified  be  not  foreknown,  the  Law  of  Things  should  not
follow,  but  should  precede  the  Law  of  Persons.  For  which
reason,  with  various  other  reasons  to  be  stated  in  the  lectures,
I  consider  the  two  departments  in  that  order.

The  division  in  question,  like  most  attempts  at  scientific
arrangement,  is  far  from  attaining  perfect  distinctness.  Its  two
compartments  frequently  blend,  or  frequently  run  into  one
another.  Consequently,  as  I  travel  through  the  Law  of  Things,
I  shall  often  be  compelled  to  touch,  by  a  somewhat  inconvenient
anticipation,  upon  a  portion  of  the  Law  of  Persons.

Note, — In  hia  '  AnalysiB  of  the  Law/  which  abounds  with  acute  and
judicious  remarks,  it  is  stated  expressly  by  Sir  Matthew  Hale,  that  the  Law
of  Things  should  precede  the  Law  of  Persons.  He  says  that  the  student
should  begin  with  tiie  jue  rsrum :  *  for  the  jue  pentmarum  contains  matter
proper  for  the  study  of  one  that  is  well  acquainted  with  the  ju$  reruftL*

It  is  worthy  of  remark,  that  the  order  recommended  by  Hale  is  the  order
of  the  Prussian  Code.  The  admirable  Suarez,  under  whose  superintendence
.the  Code  was  compiled,  assigns  the  following  reason  for  his  preference  of
that  order  to  the  method  of  the  Classical  Jurists  : —


Course  of  Lectures.  4  3

*  Reflecting  on  the  departments  of  law  which  are  styled  the  Law  of  Per-
sons and  the  Law  of  Things,  we  shall  find  that  the  two  departments  are
mutually  related  :  that  each  contains  matters  which  it  is  necessary  we  should
know,  before  we  can  know  correctly  the  appropriate  subject  of  the  other.
But  such  of  these  fraecognoaeenda  as  are  contained  by  the  Law  of  Things,
are  far  more  numerous  and  far  more  weighty  than  such  of  these  praecog-
7io8cenda  as  are  contained  by  the  Law  of  Persons.  For  where  the  subject  of
either  is  implicated  with  that  of  the  other,  the  former  is  commonly  con-
cerned with  some  more  general  rule,  which  by  reason  of  its  greater  generality,
sins  through  excess  or  defect:  whilst  the  latter  is  commonly  concerned
with  some  less  general  division,  by  which  that  rule  is  pruned  of  its  excesses,
or  by  which  its  defects  are  supplied.'


LAW  OF  THINGS.

L  There  are  facts  or  events  from  which  rights  and  duties Lect.
arise,  which  are  legal  causes  or  antecedents  of  rights  and  duties, ^^^  ^^-^
or  of  which  rights  and  duties  are  legal  effects  or  consequences.
There  are  also  facts  or  events  which  extinguish  rights  and  duties,
or  on  which  rights  and  duties  terminate  or  cease.

The  events  which  are  causes  of  rights  and  duties,  may  be
divided  in  the  following  manner :  namely,  into  acts,  forbearances,
and  omissions,  which  are  violations  of  rights  or  duties  and  events
which  are  not  violations  of  rights  or  duties.
'  Acts,  forbearances,  and  omissions,  which  are  violations  of
rights  or  duties,  are  styled  delicts,  injuries,  or  offences.
^■^^  Eights  and  duties  which  are  consequences  of  delicts,  are
sanctioning  (or  preventive)  and  remedial  (or  reparative).  In
other  words,  the  ends  or  purposes  for  which  they  are  conferred
and  imposed,  are  two :  Jirst,  to  prevent  violations  of  rights  and
duties  which  are  n^t  consequences  of  delicts :  secondly,  to  cure
the  evils,  or  repair  the  mischiefs,  which  such  violations  engender.

Eights  and  duties  not  arising  from  deUcts,  may  be  distin-
guished from  rights  and  duties  which  are  consequences  of  delicts,
by  the  name  of  primary  (or  principal).  Eights  and  duties  arising
from  delicts,  may  be  distinguished  from  rights  and  duties  which
are  7U)t  consequences  of  delicts,  by  the  name  of  sanctioning  (or
secondary).

My  main  division  of  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things,  rests
upon  the  basis  or  principle  at  which  I  have  now  pointed :
namely,  the  distinction  of  rights  and  of  duties  (relative  and
absolute),  into  primary  and  sanctioning.  Accordingly,  I  dis-
tribute the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things  under  two  capital
departments. — 1.  Primary  rights,  with  primary  relative  duties.
2. Sanctioning  rights,  with sav4stioning  duties (relative and


44  Outline  of  the

Le6t.  absolute) :  Delicts  or  injuries  (which  are  causes  or  antecedents
. ^ . of  sanctioning  rights  and  duties)  included.

II.  The  basis  of  my  main  division  of  the  matter  of  the  Law
of  Things,  with  the  two  capital  departments  under  which  I
distribute  that  matter,  I  have  now  stated  or  suggested.  Many
of  the  sub- departments  into  which  those  capital  departments
immediately  sever,  rest  upon  a  principle  of  division  which  I
shall  expound  in  my  preliminary  lectures,  but  which  I  may
indicate  commodiously  at  the  present  point  of  my  outline.

The  principle  consists  of  an  extensive  and  important  dis-
tinction, for  which,  as  c<mceived  with  the  whole  of  its  extewt  and
importance,  we  are  indebted  to  the  penetrating  acuteness  of  the
classical  Soman  jurists,  and  to  that  good  sense,  or  rectitude  of
mind,  which  commonly  guided  their  acuteness  to  true  and  useful
results.  Every  student  of  law  who  aspires  to  master  its  prin-
ciples, should  seize  the  distinction  in  question  adequately  as  well
as  clearly ;  and  should  not  be  satisfied  with  catching  it^  as  it
obtains  here  or  there.  For  the  difference  whereon  it  rests,  runs
through  every  department  of  every  system  of  jurisprudence:
although,  in  our  own  system,  the  difference  is  far  from  being
obvious,  and  although  it  is  impossible  to  express  it,  sufficiently
and  concisely  at  once,  without  a  resort  to  terms  which  are
unknown  to  the  English  Law,  and  which  may  appear  uncouth
and  ridicidous  to  a  merely  English  lawyer.

The  distinction  in  question  is  a  distinction  which  obtains
between  rigJUs,  and  which  therefore  obtains,  by  necessary
implication,  between  the  rekUive  duties  answering  to  rights.  It
may  be  stated  thus :

Every  right,  be  it  primary  or  sanctioning,  resides  in  a  person
or  persons  determinate  or  certain :  meaning  by  a  person  deter-
minate, a  person  determined  specifically.  And  it  avedls  against
a  person  or  persons  (or  answers  to  a  relative  duty  incumbent  on
a  person  or  persons)  other  than  the  person  or  persons  in  whom
it  resides.

But  though  every  right  resides  in  a  person  or  persons  deter-
minate, a  right  may  avaU  against  a  person  or  persons  determinate,
or  against  the  world  at  large.  In  other  words,  the  duty  implied
by  the  right,  or  to  which  the  right  corresponds,  may  Ke  exclu-
sively on  a  person  or  persons  determinate,  or  it  may  lie  upon
persons  generally  and  indeterminately.

Duties  answering  to  rights  which  avail  against  the  world  at
large,  are  negative :  that  is  to  say,  duties  to  forbear.  Of  duties
answering  to  rights  which  avail  against  persons  determinate,


Course  of  Lectures.  45

some  are  negative,  but  others,  and  most,  are  positive :  that  is  to Lect.
say,  duties  to  do  or  perform.  $il^

A  right  availing  against  the  world  at  large  is  defined  by
Grotius  and  others,  thus ;  facultas  personae  competens  sine  respedu
ad  certAm  personam :  a  right  availing  exclusively  against  a  person
or  persons  determinate,  thus ;  facultas  personae  competens  in
certam  personam.

By  most  of  the  modern  Civilians,  though  not  by  the  Eoman
Lawyers,  rights  availing  against  the  world  at  large  are  named
jura  in  rem:  rights  availing  against  persons  determinate, /wra
in  personam,  or  jura  in  personam  certam.  And  by  these  different
names  of  rights  in  rem  and  rights  in  personam,  I  distinguish
rights  of  the  former  from  rights  of  the  latter  description, — My
reasons  for  adopting  them  in  preference  to  others,  I  shall  assign
in  my  lectures :  wherein  I  shall  endeavour  to  clear  them  of
obscurity,  and  shall  contrast  them  with  the  equivalent  names  of
the  Eoman  Lawyers.

The  relative  duties  answering  to  rights  in  rem,  might  be
distinguished  convenientiy  from  duties  of  the  opposite  class,  by
the  appropriate  name  of  offices:  the  relative  duties  answering
to  rights  in  personam,  by  the  appropriate  name  of  obligations.

Note. — In  the  writings  of  the  Roman  Lawyers,  the  term  oUigcUio  is
never  applied  to  a  duty  which  answers  to  a  right  in  rem.  But,  since  they
have  no  name  appropriate  to  a  right  in  personam,  they  use  the  term  MigaHo
to  denote  a  right  of  the  class,  as  well  as  to  denote  the  duty  which  the  right
implies.  Jus  in  rem  or  jura  in  rem,  they  style  dominium  or  dominia  (with
the  larger  meaning  of  the  term) ;  and  to  dominia  (with  that  more  extensive
meaning),  they  oppose  jura  in  personam,  by  the  name  of  obHgationes.

To  exemplify  the  leading  distinction  which  I  have  stated  in
general  expressions,  I  advert  (with  the  brevity  which  the  limits
of  an  outline  command)  to  the  right  of  property  or  ownership,  and
to  rights  arising  from  contracts. — ^The  proprietor  or  owner  of  a
given  subject  has  a  right  in  rem:  since  the  relative  duty
answering  to  his  right  is  a  duty  incumbent  upon  persons
generally  and  indeterminately,  to  forbear  from  aU  such  acts  as
would  hinder  his  dealing  with  the  subject  agreeably  to  the  lawful
purposes  for  which  his  right  exists.  But  if  I  singly,  or  I  and
you  jointiy,  be  obliged  by  bond  or  covenant  to  pay  a  sum  of
money,  or  not  to  exercise  a  calling  within  conventional  limits,
the  right  of  the  obligee  or  covenantee  is  a  right  in  personam :
the  relative  duty  answering  to  his  right  being  an  obligation  to
do  or  to  forbear,  which  lies  exclusively  on  a  person  or  persons
determinate.


46  Outline  of  the

Lbct.  III.  With  the  help  of  what  I  have  premised,  I  can  now

V  -  ^  .  indicate  the  method  or  order  wherein  I  treat  or  consider  the
matter  of  the  Law  of  Things.  That  method  may  be  suggested
thus:

The  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things,  I  arrange  or  distribute
under  two  capital  departments.

The  subjects  of  the  first  of  those  capital  departments  are
primary  rights,  with  primary  relative  duties :  which  I  arrange
or  distribute  under  four  sub-departments. — 1.  Eights  m  rem  as
existing  per  se,  or  as  not  combined  with  rights  in  personam,  2.
Sights  in  persoiiam  as  existing  per  se,  or  as  not  combined  with
rights  in  rem,  3.  Such  of  the  combinaiions  of  rights  in  rem  emd
rights  in  personam  as  are  particular  and  comparatively  simple.
4.  Such  universities  of  rights  and  duties  (or  such  complex  aggre-
gates of  rights  and  duties)  as  arise  by  universal  succession.

Sanctioning  rights  (all  of  which  are  rights  in  personam),
sanctioning  duties  (some  of  which  are  relative,  but  others  of
which  are  absolute),  together  with  delicts  or  injuries  (which  are
causes  or  antecedents  of  sanctioning  rights  and  duties),  are  the
subjects  of  the  second  of  the  capital  departments  under  which
I  arrange  or  distribute  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things.

But  before  I  proceed  to  those  capital  departments,  I  shall
distribute  Things,  as  subjects  of  rights  and  duties,  under  their
various  classes.  And  before  I  proceed  to  those  capital  depart-
ments, I  shall  remark  generally  upon  Persons,  as  subjects  of  rights
and  duties ;  upon  Acts  and  Forbearances,  as  obfects  of  rights  and
duties ;  and  upon  FcLcts  or  Events,  as  causes  of  rights  and  duties,
or  as  extinguishing  rights  and  duties.

Lect.  Primary  Bights,  with  primary  relative  Duties,

XLVII
^-  Eights  in  rem,  as  existing  per  se,  or  as  not

combined  with  rights  in  personam.

The  following  is  the  matter  of  this  sub -department,  and
the  following  is  the  order  in  which  that  matter  will  be  treated.

I.  As  the  reader  may  infer  from  a  foregoing  part  of  my
outline,  and  as  I  shall  show  completely  in  my  preliminary
lectures,  the  expression  in  rem,  when  annexed  to  the  term  right,
does  not  denote  that  the  right  in  question  is  a  right  over  a
thing.  Lostead  of  indicating  the  nature  of  the  subject,  it  points
at  tiie  compass  of  the  correlating  duty.  It  denotes  that  the
relative  duty  lies  upon  persons  generally,  and  is  not  exclusively
inctmibent  upon  a  person  or  persons  determinate. In other


Course  of  Lectures.  47

words,  it  denotes  that  the  right  in  question  wmih  against  the
world  at  large.

Accordingly,  some  rights  in  rem  are  rights  over  things:
others  are  rights  oyer  persons:  whilst  others  have  no  subjects
(persons  or  things)  over  or  to  which  we  can  say  they  exist,  or
in  which  we  can  say  they  adhere. — ^For  example :  Property  in
a  horse,  property  in  a  quantity  of  com,  or  property  in,  or  a  right
of  way  through  a  field,  is  a  right  in  rem  over  or  to  a  thing,
a  right  in  rem  inhering  in  a  thing,  or  a  right  in  rem  whereof
the  subject  is  a  thing, — ^The  right  of  the  master,  against  third
parties,  to  his  slave,  servant,  or  apprentice,  is  a  right  in  rem  over
or  to  a  person.  It  is  a  right  residing  in  one  person,  and  inhering
in  another  person  as  its  subject — ^The  right  styled  a  monopoly,
is  a  right  in  rem  which  has  no  subject.  There  is  no  specific
subject  (person  or  thing)  over  or  to  which  the  right  exists,  or  in
which  the  right  inheres.  The  ojicium  or  common  duty  to  which
the  right  corresponds,  is  a  duty  lying  on  the  world  at  large,  to
forbear  from  selling  commodities  of  a  given  description  or  class :
but  it  is  not  a  duty  lying  on  the  world  at  large,  to  forbear  from
acts  regarding  determinately  a  specifically  determined  subject.
A  man's  right  or  interest  in  his  reputation  or  good  name,  with
a  multitude  of  rights  which  I  am  compelled  to  pass  in  silence,
would  also  be  found,  on  analysis,  to  avail  against  the  world  at
large,  and  yet  to  be  wanting  in  persons  and  things  which  it  were
possible  to  style  their  subjects.

I  shall  therefore  distinguish  rights  in  rem  (their  answering
relative  duties  being  implied)  with  reference  to  differences  be-
tween their  svhjects,  or  between  the  aspects  of  the  forbearances
which  may  be  styled  their  objects.  As  distinguished  with  refer-
ence to  those  differences,  they  will  fall  (as  I  have  intimated
already)  into  three  classes. — 1.  Rights  in  rem  of  which  the
subjects  are  things,  or  of  which  the  objects  are  such  forbearances
as  determinately  regard  specifically  determined  things.  2.  Eights
in  rem  of  which  the  subjects  are  persons,  or  of  which  the  objects
are  such  forbearances  as  determinately  regard  specifically  deter-
mined persons.  3.  Rights  in  rem  without  specific  subjects,  or
of  which  the  objects  are  such  forbearances  as  have  no  specific
r^ard  to  specific  things  or  persons.

n.  By  different  rights  in  rem  over  things  or  persons,  the Lect.
different  persons  in  whom  they  respectively  reside  are  empowered  ^^^^-^
to  derive  from  their  respective  subjects  different  quantities  of
uses  or  services. Or  (changing  the  expression)  the  different
persons  in  whom  they  respectively  reside,  are  empowered  to  use


48  Outline  of  the

Leot.  or  deal  with  their  respective  subjects  in  different  degrees  or  to
XLYIII-L  (jiffgrgnij  extents.  Or  (changing  the  expression  again)  the  differ-
ent persons  in  whom  they  respectively  reside,  are  empowered  to
turn  or  apply  their  respective  subjects  to  ends  or  purposes  more
or  less  numerous. — ^And  such  differences  obtain  between  such
rights,  independently  of  differences  between  their  respective
durations,  or  the  respective  quantities  of  time  during  which
they  are  calculated  to  last.

Of  such  differences  between  such  rights,  the  principal  or
leading  one  is  this. — 1.  By  virtue  of  some  of  such  rights,  the
entitled  persons,  or  the  persons  in  whom  tliey  reside,  may  use
or  deal  with  the  subjects  of  the  rights  to  an  extent  which  is
incapable  of  exact  circumscription,  although  it  is  not  unlimited.
Or  (changing  the  expression)  the  entitled  persons  may  apply
the  subjects  to  purposes,  the  number  and  classes  of  which  cannot
be  defined  precisely,  although  such  purposes  are  not  unrestricted.
For  example :  The  proprietor  or  owner  is  empowered  to  turn  or
apply  the  subject  of  his  property  or  ownership,  to  uses  or  pur-
poses which  are  not  absolutely  unlimited,  but  which  are  incapable
of  exact  circumscription  with  regard  to  class  or  number.  The
right  of  the  owner,  in  respect  of  the  purposes  to  which  he  may
turn  the  subject,  is  only  limited,  generally  and  vaguely,  by  all
the  rights  of  all  other  persons,  and  by  all  the  duties  (absolute
as  well  as  relative)  incumbent  on  himself.  He  may  not  use
his  own  so  that  he  injure  another,  or  so  that  he  violate  a  duty
(relative  or  absolute)  to  which  he  himself  is  subject.  But  he
may  turn  or  apply  his  own  to  every  use  or  purpose  which  is
not  inconsistent  with  that  general  and  vague  restriction. —  2.
By  virtue  of  other  of  such  rights  the  entitled  persons,  or  the
persons  in  whom  they  reside,  may  merely  use  or  deal  with  their
subjects,  to  an  extent  exactly  circumscribed  (at  least  in  one
direction).  Or  (changing  the  expression)  they  may  merely  turn
them  to  purposes  defined  in  respect  of  number,  or,  at  least,  in
respect  of  class.  For  example:  He  who  has  a  right  of  way
through  land  owned  by  another,  may  merely  turn  the  land  to
purposes  of  a  certain  class,  or  to  purposes  of  determined  classes.
He  may  cross  it  in  the  fashions  settled  by  the  grant  or  prsescrip-
tion,  but  those  are  the  only  purposes  to  which  he  may  turn  it
lawfully.

A  right  belonging  to  the  first-mentioned  kind,  may  be  styled
dominion,  property,  or  ownership,  with  the  sense  wherein  dominion
is  opposed  to  servitus  or  easement.  As  contradistinguished  to  a
right  belonging  to  the  fijist-mentioned  kind,  a  right  belonging  to


Course  of  Lectures.  49

the  last-meiitioned  kind  may  be  noted  by  one  or  another  of  the Lxct.

XT  VTTT T

last-mentioned  names. — Dominion,  property,  or  ovmership,  is  a  ^  "  7'
name  liable  to  objection.  For,  first,  it  may  import  that  the
right  in  question  is  a  right  of  unmeasured  duration,  as  weU  as
indicate  the  indefinite  extent  of  the  purposes  to  which  the
entitled  person  may  turn  the  subject.  Secondly:  It  often
signifies  property,  with  the  meaning  wherein  property  is  distin-
guished from  the  right  of  possession  to  which  I  shall  advert
below.  Thirdly :  Dominion,  with  one  of  its  meanings,  is  exactly
coextensive  with  jtis  in  rem,  and  applies  to  every  right  which
is  not  fus  in  personam. — For  various  reasons  which  I  shall  pro-
duce in  my  lectures,  a  right  belonging  to  the  last- mentioned
kind  is  not  denoted  adequately  by  the  '  servUus '  of  the  Eoman,
or  by  the  '  easement  *  of  the  English  law. — But  in  spite  of  the
numerous  ambiguities  which  encumber  these  several  terms,  I
think  them  less  incommodious  than  the  newly  devised  names
by  which  it  were  possible  to  distinguish  the  rights  of  the  two
lands.  For  newly  devised  names,  however  significant  and
determinate,  commonly  need  as  frequent  explanation  as  the
ambiguous  but  established  expressions  which  they  were  intended
to  supplant.  And  newly  devised  names  are  open  to  a  great
inconvenience  from  which  established  though  ambiguous  expres-
sions are  completely  exempt  They  are  open  to  that  undisceming,
yet  overwhelming  ridicule,  which  is  poured  upon  innovations
in  speech  by  the  formidable  confederacy  of  fools:  who  being
incapable  of  clear  and  discriminating  apprehension,  cannot  per-
ceive the  difficulties  which  the  names  were  devised  to  obviate,
though  they  know  that  their  ears  are  tingling  with  novel  and
grating  sounds.

With  the  help  of  what  I  have  premised,  I  can  now  indicate
the  principal  matters  which  I  shall  pass  in  review  at  this  point
of  my  Course. — 1.  I  shall  consider  in  a  general  manner  such
distinctions  between  rights  in  rem  as  are  founded  on  differences
between  the  degrees  wherein  the  entitled  persons  may  use  or
deal  with  the  subjects.  2.  I  shall  consider  particularly  that
leading  distinction  of  the  kind,  which  may  be  marked  with  the
opposed  expressions  dominium  et  servitus,  or  onmership  and  ease-
ment: understandiDg  the  expression  dominium,  or  ownership,  as
indicating  merely  the  indefinite  extent  of  the  purposes  to  which
the  entitled  person  may  turn  the  subject  of  the  right.  3.  I
shall  consider  the  various  Trvodes  of  dominion  or  ownership,  and
shall  advert  to  the  various  classes  of  servitude  or  easements.
4.  Although  they  are  incapable  of  exact  circumscription,  the

VOL.  L  E


so  Outline  of  the

LKcrr.  purposes  to  which  the  owner  may  turn  the  subject  of  his  owner-
.  "v  ship,  are  not  exempt  from  restrictions.  The  oblique  manner
wherein  the  restrictions  are  set,  I  shall  attempt  to  explain :  an
attempt  which  will  lead  me  to  consider  generally,  the  actual
and  possible  modes  of  defining  rights  and  duties,  with  the
approach  to  completeness  and  correctness  whereof  the  process
admits.
Lbot.  LI  III.  Whether  they  be  rights  to  specific  subjects,  or  rights

without  such  subjects ;  and  whatever  be  the  purposes  to  which
the  entitled  persons  may  turn  their  subjects ;  rights  in  rem  are
distinguishable  by  diflferences  between  the  quantities  of  time
during  which  they  are  calculated  to  last.

As  distinguishable  by  diflferences  between  their  respective
durations,  rights  in  rem  will  be  considered  in  the  following
order. — Eights  in  rem  are  rights  of  unlimited,  or  rights  of
limited  duration.  Every  right  of  unlimited  duration,  is  also  a
right  of  unmeasured  duration  :  that  is  to  say,  a  right  of  which
the  duration  is  not  exactly  defined.  But  of  rights  of  limited
duration,  some  are  rights  of  unmeasured  duration,  whilst  others
are  rights  of  a  duration  exactly  defined  or  measured.  For
example :  An  estate  in  fee  simple,  or  property  in  a  personal
chattel,  is  a  right  of  unlimited,  and  therefore  of  unmeasured
duration.  An  estate  for  life,  is  a  right  of  unmeasured,  but
limited  duration.  The  interest  created  by  a  lease  for  a  given
number  of  years,  is  a  right  of  a  duration  limited  and  measured.
— ^Accordingly,  I  shall  distinguish  rights  of  unlimited,  from
rights  of  limited  duration :  and  I  shall  distinguish  rights  of
limited,  into  rights  of  unmeasured,  and  rights  of  measured
duration.

DifiTerences  between  the  degrees  wherein  the  entitled  persons
may  use  or  deal  with  the  subjects,  are  related  to  diflferences
between  the  durations  of  the  rights. The  several  relations
between  those  respective  diflferences  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain.
Lkct.  LIII  IV.  Whether  they  be  rights  to  specific  subjects,  or  rights

without  such  subjects ;  whatever  be  the  purposes  to  which  the
entitled  persons  may  turn  their  subjects ;  and  whatever  be  the
quantities  of  time  during  which  they  are  calculated  to  last;
rights  in  rem  are  distinguishable  by  the  following  diflferences.

.  Of  rights  in  rem,  some  are  present  or  vested :  others  are
future,  contingent,  or  merely  inchoate. — ^Vested  rights  essentially
diflfer  from  one  another,  as  well  as  from  rights  which  are  con-
tingent. For  in  some  cases  of  vested  rights,  the  party  entitled,
or  the  party  in  whom  it  resides,  may  exercise  the  right  presently.


Course  of  Lectures.  5 1

But  in  other  cases  of  vested  right,  the  exercise  of  the  right  is  Laor.LllI
presently  suspended  by  the  presence  of  an  anterior  and  prefer- "
able  right — ^And  whether  a  right  be  vested  or  contingent,  it
may  be  liable  to  end,  on  the  happening  of  a  given  event,  before
the  lapse  of  its  possible  duration.

Upon  these  differences,  and  the  distinctions  resulting  from
these  differences,  I  shall  touch  briefly  in  this  sub-department :
postponing  a  larger  explanation  to  that  subsequent  point  of  my
CJourse,  at  which  I  shall  consider  the  trust-substitutions  and
entails  of  the  Boman  and  English  Law.

V.®  I  shall  consider  the  various  events  from  which  rights  Leot.LIV-
in  rem  arise,  with  the  various  events  by  which  they  are  ex- LVIII
tingmshed :  reserving,  however,  an  exact  account  oi  proBScription,
imtil  I  shall  have  duly  analysed  the  right  of  possession,

YL  If  one  person  exercise  a  right  residing  in  another
person,  but  without  authority  from  the  latter,  and  without
authority  from  those  through  whom  the  latter  is  entitled,  the
former  acquires,  by  his  unauthorised  or  adverse  exercise,  the
anomalous  right  which  is  styled  the  right  of  possession.

This  general  description  of  the  right  of  possession  must,
however,  be  taken  with  the  following  limitation. — The  person
who  possesses  adversely,  or  who  exercises  the  right  of  another
without  the  requisite  authority,  does  not  acquire  thereby  the
right  of  possession,  in  case  his  adverse  possession  began  vi,  or
arose  through  any  of  the  means  which  fall  within  the  name  of
violence.

The  right  of  possession  must  be  distinguished  from  the  right
of  possessing  y  or  (changing  the  phrase)  from  the  right  to  possess:
for  the  right  of  possessing,  or  the  rigJU  to  possess,  is  a  property  or
integrant  part  of  the  right  of  possession  itself,  and  also  of
numerous  rights  which  widely  differ  from  the  latter.  In  other
words,  the  right  of  possessing,  considered  generally,  may  arise
from  any  of  various  titles  or  causes :  but  the  peculiar  right  of
possessing  which  is  styled  the  right  of  possession,  is  a  right  of
possessing  that  arises  exclusively  from  the  fact  of  an  adverse
possession.

Although  it  arises  from  actual  possession,  the  right  in  rem
which  is  styled  the  right  of  possession,  must  also  be  distinguished
from  the  rights  in  rem  which  arise  from  occupation  or  occupancy.
For  the  fact  of  possessing  which  is  styled  occupation  or  occu-

*  It  is  in  the  coone  of  the  develop-  break  off. See  Lecture  LVIII,  and  the
ment  of  this  fifth  head  of  the  sub-depait- observations  there  placed.— R.  C.
ment  here  treated  of,  that  the  lectures


52  Outline  of  the

pancy,  consists  in  the  possession  of  a  something  that  is  res
mUliiis.  But  the  fact  of  possessing  which  gives  the  right  of
possession,  consists  in  the  adverse  exercise,  by  the  person  who
acquires  the  right,  of  a  right  residing  in  another.

Consequently,  the  following  description  of  the  right  of
possession  has  all  the  exactness  which  accords  with  extreme
brevity. — It  is  that  right  to  possess  (or  to  use  or  exercise  a
right)  which  springs  from  the  fact  of  an  adverse  possession  not
beginning  through  violence.

As  against  all  but  the  person  whose  right  is  exercised
adversely,  the  person  who  acquires  the  right  of  possession  is
clothed  with  the  very  right  which  he  affects  to  exercise.  And
as  against  the  person  whose  right  is  exercised  adversely,  he  may
acquire  the  very  right  which  he  affects  to  exercise  through  the
title,  or  mode  of  acquisition,  styled  prcescription.  Or  (adopting
a  current  but  inadequate  phrase)  the  right  of  possession  ripens,
by  prsescription,  into  the  right  of  dominion  or  property.

Note, — ^The  right  of  possession  strictly  and  properly  so  called,  or  the
right  of  possession  considered  as  a  subttafUive  right,  is  a  right  that  arises
exclusively  from  the  fact  of  an  adverse  possession.  But  the  term  right  of
pouession  is  not  imfrequently  employed  with  an  extremely  large  signification.
Taking  the  term  with  this  very  extensive  meaning,  the  right  of'  possession
arises  from  an  actual  possession,  whether  the  actual  possession  be  advent  or
not.  For  example  :  It  is  said  that  the  dominus  in  actual  possession,  has  a
right  of  possession  which  arises  firom  that  actual  possession,  and  which  is
completely  independent  of  his  right  of  dominion.  But  (as  I  shall  show  in
my  lectures)  the  right  of  possession  considered  as  a  svhstantive  right,  is  a
right  that  arises  exclusively  from  the  fact  of  an  adverse  possession  :  the  so
called  right  of  possession  which  arises  firom  an  actual  possession  not  adverse,
being  a  property  of  another  right,  or  being  an  integrant  part  of  another  right.
For  example :  It  is  absurd  to  ascribe  to  the  dominus  in  possession,  a  right  of
possession  independent  of  his  right  of  dominion  :  for  if  the  dominits  actually
possess,  it  is  as  dominus  that  he  actually  possesses.  As  I  shall  show  in  my
lectures,  the  term  right  ofpossemon  acquired  the  large  signification  to  which
I  have  adverted  above,  in  consequence  of  an  extension  of  such  possessory
remedies  as  in  their  origin  were  appropriate  to  parties  invested  with  the  right
of  possession  strictly  and  properly  so  called.  These  possessory  remedies,
though  originally  appropriate  to  such  parties,  were  afterwards  extended  to
any  possessors  who  had  been  wrongfully  disturbed  in  their  actual  possessions.
In  the  Koman  Law,  for  example,  a  certain  interdict  (closely  analogous  to  an
action  of  ^ectmmt)  was  originally  appropriate  to  parties  invested  with  the
right  of  possession  strictly  and  properly  so  called.  But  it  was  extended  to
the  dominus  who  had  been  wrongfully  evicted  from  his  actual  possession.
For  by  resorting  to  an  interdict  groimded  on  his  actual  possession,  instead
of  resorting  to  an  action  grounded  on  his  right  of  dominion,  he  avoided  the
inconvenient  necessity  of  proving  his  right  of  dominion,  and  had  merely  to
demonstrate  his  actual  possession  at  the  time  of  the  wrongful  eviction  :  just
as  a  party  who  is  seised  or  entitled  in  fee,  recovers  through  an  action  of
ejectment,  from  an  ejector  without  title,  by  merely  proving  his  actual


Course  of  Lectures.  5  3

poesesBion  at  the  time  of  the  wiongfol  ejectment.  And  since  the  domimu
recovered  by  the  inteidicfcy  on  merely  proTing  his  actual  possession,  he  re-
coyeredy  in  a  certain  sense,  throng  his  right  of  possession  merely.  But  yet
it  were  ahenrd  to  affiim  that  he  had  any  right  of  possessing  independently
of  his  right  of  dominion ;  or  to  liken  the  right  of  possessing  which  is  parcel
of  the  right  of  dominion,  to  the  snbstantiYe  right  of  possessing  which  arises
solely  or  exdusiTely  from  the  fact  of  an  adverse  possession. — ^The  above-
mentioned  extension  of  possessory  remedies,  has  rendered  the  right  of
possession  one  of  the  darkest  of  the  topics  which  the  science  of  jurisprudence
presents.  Bat  there  is  not  intrinsically  any  remarl^able  difficulty  in  the
right  of  possession  which  is  strictly  and  properly  so  called  :  that  is  to  say,
which  arises  solely  or  exdusiTely  from  ^e  fact  of  an  adverse  possession,
and  which  is  the  basis  of  acquisition  by  luucapion,  and  of  other  acquisition
by  |me«Ti|jKofL

At  this  point  of  my  Course,  I  shall  therefore  proceed  in  the
following  manner.

I  shall  analyse  the  anomalous  and  perplexed  right  which
is  styled  the  right  of  possession.  Performing  the  analysis,  I
shall  happily  be  able  to  borrow  from  a  celebrated  treatise  by
V(m  Savigny,  entitled  Das  Becht  des  Besitzes,  or  Be  Jure  Posses-
sionis:  of  all  books  upon  law,  the  most  consummate  and
masterly ;  and  of  all  books  which  I  pretend  to  know  accurately,
the  least  alloyed  with  error  and  imperfection.

Having  analysed  the  right  of  possession,  I  shall  turn  to  the
title,  or  the  mode  of  acquisition,  wherein  the  right  of  possession
is  a  necessary  ingredient :  namely,  ttsucapian  and  other  prasscrip-
tion,  I  shall  consider  generally  the  nature  of  the  title ;  and
shall  advert  to  the  respective  peculiarities  of  the  Boman  and
English  Law,  in  regard  to  the  terms  or  conditions  whereon  the
title  is  allowed. — If  I  find  it  possible  or  prudent  to  touch  that
extensive  subject,  I  shall  proceed  from  title  by  prescription  to
the  connected  subject  of  registration.

Bights  in  personam  as  existing  per  se,  or  as  not
combined  with  rights  in  rem.

Bights  in  personam,  including  the  obligations'  which  answer
to  rights  in  personam,  arise  &om  facts  or  events  of  three  distinct
natures :  namely,  from  contracts,  from  quasi-contracts,  and  from
delicts.

The  only  rights  in  personam  which  belong  to  this  sub-
department,  are  such  as  arise  from  contracts  and  quasi-contracts.
Such  as  arise  from  delicts,  belong  to  the  second  of  the  capital
departments  under  which  I  arrange  or  distribute  the  matter  of
the  Law  of  Things.

Note. — Perceiving  that  rights  ex  delicto  were  generally  rights  in  penonam,
but  not  adverting  to  the  importance  of  marking  their  sanctioning  character,


54  Outline  of  the

the  cluBBical  Roman  jurists,  in  their  infititutional  or  elementary  writings,
arranged  them  with  rights  ex  eanJhudu  and  ^von  ex  wntraciu :  with  rights
which  also  are  rights  in  personam,  but  are  not  bottomed,  like  rights  ex  ieZtcfo,
in  infringements  of  other  rights.  And  hence  much  of  the  obscurity  which
hangs  oyer  the  Institutes  of  their  imitator,  the  Emperor  Justinian.

The  matter  of  this  sub-department  will  be  treated  in  the
following  order.

I.  I  shall  define  or  determine  the  meanings  of  certain  lead-
ing expressions :  viz.  Promise :  Pollicitation :  Convention  or
Agreement:  Pact:  Contract:  Quasi-Contract.

II.  Having  defined  the  meanings  of  those  leading  expres-
sions, I  shall  consider  particularly  the  nature  of  contracts.  I
shall  distinguish  contracts  properly  so  called  from  certain  facts
or  events  which  are  styled  contracts,  but  which  virtually  are
alienations  or  conveyances.  I  shall  distribute  contracts  under
their  various  classes:  expounding  the  distinctions  (with  many
other  distinctions)  between  unilateral  and  bilateral,  principal  and
accessory,  nominate  and  innominate  contracts.  Expounding  this
last  distinction,  I  shall  show  what  is  meant  by  the  essence,  and
what  by  the  cLcddents  of  a  contract  I  shall  notice  the  solem-
nities or  formalities  which  are  essential  to  the  validity  of  certain
contracts :  and,  thereupon,  I  shall  analyse  the  rationale  of  the
doctrine  of  considerations.  Finally,  I  shall  turn  to  the  events
whereon,  or  to  the  modes  wherein,  the  rights  and  obligations
arising  from  contracts,  cease  or  are  extinguished.

III.  From  contracts,  I  shall  proceed  to  qtuisi-contracts :  that
is  to  say,  facts  or  events  which  are  neither  contracts  nor  delicts ;
but  which,  inasmuch  as  they  engender  rights  in  personam  and
obligations,  are,  in  that  respect,  analogous  to  contracts.  I  shall
notice  the  frequent  confusion  of  merely  quasi-contracts  with  con-
tracts which  properly  are  such,  although  they  are  tacit  or  implied.
I  shall  show  that  quasi-contracts  are  analogous  to  the  fancied
contracts  from  which  speculators  on  government  have  derived
the  duties  of  tke  governed :  and  I  shall  show  the  causes  of  the
tendency  to  imagine  or  feign  contracts,  for  the  purpose  of  ex-
plaining the  origin  of  duties  which  emanate  from  other  sources.
I  shall  advert  to  the  classes  of  quasi-contracts ;  and  to  the  events
whereon,  or  the  modes  wherein,  the  rights  and  obligations  which
they  generate,  cease  or  are  extinguished.

Such  of  the  comhinaiions  of  rights  in  rem  and  rights
in  personam  as  are  particular  and  comparatively
simple.

Though  jus  in  rem,  or  jus  in  personam,  may  exist  separately.


Course  of  Lectures,  5  5

or  uncombined  with  the  other,  both  may  vest  uno  ictu  in  one
and  the  same  party:  or  (changing  the  expression)  an  event
which  invests  a  party  with  a  right  in  rem  or  in  personamy  may
invest  the  same  i>arty  with  a  right  in  persoruim  or  in  rem.  As
examples  of  such  events,  I  may  mention  the  following :  namely,
a  conveyance  with  a  covenant  for  title :  a  hypotheca  or  mortgage,
express  or  tacit :  a  sale  completed  by  delivery,  with  a  warranty,
express  or  tacit,  for  title  or  soundness.  And,  as  I  shall  show  in
my  lectures,  many  a  fact  or  event  which  is  styled  simply  a  con-
tract, is  properly  a  complex  event  compounded  of  a  conveyance
and  a  contract,  and  iiiiparting  uno  flatu  a  right  in  rem  and  in
personam.

Such  of  the  combinations  of  rights  in  rem  and  in  personam
as  are  particular  and  comparatively  simple,  are  the  matter  of  this
sub-department.  What  I  mean  by  their  particiUar,  or  rather
their  singular,  combinations,  as  distinguished  from  the  universal
aggregates  which  are  the  matter  of  the  next  sub-department,
would  scarcely  admit  of  explanation  within  the  limits  of  an  out-
line. In  order  to  an  explanation  of  my  meaning,  I  must  explain
the  distinction  between  singular  and  universal  successors,  or  suc-
cession rei  singvlce  and  succession  per  universitatem :  nearly  the
most  perplexed  of  the  many  intricate  knots  with  which  the
science  of  law  tries  the  patience  of  its  students.

Such  universities  of  rights  and  duties  (or  such  com-
plex aggregates  of  rights  and  duties)  as  arise  by
imiversal  succession.

The  matter  of  this  sub-department  will  be  treated  in  the
following  order.

L  The  complex  aggregates  of  rights  and  duties,  which  com-
monly are  named  by  modem  Civilians,  '  universitates  juris,'  will
be  distinguished  froin  the  aggregates  or  collections  of  things,  which
commonly  are  named  by  the  same  Civilians,  *  universitates  rerum
sive  facti.* — ^They  will  also  be  distinguished  from  the  complex
and  fictitious  persons  (or  the  collective  bodies  of  individual  or
physical  persons),  which  are  named  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers,
universitates  or  collegia,  and  by  the  English  Lawyers,  corporations
aggregate. — The  imiversities  of  rights  and  duties,  which  are  the
matter  of  this  sub-department,  will  also  be  distinguished  from
status  or  conditions.  For  the  aggregates  of  rights  and  duties,
capacities  and  incapacities,  which  are  styled  status  or  conditions,
are,  for  the  most  part,  juris  universitates,

II.  Since  all  the  universities  of  rights  and  duties,  which  are


56  Outline  of  the

the  matter  of  this  sub-department,  arise  by  universal  succession,
the  distinction  between  singular  and  universal  successors,  or
succession  m  singvlcB  and  succession  per  universitatem,  will  be
stated  and  explained.  As  I  have  ah*eady  remarked,  that  knotty
distinction  would  scarcely  admit  of  explanation  within  the  limits
of  an  outline.  But  the  following  examples  may  suggest  to  the
reflecting  reader,  the  character  of  successors  per  universitatem,
with  the  nature  of  the  universitates  to  which  such  successors
succeed. — ^The  executor  or  administrator  of  a  testator  or  intestate,
with  the  general  assignee  of  a  bankrupt  or  insolvent,  are  universal
successors.  And,  in  respect  of  specialty  debts  due  from  the
ancestor  or  devisor,  the  heir  or  devisee,  general  or  particular,
succeeds  per  universitatem. — ^The  aggregate  of  rights  and  obliga-
tions which  devolves  from  the  testator  or  intestate  to  the  executor
or  administrator,  with  that  which  passes  from  the  bankrupt  or
insolvent  to  the  general  assignee  of  his  estate  and  effects,  are
universities  of  rights  and  duties.  And  since  all  the  obligations
of  a  given  class,  which  were  due  from  the  ancestor  or  devisor,
attach  at  once  upon  the  heir  or  devisee,  that  mass  of  obligations
faUs  within  the  notion  of  a  juris  universitas.

For  every  juris  universitas  bears  one  or  both  of  the  following
characters.  First :  Where  a  universitas  juris  arises  by  imiversal
succession,  rights  residing  in,  or  obligations  incumbent  upon,  a
person  or  persons,  pass  uno  ictu  to  another  person  or  persons,
and  pass  in  genere  and  not  per  speciem.  In  other  words,  they
pass  or  devolve  at  once  or  together,  and  they  pass  or  devolve  as
belonging  to  their  kinds  or  sorts,  and  not  as  determined  by  their
specific  or  individual  natures.  Secondly :  Whatever  be  its  origin,
a  universitas  juris,  so  far  as  it  consists  of  rights,  is  of  itself  (or
considered  as  abstracted  from  its  component  particulars),  the
subject  of  a  right  in  rem.  The  party  invested  with  a  universitas
juris,  has  a  right  in  the  aggregate  availing  against  the  world  at
large,  even  though  all  the  rights  which  are  constituent  elements
of  the  aggregate,  be  merely  rights  in  personam,  or  availing  against
persons  determinate. — I  shall  show  in  my  lectures,  that  every
statm  or  condition  which  is  not  purely  burthensome,  bears  the
last  of  these  marks,  and  therefore  is  juris  universitas.  I  shall
also  explain  in  my  lectures,  why  the  right  in  rem  over  a  juris
universitas  (considered  as  abstracted  from  its  component  particu-
lars) stands  out  conspicuously  in  the  Eoman  Law,  and  is  far
less  obvious  in  the  English.

The  legatee  of  a  specific  thing,  the  alienee  of  a  specific
thing  by  transfer  inter  vivos,  or  the  assignee  of  a  given  bond


Course  of  Lectures.  57

or  other  contract,  are  singular  successors,  or  successors  m
8ingul(B.

III.  From  the  generic  nature  of  universitates  juris,  and  the
peculiar  nature  of  such  of  them  as  arise  by  universal  succession,
I  shall  proceed  to  such  of  these  last  as  are  the  matter  of  this
sub-department  Now  universitates  Juris  which  devolve  to
universal  successors,  and  which  are  the  matter  of  this  sub-
department,  are  of  two  kinds :  1.  Universitates  juris  devolving
from  the  dead  as  such :  2.  Universitates  juris  devolving  from
the  living,  or  devolving  from  the  dead,  but  not  from  the  dead  as
such. And  those  two  kinds  I  shall  consider  in  that  order.

Universal  successors  succeeding  to  the  dead  as  such,  take  ah
intestato  or  ex  testamento.  Accordingly,  I  shall  explain  universal
succession  ah  iniestaio,  and  universal  succession  ex  testamento.
And  to  exemplify  my  explanation  of  the  distinction,  I  shall
compare  the  characters  of  the  Boman  hceres  legitimus,  of  the
English  administrator  and  next  of  kin,  and  of  the  English  ?ieir :
of  the  Eoman  hceres  testaToentarius,  of  the  English  executor  and
residuary  legatee,  and  of  the  English  devisee  general  or  particular.

Note, — By  the  English  lawyers,  real  rights  (property  in  things  real,  or
real  property)  are  distinguished  from  personal  rights  property  in  things
pertonaly  or  personal  property).  These  two  classes  of  rights  blend  at  so
many  points,  that  the  diiference  between  them  cannot  he  described  correctly
in  generic  and  concise  expressions.  A  correct  description  of  the  difference
hetween  the  two  classes  of  rights,  would  involve  a  complete  description  of
the  several  or  various  rights  which  belong  to  those  classes  respectively.  Of
the  generic  and  concise  descriptions  which  the  difference  in  question  will
take,  the  following,  I  incline  to  believe,  is  the  least  remote  from  the  truth.
Real  rights  (property  in  things  real,  or  real  property)  are  rights  which  are
inheritable:  which  (where  they  are  transmissible  to  representatives)  devolve
ab  intestato  to  h>eirs.  Personal  rights  (property  in  things  personal,  or  per-
sonal property)  are  rights  which  are  not  inheritable :  which  (where  they  are
transmissible  to  representatives)  devolve  ab  intestato  to  administrators  (or
next  of  kin).  The  difference,  therefore,  between  real  and  personal  rights,
mainly  consists  in  this.  According  to  the  English  law,  succession  ab
intestato  is  of  two  descriptions :  namely,  succession  by  heirs  (strictly  and
technically  so  called),  and  succession  by  administrators  (or  next  of  kin).
Bights  devolving  ab  intestato  to  successors  of  the  former  description,  are
real :  rights  devolving  ab  intestato  to  successors  of  the  latter  description,
are  personal — It  were  easy  to  demonstrate,  that  the  division  of  rights  into
real  and  personal  (or  the  division  of  property  into  real  and  personal)  does
not  quadrate  with  the  division  of  things  into  things  immoveable  and  things
moveable :  It  were  also  easy  to  demonstrate,  that  it  does  not  quadrate  with
the  division  of  things  into  things  iohich  are  subjects  of  tenure  and  things
vhieh  are  not.  As  I  have  remarked  already,  the  division  of  property  into
real  and  personal,  is  not  susceptible  of  a  precise  generic  description.  He
who  would  know  precisely  the  meaning  of  the  division  in  question,  must
master  all the  details  which  each  of  its  compartments  embraces. Or


58  Outline  of  the

(changing  the  expression)  the  various  details  which  each  of  its  compartments
embraces,  are  not  connected  by  a  common  character  or  property,  but  form
a  heap,  inevitably  incondite,  of  heterogeneous  particulars — This  needless
distinction  between  real  and  personal  property,  which  is  nearly  the  largest
of  the  distinctions  that  the  Law  of  England  contains,  is  one  prolific  source
of  the  unrivalled  intricacy  of  the  system,  and  of  its  matchless  confusion
and  obscurity.  To  the  absence  of  this  distinction  (a  cause  of  complexness,
disorder,  and  darkness,  which  naught  but  the  extirpation  of  the  distinction
can  thoroughly  cure),  the  greater  compactness  of  the  Roman  system,  with
its  greater  symmetry  and  clearness,  are  mainly  imputable.  There  is  not,
indeed,  in  the  Roman  jurisprudence,  the  brevity  and  harmony  of  parts,
with  the  consequent  lucidity  and  certainty,  which  are  essential  to  a  system
of  law  that  were  worthy  of  the  prostituted  name ;  a  system  of  law  that
were  truly  a  guide  of  conduct,  and  not  a  snare  in  the  way  of  the  parties
bound  to  observe  its  provisions.  But,  this  notwithstanding,  the  Roman
Law  (mainly  through  the  absence  of  the  distinction  between  real  and
personal  property)  is  greatly  and  palpably  superior,  considered  as  a  system
or  whole,  to  the  Law  of  England.  Turning  from  the  study  of  the  English
to  the  study  of  the  Roman  Law,  you  escape  from  the  empire  of  chaos  and
darkness,  to  a  world  which  seems  by  comparison,  the  region  of  order  and
light.

The  distinction  of  the  English  lawyers,  between  rtal  and  'pa'wnal  rights,
is  peculiar  to  the  systems  of  positive  law  which  are  mainly  bottomed  in
feudal  institutions.  As  I  have  stated  already,  there  is  not  in  the  Roman
Law  the  faintest  trace  of  it.  According  to  the  Roman  Law,  rights  devolve
ah  inUstato  agreeably  to  a  uniform  and  coherent  scheme.  It  is  true  that
rights  are  distinguished  by  most  of  the  modem  Civilians,  into  jura  realia
and  jura  personalia :  and  that  this  distinction  of  rights  into  jura  realia  and
jura  personalia,  obtains  in  every  system  of  particular  and  positive  law,  which
is  an  offset  or  derivative  of  the  Roman.  But  the  distinction  of  the  modem
Civilians,  between  jura  realia  and  jura  personaliay  is  equivalent  to  the
distinction,  made  by  the  same  Civilians,  between  jura  in  rem  and  jura  in
personam :  and  it  is  also  equivalent  to  the  distinction,  made  by  the  Roman
Lawyers,  between  dominia  (with  the  larger  meaning  of  the  term)  and
obligationes.  Real  rights  (in  the  sense  of  the  English  Lawyers)  comprise
rights  which  are  personal  as  well  as  rights  which  are  real  (in  the  sense  of
the  modem  Civilians) :  and  personal  rights  (in  the  sense  of  the  former)
comprise  rights  which  are  real  as  well  as  rights  which  are  personal  (in  the
sense  of  the  latter).  The  difference  between  real  and  personal  rights  (as  the
terms  are  xmderstood  by  the  modem  Civilians)  is  essential  or  necessary.
It  runs  through  the  English  Law,  just  as  it  pervades  the  Roman :  although
it  is  obscured  in  the  English,  by  the  multitude  of  wanton  distinctions
which  darken  and  deform  the  system.  But  the  difference  between  real
and  personal  rights  (as  the  terms  are  understood  by  the  English  Lawyers)
is  purely  accidental.

And  since  this  difference  is  purely  accidental,  it  is  not  involved  by
general  jurisprudence :  for  general  jurisprudence,  or  the  philosophy  of
positive  law,  is  concerned  with  principles  and  distinctions  which  are
essential  or  necessary.  Accordingly,  I  shall  touch  upon  the  difference  in  a
merely  incidental  manner,  and  merely  to  illustrate  principles  and  distinctions
which  the  scope  of  general  jurisprudence  properly  embraces.

Succession  to  the  subject  of  a  specific,  or  other  particular
l^acy,  is  succession  m  singvice :  and  it  therefore  belongs  logically


Course  of  Lectures.  59

to  one  or  another  of  the  three  foregoing  sub-departments.  But
since  such  succession,  although  it  be  singular,  is  succession  ex
testamento,  it  could  not  be  considered,  under  any  of  those  sub-
departments,  without  an  inconvenient  anticipation  of  the  doctrine
of  testaments.  Accordingly,  succession  to  the  subject  of  a
specific,  or  other  particular  legacy,  will  be  considered  at  this
point  of  this  sub-department. — For  a  similar  reason,  the  entails
and  trust'Substitutwns  of  the  English  and  Eoman  law,  wiU  be
postponed  to  the  same  point.  According  to  the  Boman  law,  the
person  who  takes  virtually  by  a  trust-substitution,  is  always,  in
effect,  successor  singtUaris :  but  the  subject  of  a  trust-substitution
is  either  a  juris  universitas  or  a  res  singula.  According  to  the
same  system,  every  trust-substitution  is  created  by  testamentary
disposition.  And,  according  to  the  Law  of  England,  an  entail
is  created  by  testament  or  will,  as  well  as  by  act  inter  vivos.  I
therefore  shall  find  it  expedient  to  postpone  substitutions  and
entails,  until  I  shall  have  passed  in  review  the  nature  of  a  juris
universitas,  and  of  succession,  tmiversal  and  singular,  ex  testamento,
— In  liberd  rqpvhlicd,  and  under  the  earlier  Emperors,  every  dis-
position suspending  the  vesting  of  its  subject,  and  almost  every
disposition  restraining  the  power  of  alienation,  was  prohibited
by  the  Roman  Law ;  and  such  dispositions  of  the  kind  as  it
afterwards  allowed,  were  created  exclusively  by  testament  or
codicil,  and  in  the  circuitous  and  absurd  manner  of  a  fdei-com^
missum.  Consequently,  as  succession  ex  testamento  will  lead  me
to  entails,  so  will  entails  conduct  me  to  the  nature  of  trusts :
that  is  to  say,  to  the  nature  of  trusts  in  general,  as  well  as  to
the  Jidei'commissa  which  are  peculiar  to  the  Eoman  Law,  and  to
the  uses  and  trusts  (an  offset  of  those  fidei-commissa)  which  are
peculiar  to  the  Law  of  England.

Having  treated  of  imiversal  successors  succeeding  to  the
dead  as  such,  I  shall  treat  of  universal  successors  succeeding  to
the  living,  or  succeeding  to  the  dead,  but  not  to  the  dead  as
such.*  And  treating  of  imiversal  successors  of  those  generic
characters,  I  shall  consider  particularly  the  succession  per
universitatem  which  obtains  in  cases  of  insolvency  and  of  the
consequent  cessio  honorum.

Note, — In  this  Bub-department  of  the  Law  of  Things,  I  shall  consider
xmiyersal  succession  as  it  obtains  genertUly,  In  other  words,  I  shall  consider
uniyersal  snccession  abstracted  from  persons,  in  so  far  as  persons  are  invested
with  steUiu  or  conditions.

In  some  cases  of  universal  snccession,  the  snccession  is  the  consequence
of  certain  status  or  conditions,  or  supposes  the  pre-existence  of  certain  status
or  conditions :  and  in  other  cases  of  universal  succession,  certain  parties


6o  Outline  of  the

are  invested  wiUi  conditions,  in  consequence  of  the  sacoes&ion  itselfl  Aa
examples  of  universal  succession,  the  effect  or  cause  of  conditions,  I  adduce
the  following  cases  from  the  Roman  and  English  Law :  namely,  universal
succession,  ah  inUstato  or  ex  testamento,  to  the  -rights  and  obligations  of  a
freedman :  universal  succession,  by  the  adopting  father,  to  the  rights  and
obligations  of  an  abrogated  son :  universal  succession,  by  the  general
assignees  or  trustees,  to  the  rights  and  obligations  of  an  insolvent  trader.
For  through  a  distinction  built  on  an  essential  difference,  but  carried  to
needless  length  and  breeding  needless  complexness,  the  law  of  England,
and  of  other  modem  nations,  severs  the  insolvency  of  traders  from  other
insolvency,  and  makes  it  the  subject  of  a  peculiar  system  of  rules.

Now  where  universal  succession  is  the  effect  or  cause  of  conditions,  it
ought  to  be  excluded  from  the  Law  of  Things,  and  treated  with  the  con-
ditions from  which  it  emanates,  or  of  which  it  is  the  fountain  or  spring.

But  in  spite  of  that  exclusion,  the  consideration  of  the  universal  suc-
cession which  is  matter  for  the  Law  of  Things,  involves  large  anticipations
from  the  Law  of  Persons.  For  example  :  Succession  ah  irUestato  cannot  be
explained  completely,  without  an  explanation  of  consanguinity,  or  of  cog-
nation {sensu  latiore) :  whilst  consanguinity  cannot  be  explained  completely,
without  a  large  anticipation  from  the  law  of  marriage,  or  a  long  reference
forward  to  the  status  of  husband  and  wife.  Wearing  the  peculiar  form,
which  it  takes  in  the  Roman  Law,  succession  ah  intestato  cannot  be  explained
completely,  without  an  explanation  of  cognation  (sensu  latiore),  of  the
relation  styled  agnation,  and  also  of  that  cognation  which  is  contradistin-
guished to  agnation,  and  which  therefore  differs  from  cognation  (in  the
larger  meaning  of  the  term).  But  since  the  relation  styled  agnation  results
from  the  patria  potestas,  the  consideration  of  the  Roman  succession  a6
intesta;to,  involves  a  double  reference  to  the  Law  of  Persons :  namely,  a
reference  to  the  status  or  conditions  of  pater  et  JUitis  familias,  as  well  as  to
the  status  or  conditions  of  husband  and  wife.

As  I  shall  show  in  my  lectures,  that  portion  of  the  Law  of  Things
which  is  concerned  with  universal  sucpession,  is  more  implicated  than  any
other  with  the  Law  of  Peisons  or  Status,  If,  indeed,  it  were  closely
analysed,  the  whole  of  that  portion  of  the  Law  of  Things  might  be  found  to
consist  of  matter  belonging  logically  to  the  Law  of  Persons,  but  interpolated
in  the  Law  of  Things,  for  the  sake  of  commodious  exposition.

As  I  treat  of  universal  succession  to  intestates,  testators,  and  insolvents,
another  implication  of  the  parts  of  my  subject  will  compel  me  to  draw
upon  the  second  of  those  two  capital  departments  under  which  I  arrange
or  distribute  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things.  For  rights  and  obligations
arising  from  delicts  devolve  or  pass,  in  company  with  others,  to  the  universal
successors,  or  general  representatives,  of  intestates,  testators,  and  insolvent&

Sanctioning  Big/Us,  with  saiMtioning  Duties  {relative  and  aisoltUe)  :
Delicts  or  Injuries  (which  are  causes  or  antecedents  of  sanctum-
ing  rights  and  duties)  included.

This  is  the  second  of  the  capital  departments  under  which
I  arrange  or  distribute  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  sub-departments  under  which  I
distribute  the  subjects  of  this  second  capital  department,  I  shall
distinguish  delicts  into  dvU  injuries  and  crimes :  or  (what  is  the


Course  of  Lectures.  6 1

same  process  stated  in  different  expressions)  I  shall  distinguish
the  rights  and  duties  which  are  effects  of  dvil  delicts,  from  the
duties,  and  other  consequences,  which  are  effects  of  criminal.

Having  expounded  the  nature  of  the  distinction  between
civil  and  criminal  delicts,  I  shall  distribute  the  subjects  of
this  second  capital  department  under  two  sub -departments. —
1.  Bights  and  duties  arising  from  dvU  injuries.  2.  Duties,  and
other  consequences,  arising  from  crimes.

Eights  and  duties  arising  from  civil  injtmes.

The  matter  of  this  sub-department  will  be  treated  in  the
following  order.

L  Civil  injuries  will  be  classed  and  described  with  refer-
ence to  the  rights  and  duties  whereof  they  are  respectively
infringements.

II.  Eights  arising  from  civil  delicts  are  generally  rights
in  personam:  that  is  to  say,  rights  availing  against  persons
certain,  or  rights  answering  to  duties  incumbent  on  determinate
persons.

The  rights  arising  from  civil  delicts,  including  the  relative
duties  answering  to  those  rights,  I  distribute  under  two  depart-
ments :  each  of  which  two  departments  immediately  severs  into
various  sub-departments.

The  division  of  those  rights  into  those  two  departments,
rests  upon  a  principle  of  division  which  may  be  stated  thus :
namely,  the  difference  between  the  natures  of  the  rights  and
duties  whereof  civil  delicts  are  respectively  infringements.
Accordingly,  rights  arising  from  civil  delicts  which  are  infringe-
ments of  rights  in  rem,  are  the  subjects  of  the  first  department
Eights  arising  from  civil  delicts  which  are  infringements  of
rights  in  personam,  are  the  subjects  of  the  second  department

The  various  sub-departments  into  which  those  two  depart-
ments immediately  sever,  rest  upon  a  principle  of  division
which  may  be  stated  thus:  namely,  the  respective  differ-
ences between  the  immediate  purposes  which  the  rights  and
duties  arising  from  civil  delicts  are  respectively  calculated  to
accomplish.

Note. — In  the  language  of  the  Roman  Law,  the  term  delict,  as  applied
to  civil  injuries,  is  commonly  limited  to  civil  injuries  which  are  infringe-
ments of  rights  in  rem.  Violations  of  rights  in  peraonam,  or  breaches  of
contracts  and  quasi-contracts,  are  not  commonly  styled  delicts  or  injuries,
and  are  not  commonly  considered  in  a  peculiar  or  appropriate  department.
In  the  Institutes  of  Qbiub,  as  well  as  in  those  of  Justinian,  they  are  con-


62  Outline  of  the

aidered  with  contracts  and  quasi-contracts,  or  with  the  primary  rights  in
fwwMm,  of  which  they  are  infringements.

In  the  language  of  the  English  Law  (here  manifestly  borrowing  the
language  of  the  Roman),  the  term  dMd  (in  so  far  as  the  term  is  employed
by  English  Lawyers)  is  also  limited  to  dvil  injuries  which  are  infringements
of  rights  in  rem.  Remedies  by  action  are  not  unfrequently  distinguished
into  actions  ex  delicto  and  actions  ex  contractu.  The  former  are  remedial  of
injuries  which  are  infringements  of  rights  in  rem :  the  latter  are  remedial  of
breaches  of  contracts,  and  of  breaches  of  quasi-contracts.  Such,  at  least,  is
the  nature  of  the  distinction  as  conceived  and  stated  generally.  The  various
classes  of  actions  having  been  much  confounded,  the  foregoing  general  state-
ment of  the  nature  or  rationale  of  the  distinction,  must  be  taken  with
numerous  qualifications.  For  example :  In  case,  strictly  so  called,  the
general  issue  is  not  guiUy,  and  the  ground  of  the  action  is  properly  a  tort :
that  is  to  say,  the  ground  of  the  action  is  properly  a  delict  (in  the  narrower
signification  of  the  term  to  which  I  have  now  adverted).  But,  this  not-
withstanding, the  action  is  frequently  brought  on  breaches  of  contracts,
and  on  breaches  of  quasi-contracts. — The  department  of  the  English  Law
which  relates  to  rights  of  action,  is  signally  impressed  with  the  disgraceful
character  of  the  system  :  namely,  a  want  of  broad  and  precise  principles  ;
and  of  large,  dear,  and  conspicuous  distinctions.

In  the  language  of  the  Roman  Law,  the  term  delict  has  another  and  a
larger  meaning ;  being  co-extensive  with  the  term  injury,  and  signifying
any  violation  of  any  right  or  duty.  This  is  the  meaning  with  which
1  employ  the  term,  unless  I  employ  it  expressly  with  its  narrower
signification.

Agreeably  to  the  principles  of  division  which  I  have  stated
or  suggested  above,  the  rights  arising  from  civil  delicts,  including
the  relative  duties  answering  to  those  rights,  will  be  distributed
under  the  two  departments,  and  the  various  sub-departments,
which  are  sketched  or  indicated  below.

1.  Eights  arising  from  civil  delicts  which  are  infringements
of  rights  in  rem,  are  the  subjects  of  the  first  department :  which
first  department  immediately  severs  into  the  four  following
sub-departments.

If  the  user  of  a  right  in  rem  be  prevented  or  hindered
presently,  and  the  preventive  cause  or  hindrance  can  be  removed
or  abated,  the  party  injured  by  the  prevention  or  hindrance,
may  be  restored  to  the  ability  of  exercising  the  right  freely.
Bights  to  such  restoration  are  of  two  kinds.  Some,  and  most,
are  rights  of  action :  but  others  are  exercised  extra-judicially,
and  are  matter  for  justification.  A  right  of  action  to  obtain
possession  of  a  house,  or  to  procure  the  abatement  of  a  nuisance
which  hinders  the  user  of  the  house,  is  a  right  of  the  former
kind.  A  right  of  recapturing  without  resorting  to  action,  is  a
right  of  the  latter  kind.  Eights  to  such  restoration,  which
might  be  styled  significantly  and  shortly, ' rights  of  vindication*
are  the  subjects  of  the  first  sub-department.


Course  of  Lectures.  63

K  a  violated  right  in  rem  be  virtually  annihilated  by  the
injury,  the  only  remedy  of  which  the  case  will  admit  is  satis-
fcu^ion  to  the  injured  party.  Where  a  prevention  or  hindrance
opposed  to  the  user  of  a  right,  has  been  withdrawn,  or  has
otherwise  ceased,  satisfaction  to  the  injured  party  for  the  past
prevention  or  hindrance  is  the  apt  or  appropriate  remedy.
And,  generally,  the  apt  or  appropriate  remedy  for  a  past  delict
is  satisfaction  or  compensation  to  the  injured  party  for  the
damage  or  inconvenience  which  the  party  has  suffered  through
or  in  consequence  of  the  offence. — Eights  to  satisfaction,
pecuniary  or  other,  are  the  subjects  of  the  second  sub-depart-
ment

If  the  user  of  a  right  in  rem  be  prevented  or  hindered
preserUly,  the  party  injured  by  the  prevention,  or  hindrance,  has
commonly  a  right  to  satisfaction  for  damage  or  inconvenience,
as  well  as  a  right  of  restoration  to  the  ability  of  free  exercise. —
Eights  of  vindication  combined  with  rights  to  satisfaction,  are
the  subjects  of  the  third  sub-department.

Where  an  offence  is  merely  incipient  or  impending,  the
offence  may  be  stayed  or  prevented.  For  example:  Forcible
dispossession  is  prevented,  and  waste  is  prevented  or  stayed,  by
an  interdict  or  injunction :  or  if  I  be  threatened  with  an  instant
assault,  I  may  prevent  the  approaching  injury  by  repelling  the
assailant. — Eights  of  preventing  or  staying,  judicially  or  extra-
judicially, impending  or  incipient  offences  against  rights  in  rem,
are  the  subjects  of  the  fourth  sub-department.

2.  Eights  arising  from  civil  delicts  which  are  infringements
of  rights  in  personam,  are  the  subjects  of  the  second  department  :
which  second  department  immediately  severs  into  the  three
following  sub-departments. — ^First :  Eights  of  compelling  judici-
ally or  extra-judicially,  the  specific  performance  of  such  obligations
as  arise  from  contracts  and  quasi-contracts :  e.g,  A  right  of
compelling  performance  by  cu^tion  or  suit :  A  right  to  an  interdict
or  injunction,  for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  obligor  or  debtor
from  evading  the  fulfilment  of  the  obligation:  A  right  of
retainer  or  detention,  by  the  creditor  or  obligee,  of  a  thing  or
person  which  belongs  to  the  obligor  or  debtor,  but  on  which  the
obligee  or  creditor  has  expended  money  or  labour. — Secondly :
Eights  of  obtaining  satisfaction,  in  lieu  of  specific  performance,
where  obligees  or  creditors  are  content  with  compensation,  or
where  specific  performance  is  not  possible,  or  where  specific
performance  would  not  be  advantageous  to  creditors,  or  would
be followed by preponderant inconvenience  to obligors or


64  Outline  of  the

debtors. — Thirdly :  Eights  of  obtaining  specific  performance  in
part,  with  satisfaction  or  compensation  for  the  residue.

NoU, — I  here  shall  analyse  the  principles  whereon  specific  performance
is  rationally  compelled.  The  caprices  of  the  English  Law  with  regard  to
specific  performance,  and  with  regard  to  the  connected  matter  of  recovery
in  specie,  I  shall  try  to  explain  historically.

Travelling  through  the  rights  which  arise  from  civil  injuries,
I  shall  note  the  respective  applicability  of  those  various  remedies
to  the  various  cases  of  injury  previously  classed  and  described.

III.  Having  classed  and  described  civil  injuries,  and  treated
of  the  rights  and  duties  which  civil  injuries  engender,  I  shall
consider  the  modes  wherein  those  rights  are  exercised,  and  wherein
those  duties  are  enforced.  In  other  words,  I  shall  consider  civil
procedure.

Now  the  pursuit  of  rights  of  action,  with  the  conduct  of  the
incidental  defences,  are  the  principal  matter  of  that  department
of  jurisprudence.  The  consideration  of  which  matter  will
involve  a  consideration  of  the  following  principal,  and  of  many
subordinate,  topics :

The  functions  of  judges  and  other  ministers  of  justica

The  rationale  of  the  process  styled  pleading,  with  the  con-
nected rationale  of  judicial  evidence.

Judicial  decisions,  with  their  necessary  or  more  usual  con-
comitants :  namely.  The  interpretation  or  construction  of  statute
law,  or  law  established  in  the  properly  legislative  mode :  The
peculiar  process  of  induction  (not  unfrequently  confounded  with
the  interpretation  of  statute  law)  through  which  a  rule  made  by
judicial  legislation,  is  gathered  from  the  decision  or  decisions
whereby  it  was  established :  The  application  of  the  law,  be  it
statute  law  or  a  rule  made  judicially,  to  the  fact,  case,  or  species
ohveniens,  which  awaits  the  solution  of  the  tribunal.

The  judgments,  decrees,  or  judicial  commands,  which  are  con-
sequent on  judicial  decisions. Appeals. Execution  of  judgments.

Judgments  considered  as  modes  of  acquisition:  that  is  to
say,  not  merely  as  instruments  by  which  rights  of  action  are
enforced,  but  as  causes  of  ulterior  rights :  e.g,  as  causes  of  Uens,
or  tacit  mortgages,  given  to  plaintiffs  on  lands  or  moveables  of
defendants.

Such  judgments  or  decrees  as  virtually  are  mere  solemnities
adjected  to  conveyances  or  contracts.  The  explanation  of  which
solemnities  will  involve  an  explanation  of  the  distinction  between
voluntary  and  contentious  jurisdiction.

Note. — A  right  which  arises  from  a  judgment  is  often  distinct  from  the


Course  of  Lectures.

light  of  action  which  is  porsaed  to  judgment  and  execution.  Arising
directly  from  the  judgmenty  it  arises  not  from  the  iir^ury  which  is  the  cause
of  the  right  of  action,  as  from  a  mode  of  acquisition.  Consequently,  rights
of  the  kind  ought  in  strictness  to  be  classed  with  rights  which  I  style
primary:  that  is  to  say,  with  rights  which  do  not  arise  from  delicts  or
offences.  But  the  clasedng  them  with  primary  rights  were  followed  by  this
inconvenience :  that  the  writer  were  unable  to  explain  them  in  a  satisfactory
manner,  unless  he  anticipated  the  doctrine  of  ii^juries,  of  rights  arising  from
injuries^  and  of  civil  procedure.

As  certain  rights  arising  from  judgment  should  in  strictness  be  placed
under  a  foregoing  head,  so  should  'the  functions  of  judges  and  other
ministers  of  justice'  be  placed  under  a  following:  namely,  the  Law  of
Persons.  But  if  this  matter,  which  logically  belongs  to  that  following  head,
were  not  anticipated  under  the  present,  the  exposition  of  civil  procedure
would  be  incomplete.

Whoever  reads  and  reflects  on  the  arrangement  of  a  corpus  juris,  must
perceive  that  it  cannot  be  constructed  with  logical  rigour.  The  members
or  parts  of  the  arrangement  being  extremely  numerous,  and  their  common
matter  being  an  organic  whole,  they  can  hardly  be  opposed  completely.  In
other  words,  the  arrangement  of  a  corpus  juris  can  hardly  be  so  constructed,
that  none  of  its  members  shall  contain  matter  which  logically  belongs  to
another.  If  the  principles  of  the  various  divisions  were  conceived  and
expressed  clearly,  if  the  departments  resulting  from  the  divisions  were
distinguished  broadly,  and  if  the  necessary  departures  from  the  principles
were  marked  conspicuously,  the  arrangement  would  make  the  approach  to
logical  completeness  and  correctness,  which  is  all  that  its  stubborn  and
reluctant  matter  will  permit  us  to  accomplish.

Duties, and other consequences, arising from
crifntes.

This  is  the  second  sub -department  of  the  second  of  the
capital  departments  under  which  I  arrange  or  distribute  the
matter  of  the  Law  of  Things.

The  matter  of  this  sub-department  will  be  treated  in  the
following  order.

L  Duties  are  relative  or  absolute.  A  relative  duty  is
implied  by  a  right  to  which  that  duty  answers.  An  absolute
duty  does  not  answer,  or  is  not  implied  by,  an  answering  right.

As  an  example  of  an  absolute  duty,  I  may  mention  a  duty
to  forbear  from  cruelty  to  any  of  the  lower  animals.  For  a
necessary  element  of  a  right  (implying  or  answering  the  duty)
is  wanting.  There  is  no  person,  individual  or  complex,  towards
or  in  respect  of  whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed.

I  have  adduced  the  foregoing  example  of  an  absolute  duty,
on  account  of  its  extreme  simplicity,  and  of  the  brevity  with
which  it  may  be  suggested.  But,  as  I  shall  show  in  my
preliminary  lectures,  absolute  duties  are  very  numerous,  and
many  of  them  are  very  important As  I  shall  also  show  in  my

VOL,  I.  F


66  Outline  of  the

preliminaiy  lectures,  there  are  three  cases  wherein  a  duty  is
absolute,  or  wherein  it  answereth  not  to  an  answering  right;
wherein  it  answers  to  nothing  which  we  could  call  a  righJL^  unless
we  gave  to  the  term  so  large  and  vague  a  meaning,  that  the  term
would  denote,  in  effect,  just  nothing  at  alL  The  three  cases
may  be  stated  briefly,  in  the  following  manner. — The  duty  is
absolute,  in  case  there  be  no  person,  individual  or  complex,
towards  or  in  respect  of  whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed.  The
duty  is  absolute,  in  case  the  persons,  towards  or  in  respect  of
whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed,  be  tmeertain  or  indeterminate.
The  duty  is  absolute,  in  case  the  only  person,  towards  or  in
respect  of  whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed,  be  the  monarch,  or
sovereign  number,  ruling  the  given  community.

Now  absolute  duties,  like  relative  duties,  are  primary  or
sanctioning :  that  is  to  say,  not  arising  from  injuries,  or  arising
from  injuries.  Again :  Primary  rights,  with  the  primary  relative
duties  which  respectively  answer  to  those  rights,  are  the  only
subjects  of  the  capital  department  to  which  I  have  given  the
title  of  'primury  rights  and  duties/  But  primary  absolute  duties
ought  to  be  placed  somewhere.  And  though  the  present  sub-
department  be  a  member  of  the  capital  department  to  which  I
have  given  the  title  of  '  sanctioning  rights  and  duties,'  primary
absolute  duties  may  be  placed  commodiously  here.  For  infringe-
ments of  duties  primary  and  absolute,  belong  to  the  cl£iss  of
delicts  which  are  styled  criTnes.

Accordingly,  I  shall  here  interpolate  a  description  of  the
primary  absolute  duties  which  are  not  appropriate  subjects  for
the  Law  of  Persons.  As  I  have  already  remarked,  such  inter-
polations of  foreign  matter  cannot  be  avoided  always.

II.  Having  interpolated  a  brief  description  of  primary
absolute  duties,  I  shall  class  and  describe  crim£s  (be  they
breaches  of  primary  absolute,  or  of  primary  relative  duties),  with
reference  to  the  rights  and  duties  whereof  they  are  respectively
infringements.

III.  Having  classed  and  described  crimes,  I  shall  briefly
touch  upon  the  duties  (all  such  duties  being  absolute)  which
arise  from  crimes.  I  shall  also  notice  briefly  those  consequences
of  crimes  which  are  styled,  strictly  and  properly,  punishm^ents,,

IV.  I  shall  advert  to  criminal  procedure,  with  what  may  be
called,  by  a  strict  application  of  the  name,  police.  In  other
words,  I  shall  advert  to  the  modes  wherein  crimes  are  pursued
to  punishment,  with  the  precautions  which  may  be  taken  to
prevent  them.


Course  of  Lectures.  67

LAW  OF  PERSONS.

Having  made  an  attempt,  at  a  previous  point  of  my  Course,
to  determine  the  notion  of  status  or  condition,  I  shall  enter  the
department  of  law  which  is  styled  the  Law  of  Persons,  with  an
attempt  to  distribute  statris  or  conditions  under  certain  principal
and  subordinate  classes.

Accordingly,  I  shall  divide  conditions  into  private  and
political. — I  shall  divide  private  conditions  into  domestic  (or
osconomical)  and  professional. — Certain  conditions  nearly  related
to  the  domestic,  I  shall  place  with  the  latter:  styling  the
former,  by  reason  of  the  analogy  through  which  they  are  so
related,  quasi' domestic  conditions. — Certain  conditions  which
will  not  bend  to  my  arrangement,  I  shall  place  on  a  line  with
private  and  political  conditions,  and  shall  style  anomjaious  or
miscellanecus.

My  arrangement,  therefore,  of  status  or  conditions  will  stand
thus:

I  shall  distribute  conditions  under  three  principal  classes :
1.  Prit;afe  conditions :  2.  PoZi^torf  conditions :  3.  Anomalous  01
miscellaneous  conditions.  And  I  shall  distribute  private  condi-
tions under  two  subordinate  classes:  1.  Domestic  (or  osconomical)
and  quasi'domestic  conditions  :  2.  Professional  conditions.

Note. — According  to  the  jurists  of  ancient  Rome,  and  to  the  jurists  of
the  modem  nations  whose  law  is  fjEishioned  on  the  Roman,  the  capital  or
leading  division  of  the  entire  corpus  juris  is  the  division  oljus  into  publicum
and  privcUum.  In  other  words,  positive  law  (considered  with  reference  to
its  different  purposes  and  subjects)  is  divided  by  those  jurists,  at  the  outset
of  the  division,  into  puMic  and  privcUe.

Now  the  name  puUxc  law  has  two  principal  significations  :  one  of  which
significations  is  large  and  vague  ;  the  other,  strict  and  definite.

Taken  with  its  large  and  vague  signification,  the  name  will  apply  indif-
ferently (as  I  shall  show  in  my  lectures)  to  law  of  every  department  The
various  writers,  therefore,  who  take  it  with  that  signification,  determine
the  province  of  public  law  in  various  and  inconsistent  ways.  According
to  some,  the  province  of  public  law  comprises  political  conditions,  together
with  civil  procedure,  and  the  law  which  is  styled  criminal :  that  is  to  say,
the  department  of  law  which  is  concerned  with  crimes ;  with  the  duties
ariBong  from  crimes  ;  with  the  punishments  annexed  to  crimes  ;  and  with
criminal  procedure  and  preventive  police.  According  to  others,  the  pro-
vince of  public  law  embraces  criminal  law,  but  excludes  civil  procedure.
According  to  others,  its  province  rejects  both.  Whilst  others  (confounding
positive  law  and  positive  morality)  extend  its  province  to  the  so-called  law
of  nations,  as  well  as  to  civil  procedure  and  to  the  law  which  is  styled
criminaL  But  in  one  thing  all  of  them  agree.  All  of  them  distribute
the  entire  corpus  juris  under  two  principal  and  contradistinguished  depart-
ments :  namely,  jus  publicum  and  jus  privatum. And,  consequently,  all  of


68  Outline  of  the

them  contradistinguiali  their  so-called  -gfiMw  law  to  the  two  principal  and
opposed  departments  of  their  so-called  private  law :  namely.  The  Law  of
Persons  and  The  Law  of  Things.  Now,  as  I  shall  show  in  my  lectures,
this  notable  division  and  arrangement  of  the  corptu  juris  is  erroneous  and
pregnant  with  error :  springing  from  a  perplexed  apprehension  of  the  ends
or  purposes  of  law,  and  tending  to  generate  a  like  apprehension  in  the
helpless  and  bewildered  student.  As  I  shall  show  also,  every  department
of  law,  viewed  from  a  certain  aspect,  may  be  styled  private  ;  whilst  every
department  of  law,  viewed  from  another  aspect,  may  be  styled  public.  As
I  shall  show  further,  public  law  and  private  law  are  names  which  should  be
banished  the  science ;  for  since  each  will  apply  indifferently  to  every
department  of  law,  neither  can  be  used  conveniently  to  the  purpose  of
signifying  any.  As  I  shall  show,  moreover,  the  entire  corpus  juris  ought
to  be  divided,  at  the  outset,  into  Law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons ;
whilst  the  only  portion  of  law  that  can  be  styled  puUic  law  with  a  certain
or  determinate  meaning,  ought  not  to  be  contradistinguished  to  the  Law
of  Things  and  Persons,  but  ought  to  be  inserted  in  the  Law  of  Persons,  as
one  of  its  limbs  or  members.

Taken  with  its  strict  and  definite  signification,  the  name  pMic  law  is
confined  to  that  portion  of  law  which  is  concerned  with  political  condi-
tions. Accordingly,  I  take  the  name  with  that  its  determinate  meaning,
and  I  deem  that  portion  of  law,  a  member  of  the  Law  of  Persons.  But,
to  obviate  a  cause  of  misconception,  I  style  that  portion  of  law.  The  Law
of  Political  Status,  or  the  Law  of  Political  Conditions :  suppressing  the
ambiguous  names  of  public  and  private  law,  along  with  that  groundless
division  of  the  corpus  juris  which  those  opposed  names  are  commonly
employed  to  signify.  For,  as  I  have  intimated  above,  the  Law  of  Political
Status,  like  every  other  portion  of  the  entire  corptu  juris,  might  be  styled
with  perfect  propriety,  public  or  private :  public,  when  viewed  from  a
certain  aspect ;  private,  when  viewed  from  another.

In  rejecting  the  division  of  law  into  public  and  private,  in  rejecting
the  names  by  which  the  division  is  signified,  and  in  classing  political
conditions  with  conditions  of  other  natures,  I  am  justified  by  the  great
authority  of  our  own  admirable  Hale,  as  well  as  by  the  cogent  reasons
whereon  I  shall  insist  in  my  lectures.  In  his  Analysis  of  the  Law  of
England  (or  rather  of  the  Law  of  England,  excepting  the  criminal  part  of
it),  he  classes  political  conditions  (or  *  political  relations ')  with  the  private
conditions  (or  '  relations  *)  which  he  styles  oeconomicaL  Nor  can  I  discover
in  any  nook  of  his  treatise  the  slightest  trace  of  the  perplexed  apprehension
which  is  the  source  of  the  division  of  law  into  public  and  private.  Even
in  adverting  to  criminal  delicts,  where  it  was  most  likely  that  he  would
fjGill  into  the  error,  he  avoids  it  Unlike  lus  imitator,  Blackstone,  who
calls  them  public  wrongs,  he  styles  them  criminal  wrongs,  or  matter  for
Pleas  of  the  Grown  :  hitting  precisely  by  the  last  expression  the  basis  of  the
division  of  wrongs  into  civil  injuries  and  crimes.  We  scarcely  can  estimate
completely  the  originality  and  depth  of  his  Analysis,  unless  we  compare
it  closely  with  the  institutes  of  Gaius  or  Justinian,  and  unless  we  look
vigilantly  for  the  instructive  but  brief  hints  which  abound  in  every  part
of  it  The  only  gross  mistakes  that  I  have  found  in  his  masterly  outiine
are  his  glaring  and  strange  mistranslation  of  ^ju»  personarum  et  rervm^  and
his  placing  under  the  department  assigned  to  the  $taJtus  of  persons,  certain
rights  of  persons  which  he  styles  their  absolute  rights.  Seeing  that  aU
rights  are  rights  of  persons,  and  seeing  that  things  are  merely  suJbjects  of


Course  of  Lectures.  69

riglitSi  it  is  clear  that  the  genuine  meaning  of  '  jiu  personamm  et  renim '
Ib  not  very  happily  rendered  by  '  rights  of  persons  and  things.'  And  as  to
(Atolvle  (commonly  denominated  naiwrdL  or  innaJU)  rights,  they  are  not
matter  for  the  Law  of  StaluSy  but  belong  pre-eminently  and  conspicuously
to  the  contradistinguished  department  But,  in  justice  to  this  great  and
excellent  person,  I  must  add  that  the  former  nustake  is  verbal  rather  than
SEubstantiaL  Unlike  the  imitator  Blackstone,  with  his  ^righU  of  persons
and  things,'  Hale  seizes,  for  the  most  part,  the  genuine  meaning  of  the
distinction,  though  he  thickens  the  obscurity  of  the  obscure  phrases  by
which  the  modem  Civilians  usually  express  it — In  rejecting  the  division
of  law  into  public  and  private,  and  in  classing  political  with  other  condi-
tions, Hale,  I  beUeve,  is  original,  and  nearly  singular.  In  an  encydopadia
by  Falck,  a  professor  of  law  at  Kiel,  it  is  said  that  the  authors  of  the
Danish  Code,  with  those  of  the  Danish  writers  who  treat  law  efystematically,r
observe,  in  this  respect,  the  arrangement  observed  by  Hale.  But  in  all  thef
treatises  by  Continental  Jurists  which  have  fallen  under  my  inspectioni
law  is  divided  into  public  and  private,  though  the  province  of  public  law
is  variously  determined  and  described.  I

It  is  true  that  Sir  William  Blackstone  also  rejects  that  division,  and
also  considers  the  law  which  is  concerned  with  political  conditions  a
member  of  the  Law  of  Persons.  But  the  method  observed  by  Blackstone
in  his  far  too  celebrated  Commentaries,  is  a  slavish  and  blundering  copy
of  the  very  imperfect  method  which  Hale  delineates  roughly  in  his  short
and  unfinished  Analysisi  From  the  outset  to  the  end  of  his  Commentaries,
he  blindly  adopts  the  mistakes  of  his  rude  and  compendious  model,  missing
invariably,  with  a  nice  and  surprising  infelicity,  the  pregnant  but  obscure
suggestions  which  it  proffered  to  his  attention,  and  which  would  have
guided  a  discerning  and  inventive  writer  to  an  arrangement  comparatively
just.  Neither  in  the  general  conception,  nor  in  the  detail  of  his  book,  is
there  a  single  particle  of  original  and  discriminating  thought.  He  had
read  somewhat  (though  far  less  than  is  commonly  believed) ;  but  he  had
swallowed  the  matter  of  his  reading,  without  choice  and  without  rumina-
tion. He  owed  the  popularity  of  his  book  to  a  paltry  but  effectual  artifice,
and  to  a  poor,  supei^cial  merit.  He  truckled  to  the  sinister  interests  and
to  the  mischievous  prejudices  of  power  ;  and  he  flattered  the  overweening
conceit  of  their  national  or  peculiar  institutions,  which  then  was  devoutiy
entertained  by  the  body  of  the  English  people,  though  now  it  is  happily
vanishing  before  the  advancement  of  reason.  And  to  this  paltry  but  effect-
ual artifice  he  added  the  allurement  of  a  style  which  is  fitted  to  tickle  the
ear,  though  it  never  or  rarely  satisfies  a  severe  and  masculine  taste.  For
that  rhetorical  and  prattling  manner  of  his  is  not  the  manner  which  suited
the  matter  in  hand.  It  is  not  the  manner  of  those  classical  Roman  jurists
who  are  always  models  of  expression,  though  their  meaning  be  never  so
faulty.  It  differs  from  their  unaffected,  yet  apt  and  nervous  style,  as  the
tawdry  and  flimsy  dress  of  a  milliner's  doU,  from  the  graceful  and  imposing
nakedness  of  a  Grecian  statue.

Having  distributed  status  or  conditions  under  the  principal
and  subordinate  classes  mentioned  above,  I  shall  consider  them
particularly  in  the  following  order  and  manner.

I.  I  shall  review  domestic  and  quasi-domestic  conditions :
describing  the  rights  and  duties,  capacities  and  incapacities,  of
which  they  are  constituted  or  composed :  and  also  describing  the


70  Outline  of  the

events  by  which  persons  are  invested  with  them,  or  are  divested
of  them. — Of  these  conditions  the  following  are  the  principal :
nEunely,  The  conditions  of  Husband  and  Wife :  of  Parent  and
Child :  of  Master  and  Slave :  of  Master  and  Servant :  of  Persons
who  by  reason  of  their  age,  or  by  reason  of  their  sex,  or  by
reason  of  infirmity  arising  from  disease,  require,  or  are  thought
to  require,  an  extraordinary  measure  of  protection  and  restraint

Having  reviewed  domestic  and  quasi-domestic  conditions,
in  the  manner  which  I  have  now  suggested,  I  shall  review
professional  conditions  (the  other  leading  class  of  private
conditions),  in  a  similar  manner.

II.  Having  reviewed  private  conditions,  in  the  manner
suggested  above,  I  shall  review,  in  a  similar  manner,  political
conditions:  that  is  to  say,  the  staJtm  or  conditions  of  subor-
dinate political  superiors.  Of  the  classes  of  persons  bearing
political  conditions,  the  following  are  the  most  remarkable.
1.  Judges  and  other  ministers  of  justice.  2.  Persons  whose
principal  and  appropriate  duty  is  the  defence  of  the  community
against  foreign  enemies.  3.  Persons  invested  with  rights  to  col-
lect and  distribute  the  revenue  of  the  state.  4.  Persons  com-
missioned by  the  state  to  instruct  its  subjects  in  religion,  science,
or  art  5.  Persons  commissioned  by  the  state  to  minister
to  the  relief  of  calamity :  e,g,  overseers  of  the  poor.  6.  Persons
commissioned  by  the  state  to  construct  or  uphold  works  which
require,  or  are  thought  to  require,  its  special  attention  and  in-
terference :  e,g,  roads,  canals,  aqueducts,  sewers,  embankments.

N<M. — Before  I  dismiBs  the  matter  of  the  present  article,  I  will  request
the  attention  of  the  reader  to  the  foUowing  explanatory  suggestions.

1.  The  monarch  properly  so  called,  or  the  sovereign  number  in  its  col-
legiate and  sovereign  capacity,  is  not  invested  with  a  8to^tu  (in  the  proper
acceptation  of  the  term).  A  zUdva  is  composed  or  constituted  of  legal  rights
and  duties,  and  of  capacities  and  incapacities  to  take  and  incur  them.  Now,
since  they  are  merely  creatures  of  the  positive  law  of  the  conmiunity,  and
since  that  positive  law  is  merely  a  creature  of  the  sovereign,  we  cannot
ascribe  such  rights  and  duties  to  the  monarch  or  sovereign  body.  We  may
say  that  the  sovereign  has  powen.  We  may  say  that  the  sovereign  has
rights  conferred  by  the  Law  of  God  ;  that  the  sovereign  has  rights  conferred
by  positive  morality ;  that  the  sovereign  is  subject  to  duties  set  by  the
Law  of  God ;  that  the  sovereign  is  subject  to  duties  which  positive  morality
imposes.  Nay,  a  sovereign  government  may  have  a  legal  right  against  a
subject  or  subjects  of  another  sovereign  government.  But  it  cannot  be
bound  by  legal  duties,  and  cannot  have  legsd  rights  against  its  own  subjects.
Consequently,  a  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign  government
of  a  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  is  not  invested  with  a
Btatui  (in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term) ;  or  it  is  not  invested  with  a
BtatuB  (in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term)  derived  from  the  positive  law
of  its  own  political  community.


Course  of  Lectures.  7 1

For  the  sake,  however,  of  ahortneas,  but  not  without  impropriety,  we
may  say  that  the  sovereign  bears  a  tiatui  composed  or  constituted  of  powers.
And,  by  reason  of  the  intimate  connection  of  that  improper  stattu  with  the
it(Uu8  (properly  so  called)  of  subordinate  political  superiors,  I  shall  consider
the  powers  of  the  monarch,  or  the  powers  of  the  sovereign  number  in  its
collegiate  and  sovereign  cajmcity,  with  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  sub-
ordinate political  superiors  to  whom  portions  of  those  powers  are  delegated
or  committed  in  trust.  Or,  rather,  I  shall  consider  the  powers  of  the
sovereign,  at  the  present  point  of  my  Course,  in  so  fjEur  as  the  essentials  of
the  matter  may  not  have  been  treated  adequately  in  my  preliminary  lecture
on  sovereignty  and  independent  political  society.

2.  The  law  of  political  conditions,  or  public  law  (with  the  strict  and
definite  meaning),  is  frequently  divided  into  conttitutionctl  and  administrative.

In  a  country  governed  by  a  monarch,  constitutional  law  is  extremely
simple :  for  it  merely  determines  the  person  who  shall  bear  the  sovereignty.
In  a  country  governed  by  a  number,  constitutional  law  is  more  complex  :
for  it  determines  the  persons,  or  the  classes  of  the  persons  who  shall  bear
the  sovereign  powers  ;  and  it  determines,  moreover,  the  mode  wherein  those
persons  shall  share  those  powers. — In  a  country  governed  by  a  monarch,
constitutional  law  is  positive  morality  merely  :  In  a  country  governed  by
a  number,  it  may  consist  of  positive  morality,  or  of  a  compound  of  positive
morality  and  positive  law.

Administrative  law  determines  the  ends  and  modes  to  and  in  which  the
sovereign  powers  shall  be  exercised :  shall  be  exercised  directly  by  the
monarch  or  sovereign  number,  or  shall  be  exercised  directly  by  the  sub-
ordinate political  superiors  to  whom  portions  of  those  powers  are  delegated
or  committed  in  trust.

The  two  departments,  therefore,  of  constitutional  and  administrative
law,  do  not  quadrate  exactly  with  the  two  departments  of  law  which  regard
respectively  the  status  of  the  sovereign,  and  the  various  status  of  subordinate
political  superiors.  Though  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  latter  are  com-
prised by  administrative  law,  and  are  not  comprised  by  constitutional  law,
administrative  law  comprises  the  powers  of  the  sovereign,  in  so  far  as  they
are  exercised  directly  by  the  monarch  or  sovereign  number.

In  so  far  as  the  powers  of  the  sovereign  are  delegated  to  political
subordinates,  administrative  law  is  positive  law,  whether  the  country  be
governed  by  a  monarch,  or  by  a  sovereign  number.  In  so  far  as  the
sovereign  powers  are  exercised  by  the  sovereign  directly,  administrative
law,  in  a  country  governed  by  a  monarch,  is  positive  morality  merely  :  In
a  country  governed  by  a  number,  it  may  consist  of  positive  morality,  or  of
a  compound  of  positive  morality  and  positive  law.

3.  It  is  somewhat  difficult  to  describe  the  boundary  by  which  the
conditions  of  political  subordinates  are  severed  from  the  conditions  of
private  persons.  The  rights  and  duties  of  political  subordinates,  and  the
rights  and  duties  of  private  persons,  are  creatures  of  a  common  author :
namely,  the  sove^ign  or  state.  And  if  we  examine  the  purposes  to  which
their  rights  and  duties  are  conferred  and  imposed  by  the  sovereign,  we  shall
find  that  the  purposes  of  the  rights  and  duties  which  the  sovereign  confers
and  imposes  on  private  persons,  often  coincide  with  the  purposes  of  those
which  the  sovereign  confers  and  imposes  on  subordinate  political  superiors.
Accordingly,  the  conditions  of  x>&rent  and  guardian  (with  the  answering
conditions  of  child  and  ward)  are  not  unfrequently  treated  by  writers  on
jurisprudence,  as  portions  of  public  law. For  example  :  The  patria  patestas


72  Outline  of  the

and  ihe  tuXdn  of  the  Boman  Law  are  treated  thus,  in  his  masterly  System
des  Pandektm-BedUs,  bj  Thibaut  of  Heidelbeig :  who,  for  penetrating
acnteness,  rectitude  of  judgment,  depth  of  learning,  and  vigour  and  elegance
of  exposition,  may  be  placed,  by  the  side  of  Von  Savigny,  at  the  head  of
all  living  Civilians.

At  the  earliest  part  of  my  Couise  that  wiU  admit  the  subject  con-
veniently, I  shall  try  to  distinguish  political  from  private  conditions,  or  to
determine  the  province  of  public  law  (with  the  strict  and  definite  meaning) :
an  attempt  which  will  lead  me  to  examine  the  current  division  of  law  into
jtu  publicum  and  jus  privaium;  and  which  will  lead  me  to  explain  the
numerous  and  disparate  senses  attached  to  the  two  expressions.  I  would
briefly  remark  at  present,  that  I  merely  mean  by  private  persons,  persons
not  political :  that  is  to  say,  persons  not  invested  with  political  conations  ;
or  persons  bearing  political  conditions,  but  not  considered  in  those  char-
acters, or  not  viewed  from  that  aspect.  I  intend  not  to  intimate  by  the
term  private^  that  private  or  not  political,  and  public  or  political  persons,
are  distinguishable  by  differences  between  the  ultimate  purpoBea  for  which
their  rights  and  duties  are  respectively  conferred  and  imposed.

III.  Having  reviewed  private  and  political  conditions,  in
the  manner  suggested  above,  I  shall  review  anomalous  or
miscellaneous  conditions  in  a  similar  manner. — ^As  examples  of
such  conditions,  I  adduce  the  following:  namely,  the  conditions
of  Aliens  :  the  conditions  of  Persons  incapable  of  rights  by  reason
of  their  religious  opinions :  the  conditions  of  Persons  incapable  of
rights  by  reason  of  their  crimes.

Note. — ^In  any  department  of  the  Law  of  Persons  assigned  to  a  given
condition,  the  rights  and  duties  composing  the  given  condition,  would
naturally  be  arranged  (in  a  corpus  juris)  agreeably  to  the  order  or  method
observed  in  the  Law  of  Things.  For  example  :  Agreeably  to  the  order  or
method  which  I  have  delineated  above,  the  rights  and  duties  composing
the  given  condition,  would  naturally  be  divided  at  the  outset,  into  primary
and  sanctioning  :  those  primary  rights  and  duties  being  divided  again,  into
rights  in  rem,  rights  in  personam,  combinations  of  rights  in  rem  and  rights
in  personam,  and  so  on.  And  in  any  department  of  the  Law  of  Persons
assigned  to  a  given  condition,  the  constituent  elements  of  the  given  con-
dition would  naturally  be  treated  with  perpetual  reference  to  the  principles
and  ndes  expounded  in  the  Law  of  Things.


To  the  series  of  lectures  briefly  delineated  above,  I  shall  add
a  concise  summary  of  the  positive  moral  rules  which  are  styled
by  recent  writers,  the  positive  law  of  nations,  or  positive  inter-
national law :  concluding  therewith  my  review  of  positive  law,
as  conceived  with  its  relations  to  positive  morality,  and  to  that
dvoirie  law  which  is  the  ultimate  test  of  both.


I have drawn  and published  the  foregoing  explanatory
Outline  with  two  purposes :  with  the  puipose  of  suggesting  to


Course  of  Lectures.  73

straogeis  the  subject  and  scope  of  my  Course,  and  with  the
purpose  of  enabling  my  Class  to  follow  my  Course  easily.

To  the  members  of  my  Class  the  outline,  I  think,  will  be
usefdL  Many  of  the  numerous  topics  upon  which  it  touches
will  be  treated  in  the  Course  slightly  and  defectively.  But,
having  those  topics  before  them  in  a  connected  and  orderly
series,  they  may  easily  fill  the  chasms  which  I  shall  inevitably
leave,  with  apt  conclusions  of  their  own.  And  every  demand
for  explanation  that  the  outline  may  suggest  to  any  of  them,
I  shall  gladly  answer  and  satisfy  to  the  best  of  my  knowledge
and  ability.

For  the  numerous  faults  of  my  intended  Course,  I  shall
not  apologise.

Such  an  exposition  of  my  subject  as  would  satisfy  my  own
wishes,  would  fill,  at  the  least,  a  hundred  and  twenty  lectures.
It  would  fill,  at  the  least,  a  hundred  and  twenty  lectures,  though
every  lecture  of  the  series  occupied  an  hour  in  the  delivery,  and
were  packed  as  closely  as  possible  with  strictly  pertinent  matter.

And,  as  competent  and  candid  judges  will  readily  perceive
and  admit,  a  good  exposition  of  the  subject  which  I  have  under-
taken to  treat,  were  scarcely  the  forced  product  of  a  violent  and
short  efibrt  It  were  rather  the  tardy  fniit  of  large  and  careful
research,  and  of  obstinate  and  sustained  meditation.  After  a
few  repetitions,  my  Course  may  satisfy  my  hearers,  and  may
almost  satisfy  myself.  But,  until  I  shall  have  traversed  my
ground  again  and  again,  it  will  abound  with  faults  which  I  fairly
style  inevitable,  and  for  which  I  confidently  claim  a  laige  and
liberal  construction.

John  Austin.


74  Abstract  of  Outline.


AN  ABSTRACT  OF  THE  FOREGOING  OUTLINE.


PRELIMINARY  EXPLANATIONS.

Lect.I-VI The  province  of  Jurispradence  determineA

General  jurispradence  distingnished  from  particular.

Leot.XII- Analyses  of  certain  notions  which  pervade  the  science  of  law.
XXVII

Lbct. law considered WITH REFERENCE TO ITS SOURCES,
^XIX -^^^ ^^"^^ REFERENCE TO  THE MODES  IN WHICH IT
BEGINS  AND  ENDS.

Written,  or  promulged  law ;  and  urmriUen,  or  unpromulged
law.

Law  made  directly,  or  in  the  properly  legislative  manner ;
and  law  made  judicially,  or  in  the  way  of  improper  legislation.

Codification.

Law,  the  occasions  of  which,  or  the  motives  to  the  establish-
ment of  which,  are  frequently  mistaken  or  confounded  for  or
with  its  sources :  viz.

Jus TnorSms  constUvtum ;  or  law fashioned by  judicial

decision  upon  pre-existing  custom :
Jus  prvderUibus  compositum  ;  or  law  fashioned  by  judicial
decision  upon  opinions  and  practices  of  private  or  un-
authorised lawyers :
The  Tudural  law  of  modem  writers  upon  jurisprudence,
with  the  equivalent  jus  naturale,  fus  gentium,  or  jus
ncUu/rcde  et  gentium,  of  the  classical  Boman  jurists :
Jus  receptum ;  or  law  fashioned  by  judicial  decision  upon

law  of  a  foreign  and  independent  nation :
Law  fashioned  by  judicial  decision  upon  positive  inter-
national morality.
Distinction  of  positive  law  into  law  and  equity,  or  jus  civile
and  jus  prcetorittm.

Modes  in  which  law  is  abrogated,  or  in  which  it  otherwise
ids.


Abstract  of  Outline.  7  5

LAW CX)NSIDERED WITH EEFERENCE TO ITS PURPOSES, Lbot.  XL
AND WITH REFERENCE TO THE SUBJECTS ABOUT ^
WHICH  IT  IS  CONVERSANT.

Divisioii  of  Law  into  Law  of  Things  and  Law  of  Persons.
Principle  or  basis  of  that  Division,  and  of  the  two  depart-
ments which  result  from  it.

•  LAW  OF  THINGS.  Lect.

XLV,  &c
Division  of  rights,  and  of  duties  (relative  and  absolute)  into

primary  and  sanctioning.

Principle  or  basis  of  that  division,  and  of  the  two  depart-
ments which  result  from  it.

Principle  or  basis  of  many  of  the  sub-departments  into
which  those  two  departments  immediately  sever:  namely,  The
distinction  of  rights  and  of  relative  duties,  into  rights  in  rem
with  their  answering  offices,  and  rights  in  personam  with  their
answering  obligations.

Method  or  order  wherein  the  matter  of  the  Law  of  Things
will  be  treated  in  the  intended  lectures.

Preliminary  remarks  on  things  and  persons,  as  subjects  of
rights  and  duties :  on  acts  and  forbearances,  as  objects  of  rights
and  duties :  and  on  facts  and  events,  as  causes  of  rights  and
duties,  or  as  extinguishing  rights  and  duties.

Prim/iry  Rights,  with  primary  relative  Duties,  Lkct.

XLVII,&c.

Rights  in  rem  as  existing  per  se,  or  as  not  combined  with  Onlyapart
rights  in  personam.  of  tma  first

Bights  %n  personam  as  existing  per  se,  or  as  not  combmed  ment  u
with  rights  in  rem.  iSf  «.^'

Such  of  the  combinations  of  rights  in  rem  and  rights  in  mainderof
personam  as  are  particular  and  comparatively  simpla  f^  ^'

Such  universities  of  rights  and duties (or  such  complex  filled  up.
abrogates  of  rights  and  duties)  as  arise  by  universal  succession.

Sanctioning  Bights,  with  sanctioning  Duties  (relative
and  absolute).

Delicts  distinguished  into  civil injuries  and  crimes: or
rights  and  duties  which  are  effects  of  civil  delicts,  distinguished
from  duties,  and  other  consequences,  which  are  effects  of  criminal.
Sights  and  duties  arising  from  civil  injuries.
Duties,  and  other  consequences  arising  from  crimes.

[Interpolated  description  of  primary  absolute  duties.]


76  Abstract  of  Outline.

^}^\  LAW  OF  PERSONa

^^  Distribution  of  staiv,s  or  conditions  under  certain  principal

and  subordinate  classes.

Divisioii  of  law  into  puhUc  and  frwaJU,

Beview  of  private  conditions.
Beview  of  political  conditions.

The  daJbu  or  condition  (improperly  bo  called)  of  the  monarch  or

sovereign  number.
Division  of  the  law  which  regards  political  conditions,  into  con-

tiitvtiaiuil  and  administratiwe.
Boundary  which  severs  political  from  private  conditions.

Beview  of  anomalous  or  miscellaneous  conditions.

The  respective  arrangements  of  those  sets  of  rights  and  duties
which  respectively  compose  or  constitute  the  several  status  or
conditions.


71


t 111?

08*43


ii


liril


-in


-ti

3-!


Lectures  on  Jxtbispbudence.


THE

PEOVINCE  OF  JUEISPRUDENCE

DETEEMINED*


Laws  proper,  or  properly  so  called,  are  commands ;  laws  which Analysis
are  not  commands,  are  laws  improper  or  improperly  so  called. ^'  "  '
Laws  properly  so  called,  with  laws  improperly  so  called,  may  be  Purpoae  or
aptly  divided  into  the  four  following  kinds.  oid^^he

1.  The  divine  laws,  or  the  laws  of  Grod:  that  is  to  say,  the  ^^^j^?,"'
laws  which  are  set  by  God  to  his  human  creatures.  the  six  en-

2.  Positive  laws :  that  is  to  say,  laws  which  are  simply  and  J^J^  ^^'
strictly  so  called,  and  which  form  the  appropriate  matter  of
general  and  particular  jurisprudence.

3.  Positive  morality,  rules  of  positive  morality,  or  positive
moral  rules.

4.  Laws  metaphorical  or  figurative,  or  merely  metaphorical
or  figurative

The  divine  laws  and  positive  laws  are  laws  properly  so
called. — Of  positive  moral  rules,  some  are  laws  properly  so
called,  but  others  are  laws  improper.  The  positive  moral  rules
which  are  laws  improperly  so  called,  may  be  styled  laws  or  rules
set  or  imposed  by  opinion:  for  they  are  merely  opinions  or
sentiments  held  or  felt  by  men  in  regard  to  human  conduct.
A  law  set  by  opinion  and  a  law  imperative  and  proper  are  allied
by  analogy  merely;  although  the  analogy  by  which  they  are

•  The  author's  preface  to  the  original  afterwards  published  by  him  in  a  treatise

edition  of  the  work  under  this  title  states  nnder  the  title  of '  The  Province  of  Jaris-

that  oat  of  the  lectures  ori^ally  de-  prudence  determined ;'  and  the  treatise

Uyered  by  Mr.  Austin,  at  the  university  so  published  being  divided  according  to

of  London,  the  first  ten  were  directed  topics,  and  not  by  the  hours  of  reading,

towards  distinguishing  positive  law  (the  was  comprised  in  six  lectures. These

appropriate matter of jurisnrudence),  publishea  lectures,  with  alterations  con-

from  various  objects  with  wnich  it  is  nned  to  a  few  pages,  chiefly  made  in

connected by resemblance, and from  accordance  with  later  memoranda  of  the

various  other  o^ects  to  which  it  is  allied  author,  are  the  six  lectures  which  im-

by  analogy. These  ten  lectures  were  mediately  here  follow.— R.C.


8o  The  Province  of

AKALT8I8  allied  is  strong  or  close. — ^Laws  metaphorical  or  figurative,  or

t""*' }  merely  metaphorical  or  figurative,  are  laws  improperly  so  called.

A  law  metaphorical  or  figurative  and  a  law  imperative  and

proper  are  allied  by  analogy  merely ;  and  the  analogy  by  which

they  are  allied  is  dender  or  remote.

Consequently,  positive  laws  (the  appropriate  matter  of  juris-
prudence) are  related  in  the  way  of  resemblance,  or  by  close  or
remote  analogies,  to  the  following  objects.  1.  In  the  way  of
resemblance,  they  are  related  to  the  laws  of  God.  2.  In  the
way  of  resemblance,  they  are  related  to  those  rules  of  positive
morality  which  are  laws  properly  so  called:  And  by  a  close
or  strong  analogy,  they  are  related  to  those  rules  of  positive
morality  which  are  laws  set  by  opinion.  3.  By  a  remote  or
slender  analogy,  they  are  related  to  laws  metaphorical,  or  laws
merely  metaphorical.

The  principal  purpose  or  scope  of  the  six  ensuing  lectures,
is  to  distinguish  positive  laws  (the  appropriate  matter  of  juris-
prudence) from  the  objects  now  enumerated :  objects  with  which
they  are  connected  by  ties  of  resemblance  and  analogy ;  with
which  they  are  further  connected  by  the  common  nsune  of
'  laws ;'  and  with  which,  therefore,  they  often  are  blended  and
confounded.  And,  since  such  is  the  principal  purpose  of  the
six  ensuing  lectures,  I  style  them,  considered  as  a  whole, '  the
province  of  jurisprudence  determined.'  For,  since  such  is  their
principal  purpose,  they  affect  to  describe  the  boundaiy  which
severs  the  province  of  jurisprudence  from  the  regions  lying  on
its  confines.

The  way  which  I  take  in  order  to  the  accomplishment  of
that  purpose,  may  be  stated  shortly  thus.

I.  I  determine  the  essence  or  nature  which  is  common  to
all  laws  that  are  laws  properly  so  called:  In  other  words,  I
determine  the  essence  or  nature  of  a  law  imperative  and  proper.

II.  I  determine  the  respective  characters  of  the  four  several
kinds  into  which  laws  may  be  aptly  divided :  Or  (changing  the
phrase)  I  determine  the  appropriate  marks  by  which  laws  of
each  kind  are  distinguished  from  laws  of  the  others.

And  here  I  remark,  by  the  by,  that,  examining  the  respect-
ive characters  of  those  four  several  kinds,  I  found  the  following
the  order  wherein  I  could  explain  them  best :  Firsts  the  char-
acters or  distinguishing  marks  of  the  laws  of  Grod;  secondly,  the
characters  or  distinguishing  marks  of  positive  moral  rules;
thirdly,  the  characters  or  distinguishing  marks  of  laws  meta-
phorical or  figurative;  fourthly  and  lastly,  the  characters  or


yurisprudence  determined,  8 1

distingiiishing  marks  of  posdtiye  law,  or  laws  simply  and  strictly  Analysis
so  called.  Lect^^

By  determining  the  essence  or  nature  of  a  law  imperative
and  proper,  and  by  determining  the  respective  characters  of
those  four  several  kinds,  I  determine  positively  and  negatively
the  appropriate  matter  of  jurisprudence.  I  determine  positively
what  that  matter  is ;  and  I  distinguish  it  from  various  objects
which  are  variously  related  to  it,  and  with  which  it  not  un-
frequently  is  blended  and  confounded.  I  show  moreover  its
affinities  with  those  various  related  objects :  affinities  that  ought
to  be  conceived  as  precisely  and  clearly  as  may  be,  inasmuch  as
there  are  numerous  portions  of  the  rationale  of  positive  law  to
which  they  are  the  only  or  principal  key.

Having  suggested  the  principal  purpose  of  the  following
treatise,  I  now  will  indicate  the  topics  with  which  it  is  chiefly
concerned,  and  also  the  order  wherein  it  presents  them  to  the
reader.

I.  In  the  first  of  the  six  lectures  which  immediately  follow,
I  state  the  essentials  of  a  law  or  rule  (taken  with  the  largest
signification  that  can  be  given  to  the  term  properly).  In  other
words,  I  determine  the  essence  or  nature  which  is  common  to
all  laws  that  are  laws  properly  so  called.

Determining  the  essence  or  nature  of  a  law  imperative  and
proper,  I  determine  implicitly  the  essence  or  nature  of  a  command;
and  I  distinguish  such  commands  as  are  laws  or  rules  from  such
commands  as  are  merely  occasional  or  particular.  Determining
the  nature  of  a  command,  I  fix  the  meanings  of  the  terms  which
the  term  '  command '  implies :  namely,  *  sanction '  or  *  enforce-
ment of  obedience;*  'duty'  or  'obligation;'  'superior  and
inferior.'

II.  (a)  In  the  beginning  of  the  second  lecture,  I  briefly
determine  the  characters  or  marks  by  which  the  laws  of  God  are
distinguished  from  other  laws.

In  the  beginning  of  the  same  lecture,  I  briefly  divide  the
laws,  and  the  other  commands  of  the  Deity,  into  two  kinds  :
the  revealed  or  express,  and  the  unrevealed  or  tacit.

Having  briefly  distinguished  his  revealed  from  his  unrevealed
commands,  I  pass  to  the  nature  of  the  signs  or  index  through
which  the  latter  are  manifested  to  Man.  Now,  concerning  the
nature  of  the  index  to  the  tacit  commands  of  the  Deity,  there
are  three  theories  or  three  hypotheses :  First,  the  pure  hypothesis
VOL.  I.  G


82  The  Province  of

ANALT8I8  or  theory  of  general  utility ;  secondly,  the  pure  hjrpothesis  or
LkctJ-VI  ^jjQQpy  Qf  a  moral  sense ;  thirdly,  a  hypothesis  or  theory  mixed
or  compounded  of  the  others.  And  with  a  statement  and
explanation  of  the  three  hypotheses  or  theories,  the  greater
portion  of  the  dM&nd  lecture,  and  the  whole  of  the  third  and
fowrth  lectures,  are  exclusively  or  chiefly  occupied.

That  exposition  of  the  three  hjrpotheses  or  theories,  may
seem  somewhat  impertinent  to  the  subject  and  scope  of  my
Course.  But  in  a  chain  of  systematical  lectures  concerned  with
the  rationale  of  jurisprudence,  such  an  exposition  is  a  necessary

link.

Of  the  principles  arid  distinctions  involved  by  the  rationale
of  jurisprudence,  or  of  the  principles  and  distinctions  occurring
in  the  writings  of  jurists,  there  are  many  which  could  not  be
expounded  correctly  and  clearly,  if  the  three  hypotheses  or
theories  had  not  been  expounded  previously.  For  example:
Positive  law  and  morality  are  distinguished  by  modem  jurists
into  law  natural  and  law  positive :  that  is  to  say,  into  positive
law  and  morality  fashioned  on  the  law  of  Grod,  and  positive  law
and  morality  of  purely  human  origin.  And  this  distinction  of
law  and  morality  into  law  natural  and  law  positive,  nearly
tallies  with  a  distinction  which  runs  through  the  Pandects  and
Institutes,  and  which  was  taken  by  the  compilers  from  the
jurists  who  are  styled  '  classicaL'  By  the  jurists  who  are  styled
'  classical '  (and  of  excerpts  from  whose  writings  the  Pandects
axQ  mainly  composed),  jvs  civile  ia  distinguished  from  jits  gerUium,
or  jus  omnium  gentium.  For  (say  they)  a  portion  of  the  positive
law  which  obtains  in  a  particul£ir  nation,  is  peculiar  to  that
community :  And,  being  peculiar  to  that  community,  it  may  be
styled  jus  civile,  or  jus  proprium  ipsius  dvitatis.  But,  besides
such  portions  of  positive  law  as  are  respectively  peculiar  to
particular  nations  or  states,  there  are  rules  of  positive  law  which
obtain  in  all  nations,  and  rules  of  positive  morality  which  all
mankind  observe :  And  since  these  legal  rules  obtain  in  all
nations,  and  since  these  moral  rules  are  observed  by  all  man-
kind, they  may  be  styled  the  jus  omnium  gentium,  or  the  com-
mune omnium  hominum  jus.  Now  these  universal  rules,  being
universal  rules,  cannot  be  purely  or  simply  of  human  invention
and  position.  They  rather  are  made  by  men  on  laws  coming
from  God,  or  from  the  intelligent  and  rational  Nature  which
is  the  soul  and  the  guide  of  the  universe.  They  are  not  so
properly  laws  of  human  device  and  institution,  as  divine  or
natural  laws  clothed  with  human  sanctions. But  tJie  legal  and


yurisprudence  determined.  83

moral  rales  which  are  peculiar  to  particular  nations,  are  purely  Analtsis
or  simply  of  human  invention  and  position.  Inasmuch  as  they  ^  \  '  >
are  partial  and  transient,  and  not  universal  and  enduring,  they
hardly  are  fashioned  by  their  human  authors  on  divine  or
natural  models. — ^Now,  without  a  previous  knowledge  of  the  three
hypotheses  in  question,  the  worth  of  the  two  distinctions  to
which  I  have  briefly  alluded,  cannot  be  known  correctly,  and
cannot  be  estimated  truly.  Assuming  the  pure  hypothesis  of  a
moral  sense,  or  assuming  the  pure  hypothesis  of  general  utility,
those  distinctions  are  absurd,  or  are  purposeless  and  idle  subtilties.
But,  assuming  the  hypothesis  compounded  of  the  others,  those
distinctions  are  significant,  and  are  also  of  considerable  moment

Besides,  the  divine  law  is  the  measure  or  test  of  positive
law  and  morality :  or  (changing  the  phrase)  law  and  morality,
in  so  far  as  they  art  what  they  <mghJt  to  be,  conform,  or  are  not
repugnant,  to  the  law  of  Grod.  Consequentiy,  an  all-important
object  of  the  science  of  ethics  (or,  borrowing  the  language  of
Bentham,  *■  the  science  of  deontology')  is  to  determine  the  nature
of  the  index  to  the  tacit  commands  of  the  Deity,  or  the  nature
of  the  signs  or  proofs  through  which  those  commands  may  be
known, — I  mean  by  '  the  science  of  ethics '  (or  by  *  the  science
of  deontology'),  the  science  of  law  and  morality  as  they  respect-
ively (mght  to  be :  or  (changing  the  phrase),  the  science  of  law
and  morality  as  they  respectively  'mmt  be  if  they  conform  to
their  measure  or  test.  That  department  of  the  science  of  ethics,
which  i?i  concerned  especially  with  positive  law  as  it  ought  to
be,  is  styled  the  science  of  legislation :  that  department  of  the
science  of  ethics,  which  is  concerned  especially  with  positive
morality  as  it  ought  to  be,  has  hardly,  gotten  a  name  perfectly
appropriate  and  distinctive. — ^Now,  though  the  science  of  legis-
lation (or  of  positive  law  as  it  ought  to  be)  is  not  the  science  of
jurisprudence  (or  of  positive  law  as  it  is),  still  the  sciences  are
connected  by  numerous  and  indissoluble  ties.  Since,  then,  the
nature  of  the  index  to  the  tacit  command  of  the  Deity  is  an
all-important  object  of  the  science  of  legislation,  it  is  a  fit  and
important  object  of  the  kindred  science  of  jurisprudence.

There  are  certain  current  and  important  misconceptions  of
the  theory  of  general  utility :  There  are  certaiu  objections  resting
on  those  misconceptions,  which  frequently  are  urged  against  it :
There  are  also  considerable  difficulties  with  which  it  really  is
embarrassed.  Labouring  to  rectify  those  misconceptions,  to
answer  those  objections,  and  to  solve  or  extenuate  those  diffi-
culties, I  probably  dwell  upon  the  theory  somewhat  longer  than


84  The  Province  of

Analysis  I  ought  Deeply  convinced  of  its  truth  and  importance,  and
y^\ "  >  therefore  earnestly  intent  on  commending  it  to  the  minds  of
others,  I  probably  wander  into  ethical  disquisitions  which  are
not  precisely  in  keeping  with  the  subject  and  scope  of  my
Course.  If  I  am  guilty  of  this  departure  from  the  subject  and
scope  of  my  Course,  the  absorbing  interest  of  the  purpose  which
leads  me  ftom  my  proper  path,  will  excuse,  to  indulgent  readers,
my  offence  against  rigorous  logic.

II.  (b)  At  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  lecture,  I  distribute
laws  or  rules  under  two  classes :  First,  laws  properly  so  called,
with  such  improper  laws  as  are  closely  analogous  to  the  proper ;
secondly,  those  improper  laws  which  are  remotely  analogous  to
the  proper,  and  which  I  style,  therefore,  laws  metaphorical  or
figurative. — ^I  also  distribute  laws  proper,  with  such  improper
laws  as  are  closely  analogous  to  the  proper,  under  three  classes :
namely,  the  laws  properly  so  called  which  I  style  the  laws  of
God ;  the  laws  properly  so  called  which  I  style  positive  laws ;
and  the  laws  properly  so  called,  with  the  laws  improperly  so
called,  which  I  style  positive  morality  or  positive  moral  rules. —
I  assign  moreover  my  reasons  for  marking  those  several  classes
with  those  respective  names.

Having  determined,  in  preceding  lectures,  the  characters  or
distinguishing  marks  of  the  divine  laws,  I  determine,  in  the  fifth
lecture,  the  characters  or  distinguishing  marks  of  positive  moral
rules :  that  is  to  say,  such  of  the  laws  or  rules  set  by  men  to
men  as  are  not  armed  with  legal  sanctions ;  or  such  of  those
laws  or  rules  as  are  not  positive  laws,  or  are  not  appropriate
matter  for  general  or  particular  jurisprudence. — Having  deter-
mined the  distinguishing  marks  of  positive  moral  rules,  I
determine  the  respective  characters  of  their  two  dissimilar  kinds  :
namely,  the  positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws  imperative  and
proper,  and  the  positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws  set  by
opinion.

The  divine  law,  positive  law,  and  positive  morality,  are
mutually  related  in  various  ways.  To  illustrate  their  mutual
relations,  I  advert,  in  the  fifth  lecture,  to  the  cases  wherein  they
agree,  wherein  they  disagree  without  conflicting,  and  wherein
they  disagree  and  conflict

I  show,  in  the  same  lecture,  that  my  distribution  of  laws
proper,  and  of  such  improper  laws  as  are  closely  analogous  to
the  proper,  tallies,  in  the  main,  with  a  division  of  laws  which
is  given  incidentally  by  Locke  in  his  Essay  on  Human
Understanding.


yurisprudence  determined.  85

II.  (c)  At  the  end  of  the  same  lecture,  I  determine  the  Akaltsis
characters,  or  distinguishing marks  of  laws metaphorical or v '  "  .
figurative. And  I  show  that  laws  which  are  merely laws
through  metaphors,  are  blended  and  confounded,  by  writers  of
celebrity,  with  laws  imperative  and  proper.

II.  (d)  In  the  sixth  and  loust  lecture,  I  determine  the
characters  of  laws  positive:  that  is  to  say,  laws  which  are
simply  and  strictly  so  called,  and  which  form  the  appropriate
matter  of  general  and  particular  jurisprudence.

Determining  the  characters  of  positive  laws,  I  determine
implicitly  the  notion  of  sovereignty,  with  the  implied  or  cor-
relative notion  of  independent  political  society.  For  the
essential  difference  of  a  positive  law  (or  the  difference  that
severs  it  fix)m  a  law  which  is  not  a  positive  law)  may  be  stated
generally  in  the  following  manner.  Every  positive  law  or
every  law  simply  and  strictly  so  called,  is  set  by  a  sovereign
person,  or  a  sovereign  body  of  persons,  to  a  member  or  members
of  the  independent  political  society  wherein  that  person  or  body
is  sovereign  or  supreme.  Or  (changing  the  phrase)  it  is  set  by
a  monarch,  or  sovereign  number,  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a
state  of  subjection  to  its  author.

To  elucidate  the  nature  of  sovereignty,  and  of  the  independ-
ent political  society  that  sovereignty  implies,  I  examine  various
topics  which  I  arrange  under  the  following  heads.  First,  the
possible  forms  or  shapes  of  supreme  political  government;
secondly,  the  limits,  real  or  imaginary,  of  supreme  political
power;  thirdly,  the  origin  or  causes  of  political  government
and  society.  Examining  those  various  topics,  I  complete  my
description  of  the  limit  or  boundary  by  which  positive  law  is
severed  from  positive  morality.  For  I  distinguish  them  at
certain  points  whereat  they  seemingly  blend,  or  whereat  the
line  which  divides  them  is  not  easily  perceptible.

The  essential  difference  of  a  positive  law  (or  the  difference
that  severs  it  from  a  law  which  is  not  a  positive  law)  may  be
stated  generally  as  I  have  stated  it  abova  But  the  foregoing
general  statement  of  that  essential  difference  is  open  to  certain
correctives.  And  with  a  brief  allusion  to  those  correctives,  I
close  the  sixth  and  last  lecture.


86  The  Province  of


LECTUEE  I.

Lect.  I The  matter  of  jurisprudence  is  positive  law :  law,  simply  and
^^", strictly  so  called :  or  law  set  by  political  superiors  to  political
ixwofthe  inferiors. But  positive  law  (or law,  simply  and strictly  so
att^Ipt^to  called)  is  often  confounded  with  objects  to  which  it  is  related
determine by  reseniblance,  and  with  objects  to  which  it  is  related  in  the
vince'S "^''^^y  ^f  analogy :  with  objects  which  are  also  signified,  properly
jurispni- and  improperly,  by  the  large  and  vague  expression  law. To
s^dor obviate  the  d^culties  springing  from  that  confasion,  I  begin
■"ggestod. my  projected  Course  with  determining  the  province  of  juris-
prudence, or  with  distinguishing  the  matter  of  jurisprudence
from  those  various  related  objects :  trying  to  define  the  subject
of  which  I  intend  to  treat,  before  I  endeavour  to  analyse  its
numerous  and  complicated  parts.
Law: what, A  law,  in  the  most  general  and  comprehensive  acceptation
S^re- ^  which  the  term,  in  its  literal  meaning,  is  employed,  may  be
hensive said  to  be  a  rule  laid  down  for  the  guidance  of  an  intelligent
being  by  an  intelligent  being  having  power  over  him. Under


sense.


this  definition  are  included,  and  without  impropriety,  several
species.  It  is  necessary  to  define  accurately  the  line  of  demarc-
ation which  separates  these  species  from  one  another,  as  much
mistiness  and  intricacy  has  been  infused  into  the  science  of
jurisprudence  by  their  being  confounded  or  not  clearly  distin-
guished. In  the  comprehensive  sense  above  indicated,  or  in
the  largest  meaning  which  it  has,  without  extension  by  metaphor
or  analogy,  the  term  law  embraces  the  following  .  objects : —
Laws  set  by  God  to  his  human  creatures^  and  laws  set  by  men
to  men.
Law  of  The  whole  or  a  portion  of  the  laws  set  by  God  to  men  is

^^^  frequently  styled  the  law  of  nature,  or  natural  law :  being,  in

truth,  the  only  natural  law  of  which  it  is  possible  to  speak
without  a  metaphor,  or  without  a  blending  of  objects  which
ought  to  be  distinguished  broadly.  But,  rejecting  the  appellation
Law  of  Nature  as  ambiguous  and  misleading,  I  name  those  laws
or  rules,  as  considered  collectively  or  in  a  mass,  the  Divine  law,
or  the  law  of  Ood.
Human  Laws  set  by  men  to  men  are  of  two  leading  or  principal

^^-  classes:  classes  which  are  often  blended,  although  they  differ

classes. extremely; and  which,  for that reason,  should be severed

precisely,  and  opposed  distincfly  and  conspicuously,
ist  daaa.  Of  the  laws  or  rules  set  by  men  to  men,  some  are  established


Jurisprtidence  determined.  8  7

by  politieal  superiors,  sovereign  and  subject :  by  persons  exer- Lect.  I
cising  supreme  and subordinate  govemmerU, in independent  Laws' set
nations,  or  independent  political  societies. The  aggregate  of  hjpoiUuxa
the  rules  thus  established,  or  some  aggregate  forming  a  portion  ^''•'"*^*
of  that  aggregate,  is  the  appropriate  matter  of  jurisprudence,
general  or  particular. To  the aggr^ate  of  the*  rules thus
established,  or  to  some  aggregate  forming  a  portion  of  that
aggregate,  the  term  law,  as  used  simply  and  strictly,  is  exclu-
sively applied. But,  as  contradistinguished  to  natural  law,  or
to  the  law  of  nature  (meaning,  by  those  expressions,  the  law  of
God), the aggregate of the rules, established by political
superiors,  is  frequently  styled  positive  law,  or  law  existing  by
position. As  contradistinguished  to  the  rules  which I  style
positive  morality,  and  on  which  I  shall  touch  immediately,  the
ftggi^g&te  of  the  rules,  established  by  political  superiors,  may ^
also  be  marked  commodiously  with  the  name  of  positive  law.
For  the  sake,  then,  of  getting  a  name  brief  and  distinctive  at
once,  and  agreeably  to  frequent  usage,  I  style  that  aggregate  of
rules,  or  any  portion  of  that  aggregate,  positive  law: though
rules,  which  are  not  established  by  political  superiors,  are  also
positive,  or  exist  by  position,  if  they  be  rules  or  laws,  in  the
proper  signification  of  the  term.

Though  some  of  the  laws  or  rules,  which  are  set  by  men  to  2nd  class,
men,  are  established  by  political  superiors,  others  are  not  estab-  by  menuaot
lished  by  political  superiors,  or  are  not  established  by  political  political
superiors,  in  that  capacity  or  character.  supenors.

Closely  analogous  to  human  laws  of  this  second  class,  are  Objects
a  set  of  objects  frequently  but  improperly  termed  laws,  being  ^utw!^
rules  set  and  enforced  by  mere  opinion,  that  is,  by  the  opinions  analogy
or  sentiments  held  or  felt  by  an  indeterminate  body  of  men  in  ^™®^
r^ard  to  humian  conduct. Instances  of  such  a  use  of  the  term
law  are  the  expressions — '  The  law  of  honour ;' '  The  law  set
by  fashion ;'  and  rules  of  this  species  constitute  much  of  what
is  usually  termed  '  International  law/

The  aggregate  of  human  laws  properly  so  called  belonging  The  two
to  the  second  of  the  classes  above  mentioned,  with  the  aggregate  jj^on^^cj^
of  objects  improperly  but  by  dose  analogy  termed  laws,  I  place  under  the
together  in  a  common class,  and  denote  them  by  the  term  JJ^^,^!
positive  morality. The  name  morality  severs  them  from  positive  Hy-
law,  while  the  epithet  positive  disjoins  them  from  the  law  of
God. And  to  the  end  of  obviating  confusion,  it  is  necessary
or  expedient  that  they  should  be  disjoined  from  the  latter  by
that  distinguishing  epithet For  the  name  morality  (or  m^aJs),


88


Lect.  I


Objects
metaphor-
ically
termed
laws.


Laws  or
rules  pro-
perly  so
called,  are
a  species  of
commands.


TAe  Province  of

when  standing  unqualified  or  alone,  denotes  indifferently  either
of  the  following  objects :  namely,  positive  morality  cw  i^  is,  or
without  regard  to  its  merits ;  and  positive  morality  as  ii  would
he,  if  it  conformed  to  the  law  of  God,  and  were,  therefore,  deserv-
ing of  approbcUion,

Besides  the  various  sorts  of  rules  which  are  included  in  the
literal  acceptation  of  the  term  law,  and  those  which  are  by  a
close  and  striking  analogy,  though  improperly,  termed  laws,
there  are  numerous  applications  of  the  term  law,  which  rest
upon  a  slender  analogy  and  are  merely  metaphorical  or  figura-
tive. Such  is  the  case  when  we  talk  of  laws  observed  by  the
lower  animals;  of  laws  regulating  the  growth  or  decay  of
vegetables;  of  laws  determining  the  movements  of  inanimate
bodies  or  masses.  For  where  intelligence  is  not,  or  where  it  is
too  bounded  to  take  the  name  of  rea^son,  and,  therefore,  is  too
bounded  to  conceive  the  purpose  of  a  law,  there  is  not  the  will
which  law  can  work  on,  or  which  duty  can  incite  or  restrain.
Yet  through  these  misapplications  of  a  Ttame,  flagrant  as  the
metaphor  is,  has  the  field  of  jurisprudence  and  morals  been
deluged  with  muddy  speculation.

Having  suggested  the  purpose  of  my  attempt  to  determine
the  province  of  jurisprudence :  to  distinguish  positive  law,  the
appropriate  matter  of  jurisprudence,  from  the  various  objects  to
which  it  is  related  by  resemblance,  and  to  which  it  is  related,
nearly  or  remotely,  by  a  strong  or  slender  analogy :  I  shall  now
state  the  essentials  of  a  law  or  nUe  (taken  with  the  largest  signi-
fication which  can  be  given  to  the  term  properly).

Every  law  or  rule  (taken  with  the  largest  signification  which
can  be  given  to  the  term  properly)  is  a  command.  Or,  rather,
laws  or  rules,  properly  so  called,  are  a  species  of  commands.

Now,  since  the  term  command  comprises  the  term  law,  the
first  is  the  simpler  as  well  as  the  larger  of  the  two.  But,  simple
as  it  is,  it  admits  of  explanation.  And,  since  it  is  the  key  to
the  sciences  of  jurisprudence  and  morals,  its  meaning  should
be  analysed  with  precision.

Accordingly,  I  shall  endeavour,  in  the  first  instance,  to
analyze  the  meaning  of  'command:'  an  analysis  which,  I  fear,
will  task  the  patience  of  my  hearers,  but  which  they  will  bear
with  cheerfulness,  or,  at  least,  with  resignation,  if  they  consider
the  difficulty  of  performing  it  The  elements  of  a  science  are
precisely  the  parts  of  it  which  are  explained  least  easily.  Terms
that  are  the  largest,  and,  therefore,  the  simplest  of  a  series,  are
without  equivalent  expressions  into  which  we  can  resolve  them


yurisprtidence  determined.  89

concisdy. And  when  we  endeavour  to  define  them,  or  to  trans- Lbot.  I
late  them  into  terms  which  we  suppose  are  better  understood,  we *
are  forced  upon  awkward  and  tedious  circumlocutions.

K  you  express  or  intimate  a  wish  that  I  shall  do  or  forbear  The  mean-
from  some  act,  and  if  you  vrtll  visit  me  with  an  evil  in  case  I  term  com^
comply  not  with  your  wish,  the  expression  or  intimation  of  your\^«<*«
wish  is  a  command.  A  command  is  distinguished  from  other]
significations  of  desire,  not  by  the  style  in  which  the  desire  is
signified,  but  by  the  power  and  the  purpose  of  the  party  com-
manding to  inflict  an  evil  or  pain  in  case  the  desire  be  disre-j
garded.  If  you  cannot  or  will  not  harm  me  in  case  I  comply
not  with  your  wish,  the  expression  of  your  wish  is  not  a  com-
mand, although  you  utter  your  wish  in  imperative  phrase.  If
you  are  able  and  willing  to  harm  me  in  case  I  comply  not  with
your  wish,  the  expression  of  your  wish  amounts  to  a  command,
although  you  are  prompted  by  a  spirit  of  courtesy  to  utter  it  in
the  shape  of  a  request.  *  Freces  erant,  sed  guHms  contradid  non
posset.*  Such  is  the  language  of  Tacitus,  when  speaking  of  a
petition  by  the  soldiery  to  a  son  and  lieutenant  of  Vespasian.

A  command,  then,  is  a  signification  of  desire.  But  a  com-
mand is  distinguished  from  other  significations  of  desire  by  this
peculiarity :  that  the  party  to  whom  it  is  directed  is  liable  to
evil  from  the  other,  in  case  he  comply  not  with  the  desire.

Being  liable  to  evil  from  you  if  I  comply  not  with  a  wish  The  mean-
which  you  signify,  I  am  hound  or  obliged  by  your  command,  or  I  ^^^*^®
lie  under  a  duty  to  obey  it. If,  in  spite  of  that  evil  in  prospect,
I  comply  not  with  the  wish  which  you  signify,  I  am  said  to
disobey  your  command,  or  to  violate  the  duty  which  it  imposes.

Command  and  duty  are,  therefore,  correlative  terms:  the  The  terms
meaning  denoted  by  each  being  implied  or  supposed  by  the  ^^^J^T^
other. Or  (changing  the  expression)  wherever  a  duty  Ues,  a  are  corre-
command  has  been signified; and  whenever  a  command  is  ^**^^®-
signified,  a  duty  is  imposed.

Ck)ncisely  expressed,  the  meaning  of  the  correlative  expres-
sions is  this.  He  who  will  inflict  an  evil  in  case  his  desire  be
disregarded,  utters  a  command  by  expressing  or  intimating  his
desire :  He  who  is  liable  to  the  evil  in  case  he  disregard  the
desire,  is  bound  or  obliged  by  the  command.

The  evil  which  will  probably  be  incurred  in  case  a  command  The  mean-
be  disobeyed  or  (to  use  an  equivalent  expression)  in  case  a  duty  be  ^  °^  **^®
broken,  is  frequently  called  a  sanction,  or  an  enforcemeTU  of  obedi-  turn,
ence. Or  (varying  the  phrase)  the  command  or  the  duty  is  said
to  be  sanctioned  or  enforced  by  the  chance  of  incurring  the  evil.


90


The  Province  of


Leot.  I


To  the  ex-
istence of  a
command,
a  duty,  and
a  sanction,

motive  to
compli-
ance is  not
requisite.


Rewards
are  not
sanctions.


Considered  as  thus  abstracted  from  the  command  and  the
duty  which  it  enforces,  the  evil  to  be  incurred  by  disobedience
is  frequently  styled  a  punishment.  But,  as  punishments,  strictly
so  called,  are  only  a  doss  of  sanctions,  the  term  is  too  narrow  to
express  the  meaning  adequately.

I  observe  that  Dr.  Paley,  in  hia  analysis  of  the  term  obliga-
tion,  lays  much  stress  upon  the  violence  of  the  motive  to  com-
pliance. In  so  far  as  I  can  gather  a  meaning  from  his  loose
and  inconsistent  statement,  his  meaning  appears  to  be  this :
that  unless  the  motive  to  compliance  be  violent  or  irUcTisey  the
expression  or  intimation  of  a  wish  is  not  a  command,  nor  does  the
party  to  whom  it  is  directed  lie  under  a  diUy  to  regard  it.

If  he  means,  by  a  violent  motive,  a  motive  operating  with
certainty,  his  proposition  is  manifestly  false.  The  greater  the
evil  to  be  incurred  in  case  the  wish  be  disregarded,  and  the
greater  the  chance  of  incurring  it  on  that  same  event,  the  greater,
no  doubt,  is  the  chance  that  the  wish  will  not  be  disregarded.
But  no  conceivable  motive  will  certainly  determine  to  compliance,
or  no  conceivable  motive  will  render  obedience  inevitable.  If
Paley's  proposition  be  true,  in  the  sense  which  I  have  now
ascribed  to  it,  commands  and  duties  are  simply  impossible.  Or,
reducing  his  proposition  to  absurdity  by  a  consequence  as  mani-
festly false,  commands  and  duties  are  possible,  but  are  never
disobeyed  or  broken.

K  he  means  by  a  violent  motive,  an  evil  which  inspires  fear,
his  meaning  is  simply  this  :  that  the  party  bound  by  a  conmiand
is  bound  by  the  prospect  of  an  evil.  For  that  which  is  not
feared  is  not  apprehended  as  an  evil;  or  (changing  the  shape
of  the  expression)  is  not  an  evil  in  prospect.

The  truth  is,  that  the  magnitude  of  the  eventual  evil,  and
the  magnitude  of  the  chance  of  incurring  it,  are  foreign  to  the
matter  in  question.  The  greater  the  eventual  evil,  and  the
greater  the  chance  of  incurring  it,  the  greater  is  the  efficacy  of
the  command,  and  the  greater  is  the  strength  of  the  obligation  :
Or  (substituting  expressions  exactly  equivalent),  the  greater  is
the  chance  that  the  command  will  be  obeyed,  and  that  the  duty
will  not  be  broken.  But  where  there  is  the  smallest  chance  of
incurring  the  smallest  evil,  the  expression  of  a  wish  amounts  to
a  command,  and,  therefore,  imposes  a  duty.  The  sanction,  if  you
will,  is  feeble  or  insufficient ;  but  still  there  is  a  sanction,  and,
therefore,  a  duty  and  a  command.

By  some  celebrated  writers  (by  Locke,  Bentham,  and,  I  think,
Paley),  the  term  sanction,  or  enforcew^ent  of  obedience,  is  applied


yurtsprudence  determined.  91

to  conditional  good  as  well  as  to  conditional  evil :  to  reward  as l'^^*  ^
well  as  to  punishment. But,  with  all  my  habitual  veneration
for  the  names  of  Locke  and  Bentham,  I  think  that  this  extension
of  the  term  is  pregnant  with  confusion  and  perplexity.

Bewards  are,  indisputably,  motives  to  comply  with  the  wishes
of  others.  But  to  talk  of  commands  and  duties,  as  sanctioned  or
enforced  by  rewards,  or  to  talk  of  rewards  as  ohliffing  or  constrainr
ing  to  obedience,  is  surely  a  wide  departure  from  the  established
meaning  of  the  terms.

If  you  expressed  a  desire  that  /  should  render  a  service,  and
if  you  profifered  a  reward  as  the  motive  or  inducement  to  render
it^  you  would  scarcely  be  said  to  command  the  service,  nor  should
/,  in  ordinary  language,  be  obliged  to  render  it.  In  ordinary
language,  you  would  promise  me  a  reward,  on  condition  of  my
rendering  the  service,  whilst  /  might  be  incited  or  persuaded  to
render  it  by  the  hope  of  obtaining  the  reward.

Again :  If  a  law  hold  out  a  reward  as  an  inducement  to  do
some  act,  an  eventual  right  is  conferred,  and  not  an  obligation
imposed,  upon  those  who  shall  act  accordingly :  The  imperative
part  of  the  law  being  addressed  or  directed  to  the  party  whom
it  requires  to  render  the  reward.

In  short,  I  am  determined  or  inclined  to  comply  with  the
wish  of  another,  by  the  fear  of  disadvantage  or  eviL  I  am  also
determined  or  inclined  to  comply  with  the  wish  of  another,  by
the  hope  of  advantage  or  good.  But  it  is  only  by  the  chance
of  incurring  evU,  that  I  am  bound  or  obliged  to  compliance.  It
is  only  by  conditional  evU,  that  duties  are  sanctioned  or  enforced.
It  is  the  power  and  the  purpose  of  inflicting  eventual  evU,  and
not  the  power  and  the  purpose  of  imparting  eventual  good,  which
gives  to  the  expression  of  a  wish  the  name  of  a  command.

K  we  put  reward  into  the  import  of  the  term  sanction,  we
must  engage  in  a  toilsome  struggle  with  the  current  of  ordinary
speech ;  and  shall  often  slide  unconsciously,  notwithstanding  our
efforts  to  the  contrary,  into  the  narrower  and  customary  meaning.

It  appears,  then,  from  what  has  been  premised,  that  the  ideas  The  mean-
er notions  comprehended  by  the  term  command  are  the  following,  j^^!
1.  A  wish  or  desire  conceived  by  a  rational  being,  that  another  mand,
rational  being  shall  do  or  forbear. 2.  An  evil  to  proceed  from  JSted. "
the  former,  and  to  be  incurred  by  the  latter,  in  case  the  latter
comply  not  with  the  wish. 3.  An  expression  or  intimation  of
the  wish  by  words  or  other  signs.

It  also  appears  from  what  has  been  premised,  that  command,  Theinsepa-
dnty,  and  sanction  are  inseparably  connected  terms :  that  each  ^onTf


92  The  Province  of

Lbct.  I embraces  the  same  ideas  as  the  others,  though  each  denotes  those
the  three ideas  in  a  peculiar  order  or  series.

terms,  cwn-  *  A  wish  conccived  by  one,  and  expressed  or  intimated  to
dviiy,  and  another,  with  an  evil  to  be  inflicted  and  incurred  in  case  the
«inrfum.  ^igh  be  disregarded,'  are  signified  directly  and  indirectly  by  each
of  the  three  expressions.  Each  is  the  name  of  the  same  complex
notion.
The  man-  But  when  I  am  talking  directly  of  the  expression  or  intima-

couneidon!  ^^^^  ^^  ^^  wish,  I  employ  the  term  command :  The  expression
or  intimation  of  the  wish  being  presented  prominently  to  my
hearer;  whilst  the  evil  to  be  incurred,  with  the  chance  of
incurring  it,  are  kept  (if  I  may  so  express  myself)  in  the  back-
ground of  my  picture.

When  I  am  talking  directly  of  the  chance  of  incurring  the
evil,  or  (changing  the  expression)  of  the  liability  or  obnoxiousness
to  the  evil,  I  employ  the  term  duty,  or  the  term  obligation :  The
liability  or  obnoxiousness  to  the  evil  being  put  foremost,  and  the
rest  of  the  complex  notion  being  signified  implicitly.

When  I  am  talking  immediately  of  the  evil  itself,  I  employ
the  term  sanction,  or  a  term  of  the  like  import :  The  evil  to  be
incurred  being  signified  directly;  whilst  the  obnoxiousness  to
that  evil,  with  the  expression  or  intimation  of  the  wish,  are
indicated  indirectly  or  obliquely.

To  those  who  are  familiar  with  the  language  of  logicians
(language  unrivalled  for  brevity,  distinctness,  and  precision),  I
can  express  my  meaning  accurately  in  a  breath. — ^Each  of  the
three  terms  signifies  the  same  notion ;  but  each  denotes  a  difiTerent
part  of  that  notion,  and  connotes  the  residue.
Lav}8  or  Commands  are  of  two  species. Some  are  laws  or  rules. The

t^guished  others  have  not  acquired  an  appropriate  name,  nor  does  language
from  com- afford  an  expression  which  will  mark  them  briefly  and  precisely,
^kh  are ^  must,  therefore,  note  them  as  well  as  I  can  by  the  ambiguous
oecasicmai and  inexpressive  name  of  '  occasumal  or  particular  commands.*
lar,  ^  The  term  laws  or  rules  being  not  unfrequently  applied  to

occasional  or  particular  commands,  it  is  hardly  possible  to  describe
a  line  of  separation  which  shall  consist  in  every  respect  with
established  forms  of  speech.  But  the  distinction  between  laws
and  particular  commands  may,  I  think,  be  stated  in  the  follow-
ing manner.

By  every  command,  the  party  to  whom  it  is  directed  is
obliged  to  do  or  to  forbear.

Now  where  it  obliges  generally  to  acts  or  forbearances  of  a
ckiss,  a  command  is  a  law  or  rule. But  where  it  obliges  to  a


yurisprtidence  determined.  93

specific  act  or  forbearance,  or  to  acts  or  forbearances  which  it  Lect.  i
determines  specifically  or  individimUy,  a  command  is  occasional  '  *
or  particular.  In  other  words,  a  class  or  description  of  acts  is
determined  by  a  law  or  rule,  and  acts  of  that  class  or  description
are  enjoined  or  forbidden  generally.  But  where  a  command  is
occasional  or  particular,  the  act  or  acts,  which  the  command
enjoins  or  forbids,  are  assigned  or  determined  by  their  specific
or  individual  natures  as  well  as  by  the  class  or  description  to
which  they  belong.

The  statement  which  I  have  given  in  abstract  expressions
I  will  now  endeavour  to  illustrate  by  apt  examples.

If  you  command  your  servant  to  go  on  a  given  errand,  or
not  to  leave  your  house  on  a  given  evening,  or  to  rise  at  such
an  hour  on  such  a  morning,  or  to  rise  at  that  hour  during  the
next  week  or  month,  the  command  is  occasional  or  particular.
For  the  act  or  acts  enjoined  or  forbidden  are  specially  determined
or  assigned.

But  if  you  command  him  simply  to  rise  at  that  hour,  or  to
rise  at  that  hour  always,  or  to  rise  at  that  hour  till  fwrther  orders,
it  may  be  said,  with  propriety,  that  you  lay  down  a  rvle  for  the
guidsmce  of  your  servant's  conduct.  For  no  specific  act  is
assigned  by  the  command,  but  the  command  obliges  him  generally
to  acts  of  a  determined  class.

If  a  regiment  be  ordered  to  attack  or  defend  a  post,  or  to
quell  a  riot,  or  to  march  from  their  present  quarters,  the  command
is  occasional  or  particular.  But  an  order  to  exercise  daily  till
further  orders  shall  be  given  would  be  called  a  general  order,  and
might  be  called  a  rule.

If  Parliament  prohibited  simply  the  exportation  of  com,
either  for  a  given  period  or  indefinitely,  it  would  establish  a  law
or  rule :  a  hivd  or  sort  of  acts  being  determined  by  the  command,
and  acts  of  that  kind  or  sort  being  generally  forbidden.  But  an
order  issued  by  Parliament  to  meet  an  impending  scarcity,  and
stopping  the  exportation  of  com  then  shipped  and  in  port,  would
not  be  a  law  or  rule,  though  issued  by  the  sovereign  legislature.
The  order  r^arding  exclusively  a  specified  quantity  of  com,  the
negative  acts  or  forbearances,  enjoined  by  the  command,  would
be  determined  specifically  or  individually  by  the  determinate
nature  of  their  subject

As  issued  by  a  sovereign  legislature,  and  as  wearing  the
form  of  a  law,  the  order  which  I  have  now  imagined  would
probably  be  called  a  law.  And  hence  the  difficulty  of  drawing
a  distinct  boundary  between  laws  and  occasional  commands.


94  The  Province  of

Leot.  I  Again :  An  act  which  is  not  an  offence,  according  to  the

'  existing  law,  moves  the  sovereign  to  displeasure :  and,  though
the  authors  of  the  act  are  legally  innocent  or  unoffending,  the
sovereign  commands  that  they  shall  be  punished.  As  enjoining
a  specific  punishment  in  that  specific  case,  and  as  not  enjoining
generally  acts  or  forbearances  of  a  class,  the  order  uttered  by
the  sovereign  is  not  a  law  or  rule.

Whether  such  an  order  would  be  caUtd  a  law,  seems  to
depend  upon  circumstances  which  are  purely  immaterial :  im-
material, that  is,  with  reference  to  the  present  purpose,  though
material  with  reference  to  others.  If  made  by  a  sovereign
assembly  deliberately,  and  with  the  forms  of  legislation,  it  would
probably  be  called  a  law.  If  uttered  by  an  absolute  monarch,
without  deliberation  or  ceremony,  it  would  scarcely  be  con-
founded with  acts  of  legislation,  and  would  be  styled  an  arbitrary
command.  Yet,  on  either  of  these  suppositions,  its  nature  would
be  the  same.  It  would  not  be  a  law  or  rule,  but  an  occasional
or  particular  command  of  the  sovereign  One  or  Number.

To  conclude  with  an  example  which  best  illustrates  the  dis-
tinction, and  which  shows  the  importance  of  the  distinction
most  conspicuously,  judicial  commands  are  commonly  occasional
or  particular,  although  the  commands  which  they  are  calculated
to  enforce  are  commonly  laws  or  rules.

For  instance,  the  lawgiver  commands  that  thieves  shall  be
hanged.  A  specific  theft  and  a  specified  thief  being  given,  the
judge  commands  that  the  thief  shall  be  hanged,  agreeably  to
the  command  of  the  lawgiver.

Now  the  lawgiver  determines  a  class  or  description  of  acts ;
prohibits  acts  of  the  class  generally  and  indefinitely ;  and  com-
mands, with  the  like  generality,  that  punishment  shall  foUow
transgression.  The  command  of  the  lawgiver  is,  therefore,  a  law
or  rule.  But  the  command  of  the  judge  is  occasional  or  parti-
cular. For  he  orders  a  specific  punishment,  as  the  consequence
of  a  specific  offence.

According  to  the  line  of  separation  which  I  have  now
attempted  to  describe,  a  law  and  a  particular  command  are  dis-
tinguished thus. — Acts  or  forbearances  of  a  class  are  enjoined
generally  by  the  former.  Acts  determined  specifically,  are  enjoined
or  forbidden  by  the  latter.

A  different  line  of  separation  has  been  drawn  by  Blackstone
and  others.  According  to  Blackstone  and  others,  a  law  and  a
particular  command  are  distinguished  in  the  following  manner. —


yurisprudence  determined,  g  5

A  law  obliges  generally  the  members  of  the  given  commimity,  or Ijsct.  I
a  law  obliges  genercUly  persons  of  a  given  class. A  particular '
command  obliges  a  single  person,  or  persons  whom  it  determines
individtudly.

That  laws  and  particular  commands  are  not  to  be  distin-
guished thus,  will  appear  on  a  moment's  reflection.

For,  first,  commands  which  oblige  generally  the  members  of
the  given  community,  or  commands  which  oblige  generally  persons
of  given  classes,  are  not  always  laws  or  rules.

Thus,  in  the  case  already  supposed;  that  in  which  the
sovereign  commands  that  aU  com  actually  shipped  for  exporta-
tion be  stopped  and  detained ;  the  command  is  obligatory  upon
the  whole  community,  but  as  it  obliges  them  only  to  a  set  of
acts  individually  assigned,  it  iB  not  a  law.  Again,  suppose  the
sovereign  to  issue  an  order,  enforced  by  penalties,  for  a  gene-
ral mourning,  on  occasion  of  a  public  calamity.  Now,  though
it  is  addressed  to  the  community  at  large,  the  order  is  scarcely
a  rule,  in  the  usual  acceptation  of  the  term.  For,  though  it
obliges  generally  the  members  of  the  entire  community,  it
obliges  to  acts  which  it  assigns  specifically,  instead  of  obliging
generally  to  acts  or  forbearances  of  a  class.  If  the  sovereign
commanded  that  black  should  be  the  dress  of  his  subjects,  his
command  would  amount  to  a  law.  But  if  he  commanded  them
to  wear  it  on  a  specified  occasion,  his  command  would  be  merely
particular.

And,  secondly,  a  command  which  obliges  exclusively  persons
individually  determined,  may  amount,  notwithstanding,  to  a  law
or  rule.

For  example,  A  father  may  set  a  nde  to  his  child  or  children :
a  guardian,  to  his  ward :  a  master,  to  his  slave  or  servant.  And
certain  of  God's  laws  were  as  binding  on  the  first  man,  as  they
are  binding  at  this  hour  on  the  millions  who  have  sprung  from
his  loins.

Most,  indeed,  of  the  laws  which  are  established  by  political
superiors,  or  most  of  the  laws  which  are  simply  and  strictly  so
called,  oblige  generally  the  members  of  the  political  community,
or  oblige  generally  persons  of  a  class.  To  frame  a  system  of
duties  for  every  individual  of  the  community,  were  simply  im-
possible :  and  if  it  were  possible,  it  were  utterly  useless.  Most
of  the  laws  established  by  political  superiors  are,  therefore,
general  in  a  twofold  manner :  as  enjoining  or  forbidding  generally
acts  of  kinds  or  sorts ;  and  as  binding  the  whole  community,  or,
at  least,  whole  classes  of  its  members.


96  The  Province  of

Lect.  I  But  if  we  suppose  that  Parliament  creates  and  grants  an

' ^ ' oflBce,  and  that  Parliament  binds  the  grantee  to  services  of  a

given  description,  we  suppose  a  law  established  by  political

superiors,  and  yet  exclusively  binding  a  specified  or  determinate

person.

Laws established by  political superiors,  and exclusively
binding  specified or determinate persons,  are  styled,  in  the
language  of  the  Eoman  jurists,  privilegia. Though  that,  indeed,
is  a  name  which  will  hardly  denote  them  distinctly :  for,  like
most of  the leading terms  in  actual systems  of  law,  it  is
not  the  name  of  a  definite  class  of  objects,  but  of  a  heap  of
heterogeneous  objects/*^
Thedefini- It  appears,  from  what has been premised,  that a  law,
kvTorrul P^^perly  so  called,  may  be  defined  in  the  following  manner.
properly  A  law  is  a  command  which  obliges  a  person  or  persons,

so  called.  g^|.^  ^  contradistinguished  or  opposed  to  an  occasional  or

particular  conmiand,  a  law  is  a  command  which  obliges  a  person
or  persons,  and  obliges  genercdly  to  acts  or  forbearances  of  a  dass.
In  language  more  popular  but  less  distinct  and  precise,  a
law  is  a  command  which  obliges  a  person  or  persons  to  a  cov/rse
of  conduct
The  mean- Laws  and  other  commands  are  said  to  proceed  from  superiors,
^°^*f  ti^^ and  to  bind  or  oblige  inferiors, I  will,  therefore,  analyze  the
teniis«*;>e-  meaning  of  those  correlative  expressions ;  and  will  try  to  strip
r^^^ them  of  a  certain  mystery,  by  which that  simple  meaning
appears  to  be  obscured.

Superiority  is  often  synonjrmous  with  precedence  or  excel-
lence. We  talk  of  superiors  in  rank ;  of  superiors  in  wealth ;
of  superiors  in  virtue :  comparing  certain  persons  with  certain
other  persons;  and  meaning  that  the  former  precede  or  excel
the  latter  in  rank,  in  wealth,  or  in  virtue.

But,  taken  with  the  meaning  wherein  I  here  imderstand
it,  the  term  superiority  signifies  might :  the  power  of  affecting
others  with  evil  or  pain,  and  of  forcing  them,  through  fear  of
that  evil,  to  fashion  their  conduct  to  one's  wishes.

For  example,  God  is emphatically  the  superior  of  Man.

(•)  Where  a  privilegium  merely  im-  and,  therefore,  iaprivileffium.  In  respect
poses  a  duty,  it  exclusively  obliges  a  de-  of  the  duty  imposed,  and  corresponding
terminate  person  or  persons.  But  where  to  the  right  conferred,  the  law  regards
a  privUeffium  confers  a  right,  and  the  generally  the  members  of  the  entire  corn-
right  conferred  avails  against  the  world  munity.

at  large^  the  law  is  privUegium  as  viewed This  I  shall  explain  particularly  at  a

from  a  certain  aspect,  but  is  also  a  gene-  subsequent  point  of  my  Course,  when

ral  law  as  viewed  from  another  aspect  I  consider  the  peculiar  nature  of  so-

In  respect' of  the  right  conferred,  the  law  called  privHegia,  or  of  so-called  private

''""'•"nvely  regards  a  determinate  person,  laws.


Jurispnidence  determined,  97

For  his  power  of  afifecting  us  with  pain,  and  of  forcing  us  to Lect.  I
comply  with  his  will,  is  unbounded  and  resistless.

To  a  limited  extent,  the  sovereign  One  or  Number  is  the
superior  of  the  subject  or  citizen :  the  master,  of  the  slave  or
servant :  the  father,  of  the  child.

In  short,  whoever  can  oblige  another  to  comply  with  his
wishes,  is  the  superior  of  that  other,  so  far  as  the  ability  reaches :
The  party  who  is  obnoxious  to  the  impending  evil,  being,  to  that
same  extent,  the  inferior.

The  might  or  superiority  of  God,  is  simple  or  absolute.
But  in  all  or  most  cases  of  human  superiority,  the  relation  of
superior  and  inferior,  and  the  relation  of  inferior  and  superior,
are  reciprocal  Or  (changing  the  expression)  the  party  who  is
the  superior  as  viewed  from  one  aspect,  is  the  inferior  as  viewed
from  another.

For  example,  To  an  indefinite,  though  limited  extent,  the
monarch  is  the  superior  of  the  governed:  his  power  being
commonly  sufScient  to  enforce  compliance  with  his  wilL  But
the  governed,  collectively  or  in  maas,  are  also  the  superior  of
the  monarch :  who  is  checked  in  the  abuse  of  his  might  by  his
fear  of  exciting  their  anger ;  and  of  rousing  to  active  resistance
the  might  which  slumbers  in  the  multitude.

A  member  of  a  sovereign  assembly  is  the  superior  of  the
judge :  the  judge  being  boimd  by  the  law  which  proceeds  from
that  sovereign  body.  But,  in  his  character  of  citizen  or  subject,
he  is  the  inferior  of  the  judge :  the  judge  being  the  minister  of
the  law,  and  armed  with  the  power  of  enforcing  it

It  appears,  then,  that  the  term  superiority  (like  the  terms
duty  and  sanction)  is  implied  by  the  term  command.  For
superiority  is  the  power  of  enforcing  compliance  with  a  wish :
and  the  expression  or  intimation  of  a  wish,  with  the  power  and
the  purpose  of  enforcing  it,  are  the  constituent  elements  of  a
command.

'  That  laws  emanate  from  superiors '  is,  therefore,  an  identical
proposition.  For  the  meaning  which  it  affects  to  impart  is
contained  in  its  subject.

If  I  mark  the  peculiar  source  of  a  given  law,  or  if  I  mark
the  peculiar  source  of  laws  of  a  given  class,  it  is  possible  that  I
am  saying  something  which  may  instruct  the  hearer.  But  to
affirm  of  laws  universally  '  that  they  flow  from  superiors,'  or  to
affirm  of  laws  universally  'that  inferiors  are  bound  to  obey
them,'  is  the  merest  tautology  and  trifling.

like  most  of  the  leading  terms  in  the  sciences  of  juris-  Laws  (»m-

VOL.  I.  H


98  The  Promnce  of

Lect.  I  prudence  and  morals,  the  term  laws  is  extremely  ambiguous.
properly  so  Taken  with  the  largest  signification  which  can  be  given  to  the
called)  term  properly,  laws  are  a  species  of  commands.  But  the  tenn
not  com-  is  improperly  applied  to  various  objects  which  have  nothing  of
mands.  ^he  imperative  character :  to  objects  which  are  not  commands ;
and  which,  therefore,  are  n4>t  laws,  properly  so  called.

Accordingly,  the  proposition  *that  laws  are  commands'  must
be  taken  with  limitations.  Or,  rather,  we  must  distinguish  the
various  meanings  of  the  term  laws;  and  must  restrict  the
proposition  to  that  class  of  objects  which  is  embraced  by  the
largest  signification  that  can  be  given  to  the  term  properly.

I  have  already  indicated,  and  shall  hereafter  more  fully
describe,  the  objects  improperly  termed  laws,  which  are  not
within  the  province  of  jurisprudence  (being  either  rules  enforced
by  opinion  and  closely  analogous  to  laws  properly  so  called,  or
being  laws  so  called  by  a  metaphorical  application  of  the  term
merely).  There  are  other  objects  improperly  termed  laws  (not
being  commands)  which  yet  may  properly  be  included  within
the  province  of  jurisprudence.  These  I  shall  endeavour  to
particularise : —

1.  Acts  on  the  part  of  legislatures  to  explain  positive  law,
can  scarcely  be  called  laws,  in  the  proper  signification  of  the
term.  Working  no  change  in  the  actual  duties  of  the  governed,
but  simply  declaring  what  those  duties  are,  they  properly  are
acts  of  interpretation  by  legislative  authority.  Or,  to  borrow  an
expression  from  the  writers  on  the  Eoman  Law,  they  are  acts  of
atUJientic  interpretation.

But,  this  notwithstanding,  they  are  frequently  styled  laws ;
dedaratory  laws,  or  declaratory  statutes.  They  must,  therefore,
be  noted  as  forming  an  exception  to  the  proposition  '  that  laws
are  a  species  of  commands.'

It  often,  indeed,  happens  (as  I  shall  show  in  the  proper
place),  that  laws  declaratory  in  name  are  imperative  in  effect :
Legislative,  like  judicial  interpretation,  being  frequently  decep-
tive ;  and  establishing  new  law,  under  guise  of  expounding  the
old.

2.  Laws  to  repeal  laws,  and  to  release  from  existing  duties,
must  also  be  excepted  from  the  proposition  'that  laws  are  a
species  of  commands.'  In  so  far  as  they  release  from  duties
imposed  by  existing  laws,  they  are  not  commands,  but  revoca-
tions of  commands.  They  authorize  or  permit  the  parties,  to
whom  the  repeal  extends,  to  do  or  to  forbear  fix)m  acts  which
they  were  conmianded  to  forbear  from  or  to  do. And,  considered


Jurisprtuience  detemtined.  99

with  regard  to  this,  their  immediate  or  direct  purpose,  they  are Lect.  I
often  named  permissive  laws,  or,  more  briefly  and  more  properly, '
permissions.

Remotely  and  indirectly,  indeed,  permissive  laws  are  often
or  always  imperative.  For  the  parties  released  from  duties  are
restored  to  liberties  or  rights :  and  duties  answering  those  rights
are,  therefore,  created  or  revived.

But  this  is  a  matter  which  I  shall  examine  with  exactness,
when  I  analyze  the  expressions  '  legal  right,'  '  permission  by  the
sovereign  or  state,'  and  '  civil  or  political  liberty.'

3.  Imperfect  laws,  or  laws  of  imperfect  obligation,  must
also  be  excepted  from  the  proposition  '  that  laws  are  a  species
of  commands.'

An  imperfect  law  (with  the  sense  wherein  the  term  is  used  ]
by  the  Roman  jurists)  is  a  law  which  wants  a  sanction,  and  ;
which,  therefore,  is  not  binding.  A  law  declaring  that  certain  I
acts  are  crimes,  but  annexing  no  punishment  to  the  commission  j
of  acts  of  the  class,  is  the  simplest  and  most  obvious  example.

Though  the  author  of  an  imperfect  law  signifies  a  desire,  he
manifests  no  purpose  of  enforcing  compliance  with  the  desire.
But  where  there  is  not  a  purpose  of  enforcing  compliance  with
the  desire,  the  expression  of  a  desire  is  not  a  command.  Conse-
quently, an  imperfect  law  is  not  so  properly  a  law,  as  counsel,
or  exhortation,  addressed  by  a  superior  to  inferiors.

Examples  of  imperfect  laws  are  cited  by  the  Roman  jurists.
But  with  us  in  England,  laws  professedly  imperative  are  always
(I  believe)  perfect  or  obligatory.  Where  the  English  legislature
afifects  to  command,  the  English  tribunals  not  unreasonably
presume  that  the  legislature  exacts  obedience.  And,  if  no
specific  sanction  be.annexed  to  a  given  law,  a  sanction  is  supplied
by  the  courts  of  justice,  agreeably  to  a  general  maxim  which
obtains  in  cases  of  the  kind.

The  imperfect  laws,  of  which  I  am  now  speaking,  are  laws
which  are  imperfect,  in  the  sense  of  tJie  Hainan  jurists :  that  is
to  say,  laws  which  speak  the  desires  of  political  superiors,  but
which  their  authors  (by  oversight  or  design)  have  not  provided
with  sanctions.  Many  of  the  writers  on  morals,  and  on  the  so
called  law  of  nature,  have  annexed  a  different  meaning  to  the
term  imperfect  Speaking  of  imperfect  obligations,  they  commonly
mean  duties  wjiich  are  not  legal :  duties  imposed  by  commands
of  God,  or  duties  imposed  by  positive  morality,  as  contradis-
tinguished to  duties  imposed  by  positive  law.  An  imperfect
obligation,  in  the  sense  of  the  Roman  jurists,  is  exactly  equivalent


1 00  The  Province  of

Leot.  I to  no  obligation  at  alL For  the  tenn  imperfect  denotes  simply,

' ' that  the  law  wants  the  sanction  appropriate  to  laws  of  the  kind.

An  imperfect  obligation,  in  the  other  meaning  of  the  expression,

is  a  religious  or  a  moral  obligation. The  term  imperfect  does

not  denote  that  the  law  imposing  the  duty  wants  the  appropriate

sanction. It  denotes  that  the  law  imposing  the  duty  \&  not  ^

law  established  by  a  political  superior :  that  it  wants  that  perfect^

or  that  surer  or  more  cogent  sanction,  which  is  imparted  by  the

sovereign  or  state.

Laws  {j^fh I  believe  that  I  have  now  reviewed  aU  the  classes  of  objects,

caUedr ^  which the term laws is improperly  applied. The laws

which  may  (improperly  so  called)  which  I  have  here  lastly  enumerated,  are

^^^^ (I  think)  the  only  laws  which  are  not  commands,  and  which  yet

tive.  may  be  properly  included  within  the  province  of  jurisprudence.

But  though  these,  with  the  so  called  laws  set  by  opinion  and

the  objects  metaphorically  termed  laws,  are  the  only  laws  which

really  are  not  commands,  there  are  certain  laws  (properly  so

called)  which  may  «eem  not  imperative. Accordingly,  I  will

subjoin  a  few  remarks  upon  laws  of  this  dubious  character.

1.  There  are  laws,  it  may  be  said,  which  merely  create
rights :  And,  seeing  that  every  command  imposes  a  dtUy^  laws
of  this  nature  are  not  imperative.

But,  as  I  have  intimated  already,  and  shall  show  completely
hereafter,  there  are  no  laws  merely  creating  rights.  There  are
laws,  it  is  true,  which  m/erely  create  dAdies :  duties  not  correlating
with  correlating  rights,  and  which,  therefore  may  be  styled  absolute.
But  every  law,  really  conferring  a  right,  imposes  expressly  or
tacitly  a  relative  duty,  or  a  duty  correlating  with  the  right.  If
it  specify  the  remedy  to  be  given,  in  case  the  right  shall  be
infringed,  it  imposes  the  relative  duty  expressly.  If  the  remedy
to  be  given  be  not  specified,  it  refers  tacitly  to  pre-existing  law,
and  clothes  the  right  which  it  purports  to  create  with  a  remedy
provided  by  that  law.  Every  law,  really  conferring  a  right,
is,  therefore,  imperative :  as  imperative,  as  if  its  only  purpose
were  the  creation  of  a  duty,  or  as  if  the  relative  duty,  which
it  inevitably  imposes,  were  merely  absolute.

The  meanings  of  the  term  right,  are  various  and  perplexed ;
taken  with  its  proper  meaning,  it  comprises  ideas  which  are
numerous  and  complicated;  and  the  searching  and  extensive
analysis,  which  the  term,  therefore,  requires,  would  occupy  more
room  than  could  be  given  to  it  in  the  present  lecture.  It  is
not,  however,  necessary,  that  the  analysis  should  be  performed
here. I  purpose,  in  my  earlier  lectures,  to  determine  the  pro-


yurisprtidence  determined.  loi

vince  of  juiisprudence ;  or  to  distinguish  the  laws  established  '  Lect.  I  '
by  political  superiors,  from  the  various  laws,  proper  and  improper, '
with  which  they  are  frequently  confounded And  this  I  may
accomplish  exactly  enough,  without  a  nice  inquiry  into  the
import  of  the  term  righJL,

2.  According  to  an  opinion  which  I  must  notice  incideTitaUy
here,  though  the  subject  to  which  it  relates  will  be  treated
directly  hereafter,  customary  laws  must  be  expected  from  the
proposition  '  that  laws  are  a  species  of  commands.'

By  many  of  the  admirers  of  customary  laws  (and,  especially,
of  their  German  admirers),  th^  are  thought  to  oblige  legally
(independently  of  the  jovereign  or  state),  becavse_the  citizens^or
subjects  have  observed  or  kept  them.  Agreeably  to  this  opinion,
they  are  not  the  creatures  of  the  sovereign  or  state,  although  the
sovereign  or  state  may  abolish  them  at  pleasure.  Agreeably  to
this  opinion,  they  are  positive  law  (or  law,  strictly  so  called),
inasmuch  as  they  are  enforced  by  the  courts  of  justice :  But,
that  notwithfltanding,  thfyy  PYiat  as  jpositive  law  hj^the  spon-
taneous  adoption  of  the  governed,  and  not  by  position  or
es^blishiaexiLiau.the  part  of  political  supejiors.  Consequently,
customary  kws^  considered  as  positive  law>  .are  not  coJissiands.
Aiid,  consequently,  customary  laws,  considered  as  positive  law,
aie  not  laws  or  rules  pipperly  so  called.

An  opinion  less  mysterious,  but  somewhat  allied  to  this,  is
not  uncommonly  held  by  the  adverse  party  :  by  the  party  which
is  strongly  opposed  to  customary  law ;  and  to  all  law  made
judicially,  or  in  the  way  of  judicial  legislation.  According  to
the  latter  opinion,  all  judge-made  law,  or  all  judge-made  law
established  by  subject  judges,  is  purely  the  creature  of  the  judges
by  whom  it  is  established  immediately.  To  impute  it  to  the
sovereign  legislature,  or  to  suppose  that  it  speaks  the  will  of  the
sovereign  legislature,  is  one  of  the  foolish  or  knavish  Jictians
with  which  lawyers,  in  every  age  and  nation,  have  perplexed
and  darkened  the  simplest  and  clearest  truths.

I  think  it  will  appear,  on  a  moment's  reflection,  that  each
of  these  opinions  is  groundless :  that  customary  law  is  imperative,
in  the  proper  signification  of  the  term ;  and  that  all  judge-made
law  is  the  creature  of  the  sovereign  or  state.

At  its  origin,  a  custom  is  a  rule  of  conduct  which  the
governed  observe  spontaneously,  or  not  in  pursuance  of  a  law
set  by  a  political  superior.  The  custom  is  transmuted  into
positive  law,  when  it  is  adopted  as  such  by  the  courts  of  justice,
and  when  the  judicial  decisions  fashioned  upon  it  are  enforced


I  o  2  The  Province  of

Lect.  I  /  by  the  power  of  the  state. But  before  it  is  adopted  by  the

' ' courts,  and  clothed  with  the  legal  sanction,  it  is  merely  a  rule

. of  positive  morality :  a  rule  generally  observed  by  the  citizens

I or  subjects;  bxiLjifiiiKing,the  only  force»  which  it  can  be  said

to  possess,  from  the  general  disapprobation  falling  on  those  who

transgress  it

Now_w£en  judges  transmute  a  custom  into  a  legal  rule  (or
make  a  legal. rule,  not  suggested  by  a  custom),  the_legar  rule
which  they  establish  is  established  by  the  sovereign  legislature.
A  subordinate  or  subject  judge  is  merely  a  minister.  The
portion  of  the  sovereign  power  which  lies  at  his  disposition  is
merely  delegated.  The  rules  which  he  makes  derive  their  legal
force  from  authority  given  by  the  state :  an  authority  which  the
state  may  confer  expressly,  but  which  it  commonly  imparts  in
the  way  of  acquiescence.  For,  since  the  state  may  reverse  the
rules  which  he  makes,  and  yet  permits  him  to  enforce  them  by
the  power  of  the  political  community,  its  sovereign  will  *  that
his  rules  shall  obtain  as  law '  is  clearly  evinced  by  its  conduct,
though  not  by  its  express  declaration.

The  admirers  of  customary  law  love  to  trick  out  their  idol
with  mysterious  and  imposing  attributes.  But  to  those  who
can  see  the  difference  between  positive  law  and  morality,  there
is  nothing  of  mystery  about  it Considered  as  rules  of  positive

i morality,  customary  laws  arise  from  the  consent  of  the  governed,
and  not  from  the  position  or  establishment  of  political  superiors.
But,  considered  as  moral  rules  turned  into  positive  lawS;  custom-
ary laws  are  established  by  the  state:  established^Bylhe  state
directly,  when  the  customs  are  promulged  in  its  statutes ;
established  by  the  state  circuitously,  when  the  customs  are
adopted  by  its  tribunals.
The  opinion  of  the  party  which  abhors  judge-made  laws,
springs  from  their  inadequate  conception  of  the  nature  of
commands.

Like  other  significations  of  desire,  a  command  is  express  or
tacit  If  the  desire  be  signified  by  words  (written  or  spoken),  the
command  is  express.  If  the  desire  be  signified  by  conduct  (or  by
any  signs  of  desire  which  are  not  words),  the  command  is  tacit.
Now  when  customs  are  turned  into  legal  rules  by  decisions
of  subject  judges,  the  legal  rules  which  emerge  from  the  customs
are  tacit  commands  of  the  sovereign  legislature.  The  state,
which  is  able  to  abolish,  permits  its  ministers  to  enforce  them :
and  it,  therefore,  signifies  its  pleasure,  by  that  its  volimtary
acquiescence,  '  that  they  shall  serve  as  a  law  to  the  governed.'


yurtsprudence  determined,  103

My  present  purpose  is  merely  this :  to  prove  that  the  Leot.  I
positive  law  styled  cvMomary  (and  all  positive  law  made  '
judicially)  is  established  by  the  state  directly  or  circuitously,
an37  therefore,  is  imperative,  J  am  far  from  disputing,  that  law
made  judicially  (or  in  the  way  of  improper  legislation)  and  law
made  by  statute  (or  in  the  properly  legislative  manner)  are
distinguished  by  weighty  differences.  I  shall  inquire,  in  future
lectures,  what  those  differences  are ;  and  why  subject  judges,
who  are  properly  ministers  of  the  law,  have  commonly  shared
with  the  sovereign  in  the  business  of  making  it.

I  assume,  then,  that  the  only  laws  which  are  not  imperative.  Laws
and  which  belong  to  the  subject-matter  of  jurisprudence,  are  the  not  com^
following : — 1.  Declaratory  laws,  or  laws  explaining  the  import  mands,
of  existing  positive  law. 2. Laws abrogating  or  repealing  »^.*
existing  positive  law. 3.  Imperfect  laws,  or  laws  of  imperfect
obligation  (with  the  sense  wherein  the  expression  is  used  by
the  Boman  jurists).

But  the  space  occupied  in  the  science  by  these  improper
laws  is  comparatively  narrow  and  insignificant.  Accordingly,
although  I  shall  take  them  into  accoimt  so  often  as  I  refer  to
them  directly,  I  shall  throw  them  out  of  account  on  other  occa-
sions. Or  (changing  the  expression)  I  shall  limit  the  term  law
to  laws  which  are  imperative,  unless  I  extend  it  expressly  to
laws  which  are  not.


LECTURE  IL


In  my  first  lecture,  I  stated  or  suggested  the  purpose  and  the Lect.  ll
manner  of  my  attempt  to  determine  the  province  of  juris-  '^^®  ®°^"
prudence :  to  distinguish  positive  law,  the  appropriate  matter  of  the  second
jurisprudence,  from  the  various  objects  to  which  it  is  related  by  gj^^i^^f
resemblance,  and  to  which  it  is  related,  nearly  or  remotely,  by  ture.
a  strong  or  slender  analogy.

In  pursuance  of  that  purpose,  and  agreeably  to  that  manner,
I  stated  the  essentials  of  a  law  or  rule  (taken  with  the  largest
signification  which  can  be  given  to  the  term  properly).

In  pursyance  of  that  purpose,  and  agreeably  to  that  manner,
I  proceed  to  distinguish  laws  set  by  men  to  men  from  those
Divine  laws  which  are  the  ultimate  test  of  human.

The  Divine  laws,  or  the  laws  of  God,  are  laws  set  by  God  The  Divine
to  his  human  creatures. As I have  intimated  already,  and  J^^goP  *
shall  show  more  fully  hereafter,  they  are  laws  or  rules,  properly  God.
so  called.


104  The  Province  of

Lect.  II  As distinguished from duties  imposed  by  human laws,

duties  imposed  by  the  Divine  laws  may  be  called  reliffious
duties.

As  distinguished  from  violations  of  duties  imposed  by
human  laws,  violations  of  religious  duties  are  styled  sins.

As  distinguished  from  sanctions  annexed  to  human  laws,

the  sanctions  annexed  to  the  Divine  laws  may  be  called  rdiffums

sanctions. They  consist  of  the  evils,  or  pains,  which  we  may

suffer  here  or  hereafter,  by  the  immediate  appointment  of  God,

and  as  conseqtunces  of  breaking  his  commandments.

Of  the  Di-  Of  the  Divine  laws,  or  the  laws  of  Grod,  some  are  revealed

some  aro ' ^^  promulged,  and  others  are  unreveaJed. Such  of  the  laws  of

revealed, Grod  as  are  unrevealed  are  not  unfrequently  denoted  by  the

aro  un- following  names  or  phrases :  *  the  law  of  nature  ;*  '  natural  law ;'

revealed. « the  law  manifested  to  man  by  the  light  of  nature  or  reason ;'

'  the  laws,  precepts,  or  dictates  of  natural  religion.'

The  revealed  law  of  God,  and  the  portion  of  the  law  of  Grod
which  is  unrevealed,  are  manifested  to  men  in  different  ways,  or
by  different  sets  of  signs.
Snchofthe With  regard  to  the  laws  which  God  is  pleased  to  reveal,  the
2j^^  ^^  way  wherein  they  are  manifested  is  easily  conceived. They  are
revealed, eoypress  commands: portions  of  the  word  of  God:  commands
signified  to  men  through  the  medium  of  human  language ;  and
uttered  by  God  directly,  or  by  servants  whom he  sends  to
annoimce  them.
Such  of  the Such  of  the  Divine  laws  as  are  unrevealed  are  laws  set  by
laws  as ^^^  ^  ^^  human  creatures,  but  not  through  the  medium  of
are  un- human  language,  or  not  expressly.

These  are  the  only  laws  which  he  has  set  to  that  portion  of
mankind  who  are  excluded  fix)m  the  light  of  Bevelation.

These  laws  are  binding  upon  us  (who  have  access  to  the
truths  of  Bevelation),  in  so  far  as  the  revealed  law  has  left  our
duties  undetermined.  For,  though  his  express  declarations  are
the  clearest  evidence  of  his  will,  we  must  look  for  many  of  the
duties,  which  God  has  imposed  upon  us,  to  the  marks  or  signs
of  his  pleasure  which  are  styled  the  light  of  nature.  Paley  and
other  divines  have  proved  beyond  a  doubt,  that  it  was  not  the
purpose  of  Bevelation  to  disclose  the  whole  of  those  duties.
Some  we  could  not  know,  without  the  help  of  Bevelation;  and
these  the  revealed  law  has  stated  distinctly  and  precisely.  The
rest  we  may  know,  if  we  will,  by  the  light  of  nature  or  reason ;
and  these  the  revealed  law  supposes  or  assumes.  It  passes
them  over  in  silence,  or  with  a  brief  and  incidental  notice.


yurisprudence  determined.  i  o  5

But  if  Grod  has  given  us  laws  which  he  has  not  revealed  or  ^^f^-  n
promulged,  how  shall  we  know  them  ?  What  are  those  signs  of  whatlT^
his  pleasure,  which  we  style  the  lighJt  of  nature ;  and  oppose,  ^«  ir^
by  that  figurative  phrase,  to  express  declarations  of  his  will  ? the  Divine

laws  as  are
unre-

The  hypotheses  or  theories  which  attempt  to  resolve  this  vealed?
question,  may  be  reduced,  I  think,  to  two.  The  hypo-

theses  OT
theories

According  to  one  of  them,  there  are  human  actions  which  ^^^J®"
all  mankind  approve,  human  actions  which  all  men  disapprove ;  ^ture  of
and  these  universal  sentiments  arise  at  the  thought  of  those  tib»tuidex.
actions,  spontaneously,  instantly,  and  inevitably.  Being  common  thesis  or
to  all  mankind,  and  inseparable  from  the  thoughts  of  those  ^^^^^
actions,  these  sentiments  are  marks  or  signs  of  the  Divine  plea-  sense:  of
sure.  They  are  proofs  that  the  actions  which  excite  them  are  ^^^^
enjoined  or  forbidden  by  the  Deity.  principles;

The  rectitude  or  pravity  of  himian  conduct,  or  its  agreement  ^l^/'^'
or  disagreement  with the  laws  of  Grod,  is  instantly  inferred  reason:  of
from  these  sentiments,  without  the  possibility  of  mistaka He  J^^**^
has  resolved  that  our  happiness  shall  depend  on  our  keeping  his  ^•
commandments:  and  it  manifestly  consists  with  his  manifest
wisdom  and  goodness,  that  we  should  know  them  promptly  and
certainly. Accordingly,  he  has  not  committed  us  to  the  guid-
ance of  our  slow  and  fallible  reason. He  has  wisely  endowed
us  with  fedings,  which  warn  us  at  every  step ;  and  pursue  us,
with  their  importunate  reproaches,  when  we  wander  from  the
path  of  our  duties.

These  simple  or  inscrutable  feelings  have  been  compared
to  those  which  we  derive  horn  the  outward  senses,  and  have
been  referred  to  a  peculiar  faculty  called  the  moral  sense:
though,  admitting  that  the  feelings  exist,  and  are  proofs  of  the
Divine  pleasure,  I  am  unable  to  discover  the  analogy  which
suggested  the  comparison  and  the  name.  The  objects  or
appearances  which  properly  are  perceived  through  the  senses,
are  perceived  immediately,  or  without  an  inference  of  the
understanding.  According  to  the  hypothesis  which  I  have
briefly  stated  or  suggested,  there  is  always  an  inference  of  the
imderstanding,  though  the  inference  is  short  and  inevitable.
From  feelings  which  arise  within  us  when  we  think  of  certain
actions,  we  infer  that  those  actions  are  enjoined  or  forbidden  by
the  Deity.

The  hypothesis,  however,  of  a  m/yrcd  sense,  is  expressed  in
other  ways.


io6


The  Province  of


Lect.  II


The  theory
or  hypo-
thesis of
utility.


A  brief
summary
of  the
theory  of
utility.


Thefollow-
ing  expla-
nations of
that  sum-
mary
briefly  in-
troduced.


The  laws  of  God,  to  which  these  feelings  are  the  index,  are
not  nnfrequently  named  innate  practical  principles,  or  postulates
of  practical  reason :  or  they  are  said  to  be  written  on  our  hearts,
by  the  finger  of  their  great  Author,  in  broad  and  [indelible
characters.

Common  sense  (the  most  yielding  and  accommodating  of
phrases)  has  been  moulded  and  fitted  to  the  purpose  of  express-
ing the  hypothesis  in  question.  In  all  their  decisions  on  the
rectitude  or  pravity  of  conduct  (its  agreement  or  disagreement
with  the  unrevealed  law),  mankind  are  said  to  be  determined  by
common  sense :  this  same  comw/m  sense  meaning,  in  this  instance,
the  simple  or  inscrutable  sentiments  which  I  have  endeavoured
to  describe.

Considered  as  affecting  the  soul,  when  the  man  thinks
especially  of  his  ovm  conduct,  these  sentiments,  feelings,  or
emotions,  are  frequently  styled  his  conscience.

According  to  the  other  of  the  adverse  theories  or  hypotheses,
the  laws  of  God,  which  are  not  revealed  or  promulged,  must  be
gathered  by  man  from  the  goodness  of  Grod,  and  from  the
tendencies  of  human  actions.  In  other  words,  the  benevolence
of  God,  with  the  principle  of  general  utility,  is  our  only  index
or  guide  to  his  unrevealed  law.

God  designs  the  happiness  of  all  his  sentient  creatures.
Some  human  actions  forward  that  benevolent  purpose,  or  their
tendencies  are  beneficent  or  usefuL  Other  human  actions  are
adverse  to  that  purpose,  or  their  tendencies  are  mischievous  or
pernicious.  The  former,  as  promoting  his  purpose,  God  has
enjoined.  The  latter,  as  opposed  to  his  purpose,  God  has
forbidden.  He  has  given  us  the  faculty  of  observing ;  of  re-
membering ;  of  reasoning :  and,  by  duly  applying  those  faculties,
we  may  collect  the  tendencies  of  our  actions.  Knowing  the
tendencies  of  our  actions,  and  knowing  his  benevolent  purpose,
we  know  his  tacit  commands.

Such  is  a  brief  summary  of  this  celebrated  theory.  I  should
wander  to  a  measureless  distance  from  the  main  purpose  of  my
lectures,  if  I  stated  all  the  explanations  with  which  that
summary  must  be  received.  But,  to  obviate  the  principal
misconceptions  to  which  the  theory  is  obnoxious,  I  will  subjoin
as  many  of  those  explanations  as  my  purpose  and  limits  will
admit.

The  theory  is  this. Inasmuch  as  the  goodness  of  God  is

boundless  and  impartial,  he  designs  the  greatest  happiness  of  all
his sentient  creatures:  he  wills that the aggregate  of  their


Jurisprudence  determined,  1 07

enjoyments  shall  find  no  nearer  limit  than  that  which  is  inevit- Lect.  II
ably  set  to  it  by  their  finite  and  imperfect  nature. From  the '
probable  effects  of  our  actions  on  the  greatest  happiness  of  all,
or  from  the  tendencies  of  human  actions  to  increase  or  diminish
that  aggregate,  we  may  infer  the  laws  which  he  has  given,  but
has  not  expressed  or  revealed.

Now  the  tendency  of  a  human  action  (as  its  tendency  is  thus  The  trae
understood)  is  the  whole  of  its  tendency :  the  sum  of  its  probable  a  i^mSa^^
consequences,  in  so  far  as  they  are  important  or  material :  the  action,  and
sum of  its  remote and collateral,  as  well as of its direct  Llofthat
consequences,  in  so  far  as  any  of  its  consequences  may  influence  tendency.
the  general  happiness.

Trying  to  coUect  its  tendency  (as  its  tendency  is  thus  under-
stood), we  must  not  consider  the  action  as  if  it  were  single  and
insulated,  but  must  look  at  the  doss  of  actions  to  which  it
belongs.  The  probable  ^edfic  consequences  of  doing  that  single
act,  of  forbearing  from  that  single  act,  or  of  omitting  that  single
act,  are  not  the  objects  of  the  inquiry.  The  question  to  be
solved  is  this : — If  acts  of  the  doss  were  generally  done,  or
generoMy  forborne  or  omitted,  what  would  be  the  probable  effect
on  the  general  happiness  or  good  ?

Considered  by  itself,  a  mischievous  act  may  seem  to  be  useful
or  harmless.  Considered  by  itself,  a  useful  act  may  seem  to  be
pernicious.

For  example.  If  a  poor  man  steal  a  handful  from  the  heap
of  his  rich  neighbour,  the  act,  considered  by  itself,  is  harmless
or  positively  good.  One  man's  property  is  assuaged  with  the
superfluous  wealth  of  another.

But  suppose  that  thefts  were  general  (or  that  the  useful
right  of  property  were  open  to  firequent  invasions),  and  mark
the  result

Without  security  for  property,  there  were  no  inducement  to
save.  Without  habitual  saving  on  the  part  of  proprietors,
there  were  no  accumulation  of  capitaL  Without  accumulation
of  capital,  there  were  no  fund  for  the  payment  of  wages,  no  I
division  of  labour,  no  elaborate  and  costly  machines :  there  were  '
none  of  those  helps  to  labour  which  augment  its  productive
power,  and,  therefore,  multiply  the  enjoyments  of  every  indi-
vidual in  the  community.  Frequent  invasions  of  property
would  bring  the  rich  to  poverty ;  and,  what  were  a  greater  evil,
would  aggravate  the  poverty  of  the  poor.

If  a  single  and  insulated  theft  seem  to  be  harmless  or  good,
the  fallacious  appearance  merely  arises  from  this :  that  the  vast


io8
Lect.  II


According
to  the
theory  of
utility,
God's  com-
mands are
mostly
rules.


The  Province  of

majority  of  those  who  are  tempted  to  steal  abstain  from  invasions
of  property ;  and  the  detriment  to  security,  which  is  the  end
produced  by  a  single  theft,  is  overbalanced  and  concealed  by  the
mass  of  wealth,  the  accumulation  of  which  is  produced  by
general  security.

Again :  If  I  evade  the  payment  of  a  tax  imposed  by  a  good
government,  the  specific  efifects  of  the  mischievous  forbearance
are  indisputably  useful.  For  the  money  which  I  unduly  with-
hold is  convenient  to  myself;  and,  compared  with  the  bulk  of
the  public  revenue,  is  a  quantity  too  small  to  be  missed.  But
the  regular  payment  of  taxes  is  necessary  to  the  existence  of  the
government.  And  I,  and  the  rest  of  the  community,  enjoy  the
security  which  it  gives,  because^  the  payment  of  taxes  is  rarely
evaded.

In  the  cases  now  supposed,  the  act  or  omission  is  good,
considered  as  single  or  insulated ;  but,  considered  with  the  rest
of  its  class,  is  eviL  In  other  cases,  an  act  or  omission  is  evil,
considered  as  single  or  insulated ;  but,  considered  with  the  rest
of  its  class,  is  good.

For  example,  A  punishment,  as  a  solitary  fact,  is  an  evil :
the  pain  inflicted  on  the  criminal  being  added  to  the  mischief
of  the  crime.  But,  considered  as  part  of  a  system,  a  punish-
ment is  useful  or  beneficent.  By  a  dozen  or  score  of  punish-
ments, thousands  of  crimes  are  prevented.  With  the  sufferings
of  the  guilty  few,  the  security  of  the  many  is  purchased.  By
the  lopping  of  a  peccant  member,  the  body  is  saved  from  decay.

It,  therefore,  is  true  generally  (for  the  proposition  admits  of
exceptions),  that,  to  determine  the  true  tendency  of  an  act,
forbearance,  or  omission,  we  must  resolve  the  following  question.
— What  would  be  the  probable  effect  on  \hQ  general  happiness
or  good,  if  similar  acts,  forbearances,  or  omissions  were  general
or  frequent  ?

Such  is  the  test  to  which  we  must  usually  resort,  if  we
would  try  the  true  tendency  of  an  act,  forbearance,  or  omission :
Meaning,  by  the  true  tendency  of  an  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,
the  sum  of  its  probable  effects  on  the  general  happiness  or  good,
or  its  agreement  or  disagreement  with  the  principle  of  general
utility.

But,  if  this  be  the  ordinary  test  for  trying  the  tendencies  of
actions,  and  if  the  tendencies  of  actions  be  the  index  to  the  will
of  God,  it  follows  that  most  of  his  commands  are  general  or
universal.  The  useful  acts  which  he  enjoins,  and  the  pernicious
acts  which  he  prohibits,  he  enjoins  or  prohibits,  for  the  most


yurtsprudence  determined.  109

part,  not  singly,  but  by  classes :  not  by  commands  which  are ^^^^  n
particular,  or  directed  to  insulated  cases ;  but  by  laws  or  rules
which  are  general,  and  commonly  inflexible.

For  example,  Certain  acts  are  pernicious,  considered  as  a
class:  or  (in  other  words)  the  frequent  repetition  of  the  act
were  adverse  to  the  general  happiness,  though,  in  this  or
that  instance,  the  act  might  be  useful  or  harmless.  Further :
Such  are  the  motives  or  inducements  to  the  commission  of
acts  of  the  class,  that,  unless  we  were  determined  to  forbearance
by  the  fear  of  punishment,  they  would  be  frequently  committed.
Now,  if  we  combine  these  data  with  the  wisdom  and  goodness
of  God,  we  must  infer  that  he  forbids  such  acts,  and  forbids
them  without  exception.  In  the  tenth,  or  the  hundredth  case,
the  act  might  be  useful :  in  the  nine,  or  the  ninety  and  nine,
the  act  would  be  pernicious.  If  the  act  were  permitted  or
tolerated  in  the  rare  and  anomalous  case,  the  motives  to  forbear
in  the  others  would  be  weakened  or  destroyed.  In  the  hurry
and  tumult  of  action,  it  is  hard  to  distinguish  justly.  To  grasp
at  present  enjoyment,  and  to  turn  from  present  imeasiness,  is
the  habitual  inclination  of  us  all.  And  thus,  through  the
weakness  of  our  judgments,  and  the  more  dangerous  infirmity  of
our  wills,  we  should  frequently  stretch  the  exception  to  cases
embraced  by  the  rule.

Consequently,  where  acts,  considered  as  a  class,  are  useful
or  pernicious,  we  must  conclude  that  he  enjoins  or  forbids  them,
and  by  a  rule  which  probably  is  inflexible.

Such,  I  say,  is  the  conclusion  at  which  we  must  arrive.  It  does  not
supposing  that  the  fear  of  punishment  be  necessary  to  incite  the  thMSr
or  restrain.  of  utility,

For  the  tendency  of  an  act  is  one  thing:  the  utility  of  ugefnTac^
enjoining  or  forbidding  it  is  another  thing. There  are  classes  ^^?  ^«  ^^®
of  usefcd  acts,  which it  were  useless  to enjoin; classes of  DivUie^in*
mischievous  acts,  which  it  were  useless  to  prohibit. Sanctions  J^^ction ;
were  superfluous. We  are  suflSciently  prone  to  the  useful,  and  pernicious
sufficiently averse from the mischievous acts, without the  ^**^t'ofa
motives  which  are  presented  to  the  will  by  a  lawgiver. Motives  Divine  pro-
ncUural  or  spontaneous  (or  motives  otJier  than  those  which  are  ^^^^^°^-
created  by  injunctions  and  prohibitions)  impel  us  to  action  in
the  one  case,  and  hold  us  to  forbearance  in  the  other. In  the
language  of  Mr.  Locke,  '  The mischievous  omission  or  action
would  bring  down  evils  upon  us,  which  are  its  ruztural  products
or  consequences ;  and  which,  as  natural  inconveniences,  operate
without  a  law!


1 1  o  The  Province  of

Lect.  II  Now,  if  the  measure  or  test  which  I  have  endeavoured  to

^"^J[J!j;^ explain  be  the  ordinary  measure  or  test  for  trying  the  tendencies
and  spe- of  OUT  actions,  the  most  current  and  specious  of  the  objections,
tion\o  the  which  are  made  to  the  theory  of  utility,  is  founded  in  gross
theory  of mistake,  and  is  open  to  triumphant  refutation,
troduced"  The  theory,  be  it  always  remembered,  is  this :

and  stated.  Qur  motives  to  obey  the  laws  which  God  has  given  us,  are

paramount  to  all  others.  For  the  transient  pleasures  which  we
may  snatch,  or  the  transient  pains  which  we  may  shun,  by
violating  the  duties  which  they  impose,  are  nothing  in  com-
parison with  the  pains  by  which  those  duties  are  sanctioned.

The  greatest  possible  happiness  of  all  his  sentient  creatures,
is  the  purpose  and  effect  of  those  laws.  For  the  benevolence
by  which  they  were  prompted,  and  the  wisdom  with  which  they
were  planned,  equal  the  might  which  enforces  them.

But,  seeing  that  such  is  their  purpose,  they  embrace  the
whoU  of  our  conduct :  so  far,  that  is,  as  our  conduct  may  pro-
mote or  obstruct  that  purpose ;  and  so  far  as  injimctions  and
prohibitions  are  necessary  to  correct  our  desires.

In  so  far  as  the  laws  of  God  are  clearly  and  indisputably
revealed,  we  are  bound  to  guide  our  conduct  by  the  plain  mean-
ing of  their  terms.  In  so  far  as  they  are  not  revealed,  we  must
resort  to  another  guide :  namely,  the  probable  effect  of  our  con-
duct on  that  general  happiness  or  good  which  is  the  object  of  the
Divine  Lawgiver  in  all  his  laws  and  commandments.

In  each  of  these  cases  the  source  of  our  duties  is  the  same ;
though  the  proofs  by  which  we  know  them  are  different.  The
principle  of  general  utility  is  the  index  to  many  of  these  duties ;
but  the  principle  of  general  utility  is  not  their  fountain  or  source.
For  duties  or  obligations  arise  from  commands  and  sanctions.
And  commands,  it  is  manifest,  proceed  not  from  abstractions,
but  from  living  and  rational  beings.

Admit  these  premises,  and  the  following  conclusion  is  in-
evitable.  The  wiiole  of  our  conduct  should  be  guided  by  the

principle  of  utility,  in  so  far  as  the  conduct  to  be  pursued  has
not  been  determined  by  Revelation.  For,  to  conform  to  the
principle  or  maxim  with  which  a  law  coincides,  is  equivalent  to
obeying  that  law.

Such  is  the  theory :  which  I  have  repeated  in  various  forms,
and,  I  fear,  at  tedious  length,  in  order  that  my  younger  hearers
might  conceive  it  with  due  distinctness.

The  current  and  specious  objection  to  which  I  have  adverted,
may  be  stated  thus :


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 1 1

*  Pleasure  and  pain  (or  good  and  evil)  are  inseparably  con- Lect.  II

*  nected. Every  positive  act,  and  every  forbearance  or  omission,

*  is  followed  by  hoth :  immediately  or  remotely,  directly  or  col-
'  laterally,  to  ourselves  or  to  our  feUow-creatures.

'  Consequently,  if  we  shape  our  conduct  justly  to  the  prin-

*  ciple  of  general  utility,  every  election  which  we  make  between

*  doing or  forbearing from  an  act  wiU be preceded  by  the

*  following  process.  First :  We  shall  conjecture  the  consequences
'  of  the  act,  and  also  the  consequences  of  the  forbearanca  For
'  these  are  the  competing  elements  of  that  calculation,  which,

*  according  to  our  guiding  principle,  we  are  bound  to  make.
'  Secondly :  We  shall  compare  the  consequences  of  the  act  with

*  the  consequences  of  the  forbearance,  and  determine  the  set  of
'  consequences  which  gives  the  balance  of  advantage:  which
'  yields  the  larger  residue  of  probable  good,  or (adopting  a

*  different,  though  exactly  equivalent  expression)  which  leaves
'  the  smaller  residue  of  probable  evil.

'Now  let  us  suppose  that  we  actually  tried  this  process,
'  before  we  arrived  at  our  resolves.  And  then  let  us  mark  the
'  absurd  and  mischievous  effects  which  would  inevitably  follow
'  our  attempts.

'  Generally  speaking,  the  period  allowed  for  deliberation  is

*  brief:  and  to  lengthen  deliberation  beyond  that  limited  period,
'  is  equivalent  to  forbearance  or  omission. Consequently,  if  we

*  performed  this  elaborate  process  completely  and  correctly,  we
'  should  often  defeat  its  purpose.  We  should  abstain  from  action
'  altogether,  though  utility  required  us  to  act ;  or  the  occasion
'  for  acting  usefully  would  slip  through  our  fingers,  whilst  we

*  weighed,  with  anxious  scrupulosity,  the  merits  of  the  act  and
'  the  forbearance.

*  But  feeling  the  necessity  of  resolving  promptly,  we  should

*  not  perform  the  process  completely  and  correctly. We  should

*  guess  or  conjecture  hastily  the  effects  of  the  act  and  the  for-

*  bearance,  and  compare  their  respective  effects  with  equal  pre-

*  cipitancy.  Our  premises  would  be  false  or  imperfect ;  our  con-
'  elusions,  badly  deduced. Labouring  to  adjust  our  conduct  to  the

*  principle  of  general  utility,  we  should  work  inevitable  mischief.

'  And  such  were  the  consequences  of  following  the  principle
'  of  utility,  though  we  sought  the  true  and  the  useful  with
'  simplicity  and  in  earnest.  But,  as  we  commonly  prefer  our
'  own  to  the  interests  of  our  fellow-creatures,  and  our  own
'  immediate  to  our  own  remote  interests,  it  is  clear  that  we  should

*  warp  the  principle  to  selfish  and  sinister  ends.


112  The  Province  of

Lect.  II  '  The  final  cause  or  purpose  of  the  Divine  laws  is  the  general

'  '  '  happiness  or  good.  But  to  trace  the  effect  of  our  conduct  on
'  the  general  happiness  or  good  is  not  the  way  to  know  them.
'  By  consulting  and  obeying  the  laws  of  Grod  we  promote  our
'  own  happiness  and  the  happiness  of  our  fellow-creatures.  But
'  we  should  tiot  consult  his  laws,  we  should  iiot  obey  his  laws,

*  and,  so  far  as  in  us  lay,  we  should  thwart  their  benevolent
'  design,  if  we  made  the  general  happiness  our  object  or  end.

*  In  a  breath,  we  should  widely  deviate  in  effect  from  the  prin-

*  ciple  of  general  utility  by  taking  it  as  the  guide  of  our  conduct'
Theiifloapt  Such,  I  believe,  is  the  meaning  of  those — if  they  have  a
the^foreio-  D^^^i^g — ^ho  object  to  the  principle  of  utility '  that  it  were  a
ing  objec- dangerous  principle  of  conduct'

ii^ro^"^  As  the  objectors  are  generally  persons  Uttle  accustomed  to

duced.  clear  and  determinate  thinking,  I  am  not  quite  certain  that  I
have  conceived  the  objection  exactly.  But  I  have  endeavoured
with  perfectly  good  faith  to  imderstand  their  meaning,  and  as
forcibly  as  I  can  to  state  it,  or  to  state  the  most  rational  mean-
ing which  their  words  can  be  supposed  to  import

It  has  been  said,  in  answer  to  this  objection,  that  it  involves
a  contradiction  in  terms.  Danger  is  another  name  for  probable
mischief:  And,  surely,  we  best  avert  the  probable  mischiefs  of
our  conduct,  by  conjecturing  and  estimating  its  probable  conse-
quences. To  say  '  that  the  principle  of  utility  were  a  dangerous
principle  of  conduct,'  is  to  say  *  that  it  were  contrary  to  utility
to  consult  utility.'

Now,  though  this  is  so  brief  and  pithy  that  I  heartily  wish
it  were  conclusive,  I  must  needs  admit  that  it  scarcely  touches  the
objection,  and  falls  far  short  of  a  crushing  reduction  to  absurdity.
For  the  objection  obviously  assumes  that  we  cannot  foresee  and
estimate  the  probable  effects  of  our  conduct :  that  if  we  attempted
to  calculate  its  good  and  its  evil  consequences,  our  presumptuous
attempt  at  calculation  would  lead  us  to  error  and  sin.  What  is
contended  is,  that  by  the  attempt  to  act  according  to  utiUty,  an
attempt  which  would  not  be  successful,  we  should  deviate  from
utility.  A  proposition  involving  when  fairly  stated  nothing  like
a  contradiction.

But,  though  this  is  not  the  refutation,  there  is  a  refutation.
Tht^  first  And  first.  If  utiUty  be  our  only  index  to  the  tacit  commands

thelbreTO.  ^^  *^®  Deity,  it  is  idle  to  object  its  imperfections. We  must
ing  objec- even  make  the  most  of  it.

tionstated.  j£  ^^  vfQTQ  endowed  with  a  moral  sense,  or  with  a  comm/m

sense,  or  with  a  practical  reason^  we  scarcely  should  construe  his


y  urisprudence  determined,  1 1 3

commands  by  the  principle  of  general  utility.  If  our  souls  were  Lect.  II
furnished  out  with  inruxtt  'practical  prificiples,  we  scarcely  should  '
read  his  commands  in  the  tendencies  of  human  actions.  For,  by
the  supposition,  man  would  be  gifted  with  a  peculiar  organ  for
acquiring  a  knowledge  of  his  duties.  The  duties  unposed  by
the  Deity  would  be  subjects  of  immediate  consciousness,  and
completely  exempted  from  the  jurisdiction  of  observation  and  in-
duction. An  attempt  to  displace  that  invincible  consciousness,
and  to  thrust  the  principle  of  utility  into  the  vacant  seat,
would  be  simply  impossible  and  manifestly  absurd.  An  attempt
to  taste  or  smell  by  force  of  syllogism,  were  not  less  hopeful  or
judicious.

But,  if  we  are  not  gifted  with  that  peculiar  organ,  we  must
take  to  the  principle  of  utility,  let  it  be  never  so  defective.
We  must  gather  our  duties,  as  we  can,  from  the  tendencies  of
human  actions ;  or  remain,  at  our  own  peril,  in  ignorance  of
our  duties.  We  must  pick  our  scabrous  way  with  the  help  of)
a  glimmering  light,  or  wander  in  profound  darkness.  '

Whether  there  be  any  ground  for  the  hypothesis  of  a  moral  The  second
sense,  is  a  question  which  I  shall duly  examine  in a future  theTore^-
lecture,  but  which  I  shall  not  pursue  in  the  present  place. For  ing  ot>je<^-
the  present  is  a  convenient  place  for  the  introduction  of  another  intro-
topic :  namely,  that  they  who  advance  the  objection  in  question  duced.
misunderstand  the  theory  which  they  presume  to  impugn.

Their  objection  is  foimded  on  the  following  assumption,

That,  if  we  adjusted  our  conduct  to  the  principle  of  general
utility,  every  election  which  we  made  between  doing  and  for-
bearing from  an  act  would  be  preceded  by  a  caicvlation :  by  an
attempt  to  conjecture  and  compare  the  respective  probable  con-
sequences of  action  and  forbearance.  '

Or  (changing  the  expression)  their  assumption  is  this.

That,  if  we  adjusted  our  conduct  to  the  principle  of  general
utility,  our  conduct  would  always  be  determined  by  an  immedi-
ate or  direct  resort  to  it.

And,  granting  their  assumption,  I  grant  their  inference.  I
grant  that  the  principle  of  utility  were  a  halting  and  purblind
guide.

But  their  assumption  is  groundless.  They  are  battering
(and  most  eflfectuaUy)  a  misconception  of  their  own,  whilst  they
fancy  they  are  hard  at  work  demolishing  the  theory  which  they
hate.

For,  according  to  that  theory,  our  conduct  would  conform
to  rules  inferred  from  the  tendencies  of  actions,  but  would  not

VOL.  I.  I


1 1 4  714^  Province  of

Leot.  II  be  determined  by  a  direct  resort  to  the  principle  of  general
^""^"^  '  utility.  Utility  would  be  the  test  of  our  conduct,  ultimately,
but  not  immediately :  the  immediate  test  of  the  rules  to  which
our  conduct  would  conform,  but  not  the  immediate  test  of  specific
or  individual  actions.  Our  rules  would  be  fashioned  on  utility ;
our  conduct,  on  our  rules.

Eecall  the  true  test  for  trying  the  tendency  of  an  action,
and,  by  a  short  and  easy  deduction,  you  will  see  that  their
assumption  is  groundless.
If  our  con-  K  we  would  try  the  tendency  of  a  specific  or  individual
tndyld^  ^^^>  ^®  °^^^  ^^^  Contemplate  the  act  as  if  it  were  single  and
justed  to  insulated,  but  must  look  at  the  class  of  acts  to  which  it  belongs,
ciple^o?  We  must  suppose  that  acts  of  the  class  were  generally  done  or
general  omitted,  and  consider  the  probable  effect  upon  the  general  happi-
conduct ness  or  good.

would  con-  yj^  xosi&t  guess  the  consequences  which  would  follow,  if
the  most  acts  of  the  class  were  general ;  and  also  the  consequences  which
^S^- mles  ''^ould  follow,  if  they  were  generally  omitted.  We  must  then
which  ema-  compare  the  consequences  on  the  positive  and  negative  sides,  and
the^DMty  determine  on  which  of  the  two  the  balance  of  advantage  Kes.
and  to '  If  it  lie  on  the  positive  side,  the  tendency  of  the  act  is

tendenciw  g^^  •  ^^  (adopting  a  wider,  yet  exactly  equivalent  expression)
of  human  the  general  happiness  requires  that  oote  of  the  class  shall  be
the  fSd?*  done.  If  it  Ue  on  the  negative  side,  the  tendency  of  the  act  is
or  index,  bad :  or  (again  adopting  a  wider,  yet  exactly  equivalent  expres-
sion) the  general  happiness  requires  that  acts  of  the  class  shall
be  forboma

In  a  breath,  if  we  truly  try  the  tendency  of  a  specific  or
individual  act,  we  try  the  tendency  of  the  class  to  which  that
act  belongs.  The  particular  conclusion  which  we  draw,  with
regard  to  the  single  act,  implies  a  general  conclusion  embracing
all  similar  acts.

But,  concluding  that  acts  of  the  class  are  useful  or  perni-
cious, we  are  forced  upon  a  further  inference.  Adverting  to
the  known  wisdom  and  the  known  benevolence  of  the  Deity,
we  infer  that  he  enjoins  or  forbids  them  by  a  general  and
inflexible  rvle,

Sv/ih  is  the  inference  at  which  we  inevitably  arrive,  supposing
that  the  acts  be  sv4ih  as  to  call  for  the  intervention  of  a  lawgiver.
To  rvles  thus  inferred,  and  lodged  in  the  memory,  our  con-
duct would  conform  immediately  if  it  were  truly  adjusted  to
utility.  To  consider  the  specific  consequences  of  single  or  in-
dividual acts,  would  seldom  consist  with  that  ultimate  principle.


y  urisprudence  determined.  1 1 5

And  our  conduct  would,  therefore,  be  guided  by  general  conclu-  Lect.  II
sions,  or  (to  speak  more  accurately)  by  rules  inferred  from  those  ^  '  '
conclusions.

But,  this  being  admitted,  the  necessity  of  pausing  and  cal-
culating, which  the  objection  in  question  supposes,  is  an  imaginary
necessity.  To  preface  each  act  or  forbearance  by  a  conjecture
and  comparison  of  consequences,  were  clearly  superfluous  and
mischievous.  It  were  clearly  superfluous,  inasmuch  as  the
result  of  that  process  would  be  embodied  in  a  known  rwfe.  It
were  clearly  mischievous,  inasmuch  as  the  truue  result  would  be
expressed  by  that  rule,  whilst  the  process  would  probably  be
faulty,  if  it  were  done  on  the  spur  of  the  occasion.

Speaking  generally,  human  conduct,  including  the  human  Thewy
conduct  which  is  subject  to  the  Divine  commands,  is  inevitably  *^^^.
guided  by  rvJUs^  or  by  principles  or  maxims.  separable.

If  our  experience  and  observation  of  particulars  were  not
generalized,  our  experience  and  observation  of  particulars  would
seldom  avail  us  in  practice.  To  review  on  the  spur  of  the
occasion  a  host  of  particulars,  and  to  obtain  from  those  parti-
culars a  conclusion  applicable  to  the  case,  were  a  process  too
slow  and  uncertain  to  meet  the  exigencies  of  our  Uves.  The
inferences  su^ested  to  our  minds  by  repeated  experience  and
observation  are,  therefore,  drawn  into  principles,  or  compressed
into  mcudrfis.  These  we  carry  about  us  ready  for  use,  and  apply
to  individual  cases  promptly  or  without  hesitation:  without
reverting  to  the  process  by  which  they  were  obtained ;  or  without
recalling,  and  arraying  before  our  minds,  the  numerous  and  in-
tricate considerations  of  which  they  are  handy  abridgments.

This  is  the  main,  though  not  the  only  use  of  theory :  which
ignorant  and  weak  people  are  in  a  habit  of  opposing  to  practice,
but  which  is  essential  to  practice  guided  by  experience  and
observation.

*  'Tis  true  in  theory  ;  but,  then,  'tis  false  in  practice.^  Such
is  a  common  talk.  This  says  Noodle ;  propounding  it  with  a
look  of  the  most  ludicrous  profundity.

But,  with  due  and  discreet  deference  to  this  worshipful  and
weighty  personage,  that  which  is  true  in  theory  is  also  true  in
praxitice.

Seeing  that  a  true  theory  is  a  compendium  of  particular
truths,  it  is  necessarily  true  as  applied  to  particular  cases.  The
terms  of  the  theory  are  general  and  abstract,  or  the  particular
truths  which  the  theory  implies  would  not  be  abbreviated  or
condensed. But,  unless  it  be  true  of  particulars,  and,  therefore.


1 1 6  The  Province  of

Lect.  II  true  in  practice,  it  has  no  truth  at  all.  Trvih  is  always  parti-
'  '  '  cular,  though  larigvxige  is  commonly  general.  Unless  the  terms
of  a  theory  can  be  resolved  into  particular  truths,  the  theory  is
mere  jargon :  a  coil  of  those  senseless  abstractions  which  often
ensnare  the  instructed  ;  and  in  which  the  wits  of  the  ignorant  are
certainly  caught  and  entangled,  when  they  stir  from  the  track  of
authority,  and  venture  to  think  for  themselves.

They  who  talk  of  theory  as  if  it  were  the  antagonist  of
practice,  or  of  a  thing  being  true  in  theory  but  not  true  in
practice,  mean  (if  they  have  a  meaning)  that  the  theory  in  ques-
tion is  false :  that  the  particular  truths  which  it  concerns  are
treated  imperfectly  or  incorrectly ;  and  that,  if  it  were  applied
in  practice,  it  might,  therefore,  mislead.  They  say  that  truth  in
theory  is  not  truth  in  practice.  '  They  mean  that  a  false  theory
is  not  a  true  one,  and  might  lead  us  to  practical  errors.
If  our  con-  Speaking,  then,  generally,  human  conduct  is  inevitably  guided

?^y^^^ by  rules,  or  by  principles  or  maxims.

justed  to  The  human  conduct  which  is  subject  to  the  Divine  com-

ciplf  oT  mands,  is  not  only  guided  by  rules,  but  also  by  moral  sentiments
general associated  with  those  rules.

conduct^^'^  If  I  believe  (no  matter  why)  that  acts  of  a  class  or  descrip-

wo^l^^  tion  are  enjoined  or  forbidden  by  the  Deity,  a  moral  sentiment
the  most  or  feeling  (or  a  sentiment  or  feeling  of  approbation  or  disappro-
^*!r  ^^its  b^^^^^)  ^^  inseparably  connected  in  my  mind  with  the  thought
associated  or  conception  of  such  acts.  And  by  this  I  am  urged  to  do,  or
rules  ^^^*  restrained  from  doing  such  acts,  although  I  advert  not  to  the
which  ema-  reason  in  which  my  belief  originated,  nor  recall  the  Divine  rule
the\)eky, which  I  have  inferred  from  that  reason.

and  to  Now,  if  the  reason  in  which  my  belief  originated  be  the

tendencie^s  uscful  or  pemicious  tendency  of  acts  of  the  class,  my  conduct
of  human  jg  truly  adjusted  to  the  principle  of  general  utility,  but  my
the  guide  conduct  is  not  determined  by  a  direct  resort  to  it.  It  is  directly
or  index,  determined  by  a  sentivunt  associated  with  acts  of  the  class,  and
with  the  rule  which  I  have  inferred  from  their  tendency.

If  my  conduct  be  truly  adjusted  to  the  principle  of  general
utility,  my  conduct  is  guided  remotely  by  calculation.  But,
inmiediately,  or  at  the  moment  of  action,  my  conduct  is  deter-
mined by  sentiment.  I  am  swayed  by  sentiment  as  imperiously
as  I  should  be  swayed  by  it,  supposing  I  were  utterly  unable
to  produce  a  reason  for  my  conduct,  and  were  ruled  by  the
capricious  feelings  which  are  styled  the  moral  sense.

For  example,  Eeasons  which  are  quite  satisfactory,  but  some-
what numerous  and  intricate,  convince  me  that  the  institution  of


Jurisprudence  determined,  1 1 7

property  is  necessary  to  the  general  good. Convinced  of  this, Lect.  II
I  am  convinced  that thefts  are  pernicious. Convinced  that ' '
thefts  are  pernicious,  I  infer  that  the  Deity  forbids  them  by  a
general  and  inflexible  rule.

Now  the  train  of  induction  and  reasoning  by  which  I  arrive
at  this  rule,  is  somewhat  long  and  elaborate.  But  I  am  not
compelled  to  repeat  the  process,  before  I  can  know  with  certainty
that  I  should  forbear  from  taking  your  purse.  Through  my
previous  habits  of  thought  and  by  my  education,  a  sentiTnent  of
aversion  has  become  associated  in  my  mind  with  the  thought  or
conception  of  a  theft:  And,  without  adverting  to  the  reasons
which  have  convinced  me  that  thefts  are  pernicious,  or  without
adverting  to  the  rule  which  I  have  inferred  from  their  pernicious
tendency,  I  am  determined  by  that  ready  emotion  to  keep  my
fingers  firom  your  purse.

To  think  that  the  theory  of  utility  would  substitute  calcula-
tion for  sentiment,  is  a  gross  and  flagrant  error :  the  error  of  a
shallow,  precipitate  understanding.  He  who  opposes  calculation
and  sentiment,  opposes  the  rudder  to  the  sail,  or  to  the  breeze
which  swells  the  sail.  Calculation  is  the  guide,  and  not  the
antagonist  of  sentiment.  Sentiment  without  calculation  were
blind  and  capricious;  but  calculation  without  sentiment  were
inert.

To  crush  the  moral  sentiments,  is  not  the  scope  or  purpose
of  the  true  theory  of  utility.  It  seeks  to  impress  those  sentiments
with  a  just  or  beneficent  direction:  to  free  us  of  groundless
likings,  and  from  the  tyranny  of  senseless  antipathies ;  to  fix
our  love  upon  the  useful,  our  hate  upon  the  pernicious.

If,  then,  the  principle  of  utility  were  the  presiding  principle  If  our  con-
of  our  conduct,  our  conduct  would  be  determined  immediately  truiyld-^
by  Divine  rules,  or  rather  by  moral  sentiments  associated  with  justed  to
those  rules. And,  consequently,  the  application  of  the  principle  cipie^of*
of  utility  to  particular  or  individual  cases,  would  neither  be  general
attended  by  the  errors,  nor  followed  by  the  mischiefs,  which  the  conduct
current  objection  in  question  supposes.  would  con-

But  these  conclusions  (like  most  conclusions)  must  be  taken  the  most
with  limitations.  f!^^;  1°

Divine

There  certainly  are  cases  (of  comparatively  rai-e  occurrence)  rules,  and
wherein  the  specific considerations balance or  outweigh the  ^^  IJi^^d^
general :  cases  which  (in  the  language  of  Bacon)  are  '  immersed  for  the
in  matter :'  cases  perplexed  with  peculiarities  from  which  it  were  ™y  ^e/S-  *
dangerous  to  abstract  them ;  and  to  which  our  attention  would  ^n^^i^asso-
be  directed,  if  we  were  true  to  our  presiding  principle. It  were  those  rules.


ii8


The  Province  of


Lect.  II

But,  in
anomalous
and  ex-
cepted
cases  (of
compara-
tivefy  rare
occur-
rence) our
conduct
would  be
fashioned
direcUy  on
the  prin-
ciple of
general
utility,  or
guided  by  a
conjecture
and  com-
parison of
specific  or
particular
conse-
quences.


mischievous  to  depart  from  a  rule  which  regarded  any  of  these
cases ;  since  every  departure  from  a  rule  tends  to  weaken  its
authority.  But  so  important  were  the  specific  consequences
which  would  follow  our  resolves,  that  the  evil  of  observing  the
rule  might  surpass  the  evil  of  breaking  it.  Looking  at  the
reasons  from  which  we  had  inferred  the  rule,  it  were  absurd  to
think  it  inflexible.  We  should,  therefore,  dismiss  the  rule;  resort
directly  to  the  principle  upon  which  our  rules  were  fashioned ;
and  calculate  specific  consequences  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge
and  ability.

For  example,  If  we  take  the  principle  of  utility  as  our  index
to  the  Divine  commands,  we  must  infer  that  obedience  to
established  government  is  enjoined  generally  by  the  Deity.  For,
without  obedience  to  '  the  powers  which  be,'  there  were  little
security  and  little  enjoyment  The  ground,  however,  of  the
inference,  is  the  utUUy  of  government :  And  if  the  protection
which  it  yields  be  too  costly,  or  if  it  vex  us  with  needless  restraints
and  load  us  with  needless  exactions,  the  principle  which  points
at  submission  as  our  general  duty  may  counsel  and  justify  resist-
ance. Disobedience  to  an  established  government,  let  it  be
never  so  bad,  is  an  evil :  For  the  mischiefs  inflicted  by  a  bad
government  are  less  than  the  mischiefs  of  anarchy.  So  moment-
ous, however,  is  the  difference  between  a  bad  and  a  good  govern-
ment, that,  if  it  would  lead  to  a  good  one,  resistance  to  a  bad  one
would  be  useful.  The  anarchy  attending  the  transition  were  an
extensive,  but  a  passing  evil :  The  good  which  would  follow  the
transition  were  extensive  and  lasting.  The  peculiar  good  would
outweigh  the  generic  evil :  The  good  which  would  crown  the
change  in  the  insulated  and  eccentric  case,  would  more  than
compensate  the  evil  which  is  inseparable  from  rebellion.

Whether  resistance  to  government  be  useful  or  pernicious,
be  consistent  or  inconsistent  with  the  Divine  pleasure,  is,  there-
fore, an  anomalous  question.  We  must  try  it  by  a  direct  resort
to  the  ultimate  or  presiding  principle,  and  not  by  the  Divine
rule  which  the  principle  clearly  indicates.  To  consult  the  rule,
were  absurd.  For,  the  rule  being  general  and  applicable  to
ordinary  cases,  it  ordains  obedience  to  government,  and  excludes
the  question.

The  members  of  a  political  society  who  revolve  tins  moment-
ous question  must,  therefore,  dismiss  the  rule,  and  calculate
specific  consequences.  They  must  measure  the  mischief  wrought
by  the  actual  government;  the  chance  of  getting  a  better,  by
resorting  to  resistance ;  the  evil  which  must  attend  resistance,


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 1 9

whether  it  prosper  or  fidl ; and  the  good  which  may  follow Lbct.  II
resistance,  in  case  it  be  crowned  with  success. And,  then,  by
comparing  these,  the  elements  of  their  moral  calculation,  they
must  solve  the  question  before  them  to  the  best  of  their  know-
ledge and  ability.

And  in  this  eccentric  or  anomalous  case,  the  application  of
the  principle  of  utility  would  probably  be  beset  with  the  diffi-
culties which  the  current  objection  in  question  imputes  to  it
generally.  To  measure  and  compare  the  evils  of  submission
and  disobedience,  and  to  determine  which  of  the  two  would  give
the  balance  of  advantage,  would  probably  be  a  difficult  and
uncertain  process.  The  numerous  and  competing  considerations
by  which  the  question  must  be  solved,  might  well  perplex  and
divide  the  wise,  and  the  good,  and  the  brava  A  Milton  or  a
Hampden  might  animate  their  countrymen  to  resistance,  but  a
Hobbes  or  a  Falkland  would  counsel  obedience  and  peace.

But,  though  the  principle  of  utility  would  afford  no  certain
solution,  the  community  would  be  fortunate,  if  their  opinions
and  sentiments  were  formed  upon  it.  The  pretensions  of  the
opposite  parties  being  tried  by  an  intelligible  test,  a  peace-
able compromise  of  their  difference  would,  at  least,  be  possible.
The  adherents  of  the  established  government,  might  think  it
the  most  exfpedimJt:  but,  as  their  liking  would  depend  upon
reasons,  and  not  upon  names  and  phrases,  they  might  possibly
prefer  innovations,  of  which  they  would  otherwise  disapprove,
to  the  mischiefs  of  a  violent  contest  They  might  chance  to  see
the  absurdity  of  upholding  the  existing  order,  with  a  stiffiiess
which  must  end  in  anarchy.  The  party  affecting  reform,  being
also  intent  upon  viility,  would  probably  accept  concessions  short
of  their  notions  and  wishes,  rather  than  persist  in  the  chase  of
a  greater  possible  good  through  the  evils  and  the  hazards  of  a
war.  In  short,  if  the  object  of  each  party  were  measured  by
the  standard  of  utility,  each  might  compare  the  worth  of  its
object  with  the  cost  of  a  violent  pursuit.

But,  if  the  parties  were  led  by  their  ears,  and  not  by  the
principle  of  utility ;  if  they  appealed  to  unmeaning  abstractions,
or  to  senseless  fictions ;  if  they  mouthed  of  '  the  rights  of  man,'
or  '  the  sacred  rights  of  sovereigns,'  of  '  unalienable  liberties,'  or
'eternal  and  immutable  justice;'  of  an  'original  contract  or
covenant,'  or  'the  principles  of  an  inviolable  constitution;'
neither  could  compare  its  object  with  the  cost  of  a  violent
pursuit,  nor  would  the  difference  between  them  admit  of  a
peaceable  compromise. A  sacred  or  unalienable  right  is  truly


1 20  The  Province  of

Lect.  II  and  indeed  invaltuible :  For,  seeing  that  it  means  nothing,  there
' — ' — '  is  nothing  with  which  it  can  be  measured.  Parties  who  rest
their  pretensions  on  the  jargon  to  which  I  have  adverted,  must
inevitably  push  to  their  objects  through  thick  and  thin,  though
their  objects  be  straws  or  feathers  as  weighed  in  -the  balance  of
utility.  Having  bandied  their  fustian  phrases,  and  '  bawled  till
their  lungs  be  spent,'  they  must  even  take  to  their  weapons,  and
fight  their  difference  out.

It  really  is  important  (though  I  feel  the  audacity  of  the  para-
dox), that  men  should  think  distinctly,  and  speak  with  a  meaning.

In  most  of  the  domestic  broUs  which  have  agitated  civilized
communities,  the  result  has  been  determined  or  seriously
affected,  by  the  nature  of  the  prevalent  talk :  by  the  nature  of
the  topics  or  phrases  which  have  figured  in  the  war  of  words.
These  topics  or  phrases  have  been  more  than  pretexts:  more
than  varnish:  more  than  distinguishing  cockades  mounted  by
the  opposite  parties.

For  example.  If  the  bulk  of  the  people  of  England  had
thought  and  reasoned  with  Mr.  Burke,  had  been  imbued  with
the  spirit  and  had  seized  the  scope  of  his  arguments,  her  need-
less and  disastrous  war  with  her  American  colonies  would  have
been  stifled  at  the  birth.  The  stupid  and  infuriate  majority
who  rushed  into  that  odious  war,  could  perceive  and  discourse
of  nothing  but  the  sovereignty  of  the  mother  country,  and  her
so  called  right  to  tax  her  colonial  subjects.

But,  granting  that  the  mother  country  was  properly  the
sovereign  of  the  colonies,  granting  that  the  fact  of  her  sovereignty
was  proved  by  invariable  practice,  and  granting  her  so  called
right  to  tax  her  colonial  subjects,  this  was  hardly  a  topic  to
move  an  enlightened  people.

Is  it  the  interest  of  England  to  insist  upon  her  sovereignty  ?
Is  it  her  interest  to  exercise  her  right  without  the  approbation
of  the  colonists  ?  For  the  chance  of  a  slight  revenue  to  be
wrung  from  her  American  subjects,  and  of  a  trifling  relief  from
the  taxation  which  now  oppresses  herself,  shall  she  drive  those
reluctant  subjects  to  assert  their  alleged  independence,  visit  her
own  children  with  the  evil  of  war,  squander  her  treasures  and
soldiers  in  trying  to  keep  them  down,  and  desolate  the  very

region  from  which  the  revenue  must  be  drawn  ? These  and

the  like  considerations  would  have  determined  the  people  of
England,  if  their  dominant  opinions  and  sentiments  had  been
fashioned  on  the  principle  of  utility.


yurisprudence  determined,  1 2 1

And,  if  these  and  the  like  considerations  had  determined  Lect.  II
the  public  mind,  the  public  would  have  damned  the  project  '
of  taxing  and  coercing  the  colonies,  and  the  government
would  have  abandoned  the  project  For,  it  is  only  in  the
ignorance  of  the  people,  and  in  their  consequent  mental  im-
becility, that  governments  or  demagogues  can  find  the  means  of
mischief

If  these  and  the  like  considerations  had  determined  the
public  mind,  the  expenses  and  miseries  of  the  war  would  have
been  avoided ;  the  connection  of  England  with  America  would
not  have  been  torn  asimder ;  and,  in  case  their  common  interests
had  led  them  to  dissolve  it  quietly,  the  relation  of  sovereign  and
subject,  or  of  parent  and  child,  would  have  been  followed  by  an
equal,  but  intimate  and  lasting  alliance.  For  the  interests  of
the  two  nations  perfectly  coincide;  and  the  open,  and  the
covert  hostilities,  with  which  they  plague  one  another,  are  the
offspring  of  a  bestial  antipathy  begotten  by  their  original
quarrel

But  arguments  drawn  from  utility  were  not  to  the  dull
taste  of  the  stupid  and  infuriate  majority.  The  rabble,  great
and  small,  would  hear  of  nothing  but  their  right,  '  They'd  a
riglU  to  tax  the  colonists,  and  tax  'em  they  would :  Ay,  that
they  would.'  Just  as  if  a  right  were  worth  a  rush  of  itself,  or
a  something  to  be  cherished  and  asserted  independently  of  the
good  that  it  may  bring.

Mr.  Burke  would  have  taught  them  better :  would  have
purged  their  muddled  brains,  and  *  laid  the  fever  in  their  souls,'
with  the  healing  principle  of  utility.  He  asked  them  what
they  would  get,  if  the  project  of  coercion  should  succeed ;  and
implored  them  to  compare  the  advantage  with  the  hazard  and
the  cost.  But  th6  sound  practical  men  still  insisted  on  the
right ;  and  sagaciously  shook  their  heads  at  him,  as  a  refiner
and  a  theorist.

If  a  serious  difference  shall  arise  between  ourselves  and
Canada,  or  if  a  serious  difierence  shall  arise  between  ourselves
and  Ireland,  an  attempt  will  probably  be  made  to  cram  us  with
the  same  stuff.  But,  such  are  the  mighty  strides  which  reason
has  taken  in  the  interval,  that  I  hope  we  shall  not  swallow  it
with  the  relish  of  our  good  ancestors.  It  wUl  probably  occur
to  us  to  ask,  whether  she  be  worth  keeping,  and  whether  she  be
worth  keeping  at  the  cost  of  a  war  ? — I  think  there  is  nothing
romantic  in  the  hope  which  I  now  express ;  since  an  admirable
speech  of  Mr.  Baring,  advising  the  relinquishment  of  Canada,


1 2  2  The  Province  of

Lbct.  11 was  seemingly  received,  a  few  years  ago,  with  general  assent
* and  approbation.^

The  9K(md There  are,  then,  cases,  which  are  anomalous  or  eccentric ;

theTore^-  ^"^^  ^  which  the  man,  whose  conduct  was  fashioned  on  utility,

ingobjec- would  apply  that  ultimate principle  inmiediately  or  directly.

resumed.  ^  ^^^d,  in  these  anomalous  or  eccentric  cases,  the  application  of
the  principle  would  probably  be  beset  with  the  difficulties  which
the  current  objection  in  question  imputes  to  it  generally.

But,  even  in  these  cases,  the  principle  would  aflford  an
intelligible  test,  and  a  likelihood  of  a  just  solution :  a  probability
of  discovering  the  conduct  required  by  the  general  good,  and,
therefore,  required  by  the  commands  of  a  wise  and  benevolent
Deity.

And  the  anomalies,  after  all,  are  comparatively  few.  In
the  great  majority  of  cases,  the  general  happiness  requires  that
rules  shall  be  observed,  and  that  sentiments  associated  with  rules
shall  be  promptly  obeyed.  If  our  conduct  were  truly  adjusted
to  the  principle  of  general  utility,  our  conduct  would  seldom  be
determined  by  an  immediate  or  direct  resort  to  it.


LECTURE  III.

Lbot.  Ill Although  it  is  not  the  object  of  this  course  of  lectures  to  treat
2""jj ' of  the  science  of  legislation,  but  to  evolve  and  expound  the
for  intro- principles  and  distinctions  involved  in  the  idea  of  law,  it  was
prinSple^*  not  a  deviation  from  my  subject  to  introduce  the  principle  of
of  utility, utility. For  I  shall  often  have  occasion  to  refer  to  that  prin-
ciple in  my  course,  as  that  which  not  only  ought  to  guide,  but
has  commonly  in  fact  guided  the  legislator. The  principle  of
utility,  well  or  ill  understood,  has  usually  been  the  principle
consulted  in  making  laws; and  I  therefore  should  often  be
unable  to  explain  distinctly  and  precisely  the  scope  and  purport
of  a  law,  without  having  brought  the  principle  of  utility  directly
before  you. I  have  therefore  done  so,  not  pretending  to  expound
the principle  in  its  various  applications,  which  would  be  a
subject  of  sufficient  extent  for  many  courses  of  lectures ;  but
attempting  to  give  you  a  general  notion  of  the  principle,  and  to
obviate  the  most  specious  of  the  objections  which  are  commonly
made  to  it.

**  The rationale of the so-called treated  in  more  detail  in  Lecture  VI.
rights of sovereign governments is post.


yurisprudence  determined,  123

In  my  second  lecture,  I  examined  a  current  and  specious Leot.  Ill
objection  to  the  theory  of  general  utility.  Thecon^

The  drift  of  the  objection,  you  undoubtedly  remember ;  and  ^^^^P??^
you  probably  remember  the  arguments  by  which  I  attempted  to  with  the
refute  it.  ^^eco^

Accordingly,  I  merely  resume  that  general  conclusion
which  I  endeavoured  to  establish  by  the  second  of  my  two
answers.

The  conclusion  may  be  stated  briefly,  in  the  following
manner, — If  our  conduct  were  truly  adjusted  to  the  principle  of
general  utility,  our  conduct  would  conform,  for  the  most  part,
to  laws  or  rvles :  laws  or  rules  which  are  set  by  the  Deity,  and
to  which  the  tendencies  of  dosses  of  actions  are  the  guide  or
index.

But  here  arises  a  difficulty  which  certainly  is  most  perplex-  a  second
ing,  and  which  scarcely  admits  of  a  solution  that  will  perfectly  t^^^hf  ^^
satisfy  the  mind.  theory  of

If  the  Divine  laws  must  be  gathered  from  the  tendencies  of  gtatS
action,  how  can  they,  who  are  boimd  to  keep  them,  know  them
fully  and  correctly  ?

So  numerous  are  the  classes  of  actions  to  which  those  laws
relate,  that  no  single  mind  can  mark  the  whole  of  those  classes,
and  examine  completely  their  respective  tendencies.  If  every
single  man  must  learn  their  respective  tendencies,  and  thence
infer  the  rules  which  God  has  set  to  mankind,  every  man's
scheme  of  ethics  will  embrace  but  a  part  of  those  rules,  and,  on
many  or  most  of  the  occasions  which  require  him  to  act  or  for-
bear, he  will  be  forced  on  the  dangerous  process  of  calculating
specific  consequences.

Besides,  ethical,  Uke  other  wisdom,  '  cometh  by  opportunity
of  leisure :'  And,  since  they  are  busied  with  earning  the  means
of  living,  the  many  are  unable  to  explore  the  field  of  ethics,  and
to  learn  their  numerous  duties  by  learning  the  tendencies  of
actions.

K  the  Divine  laws  must  be  gathered  from  the  tendencies  of

actions,  the  inevitable  conclusion  is  absurd  and  monstrous.

God  has  given  us  laws  which  no  man  can  know  completely,  and
to  which  the  great  bulk  of  mankind  has  scarcely  the  slightest
access.

The  considerations  suggested  by  this  and  the  next  discourse,
may  solve  or  extenuate  the  perplexing  difficulty  to  which  I
have  now  adverted.


1 24  TJte  Province  of

Lect.  Ill  In  so  far  as  law  and  morality  are  what  they  ought  to  be  (or

An  answer  ill  80  f^r  as  law  and  morality  accord  with  their  ultimate  test,  or

to  that in  so  far  as  law  and  morality  accord  with  the  Divine  commands),

jection  in- legal  and  moral  rules  have  been  fashioned  on  the  principle  of

troduced. utility, or obtained by  observation and  induction  from the

tendencies  of  human  actions. But,  though  they  have  been

fashioned  on  the  principle  of  utility,  or  obtained  by  observation

and  induction  from  the  tendencies  of  human  actions,  it  is  not

necessary  that  all  whom  they  bind  should  know  or  advert  to

the  process  through  which  they  have  been  gotten. If  aU  whom

they  bind  keep  or  observe  them,  the  ends  to  which  they  exist

are  sufficiently  accomplished. The  ends  to  which  they  exist

are  sufficiently  accomplished,  though  most  of  those  who  observe

them  be  unable  to  perceive  their  ends,  and  be  ignorant  of  the

reasons  on  which  they  were  founded,  or  of  the  proofs from

which  they  were  inferred.

According  to  the  theory  of  utility,  the  science  of  Ethics  or
Deontology  (or  the  science  of  Law  and  Morality,  as  they  shmdd
be,  or  ought  to  be)  is  one  of  the  sciences  which  rest  upon  obser-
vation and  induction.  The  science  has  been  formed,  through  a
long  succession  of  ages,  by  many  and  separate  contributions
from  many  and  separate  discoverers.  No  single  mind  could
explore  the  whole  of  the  field,  though  each  of  its  numerous
departments  has  been  explored  by  numerous  inquirers.

If  positive  law  and  morality  were  exactly  what  they  ought
to  be  (or  if  positive  law  and  morality  were  exactly  fashioned  to
utility),  sufficient  reasons  might  be  given  for  each  of  their  con-
stituent rules,  and  each  of  their  constituent  rules  would  in  fojct
have  been  founded  on  those  reasons.  But  no  single  mind  could
have  found  the  whole  of  those  rules,  nor  could  any  single  mind
compass  the  whole  of  their  proofs.  Though  all  the  evidence
would  be  known,  the  several  parts  of  the  evidence  would  be
known  by  different  men.  Every  single  man  might  master  a
portion  of  the  evidence :  a  portion  commensurate  with  the
attention  which  he  gave  to  the  science  of  ethics,  and  with  the
mental  perspicacity  and  vigour  which  he  brought  to  the  study.
But  no  single  man  could  master  more  than  a  portion:  And
many  of  the  rules  of  conduct,  which  were  actually  observed  or
admitted,  would  be  taken,  by  the  most  instructed,  on  authority,
testimony,  or  trust.

In  short,  if  a  system  of  law  and  morality  were  exactly
fashioned  to  utility,  all  its  constituent  rules  might  be  known
by  all  or  most. But  all  the  numerous  reasons,  upon  which  the


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 2  5

system  would  rest,  could  scarcely  be  compassed  by  any :  while Lect.  Ill
most  must  limit  their  inquiries  to  a  few  of  those  numerous "^^
reasons ;  or,  without  an  attempt  to  examine  the  reasons,  must
receive  the  whole  of  the  rules  from  the  teaching  and  example
of  others.

But  this  inconvenience  is  not  peculiar  to  law  and  morality.
It  extends  to  all  the  sciences,  and  to  all  the  arts.

Many  mathematical  truths  are  probably  taken  upon  trust
by  deep  and  searching  mathematicians  :^°  And  of  the  thousands
who  apply  arithmetic  to  daily  and  hourly  use,  not  one  in  a
hundred  knows  or  surmises  the  reasons  upon  which  its  rules  are
founded.  Of  the  millions  who  till  the  earth  and  ply  the  various
handicrafts,  few  are  acquainted  with  the  grounds  of  their
homely  but  important  arts,  though  these  arts  are  generally
practised  with  passable  expertness  and  success.

The  powers  of  single  individuals  are  feeble  and  poor,
though  the  powers  of  conspiring  numbers  are  gigantic  and
admirable.  Little  of  any  man's  knowledge  is  gotten  by
original  research.  It  mostly  consists  of  results  gotten  by  the
researches  of  others,  and  taken  by  himself  upon  testimony.

And  in  many  departments  of  science  we  may  safely  rely
upon  testimony :  though  the  knowledge  which  we  thus  obtain
is  less  satisfactory  and  useful  than  that  which  we  win  for
ourselves  by  direct  examination  of  the  proofs.

In  the  mathematical  and  physical  sciences,  and  in  the  arts
which  are  fotmded  upon  them,  we  may  commonly  trust  the

^*  In  J.  S.  M.'s  notes  I  find  this  pas-  curate  expression  of  the  physical  condi-

sage  in  the  foUowing  form  : — *  There  are  tions  which  regulate  the  motions  of  tlie

doubtless many mathematical truths  heavenly  bodies)  rests  upon  a  combina-

which  are  believed  on  authority  or  tcsti-  tion  of  data  reduced  from  an  enormous

mony  by  the  greatest  mathematicians. '  number  of  observations,  and  a  variety  of

By  'mathematical  truths'  the  author  mathematical  calculations  which  alter-
cannot  have  intended  those  hypothetical  nately  assume  approximate  results,  and
conclusions  or  deductions  which  pertain  by  the  use  of  these  assumptions,  make
to  the  branch  of  science  sometimes  called  new  and  closer  approximations.  All
pure  mathematics.  As  the  meaning  and  these  calculations  implicitly  involve  or
purport  of  such  conclusions  is  seldom  assume  the  law  of  gravitation,  and  the
correctly  apprehended  without  pursuing  evidence  of  that  law  depends  on  the
the  steps  of  reasoning  upon  which  they  accuracy  of  the  entire  calculations,  corn-
rest,  it  would  be  merely  iale  for  a  mathe-  bined  with  the  final  agreement  of  calcu-
matician  to  take  them  upon  trust,  or  to  lation  with  observation.  Now  no  single
believe  them  upon  testimony.  individual  has  ever  verified  more  than  a

The  author's  remark  is  however  un-  fractional  part  of  this  evidence.  Or  to
doubtedly  just,  with  reganl  to  all  take  a  connected  and  more  homely  illus-
scientific  conclusions  relating  to  actual  tration.  No  single  individual  has  ex-
phenomena,  and  based  upon  oDservations  amined  more  than  a  faction  of  the  evi-
and  experiment  I  will  take  as  an  in-  dence  on  which  depends  the  accuracy  of
stance  one  of  the  best  known  and  most  a  single  statement  in  the  Nautical  Al-
widely  accepted  of  them.  The  ultimate  manac  for  the  current  year.  Yet  the
demonstration  of  the  (so  called)  law  of  (ioto  of  that  publication  will  be  implicitly
gravitation  (or  rather  the  demonstration  relied  on  by  astronomers  no  less  than  by
of  its  extreme  approximation  to  an  ac-  navigators. — R.  C.


1 26  The  Province  of

Lect.  Ill  conclusions  which  we  take  upon  authority.  For  the  adepts  in
'  *  '  these  sciences  and  arts  mostly  agree  in  their  results,  and  lie
under  no  temptation  to  cheat  the  ignorant  with  error.  I  firmly
believe  (for  example)  that  the  earth  moves  round  the  sun;
though  I  know  not  a  tittle  of  the  evidence  from  which  the
conclusion  is  inferred.  And  my  belief  is  perfectly  rational,
though  it  rests  upon  mere  authority.  For  there  is  nothing  in
the  alleged  fact,  contrary  to  my  experience  of  nature :  whilst
all  who  have  scrutinized  the  evidence  concur  in  aflfirming  the
fact ;  and  have  no  conceivable  motive  to  assert  and  diffuse  the
conclusion,  but  the  liberal  and  beneficent  desire  of  maintaining
and  propagating  truth.

Anobjec-  ^^t  the  case  is  unhappily  different with the important

tion  to  the  science  of  ethics,  and  also  with  the  various  sciences — such  as
answer,  l^islation,  politics,  and  political  economy — which  are  nearly
stated.  related  to  ethics.  Those  who  have  inquired,  or  affected  to
inquire  into  ethics,  have  rarely  been  impartial,  and,  therefore,
have  differed  in  their  results.  Sinister  interests,  or  prejudices
begotten  by  such  interests,  have  mostly  determined  them  to
embrace  the  opinions  which  they  have  laboured  to  impress
upon  others.  Most  of  them  have  been  advocates  rather  than
inquirers.  Instead  of  examining  the  evidence  and  honestly
pursuing  its  consequences,  most  of  them  have  hunted  for
arguments  in  favour  of  given  conclusions,  and  have  neglected  or
purposely  suppressed  the  unbending  and  incommodious  con-
siderations which  pointed  at  opposite  inferences.

Now  how  can  the  bulk  of  mankind,  who  have  little  oppor-
tunity for  research,  compare  the  respective  merits  of  these
varying  and  hostile  opinions,  and  hit  upon  those  of  the  throng
which  accord  with  utility  and  truth  ?  Here,  testimony  is  not
to  be  trusted.  There  is  not  thaJt  coTicurrence  or  agreement  of
numerom  and  impartial  inquirers,  to  which  the  most  cautious
and  erect  understanding  readily  and  wisely  defers.  With
regard  to  the  science  of  ethics,  and  to  all  the  various  sciences
which  are  nearly  related  to  ethics,  invincible  doubt,  or  blind
and  prostrate  belief,  would  seem  to  be  the  doom  of  the  multi-
tude. Anxiously  busied  with  the  means  of  earning  a  precarious
livelihood,  they  are  debarred  from  every  opportunity  of  carefully
surveying  the  evidence:  whilst  every  authority,  whereon  they
may  hang  their  faith,  wants  that  mark  of  trustworthiness  which
justifies  reliance  on  authority.

Accordingly,  the  science  of  ethics,  with  all  the various


yurisprtidence  determined.  127

sciences  which  are  nearly  related  to  ethics,  lag  behind  the  Lect.  Ill
others.  So  few  are  the  sincere  inquirers  who  turn  their  atten-  '  *
tion  to  these  sciences,  and  so  difficult  is  it  for  the  multitude  to
perceive  the  worth  of  their  labours,  that  the  advancement  of
the  sciences  themselves  is  comparatively  slow ;  whilst  the  most
perspicuous  of  the  truths,  with  which  they  are  occasionally
enriched,  are  either  rejected  by  the  many  as  worthless  or  per-
nicious paradoxes,  or  win  their  laborious  way  to  general  assent
through  a  long  and  dubious  struggle  with  established  and
obstinate  errors.

Many  of  the  legal  and  moral  rules  which  obtain  in  the
most  civilized  communities,  rest  upon  brute  custom,  and  not
upon  manly  reason.  They  have  been  taken  from  preceding
generations  without  examination,  and  are  deeply  tinctured  with
barbarity.  They  arose  in  early  ages,  and  in  the  infancy  of  the
human  mind,  partly  from  caprices  of  the  fancy  (which  are
nearly  omnipotent  with  barbarians),  and  partly  from  the  imper-
fect apprehension  of  general  utility  which  is  the  consequence
of  narrow  experience.  And  so  great  and  numerous  are  the
obstacles  to  the  difiPiision  of  ethical  truth,  that  these  monstrous
or  crude  productions  of  childish  and  imbecile  intellect  have
been  cherished  and  perpetuated,  through  ages  of  advancing
knowledge,  to  the  comparatively  enlightened  period  in  which  it
is  our  happiness  to  live.

It  were  idle  to  deny  the  difficulty.  The  diffiision  and  the  The  fore-
advancement  of  ethical  truth  are  certainly  prevented  or  obstructed  S^tion  to
by  great  and  peculiar  obstacles.  the  fore-

But  these  obstacles,  I  am  firmly  convinced,  will  gradually  S^er
disappear. In  two  causes  of  slow  but  sure  operation,  we  may  «>lved  or

clearly  perceive  a  cure,  or,  at  least,  a  palliative  of  the  evil ated"'^

In  every  civilized  community  of  the  Old  and  New  World,  the
leading  principles  of  the  science  of  ethics,  and  also  of  the  various
sciences  which  are  nearly  related  to  ethics,  are  gradually  finding
their  way,  in  company  with  other  knowledge,  amongst  the  great
mass  of  the  people:  whilst  those  who  accurately  study,  and
who  labour  to  advance  these  sciences,  are  proportionally  increas-
ing in  number,  and  waxiog  in  zeal  and  activity.  From  the
combination  of  these  two  causes  we  may  hope  for  a  more  rapid
progress  both  in  the  discovery  and  in  the  diffiision  of  moral
truth.

Profound  knowledge  of  these,  as  of  the  other  sciences,  will


1 2  8  TIte  Province  of

Lect.  Ill  always  be  confined  to  the  comparatively  few  who  study  them
"^^  '  long  and  assiduously.  But  the  multitude  are  fully  competent
to  conceive  the  leading  pi^imcipleSy  and  to  apply  those  leading
principles  to  particular  cases.  And,  if  they  were  imbued  with
those  principles,  and  were  practised  in  the  art  of  applying  them,
they  would  be  docile  to  the  voice  of  reason,  and  armed  against
sophistry  and  error.  There  is  a  wide  and  important  difference
between  ignorance  of  principles  and  ignorance  of  particulars  or
details.  The  man  who  is  ignorant  of  principles,  and  unpractised
in  right  reasoning,  is  imbecile  as  well  as  ignorant.  The  man
who  is  simply  ignorant  of  particulars  or  details,  can  reason
correctly  from  premises  which  are  suggested  to  his  imderstanding,
and  can  justly  estimate  the  consequences  which  are  drawn  from
those  premises  by  othera.  If  the  minds  of  the  many  were
informed  and  invigorated,  so  far  as  their  position  will  permit,
they  could  distinguish  the  statements  and  reasonings  of  their
instructed  and  judicious  friends,  from  the  lies  and  fallacies  of
those  who  would  use  them  to  sinister  purposes,  and  from  the
equally  pernicious  nonsense  of  their  weak  and  ignorant  well-
wishers.  Possessed  of  directing  principles,  able  to  reason  rightly,
helped  to  the  requisite  premises  by  accurate  and  comprehensive
inquirers,  they  could  examine  and  fathom  the  questions  which
it  most  behoves  them  to  imderstand :  Though  the  leisure  which
they  can  snatch  from  their  callings  is  necessarily  so  limited,
that  their  opinions  upon  numerous  questions  of  subordinate
importance  would  continue  to  be  taken  from  the  mere  aiUlioritij
of  others.

The  shortest  and  clearest  illustrations  of  this  most  cheerinff
truth,  are  furnished  by  the  inestimable  science  of  political
economy,  which  is  so  interwoven  with  every  consideration
belonging  to  morals,  politics,  and  legislation,  that  it  is  impossible
to  treat  any  one  of  these  sciences  without  a  continual  reference
to  it.

The  broad  or  leading  principles  of  the  science  of  political
economy,  may  be  mastered,  with  moderate  attention,  in  a  short
period.  With  these  simple,  but  commanding  principles,  a
number  of  important  questions  are  easily  resolved.  And  if  the
multitude  (as  they  can  and  will)  shall  ever  understand  these
principles,  many  pernicious  prejudices  will  be  extirpated  from
the  popular  mind,  and  truths  of  inefifable  moment  planted  in
their  stead.

For  example.  In  many  or  all  countries  (the  least  uncivilized
not  excepted),  the  prevalent  opinions and sentiments  of  the


Jurisprudence  determined.  129

working  people  are  certainly  not  consistent  with  the  complete  I^^crr-  m
security  of  property.  To  the  ignorant  poor,  the  inequality  wliich
inevitably  follows  the  beneficent  institution  of  property  is  neces-
sarily invidious.  That  they  who  toQ  and  produce  should  fare
scantily,  whilst  others,  who  '  delve  not  nor  spin,'  batten  on  the
fruits  of  labour,  seems,  to  the  jaundiced  eyes  of  the  poor  and
the  ignorant,  a  monstrous  state  of  things:  an  arrangement
upheld  by  the  few  at  the  cost  of  the  many,  and  flatly  inconsist-
ent with  the  benevolent  purposes  of  Providence.

A  statement  of  the  numerous  evils  which  flow  from  this
single  prejudice,  would  occupy  a  volume.  But  they  cast  so
clear  a  light  on  the  mischiefs  of  popular  ignorance,  and  show
so  distinctly  the  advantages  of  popular  instruction,  that  I  will
briefly  touch  upon  a  few  of  them,  though  at  the  risk  of  tiring
your  patience.

In  the  first  place,  this  prejudice  blinds  the  people  to  the
cause  of  their  suflferings,  and  to  the  only  remedy  or  palliative
which  the  case  will  admit.

Want  and  labour  spring  from  the  niggardliness  of  nature,
and  not  from  the  inequality  which  is  consequent  on  the  institu-
tion of  property.  These  evils  are  inseparable  from  the  condition
of  man  upon  earth ;  and  are  lightened,  not  aggravated,  by  this
useful,  though  invidious  institution.  Without  capital,  and  the
arts  which  depend  upon  capital,  the  reward  of  labour  would  be
far  scantier  than  it  is ;  and  capital,  with  the  arts  which  depend
upon  it,  are  creatures  of  the  institution  of  property.  The
institution  is  good  for  the  many,  as  well  as  for  the  few.  The
poor  are  not  stripped  by  it  of  the  produce  of  their  labour ;  but
it  gives  them  a  part  in  the  enjoyment  of  wealth  which  it  calls
into  being.  In  effect,  though  not  in  law,  the  labourers  are
co-proprietors  with  the  capitalists  who  hire  their  labour.  The
reward  which  they  get  for  their  labour  is  principally  drawn
from  capital ;  and  they  are  not  less  interested  than  the  legal
owners  in  protecting  the  fund  from  invasion.

It  is  certainly  to  be  wished,  that  their  reward  were  greater ;
and  that  they  were  relieved  from  the  incessant  drudgery  to
which  they  are  now  condemned.  But  the  condition  of  the
working  people  (whether  their  wages  shall  be  high  or  low ;  their
labour,  moderate  or  extreme)  depends  upon  their  own  will,  and
not  upon  the  will  of  the  rich.  In  the  true  principle  of  population,
detected  by  the  sagacity  of  Mr.  Malthus,  they  must  look  for  the
cause  and  the  remedy  of  their  penury  and  excessive  toil.  There
they  may  find  the  means  which  would  give  them  comparative

VOL.  I.  K


1 30  The  Province  of

Lect.  Ill  affluence ;  which  would  give  them  the  degree  of  leisure  neces-
^'"■*^'  '  sary  to  knowledge  and  refinement ;  which  would  raise  them  to
personal  dignity  and  political  influence,  from  grovelling  and
sordid  subjection  to  the  arbitrary  rule  of  a  few.

And  these  momentous  truths  are  deducible  from  plain
principles,  by  short  and  obvious  inferences.  Here,  there  is  no
need  of  large  and  careful  research,  or  of  subtle  and  sustained
thinking.  If  the  people  understood  distinctly  a  few  indisputable
propositions,  and  were  capable  of  going  correctly  through  an
easy  process  of  reasoning,  their  minds  would  be  purged  of  the
prejudice  which  binds  them  to  the  cause  of  their  suflferings,  and
they  would  see  and  apply  the  remedy  which  is  suggested  by  the
principle  of  population.  Their  repinings  at  the  affluence  of  the
rich,  would  be  appeased.  Their  murmurs  at  the  injustice  of  the
rich,  would  be  silenced.  They  would  scarcely  break  machinery,
or  fire  barns  and  com-ricks,  to  the  end  of  raising  wages,  or  the
rate  of  parish  relief.  They  would  see  that  violations  of  property
are  mischievous  to  themselves :  that  such  violations  weaken  the
motives  to  accumulation,  and,  therefore,  diminish  the  fund  which
yields  the  labourer  his  subsistence.  They  would  see  that  they
are  deeply  interested  in  the  security  of  property :  that,  if  they
adjusted  their  numbers  to  the  demand  for  their  labour,  they
would  share  abundantly,  with  their  employers,  in  the  blessings
of  that  useful  institution.

Another  of  the  numerous  evils  which  flow  from  the  prejudice
in  question,  is  the  frequency  of  crimes.

Nineteen  oflfences  out  of  twenty,  are  offences  against  pro-
perty. And  most  offences  against  property  may  be  imputed  to
the  prejudice  in  question.

The  authors  of  such  offences  are  commonly  of  the  poorer
sort.  For  the  most  part,  poverty  is  the  incentive.  And  this
prejudice  perpetuates  poverty  amongst  the  great  body  of  the
people,  by  blinding  them  to  the  cause  and  the  remedy.

And  whilst  it  perpetuates  the  ordinary  incentive  to  crime,
it  weakens  the  restraints.

As  a  check  or  deterring  motive,  as  an  inducement  to  abstain
from  crime,  the  fear  of  public  disapprobation,  with  its  countless
train  of  evils,  is  scarcely  less  effectual  than  the  fear  of  legal
punishment.  To  the  purpose  of  forming  the  moral  character,  of
rooting  in  the  soul  a  prompt  aversion  from  crime,  it  is  infinitely
more  effectual.

The  help  of  the  hangman  and  the  gaoler  would  seldom  be
called  for,  if  the  opinion  of  the  great  body  of  the  people  were


Jurisprudence  determined.  131

cleared  of  the  prejudice  in  question,  and,  therefore,  fell  heavily  Lect.  Ill
upon  all  offenders  against  property.  If  the  general  opinion  were  *
thoroughly  cleared  of  that  prejudice,  it  would  greatly  weaken
the  temptations  to  crime,  by  its  salutary  influence  on  the  moral
character  of  the  multitude :  The  motives  which  it  would  oppose
to  those  temptations,  would  be  scarcely  less  eflfectual  than  the
motives  which  are  presented  by  the  law :  And  it  would  heighten
the  terrors,  and  strengthen  the  restraints  of  the  law,  by  engaging
a  countless  host  of  eager  and  active  volunteers  in  the  service  of
criminal  justice.  If  the  people  saw  distinctly  the  tendencies  of
offences  against  property ;  if  the  people  saw  distinctly  the  ten-
dencies and  the  grounds  of  the  punishments ;  and  if  they  were,
therefore,  bent  upon  pursuing  the  criminals  to  justice ;  the  laws
whicli  prohibit  these  offences  would  seldom  be  broken  with
impunity,  and,  by  consequence,  would  seldom  be  broken.  An
enlightened  people  were  a  better  auxiliary  to  the  judge  than  an
army  of  policemen.

But,  in  consequence  of  the  prejudice  in  question,  the  fear  of
public  disapprobation  scarcely  operates  upon  the  poor  to  the  end
of  restraining  them  from  offences  against  the  property  of  the
wealthier  classes.  For  every  man's  public  is  formed  of  his  own
class :  of  those  with  whom  he  associates :  of  those  whose  favour-
able or  unfavourable  opinion  sweetens  or  embitters  his  life.  The
poor  man's  public  is  formed  of  the  poor.  And  the  crimes,  which
affect  merely  the  property  of  the  wealthier  classes,  are  certainly
regarded  with  little,  or  rather  with  no  abhorrence,  by  the  indigent
and  ignorant  portion  of  the  working  people.  Not  perceiving
that  such  crimes  are  pernicious  to  all  classes,  but  considering
property  to  be  a  benefit  in  which  they  have  no  share,  and  which
is  enjoyed  by  others  at  their  expense,  the  indigent  and  ignorant
portion  of  the  working  people  are  prone  to  consider  such  crimes
as  reprisals  made  upon  usurpers  and  enemies.  They  regard  the
criminal  with  sympathy  rather  than  with  indignation.  They
rather  incline  to  favour,  or,  at  least,  to  wink  at  his  escape,  than
to  lend  their  hearty  aid  towards  bringing  him  to  justice.

Those  who  have  inquired  into  the  causes  of  crimes,  and  into
the  means  of  lessening  their  number,  have  commonly  expected
magnificent  results  from  an  improved  system  of  punishments.
And  I  admit  that  something  might  be  done  by  a  judicious  mitiga-
tion of  punishments,  and  by  removing  that  frequent  inclination  to
abet  the  escape  of  a  criminal  which  springs  from  their  repulsive
severity.  Something  might  also  be  accomplished  by  improve-
ments in  prison-discipline,  and  by  providing  a  refuge  for  criminals


132  The  Province  of

Lect.  Ill who  have  suffered  their  punishments. For  the  stigma  of  legal
' punishment  is  commonly  indelible;  and,  by  debarring  the  un-
happy criminal  from  the  means  of  living  honestly,  forces  him
on  further  crimes.

But  nothing  but  the  diffusion  of  knowledge  through  the  great
mass  of  the  people  will  go  to  the  root  of  the  evil  Nothing  but
this  will  cure  or  alleviate  the  poverty  which  is  the  ordinary
incentive  to  crime.  Nothing  but  this  will  extirpate  their  pre-
judices, and  correct  their  moral  sentiments :  will  lay  them  under
the  restraints  which  are  imposed  by  enlightened  opinion,  and  which
operate  so  potently  on  the  higher  and  more  cultivated  classes.

The  evils  which  I  have  now  mentioned,  with  many  which  I
pass  in  silence,  flow  from  one  of  the  prejudices  which  enslave
the  popular  mind.  The  advantages  at  which  I  have  pointed,
with  many  which  I  leave  unnoticed,  would  follow  the  emancipa-
tion of  the  multitude  from  that  single  error.

And  this,  with  other  prejudices,  might  be  expelled  from
their  understandings  and  affections,  if  they  had  mastered  the
broad  principles  of  the  science  of  political  economy,  and  could
make  the  easiest  applications  of  those  simple,  though  command-
ing truths.

The  functions  of  paper-money,  the  incidence  of  taxes,  with
other  of  the  nicer  points  which  are  presented  by  this  science,
the  multitude,  it  is  probable,  will  never  understand  distinctly :
and  their  opinions  on  such  points  (if  ever  they  shall  think  of
them  at  all)  will,  it  is  most  likely,  be  always  taken  from  authority.
But  the  importance  of  those  nicer  points  dwindles  to  nothing,
when  they  are  compared  with  the  true  reasons  which  call  for
the  institution  of  property,  and  with  the  effect  of  the  principle
of  population  on  the  price  of  labour.  For  if  these  (which  are
not  difficult)  were  clearly  apprehended  by  the  many,  they  would
be  raised  from  penury  to  comfort :  from  the  necessity  of  toiling
like  cattle,  to  the  enjoyment  of  sufficient  leisure :  from  ignorance
and  brutishness,  to  knowledge  and  refinement :  firom  abject  sub-
jection, to  the  independence  which  commands  respect

If  my  limits  would  permit  me  to  dwell  upon  the  topic  at
length,  I  could  show,  by  many  additional  and  pregnant  examples,
that  the  multitude  might  clearly  apprehend  the  leading  prmdples
of  ethics,  and  also  of  the  various  sciences  which  are  nearly  related
to  ethics :  and  that,  if  they  had  seized  these  principles,  and  could
reason  distinctly  and  justly,  all  the  more  momentous  of  the
derivative  practical  truths  would  find  access  to  their  under-
jstandings  and  expel  the  antagonist  errors.


Jurisprtidence  determined.  133

And  the  multitude  (in  civilized  communities)  would  soon  Lect.  Ill
apprehend  these  principles,  and  would  soon  acquire  the  talent  ^'""^'
of  reasoning  distinctly  and  justly,  if  one  of  the  weightiest  of  the
duties,  which  Grod  has  laid  upon  governments,  were  performed
with  fidelity  and  zeal  For,  if  we  must  construe  those  duties
by  the  principles  of  general  utility,  it  is  not  less  incumbent  on
governments  to  forward  the  diffusion  of  knowledge,  than  to  pro-
tect their  subjects  from  one  another  by  a  due  administration  of
justice,  or  to  defend  them  by  a  military  force  from  the  attacks
of  external  enemies.  A  small  fraction  of  the  sums  which  are
squandered  in  needless  war,  would  provide  complete  instruction
for  the  working  people :  would  give  this  important  class  that
portion  in  the  knowledge  of  the  age,  which  consists  with  the
nature  of  their  callings,  and  with  the  necessity  of  toiling  for  a
livelihood.

It  appears,  then,  that  the  ignorance  of  the  multitude  is  not
altogether  invincible,  though  the  principle  of  general  utility  be
the  index  to  God's  commands,  and,  therefore,  the  proximate  test
of  positive  law  and  morality.

If  ethical  science  must  be  gotten  by  consulting  the  principle
of  utility,  if  it  rest  upon  observation  and  induction  applied  to
the  tendencies  of  actions,  if  it  be  matter  of  acquired  knowledge
and  not  of  immediate  consciousness,  much  of  it  (I  admit)  will
ever  be  hidden  from  the  multitude,  or  will  ever  be  taken  by  the
multitude  on  authority,  testimony,  or  trust.  For  an  inquiry
into  the  tendencies  of  actions  embraces  so  spacious  a  field,  that
none  but  the  comparatively  few,  who  study  the  science  assidu-
ously, can  apply  the  principle  extensively  to  received  or  positive
rules,  and  determine  how  far  they  accord  with  its  genuine  sug-
gestions or  dictates.

But  the  multitude  might  clearly  understand  the  elements  or
groundwork  of  the  science,  together  with  the  more  momentous
of  the  derivative  practical  truths.  To  that  extent,  they  might
be  freed  from  the  dominion  of  authority :  from  the  necessity  of
blindly  persisting  in  hereditary  opinions  and  practices;  or  of
turning  and  veering,  for  want  of  directing  principles,  with  every
wind  of  doctrine.

Nor  i9  this  the  only  advantage  which  would  follow  the
spread  of  those  elements  amongst  the  great  body  of  the  people.

If  the  elements  of  ethical  science  were  widely  diffused^  the
science  would  advance  with  proportionate  rapidity.


134  The  Province  of

Lect.  Ill  If  the  minds  of  the  many  were  informed  and  invigorated,

their  coarse  and  sordid  pleasures,  and  their  stupid  indiflference
about  knowledge,  would  be  supplanted  by  refined  amusements,
and  by  liberal  curiosity.  A  numerous  body  of  recruits  from  the
lower  of  the  middle  classes,  and  even  from  the  higher  classes  of
the  working  people,  would  thicken  the  slender  ranks  of  the  read-
ing and  reflecting  public :  the  public  which  occupies  its  leisure
with  letters,  science,  and  philosophy ;  whose  opinion  determines
the  success  or  failure  of  books ;  and  whose  notice  and  favour  are
naturally  courted  by  the  writers.

And  until  that  public  shall  be  much  extended,  shall  embrace
a  considerable  portion  of  the  middle  and  working  people,  the
science  of  ethics,  with  all  the  various  sciences  which  are  nearly
related  to  ethics,  will  advance  slowly.

It  was  the  opinion  of  Mr.  Locke,  and  I  fully  concur  in  the
opinion,  that  there  is  no  peculiar  uncertainty  in  the  subject
or  matter  of  these  sciences :  that  the  great  and  extraordinary
difficulties,  by  which  their  advancement  is  impeded,  are  extrin-
sick;  are  opposed  by  sinister  interests,  or  by  prejudices  which
are  the  oflFspring  of  such  interests :  that,  if  they  who  seek,  or
aflfect  to  seek  the  truth,  would  pursue  it  with  obstinate  applica-
tion and  with  due  '  indifferency'  they  might  frequently  hit  upon
the  object  which  they  profess  to  look  for.

Now  few  of  them  will  pursue  it  with  this  requisite  '  indif-
ferency'  or  impartiality,  so  long  as  the  bulk  of  the  public,
which  determines  the  fate  of  their  labours,  shall  continue  to
be  formed  from  the  classes  which  are  elevated  by  rank  or
opulence,  and  from  the  peculiar  professions  or  callings  which
are  distinguished  by  the  name  of  '  liberal'

In  the  science  of  ethics,  and  in  all  the  various  sciences
which  are  nearly  related  to  ethics,  your  only  sure  guide  is
general  utility.  If  thinkers  and  writers  would  stick  to  it
honestly  and  closely,  they  would  frequently  enrich  these
sciences  with  additional  truths,  or  would  do  them  good  service
by  weeding  them  of  nonsense  and  error.  But,  since  the  peculiar
interests  of  particular  and  narrow  classes  are  always  somewhat
adverse  to  the  interests  of  the  great  majority,  it  is  hardly  to  be
expected  of  writers,  whose  reputation  depends  upon  such  classes,
that  they  should  fearlessly  tread  the  path  which  is  indicated  by
the  general  well-being.  The  indifferency  in  the  pursuit  of  truth
which  is  so  earnestly  inculcated  by  Mr.  Locke,  is  hardly  to  be
expected  of  writers  who  occupy  so  base  a  position.  Knowing
that  a  fraction  of  the  community  can  make  or  mar  their  reputa-


Jurisprudence  determined.  135

tion,  they  unconsciously  or  purposely  accommodate  their  con- Lect.  Ill
elusions  to  the  prejudices of  that  narrower  public. Or,  to ' '^
borrow  the  expressive  language  of  this  greatest  and  best  of
philosophers, '  they begin with espousing the well -endowed
opinions  in  fashion ;  and,  then,  seek  arguments  to  show  their
beauty,  or  to  varnish  and  disguise  their  deformity.'

The  treatise  by  Dr.  Paley  on  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy  ex-
emplifies the  natural  tendency  of  narrow  and  domineering  interests
to  pervert  the  course  of  inquiry  from  its  legitimate  purpose.

As  men  go,  this  celebrated  and  influential  writer  was  a
wise  and  a  virtuous  man.  By  the  qualities  of  his  head  and
heart,  by  the  cast  of  his  talents  and  affections,  he  was  fitted,
in  a  high  degree,  to  seek  for  ethical  truth,  and  to  expound  it
successfully  to  others.  He  had  a  clear  and  just  understanding ;  ,
a  hearty  contempt  of  paradox,  and  of  ingenious,  but  useless
refinements ;  no  fastidious  disdain  of  the  working  people,  but  a
warm  sympathy  with  their  homely  enjoyments  and  sufferings.
He  knew  that  they  are  more  numerous  than  all  the  rest  of  the
community,  and  he  felt  that  they  are  more  important  than  all
the  rest  of  the  community  to  the  eye  of  unclouded  reason  and
impartial  benevolence.

But  the  sinister  influence  of  the  position  which  he  unluckily
occupied,  cramped  his  generous  affections,  and  warped  the  recti-
tude of  his  understanding.

A  steady  pursuit  of  the  consequences  indicated  by  general
utility,  was  not  the  most  obvious  way  to  professional  advance-
ment, nor  even  the  short  cut  to  extensive  reputation.  For  there
was  no  impartial  public,  formed  from  the  community  at  large,
to  reward  and  encourage,  with  its  approbation,  an  inflexible
adherence  to  truth.

If  the  bulk  of  the  community  had  been  instructed,  so  far  as
their  position  will  permit,  he  might  have  looked  for  a  host  of
readers  from  the  middle  classes.  He  might  have  looked  for  a  host
of  readers  from  those  classes  of  the  working  people,  whose  wages
are  commonly  high,  whose  leisure  is  not  inconsiderable,  and  whose
mental  powers  are  called  into  frequent  exercise  by  the  natures  of
their  occupations  or  callings.  To  readers  of  the  middle  classes,  and
of  all  the  higher  classes  of  the  working  people,  a  well  made  and
honest  treatise  on  Moral  and  Political  Philosophy,  in  his  clear,
vivid,  downright,  English  style,  would  have  been  the  most  easy
and  attractive,  as  well  as  instructive  and  useful,  of  abstract  or
scientific  books.


1 38  The  Province  of

Lect.  Ill  which  the  science  is  clouded,  and  would  clear  it  from  most  of
its  uncertainties.  The  wish,  the  hope,  the  prediction  of  Mr.
Locke  would,  in  time,  be  accomplished :  and  '  ethics  would  rank
with  the  sciences  which  are  capable  of  demonstration.*  The
adepts  in  ethical,  as  well  as  in  mathematical  science,  would
commonly  agree  in  their  results :  And,  as  the  jar  of  tfieir  con-
clusions gradually  subsided,  a  body  of  doctrine  and  authority  to
which  the  multitude  might  trust  would  emerge  from  the  existing
chaos.  The  direct  examination  of  the  multitude  would  only
extend  to  the  elements,  and  to  the  easier,  though  more  momentous,
of  the  derivative  practical  truths.  But  none  of  their  opinions
would  be  adopted  blindly,  nor  would  any  of  their  opinions  be
obnoxious  to  groundless  and  capricious  change.  Though  most
or  many  of  their  opinions  would  still  be  taken  from  authority,
the  authority  to  which  they  would  trust  might  satisfy  the  most
scrupulous  reason.  In  the  unanimous  or  general  conscTit  of
numerous  and  impartial  inquirers,  they  would  find  that  mark  of
trustworthiness  which  justifies  reliance  on  authority,  wherever
we  are  debarred  from  the  opportunity  of  examining  the  evidence
for  ourselves.
The  second  With  regard,  then,  to  the  perplexing  difficulty  which  I  am

tol^he^^^ trying  to  solve  or  extenuate,  the  case  stands  thus :
theory  of  If  utility  be  the  proximate  test  of  positive  law  and  morality,

together  ^^  ^^  simply  impossible  that  positive  law  and  morality  should
with  the  be  free  from  defects  and  errors.  Or  (adopting  a  different,  though
answer^to  exactly  equivalent  expression)  if  the  principle  of  general  utility
that  be  our  guide  to  the  Divine  commands,  it  is  impossible  that  the

objection, rules  of  conduct  a^uxjdly  obtaining  amongst  mankind  should  accord
^StoZ  ^' completely  and  correctly  with  the  laws  established  by  the  Deity.
The  index  to  his  will  is  imperfect  and  uncertain. His  laws  are
signified  obscurely  to  those  upon  whom  they  are  binding,  and
are  subject  to  inevitable  and  involuntary  misconstruction.

For,  first,  positive  law  and  morality,  fashioned  on  the  prin-
ciple of  utility,  are  gotten  by  observation  and  induction  from
the  tendencies  of  human  actions :  from  what  can  be  known  or
conjectured,  by  means  of  observation  and  induction,  of  their
uniform  or  customary  efiFects  on  the  general  happiness  or  good.
Consequently,  tiU  these  actions  shall  be  marked  and  classed  with
perfect  completeness,  and  their  effects  observed  and  ascertained
with  similar  completeness,  positive  law  and  morality,  fashioned
on  the  principle  of  utility,  must  be  more  or  less  defective,  and
more  or  less  erroneous.  And  these  actions  being  infinitely
various,  and  their  effects  being  infinitely  diversified,  the  work


Jurisprudence  determined.  139

of  classing  them  completely,  and  of  collecting  their  effects  com-  Lect.  Ill
pletely,  transcends  the  limited  faculties  of  created  and  finite  '  *
beings.  As  the  experience  of  mankind  enlarges,  as  they  observe
more  extensively  and  accurately  and  reason  more  closely  and
precisely,  they  may  gradually  mend  the  defects  of  their  legal
and  moral  rules,  and  may  gradually  clear  their  rules  from  the
errors  and  nonsense  of  their  predecessors.  But,  though  they
may  constantly  approach,  they  certainly  will  never  attain  to  a
faultless  system  of  ethics :  to  a  system  perfectly  in  unison  with
the  dictates  of  general  utility,  and,  therefore,  perfectly  in  unison
with  the  benevolent  wishes  of  the  Deity.

And,  secondly y  if  utility  be  the  proximate  test  of  positive  law
and  morality,  the  defects  and  errors  of  popvlar  or  vulgar  ethics
will  scarcely  admit  of  a  remedy.  For,  if  ethical  truth  be  matter
of  science,  and  not  of  immediate  consciousness,  most  of  the
ethical  maxims,  which  govern  the  sentiments  of  the  multitude,
must  be  taken,  without  examination,  from  human  authority.
And  where  is  the  human  authority  upon  which  they  can  safely
rely  ?  Where  is  the  human  authority  bearing  such  marks  of
trustworthiness,  that  the  ignorant  may  hang  their  faith  upon  it
with  reasonable  assurance  ?  Reviewing  the  various  ages  and
the  various  nations  of  the  world,  reviewing  the  various  sects
which  have  divided  the  opinions  of  mankind,  we  find  conflicting
maxims  taught  with  equal  confidence,  and  received  with  equal
docility.  We  find  the  guides  of  the  multitude  moved  by  sinister
interests,  or  by  prejudices  which  are  the  offspring  of  such
interests.  We  find  them  stifling  inquiry,  according  to  the
measure  of  their  means :  upholding  with  fire  and  sword,  or  with
sophistry,  declamation  and  calumny,  the  theological  and  ethical
dogmas  which  they  impose  upon  their  prostrate  disciples.

Such  is  the  difiiculty. — The  only  solution  of  which  this
difficulty  seems  to  admit,  is  suggested  by  the  remarks  which  I
have  already  submitted  to  your  attention,  and  which  I  will  now
repeat  in  an  inverted  and  compendious  form.

In  the  first  place,  the  diffusion  of  ethical  science  amongst
the  great  bulk  of  mankind  will  gradually  remove  the  obstacles
which  prevent  or  retard  its  advancement.  The  field  of  human
conduct  being  infinite  or  immense,  it  is  impossible  that  human
understanding  should  embrace  and  explore  it  completely.  But,
by  the  general  difl'usion  of  knowledge  amongst  the  great  bulk  of
mankind,  by  the  impulse  and  the  direction  which  the  diffusion
will  give  to  inquiry,  many  of  the  defects  and  errors  in  existing
law  and  morality  will  in  time  be  supplied  and  corrected.


140


Tfu  Province  of


Lbct.  Ill  Secondly :  Though  the  many  must  trust  to  authority  for  a

'  number  of  subordinate  truths,  they  are  competent  to  examine

the  elements  which  are  the  groundwork  of  the  science  of  ethics,

and  to  infer  the  more  momentous  of  the  derivative  practical

consequences.

And,  thirdly,  as  the  science  of  ethics  advances,  and  is  cleared
of  obscurity  and  uncertainties,  they  who  are  debarred  from
opportunities  of  examining  the  science  extensively,  will  find  an
authority,  whereon  they  may  rationally  rely,  in  the  unanimous
or  general  agreement  of  searching  and  impartial  inquirers.^^


Lect.  IV

The  con-
nection of
the  fourth
with  the
third
lecture.


LECTURE  IV.

In  my  last  lecture,  I  endeavoured  to  answer  an  objection  which
may  be  urged  against  the  theory  of  utility.  And  to  the  purpose
of  linking  my  present  with  my  last  lecture,  I  will  now  restate,
in  a  somewhat  abridged  shape,  that  summary  of  the  objection
and  the  answer  with  which  I  concluded  my  discourse.

The  objection  may  be  put  briefly,  in  the  following  manner.

If  utility  be  the  proximate  test  of  positive  law  and  morality,
it  is  impossible  that  the  rules  of  conduct  actvxdly  obtaining
amongst  mankind  should  accord  completely  and  correctly  with
the  laws  established  by  the  Deity.  The  index  to  his  will  is
imperfect  and  uncertain.  His  laws  are  signified  obscurely  to
those  upon  whom  they  are  binding,  and  are  subject  to  inevitable
and  involuntary  misconstruction.

For,  fir^,  positive  law  and  morality,  fashioned  on  the  prin-
ciple of  utility,  are  gotten  by  observation  and  induction  from
the  tendencies  of  human  actions.  Consequently,  till  these
actions  shall  be  marked  and  classed  with  perfect  completeness,
and  their  effects  observed  and  ascertained  with  similar  complete-
ness, positive  law  and  morality,  fashioned  on  the  principle  of


**  The  experience  of  the  thirty  years
which  have  elapsed  since  the  foregoing
lecture  was  written  does  not  seem  to
justify  the  author's  sanguine  anticipa-
tions of  the  effects  of  the  spread  of  educa-
tion among  the  people,  but  it  must  be
observed  that,  as  little  or  no  attempt  has
been  made  to  give  the  sort  of  instruction
which  he  contemplated  (and  upon  which
alone  his  expectations  rested),  nothing
at  variance  with  these  consolatory  views
can  be  inferred.— S.  A.  {Ed,  1861.)

The  history  of  even  the  few  years
which  have  elapsed  since  the  date  of
the  above  note,  inspires  a  more  hopeful


view.  And  if  sound  conceptions  of  ethics
and  political  economy  have  in  our  own
country  penetrated  more  widely  and
deeply  than  a  few  years  ago  was  appa-
rent, I  believe  it  possible  to  discern,  in
the  writings  of  those  who  have  been
most  successful  in  diffusing  this  know-
ledge among  the  populace,  a  trace  at
least  of  Mr.  Austin's  influence  ;  an  influ-
ence far  more  powerful,  as  I  am  assured
by  those  conversant  with  his  living  dis-
course, than  can  be  estimated  by  those
conversant  only  with  the  remains  of  his
writings. — R.  C.


yurisprudence  determined.  141

utility,  must  be  more  or  less  defective,  and  more  or  less  erroneous. I^^ct.  IV
And,  these  actions  being  infinitely  various,  and  their  effects
being  infinitely  diversified,  the  work  of  classing  them  completely
and  of  collecting  their  effects  completely,  transcends  the  limited
faculties  of  created  and  finite  beings.

And,  secancUy,  if  utility  be  the  proximate  test  of  positive  law
and  morality,  the  defects  and  errors  of  popular  or  vulgar  ethics
will  scarcely  admit  of  a  remedy.  For  if  ethical  truth  be  matter
of  science,  and  not  of  immediate  consciousness,  most  of  the
ethical  maxims,  which  govern  the  sentiments  of  the  multitude,
must  be  taken  without  examination,  from  human  authority.

Such  is  the  objection. — The  only  answer  of  which  the
objection  will  admit,  is  suggested  by  the  remarks  which  I  offered
in  my  last  lecture,  and  which  I  repeated  at  its  close,  and  here
repeat  in  an  inverted  and  compendious  form.

In  the  first  place,  the  diffusion  of  ethical  science  amongst
the  great  bulk  of  mankind  wiU  gradually  remove  the  obstacles
which  prevent  or  retard  its  advancemerU.  The  field  of  human
conduct  being  infinite  or  immense,  it  is  impossible  that  human
understanding  should  embrace  and  explore  it  completely.  But,
by  the  general  diffusion  of  knowledge  amongst  the  great  bulk
of  mankind,  by  the  impulse  and  the  direction  which  the  diffusion
will  give  to  inquiry,  many  of  the  defects  and  errors  in  existing
law  and  morality  will  in  time  be  supplied  and  corrected.

Secondly :  Though  the  many  must  trust  to  authority  for  a
number  of  subordinate  truths,  they  are  competent  to  examine
the  elements  which  are  the  groundwork  of  the  science  of  ethics,
and  to  infer  the  more  momentous  of  the  derivative  practical
consequences.

And,  thirdly,  as  the  science  of  ethics  advances,  and  is  cleared
of  obscurity  and  uncertainties,  they,  who  are  debarred  from
opportunities  of  examining  the  science  extensively,  will  find  an
authority  whereon  they  may  rationally  rely,  in  the  unanimous
or  general  agreement  of  searching  and  impartial  inquirers.

But  this  answer,  it  must  be  admitted,  merely  extenu^ttes  the  Thesecond
objection. It  shows  that  law  and  morality  fashioned  on  the  ^^^f^^
principle  of  utility  might  approach  continually  and  indefinitely  theory  of
to  absolute  perfection. But  it  grants  that  law  and  morality  resumed,
fashioned  on  the  principle  of  utility  is  inevitably  defective  and
erroneous :  that,  if  the  laws  established  by  the  Deity  must  be
construed  by  the  principle  of  utility,  the  most  perfect  system  of
ethics  which  the  wit  of  man  could  conceive,  were  a  partial  and
inaccurate  copy  of  the  Divine  original  or  pattern.


142


The  Province  of


Lect.  IV


A  further
answer  to
that
second
objection.


And  this  (it  may  be  urged)  disproves  the  theory  which
makes  the  principle  of  utility  the  index  to  the  Divine  pleasure.
For  it  consists  not  with  the  known  wisdom  and  the  known
benevolence  of  the  Deity,  that  he  should  signify  his  commands
defectively  and  obscurely  to  those  upon  whom  they  are  binding.

But  admitting  the  imperfection  of  utility  as  the  index  to  the
Divine  pleasure,  it  is  impossible  to  argue,  from  this  its  admitted
imperfection,  '  that  utility  is  not  the  index/

Owing  to  causes  which  are  hidden  from  human  understand-
ing, all  the  works  of  the  Deity  which  are  open  to  human  obser-
vation are  alloyed  with  imperfection  or  evil.  That  the  Deity
should  signify  his  commands  defectively  and  obscurely,  is  strictly
in  keeping  or  unison  with  the  rest  of  his  inscrutable  ways.  The
objection  now  in  question  proves  too  much,  and,  therefore,  is
untenable.  If  you  argue  '  that  the  principle  of  utility  is  ivot  the
index  to  his  laws,  because  the  principle  of  utility  were  an  im-
perfect index  to  his  laws,'  you  argue  *  that  all  his  works  are  in
fad  exempt  from  evil,  because  imperfection  or  evil  is  inconsistent
with  his  wisdom  and  goodness.'  The  former  of  these  arguments
implies  the  latter,  or  is  merely  an  application  of  the  sweeping
position  to  one  of  innumerable  cases.

Accordingly,  if  the  objection  now  in  question  will  lie  to  the
theory  of  utility,  a  similar  objection  wiU  lie  to  every  theory  of
ethics  which  supposes  that  any  of  our  duties  are  set  or  imposed
by  the  Deity.

The  objection  is  founded  on  the  alleged  inconsistency  of  evil
with  his  perfect  wisdom  and  goodness.  But  the  notion  or  idea
of  evil  or  imperfection  is  involved  in  the  connected  notions  of
law,  duty,  and  sanction.  For,  seeing  that  every  law  imposes  a
restraint,  every  law  is  an  evil  of  itself :  and,  unless  it  be  the
work  of  malignity,  or  proceed  from  consummate  folly,  it  also  sup-
poses an  evil  which  it  is  designed  to  prevent  or  remedy.  Law,
like  medicine,  is  a  preventive  or  remedy  of  evil:  and,  if  the  world
were  free  from  evil,  the  notion  and  the  name  would  be  unknown.

*  That  his  laws  are  signified  obscurely,  if  utility  be  the  index
to  his  laws,'  is  rather  a  presumption  in  favour  of  the  theory  which
makes  utility  our  guide.  Analogy  might  lead  us  to  expect
that  they  would  be  signified  obscurely.  For  laws  or  commands
suppose  the  existence  of  evils  which  they  are  designed  to  remedy:
let  them  be  signified  as  they  may,  they  remedy  those  evils  im-
perfectly: and  the  imperfection  which  they  are  designed  to  remedy,
and  of  which  the  remedy  partakes,  might  naturally  be  expected
to  show  itself  in  the  mode  by  which  they  are  manifested.


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 43

My  answer  to  the  objection  is  the  very  argument  which  the  Leot.  IV
excellent  Butler,  in  his  admirable  '  Analogy/  has  wielded  in  de-  '  '  '
fence  of  Christianity  with  the  vigour  and  the  skill  of  a  master.

Considered  as  a  system  of  rules  for  the  guidance  of  human
conduct,  the  Christian  religion  is  defective.  There  are  also
circumstances,  regarding  the  manner  of  its  promulgation,  which
human  reason  vainly  labours  to  reconcile  with  the  wisdom  and
goodness  of  God.  Still  it  were  absurd  to  argue  *that  the  religion
is  not  of  God,  because  the  religion  is  defective,  and  is  imperfectly
revealed  to  mankind.'  For  the  objection  is  founded  on  the
alleged  inconsistency  of  evil  with  his  perfect  wisdom  and  good-
ness. And,  since  evil  pervades  the  universe,  in  so  far  as  it  is
open  to  our  inspection,  a  similar  objection  will  lie  to  every  system
of  religion  which  ascribes  the  existence  of  the  universe  to  a  wise
and  benevolent  Author.  Whoever  believes  that  the  universe  is
the  work  of  benevolence  and  wisdom,  is  concluded,  or  estopped,
by  his  own  religious  creed,  from  taking  an  objection  of  the  kind
to  the  creed  or  system  of  another.

Analogy  (as  Butler  has  shown)  would  lead  us  to  expect  the
imperfection  upon  which  the  objection  is  founded.  Something
of  the  imperfection  which  runs  through  the  frame  of  the  universe,
would  probably  be  found  in  a  revelation  emanating  from  the
Author  of  the  universe.

And  here  my  solution  of  the  diflSculty  necessarily  stops.  A
complete  solution  is  manifestly  impossible.  To  reconcile  the
existence  of  evil  with  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  God  is  a  task
which  surpasses  the  powers  of  our  narrow  and  feeble  understand-
ings. This  is  a  deep  which  our  reason  is  too  short  to  fathom.
From  the  decided  predominance  of  good  which  is  observable  in
the  order  of  the  world,  and  from  the  manifold  marks  of  wisdom
which  the  order  of  the  world  exhibits,  we  may  draw  the  cheer-
ing inference  'that  its  Author  is  good  and  wise.'  Why  the
world  which  he  has  made  is  not  altogether  perfect,  or  why  a
benevolent  Deity  tolerates  the  existence  of  evil,  or  what  (if  I
may  so  express  myself)  are  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  his
benevolence,  are  clearly  questions  which  it  were  impossible  to
solve,  and  which  it  were  idle  to  agitate  although  they  admitted
a  solution.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know,  that  the  Deity  is
perfectly  good ;  and  that,  since  he  is  perfectly  good,  he  wills
the  happiness  of  his  creatures.  This  is  a  truth  of  the  greatest
practical  moment.  For  the  cast  of  the  affections,  which  we
attribute  to  the  Deity,  determines,  for  the  most  part,  the  cast  of
our  moral  sentiments.


144

Lect.  IV

The  hypo-
thesis of  a
moral
sense,
briefly  in-
troduced.


'A  moral
sense/  'a
common
sense/  'a
moral  in-
stinct,' *a
principle
of  reflec-
tion or  con-
science,'
'a  practical
reason,'
'  innate
practical
prin-
ciples,'
'  connate
practical
prin-
ciples,*
etc.  etc.,
are  various
expres-
sions for
oneandthe
same  hypo-
thesis.


The  hypo-
thesis in
question
involves
two  as-
sumptions.

The  first
of  the  two
assump-


T/ie  Province  of

I  admit,  then,  that  God's  commands  are  imperfectly  signified
to  man,  supposing  we  must  gather  his  commands  from  the
tendencies  of  human  actions.  But  I  deny  that  this  imperfection
is  a  conclusive  objection  to  the  theory  which  makes  the  principle
of  utility  our  guide  or  index  to  his  will.  Whoever  would  dis-
prove the  theory  which  makes  utility  our  guide,  must  produce
another  principle  that  were  a  surer  and  a  better  guide.

Now,  if  we  reject  tUUity  as  the  index  to  God*s  commands,
we  must  assent  to  the  theory  or  hypothesis  which  supposes  a
moral  sense.  One  of  the  adverse  theories,  which  regard  the
nature  of  that  index,  is  certainly  true.  He  has  left  us  to
presume  his  commands  from  the  tendencies  of  human  actions,  or
he  has  given  us  a  peculiar  sense  of  which  his  commands  are  the
objects.

All  the  hypotheses,  regarding  the  nature  of  that  index,  which
discard  the  principle  of  utility,  are  built  upon  the  supposition  of
a  peculiar  or  appropriate  sense.  The  language  of  each  of  these
hypotheses  differs  from  the  language  of  the  others,  but  the
import  of  each  resembles  the  import  of  the  rest.

By  *  a  Tfioral  sense*  with  which  my  understanding  is  fur-
nished, I  discern  the  human  actions  which  the  Deity  enjoins
and  forbids:  And,  since  you  and  the  rest  of  the  species  are
provided  with  a  like  organ,  it  is  clear  that  this  sense  of  mine  is
'the  common  sense  of  mankind.'  By  'a  moral  instinct  *  with
which  the  Deity  has  endowed  me,  I  am  urged  to  some  of  these
actions,  and  am  warned  to  forbear  from  others.  '  A  principle  of
reflection  or  conscience,'  which  Butler  assures  me  I  possess,  in-
forms me  of  their  rectitude  or  pravity.  Or  '  the  innate  practical
principles*  which  Locke  has  presumed  to  question,  define  the
duties,  which  Grod  has  imposed  upon  me,  with  infallible  clear-
ness and  certainty.

These  and  other  phrases  are  various  but  equivalent  expres-
sions for  one  and  the  same  hypothesis.  The  only  observable
difference  between  these  various  expressions  consists  in  this:
that  some  denote  sentiments  which  are  excited  by  human  actions,
whilst  others  denote  the  commands  to  which  those  sentiments
are  the  index.

The  hypothesis  of  a  moral  sense,  or  the  hypothesis  which  is
variously  signified  by  these  various  but  equivalent  expressions,
involves  two  assumptions.

The  first  of  the  two  assumptions  involved  by  the  hypothesis
in  question,  may  be  stated,  in  general  expressions,  thus :

Certain  sentiments  or  feelings  of  approbation  or  disapproba-


Jurisprudence  determined.  145

tion  accompany  our  conceptions  of  certain  human  actions. They Lect.  iv
are  neither  efifects  of  reflection  upon  the  tendencies  of  the  actions  tiona'in-
which  excite  them,  nor  are  they  efifects  of  education. A  concep-  "^^^^  ^^
tion  of  any  of  these  actions  would  be  accompanied  by  certain  of  thesis'^m
these  sentiments,  although  we  had  not  adverted  to  its  good  or  ^^^°P'
evil  tendency,  nor  knew  the  opinions  of  others  with  regard  to  general  ex-
actions of  the  class.  pressions.;

In  a  word,  that  portion  of  the  hypothesis  in  question  which
I  am  now  stating  is  purely  negative.  We  are  gifted  with  moral
sentiments  which  are  tUtimate  or  inscrutable  facta :  which  are  not
the  consequences  of  reflection  upon  the  tendencies  of  human
actions,  which  are  not  the  consequences  of  the  education  that
we  receive  from  our  feUow-men,  which  are  not  the  consequences
or  efifects  of  any  antecedents  or  causes  placed  within  the  reach
of  our  inspection.  Our  conceptions  of  certain  actions  are
accompanied  by  certain  sentiments,  and  there  is  an  end  of  our
knowledge.

For  the  sake  of  brevity,  we  may  say  that  these  sentiments
are  '  instinctive,'  or  we  may  call  them  '  moral  instincts.'

For  the  terms  'instinctive,'  and  'instinct,'  are  merely
negative  expressions.  They  merely  denote  our  own  ignorance.
They  mean  that  the  phenomena  of  which  we  happen  to  be
talking  are  n>ot  preceded  by  causes  which  man  is  able  to  per-
ceive. For  example.  The  bird,  it  is  commonly  said,  builds
her  nest  by  '  instinct :'  or  the  skill  which  the  bird  evinces  in
the  building  of  her  nest,  is  commonly  styled  'instinctive.'
That  is  to  say.  It  is  not  the  product  of  experiments  made  by
the  bird  herself ;  it  has  not  been  imparted  to  the  bird  by  the
teaching  or  example  of  others;  nor  is  it  the  consequence  or
effect  of  any  antecedent  or  cause  open  to  our  observation.

The  remark  which  I  have  now  made  upon  the  terms  '  in-
stinctive' and  'instinct,'  is  not  interposed  needlessly.  For,
though  their  true  import  is  extremely  simple  and  trivial,  they
are  apt  to  dazzle  and  confound  us  (unless  we  advert  to  it
steadily)  with  the  false  and  cheating  appearance  of  a  mysterious
and  magnificent  meaning.

In  order  that  we  may  clearly  apprehend  the  nature  of  these  The  fore-
'  moral  instincts,'  I  wiU  descend  from  general  expressions  to  an  ^SiTement
imaginary  case.  of  the  first

I  will  not  imagine  the  case  which  is  fancied  by  Dr.  Paley :  ^™e^-

for  I  think  it  ill  fitted  to  bring  out  the  meaning  sharply. I  empiified

will  merely  take  the  liberty  of  borrowing  his  solitary  savage :  a  piauf^'  by

child  abandoned  in  the  wilderness  inmiediately  after  its  birth,  an  imagin-
ary case.
VOL.  I.  L  -^


1 46  The  Province  of

Lect.  IV and growing  to the  age  of  manhood in  estrangement  from
' human  society.

Having  gotten  my  subject,  I  proceed  to  deal  with  him  after
my  own  fashion.

I  imagine  that  the  savage,  as  he  wanders  in  search  of  prey,
meets,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  with  a  man.  This  man  is
a  hunter,  and  is  carrying  a  deer  which  he  has  killed.  The
savage  pounces  upon  it.  The  hunter  holds  it  fast.  And,  in
order  that  he  may  remove  this  obstacle  to  the  satisfaction  of  his
gnawing  hunger,  the  savage  seizes  a  stone,  and  knocks  the
himter  on  the  head. — ^Now,  according  to  the  hypothesis  in
question,  the  savage  is  affected  with  rerruyrse  at  the  thought  of
the  deed  which  he  has  done.  He  is  affected  with  more  than
the  compassum  which  is  excited  by  the  sufferings  of  another,
and  which,  considered  by  itself,  amounts  not  to  a  moral  senti-
ment. He  is  affected  with  the  more  complex  emotion  of
self^ondemnation  or  remorse:  with  a  consciousness  of  guilt:
with  the  feeling  that  haunts  and  tortures  civilized  or  cultivated
men,  whenever  they  violate  rules  which  accord  with  their
notions  of  utility,  or  which  they  have  learned  from  others  to
regard  with  habitual  veneration.  He  feels  as  you  would  feel,
in  case  you  had  committed  a  murder:  in  case  you  had  killed
another,  in  an  attempt  to  rob  him  of  his  goods :  or  in  case  you
had  killed  another  under  any  combination  of  circumstances,
which,  agreeably  to  your  notions  of  utility,  would  make  the  act
a  pernicious  one,  or,  agreeably  to  the  moral  impressions  which
you  have  passively  received  from  others,  would  give  to  the  act
of  killing  the  quality  and  the  name  of  an  injury.

Again ;  Shortly  after  the  incident  which  I  have  now
imagined,  he  meets  with  a  second  hunter  whom  he  also  knocks
on  the  head.  But,  in  this  instance,  he  is  not  the  aggressor.
He  is  attacked,  beaten,  woimded,  without  the  shadow  of  a
provocation :  and  to  prevent  a  deadly  blow  which  is  aimed  at
his  own  head,  he  lolls  the  wanton  assailant. — Now  here,  accord-
ing to  the  hypothesis,  he  is  7u>t  affected  with  remorsa  The
sufferings  of  the  dying  man  move  him,  perhaps,  to  compassion :
but  his  conscience  (as  the  phrase  goes)  is  tranquil  He  feels  as
you  would  feel,  after  a  justifiable  homicide :  after  you  had  shot
a  highwayman  in  defence  of  your  goods  and  your  life :  or  after
you  had  killed  another  imder  any  combination  of  circumstances,
which,  agreeably  to  your  notions  of  utility,  would  render  IHIlmg
innocuous,  or,  agreeably  to  the  current  morality  of  your  age  and
country,  would  render  the  killing  of  another  a  just  or  lawful  action.


yurisprudence  determined.  147

That  yon  should  feel  remorse  if  you  kill  in  an  attempt  to  Lect.  iy
rob,  and  should  not  be  affected  with  remorse  if  you  kill  a
murderous  robber,  is  a  difference  which  I  readily  account  for
without  the  supposition  of  an  instinct.  The  law  of  your
country  distinguishes  the  cases:  and  the  current  morality  of
your  country  accords  with  the  law.

Supposing  that  you  have  never  adverted  to  the  reasons  of
that  distinction,  the  difference  between  your  feelings  is  easily
explained  by  imputing  it  to  education :  Meaning,  by  the  term
ediuxUion,  the  influence  of  authority  and  example  on  opinions,
sentiments,  and  habits.

Supposing  that  you  have  ever  adverted  to  the  reasons  of
that  distinction,  you,  of  course,  have  been  struck  with  its
obvious  utility. — Generally  speaking,  the  intentional  killing  of
another  is  an  act  of  pernicious  tendency.  K  the  act  were
frequent,  it  would  annihilate  that  general  security,  and  that
general  feeling  of  security,  which  are,  or  should  be,  the  prin-
cipal ends  of  political  society  and  law.  But  to  this  there  are
exceptions :  and  the  intentional  killing  of  a  robber  who  aims  at
your  property  and  life,  is  amongst  those  exceptions.  Instead  of
being  adverse  to  the  principal  ends  of  law,  it  rather  promotes
those  ends.  It  answers  the  purpose  of  the  punishment  which
the  law  inflicts  upon  murderers:  and  it  also  accomplishes  a
purpose  which  punishment  is  too  tardy  to  reach.  The  death
inflicted  on  the  aggressor  tends,  as  his  punishment  would
tend,  to  deter  from  the  crime  of  murder :  and  it  also  prevents,
what  his  punishment  would  not  prevent,  the  completion  of
the  murderous  design  in  the  specific  or  particular  instance. —
Supposing  that  you  have  ever  adverted  to  these  and  similar
reasons,  the  difference  between  your  feelings  is  easily  explained
by  imputing  it  to  a  perception  of  lUility.  You  see  that  the
tendencies  of  the  act  vary  with  the  circumstances  of  the  act,
and  your  sentiments  in  regard  to  the  act  vary  with  those
varying  tendencies.

But  the  difference,  supposed  by  the  hypothesis,  between  the
feelings  of  the  savage,  cannot  be  imputed  to  education.  For  the
savage  has  lived  in  estrangement  from  human  society.

Nor  can  the  supposed  difference  be  imputed  to  a  perception
of  utility. — He  knocks  a  man  on  the  head,  that  he  may  satisfy
his  gnawing  hunger.  He  knocks  another  on  the  head,  that  he
may  escape  from  woimds  and  death.  So  far,  then,  as  these
different  actions  exclusively  regard  himself,  they  are  equally
good:  and  so  far  as  these different  actions  regard  the  men


1 4  8  The  Province  of

Lect.  IV  whom  he  kills,  they  are  equally  bad  As  tried  by  the  test  of
"  utility,  ani  with  the  lights  whidi  the  savage  possesses,  the  moral
qualities  of  the  two  actions  are  precisely  the  same.  If  we  sup-
pose it  possible  that  he  adverts  to  considerations  of  utility,  and
that  his  sentiments  in  respect  to  these  actions  are  determined
by  considerations  of  utility,  we  must  infer  that  he  remembers
both  of  them  with  similar  feelings:  with  similar  feelings  of
complacency,  as  the  actions  regard  himself ;  with  similar  f edings
of  regret,  as  they  regard  the  sufferings  of  the  slain.

To  the  socifid  man  the  difference  between  these  actions,  as
tried  by  the  test  of  utility,  were  immensa — The  general  happi-
ness or  good  demands  the  institution  of  property:  that  the
exclusive  enjoyment  conferred  by  the  law  upon  the  owner  shall
not  be  disturbed  by  private  and  unauthorised  persons :  that  no
man  shall  take  from  another  the  product  of  his  labour  or  saving,
without  the  permission  of  the  owner  previously  signified,  or
without  the  authority  of  the  sovereign  acting  for  the  common
weaL  Were  want,  however  intense,  an  excuse  for  violations  of
property ;  could  every  man  who  hungers  take  from  another  with
impunity,  and  slay  the  ownei;  with  impunity  if  the  owner  stood
on  his  possession;  that  beneficent  institution  would  become
nugatory,  and  the  ends  of  government  and  law  would  be
defeated — ^And,  on  the  other  hand,  the  very  principle  of  utility
which  demands  the  institution  of  property  requires  that  an
attack  upon  the  body  shall  be  repelled  at  the  instant :  that,  if
the  impending  evil  cannot  be  averted  otherwise,  the  aggressor
shall  be  slain  on  the  spot  by  the  party  whose  life  is  in  jeopardy.
But  these  are  considerations  which  would  not  present  them-
selves to  the  solitary  savage.  They  involve  a  number  of  notions
with  which  his  mind  would  be  unfurnished  They  involve  the
notions  of  political  society ;  of  supreme  government ;  of  positive
law ;  of  legal  right ;  of  legal  duty ;  of  legal  injury.  The  good
and  the  evil  of  the  two  actions,  in  so  far  as  the  two  actions
would  affect  the  immediate  parties,  is  all  that  the  savage  could
perceive.

The  difference,  supposed  by  the  hypothesis,  between  the

feelings  of  the  savage,  must,  therefore,  be  ascribed  to  a  moral

sense,  or  to  innate  practical  principles. Or  (speaking  in  homelier

but  plainer  language)  he  would  regard  the  two  actions  with

different  sentiments,  we  know  not  why.

The  first  of The  first  of  the  two  assumptions  involved  by  the  hypothesis

Bumptions ^^  question  is,  therefore,  this. — Certain  inscrutable  sentiments

involved of  approbation  or  disapprobation  accompany  our  conceptions  of


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 49

certain  human  actions. They  are  not  begotten  by  reflection Lect.  iv
upon  the  tendencies  of  the  actions  which  excite  them,  nor  are  by  the  hy-
they  instilled  into  our  minds  by  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-  pothesis  m
men. They  are  simple  elements  of  our nature. They  are  SriSy^re-
ultimate  facts. They  are  not  the  effects  of  causes,  or  are  not  stated  in
the consequents of antecedents,  which are  open to human  preasions.
observation.

And,  thus  far,  the  hypothesis  in  question  has  been  embraced
by  sceptics  as  well  as  by  religionists.  For  example,  It  is
supposed  by  David  Hume,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Principles  of
Morals,  that  some  of  our  moral  sentiments  spring  from  a  percqh
tion  of  viUUy :  but  he  also  appears  to  imagine  that  ot?iers  are
not  to  be  analyzed,  or  belong  exclusively  to  the  province  of
taste.  Such,  I  say,  appears  to  be  his  meaning.  For,  in  this
essay,  as  in  all  his  writings,  he  is  rather  acute  and  ingenious
than  coherent  and  profound:  handling  detached  topics  with
signal  dexterity,  but  evincing  an  utter  inability  to  grasp  his
subject  as  a  whole.  When  he  speaks  of  moral  sentiments
belonging  to  the  province  of  taste,  he  may,  perhaps,  be  adverting
to  the  origin  of  hefievolence,  or  to  the  origin  of  our  sympathy  with
the  pleasures  and  pains  of  others:  a  feeling  that  differs  as
broadly  as  the  appetite  of  hunger  or  thirst  from  the  sentiments
of  approbation  or  disapprobation  which  accompany  our  judg-
ments upon  actions.

That  these  inscrutable  sentiments  are  signs  of  the  Divine  The  second
will, or  the  proofs that the  actions  which excite  them  are  ^^p7*^
enjoined  or  forbidden  by  Grod,  is  the  second  of  the  two  assump-  tions  in-
tions  involved  by  the  hypothesis  in  question.  the^hypo^

In  the  language  of  the  admirable  Butler  (who  is  the  ablest  thews  m
advocate  of  the  hypothesis),  the  human  actions  by  which  these  Sriefly^"'
feelings are  excited  are  their  direct  and  appropriate  objects:  stated
just  as  things  visible  are  the  direct  and  appropriate  objects  of
the  sense  of  seeing.

In  homelier  but  plainer  language,  I  may  put  his  meaning  ^
thus. — As  God  has  given  us  eyes,  in  order  that  we  may  see
therewith;  so  has  he  gifted  or  endowed  us  with  the  feelings
or  sentiments  in  question,  in  order  that  we  may  distinguish
directly,  by  means  of  these  feelings  or  sentiments,  the  actions
which  he  enjoins  or  permits,  from  the  actions  which  he  pro-
hibits.

Or,  if  you  like  it  better,  I  may  put  the  meaning  thus. —
That  these  inscrutable  sentiments  are  signs  of  the  Divine  will,
is  an  inference  which  we  necessarily  deduce  from  our  considera-


I  so  The  Province  of

Lect.  IV tion  oi  final  causes. Like  the  rest  of  our  appetites  or  aversions,
^ ' these  sentiments  were  designed  by  the  Author  of  our  being  to
answer  an  appropriate  end. And  the  only  pertinent  end  which
we  can  possibly  ascribe  to  them,  is  the  end  or  final  cause  at
which  I  have  now  pointed.
As  an  ill-  Now, supposing  that  the  Deity  has endowed  us  with  a

God's^com-  °^o^l  sense  or  instinct,  we  are  free  of  the  difficulty  to  which
mands, we  are  subject,  if  we  must  construe  his  laws  by  the  principle  of
sense^were general  utility. According  to  the  hypothesis  in  question,  the
lessfaUible  inscrutable  feelings  which  are styled  the moral sense arise
pi^dple directly  and  inevitably  with  the  thoughts  of  their  appropriate
of  general objects. We  cannot  mistake  the  laws  which  God  has  prescribed
to  mankind,  although  we  may  often  be  seduced  by  the  blandish-
ments of  present  advantage  from  the  plain  path  of  our  duties. The
understanding  is  never  at  a  fault,  although  the  will  may  be  frail.
Butisthere  But  here  arises  a  small  question. — Is  there  any  evidence

rfSLeTo ^^^  ^®  ^^®  gifted  with  feelings  of  the  sort  ?
sustain  the That  this  question  is  possible,  or  is  seriously  asked  and
i/ques-^^  agitated,  would  seem  of  itself  a  sufficient  proof  that  we  are  riot
tioii'  endowed  with  such  feelings. — According  to  the  hypothesis  of  a

Sies^^^' moral  sense,  we  are  conscious  of  the  feelings  which indicate
question  is  God's  Commands,  as  we  are  conscious  of  hunger  or  thirst. In
by  the^^^ Other  words,  the  feelings  which  indicate  God's  commands  are
negative ultimate  facts. But,  since  they  are  ultimate  facts,  these  feelings
or  sentiments  must  be  indisputable,  and  must  also  differ  ob-
viously from  the  other  elements  of  our  nature. If  I  were  really
gifted  with  feelings  or  sentiments  of  the  sort,  I  could  no  more
seriously  question  whether  I  had  them  or  not,  and  could  no
more  blend  and  confound  them  with  my  other  feelings  or  senti-
ments, than  I  can  seriously  question  the  existence  of  hunger  or
thirst,  or  can  mistake  the  feeling  which  affects  me  when  I  am
hungry  for  the  different  feeling  which  affects  me  when  I  am
thirsty. All  the  parts  of  our  nature  which  are  ultimate,  or
•  incapable  of  analysis,  are  certain  and  distinct  as  well  as  in-
scrutable. We  know  and  discern  them  with  unhesitating  and
invincible  assurance.
Tlie  two  The  two  current  arguments  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis  in

arguments  ^^Gstion  are  raised  on  the  following  assertions.  1.  The  judg-
in  favour  of  ments  which  we  pass  internally  upon  the- rectitude  or  pravity
thesis^m  ^^  actions  are  immediate  and  involuntary.  In  other  words,  our
question,  moral  Sentiments  or  feelings  arise  directly  and  inevitably  with
stated.  our  conceptions  of  the  actions  which  excite  them.  2.  The
moral  sentiments  of  all  men  are  precisely  alike.


state  of  our
conscious-


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 5 1

Now  the  first  of  these  venturous  assertions  is  not  universally Lect.  IV
true. In numberless cases,  the judgments  which  we pass  xhe  first
internally  upon  the  rectitude  or  pravity  of  actions  are  hesitating  armiment
and  slow. And  it  not  unfrequently  happens  that  we  cannot  of  the
arrive  at  a  conclusion,  or  are  utterly  at  a  loss  to  determine  ^ypot^e8is
whether  we  shall  praise  or  blame.  tion,  ex-

And,  granting  that  our  moral  sentiments  are  always  in-  ^^^^^^
stantaneous  and  inevitable,  this  will  not  demonstrate  that  our
moral  sentiments  are  instinctive.  Sentiments  which  are  fac-
titious, or  begotten  in  the  way  of  association,  are  not  less
prompt  and  involimtary  than  feelings  which  are  instinctive  or
inscrutable.  For  example.  We  begin  by  loving  money  for  the
sake  of  the  enjoyment  which  it  purchases :  and,  that  enjoyment
apart,  we  care  not  a  straw  for  money.  But,  in  time,  our  love
of  enjoyment  is  extended  to  money  itself,  or  our  love  of  enjoy-
ment becomes  inseparably  associated  with  the  thought  of  the
money  which  procures  it  The  conception  of  money  suggests  a
wish  for  money,  although  we  think  not  of  the  uses  to  which  we
should  apply  it  Again :  We  begin  by  loving  knowledge  as  a
mean  to  ends.  But,  in  time,  the  love  of  the  ends  becomes
inseparably  associated  with  the  thought  or  conception  of  the
instrument.  Curiosity  is  instantly  roused  by  every  unusual
appearance,  although  there  is  no  purpose  which  the  solution  of
the  appearance  would  answer,  or  although  we  advert  not  to  the
purpose  which  the  solution  of  the  appearance  might  subserve.

The  promptitude  and  decision  with  which  we  judge  of
actions  are  impertinent  to  the  matter  in  question :  for  our  moral
sentiments  would  be  prompt  and  inevitable,  although  they  arose
from  a  perception  of  utility,  or  although  they  were  impressed
upon  our  minds  by  the  authority  of  our  fellow-men.  Supposing
that  a  moral  sentiment  sprang  from  a  perception  of  utility,  or
supposing  that  a  moral  sentiment  were  impressed  upon  our
minds  by  authority,  it  would  hardly  recur  spontaneously  until
it  had  recurred  frequently.  Unless  we  recalled  the  reasons  which
had  led  us  to  our  opinion,  or  unless  we  adverted  to  the  authority
which  had  determined  our  opinion,  the  sentiment,  at  the  outset,
would  hardly  be  excited  by  the  thought  of  the  corresponding  action.
But,  in  time,  the  sentiment  would  adhere  inseparably  to  the  thought
of  the  correspondin^action.  Although  we  recalled  not  the  ground
of  our  moral  approbation  or  aversion,  the  sentiment  would  recur
directly  and  inevitably  with  the  conception  of  its  appropriate  object

But,  to  prove  that  moral sentiments are instinctive or  Thesecond
inscrutable,  it is bodily  asserted, by  the advocates of the  "8^™®^*


152  The  Province  of

Lect.  IV hypothesis  in  question,  that  the  moral  sentiments  of  all  men  are
infavourof  precisely  alike.

the  hypo-  The  argument,  in  favour  of  the  hypothesis,  which  is  raised

question,  on  this  hardy  assertion,  may  be  stated  briefly  in  the  following
examined,  manner. — No  opinion  or  sentiment  which  is  a  result  of  observa-
tion and  induction  is  held  or  felt  by  all  mankind.  Observation
and  induction,  as  applied  to  the  same  subject,  lead  different
men  to  different  conclusions.  But  the  judgments  which  are
passed  internally  upon  the  rectitude  or  pravity  of  actions,  or
the  moral  sentiments  or  feelings  which  actions  excite,  are  pre-
cisely alike  with  all  men.  Consequently,  our  moral  sentiments
or  feelings  were  not  gotten  by  our  inductions  ficom  the  ten-
dencies of  the  actions  which  excite  them:  nor  were  these
sentiments  or  feelings  gotten  by  inductions  of  others,  and  then
impressed  upon  our  minds  by  human  authority  and  example.
Consequently,  our  moral  sentiments  are  instinctive  or  are
ultimate  or  inscrutable  facts.

Kow,  though  the  assertion  were  granted,  the  argument
raised  on  the  assertion  would  hardly  endure  examination.
Though  the  moral  sentiments  of  all  men  were  precisely  alike,  it
would  hardly  follow  that  moral  sentiments  are  instinctive.

But  an  attempt  to  confute  the  argument  were  superfluous
labour:  for  the  assertion  whereon  it  is  raised  is  groimdless.
The  respective  moral  sentiments  of  different  ages  and  nations,
and  of  different  men  in  the  same  age  and  nation,  have  differed
to  infinity.  This  proposition  is  so  notoriously  true,  and  to
every  instructed  mind  the  facts  upon  which  it  rests  are  so
familiar,  that  I  should  hardly  treat  my  hearers  with  due  respect
if  I  attempted  to  establish  it  by  proof.  I  therefore  assume  it
without  an  attempt  at  proof;  and  I  oppose  it  to  the  assertion
which  I  am  now  considering,  and  to  the  argument  which  is
raised  on  that  assertioiL

But,  before  I  dismiss  the  assertion  which  I  am  now  con-
sidering, I  will  briefly  advert  to  a  diflSculty  attending  the
hypothesis  in  question  which  that  unfounded  assertion  naturally
suggests. — Assuming  that  moral  sentiments  are  instinctive  or
inscrutable,  they  are  either  different  with  different  men,  or  they
are  alike  with  all  men.  To  affirm  '  that  they  are  alike  with  all
men,'  is  merely  to  hazard  a  bold  assertion  contradicted  by
notorious  facts.  If  they  are  different  with  different  men,  it
follows  that  God  has  not  set  to  men  a  common  rule.  If  they
are  different  with  different  men,  there  is  no  common  test  of
human  conduct :  there  is  no  test  by  which  one  man  may  try


Jurisprudence  determined.  i  s  3

the  conduct  of  another.  It  were  folly  and  presumption  in  mt  Lkct.  IV
to  sit  in  judgment  upon  yov,.  That  which  were  pravity  in  me
may,  for  aught  I  can  know,  be  rectitude  in  you.  The  moral
sense  which  y(m  allege,  may  be  just  as  good  and  genuine  as
that  of  which  /  am  conscious.  Though  my  instinct  points  one
way,  y(mrs  may  point  another.  There  is  no  broad  sun  destined
to  illumine  the  world,  but  every  single  man  must  walk  by  his
own  candla

Now  what  is  the  fact '  whereon  the  second  argument  in  A  brief
favour  of  the  hypothesis  in  question  is  founded? The  plain  of\helMt
and  glaring  fact  is  thia — With  regard  to  actions  of  a  few  whereon
classes,  the  moral  sentiments  of  most,  though  not  of  all  men,  argi^it
have  been  alike. But,  with  regard  to  actions  of  other  classes,  '^^  favour
their  moral  sentiments  have  differed,  through  every  shade  or  hypothesis
degree,  from  slight  diversity  to  direct  opposition.  ^?^^d^

And  this  is  what  might  be  expected,  supposing  that  the  xj^gfj^ct
principle  of  general  utility  is  our  only  guide  or  index  to  the  accords
tacit  commands  of  the  Deity. The  fact  accords  exactly  with  ^^*^e
that  hypothesis  or  theory. For,  first,  the  positions  wherein  hypothesis
men  are,  in  different  ages  and  nations,  are,  in  many  respects,  ofutUity.
widely  different :  whence  it  inevitably  follows,  that  much  which
was  useful  there  and  then  were  useless  or  pernicious  here  and
now. And,  secondly,  since  human  tastes  are  various,  and  since
human  reason  is  fallible,  men's  moral  sentiments  must  often
widely  differ  even  in  respect  of  the  circumstances  wherein  their
positions  are  alike. But,  with  regard  to  actions  of  a  few  classes,
the  dictates  of  utility  are  the  same  at  all  times  and  places,  and
are  also  so  obvious  that  they  hardly  admit  of  mistake  or  doubt.
And  hence  would  naturally  ensue  what  observation  shows  us  is
the  fact :  namely,  a  general  resemblance,  with  infinite  variety,
in the systems of law and morality which have actually
obtained  in  the  world.

According  to  the  hypothesis  which  I  have  now  stated  and  A  brief
examined,  the  moral  sense  is  our  (yrdy  index  to  the  tacit  com-  ^^  ^™in-
mands  of  the  Diety. According  to  an  intermediate  hypothesis,  tennediate
compounded  of  the  hypothesis  of  utility  and  the  hypothesis  of  a  ^^  ^"
moral  sense,  the  moral  sense  is  our  index  to  some  of  his  tacit  com-  '^  com-
mands,  but  the  principle  of  general  utility  is  our  index  to  others,  §Je  hypo-
In  so  far  as  I  can  gather  his  opinion  from  his  admirable  ^?sis  of
sermons,  it  would  seem  that the  compound  hypothesis  was  and  the
embraced  by  Bishop  Butler. But  of  this  I  am  not  certain :  hypothesis

•^  ^  .  of  a  moral

for,  from  many  passages  m  those  sermons,  we  may  perhaps  sense.
infer  that  he  thought  the  moral  sense  our  only  index  or  guide.


154


Lect.  IV


The  divi-
sionofposi-
tive  law
into  law
ncUural
and  law
positive^
and  the
diviaion  of
jus  civile
into  jits
gentium
and  jus
civile,  sup-
pose or  in-
volve the
intenned-
iate  hy-
pothesis
which
is  com-
pounded
of  the  hy-
pothesis
of  utility
and  the
hypothesis
of  a  moral


TAe  Province  of

The  compound  hypothesis  now  in  question  naturally  arose
from  the  fact  to  which  I  have  already  adverted. — ^With  regard
to  actions  of  a  few  classes,  the  moral  sentiments  of  most,  though
not  of  all  men,  have  been  alike.  With  regard  to  actions  of
other  classes,  their  moral  sentiments  have  diflFered,  through  every
shade  or  degree,  from  slight  diversity  to  direct  opposition. — In
respect  to  the  classes  of  actions,  with  regard  to  which  their
moral  sentiments  have  agreed,  there  was  some  show  of  reason
for  the  supposition  of  a  moral  sense.  In  respect  to  the  classes
of  actions,  with  regard  to  which  their  moral  sentiments  have
differed,  the  supposition  of  a  moral  sense  seemed  to  be  excluded.

But  the  modified  or  mixed  hypothesis  now  in  question  is
not  less  halting  than  the  pure  hypothesis  of  a  moral  sense  or
instinct. — ^With  regard  to  actions  of  a  few  classes,  the  moral
sentiments  of  mo9t  men  have  concurred  or  agreed.  But  it  were
hardly  possible  to  indicate  a  single  class  of  actions,  with  regard
to  which  all  men  have  thought  and  felt  alike.  And  it  is  clear
that  every  objection  to  the  simple  or  pure  hypothesis  may  be
urged,  with  slight  adaptations,  against  the  modified  or  mixed.

By  modern  writers  on  jurisprudence,  positive  law  (or  law,
simply  and  strictly  so  called)  is  divided  into  law  ruitural  and
law  positive.  By  the  classical  Eoman  jurists,  borrowing  from
the  Greek  philosophers,  jus  civile  (or  positive  law)  is  divided
into  fus  gentium  and  fus  civile.  Which  two  divisions  of  positive
law  are  exactly  equivalent.

By  modern  writers  on  jurisprudence,  and  by  the  classical
Boman  jurists,  positive  morality  is  also  divided  into  natural  and
positive.  For,  through  the  frequent  confusion  (to  which  I  shall
advert  hereafter)  of  positive  law  and  positive  morality,  a  portion
of  positive  morality,  as  well  as  of  positive  law,  is  embraced  by
the  law  natural  of  modem  writers  on  jurisprudence,  and  by  the
equivalent  jus  gentium  of  the  classical  Soman  jurists.

By  reason  of  the  division  of  positive  law  into  law  natural
and  lato  positive,  crimes  are  divided,  by  modern  writers  on
jurisprudence,  into  crimes  which  are  'mala  in  se*  and  crimes
which  are  '  mala  gma  prohibita!  By  reason  of  the  division  of
positive  law  into  jus  gentium  and  jus  civile^  crimes  are  divided,
by  the  classical  Eoman  jurists,  into  such  as  are  crimes  juris
gentium  and  such  as  are  crimes  jure  civUi,  Which  divisions  of
crimes,  like  the  divisions  of  law  wherefrom  they  are  respectively
derived,  are  exactly  equivalent.

Now  without  a  clear  apprehension  of  the  hypothesis  of
utility,  of  the  pure  hypothesis  of  a  moral  sense,  and  of  the


Jurisprudence  determined,  1 5  S

modified  or  mixed  hypothesis  which  is  compounded  of  the  Lect.  iv
others,  the  distinction  of  positive  law  into  natural  and  posi-
live,  with  the  various  derivative  distinctions  which  rest  upon
that  main  one,  are  utterly  unintelligible.  Assuming  the
hypothesis  of  utility,  or  assuming  the  pure  hypothesis  of  a
moral  sense,  the  distinction  of  positive  law  into  natural  and
positive  is  senseless.  But,  assuming  the  intermediate  hypo-
thesis which  is  compounded  of  the  others,  positive  law,  and
also  positive  morality,  is  inevitably  distinguished  into  natural
and  positive.  In  other  words,  if  the  modified  or  mixed
hypothesis  be  founded  in  truth,  positive  human  rules  fall
into  two  parcels: — 1.  Positive  human  rules  which  obtain
with  all  mankind;  and  the  conformity  of  which  to  Divine
commands  is,  therefore,  indicated  by  the  moral  sense :  2.
Positive  human  rules  which  do  not  obtain  universally;  and
the  conformity  of  which  to  Divine  commands  is,  therefore,  not
indicated  by  that  infallible  guide.

When  I  treat  of  positive  law  as  considered  with  reference
to  its  sources,  I  shaU  show  completely  that  the  modified  or
mixed  hypothesis  is  involved  by  the  distinction  of  positive
law  into  law  natural  and  law  positive.  I  touch  upon  the
topic,  at  the  present  point  of  my  Course,  to  the  following
purpose :  namely,  to  show  that  my  disquisitions  on  the  hypo-
thesis of  utility,  on  the  hypothesis  of  a  moitd  sense,  and  on
that  intermediate  hypothesis  which  is  compounded  of  the  others,
are  necessary  steps  in  a  series  of  discourses  occupied  with  the
rationale  of  jurisprudence.  It  will,  indeed,  appear,  as  I  advance
in  my  projected  Course,  that  many  of  the  distinctions,  which
the  science  of  jurisprudence  presents,  cannot  be  expounded,  in  a
complete  and  satisfactory  manner,  without  a  previous  exposition
of  those  seemingly  irrelative  hypotheses.  But  the  topic  upon
which  I  have  touched  at  the  present  point  of  my  Course  shows
most  succinctly  the  pertinence  of  the  disquisitions  in  question.

Having  stated  the  hypothesis  of  utility,  the  hypothesis  of  a  The  fore-

moral  sense, and  the  modified  or  mixed  hypothesis  which  is  q^^^^ions

compounded  of  the  others,  I  will  close  my  disquisitions  on  the  pn  the

index  to  God's  commands  with  an  endeavour  to  clear  the  hjrpo-  God's

thesis  of  utility  from  two  current  though  gross  misconceptions,  com-

closedwith

Of  the  writers  who  maintain and  impugn  the  theory  of  ^^'
utility,  three  out  of  four  fall  into  one  or  the  other  of  the  fol-  clear  the
lowing  errors. — 1.  Some  of  them  confound  the  motives  which  ^^^^^  °^


156


The  Province  of


Lkct.IV

utility
from  two
current
though
gross  mis-
concep-
tions.
The  two
miscon-
ceptions
stated.


The  first
miscon-
ception ex-
amined.


ought  to  determine  our  conduct  with  the  proximate  ttieaswrt
or  test  to  which  our  conduct  should  conform  and  by  which
our  conduct  should  be  tried. — 2.  Others  confound  the  th&ory
of  general  utility  with  that  theoTry  or  hypothesis  concerning  the
origin  of  benevolence  which  is  branded  by  its  ignorant  or  dis-
ingenuous adversaries  with  the  misleading  and  invidious  name
of  the  selfish  system,

Now  these  errors  are  so  palpable,  that,  perhaps,  I  ought  to
conclude  with  the  bare  statement,  and  leave  my  hearers  to
supply  the  corrective.  But^  let  them  be  never  so  palpable,  they
have  imposed  upon  persons  of  unquestionable  penetration,  and
therefore  may  impose  upon  all  who  will  not  pause  to  examine  themu
Accordingly,  I  will  clear  the  theory  of  utility  from  these  gross  but
current  misconceptions  as  completely  as  my  limits  will  permit

I  will  first  examine  the  error  of  confounding  motives  to
conduct  with  the  proximate  measure  ot  test  to  which  our  conduct
should  conform  and  by  which  our  conduct  should  be  tried.  I
will  then  examine  the  error  of  confounding  the  theory  of  tUility
with  that  theory  or  hypothesis  concerning  the  origin  of  hmevolence
which  is  styled  the  selfish  system.

According  to  the  theory  of  utility,  the  measure  or  test  of
human  conduct  is  the  law  set  by  God  to  his  human  creatures.
Now  some  of  his  commands  are  revealed,  whilst  others  are
unrevealed.  Or  (changing  the  phrase)  some  of  his  commands
are  express,  whilst  others  are  tacit  The  commands  which  Grod
has  revealed,  we  must  gather  from  the  terms  wherein  they  are
promulged.  The  commands  which  he  has  not  revealed,  we
must  construe  by  the  principle  of  utility:  by  the  probable
effects  of  our  conduct  on  that  general  happiness  or  good  which
is  the  final  cause  or  purpose  of  the  good  and  wise  lawgiver  in  all
his  laws  and  commandments.

Strictly  speaking,  therefore,  utility  is  not  the  measure  to
which  our  conduct  should  conform,  nor  is  utility  the  test  by
which  our  conduct  should  be  tried.  It  is  not  in  itself  the
source  or  spring  of  our  highest  or  paramount  obligations,  but
it  guides  us  to  the  source  whence  these  obligations  flow.  It  is
merely  the  index  to  the  measure,  the  index  to  the  test  But,
since  we  conform  to  the  measure  by  following  the  suggestions
of  the  index,  I  may  say  with  sufficient,  though  not  with  strict
propriety,  that  utility  is  the  measure  or  test  proximaidy  or
imm^iately.  Accordingly,  I  style  the  Divine  commands  the
ultimate  measure  or  test :  but  I  style  the  principle  of  utility,  or
the  general  happiness  or  good,  the  proximale  measure  to  which


yurisprudence  determined.  1 5  7

our  conduct  should  conform,  or  the  ^proximate  test  by  which  our Leot.  IV
conduct  should  be  tried.  ^^

Now,  though  the  general  good  is  that  proximate  Tneamre,  or
though  the  general  good  is  that  proximate  test,  it  is  not  in  all,
or  even  in  most  cases,  the  motive  or  inducement  which  ought  to
determine  our  conduct.  If  our  conduct  were  always  determined
by  it  considered  as  a  motive  or  indtccement,  our  conduct  would
often  disagree  with  it  considered  as  the  standard  or  Tneasure.  If
our  conduct  were  always  determined  by  it  considered  as  a  motive
or  indtusement,  our  conduct  would  often  be  blameable,  rather  than
deserving  of  praise,  when  tried  by  it  as  the  test.

Though  these  propositions  may  sound  like  paradoxes,  they
are  perfectly  just  I  should  occupy  more  time  than  I  can  give
to  the  disquisition,  if  I  went  through  the  whole  of  the  proofs
which  would  establish  them  beyond  contradiction.  But  the  few
hints  which  I  shall  now  throw  out  will  suflBciently  suggest  the
evidence  to  those  of  my  hearers  who  may  not  have  reflected  on
the  subject

When  I  speak  of  the  public  good,  or  of  the  general  good,
I  mean  the  aggregate  enjoyments  of  the  single  or  individual
persons  who  compose  that  public  or  general  to  which  my  atten-
tion is  directed.  The  good  of  mankind,  is  the  aggregate  of  the
pleasures  which  are  respectively  enjoyed  by  the  individuals  who
constitute  the  human  race.  The  good  of  England,  is  the  aggre-
gate of  the  pleasures  which  fall  to  the  lot  of  Englishmen  con-
sidered individually  or  singly.  The  good  of  the  public  in  the
town  to  which  I  belong,  is  the  aggregate  of  the  pleasures  which
the  inhabitants  severally  enjoy.

'  Mankind,'  *  coimtry,'  *  public,'  are  concise  expressions  for  a
number  of  individual  persons  considered  collectively  or  as  a
whole.  In  case  the  good  of  those  persons  considered  singly  or
individually  were  sacrificed  to  the  good  of  those  persons  con-
sidered collectively  or  as  a  whole,  the  general  good  would  be
destroyed  by  the  sacrifice.  The  sum  of  the  particular  enjoy-
ments which  constitutes  the  general  good,  would  be  sacrificed  to
the  mere  name  by  which  that  good  is  denoted.

When  it  is  stated  strictly  and  nakedly,  this  truth  is  so  plain
and  palpable  that  the  statement  is  almost  laughable.  But  ex-
perience sufficiently  evinces,  that  plain  and  palpable  truths  are
prone  to  slip  from  the  memory :  that  the  neglect  of  plain  and
palpable  truths  is  the  source  of  most  of  the  errors  with  which
the  world  is  infested. For  example.  That  notion  of  the  public


1 5  8  The  Province  of

Lect.  IV  good  which  was  current  in  the  ancient  repubKcs  supposes  a
^"^  '  neglect  of  the  truism  to  which  I  have  called  your  attention.
Agreeably  to  that  notion  of  the  public  good,  the  happiness  of
the  individual  citizens  is  sacrificed  without  scrapie  in  order  that
the  common  weal  may  wax  and  prosper.  The  only  substantial
interests  are  the  victims  of  a  barren  abstraction,  of  a  sounding
but  empty  phrase.

Now  (speaking  generaUy)  every  individual  person  is  the  best
possible  judge  of  his  own  interests :  of  what  wiU  aflfect  himself
with  the  greatest  pleasures  and  pains.  Compared  with  his
intimate  consciousness  of  his  own  peculiar  interests,  his  know-
ledge of  the  interests  of  others  is  vague  conjecture.

Consequently,  the  principle  of  general  utility  imperiously
demands  that  he  commonly  shall  attend  to  his  own  rather  than
to  the  interests  of  others :  that  he  shall  not  habitually  neglect
that  which  he  knows  accurately  in  order  that  he  may  habitually
pursue  that  which  he  knows  imperfectly.

This  is  the  arrangement  which  the  principle  of  general
utility  manifestly  requires.  It  is  also  the  arrangement  which
the  Author  of  man's  nature  manifestly  intended.  For  our  self-
regarding  affections  are  steadier  and  stronger  than  our  social :
the  motives  by  which  we  are  urged  to  pursue  our  peculiar  good
operate  with  more  constancy,  and  commonly  with  more  energy,
than  the  motives  by  which  we  are  solicited  to  pursue  the  good
of  our  feUows.

If  every  individual  neglected  his  own  to  the  end  of  pursuing
and  promoting  the  interests  of  others,  every  individual  would
neglect  the  objects  with  which  he  is  intimately  acquainted  to  the
end  of  forwarding  objects  of  which  he  is  comparatively  ignorant.
Consequently,  the  interests  of  every  individual  would  be  managed
unskilfully.  And,  since  the  general  good  is  an  aggregate  of
individual  enjoyments,  the  good  of  the  general  or  public  would
diminish  with  the  good  of  the  individuals  of  whom  that  general
or  public  is  constituted  or  composed.

The  principle  of  general  utUity  does  not  demand  of  us,  that
we  shaU  always  or  habitually  intend  the  general  good :  though
the  principle  of  general  utility  does  demand  of  us,  that  we  shall
never  pursue  our  own  peculiar  good  by  means  which  are  incon-
sistent with  that  paramount  object.

For  example :  The  man  who  delves  or  spins,  delves  or  spins
to  put  money  in  his  purse,  and  not  with  the  purpose  or  thought
of  promoting  the  general  well-being.  But  by  delving  or  spinning,
he  adds  to  the  sum  of  commodities :  and  he  therefore  promotes


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 5  9

that  general  well-being,  which  is  not,  and  ought  not  to  be,  his Lect.  IV
practical  end. General  utility  is  not  his  motive  to  action. But ^ '
his  action  conforms  to  utility  considered  as  the  standard  of  con-
duct :  and  when  tried  by  utility  considered  as  the  test  of  conduct,
his  action  deserves  approbation.

Again :  Of  all  pleasures  bodily  or  mental,  the  pleasures  of
mutual  love,  cemented  by  mutual  esteem,  are  the  most  enduring
and  varied.  They  therefore  contribute  largely  to  swell  the  sum
of  well-being,  or  they  form  an  important  item  in  the  account  of
human  happiness.  And,  for  that  reason,  the  well-wisher  of  the
general  good,  or  the  adherent  of  the  principle  of  utility,  must,  in
that  character,  consider  them  with  much  complacency.  But,
though  he  approves  of  love  because  it  accords  with  his  principle,
he  is  far  from  maintaining  that  the  general  good  ought  to  be  the
motive  of  the  lover.  It  was  never  contended  or  conceited  by  a
sound,  orthodox  utilitarian,  that  the  lover  should  kiss  his  mistress
with  an  eye  to  the  common  weaL

And  by  this  last  example,  I  am  naturally  conducted  to  this
further  consideration.

Even  where  utility  requires  that  benevolence  shall  be  our
motive,  it  commonly  requires  that  we  shall  be  determined  by
partial,  rather  than  by  general  benevolence :  by  the  love  of  the
narrower  circle  which  is  formed  of  family  or  relations,  rather
than  by  sympathy  with  the  wider  circle  which  is  formed  of
friends  or  acquaintance :  by  sympathy  with  friends  or  acquaint-
ance, rather  than  by  patriotism :  by  patriotism,  or  love  of  country,
rather  than  by  the  larger  humanity  which  embraces  mankind.

In  short,  the  principle  of  utility  requires  that  we  shall  act
with  the  utmost  effect,  or  that  we  shall  so  act  as  to  produce  the
utmost  good.  And  (speaking  generally)  we  act  with  the  utmost
effect,  or  we  so  act  as  to  produce  the  utmost  good,  when  our
motive  or  inducement  to  conduct  is  the  most  urgent  and  steady,
when  the  sphere  wherein  we  act  is  the  most  restricted  and  the
most  familiar  to  us,  and  when  the  purpose  which  we  directly
pursue  is  the  most  determinate  or  precise.

The  foregoing  general  statement  must,  indeed,  be  received
with  numerous  limitations.  The  principle  of  utility  not  unfre-
quently  requires  that  the  order  at  which  I  have  pointed  shall  be
inverted  or  reversed :  that  the  self-regarding  affections  shall  yield
to  the  love  of  family,  or  to  sympathy  with  friends  or  acquaint-
ance :  that  the  love  of  family,  or  sjrmpathy  with  friends  or
acquaintance,  shall  yield  to  the  love  of  country :  that  the  love
of  country  shall  yield  to  the  love  of  mankind :  that  the  general


1 60  The  Province  of

Lect.  IV happiness  or  good,  which  is  always  the  test  of  our  conduct,  shall
^"^ ' also  be  the  motive  determining  our  conduct,  or  shall  also  be*  the

practical  end  to  which  our  conduct  is  directed.
Goodness  In  order  further  to  dissipate  the  confusion  of  ideas  giving

ncM  of ^^®  ^  ^®  misconception  last  examined,  I  shall  here  pause  to
motives, analyze  the  expression  'good  and  bad  motives,'  and  to  show
in  what  sense  it  represents  a  sound  distinction.

We  often  say  of  a  man  on  any  given  occasion  that  his
motive  was  good  or  bad,  and  in  a  certain  sense  we  may  truly
say  that  some  motives  are  better  than  others;  inasmuch  as
some  motives  are  more  likely  than  others  to  lead  to  beneficial
conduct

But,  in  another  and  more  extended  sense,  no  motive  is  good
or  bad :  since  there  is  no  motive  which  may  not  by  possibility,
and  which  does  not  occasionally  in  fact,  lead  both  to  beneficial
and  to  mischievous  conduct

'  Thus  in  the  case  which  I  have  already  used  as  an  illustra-
tion, that  of  the  man  who  digs  or  weaves  for  his  own  subsist-
ence ;  the  motive  is  self-regarding,  but  the  action  is  beneficial.
The  same  motive,  the  desire  of  subsistence,  may  lead  to
pernicious  acts,  such  as  stealing.  [Love  of  reputation,  though  a
self-regarding  motive,  is  a  motive  generally  productive  of
beneficial  acts ;  and  there  are  persons  with  whom  it  is  one  of
the  most  powerful  incentives. to  acts  for  the  public  good.  That
form  of  love  of  reputation  called  vanity,  on  the  other  hand,
implying,  as  it  does,  that  the  aim  of  its  possessor  is  set  upon
worthless  objects,  commonly  leads  to  evil,  «ince  it  leads  to  a
waste  of  energy,  which  might  otherwise  have  been  turned  to
useful  ends.  Yet  if,  as  a  motive,  it  be  subordinate  in  the
individual  to  other  springs  of  action,  and  exist  merely  as  a
latent  feeling  of  self-complacency  arising  out  of  considerations
however  foolish  or  unsubstantial,  it  may  be  harmless,  or  even
useful  as  tending  to  promote  energy.]  Benevolence,  on  the
other  hand,  and  even  religion,  though  certainly  unselfish,  and
generally  esteemed  good  motives,  may,  when  ntirrowed  in  their
aims,  or  directed  by  a  perverted  understanding,  lead  to  actions
most  pernicious.  For  instance,  the  affection  for  children,  and
the  consequent  desire  of  pushing  or  advancing  them  in  the
world  (a  species  of  narrow  benevolence),  is  with  many  persons
more  apt  to  lead  to  acts  contrary  to  the  public  good  than  any
purely  selfish  motive ;  and  the  palliation,  which  the  supposed
goodness  of  the  motive  constitutes  in  the  eyes  of  the  public  for
the  pernicious  act,  encourages  men  to  do  for  the  sake  of  their


yurisprudence  determined.  1 6 1

children,  actions  which  they  would  be  ashamed  to  do  for  their  Lect.  iv
own  direct  interest.  Even  that  enlarged  benevolence  which  '
embraces  humanity,  may  lead  to  actions  extremely  mischievous,
unless  guided  by  a  perfectly  sound  judgment.  Few  will  doubt,
for  example,  that  Sand  and  those  other  enthusiasts  in  Germany,
who  have  at  different  times  thought  it  right  to  assassinate  those
persons  whom  they  believed  to  be  tyrants,  have  acted  in  a
manner  highly  pernicious  as  regards  the  general  good.  Of  the
purity  (as  it  is  commonly  termed)  of  their  motives,  I  have  not
the  least  doubt ;  that  is  to  say,  I  am  convinced  that  they  acted
imder  the  impulse  of  a  most  enlarged  benevolence ;  but  I  have
as  little  doubt  that,  by  this  benevolence,  they  were  led  to  the
commission  of  acts  utterly  inconsistent  with  that  general  good
at  which  they  aimed.

But,  although  every  motive  may  lead  to  good  or  bad,  some
are  pre-eminently  likely  to  lead  to  good ;  e,g.  benevolence,  love
of  reputation,  religion.  Others  pre-eminently  likely  to  lead  to
bad,  and  little  likely  to  lead  to  good;  e.^.  the  anti-social; —
antipathy — ^particular  or  general.  Others,  again,  are  as  likely
to  lead  to  good  as  to  bad;  t.g,  the  self-regarding.  They  are
the  origin  of  most  of  the  steady  industry,  but  also  of  most  of
the  offences  of  men.

In  this  qualified  sense,  therefore,  motives  may  be  divided
into  such  as  are  good,  such  as  are  bad,  and  such  as  are  neither
good  nor  bad.

If  an  action  is  good ;  that  is,  conforming  to  general  utility ;
the  motive  makes  it  more  laudable.  If  not,  not.  But  it  is
only  secondarily  that  the  nature  of  the  motive  affects  the
quality  of  the  action.

[That  the  nature  of  the  motive  does  affect  the  quality  of
the  action  is  evident  from  this  consideration.  Acts  are  never
insulated.  And  as  their  moral  complexion  is  ultimately  tested
by  their  conformity  to  the  law  having  utility  for  its  index,  so  is
that  moral  complexion  immediately  tested  by  the  nature  and
tendency  of  the  course  of  conduct  of  which  the  acts  are  samples.
Now,  the  conduct  of  an  individual  is  (speaking  generally)  deter-
mined partly  by  the  motives  which  are  his  springs  of  action,  and
partly  by  the  intention,  or  the  state  of  his  understanding  at  the
instant  of  action,  regarding  the  effects  or  tendency  of  his  acts ;
both  being  antecedent  to  the  volition  by  which  these  immediately
emerge  into  act  Human  conduct  is,  in  short,  determined  by  the
motiveswhich  urge,  as  well  as  by  the  intentions  which  direct  The
intention  is  the  aim  of  the  act,  of  which  the  motive  is  the  spring.]
VOL.  I.  M


1 62  The  Province  of

Leot.  IV  It  is,  therefore,  wrong  to  maintain  that  the  complexion  of

'  the  action  mainly  depends  on  the  complexion  of  the  motive.
It  is  equally  wrong  to  maintain  that  the  nature  of  the  motive
does  not,  to  a  certain  degree,  determine  its  complexion.

In  this  limited  sense,  therefore,  the  moral  complexion  of  the
action  is  determined  by  the  motive.  If  the  intention  be  good,
the  action  is  the  better  for  being  prompted  by  a  social  motive.
If  the  action  be  bad,  it  is  less  bad  if  prompted  by  a  social  one.

It  is  important  that  good  dispositions  should  be  recognised
and  approved.  But  the  goodness  of  the  action  depends  upon
its  conformity  to  utility ;  [and  even  if  judged  from  the  narrow
point  of  view  commanded  by  the  individual  whose  acts  are  in
question,  depends  upon  the  state  of  his  understanding  as  to  the
effects  of  the  action ;  that  is,  upon  the  intention,  no  less  than
upon  the  motive.]^*

But  to  adjust  the  respective  claims  of  the  selfish  and  social
motives,  of  partial  sjnnpathy  and  general  benevolence,  is  a  task
which  belongs  to  the  detail,  rather  than  to  the  principles  of
ethics :  a  task  which  I  could  hardly  accomplish  in  a  clear  and
satisfactory  manner,  unless  I  visited  my  hearers  with  a  complete
dissertation  upon  ethics,  and  wandered  at  unconscionable  length
from  the  appropriate  purpose  of  my  Course.  What  I  have
suggested  will  suffice  to  conduct  the  reflecting  to  the  following
conclusions.  1.  General  utility  considered  as  the  measure  or
test,  differs  firom  general  utility  considered  as  a  motive  or
inducement  2.  K  our  conduct  were  truly  adjusted  to  the
principle  of  utility,  our  conduct  would  conform  to  rules  fashioned
on  the  principle  of  utility,  or  our  conduct  would  be  guided  by
sentiments  associated  with  such  rules.  But,  this  notwithstand-
ing, general  utility,  or  the  general  happiness  or  good,  woidd  not
be  in  all,  or  even  in  most  cases,  our  motive  to  action  or
forbearance.

The  second Having  touched  generally  and  briefly  on  the  first  of  the

tion  ex-*^  two  misconceptions,  I  will  now  advert  to  the  second  with  the

amined. like  generality  and  brevity.

^'  The  foregoing  passage,  commencing  substance  in  the  more  ample  edition  of
at  the  fourth  line  of  p.  160,  is  not  con-  the  work  which  he  meditated ;  I  have
tained  in  the  text  of  either  of  the  previous  ventured  to  construct  the  above  passage
editions  of  these  lectures.  The  purport  partly  from  the  fragmentary  notes  last
of  it  is  however  contained  partly  in  J .  S.  mentioned,  and  partly  from  J.  S.  M.  *8
M.'s  notes  of  the  lectures  as  originally  notes.  Some  of  the  fragmentary  notes
delivered;  and  partly  in  the  fra^ents  I  have  ventured  to  expand,  endeavour-
from  the  author's  MS.  printed  in  the  ing  to  do  so  consistently  with  the  pur-
notes  to  the  last  edition.  As  it  may  be  port  of  the  rest  of  these  lectures.  The
inferred  from  these  fragments  that  the  passages  so  expanded  I  have  marked
author  contemplated  incorporating  their  by  the  use  of  brackets.— R.  C.


Jurisprudence  determined.  163

They  who  fall  into  this  misconception  are  guilty  of  two  errors. Lbct.  IV
1.  They  mistake  and  distort  the  hypothesis 'bonceming  the  origin ^'""^' '
of  benevolence  which  is styled the  sdfisk  system. 2.  They
imagine  that  that  hypothesis,  as  thus  mistaken  and  distorted,
is  an  essential  or  necessary  ingredient  in  the  theory  of  utility ^^

I  will  examine  the  two  errors  into  which  the  misconception
may  be  resolved,  in  the  order  wherein  I  have  stated  them.

1.  According  to  an  hypothesis  of  Hartley  and  of  various
other  writers,  benevolence  or  sympathy  is  not  an  ultimate  fact,
or  is  not  unsusceptible  of  analysis  or  resolution,  or  is  not  a
simple  or  inscrutable  element  of  man's  being  or  nature.  According
to  their  hypothesis,  it  emanates  from  self-love,  or  from  the  self-
regarding  afiPections,  through  that  familiar  process  styled  'the
association  of  ideas,'  to  which  I  have  briefly  adverted  in  a
preceding  portion  of  my  discourse.

Now  it  follows  palpably  from  the  foregoing  concise  statement,
that  these  writers  dispute  not  the  existence  of  disinterested
benevolence  or  sympathy:  that,  assuming  the  existence  of
disinterested  benevolence  or  sympathy,  they  endeavour  to  trace
the  feeling,  through  its  supposed  generation,  to  the  simpler  and
ulterior  feeling  of  which  they  believe  it  the  offspring.

But,  palpable  as  this  consequence  is,  it  is  fancied  by  many
opponents  of  the  theory  of  utility,  and  (what  is  more  remarkable)
by  some  of  its  adherents  also,  that  these  writers  dispute  the
existence  of  disinterested  benevolence  or  sympathy.

According  to  the  hypothesis  in  question,  as  thus  mistaken
and  distorted,  we  have  no  sympathy,  properly  so  called,  with  the
pleasures  and  pains  of  others.  That  which  is  styled  sympathy,
or  that  which  is  styled  benevolence,  is  provident  regard  to  self.
Every  good  office  done  by  man  to  man  springs  from  a  calculation
of  which  self  is  the  object.  We  perceive  that  we  depend  on
others  for  much  of  our  own  happiness  :  and,  perceiving  that  we

(^)  '  The  first  of  these  mistakes  is  made  every  aspect,  and  has  fitted  it  for  prac-

by  Godwin.*' The  second  by  Paley.  tice.*

'From  Epicurus  and  Lucretius  down  *Many  of  the  writers  who  appear  to

to  Paley  and  Godwin,  Mr.  Bentham  is  reject  utility  do,  in  fact,  embrace  it ;

the  only  writer  who  has  explained  this  (e.g. Cicero, Seneca, Johnson, etc.)

subject  with  clearness  and  accuracy. He  (Eudamonismus). The  honestum  is  the

is  not,  indeed,  the  inventor  of  the  theory  generally  usefuL The  tUile  is  the  gene-

of utility  (for that  is  as old  as  the  ra%  pernicious ;  but  which  would  answer

human  race),  but  he  is  the  first  of  all  some  selfish  and  sinister  purpose.* — MS.

philosophers  who has  viewed  it  from  Fragment.

*'  Enauiiy  concerning  Political  Justice,  certainly  anticipates,  under  the  name  of

By  William  Godwin. January, 1793,  the  principle  ofjuHice^  some  of  the  argu-

book  iv.  ch.  viii. I  presume  the  author  ments  most  effectivelv  urged  in  favour  of

classes  Godwin  amongst  the  adherents  the  theory  of  utility  by  its  more  modem

of  the  theory  of  utility. This  writer  adherents.— R.  C.


1 64


The  Province  of


Lect.  rv depend  on  others  for  much  of  our  own  happiness,  we  do  good
' unto  others  that  others  may  do  it  unto  us. The  seemingly-
disinterested  services  that  are  rendered  by  men  to  men,  are  the
offspring  of  the  very  motives,  and  are  governed  by  the  very
principles,  which  engender  and  regulate  tradeS^^

2.  Having  thus  mistaken  and  distorted  the  so-called  selfish
system,  many  opponents  of  the  theory  of  viility,  together  with
some  adherents  of  the  same  theory,  imagine  that  the  former,  as
thus  mistaken  and  distorted,  is  a  necessary  portion  of  the  latter.
And  hence  it  naturally  follows,  that  the  adherents  of  the  theory
of  utility  are  styled  by  many  of  its  opponents  '  selfish,  sordid,
and  cold-blooded  calculators/


(^)  The  selfish  system,  in  this  its  literal
import,  is  flatly  inconsistent  with  obvious
facts,  and  therefore  is  hardly  deserving
of  serious  refutation.  We  are  daily  and
hourly  conscious  of  disinterested  benevo-
lence or  sympathy,  or  of  wishing  the
good  of  others  without  regard  to  our
own.  In  the  present  wretched  condition
of  human  society,  so  unfavourable  are
the  outward  circumstances  wherein  most
men  are  placed,  and  so  bad  is  the  edu-
cation or  training  received  by  most  men
in  their  youth,  that  the  benevolence  of
most  men  wants  the  intensity  and  en-
durance which  are  requisite  to  their  own
happiness  and  to  the  nappiness  of  their
fellow-creatures.  With  most  men,  bene-
volence or  sympathy  is  rather  a  barren
emotion  than  a  strong  and  steady  incen-
tive to  vigorous  and  efficient  action.
Although  the  feeling  or  sentiment  affects
them  often  enough,  it  is  commonly  stifled
at  the  birth  by  antagonist  feelings  or
sentiments.  But  to  deny,  with  I^che-
foucauld  or  Mandeville,  the  existence  of
benevolence  or  sympathy,  is  rather  a
wild  paradox,  hazarded  m  the  wanton-
ness of  satire,  than  the  deliberate  posi-
tion of  a  philosopher  examining  the
springs  of  conduct.

And  here  I  may  briefly  remark,  that
the  expression  selfish^  as  applied  to  mo-
tives, has  a  large  and  a  narrower  mean-
ing.— Taking  the  expression  selfish  with
its  larger  meaning,  au  motives  are  selfish.
For  every  motive  is  a  wish ;  and  every
wish  is  a  pain  which  affects  a  man's  selfy
and  which  urges  him  to  seek  relief,  by
attaining  the  object  wished. — Taking
the  expression  selfish  with  its  narrower
meaning,  motives  which  are  selfish  must
be  distinguished  from  motives  which  are
benevolent :  our  wishes  for  our  own
good,  from  our  wishes  for  the  food  of
our  neighbour  :  the  desires  which  impel
us  to  pursue  our  own  advantage  or
benefit,  from  the  desires  which  solicit


us  to  pursue  the  advantage  or  benefit  of
others.

To  obviate  this  ambiguity,  with  the
wretched  quibbling  which  it  begets,  Mr.
Bentham  has  judiciously  discarded  the
dubious  expression  selfish.  The  motives
which  solicit  us  to  pursue  the  advantage
or  good  of  others,  he  styles  social.  The
motives  which  impel  us  to  pursue  our
own  advantage  or  good,  he  styles  self-
regarding.

But,  besides  the  social  and  self-regard-
ing motives,  there  are  disinterested
motives,  or  disinterested  wishes,  by
which  we  are  impelled  or  solicited  to
visit  others  with  evil.  These  disin-
terested but  malevolent  motives,  he
styles  anli'Social. — When  I  style  a  mo-
tive of  the  sort  a  disinterested  motive,
I  apply  the  epithet  with  the  meaning
wherein  I  apply  it  to  a  benevolent  motive.
Speaking  with  absolute  precision,  the
motive  is  not  disinterested  m  either  case :
for,  in  each  of  the  two  cases,  the  man
desires  relief  from  a  wish  importuning
himself.  But,  excepting  the  desire  of
relief  which  the  wish  necessarily  implies,
the  wish,  in  each  of  the  cases,  is  purely
disinterested.  The  end  or  object  to
which  it  urges  the  man  is  the  good  or
evil  of  another,  and  not  his  own  advan-
tage.— By  imputing  to  human  nature
disinterested  malevolence,  Mr.  Bentham
has  drawn  upon  himself  the  reproaches
of  certain  critics.  But  in  imputing  dis-
interested malevolence  to  human  nature,
he  is  far  from  being  singular.  The  fact
is  admitted  or  assumed  by  Aristotle  and
Butler,  and  by  all  who  have  closely
examined  the  springs  or  motives  of  con-
duct And  the  fact  is  easily  explained
by  the  all-pervading  principle  which  is
styled  'the  association  of  ideas.*  Dis-
interested malevolence  or  antipathy,  like
disinterested  benevolence  or  sympathy,
is  begotten  by  that  principle  on  the  self-
regarding  affections.


Jurisprudence  determined.  165

Now  the  thtory  of  ethics  which  I  style  the  theory  of  utility  Lkot.  IV
has  no  necessary  connection  with  any  theory  of  motives.  It  has  '
no  necessary  connection  with  any  theory  or  hypothesis  which
concerns  the  nature  or  origin  of  benevolence  or  sjnnpathy.
The  theory  of  utility  will  hold  good,  whether  benevolence  or
sympathy  be  truly  a  portion  of  our  nature,  or  be  nothing  but  a
mere  name  for  provident  regard  to  self.  The  theory  of  utility
will  hold  good,  whether  benevolence  or  sympathy  be  a  simple
or  ultimate  fact,  or  be  engendered  by  the  principle  of  association
on  the  self-regarding  afifections.

According  to  the  theory  of  utility,  the  principle  of  general
utility  is  the  index  to  God's  commands,  and  is  therefore  the
proximate  measure  of  all  human  conduct  We  are  bound  by  the
awful  sanctions  with  which  his  commands  are  armed,  to  adjust
our  conduct  to  rules  formed  on  that  proximate  measure.
Though  benevolence  be  nothing  but  a  name  for  provident
regard  to  self,  we  are  moved  by  regard  to  self,  when  we  think
of  those  awful  sanctions,  to  pursue  the  generally  useful,  and  to
forbear  from  the  generally  pernicious.  Accordingly,  that  is  the
version  of  the  theory  of  utility  which  is  rendered  by  Dr.  Paley.
He  supposes  that  general  utility  is  the  proximate  test  of  conduct :
but  he  supposes  that  all  the  motives  by  which  our  conduct  is
determined  are  purely  self-regarding.  And  his  version  of  the
theory  of  utility  is,  nevertheless,  coherent :  though  I  think  that
his  theory  of  motives  is  miserably  partial  and  shallow,  and  that
mere  regard  to  self,  although  it  were  never  so  provident,  would
hardly  perform  the  office  of  genuine  benevolence  or  sympathy.
For  if  genuine  benevolence  or  sympathy  be  not  a  portion  of  our
nature,  we  have  only  one  inducement  to  consult  the  general  good  :
namely,  a  provident  regard  to  our  own  welfare  or  happiness.
But  if  genuine  benevolence  or  sympathy  be  a  portion  of  our
nature,  we  have  two  distinct  inducements  to  consult  the  general
good :  namely,  the  same  provident  regard  to  our  own  welfare  or
happiness,  and  also  a  disinterested  regard  to  the  welfare  or
happiness  of  others.  If  genuine  benevolence  or  sympathy  were
not  a  portion  of  our  nature,  our  motives  to  consult  the  general
good  would  be  more  defective  than  they  are.^^^

(')  Confusion  of  Sympathy  toUh  Moral  with  moral  sentiments  (let  their  origin

Sense.  be  what  it  may),  often  runs  counter  to

Sympathy  is the pleasure or pain  them. As  {e.g.)  that  large  sympathy

which  we  feel  when  another  ei^oys  or  with  every  sentient  being,  or  at  least

suffers. In  common  language  it  is  fel-  with  every  human  being,  which  is  called

low -feeling. This  is  totally  different  humanity  or  benevolence,  inclines  us  to

from  monu  approbation  or  disapproba-  sympathize  with  the  sufferings  of  the

tion,  and  instead  of  always  coinciding  culprit  whose  punishment  we  approve.


1 66  The  Province  of

Lbct.  IV  Again :  Assuming  that  benevolence  or  sympathy  is  truly  a

"  portion  of  our  nature,  the  theory  of  utility  has  no  connection
whatever  with  any  hypothesis  or  theory  which  concerns  the
origin  of  the  motive.  Whether  benevolence  or  sympathy  be  a
simple  or  ultimate  fact,  or  be  engendered  by  the  principle  of
association  on  the  self-regarding  affections,  it  ts  one  of  the  motives
by  which  our  conduct  is  determined.  And,  on  either  of  the
conflicting  suppositions,  the  principle  of  utility,  and  not  bene-
volence or  sympathy,  is  the  Tneamre  or  te^  of  conduct :  For  as
conduct  may  be  generally  useful,  though  the  motive  is  self-
regarding  ;  so  may  conduct  be  generally  pernicious,  though  the
motive  is  purely  benevolent.  Accordingly,  in  aU  his  expositions
of  the  theory  of  utility,  Mr.  Bentham  assumes  or  supposes  the
existence  of  disinterested  sympathy,  and  scarcely  adverts  to
the  hypotheses  which  regard  the  origin  of  the  feeling.^®^

Like  the  pains  and  pleasures  which  narrow  and  contracted  being  that  crawls
purely  regud.  ourselves,  the  pains  and  the  earth.  Maternal  love,  the  passion
pleasures  of  sympathy  are  not  moral  between  the  sexes  when  ezaltc^l  into
sentiments,  but  feelings  or  motives  which,  Love,  the  spirit  of  sect  and  party,  a  nar-
according  to  the  justness  of  our  moral  row  patriotism — all  these  are  as  likely
sentiments,  may  lead  us  wrong  or  right, to  mislead  the  judgment  or  the  moral

This  sympathy  ma^  be  an  original  in-  sense  as  the  purely  self-regarding  affec-
stinct,  like  our  appetites,  or  begotten  by  tions  ;  which,  on  the  other  hand,  though
association,  like  aiseased  curiosity,  love  often  misleading,  are,  to  a  great  extent,
of  money,  etc.  (Bishop  Butler).  the  causes  of  good,  prompting  men  to  all

But  on  neither  of  these  hypotheses  is  long  and  obscure  effort. — MS.  Fragment,
the  theory  which  derives  our  moral  senti-  (•)  But  here  I  would  briefly  remark,
ments  from  utility  at  all  affected.  that,  though  the  hypothesis  of  Hartley

The  theory  of  utility  assumes  sym-  is  no  necessary  ingredient  in  the  theory
pathy,  but  maintains  that  our  ^'udgments  of  ceneral  utility,  it  is  a  necessary  in-
of  actions  ought  to  be,  and  in  a  great  gredient  (if  it  be  not  unfounded)  in
measure  are,  derived  from  our  perception  every  sound  system  of  education  or
of  the  general  consec^uences  of  actions  ;  training.  For  the  sake  of  our  own  hap-
%,e,  not  their  immediate,  but  their  re-  piness,  and  the  happiness  of  our  fellow-
mote  consequences,  supposing  them  un-  creatures,  the  affection  of  benevolence
regulated  by  Morals  and  Law  ;  and  not  or  sympathy  should  be  strong  and  steady
only  their  consequences  upon  ourselves,  as  possible :  for  though,  like  other  mo-
but  also  upon  our  relations,  our  friends,  tives,  it  may  lead  us  to  pernicious  con-
cur country,  our  fellow-men  ;  with  whom,  duct,  it  is  less  likely  than  most  of  the
according  to  the  theory,  as  I  understand  others  to  seduce  us  from  the  right  road,
it,  we  are  held  by  bonds  of  sympathy ;  Now  if  benevolence  or  sympathy  be
which,  though  not  so  strong  nor  so  con-  engendered  by  the  principle  of  associa-
stant  as  our  mere  regard  to  ourselves,  is  tion,  the  affection  may  be  planted  and
just  as  necessary  to  our  own  well-bein^.  nurtured  by  education  or  training.  The
Sympathy,  as  weU  as  pure  self-love,  is  truth  or  falsehood  of  the  hypothesis,  to-
not  a  moral  sentiment,  but  a  principle  gether  with  the  process  by  which  the
or  motive  to  action:  either  being  liable  affection  is  generated,  are  therefore  ob-
to  disturb  our  moral  judgment.  Indeed  jects  of  great  practical  moment,  and
a  narrow  sympathy  is,  m  some  minds,  well  deserving  of  close  and  minute  ex-
as  tyrannous  as  the  self-love  of  the  most amination.


Jurisprudence  determined.  167


LECTUEE  V.

The  term  lawy  or  the  term  laws,  is  applied  to  the  following Lect.  V
objects: — to  laws  proper  or  properly  so  called,  and  to  laws  Laws'pro^
improper  or  improperly  so  called :  to  objects  which  have  all  the  per  or  pro-
essentials  of  an  imperative  law  or  rule,  and  to  objects  which  ^u^f^d
are  wanting  in  some  of  those  essentials,  but  to  which  the  term  1*^  i™-
is  unduly  extended  either  by  reason  of  analogy  or  in  the  way  of  Sn^perly
metapAor.  «>  ^^

Strictly  speaking,  ail  improper  laws  are  analogavs  to  laws
proper:  and  the  term  law,  as  applied  to  any  of  them,  is  a
metaphorical  or  figurative  expression.

For  every  metaphor  springs  from  an  analogy :  and  every
analogical  extension  given  to  a  term  is  a  metaphor  or  figure  of
speecL  The  term  is  extended  from  the  objects  which  it  properly
signifies  to  objects  of  another  nature ;  to  objects  not  of  the  class
wherein  the  former  are  contained,  although  they  are  allied  to
the  former  by  that  more  distant  resemblance  which  is  usually
styled  analogy.  But,  taking  the  expressions  with  the  meanings
which  custom  or  usage  has  established,  there  is  a  difference
between  an  employment  of  a  term  analogically  and  a  metaphor.

Analogy  is  a  species  of  resemblance. The  word  resemblance  Analogy
is  here  taken  in  that  large  sense,  in  which  all  subjects  which  phor'as^^
have  any  property  in  common,  are  said  to  resemble. But  besides  used  in
this  more  extended  acceptation  according  to  which  resemblance  ^^^^e,
is  a  genus,  and  analogy  one  of  the  species  included  therein,  there  defined,
is  another  and  a  narrower  sense,  in  which  resemblance  is  opposed
to  analogy. Two  resembling  subjects  are  said  to  resemble  in  the
narrower  meaning  of  the  term,  when  they  both  belong  to  some
determinate  genus  or  species  expressly  or  tacitly  referred  to ;
when  they  both  have  every  property,  which  belongs  to  aU  the
subjects  included  in  the  class. Two  resembling  subjects  are
said  on  the  contrary  to  be  analogous,  when  (me  of  them  belongs
to  some  class  expressly  or  tacitly  referred  to,  and  the  other  does
not :  when  one  possesses  all  the  properties  common  to  the  class
and  the  other  only  some  of  them. I  choose,  for  instance,  on
account  of  a  particular  convenience,  to  range  together  in  one
class  all  aninuds  having  feet When  I  am  speaking  with  refer-
ence to  this  class,  the  foot  of  a  lion  and  the  foot  of  a  man  would
be  said  to  resemble  in  the  narrower  as  well  as  in  the  wider  sense
of  the  word. But  the  foot  of  a  table,  though  it  resembles  the
foot  of  a  lion  and  of  a  man  in  the  more  enlarged  sense,  does


1 68  The  Province  of

Lect.  V  not  resemble  these  in  the  narrower  sense,  but  is  only  analogous
'""*'^'  to  them.  For  these  possess. the  whole  of  the  qualities  belonging
universally  to  the  class,  while  it  possesses  only  a  part  of  the
same  qualities.  If  I  were  not  tacitly  referring  to  a  genus,  I
might  say  that  all  the  three  objects  resemble,  but  if  the  genus
be  referred  to,  the  foot  of  the  lion  and  the  foot  of  the  man
resemble,  the  foot  of  the  table  is  only  analogous  to  them.

Eesemblance  is  hence  an  ambiguous  term.  When  two  things
resemble  in  the  narrow  sense,  that  is,  when  they  both  possess
all  the  properties  which  belong  universally  to  the  class,  the
common  name  (such  as  foot  in  the  instance  above  given),  is
applied  to  both  of  them  strictly  and  properly.  When  they  are
analogous,  that  is  when  the  one  possesses  all,  the  other  only  some
of  the  properties  which  belong  universally  to  the  class,  the  name
denotes  the  one  properly,  the  other  improperly  or  analogically.

It  is  extremely  important  to  fix  our  conception  with  respect
to  this  ambiguity,  as  the  words  analogy  and  analogous  often  recur
in  the  science  of  jurisprudence,  and  by  the  laxity  with  which
they  are  employed  involve  it  in  a  scarcely  penetrable  mist
The  nature  of  unwritten  law,  and  the  principles  of  interpretation
or  construction,  are  among  the  most  obscure  of  all  the  questions
which  arise  in  jurisprudence.  This  obscurity  springs,  as  is
usually  the  case,  from  nonsense  or  jargon;  which  jargon,  on
these  questions,  arises  from  hence,  that  men  talk  profusely  of
analogy  and  things  analogous,  without  ascertaining  the  precise
meaning  of  those  terms,  or  taking  pains  to  employ  them  with
any  precise  meaning.  Professor  Thibaut  of  Berlin,  in  his  treatise
on  the  interpretation  of  the  Eoman  Law,  is,  as  far  as  I  know,
the  only  writer  who  has  seen  this  perplexity;  and  notwith-
standing my  warm  respect  for  that  learned  and  discerning  jurist,
it  seems  to  me  that  even  he  has  scarcely  solved  the  difficulty,
though  he  has  pointed  out  the  path  by  which  we  may  arrive  at
a  solution.

A  metaphor  is  the  transference  of  a  term  from  its  primitive
signification  to  subjects  to  which  it  is  applied  not  in  that,  but
in  a  secondary  sense.  An  analogy  real  or  supposed,  is  always
the  groimd  of  the  transference;  hence  every  metaphor  is  an
analogical  application  of  a  term,  and  every  analogical  application
of  a  term  is  a  metaphor.  But  a  metaphorical  or  figurative
application  is  scarcely,  in  common  parlance,  synonymous  with
an  analogical  application.  By  a  metaphorical  or  figurative
application,  we  usually  mean  one  in  which  the  analogy  is  faint,
the  alliance  between  the  primitive  and  the  derivative  signification


yurisprudence  determined.  169

remote. When  the  analogy  is  clear,  strong,  and  close ;  when  the Lect.  v
subjects  to  which  the  term  is  deflected  lie  on  the  confines  of
the  class  properly  denoted  by  it,  and  have  many  of  the  pro-
perties common  to  the  class,  we  hardly  say  that  the  name  is
employed  figuratively  or  metaphorically.

In  the  language  of  logic,  objects  which  have  all  the  qualities
composing  the  essence  of  the  class,  and  all  the  qualities  which
are  the  necessary  consequences  of  those  composing  the  essence,
resemble.  When  an  object  does  not  possess  all  the  essence  of
the  class,  but  possesses  many  of  the  qualities  which  compose
the  essence,  or  many  of  those  which  necessarily  result  from  the
essence,  the  application  of  the  name  to  that  object  will  be  said
to  be  analogical  and  not  a  metaphor.  The  difference  between
metaphor  and  analogy  is  hence  a  difference  of  degree,  and  not
to  be  settled  precisely  by  drawing  a  strict  line  between  them.^*

Now  a  broad  distinction  obtains  between  laws  improperly  Laws  im-
so  called. Some  are  closely,  others  are  remotely  analogous  to  PJ^'  ^^
laws  proper. The  term  law  is  extended  to  some  by  a  decision  kinds.—
of  the  reason  or  understanding. The  term  law  is  extended  to  Jj^j^^®
others  by  a  turn  or  caprice  of  the  fancy.  analogous

In  order  that  I  may  mark  this  distinction  briefly  and  com-  ^J^^
modiously,  I  avail  myself  of  the  difference,  established  by  custom  2.  Laws
or  usage,  between  the  meanings  of  the  expressions  analogical  ^oi^ott^

and  figurative. 1  style  laws  of  the  first  kind  laws  closely  ative.

analogous  to  laws  proper. I  say  that  they  are  called  laws  by  an

analogical  extension  of  the  term. 1  style  laws  of  the  second

kind  laws  metaphorical  or  fi^rative. I  say  that  they  are  called
laws  by  a  metaphor  or  fi/gv/re  of  speech.

Now  laws  proper,  with  such  improper  laws  as  are  closely  Division  of
analogous  to  the  proper,  are  divisible  thus.  per,"wid  of

Of  laws  properly  so  called,  some  are  set  by  God  to  his  suchim-

-  r r .^  >  J  proper

human  creatures,  others  are  set  by  men  to  men.  kws  as  are

Of  the  laws  properly  so  called  which  are  set  by  men  to  men,  ^^^

some  are  set  by  men  as  political  superiors,  or  by  men,  as  private  to  the

persons,  in  pursuance  of  legal  rights. Others  may  be  described  P^^P®""-
in  the  following  negative  manner :  They  are  not  set  by  men  as

>*  The  sabject  of  analogy  will  be  found  of  these  lectures  was  impracticable ;  but

more  fiUly  treated  in  a  separate  essay  in  order  to  carry  out  to  some  extent  the

or  eoDcursus  printed  in  the  second  volume,  intention  indicated  by  the  note  now  re-

beinff  one  of  the  MSS.  collected  by  the  ferred  to,  I  have  ventured  to  restore  the

late  Mrs.  Austin  after  the  author's  death,  above  passage  (upon  analogy  and  meta-

It  appears  from  a  note  to  the  edition  of  phor,  commencing  on  p.  167)  from  Mr.

1861,  that  the  author  had  some  intention  J.  S.  Mill's  notes  of  the  oral  lectures,

of  inserting  the  essay  in  the  body  of  where  it  is  much  less  condensed  than  the

the  more  extended  work  which  he  medi-  corresponding  passage  of  the  lectures  as

tated. To  insert  it  entire  in  the  body  formerly  publisned. — R.  C.


1 70  The  Province  of

Lect.  V political  superiors,  nor  are  they  set  by  men,  as  private  persons,
' in  pursuance  of  legal  rights.

The  laws  improperly  so  called  which  are  closely  analogous
to  the  proper,  are  merely  opinions  or  sentiments  held  or  felt  by
men  in  regard  to  human  conduct  As  I  shall  show  hereafter,
these  opinions  and  sentiments  are  styled  laws,  because  they  are
aTialogcms  to  laws  properly  so  called :  because  they  resemble  laws
properly  so  called  in  some  of  their  propertiea  or  soTtie  of  their
effects  or  consequences.
Distribu-  Accordingly,  I  distribute  laws  proper,  with  such  improper

pro^r,and  ^^^  ^  ^®  closely  analogous  to  the  proper,  under  three  capital

of  such  im- classes.

Fawras  are The  first  comprises  the  laws  (properly  so  called)  which  are

closely get  by  God  to  his  human  creatures.

to  the  pro-  The  second  comprises  the  laws  (properly  so  called)  which  are

Sbree*^^*^ set  by  men  as  political  superiors,  or  by  men,  as  private  persons,

capital in  pursuance  of  legal  rights.

?*m*law ^^  ^^^^  comprises  laws  of  the  two  following  species :  1.

of  God,  or The  laws  (properly  so  called)  which  are  set  by  men  to  men,  but

G<kl.^^'  ^ ^^^  ^y  °^®^  ^  political  superiors,  nor  by  men,  as  private  persons,

2.  Positive  in  pursuance  of  legal  rights : 2. The  laws  which  are  closely

positive analogous  to  laws  proper,  but  are  merely  opinions  or  sentiments

laws.  held  or  felt  by  men  in  regard  to  human  conduct. 1  put  laws

morality, of  these  species  into  a  common  class,  and  I  mark  them  with  the

rules  of common  name  to  which  I  shall  advert  immediately,  for  the

positive

morality, following  reason. No  law  of  either  species  is  a  direct  or  circuit-

moraT^^^^^  0U8  command  of  a  monarch  or  sovereign  number  in  the  character

rules.  of  political  superior. In  other  words,  no  law  of  either  species

is  a  direct  or  circuitous  command  of  a  monarch  or  sovereign

number  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  its

author. Consequently,  laws  of  both  species  may  be  aptly  opposed

to  laws  of  the  second  capital  class. For  every  law  of  that  second

capital  class  is  a  direct  or  circuitous  command  of  a  monarch  or

sovereign  number  in  the  character  of  political  superior :  that  is

to  say,  a  direct  or  circuitous  command  of  a  monarch  or  sovereign

number  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  its

author.

Laws  comprised  by  these  three  capital  classes  I  mark  with

the  following  names.

I  name  laws  of  the  first  class  the  law  or  laws  of  God,  or  tJie

Divine  law  or  laws.

For  various  reasons  which  I  shall  produce  immediately,  I

name  laws  of  the  second  class  positive  law,  or  positive  laws.


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 7 1

For  the  same  reasons,  I  name  laws  of  the  third  class  positive Lbot.  v
morality,  rules  of  positive  morality,  ov  positive  moral  rules.  "

My  reasons  for  using  the  two  expressions  'positive  law  *  and  Digression
'positive  morality/  are  the  following.  the^expws-

There  are  two  capital  classes  of  human  laws. The  first  apnapon-
comprises  the  laws  (properly  so  called)  which  are  set  by  men  as  ^^p^.
political  superiors,  or  by  men,  as  private  persons,  in  pursuance  ^}^  moral-
of  legal  rights. The  second  comprises  the  laws  (proper  and ^'
improper)  which  belong  to  the  two  species  mentioned  on  the
preceding  page.

As  merely  distinguished  from  the  second,  the  first  of  those
capital  classes  might  be  named  simply  law.  As  merely  distin-
guished from  the  first,  the  second  of  those  capital  classes  might
be  named  simply  morality.  But  both  must  be  distinguished  from
the  law  of  God :  and,  for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing  both  from
the  law  of  God,  we  must  qualify  the  names  law  and  morality.
Accordingly,  I  style  the  first  of  those  capital  classes  'positive
law  :*  and  I  style  the  second  of  those  capital  classes  'positive
morality.'  By  the  common  epithet  positive,  I  denote  that  both
classes  flow  from  human  sources.  By  the  distinctive  names  law
and  morality,  I  denote  the  difference  between  the  human  sources
from  which  the  two  classes  respectively  emanate.

^  Strictly  speaking,  every  law  properly  so  called  is  a  positive
law.  For  it  is  pvt  or  set  by  its  individual  or  collective  author,
or  it  exists  by  the  position  or  institution  of  its  individual  or
collective  author.

But,  as  opposed  to  the  law  of  nature  (meaning  the  law  of
God),  human  law  of  the  first  of  those  capital  classes  is  styled  by
writers  on  jurisprudence  'positive  law.*  This  application  of  the
expression  'positive  law '  was  manifestly  made  for  the  purpose
of  obviating  confusion ;  confusion  of  human  law  of  the  first  of
those  capitid  classes  with  that  Di\dne  law  which  is  the  measure
or  test  of  human.

And,  in  order  to  obviate  similar  confusion,  I  apply  the
expression  'positive  morality  *  to  human  law  of  the  second  capital
class.  For  the  name  Tnorality,  when  standing  unqualified  or
alone,  may  signify  the  law  set  by  God,  or  human  law  of  that
second  capitfid  class.  If  you  say  that  an  act  or  omission  vio-
lates m/ymlity,  you  speak  ambiguously.  You  may  mean  that
it  violates  the  law  which  I  style  'positive  morality,'  or  that
it  violates  the  Divine  law  which  is  the  measure  or  test  of  the
former.

Again:  The  human  laws  or  rules  which  I  style  'positive


1 7  2  The  Province  of

Lect.  V morality/  I  mark  with  that  expression  for  the  following  additional
* reason.

I  have  said  that  the  name  morality,  when  standing  unqualified
or  alone,  may  signify  positive  morality,  or  may  signify  the  law
of  God.  But  the  name  morality,  when  standing  unqualified  or
alone,  is  perplexed  with  a  further  ambiguity.  It  may  import
indifferently  either  of  the  two  following  senses. — 1.  The  name
morality,  when  standing  imqualified  or  alone,  may  signify  positive
moraKty  which  is  good  or  worthy  of  approbation,  or  positive
morality  as  it  would  be  if  it  were  good  or  worthy  of  approbation.
In  other  words,  the  name  morality,  when  standing  unqualified
or  alone,  may  signify  positive  morality  which  agrees  with  its
measure  or  test,  or  positive  morality  as  it  would  be  if  it  agreed
with  its  measure  or  test.  2.  The  name  morality,  when  standing
unqualified  or  alone,  may  signify  the  human  laws,  which  I  style
positive  morality,  as  considered  without  regard  to  their  goodness
or  badness.  For  example,  Such  laws  of  the  class  as  are  peculiar
to  a  given  age,  or  such  laws  of  the  class  as  are  peculiar  to  a
given  nation,  we  style  the  m^*ality  of  that  given  age  or  nation,
whether  we  think  them  good  or  deem  them  bad.  Or,  in  case  we
mean  to  intimate  that  we  approve  or  disapprove  of  them,  we
name  them  the  morality  of  that  given  age  or  nation,  and  we
qualify  that  name  with  the  epithet  good  or  bad.

Now,  by  the  name  'positive  morality,'  I  mean  the  human
laws  which  I  mark  with  that  expression,  as  considered  without
regard  to  their  goodness  or  badness.  Whether  human  laws  be
worthy  of  praise  or  blame,  or  whether  they  accord  or  not  with
their  measure  or  test,  they  are  '  rules  of  positive  morality,'  in  the
sense  which  I  give  to  the  expression,  if  they  belong  to  either  of
the  two  species  lastly  mentioned  on  p.  170.  But,  in  conse-
quence of  that  ambiguity  which  I  have  now  attempted  to  explain,
I  could  hardly  express  my  meaning  with  passable  distinctness
by  the  unqualified  name  morality,
Explana-  From  the  expression  positive  law  and  the  expression  positive

folio^*^*  mora/i^y,  I  pass  to  certain  expressions  with  which  they  are
expres- closely  connected.

s^!mee  o^'  '^^  science  of  jurisprudence  (or,  simply  and  briefly,  Juris-

jwrispru-  prudence)  is  concerned  with  positive  laws,  or  with  laws  strictly
^^^^f  so  called,  as  considered  without  regard  to  their  goodness  or
positive badness.

^^*^'  Positive moraKty, as considered without regard to its

ethics  or  goodness  or  badness,  might  be  the  subject  of  a  science  closely
sdmurf'  analogous  to  jurisprudence. I  say  ' might  be :'  since  it  is  only


yurisprudence  determined.  173

in  one of  its  branches  (namely,  the  law  of  nations  or  inter- Lbct.  V
national  law), that  positive  morality, as considered without  ugidaiim
regard  to  its  goodness  or  badness,  has  been  treated  by  writers  in  and  scU^nce
a  scientific  or  systematic  manner. — ^For  the  science  of  positive ^^'^
morality,  as  considered  without  regard  to  its  goodness  or  badness,
current  or  established  language  will  hardly  afford  us  a  name.
The  name  rnorak,  or  science  of  morals,  would  denote  it  ambigu-
ously :  the  name  morals,  or  science  of  morals,  being  commonly
applied  (as  I  shall  show  immediately)  to  a  department  of  ethics
or  deontology. But,  since  the  science  of  jurisprudence  is  not
unfrequently  styled  '  the  science  of  positive  law,'  the  science  in
question  might  be  styled  analogically  'the  science  of  'positive
morality.' The  department  of  the  science  in  question  which
relates  to  international  law,  has  actually  been  styled  by  Von
Martens,  a  recent  writer  of  celebrity,  ^positives  oder  praMisches
Volkerrecht:' that is  to say,  *  positive  international law,'  or
'pra4^ical  international  law.' Had  he  named  that  department
of  the  science  *  positive  international  moralityl  the  name  would
have  hit  its  import  with  perfect  precision.

7^  science  of  ethics  (or,  in  the  language  of  Mr.  Bentham,
the  science  of  deontology)  may  be  defined  in  the  following
maimer. — It  afiects  to  determine  the  test  of  positive  law  and
morality,  or  it  affects  to  determine  the  principles  whereon  they
must  be  fashioned  in  order  that  they  may  merit  approbation.
In  other  words,  it  affects  to  expound  them  as  they  should  be ;
or  it  affects  to  expound  them  as  they  ought  to  be ;  or  it  affects
to  expound  them  as  they  would  be  if  they  were  good  or  worthy
of  praise ;  or  it  affects  to  expound  them  as  they  would  be  if
they  conformed  to  an  assumed  measure.

The  science  of  ethics  (or,  simply  and  briefly,  ethics)  consists
of  two  departments :  one  relating  specially  to  positive  law,  the
other  relating  specially  to  positive  morality.  The  department
which  relates  specially  to  positive  law,  is  commonly  styled  the
science  of  legislation,  or,  simply  and  briefly,  legiskUion.  The
department  which  relates  specially  to  positive  morality,  is
commonly  styled  the  science  of  morals,  or,  simply  and  briefly,
morals.

The  foregoing  attempt  to  define  the  science  of  ethics  natur-  Meanineof
ally  leads  me  to  offer  the  following  explanatory  remark.  ^^tthad

When  we  say  that  a  human  law  is  good  or  bad,  or  is  worthy  as  applied
of  praise  or  blame,  or  is  what  it  should  be  or  what  it  should  i^w.
not  be,  or  is  what  it  ought  to  be  or  what  it  ought  not  to  be,  we
mean  (unless  we  intimate  our  mere  liking  or  aversion)  this:


1 74  The  Province  of

Lect.  V namely,  that  the  law  agrees  with  or  difiTers  from  a  something  to
' — ' — ' which  we  tacitly  refer  it  as  to  a  measure  or  test.

For  example,  According  to  either  of  the  hypotheses  which  I
stated  in  preceding  lectures,  a  human  law  is  good  or  bad  as  it
agrees  or  does  not  agree  with  the  law  of  God :  that  is  to  say,
with  the  law  of  Grod  as  indicated  by  the  principle  of  utility,  or
with  the  law  of  God  as  indicated  by  the  moral  sense.  To  the
adherent  of  the  theory  of  utility,  a  human  law  is  good  if  it  be
generally  useful,  and  a  human  law  is  bad  if  it  be  generally
pernicious.  For,  in  his  opinion,  it  is  consonant  or  not  with  the
law  of  God,  inasmuch  as  it  is  consonant  or  not  with  the
principle  of  general  utility.  To  the  adherent  of  the  hypothesis
of  a  moral  sense,  a  human  law  is  good  if  he  likes  it  he  knows
not  why,  and  a  human  law  is  bad  if  he  hates  it  he  knows  not
wherefore.  For,  in  his  opinion,  that  his  inexplicable  feeling  of
liking  or  aversion  shows  that  the  human  law  pleases  or  ofiTends
the  Deity.

To  the  atheist,  a  human  law  is  good  if  it  be  generally  useful,
and  a  human  law  is  bad  if  it  be  generally  pernicious.  For  the
principle  of  general  utility  would  serve  as  a  measure  or  test,
although  it  were  not  an  index  to  an  ulterior  measure  or  test.
But  if  he  call  the  law  a  good  one  without  believing  it  useful,  or
if  he  call  the  law  a  bad  one  without  believing  it  pernicious,  the
atheist  simply  intimates  his  mere  liking  or  aversion.  For,
unless  it  be  thought  an  index  to  the  law  set  by  the  Deity,  an
inexplicable  feeling  of  approbation  or  disapprobation  can  hardly
be  considered  a  measure  or  test.  And,  in  the  opinion  of  the
atheist,  there  is  no  law  of  G^  which  his  inexplicable  feeling
can  point  at.

To  the  believer  in  a  supposed  revelation,  a  human  law  is
good  or  bad  as  it  agrees  with  or  differs  from  the  terms  wherein
the  revelation  is  expressed.

In  short,  the  goodness or  badness  of  a  human  law  is  a

phrase  of  relative  and  varying  import A  law  which  is  good

to  one  man  is  bad  to  another,  in  case  they  tacitly  refer  it  to

different  and  adverse  tests;

Meaningof The  Divine  laws  may  be  styled  good,  in the  sense  with

ff^^as  ap-  ^^^^  ^^  atheist  may  apply  the  epithet  to  human. We  may

jpliedtothe  style  them  good,  or  worthy  of  praise,  inasmuch  as  they  agree

law  of  God.  ^j^j^  utility  considered  as  an  ultimate  test. And  this  is  the

only  meaning  with  which  we  can  apply  the  epithet  to  the  laws

of  God. Unless we  refer  them to  utility considered  as  an

ultimate  test,  we  have  no  test  by  which  we  can  try  them. To


Jurisprudence  determined.  175

say  that  they  are  good  because  they  are  set  by  the  Deity,  is  to  Lect.  v
say  that  they  are  good  as  measured  or  tried  by  themselves.  '  '"^
But  to  say  this  is  to  talk  absurdly :  for  every  object  which  is
measured,  or  every  object  which  is  brought  to  a  test,  is  compared
with  a  given  object  other  than  itself. — K  the  laws  set  by  the
Deity  were  not  generally  useful,  or  if  they  did  not  promote  the
general  happiness  of  his  creatures,  or  if  their  great  Author  were
not  wise  and  benevolent,  they  would  not  be  good,  or  worthy  of
praise,  but  were  devilish  and  worthy  of  execration.

Before  I  conclude  the  present  digression,  I  must  submit
this  further  remark  to  the  attention  of  the  reader.

I  have  intimated  in  the  course  of  this  digression,  that  the  The  ex-
phrase  law  of  nature,  or  the  phrase  natural  law,  often  signifies  JJ^o/^

the  law  of  God.  naturcy  or

Natural  law  as  thus  understood,  and  the  natural  law  which  law^^hdA
I  mentioned  in  my  fourth  lecture,  are  disparate  expressions. The  *^o  ^'^'
naiural  law  which  I  there  mentioned,  is  a  portion  of  positive  law  meanings.
and  positive  morality. It  consists  of  the  human  rules,  legal  and  J^  sonifies
moral,  which  have  obtained  at  all  times  and  obtained  at  aU  places.  God,  or  a

According  to  the  compound  hypothesis  which  I  mentioned  I^^j?^<>^
in  my  fourth  lecture,  these  human  rules,  legal  and  moral,  have  law  and
been  fashioned  on  the  law  of  God  as  indicated  by  the  moral  moramy.
sense. Or,  adopting  the  language  of  the  classical  Eoman  jurists,
these  human  rules,  legal  and  moral,  have  been  fashioned  on  the
Divine  law  as  known  by  natural  reason.

But,  besides  the  human  rules  which  have  obtained  with  all
mankind,  there  are  human  rules,  legal  and  moral,  which  have
been  limited  to  peculiar  times,  or  limited  to  peculiar  places.

Now,  according  to  the  compound  hypothesis  which  I  men-
tioned in  my  fourth  lecture,  these  last  have  not  been  fashioned
on  the  law  of  God,  or  have  been  fashioned  on  the  law  of  God  as
conjectured  by  the  light  of  utility.

Being  fashioned  on  the  law  of  God  as  known  by  an  infallible
guide,  human  rules  of  the  first  class  are  styled  the  law  of  nature :
For  they  are  not  of  human  position  purely  or  simply,  but  are
laws  of  God  or  Nature  clothed  with  human  sanctions.  As
obtaining  at  all  times  and  obtaining  at  all  places,  they  are  styled
by  the  classical  jurists /i(5  gentium,  or  jus  omnium  gentium.

But  human  rules  of  the  second  class  are  styled  positive.
For,  not  being  fashioned  on  the  law  of  God,  or  being  fashioned
on  the  law  of  God  as  merely  conjectured  by  utility,  they,  cer-
tainly or  probably,  are  of  purely  human  position.  They  are  not
laws  of  God  or  Nature  clothed  with  human  sanctions.


I  t6  The  Province  of

Lect.  V  As  I  stated  in  my  fourth  lecture,  and  shall  show  completely

' ' hereafter,  the  distinction  of  human  rules  into  natural  and  positive

involves  the  compound  hypothesis  which  I  mentioned  in  that

discourse.  ^^

The  con-  Positive  laws,  the  appropriate  matter  of  jurisprudence,  are

thepresent  ^^^^^^  ^  ^^®  ^^1  ^^  resemblance,  or  by  a  close  or  remote

(the  fifth) analogy,  to  the  following  objects. — 1.  In  the  way  of  resemblance,

wUhUie ^^®y  *^  related  to  the  laws  of  God. 2.  In  the  way  of  resemblance,

first,  they  are  related  to  those  rules  of  positive  moraUty  which  are

third, ' i^ws  properly  so  called. 3.  By  a  close  or  strong  analogy,  they

fourth,and  are  related  to  those  rules  of  positive  morality  which  are  merely

opinions  or  sentiments  held  or  felt  by  men  in  regard  to  human

conduct. 4.  By  a  remote  or  slender  analogy,  they  are  related

to  laws  merely  mekaphorical,  or  laws  merely  figurativa

To  distinguish*  positive  laws  from  the  objects  now  enume-
rated, is  the  purpose  of  the  present  attempt  to  determine  the
province  of  jurisprudence.

In  pursuance  of  the  purpose  to  which  I  have  now  adverted,
I  stated,  in  my  first  lectuj»,.the  essentials  of  a  law  or  rvh  (taken
with  the  largest  signification  which  can  be  given  to  the  term
properly).

In  my  second,  third,  and  fourth  lectures,  I  stated  the  marks
or  characters  by  which  the  laws  of  God  are  distinguished  from
other  laws.  And,  stating  those  marks  or  characters,  I  explained
the  nature  of  the  index  to  his  unrevealed  laws,  or  I  explained  and
examined  the  hypotheses  which  regard  the  nature  of  that  index.
I  made  this  explanation  at  a  length  which  may  seem  dispropor-
tionate, but  which  I  have  deemed  necessary  because  these  laws,
and  the  index  by  which  they  are  known,  are  the  standard  or
measure  to  which  all  other  laws  should  conform,  and  the  standard
me£isure  or  test  by  which  they  should  be  tried.

But  before  I  can  complete  the  purpose  to  which  I  have
adverted  above,  I  must  examine  or  discuss  especially  the  follow-
ing principal  topics  (and  must  touch  upon  other  topics  of
secondary  or  subordinate  importance). — 1.  I  must  examine  the
marks  or  characters  by  which  positive  laws  are  distinguished
from  other  laws. 2.  I  must  examine  the  distinguishing  marks

^"  The  above  di^pression  was  in  both  it,  one  of  the  minor  points  of  classifi-
the  previous  editions  comprised  in  a  cation  contained  in  the  first  Lecture,  I
disquisition  in  the  form  of  a  note,  which  have  endeavoured  to  represent  the  final
appears  to  have  been  penned  by  the  intention  of  the  author.  The  place  of
author  after  some  portion  of  the  original  the  i|itrusion  is  marked  by  the  use  of
edition  was  in  the  press.  By  inserting  the  word  *  digression '  in  the  marginal
in  the  text  the  greater  part  of  this  note,  note  at  the  commencement  of  the  in-
after  modifying,  in  accordance  with  the  serted  passage  (p.  171  an^). — R.  C.
suggestions  contained  in  another  part  of


yurisprudence  determined.  1 7  7

of  those  positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws  properly  so  called. Lect.  V
3.  I  must  examine  the  distinguishing  marks  of  those  positive ^ '"^
moral  rules  which  are  styled  laws  or  rvhs  by  an  analogical
extension  of  the  term. 4.  I  must  examine  the  distinguishing
marks  of  laws  merely  metaphorical,  or  laws  merely  figurative.

In  order  to  an  explanation  of  the  marks  which  distinguish
positive  laws,  I  must  analyze  the  expression  sovereignty,  the
correlative  expression  subjection,  and  the  inseparably  connected
expression  independent  political  society.  For  the  essential  differ-
ence of  a  positive  law  (or  the  difference  that  severs  it  from  a
law  which  is  not  a  positive  law)  may  be  stated  thus.  Every
positive  law,  or  every  law  simply  and  strictiy  so  called,  is  set
by  a  sovereign  person,  or  a  sovereign  body  of  persons,  to  a
member  or  members  of  the  independent  political  society  wherein
that  person  or  body  is  sovereign  or  supreme.  Or  (changing  the
expression)  it  is  set  by  a  monarch,  or  sovereign  number,  to  a
person  or  persons  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  its  author.

But  my  analysis  of  those  expressions  occupies  so  large  a
space,  that,  in  case  I  placed  it  in  the  Jecture  which  I  am  now
delivering,  the  lecture  which  I  am  now  delivering  would  run  to
insufferable  lengtL

The  purpose  mentioned  above  will,  therefore,  be  completed
in  the  following  order.

Excluding  from  my  present  discourse  my  analysis  of  those
expressions,  I  shall  complete,  in  my  present  discourse,  the
purpose  mentioned  above,  so  far  as  I  can  complete  it  consistently
with  that  exclusion.  In  my  present  discourse,  I  shall  examine
or  discuss  especially  the  following  principal  topics :  namely,  the
distinguishing  marks  of  those  positive  moral  rules  which  are
laws  properly  so  called :  the  distinguishing  marks  of  those  posi-
tive moral  rules  which  are  styled  laws  or  rules  by  an  analogical
extension  of  the  term :  the  distinguishing  marks  of  the  laws
which  are  styled  laws  by  a  metaphor.

I  shall  complete,  in  my  sixth  lecture,  the  purpose  mentioned
above,  by  explaining  the  marks  or  characters  which  distinguish
positive  laws,  or  laws  strictly  so  called :  an  explanation  involving
an  analysis  of  the  capital  expression  sovereignty,  the  correlative
expression  svifection,  and  the  inseparably  connected  expression
independent  political  society.

Having  shown  the  connection  of  my  present  discourse  with
foregoing  and  following  lectures,  I  proceed  to  examine  or  discuss
its  appropriate  topics  or  subjects.

VOL.  I.  N


1 78  714^  Province  of

Lkct.  V  In  my  first  lecture,  I  endeavoured  to  resolve  a  law  (taken

The  easeu-  '^^^  ^^®  largest  signification  which  can  be  ^ven  to  the  term
tiais  of  a properly)  into  the  necessary  or  essential  elements  of  which  it  is

law  pro-  J

poriy  80 composed. »

called,  to-  ^ jf  qw  those  essentials  of  a  law  proper,  together  with  certain

with  cer- bonsequences  which  those  essentials  import,  may  be  stated  briefly

tainconse-  jjj  ^^  following  manner. — 1.  Laws  properly  so  called  are  a

which species  of  commands. But,  being  a  command,  every  law  properly

sentiaU ®^  caUed  flows  from  a  determinate  source,  or  emanates  from  a

import. determinaie  author. In  other. words,  the  author  from  whom  it

proceeds  is  a  determinate  rational  being,  or  a  determinaie  body

or  aggregate  of  rational  beings. For  whenever  a  command  is

expressed  or  intimated,  one  party  signifies  a  wish  that  another

shall  do  or  forbear:  and  the  latter  is  obnoxious. to  an  evil  which

the  former  intends  to  inflict  in  case  the  wish  be  disregarded.

But  every  signification  of  a  wish  made  by  a  single  individual,  or

made  ^y  a  body  of  individuals  as  a  body  or  collective  whole,

supposes  that  the  individual  or  body  is  certain  or  determinate.

And  every  intention  or  purpose  held  by  a  single  individual,  or  held

by  a  body  of  individuals  as  a  body  or  collective  whole,  involves

the  same  supposition. 2.  Every  sanction  properly  so  caUed

is  an  eventual  evil  annexed  to  a  comm/md. Any  eventual  evil

may  operate  as  a  motive  to  conduct : .  but,  unless  the  conduct  be

commanded  and  the  evil  be  annexed  to  the  command  purposely

to  enforce  obedience,  the  evil  is  not  a  san/^ion  in  the  proper

acceptation  of  the  term. 3.  Every  duty  properly  so  called

supposes  a  command  by  which  it  is  created. For  every  sanction

properly  so  called  is  an  ev^entual  evil  ann^exed  to  a  comrnand.

And  duty  properly  so  called  is  obnoxiousness  to  evils  of  the

kind.

The  laws  Now  it  foUd^^s  from  these  premises,  that  the  laws  of  God,

positive  ° and  positive  laws,  are  laws  proper,  or  laws  properly  so  called.

laws,  are  The  laws  of  God  are  laws  proper,  inasmuch  as  they  are

perly  so commands  express  or  tacit,  and  therefore  emanate  from  a  certain

called. source.

Positive  laws,  or  laws  strictly  so  called,  are  established
directly  or  immediately  by  authors  of  three  kinds : — ^by  monarchs,
or  sovereign  bodies,  as  supreme  political. superiors  :  by  men  in  a
state  of  subjection,  as  subordinate  political  superiors :  by  subjects,
as  private  persons,  in  pursuance  of  legal  rights.  But  every  positive
law,  or  every  law  strictly  so  called,  is  a  direct  or  circuitous  com-
mand of  a  monarch  or  sovereign,  number  in  the  character  of
political  superior :  that  is  to  say,  a  direct  or  circuitous  command


Jurispnidence  determined.  1 7  9

of  a  monarch  or  sovereign  number  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a Lect.  v
state  of  subjection  to  its  author. And  being  a  command  (and
therefore  flowing  fi'om  a  determinate  source),  every  positive  law
is  a  law  proper,  or  a  law  properly  so  called.

Besides  the  human  laws  which  I  style  positive  law,  there  The  gen-
are  human  laws  which  I  style  positive  morality,  rules  of  positive  ^"teror
morality,  or  positive  moral  rules.  positive

The  generic  character  of  laws  of  the  class  may  be  stated  J^j™
briefly  in  the  following  negative  manner. — No  law  belonging  to
the  class  is  a  direct  or  circuitous  command  of  a  monarch  or
sovereign  number  in  the  character  of  political  superior.  In
other  words,  no  law  belonging  to  the  class  is  a  direct  or  circuitous
command  of  a  monarch  or  sovereign  number  to  a  person  or  per-
sons in  a  stat^  of  subjection  to  its  author.

But  of  positive  moral  rules,  some  are  laws  proper,  or  law$  Of  positive
properly  so  called :  others  are  laws  improper,  or  laws  improperly  J^^^
so  called. Some  have  all  the  essentials  of  an  imperative  law  or'  some  are
rule :  others  are  deficient  in  some  of  those  essentials,  and  are  ^^^^'
styled  laws  or  nUes  by  an  analogical  extension  of  the  term.  o^^ere  are

The  positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws  properly  so  called,  prd^r.
are  distinguished  from  other  laws  by  the  union  of  two  marks. —  The  posi-
1.  They  are  imperative  laws  or  rules  set  by  men  to  men. 2.  Jj^^y"^'*^
They  are  not  set  by  men  as  political  superiors,  nor  are  they  seti  which  are
by  men  as  private  persons,  in  pursuance  of  legal  rights.  ^Tly^TO '

Inasmuch  as  they  bear  the  latter  of  these  two  marks,  they  called,  are
are  not  commands  of  sovereigns  in  the  character  of  political '.^'*^"*^
superiors. Consequently,  they  are  not  positive  laws :  they  are  ,
not  clothed  with  legal  sanctions,  nor  do  they  oblige  legally  the  \
persons  to  whom  they  are  set. But  being  commands  (and  there-
fore being  established  by  determinate  individuals  or  bodies),  they
are  laws  properly  so  called :  they  are  armed  with  sanctions,  and
impose  duties,  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  terms.

It  will  appear  from  the  following  distinctions,  that  positive
moral  r^iles  which  are  laws  properly  so  called  may  be  reduced
to  three  kinds.

Of' positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws  properly  so  called,
some  are  established  by  men  who  are  not  subjects,  or  are  not  in
a  state  of  subjection :  Meaning  by  *  subjects,*  or  by  '  men  in  a
state  of  subjection,'  men  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  a  monarch
or  sovereign  nimiber. — Of  positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws
properly  so  called,  and  are  not  established  by  men  in  a  state  of
subjection,  some  are  established  by  men  living  in  the  negative
state  which  is  styled  a  state  of  nature  or  a  state  of  anarchy :


1 80  The  Province  of

Lect.  V  that  is  to  say,  by  men  who  are  'n/ot  in  the  state  which  is  styled
^"""^  '  a  state  of  government,  or  are  iwi  members,  sovereign  or  subject,
of  any  political  society. — Of  positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws
properly  so  called,  and  are  not  established  by  men  in  a  state  of
subjection,  others  are  established  by  sovereign  individuals  or
bodies,  but  are  not  established  by  sovereigns  in  the  character  of
political  superiors.  Or  a  positive  moral  rule  of  this  kind  may
be  described  in  the  following  manner :  It  is  set  by  a  monarch
or  sovereign  number,  but  not  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state
of  subjection  to  its  author.

Of  laws  properly  so  called  which  are  set  by  subjects,  some
are  set  by  subjects  as  subordinate  political  superiors.  But  of
laws  properly  so  called  which  are  set  by  subjects,  others  are  set
by  subjects  as  private  persons:  Meaning  by  'private  persons,'
subjects  not  in  the  class  of  subordinate  political  superiors,  or
subordinate  political  superiors  not  considered  as  such. — Laws
set  by  subjects  £is  subordinate  political  superiors,  are  positive
laws:  they  are  clothed  with  legal  sanctions,  and  impose  legal
duties.  They  are  set  by  sovereigns  or  states  in  the  character  of
political  superiors,  although  they  are  set  by  sovereigns  circuitously
or  remotely.  Although  they  are  made  directly  by  subject  or
subordinate  authors,  they  are  made  through  legal  rights  granted
by  sovereigns  or  states,  and  held  by  those  subject  authors  as  mere
trustees  for  the  granters. — Of  laws  set  by  subjects  as  private
persons,  some  are  not  established  by  sovereign  or  supreme
authority.  And  these  are  rules  of  positive  morality :  they  are
not  clothed  with  legal  sanctions,  nor  do  they  oblige  legally  the
parties  to  whom  they  are  set. — But  of  laws  set  by  subjects  as
private  persons,  others  are  set  or  established  in  pursuance  of
legal  rights  residing  in  the  subject  authors.  And  these  are
positive  laws  or  laws  strictly  so  called.  Although  they  are
made  directly  by  subject  authors,  they  are  made  in  pursuance
of  rights  granted  or  conferred  by  sovereigns  in  the  character  of
political  superiors :  they  legally  oblige  the  parties  to  whom  they
are  set,  or  are  clothed  with  legal  sanctions.  They  are  commands
of  sovereigns  as  political  superiors,  although  they  are  set  by
sovereigns  circuitously  or  remotely.^'^

Laws  set  (0  A  law  set  by  a  sabject  as  a  private  law  as  yiewed  from  one  aspect,  and  a

by  men,  as  person,  but  in  pursuance  of  a  legal  right  rule  of  positive  morality  as  viewed  from

private  residing  in  the  subject  author,  is  either  a  another.

persons,  in  positive  law  purely  or  simply,  or  is  com-  The  person  who  makes  the  law  in

pursuance  pounded  of  a  positive  law  and  a  rule  of  pursuance  of  the  leeal  right,  is  either

of  legal  positive morality. Or (chan^ng the  legally  bound  to  male  the  law,  or  he  is

rights.  expression)  it  is  either  a  positive  law  not. In  the  first  case,  the  law  is  a  posi-

purely  or  simply, or  it  is  a  positive  tive  law  purely  or  simply. In  the  second


Jurisprudence  determined.


i8i


It  appears  from  the  foregoing  distinctions,  that  positive  Leot.  V
moral  rules  which  are  laws  properly  so  called  are  of  three  kinds.  ^  '"^
— 1.  Those  which  are  set  by  men  living  in  a  state  of  nature.
2.  Those  which  are  set  by  sovereigns,  but  not  by  sovereigns  as
political  superiors.  3.  Those  which  are  set  by  subjects  as  private
persons,  and  are  not  set  by  the  subject  authors  in  pursuance  of
legal  rights.

To  cite  an  example  of  rules  of  the  first  kind  were  superfluous
labour.  A  man  living  in  a  state  of  nature  may  impose  an  im-
perative law :  though,  since  the  man  is  in  a  state  of  nature,  he
cannot  impose  the  law  in  the  character  of  sovereign,  and  cannot
impose  the  law  in  pursuance  of  a  legal  right  And  the  law
being  imperative  (and  therefore  proceeding  from  a  determinate


case,  the  law  is  compounded  of  a  pomtive
law  and  a  pontive  moral  i-ule.

For  example,  A  guardian  may  have  a
right  over  hia  pnpu  or  ward,  which  he
is  l^ally  bound  to  exercise,  for  the
benefit  of  the  pupil  or  ward,  in  a  given
or  specified  manner.  In  other  words,  a
guanlian  may  be  clothed  with  a  right,
oyer  his  pupil  or  ward,  in  trust  to  exercise
the  same,  for  the  benefit  of  the  pupil  or
ward,  in  a  given  or  specified  manner.
Now  if,  in  pursuance  of  his  rieht,  and
agreeably  to  his  duty  or  trust,  he  sets  a
law  or  rule  to  the  pupil  or  ward,  the  law
is  a  positive  law  purely  or  simply.  It  is
properly  a  law  which  the  state  sets  to
the  wajtl  through  its  minister  or  in-
strument the  guardian.  It  is  not  made
by  the  guardian  of  his  own  spontaneous
movement,  or  is  made  in  pursuance  of  a
duty  which  the  state  has  imposed  upon
him.  The  position  of  the  ^ardian  is
closely  analo^us  to  the  position  of  sub-
ordinate pohtical  supenors ;  who  hold
their  delegated  powers  of  direct  or  judi-
cial legisbtion  as  mere  trustees  for  the
sovereign  granters.

Again :  the  master  has  legal  rights,
over  or  against  his  slave,  which  are  con-
ferred by  the  state  upon  the  master  for
his  own  benefit  And,  since  they  are
conferred  upon  him  for  his  own  benefit,
he  is  not  legally  bound  to  exercise  or  use
them.  Now  if,  in  pursuance  of  these
rights  he  sets  a  law  to  his  slave,  the  law
is  compounded  of  a  positive  law  and  a
positive  moral  rule.  Being  made  by
sovereign  authority,  and  clothed  by  the
sovereign  with  sanctions,  the  law  made
by  the  master  is  properly  a  positive  law.
But,  since  it  is  made  by  the  master  of
his  own  spontaneous  movement,  or  is  not
made  by  the  master  in  pursuance  of  a  legal
duty,  it  is  properly  a  rule  of  positive  mo-
rality, as  well  as  a  positive  law.  Though
the  law  set  by  tne  master  is  set  cir-


cuitouslv  by  the  sovereign,  it  is  set  or
establisned  by  the  sovereiffu  at  the
pleasure  of  the  subject  auuior.  The
master  is  not  the  instrument  of  the  sove-
reign or  state,  but  the  sovereign  or  state
is  rather  the  instrument  of  the  master.

Before  I  dismiss  the  subject  of  the
present  note,  I  must  make  two  remarks.

1.  Of  laws  made  by  men  as  private
persons,  some  are  frequently  styled  '  laws
auUmomic*  Or  it  is  frequently  said  of
some  of  those  laws,  that  they  are  made
through  an  a&rwofda  residing  in  the
subject  authors.  Kow  laws  autonomic,
or  auUmomical,  are  laws  made  by  sub-
jects, as  private,  persons,  in  pursuance
of  legal  rights :  tnat  is  to  say,  in  pur-
suance of  le^  rights  which  they  are
free  to  exercise  or  not,  or  in  pursuance
of  legal  rights  which  are  not  saddled
with  trusts.  A  law  of  the  kind  is  styled
autonomic,  because  it  is  made  by  its
author  of  bis  own  spontaneous  disposi-
tion, or  not  in  pursuance  of  a  duty  im-
posed upon  him  by  the  state.

It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  term
autonomic  is  not  exclusively  applicable
to  laws  of  the  kind  in  question.  The
term  will  apply  to  every  law  which  Ib
not  made  by  its  author  in  pursuance  of
a  legal  duty.  It  will  apply,  for  instance,
to  every  law  which  is  made  immediately
or  directly  by  a  monarch  or  sovereign
number:  independence  of  legal  duty
being  of  the  essence  of  sovereignty.

2.  Laws  which  are  positive  law  as
viewed  from  one  aspect,  but  which  are

rsitive  morality  as  viewed  from  another,
place  simply  or  absolutely  in  the  first
of  those  capital  classes.  If,  affecting
exauisite  precision,  I  placed  them  in
each  of  tnose  classes,  I  could  hardly
indicate  the  boundary  by  which  those
classes  are  severed  without  resorting  to
expressions  of  repulsive  complexity  and
length.


1 82  The  Provifice  of

Lect.  V source)  is a  law  properly  so called : though,  for  want of  a
' ' ' sovereign  author  proximate  or  remote,  it  is  not  a  positive  law
but  a  rule  of  positive  morality.

r  An  imperative  law  set  hy  a  sovereign  to  a  sovereign,  or  by
\one  supreme  government  to  another  supreme  government,  is  an
/example  of  rules  of  the  second  kind.  Since  no  supreme  govem-
Iment  is  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  another,  an  imperative  law
f  set  by  a  sovereign  to  a  sovereign  is  not  set  by  its  author  in  the
character  of  political  superior.  Nor  is  it  set  by  its  author  in
pursuance  of  a  legal  right :  for  every  legal  right  is  conferred  by  a
supreme  government,  and  is  conferred  on  a  person  or  persons  in
a  state  of  subjection  to  the  granter.  Consequently,  an  imperative
law  set  by  a  sovereign  to  a  sovereign  is  not  a  positive  law  or  a
law  strictly  so  called.  But  being  imperative  (and  therefore  pro-
ceeding from  a  determinate  source),  it  amounts  to  a  law  in  the
proper  signification  of  the  term,  although  it  is  purely  or  simply
\a  rule  of  positive  morality.

If  they  be  set  by  subjects  as  private  persons,  and  be  not
set  by  their  authors  in  pursuance  of  legal  rights,  the  laws  follow-
ing axe  examples  of  rules  of  the  third  kind :  namely,  imperative
laws  set  by  parents  to  children ;  imperative  laws  set  by  masters
to  servants;  imperative  laws  set  by  lenders  to  borrowers;
imperative  laws  set  by  patrons  to  parasites.  Being  imperative
(and  therefore  proceeding  from  determinate  sources) ;  the  laws
foregoing  are  laws  properly  so  called :  though,  if  they  be  set  by
subjects  as  private  persons,  and  be  not  set  by  their  authors  in
pursuance  of  legal  rights,  they  are  not  positive  laws  but  rules  of
positive  morality.

Again:  A  club  or  society  of  men,  signifying  its  collective
pleasure  by  a  vote  of  its  assembled  members,  passes  or  makes  a
law  to  be  kept  by  its  members  severally  under  pain  of  exclusion
from  its  meetings.  Now  if  it  be  made  by  subjects  aa  private
persons,  and  be  not  made  by  its  authors  in  pursuance  of  a  legal
right,  the  law  voted  and  passed  by  the  assembled  members  of
the  club  is  a  further  example  of  rules  of  the  third  kind.  If  it
be  made  by  subjects  as  private  persons,  and  be  not  made  by  its
authors  in  pursuance  of  a  legal  right,  it  is  not  a  positive  law  or
a  law  strictly  so  called.  But  being  an  imperative  law  (and
the  body  by  which  it  is  set  being  therefore  determinate),  it  may
be  styled  a  law  or  rule  with  absolute  precision  or  propriety,
although  it  is  purely  or  simply  a  rule  of  positive  mortdity.
Theposi-  The  positive  moral  rules  which are laws  improperly  so

tive  moral called,  are  laws  set  or  imposed  by  general  opinion :  that  is  to  say,


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 8  3

by  the  general  opinion  of  [any  class  or  any  society  of  persons. Lbct.  v
For  example,  Some  are  set  or  imposed  by  the  general  opinion  of  rui^^^^
persons  who  are  members  of  a  profession  or  calling :  others,  by  J^hich  are
that  of  persons  who  inhabit  a  town  or  province :  others,  by  that  properly  so
of  a  nation  or  independent  political  society:  others,  by  that  of  ?* *  *''®
a  larger  society  formed  of  various  nations.  imposed  by

A  few  species  of  the  laws  which  are  set  by  general  opinion  9^^;^^
have  gotten  appropriate  names. — For  example,  There  are  laws
or  rules  imposed  upon  gentlemen  by  opinions  current  amongst
gentlemen.  And  these  are  usually  styled  the  rules  of  honour,  or
the  laws  or  law  of  horiov/r. — ^There  are  laws  or  rules  imposed
upon  people  of  fashion  by  opinions  current  in  the  fashionable
world.  And  these  are  usually  styled  the  law  set  hy  fashion, —
There  are  laws  which  regard  the  conduct  of  independent  political
societies  in  their  various  relations  to  one  another :  Or,  rather,
there  are  laws  which  regard  the  conduct  of  sovereigns  or  supreme
governments  in  their  various  relations  to  one  another.  And
laws  or  rules  of  this  species,  which  are  imposed  upon  nations  or
sovereigns  by  opinions  current  amongst  nations,  are  usually  styled
the  law  of  naiions  or  international  law.

Now  a  law  set  or  imposed  by  general  opinion  is  a  law  im-\A  law  set
properly  so  called. It  is  styled  a  law  or  rule  by  an  analogical  (by^TOneral
extension  of  the  term. When  we  speak  of  a  law  set  by  general  opinion,  is
opinion,  we  denote,  by  that  expression,  the  following  fact. —  ^J!^o/
Some  intermediate  body  or  uncertain  aggregate  of  persons  regards '  seruiment
a  kind  of  conduct  with  a  sentunent  of  aversion  or  nking :  Or  terminau
(changing  the  expression)  that  indeterminate  body  opines  un-  ^xxiyo^.
favourably  or  favourably  of  a  given  kind  of  conduct. In  conse-  Tegard  to  a
quence  of  that  sentiment,  or  in  consequence  of  that  opinion,  it  is  ^n^^/^
likely  that  they  or  some  of  them  will  be  displeased  with  a  party
who  shall  pursue  or  not  pursue  conduct  of  that  kind. And,  in  ,
consequence  of  that  displeasure,  it  is  likely  that  some  party  {whai
party  being  undetermined)  will  visit  the  party  provoking  it  with  i
some  evil  or  another.

The  body  by  whose  opinion  the  law  is  said  to  be  set,  does/
not  command,  expressly  or  tacitly,  that  conduct  of  the  given
kind  shall  be  forborne  or  pursued. For,  since  it  is  not  a  body
precisely  determined  or  certain,  it  cannot^  as  a  body,  express  orj '
intimate  a  wish. As  a  body,  it  cannot  signify  a  wish  by  oral \
or  written  words,  or  by  positive '  or  negative  deportment^ The
so  called  law  or  ruie  which  its  opinion  is  said  to  impose,  is'^
merely  the  sentim^ent  which  it  feels,  or  is  merely  the  opinion  j
which  it  holds,  in  regard  to  a  kind  of  conduct.  ^

■ )


1 84  The  Province  of

Lbct.  V  A  determinate  member  of  the  body,  who  opines  or  feels

'  '  '  with  the  body,  may  doubtless  be  moved  or  impelled,  by  that
very  opinion  or  sentiment,  to  comrrumd  that  conduct  of  the  kind
shall  be  forborne  or  pursued.  But  the  command  expressed  or
intimated  by  that  determinate  party  is  not  a  law  or  rule  imposed
by  general  opinion.  It  is  a  law  properly  so  called,  set  by  a
determinate  author. — ^For  example.  The  so  called  law  of  nations
consists  of  opinions  or  sentiments  current  among  nations
generally.  It  therefore  is  not  law  properly  so  called.  But  one
supreme  government  may  doubtless  command  another  to  forbear
from  a  kind  of  conduct  which  the  law  of  nations  condemns.
And,  though  it  is  fashioned  on  law  which  is  law  improperly  so
called,  this  command  is  a  law  in  the  proper  signification  of  the
term.  Speaking  precisely,  the  command  is  a  rule  of  positive
morality  set  by  a  determinate  author.  For,  as  no  supreme
government  is  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  another,  the  govern-
ment commanding  does  not  command  in  its  character  of  political
superior.  If  the  government  receiving  the  conmiand  were  in  a
state  of  subjection  to  the  other,  the  command,  though  fashioned
on  the  law  of  nations,  would  amount  to  a  positive  law.

The  foregoing  description  of  a  law  set  by  general  opinion
imports  the  following  consequences : — ^that  the  party  who  will
enforce  it  against  any  future  transgressor  is  never  determinate
and  assignable.  The  party  who  actually  enforces  it  against  an
actual  transgressor  is,  of  necessity,  certain.  In  other  words,  if
an  actual  transgressor  be  harmed  in  consequence  of  the  breach
of  the  law,  and  in  consequence  of  that  displeasure  which  the
breach  of  the  law  has  provoked,  he  receives  the  harm  from  a
party,  who,  of  necessity,  is  certain.  But  that  certain  party  is
not  the  executor  of  a  command  proceeding  from  the  uncertain
body.  He  has  not  been  authorised  by  that  uncertain  body  to
enforce  that  so  called  law  which  its  opinion  is  said  to  establish.
He  is  not  in  the  position  of  a  minister  of  justice  appointed  by
the  sovereign  or  state  to  execute  conmiands  which  it  issues.
He  harms  the  actual  offender  against  the  so  called  law  or  (to
speak  in  analogical  language)  he  applies  the  sanction  annexed
to  it,  of  his  own  spontaneous  movement.  Consequently,  though
a  party  who  actually  enforces  it  is,  of  necessity,  certain,  the
party  who  will  enforce  it  against  any  future  offender  is  never
determinate  and  assignable.
A  brief  It  follows  from  the  foregoing  reasons,  that  a  so  called  law

o^th™^^*^ set  by  general  opinion  is  not  a  law  in  the  proper  signification
analogy of  the  term. It  also  follows  from  the  same  reasons,  that  it  is


Jurispnidence  determined.  1 8  5

not  armed  with  a  sanction,  and  does  not  impose  a  duty,  in  the ^^'^  ^•
proper  acceptation  of  the  expressions. For  a  sanction  properly  between  a
so  called  is  an  evil  annexed  to  a  command. And  duty  properly  ^^  proper
so  called  is  an  obnoxiousness  to  evils  of  the  kind.  set  or  im-

But  a  so  called  law  set  by  general  opinion  is  closely  ana-  ^^^
logons  to  a  law  in  the  proper  signification  of  the  term. And,  opinion,
by  consequence,  the  so  called  sanction  with  which  the  former
is  armed,  and  the  so  called  duty  which  the  former  imposes,  are
closely  analogous  to  a  sanction  and  a  duty  in  the  proper  accepta-
tion of  the  expressions.

The  analogy  between  a  law  in  the  proper  signification  of
the  term  and  a  so  called  law  set  by  general  opinion,  may  be
stated  briefly  in  the  following  manner. — 1.  In  the  case  of  a
law  properly  so  called,  the  determinate  individual  or  body  by
whom  the  law  is  established  wishes  that  conduct  of  a  kind  shall
be  forborne  or  pursued.  In  the  case  of  a  law  imposed  by
general  opinion,  a  wish  that  conduct  of  a  kind  shall  be  forborne
or  pursued  is  felt  by  the  imcertain  body  whose  general  opinion
imposes  it.  2.  If  a  party  obliged  by  the  law  proper  shall  not
comply  with  the  wish  of  the  determinate  individual  or  body,
he  probably  will  suffer,  in  wn^eq^Mftuie  of  his  not  complying,  the
evil  or  inconvenience  annexed  to  the  law  as  a  sanction.  If
a  party  obnoxious  to  their  displeasure  shall  not  comply  with
the  wish  of  the  uncertain  body  of  persons,  he  probably  will
suffer,  in  consMpi^fMie  of  his  not  complying,  some  evil  or  incon-
venience from  some  party  or  another.  3.  By  the  sanction
annexed  to  the  law  proper,  the  parties  obliged  are  inclined  to
act  or  forbear  agreeably  to  its  injunctions  or  prohibitions.  By
the  evil  which  probably  will  follow  the  displeasure  of  the
imcertain  body,  the  parties  obnoxious  are  inclined  to  act  or
forbear  agreeably  to  the  sentiment  or  opinion  which  is  styled
analogically  a  law.  4.  In  consequence  of  the  law  properly  so
called,  the  conduct  of  the  parties  obUged  has  a  steadiness,
constancy,  or  uniformity,  which,  without  the  existence  of  the
law,  their  conduct  would  probably  want.  In  consequence  of
the  sentiment  or  opinion  which  is  styled  analogically  a  law,  the
conduct  of  the  parties  obnoxious  has  a  steadiness,  constancy,  or
uniformity,  which,  without  the  existence  of  that  sentiment  in
the  uncertain  body  of  persons,  their  conduct  would  hardly
present  For  they  who  are  obnoxious  to  the  sanction  which
arms  the  law  proper,  commonly  do  or  forbear  from  the  acts
which  the  law  enjoins  or  forbids ;  whilst  they  who  are  obnoxious
to  the  evil  which  will  probably  follow  the  displeasure  of  the


1 86


liEcr.  V


Distinc-
tion be-
tween a
determin-
ate,  and  an
iiuieter-
mincUe
body  of
single  or
individual
persons.


TAe  Province  of

uncertain  body  of  persons,  commonly  do  or  forbear  from  the
acts  which  the  body  approves  or  dislikes. — ^Many  of  the  applica-
tions of  the  term  law  which  are  merely  metaphorical  or  figura-
tive, were  probably  suggested  (as  I  shall  show  hereafter)  by  that
uniformity  of  conduct  which  is  consequent  on  a  law  proper.

In  the  foregoing  analysis  of  a  law  set  by  general  oproion,
the  meaning  of  the  expression  '  indeterminate  body  of  persons '
is  indicated  rather  than  explaiDed.  To  complete  my  analysis  of
a  law  set  by  general  opinion  (and  to  abridge  that  analysis  of
sovereignty  which  I  shall  place  in  my  sixth  lecture),  I  will  here
insert  a  concise  exposition  of  the  following  pregnant  distinction :
namely,  the  distinction  between  a  determinate,  and  an  indeter-
minate body  of  single  or  individual  persons. — If  my  exposition
of  the  distinction  shall  appear  obscure  and  crabbed,  my  hearers
(I  hope)  will  recollect  that  the  distinction  could  hardly  be
expounded  in  lucid  and  flowing  expressions.

I  will  first  describe  the  distinction  in  general  or  abstract
terms,  and  will  then  exemplify  and  illustrate  the  general  or
.abstract  description.

If  a  body  of  persons  be  determinate,  ail  the  persons  who
compose  it  are  determined  and  assignable,  or  every  person  who
belongs  to  it  is  determined  and  may  be  indicated.

But  determinate  bodies  are  of  two  kinds.

A  determinate  body  of  one  of  those  kinds  is  distinguished  by
the  following  marks. — 1.  The  body  is  composed  of  persons  deter-
mined specifically  or  individuaUy,  or  determined  by  characters  or
descriptions  respectively  appropriate  to  themselves.  2.  Though
every  individual  member  must  of  necessity  answer  to  many
generic  descriptions,  every  individual  member  is  a  member  of  the
determinate  body,  not  by  reason  of  his  answering  to  any  generic
description,  but  by  reason  of  his  bearing  his  specific  or  appropriate
character.

A  determinate  body  of  the  other  of  those  kinds  is  distinguished
by  the  following  marks. — 1.  It  comprises  all  the  persons  who
belong  to  a  given  class,  or  who  belong  respectively  to  two  or
more  of  such  classes.  In  other  words,  every  person  who  answers
to  a  given  generic  description,  or  to  any  of  two  or  more  given
generic  descriptions,  is  also  a  member  of  the  determinate  body.
2.  Though  every  individual  member  is  of  necessity  determined
by  a  specific  or  appropriate  character,  every  individual  member
is  a  member  of  the  determinate  body,  not  by  reason  of  his
bearing  his  specific  or  appropriate  character,  but  by  reason  of
his  answering  to  the  given  generic  description.


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 8  7

If  a  body  be  indetenninate,  all  the  persons  who  compose  it Lect.  V
are  not  determined  and  assignable. Or  (changing  the  expres- ' '
sion)  &oery  person  who  belongs  to  it  is  not  determined,  and,  /
therefore,  cannot  be  indicated. — For  an,  indeterminate  body  con-  I
sists  of  sorm  of  the  persons  who  belong  to  another  and  larger  I
aggregate. But  hxm  many  of  those  persons  are  members  of  the  /
indeterminate  body,  or  which  of  those  persons  in  particular  are  /
members  of  the  indeterminate  body,  is  not  and  cannot  be  known/
completely  and  exactly.  ^

For  example.  The  trading  firm  or  partnership  of  A  B  and  C
is  a  determinate  body  of  the  kind  first  described  above.  Every
member  of  the  firm  is  determined  specifically,  or  by  a  character
or  description  peculiar  or  appropriate  to  himself.  And  every
member  of  the  firm  belongs  to  the  determinate  body,  not  by
reason  of  his  answering  to  any  generic  description,  but  by  reason
of  his  bearing  his  specific  or  appropriate  character.  It  is  as
being  that  very  individual  person  that  A  B  or  C  is  a  limb  of
the  partnership.

The  British  Parliament  for  the  time  being,  is  a  determinate
body  of  the  kind  lastly  described  above.  It  comprises  the  only
person  who  answers  for  the  time  being  to  the  generic  description
of  king.  It  comprises  every  person  belonging  to  the  class  of
peers  who  are  entitled  for  the  time  being  to  vote  in  the  upper
house.  It  comprises  every  person  belonging  to  the  class  of
commoners  who  for  the  time  being  represent  the  conunons  in
parliament  And,  though  every  member  of  the  British  Parlia-
ment is  of  necessity  determined  by  a  specific  or  appropriate
character,  he  is  not  a  member  of  the  parliament  by  reason  of
his  bearing  that  character,  but  by  reason  of  his  answering  to
the  given  generic  description.  It  is  not  as  being  the  individual
George,  but  as  being  the  individual  who  answers  to  the  generic
description  of  king,  that  George  is  king  of  Britain  and  Ireland,
and  a  limb  of  the  determinate  body  which  is  sovereign  or
supreme  therein.  It  is  not  as  being  the  individual  Grey,  or
as  being  the  individual  Peel,  that  Grey  is  a  member  of  the
upper  house,  or  Peel  a  member  of  the  lower.  Grey  is  a  member
of  the  upper  house,  as  belonging  to  the  class  of  peers  entitled
to  vote  therein.  Peel  is  a  member  of  the  lower  house,  as
answering  the  generic  description  '  representative  of  the  commons
in  parliament.' — The  generic  characters  of  the  persons  who
compose  the  British  Parliament,  are  here  described  generally,
and,  therefore,  inaccurately.  To  describe  those  generic  characters
minutely  and  accurately,  were  to  render  a  complete  description


1 88  The  Province  of

Lect.  V  of  the  intricate  and  perplexed  system  which  is  styled  the  British
^^^  Constitution. — ^A  maxim  of  that  Constitution  may  illustrate  the
subject  of  the  present  paragraph.  The  meaning  of  the  maxim,
'  the  king  never  dies/  may,  I  believe,  be  rendered  in  the  following
manner.  Though  an  actual  occupant  of  the  kingly  office  is
human,  mortal,  and  transient,  the  duration  of  the  office  itself
has  no  possible  limit  which  the  British  Constitution  can  con-
template. And  on  the  death  of  an  actual  occupant,  the  office
instantly  devolves  to  that  individual  person  who  bears  the
generic  character  which  entitles  to  take  the  crown:  to  that
individual  person  who  is  then  heir  to  the  crown,  according  to
the  generic  description  contained  in  the  Act  of  Settlement

To  exemplify  the  foregoing  description  of  an  indeterminate
body,  I  will  revert  to  the  nature  of  a  law  set  by  general  opinion.
Where  a  so  called  law  is  set  by  geii^al  opinion,  most  of  the
persons  who  belong  to  a  determinate  body  or  class  opine  or  feel
alike  in  regard  to  a  kind  of  conduct  But  the  number  of  that
majority,  or  the  several  individuals  who  compose  it,  ccuinot  be
fixed  or  assigned  with  perfect  fulness  or  accuracy.  For  example,
A  law  set  or  imposed  by  the  general  opinion  of  a  nation,  by
the  general  opinion  of  a  legislative  assembly,  by  the  general
opinion  of  a  profession,  or  by  the  general  opinion  of  a  club,  is
an  opinion  or  sentiment,  relating  to  conduct  of  a  kind,  which  is
held  or  felt  by  mast  of  those  who  belong  to  that  certain  body.
But  how  many  of  that  body,  or  which  of  that  body  in  particular*,
hold  or  feel  that  given  opinion  or  sentiment,  is  not  and  cannot
be  known  completely  and  correctly.  Consequently,  that  majority
of  the  certain  body  forms  a  body  uncertain.  Or  (changing  the
expression)  the  body  which  is  formed  by  that  majority  is  an
indeterminate  portion  of  a  determinate  body  or  aggregate. —
Generally  speaking,  therefore,  an  indeterminate  body  is  an
indeterminate  portion  of  a  body  determinate  or  certain.  But  a
body  or  class  of  persons  may  also  be  indeterminate,  because  it
consists  of  persons  of  a  vague  generic  character.  For  example.
The  body  or  class  of  gentlemen  consists  of  individual  persons
whose  generic  character  of  gentleman  cannot  be  described  pre-
cisely. Whether  a  given  man  were  a  genuine  gentleman  or
not,  is  a  question  which  diflTerent  men  might  answer  in  different
ways. — ^An  indeterminate  body  may  therefore  be  indeterminate
after  a  twofold  manner.  It  may  consist  of  an  uncertain  portion
of  an  uncertain  body  or  class.  For  example,  a  law  set  or
imposed  by  the  general  opinion  of  gentlemen  is  an  opinion  or
sentiment  of  most  of  those  who  are  commonly  deemed  gentle-


yurisprtidence  determined.  1 89

manly.  But  what  proportion  of  the  class  holds  the  opinion  in  Lect.  V
question,  or  what  proportion  of  the  class  feels  the  sentiment  in  "'^
question,  is  not  less  indeterminate  than  the  generic  character  of
gentlemen.  The  body  by  whose  opinion  the  so  called  law  is  set,
is,  therefore,  an  imcertain  portion  of  an  uncertain  body  or
aggregate. — And  here  I  may  briefly  remark,  that  a  certain
portion  of  a  certain  body  is  itself  a  body  determinate.  For
example,  The  persons  who  answer  the  generic  description '  repre-
sentative of  the  commons  in  parliament,'  are  a  certain  portion
of  the  persons  who  answer  the  generic  description  '  commoner
of  the  united  kingdom.'  A  select  committee  of  the  representative
body,  or  any  portion  of  the  body  happening  to  form  a  house,  is
a  certain  or  determined  portion  of  the  representatives  of  the
commons  in  parliament.  And,  in  any  of  these  or  similar
cases,  the  certain  portion  of  the  certain  body  is  itself  a  body
determinate.

A  determinate  body  of  persons  is  capable  of  corporate  con-
duct, or  is  capable,  as  a  body,  of  positive  or  negative  deportment.
Whether  it  consist  of  persons  determined  by  specific  characters,
or  of  persons  determined  or  defined  by  a  character  or  characters
generic,  every  person  who  belongs  to  it  is  determined  and  may
be  indicated.  In  the  first  case,  every  person  who  belongs  to  it
may  be  indicated  by  his  specific  character.  In  the  second  case,
every  person  who  belongs  to  it  is  also  knowable:  For  every
person  who  answers  to  the  given  generic  description,  or  who
answers  to  any  of  the  given  generic  descriptions,  is  therefore  a
member  of  the  body.  Consequently,  the  entire  body,*  or  any
proportion  of  its  members,  is  capable,  as  a  body,  of  positive  or
negative  deportment :  As,  for  example,  of  meeting  at  determinate
times  and  places ;  of  issuing  expressly  or  tacitly  a  law  or  other
command ;  of  choosing  and  deputing  representatives  to  perform
its  intentions  or  wishes ;  of  receiving  obedience  from  others,  or
from  any  of  its  own  members.

But  an  indeterminate  body  is  incapable  of  corporate  conduct,
or  is  incapable,  as  a  body,  of  positive  or  negative  deportment.
An  indeterminate  body  is  incapable  of  corporate  conduct,  inas-
much as  the  several  persons  of  whom  it  consists  cannot  be
known  and  indicated  completely  and  correctly.  In  case  a
portion  of  its  members  act  or  forbeai;  in  concert,  that  given
portion  of  its  members  is,  by  that  very  concert,  a  determinate
or  certain  body.  For  example,  A  law  set  or  imposed  by  the
general  opinion  of  barristers  condemns  the  sordid  practice  of
hugging  or  caressing  attorneys. And  as  those  whose  opinion


1 90  The  Province  of

Lect.  V  or  sentiment  sets  the  so  called  law  are  an  indeterminate  part  of
'  '  the  determinate  body  of  barristers,  they  form  a  body  uncertain
and  incapable  of  corporate  conduct.  But  in  case  a  number  or
portion  of  that  uncertain  body  assembled  and  passed  a  resolution
to  check  the  practice  of  hugging,  that  number  or  portion  of  that
uncertain  body  would  be,  by  the  very  act,  a  certain  body  or
aggregate.  It  would  form  a  determinate  body  consisting  of  the
determined  individuals  who  assembled  and  passed  the  resolution.
— ^A  law  imposed  by  general  opinion  may  be  the  cause  of  a  law
in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term.  But  the  law  properly  so
called,  which  is  the  consequent  or  effect,  utterly  differs  from  the
so  called  law  which  is  the  antecedent  or  cause.  The  one  is  an
opinion  or  sentiment  of  an  uncertain  body  of  persons ;  of  a  body
essentially  incapable  of  joint  or  corporate  conduct.  The  other
is  set  or  established  by  the  positive  or  negative  deportment  of
a  certain  individual  or  aggregate.

For  the  purpose  of  rendering  my  exposition  as  little  intri-
cate as  possible,  I  have  supposed  that  a  body  of  persons,  form-
ing a  body  determinate,  either  consists  of  persons  determined
by  specific  characters,  or  of  persons  determined  or  defined  by  a
generic  description  or  descriptions. — But  a  body  of  persons,
forming  a  body  determinate,  may  consist  of  persons  determined
by  specific  or  appropriate  characters,  and  also  of  persons  deter-
mined by  a  character  or  characters  generic.  Let  us  suppose,
for  example,  that  the  individual  Oliver  Cromwell  was  sovereign
or  supreme  in  England :  or  that  the  individual  Cromwell,  and
the  individuals  Ireton  and  Fleetwood,  formed  a  triumvirate
which  was  sovereign  in  that  country.  Let  us  suppose,  more-
over, that  Cromwell,  or  the  triumvirs,  convened  a  house  of
commons  elected  in  the  ancient  manner ;  and  that  Cromwell,  or
the  triumvirs,  yielded  a  part  in  the  sovereignty  to  this  repre-
sentative body.  Now  the  sovereign  or  supreme  body  formed
by  Cromwell  and  the  house,  or  the  sovereign  and  supreme  body
formed  by  the  triumvirs  and  the  house,  would  have  consisted  of
a  person  or  persons  determined  or  defined  specifically,  and  of
persons  determined  or  defined  by  a  generic  character  or  descrip-
tion. The  members  of  the  house  of  commons  would  have
been  members  of  the  sovereign  body,  as  answering  the  generic
description  'representatives  of  the  commons  in  parliament*
But  it  is  as  being  the  very  individusJ  CromweU,  or  as  being  the
very  individuals  Cromwell,  Ireton,  and  Fleetwood,  that  he  or
they  would  have  formed  a  limb  of  the  sovereign  or  supreme
body. It  is  not  as  answering  to  a  given  generic  description,  or


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 9 1

as  acquiring  a  part  in  the  sovereignty  by  a  given  generic  mode,  Lect.  V
that  he  or  they  would  have  shared  the  sovereignty  with  the  '
body  representing  the  people. — ^A  body  of  persons,  forming  a
body  determinate,  may  also  consist  of  persons  determined  or
defined  specifically,  and  determined  or  defined  moreover  by  a
character  or  characters  generic.  A  select  committee  of  a  body
representing  a  people  or  nation,  consists  of  individual  persons
named  or  appointed  specifically  to  sit  on  that  given  committee.
But  those  specific  individuals  could  not  be  members  of  the
committee,  unless  they  answered  the  generic  description  *  repre-
sentative of  the  people  or  nation.'

It  follows  from  the  exposition  immediately  preceding  that  \
the  one  or  the  number  which  is  sovereign  in  an  independent  \
political  society  is  a  determinate  individual  person  or  a  deter- I
minate  body  of  persons. If  the  sovereign  one  or  number  were  I
not  determinate  or  certain,  it  could  not  command  expressly  or  1
tacitly,  and  could  not  be  an  object  of  obedience  to  the  subject  I
members  of  the  community. — Inasmuch  as  this  principle  is
amply  explained  by  the  exposition  immediately  preceding,  I
shall  refer  to  it  in  my  sixth  lecture,  as  to  a  principle  sufficiently
known. The  intricate  and  difficult  analysis  which  I  shall  place
in  that  discourse,  will  thus  be  somewhat  facilitated,  and  not
inconsiderably  abridged.

As  closely  connected  with  the  matter  of  the  exposition
immediately  preceding,  the  following  remark  concerning  supreme
government  may  be  put  commodiously  in  the  present  place. — In
order  that  a  supreme  government  may  possess  much  stability,
and  that  the  society  wherein  it  is  supreme  may  enjoy  much
tranquillity,  the  persons  who  take  the  sovereignty  in  the  way  of
succession,  must  take  or  acquire  by  a  given  generic  mode,  or  by
given  generic  modes.  Or  (changing  the  expression)  they  must
take  by  reason  of  their  answering  to  a  given  generic  description,
or  by  reason  of  their  respectively  answering  to  given  generic
descriptions. — For  example,  the  Eoman  Emperors  or  Princes
(who  were  virtually  monarchs  or  autocrators)  did  not  succeed
to  the  sovereignty  of  the  Boman  Empire  or  World  by  a  given
generic  title:  by  a  mode  of  acquisition  given  or  preordained,
and  susceptible  of  generic  description.  It  was  neither  as  lineal
descendant  of  Julius  Caesar  or  Augustus,  nor  by  the  testament
or  other  disposition  of  the  last  possessor  of  the  throne,  nor  by
the  appointment  or  nomination  of  the  Boman  people  or  senate,
nor  by  the  election  of  a  determinate  body  formed  of  the  military
class,  nor  by  any  mode  of  acquisition  generic  and  preordained,


1 92  The  Province  of

LdECT.  V  that  every  successive  Emperor,  or  every  successive  Prince,
''""^'  '  acquired  the  virtual  sovereignty  of  the  Koman  Empire  or
World.  Every  successive  Emperor  acquired  by  a  mode  of  acqui-
sition which  was  purely  anomalous  or  accidental :  which  had  not
.  been  predetermined  by  any  law  or  custom,  or  by  any  positive
law  or  rule  of  positive  morality.  Every  actual  occupant  of  the
Imperial  ofl&ce  or  dignity  (whatever  may  have  been  the  manner
wherein  he  had  gotten  possession)  was  obeyed,  for  the  time,  by
the  bulk  of  the  military  class ;  was  acknowledged,  of  course,  by
the  impotent  and  trembling  senate ;  and  received  submission,  of
course,  from  the  inert  and  helpless  mass  which  inhabited  the  city
and  provinces.  By  reason  of  this  irregularity  in  the  succession
to  the  virtual  sovereignty,  the  demise  of  an  Emperor  was  not
imcommonly  followed  by  a  shorter  or  longer  dissolution  of  the
general  supreme  government.  Since  no  one  could  claim  to
succeed  by  a  given  generic  title,  or  as  answering  for  the  time
being  to  a  given  generic  description,  a  contest  for  the  prostrate
sovereignty  almost  inevitably  arose  between  the  more  influential
of  the  actual  military  chiefs.  And  till  one  of  the  military
candidates  had  vanquished  and  crushed  his  rivals,  and  had  forced
with  an  armed  hand  his  way  to  the  vacant  throne,  the  generality
or  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  in  the  Eoman  Empire  or  World
could  hardly  render  obedience  to  one  and  the  same  superior.
By  reason,  also,  of  this  irregularity  in  the  succession  to  the
Imperial  office,  the  general  and  habitual  obedience  to  an  actual
occupant  of  the  office  was  always  extremely  precarious.  For,
since  he  was  not  occupant  by  a  given  generic  title,  or  by  reason
of  his  having  answered  to  a  given  generic  description,  the  title
of  any  rebel,  who  might  anyhow  eject  him,  would  not  have
been  less  legitimate  or  less  constitutional  than  his  own.  Or
(speaking  with  greater  precision)  there  was  no  mode  of  acquiring
the  office,  which  could  be  styled  legitimate,  or  which  could  be
styled  constitutional :  which  was  susceptible  of  generic  descrip-
tion, and  which  had  been  predetermined  by  positive  law  or
morality.  There  was  not,  in  the  Boman  World,  any  determinate
person,  whom  positive  law  or  morality  had  pointed  out  to  its
inhabitants  as  the  exclusively  appropriate  object  of  general  and
habitual  obedience. — The  reasoning  which  applies  in  the  case
of  a  monarchy,  will  also  apply,  with  few  variations,  in  the  case
of  a  government  by  a  number.  Unless  the  members  of  the
supreme  body  hold  their  respective  stations  by  titles  generic
and  fixed,  the  given  supreme  government  must  be  extremely
unstable,  and  the  given  society  wherein  it  is  supreme  must


yurisprudence  determined.  1 9  3

often  be  torn  by  contests  for  the  possession  of  shares  in  the Lect.  V
sovereignty.  *

Before  I  close  my  analysis  of  those  laws  improperly  so  Lawaset
called  which  are  closely  analogous  to  laws  in  the  proper  accepta-  opin^  or
tion  of  the  term,  I  must  advert  to  a  seeming  caprice  of  current  opinions  or
or  established  language.  ^i'^lZr-

A  law  set  or  imposed  by  general  opinion,  is  ain  opinion  or  V^^f^
sentiment,  regarding  conduct  of  a  kind,  which  is  held  or  felt  by  the  only
an  indeterminoUe  body :  that  is  to  say,  an  indeterminate  portion  of  opi^onsor

r  sentiments

a  certam  or  uncertam  aggregate.  that  have

Now  a  like  opinion  or  sentiment  held  or  felt  by  an  individtuil,  ^^^^f^^
or  held  or  felt  universally  by  the  members  of  a  body  determinate,  lam. But
may  be  as  closely  analogous  to  a  law  proper  as  a  so  called  law  ^  senti-^^
set  by  general  opinion. It  may  bear  an  analogy  to  a  law  in  ment  held
the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term,  exjwstly  or  nearly  resembling  ^n  tndi^
the  analogy  to  a  law  proper  which  is  borne  by  an  opinion  or  i^m«^,  or
sentiment  of  an  indeterminate  body. An  opinion,  for  example,  nJ^mbera^
of  a  patron,  in  regard  to  conduct  of  a  kind,  may  be  a  law  or  rule  o^  *  ^'
to  his  own  dependant  or  dependants,  just  as  a  like  opinion  of  aau,  may
an  indeterminate  body  is  a  law  or  rule  to  all  who  might  suffer  "^  *^,
by  provoking  its  displeasure. And  whether  a  like  opinion  be  analogous
held  by  an  uncertain  aggregate,  or  be  held  by  every  member  of  a  ^^^^^
precisely  determined  body,  its  analogy  to  a  law  proper  is  exactly  the
or  nearly  the  same.  ^P^--

But  when  we  speak  of  a  law  set  or  imposed  by  opinion,  we  of aninde-
always  or  commonly  mean  (I  rather  incline  to  believe)  a  law  set  body.^*
or  imposed  by  general  opinion :  that  is  to  say,  an  opinion  or
sentiment,  regarding  conduct  of  a  kind,  which  is  held  or  felt  by
an  uncertain  body  or  class.  The  term  law,  or  law  set  by  opinion,
is  never  or  rarely  applied  to  a  like  opinion  or  sentiment  of  a
precisely  determined  party:  that  is  to  say,  a  like  opinion  or
sentiment  held  or  felt  by  an  individual,  or  held  or  felt  univers-
ally by  the  members  of  a  certain  aggregate.

This  seeming  caprice  of  current  or  established  language
probably  arose  from  the  following  caus^.

An  opinion,  regarding  conduct,  which  is  held  by  an  indi-
vidual person,  or  which  is  held  universally  by  a  sm^ill  deter-
minate body,  is  commonly  followed  by  consequences  of  compara-
tively trifling  importance.  The  circle  of  the  persons  to  whom
its  influence  reaches,  or  whose  desires  or  conduct  it  affects
or  determines,  is  rarely  extensive.  The  analogy  which  such
opinions  bear  to  laws  proper,  has,  therefore,  attracted  little
attention,  and  has,  therefore,  not  gotten  them  the  name  of  laws.
VOL.  I.  0


194  '^^  Province  of

Lect.  V  — An  opinion  held  universally  by  a  large  detenninate  body,  is
^  '  '  not  less  largely  influential,  or  is  more  largely  influential,  than
an  opinion  of  an  uncertain  portion  of  the  same  certain  aggregate.
But  since  the  detenninate  body  is  large  or  numerous,  an  opinion
held  by  idl  its  members  can  hardly  be  distinguished  from  an
opinion  held  by  mo^  of  its  members.  An  opinion  held  v/idvefn-
ally  by  the  members  of  the  body  determinate,  is,  therefore,
equivalent  in  practice  to  a  geTveral  opinion  of  the  body,  and  is,
therefore,  classed  with  the  laws  which  general  opinion  imposes.

Deferring  to  this  seeming  caprice  of  current  or  established
language,  I  have  forborne  from  ranking  sentiments  of  precisely
determined  parties  with  the  laws  improperly  so  called  which  are
closely  analogous  to  the  proper.  I  have  restricted  that  descrip-
tion to  sentiments,  regarding  conduct,  of  uncertain  bodies  or
classes.  My  foregoing  analysis  or  exposition  of  laws  of  that
description,  is,  therefore,  an  analysis  of  laws  set  by  general
opinion.

If  the  description  ought  to  embrace  (as,  I  think,  it  certainly
ought)  opinions,  regarding  conduct,  of  precisely  determined
parties,  my  foregoing  analysis  or  exposition  will  still  be  correct
substantially.  With  a  few  slight  and  obvious  changes,  my  fore-
going analysis  of  a  law  set  by  general  opinion  will  serve  as  an
analysis  of  a  law  set  by  any  opinion :  of  a  law  set  by  the  opinion
of  an  indeterminate  body,  and  of  a  law  set  by  the  opinion  of  a
precisely  determined  i>arty.

For  the  character  or  essential  diflTerence  of  a  law  imposed  by
opinion,  is  this :  that  the  law  is  not  a  command,  issued  expressly
or  tacitly,  but  is  merely  an  opinion  or  sentimenly  relating  to  con-
duct of  a  kind,  which  is  held  or  felt  by  an  uncertain  body,  or  by
a  determinate  party.  A  wish  that  conduct  of  the  kind  shall  be
pursued  or  forborne,  is  not  signified,  expressly  or  tacitly,  by  that
uncertain  body,  or  that  determinate  party :  nor  does  that  body
or  party  irUeind  to  inflict  an  evil  upon  any  whose  conduct  may
deviate  from  the  given  opinion  or  sentiment  The  opinion  or
sentiment  is  merely  an  opinion  or  sentiment,  although  it  subjects
a  transgressor  to  the  chance  of  a  consequent  evil,  and  may  even
lead  to  a  command  regarding  conduct  of  the  kind.

Between  the  opinion  or  sentiment  of  the  indeterminate  body,
and  the  opinion  or  sentiment  of  the  precisely  determined  party,
there  is  merely  the  following  differenca — The  precisely  deter-
mined party  is  capable  of  issuing  a  command  in  pursuance  of  the
opinion  or  sentiment  But  the  uncertain  body  is  not  For,
being  essentially  incapable  of  joint  or  corporate  conduct,  it  can-


Jurisprudence  determined.  1 9  5

not,  as  a  body,  signify  a  wish  or  desire,  and  cannot,  as  a  body, Lect.  y
hold  an  intention  or  purpose.  '  ''""^'

It  appears  from  the  expositions  in  the  preceding  portion  of  The  fore-
my  discourse,  that  laws  properly  so  called,  with  such  improper  f^biSion
laws  as  are  closely  analogous  to  the  proper,  are  of  three  capital  of  laws
classes. — 1.  The  law  of  God,  or  the  laws  of  God. 2.  Positive  ^^^l^^
law,  or  positive  laws. 3.  Positive  morality,  rules  of  positive  improper
morality,  or  positive  moral  rules.  cl^iy  "^

It  also  appears  from  the  same  expositions,  that  positive  analogous
moral  rules  are  of  two  species, — 1.  Those  positive  moral  rules  per,  brw"y
which  are  express  or  tacit  commands,  and  which  are  therefore  f®?*?^*'*'
laws  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term. 2.  Those  laws  im-
properly so  called  (but  closely  analogous  to  laws  in  the  proper
acceptation  of  the  term)  which  are  set  by  general  opinion,  or
are  set  by  opinion:  which  are  set  by  opinions  of  uncertain
bodies; or  by  opinions  of  imcertain  bodies,  and  opinions  of
determinate  parties.

The  sanctions  annexed  to  the  laws  of  God,  may  be  styled  The  sanc-
religuyus, — The  sanctions  annexed  to  positive  laws,  may  be  styled,  per^^f  "*
emphatically,  legal:  for  the  laws  to  which  they  are  annexed,  improper,
are  styled,  simply  and  emphatically,  latos  or  law.  Or,  as  every  ^^  Hy^g
positive  law  supposes  a  iroKi^  or  civitas,  or  supposes  a  society  arerespect-
political  and  independent,  the  epithet  political  may  be  applied  forced; the
to  the  sanctions  by  which  such  laws  are  enforced. — Of  the  d^tie8,T)ro-

^  per  and

sanctions  which  enforce  compliance  with  positive  moral  rules,  improper,
some  are  sanctions  properly  so  called,  and  others  are  styled  Jj^^^^i^^g
sanctions  by  an  analogical  extension  of  the  term :  that  is  to  say,  resnect-
some  are  annexed  to  rules  which  are  laws  imperative  and  proper,  ^eVwid
and  others  enforce  the  rule  which  are  laws  set  by  opinion.  Since  the  rights,
rules  of  either  species  may  be  styled  positive  morality,  the  Sln^per,
sanctions  which  enforce  compliance  with  rules  of  either  species  which

those  laws

may  be  styled  vwral  sanctions. Or  (changing  the  expression)  respect-
we  may  say  of  rules  of  either  species,  that  they  are  sanctioned  j^^^y  ^on-
or  enforced  morally !^^

The duties  imposed  by  the  laws  of  God  may  be  styled

(g)  The  term  moralUyf  moralf  or  ma-  which  the  sanctions  are  annexed,  or  by

rcUly,  is  often  opposed  tacitly  to  immor-  which  the  duties  or  rights  are  imposed

aiUyf  immoral,  ot  immorally f&ndun'poTta  or  conferred,  are  positive  moral  mles:

that  the  object  to  which  it  is  applied  or  rules  bearing  the  ceneric  character  which

referred  is  approved  of  by  the  speaker  I  have  stated  and  explained  above. If

or  writer. But  by  the  term  m^nulUy,  I  I  mean  to  praise  or  blame  a  positive

merely  denote  the  human  rules  which  I  human  rule,  or  a  duty  or  right  which

style  'positive  morality.' And  by  the  the  rule  imposes  or  confers,  I  style  it

terms *  moral sanctions,'  'rules sane-  consonant  to  the  law  of  Ood,  or  contrary

tioned  Tnorally,*  'moral  duties  or  rights,'  to  the  law  of  Ood. Or  (what,  in  effect

and 'duties  or  rights  sanctioned mo-  is  the  same  thing)  I  style  it  generally

rally/  I  merely  mean  that  the  rules  to  useful,  or  generally  pernicious.


196  The  Province  of

Lbct.  V  rdigiavs, — The  duties  imposed  by  positive  laws,  may  be  styled,
'  '  '  emphatically,  legal :  or,  like  the  laws  by  which  they  are  imposed,
they  may  be  said  to  be  sanctioned  legally. — Of  the  duties  im-
posed by  positive  moral  rules,  some  are  duties  properly  so  called,
and  others  are  styled  duties  by  an  analogical  extension  of  the
term :  that  is  to  say,  some  are  creatures  of  rules  which  are  laws
imperative  and  proper,  and  others  are  creatures  of  the  rules
which  are  laws  set  by  opinion.  Like  the  sanctions  proper  and
improper  by  which  they  are  respectively  enforced,  these  duties
proper  and  improper  may  be  styled  moral.  Or  we  may  say  of
the  duties,  as  of  the  rules  by  which  they  are  imposed,  that  they
are  sanctioned  or  enforced  rrwrally.

Every  right  supposes  a  duty  incumbent  on  a  party  or  parties
other  than  the  party  entitled.  Through  the  imposition  of  that
corresponding  duty,  the  right  was  conferred.  Through  the  con-
tinuance of  that  corresponding  duty,  the  right  continues  to  exist.
If  that  corresponding  duty  be  the  creature  of  a  law  imperative,
the  right  is  a  right  properly  so  called.  If  that  corresponding
duty  be  the  creature  of  a  law  improper,  the  right  is  styled  a  right
by  an  analogical  extension  of  the  term. — Consequently,  a  right
existing  through  a  duty  imposed  by  the  law  of  God,  or  a  right
existing  through  a  duty  imposed  by  positive  law,  is  a  right  pro-
perly so  called.  Where  the  duty  is  the  creature  of  a  positive
moTsl  rule,  the  nature  of  the  corresponding  right  depends  upon
the  nature  of  the  rula  If  the  rule  imposing  the  duty  be  a  law
imperative  and  proper,  the  right  is  a  right  properly  so  called.
If  the  rule  imposing  the  duty  be  a  law  set  by  opinion,  the  right
is  styled  a  right  through  an  smalogical  extension  of  the  term. —
Rights  conferred  by  the  law  of  God,  or  rights  existing  through
duties  imposed  by  the  law  of  God,  may  be  styled  Divine, —
Rights  conferred  by  positive  law,  or  rights  existing  through
duties  imposed  by  positive  law,  may  be  styled,  emphatically,
legal.  Or  it  may  be  said  of  rights  conferr^  by  positive  law,
that  they  are  sanctioned  or  protected  legally. — The  rights  proper
and  improper  which  are  conferred  by  positive  morality,  may  be
styled  moral.  Or  it  may  be  said  of  rights  conferred  by  positive
morality,  that  they  are  sanctioned  or  protected  morally.^^

(^)  Here  I  may  brieflv  observe,  that,  supreme  political  superiors.  And,  for
in  order  to  a  complete  aetermination  of  various  other  reasons  which  will  apjsear
the  appropriate  province  of  jurispni-  in  my  sixth  lecture,  the  appropriate
dence,  it  is  necessary  to  explain  the  im-  province  of  jurisprudence  cannot  be  de-
port of  the  term  right.  For,  as  I  have  fined  completely,  unless  an  explanation
stated  already,  numerous  positive  laws  of  the  term  right  constitute  a  part  of  the
proceed  directly  from  subjects  through  definition.  But,  in  order  to  an  explana-
rigJUs  conferred  upon  the  authors  by  tion  of  right  in  ahHract  (or  in  order  to


Jurisprudence  determined.  197

The  body  or  aggregate  of  laws  which  may  be  styled  the  law Lect.  v
of  God,  the  body  or  aggregate  of  laws  which  may  be  styled  The  law  of
positive  law,  and  the  body  or  aggregate  of  laws  which  may  be  God,  poai-
styled  positive  morality,  sometimes  coincide,  sometimes  do  not  and  posi-
coincide,  and  sometimes  confiict.  tive  mo-

One  of  these  bodies  of  laws  coincides  with  another,  when  sometimes
acts,  which  are  enjoined  or  forbidden  by  the  former,  are  also  <»*»^»

. . ,  ,  ,  rm sometimes

enjomed,  or  are  also  forbidden  by  the  latter. — For  example,  The  Aonu
killing  which  is  styled  murder  is  forbidden  by  the  positive  law  ^^^aolne-
of  every  political  society :  it  is  also  forbidden  by  a  so  called  law  times  am-
which  the  general  opinion  of  the  society  has  set  or  imposed :  it  ^^'
is  also  forbidden  by  the  law  of  God  as  known  through  the
principle of  utility. The  murderer  commits  a  crime,  or  he
violates  a  positive  law ;  he  commits  a  conventional  immorality,
or  he  violates  a  so  called  law  which  general  opinion  has  estab-
lished :  he  commits  a  sin,  or  he  violates  the  law  of  God. He  is
obnoxious to punishment, or other evil,  to be  inflicted  by
sovereign  authority :  he  is  obnoxious  to  the  hate  and  the  spon-
taneous ill-offices  of  the  generality  or  bulk  of  the  society :  he  is
obnoxious  to  evil  or  pain  to  be  su£fered  here  or  hereafter  by  the
immediate  appointment  of  the  Deity.

One  of  these  bodies  of  laws  does  not  coincide  with  another,
when  acts,  which  are  enjoined  or  forbidden  by  the  former,  are
not  enjoined,  or  are  not  forbidden  by  the  latter. — For  example,
Though  smuggling  is  forbidden  by  positive  law,  and  (speaking
generally)  is  not  less  pernicious  than  theft,  it  is  not  forbidden
by  the  opinions  or  sentiments  of  the  ignorant  or  unreflecting.
Where  the  impost  or  tax  is  itself  of  pernicious  tendency,
smuggling  is  hardly  forbidden  by  the  opinions  or  sentiments  of
any :  And  it  is  therefore  practised  by  any  without  the  slightest
shame,  or  without  the  slightest  fear  of  incurring  genered  censure.
Such,  for  instance,  is  the  case  where  the  impost  or  tax  is  laid
upon  the  foreign  commodity,  not  for  the  useful  purpose  of  raising
a  public  revenue,  but  for  the  absurd  and  mischievous  purpose  of
protecting  a  domestic  manufacture. — Offences  against  the  game

an  explanation  of  the  nature  which  is  to  determine  the  province  of  jnrispru-

common to all  rights), I  most pre-  dence.

viously  explain  the differences  of  the At  every  step  which  he  takes  on  his

principal  kinds  of  rights,  with  the  mean-  long  and  scabrous  road,  a  difficulty  simi-

ings  of  various  terms  which  the  term  lar  to  that  which  I  have  now  endeavoured

right  implies. And  as  that  previous  ex-  to  suggest  encounters  the  expositor  of

planation  cannot  be  given  with  effect,  the  science. As  every  department  of  the

till  positive  law  is  distinguished  from  science  is  implicated  with  every  other,

the  objects  to  which  it  is  related,  it  fol-  any  detached  exposition  of  a  single  and

lows  that  an  explanation  of  the  expres-  separate  department  is  inevitably  a  frag-

sion  right  cannot  enter  into  the  attempt  ment  more  or  less  imperfect


1 98 .  TJie  Province  of

Leot.  V  laws  are  also  in  point :  for  they  are  not  offences  against  positive
'  morality,  although  they  are  forbidden  by  positive  law.  A  gentle-
man is  not  dishonoured,  or  generally  shunned  by  gentlemen,
though  he  shoots  without  a  qualification.  A  peasant  who  wires
hares  escapes  the  censure  of  peasants,  though  the  squires,  as
doing  justiceship,  send  him  to  the  prison  and  the  tread-milL

One  of  these  bodies  of  laws  conjlicts  with  another,  when
acts,  which  are  enjoined  or  forbidden  by  the  former,  are  forbidden
or  enjoined  by  the  latter. — For  example.  In  most  of  the  nations
of  modem  Europe,  the  practice  of  duelling  is  forbidden  by  positive
law.  It  is  also  at  variance  with  the  law  which  is  received  in
most  of  those  nations  as  having  been  set  by  the  Deity  in  the
way  of  express  revelation.  But  in  spite  of  positive  law,  and  in
spite  of  his  religious  convictions,  a  man  of  the  class  of  gentlemen
may  be  forced  by  the  law  of  honour  to  give  or  to  take  a  challenge.
If  he  forebore  from  giving,  or  if  he  declined  a  challenge,  he
might  incur  the  general  contempt  of  gentlemen  or  men  of  honour,
and  might  meet  with  slights  and  insults  sufficient  to  embitter
his  existence.  The  negative  legal  duty  which  certainly  is  in-
cumbent upon  him,  and  the  negative  religious  duty  to  which  he
believes  himself  subject,  are  therefore  mastered  and  controlled
by  that  positive  Tnoral  duty  which  arises  from  the  so-called  law
set  by  the  opinion  of  his  class.

The  simple  and  obvious  considerations  to  which  I  have  now
adverted,  are  often  overlooked  by  legislators.  If  they  fancy  a
practice  pernicious,  or  hate  it  they  know  not  why,  they  proceed,
without  further  thought,  to  forbid  it  by  positive  law.  They
forget  that  positive  law  may  be  superfluous  or  impotent,  and
therefore  may  lead  to  nothing  but  purely  gratuitous  vexation.
They  forget  that  the  moral  or  the  religious  sentiments  of  the
community  may  already  suppress  the  practice  as  completely  as
it  can  be  suppressed:  or  that,  if  the  practice  is  favoured  by
those  moral  or  religious  sentiments,  the  strongest  possible  fear
which  legal  pains  can  inspire  may  be  mastered  by  a  stronger
fear  of  other  and  conflicting  sanctions.^^^

The  acts  0)  There are  classes  of  useful acts  such  classes  are j  not  eigoined  or  forbid-

and  for-  which it  were  useless  to enjoin, and  den  by  the  law  of  Grod ;  that  he  no  more

bearances,  classes  of  mischievous  acts  which  it  were  eigoins  or  forbids  acts  of  the  dasses  in

which,  ac-  useless  to  forbid  :  for  we  are  sufficiently  question,  than  he  enjoins  or  forbids  such

cording  to  prone  to the useful, and sufficiently  acts  as  are  generally  pernicious  or  useful,

the  theory  averse  from  the  mischievous  acts,  without  There  are  also  classes  of  acts,  gene-

of  utility,  tlie  incentives  and  restraints  applied  by  rally  useful  or  pernicious,  which  demand

are  objects  religious  sanctions,  or  by  sanctions  legal  the  incentives  or  restraints  applied  by

of  the  law  or  moraL And,  assuming  that  general  religious  sanctions,  or  by  sanctions  legal

of  God :  utility  is  the  index  to  the  Divine  com-  or  moral. Without  the  incentives  and

mands,  we  may  fairly  infer  that  acts  of  restraints  applied  by  religious  sanctions.


yurisprudence  determined.


199


In  consequence  of  the  frequent  coincidence  of  positive  law
and  morality,  and  of  positive  law  and  the  law  of  God,  the  true
nature  and  fountain  of  positive  law  is  often  absurdly  mistaken
by  writers  upon  jurisprudence.  Where  positive  law  has  been
f3shioned  on  positive  morality,  or  where  positive  law  has  been
fashioned  on  the  law  of  God,  they  forget  that  the  copy  is  the
creature  of  the  sovereign,  and  impute  it  to  the  author  of  the  model.

For  example :  Cusl£tm.aix  laws  are  positive  laws  fashioned
by  judkial  legislation _upon  pre-existing  customs.  ISowT"^
they  become  the  grounds  of  judicial  decisions  "upon  cases,  and
are  clothed  with  legal  sanctions  by  the  sovereign  one  or  number,
the  customs  are  merely  rules  set  by  opinions  of  the  governed,
and  sanctioned  or^  enforced  morally :  Though,  when  they  become
the"  reasons  of  judiciai  decisions  upon  cases,  and  are  clothed
with  legal  sanctions  by  the  sovereign  one  or  number,  the  customs
are  rules  of  positive  law  as  well  as  of  positive  morality.  But,
because  the  customs  were  observed  by  the  governed  before  they
were  clothed  with  sanctions  by  the  sovereign  one  or  number,  it
is  fancied  that  customary  laws  exist  as  positive  laws  by  the
institution  of  the  private  persons  with  whom  the  customs  origi-
nated.— Admitting  the  conceit,  and  reasoning  by  analogy,  we
ought  to  consider  the  sovereign  the  author  of  the  positive
morality  which  is  often  a  consequence  of  positive  law.  Where  a
positive  law,  not  fashioned  on  a  custom,  is  favourably  received  by


Lbct.  V


or  applied  by  sanctions  legal  or  moral,
we  are  not  snfSciently  prone  to  thoee
which  are  generally  nseral,  and  are  not
sufficiently  averse  from  those  which  are
generally  pernicious.  And,  assuming
that  general  utility  is  the  index  to  the
Divine  commands,  all  these  classes  of
useful,  and  all  these  classes  of  pernicious
acts,  are  ex^oined  and  forbidden  respect-
ively by  the  law  of  God.

Bein^  exgoined  or  being  forbidden  by
the  Deity,  all  these  classes  of  useful,  and
all  these  classes  of  pernicious  acts,  ought
to  be  enjoined  or  forbidden  by  positive
morality :  that  is  to  say,  by  the  positive
morality  which  consists  of  opinions  or
sentiments.  But,  this  notwitnstanding,
some  of  these  clssses  of  acts  ought  not
to  be  enjoined  or  forbidden  by  positive
law.  Some  of  these  classes  of  acts  ought
not  to  be  eiijoined  or  forbidden  even  by
the  positive  morality  which  consists  of
imperative  rules.

Every  act  or  forbearance  that  ought
to  be  an  object  of  positive  law,  ought  to  be
an  object  of  the  positive  morali^  which
consists  of  opinions  or  sentiments.  Every
act  or  forbearance  that  ought  to  be  an


object  of  the  latter,  is  an  object  of  the
law  of  God  as  construed  by  the  princinle
of  utility.  But  the  circle  embraced  by
the  law  of  God,  and  which  may  be  em-
braced to  advantage  b^  nositive  morality,
is  laiger  than  the  circle  which  can  be
embnuied  to  advantage  by  positive  law.
Inasmuch  as  the  two  circles  have  one
and  the  same  centre,  the  whole  of  the
region  comprised  by  the  latter  is  also
comprised  by  the  former.  But  the  whole
of  the  region  comprised  by  the  former  is
not  comprised  bv  the  latter.

To  distinguish  the  acts  and  forbear-
ances that  ought  to  be  objects  of  law,
from  those  that  ought  to  be  abandoned
to  the  exclusive  cognisance  of  morality,
is,  perhaps,  the  haraest  of  the  problems
which  the  science  of  ethics  presents.
The  only  existing  approach  to  a  solution
of  the  problem,  mav  be  found  in  the
writings  of  Mr.  Bentham :  who,  in  most
of  the  departments  of  the  two  p^reat
branches  of  ethics,  has  accomplished
more  for  the  advancement  of  the  science
than  all  his  predecessors  put  together. —
See,  in  particular,  his  Principles  0/ Morals
and  L^iiskUion,  ch.  xviL


and  the
acts  and
forbear-
ances,
which,  ac-
cording to
the  same
theory,
ought  to
be  objects
respect-
ively of
positive
morality
and  law.


200


Leot.  V


The  fore-
going dis-
tribution
of  laws
proper,
and  of
such  im-
proper
laws  as  are
closely
analogous
to  the  pro-
per, tallies,
in  the
main,  with
a  division
of  laws
which  is

fiven  inci-
entallv
by  Locke
in  his
£s8ay  on
Human
Under-
standing.


Tfie  Province  of

the  governed,  and  enforced  by  their  opinions  or  sentiments,  we
must  deem  the  so  called  law,  set  by  those  opinions  or  sentiments,
a  law  imperative  and  proper  of  the  supreme  political  superior.

Again :  The  portion  of  positive  law  which  is  parcel  of  the
law  of  nature  (or,  in  the  language  of  the  classical  jurists,  which
is  parcel  of  the  jus  gentium)  is  often  supposed  to  emanate,  even
as  positive  law,  from  a  Divine  or  Natural  source.  But  (admit-
ting the  distinction  of  positive  law  into  law  natural  and  law
positive)  it  is  manifest  that  law  natural,  considered  as  a  portion
of  positive,  is  the  creature  of  human  sovereigns,  and  not  of  the
Divine  monarch.  To  say  that  it  emanates,  as  positive  law,  from  a
Divine  or  Natural  source,  is  to  confound  positive  law  with  law
whereon  it  is  fashioned,  or  with  law  whereunto  it  conforms.^*

The  foregoing  distribution  of  laws  proper,  and  of  such  im-
proper laws  as  are  closely  analogous  to  the  proper,  tallies,  in
the  main,  with  a  division  of  laws  which  is  given  incidentally
by  Locke  in  his  Essay  on  Human  Understanding.  And  since
this  division  of  laws,  or  of  the  sources  of  duties  or  obligations,
is  recommended  by  the  great  authority  which  the  writer  has
justly  acquired,  I  gladly  append  it  to  my  own  division  or  ana-
lysis. The  passage  of  his  essay  in  which  the  division  occurs,
is  part  of  an  inquiry  into  the  nature  of  relation,  and  is  there-
fore concerned  indirectly  with  the  nature  and  kinds  of  law.
With  the  exclusion  of  all  that  is  foreign  to  the  nature  and  kinds
of  law,  with  the  exclusion  of  a  few  expressions  which  are
obviously  redundant,  and  with  the  correction  of  a  few  expres-
sions which  are  somewhat  obscure,  the  passage  containing  the
divisions  may  be  rendered  in  the  words  following  :^^


^*  In  J.  S.  M.*s  notes  of  the  lectures
as  originally  delivered  I  find  a  consider-
able passage  giving  instances  of  the  pre-
vailing tendency  to  the  confusion  of  iaeas
above  referred  to.  I  have  not  ventured
on  the  attempt  to  incorporate  the  pas-
sage in  the  text,  presuming  that  the
author refrained advisedly  from here

Sursuing  the  topic  further,  and  that  he
eemed  such  instances  less  suitable  to  a
written  discourse  than  to  an  oral  lecture.
I  think  it,  however,  of  some  value  to
preserve  this  passage,  both  as  calculated
to  aid  the  student  in  applying  the  prin-
ciples stated  in  the  text,  and  also  as
illustrative  of  the  author*8  mode,  when
orally  amplifying  in  presence  of  his  class,
the  lepture  which  in  substance  he  always
had  committed  to  writing.  The  passage,
being  inconveniently  long  to  insert  as  a
note  here,  I  have  placed  in  the  form  of
a  note  at  the  end  of  this  lecture. — K  C.
(^)  Locke's  division  or  analysis  is  far


from  being  complete,  and  the  language
in  which  it  is  stated  is  often  extremely
unapt.  It  must,  however,  be  remem-
bered, that  the  nature  of  relation  gene-
raUy  (and  not  the  nature  of  law,  with
its  principal  kinds)  is  the  appropriate
object  of  hip  inquiry.  Allowing  for  the
defects,  which,  therefore,  were  nearly
inevitable,  his  analysis  is  strikingly  ac-
curate. It  evinces  that  matchless  power
of  precise  and  just  thinking,  with  that
religious  regard  for  general  utility  and
truth,  which  marked  the  incomparable
man  who  emancipated  human  reason
from  the  yoke  of  mystery  and  jai^on.
And  from  this  his  incidental  excursion
into  the  field  of  law  and  morality,  and
from  other  passages  of  his  essay  wherein
he  touches  upon  them,  we  may  infer  the
important  services  which  he  would  have
rendered  to  the  science  of  ethics,  if,  com-
plying with  the  instances  of  Molyneux,
he  had  examined  the  subject  exactly.


yurisprudence  determhud.  201

*  The  conformity  or  disagreement  men's  voluntary  actions L"ct-  V
have  to  a  rule  to  which  they  are  referred,  and  by  which  they
are  judged  of,  is  a  sort  of  rdation  which  may  be  called  moral
relation,

'Human  actions,  when  with  their  various  ends,  objects,
manners,  and  circumstances,  they  are  framed  into  distinct  com-
plex ideas,  are,  as  has  been  shown,  so  many  mixed  modes,  a  great
part  whereof  have  names  annexed  to  them.  Thus,  supposing
gratitude  to  be  a  readiness  to  acknowledge  and  return  kindness
received,  or  polygamy  to  be  the  having  more  wives  than  one  at
once,  when  we  frame  these  notions  thus  in  our  minds,  we  have
there  so  many  determined  ideas  of  mixed  modes.

'  But  this  is  not  all  that  concerns  our  actions.  It  is  not
enough  to  have  determined  ideas  of  them,  and  to  know  what
names  belong  to  such  and  such  combinations  of  ideas.  We
have  a  further  and  greater  concernment.  And  that  is,  to  know
whether  such  actions  are  morally  good  or  bad.

'  Grood  or  evil  is  nothing  but  pleasure  or  pain,  or  that  which
occasions  or  procures  pleasure  or  pain  to  us.  Morai  good  or  evil,
then,  is  only  the  conformity  or  disagreement  of  our  voluntary
actions  to  some  law,  whereby  good  or  evil  is  drawn  on  us  by
the  will  and  power  of  the  law-maker:  which  good  or  evil,
pleasure  or  pain,  attending  our  observance  or  breach  of  the  law,
by  the  decree  of  the  law -maker,  is  that  we  call  reward  or
punishment.

'  Of  these  moral  rules  or  laws,  to  which  men  generally  refer,
and  by  which  they  judge  of  the  rectitude  or  pravity  of  their
actions,  there  seem  to  me  to  be  three  sorts,  with  their  three  different
enforcements,  or  rewards  and  punishments.  For  since  it  would
be  utterly  in  vain  to  suppose  a  rule  set  to  the  free  actions  of
man,  without  annexing  to  it  some  enforcement  of  good  and  evil
to  determine  his  will,  we  must,  wherever  we  suppose  a  law,
suppose  also  some  reward  or  punishment  annexed  to  that  law.
It  would  be  in  vain  for  one  intelligent  being  to  set  a  rule  to
the  actions  of  another,  if  he  had  it  not  in  his  power  to  reward
the  compliance  with,  and  punish  deviation  from  his  rule,  by
some  good  and  evil  that  is  not  the  natural  product  and  conse-
quence of  the  action  itself:  for  that  being  a  natural  convenience
or  inconvenience,  would  operate  of  itself  without  a  law.  This,
if  I  mistake  not,  is  the  true  nature  of  all  law  properly  so  called.

*  The  laws  that  men  generally  refer  their  actions  to,  to  judge
of  their  rectitude  or  obliquity,  seem  to  me  to  be  these  three  :  1.
The  Divine  law. 2.  The  civU  law. 3.  The  law  of  opinion  or


202  714^  Province  of

Lect.  V  reputation,  if  I  may  so  call  it — By  the  relation  they  bear  to
'  '  the  first  of  these,  men  judge  whether  their  actions  are  sins  or
duties :  by  the  second,  whether  they  be  criminal  or  innocent :
and  by  the  third,  whether  they  be  virtues  or  vices.

'  By  the  Divine  law,  I  mean  that  law  which  Grod  hath  set  to
the  actions  of  men,  whether  promulgated  to  them  by  the  light
of  nature,  or  the  voice  of  revelation.  This  is  the  only  true
touchstone  of  morai  rectitude.  And  by  comparing  them  to  this
law,  it  is,  that  men  judge  of  the  most  considerable  moral  good
or  evil  of  their  actions :  that  is,  whether  as  dviies  or  sins,  they
are  like  to  procure  them  happiness  or  misery  from  the  hands  of
the  Almighty.

'  The  civil  law,  the  rule  set  by  the  conmionwealth  to  the
actions  of  those  who  belong  to  it,  is  a  rule  to  which  men  refer
their  actions,  to  judge  whether  they  be  crimincU  or  no.  This
law  nobody  overlooks,  the  rewards  and  punishments  that  enforce
it  being  ready  at  hand,  and  suitable  to  the  power  that  makes  it :
which  is  the  force  of  the  commonwealth,  engaged  to  protect  the
lives,  liberties  and  possessions  of  those  who  live  according  to  its
law,  and  has  power  to  take  away  life,  liberty  or  goods  from  him
who  disobeys.

'  The  law  of  opinion  or  reputation  is  another  law  that  men
generally  refer  their  actions  to,  to  judge  of  their  rectitude  or
obliquity.

'  Virtue  and  vice  are  names  pretended,  and  supposed  every-
where to  stand  for  actions  in  their  own  nature  right  or  wrong :
and  as  far  as  they  really  are  so  applied,  they  so  far  are  coincident
with  the  Divine  law  above  mentioned.  But  yet,  whatever  is
pretended,  this  is  visible,  that  these  names  virtue  and  vice,  in
the  particular  instances  of  their  application  through  the  several
nations  and  societies  of  men  in  the  world,  are  constantly
attributed  to  such  actions  only  as  in  each  country  and  society
are  in  reputation  or  discredit  Nor  is  it  to  be  thought  strange,
that  men  everywhere  should  give  the  name  of  virtue  to  those
actions  which  amongst  them  are  judged  praiseworthy,  and  call
that  vice  which  they  account  blameable;  since  they  would
condemn  themselves,  if  they  should  think  anything  righl,  to
which  they  allowed  not  commendation ;  anything  wrong,  which
they  let  pass  without  blame.

'Thus  the  measure  of  what  is  everywhere  called  and
esteemed  virtue  and  vice,  is  this  approbation  or  dislike,  praise
or  blame,  which  by  a  secret  and  tacit  consent  establishes  itself
in  the  ''-^"^i  'societies,  tribes,  and  clubs  of  men  in  the  world ;


yurispnidence  determined.  203

whereby  several  actions  come  to  find  credit  or  disgrace  amongst  Lect.  v
them,  according  to  the  judgment,  maxims,  or  fashions  of  that  ''""^'
place.  For  though  men  imiting  into  politick  societies  have
resigned  up  to  the  publick  the  disposing  of  all  their  force,  so
that  they  cannot  employ  it  against  any  fellow-citizens  any
further  than  the  law  of  the  country  directs,  yet  they  retain  still
the  power  of  thinking  well  or  ill,  approving  or  disapproving  of
the  actions  of  those  whom  they  live  amongst  and  converse  with :
and  by  this  approbation  and  dislike,  they  establish  amongst
themselves  what  they  will  call  virtut  and  mce.

'  That  this  is  the  conmion  measure  of  virtue  and  vice,  will
appear  to  any  one  who  considers,  that,  though  that  passes  for
vice  in  one  country,  which  is  counted  virtvs  (or,  at  least,  not  vice)
in  another,  yet  everywhere  virtue  and  praise,  vice  and  blame  go
togetlier.  Virtue  is  everywhere  that  which  is  thought  praise-
worthy ;  and  nothing  but  that  which  has  the  allowtuice  of  public
esteem  is  called  virtue.  Virtue  and  praise  are  so  united,  that
they  are  often  called  by  the  same  name.  "  Sunt  sua  prcemia
laudi,"  says  VirgiL  And,  says  Cicero,  "nihil  habet  natura
prsestantius,  quam  honestatem,  quam  laudem,  quam  dignitatem,
quam  dectis:"  all  which,  he  tells  you,  are  names  for  the  same
thing.  Such  is  the  language  of  the  heathen  philosophers,  who
well  understood  wherein  the  notions  of  virtue  and  vice  consisted.

'But  though,  by  the  different  temper,  education,  fashion,
maxims,  or  interest  of  different  sorts  of  men,  it  fell  out,  that
what  was  thought  praiseworthy  in  one  place,  escaped  not  censure
in  another,  and  so  in  different  societies  virtues  and  vices  were
changed,  yet,  as  to  the  main,  they  for  the  most  part  kept  the
same  everywhere.  For  since  nothing  can  be  more  natural,  than
to  encourage  with  esteem  and  reputation  that  wherein  every-
one finds  his  advantage,  and  to  blame  and  discountenance  the
contrary,  it  is  no  wonder  that  esteem  and  discredit,  virtue  and
vice,  should  in  a  great  measure  everywhere  correspond  with  the
unchangeable  rul6  of  right  and  wrong  which  the  law  of  God
hath  established:  there  being  nothing  that  so  directly  and
visibly  secures  and  advances  the  general  good  of  mankind  in  this
world  as  obedience  to  the  law  He  has  set  them,  and  nothing
that  breeds  such  mischiefs  and  confusion  as  the  neglect  of  it.
And  therefore  men,  without  renouncing  all  sense  and  reason,
and  their  own  interest,  could  not  generally  mistake  in  placing
their  conmiendation  or  blame  on  that  side  which  really  deserved
it  not  Nay,  even  those  men,  whose  practice  was  otherwise,
failed  not  to  give  their  approbation  right :  few  being  depraved


204  The  Province  of

Lect.  V to  that  degree,  as  not  to  condemn,  at  least  in  others,  the  faults
^ they  themselves  were  guilty  of. Whereby,  even  in  the  corrup-
tion of  manners,  the  law  of  God,  which  ought  to  be  the  rule  of
virtue  and  vice,  was  pretty  well  observed.

*  If  any  one  shall  imagine  that  I  have  forgotten  my  own
notion  of  a  law,  when  I  make  the  law,  whereby  men  judge  of
vvrtvA  and  vine,  to  be  nothing  but  the  consent  of  private  men
who  have  not  authority  to  make  a  law;  especially  wanting
that  which  is  so  necessary  and  essential  to  a  law,  a  power  to
enforce  it :  I  think,  I  may  say,  that  he  who  imagines  commenda-
tion and  disgrace  not  to  be  strong  motives  on  men  to  accommodate
themselves  to  the  opinions  and  rules  of  those  with  whom  they
converse,  seems  little  skilled  in  the  nature  or  history  of  mankind  :
The  greatest  part  whereof  he  shall  find  to  govern  themselves
chiefly,  if  not  solely,  by  this  law  of  faahion  :  and  so  they  da  that
which  keeps  them  in  reputation  with  their  company,  little  regard
the  law  of  God  or  the  magistrate.  The  penalties  that  attend
the  breach  of  God's  law,  some,  nay,  perhaps,  most  men  seldom
seriously  reflect  on ;  and  amongst  those  that  do,  many,  whilst
they  break  the  law,  entertain  thoughts  of  future  reconciliation,
and  making  their  peace  for  such  breaches.  And  as  to  the
punishments  due  from  the  law  of  the  commonwealth,  they
frequently  flatter  themselves  with  the  hope  of  impunity.  But
no  man  escapes  the  punishment  of  their  censure  and  dislike,
who  offends  against  the  fashion  and^  opinion  of  the  company  he
keeps,  and  would  recommend  himself  to.  Nor  is  there  one  of
ten  thousand,  who  is  stiff  and  insensible  enough  to  bear  up  under
the  constant  dislike  and  condemnation  of  his  own  club.  He
must  be  of  a  strange  and  unusual  constitution,  who  can  content
himself  to  live  in  constant  disgrace  jmd  disrepute  with  his  own
particular  society.  Solitude  many  men  have  sought  and  been
reconciled  to :  but  nobody  that  has  the  least  thought  or  sense
of  a  mem  about  him,  can  live  in  society  under  the  constant  dislike
and  ill  opinion  of  his  familiars,  and  those  he  converses  with.
This  is  a  burthen  too  heavy  for  human  sufferance :  and  he  must
be  made  up  of  irreconcileable  contradictions,  who  can  take
pleasure  in  company,  and  yet  be  insensible  of  contempt  and
disgrace  from  his  companions.

'  The  law  of  God,  the  law  of  politick  societies,  and  the  law
of  fashion  or  private  censure,  are,  then,  the  three  rules  to  which
men  variously  compare  their  actions.  And  it  is  from  their
conformity  or  disagreement  to  one  of  these  rules,  that  they  judge
of  their  rectitude  or  obliquity,  and  name  them  good  or  bad.


Jurisprudence  determined.  205

*  Whether  we  take  the  rule,  to  which,  as  to  a  touchstone,  we  Lect.  v
bring  our  voluntary  actions,  from  the  fashion  of  the  country,  or  '  '
from  the  will  of  a  law-maker,  the  mind  is  easily  able  to  observe
the  relation  any  action  hath  to  it,  and  to  judge  whether  the
action  agrees  or  disagrees  with  the  rule.  And  thus  the  mind
hath  a  notion  of  moral  goodness  or  evil :  which  is  either  conformity
or  not  conformity  of  any  action  to  that  rule.  If  I  find  an  action
to  agree  or  disagree  with  the  esteem  of  the  coimtry  I  have  been
bred  in,  and  to  be  held  by  most  men  there  worthy  of  praise  or
blame,  I  call  the  action  virtuous  or  vicious.  If  I  have  the  will
of  a  supreme  invisible  law-maker  for  my  rule,  then,  as  I  suppose
the  action  commanded  or  forbidden  by  God,  I  call  it  good  or
evil,  duty  or  sin.  And  if  I  compare  it  to  the  civil  law,  the  rule
made  by  the  legislative  power  of  the  country,  I  call  it  lawful  or
unlawful,  no  crime  or  a  crime.  So  that  whencesoever  we  take
the  rule  of  actions,  or  by  what  standard  soever  we  frame  in  our
minds  the  ideas  of  virtues  or  vices,  their  rectitude  or  obliquity
consists  in  their  agreement  or  disagreement  with  the  patterns
prescribed  by  some  law.

'Before  I  quit  this  argument,  I  would  observe  that,  in  the
relations  which  I  call  moral  relations,  I  have  a  true  notion  of
relation,  by  comparing  the  action  with  the  rule,  whether  the
rule  be  true  or  false.  For  if  I  measure  any  thing  by  a  supposed
yard,  I  know  whether  the  thing  I  measure  be  longer  or  shorter
than  that  supposed  yard,  though  the  yard  I  measure  by  be  not
exactly  the  standard.  Measuring  an  action  by  a  wrong  rule,  I
shall  judge  amiss  of  its  moral  rectitude :  but  I  shall  not  mistake
the  relation  which  the  action  bears  to  the  rule  whereunto  I
compare  it' — Essay  concerning  Human  Understanding,  Book
IL  Chap.  XXVIII.

The  analogy  borne  to  a  law  proper  by  a  law  which  opinion  Lawsmeta-
imposes,  lies  mainly  in  the  following  point  of  resemblance. In  ^g^Jitive.'^
the  case  of  a  law  set  by  opinion,  as  well  as  in  the  case  of  a  law  —The
properly  so  called,  a  rational  being  or  beings  are  obnoxious  to  and  n^-
contingent  evil,  in  the  event  of  their  not  complying  with a  tive  nature
known  or  presumed  desire  of  another  being  or  beings  of  a  like  the  class,
nature. If,  in  either  of  the  two  cases,  the  contingent  evil  is
suflfered,  it  is  suffered  by  a  rational  being,  through  a  rational
being :  And  it  is  suffered  by  a  rational  being,  through  a  rational
being,  in  consequence  of  the  suffering  party  having  disregarded
a  desire  of  a  rational  being  or  beings. — ^The  analogy,  therefore,
by  which  the  laws  are  related,  mainly  lies  in  the  resemblance
of  the  improper  sanction  and  duty  to  the  sanction  and  duty


206


Tlie  Province  of


Lect.  V


The  com-
mon and
negative
nature  of
laws  meta-

Shorical  or
gurative,
shown  by
examples.


properly  so  called.  The  contingent  evil  in  prospect  which
enforces  the  law  improper,  and  the  present  obnoxiousness  to
that  contingent  evil,  may  be  Ukened  to  the  genuine  sanction
which  enforces  the  law  proper,  jmd  the  genuine  duty  or  obliga-
tion which  the  law  proper  imposes. — The  analogy  between  a
law  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term,  and  a  law  improperly
so  called  which  opinion  sets  or  imposes,  is,  therefore,  strong  or
close.  The  defect  which  excludes  the  latter  from  the  rank  of  a
law  proper,  merely  consists  in  this :  that  the  wish  or  desire  of
its  authors  has  not  been  duly  signified,  and  that  they  have  no
formed  itdemJiion,  of  inflicting  evU  or  pain  upon  those  who  may
break  or  transgress  it

But,  beside  the  laws  improper  which  are  set  or  imposed  by
opinion,  there  are  laws  improperly  so  called  which  are  related
to  laws  proper  by  slender  or  remote  analogies.  And,  since  they
have  gotten  the  name  of  laws  from  their  slender  or  remote
analogies  to  laws  properly  so  called,  I  style  them  laws  meta-
phorical, or  laws  merely  metaphoricaL

The  metaphorical  applications  of  the  term  law  are  numerous
and  different.  The  cmalogies  by  which  they  are  suggested,  or
by  which  metaphorical  laws  are  related  to  laws  proper,  will,
therefore,  hardly  admit  of  a  common  and  positive  description.
But  laws  metaphorical,  though  numerous  and  different,  have  the
following  common  and  negative  nature. — ^No  property  or  char-
acter of  any  metaphorical  law  can  be  likened  to  a  sanction  or  a
duty.  Consequently,  every  metaphorical  law  wants  that  point
of  resemblance  which  mainly  constitutes  the  analogy  between  a
law  proper  and  a  law  set  by  opinion.

To  show  that  figurative  laws  want  that  point  of  resemblance,
and  are  therefore  remotely  analogous  to  laws  properly  so  called,
I  will  touch  slightly  and  briefly  upon  a  few  of  the  numberless
cases  in  which  the  term  law  is  extended  and  applied  by  a
metaphor.

The  most  frequent  and  remarkable  of  those  metaphorical
applications  is  suggested  by  that  imiformity,  or  that  stability  of
conduct,  which  is  one  of  the  ordinary  consequences  of  a  law
proper. — ^By  reason  of  the  sanction  working  on  their  wills  or
desires,  the  parties  obliged  by  a  law  proper  commonly  adjust
their  conduct  to  the  pattern  which  the  law  prescribes.  Conse-
quently, wherever  we  observe  a  uniform  order  of  events,  or  a
uniform  order  of  coexisting  phsenomena,  we  are  prone  to  impute
that  order  to  a  law  set  by  its  author,  though  the  case  presents
us  with  nothing  that  can  be  likened  to  a  sanction  or  a  duty.


yurisprtidence  determined.  207

For  example :  We  say  that  the  movements  of  lifeless  bodies Lect.  v
are  determined  by  certain  laws:  though,  since  the  bodies  are
lifeless  and  have  no  desires  or  aversions,  they  cannot  be  touched
by  aught  which  in  the  least  resembles  a  sanction,  and  cannot
be  subject  to  aught  which  in  the  least  resembles  an  obligation.
We  mean  that  they  move  in  certain  uniform  modes,  and  that
they  move  in  those  uniform  modes  through  the  pleasure  and
appointment  of  Grod :  just  as  parties  obliged  behave  in  a  uniform
manner  through  the  pleasure  and  appointment  of  the  party  who
imposes  the  law  and  the  duty. — ^Again :  We  say  that  certain
actions  of  the  lower  and  irrational  animals  are  determined  by
certain  laws :  though,  since  they  cannot  understand  the  purpose
and  provisions  of  a  law,  it  is  impossible  that  sanctions  should
effectually  move  them  to  obedience,  or  that  their  conduct  should
be  guided  by  a  regard  to  duties  or  obligations. We  mean  that
they  act  in  certain  uniform  modes,  either  in  consequence  of
instincts  (or  causes  which  we  cannot  explain),  or  else  in  conse-
quence of  hints  which  they  catch  from  experience  and  observa-
tion :  and  that,  since  their  uniformity  of  action  is  an  effect  of
the Divine  pleasure,  it closely  resembles  the  uniformity  of
conduct  which  is  wrought  by  the  authors  of  laws  in  those  who
are  obnoxious  to  the  sanctions.^ — ^In  short,  whenever  we  talk  of
laws  governing  the  irrational  world,  the  metaphorical  application
of  the  term  law  is  suggested  by  this  double  analogy. 1.  The
successive  and  synchronous  phaenomena  composing  the  irrational
world,  happen  and  exist,  for  the  most  part,  in  uniform  series :
which  uniformity  of  succession  and  coexistence  resembles  the
uniformity  of  conduct  produced  by  an  imperative  law. 2.  That
tmiformity  of  succession  cmd  coexistence,  like  the  uniformity  of
conduct  produced  by  an  imperative  law,  springs  from  the  will
and  intention  of  an  intelligent  cmd  rational  author. — ^When  an
atheist  speaks  of  laws  governing  the  irrational  world,  the  meta-
phorical appUcation  is  suggested  by  an  analogy  still  more  slender
and  remote  than  that  which  I  have  now  analyzed. He  means
that  the  imif  ormity  of  succession  and  coexistence  resembles  the
uniformity  of  conduct  produced  by  an  imperative  rula If,  to

0)  Speakinj^  with  absolute  precision,  gacioos  are  so  far  from  being  irrational,

the  lower  animals,  or  the  animals  infe-  that  they  understand  and  observe  laws

rior  to  man,  are  not  destitute  of  reason,  set  to  them  by  human  masters. But

Since  their  conduct  is  partly  determined  these  laws  being  few  and  of  little  im-

by  conclusions  drawn  from  experience,  portance,  I  throw  them,  for  the  st^e  of

they  obeerve, compare, abstract, and  simplicity,  out  of  my  account I  say

infer. But  the  intelligence  of  the  lower  umversally  of  the  lower  animals,  that

animals  is  so  extremely  limited,  that,  they  cannot  understand  a  law,  or  guide

adopting  the  current  expression,  I  style  their  conduct  by  a  duty,
them  irrational. Some  of  the  more  sa-


20 8  The  Province  of

Lect.  V  draw  the  analogy  closer,  he  ascribes  those  laws  to  an  author,  he
'  personifies  a  verbal  abstraction,  and  makes  it  play  the  legislator.
He  attributes  the  uniformity  of  succession  and  coexistence  to
laws  set  by  nature :  meaning,  by  nature,  the  world  itself ;  or,
perhaps,  that  very  uniformity  which  he  imputes  to  nature's
commands.

Many  metaphorical  applications  of  the  term  law  or  rule  are
suggested  by  the  analogy  following. — ^An  imperative  law  or
rule  guides  the  conduct  of  the  obliged,  or  is  a  norma,  model,  or
pattern,  to  which  their  conduct  conforms.  A  proposed  guide  of
human  conduct,  or  a  model  or  pattern  offered  to  human  imita-
tion, is,  therefore,  frequently  styled  a  law  or  rule  of  conduct,
although  there  be  not  in  the  case  a  shadow  of  a  sanction  or  a
duty.

For  example:  To  every  law  properly  so  called  there  are
two  distinct  parties :  a  party  by  whom  it  is  established,  and  a
party  to  whom  it  is  set.  But,  this  notwithstanding,  we  often
speak  of  a  law  set  by  a  man  to  himself:  meaning  that  he
intends  to  pursue  some  given  course  of  conduct  as  excLctly  as  he
would  pursue  it  if  he  were  bound  to  pursue  it  by  a  law.  An
intention  of  pursuing  exactly  some  given  course  of  conduct,  is
the  only  law  or  rule  which  a  man  can  set  to  himself.  The
binding  virtue  of  a  law  lies  in  the  sanction  annexed  to  it.  But
in  the  case  of  a  so  called  law  set  by  a  man  to  himself,  he  is  not
constrained  to  observe  it  by  aught  that  resembles  a  sanction.
For  though  he  may  fairly  purpose  to  inflict  a  pain  on  himself,
if  his  conduct  shall  depart  from  the  guide  which  he  intends  it
shall  follow,  the  infliction  of  the  conditional  pain  depends  upon
his  own  wilL — ^Again :  When  we  talk  of  rules  of  art,  the  meta-
phorical application  of  the  term  rules  is  suggested  by  the  analogy
in  question.  By  a  rule  of  art,  we  mean  a  prescription  or  pattern
which  is  offered  to  practitioners  of  an  art,  and  which  they  are
advised  to  observe  when  performing  some  given  process.  There
is  not  the  semblance  of  a  sanction,  nor  is  there  the  shadow  of  a
duty.  But  the  offered  prescription  or  pattern  may  guide  the
conduct  of  practitioners,  as  a  rule  imperative  and  proper  guides
the  conduct  of  the  obliged.^^
Laws  The  preceding disquisition on  figurative  laws  is  not so

icaUr  ^^ Superfluous  as  some  of  my  hearers  may  deem  it. Figurative

^  Sapposed difference  between law  and  to  '  metaphorical  applications  of  the

and  rule. — M.S,  note,  term  obligation^  like  those  of  the  term

The author refers, in a  memoran-  lato.* Unhappily  I  have  been  unable  to

dum,  to  notes  on  'laws  metanhorical,  at  find  them. — ^S.  A.
the  point  which  relates  to  Rules  "of  Art/


'  XTTLT^'-TWLTL.-  M^z^ryrz-  f 4.  -zC  ^-NT


ar&  r>:rtZT  *ai:i  lir'icjn.  1  nirfuziijic »-T:  lies**  3d,>?c  ^as?  iJ»i


tv*. -^.^


his  IzsziiTZr&.  \  iiziiiei  /'^ %:7»'"^^  .x"cii:i»:c:  ic  ill  ir,:tv,vt^  i^

hare  adTrnai  iiiiT-*^ -y«  *:ri. •"::->  e?5.  ^'^.xl  r:Ji:;;:r*  ocv,:::a

sed  f'ZzilzzL  Ar— V— ^  CTue  in  tcin.  qr-t  ia  r.:.in  ::*?>.  u:i:uT.
aviuiQ  .^:i>;:ie  -xzin-izie  esc  H:-*  desc^::.!::  niJkri^  jk:v;;:o  tx^:ixir,st*
conjuncdo.  q::an  =?:<«  ?r.ArrT—  -'-->  ar{^lIarLiu$ ;  hiuv*  Ulvrv^mui
procreaiio,  hiac  ei:i:ai:>:  vidriL.us  etenim  c^tew  qv:v\;ue  Auiuu^lU^
feras  edam,  isdas  Juris  perida  wnseri.  /w  ^^'V,fcv«  ^ti^;^  \\v\o
gentes  humaD^  orunmr.  QnoJ  a  uti^i  '^^^i  wvwioiw  iiuto  fcuulo
intelligere  licet ;  quia  illud  omnibos  animalilniSv  hvv  $^^li^  homiui*
bus  inter  se  commune  esL'  The  J\4S  nj.'hnuV  which  Vl^nnu  hox»
describes^  and  which  he  here  distinguishes  fn>m  the  y*.v<  ••,•;*>  »m*V
or  geniium,  is  a  name  for  the  instincts  of  animidis^  Mon>  i>siHvi»
ally,  it  denotes  that  instinctive  appetite  which  K\uis  lhi>iu  to
propagate  their  kinds,  with  that  instinctive  symi^uhy  which
inclines  parent  animals  to  nourish  and  educate  their  yvmu^*  ^^^>v
the  instincts  of  animals  are  related  to  laws  by  tJu>  j^Knuiin*  or
remote  analogy  which  I  have  already  eiuleiuinmnl  to  oxphuiu
They  incline  the  animals  to  act  in  certain  uniform  uuhIcs.  «ud
they  are  given  to  the  animals  for  that  pur^KX^^o  by  an  intoUig^nit
and  rational  Author.  But  these  metaphorical  laws  which  gx^vovn
the  lower  animals,  and  which  govern  (though  loss  dosiHUicully)
the  human  species  itself,  should  not  havo  boon  bUnuloil  anil
confounded,  by  a  grave  writer  upon  jurisprudouco.  with  lawM
properly  so  called.  It  is  true  that  the  instincts  of  tho  unin\ul
man,  like  many  of  his  affections  which  are  not  inatinotivo,  aiv
amongst  the  causes  of  laws  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  tho  lorni.
More  especially,  the  laws  regarding  the  n^latiou  of  huabund  and
wife,  and  the  laws  regarding  tho  relation  of  parent  and  chihl,  am
mainly  caused  by  the  instincts  which  Ulpian  particularly  jioiutH
at.  And  that,  it  is  likely,  was  the  reason  which  doU)rnilm«l
VOL.  L  V


2 lo  The  Province  of


Lect.  V this  legal  oracle  to  class  the  instincts  of  animals  with  laws

' ' imperative  and  proper. But  nothing  can  be  more  absurd  than

the  ranking  with  laws  themselves  the  causes  which  lead  to  their

existence. And  if  human  instincts  are  laws  because  they  are

causes  of  laws,  there  is  scarcely  a  faculty  or  affection  belonging

to  the  human  mind,  and  scarcely  a  class  of  objects  presented  by

the  outward  world,  that  must  not  be  esteemed  a  law  and  an

appropriate  subject  of  jurisprudence. — I  must,  however,  remark,

that  the  jva  qyuod  TuUura  omnia  animaiia  docuit  is  a  conceit

peculiar  to  Ulpian :  and  that  this  most  foolish  conceit,  though

inserted  in  Justinian's  compilations,  has  no  perceptible  influence

on  the  detail  of  the  Boman  law. The  jti$  naturcde  of  the

classical  jurists  generally,  and  the  jus  ncUurale  occurring  generally

in  the  Pcmdects,  is  equivalent  to  the  natwrcd  law  of  modem

writers  upon  jurisprudence,  and  is  synonymous  with  the  jus

gentium,  or  the  jus  naturale  et  geTitium,  which  I  have  tried  to

explain  concisely  at  the  end  of  a  preceding  note. It  means

those  positive  laws  and  those  rules  of  positive  morality,  which

are  not  peculiar  or  appropriate  to  any  nation  or  age,  but  obtain,

or  are  thought  to  obtain,  in  all  nations  and  ages :  and  which,  by

reason  of  their  obtaining  in  all  nations  and  ages,  are  supposed  to

be  formed  or  fashioned  on  the  law  of  God  or  Nature  as  known

by  the  moral  sense. '  Omnes  populi '  (says  Gains),  *  qui  legibus

et  moribus  reguntur,  partim  suo  proprio,  partim  communi  omnium

hominum  jure  utuntur. Nam  quod  quisque  populus  ipse  sibi

jus  constituit,  id  ipsius  proprium  est,  vocaturque  jus  civile ;  quasi

jus  proprium  ipsius  civitatis. Quod  vero  naturalis  ratio  inter

omnes homines constittdt, id aput omnes populos perseque

custoditur,  vocaturque  jus  gentium ;  quasi  quo  jure  omnes  gentes

utuntur.' The.  imiversal  leges  et  mores  here  described  by  Gains,

and  distinguished  from  the  leges  et  mores  peculiar  to  a  particular

nation,  are  styled  indifferently,  by  most  of  the  classical  jurists,

JUS  gentium,  jus  naturale,  or  jus  naturale  et  gentium. And  the

law  of  nature,  aa  thus  imderstood,  is  not  intrinsically  absurd.

For  as  some  of  the  dictates  of  utility  are  always  jmd  everywhere

the  same,  and  are  also  so  plain  and  glaring  that  they  hardly

admit  of  mistake,  there  are  legal  and  moral  rules  which  are

nearly  or  quite  universal,  and  the  expediency  of  which  must  be

seen  by  merely  n^Uural  reason,  or  by  reason  without  the  lights

of  extensive  experience  and  observation. The  distinction  of  law

and  morality  into  natural  and  positive,  is  a  needless  and  futile

subtilty: but  still  the  distinction  is  founded  on  a real  and

manifest  differenca The  jus  naturale  or  gentium  would  be  liable


Jurisprudence  determined.  2 1 1

to  little  objection,  if  it  were  not  supposed  to  be  the  oflfspiing  of Lect.  V
a  moral  instinct  or  sense,  or  of  innate  practical  principles. But, ' ^^^
since  it  is  closely  allied  (as  I  shall  show  hereafter  ^^)  to  that
misleading  and  pernicious  jargon,  it  ought  to  be  expelled,  with
the  naiural  law  of  the  modems,  from  the  sciences  of  jurisprudence
and  morality.

The  following  passage  is  the  first  sentence  in  Montesquieu's  \
Spirit  of  Law$.  *  Les  lois,  dans  la  signification  la  plus  ^tendue,
sont  les  rapports  n^cessaires  qui  d^rivent  de  la  nature  des  choses:  |
et  dans  ce  sens  tons  les  etres  ont  leurs  lois :  la  Divinity  a  ses  i
lois ;  le  monde  materiel  a  ses  lois ;  les  intelligences  sup^rieures
h.  rhomme  ont  leurs  lois ;  les  bStes  ont  leurs  lois ;  I'homme  a
*  ses  lois.*  Now  objects  widely  different,  though  bearing  a  common
name,  are  here  blended  and  confounded.  Of  the  laws  which
govern  the  conduct  of  intelligent  and  rational  creatures,  some  '
are  laws  imperative  and  proper,  and  others  are  closely  analogous
to  laws  of  that  description.  But  the  so  called  laws  which  govern
the  material  world,  with  the  so  called  laws  which  govern  the
lower  animals,  are  merely  laws  by  a  metaphor.  And  the  so
called  laws  which  govern  or  determine  the  Deity  are  clearly  in
the  same  predicament.  If  his  actions  were  governed  or  deter-
mined by  laws  imperative  and  proper,  he  would  be  in  a  state  of
dependence  on  another  and  superior  being.  When  we  say  that
the  actions  of  the  Deity  are  governed  or  determined  by  laws,  we
mean  that  they  conform  to  intentions  which  the  Deity  himself
has  conceived,  and  which  he  pursues  or  observes  with  inflexible
steadiness  or  constancy.  To  mix  these  figurative  laws  with  laws
imperative  and  proper,  is  to  obscure,  and  not  to  elucidate,  the
nature  or  essence  of  the  latter. — The  beginning  of  the  passage  is
worthy  of  the  sequel.  We  are  told  that  laws  are  the  necessary
relations  which  flow  from  the  nature  of  things.  But  what,  I
would  crave,  are  relations  ?  What,  I  would  also  crave,  is  the
nature  of  things  ?  And  how  do  the  necessary  relations  which  |
flow  from  the  nature  of  things  differ  from  those  relations  which
originate  in  other  sources  ?  The  terms  of  the  definition  are
incomparably  more  obscure  than  the  term  which  it  affects  to
expound.

If  you  read  the  disquisition  in  Blackstone  on  the  nature  of
laws  in  general,  or  the  fustian  description  of  law  in  Hooker's
Ecclesiastical  Polity,  you  will  find  the  same  confusion  of  laws
imperative  and  proper  with  laws  which  are  merely  such  by  a
glaring  perversion  of  the  term.  The  cases  of  this  confusion
"  Lect  zzzii.  post.


2 1 2  The  Province  of

Lect.  V are,  indeed,  so  numerous,  that  they  would  fill  a  considerable

volume.
Physical .  From  the  confusion  of  laws  metaphorical  with  laws  impera-
sanctions. ^^^^  ^^^  proper,  I  tum  to  a  mistake,  somewhat  similar,  which,
I  presume  to  think,  has  been  committed  by  Mr.  Bentham.

Sanctions  proper  and  improper  are  of  three  capital  classes :
— the  sanctions  properly  so  called  which  are  annexed  to  the
laws  of  God :  the  sanctions  properly  so  called  which  are  annexed
to  positive  laws:  the  sanctions  properly  so  called,  and  the
sanctions  closely  analogous  to  sanctions  properly  so  called,  which
respectively  enforce  compliance  with  positive  moral  rules.  But
to  sanction  religious,  legal,  and  moral,  this  great  philosopher
and  jurist  adds  a  class  of  sanctions  which  he  styles  physical  or
naiuraL

When  he  styles  these  sanctions  physical,  he  does  not  intend
to  intimate  that  they  are  distinguished  from  other  sanctions  by
the  mode  wherein  they  operate :  he  does  not  intend  to  intimate
that  these  are  the  only  sanctions  which  affect  the  suffering
parties  through  physical  or  material  means.  Any  sanction  of
any  class  may  reach  the  suffering  party  through  means  of  that
description.  If  a  man  were  smitten  with  blindness  by  the
immediate  appointment  of  the  Deity,  and  in  consequence  of  a
sin  he  had  committed  against  the  Divine  law,  he  would  suffer  a
religious  sanction  through  his  physical  or  bodily  organs.  The
thief  who  is  hanged  or  imprisoned  by  virtue  of  a  judicial  com-
mand, suffers  a  legal  sanction  through  physical  or  material
means.  If  a  man  of  the  class  of  gentlemen  violates  the  law  of
honour,  and  happens  to  be  shot  in  a  duel  arising  from  his  moral
delinquency,  he  suffers  a  moral  sanction  in  a  physical  or
material  form.

The  meaning  annexed  by  Mr.  Bentham  to  the  expression
'  physical  sanction,'  may,  I  believe,  be  rendered  in  the  following
manner. — ^A  physical  sanction  is  an  evil  brought  upon  the
suffering  party  by  an  act  or  omission  of  his  own.  But,  though
it  is  brought  upon  the  sufferer  by  an  act  or  omission  of  his  own,
it  is  not  brought  upon  the  sufferer  through  any  Divine  law,  or
through  any  positive  law,  or  rule  of  positive  morality.  For
example:  If  your  house  be  destroyed  by  fire  through  your
neglecting  to  put  out  a  light,  you  bring  upon  yourself,  by  your
negligent  omission,  a  physical  or  natural  sanction :  supposing,
I  mean,  that  your  omission  is  not  to  be  deemed  a  sin,  and  that
the  consequent  destruction  of  your  house  is  not  to  be  deemed  a
punishment  inflicted  by the hand  of  the  Deity. In  short,


yurispmdence  determined.  213

though  a  physical  sanction  is  an  evil  falling  on  a  rational  being,  Lect.  Y
and  brought  on  a  rational  being  by  an  act  or  omission  of  his  ^"■"^'
own,  it  is  neither  brought  on  the  sufferer  through  a  law  impera-
tive and  proper,  nor  through  an  analogous  law  set  or  imposed
by  opinion.  In  case  I  borrowed  the  just,  though  tautological
language  of  Locke,  I  should  describe  a  physical  sanction  in
some  such  terms  as  the  following.  '  It  is  an  evil  naturally  pro-
duced by  the  conduct  whereon  it  is  consequent:  and,  being
Tuiturally  produced  by  the  conduct  whereon  it  is  consequent,  it
reaches  the  suffering  party  wUhovt  the  intervention  of  a  law.*

Such  physical  or  natural  evils  are  related  by  the  following
analogy  to  sanctions  properly  so  called.  1.  When  they  are
actually  suffered,  they  are  suffered  by  rational  beings  through
acts  or  omissions  of  their  own.  2.  Before  they  are  actually
suffered,  or  whilst  they  exist  in  prospect,  they  affect  the  wills
or  desires  of  the  parties  obnoxious  to  them  as  sanctions  properly
so  called  affect  the  wills  of  the  obliged.  The  parties  are  urged
to  the  acts  which  may  avert  the  evils  from  their  heads,  or  the
parties  are  deterred  from  the  acts  which  may  bring  the  evik
upon  them.

But  in  spite  of  the  specious  analogy  at  which  I  have  now
pointed,  I  dislike,  for  various  reasons,  the  application  of  the
term  sanction  to  these  physical  or  natural  evils.  Of  those
reasons  I  will  briefly  mention  the  following. — 1.  Although
these  evils  are  suffered  by  intelligent  rational  beings,  and  by
intelligent  rational  beings  through  acts  or  omissions  of  their
own,  they  are  not  suffered  as  consequences  of  their  not  com-
plying with  desires  of  intelligent  rational  beings.  The  acts  or
omissions  whereon  these  evils  are  consequent,  can  hardly  be
likened  to  breaches  of  duties)  or  to  violations  of  imperative
laws.  The  analogy  borne  by  these  evils  to  sanctions  properly
so  called,  is  nearly  as  remote  as  the  analogy  borne  by  laws
metaphorical  to  laws  imperative  and  proper.  2.  By  the  term
sanction,  as  it  is  now  restricted,  the  evils  enforcing  compliance
with  laws  imperative  and  proper,  or  with  the  closely  analogous
laws  which  opinion  sets  or  imposes,  are  distinguished  from
other  evils  briefly  and  commodiously.  If  the  term  were
commonly  extended  to  these  physical  or  natural  evils,  this
advantage  would  be  lost  The  term  would  then  comprehend
every  possible  evil  which  a  man  may  bring  upon  himself  by  his
own  voluntary  conduct.  The  term  would  then  comprehend
every  contingent  evil  which  can  work  on  the  wiU  or  desires  as
a  motive  to  action  or  forbearance.


214
Lect.  V

In  strict-
nesa,  decla-
ratory
laws,  laws
repealing
laws,  and
laws  of  im-
perfect
obligation
(in  tne
sense  of
the  Roman
jurists),
onghtto  be
classed  re-
spectively
with  laws
metaphor-
ical or
figurative,
and  rules
of  positive
morality.


1st.  Ten-
dency  to
confound
positive
kw  with
the  science
of  legisla-
tion and
positive
morality
with  deon-
tology, f
£zample|
from
Black- ;
stone. '


TAe  Province  of

I  close  my  disquisitions  on  figurative  laws,  and  on  those
metaphorical  sanctions  which  Mr.  Bentham  denominates  physical,
with  the  following  connected  remark.

Declaratory  laws,  laws  repealing  laws,  and  laws  of  imperfect
obligation  (in  the  sense  of  the  Boman  jurists),  are  merely
cmalogous  to  laws  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term.  like
laws  imperative  and  proper,  declaratory  laws,  laws  repealing
laws,  and  laws  of  imperfect  obligation  (in  the  sense  of  the
Eoman  jurists),  are  signs  of  pleasure  or  desire  proceeding  from
law-makers.  A  law  of  imperfect  obligation  (in  the  sense  of  the
Soman  jurists)  is  also  allied  to  an  imperative  law  by  the  follow-
ing point  of  resemblance.  Like  a  law  imperative  and  proper,
it  is  offered  as  a  norma,  or  guide  of  conduct,  although  it  is  not
armed  with  a  legal  or  political  sanction.

Declaratory  laws,  and  laws  repealing  laws,  ought  in  strict-
ness to  be  classed  with  laws  metaphorical  or  figurative:  for
the  analogy  by  which  they  are  related  to  laws  imperative  cmd
proper  is  extremely  slender  or  remote.  Laws  of  imperfect
obligation  (in  the  sense  of  the  Boman  jurists)  are  laws  set  or
imposed  by  the  opinions  of  the  law -makers,  and  ought  in
strictness  to  be  classed  with  rules  of  positive  morality.  But
though  laws  of  these  three  species  are  merely  analogous  to  laws
in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term,  they  are  closely  con-
nected with  positive  laws,  and  are  appropriate  subjects  of
jurisprudence.  Consequently  I  treat  them  as  improper  laws  of
anomalous  or  eccentric  sorts,  and  exclude  them  from  the  classes
of  laws  to  which  in  strictness  they  belong.

NgU — on  the  prevailing  tendency  to  confound  what  is  with  what  ought
to  be  law  or  morality,  that  is,  Ist,  to  confound  x>08itive  law  with  the  science
of  legislation,  and  positive  morality  with  deontology  ;  and  2ndly,  to  con-
found positive  law  with  positive  morality,  and  both  with  legislation  and
deontology. — (See  page  200,  and  note  there.)

The  existence  of  law  is  one  thing ;  its  merit  or  demerit  is  another.
Whether  it  be  or  be  not  is  one  enquiry  ;  whether  it  be  or  be  not  conform-
able to  an  assumed  standard,  is  a  different  enquiry.  A  law,  which  actually
exists,  is  a  law,  though  we  happen  to  dislike  it,  or  though  it  vary  from  the
text,  by  which  we  regulate  our  approbation  and  disapprobation.  This
truth,  when  formally  announced  as  an  abstract  proposition,  is  so  simple
and  glaring  that  it  seems  idle  to  insist  upon  it.  But  simple  and  glaring
as  it  is,  when  enunciated  in  abstract  expressions  the  enumeration  of  the
instances  in  which  it  has  been  forgotten  would  fill  a  volume.

Sir  William  Blackstone,  for  example,  says  in  his  '  Commentaries,'  that
the  laws  of  God  are  superior  in  obligation  to  all  other  laws  ;  that  no  human
laws  should  be  suffered  to  contradict  them ;  that  human  laws  are  of  no
validity  if  contrary  to  them  ;  and  that  all  valid  laws  derive  their  force
from  that  Divine  original.


Jurisprudence  determined.  2 1 5

Now,  he  may  mean  that  all  haman  laws  ought  to  conform  to  the  Divine  Lbct.  Y
laws.  If  this  be  his  meaning,  I  assent  to  it  without  hesitation.  The  evils  ^  »  ^
which  we  are  exposed  to  suffer  from  the  hands  of  Gkxl  as  a  consequence  of
disobeying  HiB  commands  are  the  greatest  evils  to  which  we  are  obnoxious  ;
the  obligations  which  they  impose  are  consequently  paramount  to  those
imposed  by  any  other  laws,  and  if  human  commands  conflict  with  the
Divine  law,  we  ought  to  disobey  the  command  which  is  enforced  by  the
less  powerM  sanction  ;  this  is  implied  in  the  term  ougU :  the  proposition
is  identical,  and  therefore  perfectly  indisputable — ^it  is  our  interest  to  choose
the  smaller  and  more  uncertain  evil,  in  preference  to  the  greater  and  surer.
If  this  be  Blackstone's  meaning,  I  assent  to  his  proposition,  and  have  only
to  object  to  it,  that  it  tells  us  just  nothing.

Perhaps,  again,  he  means  that  human  lawgivers  are  themselves  obliged
by  the  Divine  laws  to  fEkshion  the  laws  which  they  impose  by  that  ultimate
standard,  because  if  they  do  not^  God  will  punish  them.  To  this  also  I
entirely  assent :  for  if  the  index  to  the  law  of  God  be  the  principle  of
utility,  that  law  embraces  the  whole  of  our  voluntary  actions  in  so  far  as
motives  applied  from  without  are  required  to  give  them  a  direction  con-
formable to  the  general  happiness.

But  the  meaning  of  this  passage  of  Blackstone,  if  it  has  a  meaning,  seems
rather  to  be  this :  that  no  human  law  which  conflicts  with  the  Divine  law
is  obligatory  or  binding ;  in  other  words,  that  no  human  law  which  conflicts
with  the  Divine  law  is  a  law,  for  a  law  without  an  obligation  is  a  contra-
diction in  terms.  I  suppose  this  to  be  his  meaning,  because  when  we  say  of
any  transaction  that  it  is  invalid  or  void,  we  mean  that  it  is  not  binding :
as,  for  example,  if  it  be  a  contract,  we  mean  that  the  political  law  will  not
lend  its  sanction  to  enforce  the  contract.

Now,  to  say  that  human  laws  which  conflict  with  the  Divine  law  are
not  binding,  that  is  to  say,  are  not  laws,  is  to  talk  stark  nonsense.  The
most  pernicious  laws,  and  therefore  those  which  are  most  opposed  to  the
will  of  God,  have  been  and  are  continually  enforced  as  laws  by  judicial
tribunals.  Suppose  an  act  innocuous,  or  positively  beneficial,  be  prohibited  '
by  the  sovereign  under  the  penalty  of  death  ;  if  I  commit  this  act,  I  shall
be  tried  and  condemned,  and  if  I  object  to  the  sentence,  that  it  is  contrary
to  the  law  of  God,  who  has  commanded  that  human  lawgivers  shall  not
prohibit  acts  which  have  no  evil  consequences,  the  Court  of  Justice  will
demonstrate  the  inconclusiveness  of  my  reasoning  by  hanging  me  up,  in
pursuance  of  the  law  of  which  I  have  impugned  the  validity.  An  excep-
tion, demurrer,  or  plea,  founded  on  the  law  of  God  was  never  heard  in  a
Court  of  Justice,  from  the  creation  of  the  world  down  to  the  present
moment

But  this  abuse  of  language  is  not  merely  puerile,  it  is  nuschievous.
When  it  is  said  that  a  law  ought  to  be  disobeyed,  what  is  meant  is  that
we  are  urged  to  disobey  it  by  motives  more  cogent  and  compulsory  than
those  by  which  it  is  itself  sanctioned.  If  the  laws  of  God  are  certain,  the
motives  which  they  hold  out  to  disobey  any  human  command  which  is  at
variance  with  them  are  paramount  to  all  others.  But  the  laws  of  God  are
not  always  certain.  All  divines,  at  least  all  reasonable  divines,  admit  that
no  scheme  of  duties  perfectly  complete  and  unambiguous  was  ever  imparted
to  us  by  revelation.  As  an  index  to  the  Divine  will,  utility  is  obviously
insufllcient  What  appears  pernicious  to  one  person  may  appear  beneficial  to
another.  And  as  for  the  moral  sense,  innate  practical  principles,  conscience
they  are  merely  convenient  cloaks  for  ignorance  or  sinister  interest :  they


2l6


Lect.  V


Another
example
from
Black-
stone.


J  de-
finition of
civil
liberty.


Example
from  the
writers  on
interna-
tional law.


The  Province  of

mean  either  that  I  hate  the  law  to  which  I  object  and  cannot  tell  why,  or
that  I  hate  the  law,  and  that  the  cause  of  my  hatred  is  one  which  I  find  it
incommodious  to  avow.  If  I  say  openly,  I  hate  the  law,  ergo^  it  is  not
binding  and  ought  to  be  disobeyed,  no  one  will  Listen  to  me  ;  but  by  calling
my  hate  my  conscience  or  my  moral  sense,  I  urge  the  same  argument  in
another  and  a  more  plausible  form  :  I  seem  to  assign  a  reason  for  my  dislike,
when  in  truth  I  have  only  given  it  a  sounding  and  specious  name.  In
times  of  civil  discord  the  mischief  of  this  detestable  abuse  of  language  is
apparent.  In  quiet  times  the  dictates  of  utility  are  fortunately  so  obvious
that  the  anarchical  doctrine  sleeps,  and  men  habitually  admit  the  validity  of
laws  which  they  dislike.  To  prove  by  pertinent  reasons  that  a  law  is
pernicious  is  highly  useful,  because  such  process  may  lead  to  the  abrogation
of  the  pernicious  ikw.  To  incite  the  public  to  resistance  by  determinate
views  of  Miilii'^  may  be  useful,  for  resistance,  grounded  on  clear  and  definite
prospects  of  good,  is  sometimes  beneficial  But  to  proclaim  generally  that
all  laws  which  are  pernicious  or  contrary  to  the  will  of  God  are  void  and
not  to  be  tolerated,  is  to  preach  anarchy,  hostile  and  perilous  as  much  to
wise  and  benign  rule  as  to  stupid  and  galling  tyranny.

In  another  passage  of  his  *  Commentaries,'  Blackstone  enters  into  an
argument  to  prove  that  a  master  cannot  have  a  right  to  the  labour  of  his
slave.  Had  he  contented  himself  with  expressing  his  <2isaj9pro(atum,  a  very
well-grounded  one  certainly,  of  the  institution  of  slavery,  no  objection  could
have  been  made  to  his  so  expressing  himself.  But  to  dispute  the  existence
or  the  possibility  of  the  right  is  to  talk  absurdly.  For  in  every  age,  and  in
almost  every  nation,  the  right  has  been  given  by  positive  law,  whilst  that
pernicious  disposition  of  positive  law  has  been  backed  by  the  positive
morality  of  the  free  or  master  classes.

Pale/s  admired  definition  of  civil  liberty  appears  to  me  to  be  obnoxious
to  the  very  same  objection  :  it  is  a  definition  of  civil  liberty  as  it  ought  to
be.  *  Civil  liberty,'  he  says,  *  is  the  not  being  restrained  by  any  law  but
which  conduces  in  a  greater  degree  to  the  public  welfare  ;'  and  this  is  dis-
tinguished from  'M^ral  liberty,  which  is  the  not  being  restrained  at  aU.
But  when  liberty  is  not  exactly  synonymous  with  right,  it  means,  and  can
mean  nothing  eke,  but  exemption  from  restraint  or  obligation,  and  is  there-
fore altogether  incompatible  with  law,  the  very  idea  of  which  implies  restraint
and  obligation.  But  restraint  is  restraint  although  it  be  useful,  and  liberty
is  liberty  though  it  may  be  pernicious.  You  may,  if  you  please,  call  a  useful
restraint  Mheriyj^  and  refuse  the  name  liberty  to  exemption  from  restraint
when  restraint  is  for  the  public  advantage.  But  by  this  abuse  of  language
you  throw  not  a  ray  of  light  upon  the  nature  of  political  liberty  ;  you  only
add  to  the  ambiguity  and  indistinctness  in  which  it  is  already  involved.  I
shall  have  to  define  and  analyze  the  notion  of  liberty  hereafter,  on  account
of  its  intimate  connexion  witli  right,  obligation,  and  sanction.

Grotius,  Puffendorf,  and  the  other  writers  on  the  so-called  law  of  nations,
have  fallen  into  a  similar  confusion  of  ideas  :  they  have  confounded  positive
international  morality,  or  the  rules  which  actually  obtain  among  civilized
nations  in  their  mutual  intercourse,  with  their  own  vague  conceptions  of
international  morality  as  it  (Aighi  to  be,  with  that  indeterminate  something
which  they  conceived  it  would  be,  if  it  conformed  to  that  indeterminate
something  which  they  call  the  law  of  nature.  Professor  Von  Martens,  of
Gottingen,  who  died  only  a  few  years  ago,^^  is  actually  the  first  of  the


u  This,  it  will  be  remembered,  was  spoken  in  the  year  1880  or  1881.


yurtsprudence  determined.  217

writers  on  the  law  of  nations  who  has  seized  this  distinction  with  a  firm Lect.  V

grasp,  the  first  who  has  distinguished  the  rules  which  ought  to  be  received "^

in  the  intercourse  of  nations,  or  which  would  be  received  if  they  conformed

to  an  assumed  standard  of  whatever  kind,  from  those  which  art  so  received,

endeavour  to  collect  from  the  practice  of  civilized  communities  what  are

the  rules  actually  recognized  and  acted  upon  by  them,  and  gave  to  these

rules  the  name  of  positive  international  law.

I  have  given  several  instances  in  which  law  and  morality  as  they  ought  2nd.  Ten-
to  be  are  confounded  with  the  law  and  morality  which  actually  exist. I dency  to
shall  next  mention  some  examples  in  which  positive  law  is  confounded  with  ^|^^!^
positive  morality,  and  both  with  the  science  of  legislation  and  deontology, kw  with

Those  who  know  the  writings  of  the  Roman  lawyers  only  by  hearsay  are  positiye
accustomed  to  admire  their  philosophy. Now  this,  in  my  estimation,  is  the  ™°}^*?»
only  part  of  their  writings  which  deserves  contempt Their  extraordinary  ^^j^  j^  .  ^
merit  is  evinced  not  in  general  speculation,  but  as  expositors  of  the  Roman  lation  and
law. They  have  seized  its  general  principles  with  great  clearness  and  pene- deonto-
tration,  have  applied  these  principles  with  admirable  logic  to  the  explanation  ^^SJ*
of  details,  and  have  thus  reduced  this  positive  system  of  law  to  a  compact  Examples
and  coherent  whole. But  the  philosophy  which  they  borrowed  from  the  ^^^  ^
Greeks,  or  which,  after  the  examples  of  the  Greeks,  they  themselves  fashioned,  jurists,
is  naught. Their  attempts  to  define  jurisprudence  and  to  determine  the
province  of  the  jurisconsult  are  absolutely  pitiable,  and  it  is  hardly  con-
ceivable how  men  of  such  admirable  discernment  should  have  displayed
such  contemptible  imbecility.

At  the  commencement  of  the  digest  is  a  passage  attempting  to  define  \
jurisprudence.  I  shall  first  present  you  with  this  passage  in  a  free  transla-
tion, and  afterwards  in  the  original.  ^  Jurisprudence,'  says  this  definition,
'  is  the  knowledge  of  things  divine  and  human  ;  the  science  which  teaches
men  to  discern  the  just  from  the  unjust'  '  Jurisprudentia  est  divinarum
atque  humanarum  rerum  notitia,  justi  atque  injusti  scientia.'  In  the  '
excerpt  frx)m  Ulpian,  which  is  placed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Digest,  it  is
attempted  to  define  the  office  or  province  of  the  jurisconsult  '  Law,'  says
the  passage,  '  derives  its  name  from  justice,  justitiaj  and  is  the  science  or
skill  in  the  good  and  the  equitable.  Law  being  the  creature  of  justice,  we
the  jurisconsults  may  be  considered  as  her  priests,  for  justice  is  the  goddess
whom  we  worship,  and  to  whose  service  we  are  devoted.  Justice  and
equity  are  our  vocation ;  we  teach  men  to  know  the  difference  between  the
just  and  the  unjust,  the  lawful  and  the  unlawful ;  we  strive  to  reclaim
them  from  vice,  not  only  by  the  terrors  of  punishment,  but  also  by  the
blandishment  of  rewards ;  herein,  unless  we  flatter  ourselves,  aspiring  to
sound  and  real  philosophy,  and  not  like  some  whom  we  could  mention,
contenting  ourselves  with  vain  and  empty  pretension.'  'Juri  operam
datUTum  prius  nosse  oportet,  unde  nomen  juris  descendat  Est  autem  a
justitia  appellatum ;  nam,  ut  eleganter  Celsus  definit,  jus  est  ars  boni  et
aequi.  Cujus  merito  quis  nos  sacerdotes  appellet ;  justitiam  namque  colimus,
et  boni  et  aequi  notitiam  profitemur,  ssquum  ab  iniquo  separantes,  licitum
ab  illicito  discementes,  bonos  non  solum  metu  poenarum  verum  etiam
proemiorum  quoque  exhortatione  efficere  cupientes,  veram,  nisi  fallor,  philo-
sophiam,  non  simulatam  affectantes.'

Were  I  to  present  you  with  all  the  criticisms  which  these  two  passages
suggest)  I  shotdd  detain  you  a  full  hour.  I  shall  content  myself  with  one
observation  on  the  scope  and  purpose  of  them  both.  That  is,  that  they
affect  to  define  jurisprudence,  or  what  comes  exactly  to  the  same  thing,  the


2 1 8  The  Province  of

Lect.  y office  or  province  df  the  jurisconsult. Now  jurisprudence,  if  it  is  anything,
T  is  the  science  of  law,  or  at  most  the  science  of  law  combined  with  the  art  of

applying  it ;  but  what  is  here  given  as  a  definition  of  it^  embraces  not  only
law,  but  x>ositive  morality,  and  even  the  test  to  which  both  these  are  to  be
referred.  It  therefore  comprises  the  science*  of  legislation  and  deontology.
Further,  it  affirms  that  law  is  the  creature  of  justice,  which  is  as  much  as
to  say  that  it  is  the  child  of  its  own  offspring.  For  when  by  jiMf  we  mean
anything  but  to  express  our  own  approbation  we  mean  something  which
accords  wUh  some  given  law.  True,  we  speak  of  law  and  justice,  or  of  law
and  equity,  as  opposed  to  each  other,  but  when  we  do  so,  we  mean  to  express
mere  dislike  of  the  law,  or  to  intimate  that  it  conflicts  with  another  law,
the  law  of  Gkxl,  which  is  its  standard.  According  to  this,  every  pernicious
law  is  unjust.  But,  in  truth,  law  is  itself  the  standard  of  justice.  What
deviates  from  any  law  is  unjust  with  reference  to  that  law,  though  it  may
be  just  with  reference  to  another  law  of  superior  authority.  The  terms  just
and  unjust  imply  a  standard,  and  conformity  to  that  standard  and  a  devia-
tion from  it ;  else  they  signify  mere  dislike,  which  it  would  be  far  better  to
signify  by  a  grunt  or  a  groan  than  by  a  mischievous  and  detestable  abuse  of
articulate  language.  But  justice  is  commonly  erected  into  an  entity,  and
spoken  of  as  a  legislator,  in  which  character  it  is  supposed  to  prescribe  the
law,  conformity  to  which  it  should  denote.  The  veriest  dolt  who  is  placed  '
in  a  jury  box,  the  merest  old  woman  who  happens  to  be  raised  to  the
bench,  will  talk  finely  of  equity  or  justice — the  justice  of  the  case,  the
equity  of  the  case,  the  imperious  demands  of  justice,  the  plain  dictates  of
equity.  He  forgets  that  he  is  there  to  enforce  ihe  lavs  of  the  kmdy  else  he
does  not  administer  that  justice  or  that  equity  with  which  alone  he  is
immediately  concerned.
Example  This  is  well  known  to  have  been  a  strong  tendency  of  Lord  Mansfield —

from  Lord  a  strange  obliquity  in  so  great  a  man.  I  wiU  give  an  instance.  By  the
Mansfield.  Ej^gijgij  j^w,  a  promise  to  give  something  or  to  do  something  for  the  benefit
of  another  is  not  binding  without  what  is  called  a  consideration,  that  is,  a
motive  assigned  for  the  promise,  which  motive  must  be  of  a  particular
kind.  Lord  Mansfield,  however,  overruled  the  distinct  provisions  of  the
law  by  ruling  that  moral  obligation  was  a  sufficient  consideration.  Now,
moral  obligation  is  an  obligation  imposed  by  opinion,  or  an  obligation
imposed  by  God  :  that  is,  moral  obligation  is  anything  which  we  choose  to
call  so,  for  the  precepts  of  positive  morality  are  infinitely  varying,  and  the
will  of  God,  whether  indicated  by  utility  or  by  a  moral  sense,  is  equally
matter' of  dispute.  This  decision  of  Lord  Mansfield,  which  assumes  that
the  judge  is  to  enforce  morality,  enables  the  judge  to  enforce  just  whatever
he  pleasea

I  must  here  observe  that  I  am  not  objecting  to  Lord  Mansfield  for
assuming  the  office  of  a  legislator.  I  by  no  means  disapprove  of  what  Mr.
Bentham  has  chosen  to  call  by  the  disrespectful,  and  therefore,  as  I  con-
ceive, injudicious,  name  of  judge-made  law.  For  I  consider  it  injudicious
to  call  by  any  name  indicative  of  disrespect  what  appears  to  me  highly
beneficial  and  even  absolutely  necessary.  I  cannot  understand  how  any
person  who  has  considered  the  subject  can  suppose  that  society  could  pos-
sibly have  gone  on  if  judges  had  not  legislated,  or  that  there  is  any  danger
whatever  in  allowing  them  that  power  which  they  have  in  fact  exercised,
to  make  up  for  the  negligence  or  the  incapacity  of  the  avowed  legislator.
That  part  of  the  law  of  every  country  which  was  made  by  judges  has  been
for  better  made  than  that  part  which  consists  of  statutes  enacted  by  the


Jurisprudence  determined.  219

legidataie. Notwithstanding  my  great  admiration  for  Mr.  Bentham,  I Lkct.  Y
cannot  but  think  that^  instead  of  blaming  judges  for  having  legislated,  he ^  ' t ''
should  blame  them  for  the  timid,  narrow,  and  piecemeal  manner  in  which
they  have  legislated,  and  for  l^islating  under  cover  of  vague  and  indeter-
minate phrases,  such  as  Lord  Mansfield  employed  in  the  above  example,
and  which  would  be  censurable  in  any  legislator.


LECTURE  VI.


PosmvB  laws,  the appropriate matter  of  jurisprudence,  are Lect.  vi
related  in  the  way  of  resemblance,  or  by  a  close  or  remote  '^^^**^"r
analogy,  to  the  following  objects. — 1.  In  the  way  of  resemblance,  the  sixth
they  are  related  to  the  laws  of  God. 2.  In  the  way  of  resem-  J^^^^tiie
blance,  they  are  related  to  those  rules  of  positive  morality  which  first,
are  laws  properly  so  called. 3.  By  a  close  or  strong  analogy,  ^^^
they  are  related  to  those  rules  of  positive  morality  which  are  fourth,  and
merely  opinions  or  sentiments  held  or  felt  by  men  in  regard  to
human  conduct 4.  By  a  remote  or  slender  analogy,  they  are
related  to  laws  merely  metaphorical,  or  laws  merely  figurative.

To  distinguish  positive  laws  from  the  objects  now  enume-
rated, is  the  purpose  of  the  present  attempt  to  determine  the
province  of  jurisprudence.

In  pursuance  of  the  purpose  to  which  I  have  now  adverted,
I  stated,  in  my  first  lecture,  the  essentials  of  a  law  or  rwZe  (taken
with  the  largest  signification  which  can  be  given  to  the  term
^properly).

In  my  second,  third,  and  fourth  lectures,  I  stated  the  marks
or  characters  by  which  the  laws  of  God  are  distinguished  from
other  laws.  And,  stating  those  marks  or  characters,  I  explained
the  nature  of  the  index  to  his  unrevealed  laws,  or  I  explained
and  examined  the  hypotheses  which  regard  the  nature  of  that
index.

In  my  fifth  lecture,  I  examined  or  discussed  especially  the
following  principal  topics  (and  I  touched  upon  other  topics  of
secondary  or  subordinate  importance). — I  examined  the  distin-
guishing marks  of  those  positive  moral  rules  which  are  laws
properly  so  called:  I  examined  the  distinguishing  marks  of
those  positive  moral  rules  which  are  styled  laws  or  rvle»  by  an
analogical  extension  of  the  term :  and  I  examined  the  distin-
guishing marks  of  laws  merely  metaphorical,  or  laws  merely
figurative.

I  shall  finish,  in  the  present  lecture,  the  purpose  mentioned
above,  by  explaining  the  marks  or  characters  which  distinguish


2  20


The  Province  of


Leot.  VI  positive  laws,  or  laws  strictly  so  called.  And,  in  order  to  an
^^  explanation  of  the  marks  which  distinguish  positive  laws,  I  shall
analyze  the  expression  sovereignty,  the  correlative  expression
subjection,  and  the  inseparably  connected  expression  independent
political  society.  With  the  ends  or  final  causes  for  which  govern-
ments oiLgkt  to  exist,  or  with  their  diflferent  degrees  of  fitness  to
attain  or  approach  those  ends,  I  have  no  concern.  I  examine
the  notions  of  sovereignty  and  independent  political  society,  in
order  that  I  may  finish  the  purpose  to  which  I  have  adverted
above :  in  order  that  I  may  distinguish  completely  the  appro-
priate province  of  jurisprudence  from  the  regions  which  lie  upon
its  confines,  and  by  which  it  is  encircled.  It  is  necessary  that  I
should  examine  those  notions,  in  order  that  I  may  finish  that
purpose.  For  the  essential  difference  of  a  positive  law  (or  the
difference  that  severs  it  from  a  law  which  is  not  a  positive  law)
may  be  stated  thus.  Every  positive  law,  or  every  law  simply
and  strictly  so  called,  is  set  by  a  sovereign  person,  or  a  sovereign
body  of  persons,  to  a  member  or  memlbers  of  the  independent
political  society  wherein  that  person  or  body  is  sovereign  or
supreme.  Or  (changing  the  expression)  it  is  set  by  a  monarch,
or  sovereign  number,  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state  of  subjec-
tion to  its  author.  Even  though  it  sprung  directly  from  another
fountain  or  source,  it  is  a  positive  law,  or  a  law  strictly  so  called,
by  the  institution  of  that  present  sovereign  in  the  character
of  political  superior.  Or  (borrowing  the  language  of  Hobbes)
'  the  legislator  is  he,  not  by  whose  authority  the  law  was  first
made,  but  by  whose  authority  it  continues  to  be  a  law.'

Having  stated  the  topic  or  subject  appropriate  to  my  present
discourse,  I  proceed  to  distinguish  sovereignty  from  other
superiority  or  might,  and  to  distinguish  society  political  and
independent  from  society  of  other  descriptions.


rrhedistin-
Iguinhiiig
marks  of


sove-
reignty


and  inde-
pendent
political
society.


The  superiority  which  is  styled  sovereignty,  and  the  inde-
pendent political  society  which  sovereignty  implies,  is  distin-
guished from  other  superiority,  and  from  other  society,  by  the
following  marks  or  characters. — 1.  The  hvlk  of  the  given  society
are  in  a  habit  of  obedience  or  submission  to  a  determinate  and
common  superior :  let  that  common  superior  be  a  certain  indi-
vidual person,  or  a  certain  body  or  aggregate  of  individual
persons.  2.  That  certain  individual,  or  that  certain  body  of
individuals,  is  Tto^  in  a  habit  of  obedience  to  a  determinate
human  superior. Laws  (improperly  so  called)  which  opinion


yurisprudence  determined.  221

sets  or  imposes,  may  permanently  aflTect  the  conduct  of  that  Lbct.  vi
certain  individual  or  body.  To  express  or  tacit  commands  of  ^  *  '
other  determinate  parties,  that  certain  individual  or  body  may
yield  occasional  submission.  But  there  is  no  determinate  person,
or  determinate  aggregate  of  persons,  to  whose  commands,  express
or  tacit,  that  certain  individual  or  body  renders  habitual
obedience.

Or  the  notions  of  sovereignty  and  independent  political  \
society  may  be  expressed  concisely  thus. — If  a  determinate  \
human  superior,  not  in  a  habit  of  obedience  to  a  like  superior,  I
receive  habitual  obedience  from  the  hdk  of  a  given  society,  that  /
determinate  superior  is  sovereign  in  that  society,  and  the  society  /
(including  the  superior)  is  a  society  political  and  independent.

To  that  determinate  superior,  the  other  members  of  the  Therola-
society  are  svJbject :  or  on  that  determinate  superior,  the  other  ^°^.®^
members  of  the  society  are  dependent. The  position  of  its  other  rekmty
members  towards  that  determinate  superior,  is  a  state  of  subjection,  f^^ion.
or  a  state  of  dependence. The  mutual  relation  which  subsists
between  that  superior  and  them,  may  be  styled  the  relation  of
sovereign  and  subject,  or  the  relation  of  sovereignty  and  subj'ection.

Hence  it  follows,  that  it  is  only  through  an  ellipsis,  or  an  Strictly
abridged  form  of  expression,  that  the  society  is  styled  independerU.  ^Eewvf-'
The  party  truly  independent  (independent,  that  is  to  say,  of  reign  por-
a  determinate  human  superior),  is  not  the  society,  but the  ^ie?^, ^
sovereign  portion  of  the  society:  that  certain  member  of  the  and  not
society,  or  that  certain  body  of  its  members,  to  whose  conmiands,  itJ^if^
expressed  or  intimated,  the  generality  or  bulk  of  its  members  independ-
render  habitual  obedience. Upon  that  certain  person,  or  certain  rei^,  or
body  of  persons,  the  other  members  of  the  society  are  dependent :  supreme,
or  to  that  certain  person,  or  certain  body  of  persons,  the  other
members  of  the  society  are  subject. By '  an  independent  political
society,'  or  '  an  independent  and  sovereign  nation,'  we  mean  a
political  society  consisting  of  a  sovereign  and  subjects,  as  opposed
to  a  political  society  which  is  merely  subordinate :  that  is  to
say,  which  is  merely  a  limb  or  member  of  another  political  /

society,  and  which  therefore  consists  entirely  of  persons  in  a
state  of  subjection.

In  order  that  a  given  society  may  form  a  society  political  In  order
and  independent,  the  two  distinguishing  marks  which  I  have  ^y^^go-
mentioned above must unite. The  generality  of the given  cietymay
society  must  be  in  the  hahU  of  obedience  to  a  determinate  and  g^^y
common  superior :  whilst  that  determinate  person,  or  determinate  poHtical
body  of  persons must  Tiot  be  habitually  obedient  to  a  deter-  pendent.


must
unite.


y/'-


222  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  minate  person  or  body. It  is  the  union  of  that  positive,  with

the  two  t^s  negative  mark,  which  renders  that  certain  superior  sovereign

distiu-  or  supreme,  and  which  renders  that  given  society  (including  that

marks^^  Certain  superior)  a  society  political  and  independent.

which  are  To  show  that  the  union  of  those  marks  renders  a  given

mentioned  °

above society  a  society  political  and  independent,  I  call  your  attention
to  the  following  positions  and  examples.

^  1.  In  order  that  a  given  society  may  form  a  society  poli-
tical, the  generality  or  bulk  of  its  members  must  be  in  a  haibii
of  obedience  to  a  determinate  and  common  superior.

In  case  the  generality  of  its  members  obey  a  determinate
superior,  but  the  obedience  be  rare  or  transient  and  not  habitual
or  permanent,  the  relation  of  sovereignty  and  subjection  is  not
created  thereby  between  that  certain  superior  and  the  members
of  that  given  society.  In  other  words,  that  determinate  superior
and  the  members  of  that  given  society  do  not  become  thereby
an  independent  political  society.  Whether  that  given  society  be
political  and  independent  or  not,  it  is  not  an  independent  political
society  whereof  that  certain  superior  is  the  sovereign  portion.

For  example:  In  1815  the  allied  armies  occupied  France;
and  so  long  as  the  allied  armies  occupied  France,  the  com-
mands of  the  allied  sovereigns  were  obeyed  by  the  French
government,  and,  through  the  French  government,  by  the  French
people  generally.  But  since  the  commands  and  the  obedience
were  comparatively  rare  and  transient,  they  were  not  sufficient
to  constitute  the  relation  of  sovereignty  and  subjection  between
the  allied  sovereigns  and  the  members  of  the  invaded  nation.
In  spite  of  those  commands,  and  in  spite  of  that  obedience,  the
French  government  was  sovereign  or  independent.  Or  in  spite
of  those  commands,  and  in  spite  of  that  obedience,  the  French
government  and  its  subjects  were  an  independent  political  society
whereof  the  allied  sovereigns  were  not  the  sovereign  portion.

Now  if  the  French  nation,  before  the  obedience  to  those
sovereigns,  had  been  an  independent  society  in  a  state  of  nature
or  anarchy,  it  would  not  have  been  changed  by  the  obedience
into  a  society  political  And  it  would  not  have  been  changed
by  the  obedience  into  a  society  political,  because  the  obedience
was  not  habitual  For,  inasmuch  as  the  obedience  was  not
habitual,  it  was  not  changed  by  the  obedience  from  a  society
political  and  independent,  into  a  society  political  but  subordinate.
— ^A  given  society,  therefore,  is  not  a  society  political,  imless
the  generality  of  its  members  be  in  a  Juiihii  of  obedience  to  a
determinate  and  common  superior.


Jurisprudence  determined.  223

Again :  A  feeble  state  holds  its  independence  precariously,  Lkct.  yi
or  at  the  will  of  the  powerful  states  to  whose  aggressions  it  is  '
obnoxious.  And  since  it  is  obnoxious  to  their  aggressions,  it
and  the  bulk  of  its  subjects  render  obedience  to  commands  which
they  occasionally  express  or  intimate.  Such,  for  instance,  is  the
position  of  the  Saxon  government  and  its  subjects  in  respect  of
the  conspiring  sovereigns  who  form  the  Holy  Alliance.  But
since  the  commands  and  the  obedience  are  comparatively  few
and  rare,  they  are  not  sufficient  to  constitute  the  relation  of
sovereignty  and  subjection  between  the  ^powerful  states  and  the
feeble  state  with  its  subjects.  In  spite  of  those  commands,  and
in  spite  of  that  obedience,  the  feeble  state  is  sovereign  or  inde-
pendent. Or  in  spite  of  those  commands,  and  in  spite  of  that
obedience,  the  feeble  state  and  its  subjects  are  an  independent
political  society  whereof  the  powerful  states  are  not  the  sovereign
portion.  Although  the  powerful  states  are  permanently  superior,
and  although  the  feeble  state  is  permanently  inferior,  there  is
neither  a  Juibit  of  command  on  the  part  of  the  former,  nor  a
habit  of  obedience  on  the  part  of  the  latter.  Although  the  latter
is  unable  to  defend  and  maintain  its  independence,  the  latter  is
independent  of  the  former  in  fact  or  practice.

From  the  example  now  adduced,  as  from  the  example
adduced  before,  we  may  draw  the  following  inference:  that  a
given  society  is  not  a  society  political,  imless  the  generality  of
its  members  be  in  a  JuxiU  of  obedience  to  a  determinate  and
common  superior. — By  the  obedience  to  the  powerful  states,  the
feeble  state  and  its  subjects  are  not  changed  from  an  independent,
into  a  subordinate  political  society.  And  they  are  not  changed
by  the  obedience  into  a  subordinate  political  society,  because
the  obedience  is  not  habitual  Consequently,  if  they  were  a
natural  society  (setting  that  obedience  aside),  they  would  not  be
changed  by  that  obedience  into  a  society  political  -  — — ,

2.  In  order  that  a  given  society  may  form  a  society  political,
habitual  obedience  must  be  rendered,  by  the  generality  or  bvik  of
its  members,  to  a  determinate  and  common  superior.  In  other
words,  habitual  obedience  must  be  rendered,  by  the  generality
or  bulk  of  its  members,  to  one  and  the  same  determinate  person,/
or  determinate  body  of  persons.

Unless  habitual  obedience  be  rendered  by  the  bulk  of  its
members,  and  be  rendered  by  the  bulk  of  its  members  to  one
and  the  same  superior,  the  given  society  is  either  in  a  state  of
nature,  or  is  split  into  two  or  more  independent  political  societies.

For  example :  In  case  a  given  society  be  torn  by  intestihe'


224  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  war,  and  in  case  the  conflicting  parties  be  nearly  balanced,  the
^  '  given  society  is  in  one  of  the  two  positions  which  I  have  now
supposed. — k&  there  is  no  common  superior  to  which  the  bulk
of  its  members  render  habitual  obedience,  it  is  not  a  political
society  single  or  undivided. — If  the  bulk  of  each  of  the  parties
be  in  a  habit  of  obedience  to  its  head,  the  given  society  is  broken
into  two  or  more  societies,  which,  perhaps,  may  be  styled  inde-
pendent political  societies. — If  the  bulk  of  each  of  the  parties
be  not  in  that  habit  of  obedience,  the  given  society  is  simply  or
absolutely  in  a  state  of  nature  or  anarchy.  It  is  either  resolved
or  broken  into  its  individual  elements,  or  into  numerous  societies
of  an  extremely  limited  size :  of  a  size  so  extremely  limited,
that  they  could  hardly  be  styled  societies  independent  and
'political.  For,  as  I  shall  show  hereafter,  a  given  independent
society  would  hardly  be  styled  political,  in  case  it  fell  short  of  a
numier  which  cfiumot  be  fixed  with  precision,  but  which  may  be
called  considerable,  or  not  extremely  minute.
/  3.  In  order  that  a  given  society  may  form  a  society  political,
the  generality  or  bulk  of  its  members  must  habitually  obey  a
I superior  determinate  as  well  as  common.

:  On  this  position  I  shaXL  not  insist  here. For  I  have  shown

.  sufficiently  in  my  fifth  lecture,  that  no  indeterminate  party  can
command  expressly  or  tacitly,  or  can  receive  obedience  or  sub-
mission :  that  no  indeterminate  body  is  capable  of  corporate  con-
duct, or  is  capable,  as  a  body,  of  positive  or  negative  deportment.
It  appears  from  what  has  preceded,  that,  in  order  that  a
/  given  society  may  form  a  society  political,  the  bulk  of  its  mem-
bers must  be  in  a  habit  of  obedience  to  a  certain  and  common
superior.  But,  in  order  that  the  given  society  may  form  a
society  political  and  independent,  that  certain  superior  must  not
I  Jigjiabitually  obedient  to  a  determinate  human  superior.

The  given  society  may  form  a  society  political  and  inde-
pendent, although  that  certain  superior  be  habitually  aflfected  by
laws  which  opinion  sets  or  imposes.  The  given  society  may
form  a  society  political  and  independent,  although  that  certain
superior  render  occasional  submission  to  commands  of  deter-
minate parties.  But  the  society  is  not  independent,  although  it
may  be  political,  in  case  that  certain  superior  habitually  obey
the  commands  of  a  certain  person  or  body.

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  a  viceroy  obeys  habitually
the  author  of  his  delegated  powers.  And,  to  render  the  example
complete,  let  us  suppose  that  the  viceroy  receives  habitual
obedience  from  the  generality  or  bulk  of  the  persons  who  inhabit


yurisprudence  determined.  325

his  proyinoe. — ^Now  though  he  commands  habitually  within  the  I'Bct.  ti
limits  of  his  proirinoe,  and  leceives  habitual  obedience  from  the  ^^
generality  or  balk  of  its  inhabitants,  the  viceroy  is  not  sovereign
within  the  limits  of  his  province,  nor  are  he  and  its  inhabitants
an  independent  political  society.  The  viceroy,  and  (through  the
viceroy)  the  generality  or  bulk  of  its  inhabitants,  aro  habitually
obedient  or  submissive  to  the  sovereign  of  a  larger  society.  He
and  the  inhabitants  of  his  province  are  therefore  in  a  state  of
subjection  to  the  sovereign  of  that  larger  society.  He  and  the
inhabitants  of  his  province  aro  a  society  political  but  subordinate,
or  form  a  political  society  which  is  merely  a  limb  of  another.

A  natural  society,  a  society  in  a  state  of  nature,  or  a  society  A  socieu
independent  but  natural,  is  composed  of  persons  who  are  con-  ^t  £at
nected  by  mutual  intercourse,  but  are  not  members,  sovereign  natural,
or  subject,  of  any  society  political None  of  the  persons  who
compose  it  lives  in  the  positive  state  which  is  styled  a  state  of
subjection :  or  all  the  persons  who  compose  it  live  in  the  n^ative
state  which  is  styled  a  state  of  independence.

Considered  as  entire  communities,  and  considered  in  respect  Sodetv
of  one  another,  independent  political  societies  live,  it  is  commonly  ^Ti^^f
said,  in  a  state  of  nature. And  considered  as  entire  communities,  course  of
and  as  connected  by  mutual  intercourse,  independent  political  ©nt  poU-
societies  form,  it  is  commonly  said,  a  natural  society. These  tical
expressions,  however,  are  not  perfectly  apposite. Since  all  the  *^*^  ^
members  of  each  of  the  related  societies  are  members  of  a
society  political,  none  of  the  related  societies  is  strictly  in  a
state  of  nature:  nor  can  the  larger  society  formed  by  their
mutual  intercourse  be  styled  strictly  a  natural  society. Speaking
strictly,  the  several  members  of  the  several  related  societies  are
placed  in  the  following  positions. The  sovereign  and  subject
members  of  each  of  the  related  societies  form  a  society  political :
but  the  sovereign  portion  of  each  of  the  related  societies  lives  in
the  negative  condition  which  is  styled  a  state  of  independence.

Society  formed  by  the  intercourse  of  independent  political
societies,  is  the  province  of  international  law,  or  of  the  law
obtaining  between  nations.  For  (adopting  a  current  expression)
international  law,  or  the  law  obtaining  between  nations,  is  con-
versant about  the  conduct  of  independent  political  societies
considered  as  entire  commimities :  circa  negotia  et  catims  gentium
integrarum.  Speaking  with  greater  precision,  international  law,
or  the  law  obtaining  between  nations,  regards  the  conduct  of
sovereigns  considered  as  related  to  one  another.

And  hence  it  inevitably  follows,  that  the  law  obtaining
VOL.  I.  Q


226  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI \  between  nations  is  not  positive  law:  for  every  positive  law  is
set  by  a  given  sovereign  to  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state  of
subjection  to  its  author.  As  I  have  already  intimated,  the  law
obtaining  between  nations  is  law  (improperly  so  called)  set  by
general  opinion.  The  duties  which  it  imposes  are  enforced  by
moral  sanctions :  by  fear  on  the  part  of  nations,  or  by  fear  on  the
part  of  sovereigns,  of  provoking  general  hostility,  and  incurring
its  probable  evils,  in  case  they  shall  violate  maxims  generally
received  and  respected.
A  society  A  society  political  but  subordinate  is  merely  a  limb or

Eut  subor- Daember  of  a  society  political  and  independent. All  the  persons
dinate. who  compose  it,  including  the  person  or  body  which  is  its
immediate  chief,  live  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  one  and  the
same  sovereign.
A  society  Besides  societies  political  and  independent,  societies  inde-

cal,^ut^ pendent  but natural,  society formed by the intercourse of
forming  a independent  political  societies,  and  societies  political  but  subor-
member  of  dinate,  there  are  societies  which  will  not  quadrate  with  any  of
*  ^Jf®^ those  descriptions. Though,  like  a  society  political  but  subor-
and  inde- dinate,  it  forms  a  limb  or  member  of  a  society  political  and  in-
pendent, dependent,  a  society  of  the  class  in  question  is  not  a  political
society. Although  it  consists  of  members  living  in  a  state  of
subjection,  it  consists  of  subjects  considered  as  private  persons.
— ^A  society  consisting  of  parents  and  children,  living  in  a  state
of  subjection,  and  considered  in  those  characters,  may  serve  as
an  example.

To  distinguish  societies  political  but  subordinate  from  societies
not  political  but  consisting  of  subject  members,  is  to  distinguish
the  rights  and  duties  of  subordinate  political  superiors  from  the
rights  and  duties  of  subjects  considered  as  private  persons.  And
before  I  can  draw  that  distinction,  I  must  analyze  many  expres-
sions of  large  and  intricate  meaning  which  belong  to  the  detail
of  jurisprudenca  But  an  explanation  of  that  distinction  is  not
required  by  my  present  purpose.  To  the  accomplishment  of  my
present  purpose,  it  is  merely  incumbent  upon  me  to  determine
the  notion  of  sovereignty,  with  the  inseparably  connected  notion
of  independent  political  society.  For  every  positive  law,  or
every  law  simply  and  strictly  so  called,  is  set  directly  or  circuit-
ously  by  a  monarch  or  sovereign  number  to  a  person  or  persons
in  a  state  of  subjection  to  its  author.
Thedefini-  The  definition  of  the  abstract  term  independent  political
abSract  ^^  society  (including  the  definition  of  the  correlative  term  sovereignty)
term  inde-  cannot  be  rendered  in  expressions  of  perfectly  precise  import,


yurtsprudence  determined.  227

and  is  therefore  a  fallible  test  of  specific  or  particular  cases. The  Lect.  vi

least  imperfect definition  which  the  abstract  term  will  take,  ^ndmi

would  hardly  enable  us  to  fix  the  class  of  every  possible  society,  poiuicai

It  would  hardly  enable  us  to  determine  of  every  independent  eluding

society,  whether  it  were  political  or  natural. It  would  hardly  ^^®  ^®5??"

enable  us  to  determine  of  eveTy  political  society,  whether  it  were  correlative

independent  or  stdordin^e.  *cSn/T^

In  order  that  a  given  society  may  form  a  society  political  cannot  be

and  independent,  the  positive  and  negative  marks  which  I  have  [n^^^pj^g.

mentioned  above must  unite. The  generality  or  bulk  of  its  sionsof

members  must  be  in  a  haMt  of  obedience  to a  certain and  p^^ciseim-

common  superior :  whilst  that  certain  person,  or  certain  body  of  prt,  and

persons,  must  no^  be  habitually  obedient  to  a  certain  person  or  fore  a

body.  {aUiWe

test  Oi

But,  in  order  that  the  hvlk  of  its  members  may  render  specific  or
obedience  to  a  common  superior,  how  many  of  its  members,  or  pai*ticular

"^  ,  cases.

lohai  proportion  of  its  members,  must  render  obedience  to  one
and  the  same  superior?  And,  assuming  that  the  hulk  of  its
members  render  obedience  to  a  common  superior,  how  often  must
they  render  it,  and  how  long  must  they  render  it,  in  order  that
that  obedience  may  be  hahitualt — Now  since  these  questions
cannot  be  answered  precisely,  the  positive  mark  of  sovereignty
and  independent  political  society  is  a  fallible  test  of  specific  or
particular  cases.  It  would  not  enable  us  to  determine  of  every
independent  society,  whether  it  were  political  or  nMural.

In  the  cases  of  independent  society  which  lie,  as  it  were,
at  the  extremes,  we  should  apply  that  positive  test  without  a
moment's  difficulty,  and  should  fix  the  class  of  the  society
without  a  moment's  hesitation. — In  some  of  those  cases,  so  large
a  proportion  of  the  members  obey  the  same  superior,  and  the
obedience  of  that  proportion  is  so  frequent  and  continued,  that,
without  a  moment's  difficulty  and  without  a  moment's  hesitation,
we  should  pronounce  the  society  political:  that,  without  a
moment's  difficulty  and  without  a  moment's  hesitation,  we
should  say  the  generality  of  its  members  were  in  a  haMt  of
obedience  or  submission  to  a  certain  and  common  superior.
Such,  for  example,  is  the  ordinary  state  of  England,  and  of  every
independent  society  somewhat  advanced  in  civilization. — In
other  of  those  cases,  obedience  to  the  same  superior  is  rendered
by  so  few  of  the  members,  or  general  obedience  to  the  same  is
so  unfrequent  and  broken,  that,  without  a  moment's  difficulty
and  without  a  moment's  hesitation,  we  should  pronounce  the
society  natural :  that,  without  a  moment's  difficulty  and  without


228  The  Province  of

Lkot.  VI  a  moment's  hesitation,  we  should  say  the  generality  of  its
members  were  Tiot  in  a  habit  of  obedience  to  a  certain  and
common  superior.  Such,  for  example,  is  the  state  of  the
independent  and  savage  societies  which  subsist  by  hunting  or
fishing  in  the  woods  or  on  the  coasts  of  New  Holland.

But  in  the  cases  of  independent  society  which  lie  between
the  extremes,  we  should  hardly  find  it  possible  to  fix  with
absolute  certainty  the  class  of  the  given  community.  We
should  hardly  find  it  possible  to  determine  with  absolute
certainty,  whether  the  generality  of  its  members  did  or  did  not
obey  one  and  the  same  superior.  Or  we  should  hardly  find  it
possible  to  determine  with  absolute  certainty,  whether  the
general  obedience  to  one  and  the  same  superior  was  or  was  not
habitual  For  example :  During  the  height  of  the  conflict  be-
tween Charles  the  First  and  the  Parliament,  the  English  nation
was  broken  into  two  distinct  societies :  each  of  which  societies
may  perhaps  be  styled  political,  and  may  certainly  be  styled
independent.  After  the  conflict  had  subsided,  those  distinct
societies  were  in  their  turn  dissolved;  and  the  nation  was
reimited,  under  the  common  government  of  the  Parliament,  into
one  independent  and  political  community.  But  at  what  juncture
precisely,  after  the  conflict  had  subsided,  was  a  common  govern-
ment completely  re-established  ?  Or  at  what  juncture  precisely,
after  the  conflict  had  subsided,  were  those  distinct  societies
completely  dissolved,  and  the  nation  completely  reunited  into
one  political  community  ?  When  had  so  many  of  the  nation
rendered  obedience  to  the  Parliament,  and  when  had  the  general
obedience  become  so  frequent  and  lasting,  that  the  biUk  of  the
nation  were  habitually  obedient  to  the  body  which  affected  sove-
reignty ?  And  after  the  conflict  had  subsided,  and  until  that
juncture  had  arrived,  what  was  the  class  of  the  society  which
was  formed  by  the  English  people  ? — These  are  questions  which
it  were  impossible  to  answer  with  certainty,  although  the  facts
of  the  case  were  precisely  known.

The  positive  mark  of  sovereignty  and  independent  political
society  is  therefore  a  fallible  test.  It  would  not  enable  us  to
determine  of  every  independent  society,  whether  it  were  political
or  natural.

The  negative  mark  of  sovereignty  and  independent  political
society  is  also  an  uncertain  measure.  It  would  not  enable  us
to  determine  of  every  political  society,  whether  it  were  independ-
ent or  subordinate. — Given  a  determinate  and  common  superior,
and  also  that  the  bulk  of the  society  habitually  obey  that


Jurisprudence  determined.  22g

superior,  is  that  common  superior  free  from  a  habit  of  obedience L"ct.  VI
to  a  determinate  person  or  body? Is  that  common  superior
sovereign  and  independent,  or  is  that  common  superior  a  superior
in  a  state  of  subjection  ?

In  numerous  cases  of  political  society,  it  were  impossible  to
answer  this  question  with  absolute  certainty.  For  example:
Although  the  Holy  Alliance  dictates  to  the  Saxon  government,
the  commands  which  it  gives,  and  the  submission  which  it
receives,  are  comparatively  few  and  rare.  Consequently,  the
Saxon  government  is  sovereign  or  supreme,  and  the  Saxon
government  and  its  subjects  are  an  independent  political  society,
notwithstanding  its  submission  to  the  Holy  Alliance.  But,  in
case  the  commands  and  submission  were  somewhat  more  numer-
ous and  frequent,  we  might  find  it  impossible  to  determine
certainly  the  class  of  the  Saxon  community.  We  might  find  it
impossible  to  determine  certainly  where  the  sovereignty  resided :
whether  the  Saxon  government  were  a  government  supreme  and
independent ;  or  were  in  a  TuxiU  of  obedience,  and  therefore  in
a  state  of  subjection,  to  the  allied  or  conspiring  monarchs.*^

The  definition  or  general  notion  of  independent  political
society,  is  therefore  vague  or  imcertain.  Applying  it  to  specific
or  particular  cases,  we  should  often  encounter  the  difficulties
which  I  have  laboured  to  explain.

The  difficulties  which  I  have  laboured  to  explain,  often
embarrass  the  application  of  those  positive  moral  rules  which
are  styled  international  law.

For  example :  When  did  the  revolted  colony,  which  is  now
the  Mexican  nation,  ascend  from  the  condition  of  an  insurgent
province  to  that  of  an  independent  commimity  ?  When  did  the
body  of  colonists,  who  affected  sovereignty  in  Mexico,  change  the
character  of  rebel  leaders  for  that  of  a  supreme  government  ?
Or  (adopting  the  current  language  about  governments  de  jure
and  de  facto)  when  did  the  body  of  colonists,  who  affected  sove-
reignty in  Mexico,  become  sovereign  in  fact  t — ^And  (applying
international  law  to  the  specific  or  particular  case)  when  did
international  law  authorize  neutral  nations  to  admit  the  in-
dependence of  Mexico  with  the  sovereignty  of  the  Mexican
government  ?

Now  the  questions  suggested  above  are  equivalent  to  this :
— ^When  had  the  inhabitants  of  Mexico  obeyed  that  body  so
generally,  and  when  had  that  general  obedience  become so


^  A  very  apt  instance  of  this  kind  of  now  comprised  in  the  North  German
difficulty  is  suggested  by  the  present  re- Confederation. — RC.
lation  of Prussia  to the  other  states


2  30  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI frequent  and  lasting,  that  the  hvlk  of  the  inhabitants  of  Mexico
' were  habitually  disobedient  to  Spain,  and  probably  would  not
resume  their  discarded  habit  of  submission  ?

Or  the  questions  suggested  above  are  equivalent  to  this : —
When  had  the  inhabitants  of  Mexico  obeyed  that  body  so  gene-
rally, and  when  had  that  general  obedience  become  so  frequent
and  lasting,  that  the  inhabitants  of  Mexico  were  independent
of  Spain  in  practice,  and  were  likely  to  remain  permanently  in
that  state  of  practical  independence  ?

At  that  juncture  exactly  (let  it  have  arrived  when  it  may),
neutral  nations  were  authorized,  by  the  morality  which  obtains
between  nations,  to  admit  the  independence  of  Mexico  with  the
sovereignty  of  the  Mexican  government  But,  by  reason  of  the
perplexing  difl&culties  which  I  have  laboured  to  explain,  it  was
impossible  for  neutral  nations  to  hit  that  juncture  with  precision,
and  to  hold  the  balance  of  justice  between  Spain  and  her  revolted
colony  with  a  perfectly  even  hand.

This  difficulty  presents  itself  imder  numerous  forms  in  inter-
national law :  indeed  almost  the  only  difficult  and  embarrassing
questions  in  that  science  arise  out  of  it.  And  as  I  shall  often
have  occasion  to  show,  law  strictly  so  called  is  not  free  from  like
difficulties.  What  can  be  more  indefinite,  for  instance,  than
the  expressions  reasonable  time,  reasonable  notice,  reasonable
diligence  ?  Than  the  line  of  demarcation  which  distinguishes
libel  and  fair  criticism ;  than  that  which  constitutes  a  violation
of  copyright ;  than  that  degree  of  mental  aberration  which  con-
stitutes idiocy  or  lunacy  ?  In  all  these  cases,  the  difficulty  is
of  the  same  nature  with  that  which  adheres  to  the  phrases
sovereignty  and  independent  society ;  it  arises  from  the  vague-
ness or  indefiniteness  of  the  terms  in  which  the  definition  or
rule  is  inevitably  conceived.  And  this,  I  suppose,  is  what
people  were  driving  at  when  they  have  agitated  the  very  absurd
enquiry  whether  questions  of  this  kind  are  questions  of  law  or
of  fact.  The  truth  is  that  they  are  questions  neither  of  law  nor
of  fact.  The  fact  may  be  perfectly  ascertained,  and  so  may  the
law,  as  far  as  it  is  capable  of  being  ascertained.  The  rule  is
known,  and  so  is  the  given  species,  as  the  Soman  jurists  term
it ;  the  difficulty  is  in  bringing  the  species  under  the  rule ;  in
determining  not  what  the  law  is,  or  what  the  fact  is,  but  whether
the  given  law  is  applicable  to  the  given  fact.

I  have  tacitly  supposed,  during  the  preceding  analysis,  that
every  independent  society  forming  a  society  political  possesses
the  essential  property  which  I  will  now  describe.


yurisprudence  determined,  23 1

In  order  that  an  independent  society  may  fonn  a  society  I'Bot.  vi

political,  it  must  not  fall  short  of  a  numler  which  cannot  be  in  order

fixed  with  precision,  but  which  may  be  called  considerable,  or  ^^*^  *J  ^^•

not  extremely  minute. A  given  independent  society,  whose  society

number  may  be  called  inconsiderable,  is  commonly  esteemed  a  ^*y  ?^5?

ncUural,  and  not  a  political  society,  although  the  generality  of  political,

its  members  be  habitually  obedient  or  submissive  to  a  certain  ^q^^J

and  common  superior.  short  of  a

Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  a  single  family  of  savages  ^hich  can-
lives  in  absolute  estrangement  from  every  other community,  not  be
And  let  us  suppose  that  the  father,  the  chief  of  this  insulated  precision,
family,  receives  habitual  obedience  from  the  mother  and  children,  o^*  ^l"ch
— ^Now,  since  it  is  not  a  limb  of  another  and  larger  community,  calfcd  con-

the  society  formed  by  the  parents  and  children  is  clearly  an  »de™We,
•'  •'  *  •'or  not  ex-

independent society. And, since the rest of  its members  tremely

habitually  obey  its  chief,  this  independent  society  would  fonn  a  ™'°^*®-

society  political,  in  case  the  number  of  its  members  were  not

extremely  minute. But,  since  the  number  of  its  members  is

extremely  minute,  it  would  (I  believe)  be  esteemed  a  society  in

a  state  of  nature :  that  is  to  say,  a  society  consisting  of  persons

not  in  a  state  of  subjection. Without  an  application  of  the

terms  which  would  somewhat  smack  of  the  ridiculous,  we  could

hardly  style  the  society  a  society  political  and  independent,  the

imperative  father  and  chief  a monarch  or sovereign,  or the

obedient  mother  and  children  subjects. — *  La  puissance  politique '

(says  Montesquieu)  'comprend  n^cessairement  Tunion  de  plusieurs

families.'

Again :  let  us  suppose  a  society  which  may  be  styled
independent,  or  which  is  not  a  limb  of  another  and  larger
community.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  number  of  its  members
is  not  extremely  minute.  And  let  us  suppose  it  in  the  savage
condition,  or  in  the  extremely  barbarous  condition  which  closely
approaches  the  savage.

Inasmuch  as  the  given  society  lives  in  the  savage  condition,
or  in  the  extremely  barbarous  condition  which  closely  approaches
the  savage,  the  generality  or  bulk  of  its  members  is  not  in  a
habit  of  obedience  to  one  and  the  same  superior.  For  the
purpose  of  attacking  an  external  enemy,  or  for  the  purpose  of
repelling  an  attack  made  by  an  external  enemy,  the  generality
or  bulk  of  its  members,  who  are  capable  of  bearing  arms,
submits  to  one  leader,  or  to  one  body  of  leaders.  But  so  soon
as  that  exigency  passes,  this  transient  submission  ceases ;  and
the  society  reverts  to the  state  which  may  be deemed its


232  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  ordinary  state.  The  bulk  of  each  of  the  families  which  com-
pose the  given  society,  renders  habitual  obedience  to  its  own
peculiar  chief:  but  those  domestic  societies  are  themselves
independent  societies,  or  are  not  united  or  compacted  into  one
political  society  by  general  and  habitual  obedience  to  a  certain
and  common  superior.  And,  as  the  bulk  of  the  given  society
is  not  in  a  habit  of  obedience  to  one  and  the  same  superior,
there  is  no  law  (simply  or  strictly  so  styled)  which  can  be
called  the  law  of  that  given  society  or  community.  The  so-
called  laws  which  are  common  to  the  bulk  of  the  community,
are  purely  and  properly  customary  laws :  that  is  to  say,  laws
which  are  set  or  imposed  by  the  general  opinion  of  the  com-
munity, but  which  are  not  enforced  by  legal  or  political
sanctions. — ^The  state  which  I  have  briefly  delineated,  is  the
ordinary  state  of  the  savage  and  independent  societies  which
live  by  hunting  or  fishing  in  the  woods  or  on  the  coasts  of
New  Holland.  It  is  also  the  ordinary  state  of  the  savage  and
independent  societies  which  range  in  the  forests  or  plains  of
the  North  American  continent  It  was  also  the  ordinary  state
of  many  of  the  German  nations  whose  manners  are  described
by  Tacitus.

Now,  since  the  bulk  of  its  members  is  not  in  a  habit  of
obedience  to  one  and  the  same  superior,  the  given  independent
society  would  (I  believe)  be  esteemed  a  society  in  a  state  of
nature :  that  is  to  say,  a  society  consisting  of  persons  not  in  a
state  of  subjection.  But  such  it  could  not  be  esteemed,  unless
the  term  political  were  restricted  to  independent  societies  whose
numbers  are  not  inconsiderable.  Supposing  that  the  term
political  applied  to  independent  societies  whose  numbers  are
extremely  minute,  each  of  the  independent  families  which
constitute  the  given  society  would  form  of  itself  a  political
community:  for  the  bulk  of  each  of  those  families  renders
habitual  obedience  to  its  own  peculiar  chiefl  And,  seeing  that
each  of  those  families  would  form  of  itself  an  independent
political  community,  the  given  independent  society  could  hardly
be  styled  with  strictness  a  natural  society.  Speaking  strictly,
that  given  society  would  form  a  congeries  of  independent
political  communities.  Or,  seeing  that  a  few  of  its  members
might  not  be  members  also  of  those  independent  families,  it
would  form  a  congeries  of  independent  political  communities
mingled  with  a  few  individuals  living  in  a  state  of  nature. —
Unless  the  term  political  were  restricted  to  independent  societies
whose  numbers  are  not  inconsiderable,  few  of  the  many  societies


Jurisprudence  determined.  233

which  are  commonly  esteemed  natural  could  be  styled  natural Lect.  vi
societies  with  perfect  precision  and  propriety.  ' * '

For  the  reasons  which  I  have  now  produced,  and  for
reasons  which  I  pass  in  silence,  we  must,  I  believe,  arrive  at
the  following  conclusion. — A  given  independent  society,  whose
number  may  be  called  inconsiderable,  is  commonly  esteemed  a
natural,  and  not  a  political  society,  although  the  generality  of
its  members  be  habitually  obedient  or  submissive  to  a  certain
and  common  superior.

And  arriving  at  that  conclusion,  we  must  proceed  to  this
further  conclusion. — In  order  that  an  independent  society  may
form  a  society  political,  it  must  not  fall  short  of  a  number
which  may  be  called  considerable.

The  lowest  possible  number  which  will  satisfy  that  vague
condition  cannot  be  fixed  precisely.  But,  looking  at  many  of
the  communities  which  commonly  are  considered  and  treated  as
independent  political  societies,  we  must  infer  that  an  independent .
society  may  form  a  society  political,  although  the  number  of  its
members  exceed  not  a  few  thousands,  or  exceed  not  a  few
hundreds.  The  ancient  Orison  Confederacy  (like  the  ancient
Swiss  Confederacy  with  which  the  Grison  was  connected)  was
rather  an  alliance  or  union  of  independent  political  societies,
than  one  independent  community  under  a  common  sovereign.
Now  the  number  of  the  largest  of  the  societies  which  were
independent  members  of  the  ancient  Grison  Confederacy  hardly
exceeded  a  few  thousands.  And  the  number  of  the  smallest
of  those  numerous  confederated  nations  hardly  exceeded  a  few
hundreds.

The  definition  of  the  terms  sovereignty  and  indq>endent
political  society,  is,  therefore,  embarrassed  by  the  difficulty
following,  as  well  as  by  the  difficulties  which  I  have  stated  in
a  foregoing  department  of  my  discourse. — In  order  that  an
independent  society  may  form  a  society  political,  it  must  not
fall  short  of  a  nurriber  which  may  be  called  considerable.  And
the  lowest  possible  number  which  will  satisfy  that  vague  con-
dition cannot  be  fixed  precisely.

But  here  I  must  briefly  remark,  that,  though  the  essential
property  which  I  have  now  described  is  an  essential  or
necessary  property  of  independefrU  political  society,  it  is  not  an
essential  property  of  subordinate  political  society.  If  the  inde-
pendent society,  of  which  it  is  a  limb  or  member,  be  a  political
and  not  a  natural  society,  a  subordinate  society  may  form  a
society  political,  although  the  number  of  its  members  might  be


234

Leot.  VI


Certain  of
the  defini-
tions of  the
term  sove-
rcigntyt
and  of  the
implied  or
correlative
term  iiide-


political
society,
which
have  been
given  by
writers  of
celebrity.


T/ie  Province  of

called  extremely  minute.  For  example :  A  society  incorporated
by  the  state  for  political  or  public  purposes  is  a  society  or  body
politic :  and  it  continues  to  bear  the  character  of  a  society  or
body  politic,  although  its  number  be  reduced,  by  deaths  or  other
causes,  to  that  of  a  small  family  or  small  domestic  community.

Having  tried  to  determine  the  notion  of  sovereignty,  with
the  implied  or  correlative  notion  of  independent  political
society,  I  will  produce  and  briefly  examine  a  few  of  the
definitions  of  those  notions  which  have  been  given  by  writers  of
celebrity.

Distinguishing  political  from  natural  society,  Mr.  Bentham,
in  his  Fragment  on  Government,  thus  defines  the  former:
*  When  a  number  of  persons  (whom  we  may  style  subjects)  are
supposed  to  be  in  the  haiit  of  paying  obedience  to  a  person,  or
an  assemblage  of  persons,  of  a  known  and  certain  description
(whom  we  may  call  governor  or  governors),  such  persons
altogether  {subjects  and  governors)  are  said  to  be  in  a  state  of
political  society.'  And  in  order  to  exclude  from  his  definition
such  a  society  as  the  single  family  conceived  of  above,  he  adds
a  second  essential  of  political  society,  namely  that  the  society
should  be  capable  of  indefinite  duration. — Considered  as  a
definition  of  independent  political  society,  this  definition  is
inadequate  or  defective.  In  order  that  a  given  society  may
form  a  society  political  and  independent,  the  superior  habitually
obeyed  by  the  bulk  or  generality  of  its  members  must  not  be
habitually  obedient  to  a  certain  individual  or  body:  which
negative  character  or  essential  of  independent  political  society
Mr.  Bentham  has  forgotten  to  notice.  And,  since  the  definition
in  question  is  an  inadequate  or  defective  definition  of  xTide-
penderU  political  society,  it  is  also  an  inadequate  or  defective
definition  of  political  society  in  general.  Before  we  can  define
political  society,  or  can  distinguish  political  society  from  society
not  political,  we  must  determine  the  nature  of  those  societies
which  are  at  once  political  and  independent  For  a  political
society  which  is  not  independent  is  a  member  or  constituent
parcel  of  a  political  society  which  is.  Or  (changing  the  ex-
pression) the  powers  or  rights  of  subordinate  political  superiors
are  merely  emanations  of  sovereignty.  They  are  merely  particles
of  sovereignty  committed  by  sovereigns  to  subjects.

According  to  the  definition  of  independent  political  society
which  is  stated  or  supposed  by  Hobbes  in  Ms  excellent  treatises
on  government,  a  society  is  not  a  society  political  and  inde-
pendent, unless  it  can  maintain  its  independence,  against  attacks


yurispmdence  determined.  235

from  without,  by  its  own  intrinsic  or  unaided  stiengtL  But  if  Lect.  vi
power  to  maintain  its  independence  by  its  own  intrinsic  strength  ""^
be  a  character  or  essential  property  of  an  independent  political
society,  the  name  will  scarcely  apply  to  any  existing  society,  or
to  any  of  the  past  societies  which  occur  in  the  history  of
mankind  The  weaker  of  such  actual  societies  as  are  deemed
political  and  independent,  owe  their  precarious  independence  to
positive  international  morality,  and  to  the  mutual  fears  or
jealousies  of  stronger  communities.  The  most  powerful  of
such  actual  societies  as  are  deemed  political  and  independent,
could  hardly  maintain  its  independence,  by  its  own  intrinsic
strength,  against  an  extensive  conspiracy  of  other  independent
nations. — Any  political  society  is  (I  conceive)  independent,  if  it
be  not  dependent  in  fact  or  practice:  if  the  party  habitually
obeyed  by  the  bulk  or  generality  of  its  members  be  not  in  a
habit  of  obedience  to  a  determinate  individual  or  body.

In  his  great  treatise  on  international  law,  Grotius  defines
sovereignty  in  the  following  maimer.  '  Summa  potestas  dmlis
ilia  dicitur,  cujus  actus  alterius  juri  non  subsunt,  ita  ut  alterius
voluntatis  humanae  arbitrio  irriti  possint  reddi  Alterius  cum
dico,  ipsum  exdudo,  qui  simima  potestate  utitur ;  cui  voluntatem
mutare  licet'  Which  definition  is  thus  rendered  by  his  trans-
lator and  commentator  Barbeyrac.  '  La  puissance  souveraine  est
celle  dont  les  actes  sont  ind^pendans  de  tout  autre  pouvoir
sup^rieur,  en  sorte  qu'ils  ne  peuvent  Stre  annullez  par  aucune
autre  volenti  himiaine.  Je  dis,  par  atunine  autre  volants  humaine;
car  il  faut  excepter  ici  le  souverain  lui-mSme,  k  qui  il  est  libre  de
changer  de  volontd' — ^Now  in  order  that  an  individual  or  body
may  be  sovereign  in  a  given  society,  two  essentials  must  unite.
The  generality  of  the  given  society  must  render  habitual  obedience
to  that  certain  individual  or  body :  whilst  that  individual  or
body  must  not  be  habitually  obedient  to  a  determinate  human
superior.  In  order  to  an  adequate  conception  of  the  nature  of
international  morality,  as  in  order  to  an  adequate  conception  of
the  nature  of  positive  law,  the  former  as  well  as  the  latter  of
those  two  essentials  of  sovereignty  must  be  noted  or  taken  into
account  But,  this  notwithstanding,  the  former  and  positive
essential  of  sovereign  or  supreme  power  is  not  inserted  by  Grotius
in  that  his  formal  definition.  And  the  latter  and  negative  essen-
tial is  stated  inaccurately.  Sovereign  power  (according  to  Grotius)
is  perfectly  or  completely  independent  of  other  human  power ;
inasmuch  that  its  acts  cannot  be  annulled  by  any  human  will
other  than  its  own. But  if  perfect  or  complete  independence  be


236  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI of  the  essence  of  sovereign  power,  there  is  not  in  fact  the  human
^^ power  to  which  the  epithet  sovereign  will  apply  with  propriety.
Every  government,  let  it  be  never  so  powerful,  renders  occasional
obedience  to  commands  of  other  governments. Every  govern-
ment defers  frequently  to  those  opinions  and  sentiments  which
i^are  styled  international  law. And  every  government  defers
I  habitually  to  the  opinions  and  sentiments  of  its  own  subjects.
If  it  were  not  in  a  habit  of  obedience  to  the  commands  of  a
determinate  party,  a  government  has  all  the  independence  which
a  government  can  possibly  enjoy.

According  to  Von  Martens  of  (Jottingen  (the  writer  on
positive  international  law  already  referred  to),  '  a  sovereign
government  is  a  government  which  onghJt  not  to  receive  com-
mands from  any  external  or  foreign  government' — Of  the  con-
clusive and  obvious  objections  to  this  definition  of  sovereignty
the  following  are  only  a  few.  1.  If  the  definition  in  question
will  apply  to  sovereign  governments,  it  will  also  apply  to
subordinate.  If  a  sovereign  ought  to  be  free  from  the  commands
of  foreign  governments,  so  ought  every  government  which  is
merely  the  creature  of  a  sovereign,  and  which  holds  its  powers
or  rights  as  a  mere  trustee  for  its  author.  2.  Whether  a  given
government  be  or  be  not  supreme,  is  rather  a  question  of  fact
than  a  question  of  international  law.  A  government  reduced  to
subjection  is  actually  a  subordinate  government,  although  the
state  of  subjection  wherein  it  is  actually  held  be  repugnant  to
the  positive  morality  which  obtains  between  nations  or  sove-
reigns. Though,  according  to  that  morality,  it  imghJt  to  be
sovereign  or  independent,  it  is  subordinate  or  dependent  in
practice.  3.  It  cannot  be  affirmed  absolutely  of  a  sovereign  or
independent  government,  that  it  (nx/ghJt  not  to  receive  commands
from  foreign  or  external  governments.  The  intermeddling  of
independent  governments  with  other  independent  governments
is  often  repugnant  to  the  morality  which  actually  obtains
between  nations.  But  according  to  that  morality  which  actually
obtains  between  nations  (and  to  that  international  morality
which  general  utility  commends),  no  independent  government
ought  to  be  freed  completely  from  the  supervision  and  control
of  its  fellows.  4.  In  this  definition  by  Von  Martens  (as  in  that
which  is  given  by  Grotius)  there  is  not  the  shadow  of  an  allusion
to  the  positive  character  pf  sovereignty.  The  definition  points
at  the  relations  which  are  borne  by  sovereigns  to  sovereigns:
but  it  omits  the  relations,  not  less  essential,  which  are  borne  by
sovereigns  to  their  own  subjects.


yurisprudence  determined.  237

I  have  now  endeavoured  to  determine  the  general  notion  of  Lect.  VI
sovereignty,  including  the  general  notion  of  independent  political  -n^Tensiih
society. But  in  order  that  I  may  further  elucidate  the  nature  ingportion
or  essence  of  sovereignty,  and  of  the  independent  political  society  ^^^  \^'
which  sovereignty  implies,  I  will  call  the  attention  of  my  hearers  turew  con-
to  a  few  concise  remarks  upon  the  following  subjects  or  topics,  with  the
— 1.  The  various  shapes  which  sovereignty  may  assume,  or  the  ^llp^ng
various  possible  forms  of  supreme  government 2.  The  real  and  The  forms
imaginary  limits  which  bound  the  power  of  sovereigns,  and  by  of  supreme
which  the  power  of  sovereigns  is  supposed  to  be  bounded. 3.  ment. 2.
The  origin  of  government,  with  the  origin  of  political  society :  of^go^g?*^
or  the  causes  of  the  habitual  obedience  which  is  rendered  by  reign
the  bulk  of  subjects,  and  from  which  the  power  of  sovereigns  to  ^^j^^origin

compel  and  restrain  the  refractory  is  entirely  or  mainly  derived,  of  govern-
ment, or

An independent political society is divisible into two  Qf^^jJ^i
portions :  namely,  the  portion  of  its  members  which  is  sovereign  society,
or  supreme,  and  the  portion  of  its  members  which  is  merely  The  forms
subject. The  sovereignty  can  hardly  reside  in  all  the  members]  £0^^^™*
of  a  society : for  it  can  hardly  happen  that  some  of  those  &ent.
members  shall  not  be  naturally  incompetent  to  exercise  sove-,
reign  powers. In  most  actual  societies,  the  sovereign  powers^
are  engrossed  by  a  single  member  of  the  whole,  or  are  shared,
exclusively  by  a  very  few  of  its  members: and  even  in  thel
actual  societies  whose  governments  are  esteemed  popular,  th^
sovereign  number  is  a  slender  portion  of  the  entire  politicaJu
community. An  independent  political  society  governed  by  it-
self, or  governed  by  a  sovereign  body  consisting  of  the  whole
community,  is  not  impossible:  but  the  existence  of  such  societies
is  so  extremely  improbable,  that,  with  this  passing  notice,  I
throw  them  out  of  my  account.^"^^

Every  society  political  and  independent  is  therefore  divisible  Every  su-
into  two  portions :  namely,  the  portion  of  its  members  which  is  emmettt  ^
sovereign  or  supreme,  and  the  portion  of  its  members  which  is  is  a

(™)  If  every  member  of  an  independent  exercise  sovereign  powers  are  not  the

political  society  were  adnlt  and  of  sonnd  only  members  excluded  from  the  sove-

mind,  every  member  would  be  naturally  reign  body. If  we  add  to  the  members

competent  to  exercise  sovereign  powers :  excluded  by  reason  of  natural  incom-

and  if  we  suppose  a  society  so  constituted,  petency,  the  members  (women,  for  ex-

we  may  also  suppose  a  society  which  ample),  excluded  without  that  necessity,

strictly  is  governed  by  itself,  or  m  which  we  shall  find  that  a  great  majority  even

the  supreme  government  S&  strictly  a  of  such  a  society  is  merely  in  a  state  of

government  of  all. But  in  every  actual  subjection. Consequently, though a

society,  many  of  the  members  are  natu-  government  of  all is not  impossible,

rally  incompetent  to  exercise  sovereign  every  actual  society  is  govemea  by  one

powers :  ana  even  in  an  actuid  society  of  its  members,  or  by  a  number  of  its

whose  government  is  the  most  popular,  members  which  lies  between  one  and

the  members  naturally  incompetent  to  all.


238


Lect.  VI

Trumarchy
(properly
so  called),
or  an  aria-
tocracy  (in
the  generic
meaning  of
the  expres-
sion). In
other

words,  it  is
a  govern-
ment of
one,  or  a
govern-
ment of  a
number.


T/ie  Province  of

merely  subject.  In  case  that  sovereign  portion  consists  of  a
single  member,  the  supreme  government  is  properly  a  monarchy,
or  the  sovereign  is  properly  a  monarch.  In  case  that  sovereign
portion  consists  of  a  number  of  members,  the  supreme  govern-
ment may  be  styled  an  aristocracy  (in  the  generic  meaning  of  the
expression). — ^And  here  I  may  briefly  remark,  that  a  monarchy
or  government  of  one,  and  an  aristocracy  or  government  of  a
number,  are  essentially  and  broadly  distinguished  by  the  following
important  difference.  In  the  case  of  a  monarchy  or  government
of  one,  the  sovereign  portion  of  the  conmiunity  is  simply  or
purely  sovereign.  In  the  case  of  an  aristocracy  or  government
of  a  number,  that  sovereign  portion  is  sovereign  as  viewed  from
one  aspect,  but  is  also  subject  as  viewed  from  another.  In  the
case  of  an  aristocracy  or  government  of  a  nxmiber,  the  sovereign
number  is  an  aggregate  of  individuals,  and,  commonly,  of  smaller
aggregates  composed  by  those  individuals.  Now,  considered
collectively,  or  considered  in  its  corporate  character,  that  sove-
reign number  is  sovereign  and  independent.  But,  considered
severally,  the  individuals  and  smaller  aggregates  composing  that
sovereign  number  are  subject  to  the  supreme  body  of  which  they
are  component  parts.

In  every  society,  therefore,  which  may  be  styled  political
and  independent,  one  of  the  individual  members  engrosses  the
sovereign  powers,  or  the  sovereign  powers  are  shared  by  a
nvmiber  of  the  individual  members  less  than  the  number  of  the
individuals  composing  the  entire  community.  Changing  the
phrase,  every  supreme  government  is  a  Toonarchy  (properly
so  called),  or  an  aristocracy  (in  the  generic  meaning  of  the
expression).^'*^


(**)  In  every  monarchy,  the  monarch
renders  habitual  deference  to  the  opin-
ions and  sentiments  held  and  felt  by
his  subjects.  But  in  almost  every  mon-
archy, he  defers  especially  to  the  opinions
and  sentiments,  or  he  consults  especially
the  interests  and  prejudices,  oi  some
especially  influential  thoueh  narrow  por-
tion of  the  community.  If  the  monarchy
be  military,  or  if  the  main  instniment  of
rule  be  the  sword,  this  influential  portion
is  the  military  class  generally,  or  a  select
body  of  the  soldiery.  If  the  main  in-
strument of  rule  be  not  the  sword,  this
influential  portion  commonly  consists  of
nobles,  or  of  nobles,  priests,  and  lawyers.
For  example  :  In  the  Roman  world,  un-
der the  sovereignty  of  the  princes  or
emperors,  this  influential  portion  was
formed  by  the  standing  armies,  and,  more
particularly,  by  the  Prsetorian  guard  :


as,  in  the  Turkish  empire,  it  consists,  or
consisted,  of  the  corps  of  Janizaries.  In
France,  after  the  kings  had  become  sove-
reign, and  before  the  great  revolution,
this  influential  portion  was  formed  by  the
nobility  of  the  sword,  the  secular  and
regular  clergy,  and  the  members  of  the
parliaments  or  higher  courts  of  justice.

Hence  it  has  been  concluded,  that
there  are  no  monarchies  properly  so
called  :  that  every  supreme  government
is  a  government  of  a  number  :  that  in
every  community  which  seems  to  be  gov-
erned by  one,  the  sovereignty  really
resides  in  the  seeming  monarch  or  auto-
crator,  with  that  especially  influential
though  narrow  portion  of  the  community
to  whose  opinions  and  sentiments  he
especially  defers.  This,  though  plaus-
ible, is  an  error.  If  he  habitually  oDeyed
the  com/mands  of  a  determinate  portion


yurisprudence  determined.

Governments  which  may  be  styled  aristocracies  (in  the
generic  meaning  of  the  expression)  are  not  unfrequently  distin-
guished into  the  three  following  forms :  namely,  oligarchies,
aristocracies  (in  the  specific  meaning  of  the  name),  and  democracies.
If  the  proportion  of  the  sovereign  number  to  the  number  of  the
entire  commimity  be  deemed  extremely  small,  the  supreme
government  is  styled  an  oligarchy.  If  the  proportion  be  deemed
small,  but  not  extremely  small,  the  supreme  government  is  styled
an  aristocracy  (in  the  specific  meaning  of  the  name).  If  the
proportion  be  deemed  large,  the  supreme  government  is  styled
popular,  or  is  styled  a  democrobcy.  But  these  three  forms  of
aristocracy  (in  the  generic  meaning  of  the  expression)  can  hardly
be  distinguished  with  precision,  or  even  with  a  distant  approach
to  it.  A  government  which  one  man  shall  deem  an  oligarchy,
will  appear  to  another  a  liberal  aristocracy :  whilst  a  government
which  one  man  shall  deem  an  aristocracy,  will  appear  to  another
a  narrow  oligarchy.  A  government  which  one  man  shall  deem
a  democracy,  will  appear  to  another  a  government  of  a  few:
whilst  a  government  which  one  man  shall  deem  an  aristocracy,
will  appear  to  another  a  government  of  many.  The  proportion,
moreover,  of  the  sovereign  number  to  the  number  of  the  entire
conmiunity,  may  stand,  it  is  manifest,  at  any  point  in  a  long
series  of  minute  degrees.

The  distinctions  between  aristocracies  to  which  I  have  now
adverted,  are  foimded  on  differences  between  the  proportions
which  the  mmiber  of  the  sovereign  body  may  bear  to  the  number
of  the  community.


of  the  community,  the  soyereignty  would
reside  in  the  miscalled  monarch,  with
that  detenninate  hody  of  his  miscalled
subiecta :  or  the  sovereignty  would  reside
exclusively  in  that  determinate  body,
whilst  he  would  be  merely  a  minister  of
the  supreme  government  For  example :
In  case  the  corps  of  Janizaries,  acting  as
an  organised  body,  habitually  addressed
commands  to  the  Turkish  sultan,  the
Turkish  sultan,  if  he  habitually  obeyed
those  commands,  would  not  be  sovereign
in  the  Turkish  empire.  The  sovereignty
would  reside  in  the  corps  of  Janizaries,
with  the  miscalled  sultan  or  monarch :
or  the  sovereignty  would  reside  exclu-
sively in  the  corps  of  Janizaries,  whilst
he  would  be  merely  their  vizier  or  prime
minister.  3ut  habitual  deference  to  opin-
ions of  the  community,  or  habitual  and
especial  deference  to  opinions  of  a  portion
of  the  community,  consists  with  that  in-
dependence which  is  one  of  the  essentials
of  sovereignty. If  it  did  not,  none  of


239

Lect.  VI

Of  such
distinc-
tions be-
tween aris-
tocracies
as  are
founded
on  differ-
ences be-
tween the
propor-
tions

which  the
number  of
the  sove-
reign body
may  bear
to  the
number  of
the  com-
munity.


the  governments  deemed  supreme  would
be  tnily  sovereign ;  for  habitual  deference
to  opinions  of  the  community,  or  habitual
and  especial  deference  to  opinions  of  a

Eortion  of  the  community,  is  rendered
y  every  aristocracy,  or  by  every  govern-  ,
ment  of  a  number,  as  well  as  by  every
monarch.  Nay,  supreme  government
would  be  impossible :  for  if  the  sove-
reignty resided  in  the  ^rtion  of  the
community  to  whose  opinions  and  senti-
ments the  sovereign  especially  deferred,
it  would  reside  in  a  body  uncertain  (that
is  to  say,  nowhere),  or  in  a  certain  body
not  in  a  habit  of  command.  A  confusion
of  laws  properly  so  called  with  laws  im-
proper imposed  by  opinion,  is  the  source
of  tne  error  in  question.  The  habitual
independence  which  is  one  of  the  essen-
tials of  sovereignty,  is  merely  habitual
independence  of  laws  imp|erative  and
proper.  By  laws  which  opinion  imposes,
every  member  of  every  society  is  habit-
ually determined.


240


The  Province  of


Lect.  VI


Of  such
difltinc-
tions  be-
tween aris-
tocracies
as  are
founded  on
differences
between
the  modes
wherein
the  sove-
reign num-
ber mav
share  the
sovereign
powers.


Of  such
aristocra-
cies as  are
styled
limited

VMfWOLT'

chies.


Other  distinctions  between  aristocracies  are  founded  on
differences  between  the  modes  wherein  the  sovereign  number
may  share  the  sovereign  powers.

For  though  the  sovereign  number  may  be  a  homogeneous
body,  or  a  body  of  individufid  persons  whose  political  characters
are  similar,  it  is  commonly  a  mixed  or  heterogeneous  body,  or  a
body  of  individual  persons  whose  political  characters  are  different.
The  sovereign  number,  for  example,  may  consist  of  an  oligarchical
or  narrower,  and  a  democratical  or  larger  body:  of  a  single
individual  person  styled  an  emperor  or  king,  and  a  body  oli-
garchical, or  a  body  democratical :  or  of  a  single  individual  person
bearing  one  of  those  names,  and  a  body  of  the  former  description,
with  another  of  the  last-mentioned  kind.  And  in  any  of  these
cases,  or  of  numberless  similar  cases,  the  various  constituent
members  of  the  heterogeneous  and  sovereign  body  may  share  the
sovereign  powers  in  any  of  infinite  modes.

The  infinite  forms  of  aristocracy  which  result  from  those
infinite  modes,  have  not  been  divided  systematically  into  kinds
and  sorts,  or  have  not  been  distinguished  systematically  by
generic  and  specific  names.  But  some  of  those  infinite  forms
have  been  distinguished  broadly  from  the  rest,  and  have  been
marked  with  the  common  name  of  limited  monarchies.

Now  (as  I  have  intimated  above,  and  shall  show  more  fully
hereafter),  the  difference  between  monarchies  or  governments
of  one,  and  aristocracies  or  governments  of  a  number,  is  of  all
the  differences  between  governments  the  most  precise  or  definite,
and,  in  regard  to  the  pregnant  distinction  between  positive  law
and  morality,  incomparably  the  most  important.  And,  since
this  capital  difference  between  governments  of  one  and  a  number
is  involved  in  some  obscurity  through  the  name  of  limited
moTiarchy,  I  will  offer  a  few  remarks  upon  the  various  forms  of
aristocracy  to  which  that  name  is  applied.

In  all  or  most  of  the  governments  which  are  styled  limited
monarchies,  a  single  individual  shares  the  sovereign  powers  with
an  aggregate  or  aggregates  of  individuals:  the  share  of  that
single  individual,  be  it  greater  or  less,  surpassing  or  exceeding
the  share  of  any  of  the  other  individuals  who  are  also  constituent
members  of  the  supreme  and  heterogeneous  body.  And  by  that
pre-eminence  of  share  in  the  sovereign  or  supreme  powers,  and
(perhaps)  by  precedence  in  rank  or  other  honorary  marks,  that
single  individual  is  distinguished,  more  or  less  conspicuously,
from  any  of  the  other  individuals  with  whom  he  partakes  in  the
sovereignty.


Jurisprudence  determined.  241

But  in  spite  of  that  pre-eminence,  and  in  spite  of  that  Lect.  VI
precedence,  that  foremost  individual  member  of  the  mixed  or  ^^^^
heterogeneous  aristocracy,  is  not  a  monarch  in  the  proper  accept-
ation of  the  term :  nor  is  the  mixed  aristocracy  of  which  he  is
the  foremost  member,  a  monarchy  properly  so  called.  Unlike
a  monarch  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term,  that  single
individual  is  not  a  sovereign,  but  is  one  of  a  sovereign  number.
Unlike  a  monarch  properly  so  called,  that  single  individual,
considered  singly,  lives  in  a  state  of  subjection.  Considered
singly,  he  is  subject  to  the  sovereign  body  of  which  he  is  merely
a  limb.

Limited  monarchy,  therefore,  is  not  monarchy.  It  is  one  or
another  of  those  infinite  forms  of  aristocracy  which  result  from
the  infinite  modes  wherein  the  sovereign  number  may  share  the
sovereign  powers.  And,  like  any  other  of  those  infinite  forms,
it  belongs  to  one  or  another  of  those  three  forms  of  aristocracy
which  I  have  noticed  in  a  preceding  paragraph.  If  the  number
of  the  sovereign  body  (the  so  called  monarch  included)  bear  to
the  number  of  the  community  an  extremely  small  proportion,
the  so  called  monarchy  is  an  oligarchy.  If  the  same  proportion
be  small,  but  not  extremely  small,  the  so  called  limited  monarchy
is  an  aristocratical  government  (in  the  specific  meaning  of  the
name).  If  the  same  proportion  be  large,  the  so  called  limited
monarchy  is  a  democratical  or  popular  government,  or  a  govern-
ment of  many.^®^

As  meaning  monarchical  power  limited  by  positive  law,  the
name  limited  monarchy  involves  a  contradiction  in  terms.  For
a  monarch  properly  so  called  is  sovereign  or  supreme ;  and,  as
I  shall  show  hereafter,  sovereign  or  supreme  power  is  incapable
of  legal  limitation,  whether  it  reside  in  an  individual,  or  in  a
number  of  individuals.  It  is  true  that  the  power  of  an  aris-
tocracy, styled  a  limited  monarchy,  is  limited  by  positive  morality,

(o)*  The  government  of  a  kingdom  where-  however,  be  said,  with  perfect  precision,

in  the  king  is  limited,  is  by  most  writers  that  the  so  called  limited  monarch  is

called  monarchy. Such  a  king,  however,  merely  a  minister  of  the  sovereign. He

is  not  soveraign,  but  is  a  minister  of  him  commonly,  it  is  true,  has  subordinate

or  them  who  truly  have  the  soveraign  political  powers,  or  is  a  minister  of  the

power.  * *  The  king  whose  power  is  lim-  sovereign  body  :  but,  unless  he  also  par-

ited,  is  not  the  soveraign  of  the  assembly  took  in  the  supreme  powers,  or  unless  he

which  hath  the  power  to  limit  it The  were  a  member,  as  well  as  a  minister  of

soverai^ty,  therefore,  is  in  that  assem-  the  body,  he  would  hardly  be  compli-

bly  which  hath  the  power  to  limit  him.  mented  with  the  magnificent  name  of

And,  by  consequence,  the  government  is  monarch,  and  the  sovereign  government

not  monarchv,  but  aristocracy  or  demo-  of  which  he  was  merely  a  servant  would

cracy.* — In  these  extracts  from  Hobbes'  hardly  be  styled  a  monarchy. I  shall

ZcrioMan,  the  true  nature  of  the  supreme  revert  to  the  character  or  position  of  a

governments  which  are  styled  limited  so  called  limited  monarch,  when  I  come

monarchies  is  well  stated. It  cannot,  to  consider  the  limits  of  sovereign  power.
VOL.  I.  R


242


The  Province  of


Lect.  VI  and  also  by  the  law  of  GkxL  But,  the  power  of  every  govern-
'  ment  being  limited  by  those  restraints,  the  name  limited  monarchy,
as  pointing  to  those  restraints,  is  not  a  whit  more  applicable  to
snch  aristocracies  as  are  marked  with  it,  than  to  monarchies
properly  so  called. — ^And  as  the  name  is  absurd  or  inappropriate,
so  is  its  application  capricious.  Although  it  is  applied  to  some
of  the  aristocracies  wherein  a  single  individual  has  the  pre-
eminence mentioned  above,  it  is  also  withheld  &om  others  to
which  it  is  equally*  applicable.  Its  application,  indeed,  is
commonly  determined  by  a  purely  immaterial  circumstance :  by
the  nature  of  the  title,  or  the  nature  of  the  name  of  oifice,  which
that  foremost  member  of  the  mixed  aristocracy  happens  to  bear.
If  he  happen  to  bear  a  title  which  commonly  is  borne  by
monarchs  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term,  the  supreme
government  whereof  he  is  a  member  is  usually  styled  a  limited
monarchy.  Otherwise,  the  supreme  government  whereof  he  is  a
member  is  usually  marked  with  a  different  name.  For  example :
The  title  of  fiaaiKev^:,  rex,  or  king,  is  commonly  borne  by
monarchs  in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term :  and  since  our
own  king  happens  to  bear  that  title,  our  own  mixed  aristocracy
of  king,  lords,  and  commons,  is  usually  styled  a  limited  monarchy.
If  his  share  in  the  sovereign  powers  were  exactly  what  it  is  now,
but  he  were  called  protector,  president,  or  stadtholder,  the  mixed
aristocracy  of  which  he  is  a  member  would  probably  be  styled  a
republic.  And  for  such  verbal  differences  between  forms  of
supreme  government  has  the  peace  of  mankind  been  frequently
troubled  by  ignorant  and  headlong  fanatics/^^


Various  (')  The  present  is  a  conyenient  place

meanings  for  the  following  remarks  upon  terms,
ofthefol-  The  term  'sovereign/  or  *the  sove-
lowing  reifn,'  applies  to  a  sovereign  body  as
terms:  1.  well  as  to  a  sovereign  individual.  'II
The  term  sovrano '  and  '  le  souverain '  are  used  bj
*8ove-  Italian  and  French  writers  with this

reign,'  or  generic  and  commodious  meaning.  I  say
'  the  sove-  commodious :  for  supreme  government,
reign.'  2.  abstracted  from  form,  is  nequently  a
The  term  subject  of  discourse.  *  Die  Obrigkeit  *
*  republic,'  (the  person  or  body  over  the  community)
or  '  com-  iB  also  applied  indifferently,  by  German
mon-  writers,  to  a  sovereign  indiviaual  or  a

wealth.'  3.  sovereign  number :  though  it  not  unfre-
The  term quently  signifies  the  aggregate  of  the
'state,'  or political  superiors  who  in  capacities  su-
'  the  state. ' preme  and  subordinate  govern  the  given
4.  The  term society. But  though  'sovereign'  is  a
'nation.' genenc  name  for  sovereign  inaividuals
and  bodies,  it  is  not  unfrequently  used
as  if  it  were  appropriate  to  the  former  :
as  if  it  were  synonymous  with  '  monarch '
in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term.


'  Soverei^,'  as  well  as  '  monarch,'  is  also
often  misapplied  to  the  foremost  indi-
vidual member  of  a  so  called  limited
monarchy.  Our  own  king,  for  example,
is  neither  *  sovereign '  nor  '  monarch  : '
but,  this  notwithstanding,  he  hardly  is
mentioned  oftener  by  his  appropriate
title  of  'king,'  than  by  those  inappro-
priate and  afScted  names.

'Rennblic,' or  'commonwealth,*  has
the  following  amongst  other  meaninos. —

1.  Without  reference  to  the  form  of  the
government,  it  denotes  the  main  object
for  which  a  government  should  exist.  It
denotes  the  weal  or  good  of  an  independ-
ent political  society :  that  is  to  say,  the
aggregate  good  of  all  the  individual
mem^rs,  or  the  aggregate  good  of  those
of  the  individual  members  whose  weal  is
deemed  by  the  speaker  worthy  of  regard.

2.  Without  reference  to  the  form  of  the
government,  it  denotes  a  society  political
and  independent  8.  Any  aristocracy,
or  government  of  a  number,  which  has


Jurisprudence  determined.  243

To  the  foregoing  brief  analysis  of  the  forms  of  supreme  L«ct.  vi
government,  I  append  a  short  examination  of  the  four  following  '  '
topics:  for  they  are  far  more  intimately  connected  with  the
subject  of  that  analysis  than  with  any  of  the  other  subjects
which  the  scope  of  my  lecture  embraces.  1.  The  exercise  of
sovereign  powers,  by  a  monarch  or  sovereign  body,  through
political  subordinates  or  delegates  representing  their  sovereign
author.  2.  The  distinction  of  sovereign  and  other  political
powers,  into  such  as  are  legislatwe,  and  such  as  are  executive  or
administrative,  3.  The  true  natures  of  the  communities  or
governments  which  are  styled  by  writers  on  positive  international
law  hcUf'SOvereign  states,  4.  The  nature  of  a  composite  state,
or  a  supreme  federal  ffovemmeTit :  with  the  nature  of  a  system
of  confederated  states,  or  a  permanent  confederacy  of  supreme
governments.

In  an  independent  political  society  of  the  smallest  possible  Of  the

not  acquired  the  name  of  a  limited  mon-  'statas  reipnblicse,'  as  thns  understood,

archy,  is  commonly  styled  a  republican  is  the  appropriate  subject  of  public  law

ffovemment,  or,  more  briefly,  a  republic,  in  the  demiite  meaning  of  the  term :  that

But  the  name  'republican  government,'  is  to  say,  the  portion  of  a  corpus  juris

or  the  name  'republic,'  is  applied  em-  which  is  concerned  with  political  con-

phatically  to  such  of  the  aristocracies  in  ditions,  or  with  the  powers,  rights,  and

question  as  are  deemed  democracies  or  duties  of  political  superiors. It  is  hardly

governments  of  many. 4. '  Republic  *  necessary  to  remark,  that  the  expression

also denotes  an  independent political  '  status  reipublicse '  is  not  coextensive  or

society  whose  supreme  government  is  ^nonymous with  the  expression 'status.'

styled  republican.  The  former  is  a  collective  name  for  po-

^  The  meanings  of 'state,*  or '^  state,'  litical  or  public  conditions,  or  for  the

are  numerous  and  disparate :  of  which  powers,  rights,  and  duties  of  political

numerous  and  disparate  meanings  the  superiors. The latter  is synonymous

following  are  the  most  remarkame — 1.  with  the  term  'condition,'  and  denotes

'  T?ie  state '  is  usually  synonymous  with  a  private  condition  as  well  as  a  political

'^sovereign.'  It  denotes  the  individual  or  public. S.  Where  a  sovereign  body

person,  or  the  body  of  individual  persons,  is  compounded  of  minor  bodies,  or  of

which  bears  the  supreme  powers  in  an  one  individual  person  and  minor  bodies,

independent  political  society. This  is  those  minor  bodies  are  not  unfrequently

the  meaning  which  I  annex  to  the  term,  styled 'states'  or 'estates.' For  ex-

unless I employ  it expressly  with  a  ample :  Before  the  kings  of  France  had

different  import. 2. By  the Roman  become  substantially  sovereign,  the  sove-

lawyers,  the  expression  *  status  reipub-  reignty  resided  in  the  king  with  the

licse '  seems  to  be  used  ia  two  senses. As  three  estates  of  the  realm. 4.  An  inde-

used  in  one  of  those  senses,  it  is  synony-  pendent  political  society  is  often  styled

mouswith*  republic,*  or 'commonwealth,*  a  'state,*  or  a  'sovereign  and  independ-

in  the  first  of  the  four  meanings  which  I  ent  state.'

have  enumerated  above  :  that  is  to  say,  An  independent  political  society  is
it  denotes  the  weal  or  good  of  an  inde-  often  stylea  a  'nation,'  or  a  'sovereign
pendent  political  society.  As  used  in  and  independent  nation.*  But  the  term
the  other  of  those  senses,  it  denotes  the  '  nation,  or  the  term  ^aens/  is  used  more
individual  or  body  which  is  sovereign  in  properly  with  the  foUowing  meaning,
a  given  society,  together  with  the  subject  It  aenotes  an  aggregate  of  persons,  ex-
individuals  and  subject  bodies  who  hold  ceeding  a  sinele  family,  who  are  con-
political  rights  from  that  sovereign  one  uQcted  througn  blood  or  lineage,  and,
or  number.  Or  (changing  the  phrase)  perhaps,  through  a  common  language,
it  denotes  the  respective  conditions  of  And,  thus  understood,  a  'nation'  or
the  several  political  superiors  who  witii  '  gens '  is  not  necessarily  an  independent
sovereign  and  delegated  powers  govern  political  society,
the  community  in  question. And  the


St

I m


244


The  Province  of


political
subordin-
ates or
delegates
represent-
ing their
sovereign
author.


Lbct.  VI  magnitude,  inhabiting  a  territory  of  the  smallest  possible  extent,
exercise  of  ^^^  living  under  a  monarchy  or  an  extremely  narrow  oligarchy,
sovereign  all  the  supreme  powers  brought  into  exercise  (save  those  com-
rmoSrch  flitted  to  subjects  as  private  persons)  might  possibly  be  exercised
or  sove-  directly  by  the  monarch  or  supreme  body.  But  by  every  actual
S^gh  ^'x  sovereign  (whether  the  sovereign  be  one  individual,  or  a  number
or  aggregate  of  individuals),  some  of  those  powers  are  exercised
through  political  subordinates  or  delegates  representing  their
sovereign  author.  This  exercise  of  sovereign  powers  through
political  subordinates  or  delegates,  is  rendered  absolutely  neces-
sary, in  every  actual  society,  by  innumerable  causes.  For
example,  if  the  number  of  the  society  be  large,  or  if  its  territory
be  large,  although  its  number  be  small,  the  quantity  of  work  to
be  done  in  the  way  of  political  government  is  more  than  can  be
done  by  the  sovereign  without  the  assistance  of  ministers.  If
the  society  be  governed  by  a  popular  body,  there  is  some  of  the
business  of  government  which  cannot  be  done  by  the  sovereign
without  the  intervention  of  representatives ;  foi;  there  is  some  ot
the  business  of  government  to  which  the  body  is  incompetent
by  reason  of  its  own  bulk ;  and  some  of  the  business  of  govern-
ment the  body  is  prevented  from  performing  by  the  private
avocations  of  its  members.  If  the  society  be  governed  by  a
popular  body  whose  members  live  dispersedly  throughout  an
extensive  territory,  the  sovereign  body  is  constrained  by  the
wide  dispersion  of  its  members  to  exercise  through  representatives
some  of  its  sovereign  powers.

In  most  or  many  of  the  societies  whose  supreme  govern-
ments are  monarchical,  or  whose  supreme  governments  are
oligarchical,  or  whose  supreme  governments  are  aristocratical
(in  the  specific  meaning  of  the  name),  many  of  the  sovereign
powers  are  exercised  by  the  sovereign  directly,  or  the  sovereign
performs  directly  much  of  the  business  of  government.

Many  of  the  sovereign  powers  are  exercised  by  the  sovereign
directly,  or  the  sovereign  performs  directly  much  of  the  business
of  government,  even  in  some  of  the  societies  whose  supreme
governments  are  popular.  For  example :  In  all  or  most  of  the
democracies  of  ancient  Greece  and  Italy,  the  sovereign  people
or  number,  formally  assembled,  exercised  directly  many  of  its
sovereign  powers.  And  in  some  of  the  Swiss  Cantons  whose
supreme  governments  are  popular,  the  sovereign  portion  of  the
citizens,  regularly  convened,  performs  directly  much  of  the
business  of  government.

But  in  many  of  the  societies  whose  supreme  governments


yurisprudence  determined.


245


are  popular,  the  sovereign  or  supreme  body  (or  any  numerous  Lect.  vi
body  forming  a  component  part  of  it)  exercises  through  repre-  '  '
sentatives,  whom  it  elects  and  appoints,  the  whole,  or  nearly
the  whole,  of  its  sovereign  or  supreme  powers.  In  our  owri\
country,  for  example,  one  component  part  of  the  sovereign  or
supreme  body  is  the  numerous  body  of  the  corwmons  (in  the  strict
signification  of  the  name) :  that  is  to  say,  such  of  the  commons
(in  the  large  acceptation  of  the  term)  as  share  the  sovereignty
with  the  king  and  the  peers,  and  elect  the  members  of  the
commons'  house.  Now  the  commons  exercise  through  repre-
sentatives the  whole  of  their  sovereign  powers ;  or  they  exercise
through  representatives  the  whole  of  their  sovereign  powers,
except  their  sovereign  power  of  electing  and  appointing  repre-
sentatives to  represent  them  in  the  British  Parliament  So
that  if  the  commons  were  sovereign  without  the  king  and  the
peers,  not  a  single  sovereign  power,  save  that  which  I  have  now
specified,  would  be  exercised  by  the  sovereign  directly.

Where  a  sovereign  body  (or  any  smaller  body  forming  a
component part  of  it) exercises  through  representatives  the
whole  of  its  sovereign  powers,  it  may  delegate  those  its  powers
to  those  its  representatives,  in  either  of  two  modes. 1.  It  may
delegate  those  its  powers  to  those  its  representatives,  subject  to
a  trust  or  trusts. 2.  It  may  delegate  those  its  powers  to  those  I
its  representatives,  absolutely  or  unconditionally :  insomuch  that  I
the  representative  body,  during  the  period  for  which  it  is  elected
and  appointed,  occupies  completely  the  place  of  the  electoral  ]
or  insomuch  that  the  former,  during  the  period  for  which  it  is
elected  and  appointed,  is  invested  completely  with  the  sovereign  /I
character  of  the  latter.  '  '

For  example :  The  commons  delegate  their  powers  to  the
members  of  the  commons'  house,  in  the  second  of  the  above-
mentioned  modes.  During  the  period  for  which  those  members
are  elected,  or  during  the  parliament  of  which  those  members
are  a  limb,  the  sovereignty  is  possessed  by  the  king  and  the
peers,  with  the  members  of  the  commons*  house,  and  not  by  the
king  and  the  peers,  with  the  delegating  body  of  the  commons :
though  when  that  period  expires,  or  when  that  parliament  is
any  how  dissolved,  the  delegated  share  in  the  sovereignty  reverts
to  that  delegating  body,  or  the  king  and  the  peers,  with  the
delegating  body  of  the  commons,  are  then  the  body  wherein  the
sovereignty  resides.  So  that  if  the  commons  were  sovereign
without  the  king  and  the  peers,  their  present  representatives  in
parliament  would  be  the  sovereign  in  efifect,  or  would


246


The  Province  of


Leot.  VI  the  entire  sovereignty  free  from  trust  or  obligation. — ^The  powers
'  of  the  commons  are  delegated  so  absolutely  to  the  members  of
the  commons'  house,  that  this  representative  assembly  might
concur  with  the  king  and  the  peers  in  defeating  the  principal
ends  for  which  it  is  elected  and  appointed.  It  might  concur,
for  instance,  in  making  a  statute  which  would  lengthen  its  own
duration  from  seven  to  twenty  years;  or  which  would  anni-
hilate completely  the  actual  constitution  of  the  government,  by
transferring  the  sovereignty  to  the  king  or  the  peers  from  the
tripartite  body  wherein  it  resides  at  present

But  though  the  commons  delegate  their  powers  in  the
second  of  the  above-mentioned  modes,  it  is  clear  that  they
might  delegate  them  subject  to  a  trust  or  trusts.  The  repre-
sentative body,  for  instance,  might  be  bound  to  use  those  powers
consistently  with  specific  ends  pointed  out  by  the  electoral :  or
it  might  be  bound,  more  generally  and  vaguely,  not  to  annihilate,
or  alter  essentially,  the  actual  constitution  of  the  supreme
government.  And  if  the  commons  were  sovereign  without  the
king  and  the  peers,  they  might  impose  a  similar  trust  upon  any
representative  body  to  which  they  might  delegate  the  entire
sovereignty.

Where  such  a  trust  is  imposed  by  a  sovereign  or  supreme
body  (or  by  a  smaller  body  forming  a  component  part  of  it),  the
trust  is  enforced  by  legal,  or  by  merely  moral  sanctions.  The
representative  body  is  bound  by  a  positive  law  or  laws :  or  it  is
merely  bound  by  a  fear  that  it  may  oflFend  the  bulk  of  the
community,  in  case  it  shall  break  the  engagement  which  it  has
contracted  with  the  electoral

And  here  I  may  briefly  remark,  that  this  last  is  the  position
which  really  is  occupied  by  the  members  of  the  commons'  house.
Adopting  the  language  of  most  of  the  writers  who  have  treated
of  the  British  Constitution,  I  commonly  suppose  that  the  present
parliament,  or  the  parliament  for  the  time  being,  is  possessed  of
the  sovereignty :  or  I  commonly  suppose  that  the  king  and  the
lords,  with  the  members  of  the  commons*  house,  form  a  tripartite
body  which  is  sovereign  or  supreme.  But,  speaking  accurately,
the  members  of  the  commons'  house  are  merely  trustees  for  the
body  by  which  they  are  elected  and  appointed  :  and,  consequently,
the  sovereignty  always  resides  in"  the  king  and  the  peers,  with
the  electoral  body  of  the  commons.  That  a  trust  is  imposed  by
the  party  delegating,  and  that  the  party  representing  engages
to  discharge  the  trust,  seems  to  be  imported  by  the  correlative
expressions  delegation  and  representation. It  were  absurd to


Jurisprudence  determined.  247

suppose  that  the  delegating  empowers  the  representative  party  Lect.  VI
to  defeat  or  abandon  any  of  the  purposes  for  which  the  latter  is  """^
appointed :  to  suppose,  for  example,  that  the  commons  empower
their  representatives  in  parliament  to  relinquish  their  share  in
the  sovereignty  to  the  king  and  the  lords. — The  supposition
that  the  powers  of  the  commons  are  delegated  absolutely  to  the
members  of  the  commons'  house  probably  arose  from  the  following
causes.  1.  The  trust  imposed  by  the  electoral  body  upon  the
body  representing  them  in  parliament,  is  tacit  rather  than  express:
it  arises  from  the  relation  between  the  bodies  as  delegating  and
representative  parties,  rather  than  from  oral  or  written  instruc-
tions given  by  the  former  to  the  latter.  But  since  it  arises  from
that  relation,  the  trust  is  general  and  vague.  The  representatives
are  merely  bound,  generally  and  vaguely,  to  abstain  from  any
such  exercise  of  the  delegated  sovereign  powers  as  would  tend
to  defeat  the  purposes  for  which  they  are  elected  and  appointed.
2.  The  trust  is  simply  enforced  by  moral  sanctions.  In  other
words,  that  portion  of  constitutional  law  which  regards  the
duties  of  the  representative  towards  the  electoral  body,  is  positive
morality  merely.  Nor  is  this  extraordinary.  For  (as  I  shall
show  hereafter)  all  constitutional  law,  in  every  country  whatever,
is,  as  against  the  sovereign,  in  that  predicament :  and  much  of
it,  in  every  country,  is  also  in  that  predicament,  even  as  against
parties  who  are  subject  or  subordinate  to  the  sovereign,  and  who
therefore  might  be  held  from  infringing  it  by  legal  or  political
sanctions.

If  a  trust  of  the  kind  in  question  were  enforced  by  legal
sanctions,  the  positive  law  binding  the  representative  body
might  be  made  by  the  representative  body  and  not  by  the
electoral  For  example :  If  the  duties  of  the  commons'  house
towards  the  commons  who  appoint  it  were  enforced  by  legal
sanctions,  the  positive  law  binding  the  commons'  house  might
be  made  by  the  parliament:  that  is  to  say,  by  the  conmions'
house  itself  in  conjunction  with  the  king  and  the  peers.  Or,
supposing  the  sovereignty  resided  in  the  commons  without  the
king  and  the  peers,  the  positive  law  binding  the  commons'
house  might  be  made  by  the  house  itself  as  representing  the
sovereign  or  state. — But,  in  either  of  these  cases,  the  law  might
be  abrogated  by  its  immediate  author  without  the  direct  consent  .
of  the  electoral  body.  Nor  could  the  electoral  body  escape
from  that  inconvenience,  so  long  as  its  direct  exercise  of  its
sovereign  or  supreme  powers  was  limited  to  the  election  of
representatives. In  order  th^t  the  electoral  body  might  escape


248  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI  from  that  inconvenience,  the  positive  law  binding  its  repre-
*  '  sentatives  must  be  made  directly  by  itself  or  with  its  direct
concurrence.  For  example :  In  order  that  the  members  of  the
commons'  house  might  be  bound  legally  and  completely  to
discharge  their  duties  to  the  commons,  the  law  must  be  made
directly  by  the  commons  themselves  in  concurrence  with  the
king  and  the  lords :  or,  supposing  the  sovereignty  resided  in  the
commons  without  the  king  and  the  peers,  the  law  must  be  made
directly  by  the  commons  themselves  as  being  exclusively  the
sovereign.  In  either  of  these  cases,  the  law  could  not  be
abrogated  without  the  direct  consent  of  the  electoral  body  itself.
For  the  king  and  the  lords  with  the  electoral  body  of  the
commons,  or  the  electoral  body  of  the  commons  as  being  exclu-
sively the  sovereign,  would  form  an  extraordinary  and  ulterior
legislature  :  a  legislature  superior  to  that  ordinary  legislature
which  would  be  formed  by  the  parliament  or  by  the  commons'
house.  A  law  of  the  parliament,  or  a  law  of  the  commons'
house,  which  affected  to  abrogate  a  law  of  the  extraordinary  and
ulterior  legislature,  would  not  be  obeyed  by  the  courts  of  justice.
The  tribunals  would  enforce  the  latter  in  the  teeth  of  the  former.
They  would  examine  the  competence  of  the  ordinary  legislature
to  make  the  abrogating  law,  as  they  now  examine  the  competence
of  any  subordinate  corporation  to  establish  a  by-law  or  other
statute  or  ordinance.  In  the  state  of  New  York,  the  ordinary
legislature  of  the  state  is  controlled  by  an  extraordinary  legis-
lature, in  the  manner  which  I  have  now  described.  The  body
of  citizens  appointing  the  ordinary  legislature,  forms  an  extra-
ordinary and  ulterior  legislature  by  which  the  constitution  of
the  state  was  directly  established :  and  any  law  of  the  ordinary
legislature,  which  conflicted  with  a  constitutional  law  directly
proceeding  from  the  extraordinary,  would  be  treated  by  the  courts
of  justice  as  a  legally  invalid  act. — That  such  an  extraordinary
and  ulterior  legislature  is  a  good  or  useful  institution,  I  pretend
not  to  affirm.  I  merely  affirm  that  the  institution  is  possible,
,  ,.  and  that  in  one  political  society  the  institution  actually  obtains,
tinction  of  Jtrom  the  exercise  of  sovereign  powers  by  the  sovereign
^^A^^'  directly,  and  also  by  the  sovereign  through  political  subordinates
political  or  delegates,  I  pass  to  the  distinction  of  sovereign,  and  other
^T^"'  h  political  powers,  into  such  as  are  legislative,  and  such  as  are
2Azx^Ugis-  exectUive  or  administrative,

^chBslre  ^^  seems  to  be  supposed  by  many  writers,  that  legislative
executive  oT  political  powers,  and  executive  political  powers,  may  be  dis-
^^**' tinguished  precisely,  or,  at  least,  with  an  approach  to  precision :


yurisprudence  determined,  249

and  that  in  every  society  whose  government  is  a  government  of  Lect.  VI
a  number,  or,  at  least,  in  every  society  whose  government  is  a  '
limited  monarchy,  the  legislative  sovereign  powers,  and  the
executive  sovereign  powers,  belong  to  distinct  parties.  Accord-
ing, for  example,  to  Sir  William  Blackstone,  the  legislative
sovereign  powers  reside  in  the  parliament :  that  is  to  say,  in
the  tripartite  sovereign  body  formed  by  the  king,  the  members
of  the  house  of  lords,  and  the  members  of  the  house  of  commons.
But,  according  to  the  same  writer,  the  executive  sovereign
powers  reside  in  the  king  alone.

Now  the  distinction  of  political  powers  into  such  as  are
legislative,  and  such  as  are  eoceciUive,  scarcely  coincides  with  the
distinction  of  those  powers  into  such  as  are  supreme  and  such  as
are  svhordinate :  for  it  is  stated  or  assumed  by  the  writers  who
make  the  former  distinction,  that  sovereign  political  powers
(and,  indeed,  subordinate  also)  are  divisible  into  such  as  are
legislative  and  such  as  are  executive.  K  the  distinction  of
political  powers  into  legislative  and  executive  have  any  deter-
minate meaning,  its  meaning  must  be  this:  The  former  are
powers  of  establishing  laws,  and  of  issuing  other  commands  :
whilst  the  latter  are  powers  of  administering,  or  of  carrying  into
operation,  laws  or  other  commands  already  established  or  issued.
But  the  distinction,  as  thus  understood,  is  far  from  approaching
to  precision.  For  of  all  the  instruments  or  means  by  which
laws  and  other  commands  are  administered  or  executed,  laws
and  other  commands  are  incomparably  the  most  frequent:
insomuch  that  most  of  the  powers  deemed  executive  or  adminis-
trative are  themselves  legislative  powers,  or  involve  powers
which  are  legislative.  For  example:  As  administered  or
executed  by  courts  of  justice,  laws  are  mainly  administered
through  judgments  or  decrees :  that  is  to  say,  through  commands
issued  in  particular  cases  by  supreme  or  subordinate  tribunals.
And,  in  order  that  the  law  so  administered  may  be  administered
well,  they  must  be  administered  agreeably  to  laws  which  are
merely  subservient  to  that  purpose.  Thus :  All  laws  or  rules
determining  the  practice  of  courts,  or  all  laws  or  rules  deter-
mining judicial  procedure,  are  purely  subsidiary  to  the  due
execution  of  others.

That  the  legislative  sovereign  powers,  and  the  executive
sovereign  powers,  belong,  in  any  society,  to  distinct  parties,  is  a
supposition  too  palpably  false  to  endure  a  moment's  examination.
Of  the  numerous  proofs  of  its  falsity  which  it  were  easy  to  pro-
duce the  following  will  more  than  sufi&ce. — 1.  Of  the  laws  or


250  The  Province  of

Leot.  VI rules  made  by  the  British  parliament,  or  by  any  supreme  legis-
'  lature,  many  are  subsidiary,  and  are  intended  to  be  subsidiary,

to  the  due  execution  of  others.  And  as  making  laws  or  rules
subservient  to  that  purpose,  it  is  not  less  executive  than  courts
of  justice  as  making  regulations  of  procedure. — 2.  In  almost
every  society,  jvdicial  powers,  commonly  esteemed  execviive  or
administrative,  are  exercised  directly  by  the  supreme  legislature.
For  example :  The  Roman  emperors  or  princes,  who  were  virtu-
ally sovereign  in  the  Eoman  empire  or  world,  not  only  issued  the
edictal  constitutions  which  were  general  rules  or  laws,  but,  as
forming  the  highest  or  ultimate  tribunal  of  appeal,  they  also  issued
the  particular  constitutions  which  were  styled  ^^ecre^es  or  judgments.
In  libera  repuilica,  or  before  the  virtual  dissolution  of  tfie  free
or  popular  government,  the  sovereign  Boman  people,  then  the
supreme  legislature,  was  a  high  court  of  justice  for  the  trial  of
criminal  causes.  The  powers  of  supreme  judicature  inhering  in
the  modem  parliament,  or  the  body  formed  by  the  king  and  the
upper  and  lower  houses,  have  ever  (I  believe)  been  dormant,  or
have  never  been  brought  into  exercise :  for,  as  making  the  par-
ticular but  ex  post  facto  statutes  which  are  styled  acts  of
attainder,  it  is  not  properly  a  court  of  justice.  But  the  ancient
parliament,  formed  by  the  king  and  the  barons,  of  which  the
modem  is  the  offspring,  was  the  ultimate  court  of  appeal  as
well  as  the  sovereign  legislature. — 3.  The  present  British
constitution  affords  not  the  slightest  countenance  to  the  sup-
position which  I  am  now  examining.  It  is  absurd  to  say  that
the  parliament  has  the  legislative  sovereign  powers,  but  that
the  executive  sovereign  powers  belong  to  the  king  alone.  If
the  parliament  (as  Blackstone  affirms)  be  sovereign  or  absolute,
every  sovereign  power  must  belong  to  that  sovereign  body,  or
to  one  or  more  of  its  members  as  forming  a  part  or  parts  of  it.
The  powers  of  the  king  considered  as  detached  from  the  body,
or  the  powers  of  any  of  its  members  considered  in  the  same
light,  are  not  sovereign  powers,  but  are  simply  or  purely  sub-
ordinate: or  (changing  the  phrase)  if  the  king  or  any  of  its
members,  considered  as  detached  from  the  body,  be  invested
with  political  powers,  that  member  as  so  detached  is  merely  a
minister  of  the  body,  or  those  political  powers  are  merely  em-
anations of  its  sovereignty.  Besides,  political  powers  which
surely  may  be  deemed  execviive  are  exercised  by  each  of  the
houses;  whilst  political  powers  which  surely  may  be  deemed
legislative  are  exercised  by  the  king.  In  civil  causes,  the  house
of  lords  is  the  ultimate  court  of  appeal ;  and  of  aU  the  political


yurisprtidence  determi7i€d.  251

powers  which  are  deemed  executive  or  admimstrative,  judicial  I^^ct.  VI
powers  are  the  most  important  and  remarkable.  The  executive
or  administrative  powers  which  reside  in  the  lower  house,  are
not  so  weighty  and  obvious  as  those  which  belong  to  the  upper :
but  still  it  were  easy  to  show  that  it  exercises  powers  of  the
kind.  For  example :  Exercising  judicature,  through  select  com-
mittees of  its  members,  it  adjudges  that  elections  of  its  members
are  legally  valid  or  void.^  The  political  powers  exercised  by
the  king  which  surely  may  be  deemed  legislative,  are  of  vast
extent  and  importance.  As  captain  general,  for  example,  he
makes  articles  of  war :  that  is  to  say,  laws  which  regard  especi-
ally the  discipline  or  government  of  the  soldiery.  As  adminis-
tering the  law,  through  subordinate  courts  of  justice,  he  is  the
author  of  the  rules  of  procedure  which  they  have  established
avowedly,  or  in  the  properly  legislative  mode :  and  (what  is  of
greater  importance)  he  is  the  author  of  that  measureless  system
of  judge-made  rules  of  law,  or  rules  of  law  made  in  the  judicial
manner,  which  has  been  established  covertly  by  those  subor-
dinate tribunals  as  directly  exercising  their  judicial  functions.^

Of  all  the  larger  divisions  of  political  powers,  the  division
of  those  powers  into  supreme  and  subordinate  is  perhaps  the  only
precise  one.  The  former  are  the  political  powers,  infinite  in
number  and  kind,  which,  partly  brought  into  exercise,  and  partly
Ijdng  dormant,  belong  to  a  sovereign  or  state :  that  is  to  say,  to
the  monarch  properly  so  called,  if  the  government  be  a  govern-
ment of  one :  and,  if  the  government  be  a  government  of  a
number,  to  the  sovereign  body  considered  collectively,  or  to  its
various  members  considered  as  component  parts  of  it  The  latter
are  those  portions  of  the  supreme  powers  which  are  delegated  to
political  subordinates:  such  political  subordinates  being  sub-
ordinate or  subject  merely,  or  also  immediate  partakers  in  those

^  This  judicial  power  in  regard  to  (despotic  or  republican). The  latter  is

elections  is  for  the  nrst  time  committed  founded  on  a  fancied  distinction  between

to  subordinate  judges,  by  *  The  Parlia-  executive and legislative. See Kant,

mentaiy  Elections  Act  1868.' — R.  C.  Entvmrfzum  ewigen  Frieden,  pp.  25-30.

"  Division  of  governments  according  Erug,  Allgemeines  Handw&rterbuch  der

to/or»ia  imperii  (Monarchy,  Aristocracy,  Philosophies  &c.,  Vol.  IV.,  p.  37. Politz,

and Democracy), or  forma regiminis  Staatsynssenschaftt  Vol.  I. MS.  Note,


[On  referring  to  Kant's  'Entwurf,'  I  at  the  end  of  this  Lecture,  not  only  on

found  it  filled  with  the  marsinal  notes  account  of  their  intrinsic  value,  but  as

with  which  almost  all  the  Author's  books  affording  an  example  of  the  manner  in

treating  of  the  subjects  of  his  patient  which  TOoks  were  dealt  with  bv  one  who

and penetrating  study, are enriched,  never Quitted a subject till he had

The  blank  leaves  in  the  covers  are  also  thoroughly  mastered  it,  and  placed  it

covered  with  Tables,  to  which  he  had  before  his  own  mind  with  luminous  dis-

reduced  Kant's  definitions  of  the  several  tinctness.— ^.  A.]
forms  of  Government They  are  inserted


252
Leot.  VI


The  true
natures  of
the  com-
munities
or  govern-
ments
which  are
styled  by
writers  on
positive
interna-
tional law
half  SOW"
reignstates.


The  Province  of

very  supreme  powers  of  portions  or  shares  wherein  they  are
posgessed  as  ministers  and  trustees.

There  were  formerly  in  Europe  many  of  the  communities  or
governments  which  are  styled  by  writers  on  positive  international
law  Judf  sovereign  states.  In  consequence  of  the  mighty  changes
wrought  by  the  French  revolution,  such  communities  or  govern-
ments have  wholly  or  nearly  disappeared :  and  I  advert  to  the
true  natures  of  such  communities  or  governments,  not  because
they  are  intrinsically  of  any  importance  or  interest,  but  because
the  incongruous  epithet  half  or  imperfectly  sovereign  obscures  the
essence  of  sovereignty  and  independent  political  society.  It
seems  to  import  that  the  governments  marked  with  it  are
sovereign  and  subject  at  once.

According  to  writers  on  positive  international  law,  a  govern-
ment half  or  imperfectly  sovereign  occupies  the  following  position.
— In  spite  of  its  half  or  imperfect  dependence,  it  has  most  of
the  political  and  sovereign  powers  which  belong  to  a  government
wholly  or  perfectly  supreme.  More  especially,  in  all  or  most  of
its  foreign  relations,  or  in  all  or  most  of  its  relations  to  foreign
or  external  governments,  it  acts  and  is  treated  as  a  perfectly
sovereign  government,  and  not  as  a  government  in  a  state  of
subjection  to  another:  insomuch  that  it  makes  and  breaks
alliances,  and  makes  war  or  peace,  without  authority  from
another  government,  or  of  its  own  discretion.  But,  this  not-
withstanding, the  government,  or  a  member  of  the  government,
of  another  political  society,  has  political  powers  over  the  society
deemed  imperfectly  independent.  For  example :  In  the  Ger-
manico-Eoman  or  Romano -Germanic  empire,  the  particular
German  governments  depending  on  the  empire  inmiediately,  or
holding  of  the  emperor  by  tenure  in  capite  were  deemed  imper-
fectly sovereign  in  regard  to  that  general  government  which
consisted  of  the  emperor  and  themselves  as  forming  the  Imperial
Diet.  For  though  in  their  foreign  relations  they  were  wholly  or
nearly  independent,  they  were  bound  (in  reality  or  show)  by
laws  of  that  general  government :  and  its  tribunals  had  appellate
judicature  (substantially  or  to  appearance)  over  the  political  and
haK  independent  communities  wherein  they  were  half  supreme.
Most,  indeed,  of  the  governments  deemed  imperfectly  supreme,
are  governments  which  in  their  orijgin  had  been  substantially
vassal :  but  which  had  insensibly  escaped  from  most  of  their
feudal  bonds,  though  they  still  continued  apparently  in  their
primitive  state  of  subjection.

Now  I  think  it  will  appear  on  analysis,  that  every  govern-


Jurisprudence  determined.  253

ment  deemed  imperfectly  supreme  is  really  in  one  or  another  of  \  Lect.  VI
the  three  following  predicaments. It  is  perfectly  subject  to
that  other  government  in  relation  to  which  it  is  deemed  im-
perfectly supreme :  Or  it  is  perfectly  independent  of  the  other,
and  therefore  is  of  itself  a  truly  sovereign  government :  Or  in
its  own  community  it  is  jointly  sovereign  with  the  other,  and
is  therefore  a  constituent  member  of  a  government  supreme  and
independent. And  if  every  government deemed imperfectly
supreme  be  really  in  one  or  another  of  the  three  foregoing
predicaments,  there  is  no  such  political  mongrel  as  a  govern-
ment sovereign and  subject — 1. The  political  powers  of  the
government deemed imperfectly  supreme,  may be exercised
entirely and  habitually  at  the  pleasure and  bidding  of  the
other. On  which  supposition,  its  so  called  half  sovereignty  is
merely  nominal  and  illusive. It  is  perfectly  subject  to  the
other  government,  though  that  its  perfect  subjection  may  be
imperfect  in  ostent. For  example :  Although,  in  its  own  name,
and  as  of  its  own  discretion,  it  makes  war  or  peace,  its  power
of  making  either  is  merely  nominal  and  illusive,  if  the  power
be  exercised  habitually  at  the  bidding  of  the  other  government.
— 2.  The  political  powers  exercised  by  the  other  government
over  the  political  society  deemed  imperfectly  independent,  may
be  exercised  through  the  permission,  or  through  the  authority,
of  the  government  deemed  imperfectly  supreme. On  which
supposition,  the  government  deemed  imperfectly  supreme  is  of
itself  a  truly  sovereign  government :  those  powers  being  legal
rights  over  its  own  subjects,  which  it  grants  expressly  or  tacitly
to  another  sovereign  government (For,  as  I  shall  show  here-
after, a  sovereign  government,  with  the  permission  or  authority
of  another,  may  possess  legal  rights  against  the  subjects  of  the
latter.) For  example  :  The  great  Frederic  of  Prussia,  as  prince-
elector  of  Brandenburg,  was  deemed  half  or  imperfectly  sovereign
in  respect  of  his  feudal  connection  with  the  German  empire.
Potentially  and  in  practice,  he  was  thoroughly  independent  of
the  Imperial  government:  and,  supposing  it  exercised  political
powers  over  his  subjects  of  the  electorate,  it  virtually  exercised
them  through  his  authority,  and  not  through  his  obedience  to
its  conmiands. Being  in  a  habit  of  thrashing  its  armies,  he
was  not  in  a  habit  of  submission  to  his  seeming  feudal  superior.
— 3.  The  political  powers  of  the  government  deemed  imperfectly
supreme,  may  not  be  exercised  entirely  and  habitually  at  the
pleasure  and  bidding  of  the  other :  but  yet  its  independence  of
the  other  may  not  be  so  complete,  that  the  political  powers


2  54  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  exercised  by  the  other  over  the  political  society  deemed  im-
'  perfectly  independent,  are  merely  exercised  through  its  per-
mission or  authority.  For  example :  We  may  suppose  that  the
elector  of  Bavaria  was  independent  of  the  Imperial  government,
in  all  or  most  of  his  foreign,  and  in  most  of  his  domestic
relations :  but  that,  this  his  independence  notwithstanding,  he
could  not  have  abolished  completely,  without  incurring  consider-
able danger,  the  appellate  judicature  of  the  Imperial  tribunals
over  the  Bavarian  community.  But  on  the  supposition  which
I  have  now  stated  and  exemplified,  the  sovereignty  of  the
society  deemed  imperfectly  independent  resides  in  the  govern-
ment deemed  imperfectly  supreme  together  with  the  other
government:  and,  consequently,  the  government  deemed  im-
perfectly supreme  is  properly  a  constituent  member  of  a
government  supreme  and  independent.  The  supreme  govern-
ment of  the  society  deemed  imperfectly  independent,  is  one  of
the  infinite  forms  of  supreme  government  by  a  number,  which
result  from  the  infinite  modes  wherein  the  sovereign  number
may  share  the  sovereign  powers.  There  is  in  the  case,  nothing
extraordinary  but  this:  that  all  the  constituent  members  of
the  supreme  government  in  question  are  not  exclusively
members  of  the  political  society  which  it  governs ;  since  one  of
them  is  also  sovereign  in  another  political  society,  or  is  also  a
constituent  member  of  another  supreme  government.  In  con-
sequence of  this  anomaly,  the  interests  and  pretensions  of  the
constituent  members  more  or  less  antagonize.  But  in  almost
every  case  of  supreme  government  by  a  number,  the  interests
and  pretensions  of  the  members  more  or  less  antagonize,
although  th^  supreme  government  be  purely  domestic.  Whether
a  supreme  government  be  purely  domestic,  or  one  of  its  limbs  be
also  a  limb  of  another,  the  supreme  government  is  perpetuated
through  the  mutual  concessions  of  its  members,  notwithstanding
the  opposition  of  their  interests  and  pretensions,  and  the  bloody
or  bloodless  conflicts  which  the  opposition  may  occasionally
beget. — For  the  reasons  produced  and  suggested  in  the  course
of  the  foregoing  analysis,  I  believe  that  no  government  is
sovereign  and  subject  at  once:  that  no  government  can  be
styled  with  propriety  half  or  imperfectly  supremeS'^)

(4)  The  application  of  the  epithet  Aa//  an  external  government,  or  'a  member
sovereign  seems  to  be  capricious.  For  ex-  of  an  external  government.  But  those
ample  :  Over  most  of  tne  political  com-  political  communities,  or  their  domestic
munities  wherein  the  Roman  Catholic  is  and  temporal  governments,  are  not  de-
the  prevalent  and  established  religion,  nominated,  therefore,  by  writers  on  inter-
legislative  and  judicial  powers  are  exer-  national  law,  half  independent  or  half
ci^  by  the  Pope:  that  is  to  say,  by  supreme. It  seems  to  be  supposed  by


Jurisprudence  determined,  255

Before  I  dismiss  the  riddle  which  I  have  now  endeavoured  Lect-  VI
to  resolve,  I  must  state  or  suggest  the  following  difference. — In
numberless  cases,  political  powers  are  exercised  over  a  political
community,  by  the  government,  or  a  member  of  the  govenmient,
of  an  external  political  community.  But  the  government  of
the  former  community  is  scarcely  denominated  half  or  imper-
fectly sovereign,  unless  the  government  of  the  latter,  or  the
member  of  the  government  of  the  latter,  possess  those  political
powers  as  being  the  government  of  the  latter,  or  as  being  a
member  of  its  government.  For  example :  The  particular
German  governments  which  depended  on  the  empire  immedi-
ately, are  denominated  half  sovereign :  for  the  powers  exercised
by  the  Imperial  government  over  their  respective  communities,
were  exercised  by  that  government  as  being  that  very  govern-
ment, or  as  being  (at  least,  to  appearance)  the  general  govern-
ment of  Germany.  But  the  government  of  the  British  Islands
is  not  imperfectly  sovereign  in  regard  to  the  government  of
Hanover:  nor  is  the  government  of  Hanover  an  imperfectly
sovereign  government  in  regard  to  the  government  of  the  British
Islands.  For  though  the  king  of  the  British  Islands  is  also
king  of  Hanover,  he  is  not  king  in  either  coimtry  as  being  king
in  the  other.  The  powers  which  he  exercises  there,  have  no
dependence  whatever  on  his  share  in  the  sovereignty  here :  nor
have  the  powers  which  he  exercises  here,  any  dependence  on
his  sovereignty  (or  his  share  in  the  sovereignty)  there. — The
difference  which  I  have  now  suggested,  is  analogous  to  the
difference,  in  the  Boman  law,  between  rtal  and  personal
servitudes:  or  to  the  resembling  difference,  in  the  law  of
England,  between  easements  appurtenant  and  easements  in
gross.  A  real  right  of  servitude,  or  a  right  of  easement  ap-
purtenant, belongs  to  the  party  invested  with  the  right,  as  being
the  owner  or  occupier  of  specifically  determined  land. A  personal

such  writers, that, in every  political through its permission or authority,
oommonity  occupying  that  position,  those And,  conseouently,  it  is  not  necessary


powers  are  merely  exercised  by  the  au-  to  suppose  tnat  it  shares  the  sovereignty
thority  of  the  domestic  government,  or  with  tne  Pope,  or  to  mark  it  with  the
the  domestic  government  and  the  Pope  incongruous  epithet  of  half  or  imperfectly
are  jointly  sovereign.  On  the  first  of  supreme.  But  though  those  powers  be
which  suppositions,  the  former  is  of  exclusively  exercised  in  matters  strictly
itself  perfectly  sovereign:  and  on  the  ecclesiastical,  still  they  are  legislative
last  of  which  suppositions,  the  former  is  and  iudicial  pnowers.  And  how  is  it
a  constituent  member  of  a  government  possible  to  distinguish  precisely,  matters
supreme  and  independent  which  are  strictly  ecclesiastical,  from
According,  indeed,  to  some  of  such  matters  which  are  not?  the  powers  of
writers,  if  those  powers  be  exclusively  ecclesiastical  regiment  which  none  but
exercised  in  matters  strictly  ecclesiastical,  the  church  should  wield,  from  the  powers
the  sovereignty  of  the  domestic  govern-  of  ecclesiastical  regiment  (or  the  ju8  circa
ment  is  not  impaired  by  the  exercise,  sacra)  which  secular  and  profane  govern-
though  they  are  not  merely  exercised  ments  may  handle  without  sin  ?


2  s  6  The  Province  of

Leot.  VI right  of  servitude,  or  a  right  of  easement  in  gross,  does  not  belong
' ' ' to  the  party  as  being  such  owner  or  occupier,  but  (according  to
the  current  jargon)  is  annexed  to,  or  inheres  in,  his  person.

Before  I  proceed  to  composite  states,  and  systems  of  con-
federated states,  I  will  try  to  explain  a  difficulty  that  is  closely
connected  with  the  subjects  which  I  have  examined  in  the
present  section. — I  have  remarked  already,  and  shall  endeavour
to  demonstrate  hereafter,  that  all  the  individuals  or  aggregates
composing  a  sovereign  number  are  subject  to  the  supreme  body
of  which  they  are  component  parts.  Now  where  a  member  of
a  body  which  is  sovereign  in  one  commimity,  is  exclusively
sovereign  in  another,  how  does  the  sovereignty  of  that  member
in  the  latter  of  the  two  conmiunities,  consist  with  the  subjection
of  that  member  to  the  body  which  is  sovereign  in  the  former  ?
Supposing,  for  example,  that  our  own  king  was  monarch  and
autocrator  in  Hanover,  how  would  his  subjection  to  the  sovereign
body  of  king,  lords,  and  commons,  consist  with  his  sovereignty
in  his  Grerman  kingdom  ?  A  limb  or  member  of  a  sovereign
body  would  seem  to  be  shorn,  by  its  habitual  obedience  to  the
body,  of  the  habitual  independence  which  must  needs  belong
to  it  as  sovereign  in  a  foreign  community. — To  explain  the
difficulty,  we  must  assume  that  the  characters  of  sovereign,  and
member  of  the  sovereign  body,  are  practically  distinct :  that,  as
monarch  (for  instance)  of  the  foreign  community,  a  member  of
the  sovereign  body  neither  habitually  obeys  it,  nor  is  habitually
obeyed  by  it.  For  if,  as  monarch  of  the  foreign  community,  he
habitually  obeyed  the  body,  the  body  would  be  sovereign  in
that  community,  and  he  would  be  merely  its  minister :  and,  if,
as  monarch  of  the  foreign  community,  he  were  habitually  obeyed
by  the  body,  he,  and  not  the  body,  would  be  sovereign  in  the
other  society.  Insomuch  that  if  the  characters  were  practically
blended,  or,  remaining  practically  distinct,  thoroughly  conflicted,
one  of  the  following  results  would  probably  ensue.  The  member
would  become  subject,  or  else  exclusively  sovereign,  in  both
communities :  or  to  preserve  his  sovereignty  in  the  one,  or  his
part  sovereignty  in  the  other,  he  would  renounce  his  connection
with  the  latter,  or  with  the  former  society.

Wherever  a  member  of  a  body  sovereign  in  one  community,
is  also  a  member  of  a  body  sovereign  in  another,  there  is  the
same  or  a  similar  difficulty.  A  state  of  subjection  to  the  former,
and  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  latter,  may  become  incompatible  :
just  as  a  state  of  subjection  may  become  incompatible  with  the
independence  which  is  one  of  the  essentials  of  sovereignty.


Jurisprudence  determined,  257

It  not  unfrequently  happens,  that  two  or  more  independent  Lect.  VI
political  societies  become  subject  to  a  common  sovereign :  but  '
that  after  their  union,  through  that  common  subjection,  they
still  are  governed  distinctly,  and  distinguished  by  their  ancient
titles.  In  this  case,  there  is  not  the  difficulty  suggested  above.
The  monarch  or  sovereign  body  ruling  the  two  societies,  is  one
and  the  same  sovereign :  and,  through  their  subjection  to  that
common  sovereign,  they  are  one  society  political  and  in-
dependent.

It frequently happens, that one society political and  The  nature
independent  arises  from  a  federal  union  of several  political  ^^^'
societies:  or,  rather,  that  one  government  political  and  sove-  ora*M-'
reign  arises  from  a  federal  union  of  several  political  governments.  ^r^Ug^
By  some  of  the  writers  on  positive  international  law,  such  an  ernment .
independent  political  society,  or  the  sovereign  government  of  ^tureof
such  a  society,  is  styled  a  composite  state. But  the  sovereign  ^^stemqf
government  of  such  a  society,  might  be  styled  more  aptly,  as  JStted
well  as  more  popularly,  a  supreme  federal  government,  '^^^^^  ^^  ®

It  also  frequently  happens,  that  several  political  societies  confide-
which  are  severally  independent,  or  several  political  governments  *^^*^  ^-^
which  are  severally  sovereign,  are  compacted  by  a  permanent  govern-
alliance. By  some  of  the  writers  on  positive  international  law,  ^'^^^'
the  several  societies  or  governments,  considered  as  thus  com-
pacted, are styled a  system  of  confederated states. But  the
several  governments,  considered  as  thus  compacted,  might  be
styled  more  aptly,  as  well  as  more  popularly,  a  permanent  con-
federacy of  supreme  governments.

I  advert  to  the  nature  of  a  composite  state,  and  to  that  of  al
system  of  confederated  states,  for  the  following  purposes. — It
results  from  positions  which  I  shall  try  to  establish  hereafter,
that  the  power  of  a  sovereign  is  incai)able  of  legal  limitation. »
It  also  results  from  positions  which  I  have  tried  to  establish .
already,  that  in  every  society  political  and  independent,  the ^
sovereign  is  one  individual,  or  one  body  of  individuals:  that
imless  the  sovereign  be  one  individual,  or  on>e  body  of  indi-
viduals, the  given  independent  society  is  either  in  a  state  of 1
nature,  or is split into  two or more independent political
societies. But  in  a  political  society  styled  a  composite  state, '
the  sovereignty  is  so  shared  by  various  individuals  or  bodies,
that  the  one  sovereign  body  whereof  they  are  the  constituent
members, is not conspicuous and easily perceived. In a
political  society  styled  a  composite  state,  there  is  not  obviously
any  party  truly  sovereign  and  independent :  there  is  not  ob-
VOL.  I.  s


2  58  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI  viously  any  party  armed  with  political  powers  incapable  of  legal
limitation.  Accordingly,  I  advert  to  the  nature  of  a  supreme
federal  government,  to  show  that  the  society  which  it  rules  is
ruled  by  one  sovereign,  or  is  ruled  by  a  party  truly  sovereign
and  independent.  And  adverting  to  the  nature  of  a  composite
state,  I  also  advert  to  the  nature  of  a  system  of  confederated
states.  For  the  fallacious  resemblance  of  those  widely  different
objects,  tends  to  produce  a  confusion  which  I  think  it  expedient
to  obviate:  and,  through  a  comparison  or  contrast  of  those
widely  diflFerent  objects,  I  can  indicate  the  nature  of  the  former,
more  concisely  and  clearly.

1.  In  the  case  of  a  composite  state,  or  a  supreme  federal
■ government,  the  several  united  governments  of  the  several  united
societies,  together  with  a  government  common  to  those  several
, societies,  are  jointly  sovereign  in  each  of  those  several  societies,
I and  also  in  the  larger  society  arising  from  the  federal  union.
,' Or,  since  the  political  powers  of  the  common  or  general  govem-
• ment  were  relinquished  and  conferred  upon  it  by  those  several
united  governments,  the  nature  of  a  composite  state  may  be
! described  more  accurately  thus. As  compacted  by  the  common
•  \ government  which  they  have  concurred  in  creating,  and  to  which
they  have  severally  delegated  portions  of  their  several  sovereign-
ties, the  several  governments  of  the  several  united  societies  are
jointly  sovereign  in  each  and  all.

It  will  appear  on  a  moment's  reflection,  that  the  common  or
general  government  is  not  sovereign  or  supreme.  It  will  also
appear  on  a  moment's  reflection,  that  none  of  the  several  govern-
ments is  sovereign  or  supreme,  even  in  the  several  society  of
which  it  is  the  immediate  chief.
/  If  the  common  or  general  government  were  sovereign  or

I  supreme,  the  several  united  societies,  though  constituting  one
society,  would  not  constitute  a  composite  state :  or,  though  they
would  be  governed  by  a  common  and  supreme  government,  their
common  and  supreme  government  would  not  be  federal  For
in  almost  every  case  of  independent  political  society,  several
political  societies,  governed  by  several  governments,  are  com-
prised by  the  one  society  which  is  political  and  independent :
insomuch  that  a  government  supreme  and  federal,  and  a  govern-
ment supreme  but  not  federal,  are  merely  distinguished  by  the
following  diJBference.  Where  the  supreme  government  is  not
federal,  each  of  the  several  governments,  considered  in  that
character,  is  purely  subordinate :  or  none  of  the  several  govern-
ments, considered  in  that  character,  partakes  of  the  sovereignty.


Jurisprudence  determined.  259

But  where  the  supreme  government  is  properly  federal,  each  of  1  f^gor.  VI
the  several  governments,  whUh  were  immediate  parties  to  the  \
federal  compact,  is,  in  that  character,  a  limb  of  the  sovereign
body.  Consequently,  although  they  are  subject  to  the  sovereign
body  of  which  they  are  constituent  members,  those  several
governments,  even  considered  as  such,  are  not  purely  in  a  state
of  subjection. — But  since  those  several  governments,  even  con-
sidered as  such,  are  not  purely  in  a  state  of  subjection,  the
common  or  general  government  which  they  have  concurred  in
creating  is  not  sovereign  or  supreme.

Nor  is  any  of  those  several  governments  sovereign  or  I
supreme,  even  in  the  several  society  of  which  it  is  the  im-  '
mediate  chief.  If  those  several  governments  were  severally
sovereign,  they  would  not  be  members  of  a  composite  state:
though,  if  they  were  severally  sovereign,  and  yet  were  per-
manently compacted,  they  would  form  (as  I  shall  show  im-
mediately) a  system  of  confederated  states.

To  illustrate  the  nature  of  a  composite  state,  I  will  add  the
following  remark  to  the  foregoing  general  description. — Neither
the  immediate  tribunals  of  the  conmion  or  general  government,
nor  the  immediate  tribunals  of  the  several  united  governments,
are  bound,  or  empowered,  to  administer  or  execute  every  com-
mand that  it  may  issue.  The  political  powers  of  the  common  ^
or  general  government,  are  merely  those  portions  of  their  several
sovereignties,  which  the  several  united  governments,  as  parties
to  the  federal  compact,  have  relinquished  and  conferred  upon  it
Consequently,  its  competence  to  make  laws  and  to  issue  other
commands,  may  and  ought  to  be  examined  by  its  own  immediate
tribunals,  and  also  by  the  immediate  tribunals  of  the  several
united  governments.  And  if,  in  making  a  law  or  issuing  a
particular  command,  it  exceed  the  limited  powers  which  it  de-
rives from  the  federal  compact,  all  those  various  tribunals  are
empowered  and  bound  to  disobey. — And  since  each  of  the
united  governments,  as  a  party  to  the  federal  compact,  has
relinquished  a  portion  of  its  sovereignty,  neither  the  immediate
tribunals  of  the  common  or  general  government,  nor  the  im-
mediate tribunals  of  the  other  united  governments,  nor  even  the
tribunals  which  itself  immediately  appoints,  are  bound,  or  em-
powered, to  administer  or  execute  every  command  that  it  may
issue.  Since  each  of  the  united  governments,  as  a  party  to  the
federal  compact,  has  relinquished  a  portion  of  its  sovereignty,  its
competence  to  make  laws  and  to  issue  other  commands,  may
and  ought  to  be  examined  by  all  those  various  tribunals. And


26o  The  Province  of

Leot.  VI if  it  enact  a  law  or  issue  a  particular  command,  as  exercising

' ' the  sovereign  powers  which  it  has  relinquished  by  the  compact,

all  those  various  tribunals  are  empowered  and  bound  to  disobey.

/ If,  then,  the  general  government  were  of  itself  sovereign,  or

'  if  the  united  governments  were  severally  sovereign,  the  united

'  societies  would  not  constitute  one  composite  state. The  united

, societies  would  constitute  one  independent  society,  with  a  govem-

/ ment  supreme  but  not  federal ;  or  a  knot  of  societies  severally

' independent, with governments severally supreme. Conse-

/ quently,  the  several  united  governments  as  forming  one  aggregate

\ body,  or  they  and  the  general  government  as  forming  a  similar

\ body,  are  jointly  sovereign  in  each  of  the  united  societies,  and

i also  in  the  larger  society  arising  from  the  union  of  all.

Now  since  the  political  powers  of  the  common  or  general
government  are  merely  delegated  to  it  by  the  several  united
governments,  it  is  not  a  constituent  member  of  the  sovereign
body,  but  is  merely  its  subject  minister.  Consequently,  the
sovereignty  of  each  of  the  united  societies,  and  also  of  the  larger
society  arising  from  the  union  of  all,  resides  in  the  united
governments  as  forming  one  aggregate  body :  that  is  to  say,  as
signifying  their  joint  pleasure,  or  the  joint  pleasure  of  a  majority
of  their  number,  agreeably  to  the  modes  or  forms  determined  by
their  federal  compact

By  that  aggregate  body,  the  powers  of  the  general  govern-
ment were  conferred  and  determined:  and  by  that  aggregate
body,  its  powers  may  be  revoked,  abridged,  or  enlarged. — To
that  aggregate  body,  the  several  united  governments,  though  not
merely  subordinate,  are  tridy  in  a  state  of  subjection.  Other-
wise, those  imited  governments  would  be  severally  ^vereign  or
supreme,  and  the  united  societies  would  merely  constitute  a
system  of  confederated  states.  Besides,  since  the  powers  of  the
general  government  were  determined  by  that  aggregate  body,
and  since  that  aggregate  body  is  competent  to  enlarge  those
powers,  it  necessarily  determined  the  powers,  and  is  competent
to  abridge  the  powers,  of  its  own  constituent  members.  For
every  political  power  conferred  on  the  general  government,  is
subtracted  from  the  several  sovereignties  of  the  several  united
governments. — From  the  sovereignty  of  that  aggregate  body,  we
may  deduce,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  the  fact  which  I  have
mentioned  above :  namely,  that  the  competence  of  the  general
government,  and  of  any  of  the  united  governments,  may  and
ought  to  be  examined  by  the  immediate  tribunals  of  the  former,
and  also  by  the  immediate  tribunals  of  any  of  the  latter. For


Jurisprudence  determined.  261

since  the  general  government,  and  also  the  united  governments,  Lect.  VI
are  subject  to  that  aggregate  body,  the  respective  courts  of  justice  '
which  they  respectively  appoint,  ultimately  derive  their  powers
from  that  sovereign  and  ultimate  legislature.  Consequently,  those
courts  are  ministers  and  trustees  of  that  sovereign  and  ultimate
legislature,  as  well  as  of  the  subject  legislatures  by  which  they
are  immediately  appointed.  And,  consequently,  those  courts  are
empowered,  and  are  even  bound  to  disobey,  wherever  those
subject  legislatures  exceed  the  limited  powers  which  that
sovereign  and  ultimate  legislature  has  granted  or  left  them.

The  supreme  government  of  the  United  States  of  America,  /
agrees  (I  believe)  with  the  foregoing  general  description  of  a  I
supreme federal government. I believe that the common  /
government,  or  the  government  consisting  of  the  congress  and  /
the  president  of  the  united  states,  is  merely  a  subject  minister  1
of  the  united  states'  governments. I  believe  that  none  of  the  '
latter  is  properly  sovereign  or  supreme,  even  in  the  state  or
political  society  of  which  it  is  the  immediate  chief. And,  lastly,
I  believe  that  the  sovereignty  of  each  of  the  states,  and  also  of
the  larger  state  arising  from  the  federal  union,  resides  in  the
states'  governments  as  forming  one  aggregate  body :  meaning  by  a  .
state's  government,  not  its  ordinary  legislature,  but  the  body  of  ■
its  citizens  which  appoints  its  ordinary  legislature,  and  which,  '
the  union  apart,  is  properly  sovereign  therein. If  the  several .
immediate  chiefs  of  the  several  united  states,  were  respectively '
single  individuals,  or  were  respectively  narrow  oligarchies,  the !
sovereignty  of  each  of  the  states,  and  also  of  the  larger  state
arising  from  the  federal  union,  would  reside  in  those  several
individuals, or  would  reside  in those  several  oligarchies,  as
forming  a  collective  wholeS^^

2.  A  composite  state,  and  a  system  of  confederaied  states,  are  1
broadly  distinguished  by  the  following  essential  difference.  In  I
the  case  of  a  composite  state,  the  several  united  societies  are  one  \
independent  society,  or  are  severally  subject  to  one  sovereign

(')  The Constitution of  the United  this  constitution :  or,  on  the  application

States, or the constitution of their  of  the  legislatures  of  two-thims  of  the

Seneral goyemment, was framed by  several  states,  shall  call  a  conyention  for

eputies  vrora  the  several  states  in  1787.  proposing  amendments  :  which  amend*

It  may  (I  think)  be  inferred  from  the  ments,  in  either  case,  shall  be  valid  to

fifth  article,  that  the  sovereignty  of  each  all  intents  and  purposes,  as  part  of  this

of  the  states,  and  also  of  the  larger  state  constitution,  when  ratified  by  the  legia-

arising  from  the  federal  union,  resides  in  latures  of  three -fourths  of  the  aeveral

the  states'  governments  as  forming  one  states,  or  by  convention  in  three-fourths

aggregate  body. It  is  provided  by  that  thereof^ See  also  the  tenth  section  of

article, that '  the congress, whenever  the  first  article :  in  which  section,  some

two-thirds  of  both  houses  shall  deem  it  of  the  disabilities  of  the  several  states'

necessary  shall  propose  amendments  to  governments  are  determined  expressly.


262  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI  body :  which,  through  its  minister  the  general  government,  and
^'"^^^  '  through  its  members  and  ministers  the  several  united  govern-
ments, is  habitually  and  generally  obeyed  in  each  of  the  united
societies,  and  also  in  the  larger  society  arising  from  the  union  of
all.  In  the  case  of  a  zy^em  of  confederated  states,  the  several
compacted  societies  are  not  one  society,  and  are  not  subject  to  a
common  sovereign :  or  (changing  the  phrase)  each  of  the  several
societies  is  an  independent  political  society,  and  each  of  their
several  governments  is  properly  sovereign  or  supreme.  Though
the  aggregate  of  the  several  governments  was  the  framer  of  the
federal  compact,  and  may  subsequently  pass  resolutions  concern-
ing the  entire  confederacy,  neither  the  terms  of  that  compact,
nor  such  subsequent  resolutions,  are  enforced  in  any  of  the
societies  by  the  authority  of  that  aggregate  body.  To  each  of
the  confederated  governments,  those  terms  and  resolutions  are
merely  articles  of  agreement  which  it  spontaneously  adopts :
and  they  owe  their  legal  eflFect,  in  its  own  political  society,  to
laws  and  other  commands  which  it  makes  or  fashions  upon  them,
and  which,  of  its  own  authority,  it  addresses  to  its  own  subjects.
In  short,  a  system  of  confederated  states  is  not  essentially
different  from  a  number  of  independent  governments  connected
by  an  ordinary  alliance.  And  where  independent  governments
are  connected  by  an  ordinary  alliance,  none  of  the  allied  govern-
ments is  subject  to  the  allied  governments  considered  as  an
aggregate  body :  though  each  of  the  allied  governments  adopts
the  terms  of  the  alliance,  and  commonly  enforces  those  terms,  by
laws  and  commands  of  its  own,  in  its  own  independent  commun-
ity. Indeed,  a  system  of  confederated  states,  and  a  number
of  independent  governments  connected  by  an  ordinary  alliance,
cannot  be  distinguished  precisely  through  general  or  abstract
expressions.  So  long  as  we  abide  in  general  expressions,  we
can  only  affirm  generally  and  vaguely,  that  the  compact  of  the
former  is  intended  to  be  permanent,  whilst  the  alliance  of  the
latter  is  commonly  intended  to  be  temporary :  and  that  the  ends
or  purposes  which  are  embraced  by  the  compact,  are  commonly
more  numerous,  and  are  conamonly  more  complicated,  than  those
which  the  alliance  contemplates.

I  believe  that  the  German  Confederation,  which  has  suc-
ceeded to  the  ancient  Empire,  is  merely  a  system  of  confederated
states.  I  believe  that  the  present  Diet  is  merely  an  assembly
of  ambassadors  from  several  confederated  but  severally  independ-
ent governments :  that  the  resolutions  of  the  Diet  are  merely
articles  of  agreement  which  each  of  the  confederated  governments


Jurisprudence  determined.  263

spontaneously  adopts :  and  that  they  owe  their  legal  eflTect,  in  Leot.  vi
each  of  the  compacted  communities,  to  laws  and  commands
which  are  fashioned  upon  them  by  its  own  immediate  chief.
I  also  believe  that  the  Swiss  Confederation  was  and  is  of  the
same  nature.  If,  in  the  case  of  the  German,  or  of  the  Swiss
Confederation,  the  body  of  confederated  governments  enforces
its  own  resolutions,  those  confederated  governments  are  one
composite  state,  rather  than  a  system  of  confederated  states.
The  body  of  confederated  governments  is  properly  sovereign:
and  to  that  aggregate  and  sovereign  body,  each  of  its  constituent
members  is  properly  in  a  state  of  subjection.

From  the  various  shapes  which  sovereignty  may  assume  or  The  limits
from  the  various  possible  forms  of  supreme  government,  I  proceed  ^i^^^
to  the  limits,  real  and  imaginary,  of  sovereign  or  supreme  power,  power.

Subject  to  the  slight  correctives  which  I  shall  state  at  the  The  essen-
close  of  my  discourse,  the  essential  difference  of  a  positive  law  ^ce  ofa"^
(or  the  difference  that  severs  it  from  a  law  which  is  not  a  posi-  positive
tive  law)  may  be  put  in  the  following  manner. — ^Every  po8itive\*^'
law,  or  every  law  simply  and  strictly  so  called,  is  set,  directly
or  circuitously,  by  a  sovereign  person  or  body,  to  a  member  or
members  of  the  independent  political  society  wherein  that  person  .
or  body  is  sovereign  or  supreme. Or  (changing  the  expression)  it  I
is  set,  directly  or  circuitously,  by  a  monarch  or  sovereign  number,  /
to  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  its  author.

Now  it  follows  from  the  essential  difference  of  a  positive  law,  It  follows
and  from  the  nature  of  sovereignty  and  independent  political  ^^^al
society,  that  the  power  of  a  monarch  properly  so  called,  or  the  difference
power  of  a  sovereign  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  tiveS^!
capacity,  is  incapable  of  legal  limitation. A  monarch  or  sovereign  and  from
number  bound  by  a  legal  duty,  were  subject  to  a  higher  or  of  sove-
superior  sovereign: that  is  to  say,  a  monarch  or  sovereign  ^W^y\
number  bound  by  a  legal  duty,  were  sovereign  and  not  sovereign,  pendent
Supreme_power  limited  by  positive  law,  is  a  flat  contradiction  poljti^

f  sociecy,

m  terms.  that  the

Nor  would  a  political  society  escape  from  legal  despotism,  ^^^^^^^  *
although  the  power  of  the  sovereign  were  boimded  by  legal  properlyso
restraints.  The  power  of  the  superior  sovereign  immediately  the  ^^r
imposing  the  restraints,  or  the  power  of  some  other  sovereign  of  a  sove-
superior  to  that  superior,  would  still  be  absolutely  free  from  the  berm^ite^
fetters  of  positive  law.  For  unless  the  imagined  restraints  were  collegiate
ultimately  imposed  by  a  sovereign  not  in  a  state  of  subjection  i^ign  ^!'
to  a  higher  or  superior  sovereign,  a  series  of  sovereigns  ascend-  pacity,  is


powers.


264  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  ling  to  infinity  would  govern  the  imagined  community. Which
^^^^^  |is  impossible  and  absurd.

ofiegai^ iMonarchs  and  sovereign  bodies  have  attempted  to  oblige

A^mpS^  themselves,  or  to  oblige  the  successors  to  their  sovereign  powers,
of  sove-  \  But  in  spite  of  the  laws  which  sovereigns  have  imposed  on  them-
ob^  ^  \  selves,  or  which  they  have  imposed  on  the  successors  to  their
them-  I  sovereign  powers,  the  position  that  *  sovereign  power  is  incapable
to  obU^'  \  of  legal  limitation '  will  hold  universally  or  without  exception,
the  succes--^-^  The  immediate  author  of  a  law  of  the  kind,  or  any  of  the
their  Sovereign  successors  to  that  immediate  author,  may  abrogate  the

^ml^  law  at  pleasure.  And  though  the  law  be  not  abrogated,  the
sovereign  for  the  time  being  is  not  constrained  to  observe  it  by  a
legal  or  political  sanction.  For  if  the  sovereign  for  the  time  being
were  legally  bound  to  observe  it,  that  present  sovereign  would
be  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  a  higher  or  superior  sovereign.

"^s  it  regaxST'the  successors  to  the  sovereign  or  supreme
powers,  a  law  of  the  kind  amounts,  at  the  most,  to  a  rule  of
positive  morality.  As  it  regards  its  immediate  author,  it  is
merely  a  law  by  a  metaphor.  For  if  we  would  speak  with  pro-
priety, we  ccmnot  speak  of  a  law  set  by  a  man  to  himself :  though
a  man  may  adopt  a  principle  as  a  guide  to  his  own  conduct,  and
may  observe  it  as  he  would  observe  it  if  he  were  bound  to
observe  it  by  a  sanction.

The  laws  which  sovereigns  afiPect  to  impose  upon  themselves,
or  the  laws  which  sovereigns  affect  to  impose  upon  their
followers,  are  merely  principles  or  maxims  which  they  adopt  as
guides,  or  which  they  commend  as  guides  to  their  successors  in
sovereign  power.  A  departure  by  a  sovereign  or  state  from  a
law  of  the  kind  in  question,  is  not  illegal.  If  a  law  which  it
sets  to  its  subjects  conflict  with  a  law  of  the  kind,  the  former  is
legally  valid,  or  legally  binding.

For  example :  The  sovereign  Eoman  people  solemnly  voted
or  resolved,  that  they  would  never  pass,  or  even  take  into  con-
sideration, what  I  will  venture  to  denominate  a  bill  of  pains  and
penalties.  For  though,  at  the  period  in  question,  the  Roman
people  were  barbarians,  they  keenly  felt  a  truth  which  is  often
forgotten  by  legislators  in  nations  boasting  of  refinement:
namely,  that  punishment  ought  to  be  inflicted  agreeably  to
prospective  rules,  and  not  in  pursuance  of  particular  and  ex  post
ado  commands.  This  solemn  resolution  or  vote  was  passed
with  the  forms  of  legislation,  and  was  inserted  in  the  twelve
tables  in  the  following  imperative  terms :  privilegia  ne  irroganto.
But  although  the  resolution  or  vote  was  passed  with  the  forms


yurisprudence  determined.  * 265

of  legislation,  although  it  was  clothed  with  the  expressions  appro-  Lect.  VI
priate  to  a  law,  and  although  it  was  inserted  as  a  law  in  a  code
or  body  of  statutes,  it  scarcely  was  a  law  in  the  proper  accepta-
tion of  the  term,  and  certainly  was  not  a  law  simply  and  strictly
so  called.  By  that  resolution  or  vote,  the  sovereign  people
adopted,  and  commended  to  their  successors  in  the  sovereignty,
an  ethical  principle  or  maxim.  The  present  and  future  sovereign
which  the  resolution  affected  to  oblige,  was  not  bound  or  estopped
by  it  Privileges  enacted  in  spite  of  it  by  the  sovereign  Eoman
people,  were  not  illegal  The  Eoman  tribunals  might  not  have
treated  them  as  legally  invalid  acts,  although  they  conflicted  with
the  maxim,  wearing  the  guise  of  a  law,  privUegia  ne  irrogarUo.

Again :  By  the  authors  of  the  union  between  England  and
Scotland,  an  attempt  was  made  to  oblige  the  legislature,  which,
in  consequence  of  that  union,  is  sovereign  in  both  countries.  It
is  declared  in  the  Articles  and  Acts,  that  the  preservation  of  the
Church  of  England,  and  of  the  Kirk  of  Scotland,  is  a  fundamental
condition  of  the  union :  or,  in  other  words,  that  the  Parliament
of  Great  Britain  shall  not  abolish  those  churches,  or  make  an
essential  change  in  their  structures  or  constitutions.  Now,  so
long  as  the  bulk  of  either  nation  shall  regard  its  established
church  with  love  and  respect,  the  abolition  of  the  church  by  the
British  Parliament  would  be  an  immoral  act ;  for  it  would  violate
positive  morality  which  obtains  with  the  bulk  of  the  nation,  or
would  shock  opinions  and  sentiments  which  the  bulk  of  the
nation  holds.  Assuming  that  the  church  establishment  is  com-
mended by  the  revealed  law,  the  abolition  would  be  irreligums :
or,  assuming  that  the  continuance  of  the  establishment  were
commended  by  general  utility,  the  abolition,  as  generally
pernicious,  would  also  amount  to  a  sin.  But  no  man,  talking
with  a  meaning,  would  call  a  parliamentary  abolition  of  either
or  both  of  the  churches  an  illegal  act  For  if  the  parliament  for
the  time  being  be  sovereign  in  England  and  Scotland,  it  cannot
be  bound  legally  by  that  condition  of  the  union  which  affects  to
confer  immortality  upon  those  ecclesiastical  institutions.  That
condition  of  the  union  is  not  a  positive  law,  but  is  counsel  or  advice
offered  by  the  authors  of  the  union  to  future  supreme  legislatures.

By  the  two  examples  which  I  have  now  adduced,  I  am  led  The  mean,
to  consider  the  meanings  of  the  epithet  unconstitutional,  as  it  is  ^"^v^l^^®
contradistinguished  in  the  epithet  illegal,  and  as  it  is  applied  to  uneonsu-
conduct  of  a  monarch,  or  to  conduct  of  a  sovereign  number  in  ^'^^^^A

11 •  -1  .  .  m-i  .  -I  • , asitiscon-

its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity. The  epithet  unconstitutional,  tradis-

as  thus  opposed  and  applied,  is  sometimes  used  with  a  meaning  *i°«"^8^«^


266

Leot.  VI

to  the
epithet
ilUgal,  and
as  it  is
applied  to
conduct  of
a  monarch,
or  to  con-
duct of  a
sovereign
number  in
its  colle-
giate and
sovereign
capacity.


TAe  Province  of

which  is  more  general  and  vague,  and  is  sometimes  used  with  a
meaning  which  is  more  special  and  definite.  I  will  begin  with
the  former.

1.  In  every,  or  almost  every,  independent  political  society,
there  are  principles  or  mamms  which  the  sovereign  habitually
observes,  and  which  the  bulk  of  the  society,  or  the  bulk  of  its
influential  members,  regard  with  feelings  of  approbation.  Not
unfrequently,  such  maxims  are  expressly  adopted,  as  well  as
habitually  observed,  by  the  sovereign  or  state.  More  commonly,
they  are  not  expressly  adopted  by  the  sovereign  or  state,  but
are  simply  imposed  upon  it  by  opinions  prevalent  in  the  com-
mimity.  Whether  they  are  expressly  adopted  by  the  sovereign
or  state,  or  are  simply  imposed  upon  it  by  opinions  prevalent  in
the  community,  it  is  bound  or  constrained  to  observe  them  by
merely  moral  sanctions.  Or  (changing  the  phrase)  in  case  it
ventured  to  deviate  from  a  maxim  of  the  kind  in  question,  it
would  not  and  could  not  incur  a  l^al  pain  or  penalty,  but  it
probably  would  incur  censure,  and  might  chance  to  meet  with
resistance,  from  the  generality  or  bulk  of  the  governed.

Now,  if  a  law  or  other  act  of  a  monarch  or  sovereign
number  conflict  with  a  maxim  of  the  kind  to  which  I  have
adverted  above,  the  law  or  other  act  may  be  called  wMfyn;siiJtu-
tional  (in  that  more  general  meaning  which  is  sometimes  given  to
the  epithet).  For  example:  The  ex  post  facto  statutes  which  are
styled  acts  of  attainder,  may  be  called  unconstittUional,  though  they
cannot  be  called  illegal.  For  they  conflict  with  a  principle  of
legislation  which  parliament  has  habitually  observed,  and  which  is
regarded  with  approbation  by  the  bulk  of  the  British  community.

In  short,  when  we  style  an  act  of  a  sovereign  an  unconsti-
tiUional  act  (with  that  more  general  import  which  is  sometimes
given  to  the  epithet),  we  mean,  I  believe,  this :  That  the  act
is  inconsistent  with  some  given  principle  or  maxim :  that  the
given  supreme  government  has  expressly  adopted  the  principle,
or,  at  least,  has  habitually  observed  it:  that  the  bulk  of  the
given  society,  or  the  bulk  of  its  influential  members,  regard  the
principle  with  approbation :  and  that,  since  the  supreme  govern-
ment has  habitually  observed  the  principle,  and  since  the  bulk
of  the  society  regard  it  with  approbation,  the  act  in  question
must  thwart  the  expectations  of  the  latter,  and  must  shock
their  opinions  and  sentiments.  Unless  we  mean  this,  we  merely
mean  that  we  deem  the  act  in  question  generally  pernicious :
or  that,  without  a  definite  reason  for  the  disapprobation  which
we  feel,  we  regard  the  act  with  dislike.


yurisprudence  determined.  267

2.  The  epithet  uncanstitiUianal  as  applied  to  conduct  of  a Lect.  VI
sovereign,  and  as  used  with  the  meaning  which  is  more  special ' ' '
and  definite,  imports  that  the  conduct  in  question  conflicts  with
constitutional  law.

And  here  I  would  briefly  remark,  that  I  mean  by  the  ex-
pression constitutional  law,  the  positive  morality,  or  the  com-
pound of  positive  morality  and  positive  law,  which  fixes  the
constitution  or  structure  of  the  given  supreme  government.  I
mean  the  positive  morality,  or  the  compound  of  positive  morality
and  positive  law,  which  determines  the  character  of  the  person,
or  the  respective  characters  of  the  persons,  in  whom,  for  the
time  being,  the  sovereignty  shall  reside:  and,  supposing  the
government  in  question  an  aristocracy  or  government  of  a
number,  which  determines  moreover  the  mode  wherein  the
sovereign  powers  shall  be  shared  by  the  constituent  members  of
the  sovereign  nimiber  or  body.

Now,  against  a  monarch  properly  so  called,  or  against  a.
sovereign  body  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  con-  \
stitutional  law  is  positive  morality  merely,  or  is  enforced  merely
by  moral  sanctions :  though,  as  I  shall  show  hereafter,  it  may
amount  to  positive  law,  or  may  be  enforced  by  legal  sanctions,  '
against  the  members  of  the  body  considered  severally.  The  »
sovereign  for  the  time  being,  or  the  predecessors  of  the
sovereign,  may  have  expressly  adopted,  and  expressly  promised
to  observe  it.  But  whether  constitutional  law  has  thus  been
expressly  adopted,  or  simply  consists  of  principles  current  in
the  political  community,  it  is  merely  guarded,  against  the
sovereign,  by  sentiments  or  feelings  of  the  governed.  Con-
sequently, although  an  act  of  the  sovereign  which  violates
constitutional  law,  may  be  styled  with  propriety  unconstitutional,
it  is  not  an  infringement  of  law  simply  and  strictly  so  called,
and  cannot  be  styled  with  propriety  illegal.

For  example:  From  the  ministry  of  Cardinal  Eichelieu
down  to  the  great  revolution,  the  king  for  the  time  being  was
virtually  sovereign  in  France.  But,  in  the  same  country,  and
during  the  same  period,  a  traditional  maxim  cherished  by  the
courts  of  justice,  and  rooted  in  the  afiections  of  the  bulk  of  the
people,  determined  the  succession  to  the  throne :  It  determined
that  the  throne,  on  the  demise  of  an  actual  occupant,  should
invariably  be  taken  by  the  person  who  then  might  happen  to
be  heir  to  it  agreeably  to  the  canon  of  inheritance  which  was
named  the  Salic  law.  Now,  in  case  an  actual  king,  by  a  royal
ordinance  or  law,  had  attempted  to  divert  the  throne  to  his


268


LEcrr.  VI


The  Province  of

only  daughter  and  child,  that  royal  ordinance  or  law  might
have  been  styled  with  perfect  propriety  an  unconstitutional  act.
It  would  have  conflicted  with  the  traditional  maxim  which
fixed  the  constitution  of  the  monarchy,  and  which  was  guarded
from  infringement  by  sentiments  prevalent  in  the  nation.  But
illegal  it  could  not  have  been  called :  for,  inasmuch  as  the  actual
king  was  virtually  sovereign,  he  was  inevitably  independent  of
legal  obligation.  Nay,  if  the  governed  had  resisted  the  uncon-
stitutional ordinance,  their  resistance  would  have  been  illegal
or  a  breach  of  positive  law,  though  consonant  to  the  positive
morality  which  is  styled  constitutional  law,  and  perhaps  to  that
principle  of  utility  which  is  the  test  of  positive  rules.

Again:  An  act  of  the  British  parliament  vesting  the  so-
vereignty in  the  king,  or  vesting  the  sovereignty  in  the  king
and  the  upper  or  lower  house,  would  essentially  alter  the
structure  of  our  present  supreme  government,  and  might  there-
fore be  styled  with  propriety  an  unconstitviionai  law.  In  case
the  imagined  statute  were  also  generally  pernicious,  and  in  case
it  offended  moreover  the  generality  or  bulk  of  the  nation,  it
might  be  styled  irreligious  and  immoral  as  well  as  unconstitu-
tionaL  But  to  call  it  illegal  were  absurd  :  for  if  the  parliament
for  the  time  being  be  sovereign  in  the  united  kingdom,  it  is  the
author,  directly  or  circuitously,  of  all  our  positive  law,  and
exclusively  sets  us  the  measure  of  legal  justice  and  injustice.^*^


The  mean-
ing of
Hobbes'a
proposi-
tion that
*  no  law
can  be
unjust.'

Just  or  un-
just, justice
or  injus-
tice, is  a
term  of
relative
and  vary-
ing im-
.  port.


(•)  It  is  affinned  by  Hobbes,  in  his
masterly  treatises  on  government,  that
'no  law  can  be  unjust:'  which  -pto-
jx)sition  has  been  deemed  by  many,  an
immoral  or  pernicious  paradox.  If  we
look  at  the  scope  of  the  treatises  in
which  it  occurs,  or  even  at  the  passages
by  which  it  is  immediately  followed,  we
shall  find  that  the  proposition  is  neither
pernicious  nor  paradoxical,  but  is  merely
a  truism  put  in  unguarded  terms.  His
meaning  is  obviously  this  :  that  *  no
jyosUivel&w  is  legally  unjust'  And  the
decried  proposition,  as  thus  understood,
is  indisputably  true.  For  positive  law
is  the  measure  or  test  of  legal  justice  and
injustice  :  and,  consequently,  if  positive
law  might  be  legally  unjust,  positive
law  might  be  unjust  as  measured  or
tried  by  itself.  In  the  passages  im-
mediately following,  he  tells  us  that
positive  law  may  oe  generally  perni-
cious ;  that  is  to  say,  may  conflict  with
the  Divine  law  which  general  utility
indicates,  and,  as  measured  or  tried  by
that  law,  mav  be  unjust.  He  might
have  added,  tliat  it  also  may  be  u]\just
j^s  measured  by  positive  morality,  al-


though it  must  needs  be  just  as  measured
by  itself,  and  although  it  happen  to  be
just  as  measured  by  the  law  of  God.

FoT  jud  OT  U7ijustf  justice  or  injustice,
is  a  term  of  relative  and  varying  import.
Whenever  it  is  uttered  with  a  deter-
minate meaning,  it  is  uttered  with  relation
to  a  determinate  law  which  the  speaker
assumes  as  a  standard  of  comparison.
This  is  hinted  by  Locke  at  the  end  of
the  division  of  laws  which  I  have  in-
serted in  my  fifth  lecture ;  and  it  is,
indeed,  so  manifest,  on  a  little  sustained
reflection,  that  it  hardly  needs  the  au-
thority of  that  great  and  venerable
name.

By  the  epithet  just,  we  mean  that  a
given  object,  to  which  we  apply  the
epithet,  accords  with  a  given  law  to
which  we  refer  it  as  to  a  test.  And  as
that  which  is  just  conforms  to  a  deter-
minate law,  justice  is  the  conformity  of  a
given  object  to  the  same  or  a  similar
measure  :  for  justice  is  the  abstract  term
which  corresponds  to  the  epithet  just.
By  the  epithet  unjust,  we  mean  that  the

g'ven  object  conforms  not  to  the  given
w. And  since  the  term  injustice  is


yunsprudence  determined.

But  when  I  affirm  that  the  power  of  a  sovereign  is  incapable
of  legal  limitation,  I  always  mean  by  a  '  sovereign/  a  monarch
properly  so  called,  or  a  sovereign  number  in  its  collegiate  and
sovereign  capacity.  Considered  coUectivejy^  or  considered  in
its  corporate  character,  a  sovereign  number  ia  jsovereign-and
independent :  but,  considered"  severally,  the  individuals  and
smaHerliggregates  composing  that  sovereign  number  are  subject
to  the  supreme  body  of  which  they  are  component  parts.  Con-
sequently,  though  the  boily^  inevitably  independent  of  legal  or
political  duty,  any  of  the  individuals  or  aggregates  whereof  the
body  is  composed  may  be  legally  bound  by  laws  of  which  the
body  is  the  author.  For  example :  A  member  of  the  house  of
lords,  or  a  member  of  the  house  of  commons,  may  be  legally
bound  by  an  act  of  parliament,  which,  as  one  of  the  sovereign
legislature,  he  has  concurred  with  others  in  making.  Nay,  he
may  be  legally  boimd  by  statutes,  or  by  rules  made  judicially,
which  have  immediately  proceeded  from  subject  or  subordinate
legislatures :  for  a  law  which  proceeds  immediately  from  a
subject  or  subordinate  legislature  is  set  by  the  authority  of  the
supreme.

And  hence  an  important  difference  between  monarchies  or
governments  of  one,  and  aristocracies  or  governments  of  a
number.

Against  a  monarch  properly  so  called,  or  against  a  sovereign
number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  constUiUional


269

Lect.  VI

Con-
sidered
severally,
the  mem-
bers of  a
sorereign
body  are
in  a  state
of  subjec-
tion to  the
body,  and
may  there-
fore be


bound
even  as
members
of  the
body,  by
laws  of
which  it  is
the  author.


merely  the  corresponding  abstract,  it
signifies  the  nonconformi^  of  the  ^ven
and  compared  object  to  that  determinate
law  which  is  assumed  as  the  standard  of
comparison. — ^And  since  such  is  the  re-
lative nature  of  justice  and  iigustice,
one  and  the  same  act  may  be  just  and
unjust  as  tried  by  different  measures.
Or  (changing  the  expression)  an  act  may
be  just  as  agreeing  with  a  nven  law,
although  the  act  itself,  ana  the  law
with  which  it  agrees,  are  both  of  them
unjust  as  compared  with  a  different  rule.
For  example  :  Where  positive  law  con-
flicts with  positive  morality,  that  which
is  just  as  tried  by  the  former,  is  also  un-
just, as  tried  by  the  latter:  or  where
law  or  morality  conflicts  with  the  law  of
God,  that  which  is  just  as  tried  by  the
human  nde,  is  also  unjust  as  tried  by
the  Divine.
Though  it  signifies  conformity  or  non-


conformity to  any  determinate  law,  the
term  justice  or  ivjustiee  sometimes  de-
notes emphatically,  conformity  or  non-
conformity to  the  ultimate  measure  or
test :  namely,  the  law  of  God.  This  is
the  meaning  annexed  to  justice,  when
law  and  justice  are  opposed:  when  a
positive  human  rule  is  styled  unjust.
And  when  it  is  used  with  this  meaning,
justice  is  nearly  equivalent  to  gemral
utility.  The  only  difference  lietween
them  consists  in  this :  that,  as  agreeing
immediately  with  the  law  of  Ood,  a
given  and  compared  action  is  just;
whilst,  as  agreeing  immediately  with
the  principle  which  is  the  index  to  the
law  of  God,  that  given  and  compared
action  is  generally  uscfvX,  And  hence
it  arises,  that  when  we  style  an  action
just  or  uig'ust,  we  not  uncommonly
mean  that  it  is  generally  useful  or
pernicious."


"  The  substance  of  the  remainder  of  serted  in  this  edition  at  the  end  of  lec-
this  note,  as  it  stood  in  the  former  ture  Y  (p.  214,  and  following  pages.  See
editions,  is  contained  in  the  note  in- also  note  16,  p.  200.) — K  C.


270  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  law  (as  I  have  remarked  already)  is  enforced,  or  protected  from
'  infringement,  by  merely  moral  sanctions.  Against  a  monarch
properly  so  called,  or  against  a  sovereign  number  in  its  collegiate
and  sovereign  capacity,  constitutional  law  and  the  law  of  nations
are  nearly  in  the  same  predicament  Each  is  positive  morality
rather  than  positive  law.  The  former  is  guarded  by  sentiments
current  in  the  given  community,  as  the  latter  is  guarded  by
sentiments  current  amongst  nations  generally.

But,  considered  severally,  the  members  of  a  sovereign  body,
even  as  members  of  the  body,  may  be  legally  bound  by  laws  of
which  the  body  is  the  author,  and  which  regard  the  constitution
of  the  given  supreme  government. — In  case  it  be  clothed  with
a  legal  sanction,  or  the  means  of  enforcing  it  judicially  be  pro-
vided by  its  author,  a  law  set  by  the  body  to  any  of  its  own
members  is  properly  a  positive  law :  It  is  properly  a  positive
law,  or  a  law  strictly  so  called,  although  it  be  imposed  upon  the
obliged  party  as  a  member  of  the  body  which  sets  it  If  the
means  of  enforcing  it  judicially  be  not  provided  by  its  author,
it  is  rather  a  rule  of  positive  morality  than  a  rule  of  positive
law.  But  it  wants  the  essentials  of  a  positive  law,  not  through
the  character  of  the  party  to  whom  it  is  set  or  directed,  but
because  it  is  not  invested  with  a  legal  or  political  sanction,  or
is  a  law  of  imperfect  obligation  in  the  sense  of  the  Boman
jurists. — In  case  the  law  be  invested  with  a  legal  or  political
sanction,  and  regard  the  constitution  or  structure  of  the  given
supreme  government,  a  breach  of  the  law,  by  the  party  to  whom
it  is  set,  is  not  only  unconstUtUional,  but  is  also  illegal.  The
breach  of  the  law  is  unconstitiUional,  inasmuch  as  the  violated
law  regards  the  constitution  of  the  state.  The  breach  of  the
law  is  also  illegal,  inasmuch  as  the  violated  law  may  be  enforced
by  judicial  procedure.

For  example :  The  king,  as  a  limb  of  the  parliament,  might
be  punishable  by  act  of  parliament,  in  the  event  of  his  trans-
gressing the  limits  which  the  constitution  has  set  to  his  author-
ity :  in  the  event,  for  instance,  of  his  pretending  to  give  to  a
proclamation  of  his  own  the  legal  effect  of  a  statute  emanating
from  the  sovereign  legislature.  Or  the  members  of  either  house
might  be  punishable  by  act  of  parliament,  if,  as  forming  a  limb
of  the  parliament  they  exceeded  their  constitutional  powers :  if,
for  instance,  they  pretended  to  give  that  legal  effect  to  an  ordi-
nance or  resolution  of  their  own  body.

Where,  then,  the  supreme  government  is  a  monarchy  or
government  of  one,  constitutional  law,  as  against  that  govern-


yurisprudence  determined.  27 1

ment,  is  inevitably  nothing  more  than  positive  morality.  Where  I^ct.  VI
the  supreme  government  is  an  aristocracy  or  government  of  a
number,  constitutional  law,  as  against  the  members  of  that
government,  may  either  consist  of  positive  morality,  or  of  a
compound  of  positive  morality  and  positive  law.  Against  the
sovereign  body  in  its  corporate  and  sovereign  character,  it  is
inevitably  nothing  more  than  positive  morality.  But  against
the  '  members  considered  severally,  be  they  individuals  or  be
they  aggregates  of  individuals,  it  may  be  guarded  by  legal  or
political,  as  well  as  by  moral  sanctions.

In  fact  or  practice,  the  members  considered  severally,  but
considered  as  members  of  the  body,  are  commonly  free,  wholly
or  partially,  from  legal  or  political  restraints.  For  example:
The  king,  as  a  limb  of  the  parliament,  is  not  responsible  legally,
or  cannot  commit  a  legal  injury :  and,  as  partaking  in  conduct
of  the  assembly  to  which  he  immediately  belongs,  a  member  of
the  house  of  lords,  or  a  member  of  the  house  of  commons,  is
not  amenable  to  positive  law.  But  though  this  freedom  from
legal  restraints  may  be  highly  useful  or  expedient,  it  is  not
necessary  or  inevitable.  Considered  severally,  the  members  of
a  sovereign  body,  be  they  individuals  or  be  they  aggregates  of
individuals,  may  clearly  be  legally  amenable,  even  as  members
of  the  body,  to  laws  which  the  body  imposes.

And  here  I  may  remark,  that  if  a  member  considered  sever-
ally, but  considered  as  a  member  of  the  body,  be  wholly  or  parti-
ally free  from  legal  or  political  obligation,  that  legally  irresponsible
aggregate,  or  that  legally  irresponsible  individual,  is  restrained
or  debarred  in  two  ways  from  an  unconstitutional  exercise  of  its
legally  imlimited  power.  1.  Like  the  sovereign  body  of  which
it  is  a  member,  it  is  obliged  or  restrained  morally :  that  is  to
say,  it  is  controlled  by  opinions  and  sentiments  current  in  the
given  community.  2.  If  it  affected  to  issue  a  command
which  it  is  not  empowered  to  issue  by  its  constitutional  share
in  the  sovereignty,  its  unconstitutional  command  would  not  be
legally  binding,  and  disobedience  to  that  command  would  there-
fore not  be  illegal.  Nay,  although  it  would  not  be  responsible
legally  for  thus  exceeding  its  powers,  those  whom  it  commissioned
to  execute  its  unconstitutional  command,  would  probably  be  I
amenable  to  positive  law,  if  they  tried  to  accomplish  their]
mandate.  For  example :  If  the  king  or  either  of  the  houses,  by '
way  of  proclamation  or  ordinance,  affected  to  establish  a  law
equivalent  to  an  act  of  parliament,  the  pretended  statute  would
not  be  legally  binding,  and  disobedience  to  the  pretended  statute


272  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI would  therefore  not  be  illegal. And  although  the  king  or  the

''"^^' ' house  would  not  be  responsible  legally  for  this  supposed  violation

of  constitutional  law  or  morality,  those  whom  the  king  or  the

house  might  order  to  enforce  the  statute,  would  be  liable  civilly

or  criminally,  if  they  attempted  to  execute  the  order.

I  have  affirmed  above,  that,  taken  or  considered  severally,
all  the  individuals  and  aggregates  composing  a  sovereign
number  are  subject  to  the  supreme  body  of  which  they  are
component  parts.  By  the  matter  contained  in  the  last  para-
graph, I  am  led  to  clear  the  proposition  to  which  I  have  now
adverted,  from  a  seeming  difficulty.

Generally  speaking,  if  a  member  of  a  sovereign  body,  taken
or  considered  severally,  be  not  amenable  to  positive  law,  it  is
merely  as  a  member  of  the  body  that  he  is  free  from  legal
obligation.  Generally  speaking,  he  is  bound,  in  his  other
characters,  by  legal  restraints.  But  in  some  of  the  mixed
aristocracies  which  are  styled  limited  monarchies,  the  so  called
limited  monarch  is  exempted  or  absolved  completely  from  legal
or  political  duty.  For  example :  According  to  a  maxim  of  the
English  law,  the  king  is  incapable  of  committing  wrong :  that  is
to  say,  he  is  not  responsible  legally  for  aught  that  he  may  please
to  do,  or  for  any  forbearance  or  omission.

But  though  he  is  absolved  completely  from  legal  or  political
duty,  it  cannot  be  thence  inferred  that  the  king  is  sovereign  or
supreme,  or  that  he  is  not  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  sove-
reign or  supreme  parliament  of  which  he  is  a  constituent
member.

Of  the  numerous  proofs  of  this  negative  conclusion,  which
it  were  easy  to  produce,  the  following  will  amply  suffice. — 1.
Although  he  is  free  in  fact  from  the  fetters  of  positive  law,  he
is  not  incapable  of  legal  obligation.  A  law  of  the  sovereign
parliament,  made  with  his  own  assent,  might  render  himself  and
his  successors  legally  responsible.  But  a  monarch  properly  so
called,  or  a  sovereign  number  in  its  corporate  and  sovereign
character,  cannot  be  rendered,  by  any  contrivance,  amenable  to
positive  law. — 2.  If  he  affected  to  transgress  the  limits  which
the  constitution  has  set  to  his  authority,  disobedience  on  the
part  of  the  governed  to  his  unconstitutional  conmiands,  would
not  be  illegal :  whilst  the  ministers  or  instruments  of  his  un-
constitutional commands,  would  be  legally  amenable,  for  their
unconstitutional  obedience,  to  laws  of  that  sovereign  body
whereof  he  is  merely  a  limb.  But  commands  issued  by
sovereigns  cannot  be  disobeyed  by  their  subjects  without  an


Jurisprudence  determined.  273

infringement  of  positive  law :  whilst  the  ministers  or  instru-  Lbot.  VI
ments  of  such  a  sovereign  command,  cannot  be  legally  respon-  "
sible  to  any  portion  of  the  community,  excepting  the  author  of
their  mandate. — 3.  He  habitually  obeys  the  laws  set  by  the
sovereign  body  of  which  he  is  a  constituent  member.  If  he  did
not,  he  must  speedily  yield  his  ofl&ce  to  a  less  refractory
successor,  or  the  British  constitution  must  speedily  expire.  If
he  habitually  broke  the  laws  set  by  the  sovereign  body,  the  other
members  of  the  body  would  probably  devise  a  remedy :  though
a  prospective  and  definite  remedy,  fitted  to  meet  the  contingency,
has  not  been  provided  by  positive  law,  or  even  by  constitutional
morality.  Consequently,  he  is  bound  by  a  cogent  sanction  to
respect  the  laws  of  the  body,  although  that  cogent  sanction  is
not  predetermined. and  certain.  A  law  which  is  set  by  the
opinion  of  the  upper  and  lower  houses  (besides  a  law  which  is
set  by  the  opinion  of  the  community  at  large)  constrains  him  to
observe  habitually  the  proper  and  positive  laws  which  are  set
by  the  entire  parliament — But  habitually  obeying  the  laws  of
a  determinate  and  sovereign  body,  he  is  not  properly  sovereign :
for  such  habitual  obedience  consists  not  with  that  independence
which  is  one  of  the  essentials  of  sovereignty.  And  habitually
obeying  the  laws  of  a  certain  and  supreme  body,  he  is  really  in
a  state  of  subjection  to  that  certain  and  supreme  body,  though
the  other  membei-s  of  the  body,  together  with  the  rest  of  the
conmiunity,  are  commonly  styled  his  subjects.  It  is  mainly
through  the  forms  of  procedure  which  obtain  in  the  courts  of
justice,  that  he  is  commonly  considered  sovereign.  He  is  clothed
by  the  British  constitution,  or  rather  by  the  parliament  of  which
he  is  a  limb,  with  subordinate  political  powers  of  administering
the  law,  or  rather  of  supervising  its  administration.  Infringe-
ments of  the  law  are,  therefore,  in  the  style  of  procedure,  offences
against  the  king.  In  truth,  they  are  not  ofiences  against  the
king,  but  against  that  sovereign  body  of  king,  lords,  and
commons,  by  which  our  positive  law  is  directly  or  circuitously
established.  And  to  that  sovereign  body,  and  not  to  the  king,
the  several  members  of  the  body,  together  with  the  rest  of  the
conmiunity,  are  truly  subject  \

But  if  sovereign  or  supreme  power  be  incapable  of  legal  We  nature
limitation,  or  if  every  supreme  government  be  legally  absolute,  If^vif
wherein  (it  may  be  asked)  doth  political  liberty  consist,  and  how  iberty  to-
do  the  supreme  governments  which  are  commonly  deemed  free,  |ith^the
differ  from the supreme governments  which are commonly  supposed

JJJJ.-/J  difference

deemed  despotic  ?  between

VOL.  I.  T


■1


274  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  I  answer,  that  political  or  civil  liberty  is  the  liberty  from

free  and  l®g^  obligation,  which  is  left  or  granted  by  a  sovereign  govem-
deapotic  ment  to  any  of  its  own  subjects :  and  that,  since  the  power  of
m^ts.  the  government  is  incapable  of  legal  limitation,  the  government
is  legally  free  to  abridge  their  political  liberty,  at  its  own
pleasure  or  discretion.  I  say  it  is  legally  free  to  abridge  their
political  liberty,  at  its  own  pleasure  or  discretion.  For  a
government  may  be  hindered  hy  positive  morality  from  abridging
the  political  liberty  which  it  leaves  or  grants  to  its  subjects :
and  it  is  bound  by  the  law  of  Ood,  as  known  through  the
I  principle  of  utility,  not  to  load  them  with  l^al  duties  which
J  general  utility  condemns. — ^There  are  kinds  of  liberty  from  legal
obligation,  which  will  not  quadrate  with  the  foregoing  descrip-
tion: for  persons  in  a  state  of  nature  are  independent  of
political  duty,  and  independence  of  political  duty  is  one  of  the
essentials  of  sovereignty.  But  political  or  civil  liberty  supposes
political  society,  or  supposes  a  ttoXl^  or  dvitas :  and  it  is  the
liberty  from  legal  obligation  which  is  left  by  a  state  to  its
subjects,  rather  than  the  liberty  from  legal  obligation  which  is
inherent  in  sovereign  power.

Political  or  civil  liberty  has  been  erected  into  an  idol,  and
extolled  with  extravagant  praises  by  doting  and  fanatical
worshippers.  But  political  or  civil  liberty  is  not  more  worthy
^  \of  eulogy  than  political  or  legal  restraint  Political  or  civil
',  1  liberty,  like  political  or  legal  restraint,  may  be  generally  useful,
;  jor  generally  pemicioils ;  and  it  is  not  as  being  liberty,  but  as
'  .conducing  to  the  general  good,  that  political  or  civil  Uberty  is  an
/j  object  deserving  applause.

To  the  ignorant  and  bawling  fanatics  who  stim  you  with
their  pother  about  liberty,  political  or  civil  liberty  seems  to
be  the  principal  end for  which government  ought to  exist
I  But  the  final  cause  or  purpose  for  which  government  ought
I  to  exist,  is  the  furtherance  of  the  common  weal  to  the  greatest
possible  e:^tfint And  it  must  mainly  attain  the  purpose  for
^hicL^^"lt"nTcrg!it to  exist,  by two  sets of means:  first, by
conferring  such  rights  on  its  subjects  as  general  utility  com-
mends, and  by  imposing  such  relative  duties  (or  duties  cor-
responding to  the  rights) as  are  necessary  to  the  enjoyment
of the former:  secondly, by imposing such absolute duties
(or by  imposing such duties without corresponding rights)
as  tend  to  promote  the  good  of  the  political  community  at
large,  although they promote  not specially  the  interests of
determinate parties. Now  he  who  is clothed  with a legal


Jurisprudence  determined.  275

right,  is  also  clothed  with  a  political  liberty :  that  is  to  say, Lect.  VI
he  has the  liberty  from  legal  obligation,  which  is  necessary '^^^
to  the  enjoyment  of  the  right Consequently,  in  so  far  as
it  attains  its  appropriate  purpose  by  conferring  rights  upon
its subjects, government attains that purpose through the
medium of  political liberty. But since it  must impose a
duty  wherever it confers a right,  and should also impose
duties  which  have  no  corresponding  rights,  it  is  less  through
the  medium  of  political  liberty,  than  through  that  of  legal
restraint,  that  government  must  attain  the  purpose  for  which
it  ought  to  exist To  say  that  political  liberty  ought  to  be
its  principal  end,  or  to  say  that  its  principal  end  ought  to
be  legal  restraint,  is  to  talk  absurdly :  for  each  is  merely  a
mean  to  that  furtherance  of  the  common  weal,  which  is  the  Ia^
only  ultimate  object  of  good  or  beneficent  sovereignty. But//
though  both  propositions  are  absurd,  the  latter  of the  two
absurdities  is  the  least  remote  from  the  truth. — As  I  shall
show  hereafter,  political  or  civil  liberties  rarely  exist  apart
from corresponding legal restraints. Where persons in a
state  of  subjection  are  free  from  legal  duties,  their  liberties
(generally speaking)  would be  nearly  useless to  themselves,
unless  they  were  protected  in  the  enjoyment  of  their  liberties,
by  legal  duties  on  their  fellows :  that  is  to  say,  unless  they
had legal  rights  (importing  such  duties  on  their  fellows)  to
those  political  liberties  which  are  left  them  by  the  sovereign
government I  am  legally  free,  for  example,  to  move  from
place  to  place,  in  so  far  as  I  can  move  from  place  to  place
consistently  with  my  l^al  obligations:  but  this  my  political
liberty  would  be  but  a  sorry  liberty  imless  my  fellow-subjects
were  restrained  by  a  political  duty  from  assaulting  and  im-
prisoning  my  body. Through the ignorance or negligence
of  a  sovereign  government,  some  of  the  civil  liberties  which
it leaves or grants to its subjects, may  not be protected
against their  fellows by  answering legal duties:  and some
of those  civil  liberties  may  perhaps be  protected  sufficiently
by  religious  and  moral  obligations. But,  speaking  generally,
a  political  or  civil  liberty  is  coupled  with  a  legal  right  to  it :
and, consequently,  political  liberty  is  fostered  by  that  very
political  restraint  from  which  the  devotees  of  the  idol  liberty
are  so  fearfully  and  blindly  averse.^*^

(*)  Political  or  civil  liberties  are  left  missions. If  a  subject  possessed  of  a

or  granted  by  sovereigns  in  two  ways  ;  liberty  be  clothed  with  a  legal  right  to

namely, through permissions  coupled  it,  the  liberty  was  granted  by  the  soye-

with  commands,  or  through  simple  per-  reign  through  a  permission  coupled  with


276  TJie  Province  of

Lect.  VI  From  the  nature  of  political  or  civil  liberty,  I  turn  to  the

supposed  diflference  betwen  free  and  despotic  governments.

Every  supreme  government  is  frte  from  legal  restraints:
or  (what  is  the  same  proposition  dressed  in  a  different  phrase)
r^  every  supreme  government  is  legally  despotic.  The  distinction,
therefore,  of  governments  into  free  and  despotic,  can  hardly  mean
that  some  of  them  are  freer  from  restraints  than  others :  or  that
the  subjects  of  the  governments  which  are  denominated  free,
are  protected  against  their  governments  by  positive  law.

Nor  can  it  mean  that  the  governments  which  are  denomi-
nated free,  leave  or  grant  to  their  subjects  more  of  political
liberty  than  those  which  are  styled  despotic.  For  the  epithet
free  importing  praise,  and  the  epithet  despotic  importing
blame,  they  who  distinguish  governments  into  free  and  despotic,
suppose  that  the  first  are  better  than  the  second.  But  inasmuch
as  political  liberty  may  be  generally  useful  or  pernicious,  we
cannot  infer  that  a  government  is  better  than  another  govern-
ment, because  the  sum  of  the  liberties  which  the  former  leaves
to  its  subjects,  exceeds  the  sum  of  the  liberties  which  are  left  to
its  subjects  by  the  latter.  The  excess  in  the  sum  of  the
liberties  which  the  former  leaves  to  its  subjects,  may  be  purely
mischievous.  It  may  consist  of  freedom  from  restraints  which
are  required  by  the  common  weal ;  and  which  the  government
would  lay  upon  its  subjects,  if  it  fulfilled  its  duties  to  the  Deity.
In  consequence,  for  example,  of  that  mischievous  freedom,  its
subjects  may  be  guarded  inadequately  against  one  another,  or
against  attacks  from  external  enemies.

They  who  distinguish  governments  into  free  and  despotic,
probably  mean  this :

The  rights  which  a,  government  confers,  and  the  duties
which  it  lays  on  its  subjects,  ought  to  be  conferred  and  im-
posed for  the  advancement  of  the  common  weal,  or  with  a
view  to  the  aggregate  happiness  of  all  the  members  of  the
society.  But  in  every  political  society,  the  government  deviates,
more  or  less,  from  that  ethical  principle  or  maxim.  In  conferring
rights  and  imposing  duties,  it  more  or  less  disregards  the
common  or  general  weal,  and  looks,  with  partial  affection,  to
the  peculiar  and  narrower  interests  of  a  portion  or  portions  of

a  command :  a  jjermission  to  the  subject  and  moral  obligations. In  other  words,

who  is  clothed  with  the  legal  right,  and  a  the  subject  possessed  of  the  political  li-

command  to  the  subject  or  subjects  who  berty  may  not  be  clothed  with  a  1^1

are  burthened  with  the  relative  duty,  right  to  it And,  on  that  supposition,

But  a  i>olitical  or  civil  liberty  left  or  the  political  or  civil  liberty  was  left  or

granted  to  a  subject,  may  be  merely^  pro-  granted  to  the  subject  through  a  simple

tected  against  his  fellows  by  religious  permission  of  the  sovereign  or  state.


yurisprudence  determined.  277

the  community. — Now  the  governments  which  deviate  less  1  L«ot.  vi
from  that  ethical  principle  or  maxim,  are  better  than  the  govern-
ments which  deviate  more.  But,  according  to  the  opinion  of
those  who  make  the  distinction  in  question,  the  governments
which  deviate  less  from  that  ethical  principle  or  maxim,  are
popular  governments  (in  the  largest  sense  of  the  expression) :
meaning  by  a  popular  government  (in  the  largest  sense  of  the
expression),  any  aristocracy  (limited  monarchy  or  other)  which
consists  of  such  a  number  of  the  given  political  community  as
bears  a  large  proportion  to  the  number  of  the  whole  society.
For  it  is  supposed  by  those  who  make  the  distinction  in  question,
that,  where  the  government  is  democratical  or  popular,  the
interests  of  the  sovereign  number,  and  the  interests  of  the  entire
conmiimity,  are  nearly  identical,  or  nearly  coincide :  but  that,
where  the  government  is  properly  monarchical,  or  where  the
supreme  powers  reside  in  a  comparatively  few,  the  sovereign  one
or  number  has  numerous  sinister  interests,  or  interests  which
are  not  consistent  with  the  good  or  weal  of  the  general —
According,  therefore,  to  those  who  make  the  distinction  in
question  the  duties  which  a  government  of  many  lays  upon
its  subjects,  are  more  consonant  to  the  general  good  than
the  duties  which  are  laid  upon  its  subjects  by  a  government
of  one  or  a  few.  Consequently,  though  it  leaves  for  grants
not  to  its  subjects,  more  of  political  liberty  than  is  left  or
granted  to  its  subjects  by  a  government  of  one  or  a  few,  it
leaves  or  grants  to  its  subjects  more  of  the  political  liberty  1  \  ^
whuJi  condtu^es  to  the  common  weal.  But,  as  leaving  or  grant-
ing to  its  subjects  more  of  that  useful  liberty,  a  government
of  many  may  be  styled  free :  whilst,  as  leaving  or  granting  to
its  subjects  less  of  that  useful  liberty,  a  government  of  one
or  a  few  may  be  styled  Tiot  free^  or  may  be  styled  despotic  or
ahsolute.  Consequently,  a/rec  government,  or  a  good  government,  *
is  a  democratical  or  popular  government  (in  the  largest  sense  of
the  expression) :  whilst  a  despotic  government,  or  a  had  govern-
ment, is  either  a  monarchy  properly  so  called,  or  any  such  1
narrow  aristocracy  (limited  monarchy  or  other)  as  is  deemed  an
oligarchy.  '

They  who  distinguish  governments  into  firee  and  despotic,
are  therefore  lovers  of  democracy.  By  the  epithet  free,  as
applied  to  governments  of  many,  they  mean  that  governments
of  many  are  comparatively  good :  and  by  the  epithet  despotic,  as
applied  to  monarchies  or  oligarchies,  they  mean  that  monarchies
or  oligarchies  are  comparatively  lad. The  epithets  free  and


278  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  despotic  are  rarely,  I  think,  employed  by  the  lovers  of  monarchy
'  or  oligarchy.  If  the  lovers  of  monarchy  or  oligarchy  did  employ
those  epithets,  they  would  apply  the  epithet  free  to  governments
of  one  or  a  few,  and  the  epithet  despotic  to  governments  of  many.
For  they  think  the  former  comparatively  good,  and  the  latter
comparatively  bad;  or  that  monarchical  or  oligarchical  govern-
ments are  better  adapted  than  popular,  to  attain  the  ultimate
purpose  for  which  governments  ought  to  exist.  They  deny  that
the  latter  are  less  misled  than  the  former,  by  interests  which
are  not  consistent  with  the  common  or  general  weal :  or,  grant-
ing that  excellence  to  governments  of  many,  they  think  it  greatly
outweighed  by  numerous  other  excellences  which  they  ascribe
to  governments  of  one  or  to  governments  of  a  few.

But  with  the  respective  merits  or  demerits  of  various  forms
of  government,  I  have  no  direct  concern. I  have  examined  the
current distinction between free and despotic governments,
because  it  is  expressed  in  terms  which  are  extremely  inappro-
priate and  absurd,  and  which  tend  to  obscure  the  independence
of  political  or  legal  obligation,  that  is  common  to  sovereign
governments  of  all  forms  or  kinds.
Whyithaa That  the  power  of  a  sovereign  is  incapable  of  legal  limitation,
doubted ^  ^^^  doubtcd,  and  even  denied. But  the  difficulty,  like
that  the thciisands  of  others,  probably  arose  from  a  verbal  ambiguity. —
TOvereign* "^^  foremost  individual  member  of  a  so  called  limited  monarchy,
is  incap- is  styled  improperly  Ttwnarch  or  sovereign.  .  Now  the  power  of  a
legal^ monarch  or  sovereign,  thus  improperly  so  styled,  is  not  only
limitation,  capable  of  legal  limitations,  but  is  sometimes  actually  limited
by  positive  law. But  monarchs  or  sovereigns,  thus  improperly
so  styled,  were  confoimded  with  monarchs,  and  other  sovereigns,
in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  terms. And  since  the  power
of  the  former  is  capable  of  legal  limitations,  it  was  thought  that
the  power  of  the  latter  might  be  bounded  by  similar  restraints.
The  pro-  Whatever  may  be  its  origin,  the  error  is  remarkable. For

aMerted  ^  ^^®  ^^8*''^  independence  of  monarchs  in  the  proper  acceptation  of
expressly  the  term,  and  of  sovereign  bodies  in  their  corporate  and  sovereign
nowned  Capacities,  not  only  follows  inevitably  from  the  nature  of  sovereign
political  power,  but  is  also  asserted  expressly  by  renowned  political  writers
opposite  of  opposite  parties  or  sects:  by  celebrated  advocates  of  the
pai^es  or  governments  which  are  decked  with  the  epithet  free,  as  by
celebrated  advocates  of  the  governments  which  are  branded  with
the  epithet  despotic,

'  If  it  be  objected  (says  Sidney)  that  I  am  a  defender  of
arbitrary  powers,  I  confess  I  cannot  comprehend  how  any  society


yurtsprudence  determined.

can  be  established  or  subsist  without  them.  The  difference
between  good  and  ill  governments  is  not,  that  those  of  one  sort
have  an  arbitrary  power  which  the  others  have  not ;  for  they  all
have  it ;  but  that  in  those  which  are  well  constituted,  this  power
is  so  placed  as  it  may  be  beneficial  to  the  people.'

'  It  appeareth  plainly  (says  Hobbes)  to  my  understanding,
that  the  soveraign  power  whether  placed  in  one  man,  as  in
monarchy,  or  in' one  assembly  of  men,  as  in  popular  and  aris-
tocraticall  commonwealths,  is  as  great  as  men  can  be  imagined  |
to  make  it.  And  though  of  so  unlimited  a  power  men  may
fancy  many  evill  consequences,  yet  the  consequence  of  the  want
of  it,  which  is  warre  of  every  man  against  his  neighbour,  is  much
worse.  The  condition  of  man  in  this  life  shall  never  be  without
inconveniences :  but  there  happeneth  in  no  commonwealth  any
great  inconvenience,  but  what  proceeds  from  the  subjects'
disobedience.  And  whosoever,  thinking  soveraign  power  too
great,  will  seek  to  make  it  lesse,  must  subject  himselfe  to  a
power  which  can  limit  it :  that  is  to  say,  to  a  greater.' — '  One
of  the  opinions  (says  the  same  writer)  which  are  repugnant  to
the  nature  of  a  commonwealth,  is  this :  that  he  who  hath  the
soveraign  power  is  subject  to  the  civill  lawes.  It  is  true  that
all  soveraigns  are  subject  to  the  lawes  of  nature ;  because  such
lawes  be  Divine,  and  cannot  by  any  man,  or  by  any  common-
wealth, be  abrogated.  But  to  the  civill  lawes,  or  to  the  lawes
which  the  soveraign  maketh,  the  soveraign  is  not  subject :  for  if
he  were  subject  to  the  civill  lawes,  he  were  subject  to  himselfe ;
which  were  not  subjection,  but  freedom.  The  opinion  now  in
question,  because  it  setteth  the  civill  lawes  above  the  soveraign,
setteth  also  a  judge  above  him,  and  a  power  to  punish  him :
which  is  to  make  a  new  soveraign ;  and,  again,  for  the  same
reason,  a  third  to  punish  the  second ;  and  so  continually  without
end,  to  the  confusion  and  dissolution  of  the  commonwealth.' —
'The  difference  (says  the  same  writer)  between  the  kinds  or
forms  of  commonwealth,  consisteth  not  in  a  difference  between
their  powers,  but  in  a  difference  between  their  aptitudes  to
produce  the  peace  and  security  of  the  people :  which  is  their
end.'<^>

(<*)  By  hia  modem  censors,  French,  rant,  that  his  main  design  is  the  defence  of
German,  and  even  English,  Hobbes's  monarchical  government  Now,  though
main  design  in  his  yarioos  treatises  on  he  prefers  monarchical,  to  popular,  or
politics,  is  grossly  and  thoroughly  mis-  oligarchical  government,  it  is  certain  that
taken.  With  a  marvellous  ignorance  of  his  main  design  is  the  establishment  of
the  writings  which  they  impudently  pre-  these  propositions :  1.  That  sovereign
sume  to  condemn,  they  style  him  'the  power,  wkeUier  U  reside  in  one,  or  in
apologist  of  tyranny:*  meaning  by  that  many  or  a  few,  cannot  be  limited  by


28o


The  Province  of


Leot.  VI


Before  I  discuss  the  origin  of  political  govenunent  and
society,  I  will  briefly  examine  a  topic  allied  to  the  liberty  of
sovereigns  from  political  or  legal  restraints.

positive  law:  2.  That  a  present  or  es-  to  the  glaring  mischiefs  of  resistance,
tablished  goyemment,  heiio,  ffovemment  and  scarcely  adverted  to  the  mischiefs
of  OTie,  or  a  aovemmetU  of  many  or  a  few,  which  obedienoe  occasionally  engenders,
cannot  be  disobeyed  by  its  subjects  con-  And  although  hia  integrity  was  not  less
sistently  with  the  common  weal,  or  con-  remarkable  than  the  gigantic  strength  of
sistently  with  the  law  of  God  as  known  hia  nnderstandinff,  we  may  presume  that
through  utility  or  the  scriptures. — ^That  his  extreme  timi<uty  somewhat  corrupted
his  principal  purpose  is  not  the  defence  hia  judgment,  and  inclined  him  to  insist
of  monarchy,  is  sufficiently  evinced  by  unduly  upon  the  evils  of  rebellion  and
the  following  paasases  from  his  Levia-  strife. — 2.  Instead  of  directly  deriving
than.  *  The  prospenty  of  a  people  ruled  the  existence  of  political  government
by  an  aristocraticall  or  democraticall  from  a  perception  by  the  bulk  of  the
assembly,  cometh  not  from  aristocracy  governed  of  its  great  and  obvious  ex-
or  democracy,  but  frt>m  the  obedience  pediency,  he  ascribes  the  origin  of
and  concord  of  the  subjects :  nor  do  the  sovereignty,  and  of  independent  political
people  flourish  in  a  monarchy,  because  society,  to  a  fictitious  agreement  or  cove-
they  are  ruled  by  one  man,  but  because  nant  He  imagines  that  the  future
they  obey  him.  Take  away  in  a  state  of  subjects  covenant  with  one  another,  or
any  kind,  the  obedience,  and  consequently  that  the  future  subjects  covenant  with  the
the  concord  of  the  people,  and  they  ^all  future  sovereign,  to  obey  without  reserve
not  only  not  flourish,  out  in  short  time  every  command  of  the  latter :  And  of
be  dissolved.  And  they  that  go  about  this  imaginary  covenant,  immediately
by  disobedience  to  doe  no  more  than  re-  preceding  the  formation  of  the  political
forme  the  commonwealth,  shall  find  that  government  and  community,  the  religious
they  doe  thereby  destroy  it.'  '  In  mon-  duty  of  the  subjects  to  render  unlimited
archy  one  man  is  supreme ;  and  all  other  submission,  and  the  divine  right  of  the
men  who  have  power  in  the  state,  have  sovereign  to  exact  and  receive  such  sub-
it  by  his  commission,  and  during  his  mission,  are,  according  to  Hobbes,  neces-
pleasure.  In  aristocracy  or  democracy  sary  and  permanent  consequences.  He
there  is  one  supreme  assembly;  which  supposes,  mdeed,  that  the  subjects  are
supreme  assembly  hath  the  same  un-  induced  to  make  that  agreement,  by
limited  power  that  in  monarchy  be-  their  perception  of  the  expediency  of
longeth  to  the  monarch.  And  which  is  government,  and  by  their  desire  to  escape
the  best  of  these  three  kinda  of  govern-  from  anarchy.  But,  placing  hia  system
ment,  is  not  to  be  disputed  there  where  immediately  on  that  interposed  figment,
any  of  them  is  already  established.'  So  instead  of  resting  it  directly  on  the  ulti-
man^r  similar  passages  occur  in  the  same  mate  basis  of  utility,  he  often  arrives
treatise,  and  also  in  his  treatise  De  Cive,  at  his  conclusions  in  a  sophistical  and
that  they  who  confidently  style  him  '  the  q^nibbling  manner,  though  his  conclu-
apologist  of  tyranny  or  monarchy,'  must  sions  are  commonly  such  as  the  principle
have  taken  their  notion  of  his  purpose  of  utility  will  warrant.  The  religious
from  mere  hearsay.  A  dip  here  or  there  duty  of  the  subjects  to  render  unlimited
into  either  of  the  decried  books,  would  obedience,  and  the  divine  right  of  the
have  led  them  to  withhold  their  sentence,  sovereign  to  exact  and  receive  such
To  those  who  have  really  read,  although  obedience,  cannot,  indeed,  be  reckoned
in  a  cursory  manner,  these  the  most  lucid  amougst  those  of  Hobbes's  conclusions
and  easy  of  profound  and  elaborate  com-  which  that  principle  will  justify.  In
positions,  the  current  conception  of  their  truth,  the  duty  ana  the  right  cannot  be
object  and  tendency  is  utterly  laughable,  inferred  logically  even  from  his  own
The  capital  errors  in  Hobbes's  politi-  fiction.  For,  according  to  his  own  fiction,
cal  treatises  are  the  following : — 1.  He  the  subjects  were  induced  to  promise
inculcates  too  absolutely  the  religious  ob-  obedience,  by  their  perception  of  the
ligation  of  obedience  to  present  or  estab-  utility  of  government :  and,  since  their
lished  government.  He  makes  not  the  inducement  to  the  promise  was  that  per-
requisite  allowance  for  the  anomalous  ception  of  utility,  they  hardly  promised
and  excepted  cases  wherein  disobedience  to  obey  in  those  anomalous  cases  wherein
is  counselled  by  that  very  principle  of  the  evils  of  anarchy  are  surpassed  by  the
utility  which  indicates  the  duty  of  sub-  evils  of  submission.  And  though  they
mission.  Writing  in  a  season  of  civil  promised  to  obey  even  in  those  cases,
discord,  or  writing  in  apprehension  of  its  they  are  not  religiously  obliged  to  render
approach,  he  naturally  fixed  his  attention  unlimited  obedience :  for,  as  the  principle


yurisprudence  determined.


281


A  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign  government Lbct.  VI
of  a  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  has  no  ment'of
legal  rights  (in  the  proper  acceptation  of  the  term)  against  its  ®°®»_^f  j^
ovm  subjects.


sovereign
govern-


of  general  utility  is  the  index  to  religions
obli^tions,  no  religions  obligation  can
possibly  arise  from  a  promise  whose  ten-
dency is  generally  pemicions.  Besides
though  the  subject  founders  of  the  poli-
tical community  were  reli^ously  obliged
by  their  mischieyous  promise,  a  religious
oblation  would  hardly  be  imposed  upon
their  followers,  by  yirtue  of  a  mischievous
agreement  to  which  their  followers  were
strangers.  The  last  objection,  howeyer,
is  not  exclusively  applicable  to  Hobbes's
peculiar  fiction.  That,  or  a  like  objection,
may  be  urged  against  all  the  romances
which  derive  the  existence  of  government
from  a  fancied  original  contract.  Whether
we  suppose,  with  Hobbes,  that  the  sub-
jects were  the  only  promisers,  or  we  sup-
pose, with  others,  that  the  sovereign  also
covenanted  ;  whether  we  suppose,  with
Hobbes,  that  they  promised  unlimited
obedience,  or  we  suppose,  with  others,
that  theirpromise  contained  reservations ;
we  can  hardly  suppose  that  the  contract
of  the  founders,  unless  it  be  presently
useful,  imposes  religious  obligations  on
the  present  members  of  the  community.

If  these  two  capital  errors  be  kept  in
mind  by  the  reader,  Hobbes's  extremely
celebrated  but  extremely  neglected  treat-
ises may  be  read  to  great  advantage.
I  know  of  no  other  writer  (excepting  our
great  contemporary  Jeremy  Bentham)
who  has  uttered  so  many  truths,  at  once
new  and  important,  concerning  the
necessary  structure  of  supreme  political
goyernment,  and  the  larger  of  the  neces-
sary distinctions  implied  by  positive  law.
And  he  is  signally  gifted  with  the  talent,
peculiar  to  writers  of  genius,  of  incitinff
the  mind  of  the  student  to  active  and
original  thought

The  authors  of  the  antipathy  with
which  he  is  commonly  regarded,  were  the
papistical  clergy  of  the  Roman  Catholic
Church,  the  high  church  clergy  of  the
Church  of  England,  and  the  Pr^byterian
clergy  of  the  true  blue  complexion.  In
matters  ecclesiastical  (a  phrase  of  uncer-
tain meaning,  and  thereiore  of  measure-
less compass),  independence  of  secular
authority  was  more  or  less  affected  by
churchmen  of  each  of  those  factions.  In
other  words  they  held  that  their  own
church  was  coordinate  with  the  secular
goyernment :  or  that  the  secular  govern-
ment was  not  of  itself  supreme,  but  rather
partook  in  the  supreme  powers  with  one
or  more  of  the  clerical  order. Hobbes*s


unfEdling  loyalty  to  the  present  temporal
sovereign,  was  alarmed  and  offended  by
this  anarchical  pretension :  and  he  re-
pelled it  with  a  weight  of  reason,  and
an  aptness  and  pungency  of  expression,
which  the  aspiring  and  yindictive  priests
did  bitterly  feel  and  resent  Acooraingly,
they  assailed  him  with  the  poisoned
weapons  which  are  ministered  by  malig-
nity and  cowardice.  All  of  them  twitted
him  (agreeably  to  their  wont)  with  flat
atheism ;  whilst  some  of  them  affected
to  style  him  an  apolo^t  of  tyranny  or
misnile,  and  to  rank  Mm  with  the  per-
verse writers  (MachiayeUi,  for  example)
who  really  have  applauded  tyranny  main-
tained by  ability  and  courage.  By  these
calumnies,  those  conspiring  and  potent
£Eu;tions  blackened  the  reputation  of  their
common  enemy.  And  so  deep  and  en-
during is  the  impression  which  they  made
upon  the  public  mind,  that  '  Hobbes  the
Atheist,'  or  'Hobbes  the  apologist  of
tyranny,'  is  still  regarded  with  pious,  or
with  republican  horror,  by  all  but  the
extremely  few  who  have  ventured  to  ex-
amine his  writings.

Of  positive  atheism;  of  mere  scepti-
cism concerning  the  existence  of  the
Deity ;  or  of,  what  is  more  impious  and
miscnievous  than  either,  a  religion  im-
puting to  the  Deity  human  infirmities
and  vices ;  there  is  not,  I  belieye,  in  any
of  his  writings,  the  shadow  of  a  shade.

It  is  true  that  he  prefers  monarchical
(though  he  intimates  his  preference
rarely),  to  popular  or  oligarchical  goyern-
ment If,  then,  tyranny  be  synonymous
with  monarchy,  he  is  certainly  an  apolo-
gist and  fautor  of  tyranny,  inasmuch  as
he  inclines  to  the  one,  rather  than  the
many  or  the  few.  But  if  tyranny  be
synonymous  with  misrule,  or  if  tyranny
be  raecially  synonymous  with  monar-
chical misrule,  he  is  not  of  the  apologists
and  fautors  of  tyranny,  but  may  rank
with  the  ablest  and  most  zealous  of  its
foes.  Scarcely  a  single  advocate  of  free
or  popular  institutions,  even  in  these
latter  and  comparatively  enlightened
ages,  perceives  and  inculcates  so  dearly
and  earnestly  as  he,  the  principal  cause
and  preventive  of  tyrannous  or  Imd  gov-
ernment. The  principal  cause  of  tyran-
nous or  bad  government,  is  ignorance,  on
the  part  of  the  multitude  of  sound  poli-
tical science  (in  the  largest  sense  of  the
expression) :  that  is  to  say,  political
(economy ^  with  the  two  great  branches  of


282


The  Province  of


Lect.  VI  Every  legal  right  is  the  creature  of  a  positive  law :  and  it

ment'ofa'  answers  to  a  relative  duty  imposed  by  that  positive  law,  and

number  in  incumbent  on  a  person  or  persons  other  than  the  person  or

itscoUe-  ^ ^


dhics^  as  well  as  polUica  (in  the  strict
acceptation  of  the  term).  And  if  such
be  tne  principal  cause  of  tyrannous  or
bad  government,  the  principal  preventive
of  the  evil  must  lie  in  the  diffusion  of
such  knowledge  throughout  the  mass  of
the  communi^.  Compared  with  this,
the  best  political  constitution  that  the
wit  of  man  could  devise,  were  surely  a
poor  security  for  good  or  beneficent  rule.
— Now  in  those  departments  of  his
treatises  on  politics,  which  are  con-
cerned with  'the  office  (or  duty)  of  the
sovereign,'  Hobbes  insists  on  the  follow-
ing propositions :  HuU  good  wnd  stabU
government  is  simply  or  nearly  impossible^
unless  the  fundamenials  of  political
science  be  known  by  the  bulk  of  the  people  :
that  the  bulk  of  the  people  are  as  cabbie
of  receiving  such  saence  as  the  lortiest
and  proudest  of  their  superiors  in  station,
wealth,  or  learning :  that  to  provide  for
the  diffusion  of  such  science  throughout
the  bulk  of  the  people,  mav  be  classed
with  the  weightiest  of  the  duties  which
the  Deity  lays  upon  the  sovereign  :  that
he  is  bound  to  hear  their  complaints,
and  even  to  seek  their  advice,  in  order
that  he  may  better  understand  the
nature  of  their  wants,  and  may  better
adapt  his  institutions  to  the  advance-
ment of  the  general  good :  that  he  ia
bound  to  render  his  laws  as  compendious
and  clear  as  possible,  and  also  to  pro-
mulge  a  knowledge  of  their  more  im-
portant provisions  through  every  possible
channel :  that  if  the  bulK  of  his  people
Imow  their  duties  imperfectly,  for  want
of  the  instruction  which  he  is  able  and
bound  to  impart,  he  is  responsible  reli-
ffiously  for  all  their  breaches  of  the
duties  whereof  he  hath  left  them  in
ignorance.

In  regard  to  the  respective  aptitudes
of  the  several  forms  of  government  to  ac-
complish the  ultimate  purpose  for  which
government  ought  to  exist,  Hobbes's
opinion  closelv  resembles  the  doctrine,
which,  about  the  middle  of  the  eighteenth
century,  was  taught  by  the  French  philo-
sophers who  are  styled  emphatically  the
Wcanomists. — In  order,  say  the  (£con-
onusts,  to  the  being  of  a  good  govern-
ment, two  things  must  preexist :  1.
Knowledge  by  the  bulk  of  the  people,
of  the  elements  of  political  science  (in
the  largest  sense  of  the  expression) :  2.
A  numerous  body  of  citizens  versed  in
political  science,  and  not  misled  by
interests  conflicting  with  the  common
weal, who may shape the political


opinions,  and  steer  the  political  conduct,
of  the  less  profoundly  informed,  though
instructed  and  rational  multitude. —
Without  that  knowledge  in  the  bulk  of
the  people,  and  without  that  numerous
body  of  'gens  lumineux,'  the  government,
say  the  CSconomists,  will  surely  be  bad,
be  it  a  government  of  one  or  a  few,  or  be
it  a  government  of  many.  If  it  be  a
government  of  one  or  a  few,  it  will  con-
sult exclusively  the  peculiar  and  narrow
interests  of  a  portion  or  portions  of  the
community:  for  it  will  not  be  constrained
to  the  advancement  of  the  general  or
common  good,  by  the  general  opinion  of
a  duly  instructed  sode^.  If  it  be  a  gov-
emment  of  many,  it  may  not  be  diverted
from  the  advancement  of  tiie  general  or
common  good,  by  partial  ana  sinister
regard  for  peculiar  and  narrow  interests :
but,  being  controlled  by  the  general
opinion  of  the  society,  and  that  society
not  being  duly  instructed,  it  will  often
be  turned  from  the  paths  leading  to  its
appropriate  end,  by  the  restive  and  tyran-
nous prejudices  of  an  ignorant  and  asi-
nine multitude. — But,  given  that  know-
ledge in  the  bulk  of  the  people,  and  given
that  numerous  body  or  *  light -dif  using
citizens,'  the  government,  say  the  (Econ-
omists, let  the  form  be  what  it  may,  will
be  strongly  and  steadily  impelled  to  the
furtherance  of  the  general  good,  by  the
sound  and  commanmng  monlity  obtain-
ing throughout  the  community.  And,
for  numerous  and  plausible  reasons
(which  my  limits  compel  me  to  omit),
they  affirm,  that  in  any  society  thus
duly  instructed,  monarchical  government
would  not  only  be  the  best,  but  would
surely  be  chosen  by  that  enlightened
community,  in  preference  to  a  govern-
ment of  a  few,  or  even  to  a  government
of  many.

Such  is  the  opinion  (stated  briefly,
and  without  their  peculiar  phraseology)
which  was  taught  by  Quesnai  and  the
other  (Economists  about  the  middle  of
the  last  century.  And  such  is  also  the
opinion  (although  he  conceived  it  less
clearly,  and  less  completely,  than  they)
which  was  pubUshed  bv  their  great  pre-
cursor, in  the  middle  of  the  century  pre-
ceding.

The  opinion  taught  by  the  (Economists
is  rather,  perhaps,  defective,  than  posi-
tively erroneous.  Their  opinion,  perhaps,
is  sound,  so  far  as  it  reaches :  but  they
leave  an  essential  consideration  uncan-
vassed  and  nearly  untouched. — In  a
political  community  not  duly  instructed.


jurisprudence  determined.


283


persons  in  whom  the  right  resides.  To  every  legal  right,  there
are  therefore  three  parties :  The  sovereign  government  of  on^  or
a  number  which  sets  the  positive  law,  and  which  through  the
positive  law  confers  the  legal  right,  and  imposes  the  relative
duty :  the  person  or  persons  on  whom  the  right  is  conferred :
the  person  or  persons  on  whom  the  duty  is  imposed,  or  to
whom  the  positive  law  is  set  or  directed. — Aa  I  shall  show
hereafter,  the  person  or  persons  invested  with  the  right,  are  not
necessarily  members  of  the  independent  political  society  wherein
the  author  of  the  law  is  sovereign  or  supreme.  The  person  or
persons  invested  with  the  right,  may  be  a  member  or  members,
sovereign  or  subject,  of  another  society  political  aud  independent.
But  (taking  the  proposition  with  the  slight  correctives  which  I
shall  state  hereafter)  the  person  or  persons  on  whom  the  duty  is
imposed,  or  to  whom  the  law  is  set  or  directed,  are  necessarily
members  of  the  independent  political  society  wherein  the  author
of  the  law  is  sovereign  or  supreme.  For  unless  the  party  bur-
thened  with  the  duty  were  subject  to  the  author  of  the  law,  the
party  would  not  be  obnoxious  to  the  legal  or  political  sanction
by  which  the  duty  and  the  right  are  respectively  enforced  and
protected.  A  government  can  hardly  impose  legal  duties  or
obligations  upon  members  of  foreign  societies :  although  it  can
invest  them  with  legal  rights,  by  imposing  relative  duties  upon
members  of  its  own  community.  A  party  bearing  a  legal  right,
is  not  necessarily  burthened  with  a  legal  trust.  Consequently,
a  party  may  b^r  and  exercise  a  legal  right,  though  the  party
cannot  be  touched  by  the  might  or  power  of  its  author. But


Lect.  VI

giate  and
sovereign
capacity,
has  no
U^gal  rights
(in  the
proper  ac-
ceptation
of  the
term)
agaitist
Us  <yum
siUjjects,


a  ^vemment  good  and  stable  is,  I
beheve,  impossible:  and  in  a  political
community  duly  instmcted,  monarchy,
I  incline  to  belieye,  were  better  than
democracy.  Bnt  in  a  political  community
not  duly  instructed,  is  not  popular  gov-
ernment, with  all  its  awkward  complex-
ness,  less  inconvenient  than  monarchy  f
And,  unless  the  goyemment  be  popular,
can  a  political  community  not  auly  in-
structea,  emerge  from  darkness  to  light  ?
from  the  ignorance  of  political  science,
which  is  the  principal  cause  of  misrule,
to  the  knowledge  of  political  science,
which  were  the  Mst  security  against  it  ?
— ^To  these  questions,  the  (Economists
hardly  advert :  and,  unhappily,  the  best
of  possible  eovemments  for  a  society  al-
ready enlightened,  is,  when  compared
with  these,  a  question  of  little  importance.
The  (Economists,  indeed,  occasionally
admit,  '  que  dans  V^tat  cPignorance  I'au-
torit4  est  plus  dangereuse  dans  les  mains


d'un  seul,  qu'elle  ne  Test  dans  les  mains
de  plusieurs.'  But  with  this  considera-
tion they  rarely  meddle.  They  commonly
infer  or  assume,  that,  since  in  the  state  of
ignorance  the  eoyemment  is  inevitably
bad,  the  form  of  the  government,  during
that  state,  is  a  matter  of  consummate
indifference.  Agreeing  with  them  in
most  of  their  premises,  I  arrivd  at  an
inference  extremely  remote  from  theirs  ;
namely,  that  in  a  community  already
enlightened,  the  form  of  the  government
were  nearly  a  matter  of  indifference  ;  but
that  where  a  community  is  still  in  the
state  of  ignorance,  the  form  of  the  gov-
ernment is  a  matter  of  the  highest  im-
portance.

The  political  and  osconomical  system
of  Quesnai  and  the  other  (Economists,
is  stated  concisely  and  clearly  by  M.
Mercier  de  la  Riviere  in  his  'L'Ordre
naturel  et  essentiel  des  Soci6t4s  poll-
tiques.'


284  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  unless  the  opposite  party,  or  the  party  burthened  with  the
"^  *  relative  duty,  could  be  touched  by  the  might  of  its  author,  the
right  and  the  relative  duty,  with  the  law  which  confers  and  im-
poses  them,  were  merely  nominal  and  illusory.  And  (taking
the  proposition  with  the  slight  correctives  which  I  shall  state
hereafter)  a  person  obnoxious  to  the  sanction  enforcing  a  positive
law,  is  necessarily  subject  to  the  author  of  the  law,  or  is
necessarily  a  member  of  the  society,  wherein  the  author  is
sovereign.

It  follows  from  the  essentials  of  a  legal  right,  that  a  sovereign
government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign  government  of  a  number  in
its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  has  no  legal  rights  (in  the
proper  acceptation  of  the  term)  against  its  own  subjects.

To  every  legal  righ£,  there  are  three  several  parties :  namely,
/  a  party  bearing  the  right ;  a  party  burthened  with  the  relative
/  duty;  and  a  sovereign  government  setting  the  law  through
which  the  right  and  the  duty  are  respectively  conferred  and  im-
posed. A  sovereign  government  cannot  acquire  rights  through
laws  set  by  itself  to  its  own  subjects.  A  man  is  no  more  able
to  confer  a  right  on  himself,  than  he  is  able  to  impose  on  himself
a  law  or  duty.  Every  party  bearing  a  right  (divine,  legal,  or
moral)  has  necessarily  acquired  the  right  through  the  might  or
power  of  another:  that  is  to  say,  through  a  law  and  a  duty
(proper  or  improper)  laid  by  that  other  party  on  a  further  and
distinct  party.  Consequently,  if  a  sovereign  government  had
legal  rights  against  its  own  subjects,  those  rights  were  the  crea-
tures of  positive  laws  set  to  its  own  subjects  by  a  third  person
or  body.  And,  as  every  positive  law  is  laid  by  a  sovereign
government  on  a  person  or  persons  in  a  state  of  subjection  to
itself,  that  third  person  or  body  were  sovereign  in  that  com-
munity whose  own  sovereign  government  bore  the  legal  rights :
that  is  to  say,  the  community  were  subject  to  its  own  sovereign,
and  were  also  subject  to  a  sovereign  conferring  rights  upon  its
own. Which  is  impossible  and  absurd.^^^

'  Bight  is  (^)  It  has  often  been  affirmed  that  of  another :  namely,  the  author  of  the
mignt.*  'right  is  might,*  or  that  *mi^ht  is  right'  kw  by  which  the  right  is  conferred,
Bat  this  paradoxical  proposition  (a  great  and  by  which  the  duty  answering  to  the
favourite  with  shallow  scofifers  and  buf-  right  is  laid  on  a  third  and  distinct  part^.
feons)  is  either  a  flat  truism  affectedly  Speaking  generally,  a  person  who  is
and  darkly  expressed,  or  is  thoroughly  clothed  with  a  right  is  weak  rather  than
false  and  absurd.  mighty ;  and  unless  he  were  shielded
If  it  mean  that  a  ^rty  who  possesses  from  harm  by  the  might  of  the  author
a  right  possesses  the  right  through  might  of  the  right,  he  would  live,  by  reason  of
or  power  of  his  own,  the  proposition  is  his  weakness,  in  ceaseless  insecurity  and
false  and  absurd.  For  a  party  who  alarm.  For  example :  Such  is  the  pre-
possesses a  right  necessarily  possesses  dicament  of  persons  clothed  with  legal
the  ^" the  might  or  power  rights,  who  are  merely  subject  members


yurisprudence  determined.


285


But  so  far  as  they  are  bound  by  the  law  of  God  to  obey
their  temporal  sovereign,  a  sovereign  government  has  rights  divine
against  its  own  subjects :  rights  which  are  conferred  upon  itself,


Lect.  VI


of  an  independent  political  society,  and
who  owe  tneir  legal  rights  to  the  might
and  pleasure  of  tneir  sovereiip.

If  it  mean  that  right  and  might  are
one  and  the  same  thing,  or  are  merely
different  names  for  one  and  the  same
object,  the  proposition  in  Question  is  also
false  and  absurd.  My  pnysical  ability
to  move  about,  when  my  body  is  free
from  bonds,  may  be  called  migJU  or
power,  but  cannot  be  called  a  right:
though  my  ability  to  move  about  wWwui
hindrance  from  you,  may  doubtless  be
styled  a  righty  wiUi  perfect  precision  and
propriety,  if  I  owe  the  ability  to  a  law
imposed  upon  you  by  another.

If  it  mean  that  every  right  is  a  crea-
ture of  might  or  power,  the  proposition
is  merely  a  truism  disguised  in  para-
doxical language.  For  every  right  (di-
vine, legal,  or  moral)  rests  on  a  relative
duty  ;  tnat  is  to  say,  a  duty  lying  on  a
party  or  parties  other  than  the  paxty  or
parties  in  whom  the  right  resides.  And,
manifestly,  that  relative  duty  would  not
be  a  duty  substantially,  if  the  law  which
affects  to  impose  it  were  not  sustained
by  might

I  wul  briefly  remark  before  I  conclude
the  note,  that  '  right '  has  two  meanings
which  ought  to  be  distiDguiBhed  carefully.

The  noun  substantive  '  a  right '  signi-
fies that  which  jurists  denominate  'a
faculty : '  that  which  resides  in  a  deter-
minate' party  or  parties,  by  virtue  of  a
given  law ;  and  which  avails  against  a
party  or  parties  (or  answers  to  a  duty
lying  on  a  party  or  parties)  other  than
the  party  or  parties  in  whom  it  resides.
And  the  noun  substantive  '  rights '  is  the
plural  of  the  noun  substantive  *a  ri^ht'
But  the  expression  'right,'  when  it  is
used  as  an  ai^ective,  is  equivalent  to  the
adjective  "just :'  as  the  adverb  '  rightly '
is  equivalent  to  the  adverb  'justly.  And
when  it  is  used  as  the  abstract  name
corresponding  to  the  adjective  'right,'
the  noun  suMtantive  '  right '  is  synony-
mous with  the  noun  substantive  'justice.'
— If,  for  example,  I  owe  you  a  hundred
pounds,  you  have  '  a  right '  to  the  pay-
ment of  the  money :  a  right  importins
an  obligation  to  pay  the  mone^,  which
is  incumbent  upon  me.  Now  m  case  I
make  the  payment  to  which  you  have  '  a
right,'  I  do  that  which  is ' right '  or  just,
or  I  do  that  which  consists  with  '  right '
or  justice. — ^Again :  I  have  *a  right '  to
the  quiet  enjoyment  of  my  house :  a  right
importing  a  duty  to)  forbear  from  dis-
turoing  my  enjoyment,  which  lies  upon


other  persons  generally,  or  lies  upon  the
world  at  laig^.  Now  they  who  practise
the  forbearance  to  which  I  have '  a  right,'
conduct  themselves  therein  '  rightly '  or
justly.  Or  so  far  as  they  practise  the
forbearance  to  which  I  have  '  a  right,'
their  conduct  is  '  right '  or  just  Or  so
far  as  they  practise  the  forbearance  to
which  I  have  'a  right,'  they  are  observ-
ant of  '  right '  or  justice.

It  is  manifest  uiat  '  right '  as  sif^nify-
ing  'faculty,'  and  'rijB;ht'  as  signifying
'justice,'  are  widely  different  thoagh  not
unconnected  terms.  But,  nevertheless,
the  terms  are  confounded  by  many  of  the
writers  who  attempt  a  definition  of
'  right : '  and  their  attempts  to  determine
the  meaning  of  that  very  perplexing  ex-
pression, are,  therefore,  sheer  jargon.  By
many  of  the  German  writers  on  the
sciences  of  law  and  morality  (as  by  Kant,
for  example,  in  his  '  Metaphysical  Prin-
ciples of  Jurisprudence '),  *  right '  in  the
one  sense  is  blended  with  '  right '  in  the
other.  And  through  the  disquisition  on
'right'  or  'rights,^ which  ocaurs  in  his
'Moral  Philosonhy,'  Paley  obviously
wavers  between  the  dissimilar  meanings.

An  adequate  definition  of  'a  right,'  or
of  '  right '  as  signifying  'facul^, '  cannot,
indeed,  be  rendered  easily.  In  order  to
a  definition  of  '  a  right,'  or  of  '  right '  as
signifying  'faculty,^ we  must  determine
the  respective  differences  of  the  principal
kinds  of  rights,  and  also  the  respective
meanings  of  many  intricate  terms  which
are  immied  by  the  term  to  be  defined.

The  Italian  'diritto,' the  French  'droit,'
the  German  'recht,'  and  the  English
'right,'  signify  'right*  as  meaning  'fa-
culty,' and  also  signify  'justice :'  though
each  of  those  several  tongues  has  a
name  which  is  appropriate  to  'justice,'
and  by  which  it  is  denoted  without  ambi-
gtiity.

In  the  Latin,  Italian,  French,  and
German,  the  name  which  si^ifies  '  right '
as  meaning '  faculty,'  also  signifies '  law : '
'jus,'  'diritto,'  'droit,'  or  'recht,'  denoting
indifferently  either  of  the  two  objects.
Accordingly,  the  '  recht '  which  signifies
'law,'  and  the  'recht'  which  signifies
'right'  as  meaning  'fSaculty,'  are  con-
founded by  German  writers  on  the  philo-
sophy or  rationale  of  law,  and  even  by
German  expositors  of  particular  systems
of  jurisprudence.  Not  perceiving  that
the  two  names  are  names  respectively
for  two  disparate  objects,  they  make  of
the  two  objects,  or  make  of  the  two
names,  one  'recht' Which  one  'recht,'


'Right'  as
meaning
'faculty,'
'right*  as
meaning
'justice,'  *
and 'right*
as  meaning
'kw.*


2  86  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  through  duties  which  are  laid  upon  its  subjects,  by  laws  of  a
'  '  common  superior.  And  so  far  as  the  members  of  its  own  com-
munity are  severally  constrained  to  obey  it  by  the  opinion  of
the  community  at  large,  it  has  also  moral  rights  (or  rights  arising
from  positive  morality)  against  its  own  subjects  severally  con-
sidered :  rights  which  are  conferred  upon  itself  by  the  opinion
of  the  community  at  large,  and  which  answer  to  relative  duties
laid  upon  its  several  subjects  by  the  general  or  prevalent  opinion
of  the  same  indeterminate  body.

Consequently,  when  we  say  that  a  sovereign  government,  as
against  its  own  subjects,  has  or  has  not  a  right  to  do  this  or
that,  we  necessarily  mean  by  a  riglU  (supposing  we  speak  exactly),
a  right  divirie  or  moral:  we  necessarily  mean  (supposing  we
speak  exactly),  that  it  has  or  has  not  a  right  derived  from  a  law
of  Grod,  or  derived  from  a  law  improperly  so  called  which  the
general  opinion  of  the  community  sets  to  its  members  severally.

But  when  we  say  that  a  government,  as  against  its  own
subjects,  has  or  has  not  a  right  to  do  this  or  that,  we  not  un-
commonly mean  that  we  deem  the  act  in  question  generally
'useful  or  pernicious.  This  application  of  the  term  right,  resembles
an  application  of  the  term  justice  to  which  I  have  adverted  above.
— An  act  which  conforms  to  the  Divine  law,  is  styled,  emphatic-
ally, just :  an  act  which  does  not,  is  styled,  emphatically,  unjust
An  act  which  is  generally  useful,  conforms  to  the  Divine  law  as
known  through  the  principle  of  utility:  an  act  which  is  generally
pernicious,  does  not  conform  to  the  Divine  law  as  known  through
the  same  exponent  Consequently,  'an  act  which  is  just  or
unjust^'  and  '  an  act  which  is  generally  useful  or  generally  per-
nicious,' are  nearly  equivalent  expressions. — An  act  which  a

as  forming  a  genus  or  kind,  they  divide  and  *recht  in  the  subjective  sense;'  de-
into  two  species  or  two  sorts :  namely,  noting  by  the  former  of  those  onapposite
the  ' recht '  eqaivaJent  to  ' law/ and  the  phrases,  'law;'  and  denoting  by  the
'  recht '  equivalent  to  '  right  *  as  meaning  latter, '  right  *  as  meaning  '  faculty.'
'faculty.'  And  since  the  strongest  and  The  confusion  of  'law 'and  'right,'
wariest  minds  are  often  ensnared  by  our  own  writers  avoid  :  for  the  two  dis-
ambiguous  words,  their  confusion  of  parate  objects  which  the  terms  respect-
those  disparate  objects  is  a  venial  error,  ively  signify,  are  commonly  denoted  in
Some,  however,  of  these  German  writers  our  own  limguafie  by  palpably  distinct
are  guilty  of  a  grave  offence  against  marks.  I  say  that  they  are  commonly
good  sense  and  taste.  They  thicken  the  denoted  in  our  own  language  by  palpablv
mess  which  that  confusion  produces,  distinct  marks :  for  the  modem  English
with  a  misapplication  of  terms  borrowed  '  right '  (which  probably  comes  from  the
from  the  Kantian  philosophy.  They  Anglo  Saxon,  and  therefore  is  allied  to
divide  '  recht,'  as  forming  the  genus  or  the  German  '  recht ')  means,  in  a  few  in-
kind,  into  *  recht  in  the  objective  sense,'  stances,  'law.'^

^  'Hale  and  Blackstone  (as  I  have  They  translate iiMpersonarum  et  remm,
mentioned  in  the  Outline)  are  misled  by  "  rights  of  persons  and  things : "  which  is
this  double  meaning  of  the  word  jus. mere  jargon.' — MS,  Note,


yiirisprtidence  determined.  287

sovereign  government  has  a  Divine  right  to  do,  it,  emphatically,  Lect.  vi
has  a  right  to  do :  if  it  has  not  a  Divine  right,  it,  emphatically,
has  not  a  right  An  act  which  were  generally  useful,  the  Divine
law,  as  known  through  the  principle  of  utility,  has  conferred  on
the  sovereign  government  a  right  to  do :  an  act  which  were
generally  pernicious,  the  Divine  law,  as  known  through  the
same  exponent,  has  not  conferred  on  the  sovereign  government
a  right  to  do.  Consequently,  an  act  which  the  government  has
a  right  to  do,  is  an  act  which  were  generally  useful :  as  an  act
which  the  government  has  not  a  right  to  do,  is  an  act  which
were  generally  pernicious.

To  ignorance  or  neglect  of  the  palpable  truths  which  I  have
expounded  in  the  present  section,  we  may  impute  a  pernicious
jargon  that  was  current  in  our  own  country  on  the  eve  of  her
horrible  war  with  her  North  American  children.  By  the  great
and  small  rabble  in  and  out  of  parliament,  it  was  said  that  the
government  sovereign  in  Britain  was  also  sovereign  in  the
colonies;  and  that,  since  it  was  sovereign  in  the  colonies,  it
had  a  right  to  tax  their  inhabitants.  It  was  objected  by  Mr.
Burke  to  the  project  of  taxing  their  inhabitants,  that  the  project
W£U}  ineapedierU :  pregnant  with  probable  evil  to  the  inhabitants
of  the  colonies,  «uid  pregnant  with  probable  evil  to  the  inhabit-
ants of  the  mother  country.  But  to  that  most  rational  objection,
the  sticklers  for  the  scheme  of  taxation  returned  tins  asinine
answer.  They  said  that  the  British  government  had  a  right  to
tax  the  colonists ;  and  that  it  ought  not  to  be  withheld  by  paltry
considerations  of  ea^ediency,  from  enforcing  its  sovereign  right
against  its  refractory  subjects. — ^Now,  assuming  that  the  govern-
ment sovereign  in  Britain  was  properly  sovereign  in  the  colonies,
it  had  no  legal  right  to  tsix  its  colonial  subjects ;  although  it
was  not  restrained  by  positive  law,  from  dealing  with  its  colonial
subjects  at  its  own  pleasure  or  discretion.  If,  then,  the  sticklers
for  the  scheme  of  taxation  had  any  determinate  meaning,  they
meant  that  the  British  government  was  empowered  by  the  law
of  God  to  tax  its  American  subjects.  But  it  had  not  a  Divine
right  to  tax  its  American  subjects,  unless  the  project  of  taxing
them  accorded  with  general  utility:  for  every  Divine  right
springs  from  the  Divine  law ;  and  to  the  Divine  law,  general
utility  is  the  index.  Consequently,  when  the  sticklers  for  the
scheme  of  taxation  opposed  the  right  to  expediency y  they  opposed
the  right  to  the  only  test  by  which  it  was  possible  to  determine
the  reality  of  the  right  itself.  ^

A  .  ®  .  .  From  an

A  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign  government  appear-


288

Lect.  VI

ance  of  a
sovereign
govern-
ment
before  a
tribunal  of
its  own,
we  cannot
infer  that
the  gov-
ernment
lies  under
legal

duties,  or
has  legal
rights
against  its
own  sub-
jects.


The  Province  of

of  a  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  may  appear
in  the  character  of  defendant,  or  may  appear  in  the  character  of
demandant,  before  a  tribunal  of  its  own  appointment,  or  deriving
jurisdiction  from  itself.  But  from  such  an  appearance  of  a
sovereign  government,  we  cannot  infer  that  the  government  lies
imder  legal  duties,  or  has  legal  rights  against  its  own  subjects.

Supposing  that  the  claim  of  the  plaintiff  against  the  sovereign
defendant  were  truly  founded  on  a  positive  law,  it  were  founded
on  a  positive  law  set  to  the  sovereign  defendant  by  a  third  person
or  body :  or  (changing  the  phrase)  the  sovereign  defendant  would
be  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  another  and  superior  sovereign.
Which  is  impossible  and  absurd. — And  supposing  that  the
claim  of  the  sovereign  demandant  were  truly  founded  on  a  posi-
tive law,  it  were  founded  on  a  positive  law  set  by  a  third  party
to  a  member,  or  members  of  the  society  wherein  the  demandant
is  supreme :  or  (changing  the  phrase)  the  society  subject  to  the
sovereign  demandant,  were  subject,  at  the  same  time,  to  another
supreme  government. Which  is  also  impossible  and  absurd.

Besides,  where  the  sovereign  government  appears  in  the
character  of  defendant,  it  appears  to  a  claim  founded  on  a  so
called  law  which  it  has  set  to  itself.  It  therefore  may  defeat
the  claim  by  abolishing  the  law  entirely,  or  by  abolishing  the
law  in  the  particular  or  specific  case. — ^Where  it  appears  in  the
character  of  demandant,  it  apparently  founds  its  claim  on  a
positive  law  of  its  own,  and  it  pursues  its  claim  judicially.  But
although  it  reaches  its  purpose  through  a  general  and  prospective
rule,  and  through  the  medium  of  judicial  procedure,  it  is  legally
free  to  accomplish  its  end  by  an  arbitrary  or  irregular  exercise
of  its  legally  unlimited  power.

The  rights  which  are  pursued  against  it  before  tribunals  of
its  own,  and  also  the  rights  which  it  pursues  before  tribunals  of
its  own,  are  merely  arudogous  to  legal  rights  (in  the  proper
acceptation  of  the  term):  or  (borrowing  the  brief  and  com-
modious expressions  by  which  the  Boman  jurists  commonly
denote  an  analogy)  they  are  legal  rights  quasiy  or  legal  rights
uti. — ^The  rights  which  are  pursued  against  it  before  tribunals
of  its  own,  it  may  extinguish  by  its  own  authority.  But,  this
notwithstanding,  it  permits  the  demandants  to  prosecute  their
claims :  And  it  yields  to  those  claims,  when  they  are  established
judicially,  as  if  they  were  truly  founded  on  positive  laws  set  to
itself  by  a  third  and  distinct  party. — The  rights  which  it  pursues
before  tribunals  of  its  own,  are  powers  which  it  is  free  to  exer-
cise according  to  its  own  pleasure. But,  this  notwithstanding,


Jurisprudence  determined.  289

it  prosecutes  its  claims  through  the  medium  of  judicial  pro- Leot.  VI
cedure,  ew  if  they  were  truly  founded  on  positive  laws  set  to '
the  parties  defendant  by  a  third  person  or  body.**

The  foregoing  explanation  of  the  seeming  legal  rights  which
are  pursued  against  sovereign  governments  before  tribunals  of
their  own,  tallies  with  the  style  of  judicial  procedure,  which,  in
all  or  most  nations,  is  observed  in  cases  of  the  kind.  The  object
of  the  plaintifiTs  claim  is  not  demanded  as  of  right,  but  is  begged
of  the  sovereign  defendant  as  a  grace  or  favour.

In  our  own  country,  claims  pursued  judicially  against  our
own  king  are  presented  to  the  courts  of  justice  in  the  same  or
a  similar  style.  The  plaintiff  jpc^i^ioTw  the  royal  defendant  to
grant  him  his  so  called  right :  or  he  siums  to  the  royal  defendant
his  so  called  right  and  injury,  and  prays  the  royal  defendant  to
yield  him  fitting  redress. — ^But  where  a  claim  is  pursued  judici-
ally against  our  own  king,  this  mendicant  style  of  presenting
the  claim  is  merely  accidental  It  arises  from  the  mere  accident
to  which  I  have  adverted  already :  namely,  that  our  own  king,
though  not  properly  sovereign,  is  completely  free  in  fact  fix)m
legal  or  political  duties.  Since  he  is  free  in  fact  from  every
legal  obligation,  no  one  has  a  legal  right  (in  the  proper  accepta-
tion of  the  term)  against  the  king :  for  if  any  had  a  legal  right
against  the  king,  the  king  were  necessarily  subject  to  an  answer-
ing legal  duty.  But  seeing  that  our  own  king  is  merely  a  limb
of  the  parliament,  and  is  virtually  in  a  state  of  subjection  to
that  sovereign  body  or  aggregate,  he  is  capable  of  legal  duties :
that  is  to  say,  duties  imposed  upon  him  by  that  sovereign  body
or  aggregate  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  character.  For  the
same  reason,  he  is  capable  of  legal  rights :  that  is  to  say,  rights
conferred  upon  him  by  that  sovereign  body  or  aggregate,  and
answering  to  relative  duties  imposed  by  the  same  body  on  others
of  its  own  subjects.  Accordingly,  the  king  has  legal  rights  against
others  of  his  fellow  subjects :  though  by  reason  of  his  actual  exemp-
tion from  every  legal  obligation,  none  of  his  fellow  subjects  have
legal  rights  against  him.

Though  a  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign  govern-  Though  a
ment  of  a  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity,  cannot  ^vem?"
have  legal  rights  against  its  own  subjects,  it  may  have  a  legal  ™e»^t  ^^
right  against  a  subject  or  subjects  of  another  sovereign  govern-  sovereign
ment. For  seeing  that  a  legal  or  political  right  is  not  of  neces-  govem-
sity  saddled  with  a  legal  or  political  trust,  the  positive  law  number  in

^  A  good  govemment  wiU  not  arbi-  ferred.  And,  where  possible,  will  accom-
trarilj  (or  by  esc  Tpoai  fada  commands)  plish  its  ends  by  prospective  rules. —
abrogate  quasi  rights  which  it  has  con- MS.  Note,

VOL.  I.  U


290  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI  conferring  the  right  may  not  be  set  to  the  government  on  which

its  coUe-  ^^  r\^\,  is  conferred The  law  conferring  the  right  (as  well

giateand  as  the  relative  duty  answering  to  the  right)  may  be  laid  or

capacit^  imposed  exclusively  on  the  subject  or  subjects  of  the  government

cannot  ^^y  -^hich  the  right  is  imparted. The  possession  of  a  legal  or

rights  political  right  against  a  subject  or  subjects  of  another  sovereign

0^°  ub-^  government,  consists,  therefore,  with  that  independence  which  is

jects,  it  one  of  the  essentials  of  sovereignty. And  since  the  legal  right

rfegal*^^  is  acquired  from  another  government,  and  through  a  law  which

right  it  sets  to  a  subject  or  subjects  of  its  own,  the  existence  of  the

subject  or  ^^8^  ri^\»  implies  no  absurdity. It  is  neither  acquired  through

subjects  of  a  positive  law  set  by  the  government  which  acquires  it,  nor

vereigugo^  through  a  positive  law  set  by  another  government  to  a  member

vemment.  or  members  of  the  society  wherein  the  acquirer  is  supreme.^

The  origin I  now  have  defined  or  determined  the  general  notion  of

of  pomical  sovereignty,  including  the  general  notion  of  independent  political

goTern- society :  And,  in  order  that  I  might  further  elucidate  the  nature

socfetyT ^^  essence  of sovereignty,  and  of  the  independent  apolitical

society  which  sovereignty  implies,  I  have  considered  the  possible

forms  of  supreme  political  government  with  the  limits,  real  or

' imaginary,  of  supreme  political  power. To  complete  my  intended

disquisition  on  the  nature  or  essence  of  sovereignty,  and  of  the

independent  political  society  that  sovereignty  implies,  T  proceed

to  the  origin  or  causes  of  the  habitual  or  permanent  obedience,

which,  in  every  society  political  and  independent,  is  rendered  by

the  bulk  of  the  community  to  the  monarch  or  sovereign  number.

In  other  words,  I  proceed  to  the  origin  or  causes  of  political

government  and  society.

The  proper  purpose  or  end  of  a  sovereign  political  govern-
ment, or  the  purpose  or  end  for  which  it  ought  to  exist,  is  the
greatest  possible  advancement  of  human  happiness :  Though,  if
it  would  duly  accomplish  its  proper  purpose  or  end,  or  advance
as  far  as  is  possible  the  weal  or  good  of  mankind,  it  commonly
must  labour  directly. and  particularly  to  advance  as  far  as  is
possible  the  weal  of  its  own  community. The  good  of  the

^  In  our  own  courts  of  law  and  equity  hurst  in  the  House  of  Lords. 2  Bli^h

it  is  held  as  undoubted, that  foreiffn  Re^rts. New  series,  p.  31. Case  of  the

sovereigns,  whether  in  name  monarcns  United  States  of  America  v. Wagner,

or  republics,  can  sue  in  their  sovereign  Court  of  Chancery,  May  29,  June  11,  17,

capacity; and  they  are  recognised  as  1867. Judgment  by  Lord  Chancellor

plaintiffs  in  our  courts  of  law  and  equitv  Chelmsford  and Lord  Justices  Turner

by  the  same  name  and  style  under  which  and  Cairns.)

they  are  recognised  by  our  own  soverei^  As  to  the  possibility  of  a  sovereign

(that  is,  nominally,  by  Her  Majesty)  m  bein^  subject  to  another  sovereign,  to

diplomatic  intercourse. — (Case of  the  certain  limited  effects,  see  concluding  ex-

Eing  of  Spain,  judgment  by  Lord  Lynd-  planations  in  this  chapter. — R.  C.
i


yurisprudence  determined.  2  9 1

universal  society  formed  by  mankind,  is  the  aggregate  good  of  Lect.  vi
the  particular  societies  into  which  mankind  is  divided :  just  as  "
the  happiness  of  any  of  those  societies  is  the  aggregate  happiness
of  its  single  or  individual  members.  Though,  then  the  weal  of
mankind  is  the  proper  object  of  a  government,  or  though  the
test  of  its  conduct  is  the  principle  of  general  utility,  it  commonly
ought  to  consult  directly  and  particularly  the  weal  of  the
particular  community  which  the  Deity  has  committed  to  its
rule.  If  it  truly  adjust  its  conduct  to  the  principle  of  general
utility,  it  commonly  will  aim  immediately  at  the  particular  and
more  precise,  rather  than  the  general  and  less  determinate  end.

It  were  easy  to  show,  that  the  general  and  particular  ends
never  or  rarely  conflict.  Universally,  or  nearly  universally,  the
ends  are  perfectly  consistent,  or  rather  are  inseparably  connected.
An  enlightened  regard  for  the  common  happiness  of  nations,
implies  an  enlightened  patriotism;  whilst  the  stupid  and  atrocious
patriotism  which  looks  exclusively  to  country,  and  would  further
the  interests  of  country  at  the  cost  of  all  other  communities,
grossly  misapprehends  and  frequently  crosses  the  interests  that
are  the  object  of  its  narrow  concern. — But  the  topic  which  I  now
have  suggested,  belongs  to  the  province  of  ethics,  rather  than
the  province  of  jurisprudence.  It  belongs  especially  to  the
peculiar  department  of  ethics,  which  is  concerned  with  inter-
national morality :  which  afiects  to  determine  the  morality  that
ought  to  obtain  between  nations,  or  to  determine  the  international
morality  commended  by  genei'al  utility .^^^

(^)  The  proper  purpose  or  end  of  a  8ove-  greatest  possible adyancement of tht  The  proper

reign  political  government,  or  the  purpose  comwon  Mppinesa  or  weal :  *  meaning  in- purpose  or

or  end  for  which  it  ought  to  exist,  is  con-  differently  by  '  the  common  happiness  or  end  of  po-

ceived  inadequately,  or  is  conceived  ob-  weal,'  the  common  happiness  or  weal  of  liticalgov-

scurely,  by  most  or  many  of  the  specula-  its  own  particular  community,  or  the  com- emment

tors  on  political  government  and  society,  mon  happiness  or  weal  of  the  universal and  so-

To  advance  as  far  as  is  possible  the  weal  community  of  mankind. (Here  I  may ciety,  or
or  good  of  mankind,  is  more  generally  but  remark,  that  in  my  fourth  lecture,  from the  pur-
more  vaguely  its  pro^r  purpose  or  end  :  page  155  to  159,  I  shortly  examined  a  pose  or  end
To  advance  as  far  as  is  possible  the  weal  current  misconception  of  the  theory  of  for  which
of  its  own  community,  is  more  particu-  general  utility  ;  and  that  the  brief  sug- they
larly  and  more  determinately  tne  pur-  gestions  which  I  then  threw  out,  may ougnt  to

Cor  end  for  which  it  ought  to  exist,  easily  be  fitted  to  the  topic  on  which  I exist

rif  it  would  accomplish  the  general  now  have  touched.)
object,  it  commonly  must  labour  directly To  advance  as  far  as  is  possible  the

to  accomplish  the  particular :  And  it  weal  or  good  of  mankind,  or  to  advance

hardly  will  accomplish  the  particular  ob-  as  far  as  is  possible  the  weal  of  its  own

ject,  unless  it  regard  the  general. Since,  community,  is,  then,  the  paramount  or

then,  each  of  the  objects  is  inseparably  absolute  end  for  which  a  sovereign  gov-

connected  with  the  other,  either  may  hd  emment  ought  to  exist. We  may  say

deemed  the  paramount  object  for  which  of  the  government  itself,  what  Bacon

the  sovereign  government  ought  to  exist  says  of  uie  law  which  it  sets  to  its  sub-

We  therefore  may  say,  for  the  sake  of  con-  jects :  '  Finis  et  scopus  quem  intueri  de-

ciseness,  that  its  proper  paramount  pur-  bet,  non  alius  est,  quam  ut  cives  felidter

pose,  or  its  proper  absolute  end,  is  'the  degant.' The  way,  indeed,  of  the  gov-


292  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI From  the  proper  purpose  or  end  of  a  sovereign  political

' government,  or  from  the  purpose  or  end  for  which  it  ought  to

exist,  we  may  readily  infer  the  causes  of  that  habitual  obedience

emment  to  the  attainment  of  its  abao-  tion  would  stand  thus : '  The  creation

lute  end,  lies  through  the  attainment  of  and  protection  of  legal  rights  of  dominion,

ends  which  may  m  styled  subordinate  is  the  end  of  every  goyernment ;  but  the

or  instrumental : Or  in  order  that  the  creation  of  lej;al  rights  which  are  not

government  may  accomplish  its  proper  rights  of  dominion  (as  legal  rights,  for

absolute  end,  the  government  must  ac-  example,  which  are  properly  effects  of

complin  ends  subserving  that  absolute  contracts),  is  not  parcel  of  its  end,  or

end,  or  serving  as  means  to  its  accom-  falls  not  within  its  scope/ Con8e<^uently,

pUshment  But  the  subordinate  or  instru-  their  proposition  amounts  to  this :  '  To

mental  ends  through  which  the  govern-  confer  on  its  subjects  legal  rights,  and

ment  must  accompBsh  its  paramount  or  to  preserve  those  rights  from  in&inge-

absolute  end, will  hardly  admit  of  a  ment,  is  the  end  of  every  government  ^

complete  description,  or  a  description  Now  the  proper  paramount  purpose  of  a

approaching  to  completeness. Certainly  sovereign  political  government,  is  not

they  are  not  to  be  determined,  and  are  the creation  and protection of  legal

not  to  be  suggested  justly,  by  a  short  rights  or  faculties,  or  (in  the  terms  of  uie

and  sweeping  definition. For,  assum-  proposition)  the  institution  and  protec-

ing  that  the  government  accomplished  tion  of  property. If  the  creation  and

thoroughly  its  paramount  or  absolute  protection  of  legal  rights  were  its  proper

purpose,  its  care  would  extend  (as  Bacon  paramount  purpose,  its  proper  paramount

adequately  affirms) '  ad  im,nia  circa  bene  purpose  might  be  the  advancement  of

esse  civitatis  ;'  its  care  would  extend  to  misery,  rather  than  the  advancement  of

all  the  means  through  which  it  probably  haopiness ; since many of the legal

might  minister  to  tne  furtherance  of  the  rignts  which  governments  have  created

common  weaL  and  protected  (as  the  rights  of  masters.

But,  by  most  or  many  of  the  specula-  for example, to and against  slaves),

tors  on  political  government  and  society,  are generally  pernicious, rather thaii

one  or  a  few  of  the  instrumental  ends  ^nerallv  usdful. To  advance  as  far  as

throueh  which  a  government  must  ac-  is  possible  the common  happiness  or

compush  its  proper  absolute  end,  are  weal,  a  government  must  confer  on  its

mistaken  for  that  paramount  purpose.  subjects  legal  rights :  that  is  to  say.

For  example : It  is  said  by  many  of  a  government  must  confer  on  its  sub-

the  speculatora  on  political  government  jects htfMficenl  legal rights, or audi

and  society,  that  '  the  end  of  every  gov-  legal  rights  as  general  utility  commends,

emment  is  to  institute  and  protect  pro-  And, having  conferred  on  its  subjects

perty.' And  here  I  must  remark,  by  the  beneficent  legal  rights,  the  government,

b^,  that  the  propounders  of  this  absurdity  moreover, must preserve  those  rights

eve  to  the  term  *  property '  an  extremely  from  infringement,  by  enforcing  the  cor-

rge  and  not  very  definite  signification,  responding  sanctions. But  the  instita-

They  mean  generally  by  the  term  '  pro-  tion  and  protection  of  beneficent  legal

perty,'  legal  rights,  or  legal  faculties:  rights,  or  of  the  kinds  of  property  that

And  they  mean  not  particularly  by  the  are  commended by  general  utility,  is

term  '  property,'  the  legal  rights,  or  le-  merely  a  subordinate  and  instrumental

gal  faculties, which are denominated  end  through  which  the  government  must

strictly  '  rights  of  property  or  dominion.*  accomplish  its  paramount  or  absolute

If  they  limited  the  term  'property '  to  purpose. As  affecting to  determine

legal  rights  of  dominion,  their  proposi-  the  absolute  end  for  which  a  sovereign


^  The maintenance of  the Rights  though  they  minister  to  that  ultimate

•  which  are  vested  in  private  individuals  purpose  for which Rights  themselves

(i.e.  in  the  governed)  is  not  the  only  end  should exist : viz. the general well-

for  which  Government  ought  to  exist,  being. ^ {fi,g,  Powera  to  construct  roads,

It  is  often  expedient  that  it  should  be  in-  etc) See  Hugo,  Lehrbueh  des  Natur-

vested  with  powera  which  neither  di-  rechts^  p.  183. — M,S.  Note,
rectly  nor  inoirectly  subserve  that  end,


^  [*  Neque  tamen  jus  publicum  ad  hoc  religionem  et  arma  et  disciplinam  et  or-

tantum  spectat,  ut  addatur  tanquam  cus-  namenta  et  opes,  deniqtie  ad  omnia  circa

tos  juri  privato,  ne  illud  violetur  atque  bene  esse  civitatis.' — Bacon.]
cessent  injurise;  sed  extenditur  etiam  ad


Jurisprudence  determined.

which  would  be  paid  to  the  sovereign  by  the  bulk  of  an  enlight-
ened society.  Supposing  that  a  given  society  were  adequately
instructed  or  enlightened,  the  habitual  obedience  to  its  govern-
ment which  was  rendered  by  the  bulk  of  the  community,  would
exclusively  arise  from  reasons  bottomed  in  the  principle  of
utility.  If  they  thought  the  government  perfect,  or  that  the
government  accomplished  perfectly  its  proper  purpose  or  end,
this  their  conviction  or  opinion  would  be  their  motive  to  obey.
If  they  deemed  the  government  faulty,  a  fear  that  the  evil  of
resistance  might  surpass  the  evil  of  obedience,  would  be  their
inducement  to  submit:  for  they  would  not  persist  in  their
obedience  to  a  government  which  they  deemed  imperfect,  if  they
thought  that  a  better  government  might  probably  be  got  by


293

Lbct.  VI


goverment  ought  to  exist,  the  proposi-
tion in  question  is,  therefore,  false.  And,
considered  as  a  definition  of  the  means
through  which  the  sovereign  govemment
must  reach  that  absolute  end,  the  propo-
sition in  question  is  defectiye.  if  the
goTemment  would  duly  accomplish  its
proper  paramount  purpose,  it  must  not
confine  its  care  to  the  creation  of  legal
rights,  and  to  the  creation  and  enforce-
ment of  the  answering  relative  duties.
There  are  absolute  legu  duties,  or  legal
duties  without  corresponding  rights,
that  are  not  a  whit  less  requisite  to  the
advancement  of  the  general  ffood  than
legal  rights  themselves  with  the  relative
duties  which  they  imply.  Nor  would  a
govemment  accomplish  thoroughly  its
proper  paramount  purpose,  if  it  merely
conferred  and  protected  the  requisite
rights,  and  imposed  and  enforced  the  re-
quisite absolute  duties :  that  is  to  say,  if
it  merely  established  and  issued  the  re-
quisite laws  and  commands,  and  looked
to  their  due  execution.  The  sum  of  the
subordinate  ends  which  may  subserve
its  absolute  end,  is  scarcely  comprised
by  a  ^od  legislation  and  a  good  admin-
istration of  justice :  Though  a  good
legislation  witii  a  good  administration  of
justice,  or  good  laws  well  administered,
are  doubtless  the  chief  of  the  means


through  which  it  must  attain  to  that  end«
or  (in  Bacon's  figurative  language)  are
the  'MTvti  of  the  common  weaL

The  prevalent  mistake  which  I  now
have  stated  and  exemplified,  is  committed
by  certain  of  the  writers  on  the  science
of  political  oeconomy,  whenever  they
meddle  incidentally  with  the  connected
science  of  legislation.  Whenever  they
step  from  their  own  into  the  adjoining
province,  they  make  expressly,  or  thev
make  tacitly  and  unconsciously,  the  fol-
lowing assumption :  that  the  proper
absolute  end  of  a  sovereign  political
^vemment  is  to  further  as  far  as  is  pos-
sible the  growth  of  the  national  wealth.
If  they  tmnk  that  a  political  institution
fosters  production  and  accumulation,  or
that  a  political  institution  damps  pro-
duction and  accumulation,  they  pro-
nounce, without  more,  that  the  institu-
tion is  eood  or  bad.  The^  forget  that
the  weaUh  of  the  community  is  not  the
weal  of  the  community,  though  wealth
is  one  of  the  means  requisite  to  the  at-
tainment of  happiness.  They  forget  that
a  political  institution  may  further  the
weal  of  the  community,  though  it  checks
the  growth  of  its  wealth ;  and  that  a
political  institution  which  quickens  the
growth  of  its  wealth,  may  hinder  the
advancement  of  its  weal.


[Mistakes  like  those  of  political  oeco-
nomists  are  made  by  utihtarians,  only
of  a  more  general  nature.  Instead  of
confounding  (specifically)  some  subordin-
ate end  of  govemment  with  the  para-
mount end  of  the  same,  they  take  a  part
of  human  happiness,  or  a  part  of  the
means  towards  it,  for  the  whole  of  human
happiness,  or  the  whole  of  those  means,
(e.^.  The  exclusion  of  poetry  or  the  fine
arts, or  the degrading them  to ^the


le.'  Their  eminent  utility.  The
wisdom  to  be  got  from  poets.  Give
examples.)

This  partial  view  of  human  happiness,
or  of  means  towards  it,  will  always  be
taken  till  a  system  of  ethical  teleology
be  oonstmcted  :  ie.  an  analysis  of  hap-
piness, the  means  towards  it,  and  there-
fore the  ends  to  be  pursued  directly. —
US,  FragmenL]


294  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI resistance,  and  that  the  probable  good  of  the  change  outweighed
its  probable  mischie£

Since  every  actual  society  is  inadequately  instructed  or
enlightened,  the  habitual  obedience  to  its  govemment  which  is
rendered  by  the  bulk  of  the  community,  is  partly  the  consequence
of  custom :  They  partly  pay  that  obedience  to  that  present  or
established  government,  because  they,  and  perhaps  their  ancestors,
have  been  in  a  habit  of  obeying  it.  Or  the  habitual  obedience
to  the  govemment  which  is  rendered  by  the  bulk  of  the  com-
munity, is  partly  the  consequence  of  prejudices:  meaning  by
'  prejudices,'  opinions  and  sentiments  which  have  no  foundation
whatever  in  the  principle  of  general  utility.  If,  for  ^example,
the  govemment  is  monarchical,  they  partly  pay  that  obedience
to  that  present  or  established  govemment  because  they  are  fond
of  monarchy  inasmuch  as  it  is  monarchy,  or  because  they  are
fond  of  the  race  from  which  the  monarch  has  descended.  Or  if,
for  example,  the  govemment  is  •popular,  they  partly  pay  that
obedience  to  that  present  or  established  govemment,  because  they
are  fond  of  democracy  inasmuch  as  it  is  democracy,  or  because
the  word  '  republic '  captivates  their  fancies  and  aflfections.

But  though  that  habitual  obedience  is  partly  the  consequence
of  custom,  or  though  that  habitual  obedience  is  partly  the  con-
sequence of  prejudices,  it  partly  arises  from  a  reason  bottomed
in  the  principle  of  utility.^  It  partly  arises  from  a  perception,
by  the  generality  or  bulk  of  the  community,  of  the  expediency
of  political  govemment :  or  (changing  the  phrase)  it  partly  arises
from  a  preference,  by  the  generality  or  bulk  of  the  community,
of  any  government  to  anarchy.  If,  for  specific  reasons,  they  are
attached  to  the  established  government^  their  general  perception
of  the  utility  of  govemment  concurs  with  their  special  attach-
ment. If  they  dislike  the  established  govemment,  their  general
perception  of  the  utility  of  govemment  controls  and  masters

*  As  connected  with  the  proper  pur-  Jurists). But  however  perfect  and  uni-

pose  or  end  of  political  govemment  and  venal  the  inclination  to  act  up  to  rules

society,  I  may  mention  one  cause  which  tending  to  the  general  good,  it  is  impos-

always  will  make  political  govemment  sible  to  dispense  with  a  governing  or

(or  political  govemment  qyxu^  necessary  guiding  heaa.

or  highly  expedient :  namely,  the  uncer- (Uncertainty  of  existence  of  positive

tainly,  scantiness,  and  imperfection  of  moral  rules :  want  of  the  precision  and

pNOsitive  moral  rales. Hence  the  neces-  detail  required  by  dispositions  regarding

sity  for  a  common  governing  (or  common  the  objects  about  which  positive  law  is

guiding)  head  to  whom  the  community  conversant Hence  Godwm,  Fichte,  and

may  in  concert  defer.  others  have  made  a  great  mistake.)

ft  is  possible  to  conceive  a  society  in In  many  cases,  however,  notwithstand-

which  lecal  sanctions  would  lie  dormant,  ing  its  defectiveness,  it  is  necessaiy  to

or  in  wnich  quasi  govemment  would  abandon  acts  to  positive  morality. (See

merely  recommend,  or  utter  laws  of  tm-  Note,  p.  199,)— MS.  Fragment
perfect  obligation  (in  the  sense  of  Roman


Jurisprtidence  determined.  295

their  dislike. They  detest  the  established  government :  but  if Lkot.  VI
they  would  change  it  for  another  by  resorting  to  resistance,  they "
must  travel  to  their  object  through  an  intervening  anarchy  which
they  detest  more.

The  habitual  obedience  to  the  government  which  is  rendered
by  the  bulk  of  the  community,  partly  arises,  therefore,  in  almost
every  society,  from  the  cause  which  I  now  have  described:
namely,  a  perception,  by  the  bulk  of  the  community,  of  the
utility  of  political  government,  or  a  preference  by  the  bulk  of
the  community,  of  any  government  to  anarchy.  And  this  is  the
only  cause  of  the  habitual  obedience  in  question,  which  is
common  to  all  societies,  or  nearly  all  societies.  It  therefore  is
the  only  cause  of  the  habitual  obedience  in  question,  which  the
present  general  disquisition  can  properly  embrace.  The  causes
of  the  obedience  in  question  which  are  peculiar  to  particular
societies,  belong  to  the  province  of  statistics,  or  the  province  of
particular  history.

The  only  general  cause  of  the  'permanmct  of  political  govern-
ments, and  the  only  general  cause  of  the  origin  of  political
governments,  are  exactly  or  nearly  alike.  Though  every  govern-
ment has  arisen  in  part  from  specific  or  particular  causes,  almost
every  government  must  have  arisen  in  part  from  the  following
general  cause :  namely,  that  the  bulk  of  the  natural  society  from
which  the  political  was  formed,  were  desirous  of  escaping  to  a
state  of  government,  from  a  state  of  nature  or  anarchy.  If  they
liked  specially  the  government  to  which  they  submitted,  their
general  perception  of  the  utility  of  government  concurred  with
their  special  inclination.  If  they  disliked  the  government  to
which  they  submitted,  their  general  perception  of  the  utility  of
government  controlled  and  mastered  their  repugnance.

The  specific  or  particular  causes  of  specific  or  particular
governments,  are  rather  appropriate  matter  for  particular  history,
than  for  the  present  general  disquisition.

According  to  a  current  opinion  (or  according  to  a  current  The  poei- \
expression),  the  permanence  and  origin  of  every  government  are  ^™**^*!
owing  to  the  people's  owwen^ :  that  is  to  say,  every  government  ernment
continues  through  the  consent  of  the  people,  or  the  bulk  of  the  ^J^^^
political  community :  and  every  government  arises  through  the  the
consent  of  the  people,  or  the  bulk  of  the  natural  society  firom  ^^^*
which  the  political  is  formed. According  to  the  same  opinion  and  the
dressed  in  a  different  phrase,  the  power  of  the  sovereign  flows  JjSatevery
from  the  people,  or  the  people  is  the  fountain  of  sovereign  power,  govern-

Now  the  permanence  of  every  government  depends  on  the  through


296  The  Province  of

Lect.  yi  ,  habitual  obedience  which  it  receives  from  the  bulk  of  the  com-
the  \miinity. For  if  the  bulk  of  the  community  were  fully  deter-

^0^", mined  to  destroy  it>  and  to  brave  and  endure  the  evils  through
examined Which  they  must  pass  to  their  object,  the  might  of  the  govern-
*J|^^" ^3ient  itself,  with  the  might  of  the  minority  attached  to  it,  would
Scarcely  suflSce  to  preserve  it,  or  even  to  retard  its  subversion,
^d  though  it  were  aided  by  foreign  governments,  and  therefore
fWere  more  than  a  match  for  the  disaffected  and  rebellious  people,
it  hardly  could  reduce  them  to  subjection,  or  constrain  them  to
.  permanent  obedience,  in  case  they  hated  it  mortally,  and  were
'  prepared  to  resist  it  to  the  death. — ^But  all  obedience  is  voluntary
■  or  free,  or  every  party  who  obeys  consents  to  obey. In  other
words,  every  party  who  obeys  wills  the  obedience  which  he
\  renJers,  or  is  determined  to  render  it  by  some  motive  or  another.
;  That  acquiescence  which  is  purely  involuntary,  or  which  is  purely
the  consequence  of  physical  compulsion  or  restraint,  is  not  obedi-
ence or  submission. If  a  man  condemned  to  imprisonment  were
i dragged  to  the  prison  by  the  jailers,  he  would  not  obey  or  submit
But  if  he  were  liable  to  imprisonment  in  the  event  of  his  refus-
ing to  walk  to  it,  and  if  he  were  determined  to  walk  to  it  by  a
> fear  of  that  further  restraint,  the  man  would  render  obedience  to
the  sentence  or  command  of  the  judge. Moved  by  his  dislike
of  the  contingent  punishment,  he  would  consent  to  the  infliction
of  the  present — Since,  then,  a  government  continues  through  the
obedience  of  the  people,  and  since  the  obedience  of  the  people  is
voluntsuy  or  free,  every  government  continues  through  the  consent
of  the  people,  or  the  bulk  of  the  political  society. If  they  like
the  government,  they  are  determined  to  obey  it  habitually  or  to
consent  to  its  continuance,  by  their  special  indination  or  attach-
ment If  they  hate  the  government,  they  are  determined  to
obey  it  habitually,  or  to  consent  to  its  continance,  by  their  dread
of  a  violent  revolution. They  consent  to  what  they  abhor,
because  they  avoid  thereby  what  they  abhor  more, — ^As  correctly
or  truly  apprehended,  the  position  '  that  every  government  con-
tinues through  the  people's  consent'  merely  amounts  to  this:
That,  in  every  society  political  and  independent,  the  people  are
determined  by  motives  of  some  description  or  another,  to  obey
their  government  habitually :  and  that,  if  the  bulk  of  the  com-
munity ceased  to  obey  it  habitually,  the  government  would  cease
to  exist

But  the  position  in  question,  as  it  is  often  understood,  is
taken  with  one  or  another  of  the  two  following  meanings.

Taken  with  the  first  of  those  meanings,  the  position  amounts


yurispmdence  determined.  297

to  this :  That  the  bulk  of  every  community,  -without  inconvenin Leot.  vi
ence  to  themselves,  can  abolish  the  established  government :  and '
that  being  able  to  abolish  it  without  inconvenience  to  themselves,  ':
they  yet  consent  to  its  continuance  or  pay  it  habitual  obedience. ,
Or,  taken  with  the  first  of  those  meanings,  the  position  amounts  '
to this: That  the  bulk  of  every  community  approve  of  the
established  government,  or  prefer  it  to  every  government  which
could  be  substituted  for  it :  and  that  they  consent  tp  its  con-
tinuance, or  pay  it  habitual  obedience,  by  reason  of  that  theii^
approbation  or  by  reason  of  that  their  preference. As  thu^
understood,  the position is ridiculously  false : the habitual
obedience  of  the  people  in  most  or  many  communities,  arising
wholly  or  partly  from  their  fear  of  the  probable  evils  which  they
might  suffer  by  resistance.  ]

Taken  with  the  second  of  those  meanings,  the  position
amounts  to  this :  That,  if  the  bulk  of  a  community  dislike  the
established  government,  the  government  awghJt  not  to  continue :
or  that,  if  the  bulk  of  a  community  dislike  the  established
government,  the  government  therefore  is  bad  or  pernicious,
and  the  general  good  of  the  community  requires  its  abolition.
And,  if  every  actual  society  were  adequately  instructed  or
enlightened,  the  position,  as  thus  understood,  would  approach
nearly  to  the  trutL  For  the  dislike  of  an  enlightened  people
towards  their  established  government,  would  beget  a  violent
presumption  that  the  government  was  faulty  or  imperfect.  But,
in  every  actual  society,  the  government  has  neglected  to  instruct
the  people  in  sound  political  science ;  or  pains  have  been  taken
.by  the  government,  or  the  classes  that  influence  the  government,
to  exclude  the  bulk  of  the  community  from  sound  political
science,  and  to  perpetuate  or  prolong  the  prejudices  which
weaken  and  distort  their  undertakings.  Every  society,  there-
fore, is  inadequately  instructed  or  enlightened:  And,  in  most
or  many  societies  the  love  or  hate  of  the  people  towards  their
established  government  would  scarcely  beget  a  presumption  that
the  government  was  good  or  bad.  An  ignorant  people  may
love  their  established  government,  though  it  positively  crosses
the  purpose  for  which  it  ought  to  exist :  though,  by  cherishing
pernicious  institutions  and  fostering  mischievous  prejudices,  it
positively  prevents  the  progress  in  useful  knowledge  and  in
happiness,  which  its  subjects  would  make  spontaneously  if  it
simply  were  careless  of  their  good.  If  the  goodness  of  an
established  government  be  proportioned  to  the  love  of  the
people,  the  priest-bestridden  government  of  besotted  Portugal  or


298  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI  Spain  is  probably  the  best  of  governments :  As  weighed  against
'  Miguel  and  Ferdinand,  Trajan  and  Aurelius,  or  Frederic  and
Joseph,  weie  fools  and  malignant  tyrants.  And  as  an  ignorant
people  may  love  their  established  government,  though  it  posi-
tively crosses  the  purpose  for  which  it  ought  to  exist,  so  may
an  ignorant  people  hate  their  established  government,  though  it
labours  strenuously  and  wisely  to  further  the  general  weal  The
dislike  of  the  French  people  to  the  ministry  of  the  godlike
Turgot,  amply  evinces  the  melancholy  truth.  They  stupidly
thwarted  the  measures  of  their  warmest  and  wisest  Mend,  and
made  common  cause  with  his  and  their  enemies:  with  the
rabble  of  nobles  and  priests  who  strove  to  uphold  misrule,  and
to  crush  the  reforming  ministry  with  a  load  of  calumny  and
ridicule.

That  the  'permwMfM/t  of  every  government  is  owing  to  the
people's  consent,  and  that  the  origin  of  every  government  is
owing  to  the  people's  consent,  are  two  positions  so  closely
allied,  that  what  I  have  said  of  the  former  will  nearly  apply  to
the  latter.

Every  government  has  arisen  through  the  co9tsen^  of  the
people,  or  the  bulk  of  the  natural  society  from  which  the
political  was  formed.  For  the  bulk  of  the  natural  society  from
which  a  political  is  formed,  submit  frzdy  or  voluntarily  to  the
inchoate  political  government  Or  (changing  the  phrase)  their
submission  is  a  consequence  of  moHves,  or  they  will  the  submis-
sion which  they  render.

But  a  special  approbation  of  the  government  to  which  they
freely  submit,  or  a  preference  of  that  government  to  every  other
government,  may  not  be  their  motive  to  submission.  Although
they  submit  to  it  freely,  the  government  perhaps  is  forced  upon
them :  that  is  to  say,  they  could  not  withhold  their  submission
from  that  particular  government,  unless  they  struggled  through
evils  which  they  are  loath  to  endure,  or  unless  they  resisted
to  the  death.  Determined  by  a  fear  of  the  evils  which  would
follow  a  refusal  to  submit  (and,  probably,  by  a  general  percep-
tion of  the  utility  of  political  government),  they  freely  submit
to 'a  government  from  which  they  are  specially  averse.

The  expression  '  that  every  government  arises  through  the
people's  consent,'  is  often  uttered  with  the  following  meaning :
^  That  the  bulk  of  a  natural  society  about  to  become  a  political,
or  the  inchoate  subjects  of  an  inchoate  political  government,
promise,  expressly  or  tacitly,  to  obey  the  future  sovereign.  The
expression,  however,  as  uttered  with  the  meaning  in  question,


Jurisprudence  dete^nnined.  299

confounds  com&nJt  and  promise,  and  therefore  is  grossly  incorrect  ^^bct.  VI
That  the  inchoate  subjects  of  every  inchoate  government  vnll  j
or  consent  to  obey  it,  is  one  proposition:  that  they  promise,
expressly  or  tacitly,  to  render  it  obedience,  is  another  proposi-
tion. Inasmuch  as  they  actually  obey,  they  will  or  consent  to
obey:  or  their  will  or  consent  to  obey,  is  evinced  by  their
actual  obedience.  But  a  will  to  render  obedience,  as  evinced
by  actual  obedience,  is  not  of  necessity  a  tacit  promise  to  render
it :  although  by  a  promise  to  render  obedience,  a  will  or  consent
to  render  it  is  commonly  expressed  or  intimated.

That  the  inchoate  subjects  of  every  inchoate  government
promise  to  render  it  obedience,  is  a  position  involved  by  an
hypothesis  which  I  shall  examine  in  the  next  section.

In every community ruled by a monarch,  the subject  The  hypo-
members  of  the  community  lie  under  duties  to  the  monarch ;  the^^^
and  in  every  community  ruled  by  a  sovereign  body,  the  subject  ^«^  cow-
members  of  the  community  (including  the  several  members  of  funda^
the  body  itself),  lie  under  duties  to  the  body  in  its  collective  ^'^^^
and sovereign capacity. In every community ruled by  a
monarch,  the  monarch  lies  under  duties  towards  his  subjects :
and  in  every  community  ruled  by  a  sovereign  body,  the  collective
and  sovereign  body  lies  under  duties  to  its  subjects  (including
its  own  members  considered  severally).

The  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign  government,
are  partly  religious,  partly  legal,  and  partly  moral

The  religious  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign
government,  are  creatures  of  the  Divine  law  as  known  through
the  principle  of  utility.  If  it  thoroughly  accomplish  the
purpose  for  which  it  ought  to  exist,  or  further  the  general  weal
to  the  greatest  possible  extent,  the  subjects  are  boimd  religiously
to  pay  it  habitual  obedience.  And,  if  the  general  good  which
probably  would  follow  submission  outweigh  the  general  good
which  probably  would  follow  resistance,  the  subjects  are  bound
religiously  to  pay  it  habitual  obedience,  although  it  accomplish
imperfectly  its  proper  purpose  or  end. — ^The  legal  duties  of  the
subjects  towards  the  sovereign  government,  are  creatures  of
positive  laws  which  itself  has  imposed  upon  them,  or  which  ecre
incumbent  upon  them  by  its  own  authority  and  might. — ^The
moral  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign  government,
are  creatures  of  positive  morality.  They  mainly  are  creatures  of
laws  (in  the  improper  acceptation  of  the  term)  which  the  general
opinion  of  the  commimity  itself  sets  to  its  several  members.

The  duties  of  the  sovereign  government  towards  the  subjects


300  The  Province  of

Lect.  vi are  partly  religions  and  partly  moral K  it  lay  under  legal
' duties  towards  the  subjects,  it  were  not  a  supreme,  but  were
merely  a  subordinate  government

Its  religious  duties  towards  the  subjects,  are  creatures  of
the  Divine  law  as  known  through  the  principle  of  utility.  It
is  bound  by  the  Divine  law  as  known  through  the  principle  of
utility,  to  advance  as  far  as  is  possible  the  weal  or  good  of
mankind :  and,  to  advance  as  far  as  is  possible  the  weal  or  good
of  mankind,  it  commonly  must  labour  directly  and  particularly
to  advance  as  far  as  is  possible  the  happiness  of  its  own  com-
munity.— Its  moral  duties  towards  the  subjects,  are  creatures  of
positive  morality.  They  mainly  are  creatures  of  laws  (in  the
improper  acceptation  of  the  term)  which  the  general  opinion  of
its  own  community  lays  or  imposes  upon  it.

It  follows  from  the  foregoing  analysis,  that  the  duties  of
the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign  government,  with  the  duties
of  the  sovereign  government  towards  the  subjects,  originate
respectively  in  three  several  sources :  namely,  the  Divine  law  (as
y  indicated  by  the  principle  of  utility),  positive  law,  and  positive

,-  morality. And,  to  my  understanding,  it  seems  that  we  account

'^  /'  \ ' sufficiently  for  the  origin  of  those  obligations,  when  we  simply
/  \  refer  them  to  those  their  obvious  fountains. It  seems  to  my

understanding,  that  an  ampler  solution  of  their  origin  is  not  in
the  least  requisite,  and,  indeed,  is  impossible.  But  there  are
many  writers  on  political  government  and  society,  who  are  not
content  to  account  for  their  origin,  by  simply  referring  them  to
those  their  manifest  sources.  It  seems  to  tiie  writers  in  ques-
tion, that  we  want  an  ampler  solution  of  the  origin  of  those
obligations,  or,  at  least,  of  the  origin  of  such  of  them  as  are
imposed  by  the  law  of  (rod.  And,  to  find  that  ampler  solution
which  they  believe  requisite,  those  writers  resort  to  the  hypo-
thesis of  the  original  covenant  or  contract,  or  the  fundamental
civU  pactS^^

By  the  writers  who  resort  to  it,  this  renowned  and  not

exploded  hypothesis  is  imagined  and  rendered  variously. But

, the  purport  or  efiect  of  the  hypothesis,  as  it  is  imagined  and

rendered  by  most  of  those  writers,  may  be  stated  generally  thus  :

To  the  formation  of  every  society  political  and  independent,

(')  I  style  the  supposed  coyenant '  the  properly  so  called,  is  a  convention  which

original  covenant  or  convention,*  rather  binas  legaUy  the promisinff  party  or

than *  the original cotUraeL* Every  parties. But  admitting  the  hypothesis,

convention,  agreement,  or  pact,  is  not  a  the  supposed  '  original  covenant '  would

contract  properlv  so  called :  though  every  not  ana  could  not  engender  legal  or

contract  properly  so  called  is  a  conven-  political  duties,
tion,  agreement,  or  pact. A  contract


yurisprtuience  determined.  301

or  to  the  institution  of  every  itoKl^  or  civitas,  all  its  future  Lkct.  VI
members  then  in  being  axe  joint  or  concurring  parties :  for  all  '
are  parties  to  an  agreement  in  which  it  then  originates,  and
which  is  also  the  basis  whereon  it  afterwards  rests.  As  being
the  necessary  source  of  the  independent  political  society,  or  as
being  a  condition  necessarily  preceding  its  existence,  this  agree-
ment of  all  is  styled  the  original  covcTumt :  as  being  the  necessary
basis  whereon  the  dvitas  afterwa;rds  rests,  it  is  styled  pachm,

civile  fimdamentale. In  the  process  of  making  this  covenant

or  pact,  or  the  process  of  forming  the  society  political  and  inde-
pendent, there are  three  several  stages:  which  three  several
stages may  be  described  in  the following  manner. 1.  The
future  members  of  the  community  just  about  to  be  created,
jointly  resolve  to  unite  themselves  into  an  independent  political
society: signifying and determining withal the paramount
purpose  of  their  union,  or  even  more  or  fewer  of  its  subordinate
or  instrumental  ends. And  here  I  must  briefly  remark,  that
the  paramount  purpose  of  their  union,  or  the  paramoxmt  purpose
of  the  community  just  about  to  be  created,  is  the  paramount
purpose  (let  it  be  what  it  may)  for  which  a  society  political  and
independent  ought  to  be  founded  and  perpetuated. By  the
writers  who  resort  to  the  hypothesis,  this  paramount  purpose  or
absolute  end  is  conceived  differently :  their  several  conceptions
of  this  purpose  or  end,  differing  with  the  several  natures  of  their
respective  ethical  systems. To  writers  who  admit  the  system
which  I  style  the  theory  of  utility,  this  purpose  or  end  is  the
advancement  of  human  happiness. To  a  multitude  of  writers
who  have  flourished  and  flourish  in  Germany,  the  following  is
the  truly  magnificent  though  somewhat  mysterious  object  of
political  government  and  society: namely,  the  extension  over
the  earth,  or  over  its  human  inhabitants,  of  the  empire  of  right
or  justice. It  would  seem  that  this  right  or  justice,  like  the
good  TJlpian's  justice,  is  absolute,  eternal,  and  immutable. It
would  seem  that  this  right  or  justice  is  not  a  creature  of  law :
that  it  was  anterior  to  every  law ;  exists  independently  of  every
law ;  and  is  the  measure  or  test  of  aU  law  and  morality. Con-
sequently, it  is  not  the  right  or  justice  which  is  a  creature  of
the  law  of  God,  and  to  which  the  name  of  'justice*  is  often
applied  emphatically. It  rather  is  a  something,  perfectly  self^
existent,  to  which  his  law  conforms,  or  to  which  his  law  should
conform. I,  therefore,  cannot  understand  it,  and  will  not  affect
to  explain  it. Merely  guessing  at  what  it  may  be,  I  take  it  for
the  right  or  justice  mentioned  in  a  preceding  note :  I  take  it


302  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI  for  general  utility  darkly  conceived  and  expressed.  Let  it
^"^^^  '  be  what  it  may,  it  doubtless  is  excellently  good,  or  is  super-
latively fair  or  high,  or  (in  a  breath)  is  pre-eminently  worthy  of
praise.  For,  compared  with  the  extension  of  its  empire  over
mankind,  the  mere  advancement  of  their  happiness  is  a  mean
and  contemptible-  object.  2.  Having  resolved  to  unite  them-
selves into  an  independent  political  society,  all  the  members  of
the  inchoate  community  jointly  determine  the  constitution  of  its
sovereign  political  government  In  other  words,  they  jointly
determine  the  member  or  members  in  whom  the  sovereignty
shall  reside :  and,  in  case  they  will  that  the  sovereignty  shall
reside  in  more  than  one,  they  jointly  determine  the  mode
wherein  the  sovereign  number  shall  share  the  sovereign  powers.
3.  The  process  of  forming  the  independent  political  society,  or
the  process  of  forming  its  supreme  political  government,  is  com-
pleted by  promises  given  and  accepted :  namely,  by  a  promise
of  the  inchoate  sovereign  to  the  inchoate  subjects,  by  promises
of  the  latter  to  the  former,  and  by  a  promise  of  each  of  the  latter
to  all  and  each  of  the  rest.  The  promise  made  by  the  sovereign,
and  the  promises  made  by  the  subjects,  are  made  to  a  common
object :  namely,  the  accomplishment  of  the  paramount  purpose
of  the  independent  political  society,  and  of  such  of  its  subordinate
purposes  as  were  signified  by  the  resolution  to  form  it.  The
purport  of  the  promise  made  by  the  sovereign,  and  the  purport
of  the  promises  made  by  the  subjects,  are,  therefore,  the  follow-
ing. The  sovereign  promises  generally  to  govern  to  the  para-
mount end  of  the  independent  political  society :  and,  if  any  of
its  subordinate  ends  were  signified  by  the  resolution  to  form  it,
the  sovereign  moreover  promises  specifically  to  govern  specifically
to  those  subordinate  ends.  The  subjects  promise  to  render  to
the  sovereign  a  qualified  or  conditional  obedience:  that  is  to
say,  to  render  to  the  sovereign  all  the  obedience  which  shall
consist  with  that  paramount purpose  and those subordinate

purposes. ^The  resolution  of  the  members  to  unite  themselves

into  an  independent  political  society,  is  styled  pcuctum  unionis.
Their  determination  of  the  constitution  or  structure  of  the  sove-
reign political  government,  is  styled  pactum  constittUionis  or
pactum  ordinationis.  The  promise  of  the  sovereign  to  the
subjects,  with  the  promises  of  the  subjects  to  the  sovereign  and
to  one  another,  are  styled  pactum  subjectionis :  for,  through  the
promises  of  the  subjects,  or  through  the  promises  of  the  subjects
coupled  with  the  promise  of  the  sovereign,  the  former  are
placed  completely  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the  latter,  or  the


yurisprtuience  determined.  303

relation  of  subjection  and  sovereignty  arises  between  the  parties. Lect.  vi
But  of  the  so-called  'pcuct  of  union,  the  so-called  pact  constituent, ' '
and  the  so-called  pact  of  subjection,  the  last  only  is  properly  a
convention. The  so-called  pact  of  union  and  the  so-called  pact
constituent  are  properly  resolves  or  determinations  introductory
to  the  pact  of  subjection :  the  pact  of  subjection  being  the  original

covenant  or  the  fundamental  civil  pact ^Through  this  original

covenant,  or  this  fundamental  pact,  the  sovereign  is  bound  (or
at  least  is  bound  religiously)  to  govern  as  is  mentioned  above :
and  the  subjects  are  bound  (or,  at  least,  are  bound  religiously)
to  render  to  the  sovereign  for  the  time  being,  the  obedience
above  described.  And  the  binding  virtue  of  this  fundamental
pact  is  not  confined  to  the  founders  of  the  independent  political
society.  The  binding  virtue  of  this  fundamental  pact  extends
to  the  following  members  of  the  same  community.  For  the
promises  which  the  founders  of  the  community  made  for  them-
selves respectively,  import  similar  promises  which  they  make
for  their  respective  successors.  Through  the  promise  made  by
the  original  sovereign,  following  sovereigns  are  bound  (or  at  least,
are  bound  religiously)  to  govern  as  is  mentioned  above.  Through  '
the  promises  made  by  the  original  subjects,  following  subjects  are
bound  (or  at  least,  are  bound  religiously)  to  render  to  the  sove-
reign for  the  time  being,  the  obedience  above  described. In

every  society  political  and  indei)endent,  the  duties  of  the  sove-
reign towards  the  subjects  (or  the  religious  duties  of  the  sovereign
towards  the  subjects)  spring  from  an  original  covenant  like  that
which  I  now  have  delineated :  And  in  every  society  political
and  independent,  the  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign
(or  the  religious  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign)
arise  from  a  similar  pact.  Unless  we  suppose  that  such  an
agreement  is  incumbent  on  the  sovereign  and  subjects,  we  cannot
accoimt  adequately  for  those  their  respective  obligations.  Unless
the  subjects  were  held  to  render  it  by  an  ^reement  that  they
shall  render  it,  the  subjects  would  not  be  obliged,  or  would  not
be  obliged  sufficiently,  to  render  to  the  sovereign  the  requisite
obedience :  that  is  to  say,  the  obedience  requisite  to  the  accom-
plishment of  the  proper  purpose  or  end  of  the  independent
political  society.  Unless  the  sovereign  were  held  by  an  agree-
ment to  govern  as  is  mentioned  above,  the  sovereign  would  not
be  obliged,  or  would  not  be  obliged  sufficiently,  from  governing
despotically  or  arbitrarily :  that  is  to  say,  governing  with  little
or  no  regard  to  the  proper  purpose  or  end  of  a  supreme  political
government.


304  The  Province  of

LscT.  YI  Such,  I  believe,  is  the  general  purport  of  the  hypothesis,  as  it

' is  imagined  and  rendered  by  most  of  the  writers  who  resort  to  it

But,  as  I  have  remarked  above,  the  writers  who  resort  to
the  hypothesis  imagine  and  render  it  variously. — ^According,  for
example,  to  some  of  those  writers.  The  original  subjects,  cove-
nanting for  themselves  and  their  followers,  promise  obedience  to
the  original  and  following  sovereigns.  But  the  original  sovereign
is  not  a  promising  party  to  the  fundamental  civil  pact  The
original  sovereign  does  not  agree  with  the  subjects,  that  the
sovereign  powers  shall  be  used  to  a  given  end  or  ends,  or
that  those  powers  shall  be  used  in  a  given  mode  or  modes. —
And  by  the  difierent  writers  who  render  the  hypothesis  thus,
the  purport  of  the  subjects'  promises  is  imagined.  For  example:
Some  suppose  that  the  obedience  promised  by  the  subjects,  is
the  qualified  or  conditional  obedience  briefly  described  above ;
whilst  others  suppose  that  the  obedience  promised  by  the  subjects,
is  an  obedience  passive  or  unlimited. — ^The  writers,  in  short,
who  suppose  an  original  covenant,  think  variously  concerning
the  nature  of  the  end  for  which  a  supreme  government  ought  to
exist  They  think  moreover  variously  concerning  the  extent  of
the  obedience  which  a  supreme  government  ought  to  receive
from  its  subjects:  And  to  his  own  opinion  concerning  the  nature
of  that  end,  or  to  his  own  opinion  concerning  the  extent  of  that
obedience,  each  of  the  writers  in  question  endeavours  to  shape
the  hypothesis. — But  though  the  writers  who  resort  to  the
hypothesis  imagiae  and  render  it  variously,  they  concur  in  this :
That  the  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign  (or  the
religious  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign)  are  creatures
of  the  original  covenant  And  the  writers  who  fancy  that  the
original  sovereign  was  a  promising  party  to  the  pact,  also  concur
in  this :  That  the  duties  of  the  sovereign  towards  the  subjects
(or  the  religious  duties  of  the  sovereign  towards  the  subjects)
are  engendered  by  the  same  agreement

A  complete  though  concise  exposition  of  the  various  forms
or  shapes  in  which  various  writers  imagine  and  render  the
hypothesis,  would  fill  a  considerable  volume.  Besides,  the
ensuing  strictures  apply  exactly,  or  may  be  fitted  easily,  to  any
original  covenant  that  has  been  or  can  be  conceived ;  although
they  are  directed  more  particularly  to  the  fancied  original
covenant  which  I  have  delineated  above.  My  statement  of  the
purport  of  the  hypothesis,  I,  therefore,  conclude  here.  And  I
now  will  suggest  shortly  a  few  of  the  conclusive  objections  to
which  the  hypothesis  is  open.


Jurisprudence  determined,  305

1.  To  account  for  the  duties  of  subjects  towards  their  Lect.  vi
sovereign  government,  or  for  those  of  the  sovereign  government  '
towards  its  subjects,  or  for  those  of  each  of  the  parties  towards
the  other,  is  the  scope  of  every  writer  who  supposes  an  original
covenant. — ^But,  to  account  for  the  duties  of  subjects  towards  their
sovereign  govennnent,  or  for  those  of  the  sovereign  government
towards  its  subjects,  we  need  not  resort  to  the  hypothesis  of  a
fundamental  civil  pact.  We  sufficiently  account  for  the  origin
of  those  respective  obligations,  when  we  refer  them  simply  (or
without  the  supposition  of  an  original  covenant)  to  their  ap-
parent and  obvious  fountains :  namely,  the  law  of  God,  positive
law,  and  positive  morality. — ^Besides,  although  the  formation  of
an  independent  political  society  were  really  preceded  by  a
fundamental  ciAol  pact,  scarce  any  of  the  duties  lying  thereafter
on  the  subjects,  or  of  the  duties  lying  thereafter  on  the  sovereign,
would  be  engendered  or  influenced  by  that  foregoing  convention.
— The  hypothesis,  therefore,  of  an  original  covenant,  is  needless,
and  is  worse  than  needless.  It  affects  to  assign  the  cause  of
certain  phaenomena:  namely,  the  duties  of  subjects  towards
their  sovereign  government,  or  the  duties  of  the  sovereign
government  towards  its  subjects,  or  the  duties  of  each  of  the
parties  towards  the  other.  But  the  cause  which  it  assigns  is
superfluous ;  inasmuch  as  there  are  other  causes  which  are  at
once  obvious  and  adequate:  And  that  superfluous  cause  is
inefficient  as  well  as  superfluous,  or  could  not  have  produced
the  phaenomena  whereof  it  is  the  fancied  source.

It  will  appear  from  the  following  analysis,  that,  although
the  formation  of  an  independent  political  society  were  really
preceded  by  an  original  covenant,  scarce  any  of  the  duties
lying  thereafter  on  the  subjects,  or  of  the  duties  lying  thereafter
on  the  sovereign,  would  be  engendered  or  affected  by  that
foregoing  agreement.  In  other  words,  the  covenant  would
hardly  oblige  {legcdlyy  religwasly,  or  morcUly)  the  original  or
following  subjects,  or  the  original  or  following  sovereigns.

Every  convention  which  obliges  legally  (or  every  contract
properly  so  called)  derives  its  legal  efficacy  from  a  positive
law.  Speaking  exactly,  it  is  not  the  convention  that  obliges
legally,  or  that  engenders  the  legal  duty :  but  the  law  obliges
legally,  or  engenders  the  legal  duty,  through  the  convention.
In  other  words,  the  positive  law  annexes  the  duty  to  the  con-
vention :  or  it  determines  that  duties  of  the  given  class  shall
follow  conventions  of  the  given  description. — Consequently,  if
the  sovereign  government  were  bound  legally  by  the  fundamental
VOL.  I.  X


3o6  The  Province  of

Leot.  VI  civil  pact,  the  legal  duty  lying  on  the  government  were  the
'""^'  creature  of  a  positive  law  :  that  is  to  say,  the  legal  duty  lying
on  the  government  were  the  creature  of  a  positive  law  annexing
the  duty  to  the  pact.  And,  seeing  that  a  law  set  by  the
government  to  itself  were  merely  a  law  through  a  metaphor,
the  positive  law  annexing  the  duty  to  the  pact  would  be  set  to
the  sovereign  government  by  another  and  superior  sovereign.
Consequently,  the  sovereign  government  legally  bound  by  the
pact  would  be  in  a  state  of  subjection. — ^Through  a  positive  law
set  by  their  own  sovereign,  the  subjects  might  be  bound  legally
to  keep  the  original  covenant.  But  the  legal  or  political  duty
thus  incumbent  on  the  subjects,  would  properly  proceed  from
the  law  set  by  their  own  sovereign,  and  not  from  the  covenant
itself.  If  they  were  bound  legally  to  keep  the  original  covenant,
without  a  positive  law  set  by  their  own  sovereign,  the  subjects
would  be  bound  legally  to  keep  the  original  covenant,  through
a  positive  law  set  by  another  sovereign :  that  is  to  say,  they
would  be  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  their  own  sovereign  govern-
ment, and  also  to  a  sovereign  government  conferring  rights
upon  their  own.

Every  convention  which  obliges  (properly  or  improperly),
derives  its  efl&cacy  from  law  (proper  or  improper).  As  obliging
legally,  a  convention  derives  its  efl&cacy  from  law  positive :  As
obliging  religiously  or  morally,  it  derives  its  eflScacy  from  the
law  of  God  or  from  positive  morality. — Consequently,  if  the
sovereign  or  subjects  were  bound  rdiffiovsly  by  the  fundamental
civil  pact,  the  religious  duty  lying  on  the  sovereign,  or  the
religious  duty  lying  on  the  subjects,  would  properly  proceed
from  the  Divine  law,  and  not  from  the  pact  itself.  The  party
bound  religiously  would  be  bound  by  the  law  of  God  through
the  original  covenant :  or  the  religious  duty  lying  on  the  party,
would  be  annexed  to  the  original  covenant  by  the  law  of  God.

Now  the  proper  absolute  end  of  an  independent  political
society,  and  the  nature  of  the  index  to  the  law  of  God,  are
conceived  dififerently  by  dififerent  men.  But  whatever  be  the
absolute  end  of  an  independent  political  society,  and  whatever
be  the  nature  of  the  index  to  the  law  of  God,  the  sovereign
would  be  bound  religiously,  without  an  original  covenant,  to
govern  to  that  absolute  end:  whilst  the  subjects  would  be
bound  religiously,  without  an  original  covenant,  to  render  to
the  sovereign  the  obedience  which  the  accomplishment  of  the
end  might  requira  Consequently,  whether  it  consisted  or
conflicted  with  that  proper  absolute  end,  the  original  covenant


Jurisprudence  determined.  307

would  not  oblige  religiously  either  of  the  two  parties. — If  the  I^ect.  vi
original  covenant  consisted  with  that  absolute  end,  the  original  *  '
covenant  would  be  superfluous,  and  therefore  would  be  inopera-
tive. The  religious  duties  lying  on  the  sovereign  and  subjects,
would  not  be  effects  or  consequences,  mediately  or  immediately,
of  the  fundamental  civil  pact.  Inasmuch  as  the  Divine  law
would  impose  those  religious  duties,  although  the  pact  had  not
been  made,  they  would  not  be  effects  or  consequences  annexed
to  the  pact  by  the  law,  or  would  not  be  imposed  by  the  law
through  the  pact. — If  the  original  covenant  conflicted  with  that
absolute  end,  it  would  also  conflict  with  the  law  which  is  the
source  of  religious  obligations,  and  would  not  oblige  religiously
the  sovereign  government  or  its  subjects.

For  example :  Let  us  suppose  that  the  principle  of  utility
is  the  index  to  the  law  of  God ;  and  that,  since  the  principle  of
utility  is  the  index  to  the  law  of  God,  the  greatest  possible
advancement  of  the  common  happiness  or  weal  is  the  proper
absolute  end  of  an  independent  political  society.  Let  us
suppose,  moreover,  that  the  accomplishment  of  this  absolute  end
was  the  scope  of  the  original  covenant  Now  no  religious
obligation  would  be  laid  on  the  sovereign  or  subjects  through
the  fundamental  pact.  For  the  sovereign  would  be  bound
religiously,  without  the  fundamental  pact,  to  govern  to  thet  very
end  at  which  its  authors  had  aimed :  whilst  the  subjects  would
be  bound  religiously,  without  the  fundamental  pact,  to  render  to
the  sovereign  the  obedience  which  the  accomplishment  of  the
end  might  require.  And  if  the  accomplishment  of  this  same
end  were  not  the  scope  of  the  pact,  the  pact  woidd  conflict  with
the  law  as  known  through  the  principle  of  utility,  and  would
not  oblige  religiously  either  of  the  two  parties.  To  majce  a
promise  which  general  utility  condemns,  is  an  offence  against
the  law  of  God :  but  to  break  a  promise  of  a  generally  pernicious
tendency,  is  the  fulfilment  of  a  religious  duty.

And  though  the  original  sovereign  or  the  original  subjects
might  have  been  bound  religiously  by  the  original  covenant,
why  or  how  should  it  bind  religiously  the  following  sovereigns
or  subjects  ?  Duties  to  the  subjects  for  the  time  being,  would
be  laid  by  the  law  of  God  on  all  the  following  sovereigns ;  and
duties  to  the  sovereign  for  the  time  being,  would  be  laid  by  the
law  of  God  on  all  the  following  subjects :  but  why  should  those
obligations  be  laid  on  those  following  parties,  through  the
fundamental  pact  ?  through  or  in  consequence  of  a  pact  made
without  their  authority,  and  even  without  their  knowledge  ?


3o8  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  Legal  obligations  often  lie  upon  parties  (as,  for  example,  upon
'  heirs  or  administrators),  through  or  in  consequence  of  promises
made  by  other  parties  whose  legal  representatives  they  are :
whose  faculties  or  means  of  fulfiling  obligations  devolve  or
descend  to  them  by  virtue  of  positive  law.  And  I  perceive
readily,  why  the  legal  obligations  which  are  consequent  on  those
promises,  extend  from  the  makers  of  the  promises  to  the  parties
who  legally  represent  them.  It  is  expedient,  for  various  reasons,
that  positive  law  should  impose  obligations  on  the  makers  of
certain  promises :  and  for  the  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  reasons,
it  is  expedient  that  the  legal  duties  which  are  laid  on  the
makers  themselves,  should  pass  to  the  parties  who  legally
represent  them,  and  who  take  their  faculties  or  means.  But  I
am  unable  to  perceive,  why  or  how  a  promise  of  the  original
sovereign  or  subjects  should  bind  religiously  the  following
sovereigns  or  subjects :  Though  I  see  that  the  cases  of  legal
obligation  to  which  I  now  have  adverted,  probably  suggested
the  groundless  conceit  to  those  who  devised  the  hjrpothesis  of  a
fundamental  civil  pact.

If  the  sovereign  were  bound  morally  to  keep  the  original
covenant,  the  sovereign  would  be  bound  by  opinions  current
amongst  the  subjects,  to  govern  to  the  absolute  end  at  which
its  authors  had  aimed :  And  if  the  subjects  were  bound  morally
to  keep  the  original  covenant,  the  subjects  would  be  bound
severally  by  opinions  of  the  community  at  large,  to  render  to
the  sovereign  the  obedience  which  the  accomplishment  of  the
end  might  require.  But  the  moral  obligations  thus  incumbent
on  the  sovereign,  with  the  moral  obligations  thus  incumbent  on
the  subjects,  would  not  be  engendered  or  affected  by  the  original
covenant.  They  would  not  be  imposed  by  the  positive  morality
of  the  community,  through  or  in  consequence  of  the  pact.  For
the  opinions  obliging  the  sovereign  to  govern  to  that  absolute
end,  with  the  opinions  obliging  the  subjects  to  render  that
requisite  obedience,  would  not  be  consequents  of  the  pact,  but
would  have  been  its  antecedents :  inasmuch  as  the  pact  itself
would  have  been  made  by  the  founders  of  the  community,
because  those  very  opinions  were  held  by  aU  or  most  of  them.

We  may,  if  we  like,  imagine  and  assume,  that  the  fancied
original  covenant  was  conceived  and  constructed  by  its  authors,
with  some  particularity  and  precision  :  that,  having  determined
the  absolute  end  of  their  union,  it  specified  some  of  the  ends
positive  or  negative,  or  some  of  the  means  or  modes  positive  or
negative,  through  which  the  sovereign  government  should  rule


Jurisprudence  determined.  309

to  that  absolute  end.  The  founders,  for  example,  of  the  inde-  I-^ct.  VI
pendent  political  society  (like  the  Roman  people  who  adopted
the  Twelve  Tables),  might  have  adverted  specially  to  the
monstrous  and  palpable  mischiefs  of  er  ^st  facto  legislation :
and  therefore  the  fancied  covenant  might  have  determined
specially,  that  the  sovereign  government  about  to  be  formed
should  forbear  from  legislation  of  the  kind.  And  if  any  of
those  positive  or  negative  ends  were  specified  by  the  original
covenant,  the  promise  of  the  subjects  to  render  obedience  to
the  sovereign,  was  made  with  special  reservations ;  it  was  not
extended  to  any  of  the  cases  wherein  the  sovereign  might
deviate  from  any  of  the  subordinate  ends  which  the  covenant
determined  specially.

Now  the  bulk  or  generality  of  the  subjects,  in  an  inde-
pendent political  community,  might  think  alike  or  uniformly
concerning  the  absolute  end  to  which  their  sovereign  govern-
ment ought  to  rule :  and  yet  their  uniform  opinions  concerning
that  absolute  end  might  bind  or  control  their  sovereign  very
imperfectly.  Notwithstanding  the  uniformity  of  their  opinions
concerning  that  absolute  end,  the  bulk  of  the  subjects  might
think  variously  concerning  the  conduct  of  their  sovereign  :  since
the  proper  absolute  end  of  a  sovereign  political  government,  or
the  absolute  end  for  which  it  ought  to  exist,  is  inevitably  con-
ceived in  a  form,  or  is  inevitably  stated  in  expressions,  extremely
abstract  and  vague.  For  example  :  The  bulk  or  generality  of
the  subjects  might  possibly  concur  in  thinking,  that  the  proper
absolute  end  of  their  sovereign  political  government  was  the
greatest  possible  advancement  of  the  general  or  common  weal :
but  whether  a  positive  law  made  by  it  ex  post  facto  did  or  did
not  comport  with  its  proper  absolute  end,  is  clearly  a  question
which  they  might  answer  variously,  notwithstanding  the  uni-
formity of  their  opinions  concerning  that  paramount  purpose.
Unless,  then,  the  bulk  of  the  subjects  thought  alike  or  uniformly
concerning  more  or  fewer  of  its  proper  subordinate  ends,  they
hardly  would  oppose  to  the  government,  in  any  particular  case,
a  uniform,  simultaneous,  and  effectual  resistance.  Consequently,
the  sovereign  government  would  not  be  affected  constantly  by
the  fear  of  an  effectual  resistance  from  the  subject  members  of
the  community :  and,  consequently,  their  general  and  uniform
opinions  concerning  its  paramount  purpose  would  bind  or  control
it  feebly. — But  if  the  mass  of  the  subjects  thought  alike  or
uniformly  concerning  more  or  fewer  of  its  proper  subordinate
ends,  the  uniform  opinions  of  the  mass,  concerning  those  sub-


3 1  o  The  Province  of

lect.  VI  ordinate  ends,  would  probably  control  it  potently.  Speaking
'■"^^'  '  generally,  the  proper  subordinate  ends  of  a  sovereign  political
government  (let  those  ends  or  means  be  what  they  may)  may
be  imagined  in  forms,  or  may  be  stated  in  expressions,  which
are  neither  extremely  abstract,  nor  extremely  vague.  Conse-
quently, if  the  government  ventured  to  deviate  from  any  of  the
subordinate  ends  to  which  those  uniform  opinions  were  decidedly
favourable,  the  bulk  or  generality  of  the  subjects  would  probably
unite  in  resenting,  and  even  in  resisting  its  measures :  for  if
they  tried  its  measures  by  one  and  the  same  standard,  and  if
that  standard  or  test  were  determinate  and  not  dubious,  their
respective  opinions  concerning  its  measures  would  exactly  or
nearly  tally.  Consequently,  a  fear  of  encountering  an  effectual
resistance,  in  case  it  should  venture  to  deviate  from  any  of  those
ends,  would  constantly  hold  the  government  to  all  the  subor-
dinate ends  which  the  uniform  opinions  of  the  mass  decidedly
favoured. — The  extent  to  which  a  government  is  bound  by  the
opinions  of  its  subjects,  and  the  efficacy  of  the  moral  duties
which  their  opinions  impose  upon  it,  therefore  depend  mainly  on
the  two  following  causes :  First,  the  number  of  its  subordinate
ends  (or  the  number  of  the  ends  subserving  its  absolute  end)
concerning  which  the  mass  of  its  subjects  think  alike  or  uni-
formly: secondly,  the  degree  of  clearness  and  precision  with
which  they  conceive  the  ends  in  respect  whereof  their  opinions
thus  coincide.  The  greater  is  that  number,  and  the  greater  is
that  degree,  the  more  extensively,  and  the  more  effectually,  is
the  government  bound  or  controlled  by  the  positive  morality  of
the  community.

Now  it  follows  from  what  I  have  premised,  that,  if  an
original  covenant  had  determined  clearly  and  precisely  some  of
the  subordinate  ends  whereto  the  sovereign  should  rule,  the
sovereign  would  be  bound  effectually  by  the  positive  morality
of  the  community,  to  rule  to  the  subordinate  ends  which  the
covenant  had  thus  specified :  supposing  (I,  of  course,  understand)
that  those  same  subordinate  ends  were  favoured  by  opinions
and  sentiments  which  the  mass  of  the  subjects  for  the  time
being  held  and  felt  And  here  (it  might  be  argued)  the
sovereign  would  be  bound  morally  to  rule  to  those  same  ends,
through  the  fundamental  pact,  or  in  consequence  of  the  funda-
mental pact.  For  (it  might  be  said)  the  efficacy  of  the  opinions
binding  the  sovereign  government  would  mainly  arise  from  the
clearness  and  precision  with  which  those  same  ends  were  con-
ceived by  the  mass  of  the  subjects ;  whilst  the  clearness  and


Jurisprudence  determined.  3 1 1

precision  of  their  conceptions  would  mainly  arise  from  the  Lect.  vi
clearness  and  precision  with  which  those  same  ends  had  been  ^"'^^'
specified  by  the  original  covenant.  It  will,  however,  appear  on
a  moment's  reflection,  that  the  opinions  of  the  generality  of  the
subjects,  concerning  those  same  ends,  would  not  be  engendered
.  by  but  rather  would  have  engendered  the  covenant :  For  if  most
of  the  subject  founders  of  the  independent  political  society  had
not  been  affected  by  opinions  exactly  similar,  why  were  those
same  ends  specially  determined  by  the  covenant  of  which  those
subject  founders  were  the  principal  authors?  And,  granting
that  the  clearness  with  which  they  were  specified  by  the
covenant  would  impart  an  answering  clearness  to  the  conceptions
of  the  following  subjects,  that  effect  on  the  opinions  held  by  the
following  subjects  would  not  be  wrought  by  the  covenant  as
being  a  comnard  or  'pact :  that  is  to  say,  as  being  a  promise,  or
mutual  promises,  proffered  and  accepted.  That  effect  would  be
wrought  by  the  covenant  as  being  a  luminous  statement  of  those
same  subordinate  ends.  And  any  similar  statement  which  might
circulate  widely  (as  a  similar  statement,  for  example,  by  a
popular  and  respected  writer),  would  work  a  similar  effect  on
the  opinions  of  the  following  subjects.  Stating  clearly  and
precisely  those  same  subordinate  ends,  it  would  naturally  give
to  their  conceptions  of  those  same  subordinate  ends  a  corre-
sponding clearness  and  precision.

The  following  (I  think)  is  the  only,  or  nearly  the  only  case,
wherein  an  original  covenant,  as  being  a  covenant  or  pact,  might
generate  or  influence  any  of  the  duties  lying  on  the  sovereign
or  subjects.

It  might  be  believed  by  the  bulk  of  the  subjects,  that  an
agreement  or  convention  (or  a  promise  proffered  and  accepted)
has  that  mysterious  efficacy  which  is  expressly  or  tacitly  ascribed
to  it  by  those  who  resort  to  the  hypothesis  of  a  fundamental
civil  pact — It  might  be  believed  by  the  bulk  of  the  subjects,
that  unless  their  sovereign  government  had  promised  so  to
govern,  it  would  not  be  bound  by  the  law  of  God,  or  would  not
be  bound  sufficiently  by  the  law  of  God,  to  govern  to  what
they  esteemed  its  proper  absolute  end.  It  might  be  believed
moreover  by  the  bulk  of  the  subjects,  that  the  promise  made  by
the  original  sovereign  was  a  promise  made  in  effect  by  each  of
the  following  sovereigns,  and  therefore  it  might  be  believed  by
the  bulk  of  the  subjects,  that  their  sovereign  government  was
bound  religiously  to  govern  to  that  absolute  end,  rather  because
it  had  promised  to  govern  to  that  absolute  end,  than  by  reason


3 1 2  TIu  Province  of

Lect.  VI  of  the  intrinsic  worth  belonging  to  the  end  itself. — ^Now,  if  the
'"■"^  mass  of  the  subjects  potently  believed  these  positions,  the  duties
of  the  government  towards  its  subjects,  which  the  positive
morality  of  the  community  imposed  upon  it,' would  be  engen-
dered or  affected  by  the  original  covenant  They  would  be
imposed  upon  it,  wholly  or  in  part,  because  the  original  covenant
had  preceded  or  accompanied  the  institution  of  the  independent .
political  society.  For  if  it  departed  from  any  of  the  ends
determined  by  the  original  covenant,  the  mass  of  its  subjects
would  be  moved  to  anger  (and  perhaps  to  eventual  rebellion),
by  its  brecwh  of  its  promise,  real  or  supposed,  rather  than  by
that  misrule  of  which  they  esteemed  it  guilty.  Its  breach  of
its  promise,  as  being  a  breach  of  a  promise,  would  be  the  cause
of  their  offence,  wholly  or  in  part  For  they  would  impute  to
the  promise,  real  or  supposed,  a  proper  and  absolute  worth ;  or
they  would  care  for  the  promise,  real  or  supposed,  without  regard
to  its  scope  and  tendency.

It  appears  from  the  foregoing  analysis,  that,  although  the
formation  of  the  independent  political  society  had  really  been
preceded  by  a  fundamental  civil  pact,  none  of  the  legal  or
religious  duties  lying  on  the  sovereign  or  subjects  could  be
engendered  or  influenced  by  that  preceding  convention:  that
there  is  only  a  single  case,  or  are  only  a  few  cases,  wherein  it
could  engender  or  influence  any  of  the  moral  duties  lying  on  the
same  parties.  It  will  appear  from  the  following  analysis,  that,
where  it  might  engender  or  influence  any  of  those  thotoZ  duties,
that  preceding  convention  would  probably  be  pernicious.

Of  the  duties  of  the  sovereign  towards  the  subjects,  and  of
the  duties  of  the  subjects  towards  the  sovereign,  it  is  only  those
which  are  moral,  or  are  imposed  by  positive  morality,  that  any
original  covenant  could  possibly  affect  And,  considered  with
reference  to  those,  an  original  covenant  would  be  simply  useless,
or  would  be  positively  pernicious.

An  original  covenant  would  be  simply  useless,  if  it  merely
determined  the  absolute  end  of  the  sovereign  political  govern-
ment: if  it  merely  determined  that  the  absolute  end  of  the
government  was  the  greatest  possible  advancement  of  the  common
happiness  or  weal.  For  though  the  covenant  might  give  uni-
formity to  the  opinions  of  the  mass  of  the  subjects,  it  would
only  affect  their  opinions  concerning  that  absolute  end :  And,  as
I  have  shown  already,  the  uniformity  of  their  opinions  concerning
the  paramount  purpose,  would  hardly  influence  the  conduct  of
their  sovereign  political  government.


Jurisprudence  determined.  3 1 3

But  the  covenant  might  specify  some  of  the  means,  or  some  Lect.  VI
of  the  subordinate  or  instrumental  ends,  through  which  the  '  '
government  should  rule  to  that  its  absolute  end,  or  through
which  it  should  so  rule  as  to  further  the  common  weaL  And
as  specially  determining  any  of  those  means,  or  .any  of  the
subordinate  ends  to  which  the  government  should  rule,  the
original  covenant  would  be  simply  useless,  or  would  be  positively
pernicious.

For  the  opinions  of  the  following  members  of  the  independent
political  community,  concerning  the  subordinate  ends  to  which 1
the  government  should  rule,  would  or  would  be  not  affected  by ^
the  covenant  or  pact  of  the  founders.

If  the  covenant  of  the  founders  of  the  community  did  not
affect  the  opinions  of  its. following  members,  the  covenant  would
be  simply  useless.

If  the  covenant  of  the  founders  of  the  conmiunity  did  affect
the  opinions  of  its  following  members,  the  covenant  probably
would  be  positively  pernicious.  For  the  opinions  of  the  following
members  would  probably  be  affected  by  the  covenant  as  being
a  covenant  or  pact  made  by  the  founders.  They  probably  would
impute  to  the  subordinate  ends  specified  by  the  original  covenant,
a  worth  extrinsic  and  arbitrary,  or  independent  of  their  intrinsic
merits.  A  belief  that  the  specified  ends  were  of  a  useful  or
beneficent  tendency,  or  were  ends  tending  to  the  furtherance  of
the  common  happiness  or  weal,  would  not  be  their  reason,  or
would  not  be  their  only  reason,  for  regarding  the  ends  with
respect.  They  probably  would  respect  the  specified  ends,  or
probably  would  partly  respect  them,  because  the  venerable
foimders  of  the  independent  political  society  (by  the  venerable
covenant  or  pact  which  was  the  basis  of  the  social  fabric)  had
determined  that  those  same  ends  were  some  of  the  ends  or  means
through  which  the  weal  of  the  commimity  might  be  furthered
by  its  sovereign  government.  Now  the  venerable  age  or  times
wherein  the  community  was  founded,  would  probably  be  less
enlightened  (notwithstanding  its  claims  to  veneration)  than  any
of  the  ensuing  and  degenerate  ages  through  which  the  community
might  endure.  Consequently,  the  following  pernicious  effect
woidd  be  wrought  by  the  original  covenant.  The  opinions  held
in  an  age  comparatively  ignorant,  concerning  the  subordinate
ends  to  which  the  government  should  rule,  would  influence,
more  or  less,  through  the  medium  of  the  covenant,  the  opinions
held,  concerning  those  ends,  in  ages  comparatively  knowing. —
Let  us  suppose,  for  example,  that  the  formation  of  the  British


3 1 4  The  Province  of,

Lbct.  VI  community  was  preceded  by  a  fundamental  pact  Let  us  suppose
^^^  (a  '  most  unforced '  supposition),  that  th^  ignorant  founders  of
the  community  deemed  foreign  commerce  hurtful  to  domestic
industry.  Let  us,  therefore,  suppose,  moreover,  that  the  govern-
ment about  to  be  formed  promised  for  itself  and  its  successors,
to  protect  the  industry  of  its  own  society,  by  forbidding  and
preventing  the  importation  of  foreign  manufactures.  Now  if
the  fundamental  pact  made  by  our  worthy  ancestors  were
devoutly  reverenced  by  many  of  ourselves,  it  would  hinder  the
diffusiou  of  sound  ceconomical  doctrines  through  the  present
community.  The  present  sovereign  government  would,  therefore,
be  prevented  by  the  pact,  from  legislating  wisely  and  usefuUy
in  regard  to  our  commercial  intercourse  with  other  independent
nations.  If  the  government  attempted  to  withdraw  the  restric-
tions which  the  laws  of  preceding  governments  have  laid  on  our
foreign  commerce,  the  fallacies  which  now  are  current,  and  the
nonsense  which  now  is  in  vogue,  would  not  be  the  only  fallacies,
and  would  not  be  the  only  nonsense,  wherewith  the  haters  of
improvement  would  belabour  the  audacious  innovators.  All
who  delighted  in  '  things  ancient,'  would  certainly  accuse  it  of
infringing  a  principle  which  was  part  of  the  very  basis  whereon
the  community  rested :  which  the  wise  and  venerable  authors
of  the  fundamental  pact  itself  had  formerly  adopted  and
consecrated.  Nay,  the  lovers  of  darkness  assuredly  would
affirm,  and  probably  would  potently  believe,  that  the  government
was  incompetent  to  withdraw  the  restrictions  which  the  laws  of
preceding  governments  have  laid  on  our  foreign  commerce :  that
being,  as  it  were,  a  privy  of  the  first  or  original  government,  it
was  estopped  by  the  solemn  promise  which  that  government
had  given.

Promises  or  oaths  on  the  part  of  the  original  sovereign,  or
promises  or  oaths  on  the  part  of  succeeding  sovereigns,  are  not
the  efficient  securities,  moral  or  religions,  for  beneficent  govern-
ment or  rule. — ^The  best  of  Tnoral  securities,  or  the  best  of  the
securities  yielded  by  positive  morality,  would  arise  from  a  wide
diffusion,  through  the  mass  of  the  subjects,  of  the  soundest
political  science  which  the  lights  of  the  age  could  afford.  If
they  conceived  correctly  the  paramount  end  of  their  government,
with  the  means  or  subordinate  ends  through  which  it  must
accomplish  that  end,  none  of  its  measures  would  be  grossly
foolish  or  wicked,  and  its  conduct  positive  and  negative  would
commonly  be  wise  and  beneficent. — The  best  of  religious  securities,
or  the  best  of  the  securities  yielded  by  religious  convictions.


Jurisprudence  determined,  3 1 5

would  arise  from  worthy  opinions,  held  by  rulers  and  subjects, Lect.  VI
concerning  the  wishes and purposes of the  Good  and  Wise
Monarch,  and  concerning  the  nature  of  the  duties  which  he  lays
upon  earthly  sovereigns.

2.  It  appears  from  the  foregoing  strictures  on  the  hypothesis
of  the  original  covenant,  that  the  hypothesis  is  needless,  and  is
worse  than  needless :  that  we  are  able  to  account  sufficiently,
without  resorting  to  the  hypothesis,  for  the  duties  of  subjects
towards  their  sovereign  government,  with  the  duties  of  the
sovereign  government  towards  its  subjects ;  and  that,  though  the
formation  of  the  independent  political  society  had  really  been
preceded  by  a  fundamental  civil  pact,  scarce  any  of  those  obli-
gations would  be  engendered  or  influenced  by  that  preceding
agreement.  It  will  appear  from  the  following  strictures,  that
the  hypothesis  of  the  fundamental  pact  is  not  only  a  fiction,  but
is  a  fiction  approaching  to  an  impossibility :  that  the  institution
of  a  7ro\t9  or  civitas,  or  the  formation  of  a  society  political  and
independent,  was  never  preceded  or  accompanied,  and  could
hardly  be  preceded  or  accompanied,  by  an  original  covenant
properly  so  called,  or  by  aught  resembling  the  idea  of  a  proper
original  covenant.

Every  convention  properly  so  called,  or  every  pact  or  agree-
ment properly  so  called,  consists  of  a  promise  (or  mutual  promises)
proffered  and  accepted.  Wherever  mutual  promises  are  proffered
and  accepted,  there  are,  in  strictness,  two  or  more  conventions  :
for  the  promise  proffered  by  each,  and  accepted  by  the  other  of
the  agreeing  parties,  is  of  itself  an  agreement.  But  where  the
performance  of  either  of  the  promises  is  made  by  either  to  depend
on  the  performance  of  the  other,  the  several  conventions  are  cross
or  implicated  conventions,  and  conmionly  are  deemed,  therefore,
one  convention. — Where  one  only  of  the  agreeing  parties  gives
or  passes  a  promise,  the  promise  which  is  proffered  by  the  one,
and  which  is  accepted  by  the  other,  is,  in  the  language  of  jurists,
'  a  convention  unilateral'  Where  each  of  the  agreeing  parties
gives  or  passes  a  promise,  and  the  performance  of  either  of  the
promises  is  made  to  depend  on  the  performance  of  the  other,  the
several  promises  respectively  proffered  and  accepted,  are,  in  the
language  of  jurists,  a  'convention  bilateral.'  Where  each  of  the
agreeing  parties  gives  or  passes  a  promise,  but  the  performance  of
either  of  the  promises  is  not  made  to  depend  on  the  performance
of  the  other,  each  of  the  several  conventions  is  a  separate  uni-
lateral convention,  although  the  several  conventions  be  made  at
one  time. For  example :  If  I  promise  you  to  render  you  a


3 1 6  The  Province  of

Lbct.  VI  service,  and  if  you  accept  the  proffered  promise,  the  promise
^"^  '  proffered  and  accepted  forms  a  convention  unilateral.  If  I
promise  y(m  to  render  you  a  service,  and  you  promise  mt  to
render  me  a  service  therefor^  the  promises  respectively  proffered,
if  they  are  respectively  accepted,  form  a  convention  bilateral
If  each  of  us  promise  the  other  to  render  the  other  a  service,
but  the  render  of-  either  of  the  services  is  not  made  to  depend
on  the  render  of  the  other,  the  promises  proffered  and  accepted
are  separate  unilateral  conventions,  although  they  be  proffered
and  accepted  at  one  and  the  same  time. — Since,  then,  a  conven-
tion bQateral  is  formed  by  the  implication  of  several  unilateral
conventions,  every  convention  is  properly  a  unilateral  convention,
or  a  promise  proffered  and  ouxepted.

The  essentials  of  a  convention  may  be  stated  generally  thus.
1.  The  promisor,  or  the  party  who  proffers  the  promise,  promises
the  promisee,  or  the  party  to  whom  it  is  proffered,  that  he  will
do  or  perform  some  given  act  or  acts,  will  forbear  or  abstain
from  some  given  act  or  acts,  or  will  do  or  perform  and  also
forbear  or  abstain.  And  the  acts  or  forbearances  which  he
promises,  or  the  acts  and  forbearances  which  he  promises,  may
be  styled  the  object  of  his  promise,  and  also  the  object  of  the
convention.  2.  The  promisor  signifies  to  the  promisee,  that  he
irUends  to  do  the  acts,  or  to  observe  the  forbearances,  which  form
the  object  of  his  promise.  If  he  signifies  this  his  intention  by
spoken  or  written  words  (or  by  signs  which  custom  or  usage
has  rendered  equivalent  to  words),  his  proffered  promise  is  re-
press. If  he  signifies  this  his  intention  by  signs  of  anotiier
nature,  his  proffered  promise  is  still  a  genuine  promise,  but  is
implied  or  tadt.  If,  for  example,  I  receive  goods  from  a  shop-
keeper, telling  him  that  I  mean  to  pay  for  them,  I  promise
expressly  to  pay  for  the  goods  which  I  receive :  for  I  signify  an
intention  to  pay  for  them,  through  spoken  or  written  language.
Again :  Having  been  accustomed  to  receive  goods  from  the
shopkeeper,  and  also  to  pay  for  the  goods  which  I  have  been
accustomed  to  receive,  I  receive  goods  which  the  shopkeeper
delivers  at  my  house,  without  signifying  by  words  spoken  or
written  (or  by  signs  which  custom  or  usage  has  rendered  equi-
valent to  words),  any  intention  or  purpose  of  paying  for  the
goods  which  he  delivers.  Consequently,  I  do  not  promise
expressly  to  pay  for  the  particular  goods.  I  promise,  however,
tacitly.  For  by  receiving  the  particular  goods,  under  the  various
circumstances  which  have  preceded  and  accompanied  the  recep-
tion, I  signify  to  the  party  who  delivers  them,  my  intention  of


Jurisprudence  determined,  3 1 7

paying  for  the  goods,  as  decidedly  as  I  shoidd  signify  it  if  I  Lect.  VI
told  him  that  I  meant  to  pay.  The  only  diflference  between  '  '^^^'
the  express,  and  the  tacit  or  implied  promise,  lies  in  the  differ-
ence between  the  natures  of  the  signs  through  which  the  two
intentions  are  respectively  signified  or  evinced.  3.  The  promisee
a4xept8  the  proffered  promise.  In  other  words,  he  signifies  to
the  promisor,  expressly  or  tacitly,  his  hdief  or  expectation  that
the  latter  will  do  or  forbear  agreeably  to  the  intention  or  pur-
pose which  the  latter  has  expressed  or  intimated.  Unless  the
promise  be  accepted,  or  such  a  belief  or  expectation  be  signified
expressly  or  tacitly,  the  promise  is  not  a  convention.  If  the  acts
or  forbearances  which  form  the  object  of  the  promise  be  after-
wards done  or  observed,  they  are  done  or  observed  spontaneously
by  the  promising  party,  or  not  by  reason  of  the  promise  con-
sidered as  such :  for  the  promise  would  not  be  enforced  (legally
or  morally)  by  a  rational  supreme  government  or  a  sane  public
opinion.  In  the  technical  language  of  the  Eoman  jurists,  and
by  most  of  the  modem  jurists  who  are  familiar  with  that  techni-
cal language,  a  promise  proffered  but  not  accepted  is  styled  a
pollicitation.

Consequently,  the  main  essentials  of  a  convention  are  these :
First,  a  signifi^ccUion  by  the  promising  party,  of  his  intention  to
do  the  acts,  or  to  observe  the  forbearances,  which  he  promises
to  do  or  observe :  secondly,  a  signification  by  the  promisee,  that
he  expects  the  promising  party  will  fulfil  the  proffered  promise.
And  that  this  signification  of  intention  and  this  signification  of
expectation  are  of  the  very  essence  of  a  proper  convention  or
agreement,  will  appear  on  a  moment's  reflection.

The  conventions  enforced  by  positive  law  or  morality,  are
enforced  legally  or  morally  for  various  reasons.  But  of  the
various  reasons  for  enforcing  any  convention,  the  following  is
always  one. — Sanctions  apart,  a  convention  naturally  raises  in
the  mind  of  the  promisee  (or  a  convention  tends  to  raise  in  the
mind  of  the  promisee),  an  expectation  that  its  object  will  be
accomplished :  and  to  the  expectation  naturally  raised  by  the
convention,  he  as  naturally  shapes  his  conduct  Now,  as  much
of  the  business  of  human  life  turns  or  moves  upon  conventions,
frequent  disappointments  of  those  expectations  which  conventions
naturally  excite,  would  render  human  society  a  scene  of  baffled
hopes,  and  of  thwarted  projects  and  labours.  To  prevent  disap-
pointments of  such  expectations,  is  therefore  a  main  object  of
the  legal  and  moral  rules  whose  direct  and  appropriate  purpose
is  the  enforcement  of  pacts  or  agreements. But  the  promisee


3 1 8  Tlie  Province  of

Lect.  VI  would  not  entertain  the  expectation,  unless  the  corresponding
intention  were  signified  by  the  promising  party :  and,  unless  the
existence  of  the  expectation  were  signified  by  the  promisee,
the  promising  party  would  not  be  apprised  of  its  existence,
although  the  proffered  promise  had  actually  raised  it.  Without
the  signification  of  the  intention,  there  were  no  promise  properly
so  called :  without  the  signification  of  the  expectation,  there  were
no  sufficient  reason  for  enforcing  the  genuine  promise  which
really  may  have  been  profiTered.^^

It  follows  from  the  foregoing  statement  of  the  main  essentials
of  a  convention,  that  an  original  covenant  properly  so  called,  or
aught  resembling  the  idea  of  a  proper  original  covenant,  could
hardly  precede  the  formation  of  an  independent  political  society.

According  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  original  covenant,  in  so
far  as  it  regards  the  promise  of  the  original  sovereign,  the  sove-
reign promises  to  govern  to  the  absolute  end  of  the  union  (and,
perhaps,  to  more  or  fewer  of  its  subordinate  or  instrumental
ends).  And  the  promise  is  proffered  to,  and  is  accepted  by,  all
the  original  subjects.  In  case  the  inchoate  government  be  a
government  of  one,  the  promise  passes  from  the  monarch  to  all
the  members  of  the  conununity  (excepting  the  monarch  himself).
In  case  the  inchoate  government  be  a  government  of  a  number,
it  passes  from  the  sovereign  body  (in  its  collective  and  sovereign
capacity)  to  all  the  subject  members  of  the  inchoate  community
(including  the  members  of  the  body  considered  severally). —
According  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  original  covenant,  in  so  far
as  it  regards  the  promise  of  the  original  subjects,  they  promise
to  render  to  the  sovereign  a  passive  and  unlimited  obedience,  or
they  promise  to  render  to  the  sovereign  such  a  qualified  obedience

(y)  The  incidental  statement,  in  the  ciOfMtnt  which  is  of  the  essence  of  a  con-
text, of  the  essentials  of  a  convention  or  vention,  is  formed  of  the  intention
pact,  is  sufficient  for  the  limited  purpose  signified  by  the  promisor,  and  of  the  cor-
to  which  I  have  there  placed  it.  If  I  responding  ex^.tation  signified  by  the
were  expounding  directly  the  raticnale  of  promisee.  This  intention  with  this  ex-
the  doctrine  of  contracts,  I  should  annex  pectation  is  styled  the  consensus  of  the
to  the  ^neral  statement  which  I  have  parties,  because  the  intention  and  expect-
placed  in  the  text,  many  explanations  ation  chime  or  so  together,  or  because
and  restrictions  which  now  I  must  pass  they  are  directed  to  a  common  object ;
in  silence.  A  good  exposition  of  that  namely,  the  acts  or  forbearances  which
rationale  (which  jargon  and  bad  logic  form  the  object  of  the  convention.  But
have  marveUously  perplexed  and  ob-  the  term  consent,  as  used  with  a  wider
scured)  would  involve  a  searching  analy-  meaning,  signifies  any  compliance  with
sis  of  the  following  intricate  expressions :  any  wish  of  another.  And,  taking  the
promise; pollicitation; convention, agree-  term  with  this  wider  meaning,  subjects
ment,  or  pact ;  contract ;  quasi-contract  (as  I  have  shown  already)  consent  to

But  I  will  add  to  the  statement  in  the  obey  their  sovereign,  whether  they  pro-
text,  before  I  conclude  the  note,  the  fol-  mise  or  not  to  render  obedience,  and
lowing  remark  on  that  consent  which  is  whatever  be  the  nature  of  the  motives  by
of  the  essence  of  a  convention. That  which  they  are  determined  to  render  it.


Jurisprudence  determined.  3 1 9

as  shall  consist  with  a  given  end  or  with  given  ends.  And  the  Lkct.  VI
promise  of  the  subjects  passes  £rom  all  the  subjects :  from  all
and  each  of  the  subjects  to  the  monarch  or  sovereign  body,  or
from  each  of  the  subjects  to  all  and  each  of  the  rest  In  case
the  inchoate  govenmient  be  a  government  of  one,  it  passes  from
all  the  members  of  the  inchoate  community  (excepting  the  mon-
arch). In  case  the  inchoate  government  be  a  government  of  a
number,  it  passes  from  all  the  members  of  the  inchoate  com-
munity (including  the  several  members  of  the  sovereign  body).

Now  it  appears  from  the  foregoing  statement  of  the  main
essentials  of  a  convention,  that  the  promise  of  the  sovereign  to
the  subjects  would  not  be  a  covenant  properly,  unless  the  sub-
jects (wcepted  it. But  the  subjects  could  hardly  accept  it,  unless
they  apprehended its  object. Unless  they  apprehended its
object,  it  hardly  could  raise  in  their  minds  any  determinate
expectation :  and  unless  it  raised  in  their  minds  a  determinate
expectation,  they  hardly  could  signify  virtually  any  determinate
expectation,  or  could  hardly  accept  virtually  the  proffered  promise.
The  signs  of  acceptance  which  might  actually  fall  from  thetn,
would  not  be  signs  of  virtual  acceptance,  but  would  be  in  reality
unmeaning  noise  or  show. — ^Now  the  ignorant  and  weaker  por-
tion of  the  inchoate  community  (the  portion,  for  example,  which
was  not  adult)  could  hardly  apprehend  the  object  of  the  sove-
reign's promise,  whether  the  promise  were  general  or  special :
whether  the  sovereign  promised generally  to govern  to  the
absolute  end  of  the  independent  political  society,  or  promised
moreover  specially  to  govern  specially  and  directly  to  certain
subordinate  ends. We  know  that  the  great  majority,  in  any
actual  community,  have  no  determinate  notions  concerning  the
absolute  end  to  which  their  sovereign  government  ought  to  rule :
that  they  have  no  determinate  notions  concerning  the  ends  or
means  through  which  it  should  aim  at  the  accomplishment  of
that  its  paramount  purpose. It  surely,  therefore,  were  absurd
to  suppose,  that  all  or  many  of  the  members  of  any  inchoate
community  would  have  determinate  notions  (or  notions  approach-
ing to  determinateness)  concerning  the  scope  of  their  union,  or
concerning  the  means  to  its  attainment. Consequently,  most  or
many  of  the  original  subjects  would  not  apprehend  the  object
of  the  original  sovereign's  promise :  and,  not  apprehending  its
object,  they  would  not  accept  it  in  effect,  although  they  might
accept  it  in  show. With  regard  to  most  or  many  of  the  original
subjects,  the  promise  of  the original  sovereign  were  hardly  a
covenant  or  pact,  but  were  rather  a  pollicitation.


/:


320  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  The  remarks  which  I  now  have  made  on  the  promise  of  the

'""^^'  original  sovereign,  will  apply,  with  a  few  adaptations,  to  the  pro-
mise of  the  original  subjects.  If  really  they  proflTered  to  the
sovereign  (or  if  really  they  proffered  to  one  another)  that  promise
to  render  obedience  which  the  hypothesis  supposes  or  feigns,
they  would  signify  expressly  or  tacitly  an  irUention  of  fulfilling
it.  But  such  a  signification  of  intention  could  not  be  made  by
all  of  them,  or  even  by  most  or  many  of  them :  for  by  most  or
many  of  them,  the  object  of  the  fancied  promise  would  not  be
apprehended  determinately,  or  with  a  distant  approach  to
determinateness. — If  you  feign  that  the  promise  to  obey  passes
from  the  subjects  to  the  subjects,  you  thicken  the  absurdity  of
the  fiction.  You  fancy  that  a  promise  is  proffered  by  parties  to
whom  the  object  of  the  promise  is  nearly  or  quite  unintelligible :
and,  seeing  that  the  promisors  are  also  the  promisees,  you  fancy
that  the  promise  is  accepted  by  parties  to  whom  the  object  of
the  promise  is  equally  incomprehensible.

If  you  would  suppose  an  original  covenant  which  as  a  mere
hypothesis  will  hold  water,  you  must  suppose  that  the  society
about  to  be  formed  is  composed  entirely  of  adult  members :  that
all  these  adult  members  are  persons  of  sane  mind,  and  even  of
much  sagacity  and  much  judgment:  and  that  being  very
sagacious  and  very  judicious,  they  also  are  perfectly  familiar,  or
at  least  are  passably  acquainted,  with  political  and  ethical
science.  On  these  bare  possibilities,  you  may  build  an  original
covenant  which  shall  be  a  coherent  fiction.

It  hardly  is  necessary  to  add,  that  the  hypothesis  of  the
original  covenant,  in  any  of  its  forms  or  shapes,  has  no  founda-
tion in  actual  facts.  There  is  no  historical  evidence,  that  the
hypothesis  has  ever  been  realised :  that  the  formation  of  any
society  political  and  independent  has  actually  been  preceded  by
a  proper  original  covenant,  or  by  aught  approaching  to  the  idea.

In  a  few  societies  political  and  independent  (as,  for  example,
in  the  Anglo-American  States),  the  sovereign  political  government
has  been  determined  at  once,  and  agreeably  to  a  scheme  or  plan.
But,  even  in  these  societies,  the  parties  who  determined  the  con-
stitution (either  as  scheming  or  planning,  or  as  simply  voting  or
adopting  it)  were  merely  a  slender  portion  of  the  whole  of  the
independent  community,  and  were  virtually  sovereign  therein
before  the  constitution  was  determined:  insomuch  that  the
constitution  was  not  constructed  by  the  whole  of  an  inchoate
community,  but  rather  was  constructed  by  a  fraction  of  a  com-
munity already  consummate  or  complete. If  you  would  show


Jurisprtidence  determined.  3  2 1

me  an  actual  case  exactly  squaring  with  the  idea  of  a  proper  Lbot.  vi
original  covenant,  you  must  show  me  a  society  political  and
independent,  with  a  government  political  and  sovereign,  which
all  the  members  of  the  society  who  were  then  in  existence  jointly
founded  and  constituted.  You  must  show  me,  also,  that  all  the
subject  or  sovereign  authors  of  this  society  and  government
were  parties  expressly  or  tacitly  to  a  true  or  genuine  convention
resembling  the  original  covenants  which  I  have  mentioned  above.
— In  most  societies  political  and  independent,  the  constitution
of  the  supreme  government  has  grown.  By  which  fustian  but
current  phrase,  I  intend  not  to  intimate  that  it  hath  come  of
itself,  or  is  a  marvellous  something  fashioned  without  hands.
For  though  we  say  of  governments  which  we  mean  to  praise,
'that  they  are  governments  of  laws,  and  not  governments  of
men,'  all  human  governments  are  governments  of  men:  And,
without  men  to  make  them,  and  without  men  to  enforce  them,
human  laws  were  just  nothing  at  all,  or  were  merely  idle  words
scribbled  on  paper  or  parchment  I  intend  to  intimate,  by  the
phrase  in  question,  that  the  constitution  of  the  supreme  govern-
ment has  not  been  determined  at  once,  or  agreeably  to  a  scheme
or  plan :  that  positive  moral  rules  of  successive  generations  of
the  community  (and,  perhaps,  positive  laws  made  by  its  successive
sovereigns)  have  determined  the  constitution,  with  more  or  less
of  exactness,  slowly  and  unsystematically.  Consequently,  the
supreme  government  was  not  constituted  by  the  original
members  of  the  society :  Its  constitution  has  been  the  work  of
a  long  series  of  authors,  comprising  the  original  members  and
many  generations  of  their  followers.  And  the  same  may  be
said  of  most  of  the  ethical  maxims  which  opinions  current  with
the  subjects  constrain  the  sovereign  to  observe.  The  original
sovereign  government  could  not  have  promised  its  subjects  to
govern  by  those  maxims.  For  the  current  opinions  which
actually  enforce  those  maxims,  are  not  coeval  with  the  inde-
pendent political  society,  but  rather  have  arisen  insensibly  since
the  society  was  formed. — In  some  societies  political  and  inde-
pendent, oaths  or  promises  are  made  by  rulers  on  their  accession
to  of&ce.  But  such  an  oath  or  promise,  and  an  original  covenant
to  which  the  original  sovereign  is  a  promising  party,  have  little
or  no  resemblance.  That  the  formation  of  the  society  political
and  independent  preceded  the  conception  of  the  oath  itself,  is
commonly  implied  by  the  terms  of  the  latter.  The  swearing
party,  moreover,  is  commonly  a  limited  monarch,  or  occupies
some  position  like  that  of  a  limited  monarch :  that  is  to  say,

VOL.  I.  Y


322  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  the  swearing  party  is  not  sovereign,  but  is  merely  a  limb  or
' ' ' member  of  a  sovereign  body.

And  if  actual  original  covenants  might  be  detected  in  history,
they  would  not  sustain  the  hjrpothesis.  For,  according  to  the
hypothesis,  an  original  covenant  necessarily  precedes  the  forma-
tion of  an  independent  political  society.  And  in  numerous  cases
of  independent  political  society,  the  formation  of  the  society,  as
we  know  from  history,  was  not  preceded  by  an  original  covenant:
Or,  at  least,  the  formation  of  the  society,  as  we  know  firom
history,  was  not  preceded  by  an  express  original  covenant.

It  is  said,  however,  by  the  advocates  of  the  hypothesis  (for
the  purpose  of  obviating  the  difficulty  which  these  negative
cases  present),  that  a  tadt  original  covenant  preceded  the  forma-
tion of  the  society,  although  its  formation  was  not  preceded  by
an  express  covenant  of  the  kind.

Now  (as  I  have  shown  above)  an  actual  signification  of
intention  on  the  part  of  the  promisor,  with  an  actual  acceptance
of  the  promise  on  the  part  of  the  promisee,  are  of  the  very
essence  of  a  genuine  convention  or  pact,  be  it  express,  or  be  it
tacit.  The  only  difference  between  an  express,  and  a  tacit  or
implied  convention,  lies  in  this :  That,  where  the  convention  is
express,  the  intention  and  acceptance  are  signified  by  language,
or  by  signs  which  custom  or  usage  has  rendered  equivalent  to
language :  but  that,  where  the  convention  is  tadt  or  implied,
the  intention  and  acceptance  are  not  signified  by  words,  or  by
signs  which  custom  or  usage  has  made  tantamount  to  words.^'^

(.)  Qaasi-contncta,  or  contracts  qtuui  obligation,  and  not  the  creation  of  a
ortUif  ought  to  be  distingnished  carefully  future  obligation,  is  the  scope  or  design
firom  tacit  or  implied  contracts.  A  tadt  of  the  transaction  between  the  payor
or  implied  contract  is  a  genuine  contract :  and  payee.  But  since  the  money  is  not
that  IS  to  say,  a  genuine  convention  owed,  and  is  not  given  as  a  gift,  a  leeal
which  binds  legally,  or  to  which  positive  obligation  to  return  it  lies  upon  uie
law  annexes  an  obligation.  But  a  quasi-  payee  from  the  moment  of  the  erroneous
contract  is  not  a  genuine  convention,  payment.  Although  he  ia  not  obliged
and,  by  consequence,  is  not  a  genuine  ex  contradu,  he  is  obliged  queui  ex  eon-
contract.  It  is  some  fact  or  event,  not  tntetu,  <u  if  he  truly  had  contracted  to
a  genuine  convention,  to  which  positive  return  the  money.  The  payee  is  obliged
law  annexes  an  obligation,  cu  if  (quasi  to  return  it,  as  he  might  have  been
or  uti)  it  were  a  genuine  convention,  obliged,  ifhe  had  promised  to  return  it,
And  the  analogy  between  a  contract  and  and  the  payor  had  accepted  his  promise,
a  contract  quasi  or  tUi,  merely  lies  in  In  the  languagexof  EnffUsh  juiispru-
the  resemblance  between  the  two  obli-  deuce,  £Eu;t8  or  events  which  are  contracts
gations  which  are  annexed  respectively  quasi  or  uti,  are  styled  implied  eontraets,
to  the  two  facts  or  events.  In  other  re-  or  cofUrcKsts  which  the  law  implies :  that
spects  the  two  facts  are  dissimilar.  For  is  to  say,  contracts  quasi  or  uti,  and
example :  The  pajrment  and  receipt  of  genuine  though  tadt  contracts,  are  de-
money  erroneously  supposed  to  be  owed,  noted  by  a  common  name,  or  by  names
is  a  fact  or  event  amounting  to  a  contract  nearly  alike.  And,  consequently,  con-
quasu  There  is  nothing  m  the  fact  or  tracts,  quasi  or  uti,  and  implied  or  tacit
event  that  savours  of  a  convention  or  contracts,  are  commonly  or  frequently
pact ;  for  the  fulfilment  of  an  existing  confounded  by  English  lawyers. See,  in


yurisprudence  determined.  323

Most  or  many,  therefore,  of  the  members  of  the  inchoate  Lect.  VI
society,  could  not  have  been  parties,  as  promisors  or  promisees,  '  '  '
to  a  tacit  original  covenant  Most  or  many  of  the  members
could  not  have  signified  virtually  the  requisite  intention  or
acceptance :  for  they  could  not  have  conceived  the  object  (as  I
have  shovm  above)  with  which,  according  to  the  hypothesis,  an
original  covenant  is  concerned.

Besides,  in  many  of  the  negative  cases  to  which  I  now  am
adverting,  the  position  and  deportment  of  the  original  sovereign
government,  and  the  position  and  deportment  of  the  bulk  of
the  original  subjects,  exclude  the  supposition  of  a  tacit  original  *
covenant  For  example :  Where  the  original  government  begins
in  a  violent  conquest,  it  scarcely  promises  tacitly,  by  its  vio-
lences towards  the  vanquished,  that  it  will  make  their  weal
the  paramoimt  end  of  its  rule.  And  a  tacit  promise  to  render
obedience  to  the  intrusive  and  hated  government,  scarcely  passes
from  the  reluctant  subjects.  They  presently  wUl  to  obey  it,  or
presently  consent  to  obey  it,  because  they  are  determined  to  obey
it,  by  their  fear  of  its  military  sword.  But  the  iMl  or  consent
to  obey  it  presently,  to  which  they  are  thus  determined,  is
scarcely  a  tacit  promise  (or  a  tacit  manifestation  of  intention)  to

particalar,  Sir  William  Blackstone's  are,  in  that  respect,  cmdlogoua  to  con-
Commentaries.,  B.  II.  Ch.  30.,  and  B.  IIL  tracts.  2.  The  only  resemblance  be-
Ch.  9.  tween  their  speciea  or  sorts,  lies  in  the
As  the  reader  may  see  in  the  annexed  resemblance  between  the  obligations
outline  (pp.  45,  53),  rights  of  one  great  which  are  respectiyely  annexed  to  them,
class  are  rights  in  personam  ceriam :  that  C!onseqaently,  the  common  name  ot  quasi-
is  to  say,  rights  which  avail  exclusively  contracts  is  applied  to  the  genus  or  kind,
against  persons  determined  specifically,  for  want  of  a  generic  term  more  apt  and
or  whicn  answer  to  duties  that  He  significant — As  the  expression  is  em-
exclusively  on  persons  determined  spe-  ployed  by  the  Roman  lawyers,  *  obliga-
cifically.  To  the  duties  answering  to  tiones  quasi  ex  contractu '  is  equivalent
such  rights,  the  Roman  lawyers  limit  to  *  anomalous  obligations,'  or  to  ^mis-
the  expression  obligationes:  and  since  cellaneous  obligations:'  that  is  to  say,
they  have  no  name  appropriate  to  rights  ohligaliones,  or  rights  in  personam,  which
of  the  class,  they  apply  that  expression  are  annexed  to  facts  that  are  neither
to  the  rights  themselves  as  well  as  to  the  contracts  nor  delicts;  and  which  being
answeringdutieswhich  the  rights  import,  annexed  to  facts  that  are  neither  con-
Now  rights  in  personam,  or  obligaiiones,  tracts  nor  delicts,  cannot  be  brought
arise  principally  from  facts  of  two  under  either  of  those  two  principal  classes
classes :  namely,  eenuine  contracts  ex-  into  which  rights  in  personam  are  aptly
press  or  tacit,  and  delicts  or  ii^juries.  divisible.  '  Obligationes  (say  the  Digests)
But  besides  contracts  and  delicts,  there  aut  ex  contractu  nascuntur,  aut  ex  male-
are  fiicts  or  events,  not  contracts  or  ficio  (sive  delicto),  aut  propria  quodam
delicts,  to  which  positive  law  annexes  jure  ex  ixiriis  causarum  figwris. — The
obligationes.  By  the  Roman  lawyers,  confusion  of  quasi-contracts  with  tacit
these  facts  or  events  are  styled  quasi-  yet  genuine  contracts,  is  certainly  not  im-
contracts :  or  the  obligations  annexed  to  putable  to  the  Roman  jurists.  But  with
these  facts  or  events,  are  styled  obliga-  modem  lawyers  (how,  I  cannot  conjec-
tions  qiuui  ex  contractu.  These  facts  or  ture),  this  gross  confusion  of  ideas  is  ex-
events  are  styled  gua^- contracts,  for  tremely  frequent  It  is,  indc^  the  cause
two  reasons.  1.  Inasmuch  as  the  obli-  ofmostof  the  nonsense  and  jargon  which
gations  annexed  to  them  resemble  the  have  covered  the  nature  of  conventions
obligations  annexed  to  contracts,  they  with  nearly  impenetrable  obscurity.


324  The  Province  of

Leot.  VI render  it  future  obedience. For  they  intimate  pretty  signi-
' ' ficantly,  by  the  reluctance  with  which  they  obey  it,  that  they
would  kick  with  all  their  might  against  the  intrusive  govern-
ment, if  the  military  sword  which  it  brandishes  were  not  so
long  and  fearfuL

By  the  recent  and  present  advocates  of  the  hypothesis  of
the original covenant  (who chiefly  are German  writers on
political  government  and  society),  it  commonly  is  admitted  that
original covenants  are not historical facts: that  an actual
original  covenant  never  preceded  the  formation  of  any  actual
' ' society  political  and  independent. But  they  zealously  maintain,
notwithstanding  this  sweeping  admission,  that  the  only  sufficient
, basis  of  an  independent  political  society  is  a  fundamental  civil
pact Their  doctrine,  therefore,  touching  the  original  covenant
amounts  to  this :  namely,  that  the  original  covenant  hath  not
preceded  the  formation  of  any  society  political  and  independent  :
but  that  though  it  hath  not  preceded  the  formation  of  any,  it
yet  precedeth  inevitably  the  formation  of  emry, — Such  is  a  tast^
or  sample  of  the  high  ideal  philosophy  which  the  Grermans
^ oppose  exultingly  to  the  philosophy  of  Bacon  and  Locke :  to  the
earthly,  grovelling,  empirical  philosophy,  which  deigns  to  scru-
\ tinise  facts,  or  stoops  to  observation  and  induction.
^  It  would  seem  that  the propounders  of  this  lucid and

coherent  doctrine,  mean  to  insist  on  one  or  another  of  the  two
following  positions.  1.  That  an  eayyress  original  covenant  has
not  preceded  the  formation  of  any  society  political  and  independ-
ent :  but  that  a  tadt  original  covenant  (or  an  original  covenant
imported  by  the  fact  of  the  formation)  necessarily  precedes  the
formation  of  every  society  of  the  kind.  2.  That  the  formation
of  a  society  political  and  independent  must  have  been  preceded
by  a  fundamental  civil  pact,  if  the  sovereign  political  government
be  rightful,  lawful,  or  Just — *  wenn  es  rechtsbestdndig  sein  soil :'
Meaning  by  'rightful,'  'lawful,'  or  *just,'  consonant  to  the  law
of  God  (as  known  somehow  or  other),  or  consonant  to  the  right
or  justice  (mentioned  in  foregoiug  pages)  which  exists  independ-
ently of  law,  and  is  the  test  of  all  law.

On  which  of  these  positions  they  mean  to  insist,  I  cannot
determine:  for  they  waver  impartially  between  the  two,  or
evince  a  perceptible  inclination  to  neither.  And  an  attempt  to
determine  the  position  on  which  they  mean  to  insist,  were
profitless  labour:  seeing  that  both  positions  are  false  and
absurd. — ^As  I  have  shown  above,  a  tacit  original  covenant
could  scarcely  precede  the  formation  of  an  independent  political


Jurisprudence  determined,

society.  And,  granting  the  second  of  the  two  positions,  no
sovereign  government  has  been  or  can  be  lawful  For,  according
to  their  own  admission,  the  formation  of  a  society  political  and
independent  was  never  preceded  actually  by  a  fundamental  civil
pact :  And,  as  I  have  shown  above,  a  proper  original  covenant,
or  aught  approaching  to  the  idea,  could  scarcely  precede  the
formation  of  any  society  of  the  kind.^*^

3.  I  close  my  strictures  on  the  hypothesis  of  the  original
covenant,  with  the  following  remark :

It  would  seem  that  the  hypothesis  was  suggested  to  its
authors,  by  one  or  another  of  these  suppositions.  1.  Where
there  is  no  convention,  there  is  no  duty.  In  other  words,
whoever  is  obliged,  is  obliged  through  a  promise  given  and
accepted.  2.  Every  convention  is  necessarily  followed  by  a
duty.  In  other  words,  wherever  a  promise  is  given  and  accepted,
the  promising  party  is  obliged  through  the  promise,  let  its  object
and  tendency  be  what  they  may. — It  is  assumed,  expressly  or
tacitly,  by  Hobbes,  Kant,  and  others,  that  he  who  is  bound  has
necessarily  given  a  promise,  and  that  he  who  has  given  a
promise  is  necessarily  bound.

It  follows  from  the  first  supposition,  that  unless  the  sovereign
and  subjects  were  bound  t^irough  a  pact,  neither  of  the  parties
would  lie  under  duties  to  the  other.  It  follows  from  the  second
supposition,  that  if  the  sovereign  and  subjects  were  parties  to


325
Lect.  VI


(*)  For  the  notions  or  language,  con-
cerning the  original  covenant,  of  recent
German  writers  on  political  ^vemment
and  society,  I  refer  the  curious  reader
to  the  following  books. — 1.  Kant's  Meta-
physical Principles  of  Jurisprudence.
For  the  original  covenant,  see  the  head
Das  StaiUarechL^2,  A  well  made  Philo-
sophical Dictionary  (in  four  octavo
volumes),  bv  Professor  Erug  of  the
University  of  Leipzig.  For  the  original
covenant,  see  the  article  SUuUsursprung.
— 8.  An  Exposition  of  the  Political
Sciences  {Staatntnssenschafien),  by  Pro-
fessor PoUtz  of  the  same  University :  an
elaborate  and  useful  work  in  five  octavo
volumes.  For  the  original  covenant,  see
the  head  StcuUs  una  StcuUenreckt, —
4.  The  Historical  Journal  (for  Nov.  1799)
of  Fr.  V.  Gentz :  a  celebrated  servant  of
the  Austrian  government.

For,  in  Germany,  the  lucid  and  co-
herent doctrine  to  which  I  have  adverted
in  the  text,  is  not  maintained  exclusively
by  mere  metaphysical  speculators,  and
mere  universify- professors,  of  politics
and  jurisprudence.  We  are  gravelv  as-
original


by  Gentz,  that  the  original  co-


venant (meaning  this  same  doctrine
touching  the  onginal  covenant)  is  the
very  basis  of  the  science  of  politics :  that,
without  a  correct  conception  of  the  ori-
ginal covenant,  we  cannot  judge  soundly
on  any  of  the  questions  or  problems
which  the  science  of  politics  presents.
'  Der  gesellschaftliche  V ertrag  (says  he)
ist  die  Basis  der  aUgemeinen  Staatswis-
senschaft  Eine  richtige  VorsteUung  von
diesem  Vertrage  ist  &a  erste  Erforder-
niss  zu  einem  reinen  Urtheile  iiber  alle
Fracen  und  Aufffaben  der  Politik. '  Nay,
he  thinks  that  this  same  doctrine  touch-
ing the  original  covenant,  is  probably
the  happiest  result  of  the  newer  German
philosophv;  insomuch  that  the  fairest
product  of  the  newer  (German  philosophy,
IS  the  conceit  of  an  original  covenant
which  never  was  made  anywhere,  but
which  is  the  necessary  basis  of  political
government  and  society. — ^Warmly  ad-
miring German  literature,  and  pro-
foundly respecting  German  scholarsnip,
I  cannot  but  resret  the  proneness  of
German  philosophy  to  vague  and  misty
abstraction.


326  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  an  original  covenant  (either  immediately,  or  as  representing  the
'  founders  of  the  community),  each  of  the  parties  would  be  bound
to  the  other,  assuredly  and  indissolubly.  As  the  duties  of  each
towards  the  other  would  be  imposed  through  a  pact,  they  would
possess  a  certain  s£u^redness  which  perhaps  they  might  want  if
they  were  imposed  otherwise.

But  both  suppositions  are  grossly  and  obviously  false. — Of

religious,  legal,  and  moral  duties,  some  are  imposed  by  the  laws

which  are  their  respective  sources,  through  or  in  consequence  of

conventions. But  others  are  annexed  to  facts  which  have  no

resemblance  to  a  convention,  or  to  aught  that  can  be  deemed  a

promise. Consequently, a sovereign government might lie

under  duties  to  its  subjects,  and  its  subjects  might  lie  under

duties  towards  itself,  though  neither  it  nor  its  subjects  were

bound  through  a  pact. — ^And  as  duties  are  annexed  to  facts

which  are  not  pacts  or conventions,  so  are there  pacts or

conventions  which  are  not  followed  by  duties. Conventions  are

not  enforced  by  divine  or  human  law,  without  reference  to  their

objects  and  tendencies. There  are  many  conventions  which

positive  morality  reprobates :  There  are  many  which  positive  law

wUl  not  sustain,  and  many  which  positive  law  actively  annuls :

There  are  many  which  conflict  with  the  law  of  God,  inasmuch

as  their  tendencies  are  generally  pernicious. Consequently,

although  the  sovereign  and  subjects  were  parties  to  an  original

covenant,  neither  the  sovereign  nor  subjects  would  of  necessity

be  bound  by  it

Thedis-  From  the  origin or  causes of  political  government  and

tinction  of  society,  I  pass  to  the  distinction  of  sovereign  governments  into

govern- governments  de  jfwrt  and  governments  dt  facto. For  the  two

^vem^^  topics  are  so  connected,  that  the  few  brief  remarks  which  I  shall

mentsdc make  on the  latter,  may  be  placed  apdy  at  the  end  of  my

^^^. disquisition  on  the  former.

rnents  de  In  respect  of  the  distinction  now  in  question,  governments

are  commonly  divided  into  three  kinds:  First,  governments
which  are  governments  de  jure  and  also  de  fdcto;  secondly,
governments  which  are  governments  de  jure  but  not  de  facto ;
thirdly,  governments  which  are  governments  de  foLcto  but  not  de
jure,  A  government  de  jure  and  also  de  facto,  is  a  government
deemed  lawful,  or  deemed  rightful  or  just,  which  is  present  or
established:  that  is  to  say,  which  receives  presently  habitual
obedience  from  the  bulk  or  generality  of  the  members  of  the
independent  political  community.  A  government  de  jure  but  not
de  facto,  is  a  goverment  deemed  lawful,  or  deemed  rightful  or


Jurisprudence  determined.  327

just,  which,  nevertheless,  has  been  supplanted  or  displaced :  that^  l^Jscr.  vi
is  to  say,  which  receives  not  presently  (although  it  received
formerly)  habitual  obedience  from  the  bulk  of  the  community.
A  government  de  facto  but  not  de  jure,  is  a  government  deemed
unlawful,  or  deemed  wrongful  or  unjust,  which,  nevertheless,  is
present  or  established :  that  is  to  say,  which  receives  presently
habitual  obedience  from  the  bulk  of  the  community.  A
government  supplanted  or  displaced,  and  not  deemed  lawful,  is
neither  a  government  de  facto  nor  a  government  de  jure, — ^Any
government  deemed  lawful,  be  it  established  or  be  it  not,is  agovem-
ment  de  jure.  By  a  government,  however,  de  jure,  we  often  me«ui
a  government  which  is  deemed  lawful,  but  which,  nevertheless,
has  been  supplanted  or  displaced.  Any  established  government,
be  it  deemed  lawful  or  be  it  deemed  unlawful,  is  a  government
de  facto.  By  a  government,  however,  de  facto,  we  often  mean,  a
government  which  is  deemed  unlawful,  but  which,  nevertheless,
is  established  or  present. — It  scarcely  is  necessary  to  add,  that
every  government  properly  so  called  is  a  government  de  facto.
In  strictness,  a  so  called  government  de  jure  but  not  de  facto,  is
not  a  government  It  merely  is  that  which  was  a  government
once,  and  which  (according  to  the  speaker)  ought  to  be  a
government  stiU.

In  respect  of  positive  law,  a  sovereign  political  government
which  ifl  established  or  present,  is  neither  lawful  nor  unlawful :
In  respect  of  positive  law,  it  is  neither  rightful  nor  wrongful,  it
is  neither  just  nor  unjust.  Or  (changing  the  expression)  a
sovereign  political  government  which  is  established  or  present,
is  neither  legal  nor  illegal.

In  every  society  political  and  independent,  the  actual  posi-
tive law  is  a  creature  of  the  actual  sovereign.  Although  it  was
positive  law  under  foregoing  sovereigns,  it  is  positive  law
presently,  or  is  positive  law,  through  the  power  and  authority
of  the  present  supreme  government.  For  though  the  present
government  may  have  supplanted  another,  and  though  the
supplanted  government  be  deemed  the  lawful  government,  the
supplanted  government  is  stripped  of  the  might  which  is  re-
quisite to  the  enforcement  of  the  law  considered  as  posi-
tive law.  Consequently,  if  the  law  were  not  enforced  by
the  present  supreme  government,  it  would  want  the  appro-
priate sanctions  which  are  essential  to  positive  law,  and,  as
positive  law,  would  not  be  law  imperative :  that  is  to  say,  as
positive  law,  it  would  not  be  law. — ^To  borrow  the  language
of  Hobbes,  *  The  legislator  is  he  (not  by  whose  authority  the


328  The  Province  of

Leot.  yi  law  was  first  made,  but)  by  whose  authority  it  continues  to  be
^—"^ law.'

Consequently,  an  established  sovereign  government,  in  re-
spect of  the  positive  law  of  its  own  independent  community,
is  neither  lawful  nor  unlawful  If  it  were  lawful  or  unlawful,
in  respect  of  the  positive  law  of  its  own  independent  community,
it  were  lawful  or  unlawful  by  law  of  its  own  making,  or  were
lawful  or  unlawful  by  its  own  appointment  Which  is  absurd.
— And  if  it  were  lawful  or  tmlawful,  in  respect  of  the  positive
law  of  another  independent  community,  it  were  lawful  or  un-
lawful by  the  appointment  of  another  sovereign:  that  is  to
say,  it  were  not  an  actual  supreme,  but  an  actual  subordinate
*  government Which  also  is  absurd.

In  respect  of  the  positive  law  of  that  independent  commu-
nity wherein  it  once  was  sovereign,  a  so  called  government  de
jv/re  but  not  de  facto^  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  a  lawful  govern-
ment :  for  the  positive  law  of  that  independent  community  is
now  positive  law  by  the  authority  of  the  government  dt  facto.
And  though  it  now  were  positive  law  by  the  authority  of  the
displaced  government,  the  displaced  government,  in  respect  of
this  law,  were  neither  lawful  nor  unlawful :  for  if,  in  respect  of
this  law,  the  displaced  government  were  lawful  or  unlawful,  it
were  lawful  or  unlawful  by  law  of  its  own  making,  or  were
lawful  or  unlawful  by  its  own  appointment  The  truth  is,  that,
in  respect  of  the  positive  law  of  that  independent  community,
the  supplanted  government,  though  deemed  dejure^  is  unlawful :
for,  being  positive  law  by  the  authority  of  the  government  de
facto,  this  positive  law  proscribes  the  supplanted  government,
and  Idetermines  that  'attempts  to  restore  it  are  legal  wrongs. —
In  respect  of  the  positive  law  of  another  independent  commu-
nity, a  so  called  government  de  jure  but  not  de  facto,  is  neither
lawful  nor  unlawful  For  if,  in  respect  of  this  law,  it  were
lawful  or  unlawful,  it  were  lawful  or  unlawful  by  the  appoint-
ment of  the  law-maker ;  that  is  to  say,  it  were  not  an  ousted
supreme,  but  an  ousted  subordinate  government

In  respect,  then,  oi  positive  law,  the  distinction  of  sovereign
governments  into  lawful  and  unlawful  is  a  distinction  without  a
I  meaning.  For,  as  tried  by  this  test^  or  as  measured  by  this
standard,  a  so  called  government  de  jure  but  not  de  facto  cannot
be  lawful :  And,  as  tried  by  the  same  test,  or  measured  by  the
same  standard,  a  government  de  fojdo  is  neither  lawful  nor
unlawful.

In  respect,  however,  of  positive  morality,  the  distinction  of


Jurisprudence  determined,  329

sovereign  governments  into  lawful  and  unlawful,  is  not  a  dis- L^^r.  VI
tinction  without  a  meaning. For,  in  respect  of  positive  morality,
a  government  not  de  facto  is  not  of  necessity  unlawful And,
in  respect  of  positive  morality,  the  term  '  lawful '  or  '  unlawful,'
as  applied  to  a  government  de  facto,  is  not  of  necessity  jargon.

A  government  de  faxto  may  be  lawful,  or  a  government  cie
fa£to  may  be  unlawful,  in  respect  of  the  positive  morality  of
that  independent  community  wherein  it  is  established.  If  the
opinions  of  the  bulk  of  the*  community  favour  the  government
de  facto,  the  government  de  facto  is  morally  lawful  in  respect  of
the  positive  morality  of  that  particular  society.  If  the  opinions
of  the  bulk  of  the  community  be  adverse  to  the  government  de
facto,  it  is  morally  unlawful  in  respect  of  the  same  standard.
The  bulk,  however,  of  the  community,  may  regard  it  with
indiJSerence :  or  a  large  portion  of  the  community  may  regard
it  with  favour,  whilst  another  considerable  portion  regards  it
with  aversion.  And,  in  either  of  these  cases,  it  is  neither
morally  lawful,  nor  morally  unlawful,  in  respect  of  the  positive
morality  of  that  independent  community  wherein  it  is  estab-
lished.— ^And  what  I  have  said  of  a  government  de  facto,  in
regard  to  the  morality  of  the  community  wherein  it  is  estab-
lished, may  also  be  said  of  a  government  not  a  government
de  facto,  in  regard  to  the  morality  of  the  community  wherein  it
formerly  ruled.

And  a  government  de  facto,  or  a  government  not  de  facto,
may  be  morally  lawful,  or  morally  unlawful,  in  respect  of  the
positive  morality  which  obtains  between  nations  or  states.
Though  positive  international  morality  looks  mainly  at  the
possession,  every  government  in  possession,  or  every  government
defaxto,  is  not  acknowledged  of  course  by  other  established
governments.  In  respect,  therefore,  of  positive  international
morality,  a  government  de  facto  may  be  unlawful,  whilst  a
government  not  de  facto  may  be  a  government  de  jv/re.

A  government,  moreover,  de  facto,  or  a  government  not  de
facto,  may  be  lawful  or  unlawful  in  respect  of  the  law  of  God.
Tried  by  the  Divine  law,  as  known  through  the  principle  of  utility,
a  sovereign  government  de  facto  is  lawfully  a  sovereign  govern-
ment, if  the  general  happiness  or  weal  requires  its  continuance :
Tried  by  the  same  law,  as  known  through  the  same  index,  a
sovereign  government  de  facto  is  not  lawfully  sovereign,  if  the
general  happiness  or  weal  requires  its  abolition.  Tried  by  the
Divine  law,  as  known  through  the  principle  of  utility,  a  govern-
ment not  de  facto  is  yet  a  government  de  jwre,  if  the  general


330


The  Province  of


Lbct.  VI happiness  or  weal  requires  its  restoration : Tried  by  the  same
' ' law,  as  known  through  the  same  exponent,  a  government  not
de  fa/Ao  is  also  not  de  jure^  if  the  general  happiness  or  weal
requires  its  exclu8ion.(^)


A  ccneral
dennition
of  a  posi-
tive law :
Or  a
general
statement
of  the
essential
difference
by  which
it  is
severed
from  a  law
not  a  posi-
tive law.

This  de-
finition of
a  positive
law  is
assumed
expressly
or  tacitly
throagh-
oat  the
foregoing
lectures.
But  it  only
approaches^
to  a  per-
fectly  com]
plete  and
perfectly
exact  defi-
nition.
And,  con-
sequently,
the  deter-
mination
of  the  pro-
vince of
jurispru-
dence,
which  is
attempted
in  the
foregoing
lectures,
only  ap-
proaches


A  positive  law  may  be  defined  generally  in  the  following
manner:  or  the  essential  difference  of  a  positive  law  (or  the
difference  which  severs  it  from  a  law  not  a  positive  law)  may
be  stated  generally  in  the  following  manner. — Every  positive
law  (or  every  law  simply  and  strictiy  so  called)  is  set,  directly
or  circuitously,  by  a  sovereign  individual  or  body,  to  a  member
or  members  of  the  independent  political  society  wherein  its
author  is  supreme.  In  other  words,  It  is  set,  directly  or  cir-
cuitously, by  a  monarch  or  sovereign  number,  to  a  person  or
persons  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  its  author.

This  definition  of  a  positive  law  is  assumed  expressly  or
tacifly  throughout  the  foregoing  lectures.  But  it  only  ap-
proaches to  a  perfectly  complete  and  perfectiy  exact  definition.
It  is  open  to  certain  correctives  which  I  now  wiU  briefly
suggest.

The  party  or  parties  to  whom  a  law  is  set,  or  the  party  or
parties  on  whom  a  duty  is  laid,  are  necessarily  obnoxious  to
the  sanction  which  enforces  the  law  and  the  duty.  In  other
words,  every  law  properly  so  called  is  set  by  a  superior  to  an
inferior  or  inferiors :  It  is  set  by  a  party  armed  with  might,  to
a  party  or  parties  whom  that  might  can  reach.  If  the  party  to
whom  it  is  set  could  not  be  touched  by  the  might  of  its  author,
its  author  would  signify  to  the  party  a  wish  or  desire,  but
would  not  impose  on  the  party  a  proper  and  imperative  law.
Now  (speaking  generally)  a  party  who  is  obnoxious  to  a  legal
sanction,  or  to  the  might  of  the  author  of  the  law  which  the
legal  sanction  enforces,  is  a  member  of  the  independent  commun-
ity wherein  the  author  is  sovereign.  In  other  words,  a  party
who  is  obnoxious  to  a  legal  sanction  is  a  subject  of  the  author
of  the  law  to  which  the  sanction  is  annexed.  But  as  none  but
members  of  the  community  wherein  the  law  obtains  are  ob-
noxious to  the  legal  sanction  which  enforces  a  positive  law,  the
positive  law  is  imposed  exclusively  on  a  member  or  members  of

03)  It  appears  from  the  Author's  Me-  unlawful  by  Divine  law.  * Also  on  *  Sove-

moranda  that  he  intended  to  insert  here  rei^ty  of  the  People.' It  appears  that

'  Notes  on  Gk>yemments  de  facto  and  de  he  intended  to  connect  this  subject  with

jure  ;  and  on  *  Rights  of  Sovereign  Gov-  that  treated  of  at  the  conclusion  of  Lec-

emments  and  Governments lawful  or  ture  II. — S.  A.


Jurisprudence  determined,  3  3  ^

that  independent  community. Although  the  positive  law  may Lect.  vi
afifect  to  oblige  strangers  (or  parties  who  are  not  members  of  to  a  per-
that  independent  community),  none  but  members  of  that  inde-  ^^^  <^™"
pendent  commimity  are  virtually  or  truly  bound  by  it — Besides,  perfectly
if  the  positive  law  of  one  independent  community  bound  legally  ^^J^Jmin^.
the  members  of  another,  the  other  independent  community  were  tion.
not  an  independent  community,  but  were  merely  a  subordinate
community  forming  a  limb  of  the  first If  it  bound  the  so-
vereign government  of  the  other  independent  community,  that
sovereign  government  would  be  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  the
sovereign  author  of  the  law. If  it  bound  the  subject  members
of  the  other  independent  community,  the  sovereign  author  of
the  law  would  usurp  the  functions  and  authority  of  their  own
sovereign  government :  or  their  own  sovereign  government  would
be  displaced  or  supplanted  by  the  foreign  and  intrusive  law-
giver. So  that  if  the  positive  law  of  every  independent  com-
munity bound  legally  the  members  of  others,  the  subjects  in
every  community  would  be  subject  to  all  sovereigns,  and  every
sovereign  government  would  be  sovereign  in  all  societies. In
other  words,  the  subject  members  of  every  independent  com-
munity would  be  in  a  state  of  subjection  to  every  supreme
government; whilst  every  supreme  government  would  be  the
subject  of  the  rest,  and,  at  the  same  timCi  would  be  their
sovereign.

Speaking,  then,  generally,  we  may  say  that  a  positive  law
is  set  or  directed  exclusively  to  a  subject  or  subjects  of  its
author :  or  that  a  positive  law  is  set  or  directed  exclusively  to
a  member  or  members  of  the  community  wherein  its  author  is
sovereign.  But,  in  many  cases,  the  positive  law  of  a  given
independent  community  imposes  a  duty  on  a  stranger:  on  a
party  who  is  7U)t  a  member  of  the  given  independent  community,
or  is  only  a  member  to  certain  limited  purposes.  For  such,  in
these  cases,  is  the  position  of  the  stranger,  that,  though  he  is
properly  a  member  of  a  foreign  independent  community,  and
therefore  is  properly  a  subject  of  a  foreign  supreme  government,
he  yet  is  obnoxious  to  the  sanction  by  which  the  duty  is  en-
forced, or  to  the  might  of  the  author  of  the  law  through  which
the  duty  is  imposed.  And  such,  in  these  cases,  is  also  the
position  of  the  stranger,  that  the  imposition  of  the  legal  duty
consists  with  the  sovereignty  of  the  government  of  which  he  is
properly  a  subject  Although  the  legal  duty  is  laid  on  one  of
its  subjects,  it  is  not  laid  on  the  foreign  government  itself:  nor
does  the  author  of  the  law,  by  imposing  the  legal  duty,  exercise


332  The  Province  of

Lect.  VI  sovereign  power  in  the  commnnity  of  the  foreign  government,
or  over  one  of  its  subjects  as  being  one  of  its  subjects. — ^For
example :  A  party  not  a  member  of  a  given  independent  com-
munity, but  living  within  its  territory  and  within  the  juris-
diction of  its  sovereign,  is  bound  or  obliged,  to  a  certain  limited
extent  by  its  positive  law.  Living  within  the  territory,  he  is
obnoxious  to  the  l^al  sanctions  by  which  the  law  is  enforced.
And  the  legal  duties  imposed  upon  him  by  the  law  are  consistent
with  the  sovereignty  of  the  foreign  government  of  which  he  is
properly  a  subject.  For  the  duties  are  not  imposed  upon  the
foreign  government  itself,  or  upon  a  party  within  its  independent
community:  nor  are  they  laid  upon  the  obliged  party  as  being
one  of  its  subjects,  but  as  being  a  member,  to  certain  limited
purposes,  of  the  community  wherein  he  resides.  Again :  If  a
stranger  not  residing  within  the  given  community  be  the  owner
of  land  or  moveables  lying  within  its  territory,  a  convention  of
the  stranger,  with  any  of  its  members  or  a  stranger,  may  be
enforced  against  him  by  its  positive  law.  For  if  he  be  sued  on
the  agreement^  and  judgment  be  given  for  the  plaintiff^  the
tribunal  may  execute  its  judgment  by  resorting  to  the  land  or
moveables,  sdthough  the  defendant's  body  is  beyond  the  reach
of  its  process.  And  this  execution  of  the  judgment  consists
with  the  sovereignty  of  the  government  of  which  the  stranger  is
properly  a  subject  For  the  judgment  is  not  executed  against
that  foreign  government,  or  within  the  independent  community
of  which  it  is  the  chief:  nor  is  it  executed  against  the  de-
fendant as  being  one  of  its  subjects,  but  as  owning  land  or
moveables  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  tribunal  If  the
judgment  were  executed  within  the  jurisdiction  of  the  foreign
supreme  government,  the  execution  would  wound  the  sovereignty
of  the  foreign  supreme  government,  unless  the  judgment  were
executed  through  its  permission  and  authority.  And  if  the
judgment  were  executed  through  its  permission  and  authority,
the  duty  enforced  against  the  defendant  would  be  imposed  in
effect  by  the  law  of  his  own  community :  the  law  of  his  own
community  adopting  the  law  of  the  other,  by  reason  of  a  special
convention  between  the  respective  governments,  or  of  a  rule  of
international  morality  which  the  governments  acknowledge  and
observe. — In  all  the  cases,  therefore,  which  I  now  have  noted
and  exemplified,  the  positive  law  of  a  given  independent  society
may  impose  a  duty  on  a  stranger.  By  reason  of  the  obstacles
mentioned  in  the  last  paragraph,  the  binding  virtue  of  the
positive  law  cannot  extend  generally  to  members  of  foreign


Jurisprudence  determined,  333

communities. But  in  the  cases  which  I  now  have  noted  and Lect.  VI
exemplified  those  obstacles  do  not  intervene. For  the  stranger ' ' '
is  obnoxious  to  the  sanctions  by  which  the  law  is  enforced:
and  the  enforcement  of  the  law  against  the  stranger  is  not  in-
consistent with  the  sovereignty  of  a  foreign  supreme  government.

The  definition,  therefore,  of  a  positive  law,  which  is  assumed
expressly  or  tacitly  throughout  the  foregoing  lectures,  is  not  a
perfectly  complete  and  p^ectly  exact  definition.  In  the  cases
noted  and  exemplified  in  the  last  paragraph,  a  positive  law
obliges  legally,  or  a  positive  law  is  set  or  directed  to,  a  stranger
or  strangers:  that  is  to  say,  a  person  or  persons  not  of  the
community  wherein  the  author  of  the  law  is  sovereign  or
supreme.  Now,  since  the  cases  in  question  are  omitted  by  that
definition,  the  definition  is  too  narrow,  or  is  defective  or
inadequate.  To  render  that  definition  complete  or  adequate,  a
comprehensive  summary  of  these  anomalous  cases  (or,  perhaps,
a  full  enumeration  of  tiiese  anomalous  cases)  must  be  tacked  to
the  definition  in  the  way  of  supplement. — ^But  positive  law,
the  subject  of  the  definition,  is  Uie  subject  of  the  foregoing
attempt  to  determine  the  province  of  jurisprudence.  And  since
the  definition  is  defective  or  inadequate,  and  is  assumed
expressly  or  tacitly  throughout  the  foregoing  lectures,  the
determination  of  the  province  of  jurisprudence,  which  is  at-
tempted in  those  discourses,  is  not  a  perfectly  complete  and
perfectly  exact  determination.

But  I  think  that  the  foregoiag  attempt  to  determine  the
province  of  jurisprudence,  and  the  definition  of  a  positive  law
which  the  attempt  assumes  throughout,  have  as  much  of  com-
pleteness and  exactness  as  the  scope  of  the  attempt  requires. —
To  determine  the  province  of  jurisprudence  is  to  distinguish
positive  law  (the  appropriate  matter  of  jurisprudence)  bom  the
various  objects  (noted  in  the  foregoing  lectures)  to  which  it  is
allied  or  related  in  the  way  of  resemblance  or  analogy.  But  so
numerous  are  the  ties  by  which  it  is  connected  with  those
objects,  or  so  numerous  are  the  points  at  which  it  touches  those
objects,  that  a  perfect  determination  of  the  province  of  juris-
prudence were  a  perfect  exposition  of  the  science  in  all  its
manifold  parts.  An  adequate  exposition  of  the  science  (the
only  adequate  determination  of  the  province  of  jurisprudence)  is
really  the  ambitious  aim  of  the  entire  Course  of  Lectures  of
which  the  foregoing  attempt  is  merely  the  opening  portion.
But  a  perfect  determination  of  the  province  of  jurisprudence  is
not  the  purpose  of  the  attempt  itself. Its  purpose  is  merely  to


334  ^/^  Province  of

Lect.  VI  mggest  (with  as  much  of  completeness  and  exactness  as  consist
^  '  ^  with  generality  and  brevity)  the  subject  of  that  adequate
exposition  of  the  science  of  jurisprudence,  or  the  subject  of  that
adequate  determination  of  the  province  of  jurisprudence,  which
is  the  purpose  of  the  entire  Course. — Since  such  is  the  scope  of
the  foregoing  attempt,  the  definition  of  a  positive  law  which  it
assumes  throughout  has  as  much  of  completeness  and  exactness
as  its  scope  requires.  To  render  that  definition  complete  or
adequate,  a  comprehensive  summary  of  the  anomalous  cases  in
question  (or,  perhaps,  a  full  enumeration  of  the  anomalous  cases
in  question)  must  be  tacked  to  the  definition  in  the  way  of
supplement.  But  these  anomalous  cases  belong  to  the  de-
partments of  my  Course  which  are  concerned  with  the  detail
of  the  science.  They  hardly  were  appropriate  matter  for  the
foregoing  general  attempt  to  determine  the  province  of  juris-
prudence :  for  the  foregoing  attempt  to  suggest  the  subject  of
the  science,  with  as  much  of  completeness  and  exactness  as
1  consist  with  generality  and  brevity.  Accordingly,  the  definition
I  or  notion  of  a  positive  law  which  is  assumed  expressly  or  tacitly
I  throughout  the  preceding  lectures,  omits  entirely  the  anomalous
cases  in  question.  And  the  truth  of  the  positions  and  in-
ferences contained  by  the  preceding  lectures  is  not,  I  believe,
impaired,  or  is  not  impaired  materially,  by  this  omission  and
defect.

And  though  the  definition  is  not  complete,  it  approaches

nearly  to completeness. Allowing for the omission of  the

anomalous cases in question,  it is,  I believe,  an adequate

definition  of  its  subject I  hardly  could  have  rendered  a  juster

definition  of  the  subject,  in  brief  and  abstract  expressions :  that

is  to  say,  unless  I  had  descended  from  the  generals  to  the  detail

of  the  science  of  jurisprudence.

An  expla-  Defining  sovereignty  and  independent  political  society  (or

nation  of  a  stating  their  characters  or  distinguishing  marks),  I  have  said

defect  m that  a  given  society  is  a  society  political  and  independent,  if

^ing^^ the  bulk  or  genersJity  of its  members habitually  obey  the

general de-  commands  of  a  determinate  and  independent  party:  meaning

inderond- ^^ '* determinate and independent party' a determinate

ent  polit- individual,  or  a  determinate  body  of  individuals,  not  obeying

society. habitually  the  express  or  tacit  commands  of a determinate

human  superior. — But  who  are  the  members  of  a  given  society  ?

By  what  characters,  or  by  what  distinguishing  marks,  are  its

members  severed  from  persons  who  are  not  of  its  members  ?

Or  how  is  a  given  person  determined  to  a  given  community  ? —


Jurispruclence  determined.  335

By  the  foregoing  general  definition  of  independent  political  Lect.  vi
society  (or  the  foregoing  general  statement  of  its  characters  or  ^""^^^
distinguishing  marks)  the  questions  which  I  now  have  suggested
are  not  resolved  or  touched :  And  it  may  seem,  therefore,  that
the  foregoing  general  definition  is  not  complete  or  adequate.
But,  for  the  following  reasons,  I  believe  that  the  foregoing
definition,  considered  as  a  general  definition,  is,  notwithstanding,
complete  or  adequate :  that  a  general  definition  of  independent
political  society  (or  such  a  definition  as  is  applicable  to  every
society  of  the  kind)  could  hardly  resolve  the  questions  which  I
have  suggested  abova

1.  It  is  not  through  one  mode,  or  it  is  not  through  one
cause,  that  the  members  of  a  given  society  are  members  of  that
community.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  through  one  mode,  or  it
is  not  through  one  cause,  that  they  are  subjects  of  the  person  or
body  sovereign  therein.  A  person  may  be  a  member  of  a  given
society,  or  a  person  may  be  determined  to  a  given  society,  by
any  of  numerous  modes,  or  by  any  of  numerous  causes :  as,  for
example,  by  birth  within  the  territory  which  it  occupies ;  by
birth  without  its  territoiy,  but  of  parents  being  of  its  members ;
by  simple  residence  within  its  territory ;  or  by  naturalization«('y)
— Again  :  A  subject  member  of  one  society  may  be,  at  the  same
time,  a  subject  member  of  another.  A  person,  for  example,  who
is  naturalized  in  one  independent  society,  may  yet  be  a  member
completely,  or  to  certain  limited  purposes,  of  that  independent
society  which  he  aflfects  to  renounce:  or  a  member  of  one
society  who  simply  resides  in  another,  may  be  a  member  com-
pletely of  the  former  society,  and,  to  limited  purposes,  a  member
of  the  latter.  Nay,  a  person  who  is  sovereign  in  one  society,
may  be,  at  the  same  time,  a  subject  member  of  another.  Such,
for  example,  would  be  the  plight  of  a  so  called  limited  monarch,
if  he  were  monarch  and  autocrator  in  a  foreign  independent
community. — Now  if  the  foregoing  definition  of  independent
political  society  had  affected  to  resolve  the  questions  which  I
have  suggested  above,  I  must  have  discussed  the  topics  which  I

(7)  The  foUowing  brief  explanation  society)  of  a  detennined  territory,  or

may  be  placed  pertinently  here.  seat,  is  of  the  very  essence  of  a  society  of

Generally  speaking,  a  society  political  the  kind. But  this  is  an  error. History

and  independent  occapies  a  determined  presents  us  with  societies  of  the  kind,

territory. Consequently,  when  we  ima-  which  have  been,  as  it  were,  in  transitu,

gine  an  independent  j>oUtical  society,  we  Many, for  example, of  the  barbarous

commonly  imagine  it  in  that  pl^ht:  nations  which  invaded  and  settled  in

And,  according  to  the  definition  of  inde-  the  Roman  Empire,  were  not,  for  many

pendent  political  society  which  is  as-  years  before  their  final  establishment,

sumed expressly or  tacitly  by  many  occupants  of  determined  seats,
writer^  the  occupation  (by  the  given


336  714^  ProviTue  of

Leot.  VI have  touched  in  the  present  paragraph. I  must  have  gone  £rom

^"■"^' ' the  generals  into  the  detail  of  jurisprudence ;  and  therefore  I

must  have  wandered  from  the  proper  purpose  or  scope  of  the

foregoing general  attempt  to  determine  the  province  of  the

science.

2.  By  a  general  definition  of  independent  political  society
(or  such  a  definition  as  is  applicable  to  every  society  of  the
kind),  I  could  not  have  resolved  completely  the  questions  sug-
gested above,  although  I  had  discussed  the  topics  touched  in  the
last  paragraph.  For  the  modes  through  which  persons  are
members  of  particular  societies  (or  the  causes  by  which  persons
are  determined  to  particular  societies)  differ  in  different  com-
munities. These  modes  are  fixed  differently  in  different
particular  societies,  by  their  different  particular  systems  of
positive  law  or  morality.  In  some  societies,  for  example,  a
person  bom  of  aliens  within  the  territory  of  the  community,  is,
ipso  juTCy  or  without  an  act  of  his  own,  a  perfect  member  of  the
community  within  whose  territory  he  is  bom;  but,  in  other
societies,  he  is  not  a  perfect  member  (or  is  merely  a  resident
alien)  unless  he  acquire  the  character  by  fulfilling  certain
conditions.  (See  the  French  Code,  Article  9.)  It  therefore  is
only  in  relation  to  a  given  particidar  society  that  the  questions
suggested  above  can  be  completely  resolved.
Restric-  I  have  assumed  expressly  or  tacitly  throughout  the  foregoing

planations  l^ctures  that  a  sovereign  government  of  one,  or  a  sovereign
of  the  two  government  of  a  number  in  its  collective  and  sovereign  capacity,
pofliti^:  cannot  be  houvd  legally.  In  the  sense  with  which  I  have
namely,  assumed  it,  the  position  will  hold  universally.  But  it  needs  a
Boyereign  shght  restriction,  or  rather  a  slight  explanation,  which  may  be
govern-  placed  conveniently  at  the  close  of  my  present  discourse,
cannot  be  It  is  tme  universally,  that  as  being  the  sovereign  of  the

^^  conmiunity  wherein  it  is  sovereign,  a  sovereign  government
and  that  Cannot  be  bound  legally :  And  this  is  the  sense  with  which  I
have^icaoZ  ^^®  assumed  the  position  throughout  the  foregoing  lectures.
rigius  But,  as  being  a  subject  of  a  foreign  supreme  government  (either
oroTub-**  generally  or  to  certain  limited  purposes),  it  may  be  bound  by
jects.  laws  (simply  and  strictly  so  called)  of  that  foreign  supreme

government  In  the  case  which  I  now  am  supposing,  the
sovereign  political  government  bound  by  positive  laws  bears  two
characters,  or  bears  two  persons :  namely,  the  character  or  person
of  sovereign  in  its  own  independent  society,  and  the  character
or  person  of  subject  in  the  foreign  independent  community.
And  in  order  to  the  existence  of  the  case  which  I  now  am


Jurisprudence  determined.  337

supposing,  its  two  chaxacters  or  two  persons  must  be  distinct  in  Lect.  vi
practice,  as  well  as  in  name  and  show.  The  laws  which  are
laid  upon  it  by  the  foreign  supreme  government  may  really  be
laid  upon  it  as  chief  in  its  own  society  :  and,  on  this  supposi-
tion, it  is  subject  (in  that  character)  to  the  sovereign  author  of
the  laws,  in  case  the  obedience  which  it  yields  to  them  amounts
to  a  hoUM  of  obedience.  But  if  the  laws  be  exclusively  laid
upon  it  as  subject  in  the  foreign  conununity,  its  sovereignty  is
not  impaired  by  the  obedience  which  it  yields  to  them,  although
the  obedience  amounts  to  a  habit — The  following  cases  will
amply  illustrate  the  meaning  which  I  have  stated  in  general
expressions. — Let  us  suppose  that  our  own  king  is  properly
monarch  in  Hanover :  and  that  our  own  king,  as  limited  monarch
in  Britain,  is  not  absolved  completely  from  l^al  obligation.
Now  if,  as  chief  in  Hanover,  he  be  not  in  a  habit  of  obedience
to  the  sovereign  British  parliament^  the  legal  duties  incumbent
upon  him  consist  with  his  sovereignty  in  his  German  kingdom.
For  the  duties  are  incumbent  upon  him  (not  as  autocrator  there,
but)  as  limited  monarch  here:  as  member  of  the  sovereign
body  by  which  he  is  legally  bound. — Before  the  French  Eevolu-
tion,  the  sovereign  government  of  the  Canton  of  Bern  had  money
in  the  English  funds  :  And  if  the  English  law  empowered  it  to
hold  lands,  it  might  be  the  owner  of  lands  within  the  English
territory,  as  well  as  the  owner  of  money  in  the.  English  funds.
Now,  assuming  that  the  government  of  Bern  is  an  owner  of  lands
in  England,  it  also  is  subject  to  the  legal  duties  with  which
property  in  land  is  saddled  by  the  English  law.  But  by  its
subjection  to  those  duties,  and  its  habitual  observance  of  the
law  through  which  those  duties  are  imposed,  its  sovereignty  in
its  own  Canton  is  not  annulled  or  impaired.  For  the  duties  are
incumbent  upon  it  (not  as  governing  there,  but)  as  owning  lands
here :  as  being,  to  limited  purposes,  a  member  of  the  British
community,  and  obnoxious,  through  the  lands,  to  the  process  of
the  English  tribunals.

I  have  said  in  a  preceding  section,  that  a  sovereign  govern-
ment of  one,  or  a  sovereign  government  of  a  number  in  its
collective  and  sovereign  capacity,  cannot  have  Ugal  rights  (in  the
proper  acceptation  of  the  term)  against  its  own  subjects.  In  the
sense  with  which  I  have  advanced  it,  the  position  will  hold
universally.  But  it  needs  a  slight  restriction,  or  rather  a  slight
explanation,  which  I  now  will  state  or  suggest.

It  is  true  universally,  that  against  a  subject  of  its  own,  as
being  a  subject  of  its  own,  a  sovereign  political  government
VOL.  L  z


338  The  Province  determined.

LBcrr.  VI  cannot  have  legal  rights :  And  this  is  the  sense  with  which  I
have  advanced  the  position.  But  against  a  subject  of  its  own,
as  being  generally  or  partially  a  subject  of  a  foreign  government,
a  sovereign  political  government  may  have  legal  rights.  For
example :  Let  us  suppose  that  a  Bussian  merchant  is  resident
and  domiciled  in  England:  that  he  agrees  with  the  Bussian
emperor  to  supply  the  latter  with  naval  stores :  and  that  the
laws  of  England,  or  the  English  tribunals^  lend  their  sanctions
to  the  agreement  Now,  according  to  these  suppositions,  the
emperor  bears  a  right,  given  by  the  law  of  England,  against  a
Bussian  subject  But  the  emperor  has  not  the  right  through  a
law  of  his  own,  or  against  a  Bussian  subject  in  that  capacity
or  character.  He  bears  the  legal  right  against  a  subject  of  his
own,  through  the  positive  law  of  a  foreign  independent  society ;
and  he  bears  it  against  his  subject  (not  as  being  his  subject,  but)
as  being,  to  limited  purposes,  a  subject  of  a  foreign  sovereign.
And  the  relative  legal  duty  lying  on  the  Bussian  merchant
consists  with  the  emperor's  autocracy  in  all  the  Bussias.  For
since  it  lies  upon  the  merchant  as  resident  and  domiciled  in
England,  the  sovereign  British  parliament,  by  imposing  the  duty
upon  him,  does  not  interfere  with  the  autocrat  in  his  own
independent  community.


Note  to  Page  251.


In  a  note  at  p.  251,  I  have  referred  to  Tables  drawn  out  in
the  blank  leaves  of  Kant's  'Entwurf  zum  ewigen  Frieden.*
They  are  in  pencil,  and  were  obviously  constructed  by  Mr.
Austin  solely  for  his  own  satisfaction.

The  reader  is  desired  to  observe  that  the  opinions  embodied
in  these  Tables  are  not  given  as  Mr.  Austin's.  In  the  note  to
Table  II.,  as  we  see,  he  questions  one  important  assumption.

The  Tables  are  not  numbered,  so  that  I  have  been  guided
in  their  arrangement  mainly  by  the  order  in  which  they  follow.
— S.  A.


Note  to  page  2%\.  339

TABLE  I.

Forma  Imperii^  or  Staatsform :  ix,  the  form  of  the  Sovereignty.


Monarchy,  or  Aristocracy,  or  Democracy,  or

government  government  government

of  one.  of  some.  of  all.

I


Despotic  or  Republican.  Despotic.

TABLE  IL

Forma  Regvmmu — Regierungsform,  or  StaaUverfassung,


Despotical ;  wherein  the  Republican  ; wherein the

legislative  and  execu-  l^islative powers re-

tive  powers  are  united  side in the sovereign

in  the  sovereign  one  or  one  or  number,  with  re-

number.* presentativea  of  the sub-

jects; and  the  executive
powers,  in  the  sovereign
one  or  number,  f

*  On  this  division,  as  expounded  in  Kant's  text,  Mr.  Austin  remarks : — 'The
making  of  a  law,  and  the  execation  of  a  law,  are  necessarily  different  processes.
But  how  is  it  necessary  that  the  two  processes  should  be  performed  by  different
persons?'

t  The  power  of  appointing  representatives,  is  often  called  political  liberty ;  i,e,
a  portion  in  the  Sovereignty. — Kant

The  passage  in  Kant's  book  to  which  Table  II.  refers,  ends  as  follows :

'  The  sort  or  mode  of  crovemment  {Begierungsart)  is  beyond  all  comparison  more
important  to  a  people  than  the  form  of  a  Sovereignty  {SteuUsform) ;  although  a
great  deal  also  depends  on  the  greater  or  less  adaptability  of  the  latter  to  attain  by
firadual  reforms  to  the  character  of  a  perfect  Republic  To  that  eud,  however,  the
Kepresentative  System  is  absolutely  indispensable ;  without  it  (be  the  form  of  the
Sovereignty  what  it  may)  the  government  is  despotic  and  arbitrary.  None  of  the
ancient  so-called  republics  knew  of  this,  and  they  therefore  inevitably  subsided  into
despotisms ;  the  most  endurable  form  of  which  is,  the  sovereign  rule  of  one.' — Kant,
'Entwurf,*p.  29.

In  a  note,  Kant  refers  here  to  the  often  quoted  line  of  Pope,  which  he  translates,
'  die  bestgefuhrte  ist  die  beste,*  '  If  that,'  says  he,  '  is  equivalent  to  saying  that  the
best  administered  is  the  best  administered,  Pope  (to  quote  Swift's  expression)  only
cracked  a  nut  which  rewarded  him  with  a  maggot,  cut  if  it  means  that  the  best
administered,  is  also  the  best  constituted  government,  it  is  utterly  false  {grund-
falseh) ;  for  examples  of  good  government  prove  nothing  in  favour  of  the  form.
Who  ever  governed,  better  than  Titus  or  Marcus  Aurelius  i  and  yet  the  one  left  a
Domitian,  the  other  a  Commodus,  as  his  successor.'— S.  A


340  Note  to  page  251.

TABLE  III.

Despotical  Governments  are


Monarcliies  Aristocracies :  Democracies'*

(called  in  this  case  (necessarily).

Autocracies) :  |

"- /

Sovereign,

Republican  Qovemments  are


Monarchies  (called  in  this  case  Aristocracies,

limited  or  constitutional  mon-
archies).

v. ^.^ -

Not  sovereign,  but  sharing  sovereign  powers  with
representatives  of  subjects.t


TABLE  IV.

Monarchy.  Polyarchy.

(Government  of  one,  or  of  a  (Government  of  a  number,  of

physicalor  individual  per-  a  body,  or  of  a  coUegiate

son.)  and  fictitious  person.)


I  \  \

Oligarchy.  Aristocracy.  Democracy.

(Two,  or  other  (A  number  neither  (Any  large  num-

small  number.)  small  nor  large.)  ber,  short  of  alL)]!

*  Democracy,  or  the  government  of  all,  is  necessarily  autocratical  or  despotic.
—Kant

t  Legislative  powers  =  Sovereignty  :  Consequently,  in  no  republican  (or  syncra-
tical)  ffovemment  is  the  so-called  sovereign,  sovereign.  It  is  merely  co-sovereign
with  tne  active  portion  of  the  citizens.  As  Regent  (when  considered  by  itself)  it  is
subject-minister  of  the  joint  sovereign. — Note  by  Mr.  Austin.

:;:  In  the  text,  Kant  says,  *■  AUe,  die  doch  nicht  alle  sind  : '  referring  obviously
to  the  exceptions  made  in  all  schemes  of  universal  suffrage. — S.  A.


Note  to  page  251.


341


Autocracy.

I


TABLE  V.


1.  Monarchy.
\


2.  Polyarchy.


Properly  sovereign.


Syncracy.


I

3.  Monarchy.


4.  Polyarchy.


Nominally  sovereign,  but
sharing  sovereignty
with  active  citizens.


TABLE  VL

Fwma,  Regiminis.


Autocracy :  wherein  the  legisla-
tive and  executive  powers  are
united  in  the  sovereign  one
or  number.


I

Syncracy:  wherein  the  executive
powers  reside  in  the  sovereign
one  or  number  ;  but  the  legis-
kUive  powers,  in  the  sovereign
one  or  number,  with  the  active
(as  distinguished  from  the
passive)  portion  of  the  subject
citizens.*


I

Bepresentative  (i.e.
of  active  citizens).


Non-represent-
ative.


Autocracies.


TABLE  VIL


Syncracies.


I

Monarchies.

I


Aristocracies  and
Democracies.


Monarchies.


I

Aristocracies.


Sovereign


Sovereign  govern-
ment of  one.


Sovereign  governments
of  a  number.


Not  sovereign,  but  sharing
sovereignty  with  active
citizens.!


*  The  share  of  the  active  citizens  in  the  sovereignty  is  called  political  liberty. —
Kant

t  See  Krug,  voL  iv.  p.  36,  and  Politz,  vol.  i.  p.  178  et  seq.


Lectures  on  Jurisprudence.


ANALYSIS  OF.  PERVADING  NOTIONS.

LECTURE XII~

ANALYSIS OF THE  TERM RIGHT.

I  HAVE  endeavouied  in  the  preceding  Lectures  to  accomplish  Lect.  Xll
the  following  objects:  1st,  To  determine  the  essentials  of  a  '  '  '
Law  (in  the  largest  signification  which  can  be  given  to  the
term  properly) :  2ndly,  To  distinguish  the  laws  proper  which
are  set  by  God  to  Man,  and  the  laws  proper  and  improper
which  are  ssmctioned  or  oblige  morally,  from  the  laws  proper
which  are  sanctioned  or  oblige  legally,  or  are  established
directly  or  indirectly  by  sovereign  authority.

Having  attempted  to  determine  generally  the  nature  of
Law,  and  to  mark  the  boundaries  of  the  field  which  is  occu-
pied by  the  science  of  Jurisprudence,  I  shall  now  endeavour
to  unfold  (as  briefly  as  I  can)  the  essential  properties  of
Bights:  meaning  by  Bights,  legai  rights,  or  rights  which  are
creatures  of  Law,  strictly  or  simply  so  called.

There  are,  indeed,  Bights  which  arise  from  other  sources :  Natural
namely,  from  the  laws  of  God  or  Nature,  and  from  laws  which  ^^^JJ^ot
are  sanctioned  morally. But  the  peculiarities  of  these  may  be  Rights'
easily  collected,  by  considering  the  peculiarities  of  the  sources  merely"^
from which they flow. Accordingly,  I shall  not pause  to  sanctioned
examine  them  in  a  direct  or  formal  manner,  although  I  shall  ^^^Z
advert to them occasionally in the course of the  ensuing
Lectures. At present I dismiss them with the following
remarks. 1st,  Like  the  Obligations  to  wjiich  they  correspond,
natural  and  moral  Bights  (or  rights  which  are  merely  sanctioned

'^  This  lecture  was  marked  xii  in  the  the  same  numhering. There  is,  however,

former  edition,  being  the  twelfth  lecture  no  hiatus  between  this  and  the  last  lee-

in  one  of  the  courses  as  delivered  bv  the  ture,  which  in  fact  contained  the  matter

author. I  have  thought  it  advisable  for  of  several  of  the  lectures  orally  delivered,

the  purposes  of  reference  to  adhere  to  — K  G.  I


344  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbct.  xil^religioTisly  or  morally)  are  imperfect. In  other  words,  they  are
'  not armed  with'  the legal sanction,  or cannot be enforced

judicially.  2ndly,  The  Eights  (if  such  they  can  be  called)
which  are  conferred  by  positive  morality,  partake  of  the  nature
of  the  source  from  which  they  emanate. — So  far  as  positive
morality  consists  of  laws  improper,  the  rights  which  are  said  to
arise  from  it  are  rights  hy  way  of  analogy.

For  example,  rights  which  are  derived  from  the  Law  of
Nations  are  related  to  rights  which  are  derived  from  positive
Law,  by  a  remote  or  faint  resemblanca  They  are  neither
armed  with  the  legal  sanction,  nor  are  they  creatures  of  Law
established  by  determinate  superiors.

Strictly  speaking,  there  are  no  rights  but  those  which  are
the  creatures  of  law ;  and  I  speak  of  any  other  kind  of  rights
only  in  order  that  I  may  conform  to  the  received  language,
which  certainly  does  allow  us  to  speak  of  moral  rights  not
sanctioned  by  law;  thus,  for  example,  we  speak  of  rights
created  by  treaty.
Ideas,  the  In  attempting  to  explain  the  nature  of  a  legal  Bight,  I

*  hf^*^  °^  ®^^  inevitably  advert  to  the  import  of  the  following  terms :
inevitably  1st,  Law,  Duty,  and  Sanction. For,  though  every  law  does

in^hatof ^^*  create  a  right,  every  right  is  the  creature  of  Law. And,
right though  every  obligation  and  sanction  does  not  imply  a  right,
every  right  implies  an  obligation  and  a  sanction.

2ndly,  Person,  Thing,  Act  and  Forbearance,  For  rights
are  exercised  by  persons ;  or  if  not  exercised  by  persons,  reside
in  persons.  And  persons,  things,  acts  and  forbearances,  are  the
subjects  or  objects  of  rights  and  obligations,  or  (changing  the
shape  of  the  expression)  sure  the  matter  about  which  they  are
conversant

3rdly,  Injury ; — ^Wrong ; — or  Breach  of  Obligation  or  Duty
by  commission  or  omission.  For  as  rights  suppose  or  imply
obligations  and  sanctions,  so  do  obligations  or  sanctions  suppose
injuries  or  wrongs.  In  other  words,  their  ends  or  purposes  are
the  jprevevUion  of  injuries  or  wrongs,  and  the  redress  of  the
damage  or  mischief  which  is  commonly  the  consequence  or
effect.

4thly,  Intention  and  Negligence  (including  under  the  latter
of  these  terms  what  may  be  called  rashness  or  temerity).
For  every  wrong  (whether  it  be  positive  or  negative,  or  consist
of  a  commission  or  omission)  supposes  intention  or  negligence
on  the  part  of  the  wrongdoer.

5thly,  Will  and  Motive. For  the  import  of  the  expressions


Right.  345

'  will  *  and  *  motive '  is  implied  in  the  import  of  the  expressions  Lucr.  Xii
'irUeTUion*  and  'negligence,*  And,  further  obligation  and  sanction  '
operate  upon  the  ivill  of  the  obliged,  and  are  thereby  dis-
tinguished from  the  compiUsion  or  restraint,  which  (for  want  of
a  better  name)  may  be  styled  merely  physical  Nothing  is
more  frequent  in  jurisprudence  than  the  confusion  of  motive
with  intention;  and  of  this  confusion  the  law  of  England
affords  a  flagrant  instance,  when  it  lays  down  that  murder  must
be  committed  of  malice  afordkought.  By  this  is  merely  meant
that  it  must  be  committed  intentionally.  Malice  is  properly
the  name  of  a  motive :  namely,  that  of  malevolence  or  ill-will ;
but  it  is  not  by  any  means  necessary  in  the  law  of  England
that  the  act  should  have  been  committed  from  ill-will :  on  the
contrary,  the  great  majority  of  murders  are  committed  from
motives  altogether  different — such  as  that  of  obtaining  the
property  of  the  murdered  person — :  it  is  only  necessary  that
the  murder  should  be  intentional  There  is  one  case  of
peculiar  absurdity,  that  of  murders  said  to  be  committed  out  of
malice  or  ill-will  to  all  mankind.  For  example,  if  a  workmcm
throws  rubbish  from  the  top  of  a  building  without  giving
warning  to  the  passers-by,  and  if  he  consequently  kills  one
of  them,  it  would  be  too  obvious  an  absurdity  to  pretend  that
he  acted  from  ill-will  towards  the  particular  person,  whom  in  all
probability  he  has  never  before  seen  or  heard  of,  but  he  is  said
to  have  acted  from  malice  or  ill-will  towards  all  mankind ;  the
real  ground  for  his  punishment  being  that  he  has  acted  with
gross  and  mischievous  negligence ;  that  he  has  shown  a  want  of
regard  for  the  lives  and  safety  of  others,  which  ought  to  subject
him  to  legal  punishment.  He  has  committed  the  offence  not
from  a  peculiar  motive  but  from  the  want  of  a  certain  motive,
and  his  state  of  mind  requires  to  be  distinguished  from  inten-
tion, as  intention  and  negligence  both  require  to  be  distinguished
from  motives.

Finally,  Political  or  Civil  Lvberiy : — a  term  which,  not
unfrequently,  is  synonymous  with  right;  but  which  often
denotes  simply  exemption  from  obligation,  conferred  in  a  peculiar
manner :  namely  by  the  indirect  or  circuitous  process  which  is
styled  'permission'  For  it  will  be  shown  in  the  sequel  that
when  the  law  only  permits,  it  as  clearly  confers  a  right  as
when  it  commands.

Having  attempted  to  explain  the  import  of  the  term  'Eight,'
and  having  touched  upon  the  import  of  the  terms  which  I  have


346  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XII  now  enamerated,  I  shall  advert  to  the  ambiguities  by  which
some  of  these  expressions  are  obscuied.  I  shall  point  par-
ticularly at  the  varying  significations  of  'Law/  'Eight/  and
'Obligation.'  In  attempting  to  unfold  the  notions  which  aie
signified  by  the  term  '  Right,'  and  to  indicate  the  import  of  the
terms  with  which  it  is  inseparably  connected,  I  shall  scarcely
find  it  possible  to  avoid  repetition.  For  each  of  these  expressions
is  so  implicated  vdth  the  rest,  that  the  explication  of  any  of
them  involves  allusions  to  the  others.  For  the  same  reason,
the  parts  of  the  analysis  will  probably  be  obscure :  though  I
hope  that  the  whole  may  express  the  intended  meaning,  or,  at
least,  may  suggest  it  to  the  hearer.

Having  briefly  pointed  at  the  purpose  of  the  following
analysis,  and  apologised  for  its  repetitions  and  obscurities,  I
now  proceed  to  the  subject  of  it.

Obliga-  Every  Law  (properly  so  called)  is  an  express  or  tacit,  a

Duties  are direct  or  circuitous  CommancL

poritiye  or  By  every  command,  an  Obligation  is  imppsed  upon  the  party
negative.  ^  whom  it  is  addressed  or  intimated.  Or  (changing  the  expres-
sion) it  obliges  the  party  by  virtue  of  the  corresponding  sanction.
Every  Obligation  or  Duty  (terms,  which,  for  the  present,  I
consider  as  synonymous)  is  positive  or  negative.  In  other  words,
the  party  upon  whom  it  is  incumbent  is  commanded  to  do  or
perform,  or  is  commanded  to  forbear  or  abstain.

In  order  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  positive  obligation,  the  act
or  acts  which  are  enjoined  by  the  Command  must  be  done  or
performed  by,  or  on  the  part  of,  the  obliged.  In  order  to  the
fulfilment  of  a  negative  obligation,  he  must  forbear  from  the
act  or  acts  which  the  Command  prohibits  or  forbids.  In  the
one  case,  the  active  intervention  of  the  obliged  is  necessary.
In  the  other  case,  the  active  intervention  of  the  obliged  is  not
only  needless  but  is  inconsistent  with  the  purpose  of  the
obligation.

An  obligation  to  deliver  goods  agreeably  to  a  contract,  to
pay  damages  in  satisfaction  of  a  wrong,  or  to  yield  the  pos-
session of  land  in  pursuance  of  a  judicial  order,  is  a  positive
obligation.  An  obligation  to  abstain  from  killing,  from  taking
the  goods  of  another  without  his  consent,  or  from  entering  his
land  without  his  licence,  is  a  negative  obligation.
Forbear-  I  observe  that  forbearances  have  been  styled  by  Mr.  Ben-

""tlbe^*" thtun"  negative  services. And,  if  we  like,  we  may  caU  them

"  TraiUs  de  Legislation,  I.  p.  154.


Right — Person.  347

by  that,  or by  any  other name. But whether established  Leot.  XII
language  authorise  the  expressions  seems  to  be  doubtful If  styledwith
you  abstain  from  knocking  me  on  the  head,  or  from  taking  P^Pjl®*^
my  purse,  or  from  blackening  my  reputation,  it  can  scarcely  services,
be  said  with  propriety  that  *you  render  me  a  service.' In
ordinary  language  *  you  forbear  from  doing  me  a  mischief.' It
would  seem  that  Mr.  Bentham  has  transferred  to  the  obfect  of  an
obligation,  an  expression  which  applies  correctly  to  the  obligation
itself. A  forbearance,  in  pursuance  of  an  obligation,  is  hardly  a
*  negative  service,'  though  the  obligation  of  which  it  is  the  object
is  properly  a  *  negative  Migation,'

Obligations  may  also  be  distinguished into  relative and  Obliga-

A  relative  obligation  is  incumbent  upon  one  party,  and  absolute,
correlates  with  a  right  residing  in  another  party.  Changing
the  expression,  A  relative  obligation  corresponds  or  answers
to  a  right,  or  implies,  and  is  implied  by,  a  Right.  Where  an
obligation  is  absolute,  there  is  no  right  with  which  it  correlates.
There  is  no  right  to  which  it  corresponds  or  answers.  It  neither
implies,  nor  is  implied  by  a  right.  Here,  as  elsewhere,  the  term
'  absolute '  is  a  negative  or  privative  expression.  Here,  as  else-
where, it  denotes  the  absence  of  an  object  to  which  the  speaker
or  writer  expressly  or  tacitly  refers.

But,  in  order  to  the  complete  explanation  of  a  negative  or
privative  expression,  we  must  first  explain  the  object  of  which  it
denotes  the  absence.  Consequently,  I  shall  begin  with  rights,
and  with  the  obligations  which  are  implied  by  rights;  and  I  shall
then  proceed  to  the  obligations  which  have  no  corresponding
rights,  or  which  (in  a  word)  are  aisoliUe.

Since  rights  reside  in  persons,  and  since  persons,  things,  acts.  Rights  im-
and  forbearances  are  the  subjects  or  objects  of  rights,  I  must  ^^^"
advert  to  the  respective  significations  of  these  various  related  things,
expressions,  before I address myself to rights and to the  forbe^-
obligations  with  which  they  correlate.  ^''*"-

Persons  are  divisible  into  two  classes : — physical  or  natural  Persons
persons,  and  legal  or  fictitious  persons.  ficSiou^^

In  this  instance,  'physical*  or  *  natural'  bears  the  sig-
nification which  is  usually  attached  to  it  in  the  language  of
Jurisprudence,  and  (I  believe)  in  the  language  of  other  sciences.
Its  import  is  negative.  It  denotes  a  person  not  fictitious  or
legal,  and  is  used  to  distinguish  persons,  properly  so  called,  from
persons  which  are  such  by  a  figment,  and  for  the  sake  of  brevity
in  discourse. Consequently,  when  we  speak  of  *  persons '  simply,


348  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XII  and  without  opposing  them  to  legal  or  fictitious  persons,  we

' mean  persons  properly  so  called,  or  persons  physical  or  natural

Meaningof By  a  physical or  natural  person^  or,  by  a  person  simply,

peiTOn,^or  ^  Diean  homo,  or  a  wian,  in  the  largest  signification  of  the  term  :

*  person ' that  18  to  Say,  as  including  every  being  which  can  be  deemed

"™P  ^* human. This  is  the  meaning  which  is  given  to  the  term  person,

in  familiar  discourse. And  this,  I  believe,  is  the  meaning  which

is  given  to  it  by  the  Soman  Lawyers  (from  whose  writings  it

has  been  borrowed  by  modem  jurists)  when  they  denote  by  it  a

physical  or  natural  person,  and  not  a  legal  or  fictitious  one.

Many  of  the  modern  Civilians  have  narrowed  the  import  of
the  term  person  as  meaning  a  physical  or  natural  person.

They  define  a  person  thus :  *  homx>,  cum  staiu  suo  considera-
tus:'  a  'human  being,  invested  with  a  condition  or  stains'
And,  in  this  definition,  they  use  the  term  staius  in  a  restricted
sense :  As  including  only  those  conditions  which  comprise  rights;
and  as  excluding  conditions  which  are  purely  onerous  or
burthensome,  or  which  consist  of  duties  merely.  According  to
this  definition,  human  beings  who  have  no  rights  are  not
persons,  but  things ;  being  classed  with  other  things  which  have
no  rights  residing  in  themselves,  but  are  merely  the  subjects  of
rights  residing  in  others.  Such,  in  the  Eoman  Law,  down  to
the  age  of  the  Antonines,  was  the  position  of  the  slave.  In
respect  of  his  master,  and  ako  in  respect  of  strangers,  he  was
subject  to  Obligations  or  Duties.  But  he  had  no  Rights  as
against  his  master,  or  even  as  against  strangers.  His  master
might  deal  with  him,  as  if  he  had  been  a  thing  of  which  his
master  was  the  owner: — might  use,  abuse,  and  even  destroy
him,  without  stint  or  measure,  and  with  absolute  impunity.  In
case  he  were  killed  or  maltreated  by  a  third  party,  the  act  was
not  a  wrong  againt  the  slave  himself,  but  was  merely  an  offence
against  the  dominion  or  property  which  resided  in  the  master.
In  a  word,  the  slave  (like  a  thing)  was  susceptible  of  damage,
but  was  not  susceptible  of  injury.  'Servo  ipsi  nuUa  injuria
intelligitur  fieri :  sed  domino  per  eum  fieri  videtur.*^^

Agreeably  to  this  definition,  as  understood  by  the  modern
civilians  above  mentioned,  a  person  is  a  human  being  invested
with  rights. Or  s,  person  is  a  human  being  capable  of  rights.

But  this,  I  am  convinced,  was  not  the  notion  attached  to
the  term  *  person*  by  the  Roman  Lawyers  themselves,  when  they
denoted  by  it  a  physical  or  natural  person.

For,  first,  in  all  their  divisions  of  persons,  or  in  all  their
^  Gaii  Institutionum  Comment.  III.  §  222.


Right— Person.  349

distributions  of  persons  into  various  classes,  slaves,  who  had  no  Lect.  Xll
rights,  are  considered  as  persons,  and  *  persona*  and  'homo*  are
synon3nnous  or  equivalent  expressions.  '  Summa  divisio  de  jure
personarum,  haec  est ;  quod  omnes  homines  aut  liberi  sunt  aut
servi!  Again :  '  Sequitur  de  jure  personarum  alia  divisio.  Nam
quaedam  personoe  sui  juris  sunt;  qusedam  alieno  juri  subject®.
Sed  rursus  earum  personarum  quae  alieno  juri  subject®  sunt,
alise  in  potestate,  alise  in  manu,  alise  in  mancipio  sunt.  Yidea-
mus  nunc  de  iis  quae  alieno  juri  subjectae  sunt:  Ac  prius
dispiciamus  de  iis  qui  in  aliend.  potestate  sunt  In  potestate
itaque  sunt  servi  dominorum.'  ^

In  these  passages  from  the  Institutes  of  Gains  (and  in
various  corresponding  passages  in  the  Institutes  and  Digest  of
Justinian)  slaves  (who  had  no  rights)  are  treated  as  a  class  of
persons,  and  'homo*  and  'persona*  are  applied  indifferently,  or
as  if  they  were  equivalent  expressions.  And,  in  penning  these
passages,  the  attention  of  the  authors  must  have  been  par-
ticularly directed  to  the  just  l^al  import  of  the  term  *  person.'
For  the  purpose  with  which  they  were  occupied  was  the
division  of  persons,  or  the  distribution  of  persons  into  genera
and  species.

Secondly,  Although  the  slave  had  no  rights,  there  are
numerous  places  in  the  Institutes  of  Gains,  in  the  Institutes  of
Justinian,  and  also  in  his  Digest  or  Pandects,  in  which  a  stalv^
or  condition  is  ascribed  to  the  slave,  or  in  which  the  slave  is
spoken  of  as  bearing  a  datm  or  condition.

^  Gaii  Institutionum  Comment. Lib.  that  term  would  apply)  might  be  morally

I.  §  9,  48-52. At  the  passage  indicated  or  religiously  *  persons,'  but  bein^  sub-

the  following  note  is  written  by  the  ject  to  no  obligations,  and  enjoying  no

author's  hand  in  the  margin  of  his  own  rights  po^i/icaZZyAinc^umeef,  would  legally

copy  : —  speakingbe  'Aomines' merely. — Marginal

Slayes  are  ranked  by  Gains  amongst  Note,
persons.  If  the  cnjofi/meTU  of  Tights  x)&  And  again,  at  p.  295,  Lib.  IIL  §  220,
necessary  to  satisfy  the  term,  a  slaye  (in  et  seq.f  is  the  following : —
the  earber  ages  of  Borne)  was  not  a  per-  A  slaye  (as  the  subject  of  property)
son,  but  a  thing.  If  suijectum  to  obliga-  may  be  damaged  ;  but  (as  haying  no
lion  suffices  to  constitute  a  person,  a  rights)  is  not  himself  susceptible  of  in-
slaye  without  rights  belongs  to  the  class  jury  {ante,  L  §  58,  Constitution  of  Anto-
of  persons.  In  the  ago  of  Gains,  slayes  nine. )  The  rights,  howeyer,  which  are
were  persons  in  eyery  sense  of  the  term  ;  there  spoken  or  were  giyen  to  the  slaye
since,  by  certain  Constitutions,  they  as  against  his  master;  and  damage  or
were  protected  for  thtir  own  adyantage,  even  death  inflicted  upon  the  former  by
eyen  a^^ainst  their  masters.  *  A  person '  a  third  person  may  still  haye  been  con-
(to  which  '  condition '  or  '  status  is  the  sidered  as  an  injury  done  to  the  property
corresponding  abstract  term)  seems  to  of  the  latter  {mde  III.  §  213).  The  Con-
be  susceptible  of  only  two  definitions :  stitution,  howeyer,  of  Antonine  seems  to
the  narrower,  '  a  human  being  considered  imply  that  the  causeless  killing  of
as  enjoying  or  inyested  with  Rights:'  another's  slaye  was  already  a  crime;
the  more  eztensiye,  *■  a  human  bein^  and,  by  consequence,  that  the  slaye  was
considered  as  subjected  to  Obligations,  not  without  rights,  eyen  as  against  a
Men  liying  without  a  goyemment  (i.«.  stranger. — Marginal  Notes,
without  any  common  superior  to  which


350  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XII  Even,  therefore,  if  we  admit  that  the  definition  in  question
will  apply  to  the  term  *  person,*  and  that  a  person  is  a  human
being  bearing  a  condition  or  status,  it  will  not  follow  that  the
term  'person  *  is  exclusively  applicable  to  such  human  beings  as
are  invested  with  rights.

If  we  admit  the  definition,  while  we  look  at  the  true  im-
port of  the  term  status,  the  meaning  of  *  person '  is  this :  namely,
a  human  being  considered  as  invested  with  rights,  or  considered
as  subject  to  duties.^

Taking  the  term  in  that  meaning,  it  would  apply  to  every
human  creature,  if  a  member  of  a  political  society,  and  not
sovereign  therein.  It  could  not  apply  to  a  human  being  not
a  member  of  any  political  society,  for  a  human  being  in  that
situation  has  no  legal  rights,  and  is  free  from  legal  obligations.
Nor,  taken  in  that  meaning,  can  it  apply  to  a  monarch,  for  as  I
have  before  observed,^  we  cannot  say  with  correctness,  that
sovereigns  have  legal  rights,  nor  that  they  are  subject  to  legal
obligations.  Obligations  are  imposed,  and  rights  conferred  by
laws.  He,  therefore,  who  has  rights,  or  who  lies  under  obliga-
tions, occupies  a  position  wherein  sovereigns  are  not  He  is  in
a  state  of  subjection,  or  in  a  habit  of  obedience,  to  some  de-
terminate superior  from  whom  he  receives  the  law.

But,  according  to  the  meaning  which  was  attached  to  it  by
the  Soman  Lawyers,  neither  of  the  significations  in  question
belongs  to  the  term  'person,*  They  neither  confined  it  to
human  beings,  considered  as  invested  with  rights ;  nor  did  they
even  restrict  it  to  human  beings,  considered  as  subject  to
obligations.  The  meaning  which  they  attached  to  the  term,  is
the  familiar  or  vulgar  meaning.  With  them  'persorui  *  denoted
' homo*  or  any  being  which  can  be  styled  human.

The  modem  limitation  of  the  term  'person*  to  'hum^an
beings  considered  as  invested  with  rights*  appears  to  have  arisen
thus:  1st,  A  person  was  defined  by  many  of  the  modem
Civilians, '  a  human  being  bearing  a  staius  or  condition.'  2ndly,
The  authors  of  the  definition  used  the  term  '  siattis*  in  a
peculiar  and  narrow  sense. They  assumed  that  every  statvs

**  Hugo, Lehrbuch der  juristischen  wife  in  the  husband,  etc.,  there  is  a  com-

Encyclopadie,  vol.  i.  p.  800.  Mr.  Austin's  bination  of  Jtts  in  Re  with  Jtts  ad  Rem  ;

copy  of  this  book  is  filled  with  maiginal  jua  in  re,  as  against  other  persons,  jua

notes. The  following  is  from  the  page  ad  rem,  as  against  the  person  who  is

referred  to  {ServUvi) : —  obliged  to  perform  the  services. AU

Wherever  a  man  has  a  right  to  the  such  rights  belong  to  Jura  Ferafmarum:

services  of  another,  whether  it  be  un-  i.e.  they  suppose  a  Status. — Marginal

limited,  as  in  the  case  of  unqualified  Note.

slavery ;  or  limited,  as  the  riffht  of  the  ^  See  p.  281  et  seq.,  ante,
husband  in  the  wife,  the  right  of  the


Right — Person.  3  5 1

comprises  rigMs^  or,  at  least,  comprises  capacities  to  acquire  or  L»ct.  XII
take  rights.  They  assumed  that  a  stai'm  or  condition  could  not
be  ascribed  to  any  one  who  was  excluded  from  all  rights,  and
was  simply  subject  to  duties.  Now  there  is  no  classical
authority  for  defining  a  person, '  a  human  being  bearing  a  stoAus
or  condition/  And  further,  I  could  cite  numerous  passages
from  the  Classical  Jurists,  in  which  a  stains  or  condition  is
ascribed  to  the  dam :  That  is  to  say,  to  a  human  being  who  is
excluded  from  rights ;  and  whose  condition  or  static  is  therefore
purely  onerous,  or  consists  of  duties  merely.  The  truth  appears
to  be  that  the  authors  of  the  definition  considered  the  term
*  status*  as  equivalent  to  the  term  'captU:'  a  word  denoting
conditions  of  a  particular  class:  conditions  which  do  comprise
rights,  and  comprise  rights  so  numerous  and  important,  that  the
conditions  or  statits  of  which  those  rights  are  constituent  parts,
are  marl^  and  distinguished  by  a  name  importing  pire-
eminence.

For  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  the  meaning  which  should
be  assigned  to  the  term  statiis,  I  have  searched  the  meanings
which  were  annexed  to  it  by  the  Roman  Lawyers,  through  the
Institutes  of  Gains  and  Justinian,  and  through  the  more  volu-
minous Digest  of  the  latter.  And  the  result  at  which  I  have
arrived  is  this :  that  statvs  and  capiU  are  not  synonymous  ex-
pressions, but  that  the  term  captU  signifies  certain  conditions
which  are  capital  or  principal :  which  cannot  be  acquired  and
cannot  be  lost,  without  a  mighty  and  conspicuous  change  in  the
legal  position  of  the  party.  Such,  for  instance,  are  the  status
libertcUis  and  the  status  dvitatis:  that  is  to  say,  the  condition  of
the  freeman,  as  opposed  to  the  condition  of  the  slave ;  and  the
condition  of  the  citizen  or  member  of  the  political  society,  as
opposed  to  the  condition  of  the  foreigner.

Whatever  may  be  the  meanings  of  these  terms  as  they  are
used  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  it  is  certain  that  they  are  not
synonymous.  For  a  condition  or  status  is  repeatedly  ascribed
to  the  slave,  and  yet  it  is  affirmed  of  the  slave  '  that  he  has
nuilum  capid*

It  is  much  to  be  wished,  that  the  difference  between  them
could  be  ascertained.  For  of  all  the  perplexing  questions  which
the  science  of  Jurisprudence  presents,  the  notion  of  status  or
condition  is  incomparably  the  most  difficult  And  much  of  the
obscurity  in  which  it  is  involved,  arises  from  the  manner  in
which  it  has  been  treated  by  the  modern  Commentators  upon
the  Roman  Law : Particularly  from  their  habit  of  restricting


352  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Leot.  XII  the  import  of  '  stcUvs'  and  of  using  it  as  if  it  werd  equivalent  to
^^ ' the  narrower  expression  ' caput*

I  think,  then,  that  I  am  justified  by  authority,  as  well  as
by  the  convenience  which  results  from  it,  in  imputing  to  the
term  person  (as  denoting  a  physical  or  natural  person)  the
familiar  or  vulgar  meaning;  or  in  considering  a  physical  or
natural  person  as  exactly  equivalent  to  '  man '  (in  the  largest
signification  of  the  term).

If  persona  (as  meaning  Tnan)  be  equivalent  to  homo,  and  be

not exclusively  applicable to *  men  invested with rights' it

follows  that  the  slave  is  a  person,  though  he  be  excluded  from

rights. If,  indeed,  we  consider  him  from  a  certain  aspect,  we

may,  in  a  certain  sense,  style  him  a  thing. But  almost  every

person  may  be  considered  ftom  a  similar  aspect,  and  may  also

be  styled  a  thing,  with  equal  propriety. As  I  shall  show  more

fully  when  I  get  further  on,  persons  must  be  considered  from

three  points  of  view  :  As  invested  with  rights ;  as  lying  under

obligations  or  duties ; and  as  being  the  subjects  or  objects  of

rights  and  obligations.

*  Person '  I  have  hitherto  considered  the  extension  of  the  term  *  person'

sj^ony-  ^  ^  denoting  a  human  being. And  in  regard  to  the  extension  of

inous  ¥dth  the  term,  as  denoting  a  human  being,  I  believe  that  Classical

*condi- Jurists,  when  they  used  it  with  that  meaning,  used  it  with  the

tion.'  large  signification  which it  bears in  familiar  discourse: — ^as

being  synonymous  with  *  Aomo,'  or  as  applying  to  every  being

which  can  be  styled  human.

But,  instead  of  denoting  men  (or  human  beings),  it  some-
times denotes  the  conditions  or  status  with  which  men  are
invested.  And  taking  the  term  in  this  signification,  every
human  being  who  has  rights  and  duties  bears  a  nuinber  of
persons.  '  XJnus  homo  sustinet  plures  personas.'  For  example,
every  human  being  who  has  rights  and  duties,  is  citizen  or
foreigner:  that  is  to  say,  he  is  either  a  member  of  a  given  in-
dependent society,  or  he  is  not  a  member  of  that  given
-  independent  society.  He  is  also  a  son.  Probably,  he  is
husband  and  father.  It  may  happen,  moreover,  that  he  is
guardian  or  tv^tor.  His  profession  or  calling  may  give  him
distinctive  rights,  or  may  subject  him  to  distinctive  duties.
And  with  the  various  conditions  or  status  of  citizen,  son,
husband,  father,  guardian,  advocate,  attorney,  or  trader,  he  may
combine  the  condition  of  judge,  or  of  member  of  the  supreme
legislature,  and  so  on  to  infinity.

The  term  'person'  as  denoting  a  condition  or  status,  is  there-


Right — Person.  353

fore  equivalent  to  character.  It  signified  originally,  a  mask  worn  L«ct.  XII
by  a  player,  and  distinguishing  the  character  which  he  repre-
sented from  the  other  characters  in  the  piece.  From  the  mask
which  expressed  the  character,  it  was  extended  to  the  char-
acter itself.  From  characters  represented  by  players,  or  from
dramatic  characters,  it  was  further  extended  by  a  metaphor  to
conditions  or  staius.  For  men,  as  subjects  of  law,  are  distin-
guished by  their  respective  conditions ;  just  as  players,  performing
a  play,  are  distinguished  by  the  several  persons  which  they
respectively  enact  or  sustain.

By  the  Greek  commentators  on  the  Eoman  Law,  or  by
those  who  have  translated  the  expositions  of  the  Boman  Law
into  Greek  (as  Theophilus),  persona  is  translated  by  the  word
irpoo-toirov,  which  signifies  a  visage  or  face,  and  is  obviously
meant  to  denote  character  or  status,  and  not  in  the  other
import.

The  term  'person'  has,  therefore,  two  meanings,  which
must  be  carefully  distinguished.  It  denotes  a  man  or  human
being;  or  it  signifies  some  condition  borne  by  a  man.  A
person  (as  meaning  a  man)  is  one  or  individual :  But  a  single
or  individual  person  (meaning  a  man)  may  sustain  a  number  of
persons  (meaning  conditions  or  status).  The  erroneous  defi-
nition of  a  person  to  which  I  have  already  adverted,  probably
arose  in  part  from  a  confusion  of  these  significations.  Every
status  or  condition  consists  of  rights  or  duties ;  or  it  consists
of  both.  And  if  we  impute  to  a  person  (as  meaning  a  man)
this  essential  of  a  person  (as  meaning  a  condition),  it  will
follow  that  a  person  (as  meaning  a  man)  must  be  defined  thus :
A  man  invested  with  rights,  or  subject  to  obligations.

The  further  limitation  of  the  term  'person'  to  'a  man
invested  with  rights'  probably  arose  (as  I  intimated  before)  from
an  erroneous  limitation  of  the  term  '  status : '  from  the  restriction
of  the  term  to  certain  capital  conditions,  which  consist  of  rights
as  well  as  of  duties ;  and  wherein  the  rights  are  the  more  con-
spicuous and  distinctive  constituents  or  components.  A  Roman
Citizen,  for  instance,  was  of  course  distinguished  from  a  foreigner,
chiefly  by  the  numerous  rights  which  he  enjoyed:  so  was  a
freeman  from  a  slave :  insomuch  that  he  who  was  reduced  from
the  more  advantageous  of  these  situations  to  the  other  was  said
to  undergo  capitis  deminutio :  so  predominating  was  the  idea  of
the  rights  which  he  lost  over  that  of  the  duties  from  which  he
became  freed,  although  by  the  same  event  by  which  he  lost  the
rights  he  became  freed  from  the  duties  also.  This  last  mentioned
VOL.  I.  2  a


354  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XII  error,  in  short,  arose  from  the  confusion  of  staiiis  (the  larger  or

generic  expression)  with  ca'pvi  (the  narrower  or  specific).
Fictitious  Fictitious  or  legal  persons  are  of  three  kinds :  1st,  Some

^r^.  3X6  collections  or  aggregates  of  physical  persons  :  2ndly,  others
are  ihingz  in  the  proper  signification  of  the  term :  3rdly,  others
are  collections  or  aggregates  of  rights  and  duties.  The  collegia
of  the  Boman  Law,  and  the  corporations  a^regate  of  the
English,  are  instances  of  the  first :  the  proedium  dominans  and
servieTis  of  the  Boman  Law,  is  an  instance  of  the  second:
the  hcereditas  jacens  of  the  Boman  Law,  is  an  instance  of  the
third.

It  is  impossible  that  I  should  enter  here  upon  the  con-
sideration of  legal  persons.  For  their  natures  are  various ;
the  ideas  which  they  stand  for  are  extremely  complex;  and
they,  therefore,  belong  to  the  detail,  rather  than  to  the  generalia
of  the  science.  At  present  I  will  merely  remark  that  they  are
persons  by  a  figment,  and  for  the  sake  of  brevity  in  discourse.
All  rights  reside  in,  and  all  duties  are  incumbent  upon,  physical
or  natural  persons.  But  by  ascribing  them  to  feigned  persons,
and  not  to  the  physical  persons  whom  they  in  truth  concern,  we
are  frequently  able  to  abridge  our  descriptions  of  them.

To  take  the  easiest  instance;  this  is  the  case  with  the
prcedium  dominans  and  serviens  of  the  Boman  Law.  A  servitus
or  easement  over  one  pra^ium  resides  in  every  person  who
occupies  another  prcedium:  meaning  by  a  prcedium  a  given
piece  of  land,  or  a  given  building  with  the  land  on  which  it  is
erected.  The  servitude  or  easement  in  question  (as,  for  instance,
a  right  of  way)  is  ascribed,  by  a  fiction,  to  one  of  these  prcedia  ;
and,  by  a  similar  fiction,  an  obligation  or  duty  to  bear  the
exercise  of  the  servitude  is  imputed  to  the  other.  The  first  is
styled  dominans ;  the  latter  serviens.  Or  (as  we  should  say  in
English  Law-language)  the  Jus  servituiis  or  easement  is  appur-
tenant to  the  lands  or  messuages.  In  truth,  the  right  resides  in
every  physical  person  who  successively  owns  or  occupies  the
prcedium  styled  dominans.  And  the  right  avails  against  every
physical  person  who  successively  owns  or  occupies  the  prcedium
styled  serviens.  But  by  imputing  these  rights  and  obligations
to  the  prcedia  themselves,  and  by  talking  of  them  as  if  they
were  persons,  we  express  the  rights  and  duties  of  the  persons
who  are  really  concerned,  with  greater  conciseness.

To  take  another  instance.  Hcereditas  jacens  was  a  term
employed  in  the  Boman  Law  to  denote  the  whole  of  the  rights
and  obligations  which,  at  any  instant  of  time  during  the  period


Fragments.  355

which  intervenes  between  the  death  of  the  testator  or  intestate,  Lscrr.  XII
and  the  heir's  acceptance  of  the  inheritance,  would  have  de-
volved upon  an  heir  at  that  instant  entering  upon  the  inheritance.
This  mass  of  rights  and  obligations  was  by  a  fiction  styled  a
person,  although  clearly  not  a  person  in  the  popular  sense  of
the  word,  nor  even  consisting  of  any  determinate  thing,  but
being  a  mere  collection  of  rights  and  obligations.  It  was  so
termed  by  way  of  expressing  that  any  benefit  accruing  to  the
inheritance  during  the  above  period,  would  enure  to  the  benefit
of  the  heir.


Fragments.


Law  %8  imperative  or  permissive.^

Law,  considered  as  a  rule  of  conduct,  prescribed  by  the  Legis-
lator or  Judge,  is  necessarily  imperative,  since  it  imposes  an  obligation
to  act  or  to  refrain  from  acting  in  a  given  manner.^

As  conferring  a  right,  it  is  permissive.  Considered  as  an  ex-
pression of  the  will  of  the  Legislator  or  Judge,  it  is  imperative  or
permissive. For  it  may  consist  in  the  removal  of  restraint

Penal  Laws  are  seldom  directly  imperative.

Sanction  is  not  of  the  essence  of  permissible  law.  For,  by  such
a  law,  an  obligation,  instead  of  being  imposed,  may  be  simply  re-
moved. {Sed  gucere,)

It  has  hitherto  been  assumed  that  every  law  imposes  an  Obli-
gation. Apparent  exception  in  the  case  of  Permissive  Laws.  The
exception  oidy  apparent  Taking  off  an  Obligation,  it  confers  a
Right,  and  so  imposes  an  Obligation  corresponding  to  that  right

With  reference  to  such  parts  of  conduct  as  the  positive  law  of
the  community  does  not  touch,  the  members  of  a  political  society
are  in  a  state  of  nature.  (Sed  quare :  For  they  are  protected  in  that
liberty  by  the  State.  Such  liberty  would  seem  to  consist  of  rights
conferred  in  the  way  of  permission.)

Law  is  absolute  or  conditional ; — ^is  to  take  effect  at  all  events,
or  only  in  default  of  dispositions  by  the  interested  parties.

*  Bentham,  *  Principles,*  etc.  pp.  221,  Inhalte  der  Gebote  oder  Verbote  un-

82S-9,  Blackstone, 86. Thibaut,  Sys-  mittelbar  gefolgert  werden  kann, was

tern.  eriaubt ist,*  etc. etc^ — Falck, JuriaL

^  'Insofem  wir  iinter  Gesetzen,  die  Encyc.  p.  31.

wm  der  Staaiagewali  den  Unterthanen  If  by  Laws  be  meant  obligatory  or

voraesehriebenen  Regeln  verstehen,  ist  es  sanctioned  Rules,  Laws  are  either  im-

einleuchtend,  dass  es  in  diesem  Sinne  nur  perative  (commanding  something  which

aebietende  nnd  vtrbietende  Gesetze,  aber  shall  be  done),  or  prohibitive  (command-

keineswegs erlaubende Gesetze geben  ing  something  which  shall  not  be  done),

kann. Denn  in  Beziehang  anf  die  er-  but cannot be  permissive, — Marginal

laubten Handlungen bodarf  es  keincr  Note,
besondem Bestimmung, da ans dem


356  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XII Liberty,

^  Freedom,  Liberty,  are  negative  names,  denoting  the  absence  of

Eestraint.

Civil,  Political,  or  Legal  Liberty,  is  the  absence  of  Legal  Re-
straint, whether  such  restraint  has  never  been  imposed,  or  having
been  imposed,  has  been  withdrawn.

It  is  general  or  particular :  i.e,  it  extends  to  all ;  or  it  is  granted
to  one  or  some,  by  an  exemption  or  privUegium  (see  post,  *  Privilege').

Liberty  and  Eight  are  synonymous ;  since  the  liberty  of  acting
according  to  one's  will  would  be  altogether  illusory  if  it  were  not
protected  from  obstruction.  There  is  however  this  difference  be-
tween the  terms.  In  Liberty,  the  prominent  or  leading  idea  is,  the
absence  of  legal  restraint :  whilst  the  security  or  protection  for  the
enjo3rment  of  that  liberty  is  the  secondary  idea.  Right,  on  the  other
hand,  ^^raotes  the  protection  and  connotes  the  absence  of  Restraint.^

If  the  protection  afforded  by  the  law  be  considered  as  afforded
against  private  persons,  the  word  Right  is  commonly  employed.  If
against  the  Government,  or  rather  against  some  member  of  the
Government,  Liberty  is  more  frequently  used ;  e.g,  the  Liberties  of
Englishmen.^  Liberty  and  Right  are  not  however  always  coexten-
sive, since  the  security  for  the  enjojrment  of  the  former  may  in  part
be  left  to  the  moral  and  religious  sanctions.

(Sed  quccre)  Whether  Liberty  can  ever  mean  anjrthing  but  the
right  to  dispose  of  one's  person  at  pleasure  1  Liberty  or  Freedom  to
deal  with  an  external  subject  seems,  however,  to  be  equivalent  to
*  Right  to  deal  with  it'

On  the  whole.  Right  and  Liberty  seem  to  be  synonymous ; —
either  of  them  meaning,  1st,  permission  on  the  part  of  the  Sovereign
to  dispose  of  one's  person  or  of  any  external  subject  (subject  to  re-
strictions, of  course) ;  2ndly,  security  against  others  for  the  exercise
of  such  right  and  liberty.

Wherever  there  is  protection  afforded.  Right  is  the  proper  word.
As  against  the  sovereign,  there  can  be  no  right.

Physical  freedom  is  the  absence  of  external  obstacles;  i.e.  the
absence  of  causes  which  operate  independently  of  the  will.  Moral
freedom  is  the  absence  of  motives  of  the  painful  sort

^  'Par  rapport  anx  actions  sur  les-  fond^  sur  des  obligations. Comment

Suelles le legislateur  ne prononce  ni  me  conf&re-t-on  un  droit  de  propri^t^  sur

^fense  ni  i^jonction,  il  ne  cr^e  aucnn  un  terrain  ? C'est  en  imposant  k  tons

delit,  aucune  obligation,  aucun  service  ;  les  autres  I'obligation  de  ne  ^  toucher

cependarU  il  v(ms  canfire  un  certain  droit,  k  ses  produits. Comment  ai-je  le  droit

celui  de  /aire  ou  de  ne  pas  /aire,  selon  d'aller  et  venir  dans  toutes  les  rues  d'une

votre  propre  volonU,' — Traits  de  L6g,  ville? C'est  qu'il  n'eziste  point  d'obli-

vol.  i  p.  166.  gation  qui  m'en  emp^cbe.* — TraiUs,  etc
The  right  of  doing  that  which  is  not And  there  does  exist  an  obli^tion  on

prohibited, supposes  an  obligation  on  others  to  refrain  from  obstructing  me. —

others  not  to  oostruct See  *  Principles,*  Marginal  Note,

etc.  p.  222. — Marginal  Note,  "  For  Liberty,  as  meaning  share  in

*  On  pent  imposer  des  obligations  sans  Sovereignty, see  Kant, '  Zum ewigen

qu'il  en  r^sulte  des  droits  ;  mais  on  ne  Frieden.' See  also  ante,  p.  273  el  seq,
pout  pas  cr^er  des  droits  qu'ils  ne  soient


Person — Thing.  357

LECTUEE  XIIL

PERSON AND THING.

In  my  last  Lectxire,  I  distinguished  Obligations  or  Duties  into  Lbot.XIII
positive  and  negative;  and  indicated  generally  and  briefly  the  _^  '.
nature  of  that  important  distinction.  lation

I  also  distinguished  Obligations  into  relative  and  absolute :
that  is  to  say,  obligations  which  correlate  with,  or  correspond  or
answer  to  rights  ;  and  obligations  which  neither  imply,  nor  are
implied  by,  rights.  And,  for  the  reason  which  I  then  assigned,
I  began  with  the  analysis  of  rights  (and  of  the  obligations  im-
plied by  rights);  and  deferred  all  further  remark  upon  the
nature  of  absolute  obligations,  till  that  analysis  should  be  com-
pleted.

But,  since  rights  reside  in  persons,  and  since  persons,  things,
ads,  and  forbearances  are  the  subjects  or  objects  of  rights,  it  was
necessary  that  I  should  advert  to  the  significations  of  those
several  related  expressions,  before  I  could  address  myself  to
rights  and  to  the  obligations  with  which  they  correlate.

Accordingly,  I  distinguished  persons  into  physical  or  natural,
and  legal  or  fictitious :  that  is  to  say,  into  persons,  properly  and
simply  so  called ;  and  persons  which  are  such  by  a  fiction,  and
for  the  sake  of  brevity  in  discourse.

I  then  stated  the  meaning  which  I  attach  to  the  term
'  person,'  as  signifying  a  physical  or  individual  person,  I  en-
deavoured to  demonstrate,  that  the  extensive  meaning  which  I
attach  to  the  term,  coincides  with  the  meaning  which  was
annexed  to  it  by  the  Roman  Lawyers.  And  I  distinguished
that  meaning  from  another  and  a  very  different  meaning  in
which  they  frequently  employ  it:  namely,  not  as  signifying
physical  or  individual  persons,  but  as  signifying  the  conditions
or  status  which  are  borne  or  sustained  by  the  former.

In  conclusion,  I  enumerated  the  kinds  of  persons  which  are
persons  by  virtue  of  fictions ;  and  I  also  pointed  at  the  design
which  those  fictions  are  intended  to  answer.  But  inasmuch  as
fictitious  persons  are  of  widely  differing  natures,  and  inasmuch
as  the  ideas  which  they  denote  are  for  the  most  part  extremely
complex,  I  deferred  all  further  consideration  of  them  till  I
should  descend  to  the  detail  of  the  science.

Having  considered  the  import  of  person,  I  proceed  to  the
significations  of  Thing,  Act  and  Forbearance,


358  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XIII  Things  are  such  permaiunt  objects,  not  hdng  persons,  as  are

sensible  or  perceptible  through  the  senses.  Or  (changing  the
expression)  things  are  such  pci^manent  external  objects  as  are
7iot  persons.  Such  (for  example)  is  a  field,  a  house,  a  horse,  a
garment,  a  piece  of  coined  gold.  Such  is  a  quantity  of  coined
or  uncoined  gold,  determined  or  ascertained  by  number  or  weight.
Such  is  a  qvAintity  of  cloth,  corn,  or  wine,  deteimined  or  ascer-
tained by  measure.

Things  are  opposed,  on  the  one  hand,  to  persons  themselves ;
and  are  contradistinguished,  on  the  other,  from  the  acts  of  the
persons,  and  from  the  rest  of  the  transierU  objects  which  are
denominated  facts  or  events.

Things  resemble  persons  in  this :  That  they  are  permanent
external  objects ;  or  objects  which  are  permanent,  and  sensible
or  perceptible  through  the  senses.  They  differ  from  persons  in
this :  That  Persons  are  invested  with  rights  and  subject  to
obligations,  or,  at  least,  are  capable  of  both :  Things  are  essen-
tially incapable  of  rights  or  obligations ;  although  (by  a  fiction)
they  are  sometimes  considered  as  persons,  and  rights  pv  obliga-
tions are  ascribed  or  imputed  to  them  accordingly.

They  resemble  facts  or  events  in  this :  That  they  are  inca-
pable of  rights  or  obligations.  They  differ  from  facts  or  events
in  this :  That  things  are  permanent  external  objects ;  whilst  facts
or  events  are  transient  objects,  and  consist  of  determinations  of
the  will,  with  other  affections  of  the  mind ;  as  well  as  of  objects
perceptible  through  the  senses.

In  drawing  the  line,  by  which  Persons  and  Things  are
separated  from  Events,  I  content  myself  with  vague  expressions,
and  am  far  from  aspiring  to  metaphysical  precision.  If  I
attempted  to  describe  the  boundary  with  metaphysical  precision,
I  should  run  into  enquiries  which  my  limits  imperiously  forbid,
and  which  were  scarcely  consistent  with  the  purpose  of  these
discourses.  If  I  endeavoured  to  define  exactly  the  meaning  of
'  permanent  object,'  I  should  enter  upon  the  perplexing  question
of  sameness  or  identity.  If  I  endeavoured  to  define  exactly  the
meaning  of  '  sensible  object,'  I  should  enter  upon  the  intermin-
able question  about  the  difference  between  mind  and  matter,  or
percipient  and  perceived.  And,  in  either  case,  I  should  thrust
a  treatise  upon  Intellectual  Philosophy  into  a  series  of  discourses
upon  Jurisprudence.

Accordingly,  now  that  I  have  indicated  rather  than  deter-
mined the  boundary,  I  must  leave  my  hearers  to  settle  it  for
themselves,  according  to  their  own  fashion. I  must  leave  them


Person —  Thing.  \  359

to  distinguish,  after  their  own  fashion,  between  objects  which  Lbct.XIII
are  perceptible  through  the  senses,  and  objects  which  are  not ;
between  sensible  objects  which  are  permanent,  and  are  things
(strictly  so  called),  and  sensible  objects  which  are  transient,  and
are  ranked  with  facts  or  everUs.  The  discretion  which  prompts
my  reserve  will  be  understood  by  those  who  have  turned  a
portion  of  their  attention  to  the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,
and  will  meet  with  approbation  rather  than  censure.  Those
who  are  ignorant  of  what  is  styled  Metaphysic  frequently  run,
without  knowing  it,  into  ill-timed  metaphysical  speculation.
Those  who  are  versed  in  Metaphysic,  know  the  occasions  for
abstaining  from  it,  as  well  as  the  occasions  on  which  it  can  be
applied  to  advantage.

But,  in  order  that  we  may  keep  clear  of  a  very  perplexing
ambiguity,  I  will  remark  for  a  moment  upon  two  distinct  signi-
fications of  '  permanent'  and  *  transient'  And  this  remark  I  am
compelled  to  interpose,  inasmuch  as  it  regards  a  distinction  which
strictly  belongs  to  Jurisprudence,  whether  it  be  metaphysical
or  not.

Sensible  objects,  or  objects  perceptible  through  the  senses,
are  permanent  or  transient.  The  former  are  persons  or  things :
the  latter  rank  with  the  objects  which  are  denominated  facts  or
events.

Now  when  it  denotes  a  thing,  as  contradistinguished  from
an  evcTity  the  import  of  the  expression  *  permanent  sensible  object,'
is  (I  think)  this :  It  denotes  an  object  which  is  perceptible
repeatedly,  and  which  is  considered  by  those  who  repeatedly
perceive  it,  as  being  (on  those  several  occasions)  one  and  the
same  object.  Thus,  the  horse  or  the  house  of  to-day  is  the  horse
or  house  of  yesterday ;  in  spite  of  the  intervening  changes  which
its  appearance  may  have  undergone.

The  transient  sensible  objects  which  rank  with  facts  or  events,
are  not  perceptible  repeatedly.  They  exist  for  a  moment :  dis-
appear :  and  never  recur  to  the  sense,  although  they  may  be
recalled  by  the  memory.  Such  (I  think)  is  the  distinction
(indicated  in  very  general  expressions)  between  the  term  'per-
manent,' as  applied  to  things,  and  the  term  *  transient  *  as  applied
to  sensible  events.  And,  taking  the  terms  in  these  significations,
all  things  are  permanent,  and  no  things  are  transient.

But,  taking  the  terms  in  other  significations,  things  may  be
distinguished  into  permanent  and  transient,  or  into  such  as  are
more  permanent  and  such  as  are  less  permanent.  For  some  are
more  enduring ;  others  are  less  enduring. In  other  words,  some


36o  Pervading  Notions  analysed^

Leot.XIII  retain  the  forms  which  give  them  their  actual  names  for  a  longer
period :  some  retain  those  forms  for  a  shorter  period,  or  corrupt,
decay,  and  perish  speedUy,

The  purpose  of  this  distinction  will  appear  clearly,  when
I  consider  the  kinds  and  sorts  into  which  things  are  divisible :
especially  the  kind  of  things  which  have  been  styled  fungible^
and  the  sort  of  fungible  things  quoe  usu  consumuntur.

Eesuming  the  definition  of  a  thing,  I  mean  by  a  thing  (as
contradistinguished  from  an  even^)  any  permanent  external  object
not  a  person.  Or  (changing  the  expression)  I  mean  by  a  thing
(as  contradistinguished  from  an  event)  any  sensible  object,  not
being  a  person,  which  is  capable  of  being  perceived  repeaiedly,
or  is  capable  of  recurring  to  the  sense.  *

Distinc-  The  distinctions  between  Things,  or  the  various  genera  and

be^een  ^*^^  under  which  they  are  distributed,  will  be  considered  here-
Things.  after.  For,  though  these  distinctions  are  derived  (in  part)  from
the  physical  differences  between  things,  they  are  also  derived
(in  part)  from  the  differences  between  rights  and  obligations ;
and  are  just  as  factitious,  or  as  completely  the  work  of  Law,  as
the  rights  and  obligations  of  which  things  are  the  subjects.
Consequently,  a  statement  of  the  distinctions  between  Things
(as  subjects  of  the  science  of  Jurisprudence)  must  be  preceded
by  a  general  statement  of  the  distinctions  between  rights  and
duties.

From  the  import  of  the  term  thin^  (as  opposed  to  person  and
event)  I  proceed  to  certain  ambiguities  by  which  it  is  perplexed
and  obscured.
T^i^P.^s  And,  first,  'res'  or  thing  (as  used  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers)

arts  M^d^  is  frequently  extended  from  things  (strictly  so  called)  to  ocfe  and
forbear-  forbearances  considered  from  a  particular  aspect :  namely,  con-
sidered as  the  objects  of  obligations,  and  of  the  rights  correspond-
ing to  obligations.  For  example.  If  you  are  bound  by  virtue  of
a  contract  to  do  certain  acts  (as  to  perform  work  and  labour  in
repairing  a  house) ;  or  if  you  are  bound  by  virtue  of  a  contract
to  forbear  from  certain  acts  (as  to  forbear  from  exercising  a  trade
within  certain  limits),  the  acts  or  forbearances  to  which  you  are
obliged,  and  to  which  the  opposite  party  has  a  correlating  or
corresponding  right,  are  res  or  things  (in  the  sense  which  I  am
now  considering).  Strictly  speaking,  the  act  or  forbearance  is
not  a  thing.  It  is  not  a  permanent  external  object.  Strictly
speaking,  it  is  the  object  or  end  of  the  right,  and  of  the  obliga-
tion which  corresponds  to  the  right ;  or  it  is  the  purpose  for  the
accomplishment  of  which  the  right  and  the  obligation  exist.


Things.  361

A  more  remarkable  and  a  more  perplexing  ambiguity  is  the  Lbct.XIII

following.  Corporeal

Things  are  divided  by  the  Roman  Lawyers  into  corporeal  and  Incor-
and  incorporeal  Mngs.

Under  corporeal  things  are  included,

Ist,  Things  (strictly  so  called) :  that  is  to  say,  permanent
external  objects  Tiot  persons.  2ndly,  Persons,  as  considered  from
an  aspect  to  which  I  shall  advert  immediately :  that  is  to  say,
not  as  having  rights,  or  as  being  bound  by  obligations,  but  as
the  subjects  or  objects  of  rights  and  obligations  residing  in,  or
incumbent  upon  others.  3rdly,  Acts  and  Forbearances,  considered
from  the  aspect  to  which  I  have  alluded  already :  that  is  to  say,
as  the  object  of  rights  and  obligations.

By  '  incorpore€U  things,'  they  understood  not  the  subjects  of
rights  and  obligations,  but  rights  and  obligations  themselves:
'  Ea  quae  in  jure  consistunt :'  velut  'fus  hereditatis,'  'Jvs  utendi
fruendi,'  'jits  servitutis,'  '  obligcUiones,  quoquo  modo  contractse.'

By  '  corporeal '  they  meant  sensible  or  perceptible  through
the  senses :  Or  (in  that  philosophical  jargon  which  they  borrowed
from  the  Greeks)  they  meant  by  '  corporeal,'  tangible.  For,  in
the  language  of  the  Stoics,  and  also  of  the  Epicureans,  all  the
various  senses  were  considered  as  organs  of  touch ;  or  all  sensa-
tions, as  modifications  of  the  sensation  of  touch.^

And  taking  '  corporeal  *  and  '  tangible '  in  that  sense,  res  cor-
porcdes  or  res  gruce  tangi  possurU,  will  not  only  comprise  things
(in  the  strict  signification  of  the  term),  but  also  acts  (as  the
objects  of  rights  and  obligations).  For  every  act  which  can  be
the  object  of  a  right  or  obligation,  is  an  act  external  or  perceptible
h/  sense.  To  forbearances,  indeed,  the  term  res  corporales  will
not  apply  strictly.  For  all  forbearances  are  mere  determinations
of  the  wilL  But  it  was  probably  extended  to  forbearances  which
are  the  objects  of  rights  and  obligations,  partly  for  the  sake  of
convenience,  and  partly  because  the  acts  to  be  forborne  are
tangible  or  sensible.

In  the  language,  then,  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  the  term  res
has  two  significations  which  are  widely  different.  1st,  It  denotes
Things,  Acts,  and  Forbearances,  as  the  subjects  or  objects  of  rights
and  obligations,  and  it  sometimes  denotes  persons  considered  from

^  'Pondus  nti  saxis, calor  ignibus.  Corporis  est  sensus, vel  cum res

liquor  aquai  eztera  sese

Tactus  corporibus  cunctis,  intactus  Insiuuat, yel  cum luedit, qusB  in

Inani.'  corpore  nata  est.'

'  Tactus  *enim,  Tactus,  proh  Divum  Lucretius,  Lib.  L  &  IL

numina  sancta  1


362  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XIII  that  same  aspect  2ndly,  It  denotes  Rights  and  Obligations
' themselves.

In  the  English  Law,  we  have  this  same  jargon  about  *  incor-
poreal things'*^  (derived  from  the  Stoical  Philosophy  through
the  Eoman  Law),  applied  less  extensively.  With  us,  all  rights
and  obligations  are  not  incorporeal  things ;  but  certain  rights  are
styled  incorporeal  hereditaments,  and  are  opposed  by  that  name
to  hereditaments  corporeal.  That  is  to  say,  rights  of  a  certain
species,  or  rather  of  numerous  and  very  different  species,  are
absurdly  opposed  to  the  things  (strictly  so  called)  which  are  the
subjects  or  maiter  of  rights  of  another  species.

The  word  hereditaments  is  evidently  taken  in  two  senses,  in
the  two  phrases  which  stand  to  denote  the  species  of  heredita-
ments. A  corporeal  hereditament  is  the  thing  itself  which  is
the  subject  of  the  right ;  an  incorporeal  hereditament  is  not  the
subject  of  the  right,  but  the  right  itself.

I  observed,  in  my  last  Lecture,  that  the  slave  is  styled  by
the  Roman  Lawyers  a  '  person.'  And  considered  as  bearing  a
condition,  and  as  bound  by  obligations,  he  is  a  person.  But
considered  as  the  subject  of  the  dominion  which  resides  in  the
master  (a  right  which  the  master  can  assert  against  the  rest  of
the  world),  he  is  sometimes  styled  a  thin^.  For  example,  In
case  he  be  unjustly  detained  by  a  third  party,  the  master  may
recover  him  by  that  peculiar  action  which  is  styled  rei  vindicatio :
an  action  which  was  confined  to  the  recovery  of  things;  and
which  could  not  be  brought  by  the  father  for  the  purpose  of
recovering  his  son,  although  the  patria  potestas  (or  right  of  the
father  in  the  son)  was  closely  analogous  to  the  dominion  of  the
master.

This  is  utterly  capricious.  For,  if  the  slave  is  a  thing  (as
the  subject  of  the  master's  right),  so  should  every  person  be
considered  as  a  thing,  where  he  is  the  subject  of  a  right  residing
in  another.  In  this  sense,  almost  every  person  is  a  thing.  For
there  is  scarcely  a  person  who  is  not  the  subject  of  a  right,
which  resides  in  another  person,  and  avails  against  the  world  at
large. For  instance:  A  servant,  in  our  own  country,  is  the

*  Blackstone,  Vol.  ii.  c.  3.  not  hereditament, — for  they  devolve  not

The  'Incorporeal  Hereditaments'  of  upon  heirSy — but  thing,  going  to  ezecu-

the  English  Law  are  not  exactly  equiva-  tors  or  administrators,  or  to  those  who

lent  to  the  *Res  Incorporales '  of  the  are  entitled  to  that  office. — Marginal  note

Roman. The  difference  is  occasioned  in  the  page  referred  to,

by  the  difference  in  the  English  law  be-  And  lower  down  (same  page) : Like

tween  the  descent  or  devolution  of  move-  *  property '  (the  more  extensive  right)

ables  and  immoveables  ;  including  in  the  it  is  a  collective  name  ;  an^  by  conse-

lirst  jura  ad  renty or  most  of  them,  quence,  has  no  one  thing  or  incident

ffxreditas  or  obligatio  =  an  incorporeal,  corresponding  to  it. — Marginal  note.


Things.  363

subject  of  rights  residing  in  his  master;  not  only  of  the  rights  Lbot.XIII
which  the  master  enjoys  by  contract  over  the  servant  himself,
but  of  rights  in  him  availing  against  the  world.  If  a  third
party  were  to  seduce  the  servant  from  his  master's  service,  or  to
maltreat  him,  so  as  to  disable  him  from  performing  his  service,
this  would  be  an  offence  against  the  right  of  the  master  in  the
servant.  Such,  again,  is  the  case  of  a  husband  and  a  wife.
There  are  in  all  such  cases  two  distinct  rights,  that  of  the  one
person  against  the  other,  and  that  of  the  one  person  in  the  other
as  against  third  parties.  Such  cases  are  very  numerous,  as  will
be  shown  hereafter.  Eights  may  be  had  in  persons,  just  as
they  may  be  had  in  things ;  and  there  is  no  difference  between
the  cases,  except  that  in  one  case  the  subject  is  a  person,  in  the
other  the  subject  is  a  thing.  In  the  same  sense,  therefore,  in
which  the  slave  is  sometimes  called  a  thing,  all  persons  what-
ever might  be  so  styled.  There  are,  however,  very  few  cases  in
which  the  slave  is  styled  a  thing  (even  when  he  is  considered
as  the  subject  of  the  master's  dominion).  Generally  speaking,  he
is  styled  homOy  or  servilis  persona  (even  when  considered  under
that  aspect) :  For  instance,  when  he  is  considered  as  the  subject
of  the  ancient  and  formal  conveyance  called  mancipatio  (Gains,
I.  §  120).

I  shall  take  this  occasion  of  recalling  your  attention  to  the  Distinc-
double  meaning  of  persona  in  the  Eoman  law  as  signifying,  tw6en}wro
sometimes  a  physical  or  real  person,  and  sometimes  a  statics  or  ^erum  and
condition :  for  the  purpose  of  observing  that  the  last  acceptation  i^i^
of  persona,  combined  with  that  of  res  as  denoting  in  certain  cases  }>riefly
rights  and  obligations,  throws  considerable  light  on  the  celebrated  duced.
distinction  between  jus  rerum  and  jus  personarum  ;  phrases  which
have  been  translated  so  absurdly  by  Blackstone  and  others —
rights  of  persons  and  rights  of  things. Jus  personarum  did  not
mean  law  of  persons  or  rights  of  persons,  but  law  of  status  or
condition. A  person  is  here  not  a  physical  or  individual  person,
but  the  status  or  condition  with  which  he  is  invested. It  is  a
remarkable  confirmation  of  this  that  Gains,  in  the  margin,  pur-
porting to  give  the  title  or  heading  of  this  part  of  the  law,  has
entitled  it thus,  Be  conditione  hominum: and  Theophilus,  in
translating  the  Institutes  of  Justinian  from  Latin  into  Greek
has  translated  jus  personarum — 17  r&v  irpoad  irwv  Suilpeai^ —
Divisio personarum: understanding evidently by  persona  or
irpotroiirov  not  an  individual  or  physical  person,  but  the  status,
condition,  or  character  borne  by  physicsJ  persons. This  dis-
tinctly shows  the  meaning  of  the  phrase  jvs  personarum,  which


364  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XIII  has  been  involved  in  impenetrable  obscurity  by  Blackstone  and
Hede.  The  law  of  persons  is  the  law  of  status  or  condition ;  the
law  of  things  is  the  law  of  rights  and  obligations,  considered
in  a  general  manner  or  as  distinguished  from  those  peculiar
collections  of  rights  and  obligations  which  are  styled  conditions,
and  considered  apart.

From  the  same  ambiguity  arose  the  mistake  of  supposing
that  jura  in  rem  must  have  something  to  do  with  things ;  whereas
the  phrase  really  denotes  rights  which  avail  gerieraUy  as  distin-
guished from  those  which  avail  only  against  some  determinate
individual.


LECTUEE  XrV.

ACT AND FORBEAEANCE: JTJS IN REM IN PERSONAM.

Lbct.XIV  In  the  last  Lecture,  I  entered  upon  the  analysis  of  the  term
'  Eight'

But,  since  rights  reside  in  persons,  and  since  persons,  things,
acts  and  forbearances  are  the  subjects  or  objects  of  rights,  it  was
necessary  that  I  should  advert  to  the  meaning  of  those  several
related  expressions,  before  I  could  address  myself  immediately  to
rights  and  their  corresponding  duties.

Accordingly,  in  the  last  Lecture,  I  considered  the  term
*  Person,'  and  the  term  '  Thing.'

In  the  present  Lecture  I  shall  point  at  the  respective  signifi-
cations of  '  Act '  and  '  Forbearance,'  and  shall  consider  briefly  an
important  distinction  which  obtains  between  rights  themselves :
— A  distinction  of  which  we  must  seize  the  general  scope  or
import,  before  we  can  understand,  and  can  express  adequately
and  correctly,  that  nature  or  essence  which  is  common  to  aJl
rights.
PersoDs  Persons  and  Things  are  objects  external  and  permanent. Or

^incs. persons  and  things  may  be  distinguished  from  other  objects,  in
the  following  manner :

1st.  A  person  or  thing  is  a  sensible  object,  or  an  object
perceptible  by  sense.

2ndly.  A  person  or  thing  is  perceptible  repeatedly,  or  is
capable  of  recurring  to  the  sense.

3rdly.  A  person  or  thing  recurring  to  the  sense  is  considered
by  him  who  repeatedly  perceives  it  as  being,  on  those  several
occasions,  one  and  the  same  object.


Fact — Incident — Event.  365

Things are such permanent external objects  as are  tiot  Leot.XIV
Persons ;  that  is  to  say,  as  are  not  physical  or  individual  persons ;  persc^ns
as  are  not  men  (in  the  largest  signification  of  the  term) ;  or  andThings
(using  the  term  '  men '  in  its  narrower  import)  as  are  not  men,  gSshed.
women,  or  children,

Fa/is^  Events,  or  Incidents,  may  be  distinguished  from  Persons  Events,
and  Things  in  the  following  manner. 1st.  Every  person or
thing  is  a  sensible  object. Of  events,  soTne  are  perceptible  by
sense; but some are determinations of the will, or other
affections  of  the  mind.

2ndly.  Every  person  or  thing  is  a  permanent  sensible  objecfr.
But  an  event  perceptible  by  sense  (like  every  other  event)  is
transient.  That  is  to  say,  an  event  perceptible  by  sense,  is  not
perceptible  repeatedly.  It  exists  for  a  moment :  Then,  ceases  to
exist :  And  never  recurs  to  the  sense,  although  the  memory  may
recal  it.

Events  are  simple,  single,  or  individual ;  or  they  are  com-  Events  are
plex.  A  simple  event  is  incapable  of  analysis ;  or  is  considered  complwc!^
incapable  of  analysis.  A  complex  event  is  a  number  of  simple
events,  marked  (for  the  sake  of  brevity)  by  a  collective  name.
The  importance  of  this  distinction  will  appear  clearly,  when  I
consider  events  more  in  detail :  especially,  when  I  consider  them
as  catises  of  rights  and  duties,  and  of  the  termination  of  rights
and  duties.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  terms  '  Act '  and  '  Forbearance/  I  import  of
will  offer  a  brief  remark  upon  the  terms  which  are  now  in  'incident'
question.

The  terms  'fact'  and  'incident'  are  sometimes  synonymous
with  the  term  '  event.'  But,  not  unfrequently, '  fact '  is  restricted
to  human  acts  and  forbearances,  and  '  incident '  employed  in  a
sense  to  which  I  shall  advert  hereafter.  Consequently,  the
objects  which  I  am  endeavouring  to  distinguish  from  persons
and  things,  are  best  denoted  by  the  term  '  events.'  '  Event '  is
adequate  and  unambiguous :  It  will  always  apply  to  any  of  the
objects  in  question.  'Fact'  and  'incident'  are  ambiguous.
Taken  in  one  signification,  each  of  them  will  apply  to  any  of  the
objects  in  question.  Taken  in  another  signification,  it  applies
exclusively  to  events  of  a  class.

The  only  class  of  events  to  which  I  advert  at  present,  are  Acte  and
human  acts  and  forbearances.  ^^^^3  ^'

Now  human  acts  or  actions  are  internal  or  external.*^ In  Act.

^  Bnt  observe  the  correction  (p.  420, wiU  there  be  seen  that  the  author  on
post)  of  the  terminology  used  her& It further reflection adopts the phrase


366  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XIV  other  words,  they  are  not  perceptible  by  sense,  or  they  are
'  perceptible  by  sense.  Internal  acts  are  determinations  of  the
will.  External  acts  are  such  motions  of  the  body  as  are  (xmst-
qtient  upon  determinations  of  the  wUL  Determinations  of  the
will,  and  such  motions  of  the  body  as  are  consequent  upon
determinations  of  the  will,  are  (I  conceive)  the  only  objects  to
which  thfe  term  'act'  can  be  applied  with  propriety.  It  is
scarcely  applicable  to  those  motions  of  the  body  which  are
involuntary :  that  is  to  say,  which  are  involuntary  (in  the  large
acceptation  of  the  term),  or  are  not  consequent  upon  determina-
tions of  the  will.  If  (for  example)  you  plunged  into  the  water
purposely,  the  motions  of  your  body  consequent  upon  the  a^  of  your
will  would  be  considered  an  act,  or  a  series  of  acts.  But  if  you
fell  into  the  water  without  design,  the  descent  of  your  body
into  the  water  would  hardly  be  styled  an  act,  although  it  would
be  called  an  event.

Nor  is  the  term  '  act '  applicable  to  those  affections  of  the
mind  which  are  frequently  styled  passive :  that  is  to  say,  which
are  not  determinations  of  the  will  Whether  it  will  apply  to
these,  without  a  solecism,  seems  to  be  doubtful  But  we  certainly
read  and  hear  of  'acts  of  the  will;'  and  I  think  that  the  term
may  be  extended  to  determinations  of  the  will,  consistently  with
general  usage.  At  all  events,  I  shall  take  leave  to  consider
them  as  belonging  to  the  class  of  acts :  styling  them,  by  way  of
distinction,  *  acts  of  the  vnll,'  or  '  acts  internal,'
Forbear-  A Forbearance  is  a  determination  of  the  will,  not  to do

*^*^®-  some  given  external  act. Or  (taking  the  notions  which  the

term  includes  in  a  different  order)  a  forbearance  is  the  not
doing  some  given  external  act,  and  the  not  doing  it  in  consequent
of  a  determination  of  the  will  The  import  of  the  term  is,
therefore,  double.  As  denoting  the  determination  of  the  will,
its  import  is  positive.  As  denoting  the  inaction  which  is
consequent  upon  that  determination,  its  import  is  negative.

This  double  import  should  be  marked  and  remembered.
For  mere  inaction  imports  much  less  than  forbearance  or  absti-
nence from  action.

In  popular  and  loose  language,  a  culpable  forbearance  (or  a
forbearance  which  is  a  violation  of  some  law  or  rule)  is  not
styled  a  '  forbearance,'  but  is  ranked  with  omissions.  But  an
omission  (properly  so  called)  is  widely  different  from  a  culpable

*  determinations  of  the  will  *  as  sufficient term *  acts  *  to  denote  what  are  here
to  denote  what  are  here  termed  *  internal termed  'external  acts.' — R.  C.
acts,'  and  restricts  the  meaning  of  the


Act — Forbearance.  367

forbearance.  A  culpable  forbearance  is  an  act  of  the  will,  or  Licr.xiv
supposes  an  act  of  the  wilL  An  omission  is  not  the  con-  '  *  '
sequence  of  an  act  of  the  will,  but  of  that  state  of  the  mind
which  is  styled  '  negligence,'  and  implies  the  absence  of  will  and
intention.  Accordingly,  I  apply  th^  term  '  forbearance '  to  all
voluntary  inaction,  or  to  all  inaction  which  is  consequent  upon
volition.  Those  forbearances  which  are  violations  of  laws  or
rules,  may  be  styled,  by  way  of  distinction,  unlawful,  unjust,  or
culpable.

And  here  I  dismiss  for  the  present  the  terms  'Act*  and
'Forbearance.'  Before  we  can  settle  the  import  of  these
expressions,  we  must  settle  the  import  of  the  term  *  Will,'  and
of  the  inseparably  connected  term  'Intention.'  But  these  I
shall  consider  (in  conjunction  with '  Negligence '  and  '  Eashness ')
when  I  endeavour  to  determine  the  nature  of  *  Iiyuries  *  and
'Sanctions;'  and  to  distinguish  the  compulsion  and  restraint
which  are  styled  '  Obligation,'  from  the  compulsion  and  restraint
which  operate  not  upon  the  will,  and  may  be  styled  '  merely
physical.'

From  Persons,  Things,  Acts  and  Forbearances,  I  proceed  to  Introduc-
analyse,  in  a  general  and  concise  manner,  an  important  dis-  jJi^inc-*^^
tinction  which  obtains  between  Rights,  and  between  the  duties  tion  be-
or  obligations  which  are  implied  by  rights. But  in  order  that  Jn rwiand
you  may  follow  this  analysis  with  greater  ease,  I  introduce  it  ;«*  t»|w-
with  the  following  assumptions,  and  with  the  following  explana-  "^^"^
tory  remarks. The  tnith  of  the  assumptions  wiU  be  proved
hereafter. I  introduce  them  here  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating
apprehension.

1st.  External  Acts  and  Forbearances  (or,  briefly.  Acts  and
Forbearances)  are  the  obfects  of  duties.  Changing  the  expression,
the  ends  or  purposes  for  which  duties  are  imposed  are  these ;
that  the  parties  obliged  may  do  or  perform  acts,  or  may  forbear
or  abstain  from  acts.  The  acts  or  forbearances  then  to  which
the  obliged  are  bound,  I  style  the  objects  of  duties.

2ndly.  The  objects  of  relative  duties,  or  of  duties  which
answer  to  rights,  may  also  be  styled  the  obfects  of  the  rights  in
which  those  duties  are  implied.  In  other  words,  all  rights
reside  in  persons,  and  are  rights  to  acts  or  forbearances  on  the
part  of  other  persons.  Considered  as  corresponding  to  duties,
or  as  being  rights  to  acts  or  forbearances,  rights  may  be  said  to
avail  against  persons.  Or,  changing  the  expression,  they  are
capable  of  being  enforced  judicially  against  the  persons  who
are  bound  to  those  acts  or  forbearances. The  acts  or  forbear-


368  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Leot.  XIV  ances,  then,  to  which  these  persons  are  bound,  may  be  called
' * ' the  objects,  not  only  of  the  duties  themselves,  but  of  the  rights
corresponding  to  these  duties.

3rdly.  Of  rights,  some  are  rights  ovefr  things  or  persons,  or
in  or  to  things  or  persons.  Others  are  Tiot  rights  over  things  or
persons,  or  in  or  to  things  or  persons.  All  rights  over  things
or  persons  are  of  that  class  of  rights  which  avail  against  persons
generally,  or  (in  other  words)  which  avail  against  the  world
at  large.

Of  rights  which  are  riot  rights  over  things  or  persons,  some
are  of  the  class  of  rights  which  avail  against  persons  generally.
Others  avail  exclusively  against  persons  certain  or  determinate,
or  against  persons  who  are  determined  individually.

Where  a  right  is  a  right  over  a  thing,  or  (changing  the
shape  of  the  expression)  in  or  to  a  thing,  I  style  the  thing  over
which  it  exists  the  subject  or  matter  of  the  right  I  thus
distinguish  it  from  acts  and  forbearances,  considered  as  the
objects  of  rights.

Where  a  right  is  a  right  over  a  person,  I  also  style  the
person  over  whom  it  exists  the  subjed  of  the  right.  For  a
person,  considered  from  this  aspect,  is  placed  in  a  position
resembling  the  position  of  a  thiifig  which  is  the  subject  or
matter  of  a  right.  Considered  from  this  aspect,  he  is  not
considered  as  invested  with  rights,  nor  is  he  considered  as
lying  under  duties  or  obligations.  He  is  considered  as  the
subject  of  a  right  which  resides  in  another  person,  and  which
answers  to  duties  or  obligations  incumbent  upon  third  persons.

For  example,  the  relation  of  master  and  servant  implies  two
rights  which  are  utterly  distinct  and  disparate.  The  master  has
a  right,  which  avails  against  the  servant  specially,  to  acts  and
forbearances  on  the  part  of  the  servant  himself.  The  master
has  also  a  right  over  or  in  the  servant,  which  avails  against
other  persons  generally,  or  against  the  world  at  large.  With
respect  to  the  first  of  these  rights,  the  servant  lies  under  obliga-
tions answering  to  the  right  of  the  master.  But  with  respect
to  the  second  of  these  rights,  he  is  placed  in  a  position  resem-
bling the  position  of  a  thirig  which  is  the  subject  or  matter  of  a
right.  With  respect  to  that  right,  he  lies  under  no  obligations.
He  is  merely  the  subject  of  a  right  which  resides  in  his  master,
and  which  avails  {not  against  himself)  but  against  third  persons.

To  resume :

All  rights  reside  in  persons,  and  are  rights  to  acts  or
forbearances  on  the  part of other  persons. And acts and


Ads  and  Forbearances  the  Objects  of  Rights.  369

forbearances,  considered  from  this  aspect,  I  would  style  the  Lbct.XIV
objtds  of  rights,  and  of  the  corresponding  duties  or  obligations.  '  *  '
But  some  rights  are  rights  over  persons  or  things :  Or  (changing
the  shape  of  the  expression)  they  are  rights  in  or  to  persons  or
things.  And  persons  and  things,  considered  from  this  aspect,  I
would  style  the  subjects  of  those  rights,  and  of  the  duties  which
answer  to  those  rights.

And  here  I  will  briefly  remark,  that  the  term  '  subject,'  as
applied  to  a  person,  is  somewhat  ambiguous.  A  person  is
subject  to  a  duty,  when  he  is  bound  by  the  duty,  or  the  duty  is
incumbent  upon  him.  He  is  the  subject  of  a  duty,  when  the
duty  is  not  incumbent  upon  himself,  but  he  is  merely  that
about  which  the  duty  is  conversant  To  recur  to  the  example
which  I  have  just  cited :  As  between  himself  and  his  master,
the  servant  is  subject  to  a  duty:  that  is  to  say,  a  duty  is
incumbent  upon  him.  But  he  is  the  subject  of  the  duty  which
is  incumbent  upon  third  persoTis  towards  his  master.

The  distinction  between  Eights  which  I  shall  presently
endeavour  to  explain,  is  that  all -pervading  and  important
distinction  which  has  been  assumed  by  the  Soman  Institutional
Writers  as  the  main  groundwork  of  their  arrangement :  namely,
the  distinction  between  rights  in  rem  and  rights  in  personam ;
or  rights  which  avail  against  persons  generally  or  universally,
and  rights  which  avail  exclusively  against  certain  or  determinate
persons.

The  terms  ^jus  in  rem '  and  *jus  in  personam '  were  devised
by  the  Civilians  of  the  Middle  Ages,  or  arose  in  times  still
more  recent.  I  adopt  them  without  hesitation,  though  at  the
risk  of  offending  your  ears.  For  of  all  the  numerous  terms  by
which  the  distinction  is  expressed,  they  denote  it  the  most
adequately  and  the  least  ambiguously.  The  terms  which  were
employed  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers  themselves,  with  various  other
names  for  the  classes  of  rights  in  question,  I  shall  explain
briefly  hereafter.

At  present,  I  wiU  merely  point  at  an  ambiguity  which
perplexes  and  obscures  the  import  oijus  in  rem.

The  phrase  in  rem  denotes  the  compass,  and  not  the  subject
of  the  right.  It  denotes  that  the  right  in  question  avails
against  persons  generally ;  and  Tiot  that  the  right  in  question  is
a  right  over  a  thing.  For,  as  I  shall  show  hereafter,  many  of
the  rights,  which  are  jura  or  rights  in  rem,  are  either  rights
over,  or  to,  persons,  or  have  no  subject  (person  or  thing).

The  phrase  in  personam  is  an  elliptical  or  abridged  expres-
VOL.  I.  2  b


370  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Leot.XIY  sion  for  'in  personam  certam  sive  determinatum.' like  the
' * ' phrase  in  rem,  it  denotes  the  compass  of  the  right It  denotes
that  the  right  avails  exclusively  against  a  determiTuUe  person,  or
against  determinate  persons.

Before  I  proceed  to  the  distinction  between  the  two  classes
of  rights,  I  must  yet  interpose  a  remark  relating  to  terms.

In  the  language  of  the  Soman  Law,  and  of  all  the  modem
systems  which  are  offsets  from  the  Soman  Law,  the  term
'  Obligation '  is  restricted  to  the  duties  which  answer  to  rights
inpersonam.^  For  the  duties  which  answer  to  rights  availing
against  persons  generally,  the  Soman  Lawyers  had  no  distinctive
name.  They  opposed  them  to  Obligations  (in  the  strict  or
proper  sense)  by  the  name  of  Offices  or  Duties :  Though  office  or
duty  is  a  generic  expression ;  and  comprises  Obligations  (in  the
strict  or  proper  sense)  as  well  as  the  duties  which  answer  to
rights  in  rem.

This  limitation  of  the  term  'Obligatio'  by  the  Soman
Lawyers  must  be  carefully  noted.  Unless  it  be  clearly  under-
stood, their  writings,  as  well  as  those  of  most  Continental
Jurists,  will  appear  an  inexplicable  riddla  Three -fourths  of
those  who  in  our  own  countiy  profess  to  read  and  talk  about
the  French  Code,  cannot  possibly  imderstand  a  word  of  it,  by
reason  of  the  sense  in  which  this  word  is  employed  therein.

DUtinc-  Having  premised  these  lemarks,  I  proceed  to  state  and  to

twesa  Jus illustrate  the  important  distinction  in  question,  with  all  the

in  rw»  and  brevity  which  is  consistent  with  deamess.**

•J^J^^*^  Sights  in  rem  may  be  defined  in  the  following  manner : —

'  Sights  residing  in  persons,  and  availing  against  other  persons
generally*  Or  they  may  be  defined  thus : — ' Sights  residing  in
persons,  and  answering  to  duties  incumbent  upon  other  persons
generally.  By  a  crowd  of  modem  Civilians,  fus  in  rem  has  been
defined  as  follows  : — '  facultas  homini  competens  sine  respectu
ad  certam  personam,'  a  definition  I  believe  invented  by  Grotius.
The  following  definitions  will  apply  to  personal  rights : —
'Sights  residing  in  persons,  and  availing  exclusively  against
persons  specifically  determinate ' : — Or,  *  Sights  residing  in
persons,  and  answering  to  duties  which  are  incumbent  exclu-
sively on persons specifically determinate/** By modem

^  For  the  distinction  ffenerally,  see  tiber  ein2elne  Theile der Theorie  des

Hugo,  Jurist  Encvc.  pp.  75,  298,  325,  Rechts,  ii  p.  28 ;  and  note  at  the  end  of

385. — Haubold, .Tus. Rom. Priv. pp.  this  lecture.

7-8.— Savigny,  Vom  Berof,  etc,  pp.  Q%  **  An  obligation  attaches  exclusively

99. — Bentham,  Principles  of  Morals  and  upon  a  determinate  person  or  persons.

Legislation,  p.  246.— Thibaut,  Versuche  Where  it  is  capable  of  attaching  upon


yus  in  Rem — in  Personam.  371

Civilians,  a  personal  right  is  commonly  defined  in  the  follow-  Lect.XIV
ing  manner : — '  facultas  homini  competens  in  certam  personam.' ' "^^
This  definition  also,  like  the  former,  was,  I  believe,  devised  by
Grotius :  in  neither  of  them  is  there  any  great  merit

According  to  these  definitions,  a  right  of  the  first  class  and
a  right  of  the  second  class  are  distinguishable  thus :  The  duty
which  correlates  with  the  latter  is  restricted  to  a  person  or
persons  specifically  determinate.  The  duty  which  correlates
with  the  former  attaches  upon  persons  generally.

But  though  this  be  the  essence  of  the  distinction,  these  two
classes  of  rights  are  further  distinguishable  thus.  The  duties
which  correlate  with  rights  in  rem,  are  always  negative :  that  is
to  say,  they  are  duties  to  forbear  or  abstain.  Of  the  obligations
which  correlate  with  rights  in  personam,  some  are  negative,  but
some  (and  most)  are  positive — that  is  to  say,  obligations  to  do  or
perform.

As  every  imaginable  right  belongs  to  one  of  these  classes,  lUuBtra-
or  else  is  compounded  of  rights  belonging  to  each  of  these  J^n°^^j
classes,  it  is  manifest  that  a  full  exposition  of  this  all-pervading  between
distinction  were  nearly  equivalent  to  a  full  exposition  of  the  a^*^^
entire  science  of  Law. Leaving  the  fuller  exposition  of  it  for  personam,
future  Lectures,  I  shall  merely  endeavour,  at  present,  to  give
the  clue  to  its  import,  by  adducing  as  briefly  as  possible  a  few
apt  examples.

1st  Ownership  or  Property  (equivalent  to  Dominion,  in  its  Property,
strict  or  proper  signification)  is  a  term  of  such  complex  and
various  meaning  that  I  must  defer  the  full  and  accurate  explana-
tion of  it  to  a  future  opportunity.  But,  in  order  to  the  illustra-
tion of  the  distinction  which  I  am  endeavouring  to  exemplify
and  explain.  Ownership  or  Property  may  be  described  accurately
enough,  in  the  following  manner :  '  the  right  to  i(^  or  deal  with
some  given  subject,  in  a  manner,  or  to  an  extent,  which,  though
it  is  not  unlimited,  is  indefinite.'

Now  in  this  description  it  is  necessarily  implied,  that  the
law  will  protect  or  relieve  the  owner  against  every  disturbance
of  his  right  on  the  part  of  any  other  person.  Changing  the
expression,  all  other  persons  are  bound  to  forbear  from  acts
which  would  prevent  or  hinder  the  enjoyment  or  exercise  of
the  right

indeterminate  persons  (as  e,g,  the  repre-  sin^lar  or oniyersal, of  the  original

sentative  of  the  obligor  in  cases  of  con-  obligor.

tracts,  some  obligations  ex  delicto,  etc. ),  A  right  in  personam  avails  ezclusiyely

it  is  only  capable  of  attaching  upon  them  against  the  obligor,  though  the  obligor

as represeniing the original obligors,  may  be  prevented  from  performance  oy

It  never  extends  beyond  the  successor,  a  thiixl  party.


372  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XIV  But,  here,  the  duties  which  correspond  to  the  right  of
property  terminate.  Every  positive  duty  which  may  happen  to
concern  or  regard  it,  is  nevertheless  foreign  or  extraneous  to  it,
and  flows  from  some  incident  specially  binding  the  party  upon
whom  the  duty  is  incumbent :  for  instance,  from  a  contract  or
covenant  into  which  he  enters  with  the  owner,  or  from  a  delict
which  he  commits  against  his  right  of  ownership.  In  other
words,  every  such  positive  duty  is  restricted  to  a  determinate
person,  and  is,  therefore,  an  Obligation  (in  the  sense  of  the
Boman  Lawyers).  And  even  a  duty  which  is  negative  and
regards  the  right  of  ownership,  is  not  an  obligation  correspond-
ing to  that  very  right,  in  case  the  vinculum  be  special :  that  is
to  say,  not  attaching  indefinitely  upon  mankind  at  large,  but
binding  some  certain  person,  or  some  certain  persons,  and  arising
from  some  incident  which  exclusively  regards  the  obliged.  An
obligation,  however,  in  the  sense  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers,  or  a
duty  binding  a  determinate  person,  may,  whether  positive  or
negative,  co-exist  with  the  duties  which  correspond  to  the  right
of  property,  by  reason  of  some  incident  which  superadds  to
the  ownership  a  right  in  personam.  Thus  if  in  selling  you  an
estate  I  enter  into  a  covenant  not  to  molest  you  in  the  posses-
sion of  it,  or  into  a  covenant  for  further  assurance,  you  enjoy,
besides  your  right  of  ownership,  which  avails  and  can  be  en-
forced against  the  world  at  large,  another  right  arising  out  of
the  covenant,  and  which  avails  solely  against  me.  Or  if  I  trespass
on  land  of  which  you  are  the  owner,  I  become  amenable  to  an
obligation  ex  delicto,  which  is  superadded  to  the  duties  incumbent
upon  me  and  all  other  persons  in  respect  of  your  ownership.

Ownership  or  Property,  is,  therefore,  a  species  of  Jus  in  rem.
For  ownership  is  a  right  residing  in  a  person,  over  or  to  a
person  or  thing,  and  availing  against  other  persons  universally  or
generally.  It  is  a  right  implying  and  exclusively  resting  upon
obligations  which  are  at  once  universal  and  negative.

Where  the  subject  of  a  right  in  rem  happens  to  be  a  person,
the  position  of  the  party  who  is  invested  with  the  right  wears  a
double  aspect.  He  has  a  right  (or  rights)  over  or  to  the  subject
as  against  other  persons  generally.  He  has  also  rights  {in
personam)  against  the  sfuhject,  or  lies  under  obligations  (in  the
sense  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers)  towards  the  subject.  But  this  is
a  matter  to  which  I  shall  revert  presently.
Servitus.  2ndly.  The  Servitudes  of  the  Boman  Law,  and  of  the  various

modem  systems  which  are  modifications  of  the  Boman  Law,  may
also  be  adduced  as  examples  of  rights  i7i  rem.


yus  in  Rem — in  Personam.  373

Servitua  (for  which  the  English  'Easement'  is  hardly  an  Lect.XIV
adequate  expression)  is  a  right  to  use  or  deal  with,  in  a  given  '
and  definite  manner,  a  subject  owned  by  another.  Take,  for
instance,  a  Eight  of  Way  over  another's  land.  Now  according
to  this  definition,  the  capital  diflference  between  Ownership  and
ServitiLS  is  the  following : — The  right  of  dealing  with  the  subject
which  resides  in  the  owner  or  proprietor,  is  larger,  and,  indeed,
indefinite :  That  which  resides  in  the  party  who  is  invested  with
a  right  of  servitude,  is  narrower  and  determinate.

But  in  respect  of  that  great  distinction  which  I  am  now
endeavouring  to  illustrate,  the  Right  of  Ownership  or  Property,
and  a  Eight  of  Servitude,  are  perfectly  equivalent  rights.
Servitvs  (like  Ownership)  is  a  right  in  rem.  For  it  avails
against  cdl  mankind  (including  the  owner  of  the  subject).  Or
(changing  the  expression)  it  implies  an  obligation  upon  all  (the
owner  again  included)  to  forbear  from  every  act  inconsistent
with  the  exercise  of  the  right

But  this  negative  and  universal  duty,  is  the  only  obligation
which  correlates  with  the  fus  servitutis,  or  which  corresponds  to
that  very  right.  Every  special  obligation  which  happens  to
regard  or  concern  it,  is  nevertheless  foreign  or  extraneous  to
it,  and  answers  to  some  right  of  the  opposite  or  antagonist  class.

Suppose,  for  example,  that  the  servitude  has  been  constittUed
(or  granted)  by  the  actual  owner  of  the  subject.  And  suppose
that  the  owner  has  also  contracted  with  the  grantee  not  to  molest
him  in  the  enjoyment  or  exercise  of  the  right.  Now,  here,  the
grantor  of  the  servitude  lies  under  tu}o  duties  which  are  com-
pletely distinct  and  disparate : — One  of  them  arising  from  the
grant,  and  answering  to  the  right  which  it  creates ; — the  other
arising  from  the  contract  by  which  he  is  specially  bound,  and
answering  to  the  right  in  personam  which  the  contract  vests  in
the  grantee.  In  case  he  molest  the  grantee  in  the  exercise  of
the  servitude,  the  injury  is  double,  though  the  act  is  single.  By
one  and  the  same  act,  he  violates  an  Offidum  which  he  shares
with  the  rest  of  mankind,  and  he  also  breaks  an  Obligation  (in
the  sense  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers)  which  arises  from  his  peculiar
position.

Having  given  an  example  or  two  of  real  rights  (or  of  rights  Examples
which  correspond  to  duties  gen£ral  and  negative),  I  will  now  ^^nmtu
adduce  examples  of  personal  rights :  that  is  to  say,  rights  which
avail  exclusively  against  persons  certain  or  determinate,  or  which
correlate  with  obligations,  incumbent  upon  determinate  persons,
to  do  or  perform,  or  to  forbear  or  abstain.


3  74  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XIV  All Rights arising from Contracts belong to this last-

ist  A mentioned  class :  although  there  are  certain  cases  (to  \ehich  I

right  aris- shall  presently  advert)  wherein  the  right  of  ownership,  and

a  c(mtra4i. others,  of  the  same  kind,  are  said  (by  a  solecism)  to  arise  from

Contracts,  or  are  even  talked  of  (with  flagrant  absurdity)  as  if

they  arose  from  Obligations  (in  the  sense  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers).

Eights,  which,  properly  speaking,  arise  from  Contracts,  avail

against  the  parties  who  bind  themselves  by  contract,  and  also

against  the  parties  who  are  said  to  rqyresent  their  persons :  that

is  to  say,  who  succeed  on  certain  events  to  the  aggregate  or  bulk

of  their  rights ;  and,  therefore,  to  their  fcundties  or  means  of

fulfilling  or  liquidating  their  obligations. But  as  against  parties

who  neither  oblige  themselves  by  contract,  nor  represent  the

persons  of  parties  who  oblige  themselves  by  contract,  the  rights,

which,  properly  speaking,  arise  from  contracts,  have  no  force  or

effect.

Suppose  (for  example)  that  you  contract  with  me  to  deliver
me  some  moveable;**  but,  instead  of  delivering  it  to  mg  in
pursuance  of  the  contract,  that  you  sell  and  deliver  it  to  aTiother,
Now,  here,  the  rights  which  I  acquire  by  virtue  of  the  con-
tract, are  the  following.

I  have  a  right  to  the  moveable  in  question  as  against  you
specially.  So  long  as  the  ownership  and  the  possession  continue
to  reside  in  you,  I  can  force  you  to  deliver  me  the  thing  in
specific  performance  of  contract ;  or,  at  least,  to  make  me  satis-
faction, in  case  you  detain  it  After  the  delivery  to  the  buyer,
I  can  compel  you  to  make  me  satisfaction  for  your  breach  of
the  contract  with  me.

But  here  my  rights  terminate.  As  against  strangers  to  that
contract,  I  have  no  right  whatever  to  the  moveable  in  question.
And,  by  consequence,  I  can  neither  compel  the  buyer  to  yield  it
to  me,  nor  force  him  to  make  me  satisfaction  as  detaining  a
thing  of  mine.  For  '  ohligationum  substantia  non  in  eo  consistit
lit  aliquod  nostrum  fadaJt,  sed  t^  alium  nobis  dbstringat  ad  dandum
aliquid,  vel  faciendum  vel  praestandum.' [Or  rather,  *  ad  fad-

^  If  the  contract  to  deliver,  however,  ayoiding  most of  its  practical  conse-

be  causd  venditionis,  the  transaction  is  quences  {e.g.  the  Bills  of  Sales  Act;  the

one  which  in  English  law  depends  for  equitable  doctrines  of  vendor's  lien,  the

its  effect  as  to  thira  narties,  on  a  variety  equitable  rules  as  to  notice,  etc. ),  are  ex-

of  circumstances. This  arises  from  the  amples  of  the  inconvenience  which  arises

peculiar  theory  of  English  law  that  the  from  the  pretension  of  our  Courts  to

property  in  moveables  is  transferred  by  ignore  the  principles  of  the  Roman  law,

a  sale  in  specie  without  reference  to  the  while  compeUed  by  the  exigencies  of

fact  of  deliverv. The  confusion  intro-  commerce  to  adopt  the  results  of  those

duced  by  this  doctrine,  and  the  various  principles. — R.  C.
expedients  resorted  to  for  the  purpose  of


yus  in  Rem — in  Personam.  375

endum'  (including '  dandum*)  vel  'rion  faciendum.' '  Ptcestamdum^  Lbot.  XIV
seems  to  include  botL]

But  if  you  deliver  the  moveable,  in  pursuance  of  your
contract  with  me,  my  position  Umards  other  persons  generally
assumes  a  different  aspect  In  consequence  of  the  delivery  by
you  and  the  concurring  apprehension  by  me,  the  thing  becomes
mine.  I  have  fus  in  rem :  I  have  a  right  over  the  thing,  or
a  right  in  the  thing,  as  against  all  mankind :  A  right  which
answers  to  obligations  universal  and  negative.  And,  by  conse-
quence, I  can  compel  the  restitution  of  the  thing  from  any
who  may  take  it  or  detain  it,  or  can  force  him  to  make  me
satisfJAction  as  for  an  injury  to  my  right  of  ownership.  In  the
language  of  Heineccius  (a  celebrated  Civilian  of  the  last  century),
'  Ubi  rem  m,eam  invenio,  ibi  eam  vindico :  sive  cum  ed  person§.
negotium  mihi  fuerit,  sive  non  fuerit.  Contra,  si  a  bibliopol^
librum  emi,  isque  eum  nondum  mihi  traditvm  vendiderit  iterum
Sempronio,  ego  sane  contra  Sempronium  agere  nequeo  :  quia
cum  Sempronio  nullum  mihi  unquam  intercessit  negotium.
Sed  agere  debeo  adversus  bibliopolam  a  quo  emi :  quia  ^o  ex
contractu,  i.e.  ex  jure  ad  rem.'

All  rights  which  arise  from  contracts  and  (speaking  generally)
all  rights  in  personam,  are  rights  to  acts  or  forbearaTices  on  the
part  of  determinate  persons,  and  to  nothing  more.  At  first
sights  that  species  of  jm  in  personam  which  is  styled  jvs  ad  rem
may  appear  to  form  an  exception.  It  may  seem  that  the  party
who  is  invested  with  the  right,  has  a  right  to  a  thing,  or  a  right
in  a  thing,  as  against  the  party  who  lies  under  the  corresponding
obligation.  But,  in  every  case  of  the  kind,  the  right  of  the
party  entitled  amounts,  in  strictness,  to  this :  He  has  a  right  to
acquire  the  thing  from  the  opposite  party,  or  to  compel  the  party
to  make  the  thing  his  by  an  ac^  of  conveyance  or  transfer.  It
is  only  by  an  ellipsis,  or  for  the  sake  of  brevity  in  the  expression,
that  the  party  invested  with  the  right  is  said  to  have  a  right  to
a  thing,^

Take  the  following  examples.

1st,  If  you  contract  with  me  to  deliver  me  a  specific  thing,
I  am  said  to  have  jus  ad  rem :  that  is  to  say,  a  right  to  the
thing  which  is  the  subject  of  the  contract,  as  against  you  specially.
But,  in  strictness,  I  have  merely  a  right  to  the  a4iquisition  of  the
thing :  a  right  of  compelling  you  to  give  me  jus  in  rem,  in  or

^  In the  language devised  by  the Civilians,  he  has  jus  ad  rem :  that  is  to
Canonists,  and  adopted  by  the  modern say,  jus  ad  rem  aequirendam.


376  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.xiv  over  the  thing ;  to  do  some  ew^,  in  the  way  of  grant  or  convej-
" ance,  which  shall  make  the  thing  mint,

2ndly,  If  you  owe  me  money  determined  in  point  of  q^mntity,
or  if  you  have  done  me  an  injury  and  are  bound  to  pay  me
damages,  I  have  also  a  right  to  the  a4yuisiti(m  of  a  thing ;  but,
strictly  and  properly  speaking,  I  have  not  a  right  to  a  thin^.  I
have  a  right  of  compelling  you  to  deliver  or  pay  me  moneys,
which  are  not  determined  in  specie,  and  as  yet  are  not  mine :
though  they  vnll  be  determined  in  specie,  and  will  become  mine
by  the  act  of  delivery  or  payment

In  this  case,  the  nature  of  the  right  is  obvious.  For  as  there
is  no  determinate  thing  upon  which  it  can  possibly  attach,  it
caimot  be  a  right  to  a  thing.

3rdly,  Suppose  that  you  enjoy  a  monopoly  by  virtue  of  a
patent ;  and  that  you  enter  into  a  contract  with  me,  to  transfer
your  exclusive  right  in  my  favour.  Now  here,  also,  I  have  jus
ad  rem,  but  it  is  utterly  impossible  to  aflSrm  that  I  have  a  right
to  a  thing.  The  subject  of  the  contract  is  not  a  determined
thing,  nor  a  thing  that  can  be  determined.  My  right  is  this :
a  right  of  compelling  you  to  transfer  a  right  in  rem,  as  /  shall
direct  or  appoint.  If  I  may  refine  upon  the  expression  which
custom  has  established,  I  have  not  so  properly  jus  ad  rem,  as  fits
AD  JUS  in  rem.

And  this,  indeed,  is  the  accurate  expression  for  every  case
of  that  species  of  jus  in  personam  which  is  styled  jus  ad  rem.
In  every  case  of  the  kind,  the  party  entitled  has  jus  in  personam
AD  jus  in  rem  acquirendam.  That  is  to  say,  he  has  a  right,
availing  against  a  determinate  person,  to  the  a/squisition  of  a
right  availing  against  the  world  at  large.  And,  by  consequence,
his  right  is  a  right  to  an  a(^  of  conveyance  or  transfer  on  the
part  of  the  person  obliged.

With  regard  to  the  other  species  of  jus  in  personam,  there
can  be  no  doubt.  If  you  contract  with  me  to  do  work  and
labour,  or  if  you  contract  with  me  to  forbear  from  some  given
act,  it  is  manifest  that  my  right  is  a  right  to  acts  or  forbearances,
and  to  nothing  more.

I  will  now  advert  to  the  class  of  cases  above  alluded  to
(p,  373)  which  obscure  the  otherwise  broad  and  distinct  line  of
demarcation  whereby  these  two  great  classes  of  rights  are  sepa-
rated. Eights  in  rem  sometimes  arise  from  an  instrument  which
is  called  a  contract,  and  are  therefore  said  to  arise  from  a
contract :  the  instrument  in  these  cases  wears  a  double  aspect,
or  has  a  twofold  effect ;  to  one  purpose  it  gives  jus  in  personam


Contract  and  Conveyance.  m

and  is  a  contract,  to  another  purpose  it  gives  jus  in  rem  and  is  Leot.  XIV
a  conveyance.  When  a  so-called  contract  passes  an  estate,  or,
in  the  language  of  the  modem  Civilians,  a  right  in  rem,  to  the
obligor,  it  is  to  that  extent  not  a  contract  but  a  conveyance;
although  it  may  be  a  contract  to  some  other  extent,  and  con-
sidered from  some  other  aspect.  A  contract  is  not  distinguished
from  a  conveyance  by  the  mere  consent  of  parties,  for  that
consent  is  evidently  necessary  in  a  conveyance  as  well  as  in  a
contract

For  example,  a  contract  for  the  sale  of  an  immoveable  in
the  French  law,  is  of  itself  a  conveyance ;  there  is  no  other ;
the  contract,  or  agreement  to  sell,  is  registered,  and  the  owner-
ship of  the  immoveable  at  once  passes  to  the  buyer.

By  the  provisions  of  that  part  of  the  English  law  which  is
called  equity,  a  contract  to  sell  at  once  vests  jus  in  rem  or
ownership  in  the  buyer,  and  the  seller  has  only  jt^  in  re  aliend.
But  according  to  the  conflicting  provisions  of  that  part  of  the
English  system  called  peculiarly  law,  a  sale  and  purchase  with-
out certain  formalities  merely  gives  jus  ad  rem,  or  a  right  to
receive  the  ownership,  not  ownership  itself :  and  for  this  reason
a  contract  to  sell,  though  in  equity  it  confers  ownership,  is  yet
an  imperfect  conveyance,  in  consequence  of  the  conflicting  pre-
tensions of  law.*^  To  complete  the  transaction  the  legal  interest
of  the  seller  must  be  passed  to  the  buyer,  in  legal  form.  To
this  purpose,  the  buyer  has  only  jus  in  personam :  a  right  to
compel  the  seller  to  pass  his  legal  interest ;  but,  speaking  gene-
rally, he  has  dominium  or  jus  in  rem,  and  the  instrument  is  a
conveyance.  To  this  one  intent  only  he  has  jus  in  personam  ;
the  seller  remains  obliged,  and  equity  will  enforce  this  obligation
in  specie  against  the  seller,  or  will  compel  him  to  fulfil  it  by
transferring  his  legal  interest  in  legal  form.

Considered  with  relation  to  this  obligation,  which  correlates
to  a  right  in  personam,  the  so-called  contract  is  a  contract ;  but
if  there  were  only  one  system  of  law  in  England,  and  that  law
were  the  law  administered  by  the  Court  of  Chancery,  it  would
not  be  a  contract,  but  a  mere  conveyance.

Briefly,  no  right  to  a  thing,  properly  speaking,  is  ever  given
by  a  contract.  Where  a  thing  is  the  subject  of  the  contract,
the  right  is  not  a  right  over,  in,  or  to  the  thing,  but  a  right  to
an  act  of  transfer,  or  assignment  of  the  thing  on  the  part  of  the
obligor.

^  This  of  course  cannot  happen  in  which  requires  no  particukr  formality  in
the  case  of  a  sale  of  moveable  chattels, law  any  more  than  in  equity. — R^  C.


378  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XIV All  rights  founded  upon  injuries,  or  rights  of  action  in  the

' largest  sense  of  the  word,  are  rights  in  personam,  equally  vrith

righf ' those  which  arise  from  contracts :  and,  like  all  rights  in  personam,

foundedon  ^j^  rights  to  acts  or  forbearances  on  the  part  of  determinate

an  u^ory.  °  *

persons,  and  to  nothing  more.  Some  confusion  has  arisen  upon
this  point  from  the  actio  in  rem  of  the  Eoman  lawyers.  Actio
in  rem  was  a  name  given  by  the  Boman  lawyers  to  the  form  of
action  appointed  for  the  vindication  of  rights  founded  on  injuries.
The  name  does  not  imply  that  the  right  vindicated  is  a  right  in
rem,  but  is  an  abridged  expression  to  denote  an  action  foimded
on  an  injuiy  against  fus  in  rem.

AU  rights  of  action  must^  it  is  evident,  be  founded  on  rights
in  personam — that  is,  on  rights  which  avail  exclusively  against
the  determinate  person  or  persons  against  whom  the  action  will
lie ;  although  those  persons  may  have  been  brought  under  that
designation  by  committing  an  offence  against  a  right  in  rem.
Actions  in  rem  are  rights  of  action  founded  on  an  offence  against
a  right  in  rem,  and  seeking  the  restitution  of  the  party  to  the
enjoyment  of  that  very  right,  and  not  merely  satisfaction  for
being  deprived  of  it  Thus,  an  action  of  ejectment  in  English
law  would  be  said  by  the  Roman  lawyers  to  be  an  action  in  rem :
because  it  is  founded  upon  an  act  of  dispossession  infringing  upon
my  right  of  ownership  in  the  land,  and  because  it  seeks  the
restoration  to  me  of  that  specific  right  So  likewise  an  action
of  detinue  would  be  called  an  action  in  rem :  but  an  action  of
trover  would  not ;  because,  though  founded  upon  the  supposition
of  a  wrongful  conversion  of  the  subject  claimed  to  the  defendant's
use,  it  does  not  seek  specific  restitution,  but  merely  satisfaction
or  damages.


The  following  are  some  of  the  passages  referred  to  in  note  ^  p.
370,  ante,  together  with  the  marginal  notes  attached  to  them.

Those  from  Hugo's  *  Juristische  Encyclopadie '  are  as  follows : —

I

'  Die  Foderungen  sind  tiberhaupt  Rights of Actions are  classed

RechtsverhaltnisBe,  hei  welchen  noiK-  with  Obligations  ;  wlnlst  obligations

wendigauf  einen  hegtimmUn  VerpJUch-  to  suffer  punishment  (which  are  not

teten  BUckgicht  genommen  werden  muss,  more  sanctionative  than  the  former),

In  der  romischen  Sprache  sind  sie  are  referred  (together  with  Crimes

theils  obligationes,  theils  actiones,  je  and  Criminal  Procedure)  to  Public

nachdem  sie  fiir  sich  hestehende  Ver-  Law. Civil  Procedure  is  completely

hUUnisse  zwischen  den  creditor  und  separated  from  the  Rights  of  Action,

debitor  {Sarictioned),  oder  Yerhalt-  and  the  Matters  for  Exception,  upon

nisse zur Verfolgung irgend einea  which  it  is  built Civil  Iiyuries  are

andem  RecfUsverhUUnisses  sind  (Sano  not  considered  directly. Sanction-

tioniiig), Bei  den  Alten  unterschei-  ative  Civil  Rights  which  are  exercised


Extracts  and  Notes.


379


den  Bie  sich  aach  dadorch,  dass  die
obligatio  an  sich  nie  der  Rechtsfahig-
keit  des  Yerpflichteten  ein  Ende
machen  kann,  wie  dies  bei  der  actio
oft  der  Fall  iat.' — HugOy  Jurist  Enc,
voL  i.  p.  76.

Page  298.  —  ^Arten  von  Eechten  an
einer  Sache,*
Hugo  enumerates  three,  viz.
Eigenthum,  Servitut,  and  Pfand-
recht*  *Doch/  he  continues,  'muss
bemerkt  werden,  warum  das  Erbrecht
und  der  Besitz  nicht  hierher  gehoren.
Ersteres,  weil  es  eine  Art  des  Eigen-
thums,  Oder  eine  Art  es  zu  erwer-
ben  :  t  und  Letzterer,  weil  es  etwas
mehr  auf  dem  gegenwartigen  natiir-
lichen  Zustande  (Factum)  als  auf
einem  Rechte  beruhendes  ist;  wo-
durch  freilich  auch  ein  strenges  Becht
gegen  den  unschuldigen  drittenBesit-
zer  entstehen  kann,  wenn  der  Anfang
des  Besitzes  (caiua  oder  initium  po9-
sessionis,  spaterhin  tUtUus)  es  erlaubt;
oft  entsteht  aber  daraus  nur  eine
Obligatio.' J


Page  326. — '  Von  Foderungm.'
'  Der  G^enstand  einer  Foderung
ist entweder  ein Geben,  oder  ein
Thun,  oder  ein  Qestatten.' , . ,


extrajudicially  are  forgotten. — Mar-  Leot.XIV
ginai  Note,  '^"^^ — '


*  Mortgage,  etc.,  is  Jus  in  Be
given  by  way  of  security  for  the  per-
formance of  some  obligation,  though
it  may  lead  in  the  event  to  the  enjoy-
ment of  the  subject  The  Bight  of
the  Obligor  may  be  Property  or
Servitus. — Margined  Note,

f  And  setting  aside  this  ambi-
guity— assuming  that  it  denotes  Jus,
and  not  also  a  mode  of  acquisition —
it  cannot  be  classed  with  Jura  in  Be,
because  it  also  includes  Jus  ad  Bern,
Possession  must  be  considered  under
three  aspects.  1^  As  titulus,  as  the
fact  (the  fEu^t  of  enjoyment  or  occu-
pancy) which  gives  a  right  as  against
all  except  the  proprietor,  2*"  As  the
name  of  this  right  3^  As  a  titulus,
which  combined  with  other  titiUi
gives  a  right  even  as  against  the
proprietor. — Marginal  Note.

X  i,e.  Jus  ad  Bern  against  the
alienor  by  virtue  of  the  warranty  for
Title,— Marginal  Note.

Every  obligation  is  positive  or
negative  :  is  an  obligation  to  give  or
to  perform  (in  one  word,  to  perform) ;
or  to  permit)  i,e,  not  to  hinder. —
Marginal  Note.


Subjects  of  Private  Law,


'Juris  in  artem  redacti,  seu  systematis  juris,  quantum  ad  jus
privatum,  tres  constituuntur  partes  primari»  maxims  ah  instUutorum
ejusdem  juris  varietate  ductse :  a.&  Jus  Personarum,  quod  de  person-
arum  coDditione,  et  in  primis  de  statu  famili»  prsecipit :  b.b.  Jus
fierum,  quo  de  rerum  divisionibus  et  jure  circa  res,  tam  proprias
quam  alienas,  etiam  defunctorum,  disseritur:  denique:  cc.  Jus
Obligationum  et  Actionum,  quod  doctrinam,  tum  de  jure  adversus
certos  debitores  per  obligationem  competente,  tum  de  variis  modisjusy
quod  supra  traditum  est,  injudicio  persequendi  tractat  Quibus  partibus
tamquam  corollarium,  sed  sine  quo  ipsa  juris  privati  ratio  viz  intelligi
possit,  recte  adnectitur  universae /()rmt^  et  ordinisjudiciorum  descriptio.
— Haubold,  InstUutorum  Juris  Privati  Eomani  Lineamenta,  p.  7.


380  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbct.  XIV  On  the  blank  part  of  the  page,  referred  to  in  '  Thibaut's  V ersuche,'  is
' — ' — '  the  following  table :

Res.


Res.  Actiones.


Corporales  Incorporales.

[Res  et  Facta].


Dominia  Obligationes  (s.  1.).


I  I

Obligationes  Actiones.

(8.  s.).


NoU  on  iht  Use  of  the  Terms  Beal  and  Personal  in  the  Law  of
Scotland,

It  may  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  observe  that  the  tenns  real  and  penonal,
when  applied  by  writers  on  the  law  of  Scotland  to  distinguish  rights,  are
invariably  applied  in  a  sense  conformable  to  that  of  the  Civilians.

The  woid  real  has  in  the  law  of  Scotland  several  shades  of  meaning,  but
all  of  them  importing  a  distinction  of  a  similar  nature  to  that  insisted  on  by
Mr.  Austin.  Thus,  a  real  burden  affecting  lands  means  an  obligation,  simila^
in  character  to  that  imposed  by  what  is  called  in  English  law  a  covenant
running  with  the  land^  and  is,  therefore,  a  right  availing  not  in  eertam
personam,  but  against  persons  of  a  generic  description,  namely,  owners,  or
possessors  of  the  land.  Thus,  also,  a  right  to  teinds  is  classed  amongst  real
lights,  being  available  not  against  eertam  personam,  but  against  all  persons
intromiting  with  (i,e,  reducing  into  possession)  the  produce  or  rents.

But  the  application  of  the  terms  real  and  personal  which  has  most
precision  and  distinctness  is  the  following : — A  r^l  right  in  land,  or  other
subjects  capable  of  feudal  investiture,  is  a  right  completed  hy  infeftment  (that
is,  according  to  modem  forms,  duly  registered  in  the  Register  of  Sasines).
A  personal  right  to  land,  etc.,  is  a  right  not  completed  hy  infeftment.

To  understand  the  distinction,  the  English  reader  must  be  informed
that  the  complete  title  to  land  in  Scotland  is  of  a  double  nature.  There  is
the  tide  proper  (or  personal  title),  consisting  of  a  series  or  progress  of  docu-
ments connecting  (or  presumed  to  connect)  the  proprietor  with  the  Crown,
as  the  ultimate  author  of  all  feudal  rights.  There  is  also  the  sasine,
formerly  a  public  act  of  taking  possession,  now  effected  by  registering  the
appropriate  instrument  or  deed  in  the  Register  of  Sasines :  which  being
done,  in  pursuance  of  lawful  warrants,  the  proprietor  is  said  to  be  infeft.


Notes.  381

or  feudally  invested  with  the  property. The  word  iikjtfim&td^  or  invoftture,  Lect.  XIV
properly  applies  to  the  personal  title  completed  hy  the  sasine  :  but  is  some- ' — r^^
times  applied  to  the  sasine  as  distinct  from  the  personal  title,  where,  as  it
sometimes  happens,  they  conflict.

Now  the  essential  and,  I  believe,  only  practical  difiference  in  'j^ewni
effect  made  by  the  sasine  (omitting  the  notice  effected  by  registration  and
the  operation  of  prescription  to  cure  defects  in  the  personal  title)  is  the
following : —

If  A.  (the  owner,  or  dominus)  be  unlawfully  kept  out  of  possession  by  a
tenant  or  other  person,  possessing  on  a  colourable  title  not  derived  by  way
of  contract  from  A.,  or  from  one  whose  person  A.  represents,  A.  cannot
remove  or  gect  the  possessor  imtil  he  is  himself  infeft  in  the  lands.  That  is
to  say,  A.  infeft  can  enforce  his  right  against  persons  in  general ;  A.  uninfefty
only  against  certas  penonasy  namely,  1st,  against  those  who  possess  under
contract  with  him  ;  and  2ndly,  against  those  whose  acts  may  be  necessary  to
procure  lus  personal  right  to  be  clothed  with  the  feudal  investiture.

No  doubt  the  heir  who  has  entered  on  the  inheritance,  although  not
infeft,  has  many  of  the  real  rights  of  the  dtnniniu  (e.g,  against  trespassers) ;
but  I  believe  that  in  the  above  distinction  lies  the  reason  why  the  terms
recU  and  personal  were  applied  by  our  lawyers  of  the  last  century  (the  best
of  whom  were  well  versed  in  the  learning  of  the  Civilians)  to  distinguish
rights  completed  by  infeftmentf  and  rights  not  so  completed.

The  rights  descendible  to  heirs,  as  distinguished  from  those  descendible
to  execiUors  or  administrators,  are  in  the  law  of  Scotland  denoted  by  the
appropriate  term  heritable,  and  never  by  the  term  real — R.  C.


LECTUEE  XV.

JUS  IN  REM — IN  PERSONAM  (contintied).

In  my  last  Lecture,  I  attempted  to  explain  that  leading  and  Lect.  XV
important  distinction,  which  has  been  assumed  by  the  Soman
Institutional  Writers,  as  the  principal  basis  (or  one  of  the
principal  bases)  of  their  System  or  Arrangement :  Namely,  the
distinction  between  rights  in  rem  and  rights  in  personam ;  or
between  rights  which  avail  against  persons  universally  or  generally,
and  rights  which  avail  exclvsively  against  certain  or  determinate
persfons.

Having  first  endeavoured  to  state  it  in  general  or  abstract
expressions,  I  tried  to  illustrate  the  distinction  between  the  two
classes  of  rights  by  adducing  examples  of  each.

As  examples  of  jura  in  rem,  I  referred  to  the  right  of
ownership,  property  or  dominion ;  and  also  to  those  rights  over
subjects  owned  by  others,  which  are  styled  by  the  Eoman
Lawyers  servitutes  or  jura  servUutis,  and  which  may  be  styled  in
our  own  language  (though  not  with  perfect  propriety)  easements
or  rigMs  to  easements.


382  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XV  As  examples of  rights  in  personam,  I  referred  to  rights

' ex  contractu,  or  to  rights  which  arise  directly  from  contracts
properly  so  called. And  I  also  adverted  to  the  rights  which
arise  from  injuries  or  wrongs,  and  which  (taking  the  term  auction
in  its  largest  import)  may  be  styled  rights  of  actiojL I  say,  in
its  largest  import,  because  the  term  action  is  ambiguous ;  it  has
a  wider  and  a  narrower  signification. Taken  in  its  widest  sense,
it  denotes  any  judicial  remedy  whatever ;  taken  in  its  narrower
sense,  it  expresses  only  a  particular  species  of  jvdidal  remedy.
There  are  many  cases  in  which  judicial  remedies  are  not  techni-
cally styled  rights  of  action. Such,  for  instance,  is,  in  the
Soman  Law,  the  edict  unde  vi,  which  answers  almost  exactly  to
our  action  of  ejectment,  being  founded  on  a  wrongful  dispos-
session by  the  party  against  whom  it  is  brought,  and  seeking
specific  restitution  of  the  particular  right  of  which  the  other
party  has  been  deprived. Again,  a  right  to  an  injimction,  and
a  right  to  a  writ  of  habeas  corpus,  being  foimded  on  an  injury,
and  seeking  in  the  one  case  the  stoppage  of  the  injury,  before  it
is  completed,  in  the  other  case,  the  specific  restoration  of  the
party  to  the  right  of  which  he  has  been  deprived  by  the  injury,
are  to  all  intents  and  purposes  rights  of  action,  as  much  as  those
which  are  in  technical  jargon  callefl  by  the  name. The  whole
theory  of  actions  is  in  truth  perfectly  easy  and  simple,  were  it
not  for  the  absurd  technical  distinctions  by  whi^h  it  is  perplexed
and  incumbered.
Further  il- In  order  that  I  may  further  illustrate  the  import  of  the
of\h^  d^' leading  distinction  in  question,  I  shall  direct  your  attention  to
^ction those  rights  in  rem  which  are  rights  over  persons,  and  to  certain
jus  in  rem  rights  in  rem,  or  availing  against  the  world  at  large,  which  have
And  Jus  in no  determinate  subfects  {^TSOiiB  OT  iinxxgs).
Jus  in  rem Looking  at  the  obvious  signification  of  the  epithet  reai  (and
restricted of  the  phrase  in  rem,  from  which  the  epithet  is  derived),  we
writers  to should  naturally  conclude  that  a  reai  right  must  be  a  right  in  a
Jus  in  rem  thing. And,  accordingly,  by  many  of  the  modern  expositors  of
things, the  Eoman  Law,  the  term  real  right  ox  jus  in  rem  (which  terms
I  shall  hereafter  use  as  equivalent  expressions  unless  the  contrary
is  indicated),  is  restricted  to  mch  of  the  rights  availing  against
the  world  at  large,  as  are  rights  over  thi'njgs  properly  so  called —
that  is  to  say,  over  permanent  external  objects  which  are  not
persons,  as  distinguished  both  from  persons,  and  from  those
transient  objects  which  are  called  acts  and  forbearances.

When  I  say  that  they  restrict  the  term  in  the  manner
which  I  have  now  mentioned,  I  mean  that  they  so  restrict  it


Recapitulation,  383

when  they  state  its  meaning  in  gmerals,  or  when  they  attempt  Lbct.  XV
to  define  it  For,  when  they  are  occupied  with  the  detail  of  '
the  Soman  Law,  they  unconsciously  deviate  from  their  own
insufficient  notion,  and  extend  the  term  to  numerous  rights
which  are  not  rights  over  things.  For  example,  it  is  admitted-
or  assumed  by  every  Civilian,  that  the  right  of  the  Boman  heir
over  or  in  the  heritage  is  a  real  right.

I  say  the  right  of  the  heir  over  or  in  the  heritage.  For,
independently  of  the  severed  rights  which  devolve  to  him  from
the  testator  or  intestate,  he  has  a  right  in  the  aggregate  which
is  f  onned  by  those  several  rights ;  and  which  aggregate,  coupled
with  the  obligations  of  the  deceased,  constitute  the  complex
whole  which  is  styled  the  hereditas  or  heritage.  In  this  heritage,
so  far  as  it  consisted  of  rights,  the  heir  had,  by  the  Boman  Law,
a  right  which  availed  against  the  world  at  large,  and  which  he
could  maintain  against  any  one  who  might  gainsay  or  dispute
it,  by  a  peculiar  judicial  proceeding  called  petitio  hereditatis^
which  proceeding  was  an  action  in  rem — that  is,  an  action
grounded  on  an  injury  to  a  real  right,  and  seeking  the  restora-
tion of  the  injured  party  to  the  immolested  exercise  of  the  right
in  which  he  has  been  disturbed.

But  though  this  right  of  the  heir  is  indisputably  JTis  in  rem,
it  is  not  a  right  over  or  in  a  thing,  or  over  or  in  things.  It  is
properly  a  right  in  an  aggregate  of  rights;  partly,  perhaps,
consisting  of  rights  over  things,  but  partly  consisting  of  rights
which  are  of  a  widely  different  character :  namely,  of  debts  due
to  the  testator  or  intestate ;  or  of  such  rights  of  action,  vested
in  the  testator  or  intestate,  as  devolved  to  his  heir  or  general
representative.  Here  then  was  a  case,  and  a  most  important
one,  in  which  the  writers  to  whom  I  have  referred  departed  from
their  own  deiSnition,  and  approached  to  that  adequate  notion
oijiis  in  rem,  which  I  have  endeavoured  to  impress  upon  my
hearers ;  that  which  considers  it  to  denote  only  the  compass  or
range  of  the  right :  namely,  that  it  avaOs  against  the  world  at
large,  in  contradistinction  to  jvs  in  person/im,  which  avails  only
against  certain  or  determinate  individuals.

By  jiis  in  rem  and  jus  in  pers(mam,  the  authors  of  those
terms  intended  to  indicate  this  broad  and  simple  distinction;
which  the  Boman  lawyers  also  marked  by  the  words  dominium
and  obligatio — terms,  the  distinction  between  which  was  the
groundwork  of  all  their  attempts  to  arrange  rights  and  duties  in
an  accurate  or  scientific  manner.  This  is  not  a  hasty  surmise,
but  the  result  of  a  careful  and  ample  induction,  foimded  on  a


rem.  over
persons.


384  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbot.  XV  most  diligent  study  of  the  Institutes  of  Gains  and  of  Justinian,
'"""^'  '  and  an  attentive  perusal  of  the  Pandects  or  Digest  of  the  latter.
Nor  is  this  opinion  confined  to  myself ;  otherwise  I  should,  of
course,  feel  much  less  confidence  in  its  correctness.  But  I  share
it  with  such  men  as  Thibaut  and  Feuerbach,  men  of  indefatigable
perseverance  and  of  a  sagacity  never  surpassed.  The  importance
of  the  distinction  will  appear  in  glaring  colours,  when  I  pass
from  the  genercdia  into  the  detail  of  the  science.  I  must,  for
the  present,  content  myself  with  illustrating  it  in  a  general  and
passing  manner ;  and  shall  shew  its  applications  hereafter.

Besides  the  right  of  the  heir  over  or  in  the  heritage  (which
is  deemed  by  every  Civilian  a  real  right),  there  are  numerous
real  rights  which  are  not  rights  over  things :  being  rights  over
persons ;  or  being  rights  to  forbearances  merely,  and  having  no
subjects  (persons  or  things).
Rights  in  Of  rights  existing  over  persons,  and  availing  against  other

persons  generally,  I  may  cite  the  following  as  examples : — ^The
right  of  the  father  to  the  custody  and  education  of  the  child : —
the  right  of  the  guardian  to  the  custody  and  education  of  the
ward : — the  right  of  the  master  to  the  services  of  the  slave  or
servant.

Against  the  child  or  ward,  and  against  the  slave  or  servant,
these  rights  are  rights  in  personam:  that  is  to  say,  they  are
rights  answering  to  obligations  (in  the  sense  of  the  Eoman
Lawyers)  which  are  incumbent  excltisively  upon  those  determinate
individuals.  In  case  the  child  or  ward  desert  the  father  or
guardian,  or  refuse  the  lessons  of  the  teachers  whom  the  father
or  guardian  has  appointed,  the  father  or  guardian  may  compel
him  to  return,  and  may  punish  him  with  due  moderation  for
his  laziness  or  perverseness.  If  the  slave  run  from  his  work,
the  master  may  force  him  back,  and  drive  him  to  his  work  by
chastisement.  If  the  servant  abandon  his  service  before  its  due
expiration,  the  master  may  sue  him  as  for  a  breach  of  the
contract  of  hiring,  or  as  for  breach  of  an  obligation  (quasi  ex
contractu)  implied  in  the  status  of  servant.

But  considered  from  another  aspect,  these  rights  are  of
another  character,  and  belong  to  another  class.  Considered
from  that  aspect,  they  avail  against  persons  generally,  or  against
the  world  at  large ;  and  the  duties  to  which  they  correspond,
are  invariably  negative.  As  against  other  persons  generally,
they  are  not  so  much  rights  to  the  custody  and  education  of  the
child,  to  the  custody  and  education  of  the  ward,  and  to  the
services  of  the  slave  or  servant,  as  rights  to  the  exercise  of  such


Rights  in  Rem  over  Persons.  385

rights  withyui  moltstaJtwa  hy  strangers. As  against  strangers, Lbct.  XV
their  substance  consists  of  duties,  incumbent  upon  strangers,  to ^^^
forbear  or  abstain  from  acts  inconsistent  with  their  scope  or
purpose.

In  case  the  child  (or  ward)  be  detained  from  the  father  (or
guardian),  the  latter  can  recover  him  from  the  stranger.  In
case  the  child  be  beaten,  or  otherwise  harmed  injuriously,  the
father  has  an  action  against  the  wrong-doer  for  the  wrong
against  his  interest  in  the  child.  In  case  the  slave  be  detained
from  his  master's  service,  the  master  can  recover  him  in  specie
(or  his  value  in  the  shape  of  damages)  from  the  stranger  who
wrongfully  detains  him.  In  case  the  slave  be  harmed  and
rendered  unfit  for  his  work,  the  master  is  entitled  to  satisfaction
for  the  injury  to  his  right  of  ownership.  If  the  servant  be
seduced  from  his  service,  the  master  can  sue  the  servant  for  the
breach  of  the  contract  of  hiring ;  and  also  the  instigator  of  the
desertion,  for  the  wrong  to  his  interest  in  the  servant.  In  case
the  servant  be  harmed,  and  disabled  from  rendering  his  service,
the  harm  is  an  injury  to  the  master's  interest  in  the  servant,  as
well  as  to  the  person  of  the  latter.

The  correlating  conditions  or  status  of  husband  and  wife,
will  also  illustrate  the  nature  of  the  capital  distinction,  which
I  am  endeavouring  to  explain  and  exemplify.

Between  themselves,  each  has  personal  rights  availing  against
the  other,  and  each  is  subject  to  corresponding  obligations  (in
the  sense  of  the  Boman  Lawyers).  Moreover,  each  has  a  right
in  the  other,  availing  against  the  rest  of  the  world,  or  answering
to  duties  attaching  upon  persons  generally.  Adultery  by  the
wife  violates  a  right  of  the  former  class,  and  entitles  the  husband
(against  the  vnfe)  to  an  absolute  or  qualified  divorce.  Adultery
ivith  the  wife  violates  a  right  of  the  latter  class,  and  gives  him
an  action  for  damages  against  the  adulterer.

And  here  I  may  remark  conveniently,  that  where  a  real  A  person
right  is  over  a  person,  or  where  a  personal  right  is  a  right  to  a  ^^^of  ^
person,  the  person  is  neither  invested  with  the  right,  nor  is  he  Jvsiyi  rem
bound  by  the  duty  to  which  the  right  corresponds :  the  right  a  TOskioiT
residing  in  a  person  or  persons  distinct  from  himself,  and  availing  ^i««  tlie
against  a  person  or  persons  also  distinct  from  himself. He  a  thing
therefore  is  merely  the  subject  of  the  real  or  personal  right,  and  !?^^V-^  .
occupies  a  position  analogous  to  that  of  a  thing  which  is  the  of  a  similar
subject  of  a  similar  right. Consequently,  whatever  be  the  kind  2nd^nav
or  sort  of the  real or personal right, he  might be  styled  be  styled
analogically  (when  considered  as  its  subject),  a  thing,  alo^" «

VOL.  I,  2  0  ihi'M


3  86  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbct.  XV  For  example,  Independently  of  his  rights  against  the  child,

'  *  '  and  independently  of  •  his  obligations  towards  the  child,  the
parent  has  a  right  in  the  child  availing  against  the  worid  at
large.  And,  considered  as  the  subject  of  this  last-mentioned
right,  the  child  is  placed  in  a  position  analogous  to  that  of  a  thing^
and  might  be  styled  (in  respect  of  that  analogy)  a  thing.

Independently  of  his  rights  against  the  parent,  and  inde-
pendently of  his  obligations  towards  the  parent,  the  child  has  a
right  in  the  parent  availing  against  the  world  at  large.  The
murder  of  the  parent  by  a  third  person  might  not  only  be  treated
as  a  crime,  or  pvhlic  wrong;  but  might  also  be  treated  as  a  civU
injury  against  that  right  in  the  parent  which  belongs  to  the  child.
By  the  laws  of  modem  Europe,  the  civil  injury  merges  in  the
crime ;  but  in  other  ages  the  case  was  different ;  the  offender  lay
under  a  twofold  obligation :  to  suffer  punishment  on  the  part  of
the  society  or  community,  and  to  satisfy  the  parties  whose
interest  in  the  deceased  he  had  destroyed.  Before  the  abolition
of  Appeals  in  criminal  cases,^  this  was  nearly  the  case  in  the
law  of  England.  The  murderer  was  obnoxious  to  punishment
to  be  inflicted  on  the  part  of  the  State ;  and  the  wife  and  the
heir  of  the  slain  were  entitled  to  vindictive  satisfa/stion^  which
they  exacted  or  remitted  at  their  pleasure.  And  this  is  the
distinction,  and  the  only  one,  which  exists  between  a  civil  injury
and  a  crime.**

Now,  considered  as  the  subject  of  the  real  right  which  resides
in  the  child,  the  parent  is  placed  in  a  position  analogotis  to  that
of  a  thing,  and  might  be  styled  (in  respect  of  that  analogy)  a
thing.  In  short,  whoever  is  the  subject  of  a  right  which  resides
in  another  person,  and  which  avails  or  obtains  against  a  third
person  or  persons,  is  placed  in  a  position  analogous  to  that  of  a
thing,  and  might  be  styled  (in  respect  of  that  analogy)  a  thing.

^  By  the  59  Geo.  III.  c.  46.  in  the  English  system. For  the  distinc-

*•  By  the  law  of  Scotland  the  wife  and  tion,  such  as  it  is,  in  English  Law,  does

family  of  the  slain  have  still  the  right  to  not  arise until commitment  for  trial

bring  a  civil  action  for  assythemamt  (the  {vide  Stephen's  Criminal  Law,  p.  155).

ground  of  action  being  not  only  indem-  In  Scotland  the  duty  of  investigation

nification  for  damage,  but  also  solaUum  and  prosecution,  as  well  as  the  power  of

for  the  bereavement),  notwithstanding  a  abandoning  proceedings,  from  th^  tinu  of

criminal  prosecution  instituted  by  the  the  commission  of  the  crime  until  sentence.

Public  Prosecutor,  unless  capital  pun-  lies  with  Her  Mig'estv's  Advocate,  and

ishment  be  suflfered. It  may  be  nere  his  subordinates  for  whom  he  is  respon-

observed,  that  in  Scotland  and  in  other  sible  ;  and  there  is  further  this  distinc-

countries  where  there  is  a  Public  Prose-  tion,  that  all  criminal  proceedings  aro

cutor  charged  with  the  investigation  and  either  taken  in,  or  are  subject  to  review

Srosecution  of  crimes  and  of&nces,  the  by,  the  Court  of  Justiciary  ;  a  court  with

istinction  between  crimes  and  offences  a  jurisdiction  quite  distinct  from  that  of

on  the  one  hand,  and  civil  injuries  on  the  Court  of  Session,  which  is  the  proper

the  other,  is  much  more  intelligible  than  tribunal  in  civil  actions. — R.  C.


Rights  in  Rem  over  Persons.  387

But  though  any  person,  as  the  subject  of  any  right,  might Lbct.  xv
be  styled  (by  analogy)  a  thing,  this  analogical  application  of """^^^ '
the  term  thing  has  (in  fact)  been  partial  and  capricious. So  far
as  I  can  remember,  there  are  two  instances,  and  only  two,  in
which  the  term  thing  has  been  applied  to  persons,  considered  as
the  svbjects  of  rights.

Considered  as  the  subject  of  the  reed  right  which  resides  in  the
master,  the  slave  is  occasionally  ranked  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers
with  things.  And  considered  as  the  subject  of  the  real  right
which  resides  in  the  paterfamiliaSy  the  JUiusfamUias  has  been
classed  with  things  by  certain  modem  Civilians.  Itespectu
patris  JUitisfamilias  est  res,  respectu  aiiorum  persona.  These  are
the  words  of  Heineccius  and  others.

According  to  a  current  opinion,  which  I  mentioned  in  a
preceding  Lecture,  the  slave  was  not  considered  by  the  Eoman
Lawyers  as  belonging  to  the  class  of  persons.  But  this  is  one
of  those  opinions,  utterly  destitute  of  foundation,  which  have
been  successively  received  by  successive  generations,  though  the
means  of  detection  are  open  and  obvious  to  alL  Considered  as
bound  by  duties  towards  his  master  and  others,  the  slave  is
ranked  by  the  Eoman  Lawyers  with  physical  persons ;  and  is
spoken  of  as  bearing,  or  sustaining,  a  person,  stains,  or  condition.
Considered  as  the  subject  of  the  right  residing  in  his  master,
and  availing  {not  against  himself,  but  against  third  persons),  he
is  occasionally  styled  res.  But,  even  as  considered  from  this
aspect,  he  is  usually  deemed  a  person  rather  than  a  thing,  and
is  styled  usually  servilis  persona.  The  right  of  the  master  to
the  services  of  the  slave  is  distinguished  by  a  different  name
from  that  which  expresses  the  analogous  right  in  a  thing.  It  is
called  potestas,  or  potestas  domini  in  servum,  not  dominiwni.  This
last  is  the  name  most  commonly  applied  to  the  analogous  right
to  a  thing ;  it  is,  however,  though  less  frequently,  called,  pro-
prieta^s  ;  or,  still  more  rarely,  in  re  potestas.  Gains,  in  describing
mancipation,  which  is  a  particular  form  of  conveyance,  and
enumerating  the  subjects  which  may  be  conveyed  by  it,  says,
£0  modo  et  serviles  et  liberce  personce  mandpantur.  Here  the
slave  is  spoken  of  as  the  subject  of  a  right  in  the  master^  and  is
yet  styled  servilis  persona.  In  all  the  passages  in  which  he  is
spoken  of  as  res  ;  e.g,  in  the  passage  at  the  beginning  of  the  2nd
Book  of  Gains,  where  he  distributes  things  considered  as  subjects
of  rights ;  in  treating  of  usufruct,  where  he  speaks  of  ususfructus
hominum  et  ceterarum  animalium;  and  in  the  most  decisive
passage  of  all,  that  in  the  Digest,  where  the  action  called  ret


388  Pervading  Notions  analysed,

liBcr.  XV  vindicatio,  corresponding  to  our  real  action  for  the  recovery  of
'  land,  and  our  action  of  detinue  for  a  chattel,  is  said  to  be  appli-
cable to  the  recovery  of  a  slave ;  in  all  these  passages,  the  slave
is  spoken  of  as  the  subject  of  rights  in  the  master,  availing
against  third  persons,  and  not  as  being  himself  subject  to  obli-
gations. As  for  the  JUiusfamiliaSy  I  am  not  aware  of  any  passage
in  the  classical  jurists  where  he  is  styled  a  thing.  In  the
passage  of  the  Digest,  to  which  I  have  just  referred,  it  is  denied
by  implication  that  he  can  be  ranked  with  things.  Per  Jumc
atUem  actionem,  librce  personce  qua  sunt  juris  nostri  ut  jmta  liberi
qui  sunt  in  potestate,  non  petuntur.  The  right  of  the  father  over
his  son  is  never  styled  dominium  or  proprietas,  hut  pcUria  potestas,
or  potestas  patris  in  liberos.

Many  have  been  shocked  and  scandalised  by  the  Boman
Jurists,  because  these  hard-hearted  and  cold-blooded  lawyers
degraded  the  slave  to  a  level  with  things.

Upon  which  gross  misconception,  I  remark  as  follows :
It  is  not  trus  that  the  Eoman  Lawyers  ranked  slaves  with
things.  Or  i/"  it  be  true,  it  is  only  true  in  that  limited  sense
which  I  have  just  explained.  And,  admitting  that  the  Boman
Lawyers  ranked  slaves  with  things,  it  foUows  not  that  they  were
cold-blooded  men,  and  intended  to  degrade  and  vilify  the  miser-
able slave.  In  styling  the  slave  a  thing,  they  considered  him
from  a  certain  aspect :  namely,  as  being  the  subject  of  a  right
residing  in  another  person,  and  availing  against  third  persons.
And  (as  I  have  proved  to  satiety)  the  analogy  which  led  these
lawyers  to  rank  the  slave  with  things,  would  justify  the
extension  of  the  term  thin^  to  any  person  who  is  the  subject  of
any  right.  I  am  far  enough  from  wishing  to  palliate  slavery,
which  I  regard  with  the  utmost  abhorrence,  but  I  wish  that  its
opponents  would  place  their  reprobation  of  it  on  the  right
foundation.

Much  eloquent  indignation  has  also  been  vented  superfluously

on  the  application  of  the  term  chattel  to  the  slaves  in  the  English

colonies :  seeing  that  the  term  chattel,  as  applied  to  the  slave,

does  not  import  that  the  slave  is  deemed  a  moveable  thing,  but

that  the  rights  of  the  master  over  his  slaves,  like  his  analogous

rights  over  his  moveable  things,  devolve,  on  the  master's  intestacy,

to  a  certain  class  of  his  representatives.

pereoMk '^ Having  cited  examples  of  real  rights  which  are  rights  over

Kightsiw persons,  I  will  cite  an  example  or  two  of  real  rights,  which  are

ouT  deter- ^^^  rights  over  things  or  persons,  but  are  rights  to  forbearances

minate merely.

subjects.


Rights  in  Rem  having  no  determinate  Subjects.  389

1.  A  man's  right  or  interest  in  his  good-narm  is  a  right  which  Lect.  XV
avails  against  persons,  as  considered  generally  and  indeter-
minately: they  are  bound  to  forbear  from  such  imputations
against  him  as  would  amoimt  to  injuries  towards  his  right  in  his
reputation.  But,  though  the  right  is  a  real  right,  there  is  no
subject,  thing  or  person,  over  which  it  can  be  said  to  exist. If

the  right  has  any  subject,  its  subject  consists  of  the  contingent
advantages  which  he  may  possibly  derive  from  the  approbation
of  others.

2.  A  monopoly,  or  the  right  of  selling  exclusively  com-
modities of  a  given  class  (a  patent  right  for  instance),  is  also  a
real  right :  All  persons,  other  than  the  party  in  whom  the  right
resides,  are  bound  to  forheai^  from  selling  commodities  of  the
given  class  or  description.  But,  though  the  right  is  a  real  right,
there  is  no  subject,  person  or  thing,  over  which  it  can  be  said  to
exist  If  the  right  has  any  subject,  its  subject  consists  of  the
future  profits,  above  the  average  rate,  which  he  may  possibly
derive  from  his  exclusive  right  to  sell.

3.  Many  more  examples  of  this  class  of  rights  might  be
selected  from  among  franchises ;  a  law  term  embracing  an
immense  variety  of  rights,  having  no  common  property  whatever
except  their  supposed  origin,  being  all  of  them  considered  to
have  been  originally  granted  by  the  Crown.  Such,  for  example,
is  a  right  of  exclusive  jurisdiction  in  a  given  territory,  or  a  right
of  levying  a  toll  at  a  certain  bridge  or  ferry.  The  law  in  these
cases  empowers  a  party  to  do  certain  acts,  and  enjoins  all  other
persons  to  forbear  ftom  every  act  which  would  defeat  the  purpose
of  the  right.  But  these  rights  are  not  exercised  over  any
determinate  subject,  and  are  yet  available  against  the  world  at
large.  The  rights  in  personam,  which  concur  with  the  rights  in
question  are  perfectly  distinct  from  those  rights  themselves.
Those  who  reside  within  the  territory,  or  who  traverse  the  bridge,
are  bound  by  obligations  arising  out  of  the  franchise ;  but  these
obligations,  which  result  from  their  peculiar  position,  and  which
answer  to  rights  in  personam,  are  distinct  from  the  obligation
incumbent  upon  third  parties,  and  answering  to  the  right  in  rem :
namely,  the  obligation  not  to  impede  the  exercise  of  the  juris-
diction, the  levying  of  the  toU,  or  the  passage  over  the  bridge ;
nor  to  carry  passengers  across  within  the  limits  of  the  ferry,  to
the  detriment  of  the  exclusive  right  of  the  person  entitled.

4.  Lastly,  a  right  in  a  Status  or  Condition  (considered  as  an
aggregate  of  rights  and  capacities)  is  also  a  real  right.  I  am
not  able  at  present  to  explain  the  nature  of  Conditions. To


390  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Leot.  XV  determine  precisely  what  a  StaJtm  is,  is  in  my  opinion  the  most
*^^  difficult  problem  in  the  whole  science  of  jurisprudence.  For  the
purpose  immediately  before  me,  the  following  remarks  will
suffice.

A  Status  or  Condition  may  be  purely  <mer<m$,  or  may  consist
of  duties  only.  Such  was  the  condition  of  the  slave,  according
to  the  older  Eoman  Law.  He  was  the  svJbjed  of  rights  residing
in  his  master,  and  availing  against  third  persons.  He  also  was
bound  by  duties  towards  his  master  and  others.  But  he  had
not  a  particle  of  right  as  against  his  master  or  even  against
strangers.  Considered  as  the  subject  of  rights  residing  in  his
master,  he  was  susceptible  of  damage:  But  he  was  not  sus-
ceptible of  injury.

Now  a  right  in  a  condition  which  is  purely  burthensome,  is
hardly  conceivable.  But,  so  far  as  a  condition  consists  of
rights,  and  of  capacities  to  take  rights,  we  may  imagine  a  right
in  the  condition  considered  as  a  complex  whole.

According  to  the  Roman  Law,  as  the  heir  has  a  right  in  the
heritage  (abstracted  from  its  several  parts),  so  has  the  party
invested  with  a  condition,  a  right  or  interest  in  the  condition
itself  (abstracted  from  the  rights  and  capacities  of  which  it  is
compounded).  His  right  in  the  condition,  considered  as  an
aggregate  or  whole,  is  analogous  to  the  right  of  ownership  in  a
single  or  individual  thing.

Consequently,  wrongs  against  this  right  are  analogous  to
wrongs  against  ownership;  and,  according  to  the  practice  of
the  Eoman  Law,  wrongs  of  both  classes  are  redressed  by
analogous  remedies.  Where  the  individual  thing  is  unlawfully
detained  from  the  owner,  he  may  vindicate  or  recover  the  thing.
And  where  the  right  in  the  condition  is  wrongfully  disputed,  the
party  may  assert  his  right  by  an  appropriate  action,  which  is
deemed  and  styled  a  vindication,^

The  reason  why  status  or  condition  make  so  little  figure  in
the  English  law  as  compared  with  the  Boman,  though  the  idea
must  of  course  exist  in  all  systems  of  law,  seems  to  be  this :
that  the  right  in  a  status  may  by  the  Boman  law  be  asserted
directly  and  explicitly  by  an  action  expressly  for  its  recovery ;
while  in  English  law  no  such  action  can  be  brought,  and  the
right  to  a  status,  though  of  course  it  often  becomes  the  subject
of  a  judicial  decision,  almost  always  comes  in  as  an  episode,
incidental  to  an  action  of  which  the  direct  purpose  is  something

^  See Bentham's 'Principles,'  etc.,  'payment,'  p.  246. Hugo,  Jur.  Enc.  p.
885.


Fragments.  39 1

else."  Thus  a  question  of  legitimacy,  which  is  precisely  a  Leot.  XV
question  of  statiLS,  is  usually  brought  in  and  decided  upon
incidentally,  in  an  action  of  ejectment.  The  question  whether
or  not  a  particular  person  is  a  dave,  would  generally  come  before
the  judge  upon  a  prosecution  by  the  slave  of  the  person  claiming
to  be  his  master  for  doing  some  act  which  would  be  illegal
unless  the  claim  could  be  established.  The  only  case  in  which
a  question  of  stcUvs  is  decided  directly  in  English  law,  is  when  a
jury  is  summoned  to  try  that  precise  question  as  an  issv^
incidental  to  a  suit  in  another  court.


Notes  found  at  the  End  of  Lecture  XV.

The  definition  of  jus  in  rem,  that  ^  it  begets  a  vindicatory  action
against  every  unlawful  disturber/  is  not  universally  true.  It  may
beget  a  mere  right  to  satisfaction  (e.^.  Trover).  If  true,  it  is  a  mere
consequence  or  property  of  the  right»  and  is  not  of  its  essence.

Besides  it  merely  amounts  to  this :  that  the  disturbance  begets  a
right  of  action  against  the  disturber  or  violator ;  which  is  true  of
every  disturbance  of  a  right  in  personam,

N.B.  Any  prevention  of  the  completion  of  an  Obligation  (strido
sensu)  caused  by  a  third  party  would  be  no  violation  of  a  Bight  in
the  Obligee  ;  or,  if  it  would,  would  be  a  violation  of  a  distinct  Right
A  stranger  who  engages  a  builder  to  undertake  an  extensive  work,
or  wounds  or  maims  him  (thereby  in  either  case,  preventing  him
from  completing  a  previous  contract  with  myself)  violates  no  Bight
in  me ;  and  my  remedy  is  against  the  builder  for  the  breach  of  con-
tract with  myself.  A  stranger  who  inveigles  my  servant^  violates,
not  my  jus  ad  rem  under  the  contract^  but  my  jus  in  re.  The  servant
himself,  indeed,  does ;  and  for  this  breach  of  his  Obligation  {strido
sensu)y  I  may  sue  him  on  the  contract.

Obligation  to  pay  taxes  ;  Obligation  to  military  service,  etc

The  obligations  to  military  service,  etc.,  seem  to  be  merely  absolute
obligations.  (See  Lecture  XLIX.)  The  state,  to  which  it  is  due,
and  which  alone  can  have  the  Bight,  has  not  properly  Bights,  Be-
sides, there  is  no  Person  or  Thing  to  which  the  State  has  a  right,
as  against  all. It  has  merely  a  right  to  the  services  of  the  dker-

'^  In  the  English  Probate  Ck)urt  —  a  formal  proceeding,  possibly  a  matter  of

formerly  the  Ecclesiastical  Court — the  judicial  cognizance,  and  appears  to  have

right  to  the  executorship  or  administra-  been  requisite  in  the  case  of  a  stranger

tion,  a  species  of  universUas  juris,  is  heir  (i.e.  one  who  was  not  9uus  haerea  or

obtained  by  what  is  substantially  a  judi-  necessarius  hxres)  in  order  to  obtain  an

cial  proceeding. It  is  somewhat  remark-  adive  title  to  the  res  singula  comprised

able  that  in  the  English system  the  in  the  inheritance. A  passive  title  {i,e,

rights  of  the  heir  vest  in  him  without  liability  to  the  obligations  of  an  heir)

any  public  formality,  such  as  the  adUio  mieht  oe  inferred  by  geUio  pro  hoDrede

in  the  Roman,  the  service  in  the  Scotch  wiuiout  aditio, — R.  C.
law.  The  aditio  in  Roman  law  was  clearly


392  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XY  minaie  individual.  It  has  not  a  right  to  the  money  in  specie,  to  the
'  services,  etc.,  as  against  others ;  but  a  right  to  the  pat^merU  of  the
tax  and  the  performance  of  the  service,  against  the  determinate
person  upon  whom  the  obligation  rests.  So  soon  as  the  tax  is  paid,
the  Government  indeed  has  jus  tn  re  in  the  money  which  is  ren-
dered ;  and  as  against  other  persons,  it  has  a  right  (analogous  to  the
jus  in  re  of  an  ordinary  master)  to  the  services  of  the  determinate
person.  e.g.  A  conscript  is  punishable  for  desertion  by  virtue  of  the
Obligation  {strido  sensu) — a  person  seducing  him  to  desert,  by  virtue
of  the  obligation,  which  answers  to  the  jus  in  re.

The  ri^t  which  the  Government  has  to  the  services  of  its  subjects
generally,  is  in  truth  not  a  Bight  to  a  person  or  thing  against  all ;
but  Rights  against  a  number ;  rights  that  they  shall  perform  a  par-
ticular Migatian  on  the  happening  of  such  an  incident


(The  passage  in  Hugo  referred  to  in  the  note  at  the  bottom  of  the
last  page,  is  as  follows,  together  with  Mr.  Austin's  marginal  notes.)


*Unter  den  vermischten  Fallen
gibt  es  einige,  die  mit  einem  Vertrage
AehfUichkeit  haben*  (die  Fodening
entsteht  quasi  ex  wnJtradu;  z.  B.
negotia  gesta,  in  diesem  Sinne,
Verwaltung  einer  Yormundschaft,
Yerwaltung  von  etwas  Qemeinschaft-
lichem,  Antretung  einer  Erbschaft  in
Beziehong  auf  die  Yermachtnisse,
Entrichtung  von  etwas,  was  man
nicht  Bchuldig  ist) :  andere  grenzen
an  Yeigebungen  f  {quasi  ex  makfido,
z.  B.  das  Einstehenmussen  fur  Andere
bei  gewissen  Gelegenheiten) :  aber
auch  noch  auf  andere  Art  entsteht
eine  Foderung ;  z.  R  aus  dem
Auflwerfen  J  (lex  Ehodia  de  jactu)  ;
auf  Unterhalt,  Dos  und  BeerdiguDg,§
auf  die  Abgaben,1T  und  auf  das
Einetehen^  fiir  die  physischen  und
juristischen  Fehler  einer  Sache
{adUitium  edictum  und  evictioy —
Hugo,  Jurist,  Encyc  p.  335.


*  Qaasi- Contract :  An  incident
from  which  the  Obligor  derives  a
benefit:  a  benefit  which  he  ought
to  requite,  or  which  he  ought  to
surrender  to  the  party  at  whose  cost
he  has  obtained  it.  In  the  last  case,
there  seems  to  be  no  obligation
without  demand  and  refusal ;  for
till  then,  the  intention  to  retain
cannot  be  known.

t  Quasi-Delict :  Damage  done  to
the  Obligee,  but  without  intention  or
negligence  on  the  part  of  the  obligor.

{  Quasi-Delict.

§  Quasi -Contract ;  there  being
benefit  to  the  Obligor.

H  Neither ;  unless  by  a  fiction  we
supposed  the  governed,  in  considera-
tion of  protection,  quast-contraxisse
with  the  Government.  The  distinc-
tion is  useless.  Inthecaseofthe^iMui-
contracty  there  has  been  no  coiUract,
In  the  case  of  the  quamrddid  there  has
been  damage,  but  no  injury ;  at  least,
no  injury  on  the  part  of  the  obligor,
though  there  may  have  been  on  the  part
of  his  representatives.  The  injury  on
his  part  does  not  arise'till  he  refuses
satisfaction.  The  obligation  however
is  like  an  obligation  ex  contractu.

II  Implied  warranty :  t.«.  An
obligation  to  satisfy,  annexed  to  the
original  contract:  and  therefore  a
Contract,  though  by  virtue  of  a
dispositive  Law.


Rights  considered  generally.  393


LECTURE XVI.*2

RIGHTS CONSIDERED GENERALLY.

In  the  preceding  Lectures,  I  have  entered  upon  the  analysis  or  Leot.XVI
explanation  of  the  term  '  Eight*  '

Now  (as  I  shall  endeavour  to  demonstrate  in  this  evening's
discourse)  all  that  can  be  affirmed  of  Rights  considered  universally,
amounts  to  a  brief  and  barren  generality,  and  may  be  com-
pressed into  a  single  proposition,  or  into  a  few  short  propositions.

But,  before  I  could  shew  the  little  which  can  be  affirmed  of
rights  in  gmeral — or  (rather)  before  I  could  shew  lum  little  can
be  affirmed  of  rights  in  general,  it  was  necessary  that  I  should
advert  to  persons,  considered  as  invested  with  rights ;  to  things
and  persons,  considered  as  the  subjects  of  rights ;  to  acts  and
forbearances,  considered  as  the  objects  of  rights ;  and  to  a  leading
or  capital  distinMion  which  obtains  between  rights  themselves.

Accordingly,  I  called  your  attention  to  the  following  objects:

1st,  To  persons  as  invested  with  rights,  and  as  lying  under
duties  or  obligations.  2ndly,  To  things  as  subjects  of  rights,
and  of  the  duties  corresponding  to  rights.  3rdly,  To  persons
as  placed  in  a  position  analogous  to  the  position  of  things :  that
is  to  say,  not  as  invested  with  rights,  or  as  lying  under  duties  or
obligations,  but  as  subjects  of  rights  residing  in  other  persons,
and  availing  against  strangers  or  third  persons.  4thly,  To  acts
and  forbear anjces  as  objects  of  rights,  and  of  duties  or  obligations
correlating  with  rights.  5thly,  and  lastly.  To  the  distinction
between  jus  in  rem  and  jus  in  personxim ;  or  between  rights
which  avail  against  persons  universally  or  generally,  and  rights
which  avail  against  persons  certain  or  determinaie.

In  the  present  Lecture,  I  shall  endeavour  to  explain  the  Purpose
nature  or  essence  which  is  common  to  all  rights. Or  (changing  ^^^"^^"^
the  expression)  I  shall  endeavour  to  indicate  the  point  at  which  present
they  meet  or  coincide ;  or  to  shew  the  properties  wherein  they *'"*'
resemble  or  agree ; or  to  state  thcd  which  may  be  affirmed  of
rights  universally,  or  without  respect  to  the  generic  and  specific
differences  by  which  their  kinds  and  sorts  are  separated  and  dis-
tinguished.

"  The  notes  of  the  oral  lectures  cor-  missing.  These  lectures  are  therefore
responding  to  the  printed  Lectures  XVI  reprinted  without  alteration  from  the
to  X^IIL  inclusive,  are  unfortunately  former  edition. — R  C.


394  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XVI  In  trying  to  accomplish  this  purpose  I  shall  proceed  in  the

" following  order :

1st,  I  shall  endeavour  to  state,  in  general  expressions,  the
nature,  essence,  or  properties,  common  to  all  rights.  2ndly,
I  shall  advert  briefly  to  certain  dassM  of  rights ;  and  I  shall
endeavour  to  shew,  that  they  agree  in  nothing,  excepting  those
common  properties.  3rdly,  I  shall  examine  certain  dejinitunis
of  the  term  'right;*  and  I  shall  endeavour  to  elucidate  the
common  nature  of  rights,  by  shevdng  the  vices  or  defects  of
those  definitions.
Common  Every  right  is  a  right  in  rem,  or  a  right  in  personam.

^^2  °  The  essentials  of  a  right  in  rem  are  these :

It  resides  in  a  determinate  person,  or  in  determinate  per-
sons, and  avails  against  other  persons  universally  or  generally.
Further,  the  duty  with  which  it  correlates,  or  to  which  it
corresponds,  is  negative :  that  is  to  say,  a  duty  to  forbear  or
abstain.  Consequently,  all  rights  in  rem  reside  in  determinate
persons,  and  are  rights  to  forbearances  on  the  part  of  persons
generally.

The  essentials  of  a  right  in  personam  are  these :

It  resides  in  a  determinate  person,  or  in  determinate  persons,
and  avails  against  a  person  or  persons  certain  or  determinate.
Further,  the  obligation  with  which  it  correlates,  or  to  which  it
corresponds,  is  negative  or  positive :  that  is  to  say,  an  obligation
to  forbear  or  abstain,  or  an  obligation  to  do  or  perform.  Con-
sequently, all  rights  in  personam  reside  in  determinate  persons,
and  are  rights  to  forbearances  or  acts  on  the  part  of  determinate
persons.

It  follows  from  this  analysis,  first.  That  all  rights  reside  in
determinate  persons.  Secondly,  That  all  rights  correspond  to
duties  or  obligations  incumbent  upon  other  persons :  that  is  to
say,  upon  persons  distinct  from  those  in  whom  the  rights  reside.
Thirdly,  That  all  rights  are  rights  to  forbearances  or  axts  on  the
part  of  the  persons  who  are  bound.

These  (I  believe)  are  the  only  properties  wherein  all  rights
resemble  or  agree.

Consequently,  right  considered  in  abstract  (or  apart  from  the
kinds  and  sorts  into  which  rights  are  divisible)  may  be  conceived
and  described  generally  in  the  following  manner.

Every  legal  duty  arises  from  a  Command,  signified,  expressly
or  tacitly,  by  the  Sovereign  of  a  given  Society.

Every  legal  duty  binds  the  party  obliged,  by  virtue  of  a


Duty  the  Basis  of  Right.  395

legal  sanction. In  other  words,  in  case  the  party  obliged  violate  ^^^^  ^^^
the  duty  imposed  upon  him,  he  will  be  obnoxious  or  liable  to
evil  or  inconvenience,  to  be  inflicted  by  sovereign  authority.

[Now  the  person  who  is  subject  to  a  duty,  or  upon  whom
a  duty  is  incumbent,  is  bound  to  do,  or  to  forbear  from,  some
given  act  or  acts.  And  further,  he  is  bound  to  do,  or  to  forbear
from,  the  given  act  or  acts  absolutely  or  relatively ;  That  is  to
say,  withxnU  respect  to  a  determinate  person  or  persons,  or  towards
a  determinate  person  or  determinate  persons.]

The  objects  of  duties  are  Acts  and  Forbearances.  Or
(changing  the  expression)  every  party  upon  whom  a  duty  is
incumbent,  is  bound  to  do  or  to  forbear.  Or  (changing  the
expression  again)  the  party  violates  the  duty  which  is  incumbent
upon  him,  by  not  doing  some  act  which  he  is  commanded  to  do,
or  by  doing  some  act  from  which  he  is  commanded  to  abstain.

Duty  is  the  basis  of  Eight  That  is  to  say,  parties  who
have  rights,  or  parties  who  are  invested  with  rights,  have  rights
to  acts  or  forbearances  enjoined  by  the  sovereign  upon  other
parties.

Or  (in  other  words)  parties  invested  with  rights  are  invested
with  rights,  because  other  parties  are  boimd  by  the  command  of
the  sovereign,  to  do  or  perform  acts,  or  to  forbear  or  abstain
from  acts.

In  short,  the  term  'right'  and  the  term  'relative  duty'
signify  the  same  notion  considered  from  different  aspects.
Every  right  supposes  distinct  parties :  A  party  commanded  by
the  sovereign  to  do  or  to  forbear,  and  a  party  towards  whom  he
is  commanded  to  do  or  to  forbear.  The  party  to  whom  the
sovereign  expresses  or  intimates  the  command,  is  said  to  lie
under  a  dtUy :  that  is  to  say  a  relative  duty.  The  party  towards
whom  he  is  commanded  to  do  or  to  forbear,  is  said  to  have  a
right  to  the  acts  or  forbearances  in  question.

Or  the  meaning  which  I  am  labouring  to  convey  may  be
put  thus.

Wherever  a  right  is  conferred,  a  relative  duty  is  also
imposed:  the  right  being  conferred  upon  a  certain  or  determinate
party,  otiier  than  the  party  obliged.  Or  (changing  the  expres-
sion) a  party  is  commanded  by  the  sovereign  to  do  or  to  forbear  .
from  acts,  and  is  commanded  to  do  or  forbear  from  those  given
acts  towardsy  or  with  regard  to,  a  party  determinate  and  distinct
from  himself

For  (as  I  shall  shew  hereafter)  duties  towards  oneself  and
duties  towards  persons  indefinitely,  can  scarcely  be  said  with


396  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lrot.XVI  propriety  to  correlate  with  rights.  As  against  others,  I  have  a
'  right  to  my  life.  For  others  are  bound  or  obliged  to  forbear
from  acts  which  would  destroy  or  endanger  my  life.  But  it
can  scarcely  be  said,  with  propriety,  '  that  I  have  a  right  to  my
own  life  as  against  my  self :'  Although  I  am  legally  bound  to
abstain  from  suicide,  by  virtue  of  certain  sanctions  whose  nature
I  shall  explain  hereafter.  And  the  same  may  be  aflBrmed  of
duties  towards  persons  indefinitely :  that  is  to  say,  towards  the
community  at  large,  or  towards  mankind  generally.

A  law  which  prohibits  the  importation  of  certain  foreign
commodities,  to  the  end  of  encouraging  the  production  of  the
corresponding  domestic  commodities,  imposes  a  diUy  to  forbear
from  importing  the  commodities  which  it  is  said  to  prohibit.
But  it  can  hardly  be  said,  with  propriety,  that  the  law  confers  a
right.  For  there  is  no  determinate  party  who  woidd  be  injured
by  a  breach  of  the  duty,  or  towards  or  with  regard  to  whom  the
prohibited  act  is  to  be  forborne.  In  the  technical  language  of
certain  systems,  breaches  of  such  duties  are  offences  against  the
sovereign,  and  the  sovereign  is  invested  with  rigJUs  answering  to
those  duties.

But  to  impute  rights  to  the  sovereign  is  to  talk  absurdly.
For  rights  are  conferred  by  commands  issuing  from  the  sovereign.

As  violating  commands  issuing  from  the  sovereign,  breaches
of  the  duties  in  question  are  offences  against  the  sovereign.
But  so  is  a  breach  of  every  imaginable  duty.  For  all  duties
are  the  creatures  of  sovereign  will,  or  are  imposed  by  Laws  or
Commands  emanating  from  the  Sovereign  or  State.  The  truth
is,  that. duties  towards  oneself,  and  towards  persons  indefinitely,
are  absolute  duties.  That  is  to  say,  there  is  no  determinate
party  whom  a  breach  of  the  duty  would  injure,  or  towards  or  in
respect  of  whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed.

It  is  difficult  to  indicate  the  import  of  the  term  'Right*
(considered  as  an  abstract  expression  embracing  all  rights).
For  right  (as  thus  considered)  is  so  extremely  abstract — is  so
extremely  remote  from  the  particulars  which  are  comprised  in  its
extension — ^that  its  meaning  or  import  is,  as  it  were,  a  shadow,
and  closely  verges  upon  the  confines  of  no-meaning.

All  the  ideas  or  notions  which  are  comprehended  by  that
slender  meaning  may,  I  think,  be  compressed  into  the  following
propositions.

Right,  like  Duty,  is  the  creature  of  Law,  or  arises  from  the
command  of  the  Sovereign  in  a  given  independent  society.

Every  right  is  created  or  conferred  in  the  following  manner.


Definition  of  Right  criticised.  397

A  person  or  persons  are  commanded  to  do  or  to  forbear  Lkct.XVI
towards,  or  with  regard  to,  another  and  a  determinate  party.  ^"'^^'

The  person  or  persons  to  whom  the  conmiand  is  directed,  are
said  to  be  obliged,  or  to  lie  under  a  diUy.

The  party  towards  whom  the  duty  is  to  be  observed,  is  said
to  have  a  right,  or  to  be  invested  with  a  right

In  order  that  we  may  conceive  distinctly  the  nature  of
rights,  we  must  descend  from  Right  in  abstract  to  the  species  or
sorts  of  rights.  We  must  take  a  right  of  a  given  species  or  sort,
and  must  look  at  its  scope  or  purpose.  That  is  to  say,  we  must
look  at  the  end  of  th'e  lawgiver  in  conferring  the  right  in
question,  and  in  imposing  the  duty  or  obligation  which  the
right  in  question  implies.

Now  the  ends  or  purposes  of  different  rights  are  extremely
various.  The  end  of  the  rights  in  rem  which  are  conferred  over
things,  is  this :  that  the  entitled  party  may  deal  with,  or  dispose
of,  the  thing  in  question  in  such  or  such  a  manner  and  to  such
or  such  an  extent.  In  order  to  that  end,  other  persons  generally
are  laid  under  duties  to  forbear  or  abstain  from  acts  which  would
defeat  or  thwart  it

But  from  this  general  notion  of  rights  over  things,  we  must
descend  to  the  species  into  which  they  are  divisible.  For  the
ends  of  the  various  rights  which  are  conferred  over  things,  differ
from  one  another.  And  what  I  have  said  of  rights  in  rem  over
things,  will  apply  to  such  rights  over  persons  as  avail  against
other  persons  generally ;  and  also  to  such  rights  availing  against
other  persons  generally  as  have  no  determinate  subjects.

The  ends  or  purposes  of  rights  in  personam  are  widely
different  from  those  of  rights  in  rem.

The  ends  or  purposes  of  the  various  rights  in  personam  are
again  extremely  different  from  each  other.

A  right  has  been  defined  by  certain  writers,  as  that  security  Certain  de-
fer the  enjoyment  of  a  good  or  advantage  which  one  man  derives  ^  richt**'^
from  a  duty  imposed  upon  another  or  others.  examined.

It  has  also  been  said  that  rights  are  powers  \^  powers  over,
or  powers  to  deal  with,  things  or  persons.

Objections :  1st,  all  rights  are  not  powers  over  things  or
persons.  All  (or  most)  of  the  rights  which  I  style  rights  in
personam  are  merely  rights  to  acts  or  forbearances. And  many

"  In  a  note,  Mr.  Austin  proposes  to  Ri^ht  in  the  abstract,  and  to  the  little

'read  from Bentham's "Principles  of  which  such  a  definition  can  comprise.'

Morals  and  L^slation,"  such  passages  These  passages  are  to  be  found  at  p.  221-

as  relate  to  the  difficulty  of  defining  22Z,S,A,


398  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Leot.XVI  of  the  rights  which  I  style /i^ra  in  rem  have  no  subjects  (persons
' or  things).

2ndly.  What  is  meant  by  saying  that  a  right  is  a  power  ?
The  party  invested  with  a  right,  is  invested  with  that  right  by
virtue  of  the  corresponding  duty  imposed  upon  another  or  others.
And  this  duty  is  enforced,  not  by  the  power  of  the  party  in-
vested with  the  right,  but  by  the  power  of  the  state.  The  power
resides  in  the  state ;  and  by  virtue  of  the  power  residing  in  the
state,  the  party  invested  with  the  right  is  enabled  to  exercise
or  enjoy  it.**

It  may,  indeed,  be  said,  that  a  man  has  a  power  over  a
thing  or  person,  when  he  can  deal  with  it  according  to  his
pleasure,  free  from  obstacles  opposed  by  others.  Now  in  conse-
quence of  the  duties  imposed  upon  others,  he  is  thus  able.  And,
in  that  sense,  a  right  may  be  styled  a  power.  But,  even  in  this
sense,  the  definition  will  only  apply  to  certain  rights  to  forbear-
ances. In  the  case  of  a  right  to  an  act,  the  party  entitled  has
not  always  (or  often)  a  power.

3rdly.  Famltas  faciendi  {aut  nan  fadendi).  This  definition
is  open  to  the  same  objections  as  the  last  definition.  ' Factdtas'
what?

4thly.  '  A  person  has  a  right,  when  the  law  authorizes  him
to  exact  bom  another  an  act  or  forbearance.*  The  test  of  a
right: — that  (independently  of  positive  provision)  the  acts  or
forbearances  enjoined  are  not  incapable  of  being  enforced
civilly  or  in  the  way  of  civil  action :  i.e.  at  the  discretion  or
pleasure  of  the  party  towards  whom  they  are  to  be  done  or
observed.  This  would  distinguish  them  from  absolute  duties.
For  to  talk  of  a  man  enforcing  a  duty  against  himself  is  absurd.
And  where  there  is  no  determinate  person  towards  whom  it  is
observed,  it  is  incapable  of  being  enforced  civilly.

Eight ; — the  capacity  or  power  of  exacting  from  another  or
others  acts  or  forbearances ; — is  nearest  to  a  true  definition.

For  all  these  reasons,  I  say  that  a  party  has  a  right,  when
another  or  others  are  bound  or  obliged  by  the  law,  to  do  or  to
forbear,  towards  or  in  regard  of  him.

But,  as  I  stated  at  the  outset  of  the  analysis,  the  full  im-
port of  the  term  '  right '  cannot  be  made  to  appear  tiU  all  the
related  expressions  are  examined.

•*  •  La  loi  me  defend-elle  de  vous  tuer  I  tham,  TraiUs,  etc  voL  i  p.  164.

£Ue  m'impose  Vobligatum  de  ne  pas  vous  A  service  cannot  be  negative  ;  though

tuer. £lle  vous  accorde  le  droit  de  ne  an  obligation  {not  to  obstruct  the  enjoy-

ri  6tre  tu^  par  moi ;  eUe  exige  de  moi  ment  of  a  subject  from  which  uses  or

vous  rendre  le  service  negatif  qui  con-  services  are  derivable)  may, — Marginal

siste  k  m'abstenir  de  vous  tuer.  —Ben-  Notes,


Fragments.  399

Notes  at  the  End  of  Lecture  XVI.  Leot^xvi

Blackstone's  absolute  right,  vol.  i.  123.  His  confusion  of  Right
as  meaning  conformity  with  a  rule,  and  of  Eight  as  correlating  with
duty.  (7Wd.)

There  is  no  general  definition  of  a  Right  by  the  Classical  Jurists.

The  following  passage  from  Ulpian  is  in  the  Digests :

'  Totum  autem  jus  consistit  aut  in  acquirendo,  aut  in  conservando,
aut  in  minuendo.  Aut  enim  hoc  agitur,  quemadmodum  quid  cu-
jusque  fiat;  aut  quemadmodum  quis  jus  suum  conservet,  aut  quo-
modo  amittat'  But  this  passage  relates,  not  to  the  definition  of  a
rights  but  to  the  modes  wherein  rights  are  required,  preserved,  or
lost.

The  definition  of  a  Right  is  not  given  in  any  one  part  of  the
Corpus  Juris,  but  extends  through  three  :  Primary  rights ;  Viola-
tions; and  Sanctions.  The  first  adumbrates  in  generals;  the
second  limits  and  enlarges,  so  as  to  correct  the  generality  of  the
first;  the  third  describes  the  Sanction. — Marginal  Note  m  FalcVs
Jurist,  Encyc.  p.  31.

Rechi  und  Oerechtigkeit.

'Das  deutsche  Hauptwort  Recht  hat,  wie  das  lateinische,  jus,
eine  zweifache  Bedeutung.  1^  Im  objectiven  Sinne  versteht  man
darunter  diejenigen  Regeln  und  Vorschriften,  welche  die  Menschen  als
vemiinftig  sinnliche  Wesen  in  ihren  gegenseitigen  Verhaltnissen  zu
einander,  als  die  Norm  ihrer  freien  Handlungen  zu  beobachten
haben.  Dasjenige,  was  mit  diesen  Vorschriften  iibereinstimmt  be-
zeichnen  wir  mit  dem  Beiworte  recht  (justum  sive  rectum)  ^  und  die
auf  dem  innem  eignen  Antriebe  des  Menschen  und  auf  seiner  Nei-
gung  zum  Outen  beruhende  Uebereinstimmung  der  Handlungen
desselben,  mit  den  Vorschriften  des  Rechts  heisst  Gerechtigkeit
(justitia),  2°  Im  subjectiven  Sinne  hingegen,  bedeutet  Recht  so  viel
als  Befiigniss  zu  handeln,  oder  die  moralische  Moglichkeit  entweder
etwas  selbst  thun  zu  diirfen,  oder  zu  verlangen  dass  ein  Anderer
zu  unserm  Vortheil  etwas  thue  oder  unterlasse.^^  Hier  zeigt  es  also
das  giinstige  Verhaltniss  eines  Menschen  zu  eimen  Andern  an,  und
ist  gleichbedeutend  mit  demjenigen,  was  wir  auch  wohl  Gerechtsame
oder  Grerechtigkeit  in  diesem  Sinne  zu  nennen  pflegen.' — Mackeldey,
Lehrluch  des  heutigen  rimischen  Rechts,  p.  1.


'  Jus  vocamus  conditionem  facultatemque  faciendi  aut  rwn  faciendi.
Ex  quo  nascitur  ut  juri  semper  respondeat  aliorum  officium  ;  ^^  idque
aut  commune  est  omnium,  quod  eo  solo  cemitur,  ut  ne  quis  alterum

»  Richt  as  opposed  to  Wrong.— ifar- Necessitaa  of^cmm.— Marginal  Note.

ginal  Note.  *7  Potestas  et  officium :  jus  in  per-

M  Right as opposed  to obligation, sonam  et  obligatio. — Marginal  Note,


400  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XVI  Isedat  aut  cerUnum  hominum  proprium,  scilicet  ex  eo  jure  oriundiim,

' — ' — ' quo  singuli  singulis  obstringuntur.

'  Atque  iuris  quidem  vis  omrUs  in  cogendi  poiesiaU  posiia  est,  eftque
aut  perfeddf  quae  actionibus  mazime  continetur,  aut  imperfectd  qua
defensionibus  tantum.  Omnino  autem  hcec  sunt  sine  guibus  esse  nequU
jus,  et  persona  in  quam  cadere  potest  jus  et  materia  juris  legitima,  et
causa  juri  constituendo  idonea.' — MufUenbruch,  Dodrina  Paniectarum^
vol  i  p.  144.

'  Jedes  Recht  fiihrt  als  solches  die  Moglicbkeit  des  Zwanges  mit
sich ;  entweder  um  den  Yerpflichteten  zu  positiven  Handlungen  zu
nothigen,  oder  ihn  davon  abzuhalten.' — Thibaut^  System  des  Pandeden-
RechiSy  voL  i  p.  44.


LECTURE  XVII.

ABSOLUTE AND RBLATIVB DUTIEa

Lfxtt. In  my  last  Lecture,  I  attempted  to  settle  the  import  of  the  term

^^^^ 'right/  considered  as  an  expression  embracing  all  rights, or

considered  as  an  expression  for  rights  in  abstract,  or  without

regard  to  their  generic  and  specific  differences.

Import  of  The  import  of  the  term  *  Right,*  as  thus  considered,  may  (I

'(^a^  ^^  think)  be  expressed  briefly  in  the  following  maimer.

A  monarch  or  sovereign  body  expressly  or  tacitly  com-
mands,  *  that  one  or  more  of  its  subjects  shall  do  or  forbear  from
acts,  towards,  or  in  respect  of,  a  distinct  and  determinate  party."
The  person  or  persons  who  are  to  do  or  forbear  from  these  acts,
are  said  to  be  subject  to  a  dtUy,  or  to  lie  under  a  dtUy.  The
party  towards  whom  those  acts  are  to  be  done  or  forborne,  is  said
to  have  a  right,  or  to  be  invested  with  a  right.

Consequently,  the  term  ' right '  and  the  term  'relative  duty '
are  correlating  expressions.  They  signify  the  same  notions,
considered  from  different  aspects,  or  taken  in  different  series.
The  acts  or  forbearances  which  are  expressly  or  tacitly  enjoined,
are  the  objects  of  the  right  as  well  as  of  the  corresponding  duty.
But  with  reference  to  the  person  or  persons  commanded  to  do  or

^  In  the  case  of  the  negative  duties  quently,  to  persons  determined  generic-
corresponding  to  jus  in  renif  it  is  not  ally.  In  every  case  of  a  right,  and  of
necessary  to  take  into  conndenUion  any  an  obligation  {senau  Itomano)  the  party
determinate  or  assigned  party.  The  having  the  right,  or  the  party  bound  by
parties  on  whom  the  duty  is  incumbent  the  obii^tion,  is  assifnable  individually
are  restricted  to  persons  within  the  or  genencally,  or  boni :  And  must  M
jurisdiction of the sovereign  ; conse-  considered  as  assigned  individually.


Absolute  and  relative  Duties.  401

forbear,  a  duty  is  imposed. With  reference  to  the  opposite Leot.
party,  a  right  is  conferred.  v ^ .

As  I  intimated  at  the  outset  of  the  analysis  through  which
I  am  now  journeying,  duties  may  be  distinguished  into  relative
and  absolute,^

A  relative  duty  \a  incumbent  upon  one  party,  and  correlates  Duties  are
with  a  light  residing  in  another  party. In other  words,  a  J||^u^°^
relative  duty  answers  to  a  right ;  or  implies,  and  is  implied  by,
a  right.

Where  a  duty  is  absolute,  there  is  no  right  with  which  it
correlates.  There  is  no  right  to  which  it  answers.  It  neither
implies,  nor  is  it  implied  by,  a  right

Now  the  term  'absolute'  is  a  negative  expression.  It
signifies  the  absmce  of  some  object  to  which  the  speaker  or
writer  expressly  or  tacitly  refers.  As  applied  to  a  duty,  it
denotes  that  the  duty  in  question  has  no  corresponding  right.

But,  in  order  to  the  complete  explanation  of  a  negative
expression  we  must  first  explain  the  object  of  which  it  signifies
the  absence.  Accordingly,  I  have  attempted  to  explain  '  Right '
(and  'duty'  as  correlating  with  'right'),  and  now  proceed  to
the  duties  which  have  no  corresponding  rights,  or  which  (in  a
word)  are  absolute.


Every  legal  duty  (like  every  legal  right)  emanates  from  Absolute
sovereign  wilL It  flows  from  the  command  (express  or  tacit)  finedby*
of  a  monarch  or  sovereign  body. And  the  party  upon  whom  exhaustive
it  is  imposed  is  said  to  be  legally  obliged,  because  he  is  obnoxious  ti^n?*™
or  liable  to  those  means  of  compulsion  or  restraint  which  are
wielded  by  that  superior.

Every  duty  is  a  duty  to  do  or  forbear.  A  duty  is  relative,
or  answers  to  a  right,  where  the  sovereign  commands  that  the
acts  shall  be  done  or  forborne  towards  a  determinate  party,  other
than  the  obliged. All  other  duties  are  absolute.

Consequently,  a  duty  is  absolute  in  any  of  the  following
cases :  1st,  Where  it  is  commanded  that  the  acts  shall  be  done
or  forborne  towards  or  in  respect  of  the  party  to  whom  the
command  is  directed.  2ndly,  Where  it  is  commanded  that  the
acts  shall  be  done  or  forborne  towards  or  in  respect  of  parties
other  than  the  obliged,  but  who  are  not  determinate  persons,

^  For 'absolute  duties,' see  fen^Aam, Blackstone's 'absolute duties' are

'  Traits  de  Legislation,'  L  154,  305,  247.  moral  or  religious  duties. Vol.  It.  ch.

'Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation,'  41.
pp.  222,  289,  308.

VOL.  J.  2d


402

Lect.
XVII


Order  in
which  I
shall  con-
sider abso-
lute daties
in  the
iiresent
Lecture.


warding
duties,  and
duties  not
regarding
man,
regard
persons
^nerally
in  respect
of  their
remote
purpose.


Pervading  Notions  analysed.

physical,  or  fictitious.  For  example,  towards  the  members
generally  of  the  given  independent  society ;  or  towards  mankind
at  large.  3rdly,  Where  the  duty  imposed  is  not  a  duty  towards
man ;  or  where  the  acts  and  forbearances  commanded  by  the
sovereign,  are  not  to  be  done  or  observed  towards  a  person  or
persons.  4thly,  Where  the  duty  is  merely  to  be  observed
towaids  the  sovereign  imposing  it:  i.e,  the  monarch,  or  the
sovereign  number  in  its  collegiate  and  sovereign  capacity.

I  think  that  this  enumeration  completely  exhausts  the  cases
wherein  duties  or  obligations  can  be  considered  absolute.
Accordingly,  for  the  purpose  of  explaining  and  exemplifying
the  general  nature  of  those  duties,  I  shall  consider  them  in  the
order  which  I  have  now  announced.  Though  I  should  probably
arrange  them  in  another  order,  if  I  attempted  to  expound  them
in  detail

But  before  I  endeavour  to  explain  and  exemplify  the  classes
of  absolute  duties,  I  will  briefly  advert  to  a  topic  upon  which  I
may  insist  hereafter.

I  have  said  that  some  of  these  duties  are  self -regarding :
that  is  to  say,  that  the  acts  or  forbearances  which  the  Law
enjoins  are  to  be  done  or  observed  by  the  party  obliged  towards
or  in  respect  of  himself.

I  have  said  that  others  of  these  duties  are  not  duties  towards
man :  that  is  to  say,  that  the  acts  or  forbearances,  enjoined  by
the  Law,  are  not  to  be  done  or  observed  towards  persons,  or
towards  human  creatures.

But  in  styling  some  of  these  duties  self-regarding,  and  in
affirming  of  others  of  these  duties  'that  they  are  not  duties
towards  man,'  I  look  exclusively  at  their  immediate  or  proxi-
mate scope.

Considered  with  reference  to  their  more  remote  purposes,
they  are  absolute  duties  regarding  persons  generally.  For,
assuming  that  they  are  imposed  at  the  suggestions  of  general
Utility,  they  regard  the  members  generally  of  the  given
political  society,  or  they  regard  mankind  at  large :  so  far,  that
is,  as  Laws,  established  in  a  given  community,  can  promote  or
contemplate  an  end  so  vague  and  uncertain  as  the  weal  of
human  kind.

For  example,  the  duty  incumbent  upon  you  to  forbear  fSrom
suicide,  is  a  self-regarding  duty,  in  respect  of  its  proximate
purpose.  It  is  imposed  directly,  to  the  end  of  deterring  you
from  destroying  your  own  life.  But,  remotely  or  indirectly,  it
is  an  absolute  duty  regarding  persons  generally. For  it  is


Absolute  Duties.  403

partly  imposed  for  the  purposes  of  presemng  a  member  to  the Lkct.
comjnunity,  and  of  deterring  its  members  generally  from  the  act v,^^^
of  suicide  by  the  consequences  annexed  to  the  act  in  the  single
or  particular  instance.

Again :  A  duty  to  forbear  from  cruelty  towards  the  lower
animals,  is  not  a  duty  towards  man  in  respect  of  its  proximate
scope.  Its  proximate  or  direct  scope,  is  to  save  the  lower
animals  &om  needless  suffering :  from  suffering  which  has  no
tendency  to  promote  the  good  of  man,  or  decidedly  outweighs
the  good  which  man  can  derive  from  it.  But,  in  respect  of  its
remote  purposes,  the  duty  is  an  absolute  duty  regarding  persons
indefinitely.  For,  tending  to  preserve  and  cherish  the  sentiment
of  benevolence  or  sympathy,  it  tends  to  the  good  of  the
community,  and  to  the  good  of  mankind  at  large.

Nor  does  this  apply  exclusively  to  those  absoliUe  duties.  Relative
which  I  have  styled  (for  the  sake  of  distinction)  self-regarding,  ^^^  ^'
or  of  which  I  have  affirmed  (for  the  same  purpose)  '  that  they  sons  gene-
are  not  duties  towards  man.'  !!!ll^' J'^  t

respect  of

It  also  applies  to  relative  duties,  or  to  duties  which  correlate  their
with  rights.  ^  p^^^w.

In  numerous  instances,  rights  are  conferred  (and  their
correlating  duties  imposed)  with  the  direct  or  immediate  purpose
of  promoting  the  general  good  (as,  for  example,  the  rights  of
judges  and  other  political  subordinates) :  And  rights  are  conferred
indirectly  to  the  same  extensive  purpose,  although  their
proximate  end  be  the  advantage  of  the  parties  entitled,  or  of
other  determinate  parties  for  whom  they  are  conferred  in  trust.

For  example.  The  immediate  purpose  of  a  right  of  property,
is  either  the  advantage  of  the  proprietor  himself,  or  of  some
determinate  party  for  whom  he  is  a  Trustee.  But  the  ulterior
or  remote  end  for  which  such  rights  are  conferred,  is  the
advantage  of  the  community  at  large.  Consequently,  absolute
duties,  and  duties  correlating  with  rights,  are  not  distinguishable
when  viewed  from  a  certain  aspect.  Considered  in  respect  of  their
ultimate  or  remote  scope,  all  duties  regard  persons  generally.

And  as  duties  which  r^ard  directly  determinate  or  assigned  Duties
persons,  regard  indirectly  persons  generally  and  indefinitely,  so  ^^^
is  the  converse  of  the  proposition  equaUy  true. That  is  to  say,  generaU^
duties  which  regard  directly  persons  considered  generally  regard  rectljT^*
indirectly  determinate  persons. For  as  the  general  or  public  duties
interest  is  an  aggregate  of  individual  interests,  duties  which  tend  dkteraiin-
to  promote  the  good  of  the  general  or  whole,  tend  to  promote  *t«
the  good  of  its  several  or  single  members.  persons.


404


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Lect.
XVII


JuB  Pub-
licum et
PriTatum.


Civil  Inju
ries  and
Crimes.


In  order  that  we  may  conceive  correctly  many  important
distinctions,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  conceive  precisely
the  truths  which  I  have  now  stated.

For  example,  the  Soman  Lawyers,  and  most  writers  upon

Jurisprudence,  divide  Law  into  Public  and  Private. According

.to  the  Soman  Lawyers,  Public  Law  is  that^  'quod  ad  pMice

utilia  spectat' Private  Law  is  that  department  of  the  whole,

'  quod  ad  singtdorttm  utilitatem — ad  privatim  utilia — spectat'

But  this,  it  is  manifest,  is  no^  the  ground  of  the  intended
distinction.  For  since  the  general  interest  ia  an  aggregate  of
individual  interest.  Law  regarding  the  former,  and  Law  r^aiding
the  latter,  r^ard  the  same  subject  In  other  words,  the  terms
'  public '  and  '  private '  may  be  applied  indifferently  to  ail  Law.
Which  is  as  much  as  to  say,  that  the  distinction  in  question  is
a  distinction  without  a  difference.

It  is  manifestly  impossible  to  distinguish  the  two  departments
by  a  property  common  to  both.  I  shall  endeavour,  hereafter,
to  analyse  the  distinction.

Briefly  stated,  the  distinction  between  Public  and  Private
Law  is  this.  The  former  regards  persons  as  bearing  political
characters.  The  latter  regards,  persons  who  have  no  political
characters,  and  persons  also  who  have  them  as  bearing  different
characters.  In  a  word.  Public  Law  is  the  law  of  political  Stains;
and,  instead  of  standing  opposed  to  the  body  of  the  law,  is  a
branch  of  one  of  its  departments :  namely,  of  the  Law  of  Persons.
In  which  light  it  was  justly  considered  by  Hale;  and,  after
Hale,  by  Blackstone.

Again:  Civil  Injuries  and  Crimes  are  distinguished  by
Blackstone  and  others  in  the  following  manner.  Civil  Injuries
are  private  wrongs,  and  concern  individuals  only.  Crimes  are
ptiblic  wrongs,  and  affect  the  whole  community.

If  Blackstone  had  but  reflected  on  his  own  catalogue  of
crimes,  he  must  (I  think)  have  seen  that  this  is  not  the  basis  of
the  capital  distinction  in  question.  For  the  greater  half  of  them
are  offences  against  rights.  In  other  words,  they  are  violations
of  duties  regarding  determinate  persons,  and  therefore  affect
individuals  in  a  direct  or  proximate  manner.  Such,  for  instance,
are  offences  against  life  and  body;  murder,  mayhem,  battery,
and  the  like.  Such,  too,  are  theft  and  other  offences  against
property.

But,  independently  of  this,  Blackstone's  statement  of  the
distinction  is  utterly  untenable.

All  offences  affect  the  community,  and  all  offences  affect


Civil  Injuries  and  Crimes,  405

individuals. But  though  all  aflTect  individuals,  some  are  not Lkct.
oflfences  against  righis,  and  are  therefore  pursued,  of  necessity, y , '  >
criminally. That  is  to  say,  they  are  pursued  directly  by  the
Sovereign,  or  by  some  subordinate  representing  the  Sovereign.

Where  the  offence  is  an  offence  against  a  right,  it  migM  be
pursued  (in  all  cases)  either  by  the  injured  party,  or  by  those
who  represent  him.  But,  for  reasons  which  I  shall  explain  at
large  when  I  arrive  at  the  distinction  in  question,  it  is  often
thought  expedient  to  convert  the  offence  into  a  crima  That  is
to  say,  the  pursuit  of  it  is  not  left  to  the  discretion  of  the
injured  party  or  his  representatives,  but  is  assumed  by  the
Sovereign  or  by  the  subordinates  of  the  Sovereign.  The
differences  between  Crimes  and  Civil  Injuries,  is  not  to  be
sought  for  in  a  supposed  difference  between  their  tendencies,
but  in  the  difference  between  the  modes  wherein  they  are
respectively  pursued,  or  wherein  the  sanction  is  applied  in  the
two  cases.  An  offence  which  is  pursued  at  the  discretion  of
the  injured  party  or  his  representative  is  a  Civil  Injury.  An
offence  which  is  pursued  by  the  Sovereign  or  by  the  subordinates
of  the  Sovereign,  is  a  Crime.  ^

In  many  cases  (as  in  cases  of  Libels  and  Assaults),  the
same  offence  belongs  to  both  classes.  That  is  to  say,  the
injured  has  a  remedy  which  he  applies  or  not  as  he  likes,  and
the  Sovereign  reserves  the  power  of  visiting  the  offender  with
punishment

That  the  distinction  should  have  been  referred  to  supposed
differences  of  tendencies,  is  wonderful  For,  in  different
countries,  the  line  between  civil  and  criminal  is  utterly  different.
In  almost  all  rude  societies,  the  domain  of  Criminal  Law  is
extremely  narrow  :*^  and,  for  reasons  which  I  shall  shew  here-
after, it  generally  enlarges  as  society  advances.

The  distinction  does  not  consist  in  this :  that  the  mischief
of  crimes  (as  a  class)  is  more  extensive  than  that  of  civil
injuries  (as  a  class).  But  in  this :  the  different  tendencies  of
Civil  or  Criminal  Procedure  as  applied  in  certain  cases.

It  follows  from  what  has  been  premised,  that  in distin-  Difference

guishing  relative  from  absolute  duties,  and  in  distinguishing  the  ^^y^

kinds  of  the  latter,  we  must  not  look  to  the  ultimate  scope  or  and  abso-
lute duties,

^  See^NMt,  Lecture  XX VI II.  p.  601.  proceedings  :  t.g. In  cases  of  offences

^  Instances :  Rome  {^fuHum^*  etc.) ;  against  the  Oovemment  and  the  Minister

England  (Anglo -Saxon)  (^WtTtgiXd)\  of  Justice. This  was  necessarily  the

Ola  Germany. In  the  latter  country,  case  :  because  the  Sanction  of  Sanctions

there  was hardly any criminal law.  is  always  Punishment

Merely  so  much  as  to  give  effect  to  civil


etc.


4o6  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect. purpose  with  which  duties  are  imposed For,  as  that  is  the
^  ^  ^ V same  in  all  cases,  it  can  never  enable  us  to  draw  the  distinctions
in  question.

A  relative  duty  corresponds,  as  I  have  said,  to  a  right:  if.
it  is  a  duty  to  be  fulfilled  towards  a  determinate  person  or  deter-
mincUe  persons,  other  than  the  obliged,  and  other  than  the
Sovereign  imposing  the  duty. All  other  duties  are  absolute.

[All  duties  are  duties  towards  the  Sovereign,  and,  as  towards
the  Sovereign,  are  relative.  By  'relative,*  therefore,  as  applied
to  duty,  I  mean  a  duty  correlating  with  a  right  By  *  absolute,'
as  applied  to  a  duty,  I  mean  not  a  duty  without  relations,  but
without  relation  to  a  right]

All  absolute  obligations  are  sanctioned  criminally:  they
do  not  correspond  with  rights  in  the  Sovereign,  the  Public,
etc.®*  They  do  not  correspond  with  rights  at  all.  But  rights
to  enforce,  exist  in  persons  delegated  by  the  Sovereign.

e,g.  In  England,  offences against  absolute  duties,  like all

other  crimes,  are  said  to  be  offences  against  the  King,  because

it  is  part  of  his  ofSce  to  pursue  those  offences  as  well  as  other

crimes.*^

Distinc-  Absolute  duties  are  distinguishable  by  their  proximate  or

tw^n^ immediate  purposes.

absolute  The  proximate  purpose  of  some  is  the  advantage  of  the

"^^^" party  obliged. And  these  I  style  self-regarding.

The  proximate  purpose  of  others  is  the  advantage  of  per-
sons indefinitely :  for  instance,  of  the  community  at  large,  or  of
mankind  in  general"

The  proximate  purpose  of  others  is  not  the  advantage  of
any  person  or  persons.

I  shall  adduce  examples  of  them  in  that  order.

Duties  towards  self.

Violations  of  these  duties:  Drunkenness.^  Suicide.^
Fornication,  or  simple  breach  of  chastity,  not  accompanied  by
violation  of  a  right  residing  in  another,  as  by  adultery,  rape,

•*  For  examples  of  breaches  of  abso-  •*  *  II  y  a  bien  des  cas  oh  la  partie

lute  obligations,  see  Blackstone,  vol.  iv.  favoris^e  (the  party  on  whom  a  rieht  is

c.  8-18,  Libel,  p.  160 ;  Smuggling,  p.  154 ;  conferred)  n'est  que  le  public  entier,  et

Usury, p. 156; Forestalling,  p. 158;  non  pas  un  individu.' — TraiUs  de  Ligisl,

Breach  of  prison,  escape,  etc. p.  129 ;  vol.  i.  p.  305.

Champerty,  etc.  p.  134 ;  Quarantine,  p.  *  In  this  case,  the  only  persons  in-

161 ;  rolygamy,  p.  163. Other  examples,  vested  with  corresponding rights  are,

pp.  115-127.  persons  clothed  with  powers  In  Trust

Most  of  the  offences  styled  proBmunire  for  the  Government ' — Marginal  Note.

are  breaches  of  obligations  towards  so-  ^  Blackstone,  iv.  64.

ciety  at  large.  «  Ibid.  iv.  189.

*»  Blackstone,  i.  268  ;  iii.  40 ;  iv.  88.


Absolute  Duties.  407

seduction. (Eape  includes  injury  to  the  party  ravished,  and  to Lect.
others  who  have  an  interest,  etc.)  - ^ ^

There  can  be  no  right  as  against  self.  The  end  of  a  right
is,  that  a  party  may  be  obliged  by  a  sanction  to  do  or  to  forbear,
towards  a  determinate  person  or  persons.  But  the  act  or
forbearance,  in  this  instance,  depends  upon  the  pleasure  of  the
party.  To  give  him  a  right  to  an  act  or  forbearance  to  which
he  himself  is  bound,  were  absurd.

IhUies  tOTvards  persons  indefinitely,  or  towards  the  Sovereign
imposing  the  dtUy,

Treason*^  is  properly  an  offence  against  the  Sovereign.
But  an  offence  against  a  member  of  a  sovereign  body  is  often  so
considered.^

IhUies  not  regarding  persons.

Towards  God  (Ascetic  observances). (Blackstone,  voL  iv.

p.  43.)

Towards  the  lower  animals.

The  Deity,  an  infant,  or  one  of  the  lower  animals,  as  being
the  party  towards  whom  a  duty  is  to  he  performed,  might  be  said
to  have  a  right  But  so,  in  the  same  case,  might  an  inanimate
thing. To  call  the  Deity  a  person,  is  absurd.


LECTURE  XVIIL

WILL  AND  MOTIVE.


In  a  former  Lecture  I  entered  upon  the  analysis  and  explana- Lbct.

tion  of  the  term  '  Eights :'  Meaning  by  '  rights,'  legal  rights,  or  v ^ .

rights  which  owe  their  being  to  the  express  or  tacit  commands  Brief  re-
of  Monarchs  or  Sovereign  bodies.


Now  all  that  can  be  affirmed  of  rights  considered  in  abstract
all  that  can  be  affirmed  of  rights  apart  from  their  kinds
and  sorts — amounts  to  a  brief  and  barren  generality,  and  may
be  thrust  into  a  single  proposition,  or  into  a  few  short
propositions.

But  before  I  could  shew  the  little  which  can  be  affirmed  of
rights  in  abstract — or  before  I  could  shew  how  little  can  be
affirmed  of  rights  in  abstract — it  was  necessary  that  I  should
advert  to  persons,  as  bearing  rights  and  duties ;  to  things  and

"^  Blackstone,  ir.  81.  Tnemhers  of  soyereign  powers,  may  be

**  Offences  against  rights  residing  in considered  breaches  of  relative  duties.


4o8  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  'ptT8fm&,  as  svbfects  of  lights  and  duties ;  to  acts  and  forbearances,
-  ^  '  as  objects  of  rights  and  duties ;  and  to  a  certain  capital  distinction
which  obtains  between  rights  themselvea

Accordingly,  In  the  last  four  Lectures  I  called  your  atten-
tion to  the  following  leading  topics ;  and  to  numerous  subordinate
topics,  with  which  they  are  inseparably  connected,  or  which  they
naturally  suggest :

1st,  Persons,  as  invested  with  rights,  and  as  lying  under
duties.

2ndly,  Things,  as  subjects  of  rights,  and  of  duties  answering
to  rights.

Srdly,  Persons,  as  placed  in  a  position  analogous  to  the
position  of  things :  That  is  to  say,  not  as  invested  with  rights,
or  as  lying  under  duties,  but  as  the  subjects  or  matter  of  rights
residing  in  other  persons,  and  availing  against  strangers  or  third
persons.

4thly,  Acts  and  forbearances,  as  objects  of  rights  and  of
duties  corresponding  to  rights.

5thly,  and  lastly.  The  distinction  between  the  rights  which
avail  against  persons  generally,  and  the  rights  which  avail  against
persons  certain  or  determincUe : — ^A  distinction  which  the  Classical
Jurists  denoted  by  the  opposed  expressions,  'Dominium  et
Obligatio;*  but  which  numerous  modem  Civilians  (and  writers
upon  general  jurisprudence)  have  marked  with  the  more
adequate  and  less  ambiguous  expressions, '  Jus  in  rem  et  Jus  in
personam*

In  reviewing  these  various  topics  (and,  especially,  the
principal  kinds  into  which  rights  are  divisible),  I  endeavoured
to  prepare  the  way  for  such  a  definition  of '  Eight '  as  might
rest  upon  a  sufficient  induction :  as  might  apply  indifferently  to
every  right ;  or  might  apply  to  any  right,  without  regard  to  its
class.  Accordingly,  I  proceeded  to  examine  the  import  of  the
term  '  Eight,'  considered  as  an  expression  for  cUl  rights,  or  for
rights  abstracted  from  the  generic  and  specific  differences  by
which  their  kinds  and  sorts  are  separated  or  distinguished.
And,  in  attempting  to  settle  the  import  of  the  term  '  Eight,*  I
considered  implicitly  the  general  nature  of  the  duties  which  I
style  'relative:*  that  is  to  say,  which  correlate  with  rights,  or
answer  to  corresponding  rights.

But,  besides  the  Duties  which  I  style  *  relative,'  there  are
numerous  duties  which  have  no  corresponding  rights,  or  no
rights  wherewith  they  correlate :  And,  as  the  Analysis  through
which  I  am  joumejdng  embraces  Duties  as  well  as  Eights,  it


Recapitulation.  409

was  necessary  that  I  should  advert  to  duties  urithout  correspond- Lbct.


ing  rights,  as  well  as  to  duties  which  are  rdative.

Accordingly,  the  class  of  duties  in  question  (which  I  dis-
tinguish from  rdative  duties  by  the  negative  epithet  '  absolute ')
were  also  considered  in  the  last  Lecture.

Every  legal  duty — whether  it  be  relative  or  absolute,  or
whether  it  be  cbligcUio  or  offidum — \a  a  duty  to  do  (or  forbear
from)  an  outward  act  or  acts,  and  flows  from  the  Command,
(signified  expressly  or  tacitly)  of  the  person  or  body  which  is
sovereign  in  some  given  society.

To  fulfil  the  duty  which  the  command  imposes,  is  just  or
right.  That  is  to  say,  the  party  does  the  act,  or  the  party
observes  the  forbearance,  which  is  jussum  or  directvm  by  the
author  of  the  command.**

To  omit  (or  forbear  from)  the  act  which  the  command
enjoins,  or  to  do  the  act  which  the  command  prohibits,  is  a
wrong  or  injury : — ^A  term  denoting  (when  taken  in  its  largest
signification)  every  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  which  amounts  to
disobedience  of  a  Law  (or  to  disobedience  of  any  other  command)
emanating  directly  or  circuitously  from  a  Monarch  or  Sovereign
Number — *  Generaliter  injuria  dicitur,  omne  quod  Tum  jure  fit.*

A  party  lying  under  a  duty,  or  upon  whom  a  duty  is
incumbent,  is  liable  to  evil  or  inconvenience  (to  be  inflicted  by
sovereign  authority),  in  case  he  disobey  the  Command  by  which
the  duty  is  imposed.  This  conditional  evil  is  the  Sanction
which  enforces  the  duty,  or  the  duty  is  sanctioned  by  this
conditional  evil :  And  the  party  bound  or  obliged,  is  bound  or

^  Just  is  that  which  is  jussum;  the  Command ;  as  their  corresponding  con-
past  participle  oijubeo.  cretes  denote  a  something  which  is  com-

Righi  is  derived  from  directum ;  the  manded,  or  equal
past  participle  of  dirigo;  or,  rather,  Distinction  between  rt^A<  as  denoting
right  is  probably  derived  from  some  somethins  commanded,  and  as  denoting
Anglo-Saxon  Verb,  which  comes  with  the  position  of  the  party  Unoards  whom
dirigo  from  a  common  root.  The  Qer-  it  is  commanded.  To  do  right,  is  to
man  reeht^  gereeht, riehtig, rechUnSj  {Just)  obey  a  command.  'To  have  a  right,*
is  from  the  obsolete  riehien  or  reehten  is  to  be  placed  in  such  a  nosition  that
(dirigo).  Hence  iZicA^,  a  judge.  Latin;  another  is  commanded  to  ao  or  forbear
JUgo,  Rex,  Regula,  Rectum,  (Wrong  =  towards  or  in  respect  of  oneself.
Wrung ;  the  opposite  of  rectum. )  In  consequence  of  the  intimate  con-
Ana  as  just  and  right  signify  that  nection  between  the  terms,  ru[ht  and
which  is  commanded,  so  do  the  Latin  obligation  are  often  used  indifferently.
J^fuum  and  the  Greek  Dikaion  denote  E,g,  In  old  German  Law  language,  re^
that  which  conforms  to  a  law  or  rule,  denotes  either.  So  in  vulgar  English.
Manifestly,  a  metaphor  borrowed  from  So  the  Latin  jtu  and  dbligatio.  The
measures  of  length.  Something  equal  French  droit,  and  the  Italian  diritto,  are
to,  or  even  with,  a  something  to  which  not  free  from  this  ambiguity.  The
it  is  compared, ^uum  =  jus  gentiuuL  Greek  exousia  is  equivalent  to  facuUas,

The abstracts,  justice^  ^ustum,  di-  potestas,
kaion,  equity,  etc.,  denote  conformity  to


XVIII


4 1  o  Pervadifig  Notions  analysed.

Lect. obliged,  6ecaw«e  he  is  obnoxious  to  this  evil,  in  case  he  disobey


xnii


the  command. — That  bond,  vmcndwm,  or  ligamen,  which  is  of  the
essence  of  diUy,  is,  simply  or  merely,  liability  or  obnoxiousness  to
a  Sanction,


Now  it  follows  from  these  considerations,  that,  before  I  can

complete  the  analysis  of  legal  rigJU  and  diUy,  I  must  advert  to

the  nature  or  essentials  of  legal  Injuries  or  Wrongs,  and  of  l^al

or  political  Sanctions. — As  Person,  Thing,  Act  and  Forbearance,

are  inseparably  connected  with  the  terms  '  Right '  and  *  Duty,'  so

are  Injury  and  Sanction  imported  by  the  same  expressions.

Obliga-  But  before  we  can  determine  the  import  of  'Injury'  and

jj^^ *  Sanction  *  (or  can  distinguish  the  compulsion  or  restraint,  which

and  ' ' is  implied in Duty  or  Obligation,  from  that  compulsion  or

^ply  ^^ restraint  which  is  merely  physical),  we  must  try  to  settle  the

Motive, meaning of the following perplexing terms : namely.  Will,

tention^ Motive,  Intention,  and Negligence: — Including,  in the term

Negli- '  Negligence,'  those  modes  of  the  corresponding  complex  notion,

Sahness. which are styled '  Temerity ' or '  Eashness, Imprudence or

Heedlessness.'

Accordingly,  I  shall  now  endeavour  to  state  or  suggest  the
significations  of  '  Motive '  and  *  Will'  In  other  words,  I  shall
attempt  to  distinguish  desires,  as  determining  to  acts  or  forbear-
ances, from  those  remarkable  desires  which  are  named  volitions,
and  by  which  we  are  not  determined  to  acts  or  forbearances,
although  they  are  the  immediate  antecedents  of  such  bodily
movements  as  are  styled  (strictly  and  properly)  human  acts  or
actions.
Apology  Nor  is  this  incidental  excursion  into  the  Philosophy  of

into^^^^"^  Mind  a  wanton  digression  from  the  path  which  is  marked  out
'Motive,' by  my  subject

1  ,  etc.  j,^^  (first)  the  party  who  lies  under  a  duty  is  bound  or

obliged  by  a  sanction.  This  conditional  evil  determines  or
inclines  his  will  to  the  act  or  forbearance  enjoined.  In  other
language,  he  wishes  to  avoid  the  evil  impending  from  the  Law,
although  he  may  be  averse  from  the  fulfilment  of  the  duty  which
the  Law  imposes  upon  him.

Consequently,  if  we  would  know  precisely  the  import  of
*Duty,'  we  must  endeavour  to  clear  the  expressions  'Motive'
and  'Wiir  from  the  obscurity  with  which  they  have  been
covered  by  philosophical  and  popular  jargon.

2ndly,  The  objects  of  duties  are  acts  and  forbearances. But


Will,  Motive,  Intention,  Negligence.  4 1 1

every  act,  and  every  forbearance  from  an  act,  is  the  consequence iS^v
of  a  volition,  or  of  a  determination  of  the  wilL Consequently, n ^ ^
if  we  would  know  precisely  the  meaning  of  act  and  forbearance,
and,  therefore,  the  meaning  of  duty  or  obligation,  we  must  try
to  know  the  meaning  of  the  term  *  Will.'

3rdly,  Some  injuries  are  intentional.  Others  are  conse-
quences of  negligence  (in  the  large  signification  of  the  term).
Consequently,  if  we  would  know  the  nature  of  injuries  or
wrongs,  and  of  various  important  differences  by  which  they  are
distinguished,  we  must  try  to  determine  the  meanings  of  '  Inten-
tion '  and  *  Negligence.'

It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  the  import  of  the  last-
mentioned  expressions  should  be  settled  with  an  approach  to
precision.  For  both  of  them  run,  in  a  continued  vein,  through
the  doctrine  of  injuries  or  wrongs ;  and  of  the  rights  and  obliga-
tions which  are  begotten  by  injuries  or  wrongs.  And  one  of
them  (namely,  'Intention'),  meets  us  at  every  step,  in  every
department  of  Jurisprudence.

But,  in  order  that  we  may  settle  the  import  of  the  term
'  Intention,'  we  must  settle  the  import  of  the  term  *  WilL'  For,
although  an  intention  is  not  a  volition,  the  facts  are  inseparably
connected.  And,  since  'Negligence'  implies  the  absence  of  a
due  volition  and  intention,  it  is  manifest  that  the  explanation  of
that  expression  supposes  the  explanation  of  these.

Accordingly,  I  will  now  attempt  to  analyse  the  expressions
'Will 'and 'Motive.'

Certain  parts  of  the  human  body  obey  the  loilL Changing  The  Will,
the  expression,  certain  parts  of  our  bodies  move  in  certain  ways
so  soon  as  we  vrill  that  they  should. Or,  changing  the  expres-
sion again,  we  have  the  power  of  moving,  in  certain  ways,  certain
parts  of  our  bodies.

Now  these  expressions,  and  others  of  the  same  import,
merely  signify  this :

Certain  movements  of  our  bodies  follow  invariably  and
immediaiely  our  wishes  or  desires  for  those  same  movements:
Provided,  that  is,  that  the  bodily  organ  be  sane,  and  the  desired
movement  be  not  prevented  by  an  outward  obstacle  or  hindrance.
If  my  arm  be  free  from  disease,  and  from  chains  or  other
hindrances,  my  arm  rises,  so  soon  as  I  wish  that  it  should.
But  if  my  arm  be  palsied,  or  fastened  down  to  my  side,  my  arm
will  not  move,  although  I  desire  to  move  it


412


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Lect.
XVIII


Dominion
of  the  will


These  antecedent  wishes  and  these  consequent  movements,
are  human  volitiam  and  (zcts  (strictly  and  properly  so  called).
They  are  the  only  objects  to  which  those  terms  will  strictly  and
properly  apply.

But,  besides  the  antecedent  desire  (which  I  style  a  volition),
and  the  consequent  movement  (which  I  style  an  cust),  it  is
commonly  supposed  that  there  is  a  certain  '  WUl '  which  is  the
cause  or  author  of  botL  The  desire  is  commonly  called  an  act
of  the  wUl ;  or  is  supposed  to  be  an  effect  of  a  power  or  facfuUy
of  willing,  supposed  to  reside  in  the  man.

That  this  same  '  wUl '  is  just  nothing  at  all,  has  been  proved
(in  my  opinion)  beyond  controversy  by  the  late  Dr.  Brown :
Who  has  also  expelled  from  the  region  of  entities,  those  fiwcied
beings  called  *  power  si  of  which  this  imaginary  *%oiU'  is  one.
Many  preceding  writers  had  stated  or  suggested  generally,  the
true  nature  of  the  relation  between  cause  and  effect.  They  had
shown  that  a  cause  is  nothing  but  a  given  event  invariably  or
usually  preceding  another  given  event ;  that  an  effect  is  nothing
but  a  given  event  invariably  or  usually  following  anothCT  given
event;  and  that  the  power  of  prodtudng  the  effect  which  is
ascribed  to  the  cause,  is  merely  an  abridged  (and,  therefore,  an
obscure)  expression  for  the  customary  antecedence  and  sequence
of  the  two  events.  But  the  author  in  question,  in  his  analysis
of  that  relation,  considered  the  subject  from  numerous  aspects
equaUy  new  and  important  And  he  was  (I  believe)  the  first
who  understood  what  we  would  be  at,  when  we  talk  about  the
WUl,  and  the  power  or  faciUti/  of  vrUling,

All  that  I  am  able  to  discover  when  I  vrill  a  movement  of
my  body,  amounts  to  this :  I  tmsh  the  movement  The  move-
ment immedicUcly  follows  my  wish  of  the  movement  And  when
I  conceive  the  tirish,  I  expect  that  the  movement  wished  will
immediately  follow  it  Any  one  may  convince  himself  that  this
is  the  whole  of  the  case,  by  carefully  observing  what  passes  in
himself,  when  he  vnlls  to  move  any  of  the  bodily  organs,  which
are  said  to  obey  the  vrUl,  or  the  power  or  facviiy  of  willing.

For  further  proof  I  must  refer  you  to  Brown's  '  Analysis  of
Cause  and  Effect'  ^°  A  detailed  exposition  of  the  subject,  were
utterly  inconsistent  with  the  limits  by  which  I  am  confined,
and  with  the  direct  or  appropriate  purpose  of  these  Lectures.

The  wishes  which  are  immediately  followed  by  the  bodily

^^  Brown's  Enquiry  into  the  Relation Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Hnman
of  Cause  and  Effect (For  the  Will  in Mind,  cap.  24,  25.
particular,  Part  1,  Section  3.) Mill's


Will  and  Motive.  4 1 3

movements  wished,  are  the  only  wishes  immediately  followed  by Lect,
their  objects. Or  (changing  the  expression),  they  are  the  only v ^ >
wishes  which  conmmmate  themselves : — The  only  wishes  which  {Jjji*®^  ^
attain  their  ends  without  the  intervention  of  m^eans.  oigaiL

In  every  other  instance  of  wish  or  desire,  the  object  of  the
wish  is  attained  (in  case  it  be  attained)  through  a  m^an;  and
(generally  speaking)  through  a  series  of  means : — Each  of  the
means  being  (in  its  turn)  the  object  of  a  distinct  wish;  and
each  of  them  being  wished  (in  its  turn)  as  a  step  to  that  object
which  is  the  end  at  which  wq  aim.

For  example,  If  I  wish  that  my  arm  should  rise,  the  desired
movement  of  my  arm  immediately  follows  my  wisL  There  is
nothing  to  which  I  resort,  nothing  which  I  wish,  as  a  mean  or
instrument  wherewith  to  attain  my  purpose.  But  if  I  wish  to
lift  the  book  which  is  now  lying  before  me,  I  wish  certain
movements  of  my  bodily  organs,  and  I  employ  these  as  a  mean
or  instrument  for  the  accomplishment  of  my  ultimate  end.

Again :  If  I  wish  to  look  at  a  book  lying  beyond  my  reach,
I  resort  to  certain  movements  of  my  bodily  organs,  coupled  with
an  additional  something  which  I  employ  as  a  further  instrument.
For  instance,  I  grasp  and  raise  the  book  now  lying  before  me ;
and  wiXh  the  book  which  I  grasp  and  raise,  I  get  the  book
which  I  wish  to  look  at,  but  which  lies  on  a  part  of  the  table
beyond  the  reach  of  my  arm.

It  will  be  admitted  by  all  (on  the  bare  statement)  that  the  Dominion
dominion  of  the  will  is  limited  or  restricted  to  sxyme  of  our  uxnhedto
bodily  organs :  that  is  to  say,  that  there  are  only  certain  parts  ^ome
of our bodily  frames,  which change  their  actual states  for  orgaiJ.
different  states,  as  (and  so  soon  as)  we  wish  or  desire  that  they
should. Numberless  movements  of  my  arms  and  legs  imme-
diately follow  my  desires  of  those  same  movements. But  the
motion  of  my  heart  would  not  be  immediately  affected,  by  a
wish  I  might  happen  to  conceive  that  it  should  stop  or  quicken.

That  the  dominion  of  the  will  extends  not  to  the  mind,  may  Dominion
appear  (at  first  sight)  somewhat  disputable. It  has,  however,  ^^^^jj^
been  proved  by  the  writers  to  whom  I  have  referred. Nor,  not  to  the
indeed,  was  the  proof  diflBcult,  so  soon  as  a  definite  meaning  °^^*
had  been  attached  to  the  term  tvUL Here  (as  in  most  cases)
the  confusion  arose  from  the  indefiniteness  of  the  language  by
which  the  subjects  of  the  inquiry  were  denoted.

If  volitions  be  nothing  but  wishes  immediately  followed  by
their  objects,  it  is  manifest  that  the  mind  is  not  obedient  to  the
will. In  other  words,  it  will  not  change  its  actual,  for  differeid


414

Lect.
XVIII


Volitions,
what


Acts,
what


Pervading  Notions  analysed,

states  or  conditions,  (W  (and  so  soon  as)  it  is  wished  or  desired
that  it  should.  Try  to  recall  an  absent  thought,  or  to  banish  a
present  thought,  and  you  will  find  that  your  desire  is  not  imme-
diately followed  by  the  attainment  of  its  object.  It  is,  indeed,
manifest  that  the  attempt  would  imply  an  absurdity.  Unless
the  thought  desired  be  present  to  the  mind  aiready,  there  is  no
determinate  object  at  which  the  desire  aims,  and  which  it  can
attain  immediately,  or  without  the  intervention  of  a  mean.
And  to  desire  the  absence  of  a  thought  actually  present  to  the
mind,  is  to  conceive  the  thought  of  which  the  absence  is  desired,
and  (by  consequence)  to  perpetuate  its  presence.

Changes  in  the  state  of  the  mind,  or  in  the  state  of  the  ideas
and  desires,  are  not  to  be  attained  immediately  by  desiring  those
changes,  but  through  long  and  complex  series  of  intervening
means,  beginning  with  desires  which  reaUy  are  vditionsP^

Our  desires  of  those  bodily  movements  which  immediately
follow  our  desires  of  them,  are  therefore  the  only  objects  which
can  be  styled  volitiims ;  or  (if  you  like  the  expression  better)
which  can  be  styled  acts  of  the  will. — ^For  that  is  merely  to
afl&rm,  '  that  they  are  the  only  desires  which  are  followed  by
their  objects  immediately,  or  without  the  intervention  of  means.'
They  are  distinguished  from  other  desires  by  the  name  of  volitions,
on  account  of  this,  their  essential  or  characteristic  property.

And  as  these  are  the  only  volitions;  so  are  the  bodily
movements,  by  which  they  are  immediately  followed,  the  only
acts  or  a^dioTis  (properly  so  called).^^  It  will  be  admitted  on
the  mere  statement,  that  the  only  objects  which  can  be  called


^  Examples:  Taking  up  a  book  to
banish  an  importunate  thought  Look-
ing into  a  book  to  recoyer  an  absent
thought.

"  It  is  not  clear  whether  the  author
here  intends  to  exclude  from  the  cate-
gory of  acts  all  processes  that  do  not
imiMdicUely  result  in  a  palpable  bodily
movement. If  so,  he  is  inconsistent

The  author  elsewhere  (p.  454)  impli-
citly recognises  mediUUian  as  an  act:
Further  (p.  465),  while  he  regards  the
conviction  produced  by  evidence  as  a
case  of  physical  compulsion,  he  reco^ises
that  non-belief  may  be  blamable,  if  the
result  of  insufficient  examination,  refusal
to  examine,  etc.  The  process  of  examin-
ation is  therefore  the  obiect  of  a  duty,
and  hence,  according  to  his  own  analysis,
it  is  an  act  (pp.  867,  395).

And  it  is  difficult  to  see  why  cogito
should  not  be  classed  with  acts,  just
as  much  as  eurro or  haurio. There


seems  no  generic  difference  between  the
act  of  takmg  up  a  book  to  banish  an  im-
portunate uiought  and  the  process  of
entering  (without  external  aid)  upon  some
mental  exercise  (e,g,  a  problem  in  geo-
metry) for  the  same  purpose.  It  is  no
doubt  true  that  a  ffiven  specific  change  in
the  state  of  the  mind  cannot  generaUy  be
the  object  of  a  volition.  But  the  same  is
true  of  any  given  bodily  movement,  un-
less it  happen  to  be  one  of  those  move-
ments, very  limited  in  direction  and
extent,  which  are  immediately  in  our
power  to  effect

No  doubt  the  mental  processes  in  ques-
tion are  too  impalpable  and  obscure  to
enter  the  domain  of  positive  law,  unless
evidenced  by  acts  of  a  more  observable
kind,  which  last  are  sometimes  distin-
guished by  the  name  of  overi  CKts,  a  term
devised  not  without  insight. (See  p.  44 1 ,

P08t.)—K  C.


Will.  415

acts,  are  consequences  of  Volitions.  A  voluntary  movement  of  Lect.
my  body,  or  a  movement  which  follows  a  volition,  is  an  act  v"  ^  ^
The  twvolimtary  movements  which  are  the  consequences  of
certain  diseases,  are  not  acts.  But  as  the  bodily  movements
which  immediately  follow  volitions,  are  the  only  eiids  of  volition,
it  follows  that  those  bodily  movements  are  the  only  objects  to
which  the  term  'acts'  can  be  applied  with  perfect  precision
and  propriety.

The  only  difl&culty  with  which  the  subject  is  beset,  arises  Names  of
from  the  concise  or  abridged  manner  in  which  (generally  prise  cer-
speaking)  we  express  the  objects  of  our  discourse.  ^^,  ^^

Most  of  the  names  which  seem  to  be  names  of  acts,  are  sequences,
names  of  acts,  coupled  with  certain  of  their  consequences.  For
example,  If  I  kill  you  with  a  gun  or  pistol,  I  shoot  you :  And
the  long  train  of  incidents  which  are  denoted  by  that  brief
expression,  are  considered  (or  spoken  of)  as  if  they  constituted
an  a/it,  perpetrated  by  me.  In  truth,  the  only  parts  of  the  train
which  are  my  act  or  acts,  are  the  muscular  motions  by  which  I
raise  the  weapon ;  point  it  at  your  head  or  body,  and  pull  the
trigger.  These  I  will  The  contact  of  the  flint  and  steel ;  the
ignition  of  the  powder,  the  flight  of  the  ball  towards  your  body,
the  wound  and  subsequent  death,  with  the  numberless  incidents
included  in  these,  are  consequences  of  the  act  which  I  wUl.  I
will  not  those  consequences,  although  I  may  intend  them.

Nor  is  this  ambiguity  confined  to  the  names  by  which  our  Confusion
actions  are  denoted.  It  extends  to  the  term  '  will ;'  to  the  term  S^tention.
*  volitions ;'  and  to  the  term  '  acts  of  the  will.'  In  the  caae
which  I  have  just  stated,  I  should  be  said  to  rvill  the  whole
train  of  incidents ;  although  I  should  only  vnll  certain  muscular
motions,  and  should  intend  those  consequences  which  constitute
the  rest  of  the  train.  But  the  further  explanation  of  these  and
other  ambiguities,  must  be  reserved  for  the  explanation  of  the
term  '  intention.'

The  desires  of  those  bodily  movements  which  immediately  Motive
follow  our  desires  of  them,  are  imputed  (as  I  have  said)  to  an  "*^  ^^^'
imaginary  being,  which  is  styled  the  Will, They  are  called
acto  of  the  will And this  imaginary  being is  said to be
determined  to  action,  by  Motives,

All  which  (translated  into  intelligible  language)  merely
means  this:  I  wish  a  certain  object.  That  object  is  not
attainable  immedicUely,  by  the  wish  or  desire  itself.  But  it  is
attainable  by  means  of  bodily  movements  which  will  imme-
diately follow  my  desire  of  them. For  the  purpose  of  attaining


4 1 6  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect. that  which  I  cannot  attain  by  a  wish,  I  wish  the  movements
V ^ V which  will  immediately  follow  my  wish,  and  through  which  I
expect  to  attain  the  object  which  is  the  end  of  my  desires  (as
in  the  foregoing  instance  of  the  book).
Motives  to X  motive,  then,  is  a  wish  causing  or  preceding  a  volition : —
A  wish  for  a  something  not  to  be  attained  by  wishing  it,  but
which  the  party  believes  he  shall  probably  or  certainly  attain,
by  means  of  those  wishes  which  are  styled  acts  of  the  wilL
Motives  to In  a  certain  sense,  motives  may  precede  motives  as  well  as
acts  of  the  will For  the  desired  object  which  is  said  to  deter-
mine the  will  may  itself  be  desired  as  a  mean  to  an  ulterior
purpose. In  which  case,  the  desire  of  the  object  which  is  the
ultimate  end,  prompts  the  desire  which  immediately  precedes
the  volition.

[Give  instance.]
Why  the  That  the  will  should  have  attracted  great  attention,  is  not

Stracted  wonderful.  For  by  means  of  the  bodily  movements  which  are
80  much  the  objects  of  volitions,  the  business  of  our  lives  is  carried  on.
i^d^b^n*  That  the  will  should  have  been  thought  to  contain  something
thought  extremely  mysterious,  is  equally  natural  For  volitions  (as  we
^^  ""  have  seen)  are  the  only  desires  which  consummate  themselves :
the  only  desires  which  attain  their  objects  without  the  inter-
vention of  means.


Notes  and  Fragments.


See  Mr.  Locke ;  Chapter  on  Power  and  WilL

Hie  mistake  was  this.  He  perceived  (though  obscurely)  that  we
mean  by  the  *wilP  or  by  'volitions,'  desires  which  consammate
themselves,  or  which  are  followed  immediately  by  their  objects.
And  if  he  had  asked  himself  *  what  desires  are  attained  by  merely
desiring  them  V  he  would  have  arrived  at  the  solution  reserved  for
Dr.  Brown.

[The  following  passage  in  Hobbes  is  referred  to  by  Mr.  Austin] : —

*In  DeUberation  the  last  Appetite  or  Aversion  immediately
adhering  to  the  action,  or  to  the  omission  thereof,  is  what  we  call
the  Will ;  the  Act  (not  the  faculty)  of  Willing.  And  Beasts  that
have  Deliberation  must  necessarily  also  have  Will.  The  Definition
of  the  Will  commonly  given  by  the  Schools,  that  it  is  a  rational
Appetite,  is  not  good.  For,  if  it  were,  then  there  could  be  no  volun-
tsaj  Act  against  Eeason.  For  a  voluntary  Act  is  that  which  proceedeth
from  the  Will  and  no  other.  But  if  instead  of  a  rational  Appetite,
we  shall  say  an  Appetite  resulting  from  a  precedent  DeUberation,
then  the  Definition  is  the  same  that  I  have  given  here.  WUl  therefore
is  the  last  Appetite  in  Deliberating,  And  though  we  say  in  conmion
Discourse,  a  man  had  a  Will  once  to  do  a  thing  that  nevertheless  he


Will  and  Motive. Fragments.  4 1 7

forbore  to  do ;  yet  that  is  properly  but  an  Inclination,  which  makes  Lect.
no  Action  voluntary ;  because  the  action  depends  not  of  it,  but  of  XVIII
the  last  Inclination  or  Appetite.' — Lemathan,  p.  28,  edit.  1651.  '

The  objects  of  wishes  or  desires  are  desired  simply  or  absolutely,
or  they  are  desired  for  their  effects  or  consequences.  Changing  the
expression,  the  objects  of  wishes  or  desires  are  desired  as  ends,  or
they  are  desired  as  means  to  ends.

For  example,  I  may  desire  money  for  the  sake  of  the  advantages
which  it  would  procure ;  or  (by  virtue  of  that  process  of  association
which  I  think  it  needless  to  explain)  I  may  wish  for  money  without
adverting  to  those  advaoj^es,  or  to  any  of  the  consequences  which
would  follow  the  attainment  of  my  desire.

And  the  remark  which  I  have  applied  to  posUive  desires,  will  also
apply  to  those  negative  desires  which  are  styled  aversions,  I  may  wish
to  avoid  a  given  pain  in  prospect,  without  carrying  my  attention
beyond  that  given  object.  Or  I  may  wish  that  an  event  in  prospect
may  not  happen,  on  account  of  some  consequence  which  would
certainly  or  probably  follow  it,  and  from  which  I  am  averse.

If  we  steadily  keep  in  view  this  simple  and  obvious  truth,  I  think
that  we  may  approach  to  the  true  distinctions  between  Motive,  Will,
and  Intention.

Voluntary. — Double  meaning  of  the  word  voluntary.

First,  a  voluntary  act  is  any  act  done  in  pursuance  of  a  volition ;
ie.  an  act  {s.s.)  with  such  of  its  intentional  consequences  as  are
included  in  its  import ;  e,g.  submission  to  punishment,  in  consequence
of  a  knowledge  that  resistance  would  be  fruitless.

Secondly,  a  voluntary  act  is  an  act  done  in  consequence  of  an  act
of  the  will,  as  determined  by  certain  motives.  This  last  sense  includes
several  related  yet  different  senses ;  e.g.  sl  voluntary  act^  as  opposed
to  an  act  done  for  a  valuable  consideration :  a  voluntary  act,  as
opposed  to  an  act  done  in  apprehension  of  pain.

Spontaneous. Mr.  Bentham  says,^^

'I  purposely  abstain  from  the  use  of  the  words  voluntary  and
involurdary,  on  account  of  the  extreme  ambiguity  of  their  signification.
By  a  voluntary  act  is  meant  sometimes,  any  act  in  the  performance  of
which  the  will  has  had  any  concern  at  all  j  in  this  sense  it  is  synony-
mous to  *' intentional;"  sometimes  such  acts  only,  in  the  production
of  whicb  the  will  has  been  determined  by  motives  not  of  a  painful
nature :  in  this  sense  it  is  synonymous  with  unconstrained  or  un/ioerced;
sometimes  siuch  acts  only,  in  the  production  of  which  the  wUl  has  been
determined  by  motives  which,  whether  of  the  pleasurable  or  painful  kind,
occurred  to  a  man  himself,  without  being  suggested  by  anybody  else;^^
in  this  sense  it  is  synonymous  with  spontaneous.

'The  sense  of  the  word  "  involuntary"  does  not  correspond
completely  to  that  of  the  word  "  voluntary."  Involuntary  is  used  in
opposition  to  intentional  and  to  unconstrained,  but  not  to  spontaneous.'

^  '  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legisla-  proceeding  from  the  Moral  Sanction,  are,

tion/  pp.  22,  79,  81.  with  reference  to  le^  obligation,  spon-

'*  Or  rather,  by  motives  otiter  than  taneous,—See  *  Principles,*  etc,  p.  320. —

those  which  are  in  question. Good  offices  Marginal  Note.

VOL.  I.  2  E


4 1 8  Pervading  Notions  analysed.


LECTUEE  XIX.

INTENTION.

Leot.XIX  In  the  preceding  Lectures  I  have  endeavoured  to  analyse  the
^■^  '  expressions  '  Ugal  JRigkt  and  Duty,'  or  to  determine  generally  the
nature  and  essence  of  legal  Bights  and  DtUies.

Before  I  can  complete  the  analysis  of  *  Eight '  and  *  Duty/
or  before  I  can  determine  completely  the  import  of  those  complex
terms^  I  must  advert  in  a  general  manner  to  legal  Injuries  or
Wrongs,  and  to  legal  or  political  Sanctions.

But  before  I  could  proceed  to  the  consideration  of  Injuries
and  Sanctions,  or  could  distinguish  Duty  or  Obligation  firom
physical  compulsion  or  restraint,  it  was  necessary  that  f  I  should
examine  the  meaning  of  '  Will '  and  '  Motive,'  *  Intention '  and
'Negligence:'  Including,  in  the  term  'Negligence,'  negligence
strictly  so  called;  with  the  closely  allied,  though  somewhat
different  notions,  which  are  styled  '  Eashness  '  or  *  Temerity,'  and
'  Heedlessness.'

Accordingly,  I  examined,  in  the  last  Lecture,  the  meaning
of '  Will '  and  '  Motive ;'  and  I  now  proceed  to  the  import  of
'  Intention '  and  '  Negligence.'

"  Volitions  As  I  stated  in  my  last  Lecture,  some  of  our  wishes  or  desires

Motives.  *"^  followed  immediately  by  their  objects.  In  other  words,
some  of  our  wishes  or  desires  consummate  themselves,  or  attain
their  appropriate  ends  without  the  intervention  of  means.

The  only  wishes  or  desires  which  consummate  themselves,
are  wishes  or  desires  for  certain  movements  of  our  own  bodily
organs.  All  our  other  desires  attain  their  appropriate  ends,  by
means,  or  series  of  means :  by  means  of  the  bodily  movements
which  immediately  follow  our  desires  for  them,  or  by  means  of
those  bodily  movements  coupled  with  additional  means.

[The  bodily  movements  which  we  will,  or  which  immediately
follow  our  desires  of  them,  are  not  desired  for  themselves,  but
for  their  consequences.  They  are  not  desired  as  ends  but  as
means  to  ends.

This  (I  believe)  will  hold  universally.  The  movements  in
themselves  are  perfectly  indifferent  objects,  and  derive  all  their
interest  from  the  purposes  which  they  subserve.]

The  desires  for  those  bodily  movements  which  immediately
follow  our  desires  for  them,  are  sometimes  styled  '  volitions :' —


Volitions.  419

more  frequently,  '  determinations  of  the  will,/  or  of  *  the  power  Lkot.  XIX
or  faculty  of  willing/  For  here  (as  in  other  cases  of  cause  and
effect)  the  customary  sequence  of  the  bodily  movement  upon  the
desire  immediately  preceding,  has  been  ascribed  to  a  fancied
something  styled  a  *  power :'  A  'power  of  willing '  which  resides
in  the  man,  and  by  virtue  whereof  he  prodiices  the  movement
which  is  the  instant  consequence  of  his  wish  for  it  The  fancied
something  which  comes  between  the  wish  and  the  movement,
is  commonly  styled  (with  more  brevity)  '  the  WilL'  And  when-
ever I  find  occasion  to  mention  this  mysterious  being,  I  will  (if
you  please)  call  it  so.

For  the  structure  of  established  speech  forces  me  to  talk  of
'willing ;'  and  to  impute  the  bodily  movements,  which  imme-
diately follow  our  desires  for  them,  to  *  the  Will'

To  discard  established  terms  is  seldom  possible ;  and  where
it  is  possible,  is  seldom  expedient.  A  familiar  expression,  how-
ever obscure,  is  commonly  less  obscure,  as  well  as  more  welcome
to  the  taste,  than  a  new  and  strange  ona  Instead  of  rejecting
conventional  terms  because  they  are  ambiguous  and  obscure,  we
shall  commonly  find  it  better  to  explain  their  meanings,  or  (in
the  language  of  Old  Hobbes)  'to  muff  them  with  distinctions
and  definitions,'

Accordingly,  I  shall  talk  of  '  willing ;'  of  '  determinations  of
the  will ;'  and  of  *  motives  determining  the  will'  But  all  that
I  mean  by  those  expressions  is  this.  '  To  wUll  is  to  wish  or
desire  certain  of  those  bodily  movements  which  immediately
follow  our  desires  of  them.  A  '  determination  of  the  will,'  or  a
'  volition*  is  a  wish  or  desire  of  the  sort.  A  'motive  determining
the  will,'  is  a  wish  n^t  a  volition,  but  suggesting  a  wish  which
is.  The  wish  styled  a  *  motive,'  is  not  immediately  followed  by
its  appropriate  object :  But  the  bodily  movement  which  is  the
appropriate  object  of  the  volition,  seems  to  the  party  a  certain  or
probable  mean  for  attaining  the  something  which  is  the  appro-
priate object  of  the  motive.  In  case  that  something  be  wished
as  a  m,ean  to  an  ulterior  object,  the  wish  of  the  ulterior  object  is
a  motive  to  a  motive;  as  the  wish  of  the  intervening  mean  is  a
motive  to  the  volition.

The  bodily  movements  which  immediately  follow  our  desires  Acts,
of  them,  are  the  only  human  acts,  strictly  and  properly  so  caUed.
For  events  which  are  not  vnlled  are  not  acts ;  and  the  bodily
movements  in  question  are  the  only  events  which  we  wUL
They  are  the  only  objects  which  follow  our  desires,  without  the
intervention  of  means.


42,Q  Pervading  Notions  analysed,

Lect.  XIX But,  as  I  observed  in  my  last  Lecture,  most  of  the  names

' which  seem  to  be  names  of  acts  are  names  of  acfe  strictly  and

properly  so  called,  coupled  wUh  more  or  fewer  of  their  consequcTvces.

And  as  the  names  of  acts  comprise  certain  of  their  conse--
quencesy  so  it  is  &iid  that  those  consequences  are  willed,  althoi^h
they  are  only  intended.  In  the  case  which  I  have  just  supposed,
it  would  be  said  that  I  willed  the  consequences  of  my  voluntary
muscular  movements,  as  well  as  the  movements  themselves.

Nor  is  it  in  our  power  to  discard  these  forms  of  speech,
although  they  involve  the  nature  of  will  and  intention  in  thick
obscurity.  They  are  inseparably  interwoven  with  the  rest  of
established  language ;  and  if  we  attempted  to  change  them  for
new  and  precise  expressions,  we  should  either  resort  to  terms
which  others  would  not  understand,  or  to  tedious  circumlocutions
which  others  would  not  endure.  To  analyse,  mark,  and  remem-
ber their  complex  import,  is  all  that  we  can  accomplish.

Accordingly,  I  must  often  speak  of  'acts,'  when I  mean
'acts  arid  their  conseqtLences ;* and  must  often  speak  of  those
consequences  as  if  they  were  vnHed,  though,  in  truth,  they  are
iritended.
Internal  And  here  I  must  pause  a  moment  for  the  purpose  of  cor-

recting a  mistake  which  I  made  in  a  former  Lecture.

In  that  Lecture,  I  distinguished  acts  into  acts  internal,  and
acts  external '."^^  Meaning  by  acts  internal,  volitions  or  deter-
minations of  the  will:  and  meaning  by  acts  external,  the  bodily
movements  which  are  the  appropriate  objects  of  volitions.

I  am  convinced,  on -reflection,  that  the  terms  are  needless,
amd  tend  to  darken  their  subjects.  The  term  *  volitions,'  or  the
term  'determinations  of  the  will,'  sufficiently  denotes  the
objects  to  which  I  applied  the  term  '  internal  acts  :*  And  it  is
utterly  absurd  (unless  we  are  talking  in  metaphor)  to  apply
such  terms  as  'act'  and  'movement'  to.mewtal  phenomena.  I,.
therefore,  repudiate  the  term  *  interned  '.  acts  ;*  and,  with  that
term,  the  superfluous  distinction  in  question.  I  hastily  borrowed
the  distinction  from  the  works  of  Mr.  Bentham:^®  A  writer,
whom  I  much  revere,  and  whom  I  am  prone  to  follow,  though
I  will  not  receive  his  dogmas  with  blind  and  servile  submission.
Impostors  exact  from  their  disciples  '  prostration  of  the  under-
standing,' because  their  doctrines  will  not  endure  examination.

^'^  Lect.  XIV.,  p.  365,  supra,  acts  ;  acts  of  the  mind :  Thus,  to  strike

'•  '  In  the  second  place,  acts  may  be  is  an  external  or  exterior  act :  to  intend

distinguished  into  external  and  interjud.  to  strike,  an  internal  or  interior  one.' —

By  external  are  meant  corporal  acte ;  Bentfiam,  Principles,  etc.  p.  70.
acte  of  the  body: by  internal,  mental


Acte.


Will  and  Intention.  42 1

A  man  of  Mr.  Beiitham's  genius  may  provoke  inquiry; and  Lect.xIX
may  rest  satisfied  with  the  ample  and  genuine  admiration  which ^"^^^
his  writings  will  infallibly  extort  from  scrutinising  and  impar-
tial judges.

The  bodily  movements  which  immediatelsc  follow  our  de-  intention
sires  of  them,  are  acts  (properly  so  called).  ?^  "reswit

But  every  act is  followed  by  consequences ;  and is also  acts,  or
attended  by  concomitants,  which  are  styled  its  circumstances.  ^enc^^of

To  desire  the  act  is  to  tvill  it To  expect  any  of  its  conse-  present
quences,  is  to  intend  those  consequences.

The  act  itself  is  intended  as  well  -as  willed.  For  every
volition  is  accompanied  by  an  expectation  or  belief,  that  the
bodily  movement  wished  will  immediately  follow  the  wisL

A  consequence  of  the  act  is  never  willed.  For  none  but
acts  themselves  are  the  appropriate  objects  of  volitions.  Nor  is
it  always  inleTvded.  For  the  party  who  wills  the  act,  may  not
expect  the  consequence.  If  a  consequence  of  the  act  be  desired,
it  is  probably  intended.  But  (as  I  shall  shew  immediately)  an
intended  consequence  is  not  always  desired.  Intentions,  there-
fore, regard  cu:ts :  or  they  regard  the  conseqicen^  of  acts.

When  I  will  an  act,  I  expect  or  intend  the  act  which  is  the
appropriate  object  of  the  volition.  And  when  I  will  an  act,  I
may  expect,  contemplate,  or  intend  some  given  event,  as  a
certain  or  contingent  con^sequence  of  the  act  which  I  wilL

Hence  (no  doubt) the  frequent  confusion  of  Will  and  In-  Confusion
tention. Feeling  tJuU  imll  implies  inteni&yn  (or  that  the  ap-  ^nd  Inten-
propriate objects  of  volitions  are  intended  as  well  as  willed)  tion.
numerous  writers  upon  Jurisprudence  (and  Mr.'Bentham  amongst
the  number)  employ  '  will '  and  '  intention  *  as  synonymous"or
equivalent  terms. They  forget  thai  intention  does  nx>t  imply  vrill;
or  that  the  appropriate  objects  of  certain  intentions  are  not  the
appropriate  objects  of  volitions. The  agent  may  not  intend  a  A  conse-
consequence  of  his  act. In  other  words,  when  the  agent  wills  an^^t^may
the  act,  he  may  not  contemplate  that  given  event  as  a  certain  not  be  in-
or  contingent  consequence  of  the  act  which  he  wills.  ^  ^  *

For  example :

My  yard  or  garden  \&  divided  from  a  road  by  a  high  paling.
I  am  shooting  with  a  pistol  at  a  mark  chalked  upon  this  paling.
A  passenger  then  on  the  road,  but  whom  the  fence  intercepts
from  my  sight,  is  wounded  by  one  of  the  shots.  For  the  shot
pierces  the  paling ;  passes  to  the  road ;  and  hits  the  passenger.

Now,  when  I  aim  at  the  mark,  and  pull  the  trigger,  I  may
not  inlend  to  hurt  the  passenger. I  may  not  contemplate  the


422


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Lect.  XIX


An  in-
tended
conse-
quence of
an  act  may
be  toished
or  not.
And  if
wished,  it
may  be
wished  as
an  end,  or
as  a  mean,
Conse-
quence  of
an  act
wished  as
an  end.


hurt  of  a  passenger  as  a  contingent  consequence  of  the  act
For  though  the  hurt  of  a  passenger  be  a  probable  consequence,  I
may  not  think  of  it,  or  advert  to  it,  as  a  consequence.  Or,
though  I  may  advert  to  it  as  a  possible  consequence,  I  may
think  that  the  fence  will  intercept  the  shot,  and  prevent  it  from
passing  to  the  road.  Or  the  road  may  be  one  which  is  seldom
travelled,  and  I  may  think  the  presence  of  a  stranger  at  that
place  and  time  extremely  improbable.

On  any  of  these  suppositions,  I  am  dear  of  irUending  the
harm  :  Though  (as  I  shall  shew  hereafter)  I  may  be  guilty  of
heedlessness  or  rashness.  Before  intention  can  be  defined  exactly,
the  import  of  those  terms  must  be  taken  into  consideration.

Where  the  agent  intends  a  consequence  of  the  act,  he  may
vrish  the  consequence,,  or  he  may  7u>t  wish  it

And,  if  he  vrish  the  consequence,  he  may  wish  it  as  an  end,
or  he  may  wish  it  as  a  mean  to  an  end.

I  will  illustrate  these  three  suppositions  by  adducing  ex-
amples. But  before  I  exemplify  these  three  suppositions,  I  will
endeavour  to  expledn  what  I  mean,  when  I  say  'that  a  conse-
quence of  an  act  may  be  wished  as  an  end,'

Strictly  speaking,  no  external  consequence  of  any  act  is
desired  as  an  end.

The  end  or  ultimate  purpose  of  every  volition  and  act  is  a
feeling  or  sentiment : — ia  pleasure,  direct  or  positive ;  or  is  the
pleasure  which  arises  indirectly  from  the  removal  or  prevention
of  pain.  But  where  the  pleasure,  which  (in  strictness)  is  the
end  of  the  act,  can  only  be  attained  through  a  given  external
consequence,  that  external  consequence  is  inseparable  from  the
end ;  and  is  styled  (with  suflScient  precision)  the  end  of  the  act
and  the  volition.  For  example.  If  you  shoot  me  to  death
because  you  hate  me  mortally,  my  death  is  a  necessary  condi-
tion to  the  attainment  of  your  end.  The  end  of  the  act,  is  to
allay  the  deadly  antipathy.  But  the  end  can  only  be  attained
through  my  death.  And  my  death  (which  is  an  intended  con-
sequence of  the  act)  may,  therefore,  be  styled  the  end  of  the
act  and  the  volition.

I  stated  in  my  last  Lecture,  that  the  bodily  movements,
which  are  the  appropriate  objects  of  volitions,  are  not  desired  as
ends.

But  that  is  true  of  every  outward  object  which  is  the  object
of  a  desire.  This,  therefore,  will  not  distinguish  volitions  from
other  desires.

Nor  can  it  be  said,  that  the  appropriate  objects  of  volitions


Intention.  423

are  desired  as  means  to  ends  external,  or  to  remote  ends. In  Leot.XIX
most  cases  they  are. But  in  some  they  are  not. Namely, ^"^
dancing,  etc.,  for  nothing  but  the  present  pleasure.

The  true  test  is,  that  they  are  the  only  desires  immediately
followed  by  their  appropriate  or  direct  objects.

Where  an  intended  consequence  is  wished  as  an  end  or  a  Concur,
mean,  motive  and  intention  concur. In  other  words,  The  con-  JJoSre^
sequence  intended  is  also  wished ; and  the  wish  of  that  conse-  and  Inten-
quence  suggests  the  volition.  ^^^'

I  will  now  exemplify  those  three  varieties  of  intention  at  Exempli-
which  I  have  pointed  already."  the*three*^

The  varieties  are  the  following :  foregoing

1st.  The  agent  may  itUend  a  consequence ;  and  that  conse-  Som^*^'
quence  may  be  the  end  of  his  act

2ndly.  He  mskj  intend  a  consequence;  but  he  may  desire
that  consequence  as  a  inean  to  an  end.

3rdly.  He  may  intend  the  consequence,  without  desiring  it

As  examples  of  these  three  varieties,  I  will  adduce  three
cases  of  intentional  killing.

You hate me  mortally: And, in  order that you may  Of  the  first
appease  that  painful  and importunate  feeling,  you  shoot  me  ti<m^'
dead.

Now  here  you  intend  my  death:  And  (taking  the  word
'  end '  in  the  meaning  which  I  have  just  explained)  my  death  is
the  end  of  the  act,  and  of  the  volition  which  precedes  the  act
Nothing  but  that  consequence  would  accomplish  the  purpose,
which  (speaking  with  metaphysical  precision)  is  the  end  of  the
act  and  the  volition.  Nothing  but  that  consequence  would
allay  the  painful  sentiment  of  which  you  purpose  ridding
yourself  when  you  shoot  ma  Nothing  but  that  consequence
would  appease  your  hate,  or  satisfy  your  malice.

Again :  Of  the

You  shoot  me,  that  you  may  take  my  purse. I  refuse  to  ^^.
deliver  my  purse,  when  you  demand  it I  defend  my  purse  to  tion.
the  best  of  my  ability. And,  in  order  that  you  may  remove  the
obstacle  which  my  resistance  opposes  to  your  purpose,  you  pull
out  a  pistol  and  shoot  me  dead.

Now  here  you  intend  my  death,  and  you  also  desire  my
death.  But  you  desire  it  as  a  mean,  and  not  as  an  end.  Your
desire  of  my  death  is  not  the  ultimate  motive  suggesting  the
volition  and  the  act  Your  ultimate  motive  is  your  desire  of
my  purse.  And  if  I  would  deliver  my  purse,  you  would  not
shoot  me.


424


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Lect.  XIX

Of  the
third  sup-
position.


Lastly:

You  shoot  at  Sempronius  or  Styles,  at  Titius  or  Nokes,
desiring  and  intending  to  kill  him.  Hie  death  of  Styles  is  the
end  of  your  volition  and  act.  Your  desire  of  his  death,  is  the
ultimate  motive  to  the  volition.  You  contemplate  his  death,  as
the  probable  consequence  of  the  act.

But  when  you  shoot  at  Styles,  /  am  talking  with  him,  and
can  standing  close  by  him.  And,  &om  the  position  in  which
I  stand  with  regard  to  the  person  you  aim  at,  you  think  it  not
unlikely  that  you  may  kill  me  in  your  attempt  to  kill  him.
You  fire,  and  kill  me  accordingly.  Now  here  you  intend  my
death,  without  desiring  it.  The  end  of  the  volition  and  act,  is
the  death  of  Styles.  My  death  is  neither  desired  as  an  end^
nor  is  it  desired  as  a  mean :  My  death  subserves  not  your  end :
you  are  not  a  bit  the  nearer  to  the  death  of  Styles,  by  killing
me.  But,  since  you  contemplate  my  death  as  a  probable
consequence  of  your  act,  you  intend  my  death  although  you
desire  it  not.


Forhear-
ances  are
intended,
hut  not
willed.


L^


It  follows  from  the  nature  of  Volitions,  that  forbearances
from  acts  are  not  willed,  but  intended.

To  vrill,  is  to  wish  or  desire  one  of  those  bodily  movements
which  immediately  follow  our  desires  of  them.  These  move-
ments are  the  only  ocfe,  properly  so  called.  Consequently,  *  To
will  a  forbearance '  (or  '  to  will  the  absence  or  negation  of  an
act '),  is  a  flat  contradiction  in  terms.

When  I  forbear  from  an  act,  I  vrilL  But  I  will  an  act
oth^  than  that  from  which  I  forbear  or  abstain :  And,  knowing
that  the  act  which  I  will,  excludes  the  act  forborne,  I  intend
the  forbearance.  In  other  words,  I  contemplate  the  forbear-
ance as  a  consequence  of  the  act  which  I  will ;  or,  rather,  as  a
necessary  condition  to  the  act  which  I  wilL  For  if  I  willed
the  act  from  which  I  forbear,  I  should  not  will  (at  this  time)
the  act  which  I  presently  will.

For  example,  It  is  my  duty  to  come  hither  at  seven  o'clock.
But,  instead  of  coming  hither  at  seven  o'clock,  I  go  to  the
Playhouse  at  that  hour,  conscious  that  I  ought  to  come  hither.

Now,  in  this  case,  my  absence  from  the  room  is  intentional,
I  know  that  my  coming  hither  is  inconsistent  with  my  going
thither:  that,  if  my  legs  brought  me  to  the  University,  they
would  not  carry  me  to  the  Playhouse.

If  I  forgot  that  I  ought  to  come  hither,  my  absence  would
not  be  intentional,  but  the  effect  of  negligence.


Forbearance  and  Omission.  425

LECTUEE  XX.

NEGLIGENCE, HEEDLESSNESS, AND BASENESS.

In  my  last  Lecture,  I  endeavoured  to  distinguish  dcts  (properly  leot.  XX.
so  called)  from  the  events  which  are  conseqinemces  of  acts ; to ^~'' — *
shew  that  ojds  are  intended  as  well  as  untied ;  but  that  their  wiUed  and
consequences  are  never  willed,  although  they  are  often  intended,  q^^^  '
In  short,  every  forbearance  is  intended,  but  no  forbearance  is  quences
vnlled :  the  party  wills  a  something  inconsistent  with  the  act  JJ^^'
forborne,  conscious  that  the  something  which  he  presently  wills.  Forbear-
excludes  (for  the  time  being)  t?uU  from  which  he  forbears.  Sanded

The  motives  to  forbearances  (or,  rather,  to  the  acts  which  Motives  to
exclude  the  acts  forborne),  are  different  in  different  cases.  anc^"

Disliking  the  consequences  of  the  act  from  which  I  forbear,
I  forbear  from  the  act  because  I  dislike  those  consequences.  Or
without  disliking  (or  positively  liking)  those  consequences,  I
'prefer  the  consequences  .of  the  act  which  I  presently  will,  and
which  I  could  not  perform  unless  I  forbore  from  the  other.

In  the  first  of  these  cases,  my  motive  to  the  act  which  I
presently  will,  is  styled  aversion:  aversion  from  the  act  for-
borne, or  (rather)  from  its  probable  consequences.  But  whether
the  act  which  I  wUl  be  promoted  by  preference  or  aversion,  the
act  which  I  will,  and  nxit  the  forbearance,  is  the  object  of  the
volition  itself.  *To  will  nothing,'  is  a  flat  contradiction  in
terms.'^

Forbearances  must  be  distinguished  from  Omissions.  Forbear-

A  forbearance  (taking  the  word  in  its  large  signification)  is  ^n^^-^^d
the  not  doing  a  given  act  with  an  intention  of  not  doing  it.  fromOmis-
The  party  unlls  something  else,  knowing  that  that  which  he  ^^°^^
wills  excludes  the  given  act.

An  omission  (taking  the  word  in  its  large  signification)  is
the  not  doing  a  given  act,  without  adverting  (at  the  time)  to  the
act  which  is  not  dona

The  term  '  forbearance '  (as  it  is  often  used)  is  restricted  to  Ambigu-
lawful  forbearances: — to  such  as  are  exacted  by  duties,  or  are  tems*For.
not  inconsistent  with  duties.  bearance

The  term  'omission'  (as  it  is  often  used)  is  restricted  to  ^n;''""
unlawful  or  culpable  omissions : — ^to  such  as  are  breaches  of  '  Commit

, ^.  and  Omit.

duties.

'^  It  is  not  perhaps  rigidly  true  that  every  forbearance  is  preceded  or  accom-
panied by  an  oc^  '^  < .


426  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XX  And,  taking  the  terms  in  those  restricted  senses,  we  have  no
names  for  unlawful  or  culpable  forbearances,  or  for  lawful
omissions.  Not  unfrequently,  the  term  '  omission '  is  extended
to  all  omissions,  and  also  to  all  forbearances.  Or  the  term
'omission'  denotes  such  omissions  and  forbearances  as  are
unlawful  or  culpable.  And,  in  either  of  those  cases,  the  no^
doing,  which  is  unintentional,  is  confounded  with  the  not  doing,
which  is  intentional.

'  Omit '  (as  opposed  to  '  commit  *)  is  also  defective  or  am-
biguous. To  '  commit,'  is  to  do  an  act  inconsistent  with  a  duty.
'  To  omit,*  is  to  omit  unlawfully ;  or  to  omit  (or  forbear)  unlaw-
fully. In  the  first  case,  culpable  forheararyce  is  dropped.  In
the  last  case,  culpable  forbearance  is  confounded  with  afulpaJble
omission,

I  think  that  the  usage  of  numerous  and  good  writers  au-
thorises the  large  significations  which  I  attach  to  the  terms  in
question.  At  all  events,  those  significations  are  so  clear,  precise,
and  commodious,  that  I  should  venture  to  annex  them  to  the
terms,  in  the  teeth  of  established  usage.

Those  significations  I  will  repeat

'  To  forbear '  is  no^  to  do,  with  an  intention  of  not  doing.

'  A  forbearance,'  is  a  tw^  doing,  with  a  like  intention.

*  To  omit,'  is  not  to  do,  but  without  thought  of  the  act  which
is  not  done.

*  An  omission,'  is  a  7u>t  doing,  with  a  similar  absence  of
consciousness.

If  we  would  denote  *  that  a  forbearance  or  omission  is  a
breach  of  duty,'  we  can  easily  accomplish  the  purpose  by  ex-
press restriction.  We  can  style  it '  injurious '  or  *  unlawful,'  or
we  can  call  it '  culpable.'  Injurious  or  culpable  omissions  are
Negli-  frequently  styled  '  negligent'  The  party  who  omits  is  said  to
^^^^*  '  njeglect '  his  duty.  The  omission  is  ascribed  to  his  '  negligence!
The  state  of  his  mind  at  the  time  of  the  omission,  is  styled
*  negligence!

These  (I  think)  are  the  meanings  usually  attached  to  these
terms;  although  the  Eoman  Lawyers  (as  I  shall  shew  im-
mediately) have  given  them  a  larger  signification.

Taking  them  in  the  meanings  which  (I  believe)  are  usual,
the  term  '  negligent '  applies  exclusively  to  injurious  omissions :
— ^to  breaches  by  omission  of  positive  duties.  The  party  omits
an  act  to  which  he  is  obliged  (in  the  sense  of  the  Boijnan
Lawyers).  He  performs  not  an  act  to  which  he  is  obliged,
because  the  act  and  the  obligation  are  absent  from  his  mind.


Negligence  y  &c.,  distinguished  from  Intention.  427

'  Heedlessness '  difiPers from negligence,  although they  are  Lbct.  XX
closely  allied/®  Heedleas-

llie  party  who  is  negligent  omits  an  act,  and  breaks  a  '^^ss.
positive  duty :

The  party  who  is  heedless  does  an  act,  and  breaks  a  negative
duty.

Acts  (properly  so  called)  are  not  injuries  or  wrongs,  inde-
pendently of  their  consequences.  Where  an  act  is  forbidden,
the  duty  and  the  sanction  are  pointed  at  consequences  which
constantly  or  usually  follpw  it.  And  (as  I  shall  shew  hereafter)
the  guilt  or  innocence  of  a  given  actor,  depends  upon  the  state
of  his  consciousness,  with  regard  to  those  consequences,  in  the
given  instance  or  case.

If  he  intend  or  expect  them,  he  is  guilty  of  the  wrong  at
which  the  sanction  is  aimed.  And,  though  he  expect  them  not,
they  are  rationally  imputed  to  him,  provided  he  vnyiUd  have
expected  them,  if  he  had  thought  of  them  and  of  his  duty.
Where  he  does  the  act  without  adverting  to  those  consequences,
he  is  clear  of  intending  those  consequences,  but  he  produces  them
byjjis  heedlessness.
^_  )  I  endeavoured  in  my  last  Lecture  to  illustrate  my  meaning,
by  an  example  to  which  I  now  refer  you.^*  In  the  case
supposed,  I  did  not  advert  to  the  probable  consequence  of  my
act.  And,  since  it  was  my  duty  to  advert  to  it,  I  am  guilty
of  heedlessness,  although  I  am  clear  of  intentional  injury.

The states  of mind  which are  styled  'Negligence' and  Negli-
'  Heedlessness  '  are  precisely  alika In  either  case  the  party  is  SeS^.
inadvertent. In  the  first  case,  he  does  not  an  act  which  he  was  ??JJ^®°^'
bound  to  do,  because  he  adverts  not  to  it In  the  second  case
he  does  an  act  from  which  he  was  bound  to  forbear,  because  he
adverts  not  to  certain  of  its  probable  consequences. Absence
of  a  thought  which  one's  duty  would  naturally  suggest,  is  the
main  ingredient  in  each  of  the  complex  notions  which  are  styled
'  negligence '  and  '  heedlessness.'

The  party  who  is  guilty  of  Temerity  or  Eashness,  like  the  Rashness,
party  who  is  guilty  of  heedlessness,  does  an  act,  and  breaks  a
positive  duty.  But  the  party  who  is  guilty  of  heedlessness,
thinks  not  of  the  probable  mischief.  The  party  who  is  guilty  of
rashness  thinks  of  the  probable  mischief;  but,  in  consequence  of
a  missupposition  begotten  by  insufficient  advertence,  he  assumes
that  the  mischief  will  not  ensue  in  the  given  instance  or  case.
Such (I  think) is the meaning invariably  attached to the

"  Bentham,  'Principles,*  etc.  pp.  86,  161.  '»  See  p.  421,  ante.


428  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XX  expressions,  *  Eashness/  '  Temerity/  '  Foolhardiness/  and  the  like.

' * ' The  radical  idea  denoted  is  always  this. The  party  runs  a  risk

of  which  he  is  conscious ;  but  he  thinks  (for  a  reason  which  he

examines insufficiently)  that the mischief  will probably  be

averted  in  the  given  instance.

I  will  again  illustrate  my  meaning,  by  recurring  to  the
example  to  which  I  have  just  alluded.

Wlien  I  fire  at  the  mark  chalked  upon  the  fence,  it  occurs
to  my  mind  that  a  shot  may  pierce  the  fence,  and  may  chance
to  hit  a  passenger.  But  without  examining  carefully  the
ground  of  my  conclusion^  I  conclude  that  the  fence  is  sufficiently
thick  to  prevent  a  shot  from  passing  to  the  road.  Or,  without
giving  myself  the  trouble  to  look  into  the  road,  I  assume  that  a
passenger  is  not  there,  because  the  road  is  seldom  passed.  In
either  cases,  my  confidence  is  rash ;  and,  through  my  rashness
or  temerity y  I  am  the  author  of  the  mischief.  My  assumption
is  founded  upon  evidence  which  the  event  shews  to  be  worthless,
and  of  which  I  should  discover  the  worthlessness  if  I  scrutinised
it  as  I  ought.

By  the  Roman  Lawyers,  Eashness,  Heedlessness,  or  Negli-
gence is,  in  certain  cases,  considered  equivalent  ^  to  '  Dolus : '
that  is  to  say,  to  intention.  '  Dolo  comparatur.*  '  Vix  est  ut  a
certo  nocendi  p7*oposito  discemi  possit,'  Changing  the  ex-
pression, they  suppose  that  rashness,  heedlessness,  or  negligence
can  hardly  be  distinguished,  in  certain  cases,  from  intention.

Now  this  (it  appears  to  me)  is  a  mistake.  Intention  (it
seems  to  me)  is  a  precise  state  of  the  mind,  and  cannot  coalesce
or  conmiingle  with  a  different  state  of  the  mind.  '  To  intend,'
is  to  believe  that  a  given  act  will  follow  a  given  volition,  or
that  a  given  consequence  will  follow  a  given  act.  The  chance
of  the  sequence  may  be  rated  higher  or  lower ;  but  the  party
conceives  the  future  event,  and  believes  that  there  is  a  chance  of
its  following  his  volition  or  act.  Intention,  therefore,  is  a  state
of  consciousness.

But  negligence  and  heedlessness  suppose  t^Ticonsciousness.
In  the  first  case,  the  party  does  not  think  of  a  given  act  In
the  second  case,  the  party  does  not  think  of  a  given  con-
sequence.

Now  a  state  of  mind  between  consciousness  and  uncon-
sciousness— ^between  intention  on  the  one  side  and  negligence
or  heedlessness  on  the  other — seems  to  be  impossible.  The
party  thinks,  or  the  party  does  not  think,  of  the  act  or  con-
sequence. If  he  think  of  it,  he  intends. If  he  do  not  think  of


Negligence,  &c.,  distinguished  from  Intention.  429

it,  he  is  negligent  or  heedless. To say  that  a  negligence  or  I'Ect.  XX
heedlessness  may  run  into  intention,  is  to  say  that  a  thought
may  be  absent  from  the  mind,  and  yet  (after  a  fashion)  present
to  the  mind.

Nor  is  it  possible  to  conceive  that  supposed  mongrel  or
monster,  which  is  neither  temerity  nor  intention,  but  partakes
of  both  : — ^A  state  of  mind  Ijring  on  the  confines  of  each,  with-
out belonging  precisely  to  the  territory  of  either.

The  party  who  is  guilty  of  Eashness  thinks  of  a  given
consequence :  but,  by  reason  of  a  missupposition  arising  from
insufficient  advertence,  he  concludes  that  the  given  consequence
will  not  follow  the  act  in  the  given  instance.  Now  if  he
surmise  (though  never  so  hastily  and  faintly),  that  his  mis-
supposition  is  unfounded,  he  intends  the  consequence.  For  he
thinks  of  that  consequence ;  he  believes  that  his  missupposition
may  be  a  missupposition ;  and  he,  therefore,  believes  that  the
consequence  may  follow  his  act.

I  will  again  revert  to  the  example  which  I  have  already
cited  repeatedly.

When  I  fire  at  the  mark  chalked  upon  the  fence,  it  occurs
to  my  mind  that  the  shot  may  pierce  the  fence,  and  may  chance
to  hit  a  passenger.  But  I  assume  that  the  fence  is  sufficiently
thick  to  intercept  a  pistol-shot.  Or,  without  going  to  the  road
in  order  that  I  may  be  sure  of  the  fact,  I  assume  that  a
passenger  cannot  be  there  because  the  road  is  seldom  passed.

Now  if  my  missupposition  be  absolutely  confident  and  sin-
cere, I  am  guilty  of  rashness  only.

But,  instead  of  assuming  confidently  that  the  fence  will
intercept  the  ball,  or  that  no  passenger  is  then  on  the  road,  I
may  surmise  that  the  assumption  upon  which  I  act  is  not  al-
together just  I  think  that  a  passenger  may  chance  to  be
there,  though  I  think  the  presence  of  a  passenger  somewhat
improbable.  Or,  though  I  judge  the  fence  a  stout  and  thick
paling,  I  tacitly  admit  that  a  brick  wall  would  intercept  a
pistol-shot  more  certainly.  Consequently,  I  intend  the  hurt  of
the  passenger  who  is  actually  jut  and  wounded.  I  think  of  the
mischief,  when  I  will  the  act ;  I  believe  that  my  missupposition
may  be  a  missupposition;  and  I,  therefore,  believe  there  is  a
chance  that  the  mischief  to  which  I  advert  may  follow  my
volition.

The  proposition  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers  is,  therefore,  false.

The  mistake  (I  have  no  doubt)  arose  from  a  confusion  of
ideas  which  is  not  unfrequent: — ^from  the  confusion  of  pro-


430  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Leot.  XX  handwm  and  prolxms : — of  the  subject  of  an  inquiry  into  a  matter
' ' of  fact,  with  the  evidence.

The  state  of  a  man's  mind  can  only  be  known  by  otheis
through  his  acts :  through  his  own  declarations,  or  through  other
conduct  of  his  own.  Consequently,  it  must  often  be  diflftcult  to
determine  whether  a  party  iwtended,  or  whether  he  was  merely
negligent,  heedless,  or  rash.  The  acts  to  which  we  must  resort
as  evidence  of  the  state  of  his  mind,  ms^jJio^p^rMfftums :  inso-
much that  they  lead  us  to  one  conclusion,  as  naturally  as  to  the
other.  Judging  fix)m  his  conduct,  the  man  may  have  irUended,
or  he  may  have  been  negligent,  heedless,  or  rash.  Either
hypothesis  would  fit  the  appearances  which  are  open  to  our
observation.

But  the  difficulty  which  belongs  to  the  evidence  is  trans-
ferred to  the  subfect  of  the  inquiry.  Because  we  are  unable  *to
determine  what  was  the  state  of  his  mind,  we  fancy  that  the
state  of  lus  mind  was  itself  indetermiimte :  that  it  lay  between
the  confines  of  consciousness  and  unconsciousness,  without  be-
longing exactly  to  either.  We  forget  that  these  are  antagonist
notions,  incapable  of  blending.

When  it  was  said  by  the  Roman  Lawyers,  *  that  Negli-
gence, Heedlessness,  or  Eashness,  is  equivalent,  in  certain  cases,
to  Doltis  or  Intention,*  their  meaning  (I  believe)  was  this : —

Judging  from  the  conduct  of  the  party,  it  is  impossible  to
determine  whether  he  intended,  or  whether  he  was  negligent,
heedless,  or  rash.  And,  such  being  the  case,  it  shall  be
presumed  that  he  intended,  and  his  liability  shall  be  adjusted
accordingly,  provided  that  the  question  arise  in  a  civil  auction.  If
the  question  had  arisen  in  the  course  of  a  criminal  proceeding,
then  the  presumption  would  have  gone  in  favour  of  the  party,
and  not  against  him.

Such  (I  think)  is  the  meaning  which  floated  before  their
minds :  Although  we  must  infer  (if  we  take  their  expressions
literally)  that  they  believed  in  the  possibility  of  a  state  of  mind
lying  between  consciousness  and  imconsciousness.

If  I  attempted  to  explain  the  matter  fully,  I  should  enter
upon  certain  distinctions  between  civil  and  criminal  liability,
and  upon  the  nature  of  prcesumptiones  juris  or  legal  presumptions.

It  is,  therefore,  clear  to  me,  that  Intention  is  always  sepa-
rated from  Negligence,  Heedlessness,  or  Eashness,  by  a  precise
line  of  demarcation.  The  state  of  the  party's  mind  is  always
determined,  although  it  may  be  difi&cult  (judging  from  his
conduct)  to  ascertain  the  state  of  his  mind.


Negligence,  &c.,  likened  and  distinguished.  431

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  I  may  observe  that  hasty  inten-  Lbot.  XX
tion  is  frequently  styled  rashness.  For  instance,  an  intentional  ^  '  '
manslaughter  is  often  styled  rash,  because  the  act  is  not  pre-
meditated, or  has  not  been  preceded  by  deliberate  intention.
Before  we  can  distinguish  hasty  from  deliberate  intention,  we
must  determine  the  nature  of  intention  as  it  regards  future  acts.
But  it  is  easy  to  see  that  sudden  or  hasty  intention  is  utterly
different  from  rashness.  When  the  act  is  done,  the  party
contemplates  the  consequence,  although  he  has  not  premeditated
the  consequence  or  the  act.

To  resume :

It  is  manifest  that  Negligence,  Heedlessness,  and  Rashness,  Negli-
are  closely  allied. Want  of  the  advertence  which  one's  duty  S^^^gg
would  naturally  suggest,  is  the  fundamental  or  radical  idea  in  neas,  and
each  of  the  complex  notions. But  though  they  are  closely  ^^^^
allied,  or  are  modes  of  the same  notion,  they  are  broadly  anddistiu-
distinguished  by  dififerences.  ^^^

In  cases  of  Negligence,  the  party  performs  not  an  act  to
which  he  is  obliged. He  breaks  a  positive  duty.

In  cases  of  Heedlessness  or  Bashness,  the  party  does  an  act
from  which  he  is  bound  to  forbear. He  breaks  a  negative  duty.

In  cases  of  Negligence,  he  adverts  not  to  the  act,  which  it  is
his  duty  to  do.

In  cases  of  Heedlessness,  he  adverts  not  to  canseqiiences  of
the  act  which  he  does.

In  cases  of  Eashness,  he  adverts  to  those  consequences  of
the  act ;  but,  by  reason  of  some  assumption  which  he  examines
insufficiently,  he  concludes  that  those  consequences  wiU  not
follow  the  act  in  the  instance  before  him.

And,  since  the  notions  are  so  closely  allied,  they  are  (as
might  be  expected)  often  confounded.  Heedlessness  is  fre-
quently denoted  by  the  term  '  negligence ' ;  and  the  same  term
has  even  been  extended  to  rashness  or  temerity.  But  the  three
states  of  mind  are  nevertheless  distinct ;  and,  in  respect  of  .
diflFerences  between  their  consequences,  should  be  distinjguished. /

Having  tried  to  analyse  intention  (where  it  is  coupled  with
will),  and  to  settle  the  notions  of  negligence,  heedlessness,  and
rashness,  I  will  now  trouble  you  with  a  few  remarks  upon
certain  established  terms.

Dolus  denotes,  strictly,  fraud  ^ :  — '  Calliditas,  fallacia,  ma-  Dolus,
chinatio,  ad  circumveniendum,  decipiendum,  fallendum  alterum,
adhibita.'

»  Bentham,  Pr.  91.


432  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  XX  By  a  transference  of  its  meaning  which  is  not  very  expli-

"  cable,  it  also  signifies  irdeMvm,  ®*  or  irUentional  wrong : — *  Injuria
qualiscunque  scienter  admissa:' — 'Injuria  quam  quis  sciens
volensque  comnusit'

The  use  of  the  term  dolus  for  the  purpose  of  signifying
intefrUion,  may,  perhaps,  be  explained  thus :

Fraud  imports  intention :  For  he  who  contrives  or  machi-
nates ad  dedpiendum  cUterum,  pursues  a  given  purposa  For
want,  therefore,  of  a  name  which  would  denote  Intention
generally,  the  Eoman  Lawyers  expressed  it  (as  well  as  they
could)  by  the  name  of  a  something  which  necessarily  implied  it.

It  is  an  instance  of  those  generalizations  which  are  so  com-
mon in  language  r  of  the  extension  of  a  term  denoting  a  species,
to  the  genus  which  includes  that  species.  [e,g.  Virtue.]
Culpa.  CiUpa  (when  opposed  to  Dolus)  imports  negligence,  heedless-

ness, or  temerity ;  or  any  injury  consequent  upon  any  of  these :
*Omnis  protervitas,  temeritas,  inconsiderantia,  desidia,  negli-
gentia,  imperitia,  quibus  dtra  dolum,  cui  nocitum  est'  But
(used  in  a  larger  sense).  Culpa  is  equivalent  to  the  English
'  ChiUt*  It  denotes  that  the  party  has  broken  a  duty,  intention-
ally, negligently,  heedlessly,  or  rashly.  'Generatim,  culpa  dicitur
qusevis  injuria  ita  admissa,  ut  jure  imputari  possit  ejus  auctorl'
In  order  that  a  given  mischief  may  be  imputed  to  another,
'  necesse  est,  ut  culpal  ejus  id  accident.'  That  is  to  say,  through
his  intention  ;  or  through  his  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  temerity
(as  I  have  explained  them  above).

Culpa,  therefore,  is  sometimes  opposed  to  Dolus;  and  it
sometimes  comprises  Dolus.

Again :  the  term  Culpa  is  sometimes  opposed  to  Negligentia,
In  which  case,  these  words  have  a  very  peculiar  meaning.

Culpa  is  restricted  to  delicts  (stricto  sensu).  Negligence
denotes  breaches  of  obligations  (s.  s.).

The  injuries  done  through  Culpa  (in  this  sense)  *fa/Aendo
semper  admittantur.'

The  injuries  done  '  Negligentid'  (in  this  sense)  are  committed
*  faciendo  aut  non  faciendo.'

Obligations  {stricto  sensu)  are  positive  or  negative.

Here  then  Negligentia  includes.  Intention,  Negligence  (pro-
perly so  called).  Heedlessness,  and  Temerity.

Origin  of  this  application. Negligentia  opposed  to  DUigentia :
ie.  that  care  which  (ex  obligatione)  the  obliged  party®^  is  often
obliged  to  employ  about  the  interests  of  another.
'^  But  for  a  modification  of  this  statement  see  p.  465,  post. ^  Trustees,  Bailees,  etc


Fragments,  433

I  have  already  remarked  upon  the  extension  of  Dolus  to  lbct.  XX
Intention  generally.  In  the  English  law  (in  certain  cases)  we  ^Tp — '
have  employed  the  word  *  Malice '  for  a  similar  purpose.  As
msdice  {stricto  sensu)  implies  intention,  it  has  been  extended  to
cases  in  which  there  is  no  malice.  As  I  have  already  shewn,  it
does  not  in  this  extended  sense  denote  the  motive.  And  it  is
manifest  that  the  motive  to  a  criminal  action  may  be  laudable.®*
The  intention  of  an  action  suggested  by  a  blamable  motive,  lawful.

A  few  words  for  the  purpose  of  applying  what  has  been  said  to  Dolus  and
the Roman Law. Unintentionality, and  innocence of  intention,  S^P*"
seem  both  to  be  included  in  the  case  of  infortunium,  where  there  is  i^w.
neither  dolus  nor  culpa, Unadvisedness  coupled  with  heedlessness,
and  misadvisedness  coupled  with  rashness,  correspond  to  the  culpa
sine  dole. Direct  intentionality  corresponds  to  dolus. Oblique  in-
tentionality  seems  hardly  to  have  been  distinguished  from  direct;
were  it  to  occur,  it  would  probably  be  deemed  also  to  correspond  to
dolus,^

Meanings  of  Dolus,  etc.

Dolus  bonus  et  malua — Miihlenbruch,  vol.  i.  pp.  191,  332.

Dolus  =  Yolimtas  nocendL  Consequently  it  neither  includes
indirect,  nor  sudden  intention. — Miihl.  190,  330  et  seq,  Feuerbach,^
51-2,  68. Rosshirt,  37-9,  43. Bentham's  Princ.

Dolus  indeterminatus. — Feuerb.  56. Kossh.  39.


Culpa  =  Crimen,  Delictum,  Injuria. — ^Sosshirt,  42.

Culpa  =  Guilt :  Dolus  et  Negligentia  (in  any  of  its  modifications).
— ^Feuerb.  78-9. Rossh.  36,  42. Miihl.  326,  330  et  seq.

Culpa  as  opposed  to  Dolus.  Includes  indirect  and  hasty  intention,
with  negligence  in  all  its  modifications. — Feuerb.  51-3,  54-5;  80.
Rossh.  42-3-4. MiihL  330  et  seq.

Culpa  dolo  determinata. — Feuerb.  47. Rossh.  39.

Negligentia  ob  obligationis  vinculum,  prsBStanda. — Miihl.  333.
Mackeldey,  ii  160.

Injuria,  DeUctum,  Crimen. — MiihL  325-6,  186.  Feuerb,  24.
Rossh.  2.

Injuria  (generaliter)  =  *  Omne  quod  non  jure  fit' — Justinian.

The  obvious  division  is  into  V,  Wrongful  Intention  with  its
various  modifications,  2°,  Wrongful  inadvertence  with,  etc

Inconsistencies  consequent  upon  putting  indirect  and  sudden
intention  into  culpa,  and  excluding  them  from  dolus, — Feuerb.  80.
Rossh.  86.

^  Beutham,  'Principles,'  etc.  pp.  89,  Conditions  of  imputation  :

115,  132,  142.  1.  Knowledge,  actual  or  possible,  on

^  It  is  included  in  cuZpo. [SeierUta,  the  part  of  the  accused,  of  the  criminality

but  without  the  voluntas  nocendi. Prove  of  his  act  or  omission  :

dolum,  but  not  dolus,] Nothing  can  be  2.  Dependence  on  his  own  wishes,  of

more  accurate.  the  forbearance  or  performance  due. —

"  Imputation,  Iinpuidbility,andGhiiU,  Marginal  Note.

VOL.  I.  2  F


Table  applicable  to  Lecture  XX.


t


S3


1


13


4


4

O


S3

o


■IN


^  /


a

\


§


I


4 11

IS .. "St


-  Q>  -

I


« 5.


-.1


w


I


E3
GQ


(3


<s


-I

p


•3


I®


s  >^
S  *=•
o


-I -J


s
QQ


o
O


-^


Intention  to  do  aftiture  Act.  435


LECTURE XXI.

INTENTION FURTHER CONSIDERED.


"1


The  intentions  which I considered  in  my  last  Lecture,  are  Leot.xxi
coupled  with  present  volitions,  and  with  present  acts.  intent*  u

The  party  wishes  or  wills  certain  of  the  bodily  movements  coupled
which  immediately  follow  our  desires  of  them:  He  expects  or  ^o^^^nd
believes,  at  the  moment  of  the  volition,  that  the  bodily  movements  acts,
which*  he  wills  will  certainly  and  immediately  follow  it :  and
he  also expects  or  believes,  at  the  moment  of  the  volition,
•that  some  given  event  or  events  will  certainly  or  probably
follow  those  bodily  movements.

In  other  words,  he  presently  wilh  some  given  act ;  intend-
ing the  act  (as  the  consequence  of  the  volition),  and  intending
some  further  event  (as  the  consequence  of  the  volition  and  the
act).

But  a  present  intention  to  do  B.fiUure  act,  is  neither  coupled  Present  in-
with  the  performance  of  the  act,  nor  with  a  present  will  to  do  J^^tio^^  to
it. The  present  intention is  not  coupled with the  present  act,  dis-
performance  of  the  act. For  the  intention,  though  present,  froSanwJt
regards  the  future. Nor  is  it  coupled  with  the  present  vnll  to  with  a  pre-
do  the act  intended. For  to  will  an act  is  to  do  the  act,  Jion  Jnd
provided  that  the  bodily  organ,  which  is  the  instrument  of  the  intention,
volition  and  the  act,  be  in  a  sound  or  healthy  state.

Consequently,  to  do  an  act  with  a  present  intention,  is
widely  different  from  a  present  intention  to  do  a  future  act
In  the  first  case,  the  act  is  willed  and  done.  In  the  second
case,  it  is  neither  willed  nor  done,  although  it  is  intended.

A  present  intention  to  do  a  future  act,  may  (I  think)  be  Present  in-
resolved  into  the  following  elements.  doa^uture

First,  The  party  desires  a  given  object,  either  as  an  end,  or  ^^^f  what
as  a  mean  to  an  end.

Secondly,  He  believes  that  the  object  is  attainable  through
acts  of  his  own :  Or  (speaking  more  properly)  he  believes  that
acts  of  his  own  would  give  him  a  chance  of  attaining  it

Thirdly,  He  presently  believes  that  he  shall  do  acts  in
fiUtire,  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  the  object  Distin-

A  belief 'thsit  the  desired  object  is  attainable  through  acts  fromasim-
of  our  own,'  and  'that  we  shall  do  acts  thereafter  for  the  Pl®,^^®®^f®
purpose of attaimng it, are necessary constituents of the  ject


436  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.XXI  complex  notion  which  is  styled  'a  present  intention  to  do  a
' ' future  act.'

If  these  be  absent,  we  simply  desire  the  object
Unless  I  believe  that  the  object  be  attainable  through  acts
of  my  own,  I  cannot  presently  believe  that  I  shall  do  acts
hereafter  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  the  object  I  cannot
believe  that  I  shall  try  to  attain  an  object,  knowing  that  my
efforts  to  attain  it  are  utterly  ineffectual.^

Intention  supposes  that  the  object  is  attainable  through
conduct  of  our  own.  Or  (as  it  is  commonly  said)  that  the
attainment  of  the  object  depends  upon  our  mil.  And  {hough
I  believe  that  the  object  be  attainable  through  acts  of  my  own,
I  simply  desire  or  barely  wish  the  object,  unless  I  presently
believe  that  I  shall  do  acts  hereafter  for  the  purpose  of
attaining  it

For  example,  if  I  wish  for  a  watch  hanging  in  a  watch-
maker's window,  but  without  believing  that  I  shall  tiy  to  take
it  from  the  owner,  I  am  perfectly  clear  of  intending  to  steal  the
watch,  although  I  am  guilty  of  coveting  my  neighbour's  goods
(provided  that  the  wish  recur  frequently).
Present  in. The  belief  'that  the  desired  object  is  attainable  through
doa^future  ^^^  ^^  ^^^  ^^^^^ ^^  necessarily  implied  in  the  belief  *  that  we
act,  re- shall  do  acts  hereafter  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  it'
stated.  Consequently,  a  present  intention  to  do  a  future  act  may

be  defined  to  be :  '  A  present  desire  of  an  object  (either  as  an
end  or  a  mean),  coupled  with  a  present  belief  that  we  shall  do
acts  hereafter  for  the  purpose  of  attaining  the  object'

It  may  also  be  distinguished  briefly  from  a  present  volition
and  intention,  in  the  following  manner :

In  the  latter  case,  we  presently  will,  and  presently  act,
expecting  a  given  consequence. In  the  former  case,  we  neither
presently  will  nor  presently  act,  but  we  presently  expect  or
believe  that  we  shall  will  hereafter.
Confusion  When  we  will  a  present  act,  intending  a  given  consequence,

Intention^  it  is  frequently  said  *  that  we  will  the  consequence  as  well  as
the  act'  And  when  we  intend  a  future  act,  it  is  frequently
said  'that  we  will  the  act  tww^  although  we  postpone  the
execution  to  a  future  time.'  In  either  case,  will  is  confounded
with  intention.

When  we  intend  a  future  act,  it  is  also  commonly  said

^  E.g,  Desire  to  be  King. But  no Kindly  Office  ;  i,e.  to  pursue  a  course  of
man  in  a  private  station  (unless  he  be conduct  leading  him  to  the  throne.
a  madman)  can  intend  to  aim  at  the


Intention  to  do  a  future  Act.  437

*  that  we  resolve  or  detennine  to  do  it ;'  or  *  that  we  make  up  Leot.  xxi
our  minds  to  do  it' Frequently,  too,  a  verbal  distinction  is

taken  between  a  strong  and  a  weak  intention ;  that  is  to  say,
between  a  strong  or  a  weak  belief  that  we  shall  do  the  act  in
future.  Where  the  belief  is  strong,  we  are  more  apt  to  say
'  that  we  intend  the  act'  Where  the  belief  is  weak,  we  are
more  apt  to  say  '  that  we  believe  we  shall  do  it*

Such  being  the  forms  of  language,  it  is  somewhat  difficult
to  admit,  at  first  hearing,  '  that  a^  present  intention  to  do  a
future  act  is  nothing  but  a  present  belief  that  we  shall  do  an
act  in  future.'  But  that  nothing  but  this  really  passes  in  the
mind  any  man  may  convince  himself  by  examining  the  state  of
his  mind  when  he  intends  a  future  act

When  we  speak  of  willing  a  future  act,  we  are  not  speaking
of  our  intention  to  do  the  future  act,  but  of  our  wish  for  the
object  which  we  believe  may  be  attained  through  the  act  Or,
rather,  our  wish  for  the  object,  and  our  intention  of  resorting  to
the  mean,  are  blended  and  confounded.  And  as  every  volition
is  a  desire,  and  is  also  coupled  with  an  intention,  the  compound
of  desire  and  intention  is  naturally  styled  a  volition,  although
it  is  impossible  (from  the  nature  of  the  case)  that  we  can  will
an  act  of  which  we  defer  the  execution.

When  we  say  *  that  we  have  resolved  or  determined  on  an
act,'  or  '  that  we  have  made  up  our  minds  to  do  an  act,'  we
merely  mean  this:  'that  we  have  examined  the  object  of
the  desire,  and  have  considered  the  means  of  attaining  it,  and
that,  since  we  think  the  object  worthy  of  pursuit,  we  believe
we  shall  resort  to  the  means  which  will  give  us  a  chance  of
getting  it.'

Here  also,  the  desire  of  the  object  is  confounded  with  the
belief  which  properly  constitutes  the  intention.  Every  genuine
volition  being  a  desire,  and  every  genuine  volition  being
coupled  with  an  intention,  we  naturally  extend  the  terms  which
are  proper  to  volitions  to  every  desire  which  is  combined  with
an  intention.

It  is  clear  that  such  expressions  as  '  determining,'  '  resolv-
ing,' 'making  up  one's  mind,'  can  only  apply  in  strictness  to
'  volitions ' :  that  is  to  say,  to  those  desires  which  are  instantly
followed  by  their  objects,  and  by  which  it  may  be  said  that  we
are  concluded,  horn  the  moment  at  which  we  conceive  them.
He  who  wills  necessarily  acts  as  he  wills,  and  cannot  will  (with
eflFect) that  he  will  retract  or  recall the  volition. He  has

*  determined :^  he  has  'resolved:' He  has  'made  up  his  mind.'


438


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Intending
a  future
forbear-
ance.


Lect.  XXI  He  is  concluded  by  his  own  volition. He  cannot  wn-will  that
' ' which  he  has  willed.

But  when  such  expressions  as  'resolving'  and  'detennining'  are
applied  to  a  present  intention  to  do  a  future  act,  they  simply  denote
that  we  desire  the  object  intensely,  and  that  we  believe  (with  cor-
responding confidence)  we  shall  resort  to  means  of  attaining  it.

And  this  perfectly  accords  with  common  apprehension,
although  it  may  sound  (at  first  hearing)  as  if  it  were  a  paradox.
For,  every  intention  (or  every  so-styled  vdll),  which  regards  the
future,  is  ambulatory  or  revocable.  That  is  to  say,  the  present
desire  of  the  object  may  cease  hereafter ;  and  the  present  belief
that  we  shall  resort  to  the  means  of  attaining  it,  will,  of  course,,
cease  with  the  wish  for  it.  We  ccumot  believe  that  we  shall
try  to  get  that,  for  which  we  know  that  we  care  not.

It  is  clear  that  we  may  presently  intend  a  future  forbear-
ance as  well  as  a  future  act.

We  may  either  desire  an  object  inconsistent  with  the  act
to  be  forborne,  or  we  may  positively  dislike  the  probable
consequences  of  the  act  In  the  first  case,  we  may  presently
believe  that  we  shall  forbear  from  the  act  hereafter,  in  order
that  we  may  attain  the  object  which  we  wish  or  desire.  In
the  latter  case,  we  may  presently  believe  that  we  shall  forbear
from  the  act  hereafter,  in  order  that  we  may  avoid  the  con-
sequences from  which  we  are  averse.

[Every  present  forbearance  from  a  given  act,  is  not  preceded
or  accompanied  by  a  present  volition  to  do  another  act.

It  may  be  preceded  or  accompanied  by  mere  inaction ;  e.g.
I  may  lie  perfectly  still,  intending  not  to  rise.

But,  stni,  it  is  generally  true,  that  every  present  forbear-
ance is  preceded  or  accompanied  by  a  volition.  In  our  waking
hours,  our  lives  are  a  series  (nearly  unbroken)  of  volitions  and
acts.  And,  when  we  forbear,  we  commonly  do  a  something
inconsistent  with  the  act  forborne,  and  which  we  are  conscious  is
inconsistent  with  it]

Where  a  forbearance  is  preceded  or  accompanied  by  inaction,
the  desire  leading  to  the  forbearance  is  not  to  be  compared  to  a
volition.  The  forbearance  is  not  like  the  act,  the  direct  and
appropriate  object  of  the  wish.

All  that  can  be  said  (in  generals)  of  intentions  to  act  in
future,  may  be  applied  (with  slight  modifications)  to  intentions
to  forbear  in  future.  I  confine  myself  to  intentions  to  a4:t  in
future,  in  order  that  my  expressions  may  be  less  complex,  and,
by  consequence,  more  intelligible.


Intention  to  do  a  future  Act.  439

When  we  intend  a  future  act,  we  also  intend  certain  of  its  Lect.XXI

consequences. In  other  words,  we  believe  that  certain  conse-  AiTin^

quences  will  follow  that  future  act,  which  we  presently  believe  tended

we  shall  hereafter  wilL This  is  necessarily  implied  in  every  quence  of

intention  of  the  sort For  our  present  wish  or  desire  of  some  ^"^  ^■

probable  consequence  of  the  act,  is  our  reason  for  believing  future  act,

preserUly  that  we  shall  do  the  act  in  future,  ^  ^o* ,

&lW&V8  Q6-

But  we  may  also  intend  or  expect  that  the  act  may  be  sired.
followed  by  consequences,  which  we  do  not  desire,  or  from
which  we  are  averse.  For  example ;  I  may  intend  to  shoot  at
and  kill  you,  so  soon  as  I  can  find  an  opportunity.  But  know-
ing that  you  are  always  accompanied  by  friends  or  other  com-
panions, I  believe  that  I  may  kill  or  wound  one  of  these  in  my
intended  attempt  to  kill  you.

Here,  the  object  which  I  wish  or  desire  is  your  deatL  I
intend  the  act,  or  I  beUeve  that  I  sJicdl  will  it,  because  I  desire
your  death.  But  I  also  believe  that  the  act  will  be  followed
by  a  consequence  from  which  I  am  averse : — by  a  consequence
which  is  not  the  ground  of  my  present  intention,  although  I
intend  in  spite  of  it,  I  intend  a  future  act.  I  intend  a  conse-
quence which  I  desire.  And  I  also  intend  a  consequence  from
which  I  am  averse.

The  execution of  every  intention to do a  future  act,  is  Intentions
necessarily  postponed  to  a  future  time.  futuJ!e  ^^

Every  intention  to  do a  future  act,  is  also  revocable  or  are  certain

or  uncef  •

ambulatory. That  is  to  say.  Before  the  intention  be  carried  tain;
into  execution,  the  desire  which  is  the  ground  of  the  intention
may  cease  or  be  extinguished,  or,  although  it  continue,  may  be
outweighed  by  inconsistent  desires.

But  though  the  execution  of  the  intention  be  always  con-
tingent, the  intention  itself  may  be  certain  or  uncertain.  I  may
regard  the  intended  act  as  one  which  I  shall  certainly  will ;  or
I  may  regard  it  as  one  which  I  shall  will,  on  the  happening  of
a  given  contingency.  In  either  case,  I  may  either  intend  a  Are
precise  and  definite  act,  or  I  may  merely  intend  some  act  for  ™*^^
the  purpose  of  attaining  my  object  gested.

For  exjunple ;  I  may  intend  to  kiU  you  by  shooting,  at  a
given  pldce  and  time.  Or  (though  I  intend  to  kill  you)  I  may
neither  have  determined  the  mode  by  which  I  shall  attain  my
object,  nor  the  time  or  place  for  executing  the  murderous  design.
In  cases  of  the  first  class,  the  intention,  design,  or  purpose,  is
settled,  determinate,  or  matured.  In  cases  of  the  latter  class,  it
is  unsettled,  indeterminate,  or  undigested.


442


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Lect.XXI  expecting  a  consequence.  We  mean  that  he  used  expressions
'  with  a  certain  sense,  expecting  that  those  to  whom  he  addressed
them  would  receive  them  in  the  same  sense.

The  intention  of  the  testator  regards  the  purpose  of  the  pro-
vision, or  the  sense  which  he  attached  to  his  words.  In  either
case,  we  mean  by  'his  intention,'  that  he  did  a  certain  act
expecting  a  certain  consequence :  That  he  made  the  provision,
expecting  the  purpose  would  follow  it;  or  that  he  used  his
words  with  a  certain  sense,  expecting  that  others  would  under-
stand them  in  the  same  sense.  When  we  say,  that '  the  will  or
intention  of  the  testator  is  ambulatory,'  we  mean  that '  he  may
will  and  intend. anew.'

When  we  speak  of  the  intention  of  contracting  parties,  we
mean  the  intention  of  the  promisor,  or  the  intention  of  the
promisee.*^  If  we  mean  the  intention  of  the  promisor,  we  mean
his  intention  as  it  regards  the  performance  of  his  promise,  or  we
mean  his  intention  as  it  regards  the  nature  or  extent  of  it  In
the  first  case,  we  mean  that  he  intends  (when  he  makes  the


^  Or  rather,  the  sense  in  which  it  is
to  be  inferred  from  the  words  used,  or
from  the  transaction,  or  from  both,  that
the  one  party  gave  and  the  other  re-
ceived it  Paley's  rule  would  lead  to
this:  that  a  mistaken  apprehension  of
the  apprehension  in  which  the  promisee
received,  would  exonerate  the  promisor.
This  would  be  to  disappoint  the  promisee.
If  the  apprehension  or  the  promisee  did
not  extend  to  so  much,  as  the  promisor
apprehends  that  it  did,  it  is  true  that
the  promisor  is  not  surprised  by  a  more
onerous  obligation  than  he  expected ;
but  then  there  is  no  reason  for  giving
the  promisee  an  advantage  which  he  did
not  expect :  pain  of  loss  being  greater
than  the  mere  pleasure  of  gain ;  which
this  advantage  would  be :  there  being,
by  the  supposition,  no  expectation  and
therefore  no  engagement  in  consequence.

If,  on  the  other  nand,  the  promisor  un-
derrates the  expectation  of  the  promisee
he  disappoints  an  expectation.


The  true  rule  is  the  understanding  of
both  parties.  The  very  use  of  Paley's
rule  snows  that  it  embraces  both.  In
the  example,  Paley  seems  to  confound
the  sense  which  the  promisor,  in  common
with  all,  must  have  put  on  his  promise,
with  his  secret  intention  of  breaking
it

(See  '  Intention,'  regarding  future.)
The  serue  of  the  promise,  i.e.  the  mean-
ing which  each  party  apprehends  that
the  words  or  transaction  must  denote,  is
a  totally  different  thing  from  the  inten-
tion with  which  it  is  made.  The  one  uses,
and  he  knows  he  uses,  words  of  such  an
import ;  the  other  hears  words  which  he
knows  to  be  of  the  same  import ;  from
these  words  ensue  an  obligation,  the
extent  of  which  each  knows,  and  the
compulsory  performance  of  which  in  Ur-
minis  would  not  disapnoint  the  exnecta-
tions  of  the  parties,  wnateve?  might  be
their  intentions.


*  Where  the  terms  of  a  promise  admit
of  more  senses  than  one,  the  promise  is
to  be  performed  "in  that  sense  which
the  promisor  apprehended,  at  the  time
that  the  promisee  received  it."

*  It  is  not  the  sense  in  which  the  pro-
misor actually  intended  it,  that  always
governs  the  interpretation  of  an  equivo-
cal promise ;  because,  at  that  rate,  you
might  excite  expectations  which  you
never  meant,  nor  would  be  obliged,  to


satisfy.  Much  less  is  it  the  sense  in
which  the  promisee  actually  received  the
promise  ;  for,  according  to  that  rule,  you
might  be  drawn  into  engagements  you
never  designed  to  underS&ke.  It  must
therefore  be  the  sense  (for  there  is  no
other  remaining)  in  which  the  promisor
believed  that  tOB  promisee  accepted  his
promise. — PoZey,  SforcU  and  Polit.  Philo-
aophy,  vol.  i.  chap.  v.


Duty,  Injury,  and  Sanction.  443

promise)  to  do  or  forbear  in  future.  In  the  second  case,  we  ^ect.  XXI
mean  that  he  makes  a  certain  promise,  ea^pecting  that  the
promisee  will  understand  it  in  a  certain  sense.  In  the  first
case,  we  mean  that  he  believes  he  shall  do  or  forbear  in  future.
In  the  second  case,  we  mean  that  he  does  a  present  act,  expect-
ing a  given  consequence.

If  we  mean  the  intention  of  the  promisee,  we  mean  that  he
accepts  the  promise,  understanding  it  in  a  certain  sense,  and
expecting  a  future  consequence :  namely,  that  the  promisor  will
perform  it.

He  does  a  present  act,  expecting  a  given  consequence.


LECTUKE XXII.

DUTY, INJURY, AND SANCTION.

I  HAVE  endeavoured  to  analyse  and  to  fix  the  meanings  of  the I^bct.
following related expressions: — 'Motive,' 'Will,' 'Intention,' ^ ^ ^
'  Negligence,'  '  Heedlessness,'  '  Eashness.'

I  now  proceed  to  the  essentials  of  Injury  and  Sanction,  and
of  that  Compulsion  or  Eestraint  which  is  imported  by  Duty  or
Obligation.

Every  legal  duty  (whether  it  be  relative  or  absolute,  or  Duty,
whether  it  be  offidum  or  obligatio)  is  a  duty  to  do,  or  forbear
from,  an  act  or  acts,  and  is  imposed  by  a  Command  (express  or
tacit)  of  the  person  or  body  which  is  sovereign  in  a  given  society.

As  every  injury  or  wrong  is  a  breach  or  violation  of  duty,  it  Injury,
supposes  that  an  act  enjoined  is  Tiot  done,  or  that  an  act  for-
bidden 18  done.

A  party  lying  under  a  duty,  or  upon  whom  a  duty  is  in-  Sanction,
cumbent,  is  liable  to  evil  or  inconvenience  (to  be  inflicted  by
sovereign  authority),  in  case  he  violate  the  duty,  or  disobey  the
command  which  imposes  it.  The  evil  to  be  incurred  by  the
party  in  case  he  disobey  the  command,  enforces  oompliance  with
the  command,  or  secures  the  fulfilment  of  the  duty.  In  other
words,  it  inclines  the  party  to  obey  the  command,  or  to  fulfil
the  duty  or  obligation  which  the  command  imposes  upon  him.
By  reason  of  his  liability  or  obnoxiousness  to  the  eventual  or
conditional  evil,  there  is  a  chance  that  he  will  not  disobey :  A
chance  which  is  greater  or  less  (foreign  considerations  apart),  as
the  evil  itself,  and  the  chance  of  incurring  it  by  disobedience,


444


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Lkct.
XXII


Obli^.
tion  IB  ob-
noxioas-
ness  to  a
Sanction.


Sanction
andObli^-
tiondifltin-
goished.


Obligation
regards  the
future.


are  greater  or  less.  The  eventual  or  conditional  evil  to  which
the  party  is  obnoxious,  is  styled  a  *  Sanction;*  or  the  Law  or
other  Command  is  said  to  be  sanctioned  by  the  eviL

'  To  be  obliged  to  do  or  forbear/  or  *  to  lie  under  a  dtUtf  or
obliffotion  to  do  or  forbear/  is  to  be  liable  or  obnoxious  to  a
sanction,  in  the  event  of  disobeying  a  command.  In  other
words,  'to  lie  under  an  obligation  to  do  or  forbear/  is  to  be
liable  to  an  evil  from  the  author  of  the  command,  in  the  event
of  disobedience.

The  party  is  hound  or  obliged  to  do  or  forbear,  because  he  is
obnoxious  to  the  evil,  and  because  he  fears  the  eviL  To  borrow
the  current,  though  not  very  accurate  expressions,  he  is  compelled
by  his  fear  of  the  evil  to  do  the  act  which  is  enjoined,  or  is
restrained  by  his  fear  of  the  evil  from  doing  the  act  which  is
forbidden.

The  difference  between  Sanction  and  Obligation  is  simply
this:

Sanction  is  evil,  incurred  or  to  be  incurred,  by  disobedience
to  command.

Obligation  is  liability  to  that  evil,  in  the  event  of  disobed-
ience.

Obligation  regards  the  future.  An  obligation  to  a  past  act,
or  an  obligation  to  a  past  forbearance,  is  a  contradiction  in
terms.

If  the  party  has  acted  or  forborne  agreeably  to  the  command,
he  has  fulfilled  the  obligation  wholly  or  in  part,  and. the  obliga-
tion has  wholly  or  in  part  ended  or  ceased  in  respect  of  that  act
or  forbearance.

And  here  there  is  a  certain  difference  between  positive  and
negative  duties.  The  end  or  scope  of  positive  duties,  and  of  the
jura  in  personam  which  correspond  to  them,  is  the  performance
of  that  to  which  the  party  obliged  by  the  duty  is  bound.  But
the  scope  or  purpose  of  negative  duties,  and  of  the  rights  with
which  they  correlate,  is  not  the  observance  of  the  office  or
obligation ;  although  that  observance  is  a  necessary  condition  to
tlie  enjoyment  or  exercise  of  the  right  A  positive  obligation,
therefore,  is  determined  by  fulfilment :  but  an  office  or  negative
obligation  is  not  determined  by  fulfilment,  but  by  an  event
extraneous  to  the  duty,  namely,  the  extinguishment  of  the  right
with  which  it  correlates,  or  of  a  right  which  it  regards  or  con-
cerns. The  performance  of  a  positive  duty  extinguishes  both
the  duty  and  the  corresponding  right :  a  negative  duty  is  never
extinguished  by  fulfilment,  though  if  the  right  be  extinguished


Duty  and  Sanction.  44  S

by  another  cause,  the  duty  ceases. This difference  between Lect.
positive  and  negative  duties,  has  been  erroneously  supposed  to . ^ .
be  a  difference  between  offices  and  obligations ;  a  confusion  of
ideas pregnant with important misconceptions, and which
obscures  the  difference  between  offices  and  obligations,  between
jura  in  rem  and  jura  in  personam.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  party  has  disobeyed  the  command
by  action,  forbearance  or  omission,  he  has  actually  incurred  the
sanction,  or  is  actually  liable  to  the  application  of  the  sanction.
And,  in  respect  of  the  forbearance  which  he  has  7wt  observed,  or
in  respect  of  the  act  which  he  has  forborne  or  omitted,  the  duty
or  obligation  to  which  the  sanction  was  annexed,  has  (as  before),
wholly  or  in  part,  ended  or  ceased.  The  sanction  which  has
attached  upon  him  may  consist  of  a  new  obligation,  but  that
obligation  to  which  the  sanction  was  appended,  has  (wholly  or
in  part)  determined.

It  is  not  unfrequently  said  'that  Sanctions  operate  upon  Sanctions
the  Willi  and  '  that  men  are  obliged  to  do  or  forbear  through  °^™^ii^

their  wills,*  desires.

It  were  more  correct  to  say  *  that  Sanctions  operate  upon
the  desires*  and  ' that  men  are  obliged  to  do  or  forbear  through
their  desires!

Stated  plainly  and  precisely,  the  fact  is  this:  The  party
obliged  is  averse  from  the  conditional  evil,  which  he  may  chance
to  incur  in  case  he  break  the  obligation :  In  other  words,  he
wishes  or  desires  to  avoid  it.  But,  in  order  that  he  may  avoid
the  evil,  or  may  avoid  the  chance  of  incurring  it,  he  must  fulfil
the  obligation:  He  must  do  that  which  the  Law  enjoins,  or
must  forbear  from  thai  which  the  Law  prohibits.

That  every  sanction  operates  upon  the  desires  of  the  obliged,
is  true.  For  he  is  necessarily  averse  from  the  evil  with  which
he  is  threatened  by  the  Law,  o^  he  is  necessarily  averse  from
every  evil  whatsoever.

That  every  sanction  operates  upon  the  will  of  the  obliged,  is
not  true.  If  the  duty  be  positive,  and  if  he  fulfil  the  duty  out
of  regard  to  the  sanction,  it  may  be  said  with  propriety  that  the
sanction  operates  upon  his  itnlL  For  his  desire  of  avoiding  the
evil  which  impends  from  the  Law,  makes  him  do,  and,  therefore,
vnll,  the  act  which  is  the  object  of  the  command  and  the  duty.
But  if  the  duty  be  negative,  and  if  he  fulfil  the  duty  out  of
regard  to  the  sanction,  it  can  scarcely  be  said  with  propriety
that  the  sanction  operates  upon  his  ivUL  His  desire  of  avoiding
the  evil  which  impends  from  the  Law,  makes  him  forbear  from


446  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  the  act  which  the  Law  prohibits.  But,  though  he  intends  the
.  y^  V  forbearance,  he  does  not  vnll  the  forbearanca  He  either  wills
an  act  which  is  inconsistent  with  the  act  forborne,  or  he  remains
in  a  state  of  inaction  which  equally  excludes  it.  In  the  former
case,  he  does  not  will  the  forbearance.  In  the  latter  case,  he
wills  nothing.

If,  then,  the  party  fulfil  his  duty,  and  if  he  fulfil  his  duty
out  of  regard  to  the  sanction,  the  fact,  precisely  stated,  is  this :
He  is  obnoxious  to  evil  from  the  Law,  in  case  he  violate  his
duty.  This  conditional  evil,  like  every  possible  evil,  he  neces-
sarily wishes  to  avoid.  And,  in  order  that  he  may  avoid  the
evil  with  which  he  is  threatened  by  the  Law,  he  wills  the  act,  or
intends  the  forbearance,  which  the  Author  of  the  Law  commands.

Again:  Every  sanction  operates  upon  the  desires  of  the
obliged,  although  he  violate  the  duty.

If  he  cfo  an  act  which  the  Law  forbids,  or  if  \lq  forbear  from
an  act  which  the  Law  enjoins,  he  desires  to  avoid  the  evil  with
which  he  is  threatened  by  the  Law,  although  that  desire  be
mastered  and  suppressed  by  a  conflicting  and  stronger  desire.
And,  if  he  omit  an  act  which  the  Law  enjoins,  he  haJbittudly
desires  to  avoid  the  conditional  evil,  although,  at  the  moment  of
the  omission,  he  forgets  the  sanction  and  the  duty.

But,  when  the  obliged  party  violates  his  duty,  it  is  manifest
that  the  sanction  does  not  operate  upon  his  ivUl,  although  it
afiects  his  desires.  If  he  do  an  act  which  the  Law  forbids,  he
wills  an  act  in  spite  of  the  sanction.  If  he  violate  his  duty  by
forbearance  or  omission,  he  does  rwt  will  an  act  which  the  Law
enjoins,  and  which  it  is  the  scope  and  purpose  of  the  sanction
to  make  him  v)ilL

It  is,  therefore,  not  true,  or  is  not  true  universally,  that
'Sanction  operates  upon  the  wUl  of  the  obliged;*  or  'that  the
party  is  obliged  through  his  wilV  But  it  is  true,  and  is  true
universally,  'that  Sanction  operates  upon  the  desires  of  the
obliged,'  or  '  that  the  party  is  obliged  through  his  desires!

For  to  afl&rm  that  is  merely  to  aflBrm  this : — '  That  the  party

is  necessarily  averse  from  every  evil ;  and  necessarily  wishes  to

avoid  the  evil  by  which  the  command  is  sanctioned.*

An  obliga-  I  said,  in  a  former  Lecture,  that  an  obligation  to  ivill  is

noUmpos?  impossible.®^ Wliy  I  said  so,  I  am  somewhat  at  a  loss  to  see.

^^  The  passage  referred  to,  not  being  line  of  p.  SQ7  anUf  and  runs  thuB :— '  We

contained  in  the  lectures  as  formerly  cannot,  speaking  correctly,  be  obliged  to

published,  I  have  not  restored  in  iU  mil,  though  we  are  obliged  throu^  our

place. But  I  find  that  in  J.S.M.'s  notes  will. Neither  can  we,  strictly  speaking,

it  follows  the  sentence  ending  on  the  33d  be  obliged  to  suffer.' — R.  C.


sible.


Sanction.  447

For  it  is  quite  certain,  that  the  proposition  is  grossly  false,  and Lect.
is  not  consistent  with  my  own  deliberate  opinion.  .  ^^ .

We  are  obliged  to  will,  whenever  our  duties  are  positive :
that  is  to  say,  whenever  we  are  obliged  to  act.  The  Law  threatens
us  with  the  sanction,  in  order  that  we  may  act ;  and  in  order
that  we  may  act,  we  must  will.  This,  it  is  manifest,  is  the
meaning  of  the  proposition  'that  we  are  bound  to  act  through  our
toilh!  The  force  of  the  obligation  lies  in  our  desire  of  avoiding  the
threatened  evil.  But,  in  order  that  we  may  avoid  that  evil  by
performing  the  obligation,  we  will  the  act  which  is  commanded.

And  this  is  true.  For  ax^  and  their  consequences  are  the
objects  of  positive  duties ;  and  every  volition  is  followed  by  the
act  which  is  willed,  if  the  appropriate  bodily  organ  be  soimd  or
healthy.  Perhaps,  I  confounded  desires  (as  contradistinguished
from  volitions)  with  those  peculiar  desires  which  are  styled
'  volitions.'  Or,  perhaps,  I  intended  to  affirm  that  we  cannot  be
obliged  to  desire,  in  the  sense  wherein  desire  is  opposed  to  ivill.
And  this  is  also  true.

And  here  I  may  remark  that  we  cannot  be  obliged  to  desire  An  obli-
or  not  to  desire ;  i.e.  to  desire  thai  which  the  Law  enjoins,  or  §jSre  not
not  to  desire  that  which  the  Laws  forbids:  For  although  we  possible.
desire  to  avoid  the  sanction,  we  are  not  therefore  averse  from  that
which  the  Law  forbids,  nor  do  we  therefore  incline  to  that  which
the  Law  enjoins.

In  spite  of  our  aversion  from  the  evil  with  which  we  are
menaced  by  the  Law,  we  may  still  desire  that  which  the  Law
forbids,  or  may  desire  to  evade  that  which  the  Law  exacts:
Although  our  necessary  desire  of  avoiding  the  sanction,  may  be
stronger  than  the  opposite  desire  which  urges  us  to  a  breach  of
our  duty.  The  desire  of  avoiding  the  sanction  may  control  the
opposite  desire,  but  cannot  supplant  or  destroy  it.  Or,  if  it  can
destroy  it,  it  can  only  destroy  it  in  the  oblique  or  indirect  manner
to  which  I  shall  advert  immediately.

It  is  equally  manifest,  that  we  are  not  obliged  to  our  desire
of  avoiding  the  sanction.  We  are  not  hound  or  obliged  to
entertain  the  desire ;  but  we  are  bound  or  obliged,  because  we  are
threatened  with  the  evil,  and  because  we  inevitably  desire  to
avoid  the  eviL  We  are  not  obliged  to  entertain  the  desire,  but
we  are  obliged  because  we  entertain  it.

When  we  desire  that  which  the  Law  forbids,  or  when  we  are  Supposed
averse  from  that  which  the  Law  enjoins,  we  observe  our  duty  d^ire^and
(supposing  we  do  observe  it)  becaiise our  aversion  from  the  will,
sanction  tops  the  conflicting  wish.


448  Pervading  Notions  analysed,

Lect.  In  these,  and  in  similar  cases,  it  is  not  unusual  to  suppose  a

.  ^  .  conjlict  between  desire  and  wilL  Because  we  will  a  something
from  which  we  are  averse^  it  is  imagined  that  we  will  against  our
desires.  The  truth,  however,  is,  that  there  is  no  conflict  bettceen
desire  and  vnll,  although  there  is  a  conflict  between  inconsistent
desires.

I  wish  to  forbear  from  that  which  the  Law  enjoins,  or  I  wish
to  do  that  which  the  Law  prohibits.  But  I  also  wish  to  avoid
the  evil  with  which  I  am  threatened  by  the  Law.  And  as  my
wish  of  avoiding  this  evil  is  stronger  than  the  opposite  wish,  I
will  that  which  the  Law  enjoins,  or  I  forbear  from  that  which
the  Law  forbids.  I  do  not  will  or  forbear  against  my  desires,
but  I  will  or  forbear  in  compliance  with  a  stronger  desire,  instead
of  forbearing  or  willing  in  compliance  with  a  weaker  desire.

It  is  truly  astonishing  that  this  obvious  solution  of  the
difficulty  escaped  the  penetration  of  Mr.  Locke.  It  is  of  no
small  importance  that  the  difficulty  should  be  clearly  conceived,
and  the  solution  distinctly  apprehended.  For  I  believe  that  the
mysterious  jargon  about  the  nature  of  the  will  has  arisen  en-
tirely from  this  purely  verbal  puzzle.

If  we  suppose  that  the  Will  can  control  the  Desires,  or  that
man  can  will  against  his  desires,  we  must  suppose  that  will  and
desire  are  utterly  distinct  and  disparate ;  we  cannot,  consistently
with  such  a  supposition,  admit  that  volitions  are  a  class  of
desires,  and  are  merely  distinguished  from  other  desires  by  a
certain  specific  difference :  namely,  that  they  are  followed  im-
mediately or  without  the  intervention  of  means,  by  their  direct
or  appropriate  objects.
Effect  of  I  have  said  that  we  cannot  be  obliged  not  to  desire ;  that

obligation ^^j^^  desire  of  avoiding  the  sanction  may  master  or  control,  but
guishing cannot  extmguish  a  desire  which  urges  to  a  breach  of  duty.
wWchur  ^^^  ^^»  though  true  in  the  main,  must  be  taken  with  an

to  a  breach  important  qualification.

of  duty.  fjij^^  desire  of  avoiding  the  sanction  cannot  destroy  directly

the  conflicting  and  sinister  desire.  But  the  desire  of  avoiding
the  sanction  may  destroy  the  antagonist  desire,  gradually  or  in
the  way  of  association.  The  thought  of  the  act  or  forbearance
which  would  amount  to  a  breach  of  duty,  is  habitually  coupled
with  the  thought  of  the  evil  which  the  Law  annexes  to  the
wrong.  If  our  desire  of  avoiding  the  evil,  which  the  Law
annexes  to  the  wrong,  be  stronger  than  our  desire  of  the  con-
sequences which  might  follow  the  act  or  forbearance,  we  regard
the  latter  as  a  cause  of  probable  evil,  and  we  gradually  transfer


Sanction.  449

to  the  cause  our  aversion  from  the  eflfect Our  stronger  desire Lbct.
of  avoiding  the  Sanction,  gradually extinguishes  the  weaker ^ ^ -
desire. Our  wish  for  the  agreeable  consequences,  which  might
follow  the  wrong,  is  absorbed  by  our  wish  of  avoiding  the  evil
which  the  wrong  would  probably  induce. We  regard  the  wrong
as  a  cause  of  evil,  and  we  dislike  it  accordingly.

This  is  merely  a  case  of  a  familiar  and  indisputable  fact.
Objects  originally  agreeable  become  disagreeable  on  account  of
their  disagreeable  consequences.  And  objects  originally  pleasing
become  displeasing  by  reason  of  painful  consequences  with  which
they  are  pregnant.

This  gradual  effect  of  sanctions  in  extinguishing  sinister
desires,  is  a  matter  of  familiar  remark,  and  is  expressed  in  various
ways.  Owing  to  the  prevalent  misconceptions  regarding  the
nature  of  the  wiU,  the  effect  which  is  really  wrought  upon  the
state  of  the  desires  is  frequently  ascribed  to  the  vrilL  It  is
forgotten  that  the  will  is  merely  an  instrvmeTd  of  the  desires ;
and  that  every  change  in  disposition  and  conduct  is  a  change  in
the  dominant  desires,  and  not  in  the  subject  will

We  are  told,  for  instance,  by  Hobbes,  in  his  'Essay  on
Liberty  and  Necessity,'  *  that  the  habitual  fear  of  punishment
maketh  men  just : '  '  that  it  frames  and  moulds  their  vnUs  to
justica'  The  plain  and  simple  truth  is  this :  that  it  tends  to
quench  wishes  which  urge  to  breach  of  duty,  or  are  adverse  to
thai  which  is  fussum  or  ordained.

Where  the  fear  of  the  evils  which  impend  from  the  Law
has  extinguished  the  desires  which  urge  to  breach  of  duty,  the
man  is  fust.  He  is  not  compelled  or  restrained  by  fear  of  the
sanction,  but  he  fulfils  his  duty  spontaneously.  He  is  moved  to
right,  and  is  held  from  wrong,  by  that  habitual  aversion  from
wrong  or  injury,  which  the  habitual  fear  of  the  sanction  has
gradually  begotten.

The  man  who  fulfils  his  duty  because  he  fears  the  sanction,
is  an  i^njust  man,  although  his  conduct  be  just.  If  he  coidd
violate  his  duty  without  incurring  the  evil,  his  conduct  woidd
accord  with  the  desires  which  urge  him  to  break  it

In  short,  the  fear  of  the  evils  by  which  our  duties  are
sanctioned,  cannot  extinguish  instantly  or  directly  the  desires  and
aversions  which  urge  us  to  violate  our  duties.  But  the  fear  of
those  evils  may  extinguish  these  desires  and  aversions  gradually
or  in  the  way  of  association.  Our  necessary  aversion  from  the
evils  with  which  we  are  threatened  by  the  Law  is  often  trans-
ferred by  insensible  degrees  to  the  injuries  or  wrongs  which
VOL.  I.  2  G


450  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  might  bring  those  evils  upon  us.  Our  fear  of  the  sanction  is
V  ^  >  changed  into  hate  of  the  offence.  Instead  of  fulfilling  our  duty
through  fear  of  the  sanction,  we  fulfil  our  duty  through  that
aversion  from  wrong  which  the  habitual  fear  of  the  sanction  has
slowly  engendered.  We  come  to  love  justice  with  disinterested
love,  and  to  hate  injustice  with  disinterested  hate.  So  far  as  we
fulfil  our  duties  tlm)ugh  these  disinterested  affections,  we  are
just.  'Justitia  est  perpetua  voluntas  suum  cuique  tribuendi.'
So  far  as  we  are  moved  to  fulfil  them  by  the  evils  with  which
they  are  sanctioned,  we  are  unjust  man,  dthough  our  conduct  be
just  For  if  we  were  freed  firom  the  fear  which  compels  or
restrains  us,  our  conduct  would  accord  with  the  sinister  desires
and  aversions,  which  solicit  or  urge  us  to  violate  our  duties.

When  I  affirm  that  our  fear  of  the  evils  by  which  our  duties
are  sanctioned  is  frequently  transmuted  into  a  disinterested  hate
of  injustice,  I  am  far  from  intimating  that  thai  fear  is  tiie  onLy
source  of  thii  beneficent  disposition.  The  love  of  justice,  or  the
hate  of  injustice,  is  partly  generated  (no  doubt)  by  a  perception
of  the  lUility  of  justice ;  and  by  that  love  of  general  utility
which  is  felt  by  all  or  most  men  more  or  less  strongly.  But  it
is  also  generated,  in  part,  by  the  habitual  fear  of  sanctions.
And  to  this  consideration  my  attention  is  particularly  directed.
For  my  purpose  is  not  to  analyse  the  sources  of  the  beneficent
disposition,  but  to  distinguish  the  remote  effect  of  obligations
and  sanctions  from  the  immediate  or  direct:  —  to  shew  that
sanctions  may  inspire  us  with  a  disinterested  love  of  justice,
although  they  compel  us  to  right,  or  restrain  us  from  wrong,  in
case  that  useful  sentiment  be  absent  or  defective.

When  the  desires  of  the  man  habitually  accord  with  his
duty,  we  say  that  the  man  is  disposed  to  justice,  or  we  style  the
state  of  his  mind  a  disposition  to  justice.  And  this  disposition
to  justice  13  a  ground  for  mitigation  in  measuring  out  punish-
ment or  in  measuring  out  censure.

Every  legal  crime  shoidd  be  visited  with  legal  punishment,
and  eveiy  offence  against  morals  should  be  visited  with  repro-
bation. But  when  the  circumstances  of  the  offence  indicate  a
disposition  to  justice,  or  indicate  any  disposition  which  is  gene-
rally useful  or  beneficent,  utility  requires  that  the  punishment
should  diminish,  or  that  the  censure  should  soften  accordingly.
The  general  consequences  which  would  ensue  if  the  offender
passed  with  impunity,  render  it  expedient  that  it  shoidd  be
visited  with  punishment  or  censure.  But  since  there  would  be
few  offences  if  good  dispositions  were  general,  it  is  also  expedient


Sanction.  45 1

to  mitigate  the  punishment  or  censure,  with  a  view  to  the  good Lect.
disposition  manifested  by  the  criminal.  ^ ^ >

And  this,  accordingly,  is  the  usual  habit  of  the  world.
The  occasional  aberrations  of  a  man  who  is  habitually  just  or
humane,  are  treated  with  less  severity  than  the  offences  of
the  dishonest  and  the  cruel.  The  amount  of  punishment  is
frequently  determined  by  this  consideration ;  or  (although  the
nature  of  the  offence  exclude  mitigation  of  punishment)  public
reprobation  falls  with  comparative  lenity.  The  necessity  of
inflicting  the  punishment  is  generally  perceived  and  admitted,
but  the  offender  is  regarded  with  a  feeling  which  approaches  to
compassion  and  regret,  rather  than  to  antipathy  and  exultation.

Where  the  desires  of  the  man  are  habitually  adverse  to  his
duty,  we  say  that  the  man  is  disposed  to  injustice,  or  style  the
state  of  his  mind  a  disposition  to  injustice.

Owing  to  the  prevalent  misconceptions  about  the  nature  of
will,  we  frequently  style  the  predominance  of  pernicious  desires,
a  depraved  or  wicked  wilL  Sometimes,  indeed,  we  mean  by  a
depraved  or  wicked  will,  a  deliberate  intention  to  do  a  criminal
act  Although  it  is  perfectly  manifest,  that  badness  or  goodness
cannot  be  affirmed  of  the  will,  and  that  a  criminal  intention  may
accord  with  a  good  disposition.


Notes,

(See  Leibnitz.  Schelling  and  Kant  in  Bitter  and  Krug.
Coleridge.)«2

What  they  meant  by  freedom  of  the  Will  was  not  that  we  desire
without  a  determining  cause,  or  that  we  will  against  our  desires,  but
that,  in  the  cases  in  question,  our  desires  or  wills  go  with  our  duties,
ie,  we  desire  to  perform  our  duty  more  than  anything  else.

^  These  names,  especially  the  first  and  the  only  aim  which  ought  to  control  the

last  of  them,  suggest  an  obseiration  upon  desires. But  the  sphere  of  Revelation  he

the  ethical views maintained by  the  passes  in  silence ;  a  reserve  which  obliges

author  in  these  lectures.  tiim  to  leave  untouched  the  question,

The author recognises an absolute  how  far  it  is  possible  for  human  intelli-

standard  of  what  is  good  and  true,  not  gence  and  desire  to  reach  forward  bevond

(with Kant) as a necessary  form of  experience,  in  the  direction  of  conform-

thought,  but  as  consisting  in  the  Divine  ing  themselves  to  the  Divine  intelligence

law  which  is  set  to  man  by  a  superior,  and  the  Divine  will,
namely  the  Divine  intelligence. The The  position  thus  taken  up  by  the

indices  to  that  law  he  states  to  be  Revela-  author,  is  a  very  strong  one  ;  and  admir-

tion  and  Utility,  and  the  position  on  ably  adapted  to  the  purpose  of  an  entry

which  he  insists  at  length  in  the  intro-  into  the  field  of  jurisprudence. But  I

ductory  lectures  is  this :  that,  apart  from  cannot  help  noting  that,  in  resard  to  the

Revelation,  Utility  is  the  only  index,  entire  field  of  eihioal  scienee,  this  position

measure,  or  test  of  the  Divine  law— con-  is  comparatively  narrow,  and  that  its

formity  to  the  law  ascertained  by  Utility,  bounds  have  been  left  by  the  author


452  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  The  term  'Sanction'  denotes  the  conditional  evil,  which  is  annexed

XXII |)y  the  Sovereign  to  the  Command. The  term  *  Obligation '  imports

'  the  same  object  considered  from  a  certain  aspect. It  denotes  present

liability  to  that  contingent  evil,  in  case  the  duty  be  broken,  or  the

command  be  disobeyed.

The  Latin  Obligaiio  denotes  the  operation  of  the  sanction  upon
the  will  of  the  obliged.

It  is  manifest  that  the  Latin  obligaiio  is  equivalent  to  ligamen  or
tmculum.  The  position  of  a  party  obnoxious  to  a  contingent  evil,  is
likened  to  that  of  a  party  who  is  tied  to  a  given  place.

The  English  duty  (looking  at  its  derivation)  rather  denotes  that
to  which  a  man  is  obliged,  than  the  obligation  itsell  It  is  derived,
through  the  French  dmdr  (past  part)  and  the  Italian  dovere,  from  the
Latin  debere.  It  is,  therefore,  equivalent  to  id  quod  debittm  est,  rather
than  to  obligaiio.

Same  remark  as  to  the  German  'Forderung*  (equivalent  to  the
obligaiio  of  the  Roman  Jurists),  'Pflicht,* '  Verbindlichkeit*

By  '  duty '  may  .be  meant  any  duty ;  but  it  commonly  meant
religious  duty,  or  test  of  duties.


LECTURE  XXIII.

PHYSICAL  COMPULSION  DISTINGUISHED  FROM  SANCTION.

Lect. I  NOW  proceed  to  distinguish  physical  compulsion  or  restraint
XXIII ffQin  t;he  restraint  which  is  imposed  by  duty  or  obligation.

A  sanction  is  a  conditional  evil : — an  evil  which  the  party
obliged  may  chance  to  incur,  in  case  he  violate  the  obligation,
or  disobey  the  command  which  imposes  it.  The  party  obliged
is  obliged,  because  he  is  obnoxious  to  this  evil  in  the  event  of

undefined. And they  are  necessarily  human  nature  divinus  cUiquia  afflattts,

indefinite. For  I  conceive  that,  as  a  which  can  rise  above  experience  to  the

nuaswre  or ted,  utility  may  weU be  recognition  and  partial  realisation  of  the

extended  far  within  the  sphere  of  Reve-  good  existing  in  God  and  the  Divine

lation  ;  and  is  the  only  test  of  Revelation  Law,  and  provided  aU  the  results  of

which  the  intelligence  common  to  all  such  a  faculty  be  embraced  in  the  term

mankind  seems  capable  of  applying. But  Revelation, I readily accede to the

that  the  theory  of  utility  nas  availed,  author's rejection of a tertium quid

'  except to a very  limited extent, in  under  the  name  of  moral  sense,  etc.,

advancing  the  practical  science  of  ethics,  standing  between  Revelation  and  Utility

I  take  to  be  contrary  to  the  teaching  of  as  an  index  to  moral  truth. An  inquiry

history. For  I  confess  myself  a  learner  into  the  nature  and  province  of  Revela-

with  those  who  have  read  history  as  tion and the corresponding receptive

shewing,  that  Revelation  has  been  the  faculty  would  clearly  have  been  beyond

ffuide  and  pioneer,  in  places  which  utility  the  scope  of  these  lectures. And  as  it

has  now  fenced  and  secured  as  a  posses-  has  not  been  entered  on,  neither  is  it

sion  to  mankind  for  all  time  coming.  prejudged. — R.  C.
Provided  only  there  be  conceded  to


Physical  Compulsion  not  a  Sanction.  453

disobedience,  and  because  he  is  necessarily  averse  from  it,  or Lect.
rfmres  to  avoid  it  ^^^^

The  objed,  of  every  duty  is  an  act  or  forbearance :  Or
(changing  the  expression)  every  duty  is  a  duty  to  act  or  forbear.
But  every  act  is  the  consequence  of  a  volition,  and  every  volition
is  the  consequence  of  a  desire :  meaning  by  a  desire,  a  desire
which  is  not  a  volition,  or  a  desire  strictly  so  called.  Conse-
quently, every  act  is  the  consequence  of  a  desire.

And,  further,  every  forbearaTice  is  intended ;  and  is  either
the  effect  of  an  aversion  from  the  consequences  of  the  act  for-
borne, or  is  the  effect  of  a  preference  for  some  object  which  is
inconsistent  with  the  performance  of  that  act  Consequently,
every  forbearance,  like  every  act,  is  the  consequence  of  a  desire.

Unless  we  are  determined  to  obedience  by  disinterested  hate
of  wrong,  we  fulfil  an  obligation  because  we  are  averse  from  the
sanction.  Our  desire  of  avoiding  the  evil  which  we  might
chance  to  incur  by  disobedience,  makes  us  will  the  act  which
the  command  enjoins,  makes  us  forbear  from  the  act  which  the
conmiand  forbids.  In  other  words,  our  desire  of  avoiding  the
evil,  which  we  might  chance  to  incur  by  disobedience,  makes  us
desire  the  act,  or  makes  us  desire  the  forbearance.

Consequently,  we  cannot  be  obliged  to  thai  which  depends
not  upon  our  desires,  or  which  we  cannot  fulfil  by  desiring  or
wishing  to  fulfil  it  A  stupid  and  cruel  Legislator  may  affect
to  command  that,  which  the  party  cannot  perform,  although  he
desire  to  perform  it  But  though  he  inspire  the  party  with  a
wish  of  fulfilling*  the  command,  he  cannot  attain  his  end  by
inspiring  those  wishes.  Nor  will  the  infliction  of  the  pain
operate  in  the  way  of  example,  or  tend  to  confirm  others  in  their
desires  of  fulfilling  their  duties.  Consequently,  the  compidsion
or  restraint  which  is  implied  in  Duty  or  Obligation,  is  hate  and
fear  of  an  evil  which  we  may  avoid  by  desiring :  by  desiring  to
fulfil  a  something,  which  we  can  fulfil  if  we  wish.

Other  compulsion  or  restraint  may  be  styled  merely  j?Aywca/.  Physical
For  the  term  '  physical '  or  '  natural '  (as  it  is  commonly  used)  is  gi^^^^'^e.
simply  a  negative  expression :  denoting  that  the  object  to  which  straint  dis-
it  is  applied,  is  not  some  other  object  which  is  expressly  or  froS^that
tacitly  referred  to. As  applied  to  compulsion  or  restraint,  it  which  ia
denotes  that  the  compulsion  or  restraint  to  which  it  is  applied,  b^^uty  or
is  n4>t  the  compulsion  or  restraint  which  is  imported  by  Obliga-  obligation,
tion  or  Duty.

Physical  compulsion  or  restraint,  as  thus  understood,  may
affect  the  body,  or  may  affect  the  mind.


454  Pervading  Notions  analysed,

Lect.  For  example :  If  I  am  imprisoned  in  a  cell  of  which  the

J^f^^ door  is  locked,  physical  restraint  is  applied to  my  body. I

cannot  move  from  my  cell,  although  I  desire  to  move  from  it

Whether  I  shall  quit,  or  whether  I  shall  stay  in  my  cell,

depends  not  upon  my  desires.

Again :  I  am  imprisoned  in  a  ceU  from  which  I  am  able  to
escape,  but,  knowing  that  I  may  be  punished,  in  case  I  attempt
to  escape,  the  fear  of  the  probable  pimishment  determines  or
inclines  me  to  stay  there.

Now,  in  this  instance,  the  restramt  which  is  applied  to  me
is  not  physical  restraint,  but  I  am  obliged  to  stay  in  my  celL  My
desire  to  escape,is  not  controlled  or  prevented  by  outw&uxi  obstacles.
It  is  controlled  or  prevented  by  my  opposite  or  conflicting  desire
of  avoiding  the  probable  punishment  Whether  I  shall  quit,  or
whether  I  shall  stay  in  my  prison,  depends  upon  my  desires.

Further :  If  the  judge  sentence  me  to  imprisonment,  he  may
command  that  I  shall  be  dragged  to  prison  in  case  I  refuse  to
go,  or  he  may  command  me  to  go  to  prison  under  peril  of  an
additional  punishment  If  I  refuse  to  go  to  prison,  and  am
dragged  thither  by  the  officers  without  a  movement  of  my  own,
physical  compulsion  is  applied  to  my  body.  My  body  moves
to  the  prison  in  obedience  to  an  outward  impulse,  and  not  in
compliance  with  volitions  of  my  own,  prompted  by  a  desire  of
my  own.  Whether  I  shall  move  to  prison,  or  shall  not  move  to
prison,  depends  not  upon  my  desires.

But  if  I  go  to  prison,  knowing  that  I  shall  be  whipped  in
case  I  refuse  to  go^  physical  compulsioh  is  not  applied  to  my
body,  but  I  move  to  prison  willingly  in  consequence  of  my
obligation  to  go.  Much  as  I  hate  imprisonment,  I  hate  im-
prisonment coupled  with  whipping  more.  My  aversion  from
the  heavier  punishment,  being  stronger  than  my  aversion  from
the  lighter  punishment ;  it  may  be  said,  that  I  desire  to  go  to
my  prison,  i,e,  I  desire  it  as  a  mean :  a  mean  of  avoiding  the
greater  evil,  and  that  that  desire  makes  me  will  the  movements
which  carry  my  body  to  my  prison.

As  I  observed  in  a  former  Lecture,  the  dominion  of  the
will  extends  not  to  the  mind.^*  That  is  to  say,  no  change  in
the  state  of  the  mind  is  accomplished  by  a  mere  desire.  But,
though  no  change  in  the  mind  immediately  follows  a  desire  for
it,  changes  in  the  mind  may  be  wrought  through  means  to  which
we  resort  in  consequence  of  such  desires.

»  P.  413  anU.


Physical  Compulsion  not  a  Sanction.  455

For  example,  I  cannot  know  a  science  by  simply  wishing  Lect.
to  know  it.  But  by  resorting  to  means  suggested  by  the  wish,  ^  ^  ^
I  may  come  to  know  it.  By  reading,  writing,  and  meditation,
I  shaU  acquire  the  knowledge  which  I  desire.  And  so,  virtues
may  be  acquired  by  indirect  consequence.  Numerous  changes
in  the  mind  are,  therefore,  wrought  by  desires :  though  none  of
the  desires  which  work  changes  in  the  mind,  can  be  likened  to
the  peculiar  desires  which  are  styled  volitions.

But  a  change  in  the  mind  may  be  wrought  or  prevented,
whether  we  desire  the  change  or  whether  we  do  not  desire  it
And,  in  all  such  cases,  it  may  be  said  that  the  mind  is  affected
by  physical  compulsion  or  restraint.

The  conviction  produced  by  evidence,  is  a  case  of  physical
compulsion.  If  I  perceive  that  premisses  are  true,  and  that
the  inference  is  justly  drawn,  I  admit  the  conclusion,  though  I
do  not  wish,  to  admit  it,  or  though  the  truth  be  unwelcome,  and
I  would  reject  the  truth  if  I  could.  Accordingly,  if  I  love
darkness,  and  hate  the  light,  I  naturally  eschew  the  evidence
which  might  expel  the  grateful  error.  I  refuse  to  examine  the
proofs  which  might  render  the  truth  resistless,  and  I  dwell  with
complacency  upon  every  shadow  of  proof  which  tends  to  confirm
my  prepossession.**

I  observe,  that  certain  writers  talk  of  obligations  to  suffer,  Obliga-
and  of  obligations  not  to  suffer. And,  as  an  instance  of  an  g^rand
obligation  to  suffer,  they  cite  the  supposed  obligation  to  suffer  not  to
punishment,  which  is  incumbent  upon  a  criminal.

But  it  is  clear  that  we  cannot  be  obliged  to  suffer,  or  not  to
suffer.  For  whether  we  shall  suffer,  or  shall  not  suffer,  does
not  depend  upon  our  desires.  By  acts  or  forbearances  which
do  depend  upon  our  desires,  we  may  induce  suffering  upon
ourselves,  or  we  may  avert  suffering  from  ourselves;  but  the
sufferance  or  passion  itself  is  not  immediately  dependent  upon
our  wishes  to  suffer  or  not.

The  Criminal  who  is  condemned  to  punishment  is  never
obliged  to  mffer,  although  he  may  be  obliged  to  acts  which
facilitate  the  infliction  of  the  suffering,  or  may  be  obliged  to
forbear  from  acts  which  would  prevent  or  hinder  the  infliction.

For  example :  If  I  am  condemned  to  imprisonment,  I  am
not  obliged  to  suffer  the  imprisonment,  although  I  may  be
obliged  to  walk  to  prison,  or  to  forbear  from  breaking  prison.

^  For  this  reason,  non-belief  may  be examine, partiality  or  antipathy  indi-
blamable. Where  {fi,g,)  it  is  the  result rectly  removable,  etc.
of  insufficient  examination, refusal to ^  Tndt^s,  etc.  vol.  i.  pp.  239,  245.


4S6


Lect.
XXIII


Passion  or
suffering,
what. Is
the  uUi-
inaU  sanc-
tion of
every  obli-
gation.


Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Whether  I  shall  walk  to  prison,  or  shall  not  walk  to  prison,  or
whether  I  shall  forbear  or  not  from  attempting  to  break  my
prison,  depends  upon  my  desires.  And  I  can,  therefore,  be
bound  or  obliged  by  fear  of  additional  punishment,  to  do  the
act,  or  to  observe  the  forbearanca  But  whether  I  shall  suffer
the  imprisonment,  or  shall  not  suffer  the  imprisonment,  does  not
depend  upon  my  desires  in  the  last  result  If,  in  spite  of  the
additional  punishment  with  which  I  am  threatened,  I  refuse  to
go  to  prison,  or  attempt  to  break  prison,  I  may  not  only  be
visited  with  the  additional  punishment,  but  physical  compulsion
or  restraint  may  be  applied  to  my  body.  I  may  be  dragged  to
prison  by  the  officers  of  justice ;  or,  when  I  am  there,  I  may
be  secured  by  walls  and  chains  which  defy  my  attempts  to
escape.

To  talk  of  obligation  to  suffer,  is  to  confound  obligation  with
the  ultimate  basis  of  obligation :  In  the  last  result,  every  obliga-
tion is  sanctioned  by  suffering :  that  is  to  say,  by  some  pain
which  may  be  inflicted  upon  the  wrong-doer  whether  he  consent
or  not:  i.e,  by  some  pain  which  may -be  inflicted  upon  the
wrong-doer  independently  of  an  act  or  forbearance  of  his  own.
If  this  were  not  the  case,  and  if  every  obligation  were  sanctioned
by  a  further  obligation,  no  obligation  coidd  be  effectual  One
obligation  might  be  broken  after  another ;  and  as  no  obligation
could  be  enforced  without  the  consent  of  the  wrong-doer,  he
would  not  be  obliged  at  alL

For  example :  I  am  condemned  to  restore  a  house  which  I
detain  from  the  owner;  to  make  satisfaction  for  a  breach  of
contract ;  to  pay  damages  for  an  assault,  to  the  injured  party ;
or  to  pay  a  fine  for  the  same  offence.

The  sanction  which  attaches  upon  me,  in  this  the  first  stege,
is  an  obligation :  An  obligation  to  deliver  the  house,  or  to  pay
the  damages  or  fine.

If  I  refuse  to  perform  this  obligation,  I  may  incur  a  further
obligation :  for  instance,  an  obligation  to  pay  a  fine  or  to  suffer
imprisonment.

But  if  this  yrere  again  sanctioned  by  a  further  obligation,
and  that  by  another,  and  so  on,  it  is  manifest  that  I  should  be
exempt  (in  effect)  from  all  obligation.

Either  in  the  first  instance,  or  at  some  subsequent  point,  I
must  be  visited  with  a  sanction  which  can  be  inflicted  without
my  consent.  Suffering,  therefore,  is  the  ultimate  sanction.  Or
(changing  the  expression)  every  obligation  is  ultimately  sanc-
tioned by  suffering,  although  (in  innumerable  cases  to  which  I


straint


Physical  Compulsion  not  a  Sanction.  457

shall  advert  hereafter)  the  immediate  sanction  of  the  obligation ^  5^;
is  another  obligation.  -

But  though  suffering  is  the  ultimate  sanction,  we  cannot  be
obliged  to  suffer.  For  that  supposes  that  we  can  be  obliged  to
a  something  which  depends  not  upon  our  desires.  The  only
possible  objects  of  duties  or  obligations  are  ads  and  forbearances.

Before  I  conclude  I  beg  leave  to  observe,  that  suffering  Suffering
must  not  be  confounded  with  physical  compulsion  and  restraint  jJ^flLted
To  suffer,  is  to  incur  an^evil  independently  of  our  own  consent :  without
a  pain  which  is  inflicted  upon  us,  independently  of  an  act  or  ^^,^1.
forbearance  of  our  own.  sion  or  re-

Now,  though  physical  compulsion  or  restraint,  is  commonly
the  mean  or  instrument  by  which  suffering  is  inflicted,  suffering
may  be  inflicted  without  it.  For  instance,  certain  obligations
are  sanctioned  by  nullities;  others  again  are  sanctioned  by
penalties  which  are  purely  infamising:  by  a  declaration,  pro-
nounced by  competent  authority,  that  the  party  shall  be  held
infamous  or  merits  infamy.

In  these  and  in  other  cases,  the  sanction  is  applied  without
the  consent  of  the  party,  and  without  physical  compulsion  or
restraint  (or,  at  least,  without  such  compulsion  or  restraint
applied  to  the  body).

In  other  cases,  the  suffering  is  inflicted  by  physical  compul-
sion or  restraint :  Or  at  least  physical  compulsion  or  restraint
may  be  necessary  {e.g.  Punishments  which  affect  the  body).

In  most  of  the  cases,  in  which  it  may  be  necessary  to
inflict  suffering  by  physical  compulsion  or  restraint,  the  physical
•  compulsion  or  restraint  is,  in  fact,  needless :  because  the  party,
knowing  it  may  be  applied,  submits  voluntarily.


LECTURE  XXIV.

INJURY OR  WRONG, GUILT, IMPUTABILITY.

I  NOW  proceed  to  consider  the  import  of  *guilt  *  or '  imptitdbility :* Yxrir
which  it  is  necessary  to  determine  in  order  that  we  may  fully n ^ /
apprehend  the  nature  of  injury  or  wrong.

Every  act  and  every  forbearance  derives  its  importance  or  Immediate
interest  from  its  positive  or  negative  consequences :  that  is  to  obfectToT
say,  from  certain  events  by  which  it  is  followed ;  or  from  its  duties,
preventing  events  which  would  or  might  have  happened,  if  the
act  done  had  riot  been  done,  or  if  the  act  forborne  had  been  done.


4  5  8  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  Consequently,  Although  acts  and  forbearances  are  the  im-

^  ^  V  medicUe  objects  of  duties,  the  positive  and  negative  consequences
of  the  acts  and  forbearances  enjoined,  are  the  objects  which  they
regard  remotdy.

That  an  act  or  acts  may  be  done,  is  the  immediate  purpose
of  a  positive  duty.  But  the  production  of  events  by  which  the
act  may  be  followed,  or  the  prevention  of  events  which  may
happen  if  the  act  be  7u>^  done,  is  the  more  remote  purpose  for
which  the  duty  is  imposed.

That  an  act  or  acts  may  be  forborne,  is  the  immediate

purpose  of  a  negative  duty. But  the  prevention  of  events  which

may  happen  in  case  the  act  be  done,  or  the  production  of  events

which  the  act  might  prevent,  is  the  more  rewrote  purpose  for

which  the  duty  is  imposed.

Forbear-  If  the  act  enjoined  be  forborne  or  omitted,  or  if  the  act

Omiwions,  forbidden  be  done,  the  positive  or  negative  consequences,  which

or  Acts, it  is  the  purpose  of  the  duty  to  produce,  are  certainly  or  probably

^coMisr ^'^^  producai:  Whilst  the  opposite  or  contrary  consequences,

ent  with which  it  is  the  purpose  of  the  duty  to  avert,  certainly  or  probably

parrowB  of  ^Uow  the  forbearance,  omission,  or  act

duties.  Certain  of  such  forbearances,  omissions,  and  acts,  are  injuries

nate  ex-  The  pcrsons  who  have  forborne,  omitted,  or  acted,  are  guilty.

^r^ona, q^  ^^  persons  who  have  forborne,  omitted,  or  acted,  are  in  that
Guilt,  Im- plight  or  predicament  which  is  styled  'guilt*
=  Breach  The  forbearances,  omissions,  or  acts,  together  with  such  of

of  Duty, ijieir  consequences  as  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  duties  to  avert,
are  imputable  to  the persons  who  have  forborne,  omitted,  or  *
acted. Or  the  plight  or  predicament  of  the  persons  who  have
forborne,  omitted,  or  acted,  is  styled  ' impUabUity'^

All  these  expressions,  it  appears  to  me,  are  equivalent.
They  all  of  them  denote  this,  and  nothing  but  this :  *  that  the
persons,  who  have  forborne,  omitted,  or  acted,  have  thereby
violated  or  broken  duties  or  obligations.'

A  wrong,  or  injury,  is  an  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  of
such  a  character,  that  the  party  is  guilty  :

And,  To  be  guilty,  is  to  have  acted,  forborne,  or  omitted,
in  such  wise,  that  the  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  is  an  injury
or  vrrong.

If  the  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  be  an  injury  or  wrong,

^  ('  Imputability '  ia  properly  appli-  plight  or  predicament  of  the  party  to
cable  to  the  culpable  act,  foroearance,  or  whom  such  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,
omission. It  is,  however,  applied  to  the is  imputable.)


Injury y  Guilty  Imputability.  459

and  if  the  party  be  therefore  guilty,  the  act,  forbearance,  or Lbct.

omission,  together  with  such  of  its  consequences,  as  it  was  the > ^ *

purpose  of  the  duty  to  avert,  are  impiUdbk  to  the  party.  And
if  the  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  together  with  such  of  its
consequences  as  it  was  the  purpose  of  the  duty  to  avert,  be
imputable  to  the  party,  the  party  has  broken  or  violated  a  duty
or  obligation.

As  I  shall  shew  hereafter,  intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  intention,
or  rashness,  is  an  essentialli/  component  part  of  injury  or  wrong ;  of  J^f J^f^
guilt  or  imputability ;  of  breach  or  violation  of  duty  or  obligation,  ness,  or

Whether  the  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  constitute  an  ™^^'/*
injury  or  wrong ;  or  whether  the  party  be  placed  by  it  in  the  sence  of
predicament  of  guilt  or  imputability ;  or  whether  it  constitute  a  ^u^im.
breach  of  duty  or  obligation ;  partly  depends  upon  his  conscums-  putability,
nessy  with  regard  to  it,  or  its  consequences,  at  and  before  the  of  duty,
time  of  the  act,  forbearance,  or  omission. Unless  the  party
intended,  or  was  negligent,  heedless,  or  rash,  the  act,  forbearance,
or  omission,  is  not  an  injury  or  wrong ;  the  party  is  not  placed
by  it  in  the  predicament  of  guilt  or  imputability ;  nor  is  it  a
breach  or  violation  of  duty  or  obligation.

But  a  necessary  ingredient  is  not  the  compound  into  which  Bat  is  not
that  ingredient  must enter before  the  compound can  exist,  in^xiry,
An  essential  part  is  not  the  complex  whole  of  which  it  is  an  guilt,  etc.
essential  part

Intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,  is  of  the
essence  of  injury  or  wrong  \  ia  of  the  essence  of  breach  of  duty ;  is
a  necessary  condition  precedent  to  the  existence  of  that  plight  or
predicament  which  is  styled  guilt  or  imputability.

But  intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,  is  not  of
itself  injury  or  wrong ;  is  not  of  itself  breach  of  duty ;  will  not
of  itself  place  the  party  in  the  plight  or  predicament  of  guilt  or
imputability.  Intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,
will  not  place  the  party  in  the  plight  of  guilt  or  imputability,
unless  it  be  followed  or  accompanied  by  an  act,  forbearance,  or
omission :  by  an  act,  forbearance,  or  omission  which  amounts  to
an  injury  or  wrong,  provided  it  be  nreceded  and  accompanied
by  that  state  of  the  mind.  Action,  forbearance,  or  omission,  is
as  necessary  an  ingredient  in  the  notion  of  injury,  guilt,  or
imputability,  as  the  intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rash-
ness, by  which  the  action,  forbearance,  or  omission,  is  preceded
or  accompanied.  The  notion  of  injury,  guilt,  or  imputability,
does  not  consist  of  either  considered  alone,  but  is  compounded
of  both  taken  in  conjunction.


460


Leot.
XXIV


Brief  ana-
lysis of
NeffUgence
ana  its
modes ;  of
Intention
regarding
the  pre-
sent, and
Intention
regarding
the  future.


Whether
an  inten-
tion, nei-
ther con-
summate
nor  fol-
lowed by
an  at-
tempt,
could  be
made  the
object  of  a
neeitive
obuga-
tion  ?  (see
p.  432,
ante,)


Pervading  Notions  analysed.

This  may  be  made  manifest  by  a  short  analysis.

If  I  am  negligent,  I  advert  not  to  a  given  act :  And,  by
reason  of  that  inadvertence,  I  omit  the  act.

If  I  am  heedless,  I  will  and  do  an  act,  not  adverting  to  its
probable  consequences :  And,  by  reason  of  that  inadvertence,  I
will  and  do  the  act

If  I  am  rash,  I  will  and  do  an  act,  adverting  to  its  probable
consequences ;  but,  by  reason  of  a  missupposition  which  I  examine
inadvertently,  1  think  that  those  probable  consequences  will  not
ensue.  And,  by  reason  of  my  insufficient  advertence  to  the
ground  of  the  missupposition,  I  will  and  do  the  act.

Consequently,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,  supposes
an  omission  or  act,  which  is  the  result  of  inadvertence.  To  that
inadvertence,  as  taken  or  considered  in  conjunction  with  the  omission
or  04^,  we  give  the  name  of  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness.
But  none  of  those  names  has  the  shadow  of  a  meaning,  unless
the  inadvertence,  to  which  it  is  applied,  be  considered  in  con-
junction with  the  omission  or  act  of  which  the  inadvertence  is
the  causa

If  I  intend,  my  intention  regards  the  present,  or  jny  intention
regards  the  future.  If  my  intention  regards  the  present,  I
presently  do  an  act,  expecting  consequences :  Or  I  presently  do
an  act,  or  am  presently  inactive,  knowing  that  the  act  which  I
do,  or  the  inaction  wherein  I  am,  excludes  for  the  present  the
performance  of  another  act.  In  the  formet  case,  I  presently  do
an  act,  intending  consequences.  In  the  latter  case,  I  presently
forbear  from  an  act.

In  either  case,  my  intention  is  necessarily  coupled  with  a
present  act  of  forbearance :  And  the  word  *  intention '  has  no
meaning,  unless  the  consciousness  or  belief  to  which  it  is  applied
be  considered  in  conjunction  with  that  act  or  forbearance.

If  my  intention  regard  the  future,  I  presently  expect  or  believe
that  I  shall  act  or  forbear  hereafter.

And,  in  this  single  case,  it  is  (I  think)  possible  to  imagine,
that  mere  consciousness  might  be  treated  as  a  wrong :  might  be
imputed  to  the  party :  or  might  place  the  party  in  the  plight  or
predicament  which  is  stylea  imputabUity  or  guilt

We  might  (I  incline  to  think)  be  obliged  to  forbear  from
intentions,  which  regard  future  acts,  or  future  forbearances  from
action :  Or,  at  least,  to  forbear  from  stich  of  those  intentions,  as
are  settled,  deliberate,  or  frequently  recurring  to  the  mind.  The
fear  of  punishment  might  prevent  the  frequent  recurrence ;  and
might,  therefore,  prevent  the  pernicious  acts  or  forbearances,  to


Component  Elements  of  Injury,  &c.  461

which intentions (when they  recur frequently) certainly  or Lkct.
probably  lead.  J^^

Be  this  as  it  may,  I  am  not  aware  of  2^  positive  system  of
Law,  wherein  an  intention,  without  an  act  or  forbearance,  places
the  party  in  the  predicament  which  is  styled  imputability.  In
every  positive  system  of  which  I  have  any  knowledge,  a  mere
intention  to  forbear  in  future  is  innocent.  And  an  intention  to
act  in  future  is  not  imputed  to  the  party,  unless  it  be  followed
by  an  act  f^  imless  it  be  followed  by  an  act  which  accomplishes
his  ultimate  purpose,  or  by  an  act  which  is  an  attempt  or
endeavour  to  accomplish  that  ultimate  purpose.  In  either  case,
the  party  is  guilty,  because  the  intention  is  coupled  with  an  a^  ;
and  with  an  act  from  which  he  is  obliged  to  forbear  or  abstain.
For,  though  he  is  not  obliged  to  forbear  from  the  irUention,  he
is  obliged  to  forbear  from  endeavours  to  accomplish  that  intention,
as  well  as  from  such  acts  as  might  accomplish  his  intention
directly.

Without,  then,  staying  to  inquire,  whether  we  migfU  be  Restric-
obliged  to  forbear  from  naked  intentions,  I  assume,  for  the  present,  [iQ^yJi  ^^1
the following conclusion: a conclusion  which accords with  'Culpa'
general  or  universal  practice.  tioi?Nrgli-

Intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,  is  not  of  (^ nee,
itself  wrong,  or  breach  of  duty  or  obligation ;  nor  does  it  of  itself  ^ess,  or
place  the  party  m  the  predicament  of  guilt  or  imputability. In  Rashness,
order  that  the  party  may  be  placed  in  that  predicament,  his  of  Action,
intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness,  must  be  referred  forbear-
to  an  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  of  which  it  was  the  cause. Omission.

Accordingly,  the  term  '  Injury  *  (or  '  Wrong ')  and  the  term
'  Breach  of  Duty,'  is  invariably  applied  to  a  compound  of  action,
forbearance,  or  omission,  and  of  intention,  negligence,  heedlessness,
or  rashness.  The  term  '  imputabiUty '  is  also  applied  invariably
in  a  similar  sense.  It  denotes  that  the  party  has  broken  a  duty,
by  some  act,  forbearance,  or  omission  which  was  the  effect  of  an
intention  he  had  conceived,  or  of  his  negligence,  heedlessness,
or  rashness.

But,  in  the  language  of  lawyers,  and  especially  of  criminal
lawyers,  '  guilt '  or  '  culpa '  is  frequently  restricted  to  the  state
of  the  party's  mind.  It  denotes  the  intention  of  the  party,  or
his  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness ;  although  it  necessarily
connotes  (or  signifies  indirectly)  the  act  or  forbearance  which  was

^  See Feuerbach, *Lehrbuch des Rosshirt; 'Lehrbucli des Criminal-
gemeinen  in  Deutschland  giiltigen  pein- Kechts,'  p.  73.
lichen Rechts,' pp. 88, 41, 42, 48.


462  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

the  effect  of  his  intention,  or  the  omission  or  act  which  was  the
effect  of  his  negligence,  or  of  his  heedlessness  or  temerity.

In  order  that  I  may  shew  the  meaning  which  is  commonly
annexed  to  *  guilt/  I  will  read  a  few  passages  &om  two  treatises
on  German  Criminal  Law.

One  of  them  is  the  work  of  Feuerbach,  the  most  celebrated
Criminal  Lawyer  now  living  :^  formerly  professor  of  Boman  and
German  Jurisprudence,  and  now  president  of  a  Court  of  Appeal
in  the  Elingdom  of  Bavaria.

The  other  is  by  Dr.  Bosshirt,  professor  of  Law  at  Heidelberg.

Feuerbach's  book  is  entitled, '  Institutes  of  the  Penal  Law
which  obtains  generally  in  Germany.'

The  title  of  Dr.  Bosshirt's  book  may  be  translated  as  follows :
'Institutes  of  the  Criminal  Law  which  obtains  generally  in
Germany :  Including  a  particular  Exposition  of  Boman  Criminal
Law,  in  so  far  as  the  German  is  derived  &om  it'

'  The  application  (says  Feuerbach)  of  a  penal  Law,  supposes
that  the  will  of  the  party  was  determined  positively  or
negatively :  that  this  determination  of  the  will  was  contrary  or
adverse  to  the  duty  imposed  by  the  Law :  and  that  this  deter-
mination of  the  will  was  the  cause  of  the  criminal  fact.'  '  The
reference  of  the  fact  as  effect  to  the  determination  of  the  will  as
caiise,  constitutes  that  which  is  styled  imputation.  And  a  party
who  is  placed  in  such  a  predicament,  that  a  criminal  fact  may
be  imputed  to  a  determination  of  his  will,  is  said  to  be  in  a  state
or  condition  of  impiUahilUy*

'  The  reference  of  the  fact  as  effect  to  the  determination  of
the  will  as  cause,  settles  or  fixes  the  legal  character  of  the  latter.

'In  consequence  of  that  reference  (or  by  reason  of  the
imputation  of  the  fact)  the  determination  of  the  will  is  held  or
adjudged  to  be  guilt :  Which  guUt  is  the  ground  of  the  punish-
ment applied  to  the  party.'

He  adds,  in  a  note, '  that  the  "  culpa  "  of  the  Boman  Lawyers
(as  taken  in  its  largest  signification),  and  also  the  ''  reatus "  of
more  recent  writers  upon  jurisprudence,  answers  to  the  "SchiUd"
or  "  das  VerschtUden  "  of  the  German  Law.'

'  Culpa '  (as  taken  in  its  largest  signification),  reatus,  and
'  Schvld '  (or  '  Aw  Verschvlden ')  may  (I  apprehend)  be  translated
by  the  English  '  Quilt:

The  language  of  Dr.  Bosshirt  accords  with  that  of  Feuer-
bach.^ *  In  order  (says  he)  to  the  existence  of  a  Crime,  the

^  He  died  in  1833. The  passage  quoted  is  at  pages  78,  79  of  his  work.
»  Pages  86-42.


Injury,  Guilt,  Imputabiltty.  463

will  of  the  party  must  have  been  in  such  a  predicament,  that I'Ect.
the  criminal  fact  may  be  imptUed : that  is  to  say/  that  the  >

criminal  fact  may  be  imputed  as  effect  to  ihe  state  of  his  will  as
cattse.'

'  The  term  "  Cvipa "  as  used  by  the  Roman  Lawyers,  is
frequently  synonymous  with  Crime  or  Delict,  or  with  Injury
generally.  But,  when  they  employ  it  in  a  stricter  sense,  it  is
equivalent  to  the  reattts  of  modem  philosophical  jurisprudence,
to  the  VerschtUden  of  the  Grerman  Law.  It  denotes  the  state  of
the  party's  vMl,  considered  as  the  cause  of  the  criminal  fact.  It
denotes  the  djolus,  or  the  Tiegligentia,  of  which  the  criminal  fact
is  the  ascertained  consequence  or  efiect'

In  translating  these  passages  I  have  thrown  overboard
certain  terms  borrowed  from  the  Kantian  Philosophy.  For  the
modem  Grerman  Jurists  (like  the  Classical  Jurists  of  old)  are
prone  to  shew  off  their  knowledge  of  Philosophy,  though  actually
occupied  with  the  exposition  of  municipal  and  positive  Law.

These  impertinent  terms  being  duly  ejected,  the  meaning  of
the  passages  is  clear  and  simple.

It  merely  amounts  to  this.  '  Culpa '  c2enotes  the  state  of
the  party^s  mind :  although  it  connotes  (or  embraces  by  implica-
tion) 'the  positive  or  negative  consequence  of  the  state  of  his
mind.

But  I  think  that  the  term  'Guilt,'  as  used  by  English  lawyers,
not  only  denotes  the  state  of  the  party's  mind,  but  also  the  act,
forbearance,  or  omission,  which  was  the  consequence.  It  imports
generally  '  that  the  party  has  broken  a  duty.'  It  embraces  all
the  ingredients  which  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  wrong ;
and  is  not  restricted  to  one  of  those  necessary  ingredients.  We
say  that  a  man  is  guilty  of  an  injury,  or  is  guilty  of  a  breach  of
duty:  expressions  which  would  not  be  applicable,  unless  the  term
'  guilt  *  imported  the  whole  offence,  instead  of  being  limited  (like
the  term  '  culpa ')  to  an  essentially  component  part.

And  this  extended  meaning  of  the  word  '  guilt '  is  likewise
(I  think)  the  meaning  which  convenience  prescribes.  A  general
expression  for  culpable  intention,  and  for  the  various  modifica-
tions of  Tiegligence,  tends  to  confusion  and  obscurity  rather  than
to  order  and  clearness.  I  am  not  aware  of  a  single  instance,  in
which  it  can  be  necessary  to  talk  of  them  collectively.  But  it  is
necessary  to  distinguish  them  in  numberless  instances.  Injury,

Before  I  conclude  this  subject,  I  will  remark  that  the  term  c^tJJ[<^c*
*  Injury,'  and  also  the  term  *  Guilt,'  is  merely  the  contradictory  tory  of
of  the  term  '  Duty '  or  '  Obligation.'  ^"^^^


464  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

If  I  am  bound  or  obliged  to  (io,  I  am  bound  or  obliged  not
to  prsetermit  the  act  intentionally  or  negligently.

If  I  am  bound  or  obliged  to  forbear,  I  am  bound  or  obliged
not  to  do  the  act  intending  certain  consequences,  or  7u>^  to  do  the
act  heedlessly  or  rashly,

I  am  not  absolutely  obliged  to  do  or  forbear,  but  to  do  or
forbear  with  those  various  modificatums.

If  I  prsetermit  an  act  intentionally  or  negligently,  I  break  a
positive  duty.

If  I  do  an  act  intending  certain  consequences,  or  if  I  do  an
act  heedlessly  or  rashly,  I  break  a  n^ative  duty.

An  injury,  or  breach  of  duty,  is  therefore  the  contradictory
of  that  which  the  Law  imposing  the  duty  enjoins  or  forbids  : —
'  Omne  id  quod  tuwi  jure  fit'

Accordingly,  that  may  be  an  injury  to  one  purpose  which  is
not  an  injury  to  another  purpose.  Or  (changing  the  expression)
that  may  be  a  breach  of  one  duty,  which  is  not  a  breach  of
another  duty.

I  am  bound  not  to  kill  with  a  deliberate  intention  of  killing.

I  am  bound  not  to  kill  with  a  sudden  intention  of  killing.

Each  of  these  is  a  distinct  duty ;  and  the  compound  whole,
which  constitutes  the  corresponding  injury,  consists,  in  each  case,
of  a  distinct  set  of  ingredients.

If  I  kill  with  a  deliberate  intention  of  killing,  I  am  guilty
of  Murder.

But  if  I  kill  on  a  sudden  provocation,  I  am  guilty  of
Voluntary  Manslaughter.  With  reference  to  the  Law  which
forbids  murder,  I  am  not  guilty,  or  have  not  committed  a  wrong.
To  adopt  the  current  phrase,  there  is  not  the  corpus  delicti  which
will  sustain  a  charge  of  Murder.  There  is  not  deliberate  inten-
tion or  gross  heedlessness.
Corpus  For  corpus  delicti  (a  phrase  introduced  by  certain  modern

Delicti.  civilians)  i3  a  collective  name  for  the  sum  or  aggregate  of  the
various  ingredients  which  make  a  given  fact  a  breach  of  a  given
Law.*  Corpus  is  used  by  the  Eoman  lawyers  (like  universitas)
to  express  every  whole  composed  of  parts,  as  in  the  phrase  corpus
juris,  which  with  the  Roman  lawyers  stood  for  the  aggregate  of
the  laws,  though  by  the  moderns  it  is  applied  to  the  particular
volumes  which  contain  Justinian's  collections.
Further  re-  Before  I  conclude  I  must  correct  certain  mistakes  which  I

Si"  import  committed  in  stating  the  import  of  dolus  and  culpa. I  said,
of  the  word  that  dolvs  is  exactly  equivalent  to  intention,  except  when  dolus

1  For  Corpus  Delicti,  see  Feuerbach,  75,  76  ;  Rosshirt,  79.


Injury,  Guilt,  ImputabilUy,  4^5

is  used  in  its  original  and  narrow  sense,  to  signify  fraud.*  But  Lect.
this  is  not  precisely  the  case.  Dolus  comprises  in  its  meaning,  -  ^  -
iTitentian,  but  it  must  be  direct  intention:  the  mischief  done
must  not  only  be  intended  but  desired ;  it  must  be  the  very  end
for  which  the  party  does  the  act  Doliis  does  not  include  what
has  been  called  by  some  modem  civilians  doliis  indirectits,  and
by  Mr.  Bentham  indirect  intentionality ;  i.e.  intention  to  do  an
act  which  is  not  desired ;  as,  for  example,  when  I  shoot  at  one
person  while  another  is  standing  so  near  that  I  think  it  probable
I  shall  kill  him  in  endeavouring  to  kill  the  other.  Nor  does
dolus  include  hasty  or  sudden  intention,  as  contradistinguished
from  deliberate  intention.  This  is  included  in  culpa  as  opposed
to  dolus :  it  would  probably  be  included  in  temerUy,  in  conse-
quence of  a  confusion  of  ideas  to  which  I  formerly  adverted.
Dolus,  therefore,  denotes  all  intention,  except  indirect  and  sudden
intention.  These  are  comprised  in  culpa  as  opposed  to  dolus.
Culpa,  therefore,  includes  negligence,  heedlessness,  rashness,  and
indirect  and  sudden  intention.  This,  at  least,  is  the  meaning
of  culpa  as  opposed  to  dolus.  As  used  in  another  sense,  to
which  I  adverted  in  a  former  part  of  this  lecture,  it  denotes
intention  of  any  kind,  or  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness ;
in  short,  the  mental  state  which  is  the  cause  of  any  effect  that
can  be  imputed  to  the  party.  Negligentia,  in  the  case  of
obligatio  in  the  strict  sense,  includes  intention  of  all  species,
together  with  negligence,  heedlessness,  and  temerity,  particu-  •
larly  in  the  position  of  parties  who  are  bound  to  diligerUia,  by
reason  of  fiduciary  situations;  of  some  trust  or  other  with
which  they  are  invested.  These  are  generally  the  cases  in
which  intention  or  negligence  are  brought  in  question.  In
most  other  cases  they  are  necessarily  implied  in  the  breach  of
the  obligatio.

The  word  maltts  is  often  coupled  with  dolus  by  the  Eoman
lawyers.  The  reason  is  that  there  is  a  doltts  bo7ius,  a  machinatio
which  is  innocent  or  laudable;  artifice,  for  example,  which  is
made  use  of  to  prevent  an  impending  crime.  All  other  dolus
is  dolus  malus :  and  this  is  the  only  meaning  of  the  word  malu^s
when  attached  to  dolus.

An  example  occurs  to  me  which  shews  the  importance  of
this  classification  of  the  various  states  of  consciousness.  It  is
laid  down  that  there  cannot  be  a  culpose  attempt.  Now  this
would  be  true  if  culpa  only  included  negligence,  heedlessness,  or
rashness;  because  an  attempt  is  of  course  intentional;  but  if

2  See  p.  431,  ante,
VOL.  I.  2  H


466  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect. doLm  indirecttis,  or  sudden  intention,  be  included  in  culpa,  it  is


XXIV


clear  that  there  may  be  a  culpose  attempt


Further  instances :

Damage  corpare  to  things  belonging  to  another :  amounts  to
a  breach  of  Lex  Aquilia.'

Damage  non  corpore  amounts  to  a  breach  not  of  Lex  Aquilia,
but  of  a  duty  imposed  by  the  Prsetorian  Edict,  and  for  which  an
actio  utUis  lay.

Trespass  vi  et  armis  and  Case  is  a  somewhat  similar  distinction.

Attempts  as  distinguished  from  consummation.^

For  want  of  the  conseqiuTice  there  ia  not  the  Corpus  of  the
principal  delict  But  the  irUcntion  coupled  with  an  act  tending
to  the^  consequence  constitutes  the  corpus  of  the  secondary  delict
styled  an  '  attempt'

Ambiguity  of  Schuldner,  Beus,  etc

I  remarked  in  a  former  Lecture  that  *jusj'  ^reehty  or  ^  right,'
frequently  denotes  the  duty  incumbent  upon  the  party  obliged,  as
well  as  the  right  residing  in  the  opposite  party ;  and  that  the
*  Obligatio  *  of  the  Roman  Lawyers  denotes  the  jus  in  personam  resid-
ing in  the  party  entitled,  as  well  as  the  obligation  incumbent  upon  the
party  obliged.

The  German  *Schuld'  (or  das  '  Verschulden ')  reminds  me  of  a
similar  ambiguity.  ' Schuld '  signifies  properly ' liability'  To  impute
to  a  person  *  Schuld,'  is  to  say  that  he  has  broken  a  duty,  and  is  now
liable  to  the  sanction.

Accordingly,  ^Schuldner*  is  synonymous  with  the  Roman  *Debiior;*
which  applies  to  any  person  lying  under  any  obligaiion :  that  is  to  say,
an  obligation  {strido  sensuC),  or  in  the  sense  of  the  Roman  Lawyers.

*  Creditor,'  is  the  correlative  of  *  Debitor,'  and  applies  to  any  person
who  has  jus  in  personam.  The  French  '  Ddbiteur '  and  '  Grander '
have  precisely  the  same  meanings.  The  English  'Obligor'  and
'  Obligee '  ought  to  bear  the  same  significations.  But,  in  the  technical
language  of  our  Law,  the  term  *  obligation'  or  'bond'  has  been
miserably  mutilated.  Instead  of  denoting  obligatio  (as  correlating
with  jus  in  personam),  it  is  applied  exclusively  to  certain  unilateral
contracts  evidenced  by  writing  under  seal.  Or,  rather,  it  is  applied  to
the  writing  under  seal  by  which  the  unilateral  contract  is  evidenced.

'  '  Et  placuit  ita  demum  ex  ista  lege ^  '  Delictum  consummatmn. Conatns
actionem  esae,  si  quia  coipore  sao  dam- delinquendi' Consummate  Crimes  and
num  dederit  atqui  alio  modo  damno  dato, Criminal  Attempts. Feuerbach,  pp.  41,
utiles  actiones  dantur/  etc — Gains,  iiL 42,  48.
§  219.  *  Sine  Handlnng,  welche  die  Hervor-

Damage  done  by  the  bodily  might  of  bringung  eines  Yerbrechens  zum  ZicecJL-e
the  offender  was  the  proper  subject  of  ?uU,  ohne  den  bezweckten  verbrecher-
the  Aquilian  Law  ;  which  was  however  ischen  Thatbestand  wirklich  zu  machen,
extended  per  utiles  a/Aumea  to other ist  ein  Yersuch.' Rosshirt,  p.  58.
damage  within  its  Equity.— i/arg.  Note.


Ambiguity  of  Schuldner,  ReuSy  etc.  467

That  is  to  say,  it  is  not  the  name  of  an  obligcUionf  but  of  an  insiru-
ment  evidencing  a  coniraci  from  which  an  obligation  arises.  And,  in
consequence  of  this  absurd  application  of  the  term  Obligation  or  bond,
the  well -constructed  expressions  Obligor  and  Obligee  are  also  com-
pletely spoiled.  If  it  were  used  properly,  the  term  '  Obligee '  would
apply  to  any  person  invested  with  jvs  in  personam :  And  the  term
*  Obligor '  (as  the  correlative  of  *  Obligee ')  would  apply  to  the  party
lying  under  the  corresponding  duty.  But  in  consequence  of  the
narrow  application  of  '  bond  *  or  '  obligation^  the  term  '  obligee,*  with
its  correlative  *  obligor,*  exclusively  applies  to  persons  who  are  parties
to  certain  contracts :  namely,  such  unilateral  contracts  as  are  evidenced
by  writing  under  seal,  and  are  couched  in  a  peculiar  form:  That
peculiar  form  being  not  less  absurd  than  the  absurd  application  of
'  bond  *  or  *  obligation  *  to  which  I  have  pointed  your  attention.

In  the  strict  technical  import  which  it  bears  in  the  English  Law,
the  meaning  of  '  debt  *  is  not  less  narrow  and  inconvenient  than  the
meaning  of  *  bond  *  or  *  obligation.*

In  the  Eoman  Law,  the  term  '  debitum  *  is  exactly  co-extensive
with  the  related  or  paronymous  expression  ^debitor*  As  ^debitor*
signifies  generally  a  person  Ijdng  under  an  obligation,  'debitum*
denotes  (with  the  same  generality)  every  act  or  forbearance  to  which
a  person  is  obliged.  It  denotes  universally  the  positive  or  negative
something  which  is  due  by  virtue  of  an  obligation :  '  id  quod  ez
obligatione  prcestandum  est.'

But  in  the  strict  technical  import  which  it  bears  in  the  English
Law,  'debt*  is  restricted  to  a  definite  sum  of  money,  due  or  owing
from  one  party  to  another  party.  And,  accordingly,  the  action  of
debt  does  not  in  strictness  lie,  unless  the  object  of  the  action  be  the
recovery  of  a  sum  certain.

In  later  times,  indeed,  this  strictness  has  been  relaxed :  Insomuch
that  debt  upon  simple  contract  is  not  substantially  different  from  an
action  of  assumpsit :  whilst  debt  upon  bond  differs  from  an  action  of
covenant  in  form  rather  than  in  effect.

As  is  usual  in  English  legislation  (whether  it  be  direct  or
judicial)  a  mischievous  absurdity  of  the  old  Law  has  been  cured  by
a  mischievous  remedy.  Instead  of  extiiping  pernicious  rules  and  dis-
tinctions, English  Legislators  are  content  to  palliate  the  mischief  by
the  introduction  of  exceptions :  exceptions,  which  aggravate  the  bulk
of  the  Corpus  Juris,  and  (what  is  an  evil  of  still  greater  magnitude)
which  reduce  the  body  of  the  Law  to  a  chaos  of  incoherent  details.^

I  will  venture  to  affirm,  that  no  other  body  of  Law,  obtaining  in
a  civilized  community,  has  so  little  of  consistency  and  symmetry  as
our  own.  Hence  its  enormous  bulk ;  and  (what  is  infinitely  worse
than  its  mere  bulk)  the  utter  impossibility  of  conceiving  it  with
distinctness  and  precision.  If  you  would  know  the  English  Law,
you  must  know  all  the  details  which  make  up  the  mess. For  it  has

'  It  may  be  scarcely  necessary  to  ob-  before  the  C.L.P.  Acts,  1852  and  1854.

serve  that  the  terms  in  which  the  author  The anomalies here deprecated were

speaks  of  English  actions  at  law,  are  somewhat mitigated, though by no

directly  applicable  to  the  forms  in  use  means  removed,  by  those  Acts. — R.  C.


468  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  none  of  those  large  coherent  principles  which  are  a  sure  ind&s  to
XXIY  details.  And,  since  details  are  infinite,  it  is  manifest  that  no  man
'  (let  his  industry  be  what  it  may)  can  compass  the  whole  system.

Consequently,  the  knowledge  of  an  English  Lawyer,  is  nothing
but  a  beggarly  account  of  scraps  and  fragments.  His  memory  may
be  stored  with  numerous  particulars,  but  of  the  Law  as  a  whole,  and
of  the  mutual  relations  of  its  parts,  he  has  not  a  conceptioa

Compare  the  best  of  our  English  treatises  with  the  writings  of
the  Classical  Jurists  and  of  the  Modem  Civilians,  and  you  will
instantly  admit  that  there  is  no  exaggeration  in  what  I  have  ventured
to  state.

Eetuming  to  the  subject  from  which  I  have  digressed,  it  is
remarkable  that  '  Schvldner '  (in  the  older  German  Law)  applied  to
the  Creditor^  as  well  as  to  the  Dehitor :  Just  as  jus  sometimes  signifies
duty,  as  well  as  right ;  and  just  as  obligaiio  denotes  jus  in  personam,
as  well  as  the  duty  to  which  the  right  corresponds.

The  Reus  of  the  Eoman  Lawyers  is  in  the  same  predicament.
As  opposed  to  *  Actor '  it  signifies  the  defendant  in  a  dvU  proceeding,
or  the  party  who  is  the  object  of  accusation  in  a  criminal  proceeding.
And,  taken  in  this  sense,  it  is  not  ambiguous.

But  reus  also  signifies  a  party  to  a  stipulation:  that  is  to  say,
a  unilateral  contract  accompanied  by  peculiar  solemnities.  And,
taken  in  this  sense,  it  applies  to  the  promisee  or  obligee,  as  well
as  to  the  promisor  or  obligor.  Both  are  rei  The  party  who  makes
the  promise,  is  styled  reus  promittendi :  The  party  to  whom  it  is
made,  and  by  whom  it  is  accepted,  is  styled  reus  stipulandu  Correi
promUiendi  are  joint  promissors :  Correi  stipulandi,  joint  promisees.


LECTUEE  XXV.


Leot.
XXV

<-  ,  ''

Intention
or  inadver-
tence is  of
the  essence
of  iiyury.


ANALYSIS  OF  INJURY  OR  WRONG  CONTINUED.

I  ASSUMED,  in  my  last  Lecture,  that  Intention  or  Inadvertence
is  a  necessary  ingredient  in  injury  or  wrong.

A  short  analysis  will  shew  the  truth  of  the  assumption.

In  case  the  duty  be  positive,  the  praetermission  of  the  act
which  the  duty  requires,  is  the  result  of  forbearance,  or  the
result  of  omission.

If  the  praetermission  of  the  act  be  the  result  of  forbearance,
the  party,  at  the  time  of  the  forbearance,  is  conscious  of  his  duty,
and  knows  that  the  duty  of  which  he  is  presently  conscious,
requires  the  performance  of  the  act  from  which  he  forbears.

If  the  prsetermission  of  the  act  be  the  result  of  omission,
the  party  is  conscious  generally  of  the  duty  incumbent  upon
him,  but  adverts  not  to  his  duty,  or  to  the  act  which  his  duty
requires,  at  the  moment  of  the  omission.


Injury  or  Wrong.  469

In  either  case,  he  is  guilty  of  injury  or  wrong,  unless  some Lect.
special  reason  exempt  him  from  liability.  . ^ .

In  case  the  duty  be  negative,  the  party  does  an  act  from
which  he  is  bound  to  forbear,  expecting  consequences  which  it  is
the  object  of  the  duty  to  prevent  Or  the  party  does  the  act
without  adverting  to  those  consequences,  or  assuming  iiuxd-
vertently  that  those  consequences  will  not  ensue.  And,  on  any
of  these  suppositions,  he  is  guilty  of  Injury  or  Wrong,  unless
some  special  reason  exempt  him  from  liability.

Now,  in  all  these  various  cases  of  forbearance,  omission,  and
action,  the  party  expects  consequences  inconsistent  with  the
objects  of  his  duty,  or,  in  case  he  adverted  or  attended  in  the
manner  which  his  duty  requires,  he  might  perceive  that  such
consequences  would  certainly  or  probably  ensue.  In  other
words,  he  forbears  or  acts  with  an  intention  adverse  to  his  duty,
or  else  he  omits  or  acts  negligently,  heedlessly,  or  rashly.

Unless  he  expected  consequences  inconsistent  with  the
objects  of  his  duty,  or  migJU  expect  such  consequences  if  he
adverted  or  attended  as  he  ought,  he  would  not  and  cotdd  not
know,  that  the  forbearance,  omission,  or  act  would  conflict  with
his  duty.  And,  by  consequence,  the  sanction  vxmld  not  and
could  not  operate  as  a  motive  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  duty.  In
short,  men  are  held  to  their  duties  by  the  sanctions  annexed  to
those  duties.  But  sanctions  operate  upon  the  obliged  in  a  two-
fold manner:  that  is  to  say,  They  counteract  the  motives  or
desires  which  prompt  to  a  breach  of  duty,  and  they  tend  to
excite  the  attention  which  the  fulfilment  of  duty  requires.
Consequently,  injury  or  wrong  supposes  unlawful  intention,  or
one  of  those  modes  of  unlawful  inadvertence  which  are  styled
negligence,  heedlessness,  and  rashness.  For  unless  the  party
knew  that  he  was  violating  his  duty,  or  unless  he  migJU  have
known  that  he  was  violating  his  duty,  the  sanction  could  not
operate,  at  the  moment  of  the  wrong,  to  the  end  of  impelling
him  to  the  act  which  the  Law  enjoins,  or  of  deterring  him
from  the  act  which  the  Law  forbids.

The  only  instance  wherein  intention  or  inadvertence  is  not  Anabsurd-
an  ingredient  in  breach  of  duty,  is  furnished  by  the  Law  of  Engjiah
England. By  that  law,  in  cases  of  Obligation  arising  directly  Law  from
from  contract,  it  frequently  happens  that  the  performance  of  the  tiontothis
obligation  is  due  from  the  very  instant  at  which  the  obligation  prmciple.
arises. Or  (speaking  more  accurately)  the  time  for  performance
is  not  determined  by  the  contract,  and  performance  is  due  so
soon  as  the  obligee  shall  desire  it


470  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbct.  For  example :

.  ^^^  ,  If  a  movlBable  be  deposited  with  me  in  order  that  I  may

keep  it  in  safety,  I  am  bound,  from  the,  mommt  of  tJie  deposU,  to
restore  it  to  the  bailor.

If  I  buy  goods,  and  no  time  be  fixed  for  the  payment  of  the
price,  I  am  bound, /rom  the  moment  of  the  delivery,  to  pay  the
price  to  the  seller.

Now,  in  these,  and  in  Similar  cases,  it  is  impossible  that  the
obligation  should  be  broken,  through  intention  or  inadvertence,
until  the  obligee  desire  performance,  and  until  the  obligor  be
informed  of  the  desire.  For,  strictly  speaking,  he  is  bound  to
perform  the  given  act,  so  soon  as  the  obligee  shall  wish  the
performance,  and  so  soon  as  he  himself  shall  be  duly  apprised
of  the  wish.  But,  according  to  the  rule  which  obtains  in  the
Courts  of  Common  Law,  the  creditor  may  sue  the  debtor,  as  for
a  breach  of  the  obligation,  without  a  previous  demand:  The
debtor  being  liable  in  the  action  for  damages  and  costs,  just  as
he  would  be  liable  if  performance  had  been  required,  and  the
obligation  had  then  been  broken  through  his  own  intention  or
negligence.

Now  as  every  right  of  action  is  founded  on  an  injury,  here
is  a  case  of  injury  without  intention  or  inadvertence.  For,
without  a  previous  demand,  or  without  some  notice  or  intimation
that  the  creditor  desires  performance,  the  debtor  cannot  know
that  he  is  breaking  his  obligation,  by  not  performing  the  act
to  which  he  is  obliged.

This  monstrous  rule  of  the  Common  Law  Courts,  is  justified
by  a  reason  which  is  not  less  monstrous.  For  it  is  said  that  a
previous  demand  were  superfluous  and  needless,  inasmuch  as  the
action  is  itself  a  demand.

The  reason  forgets,  that  a  right  of  action  is  founded  on  an
injury ;  that  unlawful  intention  or  inadvertence  is  of  the  essence
of  injury ;  and  that,  in  all  the  cases  which  I  am  now  considering,
there  is  no  room  for  unlawful  intention  or  inadvertence,  until
the  creditor  desire  performance,  and  until  the  debtor  be  apprised
of  the  desire.

Where  an  injury  has  been  actually  committed,  it  is  not
necessary  (although  it  may  be  expedient)  that  the  action  founded
on  the  injury  should  be  preceded  by  a  demand.  For,  here,  the
right  of  action  has  already  accrued,  and  the  use  of  the  previous
demand  would  merely  amount  to  this :  that  it  would  give  the
debtor  an  opportunity  of  redressing  the  wrong,  and  might  there-
fore save  the  parties  from  the  evils  which  accompany  a  suit


Injury  or  Wrong,  47 '

But  in  cases  of  the  class  which  I  am  now  considering,  there Lect.
is  no  injury  (intentional  or  by  negligence),  until  the  creditor ^^  \ ^
demand  performance,  and  until  the  debtor  (intentionally  or  by
negligence)  comply  not  with  the  demand.

Strictly  speaking,  the  case  stands  thus.  Looking  at  the
essentials  of  injury,  the  party  obliged  is  not  guilty  of  injury.
But  he  is  considered  by  the  Courts  as  if  he  had  broken  his
obligation,  and  is  accordingly  liable  In  an  action  for  damages
and  costs.

In  certain  cases  of  the  class  which  I  am  now  considering,  it
is,  indeed,  expedient  that  the  creditor  should  be  permitted  to
sue,  although  no  demand  has  been  made  upon  the  debtor.  But
why  ?  Because  the  debtor  has  actually  broken  the  obligation ;
or  because  the  debtor  intends  to  break  the  obligation,  and  the
delay  occasioned  by  a  formal  demand  might  facilitate  the
execution  of  his  unlawful  design.

For  example :

If  the  debtor  withdraw  himself  from  his  home  or  from  his
usual  places  of  resort,  in  order  that  he  may  evade  a  demand,  he
is  placed  in  the  position  in  which  he  would  have  been  placed  if
the  demand  had  actually  been  made.  Or,  speaking  more  strictly,
a  demand  is  made  on  the  part  of  the  creditor :  and  it  may  fairly
be  presumed  from  the  conduct  of  the  debtor,  that  he  has  notice
of  the  demand.  He  is  fairly  liable  to  an  action,  and  to  the  costs
occasioned  by  the  action.  For  he  is  conscious  that  the  obligee
requires  performance ;  he  withholds  performance  notwithstanding;
and  he  is  therefore  guilty  of  an  actual  injury.

Again:  If  there  be  reason  to  suppose  that  he  means  to
withdraw  himself  from  the  jurisdiction,  or  to  place  his  goods
beyond  the  reach  of  process,  it  is  reasonable  that  the  creditor
should  be  permitted  to  sue,  without  a  previous  demand.  For,
here,  the  debtor  presently  intends  to  commit  an  injury ;  and  the
delay  occasioned  by  a  previous  demand,  might  enable  him  to
defeat  the  action  by  withdrawing  his  person  or  property.

In  this  case,  the  action  is  instituted  for  the  purpose  of  pre-
vention ;  and  it  operates  like  an  injunction,  or  a  7i€  exeat  regno.

But  where  there  is  nothing  in  the  conduct  of  the  debtor,
indicating  an  intention  to  frustrate  the  creditor  of  his  right,  it
is  clear  that  a  demand  of  performance,  with  subsequent  non-
performance, ought  to  precede  the  action  :  And  that  if  an  action
be  brought  without  this  important  preliminary,  the  creditor  should
be  liable  for  the  costs  of  the  needless  proceeding,  and  bound  to
make  satisfaction  for  the  gratuitous  vexation  which  he  occasions.


472  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  On  looking  over  Evans's  Digest  of  the  Statutes  for  another


XXV


purpose,  I  have  had  great  pleasure  in  observing  that  so  judicious
a  writer  takes  the  same  view  of  this  question  which  I  have
just  stated.  He  says  (vol  iiL  p.  289):  'There  is  another  Bule
in  Courts  of  Equity  which  may  deserve  a  different  consideration,
as  applied  to  legal  demands,  viz.  that  length  of  time  is  no  bar  in
case  of  a  trust.  Where  a  man  deposits  money  in  the  hands  of
another,  to  be  kept  for  his  use,  the  possession  of  the  custodee
ought  to  be  deemed  the  possession  of  the  owner,  until  an
application  and  refusal,  or  other  denial  of  the  right ;  for,  until
then,  there  is  nothing  adverse ;  and  I  conceive  that  upon  prin-
ciple, no  action  should  be  allowed  in  these  cases,  without  a
previous  demand;  consequently,  that  no  limitation  should  be
computed  further  back  than  such  demand.  And  I  think  it
probable  that,  under  these  circumstances,  the  limitation  would
not  be  allowed  to  attach,  though  the  other  part  of  the  observation
would  be  as  probably  disallowed.*  For  a  sweeping  rule  has  been
by  some  means  introduced  into  practice,  that  an  action  is  a
demand ;  whereas  every  action  in  its  nature  supposes  a  preceding
defavlt ;  where  money  is  improperly  received,  or  goods  are  bo\^ght
without  any  specific  credit,  or  even  where  money  is  borrowed
generally,  there  is  held  to  be  an  immediate  duty,  and  it  is  a
perfectly  legitiihate  conclusion  that  no  demand  can  be  necessary,
in  addition  to  the  duty  itself.  But  wherever  there  is  a  loan  in
the  nature  of  a  deposit,  or  any  other  confidential  duty  is  con-
tracted, the  mere  creation  of  that  duty,  unaccompanied  with  the
absolute  breach  of  it,  by  denial  or  inconsistent  conduct,  ought
not  to  be  considered  as  a  ground  of  action.'

I  perfectly  agree  with  this  reasoning  as  applied  to  the  case
of  the  deposit.  It  is  only  on  breach  of  the  obligation,  that  a
right  of  action  should  accrue  to  the  bailor.  And  it  is  only  by
refusal  or  neglect  to  return  the  subject  on  demand,  that  the
obligation  is  broken.

But  similar  reasoning  is  also  applicable  to  the  case  of  goods
sold  without  specific  credit ;  of  money  lent  generally ;  and  of
money  paid  and  received  by  mistake.

In  the  case  of  money  paid  and  received  by  mistake,  it  is
necessary  to  distinguish.

If  the  money  was  received  hond  fide,  it  surely  is  expedient
that  a  demand  should  precede  the  action. For  until  the  debtor

^  So  far  as  regards  the  operation  of  with  judicial  decision  (Philpott  v.  Eel-
the  statutes  of  limitations,  the  principle  ley,  3  Ad.  k  £11.  106  ;  £dwards  v.  Clay,
here  contended  for  seems  now  to  consist 28  Beav.  145).— R.  C.


Injury  or  Wrong.  473

is  apprised  of  the  mistake,  it  is  impossible  to  say  that  he  has ^t.
broken  intentionally  or  by  negligence  his  obligation  to  return  the  >

money.

If  the  money  was  received  moM  fde,  the  act  of  receiving
the  money  was  in  itself  an  injury:  an  injury  arudogovs  to
unlawful  taking.  The  only  difierence  between  the  cases  lies  in
the  means.  In  the  one  case,  I  take  the  goods  of  another  with-
out the  consent  of  the  owner.  In  the  other  case,  I  take  the
goods  with  his  consent,  but  by  reason  of  an  error  in  which  he  is,
and  of  which  I  avail  myself  by  suppressing  the  truth.  Here,
therefore,  the  debtor  is  guilty  of  an  injury  from  the  very  outset ;
and  no  demand  is  necessary  as  a  basis  for  the  action.

I  shall  here  remark  generally,  a  distinction  which  exists
between  obligations  arising  from  the  possession  of  res  aliencs,
or  things  which  are  the  property  of  another  person.  The  party
entitled  has  always  a  right  to  the  restitution  of  the  goods  or  to
satisfaction  for  their  loss,  and  the  party  in  possession  is  always
bound  to  restore  or  satisfy.

But  the  nature  of  the  obligation  depends  upon  the  conscious-
ness of  the  party  in  possession :  If  he  possess  the  subject  maid
Jide,  his  possession  is  itself  a  wrong.  His  obligation  to  restore
or  satisfy,  arises  from  an  injury;  and,  inasmuch  as  the  right
which  is  violated  is  jus  in  rem,  the  obligation  is  ex  delicto  (in  the
strict  signification  of  the  term).

If  he  possess  the  subject  bond  Jide,  his  possession  is  not  a
wrong.  His  obligation  to  restore  or  satisfy  is  qiuisi  ex  contractu  :
That  is  to  say.  It  arises  from  a  fact  which  is  neither  an  injury
nor  a  convention.  But  so  soon  as  he  is  apprised  of  the  right
which  resides  in  the  party  entitled,  the  obligation  alters  its
nature.  It  may  either  be  considered  as  arising  from  a  breach  of
the  quasi-contract ;  or  from  a  violation  of  the  jus  in  rem  which
resides  in  the  party  entitled.  And,  on  either  supposition,  it
arises  from  an  injury.  The  only  diflFerence  is,  that  it  arises,  on
the  former,  fix)m  a  breach  of  quasi-contract ;  whilst  it  arises,  on
the  latter,  from  a  delict  (strictly  so  called).

[Remark  on  the  indistinctness  of  the  boundary,  by  which  obli-
gations ex  delicto  are  distinguished  from  obligations  qua^  ex  contractu.

The  receipt  of  money  paid  by  mistake  ought  not  to  be  considered
as  begetting  an  obligation  quasi  ex  contractu,  if  the  party  receiving
be  in  mold  fide.  The  action  should  be  Case,  and  not  Assumpsit
(assuming,  that  is,  that  the  forms  of  action  should  be  kept  up).

The  Roman  Law  not  free  from  this  uncertainty.

The  confusion  of  quasi-contracts  with  contracts,  peculiar  to
English  Lawyers.]


474  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  The  allegation  in  bills,  *  that  the  plaintiflF  has  requested  the

^'  '  -  defendant  to  perform  the  object  of  the  suit,  but  that  the  defendant
has  refused  or  neglected  to  comply  with  that  request,'  is  (I  should
suppose)  merely  formal :  i.e.  it  is  not  incumbent  on  the  plaintiff
to  prove  it.  At  least,  a  demand  is  not  necessary,  where  the
defendant  has  actually  committed  an  injury.  But  where  notice
must  be  given,  before  the  defendant  can  commit  an  injury,  there
(I  apprehend)  a  demand  on  the  part  of  the  plaintiff,  with  subse-
quent refusal  or  neglect  on  the  part  of  the  defendant,  is  a
necessary  preliminary  to  the  institution  of  the  suit.  E.g. :  If
you  are  seized  in  fee  in  trust  for  me,  you  are  bound  to  convey
the  legal  estate  as  I  shall  direct.  But  if  I  filed  a  bill  for  the
purpose  of  compelling  a  conveyance  without  previous  demand
and  consequent  refusal  or  neglect,  I  think  that  Equity  (who,  let
men  traduce  her  as  they  may,  is  far  more  rational  than  her  sister
and  rival  Law)  would  compel  me  to  pay  the  costs  of  the  wanton
and  vexatious  suit.

The  Boman  Law,  in  regard  to  the  matter  in  question,  is
perfectly  rational  and  consistent.  In  all  cases,  the  institution
of  an  action  must  be  preceded  by  a  notice  to  the  debtor,  provided
the  debtor  can  be  found.  In  case  the  debtor  has  not  broken
the  obligation,  the  notice  is  necessary  as  a  basis  to  the  action.
In  case  the  debtor  has  actually  broken  the  obligation,  the  notice
gives  him  an  opportunity  of  redressing  the  injury,  and  of  saving
himself  and  the  creditor  from  the  evils  of  a  suit.

Whether  or  not  a  demand  must  precede  an  action,  is,  there-
fore, a  question  which  can  never  arise.  As  a  demand  must
precede  an  action  in  every  case  whatever,  the  only  question
which  can  arise  is  this :  namely,  whether  a  demand  of  perform-
ance must  be  made  by  the  creditor,  in  order  that  the  debtor  may
be  in  mord,  and  may  incur  the  liabilities  which  are  incident  to
that  predicament  This  I  will  endeavour  to  explain  with  all
possible  brevity.
Mord.  The  non-performance  of  an  obligation  is  in  the  Boman  Law

styled  mord  ;^  for  the  debtor  delays  performance ;  or,  in  conse-
quence of  the  non-performance,  the  creditor  is  delayed.  Not
unfrequently,  it  is  styled  frvstratio,  or  dilatio.

But  the  predicament  in  which  the  debtor  is  placed  in
consequence  of  his  non-performance,  is  also  styled  mord.  Debitor
qui  moram  fecit  in  mord  dicitur.  Being  in  mordy  he  incurs
liabilities  from  which  he  were  exempt  if  he  were  not  in
mord,

f  Muhlenbruch,  i.  325,  839. Mackeldey,  ii.  166,  165.


Injury  or  Wrong.  475

For  example :  If  a  moveable  has  been  deposited  with  the Lect,


debtor  in  order  that  he  might  keep  it  safely,  he  is  not  liable  for
accidental  damage,  unless  he  be  in  mord.  But  if  he  refuse  to
return  it  on  demand  made  by  the  creditor,  he  is  in  mord ;  and
he  is  thenceforth  liable  for  accidental  damage,  as  well  as  for
damage  occasioned  by  his  intention  or  negligence.

If  he  owe  money  payable  on  demand,  and  after  demand
decline  or  neglect  payment,  he  is  in  nwrd.  And  being  in  mord,
he  is  bound  to  pay  interest  on  the  money  which  he  detains,
though  no  interest  was  previously  payable.

Now,  if  no  time  be  fixed  for  the  performance  of  the  obligation,
the  debtor  is  not  in  mord,  and  does  not  incur  the  liabilities
incident  to  that  predicament,  imless  a  demand  of  performance
be  made  by  the  creditor,  and  unless  the  debtor  comply  not  with
the  demand.  The  rule  is  '  IrUerpellandvs  est  debitor  loco  et  tempore
opportuno*  The  authors  of  the  rule  justly  considered,  that
intention  or  inadvertence  is  of  the  essence  of  wrong ;  and  that
the  obligation  could  not  be  broken,  either  through  intention  or
inadvertence,  until  the  creditor  required  performance.

If  a  specific  terminus  or  time  be  fixed  for  the  performance,
the  debtor  is  in  mord,  imless  he  perform  at  that  time,  although
no  demand  be  made  by  the  creditor.  'Dies  interpellat  pro
Iwmine*  (N.B.  Interpellatio  signifies  making  a  demand.)  For,
here,  the  debtor  breaks  the  obligation,  intentionally  or  by
negligence,  whether  a  demand  be  made  or  not  by  the  opposite
party.  He  knows  generally  that  he  ought  to  perform  at  the
time ;  and  a  demand  of  performance  on  the  part  of  the  creditor
were,  therefore,  superfluous.

Whether  a  demand  of  performance  ought  to  precede  an
action,  and  whether  a  demand  should  be  made  in  order  that
the  debtor  may  be  in  nwrd,  are  distinct  questions.  But  it  is
manifest  that  the  solution  of  either  question  must  be  sought
for  in  the  same  source :  namely,  in  the  state  of  the  debtor's
consciousness.  If  he  know  that  the  performance  is  due,  and
yet  do  not  perform,  it  is  reasonable  to  presume  that  the  non-
performance is  the  consequence  of  intention  or  negligence.
He  is  actually  guilty  of  injury.  Consequently,  a  demand  of
performance  is  not  an  essential  preliminary  to  the  institution
of  an  action.  And,  further,  it  is  not  unreasonable  that  he
should  be  subjected  to  certain  liabilities,  which  he  would  not
have  incurred,  if  he  had  been  clear  of  unlawful  intention  or
imlawful  inadvertence.  On  this,  as  on  almost  all  other  subjects
relating  to  contracts,  the  depth  and  consistency  of  the  Boman


XXV


476


Lbct.
XXV


Pervading  Notions  analysed.

lawyers  is  truly  admirable,  and  is  only  equalled  by  their  plain
and  manly  manner  of  expressing  their  meaning.


Resume
the  prin-
ciple, that
intention
or  inad-
vertence
is  of  the
essence  of
injury.


Before  I  dismiss  this  subject,  I  may  make  this  general
remark.  In  most  cases  of  breach  of  contract,  the  intention  or
negligence  of  the  debtor  is  so  manifest,  that  the  question  is  not
agitated  or  even  adverted  to.  And  from  hence  we  might  incline
to  infer,  that  intention  or  negligence  is  not  of  the  essence  of  the
wrong.  If  we  look  into  the  detail,  we  immediately  perceive
that  breach  of  contract  as  necessarily  supposes  intention  or
negligence  as  any  other  injury  whatever.

For  instance:  whether  a  demand  be  an  essential  preliminary
to  an  action,  or  whether  the  debtor  be  in  mord  without  a  demand,
entirely  depends  upon  the  presence  or  absence  of  intention  or
negligence.  If  tvithout  demand  he  could  not  know  that  he  was
breaking  his  obligation,  it  is  manifestly  necessary  that  a  demand
should  be  made,  before  the  action  is  instituted  by  the  creditor,
or  before  the  debtor  is  placed  in  the  predicament  which  is  styled
mord.  In  all  cases  in  which  the  contract  binds  him  to  diligentia
(as  in  cases  of  bailment),  the  question  of  '  negligence  or  not,'  also
frequently  arises.  In  ordinary  cases  the  question  does  not
arise,  because  the  intention  or  negligence  is  manifest  and
indisputable.  I  make  this  remark  because,  owing  to  the
arrangement  adopted  by  the  Soman  institutional  writers,  one
is  liable  to  suppose  that  breaches  of  contract  are  not  similar  to
other  breaches  of  obligation,  and  are  not  even  injuries  at  all ;
not  being  ranked  with  delicts  or  injuries,  nor  bearing  the  same
name.  In  the  arrangement  of  the  Soman  law,  not  only  the
primary  obligations  arising  from  contracts  and  quasi-contracts,
are  called  obligations,  but  likewise  the  obligations  arising  from
breaches  of  these  primary  obligations  are  called  obligcUiones
simply  and  are  said  to  arise  not  from  delicts,  but  from  the  con-
tracts or  quasi-contracts.  And  in  our  own  law  we  talk  of  actions
ex  contractu,  and  distinguish  them  from  actions  ex  delicto.  It  is,
however,  undeniable  that  actions  ex  contractu  are  just  as  much
founded  on  injury,  as  the  actions  which  are  said  to  be  e;r  delicto.

Unlawful  intention  or  unlawful  inadvertence,  is,  therefore,
of  the  essence  of  injury,  and  for  this  reason,  that  the  sanction
could  not  have  operated  upon  the  party  as  a  motive  to  the  ful-
filment of  the  duty,  unless  at  the  moment  immediately  preceding
the  wrong  he  had  been  conscious  that  he  was  violating  his  duty,
or  unless  he  would  have  been  conscious  that  he  was  violating  his
duty,  if  he  had  adverted  or  attended  as  he  ought.


Grounds  of  Non-imputability,  477

If  we  examine  the  grounds  of  the  various  exemptions  from Lect\

liability,  we  shall  find  that  most  (though  not  all)  of  them  are  - ^ >

reducible  to  the  principles  which  I  have  now  stated. We  shall  Grounds  of

find  (generally  speaking)  that  the  party  is  clear  of  liability,  f^m  ?k^°

because  he  is  clear  of  intention  or  inadvertence : or  (what,  in  bility,

effect,  comes  to  the  same  thing),  because  it  is  'presumed  that  he  dudbfe  to

is  clear  of  intention  or  inadvertence.  the  princi-

Til  A IaA^

Thus: No one is liable  for a  mischief  resulting from  stated.
accident  or  chance  (casm). That ls  to  say,  from  some  event  i.  Casus  or
(other  than  act  of  his  own),  which  he  was  unable  to  foresee,  or,  -A-ccident*
foreseeing,  was  unable  to  prevent. Whether  the  event  happen
through  the  intervention  of  man,  or  whether  it  happen  widiout
the  intervention  of  man,  is  not  important. The  essence  of  casm,
chance,  or  a^xideni,  lies  in  this :  that  the  event  was  not  an  act
done  by  the  given  party,  and  could  not  have  been  foreseen  or  pre-
vented by  that  given  party. This  (I  think)  is  the  meaning  of
casus  or  accident  in  the  Boman,  of  chance  or  accident  in  our  own  Law.

'  By  the  Common  Law '  (says  Lord  Mansfield)  '  a  carrier  is
an  insurer.  It  is  laid  down,  that  he  is  liable  for  every  accident,
except  by  the  act  of  God  or  the  king's  enemies!  Here,  the  term
accident  includes  the  acts  of  men :  namely,  of  the  king's  enemies.
And,  in  the  Digest,  it  is  expressly  said,  '/ortuitis  casibvs  solet
etiam  adnumerari  a^gressura  latronum!

It  would  seem  then,  that  ccmis  or  accident  includes  the  act
of  man.  But  (I  think)  it  is  never  extended  to  the  act  of  the
party  himself.  An  act  of  his  own  is  hardly  called  an  accident,
although  the  act  be  not  imputable,  inasmuch  as  it  is  not  accom-
panied by  unlawful  intention  or  inadvertence,  or,  is  excusable
for  other  reasons.

In  the  language  of  the  English  Law,  an  event  which  happens
without  the  intervention  of  man,  is  styled  'the  Act  of  God.*
The  language  of  the  Boman  Law  is  nearly  the  same.  Mischiefs
arising  from  such  events  are  styled  damna  fatalia,  or  detrimenta
fatalia.  They  are  ascribed  to  vis  divina,  or  to  a  certain  per-
sonage styled  fatum.  Or  the  casus  or  accident  takes  a  specific
name,  and  is  called  fatalitas.

The  language  of  either  system  is  absurd.  For  the  act  of
man  is  as  much  the  act  of  God  as  any  event  which  arises  with-
out the  intervention  of  man.  And  if  we  choose  to  suppose  a  cer-
tain faie  or  destiny,  we  must  suppose  that  she  or  it  determines
the  acts  of  men,  as  well  as  the  events  which  are  not  acts  of  men.

>  Miihlenbrnch,  L  179,  326,  331. iii,  165. Heineccios,  Recitationes,  538.
Mackeldey,  ii.  157. Blackstoue,  iv.  26 ;  539.


478  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbct.  In  the  language  of  the  Roman  Law,  events  which  happen

.  ^^^  V  without  the  intervention  of  man,  are  sometimes  distinguished
from  the  others  by  the  term  imtural.  Or  (what  comes  to  the
same  thing)  they  are  ascribed  to  vi^  naturcUis.

Returning  to  the  legal  effect  of  casus,  chance,  or  acctderU,
no  man  is  liable,  civilly  or  criminally,  for  a  purely  accicUrUal
mischief.  For,  as  he  could  not  foresee  the  event  from  which  the
mischief  arose,  or  was  utterly  unable  to  obviate  the  event  or  its
consequences,  the  mischief  is  not  imputable  to  his  intention  or
negligence.

For  example,  If  I  am  in  possession  of  a  house,  or  of  a
moveable  belonging  to  another,  and  the  subject  whilst  in
my  possession  is  destroyed  by  an  accidental  fire,  I  am  not
liable  to  the  owner  in  respect  of  the  damage.  '  Damnum  ex
casu  sentit  dominus.'

But  when  I  say,  '  that  no  man  is  liable  in  respect  of  an
accidental  mischief,'  I  mean,  '  that  he  is  not  liable  as  for  an
injury  or  wrong,*  For,  by  virtue  of  an  obligation  arising
aliunde,  he  may  be  liable.

To  revert  to  the  instance  which  I  have  just  cited : — ^I  am
liable  to  the  owner  for  the  damage  done  by  the  fire,  in  case  I
contracted  with  him  to  that  effect.  I  am  also  liable  in  case  I
am  a  carrier,  and  the  subject  has  come  into  my  possession  in  the
course  of  my  calling.  If  the  subject  was  deposited  with  me  in
order  that  I  might  keep  it  safely,  I  am  also  liable  (according  to
the  Roman  Law)  if  I  am  m  mord :  that  is  to  say,  if  the  owner
has  requested  me  to  return  the  subject,  and  I  have  nevertheless
kept  possession  of  it

But  in  these  and  similar  cases,  I  am  not  liable  as  for  an
injury,  but  by  virtue  of  an  obligation  ex  contractu  or  gvMsi  ex
contractu.  The  mischief  done  by  the  fire,  is  not  the  consequence
of  an  injury  done  by  me ;  although  I  shall  be  answerable,  as  for
an  injury,  in  case  I  perform  not  my  special  obligation  to  make
good  the  loss  arising  from  the  accident.

The  carrier  is  a  person  on  whom  the  law  imposes  a  par-
ticular obligation,  and  all  persons  are  supposed  to  deal  with
the  carrier  on  the  terms  which  the  law  predetermines,  unless
they  specially  provide  otherwise.  This  is  the  case  of  what
are  termed  dispositive  laws.  A  particular  arrangement  is
determined  by  a  provision  of  the  law,  subject  to  be  altered  by
a  special  convention  between  the  parties.  Thus,  although  as  a
carrier  I  am  liable  for  all  damage  suffered  by  goods  under  my
charge,  except  from  the  act  of  God,  or  the  king's  enemies,  I  am


Grounds  of  Non-imput ability.  479

at  liberty  to  relieve  myself  from  this  liability,  by  sticking  up  in  Lect.
my  shop  a  notice  to  that  efiPect.  In  either  case,  the  obligation  .
arises  from  a  contract ;  in  the  one  case,  the  parties  enter  into  a
contract,  tacitly  adopting  the  provisions  of  the  dispositive  law ;
in  the  other  case,  they  enter  into  a  more  special  contract,
modifying  those  provisions.  In  the  case  of  mord,  also,  the
obligation  to  answer  for  damage  by  fire  or  other  accident,  does
not  arise  &om  the  fire,  but  is  consequent  on  a  previous  injury.
If  this  obligation  be  violated,  a  new  injury  is  commited  and  a
consequent  obligation  incurred.®

Another  ground  of  exemption  is,  ignorance  or  error  with  2.  Igno-
regard  to  matter  of  fact.  ^^^Z}^

Now,  here,  although  the  proximate  ground  is  ignorance  or
error,  the  vitimate  ground  is  the  absence  of  unlawful  intention
or  unlawful  inadvertence.  For  unless  the  ignorance  or  error
was  inevitabk  or  invincible  (or,  in  other  words,  unless  it  could
not  have  been  removed  by  due  attention  or  advertence),  the  act,
forbearance,  or  omission,  which  was  the  consequence  of  the
ignorance  or  error,  is  imputable  to  negligence,  heedlessness,  or
temerity.

I  will  touch  briefly  upon  a  few  cases,  wherein  the  party  is
exempt  from  civil  and  criminal  liability,  by  reason  of  ignorance
or  error.

'Si  quis'  (says  Ulpian)  'hominem  liberum  ceciderit,  rfwm
ptUat  servum  suum,  in  ek  causd  est,  ne  injuriarum  teneatur.'

Here  the  party  whose  conduct  is  in  question  beats  a
freeman.  But  he  is  not  liable  as  for  an  assault  and  battery,
because  he  believes  at  the  time  of  the  beating  that  the  man  is
his  slave.  In  consequence  of  ignorance  or  error,  he  thinks  that
he  is  exercising  his  indisputable  right  of  using  and  abusing  his  own.

Another  case,  closely  resembling  the  last,  is  the  following.
If  the  party  possess  bond  fide  a  thing  belonging  to  another,  and
if  the  thing  be  damaged  by  his  abuse  or  carelessness,  he  is  not
liable  to  the  owner  in  respect  of  the  damage ;  although  he  vxruM
have  been  liable,  if  he  had  possessed  the  thing  mold  fide.
*  Bem  enim  guasi  suam  neglexit.'

*  As  is  frequently  the  case  with  cus-  fore  receperintf  niti  restituerU^  in  eos  ju-
toms  which  prevail  not  in  this  country  dicium  daho '  (D.  iv.  9).  ITie  ratio  of
only  hut  throuffhout  Europe,  the  custom  the  liability  in  the  Roman  law  was  how-
ana  understanding  relating  to  carriers  ever  not  implied  contract  of  indemnity,
now  recognised  as  the  common  law  of  but  presumed  culpa, — K  C.
£ngland,  has  its  origin  in  the  positive  ^^  Feuerbach,  p.  80-4.  Muhlenbruch,
law  obtaining  amount  the  Romans :  in  193,  331.  Rosshirt,  53.  Blackstone,
this  instance  following  the  law  founded  iii.  142,  154 ;  iv.  26.  Bentham,  Pr.
on  the  Praetorian  Edict,  *  Nautce,  Cau-  168.
poneSj  Stabulariiy  qiAod  cujiisque  salvum


48o  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  The  forgoing  examples  are  taken  from  the  Boman:  the

.  ^^^  . following,  from  the  English  Law.

If  I  hire  your  servant,  knoicing  that  he  is  your  servant,  I
am  guilty  of  an  offence  against  your  right  in  the  servant,  and
am  liable  to  an  action  on  the  Case.  But  if  I  hire  your  servant,
not  knowing  that  he  is  your  servant,  I  am  not  guilty  of  a  wrong,
and  am  not  liable  to  an  action,  until  I  receive  notice  of  his
previous  contract  with  you.

If  I  keep  a  dog  given  to  worry  cattle,  and  if  I  am  apprised
of  that  his  mischievous  inclination,  I  am  liable  for  damage  done
by  the  dog  to  my  neighbour's  cow  or  sheep.  But  unless  I  am
apprised  of  his  vicious  disposition,  I  am  not  guilty  of  an  injury,
and  am  not  liable  to  make  good  the  damage.^^  For  the  damage
is  not  imputable  to  my  intention  or  inadvertence.

If,  intending  to  kill  a  burglar  who  has  broken  into  my
house,  I  strike  in  the  dark  and  kill  my  own  servant,  I  am  not
guilty  of  murder,  nor  even  of  manslaughter.  For  the  mischief
is  not  imputable  to  intention  or  inadvertence,  but  to  inevitable
error.  That  is  to  say,  to  error  which  could  not  have  been
prevented  by  any  attention  or  advertence,  practicable  under  the
circumstances.

And  so  much  for  ignorance  or  error,  with  regard  to  matter
of  fact.

'  Before  I  dismiss  the  subject,  I  will  briefly  advert  to  ignorance

' or  error,  with  regard  to  the  state  of  the  law.

In  order  that  an  obligation  may  be  effectual  (or,  in  other
words,  in  order  that  the  sanction  may  operate  as  a  motive  to
fulfilment),  two  conditions  must  concur.  1st  It  is  necessary
that  the  party  should  know  the  law,  by  which  the  Obligation  is
imposed,  and  to  which  the  Sanction  is  annexed.  2ndly.  It  is
necessary  that  he  should  actually  know  (or,  by  due  attention  or
advertence,  mif/JU  actually  know),  that  ^ihe  given  act,  or  the
given  forbearance  or  omission,  would  violate  the  law,  or  amount
to  a  breach  of  the  obligation. Unless  these  conditions  concur,

"  The  presumption  which  apparently  The  House  of  Lords  (Lords  Cranworth

exists  in  Engkna  in  favour  of  tne  Timn-  and  Brougham)  overruled  this  decision

sueta  natura  of  our  dogs  has  elsewhere  (2  Macqueen,  14). An  Act  was  subse-

not  passed  without  controversy. In  a  quently  passed  (for  Scotland),  declaring

case  m  Scotland  where  sheep  had  been  it  unnecessary,  in  an  action  against  the

worried  by  a  foxhound,  the  late  Lord  owner  of  the  dog,  to  prove  a  previous

Cockburn  repudiated  the  principle  that  propensity  to  injure  cattle  (26  k  27  Vict.

'  every  dog  is  entitled  to  have  at  least  c.  100). An  Act  to  a  similar  purport  was

one  tcorry : '  and  the  Scotch  Court  agreed  afterwards  passed  for  England  (28  k  29

with  him  in  presuming,  that  if  a  dog  Vict.  c.  60).— R.  C.
worry  sheep, the  owner  is  to  blame


yurts  et  Facti  Ignorantia.  48 1

it  is  impossible  that  the  sanction  should  operate  upon  his  desires. Lb<^*
Or  (changing  the  expression)  the  given  act,  or  the  given  forbear- ^ ^ >
ance  or  omission,  cannot  be  imputed  to  an  unlawful  intention,
or  to  any  of  those  modes  of  unlawful  inadvertence  which  are
styled  negligence,  heedlessness,  or  rashness.

Accordingly,  inevitable  ignorance  or  error  in  respect  to
matter  of  fact,  is  considered,  in  every  system,  as  a  ground  of
exemption^

With  regard  to  ignorance  or  error  in  respect  to  the  state  of
the  law,  the  provisions  of  different  systems  appear  to  differ
considerably ;  although  they  all  concur'  in  assuming  genercMy,
that  it  shall  not  be  a  ground  of  exemption.  *  Begula  est,  juris
ignorantiam  cuique  nocere,'  is  the  language  of  the  Pandects.
And  per  Manwood,  as  reported  by  Plowden,  'It  is  to  be
presumed  that  no  subject  of  this  realm  is  misconusant  of  the
Law  whereby  he  i&  governed.  Ignorance  of  the  Law  excuseth
none.'

I  have  no  doubt  that  this  rule  is  expedient,  or,  rather,  is
absolutely  necessary.  But  the  reasons  assigned  for  the  rule,
which  I  have  happened  to  meet  with,  are  not  satisfactory.

The  reason  given  in  the  Pandects  is  this :  '  In  omni  parte,
error  injure  non  eodem  loco  quo/oe^i  ignorantia  haberi  debebit,
quum  jus  finitum  et  possit  esse  et  debeat :  facti  interpretatio
plerumque  etiam  prudentissimos  fedlat'  ^^

Which  reasoning  may  be  expressed  thus :

'  Ignorance  or  error  with  regard  to  matter  of  fact,  is  often
inevitable:  that  is  to  say,  no  attention  or  advertence  could
prevent  it  But  ignorance  or  error  with  regard  to  the  state  of
the  law,  is  never  inevitable.  For  the  law  is  definite  and
knowable,  or  might  or  ought  to  be  so.  Consequently,  ignorance
or  error  with  regard  to  the  law  is  no  ground  for  exemption.  If
the  conduct  of  the  party  be  imputable  to  ignorance  of  law,  it  is
not  imputable  directly  to  unlawful  tltilention  or  inadvertence.
But  as  the  ignorance  to  which  it  is  imputable  is  the  consequence
of  unlawful  inadvertence,  his  conduct,  in  the  last  result,  is
caused  by  his  negligence.'

The  reasoning  involves  the  small  mistake  of  confounding
'  is '  with  '  might  be '  and  '  ought  to  be.*  That  Law  might  be
knowable  by  all  who  are  bound  to  obey  it,  or  that  Law  ought  to
be  knowable  by  all  who  are  bound  to  obey  it — 'finitum  et
possit  esse  et  debeat,'  is,  I  incline  to  think,  true.  That  any
actual  system  is  so  knowable,  or  that  any  actual  system  has

"  Digest,  xxiL  6,  2.
VOL.  I.  2  I


482  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbct. ever  been  so  knowable,  is  so  notoriously  and  ridiculously  false


XXV


that  I  shall  not  occupy  your  time  with  proof  of  the  contraiy.

Blackstone  produces  the  same  pretiasa  ratio,  flavoured  with
a  spice  of  that  circular  argumentation  wherein  he  delighta
'  A  mistake  (says  he)  in  point  of  Law,  which  every  person  of
discretion,  not  only  nuiy,  but  is  bound  and  presumed  to  know,
is  in  criminal  cases  no  sort  of  defence.'

Now  to  affirm  '  that  every  person  may  know  the  law/  is  to
affirm  the  thing  which  is  not  And  to  say  '  that  his  ignorance
should  not  excuse  him  hecause  he  is  hound  to  know,'  is  simply
to  assign  the  rule  as  a  reason  for  itself.  Being  bound  to  know
the  law,  he  cannot  efiectually  allege  his  ignorance  of  the  law  as
a  ground  of  exemption  from  the  law.  But  why  is  he  bound  to
know  the  law  ?  or  why  is  it  presumed,  juris  et  de  fure,  that  he
knew  the  law  ?

The  only  sufficient  reason  for  the  rule  in  question,  seems  to
be  this :  that  if  ignorance  of  law  were  admitted  as  a  ground  of
exemption,  the  Courts  would  be  involved  in  questions  which  it
wero  scarcely  possible  to  solve,  and  which  would  ronder  the
adnumstiation  of  justice  next  to  impracticable.  If  ignorance  of
law  were  admitted  as  a  ground  of  exemption,  ignorance  of  law
would  always  be  alleged  by  the  party,  and  the  Courts  in  every
case,  would  be  bound  to  decide  the  point

But,  in  order  that  the  Court  might  decide  the  point,  it  were
incumbent  upon  the  Court  to  examine  the  following  questions
of  fact :  Ist^  Was  the  party  ignorant  of  the  law  at  the  time  of
the  alleged  wrong  ?  2ndly,  Assuming  that  he  was  ignorant  of
the  law  at  the  time  of  the  wrong  alleged,  was  his  ignorance  of
the  law  inevitable  ignorance,  or  had  he  been  previously  placed
in  such  a  position  that  he  might  have  known  the  law,  if  he  had
duly  tried  ?

It  is  manifest  that  the  latter  question  is  not  less  material
than  the  former.  If  he  might  have  known  the  law  in  case  he
had  duly  tried,  the  reasoning  which  I  have  produced  from  the
Pandects  would  apply  to  his  case.  That  is  to  say ;  Inasmuch
as  the  conduct  in  question  wero  directly  imputable  to  his
ignorance,  it  were  not  imputable  directly  to  unlawful  intention
or  inadvertence.  But,  inasmuch  as  his  ignorance  of  the  law
were  imputable  to  unlawful  inadvertence,  the  conduct  in  question
were  imputable,  in  the  last  result,  to  his  negligence.

Now  either  of  these  questions  were  next  to  insoluble.
Whether  the  party  was  really  ignorant  of  the  law,  and  was  so
ignorant  of  the  law  that  he  had  no  sfurmise  of  its  provisions.


yurts  et  Facti  Ignorant ia.  483

could  scarcely  be  determined  by  any  evidence  accessible  to Lect.


others.  And  for  the  purpose  of  determining  the  catise  of  his
ignorance  (its  reality  being  ascertained),  it  were  incumbent  upon
the  tribunal  to  unravel  his  previous  history,  and  to  search  his
whole  life  for  the  elements  of  a  just  solution.

The  reason  for  the  rule  in  question  would,  therefore,  seem
to  be  this: — It  not  unfrequently  happens  that  the  party,  is
ignorant  of  the  law,  and  that  his  ignorance  of  the  law  is  inevit-
able. But  if  ignorance  of  law  were  a  ground  of  exemption,  the
administration  of  justice  would  be  arrested.  For,  in  ahnost
every  case,  ignorance  of  law  would  be  alleged.  And,  for  the
purpose  of  determining  the  reality  and  ascertaining  the  cattse  of
the  ignorance,  the  Court  were  compelled  to  enter  upon  questions
of  fact,  insoluble  and  interminable.

That  the  party  shall  be  presumed  peremptorily  conusant  of
the  law,  or  (changing  the  shape  of  the  expression)  that  his
ignorance  shall  not  exempt  him,  seems  to  be  a  rule  so  necessary,
that  law  would  become  inefTectual  if  it  were  not  applied  by  the
Courts  generally.  And  if  due  pains  were  taken  to  promulge  the
law,  and  to  clear  it  of  needless  complexity,  the  presumption  would
accord  with  the  truth  in  the  vast  majority  of  instances.  The
party  (generally  speaking)  loould  actually  know  the  law.  Or
the  party,  at  least,  might  so  mrmise  its  provisions,  that  he  could
shape  his  conduct  safely.  The  reasoning  in  the/Flmdects  would
then  be  just  The  law  would  be  in  fact  as  *finitum '  and  know-
able,  as  'possit  esse,  et  debeat'

The  admission  of  ignorance  oifojci  as  a  ground  of  exemption,
is  not  attended  with  those  inconveniences  which  would  seem  to
be  the  reason  for  rejecting  ignorance  of  law  as  a  valid  excuse.
Whether  the  ignorance  really  existed,  and  whether  it  was  im-
putable or  not  to  the  inadvertence  of  the  party,  is  a  question
which  may  be  solved  by  looking  at  the  circumstances  of  the
case.  The  inquiry  is  limited  to  a  given  incident,  and  to  the
circumstances  attending  that  incident,  and  is,  therefore,  not
interminable.

I  have  said  that  the  provisions  of  different  systems  seem  to
differ  considerably  with  regard  to  the  principle  which  I  am  now
considering.

In  our  own  law^  '  ignorantia  jtiris  non  excusat '  seems  to
obtain  without  exception.  I  am  not  aware  of  a  single  instance
in  which  ignorance  of  law  (considered  per  se)  exempts  or  dis-
charges the  party,  civilly  or  criminally.  In  the  case  of  infancy,
and  in  certain  other  cases  to  which  I  shall  advert  directly,  the


XXV


484  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lbct. presumed  incapacity  of  the  party  to  know  the  law  would  seem

^ \ - to  be  (we  of  the  grounds  upon  which  the  exemption  rests. But

his  presumed  incapacity  to  know  the  law  is  only  (mjt  of  those

grounds. His  exemption  rests  generally,  upon  his  general  in-.

capacity  (real  or  presumed)  to  judge  sanely  of  law  or  fact

From  an  opinion  thrown  out  by  Lord  Eldon,  in  the  case  of
Stockley  v,  Stockley,  I  inclined  to  think  (at  the  first  blush)  that
a  party  would  be  relieved,  in  certain  instances,  from  a  contract
into  which  he  had  entered  in  ignorance  of  law.^^  But,  admitting
the  justness  of  Lord  Eldon's  conclusion,  the  agreement  (I  conceive)
would  be  void,  not  because  the  party  was  ignorant  of  the  law,
but  because  there  is  no  consideration  to  support  the  promise.

According  to  the  Boman  Law,  there  are  certain  classes  of
persons, '  quibus  permissum  est  jus  ignorare.'  They  are  exempt
from  liability  (at  least  for  certain  purposes),  iiotJiy  j^ason  of
their  general  imbecility,  but  because  it  is  presumed  that  their
capacity  is  not  adequate  to  a  knowledge  of  the  law.  Such  are
women,  soldiers,  and  persons  who  have  not^eached  the  age  of
twenty-five.  Here,  ignorance  of  law  (considered  per  sf)  is  a
ground  of  exemption.  For  women,  soldiers,  and  multitudes  of
persons  under  twenty-five  are  not  in  that  state  of  general  im-
becility, which  is  the  ground  of  exemption  in  case  of  insanity,
or  in  case  of  extreme  youth."  But  ignorance  *>of  law  (as  a
specific  ground  of  exemption)  is  only  admissible  in  favour  of
persons  who  belong  to  certain  classes.

And  this  (I  apprehend)  shews  distinctly,  that  the  exclusion
of  ignorantia  juris,  as  a  ground  of  exemption,  is  deducible  from
the  reason  which  I  have  already  assigned.  In  ordinary  cases,
the  admission  of  ignorantia  ftiris\B3  a  ground  of  exemption
would  lead  to  interminable  inquirys  But,  in  these  excepted
cases,  it  is  presumed  from  the  sex,  or  from  the  age,  or  from  the
profession  of  the  party,  that  the  party  was  ignorant  of  the  law,
and  that  the  ignorance  was  inevitable.  The  inquiry  into  the
matter  of  fact  is  limited  to  a  given  point :  namely,  the  sex,  age,
or  profession  of  the  party  who  insists  upon  the  exemption.  That
obvious  fact  being  ascertained,  the  legal  presumption  or  inference
is  drawn  by  the  tribunal  without  further  investigation.

Whether  the  legal  presumption  ought  to  obtain,  or  whether
in  most  cases  it  do  not  conflict  with  the  truth,  is  a  distinct
question.  What  I  advance  is  this :  that  in  ordinary  cases,  the
inquiry  were  impracticable,  because  the  facts  upon  which  the
solution  depends  are  not  to  be  ascertained.

"  1  Vesey  &  B.  31.  "  Digest,  xxii.  6,  9.


yuris  et  Facli  Ignorantia.  4^5

In  these  excepted  cases  the  inquiry  is  practicable,  because  it l^cr.
is  predetennined  by  a  general  rule,  that  certain  facts  which  fiuiy -  \ -
be  ascertained  shall  be  received  by  the  Courts  as  evidence  of  the
facts  in  question. There  is  a  premmptio  juris  et  de  jure,  and
evidence  is  not  admissible  to  rebut  it. Nor  would  the  case  be
materially altered, assuming that the presumption may be
rebutted. For  the  counter  evidence  must  necessarily  consist  of
a  specific  fact  or  facts. The  large  and  vague  inquiry  is  shut 1
out  by  the  legal  presumption.  ■

[Analogous  case  of  doli  capaciUu  in  infancy. See  p.  490  post.]

Before  I  quit  this  subject,  I  will  advert  to  a  curious  dis-
tinction made  by  the  Eoman  Law.

The  persons,  quHms  permissum  est  jus  ignorare,  cannot  allege
with  effect  their  ignorance  of  the  law,  in  case  they  have  violated
those  parts  of  it  which  are  founded  upon  the  'jus  gentium* ^^
For  the  persons  in  question  are  not  generally  imbecile,  and  the
jus  gentium  is  knowable  naturaii  ratione.  With  regard  to  the
jus  civile,  or  to  those  parts  of  the  Soman  Law  which  are  peculiar
to  the  system,  they  may  allege  with  effect  their  ignorance  of
the  law.

This  coincides  with  our  distinction  between  mcUum  prohiMtum
and  malum  in  se  ;  and  the  distinction  is  reasonable.  For  some
laws  are  so  obviously  suggested  by  utility,  that  any  person  not
insane  would  naturally  surmise  or  guess  their  existence ;  which
they  could  not  be  expected  to  do,  where  the  utility  of  the  law
is  not  so  obvious.  And  most  men's  knowledge  of  the  law  is
mostly  of  this  kind.  They  see  that  a  particular  act  would  be
mischievous,  and  they  conclude  that  it  must  be  prohibited.  The
conduct  of  nineteen  men  out  of  twenty,  in  nineteen  cases  out  of
twenty,  is  rather  guided  by  a  surmise  as  to  the  law,  than  by  a
knowledge  of  it.  Even  lawyers  have  no  other  knowledge  than
this,  of  any  branch  of  law  but  that  which  they  have  peculiarly
studied.  A  Common  Law  lawyer,  if  he  were  making  a  will  or
a  settlement  of  real  property,  would,  if  he  acted  rationally,
surmise  that  there  must  be  provisions  of  the  law  of  real  property
which  were  not  known  to  him,  and  would  accordingly  have
recourse  to  a  conveyancer,  rather  than  foolishly  attempt  to  draw
the  instrument  for  himself.

Before  I  conclude,  I  must  observe  that  the  objection  to  laws  The  objec-
ex  post  foudo,  is  deducible  from  the  general  principle  already  ex-  p^f^f^

^^  Nor  (per  Labeo)  can  they  allege  it, or  if  the^  had  access  to  good  legal  ad-
if  the  law  might  have  been  conjectured, vice. Digest,  uhi  supra.


486  Pervading  Notions  analysed,

Lect.  plained,  namely,  that  intention  or  inadvertence  is  necessary  to
.  V constitute  an  injury. The  law  was  not  in  existence  at  the  time

laws,  dedu-  of  the  given  act,  forbearance,  or  omission :  consequently  the  party
the  samr  ^^^  not,  and  could  not  know  that  he  was  violating  a  law.  The
principle,  sanction  could  not  operate  as  a  motive  to  obedience,  inasmuch
as  there  was  nothing  to  obey.

I  am  provoked  to  make  this  remark  by  a  silly  and  flippant
attempt  in  the  '  Edinburgh  Beview '  to  justify  or  palliate  ex  post
facto  legislation.  Speaking  of  Lord  Strafford's  attainder,  the
writer  talks  to  the  following  effect

'  It  is  commonly  objected  to  punishment  inflicted  ex  post
facto,  that  it  operates  not  as  a  warning.  But  this  is  a  fallacy.
Punishment  inflicted  ex  post  facto  does  ^operate  as  a  warning.
The  punishment  inflicted  upon  Lord  Strafford  operated  as  a
warning  to  succeeding  statesmen.'  The  writer  mistakes  the
objection  (simple  and  obvious  as  it  is)  which  is  commonly  urged
against  punishment  inflicted  ex  post  facto.  It  is  not  objected  to
such  punishment,  that  it  may  not  operate  as  a  warning.  But  it
is  objected,  and  is  truly  objected,  to  such  punishment,  that  the
party  upon  whom  it  is  inflicted  was  not  warned.  He  confounds
the  application  of  a  law  to  cases  which  precede  it,  with  the
application  of  the  same  law  to  cases  which  follow  it  With
regard  to  cases  which  precede  it,  the  law  (if  it  extend  to  those
cases)  is  an  ex  post  fado  law.  With  regard  to  cases  which
follow  it,  it  is  not

That  is  to  say,  the  writer  answers  the  objection  to  ex  post
facU>  legislation,  by  shewing  that  the  objection  does  not  apply
to  oth&r  legislation.

I  have  treated  this  nonsense  with  great  indulgence ;  for^  I
have  assumed  that  the  punishment  inflicted  upon  Lord  Strafford
might  at  least  operate  as  a  warning  to  succeeding  statesmen.

But  even  this  is  faJse.  For  the  law  by  which  he  suffered
was  not  only  ex  post  facto,  but  was  what  is  styled  in  the  Eoman
Law  a  privUegium,  It  was  a  law  inflicting  punishment  upon
Strafford  specifically,  and  not  declaring  in  general  expressions,
'  that  those  who  might  do  thereafter  as  Strafford  had  done  should
be  visited  with  Strafford's  fate.'

If  the  punishment  had  been  inflicted  by  virtue  of  a  judicial
decision,  then  also  it  might  have  operated  as  a  warning.  For
one  judicial  decision  being  commonly  the  basis  of  others,  a
judicial  decision  is  tantamount  to  a  law  conceived  in  general
expressions.

But  from  an  arbitary  command  nothing  can  be  concluded.


y^urzs  et  Facti  Ignorantia.  487

Although  the  supreme  Legislature  punished  Strafford,  it  could
not  be  inferred  (looking  at  the  nature  of  its  proceeding)  that  it
would  punish  future  statesmen  walking  in  Strafford's  steps.

It  must  be  observed  that  a  judicial  decision  primcB  impres-
sianisy  or  a  judgment  by  which  a  new  point  of  law  is  for  the
first  time  decided,  is  always  an  ex  post  facto  law  with  respect  to
the  particular  case  on  which  the  point  first  arose,  and  on  which
the  decision  was  given.


Notes.

The  subjoined  Tables  are  copied  from  the  margins  of  Miihlen-
bruch  and  Mackeldey  at  the  pages  referred  to  in  the  footnotes,  pp.
477,  479  a/nie.—S.  A.


I  I

Damnum  fortoitum.  Damn.  ex.  homine  &cto.


I  I

Proprio.  Alieno.


licito  (sed  Tllicito

obligatorio)  q.  ex.  c.  a.  injorift  in

sensu  gen.

Aqoilia  culpa  (s.  Culpa  simpllciter)  ob  damnom  injurid  datum,  idque
faciendo,  prsBstanda.

I


Dolus.  Culpa.


I  I

Lata.  Levis.

Negligentia  ob  Obligationia  vinculum,  idque  faciendo  vel
non  faciendo,  prsestanda.

!

I  I

Culpa  lata :  C.  dolo  prox.  Culpa  levis,

Dolus.  culpa  simpliciter.

Casus.  Factum  voluntarium.


Proprium.  Alienum.


Licitum.  lUicitum.


Dolo.  Culpfi.  Morft.


488  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

LECTUEE XXVI.

THE  SAME  SUBJECT  CONTINUSD.

Having  in  the  Lecture  which  immediately  preceded  the  last,
assumed  that  intention  or  unlawful  inadvertence  is  a  necessary
B^pitu-  ingredient  in  injury  or  wrong,  I  endeavoured  in  my  last  Lecture
to  prove  this  assumption  by  a  brief  analysis  of  the  various
classes  of  injuries.  Having  demonstrated  by  general  reasoning,
that  unlawful  intention  or  inadvertence  is  of  the  essence  of
injury,  I  then  adverted  to  certain  cases  in  which  an  act,  forbear-
ance, or  omission  seems  to  be  an  injury,  although  its  author
neither  was  conscious,  nor  could  he  be  conscious,  that  he  was
violating  an  obligation.  A  creditor,  for  example,  by  English
law,  may  sue  without  previous  demand,  although  the  obligation
on  the  part  of  the  debtor  is  merely  to  pay  the  debt  on  demand.
These  cases,  I  observed,  are  anomalies,  and  the  rule  of  the
Common  Law  Courts  which  admits  such  suits,  conflicts,  not
only  with  general  principles,  but  with  the  practice  which  pre>
vails  in  analogous  cases  in  the  Courts  of  Equity,  as  well  as  with
the  rules  of  the  Boman  law.

I  next  observed  that  if  we  examined  the  ground  of  most  of
the  exemptions  from  liability,  we  should  find  that  they  idti-
mately  rest  on  the  principle  that  intention  or  inadvertence  is
necessary  to  constitute  wrong.  A  party  is  exempt,  either
because  he  is  clear  in  fact  from  unlawful  intention  or  inadvert-
ence, or  because  (which  generally  amounts  to  the  same  thing)
he  is  presumed  to  be  clear  of  both.  Li  order  to  confirm  this
remark,  I  examined  at  some  length  two  of  the  principal  grounds
of  exemption  from  liability,  namely,  1st,  cfmjL&,  chance  or  accident,
and  2ndly,  ignorant  or  error ;  this  last  being  either  with  rela-
tion to  a  matter  of  fact,  or  with  relation  to  the  state  of  the  law.

Having  explained  the  import  of  casus  or  accident,  I  en-
deavoured to  shew  that  the  exemption  on  account  of  casus  rests
on  the  broad  principle  already  laid  down.  As  the  party  could
not  foresee  the  mischievous  event,  or,  foreseeing,  could  not
prevent  it,  the  mischief  was  not  the  consequence  of  his  unlawful
intention  or  inadvertence,  and  therefore  is  not  imputed  to  him.
Obligations  to  answer  for  mischance  arise,  when  they  do  arise,
not  from  injuries,  but  from  contracts  and  quasi-contracts.

In  the  case  of  ignorance  or  error  also,  the  ground  of  the
exemption  is  the  absence  of  unlawful  intention  and  of  unlawful
inadvertence. For  if  the  ignorance  or  error  be  not  invincible


Recapitulation,  489

and  inevitable^  but  might  have  been  cured  or  prevented  by  due
attention,  the  mischievous  consequence  is  imputed  to  the  party.

With  respect  to  ignorance  or  error  regarding  the  state  of
the  law,  I  put  a  difficulty  which  naturally  suggests  itself;  it  is
this.  In  order  that  the  obligation  may  be  efifectual,  or  in  order
that  the  sanction  may  determine  the  party  from  the  wrong,  it  is
necessary,  1st,  that  the  party  should  know  or  surmise  the  law
which  imposes  the  obligation,  and  to  which  the  sanction  is
annexed ;  and  2ndly,  that  he  should  know,  or  might  know  by
due  attention  or  advertence,  that  the  specific  act,  forbearance,  or
omission  would  conflict  with  the  ends  of  the  law  and  of  the
duty.  Unless  both  these  conditions  concur,  the  sanction  cannot
operate  as  a  motive,  and  the  act,  forbearance,  or  omission,  is  not
imputable  to  unlawful  intention,  or  to  negligence,  heedlessness,
or  rashness.  But  although  to  render  the  sanction  efficacious,  it
is  necessary  that  the  party  should  know  the  law,  it  id  assumed
generally  or  universally,  in  every  system  of  law,  that  ignorance
or  error  as  to  the  state  of  the  law  shall  not  exempt  the  party
from  liability.  This  inflexible  or  nearly  inflexible  maxim  would
seem  to  conflict  with  the  necessary  principle,  which  I  have  so
often  stated,  respecting  the  constituents  of  injury  or  wrong.
For  ignorance  of  the  law  is  often  inevitable,  and  where  the
injury  or  wrong  is  the  consequence  of  that  inevitable  ignorance,
it  is  not  even  remotely  the  effect  of  unlawful  intention  or  of
unlawful  inadvertence.

The  solution  of  this  difficulty  is  to  be  found  in  the  principles
of  judicial  evidence.  The  admission  of  ignorance  of  law  as  a
specific  ground  of  exemption,  would  lead  to  interminable  investi-
gation of  insoluble  questions  of  fact,  and  would,  in  effect,  nullify
the  law  by  hindering  the  administration  of  justice.  This  rule,
therefore,  is  one  which  it  is  necessary  to  maintain,  although  it
occasionally  wounds  the  important  principle,  that  unlawful
intention  or  inadvertence  is  a  necessary  ingredient  of  injury.

I  then  adverted  to  certain  exceptions  to  this  rule  permitted
by  the  Boman  law,  and  shewed  that  those  exceptions  consist
with  the  reason  of  the  general  maxim,  and  also  serve  to  indicate
what  that  reason  is.  Lastly,  I  observed  that  these  exceptions
ultimately  rest  on  the  principle  which  it  was  the  main  purpose
of  my  Lecture  to  explain  and  illustrate: — and  shewed  that
wherever  ignorance  of  law  exempts  from  liability,  the  ignorance
is  presumed  to  be  inevitable,  and  the  party,  therefore,  to  be
clear  from  unlawful  intention  and  inadvertence.

If  I  were  to  examine  aU  the  exemptions  which  ultimately  Conaidera.


490  Pervading  Notions  analysed,

Lfxt. rest  upon  this  principle,  the  present  inquiry  would  run to
.  ^ > unconscionable  length. But  I  shall  briefly  touch  upon  a  few,
tion  of  the  to  which  I  did  not  advert  in  my  last  Lecture,
tio^^from ^^t  first,  an  infant  or  a  person  insane  is  exempted  from
liability liability,  not  because  he  is  an  infant  or  because  he  is  insane,  but
s^i  &n ^^^^^^  ^  ^  inferred  from  his  infancy  or  insanity,  that  at  the
and  in- time  of  the  alleged  wrong  he  was  not  capable  of  unlawful
sanity. intention  or  inadvertence. It  is  inferred  from  his  infancy  or
insanity,  that,  at  the  time  of  the  alleged  wrong,  he  was  ignorant
of  the  law ;  or  (what  in  effect  is  the  same  thing)  was  unable  to
remember  the  law. Or  (assuming  that  he  had  known,  and  was
unable  to  remember  the  law)  it  is  inferred  that  he  was  unable
to  apply  the  law,  and  to  govern  his  conduct  accordingly :  that
he  did  not  and  could  not  foresee  the  consequences  of  his  con-
duct;  and,  therefore,  did  not  and  could  not  foresee  that  his
conduct  tended  to  the  consequences  which  it  was  the  end  of  the
law  to  avert

For,  in  order  that  I  may  adjust  my  conduct  to  the  command
or  prohibition  of  the  law,  I  must  know  and  remember  what  the
law  i»;  \  must  distinctly  apprehend  the  wiiurt  of  the  conduct
which  I  contemplate;  and  (in  the  language  of  lawyers  and
logicians)  I  must  correctly  suhrnvM  the  specific  case  oa  falling
within  the  law.  In  other  words,  I  must  compare  the  conduct
which  I  contemplate  with  the  purpose  or  end  of  the  law,  and
must  be  able  to  perceive  that  it  agrees  or  conflicts  with  that
purpose  or  end.  Every  application  of  the  law  to  a  fact  or  case,
\a  a  syllogism  of  which  the  minor  premiss  and  the  conclusion
are  singular  propositions.  Unless  I  am  competent  to  this
intellectual  process,  the  sanction  cannot  operate  as  a  motive  to
the  fulfilment  of  the  obligation,  or  (changing  the  expression)
the  obligation  is  necessarily  ineffectual

That  the  ultimate  basis  of  the  exemption  of  infants  and
lunatics  is  the  presumed  absence  of  unlawful  intention  or
inadvertence,  will  appear  &om  the  following  consideration.

For  if  the  infant  was  doli  capax  (or  was  conscious  that  his
conduct  conflicted  with  the  law),  his  infancy  does  not  excuse
him.  Certain  evidence  of  his  capacity  of  unlawful  intention,  or
even  the  specific  and  precise  evidence  afforded  by  the  fact  or  its
circumstances,  rebuts  the  general  and  uncertain  presumption
which  arises  from  his  age.  And  if  the  alleged  wrong  was  done
in  a  lucid  interval,  the  fact  is  imputed  to  tHe  madman.  There
are,  indeed,  cases,  wherein  the  prcesumptio  juris  founded  on
infancy  is  'juris  et  de  jure,* That  is  to  say,  the  inference  which


Grounds  of  Non-Imputability  resumed,  49  ^

the  law  preappoints,  is  conclusive  as  well  as  preappointed. The Lkct.
tribunal  is  not  only  bound  to  draw  the  inference,  but  to  reject v ^ ^
c(wwter-evidence.

While  I  am  on  the  subject  of  legal  presumptions,  I  shall  l>igreasion
perhaps  be  excused  for  digressing  from  the  main  subject  of  the  f^nt^
Lecture,  for  the  purpose  of  giving  some  explanations  for  which  ^^i°<^  o^
no  other  occasion  may  arise.  ti(mes

It  is  absurd  to  style  conclusive  inferences,  j7rc»wmp^www. For  ■^**^-
a  presumption,  ex  vi  termini,  is  an  inference  or  conclusion  which
may  be  disproved. Till  proof  to  the  contrary  be  got,  the  infer-
ence may  hold. On  proof  to  the  contrary,  it  can  hold  no  longer.

But  according  to  the  language  of  the  Civilians  (language
which  has  been  adopted  by  some  of  our  writers  on  evidence),
premmpticms  are  divisible  in  the  following  manner.

Presumptions  are  prassumptiones  juris,  or  prceswmptiones
hominis,  Prcesumptiones  juris  are  inferences  drawn  in  pur-
suance of  the  preappointment  of  the  law.  The  law  predeter-
mines the  probative  effect  of  the  fact,  or  instructs  the  judge  to
draw  a  certain  inference  from  a  fact  of  a  certain  sort.  For
example,  the  presumption  already  stated  in  favour  of  infants  is
prcBsumptio  juris.  The  law  predetermines  that  from  the  fact  of
infancy,  the  incapacity  of  unlawful  intention  and  of  unlawful
inadvertence  shall  be  inferred.  Prcesumptiones  Jiominis,  or
presumptions  simply  so  called,  are  drawn  from  facts  of  which
the  law  has  left  the  probative  force  to  the  discretion  of  the
judge.  In  other  words,  he  is  not  instructed  to  draw  a  given
inference  from  a  fact  of  the  sort.  Prcesumptiones  juris,  are
again  divisible  into  prcesumptiones  juris  (simply  so  called)  and
prcesumptiones  juris  et  de  jure.

There  are  therefore  three  classes  of  presumptions:  prce-
sumptiones Jiominis,  prcesumptiones  juris,  and  prcesumptiones  juris
et  dejure.

Where  the  presumption  is  a  prcesumptio  hominis,  not  only
is  proof  to  the  contrary  admissible,  but  the  presumption  is  not
necessarily  conclusive,  though  no  proof  to  the  contrary  be
adduced.  For  instance :  I  sue  you  for  goods  sold  and  delivered,
and  I  produce  a  fact  leading  to  a  presumption  that  the  goods
were  delivered.  Not  only  is  it  competent  to  the  judge  to  admit
counter-evidence,  but  to  reject  the  presumption  as  insufficient,
though  no  counter-evidence  be  adduced.  For,  here,  the  judge
is  at  liberty  to  determine  without  restriction  the  exact  worth  of
the  fact  as  an  article  of  evidenca


492  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Actions  frequently  fail ;  not  because  the  evidence  produced
by  the  Actor,  is  met  by  counter-evidence,  nor  because  the
evidence  which  he  produces  is  altogether  worthless;  but
because  the  inference  or  presumption  founded  upon  the  fieu^ts
produced,  is  too  feeble  to  sustain  the  casa  The  inference
drawn  from  testimony  to  the  truth  of  the  fact  attested  is  also  in
truth  of  this  kind.

Where  the  presumption  is  prcMfumptio  juris  simply,  proof  to
the  contrary  is  admissible,  but,  till  it  be  produced,  the  pre-
sumption necessarily  holds.  For,  here,  the  law  has  predeter-
mined the  probative  force  of  the  fact,  although  it  permits  the
judge  to  receive  counter-evidence.  The  law,  or  the  maker  of
the  law,  says  to  the  Courts, '  Eeceive  counter-evidence  if  it  be
produced,  and  weigh  the  effect  of  that  evidence  against  the
worth  of  the  presumption.  But  till  such  counter-evidence  be
produced,  draw  from  the  given  fact  the  inference  which  I
predetermine.'  For  example :  Where  an  infant  has  attained  a
certain  age,  proof  of  his  ddi  capacitas  is  admissible.  But  until
such  proof  be  produced,  it  is  inferred  from  the  fact  of  his
infancy,  that  he  is  not  ddi  capax.

Where  the  prcssumptio  juris  is  juris  et  de  jure,  the  law
predetermines  the  probative  force  of  the  fact,  and  also  forbids
the  admission  of  counter-evidence.  The  inference  (for  it  is
absurd  to  call  it  a  presumption)  is  conclusive.  That  is  to  say,
proof  to  the  contrary  is  not  admissible.  For,  all  that  is  meant
by  a  conclusive  proof,  is  a  proof  which  the  law  had  made  so.
Independently  of  predetermination  that  it  shall  be  conclusive,
no  inference  from  one  fact  to  another  can  be  more  than
probable:  Although,  in  loose  language,  we  style  the  proof
conclusive,  wherever  the  probability  appears  to  be  great

As  an  instance  of  a  presumption  juris  et  de  jure,  I  may
mention  the  case  of  an  infant  under  a  certain  age ;  for  example,
seven  years.  Here,  according  to  the  Soman  Law,  and  {senJble)
according  to  our  own,  the  infant  is  presumed  juris  et  de  jure
incapable  of  unlawfiil  intention  or  culpable  inadvertence.  His
incapacity  is  inferred  or  presumed  from  the  age  wherein  he  is ;
and  proof  to  the  contrary  of  that  preappointed  inference  is  not
admissible  by  the  tribunals.

In  numerous  cases,  presumptions  juris  et  de  jure  are  purely
fictitious.  They  are  resorted  to  by  the  Courts  as  a  means  of
legislating  indirectly.  For  example,  a  grant  of  an  easement  is
inferred  from  the  fact  of  its  having  been  enjoyed,  or  a
surrender  of  a  trust  term  is  presumed  by  the  Courts  of  Law


Digression  on  Presumptions,  493

because  the  trust  has  been  performed. In  the  first  case  (which Lsor.


is  the  simpler  and  more  intelligible  of  the  two)  a  certain  legal
consequence  is  annexed  to  length  of  enjoyment  by  means  of  a
fictitious  presumption.  It  is  not  believed  that  there  ever  was  a
grant ;  but  the  jury  are  instructed  by  the  judge  to  infer  that
there  was  from  the  fact  of  the  enjoyment.

In  other  words,  acquisitive  prescription  is  unknown  to  the
English  Law  in  its  direct  form.^®  Directly  and  avowedly,
length  of  enjoyment  is  not  a  modd  of  acquisition,  or  (in  the
language  of  our  own  law)  a  title.  But  a  grant  is  a  title  directly
and  avowedly :  And,  by  feigning  a  grant  from  length  of  enjoy-
ment, length  of  enjoyment  becomes  a  title  in  effect,  or  that
mode  of  acquisition  which  is  styled  acquisitive  prescription  is
introduced  indirectly.

The  number  of  rights  and  obligations,  which  (in  our  own
law  and  in  the  Eoman  also)  are  created  and  imposed  obliquely
by  means  of  these  fictitious  presumptions,  is  truly  astonishing.
Probably  one-third  of  the  rights  conferred  by  the  Boman  Law,
and  a  very  great  proportion  in  our  own,  are  conferred  in  this
absurd  manner.  The  various  statutes  of  limitations  do  not  give
a  titvius  on  which  the  party  can  positively  insist,  but  are  merely
opposed  as  a  bar  to  a  right  of  action  residing  in  a  determinate
party.  All  prescription  known  to  the  English  Law  is,  I  believe,
in  theory,  merely  negative  or  extinctive.^®

It  is  evident,  that  unless  these  fictitious  presumptions  were

^*  No  acquiBitive  prescription  in  Enjj-  use  of  possessory  actions,

lish  Law.^^ Difference  between  acqui-  ^^  See  modification  of  this  statement

sitive  and  restrictive  prescription  not  so  on  p.  600,  post.
obvious  now,  on  account  of  tbe  frequent


^'  Notwithstanding  the  change  in  the  tinuously  and peaceably. Where the

law  of  prescription  made  by  the  statute  sasine,  founded  on  the  root  of  title,  bears

3  &  4  W.  IV.  c.  27,  the  statement  in  the  to  have  been  taken  by  a  sinsular  sue-

text  that '  acquisitive  prescription  is  un-  cessor  (or  pwrchaaer),  the  production  of

known  to  the  English  law  in  its  direct  the  deed  of  alienation  (or  purchase)  on

form,'  is  (subject  to  the  correction  onp.  which  the  sasine  is  grounded,  is  further

500,  pod)  stm  perfectly  accurate. Tne  necessary  to  make  an  unexceptionable

whole  frame  of  this  statute  is  negative,  title,  but  it  is  not  necessary  to  shew  any

that  is,  denying  action  to  persons  who  further  documents  so  as  to  connect  the

have  n^lected  a  claim  for  a certain  owner  with  the  crown  as  the  author  of

period  of  time  :  although,  in  the  case  of  all  heritable  rights. This  prescription

many  titles,  the  protection  afforded  by  is  said  to  be  jSaitive  or  aequisitive,  be-

this  act  is  nearly  equivalent  to  that  cause  the  owner,  although  ne  may  have

afforded  by  an acquisitive  or  positive  originaUy  purchased  a  wm  domino,  ac-

prescription. In  Scotland  there  is  an  quires by it what is expressly and

acquisitive  or  j>ositive  prescription  where  avowedly  enacted  to  be  a  title  against  all

hentable  subjects  have  been  possessed  the  world. Tlus  prescription  is  founded

conformably  to  sasines  (ttiat  ia,  to  the  on  an  Act  of  the  Scotch  Parliament  made

instrument  evidencing  the  act  of  feudally  in  the  year  1617. — R.  C.
receiving  possession)  for  forty  years  con-


XXVI


494  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  yum  tt  de  jure,  they  could  not  answer  their  purpose.  But
XXVI  presumptions  juris  et  de  jure  are  not  always  fictitious.  Some  of
them  are  really  founded  on  probability,  and  counter-evidence  is
excluded  for  a  special  reason.  Such,  for  instance,  is  the
presumption  that  the  party  knows  the  law.  This  presumption
is  really  true  la  the  majority  of  instances ;  and  is  made  con-
clusive for  the  reason  which  I  have  before  stated,  namely,  that
a  judicial  inquiry  into  its  truth  must  otherwise  be  resorted  to  in
every  instance,  and  the  administration  of  justice  be  rendered
impossible.

Reverting  to  the  subject  from  which  I  have  digressed, — the
presumption  juris  et  de  jure  '  that  the  infant  under  seven  is  not
doli  capax!  is  probably  well  founded  in  almost  every  instance.
It  is  probably  made  conclusive  in  aU  instances,  on  account  of
the  little  advantage  which  could  arise  from  the  punishment  of  a
child  in  any  instance  whatever.  His  punishment  would  ratiier
revolt,  than  serve  as  a  useful  example,  and  it  is  therefore
expedient  to  extinguish  inquiry  at  once  by  a  conclusive
presumption  of  innocence.  It  cannot,  then,  be  inferred  from
this  case,  that  the  exemption  from  liability  by  reason  of  infancy
does  not  rest  upon  the  broad  principle  which  I  am  endeavouring
to  explain.

I  observe  that  Mr.  Bentham  ascribes  this  exemption,  and
also  the  exemption  in  case  of  insanity  and  drunkenness,  to  a
different  principle:  namely,  'that  the  prospect  of  evils  so
distant  as  those  .which  are  held  forth  by  the  Law,  cannot  have
the  efiTect  of  influencing  the  conduct  of  the  party.'

But  this  (I  think)  will  not  hold.  In  case  the  party,  at  the
moment  of  the  alleged  wrong,  were  conscious  of  the  law,  and
could  foresee  the  consequences  of  his  conduct,  it  is  manifest
that  the  sanction  would  inspire  him  with  some  desire  of  avoiding
it.  And  an  inquiry  into  the  strength  or  steadiness  of  that
desire,  would  seem  to  be  idle ;  because  it  must  necessarily  be
difiTerent  in  every  difierent  person,  whether  he  be  infant  or  adult,
mad  or  sane,  drunk  or  sober.

There  are  indeed  cases,  to  which  I  shall  advert  directly,
wherein  the  party  is  held  exempt,  because  he  is  moved  to  tlie
alleged  wrong  by  a  desire  so  strong  and  imperious  that  no
sanction  could  get  the  better  of  it.  Such  are  the  cases  in  which
a  party  is  exempted  because  he  was  compelled  metu:  that  is,  by
some  apprehension  which  it  is  supposed  that  no  will,  however
strong,  can  resist.


Grounds  of  Non-Imputability,  49  5

The  reason  assigned  by  Blackstone,  and  by  various  other Leot.
writers,  is  hardly  worth  powder  and  shot.  ^ ^  ^ .

He  tells  US  that  a  wrong  is  the  effect  of  a  wicked  will.
And  (says  he)  infants  and  madmen  are  exempted,  because  the  act
goes  not  with  their  will,  or  is  not  imputable  to  a  wicked  wilL

Now,  in  case  the  alleged  wrong  be  wrought  by  action,  it  is
clear  that  there  must  be  a  will  going  with  the  act,  although  the
party  may  not  be  conscious  of  a  wrong.  In  case  it  be  wrought
negatively,  it  is  true  that  the  forbearance  or  omission  does  not
go  with  volition,  or  is  not  directly  the  consequence  of  a  volition.
But  what  would  that  matter,  if  the  forbearance  were  accom-
panied by  an  unlawful  intention,  or  the  omission  could  be
ascribed  to  culpable  negligence  ?

By  dint  of  much  explanation,  it  is  true  that  this  jargon
may  be  made  intelligible.  By  the  wiU  of  the  party,  Blackstone
means  (so  far  as  he  means  anything)  the  state  of  the  party's
consciousness.  By  a  wicked  will,  he  means  unlawful  intention
or  imlawful  inadvertence.  And  he  means  that  the  alleged
wrong  is  not  imputable  to  either,  when  he  says  that  it  cannot
be  ascribed  to  a  wicked  will.  And  when  he  afi&rms,  that  the
ground  of  every  exemption  is  a  want  or  defect  of  will,  he  means
that  the  ground  of  every  exemption  is  inevitable  ignorance:
inevitable  ignorance  of  the  law ;  or  of  the  certain  or  probable
consequences  of  the  alleged  wrong ;  or  of  the  relation  or  con-
nection between  that  alleged  wrong  and  the  law.  He  cannot
mean  to  affirm  that  an  infant  or  madman  has  not  as  much  will
as  the  adult  or  the  sane.

Nor  is  his  position,  thus  translated,  true.  For,  in  certain
cases  (as  I  shall  shew  immediately),  the  party  is  exempt,  al-
though he  is  conscious  of  the  law ;  of  the  nature  and  conse-
quences of  his  own  conduct ;  and  of  the  relation  or  connection
between  his  conduct  and  the  law.

I  have  stated  that  infancy  or  insanity  is  a  ground  of  exemp-
tion, partly  because  the  party  was  ignorant  of  the  law,  or  is
presimied  to  have  been  ignorant  of  the  law.  This  does  not
contradict  what  I  before  said,  that  ignorance  of  the  law  is  never
in  our  own  system  a  ground  of  exemption.  For  in  the  case  of
insanity  or  infancy,  it  is  not  a  specific  or  distinct  ground  of
exemption :  infants  and  lunatics  are  not  exempted  distinctly  and
solely  on  that  accoimt.  It  may,  however,  be  considered  as  one
ground  of  the  exemption  in  company  with  other  grounds  from
which  it  is  impossible  to  sever  it  in  the  particular  cases.


496


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


4. Drunk
enness  (in
some  8T8-
temB  of
law).


5.  Sudden
and  furious
anger  (in
some  sys-
tems).


In  the  English  Law,  drunkenness  is  not  an  exemption.  In
criminal  cases,  never :  nor  in  civil  cases  when  the  ground  of  the
liability  is  of  the  nature  of  a  delict ;  but  a  party  is  at  times
released  from  a  contract  which  he  entered  into  when  drunk.
In  the  Boman  Law,  drunkenness  was  an  exemption  even  in  the
case  of  a  delict ;  provided  the  drunkenness  itself  was  not  the
consequence  of  imlawful  intention :  if,  for  instance,  I  resolve  to
kill  you,  and  drink  in  order  to  get  pluck,  according  to  the
vulgar  expression,  the  mischief,  although  committed  in  drunken-
ness, is  ultimately  imputable  to  my  intention.  In  all  other
cases,  drunkenness  was  a  ground  of  exemption  in  the  Boman
Law.

The  ultimate  ground  of  this  exemption  is  the  same  as  in
the  case  of  insanity  or  infancy.  The  party  is  unable  to  re-
member the  law  if  he  knew  it,  or  to  appreciate  distinctly  the
fact  he  is  about,  or  to  subsume  it  as  falling  under  the  law.

Where  imintentional  drunkenness,  that  is,  drunkenness
which  is  not  itself  the  consequence  of  imlawful  intention,  is  not
a  groimd  of  exemption,  the  party,  it  is  evident,  is  liable  iu
respect  of  heedlessness.  There  is  no  unlawful  consciousness  at
the  time  of  the  offence,  but  he  might  have  known  before  he  got
drunk,  that  he  was  likely  when  drunk  to  commit  acts  incon-
sistent with  the  ends  of  his  duties.  He  has  heedlessly  placed
himself  in  a  position,  of  which  the  probable  consequence  will  be
the  commission  of  a  wrong.

This  remote  inadvertence  is  very  often  a  ground  of  liability.
Remote  inadvertence  is  what  I  have  just  explained.  The  party
IB  guilty  of  remote  inadvertence,  where  the  alleged  wrong  is  not
imputable  directly  to  unlawful  intention  or  inadvertence,  but  is
a  natural  consequence  of  a  position  in  which  he  has  placed
himself  from  inadvertence,  and  is  therefore  a  remote  effect  of
inadvertence.  When  the  party  commits  the  wrong  in  conse-
quence of  his  ignorance  of  the  law,  the  ground  of  liability  might
be  referred  to  remote  inadvertence.  Were  it  not  for  the  legal
presimiption,  that  he  knows  the  law,  the  fact  would  be  imput-
able to  him,  if  at  all,  from  his  having  previously  neglected  to
make  himself  acquainted  with  the  law.

Another  ground  of  exemption  is  sudden  and  furious  anger.
In  English  law,  this  is  never  a  ground  of  exemption :  in  Boman
Law  it  is,  for  the  same  reason  as  drunkenness  and  insanity.

Where  the  party  is  answerable  for  an  alleged  wrong  done
in  furious  anger,  the  reasoning  is  the  same  as  in  the  case  of
drunkenness. He  is  guilty,  not  in  respect  of  what  he  has  done


Grounds  of  Non-Imputability.  49  7

in  furious  anger,  but  in  respect  of  his  having  neglected  that Lectt.
self-discipline,  which  would  have  prevented  such  furious  fits  of v ^ ^
anger.

There  are  many  cases  of  liability  on  similar  grounds,  /m-
peritia,  for  instance,  or  want  of  skill,  is  the  source  of  a  common
case  of  liability  both  in  our  own  and  in  the  Roman  Law.  In
this  case  the  ground  of  the  obligation  is  the  same  as  in  the  case
last  specified.  Pretending  to  practise  as  a  physician  or  as  a
surgeon,  I  do  harm  to  some  person :  in  the  particular  case  I
attend  with  all  my  skill,  and  the  mischief  is  not  imputable  to
unlawful  intention  or  inadvertence  at  that  time,  but  to  neglect
of  the  previous  duty  of  qualifying  myself  by  study  for  the  pro-
fession I  affect  to  exercise.

Liability  for  injuries  done  by  third  parties,  is  ascribed  justly
by  Mr.  Bentham  to  the  same  cause.  I  am  liable  for  injuries
done  by  persons  whom  I  employ,  because  it  is  generally  in  my
power  not  to  employ  persons  of  such  a  character,  or  to  form
them  by  discipline  and  education  so  as  to  be  incapable  of  the
commission  of  wrong.  The  first  reason  applies  to  a  man's
servants,  the  last  to  his  children.  The  obligation  is  peculiarly
strong  in  the  Eoman  Law,  because  of  the  great  extent  of  the
patria  potestas :  by  reason  of  which  it  probably  was  in  the  power
of  the  father  not  only  to  form  the  character  of  his  child  by
previous  discipline,  but  in  most  cases  to  prevent  the  specific
mischief  by  specific  care.^^

Before  I  quit  the  subject,  I  shall  remark  on  a  distinction  An  illogi-
which  is  made  by  the  Eoman  lawyers,  and  which  appears  to  ^qj,  ^^^^'
me  illogical  and  absurd (a  rare  and  surprising  thing  in  the  Roman
Eoman  Law). I  mean  the  distinction  between  delicts  and  quasi-  tweende-
delicts. I  cannot  discover  any  ground  for  this  distinction  from  Hcta  and
the  capricious  way  in  which  they  arrange  offences  under  these  Scte.^  ^
two  heads.

The  imperitia  for  instance  of  a  physician  is  a  delict ;  but
the  imprudentia  of  a  judge,  who  is  liable  in  certain  cases  for
erroneous  decisions,  is  a  quasi-delict.  The  ground  of  the
liability  in  these  two  cases  is  precisely  the  same.  The  guilt  of
the  party  in  both  cases  consists  in taking  upon  himself  the

"  See  Pothier, *  Traits  des  Obliffa-  the  rationale  of  this  exemption,  which

tions,'  Part  II.  ch.  vi.  sec.  viii.  Art.  II.  appears  to  have  been  first  distinctly  laid

g  5  (454). The  distinction  that  obtains  down  by  Shaw,  C.  J.  in  an  American

in  the  case  where  the  injured  party  is  case,  the  English,  Scotch,  and  American

also  a  servant  rests  upon  the  contract  courts  are  at  one,  See  4  Metcalf,  49,  3

express  or  implied  between  the  master  Macqueen,  800,  316. Law  Reports,  1

and  the  latter,  who  is  held  to  undertake  Q.  B.  149,  2  Q.  B.  33,  and  1  H.  of  L.  Sc.

the  risks  incident  to  the  service. On  326. — K  C.

VOL.  L  2  K


498  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  exercise  of  a  function,  without  duly  qualifying  himself  by
-  \  >  previous  preparation.  And  as  the  right  violated  is  in  both
cases  a  right  in  rem,  the  offence  is  properly  a  delict  This  dis-
tinction, therefore,  appears  to  me  to  be  groundless ;  though  I
draw  such  a  conclusion  with  diffidence,  when  it  refers  to  any
distinction  drawn  by  the  Eoman  lawyers,  whose  distinctions  I
have  found  in  almost  every  other  case  to  rest  on  a  solid
foundation.

All  the  exemptions,  which have  now  been  examined,  may

be  referred to  the same  principle. The  party  neither  was

conscious  nor  could  he  be  conscious  that  he  was  violating  his

duty,  and  consequently  the  sanction  could  not  operate  on  his

desires. And  this  principle  will  account  for  the  greater  number

of  exemptions,  but  not  for  alL

Grounds  of The  party  is  exempted  in  some  cases  in  which  the  sanction

not™  e-*^'^ might  act  on  his  desires,  but  in  which  the  fact  does  not  depend

pending  on  on  his  desires.

ing  princi-  Such  is  the  case  of  physical  compulsion. A  person  is  not

f h  siil  ^*^^®  ^^^  vAidit  he  is  forced  to  do  by  physical  constraint;  in
compul-  which  he  is  not  an  agent,  but  an  instrument  or  means.  In  this
*^^"*  case,  he  may  be  conscious  of the  obligation,  and fear the

sanction:  but  the  sanction  would  not  be  effectual  if  applied,
because  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  perform  the  obligation.*^
2.  Extreme  There  is  still  another  case  which  is  distinguishable  from
this ;  in  which  the  sanction  might  operate  on  the  desires  of  the
party,  might  be  present  to  his  mind,  and  the  performance  of  the
duty  might  not  be  altogether  independent  of  his  desires ;  but
the  party  is  aflfected  with  an  opposite  desire,  of  a  strength
which  no  sanction  can  control,  and  the  sanction  therefore  would
be  ineffectual.  Such  for  instance  is  the  case  in  which  a  party
is  compelled  by  menaces  of  instant  death  to  commit  what
would  otherwise  be  a  crime.  For  example,  if  I  am  compelled
by  the  king's  enemies  to  join  their  ranks  and  fight  against  the
king,  I  am  not  liable  for  treason,  provided  that  I  take  the
earliest  opportunity  of  making  my  escape.  The  reason  is  that
I  am  urged  to  a  breach  of  the  duty  by  a  motive  more  proximate
and  more  imperious  than  any  sanction  which  the  law  could  hold
out :  and  as  the  sanction  therefore  would  not  be  operative,  its
infliction  would  be  gratuitous  cruelty.

I  believe  that  all  these  exemptions,  except  the  two  last

*>  It  will  be  observed  that  in  this  case  hlance  of  an  act  of  the  party,  as  to  be
the  act  is  not  ilieaet  of  the  party  at  all.  properly  mention^  in  an  exhaustiye
It  bears  however  so  strongly  the  «em- category  of  exemptions. — R  C.


Grounds  of  NoU'Imputability.  499

mentioned,  may  be  explained  on  the  principle  so  often  referred L«<^-

to.  ^ ^  -^

In  conformity  with  usage,  I  have  talked  of  these  various  The  80-

circumstances  as  cases  of  exemption  from  liability :  but  it  would  emptiona

be  more  correct  to  say,  that  they  are  cases  in  which  the  parties  not  pro-

ueriv  6z*

are  not  obliged ;  cases  to  which  the  notion  of  obligation  cannot  imptions,
apply,  because  the  sanction  could  not  be  operative. Injury  is  ^^^.^f®*?*^
co-extensive  with  obligation. Now  we  are  not  bound  absolutely  idea  of
to  do  or  forbear ;  we  are  bound  (strictly  speaking)  not  to  omit  5^^^^^?"
negligently,  or  to  forbear  with  unlawfid  intention  or  unlawful  apply,
inadvertence. Therefore,  where  no  unlawful  intention  or  inad-
vertence exists,  the  party  has  not  broken  any  obligation,  nor
consequently  incurred  any  liability  from  which  he  can  be  ex-
empted. The sanction  would be ineffectual, either as not
operating  on  the  desires,  as  in  the  five  first-mentioned  cases,  or
as  operating  upon  them  in  vain,  as  in  the  two  cases  last  men-
tioned.

It  may  be  remarked  that  the  first  of  these  cases,  namely,
that  of  physical  compulsion,  falls  within  cojsua  or  accident,  since,
as  I  have  already  observed,  the  act  of  man  as  aggresmra  latronum
falls  within  the  notion  of  casus.


LECTURE  XXVII.

DIFFERENT KINDS OF SANCTIONS.

I  WISH,  before  I  commence,  to  correct  one  or  two  mistakes  into JtJyjT
which  I  fell  in  my  last  Lecture.  >.— ^ — ^

I  said  that  furious  anger  is  a  ground  of  exemption  in  the  Correction
Boman Law. Now anger may  be such as  to exclude all  mentsin
consciousness  of  the  unlawfulness  of  the  act ; or  it  may  not  J^"*  ^^"
exclude all consciousness  of  the unlawfulness: although it  Anger,
prompts the party to an act (accompanied  by  an unlawful  P-^SCia^^.
intention),  from  which  he  would  otherwise  abstain.

It  is  only  in  the  first  case  that  it  is  a  ground  of  exemption
in  the  Roman  Law.  It  exempts,  precisely  as  insanity  exempts,
and  is  in  truth  considered  as  temporary  madness.  When  the
anger  does  not  exclude  all  consciousness  of  the  unlawfulness  of
the  act,  and  is  yet  a  cause  of  mitigation,  the  ground  is  not  the
absence  of  unlawful  intention  and  of  unlawful  inadvertence,  but
the  absence  of  deliberate  intention  In  this,  as  in  various  other
cases,  the  disposition  of  the  party  is  taken  into  the  account,  and


5  oo  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect. as  less  malignity  of  disposition  is  evinced  by  a  criminal  in-

V  tention  when  sudden  than  when  deliberate,  the  punishment  is

commonly  less. In  English  Law,  for  example,  if  the  fact  were

homicide,  the  offence  would  in  the  one  case  be  murder,  in  the

other  only  voluntary  manslaughter.

On  the  other  hand,  where  an  act  which  does  suspend  the
use  of  reason  is  not  a  ground  of  exemption,  it  is  because  the  act
arises  remotely  from  negligence.  Thus,  where  drunkenness  is  not
a  ground  of  exemption,  as  in  our  own  law,  the  party  is  not
answerable  because  at  the  time  of  the  wrong  he  was  guilty  of
unlawful  intention  or  unlawful  inadvertence ;  but  because  he  has
negligently  placed  himself  in  a  position  from  which  he  might
have  known  that  criminal  acts  were  not  unlikely  to  ensue.
Statement  I  also  stated  too  roundly  that  acquisitive  prsescription  in  its

quis^tive  direct  form  is  unknown  in  the  English  Law.  A  prsescription  in
pnescrip-  a  gy^  estate,  as  it  is  called,  or  a  prsescription  of  an  easement
ai\Jt^  '  appurtenant,  is  recognised  directly  by  the  English  Law.  But  I
think  this  is  the  only  instance.  Easements  in  gross  are  not
acquired  by  praescription  in  that  direct  way,  but  in  the  oblique
mode  before  explained.  Rights  amounting  to  proprietas  or
dominium  are  fievcT  acquired  by  direct  prsescription.  The
operation  of  the  different  statutes  of  limitation  is  purely  nega-
tive or  extinctive ;  it  merely  bars  the  right  of  a  definite  person,
and  does  not  give  to  the  party  in  possession  a  right  which  he
can  enforce  against  the  world.  I  may  plead  the  statutes  of
limitation  in  bar  to  an  action  brought  by  a  party  who  would
otherwise  be  entitled.  But  in  order  to  enforce  my  right  of
property  against  third  parties,  I  can  only  proceed  by  proving
anterior  possession.  This,  against  a  person  who  can  produce  no
title  at  all,  establishes  my  right.

The  distinction  between  acquisitive  and  negative  praescription
turns  solely,  as  it  appears  to  me,  upon  the  nature  of  the  evidence
which  it  is  requisite  to  give  in  order  to  enable  the  owner  to
recover  the  thing  when  detained  by  a  stranger.  It  may  be  only
necessary  to  show  anterior  possession,  in  order  to  enable  him  to
maintain  an  action ;  or  to  maintain  an  action  it  may  be  necessary
for  him  to  shew  his  title.  If  it  be  necessary  to  shew  his  title,
then  unless  a  title  may  be  acquired  by  acquisitive  praescription,
he  cannot  sustain  the  action.  But  the  right  which  he  possesses
under  the  statute  of  limitation  certainly  would  not  enable  him
to  maintain  an  action  against  a  third  party.

Having endeavoured  to  explain  the  essentials,  of  Injuries


Sanctions  Civil  and  Criminal.  501

and  Sanctions,  and,  therein,  to  illustrate  the  nature  of  obligations Lbct

XXVII

or  duties,  I  will  now  advert  to  the  differences  by  which  sanctions  .
are  distinguished.  If  I  attempted  a  complete  examination  of  all
these  differences,  the  present  inquiry  would  run  to  inordinate
length:  And  those  more  important  differences  upon  which  I
shall  touch,  will  sufficiently  suggest  the  others  to  the  memory
or  reason  of  my  hearers.

And,  first ;  Sanctions  may  be  divided  into  dvU  and  criminal,  Sanctions
or  (changing  the  expressions)  into  private  and  public,  ci^inaL

As  I  remarked  in  a  former  Lecture,^  the  distinction  between
private  and  public  wrongs,  or  civil  injuries  and  crimes,  does  not
rest  upon  any  difference  between  the  respective  tendencies  of
the  two  classes  of  offences :  All  wrongs  being  in  their  remote  con-
sequences generally  mischievous :  and  most  of  the  wrongs  styled
public,  being  immediately  detrimental  to  determinate  persons.

Viewed  from  a  certain  aspect,  all  wrongs  and  all  sanctions
are  public.  For  all  wrongs  are  violations  of  laws  established
directly  or  indirectly  by  the  Sovereign  or  State.  And  all
sanctions  are  enforced  by  the  sovereign,  or  by  sovereign  authority.

But  in  certain  cases  of  wrongs  which  are  offences  against
rights,  or  (changing  the  expression)  which  are  breaches  of  relative
duties,  the  sanction  is  enforced  at  the  instance  or  discretion  of
the  injured  party.  It  is  competent  to  the  determinate  person
immediately  affected  by  the  wrong,  to  enforce  or  remit  the
liability  incurred  by  the  wrong-doer.  And,  in  every  case  of  the
kind,  the  injury  and  the  sanction  may  be  styled  civil,  or  (if  we
like  the  term  better)  privaie.

In  other  cases  of  wrongs  which  are  breaches  of  relative
duties,  and  in  all  cases  of  wrongs  which  are  breaches  of  absolute
duties,  the  sanction  is  enforced  at  the  discretion  of  the  Sovereign
or  State.  It  is  only  by  the  sovereign  or  state  that  the  liability
incurred  by  the  wrong-doer  can  be  remitted.  And  in  every  case
of  the  kind,  the  injury  and  the  sanction  may  be  styled  criminal
or  public.

In  some  countries,  the  pui'suit  or  prosecution  of  Crimes  does
not  strictly  reside  in  the  sovereign  or  state,  but  in  some  member
of  the  sovereign  body.  For  instance,  the  pursuit  of  criminals
resides  in  this  country  in  the  King;  or,  in  a  few  instances,  in
the  House  of  Commons,  as  when  it  impeaclies  an  alleged
offender  before  the  House  of  Lords.  The  definition  of  a  criminal
sanction  and  of  a  crime  must  therefore  be  taken  with  this
qualification.

»*  Lecture  XVII.  p.  405,  ante.


S02  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  In  short,  the  distinction  between  private  and  public  wrongs,

V ^ - or  civil  injuries  and  crimes,  would  seem  to  consist  in  this :

Where  the  wrong  is  a  dvil  injury,  the  sanction  is  enforced
at  the  discretion  of  the  party  whose  right  has  been  violated.
Where  the  wrong  is  a  crm/ty  the  sanction  is  enforced  at  the
discretion  of  the  sovereign.^  And,  accordingly,  the  same  wrong
may  be  private  or  public,  as  we  take  it  with  reference  to  one,  or
to  another  sanction.  Considered  as  a  ground  of  action  on  the
part  of  the  injured  individual,  a  battery  is  a  civil  injury.  The
same  battery,  considered  as  a  ground  for  an  indictment,  is  a
crime  or  public  wrong.

The  distinction,  as  I  have  now  stated  it,  between  civil  in-
juries and  crimes,  must,  however,  be  taken  with  the  following
explanations.

Ist.  In  certain  cases  of  civil  injury,  it  is  not  competent  to
the  injured  party,  either  to  pursue  the  offender  before  the  tri-
bunals, or  to  remit  the  liability  which  the  offender  has  incurred.
For  example.  An  infant  who  has  suffered  a  wrong  is  not  capable
of  instituting  a  suit,  nor  of  renouncing  the  right  which  he  has
acquired  by  the  injury.  The  suit  is  instituted  on  his  behalf  by
a  general  or  special  Gucuxlian :  who  (as  a  trustee  for  the  infant)
may  also  be  incapable  of  remitting  the  offender's  liability.

It  were,  therefore,  more  accurate  to  say,  that  where  the
wrong  is  a  civil  injury,  the  sanction  is  enforced  at  the  instance
of  the  injured,  or  of  his  representative ;  and  that  the  liability
of  the  offender  (if  remissible  at  aU)  is  remissible  by  the  injured
party,  and  not  by  the  sovereign  or  state.

2ndly.  When  I  speak  of  the  discretion  of  the  sovereign  or
state,  I  mean  the  discretion  of  the  sovereign  or  state  as  exercised
according  to  law.  For,  by  a  special  and  arbitrary  command,
the  sovereign  may  deprive  the  injured  of  the  right  arising  from
the  injury,  or  may  exempt  the  wrong-doer  from  his  civil  liability.
[Herein  lies  the  difference  between  governments  of  law  and
governments  of  tw^ti.]  In  one  or  two  of  the  bad  governments
still  existing  in  Europe,  this  foolish  and  mischievous  proceeding
is  not  uncommon.  For  example.  Letters  of  protection  are
granted  by  the  government  to  debtors,  and  by  these  the  debtors
are  secured  from  the  pursuit  of  their  creditors.  But  in  cases
of  this  kind  the  sovereign  partially  abrogates  his  own  law  to
answer  some  special  purpose. This  is  never  practised  by  wise

"  See  distinction  between  Civil  Injuries  and  Crimes,  in  Lecture  XVII.,  *0n
Absolute  Duties,'  p.  405,  wnU.


Sanctions  Civil  and  Criminal.  503

ffovemments, whether monarchical or other. The Great Lect.
Frederick,  in  spite  of  his  imperious  temper  and  love  of  power, . ^ ^
always  conformed  his  own  conduct  to  his  own  laws.

Letters  of  protection  were  granted  in  this  country  by  the
King,  so  late  as  the  reign  of  William  III.^  These  must  have
been  illegal  For  though  the  King  is  empowered  by  the  Con-
stitution to  pursue  and  pardon  criminals  at  his  own  discretion,
he  is  not  Sovereign.  It  is  not  competent  to  him  to  disregard
the  law  by  depriving  the  injured  party  of  a  right  of  civil  action.
In  an  analogous  case,  this  has,  however,  been  done  by  the  Par-
liament A  person  named  Wright  sued  a  number  of  clergymen
for  non-residence;^^  and  though  he  had  been  encouraged  to
bring  these  actions  by  the  invitation  of  the  existing  law.  Parlia-
ment passed  an  Act  indemnifying  the  clergymen,  and  put  off  poor
Wright  with  the  expense  of  the  actions  which  he  had  brought.

The  distinction  between  private  and  public  wrongs,  is  placed  public  and

by  some  on  another  ground  :  private

._-,  ,  , . . .  .  ,  ,  -  wrongs.

Where,  say  they,  the  mjury  is  a  cnme,  the  end  or  scope  of

the  sanction  is  the  prevention  of  future  injuries.  The  evil  in-
flicted on  the  individual  offender,  is  inflicted  as  a  punishment,  or
for  the  sake  of  warning  or  example.  In  other  words,  the  evil
is  inflicted  on  the  individual  offender,  in  order  that  others  may
be  deterred  from  similar  offences.  Where  the  injury  is  civil,
the  end  of  the  sanction  is  redress  to  the  injured  party.

Now,  it  is  certainly  true,  that  where  the  injury  is  treated  as
a  crime,  the  end  of  the  sanction  is  the  prevention  of  future
wrongs.  The  sanction  is  pcena  or  punishment  (strictly  so
called) :  that  is  to  say,  an  evil  inflicted  on  a  given  offender  in
order  that  others  may  observe  the  law.  Or  (what  is  the  same
thing)  the  evil  is  inflicted  on  the  given  offender,  by  way  of
example,  warning,  or  documentum :  In  order  that  others  may  be
reminded  of  the  evils  threatened  by  the  law,  and  may  be  con-
vinced that  its  menaces  are  not  idle  and  vain.

This  is  manifestly  the  meaning  of  the  word  example,  when
we  speak  of  punishment  being  inflicted  for  the  sake  of  example.
We  mean  that  the  punishment  is  inflicted  by  way  of  caution  or
warning ;  for  the  sake  of  recalling  to  others  the  threats  of  the
law.  The  word  commonly  used  by  Latin  writers,  and  more
especially  by  Tacitus,  is  documentum.  If  the  evil  did  not
answer  this  purpose,  it  would  be  inflicted  to  no  end.

^  See  the  case  of  Lord  Cutts,  8  Lev. Taunton,  vols.  v.  and  vi. I  presume
882.  the  Act  referred  to  is  67  Geo.  III.  c  99.

^  Some  of  the  cases  are  reported  in — R.  C.


5  04  Pervading  Notions  analysed.

Lect.  It  is  also  equally  true,  that  where  the  injury  is  considered

V  ^  ^  civil,  the  proximate  end  of  the  sanction  is  (generally  speak-
ing), redress  to  the  injured  party.  But,  still,  the  difference  be-
tween civil  injuries  and  crimes,  can  hardly  be  found  in  any
difference  between  the  ends  or  purposes  of  the  corresponding
sanctions.

For,  first;  Although  the  proximate  end  of  a  civil  sanction,
is,  generally  speaking,  redress  to  the  injured  party,  its  remote
and  paramount  end,  like  that  of  a  criminal  sanction,  is  the
prevention  of  offences  generally.

And,  secondly ;  An  action  is  sometimes  given  to  the  injured
party,  in  order  that  the  wrong-doer  may  be  visited  with  punish^
ment,  and  not  in  order  that  the  injured  party  may  be  redressed.
Actions  of  this  sort  (to  which  I  shall  advert  immediately)  are
styled  penal:  In  the  language  of  the  Boman  Law,  poerue
persemitorice.

These  propositions  I  will  endeavour  to  explain.

It  is  quite  clear  that  the  necessity  of  making  redress,  and
of  paying  the  costs  of  the  proceeding  by  which  redress  is
compelled,  tends  to  prevent  the  recurrence  of  similar  injuries ;
The  immediate  effect  of  the  proceeding  is  the  restitution  of  the
injured  party  to  the  enjoyment  of  the  violated  right,  or  the
compulsory  performance  of  an  obligation  incumbent  upon  the
defendant,  or  satisfaction  to  the  injured  party  in  the  way  of
equivalent  or  compensation.  But  the  proceeding  also  operates
in  terrorem.  For  it  is  seen  that  the  wrong-doer  is  stripped  of
every  advantage  which  he  may  have  happened  to  derive  from
the  wrong,  and  is  subjected  to  the  expenses  and  other  incon-
veniences of  a  suit.

Accordingly,  a  promise  7iot  to  sue,  in  case  the  promisee  shall
wrong  the  promisor,  is  void  (generally  speaking)  by  the  Boman
Law :  Although  it  is  competent  to  a  party  who  has  actually
suffered  a  wrong  to  remit  the  civil  liability  incurred  by  the
wrong-doer.  And  the  reason  alleged  for  the  prohibition  is  this:
That  such  a  promise  removes  the  salutary  fear  which  is  inspired
by  prospective  liability.  A  right  of  action  is  not  merely  con-
sidered as  an  instrument  or  means  of  redress,  but  as  a  restraint
or  determinative  from  wrong.

In  short,  the  end  or  purpose  for  which  the  action  is  given
is  double :  redress  to  the  party  directly  affected  by  the  injury,
and  the  prevention  of  similar  injuries :  The  accomplishment  of
the  former,  which  is  the  proximate  purpose,  tending  to  accom-
plish the  latter,  which  is  the  remote  and  paramount.


Sanctions  Civil  and  Criminal.  $05

Assuming,  then,  that  the  redress  of  the  ixgured  party  is Lbot.
always  one  object  of  a  civil  proceeding,  it  cannot  be  said  that j^^^^,
dvil  and  criminal  sanctions  are  distinguished  by  their  ends  or
purposes.

It  may,  however,  be  urged,  that  the  prevention  of  future
injuries  is  the  sole  end  of  a  criminal  proceeding ;  whilst  the  end
of  a  proceeding  styled  dvil,  is  the  prevention  of  future  injuries
wnd  the  redress  of  the  injured.  But  even  this  will  scarcely
hold.  For  in  those  dvil  actions  which  are  styled  fvnal^  the
action  is  given  to  the  i>arty,  not  for  his  own  advantage,  but  for
the  mere  purpose  of  punishing  the  wrong-doer.

In  the  Roman  Law,  actions  of  this  kind  are  numerous.

For  example ;  Theft  is  not  a  crime,  but  a  private  delict :
But  besides  the  action  for  the  recovery  of  the  thing  stolen,  the
thief  was  liable  to  a  penalty,  to  be  recovered  in  a  distinct  action
by  the  injured  party.

So,  again,  if  the  heirs  of  a  testator  refused  to  pay  a  legacy
left  to  a  temple  or  church,  they  were  not  only  compelled  to  yield
'  ipsam  rem  vel  pecuniam  quae  relicta  est,  sed  aliud,  pro  pcsndL*

There  are  (I  think)  cases  of  the  kind  in  our  own  law,
though  I  cannot  at  this  instant  recal  them.  In  such  cases,  the
end  of  the  action  is  not  redress,  but  prevention.

Although  by  these  civil  actions  a  right  is  conferred  upon
the  party  injured,  the  end  for  which  the  actions  are  given  is
not  to  redress  the  damage  which  has  been  suffered  by  him,  but
to  punish  the  wrong-doer,  and  by  that  means  to  prevent  future
wrongs.  In  the  case  of  theft,  for  example,  the  damage  sustained
by  the  injured  party  is  redressed  by  the  first  action  for  restitu-
tion, and  the  end  of  the  other  action  for  the  penalty  is  solely
the  punishment  of  the  offender.  Also  popular  actions,  or  actions
given  cuivis  ex  popiUo,  which  exist  both  in  the  Soman  and
English  Law,  evidently  have  the  punishment  of  the  offender
for  their  object

Besides  this  principal  distinction,  there  are  other  species  of  Laws
sanctions  requiring  notice. Laws  are  sometimes  sanctioned  by  "^^^^.^^S
nullities. The  legislature  annexes  rights  to  certain  transactions;  b^  nuU-
for  example,  to  contracts,  on  condition  that  these  transactions  ^^^
are  accompanied  by  certain  circumstances. If  the  condition  be
not  observed,  the  transaction  is  void,  that  is,  no  right  arises ;  or
the  transaction  is  voidable,  that  is, a  right arises,  but  the
transaction  is  liable  to  be  rescinded  and  the  right  annulled
Whether  the  transaction  is  void  or  voidable,  the  sanction  may
be  applied  either  directly  or  indirectly. The  transaction  may
VOL.  L  2  L


So6


Pervading  Notions  analysed.


Lbct.
XXVII


Vicarious

ponifih-

ment


either  be  rescinded  on  an  application  made  to  that  effect,  or  the
nullity  may  be  opposed  to  a  demand  founded  on  the  transaction.
An  instance  of  the  first  kind  is  cm  application  to  the  Court  of
Chancery  to  set  aside  the  transaction :  an  instance  of  the  second
is  afforded  by  a  defendant  who  opposes  a  ground  of  nullity  to
an  tuition  at  common  law.  The  distinction  in  English  Law
between  void  and  voidable  is  the  same  as  that  in  the  Boman
Law  between  null  ipso  jure  and  ope  exceptionis.  The  first
conferred  no  right ;  the  second  conferred  a  right  which  might
be  i^escinded  or  destroyed  by  some  party  interested  in  setting  it
aside.  Ope  exceptionis  is  an  inadequate  name,  for  the  transaction
might  be  rescinded,  not  only  by  eocceptio,  that  is,  a  plea>  but  by
applications  analogous  to  an  application  to  Chancery  to  set
aside  a  voidable  instrument  or  an  instrument  obtained  by  fraud.

In  certain  cases,  sanctions  consist  in  pains  to  be  endured
by  others,  and  are  intended  to  act  on  us  through  sympathy.
These  Mr.  Bentham  has  styled  vicarious  punishments.  They
fall  on  other  persons  in  whom  we  take  an  interest,  and  if  they
affect  us  at  all,  affect  us  by  our  sympathy  with  those  persons.
Forfeiture,  in  treason,  is  an  instance.  As  it  faUs  upon  a  person
who  by  the  supposition  is  to  be  hanged,  it  is  evident  that  it
cannot  affect  him,  but  it  affects  those  in  whom  he  is  interested,
his  children  or  relations,  and  may  possibly,  for  that  reason,
influence  his  conduct  Annulling  a  marriage  has  in  part  the
same  effect,  since  it  not  only  affects  the  parties  themselves
whose  marriage  is  annulled,  but  also  bastardises  the  issue.

Sanctions,  in  some  other  cases,  consist  of  the  application  of
something  not  itself  affecting  us  as  an  evil,  but  affecting  us  by
association  as  if  it  were  an  evil  Posthumous  dishonour  is  of
this  nature.  It  is  applied  as  a  punishment  in  the  case  of
suicides  who  are  buried  with  certain  ignominious  circumstances.
This,  of  course,  can  only  operate  upon  the  mind  of  the  party  by
association,  since  at  the  time  when  he  is  buried  he  is  not
conscious  of  the  manner  of  his  burial.

In  adverting  to  the  difference  between  civil  and  criminal
sanctions,  I  forgot  to  say  that  where  the  sanction  is  criminal,  or
where  the  proceeding  is  criminal,  or  rather  where  the  injury  is
considered  as  a  crime,  nothing  but  the  intention  of  the  party,
the  state  of  his  consciousness,  is  looked  to ;  where,  on  the  other
hand,  it  is  a  civil  injury,  an  injury  must  have  been  committed ;
for  the  immediate  end,  by  the  supposition,  is  the  redress  of  the
injury  to  the  given  party :  which  supposes  that  an  injury  has
been  committed. The  state  of  the  party's  consciousness  is  the


Various  Meanings  of  the  Word  Sanction,  507

only  circumstance  which  is  considered  in  crimes :  and  on  this Leot.

XXYII
principle  a  party  is  punished  for  attempts. Generally,  attempts ^

are  perfectly  innocuous,  and  the  party  is  punished,  not  in  respect

of  the  attempt,  but  in  respect  of  what  he  intended  to  do.

I  now  advert  to  the  various  meanings  of  the  word  sanction.

As  it  is  at  present  used,  it  has  the  extensive  meaning  which  Various
I  have  attached  to  it,  and  denotes  any  conditional  evil  annexed  ^^tymo-
to  a  law  to  produce  obedience  and  conformity  to  it. According  logy  of  the
to  this  acceptation, which  I  believe  is now  general among  J-o^ "*^"
writers  on  the  subject,  the  liabilities  under  civil  actions  may  be
called  sanctions  with  the  same  propriety  as  punishments  under
a  criminal  proceeding. But  the  term  sanction  is  frequently
limited  to  punishments  strictly  so  called. This  is  the  sense  in
which  the  word  is  used  by  Blackstone,  though  not  consistently.
With  the  Eoman  lawyers,  who  were  the  authors  of  the  term,
or  rather  who  adopted  it  from  the  popular  language  of  their  own
country,  sanction  denoted,  not  the  pain  annexed  to  a  law  to
produce  obedience,  but  the  clause  of  a  penal  law  which  determines
and  declares  the  punishment

In  the  Digest  the  etymology  of  the  word  is  said  to  be  this :
SawAum  is  defined  quod  ah  injuria  hominum  defensum  est,  and
is  said  to  be  derived  from  sagmina,  the  name  of  certain  herbs
which  the  Boman  ambassadors  bore  as  marks  of  inviolability.
The  term  was  transferred,  in  a  manner  not  unconmion,  from  the
mark  of  inviolability,  to  what  is  frequently  a  cause  of  inviolability,
namely  punishment.

In  other  cases  sanction  neither  denotes  the  evil  nor  the
clause  determining  the  evil :  it  signifies  confirmation  by  some
legal  authority.  Thus,  we  say  that  a  Bill  becomes  law  when
sanctioned  by  Parliament,  and  that  it  does  not  become  law  till
it  is  sanctioned  by  the  Boyal  assent,  or  till  it  has  received  the
Boyal  sanction.  And  it  is  often  used  in  this  sense  by  the  Boman
lawyers.

Sanctio  is  also  used  to  denote  generally  a  law  or  legislative
provision,  or  to  denote  the  law  or  body  of  law  collectively.
Thus,  in  the  beginning  of  the  Digest,  totam  Bomanam  Sanctionem
is  used  for  the  whole  of  the  Boman  Law.  Sandre  means  to
enact  or  establish  laws.  The  manner  in  which  it  acquired  this
sense  is  easily  conceivable.


END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.
