The Province of Jurisprudence Determined (John Austin, 1832)
==========================================================
Austin's command theory of law: the founding text of legal positivism — law as the command of the sovereign. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/provincejurispr03austgoog).

translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http : //books . google . com/ 

2044 004 569 034 

HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 

csoc 
5 

HARVARD 

COLLEGE 
LIBRARY 

i 

N .-:"..-/* .S>. ■■■''■■■■ ,. 

THE [' 

PROVINCE OF ^JURISPIIUDENCK^ 

DETERMINED. 

DKIliO 

TUE FIRST PART OF A SERIES OF LECTURES 

JURISPRUDENCE 

OB 

THE PHILOSOPHY OP POSITIVE LAW. 

nV THK T.ATK 

JOHN Austin/ KsQ. 

OK TIIK INXKH TEMPLK, HAUIMSTKK-AT-I.AW. 

>^' 

// 

f/)Nl)()N : 

JOHN MUIillAY, ALHEMAULK yTKF<:ET, 

18G1. 

PREFACE. 

V 

It seems necessary tliat I should endeavour to justify the 
step I have taken, in bringing before the pubhc writings of 
such a nature and value as those of my deceased husband. 
I have also to explain why I have determined to publish 
them in the incomplete and unfinished state in which he 
left them. The latter decision was, indeed, a necessary con- 
sequence of the former ; since I could hardly be guilty of 
the irreverence and presumption of attempting to correct or 
alter what he had written. 

I respectfully offer these explanations to the few to whom 
it is fit that any mention of such a man should be made ; 
and I beg them not to think me so careless of his fame, 
as to have lightly and unadvisedly undertaken to do what 
might lower the reputation which (almost in spite of himself) 
he has left among them. To their judgment and candour I 
commend these imperfect remains. Whatever defects they 
may find, let them be assured he would have found more 
and greater. 

It is well known to all who are interested in the science 
of Jurisprudence, that tlie volume of which tlie present is a 
republication, has, for many years, been out of print. From 
the time this was known, earnest and flattering entreaties 
that he would publisli a second edition reached him fi-om 
various quarters. They were sufficient to stimulate any 
vanity but his. 

A 2 

v^ 

IV PBEPACB. 

Unfortunately they came too late. The public, or that 
small portion of it which interests itself in such subjecti» 
did not discover the deep and clear stream of legal science 
within its reach, till its waters had been diverted into other 
channels, or had disappeared altogether. In proportion as 
the demand for the bpok became urgent, more years and 
more occupations were interposed between the state of 
mind in which it was written, and that in which this demand 
found him. Above ally the hope, the animation, the ardour 
vdth which he had entered upon his career as a teacher of 
Jurisprudence, had been blighted by indiflcrencc and neglect ; 
and, in a temper so little sanguine as his, they could have no 
second spring. 

It was not my intention to enter into the particulars of a 
life of which there is little but disappointment and suffering 
to relate, and which, from choice as much as from necessity, 
was passed in the shade. Nothing could be more repugnant 
to a man of his proud humility and fastidious reserve than 
the submitting his private life to the inspection of the public ; 
nor woidd it consist with my reverence for him to ask for 
the admiration (even if I were sure of obtaining it) of a world 
with which he^had 60 little in common. 

But as, influenced by considerations which have appeared 
to me, and to those of his friends best qualified to advise, 
conclusive, I have determined to republish the following 
volume, and to publish the rest of the series of Lectures of 
which those herein contained form a part, it appears neces- 
sary to give some explanation of the state in which he left 
them ; to tell why the work which the author meditated was 
never completed ; why the portion already in print was so 
long and so obstinately withheld from the public; and, 
lastly, what has determined me to take upon myself .thftv:: 
arduous task of preparing these materials for the press^/.]B^|^*i 
order to do this, I must relate those passages of his Ufe wj^ji^j^^ 

PREFACE. V 

are immediately cx)nnccted with the course of his studies ; 
and also, though with infinite pain, must touch upon the 
qualities, or the events, which paralyzed his efforts for the 
advancement of legal science and the diffusion of important 
truths. 

If I dwell longer upon his personal character than may be 
thought absolutely necessary to my purpose, my apology, or 
my justification, will be found in the words of a writer who 
understood and appreciated him : — 

"His personal character was, or ought to have been, more 
instructive in these days than his intellectual vigour. He 
lived and died a poor man. He was Uttle known and little 
appreciated, nor did he seek for tlic rewards which society 
had to give ; but in all that he said and did there was a dignity 
and nmgnanimity which conveyed one of the most impressive 
lessons that can be conceived as to the true nature and true 
sources of greatness." 

At a very early age Mr. Austin entered the anriy, in wliich 
he served for five years ; a fact which would have no place 
here, but for the permanent traces it left in his character 
fmd sentiments. Though he quitted it for a profession for 
which his talents appeared more peculiarly to fit him, he 
retained to the end of his hfe a strong sympathy with, and 
respect for, the miUtary character, as he conceived it. The 
high and punctiUous sense of honour, the chivalrous tender- 
ness for the weak, the generous ardour mixed with reve- 
rence for authority and discipline, the frankness and loyalty, 
which were, he thought, the distinguishing characteristics 
of a true soldier, were also his o\yn ; perhaps even more 
pre-eminently, than the iiitcllcctunl gifts for which he was 
so remarkable. 

Mr. Austin was called to the Bar in 1818. If confidence 

"v^ "m 

W PBEPACK. 

V4 

Unfortunately they came too late. The public, or that 
small portion of it which interests itself in such subject3| 
did not discover the deep and clear stream of legal edence 
within its reach, till its waters had been diverted into other 
channels, or had disappeared altogether. In proportion as 
the demand for the bpok became urgent, more years and 
more occupations were interposed between the state of 
mind in which it was written, and that in which this demand 
found him. Above ally the hope, the animation, the ardour 
vrith which he had entered upon his career as a teacher of 
Jurisprudence, had been blighted by indifference and neglect ; 
and, in a temper so little sanguine as his, they could have no 
second spring. 

It was not my intention to enter into the particulars of a 
life of which there is little but disappointment and suffering 
to relate, and which, from choice as much as from necessity, 
was passed in the shade. Nothing could be more repugnant 
to a man of his proud humility and fastidious reserve than 
the submitting his private Ufe to the inspection of the public ; 
nor woidd it consist with my reverence for him to ask for 
the admiration (even if I were sure of obtaining it) of a world 
with which he,had 60 little in common. 

But as, influenced by considerations which have appeared 
to me, and to those of his friends best qualified to advise, 
conclusive, I have determined to republish the following 
volume, and to publish the rest of the series of Lectures of 
which those herein contained form a part, it appears neces- 
sary to give some explanation of the state in which he left 
them ; to tell why the work which the author meditated was 
never completed ; why the portion already in print was so 
long and so obstinately witliheld from the public ; and, 
lastly, what has determined me to take upon myself iba 
arduous task of preparing these materials for the press, la 
order to do this, I must relate those passages of his Ufe which 

PREFACE. V 

are immediately cx)nnected with the course of his studies ; 
and also, though with infinite pain, must touch upon the 
qiudities, or the events, which paralyzed his efforts for the 
advancement of legal science and the diffusion of important 
truths. 

If I dwell longer upon his personal character than may be 
thought absolutely necessary to my purpose, my apology, or 
my justification, will be found in the words of a writer who 
understood and appreciated him : — 

"His personal character was, or ought to have been, more 
instructive in these days than his intellectual vigour. lie 
lived and died a poor man. He was httle known and Uttle 
appreciated, nor did he seek for the rewards which society 
had to give ; but in all that he said and did there was a dignity 
and magnanimity which conveyed one of the most impressive 
lessons that can be conceived as to the true nature and true 
sources of greatness." 

At a very early age Mr. Austin entered the anriy, in which 
he served for five years ; a fact which would have no place 
here, but for the permanent traces it left in his character 
fmd sentiments. Though he quitted it for a profession for 
which his talents appeared more peculiarly to fit him, he 
retained to the end of his life a strong sympathy with, and 
respect for, the miUtary character, as he conceived it. The 
high and punctUious sense of honour, the chivalrous tender- 
ness for the weak, the generous ardour mixed with reve- 
rence for authority and discipline, the frankness and loyidty, 
which were, he thought, the distinguishing characteristics 
of a true soldier, were also his own ; perhaps even more 
pre-eminently, than the intellectual gifts for which he was 
so remarkable. 

Mr. Austin was called to the Bar in 1818. If confidence 

VI PREFACE. 

in his powers and prospects could have been given to so '^ 
sensitive and fastidious a mind by the testimony and the 
predictions of others, he would have entered on his career 
with an undoubting and buoyant spirit ; for every one of 
the eminent lawyers in whose several chambers he studied, 
spoke of his talents and his application as unequalled, and 
confidently predicted for him the highest honours of his 
profession. 

But he was never sanguine. Even in the days when hope 
is most flattering, he never took a bright view of the future ; 
nor (let me here add) did he ever attempt to excite brilliant 
anticipations in the person whom he invited to share that 
future with him. With admirable sincerity, from the very 
first, he made her the. confidant of his forebodings. Four 
years before his marriage, he concluded a letter thus : " . . ^ 
and may God, above allj strengthen us to bear up under those 
privations and disappointments with which it is but too 
probable we are destined to contend ! " The person to whom 
such language as this was addressed, has, therefore, as little 
right as she has inclination to complain of a destiny dis- 
tinctly put before her and deliberately accepted. Nor has 
she ever been able to imagine one so consonant to her ambi- 
tion, or so gratifying to her pride, as that which rendered hev 
the sharer in his honourable poverty. 

I must be permitted to say tliis, that he may not be 
thought to have disappointed expectations he never raised ; 
and that the effect of what I have to relate may not be 
enfeebled b^ the notion that it is the querulous expression 
of personal disappointment. Whatever there may be of 
complaint in this brief narrative, is excited by the recollec- 
tion of great qualities unappreciated, great powers which 
found no congenial employment, great ardour for the good 
of mankind, cliilled by indifference and neglect ; by the re- 
collection of the struggles and pangs of an over-scrupulous 

PREFACE. Vll 

and over-sensitive spirit, vainly trying to establisli, alone and 
unsustained, the claims of a science which he deemed so im- 
portant to mankind. Nor is the sorrow of an immeasurable 
private loss so engrossing as not to be enhanced by regrets 
at the loss sustained by the world. 

It became in no long time evident to one who watched 
him with the keenest anxiety, that he would not succeed 
at the Bar. His health was delicate: he was subject to 
feverish attacks which left him in a state of extreme debihty 
and prostration; and as these attacks were brought on 
by either physical or moral causes, nothing could be worse 
for him than the hurry of practice, or the close air and 
continuous excitement of a court of law. 

And if physically unfitted for the profession he had 
chosen, he was yet more disqualified by the constitution of 
his mind. Nervous and sensitive in the highest degree, he 
was totally deficient in readiness, in audacity, in self-com- 
placency, and in reliance on the superiority of which he was 
conscious, but which oppressed rather than animated him. 
Hie felt that the weapons with which he was armed, though 
of the highest possible temper, were inapplicable to the 
warfare in which he was engaged ; and lie gradually grew 
more and more self-exacting and self-distrusting. Uc could 
do nothing rapidly or imperfectly ; he could "not prevail 
upon himself to regard any portion of his work as insigni- 
ficant ; he employed a degree of thought and c^re out of 
all proportion to the nature and importance of the occa- 
sion. These habits of mind were fatal to his success in 
business. 

Indeed, even before his call to the Bar, he had detected 
in himself the germ of the peculiar disposition of mind which 
disqualified him for keeping pace with the current of human 
afiairs. In a letter addressed to his future wife, dated 1817, 
when he was still in the chambers of an Equity Draftsman, 

. ■ l,.Mt ' ^^A.I>L l WIPJiJ.l ' ' 

VUl PREFACE. 

he wrote, " I almost apprehend that the habit of drawing 
will in no short time give me so exclusive and intolerant t 
taste (as far, I mean, as relates to ray own productions) for 
perspicuity and precision, that I shall hardly venture on 
sending a letter of much purpose, even to you, unless it be 
laboured with the accuracy and circumspection which are 
requisite in a deed of conveyance." 

But the " habit of drawing" did not create, though it might 
develope, this tendency to exact from himself a degree of 
perfection incompatible with promptitude aud dispatch. lie 
was, as he says, intolerant of any imperfection ; and so long 
as lie could descry the smallest error or ambiguity in a phrase, 
he recast it again and again, till his accurate mind could no 
longer suggest an objection or a difficulty. This was not 
the temper which could accommodate itself to the imperious 
demands of btisiness. After a vain struggle, in which his 
health and spirits suffered severely, he gave up practice in 
the year 1825. 

In the year 1826, the University of London (now Uni^ 
versity College) was established. From the character and 
objects of this institution, it appeared to hold out a hope 
that not only classes of persons, but branches of science, 
excluded from the ancient universities, might find admits 
tance and fostering in this. Among the sciences which it 
was proposed to teach, was Jurisprudence, and Mr. Austin 
was chosen to fill that Chair. As soon as he was appointed, 
he resolved to go to Germany, in order to study on the 
spot what had been done, and was doing, by the great 
jurists of that coimtry, for whom he had already con^ 
ceived a profound admiration. He immediately set about 
learning the language, and had already made some progress 
before he left England. . In the autumn of 1 827, afler visiting 
Heidelberg, he established himself with his wife and child at 
Bonn, which was then the i*esidence of Niebuhr, Brandis, 

PREFACE. IX 

Schlegel, Arndt, Welcker, Mackeldey, IlefTtcr, and other 
eniiuent men, from whose society he received equal pleasure 
and instruction. Mr. Austin secured the assistance of a 
young jurist, who had just entered on that stage of the 
professional career in which men are permitted to teach, 
without holding any appointment. They are called Privat- 
docenten^ and are a sort of tutors. By reading German law- 
books with this gentleman, Mr. Austin, while pursuing his 
main object, speedily acquired the language with that pre- 
cision and completeness wliich he carried into everything 
he studied. 

He also, as I find from some slight memoranda, took great 
pains to inform himself thoroughly of the discipline and 
mode of teaching in the German Universities. He oftcMi 
expressed his earnest desire to cany home, for the use of 
England, whatever were most worthy of imitation inGennany. 
He left Bonn in the Spring of 1828, master of the German 
language and of a number of tlie greatest works which it 
contains. He always looked back upon his residence there 
as one of the most agreeable portions of his life. He and 
those belonging to him, who were then the only Enghsh 
established at Bonn, were received with cordiality by this 
distinguished society, and found there the qualities most con- 
sonant to their tastes ; respect for knowledge, love of art, 
freedom of thought, and simplicity of habits. Spite of the 
hojxjs, the projects, and the acquirements with which he 
entered upon his new functions, it was not without much 
r^ret and some forebodings that he quitted a life so full of 
interest and so free from care, for the restraints and privations 
which London imposes on poor people, and for the anxieties 
of a laborious and untried career. 

Yet eveiything promised well, excepting always his health, 
which had suffered extremely from his anxiety before 
quitting the Bar, and was only partially restored by tlie 

..rjTSjiTinp^Ti's^- ■••^ 

. if i.wt ' u ' u mmmm 

X PREFACE. 

comparative tranquillity of mind which followed his ap- 
pqintment, and by his salutary and agreeable residence on 
the Bhine. 

His Lectures opened with a class which exceeded his expec- 
tations. It included several of the men who are now most 
eminent in law, politics, or philosophy. He was much im- 
pressed and excited by the spectacle of this noble band of 

yoimg men, and he felt 
attaching to his office. 

with a sort of awe the responsibility 
He had the highest possible concep- 
tion of the importance qf dear notions on the foundations of 
Law and Morals to the welfare of the human race ; the 
thought of being the medium through which these were to 
be conveyed into so many of the minds destined to exercise 
a powerful influence ia England, filled him with ardour and 
enthusiasm. As might be expected from his susceptible 
nature and delicate conscience, these were not unmixed with 
anxiety too intense for his bodily health. 

Some notes, which I find in a blank leaf of the First 
Lecture delivered at the London University, are so strongly 
imbued with his earnest and ardent devotion to his work, 
that, not without some hesitation, I resolve to give them 
exactly aa they stand.: Even the broken sentences are 
characteristic, and, to those who knew him, inexpressibly 
touching. To such, they will vividly recall the man whose 
passionate love of truth and knowledge is apparent even in 
these hasty words. 

*' Before we separate, I wish to say a few words. 

It is my purpose to hold conversations at the end of every lec^ 
ture. 

[Advantages to myself land to the gentlemen of my class — 
Advantages of extempore lectures. 

IncompletenesB of i^ritten lectures, in respect of the ideas. 
Waste of labour in' writing; extempore lectures can be adapted at 
the moment to the hearer : 

Dullness of vrritten lectures :] 

\ 

PREFACE. XI 

I therefore wish, of all things, to form a habit of lecturing 
extempore : To this, I am at present not competent, but by dint 
of giving explanations, etc, I hope I may acquire the requisite 
£icility and composure. 

Another advantage which will arise from these discussions: 
Errors in plan and in execution will be pointed out and corrected. 
^\ b^ of you not to be restrained by false delicacy : Frankness 
is the highest compliment,^ 

I never myself acquiesce, etc 

And this is perfectly consistent with admiration for genius — 
Monstrous, therefore, for a man, etc 

I thejpefore entreat you, as the greatest favour you can do me, to 
demand explanations and ply me with objections — turn me inside 
out, I ought not to stand here, unless, etc. 

Can bear castigation without flinching, coming from a friendly 
hand. 

From this collision, advantages to both parties more advanta- 
geous than any written lecture. 

Request them to ask questions relative to studies. 

In short, my requests are, That you will ply me with questions, 
and that you will attend regularly." 

I find iu the manuscript numerous passages marked r. v. 
which he evidently meant to expand or analyze extenipora- 
neously. 

He now appeared to have attained to a position alK>ve all 
others the best suited to him. His peculiar Uiistes and talents 
fitted him for the business of a teacher. Ilis power of 
methodizing and exi)ounding was matchless ; and he had a 
natural and powerful eloquence, (when he allowed himself 
to giv.e way to it,) which was calculated to rivet the attention 
and fix itself on the memory. This was far more striking 
in conversation than in his written lectures. As soon as he 
reduced anything to writing, the severity of his taste and his 
habitual resolution to sacrifice everything to clearness and 
precision, led him to rescind every word or expression tliat 
did not, in his opinion, subserve these cuds* 

' .f ; ; ' ■ ■■'? V'i ' - ' .IJ ' . '' 

XU PREFACE. 

\ 

\. 

Perhaps no man was ever more eminently qualified to 
raise extemporaneous discourse to the highest excellence, 
had he but combined with his other singular qualifications 
that of easy confidence and self-satisfaction. His voice was 
clear and harmonioiis, and his elocution perfect Nobody 
ever heard him talk without being powerfiiUy struck with 
the vigour and originality of his discourse, the variety and 
extent of his knowledge, and the scholwrlike accuracy and 
singular appositeness of his language.^ Classical thoughts 
and turns of expression- were so familiar to him that they 
seemed innate and spontaneous/N* I think," writes a friend 
to whom I have shown tliis poor attempt to describe him, 
'* that you have hardly said enough about his eloquence in 
conversation. But the: truth is, that it is impossible to 
describe the manner in which one was carried away and 
utterly absorbed by his talk. One had travelled in an hour 
over such vast regions, and at such an elevation I And then 
the extraordinary extent and exactness of his memory ! " 
It is true that I shrink from the attempt to convey an idea 
of his eloquence in common discourse. It lives in the 
remembrance of a few. His memory was most extraor- 
dinary, and would have. been a gift to dwell on with wonder, 
had it not been so subordinate to his higher faculties. He 
never made a display of it ; and as it was always under the 
control of his severe love of truth, his hearers were certain 
that he hazarded nothing, and that his statements might be 
impUcitly relied on. 

But those qualities which, above all others, smooth the 
road to success, were not to be looked for in a character 
like his. Proud, sensitive, trying everything by the lofty 
standard he bore within him, it was only to a very peculiar 
sort of encouragement that he was accessible. The highest 
applause or admiration of ignorant millions would have failed 
to give him the smallest satisfaction. The approbation of 

H. 

i PEEPACE. XUl 

Ute few whose judgment he respected, or the persuasion that 
hifl labours tended to general utility, were the only stimu- 
lants by which he could be enabled to rise above liis consti- 
tutional shyness and reserve. 

It soon became clear that he was as far as ever from 
having found the modest, but tranquil and secure position, 
in which he might continue to labour for the advancement 
of the sublime science of which he knew himself to be so 
consiunmate a master. 

It was not to be expected, — it is never found, even in the 
count]^,^^®^^ science is most ardently pursued for its own 
8ake,-5hat studies which have no direct bearing upon what 
is called practical hfe, can, except under very peculiar cir- 
cumstances, attract numerous audiences. 7 Where, therefore, 
there is any serious intention that the few who addict them- 
selves to such studies should find competent instructors, funds 
are provided for the maintenance of men who have obviously 
nothing to expect from popular resort. Their position is 
perhaps not briUiant, but it is secure and honourable, and 
affords them leisure for the prosecution of their science. 
No such provision was, however, made for tlie Cliair to which 
Mr. Austin had been elected ; and as Jurisprudence formed 
no part of the necessary or ordinary studies of a barrister, 
his professorship became nearly an empty title. 

" In spite," says the illustrious writer of a notice of Mr. 
Austin's death, in the 'Law Magazine,* "of tlie brilliant 
commencement of his career as a Professor, it soon became 
evident that this country would not afford such a succession 
of students of Jurisi)rudencc as would suffice to maintain a 
Chair ; and as tliere was no other proviifion for the teachers 
tlian the students' fees, it followed of necessity that no man 
could continue to hold that office unless he had a private 
fortune, or combined some gainful occupation with his pro- 
fessorship. Mr. Austin, who had no fortune, and who re- 

XIV PREFACE. 

garded the study and exposition of his science as more than 
sufficient to occupy his whole life, and who knew that it 
would never be in demand amongst that immense majority 
of law students who regard their profession only as a means 
of making money, found himself under the necessity of re- 
signing his Chair."* 

Such was the end of his exertions in a cause to which he 
had devoted himself wjth an ardour and singleness of pur- 
pose of which few meni are capable. This was the real and 
irremediable calamity of his life, — ^the blow from which he 
•never recovered, ffis failure at the Bar was nothing, and 
would never have been regretted by himself or those who 
cared for him. That was not his vocation, rior had he 
any peculiar aptitude for it ; and there was no want of able 
and successful barristers. There was no one to do the 
work he could have done, as an expounder of the philo- 
sophy of Law. 

At the time he wrote his Lectures, constructed the Tables 
(hereafter mentioned), and prepared tliis volume for the 
press, I can affirm that he had no other thought, intention, 
or desire, than to push his inquiries and discoveries in thi3 
science of law as fiir, and to diffuse them as widely, as pos- 
sible. It was from no unsteadiness of purpose, no shrinking 
from labour, no distaste to a life of comparative poverty and 
obscurity, that he abandoned the pursuit to which he had 
hoped to devote his life. H there had been found for him 
some quiet and humble nook in the wide and rich domains 
of learning, it is my firm conviction that he would have gone 
on, slowly indeed, as the nature of his study and his own 
nature rendered inevitable, and with occasional interruptions 
from illness, but with ; unbroken tenacity and zeal, to the 
end of his life. 

Li June, 1832, he gave his last lecture. In that year h^ 

^ Law Magazine and Review, for May, 18G0. 

PREFACE. XV 

published the vohime, of which the present is a reprint. 
So fer was he from anticipating for it any brilliant success, 
that he was astonished at the readiness and liberality witli 
which the late Mr. Murray undertook the publication of it ; 
and for years afterwards his anxiety was extreme, lest it 
should have entailed loss upon that gentleman. When at 
length, in answer to my inquiries, Mr. Murray presented to 
me the last remaining copy, as a proof that our fears were 
groxmdless, Mr, Austin expressed perfect satisfaction, and 
something like surprise, even at this very moderate success. 
He was fully aware of the unpopularity of the studies to 
which he had devoted himself. 

**So few,** says he, **are the sincere inquirers who turn their 
attention to these sciences, and bo difficult is it for the multitude 
to perceive the worth of their labours, that the advancement of 
the sciences themselves is comparatively slow ; whilst the most 
perspicuous of the truths with which they arc occasionally en- 
riched, are either rejected by the many as worthless or pernicious 
paradoxes, or win their laborious way to general assent through 
a long and dubious struggle with established and obstinate 
errors." 

It must be admitted that the reception given to his book 
at first was not encouraging. Neither of tlie Reviews 
which profess to guide pubUc opinion on serious subjects 
took the sUghtest notice of it. Some eulogistic articles 
appeared in journals of less general currency, but on the 
whole it may be said to have been left to make its way by 
its own merits. It was only at a later period, and by slow 
d^ees, that they were appreciated. 

In the year 1833 Mr. Austin was appointed by Lord 
Brougham, then Lord Chancellor, member of the Criminal 
Law Commission. Though tliis turned him from the pur- 
suit to which he had hoped to dedicate liis life, and con- 
fined his inquiries to a narrower and loss inviting field than 

XVI 

PBEFACB. 

that he had marked ;out for himself, he entered upon it 
with the same conscientious devotion, and carried into it the 
same profound and comprehensive views. But he soon per- 
ceived tha£ they would be of small avail to himself or to 
the pubUc. The powers granted to the Commission did not 
authorise the fundamental reforms from which alone he 
beheved any good could come ; and his opinions as to the 
ground to be marked out, and the foundations to be laid, 
before any satis^toiy structure of criminal law could be 
raised, differed widely from those of his colleagues. He had 
little confidence in the efficacy of Commissions for construc- 
tive purposes. He said to me, " If they would give me 
two hundred a year for two years, 1 would shut myself up 
in a garret, and at the end of that time I would produce 
a complete map of the whole field of Crime, and a draft of 
a Criminal Code. Then let them appoint a Commission 
to pull it in pieces." He used to come. home from every 
meeting of the Commission disheartened and agitated, and 
to express his repugnance to receiving the public money 
for work from which he thought the public would derive 
little or no advantage. Some blurred and blotted sheets 
which I have found, ibear painful and afiecting marks of 
the struggle that was going on in his mind, between his 
own lofty sense of dignity and duty, and those more ordi- 
nary notions which subordinate public to private obliga- 
tions. I have also found the commencement of a project 
of a Criminal Code drawn up at that time. 

About the same time, he had arrived at the conviction 
that, Bs a teacher of Jurisprudence, he had nothing to 
hope. The insufficiency of the legal education of the country 
had for some time attracted the attention of the more en- 
lightened part of the profession ; and it was •at length de- 
termined, by the Society of the Inner Temple, that some 
attempt should be made to teach the principles and history 

FUEPACE. XVU 

of jurisprudence. Among the most earnest promoters of 
this scheme was Mr. Austin's friend, Mr. Bickersteth, after- 
wards Lord Langdale. In the year 1834, Mr. Austin was 
accordingly engaged to deliver a course of lectures on juris- 
prudence at the Inner Temple. Had this appointment been 
made under different conditions, it was one which he would 
have preferred to any other, however distinguished or how- 
ever lucrative. Unfortunately, it was not of a kind to give 
him the security and confidence he wanted. He was in- 
vited to undertake the discouraging task of trying to esta- 
blish a new order of things, without the certain though 
distant prospect which usually cheers the pioneer in such 
an enterprise. His appointment could only be regarded as 
i an experiment. This uncertainty weighed upon him from 
the first. He was, as I have said, disqualified by nature 
from all work of a passbg and temporary sort ; and in 
order to labour with courage and animation, he needed to 
see before him a long period of persistent study, and se- 
curity from harassing anxiety. His precarious health and 
depressed spirits required every possible support ; and he 
was but too easily disheartened at what he thought the want 
of confidence in the scheme, or in him, evinced in a merely 
tentative appointment 

It was also clear that the same causes which rendered 
/ ^ the appointment to a Chair of Jurisprudence abortive at 
the London University, were in operation (perhaps to a still 
greater extent) in the Inns of Court. The demand for any- 
thing like scientific legal education had to be created. The 
eminent lawyers who had adorned the English bar and 
bench (of whose great faculties no one liad a higher admi- 
ration than Mr. Austin) had been formed by a totally differ- 
ent process ; and the young men entering on the profession 
were, for the most part, profoundly indifferent to any studies 
but those which had enabled their i)rc(leccssors to attain to 
-- VOL. I. a 

XVlll ' PRBFAOB. 

places of honour and profit. Thus depressed by failure ; un- 
sustained by eympathy in his lofly and benevolent aspira- 
tions^ or by recognition of his value as a teacher ; agitated by 
conflicting duties, and harassed by anxiety about the means 
of subsistence, it is no wonder that his health became sensibly 
worse. The severe feverish attacks to which he had always 
been subject, became ; more and more frequent and violent ; 
and often, after preparing a lecture with great care and 
intense application, he was compelled, on the day when it 
should have been delivered, to send messengers round to 
the gentlemen of his class, to announce his inability to at- 
tend. He soon saw the inutility of struggling against such 
obstacles. He resolved to abandon a conflict in which he 
had met with nothing but defeat, and to seek an obscure 
but tranquil retreat on the Continent, where he might live 
upon the very small means at his disposal. 

He quitted England with a strong feeling of the disad- 
vantage at which a man like himself, devoted exclusively 
to truth and to the permanent good of mankind, stood, 
in a country where worldly success is not only the reward, 
but the test of merit; and where, unless he advances in 
certain beaten tracks^ he arrives at nothing, except neglect 
and a sort of contemptuous wonder. He felt this keenly, 
and said to the one person to whom he ever talked freely 
of himself, " I was born out of time and place. I ought to 
have been a schoolman of the twelfth century — or a Ger- 
man professor." The position of such illustrious and revered 
teachers as Hugo and S avign y seemed to him the most 
enviable in the worldJ The pecuniary inferiority of such a 
position, compared with the profits attending the practice 
of law in this country, was not a consideration to which 
his mind could easily descend. 

He had been settled at Boulogne about a year and a half, 
when a proposal was' made to him by the Colonial Ofiice, 

PHEPACE. XIX 

through his mtich-esteemed and faithful friend Sir James 
Stephen, to go to Malta as Eoyal Commissioner, to inquire 
into the nature and extent of the grievances of which the 
natives of that island complained. He accepted an appoint- 
ment for which he was indeed peculiarly fitted. Justice and 
humanity were parts of his nature, and were fostered by 
reason and by study. He had no sympathy with the inso- V 
lence of a dominant race, and he was not likely to view with | 
indulgence, violations of the conditions under which England / 
had accepted the voluntary cession of Malta by its inhabi- 
tants. On the other hand, his sagacity, knowledge, and 
strict sense of justice rendered him inaccessible to fantastic 
schemes or groundless complaints. Aided by his able and 
accomplished colleague Mr. (now Sir) George Comewall 
Lewis, he rendered to the island services which attracted 
little attention in England, but are remembered with Uvely 
and affectionate gratitude in Malta. 

He had the satisfaction of seeing every measure he recom- 
mended adopted by the Colonial Office ; and he always 
looked back with great satisfaction to his connexion with 
two men for whom he entertained so sincere a respect as 
Lord Glenelg and Sir James Stephen. But here another 
disappointment awaited him. After the reform of the tariff 
(which Sir James long after called, •' the most successful 
legislative experiment he had seen in his time"), and of 
various parts of the administration of the island, Mr. Lewis 
having been recalled to England to preside over the Poor 
Law Board, Mr. Austin was preparing to enter upon his 
more peculiar province, — legal and judicial reform. Lord 
Glenelg, however, was no longer in office, and the Com- 
mission was suddenly brought to a close by his successor. 
No reason was assigned, nor was Mr. Austin's abinii)t dis- 
missal accompanied with a single word of recognition of 

a 2 

— ;V". ■■■•''■'" ■"'•J''" 

XX PEBFAGE. 

his services. It remained for the Maltese to acknowledge 
them.* 

It is indeed but too probable that the state of his health 
would have incapacitated him for the work he projected. 
But he frequently said to me, that if, as he presumed, the 
Colonial Office wished to put an end to the expense of the 
Commission, he would have continued to live in the island 
in a private and humble maimer, till he had introduced 
something like order into the heterogeneous mass of laws^ 
bequeathed by the successive masters of Malta. It was, 
however, fortunate that he waa not permitted to attempt a 
task to which his strength was so inadequate. 

Li giving this short account of his troubled life and baffled 
designs, my object has only been to show what were the cir- 
cumstances by which he was forced out of the track on 
which he had entered, and in which his whole mind and 
soul were engaged ; and why it was that he seemed to 
abandon the science to which he had devoted his singular 
powers with so much ardour and intensity. 

It was this very ardour and intensity, this entire absorp- 
tion in his fri^bject, w&ich rendered it impossible to him to 
resume, at any given moment, trains of thought from which 
his mind had been forcibly diverted. It belonged to the 
nature of his mind to grapple with a question with difficulty, 
— almost with reluctance. It seemed as if he had a sort of 

* " Such was the man," says a Malta journal, in an article announcing 
big death, " to whom the Maltese must ever feel grateful for their improved 
condition as a people, and for the many privileges thej now enjoy ; and 
most of all for the liberty of the press under which we are now writing. 
It CMnot be c^^ifated that the inhabitants of this island are greatly ad- 
vanced in the scale of civilization, both politically and socially, and ren* 
dered more essentially British in civil polity and institutions, by the 
measures adopted on the recommendation of the Commission presided 
over by Mr. Austin." 

PBBFAOH ^i 

dread of tibe labour and tension to which, when it h&d once 
taken hold on him, it would inevitably subject himi He 
was frequently urged to write on matters which he had 
studied with an earnestness second only to that which he 
had devoted to his own peculiar science, — such as Philo- 
sophy. Political Economy, and Political Science generally. 
He usually evaded these applications; but to the person 
with whom he had no reserves, he used to say, "I can- 
not work so ; I can do nothing in a perfunctory manner." 
He knew perfectly his strength and his weakness. He 
could work out a subject requiring the utmost stretch of 
the human faculties, with a clearness and completeness that 
have rarely been equalled. But he had no mental agility. 
When he gave himself up to an inquiry, it mastered him 
like an overwhelming passion. Even as early as the year 
1816, he spoke to me, in a letter, of " the difficulty he 
found in turning his faculties from any object whereon 
they have been long and intently employed, to any other 
object." And for the same, reason, when his mind had 
once loosened its grasp of a subject, it could with difficulty 
recover its hold. 

At the time when a second edition of his book was first 
demanded, he was, as I have said, occupied in the business 
of the public, to which it was with him a matter of con- 
science to consecrate his imdivided attention. To this 
reason for delay was now added another. His health 
had gradually declined, under the pressure of labour and 
anxiety. After Ins return from Malta, in 1838, he was so 
much worse, that in 1840 his medical friends exhorted him 
to try the waters of Carlsbad, — with very small hope, as 
they afterwards confessed, of seeing him again. From 
those wonder-working waters however he received so much 
benefit that he determined to return to them, and the 
summers of 1841, 1842, and 1843 were spent there. Iiv 

JJiXL PREFACE. 

the varied and interesting society assembled in that place,' 
he made the acquaintance of many eminent persons, ftovA 
whom he eagerly sought for information on the condition of 
their several countries. The intervening winters were plea- 
santly and profitably passed at Dresden and Berlin. In 
the latter capital he found men eminent in every branch of 
science, to some of whom he had long looked up as the 
great masters of his own, — especially Herr von Sayigny* 
Political questions were then agitated with great warmth and 
acrimony in Ftussia* Mr. Austin studied them with his 
usual industry and impartiality ; and several men who were 
themselves engaged in the discussions of the day, were so 
struck with the deamess and justness of his views, that they 
urged him to write on the afiairs of their country. I have 
found memoranda which show that at one time he contem* 
plated some work of the kind. It was atpr^en that he 
wrote, for the Edinburgh Eeview, his answer to Dr. List's 
violent attack on the doctrine of Free Trade. 

In 1844 he removed to Paris, attracted thither by the 
society and friendship of some of the distinguished men who 
were then the able expositors of science, or the eloquent 
advocates of free institutions. Shortly after, he was elected 
by the Institute a corresponding member of the Moral and 
Political Class ; an honour for which he was wholly unpre- 
pared, unaccustomed as he was to any public recognition of 
his merits. I shall borrow the words of an illustrious friend, 
to describe the impression he left on some of the highest 
minds of France : I could add many such testimonies, but 
that of M. Ouizot is sufficient. ^^ C^tait un des hommes lea 
plus distingufe, un des esprits les plus rares, et un des coBurs 
les pl\is nobles que j'ai connus. Quel dommage, qu'il n'ait 
pas su employer tout c? qu'il avait, et montrer tout oe qu'il 
valait!" i 

In that year another earnest appeal was made to him to 

PREFACE. XXIU 

publiflh a seoond edition of *The Province of Jurispru- 
•dence.' Letters from friends, and even from strangers, 
arrived, lamenting the impossibility of getting a copy, and 
setting forth the constantly increasing reputation of the book. 
But these flattering representations, which perhaps at an 
earlier period would have spurred him on to fresh exertions, 
seemed to give him little pleasure, and he rarely alluded to 
them. They had now to encounter the reluctance I have 
spoken o^ to resume long-disused labour, — a labour too with 
which a crowd of painful recollections were associated. 

To give a mere reprmt of the book would have been easy 
enough, and it is what any one else so encouraged would 
probably have done ; but Mr. Austin had discovered defects 
in it which had escaped the criticism of others ; and witli 
that fastidious taste and scrupulous conscience which it was 
impossible to satisfy, he refused to republish what appeared 
to him imperfections. 

That he had long meditated a book embracing a far 
wider field,: I well knew; but I feared that this great work 
would never be accomplished, and would have gladly com- 
pounded for something far less perfect than his conceptions. 
But I saw that nothing could shake his resolution, and I 
never willingly adverted to the subject. Whenever it was 
mentioned, ')ie said, that the book must be entirely recast and 
rewritten, and that there must be at least another volume. 
His opinion of the necessity of an entire refonte of his book *^ 
arose, in great measure, from the conviction, which had \ 
continually been gaining strength in his mind, that until I 
the ethical notions of men were more clear and consistent, \j 
no considerable improvement could be hoped for in legal / 
or political science, nor, consequently, in legal or political/ 
institutions. 

The subjoined prospectus or advertisement sufliciently 
proves that he had seriously rcsrolved to execute the grout 

»fc-'.q.iw ^iJisyji. 

ZZIV FBRPAC& 

work he had planned. I have found but one copy of it, nor 
have I been able to heEU* of the existence of another. I can* 
not find that it attracted any attention* 

The Prime^piM and BdaJtUmM of Jwri»pmdmc€ and Etkia, By Jon 
Ausrnr, Etq^ of iks Inner Temple^ BarrisUr-ai'Law. 

An Oatfine of a Goone of Lectoret on GrODenlJariflpradence, p ieo ed o d 
by an sUempi to dekemune the proTince of the adence, was pnbliahed by 
the author in 1892. Bj the sale of the entire edition, and bj the eoD- 
tinued demand lor the book, he ia encouraged to undertake a woik cam* 
oerning the Mme ratgecti but going more profoundly into the related 
■nbjeot of Ethics. The matter is so Tatt, and the tadc of digesting and 
condensing it so difficult, that a connderable time must necesranlj elapea 
before the intended treatise will be ready for publication, 

A concise and unequivocal title for the intended treatise is not afibrded 
by eJtablished language. Positive law (or jia), positive morally (or mot), 
to^;ether with the prineiples which form the text of both, are the inaepa* 
rably-eonnected parts of a Tast organic whole. To explain their several 
natures, and present them with their common relations, is the purpose <^ 
the essay on which the author is employed^ But positive morality (as 
conceive in the whole of its extent) has hardly acquired a distinguishing 
name ; though one important branch of it has become the subject of a 
science, and been styled by recent writers the positive law of nations. For 
the variously oonoeiTed and much disputed principles which form the mea^ 
sure or test of positxre law s^ morality, established langusge has no name 
which will miuk them without ambiguity. As related to positive law 
(the appropriate subject of Jurisprudence), they sre s^led the principles 
of legislation. As related to positive morality, they are styled morals or 
ethics ; but as either of these names will signify positive morality, as well 
as the standard to which it ought to conform, there is no current expression 
for the principles in question which will denote them adequately and dis- 
tinctly. He (author) had thought of entitling the intended essay, the 
prineiples and relations of law, morals, and ethics ; meaning by law, poii- 
II tiV€ law ; by morals, positive morals ; and by ethics, the principles which 
are the test of both. Bui ii^ consequence of the difficulties which he has 
just stated, he preferred the more condBe and not more equivocal title 
which stands at the head of the present notice. 

For rsssons to appear hereafter, the work will be divided into two 
parts. The first will be .'^v^ to General Jurisprudence ; and in his ex« 

PREFACE. ZXV 

'pdintion of that icienoe the author will descend into the detail whioh was 
indicated by the above-mentioned outline, as deeplj as maj consbt with 
the limits assigned to an institutional treatise. The second part urill be 
given to Ethics. No separate department will be given to positive morals ; 
but, so &r as thejr are implicated with jurisprudence and ethics, they will 
be noticed in the departments allotted to those subjects. 

He announced the same intention in a letter to the present 
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, the companion of his 
early studies, the beloved and faithful friend of every period 
of his life. It was only the other day that Sir William Erie 
found the following fragment of tliis letter, wliich he lias had 
the kindness to permit me to print. Unhappily, the pai't 
containing the date is lost. It begins with a broken sentence, 
wliich must relate to one of the many applications made to 
him for a second edition : probably tliey were preceded by 
some such words as — 

[What Mr. Muiray suggests is] '*a mere reprint of it; but, if 
he would give me sufficient time (two years or so), I would do ray 
best to produce something better. 

** I shall now set to work in good earnest ; and if my unlucky 
atars will allow me a little peace, I hope I shall turn out something 
of considerable utility. 

** 1 intend to show the relations of positive morality and law 
.{rnas and/tts), and of both, to their common standard or test ; to 
show that there are principles and distinctions common to all 
systems of law (or that law is the subject of an abstract science) ; 
to show the possibility and conditions of codification ; to exhibit 
a short scheme of a body of law arranged in a natural order ; and 
to show that the English Law, in spite of its great peculiarities, 
might be made to conform to that order much more closely than 
is imagined. 

" The questions involved in this scheme are so numerous and 
difficult, that what I shall produce will be very imperfect. I 
think, however, that the subject is one which will necessarily at- 
tract attention before many years arc ovor ; and I believe that 

»CV1 PREFACE. 

my suggestioiis will be of considerable use to those wlio^ under 
happier auspices, will piuvue the inquiry. 

*^ These are points upon which I shall ask your advice. 

" Yours most truly, 

" JoicN Austin.** 

He had finally established himself in Paris, when the Eevo- 
^lution of 1848 once more uprooted him. He had watched 
with intense interest and anxiety the approach of the storm 
which was to overthrow all regxxlar government in France ; 
I /^d it was from earnest observation of what passed in that 
///country, that he became confirmed in his opinion of the 
|/ 1 difficulty, if not the impossibility, of reconstructing a society 
I^Vwhich has once been completely shattered. This opinion, 
together with his ardent and disinterested love of his country, 
found utterance in the pamphlet which he pubhshed in 
1859. 

He remained for some months in Paris after the Eevolu- 
tion, watching the coutse of things. As he became more and 
more convinced that permanent tranquilHty was not to be 
looked for in Prance, aind that life there would be incessantly 
troubled and embittered by uncertainty and alarm, he resigned 
himself to a serious pecuniary loss, and returned to Endand, 
determined to seek tranquillity in a small retreat in the 
country. He took a cottage at Weybridge, in Surrey, near 
enough to London for 'convenience, and for occasional visits 
from his only child, and far enough to enable him to enjoy 
the retirement he coveted. 

Here he entered upon the last and happiest period of his 
life ; the only portion during which he was free from carking 
cares and ever-recurring disappointments. The battle of life 
was not only over, but had hardly left a scar. He had nei- 
ther vanity, nor ambition, nor any desires beyond what his 
small income sufficed to satisfy. He had no regrets or re- 
pinings at his own poverty and obscurity, contrasted with 

PREFACE. XXVll 

the successes of other men. He was insatiable in the pur- 
suit erf knowledge and truth for their own sake ; and during 
the long daily walks which were almost the sole recreation he 
coveted or enjoyed, his mind was constantly kept in a state 
of serene elevation and harmony by the aspects of nature, 
— ^which he contemplated with ever-increasing delight, and 
described in his own fehdtous and picturesque language, — 
and by meditation on the sublimest themes that can occupy 
the mind of man. He wanted no excitement and no audi- 
ence. Though he welcomed the occasional visits of his 
friends with affectionate cordiality, and delighted them by 
the vigour and charm of his conversation, he never expressed 
the smallest desire for society. He was content to pour 
out the treasures of his knowledge, wisdom, and genius, to 
the companion whose life was (to use the expression of one 
who knew him well) " enfolded in his." 

Thus passed twelve years of retirement, rarely interrupted, 
and never uninteresting or wearisome. His health was 
greatly improved. The place he had chosen, and his mode 
of life suited him. The simplicity of his tastes and habits 
would have rendered a more showy and luxurious way of 
living disagreeable and oppressive to him. Yet none of 
the small pleasures or humble comforts provided for him 
ever escaped his grateful notice. He loved to be sur- 
rounded by homely and familiar objects, and nothing 
pleased him so much in his garden as the flowers he had 
gathered in his childhood. Things new or rare were im- 
attractive, if not distasteful, to his constant and liberal na- 
ture. He had a disinterested hatred of expense, and of 
pretension, and, though very generous, and quite indifferent 
to gain, he was habitually frugal, and respected frugality 
in others, as the guardian of many virtues. 

One regret mingled with the deep thankfulness with 
which this comparative freedom from pain and coxq wci& 

ZXVIU PBSFAGK 

regarded by those who loved him : — ^he showed no indir 
nation to devote these years of improved health and tran- 
quil leisure to the work he had so long ago projected. 
But even this regret^ poignant as it was, gradually sub- 
sided under the tranquillizing influence of his serene con* 
tentment. It is no wonder that the person most sensible 
of the immense resources and powers of his mind, and 
most deeply interested in seeing them appreciated, could 
not resolve to urge him to return to long-disused labours. 
Suffering, from ill-health and from other causes, had pur- 
sued him, almost without intermission, throughout the 
early and middle part of his hfe ; and now that he had 
found comparative ease of body and mind, fame, or even 
usefulness (so long and ardently coveted for him), faded 
into nothing, compared to these inestimable blessings. The 
calm evening that foUpwed on so cloudy and stormy a day 
was too precious to be risked for the reputation to which 
he was so indifferent, or for the advantage of a world to 
which he owed so little. 

But his generous solicitude for his country did what no- 
thing else could, and his last effort was prompted by bene- 
volence and patriotism. 

He was, in his soUtUde, a deeply interested observer of 
political events. He viewed with great anxiety and dis- 
approbation the various schemes of parliamentary reform 
brought forward during the later years of his hfe, and felt 
deeply the severe blow they gave to the respect he wished 
to feel for eminent pubhc men. 

Profoundly convinced as he was of tlie scarcity of great 
ability, and of the still greater scarcity of a disinterested 
love of truth, it niiay easily be imagined that he regarded 
with a sort of horror all schemes for placing the business 
of legislation in the hands of large bodies of men. He 
had followed step by step the progress of the great minds 

PBEPACB. XXIX 

lay which systems of law had been, through ages, slowly and 
jMunfully daborated ; and the project of submitting these 
liighest products of the human intellect, or the difficult pro- 
"blems they deal with, to the judgment and the handling of 
\meducated masses, seemed to him a return towards bar- 
l>arism. He, least of all men, was likely to be dazzled or 
attracted by wealth or rank ; but he valued them on pubUc 
grounds, as providing for their possessors the highest sort 
of education, and the leisure and opportunity to apply that 
education to the general culture of the human mind, — 
especially to the difficult sciences of legislation and govern- 
ment. The idea of popular legislation was to him as alarming 
as it was absurd ; and it was precisely on account of the dis- 
astrous consequences wliich he was certain must result from 
it to the people themselves, that he felt indignant at the 
uses made of their ignorance, and the immanly affectation 
of deference to their vrishes, by those whose duty it is to 
enlighten and guide them. Long and accurate obser\'ation 
of other countries, and intercourse with their public men, 
had taught him the full value of the institutions of this 
coimtry, and the importance of the habit of obedience to 
law ; and he was too ardent and sincere a patriot to sec 
these imperilled without the deepest emotion. The work of 
liOrd Grey, which appeared in the midst of the discussions 
on reform, excited his warm and respectful admiration ; and 
when it was suggested to him tliat he should review it, he 
immediately consented. The pamphlet published under the 
title of * A Plea for the Constitution,' was originally written 
for a quarterly journal ; but being thought unsuitable, it 
was published separately. Its success far exceeded his very 
modest expectations, and gave lum tlie satisfaction of 
thinking that he had contributed something to tlie defeat of 
pernicious projects. This was the only reward he desireil. 
From the time that he abandoned the struggle with the 

XXX. PRKTIOK;: 

world to which he was at once so unequal and so superior, 
all the bitterness excited in him by the chilling indifference 
with which lus. noble, and disinterested efforts had been 
received, subsided. His estimate of men was low, and his 
soKdtude for their approbation was consequently small. 
But while he kept aloof from them, his sympathy with their 
sufferings, and his anxiety for their improvement, never 
abated. For himself^ te coveted nothing they had to give ; 
and he awaited the judgment of another tribunal with hu- 
mility, but with a serenity which became more perfect in 
proportion as the time for his appearing before it drew nigh. 
If elevation above all the low desires and poor ambitions 
which chain the soul to earth, if a Ufe untainted by a single 
unjust or ungenerous action or thought, a single conces- 
sion to worldly or selfish objects, a single attempt to stifle or 
to disguise truth, could justify a serene anticipation of the 
world into which none of these things can enter, he might 
be permitted to feel it. 

Having, as I hope, made intelligible to that portion of 
the public, capable of sympathy with a character like Mr. 
Austin's, what were the causes which disabled him — or dis- 
inclined him — ^from entering afresh on the labour of re-con- 
structing and greatly enlarging his book, and of knitting up 
all the threads which years and events, care and sickness, 
had tangled or broken, it only remains for me to say what 
are the materials he has left ; what the motives that have 
induced me to give them to tlie world, and how it is that I 
have found myself in a manner compelled to undertake the 
arrangement of them for the press. 

I have sometimes doubted whether it was consistent with 
my obedience to him to publish what he had reftised to pub- 
lish. I have questioned myself strictly, whether, in devoting 

PBBFACB. XXXI 

the rest of mylife to an occupation which seems in some de- 
jgree to continue my intercourse with liim, I was not rather 
indulging myself than fulfilling my duty to him. There have 
been times, too, when, in the bitterness of my heart, I have 
determined that I would bury with me every vestige of his 
disinterested and unregarded labours for the good of man- 
kind. But calmer thoughts have led me to the conclusion, 
that I ought not to suffer the fruit of so much toil and of 
so great a mind to perish ; that what his own severe and 
fastidious judgment rejected as imperfect, has a substantial 
value which no defect of form or arrangement can destroy ; 
and that the benefits which he would have conferred on 
his country and on mankind, may yet flow through devious 
and indirect channels. I persuade myself that if his noble 
and benevolent spirit can receive pleasure from anything 
done on earth, it is from the knowledge that his labours 
are " of use to those who, imder happier auspices, pursue* 
the inquiry ** into subjects of such paramount importance 
to human happiness. 

Having thus come to the conclusion that some of the 
manuscripts he left ought to be given to the public, the 
next question was, — in what form, and by whom ? My first 
thought was to look about for an editor, to whom I might 
confide the redaction of the whole ; leaving to him entire 
discretion as to the matter and form of the publication. 
But it did not appear that any such person could be found, 
or was likely to be found, A great portion of the manu- 
script was in so imperfect and fragmentary a state, that it 
was clear that the whole must be recast and rewritten by 
any editor who aspired to produce a readable book, from 
which he could derive reputation or profit. I was alarmed 
at the thought of the changes the work might undergo 
in this process. It was to be feai'ed that any editor who 
had not the self-forgetting devotion of a DumotA^N^owJAXi^ 

ZXXll PREFACE. 

more sensible of his responsibility towards the public than 
of that towards his author. There are great peculiarities 
in Mr. Austin's style—not one of which was adopted with- 
out mature thought He never had the slightest idea of 
rendering his subject popular or easy. He demanded from 
his hearers or readers t;he full force of their attention ; and 
as he knew how lax and flitting the attention of most men 
is apt to be, he adopted every expedient for fixing or re- 
calling it. He shrank from no repetitions that he thought 
necessary to keep a subject steadily and distinctly before 
the mind, and he availed himself of all typographical helps 
for the same purpose. Knowing this, I have disregarded 
the advice of some of those to whom I am most bound, and 
most disposed, to defer, in retaining the numerous italics 
with which his book isi in their opinion, deformed. Future 
editors may, if they will, remove this eyesore. They will not 
be bound by the deference which must govern me. 

It will not be supposed that I think it necessary to call 
in any testimony to tHe value of the materials I have to 
produce. But those whose estimate of them is the highest, 
may very justly think they ought to have been put into 
more competent hands: This was my own opinion; and 
it was not without much anxious deliberation, or without 
consulting those of Mr. Austin's friends upon whose judg- 
ment and solicitude for his fame he would, I knew, have 
load the greatest reliance, that I determined on the course 
I have pursued. The opinion and the advice which I re- 
ceived from all was essentially the same ; — that all the 
Lectures should be pubhshed, " with only such revision as 
may remove . needless repetitions ; " and that, considering 
the confused and fragmentary state of much of the manu- 
script, the safest editor would be the person most deeply 
interested in the author's reputation, and most Hkely to 
bestow patient and reverential gare on every relic left by him. 

PREFACE. XXXI 11 

I need not repeat the terms in whicli Mr. Austin's friends 
encouraged me' to undertake the task of putting these pre- 
cious materials in order, nor the oflers of advice and assist- 
ance which determined me to venture upon it. One of 
thim, who spoke with the authority of a lifelong friendship, 
said, after looking over a mass of detached and half legible 
papers, " It will be a great and difficult labour ; but if you 
dd not do it, it will never be done." This decided me. 

I have gathered some courage from the thought that 
foipty years of the most intimate communion could not 
have left me entirely without the means of following trains 
of thought which constantly occupied the mind whence my 
own drew light and truth, as from a living fountain ; of 
guessing at half expressed meanings, or of decipliering 
words ill^ible to others. During all those years he had 
condescended to accept such small assistance as I could 
render; and even to read and talk to me on the subjects 
which engrossed his mind, and which were, for that reason, 
profoundly interesting to me. 

Having determined on the course to be pursued, the first 
thing to be done was obviously to republish the volum". 
already in print, which has been long and eagerly deminded. 
The Author's Preface explains the matter of which this 
volume consists, and his purpose in pubUshing it. I have 
altered nothing, except the position of the Outline, which 
is now placed at the beginning, instead of at the end of the 
book. I have inserted all the scattered memoranda I have 
been able to find, relating to alterations and additions which 
he meditated. Some of them are taken from a small paper 
marked " Inserenda." All these things are manifestly mere 
su^estions for his own use, — indications of matter which 
he intended to introduce or to work out. They are in- 
serted, chiefly as proofs of the thought he had given to a 
more ample exposition of jurisprudence and the allied 

VOL. I. b 

ZXZIV mSFACB. 

sciences ; but also, not without a hope that some of them 
may serve as landmarks for the guidance of future ex- 
plorers of the way hq intended to follow. 

The volume now repubhshed includes, as the Author's 
Preface states, the first ten of the liCCtures read at the 
London University ; which, though divided into that num* 
ber for delivery, were " in obe(]hence to the aflSnity of the 
topics," reduced by hjm to six.* 

There remain, unprinted, all the rest of the Lectures 
given at the London jXJniversity. These I propose to print 
exactly as he left them. I shall alter nothing, and shall 
only make the omissions suggested above. This course is, 
I think, fully justified by the opinions already cited. There 
is also the short Course, delivered at the Inner Temple. 
But as this necessarily went in great measure over ground 
which had been traversed in the earlier Courses, it does not 
appear to the friends I have consulted that it will afford 
matter for a separate volume. It is thought that it will be 
expedient to collate these with the earlier and far more 
numerous Lectures, and to insert, as notes or appendix, any 
matter which is not found in those. The state of the manu- 
script seems to show that the author meant to incorporate 
them with the former ; or rather, to employ both in the 
construction of the great work he meditated. 

When Mr. Austin was preparing his lectures at the London 
University he drew out a set of Tables, which he had printed 
for distribution to the gentlemen of his class. They were 
never published nor sold, and were consequently unknown 
to the public Nor were they ever completed. Between 
Tables L, 11 , and VIU., IX., there is a chasm, — ^never now 
to be filled. But lamentably incomplete as they are, they are 
pronounced by one eminent lawyer to be " perhaps the most 
extraordinary production of his mind ;" and, by all who 

• See Aatbor*8 Preface, p. xxxvii. 

PBEPACB. XXXV 

have studied U^m, are thought to afTord evidence of an 
astooiahing originality of conception, extent of learning and 
force of reasoning. Each Table is accompanied by explana- 
tory notes of great length. I am not without some faint 
hope that hints for the construction of some of the missing 
Tables may be found among the various scattered notes 
•which exist* 

The nature and object of these Tables are described by 
the Author in his opening Lecture, in the following words. 
After stating the causes which rendered an opening Lec- 
ture a useless ceremony in his case, he concludes thus : — 

^ I find it utterly impossible to give you the faintest notion of 
my intended Course. Nor is it necessary that I should. 

^I have been busily employed in preparing a small work 
which will answer the purpose better. It consists of a Set of 
Tables, in which I have exhibited the Arrangement intended by 
the Roman Lawyers in their Institutes or Elementary Treatises. 
And this Arraagement is compared with various others, which have 
since been adopted in Codes, or proposed by Writers on Jurispru- 
dence. To these Tables I have appended Notes, in which I have 
endeavoured to show the rationale of that Arrangement, and to 
explain the import of the distinctions upon which it turns. 

** From these Tables and from the Notes which have been ap- 
pended to them, those who may do me the honour of attending my 
Class, will collect a better idea of my general subject and design 
than from anything that I could utter here. 

** These Tables are nearly, though not completely, printed off. 
And I hope they will appear shortly. I have been working day 
and night in order that I might have them ready by the open- 
ing of my Lectures : but I have been obliged to struggle with so 
mi^y intricate questions, and to make references to so great a 
number of books, that I found it impossible to complete them in 
time. 

* As a considerable time must elapse before a new edition of thene 
Tables and Notes can be prepared for press, Romo copies of tlicm in their 
original form have been deposited with Mr. Murray. 

b2 

■fp^ 

iCXXvi PRBFACK. 

** The paina which I have taken to get them ready, must serve 
as my excuse for the present lame appearance. 

^ With an object in view which I thought important, I could 
not afford to expend my labour and time upon a mere for- 
mality." 

Lastly, I find a considerable mass of papers on Codifica- 
tion J an Essay on Interpretation; the * Excursus on Analogy/ 
referred to at the beginning of Lecture V. in the present 
volume ; and the commencement of a project of a Criminal 
Code, to which I have akeady referred. 

Such are the materials laboriously brought together and 
marvellously wrought^ which lie broken and scattered before 
me. The noblest deigns, the highest faculties, the most 
unwearied industry, Iwere employed upon them — ^in vain. 
What would have been the structmre reared out of them, 
had the Master been enabled to execute the plan he had 
conceived, is now left to melancholy conjecture. 

SARAH AUSTIN.. 

AUTHOR'S PREFACE. 

As one of the Law-Professors at the University of Lon- 
don, I planned and partly delivered a systematical Course 
of Lectures on General or Abstract Jurisprudence. In the 
ten lectures delivered at the beginning of my Course, I 
distinguished positive law (the appropriate matter of juris- 
prudence) from various objects with which it is connected 
by resemblance, and from various other objects to which it 
is allied by analogy. Out of those ten discourses, I have 
made the treatise which I now submit to the public, and 
which I venture to entitle " the province of jurisprudence 
determined." 

Expounding the matter of the treatise to my liearers at 
the University of London, I was forced to finish each of 
my readings within the compass of an hour. Hence it 
naturally followed, that the division which I gave to the 
matter differed from the division suggested by the affinities 
of the topics. Compelled to finish each of my readings 
within the compass of an hour, I expounded the matter in 
ten discourses, although the affinities of the topics would 
have led me to expound it in six. 

Addressing the matter to readera, I am not constrained 
to preserve the division, which, as addressing it to hearers, 
I was forced to adopt. Accordingly, I divide the treatise 
into six lectures, although it is made out of ten. 

xxxviii author's preface. 

But the quantity of the matter which was contained by the 
ten, is somewhat less than the quantity of the matter which 
is contained by the six. The six ensuing lectures (and, es- 
pecially, the fifth and last) are therefore longer than most of 
the essays to which the name of ** lecture " is usually given. 
But, nevertheless, I ca|ll them ** lectures " : for their matter 
is clothed with a stylei, or wears a form of expression, which 
assumes that they arcf read to an audience. This is the 
style with which theiri matter was clothed, when it was de- 
livered, in the ten lectures, to my hearers at the University 
of London : and I could not have stripped it of this, and 
dressed it in another, without much and profitless labour. 

Having stated the origin of the following treatise, I now 
will suggest its principal purpose or scope : And, having 
suggested its principal purpose or scope, I will indicate the 
topics with which it is chiefly concerned, and also the 
order wherein it presents them to the reader.* 

* It appeus from a j^emorandum of the Author, that he intended to 
transfer the following AnaljaiB to the beginning of the First Lecture, '* in 
lieu of the first five pages.*' — 8. A. 

aothob's preface. xxxix 

Laws proper or properly so called, are commands : laws 
which are not commands, are laws improper or improperly 
so called. Laws properly so called, with laws improperly so 
called, may be aptly divided into the four following kinds. 

1 T|^fi (livini^ Ifiiya^ nr tJhpJgwa nf God : that is tO Stiy,' 

the laws which are set by God to his human creatures. 

2. Positive laws j that is to say, laws which are simply , 
and stnctly so called, and which form the appropriate matter \ 
of general and particular jurisprudence. 

3. Positive m orality, rules of positive morality, or positive 
moral rules. 

4. Laws me taphorical or figurative, or merely metaphori- 
cal or figurative. 

The divine laws and positive laws are laws properly so 
called. — Of positive moral rules, some are laws properly so 
called, but others are laws improper. The positive morah / 
rules which are laws improperly so called, may be styled 
laws or niles set or jm posed b y opinion: for they are 
merely opimoris^r sentiments held or felt by men in regard 
to human conduct. A law set by opinion and a law im- 
perative and proper are allied by analogy merely ; although 
the analogy by which they are allied is strong or close. — 
laws metaphorical or figurative, or merely metaphorical or 
figurative, are laws improperly so called. A law metapho- 
rical or figurative and a law imperative and proper are 
allied by analogy merely ; and the analogy by which they 
are allied is slender or remote. 

Consequently, positive laws (the appropriate matter of 
jurisprudence) are related in the way of resemblance, or by 
dose or remote analogies, to the following objects. 1. In 
the way of resemblance, they are related to the laws of G(xl. 
2. In the way of resemblance, they are related to those 
rules of positive morality which are laws properly so called : 
And by a close or strong analogy, they are related to those 

/ 

t^^ ' Jt.^. 

them, considered as 
prudence determined; 

xl author's pbefage. 

rules of positive morality which are laws set by opinion. 
3. By a remote or slender analogy, they are related to laws 
metaphorical, or lawa merely metaphorical. 

The principal purpose or scope of the six ensuing lectures, 
is to distinguish positive laws (the appropriate matter of 
jurisprudence) from the objects now enumerated : objects 
witli which they are (Connected by ties of resemblance and 
analogy ; with which they are further connected by the 
common name of ** laws ;" and with which, therefore, they 
often are blended and confounded. And, since such is 
the principal purpose of the six ensuing lectures, I style 

a whole, " the province of juris- 
" For, since such is their principal 
purpose, they affect to describe the boundary which severs 
the province of jurisprudence from the regions lying on its 
confines. 

The way which I take in order to the accomplishment of 
that purpose, may be stated shortly thus. 

I. I determine the: essence or nature which is common 
to all laws that are laws properly so called : In other words, 
I determine the essence or nature of a law imperative and 
proper. 

n. I determine the respective characters of the four several 
kinds into which laws may be aptly divided : Or (changing 
the phrase) I determine the appropriate marks by which laws 
of each kind are distinguished from laws of the others. 

And here I remark, by the by, that, examining the 
respective characters of those four several kinds, I found 
the following the order wherein I could explain them best : 
First, the characters or distinguishing marks of the laws of 
<3lod ; secondly, the characters or distinguishing marks of 
positive moral rules ; thirdly, the characters or distinguish- 
ing marks of laws metaphorical or figurative ; fourthly and 
l;istly, the characters or distinguishing marks of positive 
law, or laws simply and strictly so called. 

authob's fbefage, xli 

By determining the essence or nature of a law impera- 
tive and proper, and by determining the respective cliarac- 
ters of those four several kinds, I determine positively and 
negatively the appropriate matter of jurisprudence. I de- 
termine positively what that matter is ; and I distinguish 
it from various objects which are variously related to it, 
and with which it not unfrequently is blended and con- 
founded. I show moreover its affinities with those various 
related objects: affinities that ought to be conceived as 
precisely and clearly as may be, inasmuch as there are nu- 
merous portions of the rationale of positive law to which 
they are the only or principal key. 

Having suggested the principal purpose of the following 
treatise, I now will indicate the topics with which it is 
chiefly concerned, and also the order wherein it presents 
them to the reader. 

I. In the Jirst of the six lectures into which the treatise 
is divided, I state the essentials of a law or rule (taken with 
the largest signification that can be given to the term pro- 
perly). In other words, I determine the essence or nature 
which is common to all laws that are laws properly so 
called. 

Determining the essence or nature of a law imperative 
and proper, I determine implicitly the essence or nature of 
a command ; and I distinguish such commands as are laws 
or rules, from such commands *as are merely occasiond or 
particular. Determining the nature of a command, I fix 
the meanings of the terms which the term ^i^command" 
implies; namely, "sanction" or " enforcement of obedi-l 
ence ; " " duty " or " obligation ; " *' superior and inferior."! 

II. (a) In the beginning of the second lecture, I briefly 

xlii AirrHOR'S PRBFACB. 

determine the characters or marks by which the laws of God 
are distinguished from other laws. 

In Uie banning of the same lecture, I briefly divide the 
laws, and the other commands of the Deity, into two kinds : 
the revealed or express, and the unrevealed or tacit. 

Having briefly distinguished his revefded from his unre- 
vealed commands, I pass to the nature of the signs or index 
through which the latter are manifested to Man. Now, 
concerning the nature of the index to the tacit commands 
of the Deity, there are three theories or three hypotheses : 
First, the pure hypothesis or theory of general utility ; 
secondly, the pure hypothesis or theory of a moral sense ; 
thirdly, a hypothesis or theory mixed or compounded of the 
others. And with a statement and explanation of the 
three hypotheses or theories, the greater portion of the 
second lectiire, and thb whole of the third and fourth lec- 
tures, are exclusively or chiefly occupied. 

That exposition of the three hypotheses or theories, may 
seem somewhat impertinent to the subject and scope of my 
Course. But in a chain of systematical lectures concerned 
with the rationale of jurisprudence, such an exposition is a 
necessary link. 

Of the principles ahd distinctions involved by the ra- 
tionale of jurisprudence, or of the principles and distinctions 
occurring in the writings of jurists, there are many which 
could not be expoimded correctly and clearly, if the three 
hypotheses or theories had not been expounded previously. 
For example : Positive law and morality are distinguished 
by modem jurists into law natural and law positive : that 
is to say, into positive law and morality fashioned on the 
law of God, and positive law and morality of purely human 
original; Atid this distinction of law and morality into 
law natural and law positive, nearly tallies with a distinction 
which runs through the Pandects and Institutes, and which 
was taken by the compilers from the jurists who are styled 

r 

author's preface. xliii 

**das8icaL" By the jurists who are styled ** classical" 
(and of excerpts from whose writings the Pandects are 
mainly composed), jus civile is distinguished from jus gen- 
Hum^ or j^is omnium gentium. For (say they) a portion of 
the positive law which obtains in a particular nation, is 
peculiar to that community: And, being peculiar to that 
community, it may be styled jus civile^ or Jus proprium ipsius 
civiiatis. But, besides such portions of positive law as are 
respectively peculiar to particular nations or states, there 
are rules of positive law which obtain in all nations, and 
rules of positive morality which all mankind observe : And 
since these legal rules obtain in all nations, and since these 
moral rules are observed by all mankind, they may be 
styled the jus omnium gentium^ or the commune omnium 
hominum jus. Now these universal rules, being universal 
rules, cannot be purely or simply of human invention and 
position. They rather are made by men on laws coming 
from God, or from the intell^ent and rational Nature which 
is the soul and the guide of the universe. They are not 
so properly laws of human device and institution, as divine 
or natural laws clothed with human sanctions. But the 
l^al and moral rules which are peculiar to particuhir 
nations, are purely or simply of human invention and jx)si- 
tion. Inasmuch as they are partial and transient, and not 
universal and enduring, they hardly are fashioned by their 
human authors on divine or natural models. — Now, without 
a previous knowledge of the three hypotheses in question, 
the worth of the two distinctions to which I have briefly 
alluded, cannot be known correctly, and cannot be estimated 
truly. Assuming the pure hypothesis of a moral sense, or 
assuming the pure hypothesis of general utility, those dis- 
tinctions are absurd, or are purposeless and idle subtilties. 
But, assuming the hypothesis compounded of the others, 
those distinctions are significant, and arc also of cunsidei*able 
moment 

xliv AUTHOB*S PHEPACB. 

Besides, the divine law is the measure or test of positive 
law and morality : or (changing the phrase) law and mo- 
raUty, in so far as they are what they ought to be, conform, 
or are not repugnant, to the law of God. Consequently, an 
all-important object of the science of ethics (or, borrowing 
the language of Bentham, " the science of deontology") is 
to deteimine the nature of the index to the tacit commands 
of the Deity, or the nature of the signs or proofs through 
which those commands may be known. — ^I mean by " the 
science of ethics " (or ;by " the science of deontology "), the 
science of law and moraUty as they respectively ought to be : 
or (changing the phrase) the science of law and morality as 
they respectively must be if they conform to their measure 
or teat. That department of the science of ethics, which is 
concerned especially with positive law as it ought to be, is 
styled the science of legislation : that department of the 
science of ethics, which is concerned especially with positive 
raoraUty as it ought to be, has hardly gotten a name per- 
fectly appropriate an4 distinctive. — Now though the science 
of legislation (or of positive law as it ought to be) is not the 
science of jurisprudence (or of positive law as it ts), still 
the sciences are connected by numerous and indissoluble 
ties. . Since, then, the nature of the index to the tacit com- 
mands of the Deity is an all-important object of the science 
of legislation, it is a fit and important object of the kindred 
science of jurisprudence. 

There are certain ciu'rent and important misconceptions 
of the theory of general utility : There are certain objections, 
resting on those misconceptions, which frequently are urged 
against it : There are also considerable difficulties with . 
which it really is embarrassed. Labouring to rectify those 
misconceptions, to answer those objections, and to solve or 
extenuate those difficulties, I probably dwell upon the theory 
somewhat longer than I ought Deeply convinced of its 
truth and importance, and therefore earnestly intent on 

author's FBEFACEi xlv 

commending it^ip the minds of others, I probably wander 
into ethical disquisitions which are not precisely in keeping 
with the subject and scope of my Course. If I am guilty 
of this departure from the subject and scope of my Course, 
the absorbing interest of the purpose which leads me from 
my proper path, will excuse, to indulgent readers, my offence 
against rigorous logic. 

n. (b) At the beginning of the ffth lecture, I distribute 
laws or rules under two classes : First, laws properly so 
called, with such improper laws as are closely analogous to 
the proper ; secondly, those improper laws which are re- 
motely analogous to the proper, and which I style, therefore, 
laws metaphorical or figurative. — I also distribute laws 
proper, with such improper laws as are closely analogous to 
the proper, under three classes : namely, the laws properly 
80 called which I style the laws of God ; the laws properly 
80 called which I style positive laws ; and the laws properly 
80 called, with the laws improperly so called, which I style 
positive morality or positive moral rules. — ^I assign more- 
over my reasons for marking those several classes with those 
respective names. 

Having determined, in preceding lectures, the characters 
or distinguishing marks of the divine laws, I determine, in 
the fifth lecture, the characters or distinguishing marks of 
positive moral niles : that is to say, such of the laws or rules 
set by men to men as are not armed with legal sanctions ; 
or such of those laws or rules as are not positive laws, or 
are not appropriate matter for general or particular juris- 
prudence. — ^Having determined the distinguishing marks of 
positive moral rules, I determine the respective characters 
of their two dissimilar kinds : namely, the positive moral 
rules which are laws imperative and proper, and the positive 
moral rules which are laws set by opinion.* 

• It appears from a memorandum of the Author that he intended to 

xlvi authob'8 preface. 

The divine law, positive law, axid positive morality, are 
mutually related in various ways. To illustrate their mutual 
relations, I advert, in the fifth lecture, to the cases wherein 
they agree, wherein they disagree without conflicting, and 
wherein they disagree and conflict. 

I show, in the same lecture, that my distribution of lawa 

proper, and of such improper laws as are closely analogous 

to the proper, tallies,; in the main, with a division of laws 

which is given incidedtally by Locke in his Essay on Human 

JSnderatanding, 

nri[c)"^Sl^e end of the same lecture, I determine the 
characters or distinguishing marks of laws metaphorical or 
figurative. And I show that laws which are merely laws 
through metaphors, are blended and confounded, by writers 
of celebrity, with laws imperative and proper. 

n. (d) In the sixth and last lecture, I determine the 
characters of laws positive : that is to say, laws which are 
simply and strictly so called, and which fonn the appropriate 
matter of general and particular jurisprudence. 

Determining the characters of positive laws, I determine 
implicitly the notion of sovereignty, with the implied or cor- 
relative notion of independent political society. For the 
essential diflerence of a positive law (or the difierence that 
severs it from a law which is not a positive law) may be 
stated generally in the following manner. Every positive 
law, or every law simply and strictly so called, is set by a 
sovereign person, or a sovereign body of persons, to a mem- 
ber or members of the independent political society wherein 
that person or body is sovereign or supreme. Or (changing 
the phrase) it is set by a monarch, or sovereign number, to 
a person or persons in a state of subjection to its author. 

To elucidate the nature of sovereignty, and of the inde- 
pendent political society that sovereignty implies, I examine 

" correct Lecture I. agreeably to the note in Preface, p. xvi." This note 
will be found transferred to the panage to which it refers. — S. A. 

AUTHOB> PBBFACB. xlvii 

varioiis topics i^hich I arrange under the following heads : 
First, the possible forms or shapes of supreme poUtical 
goyemment; secondly, the limits, real or imaginary, of 
supreme political power; thirdly, the origin or causes of 
political government and society. Eicamining those various 
topics, I complete my description of the limit or boundary 
by which positive law is severed from. positive morality. 
For I distinguish them at certain points whereat they seem- 
ingly blend, or whereat the line which divides them is not 
easily perceptible. 

The essential difference of a positive law (or the difference 
that severs it' from a law which is not a positive law) may be 
stated generally as I have stated it above. But the foregoing 
general statement of that essential difference, is open to cer- 
tain correctives. And with a brief allusion to those correc- 
tives, I close the sixth and last lecture. 

From the foregoing sketch of the following treatise, the 
reader may gather the principal scope of the latter : he may 
gather moreover the topics with which it is chiefly con- 
cerned, and also the order wlierein it presents tliem to his 
attention. 

That the reader may turn readily from topic to topic, I 
have placed in the margin of the treatise a running index 
to its matter. 

I endeavoured to give to the style through which that 
matter is conveyed, brevity, clearness, and ease, as well as 
the requisite precision. But I could not have expressed that 
matter with that indispensable precision, unless I had resorted 
occasionally to long and intricate circumlocutioiLs. And this 
the reader will be pleased to remember, in case he shall fmd 
that the style is sometimes crabbed and tedious. 

The following treatise is not proffered exclusively to 

Zlviii AITTHOB'S PEBFACE. 

those who are engaged specially in studying the science of 
jurisprudence. For the nature or essence of law, and the 
nature or essence of morality, are of general importance and 
interest ; and he who .would know exactly the natures of law 
and morality, must clfearly apprehend the distinctions which 
the treatise affects to determine. Accordingly, the matter 
of the treatise is so arranged and expressed, that any 
reflecting reader, of any condition or station, may, I thinTc, 
understand it. 

I have stated in the beginning of my preface, that the 
six lectures or essays composing the following treatise are 
made out of ten lectures which I delivered at the University 
of London. These (I may venture to add) were heard with 
some approbation, by an instructed and judicious audience. 
Imboldened by that approbation, I submit them, in their 
present form, to the judgment of a larger public. 

CONTENTS. 

Outline Of THS CouBSB OF Lecturbs page Iv 

LECTURE I. 

The purpose of the following attompt to doterniine the province of 
jurisprudence, stated or suggested. — ^I'he tnanner of the following 
attempt to detemiiao the province of jurisprudence. — I^ws or 
rulesy properfy so called, are a species of commands. — Tlio nienn- 
iog of the term command, — ^The meaning of the term dutt/. — The 
terms eamwuutd and duti/ are correlative. — ^I'he meaning of the 
term tamiioH, — To the existence of a command, a duty, and a 
sanction^ a violent motive to compliance is not requisite. — Re- 
wards are not rnndwuB, — The meaning of tlio term command ^ 
brieOy re-stated. — Tlio inseparable connexion of the three terms, 
command^ duty, and sanction. — The manner of tlint connexion. — 
Laios or rules distinguished from comninnds wliieli are occasional 
Of particular, — The definition of a law or rule, propnrhj ao called. 
— ^The meaning of the correlative terms fftt^nrior and inferior. — 
I^ws (improperly so called) which are not commands. — Laws 
(properly so called) which may eeem not imperative. — I^ws which 
are not commands, enumerated page 1 

LECTURE II. 

The connexion of the second with the first lecture. — The Divine laws, 
or the laws of Qod. — Of the Di\'ine laws, some are revcakdy and 
others are unrepealed. — Such of the Divine laws as arc niraUftL 
— Such of the Divine laws as are unrevealed, — What is the index 
to such of the Divine laws as are unrovealed ? — The hi/putlwsfs or 
theoriei which regard the nature of that index. — The hypothesis 
or theory of a moral sense : of UMute practical priticipUs ; of a. 
VOL, J. C 

'■ it:v, '? i 

CONTENTS. 

practical retuon: of i^ comuum iente: etc. etc. <— The theory or 
hypothecs of tUiUty,^-A brief summary of the theory of utility. — 
Th% following explanfitions of that summary briefly introduced. — 
The true iendmoy of i human action^ and the true test of that ten* 
dency. — ^According tQ the theory of utility, God's commands are 
mostly ndei. — It does not follow from the theory of utility, that 
every useful action is the object of a Divine injunction ; and every 
pernicious action, the object of a Divine prohibition. — A current 
and specious objection to the theory of utility, introduced and 
stated. — The two aptj answers to the foregoing objection briefly 
introduced. — The Jirk answer to the foregoing objection stated. 
— ^The iecand answei^ to the foregoing objection briefly introduced. 
— If our conduct were truly adjusted to the principle of general 
utility, our conduct would conform, for the most part, to rules: 
rules which emanate i&om the Deity, and to which the tendencies 
of human actions are the guide or index. — Theory and jn-actice 
are inseparable. — ^If our conduct were truly adjusted to the prin- 
ciple of general utility, our conduct would be guided, for the most 
part, by setUimenU ^associated with rules: rules which emanate 
fitnu the Dei^, and io which the tendencies of human actions ore 
the guide or index.— If our conduct were 'truly adjusted to the 
principle of general utility, our conduct would conform, for the 
most part, to Divine rules, and would also be guided, for the most 
part, by seniiments associated with those rules. But, in anoma- 
lous and excepted oases (of comparatively rare occurrence), our 
conduct would be fashioned directly on the principle of general 
utility, or guided by a conjecture and comparison of specific or 
particular consequences. — The second answer to the foregoing ob- 
jection, briefly resumed ^ paob27 

LECTURE III. 

The connexion of the third with the second lecture. — A second objec- 
tion to the theory of utility, stated. — An answer to that second 
objection, introduced.^ An objection to the foregoing answer, 
stated. — The foregoing objection to the foregoing answer, solved 
or extenuated. — ^The second objection to the theory of utility, to- 
gether with the foregoing answer to that second objection, briefly 
re-stated tags 53 

LECTURE IV. 

The connexion of the fourth with the third lecture. — The second ob- 
jection to the theory of utility, resumed.— A further answer to 

CJONTENTS. 11 

that second objy^on. — The hypothesis of a nwral senM, briefly 
iatroduced.— ^< A moral sense," " a common sense," " a moral in- 
stinct," ''a principle of reflection or conscience,'' ''a practical 
Mason," ''innate practical principles," "connate practical pria» 
oiples," etc. etc., are various expressions for one and the same hy- 
pothesis. — ^The hypothesis in question involves two assumptions. 
— ^The first of the two assumptions involved by the hypothesis in 
question, stated in general expressions. — The foregoing statement 
of the first assumption, exemplified and explained by an imagi- 
nary case. — ^The first of the two assumptions involved by the hy- 
pothesb in question, briefly re-stated in general expressions. — ^The 
second of the two assumptions involved by the hypothesis in ques- 
tion, briefly stated. — As an index to God's commands, a moral 
sense were less fallible than the principle of general utility. — ^But 
is there any evidmce to sustain the hypothesis in question P — The 
hypothesis in question is disproved by the negative state of our 
consciousness. ^The two current arguments in favour of the hy- 
pothesis in question, briefly stated. — ^The first argument in favour 
of the hypothesis in question, examined.— The second argument 
m favour of the hypothesis in q\iestion, examined. — A brief state- 
ment of the fact whereon the second argument in favour of the 
hypothesiB in question is founded. — ^The fact accords exactly with 
the hypothesis or theory of utility. — A brief statement of the in- 
termediate hypothesis which is compounded of the hypothesis of 
utility and t^e hypothesis of a moral sense. — ^Tho division of posi- 
tive law into lato natural and law positive, and the division of 
jus civile mto Jus gentium and Jus civile, suppose or involve the 
intermediate hypothesis which is compounded of the hypotliesis 
of utility and the hypothesis of a moral sense. — The foregoing 
disquidtions on the index to Qod*s commands, closed with an en- 
deavour to clear the theory of utility from two current though 
gross misconceptions. — ^The two misconceptions stated.— The 
first misconception examined. — The second misconception exa- 
mined PA (J K To 

LECTURE V. 

Laws proper or properly so called, and laws improper or improperly 
so called. — Laws improper are of two kinds. 1. Laws closely ana- 
logous to laws proper. 2. Laws metaphorical or figurative. — Di- 
vision of laws proper, and of such improper laws as are closely 
analogous to the proper. — Distribution of laws proper, and of such 
improper laws as are closely analogous to the proper, under three 
capital classes. 1. The law of God, or the laws of God. 2. Po- 
sitive law, or positive laws. .3. Positive morality, rules of positive 

c 2 

lii CONTRMIB. 

mondity, or poaitiTe moral rules. — ^Explanation of tho cxpreanons 
poMve law and poMve snorott^. — ^The connexion of the pre- 
sent (the fifth) lecture with the firsty aecond^ third, fourth, and 
Bixth.— Explanation of the following expressiona: tIz. science of 
juriapmdenoe and Mience of pomUv nwraUiy ; science of ethics or 
deoidohgyf sdenee of Ipguiatimf and $cienee of ntorak— Meaning 
of the epithet jfood or had as applied to a hunuin law. — ^Meaning 
of the epithet good as applied to the law of God. — ^The expreseion 
law of naiuref or naiaral law, has two disparate meanings. It 
aignifies the law of Ood, or a portion of positive law and positive 
morality.^-The essentials of a law properly so called, together 
with certain conseqnences which those essentials import — The 
laws of God, and positive laws, are laws properly so called. — ^Thu 
generic character of positive moral rules. — Of positive moral 
rules, some are laws proper, but others are laws improper. — The 
positive moral rules which are laws properly so called, are com- 
mands. — Laws set by men, as private persons, in pursuance of legal 
rights. — The positive, moral rules which are laws improperly so 
called, are laws set or\ imposed by general opifiion, — A law set or 
imposed by general opinion, is merely the opinion or sentiment of 
an indeierminaU body 'of persons in regard to a kind of conduct. 
— A brief statement of the analogy between a law proper and a 
law set or imposed by general opinion. — Distinction between a de- 
tenninate, and an indetermifuite body of single or individual per- 
sons. — Laws set by general opinion, or opinions or sentiments of 
indeterminate bodies, afe the only opinions or sentiments that have 
gotten the name of la^s. But an opinion or sentiment held or felt 
by an ind ivi dual, or by all the members of a certain aggregate, 
may be as doaely analogous to a law proper as the opinion or' 
sentiment of an indetorminate body. — ^The foregoing distribution 
of laws proper, and of such improper laws as are closely analogous 
to the proper, briefly recapitulated.— The sanctions, proper and 
improper, by which those laws are respectively enforced ; tho du- 
ties, proper and improper, which those laws respectively impose ; 
and tlie rights, proper and improper, which those laws respectively 
confer. — The law of God, positive law, and positive morality, 
sometimes ooindds, sometimes do not coincide, and sometimes 
cor^Uot, — ^The acta and forbearances, which, according to the 
theory of utility, are objects of the law of God : and the acts and 
forbearances, which, according to the same theory, ought to be 
objects respectlTely of positive morality and law.— The foregoing 
diatributiaa of laws proper, and of such improper laws as are 
closely analogOQS to the proper, tallies, in the main, with a divi- 
sion of laws which ia given incidentally by Locke in his Es^y 
on Human Understanding.— Laws metaphoricol or figurative. 

CONTENTS. liii 

— The common and negative nature of lawa of Uie class. — The 
common and negative nature of laws metaphorical or figurativci 
shown by examples. — Laws metaphorical or' figurative are often 
blended and confounded with la\V8 imperative and proper. — Phy- 
sical or natural sanctions. — In strictness, declaratory Jaws, laws 
repealing laws, and laws of imperfect obligation (in the sense of 
the Roman jurists), ought to be classed respectively with laws 
metaphorical or figurative, and rules of positive morality. taqe lOi) 

LECTURE VI. 

The connexion of the sixth lecture with the first, second, third, fourth, 
and fifth. — The distinguishing marks of sovereignty and indepen- 
dent political society. — ^The relotion of sovereignty and subjec- 
tion. — Strictly speaking, the sovereign portion of the society, and 
not the society itself, is independent, sovereign, or nuprcme. — In 
order that a given society may form a society political and ^iide- 
pendent, the two distinguishing marks which ore mentioned above 
must unite. — A society independent but natural. — Society formed 
by the intercourse of independent political societies. — A society 
political but subordinate. — A society not political, but forming a 
limb or member of a society political and independent. — The de- 
finition of the abstract term independent political sociiiy (inclu- 
ding the definition of the correlative term sovereignty) cannot bo 
rendered in expressions of perfectly precise import, and is there- 
fore -a iallible test of specific or particular cases. — In order tliat an 
independent society may form a society political, it must not fall 
short of a number which cannot be fixed with precision, but 
which may be called considerable, or not extremely minute. — 
Certain of the definitions of the term eovereu/tUi/j and of the im- 
plied or correlative term independetU political mcivti/f which have 
been given by writers of celebrity .-^The ensuing portion of the 
present lecture is concerned with the following topics. I. The 
forms of supreme government 2. The limits of sovereign power. 
3. The origin of government or the origin of political society. — 
The forms of supreme government. — Every supreme government 
is a motuxrchy (properly so called), or an aristocracy (in the ge- 
neric meaning of the expression). In other words, it is a govern- 
ment of (me, or a government of a number, — Of such distinctions 
between aristocracies as are founded on diHerences between the 
proportions which the number of the sovereign Ixxly may bear to 
the number of the community. — Of such distinctions between 
aristocracies as are founded on difierences betvyeeu the modes 
wherein the sovereign number may share the sovi*ivi«,ni powern. — 
Of such aristocracies as are stvled limital momtn/ties. — Various 

liv CONTENTS. 

meanings of the following terms : 4. The tenu ^ sovereign/* or 
" the sovereign." 2. The term " repuhlic," or " commonwealth." 
3. The term '^ state," ot^the state." 4. The term " nation."-.Of 
the exercise of soTereign powers, by a monarch or sovereign body, 
through political subordinates or delegates representing their so- 
vereign author.— Of the distinction of sovereign, and other poli- 
tical powers, into such as are leffi^aiive, and such as are executive 
or admmistrathe, — ^The true natures of the communities or go- 
vernments which are styled by writers on positive international 
law half eovereiffn daU% — The nature of a composite state, or a 
gttpreme federal govemwifint : with the nature of a system of con-' 
federated dates, or a jfiermanefU ewrfedtracy of aipretne govern- 
f/ieft^-j-Tha limits of sovereign power. — The essential difference 
of a positive law. — It fSoillows from the essential difference of a po- 
sitive law, and from the nature of sovereignty and independent 
political society, that the power of a monarch properly so called, 
or the power of a sovereign number in its collegiate and sovereign 
capacity, ismcapable of legal limitation. — ^Attempts of sovereigns 
to oblige themselves, or to oblige the successors to their sorereign 
powers. — ^The meamng^ of the epithet unconstitutional, as it is 
contradistinguished to the epithet illegal, and as it is applied to 
conduct of a monsrch, or to conduct of a sovereign number in its 
collegiate and sovereign capacity. — ^The meaning of Ilobbes^s pro- 
position, that ''no law can be unjust" — Just or un/wt, justice or 
iujtutice, is a term of relative and varying import — Considered 
severally, the members of a sovereign body are in a state of sub- 
jection to the body, and may therefore be legally bound, even as 
members of the body, by laws of which it is the author. — Confu- 
8ionof"M,"or '^ ts lurf, " with "oi^A^tobe," or ^^ ought not to 
be." — The nature of political or civil liberty, together with the 
supposed difference between free and despotic governments. — 
^^^ly it has been doubted, that the power of a sovereign is inca- 
palile of legal limitation. — ^The proposition is asserted expressly 
by renowned political writers of opposite parties or sects. — A so- 
vereign government of one, or a sovereign government of a num- 
ber in its collegiate and sovereign capacity, has no legal eights 
(in the proper acceptation of the term) against its otcn subjects, — 
** Right is might"—" Right " as meaning " faculty," and " right" 
as meaning "justice." — "Right" ss meaning "faculty," and 
" right " as meaning " law." — From an appearance of a sovei^ign 
government before a tribunal of its own, we cannot infer that the 
government lies under legal duties, or has legal rights against its 
owD subjects. — Though a sovereign government of one, or a so- 
vereign government of a number in its collegiate and sovereign 
capacity, cannot have legal rights against its own subjects, it may 

CONTENTS. Iv 

hhve a legal rigbt against a subject or subjects of another sove- 
reign govenimei^-^Tbe original causes of political government 
and society. — ^Tbe proper purpose or end of political government 
and society, or the purpose or end for which they ought to exist. 
The position ''that every government continues through the 
people's comenif** and the position^ ''that every government arises 
through the people's consent,** exomised and explained. — The hy- 
pothesis of the orif/iftal covenant or the fundamental civil pact.-^ 
The distinction of sovereign governments into governments de 
Jure and governments dc facto page lOS 

AN OUTLINE 

A COURSE OF LECTURES 

GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE, 

THE PHILOSOPHY OF POSITIVE LAW. 

**Dam potentes uliad aguDt, juriscoDSulti emditi, prudcntcii, Wno animati, 
coDfeimnt eipita pnTatim, cogitcotque de jure coiuititucndo, ut ri-ddant certius 
qiuna nunc: po8»ct is labor pneludoru priucipum auctorituti." — LKiitNiTX. 

.■*,rt<w»«,4«*ij5ft<- ••<•■* ■ • , ' . <— ..c •».■'•!'... ^., .■:"%• ^'z 

[In the first edition of this Work the following passage is inserted in 
the Preface. 

In 1831 I published an Outline of my Course : Which 
outline, carefully corrected and somewhat enlarged, I 
append to the following treatise. For the following trea- 
tise is a detached portion of the Course : And unless the 
disquisitions composing the treatise be viewed with their 
relations to the subject and scope of the Course, and the 
arrangement which I give to the subject, their pertinence 
and importance can ha^y be seen completely. To lighten 
to the reader the labour of catching the arrangement, I 
have placed, at the end of the Outline, an Abstract of the 
Outline itself. 

As the Outline relates not only to the matter of the present Volume, 
but to the entire Course, it has been thought advisable to prefix, instead 
of appending it. — S. A.] 

OUTLINE OP THE COUBSE OP LECTURES. lix 

PRELIMINARY EXPLANATIONS. 

I. I shall determine the province of jurisprudence. 

n. Having determined the province of jurisprudence, 1 
shall distinguish general jurisprudence, or the philosophy of 
positive law, from what may be styled particular jurispru- 
dence, or the science of particular law : that is to say, the 
science of any such system of positive law as now actually 
obtains, or once actually obtained, in a specifically deter- 
mined nation, or specifically determined nations. 

Note. — Of all the concise expressions which I have turned in my mind, 
'' the philosophy of positive law *' indicates the most significantly the 
subject and scope of my Course. I have borrowed the expression from 
a treatise by Hugo, a celebrated professor of jurisprudence in the Uni- 
vendty of Gottingen, and the author of an excellent history of the Roman 
Law. Although the treatise in question is entitled '^ the law of nature,** 
it is not concerned with the law of nature in the usual meaning of the 
term. In the language of the author, it is concerned with " the law of 
nature, as a philosophy of positive law," But though this last expression 
is happily chosen, the subject and scope of the treatise are conceived 
indistinctly. General jurisprudence, or the philosophy of positive law, is 
blended and confounded, from the b^inning to the end of the book, with 
the portion of deontology or ethics, which is styled the science of legisla- 
tion. Now general jurisprudence, or the philosophy of positive law, is 
not coneemed directly with the science of legislation. It is concerned 
directly with principles and distinctions which are common to various 
systems of particular and positive law ; and which each of those various 
systems inevitably involves, let it be worthy of praise or blame, or let it 
accord or not with an assumed measure or test Or (changing the phrase) 
general jurisprudence, or the philosophy of positive law, is concerned with 
law as it necessarily is, rather than with law as it ought to be : witli law as 
it must be, be it good or bad^ rather than with law as it must be, if it be good. 

The subject and scope of general jurisprudence, as contradistinguished 
to particular jurisprudence, are well expressed by Hobbes in tliat depart* 
ment of his Leviathan which is concerned with civil (or positive) laws. 
** By civil laws (says he), I understand the laws, that men are therefore 
bound to observe, because they are members, not of this or tliat common- 
wealth in particular, but of a commonwciilth. For the kn(»\vlc(lge of par- 
ticular laws belongeth to them that profess the study of the hiws of their 
8e>cnd countries: but the knowledge of civil laws in peiicnil, to any 

Ix OUTUNE OF THE 

man. The ancient law of Rome vras called their * civil law ' from the word 
civitas, which aignifiea a commonwealth : And those countries which, hav- 
ing been under the Roman empire, and governed by that law, still retain 
such part thereof as they think fit, call that port the ' civil law,* to distin- * 
guish it firom the rest of their own civil laws. But that is not it I intend 
to speak of. My design is to show, not what is law here or there, but what 
is law : as Plato, Aristotle, Cioero, and divers others have done, without 
taking upon them the profendon of the study of the law.*' 

Having distinguished general from particular jurispru- 
dence, I shall show that the study of the former is a neces-- 
sary or useful preparative to the study of the science of 
legislation. I shall also endeavour to show, that the study 
of general jurisprudence might precede or accompany with 
advantage the study of particular systems of positive law. 

Note, — ^Expounding the principles and distinctions which are the appro- 
priate matter of general jurisfjorudence, I shall present them abstracted or 
detached from every particular system. But when such a principle or dis- 
tinction, as so abstracted or detached, may seem to need exemplification, 
I shall also endeavour to present it with one or both of the forms wherein 
it respectively appears in the two particular systems which I have studied 
with some acciuracy : namely, the Roman Law, and the Law of England. 

m. Having determined the province of jurisprudence, 
and distinguished general from particular jurisprudence, I 
shall analyze certain notions which meet us at every step, 
as we travel through the science of law. Of these leading 
notions, or these leading expressions, the most important 
and remarkable are the following : — 

Person and Thing. Fact or Event, and Incident. Act, 
Forbearance, and Omission. 

L^al Duty, relative or absolute. Legal Eight. Legal 
Bights in rem, with their corresponding Offices ; and Legal 
Eights in personam^ with their corresponding Obligations. 
Legol Privilege. Permission (by the Sovereign or State), 
and Political or Civil Liberty. 

Delict or Injury, dvil or criminal 

Culpa (in the largest sense of the term), or The Groimds 
or Causes of Imputation : a notion involving the notions of 

COUKSE OF LECTUEES. Ixi 

Wish or. Desire, of Wish as Motive, and of Wisli as Will ; 
of Intention, of Negligence, of Heedlessness, and of Teme- 
rity or Eashness. The Grounds or Causes of Non-Imputa- 
Hon: e.g. Infancy, Insanity, Ignorantia Facti^ Ignorantia 
Jurisy Casus or Mishap, Vis or Compulsion. 
L^al Sanction, civil or criminal. 

Note, — Though every right implies a corresponding duty, every duty 
dees not imply a corresponding right. I therefore distinguish duties into 
relative and absolute. A relative duty is implied by a right to which 
that duty answers. An absolute duty docs not answer, or is not imi)lied 
by, an answering right. 

Persons are capable of taking rights, and are also capiibic of incurring 
duties. But a person, not unfrequently, is merely the subject of a right 
which resides in another person, and avails against third persons. And 
considered as the subject of& right, and of the corresponding duty, a per- 
son is neither invested with a right, nor subject to a duty. Considered 
as the subject of a right, and of the corresponding duty, a person occupies 
a position analogous to that of a thing. Such, for example, is the position 
of the servant or apprentice, in respect of the master^s right to the servant 
or apprentice, against third persons or strangers. 

Things are euhjects of rights, and are. also subjects of the duties to which 
those rights correspond. But, setting aside a fiction which I shall state 
and explain in my lectures, things are incapable of taking rights, and are 
also incapable of incurring duties. 

Having determined the province of jurisprudence, dis- 
tinguished generally from particular jurispnidence, and ana- 
lyzed certain notions which pervade the science of law, I 
shall leave that merely prefatory, though necessaiy or in- 
evitable matter, and shall proceed, in due order, to tlie 
various departments and sub-departments under which I 
arrange or distribute the body or bulk of my subject. 

Now, the principal of my main division, and the basis of 
the main departments which result from that main division, 
may be found in the following considerations. 

First: Subject to slight correctives, the essential differ- 
ence of a positive law (or the difference that severs it from 
a law which is not a positive law) may be put in the follow- 
ing manner. Every positive law, or every law simply and 

-ww^r: 

Ixii OUTUNB OF THE 

stxictly so called, is set by a sovereign individual, or a sove- 
reign body of individuals, to a person or persons in a state 
of subjection to its authoi:. But some positive laws are 
set by the sovereign immediately : while others are set im- 
mediately by subordinate political superiors, or by private 
persons in pursuance of legal rights. In consequence of 
which differences betw^^ their immediate authors, laws are 
said to emanate from different 5(>wrre5 or /(?wntom5. 

Secondly : A law may b^n or end in different modes^ 
whether it be set immediately by the sovereign one or 
number, or by a party in a state of subjection to the 
sovereign. 

Thirdly : Independently of the differences between their 
sources, and between the modes in which they begin and 
end, laws are calculated or intended to accomplish different 
purposeSj and are also conversant about different subjects. 

Being set or established by different immediate autfiors^ 
beginning and ending in different modes^ being calculated 
or intended to accomplish different purposes^ and being con- 
versant about different subjects^ law may be viewed from two 
distinct aspects, and may also be aptly distributed under 
the two main departments which are sketched or indicated 
below. 

In the first of those main departments, law will be con- 
sidered with reference to its sources^ and with reference to 
the modes in which it begins and ends. In the second of 
those main departments, law will be considered with re- 
ference to its purposes^ and with reference to the subjects 
about which it is conversant. 

OOUBSB OF LECTURES. Ixiii 

LAW CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO ITS SOURCES, 
AND WITH REFERENCE TO THE MODES IN WHICH 
IT BEGINS AND ENDS. 

I. A law or rule may be set immediately by the sovereign, 
or by a party in a state of subjection to the sovereign. 
Hence the distinction between written and unwritten law, 
as the terms are frequently used in treatises by modern 
civilians, or by writers on general jurisprudence. And 
hence the equivalent distinction between promulged and 
unpromulged law, as the tenns are frequently used in the 
same treatises. As the terms are frequently used in those 
treatises, written law, or promulged law, is law of which the 
sovereign is the immediate author: whilst unwritten law, 
or unpromulged law, is law which flows immediately from 
some subordinate source. 

The two distinctions, as taken in that sense, will be ex- 
pounded in the lectures : wherein I sliall explain the widely 
different senses which often are annexed to the terms. 

n. Whether it be set immediately by the sovereign one' 
or nxmiber, or by some poUtical superior in a state of 
subjection to the sovereign, a law or rule may be set or 
established in either of two modes : namely, in the properly 
legislative mode (or in the way of direct legislation), or in 
the improperly legislative mode (or in the way of judicial 
l^islation). 

A law established in tlie properly legislative mode is set 
by its author or maker as a law. The direct or proper 
purpose of its author or maker is the establishment of the 
law which is made. — A rule established in the improperly 
legislative mode is assumed by its author or maker as the 
ground of a judicial decision. The direct or proper purpose 
is the decision of a case, and not the ^^\]ixb\\^\\\\\^\\\. vil nXw^ 

r4^l ' Lf W li i 

Ixiv OUTUNE OF THE 

rule which is assumed and applied to tlie case. The author 
or maker of the rule legislates as properly judging j and not 
CIS properly legislating. 

As I have intimated above, the sovereign one or num- 
ber, or any political superior in a state of subjection to 
the sovereign, may legislate in either of these modes. For 
example : The Eoman Emperors or Princes, during the 
Lower Empire, were avowedly, as well as substantially, 
sovereign in the Roman World : and yet they established 
laws by the decretes \Yhich they gave judicially, as well as 
by the edictal constitutions which they made in their le- 
gislative character. And, on the other hand, tlie Roman 
Praitors, who were properly subject judges, established laws 
in tlie way of direct legislation, by the edicts which they 
published on their accession to office. The rules of prac- 
tice made by the English Courts, are also examples of laws 
established in the legislative mode, by subordinate political 
superiors. 

Inasmuch as its true essentials are frequently miscon- 
ceived, I shall endeavour to analyze accurately the distinc- 
tion which I have now suggested : namely, law made directly^ 
or in the properly l^islative manner ; an djaw_made j udi- 
ciqlhfj or in the way of improper le^ alfttj^" 

Having stated the essential differences of the two kinds 
of law, I shall briefly compare their respective merits and 
defects, and then briefly consider the related question of 
codification. 

ni. Every positive law, or rule of positive law, exists as 
such by the pleasure of the sovereign. As such^ it is made 
immediately by the sovereign, or by a party in a state of 
subjection to the sovereign, in one of the two modes which 
are indicated by the foregoing article. As such^ it flows 
from one or another of those sources. 

But by the classical Roman jurists, by Sir William Black- 
stone, and by numerous other writers on particular or 
general jurisprudence^ the occasxo'M of laws, or the motives 

COUBSE OF LECrrURES. Ixv 

to their* establishment,, are frequently confounded with their 
sources or fountains. 

The following examples will show the nature of the error 
to which I have now adverted. 

The prevalence of a custom amongst the governed, may i 
determine the sovereign, or some political superior in a / 
state of subjection to the sovereign, to transmute the cus- ' 
tom into positive law. Respect for a law-writer whose works 
have gotten reputation, may determine the legislator or 
judge to adopt his opinions, or to turn the speculative con- 
clusions of a private man into actually binding rules. The 
prevalence of a practice amongst private practitioners of 
the law, may determine the legislator or judge to impart the 
force of law to the practice which they obser\'e spontane- 
ously. — Now till the legislator or judge impress them with 
the character of law, the custom is noticing more than a rule 
of positive morality ; the conclusions are the speculative 
conclusions of a private or unauthorised writer; and tlie 
practice is the spontaneous practice of private practitioners. 
But the classical lloman jurists, Sir William Blackstonc, 
and a host of other writers, fancy that a rule of law made by 
judicial decision on a preexisting custom, exists a.<? positive 
law^ apart from the legislature or judge, by tlic in.stituti<jn 
of the private persons who observed it in its customary 
state. And the classical Roman jurists have the same or 
a like conceit with regard to the rules of law which are 
fashioned by judicial decision on the conclusions or prac- 
tices of private writers or practitioners. They ascribe 
their existence as law to the authority of the writers or 
practitioners, and not to the sovereign, or the represen- 
tatives of the sovereign, who clothed them with the legal 
sanction. 

With a view to these conceits, and to others equally ab- 
surd, I shall examine the natures of the following kinds of 
law. 

1. Law fashioned by judicial deciaioxv \\\>oxv Y^<^iS&\xw:^ 

VOL, I. cl 

Ixvi OUTUNB OF THE 

custom : or (borrowing the language of the classical Boman 
jurists) jW 77im6tid om^ftftitom. 

2. Ijblw fiEishioned by judicial decision upon opinions and 
practices of private or unauthorised lawyers : or (borrowing 
the language of the classical Eoman jiuists)yu^ prudeniXbus 
campositum. 

Examining customary law, or law moribus consHtuiam^ I 
shall advert to the essential differences between general cus- 
tomary laws, and such customary laws as are local or parti- 
cular : or (speaking more properly) between the customary 
laws which the tribunals know judicially^ and the customary 
laws which the tribunals will not notice, unless their exist- 
ence be proved. 

TV. Natural law^ as the term is commonly understood by 
modem writers upon jurisprudence, has two disparate 
meanings. It signifies the law of God, or a portion of po? 
eitive law and positive moraUty. 

The law natural which is parcel of law positive, is ana- 
logous to law moribus constitutum^ and to law prudentibua 
compositum. For natural lav, considered as a portion of 
positive, is positive law fashioned by the legislator or judge 
on pre^zistixig law^ another nature : namely, on the law 
of God truly or erroneously apprehended ; or on rules of 
positive morality which are not peculiar to any nation or 
age, but obtain, or are thought to obtain, in all nations and 
ages. 

Accordingly, from law moribus constitutumj and law pru- 
dentibus compositunij I shall pass, by an obvious and easy 
transition, to the law natural which is parcel of law posi- 
tive. Handling the topic, I shall show the analogy borne 
by that natural law to law moribus constitutum, and law 
prudentibus compositum. Canvassing the same topic, I shall 
sh'ow that the supposition of a natural law (considered as 
a portion of positive law and morality) involves the inter- 
mediate hypothesis which is compounded of the theory of 
utility and the hypothesis of a moral sense: that, assu- 

COUBSB OF LECTURES. IxVll 

ming the pure hypothesis of a moral sense, or assuming 
the pure theory of general utility, the distinction of human 
rules into natural and positive, were utterly senseless, or 
utterly purposeless. 

With a view to my subsequent outline of the jus proe- 
tarium^ I shall give an historical sketch of the jus gentium, 
as it was understood by the earlier Roman lawyers. The 
jus gentium of the earlier Eoman lawyers, I shall distin- 
. guish from the jus naturale, or jus gentium, which makes 
so conspicuous a figure in the van of the Institutes and 
Pandects. I shall show that the jus gentium of the earlier 
Eoman lawyers is peculiar to the Roman Law ; whilst the 
latter is equivalent to natural law, as the term is commonly 
understood by modern writers upon jurispriulence. I shall 
show that the jus gentium of the earlier Roman lawyers was 
•a purely practical notion : that it arose from the peculiar 
relations borne by the Urbs Roma to her dependent allies 
and subject provinces. I shall show that the latter is a 
purely speculative notion : that it was stolen by tlie jurists 
styled classical, and by them imported into the Roman 
law, from certain muddy hypotheses of certain Greek phi- 
losophers, touching the measure or test of positive law and 
morality. 

V. IVom the^u^ moribus constitutum, the^'w^ prudentibvs 
compositum, the natural law of modern writers upon ju- 
risprudence, and the equivalent ju^s gentium of the jurists 
styled classical, I shall pass to the distinction between law 
of domestic growth and law of foreign original : the so 
called ** jus receptum.'* For here also, tlie sources or foun- 
tains of laws are commonly confounded with their occa- 
sions, or with the motives to their establislntient. As ob- 
taining in the nation wherein it is received, the so called jus 
receptum is not of foreign original, but is law of domestic 
manufacture or domestic growth. As obtaining in the na- 
tion wherein it is received, it is law fashioned b^ tVve Uv 
bunab of that nation on law of a foreign av\i\ \\v\vi^vi\Aw\. 

d2 

Ixviii OUTLINE OP THE 

community. For essample : The Boman Law, m it obtains 
in Germany J is not law emanating from Eoman lawgivers. 
It is law made by German lawgivers, but moulded by its 
German authors on a Roman original or model. 

Passing from the jtis receptum^ I shall advert to the po- 
sitive law, closely analogous to the jus receptum^ which is 
fashioned by judicial decision on positive international mo- 
rality. 

YL Equity sometimes signifies a species of law. But, as 
used in any of the significations which are oftener and more 
properly annexed to it, it is not the name of a species of 
law. 

Of the latter significations, that which is most remark- 
able, and which I shall therefore explain with some parti- 
cularity, may be stated briefly thus. — Equity often signifies 
the analogy^ proportion^ or equality^ which is the basis of 
the spurious interpretation styled extensive. 

As signifying a species of law, the term equity is con- 
fined exclusively to Eoman and English jurisprudence. The 
law, moreover, of which it is the name in the language of 
English jurisprudence, widely differs from the law which 
it signifies in the language of the Eoman. Consequently, 
its import is not involved by the principles of general juris- 
prudence, but lies in the particular histories of those par- 
ticular systems. But since this talk of equity has obscured 
the rationale of law, and since an attempt should be made 
to dispel that thick obscurity, I shall here digress, for a 
time, from the region of philosophical or general, to the 
peculiar and narrower provinces of Eoman and English 
jurisprudence. Having sketched an historical outline of the 
jus prcetorium (which is intimately connected with the jus 
gentium^ as this last was understood by the earlier Eoman 
lawyers), I shall briefly compare the equity dispensed by 
the Eoman Praetors, with the equity administered by the 
English Chancellors.* From which brief comparison it will 
amply appear, that the distinction of positive law into law 

COURSE OP LECTURES. Ixix 

and equity (or jus civile and ju3 proetoriuni) arose in the 
fioman, and also in the English nation, from circumstances 
purely anomalous, or peculiar to the particular community. 
And from which brief comparison it will also amply appear, 
that the distinction is utterly senseless, when tried by ge- 
neral principles; and is one prolific source of the needless 
and vicious complexness which disgraces the systems of ju- 
risprudence wherein the distinction obtains. 

VIL From the sources of law, and the modes wherein it 
begins, I shall turn to the modes wherein it is abrogated, or 
wherein it otherwbe ends. 

IXX OUTUNE OF THB 

LAW CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO ITS PUR- 
POSES, AND WITH REFERENCE TO THE SUBJECTS 
ABOUT WmCH IT IS CONVERSANT. 

I. There are certain rights and dutiea^ with certain eapor 
cities and incapaciti^ to take rights and incur duties, by 
which persons^ as subjects of law, are variously determined 
to certain classes. 

The rights, duties, capacities, or incapacities, which de- 
termine a given person to any of these classes, constitute a 
condition or status which the person occupies, or with which 
the pei-son is invested. 

One and the same person may belong to many of these 
classes, or may occupy, or be invested with, many condi- 
tions or status. For example : One and the same person, at 
one and the same time, may be son, husband, father, guar- 
dian, advocate or trader, member of a sovereign number, 
and minister of that sovereign body. And various status, or 
various conditions, may thus meet or unite, in one and the 
same person, in infinitely various ways. 

The rights, duties, capacities and incapacities, whereof 
conditions or status are respectively constituted or com- 
posed, are the appropriate matter of the department of law 
which commonly is named the Law of Persons : Jus quod 
ad Personas pertinet Less ambiguously and more signifi- 
cantly, that department of law might be styled the " Law 
of Status.'' For though the term persona is properly sy- 
nonymous with the term status, such is not its usual and 
more commodious signification. Taken with its usual and 
more commodious signification, it denotes homo or man (in- 
cluding woman and child), or it denotes an aggregate or 
collection of men. Taken with its usual and more commo- 
dious signification, it does not denote a status with which a 
man is invested. 

The department, then, of law which is styled the Law of 

CX)URSB OP LECTURES. Ixxi 

Persons, is conversant about status or conditions : or (ex- 
pressing the same thing in another form) it is conversant 
about persons (meaning men) as bearing or invested with 
persona (meaning status or conditions). 

The department of law which is opposed to the Law of 
Persons, is commonly named the Law of Things : Jus' quod 
ad Res pertinet. Tlie explanation of which name needs a 
disquisition too long for the present outline.* 

The Law of Things is conversant about matter which 
may be described briefly in the following manner : 

It is conversant about rights and duties, capacities and 
incapacities, as abstracted from the rights and duties, ca- 
pacities and incapacities, whereof conditions or' status are 
• respectively constituted or composed : or (changing the ex- 
pression) it is conversant about rights and duties, capacities 
and incapacities, in so far as they are not constituent or 
component elements of status or conditions. It is also 
conversant about persons, in so far as they are invested 
with, or in so far as they are subject to, the rights and 
duties, capacities and incapacities, with which it is occu- 
pied or concerned. — It is conversant about acts, forbear- 
ances, and things, in so far as they arc objects and subjects 
of rights and duties, and in so fur as they are not con- 
sidered in the Law of Persons : for acts, forbearances, and 
things, are so far considered in the Law of Persons, as 
they are objects and subjects of the rights and duties 
with which the Law of Persons is occupied or concerned. 
It is also conversant about persons as subjects of rights 
and duties, in so far as they are not considered from that 
aspect in the Law of Persons or Status. 

n. Considered with reference to its different purposes, 
and with reference to the different subjects about wliich it 
is conversant, law may be divided in various ways. Hut of 

• "The explanation to be iunerted from Lecture XLII. See Tliibaut, 
* Versuche Uber einzelne Theile der Tlieorie dea Rechts/ vol. ii. p. 1, et 
■ed.*' (MS. note by the Author.) 

• "•i^^inww" 

bndi OUTUNE of thb 

all the main divisions which it will admit, the least incoa- 
venient is the ancient division, the import whereof I have 
now attempted to suggest. Considered with reference to its 
purposes and subjects, law vdll therefore be divided, in 
the Course which I intend, into Law of Things and Law of 
Persons. In the institutional or elementary w^tings of the 
classical Soman jurists, who were the authors or inventors 
of this celebrated division, the Law of Persons preceded 
the Law of Things. But for various reasons to which I 
shall advert immediately, I be^n with the Law of Things, 
and conclude with the Law of Persons. 

But before I consider the Law of Things, or the Law 
of Persons, I shall state and illustrate tlie import and 
uses of this ancient and celebrated divisioil. And in order 
to tjiat end, I shall proceed in the followiug manner. — 
1. I shall try to define or determine the notion of status 
or condition : for that essential or necessary notion is the 
basis or principle of the division. 2. I shall sliow that 
the division is merely arbitrary, although it is more com- 
modious than otlier divisions, and altliougli the notion 
which is its basis or principle, is essential or necessary. 
3. I shall show the uses of the division ; and shall con- 
trast it with other divisions which have been, or might be 
adopted. 4. I shall state the import of the division, as it 
was conceived by its authors, the cliissi(»al lioman jurists, 
in their institutional or elementary writings. I shall show 
that their arrangement of the Roman Law often departs 
from the notion which is the basis of the division in ques- 
tion, and on which the whole of their arrangement ulti- 
mately rests. More esj^ecially, I shall show that tlie matter 
of jus actionuniy which they placed on a line with jus per- 
sonarum et rerum^ should not 1x3 put into a department 
distinct from the two last, but ought to be distributed 
under both: that the main division of law ought to be two- 
fold only, Law of Things and Law of Persons : and tliat the 
classical Roman jui'ists therefore fell into the error of co- 

COUBSE OF LECTURES. Ixxiu 

ardifiating certain species with the genera of wliich they are 
membei^s. 5. The division of law into Law of Things and 
Persons, is obscured by the conciseness and ambiguity of 
the language wherein it is commonly expressed. Of that 
obscurity I shall endeavour to clear it. 6. I shall show 
that Blackstone and otliers, probably misled by that con- 
ciseness and ambiguity, have misapprehended grossly the 
true import of the division, and have turned tliat elliptical 
and dubious language into arrant jargon. 

From the attempt which I have made above to suggest 
the import of the division, it may be inferred tliat the Law 
of Things is concerned with principles or rules which com- 
monly are more general, or more abstract, than tlie princi- 
ples or rules contained in the Law of Persons : that the 
principles or rules with which the former is concerned, 
commonly sin, by reason of that greater generality, through 
excess or defect : and that the narrower principles or 
rules contained in the latter, commonly modify the larger 
principles or rules about which the fonner is conversant. 
Now since a modification is not to be understood, if tliat 
which is modified be not foreknown, the Law of Things 
should not follow, but should precede the Law of Persons. 
For which reason, with various other reasons to be stated 
in the lectures, I consider the two departments in that 
order. 

The division in question, Hke must attempts at scientific 
arrangement, is fai* from attaining perfect distinctness. 
Its two compartments frequently blend, or frequently run 
into one another. Consequently, as I travel through the 
Law of Things, I shall often be compelled to touch, by a 
somewhat inconvenient anticipation, u[)ou a portion of the 
Law of Pei'sons. 

Note. — In his " Amilysis of the Law," which abounda with acute 
and judicious remarks, it is stated expressly by Sir Matthew Hale, that 
the Law of Thiii'^s should precede die Law of IVrsous. He aays tluit 
the studeut should begin with the jus reruin : ^* for tlio jus personaruni 

■^1^ 4 ' JEM ? . 

jboriv ' OUTLINE OF THB 

oontains m&tter proper for the stady of one that is well acquainted with 

It is worthy of remark, that the order recommended by Hale is the 
order of the Pmsaian Code. The admirable Suarez, under whose sa- 
perintendence the Code was compiled, assigns the following reason lor his 
preference of that'order to the method of the Classical Jurists. — 

'* Beflecting on the departments of law which are styled the Law of 
Persons and the Law of Things, we shall find that the two departments 
are mutually related : that each contains matters which it is neoessaiy 
we should know, befine we can know correctly the appropriate subject 
of the other.. But such of these praeognoscenda as are contained hj the 
Law of Things, are fiur more numerous and &r more weighty than such of 
these pracognoBcenda as are oontained by the Law of Persons. For where 
the subject of either is implicated with that of the other, the former is 
commonly concerned with some more general rule which, by reason 
of its greater generality, sins through excess or defect : whilst the latter 
is commonly concerned with some less general provision, by which that 
rule is pruned of its ezoesBcs^ or by which its defects are supplied." 

CQUBSE OF LECTURES. Ixxv 

LAW OF THINGS. 

L There are facts or events from which rights and duties 
arise, which are legal causes or antecedents of rights and 
duties, or of which rights and duties are legal effects or 
consequences. Tliere are also facts or events which extui- 
guish rights and duties, or on which rights and duties ter- 
minate or cease. 

The events which are causes of rights and duties, may be 
divided in the following manner: namely, into acts, forbear- 
ances, and omissions, which are violations of rights or duties, 
and events which are not violations of rights or duties. 

Acts, forbearances, and omissions, which are violations of 
rights or duties, are styled delicts^ injuries^ or offences. 

Eights and duties which are consequences of delicts, are 
sanctioning (or preventive) and remedial (or reparative). In 
other words, the ends or purposes for which they are con- 
ferred and imposed, are two : Jirst^ to prevent violations of 
rights and duties which are not consequences of delicts : se- 
candljfj to cure the evils, or repair the mischiefs, which such 
violatioDS engender. 

Bights and duties not arising from deHcts, may be dis- 
tinguished from rights and duties which are consequences 
of delicts, by the name of primary (or principal). Rights 
and duties arising from delicts, may be distinguished from 
rights and duties which are not consequences of delicts, by 
Uie name of sanctioning (or secondary). 

My main division of the matter of tlie I^aw of Things, 
rests upon tlie basis or principle at which I have now 
pointed: namely, the distinction of rights and of duties 
(relative and absolute), into primai*y and mnctionimj. Ac- 
cordingly, I distribute tlie matter of the Law of Things, 
under two capital departments. — 1. Primanj rights, with 
primary relative duties. 2. Sanctionintj riglits, with sanc- 
tioning duties (relative and absolute): Delicts or injuries 

.,..,..«**>:»«.;i iTpwwsrsT- 

bcxvi OUTUNE OF THE 

(which are causes or antecedents of sanctioning rights and 
duties) included. 

n. The basis of my main division of the matter of the 
Law of Things, with the two capital departments under 
which I distribute that matter, I have now stated or sug- 
gested. Many of the sub-departments into which those ca- 
pital departments immediately sever, rest upon a principle 
of division which I shall expound in my preliminary lec- 
tures, but which I may indicate commodiously at the pre- 
sent point of my outline. 

The principle consists of an extensive and important dis- 
tinction, for which, as conceived with the whole of its extent 
and importance^ we are indebted to the penetrating acute- 
ness of the classical Koman jurists, and to that good sense, 
or rectitude of mind, which commonly guided their acute- 
ness to true and useful results. Every student of law who 
aspires to master its principles, should seize the distinction 
in question adequately as well as clearly ; and should not 
be satisfied with catching it, as it obtains here or there. 
For the difference whereon it rests, runs through every 
department of every system of jurisprudence : although, in 
our own system, the difference is far from being obvious j 
and although it is impossible to express it, sufficiently and 
concisely at once, without a resort to terms which are un- 
known to the English law, and which may appear uncouth 
and ridiculous to a merely English Lawyer. 

The distinction in question is a distinction whic^li obtains 
between rights^ and which therefore obtains, by necessary 
implication, between the relative duties answering to rights. 
It may be stated thus : 

Every right, be it primary or sanctioning, resides in a 
person or persons determinate or certain : moaning by a 
person determinate, a person determined specifically. And 
it avails against a person or persons (or answers to a relative 
duty incumbent on a person or persons) other than the per- 
son or persons in whom it resides. 

COURSE OP LECTURES. IxXVli 

But though every right resides in a person or persons 
determinate, a right may avail against a person or persons 
determinate, or against the world at large. In other words, 
the duty implied by the right, or to which the right corre- 
sponds, may lie exclusively on a person or persons deter- 
minate, or it may lie upon persons generally and indeter- 
minately. 

Duties answering to rights which avail against the world 
at large, are negative: that is to say, duties to forbear. 
Of duties answering to rights which avail against persons 
determinate, some are negative, but others, and most, are 
positive : that is to say, duties to do or perform. 

A right avaiUng against the world at large is defined by 
Grotius and others, thus ; facidtas personce competens sine 
respectu ad certam personam : a right availing exclusively 
against a person or persons determinate, thu:^ ; facidtas per- 
sonce competens in certam personam. 

By most of the modern Civilians, though not by the 
Boman Lawyers, fights availing against the world at large 
are named jura in rem : rights availing against persons de- 
terminate, ^wra in personam^ or jura in personam certam. 
And by these different names of rights in rem and riglits iji 
personam^ I dibtinguish rights of the former, i'vom rights of 
the latter description. — My reasons for adopting them in 
preference to others, I shall assign in my lectures : wherein 
I shall endeavour to clear them of obscurity, and shall con- 
trast them with the equivalent names of the Roman Lawyers. 

The relative duties answering to rights zn rem^ might bo 
distinguished conveniently from duties of the opposite class, 
by the appropriate name of offices : the relative duties an- 
swering to rights in personam^ by the appropriate name 
of obligations. 

Note. — 'In the writings of the Roman Lawyers, the term ohligatio is 
never applied to a duty which answers to a right in ran. But, since 
they have no name appropriate to a right in personam ^ tlicy use the term. 
ohligatio to denote a right of the chiBS, as well aa lo dcitioV^i \\\^ duUj ^\\\0a 

.^-fh«J,.'«M^'lbt< 

IXXviii OUTLINB OF THB 

the right implies. Jub m rem or jura in rtm^ thej style dominiuim or 
dominia (with the laxger meaning of ihe term) ; and to daminia (with that 
more extennre meaniqg), they oppose jura in personam^ by the name of 
obligatianei. ' 

To exemplify the leading distinction which I have stated 
in general expressions, I advert (with the brevity which 
the limits of an outline command) to the right of pro- 
perty or ownership, and to rights arising from contracts. 
— ^The proprietor or o.wner of a given subject, has a right 
in rem : since the relative duty answering to his right, is 
a duty incumbent upon persons generally and indetermi- 
nately to forbear from all such acts as would hinder hb 
dealing with the subject agreeably to the lawful purposes 
for which his right exists. But if I singly, or I and you 
jointly, be obliged by bond or covenant to pay a sum of 
money, or not to exercise a calling within conventional 
limits, the right of the obligee or covenantee is a right m 
personam : the relative duty answering to his right, being 
an obligation to do or to forbear, which lies exclusively on 
a person or persons determinate. 

ni. With the help of what I have premised, I can now 
indicate the method or order wherein I treat or consider the 
matter of the Law of Things. That method may be sug- 
gested thus : 

The matter of the Law of Things, I arrange or distribute 
under two capital departments. 

The subjects of the first of those capital departments, are 
primary rights, with primary relative duties : which I ar- 
range or distribute under four sub-departments. — 1. Rights 
in rem as existing per se^ or as not combined with rights 
in personam. 2. Bights in personam as existing per se^ or 
as not combined with rights in rem. 3. Such of the com- 
binations of rights in rem and rights in personam as are 
particular and comparatively simple. 4. Such universities 
of rights and duties (or such complex aggregates of rights 
and duties) as arise by universal succesaioxv. 

CX)URSE OP LECTURES. Ixxix 

Sanctioning rights (all of which are rights in personam)^ 
sanctioning duties (some of which are relative, but others 
of which are absolute), together with delicts or injuries 
(which are causes or antecedents of sanctioning rights and 
duties), are the subjects of the second of the capital de- 
partments under which I arrange or distribute the matter of 
the Law of Things. 

But before I proceed to those capital departments, I shall 
distribute Things^ as subjects of rights and duties, under 
their various classes. And before I proceed to those capi- 
tal departments, I shall remark generally upon Persons^ as 
subjects of rights and duties ; upon Acts and Forbearances^ 
as objects of rights and duties ; and upon Facts or Events^ 
as causes of rights and duties, or as extinguishing rights and 
duties. 

iixx OUTLINE OP TOR 

Primary Rights^ unik primary relative Duties. 

Bights in rem as exi3ting per se^ or as not 
combined with rights in personam. 

The following is the matter of this sub-department, and 
the following is the order in which that matter will be 
treated. 

L As the reader may mfer from a foregoing part of my 
outline, ajid as I shall show completely in my preliminary 
lectures, the expression in rem^ when annexed to the term 
right, does not denote that the right in question is a right 
over a thing. Instead of indicating the nature of the sub- 
ject, it points at the compass of the correlating duty. It 
denotes that the relative duty lies upon persons generally, 
and is not exclusively incumbent upon a person or persons 
determinate. In other words, it denotes that the right in 
question avails against the world at large. 

Accordingly, some . rights in rem are rights over things : 
others are rights over persons : whilst others have no sub- 
jects (persons or things) over or to which we can say they 
exist, or in which we can say they inhere. — ^For example : 
Property in a horse, property in a quantity of corn, or pro- 
perty in, or a right of way through a field, is a right in rem 
over or to a thing, a right in rem inhering in a thing^ or a 
right in rem whereof the subject is a thing. — ^The right 
of the master, against third parties, to his slave, servant, or 
apprentice, is a right in rem over or to a person. It is a 
right residing in one person, and inhering in another per- 
son as its subject. — ^The right styled a monopoly, is a right 
in rem which has no subject. There is no specific subject 
(person or thing) over or to which the right exists, or in 
which the right inheres. The officium or common duty to 
which the right corresponds, is a duty lying on the world 
at large, to forbear from selling commodities of a given de- 

COURSE OP LECTURES. Ixxxi 

sQiiptioD or class : but it is not a duty lying on the world at 
l^ge, to forbear from acts regarding deterniinately a speci- 
ficatiy determined subject. A man's right of interest in his 
reputation or good name, with a multitude of rights wliich 
I. am compelled to pass in silence, would also be i'ound, on 
analysis, to avail against the world at large, and yi^t to be 
wanting in persons and things which it were })Oirsible to 
style their subjects. 

. I shall therefore distinguish rights in rem (their answer- 
ing relative duties being implied) with reference to dilTer- 
ences between their subjects^ or between the at^i)ecls of the 
forbearances which may be styled their ohjevt^. As dis- 
tinguished with reference to those dilVerences, tlay will fall 
(as I have intimated already) into three classes. — 1. Eights 
in rem of which the subjects are things, or of wliir-h the 
objects are such forbearances as regard determinutely spe- 
cifically determined things. 2. Rights in rem of which the 
subjects are persons, or of which the objects are such for- 
be{u*ances as regard determinately specifically determined 
persons. 3. Rights in rem without specific subjects, or of 
which the objects are such forbearances as have no specific 
regard to specific things or persons. 

II. By different rights in rem over things or ])ersons, tlie 
different persons in whom they respectively reside, are em- 
powered to derive from their resj)ective subjects, dillerent 
quantities of uses or services. Or (changing the expres- 
sion) the different persons in whom they resi)ectively reside, 
are empowered to use or deal with their resj)ective subjects, 
in different degrees or to different extents. Or (changing 
the expression again) the different persons in whom they 
respectively reside, are empowered to turn or apply their 
respective subjects, to ends or purposes more or less nu- 
merous. — And such differences obtain between such rights, 
independently of differences between their respective dura- 
tions, or the respective quantities of time during which they 
are calculated to last 

VOL. L e 

Ixxxii OUTLINE OP THE 

Of such differences between such rights, the principal or 
leading one is this — 1. By virtue of some of such rights^ 
the entitled persons, or the persons in whom they reaidei 
may use or deal with the subjects of the rights, to an ex- 
tent which is incapable of exact circumscription, although it 
is not unUmited. Or (changing the expression) the entitled 
persoas may apply the subjects to purposes, the numbefr 
and classes of which cannot be defined precisely, although 
such purposes are not unrestricted. For example : The pro- 
prietor or owner is empowered to turn or apply the subject 
of his property or ownership, to uses or purposes which are 
not absolutely unlimited, but which are incapable of exact 
circumscription with regard to dass or number. The right 
of the owner, in respect of the purposes to which he may 
turn the subject, is only limited, generally and vaguely, by 
all the rights of all other persons, and by all the duties 
(absolute as well as relative) incumbent on himself. He may 
not use his own so that he injure anotlier, or so that he 
violate a duty (relative or absolute) to which he himself is 
subject. But he may turn or apply his own to every use 
or purpose which is: not inconsistent with that general and 
vague restriction. — 2. By virtue of other of such rights, 
the entitled persons, or the persons in whom they reside, 
may merely use or deal with their subjects, to an extent ex- 
actly circumscribed (at least in one direction). Or (chang- 
ing the expression) they may merely turn them to purposes 
defined in respect of number, or, at least, in respect of class. 
For example: He who has a right of way through land 
owned by another, may merely turn the land to purposes 
of a certain class, or to purposes of determined classes. He 
may cross it in the fashions settled by the grant or pne- 
scription, but those are the only purposes to which he may 
turn it lawfully. 

A right belonging to the first-mentioned kind, may be 
styled dominion^ property^ or ownership^ with the sense 
wherein dominion is opposed to servitics or easement. As 

COUBSE OF LECTURES. Ixxxiii 

contradistiDguished to a right belonging to the lirst-meii- 
tioned kind, a right belonging to the last-mentioned kind, 
may be noted by one or another of the last-mentioned 
names. — Dominion^ property^ or ownership^ is a name liable 
to objection. For, first, it may import that the right in 
question is a right of unmeasured dumtion, as well as in- 
dicate the indefinite extent of the purposes to which the 
entitled person may turn the subject. Secondly: It often 
signifies property, with the meaning wherein property is 
distinguished from the ri^ht of possession to which I shall 
advert below. Thirdly: Dominion^ with one of its mean- 
ings, is exactly coextensive with j^is in rem, and applies to 
every right which is woijiis in jiersonaiu.^Yov various rea- 
sons, which I shall produce in my lectures, a right belong- 
ing to the last-mentioned kind, is not denoted adequately 
by the ^^servitiis'* of the Roman, or by the ''casement" of 
the English Law. — But in spite of the numerous ambigui- 
ties which encumber these several terms, I think them less 
incommodious than the newly devised names by which it 
were possible to distinguish the rights of the two kinds. 
For newly devised names, however significant and deter- 
minate, commonly need as frequent explanation as the am- 
biguous but established expressions which they were in- 
tended to supplant. And newly devised names are o|)en 
to a great inconvenience from which established though 
ambiguous expressions are comi)letely exempt. They are 
open to that undiscerning, yet overwhelming ridicule, 
which is poured upon innovations in speech, by the for- 
midable confederacy of fools : who being incapable of clear 
and discriminating apprehension, cannot perceive the diffi- 
culties which the names were devised to obviate, thouj^h 
they know that their ears are tingling with novel and 
grating sounds. 

With the help of what I have premised, I can now in- 
dicate the principal matters which I shall pass in review at 
this point of my Course. — 1. I slmW cow^\\\^t \\\ ^ ^^^^sst^ 

Ixxxiv OUTLINE OP THK 

manner, such distinctions between rights in rem as are 
founded on differences between the degrees wherein the 
entitled persons may use or deal with the subjects. 2. I 
shall consider particularly that leading distinction of the 
kind, which may be marked with the opposed expressions 
dominium et servitus^ or ownership and easement :. under- 
standing the expression dominium or ownership^ as indicating 
merely the indefinite. extent of the purposes to which the en- 
titled person may turn the subject of the right. 3. I shall 
consider the various modes of dominion. or ownership, and 
shall advert to the various classes of servitudes or ease- 
ments. 4. Although they are incapable of exact circum- 
scription, the purposes to which the owner may turn the 
subject of his ownership, are not exempt from restrictions. 
The oblique manner :wherein the restrictions are set, I shall 
attempt to explain : an attempt which will lead me to con- 
sider generally, the actual and possible modes of defining 
rights and duties, with the approach to completeness and 
correctness whereof the process admits. 

in. Whether they be rights to specific subjects, or rights 
without such subjects ; and whatever be the purposes to 
which the entitled persons may turn their subjects ; rights 
m rem are distinguishable by differences between the quan- 
tities of time during which they are calculated to last. 

As distinguishable by differences between their respective 
durations, rights in rem will be considered in the following 
order. — ^Rights in rem are rights of unlimited, or rights of 
limited duration. Every right of unlimited duration, is also 
a right of unmeasured duration : that is to say, a right of 
which the duration is not exactly defined. But of rights 
of limited duration, some are rights of unmeasured dura- 
tion, whilst others are rights of a duration exactly defined 
or measured. For example: An estate in fee simple, or 
property in a personal chattel, is a right of unlimited, and 
therefore of unmeasured duration. An estate for life, is a 
right of unmeasured, but limited duration. The interest 

COURSE OF LECTURKS. IXXXV 

created by a lease for a given number of years, is a right of 
a duration limited and measured. — Accordingly, I shall dis- 
tinguish rights of unUmited, from rights of limited duration : 
and I shall distinguish rights of limited, into rights of un- 
measured, and rights of measured duration. 

Differences between the degrees wherein the entitled per- 
sons may use or deal with the subjects, are related to differ- 
ences between the durations of the rights. The several rela- 
tions between those respective differences, I shall endeavour 
to explain. 

IV. Whether they be rights to specific subjects, or rights 
without such subjects ; whatever be the purposes to which 
the entitled persons may turn their subjects ; and whatever 
be the quantities of time during which they are calculated 
to last ; rights m rein are distinguishable by the following 
differences. 

Of rights in rem^ some are present or vested : others are 
future, contingent, or merely inchoate. — Vested rights es- 
sentially differ from one another, as well as from rights 
which are contingent. For in some cases of vested right, 
tlie party entitled, or the party in whom it resides, may 
exercise the right presently. But in other ciises of vested 
right, the exercise of the right is presently suspended by 
the presence of an anterior and preferable right. — And whe- 
ther a right be vested or contingent, it may be hable to end, 
on the happening of a given event, before the lapse of its 
possible duration. 

Upon these differences, and the distinctions resulting 
from these differences, I shall touch briefly in this sub- 
department : })ostponing a larger explanation to that sub- 
sequent point of my Course, at which I shall consider the 
trustrsubstitutions and entails of the Koman and English 
Law. 

V. I shall consider the various events from which rights 
m rem arise, with the various events by which they are 
extinguished : reserving, however, an exact accoviat oC 

IxXXvi • OUTLINE OF THE 

proBScrtpHanj until I shall have duly analyzed the right of 
possession: 

VI. If one person exercise a right residing in another 
person, but without authority from the latter, and without 
authority from those through whom the latter is entitled, 
the former acquires, by his unauthorized or adverse ex- 
ercise, the anomalous right which is styled the right of 
possession. 

This general description of the right of possession, must, 
however, be taken with the following limitation. — The per- 
son who possesses adversely, or who exercises the right of 
another without the requisite authority, does not acquire 
thereby the right of possession, in case his adverse posses- 
sion began vi, or arose tli rough any of the means which fall 
within the name of violence. 

The right of possession must be distinguished from the 
right of possessing^ or (changing the phrase) from the right 
to possess : for the right of possessing^ or the right to pos- 
sess^ is a property or integrant part of the right of posses- 
sion iteelf, and also of numerous rights which widely differ 
from the latter. In other words, the right of possessing, 
considered generally, may arise from any of various titles or 
causes : but the peculiar right of possessing which is styled 
the right of possession, is a right of possessing that arises 
exclusively from the fact of an adverse possession. 

Although it arises from actual possession, the right in rem 
which is styled the right of possession, must also be distin- 
guished from the rights in rem which arise from occupation 
or occupancy. For the fact of possessing which is styled oc- 
cupation or occupancy, consists in the possession of a some- 
thing that is res nullius. But the fact of possessing which 
gives the right of possession, consists in the adverse exer- 
cise, by the person who acquires the right, of a right residing 
in another. 

Consequently, the following description of the right of 
possession has all the exactness which accords with extreme 

COURSE OF LECTURES. Ixxxvii 

l)revity. — It is that right to possess (or to use or exercise a 
Tight) which springs from the fact of an adverse possession 
not beginning through violence. 

As against all but the person whose right is exercised ad- 
versely, the person who acquires the right of possession, is 
clothed with the very right which he affects to exercise. And 
as against the person whose right is exercised adversely, 
he may acquire the very right which he affects to exercise, 
through the tide, or mode of acquisition, styled prcescrip- 
tion. Or (adopting a current but inadequate phrase) the 
right of possession ripens, by prajscription, into the right of 
dominion or property. 

Note, — The right of possession strictly and j)roperly so culled, or the 
right of possession considered as a suhstantive right, is a right that arises 
exclusively from the fact of an adverse possession. But the term right of. 
possession is not imfrequcntly employed with an extremely large signifi- 
cation. Taking the term with tl»i:i very extensive meaning, the right of 
lx)8ses8ion arises from an actual jjossci^sion, whether the actiiiil jwssession 
he adverse or not. For example: It i^ said that the ihnninus in actual 
possession, has a right of possession which arises from that actual |)0S8es- 
aion, and which is completely independent of his right of dominion. But 
(as I shall show in njy lectures) the right of possession considered as a 
mhstantive right, is a right that aris(js exclusively from the fact of an ad- 
verse possession: the so called right of ])OHsessi()n which arises from an 
actual possession not adverse, being a propertt/ of another rights or being 
an integrant part of another right. For example : It is absurd to ascribe 
to the dominus in possession, a right of possession independent of his 
right of dominion : for if the dominus actnally possess, it is as dominus 
that he actually jK>s3e8ses. As I shall show in my lectures, the term right 
of possession acquired the large signification to which 1 have adverted 
above, in consequence of an extension of such possessory remedies as in their 
origio were appropriate to parties invested with the right of possession 
strictly and properly so called. These possessory remedies, though origi- 
nally appropriate to such parties, were afterwards extended to any pos- 
sessors who had been wrongfully disturbed in their actual possessions. 
In the Roman Law, for example, a certain interdict (closely analogous 
to an action of ejectment) was originally appropriate to i»arties invested 
with the right of possession strictly and properly so called. But it was 
extended to the dominus who had been wrongfidly evicted from his actual 
possession. For by resorting to an interdict grounded on his actual pos- 
session, instead of resorting to an action grouTidedo\\\\\AT\\^X»^^^^TD^s£kKS^> 

t ,,\i} ... p i^ Hfwmwi" 

IxXXviii OUTLINE OP THE 

he avoided the inoonYenient necemdty of proving his right of dominion, 
and had merely to. demonstrate his actual possession at the time of the 
wrongful eviction : just as a party who is seised or entitled in fee, recovers 
through an action of ejectment, from an ejector without title, by merely 
proving his actual possession at the time of the wrongful ejectment. And 
since the dominus recovered by the interdict, on merely proving his actual 
posseasion, he recovered, in a certain sense, through his right of posses- 
sion merely. , But yet it .were absurd to affirm that he had any right of 
possessing independently of his right of dominion ; or to liken the right 
of possessing which is parcel of the right of dominion, to the substantive 
right of possessing which arises solely or exclusively from the fact of an ad- 
verse possession. — The above-mentioned extension of possessory remedies, 
has rendered the right of possession one of the darkest of the topics which 
the science of jurisprudence presents. But there is not intrinsically any 
remarkable difficulty in the right of possession which is strictly and pro- 
perly so called : that is to sny, which arises solely or exclusively from the 
fact of an adverse possession, and which is the basis of acquisition by 
usucapion^ and of other acquisition by prceacription. 

At this point of my Course, I shall therefore proceed in 
the following manner. 

I shall analyze the anomalous and perplexed right which 
is styled the right of possession. Performing the analysis, 
I shall happily be able to borrow from a celebrated trea- 
tise by Von Savigny^ entitled Das Recht des Besitzes^ or De 
Jure Possesstonis : of all books upon law, the most con- 
summate and masterly ; and of all books which I pretend 
to know accurately, the least alloyed with error and imper- 
fection. 

Having analyzed the right of possession, I shall turn to 
the title, or the mode of acquisition, wherein the right of 
possession is a necessary ingredient : namely, usucapion and 
other prcBscription, I shall consider generally the nature of 
the title; and shall advert to the respective peculiarities 
of the Boman and English Law, in regard to the terms or 
conditions whereon the title is allowed. — If I find it possi- 
ble or prudent to touch that extensive subject, I shall pro- 
ceed from title by prsescription, to the connected subject of 
registmtion. 

CX)URS£ OF LECTURES. Ixxxix 

Eights in personam as existing per se^ or as 
not combined with rights in rem, 

lUghts in personam^ including the obligations whicli 
answer to rights in personam^ arise from facts or events of 
three distinct natures : namely, from contracts^ from quasi- 
contrcLds^ and from delicts. 

The only rights in personam which belong to this sub- 
department, are such as arise from contracts and quasi- 
contracts. Such as arise from delicts, belong to the second 
of the capital departments under which I arrange or dis- 
tribute the matter of the Law of Things, 

Note. — Perceiving that rights ex delicto were generally rights iVi per- 
Monaniy but not adverting to the importance of marking their sanctioning 
character, the classical Roman jurists, in their institutional or elementary 
writings, arranged them with rights ex contractu and quasi ex contractu : 
with rights which also are rights in personam y but arc not bottomed, like 
rights ex delicto^ in infringements of other rights. And hence much of the 
obscurity which hanga over the Institutes of their imiUitor, the Emperor 
Justinian. 

The matter of this sub-department will be treated in the 
following order. 

I. I shall define or determine the meanings of certain 
leading expres^;ions : viz. Promise: Pollicitation: Conven- 
tion or Agreement : Pa(*t : Contract : (iuasi-Ci^ntract. 

n. Having defined the meanings of tlioj^e leading ex- 
pressions, I shall consider particularly the nature of con- 
tracts. I shall distinguish contracts properly so called, from 
certain facts or events which are styled contracts, but which 
virtually are alienations or conveyances. I shall distribute 
contracts under their various classes : expoimding the dis- 
tinctions (with many other distinctions) between unilateral 
and bilateral, principal and accessory, nominate and inno- 
minate contracts. Kxpounding this last distinction, I shall 
show what is meant by the essence, and what, by the ac- 
cidents of a contract. I shall notice the solemnities or 
formalities which 'are essential to the vaUdity of certain 
contracts : and, thereupon, I shall analyze the rationale of 

XC OUTLINE OP TUB 

the doctrine oi- considerations. Finally, I shall turn to the 
events whereon, or tjo the modes wherein, the rights and 
obligations arising from contracts, cease or are extinguished, 
in. From ccMitracts, I shall proceed to quasi-contracts : 
that is to say, facts or events which are neither contracts 
nor deUcts ; but which, inasmuch as they engender rights 
in personam and obligations, are, in that respect, analogous to 
contracts. I shall notice the frequent confusion of merely 
quasi-contracts with contracts which properly are such, al- 
though th^ are tacit or implied. I shall show that quasi- 
contracts are analogous to the fancied contracts from which 
speculators on government have derived the duties of the 
governed : and I shall show the causes of the tendency to 
imagine or feign contracts, for the purpose of explaining 
the origin of duties which emanate from other sources, I 
shall advert to the classes of quasi-contracts ; and to the 
events whereon, or the modes wherein, the rights and obh- 
gations which they generate, cease or are extinguished. 

Such of the combinations of rights in rem and 
rights in personam as are particular and com- 
paratively simple. 

Though jus in rem^ or jus in personam^ may exist sepa- 
rately, or uncombined with the other, both may vest una 
ictu in one and the same party : or (changing the expres- 
sion) an event which invests a party with a right in rem or 
in personam, may invest the same party with a right in 
personam or in rem. As examples of such events, I may 
mention the following : namely, a conveyance with a cove- 
nant for title; a hypotheca or mortgage, express or tacit: 
a sale completed by deUvery, with a warranty, express or 
tacit, for title or soundness. And, as I shall show in my 
lectures, many a fact or event which is styled simply a con- 
tract, is properly a complex event compounded of a convey- 
ance and a contract, and imparting uno fiatu a right in rem 
and mpergonavu 

COUfiSE OF LECTURES. XCl 

Such of the combinationfi of rights in rem aad in per- 
sanam as are particular and comparatively simple, are the 
matter of this sub-department. What I mean by their par- 
ticular^ or rather their singular^ combinations, as distin- 
guished from the universal aggregates which are the matter 
of the next sub-department, would scarcely admit of ex- 
planation within the limits of an oiitUne. In order to an 
explanation of my meanmg, I must explain the distinction 
between singular and universal successors, or succession rei 
singulcB and succession per universitatem : nearly the most 
perplexed of the many intricate knots with which the 
science of law ti'ies the patience of its students. 

Such universities of rights and duties (or such 
complex aggregates of rights and duties) as 
arise by universal succession. 

The matter of this sub-department will be treated in the 
following order. 

L The complex aggregates of rights and duties^ which 
commonly are named by modern Civilians, '^ universitatos 
juris^'* will be distinguished from the aggregates or collec- 
tions of tilings^ which commonly are named by the same 
Civilians, " universitates rerum sive facti'' — They will also 
be distinguished from the conij)lex and lictitious persons 
(or the collective bodies of individual or physical i)ersons), 
which are named by the Roman Lawyers, xiniversiiates or 
collegia^ and by the English Lawyers, corporations aggre- 
gate. — ^The universities of rights and duties, which are the 
matter of this sub-department, will also be distinguished 
from status or conditions. For the aggregates of rights and 
duties, capacities and incapacities, which are styled status or 
conditions, are, for the most part, juris universitates. 

n. Since all the universities of rights and duties, which 
are the matter of this sub-department, arise by universal 
succession, the distinction between singular and universal 
successors, or succession rei simjuUB vxw^ ^v\ecvi^\Qx^^ 'P^.v 

XCll OUTLINE OF THE 

univeraitatemj mil be stated and explained. As I have 
already remarked, that knotty distinction would scarcely 
admit of explanation within the limits of an outline. But 
the following examples may suggest to the reflecting reader, 
the character of successors per universitaiemy with the na- 
ture of the universttates to which such successors succeed. 
— The executor or administrator of a testator or intestate, 
with the general assignee of a bankrupt or insolvent, are uni- 
versal successors. And, in respect of specialty debts due 
from the ancestor or devisor, the heir or devisee, general or 
particular, succeeds per universitatem. — The aggregate of 
rights and obligations which devolves from the testator or 
intestate to the executor or administrator, with that which 
passes from the bankrupt or insolvent to the general as- 
signee of his estate and effects, are universities of rights and 
duties. And since all the obUgations of a given class, which 
were due from the ancestor or devisor, attach at once upon 
the heir or devisee, that mass of obhgations falls within the 
notion of a juris universitas. 

For every juris universitas bears one or both of the fol- 
lowing characters. First ; Where a universitas juris arises 
by universal succession, rights residing in, or obligations 
incumbent upon, a person or persons, pass una ictu to 
another person or persons, and pass in genere and not per 
specie m. In other words, they pass or devolve at once or 
together^ and they pass or devolve as belonging to their 
kinds or soris^ and not as determined by their specific or 
individual natures. Secondly : Whatever be its origin, a 
universitas juris^ so far as it consists of rights, is of itself 
(or considered as 'abstracted from its component particu- 
lars), the subject of a right in rem. The party invested with 
a universitas jurisj has a right in the aggregate availing 
against the world at large, even though all the rights which 
are constituent elements of the aggregate, be merely rights 
in personam^ or availing against persons determinate.— rl 
shall show m my lectures, that every status or condition 

J 

COUBSB OF LBCTURB8. ZCUl 

'which is not purely burthensome, bears the last of these 
marks, and therefore is juris universitas. I shall also ex- 
plain in my lectures, why the right in rem over a juris uni- 
versitas (considered as abstracted from its component parti- 
culars) stands out conspicuoasly in the Roman Law, and is 
&r less obvious in the English. 

The legatee of a specific thing, the alienee of a specific 
thing by transfer inter vivos^ or the assignee of a given bond 
or other contract, are singular successors, or successors rei 
singulcB. 

in. From the generic nature of universitates juris\ and 
the peculiar nature of such of them as arise by universal 
succession, I shall proceed to such of these last as are the 
matter of this sub-department. Now tmiversitates juris 
which devolve to universal successors, and which are lh(» 
matter of this sub-department, are of two kinds: 1. Uni- 
versitates juris devolving; from the dead as such : 2. Uni- 
versitates juris devolving from the liviiiff^ or devolving from 
the dead, but not from the dead as such. And those two 
kinds I shall consider in that order. 

Universal successors succeeding to the dead as such, take 
ab intestato or ex testamento. Accordingly, I shall exi)lain 
universal succession ab intestato^ and universal succession e,v 
testamento. And to exemplify my explanation of the dis- 
tinction, I shall compare the characters of the Roman Juvvcs 
legitimus^ of the English admhiistrator and next of kin^ and 
of the English heir: of the Roman hojves testamentariiii<^ of 
the English executor and residuary legat^e^ and of the 
Enghsh devisee general or particular. 

Note. — By Uie English Lawyers, real rights (property in things nnl, 
or real property) are distinguished from personal rights (property in tliinprs 
personal, or personal property). These two classes of rights blend at so 
many points, that the difference between them cannot he described cor- 
rectly in generic and concise expressions. A correct dcscrii)tion of the 
difference between the two classes of rights, would involve a complete 
deflcriptiou of the several or various rights which belong to those class4*s 
respectively. Of the generic and concise dcacriY^Uou^ nv\\\cVv \\\^ ^\^^'^'i^^'^ 

^<s ■ ;.*ci*.i.#«»'.» ^ -' i** ^'^ * -> 

Xdv OUTLINE OP THE 

in quiBstion will take^ ditf fcUowing, I incline to beliare, ia the least remote 
from the traik Beel rigbts (property, in things real, or real property) 
are rights which are inheritable : whidi (where thej are transmissible to 
representatiTes) devolve ah intestato to heirs. Personal rights (property 
in things personal, or personal property) are rights which are not inhe^ 
ritahle : which (where they are transmissible to representatives) devolve ah 
intestato to administrators (or next of kin,) The difference, therefore, be- 
tween real and personal rights, mainly consists in this. According to the 
English Law, succession o^ intestato is of two descriptions : namely, sac* 
cession by heirs (strictly and tedmically so called), and succession by 
administrators (or next of kin). Rights devolving ab intestato to successor^ 
of the former description, ; are real : rights devolving ab intestato to sue* 
ceasors of the latter description, are personaL-^^lt were easy to demon- 
strate, that the division of rights into real and personal (or the division of 
property into real and personal) does not quadrate with the division of 
things into things trnmoveable and things moveable : It were also easy to 
demonstrate, that it does not quadrate with the division of things into 
things which are subjects of tenure and things which are not. As I have 
remarked already, the division of property into real and personal, is not 
susceptible of a precise generic description. He who would know pre- 
cisely the meaning of the division in question, must master all the details 
which each of its compartments embraces. Or (changing the expression) 
the various details which each of its compartments embraces, are not con- 
nected by a common character or property, but form a heap, inevitably 
incondite, of heterogeneous particulars. — This needless distinction between 
real and personal property, which is nearly the largest of the distinctions 
that the Law of England contains, is one prolific source of the unrivalled 
intricacy of the system, and of its matchless confusion and obscurity. To 
the absence of this distinction (a cause of complcxness, disorder, and dark- 
ness, which naught but the extirpation of the distinction can thoroughly 
cure), the greater compactness of the Roman system, with its greater 
symmetry and clearness, ore mainly imputable. There is not, indeed, in 
the Roman jurisprudence, the brevity and harmony of parts, with the con- 
secjuent lucidity and certainty, which are etfsential to a system of law that 
were worthy of the prostituted name : a system of law that were truly a 
guide of conduct, and not a snare in the way of the parties bound to ob- 
serve its provisions. But, this notwithstanding, the Roman Law (mainly 
thrbngh the absence of the distinction between real and personal property) 
is greatly and palpably superior, considered as a system or whole, to the 
Law of England. Taming from the study of the English, to the study 
of the Roman Law, you escape from the empire of chaos and darkness, 
to a world which seems by comparison, the region of order and light. 

The distinction of the English I-4iwyers, between real and personal 
rights, irt peculiar to the systems of positive law which are mainly bot- 

COURSE OP LECTURES. XCV 

tomed in feudal institutions. As I have stated already, there is not in the 
Boman Law the fitintest trace of it. According to the Roman Law, rights 
devolye ah nUeatato agreeably to a uniform and coherent scheme. It is 
true that rights are distinguished by most of the modern Civilians, into 
Jura reaUa and jura personalia : and that this distinction of rights into 
Jura realia and jura personalia, obtains in every system of particular and 
poaltive law, which is an offset or derivative of the Roman. But the dis- 
tinction of the modem Civilians, between /um rea/ia and jura personalia, 
if equivalent to the distinction, made by the same Civilians, between Jura 
in rem and jura in personam : and it is also equivalent to tlie distinction, 
made by the Roman Lawyers, between dominia (with the larger meaning 
of the term) and obligationes. Real rights (in the sense of the English 
Lawyers) comprise rights which are personal as well as rights which are 
reoi (in the sense of the modem Civilians): fixxd personal rights (in the 
sense of the former) comprise rights which are real us well as rights which 
mre personal (in the sense of the latter). The difference between real and 
personal rights (as the terms are understood by the modi'in Civilians) is 
essential or necei«sary. It runs through the English Law, just as it per- 
vades the Roman : although it is obscured in the English, by the multi- 
tude of wanton distinctions which darken and deform the system. But 
the difference between real and personal rights (as the terms are luider- 
•tood by the English Lawyers) is purely accidental. 

And since this difference is purely accidental, it is not involved by gene- 
lal jurisprudence : for general jurisprudence, or the philosophy of jwsitive 
law, is concerned with principles and distinctions which arc efiscntial or 
necessary. Accordingly, I shall touch upon the difference in a merely in- 
cidental manner, and merely to illuati-ate principles and distinctions wliirh 
the scope of general jurisprudence properly embraces. 

Succession to the subject of a specific, ov oihcr pdrficftlar 
legacy, is succession rei singuloe : and it therefore belongs 
logically to one or another of the three foregoing sul)-de- 
partments. But since such succession, although it be sin- 
gular, is succession ex testamentOy it could not be considered, 
under any of those sulvdepartment*^, without an inconve- 
nient anticipation of the doctrine of testaments. Accord- 
ingly, succession to the subject of a specific, or otlu^r par- 
ticular legacy, will be considered at this point of this sub- 
department. — For a similar reason, the entaih nnd trust- 
iubstitutiojis of the English and Roman Law, will be post- 
poned to the same point. A(*cording to the Uoman I^jiw, 
the person who takes virtually by a lvusl-?\\V)A\V\\\\<^\\.,\^ 

•^T 

XCVl 

OUTLINE OF THE 

always, in effec , suecesaar singularia : but the subject of a 
trust-substitution is either a juris universitas or a res m- 
giUa. According to the same system, every trust-substi- 
tutiou is created by testamentary disposition. And, ac-< 
cording to the Law: of England, an entail is created by 
testament or will, as well as by act inter vivos, I there- 
fore shall find it expedient to postpone substitutions and 
entails, until I shall have passed in review the nature of a 
juris universitas^ and of succession, universal and singular, 
ex testamento. — In libera republican and under the earlier 
Emperors, every disposition suspending the vesting of its 
subject, and almost every disposition restraining the power 
of alienation, was prohibited by the Roman Law: and such 
dispositions of the kind as it afterwards allowed, were 
created exclusively by testament or codicil, and in the cir- 
cuitous and absurd manner of a fidei-commissum. Conse- 
quently, as succession ex testamento will lead me to entails, 
so will entails conduct me to the nature of trusts : that is 
to say, to the nature of trusts in general, as well as to the 
fidei'Commissa which are peculiar to the Eoman Law, and 
to . the uses and trusts (an offset of those fidei-commissa) 
which ;afe peculiar to the Law of England. 

Having treated of universal successors succeeding to the 
dead as such, I vitisM treat of universal successors succeed- 
ing to the living^ or succeeding to the dead, but not to the 
dead as such. And treating of universal successors of 
those generic chai-acters, I shall consider particularly the 
succession per universitatem which obtains in cases of in- 
solvency and of the consequent cessio bonorum. 

Note, — In this sub-department of the Law of Things, I shall consider 
universal succession as it obtains generally. In other words, I shall 
consider universal succession abstracted from persons, in so far as persons 
are invested with status or conditions. 

In some cases of universal succession, the succession is the consequence 
of certain status or conditions, or supposes the pre-existence of certain 
ftatus or conditions : and in other cases of universal succession, certain 
/Mirties are invested with conditions, in consequence of the succession 

COUKSE OP LECJTURE8. XCVll 

iiHelf. Ab examples of univenal euccesaion, the effect or cause of con- 
ditionSy I adduce the following cases from the Roman and English Law : 
namely, uoiversal succession, ab tntestato or ex testamento, to the rights 
and obligations of a freedman : universal succession, by tho adopting 
&ther, to the rights and obligations of an adrogated son : universal sue- 
eeflsioQ, by the general assignees or trustees, to the rights and obligations 
of an insolvent trader. For through a distinction built on an essential 
difference, but carried to needless length and breeding needless com- 
plezness, the Law of England, and of other modem nations, seven the 
insolvency of traders from other insolvency, and makes it the subject of a 
peculiar ayatem of rules. 

Now where universal succession is the effect or cause of conditions, 
it ought to be excluded from the Law of Things, and treated with the 
conditions from which it emanates, or of which it is the fountiiin or spring. 

But in spite of that exclusion, the consideration of the universal sue- 
cession which is matter for the Law of Things, involves large anticipa- 
tions from the Law of Persons. For example : Succession ah intestate 
cannot be explained completely, without an expLination of consanguinity, 
or of cognation {aensu Uitiore) : whilst consanguinity cannot be explained 
completely, without a large anticipation from the law of marriage, or a 
long reference forward to the status of husband and wife. Wearing the 
peculiar £)rm which it takes in the Roman Law, succession ab itUestato 
cannot be explained completely, without an explanation of cognation 
{s€Mu latiore\ of the relation styled agnation, and also of that cogna- 
tion which is contradistinguished to agnation, and which therefore differs 
from cognation (in the larger meaning of the term). But since the rela- 
ticQ a^led agnation results from the patria potestasy the consideration 
of the Roman aucoession ah intestato^ involves a double reference to 
the Law of Persons : namely, a reference to the status or conditions of 
patar et JUiut familiaa^ aa well aia to the status or conditions of husband 
and wife. 

Aa I ahall ahow in my lectures, that portion of the Law of Things 
which ia concerned with universal succession, is more implicated than any 
other with the Law of Persons or Status, If, indeed, it were closely 
analyzed, the whole of that portion of the Law of Tilings, might be 
ionnd to consist of matter belonging logically to the Law of Pei*sons, but 
interpolated in the Law of Things, for the sake of commodious exposition. 

Aa I treat of universal succession to intestates, testators and insolvents, 
another implication of the parts of my subject, will compel me to draw 
upon the second of those two capital departments under which I arrange 
or distribute the matter of the Law of Things. For i i^Hits and obliga- 
tions arising from delicts, devolve or pass, in coni|)«'iny Aviih others, to tlio 
universal successors, or general representatives, of intestates, testjttors and 
insolvents. 

YOL. l. f 

OUTLINE OF THB 

Sanctioning Rights^ with sanctioning Duties (relative and 
absolute) : Delicts or Injuries (lohich are causes or antece- 
dents of sanctioning rights and duties) included. 

This is the second of the capital departments under 
which I arrange or ;distribute the matter of the Law of 
Things. I 

Before I proceed to the sub-departments und« which 
I distribute the subjects of this second capital department^ 
I shall distinguish delicts into dvil injuries and crimes : or 
(what b the same process stated in different expressions) 
I shall distinguish the rights and duties which are effects 
of civil delicts, fix)m the duties, and other consequences, 
which are effects of criminal. 

Having expounded the nature of the distinction between 
civil and criminal deUcts, I shall distribute the subjects 
of this second capital department under two sub-depart- 
ments. — 1. Bights and duties arising from dvil injuries. 
2. Duties, and other consequences, arising from crimes. 

Bights and duties arising from civil injuries. 

The matter of this sub-department will be treated in the 
following order. 

I. Civil injuries will be classed and described with refer- 
ence to the rights and duties whereof they are respectively 
infringements. 

n. Bights arifdng from civil delicts are generally rights 
in personam : that is to say, rights availing against persons 
certain, or rights answering to duties incumbent on deter- 
minate persona 

The rights arising from civil delicts, including the rela- 
tive duties answering to those rights, I distribute under two 
departments : each of which two departments immediately 
severs into various sub-departments. 

The division of those rights into those two departments^ 

COUteB OP LECTURES. xcix 

rests upon a principle of division which may be stated 
thus: namely, the difference between the natures of the 
rights and duties whereof civil delicts are respectively in- 
fringements. Accordingly, rights arising from civil delicts 
which are infringements of rights in rem, are the subjects 
of the first department Eights arising from civil delicts 
which are infringements of rights in personam, are tlie sub- 
jects of the second department. 

The various sub-departments into which those two de- 
partments immediately sever, rest upon a principle of divi- 
sion which may be stated thus : namely, the respective dif- 
ferences between the immediate purposes which tlie rights 
and duties arising from civil delicts are respectively calcu- 
lated to accomplish. 

Nate, — In the langiiage of the Roman Law, the term delict^ as applied 
to civil injuries, is commonly limited to civil injuries which are iutringe- 
ments of rights in rew. Violations of rights m personam^ or breaches of 
contracts and quasi-contracts, are not commonly styled delicts or iw/une.*, 
and are not commonly considered in a peculiar or appropriate department. 
In the Institutes of Grains, as well as in those of Justinian, they are con- 
sidered with contracts and quasi-contracts, or with the primary rights in 
pertanam of which they are infringements. 

In the language of the English Law (here manifestly borrowing the 
langcuige of the Roman), the term delict (in so far as the term is employed 
by Jgwgliaii Lawyers) is also limited to civil injuries which are infringe- 
ments of rights in rem. Remedies by action are not unfrequently dis- 
tingoished into actions ex delicto and actions ex contractu. The former 
are remedial of injuries which are infringements of rights in rent : the 
latter are remedial of breaches of contracts, and of breaches of quasi- 
contracts. Such, at least, is the nature of the distinction us conceived 
and stated generally. The various classes of actions having been much 
confounded, the foregoing general statement of the nature or rationale 
of the distinction, must be taken with numerous qualifications. For 
example : In case^ strictly so called, the gencnil issue is not (jniltij^ and 
the ground of the action is properly a tort : that is to siiy, the gr(»und 
of the action is properly a delict (in the narrower sigiiilieation of the tonn 
to which I have now adverted). But, this notwithstandin^r, the action is 
frequently brought on breaches of contracts, and un breaclies of quasi- 
contracts. — ^The department of the English Law which relates to right4 
of action, is signally impressed with the diagracefuV cVv^m^cX^t <^^ x\\v^ 

f 2 

C OUTLINE OP THE 

system : namely, a want of broad and precise principles ; and of large, 
clear, and conspicuous distinctions. 

In the language of the Roman Law, the term delict has another and a 
larger meaning : being oo-extensive with the term injury, and signifying 
any violation of any right or duty. This is the meaning with which I 
employ the term, unless I employ it expressly with its narrower significa- 
tion. 

Agreeably to the principles of division which I have 
stated or suggested above, the rights arising from civU 
delicts, including the relative duties answering to those 
rights, will be distributed under the two departments, and 
the various sub-departments, which are sketched or indi- 
cated below. 

1. Bights arising from civil delicts which are infringe- 
ments of rights in rem, are the subjects of the first depart- 
ment : which first department immediately severs into the 
four following sub-departments. 

If the user of a right in rem be prevented or hindered 
presently, and the preventive cause or hindrance can be 
removed or abated, the party injured by the prevention 
or hindrance, may be restored to the ability of exercising 
the right freely. Eights to such restoration are of two 
kinds. Some, and most, are rights of action : but othei'S 
are exercised extra-judicially, and are matter for justifica- 
tion. A right of action to obtain possession of a house, or 
to procure the abatement of a nuisance which hinders the 
user of the house, is a right of the former kind. A right 
of recapturing without resorting to action, is a right of the 
latter kind. — ^Rights to such restoration, which might be 
styled significantly and shortly, " rights of vindication^'' are 
the subjects of the first sub-department. 

If a violated right in rem be virtually annihilated by 
the injury, the only remedy of which the case will admit, 
is satisfaction to the injured party. Where a prevention 
or hindrance opposed tp the user of a right, has been with- 
drawn, or has otherwise ceased, satisfaction to the injured 
party for the past prevention or hindrance, is the apt or 

CX)UB3E OF LECTUIIES. . Cl 

appropriate remedy. And, generally, the apt or appropri- 
ate remedy for a past delict, is satisfaction or compensa- 
tion to the injured party, for the damage or inconvenience 
which the party has suffered through or in consequence of 
the oflence. — ^Rights to satisfaction, pecuniary or other, are 
the subjects of the second sub-department. 

If the user of a right in rem be prevented or hindered 
presently, the party injured by the prevention or hindrance, 
has commonly a right to satisfaction for damage or incon- 
venience, as well as a riglit of restoration to the ability of 
free exercise. — ^Eights of vindication combined with rights 
to satisfaction^ are the subjects of the third sub-depai't- 
ment. 

Where an offence is merely incipient or impending, the 
offence may be stayed or prevented. For example : Forcible 
dis|jossession is prevented, and waste is prevented or stayed, 
by an interdict or injunction : or if I be threatened with 
an instant assault, I may prevent the approaching injury 
by repelling the assailant. — Rights of preventing or stay- 
ing, judicially or extra-judicially, impending or incipient of- 
fences against riglits in rem, are the subjects of the fourth 
sub-department. 

2. Rights arising from civil delicts which are infringe- 
luents of rights in personam, are the subjects of the second 
department : which second department immediately severs 
into the three following sub-departments. — First : Rights 
of compeUing, judicially or extra-judicially, the specific per- 
formance of such obligations as arise from contracts and 
quasi-contracts : e. g. A riglit of compelling performance by 
action or suit : A right to an interdict or injunction, for the 
purpose of preventing the obligor or debtor from evading 
the fulfilment of the obUgation : A right of retainer or de- 
tentian, by the creditor or obligee, of a thing or person 
which belongs to the obligor or debtor, but on which the 
obligee or creditor has expended money or labour. — Se- 
condly : Rights of obtaining salisfactioUy m \\cvx oS. ^\j^^^^ 

Cll OUTUNE OP THE 

performance, where pbligces or creditors are content with 
CDmpensation, or where specific performance is not possible, 
or where specific performance would not be advantageous 
to creditors, or would be followed by preponderant inconve- 
nience to obligors .or debtors. — .Thirdly: Rights of obtain- 
ing specific performance in part, with satisfaction or com- 
pensation for the residue. 

. Note, — I here shall analyze the principles whereon 8|iecific performance 
is rationallj compelled. The caprices of the Englisli Law with regard to 
specific performance, and with regard to the connected matter of reooTery 
in specie^ I shall try to explain historically. 

Travelling through the rights which arise from civil inju- 
ries, I shall note the respective applicability of those various 
remedies to the various cases of injury previously classed 
and described. 

III. Having classed and described civil injuries, and 
treated of the rights and duties which civil injuries en- 
gender, I shall consider the modes wherein those rights are 
exercised, and wherein those duties are enforced. In other 
words, I shall consider civil procedure. 

Now the pursuit of rights of action^ with the conduct of 
the incidental deferu^es, are the principal matter of that 
department of jurisprudence. The consideration of which 
matter, will involve a consideration of the following princi- 
pal, and of many subordinate topics : 

The functions of judges and other ministers of justice. 

The rationale of the process styled pleading^ with the 
connected rationale of judicial evidence. 

Judicial decisions, with their necessary or more usual 
concomitants : namely. The interpretation or construction of 
statute law, or law estabUshed in the properly legislative 
mode : The peculiar process of induction (not iinfrequently 
confounded with the interpretation of statute law) through 
which a ride made by judicial legislation, is gathered from 
the decision or decisions whereby it was cbtablislied : The 
application of the law, be it statute law or a rule made ju- 

COUBSE OF LECTURES. GUI 

clicially, to the fact, case, or species ohvenieiis^ whicli awaits 
the solution of the tribunal 

The judgments, decrees, or judicial commands, which are 
consequent on judicial decisions. Appeals. Execution of 
judgments. 

Judgments considered as modes of acquisition : that is to 
say, not merely as instruments by which rights of action are 
enforced, but as causes of ulterior rights : e. g. as causes 
of liens, or tacit mortgages, given to plaintiffs on lands or 
moveables of defendants. 

Such judgments or decrees as virtually are mere soleni- 
nities adjected to conveyences or contracts. The explana- 
tion of which solemnities, will involve an explanation of 
the distinction between voluntary and contritions jurisdic- 
tion. 

I^ote. — ^A right which arises from a judgment, is often distinct from 
the right of action which is pursued to judgment and execution. Arising 
directly from the judgment, it arises not from the injury which is tlie 
cause of the right of action, as from a mode of acquisition, (Donaequently, 
rights of the kind ought in strictness to be classed with rights which 
I style primary : that is to siiy, with rights which do not arise from 
delicts or offences. But the classing them with primary rights, were followed 
by this inconvenience: that the Avriter were unable to explain them in a 
satisfactory manner, unless he anticipated the doctrine of injuries, of rights 
ariaing from injuries, and of civil procedure. 

Ab certain rights arising from judgment shoidd in strictncs:^ be placed 
under a foregoing head, so should " the functions of judges and other 
ministers of justice '* be placed imder a following : namely, the Law of 
Persons. But if this matter, which logically belongs to that following 
head, were not anticipated under the present, the exposition of civil pro- 
cedure would be incomplete. 

Whoever reads and reflects on tlie arrangement of a corpus juris, must 
perceive that it cannot be constructed with logical rigour. The members 
or parts of the arrangement being extremely numerous, and their common 
matter being an organic whole, they can hardly be opposed completely. 
In other words, the arrangement of a corjnis juris can hardly be so con- 
structed, that none of its membera sliall contain matter which logically 
belongs to another. If the principles of the various divisions were 
oonceired and expressed clearly, if the departments resulting from the 
divisioDS were distinguished broadly, and if the necessary departures 

CIV OUTLINE OP THB 

from the principles were marked conspicuously, the arrangement would 
make the approach to logical completeness and correctness, which is all 
that its stubborn and reluctant matter will permit us to accomplish. 

Duties, and other consequences, arising from 
crimes. 

This is the second sub-department of the second of the 
capital departments under which I arrange or distribute the 
matter of the Law of Things. 

The matter of this sub-department will be treated in the 
following order. 

I. Duties are relative or absolute. A relative duty is im- 
plied by a right to which that duty answers. An absolute 
duty does not answer, or is not implied by, an answering 
right. 

As an example of an absolute duty, I may mention a duty 
to forbear from cruelty to any of the lower animals. For 
a necessary element of a right (implying or answering the 
duty) is wanting. There is no person^ individual or complex, 
towards or in respect of whom the duty is to be observed. 

I have adduced th^e foregoing example of an absolute 
duty, on account of its extreme simplicity, and of tlie 
brevity with which it* may be suggested. But, as I shall 
show in my preUminary lectures, absolute duties are very 
numerous, and many of them are very important. As I 
shall also show in my preliminary lectures, tliere are three 
cases wherein a duty is absolute, or wherein it answereth 
not to an answering right : wherein it answers to nothing 
which we could call a rights unless we gave to the term so 
large and vague a meaning, that the term would denote, 
in effect, just nothing at all. The three cases may be 
stated briefly, in the following manner. — ^The duty is abso- 
lute, in case th^e be no person^ individual or complex, 
towards or in respect of whom tlie duty is to be observed. 
The duty is absolute, in case the persons, towaids or in 
respect of whom the duty is to be observed, be uncertain 

COURSE OF LECTURES. CV 

or indeterminate. The duty is absolute, in case the only 
person, towards or m respect of whom the duty is to be 
observed, be the monarchy or sovereign number^ ruhng the 
given community. 

Now absolute duties, like relative duties, are primary 
or sanctioning: that is to say, not arising from injuries, 
or arising from injuries. Again : Primary rights, with 
the primary relative duties which respectively answer to 
those rights, are the only subjects of the capiUil department 
to wliich I have given the title of ""^ primary rights and 
duties." But primary absolute duties ought to be i)hiced 
somewhere. And though the present sub-department be 
a member of the capital department to which I liave given 
the title of " sanctioning rights and duties," primary abso- 
lute duties may be placed commodiously hero. For in- 
fringements of duties primary and absolute, belong to the 
class of delicts which are styled crimes. 

Accordingly I shall here interpolate a description of the 
primary absolute duties which are not appropriate subjects 
for the Law of Persons. — As I have already remarked, such 
interpolations of foreign matter cannot be avoided always. 

n. Having interpolated a brief descri])tion of primary 
absolute duties, I shall class and describe crimes (be they 
breaches of primary abisolute, or of primajy rclati\ c duties) 
with reference to the rights and duties whereof tliey are 
respectively infringements. 

in. Having classed and described crimes, I shall brielly 
touch upon the duties (all such duties bein<^ ab^^olute) 
which arise from crimes. I shall also notice brielly those 
consequences of crimes which are styled, strictly and pro- 
perly, punishments. 

IV. I shall advert to en minal procedure, with what may 
be called, by a strict application of the name, jndicc. In 
otlier words, I shall advert to the modes wliereiii crimes 
are pursued to punishment, with the precautions which may 
be biken to prevent them. 

CVl OUTUNE OF THE 

LAW OF PERSONS. 

Having made an attempt, at a previous point of my 
Course, to determine the notion of status or condition, I 
shall enter the department of law which is styled the Law 
of Persons, with an attempt to distribute status or condi- 
tions under certain principal and subordinate classes. 

Accordingly, I shall divide conditions into private and 
political. — ^I shall divide private conditions into domestic (or 
oeconomical) and professional. — ^Certain conditions nearly 
related to the domestic, I shall place with the latter : styling 
the former, by reason of the analogy through which they 
are so related, quasi-domestic conditions. — Certain condi- 
tions which will not bend to my arrangement, I shall place 
on a line with private and political conditions, and shall 
style anomalous or miscellaneous. 

My arrangement, therefore, of status or conditions, will 
stand thus : 

I shall distribute conditions under three principal classes : 
1. iVii;afd conditions : 2. P(9^t^ca/ conditions : 3. Anomalous 
or miscellaneous conditions. And I shall distribute private 
conditions under two subordinate classes : 1. Domestic (or 
(Economical) and quasi-domestic conditions : 2. Professional 
conditions. 

Note. — According to the jurists of ancient Rome, and to tlie jurists 
of the modern nations whose law is fashioned on the Roman, the capital 
or leading division of the entire corpus juris, is the division of jus into 
publicum and privatum. In other words, positive kw (considered with 
reference to its different putposes and subjects) is divided by those jurists, 
at the outset of the division, into public and private. 

Now the name public law has two principal significations : one of which 
significations is large and vague ; the other, strict and definite. 

Taken with its large and vague signification, the name will apply in- 
differently (as 1 shall show in my lectures) to law of every department. 
The various writers, therefore, who take it with that signification, deter- 
mJue the province of public law in various and inconsistent ways. Ac- 

COURSE OP LECTURKS. CVll 

cording to some, the province of public law comprises political conditions, 
togffther with civil pro. edure, and the law which is styled criminal : that 
is to say, the department of law which is concerned with crimes ; with the 
duties arising from crimes ; with the punishments annexed to crimes ; and 
with criminal procedure and preventive police. According to others, the 
province of public law embraces criminal law, but excludes civil proce- 
dure. According to others, its province rejects both. TVhilst others 
(confounding positive law and. positive morality) extend its province to 
Uie so called law of nations, as well as to civil procedure and to the 
law which is styled criminal. — ^But in one thing, all of them agree. All 
of them distribute the entire corpus juiis under two principal and con- 
tradistinguished departments: namely, jus publicum and jus privatum. 
And, consequently, all of them contradistinguish their so called public 
law to the two principal and opposed departments of tlicir so called pn- 
vote law : namely, The Law of Persons and the Law of Things. — ^Now, 
OS I shall sliow in my lectures, this notable division and aiTangement of 
the corpus juriSj is erroneous and pregnant with error : springing from a 
perplexed apprehension of the ends or purposes of law, and tending to 
generate a like apprehension in the helpless and bewiUloretl student. Ah 
I sliall show also, every department of law, viewed from a certiiin asjjcct, 
may be styled private : whilst every deimrtment of law, viuwed from ano- 
ther aspect, may be styled public. As I shall show further, public law and 
private law are names which should be banished the science : for since 
each will apply indifferently to every department of law, neither can be 
used conveniently to the purpose of signifying any. As I shall show 
moreover, the entire corpus juris ought to be divided, at the out.set, into 
Law of Things and Law of Persons : whilst the only portion of law that 
can be styled public law with a certain or determinate moaning, ought 
not to be contradistinguished to the Law of Things and Person.^ but 
ought to be inserted in the Law of Persons, as one of its limbs or mem- 
bers. 

Taken with its strict and definite signification, the name public law is 
confined to that portion of law which b concerned with political condi- 
tiona. Accordingly, I 4ake the name with that its determinate meaning, 
and I deem that portion of law, a member of the Law of Persons. But, 
to obviate a cause of misconception, I style that portion of law, Tlie Law 
of Political Status^ or The Law of Political Conditions : suppressing the 
ambiguous names of public and private law, along with that groundless 
division of the corpus juris which those opposed names are commonly 
employed to signify. For, as I have intimated above, the Law of Poli- 
tical StatuSj like every other portion of the entire corpus juris j might be 
styled with perfect propriety, public or private : public, when viewed from 
a certain «is|)ect; private, when viewed from another. 

In rejecting the division of hiw into [tublic and private, in rejecting the 

CVIU OUTLINE OP THE 

names by which the diviaion is signified, and in classing political condi-* 
tions with conditions of other natures, I am justified by the great au- 
thority of our own admirable Hale, as well as by the cogent reasons 
whereon I shall insist in my lectures. In his Analysis of the Law of 
England (or rather of tjbe Law of England, except the criminal part 
of it), he classes political conditions (or " political relations **) with the 
private conditions (or "relations)*' which he styles OBConomical. Nor 
can I discover in any nook of his treatise, the slightest trace of the 
perplexed apprehension which is the source of the division of law into 
public and private. Even in adverting to criminal delicts, where it waa^ 
most likely that he wotdd &11 into the error, he avoids it. Unlike Hia 
imitator Blackstone, who calls them public wrongs, he styles them crindfud 
wrongs, or waiter for Pleas of the Crown : hitting precisely by the last 
expression, the basis of the division of wrongs into civil injuries and 
crimes. — ^We scarcely can estimate completely the originality and depth 
of his Analysis, unless we compare it closely with the Institutes of Gains 
or Justinian, and unless we look vigilantly for the instructive but brief 
hints which abound in evory part of it. The only gross mistakes that I 
have found in his masterly outline, are his glaring and strange mistrans- 
lation of " jua peraonarum et rerum,^^ and his placing under the department 
assigned to the status of persons, certain rights of persons which he styles 
their absolute rights. Seeing that all rights are rights of persons, and 
seeing that things are merely subjects of rights, it is clear that the genuine 
meaning of "ju5 personarum et rerum" is not very happily rendered by 
^^Hghts of persons and things." And as to absolute (commonly denomi- 
nated natural or innate) rights, they are not matter for the Law of Status^ 
but belong preeminently and conspicuously to the contradistinguished 
department. But, in justice to this great and excellent person, I must 
add that tlie former mistake is verbal rather than substantial. Unlike 
the imititor Blackstone, with his " rights of persons and things," Hale 
seizes, for the most part, the genuine meaning of the distinction, though 
he thickens the obscurity of the obscure phrases by which the modem Ci- 
vilians usually express it. — In rejecting the division of law into public and 
private, and in classing political with other conditions, Hale, I believe, is 
original, and nearly singular. In an encyclopcedia by Falck, a professor 
of law at Kiel, it is said that the authors of the Danish Code, with those 
of the Damsh writers who treat law systematically, observe, in this respect, 
the arrangement observed by Hale. But in all the treatises by Conti- 
nental Jurists which have fallen tmder my inspection, law is divided into 
public and private, though the province of public law is variously deter- 
mined and described. 

It is true that Sir William Blackstone also rejects that division, and 
also considers the law which is concerned with political conditions, a 
member of the Law of Persons. But the method observed by Blackstone 

COURSE OP LECTURES. OX 

in Ilia far too celebrated Commentaries, is a slavish and blundering copy 
of the veiy imperfect method which Hale delineates roughly in his short 
and unfinished Analysis. From the outset to the end of his Commen- 
taries, he blindly adopts the mistakes of his rude and compendious model: 
missing invariably, with a nice and sui^rising infelicity, the j>regnant but 
obscure suggestions which it profferad to his attention, and which would 
have guided a discerning and inventive writer to an arrangement com- 
paratively just Neither in the general conception, nor in the detail of 
his book, is there a single particle of original and discriminating thought. 
He had read somewhat (though far less than is commonly believed) : but 
he had swallowed the matter of his reading, without choice and without 
rumination. He owed the popularity of his book to a paltry but effectual 
artifice; and to a poor, superficial merit. He truckled to the sinister 
interests, and to the mischievous prejudices of power ; and he fluttered 
the overweening conceit of their national or peculiar institutions, which 
then was devoutly entertained by the body of the English people, though 
now it is happily vanishing before the advancement of reason. And to 
tliis paltry but effectual artifice he added the allurement of a style which 
is fitted to tickle the ear, though it never or rarely satisfies a severo 
and masculine taste. For that rhetorical and prattling manner of his, 
is not the manner which suited the matter in hand. It is not the 
maimer of those classical Ronmn jurists who are always models of expres- 
sion, though their meaning be never so faulty. It differs from their unaf- 
fected, yet apt and nervous style, as the tawdry and flimsy dress of a mil- 
liner's doll, from the graceful and imposing nakedness of a Grecian statue. 

Having distributed stahcs or conditions under the prin- 
cipal and subordinate classes mentioned above, I shiill con- 
sider them particularly in the following order and manner. 

I. I shall review domestic and quasi-domestic conditions : 
describing the rights and duties, capacities and incapaci- 
ties, of which they are constituted or composed ; and also 
describing the events by which persons are invested with 
them, or are divested of them. — Of these conditions, the 
following are the principal : namely, The conditions of 
Husband and Wife : of Parent and Child : of Master and 
Slave : of Master and Servant : of Persons who by reason 
of their age, or by reason of their sex, or by leason of in- 
firmity arising from disease, require, or are thouglit to re- 
quire, an extraordinary meai«ure of protection and restraint. 

Having reviewed domestic and quasi-domestic condi- 

ex OUTLINE OF THE 

tions, in the manner which I have now suggested, I shall re- 
view professional conditions (the other leading class of pri- 
vate conditions), in a similar manner. 

n. Having reviewed priirate conditions, in the manner 
suggested above, I shall review, in a similar manner, poli- 
tical conditions : that is to say, the status or conditions of 
subordinate political superiors. — Of the classes of persons 
bearing political conditions, the following are the most re- 
markable. 1. Judges and other ministers of justice. 2. 
Persons whose principal and appropriate duty is the de- 
fence of the community against foreign enemies. 3. Per- 
sons invested with rights to collect and distribute the re-, 
venue of the state. 4. Persons commissioned by the state 
to instruct its subjects in religion, science, or art. 5. Per- 
sons commissioned by the state to minister to the reUef of 
calamity : e. g. overseers of the poor. 6. Persons commis- 
sioned by the state to construct or uphold works which re- 
quire, or are thought to require, its special attention and inter- 
ference : e.g. roads, canals, aqueducts, sewers, embankments. 

Note, — Before I difimiss the matter of the present article, I will request 
the attention of the reader to the following explanatory suggestions. 

1. The monarch properly so called, or the sovereign niunber in its 
collegiate and sovereign capacity, is not vested with a status (in the 
proper acceptation of the term). A status is composed or constituted of 
legal rights and duties, and of capaciti^ and incapacities to take and incur 
them. Now, since they are merely creatures of the positive law of the 
community, and since that positive law is merely a creature of the sove- 
reign, we cannot ascribe such rights and duties to the monarch or sove- 
reign body. We may say that the sovereign has powers. We may say 
that the sovereign has rights confeiTed by the law of God : that the 
sovereign has rights conferred by positive morality ; that the sove- 
reign is subject to duties set by the Law of God : that the sovereign is 
subject to duties which positive morality imposes. Nay, a sovereign go- 
vernment may have a legal right against a subject or subjects of another 
sovereign government But it cannot be bound by legal duties, and 
cannot have legal rights against its own subjects. Consequently, a sove- 
reign government of one, or a sovereign government of a number in its 
collegiate and sovereign capacity, is not invested with a status (in the 
proper acceptation of the term) : or it is not m^reated N^ith a status (in 

COURSE OP LECTURES. 0X1 

the proper acceptation of the term) derived from the positive law of its 
own political communitj. 

For the sake, however, of shortness, but not without impropriety, we 
may say that the sovereign bears a status composed or constituted of 
powers. And, by reason of the intimate connexion of that improper stattts 
with the status (properly so called) of subordinate political superiors, I 
■hall oonuder the powers of the monarch, or the powers of the sovereign 
number in its collegiate and sovereign capacity, with the rights and duties 
of the subordinate political superiors •to whom portions of those powers 
are del^ated or committed in trust. Or, rather, I shall consider the 
powers of the sovereign, at the present point of my Course,, in so far as 
the essentials of the matter may not have been treated adequately in my 
preliminary lecture on sovereignty and independent political society. 

2. The law of political conditions, or public law (with the strict and de- 
finite meaning), is frequently divided into constitutional and administrative. 

In a country governed by a monarch, constitutional law is extremely 
simple : for it merely determines the person who shall bear the sovereignty. 
In a country governed by a number, constitutional law in more complex : 
lor it determines the persons, or the classes of the persons, who shall bear 
the sovereign powers ; and it determines moreover the mode wherein those 
persons shall share those powers. — In a coimtry governed by a monarch, 
oonititational law is positive morality merely : In a country governed by 
a nmnber, it may consist of positive morality, or of a compound of posi- 
tive morality and positive law. 

Administrative hiw determines the ends and modes to and in which 
the sovereign powers shall be exercised : shall be exercised directly by the 
monarch or sovereign number, or shall be exercised directly by the subor- 
dinate political superiors to whom portions of those powers are delegated 
or committed in trust. 

The two departments, therefore', of constitutional and administrative 
law, do not quadrate exactly with the two departments of law which regard 
respectively the status of the sovereign, and the various status of subordi- 
nate political superiors. Though the rights and duties of the latter are 
comprised by administrative law, and are not comprised by constitutional 
law, administrative law comprises the powers of the sovtreign, in so far a.^ 
they are exercised directly by the monarch or sovereign number. 

In so fiur as the powers of the sovereign are delegated to political sub- 
ordinates, administrative law is positive law, whether the country be go- 
verned by a monarch, or by a sovereign number. In so far as the soveroigu 
powers are exercised by the sovereign directly, administrative law, in a 
country governed by a monarch, is positive morality merely : In a country 
governed by a number, it may consist of positive momlity, or of a compound 
of positive morality and positive law. 

8. It is somewhat difficult to describe the l)oundary by which the condi- 

CXll OUTLINE OP THE 

tions of political sabordiziates are severed from the conditiona of priyata 
perBons. The rights and duties of political subordinates, and the rights 
and duties of private persons, are creatures of a common author : namely, 
t)ie sovereign or state. And if we examine the purposes to which th«r 
rights and duties are oonferred and imposed by the sovereign, we shall find 
that the purposes of the rights and duties which the sovereign confin 
and imposes on private persons, often coincide with the purposes of those 
which ^e sovereign confers and imposes on subordinate political superiors. 
Accordingly, the conditions of parent and guardian (with the answering 
conditions of child and ward) are not unfrequently treated by .writers 
on jurisprudence, as portions of public law. For example : The patria 
poteitas and the tutela of the Roman Law, are treated thus, in his mas- 
terly System du Pandekten-Eechts, by Thibaut of Iliedelberg: who, for pe* 
netrating acuteness, rectitude of judgment, depth of learning, and vigour 
and elegance of exposition, may be placed, by the side of Von Savigny, 
at the head of all living Civilians. 

At the earliest part of my Course that will admit the subject conveni- 
ently, I sliall try to distinguish political from private conditions, or to de- 
termine the province of public law (with the strict and definite meaning): 
an attempt which will lead me to examine the current division of law 
into jiLS publicum and jiis privatum ; and which will lead mc to explain 
tlie numerous and disparate senses attached to the two cxj^rcssions. I 
would briefly remark at present, that I merely mean by private persons, 
persons not political : that is to say, persons not invested with political 
conditions ; or persons bearing political conditions, but not considered in 
those characters, or not viewed from that aspect. I intend not to inti- 
mate by the term private^ that private or not political, and public or po- 
litical persons, are distinguishable by differences between the ultimate pur^ 
fK)5Mfor which their rights and duties are respectively conferred and imposed. 

m. Having reviewed private and political conditions, in 
the manner suggested above, I shall review anomalous or 
miscellaneous conditions in a similar manner. — As exam- 
ples of such conditions, I adduce the following : namely, the 
conditions of Aliens : the conditions of Persons incapable of 
rights, by reason of their religious opinions : the conditions 
of Persons incapable pf rights, by reason of their crimes. 

Note. — In any department of the Law of Persons assigne'l to a given 
condition, the rights and duties composing the given condition, would na- 
turally be arranged (in a corpus juris) agreeably to the order or method 
observed in the Law of Things. For example : Agreeably to the order or 
njetbod which I have delineated above, the rights and duties composing 

COURSE OF LECTURES. cxiii 

the given condition, would natarally be divided at the outset, into primary 
and sanctioning : those primary rights and duties being divided again, into 
rights in rtm^ rights in personam^ combinations of rights in rein and rights 
in personam^ and so on. And in any department of the Law of Persons as- 
signed to a given condition, the constituent elements of the given condition, 
would naturally be ti'cated witli perpetual refurcnce to the principlcH and 
rules expounded in the Law of Things. 

To the series of lectures briefly delineated above, I shall 
add a concise summary of the positive moral rules which 
are styled by recent writers, the positive law of nations, or 
positive international law ; concluding therewith my review 
of positive law^ as conceived with its relations to podtive 
morality^ and to that divine law which is the ultimate test 
of both. 

I have drawn and published the foregoing explanatory 
Outline with two purposes : with tlie purpo.so of suggesting 
to strangers the subject and scope of my Course, and witli 
the purpose of enabling my Class to follow my Course 
easily. 

To the members of my Class tlie outline, 1 think, will be 
useful. Many of the numerous topics upon which it touches 
will be treated in the Course slightly and defectively. But, 
having those topics before them in a connected and orderly 
series, they may easily fill the chasms which I .shall incvii 
ably leave, with apt conclusions of their own. And oviry 
demand for explanation that the outline may sultl^csI to any 
of them, I shall gladly answer and satisfy to the be^t of my 
knowledge and ability. 

VOL. 1. g 

CXIV OUTLINE OP THE LECTURES. 

For the numerous faults of my intended Cotlrse, I shall 
not apologize. 

Such an expodtioh of my subject as would satisfy my 
own wishes, would fill, at the least, a hundred and twenly 
lectures. It would fiU, at the least, a huadred and twenty 
lectures, though every lecture of the series occupied an hour 
in the delivery, and were packed as closely as possible with 
strictly pertinent matter. 

And, as competent and candid judges will readily per- 
ceive and admit, a good exposition of the subject which I 
have undertaken to treat, were scarcely the forced product 
of a violent and short effort. It were rather the tardy fruit 
of large and careful research, and of obstinate and sustained 
meditation. After a few repetitions, my Course may satisfy 
my hearers, and may also satisfy myself. But, until I 
shall have traversed my ground again and again, it will 
abound with faults which I fairly style inevitable^ and for 
which I confidently claim a large and liberal construction. 

John Austin. 

AN ABSTRACT OF THE FOEEOOING 
OUTLINE. 

CXVl ABSTRACT OP OUTUNB. 

PRELIMINARY EXPLANATIONS. 

The province of jurispnidence determined. 
General jurisprudence distinguished from particular. 
Analyses of certain notions which pervade the science of 
law. 

LAW CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO ITS 
SOURCES, AND WITH REFERENCE TO THE MODES 
IN WHICH IT BEGINS AND ENDS. 

Written, or promulged law; and unwritten, or unpro- 
mulged law. 

Law made directly, or in the properly legislative man- 
ner ; and law made judicially, or in the way of improper 

legislation. Codification. 

Law, the occasions of which, or the motives to the esta- 
blishment of which, are frequently mistaken or confounded 
for or with its sources : viz. 

Jus moribus constitutum; or law fashioned by judicial 

decision upon pre-existing custom : 
Jus prudentibtis compositam ; or law fashioned by judi- 
cial decision upon opinions and practices of private 
or unauthorized lawyers : 
Tlio natural Zai^; of modern writers upon jurispnidence, 
\villi the equivalent jus naturale^jus ijentiufUy or jits 
naturale et gentium^ of the classical llonian jurists : 
Jus receptum; or law fiishioned by judicial decision 

upon law of a foreign and independent nation : 
Law fashioned by judiciiil decision upon positive inter- 
national morality. 
Distinction of positive law into law and equity^ or jus 
civile and jus proetorium. 

Modes in which law is abrogated, or in whicli it other- 

ABSTRACT OF OUTUNB. CXVU 

LAW CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TO ITS PUR- 
POSES, AND WITH REFERENCE TO THE SUBJECTS 
ABOUT WHICH IT IS CONVERSANT. 

Division of law into Law of Things and Law of Persons. 
Principle or basis of that division, and of the two depart- 
ments which result from it. 

LAW OF THINGS. 

Division of rights, and of duties (relative and absolute), 
into primary and sanctioning. 

Principle or basis of that division, and of tlu? two de- 
partments which result from it. 

Principle or basis of many of the sub-departments into 
which those two departments immediately sever : namely, 
Tlie distinction of- rights and of relative duties, into rights 
in rem with their answering offices, and rights in persanani 
with their answering obligations. 

Method or order wherein the matter of the Law of Things 
will be treated m the intended lectures. 

Preliminary remarks on things and persons, as subjects 
of rights and duties : on acts and forbearances, as objects 
of rights and duties : and on facts or events, as causes of 
rights and duties, or as extinguishing rights and duties. 

Primary Rights, with primary relative Duties, 

Eights in rem as existing per se, or as not combined with 
rights in personam. 

Rights in personam as existing per se, or as not com- 
bined with rights in rem. 

Such of the combinations of rights in rem and rights in 
personam, as are particular and comparatively simple. 

Such universities of rights and duties (or such complex 

CXVUl ABSTRACT OF OUTLINE. 

aggregates of rights and duties) as arise by universal suc- 
cession. 

Sanctioning Rights^ with sanctioning Duties {relative 
and absolute). 

Delicts distinguished into civil injuries and crimes : or 
rights and duties which are effects of civil delicts, distin- 
guished from duties, and other consequences, which are 
effects of criminal. 

Eights and duties arising from civil injuries. 
Duties, and other consequences, arising from crimes. 

[Interpolated description of primary absolute 
duties^] 

LAW OF PERSONS. 

Distribution of status or conditions under certain prin- 
cipal and subordinate classes. 

Division of law into public and private. 

Review of private conditions. 
Review of political conditions. 

The status or condition (improperly so called) of tlie monarch or 
sovereign niimber. 

Division of the law which regards political conditions, into consti- 
tutional and administrative. 

Boundary which severs political, from private conditions. 

Review of anomalous or miscellaneous conditions. 

The respective arrangements of those sets of rights and duties 
which respectively compose or constitute the several status or 
conditions. 

3 1 

c§_ ** 

F^ 

§'§" 

S CI 

as 

" 2 3 s: ^ 
- 5 » sr 

11- 

1» — 

r 

?i 

5* 

c*2 a^ 

^ •S J5 

I III 
-I ill 

2 Is- 

•^ '^ HI 

II- 

°5 

I 

o 

o 

o 

o 
> 

3 H 

a w 

3 

> 

rj 
> 

c 

THE 

PROVINCE OF JURISPRUDENCE 

DETERMINED. 

LECTUEE I. 

The matter of Jurisprudence is positive law : law, 
simply and strictly so called : or law set by i)o- Jr u/orXw. 
litical superiors to political inferiors. But posi- uWi^Sm^ 
tive law (or law, simply and strictly so called) is ^,f* J^T*"^ 
often confounded with objects to which it is re- ^^"««» '^^^^ 
lated by resemblance, and with objects to wliicli 
it is related in the way of analogy: with objects wliicli are 
also signified, properly and inijjroperly, by tlie huge and 
vague expression law. To obviate the dilliculties springing 
from that confusion, I begin my projected Course with de- 
termining the province of jurisprudence, or with distinguish- 
ing the matter of jurisprudence from those various related 
objects : trjdng to define the subject of which I intend to 
treat, before I endeavour to analyze its numerous and com- 
plicated parts. 

Taking it with the largest of its meanings which are not 
merely metaphorical, the term law embraces the following 
objects : Laws set by God to his human creatures, and laws 
set by men to men. 

The whole or a portion of the laws set by God to men, is 
frequently styled the law of nature, or natural law : being, 
m truth, the only natural law, of vr\\\i!\\ W \a ^kv^'ss&X^ 

VOL. L D 

2 THE PBOVINCB OF 

to speak without a metaphor, or without a blending of ob- 
jects which ought to be distinguished broadly. But, re- 
jecting the ambiguous expression natural law^ I name those 

• laws or rules, as considered collectively or in mass, the Dir 

I vine lawj or the law of God. 

The laws or rules set by men to men, are of two leadipg 
or principal classes : classes which are often blended, al- 
though they differ extremely ; and which, for that reason, 
should be severed precisely, and opposed distinctly and 
conspicuously. 

Of the laws or rules set by men to men, some are esta- 
blished by political superiors, sovereign and subject : by 
persons exercising supreme and subordinate government^ in 
independent nations, or independent political societies. The 
aggregate of the rules thus established, or to some aggregate' 
forming a portion of that aggregate, is the appropriate 
matter of jurisprudence, general or particular. To the ag- 
gr^ate of the rules thus established, or to some aggregate 
forming a portion of that aggregate, the term laiOj as used 
simply and strictly, is exclusively applied. But, as contra- 
distinguished to natural law, or to the law of nature (mean- 
ing, by those expressions, the law of God), the aggregate 
of the rules, established by political superiors, is frequently 
styled positive law, or law existing by position. As contra- 
distinguished to the rules which 1 style positive morality^ 
and on which I shall touch immediately, the aggregate of 
the rides, established by political superiors, may also be 
marked commodiously with the name of positive law. For 
the sake, then, of getting a name brief and distinctive at 
once, and agreeably to frequent usage, I style that aggre- 
gate of rules, or any portion of that aggregate, positive 
law : though rules, which are not established by political 
superiors, are also positivSy or exist by position^ if they be 
rules or laws, in the proper signification of the term. 

Though some of the laws or rules, which are set by men 
to men, are established by political superiors, others are not 

\ 

JURigPRUDBNCE DETERMINED. 3 

established by political superiors, or are not established by 
political superiors, in that capacity or character. 

Of human laws belonging to this second class, some are 
laws, properly so called. But others are styled laivs by an 
improper application of the term, although that improper 
application rests upon a close analogy. 

For such of the human laws belonging to this second 
class as are properly aiUed laws^ current or established lan- 
guage has no collective name. 

"But the aggregate of the human laws, which are impro- 
perly styled laws, is not luifrequently denoted by one of 
the following expressions : " moral rules," " the jnoral law," 
**the law set or prescribed by general or public opinion.'' 
Certain parcels of the aggregate denoted by those expres- 
sions, are usually styled " the law or rules of honour^' and 
** the laws set hy fashion.'' 

As opposed to the laws which are set by God to men, 
and to the laws which are established by political superiors, 
the aggr^te of the human laws, which are improperly 
styled laws^ may be named commodiously positive morality. 
The name morality severs them from positive law : whilst 
the epithet positive disjoins them from the law of Clod. 
And to the end of obviating confusion, it is necessary or 
expedient that they should be disjoined from the latter 
by that distinguishing epithet. For the name morality (or 
morals)^ when standing unqualified or alone, denotes inclif- 
ferently either of the following objects : namely, positive 
morality as it is, or without regard to its merits ; and posi- 
tive morahty as it would be, if it conformed to the law of 
God, and were, therefore, deserving of approbation. 

Laws set by God to men,^ hws established by politiail 
superiors, and laws set by meii td men (though )iot by po- 
litical superiors), are distinguished by numerous and im- 
portant differences, but agree in this : — that all of them are 
set by intelligent and rational beings to intelligent and 
rational beings. Every law of any of those kinds, is either 

B 2 

^ V 

THE PKOVINCE OF 

a law (properly so called), or is related to a law (properly 
so called) by a close and striking analogy. 

But in numerous cases wherein it is applied improperly, 
the applications of the term law rest upon a slender ana* 
logy, and are merely metaphorical or figurative. Such is 
the case when we talk of laws observed by the lower ani-r 
mals ; of latos r^ulating the growth or decay of vegetables^ 
of laws determining the movements of inanimate bodies or 
masses. For where intelligence is not, or where it is too 
bounded to take the name of reason, and, therefore, is too 
bounded to conceive the purpose of a law, there is not the 
wiU which law can work on, or which duty can incite or 
restrain. Yet through these misapplications of a name, fla- 
grant as the metaphor is, has the field of jurisprudence and 
morals been deluged with muddy speculation. 

I liave now suggested the purpose of my attempt to de^ 
termine the province of jurisprudence : to distinguish posi- 
tive law, the appropriate matter of jurisprudence, from the 
various objects to which it is related by resemblance, and 
to which it is related, nearly or remotely, by a strong or 
slender analogy. 

Attempting to determine the province of juris- 
^UiTflSi^- prudence, I shall proceed in the following manneri 
to^deSe I shall state the essentials of a law or rule 
^* JJ^gJ^f (taken with the largest signification which can be 
tJ«uce. given to the term properly). 

Having stated the essentials of a law or rule, I shall dis- 
tinguish laws established by political superiors, from laws 
set by men to men (but not by political superiors), and from 
that Divine law which is the ultimate test of human. 

Having distinguished laws established by political supe- 
riors, from the laws ;(properly so called) to which they are 
related by resemblance, and from the laws (improperly so 
called) to which they are nearly related by a strong analogy, 
I shall advert to the improper applications of the term law 
which are merely metaphorical or figurative. 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 5 

Every law or rule (taken with the largest sig- ^'i^y^twy w^"*' 
nification which can be given to the term pro- ^^^1^*7* 
perly) is a command. Or, rather, laws or rules, commaua*. 
properly so called, are a species of commands. 

Now since the term command comprises the term law, the 
first is the simpler as well as the larger of the two. But 
simple as it is, it admits of explanation. And, since it is the 
key to tlie sciences of jurisprudence and morals, its meaning 
should be analyzed with precision. 

Accordingly, I shall endeavour, in the first instance, to 
analyze the meaning of ^^ command:'* an aiudysis, which, I 
fear, will task the patience of my hearers, but wliich tluy 
will bear with cheerfulness, or, at least, with resignation, if 
they consider the difficulty of performing it. The elements 
of a science are precisely the parts of it which are explained 
least easily. Terms that are the largest, and, tlicrcfore, the 
simplest of a series, are without equivalent expressions into 
which we can resolve them concisely. And when we en- 
deavour to dejine them, or to translate them into terms 
which we suppose are better understood, we are forced upon 
awkward and tedious circumlocutions. 

If you express or ultimate a wish that I shall -n,^ mcaniinf 
do or forbear from some act, and if you will visit ^,J^'i;|j^"" 
me with an evil in case I comply not witli your 
wish, the expression or intimation of your wish is a com- 
'rnand. A command is distinguished from other significa- 
tions of .desire, not by the style in which the desire is sig- 
nified, but by the power and the purpose of the party com- 
manding to inflict an evil or pain in case the desire be dis- 
regarded. If you cannot or will not liarm nic in case I 
comply not with your wish, the expression of your wish is 
not a command, altliough you utter your wish in iini)era- 
tive phrase. If you are able and willing to harm me in 
case I comply not with your wish, the exi)ression of your 
wish amounts to a command, although you are prompted 
by a spirit of courtesy to utter it in the shape of a request. 

6 THE PROVINCE OP 

** Preces erant, sed quints contradict non posseC Such is 
the language of Tacitais, when speaking of a petition by the 
soldiery to a son and lieutenant of Vespasian. 

A command, then, is a signification of desire. But a com- 
mand is distinguished from other significations of desire by 
this peculiarity : that the party to whom it is directed is 
liable to evil from the other, in case he comply not with the 
desire. 

Being Uable to evil from you if I comply not 
i!?ui"tSlir^ with a wish which you signify, I am bound or 
*'*^- obliged by your command, or I lie under a duty 

to obey it. If, in spite of that evil in prospect, I comply 
not with the wish which you signify, I am said to disobey 
your command, or to violate the duty which it imposes. 
The tenns Command . and duty, are, therefore, correlative 

SlddS^ aie terms : the meaning denoted by each being im- 
cQireUove. p^ed or supposcd by the other. Or (changing 
the expression) wherever a duty lies, a command has been 
signified ; and whenever a command is signified, a duty is 
imposed. 

Concisely expressed, the meaning of the correlative ex- 
pression is this. He who yrill inflict an evil in case his 
desire be disregarded, utters a command by expressing or 
intimating his desire : He who is liable to the evil in case 
he disregard the desure, is bound or obliged by the com- 
mand. 

The evil which will probably be incurred in 
^^t^^ case a command be disobeyed, or (to use an 
"'^''^ equivalent expression) in case a duty be broken, 
is frequently called a sanction or an enforcement of obedience. 
Or (varying the phrase) the command or the duty is said to 
be sanctioned or enforced by the chance of incurring the 
evil. 

Considered as thus abstracted ftom the command and the 
duty which it enforces, the evil to be incurred by disobedi- 
ence is frequently styled a punishment. But as punishments. 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 7 

strictly so called, are only a class of sanctions, the term is 
too narrow to express the meaning adequately. 

I observe that Dr. Paley, in his analysis of the J„'',.JofaSJ^- 
term obligation^ lays much stress upon the violence ||'„7i*^^"y* 
of the motive to comphance. In so far as I can ti<»n, a vioUnt 

^ ... motive to 

gather a meaning from his loose and inconsistent compliance is 

o o 1 1 • 1 ""' requisite. 

Statement, his meaning appears to be this : that, 
unless the motive to comphance be violent or intense^ tlie 
expression or intimation of a wish is not a convnand, nor 
does the party to whom it is directed lie under a duti/ to 
regard it. 

If he means, by a violent motive, a motive operating with 
certainty, his proposition is manifestly false. The greater 
the evil to be incurred in case the wish be disregarded, and 
the greater the chance of incurring it on that same event, 
the greater, no doubt, is the chance that the wish will not 
be disregarded. But no conceivable motive will certainly 
determine to comphance, or no conceivable motive will 
render obedience inevitable. If Paley's proposition be true, 
in the sense which I have now ascribed to it, commands 
and duties are simply impossible. Or, reducing his proposi- 
tion to absurdity by a consequence as manifestly false, com- 
mands and duties are possible, but are never disobeyed or 
broken. 

If he means by a violent motive, an evil which inspires 
fear, his meaning is simply this : that the party bound by 
a command is bound by the prospect of an evil. For that 
which is not feared is not apprehended as an evil; or 
(changing the shape of the expression) is not an evil in 
prospect. 

The truth is, that the magnitude of the eventual evil, 
and the magnitude of the chance of incurring it, are foreign 
to the matter in question. The greater the eventual evil, 
and the greater the chance of incurring it, the greater is 
the efficacy of the command, and the greater is the strength 
of the obligation: Or (substituting expressions exactly 

TB THE PROVINCE OP 

equivalent) the greater is the chance that the command will 
be obeyed, and that the duty will not be broken. But 
where there is the smallest chance of incurring the smallest 
evil, tiie expression of a wish amounts to a command, and, 
therefore, imposes a duty. The sanction, if you will, is 
feeble or insufficient; but still there is a sanction, and, 
therefore, a duty and a command. 

rBcwardtare ^7 ^voQ Celebrated writers (by LocKeiJBOTr. 

lm>t mnctian*. ^j^^ ^^^^ J ^^iuj^^ Palcy), the term sanction or 

enforcement of obedience^ is applied to conditional good as 
well as to conditional evil : to reward as well as to punish- 
ment. But, with all my habitual veneration for the names 
of Locke and Bentham, I think that this ^Ltension of the 
term is pregnant with confusion and perplexity. 

Eewards are indisputably motives to comply with the 
wishes of others^ But to talk of commands and duties as 
sanctioned or enforced by rewards, or to talk of rewards as 
obliging or constraining to obedience, is surely a wide de- 
parture from the established meaning of the terms. 

If you expressed a desire that / should render a service, 
and if you proffered a reward as the motive or inducement 
to render it, you would sc^cely be said to command the 
service, nor should /, in ordinary language, Idc obliged to 
render it. In ordinary language, you would promise me a 
reward, on condition of my rendering the service, wliilst / 
might be incited or persuaded to render it by the hope of 
obtaining the reward. ' 

Again : If a law hold out a reward as an inducement to 
do some act, an eventual right is conferred, and not an 
obligation imposed, upon those who shall act accordingly : 
The imperative part of the law being addressed or directed 
to the party whom it requires to render the reward. 

In short, I am determined or inchned to comply with 
the wish of another, by the fear of disadvantage or evil. I 
am also determined or inclined to comply with the wish of 
another, by tlie hope of advantage or good. But it is only 

JUBI8FBUDENCB DETERMINED. 9 

by the chance of incurring evily that I am bound or obliged 
to compliance. It is only by conditional evil, that duties 
are sanctioned or enforced. It is the power and the pur- 
pose of inflicting eventual evil, and not the power and the 
purpose of imparting eventual good, which gives to the ex- 
pression of a wish the name of a command. 

If we put reward into the import of the term sanction, 
•we must engage in a toilsome struggle with the current of 
ordinary speech; and shall often sUde unconsciously, not- 
withstanding our efforts to the contrary, into the narrower 
and customary meaning. 

It appears, then, from what has been premised, ,^ 

1 f . 1 . 1 T 1 1 1 ^^^ meaning 

that tlie ideas or notions comprehended by the of the term 
term command are the following. 1. A msh or i>"eflvre- 
deeire conceived by a rational being, that anotlier 
rational being shall do or forbear. 2. An evil to proceed 
from the former, and to be incurred by the latter, in case 
the latter comply not with the wish. 3. An expression or 
intimation of the wish by words or other signs. 

It also appears from what has been premised, ,.,, . 

*■ *^ , . ^ ' 1 he insGim- 

that command, duty, and sanction are inseparably raWecouncx- 

- , , , , ion of the 

connected terms : that each embraces the same tiircc terma 
ideas as the others, tliough each denotes those Sl'ryTtnd 
ideas m a pecuhar order or series. 

" A wish conceived by one, and expressed or intimated 
to another, with an evil to be inflicted and incurred in case 
the wish be disregarded," are signified directly and indirectly 
by each of the three expressions. Each is the name of the 
same complex notion. 

But when I am talking directly of the expres- 

. . . /. 1 . 1 T 1 1 The mnnncr 

sion or mtimation of the wish, I employ the term oft»mtcon- 

command: The expression or intimation of tlie 

wish being presented prominently to my hearer ; wliilst the 

evil to be incurred, with tlie chance of incurring it, are 

kept (if I may so express myself) in the backgiouiid of my 

picture. 

10 THE PROVINCE OP 

When I am talking directly of the chance of incurring 
the evil, or (changing the expression) of the liability or ob- 
noxiousness to the evil, I employ the term dutyj or the term 
obligation : The liability or obnoxiousness to the evil being 
put foremost, and the rest of the complex notion being sig^ 
nified implicitly. 

When I am talking immediately of the evil itself, I em- 
ploy the term sanction^ or a term of the like import : The 
evil to be incurred being signified directly ; whilst the ob- 
noxiousness to that evil, with the expression or intimation 
of the wish, are indicated indirectly or obliquely. 

To those who are familiar with the language of logicians 
(language unrivalled for brevity, distinctness and precision), 
I can express my meaning accurately, in a breath. — ^Each 
of the three terms signijies the same notion ; but each de- 
notes a different part of that notion, and connotes the re- 
sidue. 
-. , Commands are of two species. Some are laws 

IxiWM or rule* t 

ubtiiiguUhod or rules. The others have not acquired an ap- 

from com- , m t 

mandt which proDnatc uamc, nor does language afford an ex- 
0i9tfmriic^ pression which will marie them bneny and pre- 
cisely. I must, therefore, note them, as well as 
I can, by the ambiguous and inexpressive name of " occa- 
sional or particular commands." 

The term laws or rules being not unfrequently applied to 
occasional or particular commands, it is hardly possible to 
describe a line of separation which shall consist in every 
respect with established forms of speech. But the distinc- 
tion between laws and particular commands, may, I think, 
be stated in the following manner. 

By every command, the party to whom it is directed is 
Obliged to do or to forbear.' 

Now where it obliges generally to acts or forbearances of 
a class^ a command is a law or rule. But where it obliges 
to a specific act or forbearance, or to acts or forbearances 
wlijch it determinea specifically or individvjaUxf^ a command 

JUBISPRUDENCB DBTEBMINED. 11 

is occasional or particular. In other words, a class or de- 
scription of acts is determined by a law or rule, and acts of 
that class or description are enjoined or forbidden generally. 
But where a command is occasional or particular, the act or 
acts, which the command enjoins or forbids, are assigned or 
determined by dieir specific or individual natures, as well as 
by the class or description to which they belong. 

The statement which I have now given in abstract ex- 
pressions, I will endeavour to illustrate by apt examples. 

If you command your servant to go on a given errand, 
or not to leave your house on a given evening, or to rise at 
such an hour on such a morning, or to rise at that hour 
during the next week or month, the command is occasional 
or particular. For the act or acts enjoined or forbidden, 
are specifically determined or assigned. 

But if you command him simply to rise at that hour, 
or to rise at that hour always, or to rise at that hour till 
further orders, it may be said, with propriety, that you lay 
down a rule for the guidance of your servant's conduct. For 
no specific act is assigned by the command, but the com- 
mand obUges him generally to acts of a determined class. 

If a regiment be oixlered to attack or defend a post, or 
to quell a riot, or to march from their present quaiters, the 
command is occasional or particular. But an order to exer- 
cise daily till fiirther orders shall be given, would be called 
a general order, and might bo called a rule. 

If Parliament prohibited simply the exportation of com, 
either for a given period or indefinitely, it would establish 
a law or rule : a kind or sort of acts being determined by 
the command, and acts of that kind or sort being ijenerally 
forbidden. But an order issued by Parhamcnt to meet an 
impending scarcity, and stopping the exportation of corn 
then shipped and in port, would not be a law or rule, though 
issued by the sovereign legislature. The order regarding 
exclusively a specified quantity of com, the negative acts or 
forbearances, enjoined by the command, would be deter- 

12 THE PBOVIKGB OF ' 

mined specifically or individually by the determinate nature 
of their subject. 

As issued by a sovereign l^islature, and as wearing the 
form of a law, the order which I have now imagined would 
probably be called a law. And hence the difficulty of draw- 
ing a distinct boundary between laws and occasional com* 
mands. 

Again : An act which is not an ofTence, according to the 
existing law, moves the sovereign to displeasure :• and, 
though the authors of the act are legally innocent or unof- 
fending, the sovereign commands that they sliall be pu- 
nished. As enjoining a specific punishment in that specific 
case, and as not enjoining generally acts or forbearances 
of a class, the order uttered by the sovereign is not a law 
or rule. 

Whether such an order would be called a law, seems to 
depend upon circumstances which are purely immaterial : 
immateriaJ, that is, with reference to the present purpose, 
though material with reference to others. K made by a 
sovereign assembly, deliberately, and with the forms of le- 
gislation, it would probably be called a law. If uttered by 
an absolute monarch; without deUberation or ceremony, it 
would scarcely be confounded with acts of l^islation, and 
would be styled an arbitrary command. Yet, on either of 
these suppositions, its nature would be the same. It would 
not be a law or rule, but an occasional or particular com- 
mand of the sovereign One or Number. 

To conclude with an example which best illustrates the 
distinction, and which shows the importance of tlie distinc- 
tion most conspicuously, judicial commands arc commonly 
occasional or particular, although the commands, wliich they 
are ciilciilated to enforce, are commonly laws or rules. 

For instance, the lawgiver commands that thieves shall be 
hanged. A specific theft and a specified thief being given, 
the judge commands that the thief shall be lianged, agreeably 
to the command of the lawgiver. 

JUBISFBUDBNCE BSTERHINSD. 13 

Now the lawgiver determines a class or description of 
acts; prohibits acts of the class generally and indefinitely; 
and commands, with the hke generahty, that punishment 
shall follow transgression. The command of the lawgiver 
is, therefore, a law or rule. But the command of the judge 
is occasional or particular. For he orders a specific pimish- 
ment, as the consequence of a specific offence. 

According to the line of separation which I have now 
attempted to describe, a law and a particular command are 
distinguished thus. — Acts or forbearances of a class, are en- 
joined generally by the former. Acts determined specifically^ 
are enjoined or forbidden by the latter. 

A different line of separation has been drawn by Black- 
stone and others. According to Blackstone and others, a 
law and a particular command are distinguished in the fol- 
lowing manner. — A law obliges generally the members of 
the given community, or a law obliges generally persons of a 
given class. A particular command obliges a single person, 
or persons whom it determines individually. 

That laws and particular commands are not to be distin- 
guished thus, will appear on a moment's reflection. 

For, firsts commands which oblige generally the mem- 
bers of the given community, or commands which oblige 
generally persons of given classes, are not always laws or 
rules. 

For example, An order for a general mourning, or an 
order for a general fast, is uttered by a monarch, or sove- 
reign assembly, on occasion of a pubhc calamity. Now, 
though it is addressed to the community at large, the order 
is scarcely a rule, in the usual acceptation of the term. For, 
though it obhges generally the members of the entire com- 
munity, it obhges to acts which it assigns specifically, in- 
stead of obliging generally to acts or forbearances of a class. 
If the sovereign commanded that black should be the dress 
of his subjects, his command woidd amount to a law. But 

14 THE PBOVINCE OF 

if he commanded them to wear it on a specified occasion, 
his command would be merely particular. 

And, secondly^ a command which obliges exclusively per- 
sons individually determined, may amount, notwithstand- 
ing, to a law or rule. 

For example, A father may set a rule to his child or 
children : a guardian, to his ward : a master, to his slave 
or servant And certain of God's laws were as binding * on 
the first man, as they are binding at this hour on the mil* 
lions who have sprung from his loins. 

Most, indeed, of the laws which are established by poli- 
tical superiors, or most of the laws which are simply and 
strictly so called, oblige generally the members of the polif 
tical community, or oblige generally persons of a class. To 
frame a system of duties for every individual of the com- 
munity, were simply impossible : and if it were possible, it 
were utterly useless. Most of the laws established by poli- 
tical superiors, are, therefore, general in a twofold manner : 
as enjoining or forbidding generally acts of kinds or sorts ; 
and as binding the whole commimity, or, at least, whole 
classes of its members. 

But if we suppose that Parliament creates and grants an 
office, and that Parliament binds the grantee to services 
of a given description, we suppose a law established by poli- 
tical superiors, and yet exclusively binding a specified or 
determinate person. 

Laws established by political superiors, and exclusively 
binding specified or determinate persons, are styled, in the 
language of the Eoman jurists, privilegia. Though that, 
indeed, is a name whioh will hardly denote them distinctly : 
Tor, like most of the leading terms in actual systems of law, 
it is not the name of a definite class of objects, but of a 
heap of heterogeneous objects.* 

• Where a pnviltgium merely imposes u duty, it exclusively obliges a 
determinate person or persons. But where a privilefjwm confers a right, 
and the right conferred avails against the world at large, the law is pri- 

JUfilSFRUDENCB DETERMINED. 15 

It appears from what has been premised, that '^•^i^ot^'* 
WL law, properly so called, may be defined in the J^^^*"'^ 
following manner. 

'A law is a command which obhges a person or persons. 

But, as contradistinguished or opposed to an occasional 
or particular command, a law is a command which obliges 
a person or persons, and obliges generally to acts or forbear- 
ances of a class. 

In language more popular but less distinct and precise, a 
law is a command which obliges a person or persons to a 
course of conduct 

Laws and other commands are said to proceed T]|»cmcwiing 

^ ^ of liic Ci)rre- 

from superiors, and to bind or obUge inferiors. Native tcmw 
I Will, therefore, analyze the meaning of those cor- in/tnur. 
relative expressions ; and will try to strip them of a cer- 
tjun mystery, by which that simple meaning ai)pears to be 
obscured. 

Superiority is often synonymous with precedence or excel- 
lence. We taJk of superiors in rank ; of superiors in weahh ; 
of superiors in virtue : comparing certain persons with cer- 
tain other persons ; and meaning that the former precede or 
excel the latter, in rank, in wealth, or in virtue. 

But, taken with the meaning wherein I here understand 
it, the term superiority signifies might : the power of afieirt- 
ing others with evil or pain, and of forcing them, through 
fear of that evil, to fashion their conduct to one's wishes. 

For example, God is emphatically the superior of Man. 
For his power of afiecting us with pain, and of forcing us 
to comply with his will, is unbounded and resistless. 

viU^um as viewed from a certain aspect, but is also a fjenfrnl law as 
viewed from another aspect. In respect of the riplit confcrntl, the law 
exclusively regards a determinate person, and, then Inn*, is pririhiiium. 
In respect of the duty imposed, and corresponding to tlie right conferred, 
the law regards generally the members of the entire connnunity. 

This I shall explain particidarly, at a subse<iueiit point of my (\>ur»p, 
when I consider tlie peculiar nature of so willed pridUgtay or of so called 
private laics. 

"T'^WWFW 

1^ THE PROVINCE OP 

To a limited extent, the sovereiga One or Number is the 
superior of the subject or citizen : the master, of the slave or 
servant : the father, of the diild. 

In short, whoever can ohliye another to comply with his 
wishes, is the smfi0n&r of that other, so far as the ability, 
reaches : The party who is obnoxious to the impending evU, 
being, to that same extent, the inferior. 

The might or superiority of God, is sunple or absolute^ 
But in all or most cases of human superiority, the relation 
of superior and inferior, and the relation of inferior and 
superior, are reciprocal. Or (changing the expression) the 
party who is the superior as viewed from one aspect, is the 
inferior as viewed from another. 

For example, To an indefinite, though limited extent, the 
monarch is the superior of the governed : his power being 
commonly sufficient to enforce compliance with his wHL 
But the governed, collectively or in mass, are also the su- 
perior of the monarch : who is checked in the abuse of his 
might by his fear of exciting their anger ; and of rousing 
to active resistance, the miglit which slumbers in the mul- 
titude. 

A member of a sovereign assembly is the superior of the 
judge : the judge being bound by the law wliich proceeds 
from that sovereign body. But, in his character of citizen 
or subject, he is the inferior of the judge : the judge being 
the minister of the law, and armed with the power of en- 
forcing it. 

It appears, then, that the term superiority (Uke the terms 
dviy and sanction) is impUed by the term command. For su- 
periority is the power of enforcing compUance with a wish ;^ 
and the expression or intimation of a wish, with the power 
and the purpose of enforcing it, are the constituent elements 
of a command. 

" That laws emanate from superiors^'' is, therefore, an 
identical proposition^ For the meaning which it affects to 
Impart is contained, in its subject. 

JUBISPRUDENCE DETEEMINgD, 17 

If I mark the peculiar source of a given law, or if I mark 
the peculiar source of laws of a given class, it is possible 
that' I am saying something which may instruct the hearer. 
But to affirm of laws universally " that they flow from sti- 
periars^*' or to affirm of laws universally " that inferiors are 
bound to obey them," is the merest tautology and trifling. 

like most of the leading terms in the sciences ^^^ 
of jurisprudence and morals, the term laws is ex- ^*JP*{^*^. 
tremely ambiguous. Taken with the largest sig- are not com- 
nification which can be given to tlie term pro- °^ 
perly, laws are a species of commands. But the term is im- 
properly applied to various objects which have nothing 
of the imperative character : to objects which are not com- 
mands; and which, therefore, are not laws, properly so called. 

Accordingly, the proposition " that laws are commands " 
must be taken with limitations. Or, ralher, we must dis- 
tinguish the various meanings of the term laics ; and must 
restrict the proposition to that class of objects which is em- 
braced by the largest signification that can be given to the 
term properly. 

This I shall try to accomplish, with all possible brevity, 
by passing in review the various classes of objects to whicli 
the term laws is improperly apphed. 

1. The human laws which 1 style ])ositive morality have 
nothing of the imperative character. They are closely ana- 
logous to laws, properly so called. The duties which they 
impose are closely analogoxis to duties, in the proper signi- 
fication of the term. The simctions with which tliey are 
armed are closely analogous to sanctions, in the proi)er 
j^cceptation of the expression. But, as I have intimated 
already, and as I shall show hereafter, they are not signifi- 
cations of desire by determinate superiors. Consequently, 
they are not commands, properly so called. They are not 
laws, in the proper meaning of the. name.* They neither 

* [Among the numeront scaUered notes which were evidently mado witli a view to 
VOL. I. C 

18 THE PBOVINCB OF 

impose duties, nor are they armed with sanctions^ in the 
proper acceptation o^ the terms. 

2. Laws merely figurative (to which I have adverted al- 
ready) I shall e:q)lain briefly in a future lecture. I notice 
them here, for the sake of regularity ; and I dismiss them, 
for the present, with the following remark. 

Like the improper laws which I style positive morality, 
they are related to laws, properly so called, in the way of 
analogy. But, unUke the improper laws which I style posi-' 
tive morality, they are related to laws, properly so called, by 
a remote or slender analogy. Like the improper laws which 
I style positive morality, they are named laws by an analo- 
gical extension of the term. But, unlike the improper laws 
which I style positive morality, they are named laws by 
such an extension of the term as is merely metaphorical or 
figurative. 

3. Acts on the part of legislatures to explain positive law, 

a corrected and enlaiged edition of thia Work, I find the following :—** Correct Lectum 
I. agreeably to note in Preiace, p. zvi." 

I have not presomed to make the correction ioggested ; but by transfening th« aol* 
from the Prafiioe to the paaugt to which it refen^ I have» I tnut, in lome degiea ftil- 
fiUed the Anthoi'a intentiooa.— S. A.] 

In the paaaage above, I affirm univenallj of poaitiye moral rules, tliat 
they are laws improperly so called ; or I limit the expresfiion ^' pontire 
moral rules '* to the laws improperly so called which are laws set by opinion. 
But this is an error. For, as I have intimated in the Preface, and aa I 
diow in the fifth lecture, there are laws imperative and proper to which the 
expression is applicable. 

In strictness, declaratory lawa and laws abrogating laws belong to the 
kind of laws which are laws metaphorical or figurative ; and laws o/mper-' . 
feet obligation f in the sense of the Boman jiurists, belong to the kind of 
laws which are Jaws metaphorical or figurative, or to the kind of lawa 
which are laws set by opinion. But, though laws of those three sorts are 
laws improperly so called, they are closely connected witli positive lawa, • 
and are appropriate subjects of jurisprudence. Accordingly, I exclude 
improj>er laws of those three sorts from laws metaphorical or figurative 
and laws set by opinion : and enumerating, in the first lecture, the classes 
of improper lawa, I place tliosc three sorts on a level with the two kinds 
of which those three sortH are strictiv limbs or members. 

JUBISPtttDfeNCfB DETEBMt!^D. 19 

aiii''flcarcely'be^ called laws, in the proper signification of the 
term. Working no change in the actual duties of the go- 
verned, but simply declaring what those duties are^ they 
properly are acts of interpretation by legislative authority. 
Or, to borrow an expression from the writers on the Eoman 
Law, they are acts of authentic interpretation. 

But, tWs notwithstanding, they are frequently styled laws : 
deddratary laws, or declaratory statutes. They must, there- 
fore, be noted as forming an exception to the proposition 
••that laws are a species of commands." 
- It often, indeed, happens (as I shall show in the proper 
place), that laws declaratory in name are imperative in ciTei^t : 
Legislative, like judicial interpretation, being frequentlj ^ 
ceptive ; and establishing new law, under guise of cxpou 
iog the old. 

4. Laws to repeal laws, and to release from existing duU* 
must also be excepted from the proposition " that laws 

a species of commands." In so far as they release uvmi 
duties imposed by existing laws, they arc not commands, 
but revocations of commands. They authorize or permit 
the parties, to whom the repeal extends, to do or to forljcnr 
from acts which they were commanded to forl)ear from or 
to do. And, considered with regard to this^ tlieir imme- 
diate or direct purpose, they are often named permissive 
laws^ or, more briefly and more propeily, penniHsions. 

Eemotely and indirectly, indeed, permissive laws are often 
or always imperative. For the parties released from duties 
are restored to liberties or rights : and duties answering 
those rights are, therefore, created or revived. 

But this is a matter wliich I shall examine with exactness, 
when I analyze the expressions " legal right,*' " ])onnis.sion 
by the sovereign or state," and ** civil or politicjil lihorly/* 

5. Imperfect laws, or laws of im})rrrcct (>])ligiiti(>n, mnsl 
also be excepted from the i)roj)ositi(ni 'Mli.it laws anj w 
species of commands." 

An imperfect law (with the sense wherein the Wv\\\ v* \\^^\ 

c 2 

20 THB PR0VINC3B OF 

by the Boman jurists) is a law which wants a sanction, and 
which, therefore, is not binding. A law declaring that cer- 
tain acts are crimes, but annexing no punishment to the 
commission of acts of the class, is the simplest and most 
obvious example. 

Though the author of an imperfect law signifies a desire, 
he manifests no purpose of enforcing compliance witii the 
desire. But where there is not a purpose of enforcing comr . 
pliance with the desire, the expression of a desire is not a 
command. Consequently, an imperfect law is not so pro- 
perly a law, as counsel, or exhortation, addressed by a su- 
perior to inferiors. 

uilxamples of imperfect laws are cited by the Eoman ju- 
,^sts. But with us in England, laws professedly imperative 
are always (I believe) perfect or obligatory. Where the 
English legislature afibcts to command, the English tribunals 
not unreasonably presume that the legislature exacts obedi- 
ence. And, if no specific sanction be annexed to a given 
law, a sanction is supplied by the courts of justice, agreeably 
to a general maxim which obtains in cases of the kind. 

The imperfect laws, of which I am now speaking, are 
laws which are imperfect, in the sense of the Roman jurists : 
that is to say, laws which speak the desires of political 
superiors, but which their authors (by oversight or design) 
have not provided with sanctions. Many of the writers on 
morals J and on the so called law of nature^ have annexed a 
different meaning to the term imperfect. Speaking of im- 
perfect obligations, they commonly mean duties which are 
not legal : duties imposed by commands of God, or duties 
imposed by positive morality, as contradistinguished to 
duties imposed by positive law. An imperfect obligation, in 
the sense of the Boman jurists, is exactly equivalent to no 
obligation at alL For the term imperfect denotes simply, 
that the law wants the sanction appropriate to laws of the 
kind. An imperfect obligation, in the other meaning of the 
expression, is a religious or a moral obligation. The term 

JUBISPRUDEKCE DETEHMIXED. 21 

imperfect does not denote that the law imposing the duty 
wants the appropriate sanction. It denotes that the law 
imposing the duty is not a law established by a political su- 
perior : that it wants that perfecty or that surer or more 
cogent sanction, which is imparted by the sovereign or state. 

I believe that I have now reviewed all the 
classes of objects, to which the term laws is impro- p^fy w 
perly appUed."* The laws (improperly so called) may tJL not 
which I have now enumerated, are (I think) the ""p^*'*^*' 
only laws which are not commands. But, though these 
are the only laws which really are not commands, there are 
certain laws (properly so called) which may seem not impe- 
rative. Accordingly, I will subjoin a few remarks upon laws 
of this dubious character. 

1. There are laws, it may be said, which merely create 
rights : And, seeing that every command imposes a duty^ 
laws of this nature are not imperative. 

But, as I have intimated already, and shall show com- 
pletely hereafter, there are no laws merely creating rights. 
There are laws, it is true, which merely create duties : duties 
not correlating with correlating rights, and whicli, there- 
fore, may be styled absohte. But every law, really confer- 
ring a right, imposes expressly or tacitly a relative duty, or 
a duty correlating with the right. K it specify the remedy 
to be given, in case the right shall be infringed, it imposes 
the relative duty expressly. K the remedy to be given be 
not specified, it refers tacitly to pre-existing law, and clothes 
the right which it purports to create with a remedy provided 
by that law. Every law, really conferring a right, is, there- 
fore, imperative : as imperative, as if its only i)iirpose were 
the creation of a duty, or as if the relative duty, which it 
inevitably imposes, were merely absolute. 
^.The meanings of the term rights are various and per- 
plexed ; taken with its proper meaning, it (•unij)n.ses ideas 

• Laws which for any reaaon are merely niill or void, are clearly not 
laws in any significadon of the term. When we say that a liaw is nnll, 

22 THE PROVINCE OF 

wldch are nximerous and complicated ; and the searching 
and extensive analysis, which the term, therefore, requires, 
would occupy more room than could be given to it in the 
present lecture. It is not, however, necessary, that the 
analysis should be performed here. I purpose, in my earlier 
lectures, to determine the province of jurisprudence ; or to 
distinguish the laws established by political superiors, from 
the various laws, proper and improper, witli which they are 
frequently confounded. And this I may accomplisli exactly 
enough, without a nice inquiry into tlie import of the term 
right 

2. According to an opinion which I must notice incidenr 
tally here, though the subject to which it relates will be 
treated directly herciifter, customary laws must be excepted 
fix>m the proposition " that laws are a species of commands." 

By many of the admirers of customaiy laws (and, espe- 
dally, of their Geiintin admirers), they are thought to oblige 
legally (independently of the sovereign or state), because the 
citizens or subjects have observed or kept them. Agreeably 
to this opinion, they are not the creatures of the sovereign 
or state, although the sovereign or state may abohsh them 
at pleasure. Agreeably to tliis opinion, they are positive 
law (or law, strictly so called), inasmuch as they are enforced 
by the courts of justice : But, that notwitlistanding, they 
exist as positive law by the spontaneous adoption of the 
governed, and not by position or establishment on the part 
of political superiors. Consequently, customaiy laws, consi- 
dered as positive law, are not commands. And, consequently, 
customary laws, considered as positive law, are not laws or 
rules, properly so called. 

An opinion less mysterious, but somewhat allied to this, 
is not uncommonly held by the adverse party : by the party 
which is strongly opposed to customary law ; and to all 

-we resort to an expression, which in strictness is contradictory and absurd, 
for the purpose of avoiding circumlocution. Wc mean that a something 
which somebody calls a Law is not a Law. — MS. Xote by the Author, 

JUBISFBUDENCE DETERMINED. 23 

law made judicially, or in the way of judicial legislation. 
According to the latter opinion, all judge-made law, or all 
judge-made law established by subject judges, is purely the 
creature of the judges by whom it is established immediately. 
Id impute it to the sovereign legislature, or to suppose that 
it speaks the will of the sovereign legislature, is one of the 
JDolish or knavish fictions with which lawyers, in every age 
and nation, have perplexed and darkened the simplest and 
dearest truths. 

I think it will appear, on a moment's reflexion, that 
each of these opinions is groundless : that customary law 
is imperative^ in the proper signification of the term ; and 
that all judge-made law is the creature of the sovereign or 
state. 

At its origin, a custom is a rule of conduct which the go- 
verned observe spontaneously, or not in pursuance of a law 
set by a poUtical superior. The custom is transmuted into 
positive law, when it is adopted as such by the courts of jus- 
tice, and when the judicial decisions fashioned upon it are 
enforced by the power of the state. But before it is adopted 
by the courts, and clothed with the legal sanction, it is merely 
a rule of positive morality : a ride generally observed by the 
citizens or subjects ; but deriving the only force, which it 
can be said to possess, from the general disapprobation fall- 
ing on those who transgress it 

Now when judges transmute a custom into a legal rule 
(or make a legal rule not suggested by a custom), the legal 
rule which they establish is established by the sovereign 
legislature. A subordinate or subject judge is merely a 
minister. The portion of the sovereign power which lies 
at his disposition is merely delegated. The rules which he 
makes derive their legal force from authority given by the 
state : an authority which the state may confer expressly, 
but which it commonly imparts in the way of ac(]uiescence. 
For, since the state may reverse the rules wliich he makes, 
and yet permits him to enforce them by the \jovi^t oi >3cl'^ 

24 THE PROYINCE OF 

political community, its sovereign will " that his rules shaH 
obtcdn as law " is clearly evinced by its conduct, though not 
by its express declaration. 

The admirers of customary law love to trick out their idol 
with mysterious and imposing attributes. But to those who 
can see the difference between positive law and morality, 
there is nothing of mystery about it. Considered as rules 
of positive morality, customary laws arise from the consent 
of the governed, and not from the position or establishment 
of poUtical superiors. But, considered as moral rules turned 
into positive laws, customary laws are established by the 
state : estabhshed by the state directly, when the customs 
are promulged in its statutes ; established by the state cir- 
cuitously, when the customs are adopted by its tribunals. 

The opinion of the party which abhors judge-made law, 
springs from thar inadequate conception of the nature of 
commands. 

Like other significations of desire, a command is express 
or tacit. If the desire be signified by words (Avritten or 
spoken), the conmaand is express. If the desire be signified 
by conduct (or by any signs of desire which are not words), 
the command is tacit 

Now when customs are turned into legal rules by deci- 
sions of subject judges, the legal rules which emerge from 
the customs arc tacit commands of the sovereign legislature. 
The state, which is able to abolish, permits its ministers to 
e'nforce them : and it, therefore, signifies its pleasure, by that 
its voluntary acquiescence, " that they shall serve as a law to 
the governed." 

My present purpose is merely this : to prove that the 
positive law styled customary (aud all ix)sitive law made ju- 
dicially) is established by tlie state directly or circuitously, 
and, therefore, is imperative, I am far from dii>])utiiig, that 
law made judicially (pr in tlie way of improper legislation) 
and law made by statute (or in tlie i)roi)crly legislative man- 
ner) are distingiushv;!:! by weighty diirerences. I shall in- 

JUBI8PRUDENCB DETBBMINED. 25 

'quire, in future lectures, whatuthose differences are ; and 
why subject judges, who are properly ministers of the law, 
have commonly shared with the sovereign in the business 
of making it. 

I assume, then, that the only laws which are j^'^oT^- 
not imperative are the following: — 1. The laws "J^^J;^**" 
or rules which I style positive morality. 2. Laws 
merely metaphorical. 3. Declaratory laws, or laws explain- 
ing the import of existing positive law. 4. Laws abrogating 
or repealing existing positive law. 5. Imperfect laws, or 
laws of imperfect obligation (with the sense wherein the ex- 
pression is used by the Eoman jurists). 

But the space occupied in the science by these improper 
laws is comparatively narrow and insignificant. Accordingly, 
although I shall take them into account so often as I refer 
to them directly, I shall throw them out of account on oUier 
occasions. Or (changing the expression) I shall limit the 
term law to laws which are imperative, unless I extend it 
expressly to laws which are not 

26 TUB PROVINCE OP 

[The following manuscript fragment is marked ' Introduction 
to Lecture II.' : — It was no doubt intended to be incorporated 
with the lecture, but, in obedience to the rule I have prescribed 
to myself, no attempt has been made to alter its form. — S. A.] 

The Matter of the Science of Jurisprudence is Law 
(strictly so called). . 

But this, as I stated in the preceding lecture, is liable to 
be confounded with certain objects, to which it is allied or 
related in the way of resemblance or analogy : viz. Divine 
Laws and Eeligious Precepts ; Moral Rules or the Laws of 
Morality ; and Laws merely improper, or purely metapho- 
rical. 

To extricate the subject of Jurisprudence from these 
foreign, though related, objects, is the purpose which I am 
trying to accomplish in this earlier portion of my course : 
and in order to accomplish this purpose, the following, I 
think, is the obvious and convenient method : — 

1st, To enumerate the essentials of a law or rule (as 
taken in the largest signification which can be given to Uie 
term with propriety). 

2ndly, Having stated the essentials of a law (in tlie largest 
signification of the term), to distinguish divine and moral 
laws from laws, strictly so called. 

3rdly, To advert, briefly, to the metaphorical applications 
of the term, and to cleanse it of the other ambiguities by 
which its import is obscured. 

Accordingly, I endeavoured, in my last lecture, to ex- 
plain the essentials of a law (as taken in the largest sig- 
nification which can be given to the tenn with propriety) 
as embracing every object to which we can apply the term 
without extending its import analogically, and without devi- 
atmg mio sheer metaphor : as comprising religious precepts 

JUSISFRUDEfTCE DETERMINED. 27 

4Uid certain moral rules, together with the laws which are 
atrictly so styled. 

Subject to the restrictions which I tliere stated, and which 
it were extremely inconvenient to repeat here, the result of 
the analysis which I apphed to the term law, is this : — 

Ist, That a law or rule is a command. 

2ndly, That, as distinguished from the commands which 
may be named occasional or particular, a law is a command, 
which obUges to a course of conduct ; or which obliges, ge- 
nerally and indefinitely^ to acts or forbearances of a class. 

But laws which are strictly so called (laws established by 
political superiors) are not the only objects wliich this defi- 
nition embraces. It comprises every object to which the 
term law can be extended, unless it be used with a mean- 
ing which is purely metaphorical and improper. It appUes, 
with perfect precision, to religious precepts ; or to the laws 
which are estabUshed immediately by God himself: And it 
also applies (although with a little inaccuracy) to those laws 
of human, but not of political institution, whicli may be 
styled the moral law, or the rules or precepts of morality. 
In short, I liave stated the essentials of a law (in the large 
ttignification of the term) and have still to distinguish the 
laws which are the matter of the science of jurisprudence, 
from the laws divine and human which are the matter of 
other sciences. 

LECTUKE n. 

In my first lecture, I stated or suggested tlie 

Tbc con- 

purpose and the manner of my attempt to dc- nexionofthc 
termine the province of jurisprudence : to distin- the ukt lec!. 

ture. 

guish positive law, the appropriate matter of juiis- 
prudence, from the various objects to whicli it is related by 
resemblance, and to which it is related, nearly or remotely, 
by a strong or slender analogy. 

In pursuance of that piupose, and agreeably to that 

28 THE PROVINCE OP 

manner, I stated the essentials of a law or rule (taken wifii 
the largest signification which can be given to the term pro- 
perly). 

In pursuance of that purpose, and agreeably to that man- 
ner, I proceed to distinguish laws set by men to men from 
those Divine laws which are the ultimate test of himian. 
Tiie Divine "^^ Divine laws, or the laws of God, are laws 
u^c?g51 ^* ^y ^^ ^ ^^ human creatures. As I have in- 
timated already, and shall show more fiilly here- 
after, they are laws or rules, properly so called. 

As distinguished from duties imposed by human laws, 
duties imposed by the Divine laws may be called religious 
duties. 

As distinguished from violations of duties imposed by 
himian laws, violations of religious duties are styled sins. 

As distinguished from sanctions annexed to human laws, 
the sanctions annexed to the Divine laws may be called re- 
ligious sanctions. They consist of the evils, or pains, which 
we may suffer here or hereafter, by the immediate appoint- 
ment of God, and as consequences of breaking his command- 
ments. 

oftheDi>ine Of the Diviuc laws, or the laws of God, some 
Jj^%3^ are revealed or promulged, and others are unre- 
!IL^™^" vealed. Such of the laws of God as are unre- 
vealed, vcalcd arc not unfrequently denoted by the fol- 

lowing names or phrases : " the law of nature ;'* '' natural 
law ;" " tlie law manifested to man by the liglit of nature 
or reason ;" " the laws, precepts or dictates of natural reh- 
gion." 

The revealed law of God, and the portion of the law of 
God which is unrevealedj are manifested to men in different 
ways, or by different sets of signs. 

Such of the With regard to the laws which God is pleased 
M^^^ri^"^ ^ '''^^^U the way wherein they are manifested is 
vealed, easily conceived. They are express commands : 

j>ortions of the wordoi God: commands signified to men 

JUBISPRUDEVCE DETERMINED. 29 

through the medium of human^knguage ; and uttered by 
God directly, or by servants whom he sends to aunounce 
them. 

Such of the Divine laws as are unrevealed are such of the 
laws set by God to his human creatures, but not i^'^rc*ijj^* 
through the medium of human language, or not ^'^^^^d, 
expressly. 

These are the only laws which he has set to that portion 
of mankind who are excluded from the light of Kevclation. 

These laws are binding upon us (who have access to the 
truths of Eevelation), in so far as the revealed law has left 
cm: duties undetermined. For, tliough his ex])rcss decla- 
rations are the clearest evidence of his will, we must look 
for many of the duties, which God has imposed upon us, 
to the marks or signs of his pleasure which are styled the 
light of nature. Paley and other divines have proved be- 
yond a doubt, that it was not the purpose of Kevelation 
to disclose the xohole of those duties. Some we could not 
know, without the help of llevelation ; and these the re- 
vealed law has stated distinctly and precisely. The rest we 
may know, if we will, by the light of nature or reason ; and 
these the revealed law supposes or assumes. It passes them 
over in silence, or with a brief and incidental notice. 

But if God has given us laws which he has . 

not revealed or promulged, how shall we know w^irxtotuch 

1 A -rm ^ , ^ . /< 1 . 1 ^^ t*»« Divine 

them? What are those signs of his pleasure, uw«M«re 

which we style the light of nature; and oppose, by 

that figurative phrase, to express declarations of liis will ? 

The hypotheses or theories which attempt to The hypothec 
resolve this question, may be reduced, I think, to ^tiih t^\ 

the UAturc of 
two. tliat bidcx. 

According to one of them, there are human ac- xiichypotho- 
tions which all mankind approve, human actions ^^'J^'^ 
which all men disapprove; and these universal •nM*/o'«»- 

30 THE PROVINCE OP 

niatpracti- sentimeiits arise at the thought of those actions, 
^el'rXtL spontaneously, instantly, and inevitably. Being 
^!^$^^ common to all mankind, and inseparable from the 
TtaetT*' thoughts of thosc actions, these sentiments are 
marks or signs of the Divine pleasure. They are 
proofe that the actions which excite them are enjoined or for- 
bidden by the Deity. 

The rectitude or pravity of human conduct, or its agree- 
ment or disagreement with the laws of God, is instantly in-' 
ferred fix)m these sentiments, without the possibility of mis- 
take. He has resolved that our happiness shall depend on 
our keeping his commandments : and it manifestly consists ^ 
with his manifest -wisdom and goodness, that we should 
know them promptly and certainly. Accordingly, he has not 
committed us to the guidance of our slow and fallible rea- 
son. He has wisely endowed us with feelings^ which warn 
us at every step ; and pursue us, with their importunate 
reproaches, when we wander from the path of our duties. 

These simple or inscrutable feeUngs liave been likened 
to the outward senses, and styled the moral sense : though, 
admitting that the feelings exist, and are proofs of the Di- 
vine pleasure, I am unable to discover the analogy which 
suggested the comparison and the name. The objects 
or appearances which properly are perceived tlirough the 
senses, are perceived immediately, or without an inference 
of the understanding. According to the h}^")otllo^sis which 
I have briefly stated or suggested, there is always an in- 
ference of the understanding, thougli the inference is short 
and inevitable. From feelings which arise within us wlien 
we thmk of certain actions, we infer that those actions are 
enjoined or forbidden by the Deity. 

The hypothesis, however, of a moral sense^ is expressed 
in other ways. 

The laws of God, to whicli these feelings arc tlie index, 
are not unfrequently named innate practical principles^ or 
postulates of practical reason : or they arc said to be written 

JUBISFRUDENOB DETERMINED. 31 

on our hearts, by the finger of their great Author, in broad 
and indelible characters. 

Common sense (the most yielding and accx)mmodating of 
phrases) has been moulded and fitted to the purpose of ex- 
pressing the hypothesis in question. In all their decisions 
on the rectitude or pravity of conduct (its agreement or 
disagreement with the unrevealed law), mankind are said to 
be determined by common sense : this same common sense 
meaning, in this instance, the simple or inscrutable senti- 
ments which I have endeavoured to describe. 

Considered as affecting the soul, when the man thinks 
especially of his own conduct, these sentiments, feelings, or 
emotions, are frequently styled his conscience. 

According to the other of the adverse theories ^^^^^ 
or hypotheses, the laws of God, which are not re- J^Fthesw of 
vealed or promulged, must be gathered by man 
from the goodness of God, and from the tendencies of hu- 
man actions. In other words, the benevolence of God, witli 
the principle of general utility, is our only index or guide to 
his unrevealed law. 

God designs the happiness of all his sentient a i.ricf sum- 
creatures. Some human actions forward that be- "^^^J^ylf^^"" 
nevolent purpose, or their tendencies are benefi- ^'^^y* 
cent or useful. Other human actions are adverse to that 
purpose, or their tendencies are mischievous or pernicious. 
The former, as promoting his purpose, God has enjoined. 
The latter, as opposed to his purpose, God ha:^ forbidden. 
He has given us the faculty of observing ; of remembciiiig ; 
of reasoning : and, by duly applying those faculties, we niiiy 
collect the tendencies of our actions. Knowinjj: the ten- 
dencies of our actions, and knowing his benevolent purpose, 
we know his tacit commands. 

Such is a brief summary of this celebrated Thcf.niowing 
theory. I should wander to a measurelcsa dvH\svwc^ ^xi^xasaxvA^^ 

32 THE PROVINCE OF 

of that sum- from the main purpose of my lectures, if I stated^ 
SS^duSwL^ all the explanations with which that smnmaiy 
must be received. But, to obviate the principal misconcep- 
tions to which the theory is obnoxious, I will subjoin as many 
of those explanations as my purpose and hmits will admit 

The theory is this. Liasmuch as the goodness of Qod 

is boundless and impartial, he designs the greatest happi- 
ness of all his sentient creatures : he wills that the aggre- 
gate of their employments shall find no nearer limit than 
that which is inevitably set to it by their finite and imper- 
fect nature. From the probable efiects of our actions on 
the greatest happiness of all, or from the tendencies of hu- 
man actions to increase or diminish that aggregate, we may 
infer the laws which he has given, but has not expressed or 
revealed. 

The true to*. Now the tendency of a human action (as its 
hSSS^ii- tendency is thus understood) is the whole of its 
toSe'fSf^o?* tendency : the sum of its probable consequences, 
ti^uen- in so far as they are important or material : the 
sima of its remote and collateral, as well as of its 
direct consequences, in so far as any of its consequences may 
influence the general happiness. 

Trying to collect its tendency (as its tendency is thus 
understood), we must not consider the action as if it were 
single and insulated, but must look at the class of actions to 
which it belongs. The probable specific consequences of 
doing that single act, of forbearing from that single act, or 
of omitting that single act, arc not the objects of the in- 
quiry. The question to be solved, is this. If acts of the 
class were generally done, or generally forborne or omitted, 
what would be the pi'obable effect on the general happiness 
or good ? 

Considered by itself, a mischievous act may seem to be 
useful or harmless. Considered by itself, a useful act may 
seem to be pernicious. 

For example. If a poor man steal a handful from the 

JUEISFBUDBNOB DETERMINED. 33 

Beap of hia rich neighbour, the act, considered by itself, is 
harmless or positively good. One man's poverty is as- 
suaged with the superfluous wealth of another. 

But suppose that thefts were general (or that the useful 
right of property were open to frequent invasions), and mark 
the result. 

Without security for property, there were no inducement 
to save. Without habitual saving on the part of proprie- 
tors, there were no accumulation of capital. Without ac- 
cumulation of capital, there were no fund for the payment 
of wages, no division of labour, no elaborate and costly 
machines : there were none of those helps to labour which 
augment its productive power, and, therefore, multiply the 
enjoyments of every individual in the community. Fre- 
quent invasions of property would bring the rich to po- 
verty ; and, what were a greater evil, would aggravate the 
poverty of the poor. 

If a single and insulated theft seem to be harmless or 
good, the fallacious appearance merely arises from this : that 
the vast majority of those, who are tempted to steal, ab- 
stain from invasions of property. Such is the quantity of 
wealth engendered by geneiid security, that the handful 
subtracted by the thief is as nothing when compared with 
the bulk. 

Again : If I evade the payment of a tax imposed by a 
good government, the specific efiects of the mischievous for- 
bearance are indisputably useful. For the money which I 
imduly withhold is convenient to myself; and, compared 
with the bulk of the public revenue, is a quantity too small 
to be missed. But the regular payment of taxes is neces- 
sary to the existence of the government. And I, and the 
rest of the community, enjoy the security which it gives, 
because the payment of taxes is rarely evaded. 

In the cases now supposed, the act or omission is good, 
considered as single or insulated ; but, considered with the 
rest of its class, is evil. In other cases, an act or omission 

VOL. I. D 

S4 THE PSOYIKCB Of 

is evil, considered as single or insulated ; but, considered 
with the rest of its class, is good. 

For example, A punishment^ as a solitary fact, is an evil :. 
the pain inflicted on the criminal being added to the mis* 
chief of the crime. But, considered as part of a system, a 
punishment is useful or beneficent. By a dozen or score 
of punishments, thousands of crimes are prevented. With 
the sufierings of the guilty few, the security of the many i$ 
pmx^ased. By the lopping of a peccant member, the body 
is saved from decay. 

It, therefore, is true generally (for the proposition admits 
of exceptions), that, to determine the true tendency of an 
act, forbearance or omission, we must resolve the following 
question. — ^What would be the probable effect on the gene- 
ral happiness or good, if similar acts, forbearances or omis- 
sions were general or frequent ? 

Such is the test to which we must usually resort, if we 
would try the true tendency of an act, forbearance or omis- 
sion : Meaning, by the true tendency of an act, forbearance 
or omission, the sum of its probable effects on the general 
happiness or good, Or its agreement or disagreement with 
the principle of general utility. 

According to But, if this bc the ordinary test for trying the 
muitytG^°8 tendencies of actions, and if the tendencies of ac- 
JJTmiTt^ tions be the index to the will of God, it follows 
'•'*^*' that most of his commands are general or univer- 

sal. The useful acts which he enjoins, and the pernicious 
acts which he prohibits, he enjoins or prohibits, for the most 
part, not singly, but by classes : not by commands which 
are particular, or directed to insulated cases ; but by laws 
or rules which are general, and commonly inflexible. 

For example, Certain acts are pernicious, considered as a 
class : or (in other words) the frequent repetition of the act 
were adverse to the general happiness, though, in this or 
that instance, the act might be useful or harmless. Further : 
Such are the motives or inducements to the a)inmission of 

JUBmntUDSNCK DETBBUINED. 35 

acts of the daas, that, unless we were determined to forbear- 
ance by the fear of punbhment, they would be frequently 
committed. Now, if we combine these data with the wis- 
dom and goodness of God, we must infer that he forbids 
such acts, and forbids them without exception. In the tenth, 
or the hundredth case, the act might be useful : in the nhie, 
or the ninety and nine, the act wquM be pernicious. If the 
act were permitted or tolerated in the rare and anomalous 
case, the motives to forbear in the others would be weakened 
or destroyed. In the hurry and tumult of action, it is hard 
to distinguish justly. To grasp at present enjoyment, and 
to turn from present uneasiness, is the habitual indination of 
us ail. And thus, through the weakness of our judgments, 
and^the more dangerous infirmity of our wills, we should fre- 
quently stretch the exception to cases embraced by the rule. 

Consequently, where acts, considered as a class, are useful 
or pernicious, we must conclude tliat he enjoins or forbids 
them; and by a ride which probably is inflexible. 

Such, I say, is the conclusion at which we JJu^^f^m 
must arrive, supposing that the fear of punish- ^'Sif^t' 
ment be necessary to incite or restrain. J^a?n*^the 

For the tendency of an act is one thing: the gii*^<^* 
utili^ of enjoining or forbidding it is another juncUon-.and 
thing. There are classes of useful acts, which ^ m;^, 
it were useless to enjoin; classes of mischievous ad^^^ 
acts, which it were useless to prohibit. Sane- p"^^*^*^^ 
tions were superfluous. We are sufficiently prone to the 
useful, and sufficiently averse from the mischievous acts, 
without the motives which are presented to the will by a 
lawgiver. Motives natural ot spontaneous (or motives other 
than those which are created by injunctions and prohibi- 
tions) impel us to actioa in tlie one case, and hold us to 
forbearance in the other. In tlie language of Mr. Locke, 
" The mischievous omission or action would bring down evils 
upon us, which are its natural products or consequences ; 
and which, as natural inconveniences, operate mt/iout a laxn ** 

d2 

3ff THE PROVINCB OF 

tiTJ^oQM ^6w^ if the measure or test which I have en- 
tSTtbJ^of deavoured to explain by the ordinary measure or 
dSJSTwd^ test for trying the tendencies of our actions, the 
sutod. iQost current and specious of the objections, which 
are made to the theory of utiUty, is founded in gross mis- 
take, and is open to triumphant refutation. 
The theory, be it always remembered, is this : 
Our motives to obey the laws which God has given us, 
are paramount to all others. For the transient pleasures 
which we may snatch, or the transient pains whicli we may 
shun, by violating the duties which they impose, are nothing 
in comparison with the pains by which those duties are 
sanctioned. 

The greatest possible happiness of all his sentient crea- 
tures, is the purpose and the effect of those laws. For the 
benevolence by which they were prompted, and the wis- 
dom with which they were planned, equal the might which 
enforces them. 

But, seeing that such is their purpose, they embrace the 
whole of our conduct : so far, that is, as our conduct may 
promote or obstruct that purpose ; and so far as injunctions 
and prohibitions are necessary to correct our desires. 

In so far as the laws of God are clearly and indisputably 
revealed, we are bound to guide our conduct by the plain 
meaning of their terms. In so far as they are not revealed, 
we must resort to anotlicr guide : namely, the probable effect 
of our conduct on that general happiness or good which is 
the object of the Divine Lawgiver in all his laws and com- 
mandments. 

In each of these cases, tlie source of our duties is the 
same; though the proof shy which we know them are different. 
The principle of general utiUty is the index to many of these 
duties ; but the principle of general utility is not their /(?M7i- 
tain or source. For duties or obligations arise from com- 
mands and sanctions. And commands, it is manifest, proceed 
not from abstractions, but from living and rational beings. 

JUBI8PBUBBNCB PKTEBMINED. 87 

Admit these premises, and the^foUowing conclusion is in- 
evitable. ^The whole of om- conduct should be guided by 

the principle of utility, in so far as the conduct to be pur- 
sued has not been determined by Eevelation. For, to con- 
form to the principle or maxim with which a law coincides, 
is equivalent to obeying that law. 

Such is the theory : which I have repeated in various forms, 
and, I fear, at tedious length, in order that my younger 
hearers might conceive it with due distinctness. 

The current and specious objection to which I have ad- 
verted, may be stated thus : 

* Pleasure and pain (or good and evil) are inseparably 
^ connected. Every positive act, and every forbearance or 
'omission, is followed by both: immediately or remotely, 

* directly or collaterally, to ourselves or to our fellow crea- 
' tures. 

* Consequently, if we shape our conduct justly to the prin* 
'ciple of general utility, every election which we make be- 
' tween doing or forbearing from an act will be preceded by 

* the following process. First : We shall conjecture the con- 

* sequences of the act, and also the consequences of the for- 

* bearance. For these are the competing elements of that 
' calculation, which, according to our guiding principle, we 
'are bound to make. Secondly: We shall compare the con- 
' sequences of the act with the consequences of the forbear- 
*ance, and determine the set of consequences which gives 
' the balance of advantage : which yields the larger residue 

* of probable good, or (adopting a different, though exactly 
' equivalent expression) which leaves the smaller residue of 

* probable evil. 

' Now let us suppose that we actually tried this process, 
'before we arrived at our resolves. And then let us mark 
' the absurd and mischievous effects which would inevitably 

* follow our attempts. 

' Generally speaking, the period allowed for deliberation 
.' is brief : and to lengthen deUberation beyond \h»X \^x£i\»^ 

88 THE PnOVINCB OP 

* period, is equivalent to forbearance or omission. Conse- 

* quently, if wis performed this elaborate process completely 
*and correctly, we should often defeat its purpose. We 

* should abstain fix)m action altogether, though utility re- 
^ quired us to act; or the occasion for acting usefully would 

* slip through our fingers, whilst we weighed, with anxious 

* scrupulosity, the merits of the act and the forbearance. 

' But feeling the necessity of resolving promptly, we should 
^not perform the process completely and correctly. We 

* should guess or conjecture hastily the effects of the act 

* and the forbearance, and compare their respective effects 

* with equal precipitancy. Our premises would be false or 

* imperfect ; our conclusions, badly deduced. Labouring to 
' adjust our conduct to the principle of general utility, we 

* should work inevitable mischief 

* And such were the consequences of following the prin- 

* ciple of utility, though we sought the true and the useful 

* with simplicity and in earnest. But, as we commonly pre- 

* fer our own to the interests of our fellow creatures, and our 

* own immediate to our own remote interests, it is clear that 

* we should warp the principle to selfish and sinister ends. 

* The final cause or purpose of the Divine laws is the 

* general happiness or good. But to trace the effect of our 

* conduct on the general happiness or good is not the way 
*to know them. By consulting and obeying the laws of 

* God we promote our own happiness and the happiness of 

* our fellow creatures. But we should not consult his laws, 

* we should not obey his laws, and, so far as in us lay, we 

* should thwart their benevolent design, if we made the ge- 

* neral happiness oiu: object or end. In a breath, we should 

* widely deviate in effect from the principle of general utility 

* by taking it as the guide of our conduct.* 

The two apt Such, I bclievc, is the meaning of those who 

thTf^dng object to the principle of utility ' that it were a 

bnSy^^Ltio- dangerous principle of conduct.' 

diwid j^Q jh^ objectors are not remarkable for clear 

JUBISPBUD£lf0S DKTBBMINSD. « S9 

and determinate thinking, I am not quite certain that I 
have conceived the objection exactly. But I have sincerely 
endeavoured to understand it, and to put it distinctly and 
£Edrly. 

It has been said, in answer to this objection, that it in- 
volves a contradiction in terms. Danger is anotlier name for 
probable mischief: And, surely, we best avert the probable 
mischiefs of our conduct, by conjecturing and estimating its 
probable consequences. To say ^ that the principle of utility 
were a dangerous principle of conduct,' is to say * that it were 
contrary to utiUty to consult utility.* 

Now, though this is so brief and pithy that I heartily 
wish it were conclusive, I must needs admit that it scarcely 
touches the objection, and falls far short of a crushing re- 
duction to absurdity. For the objection is manifestly this : 
—that we cannot foresee and estimate the probable effects 
of our conduct : that if we attempted to calculate its good 
and its evil consequences, our presumptuous attempt at cal- 
culation would lead us to error and sin. 

But, though this is not the refutation, there is a refuta- 
Ijon. 

And, first. If utility be our only index to the The ftnt^n- 
tacit commands of the Deity, it is idle to object frr^JSJ^ob- 
its imperfections. We must even make the most J«^**««*^- 

of it. : 

If we were endowed with a moral sense^ or with a com- 
mon senaej or with a practical reason^ we scarcely should con- 
strue his commands by the principle of general utility. If 
our souls were furnished out with innate practical princi- 
ples^ we scarcely should read his commands in the tenden- 
cies of human actions. For, by the supposition, man would 
be gifted with a peculiar organ for acquiring a knowledge 
of his duties. The duties imposed by the Deity would 
be subjects of immediate consciousness, and completely ex- 
empted from the jurisdiction of observation and induction. 
An attempt to displace that invincible consciousness, and to 

40 • THE PHOVINCK OF 

thrust the principle of utility into the vacant setit, would be 
simply impossible and. manifestly absurd. An attempt to 
taste or smell by force of syllogism, were not less hopeful or 
judicious. 

But if we are not gifted with that pecuhar organ, we 
must take to the principle of utility, let it be never so de- 
fective. We must gather our duties, as we can, from the ten- 
dencies of human actions ; or remain, at our own peril, in 
ignorance of our dutr^. We must pick our scabrous way 
with the help of a glimmering light, or wander m profound 
darkness. 

™-^ Whether there be any ground for the hypothe- 
•nswcrtothe sis of a morol sense^ is a question which I shall 
/JJimnbnefly duly cxamiuc in a future lecture, but which I shall 
not pursue m the present place. For the present 
is a convenient place for the introduction of another topic : 
namely, that they who advance the objection in question mis- 
understand the theory which they presume to impugn. 

Their objection is founded on the following assumption. 

That, if we adjusted our conduct to tlie principle of 

general utility, every election wliich we made between doing 
and forbearing from an act would be preceded by a calcula- 
tion : by an attempt to conjecture and compare the respec- 
tive probable consequences of action and forbearance. 

Or (changing the expression) their assumption is this. 

That, if we adjusted our conduct to the principle of general 
utility, our conduct would always be determined by an im- 
mediate or direct resort to it. 

And, granting their assumption, I grant their inference. 
I grant that the principle of utiHty Were a halting and pur- 
blind guide. 

But their assumption is groundless. They are battering 
(and most effectually) a misconception of their own, whilst 
they fancy they are hard at work demolishing the theory 
which they hate. 

JFor, according to that theory, our conduct would conform 

JX7BI8PSUBENCB DSlSlRMmED. 41 

to rules inferred from the tendencies of actions, but would 
not be determined by a direct resort to the principle of 
general utility. Utility would be the test of our conduct, 
xiltimately, but not immediately ; the immediate test of the 
rules to which our conduct would conform, but not the im- 
mediate test of specific or individual actions. Our rules 
would be fashioned on utility ; oiu: conduct, on our rules. 

Eecall the true test for trying the tendency of an action, 
and, by a short and easy deduction, you will see that their 
assumption is groundless. 

K we would try the tendency of a specific or 
individual act, we must not contemplate the act duct^S?' 
as if it were single and insulated, but must look S* totSl"*^ 
at the class of acts to which it belongs. We ^Souu. 
must suppose that acts of the class were generally duct wo^idT 
done or omitted, and consider the probable effect Slem^ti!!^, 
upon the general happiness or good. wi^which 

We must guess the consequences which would X1>ky'!i!I!d 
follow if acts of the class were general ; and also Y^ ^^»4 ^*»« 

o ' tendencies of 

the consequences which would follow, if they were *>."«•« •«- 

"* , ' •/ tions are the 

generally omitted. We must then compare the pidcor 

consequences on the positive and. negative sides, 

and determine on which of the two the balance of advantage 

lies. 

If it lie on the positive side, the tendency of the act is 
good : or (adopting a wider, yet exactly equivalent expres- 
sion) the general happiness requires that acts of the class 
shall be done. If it lie on the negative side, the tendency 
of the act is bad : or (again adopting a wider, yet exactly 
equivalent expression) the general happiness requires that 
acts of the class shall be forborne. 

In a breath, if we truly try the tendency of a specific or 
individual act, we try the tendency of the class to which 
that act belongs. The particular conclusion which we draw, 
with regard to the single act, implies a general conclusion 
embracing all similar acts. 

42 TJUS PVOYINGB OF 

But, concluding that acts of the class are useful or per- 
nicious, we are forced upon a further inference. Adverting 
to the known wisdom and the known benevolence of the 
Deity, we infer that he enjoins or forbids them by a general 
and inflexible rule. 

Such is the inference at which we inevitably arrive, sup- 
posing that the acts be mch as to call for the intervention of 
a lawgiver. 

To rules thus inferred, and lodged in the memory, our 
conduct would conform immediately if it were truly adjusted 
to utility. To consider the specific consequences of single 
or individual acts, would seldom consist with that ultimate 
principle. And our conduct would, therefore, be guided by 
general conclusions, or (to speak more accurately) by rules 
inferred from those conclusions. 

But, this being admitted, the necessity of pausing and 
calculating, which the objection in question supposes, is an 
imaginary necessity. To preface each act of forbearance by 
a conjecture and comparison of consequences, were clearly 
supeifluous and mischievous. It were clearly superfluous, 
inasmuch as the result of that process would be embodied 
in a known rtde. It were clearly mischievous, inasmuch as 
the true result would be expressed by that rule, whilst the 
process would probably be faulty, if it were done on the spur 
of the occasion. 

^^ Speaking generally, human conduct, including 

^actice m the humau conduct which is subject to the Divine 
"**^^*" ** commands, b inevitably guided by rules^ or by 
principles or maxims. 

If our experience and observation of particulars were not 
generalized^ our experience and observation of particulars 
would seldom avail us in practice. To review on the spur 
of the occasion a host of particulars, and to obtain from 
those particulars a conclusion applicable to the case, were a 
process too slow and imcertain to meet the exigencies of our 
Jives. The inferences suggested to our minds by repeated 

JURISPEUDSKCB DETERMINED. 4 3 

experience and observation, are, therefore, drawn into prin- 
ciples^ or compressed into maxima. These we carry about 
us ready for use, and apply to individual cases promptly 
or without hesitation : without reverting to the process by 
which they were obtained ; or without recaUing, and array- 
ing before our minds, the numerous and intricate consider- 
ations of which they are handy abridgments. 

This is the main, though not the only use of theory: 
which ignorant and weak people are in the habit of opposing 
to practice, but which is essential to practice guided by ex- 
perience and observation. 

" 'Tis true in theory ; but, then, 't is false in practice'^ 
Such is a common talk. This says Noodle ; propounding 
it with a look of the most ludicrous profundity. 

But, with due and discreet deference to this worshipful 
and weighty personage, that which is true in theory is also 
true in practice. 

Seeing that a true theory is a compendium of particular 
truths, it is necessarily true as applied to particular cases. 
The terms of the theory are general and abstract, or the 
particular truths which the theory impUes would not be 
abbreviated or condensed. But, unless it be true of parti- 
culars, and, therefore, true in practice, it has no truth at all. 
Truth ifl always particular, though language is commonly 
general Unless the terms of a theory can be resolved into 
particular truths, the theory is mere jargon : a coil of those 
senseless abstractions which often ensnare the instructed; 
and in which the wits of the ignorant are certainly caught 
and entangled, when they stir from the track of authority, 
and venture to think for themselves. 

They who talk of theory as if it were the antagonist of 
practice, or of a thing being true in theory but not true in 
practice^ mean (if they have a meaning) that the theory 
in question is false : that the particular truths which it con- 
cerns are treated imperfectly or incorrectly ; and that, if it 
were applied in practice, it might, therefore, mislead. They 

44 *flE PBOVINCB OP 

say that truth in theory is not truth in practice. They mean 
that a false theory is not a true one, and might lead us to 
practical errors. 

If our con- Speaking, then, generally, human conduct is ine- 
mSy'7d?ii8t- vitably guided by ruUs^ or hy principles or maxims. 
Sriidpieof T^^ human conduct which is subject to the 
ST^o)^" Divine commands, is not only guided by rules^ 
iSSwiSTrw^ but also by moral sentiments associated with those 
th« most rules. 

put. by jcH' 

«^"«>^ •»?o- If I believe f no matter why) that acts of a class 

cuted with , . ^ '' ^ 

niie«: rules or description are enjoined or forbidden by the 

which eina- __. '■- .•' n ^^ / • 

nmM fromtht Dcity, a moral sentiment or feeling (or a sentiment 
whM^'the or feeling of approbation or disapprobation) is in- 
humln^^at-^ Separably connected in my mind with the thought 
Sddeorii?* or conception of such acts. And by this I am 
urged to do, or restrained from doing such acts, 
although I advert not to the reason in which my belief ori- 
ginated, nor recall the Divine rule which I have inferred 
from that reason. 

Now, if the reason in which my belief originated be the 
useful or pernicious tendency of acts of the class, my con- 
duct is truly adjusted to the principle of general utility, but 
my conduct is not determined by a direct resort to it. It 
is directly determined by a sentiment associated with acts of 
the class, and with the rule which I have inferred from their 
tendency. 

If my conduct be truly adjusted to the principle of gene- 
ral utility, my conduct is guided remotely by calculation. 
But, immediately, or at the moment of action, my conduct 
is determined by sentiment. 1 am swayed by sentiment as 
imperiously as I should be swayed by it, supposing I were 
utterly unable to produce a reason for my conduct, and were 
ruled by the capricious feehngs which are styled the moral 
sense. 

For example. Reasons which are quite satisfactory, but 
somewhat numerous and intricate, convince me that the in- 

JUBISntUPSKGB DBTEBMINED. 45 

stitutdon of property is necessary to the general good. Con- 
vinced of this, I am convinced that thefts are pernicious. 
Convinced that thefts are pernicious, I infer that the Deity 
forbids them by a general and infieidble rule. 

Now the train of induction and reasoning by which I ar- 
rive at this rule, is somewhat long and elaborate. But I 
am not compelled to repeat the process, before I can know 
with certainty that I should forbear from taking your purse. 
A sentiment of aversion is associated in my mind with 
the thought or conception of a theft: And, without ad- 
verting to the reasons which have convinced me that thefts 
are pernicious, or without adverting to the rule which I 
have inferred from their pernicious tendency, I am deter- 
mined by that ready emotion to keep my fingers from your 
purse. 

To think that the theory of utility would substitute calcu- 
lation for sentiment, is a gross and flagrant error : the error 
of a shallow, precipitate understanding. He who opposes 
calculation and sentiment, opposes the rudder to the sail, or 
to the breeze which swells the sail. Calculation is the guide, 
and not the antagonist of sentiment Sentiment without cal- 
culation, were bUnd and capricious ; but calculation without 
sentiment, were inert. 

To crush the moral sentiments, is not the 8CO|)e or pur- 
pose of the true theory of utility. It seeks to impress those 
sentiments with a just or beneficent direction : to free us of 
groundless likings, and from the tyranny of senseless anti- 
pathies ; to fix our love upon the useful, our hate upon the 
pernicious. 

If, then, the principle of utility were the pre- iuc^w^"' 
siding principle of our conduct, our conduct would ^'^"b' a<ijutt- 
be determined immediately by Divine 7'w/tvs', or pnncipu of 
rather by moral sentiments associated with those «y"u«wu-' 
rules. And, consequently, the application of tlie iunforalVor 
principle of utihty to particular or individual cases, pnrtTto W 
would neither be attended by the errors, uor fol- ' *"* "''"' 

4d THE PROVINCE OF 

SSbT^id- 1^^^ ^y the miscliiefe^ which the current Objec* 
•d.ft»«»« tion in question supposes. 

But these conclusions (like most conclusions) 
^KththMe must be taken with limitations. 
Id moiiJ^ There certainly are cases (of comparatiyely rare 
"^T(rf^. occurrence) wherein the specific considerations ba- 

SSI?^^ lance or outweigh the general : cases which (iu 
^SdSrt*" the language of Bacon) are " immersed in mat- 
SJSjJdrf?" ter " : cases perplexed with peculiarities from which 
priS^ipi" ?f* it were dangerous to abstract them ; and to which 
f^^iTidcd ^^^ attention would be directed, if we were true 
Sw SS'oSm- *^ ^^^ presiding principle. It were mischievous to 
p*™«^^ depart from a rule which regarded any of these 
partu^^tkur cascs ; sincc every departure from a rule tends to 
quencea. wcakcu its authority. But so important were the 
specific consequences which would follow our re- 
solves, that the evil of observing the rule might surpass the 
evil of breaking it. Looking at the reasons from which we 
had inferred the rule, it were absurd to think it inflexible. 
We should, therefore, dismiss the rule; resort directly to the 
principle upon which our rules were fashioned ; and calcu- 
late specific consequences to the best of our knowledge and 
ability. 

For example. If we take the principle of utility as our 
index to the Divine commands, we must infer that obedi- 
ence to established government is enjoined generally by the 
Deity. For, without obedience to " the powers which be," 
there were Uttle security and little enjoyment The ground, 
however, of the inference, is tlie utility of government : And 
if the protection which it yields be too costly^ or if it vex 
us with needless restraints and load us with needless exac- 
tions, the principle which points at submission as our general 
duty may counsel and justify resistance. Disobedience to an 
csUiblished government, let it be never so bad, is an evil : 
For the mischiefs inflicted by a bad government are less 
than the mischiefs of anarcliy. So momentous, however, is 

JUBISFBUDSiroil DttTBBltlNED. 47 

the difference between a bad and a good government, that, 
if it would lead to a good one, resistance to a bad one would 
be QsefuL The anarchy attending the transition, were an 
extensive, but a passing evil : The good which would fol- 
low the transition, were extensive and lasting. The pecu- 
liar good would outweigh the generic evil : The good which 
would crown the change in the insulated and eccentric case, 
would more than compensate the evil which is inseparable 
from rebellion. 

Whether resistance to government be useftil or pernici- 
ous, be consistent or inconsistent with the Divine pleasure, 
is, therefore, an anomalous question. We must try it by a 
direct resort to the ultimate or presiding principle^ and not 
by the Divine rule which the principle clearly indicates. To 
consult the rule, were absurd. For, the rule being gene- 
ral and applicable to ordinary cases, it ordains obedience to 
government, and excludes the question. 

The members of a pohtical society who revolve this mo- 
mentous question, must, therefore, dismiss the rule, and 
calculate specific consequences. They must measure the 
mischief wix)ught by the actual government ; the chance of 
getting a better, by resorting to resistance ; the evil which 
must attend resistance, whether it prosper or fail ; and the 
good which may follow resistance, in case it be crowned 
with success. And, then, by comparing these, the elements 
of their moral calculation, they must solve the question be- 
fore them to the best of their knowledge and ability. 

And in this eccentric or anomalous case, the application 
of the principle of utility would probably be beset with the 
difficulties which the current objection in question imputes 
to it generally. To measure and compare the evils of sul>- 
mission and disobedience, and to determine which of the 
two would give the balance of advantage, would probably 
be a difficult and uncertiiin process. The numerous and 
competing cx)nsiderations by which the question nuist be 
solved, might well perplex and divide the w\«e, uwdvVx^ ^ff^^N 

48 / THE PROVINCE OP 

and the brave. A Milton or a Hampden might animate 
their countrymen to resistance, but a Hobbes or a Falkland 
would counsel obedience and peace. 

But, though the principle of utility would afford no cer- 
tain solution, the community would be fortunate, if their 
opinions and sentiments were formed upon it. The preten- 
tions of the opposite parties being tried by an intelligible 
test, a peaceable compromise of their difference would, at 
least, be possible. The adherents of the established govern- 
ment, might think it the most expedient : but, as their 
liking would depend upon reasons, and not upon names 
and phrases, they might possibly prefer innovations, of which 
they would otherwise disapprove, to the mischiefs of a vio- 
lent contest. They might chance to see the absurdity of up- 
holding the existing order, with a stiffness which must end 
in anarchy. The party affecting reform, being also intent 
upon utility, would probably accept concessions short of their, 
notions and wishes, rather than persist in the chase of a 
greater possible good through the evils and the hazards of 
a war. In short, if the object of each party were measured 
by the standard of utility, each might compare the worth of 
its object with the cost of a violent pursuit. 

But, if the parties were led by their ears, and not by the 
principle of utility ; if they appealed to unmeaning abstrac- 
tions, or to senseless fictions ; if they mouthed of " the rights 
of man," or " the sacred rights of sovereigns ;" of " unahen- 
able liberties," or " eternal and immutable justice ; " of an 
" original contract or covenant," or " the principles of an 
inviolable constitution ; " neither could compare its object 
with the cost of a violent pursuit, nor would the difference 
between them admit of a peaceable compromise. A sacred 
or unaUenable right is truly and indeed invaluable: For, 
seeing that it means nothing, there is nothing with which it 
can be measured. Parties who rest tlieir pretensions on the 
jargon to which I have adverted, must inevitably push to 
their objects through thick and thin, though their objects 

JUBISFEUDENOB DBTBRMINBD. 49 

be straws or feathers as weighed in the balance of utility. 
Having bandied their fustian phrases, and " bawled till their 
lungs be spent," they must even take to their weapons, and 
fight their difference out. 

It really is important (though I feel the audacity of tlic 
paradox), that men should think distinctly, and speak with 
a meaning. 

In most of the domestic broils wliich have agitated civi- 
lized commimities, the result has been determined, or seri- 
ously affected, by the nature of the prevalent talk : by the 
nature of the topics or phrases which have figured in the 
war of words. These topi(*s or plinuses have been more 
than pretexts : more than varnish : more tliaii distinguish- 
ing cockades mounted by tlie opposite parties. 

For example, If the bulk of the people of England liad 
thought and reasoned with Mr. Burke, had been imbued 
with the spirit and had seized the scope of his argimients, 
her needless and disastrous war with her American colonies 
would have been stifled at the birth. The stupid and in- 
furiate majority who rushed into that odious war, could 
perceive and discourse of nothing but the soverciunty of the 
mother country, and her so called right to tax her colonial 
subjects. 

But, grantuig that the mother country was proj^erly the 
sovereign of the colonies, granting that the fact of her sove- 
reignty .was proved by invariable practice, and gnuiting her 
so called right to tax her colonial subjects, this was hardly 
a topic to move an enlightened people. 

Is it the interest of England to insist upon her sove- 
reignty? Is it her interest to exercise her right without 
the approbation of the colonists ? For the chance of a shght 
revenue to be wrung from her AmQrican subjects, and of a 
trifling relief from the taxation which now oppresses herself, 
shall she drive those reluctant subjects U> t^sscxV. N\vevt n\- 
you 1. E 

50 THfi PBOTIKGE OF 

leged independence, vjlsit her own children with the evil of 
war, squander her treasures and soldiers in trying to keep 
them down, and desolate the very region from which the 

revenue must be drawn ? These and the like considera^ 

tions would have determined the people of England, if their 
dominant opinions and sentiments had been fashioned on 
the principle of utility. 

And, if these and the like considerations had determined 
the public mind, the public would have damned the project 
of taxing and coercing the colonies, and the government 
would have abandoned the project For, it is only in the 
ignorance of the people, and in their consequent mental 
imbecility, that governments or demagogues can find the 
means of mischief. 

If these and the like considerations had determined the 
public mind, the expenses and miseries of the war would 
have been avoided; the connection of England with America 
would not have been torn asunder ; and, in case their com- 
mon interests had led them to dissolve it quietly, the rela- 
tion of sovereign and subject, or of parent and child, would 
have been followed by an equal, but intimate and lasting 
alliance. For the interests of the two nations perfectly coin- 
cide ; and the open, and the covert hostilities, with which 
they plague one another, are the offspring of a bestial anti- 
pathy begotten by their original quarrel. 

But arguments drawn from utility were not to the dull 
taste of the stupid and infuriate majority. The rabble, great 
and small, would hear of nothing but their right *i They'd 
a right to tax the colonists, and tax 'em they would : Ay, 
t}iat they would." Just as if a right were worth a rush of 
itself, or a something to be cherished and asserted indepen- 
dently of the good that it may bring. 

Mr. Burke would have taught them better : would have 
purged their muddled brains, and " laid the fever in their 
souls," with the healing principle of utility, lie asked them 
what they would get, if the project of coercion should sue- 

TiTRISPBIinitifCS imTEBMINED. 51 

eeed; and uAplmed them to compare the advantage with 
the hazard and the cost But the soimd practical men still 
insiflted on the right ; and sagaciously shook their heads at 
him, as a refiner and a theorist. 

If a serious difference shall arise between ourselves and 
Canada, or if a serious difference shall arise between our- 
selves and Ireland, an attempt will probably be made to 
cram us with the same stuff. But, such are the mighty 
strides which reason has taken in the interval, that I hope 
we shall not swallow it with the relish of our good ances- 
tors. It will probably occm: to us to ask, whether she be 
worth keeping, and whether she be worth keeping at the 
cost of a war? — ^I think there is nothing romantic in the 
hope which I now express; since an admirable speech of Mr. 
Baring, advising the rehnquishment of Canada, was seem- 
ingly received, a few years ago, with general assent and ap- 
probation • 

There are, then, cases, which are anomalous or The ««>!«/ 
eccentric; and to which the man, whose conduct ri^^ro[„*^ ^***^ 

was fetshioned on utility, would apply that ulti- bne«»y r 
mate principle inunediately or directly. And, in •""*^ 
these anomalous or ecx'entric cases, the application of the 
principle would probably be beset with the difficulties which 
the current objection in question imputes to it generally. 

But, even in these cases, the principle would afford an 
intdligible test, and a hkeUhood of a just solution : a pro- 
bability of discovering the conduct required by the general 
good, and, therefore, required by the commands of a wise 
and benevolent Deity. 

And the anomalies, after all, are comparatively few. In 

* ^* At the end of the second Lecture refer forwards to the pasHago in 
Lecture VI., relating to the American war, and to tliat relating to the 
rights of sovereign governments, and government;} lawful and unlawful 
by Divine law/* — MS. Note of (he Au(h<n'. 

B 2 

52 THE PEOVINCB OF 

the great majority of cases, the general happiness required 
that rules shall be observed, and that sentiments associated 
with rules shall be promptly obeyed. H our conduct were 
truly adjusted to the principle of general utility, our conduct 
woiild seldom be determined by an immediate or direct re- 
sort to it. 

JUBISFBUPINCS DETEBMINBD. 53 

LECTUEE nL 

In my second lecture, I examined a current and ^« oMhT" 
specious objection to the theory of general utility. {{I^"i^,'j 

The drift of the objection, you undoubtedly i«t»«- 
remember; and you probably remember the arguments by 
which I attempted to refute it 

Accordingly, I merely resume that general conclusion 
which I endeavoured to establish by the second of my two 
answers. 

The conclusion may be stated briefly, in the following 
manner. — If our conduct were truly adjusted to the prin- 
ciple of general utility, our conduct would conform, for the 
most part, to laws or rules : laws or rules which are set by 
the Deity, and to which the tendencies of classes of actions 
are the guide or index. 

But here arises a difficulty which certainly is ^ g^^^ ^^ 
most perplexing, and which scarcely admits of a ^^^ ^^^* 
solution that will perfectly satisfy the mind. "^*^*y» •^*«^ 

K the Divine laws must be gathered from the tendencies 
of actions, how can they, who are botmd to keep them, know 
them fully and correctly ? 

80 numerous are the classes of actions to which those 
laws relate, that no single mind can mark the whole of those 
classes, and examine completely their respective tendencies. 
If every smgle man must learn their respective tendencies, 
and thence infer the rules which God has set to mankind, 
every man's scheme of ethics will embrace but a part of 
those rules, and, on many or most of the occasions which 

54 THB FBOVINCX 09 

require him to act or forbear, he will be forced on the dan- 
gerous process of calculating specific consequences. 

Besides, ethical, like other wisdom, " cometh by oppor- 
tunity of leisure :" And, since they are busied with earning 
the means of Uving, the many are unable to explore the field 
of ethics, and to learn their numerous duties by learning the 
tendencies of actions. 

K the Divine laws must be gathered from the tendencies 
of actions, the inevitable conclusion is absurd and mon- 
strous. Gk)d has given us laws which no man can know 

completely, and to which the great bulk of mankind has 
scarcely the slightest access. 

The considerations suggested by this and the next dis- 
course, may solve or extenuate the perplexing difficulty to 
which I have now adverted. 

AnMit,^ ^^ In so far as law and morality are what th^y 
SbJ^Ai^'ta- ought to be (or in so far as law and morality a ;- 
*'^'*^"^**^ cord with their ultimate test, or in so far as law 
and morality accord with the Divine commands), legal and 
moral rules have been feshioned on the principle of utility, 
or obtained by observation and induction from the ten- 
dencies of human actions.* But, thougli they have been 

* The principle of general Utility (well or ill understood) has oom- 
xnonlj in &ct and practice guided the Legi$lator, This is the principle 
(well or ill understood) upon which Laws (strictly so called) have commonly 
been fashioned. Unless I adverted to it in a distinct and precise manner, 
I should scarcely be able to explain, distinctly and precisely, many of the 
subjects which will occupy my future Lectures. 

Accordingly, without affecting to unfold or expound the principle (a task 
which it were difficult to accomplish in a long series of discourses), I gave 
in my last lecture a general notion of it, and endeavoured to obviate the 
most specious of the objections which are commonly urged against it.— - 
ATS. Note of the Author. 

JUBISfBUDSNCS 09TSRMINED. 55 

fashioned on the principle of utility, or obtained by obser- 
vaticxi and induction from the tendencies of human actions, 
it is not necessary that all whom they bind should know 
or advert to the process through which they have been 
gotten. If all whom they bind keep or observe them, the 
ends to which they exist are sufficiently accoinpUshed. The 
ends to which they exist are sufficiently accomplished, tliough 
most of those who observe them be unable to perceive their 
ends, and be ignorant of the reasons on wliich they were 
founded, or of the proofs from which they were inferred. 

According to the theory of utility, the science of Ethics 
or Deontology (or the science of Law and MoiaHty, as they 
should be, or ought to be) is one of the sciences which rest 
upon observation and induction. The science has been 
formed, through a long succession of ages, by many and se- 
parate contributions from many and separate discoverers. 
No single mind could explore the wliolc of the field, thougli 
each of its numerous departments has been explored by 
numerous inquirers. 

If positive law and morahty were exactly what they ought 
to be (or if positive law and morahty were exactly fashioned 
to utiUty), sufficient reasons might be given for each of their 
constituent rules, and each of their constituent rules would 
in fact have been founded on those reasons. But no single 
mind could have found the whole of those rules, nor could 
any single mind compass the whole of their proofs. Though 
all the evidence would be known, the several parts of the 
evidence would be known by different men. Every single 
man might master a portion of the evidence : a portion com- 
mensurate with the attention which he gave to the science 
of ethics, and with the mental perspicacity and vigour which 
he brought to the study. But no single man could master 
more than a portion : And many of the rules of conduct, 
which were actually observed or admitted, would be taken, 
by the most instructed, on authority, testimony, or tru^L 

In short, if a system of law and moraUty were exactly 

S6 THE PBOVIKCB OP 

fashioned to utility, all its constituent rules might be known 
by all or most. But all the numerous reasons^ upon which 
the system would rest,; could scarcely be compassed by any : 
whilst most must limit their inquiries to a few of those 
numerous reasons ; or, without an attempt to examine the 
reasons, must receive the whole of the rules from the teach- 
ing and example of others. 

But this inconvenience is not peculiar to law and morality. 
It extends to all the sciences, and to all the arts. 

Many mathematical truths are probably taken upon trust 
by deep and searching mathematicians : And of the thou- 
sands who apply arithmetic to daily and hourly use, not one 
iu a hundred knows or surmises the reasons upon which 
its rules are founded. Of the millions who till the earth 
and ply the various handicrafts, few are acquainted with the 
grounds of their homely but important arts, though these 
arts are generally practised with passable expertness and 
success. 

The powers of single individuals are feeble and poor, 
though the powers of conspiring numbers are gigantic and 
admirable. Little of any man's knowledge is gotten by 
original research. It mostly consists of results gotten by 
the researches of others, and taken by himself upon testi- 
mony. 

And in many departments of science we may safely rely 
upon testimony : though the knowledge which we thus ob- 
tain is less satisfactory and useful than that which we win 
for ourselves by direct examination of the proofs. 

In the mathematical and physical sciences, and in the 
arts which are founded upon them, we may commonly trust 
the conclusion which we take upon authority. For the 
adepts in these sciences and arts mostly agree in their re- 
sults, and lie under no temptation to cheat the ignorant 
with error. I firmly believe (for example) that the earth 
moves round the sun ; though I know not a tittle of the 
evidence from which the conclusion is inferred. And my 

JUEISPBUDENGB DETEBMINED. 57 

•belief is perfectly rational, though it rests upon mere au- 
thority. For there is nothing in the alleged fact, contrary to 
my experience of nature : whilst all who have scrutinized the 
evidence concur in aflSrming tlie fact ; and have no conceiv- 
able motive to assert and diffuse the conclusion, but the li- 
beral and beneficent desire of maintaining and propagating 
truth. 

But the case is unhappily different with the ^"^n^^re*^" 
important science of ethics, and also with the va- ««»"» antwer, 
rious sciences which are nearly related to ethics. 
Those who have inquired, or affected to inquire into ethics, 
have rarely been impartial, and, therefore, have differed in 
their results. Sinister interests, or prejudices begotten by 
such interests, have mostly determined them to embrace 
the opinions which they have laboured to impress upon 
others. Most of them have been advocates rather than in- 
quirers. Instead of examining the evidence and honestly 
pursuing its consequences, most of them have hunted for ar- 
guments in favour of given conclusions, and have neglected 
or purposely suppressed the unbending and incommodious 
considerations which pointed at opposite inferences. 

Now how can the bulk of mankind, wlio have little oppor- 
tunity for research, compare the respective merits of these va- 
rying and hostile opinions, and hit upon those of the throng 
which accord with utiUty and truth ? Here, testimony is 
not to be trusted. There is not that concurrence or agree- 
ment of numerous and impartial inquirers^ to whicli the most 
cautious and erect understanding readily and wisely defers. 
With regard to the science of ethics, and to all the various 
sciences which are nearly related to ethics, invincible doubt, 
or bUnd and prostrate belief, would seem to be the doom of 
the multitude. Anxiously busied with the means of earn- 
ing a precarious livelihood, they are debarred from every 
opportunity of carefully surveying the evidence : whilst every 
authority, whereon they may hang their faitli, wants that 

58 THE FBOYINCB OF 

mark of trust-worthiness which justifies reliance on autho- 
rity. 

Accordingly, the science of ethics, with all the various 
sciences which are nearly related to ethics, lag behind the 
others. So few are the sincere inquirers who turn their at- 
tention to these 8cien<;es, and so difficult is it for the multi- 
tude to perceive the worth of their labours, that the advance- 
ment of the sciences themselves is comparatively slow ; whilst 
the most perspicuous of the truths, with which they are oc- 
casionally enriched, are either rejected by the many as worth- 
less or pernicious paradoxes, or win their laborious way to 
general assent through a long and dubious struggle with 
established and obstinate errors. 

Many of the legal and moral rules which obtain in the 
most civilized commimities, rest upon brute custom, and 
not upon manly reason. They have been taken from pre- 
ceding generations without examination, and are deeply 
tinctured with barbarity. They arose in early ages, and in 
the infancy of the human mind, partly from caprices of the 
fancy (which are nearly omnipotent with barbarians), and 
partly from the imperfect apprehension of general utility 
which is the consequence of narrow experience. And so 
great and numerous are the obstacles to the diffusion of 
ethical truth, that these monstrous or crude productions of 
childish and imbecile intellect have been cherished and per- 
petuated, through ages of advancing knowledge, to the com- 
paratively enlightened period in which it is our happiness to 
live. 

The fore- It were idle to deny the difficultv. The dif" 

tion to t£e fusion and the advancement of ethical truth are 

swer, ■ofvcd Certainly prevented or obstructed bv erreat and pe- 
er cxtenu- T V \ 1 "^ ° ^ 
ate<t culiar obstacles. 

But these obstacles, I am firmly convinced, will 
gradually disappear. In two causes of slow but sure ope- 

JUBISPBUDSNCK BETEHVINED. 59 

ration, we may clearly perceive a cure, or, at least, a pal- 
liative of the evil. In every civilized community of the 

Old and New World, the leading principles of the science 
of ethics, and also of the various sciences which are nearly 
related to ethics, are gradually finding their way, in com- 
pany with other knowledge, amongst the great mass of the 
people : whilst those who accurately study, and who labour 
to advance these sciences, are proportionally increasing in 
number, and waxing in zeal and activity. 

Profound knowledge of these, as of the other sciences, 
will always be confined to the comparatively few who study 
them long and assiduously. But the multitude are fiiUy 
competent to conceive the leading principles^ and to apply 
those leading principles to particular cases. And, if they 
were imbued with those principles, and were practised in 
the art of applying them, they would be docile to the voice 
of reason, and armed against sophistry and error. There is 
a wide and important difierence between ignorance of prin- 
ciples and ignorance of particulars or details. The man who 
is ignorant of principles, and unpractised in right reasoning, 
is imbecile as well as ignorant. The man who is simply 
ignorant of particulars or details, can reason correctly from 
premises which are suggested to his understanding, and can 
justly estimate the consequences which are drawn from those 
premises by others. If the minds of the many were in- 
formed and invigorated, so far as their position will permit, 
they could distinguish the statements and reasonings of their 
instructed and judicious friends, from the lies and fallacies 
of those who would use them to sinister piuposes, and from 
the equally pernicious nonsense of their weak and ignorant 
well-wishers. Possessed of directing princii)les, able to 
reason rightly, helped to the requisite premises by accimite 
and comprehensive inquiries, they could examine and fathom 
the questions which it most behooves iWm Vjo \\\A'vixs5v3N^^^ 

60 THE PBOVINCB OP 

-Though the leisure which they can snatch from their callings 
is necessarily so limited, that their opinions upon numerous 
questions of subordinate importance would continue to be 
taken from the mere authority of others. 

The shortest and clearest illustrations of this most cheer- 
ing truth, are furnished by the inestimable science of poli- 
tical economy. 

The broad or leading principles of the science of political 
economy, may be mastered, with moderate attention, in a 
short period. With these simple, but commanding prin- 
ciples, a number of important questions are easily resolved. 
And if the multitude (as they can and will) shall ever un- 
derstand these principles, many pernicious prejudices will 
be extirped from the popular mind, and truths of ineffable 
moment planted in their stead. 

For example. In many or all countries (the least uncivi- 
lized not excepted), the prevalent opinions and sentiments 
of the working people are certainly not consistent with the 
complete security of property. To the ignorant poor, the 
inequality which inevitably follows the beneficent institu- 
tion of property is necessarily invidious. That they who 
toil and produce should fare scantily, whilst others, who 
" delve not nor spin," batten on the fruits of labour, seems, 
to the jaundiced eyes of the poor and the ignorant, a mon- 
strous state of things : an arrangement upheld by the few 
at the cost of the many, and flatly inconsistent with the be- 
nevolent purposes of Providence. 

A statement of the numerous evils which flow from this 
single prejudice, would occupy a volume. But they cast so 
clear a light on the mischiefs of popular ignorance, and show 
so distinctly the advantages of popular instruction, that I 
will briefly touch upon a few of them, though at the risk of 
tiring your patience. 

In the first place, this prejudice blinds the people to the 
cause of their sufferings, and to the only remedy or pallia- 
tive which the case will admit. 

JUBISFRITBENCB DETEBMIKED. 61 

Want and labour spring from the niggardliness of nature, 
and not from the inequality which is consequent on the in- 
stitution of property. .These evils are inseparable from the 
•condition of man upon earth ; and are lightened, not aggra- 
vated, by this useful, though invidious institution. With- 
out capital^ and the arts which depend upon capital, the re- 
ward of labour would be far scantier than it is ; and capital, 
with the arts which depend upon it, are creatures of the in- 
stitution of property. The institution is good for the many, 
as well as for the few. The poor are not stripped by it of 
the produce of their labour ; but it gives tliem a part in the 
enjoyment of wealth which it calls into being. In effect, 
though not in law, the labourers are co-proprietors with tlie 
capitalists who hire their labour. The reward wliich they 
get for their labour is principally drawn from capital ; and 
Uiey are not less interested than the legal owners in pro- 
tecting the fund from invasion. 

It is certainly to be wished, that their reward were greater ; 
and that they were relieved from the incessant drudgery to 
which they are now condemned. But the condition of the 
working people (whether their wages shall be high or low ; 
their labour, moderate or extreme) depends upon their own 
will, and not upon the will of the rich. In tlie true princi- 
ple of population^ detected by the sagacity of Mr. Malthus, 
they must look for the cause and the remedy of their penmy 
and excessive toil. There they may find the means which 
would give them comparative affluence ; which would give 
them the degree of leisure necessary to knowledge and re- 
finement ; which would raise them to personal dignity and 
political influence, from grovelling and sordid sulyeotion to 
the arbitrary rule of a few. 

And these momentous truths are dediicible from plain 
principles, by short and obvious inferences. Here, there is 
no need of large and careful research, or of subtle and sus- 
tained thinking. K the people understood distinctly a few 
indisputable propositions, and were capable of going cor- 

62 Tns FRoymcs of 

rectly through an easy process of reasoning, their minds 
would be purged of the prejudice which blinds them to the 
cause of their sufferings, and they would see and apply the 
remedy which is suggested by the principle of population* 
Their repinings at the affluence of the rich, would be ap^ 
peased. Their munmu^ at the injustice of the rich, would 
be silenced. They would scarcely break machinery, or fire 
bams and com ricks,, to the end of raising wages, or the 
rate of parish relief. They would see that violations of pro- 
perty are mischievous to themselves: that such violations 
weaken the motives to accumulation, and, therefore, dimi- 
nish the fund which yields the labourer his subsistence. 
They would see that they are deeply interested in the secih 
rity of property : that, if they adjusted their numbers to the 
demand for their labour, they would share abundantly, with 
their employers, in the blessings of that useful institution. 

Another of the numerous evils which flow from the pre- 
judice in question, is the frequency of crimes. 

Nineteen offences out of twenty, are offences against pro- 
perty. And most offences against property may be imputed 
to the prejudice in question. 

The authors of such offences are commonly of the poorer 
sort. For the most part, poverty is the incentive. And 
this prejudice perpetuates poverty amongst the great body of 
the people, by blinding them to the cause and the remedy. 

And whilst it perpetuates the ordinary incentive to crime, 
it weakens the restraints. 

As a check or deterring motive, as an inducement to ab- 
stain from crime, the fear of public disapprobation, with its 
countless train of evils, is scarcely less effectual than the 
fear of 1<^1 punishment. To the purpose of forming the 
moral character, of rooting in the soul a prompt aversion 
from crime, it is infinitely more effectual. 

The help of the hangman and the gaoler would seldom 
be called for, if the opinion of the great body of the people 
were cleared of the prejudice in question, and, therefore, fell 

JUBISFRUDEIIGV DBTEBMINED. 63 

heavily upon all offenders against property. If the general 
apbUan were thoroughly cleared of that prejudice, it would 
greatly weaken the temptations to crime, by its salutary influ- 
ence on the moral character of the multitude : The motives 
which it would oppose to those temptations, would be scarcely 
less effectual than the motives which are presented by the 
law : And it would heighten the terrors, and strengthen the 
restraints of the law, by engaging a countless host of eager 
and active volunteers in the service of criminal justice. K 
the people saw distinctly the tendencies of offences against 
property ; if the people saw distinctly the tendencies and 
the grounds of the punishments ; and if they were, there- 
fore, bent upon pursuing the criminals to justice ; the laws 
which prohibit these offences would seldom be broken with 
impunity, and, by consequence, would seldom be broken. 
An enlightened people were a better auxiliary to the judge 
than an army of policemen. 

But in consequence of the prejudice in question, the fear 
of public disapprobation scarcely operates upon the poor to 
the end of restraining them from offences against the pro- 
perty of the wealthier classes. For every man's public is 
formed of his own class : of those with whom he associates: 
of those whose favourable or unfavourable opinion sweetens 
or imbitters his life. The poor man's public is formed of 
the poor. And the crimes, which affect merely the property 
of the wealthier classes, are certainly regarded with little, 
or rather with no abhorrence, by the indigent and ignorant 
portion of the working people. Not perceiving that such 
crimes are pernicious to all classes, the indigent and igno- 
rant portion of the working people are prone to consider 
them as reprisaU made upon usurpers and enemies. They 
regard the criminal with sympathy rather than with indig- 
nation. They rather incline to favour, or, at least, to wink 
at his escape, than to lend their hearty aid towards bring- 
ing him to justice. 

Those who hfive inquired into the cawse^ o^ ^rv«v»^ «sA 

64 THE PROVINCE OF 

into the means of lessening their number, have commonly 
expected magnificent results fix)m an improved system of 
punishments. And I admit that something might be done 
by a judicious mitigation of punishments, and by removing 
that fi:^uent inclination to abet the escape of a criminal 
which springs from their repulsive severity. Something 
might also be accompUshed by improvements in prison-dis- 
ciphne, and by providing a refuge for criminals who have 
suffered their punishments. For the stigma of legal punish- 
ment is commonly indelible ; and, by debarring the unhappy 
criminal from the means of living honestly, forces him on 
further crimes. 

But nothing but the diffusion of knowledge through the 
great mass of tfie people will go to the root of the evil No- 
thing but this will cure or alienate the poverty which is the 
ordinary incentive to crime. Nothing but this will extir- 
pate their prejudices, and correct their moral sentiments : 
will lay them under the restraints which are imposed by 
enlightened opinion, and which operate so potently on the 
higher and more cultivated classes. 

The evib which I have now mentioned, with many which 
I pass in silence, flow from one of the prejudices which en- 
slave the popular mind. The advantages at which I have 
pointed, widi many which I leave unnoticed, woidd follow 
the emancipation of the multitude from that single error. 

And this, with other prejudices, might be expelled from 
their understandings and affections, if they had mastered 
the broad principles of the science of political economy, and 
could make the easiest applications of those simple, though 
commanding truths. 

The functions of paper-money, the incidence of taxes, with 
other of the nicer points which are presented by tliis science, 
the multitude, it is probable, will never understand dis- 
tinctly : and their opinions on such points (if ever they shall 
think of them at all) will, it is most likely, be always taken 
from authority. But the importance of those nicer points 

JUBISPBUDENCE DETERMINED. G5 

dwindles to nothing, when they are compared with the tme 
reasons which call for the institution of property, and witli 
the effect of the principle of population on the price of labour. 
For if these (which are not difficult) were clearly apprehended 
by the many, they would be raised from penury to comfort : 
fiom the necessity of toiling like cattle, to the enjoyment of 
sufficient leisure : from ignorance and brutishness, to know- 
ledge and refinement : from abject subjection, to the inde- 
pendence which commands respect. 

If my limits would permit me to dwell upon the topic at 
length, I could show, by many additional and pregnant exam- 
ples, that the multitude might clearly apprehend the leading 
principles of ethics, and also of the various sciiences which are 
nearly related to ethics : and, that if they had seized these 
principles, and could reason distinctly and justly, all the more 
momentous of the derivative practical truths would find ac- 
cess to their understandings and expel the antagonist eiTors. 

And the multitude in civilized communities would soon 
apprehend these principles, and would soon acquire the 
talent of reasoning distinctly and justly, if one of the 
weightiest of the duties, which God has laid upon govern- 
ments, were performed with fidelity and zeal. For, if we 
must construe those duties by the principle of general uti- 
lity, it is not less incumbent on governments to forward the 
diffusion of knowledge, than to protect their subjects from 
<me another by a due administration of justice, or to defend 
them by a miUtary force from the attacks of external ene- 
mies. A small fraction of the sums which are squandered 
in needless war, would provide complete instruction for the 
working people : would give this important class that por- 
tion in the knowledge of the age, which consists with the 
nature of their callings, and with the necessity of toiling for 
a livelihood. 

It appears, then, that the ignorance of the multitude is 

VOL. I. P 

66 ixm FROVINCB 09 

not altogether inyincible, though the principle of general 
utility be the index to God's commands, and, therefore, the 
proximate test of positive law and morality. 

If ethical science qiust be gotten by consulting the prin* 
ciple of utility, if it rest upon observation and induction ap- 
plied to the tendencies of actions, if it be matter of acquired 
knowledge and not of immediate consciousness, much of it 
(I admit) will ever be hidden from the multitude, or will 
ever be taken by the multitude on authority, testimony, or 
trust. For an inquiry into the tendencies of actions em- 
braces so spacious a field, that none but the comparatively 
few, who study the science assiduously, can apply the prin- 
ciple extensively to received or positive rules, and determine 
how far they accord with its genuine suggestions or dic^ 
tates. 

But the multitude might clearly understand the elements 
or groundwork of the science, together with the more mo- 
mentous of the derivative practical truths. To that extent, 
they might be freed from the dominion of authority : from 
the necessity of blindly persisting in hereditary opinions and 
practices ; or of turning and veering, for want of directing 
principles, with every wind of doctrine. 

Nor is this the only advantage which would follow the 
spread of those elements amongst the great body of the 
people. 

K the elements of ethical science were widely diffused^ 
the science would advance with proportionate rapidity. 

If the minds of the many were informed and invigorated, 
tlieir coarse and sordid pleasures, and their stupid indiffer- 
ence about knowledge, would be supplanted by refined 
amusements, and by liberal curiosity. A numerous body 
of recruits from the lower of the middle classes, and even 
from the higher classes of the working people, would thicken 
the slender ranks of the reading and reflecting pubUc : the 

JUBISFRUDENCE DBTBBMINED. 67 

/. -jr. 

public, which occupies its leisure with letters, science and phi- 
losophy ; whose opinion determines the success or failure of 
books ; and whose notice and favour are naturally courted 
by the writers. 

And until that public shall be much extended, shall em- 
brace a considerable portion of the middle and working 
people, the science of ethics, with all the various sciences 
which are nearly related to ethics, will advance slowly. 

It was the opinion of Mr. Locke, and I ftilly concur in 
the opinion, that there is no peculiar uncertainty in the sub- 
ject or matter of these sciences : that the great and extraor- 
dinary difficulties, by which their advancement is impeded, 
are extrinsiek ; are opposed by sinister interests, or by pre- 
judices which are the offspring of such interests : that, if 
they who seek, or affect to seek the truth, would pursue it 
with obstinate application and with due " indifferency^'' they 
might frequently hit upon the object which they profess to 
look for. 

Now few of them will pursue it with this requisite '* in- 
differency** or impartiality, so long as the bulk of the pub- 
lic, which determines the fate of their labours, shall continue 
to be formed from the classes which are elevated by rank 
or opulence, and from the peculiar professions or callings 
whidi are distinguished by the name of " liberal." 

In the science of ethics, and in all the various sciences 
which are nearly related to ethics, your only sure guide is 
general utility. If thinkers and writers would stick to it 
honestly and closely, they would frequently enrich these 
sciences with additional truths, or would do them good ser- 
vice by weeding them of nonsense and error. But, since 
the peculiar interests of particular and narrow classes are 
always somewhat adverse to the interests of the great ma- 
jority, it is hardly to be expected of writers, whose reputa- 
tion depends upon such classes, that they should fearlessly 
tread the path which is indicated by the general well-being. 
The indifferency in the pursuit of truth which is ao o.^t^'^xX^ 

r 2 

68 THE PROVINCE OF 

inculcated by Mr. Locke, is hardly to be expected of writers 
who occupy so base a position. Knowing that a fraction 
of the community can make or mar their reputation, they 
unconsciously or purposely accommodate their conclusions 
to the prejudices of that narrower public. Or, to borrow 
the expressive language of this greatest and best of philo- 
sophers, ** they begin with espousing the weUrendowed opi* 
nions in fiEtahion ; and, then, seek arguments to show their 
beauty, or to vami^ and disguise their deformity." 

The treatise by Dr. Paley on Moral and Political PhilcK 
sophy exemplifies the natural tendency of narrow and do- 
mineering interests to pervert the course of inquiry from its 
legitimate purpose. 

As men go, this celebrated and influential writer was a 
wise and a virtuous man. By the qualities of his head and 
heart, by the cast of his talents and affections, he was fitted, 
in a high degree, to seek for ethical truth, and to expound 
it successfully to others. He had a clear and a just under- 
standing ; a hearty contempt of paradox, and of ingenious, 
but useless refinements ; no fastidious disdain of the work- 
ing people, but a warm sympathy with their homely enjoy- 
ments and sufferings. He knew that they are more numerr 
ous than all the rest of the community, and he felt that they 
are more important than all the rest of the community to 
the eye of unclouded reason and impartial benevolence. 

But the sinister influence of the position, which he un- 
luckily occupied, cramped his generous affections, and warped 
the rectitude of his understanding. 

A steady pursuit of the consequences indicated hj general 
utility, was not the most obvious way to professional ad- 
vancement, or even the short cut to extensive reputation. 
For there was no impartial public, formed from the com- 
munity at large, to reward and encourage, with its appro- 
bation, an inflexible adherence to truth. 

JVBISFRUDSNOB JD£ZEBMINKD. 69 

-Tr If the bulk of the community had been instructed, so &r 
as their position will permit, he might have looked for a host 
of readers fix)m the middle classes. He might have looked 
for a host of readers fix)m those classes of the working people, 
whose wages are commonly high, whose leisure is not incon- 
siderable, and whose mental powers are called into frequent 
exercise by the natures of their occupations or callings. To 
readers of the middle classes, and of all the higher classes 
of the working pec^le, a well made and honest treatise on 
Moral and Political Hiilosophy, in his dear, vivid, down- 
right, English style, would have beai the most easy and 
attractive, as well as instructive and useful, of abstract or 
scientific books. 

But those numerous classes of the community were com- 
monly top coarse and ignorant to care for books of the sort. 
The great majority of the readers who were likely to look 
info his book, belonged to the classes which are elevated 
by rank or opulence, and to the peculiar professions or call- 
ings which are distinguished by the name of " Uberal." 
And the character of the book which he wrote betrays the 
position of the writer. In almost every chapter, and in 
almost every page, his fear of ofiending the prejudices, com- 
monly entertained by such readers, palpably suppresses the 
suggestions of his clear and vigorous reason, and masters 
the better affections which inclined him to the general good. 

He was one of the greatest and best of the great and ex- 
cellent writers, who, by the strength of their philosophical 
geniuSf or by their large and tolerant spirit, have given im- 
perishable lustre to the Church of England, and extinguished 
or softened the hostility of many who reject her creed. He 
may rank with the Berkeleys and BuUers, with the Burnets, 
TUlotsons and Hoadlys. 

But, in spite of the esteem with which I regard his me- 
mory, truth compels me to add that the book is unworthy 
of the man. For there is much ignoble truckling to the 
dominant and inUuential few. T\iere \& ^ ^<^ c!l ^oiis^^ 

TO THB FB0VINC8 01^ 

sophistry in defence or extenuation of abuses which the few 
are interested in upholding. 

If there were a reading public numerous, discerning^ and 
impartial^ the science of ethics, and all the various sciences 
which are nearly related to ethics, would advance with udi- 
cxampled rapidity. 

By the hope of obtaining the approbation which it would 
bestow upon genuine merit, writers would be incited to the 
patient researdi and reflection, which are not less requisite 
to the improvement of ethical, than to the advancement of 
mathematical science. 

Slight and incoherent thinking would be received with 
general contempt, though it were cased in polished period3 
studded with brilliant metaphors. Ethics would be consi- 
dered by readers, and, therefore, treated by writers, as the 
matter or subject of a science : as a subject for persevering 
and accurate investigation, and not as a theme for childish 
and babbling rhetoric. 

This general demand for truth (though it were clothed in 
homely guise), and this general contempt of falsehood and 
nonsense (though they were decked with rhetorical graces), 
would improve the method and the style of inquiries into 
ethics, and into the various sciences which are nearly related 
to ethics. The writers would attend to the suggestions of 
Hobbes and of Locke, and would imitate the method so suc- 
cessfully pursued by geometers : Though such is the variety 
of the premises which some of their inquiries involve, and 
such are the complexity and ambiguity of some of the terms, 
that they would often fall short of the perfect exactness and 
coherency, which the fewness of his premises, and the sim- 
plicity and definiteness of his expressions, enable the geo- 
meter to reach. But, though they would often fall short 
of geometrical exactness and coherency, they might always 
approach, and would often attain to them. They would ac- 

^quiTQ the art and the habit of defining their leading terms ; 
of steadily adhering to the meanings announced by the de- 
finitions ; and carefully examining and distinctly stating their 
premises ; and of deducing the consequences of their pre- 
mises with logical rigour. Without rejecting embellishments 
which might happen to fall in their way, the only excellen- 
cies of style for which they would seek, are precision, clear- 
ness, and conciseness; the first being absolutely requisite 
to the successful prosecution of inquiry ; whilst the others 
enable the reader to seize the meaning with certainty, and 
spare him unnecessary fatigue. 

And, what is equally important, the protection afforded 
by this public to diligent and honest writers would inspire 
into writers upon ethics, and upon the nearly related sciences, 
the spirit of dispassionate inquiry: the " indifferency'* or 
impartiality in the pursuit of truth, which is just as requi- 
site to the detection of truth, as continued and close atten- 
tion, or sincerity and simpUcity of purpose. Belying on 
the discernment and the justice of a numerous and power- 
ful public, shielded by its countenance fix)m the shafts of 
the hypocrite and the bigot, indifferent to the idle whistling 
of that harmless storm, they would scrutinize established 
institutions, and current or received opinions, fearlessly, but 
oooUy : with the fi:'eedom which is imperiously demanded by 
jB^eral utility* but without the antipathy which is b^ot- 
-ten by the dread of persecution, and which is scarcely less 
adverse than ** the love of things ancient " to the rapid ad- 
vancement of science. 

This patience of investigation, this distinctness and accu- 
racy of method, this fireedom and " indifferency " in the pur- 
suit of the useful and the true, would thoroughly dispel the 
obscurity by which the science is clouded, and would clear 
it fix)m most of its uncertainties. The wish, the hope, the 
prediction of Mr. Locke, would, in time, be accomplished : 

72 THB. pboyhtcb of , 

and ^^ ethics would rank with the sciences which are capable 
of demonstration.'' The adepts in ethical, as well as in ma* 
thematical science, would commonly agree in their results : 
And, as the jar of their conclusions gradually subsided, a 
body of doctrine and authority to which the multitude might 
trust would emeige fix)m the existing chaos. The direct ez* 
amination of the multitude would only extend to the ele* 
ments, and to the easier, though more momentous, of the de- 
rivative practical truths. But none of their opinions would 
be adopted blindly, nor would any of their opinions be ol> 
noxious to groundless and capricious change. Though most 
or many of their opinions would still be taken from autho- 
ritr/j the authority to which they would trust might satisfy the 
most scrupulous reason. In tiie unanimous or general can- 
sent of numerous and impartial inquirers^ they would find 
that mark of trust- worthiness which justifies reliance on au- 
thority, wherever we are debarred from the opportunity of 
examining the evidence for ourselves. 

^l^°to With regard, then, to the perplexing difficulty 
5^^^ which I am trying to solve or extenuate, the case 

together ^th stauds thuS •' 
the Tortg^uut 

wwwer to If Utility bc the approximate test of positive law 

lection, and morality, it is simply impossible that positive 
?tJi,^ law and morality should be free from defects and 
errors. Or (adopting a difierent, though exactly equivalent 
expression) if the principle of general utility be our guide 
to the Divine commands, it is impossible that the rules of 
conduct actually obtaining amongst mankind should accord 
completely and correctly with the laws established by the 
Deity. The index to his will is imperfect and uncertain. 
His laws are signified obscurely to those upon whom they 
are binding, and are subject to inevitable and involuntary 
misconstruction. 

For, firsts positive law and morality, fashioned on the 

bnefly re- 

JUBISPSUDSNOB J>BTBBMIN£D. 73 

'priiiidple .of utility, are gotten by observation and induction 
from .the tendencies of human actions : from what can be 
known or conjectured, by means of observation and induc- 
tion, of their imiform or customary effects on the general 
happiness or good. Consequently, till these actions shall 
be marked and classed with perfect completeness, and their 
effects observed and ascertained with similar completeness, 
positive law and morality, fashioned on the principle of uti- 
lity, must be more or less defective, and more or less erro- 
neous. And, these actions being infinitely various, and their 
effiScts being infinitely diversified, the work of classing them 
completely, and of collecting their effects completely, trans- 
cends the limited fiEtculties of created and finite beings. As 
the experience of mankind enlarges, as they observe more 
extensively and accurately and reason more closely and pre- 
cisely, they may gradually mend the defects of their l^al 
and moral rules, and may gradually clear their rules firom 
the errors and nonsense of their predecessors. But, though 
they may constantly approach, they certainly will never at- 
tain, to a faultless system of ethics : to a system perfectly in 
unison with the dictates of general utility, and, therefore, 
perfectly in unison with the benevolent wishes of the Deity. 
And, secondly^ if utility be the proximate test of pasitive 
law and morality, the defects and errors oi popular or vudgar 
ethics will scarcely admit of a remedy. For, if ethical truth 
be matter of science, and not of immediate consciousness, 
most of the ethical maxims, wliich govern the sentiments 
of the multitude, must be taken, without examination, from 
human authority. And where is the human authority upon 
which they can safely rely ? Where is the human authority 
bearing such marks of trustworthiness, that the ignorant 
may hang their faith upon it with reasonable assurance ? 
Beviewing the various ages and the various nations of the 
world, reviewing the various sects wliich have divided the 
opinions of mankind, we find conflicting maxims taught with 
^ual confidence, and received with equal docility. We find 

74 . THB PEOVINCB OF 

the guides of the multitude moved by sinister interests, or 
by prejudices which axe the offspring of such mterests. We 
find them stifling inquiry, according to the measure of dieir 
means : upholding with fire and sword, or with sophistry, de- 
clamation and calunmy, the theological and ethical dogmas 
which they impose upon their prostrate disciples. 

Such is the difficulty* — One of the only solutions which 
the difficulty will take, is suggested by the remarks which 
I have abeady submitted to your attention, and which I will 
now repeat in an inverted and compendious form. . 

In tiiejirst place, the diffusion of ethical science amongst 
the great bulk of mankind will gradually remove the obsta** 
cles which prevent or retard its advancement. The field of 
human conduct being infinite or immense, it is impossible 
that human understanding should embrace and explore it 
completely. But, by the general diffusion of knowledge 
amongst the great bulk of mankind, by the impulse and the 
direction which the diffusion will give to inquiry, many of 
the defects and errors in existing law and morality will in 
time be supplied and corrected. 

Secondly : Though the many must trust to authority for 
a number of subordinate truths, they are competent to exa- 
mine the elements which are the ground-work of the science 
of ethics, and to infer the more momentous of the derivative 
practical consequences. 

And, thirdly^ as the science of ethics advances, and is 
cleared of obscurity and uncertainties, they, who are de- 
barred from opportunities of examining the science exten- 
sively, will find an authority, whereon they may rationally 
rely, in the unanimous or general agreement of searching 
and impartial inquirers.* 

^ The experience of thirty years which have elapsed since the fbi^ 
going Lecture waa written does not seem to justify the Author's sanguine 
anticipations of the effects of the spread of education among the people. 
But it must be observed that, as little or no attempt has been made to give 
the sort of instruction which he contemplated (and upon which alone his 
expectations rested), nothing at variance vrith these consolatory views ofui 
be inferred. — S. A. 

JUJUSEBUbKHOtt DauuuONSD. 75 

LECTUEE IV. 
In my last lecture, I endeavoured to answer an The con- 

DOXIOD of 

objection which may be urged a^nst the theory th« foarth 

# ^-r^ A J A xi. r 1- 1 • -^ with the 

of utiuty. And, to the purpose of imking my thhd iwstine. 
preeent with my last lecture, I will now restate, m a some- 
what abridged shape, that summary of the objection and the 
answer with which I concluded my discourse. 

The objection may be put briefly, in the following manner. 
. If utility be the proximate test of positive law and mo- 
rality, it is impossible that the rules of conduct actually 
obtaininfi amongst :m<mkind should accord completely and 
correctly vdth the laws estabUahed by the Deity. The index to 
' hb will is imperfect and uncertain. His laws are signified 
obscurely to those upon whom they are binding, and are 
subject to inevitable and involuntary misconstruction. 
. FoTb ftrstf positive law and morality, fiashioned on the 
principle of utility, are gotten by observation and induction 
from the tendencies of human actions. Consequently, till 
these actions shall be marked and classed with perfect com- 
pleteness, and their effects observed and ascertained with 
similar completeness, positive law and morality, fiishioned 
on the principle of utility, must be more or less defective, 
and more or less erroneous. And, these actions being in- 
finitely various, and their effects being infinitely diversified, 
the work of classing them completely, and of collecting their 
effects completely, transcends the Umited faculties of created 
and finite beings. 
. And, secondly^ if utility be the proximate test of positive 

76 THB PROvmoa op 

law and morality, the defects and errors of popular or viUgar 
ethics will scarcely admit of a remedy. For, if ethical truth 
be matter of science, and not of immediate consciousness, 
most of the ethical maxims, which govern the sentiments 
of the multitude, must be taken, without examination, from 
human authority. 

Such is the objection One of the only answers which 

the objection will admit, is suggested by the remarks which 
I offei^ in my last lecture, and which I will now repeat in 
an inverted and compendious form. 

In ihejirst place, the diffusion of ethical science amongst 
the great bulk of mankind ¥dll gradually remove the ob- 
stacles which prevent or retard its advancement The field 
of human conduct being infinite or immense, it is impossible 
that human understanding should embrace and explore it 
completely. But, by the general difiusion of knowledge 
amongst ^e great bidk of mankind, by the impulse and the 
direction which the difiusion will give to inquiry, many of 
the defects and errors in existing law and morality will in 
time be supplied and corrected. 

Secondly : Though the many must trust to authority for 
a number of subordinate truths, they are competent to ex- 
amine the elements which are the ground- work of the science 
of ethics, and to infer the more momentous of the derivative 
practical consequences. 

And, thirdly, as the science of ethics advances, and is 
cleared of obscurity and uncertainties, they, who are de- 
barred from opportunities of examining the science exten- 
sively, will find an authority, whereon they may rationally 
rely, in the unanimous or general agreement of searching 
and impartial inquirers. 

^JjMcond But this answer, it must be admitted, merely 
the theory extmuates the objection. It shows that law and 
leaomed. morality fashioned on the principle of utility might 
approach continually and indefinitely to absolute perfection. 
JBut it grants that law and morality fashioned on the prin- 

J1JBIBFHU]irarCari)]BTBBHINXD. 77 

<aple of utility is inevitably defective and erroneous: that, 
if the laws established by the Deity must be construed by 
the principle of utility, the most perfect system of ethics, 
-which the wit of man could conceive, were a partial and in- 
accurate copy of the Divine original or pattern. 

And this (it may be urged) disproves the theory which 
makes the principle of utility the index to the Divine plea- 
sure. For it consists not with the known wisdom and the 
known benevolence of the Deity, that he should signify his 
commands defectively and obscurely to those upon whom 
they are binding. 

But, admitting the imperfection of utility as a farther 
the index to the Divine pleasure, it is impossible tharMMnd 
to argue, from this its admitted imperfection, * that **^J~^^**^ 
utility is not the index.' 

Owing to causes which are hidden from human under- 
standing, all the works of the Deity which are open to hu- 
man observation are alloyed with imperfection or evil. That 
the Dei^ should^ signify his commands defectively and ob- 
scurely, is strictly in keeping or unison with the rest of his 
inscrutable ways. The objection now in question proves 
too much, and, therefore, is untenable. K you argue ^ that 
the principle of -utility is not the index to his laws, because 
the. principle of utility were an imperfect index to his laws,* 
you argue ^ that all his works are in fact exempt from evil, 
beeauae imperfection or evil is inconsistent with his wisdom 
and goodness.' The former of these arguments implies the 
latter, or is merely an application of the sweeping position 
to one of innumerable cases. 

Accordingly, if the objection now in question will lie to 
the theory of utility, a similar objection will lie to et^ery 
theory of ethics which supposes that any of our duties are 
set or imposed by the Deity. 

The objection is founded on the alleged inconsistency of 
evil with his perfect wisdom and goodness. But the notion 
or idea of evil or imperfection is involved in the connected 

u!.",e.i S..t ' L ■ 

78 .- ^ THB FBOYINGB OF 

notions of law, duty, and sanction. For, seeing that every 
law imposes a restraint, every law is an evil of itself: and, 
unless it be the work of malignity, or proceed fix>m coih 
summate folly, it also supposes an evil which it is designed 
to prevent or remedy. Law, like medicine, is a preventive 
or remedy of evil : and, if the world were free fix>m evil, the 
notion and the name would be unknown. 

< That his laws are signified obscurely, if utility be the 
index to his laws," is rather a presumption in favour of the 
theory which makes utility our guide. Analogy might lead 
us to expect that they would be signified obscurely. For 
they suppose the existence of evils which they are designed 
to remedy : let them be signified as they may, they r^nedy 
those evils imperfectiy : and the imperfection which they are 
designed to remedy, and of which the remedy partakeBi 
might naturally be expected to show itself in the mode by 
which they are manifested. 

My answer to the objection is the very argument, which 
the excellent Butier, in hia admirable "Analogy," has wielded 
in defence of Christianity with the vigour and the skill of a 
master. 

Considered as a system of rules for the guidance of hu-^ 
man conduct, the Christian religion is defective. There are 
also circumBtanoes, regarding the manner of its promulgi^ 
tion, which human reason vainly labours to reconcile vrith 
the wisdom and goodness of God. Still it were absurd to 
argue * that the religion is not of God, became the religion 
is defective, and is imperfectiy revealed to mankind.' For 
the objection is founded on the allied inconsistency of evil 
with his perfect wisdom and goodness. And, since evil 
pervades the universe, in so far as it is open to our inspec- 
tion, a similar objection will lie to every system of religion 
which ascribes the existence of the universe to a wise and 
benevolent Author. Whoever believes that the universe 
is the work of benevolence and wisdom, is concluded, or 
estopped^ by his own religious creed, from taking an objec- 
tion of tiie kind to the creed or system of another. 

^' Andogy (a& Bdtler has shown) would lead us to expect 
tb8 impei&ction upon which the objection is founded. Some- 
thing of the imperfection which runs through the frame of 
the universe, would probably be found in a revelation ema- 
nating from the Author of the universe. 

And here my solution of the difficulty necessarily stc^s. 
A complete solution is manifestly impossibla To recondle 
the existence of evil with the wisdom and goodness of Qod, 
is a task which surpasses the powers of our narrow and 
feeble understandings. This is a deep which our reason is 
too short to fathom. From the decided predominance of 
good which is observable in the order of the world, and 
from the manifold works of wisdom which the order of the 
world exhibits, we may draw the cheering inference * that 
its Author is good and wise.* Why the world which he has 
made is not' altogether perfect, or why a benevolent Deity 
tolerates the existence of evil, or what (if I may so express 
myself) are the obstacles in the way of his benevolence, are 
clearly questions which it were impossible to solve, and 
which it were idle to agitate although they admitted a so- 
lution. It is enough for us to know, that the Deity is per- 
fecdy good ; and that, since he is perfectly good, he wills 
the happiness of his creaturea. This is a truth of the great>- 
ert practical moment For the cast of the affections, which 
we attribute to the Deity, determines, for the most part, the 
cast of our moral sentiments. 

I admit, then, that Gk>d's commands »re imper- ^|J^ 

fectly signified to man, supposing we must gather ^^^ ^^ 
hiB commands from the tendencies of human ac- ^uoed 
tiona. But I deny that this imperfection is a conclusive 
ol]gection to the theory which makes the principle of utility 
our guide or index to his will. Whoever would disprove 
the theory which makes utility our guide, must produce 
another principle that were a surer and a better guide. 

Now, if we reject utility as the index to God's commands, 
we must assent to the theory or hypothesis which supposes 

^^NBt^AtA-itk. 

80 ' THB PBOVINGE OP 

a moral sense. One of the adverse theories, which r^brd 
the nature of that index, is certainly true. He has left uisr 
to presume his commands from the tendencies of humaa 
actions, or he has given us a peculiar sense of which his 
commands are the objects. 

<« A moral ^ ^^ hypothcses, r^arding the nature of that 

JJJJJl^* index, which discard the principle of utility, axe 
SSS kl* built upon the supposition of a peculiar or appro- 
■^jg'^Jf priate sense. The language of each of these hy- 
j^j^ « potheses differs from the language of the others, 
^ pnicticii but the import of each resembles the import of 
the rest 

prindpiet," By " a moral sense" with which my under-^ 
p^°t^ standing is furnished, I discern the human actions 
SrS^^ which the Deity enjoins and forbids : And, since 
SUSliI*' 70VL and the rest of the species are provided with 
^^^B^ A like organ, it is dear that this sense of mine is 
bTpothedj. u jj^^ common sense of mankind." By ** a moral 
instinct^'' with which the Deity has endowed me, I am urged 
to some of these actions, and am warned to forbear from 
others. "-4 principle of reaction or conscience,' which 
Butler assures me I possess, informs me of their rectitude 
or pravity. Or ^^the innate practical principles^* which 
Locke has presumed to question, define the duties, which 
God has imposed upon me, with infallible clearness and cer- 
tainty. 

These and other phrases are various but equivalent ex- 
pressions for one and the same hypothesis. The only ob- 
servable difference between these various expressions con- 
sists in this : that some denote sentiments which are excited 
by human actions, whilst others denote the commands to 
which those sentiments are the index. 
Theh the- ^^ hypothesis of a moral sense, or the hypo- 
nainquet- thcsis which is variouslv signified by these vari- 
twoaasomp- ous but equivalent expressions, involves two as- 
sumptions. 

JUBISFSUDXNGB DSraBMINBD. 81 

-^3316 first of the two assumptions involved by ST^^Tm^ 
the hypothesiB in question, may be stated, in ge- f^™^^^ 
neral expressions, thus : «he hypo- 

Gertam sentiments or feenmra of approbation question, 
or disapprobation accompany our conceptions of gooermi ex- 
certain human actions. They are neither effects **'*"'*"*^ 
of reflection upon the tendencies of the actions which ex- 
dte them^ nor are they effects of education. A conception 
of any of these actions would be accompanied by certain 
of these sentiments, although we had not adverted to its 
good or evil tendency, nor knew the opinions of others with 
regard to actions of the class. 

In a word, that portion of the hypothesis in question 
which I am now stating is purely negative. We are gifted 
with moral sentiments which are uUiviate or inscrutable 
facts: which are not the consequences of reflection upon 
the tendencies of human actions, which are not the conse- 
quences of the education that we receive from our fellow- 
meni, which are not the consequences or effects of any ante- 
cedents* or causes placed within the reach of our inspetrtion. 
Our conceptions of certain actions are accompanied by cer- 
tain sentiments, and there is an end of our knowledge. 

For the sake of brevity, we may say that these sentiments 
are ** instinctive," or we may call them " moral instincts." 

For the terms " instinctive " and " instinct " are merely 
negative expressions. They merely denote our own igno* 
ranee. They mean that the phenomena of which we hap- 
pen to be talking are not preceded by causes which man is 
able to perceive. For example, The bird, it is commonly 
said, builds her nest " by instinct :" or the skill which the 
bird evinces in the building of her nest, is commonly styled 
"instinctive." That is to say. It is not the product of ex- 
periments made by the bird herself ; it has not been im- 
parted to the bird by the teachmg or example of others ; 
nor is it the consequence or effect of any antecedent or cause 
open to our observation. 

VOL I. Q 

82 THB PEOVINCB OF 

The remark which I have now made upon the terms 
" instinctive " and " instinct," is not interposed needlessly. 
For, though their true import is extremely simple and trivial, 
they are apt to dazzle and confound us (unless we advert to 
it steadily) with the false and cheating appearance of a my- 
sterious and magnificent meaning. 

.j^. In order that we may clearly apprehend the 

going Stare- nature of these "moral instincts," I will descend 
iintAMtiffip. fix)m general expressions to an imagmary ciise. 
piiMandex- I wiU uot imagine the case which is fancied by 
Subtly" Dr. Paley : for I think it ill fitted to bring out 
^*^' the meaning sharply. I will merely take the li- 

berty of borrowing his solitary savage : a child abandoned 
in tlie wilderness immediately after its birth, and growing 
to the age of manhood in estrangement from human society. 

Having gotten my subject, I proceed to deal with him 
after my own fashion. 

I imagine that the savage, as he wanders in search of 
prey, meets, for the first time in his life, with a man. This 
man is a hunter, and is carrying a deer which he has killed. 
The savage pounces upon it. The hunter holds it fast. 
And, in order that he may remove this obstacle to the sa- 
tisfaction of his gnawing hunger, the savage seizes a stone, 
and knocks the hunter on the head. — Now, according to 
the hypothesis in question, the savage is afTected with re- 
viorse at the thought of the deed which he has done. He 
is affected with more than the compassion which is excited 
by the sufferings of another, and which, considered by itself, 
amounts not to a moral sentiment He is affected with 
the more complex emotion of self-condemnation or remorse : 
with a consciousness of guilt : with the feeling that haunts 
and tortures civilized or cultivated men, whenever they 
violate rules which accord with their notions of utiUty, or 
which they have learned from others to regard with habitual 
veneration. He feels as you would feel, in ca^e you had 
eommitted a murder : in raso you had killed another, in an 

JUXISPSUDENGB DBrBSBONED. 83 

attenipt to tob him of his goods : or in case you had killed 
another under any combination of circumstances, which, 
i^reeably to your notions of utility, would make the act a 
pernicious one, or, agreeably to the moral impressions which 
you have passively received from others, would give to the 
act of killhig the quality and the name of an injury. 

Again: Shortly after the incident which I have now 
imagined, he meets with a second hunter whom he also 
knocks on the head. But, in this instance, he is not the 
aggressor. He is attacked, beaten, wounded, without the 
shadow of a provocation : and, to prevent a deadly blow 
which is aimed at his own head, he kiUs the wanton as- 
sailant— ^Npw, here, according to the hypothesis, he is not 
affected ¥nth remorse. The sufferings of the dying man 
move him, perhaps, to compassion : but hb conscience (as the 
phrase goes) is tranquil. He feels as you would feel, after 
a justifiable homicide : after you had shot a highwayman, 
in defence of your goods and your life: or after you had 
killed another under any combination of circumstances, 
which, agreeably to your notions of utiUty, would render 
killing innocuous, or, agreeably to the current morality of 
your age and country, would render the killing of another 
a just or lawful action. 

That you should feel remorse if you kill in an attempt to 
rob, and should not be affected with remorse if you kill a 
murderous robber, is a difference which I readily account 
for without the supposition of an instinct. The law of your 
country distinguishes the cases : and the current morality 
of your country accords with the law. 

Supposing that you have never adverted to the reasons 
of that distinction, the difference between your feelings is 
easily explained by imputing it to education : Meaning, by 
the term education^ the influence of authority and example 
on opinions, sentiments, and habits. 

Supposing that you have ever adverted to the reasons of 
that distinction, you, of course, have beeii %Xx\xd«L^^\N3^ 

Q 2 

84 MB PEOVINCB OP 

obvious utility. — ^Generally speaking, the intentional killing 
of another is an act of pernicious tendency. If the act were 
frequent, it would annihilate that general security, and that 
general feeling of security, which are, or should be, the prin- 
cipal ends of poUtical society and law. But to this there 
are exceptions : and the intentional killing of a robber, who 
aims at your property and life, is amongst those exceptions. 
Instead of being adverse to the principal ends of law, it 
rather promotes those ends. It answers the purpose of the 
punishment which the law inflicts upon murderers : and it 
also accomplishes a purpose which punishment is too tardy 
to reach. The death inflicted on the aggressor, tends, as 
his punishment would tend, to deter from the crime of mur- 
der : and it also prevents, what his punishment would not 
prevent, the completion of the murderous design in the spe- 
cific or particular instance. — Supposing that you have ever 
adverted to these and similar reasons, the diflerence between 
your feeUngs is easily explained by imputing it to a percep- 
tion of utility. You see that the tendencies of the act vary 
with the circumstances of the act, and your sentiments in 
regard to the act vary with those varying tendencies.* 

But the diflerence, supposed by the hypothesis, between the 
feelings of the savage^ cannot be imputed to education. For 
the savage has lived in estrangement from human society. 

Nor can the supposed diflerence be imputed to a percep- 
tion of utility. — ^He knocks a man on the head, that he 
may satisfy his gnawing hunger. lie knocks another on the 
head, that he may escape from wounds and death. So far^ 
then, as these diflerent actions exclusively regard himself, 
they are equally gobd.: and so far as these diflerent actions 
r^ard the men whom- he kills, they are equally bad. As 
tried by the test of utility, and with tfie lights which tlie 
savage possesses, the moral qualities of the two actions are 
precisely the same. If we suppose it possible that he ad- 
verts to considerations of utility, and that his sentiments in 
respect to these actions are determined by considerations of 

JUBISPBUBENCE DBTERMINSD. 85 

Utility, we must infer that he remembers both of them with 
fimilar feelings : with similar feelings of complacency, as the 
actions r^ard himself; with similar feelings of regret, as 
they regard the sufferings of the slain. 

To the social man, the difference between these actions, 
88 tried by the test of utility, were immense. — ^The general 
happiness or good demands the institution of property : that 
the exclusive enjoymisnt conferred by the law upon the owner 
ahall not be disturbed by private and unauthorized persons : 
that no man shall take from another the product of his labour 
or saving, without the permission of the o^vner previously 
signified, or without the authority of the sovereign acting 
for the common weal. Were want, however intense, an ex- 
cuse for violations of property ; could every man who hungers 
take from another with impunity, and slay the owner with 
impunity if the owner stood on his possession ; that bene- 
ficent institution would become nugatory, and the ends of 
government and law would be defeated. — And, on tlie other 
hand, the very principle of utiUty which demands the insti- 
tution of property requires that an attack upon the body 
shall be repelled at the instant : that, if the impending evil 
cannot be averted otherwise, the aggressor shall be slain on 
the spot by the party whose life is in jeopardy. 

But these are considerations which would not present 
themselves to the solitary savage. They involve a number 
of notions with which his mind would be unfurnished. They 
involve the notions of political society ; of supreme govern- 
ment ; of positive law ; of legal right ; of legal duty ; of 
1^1 injury. The good and the evil of the two actions, in 
so &r as the two actions would affect the immediate 
parties, is all that the savage could perceive. 

The difference, supposed by the hypothesis, between the 

feelings of the savage, must, therefore, be ascribed to a moral 

sensey or to innate practical principles. Or (speaking in 

^homelier but plainer language) he would regard the two 

actions with different sentimeats, we know not why. 

86 THB PBOVIKCE OP 

Thcfiittof The first of the two assumptions involved by 

the two as- , . . . . , ^ i . "^ 

■umptioniin- the hypothesis m question, is, therefore, this. — 
bypotheasin Certaui inscTUtable sentiments of approbation of 
2ricfl/Si- disapprobation accompany our conceptions of cer- 
gencnd'ex- tain human actioas. They are not begotten by re- 
^"^'"^'^^ flection upon the tendencies of the actions which 
excite them, nor are they instilled into our minds by our 
intercourse with our fellow-men. They are simple elem^ts 
of our nature. They are ultimate facts. They are not the 
effects of causes, or are not the consequents of antecedents, 
which are open to human observation. 

And, thus far, the hypothesis in question has been em- 
braced by sceptics as well as by religionists. For example, 
It is supposed by David Hume, in his Essay on the Prin- 
ciples of Morab, that some of our moral sentiments spring 
from a perception of utility : but he also appears to imagine 
that others are not to be analyzed, or belong exclusively to 
the province of taste. Such, I say, appears to be his mean- 
ing. For, in this essay, as in all his writings, he is rather 
acute and ingenious than coherent and profound : handling 
detached topics with signal dexterity, but evincing an utter 
inability to grasp his subject as a whole. When he speaks 
of moral sentiments belonging to the province of taste^ he 
may, perhaps, be adverting to the origin of benevolence^ or 
to the origin of our sympathy with tlie pleasures and pains 
of others : a feeling that differs as broadly as the appetite 
of hunger or thirst from the sentiments of approbation or 
disapprobation which accompany our judgments upon ac- 
tions.* 

Tii« second of ^^* ^^se inscrutablc sentiments are signs of 
wm'u^in *^® Divine will, or are proofs that the actions 
voivedbythe which cxcitc them are enioined or forbidden bv 
qaeftUon, Uod, IS the secoucl ot the two assumptions in- 

briefly stated. 11111 ^ * * ^ 

volved by the hypothesis m question. 

• Benevolence is not to be confounded with the Moral SentimentB, or 
with the test of conduct. — MS. Note. 

JUBISPSUDSNCB DBTSRMINED. 87 

In the language of the admirable Butler (who is the 
ablest advocate of the hypothesis), the human actions by 
which these feelings are excited are their direct and appro- 
priate objects: just as things visible are the direct and 
appropriate objects of the sense of seeing. 

In homelier but plainer language, I may put his meaning 
thus. — ^As God has given us eyes, in order that we may see 
therewith ; so has he gifted or endowed ui^ with the feelings 
or sentiments in question, in order that we may distinguish 
directly, by means of these feelings or sentiments, the actions 
which he enjoins or permits, from the actions which he 
prohibits. 

Or, if you Uke it better, I may put the meaning thus. 
— ^That these inscrutable sentiments are signs of the Divine 
will, is an inference which we necessarily deduce from our 
consideration oi final causes. Like the rest of our appetites 
or aversions, these sentiments were designed by the Author 
of our being to answer an appropriate end. And the only 
pertinent end which we can possibly ascribe to them, is the 
end or final cause at which I have now pointed. 

Now, supposing that the Deity has endowed us A«tn index 
with a moral sense or instinct, we are free of the commaada,« 
difficulty to which we are subject if we must con- wen imaS- 
strue hb laws by the principle of general utility, ^^^u^ 
Aoowding to the hypothesis in question, the in- ^^S^ 
somtable feelings which are styled the moral 
sense, arise directly and inevitably with the thoughts of 
their appropriate objects. We cannot mistake the laws 
which God has prescribed to mankind, although we may 
oftea be seduced by the blandishments of present advan- 
tage from the plain path of our duties. The understanding 
is never at a fault, although the will may be frail. 

But here arises a small question. — Is there any ^^^^J^ 
evidence that we are gifted with feeUngs of the ^^;^J2,^ 

sort? quwtioo? 

88 THE PROVINCE OF 

2b iii^^M^ *^ That this question is possible, or is seriously 
tioniidis- asked and agitated, would seem of itself a suffi- 

proved by /*^ •' •• i • i_ i. 

the neffatiTe cieut proof that we are not endowed with such 
onwcious- feeUngs. — Acconling to the hypothesis of a moral 
°^"* sense, we are conscious of the feeUngs which in- 

dicate God's commands, as we are conscious of hunger or 
tliirst. In other words, the feeUngs which indicate God's 
commands are ultimate facts. But, since they are ulti- 
mate facts, these feelings or sentiments must be indisput- 
able, and must also differ obviously from the other elements 
of oiu: nature. If I were really gifted with feelings or 
sentiments of the sort, I could no more seriously question 
whether I had them or not, and could no more blend and 
confound them with my other feelings or sentiments, than 
I can seriously question the existence of hunger or thirst, or 
can mistake the feehng which affects me when I am hungry 
for the different feeling which affects me when I am thirsty. 
All the parts of our nature which are ultimate, or incapable 
of analysis, are certain and distinct as well as inscrutable. 
We know and discern them with unhesitating and invin- 
cible assurance. 

The two cur- ^^^ *^^ currcut arguments in favour of the 
rent «r^- hypothcsis iu qucstiou are raised on the follow- 

ments in f«- , "^ '^ , * 

vourofthe mg asscrtious. 1. The judgments which we pass 

hvpothesiB in . „ , • i . - T 

question, mtemallv upon the rectitude or pravity of actions 
are immediate and mvoluntary. In other words, 
our moral sentiments or feelings arise directly and inevit- 
ably with our conceptions of the actions which excite them. 
2. Tlie moral sentiments of all men are precisely alike. 
The first tr- Now thc first of thcsc vcnturous assertions is 

ffuinent in . 

favour of the uot umvcrsally true. In numberless cases, the 
question, ex- judgmcuts which wc pass internally upon the 
*™"' rectitude or pravity of actions are hesitating and 

slow. And it not unfrequently happens that we cannot 
arrive at a conclusion, or are utterly at a loss to determine 
whether we shall praise or blame. 

JUBISPBUDBNCB DJEBTBRMINED. 89 

Andy granting that our moral sentiments are always in- 
stantaneous and inevitable, this will not demonstrate that 
our moral sentiments are instinctive. Sentiments which 
are factitious, or begotten in the way of association, are not 
less prompt and involuntary than feelings which are instinc- 
tive or inscrutable. For example : We begin by loving money 
for the sake of the enjoyment which it purchases ; and, that 
enjoyment apart, we care not a straw for money. But, in 
time, our love of enjoyment is extended to money itself, or 
our love of enjoyment becomes inseparably associated with 
the thought of the money which procures it. The concep- 
tion of money suggests a wish for money, although we think 
not of the uses to which we should apply it. Again : We 
begin by loving knowledge as a mean to ends. But, in time, 
the love of the ends becomes inseparably associated with the 
thought or conception of the instrument Curiosity is in- 
stantly roused by every unusual appearance, although there 
is no purpose which the solution of the appearance would 
answer, or although we advert not to the purpose which the 
solution of the appearance might subserve. 

The promptitude and decision with which we judge of 
actions are impertinent to the matter in question : for our 
moral sentiments would be prompt and inevitable, although 
they arose fix)m a perception of utility, or although they were 
impressed upon our minds by the authority of our fellow- 
men. Supposing that a moral sentiment sprung from a percep- 
tion of utility, or supposing that a moral sentiment were im- 
pressed upon our minds by authority, it would hardly reciu* 
spontaneously until it had recurred frequently. Unless we 
recalled the reasons which had led us to our opinion, or un- 
less we adverted to the authority which had determined our 
opinion, the sentiment, at the outset, would hardly be excited 
by the thought of the corresponding action. But, in time, 
the sentiment would adhere inseparably to the tliought of 
the corresponding action. Although we recalled not the 
ground of our moral approbation or aversion, the sentiment 

TTTr'TIRrT'^'^^ 

90 THE PBOVINCB OF 

woiild recur directly and inevitably with the conception of 
its appropriate object. 

TbtMoond But, to prove that moral sentiments are in- 
IkJw^'tS stinctive or- inscrutable, it is boldly asserted, by the 
quSSS^^ advocates of the hypothesis in question, that the 
■""**'*^ moral sentiments of all men are precisely alike. 

The argument, in favour of the hypothesis, which is raised 
on this hardy assertion, may be stated briefly in the follow- 
ing manner. — ^No opinion or sentiment which is a result of 
observation and induction is held or felt by all mankind 
Observation and induction, as applied to the same subject, 
lead different men to different conclusions. But the judg- 
ments which are passed internally upon the rectitude or 
pravity of actions, or the moral sentiments or feelings which 
actions excite, are precisely ahke with all men. Consequently, 
our moral sentiments or feelings were not gotten by our 
inductions from the tendencies of the actions which excite 
them : nor were these sentiments or feelings gotten by in- 
ductions of others, and then impressed upon our minds by 
human authority and example. Consequently, oiu* moral sen- 
timents are instinctive, or are ultimate or inscrutable facts. 

Now, though the assertion were granted, the argument 
raised on the assertion would hardly endure examination. 
Though the moral sentiments of all men were precisely alike, 
it would hardly follow that moral sentiments are instinctive. 

But an attempt to confute the argument were superfluous 
labour : for the assertion whereon it is raised is groundless. 
The respective moral sentiments of different ages and na- 
tions, and of different men in the same age and nation, have 
differed to infinity. This proposition is so notoriously true, 
and to every instructed mind the facts upon which it rests 
are so familiar, that I should hardly treat my hearers with 
due respect if I attempted to establish it by proof. I there- 
fore assume it without an attempt at proof; and I oppose 
it to the assertion which I am now considering, and to the 
argument which is raised on ihal assertion. 

JUBISFinnOKNCK 'OSTEBfllNBD. 91 

^' But, before I dismiss the asserCion which I am now con- 
sidOTDg, I will briefly advert to a difficulty attending the 
hypothesis in question which that unfounded assertion natu- 
rally suggests. — Assuming that moral sentiments are instinc- 
tive or inscrutable, they are either different with different 
men, or they are alike with all men. To affirm '^ that they 
are alike with all men," is merely to hazard a bold assertion 
contradicted by notorious facts. If they are different with 
different men, it follows that God has not set to men a com- 
man rule. If they are different with different men, there 
is no common test of human conduct: there is no test by 
which one man may try the conduct of another. It were 
folly and presumption in m^ to sit in judgment upon yotL, 
That which were pravity in me^ may, for aught I can know, 
be rectitude in you. The moral sense which you allege, may 
be just as good and genuine as that of which / am consci- 
ous. Though my instinct points one way, yours may point 
another. There is no broad sun destined to illumine the 
world, but every single man must walk by his own candle. 

Now what is the fact whereon the second ar- Aimefstatc- 
gument in favour of the hypothesis in question is £S^ttoJ?n 
founded? The plain and glaring fact is this. — 2!JiSSt\ii 
sWith regard to actions of a few classes, the moral JjSSiSiufiL 
sentimenta of most, though not of all men, have JJ^Jj^^ 
been afikei. But, with regard to actions of other 
daiseB, their moral sentiments have differed, through every 
shade or degree, from slight diversity to direct opposition. 

And this is what might be expected, supposi^ng The fact ac- 
that the principle of general utility is our only ^th^f 
guide or index to the tacit commands of the Sh^^*^ 
Deity. The fact accords exactly with that hypo- "^'^- * 
thesis or theory. For, first, the positions wherein men are, 
in different ages and nations, are, in many respects, widely 
different : whence it inevitably follows, that much which 
was useful there and then were useless or pernicious here 
and now. And, secondly, since human* tiwtes lue various. 

92 THE PROVIKCB Of 

and since human reason is fallible, men's moral sentiments 
must often widely differ even in respect of the circum- 
stances wherein their positions are alike. But, with re- 
gard to actions of a few classes, the dictates of utility are 
the same at all times and places, and are also so obvious 
that they hardly admit of mistake or doubt. And hence 
would naturally ensue what observation shows us is the 
fact : namely, a general resemblance, with infinite variety, 
in the systems of law and morality which have actually 
obtained in the world. 

A brief state- According to the hypothesis which I have now 
S^t^Ic^te stated and examined, the moral sense is our 
wSchbwni. ^y index to the tacit commands of the Deity. 
SSTh^^^^ufe- -^^^^^rding to an intermediate hypothesis, com- 
Mjofutuity pounded of the hypothesis of utility and the hypo- 
thesis or* thesis of a moral sense, the moral sense is our 
index to some of his tacit commands, but the 
principle of general utility is our index to others. 

In so far as I can gather his opinion from his admirable 
sermons, it would seem that the compound hypotl^esis was 
embraced by Bishop Butler. But of this I am not certain : 
for, from many passages in those sermons, we may perhaps 
infer that he thought the moral sense oiu* only index or guide. 

The compound hypothesis now in question naturally arose 
from the fact to which I have already adverted. — ^With re- 
gard to actions of a few classes, the moral sentiments of most, 
though not of all men, have been alike. With regard to 
actions of other classes, their moral sentiments have differed, 
through every shade or degree, from slight diversity to direct 
opposition. — In respect to the classes of actions, with regard 
to which their moral sentiments have agreed, there was some 
show of reason for the supposition of a moral sense. In 
respect to the causes of actions, with regard to which their 
moral sentiments have differed, the supposition of a moral 
sense seemed to be excluded. 

But the modified or mixed hypothesis now in question is 

JUBIBPSODBNCB DSTKBHIirBD* 93 

not less halting than the pure hypothesis of a moral sense 
or instinct. — ^With regard to actions of a few classes, the 
moral sentiments of most men have concurred or agreed. 
But it were hardly possible to indicate a single dass of 
actions, with regard to which all men have thought and felt 
alike. And it is clear that every objection to the simple or 
pure hypothesis may be urged, with slight adaptations, 
against the modified or mixed. 

[With regard to a few actions, the sentiments of mankind 
have really been uniform, or have closely approached to 
uniformity. And, so far, there seemed to be some ground 
for assuming ,a moral sense. But, with regard to other 
actions, the sentiments of mankind have been infinitely 
various ; and here the supposition was excluded. 

The intermediate opinion to which I have adverted ap- 
pears to be the opinion of Bishop Butler, so far as I can 
collect it from his writings : though, from many loose pas- 
sages in his excellent sermons, we might perhaps infer thaf 
he considered the moral sense as presiding over the whole 
of our conduct. 

The same intermediate opinion has also been commonly 
held by writers upon general jurisprudence. For, certain 
actions which mankind have generally concurred in approv- 
ing or condemning, are commonly spoken of by these writers 
as if they were enjoined or forbidden by a certain law of 
nature ; which law of nature I shall examine in a future 
lecture, and which law of nature (as I shall there explain,) 
is nothing but the theory of the moral sense disguised with 
another expression. — From Author's MS."] ^^ diviiOon 

By modern writers on jurisprudence, positive law J)[J*^\^^^ 
(or law, simply and strictly so called) is divided ~*Mi«i/«iid 
into law natural and law positive. By the clas- *ndihedi^- 
aical Eoman jiu-ists, borrowing from the Greek SrStVi? 
philosophers, yt« civile (or positive law) is divided i^^JlSTo., 
into jus gentium and jus civile. Which two i^TSk!t£« 
divisions of positive law are exactly equivalent bJ^^tS^!^^ 

94 .THE PEOVINCB Or 

pwJSdidT^" By modem writers on jurisprudence, and by the 
I^*o/S5iit^ dassical Boman jurists, positive morality is also di- 
widUieb>T)o- vided into natural and positive. For, through the 
mondaeoae. frequeut coufusion (to which I shall advert here- 
after) of positive law and positive morality, a portion of posi- 
tive moraUty, as well as of positive law, is embraced by the 
law natural of modem writers on jurisprudence, and by the 
equivalent yu^^mftfum of the classical Boman jurists. 

By reason of the division of positive law into law natural 
and law positive^ crimes are divided, by modem writers on ju- 
risprudence, into crimes which are '^ mala in se " and crimes 
which are " mala quia prohibita.*' By reason of the division 
of positive law into jus gentium Vindjus civile^ crimes are di- 
vided, by the classical Soman jurists, into such as are crimes 
juris gentium and such as are crimes jure civili. Which di- 
visions of crimes, Uke the divisions of law wherefrom they 
are respectively derived, are exactly equivalent. 

Now without a clear apprehension of the hypothesis of 
utility, of the pure hypothesis of a moral sense, and of the 
modified or mixed hypothesis which is compounded of the 
others, the distinction of positive law into natural and posi- 
tive^ with the various derivative distinctions which rest upon 
that main one, are utterly unintelligible. Assuming the 
hypothesis of utility, or assuming the piu-e hypothesis of a 
moral sense, the distinction of positive law into natural and 
positive is senseless. But, assuming the intermediate hy- 
pothesis which is compounded of the others, positive kw, 
and also positive morality, is inevitably distinguished into 
natural and positive. In other words, if the modified or 
mixed hypothesis be founded in tmth, positive human rules 
fall into two parcels:—!. Positive human rules which ob- 
tain with all mankind ; and the conformity of which to 
Divme commands, is, therefore, indicated by the moral 
sense : 2. Positive human rules which do not obtain uni- 
versally ; and the conformity of which to Divine commands 
is, therefore, not indicated by that infallible guide. 

JUBISpmJDrarCB.DBTEBMINSD. 9.5 

» When I treat of poative law as considered with reference 
to its saurceSj I shall shew completely that the modified or 
mixed hypothesis is involved by the distinction of positive 
law into law natural and law positive. I touch upon the 
topic, at the present point of my Course, to the following 
purpose: namely, to shew that my disquisitions on the hypo- 
thesis of utility, on the hypothesis of a moral sense, and on 
that intermediate hypothesis which is compounded of the 
others, are necessary steps in a series of discourses occupied 
with the rationale of jurisprudence. It will, indeed, appear, 
as I advance in my projected Course, that many of the dis- 
tinctions, which tlie science of jurisprudence presents, can- 
not be expounded, in a complete and satisfactory manner, 
without a previous exposition of those seemingly irrelative 
hypotheses. But the topic upon which I have touched at 
the present point of my Course shews most succinctly the 
pertinence of the disquisitions in question. 

Having stated the hypothesis of utility, tlic The fore- 
hypothesis of a moral sense, and the modified or p'tlons dS^ule 
mixed hypothesis which is compounded of tlie oid's^- 
others, I will close my disquisitions on tlie index ^'S'^an^^wT* 
to Gkxl*8 commands with an endeavour to clear cSTule^o- 
the hypothesis of utility from two current though fZ^[^^^ 
grdes misconceptions. ^'llSSi. 

ceptioni. 

cuncvptioiii 

Of the writers who maintain and impugn the tiiciwo 
theory of utinty, three out of four fall mto one or suited. 
the other of the following errors. — 1. Some of them con- 
found the motives which ought to detennine our conduct 
with the proximate measure or test to which our conduct 

96 THB PBOVINCE OF 

should conform and by which our conduct should be tried. 
2. Others confound the theory of general utility with that 
theory or hypothesis concerning the origin of benevolence 
whi(^ is branded by its ignorant or disingenuous adver- 
saries with the misleading and invidious name of the selfish 
system. 

Now these errors are so palpable, that, perhaps, I ought 
to conclude with the bare statement, and leave my hearers 
to supply the corrective. But, let them be never so pal- 
pable, they have imposed upon persons of imquestionable 
penetration, and therefore may impose upon all who wiU 
not pause to examine them. Accordingly, I will clear the 
theory of utility from these gross but current misconceptions 
as completely as my limits will permit. 

I will first examine the error of confounding motives to 
conduct with the proximate measure or test to which our 
conduct should conform and by which our conduct should 
be tried. I will then examine the error of confounding the 
theory of utility with that theory or hypothesis concerning the 
origin of benevolence which is styled the selfish system. 
Thefiretmia- Accordiug to the thcory of utility, the measure 
«za!o£i«d. or test of human conduct is the law set by God 
to his human creatures. Now some of his commands are 
revealed, whilst others are unrevealed. Or (changing the 
phrase) some of his commands are express, whilst others 
are tacit. The commands which God has revealed, we 
must gather from the terms wherein they are promulgcd. 
The commands which he has not revealed, we must con- 
strue by the principle of utility : by the probable effects of 
our conduct on that general happiness or good which is the 
final cause or purpose of the good and wise lawgiver in all 
his laws and commandments. 

Strictly speaking, therefore, utility is not the measure to 
which our conduct should conform, nor is utility the test by 
which our conduct should be tried. It is merely the index 
to the measure, the index to the test. But, since we con* 

:^iin >6 tBfe'meaaure by following the suggestions of the 
'index,'! may say with sufficient, though not* with strict 
propriety, that utility is the measure or test proximately or 
immediately. Accordingly, I style the Divine commands the 
ultimate measure or test : but I style the principle of utility, 
or the general happiness or good, the proximate measure to 
which our conduct should conform, or the proximate test by 
V which our conduct should be tried. 

Now, though the general good is that proximate measure^ 
or though the general good is that proximate testy it is not 
in all, or even in most cases, the motive or inducement which 
ought to determine our conduct If our conduct were al- 
ways determined by it considered as a motive or induce- 
mentf our conduct would often disagree with it considered 
as the standard or measure. If our conduct were always 
determined by it considered as a motive or inducement^ our 
conduct would often be blameablc, rather than deserving of 
praise, when tried by it as tlie test. 

Though these propositions may sound like paradoxes, 
they are perfectly just. I should occupy more time than I 
can give to the disquisition, if I went through tlie whole of 
the proofs which would establish them beyond contradic- 
tion. But the few hints which I shall now throw out will suf- 
ficiently suggest the evidence to those of my hearers who 
may not have reflex;ted on the subject. 

When I speak of the public good, or of the general good, 
I mean the aggregate enjoyments of the single or indivi- 
dual persons who compose that public or general to which 
my attention is directed. The good of mankind, is the ag- 
gregate of the pleasures which are respectively enjoyed by 
the individuals who constitute the human race. The good 
of England, is the aggregate of the pleiisures which fall to 
the lot of Englishmen considered individually or singly. 

VOL. I. H 

98 THB PKOVINCE OF 

The good of the public in the town to which I belong, is 
the aggr^te of ^e pleasures which the inhabitants seve- 
rally enjoy. 

" Mankind," *' country," " pubUc," are concise expres- 
sions for a number of individual persons considered collec- 
tively or as a whole. In case the good of those persons 
considered singly or individually were sacrificed to the good 
of those persons considered collectively or as a whole,. the 
general good would be destroyed by the sacrifice. The sum 
of the particular enjoyments which constitutes the general 
good, would be sacrificed to the mere name by which that 
^ good is denoted. 

When it is stated strictly and nakedly, this truth is so 
plain and palpable that the statement is almost laughable. 
But experience sufiiciently evinces, that plain and palpable 
truths are prone to shp from the memory : that the neglect 
of plain and palpable truths is the source of most of the 
errors with which the world is infested. For example, 
That notion of the public good which was current in the 
ancient republics supposes a neglect of the truism to which 
I have called your attention. Agreeably to that notion of 
the public good, the happiness of the individual citizens is 
sacrificed without scruple in order that the common weal 
may wax and prosper. The only substantial interests are 
the victims of a barren abstraction, of a sounding but empty 
phrase. 

Now (speaking generally) every individual person is the 
best possible judge of his own interests : of what will afiect 
himself with the greatest pleasures and pains. Compared 
with his intimate consciousness of his own peculiar interests, 
his knowledge of the interests of others is vague conjecture. 

Consequently, the principle of general utility imperiously 
demands that he commonly shall attend to his own rather 

' . JUBI8PIIUD£.VCB DBTBRMINSD. 99 

than to the inttiMsts of others : that he shall not habitually 
n^Iect that which he knowa accurately in order that he may 
habitually pursue that which he knows imperfectly. 

This is the arrangement which the principle of general 
utility manifestly requires. It is also the arrangement which 
the Author of man's nature manifestly intended. For our 
self-regarding affections are steadier and stronger than our 
social : the motives by which we are urged to pursue our 
peculiar good operate with more constancy, and commonly 
with more energy, than the motives by which we are soli- 
cited to pursue the good of o^r fellows. 

If every individual neglected his own to the end of pur-^ 
suing and promoting the interests of others, every indivi- 
dual would neglect the objects with which he is intimately 
acqumnted to the end of forwarding objects of which he 
is comparatively ignorant. Consequently, the interests of 
every individual would be managed unskilfully. And, since 
the general good is an aggregate of individual enjoyments, 
Uie good of the general or public would diminish with the 
good of the individuals of whom that general or public is 
constituted or composed.* 

The principle of general utility does not demand of us, 

• Goodness and Badness of Motives, 

The springs or motives of action are of various kindR, all equally ossen- 
tisL We dig and delve from r^ard to ourj>elvc8, or from a narrower aym- 
pathj with our relations and friends. Yet the actions which are suggested 
by this motive are commonly beneficent. To knock a man down and to 
take his purse is pernicious. To labour in one*8 calling for the same pur- 
pose is useful and laudable. Benevolence may prompt to the most mis- 
chievous actions. A fanatic may take it into his nuKhUi'd brain to slay a 
tyrant. The motive is benevolence, and that of tlic most extensive kind ; 
but the action is abominable. It is not Uierefore the motive, but the ac- 
tion and the design, — which is again to be tried by the test. It is true 
thati though all motives are equally necessary, some are more likely to mis- 
lead than others ; but it is impossible to pronounce of any motives that it is 
necessarily good or bad. Even tlie most dangerous of all — revenge — is 
absolutely necessary. 

Every motive may lead to* good or to bad. It consequently follows 

a 2 

^TSSC^ rTTT^y^SRHR JLfV4^.K . . ■■' i ■ ■■ i .n , |j . „j ^^, .. .,,, 

loo THE PROVIlfCE OF '^ ^ 

that we shall always or habitually intend the general goi3d : 
though the principle pf general utiUty does demand of us, 
that we shall never pursue our own peculiar good by means 
which are inconsistent with that paramount object. 

For example : The man who delves or spins, delves or 
spins to put money in his purse, and not with the purpose 
or thought of promoting the general well-being. But by 
delving or spinning, he adds to the sum of commodities : 
and he therefore promotes that general well-being, which is 

tbat conduct may be bad, though the xnotive be benevolent; and good, 
though the motive be selfiah, or even anti-Bocial. 

[Gompariaon of love of reputation with religion and benevolence.— -Self- 
regarding.] 

But though every motive may lead to bad or good, some are pre-emi- 
nently likely to lead to good : e.g. benevolence, love of reputation, religion. 
[Here, note on vanity.] Others pre-eminently likely to lead to bad, and 
little likely to lead to good ; e,g. the anti-social — antipathy — particular or 
general. Others, again, are as likely to lead to good as to bad : e,g, the 
self-regarding. They are the origin of most of the steady industry, but 
also, of most of the offences of men. * 

In this qualified sense, therefore, motives may be divided into such as 
are good, such as are bad, and such as are neither good nor bad. - 

If an action is good, he. conforming to rules fi)rmed on the principle 
of utility, the motive makes it more laudable. If not, not. But it is only 
secondarily that the nature of the motive affects the quality of the action. 

[State of the undenstanding with regard to the action : i.e. intention, 
etc.] 

It is, therefore, wrong to maintain that the complexion of the action 
mainly depends on the complexion of the motive. It is equally wrong to 
maintain that the nature of the motive does not, to a certain degree, deter- 
mine its complexion. 

In this limited sense, tli6refore, the moral complexion of the action is to 
a certain degree determined by the motive. If the intention bo good, the 
action is the better for being prompted by a social motive. If the action 
be bad, it is less bad if prompted by a social one. 

It is important that good dispositions should be recognized and ap- 
proved. But the goodness of the action depends upon its conformity to 
utility, and upon the state of the . . . — MS. Fragment 

[The subject of Motives will be found discussed at length in lectures 
J^VflL and XIX., Vol. II.— S. A.] 

^TJBiCtffilTDBNOB DBTEBMIKBD. 101 

riKit, and ought not to be, his practical end. General uti- 
lity is not his motive to action.- But his action conforms 
to utility considered as the standard of conduct : and, when 
tried by utility considered as the test of conduct, his action 
deserves approbation. 

Again : Of all pleasures bodily or mental, the pleasures 
of mutual love, cemented by mutual esteem, are the most 
enduring and varied. They therefore contribute largely to 
swell the sum of well-being, or they form an important 
item in the account of human happiness. And, for that 
reason, the well-wisher of the general good, or the adherent 
of the principle of utility, must, in that character, consider 
them with much complacency. But, though he approves 
of love because it accords with his principle, he is far from 
maintaining that the general good ought to be the motive 
of the lover. It was never contended or conceited by a 
sound, orthodox utilitarian, that the lover should kiss his 
mistress with an eye to the common weal. 

And by this last example, I am naturally conducted to 
this further consideration. 

Even where utility requires that benevolence shall be our 
motive, it commonly requires that we shall be determined 
by partial, rather than by general benevolence : by the love 
of the narrower circle which is formed of family or rela- 
tions, rather than by sympathy with the wider circle which 
is formed of friends or acquaintance : by sympathy with 
friends or acquaintance, rather than by patriotism : by pa- 
triotism, or love of country, rather than by the larger hu- 
manity which embraces mankind. 

In short, the principle of utility requires that we shall 
act with the utmost effect, or that we shall so act as to pro- 
duce the utmost good. And (speaking generally) we act 
with the utmost effect, or we so act a.s to produce the ut- 
most good, when our motive or iudiiccnicut to conduct is 
the most urgent and steady, when the sphere wherein we 
act is the most restricted and the most familiar to us, and 

Kfe THE PBOVINCK OF ' 

when the purpose which we directly pursue is the most de- 
terminate or precise. 

The foregoing general statement, must, indeed, be re- 
ceived with numerous limitations. The principle of utility 
not unfrequently requires that the order at which I have 
pointed shall be inverted or reversed : that the self-r^ard- 
ing affections shall yield to the love of family, or to sym- 
pathy with friends or acquaintance : that the love of family; 
or sympathy with friends or acquaintance, shall yield to the 
love of country : that the love of country shall yield to the 
love of mankind : that the general happiness or good, which 
is always the test of our conduct, shall also be the motive 
determining our conduct, or shall also be the practical end ' 
to which our conduct is directed. 

But to adjust the respective claims of the selfish and social 
motives, of partial sympathy and general benevolence, is a 
task which belongs to the detail, rather than to the prin- 
ciples of ethics : a task which I could hardly accomplish in 
a clear and satisfactory manner, unless I visited my hearers 
with a complete dissertation upon ethics, and wandered at 
unconscionable length from the appropriate purpose of my 
Course. What I have suggested will suffice to conduct 
the reflecting to the following conclusions. 1. General uti- 
lity considered as the measure or test, differs from general 
utility considered as a motive or inducement. 2. If our 
conduct were truly adjusted to the principle of utility, our 
conduct would conform to rules fashioned on the principle 
of utility, or our conduct would be guided by sentiments as- 
sociated with such rules. But, this notwithstanding, general 
utility, or the general happiness or good, would not be in all, 
or even in most cases, our motive to action or forbearance. 
The second Haviug touchcd generally and briefly on the 
Uo^Jx^*"" ^^^ ^^ ^^^ ^^^ misconceptions, I will now advert 
mineiL to tlic sccoud witli tlic like generality and brevity. 

Thoy who fall into this misconcxjption are guilty of two 
erroi-s. 1. They uiistiike and distort the h}i)otliesis con- 

JUBISPBUDBKCB DBTEBMINED. 103 

ceming the origin of benevolence which is styled the selfish 
m/stem. 2. They imagine that that hypothesis, as thus mis- 
taken and distorted, is an essential or necessary ingredient 
in the theory of utility.* 

I will examine the two errors into which the misconception 
may be resolved, in the order wherein I have stated them. 

1. According to an hypothesis of Hartley and of various 
other writers, benevolence or sympathy is not an ultimate 
fiu5t, or is not unsusceptible of analysis or resolution, or is 
not a simple or inscrutable element of man's being or na- 
ture. According to their hypothesis, it emanates from self- 
love, or from the self-regarding aJBfections, through that fa- 
miliar process, styled " the association of ideas," to which I 
have briefly adverted in a preceding portion of my discourse. 

Now it follows palpably from the foregoing concise state- 
ment, that these writers dispute not the existence of disin- 
terested benevolence or sympathy : that, assuming the ex- 
istence of disinterested benevolence or synipatliy, tliey en- 
deavour to trace tlie feeling, through its su])posed generation, 
to the simpler and ulterior feeUng of which they believe it 
the offspring. 

But, palpable as this consequence is, it is fancied by many 
opponents of the theory of utility, and (what is more remark- 
able) by some of its adherents also, that these writers dis- 
pute the existence of disinterested benevolence or sympathy. 

According to the hypothi^sis in question, as thus mistaken 

^ ^' The first of these mistakes is made by Godwin. The second by 
Paley. 

^ Tttam Epicurus and Lucretius down to Palcy and Godwin, Mr. Bentham 
is the only writer who has explained this subject with clearness and accu- 
itcy. He is not, indeed, the inventor of the theory of utility (for that is 
88 old as the human race), but he is the first of all philosophers who has 
Yiewed it from every asiMJct, and has fitt^<l if for practice.'* 

"Many of the writers who i\\\\n}i\v to n'jrct MtiliJy <i«», in fact, embrace 
it; {t,g, Cicero, Seneai, Johnson, etc.) (EuilaMnonisniu.s). The hotieshim 
is the generally useful. The utile is tlie generally |Ximicious ; but which 
would 8n8wer some selfish and sinister purpose.*' — MS. Fragment, 

104 THE PBOVINCB OP 

and distorUdj we have no sympathy, properly so called, with 
the pleasures and pains of others. That which is styled sym- 
pathy, or that which is styled benevolence, is provident 
regard to self. Every good office done by man to man 
springs from a calculation of which self is the object We 
perceive that we depend on others for much of our own hap- 
piness : and, perceiving that we depend on others for much 
of our own happiness, we do good unto others that others 
may do it unto us. The seemingly disinterested services 
that are rendered by men to men, are the offspring of the 
very motives, and are governed by the very principles, which 
engender and regulate tirade.* 

* The selfish system, in this its literal import, is flatly inconsistent with 
obvious facts, and therefore is hardly deserving of serious refutation. We 
are daily and hourly cottscious of disinterested benevolence or sympathy, or 
of wishing the good of others without regard to our own. In tlie present 
wretched condition of human society, so unfavourable are the outward cir- 
cumstances wherein most men ore placed, and so bad is the education or 
training received by most men in their youth, that the benevolence of most 
men wants tlie intensity and endurance which are requisite to their own 
happiness and to the happiness of their fellow- crciitures. With most 
men, benevolence or sympathy is rather a barren emotion than a stix>ng and 
steady incentive to vigorous and efficient action. Although the feeling or 
sentiment afTocts them often enough, it is commonly stifled at the birth by 
antagonist feelings or sentiments. But to deny, with Kochefoucauld or 
Mandeville, the existence of benevolence or sympathy, is mther a wild pa- 
radox, luizarded in the wantonne&s of satire, than Uie deliberate position of 
a philoHoplier examining the springs of conduct. 

And here I may briefly remark, that the expression seljishy as applied to 
motives, has a larger and a narrower meaning. — Taking die expression 
selfish with its larger meaning, all motives are selfish. For every motive 
is a wish : and every wish is a jmin which nflect** a man's self and which 
urges him to seek relief by attaining the object wislied. — Taking the ex- 
pression selfish vfith its narrower meaning, motivds which are selfish must 
be distinguished from motives which are benevolent : our wishes for our 
own good, from our wishes for the good of our neighbour : the desires which 
impel us to pursue our own advantage or benefit, from the desires which 
solicit U8 to pursue the advantage or Ininefit of others. 

To obviate this ambiguity, with the wretched (juibbling which it l^egets, 
Mr. Benihani has judiciously discarded the dul)iou.s expression selfish. The 
motives which bolicit us to pursue the advantage or good of others, he styles 

JUBISFBUDENCE DETERMINED. 105 

' '2, Having thus mistaken and distorted the so called self- 
iah systeniy many opponents of the theory of utility^ together 
with fiome adherents of the same theory, imagine that the 
former, as thus mistaken and distorted, is a necessary por- 
tion of the latter. And hence it naturally follows, that the 
adherents of the theory of utility are styled by many of its 
opponents "selfish, sordid, and cold blooded calculators." 

Now the theory of et/Ucs which I style the theory of utility 
has no necessary connection with any tJieory of motives. It 
has no necessary connection with any theory or hj^^othesis 
which concerns the nature or origin of benevolence or sym- 
pathy. The theory of utility will hold good, whether bene- 
volence or sympathy be truly a portion of our nature, or be 
nothing but a mere name for provident regard to self. The 
theory of utility will hold good, whether benevolence or sym- 
pathy be a simple or ultimate fact, or be engendered by the 
principle of association on the self-regarding affections. 

According to the theory of utility, the principle of general 

BodaL The motiyea which impel us to pursue our own advantage or good, 
he styles self -regarding. 

But, bewdes the social and self-regarding motives, there are disinterested 
motives, or disinterested wishes, by which we are impelled or solicited tu 
visit others with evil. These disinterested but malevolent motives he styles 
anti-MOcicU, — ^When I style a motive of the sort a diswteresUd motive, I ap- 
ply the epithet with the meaning wherein I ajiply it to a benevolent motive. 
Speaking with absolute precision, the motive is nut disinterested in either 
case: for, in each of the two cases, the man desires relief from a wish im- 
portuning himself. But, excepting the desire of relief which the wish ne- 
oeaaarily implies, the wish, in each of the cases, is purely disinterested. The 
end or object to which it urges the man is the good or evil of another, and 
not his own advantage. — By imputing to human nature disinterested male- 
volence, Mr. Bentham has drawn upon himself the reproaches of certain 
critics. But in imputing disinterested malevolence to human nature, he is 
far from being singular. The fact is admitted or assumed by Aristotle and 
Butler, and by all who have closely examined the springs or motives of 
conduct. And the fact is easily explained by the all-pervading principle 
• which is styled ** the association of ideas." Disinterested nuilovolcnce or 
antipatliy, like disinterested benevolence or syin])athy, is l>egottc*n by tliat 
principle ou the self-regarding affections. 

106 THE PBOYIKCB OF 

Utility is the index to iGod's commands, and is therefore the 
proximate measure of all human conduct. We are boimd by 
the awful sanctions with which his commands are armed, 
to adjust our conduct to rules formed on that proximate 
measure. Though benevolence be nothing but a name for 
provident regard to self, we are moved by regard to self, 
when we think of those awful sanctions, to pursue the ge- 
nerally useful, and to forbear from the genei^ly pernicious. 
Accordingly, that is the version of the theory of utility which 
is rendered by Dr. Paley. He supposes that general utility 
is the proximate test of conduct : but he supposes that all 
the motives by which our conduct is determined are purely 
self -regarding. And his version of the theory of utility is, 
nevertheless, coherent : though I think that his theory of 
motives is miserably partial and shallow, and that mere re- 
gard to self, although it were never so provident, would 
hardly perform the office of genuine benevolence or sympa* 
thy. For if genuine benevolence or sympathy be not a por- 
tion of our nature, we have only one inducement to consult 
the general good : .namely, a provident regard to our own 
welfare or happiness. But if genuine benevolence or sym- 
pathy be a portion of our nature, we have two distinct in- 
ducements to consult the general good : namely, the same 
provident regard to our own welfare or happiness, and also 
a disinterested regard to the welfare or happiness of others. 
If genuine benevolence or sympathy were not a portion of 
our nature, our motives to consult the general good would 
be more defective than tliey are.* 

• Confusion of Sympathy tcith Moral Sense, 

Sympathy is the pleasure or piin which we feel when another enjoys or 
suffers. In common language it is fellow-feeling. This is totally different 
from moral approbation or di^pprobation, and instead of always coinciding 
with moral sentiments (let their origin be what it may), often runs counter 
to tliem. As {e.g.) that large sympathy with every sentient being, or at least 
with every human being, which is called humanity or benevolence, inclines 
UH to sympathise with the sufferings of the culprit whose punishment we 
approve. Like the jjains and pleasures Yr\uvi\\ Y^uteX-y x^^x^ owcwXn^^^ i\\^ 

JUBISPBUDENCE DBTEBHINED. 107 

• Again : Assuming that benevolence or sympathy is truly 
a portion of our nature, the theory of utility has no connec- 
tiuQ whatever with any hjrpothesis or theory which concerns 
the origin of the motive. Whether benevolence or sym- 
pathy be a simple or ultimate fact, or be engendered by 
the principle of association on the self-regarding affections, it 
i8 one of the motives by which our conduct is determined. 
And, on either of the conflicting suppositions, the principle 
of utility, and not benevolence or sympathy, is the measure 
or test of conduct : For as conduct may be generally use- 
ful, though the motive is self-regarding ;*so may conduct be 
generally pernicious, though the motive is purely beuevo- 

paioa and pleasnres of sjrmpathj are not moral sentiments, but feelings or 
motives which, according to the justness of our moral sentiments, may lead 
us wrong or right. 

This sympathy may be an original instinct, like our appetites, or l>cgottcn 
by association, like diseased curiosity, love of money, etc. (Bisliop nutlcr.) 

But on neither of these hypotheses, is the theory which derives our moral 
sentiments from utility at all affected. 

The theory of utility assumes sympathy, but maintains that our jud^nncnts 
of actions ought to be, and in a greiit measure are, derived from our percep- 
tion of the ^«n67'aZ consequences of actions ; I.e., not their iiiinicdiiitC; but 
their remote consequences, supposing them unregulated by Momls and Law ; 
and not only their consequences ujwn ourselves, but also yx[K>\\ our relations, 
our friends, our country, our fellow-men ; with whom, according to the 
theory, as I understand it, we are held by bonds of sympathy ; whieli, though 
not so strong nor so constant as our mere regard to ourselves, is just as 
necessary to our own well-being. Sympatliy, as well as pure felf-Iovc, is 
not a moral sentiment, but a principle or motive to action : either being 
liable to disturb our moral judgment. Indeed a narrow sympathy is, in 
some minds, as tyrannous as the self-love of the most narrow and contracted 
being that crawls the earth. Maternal love, the passion between the sexes 
when exalted into Love, the spirit of sect and party, a narrow patri«»ti>ni — 
all these are as likely to mislead the judgment or the niural Kcnse* as the 
purely self-regard ing aflections; which, on llic other hand, th(.ugh ollon 
misleading, are to a great extent, the causes of good, i)ro!n])ting men to all 
long and obscure effort. — MS. Fnujment. 

[The foregoing fragments (pages 99, 103, 10(^,) wero, as the reader will 
perceive, merely rough hints or nienioranda of matter which the Author in- 
tended to introduce iuto tlie corrected and more aui\»lii vidvUviw viV \Ji\\% ^vixV 
which he mcditutcd.] ^S, K. 

108 THE FBOVINGB OF 

lent. Accordingly, in all hia expositions of the theory of 
utility, Mr. Bentham assumes or supposes the exis^ce of 
disinterested sympathy, and scarcely adverts to the hypo-' 
theses which regard the origin of the feeling.^ 

^ But here I would briefly remark, that, though the hypothesia of Hart- 
ley ia no necenary ingredient in the theory of general utility, it ia a necea- 
sazy ingredient (if it be not unfounded) in every 80\md system of education 
or training. For the sake of our own happiness, and the happinem of our 
ieflow-oMtoreSi tiie afieotion of benevolence or sympathy should be strong 
and atea^l^ possibre : for though, like other motives, it may lead ua to 
peruicioua conduct, it is less likely than most of the others to seduce ua 
from the right road, ifbw if benevolence or sympathy be engendered by 
the principle of association, the affection may be planted and nurtured by 
education or training. The truth or falsehood of the hjrpothesis^ together 
with the process by which the affection is generated, are therefore objecta 
of great practical moment| and well dessrving of close and minute exa- 
mination. 

JURISPBUDENCB DETBBMIXED. 109 

[In a list of notes called by the Author ' Inserenda/ there is 
the following : — 

** Excursus on Analogy. 

** To be inserted in the beginning of Lecture V., or reserved to 
Judge-made Law or Interpretation.'' 

In obedience to this intimation, I intended to prefix the Ex- 
CUX8U8 to the following Lecture. But as it appeared to several com- 
petent judges that its connection with the main subject of this 
Work was too indirect to justify the insertion of a considerable 
essay, I have reserved it for publication in a separate volume, with 
some other detached papers. Among these is an essay on * In- 
terpretation,' * Papers on Codification,' and other fragments, con- 
nected with the Philosophy of Law. — S. A.] 

LECTUEE V. 

The term lawj or the term laws, is applied to i-aws proper 
the following objects: — To laws proper or pro- caii^l'Vnd'**' 
perly so called, and to laws improper or iiiipro- p^ToJTiIJJIro- 
perly so called : to objects which have all the ^^ 
essentials of an imperative law or rule, and to 
objects which are wanting in some of those essentials, but 
to which the term is unduly extended cither by reason of 
analogy or in the way of metaphor. 

Strictly speaking, all improper laws arc analogous to laws 
proper : and the term law^ as applied to any of them, is a 
metaphorical or figurative expression. 

For every metaphor springs from an analogy : and every 
analogical extension given to a term is a metaphor or figure 
of speech. The term is extended from t\\e o^'^^cXa ^\i\0^ \\. 

110 THE raOVlNCB OP 

properly signifies to objects of another nature : to objects 
not of the class wherein the former are contained, although 
they are allied to the. former by that more distant resem- 
blance which is usually styled analogy. 

But, taking the expressions with the meanings which cus- 
tom or usage has established, the expressions metaphorical 
and analogical are hardly synonymous or equivalent. When 
we speak of a metaphor^ or of 2i figure of speech^ we usually 
mean to intimate that the improper application of the term 
is suggested by a slender analogy : that the secondary im- 
port of the term is remotely allied to the primitive. When 
the analogy suggesting the improper application is strong or 
close^ we scarcely say that the secondary import of the term 
is metaphorical or figurative. We usually say that its se- 
condary import is analogical : or that the term is extended 
from its proper to its improper objects, on account of the 
analogy by which those objects are allied. 

It must, however, be remarked, that the difference between 
the meanings which custom or usage has established is a dif- 
ference of degrees. Consequently, it is not to be settled with 
precision. Where the analogy is extremely strong or close, 
the secondary import of the term is usually styled analogi- 
cal. Where the analogy is extremely slender or remote, the 
improper application of the term is usually styled a meta- 
phor. In numberless cases lying between the extremes, we 
say, indifferently, that the secondary import is analogical^ or 
that the term is diverted from its primitive meaning by a 
metaphor or figure of speech. 

Uwiimpro- Now a broad distinction obtains between laws 
t?o*i5IidI— improperly so called. Some are closely^ others are 
doJd/iaio- 'f'^^otely analogous to laws proper. The term law 
m^.^^ is extended to some by a decision of the reason 
u h^^"ot ^^ understanding. The term law is extended to 
figurttivc others by a turn or caprice of the fancy. 

In order that I may mark this distinction briefly and 
commodiously, I avail myself of the difference, established 

JURISPRUDBNCE DETBEMFXED. Ill 

by custom or usage, between the meanings of the expres- 
sions analogical andjigurative. 1 style laws of the first 

kind laws closely analogous to laws proper. I say that they 

are called laws by an analogical extension of the term. 1 

style laws of the second kind laws metaphorical or Jigura- 
five. 1 say that they are called laws by a metaphor oxjigure 
of speech. 

Now laws proper, with such improper laws as Dmsion of 
are closely analogous to the proper, are divisible an7Jf"S 

.1 impro|)er 

tnUS. laws as are 

Of laws properly so called, some are set by 1!^^^^*' 
God to his human creatures. Others are set by ^^* p*"^- 
men to men. 

Of the laws properly so called which are set by men to 
men, some are set by men as political superiors, or by men, 
as private persons, in pursuance of legal rights. Others may 
be described in the following negative manner : They are 
not set by men as political superiors, nor are they set by 
men, as private persons, in pursuance of legal rights. 

The laws improperly so called which are closely analogous 
to the proper, are merely opinions or sentiments held or felt >^ 
by men in regard to human conduct. As I shall shew here- 
after, tbese opinions and sentiments are styled laws^ because 
they are analogous to laws properly so called : because they 
resemble laws properly so called in some of their properties 
or some oT their eflfects or consequences. nintribution 

Accordingly, I distribute laws proper, with such "^^J^^JJ^^ 
improper laws as are closely analogous to the ""^^^l.'JJ^J'J^ 
proper, under three capital classes. arociosciy 

The first comprises the laws (properly so called) thcpn.p, 
which are set by God to his human creatures. capital 

The second comprises the laws (properly so i.Th^uwof 
called) which are set by men as political supc- iaw«ofUHi. 

• 1 • ^ • *2. Positive 

nors, or by men, as private persons, m pursuance law, or iwsi- 
of legal rights. fpiSS-e 

The third comprises laws of the two following "®'»^'y' 

112 THE PROVIKOK OF 

. ruiMof pod- species : 1: The laws (properly so called) which 
w^ti^^' are set by men to men» but not by men as poli- 
moni rules, jj^ superiors, nor by men, as private persons, in 
pursuance of legal rights : 2. The laws which are dosely 
analogous to laws proper, but are merely opinions or.sen* 
timents held or fdt by men in regard to human conduct 

1 put laws of these species into a common dass, and I 

mark them with the common name to which I shall advert 
immediately, for the following reason. No law of either 
spedes is a direct or circuitous command of a monarch or 
sovereign number in the character of poUtical superior. In 
other words, no law of dther spedes is a direct or circuit^ 
ous command of a monarch or sovereign number to a per- 
son or persons in a state of subjection to its author. Con- 
sequently, laws of both species may be aptly opposed to 
laws of the second capital class. For every law of that se- 
cond capital class is a direct or circuitous command of a 
monarch or sovereign number in the character of political 
superior : that is to say, a direct or circuitous command of 
a monarch or sovereign number to a person or persons in 
a state of subjection to its author. 
y Laws comprised by these three capital classes I mark with 
the following names. 

I name laws of the first class the law or laws of God^ or 
the Divine law or laws. 

For various reasons which I shall produce immediately, 
I name laws of* the second class positive law, or positive 
laws. 

For the same reasons, I name laws of the third doss po- 
sitive morality, rules of positive morality, or positive moral 
~ rules.* . 

• The expression positive morality^ as thus applied, embraces humaa 
laws of the two following species : 1. The laws (properly so called) which 
are set by men to men, but not by men as political superiors, nor by men, 
as private persons, in pursuance of legal rights: 2. The laws which are 
closely analogous to laws proper, but are merely opinions or sentiments held 
or ielt hy men in r^ird to human conduct. 

JURI8PEUDENCE D£TEBMI>:£D. 113 

Positive laws, the appropriate matter of jiuis- ;rhe connex- 
prudence, are related in the way of rcseuiblauce, prea^uMtbe 
or by a close or remote analogy, to the following ^^^^^ ^'^^"'^ 

I therefore made a mistake in my first lecture, when I affirmed universally 
of poflitive moral rules, that they are laws improperly so called. I ought 
to have restricted the proposition to such rules of the class as belong to the 
■eoond of the species mentioned at the beginning of the note. But in that 
lecture, and also in the Outline of my Course, I have limited the expression 
poiitive morality to laws of that second species. 

Having rectified the mistake which I made in my first lee- Explanation 
tare, I now produce my reasons for using the two expressions of ^>»c ex[»rca- 

LL *^' \ %% 1 /, . • !• If aions positive 

^positive law" and ^^ positive morality. /««, aiiil w- 

There are two capital classes of human laws. The first '*«'* morality. 
comprises the laws (properly so called) which are set by men as political 
superiors, or by men, as private persons, in pursuance of legal rights. The 
second comprises the laws (proper and improper) which belong to the two 
species mentioned at the beginning of the note, r^ 

As merely distinguished from the second, the first of those capital classes 
might be named simply law. As merely distinguished from thu first, the se- 
cond of those capital classes might he named simply momlitij. But both must 
be distinguished from the law of God : and, for the pui*})osc of distinguish- 
ing both from the law of God, we must qualify the names law and moralitt/. 
Accordingly, I style the first of those capital classes *^ positive law : " and 
I style the second of those capital classes '* positive morality.'' By the com- v- 
men epithet positive^ I denote that both classes fiow from human sources. 
By the distinctive names law and nwralityy I denote the difference between v 
the human sources from which the two classes respectively emanate. 

Strictly speaking, every law properly so called is a positive law. For it 
is pui or set by its individual or collective author, or it exists by the posi- 
tion or institution of its individual or collective author. 

But, as opposed to the law of nature (meaning the law of God), human 
law of the first of those capital classes is styled by writers on jurisprudence 
^^ positive law." This application of the expression ^^ positive law " was ma- 
nifestly made for the purpose of obviating confusion : confusion of human 
law of the first of those capital classes with that Divine law which is the 
measure or test of human. 

And, in order to obviate similar confusion, I apply the expression *^ posi- 
tive morality " to human law of the second capital class. For the name 
morality^ when standing unqimlified or alone, may signify the law set by 
God, or human law of that second capital class. If you 8.iy that an act or 
omission violates morality^ you speak ambiguously. You may mean that 
it violates the law which I style ^* positive morality," or that violates the 
Divine law which is the measiu-e or test of the former. 
VOL. L 1 

k" 

114 THE PROVINCE OF 

Tei^nJthw^ objects. — 1. In the way of resemblance, they are 
fuurui.'and * related to the laws of God. 2. In the way of 

sixth. •' 

Again : The human laws or rules which I style '* positive morality /* I 
mark with that expression for the following additional reason. 

I have said that the name morality^ when standing unqualified or alone, 
may signify positive morality, or may signify the law of God. But the name 
morality^ when standing unqualified or alone, is perplexed with a further 
ambiguity. It may import indifferently either of the two following Fenses.— - 
1. The name morality^ when standing unqualified or alone, may signify posi- 
tive morality which is good or worthy of approbation, or positive morality 
as it would be if it were good or worthy of approbation. In other words, 
the name morality^ when standing unqualified or alone, may signify poidtive 
morality which agrees with its measure or test, or positive morality as it 
would be if it agreed with its measure or test. 2. The name morality^ 
when standing unqualified or alone, may signify the human laws, which I 
style positive morality, as considered without regard to thoir goodness or 
badness. For example. Such lavrs of the class as are peculiar to a given 
age, or such laws of the class as are peculiar to a given nation, we style 
the morality of that given age or nation, whether we think them good or 
deem them bad. Or, in case we mean to intimate that we approve or dis- 
approve of them, we name them the morality of that given age or nation, 
and we qualify that name with the epithet good or bad. 

Now, by the name ^^ positive morality^'' I mean the human laws, which 
I mark with that expression, as considered without regard to their good- 
ness or badness. Whether human laws be worthy of jiraise or blame, or 
whether they accord or not with their measure or test, they are " rules of 
positive morality,** in the sense which I give to the expression, if they be- 
long to eitlier of the species mentioned at the beginning of the note. But, 
in consequence of that ambiguity which I have now attempted to explain, 
I could hardly express my meaning with passable distinctness by tlie un- 
(jualified name morality, 

Exnlanation From the expression positive law and the expression positive 
of the follow- morality J I pass to certain expressions with which they are 
gioos: viz, closely connected. 

^^(^J^ ^^« science of jurispi^udence (or, simply and briefly, ^t/m- 

and •eienceof prudence) is concerned with positive laws, or with laws strictly 
n^/y7 "^ ^ called, as considered without regard to their goodness or 
»imce of bsdness. 

'Lloli!^. '' Positive morality, as considered without regard to its good- 

»ri>«te ofU- ness or badness, might be the subject of a science doselv ana- 
,cimve of logous to jurisprudence. I say " might be : " since it is only 
nujraU. in ouc of its branchcs (namely, tlie law of nations or inter- 

national law), that positive morality, as considered without regard to its 

JUKISPRUDKNCB DETERMINED. 115 

resemblance, they are related to those rules of positive mo- 
rality which are laws properly so called. 3. By a close or 

goodness or badness, has been treated by writers in a scientific or syste- 
matic manner.— -For the science of positive morality, as considered without 
regard to its goodness or badness, current or established hinguagc will 
hardly afford us a name. The name morals^ or science of morals^ would 
denote it ambiguously : the name morals or science of morals^ being com- 
monly applied (as I shall shew immedir.tely) to a department of ethics or 
deontology. But, since the science of jurisprudence is not imfrequently 
styled *' the science of positive law,'* the science in question might be styled 
analogically " the science of positive morality." The department of the 
science in question which relates to international law, has actually been 
styled by Von Martens, a recent writer of celebrity, ^^ positives oder prac 
tisches Vcilkerrecht : " that is to say, ^* positive international law/' or ^^prac- 
tical international law." Had he named that department of the science 
** positive international morality^'' the name would have hit its import with 
perfect precision. 

The science of ethics (or, in the language of Mr. Bentham, the science of 
deontology) may be defined in the following manner : — It affects to deter- 
mine the test of positive law and morality, or it affects to dctormine the 
principles whereon they must be fashioned in ortlcr that thoy may merit 
approbation. In other words, it affects to expound theni as they should 
be ; or it affects to expoimd them as they ought to be ; or it aifccts to ex- 
pound them as they would be if they were good or worthy of praise ; or it 
affects to expound them as tliey would be if they conformed to an assumed 
measure. 

The science of ethics (or, simply and briefly, ethics) consists of two de- 
partments : one relating specially to positive law, tlie other relating 8|>ccially 
to positive morality. The department which relates specL-illy to positive 
law, is commonly styled the science of legislation^ or, simply and briefly, le- 
giiUUion, The department which relates specially to positive morality, is 
commonly styled the science of mofxilSf or, simply and briefly, morals. 

The foregoing attempt to define the science of etliics natu- Mcanin;: of 
rally leads me to offer the following explanatory remark. *^jL/'*"*a^^ 

When we say that a human law is good or bad, or is &s applied u* 
wor^j of praise or blame, or is what it should be or what * *»»*"»*" i«**'. 
it should not be, or is what it ought to be or what it ou^ht not to bo, we 
mean (unless we intimate our mere liking or aversion) this : namely, tliat 
the law agrees with or differs from a something to which we tacitly refer 
it as to a measure or test. 

For example, According to either of the hyix)theses which I stated in 
preceding lectures, a human law is good or had as it agrees or does not 
agree with the law of God : that is to say, with the law of God as indicated 

1 2 

116 THE PROyiNC£ OF 

strong analogy, they are related to those rules of positive mo^ 
rality which are merely opinions or sentiments held or felt 

by the principle of utility or with the law of God as indicated by the moral 
Bcnae. To the adherent of the theory of utili^, a human law is good if it 
be generally useful, and a human law is bad if it be generally pernicious. 
For, in his opinion, it is consonant or not with the law of God, inasmuch 
as it is consonant or not with the principle of general utility. To the ad- 
herent of the hypothesis of a moral sense, a human law is good if he likes 
it he knows not why, and a human law is bad if he hates it he knows not 
wherefore. For, in his opinion, that his inexplicable feeling of liking or 
aversion shews that the human law pleases or offends the Deity. 

To the atheist, a human law is good if it be generally useful, and a hu- 
man law is bad if it be generally pernicious. For the principle of general 
iitility would serve as a measure or test, although it were not an index to 
an ulterior measure or test. But if he call the law a good one without be- 
lieving it useful, or if he call the law a bad one without believing it per- 
nicious, the atheist simply intimates his mere liking or aver^on. For^ 
unless it be thought an index to the law set by the Deity, an inexplicable 
feeling of approbation or disapprobation can hardly be considered a mea- 
sure or test And, in the opinion of the atheist, there is no law of God 
which his inexplicable feeling can point at. 

To the believer in a supposed revelation, a human law is good or bad 
ns it agrees with or differs Irom the terms wherein tlie revelation is ex- 
pressed. 

In sliort, the goodness or badness of a human law is a phrase of relative 
and varying import. A law which is good to one man is bad to another, 
in case they tacitly refer it to different and adverse t*»sts. 
Meaning of The Divine laws may be styled good, in the sense with 

*Jj*f^*^^®^ which the atheist may apply the epithet to human. We may 
plied to the Style them good, or worthy of praise, inasmuch as they agree 
law of God. ^j^jj utility considered as an ultimate test. And this is the 
only meaning with which we can apply the epithet to the laws of God. 
Unless we refer them to utility considered as an ultimate test, we have no 
test by which we can try them. To say that they are good because they 
are set by the Deity, is to say that they are good as measured or tried by 
themselves. But to say this is to talk absurdly : for every object which is 
measiu*ed, or every object which is brought to a test, is compared with 
a given object other than itself. — If the laws set by the Deity were not 
generally useful, or if they did not promote the general happiness of his 
creatures, or if their great Author were not wise and benevolent, they would 
not be good, or worthy of praise, but were devilish and worthy of execration. 

Before I conclude the present note, I must submit this ftirther remark 
to the attention of the re^ider. 

JUEI8FRUDENGB DETERBilNED. 117 

by men in r^ard to human conduct. 4. By a remote or 
ilender analogy, they are related to laws merely metaphori- 
cal, or laws merely figurative. 

I have intimated in the course of the note, that the phrase T^« tj^*^' 
ktw of nature^ or the phrase natural laWj often signifies the ^l^re, or 

law of God. natural law. 

Natural law as thus understood, and the natural law which pante mcan- 
I knentioned in my fourth lecture, are disparate expressions. JJg^ the Uwr 
The natural law which I there mentioned, is a portion of po- of God, or a 
Mtive hiw and positive moralitj. It consists of the human ^Jive Uw 
rales, legal and moral, which have obtained at all times and and ponitivo 
obtained at aU places. ""™^^'^'- 

According to the compound hypothesis which I mentioned in my fourth 
lecture, these human rules, legal and moral, have been fashioned on the 
law of God as indicated by the moral sense. Or, adopting the language of 
the classical Roman jurists, these human rules, legal and moral, have been 
fiushioned on the Divine law as known by natural reason. 

But, besides the human rules which have obtained with all mankind, 
there are human rules, legal and moral, which have been limited to peculiar 
times, or limited to peculiar places. 

Now, according to the compound hypothesis which I mentioned in my 
iburth lecture, these last have not been fashioned on the law of God, or have 
been fashioned on the law of God as conjectured by the light of utility. 

Being fashioned on the law of God as known by an infallible guide, hu- 
man rules of the first class are styled the law of rtatvre : For tliey arc not 
of human position piurely or simply, but are laws of God or Nature clothed 
with'human sanctions. As obtaining at all times and obtaining at all places, 
they are styled by the classical jurists jus gentium^ or jus omnium gentium. 

But human rules of the second class are styled positive. For, not being 
fiishioned on the law of God, or being fiishioned on the law of God as 
merely conjectured by utility, they, certainly or probably, pre of purely hu- 
man position. They are not laws of God or Nature clotlied with human 
nnctions. 

Ai I stated in my fourth lecture, and shall shew conijjletely liereaAcr, 
the distinction of human rules into natural and |)Ositivc involves the com- 
pound hypothesis which I mentioned in that discourse.* 

* It appetn from a memorandum of the Author that he intended to *' antici[>ate from 
the lectures on Souroet of Law, the whole of the distinction l>etwccn Law Natural and 
Law PoaitiTe;'* and to inaert that diatinction at the end of thia note, or both together 
at ppw 98, 94. Aa however the paaaage in question occurs in the Lectures hereafter to 
be published, and as it vrould require some modification to fit it for this place, I have 
tim^ht it better to leave it where it stands ; only making the reader aoquaintad with 
tiit AiUhflf^% intcatioDs^—S. A. 

•r-i- 

118 THE PBOVIKCB OF 

To distinguish positive laws from the objects now eniinie^ 
rated, is the purpose of the preset attempt to determine the 
province of jurisprudence. 

In pursuance of the purpose to which I have now adverted, 
I stated, in my first lecture, the essentials of a law or rvh 
(taken with the largest signification which can be given to 
the term properly). 

In my second, third,and fourth lectures, I stated the noarkn 
or characters by which the laws of God are distinguished 
from other laws. And, stating those marks or characters, 
I explained the nature of the index to his unrevealed laws, 
or I explained and examined the hypotheses which r^ard 
the nature of that index. 

But before I can complete the purpose to which I have 
adverted above, I must examine or discuss especially the fol- 
lowing principal topics (and must touch upon other topics 
of secondary or subordinate importance). — 1. I must ex- 
amine the marks or characters by which positive laws are 
distinguished from other laws. 2. I must examine the dis- 
tinguishing marks of those positive moral rules which are 
laws properly so called. 3. I must examine the distinguish- 
ing marks of those positive moral rules which are styled laws 
or rules by an analogical extension of the term. 4. I must 
examine the distinguishing marks of laws merely metapho- 
rical, or laws merely figurative. 

In order to an explanation of the marks which distinguish 
positive laws, I must analyze the expression sovereignty^ the 
correlative expression subjection^ and the inseparably con- 
nected expression independent political society. For the es- 
sential difference of a positive law (or the difference that 
severs it from a law which is not a positive law) may be stated 
r thus. Every positive law, or every law simply and strictly so 
) called, is set by a sovereign person, or a sovereign body of 
' persons, to a member or members of the independent poli- 
' tical society wherein that person or body is sovereign or su- 
premc. Or (changing the expression) it is set by a monarch, 

JUBISFEUDSNGE DETEBMINBD. 119 

or' sovereign number, to a person or persons in a state of 
subjection to its author. 

- But my analysis of those expressions occupies so large a 
space, that, in case I placed it in the lecture which I am now 
delivering, the lecture which I am now delivering would run 
to insufferable length. 

The purpose mentioned above will, therefore, be completed 
in the following order. 

Excluding from my present discourse my analysis of those 
expressions, I shall complete, in my present discourse, the 
purpose mentioned above, so far as I can complete it con- 
sistently w'lth that exclusion. In my present discourse, I 
shall examine or discuss especially the following principal 
topics : namely, the distinguishing marks of those positive 
moral rules which are laws properly so called : the distin- 
guishing marks of those positive moml rules which are styled 
laws or rules by an analogical extension of the term : the 
distinguishing marks of the laws which are styled laws by 
a metaphor. 

I shall complete, in my sixth lecture, the purpose men- 
tioned above, by explaining the marks or characters which 
distinguish positive laws, or laws strictly co called : an ex- 
planation involving an analysis of the capital expression so- 
vereigntyy the correlative expression subjection^ and the inse- 
parably connected expression independent political society. 

Having shewn the connexion of my present discourse with 
foregoing and following lectures, I proceed to examine or 
discuss its appropriate topics or subjects. 

In my first lecture, I endeavoured to resolve ^^ 
a law (taken with the largest signification which |jj^y J^'' 

can be given to the term properly) into the neces- 
sary or essential elements of which it is composed. ^^ 

CAlled, tOjgA- 

thcrwitboer- 

,.g ^41 ,^. ...J- -v ■ •' . r:rry — T?r^ — . - "<-. 'Wy-iUIUW-'lJfLfy 

120 THE FBOymCB OF 

V 

qoMicwwhich Now those essentials of a law proper, together 
tiauimpoit. With Certain consequences which those essentiala 
import, may be stated briefly in the following manner.^— 
1. Laws properly so called are a species of commands. But^ 
being a command^ every law properly so called flows from a 
determinate source, or emanates from a determinate author. 
In other words, the author fix)m whom it proceeds is a ifo-. 
terminate rational being, or a determinate body or aggie^ 
gate of rational beings. For whenever a command is ex- 
pressed or intimated, one party signifies a wish that another 
shall do or forbear : and the latter is obnoxious to an evil 
which the former intends to inflict in case the wish be 
disregarded. But every signification of a wish made by a 
single individual, or made by a body of individuals as a body 
or collective whole, supposes that the individual or body is 
certain or determinate. And every intention or purpose held 
by a single individual, or held by a body of individuals 09 
a body or collective wholcj involves the same supposition. 2. 
Every sanction properly so called is an eventual evil annexed 
to a command. Any eventual evil may operate as a motive 
to conduct : but, unless the conduct be commanded and the 
evil be annexed to the command, the evil is not a sanction, ^ 
in the proper acceptation of the term. 3. Every duty pro- 
perly so called supposes a command by which it is created. 
For every sanction properly so called is an eventual evil an^ 
nexed to a command. And duty properly so called is ob- : 
noxiousness to evils of the kind. 

TheUwBof Now it follows from these premises, that the 
Bitive^wr^ laws of God, and positive laws, are laws proper, 
^lyl? ^"^ or laws properly so caUed. . 

The laws of God are laws proper, inasmuch as 
they are commands express or tacit, and therefore emanate • 
from a certain source. 

Positive laws, or laws strictly so called, are established 
directly or immediately by authors of three kinds: — ^by. 
inonarchs, or sovereign bodies, as supreme political supe^ 

JUBISnUDSNCS DBTSBItlNfiD. 121 

' ffeM : ' by men in a state of subjection, as subordinate political 
■uperiors : by subjects, as private persons, in pursuance of 
l^al righta But every positive law, or every law strictly 
80 Cidled, is a direct or circuitous command of a monarch 
or sovereign number in the character of political superior : 
that is to say, a direct or circuitous command of a monarch 
or sovereign number to a person or persons in a state of 
subjection to its author. And being a command (and there- 
fore flowing from a determinate source), every positive law 
is a law proper, or a law properly so called. 

Besides the human laws which I style positive The generic 
law, there are human laws which I style positive ^ulv^^^ 
morality, rules of positive morality, or positive "*''*^ "**'^ 
moral rules. 

The generic character of laws of the class may be stated 
briefly in the following negative manner. — No law belong- 
mg to. tlie class is a direct or circuitous command of a 
monarch or sovereign number in the character of political 
superior. In other words, no law belonging to the class is 
a direct or circuitous command of a monarch or sovereign 
number to a person or persons in a state of subjection to 
its author. 

But of positive moral rules, some are laws ofpositire I/' 
proper, or laws properly so called : others are ^^1^ 
laws improper, or laws improperly so called. {TuToffiST'' 
Some have all the essentials of an imperative ^^^^ 
law or rule : others are deficient in some of those 
essentials, and are styled laws or rules by an analogical ex- 
tension of the term. 

The positive moral rules which are laws pro- The positive 
perly so called, are distinguished from other laws wI.Tch^re*^ 
by the union of two marks.— 1. They arc impo- LTi^Jirrt 
rative laws or rules set by men to men. 2. They """""""'^ 
are not set by men as political superiors, nor are they set by 
men as private persons, in pursuance of legal riglit^. 
. Inasmuch as they bear the latter of these two marks^vXvi:^ 

122 " THB FIOYUrGR OF 

are not commands of aover^gns in the character of political 
superiors. Consequently, they are not positive laws : th^y 
are not clothed with l^al sanctions, nor do they oblige 
legally the persons to whom they are set. But being com- 
mands (and therefore being established by determinate inr 
dividuals or bodies), they are laws properly so called : they 
are armed with sanctions, and impose duties, in the proper 
acceptation of the terms. 

It will appear from the following distinctions, that posi- 
tive moral rules which are laws properly so called may be 
reduced to three kinds. 

Of positive moral rules which are laws properly so called, 
some are established by men who are not subjects, or are 
not in a state of subjection : Meaning by " subjects," or by 
^^ men in a state of subjection," men in a state of subjection 
to a monarch or sovereign number. — Of positive moral rules 
which are laws properly so called, and are not estabUshed 
by men in a state of subjection, some are established by 
men living in the negative state which is styled a state of 
nature or a state of anarchy : that is to say, by men who 
are not in the state which is styled a state of government, 
or are not members, sovereign or subject, of any political 
society. — Of positive moral rules whidh are laws properly 
so called, and are not estabhshed by men in a state of sub- 
jection, others are established by sovereign individuals or 
bodies, but are not established by sovereigns in the charac- 
ter of political superiors. Or a positive moral rule of the 
kind now in question may be described in the following 
manner : It is set by a monarch or sovereign number, but 
not to a person or persons, in a state of subjection to its 
author. 

Of laws properly so called which are set by subjects, som^ 
are set by subjects as subordinate political superiors. But 
of laws properly so called which are set by subjects, others 
are set by subjects as private persons : Meaning by " pri- 
vate persons," subjects not in the class of subordinate poli- 

JUBISFBtJDSNOB DBl*SIUfINED. 123 

tioal superiors, or subordinate political superiors not consi- 
Aeied as such. — ^Laws set by subjects as subordinate politi- 
cal superiors, are positive laws : they are clothed with legal 
sanctions; and impose legal duties. They ai;e set by sove- 
reigns or states in the character of pohtical superiors, al- 
though they are set by sovereigns circuitously or remotely. 
Although they are made directly by subject or subordinate 
authors, they are made through legal rights granted by 
sovereigns pr states, and held by those subject authors as 
mere trustees for the granters. — Of laws set by subjects as 
private persons, some are not established by sovereign or 
supreme authority. And these are rules of positive morality : 
they are not clothed with legal sanctions, nor do they obUge 
legally the parties to whom they are set. — But of laws set 
by subjects as private persons, others are set or established 
in pursuance of legal rights residing in the subject authors. 
And these are positive laws or laws strictly so called. Al- 
though they are made directly by subject authors, they are 
made in pursuance of rights granted or conferred by sove- 
reigns in the character of pohtical superiors : they legally 
oblige the parties to whom they are set, or are clothed with 
legal sanctions. They are commands of sovereigns as poli- 
tical superiors, although they are set by sovereigns circuit- 
ously or remotely.* 

It appears from the foregoing distinctions, that positive 

♦ A law set by a subject as a private person, but in pur- L«^g ^^ jjy 
numce of a legal right residing in the subject author, is ™«ni •» P"- 
either a positive law piurely or simply, or is compounded of a in punuanco 
poaitive law and a rule of positive morality. Or (changing *^l}^^ 
the expression) it is either a poaitive law purely or simply, or 
it if a positive law as viewed from one aspect, and a rule of j>0Hitive mo- 
rality as viewed from another. 

• The person who makes the law in pursuance of Uic legal right, \a cither 
legally bound to make the luw, or he is not. In tlie first caK<\ tlie law is 
a poaitive law purely or simply. In the second case, tlic law is comix)und(Hl 
of a positive law and a positive moral rule. 

For ejtample, A guardian may have a right, over his pupil or ward, 
which he is legally bound to exorcise, for the benefit of tlie pupil or ward, 

124 THB PROVINCB OF 

moral rules which are laws properly so called are of three 
kinds. — 1. Those which are set by men living in a state of 
nature. 2. Those which are set by sovereigns, but not by 
sovereigns as political superiors. 3. Those which are set 
by subjects as private persons, and are not set by the subject 
authors in pursuance of legal rights. 

To cite an example of rules of the first kind, were superflur^ 
ous labour. A man living in a state of nature may impoM 
an imperative law: though, since the man is in a. state 
of nature, he cannot impose the law in the character of so- 
vereign, and cannot impose the law in pursuance of a legal 
right. And the law being imperative (and therefore pro- 
ceeding fix)m a determinate source) is a law properly so 
called : though, for want of a sovereign author proximate 
or remote, it is not a positive law but a rule of positive mo- 
rality, 

in a given or specified manner. In other words, a guardian may be clothed 
with a right, over his pupil or ward, in trust to exercise the same, for the 
benefit of the pupil or ward, in a given or specified manner. Now if, in 
pursuance of his right, and agreeably to his duty or trust, he sets a law or 
rule to the pupil or ward, the law is a positive law purely or simply. It is 
properly a law which the state sets to the ward through its minister or in- 
strument the guardian. It is not made by the guardian of his own spon- 
taneous movement, or is made in pursuance of a duty which the state has 
imposed upon him. The position of the guardian is closely analogous to 
the position of subordinate political superiors : who hold their delegated 
powers of direct or judicial legislation as mere trustees for the sovereign 
granters. 

Again : The master has legal rights, over or against his slave, which are 
conferred by the state upon the master for his own benefit. And, since 
they are conferred upon him for his own benefit, he is not legally bound 
to exercise or use them. Now if, in pursuance of these rights, he sets a 
law to his slave, the law is compounded of a positive law and a positive 
moral rule. Being made by sovereign authority, and clothed by the aoYe* 
reign with sanctions, the law made by the master is properly a positive law.* 
But, since it is made by the master of his own spontaneous movement, or 
is not made by the master in pursuance of a legal duty, it is properly a 
rule of positive morality as well as a positive law. Though the law set by 
the master is set circuitously by the sovereign, it is set or established by 
ihe aorcreign at the pleasure of the subject author. The master is not the 

JURI8FRUDEKCE DETSBlflNED. 125 

•^ An imperative law set by a sovereign to a sovereign, or 
by one supreme government to another supreme govern- 
ment, is an example of rules of the second kind. Since no 
supreme government is in a state of subjection to another, 
an imperative law set by a sovereign to a sovereign is not 
set by its author in the character of political superior. Nor 
is it set by its author in pursuance of a l^al right : for 
every 1^1 right is conferred by a supreme government, and 
18 conferred on a person or persons in a state of subjection 
to the granter. ConsequenUy, an imperative law set by a 
sovereign to a sovereign is not a positive law or a law strictly 
so called. But being imperative (and therefore proceeding 
from a determinate source), it amounts to a law in the pro- 
per signification of the term, although it is purely or simply 
a rule of positive morality. 

inBtrument of the sovereign or state, but the sovereign or state is rather 
the instrument of the master. 

Balbra I dismiis the subject of the present note, I must make two re- 
mazka. 

1. Of laws made by men as private persons, some are frequently styled 
*^ laws autonomic.*^ Or it is frequently said of some of those laws, that they 
are made through an avrovofila residing in the subject authors. Now laws 
autonomies or laws autanamical, are laws made by subjects, as private per- 
iKma, in pursuance of legal rights : that is to say, in pursuance of legal 
jigbti which they are free to exercise or not, or in pursuance of legal rights 
which are not saddled with trusts. A law of the kind is styled autanomiCf 
because it is made by its author of his own spontaneous disposition, or not 
in pursuance of a duty imposed upon him by the state. 

It is clear, however, that the term autonomic is not exclusively applicable 
to laws of the kind in question. The term will apply to every law which 
is not made by its author in pursuance of a legal duty. It will apply, for 
inatance, to every law which is made immediately or directly by a monarch 
or sovereign number : independence of legal duty being of the essence of 
wrereignty. 

2. Laws which are positive law as viewed from one aspect, but which 
are positive morality as viewed from another, I place simply or absolutely 
in the first of those capital classes. If^ affecting exquisite preciiuou, I placed 
them in each of those classes, I could hardly indicate the boundary by which 
those classei are severed without resorting to expressions of repulsive com- 
pleadty and leiigth. 

12ff THE PROVINCE OF 

If they be set by subjects as private persons, and be not 
set by their authors in pursuance of legal rights, the laws 
following axe examples of rules of the third kind : namely^ 
imperative laws set by parents to children ; imperative laws 
set by masters to servants : imperative laws set by lenders 
to borrowers ; imperative laws set by patrons to paramtes. 
Being imperative (and therefore proceeding from determi- 
note sources), the laws foregoing are laws properly so called: 
though, if they be set by subjects as private persons, and be 
not set by their authors in pursuance of legal rights, they 
are not positive laws but rules of positive morality. 

Again : A dub or society of men, signifying its collec- 
tive pleasure by a vote of its assembled members, passes or 
makes a law to be kept by its members severally under pain 
of exclusion from its meetings. Now if it be made by sub- 
jects as private persons, and be not made by its authors in 
pursuance of a legal right, the law voted and passed by the 
assembled members of the club is a further example of rules 
of the third kind. If it be made by subjects as private per- 
sons, and be not made by its authors in pursuance of a legal 
right, it is not a positive law or a law strictly so called. 
But being an imperative law (and the body by which it is 
set being therefore determinate), it may be styled a law or 
rule with absolute precision and propriety, although it is 
purely or simply a ride of positive morality. 
The Dositivc The positive moral rules which are laws impro- 
which^** perly so called, are laws set or imposed by general 
lirtyw^"^ opinion : that is to say, by the general opinion of 
lau^ i^ ^^y class or any society of persons. For example, 
JSSS'*^ Some are set or imposed by the general opinion 
'•^•^ of persons who are members of a profession or 
calling : others, by that of persons who inhabit a town or 
proymce: others, by that of a nation ormdependent poU- 
tical society: others, by that of a larger society formed of 
vanous nations. 

A few species of the laws which are set by general opinion 

JUEISPRTJDBNCB DETERMINED. 127 

have gotten appropriate names. — For example, There are 
laws or rules imposed upon gentlemen by opinions current 
amongst gentlemen. And these are usually styled the rules 
of honour^ or ihe laws or law of honour. — There are laws or 
niles imposed upon people of fashion by opinions current 
in the fBLshionable world. And these are usually styled the 
law set by fashion. — There are laws which regard the con- 
duct of independent political societies in their various re- 
lations to one another : Or, rather, there are laws which 
regard the conduct of sovereigns or supreme governments 
in their various relations to one another. And laws or 
rules of this species, which are imposed upon nations or 
sovereigns by opinions current amongst nations, are usually 
styled the law of nations or international law. 

Now a law set or imposed by general opinion AimwMtor 
is a law improperly so called. It is styled sl law ^^H^ ^^ 
or rule by an analogical extension of the term, m^rer" the 
When we speak of a law set by general opinion, ^Jl^'„f 
we denote, by that expression, the following fact. ^^y^T^f 
— Some indeterminate body or uncertain aggre- ^^^^ ^\j^j 
gate of persons regards a kind of conduct with a of conduct. 
sentiment of aversion or liking : Or (changing the expres- 
sion) that indeterminate body opines unfavourably or favour- 
ably of a given kind of conduct. In consequence of that sen- 
timent, or in consequence of that opinion, it is likely that 
they or some of them will be displeased with a party who 
shall pursue or not pursue conduct of that kind. And, in 
consequence of that displeasure, it is likely tliat some party 
{what party being undetermined) will visit the party pro- 
voking it with some evil or another. 

The body by whose opinion the law is said to be set, does 
not command^ expressly or tacitly, that conduct of the given 
kind shall be forborne or pursued. For, since it is not a 
body precisely determined or certain, it cannot, as a hody^ 
express or intimate a wish. As a body, it cannot signify a 
wish by oral or written words, or by positive or negative 

128 THE FBOVINCE OF 

deportment. The so called law jot rule which its opinion is* 
said to impose, is merely the sentiment which it feels, or is 
merely the opinion which it holds, in regard to a kind of 
conduct 

A determinate member of the body, who opines or feela 
with the body, may doubtless be moved or impelled, by that 
very opinion or sentiment, to command that conduct of the 
kind shall be forborne or pursued. But the command ex- 
pressed or intimated by that determinate party is not a law 
or rule imposed by general opinion. It is a law properly 
so called, set by a determinate author. — ^For example. The 
so called law of nations consists of opinions or sentiments 
current amongst nations generally. It therefore is not law 
properly so called. But one supreme government may 
doubtless command another to forbear from a kind of con- 
duct which the law of nations condemns. And, though it 
is fashioned on law which is law improperly so called, this 
command is a law in the proper signification of the term. 
Speaking precisely, the command is a rule of positive mo- 
rality set by a determinate author. For, as no supremo 
government is in a state of subjection to another, the go- 
vernment commanding does not command in its character 
of political superior. If the government receiving the com- 
mand were in a state of subjection to the other, the com- 
mand, though fashioned on the law of nations, would amount 
to a positive law. 

The foregoing description of a law set by general opinion 
imports the following consequence: — that the party who will 
enforce it against any future transgressor is never determi- 
nate and assignable. The party who actually enforces it 
against an actual transgressor, is, of necessity, certain. In 
other words, if an actual transgressor be harmed in conse* 
quence of the breach of the law, and in consequence of that 
displeasure which the breach of the law has provoked, he 
receives the harm from a party, who, of necessity, is certain. 
Bat that certain party is not the executor of a command pro- 

JUBISI^RUDBNCE DETERMINED. 129 

^ceding frbm the uncertain body. He has not been autho- 
lized by that uncertain body to enforce that so called law 
which its opinion is said to establish. He is not in the 
position of a minister of justice appointed by the sovereign 
or state to execute commands which it issues. He harms 
the actual offender against the so called law, or (to speak in 
analogical language) he applies the sanction annexed to it, 
of his own spontaneous movement Consequently, though 
a party who actually enforces it is, of necessity, certain, the 
pflorty who will enforce it against any future offender is never 
determinate and assignable. 

It follows from the foregoing reasons, that a so ^ brief iute- 
called law set by general opinion is not a kw in ^5^ ^ 
the proper signiScation of the term. It also fol- ^•^ ^^^ 
lows from the same reasons, that it is not armed ^Je? i>?*°'" 
with a sanction, and does not impose a duty, in e^^ 
the proper acceptation of the expressions. For 
a sanction properly so called is an evil annexed to a com- 
mand. And duty properly so called is obnoxiousncss to 
evils of the kind. 

But a so called law set by general opinion is closely ana- 
logous to a law in the proper signification of the term. And, 
by consequence, the so called sanction witli whidi the former 
is armed, and the so called duty which the former imposes, 
are closely analogous to a sanction and a duty in the proper 
acceptation of the expressions. 

The analogy between a law in the proper signification of 
the term and a so called law set by general opinion, may be 
stated briefly in the following manner. — 1. Li the case of a 
law properly so called, the determinate individual or body 
by whom the law is established wishes tliat conduct of a 
kind shall be forborne or pm^ued. In the case of a law 
imposed by general opinion, a wish that conduct of a kind 
shall be forborne or pursued is felt by the uncertain body 
whose general opinion imposes it 2. If a party obliged by 
the law proper shall not comply with the wish of the de- 

VOL. I. K 

iaO THB PROVINCB Op 

terminate individual or body, he probably will suffer, in catk- 
sequence of his not complying, the evil or inconvenience 
annexed to the law as a sanction. If a party obnoxious 
to their displeasure shall not comply with the. wish of the 
uncertain body of persons, he probably will suffer, in can- 
sequence of his not complying, some evil or inconvenience 
fix>m some party or another. 3. By the sanction annexed 
to the law proper, the parties obliged are inclined to act or 
forbear agreeably to its injunctions or prohibitions. By the 
evil which probably will follow the displeasure of the uncer- 
tain body, the parties obnoxious are indined to act or for- 
bear agreeably to the sentiment or opinion which is styled 
analogically a law. 4. In consequence of the law properly 
80 called, the conduct of the parties obliged has a steadiness, 
constancy, or uniformity, which, without the existence of the 
law, their conduct would probably want. In consequence 
of the sentiment or opinion which is styled analogically a 
law, the conduct of the parties obnoxious has a steadiness, 
constancy, or imiformity, which, without the existence of 
that sentiment in the uncertain body of persons, their con- 
duct would hardly present. For they who are obnoxious 
to the sanction which arms the law proper, commonly do 
or forbear from the acts which the law enjoins or forbids : 
whilst they who are obnoxious to the evil which will probar 
bly follow the displeasure of the uncertain body of persons, 
commonly do or forbear from the acts which the body ap- 
proves or dislikes. — Many of the applications of the term 
law which are merely metaphorical or figurative, were pro- 
bably suggested (as I shall shew hereafter) by that unifor- 
mity of conduct which is consequent on a law proper, 
pifdnction In the foregoing analysis of a law set by ge- 
ifcSwi, neral opinion, the meaning of the expression " in- 
^te!^'^e determinate body of persons'' is indicated rather 
^idfvidSS^ than explained. To complete ray analysis of a 
P*^"- law set by general opinion (and to abridge that 
UDolysis of sovereignty which I shall place in my sixth lee- 

JUKISrtttJDENCB DETJSBHINED. 131 

tore),! will here insert a concise exposition of the following 
pregnant distinction : namely, the distinction between a de- 
Urminaie^ and an indeterminate body of single or individual 
persona. — If my exposition of the distinction shall appear 
obscure and crabbed, my hearers (I hope) will recollect that 
the distinction could hardly be expoimded in lucid and flow- 
ing expressions* 

I wUl first describe the distinction in general or abstract 
terms, and will then excmpUfy and illustrate the general or 
abstract description. 

If a body of persons be determinate, all the persons who 
compose it are determined and assignable, or every person 
who belong^ to it is determined and may be indicated. 

But determinate bodies are of two kinds. 

A determinate body of one of those kinds is distinguished 
by the following marks. — 1. The body is composed of per- 
sons determined specifically or individually, or determined by 
characters or descriptions respectively appropriate to them- 
selves. 2. Though every individual member must of neces- 
sity answer to many generic descriptions, every individual 
member b a member of the determinate body, not by reason 
of bis answering to any generic description, but by reason 
of his bearing his specific or appropriate character. 

A determinate body of the other of those kinds is distin- 
guished by the following marks. — 1. It comprises aU the 
persons who belong to a given class, or who belong respec- 
tively to two or more of such classes. In other words, every 
person who answers to a given generic description, or to any 
of two or more given generic descriptions, is also a member 
of the determinate body. 2. Though every individual mem- 
ber is of necessity determined by a specific or appropriate 
character, every individual member is a meniber of the de- 
terminate body, not by reason of his Ix^aring his specific or 
appropriate character, but by reason of his answering to the 
given generic description. 

If a body be indeterminate, all l\vc \^eT^cv\\v. \iWi c^^skb^kj^^ 

1S2 THK PROVINCK OP 

it are not determined: and assignable. Or (clianging the ex- 
pression) every person who belongs to it is not determined, 
and therefore, cannot be indicated. — ^For an indeterminate 
body consists of eonie of the persons who belong to another 
and larger aggregate. But how many of those persona are 
membent of the indeterminate body, or which of those per- 
sons in particular are members of the indeterminate body, 
is not and cannot be known completely and exactly. 

For example, The trading firm or partnership of A B and 
C is a determinate body of the kind first described above. 
Every member of the firm is determined specifically, or by 
a character or description peculiar or appropriate to himsel£ 
And every member of the firm belongs to the determinate 
body, not by reason of his answering to any generic descrip- 
tion, but by reason of his bearing his specific or appropriate 
character. It is as being that very individual person, that 
A B or is a limb of the partnership.* 

The British Parliament for the time being, is a determi- 
nate body of the kind lastly described above. It comprises 
the only person who answers for the time being to the gene- 
ric description of king. It comprises every person belong- 
ing to the class of peers who are entitled for the time being 
to vote in the upper house. It comprises every person be- 
longing to the class of commoners who for the time being 
represent the commons in parliament. And, though every 
member of the British Parliament is of necessity determined 
by a specific or appropriate character, he is not a member 
of the parliament by reason of his bearing that character, 
but by reason of his answering to the given generic descrip- 
tion. It is not as being the individual George, but as being 
the individual who answers to the generic description of 
king, that George is king of Britain and Ireland, and a limb 
of the determinate body which is sovereign or supreme there- 

• In the case of a mercantile firm the parties are determined bj generic 

as well as by specific marks : e. g. tlioy are partners according to law. 

MS, Note. 

JUfilSPftUDENCE DETERMINED. 133 

in. It is not as being the individual Grey, or as being the 
mdividual Peel, that Grey is a member of the upper house, 
or Peel a member of the lower. Grey is a member of the 
upper house, as belonging to the class of peers entitled to 
vote therein. Peel ia a member of the lower house, as an- 
swering the generic description ** representative of the com- 
mons in parliament." — ^The generic characters of the per- 
sons who compose the British Parliament, are here described 
generally, and, therefore, inaccurately. To describe those 
generic characters minutely and accurately, were to render 
a complete description of the intricate and perplexed system 
which is styled the British Constitution. — A maxim of that 
Constitution may illustrate the subject of the present para- 
graph. The meaning of the maziih " the king never dies," 
may, I beUeve, be rendered in the following manner. Though 
an actual occupant of the kingly office is human, mortal, and 
transient, the duration of the office itself has no possible 
limit which the British Constitution can contemplate. And 
on the death of an actual occupant, the office instantly de- 
volves to that-individual person who bears tlic generic cha- 
racter which entitles to take the crown : to that individual 
person who is then heir to the crown, according to the ge- 
neric description cx)ntained in the Act of Settlement. 

To exemplify the foregoing description of an indeterminate 
body, I will revert to the nature of a law set by general opi- 
nion.— ^Where a so called law is set by general opinion, most 
of the persons who belong to a determinate body or class 
opine or feel alike in regard to a kind of conduct. But the 
number of that majority, or the several individuals who com- 
pose it, cannot be fixed or assigned with perfect fulness or 
. accuracy. For example, a law set or imposed by the general 
opinion of a nation, by the general opinion of a legislative 
assembly, by the general opinion of a profession, or by the 
general opinion of a club, is an opinion or sentiment, re- 
lating to conduct of a kind, which is held or felt by most of 
those who belong to that certain body. But how many of 

134 THE FBOYINCE OF 

that body, or which c^ that body in particiilar, hold or feet 
that given opinion or jsentiment, is not and cannot be known 
completely and correctly* Consequently, that majority of 
the certain body forms a body uncertain. Or (changing the 
expression) the body which is formed by that majority is an 
indetehooinate porticm of a determinate body or aggr^te* 
— rOenerally speaking, therefore, an indeterminate body is 
an indeterminate portion of a body determinate or certain. 
Bat a body or class of persons may also be indeteiminate, 
because it consists of persons of a vague generic character. 
For example, The body or class oi gentlemen consists of in* 
dividual persons whose generic character of gentleman can- 
not be described precisely. Whether a given man were a 
genuine gentleman or not, is a question which different men 
might answer in different ways. — An indeterminate body 
may therefore be indeterminate after a twofold manner. It 
may consist of an imcertain portion of an uncertain body or 
class. For example, A law set or imposed by the general 
opinion of gentlemen is an opinion or sentiment of most of 
those who are commonly deemed gentlemanly. But what 
proportion of the class holds the opinion in question, or what 
proportion of the class feels the sentiment in question, is not 
less indeterminate than the generic character of gentleman. 
The body by whose opinion the so called law is set, is, there- 
fore, an uncertain portion of an uncertain body or aggre- 
gate. — ^And here I may briefly remark, that a certain por- 
tion of a certain body is itself a body determinate. For 
example. The persons who answer the generic description 
"representative of the commons in parliament," are a cer- 
tain portion of the persons who answer the generic descrip- 
tion ^ commoner of the united kingdom." A select com- 
mittee of the representative body, or any portion of the body 
happening to form a house, is a certain or determined por- 
tion of the representatives of the commons in jxarliament. 
And, in any of these or similar cases, the certain portion of 
tlie certain body is itself a body determinate. 

JUBISPkUDfiNCB DBTEBMIKfiD. 135 

•' A determinate body of persons is capable of corporate 
conduct, or is capable, as a body^ of positive or negative de- 
portment Whether it consist of persons determined by 
specific characters, or of persons determined or defined by 
a character or characters generic, every person who belongs 
to it is determined and may be indicated. In the first case, 
every person who belongs to it may be indicated by his spe- 
cific character. In the second case, every person who be- 
longs to it is also knowable : For every person who answers 
to the given generic description, or who answers to any of 
the given generic descriptions, is therefore a member of the 
body. Consequently, the entire body, or any proportion of 
its members, is capable, as a body^ of positive or negative 
deportment : As, for example, of meeting at determinate 
times and places ; of issuing expressly or tacitly a law or 
other command ; of choosing and deputing representatives 
to perform its intentions or wishes ; of receiving obedience 
from others, or from any of its own members. 

But an indeterminate body b incapable of corporate con- 
duct, or is incapable, as a body^ of positive or negative de- 
portment. An indeterminate body is incapable of corporate 
conduct, inasmuch as the several persons of whom it con- 
osts cannot be known and indicated completely and cor- 
rectly. In case a portion of its members act or forbear in 
coDMrt, that given portion of its members is, by that very 
concert, a determinate or certain body. For example, A 
law set or imposed by the general opinion of barristers con- 
demns the sordid practice of hugging or caressing attomies. 
And as those whose opinion or sentiment sets the so called 
law are an indeterminate part of the determinate body of 
barristers, they form a body uncertain and incapable of cor- 
porate conduct But in case a number or portion of that 
uncertain body assembled and passed a resolution to check 
the practice of hugging, that number or j)ortion of that un- 
certain body would be, by the very act, a certain body or 
aggregate. It would form a determinate body consisting 

.!-H J1JUfiP^J » * f W I 

136^ THE PROVINCE OF 

of the determined individuals who assembled and passed 
the resolution. — A law imposed by general opinion may be 
the cause of a law in the proper acceptation of the term. 
But the law properly so called, which is the consequent or 
effect, utterly differs from the so called law which is the an- 
tecedent or cause. The one is an opinion or sentiment of 
an uncertain body of : persons : of a body essentially inca- 
pable of joint or corporate conduct. The other is set or 
established by the positive or negative deportment of a cer- 
tain individual or aggregate. 

For the purpose of rendering my exposition as little in- 
tricate as possible, I have supposed that a body of persons, 
forming a body determinate, either consists of persons de- 
termined by specific characters, or of persons determined 
or defined by a generic description or descriptions. — But a 
body of persons, forming a body determinate, may consist 
of persons determined by specific or appropriate characters, 
and also of persons determined by a character or characters 
generic. Let us suppose, for example, that the individual 
OUver Cromwell was sovereign or supreme in England ; or 
that the individual Cromwell, and the individuals Ireton 
and Fleetwood, formed a triumvirate which was sovereign in 
that country. Let us suppose, moreover, that Cromwell, or 
the triumvire, convened a house of commons elected in the 
ancient manner : and that Cromwell, or the triumvirs, yielded 
a part in the sovereignty to this representative body. Now 
the sovereign or supreme body formed by Cromwell and 
the house, or the sovereign and supreme body formed by 
the triumvirs and the house, would have consisted of a per- 
son or persons determined or defined specifically, and of 
persons determined or definol by a generic character or 
description. The members of the house of commons would 
have been members of the sovereign body, as answering 
the generic description " representative of the commons in 
parliament." But it is as being the very individual Crora- 
welj, or as being the very individuals Cromwell, Ijreton, and 

JTJRISPBUDENCE DBTERinNED. 137 

Fleetwood, that he or they would have formed a limb of the 
sovereigii or supreme body. It is not as answering to a 
given generic description, or as acquiring a part in the so- 
vereignty by a given generic mode, that he or they would 
have shared the sovereignty with the body representing the 
people. — A body of persons, forming a body determinate, 
may also consist of persons determined or defined specifi- 
cally, and determined or defined moreover by a character 
or characters generic. A select committee of a body repre- 
senting a people or nation, consists of individual persons 
named or appointed specifically to sit on that given com- 
mittee. But those specific individuals could not be mem- 
bers of the committee, unless they answered the generic 
description " representative of the people or nation." 

It follows from the exposition immediately preceding, that 
the one or the number which is sovereign in an independent 
political society is a determinate individual person or a de- 
terminate body of persons. If the sovereign one or number 
were not determinate or certain, it could not connnand ex- 
pressly or tacitly, and could not be an object of obedience 
to the subject members of the community. — IniiMnucli as 
this principle is amply explained by the exposition immedi- 
ately preceding, I shall refer to it, in my sixth lecture, as to 
a principle sufficiently known. The intricate and difficHilt 
analysis which I shall place in that discourse, will thus be 
somewhat facilitated, and not inconsiderably abridged. 

As closely connected with the matter of the exposition 
immediately preceding, the following remark concerning su- 
preme government may be put commodiously in the present 
place. — ^In order that a supreme goveniment may possess 
much stability, and that the society wherein it is supreme 
may enjoy much tranquillity, the persons who take the so- 
vereignty in the way of succession, must take or acquire 
by a given generic mode, or by given generic modes. Or 
(changing the exj)ression) they must take by reason of tlieir 
answering to a given generic description, or by reaaou v^t 

'■V^J'. »»tTV* wf^«»:«- 

188 »HB PBOVINCS OF 

their respectively answering to given generic descriptions.—* 
For example, The Boman Emperors or Princes (who were 
virtually monarchs or autocrators) did not succeed to the 
sovereignty of the Boman Empire or World by a given ge- 
neric title : by a mode of acquisition given or preordained, 
and susceptible of generic description. It was neither as 
lineal descendant of Julius Csssar or Augustus, nor by the 
testament or other disposition of the last possessor of the 
throne, nor by the appointment or nomination of the Boman 
people or senate, nor by the election of a determinate body 
formed of the military class, nor by any mode of acquisition 
generic and preordained, that every successive Emperor, or 
every successive Prince, acquired the virtual sovereignty of 
the Boman Empire or' World. Every successive Emperor 
acquired by a mode of acquisition which was purely anoma- 
lous or accidental: which had not been predetermined by 
any law or custom, or by any positive law or rule of posi- 
tive morality. Every actual occupant of the Imperial office 
or dignity (whatever may have been the manner wherein he 
had gotten possession) was obeyed, for the time, by the bulk 
of the military class ; was acknowledged, of course, by the 
impotent and trembling senate ; and received submission, 
of course, from the inert and helpless mass which inhabited 
the city and provinces. By reason of this irregularity in 
the succession to the virtual sovereignty, the demise of an 
Emperor was not uncommonly followed by a shorter or 
longer dissolution of the general supreme government. Since 
no one could claim to succeed by a given generic title, or as 
answering for the time being to a given generic description, 
a contest for the prostrate sovereignty almost inevitably 
arose between the more influential of the actual military 
chiefs. And till one of the mihtary candidates had vanquished 
and crushed his rivals, and had forced with an armed hand 
his way to the vacant throne, the generality or bulk of the 
inhabitants in the Boman Empire or World could hardly ren- 
der obedience to one and the same superior. By reason. 

JITBISPBUDENCE DBTEBinNED. 139 

tfbo, of this irr^ularity in the succession to the Imperial 
office, the general and habitual obedience to an actual occu- 
pant of the office was always extremely precarious. For, 
since he was not occupant by a given generic title, or by rea- 
son of his having answered to a given generic description, 
the title of any rebel, who might any how eject him, would 
not have been less Intimate or less constitutional than his 
oynu Or (speaking with greater precision) there was no 
mode of acquiring the office, which could be styled Ic^ti- 
mate, or which could be styled constitutional: which was 
susceptible of generic description, and which had been pre- 
determined by positive law or moraUty. There was not, in 
the Boman World, any determinate person, whom positive 
law or morality had pointed out to its inhabitants as the 
exclusively appropriate object of general and habitual obedi- 
ence. — ^The reasoning which applies in the case of a mo- 
narchy, wiU also apply, with a few variations, in the case of 
a government by a number. Unless the members of the su- 
preme body hold their respective sUitions by titles generic 
and fixed, the given supreme government must be extremely 
unstable, and the given society wherein it is supreme must 
often be torn by contests for the possession of shares in tlie 
sovereignty. 

Before I close my analysb of those laws im- Laws Kt by 
properly so called whith are closely analogous to I'ZZi, or 
laws in the proper acccptiition of the term, I nuist ^HumMU «f 
advert to a seeming caprice of cuiTcnt or esta- '^/'^l^ 
bUshed language. -^.t.t^ 

A law set or imposed by general opinion, is an J^;|[*",^^^ 
opinion or sentiment, regarding conduct of a kind, ^^'^^^,"J^^^ 
which is held or felt bv an indeterniinate body : '*»« »•» 

, "^ . * n o|iiin«>n or 

that 18 to say, an indeterminate portion of a cer- »ontiinent 

•^ ' . ^ held or felt 

tain or uncertam aggregate. i»y »n imn^ 

Now a like opinion or sentiment held or felt by !i//them^- 

an individiuil, or held or felt universally by the Jh^hh^- 

members of a body determinate^ may be as cloesely ^^JiSlSy 

no THE PBOVOrCS OF • 

•DAiogous to anal(^ous to a law proper as a so called law set 
M tbe^uOon by general opinion. It may bear an analogy to 
^!^^^^ a law in the proper acceptation of the term, ez- 
bSdy!°*^ actly or nearly resembling the analogy to a law 
proper which is borne by an opinion or sentiment of an 
indeterminate body. An opinion, for example, of a patron, 
in regard to conduct of a kind, may be a law or rule to 
his own dependant or dependants, just as a like opinion of 
an indeterminate body is a law or rule to all who might 
suffer by provoking its displeasure. And whether a like 
opinion be held by an uncertain aggregate, or be held by 
every member of a precisely determined body, its analogy 
to a law proper is exactly or nearly the same. 

But when we speak of a law set or imposed by opinion, 
we always or commonly mean (I rather incline to believe) a 
law set or imposed by. general opinion: that is to say, an 
opinion or sentiment, regarding conduct of a kind, which is 
held or felt by an uncertain body or class. The term law^ 
or law set by opinion^ is never or rarely applied to a like 
opinion or sentiment of a precisely determined party : that 
is to say, a like opinion or sentiment held or felt by an in- 
dividual, or held or felt universally by the members of a cer- 
tain aggregate. 

This seeming caprice of current or established language 
probably arose from the following causes. 

An oi)inion, regarding conduct, which is held by an in- 
dividual ])erson, or which is held universally by a small de- 
terminate body, is commonly followed by consequences of 
comparatively trifling importance. The circle of the persons 
to whom its influence reaches, or whose desires or conduct 
it affects or determines, is rarely extensive. The analogy 
which such opinions bear to laws proper, has, therefore, at- 
tracted little attention, and has, therefore, not gotten them 
tlie name of laws. — An opinion held universally by a large 
determinate body, is not less largely influential, or is more 
lar^'cly influential, than an ophiion of an uncertain portion 

J17BI8PRUDENCE PBTSBHINED. 141 

of the same certain aggregate. But since the determinate 
body IB large or numerous, an opinion held by all its mem- 
bers can hardly be distinguished from an opinion held by 
moat of its members. An opinion held universally by the 
members of the body determinate, is, therefore, equivalent 
in practice to a general opinion of the body, and is, there- 
fore, classed with the laws which general opinion imposes. 

Deferring to this seeming caprice of current or established 
language, I have forborne from ranking sentiments of pre- 
cisely determined parties with the laws improperly so called 
which are closely analogous to the proper. I have restricted 
that description to sentiments, regarding conduct, of uncer- 
tain bodies or classes. My foregoing analysis or exposition 
of laws of that description, is, therefore, an analysis of laws 
set by general opinion. 

If the description ought to embrace (as, I think, it cer- 
tainly ought) opinions, regarding conduct, of precisely de- 
termined parties, my foregoing analysis or exposition will 
still be correct substantiaDy. Witli a few slight and obvious 
changes, my foregoing analysis of a law set by general opi- 
nion will serve as an analysis of a law set by any opinion : 
of a law set by the opinion of an indeterminate body, and of 
a law set by lie opinion of a precisely determined party. 

For the character or essential difference of a law imposed 
by opinion, is this : that the law is not a command^ issued 
expressly or .tacitly, but is merely an opinion or sentimenty 
relating to conduct of a kind, which is held or felt by an 
uncertain body, or by a determinate party. A wish that 
conduct of the kind shall be pursued or forborne, is not sig- 
nijiedy expressly or tacitly, by that uncerUiin body, or that 
determinate party : nor does that body or paity inteful to 
inflict an evil upon any whose conduct may deviate from 
the given opinion or sentiment. The opinion or sentiment 
is merely an opinion or sentiment, although it subjects a 
transgressor to the chance of a consequent evil, and may 
even lead to a conmiand regarding conduct of the kind. 

irr^ 

142 THB PBovmca of ". 

' Between the opinion or sentament of the indetennitiat* 
body, and the opinion or sentiment of the precisely deter^ 
mined party, there is merely the following difference — ^The 
precisely determined party is capable of issuing a command 
in pursuance of the opinion or sentiment. But the unoer^ 
tain body is not For, being essentially incapable of joint 
or corporate conduct, it cannot, as a body, signify a wish or 
desire, and cannot, as a body, hold an intention or purpose. 
ThefowgoiM ^^ appears from the expositions in the prece- 
J^^^^Sa ding portion of my discourse, that laws properly 
pec, and of 80 Called, with such improper laws as are closely 

sach unpro- i ir if 

periAwsas analogous to the proper, are of three capital 
wliogou/to classes. — 1. The law of God, or the laws of 
brielj*^' God. 2. Positive law, or positive laws. 3. Po- 
*^^'* sitive morality, rules of positive morality, or po- 

sitive moral rules. 

It also appears from the same exposition^, that positive 
moral rules are of two species. — 1. Those positive moral 
rules which are express or tacit commands, and which are 
therefore laws in the proper acceptation of the term. 2. 
Those laws improperly so called (but closely analogous to 
laws in the proper acceptation of the term) which are set 
by general opinion, or are set by opinion : which are set by 
opinions of uncertain bodies ; or by opinions of uncertain 
bodies, and opinions of detenninate parties. 
The Nine- The sanctions annexed to the laws of God, 

and'i'mp^ may be styled religious, — ^The sanctions annexed 
ShIieW. to positive laws, may be styled, emphatically, 
d^eiTSJ^ %a/: for the laws to which they arc annexed, 
dUtiS,' prober ^® stylcd, simply and emphatically, laws or law. 
HJwdirSSS*' 0^» ^ every positive law supposes a v6\ig or ci- 
}?%^j^1S^; vffew, or supposes a society political and inde- 
?iIJh?!'pro,Kjr' Pej^dent, the epitliet political may be applied to 
'"r d'iST ^^^ sanctions by which such laws are enforced. 
H^l^ii^r"' — ^^ ^^^ sanctions which enforce compliance 
confer. witli positivc moral rules, some are sanctions 

JUBISPRUDBNCB DETEHMINED. Ii3 

prcqperly 80 called, and others are styled 'sanctions by an 
analogical extension of the term : that is to say, some are 
annexed to rules which are laws imperative and proper, 
and others enforce the rule which are laws set by opinion. 
Since rules of either species may be styled positive moraUty, 
the sanctions which enforce compUance with rules of either 
spedes may be styled moral sanctions. Or (changing the 
expression) we may say of rules of either species, that they 
are sanctioned or enforced morally* 

The duties imposed by the laws of God, may be styled 
religious. — ^The duties imposed by positive laws, may be 
styled, emphatically, legal: or, Uke the laws by wliicli they 
are imposed, they may be said to be sanctioned legally. — 
Of the duties imposed by positive moral rules, some are 
duties properly so called, and others are styled duties by an 
analogical extension of the term : that is to say, some are 
creatures of rules which are laws imperative and proper, 
and others are creatures of the rules wliich are laws set by 
opinion. Like the sanctions proper and improper by which 
they are respectively enforced, these duties proper and im- 
proper may be styled moral. Or we may say of tlie duties, 
as of the rules by which they are imposed, that tliey are 
sanctioned or enforced morally. 

Every right supposes a duty incumbent on a party or 

• The term morality, moral, or morally, is often opposed tacitly to im- 
morcdity, immoral, or immorally, and imports that the object to which it ia 
applied or referred is approved of hj the speaker or wnter. But by the 
term morality, I merely denote the human rules which I style ** positive 
mondity,** And by the terms " moral sanctions," " rules sanctioned wo- 
raUy,"^ " moral dudes or rights," and " duties or rights sanctioned morally,'^ 
I merely mean ^t the rules to which the sanctions are annexed, or by 
which the dutiea or rights are imposed or conferred, arc positive moral 
rules : rules bearing the generic character which I have stated and explained 
above. If I mean to praise or blame a positive human rule, or a duty or 
right which the rule imposes or confers, I style it consonant to the law of 
God, or contrary to the law of God. Or (what, in effect, is the same 
thing) I style it generally useful, or generally pernicious. 

144 THE PROVINCE OP 

parties other than the party entitled. Thix>ugh the impo- 
sition of that corresponding duty, the right was conferred 
Through the continuance of that corresponding duty, the 
right continues to exist If that corresponding duty be the 
creature of a law imperative, the right is a right properly so 
called. If that corresponding duty be the creature of a law 
improper, the right is styled a right by an analogical exten- 
sion of the term. — Consequently, a right existing through 
a duty imposed by the law of God, or a right existing 
through a duty imposed by positive law, is a right properly 
so called. Where the duty is the creature of a positive moral 
rule, the nature of the corresponding right depends upon 
the nature of the rule. If the rule imposing the duty be a 
law imperative and proper, the right is a right properly so 
called. If the law imposing the duty be a law set by opi- 
nion, the right is styled a right through an analogical ex- 
tension of the term. — ^Eights conferred by the law of God, 
or rights existing through duties imposed by the law of 
God, may be styled Divine. — Eights conferred by positive 
law, or rights existing through duties imposed by positive 
law, may be styled, emphatically, legal. Or it may be said 
of rights conferred by positive law, that they are sanctioned 
or protected legally. — The rights proper and improper which 
are conferred by positive morality, may be styled moral. Or 
it may be said of rights conferred by positive morality, that 
they are sanctioned or protected morally.* 

* Ilcro I may briefly observe, that, in order to a complete determina- 
tion of the appropriate province of jurisprudence, it is necessary to ex- 
plain the import of the term right. For, as I have staled already, nume- 
rous positive laws proceed directly from subjects through rif/hts conferred 
upon the authors by supreme political superiors. And fur various other 
reasons which will appear in my sixth lecture, the appropriate province of 
jurisprudence cannot be defined completely, unless an explanation of the 
term riglu constitute a part of the definition. But in order to an expla- 
nation of right in abstract (or in order to an explanation of the nature 
which is common to all rights), I mxist previously explain the diflferenccsof 
the principal kinds of rights, with the meanings of various terms which the 

JUSISPBUDSNCE DETEBHINED. 145 

": The body or aggregate of laws which may be Theuwof 
Btyled the law of God, the body or aggregate of liw/alld*^^* 
lawi which may be styled positive law, and the USTily) «w^ 
body or aggregate of laws which may be styled ^JI^J^t^mQ. 
positive morality, sometimes coincide^ sometimes c"llf<fi,h? U^a 
do not coincide, and sometimes conflict. ^IJ/kIJT'^ 

One of these bodies of laws coincides with an- 
other, when acts, which are enjoined or forbidden by tlie 
former, are also enjoined, or are also forbidden by the 
latter. — ^For example. The killing which is styled murder u 
forbidden by the positive law of every political society : it 
is also forbidden by a so called law which the general opi- 
nion of the society has set or imposed : it is also forbidden 
by the law of God as known through the principle of utility. 
The murderer commits a crime, or he violates a positive 
law: he commits a conventional immorality, or he violates 
a 80 called law which general opinion has establislied: he 
commits a sin, or he violates the law of God. He is ob- 
noxious to punishment, or other evU, to be inflicted by so- 
vereign authority: he is obnoxious to the hate and the spon- 
taneous ill offices of the generality or bulk of the society : 
he is obnoxious to evil or pain to be suffered here or hero- 
after by the immediate appointment of the Deity. 

One of these bodies of laws does not coincide with an- 
other, when iacts, which are enjoined or forbidden by the 
former, are not enjoined, or are not forbidden by the latter. 
— ^For example. Though smuggling is forbidden by posi- 
tive law, and (speaking generally) is not less pernicious than 

term right implies. And as that previous explanation caimot be given with 
efiect, till positire law is distinguished from the objects to which it is re- 
lated, it follows that an explanation of the expresKion rijht cannot cnttT 
into the attempt to determine Uie province of jurisprudence. 

At every step which he takes on his long and scabrous rond, a diificulty 
ttmilar to that which I have now endeavoured to suggest encounters Uie 
expositor of the science. As every department of tlie science is implicated 
with every other, any detached exposition of a single and separate depart- 
ment ia inevitably a fragment more or less imperfect 

VOU I. L 

146 iruE PROVINCE of 

theft, it is not forbidden by the opinions or sentiments of 
the ignorant or unreflecting. Where the impost or tax is 
itself of pernicious tendency, smuggling is hardly forbidden 
by the opinions or sentiments of any : And it is therefore 
practised by any without the slightest shame, or without 
the slightest fear of incurring general censure. Such, for in- 
stance, is the case, where the impost or tax is laid upon the 
foreign commodity, not for the useful purpose of raising a 
public revenue, but for the absurd and mischievous purpose 
of protecting a domestic manufEicture. — Offences against 
the game laws are also in point : for they are not offences 
against positive morality, although they are forbidden by 
positive law. A gentleman is not dishonoured, or generally 
shunned by gentlemen, though he shoots without a qualifi- 
cation. A peasant who wires hares escapes the censure of 
peasants, though the squires, as doing justiceship, send him 
to the prison and the tread-mill. 

One of these bodies of laws confiicts with another, when 
acts, which are enjoined or forbidden by the former, are for- 
bidden or enjoined by the latter. — For example. In most of 
the nations of modern Europe, the practice of duelling is 
forbidden by positive law. It is also at variance witK the 
law which is received in most of those nations as having 
been set by the Deity in the way of express revelation. But 
in spite of positive law, and in spite of his religious convic- 
tions, a man of the class of gentlemen may be forced by the 
law of lionour to give or to take a challenge. If he forbore 
from giving, or if he declined a challenge, he might incur 
the general contempt of gentlemen or men of lionour, and 
might meet with slights and insults sufficient to embitter 
his existence. The negative legal duty which certainly is in- 
cumbent upon him, [\nd the negative religious duty to which 
he believes himself subject, are therefore mastered and con- 
trolled by that positive moral duty which arises from the so 
called law set by the opinion of his class. 

The simple and obvious considerations to which I have 

JUBI8PBUDENCE DETERMINED. 147 

now adverted, are often overlooked by legislators. If tliey 
hacj a practice pernicious, or hate it they know not why, 
Ihey proc^^ without further thought, to forbid it by posi- 
tive law. u1ie]^forget that positive law may be superlluous ] 
or impotent, and therefore may lead to nothing but purely 
gratuitous vexation. They forget that the moral or the re- 
ligious sentunents of the community may already suppress 
the practice as completely as it can be suppressed : or that, 
if the practice is favoured by those moral or religious sen- 
timents, the strongest possible fear which legal piiins can 
inspire may be mastered by a stronger fear of other and 
conflicting sanctions.* 

• There are classes of useful acts which it were uselcsa to 7**5/*^ ■"** 
enjoin, and classes of mischievous acts which it were useless whkh, ac- 
to forbid : for we are sufficiently prone to the useful, and suf- 2le*thSJn- of 
ficiently arerse from the mischievous acts, without tlie incen- utility, are 
tivea and restraints applied by religious sanctions, or by uiTof^Goti •!* 
■uictions legal or moral. And, assuming that general utility a"tl Jl»e icih 
u the index to the Divine commands, we may fairly infer tliat ^ncox, which, 
acta of mch classes are not enjoined or forbidden by the law fcw^^iinK «« 
of God: that he no more enjoins or forbids acts of the thc<>ry,ought 
classes in question, than he enjoins or forbids such acts as are ^^^*^ ^ii^\* 
generally pernicious or useful. of poHitive 

There are also classes of acts, generally useful or pernicious, jJIJJr, "^ "^ 
which demand the incentives or restraints applied by religious 
aaacdoni, or by sanctions legal or moral. Without the incentives and 
fOitialutB applied by religious sanctions, or applied by sanctions legal or 
moral, we are not sufficiently prone to those which are generally useful, 
and are not sufficiently averse from those which are generally pemidous. 
And, assuming that general utility is the index to the Divine commands, 
all these classes of useful, and all these classes of pernicious acts, ai*e 
enjoined and forbidden respectively by the law of God. 

Being enjoined or being forbidden by the Deity, all these classes of use- 
ful, and aU these classes of pernicious act**, ought to be ciij(»ine(l or forbid- 
deti by positive morality : that is to say, by the })Ositive morality which 
conaiste of opinions or sentiments. But, this notwitlisLuuIing, some of 
these chisses of acts ought not to be enjcined or forbidden by fwsitive law. 
Some of these classes of acts ought not to 1>e enjoined or forbidden even 
by the positive morality which consists of im|)c native ruled. 

Every act or forbearance that ought to be an object of positive law, onglit 
to be an object of the positive morality which consists of opinions or sen- 

I. 2 

148 THE PROVINCE OF^ 

In consequence of the frequent coincidence of positive • 
law and morality, and of positive law and the law of God, 
the true nature and fountain of positive law is often ab- 
surdly mistaken by writers upon jurisprudence. • Where 
positive law has beeh fashioned on positive morality, or 
where positive law has been fashioned on the law of God; 
they forget that the copy is the creature of the sovereign, 
and impute it to the author of the model. 

For example : Customary laws are positive laws fashioned 
by judicial legislation upon pre-existing customs. Now, till 
they become the grounds of judicial decisions upon cases, 
and are clothed with legal sanctions by the sovereign one 
or number, the customs are merely rules set by opinions of 
the governed, and sanctioned or enforced morally : Though^ 
when they become the reasons of judicial decisions upon 
cases, and are clothed with l^al sanctions by the sovereign 
one or number, the customs are rules of positive law as well 
as of positive morality. But, because the customs were 
observed by the governed before they were clothed with 
sanctions by the sovereign one or number, it is fancied that 
customary laws exist as positive laws by the institution of 

timeDts. Every act or forbearance that ought to be an object of the latter, 
is an object of the law of God as construed by the principle of utility. 
But the circle embraced by the law of God, and which may be embraced 
to advantage by positive morality, is larger than the circle which can be 
embraced to advantage by positive law. Inasniuch as the two circles have 
one and the same centre, the whole of the region comprised by the latter 
is also comprised by tlie former. But the whole of the region comprised 
by the former is not comprised by the latter. 

To distinguish the acts and forbearances that ought to be objects of 
law, from those that ought to be abandoned to the exclusive cognisance 
of morality, is, perhaps, tlic hardest of the problems which the science 
of ethics presents. The only existing approach to a solution of the pro^ 
blem, may be found in the writings of Mr. Bentham : who, in most of 
the departmente of the two great branches of ethics, has accomplished 
more for the advancement of the science than all his predecessors put 
together — See, in particular, his Pnnciplea of Morals and Legislation, 
Ch. XVIL 

JVBISFEUDEXCE DETERMINED. 149 

the private persons with whom the customs originated. — Ad- 
mitting the conceit, and reteoning by analogy, we ought to 
consider the sovereign the author of the positive morahty 
which is often a consequence of positive law. Where a po- 
sitive law, not fashioned on a custom, is favourably received 
by the governed, and enforced by their opinions or senti- 
ments, we must deem the so called law, set by those opinions 
or sentiments, a law imperative and proper of the supreme 
political superior. 

. Again : The portion of positive law which is parcel of the 
law of nature (or, in the language of the classical jurists, 
which is parcel of the jus gentium) is often supposed to 
emanate, even as positive law, from a Divine or Natural 
source. But (admitting the distinction of positive law into 
law natural and law positive) it is manifest that law natural, 
considered as a portion of positive, is the creature of human 
sovereigns, and not of the Divine monarch. To say that it 
emanates, as positive law, from a Divine or Natural source, 
is to confoimd positive law with law whereon it is fashioned, 
or with law whereunto it conforms. 

The foregoing distribution of laws proper, and ?^*!fat^. 
of such improper laws as are closely analogous tionof uwi 

*-*-,, , , ° pnM)er, and of 

to the proper, taUies, in the main, with a division •»»cli impK>. 
of laws which is given incidentally by Locke in *« ciontiy 
his Essay on Human Understanding. And since tbe^Mr, 
ihis division of laws, or of the sources of duties mai^wuh I 
or obligations, is recommended by the great au- ulwt ^ich ; 
thority which the writer has justly acquired, I deStlS^b^'" 
gladly append it to my own division or analysis, {.^yo"**" 
The passage of his essay in which the division dlwuiidiigl 
occurs, is part of an inquiry into the nature of 
relation^ and is therefore concerned indirectly with the na- 
ture and kinds of law. With the exclusion of all that is 
foreign to the nature and kinds of law, with the exclusion 
of a few expressions which are obviously redundant, and 
with the correction of a few expressions which are somewhat 

■-^ .» -..<»ii*+i«N>V 

150 THE PROVWCK OP 

obscure, the passage containing the division may be rendered 
in the words following : ♦ 

" The conformity or disagreement men's voluntary actions 
have to a rule to which they ai-e referred, and by which they 
are judged of, is a sort of relation which may be called 
moral relation, 

^^ Human actions, when with their various ends, objectSj; 
manners, and circumstances, they are framed into distinct 
complex ideas, are, as has been shown, so many mixed 
modes^ a great part whereof have names annexed to them. 
Thus, supposing gratitude to be a readiness to acknowledge 
and return kindness received, or polygamy to be the having 
more wives than one at once, when we frame these notions 
thus in our minds, we have there so many determined ideas 
of mixed modes. 

" But this is not all that concerns our actions. It is not 
enough to have determined ideas of them, and to know what 
names belong to such and such combinations of ideas. We 
have a further and greater concernment. And that is, to 
know whether such actions are morally good or bad. 

" Good or evil is nothing but pleasure or pain, or that 
which occasions or procures pleasure or pain to us. Moral 
ijood or evilj then, is only the conformity or disagreement of 
our voluntary actions to some law, whereby good or evil is. 
drawn on us by the will and power of the law-maker: which 

* Locke's division or analysis is far from being complete, and the lan- 
guage in which it is stated is often extremely unapt. It must, howerer, 
be remembered, that the nature of relation generally (and not the nature of 
IctWy with its principal kinds) is the appropriate object of his inquiry. Allow- 
ing for the defects, which, therefore, were nearly inevitable, his analyaii ia 
strikingly accurate. It evinces that matchless power of precise and just 
thinking, with that religious regard for general utility and truth, which 
marked the incomparable man who emancipated human reason £rom the 
yoke of mystery and jargon. And from this his incidental excursion into 
the field of law and morality, and from other passages of his essay wherein 
he touches upon them, we may infer the important services which he would 
have rendered to the science of ethics, if, complying with the instances of 
MolyneuXy he had examined the subject exactly. 

JUBI8PRUDEKCB DETERMINED. 151 

good or evil, pleasure or pain, attending our observahce or 
breach of the law, by the decree of the law-maker, is that 
we call reward or punishment. 

•* Of these moral rules or laws, to which men generally 
refer, and by which they judge of the rectitude or pravity 
of their actions, there seem to me to be three sorts, witli 
their three diflferent enforcements, or rewards and punish- 
ments. For since it would be utterly in vain to suppose a 
rule set to the free actions of man, without annexing to it 
some enforcement of good and evil to determine his will, we 
must, wherever we suppose a law, suppose also some reward 
or punishment annexed to that law. It would be in vain 
for one intelligent being to set a rule to the actiotis of an- 
other, if he had it not in his power to reward the compliance 
with, and punish deviation from his rule, by some good and 
evil that is not the natural product and consequence of the 
action itself: for that being a natural convenience or incon- 
venience, would operate of itself without a law. This, if I 
mistake not, is the true nature of all law proj>erly so called. 

" The laws that men generally refer their actions to, to 
judge of their rectitude or obUquity, seem to me to be these 
three: 1. The Divine law. 2. The civil law. 3. The law 
of opinion or reputation, if I may so call it. — By the relation 
they bear to the first of these, men judge whether their 
actions are sins or duties : by the second, whether they be 
criminal or innocent : and by the third, whether they be 
virtues or vices. 

" By the Divine law, I mean that law which God hath set 
to the actions of men, whether promulgated to thoin by the 
light of nature, or the voice of revelation. This is the only 
true touchstone of moral rectitude. And by (Comparing theni 
to this law, it is, that men judge of the most considerable 
moral good or evil of their actions : that is, whether as duties 
or sinSj they are like to procure them happiness or misery 
from the hands of the Almighty. 

*> The civil law, the rule set by the commonwealth to the 

M.*i«ft-.** • ^*** ^*.- *. 

152 THE PBOVINCB OP 

actions of those who belong to" it, is a rule to which meq 
refer their actions, to judge whether they be criminal or no. 
This law nobody overlooks, the rewards and punishments 
that enforce it being ready at hand, and suitable to the 
power that makes it : which is the force of the common- 
wealth, engaged to protect the lives, liberties and posses* 
sions of those who live according to its law^ and has power 
to take away life, liberty or goods from him who disobeys. 

" The law cf opinion or reputation is another law that men 
generally refer their actions to, to judge of their rectitude or 
obliquity. 

" Virtue and vice are names pretended, and supposed 
everywhere to stand for actions in their own nature right 
or \vrong : and as far as they really are so applied, they so 
far are coincident with the Divine law above mentioned. 
But yet, whatever is pretended, this is visible, that these 
names virtue and vice^ in the particular instances of their 
application through the several nations and societies of men 
in the world, are constantly attributed to such actions only 
as in cacli country and .society are in reputation or discredit. 
Nor is it to be thought strange, that men everywhere 
sliould give the name of virtue to those actions which 
amongst them are judged praiseworthy, and call that vice 
which they account blameable : since they would condemn 
themselves, if they should think any thing rights to which 
they allowed not commendation ; any tiling wrong^ which 
they let pass without blame. 

" Thus the measure of what is everywhere called and es- 
teemed virtue and vicey is this approbation or dishke, praise 
or blame, which by a secret and tacit consent establishes it- 
self in the several societies, tribes, and clubs of men in the 
world : whereby several actions cx)me to find credit or dis- 
grace amongst them, according to the judgment, maxims, 
or fashions of that place. For though men uniting into po- 
litick societies have resigned up to the publick the disposing 
of all their force, so that they cannot employ it against any 

JUSISFBUDSNCB DBTEBMINED. 153 

fiellow-citizens any further than the law of the country di- 
rects, yet they retain still the power of thinking well or ill, 
approving or disapproving of the actions of those whom 
they, live amongst and converse with : and by this appro- 
bation and dislike, they establish amongst themselves what 
they will call virtue and vice. 

" That this is the common measure of virtue and vice^ will 
appear to any one who considers, tha^ though that passes 
for vice in one country, which is counted virtue (or, at least, 
not vice) in another, yet everywhere virtue and praise, vice 
and blame, go together. Virtue is everywhere that which is 
thought praiseworthy ; and nothing but that which has the 
allowance of pubhc esteem is called virtue. Virtue and praise 
are so united, that they are often called by the same name. 
*Sunt sua praemia laudi,' says Virgil. And, says Cicero, 
* nihil habet natura pncstantius, quam honestatem^qixfimlaU' 
detriy quam dignitatem y quam decus: ' all which, lie telLs you, 
are names for the same thing. Such is the language of the 
heathen philosophers, who well understood wherein the no- 
tions of virtue and vice consisted. 

" But though, by the different temper, education, frtshion, 
maxims, or interest of different soils of men, it fell out, that 
what was thought praiseworthy in one place, escaped not 
censure in another, and so in different societies virtues and 
vices were changed, yet, as to the main, they for the most 
part kept the same everywhere. For since nothing can be 
more natural, than to encourage with esteem and reputation 
that wherein every one finds his advantage, and to blame 
and discountenance the contrary, it is no wonder that esteem 
and discredit, virtue and vice, should in a groat measure 
everywhere correspond with the unchangeable rule of ri<^ht 
and wrong which the law of God hath established : there 
being nothing that so directly and visibly secures and ad- 
vances the general good of mankind in this world, as obe- 
dience to the law he has set them, and nothing that breeds 
mich mischiefs and confusion as the neglect o( it. And there- 

-n 

154 THE PBOYINCE OF 

fore men, without renouncing all sense and reason, and th^ 
own interest, could not generally mistake in placing their 
commendation or blame on that side which really deserved 
it not. Nay^ even those men, whose practice was otherwise^ 
failed not to give their approbation right : few being de- 
praved to that degree, as not to condemn, at least in others; 
the faults they themselves were guilty of. Whereby, even 
in the corruption of manners, the law of Gbd, which ought 
to be the rule of virtue and vice, was pretty well observed. 
^' If any one sliall imagine, that I have forgotten my own 
notion of a law when I make the law, whereby men judge 
of virtue and vice^ to be nothing but the consent of private 
men who have not authority to make a law ; especially want- 
ing that which is so necessary and essential to a law, a power 
to enforce it : I think, I may say, that he who imagines com- 
mendation and disgrace not to be strong motives on men to 
accommodate themselves to the opinions and rules of those 
with whom they converse, seems little skilled in the nature 
or history of mankind : The greatest part whereof he sliall 
find to govern themselves chiefly, if not solely, by this law 
of fashion ; and so they do that which keeps them in re- 
putation with their company, little r^ard the law of God 
or the magistrate. The penalties that attend the breach of 
Go(Vs law, some, nay, perhaps, most men seldom seriously 
reflect on ; and amongst those that do, many, whilst they 
break the law, entertain thoughts of future reconciliation, 
and making their peace for such breaches. And as to the 
punishments due from the law of the commonwealth, they 
frequently flatter themselves with the hope of impunity. 
But no man escapes the punishment of their censure and 
dishke, who ofiends against the fashion and opinion of the 
company he keeps, and would recommend himself to. Nor 
is there one of ten thousand, who is stifi* and insensible 
enough to bear up under the constant dishke and condem- 
nation of his own club. He must be of a strange and un- 
Ui?ual constitution, who can content himself to live in con- 

JUSISFEUDENGB DBTBRBflKED. 155 

stant diBgcace and disrepute with his own particular society. 

Solitude many men have sdught, and been reconciled to : 

but nobody that has the least thought or sense of a man 

about him, can live in society under the constant dislike 

and ill opinion of his familiars, and those he converses with. 

This is a burthen too heavy for human sufferance : and he 

must be made up of irreconcileable contradictions, who can 

take pleasure in company, and yet be insensible of contempt 

and disgrace from his companions. 

^ "The law of God, the law of politick societies, and the 

law of fashion or private censure, are, then, the three rules 

to which men variously compare tlieir actions. And it is 

fix)m their conformity or disagreement to one of these rules, 

that they judge of their rectitude or obliquity, and name 

them good or bad. 

" Whether we take the rule, to which, as to a touchstone, 
we bring our voluntary actions, from the fashion of the 
country, or from the will of a law-maker, tlie mind is easily 
able to observe the relation any action hath to it, and to 
judge whether the action agrees or disagrees with the rule. 
And thus the mind hath a notion of moral goodness or evil: 
which is either conformity or not conformity of any action 
to that rule. If I find an action to agree or disagree with 
the esteem of the country I have been bred in, and to be 
held by most men there worthy of praise or blame, I call 
the action virtuous or vicious. If I have the will of a su- 
preme invisible .law-maker for my rule, then, as I suppose 
the action commanded or forbidden by God, I call it good 
or evil, duty or sin. And if I compare it to the civil law, 
the rule made by the legislative power of the country, I call 
it lawful or imlawful, no crime or a crime. So that wlioncc- 
soever we take the rule of actions, or by wliat standard so- 
ever we frame in our minds the ideas of virtues or vices, 
their rectitude or obliquity consists in their agreement or 
disagreement with the patterns prescribed by some law. 
** Before I quit this argument, I would observe, that, in 

■"T 

155 THB PEOVINCB OF 

the relations which I call moral relations^ I have a true 
notion of relation, by comparing the action with the rule, 
whether the rule be true or false. For if I measure any 
thing by a supposed yard, I know whether the thing I mea- 
sure be longer or shorter than that supposed yard, though 
the yard I measure by be not exactly the standard. Mea- 
suring an action by a vrrong rule, I shall judge amiss of its 
moral rectitude : but I shall not mistake the relation which 
the action bears to the rule whereunto I compare iL" — 
Essay concerning Human Understanding. Book IE. Chap. 

xxvni. 

The analogy borne to a law proper by a law 
J^im'cS^OT* which opinion imposes, Ues mainly in the follow- 
Thi'^oramTn ^^g poiut of rescmblaiice. In the case of a law 
nauir^LVuwa ^ct by Opinion, as well as in the case of a law 
oftbcciMs. properly so called, a rational being or beings are 
obnoxious to contingent evil, in the event of their not com- 
plying with a known or presumed desire of another being 
or beings of a like nature. If, in either of the two cases, 
the contingent evil is suffered, it is suffered by a rational 
being, through a rational being : And it is suffered by a 
rational being, through a rational being, in consequence of 
the suffering party having disregarded a desire of a rational 
being or beings. — The analogy, therefore, by which the 
laws are related, mainly lies in the resemblance of the im- 
proper sanction and duty to the sanction and duty properly 
so called. The contingent evil in prospect which enforces 
the law improper, and the present obnoxiousness to that con- 
tingent evil, may behkened to the genuine sanction which 
enforces the law proper, and the genuine duty or obliga- 
tion wliich the law proper imposes. — The analogy between 
a law in the proper acceptation of the tenn, and a law im- 
pn)i)orly so chilled which opinion sets or imposes, is, there- 
fore, strong or close. The defect which excludes the latter 
from the rank of a law proper, merely consists in this : that 
the wish or desire of its authoi-s has not been duly signi. 

JUEISPBUDENOB BBTERHINED. 157 

find^ and that they have no formed intention of inflicting 
evil or jVain upon those who may break or transgress it. 

But, beside the laws improper which are set or imposed 
by opinion, there are laws improperly so called which are 
related to laws proper by slender or remote analogies. And, 
since they have gotten the name of laws from their slender 
or remote analogies to laws properly so called, I style them 
laws metaphorical, or laws merely metaphorical. 

The metaphorical applications of the term law are nume- 
rous and diJOferent The analogies by which they are sug- 
gested, or by which metaphorical laws are related to laws 
proper, will, therefore, hardly admit of a common and posi- 
tive description. But laws metaphorical, though numerous 
and different, have the following common and negative na- 
ture. — No property or character of any metaphorical law 
can be likened to a sanction or a duty. Consequently, every 
metaphorical law wants that point of resemblance which 
mainly constitutes the analogy between a law proper and a 
law set by opinion. 

To show that figurative laws want that point Th« common 
of resemblance, and are therefore remotely ana- SSJureS'^''* 
logons to laws properly so called, I will touch JJlIJ^JiSior 
slightly and briefly upon a few of the numberless SSi^^b** 
cases in which the term law is extended and ap- «"»?!«• 
plied by a metaphor. 

The most frequent and remarkable of those metaphorical 
appUcations is suggested by that uniformity, or that stabi- 
lity of conduct, which is one of the ordinary consequences 
of a law proper. — By reason of tlie sanction working on their 
wills or desires, the parties obliged by a law proper com- 
monly adjust their conduct to the pattern which tlic law 
prescribes. Consequently, wherever we observe a uniform 
order of events, or a uniform order of co-existing pheno- 
mena, we are prone to impute that order to a law set by its 
author, though the case presents us with nothing that can 
be Ukened to a sanction or a duty. 

158 THE PROVINCB OF 

For example: We say that the movements of lifeless 
bodies are determined by certain laws : though, smce the 
bodies are hfeless and have no desires or aversions, they 
cannot be touched by aught which in the least resembles a 
sanction, and cannot be subject to aught which in the least 
resembles an obligation. We mean that they move in cer- 
tain uniform modes, and that they move in those uniform 
modes through the pleasure and appointment of God : just 
as parties obliged behave in a uniform manner through the 
pleasure and appointment of the party who imposes the law 
and the duty. — Again : We say that certain actions of the 
lower and irrational animals are determined by certain laws : 
though, since they cannot understand the purpose and pro- 
visions of a law, it is impossible that sanctions should effec- 
tually move them to obedience, or that their conduct should 
be guided by a regard to duties or obligations. We mean 
that they act in certain uniform modes, eitlicr in consequence 
of instincts (or causes which we cannot explain), or else in 
consequence of hints which they catch from experience and 
observation : and that, since their uniformity of action is an 
efTect of the Divine pleasure, it closely resembles the imi- 
formity of conduct v/hich is wrought by the authors of laws 
in tliose who are obnoxious to the sanctions.* — In short, 
whenever we talk of laws governing the irrational world, 
tlic metaphorical application of the term law is suggested 
by this double analogy. 1. The successive and synchronous 
phaiuoin'jua composing the irrational world, happen and 

♦ Spciiking with absolute precision, the lower animals, or the animals 
inferior to man, are not destitute of reason. Since tlieir conduct is partly 
determined by conclusions drawn from experience, they observe, compan*, 
abstract, and infer. But the intelligence of tlio lower animals is so ex- 
tremely limited, that, adopting the current expreshion, I style them inrr- 
tio/Kil. — Some of the more sagacious are so far irom being irrational, that 
they imderstand and observe laws set to them by human masters*. But 
these laws being few and of little inii)ortimce, I throw them, for the sake 
orsim[.licity, out of my account. I s.iy universally of the lower animals, 
thnt t])i-Y c;mnot understand a law, or guide their conduct by a duty. 

JUBISPEUDENCE DKIXBllIKED. 353 

ebdat^for the most part, in uniform series : which nnifinrmity 
of succession and coexistence resembles the uniforsiity of 
conduct produced by an imperative law. 2. That unifor- 
mity of succession and coexistence, like the uniformity of 
conduct produced by an imperative law, springs from the 
will and intention of an intelligent and rational author. — 
When an atheist speaks of lau>8 governing the irrational 
world, the metaphorical application is suggested by an ana- 
logy still more slender and remote than that which I have 
now analyzed. He means that the uniformity of succession 
.and coexistence resenibles the uniformity of conduct pro- 
duced by an imperative rule. If, to draw the analogy 
closer, he ascribes those laws to an author, he personifies a 
verbal abstraction, and makes it play the l^slator. He 
attributes the imiformity of succession and coexistence to 
laws set by nature: meaning, by naiurej the world itself; 
or, perhaps, that very uniformity which he imputes to na- 
ture's commands. 

Many metaphorical applications of the term law or rule 
are suggested by the analogy following. — An imperative law 
or rule guides the conduct of the obliged, or is a tunnna^ 
model, or pattern, to which their conduct conforms. A 
proposed guide of human conduct, or a model or pattern 
oflered to human imitation, is, therefore, frequently s^led 
a law or rule of conduct, although there be not in the case 
the shadow of a sanction or a duty. 

For example : To every law properly so called thero are 
two distinct parties : a party by whom it is established, and 
a party to whom it is set But, this notwithstanding, we 
often speak of a law set by a man to himself: meaning that 
he intends to pursue some given course of conduct as ex- 
actly as he would pursue it if he were bound to pursue it 
by a law. An intention of pursuing exactly some given 
course of conduct, is the only law or rule which a man can 
^t to himself. The binding virtue of a law lies in the 
aanction annexed to it. But in the case of a so called law 

160 r TEE PBOyiKGE OP - 

set by a man to himself, he is not constrained to observe it 
by aught that resembles a sanction. For though he may 
fedrly purpose to inflict a pain on himself, if his conduct 
shall depart from the guide which he intends it shall fol- 
low, the infliction of the conditional pain depends upon his 
own wilL — ^Again : When we talk of rules of art, the meta- 
phorical application of the term rulea is suggested by the 
analogy in question. By a rule of art, we mean a prescrip- 
tion or pattern which is offered to practitioners of an art, 
and which thqr are advised to observe when performing 
some given process. There is not the semblance of a sanc- 
tion, nor is there the shadow of a duty. But the oflerod 
prescription or pattern may guide the conduct of practi- 
tioner as a rule imperative and proper guides the conduct 
of the obliged.* 

' f/ ;The preceding disquisition on figurative laws 
nb^Soaor is not so superfluous as some of my .hearers may 
^"SuT deem it Figurative laws are not unfi^uently 
2SSS<w* mistaken for laws imperative and proper. Nay, 
^ti^nS' attempts have actually been made, and by writers 
proper. ^f ^^ highest celebrity, to explain and illustrate 
the nature of laws imperative and proper, by allusions to so 
called laws which are merely such through a metaphor. Of 
these most gross and scarcely credible errors, various cases 
will be mentioned in future stages of my Course. For the 
present, the following examples will amply demonstrate that 
the errors are not impossible. 

In an excerpt from Ulpian placed at the beginning of the 
Pandects, and also inserted by Justinian in the second title 
of his^ Institutes, a fancied jus naturale, common to all ani- 
mals, is thus distinguished from the jus naturale or gentium 

• Supposed difference between law and rule — MS, note. 

The 4uthor refers, in a memorandum, to notes on '^ laws metaphorical, 
at the point which relates to Rules of Art ; " and to '* metaphorical appli- 
cations of the term obligation^ like those of the term /au7." Unhappily I 
have been unable to find them. — S. A. 

JOBISPBUD£NCB DETERIOSBD. 161 

to which I have adverted above. ^^Ju8 naturale est, quod 
natura omnia animalia docuit : nam jus istud non humani 
generis proprium, sed omnium animalium, quao in terra, quas 
in mari nascuntur, avium quoque commune est Hinc de- 
scendit maris atque femuue conjunctio, quam nos matrimo- 
nium appellamus ; hinc Uberorum procreatio, hinc educatio : 
videmus etenim cetera quoque animah'a, feras etiam, istius 
juris peritia censerL Jus gentium est, quo gentes humano 
utuntur. Quod a naturcUi recedere, inde bale intelligere 
licet; quia illud omnibus animalibus, hoc solis hominibus 
inter se commune eat." The jus naturale which Ulpian here 
describes, and which he here distinguishes fix)m the jus 
naturale or gentium^ is a name for the instincts of aninmla. 
More especially, it denotes that instinctive appetite which 
leads them to propagate their kinds, with that instinctive 
sympathy which inclines parent animals to nourish and edu- 
cate their young. Now the instincts of animals are related 
to laws by the slender or remote analogy which I have al- 
ready endeavoured to explain. They indine the animals to 
act in certain uniform modes, and they are given to the ani- 
mals for that purpose by an intelligent and rational author. 
But these metaphorical laws which govern the lower ani- 
mals, and which govern (though less despotically) the human 
species itself^ should not have been blended and confounded, 
by a grave writer upon jurisprudence, with laws properly so 
called. It is true that the instincts of the animal man, like 
many of his aflections which are not instinctive, are amongst 
the causes of laws in the proper acceptation of the term. More 
especially, the laws regarding the relation of husband and 
¥rife, and the laws r^arding the relation of parent and child, 
are mainly caused by the instincts which Ulpian particularly 
points at. And that, it is likely, was the reason which de- 
termined this legal oracle to class the instincts of animals 
with laws imperative and proper. But nothing can be more 
absurd than the ranking with laws themselves the causes 
which lead to their existence. And if human instincts are 
Vol. I. M 

162 THE PROVIKCB OF 

laws because they are causes of laws, there is scarcely a &- 
culty or affection belonging to the human mind, and scarcely 
a dass of objects presented by the outward world, thai must 
not be esteemed a law and an appropriate subject of juris- 
prudence. — ^I must, however, remark, that the jus quod nor 
tura ojjmia animalia dociiit is a conceit peculiar to Ulpian : 
and that this most foolish conceit, though inserted in Ju»- 
tinian^s compilations, has no perceptible influence on the 
detail of the Boman law. The ju8 naJurale of the clafrical 
jurists generally, and the jus naturale occurring generally 
in the Pandects, is equivalent to the natural law of modem 
writers upon jurisprudence, and is synonymous with the jus 
gentium^ or the jus naturale et gentium, which I have tried 
to explain condsely at the end of a preceding note. It means 
those positive laws, and those ndes of positive morali^, 
which are not peculiar or appropriate to any nation or age, 
i;^^. but obtidn, or are thought to obtain, in all nations and ages : 

^> and which, by reason of their obtaining in aU nations and 

ages, are supposed to be formed or fashioned on the law of 
God or Nature as known by the moral sense. "Omnes 
populi (says Gains), qui legibus et moribus regimtur, partim 
suo proprio, partim communi omnium hominum jure utun- 
tur. Nam quod quisque populus ipse sibi jus constituit, id 
ipsius proprium est, vocaturque jus civile; quasi jus pro- 
prium ipsius civitatis. Quod vero naturalis ratio inter omnes 
homines constituit, id aput omnes populos peraeque custo- 
ditur, vocaturque jus gentium ; quasi quo jure omnes gentes 
utuntur." The universal leges et mores here described by 
Gaius, and distinguished from the leges et mores peculiar to 
a particular nation, are styled indifferently, by most of the 
classical jurists, ^tts gentium^ jits naturale, or jus naturale et 
gentium. And the law of nature, as thus understood, is not 
intrinsically absurd. For as some of the dictates of utility 
are always and everywhere the same, and are also so plain 
and glaring that they hardly admit of mistake, there are legal 
and moral rules which are nearly or quite universal, and the 

JUBISPBUDXNCE DBTJBBMIKED. 163 

expedieD<7 of which must be seen by merely natural reason, 
or by reason without the lights of extensive experience and 
observation. The distinction of law and morality into na- 
tural and positive, is a needless and futile subtilty : but still 
the distinction is founded on a real and manifest difference. 
The jus naturale or gentium would be liable to little objec- 
tion, if it were not supposed to be the offspring of a moral 
instinct or sense, or of innate practical principles. But, since 
it is closely allied (as I shall shew hereafter) to that nuslead- 
ing and pernicious jargon, it ought to be expelled, with the 
natural law of the modems, fix>m the sciences of jurispru- 
dence and morality. 

The following passage is the first sentence in Montes- 
quieu's Spirit of Laws. ^ Les lois, dans la signification la 
plus ^tendue, sont les rapports n^cessaires qui d^vent de 
la nature des choses : et dans ce sens tons les dtres ont leurs 
lois : la Divinity a ses lois; le monde mat^el a ses lois ; les 
intelligences sup&ieures k Thomme ont leurs lois ; les bfites 
oat leurs lois ; Thomme a ses lois.** Now objects widely dif- 
ferent, though bearing a common name, are here blended 
and confounded. Of the laws which govern the conduct of 
intelligent and rational creatures, some are laws imperative 
and proper, and others are closely analogous to laws of that 
description. But the so called laws which govern the ma- 
terial world, with the so called laws which govern the lower 
animals, are merely laws by a metaphor. And the so called 
laws which govern or determine the Deity are clearly in the 
same predicament. If his actions were governed or de- 
termined by laws imperative and proper, he would be in a 
state of dependence on another and superior being. When 
we say that the actions of the Deity are governed or deter- 
mined by laws, we mean that they conform to intentions 
which the Deity himself has conceived, and which he pur- 
Sues or observes with inflexible steadiness or constanqr. To 
mix thes^ figurative laws with laws imperative and proper, 
18 to obscure, and not to elucidate, the nature or essence of 

M 2 

164 THE PROVmCB OP 

the latter. — ^The beginning of the passage is worthy of the 
sequel. We are told that laws are the necessary relations 
which flow from the nature of things. But what, I would 
crave, are relations ? What, I would also crave, is the na- 
ture of things ? And, how do the necessary relations which 
flow from the nature of things differ frx>m those relations 
which originate in other sources ? The terms of the defi- 
nition are incomparably more obscure than the term whidi 
it affects to expound. 

If you read the disquisition in Blackstone on the nature of 
laws in general, or the fustian description of law in Hooker^s 
Ecclesiastical FoUty, you will find the same confusion of laws 
imperative and proper with laws which are merely such by 
a glaring perversion of the term. The cases of this axifii- 
mon are, indeed, so numerous, that they would fill a oon- 
idderable volume. 

Phyiiedor From the confiision of laws metaphorical with 
Moeiioiii. laws imperative and proper, I turn to a mistake, 
somewhat similar, which, I presume to tlunk, has been com- 
mitted by Mr. Bentham. 

Sanctions proper and improper are of three capital classes : 
— the sanctions properly so called which are annexed to the 
laws of God : the sanctions properly so called which are 
annexed to positive laws : the sanctions properly so called, 
and the sanctions closely analogous to sanctions properly so 
called, which respectively enforce compliance with positive 
moral rules. But to sanctions religious, legal, and moral, this 
great philosopher and jurist adds a class of sanctions whirl i 
he styles physical or natural. 

When he styles these sanctions physical^ he does not ni- 
tend to intimate that they are distinguished from other sane- 
tions by the mode wherein they operate : he does not intend 
to intimate that these are the only sanctions which affect thi- 
suffering parties through physical or material means. Any 
sanction of any class may reach the suffering party through 
means of that description. If a man were smitten with bUnd- 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 165 

ness by the immediate appointment of the Deity, and in con- 
sequence of a sin he had committed against the Divine law, 
he would suffer a religious sanction through his physical or 
bodily organs. The thief who is hanged or imprisoned by 
vhtue of a judicial command, suffers a legal sanction through 
physical or material means. If a man of the class of gen- 
tlemen violates the law of honour, and happens to be shot 
in a -duel arising from his moral delinquency, he suffers a 
moral sanction in a physical or material form. 

The meaning annexed by Mr. Bentham to the expression 
** physical sanction," may, I believe, be rendered in the fol- 
lowing manner. — ^A physical sanction is an evil brought upon 
the suffering party by an act or omission of his own. But, 
though it is brought upon the sufferer by an act or omission 
of his own, it is not brought upon the sufferer through any 
Divine law, or through any positive law, or rule of positive 
morality. For example : If your house be destroyed by fire 
through your n^lecting to put out a light, you bring upon 
yourself, by your negligent omission, a physical or natural 
sanction : supposing, I mean, that your omission is not to be 
deemed a sin, and that the consequent destruction of your 
house is not to be deemed a punishment inflicted by the 
hand of the Deity. In short, though a physical sanction is 
an evil fSEdling on a rational being, and brought on a rational 
being by an act or omission of his own, it is neither brought 
on the sufferer through a law imperative and proper, nor 
through an analogous law set or imposed by opinion. In 
case I borrowed the just, though tautological language of 
Locke, I should describe a physical sanction in some such 
terms as the foUovdng. ^^ It is an evil naturally produced 
by the conduct whereon *it is consequent : and, being natu-- 
rally produced by the conduct whereon it is consequent, it 
reaches the suffering party vnthout ike intervention of a law** 

Such physical or natural evils are related by Uie follow- 
ing analogy to sanctions properly so called. 1. When they 
are actually suffered, they are suffered by rational beings 

166 THE PROVINCE OP 

through acts or omiadons of theu: own. 2. Before they are 
actually suffered, or whilst they exist in prospect, they affect 
the wills or desires of the parties obnoxious to them as sanc- 
tions properly so called affect the wills of the obliged. The 
parties are urged to the acts which may avert the evils from 
their heads, or the parties are deterred from the acts which 
may bring the evils upon them. 

But in spite of tlie specious analogy at which I have now 
pointed, I dislike, for various reasons, the application of the 
term sanction to these physical or natural evils. Of those 
reasons I will briefly mention the following. — 1. Although 
these evils are suffered by intelligent rational beings, and by 
intelligent rational beings through acts or omissions of their 
own, thqr are not suffered as consequences of their not com- 
plying with desires of intelligent rational beings. The acts 
or omissions whereon these evils are consequent, can hardly 
be likened to breaches of duties, or to violations of impe- 
rative laws. The analogy borne by these evils to sanctions 
properly so called, is nearly as remote as the analogy borne 
by laws metaphorical to laws imperative and proper. 2. By 
the term sanction^ as it is now restricted, the evils enforcing 
compliance with laws imperative and proper, or with the 
closely analogous laws which opinion sets or imposes, arc 
distinguished from other evils briefly and commodiously. 
If the term werc commonly extended to these physical or 
natural evils, this advantage would be lost. The term would 
then comprehend every possible evil which a man may bring 
upon himself by his own voluntary conduct. The term 
would then comprehend every contingent evil which can work 
on the will or desires as a motive to action or forbearance. 
In strictncH, I closc my disquisitiou's on figurative laws, and 
h^ll^h^r^ on those metaphorical sanctions which Mr. Ben- 
SSd iS^Jf** tham denominates j^AyA-ica/, with the following con- 
"^^on i^ccted remark. 

th^ R^llSiin Declaratory laws, laws repealing laws, and laws 
jurist*), ^f imperfect obli^ratiou (in the sense of the Roman 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 167 

jurists), are merely analogous to laws in the pro- ^? ^^ ^ 
per acceptation of the term. Like laws imperative J^^JJ^J^^ 
and proper, declaratory laws, laws repealing laws, ^^J^^ 
and laws of imperfect obligation (in the sense of *««i n^ies of 
the Boman jurists); are signs of pleasure or desire monoitj. 
proceeding from law-makers. A law of imperfect obliga- 
tion (in the sense of the Boman jurists) is also allied 
to an imperative law by the following point of resemblance. 
like a law imperative and proper, it is offered as a norma, 
or guide of conduct, although it is not armed with a legal 
or political sanction. 

Declaratory laws, and laws repealing laws, ought in strict- 
ness to be classed with laws metaphorical or figurative : for 
tbe analogy by which they are related to laws imperative 
and proper is extremely dender or remote. Laws of im- 
perfect obligation (in the sense of the Boman jiuists) are 
laws set or imposed by the opinions of the law-makers, and 
ought in strictness to be classed with rules of positive mo- 
rality. But though laws of these three species are merely 
analogous to laws in the proper acceptation of the term, 
they are closely connected with positive laws, and are ap- 
propriate subjects of jurisprudence. Consequently, I treat 
them as improper laws of anomalous or eccentric sorts, and 
exclude them from the classes of laws to which in strictness 
they belong. 

fe- 

168 

.suk PROvnccB of 

LBCTUEE VI. 

; 

PoBimrs laws, the appropriate matter of jurieh 
prudence, arc related in the way oi resemblance. 

tkm or lh« 
aiiElJi tacture 

^^If^tuui OT by a dose or remote analogy, to the following 

,m!^^^^^ objects. — ^1. In the way of resemblance, they are 

z'i ;'-%;;. related to the jaws of God 2. In the way of 

^resemblance, they are.related to diose ndes o f jjo^ tive mo> 

frailty which are jaws properly so call ed ^ . By a close or 

:^rtjt)Dg analogy, they are reliited to^ 

^to^orality which -are naerelyjopmions .<a;^ sen timents held or 

It by men i]iuaegard^.i),uman cQzicIuct 4. By a remote 

'Or Blender analogy, they are related .to laws merely meta- 

^oiical, or I^ws merely figurative. -— ^ 

!^<- . . To distinguish positive laws froin the objects now enume- 

_ xated, is the purpose of the present attempt to determine 

the .province of jurisprudence. . . 

In pursuance of the purpose to which I have now ad- 
vertedf I stated, in my first lecture, the essentials of a law 
or Tuk (taken with the largest signification which can Ix^ 
given to the term j9r(>per/y). ^ 

In my second, third, and fourth lectures, I stated the 
marks or characters by which the laws of God are distin- 
guished from other laws. And, stating those marks or cha- 
racters, I explained the nature of the index to his unre- 
vealed laws, or I>explained ,and examined the hypotheses 
which regard the nature of that index. 

In my fifth lecture, I examined or discussed especially, f- 
the fullowing. principal topics (4nd I touched upon otherts*' 

^ 

JURISPRUDENCE Dffm&INED. 169 

t<^ic8 of seobodary or subordinate importance). — ^I esamined i 

the distinguishing marks of those positive moral rules wjiich 
are laws properly so called : I examined the distinguiniing 
marks of those positive moral rules which are styled laioa 
or nUea by aa analogical extension of the term : and I exa- f 
mined the distinguishing marks of laws merely metaphori- 
cal, or laws merely figurative. v;, 

I shall finish, in the present lecture, the purpose men* 
tioned above, by explaiidng the marks or characters which / 
distingidsh positive laws, or laws strictly so called. And, .-V* 
in order to an explanation of the marks which distinguish^* 
positive laws,)! shall analyze^the expression ^os&^sis^f ^^ I \J^ 
-conelative e2q)res8ion suhje^iony and the insepambly con* . . . _;>^. • 
nected expression inJgS»Mfeitj?^(*^^^ 
ends or £nal causes for which govemm^ts ought t^i^s^"^ 
or with their difierent d^rees of fitness to attain or app]?6&i:3i 
those ends, I have no concern. I examine the notions of 
BavereigfU;/ and independent political society ^ In order that i 
may finish the purpose to which I have adverted above :iti 
order that I may distinguish completely the appropnate pro- 
vince -of Jurisprudence, from the regions which lie upon its 
confines, and by which it b encircled. It is necessary thai 
I should examine those notionis, in order that Ixnay finish 
that purpose. For the essential difference of a pqatiye law 
(or the difference that severs it fi^om a law which is not a 
positive law) may be stated thus.Byvery positive law, or \ ' f 
. every law simply and strictly so cal^ is set by a sovereign. \ 
v^ person, or a sovereign body of persons, to a member or i 
"* Imembers of the independent pohticaljgciety wherein thi|. ! 
' Ij^erson or body is sovereign or supre me7^ r (changing tkef 
expression) it is set by a monaro^, or sovereign number, to 
V |a pepon or persons in a state of\subjection to its auth<ir. 
Evejp[. though it sprung directly from another foimtain or 
source, i^is a positive law, or a law strictly so called, by the 
iiistitutionLjoLihat^present j^ of. 

: political superior. Or (borrowing the language of Uobbai^' 

V 

i.'.' 

170 ' :TH« PBOVINCB OP • 

^ the l^islator is he, not by whose authoriQr the Jaw was first 
maide, but by whose authority it continues to l)e a law." 

Having stated the topic or subject appropriate to my 
present discourse, I proceed to distinguish sovereignty fix)m 
other superiority or might, and to distinguish society poli- 
tical and independent from society of other descriptions. 

ISlbSf^ The superiority which is styled soverdgn^, 
jjjjj^ji^t- *^d th6 independent political society which sove- 
S^t lib^ ^^^^^ imphes, is distinguished fix)m other su- 
■wa*tjr. periority, and from otW^ society, by the following 

marks or characters.<^l. The btdk of the given ' 
society aife in a h€Unt of obedience or submission to a deter- 
minate and eammim superior : let that common superior be 
a .(^rtain individual person, or a Certain body or aggregate 
of individual persons. 2. That certain individual^ or that 

Vv llcertain body of individuals, is no/ in a habit of^oljedience 

^^to a determinate himian superior. Laws (improperly so 
called) which opinion sets or imposes, may permaneiitiy af- 
fect tiie conduct of that certain individual or bodjj To 
express or tacit commands of other determinate parties, 
that certain individual or body may yield occasioiud sub- 
kus^on. But there is no determinate person, or determi- 

,^ nate aggregate of persons, to whose commands, express or 
J(;5.i tacit, that certain individual or body renders habitual obe- 

^v- ^ence. ^ - \^ 

the notions bf sovereignty and independent political 
society may be expressed concisely thus. — ^If a determinate 
human superior, not in & habit of obedience to jl like^pe- / 
rior, receive habitual obedience from the hulxot a'given so-/ 
dety, that determinate superior is sovereign in that sodety,^N 
and the society (including the superior) is a society political 
independent. .. 

- -.1^ 

JURISFRUDBKCE DBTERlflKtiD. 171 

.To that detenninate superior, the other mem- luidstion / 
ben of the socie^ are mdject: or on that deter- ^!^^1!!^' ' 
minate superior, the other members of the society ^^"'^^ 
are dependent. The position of its other members towards 
that detenninate superior, is a state of subjectiarij or a state '. 
of dependence. The mutual relation which subsists between \ 
that superior and them, may be styled tiie relation of sove- 
reign <md eubjectj or the relation of sovereignty and svbjec- 
tion. 

Haice it follows, that it is only through an el- stnetiy 
lipsifl» or an abridged fonn of expression, that the S!«^ 
eodOy is styled independent The party truly in- Sb^llSd^ 
depei^ent (independent, that is to say, of a deter- ^USaiS^^, 
minate human superior), is not the society, but ^^p^^p^ 

l^the sovereign portion of the sodety : that certain. 
monber of the society, or that certain body of its 
members, to whose commands, expressed or intimated^ :^;.^;^^ 
generality or bulk of its members render habitual obedit^^t'; 
ence. Upon that certain person, or certain body of persons, 
the other members of the society are dependent: or to thai 
pertain person, or certain body of persons, the other mem- 
bers of the society are subject. By ^^ an independent poli- 
tical: society/' or ^^ an independent and sovereign nation,*' 
we. mean a political society consisting of a sovereign and 
subjects, as opposed to a political society which is merely 
subordinate : that is to say, which is merely a limb or mem- 
ber c^ another political society, and which therefore con* 
sists entirely of persons in a state of subjection. 

' / In order that a given society may form a so- inofderUun 
dety political and independent^ the two distin- cMtjnuij 
gui^ui:^^ marks which I have mentioned above SS^yS^i 
must unite. Vu?he generality of the given sodety dflBt!tb?t!^ 

^must be in inhabit of obedience to a determinate t!^^^^' 
and camnum superior: whilst that determinate per- ^ ^ 

^ ipn, or determinate body of persons, must not be 
Jiabitually obedient >: to a determinate person or 

aboremutt 

172 THE PKOVINCB OF 

bod^^ It is the union of that positive, with this n^^tive 
marK, which renders that certain superior sovereign or su- 
preme, and which renders that given society (including that 
certain superior) a society political and independent. 
w^ To shew that the union of those marks renders a given 

^^ society a society pohtical and independent, I call your atten- 
tion to the following positions and examplea 
^ 1. In order that a given society may form a socie^ po- 

litical, the generality or bulk of its members must be in a 
habit of obedience to a determinate and conunon superior. 

In case the generality of its members obey a determinate 
superior, but the obedience be rare or transient and nc^^ 
hflLitual or permanent, the relation of sovereignty and sub- 
jection is not created thereby between that certain superior 
and the members of that given society. In other words, 
that determinate superior and the members of that given 
society do not become thereby an independent political so- 

Idety. Whether that given society be political and inde- 
pendent or not, it is not an independent political society 
whereof that certain superior is the sovereign portion. 

For example : In 1815 the allied armies occupied France : 
and so long as the allied armies occupied France, the com- 
mands of the allied sovereigns were obeyed by the French 
government, and, through the French government, by the' 
French people generally. But since the commands and the 
obedience were comparatively rare and transient, they were 
not suflScient to constitute the relation of sovereignty and 
subjection between the allied sovereigns and the members 
of the invaded nation. In spite of those commands, and in 
spite of that obedience, the French government was sove- 
reign or independent. Or in spite of those commands, and 
in spite of that obedience, the French government and its 
^ subjects were an independent political society whereof the 

allied sovereigns were not the sovereign portion. 

Now if the French nation, before the obedience to those 
sovereigns, had been an independent society in a state of 

JUBI8PRDDKNCR DETBRMINBD. 17 3 

nfttore or anarchy, it would not have been changed by the 
obedience into a society political. And it would not have 
been changed by the obedience into a society political, be- 
cause the obedience was not habitual For, inasmuch as 
the obedience was not habitual, it was not changed by the 
obedience from a society political and independent, into a , i \ 
society political but subordinate.-XA given society, there- ) ^ 
fore, is not a society political, unless the generality of its Ij^ 
.members be in a (uibit of obedience to a determinate and |i 
common superior. ^ * 

Again: A feeble state holds its independence precariously, 
or at the will of the powerful states to whose aggressions it 
is obnoxious. And since it is obnoxious to their aggressions, 
it and the bulk of its subjects render obedience to commands 
which they occasionally express or intimate. Such, for in- 
stance, is the position of the Saxon government and its sub- 
jects in respect of the conspiring soverdgns who form the 
Holy Alliance. But since the commands and the obedience 
are comparatively few and rare, they are not sufficient to 
constitute the relation of sovereignty and subjection betweea 
the powerful states and the feeble state with its subjects. 
In spite of those commands, and in spite of that obedience, 
the feeble state is sovereign or independent Or in spite of 
those commands, and in spite of that obedience, the feeble 
state and its subjects are an independent political society 
whereof the powerful states are not the sovereign portion. 
Although the powerful states are permanently superior j and 
although the feeble state is permanently inferior j there is 
neither a habit of command on the part of the former, nor 
a habit of obedience on the part of the latter. Althou^ 
the latter is unable to defend and maintain its independence, 
the latter is independent of the former in fact or practice. 

From the example now adduced, as from the example 
adduced before, we may draw the following inference : that 
a given society is not a society political, unless the gene- 
rality of its members be in a habit of obedience to a deter* 

^^jT 1^74 THB PROVINCE OF 

minate ieuid oommoa superior. — By the obedience to the 
•powerful states, the feeble state and its subjects are not 
changed firom an independent, into a subordinate political 
society. And they are not changed by the obedience into 
a subordinate political society, because the obedience is not 
habitual CSonsequently, if th^ were a natural society (set- 
ting that obedience aside), they would not be changed by 
that obedience into a society political 
""*" 2. In order that a given sodety may form a sodety po- 
liti » habitual obedience must be rendered, by the gene- 
ra I U; of its members, to a determinate and comr 
n ior. In other words, habitual obedience must be 
rra : I by the generality or hulk of its members, U ume 
' - ^ « -d etermJTift tP pyiy^n ^ or determinate body i rf^ 

KOUn s habitual obedience be rendered by the bulk of its 

t t, and be rendered by the bulk of its members to 

e same superior, the given society is either in^ 

Xit liure, or is split into two or more independent 

' poutical societies. 

r j^FoT example: In case a given society be torn by intes- 
'^^^^ tine war, and in case the conflicting parties be nearly ba- 
lanced, the given society is in one of the two positions which 
I have now supposed. — ^As there is no common superior to 
which the bulk of its members render habitual obedience; 
it is not a political society single or undivided. — If the bulk 
of each of the parties be in a habit of obedience to its head»- 
the given society is broken into two or more societies, 
whidi, perhaps, may be styled independent political socie- 
ties.^If the bulk of each of the parties be not in that habit 
of obedience, the given society is simply or absolutely in a 
state of nature or anarch^ It is either resolved or broken 
into its individual elements, or into numerous societies of 
an extremely limited size : of a size so extremely limited, 
* that they could hardly be styled societies independent and 
poUdcal. For, as I shall show hereafter, a given indepen- ' 

JUBISPRCDBNCE DETERMINSD. 175 

dent society would hardly be styled poltticalj in case it fell 
short of a number which cannot be fixed with precision; but 
which may be called considerable, or not extremely minute. 

•-^3. In order that a given society may form a society poli- 

/ tical, the generaUty or bulk of its members must habitually 

V obey a sapeiiffLjdeterminate as well as common. 

. Qn this position I shall not insist hera For I have shtwi^ 

inifficiently in my fiflh lecture, that no indeterminate party 

pan conmiand expressly or tacitly, or can receive obedience 

.pc submiadon : that no indeterminate body is capable of cor- 
porate conduct, or is capable, as a body, of positive or n^a- 
^ deportment 
4. It appears from what has pl:eceded, that, in order that 

. it given society may form a society political, the bulk of i 
members must be in a habit of obedience to a certain' 
common superior. I But, in order that the given society 
fi>nn a socie^ political and independent, that certain su] 
nor must not be habitually obedient to a determinate human 
superior. 

The given society may form a society poUtical and inde- 
pendent, although that certain superior be habitually afiected 
by laws which 4j ginion sets or imposes. The given society 
may form a society political and independent, although that 

"Certain superior render occasional submission to commands 
of determinate parties. But the society is not independent, 
although it may be pohtical, in case that certain superior 
ha^i^mJJj^Jj^y the commands of a certain person or body.# 
Let us suppose, for example, that a viceroy obeys habitu- 
ally the author of his del^ated powers. And, to render the' 
example complete, let us suppose that the viceroy receives 
habitual obedience from the generality or bulk of the per- 
sons who inhabit his province. — ^Now though he conunands 
habitually within the limits of his province, and receives 
habitual obedience from the generahty or bulk of its inha- 
bitants, the viceroy is not sovereign within the Umits of 
Ids province, nor are he and its inhabitants an independent 

; i?- 176 THE PROVIKCB OP 

>»it 

* political society. The viceroy, and (through the viceroy) 
the generality or bulk of its inhabitants, are habitually obe- 
dient or submissive to the sovereign of a larger society. He 
and the inhabitants of his province are therefore in a state 
of subjection to the sovereign of that larger society. He 
and the inhabitants of his province are a society politica* 
but subordinate, or form a political society which is merefy 
a limb of another. • I 

?C Aiwrfrt^ A natural society, a society in a s tate of nature;' 
bl*utanL or a society independent but natural, is 65mpo6ed 
of persons who are connected bymutual intercourse, but 
are not members, sovereign or sutyecCTof any society poli- 
\ ticJEd. None of the persons who compose it lives in the 
'^jpodtive state which is styled a state-^iLauy ection : or all 
;*Mhe persons who compose it live in the n^ative state which 
^ Lib styled a state of independence. i 

t- taodctr Considered as entire communities, and consK 

. ^^ SeStB^ dered in respect of one another, independent po^ 
^% g"*^;^^ htical societies live, it is commonly said, in a sta* 
'v^>: poiiueti of uatura And considered as entire communi- 

'ri 

t»rf^- 

ties, and as connected by mutual intercourse, iqir 
dependent political societies form, it is commonly said, 4 
natural society. These expressions, however, are not per- 
fectly apposite. Since all the members of each of the re^ 
lated societies are members of a society political, none of f^^ 
related societies is strictly in a state of natiu^ : nor can -Ui'o 
laiger society formed by their mutual intercourse be style<l 
strictly a natural society. Speaking strictly, the several mem- 
bers of the several related societies are placed in the fol- 
lowing positions. The sovereign and subject members of 
each of the related societies form a society political : but tb 
sovereign portion of each of the related societies lives in the 
[ n^ative condition which is styled a state of independence. 
Society formed by the intercourse of independent poli- 
tical societies, is the province of intematiohal law, or of 
tlie law obtaining between nations. For (adopting a current 

JURISFBUDRKOE DBTBBMIXBD. 

expreaaioii) international la w, or the law obtaining between 
nations, is conversant about the conduct of independent po^ . . 
litical societies considered as entire communities: circa ne- 
gaiia et causaa gentium integrarum. Speaking with greater 
precision, international law, or the law obtaining between 
nations, regards the conduct of sovereigns considered as re- v" 
1a|i^ to one another. 
cLi^d hence it inevitably follows, that the law obtaining | a 

:^J|iefeween<iiations is not^^gositive lawJ|^or every positive law ' 
|»lB^ bya given sovereign to a person or persons in a state v( 
of mibjection to its authQp«^^.As I have already intimated,n 
the law obtaining between naticnis is law (improperly so 

* called) set by general opinionT 'the duties whidi it imposes 
are enforc^ by moral sanctions : by fear on the purt of i V 
nations, or by fear on the part of soverdgns, of provoking j ^ | 
general hostility, and incurring its probable evils, in case A ^ ^ 
they shall violate maxims generally received and respectef^l ^fi^: 

.^,>* A society political but subordinate is mierely a ^^j^.-,^ 

Imb or member of a society poUtical and inde- taboidiiMiit. ] 

pendent .^Itiie persons who compose it, including the 

..person or body which is iteT immediate chief, live in a state 

'*^f subjection to one and the same sovereign. 

:7.: Besides sodeti^ political and independent, so- Atodetjnot 

'^eties independent but natural, society formed by ^SS**** 
the intercourse of independent political societies, £fV^"ISI*" 
and societies political but subordinate, there are ^^SSSS? 
societiei which will not quadrate with any of those ^•^ 
descriptions. Though, like a society poUtical but subordi- 
nate, it forms a limb or member of a society political and 
independent, a society of the class in question is not a po- 
litical society. Although it consists of members living im 
a state of subjection, it consists of subjects considered as 
* private persons. — ^A society consisting of parmts and chil- 
dren, living in a state of subjection, and considered in those 
characters, may serve as an example. 

-" ' To distinguish, societies political but subordinate from 

VOL. I. N 

I 

/}': 

V 

^:-- 

178 TBI FBOVINCS OF 

^odedes not political but consisting of subject members^ i^ 
to distingniflh the ri^ts and duties of subordinate political 
superiors from the rights and duties of subjects considered 
as private persons. And before I can draw that distinction^ 
I must aniedlyze many expressions of laige and intricate^ 
meaning which belong to the detail of jurisprudence. Bui 
an explanation of that distinction is not required by my 
present purpose. To the accomplishment of my prei^t pur-: 
pose, it is merely incumbent upon me to determine ll:^ iijjH^: 
tion of sovereignty, with the inseparably connected notioqi/ 
of independent pditical society. For every podtive law, or 
eveiy kw simply and strictly so called, is set direqtiy or 
circuitously by a m<Hiarch or sovereign number to a person 
or pen^QS in a state of subjection to its author. 
TiMd^tni. ^^ definition of the abstract term vndependjaA 
tkoorthe poUiical society (including the definition of the i 
^^^ correlative term sovereignty) cannot be rendered ^ 
J (mtMr- in expressions of perfecdy precise import and k.V 
sitkNK^the therefore a &Uible test of specific or particular' 
tan» Io»- cases. The least imperfect definition which the 
^^be r^ abstract term will take, would hardly enable us to 
***™* "" *5 fix the class, of ev^iy possible society. It wouldL 

SJ^i^^rrtT hardly enable us ;to determine of every tndepeni 
fS^A wSS« ^^^^^ society, whether it were political or nc Uurii li,' 
Jpj^'^52^. It would hardly enable us to determine of eveiy 
krewi, political sodc^, whether it were independent' or 
€ubordi7Uite. 

In order that a given society may form a society political' 
I and independent, the positive and negative marks which J 
i have mentioned above must unite. The generality or huJk 
\ of its member must be in a habit of obedience td a certain 
, and commcn superior : whilst that certain person, or certain 
1 body of persons, must not be habitually obedient to a cer- 
l tain person or body. ? 

But, in order that the bulk of its members may render 
obedience to a common superior, Iww many of its members. 

JUSISPSUDENCB DRTBfRMlNED. 179 

or what proportion of its members, must render obedktteb t6 
one and the same eiuperior ? And, assuming that the Inilk of 
its members render obedience to a coounon superior, how 
often must they render it, and how long must thej tender 
it, in order that that obedience may be habttual T — ^Now\ 
since these questions cannot be answered precisely, the po- 1 
m&ve mark of sovereignty and independent political society 
is a figJlible test of specific or particular cases. It would not 
^blsble us to determine of every independent society whethe)r 
h'^frexe poHtieal or natural 

la the <Si»e8 of independent society which lie, as it were, 
at the extremes, we should apply that positive test witiiout 
a moment's difficultjr, and shoidd fix the class of the sbdeiy 

without a moment's hesitation In some of those cases, so 

huge a proportion of the members obey the same su(^eiier,^ 
lUid the obedience of that proportion is so firequent anB^ 
coirtimied, that, without a moment's difficulty and without^; 
-^moment's hesitation, we should pronounce the sdciety^^ 
p^Utie al : that, without a moment's difficulty and without 
a moment's hesitation, we should say* the generality of its 
members were in a habit of obedience or submission to a* 
ifertain and common superior. Such, for example, is the or^ 
dinaiy state of England, and of every independent society 
Ji l A m ew h at advanced in civilization. — ^In other of those cases, 
dbedience to the same superior is rendered by so^few of the 
niembers, or general obedience to the same is so unfi*equent 
and broken, that, without a moment's difficult and with- 
dftt a moment's hesitation, we should pronounce the society 
tiatttral: that, without a moment's difficulty and without 
^Wxmmit's hesitation, we should say the gmeraUty of its 
meinbcU were not in a habit of obedience to a certain and 
eomnwn superior. Such, for example, is the state of the in-' 
dependent and savage societies which subsist by hunting or 
fishing in the woods or on the coasts of New Holland 
^^But in the cases of independent society whicH lie between 
' the extremes, we diodd hardly find it possible to fix with 

H 3 

180 THE FROVINCE OF 

absolute certainty the class of the given community. W<- 
should hardly find it possible to determine with absoluu* 
certainty, whether the generality of its members did or diti 
not obey one and the same superior. Or we should hardl v 
find it possible to determine with absolute certainty, who 
ther the general obedience to one and the same superior wic 
or was not habitual. For example : During the height of tht 
conflict between Charles the first and the Parliament^ tj^ 
English nation was broken into two distinct societies :/^ch 
of which societies may perhaps be styled political, andmay" ., 
certainly be styled independent After the conflict had sub- ^, 
sided, those distinct sodeties were in their turn dissolved : ^^ 
and the nation was reunited, under the conunon govern-, 
ment of the Parliament, into one independent and political 
community. But at what juncture precisely, after the conr 
flict had subsided, was a conmion government completely 
reestablished ? Or at what juncture predsely, after tlie codt. 
flict had subsided, were those distinct societies completely 
dissolved, and the nation completely reunited into one poh<« 
tical community? When had so many of the nation rec- 
dered obedience to the Parliament, and when had the gene- 
ral obedience become so frequent and lasting, that the tndk 
of the nation were habitaaUy obedient to the body which 
afiected sovereignty ? And after the conflict had subsided, 
and until that juncture had arrived, what was the class cf 
the society which was formed by the English people? — 
These are questions which it were impossible to answer with 
certainty, although the fects of the case were precisely known. 
The positive mark of sovereignty and independent poli- 
tical society is therefore a fallible test It would not enable 
I us to determine of every independent society, whether ii 
were political or natural 
\ The negative mark of sovereignty and independent poli- 
''. tical societyns also an uncertain measure. It would not 
i enable us to determine of every political society, whether it 
\ were independent or subordinate. — ^Given a determinate and 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. I8l 

common superior, and also that the bulk of the society 
habitually obey that superior, is that common superior free 
from a habit of obedience to a determinate person or body ? 
Is that common superior sovereign and indqiendent, or is 
that common superior a superior in a state of subjection ? 

In numerous cases of political society, it were impossible 
to answer this question with absolute certainty. For exam- 
ple : Although the Holy Alliance dictates to the Saxon go- 
viemment, the commands which it gives, and the submission 
idiich it receives, are comparatively few and rare. Conse- 
quently, the Saxon government is sovereign or suprepie, and 
the Saxon government and its subjects are an independent 
political society, notwithstanding its submission to the Holy 
Alliance. But, in case the commands and submission were 
somewhat more numerous and frequent, we might find it 
impossible to determine certainly the class of the Saxon 
community. We might find it impossible to determine cer*^ 
-tainly where the sovereignty resided : whether the Saxon 
government were a government supreme and independent ; 
or were in a habit of obedience, and therefore in a state of 
subjection, to the allied or conspiring monarchs. 

The definition or general notion of independent political 
society, is therefore vague or uncertain. Applying it to 
specific or particular cases, we should often encounter the 
difficulties which I have laboured to explain. 

The difficulties which I have laboured to explain, often 
embarrass the application of those positive moral rules which 
are styled i nternational law . 

For example : Wnen did the revolted colony, which is 
now the Mexican nation, ascend from the condition of an 
insurgent province to that of an independent community? 
When did the body of colonists, who affected sovereignty in 
Mexico, change the character of rebel leaders for tliat of a 
supreme government? Or (adopting the current language 
about governments dejure and de facto) when did the body 
oi colonists,' who afiected sovereignty in Mexico, become 

^o2 THB PBOVIKCB OF 

aoireragn in fadT — ^And (applying intematioiuil law to 
the specific or particular case) when did international law 
authorize neutral nations to admit the independence of 
Mexico with the sovereignty of the Mexican government? 

Now the questions suggested above are equivalent to this : 
— ^When had the inhabitants of Mexico ob^ed that body so 
generally, and when had that general obedience become so 
frequent and lasting, that the btUk of the inhabitants of 
Mexico were habitually disobedient to Spain, and probably 
would not resume their discarded habit of submission ? - • : 
Or the questions suggested above are equivalent to this : 
— ^When had the inhabitants of Mexico obeyed that body so 
generally, and when had that general obedience become so 
frequent and lasting, that the inhabitants of Mexico were in- 
dependent of Spain in practice, and were likely to remain 
pginanently in that state of practical independence? 
.(At that juncture exactly (let it have arrived when it noAy), 
^utral nations were authorized, by the morahty which oV 
tains between nations, to admit the independence of Mexico 
with the sovereignty of the Mexican government A But, by 
reason of the perplexing difficulties which I have laboured 
to explain, it was impossible for neutral nations to hit that 
jimcture with precision, and to hold the balance of justice 

I between Spain and her revolted colony with a perfectly even 

> hand. 

• inotderthat I havc tacitly supposed, during the preceding 

• dent •odety analysis, that every independent society forming 
S2rty™iiti- a society political possesses the essential property 
SotfaiTi^ which I will now describe. 

A wWcTSmnot In Order that; an independent socicty may foHU 

vfr ^SJdltoLlb^ a society political, it must not fall short of a 

l ( ^^M^-^ number which cannot be fixed with predsion, but 

[v TOt^^^lj which may be called considerable, or not extremely 

V > , minuu. minute. A given independent society, whose num- 

* ber may be called inconsiderable, is commonly esteemed a 

natural^ and not a political society, although the generality 

JURISFRUDENCB DBTERlflKED. 183 

of its members be habitually obedient or 6ubniia|jp7e tO'« 
certain and common superior. '^ 

Let us suppose, for example, that a single family of savages 
lives in absolute estrangement from every other community^ 
And let us suppose that the father, the chief of this insu^ 
lated fiunily, recdves habitual obedience from the mother 
and cfaildr^. — ^Now, eince it is not a limb of another and 
larger community, the society formed by the parents and 
children is clearly an independent society. And, nnce the 
rest of its members habitually obey its chief, this indepen- 
dent society would form a society political, in case the num- 
ber of its members were not extteakdj minute. But, since 
the number of its members is extremely minute, it would (I 
believe) be esteemed a society in a state of nature : that k 
to aay, a society consisting of persons not in a state of sub- 
jection. Without an application of the tenns which would - 
. Bomevribat sniack of the ridiculous, we could hardfy style the 
. society a society politioal and independent, the imperativie 
fiither and chi^ a monarch ox savereigrij or the obediei|t 
mother and children subjects. — ^^ La puissance politique (says | 
Montesquieu) comprend n^eessairement I'union de plusieun ' 
^imilles.'' 

/ Again: let us suppose a society which may be styled 
^independent, or which b not^ limb of another and larger 
community. Let us suppose that the number of its mem- 
bers is not extremely minute. And let us suppose it in die 
savage condition, or in the extremely barbarous conditioa 
which dosi^ly approaches the savage. 

Liasmuch as the given society Hves in the savage ocfoA- 
*tion, or in the extremely barbfiux)us condition which closely 
•approaches the savage, the generality or bulk of its mem- 
bers is not in a habit of obedience to one and the sase 
superior. For the purpose of attacking an external enemy, 
or for the purpose of repelling an attack made by an ex- 
ternal enemy, the generaUty or bulk of its members, wIm 
are capable of bearing arms, submits to one leader, or to 

184 

;THB PROVIKOB OF 

SHie body of leadera. Bat so soon as that eadgency passes, 
this transi^it submissioii ceases ; and the society reverts to 
the state which may be deemed its ordinary state. The 
bulk of each of the femiiUes which compose the given so- 
dety, renders habitual obedience to its own peculiar chief: 
but those domestic sodetid^ are themselves independent so- 
deties, or are not united or compacted into one political 
iBodety by general and habitual obedience to a certain and 
<x>mmon superior. And, as the bulk of the given sodety is 
not in a habit of obedience to one and the same superior, 
th^:^ is no law (or simply strictly so styled) which can be 
called the law of that giv^i sodety or community. The so- 
called laws which are common to the bulk of ^e conmiu- 
nity, are purely and properly customary laws : that is to 
say, laws which are set or imposed by the general opinion of 
• -. ^-eonununityybut which are not enforced by l^al or poli- 

. .tical sanctions. — ^The state whidi I have briefly delineated, S 

is the ordinary state of the savage and independent sodeties I 

which live by hunting or fishing in the woods or on the coasts i^ 

of New Holland. It is also the ordinary state of the savage ^ 

and independent societies which range in the forests or plains 
^^^^oftiie North American continent. It was also the ordinary 
statb of many of the G^man nations whose manners are 
described by Tacitus. . ' ' , 

ijfow, since the bulk of its members is not in a habit of 
obedience to one and the same superior, the given indepen- 

^/ dent sodety would (I beheve) be esteemed a society in a 
state of nature : that is to say, a society consisting of per- 
Boua not in a state of subjection. But such it could not 
be esteemed, unless the term political were restricted to in- 
dependent sodeties whose numbers are not inconsiderable. 
Supposing that the term political applied to independent so- 
cieties whose nimibers are extremely minute, each of the in- 
dependent £eunilies which constitute the given society would 
form of itself a political community : for the bulk of each of 
those families renders habitual obedience to ite own peculiar 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 185 

diiefL And, seeing that each of those families would form of 
itself an independent political community, the given indepen- 
dent society could hardly be styled with strictness a natural 
society. Speaking strictly, that given society would form a 
congeri es of independent political communities. Or, seeing ^ 
thata few of its members might not be members also of 
those independent £Eunilies, it would form a congeries of in- 
dependent pohtical communities mingled with a few indivi- 
duals living in a state of nature. — ^Unless the term political 
were restricted to independent societies whose numbers are 
not inconfflderable, few of the many societies which are com- 
monly esteemed natural could be styled natural societies with 
perfect precision and propriety. 

For the treasons which I have now produced, and for rea- 
sons which I pass in .silence, we must, I beheve, arrive at . 
the following conclusion. — A given independent society, p 
whose number may be called inconsiderable, is commonly 1 ^ 
^esteemed a natural, and not a political society, although the I 
:generality of its members be habitually obedient or submis- | 
sive to a certain and common superior. 

And arriving at that conclusion, we must proceed to this 
further conclusion. — ^In order that an independent society 
may form a society political, it must not £Edl short of a num- 
ber which may be called considerable. 

The lowest possible number which will satisfy that vague 
condition camiot be fixed precisely. But, lookii^ at many of 
the conmiunities which commonly are considered and treated 
as independent political societies, we must infer that an in- 
dependent society may form a society pohtical, although the i 
number of its members exceed not a few thousands, or ex- j 
ceed not a few hundreds. The ancient Grlson Confederacy 
(like the ancient Svnss confederacy with which the Grison 
was connected) was rather an alUance or union of indepen- 
dent political societies, than one ind^ndent community 
imder a common sovereign. Now the number of the largest 
. of the societies which were independent members of the 

186 THR PROVnCGB OF 

andent Orison Confederacy hardly exceeded a few thousands. 
And the number of the smallest of those numerous confe- 
derated nations hardly exceeded a few hundreds. 

The definition of the terms sovereignty and independent 
political society^ is, therefore, embarrassed by the difficulty 
following, as well as by the difficulties which I have «tiMd 
in a foregoing department of my discourse. — ^In ordw t^ 
an independent society may form a sode^ political, it must 
not fsH short of a number which may be called considemUe. 
And the lowest possible number whidi will satisfy that yague 
condition cannot be fixed precisely. 

But here I must briefly remark, that, though the essen- 
tial property which I have now described is an essential or 
necessary property of independent political sodety, it is not 
an essential prop^iy of eiAordinate political sodety. If the 
^independent society, of which it is a limb or member, be a 
political and not a natural sodety, a subordinate spdetymay 
form a sodety political, although the number of its members 
might be caUed extremely minute. For example : A sodety 
incorporated by the state for political or public purposes is 
a society or body, politic : and it continues to bear the cha- 
racter of a sodety or body politic, although its number be 
reduced, by deaths or other causes, to that of a small family 
or small domestic commimity. 

ceiuin of Having tried to determine the notion of sove- 

ti<m« of the reignty, with the implied or correlative notion of 
rtiffn^^d independent political society, I will produce and 
iSJreSS? briefly examine a few of the (fefinitions of those 
Srf^U^T notions whichHhave been given by writers of ce- 
KJ?R;L"^ lebrity. 

wri^'^Jfoe- Distinguishing political from natural sodety, 
lebrity. j^fr^ Bentham, in his Fragment on Government, 
thus defines the former, "When a number of persons 
(whom we may style subjects) are supposed to be in the 
habit of paying obedience to a person, or 'an assemblage of 
persons, of a known and certain description (whom we may 

/ 
I 

\ 

JUBISPBUDENCE DETERMINED. 187 

^aSt^^MTVu^ or governors) J such persons altogether (subjects 
liiid governors) are said to be in a state of political sode^Z* 
— Considered as a definition of independent politick so- i 

dety, this definition is inadequate or defective. In order { 

that a given society may form a society political and inde- 
pendent, the superior habitually obeyed by the bulk or ge- 
nerality of its members must not be habitually obedient to |^y/ 
.a oertidn individual or body : which n^ative character or 
essential of independent poUtical society Mr. Bentham has 
fngotten to notice. And, since the definition in question 
18 an inadequate or defective definition of independent poli- 
tical society, it is also an inadequate or defective definition 
of political society in general. Before we can define poU- 
tical sodety, or can distinguish poUtical society from so- 
ciety not poUtical, we must determine the nature of those 
societies whidi are at once poUtical and independent, ^or 
a poUtical society which is not independent is a member 
or constituent parcel of a poUtical society which is. Or ' 
(dbianging the expression) the powers or rights of subordi-. 
nate poUtical superiors are merely emanations of sovereignty. 
They are merely partides of sovereignty conmiitted by so- 
vereigns to subjects. 

According to the definition of independent poUtical so* 
iiety which is stated or supposed by Hobbes in his excel- 
lent treatises on government, a sodety is not a sodety poli- 
tical and independent, unless it can maintain its indepen- 
dence, against attacks^ from without, by its own intrinsic or 
unaided strength. Bi\t if power to maintain its indepenP- 
dence by its own intrinsic strength be a character or essen- 
tial property of an independent poUtical sodety, the name 
wiU scarcdy apply to any existing sodety, or to any of the 
past sodeties which occur in the history of mankind. The t 
weaker of such actual sodeties as are deemed poUtical and I 
independent, owe their precarious independence to positi^ * 
international moraUty, and to the mutual fears or jealousies 
. of stronger communities. The most powerful of such ^^^^moL 

166 THEFROVmCK OF 

societies as are deemed political and independent, could 
haidfy maintain its independence, by its own intrinsic 
stieqgth, against an extensive conspiracy of other indepen- 
dent nations. — ^Any political society is (I conceive) indepen- 
dent, if it be not dependent in fact or practice : if the party 
habitually obeyed by the bulk or generaUty of its members 
be not in a habit of obedience to a determinate individual 
or body. 

In his great treatise on international law, Grotius defines 
sovereignty in the following manner. ^' Summa potestas 
eivUis ilia didtur, cujus actus alterius juri non subsunt, ita 
tit alterius voluntatis human® arbitrio irriti posant reddi. 
Alterius cum dico, ipsum ezdudo, qui summa potestate 
ulitnr; cui voluntatem mutare licet** Which definition is 
th rendered by his translator and commentator Barbey- 
*^La puissance sauveraine est celle dont les actes sont 
idans de tout autre pouvoir sup^rieur, en sorte qulb 
p 7ent 6tre annullez par aucune autre volenti humaine. 
Je d par aucune auJKfi voUmie humaine ; car il &ut ezcep- 
ter id le souverain luTSifime, & qui il est libre de changer de 
volenti." — ^Now in order that an individual or body may 
be sovereign in a given sodety, two essentials must unite. 
The generality of the given sodety must render habitual 
obedience tc^ that certain individual or body : whilst that 
individual or body must not be habitually obedient to. a 
determinate human superior. In order to an adequate con- 
ception of the nature of international morality, as in order 
to an adequate conception of the nature of positive law, the 
former as well as the latter of those two essentials of sove^ 
rdgnty must be noted or taken into account. But, this 
notwithstanding, the former and positive essential of sove- 
reign or supreme power is not inserted by Grotius in that 
y his formal definition. And the latter and negative essential 
is stated inaccurately. Soverdgn power (according to Gro- 
tius) is perfectly or completely independent of other human 
power ; insomuch that its acts cannot be annulled by any 

1 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERIONED. 189 

human will other than its own. But if perfect or complete 
independence be of the essence of sovereign power, there is 
not in tiict the human power to which the epithet sovereign 
will apply with propriety. Every government, let it be never 
so powerful, renders occasional obedience to commands of 
other governments. Every government defers frequently 
to those opinions and sentiments which are styled interna- 
tional law. And every government defers habitually to the 
.pinions and sentiments of its own subjects. If it be not 
in a habit of obedience to the commands of a determinate 
party, a government has all the independence which a go- 
vernment can possibly enjoy, (^ 'j 

According to Van Martens of Gottingen (a recent and ce- 
lebrated writer on positive intomational law), ^ a sovereign ^ 
government is a government which cughi not to receive com^: \ 
mands irom any external or foreign government." — Of ihe; . 
' conclusive and obvious objections to this definition of sove-; 
leignty the following are only a few. 1. If the definitioxi 
in question will apply to sovereign governments, it will also 
i^ply to subordinate. If a sovereign ought to be free from 
the commands of foreign governments, so ought every go- 
vernment which is merely the creature of a sovereign, and 
which holds its powers or rights as a mere trustee for its 
author. 2. Whether a given government be or be not su- o 
preme, is rather a question of fact than a question of inter- ' 
national law. A government reduced to subjection is actually 
a subordinate government, although the state of subjection 
wherein it is actually held be repugnant to the positive mo- ' 
lality which obtains between nations or sovereigns. Though, 
according to that moraUty, it o\ighJt to be sovereign or inde- 
pendent, it is subordinate or dependent in practice. 3. It 
cannot be affirmed absolutely of a sovereign or independent 
government, that it ought not to receive commands from fo- 
reign or external governments. The intermeddling of in- 
dependent governments with other independent governments . 
is often repugnant to the morality which actually obtains be- 

190 

THE PBOVINCB OF 

tweeii nataons. But axxxirding to that morftli^ which actu- 
ally obtains between nations (and to that international mo- 
rality which general utility commends), no independent go- 
Teratnent ought to be freed completely from the supervision 
and control of its fellows. 4. In this definition by Yoa Mar- 
teoB (br in that which is given by Grotius) there is not the 
shadow of an allusion to the positive character of soverdgntyi 
The definition points at the relations which are borne by! 
sovereigns to sovereigns ; but it omits the relations, not less; 
essential, which are borne by sovereigns to their own sub-^ 
jacts. 

pofrtlcm of I 
praMotlM- 

IwiCh 
T1b«fonDAof 

I have now endeavoured to determine the ge- 
neral notion of sovereignty, including the general 
notion of independent political society. - But in 
order that I may further elucidate the nature or 
^^^^ egaence of sovereignty, and of the independoif V 
^^Trhnmita political society which sovereignty implies, I will 
p^JJ^^sT call the attention of my hearers to a few concise 
go^^^tf remarks upon the following subjects or topics. — 
Sf ^iit^ 1- The various shapes which sovereignty may as- 
^^^* sume, or the various possible forms of supremp 
government. 2. The real and imaginary limits which bound 
the power of sovereigns, and by which the power of sove-! 
reigns is supposed to be boimded. 3. The origin of govern- 
ment, with the origin of political society : or the causes of 
the habitual obedience which is rendered by the bulk of sub- 
jects, and from which the power of sovereigns to compel and 
restrain the refractory is entirely or mainly derived. 

The forms of 
supreme go- 
vernment. 

An independent political society is divisible into 
two portions : namely, the portion of its members 
which is sovereign or supreme, and the portion of its mem- 
bers which is merely subject. The sovereignty can. hardly 

/ 

\ 

JUHISFEUDENCB DRERKINED. Jr91 

reside ia aU the members of a sodety : for it can hardly ^^ 
happen that 8ome of those members shall not be naturally v r^ ^ 
incompetent to exercise sovereign powers. In most actual 
societies, the sovereign powers are engrossed by a angle 
memba: of the whole, or are shared exclusively by a very 
few of its members : and even in the actual societies whose / J 
governments are esteemed popular, the sovereign number 
is a slender portion of the entire poUtical community. An 
independent poHtical society governed by itself, or governs! 
by a sovereign body consisting of the whole co mm u ni ty, is 
jiot impossible : but the existence of such sodeties is so ex- 
tremely improbable, that, with this passing notice, I throw 
them out of my account.^ 

Every society political and indq[>endent is there- zrary n. 
fore divisible into two portions : namely, the por«i ^S mStfa ; 
tion of its members which b sovereign or supreme, (prapoiy •» ' ' 
and the portion of its members which is merely ^to^** ^ 
subject In case that sovereign portion consist ^?^!1£^ 
of a single member, the supreme government is ^^^L^Ib.' V 
properly a monarchy ^ or the sovereign is properly ttb^«lJl!nii 
a monarch. In case that sovereign portion consist J^^^^JJl 
^ of a number of members, the supreme govern- 
ment may be styled an aristocracy (in the generic 

mcntofa 

\ ' * If eyeiy member of an independent political aocie^ were adult and of 
aoimd mind, eveiy member would be natundlj competent to exerciae boto- 

. leign powen : and if we suppoee a society ao constituted, we may also sup- 
poaeA aodety which atrictlj is goxsafi^l Jbj^itself; or in which the supreme 
government is strictly a goyeroment of all. But in ereiy actual sodety, 

' many of ihemembers are naturally incompetent to exercisesorereign powers: 
and eren in an actual society whose goyenmient is the most popular, the 
members natoxally incompetent to exercise aovereign powers are not the 
only membflrs excluded from the soyereign body. If we add to the members 
ex c luded by reason of natural incompetency, the members (women, for exam- 
ple,) excluded without that necessity, we shall find tibat a great majority 
even of such a aodetj is merely in a state of sul^ectioo. Consequently, 
though a goyemment of all is not impossible, eyeiy actual sode^ is go- 
rerned by enr^-its members, or byXnumber of its members which lies 
between one and alt * 

m/ 

TOE PROVINCE OF 

s|^■», 

nJ 

bipflT>y' g of the expression).— And here I may briefly re- 
TORI k that a monarchy or government of one, and an aris- 
locir^ry, or government of a number, are essentially and 
briwidlv distinguished by the following important difierence. 
In th« «»se of a monarchy or government of one, the eove- 
roifri I ortion of the community is simply or purely sove- 
nnpi. In the case of an aristocracy or government of a 
uinpi < ", that sovereign portion is sovereign as viewed fit>m 
oil: v\ ; ect, but is also subject as viewed from another. la, 
f}h (Vi'^e of an aristocracy or government of a number, the' 
?^>vo!< i^ niunber is an aggr^ate of individuals, and, com- 
lAOhiy, of smaller aggregates composedly those individuals." 
Now, considered collectively, or considered in its corporate 
chiitactier, that sovereign number is sovereign and indepen- 
dent. OBut, considered severally, the individuals and smaller 
f^'^i^^regites composing that sovereign number are subject to 
:*^-:Uic y^urireme body of which they are coniponent part^j^ ! 
Iii overy society, therefore, which may be styled political; 
aud i Independent, one of the individual members engroeees 
tho s( N ereign powers, or the sovereign powers are shared by 
,1 rruvtfier of the individual members less than the number of 
tJK^ iij'iividuals composing the entire commimity. Changing 
ihv i>li»'ase, every supreme government is a monarchy (pn 
porly ^o called), or an aristocracy (in the generic me 
v'f f^f' 3xpression).* 

* Ji. vTGiy monarchy, the moaarch renders habitual deference to opi 
iiinrui and sentiments held and folt by his subjects. But in almost evei^ 
Tiiriii%7x:lj, he defers especially to the opinions and sentiments, or he oon*- 
bult^ («j»ecial]y the interests and prejudices, of some especially influential 
. tjiungh louTow portion of the community. If the monarchy be militaJ7i 
or if the main instrument of rule be the sword, this influential portion i^ 
ihf )r il <iury class generally, or a select body of the soldiery. If the maLi 
i;!-^!.!.!:. Dt of rule be not the sword, this influential portion commonl\ 
rci.sisjv if nobles, or of nobles, priests, and lawyers. For example : In the 
'i* )ii:i.; ^N'orld, under the sovereignty of the princes or emperors, this in- 
f'r,'>nti;ii portion was formed by the standing armies, and!, more particu- 
I.I.; >; . ^ V the Praetorian guard : as, in the Turkish empire, it consists, or 
c( :):...■ V of the corps of Janizariea. In France, after the kings had be- 

JUBI8PBUDBNCB DETEIEQaNED. 19^ 

Governments which may be styled aristocrades of«whdis- 

(in the generic meaning of the expression) are not ^f^£'!Slri^ 

unfrequently distinguished into the three follow- 1^^^ 

ing forms : namely, oligarchies^ aristo(3:acie8 (in the S^JJSTST 

q)ecific meaning of the name), and den\ocracie8. 512^^ 
If the proportion of the sovereign number to 

number of 

I- 

come aoTereign, and before the great reyolutioiiy this influendal portion was 
formed bj the nobility of the sword, the secular and regular deigy, and the 
members of the parliaments or higher conrts of justice. 

Hence it baa been concluded, that there are no monarchies properly so 
called : that e veiy supreme goremmcxit is a goyemment of a number : that 
in ereiy community which seems to be goTcmed by one, the soYcrdgnty 
veally remdes in the seeming monarch or aatocrator, with that ej^>edally 
influential though narrow portion of the conununity to whose opinions and 
fleotiments he especially defers. This, though plausible, is an Cirror. If 
be habitually obeyed the eommands of a determinate portion of the commu- 
nity, the aovereignty would reside in the miscalled monarch, with that de- 
tenninate body of his miscalled subjects : or the sover^gn^ would reside 
ezclusiTely in that determinate body, whilst he would be merdy a minister 
of die supreme goremment. For example: In case the corps of Janizaries 
' MCing as an oiganised body, habitually addressed commands to the Turkish 
saltan, the Turidsh sultan, if he habitually obeyed those commands, would 
not be aoToreign in the Turkish empire. The sovereignty would reude in 
the corps of Janizaries, with the miscalled sultan or monarch : or the sove- 
reignty would reeide ezduavely in the corps of Janizaries, whilst he would 
be merely their vizier or prime minister. But habitual deference to opinu>ns 
of the conmiunity, or habitual and especial deference to opinions of a por- 
tion of the community, consists with that independence which is one of the 
esscntisls of sovereign^. If it did not, none of the governments deemed 
wapreme would be truly sovereign : for habitual deference to opinions of the 
communis, or habitual and eqiecial deference to opinions of a portion of 
the communis, is rendered by every aristocracy, or by every government 
of a number, as well as by every monarch. Nay, supreme government would 
be impossible : for if the sovereignty resided in the portion of the commu- 
nity to whose opinions and sentiments the sovereign especially defeired, it 
would reside in a body uncertain (that is to say, nowhwe), or in a certain 
body not in a habit of command. A confusion d laws properly so called 
with laws improper imposed by opinion, is the source of the error in ques- 
tion. The habitual independence which is one of the essentials of sove- 
reignty, is merely habitual independence of laws imperative and proper. 
By laws which opinion imposes, every member of eveiy society is habitu- 
ally determined. 

VOL. I. 

194 

•tHE FBOTINCB OF 

?^ 

^J 

tih^wvwvigB the number of the entire community be deemed 

bMT to tLi extremely small, tlie supreme government is styled 

tSbTcommtt. Van oUgarchy. K the proportion be deemed small, 

^' but not extremely smaU, the supreme govemmeat 

V is styled an aristocracy (in the specific meaning of the name). 
If the proportion be deemed large, the supreme government 

J is styled popular^ or is styled a democracy. But these three 
forms of aristocraqr (in Uie generic meaning of the expres- 
sion) can hardly be disUnguished with precision, or even 
with a distant approach to it A government which rae 
man shall A&esm an oligarchy, will appear to another a li- 
beral aristocracy : whilst a government which one man shall 
deem an aristocracy, will i^pear to another a narrow oli- 
garchy. A government which one man shall deem a de- 
i taiocracy, will i^pear to another a government of a few: 
; whilst a government which one man shall deem an aristo- 
; oracy, will appear to another a government of many. ;.^Th^ 
proportion, moreover, of the sovereign number to thenUuh 

V ber of the entire community, may stand, it is manifest, at 
riny point in a long series of minute d^rees. 

The distinctions between aristocracies to which I have 
now adverted, are founded on differences between the pro- 
portions which the number of the sovereign body may bear 
to the number of the community. 

Other distinctions between aristocracies are 
founded on difierences between the modes where- 
in the sovereign number may share the sovereign 
powers. 

For though the sovereign number may be a 
reignnnmiMr homogcneous body, or a body of individual per- 
the^ovJ^ sons whose political cliaracters are similar, it is 
^^*^ commonly a mixed or heterogen)sous body, or a 
body of individual persons whose political characters are 
difierent. The sovereign ' number, for example, may con- 
sist of an oligarchical or narrower, and a democratical or 
larger body : of a single individual person styled an em- 

Of such du- 
tiodions be- 
tween ariflto- 
cmdesjware 
founded on 
differeooes 
between the 
modeswbere- 
in tbeaove- 

JURI8PRUDBNCB BETEBMIKED. 195 

peror or king, and a body oligarchical, or a body dlBtno- 
cratical : or of a single individual person bearing one of 
those names, and a body of the former description, with 
another of the last-mentioned kind. And in any of these 
. cases, or of numberless similar cases, the various constitu- 
ent memben of the heterogeneous and sovereign body may 
share the sovereign powers in any of infinite modes. 

The infinite forms of aristocracy which result ofnehoit- 
fixHn those infinite modes, have not been divided ^^^^^m* 
sjyBlematically into kinds and sorts, or have not ^!!!^!ckieB. 
been distinguished systematically by generic and 
^edfic names. But some of those infinite forms have been 
distinguished broadly from the rest, and have been marked * 
with the coDunon name of limited monarchies. 

Now (as I have intimated above, and shall show more 
fully hereafter), the difierence between monarchies or go- 
vernments of one, and aristocracies or governments of a 
number, is of all the difierences between governments the 
most predse or^ definite, and, in r^ard to the pregnant disl.,^ 
tinction between positive law and morality, incomparably 
the most important. And, since this capital difierence be- 
tweesa governments of one and a number is involved in some 
obscnrify through the name of limited mmiarchy^ I will ofier 
a few remarks upon the various forms of aristocraqr to which 
that name is implied. 

In all or most of the governments which are styled limited i 

\ monarchies, a single individual shar^ the sovereign powers J 

\with an aggr^ate or aggr^ates of individuals : the share ft 
of that single in^vidual, be it greater or less, surpassing or 
exceeding the share of any of the other individuals who arc 
also constituent members of the supreme and heterogeneous 
body. And by that preeminence of share in the sovereign 
or supreme powers, and (perhaps) by precedence in rank or 
other honoraiy marks, that single individual is distinguished, 
more or les^ conspicuously, from any of the other individuals 
with whom he partakes in the sovereignly. 

o 2 

X 

-^' 

tl96j THE PROViyCB OF 

i«) 

But in spite of that preeminence, and in spite of that pre- 
cedence, that foremost individual member of the mixed or 
heterogeneous aristocracy, is not a monarch in the proper 
acceptation of the term : nor is the mixed aristocracy of 
.which he is the foremost member, a monarchy properly so 
called. Unlike a monarch in the proper acceptation of the 
term, that single individual is not sovereign, but is one of a 
sovereign number. Unlike a monarch properly so called, 
that single individual, considered singly, lives in a state df 
subjection. Considered singly, he is subject to the sovereign 
body of which he is merely a hmb, 

I limited monarchy, therefore, is not monarchy. It is one 

f or another of those infinite forms of aristocracy which result 

fix>m the infinite modes wherein the sovereign number may 

flhare the sovereign powers. And, like any other of those 

infinite fonns, it belongs to one or another of those three 

forms of anstocracy which I have noticed in a precedingpar 

ngraph. If the number of the sovereign body (the so called 

monarch included) bear to the number of the community an 

yCxtremely small proportion, the so called monarchy is an oU- 

^garchy. If the same proportion be small, but not extremely 

small, the so called Kmited monarchy is an aristocratical 

^ government (in the specific meaning of the name). If the 

same proportion be large, the so called limits monarchy 

V is a democratical or popular government, or a government 

of many.* 

f: ^ ** The goyemment of a kingdom wherein the king is limited, is by most 

writers called monarchy. Such a king, however, is not floveraign, but is ^ 
minister of him or them who truly have the soveraign power." — " The king 
whose power is limited, is not the soveraign of the assembly which hath the 
power to limit it The soveraignty, therefore, is in that assembly which 
I hath the power to limit him. And, by consequence, the government is not 
' monarchy, but aristocracy or democracy .f — In these extracts ^m Hobbes* 
Leviathan, tlie true nature of the supreme governments which are styled 
limited monarchies is well stated. It cannot, however, be said, with per- 
fect precision, that tlie so called limited monarch is merely a minister of the 
sovereign. He commonly, it is true, has subordinate political powers^ or 
is a minister of the sovereign body : but, unless he also partook in thesQ- 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 197 

. As meaning monarchical power limited by positive^ 4awj 
the name limited monarchy involves a contradiction in terms. 
For a monarch properly so called is sovereign or supreme :] 
and, as I shall rfiew hereafter, so vereign or supre m e power 
y is incapable of legal limitation , whether i t resicLe m an indi- 
yjciual, or in a number of individuals. It is true that theji 
power of an aristocracy, styled a limited monarchy, is limited' 
by B^itivenMUality, and also^byiheJawjoiJOad- But, the 
power of every government being limited by those restraints, 
the name limited monarchy^ as pointing to those restraints, 
is not a whit more applicable to such aristocracies as are 
marked with it, than to monarchies properly so called. — ^And 1/ 
as the name is absurd or inappropriate, so is its application 
capricious. Although it is applied to some of the aristocra- 
cies wherein a single individual has the preeminence men- 
tioned above, it is also withheld finom others to which it is . 
equally apphcable. Its application, indeed, is commonly de- . 
termined by a purely immaterial circumstance : by the nature 
of the title, or the nature of the name of office, which that 
foremost member of the mixed aristocracy happens to bear. 
If he happen to bear a title which commonly is borne by 
monarchs in the proper acceptation of the term, the supreme 
government whereof he is a member is usually styleda limited 
monarchy. Otherwise, the supreme government whereof he 
is a member is usually marked with a different name. For 
example : The title of 3a<riXf uV, rexj or king^ is commonly 
borne by monarchs in the proper acceptation of the term : and 
since our own king happens to bear that title, our own mixed 
aristocracy of king, lords, and commons, is usually styled 
a limited monarchy. If his share in the sovereign powers 

preme powers, or onlesB he were a member as well as a m i n ist e r of the body , 
bVnuuld lArdlj be complimented with the magnificenTname of monarch, 
and the aoYereign goYemment of which he was merelj a serrant would 
hardly be styled a monarchy. Ishall revert to the character or position of 
a ao called limited monarch, when I come to consider the limits of soyc- 
reign power. 

IV. 

j^Vr^V- 198 THE FROVmCB OF 

^ ^^' • were exactly what it is now, but he were called protector, 

president, or stadtholder, the mixed aristocracy of which he 
is a member would probably be styled a republic And for 
such verbal differences between forms of supreme govern- 
ment has the peace of mankind been frequently troubled byl 
ignorant and headlong fanatics.* » 

f ^ *™faL« of ^® prenent b a cooTenicnt place for the ibUowing re- 

|.. tlieft»Uowiiig marks apon termt!. 

J^'^JJ'J^ The term ** sorereign/' or " the sorereign,** applies to a ao- 
''•ovweign,*' vereign body as well as to a sovereign indiridiiaL ^nfionano** 
Jdjjn^i. "^ and *" ie souTerain " are used by liallfln and French writers 
P>« <«™ ^ with this generic and commodious meaning. I say cammodioitM: 
or^^oauDon- ^^ supreme goremment, abstracted firom form, is fineqnently 
s[*Th^tenn • «»^J«5t of disconrse. "" Die 06rt>keit ** (the person or body 
^•tate,** or (nftr the oommunity) is also iqyplied indifi^rently, by Gennan 
'jfrUiu L ^"^^^'"t ^ * sovereign individual or a sovereign number: 
''natiotC though it not unfrequently signifies the aggregate of the poli- 
tical superiors who in capadties supreme and subordinate go- 
vern the given society. But though '^sovereign ** is a generio naoiete 
. floverdgn individuals and bodies, it is not unfrequently used as if it wwe 
mppiopnaXe to the former: as if it were synonymous with ^ moiuueh** in 
the proper acceptation of the term. ^ Sovereign/' as well as ** monardi/' 
is also often misapplied to the foremost individual member of a so called 
limited monarchy. Our own king, for example, is neither ** sovereign ^ 
nor '' monarch : '* but, this notwithstanding, he hardly is mentioned oftener 
by his appropriate title of '' king," than by those inappropriate and affected 
names. 

'' Republic," or ** commonwealth," has the following amongst other mean- 
ings. — 1. Without reference to the form of the government, it denotes the 
main object for which a government should exist. It denotes the weaLor 
good of an independent political society ; that is to say, the aggregate good 
of all the individual members^ or the aggr^ite gbod-o f tfie s fe^of the indi- 
vidual members whose weal is deemed by the speaker worthy of regard. 
2. Without reference to the form of the government, it denotes a society 
political and independent 8. Any aristocracy, or government of a number, 
which has not acquired the name of a limited monarchy, is commonly styled 
a republican government, or, more briefly, a republic. But the name '* re- 
publican government," or the name ^' republic," is applied emphatically to 
such of the aristocracies in question as are deemed democrscies or govern- 
ments of many. 4. '* Republic " also denotes an independent political so- 
ciety whose supreme government is styled republican. 

The meaningH of " state," or '* the state," are numerous and disparate : 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERKIKED. 

. "To .the forgoing brief analysis of the forms of sapreme 
government, I append a short examination of the four fol- 
lovdng topics : for they are hr more intimately connected 
with the subject of that analysds, than with any of the other y 
subjects which the scope of my lecture embraces. 1. The 

of which numerous and disparate meaoiiigs the foUowing are the moat re- 
niaricable. — 1. *' The state*' is usually synonymous with '* the sovereign.** 
It denotes the individual person, or the body of individual persons, which 
bean the supreme powers in an independent political society. This is the 
meaning which I annex to the term, unless I employ it e xp ressly with a 
different import. 2. By the Roman lawyers, the expression ^' Mtaiue reipub- 
lien ** seems to be used in two senses. As used in one of those senses, it 
is synonymous with ^republic,** or '^ commonwealth,** in the first of the four 
meanings which I have enumerated above : that is to say, it denotes the 
weal or good of an independent political society. As used in the odier of 
those senses, it denotes the individual or body which is sovereign in a ^ven 
aocie^, together with the subject individuids and subject bodies who iiold 
political rights from that sovereign one or number. Or (changing the 
phrase) it denotes the reipecti ve conditions of the several political superiors 
■ who with sovereign and del^;ated powers govern the community in question. 
And the ** status reipublics,** as Uius understood, is the appropriate subject 
of public law in the definite meaning of the term : that is to say, the por- 
tion of a corpus juris which' is concerned with political conditions, or with 
the powers, rights, and duties of political superiors. It is hardly neoessaiy 
to remark, that the expression ** status reipublicsB ** is not coextensive or 
synonymous with the expression ^ status.** The former is a cdUecdve name 
lor political or public conditions, or for the powers, rights, and duties of 
political superiors. The latter is sjrnonymous with the term ^ condition,** 
and denotes a private condition as well as a political or public. 3. Where 
a sovereign body is compounded of minor bodies, or of one individual person 
and minor bodies, those minor bodies are not unfineqnently styled ^ states ** 
or ** estates.** For example : Before the kings of France had become sub- 
stantially sovereign, the sovereignty resided in the king with the three estates 
of the realm. 4. An independent political society is oden styled a '' state,** 
or a ^ sovereign and independent state.** 

An independent political socie^ is oden styled a ** nation,** or a ^ sove- 
reign and independent nation.** But the term '' nation,** or the term *'^«im,** 
is used more properly with the following meaning. It denotes an aggre- 
gate of persons, exceeding a single fitmily, who are connected through blood 
or lineage, and, perhaps, through a common language. And, thus under- 
stood, a ''nation** or ^^gens'^ is not necessarily aff independent political 
•ociety. 

THE FEOVINGE OF . '• 

e^^rciseof sovereign powers, by a monarch orsovereign bo^^ 
through political subordinates or del^ates repres^iting their 
sovereign author. 2. The distinction of sovereign, and otho* 
political powers, into such as are legislative^ and such as are 
executive or admimetrative. 3. The true natures of the com- 
munities or governments which are styled by writers on po- 
sitive international law half-sovereign states. 4. The nature 
I K of a composite state^ or a supreme federal government: with 

the nature of a system of confederated states^ or a permanent 
confederacy of supreme governments. 
or tb« «xcr- ^ ^ independent political society of the small- 
Sj^^S^ est possible magnitude, inhabiting a territory of 
^mS^^ the smallest possible extent, and living under a 
^^^^ monarchy or an extremely narrow oligarchy, all 
jjgM^« the supreme powers brought into ezerdse (save 
vgnMotiiv those committed to subjects as private persons)* 
if%ii«aUioc might possibly ha^ exercised directly by the mo- 
narch or supreme body, ij^ut by every actual sovereign 
(whether the sovereign be one individual, or a number or 
aggregate of individuals), some of those powers are exer- 
cised through political subordinates or delegates represent- 
ing their sovereign authorT^This exercise of sovereign 
powers through political subordinates or del^ates, is ren- 
dered absolutehr necessary, in every actual society, by in- 
numerable causes. For example : K the number of the so- 
ciety be large, or if its territory be large although its num- 
ber be small, the quantity of work to be done in the way 
of political government is more than can be done by the 
sovereign without the assistance of ministers. If the society 
be governed by a popular body, there is some of the busi- 
ness of government which cannot be done by the sovereign 
without the intervention of representatives: for there is 
some of the business of government to which the body is 
incompetent by reason of its own bulk ; and some of the 
business of government the body is prevented from per- 
forming by the private avocations of its members. If the 

JURISFinJDENCB DETEBMINED. 201 

society be governed by a popular body whose memliers live 
dispersedly throughout an extensive territory, the sovereign 
body is constrained by the wide dispersion of its members 
to exercise through representatives some of its sovereign 
powers. 

In most or many of the societies whose supreme govern- 
ments are monarchical, or whose supreme governments are 
oligarchical, or whose supreme governments are aristocra- 
tical (in the specific meaning of the name), many of the so- 
vereign powers are exercised by the sovereign directly, or 
the sovereign performs directly much of the business of go- 
vepiment. 

iMsjkj of the sovereign powers are exercised by the so- 
vereign directly, or the sovereign performs directly much of 
Ihe business of government, even in some of the societies 
whose supreme governments are populc^A For example : In^.^v 
all or most of the democracies of andem Greece and Italy, ;f'- 
the soverdgn people or number, formally assembled, exer- V* 
cised directly many ai its sovereign powers. And in some 
of the Swiss Cantons whose supreme governments are popu- 
lar, the sovereign portion of the citizens, r^ularly convened, 
performs directly much of the business of government. 

But in many of the sodeties whose supreme governments 
are popular, the sovereign or supreme body (or any nume- 
rous body forming a component part of it) exerdses through 
representatives, whom it elects and appoints, the whole, or 
nearly the whole, of its sovereign or supreme powers. In 
our own country, for example, one component part of the 
sovereign or supreme body is the numerous body of the 
comnuma (in the strict signification of the name) ; that is to 
say, such of the commons (in the large acceptation of the 
term) as share the sovereignty with the king and^e peers, 
and elect the members of the commons* house.L.Now the 
commons exerdse through representatives the whole of their 
sovereign powers ; or they exercise through representatives 
the whole of thdr sovereign powers, excepting thdr sove- 

/ 

(202) tHB PROVINCB OF 

reign power of elediDg and appointing representativee to 
represent them in the British parliament. 'So that if the 
commons were sovereign without the king and the peers, 
not a single sovereign power^ save that which I have now 
I specified, would be exercised by the sovereign directl]^ 

Where a sovereign body (or any smaller body forming a 
^mponent part of it) exercises through representatives the 
whole of its sovereign powers, it may delegate those its 
powers to those its representatives, in either of two modes. 
1. It may delegate those its powers to those its representa- 
y^ tives, subject to a trust or trusts. 2. It may delegate those 
w its powers to those its representatives, absolutely or imcon- 

ditionally: inscnnuch that the representative body, during 
the period for iidiich it is elected and appointed, occupies 
. completely the place of the electoral ; or insomuch that the 
ler, during the ])eriod for which it is elected and ap- 
^^inted^ is invested completely with the soverdgn character 
of the latt crTl 

For example : The commons del^ate their powers to the 
members of the commons' house, in the second of the 
above-mentioned modes. During the period for which 
those members are elected, or during the parliament of 
which those members are a limb, the sovereignty is pos- 
sessed by the king and the peers, with the members of the 
commons' house, and not by the king and the peers, with 
the delegating body of the commons: though when tiiat 
€^' period expires, or when that parliament is any how dis- 

solved, the delegated share in the sovereignty reverts to 
that delegating body, or the king and the peers, with the 
delegating body of the commons, are then the body where- 
in the sovereignty resides. So that if the commons were 
sovereign without (the king and the peers, their present re- 
presentatives in parliament would be the sovereign in efifect, 
I or would possess the entire sovereignty free irom trust or 
obligation.-^The powers of the conmionsare delegated so 
absolutely to the members of the commons' house, that this 

■^X 

I/: 

JORISFBUDENCB DBTEBMINED. v 203 

representative assembly might concur with the king mid the j 
peers in defeating the principal ends for which it is dected ^ 
and appointed^ It might concur, for instance, in making a K^' 
statute which would lengthen its own duration from seven \ 
to twenty years ; or which would annihilate compl^ely the 
actual constitution of the government, by transferring the 
sovereignty to the king or the peers from the tripartite body 
wherein it reades at present. 

^ut though the commons del^ate their powers in the 
second of the above-mentioned modes, it is dear that they 
might delegate them subject to a trust or trusts^) llie re- 
presentative body, for instance, might be bound to lue those 
powers consistently with specific ends pointed out by the 
electoral : or it might be bound, more generally and vaguely^ "^ 
not to annihilate, or alter essentially, the actual constitution ^ ;, 
of the supreme government And if the comnibiis wer6^^^ J^^^^^ 
sovereign without the king and the peers, \hey might vol^ J^ 
pose a similar trust upon any representative body to which V^ 
they might del^ate the entire sovereignty. 

Where such a trust is imposed by a sovereign or supreme 
body (or by a smaller body forming a component part of 
it), the trust is enforced by l^al, or by merely moral sancy ^^ 
tions. The representative body is bound by a positive law f-^^ 
or laws i^j^ it is merely bound by a fear that it may ofiend 
the bulk of the community, in case it shall break the en- 
gagement which it has contracted with the electoral. 

And here I may briefly remark, that this last is the posi- 
tion which really is occupied by the members of the com* 
mons' house!] Adopting the language of most of the writers 
who have tinted of the British Constitution, I commonly 
suppose that the present parliament, or the parliament for ^ ^ 
the time being, is possessed of the sovereignty : or I com- 
monly suppose that the king and the lords, with the mem- 
bers of the commons' house, form a tripartite body whidt 
is sovereign or supreme. But, speaking accurately, the mem- 
bers of the commons' house are merely trustees for the bo(^ 

THE PBOVINCE OF 

I , byVhich they are dected and appointed : and, consequently, 

; [ the sovereignty always resides in the king and the peers, with 

I ' the electoral body of the commons. That a trust is imposed 

>^by the party delegating, and that the party representing 
V^Vn engages to dischaige the trust, seems to be imported by 
VvV ^^^ correlative expressions delegation and representatUm. It 
were absurd to suppose that tlie del^ating empowers the 
representative party to defeat or abandon any of the pur- 
^ii poses for which the latter is appointed : to suppose, for ex- 

ample, that the conmoions empower their representatives in 
parliament to relinquish thdr share in the sovereignty to 
the king and the lords. — ^The supposition that the powers 
of the commons are delegated absolutely to the members 
of the coDunons* house, probably arose fix>m the following 
pauses. ^T! The trust imposed by the electoral body upon 
the body remresenting them in parliament, is tacit rather 
than express^it arises from the relation between the bodies 
)^m delegating and representative parlies, rather than from 
^.vy^oral or written instructions given by the former to the latter. 
But since it arises from that relation, the trust is general 
and vague. The representatives are merely bound, gene- 
rally and vaguely, to abstain from any such exercise of the 
delegated sovereign powers as would tend to defeat the 
purposes for which they are elected and appointed. ^2. The 
X-' trust is simply enforced by moral sanction^^In other words, 
that portion of constitutional law which regards the duties 
of the representative towards the electoral body, is positive 
morality merely. Nor is this extraordinary. For (as I shall 
show hereafter) all constitutional law, in every coimtry what- 
J^ \ ever, is, as against the sovereign, in that predicament : and 
much of it, in every country, is also in that predicament, 
even as against parties who are subject or subordinate to 
J I the sovereign, and who therefore might be held from in- 
fringing it by legal or political sanctions. 
' If a trust of the kind in question were enforced by legal 
eanctions, the positive law binding the representative body 

/ 

{ 

JUBISPBUDENGE DBTERMIKED. 205 

might be inade by the representative body and nbt^y-th^^'^. 
dectoraL For example : If the duties of the cosmions' 
house towards the oommous who appoint it were enforced 
by l^al sanctions, the positive law binding the commons' 
house might be made by the parliament : that is to say, by 
the conmions' house itself in conjimction with the king and 
the peers, ^r, supposing the sovereignty resided in the 
commons without the king and the peers, the poidtive law 
binding the commons' house might be made by the house 
itself as representing the sovereign or statej^^ut, in either 
of these cases, the law might be abrogated by its immedir 
ate author without the durect consent of the electoral body^ 
Nor could the electoral body escape fix)m that inconvenience, 
so long as its direct exercise of its sovereign or supreme 
powers was limited to the election of representatives. In 
order that the^electoral body might escape from that incon^ 
venience, the positivriaw binding its representatives must 
be made directly by itself or with its direct concurrence.' ^'^•'^ 
For example : In order that the members of the commons* \/ 
house might be bound l^ally and completely to dischai^e 
their duties to the commons, the law must be made directly 
by the commons themselves in concurrence with the king 
and the lords : or, supposing the sovereignty readed in the 
commons without the king and the peers, the law must be 
made directly by the commons themselves as being exclu- 
sively the sovereign. In either of these -cases, the law could 
not be abrogated without the direct consent of the electoral 
body itself. For the king and the lords with the electoral 
body of the commons, or the electoral body of the commons 
as being exclusively the sovereign, would form an extraor- 
dinary and ulterior legislature : a legislature superior to that 
ordinary legislature which would Jbe formed by the parlia- 
ment or by the commons' house. UA law of the parliament^ 
or a law of the commons' house, which affected to abrogate 
a law of the extraordinary and ulterior l^islature, would not "^ "" 
be obeyed by the courts of justice.'^The tribunals would 

\ • V=^ 

206 THB FBOTINCE OF 

^ V eofon^ the latter in the teeth of the former. Tbey would 
examine the competence of the ordinary l^ialature to make 
the abrc^ting law, as they now examine thd competence of 
|.: any subordinate corporation to establish ^ by-law or other 

I. statute or ordinance. In the state of New York, the ordi- 

nary l^islature of the state is controlled by an extraordi- 
nary legislature, in the manner which I have now described. 

1^ The body of citizens appointing the ordinary l^islatoie, 

^ forms an extraordinary and ulterior legislature by which the 

txmstitution of the state was directly established : and any 
^«j ) law of the ordinary l^islature, which conflicted with a con- 
-^rtitutional law directly proceeding from the extraOTdinary, 
would be treated by the courts of justice as a l^ally invaUd 
act — ^That such an extraordinary and ulterior legislature is 
tigood or useful institution, I pretend not to affirm. I merely 
^Sffirm that the institution is possible, and that in one poli- 
tical sociely the institution actually obtains, 
^^ifdr From the exercise of sovereign powers by the 
Md*^^* sovereign directly, and also by the sovereign 
iiSS^ch^ through political subordinates or delegates, I pass 
Af« itff»ia^ to the distinction of sovereign, and other politic 
vn tn^m^ powefs, into such as are legislative^ and such 
#U»«. are executive or administrative. 

It seems to be supposed by many writers, that l^islative 
political powers, and executive political p6wer8, may be dis- 
tinguished precisely, or, at least, witlTaiiltppfoach to preci- 
sion : and that in every society whose government is a go- 
vernment of a number, or, at least, in every society whose 
government is a limited monanjhy, the l^slative sovereign 
powers, and the executive sovereign powers, belong to dis- 
-tiuct parties. According, for example, to Sir William Black- 
stone, the l^islative sovereign powers reside jn the parlia- 
ment : that is to say, in the tripartite sovereign body formed 
by the king, the members of the house of lords, and the 
members of the house of commons. But, according to the 
^me writer, the executive sovereign powers reside in the 
king alone. 

JURISPEUDEKCB DBTEBMINSD. 207 

lI^ow the distinction of political powers into such w^are 
I tgialoHve and' such as are executive^ scarcely coinddes^iwith 
the distinction of those^powers into such as are supreme and ^^^ ^^ 

Sh as are mbordinat^ior it is stated or assumed by the ^ \ 

ters who make the rormer distinction, that sovereign po^ * 

:al powers (and, indeed, subordinate also) are divisible into ^^^ i 
such as are l^islative and such as are executive. If the \ 

'distinction of political powers into legislative and executive 
ive any determinate meaning, its meaning must be this : 
e former are powers of estabhshing laws, and of issuing . 
^ther commands : whilst the latter are powers of admims- V 
tering, or of carrying into operation, laws or other conunands \A " ^ 
already established or issued^^JSut the distinction, as thus \ 
understood, is far from approaching to precision. For of 
all the instruments or means by which laws and other com*. : 

mands are administered or executed, laws and other com* . > , \ 
mands are incomparably the most frequent : insomuch that 
most of the powers deemed executive or administrative are 
themselves l^slative powers, or involve powers which are 
l^slative. For example : As administered or executed by 
courts' of justice, laws are mainly administered through 
jti^;ipents or decrees : that is to say, timnigh commands 
1880^ in particular cases by supreme or subordinate tribu- 
nals. And, in order that ibe laws so administered may be 
administered well, they must be administered agreeably to 
laws which are merely subservient to that purpose. Thus : 
All laws or rules determining the practice of courts, or all 
laws or rules determining judicial procedure, are purely sub- 
sidiary to the due execution of others. *^ 

That the l^islative sovereign powers, and the executive 
sovereign powers, belong, in any society, to distinct parties, 
is a supposition too palpably false to endure a moment's ex- 
amination. Of the numerous proofs of its falsity which it 
were easy to produce, the following will more than suffice. — 
1. Of the laws or rules made by the British parliament, or 
by any supreme legislature, many are subsidiary, and are in- 

4/^ 

208 THE FROVINCE OF 

tended to be subsidiary, to the due execution of others, 
as making laws or rules subservient to that purpose, it is n 
less executive than courts of justice as making r^ulatioi 
of procedure. — 2. (jm almost every society^ jtidicial powers 
^ commonly estemed executive or administrative, are exer 
dsed directly by the supreme l^islature^ For example 
The Boman emperors or princes, who were -virtually sove 
reign in the Boman empire or world, not only issued th< 
edictal constitutions which were general rules or laws, bul 
as forming the highest or ultimate tribunal of appeal, th< 
also issued the particular constitutions which were styl 
decretes or judgments. In libera republican or before th^ 
virtual dissolution of the free or popular government,' th4 
sovereign Boman people, then the supreme l^iskture^^wai 
^ , y^ high court of justice for the trial of criminal cause^^Th^ 
vv:\;v- Towers ^^ supreme judicature inhering in the modem par^" 
^ Z^ liament, or the body formed by the king and the upper anct 
^^/'- lower houses, have ever (I believe) been dormant^ or havi| 
v. never been brought into exercise ; for, as making the partis 
cular but ex post facto statutes which are styled acts of 
attainder, it is not properly a court of justice*^ But the 
ancient parliament, formed by the king and the barons, of 
which the modern is the offspring, was the ultimate court of 
appeal as well as the sovereign legislature. — 3. The ^present 
British constitution affords not the slightest coimtfenance to 
the supposition which I am now examining. It is absurd tc> 
j say that the parliament has the l^islative sovereign powers, 
^^ but that the executive sovereign powers belpng to the king 
alone. Tif the parliament (as Blackstone aflirms) be sove- 
reign or absolute, every sovereign power must belong to 
>J that sovereign body, or to one or more of its members ab 
forming a part or parts of it^The powers of the king con 
sidered as detached from the body, or the powers of any q\ 
its members considered in the same light, are not sovereigi* 
powers, but are simply or purely subordinate : or (changing 
the plifase) if the king or any of its members, considere<J 

JUBI8FRUDEKGE DBTERlflNED. 209- 

1 18 detaclied fix>m the body, be invested with political powers, 
1 hat member as so detached is merely a minister of the body, 
i ^r those political powers are merely einanations of its so- 
' rereignty^ ^Besides, political powers which surely may be 
/ < ieemed executive are exercised by each of the houses ; whilst 
^ ])olitical powers which surely may be deemed legislative 
4re exercised by the kingj In civil causes, the house of 
lords is the ultimate court of appeal ; and of all the political 
powers which are deemed executive or administrative, judi- 
cial powers are the most important and remarkable. The 
«cecutive or administrative powers which reside iu the lower 
nouse, are not so wdghty and obvious as those which be- 
long to the upper : but still it were easy to shew that it 
exercises powers of the kind. For example: Exercising 
Judicature, through select committees of its members, it ad- 
judges that elections of its members are l^ally valid or void; 
The political powers exercised by the king which surely may 
ibe deemed l^isktive, are of vast extent and importance. As 
captain g^eral, for example, he makes articles of war : that 
is to say, laws which r^ard especially the discipline or go- 
vernment of the soldiery. As administering the law, through 
0ubordinate courts of justice, he is the author of the rules 
of procedure which they have established avowedly, or in 
the properly l^islative mode : and (what is of greater im- 
portance) he is the author of that measureless system of 
judge-made rules of law, or rules of law made in the judi- 
cial manner, which has been established covertly by diose 
subordinate tribunals as directly exercising their judicial 
functions.^ 

• DiTimon of gorenimentB according to forma imperii (Monarchy, Aria- 
tocracj, and Democracy), or forma regimim's (despotic or repablican). The 
latter ia Ibunded on a fancied distinction between executive and legisla- 
tive. See Kant, Entwurftum ewigen Frieden^ pp. 25-30. Krug, AUge* 
tneines HandwdrUriuch der FhHosophie^ &o^ Vol. IV. p. 87. Politz, SiaaU- 
wiMMeiuchaft^YoLL MS. Note. 

> [On Rfcnii^ to Kaat't ' Eatwuif/ 1 foand it fiUad with the maigiiud notM with which 
.ahnoRt an the Aathor't books tiestiiig of the Mbfeete of his patient and pcneCntinf 

VOL. I. P 

V 

210 

THE FBOYIKCE OF 

^)f all the lai^ger divisions of political powers, the divi- 
sion of those powers into supreme and subordinate is per- 
haps the only precise one^The former are the political 
powers, infinite in number and kind, which, partly brought 
into exercise, und partly lying dormant, belong 4o a sove- 
yi/^ reign or state : that is to say, to_ thq monarch-^roperly sc 
I called^ if the government bea government of one : and, i 

Ithe government be a government of a number, to the sove- 
reign body considered collectively, or .to its various mem- 
^ beiB considered as component parts of it The latter ar^ 
those portions of the supreme powers which, are del^ated 
to political subordinates: such poUticiSjrabordinates being 
subordinate or subject merely, or also immediate partakers 
in those very supreme powers of pbrtipns or shares wherein 
yt^ey are possessed as ministers and trustees. 

iTOii*- There were formerly in Europe many of the 
\ communities or governments which are styled by 
writers on positive international law half eovereigh^r 
states. In consequence of the mighty changes] 
te^id^'rr wrought by the French revolution, such commu- 
'*^**'i^^ nities or governments have wholly or nearly dis- 
appeared: and I advert to the true natures of 
such communities or governments, not because they are in- 
trinsically of any importance or interest, but because the in- 
congruous epithet half or imperfectly sovereign obscures the 
essence o( sovereignty and independent poUtical society. It 
seems to import that the governments marked with it are 
sovereign and subject at once- 
According to writers on positive international law, a go- 
vernment half or imperfectly sovereign occupies the follow- 
ing position. — In spite of its half or imperfect dependence, 

I of tfa« 

4f gtrr^ni' 
f' ftientA w hich 

wrilet* on ' 

. r 

i.:} 

/ 

•tttdy, are enriched. The blank WareB in the coven are also ooTered with Tables, to 
which he had reduced Kant*s definitions of the sevenl forms of GoTerament. Tbcy 
are inserted at the end of this Lecture, not only on account of their in:rinsic value, but 
as afibrding an example of the manner in which books were dealt with by one who 
never quitted a jub)ect till he had thoroaghly mastered it, and )>laced it before bis own 
mind with luminooa distinct ness^^S. A.] 

JUSISPRUDENCE DBTERMIKED. 21 L 

1 has most of the political and sovereign powers whifi|^ be-: 
long to a government wholly or perfectly supreme. More 
e^>ecially, in all or most of its foreign relations, or in all or 
most of its relations to foreign or external governments, it 
acts and is treated as a perfectly sovereign government, and 
not as. a government in a state of subjection to another : in- 
somuch that it makes and breaks alUances, and makes war 
<Mr peace, without authority from another government, or of 
its own discretion. C^ut, this notwithstanding, the govern- 
ment, or a member of the government, of another political 
society, has pohtical nowers over the society deemed im- 
perfectly independent^ For example : In the Germanico- 
Boman or Bomano-Germanic empire, the particular Oer^ 
man governments depending on the empire immediately, or 
holding of the emperor by tenure in capite^ were deemed 
imperfectly sovereign in r^ard to that general government 
srhikih consisted of the~emperor and themselves as forming 
tl^ Imperial diet For though in their foreign reUtions . 
they were wholly or nearly independent, they were, bound 
(in reality or show) by laws of that general government : 
and its tribunals had appellate judicature (substantially or 
.to appearance) over the politic^and half m^ependent com? 
munities wherein they were half supreme. ^Most^ indeed, of 
the govemmtots deemed imperfectly supreme, are govern- 
ments which in tiidr^^^ had been substantially vassal : 
but which had insensibly escaped from most of tlieir feudal 
bonds, though they still continued apparently in their pri^ 
jmtive state of subjection^ 

tow I think it will appear on analysis, that every govem- 
it deemed imperfectiy supre me^liTTeftl ly in one or an- 
other .of the threcfollowing predicaments. It is perfectiy 
subject to that other government in relation to which it is 
deemed imperfectiy supreme: Or it b perfectiy indepen- 
^nt of the other, and therefore is of itself a truly sove- 
reign government: Or in its own community it is jointly 
sovereign with the otiier, and is therefore a. constituent 

r2 

212 THE PBOVIKCE OF 

member of a government supreme and independenL][ Ahi 
if every government deemed imperfectly supreme be reallj 
in one or another of the three forgoing predicaments, ther 
^^ is no such political mongrel as a government sovereign an^ 
subject.-5i. The political powers of the government deemed 
imperfectly supreme, may be exercised entirely and habitu- 
ally at the pleasure an^^ bidding^of the other. On which 
^ supposition, its so called half sovereignty is merely nominal 

and illusive. It is perfectly subject to the other govern^ 
ment, though that its perfect subjection may be imperfect 
in ostent^For example : Although, in its ovm name, and 
as of its own discretion, it makes war or peace, its power of 
making either is merdy nominal and illusive, if the power be 
exercised habitually at the bidding of the other government 
>-«7^The political powers exercised by the other govem- 
onent over the political society deemed imperfecdy indep^i- 
r '^ :44r.'dent, may be exercised through the permisaon, or through 
ji^^- ^ )the authority, of the government deemedTmperfecdy su- 
preme. On whiclhsupposition, the government deemed im- 
perfectly supreme is of itself a truly sovereign government^ 
those powers being l^al rights over its own subjects, whidi 
It grants expressly or tacitly to another sovereign govera- 
ment. (For, as I shall shew hereafter, a sovereign govern- 
ment, with the permission or authority of another, may pos- 
sess legal rights against the subjects of the latter.) For 
example : The great Frederic of Prussia, as prince-elector 
of Brandenburg, was deemed half or imperfecdy sovereign 
in respect of his feudal connection with the German empir&v 
Potentially and in practice, he was thoroughly independent 
of the Imperial government : and, supposing it exercised po- 
litical powers over his subjects of the electorate, it virtually 
exercised them through his authority, and not through his 
obedience to its commands. Being in a habit of thrashing 
its armies, he was not in a habit of submission to his seem- 
j. ing feudal superior. — 3. The political powers of the govem- 

/ ment deemed imperfectly supreme, may not be exercised 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 

mtirely and habitually at the pleasure and bidding of the 
>ther: but yet its independence of the other may not be 
so complete, that the political powers exercised by the other 
)ver the political society deemed imperfectly independent, 
ire merely exerdsed through its permission or authority. 
Ear example : We may suppose that the elector of Bavaria 
was independent of the Imperial government, in all or most 
of his foreign, and in most of his domestic relations : but 
, that, this his independence notwithstanding, he could not 
iiave abolished completely, without incurring considerable 
;4cLanger, the appellate judicature of the Imperial tribunals over 
'the Bavarian community. But on the suppoation which I 
Jiave now stated and exemplified, the sovereignty of the so- 
iaety deemed imperfectly independent, resides in the govern* 
^ent deeme d im perfectly supreme together with the other 
government tland, consequently, the government deemed 
imperfectly supreme is properly a constituent member of a 
^vemment supreme and independent^ The supreme go^ 
Arernm^it of the society deemed imper^tly independent, id 
one of the infinite forms of supreme government by a num- 
>ber, wliich result from the infinite modes wh ^ein the so ve- 
numb er ";i^ share the sovereign^posEfi^ There is in 
4he case, nothinge3lruoitiiittiy49ttr{nis : that all the con* 
"ttituent members of the supreme government in question 
'Are not exclusively members of the political society which it 
governs ; since one of them is also sovereign in another po- 
litical society, or is also a constituent member of another 
supreme government In consequence of this anoinaly, the 
interests and pretensions, of the constituent members more 
or less antagonize. But in almost every case of supreme 
government by a number, the interests and pretensions of 
the members more or less antagonize, although the supreme 
government be purely domestic. Whether a supreme govern- 
ment be purely domestic, or one of its limbs be also a limb 
of anotherv the supreme government is perpetuated through 
)the mutual tx)ncessions of its members, notwithstanding the 

i 

■■^'^^ 

214 rUE TROYISCR OF 

opposition of their interests and pretensions, and the blood^^ 
or bloodless conflicts which the opposition may occasion) 
ally b^t. — ^For the reasons produced and suggeBted in thd 
course of the foregoing analysis, I beUeve that no govemj 
ment is sovereign and subject at once : that no govemmcnl 
can be styled^with propriety half or imperfecdy supretMt^ 
Before I dismiss the riddle which I have now endeavoured 
to resolve, I must state or suggest the following differenoe» 
— In numberless cases, political powers are exercised over^ 
political community, by the government., or a member oi the 
government, of an ^eternal political^communi^. Bat the 
government of the rarmer community is scarcely denomi- 
nated half or imperfectly sovereign, unless the government 
of the latter, or the member of the government of the latter, 
possess those political powers as being the govemmeit of 

"' ^ The application of the epithet half iovertign aeems to Im caprieioai 
For example : Orcr most of the political oommnnitiea wbere in ihe Romu 
Ctetholie is tlie prevalent and eetahliahed religion, legialatiTe and judicial 
powera are ezerdoed by tike Pope : that ia to aaj, hj an eztemal gOTeni<A 
menty or a member of an external gOTcmment. But those political com- 
manities, or their domestic and temporal goTenimente, are not denominated, 
therefore, by writers on international law, half independent or half supreme. 
It neems to be supposed by such writers, that, in every political oomma- 
nity occupying that position, those powers are merely exercised by the an* 
thority of the domestic government, or the. domestic government and the 
Pope are jointly sovereign. On the first of which suppofdtions, the former 
is of itself perfectly sovereign : and on the last of which suppositions, the 
former is a constituent member of a government supreme and independent 
' According, indeed, to some of such vnriters, if those powers be exclu- 
nvely exercised in matters strictly ecclesiastical, the sovereignty of the do- 
mestic government is not impaired by the exercise, though they are no< 
merely exercised through its permisson or authority. And, consequently, 
it is not necessary to suppose that it shares the sovereignty with the Pope 
or to mark it with the incongruous epithet of half or imperfectly supreme. 
But though these powers be exclusively exercised in matters strictly eccle- 
siastical, still they are legislative and judicial powers. And how is it possi- 
ble to distingui^ precisely, matters which are strictly ecclesiastical, from 
matters which are not 7 the powers of ecclesiastical regiment which none 
but the church ihould wield^ from the powers of eccleeiastical regiment (oi 
the ju8 circa .sacra) which secular and profane governments may handle 
without sin ? 

JURISPRDDKNCE DETERMINED. 2L5 

the latter, or as being a member of its government For 
example: The particular German governments which de- 
pended on the Empire immediately, are denominated half 
sovereign : for the powers exercised by the Imperial govern- 
ment over their respective communities, were exercised by 
^hat government as being that very government, or as being 
(at leas^ to appearance) the general government of Ger- ]| 

-many.^But the government of the -British Islands is not •; 

.imperfectly sovereign in regard to the government of Ha- 
. i&over : nor is the government of Hanover an imperfectly 
«Dvareign government in r^ard to the government of the 
3riti8h IslandsT For though the king of the British Islands 
.18 also king of Hanover, he is not king in either country as ' 

being king in the otherX The powers which he exercises i 

there,'vhave no dependence whatever on his share in the f 

sovereignty here : nor have the powers which he exerdsbs s 

herej Bsxy dependence on his sovereignty (or his share ill 
ihe sovereignty) there. — ^The difference which I have now | 

suggested, is analogous to the difference, in the Boman law, *^ 

between real and personal servitudes : or to the resembling 
difference, in the law of England, between easements appur- 
tenant and easements in gross. A real right of servitude, 
^ir a right of easement appurtenant^ belongs to the party in- 
iresXed with the right, as being the owner or occupier of 
ii^>ecifically determined land. A personal right of servitude, 
or a right of eiasement in gross^ does not belong to the party 
as being such owner or occupier, but (according to the cur- 
rent jargon) is annexed to, or mheres^in, his person. 

Before I proceed to composite states, and systemsof con- 
federated states, I will try to explain a difficulty that is closely 
connected with the subjects which I have examined in the 
present 'section. — ^I have remarked already, and shall endea- 
vour to demonstrate hereafter, that all the individuals or 
aggr^ates composing a sovereign number are subject to 
the jsupreme body of which they are component parts. Now 
where a member of a body which is sovereign in one com- 

^ 

2l§ :1HB PB0VI5CB OF ^. 

munity, is exclusively soverdgn in another, how does the; 
sovereignty of that member in the latter of the two com-j 
munities, consist with the subjection of that member to the) 
body which is sovereign in the former ? Supposing, for exJ 
ample, that our own king were monarch and autocrator in 
Banover, how would his subjection to the soverdgn body 
id king, lords, and commons, consist with his sovereign^ 
in his German kingdom ? ' A limb or member of a sovereign ; 
body would eeem to be shorn, by its habitual obedience to ; 
Ihe body, of the halutual independence which must needs ; 
belong to it as sovereign in a foreign community. — ^To ex- 

(plam the difficulty, we must assume that the diaracters of 
sovereign, and member of the sovereign body, are practically 
.distinct : that, as monarch (for instance) of the foreign com- 
^ munity, a member of the soverdgn body neither habitually 
^Ijpbeya it, nor is habitually obeyed by it* For i^ as monarch 
,:: jrf the foreign community, he habitually obeyed the body, 
')iihe body would be sovereign in that conununify, and he^ 
^^^ould be merely its minister : and if^ as monarch of. the 
[' foreign community, he were habitually obeyed by the body, 
he, and not the body, would be sovereign in the other . 
society* Insomuch that if the e!!tu:acters were practically 
blended, or, remaining practically distinct, thoroughly con^? 
flicted, one of the following results would probably ensuec 
JTthe member would become subject, or else exclusively so* 
vereign, in both commimities : or to preserve his sovereignty 
in the one, or his part sovereignty in the /k>ther, he would 
renounce his connection with the latter, or 'with the former 
society^ 

- Wherever a member of a body sovereign in one commu- 
nity, is also a member of a body sovereign in another, there 
is the same or a similar difficulty. A state of subjection to 
the former, and a state of subjection to the latter, may be- 
come incompatible: just as a state of subjection may be- 
come incompatible with the independence which is one of 
Ae essentials of sovereignty^ ,-# 

JUBI8FBUDENCE DBtEBHlKED. ^17 

It not onfrequently happens, that two or more indepen-^ ; '^ ' 
dent political societies become subject to a commoo sove- .: ^ | 
*eign: but that after their union, through that common sub- '. :• 

ection, they still are governed distinctly, and distinguished • * 
by their andent titles. Im, this case, there is not the diffi- i 

sulty suggested above. JThe monarch or sovereign body ^ 

ruling the two societies, is one and the same sovereign : 
and, through their subjection to that common sovereign,/ 
lihey are one society political and independ^jQ ' 

'It fi:«quently happens, that one society politi- ^JliJJ^*' 
cal and independent arises from a federal union ^g^*j^ 
of several political societies :(^, rather, that one ^^^Uuh 

government political and sovereign arises from a tteMtunor 

j.^^ • _j» ^ _l*j»l ^\ ^rz^^. tf 

or« 

federal union of several politi^ government^ < 

By some of the writers on positive international 

law, such an independent political society, or the ^ 

sovereign government of such a society, is styled **" ,. ^ ^ 

a compodu ^afe.£jBut the sovereign government of such a -j^^yi/ 

society, might be styled more aptly^as well as more popu- ^*l 

larly, a supreme federal gavemmenL\ / 

It also frequently happens, that several political societies 
yhicfa are severally independent, or several pohtical govern- 
ments which are severally sovereign, are compacted by a 
permanent alliance. By some of the writers on positive 
international law, the several societies or governments, con- 
sidered as thug compacted, are styled a system of confede- 
rated states.(JBut the several governments, considered as 
thus compacted, might be styled more aptly, as well as mor^ 
popularly, a permanent confederacy of supreme governments^ 
> L advert to the nature of a composite state, and to that 
of a system of confederated states, for the following pur- 
poses. — ^It results from positions which I shall tiy to esta- 
blish hereafter, that the power of a sovereign is incapable 
of l^al limitation. It also results from portions which I 
have tried to establish already, that in eveiy society politi- 
cal and independent the sovereign is one individual, or om 

V ,. 

'■\ 

21H TUB PSOVIKGE OP > 

hoUy of individuals : that unless the sovereign be one in 
di^ idual, or one body of individuals, the given independent 
tt'H iely is either in a state of nature, or is split into two o 
hiore independent political societies. But in a political so 
octy styled a composite state, the sovereignty is so sharec 
by various individuals or bodies, that the one sovereign bod} 
v horeof they are the constituent members, fs not conspl 
ciM us and easily perceived In a political society styled ij 
cc uiiposite state, there is not obviously any party truly sol 
^ vci »Mgn and independent : there is not obviously any par^ 
« ■> aiTuited vnth political powers incapable of l^al limitation^ 
A<Kx>rdingly, I advert to the .nature of a supreme fed^ 
* l^ovemment, to shew that the society which it rules is ml 
; by one Boyereign, or is ruled by a pirty truly soverdgn an< 
i^^ii^itid^pendeut. And adverting to the nature of a composif 
jSt^e, I also advert to the nature of asystem of confedei 
^ites. For the faUadous resemblance of those widely dif- 
^rt at objects, tends to produce a confusion which I thii 
^# / It ercpedient to obviate : and, through a comparison or con 
tra.-t of those widely different objects, I can indicate the 
Uiitiire of the former more concisely and clearly. 

i . In the case of a composite state^ or a supreme federal 

; 'Tnmenty the several united governments of the several 

ti j » : ed societies, together with a government common to thosd 

yK\ oral societies, are jointly sovereign in each of tliose several 

. N» -leties, and also in the larger society arising fix)m the fe- 

KivrA union. Or, since the political powers of the common 

. or general government were relinquished and conferred upon 

it \>y diose several united governments, the nature of a com- 

jKJsite state may be described more accurately thus.;CrAfl 

A ompacted by the common government whicb'they have 

1 oiuiurred in creating, and to which they have severally de- 

^ijegated portions of their several sovereignties, the several 

;:oMimments of the e^eral united societies are jomtly sove- 

i cign in each and allr^ » 

iV wiU appear on a moment's jeflection, that the common 

siV 

. I JUBISPBUDSNGE DETEBMINED. 219 

a ' general government is not sovereign or supreme. It will 
8) lo appear on a moments reflection, that none of the several . 
gi ^vemments is sovereign or supreme, even in the several 
BL ciety of which it is the immediate chief. 
/ If the common or general government were soverdgn or 
Bupreme, the several united societies, though constituting 
one society, would not constitute a composite state : or, a 
Jthough they woidd be governed by a common and supreme 
government, their common and supreme government woidd 
not be federal. For in almost every case of independent j 

'^fjpditical society, several political societies, governed by se- * 
jreral governments, are comprised by the one society which 
Is political and independent: insomuch that a government 

. eupreme and federal, and a government supi^taie but not 

^ederaL are merely distinguished by the following* difierence; ^. 

J^here the supreme government is not federal, each of tiie 
several governments, considered in that character, is purely 
subordinate : or none of the several governments, considered ^"r^j 
in that characto*, partakes of the sovereigpty. But where the ' 
supreme government is properly federal, each of the several 
governments, which were immediate parties to the federal 
compact, is, in that character, a limb of the sovereign body. 
Consequently, although they are subject to the sovereign 
body of which they are constituent members, those several . 
governments, even considered as such, are not purely in a f^ 
state of subjection. — ^But since th98e sever^ governments, 
even considered as s&ch, are not purely in a state of subjec- 
tion, the common or general government which they have i 
concurred in creating is not sovereign or suprenig^ / 

Nor. 'is any'X)f those Wvenal governments sovereign of 
supreme, even m the several society of which it is the im<^ 
mediate chief. Jif those several governments were severally 
sovereign; t&eyiwould not be members of a composite state: 
though, if they /were severally sovereign, and yet were per- 

^ manently compacted, they would form (as I shall shew im* 
mediately) a system of confederated state^V - 

220 

V 

THE FEOYIKCK OF 

iUa^d 

4 To ilLustrate the nature of a gom posite state^ I will ajid 
the following remark to the foregoihg general descriptMn. 
' — ^Neither the immediate tribunals of the common or gene- 
ral government, nor the immediate tribunals of the seveijal 
united governments, are bound, or empowered, to administer 
or execute every command that it may iss^e. The political 
powers of the common or general government, are menHj 
those portiotis of their several sovereignties, which the se- 
veral united governments, as parties to the federal compact, 
have relinquighed and conferred, upon it.^ Consequently, its' 
competence to make laws and to issue other commands, nu^ 
jmd ought to be ezanuned by its own immediate tribonak, 
and also by the inunediate tribunals of tho^Jg yeral u nited 
govemmenta And if^ in making a law or issuing a partir 
vCf^^r^ommand, it exceed the limited powers which it -de- 
rives from the federal compact, all those various tribunals are 
; empowered ancl bound to di^Bey.-^And since eacli<rf4il^e 
united governments, as a party to the federal oompaict, liaa 
relinquished a portion of its sovereignty, neither the immi^ 

' diate tribunals of the common or general government, nor 
the immediate tribunals of the other imited govemmenta^ 

^' nor even the tribunals which itself immediately appoints^ 
are bound, or empowered, to administer or execute every 
command that it may issue. Since each of the im^ted 
governments, as a party to the federal compact, has relink 
quished a portion of its sovereignty, its competence to make 
laws and to issue other commands, may and ought to be 
examined by all those various tribunals. And if it enact a 
law or issue a particular command, as exercising the so- 
vereign powers which it has rehnquished by the compact, 
all dioee various tribunals are empowered and bound to 
disobey- 
X. If, then, the general government were of itself sovereign, 

^)r if the united governments were severally sovereign, the 
united societies, would not constitute one composite stata 
The united societies would constitute one independent so^ 

1 

JUAISPBUDSKCE DETEBMINEi. '22lt 

^y, with a government supreme but not federal ; or ^}aiot 
I societies severally independent, with governments severally , 
preme^ Consequently, the several united govemmehts 
as forming one aggregate body, or they and the general go- 
vernment as forming a similar hody^ are jointly sovereign in 
each of the united societies, and also in the larger society 
arising fix)m the union of alL 

-; Now since the political powers of the common or general 
^government are merely del^ated to it by the several united 
gjov^Tunents, it is not a constituent member of the sovereign 
body, but is merely its subject minister. Oonsequently, the 
abvereigntyof eadi of the unit^ societies, and also of the 
laiger society arising from the union of all, resides in the 
imited governments as forming one aggregate body: that is 
to say, as signifying their joint pleasing or the joint plea- 
sure of a majority of their number, agreeably to the modes 
or forms determined by their federal compact. :^ 

'.^y that aggregate body, the powers of the general go- 
vernment were conferred and determined : and by that agr 
gr^ate body, its powers may be revoked, abridged, or en- 
larged — ^To that aggr^ate body, the several united ge^em- 
ments, though not merely subordinate, are truly in a^state 
<if subjection^. Otherwise, those united governments would 
be severally sovereign or supreme, and the united societies 
would merely constitute a system of confederated states. 
Besides, since the powers of the general government were 
determined by that aggr^ate body, and since that aggr^ate 
body is competent to enlarge those powers, it necessarily 
determined the powers, and is competent to abridge the 
powers, of its own constituent members. For every poli- 
tical power conferred on the general government, is sub- 
. tracted from the several sovereignties of the several united 
governments. — ^From the sovereignty of that aggregate body, 
we may deduce, as a necessary consequence, the fiact which 
I have mentioned above : namely, that the competence of 
the general government, and of any of the united govern- 

V 

1 

222 \ THE PBOTINCB OP • j 

ibenis, may -and ought to be examined by the imme*"*^ 
tribunals of the former, and also by the immediate tribima^ 
of any of the latter. For since the general government, aij 
also the united governments, are subject to that aggr^dU 
body, the respective courts of justice which they respectively 
appoint, ultimately derive their powers from that sovereign 
and ultimate legislature. Consequently, those oourts Kt& 
ministers and trustees of that sovereign and ultimate legis- 
lature, as well as of the siibiect legislatures by whidi thdf 
. are immediately appointed.^.nd, consequently, those oomiU 
' are empowered, and are even bound to disobey, wherever 
those subject l^islatures exceed the limited powers whiek 
that^vereign and ultimate legislature has granted or 1^ 
1h^^ . i 

•}r- ^1^ supreme government of the United St&tes of Americr, 
"ees (I believe) with the foregoing general deseriptioii <)f 
preme federal government. I beUeve that the oommoo 
government, or the govemmait consbting of the coi^gE» 
and the preddent of the united states, is merely a subjefjl^^ 
minister of the united states* governments. I believe th^ 
none of the latter is properly sovereign or supreme, evJtn 
in the state or political society of which it is the immediate 
chief. And, lastly, I believe that the sovereignty of each%f 
the states, and also of the larger state arising from the. Itf 
deral union, resides in the states' governments a« forma^ 
one aggregate body :' meaning by a state's government, not 
its ordinary legislature, but the body of its citizens wlii^h 
appoints its ordinary legislature, and which, the union apisfti 
is properly sovereign therein. If the several immediate 
chiefe of the several united states, were respectivdjr single 
individuals, or were respectively narrow ohgarchieSy the so 
vereignty of each of the states, and also of the larger stai * 
arising from the federal union, would reside in> those sevemi 
individuals, or would reside in those several oligarchies, ttv« 
forming a collective whole.^ ! > 

• The Constitution of the United States, or the constitotion of. tlieir 

JUBISPSUDENCE DBTERHINED. 223 

2/ A comjjHnfite states and a system of confederated states, 
*e broadlyllistinguished by the following essential differ- . 
eiioe. Q[n tie case of a composite state, the several united L. 
aoftieties are one independent society, or are severally sub- \ 
jeit to one sovereign body : which, through its minister the 
general government, and through its members and ministers 
Uie several united governments, is habitually and generally 
obeyed in each of the united societies, and also in the larger 
society ariidng from the union of alQ In the case of a, system 
of confederated states, the several compacted societies are not 
one society, and are not subject to a common sovereign : or 
(changing the phrase) each of the several societies is an in- 
dependent political society, an(ieach of their several govern- 
ments is properly sovereign or supreme. Though the aggre- 
gjEite of the several governments was the framer of the fede^ 
ral compact, and may subsequently pass resolutions concemV 
ing the entire confederacy, neither the terms of that compact^' • 
nor such subsequent resolutions, are enforced in any of the 
societies by the authority of that aggregate, body. To each 
of the confederated governments, those terms and resolu-? 
tions are merely articles of agreement which it spontane- ^^ 
; ously adopts : and they owe their l^al effect, in its own poli- 
tical society, to laws and other commands which it makes 
ob fiishions upon them, and which, of its own authority, it 

geaenl gofvemment, was framed by deputies from the aevend states in 
1787. It may (I think) be inferred from ^e fifth article, that the sove- 
reigaty of each of the states, and also of the laiger state arising from the 
Mual union, resides m the states* governments as forming one aggregate 
body. .. It 4s provided by that article, that '' the congress, whenever two- 
thirds of ;both houses ^11 deem it necessaiy, shall propose amendments 
to this oonstitution ; or, on the application of the l^iidatures of two-thirds 
of the ilerend states, shall call a convention for propomng amendments : 
which amendments, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and pur- 
poses, as^Mut of this constitution, when ratified by the legtslaiuree o/* three- 
fourths of the eeveral MtaieSf or by convention in three-fourths thereof.^ 
8ee also the tenth section of the first arti«de : in which section, some 
of the disabilities of the several states* governments are detennined ex- 
pmdy. 

S24: 

-f9Ea PBOviNCE or 

L^^ivaddresaeB to its own subjects. In short, a systenl of eoSbfi^d^ 

1^ rftti^ states is not essentially different from a|.nuxn}>er ^ 

v.; .{/^ipckpcodent governments connected by an ordinkry aiii;LDoe. 

' [\^lnd vhere independent governments are connacted In' an 

ordinary alliftnnp^ none of the allied govemmenft is ¥ni)j(Ct 

to the allied governments considered as an aggr^^ate li<>';y : 

/ V ■ thoiigL each of the allied governments adopts the tcnn^ dP 

;^i^ vtJic alliance, and commonly enforces those terms^jby laws 

. . and commands of its own, in its own independent boramk* 

r ti^ty^ Indeed, a system of confederated states, and a nuii^ 

of independent governments connected by an i^diitti 
.^, /cannot be distinguished precisely throngh ^ei iil 

^ i ezpresflions. So long as we abide in genera) e 

we can only aflirm generally and vaguely, SY^d dffei 
of the former is intended to be permanentyi vriiif^ 
e of the latter is cominonly intended to be^^ie£j|^ 
id that the ends or purposei^ which are^mb] 
jaih; ^t, iare commonly more numerous, and 
inhr inore complicated, than those which the aUiai 
4empbtes. -:?:;t,2 

,• J believe that the German Confederation, which 
•iTeeedcdto the ancient Empire, is merely a system oj 
dcratecl states. I believe that the present Diet is 
i sombly of ambassadours from several confede] 
•i^^< B ly independent governments : that the resol 
;> ^C% I^iet are merely articles of agreement which eac$ 
t-^.cfiOi derated governments spontaneoiislj _a4ppta : aifi that 
; owe their l^al effect, in each of the ci^mpacted 
y to laws and commands which are fasKidned^: 
^its own immediate chief. I also believe that 
^Confederation was and is of the same nature, 
case of the German, or of the Swiss Confederation, 
' .. of confederated governments enforce jts own^reso! 

those confederated governments are one -conipcwite stjite, 

^_: rather than a system of confederated /Sfat^^ The Ixnly of 

^^jjponfeil^rated governments is properly sovereign --' -^- 

I 

.;.*^' 

ai.}d ta 

■.t'\ 

'V'^. 

^ 

JUSISPBUDENCE DETEBMINBD. ^25^ 

X aggr^ate and sovereign body, each of its constituent 
ambers is properly in a state of subjection. | \ 

Prom the various shapes which sovereignty may ^ •K|"|** of 
ume, or from the various possible forms of su- power, 
preme government, I proceed to the limits, real and imagi- 
nary, of sovereign or supreme power. 

Subject to the slight correctives which I shall '^S^^^ 
state at the close of my discoiu'se, the essential mpontiv«uw. 
difierienoe of a positive law (or the difference that severs it 
from a law which k^not a poative law) may be put in the 
fallowing manner.-^very po^tive la^or every law siiOpIy 
and strictly so called, is set, directly or drcuitously, by a 
sovereign person or body, to a member or members of the 
independent political society wherein that person or body 
is/ sovereign or su preme, CPr (changing the expression) it ;^ 
18 set, directly or arcuitously, by a monarch or sovereign ^^, 
number, to a person or persons in a state of subjection to v^. 
.itsauthon^ ^ 

' V Now it follows from the essential difference of it fouowi 
a positive law, and from the nature of sovereignty Motua difler- 
and independent political society, that the power ndveUw^^ 
of a monarch properly so callejd^ or the power of StL^*"^ 
a sovereign nimiber in its collegiate and sovereign ^S^t^^- 
canadtv, isJnca Mble of Zgya/ limitatio n. Amo-^SJt^^^ 

• narch or soverdgn number bound by a legal duty, if^^SJJJ^^ 
were subject to a higher or superior sovereign : that S2^«*the 

V^ is to say, a monarch or sovereign number bound ^^J [^ 

by a legal duty, were sovereign and not sovereign. J2S^?!^i?L 1 I 

^Supreme power hmited by positive law, is a flat ^^S^^ I I 
contradiction in terms^ . capA6to or 1 * 

Nor would a political society escape from legal tion. 
despotism, although the power of the sovereign were bounded 
by legal restraints. The power of the superior sovereign 
immediately imposing the restraints, or the power <rf some 

VOL. I. Q 

c 

^ 

^ 

1HB FROVINCB OF 

other sovereign superior to that superior, would still be\ 
solutely free from the fetters of positive law.CjFor unlJ 
the imagined restraints were vdtimately imposed by a ; 
vereign not in a state of subjection to a higher or super 
sovereign, a scries of sovereigns ascending to' hifinity wo 
govern the imagined community. Which is impossible i 
absun^ 

Aiierapiior Mouarchs and sovereign bodies have atteraptei^ 
obiSf'Si^ to oblige themselves, or to oblige the successon t<> 
oUigi Se^ their sovereign powers. But in spite of the law^ 
™S5J^^ which sovereigns have imposed on themselves. 
s^KBpoiren. qj. ^^eh they have imposed on the successors fri 
their sovereign powers, the position '* that sovereign power 
is incapable of legal limitation *' will hold universally or 
""] wiihout excq)tion. 

^ - The immediate author of a law of the kind, or any of thb 
90ivereiga successors to that immediate author, may abrc*- 
ft ^gate the law at pleasure. And though the law be not ab- 
rogated, the sovereign for the time being is not constrained 
I* to observe it by a legal or political sanction, t^or if tho 
sovereign for the time being were legally bound to observi- 
it, that present sovereign would be in a state of subjection 
^ to a higher or superior sovereig^ 

As it r^ards the successors to the sovereign or supreme' 

powers,^a law of the kind amounts, at the most, to a roJp 

of positive morality. As it regards its inunediate author. 

i^4 \ it is merely a law by a metaphor. For if we would speak 

^^ ^ ^ A ^th propriety, we cannot speak of a law set by a man <o 

^ himself: though a man may adopt a principle as a guid • 

jV to his own conduct, and may observe it as he would ol - 

^'iJ^eit if he were bound to observe it by a sanction. 

^Jhe laws which. sovereigns affect to impose upon then 

/Selves, or the laws which sovereigns affect to impose upc 

th^ followers, are merely principles or maxims which th€> 

adopt as guides, or which they commend as guides to their 

successors in sovereign power^ A departure by a sovo- 

i I 

JURI8PRDDBKCB DETERMINED. 227 

gn or state finom a law of the kind in question, ie not 

If a law whidi it sets to its subjects conflict with ^ 

law of the kind, the former is legally valid, or legally ^ 

iding. 

For ezanlple: The sovereign Boman people solemnly 
VK ►ted or resolved, that they would never pass, or even take 
in to oonnderation, what I will venture to denominate a hiH r 
c^* pains and penalties. For though, at the period in ques- 
ti m, the Boman people were barbarians, they keenly felt 
a truth which is often forgotten by legislators in nations 
h Mating of refinement : namely, that punishment ought to 
bednflicted agreeably to prospective rules, and not in pur- 
mnice of particular and ex past facto commands. This 
8ol4mn resolution or vote was passed with the forms of le- 
fpalation, and was inserted in the twelve tables in the fol-^^r-^^ 
lowing imperative terms : privilegia ne arroganto. But Jfr \ 
though the resolution or vote was passed with the forms of \ 
lemlation, although it was clothed with the expressions ap- 
fttopriate to a law, and although it was inserted as a law 
.in' a code or body of statutes, it scarcely was a law in the 
'proper acceptation of the term, and certainly was not a law 
^funply and strictly so called.^ By that resolution or vote, 
the sovereign people adopted, and commended to their suc- 
cessors in the sovereignty, an ethical principle or mazinD^V^^ 
The present and future sovereign which the resolution af- 
fected to oblige, was not bound or estopped by it. Frivi- 
l^es enacted in spite of it by the sovereign Boman people, 
wcbre not illegal The Boman tribunals might not have 
treated them as l^ally invalid acts, although they conflicted 
with the maxim, wearing the guise of a law, privilegia ne 
irroganto. 

Again : By the authors of the union between England 
and Scotland, an attempt was made to oblige the legisla- 
ture, which, in consequence of that union, is sovereign in 
both countries. It is declared in the Articles and Act, that 
the preservation of the Church of England, and ci the Kirk 

.^> '^^ 

■^• 

\ 

228 THE PROVINCE OF I ^ 

if' of Scotland, is a fundamental condition of the union : /ir 

in other words, that the Parliament of Great Britain sh^il! 
not abolish those churches, or make an essential change i 
their structures or constitutions Now^ so long as the bi h 
of either nation shall r^ard its established church with k ri* 
and respect, the abolition of the church by the British B ir 
liament would be an immoral act : for it would violate j o- 
sitive morality which obtains with the bulk of the nati< 9u 
or would shock opinions and sentiments which the bulk of 
the nation holds. Assuming that the church establishmc ut 
is commended by the revealed law, the abolition would |)e 
irreligious: or, assuming that the continuance of the est*^ 
blishment were conmiended by general utility, the abo^i 
tion, as generally pernicious, would also amount to a ei*f. 
But no man, talking with a meaning, would call a parl\t 
itary abolition of either or both of the churches an ill< 
act For if the parliament for the time being be flo\\- 
in England and Scotland, it cannot be bound lega^' 
that condition of the union which affects to confer i& 
mortality upon those ecclesiastical institutions. That ccu- 
dition of the union is not a positive law, but is counsel or 
advice offered by the authors of the union to future su- 
preme l^slatures. • ' - • 
The mem- By the two cxamplcs which I have now i^d- 
S^SiSt^* duced, I am led to consider the meanings of tho 
H^^j^uJ ejyithet unconstitutional, as it is contradistinguishcl 
jJj^SS^J^to the epithet illegal, and as it is applied to a)i:- 
the ev»ithet ^^(.J ^f g^ mouarch, or to conduct of a sovereign 

Uleaal, and 

*u^ to^n- ^""^b^r in its collegiate and sovereign capacity, 
dactofmmo- The epithet unconstitutionaL as thus opposed 8i: i 
conduct of m applied, IS sometimcs used with a meamng wnx i 
number in ita is morc general and vague, and is sometimies us^ . 
sovereign with a meaning which is more special and d\ : 
^*^*^'^* nite. I will begin with the former. . 

1. In every, or almost every, independent political s(>- 
ciety, there are principles or maxims which the sovereicrn 

! JUBISPRUDEKCB DETKSMINBD. 229 

^itually observes, and which the bulk of the society, or 
bulk of its influential members, regard with feeling of 
approbation. Not unfrequently, such maxims are expressly 
ao^opted, as well as habitually observed, by the sovereign or 
More commonly, they are not expressly adopted by ^ 
sovereign or state, but are simply imposed upon it by \^ 
lions prevalent in the community. '^Whether they are 
crassly adopted by the sovereign or state, or are simply 
imbosed upon it by opinions prevalent in the community, it 
isjbound or constrained to observe them by merely moral ^i-^ 
8ahctions.*>Or (changing the phrase) in case it ventured to 
derviate from a maxim of the kind in question, it would not 
and could not incur a legal pidn or penalty, but it probably 
would incur censure, and might chance to meet with resis- 
tance, from the generality or bidk of the governed. 
^jNow, if a law or other act of a monarch or soverdgn | 
number conflict with a maxim of the kind to. which I have I ys/V; 
adverted above, the law or other act may be called unoansH' I J 

\iuiianal (in that more general meaning which is sometimes ' 
given to the epithetjT^ For example : The ex post facto sta- 
tutes which are styled acts of attainder, may be called un- 
coMtitutioncUj though they cannot be called iUegal. For they 
. conflict vnth a principle of legislation which parliament has 
habitually observed, and which is regarded with approba- 
tion by the bulk of the British community. 
Ctn short, when we style an act of a sovereign an unconsti- 
tutumal act (with that more general import which is some- 
times given to the epithet), we mean, I believe, this : That 
the act is^ consistent with some given principle or maxim :| 
that the given supreme government has expressly adopted 
the principle, or, at least, has habitually observed it: that 
the bulk of the given society, or the bulk of its influential 
members, regard the principle with approbation : and that, 
since the supreme government has habitually observed tlie 
principle, and since the bulk of the society r^ard it with 
approbation, the act in question must thwart the expecta- 

^Il- 

.*W ,. IHB raOTIX€B m 

tioiMof 4ie htter, and mint diock their opmk^ 
note. Unlen we mean this, we merefy mean that we " 
^ — ^ Mt in question generally peraka^ 4X that, without! a 
. definite reason for the difltppn^Mtiicm whk^ we fed, we K^ 
gnd the act with didike. 

2. The q>ithet tmctmstUuiumal as applied to conduct ni 
a sovereign, and as used with the meaning which is mo nc 
"< ^wdal and definite, imports that the conduct in queslii ii 
<»ifikte with cmsfi^tttj<^ 

And herel would fariefly remailc, that I mean by the ek- 
pK^esaion earialiiuiianal fat9,the positive moraIity,or the com- 
^ pound of positive monJity and podtive kw, whidi fixes tluf 
constitution.or structure of the given supreme govemmebt. 
I mean the positive morality, or the compound of podtivi 
r ^'^^'^^ ^^ podtive law, which determines the clMuract& r 
^'^r^>^' <^ the person, or the req>ective diarscteni of this penons,iii 
^ whom, for the time being, the soverdgnty diaU redde : m^ 
/ ' supposing the government in question an aristocracy v 
government of a number, which determines moreover tlfe 
mode wherein the sovereign powers shall be shared by tlic 
o^Bstitu^it members of the sovereign number or body^ ) 
v.Now, against a monarch properly so called, or against ti 
sovereign body in its coU^iate and sovereign capaci^, con- 
stitutional law is podtive morality merely, or is enforced 
^ ^lereW Iby ^QoralMn^ons : though, as I shall shew herfe- 
Jatterjit may amount to positive law, or may be ^iforoed Ik 
V ^fff^ sanctionsy^against the members of the body considero«l 
severallvX The soverei^ for the time being, or the pn»- 
decessorSof the sovereign, may have expresdy adopted, aiKl 
expresdy promised to observe it But whether vCCHistitu- 
tional law has thus been expressly adopted, or dmply con 
sists of prindples current in the political community, it «- 
merely guarded, against the spvereign, by sentiments or feci 
ings of the governed. Consequently, although an act of tlii: 
sovereign which violates constitutional law, may be styled ^t 
with propriety uncanstituiiancUy it is not an infringementriof ^ 

■".\ 

! JUSISPRUDEKCB DETEBMINED. 231 

kiir simply and stricUy so called, and cannot be style^ with vv^i^ 
pi/opriety illegal. 

I For example: From the ministry of Cardinal Eichdieu 
d6wn to the great revolution, the king for the tune being 
was virtually sovereign in France. But, in the same countiy, 
and during the same period, a traditional maxim cherished 
by the courts of justice, and rooted in the affections of the 
Jsilk of the people, determined the succession to the throne : 
Jt determined Uiat the throne, on the demise of an actual 
occupant, should invariably be taken by the person who 
then might happen to be heir to it agreeably to the canon . w^^^ 
of inheritance which was named the Salic law. Now, in « 
case an actual king, by a royal ordinance or law, had at- 
tempted to divert the throne to his only daughter and child, 
that royal ordinance or law might have been styled with per- 
fect propriety an unconstitutional act It would have con- 
flicted with the traditional maxim which fixed the constitu- 
tion of the monarchy, and which was guarded from infringe- 
ment by sentiments prevalent in the nation. But illegal it 
could not have been called : for, inasmuch as the actual king 
was virtually sovergign, he was inevitably independent of 
l^al obhgation. ^Nay, if the governed had resisted the 
unconstitutional orainance, their resistance would have been 
illegal or a breach of positive law, though consonant to the' 
positive morality which is styled constitutional law, and per- 
haps to that principle of utility which is the test of positive 
rul^?^ 

Again : An act of the British parliament vesting the s8- 
vereignty in the king, or vesting the sovereignty in the king 
and the upper or lower house, would essentially alter the 
structure of our present supreme government, and might 
therefore be styled with propriety an unconstitutional law. 
In case the imagined statute were also generally pernicious, 
and in case it offended moreover tlic generality or bulk of 
the nation, it might be styled irreligious and immoral as 
well as unconstitutional. But to call it illegal were absurd: 

^^ 

tJ 

232 THE FSOVIKCE OF } 

lot if the parliament for the time being be sovereign in tJhc 
. united kingdom, it is the author, directly or drcuitously, jof 
V all our positive law, and exclusively sets us the measure oi 
legal justice and injustice.?^ 

TlieaMuiiiig * It is affirmed by Hobbes, in his maaterly treatises o:> 

cTHoywi't govenunent, that '' no law can be unjust : ** which propositiori 

Sd^STTnoUw ^^** 1^^®^^ deemed by many, an immoral or pernicious paradox. 

f^S* ■&- If -we look at the scope of the treatises in which it occurs, <>. 

^^ even at the posssges by which it is immediately followed, Wt; 

diaU find that the proposition is neither pernicious nor paradoxical, but is 

merely a truism put in unguarded terms. ^His mesning is obviously this: 

i^^ that ** no positive Uw is Ugally unjust«P And ihe decried proposition, as 

tiius understood, is indisputably true. For positive law is ^e measure or 

tert of legal justice and injustice : and, consequently, if podtiye law might 

be l^gaUy unjust, posidve law might be unjuiit as measured or tried by it- 

i0el£ In the psssages immediately following, he tells us that positiye Uw 

'may be generally pernicious : that is to say, may conflict with the Divine 

.'■ I , ..Ittw which general utility indicates, and, as meamired or tried by that law, 

'/"• ' ' may be unjust He mi^t have added, that it alto may be unjust as mea- 

.V snred by positive morality, although it must needs be just as meas n aedty 

itself^ and although it happen to be just as measured by the law of God. 

Jugtormm- / For jW^ Or unjust^ jvstice or injustice, is a term of relative 

J^juBiiee 4md varying import. Whenever it is uttered with a determi- 

a't«rm of i^ °^*6 meaning, it is uttered with relation to a determinate law 

Utive and va- which the speaker assumes as a standard of comparison. This 

is liinted by Locke at the end of the division of laws which I 

have inserted in my fiflh lecture : and it is, indeed, so manifest, on a little 

sustained reflection, that it hardly needs the authority of that great and 

venerable name. 

By the epiijhet justf we mean that a given object, to wliich we apply t^e 
epithet, accords with a given law to which we refer it as to a test And as 
that which is just conforms to a determinate law, justice is the conformity 
of a given object to the same or a similar measure : for justice is the ab- 
stract term which corresponds to the epithet ^'us^ By the epi^];pt unjust, 
we mean that the given object conforms not to the given law. CAnd since 
the term injustice is merely the corresponding abstract, it signifies the non- 
conformity of the given and compared object to that determinate law which 
is assumed as the standard of comparison.-^nd since such is the relative 
nature of justice and injustice, one and the same act may be just nW^just 
I as tried by different measures. Or (changing the expression) an act may 

be just as agreeing with a given law, although the act itself, and the law 
\ with wliich it agrees, are l)Olh of them unjust as compared witli a different 

Eff ' <**ile. For cxaiiij[>le : Where positive law conflicts with positive morality, 

jnilSPRUDENCB DETERMINED. 283 

d 

18 
u 

But when I affirm that the power of a soverdgn Q^g g^ 
incapable of legal limitation, I always mean by ■»«!*fw'«f* 

a 80verei£rn, a monarch properly so called, or a bodxarein 
scvereign number m its collegiate and sovereign jeetioo to the 

tb It whidi is just as tried by tbe former, is ako unjust as tried by the 
Mter : or where law or morality conflicts with the law of God, that which 
Mj ust as tried by the human rule, is also unjust as tried by the Divine. 
r^Thoo^ it signifies conformity or nonconformity to any determinate law, 
Se termjuitice or injustice sometimes denotes emphatically, confonnity or 
aoooonformity to the ultimate measure or test : namely, the law of GoO 
^Ehis is t]ie meaning annexed to jusUcej when law and justice are opposed : 
wlien a positive human rule is styled unjust. And when it is used with 
tills meaning, ytisfiiM is nearly equivalent to gmeral utility. The only dif- 
ftrence between them consistB in this : that, as agreeing immediately with 
the law of Ood^ a given and compared action l»ju8t; whilst, as agreeing 
immediately with ^principle which is the index. to the law of God, that 
given and compared action is generally u9e/ul.\Axid hence it arises, that 
when we style an action just or unjust, we not uncommonly mean that it 
is generally useful or pemidousuL 

r Bui though justice is nothing more than conformity to a given law, and 
^bough justice is therefore an emanation and not a fountain of law, a justice 
• smterior to law, and of which law is the creature, has been imagined by 
^writers on j urisprudence. For example^ In the excerpt from Ulpian whidh 
is placed at the beginning of the Digests, yu« or law is derived fiom justice, 
or IB made the child of its own ofilspring. " Juri operam daturum ** (says 
Ulpian) " prius nosne oportet, unde nomen j uris descendat. Est autem a jus- 
titia appellatum : nam, ut el^anter Cehsus definit, jus est ars boni et asqui.** * 

nie probable meaning of thi^i celebrated jargon it is not very eacy to 
detect But it is likely that Ulpian ineant hj justice^ general utility : and 
that, in deriving law from justice, he meant that every law is or ought to 
be fashioned on that great principle of ethics. . For (as I have already re- 
VMA^d) justice is ofieu synonymous with general utility ^ although it pro- 
perly signifies conformity to a given law : and (as I shall now demonstrate) 
** M," or " is not," and " aught to be," or " ought not to be," are frequently 
blended and confounded by writere upon law and morality. 

The existence of a law is one thing : its merits or demerits Q^fg^^f^g^^ ^ 
are anotlier thing. Whether a law ht^ is one inquiiy : whether *< m,** or ** u 
it ought to be, or whether it agree with a given or assumed S^||l^ i^ 
test, is another and a distinct incjuiry. Altliough it disagree ^ m^Umght 
with a given or assumed test, a law set by the state, or a law 

* It appears from • MS. note that the Author inlendcd to trMt ** the sbftnct Justice of 
tkm Konuo lawyciB "* more st lengths— S. A. 

(11 

234 THE PBOVIKCE OF ; 

. bodjr, nd Vcapadty. ) Considered collectively, <mp conaiden .1 
SlgiiUj ^ In its corporate character, a sovereign number is 

impoted by opinion, £9 a law which the state has set, or a law which opini »r. 
has imposed : just as a yard or bnahel used in a town or prorinoe, butd i- 
fering from the yard or bushel prescribed by the sorereign legislature, u 
yard or bushel to the inhabitants of the town or proTince, althoqgh it ia r. 
fidse measure in relation to the legal standard. ' 

VHien stated in general expressions, the difference between " u,** or ^;:£ 
fiof,** and ^* aught to be,** or ^^ aught not to be,** is palpable. But ^baogh 
the difference is palpable, when stated in general expreanons, an ezposiUoo 
of the particular cases wherein it has been ibigottoi, would occupy a bulky 
Tolume. Of the numerous particular cases wherein tha palpable diffvenoe 
has been completely fi>rgottBB^'ihe following may senre is aamplea. 

1. Sir William Blackstone, in the second section oPhis IntroductioD, 
talks in the following manner. He tells us ** thit the laws of God (whether 
they are revealed, or are indicated by general utility) are superior in obli- 
gation to any other ]aw8:.diat nojhi^man laws are of any vididity, if con- 
w'^j ' imy to them : that all human laws which are valid, deriye all th^ force 
and all their authority, mediately or Immediately, fixwn thesis divine ori^- 
^': nak:** - "' ;■ 

The foregoing paaaage would seem to import, that no human law whi^h 

^^ conflicts widi the law of God, is obligatory or binding : or (changing ^ 

expression) that no human law which conflicts with the law of God, is s 

law imperative and proper. For as every imperative law necessarily impos«y^ 

a duty, a law imperative, but not binding, implies a contradicti^ in termji 

If be had said that a human law which conflicts with the law of Gout 
avght not to be imposed, he would have said truly. TFot a human lasr 
which conflicts with that ultimate test, and a human law which ought nut 
y^Ji>e imposed, are one and the same object denoted by different phrasea. 
v.But to say that a human law which conflicts with the law of God, is 
• therefore not binding, or not valid, is to talk stark nonsenseTl 

Numberleiss human laws adverse to general utility, have been and ar • 
enforced in every age and nation : and yet such human laws conflict wit4. 
; the law of God as known through the very exponent adopted by BlackstQr\- 
^ himself. 

In case I commit an act which is innocuous or positively useful, but " 
which the sovereign legislature has anoexed a capital punishment, the tri- 
bunal which tries me enforces the law, in spite of its mischievous tendency* 
If I object to the indictment, **jJ»»4.^<> }s^\y J^ aJYfir^ft ^ wHIiiy' »» « tha» 
by necessary consequence, it conflicts with the law of God ; " and " th^t 
by equally necessary consequence, it is not binding or valid; " the tribun:.* 
'demonstrates the unsoundness of my objection, by hanging me up in pur 
suance of the law which I impugn. \ ■ 

V .' r 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMU^ED. ^^^35 

8di7creign and independent: but, considered se- boaa^ieren 
verolly, t he ind ividuals and smallea: a^r^ates orSTLij, 

2. From the assamed inoonsistency of aUyerj with the law of God or 
K lure, it is not unfreqnently inferred, by fanatical enemies of the insd^- 
tKb, that the master hasno rights or cannot have a right, to the slave-^If . 
they said that his right is pernicious, and that therefore he aught not to. 
have ity they would speak to the purpose. B^ to dispute theexistence or 
posnbili^ of the right, is to talk absurdlyr^or in eveiy age, and in al- 
Hght has been giYeiTby positive law^T 

t every nation, the Hght has been given by positive law^whilst that 
pemicxms disposition of positive law, has been backed by the positive mo- 
lafitjT of the free or master classes. 

*'^. In Paley's applauded definition of political or civil liberty, useful po- 
litical liberty, or political liber^ as it aught to be, is mistaken for the thing 
to be defined. 

According to Paley, ** civil liberty is the not being restrained by any law, 
but what conduces in a greater degree to the public wel&re: ** to do what 
we will, is natural liberty : to do what we will, consistently with the interest 
of the community to whidi we belong, is civil liberty.** . ^ ' . 

Now (as I shall shew hereafter) political or dvil liberty is the Hber^ 
fiom legal obligation, which is left or granted by a sovereign government' 
to any of its own subjects. Con»equently, political liberty is liberty^ al- 
tliough it be generally najschiiyvous ; as l^gal restraint is rtstraifU^ although 
it be generally usefuL If yoig jike, y ou my give the name of liberty to re- 
■fenunt which you deem boieficent, and withhold the name of liberty from 
liberty which yoa-xieem-pcmidQUs. But, by thus abuang speech, you 
throw not a ray of light on the nature of political liberty. You merely 
thicken the ambiguities with which language is perplexed, and which are 
tiie main hindrances to clear and determinate thinking. 

4. All the older writers on the so called law of nations, incessantly blend ^ 
and confound international law as it is, with international law as it ought \ 
to be : with that indeterminate something which they suppose it would be, J 
if it conformed to the indeterminate something which they sfyle the law of / 
nature. / 

Of all the more celebrated writers on the so called law of nations, Yon 
Martens of Gottingen (who died some few years ago) was the first to per- 
ceive steadily the palpable difi^erence in quesdon. He was the first to sever 
distinctly actual international morality, from the morality, whatever it be, 
which ought to obtain between nations. From the cuitomary conduct of 
nations in their various relations to one another, he endeavoured to collect 
the morality which nations habitually observe. And to this actual morality, 
collected by this induction, he gave the diHtinctive name of ** positive inter- 
national law/* or ^* practical international law : ** '* positives oder practisches 
Vdlkerrecht." 

236^ !rHB PROVINCE OF 

^ri^of conappsing ^haLfioyereign number are subject 
tbeaathor. tho^Bupreme body of whidT^i^arejwinpone 
1 1 P^t^ Consequently, though the body is inevitably indep 
1 1 dent of legal or poliUcal duty, any of the individuals or i 
I I gregates whereof the body is composed may be l^ally bot 
I by laws of which the body is the author. For ^cample : A 
member of the house of lords, or a member of the house b! 
commons, may be l^aUy bound by an act of parliament 
which as, one of the sovereign l^slature, he has concorred 
with others in making. Nay, he may be l^ally bound by 
statutes, or by rules made judicially, which have immedi- 
ately proceeded from subject or subordinate legislatures ; 
for a law which proceeds immediately frY)m a subject or 
subordinate legislature is set by the authori^ of' the su 

r,^^ .:^i^d hence an important difference between monarchic-> 

Y of governments of one, and aristocracies or governments ^qf 

I anumbei^ ^ - i 

b ^ , Against a monarch properly so called, or against a sov^ 

^ '^ / reign number in its collegiate and sovereign capacity, con- 

^^l stitutional law (as I have remarked already) is enforced, (\r 

*^v I protected from infringement, by merely moral ^nction^. 

fj. Against a monarch properly so called, or against a sovereign 

^ number in its collegiate and sovereign capacity, constitiA 

y* tional law and the law of nations are nearly in the sano^e 

f predicament. Each is positive morality rather than positi^' 

i law. The former is guarded by sentiments current in the 

f- given community, as the latter is guarded by sentiments 

current amongst nations generally. ' > 

But, considered severally, the members of a sovercagn 

body, even as members of the body, may be legally boun^; 

by laws of which the body is the author, and whicii Te^j\ 

the constitution of the given supreme government. ^1. 

case it be clothed with a legal sanction, or the means of en ! 

forcing it judicially be provided by its -author, a law set by 

the body to any of its own members. is properly a positive 

JUBISPRUDEKCB DETERMINED. M 237 

[It is properly a positive kw, or a law stricdy so called, 
aliHough it be imposed upon the obliged party as a member 
o^the body which sets it If the means of enforcing it Ju- 
ly be not provided by its author, it is rather a rule of 
itive morality than a rule of positive law. But it wants 
^e essentials of a positive law, not through the character 
of the party to whom it is set or directed, but because it is 
not invested with a legal or poUtical sanction, or is a law 
of imperfect obligation in the sense of the Boman jurists. — 
Li case the law be invested with a legal or political sanction, 
Atd.r^ard the constitution or structure of the given su- 
preme government, a breach of the law, by the party to 
whom it is set, is not only unconstitutional, but is also ille^ 
goL The breach of the law is unconstitutional, inasmuch as 
the violated law regards the constitution of the state. The 
breach of the law is also illegal, inasmuch as the violated 
law may be enforced by judicial procedure. 

For example : The king, as a limb of the parliamtent, 
might be punishable by act of parliament, in the event of 
his transgressing the hmits which the constitution has set 
to his authority : in the event, for instance, of his pretend* 
ing to give to a proclamation of his own the legal effect of 
a statute emanating from the sovereign legislature. Or the 
members of either house might be punishable by act of par- 
liament, if, as forming a limb of the parliament, they ex- 
ceeded their constitutional powers : if, for instance, they 
pretended to give that legal effect to an ordinaiAj^^or reso- 
lution of their own body. 
..^^-'f^^rhere, then, the supreme government is a monarchy or 
government of one, constitutional law, as agadnst that go- 
vernment, is inevitably nothing more than positive mom-l 
lity. Where the supreme government is an aristocracy or 
government of a number, constitutional law, as against Uie 
members of that government, may either consist of positive 
morality,* or of a compound of positive morality and positireV"^ 
law. Against the sovereign body in its corporate and sove- 

288 THE PROVIXCE OP *^v 

. reign character, it is inevitably nothing more than positf v< 
V morality. But against the members considered severally. 
^ be they individuals or be they aggregates of individuals^' m 
yj may be guarded by legal or political, as well as by moral 
sanctions. ^'^ 

In £Bu;t or practice, the members considered severally, bin 
considered as members of the body, are commonly free, 
wholly or partiallyi horn legal or political restraints. For 
example : The king as a limb of the parliament, is not li* 
sponsible legally, or cannot commit a legal injury : and, is 
partaking in conduct of the assembly to which he immeqt- 
ately belongs, a member of the house of lords, or a member 
of the house of commons, is not amenable to positive law. 
But though this freedom from legal restraints may be highly 
useful or expedient, it is not necessary or inevitd^le. Coii - 
bidered severally, the members of a sovereign body, be they 
individuals or be they aggr^ates of individuals, may dearly 
J>e legally amenable, even as members of the body, to laws 
_ the body imposes. f 

And here I may remark, that if a member considered se- ^ 
verallj, but considered as a member of the body, be wholty 
or partially free from legal or political obligation, that la- 
gaily irresponsible aggregate, or that legally irresponsible 
individual, is restrained or debarred in two ways from m 
unconstitutional exercise of its legally unlimited power. 1. 
like the sovereign body of which it is a member, it i.s 
. / ^^bliged or restrained morally : that is to say, it is controlled 
^ / by opinions and sentiments current in the given commu- 
nity. 2. If it affected to issue a command which it is nek 
empowered to issue by its constitutional share in the sove- 
reignty, its unconstitutional command would not be legally 
binding, and disobedience to that command would therefon 
not be illegal. Nay, although it would not be respon^bl- 
legally for thus exceeding its powers, those whom it con 
missioDcd to execute its unconstitutional command, woulti 
probably be amenable to positive law, if they tried to ac 

\ 

s 

JUBISrUUDEXCE DETERMINED. 239 

con iplish their mandate. For example : If the king or either \ 
of t he houses, by way of proclamation or ordinance, Affected 
to establish a law equivalent to an act of parliament, the / 
pretended statute would not be legally binding, and dis- / 
obcndience to the pretended statute would therefore not be 
illegal And although the king or the house would not be \ 
responsible l^ally for this supposed violation of constitu- \ 
tional law or morality, those whom the king or the house \ 
might order to enforce the statute, would be hable civilly or J 
criminally, if they attempted to execute the order. ^^^ ^ 

I have affirmed above, that, taken or considered severally, 
all the individuals and aggregates composing a sovereign 
number are subject to the supreme body of which they are 
component parts. By the matter contained in the lastpa^ 
ragraph, I am led to dear the proposition to wU^rl^r^TEave 
now adverted, from a seeming (Acuity. 

Generally speaking, if a membra of a sovereign body, 
taken or consid/»:t;a aeverally, be not amenable to positive 
1a]w» it IS merely as a member of the body that he is free 
fr^m legal obligation. Generally speaking, he is bound, in ^ 
hte other characters, by legal restraints. But in some of the ^^ 
i^4ixed aristocracies which are styled limited monarchies, the 
^\o called limited monarch is exempted or absolved completely 
• fix)m legal or political duty. For example : According to a 
maxim' of the English law, the king is incapable of commit- 
ting wrong : that is to say, he is not responsible legally for 
aught that .he may please to do. or for any forbearance or ^ 
omission. 

But though he is absolved completely from legal or po- \ 
litical duty, it cannot be thence inferred that the king is 
sovereign or supreme, or that he is not in a state of subjec- 
tion to the sovereign or supreme parliament of which he is 
a constituent member. 

Of the niunerous proofs of this negative conclusion, which 
it were easy to produce, the following will amply suffice. — 
1. Although he is free in fact from the fetters of positive 

240 THE HIOVINCE OP 

/ 

I 

determinate and sovereign body, he is not properly sove- 
reign: for such habitual obedience consists not with that 
independence which is one of the essentials of sovereignty. 

law, he is not incapable of legal obligation. A law of i the 
sovereign parliament, made with his own assent, might len- 
der himself and his successors legally responsible. Bi t a 
monarch properly so called, or a sovereign number in 
corporate and sovereign character, cannot be rendered 
any contrivance, amenable to positive law. — 2. If he aflr« it 
to transgress the limits which the constitution has seii u 
his authority, disobedience on the part of the governed Vo 
his unconstitutional commands, would not be ill^al : whil(9! 
the ministers or instruments of his unconstitutional cofn- 
mands, would be legally amenable, for their unconstitutioiv.'^] 
obedience, to laws of that sovereign body whereof he .i^ 

1 1 merely a limb. But commands issued by sovereigns canr' n 
^*4*he^dfisobeyed by their subjects without an infringement t>f 

llpositiveSaw: whilst the ministers or instruments of suet a 
sovereign cxjmmand, cannot be legally responsible to i^^iy 
portion of the community, excepting the author of their 
mandate. — 3. He habitually obeyiTlhe' hwa^el by the m^ 

•^ vereign body of which he is a constituent membOTT^^ff-J?^ 
did not, he must speedily yield his office to a less refractcj V 
successor, or the British constitution must speedily expii • . 
If he habitually broke the laws set by the sovereign bocivy 
the other members of the body would probably devise a n^ . 
medy : though a prospective and definite remedy, fitted- 
meet the contingency, has not been provided by positi 
law, or even by constitutional morality. Consequently, J; 
is bound by a cogent sanction to respect the laws of .t;)o 
body, although that cogent sanction is not predetermine^! 
lind certain. A law which is set by the opinion of tlio 
upper and lower houses "(besides a law which is set by tl je 
opinion of the community at larga) constrains him to obseriie 
habitually the proper and positive laws which are set by the 
entire parliament. — But habitually obeying the laws of e I 

di^tprminntp flnd snvf»rf»ifm hnflxT-. hp is not nronerlv sov(»- < 

\ 

^ / oDENGB DETBRMINED. 241 

/ And liabitually obeying the laws of a certain and supireme 
"^body, he is really in a state of subjection to that certain and 
supreme body, tiiough the other members of the body, to- 
gether witl^the rest of the community, are commonly styled 
his subjects,^ It is mainly through tie forms of procedure 
which obtain in the courts of justice, that he is commonly 
conflidered sovereign, ^e is clothed by the British consti- 
tution, or rather by the parliament of which he is a limb, 
tnth subordinate political powers of administering the law, 
or rather of supervising its administratioi^ Infiingements 
of the law are, therefore, in the style of procedure, offences 
against the king. In truth, they are not offences against 
the king, but against that sovereign body of kid|?, lords, and 
commons, by which our positive law is directl^ or circuit- 
ously established. And to that sovereign body, and not to 
the king, the several members of the body, t^ether with 
the rest of the community, are truly s ubject 

• But if sovereign or supreme power TOincapa- 'j^Sj^^ 
ble of l^al limitation, or if every supreme go- ci^iiubert^, 
vemment be l^ally absolute, wherein (it may be ^ npTMed 
asked) doth political liberty consist, and how do tw«enft«c 
the supreme governments which are commonly gov^^ 
deemed firee, differ fix)m the supreme govern- 
ments which are commonly deemed despotic ? 

I answer, that political or civil liberty is the li berty fip m 

vemment to any of its own subjects : and that, since the 
power of the government is incapable of l^al limitation, 
the government is l^ally free to abridge their political li- 
berty, at its own pleasure or discretional say it is legally 
fi-ee to abridge their political liberty, at its own pleasure or ^^ 
discretion. For a government may be hmdered hj positive 
morgUty from abridging the political liberty which it leaves ^^ 
or grants to its subjects : and it is bound by the law of God, 
as known through the principle of utiUty, not to load them ^ ^ 
with legal duties which general utiUty OMidemns. — ^There 
VOL. J. H 

^i 

v^*'- 

t 

242 THE PSOVIKCB c. 

J 

are kinds of liberty fix)m I^al obligation, which will xkoi 
quadrate with the forgoing description : for persons in . 
state of nature are independent of political duty, and i^: 
dependence of political duty is one of the essentials of so- 
vereignty. But political or civil liberty supposes politic iif 
society, or supposes a xoXi^ or civitas : and it is the liber i\ 
from l^al obligation which is left by a state to its subject-^, 
r I rather than the liberty fix>m legal obligation which is inhe- 

rent in sovereign power. 

Pohdcal or dvil liberty has been erected into an idol, and 

extolled with extravagant praises by doting and fanatical wc^- 

j shippers. But political or dvil liberty is not more wortHy 

[o : : • of eulogy than political or l^al restraint. Political or dtil 

tK. ':;^ liberty, like political or l^al restraint, may be generally use 

\^1 ^1 till, or generally pernicious iCand it is not as being liberty, 

p^ :^ but as conducing to the general good,^at political or civil 

/^^ -'iW liberty is an object deserving applause^^ ; \ 

A' ■ To the ignorant and bawling fanatics who stun you w|lh 

fj^ ;> ^ their pother about Uberty, political or civil liberty seems (to 

F^^y^v \/ be the principal end for which government ought to exist. 

But the final cause or purpose for which government ought 

to exist, is the furtherance of the common weal to the greatest 

extent ^And it must mainly attain the purpose fcr 

which it ought to exist, by two sets of means : Jirst^ by con- 

, ferring such rights on its subjects as^g eneral utilit y com- 

4- mends^^nd byLJmposirtgjggch.relatiYe duties (o r duties. cpf- 

^ responding to the rights) as are necessar^^ the enjoymjeait 

ofjthejormer : secondly, by imposing-^ucluahsolute -dupos 

(or by imposing such duties without corresponding rig&i 

as tend to promote the good of, the.poUticd commimity/^ 

large, although the; ^ p romote not speciallyjhB-interests t - 

det;ierminate-partieaL^Now he who is clothed with a le i 

right, is also clothed with a politicaMiberty : that is to s. y 

he has the hberty firom legal obligation, which is necess.n 

to the enjoyment of the right. Consequently, in so &r as 

i^ attains its appropriate purpose by conferring rights upon 

its subjects, government aUafixi's \}^^\. ^\xt^^ xJ^t^^xy:^ the 

4 

^ 

JUBISFEUDENGE DETEBHINED. 243 

medium of political liberty. But since it must impose a 
duty wherever it confers a right, and should also impose 
duties which have no corresponding rights, it is less through 
the medium of political liberty, tbui through that of legal 
restndnt, that government must attain the purpose for which 
it ought to exist To say that political liberty ought to be 
its prindpal end, or to say that its principal end ought to 
be I^ld. restraint, is to talk absurdly : for each is merely a 
mean to^that furtJierance of the common weal, which is they (/^ 
onfy ultimate object of good or beneficent sovereignty. But 
though both proportions are absurd, the latter of the two 
absurdities is the least remote from the truth. — ^As I shall 
show hereafter, political or civil liberties rarely exist apart A- 
irom tx>rresponding l^al restraints. cJIThere persons in a 
state of subjection are free from l^al duties, their liberties 
(generally speaking) would be nearly useless to themrV^^^*-^ 
selves, unless they were protected in the enioyment of their 
liberties, by l^al duties on their Tellowsj^that is to say, 
unless they had legal rights (importmg such duties on 
their fellows) to those political liberties which are left them 
by the sovereign government. I am legally free, for exam- 
ple, to move from place to place, in so far as I can move 
from place to place consistently with my legal obligations : 
but this my political liberty would be but a sony liberty, 
^unless my fellow-subjects were restrained by a political duty 
from assaulting and imprisoning my body. Through the 
ignorance or n<^ligence of a sovereign government, some of 
the civil liberties which it leaves or grants to its subjects, 
may not be protected against their fellows by answering 
jlegal duties : and some of those civil liberties may perhaps 
be protected sufficiently by religious and moral obligations. 
But, speaking generally, a pohtical or civil liberty is coupled \li > 
with a l^al right to it : and, consequently, political liberty 
is fostered by that very political restraint from which the de- \^\\ 
votees of the idol liberty ar£ so fearfully and blindlvavd:Be.* 
^ Political or eivO liberti«s are Mt or granted bj ■ of erejga a^ Jn two 

! * 244 THE PBOYIKCE OP 

I 

From the nature of political or civil liberty, I turn to the 
supposed difTerence between free and despotic governments. 
Every supreme government is /r^^ from legfiX restraints : <n- 
(what is the same proposition dressed in a different phrase) 
v^/ \/every supreme government is l^ally despotic. The distinc- 
tion, therefore, of governments into free and despotic^ can 
7^ hardly mean that some of them are freer from restraints than 
others : or that the subjects of the governments wliich are 
^ denominated free, are protected against their governments by 
positive law. 

Nor can it mean that the governments which are deno- 
minated free, leave or grant to their subjects more of pcdi- 
tical liberty than those which are styled despotic For the 
epithet free importing praise, and the epithet despotic im- 
i- portii^ blame, they who distinguish governments into free 

C^; and despotic, suppose that the first are better than the se- 

cond. But inasmuch as political liberty may be generally use-, 
ful or pernicious, we cannot infer that a government is better 
: than another government, because the siun of the liberties 
\ which the former leaves to its subjects, exceeds the sum of 
the liberties which are left to its subjects by the latter. 
CJ'he excess in the sum of the liberties which the former 
leaves to its subjects, may be purely mischievous. It may 
\/\/ consist of freedom from restraints which are required by 
the common wealyEmd which the government would lay upon 
its subjects, if itrolfilled its duties to the Deity. In conse- 

wayB : namely, through permissions coupled with demands^ or through 
simple permissions. If a subject possessed of a liberty be clothed with a 
legal right to it, the liberty was granted by the sovereign through a per- 
misdon coupled with a command : a permission to the -subject who b 
clothed with the legal right, and a command to the subject or mibjeets who 
are burthened with the relative duty. But a political or civil liberty leA 
or granted to a subject, may be merely protected against bis. fellows by re- 
ligious and moral obligations. In other words, the subject, possessed of 
the political liberty may not be clothed with a legal right to it. And, on 
that supposition, the political or civil liberty was left or granted to the 
mibject through a simple permission of the sovereign or state. 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 245 

sub- I 

qucnce, for example, of that mischievous freedom^ ltd- sub- 
jects may be guarded inadequately against one another, 
against attacks from external enemies. 

They who distinguish governments into free and despotic, 
probably mean this: 

C^he rights which a government confers, and the duties 
which it lays on its subjects, ought to be conferred and im- 
posed for tlie advancement of the common weal, or with a 
view to the aggregate happiness of all the members of the ^^^ 
society. But in every political society, the government do- 
laates, more or less, from that ethical principle or maxim. 
In conferring rights and imposing duties, it more or less } 
disr^ards the conmion or general weal, and looks, with par- f^ '^^ 
tial affection, to the peculiar and narrower interests of a por- uvvv 
tion or portions of the community. — ^Now the governments / 
which deviate less ftt)m that ethical principle or maxim, are \^/\^ 
better than the governments which deviate morg^ But, ac- 
cording to the opinion of those who make the distinction in 
question, the governments which deviate less from that ethical 
principle or maxim, are popular governments (in the largest L ^ 
isense of the expression) ?TII?ffiing by a papular government 
(in the largeat sense of the expression), any aristocracy (li^ 
mited monarchy or other) which consists of such a number ^^-^-"•■' 
of the given political commimity as bears a lai^e proportion 
to the number of the whole society. ^ For it is supposed by 
those who make the distinction in question, that, where the 
government is democratical or popular, the inter^ts of the 
sovereign nmnber, and the interests of the entire conmiunity, 
are nearly identical, or nearly ooincide : but that, where the 
government is properly monarchical, or where the supreme 
powers reside in a comparatively few, the sovereign one or 
number. has numerous sinister interests, or interests which 
are not consistent with the good or weal of the general — 
T^ccording, therefore, to those who make the distinction in 
question, the duties which a government of many lays upon 
its subjects, are more conM)nant to the general good than 

246 THE PROVIKCB OF 

the duties whic^iare laid upon its subjects by a govenunent 
of one or a feic;3 Consequently, though it leaves or grants 
not to its subjects more of political liberty than is left or 
granted to its subjects by a government of one or a few, it 
J leaves or grants to its subjects more of the political liberty 
]r^^^J\ tohich conduces to the common weal. ^3ut, as leaving or grant- 
ing to its subjects more of that useful liberty, a government 
|l^., .f\^^^' of many may be styled free : whilst, as leaving or granting 
^ '" to its subjects less of that use/iU liberty, a government of 

. one or a few maybfi^styled not free, or may be styled de- 
spotic or absobi ie^ C onsequently, a free government, or a 
good government, is a democratical or popular government 
(in the lai^gest sense of the expression) : whilst a despotic 
government, or a had government, is either a monarchy 
properly so called, or any such narrow anstocnu^ (limited 
monarchy or other) as is deemed an oligarch^ 
t; They who distinguish governments into free and despotic, 

are therefore lovers of democracy. By the epithet free, as 
applied to governments of many, they mean that govern- 
ments of many are comparatively good : and by the epithet 
despotic^ as applied to monarchies or oligarchies, they mean 
that monarchies or oligarchies are comparatively bad. The 
epithets free and despotic are rarely, I think, employed by 
the lovers of monarchy or oligarchy. If the lovers of mo- 
narchy or oligarchy did employ those epithets, they would 
apply the epithet free to governments of one or a few, and 
the epithet despotic to governments of many. For they think 
the former comparatively good, and the latter comparatively 
bad; or that monarchical or oligarchical governments are 
better adapted than popular, to attain the ultimate purpose 
for which governments ought to exist. They deny that the 
latter are less misled than the former, by interests which are 
not consistent with the common or general weal : or, grant- 
ing that excellence to governments of many, they think it 
greatly outweighed by numerous other excellencies which they 
ascribe to governments of one or to governments of a few. 

f 

JUiUSFEUDENCE DETERMINED. 247 

But with the respective merits or demerits of yarioua 
^ forms of govermnent, I have no direct concern. I have ex- 
. amined the current distmction between free and despotic 
governments, because it is expressed in terms which are 
extremely inappropriate and absurd, and which tend to ob« 
acure the independence of political or 1^1 obligation, that 
is common to sovereign governments of all forms or kinds. 
; . That the power of a sovereign is incapable of whjithu 
l^al limitation, has been doubted, and even de- tS^*^' 
nied. But the difficulty, like thousands of others, KJSrijSTk 
. probably arose ftt>m a verbal ambiguity,— The ^JJ^,^ 
^ foremost individual member of a so called hmited ^'*^ 
monarchy, is styled improperly monarch or sovereign. Now 
the power of a monarch or sovereign, thus improperly so 
styled, is not only capable of l^al limitations, but b some- 
times actually limited by positive law. But monarchs or so- 
vereigns, thus improperly so styled, were confounded with 
monarchs, and other sovereigns, in the proper acceptation 
of the terms. And since the power of the former is capa- 
ble of legal limitations, it was thought that the power of 
the latter might be bounded by similar restraints. 

Whatever may be its origin, the error is re- Tbepiopon. 
markable. For the legal independence of mon- ^a^j^^^HS^ 
aichs in the proper acceptation of the term, and ^5Si™^ 
of soverdgn bodies in their corporate and sove- ^JJJSe^. 
rdgn capacities, not only follows inevitably from <*««"c<»- 
the nature of sovereign power, but ^is dso asserted ex- 
pressly by renowned political writers of opposite parties or 
aects : by celebrated advocates of the governments which are 
decked, with the epithet /re^, as by celebrated advocates 
of the governments which are branded with the epithet 
despotic. 

** If it be objected (says Sidney) that I am a defender of 
arbitrary powers, I confess I cannot comprehend how any 
society can be established or sul>iist without them. vThe 
difierence between good and i overnments is not, that 
those of one sort have im arbitjcary power which the o<.\n&\% 

fl-V^ 

248 THE PROVINCE OP 

have not ; for they all have it ; but that in those which are 
well constituted, this power is so placed as it may be b^ie- 
ficial to the people/0 

" It appeareth plainly (says Hobbes) to my understand- 
ing, that the soveraign power, whether placed in one man, 
as in monarchy, or in one assembly of men, as in popular 
and aristocraticall commonwealths, is as great as men can be 
imagined to make it ^Xnd though of so imhmited a power 
men may fancy many evul consequences, yet the consequence 
of the want of it, which is warre of every man against his 
neighbour, is much worsoj^ The condition of man in this 
life shall never be without inconveniences : but ^ere hap- 
peneth in no commonwealth any great inconvenience, but 
what proceeds fix)m the subjects* disobedience. And whoso- 
ever, thinking soveraign power too g^reat, will seek to make 
it lesse, must subject himselfe to a power which can limit 
it : that is to say, to a greater." — ^^ One of the opinions (says 
the same writer) which are repugnant to the nature of a OMn- 
monwealth, is this : that he who hath the soveraign power 
is subject to the civill lawes. It is true that all soveraigns 
are subject to the lawes of nature ; because such lawes be 
Divine, and cannot by any man, or by any commonwealth, 
be abrogated. But to the civill lawes, or to the lawes which 
the soveraign maketh, the soveraign is not subject: for if 
he were eubject to the civill lawes, he were subject to him- 
eelf ; which were not subjection, but freedom. The opinion 
now in question, because it setteth the civill lawes above the 
soveraign, setteth also a judge above him, and a power to 
punish him : which is to make a new soveraign ; and, again, 
for the same reason, a third to punish the second ; and so 
continually without end, to the confusion and dissolution of 
the commonwealth." — " The difference (says the same writer) 
between the kinds or forms of conmionwealth, consisteth 
not in a difference between their powers, but in a difference 
between their aptitudes to produce the peac^ and security 
of the people : which is their end."* 
-* By his modem censors, French, German, and even English, Uobbes's 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 249 

Before I discuss the origin of political govern- AwwwA ga 
ment and society, I will briefly examine a topic « fqi>^ ora 
allied to the liberty of sovereigns from political or ircnuneot Sni 
l^al restraints. cookciate and 

main dengn, in his variotis treatises on politics, is grossly and thoroughly 
misfc i ken . With a manrellous ignorance of the writings which they impu- 
dently presome to condemn, they style him ** the apologist of tyranny : ** 
liMWining by that rant, that his main design is the defence of monarchical 
govenmient Now, though he prefers monarchical, to popular or oligarchical 
goremment^ is certain that his main design is the establishment of these 
pc|>po8itionB^l. That sovereign power, whether it reside in one^ or m many \^ 
or a/ew^ cannot be limited by positive Im' : 2: That a present or estab- 
lished government, be it a ffovemmenijffone^ or a government oftnany or a 
few^ cannci be disobeyed by its subjects oonmstently with the common weal, \^ 

or conostently with the law of God as known through utilityjor-the Scrip- 

tures^Tliat his principal purpose is not the defence of monarchy, is suffi- 
ciently evinced by the followmg passages fit>m His l^ma/Aan. ^ The pros- 
perity of a people ruled by an axistoeratieall -or democraticall assembly, 
Cometh not from aristocracy or democracy, but fiom the obedience and 
concord of the subjects : nor do the people flourish in a monarchy, because 
th^ are ruled by one man, but because they obey him. ^ake away in a 
state of any kind, the obedience, and consequently the concord of the peo- 
ple, and they shall not only not flourish, but in short time be dissolvedij 
And they that go about by disobedience to doe no more than reforme the 
commonwealth, shall find diey doe thereby destroy it.*' '* In monarchy one 
man is supreme ; and all other men who have power in the state, have it 
by his commisdon, and during his pleasure. In aristocracy or democracy 
there is one supreme assembly ; which supreme assembly hath the same 
unlimited power that in monarchy belougeth to the monarch. And which 
is the best of these three kinds of government, is not to be disputed there 
where any of them is already established.*' So many similar passages occur 
in the same treatise, and also in his treatise De Cive^ that they who confi- 
dently s^le him '' the apologist of tyranny or monarchy/' must have taken 
their nodon of his purpose from mere hearsay. A dip here or there into 
either of the decried books, would have led them to withhold their sentence. 
To thoee who have really read, although in a cursory manner, these the 
most ludd and easy of profound and elaborate compositions, the current 
conception of their object and tendency is utterly laughable. 
^The captal errors in Hobbes's political treatLses, are the following.— 
l\He inculcates too absolutely the religious obligation of obedience to -^ 
present or established government^ He makes not the requisite allowance 
for the anomalous and excepted cases wherein /d isobedience is counselled 

I J 

-i 

250 THB PROVINCE OP 

jormignai. ^A Sovereign government of one, or a MvereigL 
^%ki» °* government of a number in its ooU^iate and so- , 
£j^S?5 vereign capacity, has no legal rights (in the proper 
^^la^l ax2peptation of the term) against its oum subjec^^ 
nwmtmijetiB, JjEwQty legal right is the creature of a positive 

V/by that very principle of utility which indicates the duty of 0iibmiflBio^ 
Writing in a Beaaon of civil diHCord, or writing in apprehension of ita ap- 
proach, he naturally fixed his attention on the glaring mischirft of reaia- 
tanoe, and scarcely adverted to the mischiefs which obedience occasionally 
engenders. And although his integrity was not less reinarkable dian tlie 
gigantic strength of hia understanding, we may presume that his extreme 
timidity somewhat corrupted his judgment, and inclined him to insist un- 
duly upon the evils of rebellion and strife. — 2. Instead of directly deriving 
the existence of political govemmeut, from a potseption by the bulk of the 
V^govemed of its great and obvious eiq>ediency, he ascribes the origin of so- 
// vereignty, and of independent political society, to a fic^ous agreement or 
oorenant He imagines that the future ipibjects covenant with one another, 
or that the future subjects covenant with the ftiture sovereign, to obey wiA- 
out reserve eveiy command of the latter : And of this imaginary covenant^ 
immediately preceding the formation of the political government and com- 
munity, the religious duty of the subjects to render unlimited aubmiasion, 
and the divine right of the sovereign to exact and receive such submiasion, 
[ are, according to Hobbes, necessary and permanent consequences. He 

I supposes, indeed, that the subjects are induced to make that agreement, 

^ by their perception of the expediency of government, and by their desire 

to escape from anarchy. But, placing his system immediately qn that in- 
terposed figment, instead of resting it directly on -the ultimate l>asis of 
utility, he oflen arrives at his conclusions in a sophistical and quibbling 
I manner, though his conclusions are commonly such as the principle of 

utility will warrant The religious duty of the subjects to render unlimited 
• obedience, and the divine right of the sovereign to exact and reoeive such 

obedience, cannot, indeed, be reckoned amongst those of Hobbe8*s conclu- 
sions which that principle will justify. In truth, the duty and the bright 
cannot be inferred logically even from his own fiction,^^or, according to 
his own fiction, the subjects were induced to promise obedience, hj their 
perception of the utility of government : and, since their inducement to the 
/ y promise was that perception of utility, they hardly promised to obey in 
I ^^ V those anomalous ca^ wherein the evus of anarchy are surpassed by the 
f ' evils of submission.^^And though they promised to obey even in those 

j cases, they are not'^ligiously obliged to render unlimite^bbedience .•Vfor, 

as the principle of^eQeral^tztility is the index to religious obligation^)no 
keligious oblij^tion can possibly arise frova a promise whose tendency is 

laWr an 

JUmSFBUDENCB DETERMINED. 251 

and it answers to a relative duty imposed hj that 
po^tive law, and incumbent on a person or persons other 
than the person or persons in whom the right reside^ To 
every legal right, there are therefore three parties: The l^ 

gneaHy pernicious. Beades, though the subject foundexB of the political ^-^>^ 
coamninitj were religiously obliged by their nuschievous promise, a reli- 
giooi obligation would hardly be imposed upon their followers^ by virtue of .' ^ 
a miechieYOus agreement to which their followers were stiangers. The last 
objecdon, however, is not exclusively applicable to HobbesV peculiar fiction. 
That, or a like objection, may be uiged against all the romances which de- 
rive the existence of government from a fimded original contract Whedier 
we aiqypoae, with Hobbes, that the subjects were the only promisexs^ or we 
Bupposey-with others, that the sovereign also covenanted : whether we sup^ 
pose, with Hobbes, that theypromieed unlimited obedienc&or we suppose, 
with others, that their promise contained reservations ;^e can hardly 
suppose that the contract of dke founders, unless it be presently useful, 
impoees rdig ious obligations on the present members of the oommunity^ 

If these two capital errors be kept in mind by the reader, Hobbes^s ex- 
tieniely celebrated but extremely neglected treatises may be read to great 
advantage. I know of no other writer (excepting our great oontemporaiy 
Jeremy Bentham) who has uttered so many truths, at once new and im-* 
portant, concerning the necessaiy structure of supreme political govern- ^^^^ 
ment^ and the larger of die nebieSBaTy distinctions implied by positive law. 
And he is signally gifted with the talent, peculiar to writers of genius, of 
inciting the mind of the student to active and original thought. 

Hie authors of the antipathy with which he is conmionly regarded, were 
the papistical clergy of the Roman Catholic Church, the hi^ church clergy 
of the Church of England, and the Presbyterian clergy of the true blue 
complexion. In matters eoclesiasticsl (a phrase of uncertain meaning, and 
therefore of measureless compass), independence of secular authority was 
more or less affected by churchmen of each of those Actions. In other 
ivords, theyheld that their own church was coordinate with the secular go* 
Temment ^[or that the secular government was not of itself supreme, but 
lather partook in the supreme powers with one or more of the d^ical order. y/«a* 
Hobbea*s un£uling loyal^ to the present temporal sovereign, was alarmed 
and offimded hj this anarchical pretensioEK^d he repelled it with a weight 
of reason, and an aptness and pungency of expression, which the aspiring 
and vindictive priests did bitterly feel and resent. Accordingly, they as* 
sailed him with the'potsoncd^we^pons which are ministered by maligni^ 
and cowardice. Ail of them twitted him (agreeably to their wont) with fiat 
atheism : whilst some of them afiected to style him an apologist of tyranny 
of misrule, and to rank him with the perverse writers (Maoduavelli, £m 

262 

TUS FBOTIKOIf OF 

-\ 

uS: 

I 

I ; 

sofvereigii gov^nment of <me or a number, which aeto the 
poativekw; and which, through the positive kwcoDferst^ 
kgal right, and imposes the lelatiye duty; the person or per- 
sons on whom the r^t is conferred : the person or peraons 

coEunple) wlio redly luire i^iplMidtd tjrwsuaj maintMiwwl bgr sfailitjr rad 
coonge. ByOMMCslnniieiiaoieeoiiipiriiigaiid po(« 
€aadtfi6 wpwf Hon of thihr commcm enemy. And ao deep spd endmii^ 
kAeimprarios wUeh Aey iiMd« 19011 die pol^ mind, tint "< HMbbee 
As slli^ht," or ^^UbbbsiAei^oki^of^rnuiny," k etiU v^vdod vidi 
p4oii% or widi reiiiiblieen honrbr, bjaO bat As ssctrenidjr ftw wlio Jnnrs 
ipentived to sxenune nis wiitUMEe* 

or foeilifslheiem; ofmera eB^lriniem conoeniiag tbe egietmiue of 
AelMty; ore^iriMitli nMm inqdoaiLinid .minbMTOiM dmn oidier, n 
leQgloB inqpiiting to dM I>eitf hteiaa inflr^ dwraiiaoli 

I iMlisfs, in any of jUa vri!i«(lb ^ iindow4if n ibn^ 
, BbtnwdMthe pnftnmonaidiied (di6i^^ 

iiaisly)btopopiilworol%BidiiQBlgpif«nim«n(. 1% Aan, tfmnny bi 
widi m onawhy, ha la oertainly an i^okQ^ and ftaitar of 
7, iiiimnh M he inoKnea to dM one^ ndier dian dM many or At 
ftfw. But if tjmnny be aTnonymona widi auarale, or if lyianny be wp^ 
dally fynonymooB with monaTOhicalmisniley he ia not of the apologiite 
and fiiutors of tynnny, but may rank with the ableet and moat aeidooa of 
its foes. Scarcely a eiDgle advocate of free or popular inaiitatiofsa, eren 
in theee latter and oomparatiYely enlightened ages, perceirea and incul- 
cates eo clearly and eameetly as he, the principal cauae and preventiTe of 
tyrannous or bad goYomment. The principal cauae of tyrannous or bad 
gorernment, is ignorance, on the part of the multitude, oif sound political 
science (in the largest sense of the expression) : that ia to aay, poUHeal 
iBconcmy^ with the two great branchea of ethics^ as well as politics (in the 
strict acceptation of the term), ^d if such be the principal cause of tymn- 
nous or bad goTcmment, the principal prerentiYe of the evil must lie in the 
diffusion of such knowledge-throu^out the mass of the community. Com- 
pared with this, the-best4)Ql itical c onstitution that the wit of man oould 
devise, were surely a poor securitylSnTgo^'or bencdficentlraK. — ^Now in 
diose departments of his treatises on politioB, lyhich are concerned with 
** the ojfice (^duty) of the sovereign,'* Hobbes insiets ^~the feUowing 
propositionsQ2%a< f^ood and stable government is simply or nsarly in^possi" 
ble, unless thejundamentals of political thence be knaum by the bulk of the 
peopl^^lAt the bulk of the people axe as capi£leisriebeiving auch science 
as the kyftiestand proudest of their superiora in stadon, wealth, or learn- 
ing : that to provide for tlie difiuidon 4xf such scienoe throughout the bulk 
, of the people, may be classed with the ¥rSghtiett of the duties which the 

JURISPRUDENCE DETEBMINED. 253 

on whom the duty is imposed, or to whom the positive law 
is set or directed. — ^As I shall show hereafter, the person or 
persons invested with the right, are not necessarily mem- 
bers of the independent pohtical society wherein the author 

Deity lays upon the aoYereign: that he iii bound to hear their complaints, 
and even to seek their adTice, in order that he may better understand the na- i 
tore cf thttr wants, and may better adapt his institutions to the adTancement 
of the genend good : that he is bound to render his laws as compendious 
and clear as poosible, and also to promulge a knowledge of their more im- 
portant proTisions through every poenble channel : that if the bulk of his 
people know their duties imperfectly, for want of the instruction which he 
isafale and bound to impartyhe is reqwnsible religiously forall their breaches 
of the duties whereof he hath left them in ignorance. 

In regard to the req)ectiYe aptitudes of the'several forms of goremment 
to accomplish the ultimate purpose for which goremment ought to exist, 
Hobbes^s opinion closely resembles the doctrine which, about the middle 
of the ei^teenth century, was taught by the French philosophers who are 
styled emphaticdly the (EeammU$U» — In order, say the (Economists, to the 
being of a good government, two things must preexist JTl. Elnowledge by 
the bulk of the people, of the elements of political scnSKce (in the laigest 
aenae of the expresnon) : 2. A numerous body of citisens versed in politi- 
cal science, and not misled by interests conflicting with the common weal, 
who may shape the political opinion's, and steer ^e political conduct, of 
the^Hess profoundly informed, though instructed and rational multitude.^ 
Widiout that knowledge in the bulk of the people, and without that nu- 
merous body of ^* gens /umtnfux,** the government, say the (Economists, 
will surely be bad, be it a government of one or a few, or be it a govern- 
ment of many. If it be a government of one or a few, it will consult ex- 
cLamj^j the peculiar and narrow interests of a portion or portions of the 
community : for it will not be constrained to the advancement uf the gene- 
Tal or common good, by the general opinion of _a duly instructod society. 
If it be a governiMnt ^ many, it laai^ not be divert^ fiom the advance- 
ment of the general or conmion good, by4>artial and sinister regard for 
piw"!^*'' and narrow interc^ta^ -but^ being con troUed-by the general opinion 
of the society, and that society not being duly instructed, it will often be 
tomed from the paths leading to its appropriate end, by the restive and 
tyrannous prfgudices of an ignorant and asinine multitude*— -But^ given [ 
tiiat knowledge in th^ bulk of the people, and given that numerous body 
cf ^ light-dijfuMmg citizens,*' the government, say the (Econonusta, let the 
fotm be whi^ it may, will be strongly and stesdily impelled to the further- 
ance of the general good, by the sound and commanding morality obtain- 
ing throughout the community. And, for numerous and plausible reasons 
* ( 
J 

7 :* 

i: 

i ^ 

1 r • 

! 254 THE FBOVIKCB OF 

of the law is sovereign or suprema The person or persans 
invested with the right, may be a member or members, so- 
vereign or subject, of another society political and indepen- 
dent. But (taking the proposition with the slight correc- 
tives which I shall state hereafter)]pie person or persons on 

(which my limite compel me to omit), ihej affirm, that, in any aodetj thu 
duly inntructed, monarchical government would not otdj be llie beat, but 
would sorely be dKMen by tiiat enlightened community, in pr efar e n ee to a 
* gOTernment of a iew, or even to a government of many. 

Such ia the opinion (stated briefly, and without their peculiar phraseo- 
logy) which was taught by Quesnai and the other (Eoonomiats, about the 
y middle of the last century. And mxh is also ^ opinion (altiiough he 
conceived it less cleariy, and less completdy,~than IIm^) which was pub* 
liahed by their great prec u rsor , in the middle of the century preceding. 

The opinion taught by the (Economists is ratfaer,^.peEhaps, defective, 
than positively erroneous. Their opinion, perhaps, is sound, 00 fiur aa it 
u^:; reaches: but they leavenm essentud consideratioB-uncanvassed and neatly 

v.4^ ; ' untou^ed^In a political community not duly instructed, a government 
/§ood and 'stable is, I believe, impossible : and in a political oommunitf 
Moly in8tracted,monardiy, I incline to believ^ were better than democracy. 
j But in a political community not jioly inducted, is not popular govern- 

I meot, with all its awkward complezneaa, leas inconvenient than monarchy T 

And, unless the government be popular, can a political community not 
da]y inutructed, eraeige from darkness to light 7 from the ignorance of po- 
litical science, which is the principal cause of misrule, to the knowledge of 
political science, which were the best security against it 7 — ^To these ques- 
tions, the (Economists hardly advert : and, unhappily^Jhe best of possible 
governments for a society already enlightened, is, when compared with 
these, a question of little importanoeTVThe (Economists, indeed, occa- 
sionally admit, ** que dans V^tat dignomnce Tautorit^ est plus dangereuse 
dans les mains d*un seal, qu^elle ne Test daDa.Je8.jmidnB de plusieurs." 
But with this consideration they rarely meddle. They commonly infer or as- 
aume, that, since in the state ofJgnoranoe the government is inevitably bad, 
the form of theffovemment, during that state, is <ajna(!ler of consummate 
indiflerence. ^Agreeing with them in most of thear premises, I arrive at 
an inference extremely remote from theirs : namely, that in a community 
already enlightened, the form of the government were nearly a matter of 
indifference ; but that where a community is still in the state of ignorance, 
the form of the government is a matter of the highest importsnc^ 

The political and oeconomicd system of Quesnai and die other (Econo- 
mists, is stated concisely and clearly by M. Mercier de la Rivi^e in his 
*'L'Ordre Nature! et Essentiel des Soci^t^s Politiques." I. 

\. 

I JURI8PAUDKNCE DSTJSBMINED. 255 

whom the duty is imposed, or to whom the law is setter di- 
rected, are necessarily members of the independent poikical 
society wherein the author of the law is sovereign or su- 
prem^^ For imless the party burthened with the duly were 
subject to the author of the law, the party would not be ob- 
noxious to the l^al or political sanction by which the duty 
and the right are respectively enforced and proiected.-C-A . 
government can hardly impose legal duties or obligations 
upon members of foreign societies : although it can invest 
them with l^al rights, by imposing relative duties upon mem- 
bers of its own community^ A party bearing a legal right, 
is not necessarily burthoied with a legal trust Conse- 
quently, a party may bear and ezerdse a l^al right, though 
die party cannot be touched by the might or power of its 
author. But unless the opposite party, or the party bur- 
thened with the relative duty, could be touched by the niight 
of its author, the right and the relative duty, with the law 
which confers and imposes them, were merely nominal and 
illusory. And (taking the proposition with the slight cor- 
rectives which I shall state hereafter) a person obnoxious to 
the sanction enforcing a po&dtive law, is necessarily subject 
to the author of the law, or is necessarily a member of the 
society wherein the author^ sovereign. 
^ It follows from the essentials of a legal right, that a sove- 
reign government of one, or a sovereign government of a 
number in its coll^iate and sovereign capacity, has no l^al 
r%ht8 (in tiie proper acceptation of the term) against its own 
subjects. 
_^ ' To every l^al right, there are three several parties : 
luunely, a party bearing the right ; a party burthened with 
thel:elAtive duty ; and a sovereign government setting the 
law through which the right and the duty are respectively 
conferred and imposed. A sovereign government cannot ac* | 
quire rights through laws set by itself to its own subjects, j y^^ 
A man is no more able to confer a right on himself, than he 
IB able to impose on himself a law or a duty. ^J^veiy party 

256 TEE PROVINCB OP 

( bearing a right (divine, legal, or moral) has neoessaril j a<v 
quired the right through the might or power of anodie)* : 
that is to say, through a law and a duty (proper 6r improper ) 
laid by that other party on a further and distinct, pan v. 
cJConsequently, if a sovereign govemnent had l^al riglii 
lEigainst its own subjects, those rights were the creatureS'Oi 
positive laws set to its own subjects by a third person ipr 
bodyT^ And, as every positive law is laid by a 8over^|D 
government on a person or persons in a state pf subjec^bn 
to itself, that third person or body were sovereign ia-^ppt 
community whose own sovereign government bore the Ic^ 
rights : that is to say, the community were subject to ik 
own sovereign, and were also subject toja sovereign coii- 
ferring rights upon its own« Which is iinpossible an^l 
absurd.^ 

bif'^-v^:, « Bklit ii * ^^ luw often been affirmed that ** right ia m|g^t,** Qr't)i;it 

^^ i. i^^"* ^* miglit i9 rig^t*" But thia paradoxical propoaition (a m|| 

f^;^ fiiTonrite with shallow Booffen and buffbonii) ia either a flat tmiam afl%£> 

edly and darkly expressed, or is thoroughly false and absurd. % 

If it mean that a party who possesses a right possesses the right throi^i 
might or power of his own, the proposition is £dse and absurd. For u 
party who possesses a right necessarily possesses the right through Ihe 
might or power of another : namely, tibe4mth(»~of the law by which the 
right is conferred, and by ^diich the dufy answering to the right is laid, on 
a third and distinct party. ^Speaking generally, a person who is clothed 
with a right is weak rather than mighty ; and unless he were shielded ^m 
harm by the might of the author of the right, he would live, by reason of 
his weakness, in ceaseless insecurity and alarm!\For example : Such is 
€tke predicament of persons clothed with l^al rights, who are merely sub- 
ject members of an independent political society, and who owe their. lmtl> 
rights to the, might and pleasure of their sovereign. 

If it mean that right and might are one and the same thing, or are 
merely different names for one and the sathe'object, the proposition ;b. 
question is also fiilse -and absurd. My physical ability to move about^ 
when my body is free from bonds, may be called mt^ht OT jKwa ry but can- 
not be called a right : though my ability to move about, without kindram < 
from you, may doubtless be styled a right, ¥rith perfect precision and pix; -• 
priety, if I owe^the ability to ajaw imposed upon yjm-byjinoiher. 

If it mean that every right is a~cfeature of might or poWer/Jiifipropd- 
sition in merely a truism dieguised in paradoidcal language. For. eyery 

/ 

I ^ /V^ JUEISPKUDKNCK DETERltlNED. ; , '\ ^/Jp57> 

But 80 £aj^ as they are bound by the law of God i6^ obey 
their temporal sovereign, a sovereign government has nghts « ' 
divine against its own subjects : rights which are conferred 
upon itself, through duties which are laid upon its subjects, 

right (divine, legal, or moral) rests on a relative duty: liiat is to saj, a 
duly lying on a par^ or parties other than the party or parties in whom 
die n^t resides. And, manifestly, that relative duty would not be a duty 
|Rdbsluitially, if the law which affacU to impose it were not sustained by 
n^ght* -"^ 

'*t will briefly .jemark, before I conclude tbe note, that «m^|^^M^ 
^i^g^t ** has two meanings which ought to be distinguished mining 

^lie nounsubdtantive ** a ri^t^ ognifies that which juiista m nxMuing 
denominate *'a Acuity : *" that which xendes in a determinate ^'J***^^^" 
party or parties, by virtue of a gjven law ; and which avails against a 
par^ or parties (or answers to a duty lying on a party or parties) other 
than the party or^parties in whom it resides. And the noun substantive 
^ rights ** is .the plural of ^e noim substantive ^ a right.* But the ez^^ 
preasioQ ** right^** when it is used as an adjective, is equivalent to the ad- 
jective ^just: ** as the adverb '' rightly ** is equivalent to the adverb 
^justly.** And, when it is used as the abstract name corresponding to 
the adjective ** ri^^t,** the noim substantive ** right ** is synonymous with 
the noQii substantive '' jusdce.** — ^I^ for example, I owe you a hundred 
pounds, you have ** a right ** to the payment of the money^ right im- 
jKxrtii^ an obligation to pay the money, which is incumb^ upon m^ 
Now in case I make the payment to which you have '* a rig^t,** I do that 
which is ** right ** or just, or I do that which consists with ** rig^t ** or 
justJce-f Again : I have ** a right ** to the quiet enjoyment of my house : 
a nfjbit importing a dufy to forbear from disturbing my enjoyment, which 
Ebs upon other persons generally, or lies upen the world at large. Now 
they who practise the forbearance to which I have ^a right,** conduct 
themselves there ** ri^dy ** or justly. Or so &r as they practise the fo- 
bearaobe to which I have "aright,** their o(»iduct is *' right ** or just. Or 
^JBut as they practise the forbearance to which I. have '* a right,** they are 
ol^ftenrant of ** right ** or justice. 

jEt is manifest that <«right** as ognifying "fiusul^/* and ^'right** as 
signifying *' justice,** are widely different though not unconnected , terms. 
But^ nevertheless, the terms are confounded by many of the writers who 
attempt a definition of *' right ** : and their attempts to determine the mean- 
ing of that very perplexing expression, are, therefore, sheer jargon. By 
many of the German writers on the sciences of law and morality (as by 
Kant, for example, in his '' Metapbyucal Principles of Jurisprudence **), 
^rig^t** in the one sense, is Uended with ^"^rig^t** in the other. And 
VOL. I. 8 * 

258 

THB PBOVINCB OP 

by laws of a common superior. And so iar as the member^ 
of its own conmiunity are severally constrained to obey it In 

through the diaquiflitioii on *' right ** or ** righte,** wliich oocoxs m his '^ Mor t^ 
Philosophy,*' Pale/ obviousl/ wavers between the dissimilar meanings. 

An adequate definition of '^a right,** or of *' right** as signifyih 

" fiicohj/* cannot, indeed, be rendered easily. In order to a definition < : 

'^ a right,** or of *^ right ** as mgnifying ** facnl^,** we must determine tl^c 

xeqwctiye difierences of the principal kinds of rights, and also the respeetiYe 

meaiuqgs of many intricate terms which are implied by the tenn tobedefioitod. 

/«RijHit''ss "^^ Italian "diritto," the French "droit,** the Gennan 

I mMBi^-^ ^recht,** and the English " right,*' signify "^ right*' as rneaa- 

\ ^^^ ^ ''ftcolty,*' and also signify «<jastice:" though eu^]f. 

\aMSBiiig those sereral tongues hsis a name whiich is appropziate^to 

-Isw.- "justice,** and by which it is denoted without ambiguity. 

In the Lathi, Italian, French, and German, the name which signifll^ 
"right*' as meaning « Acuity,** also ngnifies "law:** "jus,- "dirittr.,' 
"droit,** or "recht^** denoting indifferently dtiier of the two objects. 
Aooorduig^y, the " recht " which signifies " kw,** and the " recht ** which 
' Ngnifies " right ^ as meaning " Acuity,** are confounded by German wrik.n* 
on the philosophy or ratumdU of law, and even by German eiqKMitofB' of 
iMurticular systems of jurisprudence. Not peroeiying that the twojoMi^ 
are names respectiyely for two disparate objects, they make of the two 
objects, or make of the two names, one " recht : '* Which one " recht," as 
forming a genu» or kind, they divide into two species or two sorts : name];; 
the " recht** equivalent to " law,'* and the " recht ** equivalent to " right * 
as meaning " faculty.** And since the strongest and wariest minds are 
often ensnared by ambiguous words, their confusion of those disparate pl>- 
jects is a venial error. Some, however, of these Gsrman writers are guilty 
of a grave offence sgainst good sense and taste. They thicken the mest* 
which that confusion produces, with a misappHcadon of terms borrowed 
from the Kantian philosophy. They divide *' recht," as forming the gin\a 
or kind, into '* recht in the objective sense,*' and " recht in the suijekivf 
sense : '* denoting by the former of those unappoaite phrases, " law ; *' aud 
denoting by the latter, " right " as meaning " fiwjulty." ' 

■ The confusion of " law *' snd " right,** our own writers avoid: for tVio 
two disparate objects which the terms respectively signify, aie commdblv 
denoted in our own language by palpably distinct marks. I say that the^ 
are commonly denoted in our own language by palpably distinct marks : ib 
the modem English "right** (which probablycomes from the Anglo-Saxov. 
and therefore is allied to the (jerman " recht **) means, in a few instanoer. 
"law.*** i 

* < Hale and Blackstone (m I have mentiooed in the Outline) are misled by tbia doable 
meaning of the word j««. They translate jmt penonaram et renim, **righta i^ perpoai> 
tmd things c ^ which is mere jargon.' — MS, Note, 

JCRISPBUDKNOB DETSBMINED. 259 

the opinion of the community at lai^ge, it has also morialrigfUsl-^ 
(or rights arising fix)m positive morality) against its own sub* V 
jects severally considered : rights which are conferred upon 
itself by the c^inion of the community at laige, and which 
answer to relative duties laid upon its several subjects by the 
sgneral or prevalent opinion of the same indeterminate body. 
Li>onsequently, when we say that a sovereign government, 
a8..against its own subjects, has or has not a right to do this 
or that, we necessarily mean by g right (supposing we speak 
exactly), a right divine or moral: | ye necessarily mean (sup- ^ 
posing we speak exactly), ilia£ it Jias or has not a right de- 
rived from a law of God,^or derived from a' law improperly ^ry 
80 called which the general opinion of the community sets 
to its members severall]^ 

. But when we say that a government, as against its own 
subjects, has or has not a rigl^ to do this or that, we not un- 
coDunonly mean that we dee;n the act in question generally -^-^ 
aatful or pemiciaue. This application of the term right s re- 
aembles an application of the term justice to whicn l have 
adverted above. — ^An act which conforms to the Divine law, 
18 styled, emphatically, just : an act which does not, is styled, 
emphatically, imju st. ([^ An act which is generally useful, con- . 
fonns to the Divine law as known through the principle of 
"utilitv : an act which is generally pernicious, does not con- 
'K^rm to the Divine law as known through the same expo- 
nent Consequently, ^ an act which is just or unjust," and 
^ an JEtQt which is generally useful or generally pernicious,** 
^are nearly equivalent expressions. — ^An act which a sovereign 
government has a Divine right to do, it, emphatically, has a 
jright to do : if it has not a Divine right, it, emphatically, has 
foot aright. An act which were generally useful, the Divine 
law^ias known through the principle of utihty, has conferred 
on thei90vereign government a right to do : an act which were 
generally pernicious, the Divine law, as known through the 
name exponent, has not conferred on the sovereign govern- 
iDient a right to do. Iponsequently, an act which ^e govern* 

s 2 

260" IHB PBOYINCE OP - 

V 

ment has a tight to do, is an act which were generalljusefiil : 
as an act which the government has not a right to do, is tffi 
act which were generally pernicious. 

To ignorance or neglect of the palpable truths which 1 
have expounded in the present section, we may impute ft 
pernicious jargon that was current in our own country ou 
the eve of her horrible war with her North American chil* 
dren. By the great and small rabble in and out of parlia- 
ment, it was said that the government sovereign in Britain 
was also sovereign in the colonies ; and that, since it was 
sovereign in the colonies, it had a right to tax their inhabi- 
tants. It was objected by Mr. Burke to the project of taxing 
their inhabitants, that the project was inexpedient: pr^oant 
with probable evil to the inhabitants of the colonies, and 
pregnant with probable evil to the inhabitants of the mother 
country. But to that most rational objection, the sticklers 

•.\.^ T^r the scheme of taxation returned this asinine* answer. 
They said that the British government had a right to tax 
the colonists ; and that it ought not to be withheld fay* 
paltry considerations of expediency^ fh)m enforcing its sove-^ 
reign right against its refractory subjects. — ^Now, assuming 
• that the government sovereign in Britain was properly sove- 

-" '^ reign in the colonies, it had no legal right to tax its colonial 
subjects ; although it was not restrained by positive law^ 
from dealing with its colonial subjects at its own pleasure 
or discretion. If, then, the sticklers for the scheme of tax- 
ation had any determinate meaning, they meant that th </ 
British government was empowered by the law of God Vj 
tax its American subjects. But it had not a Divine right to 
tax its American subjects, unLggs the project of taxing them 
accorded with general utility (for every Divine right springs 

Hfrom the Di^e law ; and to the Divine law, general utility 
is the inde^ Consequently, when the sticklers for the 
scheme of CSSation opposed the right to expediency, they op- 
posed the right to the only test by which it was possible t<» 
determine the reality of the right itself. 

JURISFBUDENCaS DETEBKINED. 261 

A sovardgn government of one, or a sovereign ivw«aarv. 
government of a number in its collegiate and m^SSSi p. 
sovereign capacity, may appear in the character ^TaSbanai 
of defendant, or may_ appear in the character of ^^^^^H^feT* 
demandant,^before a tribunal jof its own appoint- ^^i^fJe, 
ment, or deriving jurisdiction fix)m itself. But 3^22,^2** 
from such an appearance of a sovereign^ govern- ^3,^^,10^ 
ment, we cannot infer that the government lies|*»r^«^ 
under legal duties, or has l^al rights agamst its 
own subjects. ^ 

X^ Supposing that the claim of the plaintiff against the so- 
vereign defendant were truly founded on a positive law, it 
were founded on a positive law set to the sovereign defen- 
dant by a third person or bodyj^r (changing the phrase) 
the sover^gn defendant would ^ in a state of subjection 
to another and superioi; sovereigij^ Which is impossible 
and absurd. — And supposing that the claim of the sovereign, 
demandant were truly founded on a poative^ law, it wet? 
founded on a positive law set by a third party to a mem- 
ber or members of the society wherein jthe demandant is su- 
preme : or (changing the phrase) the society subject to the 
sovereign demandant, were subject, at the same time, to an^ 
other supreme government Which is also impossible and 
absurd. 

^Besides, where the soverei^ government appears in the 
character of defendant, it appears to a daim founded on a 
80 called law which it has set to itself. It therefore may 
defeat the claim by abolishing the law entirely, or by abo- 
lishing the law in the particular or specific case!^Where it 
appears in the character of demandant, it apparently founds 
its daim on a positive law of its own, and it pursues its daim 
judidaUy. But although it reaches its purpose through a 
general and prospective rule, and through the medium of 
judicial procedure, it is legally free to accomplish its end 
by an arbitrary or irregular -excise jbf its legally unlimited 
power. ^ " 

'A 

\ 

262 THE PBOVINCB OP 

The rights which are pursued against it before tribunak 
of its OW1I9 and also the rights which it pursues -before tri- 
bunals of its own, are merely analogous to l^id rights (it 
the proper acceptation of the term) : or (borrowing the brid 
and commodious expressions by which the Boman juristb 
commonly denote an analogy) they are l^al rights guasij or 
l^al rights tift.-^Fhe rights which are pursued against it 
before tribunals of its own, it may extinguish by its ofwn 
authorityJS But, this notwithstanding, it permits the de- 
mandants to prosecute their claims : And it yields to those 
claims, when they are established judicially, as ifikey were 
truly foimded on podtive laws set to itscdf by a third and 
distinct party. — ^The rights which it pursues before tribu- 
nals of its own, are powers w^ch it is free to exercise ac- 
cording to its own pleasure.'^But, this notwithstanding, it 
prosecutes its claims through the medium of ju^Bdal pro- 
cedure, as if they were truly founded on positiye;Wr8 set 
to the parties defendant by a third person or body.^ 

The forgoing explanation of the seeming legal ligjbts 
which are pursued against sovereign governments before 
tribunals of their own, tallies with the style of judicial pro- 
cedure, which, in all or most nations, is observed in cases 
of the kind* ^The object of the plaintiflr*s claim is not de- 
manded as a right, but is begged of the soverefign defen- 
dant as a grace or favour^ 

In our own country, claims pursued judicially against our 
own king are presented to the courts of justice In the same 
or a similar style. The plaintiff jo^ft^um^ the royal. defen- 
dant to grant him his so called right : or he shows to the 
royal defendant his so called right and injury, and prays the 
royal defendant to yield him fitting redress. — ^But where a 
claim is pursued judicially against our own king, this mer 
dicant style of presenting the claim is merely accidental 

L^ A good government will not arbitrarily (or by ex postjado commands ) 
abrogate quasi rights which it has conferred. And,^here possible, will 
accomplish its ends by prospective rules. — MS. NoitJ 

^UBISFBUDENCE DETESBMINRD. 

It arises firom the mere accident to which I have adyei. 
ah^eady : namely, that our own king, though not properly 
sovereim^ is completely free in fact from l^al or poHtical 
duties, ^ince he is free in fact from every l^al obligation, 
no one has a l^al right (in the proper acceptation of the 
term) agunst the king : for if any had a legal right against ^^^^^ 
the king, the king were necessarily subject to an answering 
legal dutyr^ But seeing that our own king is merely a limb 
of the parliament, and is virtually in a state of subjection 
to that sovereign body or aggregate, he is capable of legal 
duties ; that is to say, duties imposed upon him by that so- 
vereign body or aggr^ate in its coU^iate and sovereign cha- 
racter. For^e cttme reason, he is capable of legal rights : 
that is to say, righto ^n£exied_upon him by that sovereign 
body or a^r^te, and answering to relative duties imposed 
by the same ^odj on jothers of its own subjects. Accord- 
ingly, the king has legal rights-f^nst-ot^rs of his fellow 
subjects : though, by reason of his actual exemption from 
every l^al obligation, none of his fellow subjects have l^al 
ij^ts against hipjL. 

jThough a sovereign government of one, or a ThooKfaato- 
sovereign government of a number in its coUe- ^!!SS^ 
giate and sovereign capacity, cannot have l^al^^^S^^i^ 
rights against its own subjects, it may have a le- ^^USS^i^ 
gal right against a subject or subjects of another ^^S^S^ 
sovereign government^ For seeing that a l^al or C^J^^^j"^ 
political right is not of necessity saddled with a 2[^|5^S£* 
l^al or political trust, the po3itive law conferring ^^jj^ 
the right may not be set to the government on "**yf^^ 
'which the right is conferred. The law conferring •ubjecuof 
the right (as weU as the rektive duty answering ^^ 
to the right) may be laid or imposed exclusively 
on the subject or subjects of the government by which the 
right is imparted. The possession of a l^al or political 
right against a subject or subjects of another sovereign go- 
vernment, consbts, therefore, with that independence which 

fOa PROViKCE OF 

^ne of the essentials of sovereignty. And since the leg^ 
right is acquired from another government, and throu^ ?i 
law which it sets to a subject or subjects of its own, th*.* 
existence of the l^al right implies no absurdity. It is nei 
ther acquired through a positive law set by the govemm^: 
which acquires it, nor through a positive law set by another 
government to a member or members of the socieQr v^iia^i 
the acquirer is supreme. 

Tiwori gfai « I now have defined or determined the g&aeai 
KtieaiKOTim. notiou of Sovereignty, including the general no-i 
S^. *^ tion of independent political society : And, in 
order that I might further elucidate the nature 
or essence of sovereignty, and of the independent political 
aodety which sovereignty implies, I have considered the 
possible foxms-Df suprene-political government, with 4he li^ ^ 
^F'mit8,real or imaginary, of supreme jwUtical power. To com- 
plete my intended disquisition on the nature or essence of 
sovereignty, and of the independent political society that 
sovereignty implies, I proceed to the origin or causes of the 
habitual or permanent obedience, which, in every society 
political and independent, is rendered by the bulk of t^^e 
community to the monarch or sovereign niunber. In other 
words, I proceed to the origin or causes of pohtical govern- • 
ment and society. 

The proper purpose or end of a sovereign political govern-' i 
^ ment, or the purpose or end for which it ought to exist.! '^ 
^ is the greatest possible advancement of human happine^/ 
Though, if it would duly accomplish its proper purpose ^x>r 
end, or advance as £00* as is possible the weal or good of man 
kind, it commonly must labour directly and particularly to 
advance as far as is possible the weal of its own conmiumty. 
The good of the universal society formed by mankind, is (!:c 
aggregate good of the particular societies into which num- 

\ 

JUBISFBCDSFCB DBTEBMDTEED* 265 

kind is divided : just as the happiness of any of those so- 
cieties is the a^regate happiness of its single or individual 
members. Though, then, the weal of mankind is the proper 
object of a government, or though the test of its conduct is 
the principle of general utihty, it commonly ought to con* 
suit directly and particularly the weal of the particular com- 
munity which the Deity has committed to its rule. If it 
truly adjust its conduct to the principle of general utihty, 
it commonly will aim immediately at the particular and 
more precise, rather than the general and less determinate « 
end. / 

' " It were easy to show, that the general and particular ends 
never or rarely conflict Univenudly, or nearly universally; 
the ends areperfectly consistent, or rather are inseparably 
connected. ^An enlightened regard for the common happi- T 
ness of nations, implies an enlightened patriotism pwhilsC ^,; 
the stupid and atrocious patriotism which looks exduavely : iT . . 
to country, and would further the interests of country at ^^Ji^,^ 
cost of all other communities, grossly misapprehends and ''^- . 
fi^uently crosses the interests that are the object of its 
narrow concern^But the topic which I now have sug- 
gested, belong?^ the province of ethics, rather than the 
province of jurisprudence. It belongs especially to the pe- 
culiar/^epartment of ethics, which is concerned with inter- 
national morality : which affects to determine the morahty 
that ought to obtain between nations, or to determine the 
international morality.commended by general utihty.^ 

• The proper purpose or end of a aoTereign politicftl go- 
^^aSttvt ▼eminent, or the purpose or end for which it ought to exist, 
«M^P^>- is conceiyed insdequatelj, or is oonceiTed obscurely, bj most 
■MMimdio- or msnj of the q)eeulators on political goremment and so- 

S^dPforivbid To advance as fiur as is possible the weal or good of man* 
tb^oqglit to 1^^ iajnore generally but more Tagu^y its proper pufpose 
or end^To advanoe as &r as is possible the weal of its owu 
community, is more particularly and more determinately the purpose or end 
for which it ought to ezii^ Now if it would acoomplidi the gencndobjeot| 

2^6: THE PBOVINGE OF V T 

From the proper purpose or end of a sovereign politacal 
govemm^t, or fix>m the purpose or end for which it ought 

itcommonlj must labour directly to accomplish the particular : And it 
hardly will accompliah the particular object, unleaa it regard the geoeimL 
8inoe, then, each of the objects is inseparably connected with the other, 
either may be deemed the paramount object for which the sovereign goreni- 
^ ment ought to exist We therefore may say, for the sake of conciaeneai^ 
that its proper paramount purpose, or its proper absolute end, is '' the 
greatest possible adTanoement of the common happiness or the weal:^ meaniqg 
indifferently by ^ the common happiness or weal,** the common hapjnnea 
or weal of ito own particular community, or the common hi^pinesB'or weal 
of the uniyersal community of mankind. (Here I may remark, that in my 
fourth lecture, from page 95 to page 102, I shortly examined a corrent 
misconception of the theoiy of general utility ; and that the brief sugges- 
tions which I then threw out, may easily be fitted to the topic on which I 
now hare toudied)^ " 

To adiFmnoe as fiir as is possible the weal or good of mankind, or to ad* 

l^"^' vance as fiur as is possible the weal of its own community, is, thep, the pa- 

j^^ xamount or abaolute end £nr which a aorereign goTemment ought to exirt. 

i^^' * V y^^ 0^7 ""J of the gorernmeui itself^ what Bacon says of the law which it 

~ V sets to its subjects : ^ Finis et soopus quem intueri debet, non alius est^ 

quam ut ciyes feliciter degant.** The<way,Jindeed^.of the gOYemment to 

the attainment of its absolute end, lies through the attainment of ends 

which may be styled subordinate or instrumental : Or'in^order^that the 

goyemment may accomplish its proper absolute end, the government must 

accomplish ends subserving that absolute end, or serving as means to its 

accomplishment But the subordinate or instrumental ends through which 

the government must accompHsh its paramount or absolute end, will hardly 

ladmit of a complete description, or a description approaching to complete- 

Iness. Certainly they are not to be determined, and are not to be suggested 

justly, by a short and sweeping definitioa. For, assuming that the govern- 

ment accomplished thoroughly its paramount or absolute purpose, its care 

would extend (as Bacon adequately affirms) " ad omnia circa bene esse ci- 

vitatis ;** its care would extend to all the means through which it probably 

might minister to the furtherance of the common weal. 

But, by most or many of the speculators on political government and 

society, one or a few of the instrumental ends through which a government 

must accomplish its proper absolute end, are mistaken for that pMiinaQgnt 

purpose. 

For example : It is said by many of the speculators on political goveni- 

iM^ ment and society, that '' the end of every government is to institute and 

^y^ protect property." And here I must remark, by the by, tliat the pio^ 

pounders of this absurdity give to the term '' property *' an extremely laige 

i 

JUBISPRUDENCE DBTKRMINED. 267 

to exist, we may readily infer the causes of that habitual 
obedience which would be paid to the sovereign by the bulk 

and not yeiy definite aigoification. They mean generally by the tenn ^ pro- 
pci^yy** l^lgal rig^ti^ or legal faculties : And they mean not particularly by 
the term *' property,** the legal rights, or l^g^ Acuities, which are de- 
nominated strictly ** rights of property or dominion." If they limited the 
term ** property " to legal rights of dominion, their proposition would stand 
thuB : ^ Hie craftion and protection of l^gal rights of dominion, is the end 
joffereiy gOTeroment; but the creation of l^gal rights which are not rights 
^dominion (as legal, rights, for example, which are properly effects of con- 
jtaots), is not pared of its end, or fiJls not within its scope.*' Consequently, 
iheir proposition amounts to this: *^ To confer on its subjects l^gal rightis, 
and to preserye those rights from jnfxmgement^ is the end of every gorem- 
ment.*^ Now the proper paramount purpose of a sorereign political go- 
▼emment, is not the creation and protecdonoflegal fifjbia or £MHiltifiB, or 
(jjQ the termajofthe^m^osition) the institution -and protection o^ property. 
V^^^i^^!^i^'°!^.'^^Lp'^Gitection of kgal ri^ts -were its premier paramount 
pmpose, its p roper param onnt|mrpose might be the advancement of suiuy » 
lather than the advancement jofhappiness ; since many of the legal rights 
whidi governments have created and protected (as the righte^ mastersi 
ftr example, to and against slaves), are generally pem^us, rather than 
generally usefulX To advance as fio* as is possible the common happiness 
or weal, a govdrtSient must oon&r on its subjects legal rights : that is to 
^Vf ^ goremment must confer on its subjects beneficent legal rights, or such 
legal rights as general utili^ commends. And, having conferred on its 
cnbject beneficent legal rights, the government, moreover, must preserve 
those rights fixmi infiingement, by enforcing the corre^Kmding sancticmik 
But the institution and protection of beneficent legal rights, or of the kinds 
of p rop er ty that are commended by general utility, is merely a subordinate 
and instrumental end through which the government must accomplish its 

* The maintenance of the Rights which are vested in private individuals 
{Le. in the governed) is not the only end for which Government ought to 
exist. It is often expedient that it should be invested with powers which» 
neither direody nor indirectly, subserve that end, though they minister to 
that ultimate purpose for which Rights themselves should exist : vix. the 
genenl wellbeing.* {e,g. Powers to construct roads, etc) See Ilugi^ 
Lehrbueh dee NaturrechU, p. ISS.-^MS. Nate. 

• [ ''NeqiM tamcB jet pablioim ad hoc tratom ipeeCat, at addstor tanquin costot JuA 
privsto, M illad ▼icktur stque otmmi injurue; ted eztcnditur etuun ad reUgumecn 4a 
muuL tt diacipUiuuB at aniamenU at opat, daiiqttt ad ommm drca bbitb eaas dviuuiaT 
^BaisfN.] ^ 

:j€r. 

M/-A 

268 . THK FROYINCE OF : 

of an enlightened society. (^Supposing that a given socie^ 
were adequately instructed or enlightened, the habitual obe- 
dience to its government which was rendered by the bulk 
of the conununity, would exclusiv^ arise from reasons 
t'^^ttomed in the principle of utilit^ If they thought the 
government perfect, or that the government accomplidied 
perfectly its proper purpose or end, this their conviction or 
opinion would be their motive to obey. If they deemed the 
government faulty, a fear that the evil of resistance might 

panmoant or abtolute puxpoie. Am afiecting to deCermine the abaolute 

~ end £nr which a eorereign gorerament ought to exist, the propoeitioa in 
queeticm is, therefore, fidee. And, oonndered as a definition of the means 
through which the aorereign goremment must reach that abaolnte end, the 
propontion in qnesdon is defeotiTe. If the government would dnlj aocom- 
pliih its proper paramount poipoae, it must not confine its care to the crea- 
tion of legal rights, and to the creation and enforcement of the answering 
reladTe duties. There are absolute legal duties,- or l^gal duties without 
corresponding rights, that are not a whit less requiate to the adTaaoement 
of the general good than l^gal ri^ts themselyes with the rdatiye duties 
which thej imply. Nor would a goyemment accomplish thoroughly its 
i t proper paramount purpose, if it merely conferred and protected the requi- 

I [ site rights, and imposed and enforced the requisite absolute duties : that is to 

! ! say, if it merely established and issued the requisite laws and commands, and 

I f* looked to their due execution, _The sum <^-the-subordinate ends which 

I may subserve its absolute end, is scar^ly comprised by a good l^slation 

and a good administration of justice : Though aj^ood legislation with a 
j good administration of justice, or good laws well administered, are doubt- 

less the chief of the means through which it must attain to that end, or (in 
Bacon*s figurative language) are the nerves of the common weaL 

The prevalent mistake which I now have stated and exemplified, is com- 
mitted by certain of the writers on the science of political osconomy, when- 
ever they meddle incidentally with the connected science of legislation. 
Whenever they step from their own into the adjoining province^ they make 
expressly, or they make tacitly and unconsciously, the following as8umpti<m: 
that the proper absolute end of a sovereign political government is to fur- 
ther as fiu: as is possible the growth of the national n^ealth. If they thinlr 
that a political institution fosters production and accumulation, or that a 
political institution damps production and accumulation, they pronounce, 
without more, that the institution is good or bad. They forget that the 
wealth of the community is not the weal of the communis, though wealth 
is one of the means requisite to the attainment of happiness. They foigeC .*: 

JUEISPltUDENCE DETJSBMINKD. 269 

surpass the evil of obedience, would be their inducement to 
submit : for they would not persist in their obedience to a 
govemm^it which they deemed imperfect, if they thought 
that a better government might probably be got by resis- ^-^^ 
tance, and that the probable good of the change outweighed 
its probable mischief. 

Since, every actual society is inadequately instructed or 
^ilightened, the habitual obedience to its government which 
is rendered by the bulk of the conmiunity, is partly the con- 
sequcaice oi^custom : They partly pay that obedience to that "^^ ' 
present or estaolisiied government, because they, and per- 
haps their ancestors, have been in a habit of obeying it. Or 
^toe habitual obedience to the government which is rendered \ 
Dy the bulk of the community, is partly the consequence of \| 
prejudices ; meaning by ^ prejudices," opinions and senti- tf w 
ments which have no foundation whatever in the principle g 
of general utiUty^ .If, for example, the govemAent is mo- / 
narchical, they partly pay that obedience to that present or' 
established government, because they are fond of monarchy 
inasmuch as it is monarchy, or because they are fond of the 
race firom which the mons^xdi has descended. Or if, for ex- 
ample, the government is popular, they partly pay that obe- 
dience to that present or established government, because 

t2iat a political institution maj further the weal of the community, though 
it^edu the growth of its w^th; and that a political inadtution which 
quickens the growth of its wealth, may hinder the advancement of ita weaL 

[Miatakea like thoae of political eoonomiata are made b/ utilitarianfli 
onlj of a more general nature. Instead of confounding (specifically) soma 
■abordinate end of goremment with the paramount end of the same, they 
take a paii^of human happiness, or a part of the means towards it, for the 
whde of human happiness, or the whole of those means. (iTg. The exclu- 
sion of poetry or the fine arts, or the degrading them to '' the agreeable.** 
Their eminent utility. The wisdom to be got from poets. Giye examples.) 

This partial riew of human happiness, or of means towards it, will al- 
ways be taken till a system of ethical teleology be constructed : t. e. aa 
analysu of hi^ipiness, the means towards it, and therefore the ends to be 
pursued directly. — MS. Fragment,} 

i^ 

A 

270: THB PROVIKCB OF 

they are fond of diemoonacy inasmuch as it is demooMy; 
or because the word ** republic *' captivates their fiuicies and 
affections. 
I T^But, though that habitual obedience is partly the conse- 

quence of custom, or though that habitual obedience is 
partly the consequence of prejudices, it parUy arises fix>m a 
9 . reason bottomed in the principle of utiUty.^^^^ partly arises 
fix>m a perception, by the generahty or bulk of the commu- 
nity, of the expediency of political government : or (chang- 
.^ ing the phrase) it partly arises from a preference, by the 

i^\/ \/^ generahty or bulk of the community, of any government to 
/ anarchy. I^ for specific reasons, they are attached to the 
estabhshed government^ their general perception of the uti- 
li^ of government concurs with their special attachment . If 
^^. ^ : they dislike the established government, their general percep- 
tion of the utiUty of government controls and masters Uieir 
... ^^: dislike. They detest the established government: but if 
•; !>^^" they would change it for another by resorting to resistance, 
f^^'..^ they must travel to their object through an intervening .an- 
archy which they detest more.. 
nPhe habitual obedience to the government which is ren- 

• Ab connected with the proper purpose or end of political government 
and society, I may mention one caune which always will make political go- 
vernment (or political government guast) necessary or highly expdiient : 
namely, the uncertainty, scantiness and imperfection of positive mo];al rules. 
Hence the necessity for a common governing (or conunon guiding^ head to 
whom the community may in concert defer. 

It is possible to conceive a society in which legal sanctions would lie 
dormant, or in which ^tuMt government would merely recommend, or utter 
laws of imperfect obligation (in the sense of Roman Jurists). But however 
perfect and universal the inclination to act up to rules tending to the genexal 
good, it is impossible to dispense with a governing or guiding head. / 

(Uncertainty of existence of positive moral rules : want of the precisi<Hi 
and detail required by diqx>sitions regarding the objects about which po- 
sitive law is conversant. Hence Cr^winj^Jjfihte and others have made a 
great mistake.) 

In many cases, however, notwithstanding its defectiveness, it is necessuy 
to abandon acts to positive morality. (See Note, p. 146.) — MS, Fragment, 

JUBISPEUDBNCB DETBRlflKBD. ( 271 

by the bulk of the community, pardy arises, tfaere- 
f<t>re, in almost every society, from the cause which 1 now 
have described : namely, a perception, by the bulk of the 
community, of the utUity of pohtical government, or a pre- 
ference, by the bulk of the community, of any government l/^^^ 
to anarchyrj And this is the only cause of the habitual 
obedience in question, which is common to all societies, or 
nearly all societies. It therefore is the only cause of the 
liabitual obedience.in question, which the present general 
disquisition can properly embrace. The causes of the obe- 
dience in question which are peculiar to particular societies, 
belong to the province of statistics, or the province of par- 
"ticular history. 

The only general case of the permanence of pohtical go- \^ 
yemments, and the only general cause of the origin of poli- 
tical governments, are exactJy or nearlyjdike. Though every "^^ 
government has. ^isen in part from specific or particular 
jbauses, almost every government must have arisen in part 
from the following genera} cause : namely, that the bulk of 
the natural society from which the political was formed, wera I 
desirou^of escaping to a state of government, from a state^f^ 
of nature or anarchy. ^If they liked specially the govern- 
ment to which they submitted, their general perception of 
the utility of government concurred with their special in- ^' 
dination. If they disUked the government to which they 
submitted, their general perception of the utihty of govern- 
ment controlled and mastered their repugnancy 
/ The specific or particular causes of specific or particular 
governments, are rather appropriate matter for particular 
history, than for the present general disquisition. 

According to a current opinion (or^ccording to IJ|J,p?'***** 
a current expression), the permi|nence and origin «ajrmim«rt 
of every government are owing to. the people's thnmi^ii tu 

canam t: thatisto^say, every government continues^ 
through the caneeht of the people, or the bulk of MhStmry 
the political community : and every government •'T'^"^* 

H 

NA^\ 

m ^ 

TfiE PBOTINCE OF 

itbe 
people'icoii- 

and 

arises through the consent of the people, or tli< 
bulk of the natural society from whidb the po! i 
tical is formed. According to the same opinici' 
dressed in a different phrase, the power of the sovereij • j 
flows from the people, or the people is the fountain of 80V( 
rdgn power. ' 

Now the permanence of every government depends on 
the habitual obedience which it receives firom the bulk ol 
the community. For if the bulk of the commimity were 
fully determined to destroy it, and to brave and endure the 
evils through which they must pass to their object, the might 
<xf the government itself, with the might of the minority atr 
tached to it, would scarcely suffice to preserve it, or even t<3 
retard its subversion. And though it were aided by foreign 
^vemments, and therefore were more than a match for the 
disaffected and rebeUious people, it hardly could reduce them 
to subjection, or constrain them to permanent obedience, iix 
<!a8e they hated it mortally, and were prepared to resist it 
to the death.-^ut all obedience is voluntary ar/ree^ or everj 
party who obeys consents to obey. In other words, even 
party who obeys wills the obedience which he renders, or 
is determined to render it by some motive or another\ That 
acquiescence which is purely involuntary, or which is purely 
the consequence of physical compulsion or restraint, is no: 
obedience or submission. If |i man condemned to imprison ~ 
ment were dragged to the prison by the jailers, he would 
not obey or submit But if he were liable to imprisonmeiii 
in the event of his. refusing to wfilk to it, and if he were 
. determined to walk to it by a_feax__of that further restraint, 
the man would render obedience to the sentence or com- 
mand of the judge. Moved4)y4us dislike of the contingen . 
nishment, he would consent to the infliction of the present. 
— Since, then, a government continues througtrthe obedi- 
ence of the people, and since thfijobediencejof? the people i.^ 
voluntary or free, ever y govern ment con tinues through the 

consent of the people, or the bulk of tlie political society./ 

» > 

I JUHISFRUDE9GB DBTEBMIKED. 278 

1 

If they like the government, they are determined to 6bey4t 
ijabitaally, or to consent to its continuance, by their spe^al 
inclination or attachment. K they hate the government, 
they are determined to obey it habituaUy, or to consent to 
its continuance, by their dread of a violent revolution. They / 
consent to what they abhor, because they avoid thereby 
what they abhor more. — A& correctly or truly apprehended, 
die position ^ that every government continues through the 
^ea^e\ consent^' merely amoimts to this : That^ in every 
flocie^ political and independent, the people are determined 
by motives of some description or another, to. obey their 
government habitually : and that, if the bulk of the com- 
munity ceased to obey it habitually, the government would 
cease jto ezSt. x^ 

But the position in question as it is often understood, is 
taken witlupne or another of the two following meanings. 

Taken with the first of those meanings, the position 
amounts to this : That the bulk of every community, with- 
out inconvenience to themselves, can abolish the established 
government : and that being able to abolish it without in- 
convenience to themselves, they yet consent to its continu- 
ance, or pay it habitual obedience. Or, taken with the first 
of those meaning8,Tthe 7)06ition amoimts to this : That the 
bulk of every community approve of the established govem- 
m^it, or prefer it to every government which could be sub- 
stituted for it : and that they consent to its continuance, or 
pay it habitual obedience, by reason of that their approba- . 
tion, or by reason of that their preference. As thus under- 1 
stood, the position is ridiculously false : the habitual obe- | 
dience of the people, in most or many communities, arising 
wholly or parUy from their fear of the probable evijs which 
tfa^ might suffer by resistance. 

Taken 'with the second of those meanings, the position 
amounts to this : That, if the bulk of a community disUke 
the established government, the government ought not to 
continue : or that, if the bulk of a community dislike the 

VOL. I. T 

I- 

274 

THE PBOVnrCB OF 

1/ 

established government, the government therefore is bad co^ 
pernicious, and the general good of the commmiity requirdi 
its abolition. And, if every actual society were adequately 
instructed or enlightened, the pasition, as thus understood, 
would approach nearly to the truth. For the dislike of ai) 
enlightened people towards their established govemmeni, 
would b^et a violent presumption that the govemxnem 
was £EUilty or imperfect. But, in every actual .society^ the 
government has neglected to instruct the people in IKiuni 
political science ; or pains have been taken by the govenj^ 
ment, or the classes that influence the government^ to ez« 
dude the bulk of the community fix>m sound politick 
science, and to perpetuate or prolong the praudices whieh 
weaken and distort their understandings. /Every socieh, 
therefore, is inadequately instructed or enl^htened: And, 
in most or many societies, the love or hate' of the people 
towards their established government i would scarcely^ b^et 
a presumption that the government Was good or>badi^^Aa 
ignorant people may love thi^ established govemmeo^? 
though it positively crosses the purpose- for which. it ou^t 
to exist: though, by cherishing pernicious institutions /and 
yfostering mischievous prejudices, it positively prevents: the 
•S^^^rogress in useful knowledge and in happiness, whichr its 
|S(J^ /'subjects would make spontaneously if it simply were cam- 
y \ less of their good. "If the goodness of an established ^M- 

fti\j I \vemment be proportioned to the love qfjUie people^-t^ 
' » / ^ ^^ priest-bestridden government o f_besotted/ l^&tiiffll or Spain 
probably the best of governments: As weighed agaiwt 
iguel and Ferdinand, Trajan and Aurelius, or IVedefIt 
and Joseph, were fools and malignant tyrants. Andaskt) 
orant people may l6ve their established govertune^t^ 
x)ugh it positively crosses the purpose for which^it-OOghl 
to exist, so may an ignorant people hate their 4gstablish((^ 
.i\K • government, though it labours strenuously and wisely 'U) 
further the general weal. The dislike of the French peop^l^ 
to the ministry" of the godlike Turgot, amply -evinces the 

6XAA. 

- \ 

JURISPRUDSKCB DETEBMIKED. 

melahcholy truth. They stupidly thwarted' the measures of 
iheir wannest. and wisest friend, and made common cause 
with his and tfadr enemies : widi the rabble of nobles and 
priests who strove to uphold misrule, and to crush the re^ 
fuming ministry with a load of calumny and ridicule. / 
/^Trhat the permanence of every government is owing to theVi 
I people's consent, and that the origin of every government is A-r> 
I owing to the people*s consent, are two positions so closely y 
I iidlied, that what I have said of the former will nearly appl^^ 
v^to the Later. 
^^ Eveiy government has arisen through the consent of the \j/ 
peopl^ or the bulk of the natural society from which the 
political was formed. For the bulk of the natural society ^ 
^m which a political is formed, submit /reefy or polunta- 
. Irify to the inchoate pditical government Or (changing 
^ / the phrase) their submission is a consequence of motives; 6i 
4hej will the submisaon which they render. 
<?4 JBut A^ special approbation of the government to whiidi 
4liey freely submit^ or a preference of that government to 
evayother government, may not be their motive to sub- 
missicxL Although H^ey submit to it freely, the govern- 
ment perhaps is forced upon them : that is to say, they 
^x>uld not withhold thdr submission from that particular 
govemmenty unless they struggled through evils which they 
ade Joath to endure, or unless they resisted to the death. 
Beterm&ied by a fear of the evils which would follow a 
lefiisal 'to submit, (and, probably, by a. general perception 
'.of the utility of political government,) they freely submit to 
-t^vemment from whkh <3iey are specially averse. 
e«> The expression ^ that every government arises through 
the people's consent^** is often uttered with the following 
« xaeaning: That the bulk of^a\hatural society about to be- 
' come a political, <)r the inqhoate subjects of an inchoate 
political government, jt?fYmi»se, expressly dr tacitly, to obey 
ihe fiiture sovereign. The expression, however, as uttered 
with the meaning in question, confounds consent and pro^ 

t2 

.TEE FBOYIKCB- of 

js,^ vSm^ and therefore is grossly incorrect That the inchoate 
subjects of every inchoate government vrill or consent t * 
obey it, is one proposition : that they promise, expressly ct 
V^Macitly, to render it obedience, is ano^er proposition. Lia*- 
much as they actually obey, they will or consent to obe^ : 
or their will or consent to obey, is evinced by their actiuti 
obedience. But a will to render obedience, as evinced by 
actual obedience, is not of necessity a tadt promise to ren- 
der it : although by a promise to render obedience, a wjU 
or consent to render it is commonly expressly or intimated; 
That the inchoate subjects of every inchoate govemm^ 
promiM to render it obedience, is a position involved by an 
hypothesis which I shall exaimine in the next section. 
TiMiiTpoiiw. In every conmiunity ruled by a monarch, tli€ 
Jm^IT^ subject members of the community lie tmder du- 
ju^iZi^x t^^ to the monarch; and in every community 
< «wa jMct ruled by a sovereign body, the subject niembers 
%.,^- jdf the community (including the several memben of. the 
f- ' ^ jbody itself) lie under duties to the body in.jts [coUecti^ 
and sovereign capacity. In every community ^,nded by' a 
monarch, the monarch lies irnder duties towards his syb« 
jects ; and in every community ruled by a sovereign body, 
the collective and sovereign body lies under duties to ii> 
subjects (including its own members considered.seyeirally). 

The duties* of the subjects towards the soverei^ goverii- 
ment, are partly religious, partly legal, and partly moraL' 
J^rke religious duties of the subjects towards the sove- 
reign government, are creatures of^e Divine law as knoT^a 
through the principle of utility^§f it thoroughly accon^- 
plish the purpose for which it (Jtight to exist^or fiuiher the 
-V^ geaeral weal to the greatest possible extent, the subjeits 
^ , are bound religiously to pay it habitual obedien<^^ Ai;d. 
Hljjft if the general good which probably would follo^^^bmi^ 

^^|^sion outweigh the gener al g ood which: 
aV^Iow resistance, the subjects are bound, reh^ously to pay it 
^ •/ habitual obedience, although it accomplish imperfectly itF 

/ 

JURISPRUDENCE DBTERIONBD. 277 

proper purpose or end. — The l^al duties of the sdlgects 
towards the sovereign government, are creatures of positive 
laws which itself has imposed upon them, or which are in- 
cumbent upon them by its own authority and might — ^The 
moral duties of the subjects towards the sovereign govern- 
ment, are creatures of positive morality. They mainly are 
creatures of laws (in the improper acceptation of the term) 
which the general opinion of the community itself sets to 
its several members. 

• The duties of the sovereign government towards the sub- 
jects, are partly reli^ous and partly moral. K it lay under 1/ 
legal duties towards the subjects, it were not a supreme, but '-" 
were merely a subordinate government 
/SiCs religious duties towards the subjects, are creatures of 
^'''^e Divine law as known through the principle of utili^tt=" 
It is bound by the Divine law as known through the prin* ] 

ciple of utility, to advance as faiLMJO^o^^^^^^-^^^^'^^^^ 
goodjoLffianldnd : and, to advance as far as is possible the 
weal or good of mankind, it commonly must labour direcdy 
and particularly to advance as far as is possible the happi- 
ness of its own community. — ^Its moral duties towards the 
subjects, are creatures of positive morality. They mainly 
are creatures of laws (in the improper acceptation of the 
term) which the general opinion of its own commimity lays ^ . 
orjmposes upon it. 

^ <J[t follows from the forgoing analysis, that the duties of 
' the ' subjects towards the sovereign government, with the 
C duties of the sovereign government towards the subjects, 
^ I originate respectively in three several sources : namely, the 
[Divi^ejaw (aS indicated by the principle of utility), positive 
jaw , and positive morality^ And, to my understanding, it 
seems that we account i^fimciently for the origin of those 
obligations, ^hen we simply refer them to those their ob- 
vious fountains. It-seems to my understanding, that an 
ampler solution of their origin is not iiTthe^least.reqmsite, 
and, indeed, is impossible. But there are many writers on 

V 

^ 

THE PROVINCE OF 

pditical government and sooety, who are not content tci 
account for their origin, by simply referring them to those 
their manifest sources. It seems to the writers in ques- 
tion, that we want an ampler solution of the origin of those 
obligations, or, at least, of the origin of such of them at> 
are imposed by the law of God. And, to find that ampler 
solution which they believe requisite, those writers resort* to 
the hypothesis of the original covenant or contract^ or the 
\r] jftmdamental civil pact* :i 

By the writers who resort to it, this renowned andnotex^^ 
ploded hypothesis is imagined and rendered variously. But 
! the purport or effect of the hypothesis, as it is imagined 
I and roidered by most of those writers, may be stated gene- 
^^ -jjJly thus : 

/^To the formation of every society political and indepen- 
dent, or to the institution of every Wxi^ or civi(aM^ aU its 
future members then in being are joint or ccmcuning par- 
tieis : for all are parties to an agreement in which it ihea 
onginates, and which is also the basis whereon it aflerwarcU 
rests. As being the necessary source of the independent 
political^society, or as being a condition necessarily prece- 
ding its existence, this agreement of all is styled the original 
covenant: as being the necessary basis whereon the civitas 

afterwards rests, it is styled pactum civile fundamentale. 

In the process of making this covenant or pact, or the pro- 
cess of forming the society political and independent, there 
are three several stages : which three several stages may be 
described in the following marmer. Ql. The future members 
of the community just about to be created, jointly resolve 
to unite themselves into an independent political society i 

* I style the sapposed coTenant ** the original covenant or eofwenUon^ 
rather than '' the original contract,''^ ^erj oonventian, agreement, or pact^ 
id not a contract properly so called : though every contract. ^pEoperly so 
called is a convention, agreement, or pact. A. contract properly bo called, 
is a convention which binds legally the promiong party or partiea. . But, 
. admitting the hypothesis, €je supposed ** original covenant^ would not and 
i;ould not engender legal or political duties. 

JUBISFBUDEKCB DETERMINSD. 279 

mgnifying and determining withal the paramount purpose 
of their union, or even more or fewer of its subordinate or 
instrumental ends. And here I must briefly remark, that 
the paramount purpose of their union, or the paramount 
purpose 0f the community just about to be created, is the 
paramount purpose (let it be whit it may) for which a so- 
cieiy political and independeiit ought to be founded and 
perpetuated. By the writers who resort to the hypothesis, 
this paramount purpose or absolute end is conceived difler- 
eatij : their several conceptions of this purpose or end, dif- 
fering with the several natures of thdr respective ethical 
systems. To writers who admit the system which I style 
the theory of utility, this purpose or end is the advancement 
of human happiness. ' To a multitude of writers who have 
flourished and flourish in GermanyAhe following is the truly 
magnificent 4hough somewhat mysterious object of politi- 
cal government and society : namely, the extension over the 
earthy or over its human inhabitants, of the empire of right 
or justice. 3[t would seem that this right or justice, like 
the goj^ nipian's justice, is absolute, eternal, and immu- 
table.Cj[t would seem that this right or justice is not a 
creature of law : that it was anterior to every law ; exists 
ind^>endently of ev^ law ; and is the measure or test of 
all law and morality A Consequently, it is not the right or 
justice which is a cloture of the lajv of God, and to which 
the name of ^ justice " is often implied emphatically. It ra- 
' ther is a something, perfectly self-existent, to which his law 
- conforms, or to which his law- should conform. I, there- 
• fore, cannot understand it, and will not aflect to explain it 
Manely guessing at what it may be, I take it for the right 
or justice mentioned in a preceding note: I take it for 
general utiUty darkly conceived and expressed.^ Let it be 
what it may, it doubtless is excellently good, or is supep- 
latively fairior high, or (in a breath) is preeminently worthf 
of pnuse. For, compared with the extension of its empire 
over mankind,4he mere advancement of their happiness m 

/280/ THK FBOVINCB OF 

a mean and contemptible object. 2. Having resolved tc 
unite themselves into an independent political society, al 
the members of the inchoate community jointly determine 
the constitution of its sovereign politiod government. LJn 
other words, they jointly determine the member or members 

\rJ^^Aa whom the sovereignty shall residej^and, in case they will 
that the soverdgnty shall reside m more than one, they 
jointly determine the mode wherein the sovereign number 
shall share the sovereign powers. 3. The process of form*, 
ing the independent political society, or the process of form- 
ing its supreme political government, is comfdeted by pro- 
mises ^ven and accepted : namdy, by a promise ^f the in- 
choate sovereign to the inchoate subjects, by promises of 
the latter to the former, and by a promise ofnegdi of the 
latter to all and each of the rest The pronuse made by 

^^ ;' : the soverdgn, and the promises made by the subjects, are 
^i made to a conunon object : namely, the accomplishment of 
- the paramount purpose of the independent political socijis^, 

; < and of such of its subordinate piuposes as were signified 
by the resolution to form it The purport of the proniise 
made by the sovereign, and the purport of the promises 
made by the subjects, are, thc^fore, the following. The so- 
vereign promises generally to govern to the paramount end 
of the independent political society : and, if any of its ijub- 
ordinate ends were signified by the resolution to form it, 
the sovereign moreover promises specifically to govern spe- 
cifically to those subordinate ends. The subjects promise 
/ to render to the sovereign a qualified or conditional .obe- 

^ '^dience: that is to say, to render to the sovereign all thej 
\obedience which shall consist with ^t paramount puipose 

and those subordinate purposes. ^^The resolution pf the 

members to unite themselves into an independent political 
^ society, is styled pactum^unw Their determination of 

the constitution or structure of the sovereign political go- 
vernment, is styled p(i€tumc(m^titutioni8 or pactum ordina- 
c tionis. The promise ofthe sovereign to the subjects, with 

JUBISPBUDENCE DBTEBMUnSD. ' 281 

the promises of the subjects to the sovereign and to oi^ an- 
other, are styled pactum subiectionis Afor, through the pro- 
mises of the subjects, or through thB promises of the sub- 
jects cou]ded with the promise of the sovereign, the former 
are placed completely in a state of subjection to the latter, I 
or the relation of subjection and sovereignty arises b^;ween| 
the jMuiieSi^ But of the so called pact of tmian, the so called 
pact can^iluentj and the so called pact of subjectiarij tfie last 
only is properly a convention. The so called pact of union 
and the so allied pact constituent are properly resolves or 
determinations introductory to the pact of subjection: the 
pact of subjection being the origin^ covenant or the fun- 
damental civil pact. ^Through this original covenant, or 

this fundamental pact, the sovereign is bound (or, at leasts 
is bound religiously) to govern as is mentioned above : and 
the subjects are bound (or, at least, are bound religiously) 
to render to the sovereign for the time being, the obedience 
above described. And^the binding virtue of this fundamen- 
tal pact is not confined to the founders of the^ indepen- 
dent poUtical society. 13ie binding virtue of this funda- 
mental pact extends to the following members of the same '^'^^/^ 
conmiunity. For the promises which the founders of the 
communis make for themselves respectively, import similar 
promises which they make for their respective successors. 
Through the promise made by the original soverdgn, fol- 
lowing sovereigns are bound (or, at least, are boimd religi- 
ously) to govern as is mentioned above. Through the pro- 
mises made by the original subjects, following subjects are . 
bound (or, at least, are bound religiously) to render to the 
sovereign for the time being, the obedience above described. 
I n every society poUtical and independent, the duties 
of the sovereign towards the subject (or the religious duties \/s^ 
of the sovereign towards the subjects) spring from an ori- 
ginal covenant like that which I now have delineated : And 
in every society pohtical and independent, the duties of the 
subjects towards the sovereign (or the religious duties of 

282] THE PKOVIKCE OF ' ' 

i8^ 

the fld^jpcts towards the sovereign) arise fix>m a dmilif 
pact ][Uiile3s we suppose that such an agreement is m- 
combent on the sovereign and subjects, we cannotaccoimt 
^ isdequately for those their reactive obUgatioos/J Uoleai 
die flRibjectfl were held to render it by an agre^ent that 
they flhall render it^ the subjects would not be obliged, or 
wodd not be obliged sufficiently, to render to the sovereign 
the requisite obedience : that is to say, the obedience requi- 
rite to the accomplishment of the proper purpose or end of 
the independent poHtical society. Unless the sovereign were 
held by an agreement to govern aa is mentioned above, the 
flovereign would not be obliged, or would not be obliged 
jBuflfeiently, from governing d^potically or arbitrarily : that 
ui to «y, governing with little or no regard to the proper 
pinpose or end of a e(upreme political government 
' •' Such, I believe, is the general purport of the hypothesis, 
to it is imagined and rendered by most of the writere who 
resort to it 

- Sottas I have remarked above, the*'Writer8^whoreri(^ 
the hypothesis imagine and render it variously. — ^Aooord- 
ing, for example, to some of those writers, The original sub- 
jects, covenanting for themselves and their followers, (mx>- 
mise obedience to the original and following aovereigns. 
But the original sovereign is not a promising party to the 
fundamental civil pact The original sovereign does not 
agree with the subjects, that the sovereign powei« shall be 
used to a given end or ends, or that those powers shall T^e 
used in a giv'^i mode or modes.— And by the difiereot 
writers who render the hypothesis thus, the pim>ort of tlliife 
subjects' promises is imagined. For ezampl^Some su^ 
pose that the obedience promised by the subjects^ is the 
qualified or conditional obedience briefly described above; 
whilst others suppose that the obedience promised by tl)e 
subjects, is an obedience passive or unlimited.^The writer:-, 
in short, who suppose an original covenant, "think variously 
concerning the nature of the end for which a suprane go- 

\ 

JUBISFB^EKCE DBTEBHUrBD. f 28) 

vemment'^ ought to oust They think moreover variously 
oonceming the extent of the obedience which a supreme 
government ought to receive fix)m its subjects. And to his 
own opinion concerning the nature of that end, or to his 
own opinion concerning the extent of that obedience, each 
of the writers in question endeavours to shape the hypothe- 
sis.— But though the writers who resort to the hypothesis 
ima^ne and render it variously, they concur in this : That 
the duties of the subjects towards the sovereign (or the 
religious duties of the subjects towards the sovereign) are 
QToatures of the .original cov^iant. And the writov who 
.fan<7 tliat the original sovereign was a promising party to 
the. pact, also concur in this: That the duties of ^e sove- 
reign towards the subjecta (or the religious duties of the so- 
vereign towards the mibjects) are engendered by the same 
agreement. • . . .* ? 

i : A complete though condse exposition of the various forms 
or shapes in which various writers imagine and render the 
hypothesis, would fill a considerable volume. .Besides, the 
ensuing strictures apply exactly, or may be fitted easily, to 
any original covenant that has been or can be conceited; 
although they are directed more particularly to the fancied 
original covenant. which I have delineated tJbove. My state- 
ment of the purport of the hypothesis, I, therefiDre, conclude 
here. And I now will suggest shortly a few of the condu- 
sive objections to which the hypothesis is open. 

1. To accoimt for the duties of subjects towards their so- 
vereign government, or for those of the sovereign govern- 
ment towards its subjects, or for those of each of the parties 
towards the other, iai^ scope of every writer who supposes 
an original covenant^^ut|^ to account for the duties of sub- 
I jects towards th^soverdgn government, or for those of the 
scwereign go^^munent towards its subjects, we need not re-\ 
sort to the hypothesis of a fundamental civil pact. We suffi- 1 iV' 
dently account ior the origin of those respective obligations, I 
when we refer them aimply (or without the supposition of aa I 

(284) 

-*HB- PBOVIKCB W 

B^F 

f. 

original covenant) to their apparent and obvious fountflont if 
namely, the law of Gfod, positive law, and positive monOitgjii^ 

vy-Besides, although the formation of an independent politi- 
cal society were really preceded by a fundamental civil pact, 
scarce any of the duties lying thereafter on the subjects, 
or of the duties lying thereafter on the sovereign, would be 
indered or influenced by that foregoing convention.-^ 
hypothesis, therefore, of an original covenant, is neei- 
and is worse than needleo&i It affects to assigni thi 
cause of certain phsenomena : namely, the duties of subjects 
towards their sovereign government, or the duties of-^tife 
sovereign government towards its subjects, or the' duties tof 
each of the i>arties towardsthe other. But the cause* which 
it assigns is superfluous ; inasmuch as there are other causes 
which are at once obvious and adequate : And that super- 
fluous cause is insufficient as well as superfluous, or could not 

* have produced the phia^nomena whereof it is the feuicied 
source. /I'l's^'vi-^-^-h?^:^'^* 

: It will appear from the following analysis, that, altUoiq)^ 
the formation of an independent political society were leally 
preceded by an original, covenant, scarce any of the duties 
lying thereafter on the subjects, or of the duties lying there- 
after on the sovereign, woidd be engendered or affected by 
that forgoing agreement. CjLn jother words, the cov^iant 
would hardly oblige {legally^ religiously^ or morally) the ori- 
ginal or following subjects, or the original or followicig' sove- 
reigns.^ . v"" 
. Every convention which obliges legally (or every contract 
properly so called) derives its It^al efficacy from a positives 
law. Speaking exactly, it is not the convention that obliges 
leally, or that engenders the legal duty : but the law obliges 
leally, or engenders the legal duty, throoghthe convention. 
In other words, the positive law annexes thejdiity t# the* 
convention : or it determines that duties of the given daaft 
shall follow conventions of the given-descriptionr — ConsQ^*;: 
quently, if the sovereign government werte bound legally hf: 

JURISFBUDBNCE DBTEBMINED. 

the fundamental civil pact, the l^al duty lying on the go-, 
vemment were the creature of a positive law : that is to say, 
the l^al duty lying on the government were the creature 
of a positive law annexing the duty to the pact And, see- 
ing tliat a law set by the government to itself were merely 
a law through a metaphor, the positive law annexing the >y^ 
duty to the pact would be set to the sovereign government 
by another and superior sovereign. Consequently, the so- 
vereign government legally bound by the pact would be in 
a state of subjection. — ^Through a positive law by their 
own sovereign, the subjects might be bound l^allylo keep 
the original covenant But the il^al or political duty thus 
incumbent on the subject, would properly proceed from the \ \y^ 
law set by thdr own sovereign,^and not from the covenant | 
itsell If they were bound legally to keep the original co- 
venant, without a positive law set. by their own sovereign, 
the subjects would be bound legally to keep the original 
covenant, through a positive law set by another sovereign : 
that is to say, they would be in a state of subjection to their 
own. sovereign government, and also to a sovereign govem- 
meut conferring rights upon their own. 

Every convention which obliges (properly or improperly), 
derives its efficacy fix)m law (proper or improper), ^ls obU- 
ging l^lly, a convention derives its efficacy from law posi- 
txveJYAs obliging religiously or morally, it derives its effi- 
cac^^m the law of God or from positive morality^Con- 
jSiequently, if the sovereign or subjects were bound /eUgiously. 
}pj the fundamental civil pact, the religious duty lying on ; \X 
j(he sovereign, or the religious duty lying on the subjects, j 
iir6uId4)roperly proceed from the Divine law, and not from ' 
th@4>actTt8el£-The party bound religiously, would be boimd 
by die law of .Qod, through the original covenant: or the 
religious dutyjiying on the party, would be annexed to the 
original covenant, by the law of God. 

Nowlthe proper absolute end^f an independent political 
aocic^, and the nature of the index to the law of God, are 

::> 

ffHl PROVDICB OF 

r^ 

/ 

oottcsdvisd^ffeT^tlyby'diflre^ But whatevec ibe tb 

absolute end of aii independent political sbdelyi' and wha^ 
ever be the nature of the index to the law ^pf 'Qbd^he^8^» 
vereign would be bound religiously, without an^ original oo" 
/ venant, to govern to that absolute end: whilst the mtgects 
^ would be bound religiously, without an original coveoani^ 
to render to the sovereign the obedience which the aooom^ 
plishment of the end might requireTV Consequently, wiiedier 
it consisted or conflicted with thaf'pxiper absolute *end,'tbe 
original covenant would not oblige rdi^oudy eitherxtf ^db« 
two parties. — If the original covenant consistedVith thatid>« 
solute end, this original covenant would be superflua)ia,>afed 
therefore would be inoperative. • The religioua dutiea Jying 
on the sovereign And subjects, would- not be efieeta or conse- 
quences; mediately or immediately,' of the fhn^ainental dvil 
[^. pact. ' Ihaskhuch si the Divhie-kw would impose those lef 
:' ' - Ugious duties,' although the pa<it )iad not be^ ta«4e^>tl|ef 
would hot be eflfelftts Or consequences annexed ib>ttib^|Mct' 
by the law, or would not be imposed by the 4awr4hnMigh 
the pact.— -If the original covenant cojiflicted'with'«tfaat«lH 
solute end, it would also conflict with the law which is the 
source of reUgious bbligiations; and would not oblige leli^ 
giously the sovereign government or its subjects. - L "^ « i - 

For example : Let us suppose that the principle of utility 
is the index ito the law of God; and that, since the prin^ 
ciple of utility is the index to the law of Gbd, the^gi^^dest 
possible advancement of the common happiness cr-meB]L^ 
the proper absolute end 6f an indepfeildentjjrfiticaLsoGi 
Let us suppose/nioreover, that the accomplishment of>j^ 
absolute end was the scope of the original covenanti^ ^-^oyf 
no religious obligation would be laid Jiii^ the sovereigiiPQr 
subjects through the fundamental pact. For the sovertign 
would be Iwund rehgiously without the-fimdcmientidipacti 
to goveJn to the very end kt^hich its authors had aimed ( 
whilst the subjects would be^ bound religiously, without 
tlie fundament^ pact, to Texv^« \ft ^€^^<Bcei^ the obedi- 

/lM^ 

JUBISFBm^CB DBTBBlilRED: SoT 

(^ 

/ran 

ioe niiidi the aooomplishment of the end might require. 
And if the accomplishment of this same end were not the 
scope of the pact, the pact would conflict with the law as 
known through the principle of utility, and would not oblige 
religioudj either of the two partiesTl To make a juxMnise 
which gaiend utility condemns, is an offence agunst the 
law- of God : but to break a promise of a generally pernio 
vious tendency, is the fulfilment of a reli^ous duty, 
^^nd though the original sovereign or the original subjects | 
ttught have been bound religiously by the ori^nal covraant, 
why or how -should it -bind religioiisly the following sove- 1 
teigns or subjects ? Duti^Jto the subjects for the time being, 
would be laid by the law of God on all the following sove- 
reigns ; and duties to the soverdgn fc^the iinie being, would * 
I be liud by the law of God on all the following subjectaX^ y 
but why should those obligations be laid on those foDo^^^y^^ 
ing parties, through the fimdamentd jact? thr 96gh or in 
tonsequence of a pacTlnade withouT their authority, and if 
even without iheir knowledge ? I Legal obligationsjpften lie 
upon parties^ (as, for example, upon heirs or administrators), / 
through or in consequence of promises made by other par- ^ y 
ties whose l^al representatives they are : whose £EU!ulties or \^r 
means of fulfilling obligations devolve or descend to them V^\' 
by virtue of positive law. And I perceive readily, why the 4^- ^ - 
legal obligations which are consequent on those promises, \^ 
tetend from the makers of the promises to the parties who ^ ^ 
legally represent them. It is expedient; for various reasons, ir f^-^ 
tlikt positive law should impose obligations on the makers / ijp 
dT certain promises : and for the same, or nearly the same ^ ^ 
i^easona, it is expedient that the l^al duties which are laid ^ t 
on the makers themselves, should pass to the parties who le- 
gally represent them, and who take their faculties or means. ' 
But I am viable to perceive, why or how a promise of the 
original sovereign or subjects should bind religiously the fol- t 
lowing sovereigns or subjects : Though I seethat the cases 
.of l^al obligation to which I now have adverted, probably 

o: ras FBOVINCE OF. 

4Kiggested the groundless conceit to thoee who devised the 
hypothesis of a fundamental civil pact 

K the sovereign were bound morally to keep the original 
covenant, the sovereign would be bound by opinions curreni. 
amongst the subjects, to govern to the absolute end at whid. 
its authors had aimed: And if the subjects were bound 
morally to keep the original covenant, the subjects would bu 
bound severally by opinions of the community at laiget |o 
/ render to the sovereign the obedience which the accomplislih 
/[ ment of the end might require, ^ut the moral obligatiool 
V 1 thus incumbent on the sovereign, with the moral obligatioDi 
thus incumbent on the sulgects, would not be engendoed 
I or affected by the original covenant^ lliey would not be 
imposed by the positive morality of USe conununity, through 
or in consequoice of the pact Por the opinions obliging 
the sovereign to govern to that absolute encl, with the cpi- 
k nions obliging the subjects to render that requidte obedi- 
ence, would not be consequents of the pact» but would juu^f. 
been its antecedents : inasmuch as the pact itself would hay^: 
been made by the founders of the community, because thosg 
ver^ opinions were held by all or most of themf^ 
j We may, if we like, imagine and assume, that the fancied, 
original covenant was conceived and constructed by its au-> 
thors, with some particularity and precision : that, having 
determined the absolute end of their union, it spedfied 
some of the ends positive or negative, or some of the means 
or modes positive or negative, through which the sovereiga 
government should rule to that absolute end. , - The foundei^. 
for example, of the independent political society (like the BcK 
man people who adopted the Twelve Tables), might have 
■ ' adverted specially to the monstrous and palpable^ jou^chi^fb 

< .' of ex post facto legislation : and therefore the fsLnaed cove- 

[^ V nant might Have determined speciaUy, that-, ^e sovereign 

[v government about to be formed should for^)j^ from legisla< 

p ' tion of the kind. And if any of those positive or n^ative 

t ' ends were specified by the original covenant, the promise ojf 

JURISFVUD^CE DETEBMINED. 289. 

the subjects to render obedience to the sovereign, was mlade 
wiUi special reservations : it was not extended to any ctf the 
cases wherein the sovereign might deviate from any' of the 
subordinate ends which the covenant determined specially. 

Now the bulk or generality of the subjects, in an inde- 
pendent political community, might think alike or uniformly 
concerning the absolute end to which their sovereign govern- 
ment ou^t to rule : and yet their uniform opinions concern- 
ing that absolute end might bind or control their sovereign 
very imperfectly. Notwithstanding the uniformity of their 
<^inions concerning that absolute end, the bulk of the sub- 
jects mig^t think variously concerning the conduct of their 
Mvereign : since the proper absolute end of a sovereign 
political government, or the absolute end for which it ought 
to exist, is inevitably conceived in a form, or is inevitably 
stated in expressions, extremely abstract and vague. For ex- 
ample : The bulk or generality of the subjects might possi- 
bly ooncor in thinking, that the proper absolute end of their 
sOv^ign political government was the. greatest possible 
advancement of the general or common weal : but whether a 
positive law made by it ex post facto did or did comport 
with its proper absolute end, is clearly a question which 
they mi^t answer variously, notwithstanding the umformity 
of Uieir opinions concerning that paramount purpose. Un- 
less, then, the bulk of the subjects thought alike or uniformly 
<^nceming more or fewer of its proper subordinate ends, 
they hardly would oppose to the government, in any parti- 
colar case, a uniform, simultaneous, and effectual resistance. 
Consequently, the soyereign government would not be af- 
fected constantly by the fear of an effectual resistance from 
4he ml^ect members of the community : and, consequently, 
their general and uniform opinions concerning its paramount 
purpose would bmd or control it feebly. — ^But if the mass 
of the subjects thought aUke or uniformly concerning more 
at fewer of its proper subordinate ends, the uniform opinions 
of the mass, concerning those subordinate ends, would pro* 

VOL. I. u 

y 

bably control it. potently. Speaking goierally, ihe proper 
subordinate ends of a sovereign political government (ler 
those ends or means be what they may) may be imagine ; 
in forms, or may be stated in expressions, which are neithe. 
extremely abstract, nor extremely vagua Consequently, i- 
the government ventured to deviate fh)m any of the subol- 
dinate ends to which those uniform opinions were decidedly 
favourable, the bulk or generality of the subjects woalil 
probably unite in resenting, and even in resisting its m/ 
sures : for if they tried its measures by one and the 
standard, and if that standard or test were determinate 
not dubious, their respective opinions concerning its mea-. 
sures would exactly or nearly tally. Gonsequentfy, a fear of 
aicountering an eflfectual resistance, in case it shoiQd ven- 
ture to deviate from any of those ends, would constantly 
hold the government to all the subordinate ends^'which 
the uniform opinions of the mass decidedly & 
extent to which a government is bound by iheo^mnmpt:^ 
^ Its subjects, and the efficacy of the moral duties whidi thcSr^ji 
opinions impose upon it, therefore depend mainly on the^twb , 
following causes : First, the number of its subordinate ends,- . 
(or the number of the ends subserving its afa^lute end^l, 
concerning which the mass of its subjects think alike (Xt : 
uniformly : secondly, the degree of clearness and preciffl6a\.; 
with which they conceive the ends in respect whereof thdr ^ 
opinions thus coincide. The greater is that nuteber, and 
the greater is that degree, the more extensively, and the 
more effectually, is the government bound or contrplled by 
the positive morality of the community/^ 

Now it follows from what I have premised, that, if an 
original covenant had determined clearly and precisely sbm** 
of the subordinate ends whereto the sovereign should rulo. 
the sovereign would be bound effectuaDjT^y'the' poativ? 
morality of the community, to rule to the subordinate ends 
which the covenant had thus specified: supposing'^ I, of 
course, understand) that thosc-same subordinate ends were 

JURISPktUDBlfGB DETEBlftKED. 291 

fiiToured by opinions and sentiments which the mass of iQie 
subjects for the time being held and felt And here (it mi^t 
be aiguedjtiie sovereign would be bound morally to rule to 
those same ends, through the fundamental pact, or in con- 
sequence of the fundamental pact For (it might be said) 
the efficacy of the opinions binding the sovereign govem- 
mfeht would mainly arise from the deigness and precision 
wtth which those same ends were conceived by the mass 
of tiie subjects ; whilst the deamess and precision of their 
cojuceptions would mainly arise from the deamess and pre- y 

eiasim with which those same ends had been specified by ^^ 
lS6i6 original covenant 1^ will, however, appear, on a mo- 
menlTs reflection, that the opinions of the goierality of the 
subjects, conoeming diose same ends, would not be engen- y: - 
jbi^ by, but rather would have engendered the covenant yV 
•For, if most of the subjectfounders of the independent poli- 
- tical sodety had not been afiected by opinions exactly a- 
; ttiSbuy* why were those same ends specially determined by 
^ die covenant of whidi those subject founders were the prin- 
-' dpal authois? And, granting that the deamess with which 
they were specified by the covenant would impart an an- 
flwering'deamess to ti|ie conceptions of the following sub- 
jects, tliaL-^ect -on— the opinions hdd by the following 
subjects would not be wrought by the covenant as being a 
copenant or pact: that is to say, as being a promise, or nm- 
iual pr&niises^ proffered and accepted. That efiect would 
be wrou^t by the covenant as bdng a luminous statement 
of those same subordinate ends. And any similar statement 
which might circulate widely (as a amilar statement, for . 
example, by a popular and respected writer,) would work 
a rindlar effect on the opinions of the following subjects. 
Stating deariy and precisely those same subordinate ends, 
it would naturalty give to their conceptions of those same 
subordinate-endraxorresponding deamess and precision. 
;The Jdlowing (I think) is the only, or nearly the only 
wherein an original covenant, as bang a covenant or 

V 2 

V 

^^9^ THE FROVINOS-OF - 

pact, might generitte or influence any of the duties lying qp 
the aovereign or subjects. ^ 

It might be believed by the bulk of the subjects, that an 
agreement or convention (or a promise proffered and 9^ 
cepted) has that mysterious efficacy which is expressly j<r 
tacitly ascribed to it by those who resort to the hypodi^ib 
of a fundamental civil pact — ^It might be beUeved by the 
bulk of the subjects, that, unless their soveragn govenuMht 
had promised so to govern, it would not be, bound by the 
' law of God, or would not be bound suffidently by the hew 
of God, to govern to what they esteemed its proper absplibe 
end. It might be believed moreover by the bulk of the 
subjects, that the promise made by the ori^nal sovereign 
was a promise made in eflect by each of the following sdve-. 
reigns. ^&Jid therefore it might be believed by the bulk of 
the subjects, that their soverdgn government was bound 
rehgiously to govern to that absolute end; rather' because. 
it had promised to govern to that absolute end, than bv 
reason of the intrinsic worth belonging to the end its^^ 
—Now, if the mass of the subjects potently believed these 
positions, the duties of the government towards its subjects,: 
which the positive morality of the community imposed upon, 
it, would be engendered or affected by the original cove- 
nant They would be imposed upon it, wholly or in part, 
because the original covenant had preceded or accompanied 
the institution of the independent pohtical society. For if 
it departed from any of the ends determined by the origj-, 
nal covenant, the mass of its subjects would be moved to 
anger, (and perhaps to eventual rebellion;)^by its breach of 
its promise^ real or jsupposed, rather than by that misrule of 
which they esteemed it guilty;-^ Its breach of Its pr6mi>^s 
as being a breach of a promise, would be the cause of th< '? 
offence, wholly or in part. For they would impute to tli< 
promise, real or supposed, a proper and absolute worth ; or 
they would care for the promise, real or supposed, without 
regard to its scope and tendency. 

JUBISPEUDENCB DBTEBUmED. ^293^ 

fsvy It appears fix>ih the foregoing analysis, that, althoii^ the i 
j Mmation of the independent political society had leieilly' 
1 been preceded by a fundamental civil pact, none of the 
: legal or religiaua duties lying on the sovereign or subjects 
/; could l^ engendered or influenced by that preceding con-l vV^a 
lTention|\hat there is only a single case, or are only a few 
cases, ^^rein it could engenda: or influence any of the 
fiwral duties lying on the same parties. It will appear from 
4lie following analysb, that, where it might engender or in-j 
fluence any of those moral duties that preceding conven-^ 
Jion wQuld probably be pernicious. '( 

I Of the duties of the sover^gn towards the subjects, and 
^f the duties of the subjects towards the sovereign, it is 
only those which are moral, or are imposed by positive mo- 
'.rality, that any original covenimt oould posably aBect. And, 
^nsidered with reference to those, an original covenant 
.;^ould be mmply useless, or would be po^tively pernicious. 
^ An original covenant would be simply useless, if it merely 
\ determined the absolute end of the^overeign political go- 
.yemment ^4C itmerely determined thfif^e absolute end of 
the government was the greatest possible advancement of 
^e common happinesa or weal. - Foir^ough the covenant 
.inight give uniformity to the opinions of the mass of the 
Kubjects, it would only afiect their opinions concerning that 
: absolute end: And, as I have shown already, the unifor* 
mity of their^-opinions -concerning the paramount purpose, 
would h^FdlyJnfluaioe==tiie4X)nduct of their sovereign poli- 
tical government 

i But llife covenant might specify some of Jthe means, or 
some of the subordinate or instrumentS^end^ through 
which the govemment should liile to that its absolute end, 
or through which it should so rule as^to furthei: the com- 
mon weaL And as specially determining any ojf^ those 
means,.^ any of the subordinate ends to which the govern- 
jnent should rule, the origiiidLcbvej^^tji^o 
usd^ or wotdd be poatively pernicious. ' ' 

; A . J ^ I^ tibe opinroiis of tbe fi)lloiriiig 
[^ S r pendent pc^ticil ammnmily, ooiiq 

i^^f J^^ 

'L- 

mendien of die inde- 
fbe 

Afinds to which the government should role, mold or woaKl 

^"^ jM^be affected fay the covenant or pect of thelbanden. 
^ ^ / If the covenant of the fimnden of the oomnranitj ^a 
hot affect the opinions of its fidkming memben^tibe oove- 
^(gant woold be simply usdess^ iQUw^"*^^-^^'^^'^ 

If the covenant of the foandSn of Ae comrtmnity.jlki 

affect the opinions of its foUowii^ memben, die OQvemat 

/ woold be poeitivefy pernidooBi For die opmiaos 

the following memben would probabfy be afbrtad Igr 

the covenant as being a covenant or pact made iby die 

^randen. They prabdbfy would impale to d» 

«ids specified fay the OK^;inal covenant^ a wordi ^strinac 

and.axbitiaiyyOr ind^endeni of their intrinsk merits A 

dbefiefdiat the qpiedfied ends were of a usefid orAen e fioent 

ft or were ends tending to the fbrdiennce of^die 

common happiness or weal, woidd not beiheir leason^or 

would not be thdb: only reasooy for regarding the en^ with 

^'respect They probably would respect the speci^ed aidsi 

^ or probably would partly respect diem, because the vaie- 

^;^rable foundei? of the independent political society (by the 

; venerable covenant or pact which was the basis of the social 

fabric) had Hetermined that those same ends were some of 

th^ ends or means through which the weal of the ccxnmu-; 

might be furthered by its sovereign government Now 

venerable age or times wherein die community was 

bounded, would probably be less enlightened ^notwidistand- 

ing its daim to veneration)lthan a^y of Uie ensuing and 

degenerate ages through which the conmiunity might tfur 

dure. Gonsequendy, the follovmig pernicious effect wcRiId' 

be wrought by the original covenant. v^h^opi^^onslidd 

in an age comparatively ignorant, concemmg the subordi*^ 

\ ^^T^te ends to which the government ahould rule, would ; in- 

J ^ Buence more or les^ through, llie medium of the covenant^ 

/? the opinions held, ooncieanDMi^ ^^j^efc-^a^m «^|^ a^^sos^k^^ 

,[ 

\'--ii 

.^ v-^ 

"tively knowingX-Let us suppose, for example, that ihe for- 
' 'maticHi of thefnitish community was preceded by a funda- 
mental pact Let us suppose, (a ^ most unforoed " supposi- 
tion,) that the ignorant founders of the community deemed 
foreign commerce hiuiful to domestic industry. Let us, 
^therefore, suppose, moreover, that the government about to 
be formed promised for itself and its successors, to protect 
^^ithemdustiy of its own society, by forbidding and prevent- 
*%lg the importation of foreign manu£Eu;tures.' Now if the 
^ 'fundamental pact made by our worthyancestors were de- 
\/^oatly reverenced by many of ourselv€s,~it would hinder the 
^' ^diffusion of sound ceconomical doctrines through the pre- 
' sent community. The present laoverdgn government would, 
therefore, be prevented by the pact, from l^islating wisely 
and usefully in r^ard to our commerdal intercourse with * 
^ other independent nations. If the govarnment attempted 
' to ^^thdraw the restrictions which the laws of preceding 
'governments have laid on our-&reign commerce, the &1- 

• lades, .whidb-oiow^ are. ciurent, and the ncmsense which 

* now is in vogue, would not be the only fallacies, and would 
not be the only nonsense, wherewith die haters of improve- 
ment would belabour the audacious innovators. All who 

^delighted in ^^ things ancient,** would certainly accuse it 

; of infringing a principle which^was part of the very basis 

whereon the community rested : which the wise and vene- 

* table authors of the fcindamaital pact-itself had formally 

• adopted aind consecrated. Nay, the lovers of darkness as- 
suredly would affirm, and probably: ivQuld potendjrbelieve, 

-'^ that the government was incompetent to withdraw-the re- 
strictions which the laws of preceding governments have 
laid on our foreign commerce.^: that, bemg, 4is it were, a 1 
jprtt^of the first or original government, it was estopped byy 
the Bolenm promise which that government had ^ven. a 

Prcnnises oc oaths on the part of the original sovereign, 
or promiseaoroaths on the part of succeeding sovereigns, 
are not4hejeffident securities, mom/ or religtaue^ for baie- | 

9^/ . :rSSB.flO!VOnB '<Mf - 

1/ ^^ 

:?r. 

f ^■ 

i; H -fioenfc govenuaeat or rale-^Tl^ 

/r . 4he be^ of the seciiritieB yielded bjrpoative ino!iaditj,imiiU 
AV * ^ •arise fixim a wide diflusiony throi^ the iiiaflB.of die mb* 
jects, of the soundest political scienoe wfaidi the lights of 
thoLage could afford. If they coiM»ved conectly the paia- 
mount end of ib^ir govenunent^ wi^ the means or oobciv 
dinate ends through which it must acccAiplish that ea4 
lione of its measures would te grgadyLfKifidrdr wickel 
and its. craduct podliTe and ncgatiYe would commonly ts 
wise and bmeficMt,~rhe best of nXiguim aaemitifli^ e^ 
th^ best of the secnxities yielded by rd^gioos connctioni^ 
|. wqvld arise fixxn worthy oi^^ 

L/ - jects» coDceniing the wishes and puiposesoLd^ 

. Wise MoiMUjeh, -and--cooceniiig--the'natape.^ the duties 
'y^l iK^EO^ hfijays upcm earthly sovereigns; 

>%^^ lit appean fiom the forq^oing strictures oa tiie hypo* 
/^>thesis of Ihe olig^lal corenantt that the hypoAesia is need- '. 
ksBiand is worse than^needteai: that we am aUe to4itf* 
count sufficiently, without rm to the IqFpdthen^ir 
the duties of subjects towards thdur sovereign government^ 
with7^1ie duties of the sovereign government towards its 
subjects ; and that, though the formation^of the indepen- 
dent political society had really been preceded by a fiinda- 
mental civil pact, scarce any of those obligations would be 
engendered or influenced by that preceding agreement It 
will appear fix>m the following strictures, that the hypothesis 
of the fundamental pact is not only a fiction, but is a ficticm 
approaching to an impossibility : that the^ institution of a 
9-oXi^ or civitaSj or the formation of a society political and 
independent, was never preceded or accompanied, nnd could 
hardly be preceded or accompanied, by an original cove- 
nant properly so called, or by aught resembling the idea of 
a proper original covenant 

Every convention properly so called, or ^ every pact or 
agreement properly so called, consists of ^ j9rK^m^ (or 
•mutual promises) proffered and dcc^ted. Wherever' mutual 

JUBlSEBUDSKCB DBXBBHINED. 297 

promises are proffered and accepted, tbere are, in strictness, 
'two or more conventions : for the promise proffered by each, 
and accepted by the other of the agreeing parties, is of it- 
self fnagreejpent But where the performance of either of 
the promises is made by either to depend on the perform- 
ance of the other, the wveral conventions are cross or im- 
ciplicated conventions, and commonly are deemed, therefore, 
V'On^ convention. — ^Where one only of the agreeing parties 
'jgives or passes a promise, the promise which is proffer^ by 
Tthe one, and which is accept^ by the other, is, in the Ian- 
^^guage of jurists, ^a convention jmilatau d.** Where each 
of ^the agreeing parties ^ves or passes a promise, and the 
i performance of either of the promises is made to depend on 
.the performance of the other, the several promises respec- 
tively proffered and accepted, are, in the language of jurists, 
^ a convention btlatej rf^V* Where each of .the agreeing parties 
gives or passes a promise, but the performance of dther of 
the promises is not made to depend on the performance 
of the bih^each of the several conventions is a separate 
unilateral convention, although the several conventions be 
made at one time. For example : K I promise you to ren- 
der you a service, and if you accept the proffered promise, 
the promise proffered and accepted forms a convention uni- 
latend. If I promise you to render you a service, and you 
promise me to render me a service therefor^ the promises re- 
spectively proffered, if they are respectively accepted, form 
a convention bilateral K each of us promise the other to 
render the other a service, but the render of either of the 
services is not made to depend on the render of the other, 
the promises proffered and accepted are separate unilateral 
conventions, dthough they be proffered and accepted at one 
and the same time — Since, then, a convention bilateral is 
formed by the implication of several unilateral conventions;, 
every. convention is properly a unilateral convention, or m 
promise proffered and accepted. 
:.t,The essentials of a convention may be stated general^ 

»; 
^ 

298 . THE FBOVIKGB Off 

.thus. 1. The promisor^ or the party who proffen the pro^ 
mifle, promises the promisee, or the par^to wh<nii it is prof- 
fered, that he will do or perform some given act cr acts, wiU 
forbear or abstain from some given act or acts, or will do 
<ir perform and also forbear or abstain. And the acts or 
forbearances which he promises, or the acts and forbearances 
which he promises, jnay be styled the object r^f his promise, 
and also the object of the convention. 2JUrhe promisor 
siffnifies to the promisee, that he intenda to do the act^or 
to observe the forbearances, which form the object of hisj 
promise. If he signifies this his intention by spoken or^ 
written\S[ords, (or by signs which custom or usage has ren- 
dered equivalent to words,)i^ prpfiered promisels expre^ 
If he signiiSis this his intention by signs of aaether nature, 
L . his profiered promise is still a genuine pronuse,umt is tmj^fiei 

or iaeit^ If, for example, I receive goods from a shopkeeper, 
lelUng him that I mean to pay for them, I promise expressly 
to pay for. the goods which iTeoMve;" fori signify an inten- 
tion to pay for them, through spoken or written language. 
Agdnl Having been accustomed to receive goods frx>m the 
* shopkeeper, and also to payibr_lhe goods which I have been 
accustomed to receive, I receive goods which the shopkeeper 
delivers at^ my house, without signifying by words spoken 
or written, (or "by signs which custom or usage has rendered 
equivalent to words,) any intention or purpose of paying for 
the goods which he delivers. Consequently, I do not pro- 
mise expressly to pay for the particular goods. I promise, 
however, tacitly. For by receiving the particular goods 
imder the various circumstances wliich have preceded and : 
accompany the reception, I signify to the party who delivetd 
them, my intention of paying for the goods, as decidedly as 
I should signify it if I told him that I meant to pay. The 
only difference between the express, and the tacit or implied 
promise, lies in the difference between the natures of the 
signs through which the. two intentions are respectively 
signified or evinced. S.^The promisee accepts the proffered •« v 

' JUSISPBUniNGS . DETSRimrKD. ^ 299 

. rpromiB^ In other yrorda, he ^ignifiM to the proxniaor,. ex- 
pressly or tacitly ^(Lis 6^^ or expectation that the latfer will 
do or forbear agre^ly to the intention or purpose which 
•the latter has expressed or intimatedTVUnless the promise 
be accepted, or such a belief or expecbltion be signified ex- 
. ;pres8ly or tacitly, the promise is not a convention. K the 
^ ^acts or forbearances which form the object of the promise 
v'Jbe afterwards done or observed, thc^ are done or observed 
..qx>ntaneou8ly by the promising p&rly, or not by reason of 
:^the promise considered as such : for the promise would not 
: ;be caifprced (l^^y or morally) by a rational supreme go- 
vernment or a sane public opinion. In the technical lan- 
guage of the Eoman jurists, and by most of the modem 
jurists who jare familiar with that technical lai^guage£aj)ro- 
proffered but not accepted is styled a poUidtai^n^ 
^uently, the main essentials of a convention are 
these : First, a sioniAoatian by the promiang party, of his 
intention to do the acts, or to observe the forbearances, 
which he promises to do or observe: secondlyj a eignificatian 
by the promisee, that he eapecte the promidng party will 
fulfil the proffered promise. And that tins cdgnificaticHi 
of intention and this agnification of expectation are of the 
very essence of a proper convention or agreement, will ap- 
pear on a moment's rdBection. 

The conventions enforced by positive law or morality, are 
enforced legally or morally for various reasons. But of the 
various r^tsons fonnenfordng any convention, the follow- 
ing is always one.-4:8anction8 apart, a convention naturaUji 
raises in the mind^f]^ielpromisee, (or a convention tends 
to raiae.in the mind of the promisee,)^ an expectation that 
its jobject will be accompli^ed : and to the expectatioQ 
luCEmtdly i^sed by the convention, he as uaturaUy shapes 
his conduct Now, as much of the business of himian life 
tumTdr moves upon conventions, frequent disappointments 
of those expectaticms which' conventions naturally exdte, 
would render human society a scene of l)affled hopes, and of 

300 TBRFBovmcs: OF 

thwarted projects and labours, ^o prevent disappointnoients 
of such expectations, is therefore a main object of the l^al 
and moral rules whose direct and appropriate purpose is 
the enforcement of pacts or agreementJTV But the promisee 
would not entertain the expc^tion, un)^ the correq>ond- 
ing intention were signified i^^e promising par^ : and, 
imless the existence of the expectation wer^signified by the 
promisee, the promising party would not J)^ apprised of its 
existence^ -al&ough the proffered promise had actually raised 
it Without the signification of the intention, th^e were no 
promise properly so called : without the fflgnification of the 
expectation, there were no suffident reason for enforcing 
the genuine promise which really may have been proffered.^ 
It follows from the forgoing statement of the main es- 
sentials of a convention, that an original covenant properly 
80 called, or aught resembling the idea of a proper original 
.<x>venant, could hardly precede the formation' of an indepen- 
dent political society. 

^ Th€ inddental statemenV in the text, of the eiwflntialit of a oonTentioa 
or pact, is sufficient for the limited purpose to which I have there plaoed 
it If I were expounding directly the rationale of the doctrine of contracts, 
I should annex to the general statement which I have placed in the text, 
many explanations and restrictions which now I must pass in silence. A 
good exposition of that rationale (which jaigon and bad logic have marvd- 
lously perplexed and obscured) would inyolye a searching analysis of the 
following intricate expresuons : promise; pollicitaj^on; conyention, agree- 
ment, or pact ; contract ; quasi-contnict. ^ . 

But I will add to the statement in the text, before I conclude the note, 
the following remark on that consent which is of the essence of a conven- 
tion. That consent which is of the essence of a convention, is formed of 
the intention signified by the propiisee, and of the corresponding expecta- 
tion signified by the promigQjr. This intention with this expectation is 
styled the consensus of the parties, because the intention and expectation 
chime or go together, or because they are directed to a common object : 
namely, the acts or forbearances which form the object of the oonventionl 
But the term consent, as used with a wider meaning, signifies any com- 
pliance with any wish of another. And, taking the term with this wider 
meaning, subjects (as I have shown already) consent to obey their sovereign, 
whether they promise or not to render obedience^ and whatever be the 
nature of the motives by wliich they are determined to render it 

JUBISFBUDENCB BBTKRIQNED. r. 301* 

According to the hypotheds of the original coven«|kt, in so: 
&r as itxegards the promise of the original sovereign, the so- 
vereign promises to govern to the absolute end of the union, 
(and,7KrhapSpto mo^ or fewer of its subordinate or in- 
strumental ends.) And the promise is proffered to, and iis 
. accepted by, all the original subjects. In case the inchoate 
government be the government of one, the promise passes 
from die monarch to all the' members of the community 
(^ezcepting^the momtrch hin^self). In case the inchoate go- 
vemmi^t be a govenmient of a number, it passes from ^e 
sovereign body ^n its collective and sovereign capacity) to 
all the subject mgmbers of the inchdate community (inclu- 
ding the memlj^orsU^ the body considered severally). — ^Ac- 
cording to the Iiypothesis of the pri^nal covenant, in so far 
as iti^^ards the promise of the original subjects, they -pro- 
mise to render to the sovereign a passive and unlimited obey> 
dienCe, or they promise to render to the sovereign such a 
qualified obedience as shall consist with a given end or with 
given ends. And the promise of the subjects passes from 
aU the subjects : from all and each of the subjects to the 
monarch or sovereign bod^ or from each of the subjects to 
all and each of the rest, fin case the inchoate government 
be a government of one, it passes from all the members of 
the inchoate community (excepting the monarch). In case 
the inchoate government be a government of a number, it 
passes from all the members of the inchoate community (in- 
cluding the several members of the sovereign body)^ 

Now it appears from the forgoing statement otthe main 
essentials of a convention, that the promise of the sovereign 
to the subjects would not be a covenant properly, unless the 
subjects accepted it But the subjects could hardly accept 
it, unless they apprehended its object. . Unless they appie- ^ 
hended its object, it hardly could raise in their minds any 
determinate expectation, and unless it raised in their minds 
a determinate expectation, they hardly could signify virtually 
any determinate expectation, or could hardly accept 

/: 

ytiiat 

/pose 

/ tuftlly the profiered promige. The signs of acceptance wKkb 

Imiglit actually fall from them, would not be signs of vir- 
tual acceptance, but would be in reality unmeaning noise 
or show, — Now the ignorant and weaker portion of the in- 
dboate community (the portion, for example, which was not 
adult) could liardly apprehend the object of the sovereign's 
promise* whether the promise were general or special : whe^ 
ther the sovereign promised generally to govern to the ab- 
solute end of the independent pohtical society, or promised 
y moreover specially to govern specially and directly to cer- 
tain subordinate ends. We know that tJie great majority, 
^ in any actual community, have no determinate notions con« 
t J cerning the absolute end to^ which their sovereign govern* 
|h ment ought to rule : that they have no determinate notions 
H oonocming the ends or means through which it should 
H aim at the accomplishment of that its paramount purpose. 
B It surely, therefore, were absurd to suppose, that all or 
^^ many of the members of any inchoate community would 
Iiave determinate notions (or notions approachmg to deter- 
< minateness) concerning the scope of their union, or ooncem- 
ing the. means to its attainment Consequently, most or 
many of the original subjects would not apprehend the 
object of the original sovereign's promise r. and, not iqppre- 
hending its object, they would not accept it in ^ecty al- 
though they might accept it in show. ^Tith r^ard to most 
' or many of the original subjects, ihf^prom^ of the original 
sovereign were hardly a oosenanL^or.pact^ but were rather 
a i>ollicitatioi^ 

The remarks which I now have made on the promise of 
the original sovereign, will apply, with a few adaptations, to 
the promise of the original subjects. If really they proffered 
to the sovereign (or if really they proffered to-one another) 

it promise to render obedience which tlie hypothesis sup- ^ 
poses or feigns, they would signify expressly or tadtly an * ^'. 
intention of fulfilling it But sud^a signification of inten- -i: > 
tion could not be made by all of them, or even by most or ^%;*^ 

JUBISFttOliMKCE J>WnESlDSKD. 

many of them : tost by most or many of them, the Object 
of the fancied promise would not be apprehended detemi- 
nately, or with a distant approach to determinatene^ — ^If 
you feign that the promise to obey passes from the subjects 
to the subjects, you thicken the absurctity of the fiction. 
You fiincy that a promise is profiered by parties to whom 
the object of the promi^ is nearly or quite unintelligible : y 
and, seeing that the promisors are also the promisees, you ^ 
teoicy that the promise is accepted by parties to whom the 
- object of the promise is equally incomprehensibleT 
• Ifcyou would suppose an original covenant which as a 
jnere hypothesis will hold water, you must suppose that the 
dociety about to be formed is composed entirely of adult 
members : that all these adult members are persons of sane 
mind, and even of much sagacity and much judgment : and 
s that being very sagacious and very judicious, they also aro^ - 
perfectly familiar, or at least are passably acquainted, vnth ' 
political and ethical science. On these bare possibilities, 
you^nay build an original coveniant which shall be a cohe- 
rent fiction. 

It hardly is necessary to add, that the hypothesis of the 
original covenant, in any of its fotms or shapes, has no. 
A foundation in actual facts. fThere is no historical evidence, I 
I that the hypothesis has evet been realized : that the forma-i 
I tion of any society political and independent has actually 
V I been preceded by a proper original covenant, or by aught 
\ approaching to the idear^ 

In a few societies political and independent, (as, for eacam- 
ple, in the Anglo-American States,) the sovereign political 
government has been determined at once, and agreeably to 
a scheme or plan. But, even in these societies, the parties 
who determined the constitution (either as scheming or 
planning^ or as simply voting or adopting it) were merely a 
slender portion of the whole of the independent community, 
; and were virtually aovereign therein before the constitution 
: was determined: insomuch that the 'constitution was not 

^^ 

FBOVIKCB OF 

/ 

U 

confttructed by the whole of an inchoate commtinity, but 
rather was constructed by a fraction of a community already 
consummate or complete. If you would show me an actual 
case actually squaring with the idea of a proper original 
covenant, you must show me a society political and inde- 
pendent, with a government political and sovereign, which 
1^11 th6ttmembers of the society who were then in^existence 
jointly founded and oonrtituted* You must show me, also, 
that all the subject or sovereign authors of this society and 
government were parties expressly or tacitly to a true or 
genuine convention resembling the ori^nal covenants which 
I have mentioned above.— In most societies political and 
indq>endent, the constitution of the supreme government has 
grown . By Yibk^ fustian but current phrase, I intend not 
to mtimate that it hath come of itself, or is a marvellous 
something fashioned without hands. For though we say 
of governments which we mean to praise, ^^ that they are 
governments of laws, and not governments of men/* aU 
human governments are governments of men rfAnd, without 
men to make them, and without men to enforce them, hu- 
man laws were just nothing at all, or were merely idle words 
scribbled on paper or parchment. ^I intend to intimate, by 
the phrase in question, that the constitution of the supreme 
government has not been determined at once, or agreeably 
to a scheme or plan : that p^^ ^ivfi moral rule^ of succe^ve 
generations of the community (and, perhaps, positive laws 
made by its successive sovereigns) have determined the con- 
stitution, with more or less exactness, slowly and unsys- 
tematically. Consequently, the supreme government .was 
not constituted by the original members of the society ; Its 
constitution has been the work of a long series of authors, 
comprising the original members and many generations of 
tlieir followers. And the same may be said of most of the • / 
ethical maxims which opinions current with the subjects con- • 
strain the sovereign lo obsetNe. Tcv^ ox^gLual sovereign go- . 
vernment could not \ia\e pTom\s»^^*\\a «oJci^^^\& Vr^ ^gssl^^t^:^^\s^ 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. .305 

those maxinuclFor the current opinions which actually 
enforce those maxims, are not <^sxal with the independent 
political sodety, but rather have arisen insensibly since the 
society was forme^— In some societies poUtical and inde- 
pendent, oaths or promises are made by rulers on their ac- 
cession to office. But such an oath or promise, and an origi- 
nal covenant to which the original sovereign is a promising 
party, haye^littie or no resemblance. That the formation 
of the society political and indq>endent preceded the con- 
ception ofjLhe oath itself, is commonly implied by the terms 
of the latter. The swearing party, moreover, is commonly 
a limited monarch, or occupies some portion like that of a 
limited monarch : that is to say, the swearing party is not 
sovereign, but is merely a limb or member of a sovereign 
body. 

:.And if actual original covenants might be detected in 
history, they would not sustain the hypothesis. For, ac- 
cording to the hypothesis, an original covenant necessarily 
preced^the formation of an independent political society. 
And in numerous cases of independent political society, the 
formation of the society, as we know from history, was not 
preceded by an original covenant: Or, atieast, the forma- 
tion of the society, as we know from history, was not pre- 
ceded by an express original covenant. 

Pot is said, however, by the advocates of the hypothesis,\ 
(for the purpose of obviating the difficulty which these ne- / 
gative cases present,) that a tacit original covenant preceded ( 
the formation of the society, although its formation was not \ 
preceded by an express covenant of the kind. 
^^ Now (as I have shown above) an actual signification of 
intention on the part of the promisor, with an actual accept- 
ance of the promise on the part of the promisee, are of the 
very essence of a genuine convention or pact, be it express, 
or be it tadt The only difference between an express, and 
a tacit or implied convention, lies in this: That, where the 
convention is express, the intention and acceptance are sig- 

VOL. 1. X 

ioe 

liiSed by lai^pi^s, <mi^ i^pMi wl 
miAeaceA equh^aleiitto ku^gw^ : bot^lhat^iidi^ ikiorm^ 
fCDtkHi is tadt or implied, the loteotkHi end •6Qeptaiioe4Ut' 
mot sgnified bywixdi^cr byi^^wMdk eiiito»;or vrng^ 
lias made tantamoimt to ipofd^ 

cuperully &oni tacit or impliod contaMli. ^ iMto* iiqpBii MalnMl ii« 

gcntiine contract : that in to aajta |MiaiM <Cttyiwti«l IfJlMl tiijfj4i^M^J^» 

* or to ivhich posUirc kw aTinexea M qhUprtaBuV fe|fc a ttiiiii oopinM)t k : 

I not A genuine convention, and^ hy eowixrHiWif^j » IMt # fHEIulltt ^^Btnou 

I It i« iom« fact or eyent^ not a gGindM QOOTMlliOBy t9 iMloh ^JMBrflB^l Wif--.- 

ftnnexi^ an obligation, at if {fuad nr IrtQ H liirv a gMlAlS eHRMtftei» 
r And the analogy between a contradtaad m«BtliOt fUjli^ri^^ WWii^ir IJM 
T«J|pihe reBcnibknce between tbc tw9 6tKglJ&omwVfsh§tl^ 
. *iilf to Om two ftoli «r €Miti. b oOmk ra^iio^ tfM tm ilMti^^^^m 

.ytnomi to be omd, is m ftel or «f«il ownitiagta m ooataol^fWMl 
^ TOif fa nodiiijg k tho awt or ifffc ttgfNwof^ oftatiiHiaH <fepMij{ 
4» tbo lUfibMBl of aa oskiiW oUift^ 
^bU^irtkn, k Ao ooopo or doi%ii of Ao tnuMtkn bolwoai the pq^or ond 

payee. But ainoe the money ia not owed, and ia not giren aa a gift, a 
legal obligation to xetum it lies upon the payee from the moment of the 
erroneona payment Although he ia not obliged ex cofUractUy he n obliged 
quasi ex contractu : as if he tmly had eontracted to xetum the money. The 
payee ia obliged to return it, as he might hare been obliged| if he had pro- 
mised to return it^ and the payor had accepted his promise. 

In the language of English jurisprudence, &cts or erents which are con- 
tracts quasi or uti are s^led implied contraetSj or contracts which the law 
implies : that is to say, contracts ^iMist or uti^ and genuine though tadt 
contracts, are defioted by a common name, or by namea nearly alik^ An^y 
consequently, contracta quasi or uti, and implied or taqi^ contra^ are 
commonly or frequently confounded by English lawyera^See, in parti- 
cular, Sir William Blackstone^s Commentaries, B. IL Ch. 80., and B. XII. 
Ch. 9. 

As the reader may see in the annexed outline (pp. bonrii. Ixxzix.), rights' 
of one great class are rights in personam certam : that is to say, rights 
which avail ezclusiyely against persons deteirmined specifically, or. which 
answer to duties that lie exclusiyely on persons determined specifically. To 
the duties answering to such rights, the Roman lawyers limit Ae expres- 
non obligationes : and since they haye no name appropriate to rights of 
the class, they apply that expression to the rights themselves as well as to 
liie answering duties which the Vights import. Now rights in personam^ 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 307 

CMosI or many, therefore, of the members of the inchoate 
society, could not have been parties, as promisors or pro- 
misees, to a tacit original covenant. Most or many of the 
members could not have signified virtually the requisite 
intention or acceptance : for they could not have conceived 
the object (as I have shown above) with which, according 
ta the hypothesis, an original covenant is concerned / 
^ Besides, in many of the negative cases to which I now 
. am adverting, the position and deportment of the original 
aovereign govemm^it, and the position and deportment of 
the bulk of the original subjects, exclude the supposition 
of a tadt original covenant^ For example : Where the origi- 
nal government b^ns in a violent conquest, it scarcely pro- 
mises tacitly, by its violences towards the vanquished, that 

or MigatkmB^ aiue prindpftOj from fiusts of two daslMs : namelj, genuine 
eontraeU express or tadt, and delicts or injuries. But, besides oontncts 
and delicts, there are &cti or erents, not contracts or deUdSy to which 
poshiTe law annexes obii^atianei. By the Roman lawyers, these ftcts or 
erents are atylni ^luut-contracti : or the obligations annexed to these ikcts 
or erentSi are staled obligations quasi ex contractu. These £icts or events 
are styled ^ncrsi-contracts, for two reasons. 1. Inasmudi as the oblip:ation8 
annexed to them r e s em ble the obligations annexed to contracts, they arc, 
in that re^MCt, analoffoui to contracts. 2. The only resemblance between 
their epedee or sorU^ lies in the resemblance between the obligations which 
an reipectiTely annexed to them. Consequently, the common name of 
juoft-contracts is applied to the genua or kind^ for want of a generic term 
more apt and significant. — Ae the expression is employed by the Koman 
lawyers, ** obligationes quaei ex contracta** is equiyalent to ^' anomalous 
obligatioDs^ or to ^nUsceUaneous obligations:** that is to say, obligationes^ 
inr rights in personam^ which are annexed to fiicta that are neither contracts 
nor delicts ; and which being annexed to fiicts that are neither, contracts 
iior delicts, cannot be brought under either of those two principal classes 
into wUch rights in personam are aptly drrisible. ^ OUigationes (say the 
Digests) ant ex contrscta naaeontur, aut ex maleficio (siTe delicto), ant 
proprio quodamjure ex varOs oausarumJlgurisJ** — ^The confusion of quan- 
contractB with tacit yet genuine contracts, is certainly not imputable to the 
Roman jurists. But with modem lawyers, (how, I cannot conjecture,) this 
gross confuaon of ideas is extremely frequent. It is, indeed, the cause of 
most of the nonsense and jargon which hare coTcred ^e nature of conren- 
tions widi nearly impenetrable obscurity. 

x2 

308 THE PROVINCE OP 

it will make their weal the paramount end of its role And 
a tacit promise to render obedience to the intrusive and 
hated government, scarcely passes from the reluctant sub- 
jecta They presently will to obey it, or presently canseni 
to obey it, because they are determined to obey it, by then 
fear of its military sword. But the wiU or consent to obey 
it presently, to which they are thus determined, is scarcdy 
a tacit promise (or a tacit manifestation of intention) to 
render it future obedience. For they.intimate pretty sig- 
nificantly, by the reluctance with whidi they obey it, that 
they would kick with all their might against the intrusive 
government, if the military sword whicH it brandishes were 
not so long and fearful 

By the recent and present advocates of the hypothesis of 
the original covenant, (who chiefly are German writers on 
political government and sodety,) it commonly is admitted 
that original covenants are not historical fiEicts : that an ac- 
tual original covenant never preceded the formation of any 
actual society political and independent. But they zealously 
maintain, notwithstanding this sweeping admission, that the 
only suflScient basis of an independent political society is a 
fundamental civil pact. Their doctrine, therefore, touching 
the original covenant, amounts to this : namely, that the 
original covenant hath not preceded the formation of any 
society political and independent ; but that though it hath 
not preceded the formation of any^ it yet precedeth inevit- 
ably the formation of every. — Such is a taste or sample of* 
the high ideal philosophy which the Germans oppose exult- 
ingly to the philosophy of Bacon and Locke : to the earthy, 
grovelling, empirical philosophy, wliich deigns to scrutinize 
facts, or stoops to observation and induction. 

It would seem that the propounders of this lucid and co- 
herent doctrine, mean to insist on one or another of the twc 
following positions. 1. That an express ori^nal covenant 
has not preceded the formation of any society political and 
independent : but that a tadt original covenant (or an origi- 

JI7BISPBDDSNCE DETEBMINED. 309 

nal covenant imported by the &ct of the formation) neces- 
sarily precedes tiie formation of every society of the kind. 
2. That the formation of a society political and independent 
mtist have been preceded by a fimdamental civil pact, if the 
sovereign political government be rightful^ lawjul, or just — 
^wenn es rechtsbeatdndig sein soil:" Meaning by ^^right- 
fill," "lawful," or '*just," consonant to the law of God 
(as known somehow or other), or consonant to the right or 
justice (mentioned in foregoing pages) which exists inde- 
pendently of law, and is the test of all law. 
- On which of these positions they mean to insist, I cannot 
determine : for they waver impartially between the two, 
or evince a perceptible inclination to neither. And an at- 
Jtempt to ^ct^^smine the position on which they mean to in- 
sist, were pipfitless labour : sedng that both positions are 
iiEdse, and absurd. — Aa I have shown above, a tadt original 
covenant could scarcely precede the formation of an inde- 
pendent political society. And, granting the second of the 
two positions, no sovereign government has been or can be 
lawful For, according to their own admission, the forma- 
tion of a society pohtical and independent was never pre- 
ceded actually by a Amdamental civil pact : And, as I have 
shown above, a proper original covenant, or aught approach- 
ing to the idea, could scarcely precede the formation of any 
society of the kind.* 

^ For the notionB or langoige, oonoeming the original ooyenant, of re- 
cent German writers on poli^cal goyemment and aociety, I refer the curt- 
ons reader to the following booka. — 1. Kant*8 Metaphysical Principles at 
Jorisprudence. For the original coyenant, see the head Da$ StaattrtehL 
—2. A well made Philosophical Dictionary (in four octayo yolnmes), bf 
Proifessor Knig of the Uniyersi^ of Leipzig. For the original ooyenan^ 
see the article StaaUarsprung, — Z. An Exposition of the Political Sciences 
(5taatetrtMeyMcAq/{en), by Professor Politz of the same Uniyersity : an elabo- 
rate and useful work in fiye octayo yolumes. For the original ooyenan^ 
see the head StaaU- und Staatenrecht,^4, The Historical Journal (for 
Noy. 1799) of Fn y. Gentz : a celebrated senrant of the Anstrian goyem- 
ment. 

For, in Germany, the lucid and coherent doctrine to which I liayc ad- 

3-1 closc^ ^^^^^^rf the hypothesis of the origiffl 
covenant^ with the following remark : 
V It would eeem that the hypothesis was Bu^ested to 
^authors, by one or another of these suppositions. 1. Wl 
Bthere Ls no convention, there is no duty. In other wor 
Wvhocver is obhgcd, is obliged through a promise given iit^'i 
accepted* 2. Eveiy convention is necessarily followed by' 
u a duty. In other words, wherever a promise is given Lod 

accepted^ the promising party is obhged through the pro- \ 
4 . mise, let its object and tendency be what they may, — ^It is ] 

assumed, expressly or tacitly^ by Hobbes, Kant, and othersi ^ 
jv^: that he who b bound has necessarily given a promise, and 

\€y.^ that he wlio has given a promise is necessarily bound. 

\ It follows from the first supposition, that unless the so- 
vereign and eubjects were bound through a pact, neither of ^ 
[the parties would lie under duties to the other. It follows * 

■h^rertod m the text, !b not maiDtaiaod e^cdusiY^Iy hj mere met&phyaic^ ape- 
^" culatora, and m ere untrem Ey-proreaeor^ of poll tlca an d j urisprudence* W« 
Are gravel J samired by Gentz, that the original covenant (meaning tbis same 
i doctrine touching the original coTcnant) is the very baais of the eciencc of 

politics: that, without m correct oonoeption of the origiiud oovenant, we 
cannot judge soundly on any of the questions or problems whidi the sdenoe 
of politics presents. ^ Der geaellschafUiche Vertrag (says he) ist die Baas 
der all^gemeinen Staatswissenschafi. Eine richtige Vorrtellung Ton diesem 
Vertrsge ist das erste Erfordemias zu einem reinen Urtheile Uber alleFn- 
gen und Aufgaben der Politik.** Nay, he thinks that this SMiie doctrine 
touching the original* covenant, is probably the happiest result of the newer 
German philosophy : insomuch that the fiiirest product of the newer 
German philosophy, is the conceit of an original covenant whidi never was 
made anywhere, but which is the necessary basis of political government ' 
and socie^« — ^Warmly admiring German literature, and profoundly reelect- 
ing Gennan scholarship^ I cannot but regret the proneness of Germaii 
philosophy to vague and misty abstraction.* 

* ^ Insert here ' Views of the German Historical School of Jurisprc 
dence.* **— -if ^S. Memarandvm. 

The Author's German books on Jiuis|inidcoce are filled with majq^inal notes, writl> *f 
with his accustomed clearness and vigoiur. Perhaps ont of these, aome of the "iriewa.'' 
which, as this note indicatsa, he mtended to gtre, might be colle ct ed, if hands fitted f^t 
the task could be found.~S. A. 

JUBISFBUDSNCB DKTBRMINED. 311 

firt>m the second supposition, that if the sovereign and sub- 
jects were parties to an original covenant, (either immedi- 
ately, or as representing the founders of the community,) 
each of the parties would be bound to the other, assuredly 
and indissolubly. As the duties of each towards the other 
would be imposed through a pact, they would possess a cer- 
^tain sacredness which perhaps they might want if they were \ 

iposed otherwise. 

But both suppositions are grossly and obviously £alse. — 
Of religious, l^al, and moral duties, some are imposed by 
the laws which are their respective sources, through or in 
•consequence of conventions. But others are annexed to 
tenets which have no resemblance to a convention, or to 
aught that can be deemed a promise. Consequently, a sove- 
reign government might lie under duties to its subjects, and 
its subjects might he under duties towards itsdf, though 
neither it nor its subjects were bound through a pact-^- 
And as duties are annexed to fiEicts which are not pacts or 
conventions, so are there pacts or conventions which are 
not followed by duties. . Conventions are not enforced by 
divine or human law, without reference to their objects and 
tendencies. There are many conventions which |X)8itiv6 
morahty reprobates: There are many which positive law 
tnll not sustain, and many which positive law actively an- 
nuls : There are many which conflict with the law of Gk>d, 
inasmuch as their tendencies are generally pernicious. Con- 
sequently, although the sovereign and subjects were parties 
to an original covenant, neither the sovereign nor subjects 
would of necessity be bound by it. 

/nRx>m the origin or causes of political govern- TUdUdwj- 
ment and society, I pass to the distinction of so- J^*^**^ 
vereign governments into governments de jure Bud ^^J^mi^^ 
governments de facto. For the two topics are ^JJ^JJjJ, 
so connected, that the few brief remai^ which S/ae««. 
I shall mak^ on the latter, may be placed aptly at the end 
of my disquisition ou the former. 

uto 

lU 

THE PHOTINCE OF 

In respect of the distinction now in quigtion, government5 
are commonly divided into three kinds :tf irst, gov^nmcnU 
which are governmenta dejure and also ds facta ; sea>ndly. 
governments which are governments dejure but not de facto ; 
thirdly jgovernmcnts which are governments ^€/ac^ but not 
deJureT^ government de Jure and also de facio^ is a go- 
vernment deemed lawful, or deemed rightful or juet, which I 
is present or established : that is to say, which receives pre- 
sently habitual obedience from the bulk or generality oijht 
members of the independent pohtical community, A go- 
vernment de jure but not de faato^ is a government deemed 
lawful^ or deemed rightful or just^ which^ nevertheless, ha^ 
been supplanted or displaced : that is to say» which receives 
not presently (although it received formerly) habitual obedi- 
ence from the bulk of the community, A government rftf 
/acfa but not de jure^ is a government deemed unlawful, 
or deemed wrongful or unjust, which, nevertheless, is pre- 
sent or estabhshed : that is to say, which receives presently 
habitual obedience from the bulk of the community. A go- 
vernment supplanted or displaced, and not deemed lawful, 
is neither a government de faeta nor a government dejure, 
—Any government deemed lawful, be it established or Jt^e 
it not, is a government de jure. By a government, how- 
ever, dejure^ we often mean a government which is deemed 
lawful, but which, nevertheless, has been supplanted or dis- 
placed. Any estabhshed government, be it deemed lawfiil 
or be it deemed unlawful, is a government de facto. By 
a government, however, de facto, we often mean a govern- 
ment which is deemed unlawful, but which, nevertheless, is 
established or present. — It scarcely is necessary to add, 
that every government properly so calletl is a government 
de facto. In strictness, a so called government de jure 
but not de facto, is not a government. It merely is that * 
which was a government once, and which (according to the,^ 
epeaker) ought to be a government stiU, #*• ^ 

In respect t^i positwe law, sl sovereign pohtical govern^ '^ 

JUBISFRUDENCB DETBRMIKJSD. 313 

meDt which is established or present, is neither lawfiijl nor 
unlawful : In respect of positive law^ it is neither rightful 
nor wrongful, it is neither just nor unjust Or (changing | 
the expression) a sovereign pohtical government which is 
established or present, is neither legal nor illegal. 

In every society poUtical and independent, the actual p6- 
ative law is a creature of the actual sovereign. Although 
it was positive law under forgoing sovereigns, it is positive 
law presently, or is poative law, through the power and 
authority of the present supreme government For though 
the present government may have supplanted another, and 
though the supplanted government be deemed the lawful 
government, the supplanted government is stripped of the 
might which is requisite to die eiforcement of the law con- • 
adered'as poJHtive law. Consequently, if the law were n(>t 
enforced by the present supreme government, it would want 
the appropriate sanctions which are essential to positive law^ 
and, as positive law, would not be law imperative : that is to 
say, as positive law, k would not be kw.— To borrow the 
language of Hobbes^ The l^islator is lie (not by whose 
authority the law was first made, but) by whose authori^ 
it continues to be law?^ 

I /^~ Consequently, an established sovereign government, in 
1 /respect of the positive law of its own independent commu- 

II iiity,'is neither lawful nor unlawful. If it were lawful or 
y unlawful, in respect of the positive law of its own indepen- 
1 dent commimity, it were lawful or unlawful byjaw of its 
I own making, or were lawful or u^awful by its own appoint- 
ment. Which is absurd. — ^And if iFwere lawful or unlaw- 
ful, in respect of the positive Jaw of another independent 
community, it were lawful or unlawful by the appointment 
of another sovereign : that is to say, it were not .an actual 
supreme, but an actual subordinate government. Which 

is absurd. 
In respect of the positive law of that independent com- 
munity wherein it once was sovereign, a so called government 

314 THB FBOVINCS OF 

dejure but not defacto, is not, and cannot be, a lawful go- 
vernment : for the positive law of that independent commu- 
nity is now positive law by the authority of the government 
de facto. And though it now were positive law by the au- 
thority of the displaced government, the displaced govern- 
ment, in respect of this law, were neither lawful nor unlaw- 
ful : for if, in respect of this law, the displaced government 
were lawful or imlawful, it were lawful or unlawful by -law 
of its own making, or were lawful or unlawful by its-own 
appointment. The truth is, that, in respect of the positive 
law of that independent commimity, the supplanted govern- 
ment, though deemed dejure^ is unlawful : for, being posi- 
tive law by the authority of the government defacbfy this 
positive law proscribes the supplanted government, an^: de- 
^Ti ttermines that attempts to restore it are l^al wrongs— Jn 
respect of the positive law of another independent commu- 
' ' ; i.-. nity, a so called government de jure but not de factOj is 
;i. neither lawful nor unlawful For if, in respect of this law, 
^" '^ it were lawful or unlawful, it were lawful or unlawful by the 
appointment of the law-maker : that is to say, it were not 
an ousted supreme, but an ousted subordinate government. 
(/In respect, then, of positive law^ the distinction of sove- 
reign governments into lawful and unlawful, is a distinction 
without a meaning. For, as tried by this test, or as mea- 
sured by this standard, a so called government de jure but 
not de facto, cannot be lawful : And, as tried by the same 
test, or measured by the same standaixl, a government de 
facto is neither lawful nor unlawful^ 

In respect, however, of positive morality, the distinction 
\ of sovereign governments into lawful and unlawfiil, is not 
I a distinction without a meaning. For, in respect of posi- 
tive morality, a government not de facto is not of necessit} 
unlawful. And, in respect of positive morality, the tern: 
" lawful " or " unlawful," as applied to a government d' 
facto^ is not of necessity jargon. 
|A government de facto may be lawful, or a government 

V 

JUBISFBUDENCB DETERMINED. 315 

de faOo may be unkwfiiU in respect of the positive Qiora- 
lity of that independent community wherein it is established 
If the c^inions of the bulk of the community £Biyoiir the 
government de facto ^ the government de f<uio is morally x^ 
lawful in respect of the positive morality of that particular 
society. If the opinions of the bulk of the conmiunity be 
adverse to the government de facto^ it is morally unlawful 
in respect of the same standard. The bulk, however, of the 
community, may regard it with indifference : or a laige por- 
tion of the community may regard it with fiEiVour, whilst 
another considerable portion r^ards it with aversion. And, 
in either of these cases, it is neither morally lawfii^ nor mo- 
rally unlawful, in respect of the positive morality of that in- 
dependent conmiunity wherein it is established. — ^And what 
I have said oi a government de,facto^ in regard to the mp:; 
rality of the community whercdn it is estabUshed, may also f.^"^ 
be said of a government not a govgmnent de faOo^ in re^^iJK^ ' 
gard to the morality of the community wherein it formerly ^ 
ruled* 
rs/.^^d a government defacto^ or a government not defacto^ 
^ may be morally lawful, or morally imlawful, in respect of the 
positive morality which obtains between nations or states^ 
Though positive international morahty looks mainly at the 
possession, every government in possession, or every govern- 
ment de facto J is not acknowledged of course by other esta- 
blished govemmenta In respect, therefore, of poative in- 
ternational morahty, a government de facto may be unlaw- 
ful, whilst a government not de facto may be a government 
dekare. 
Oi CA government, moreover, de facto^ or a government not 
de factor may be lawful or unlawful in respect of the law of 
God^iSTried by the Divine law, as known through the prin- 
ciple of utility, a sovereign government de facio is lawfully 
a sovereign government, if the general hi^piness or weal 
requires its continuance : Tried by the same law, as known 
through the same index, a sovereign government de facto is 

316 THK PROTIKCS OF 

not lawfully sovereign, if the general happiness or weal re 
quires its abolition. Tried by the Divine law, as knowr^ 
through the principle of utility, a government not de fuck 
is yet a government dejure^ if the general happiness or wea 
requires its restoration : Tried by the same law, as knowi 
through the same exponent, a government not de facto i 
also not dejurCj if the general happiness or weal require 
its exclusion.* ^. (j^ I r^ 

Apnenide- A posltive law may be defined generally in the 
poddT« lat: following manner : or the essential difference of a 
kMuSSn^ positive law (or the difference which severs it from 
i^/ r ^iSSl^ a law not a positive law) may be stated generally 
M^md from ii^ the following planner. — ^Every positive law (or 
Sciitire ut. ^very law simply and strictly so called) is set, 
directly or circuitously, by a sovereign individual 
or body, to a member or members of the independent poli- 
tical society wherein its author is supreme.Qh other words, 
It is set, directly or circuitously, by a monardh or sovereign 
number, to a person or persons in a state 'of subjection to 
its author^ 

u?n ol-^f"*' •- ^^ definition of a positive law is assumed ex- 
i^^^cx pr^^ly ^^ tacitly throughout the foregoing lec- 
prewiyor tuTcs. But it ouly approachos to a perfectly com- 
throughout plete and perfectly exact definition. It is open to 

the forgoing '' , ^ • i • i t mi i • n 

lectures. But ccrtam corrcctivcs which 1 now will briefly sug- 

it only ap- 

pruaches to a gCSt. 

* It appears from the Author's Memoranda that he intended to insert 
here "Notes on Governments de facto and dejure; " and on "Eights of 
sovereign Governments and Grovernments lawful or unlawfull)y Divine law." 
Also on " Sovereignty of the People." It appears that he intended to 
connect this subject with that treated of at the conclusion of Lecture II. 
— S.A. 

*;^:-. which it it 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 317 

-The party or^j)arties to whom a law is set, or ^^^^^^^j^^ 

the party or pardee on whom a duty is laid, are J^JJ^^^ 

necessarily obnoxious to the sanction which en- Aiid,ooiw 

forces the kw and the duty. In other words, 3^^. 

the 

tionof the 

every law properly so called is set by a superior «tmnoeor 
to an inferior or inferiors : It is set by a party dm^^'whidi 
armed with might, to a party or parties whom hi^^n^ 
that might can reach. lif the party to whom it S^'^S^ 
is set could not be touched by the might of its JS^^* 
author, IS^author would signify to the party a ^^^. 
wish or de»]£».but would not impose on the party J^^JJJ"™'" 
a ' proper^and imperative law. Now l[speaking 
generally) a party who is obnoxious to a l^al: sanction, or 
to the might of the author of the law which the l^al sanc- 
tion enforces, is a member of the independent conununity 
wherein the author is sovereign. Jn other words, a party 
who is obnoxious to a l^aT sanction, is a subject of the 
author of the law to which the sanction is annexed. QBut 
as none but members of the community wherein the law 
obtains are obnoxious to the l^al sanction which enforces 
a positive law, the positive law is imposed exclusively on a 
member or members of that independent community.^ Al- 
though the positive law may affect to oblige strangers, (or 
parties who are not members of that independent commu- 
nity,) none but members of that independent community 
are virtually or truly bound by it. — ^Besides, if the positive 
law of one independent commimity bound legally the mem- 
bers of another, the other independent conmiunity were not 
an independent community, but were merely a subordinate 
conmiunity forming a limb of the first. If it bound the 
sovereign government of the other independent community, 
that sovereign government would be in a state of subjection 
to the sovereign^uthor of the. law. If it bound the subject 
members of the other independent community, the sovereign 
author of the law would usurp the functions and authority 
of their own sovereign government: or their own soMe- 

J 

318 ^^A TUB FROTINCE OF 

rejgn government would be displaced or supplanted by th 
foreign and intrusive lawgiver. cSo that if tlie positive la v 
of every independent community bound legally the memlie 
of others^ the subjects in every community would be subje* 
to all sovereigns, and every sovereign government would \ 
sovereign in all societies,^ In other words, the subje- 
members of every independent community would be in 
state of subjection to every supreme government; whil^^fc,^ 
every supreme government would be the subject of tl.^ 
rest, and, at the same time, would be their sovereign. 

Speaking, then, generally, we may say that a po^tive law 
is set or directed €[xclusively to a subject or subjects of its 
author : or that a positive law is set or directed exclusively 
to a member or members of the community wherein its 
author is sovereign/ But, in many cases, the positive law 
of a given independent community imposes a duty on a 
stranger: on a party who is notd. member of the giv^n inde- 
pendent community, or is only a member to certain limited 
purposes. For such, in these cases, is the position .of the 
stranger, that, though he is properly a member of a foreign 
independent community, and therefore is properly a subject 
of a foreign supreme government, he yet is obnoxious to the 
sanction by which the duty is enforced, or to the might of 
the author of the law through which the duty is imposed. 
And such, in these cases, is also the position of the stpanger, 
that the imposition of the legal duty consists with th^ sove- 
reignty of the government of which he is properly a subjec* 
Although the l^al duty is laid on one of its subjects, it i:? 
not laid on the foreign government itself: nor does the 
author of the law, by imposing the legal duty, exercise sove- 
reign power in the community of the foreign govermnent, 
or over OMof its subjects as being one of its subjects. — ^Fcr 
example ;(^ party not a member of a given independent 
commimity, but Uving within its territory and within thei 
jurisdiction of its sovereign, is bound or obliged, to,a certain^ 
limited extent, by its positive law.^iving within jthe tern- 

/"^ 

V 

JUBISPBUDENCB DETERMINED. (819 

tory, he is obnoxious to the l^al sanctions by whiefa the 
law is enforoecL And the l^al duties imposed upon him by 
the law, are consistent with the sovereignty of the foreign 
government of which he is properly a subject For the 
duties are not imposed upon the foreign government itself, 
or upon a party within its independent conununity : nor are 
they laid upon the obliged party as being one of its subjects, 
but as being a member, to certain limited purposes, of the 
community wherein he resides. fAgain : If a stranger not 
residing within the given community be the owner of land 
Qt moveables lying within its territory, a convention of the 
stranger, with any of its members or a stranger, may be en- 
forced against him by its positive law.^^or if he be sued 
on the agreement, and judgment be ^ven for the plaintiff, 
the tribimal may execute its judgment by resorting to the 
land or moveables, although the defendant's body is beyond 
the reach of its process. And this execution of the judg- 
ment consists with the sovereignty of the government of 
which the stranger is properly a subject. For the judgment 
is not executed against that foreign government, or within 
the independent community of which it is the chief: nor is 
it executeil against the defendant as being one of its subjcfcts, 
but as owning land or moveables within the jurisdiction of 
the tribunal If the judgment were executed within the 
jurisdiction of the foreign supreme government, the execu- 
tion would wound the sovereignty of the foreign supreme 
government, unless the jud^ent were executed through its 
permission and authoritjr. ^And if the judgment were exe- 
cuted through its permission and authority, the duty enforced 
against the defendant, would be imposed in eBect'by the law 
of his own community: the law of his own conmlunity 
adopting^ the law of the other, by reason of a special con- 
vention-between the respective governments, or of a rule of 
international morality which the govenunents acknowledge 
md observe.^In all the cases, therefore, which I now have 
noticed and exemplified, the positive law of a given inde- 

1/ 

320 fatTtmmmm 

m 

pendent todety may impose a duty on a stranger. B^ 
tentm of the obslaclcs mentioned in the last paragrapTi, th* 
faindiiig Tiitiie of the positive law cannot extend gBneran> 
to membeiB of foreign comnxunitics. But in the cases whic' 
I now have noticed and exempliBcd, those obstacles do uc 
intervene. For the stranger is obnoxious to the sanction- 
hf whidi the law is enforced : and the enforcement of tbJ 
law against the stranger, is not inconsistent with the sove 
rei^^i^ of a foreign supreme government j 

The d^nition, therefore, of a positive law, which is ail 
scmed eaq^ireidy or tacitly throughout the foregoing lectures, 
18 not a perfectly complete and perfectly exact definition. 
In tte cases noticed and exemplified in the last paragr^h, 
A pontile law obliges legally, or a positive law is set or 
'directed tO| a stranger or strangers: that is to say, a person 
0t persons not of the community wherein the author of the 
law is sovwdgn or supreme. Now, since the cases in ques- 
*tion are oioitted by that definition, the definitibn is too 
narrow, or is defective ^rinadequate. To render that defi- 
nition complete or adequate, a comprehensive summary of 
these anomalous cases (or, perhaps, a full enumeration 
of these anomalous cases) must be tacked to the definition 
in the way of supplement. — ^But positive law, the sul^ect of 
the definition, is the subject of the foregoing attempt to 
determine the province of jurisprudence. C^^4 since the 
definition is defective or inadequate, and is assumed ex* 
pressly or tacitly throughout the foregoing lectujies, th<: 
detennination of the province of jurisprudence, which is 
attempted in those discourses, is not a perfectly complete 
and perfectly exact detemunationr^ 

But I thihk that the foregoing attempt to determine the 
province of jurisprudence, and the definition of a positive 
law which the attempt assumes throughout, have as much 
of completeness and exactness as the scope of the attempt 
require8.-^'o determine the province of jurisprudence, is 
to distinguish positive law (the appropriate matter of juris- 

JURISPRUDENCE DETERMINED. 321 

prudence) fix>m the various objects (noticed in the foregoing 
lectures) to which it ]s allied or related in the way of re- 
semblance or analogyA But so niunerous are the ties by 
which it is connected with those objects, or so numerous are 
the points at which it touches those objects, that a perfect 
determination of the province of jurisprudence were a per- 
fect exposition of the science in all its manifold parts. An 
ade^aate exposition of the science (the only adequate deter- 
mination of the province of jurispmdence) is really the am- 
bitidds aim of the entire Course of Lectures of whidi the 
foregoing attempt is merely the opening portion. But a 
perfect determination of the province of jurisprudence is not 
the purpose of the attempt itself. Its purpose is merely to 
' miggest (with as much of completeness and exactness as con- 

- sist with generality and brevity) the subject of ibat adequate 
exposition of the science of jurisprudence, or the subject of 
CEkt adequate determination of the province ofjuiisprudence, 
whidiis the purpose of the entire Course.— Since such is 
the 80^6 of the foregoing attempl^ the^definition of a posi- 
tive law whidi it assiunes throughout, has as much of com- 
pletS^ and exactness as its ^cope requires. To render 
that definiti^ complete or adequate, a comprehensive sum- 
mary of the anomalous cases in question (or, perhaps, a full 
enumeration of the anomalous cases in queistion) must be 
tacked to the definition in the way of supplement. But 
theae..womalous cases belong to the departments of my 

^^Ooiixpe whichjure concerned with the detail of the^ience. 
Theyirhardly were appropriate matter for the forgoing ^«i}^- 
fia£j|^empt to determine the proxince:t>fJuiisprudence^ for 
thei^regoing attempt to ^u^'^etf.theaubject of the science» 
wi^^ much of completeness and exactness as consist with 
geneddity and brevity. Accordingly, the definition or no- 
tion of a.'ipositive law which is assumed expressly or tacitly 
throughout the preceding lectures, omits entirely the ano- 
malous <:ases in question. And the truth of the positions 
and inferences contained by the preceding lectures, is not, 

VOL. I. V 

V 

' THE reOVlNCE OF 

% believe, impaired, or is not impaired materially, by thr^ 
omissioa and defect 

And though the dofinition is not complete, it approj^cl ^ 
nearly to completeness. Allowing for the omission o\ ilii* 
anomalous cases in question, it is, I believe, an adeqit; u- 
definition of its subject. I hardly could have rendexoti ii 
juster definition of tlie subject, in brief and abstract e^tor^; 
mons : that is to say, unless I had descended from the geur* 
rab, to the detail of the science of jurisprudence. 
; An *3£pi*tt*- Defining sovereignty and independent poIitiL^fi) 

^ Jjy e^jg T^m jjrfL^t m society, (or stating their charncterB or distingukli- 
^ n^mt a^a? iiig marks,) I have said that a given society is a 
^^ot^u!" society political and independent, if the bulk or ^^- 
licaiiocwtjr. ncrality of its members habitually obey the t^om- 
mands of a determinate and independent party: meimin;! 
bj^*i-« -dAtp-rminftifl^-flnfl inHpppndf>nr. . party,". a determi/iuli 
individual, or a determinate body of individuals, not obev- 
ing habitually the- express, or taci^ commands of a detoimi- 
nate human enperion — ^But who are the members of a givi^u 
society ? ^By what character, or by what distingtmhiti;r 
marks, are its members severed from persons who arc: nt < 
> of its members? Or how is a given person determinrdl'i 

I a given community ?--^y the foregoing general definition 

of independent political society, (or the foregoing genera i 
statement of its characters or distinguishing marks,) tlje 
questions which I now have suggested, are not resolved or 
touched : And it may seem, therefore, thai tiie foregoiup 
I general definition is not complete or adequate/ But, tur 

" the following reasons, I beheve that tlie foregoing definition^ 

j \ considered as a general definition^ is, notwithstanding J con- 

plete or adequate : that a general definition of indepaikdeiFt 
poUtical society, (or sucha definition as is applicable tofeveiy 
society of the kind,) could hardly resolve the questions wliir' r 
I have suggested above, ' ^ ' 

1, It is not through one mode, or it 10 not throng)* nv. 
cause, that the members of a given society are membti^ ul 

t 

JUB18PRUDENCE DBTERMIN£D. 323 

that commonity. In other words, it is not through one 
mode, or it is not through one cause, that they are subjects 
of the person or body sovereign therein. cA person may be 
a member of a given society, or a person may be determined 
to a fflven society, by any of numerous modes, or by any of 
numerous causes : as, for example, by birth within the ter- 
ritory which it occupies ; by birth without its territory, but 
of parents being of its members ; by simple residence with- 
in its territory ; or by naturalization.^-^Again : A subject 
member of one society may be, at the same time, a subject 
member of another. A person, for example, who is natu- 
talized in one independent society, may yet be a member 
'completely, or to certain limited purposes, of that indepen- 

' dent sodetjr which he affects to Jrenounce^ or a member of 
One society who simply resides in another, may be a mem* 
ber completely of the former sodety, and, to limited pur- 
poses, a member of the latter. Nay, a person who is sove- 

''teign in one society, may be, at the same time, a subject 
' member of another. Such, for example, would be the pl^ht 
of a so called limited monarch, if he were nionarch and 
autocrator in a foreign independent community. — ^Now if 
the fori^ing definition of independent political society had 
affected. to resolve the questions which I have suggested 
above, I must have discussed the topics which I have touched 
in- the present paragraph. I must have gone from the gene- 
rals, into the detail of jurisprudence \ and therefore I must 

* •The fbUowiiig brief explanation may be placed pertinently here. 
/Genendly apeakhig, a society political ani independent oocupiea a de- 
termined territory.^ Consequently, when we imagine an independent poli- 
ticifl society, we -itmunonly imagine it in that plight : And, according te 
the definition of independent political society which is assumed expn-sslj 
or tscifly by many writen, the occupation (by the given society) of a deter- 
mined tenritory or seat, is of the very essence of a sodety of the kind. B«t 
this is an error. History presents us with societies of the kind, which hare 
been, as it were, m ttansilu. ^Many , for exan^ple, of the barbarous natioa« 

I Which invaded and settled in the Roman Empire, were not^ Ibrmany yean 
before their final establishment, occupants of determined seat&| 

T 2 

324 THE FEOVIXCE OF 

have waodwetl from the [iroper purpose or scope of the 
foregoing general attempt to determine the province of the 
science. 

2. By a general definition of independent political society, 
(or sucli a definition as is appi legible Ui eveiy society of Uie 
kind,) I could not have resolved completely the questions 
su^ested above, although I hiid discussed the topics touched 
in the last paragraph. For the modes through which persona 
are members of particular societies, (or the causes by which 
porsonB are detennined to particular societies), differ id dif- 
ferent commimities. These modes are fixed differently ia 
different partictilax societies, by their different particular 
systems of positive law or morality, [jji some societies, for 
example, a |>er80a bom of aliens within the territory of the 
community, is, ipso jur0^ or without an act of his own, a 
perfect member of the community within whose territoiy 
he ia bom : but, in other societies, he la not a perfect mem* ' 
hety (or is merely a resident alien,) unjess he acquire the\ 
character, by fulfilling certain conditioi^^ (See the French 
Code, Article 9,) It therefore is only in relation to a given 
particular society, that the questions suggested above can 
be completely resolved. 

E«trictioTii ^ have assumed expressly or tacitly throughout 
«f«cpUf^* the foregoing lectures, that a sovereign govem- 
two following ment of one, or a sovereiffu government of a num- 
ii«meir, that bet m its collective and sovereign capacity, can- 
^*?eiSSSt not be bound legally. In the sense with which I 
S^i9^, have assumed it, Ihe* position will hold universally. 
*^ ^b^6 But it needs a slight restriction, or rather ^ slight 

^^i^^ explanation, which may be placed conveniently at 
••"'"^y^ the dose of my present discourse. 
^t is true universally, that as being the sovereign of the 
community wherein it is sovereign, a sovereign government 
cannot be bound l^ally DAnd this is the sense with which 
I hav^4is8umed the position, throughout the £3r^oing lec- 
tures, ^ut, as being a subject of a foreign supreme govern- 

\ 

J(JBI8PBUD£NC£ DETKRIflNBD. 325 

ment, (either generally, or to certain limited purposes,) it 
may be bound by laws (simply and strictly so called) of that 
foreign supreme govemmentAin the case which I now am 
supposing, the sovereign political government bound by 
pontive laws, bears two characters, or bears two persons : 
namely, the character or person of sovereign in its own in- 
dependent society, and the character or person of subject in 
the foreign independent community.^ And in order to the 
aistence of the case which I now am supposing, its two 
<diaiacter8, or two* persons, must be distinct in practice, as 
well aitin-name and show. The laws which are laid upon' 
it by {he foreign supreme government, may really be laid 
upon it as chief in it^own society : and, on tJbis supposition, 
it is subject (in that character) ,to the sovereign author of 
the laws, in case the obedlmce which it yields to them 
amounts to a habit of obedience. . But if the laws be exdu-' 
sive^ laid upon it as subject in the fordgn community, ita 
sovereignty is not impaired by the obedience which it yields 
to them, although the obedience amounts to a habit-^Tibe 
foUowing^ cases will amply illustrate the meaning which I 
have stated in general expressions. — ^Let us suppose that 
our own king is properly monarch in Hanover : and that 
our own king, as limited monarch in Britain, is not absolved 
completely from l^al^bligation. Now if, as chief in Ha- 
nover, he be not in a habit of obedience to the sovereign 
British parUament, the l^al duties incimibent upon him 
consist with his sovereignty in his German kingdom. For 
the duties are incumbent upon hini (not as autocrator there, 
but) as Umited monarch here : as member of the sovereign 
body by which he is l^ally bound. — ^Before the French re- 
volution, the sovereign government of the Canton of Bern 
hadmrnM^Mn the English funds: And if the English law 
empowered it to hold lands, it might be the owner of lands 
within the T^^ngHaH tenitory, as well as the oivner of money 
in the English funds. Now, assuming that the government 
of Bern is an owner of lands in England, it also is subject 

to the hgA dutk$ wHk whidi ptopmfm lani is tdk&d 
bf the Ebglidi law. But hyH» mAI^&m to fbdee dittiei. 
and its haHtiud obaervi^^ ^ &b law throi^ whidi thox 
duties are impofled, te sofefd^iitjr m ^ own Oantott is Mt 
annulled or impatrod. sPor^&e duties ime nianaboBeti^psr 
it (not u governing ^efe, but) m ownn^ lands here: ai 
bdiig» to Ifonited purposes, » iotembw of llie BiStiflh oom- 

theBagfiihtraittnak^ 

I have snd k a preoedi^ seetion, tiiat a soveieiip giK 
fetmneiit of one, or a sovere%n gO¥ernmentof a n^^ 
hsocdlecdhreand som^pi capaeiiyfeaiinot have U§^righk 
(in ih^ properlaoe^tation ef the tenu) againstlts own sub- 
jects^ la die jenas wHfa whicihl hare adianoed^ die pofli- 
ticm wifi hold wmrefsaDy. Bnl^ needs a sli^ xestrictioi^ 
or xalher a sl^t ezplanadoii,w]ydi I now iirill stete or 

[t is true universally, that against a subject of its own, 
as being a subject of its own, a sovereign political govern- 
ment <!annot have l^al rightsj^^^nd this is the sense vntk 
which I have advanced the position. But ag^nst a subject 
of its own, as being generally or partially a subject of a 
foreign government, a sovereign political government may 
have l^al rights. -For example : Let us suppose that a 
Bussian merchant is resident and domiciled in England: 
that he agrees with the Bussian emperor, to supply the lattei* 
with naval stores :* and that the laws of England,^r the 
English tribunals, lend their sanctions to the agreement 
Now, according to these suppositions, the emperor bears n 
right, given by the law of England, against a Bussian sub 
ject. But the emperor has not the right through ^ law of 
his own, or against a Bussian subject in that capadty oi 
character. (He bears the legal right against 'a subject o) 
his own, through the positive law of a foreign independeni 
society; and he bears it against his subject (not as beinj* 
his subject, but) as being, to limited purposes, a subject of a 

JUBI8PRUDENCE DETK&HINBD. 827 

foreign sovereigpA And the relative l^al duty lying on the 
Bussian merchant, consists with the emperor's autocracy in 
all the Bussias. For since it lies upon the merchant as 
resident and domiciled in England, the sovereign British 
parliament, by imposing the duty upon him, does not inter- 
fere with the autocrat in his own independent commimily. 

938 vmm^wwMmmBmt 

Nou 10 Pa6i 209. 

In a note at |>. 209, 1 lutTe reftrred to lUbles drawn out in tie 
blank laaTM of Kant*8 ' fidtiniTf mm ew%ein FViedenJ Thqr ^^ 
in pwdl, and nwe obrionslj oomtnietod bj Ifr* Amtin aoiey 
for bis own aatisGwIion. 

Hie reato* is desired to obserre t^ the epinkos embodied * 
in these TsUes are not giren as Mr. Austin's. In the note to 
Table IL, as we see, he questions one important assamption. 

The Tables are not numbered, so that I have been guided in their 
arrangement mainly by the order in which they follow. — S. A. 

NOTE TO PAGE 209. 

'829 

TABLE I. 

Finrna ImperHy or Staatsfarm : i. e. the form of the Sovereignty. 

Monarchy, or 
govemmeDt 
of one* 

Arintocracy, or go- 
vernment of 

flome. 

Deqwtic or Republican. 

Democracy, or 
government 
of all. 

Despotic. 

TABLE IL 

Forma Begwiinis — R€gieruna$farm^ or SiaattverfuBtung. 

Detpoticai; wherein the Bepnblican; wherein the 

legiflktive and execu- Imalative powen re- 

tive powers are united aide in the sovereign 

in the sovereign one or one or number, with 

number.^ rtpreseniatheM of the 

mUffecti^vkd theexecu- 
tive powersi in the sove- 
reign one or number.f 

* On this diTirion, m eipoonded in Kant's Uxt, Mr. Austin remaiks: — *'Th« 
making of a law, and the ezaention of a law are neoeeaarilj diiiflnnt proceeaee. But 
how ie it n e c eei a i y that the two proceeaee ehould be parfonned bj diiEBrent per- 
eone?" 

t Hie power of afypointing repreeentatiTee, ie often called poUtieal liberty ; i e., a 
poftioo in the Sorereignty. --kant. 

The paaeege in Kant!e book to which Table IL refere, ende aa foUows: — 
** The aoet or mode of government (Begienmg^ari) ie bmod all eoanparison more 
important to a people than the form of the Sorerei^ty {Sttat^arm) ; althoon^ a 
grtat deal also depends on the greater or leee adaptability <n the latter to attain by 
floadnal relbnns to the chareeter of a perfeet KepnbUe. To that end, howefer, the 
Sapresentative System is absolutely indispensable ; without it (be the Ibrm oi the 
Sorereignty what it may) the gorernment is deepotie and arbiteaiy. None of the 
aaeient eo-oalled repnbuos knew of this, and they therefore inevitably sabsided into 
de^otisms ; the moet endurable fonn of which is, the eor a rs ig n rale of one." — 
Eaiit,'£kitwiirf,'p. 29. 

In a notSr Kant refers here to the often qnotod line of Pope, whidi he translates, 
•*di$ bmtgdmkrU Ut die betur "If that," says he, *«is eqnivdcnt to sayii« that 
the best administered is the best administered. Pope, (to qnote 8wift*e eipreeeion,) 
only eradDed a nut which rewarded him with a mrnggpA, But if it means that tlie 
beet administered, ie also the beet constituted gov«niment» it is utteriy £slse 
(cnnuffaleek); for examples of good gorernment prove nothing in fsvour of the form. 
Who erer sovened better than Titos or Marcus Aurslhis? and yet the one left a 
Bomitian, the other a Commodus, as his suoeeaior." — 8. A. 

NOTE TO PAGE 20i>. 

331 

Autocracy. 

TA] 
archy. 

3LE V. 

1. Monarchy. 2. 

Poly 

8. Monarchy. 4. Polyarchy 

Properly sovereign. 

Nominally aovereign, but 
sharing sovereignty with 
active citizens. 

TABLE VL 

Forma 

Begiminu, 

Autocracy: wherein the legisk- 
tive and executive powers are 
united in the sovereign one 
or number. 

Syncracy : wherein the executive 
powers reside in the sovereign 
one or number; but the legis- 
lative powers, in the sovereign 
one or number, with the active 
(as distinguished from the 
passive) portion of the subject 
citizens.* 

Kepresentative (r.e. 
of active citizens.) 

Non-represen- 
tatire. 

TABLE VIL 

Autocracies. 

Syncracies. 

Monarchies. 

Aristocracies and 
Democracies. 

Sovereign. 

Sovereign govern- 
ment of one. 

Monarchies. Aristocracies. 

Not sovereign, but sharing 
sovereign^ with active 
citizens. 

Sovereign govemmenta 
of a nubmer.f 

• Th* shsra of the active eitiaent in the tOTereigntj is called poliHeal Wmiy. 
^Kant 
t See Kmg. vol. it. p. 86. and PoUU. toI. i. p. 178 M mq. 

INDEX. 

Aon, or aetioiia, tendaii^ of human, 
92, 41, 06; insulated, 34; test of 
specific, 41 ; human coodnct guided 
oj rmle$, 42, 44 ; guided in jMit h j 
anthori^ or trust, 56 ; goTemed h j 
a moral sense, 9S. 

Agnation, and cognation, xcriL 

America, oonstitutioQ oif tiie United 
States of , 222. 

American War, the, 49. 

American Colonies, assumed right of 
Ek^lland to tax, 260. 

Analogf , and meti^hor, 1 16. 
. Anim aJs, possess reason, 158 ; instincts 

o^ \ei: 

Aivkocmcj. generic meaning of the 
term, 192; forms ci, 194; limited 
. mooafch J. one form of, 196. 

Art, rules of, 160. 

Authority, or trust, principle of, 55 ; 
wanting to ethical studies^ 57. 

Benevolence, theory of disinterested, 

loa-ioa 

Bentham, on the theory of utility, 
104; on physical sanction^ 16i; 
on political sodetr, 166. 

Bladntone, on the law of things and 
persons, Izxiii; strictures on his 
Gommentaries, cix ; his description 
of law, 164; on the Divine law, 
284. 

Bodies, determinate and indetermi- 
uate, 182, aagr., 14a 

Butler, his defence of Christianity, 
78; on a moral sense, 87, 92, 107. 

Capital, and labour, 61. 
Christianity, Butler's defence of, 7a 
Churches <ii England and Sootiand, 
under the Union, 227. 

Civil procedure, cii; civil liberty 
defined, 242. 

CioHas, basis of a, 278, 298. 

Code, the Prusrian, Ixziv. 

Cognation, xcviL 

Commands, nature ofl xxzix ; Divine, 
zlii, xlvi, 46, 80. 112; meaning of 
the term, 5, 9 : oistinctions of, 10, 
13 ; laws whicn are not commands, 
25; laws a species of, 120, 122; 
laws imposed oy opinion, not com- 
mands, 141. 

Commons of England, powers exer- 
cised by the, 201. 

Common sense, 31, 39, 80. 

Composite or federal state, 218, 220; 
distinguished tttm confederated 
sUtes,228. 

Conditions, private and political, cvi ; 
extract from Hale on, cviiL 

Conduct, human, guided by rules^ 42, 
44; by authority, 55. 

Confederation, elements oL 185; fe- 
deral compact, 220; federation of 
ffoyemments, 217, 220, 223 : the 
Orison, 184; German and Swiss, 
224. 

Constitution, the British, 203. 

Constitutions! law, in a monarchical 
government, cxi, 236 ; as it affects 
monarchf , 230. 

Contracts, the nature of, Ixxxix; 
luari-contrscts, xc ; quasi and tacit. 

Convention, a civil (ass Pact) en- 
forced by moiality^299; consent 
the essence of a, 300 ; express or 
tacit, 305; nature of conventions, 
311. 

Corpm jwrU, dii; divirion of thi», 
c%ii. 

334 

IKBKX. 

CofWHBt, or ciTil paely hjpotbeiia ai, 

978b 989, 808; d«tM0 taamxed Ul 

886-988, ai^.; piMiiMiiiTolTed in, 

998^802. 
OfimiMl injuriet, proeedtire in, cr. 
Clime, eoiKMqttenoet ariaing from, 

or; ariang from poptiUr igno* 

nBioe,69. 
CHfM^ or the gioonde of impatttioii, 

IxL 
Onstom. its inJlnenee on lew, bnr; 

meening td, 93-95; ite eftieli, 88; 

ctt it o m m y lawi^ 148; obedience 

beeedon,97a 

Delegation, and reprosenlntion, 204. 

Delict*, or iojuHei", hiv, Jxxix ; rl^hU 
and dutiea iui»iing from, zcviii; in 
the RotoAH I^iiw, xdx. 

Democracy^ detin^^ lfl4 j Boyereljm 
power of deniOcmci^fHj 201 ; Hobbes 
on, 249; democmtical or popular 
gDvemment, 245. 

Deootolqgy, aeience of, xliv. 56. 

Detenmnate &ad indetemnuate bodj 
of persoDflf distinguiabed, 131 je^., 
140 f optmoa of the two, 142. 

DiTini) lawi, the, 28, 36, 112 j hi*- 
man conduct in relation to, 42, 44, 
75; utOity the index to, 4S, 54| 
87, 106^ fixi^teDce of evil in rela* 
tion to, 79; eense of the term 
good applied to, 116; law of na- 
ture, 1 17 ; laws properly eo called, 
120, 142: religious duties, 143; 
Locke*e view, 151 ; B'ackstone on, 
234 ; and positive law« 145. 103, 
241; Hobbes on, 248; justice 
conformable to, 259; regulate the 
duties of sovereign and subiect, 
277, 286; a government tried by 
the, 315. 

Domestic conditions, cvi, cix. 

Dominion, or ownership, IxxxiL 

Dohumunif Ixxviii. 

Duties, and corresponding rights, Ixi, 
Ixxv, 243, 250, 251, 255; primary, 
Ixxx ; sanctioning xcviii ; arising 
from crimes, civ ; relative or ab- 
solute, ib.; meaning of the term 
duty, 6, 9; laws creating duties, 
21 ; religious, 143; duties of obe- 
dience in a subject, 250. 

Essement, or MritVfM, Ixxxiv. 
Economy, principled of political, 60. 

h ScotliUMt, 

:ifl|i law, tiic term deU(f$ or m- 
^ itx used in, xdx; Hale's Ana- 

»i* fif, cviij. 

il*, xcvi, 

c-B^ the wrience of* xliv; bsAiA of, 
• r 115; obatadc>9 to tbo atudyi &7, 

, 07, 74, 7G ; difftwion of, mk 
existence of, 7l> ; Locke^a view <if 

Dd and twit, 150, 

utivc political powera, 200, 

tciiiHj arisiing from ignoianoe, 60, 

ral compact, terma of a, 3^; 

lieatun] under a, 222 ; tbe Grisoa 

ifedemcy, 1^1 ; Swiaa fedomt'Mm, 

4» 

Lgners, aiibject to the )awa of the 

iutry tkt^y inhabit^ 318, 

ii on Uffet ti tRonsf, 102, 

K, F. voiij on political govennneiit, 

lany, half-aovereign States of, 
Ip 215; the German confedeva* 
n, 224 ; German writere on the 
M3 m ritrhtj 258 ; on political govern* 
mcot, 309, 
Goodp geQeml, the term deeded fDT; 
goodnea^ and badness of niotiveA^ 
99; good and bad applied to a 
human law; 115; LocKe'e vttiw of 
good and evil, 160. 
Government, supreme, conditions 
and forms of, 137, 190; indepen- 
dent, 181, 189; half-aovereign 
states, 212; confederacy of, 917; 
a cx>mpo8ite state, 218j 220, 298; 
federal compact, 920; free and 
despotic governments, 24^ 946; 
Ilobbes and Sydney, on the powers 
of, 248; a sovereign government 
has no legal rights against ita sub- 
jects, 250; divine and moral rights 
of a soverei^ government, 957, 
259 ; the Divine Uw in relation to, 
259; before a tribunal of ita own, 
261 ; purpose of sovereign govern- 
ment, 264, 266-268, 9^; perma- 
nence and origin of political, 271, 
274 ; duties to Its enlgects, 277. 992, 
293 ; moral securities of good go- 
vernment, 296; an inchoate go- 

\ 

INDEX. 

885 

Temmenty 901 ; growth of ^ 

renaomUf 904; ffofwimieiits 
Jmn mod d$ fiuia, 811 ; potttire 
kw mider, 318, 816: ilried hj the 
DiTine kw, 816. 
Qiiicm oonfadenM^^ the, 184 
Grodui, his defimUon ii torweigntj, 
188. 

Halfl^ Sir M., on the kw of penooa 
and thing!, Izxiii; on priTtto and 
poHtioel rektiona, Cfiii ; hk Ana- 
Ijsa of the Law of Ekigknd, 
eriiL 

HanoTor, the fforemnMnt ci, 216. 

HarUej, Dr^lua hypothesis of sym- 

iSSi-^ 

I xciiL 
Hdhbei, 

on genetal ji 

Iz; on pdlitioal sooMtT^ 
the inheient justioe of 

; jiMt&oeof kw, S33; 

•en the limitations of the soTeielgn 

poww, 196, 848; emcs in his po- 
\ Utioal tnatkes, S49; detaoe d, 

861; on the politkal edooation of 

the people, 863. 
Hooke^^Ssdflsedption of kw, 184. 

Ignorano^ 'niaehiefii 4)f popvkr, 60, 
874^ of arincroks anddetaik oon- 
trastod, 60; fiOkcMS and crimes 
arising ;from, 00, 88; of political 
adfliioe, 874. 

IDegal aai nnoonstitQiional, the torms 
distinffoished, 82a 

Indepenaenoe, politicsl, 181. 

L^ones,- or delict% Ixzix; otiI, 
ze?y],c; the teim in EngUsh kw, 
xeix. 

Instinct, a negadTe cxpresrion^ 81; 

( M moral instinct, 82 ; of animaki 
161. 

Institotes, and Pandeeti^ zliiL 

LdmrioL of the Roman kw, IzzzrL 

International kw, the prorince oL 

' ''^,189,836; intssnational 

/886. 

^. Intenia 

Judgment^ oonsidflrsd as modes of 
acquisition, ctiL 

Jndioitoro, under a confederaer of 
sti^m 

Jttiispnidenoe, t r d ti m uh oi^ zlii; 
^enersL lix; .jQobbes on the sub- 
ject o^ Ir; Kbman and Epgliih 

compared, 
VOL. L 

pnmnce of de- 

1, 26, 168; diririons of 
positive kw, 03, 113. 

JaiL moribm eon& litt dumf and pru- 
dmtibui campatUmn^ Ixri ; tu$ in 
remy end jtu in penomam, izxyii, 
xc, criii; juru mUvermUu^ xdi; 
kterei ieaiinmi and (sdammta- 
rmtL zciii; jtarm reaiia and perso- 
naJM^ xc? ; a carpmjwriMj oil ; ju» 
pmbheum and jwimiftwi , cvi, cxii; 
Jm eiviU, and Jm gtMtmm^ xliii, 
Ixrii, 03; IWen on thejM natM- 
mfa^ 161, 168; note on the word 
>Cy 868 ; deriTalion oC; 838. 

Justice^ applied to kw, 888; the 
tenn rigk in the sense o^ 867 ; 
conformahk to the Divine kws, 
860. 

Kant, 800, 867^ 88 8. 

King, soTsreign powers of the, 206| 
800; amsnshfe to constitutional 
kw,887: hk porition in the Btate, 
841 ; judickl claims against the, 
868; hk legal rights and duties, 
868. 

KiA of Scotland, the, 827. 

Knowledge, on the diffusion o^ 64, 
868, 874; ethical, 74. 

Labour and capital, their reklion, 
61. 

Law^ — proper and improper kws, 
xxxix, idT^ 17, 81, 100, 111^ 142, 
160; poritiye laws, xlii, lix, Ixii, 
2, 03, 112^ 168, 146, 226, 236, 312, 
316; conridered with reference to 
its soMTosf and tmodm^ Ixiii, cxri; 
influence of custom unon, Ixr ; 
natural kw, Ixri ; cousidered with 
reference to its pmpotm, Ixx, 
czrii; kw of jpsrsons and things, 
Ixxi, Ixni, en; public and pri- 
▼ate, CTi, cxii ; Hale*s Analysis 
of rbglish Law, cnii; constitu- 
tional kw under a monarch, . cxi ; 
objects emkaced bj the term, 1 ; 
distinctions of DiTin^ natural, 
and poritiTe kw. 2, 146, 168; 
met^pnorical applications of the 
term. 6; distinguiihed fiom com- 
mands, 18, 16 ; figuratiTe kws, 
18 ; dedaiatfinr kws, 10, 167; 
kws to repeal. kw% A.; insnerfect 
kws,. 80; customaiT,. 88 ; INTine 
kwi^ 88^86^88^42,44,4(^64,06, 

tis 

ill ; idence m Iaw ui9 roonSitT^ 
65^ 72, 75; kwa metapboricftl, 111 ; 
Uw of Datare, 117 ; easetttiiU el«T 
menu of iv Uw, 11& ; laws ftet by 

to subject* ftod ptivate persoctiir 123 ; 
set bj & ftovcrergn to a «OTer«igti, 
125 J * imj^eratire law*, 126 j laws 
Mt bT gt'iK^ml opinioD, 127, 129, 

^ 1S3, 1 99, 140 ; MnetioiiH umeaced 

I to, 142 ; customary Uwo, 148 ; laws 
of DatuTC. 149 ; Locke's analysis 
of, 150; laws proper and laws of 
opiDion, 156f 159 ; MonteBoiueu 
on, laS; intematioiial, 175, 184); 
Idgialativ^e and executiTe powem, 
207 ; aerritudea in tba Roman law^ 

P 31d ; jtidieature luider a f^eral 
campoctf 222 ; a monarches powers 
iocapable of Legal Umitatiotij 220 j 
eonadtutional law affecting a tao- 
aarchi 230 ; the t«rm jut£ applied 
to iaw, 2B2 } Blickitone on the 

f BiTine law, 234 ; positive ioter- 
natioaal law, 235 ; coDatitutJoiml 
law, 236; the king amenable to 
law^ 237 ; Hobbea on tbe dril 

f laws, 248 ; legal Tigbta of a go- 

* Temtnenty 2^ ; partieB to legal 
rights and dut^aa, 256 ; ngbt 
meaning law, 258 ; leg»l duties 
attached to a ciTil pacti 2S5 ; ex- 
tend to strang^FB, 31 8> 

Lectures, Outline of^ M ^ abttmct^ 
civi* 

Le^ «t moreSf 162, 

Legislative and executiTe political 
powers, 206* 

LiWrtyi deiinition of dril, 235, 241 ; 
restrain La corresponding to Uber'- 
ties, 243- 

Ijocke, on the study of ethics, 07 ; 
his analysis of lawm, 140 ; on 
virtue and vice, 162. 

Malthua, hi» principle of population, 
6L 

MATtana, Von, his defioitioii of so^ 
TereigD goyernmentj 189 j his dis- 
tinctions of international mor^ 
4itj, 235, 

Mathematical truths^ taken upon 
trust, 56. 

Metaphor, definitiOD of, 110; meta^ 
pborical laws, 157, 100* 

Monarch, conjstitutional laws under 
tL, cxi; proper sense of the tenn, 

ieen 

ieic, 234; 

-—^ ^ of a, 247; thi 

ji enable to parliament, 237, 
monarchical goremment, 

duties of tubjeeta to a mo* 
1,276, 

by, de^oed, 192; limited, 
[97; exercise of sovereign 
r» under a, 200, 208; power 

monarch incapable or k^^ 
Ktion, 225; constitutional law 
i^ects a monarch, 230 ; Hobbes* 
t on, 249. 
|uieu, on lawa generally, 

ft F^^tive^ Tx^x, xlii, 3^ 17, 

241; explained, 113^ 121; 

7 of a moral senae, 29, 79, 85^ 

m i ecieuce of, 55 ; deduced 

tendencies of butejan action^ 

. moral instinct, 80, 82 : moral 

j nent^ 86, 89; »ympatny and 

I. aenae, 106 ; positive moral 

I 121, 142; moral sanctions^ 

contrasCed with immorality, 

Locke on moral laws, 151; 

I goodness or evil, 156 ; Inter- 

u QJii, 235 ; constitutioiial law ii 

] ve morality, 237 ; eonventioDi 

Ded by, 299, 
•M' I, confounded with the test of 
«jOi>»acty 96; goodnoM and baduuM 
»; to beneToleiioe, 104;«jM» 
■ edtO| tft. 

Nationa, the law obtaining between, 

177 ; meanings of the terau 198. 
Nature, the law o^ 117, 140. 

Obedience, eaeential io a politicd 
society, 174, 179; obedioiee of 
eubjecta, 250, 282; baaed on coa- 
tom and expediency, 270; Tolan- 
tM7,272. 

Oblic^on% and offioee, Ixzvii; ana- 
lyms of the term obligation, 7; 
imperfect, 20. 

OhUgaUonm, and rights. 808. 

< CEoonomists.' the, 258. 

Offices, and obligations, IzxriL 

Oligarchy, defined, 194L 198. 

Opinion, the law <^ 158; ipiblie, 164 

Outline of the Leeturei^ Ivi ; abelnei 

of, CZTL 

Ownership, or property, Ittto. 

I 

INDEX. 

337 

Ftet, ft dyil, hypoUiflns oL 276, 281 
objectioiia to tbe Inrpotlieria, 288 
oUigatioiia attached to, 288^ Me. 
vromiBM impli6diii,296,2a&8(n, 
duties annexed to, 286; a lunda- 
mental, 800 ; Gennan wiiten on, 
tb. 

Ftlsj. Ilia theoiT of utiHtf, 106; liia 
analyaia of uie tenn obligi^tion, 
7 ; nia txeatise oo moial and po- 
litical philoaopliT, 68; theoiy of 
utilitT, 106: <fcnnition of dvil 
liberty, 286. 

Pandeetey and Xnatitntei^ xliii. 

Birliamenty a determinate bodT, 
182; powera eneitieed bj, 202; 

. poweiB of jodieatuie in, ln6; the 
Mng pnidahaUe hj, 287. 240; 

' membaa amiaiaHa to iMai obli- 
.4 cation, 289. 

Patnotiam, enlightened, 266. 

JPmrtoma, definition o^ Inc. 

Persona, the law o^lx]i-lzziT,lzz?i], 
Izxz, IzxziT, x^ zciii,e¥i. criiL 

Philosoph J of positiTe law. lis. 

Political economj, princ^les of, 00: 

i popular inatmdion in poUtical 
aoenoe, 268, 274. 

Pope,powi0ra of the, 214. 

Popidmon, prindple o^ 6L 

Positife laws and fjotttire monditj, 
m\T, xlii, dpamim. 

Possession, rights of, Ixxxri; 8a- 
Tignj's woric ^Be Jure Fdsses- 
ttoms^** IzxxyiiL 

Ptactioe, and theory^ 48. 

BMMcription, IzzzniL 

BrincipiiM and details, contrasted, 
657 

iVniAyM, of the Bomsnjuristi^ 14 ; 

: prwue^ ne wrogmUo^ 227. 

Procedure, in esses of ciril injuries^ 

. di; eriminaL or. 

PtonuasB, implied in a dyil pact, 

Pi tip ertj, or ownership, Ixzzu; real 

and personal, xdv. 
Prussian Code, the, Ixziy. 
Punishments, or ; system of, 64. 

.168. 

Bepresentatkm, and delegation, 201 
Bepublic, ttaniAM on the term, 196. 
B«wMd?8. 

*'' hti^ and conenonding dutiesL 
' 248, 260, 261, 266; primary 

Bighti 

and sanctioning^ Ixxr. Ixxx: right 
of poasession, facKxn : rights m 
vermmam and m rsm, Ixxz. IxxzIt, 
Ixzzix; real and personid, zdii; 
sanctioning rig^ti^ zcriii; arinng 
from dyii injuries, xcyiii, c; aridng 
from judgmenti^ dii; um vermiUi 
of ri^ts and duties, xd ; laws cre- 
ating rights, 21 ^ meanings of the 
term, iS, 60; rights properly so 
called, 144; 'Kght is mu^ht,' 
the proportion examined, 266; 
in the aense of justice and law, 
267, 268; righta and obligations, 
806. 

Roman Law, — its diyirion of the 
law of persons, and of thin^ 
Ixxii; i w i i i wi ii faf s i or eoHUffut^ 
xd; Koman and English jurispru- . 
denoe compered, xdv ; the term i2t- 
Ket^ xdv; jm pmbHatm and pri- 
' v a ium , CTi| i& tsnna Miffoiio 
and dommmm^ Ixxrii; tt rvUm, 
Ixxxir: interdict^ Ixxxrli; rights 
of semtude, 216. 

RulesL human conduct guided br. 
42,44. 

Rules of arty 160. 

Sanctions^ meaning of the term, 6^ 
9; annexed to lawi^ 142^ proper 
and immoper, 164; phjscal or 
natural, 166. 

Sayignj, Von, hia work ^Be Jure 
PossessioniB,'' IxxxriiL 

Scotland, and Ekigland, union -<i[, 
227; the Church of Sootiand, 227. 

Sense, common, 81, 89, 80 : morsL 
theory of, 80, 86, 87, 106. 

Sentiments, assoosted witii rules, 
44; and calculation. 46; con- 
trasted with commano^ 80; mo- 
ral sentimenti, 86. 

Servitude, lights ci, 216. 

SmvUm, of ttie Roman law, Ixxxir. 

Sidney, on the powers of a gorem- 
ment, 247. 

SlaTeiy, lenl ri^ ci, 286. 

Society, mTided into determinate 
and indeterminate bodies, 188, 
960,1 independent political, 170, 
177, 180, 191, 192, 217, 242; so- 
Tereign portion of, 171 ; obedience 
essential to, 178, 268; in a state 
of nature, 176^ 184; fmtmber es- 
sential to a pditical aodety, 182; 

188 

Hi^iyp 

prenje gOTenJoient m, 191; uni 
TersJil and particttlAr, 264; poT- 
tii«neiit ffoveniiTieot basml od ba* 
bititftl oWdienc« of peviplt^, *27l ; 
importance ot popular political 
Jmow ledge, 274 ; basis of « aVcJCof^ 
^ 278p 298; m ckil pict, 27B. 
>7«tteig!3, not loveixted witb a po- 
ll tlcil #£rt^ OT conditions, ex ; 
the lovej^l^ <m§ individaal or 
one hod J of in4j%'iduftk, 218 ; kw« 
Mlf-impoaed bj ttovereigiiA, 233; 
da ilea of »OTereign» and lubjecta^ 
381, 283, 387, 2S8y 292. 

rr«i«igi3ty, MiBlfmA of ibe term, 
169; iu i«UUoii to subje^^tion^ 
171; definition of, 178, 180, 188; 
mMika of, 180; fttipreme, 190; 
monarcby tmd Arittocnicy distiti- 
guisbed, 1 92 ; dietiDctions of, 195 ; 
mnited monajicliy, 196; the term 
BOTemgHf 198 ; dUtiDCtioD of to- 
refieigD powen^ 200; WiaUtive 
•nd executive powers, 207; bolf- 
Bovereign Stuten^ SlO ; und«r a fe- 
ddral compact, 221 ; in the United 
States goverament, 222; limits of 
■ lovereign power, 22^i i tbe term 
abrereignty unoooatitiltional iib- 
jdied to acts of a soTereign, 229; 
sorereiim pow«r legally amolute, 
241, 2i7 ; right* of sorereiga ^ 
Temment OQDferred by the iMTine 

' law. 209: legal lights puzsued 
against, 202; chief purpose of, 
206; popular obedience to, 268^ 
consent of the people necessary to, 
272 ; 4uties ana tights of subjects, 
276 ; positiTe law under, 818 ; in- 
stituted by an independent poli- 
tical society, 280; ends of a so- 
Tereign goTemment, 289. seq, ; forms 
o^ according to Kant, 828. 

State, meanings of the term, 198 ; 
half-sovereign states, 210. 

Skihtif or conditionfl, nrivate, poli- 
tics], and professional, cvi: Hale 
on priyate and politick relations, 
cviii; a sovereign not investea 
witii political sUiuMj cr; dtUmi 

19L», 
Suarex, on Ui6 Uw of p«r«ons and 

tbingft, IxxiTr 
Subjects, on the dutiea ot, 260^ 
Succetaaion, testamentary, xcr\ uni- 

T^Tsal, xcvi* 
Superiority, deiinitioii of the temv 

Swiaa eonfedemtioti, tbe, 224, 
Sympftthy, eonfounded ^th moral 
eense, "lOfJ ; Haitley's hypothedi, 
108. 

Tastamentfiry enec^eionj xof^^^^B 

Teirtintonj, n^iulte taken upon, %8I 

Tbeory and prsctice, 4S, 

Tbibaut, Profea&or, cxii. 

Things, the law of, Inci-txxiTi IxxTii, 

boLXj Ixjixivj iG, idii, cvif criiL 
Truat^ important mfltience of, 66; 

tniflt^obatitution, xcvi, 

IJlpiftn, on the Jum naturaie^ 161 ; 
hh derivation mJuSf 233. 

Uneoiisdtu6onal, and lUegal, dls- 
tinotion of the terms, 228 ; applied 
to the acts of a ioverel^^ 23u. 

Union of England and Scotland, 
227. 

United States, oonstitutian of the. 
222. 

UmvertUiei of rights and duties 
xcL 

Usucapion, IxxxyiiL 

Utility, theory o^ 81, 84 91, »4. 
104; principle of, 87, 101; objec> 
tions to the principle answered, 
' 89, 61, 68 ; index to the BiTine 
commands, 46, 97; test oil 48, 
51, 68, 78 ; objections to, 72, 76, 
76; hypotheees of utility and of 
a moral sense, 92; misconoeptions 
of the theory o^ 96. 108; prin- 
ciple of public good, 99; Ben> 
tham on, 104; JPaley's theory, 
106; principle of^ the index tc 
the Divine Law, 286. 

Virtue and vice, explained by Locke. 
162. 

LOnKW 
rBIVTBB BT tPOTTiaWOODB AMD CO. 

\ j avw-vcaBn tqcABB. 

^ 

^^ V \ 

v.- \ 

m 

IVS^adent^ ef Uwr and moSitT, 
bdf 72, 75 ; Uwfl met&phorieaL 111; 
law ol natoj^, 117 ; ^^eentiAl elft^ 
ments of a Uw, lid; Uw^ eet bf 
eabj«eiB find private persooA^ 123 ^ 
«et by it sovereign to & eovenjign, 
125; impemtive Uwb, 126; lawB 
set bv geiieral opoioti, 127, 129, 
133, l39p 140; sanctiotifl Annexed 
to, 142 ; customnrj laws, 148 ; lawf 
of nature. 149 ; Loeke « analjais 
ofp 150f law8 proper and laws of 
opiDioTif 156, 169 ; MonteequiBU 
on, 163; int^niatioDal^ 17Q, 186; 
legblative and execatiTe powers, 
S07; servitudes in th^ Roman law, 
216 \ judicature under a federal 
compact, 222 ; a maDarcb'a powers 
inc&ftable of legal limitation^ 226 ; 
constitutional law affecting a mo- 
narcfa, 230 ; the term jvd applied 
to hwt 232 ; Blackstone on the 
Bivine law, 234; poeitiTe inter- 
^ national law^ 235; constitutionAl 
law, 236; the king amenable to 
law, 237; Hobbcs on the dvil 
Jaws, 248 ; lap! rigbtfl of a go- 

>Temm6[it| 250 ; parties to legal 
Tifhta and dntioA, 256; right 
meaning law, 268 ; legal duties 
attached to a d?il pftcti 265 ; ex- 
tend to atraogeiB^ 518, 
Lectures, Outline o^ In; abetrtct^ 

GXVl. 

Legislative and execatiTe political 
poweis. 206. 

Liberty, definifion of dyil, 286, 241 ; 
restraints corre^xiding to liber- 
ties, 243. 

Locke, on the study of ethics, 67; 
his analysis of laws, 140; on 
virtue and vice, 162. 

Malthus, his principle of population, 
61. 

Martens, Von, his definitaon of so- 
rerei^ government, 189; his dis- 
tinctions of international mora- 
lly, 286. 

Mathematical truths, taken upon 
trust, 66. 

Metaphor, definition of, 110; meta- 
phorical laws, 167, 160. 

Monarch, constitutional laws under 
a, czi ; proper sense of the term, 

nDEX. 

) 383 J di^aiience between 

narcbiei and aristocracies 53i; 
legal independence of a, 247 j the 
king amenable to oorliametit, 237^ 
240 ; monarcliical government, 
245; duties of eubjecta to a mo- 
narch, 270. 

Monarchy, defined^ 192; limited, 
196-197; exercise of sovereign 
powers under a, 200, 208; power 
of a monarch incapable of i^(d 
limitatian, 225; coo^tntional law 
as it atfects a monarch, 2^ ; Hobbet* 
views on, 249, 

Montesq m eu, on laws generally, 
163. 

Morality, poritive, xyxit, xlii^ S^ 17| 
112, 241; explained, 113, 121; 
theory of a moral sense, 29^ 79, &&, 
87, 92 ; scteooe of, 55 ; deduced 
from tendencjeaof faotean actaim^ 
76; a moral instinct, 80, 82 ; motal 
sentiment^ 86^ 69; sy mfiathy and 
moml oense^ 106 ; positive moral 
Tulofi* 121, 142; moral aanctiont^ 
143; conci^sted with immorali^, 
*&. ; Locke on moral lawt, 151 ; 
moral goodness or evil, 155; inter* 
national, 235; constitutional kw is 
positire morality ^ 237 ; conventiant 
enforced by, 299. 

Motive^ comounded with the test of 
conduct, 96; goodness and badnew 
of, 99 ; to benevolence, 104 ; se^ik^ 
applied to, iJ. 

Nations, the law obtaining between, 

177 ; meanings of the term, 199, 
Nature^ the law of, 117, 149. 

Obedience, essential to a political 
society, 174, 179; obedience of 
subjects, 260, 232 ; based on cus- 
tom and expHedieacy, 270; volun- 
tary, 272, 

Obligatiotis, and o£cee, IxxvH; ana- 
lysia of the term obtigmtion, 7; 
imperfect, 20* 

Oh^fftOioMMj and rights. 806. 

' CEoonomiJts,* the, 253. 

Offices, and obligations, LcxviL 

Oligarchy, defined, 194, 196. 

Opinion, the law of^ 162 ; fiublic, 154L 

Outline of the Lectuies, Ivi ; absbnet 
of, cxvi* 

Ownership, or property, Ijixii. 

INDEX. 

337 

Ftet, * ciTil, hypotheda oL 278, 281 
obiectioDS to the hrpotiiMiBy 283 
oUigatioaB attaciiea to, 288, §$q. 
niomiaes implied in, 296, m S^ 
auties annexed to, 286; * lunda- 
montaly dOO ; Gennan writerB on, 
ib, 

Fiikj. Ida theoiy of utility, 106; hia 
aiuuTjda of the tenn obligmon, 
7 ; nia treatiae on moxal and po- 
litical philoaophT, 68; theoiy of 
ntilitr, 106: Munition of ciTil 
liberty, 286. 

Pandecte, and Inatitatei^ zliiL 

Bariiannent^ * detenninate hodr, 
182; pcrfreia exeitiaed by, 202; 
poweia of jndicataie in, 206; the 

, hng puniahaUe by, 287. 240; 

jL memMn amenable to legal obli- 
4 gation,289. 

Platxiotiam, enlightened, 266. 

Artona, definition o^ Izx. 

Peraona, the law o^lxzi-lxziT, Ixxrii, 
Izxz, Ixxxiy, x^ zciii,e?i. criiL 

Phfloaqphy of poaitiye law. lix. 

Political economy, princ^lea of, 00: 

i popnlar inatroction m poHtical 
•CMnoe, 268, 274. 

Pope,poweEa of the, 214. 

PopoUmon, principle o^ 61. 

PoaltiTe lawa ana {KMitire morality, 
3DDdx, xlii, ei pamm . 

Pbaaeaaion, riffhta of^ Ixzzri; 8a- 
▼ign^a work ^De Jure Poaaea- 
noma^** IzxxYiiL 

PhMstice, and theory, 48. 

l^MMcnption, IzxxniL 

Ainctplea and detaila, contzaated, 
«7 

JVwAwM, of the KomanjuriatB, 14 ; 

: ji i'i wfy jjg wa m rogm i Of 227. 

Procedure, in caaea of dril injuriea. 

and aanctiomng, Ixxy. Izzz: right 
of poasearion, faccxn; riffhta m 

cti; criminaL er. 
Ptonuaaa, implied in a ciTil pact. 

P r o p erty, or ownerahip, Izxxii; real 

and peraonal, xdT. 
Pruaaian Code, the, IxzIt. 
Poniihmenta, er ; ayatem of, 64. 

Beaaon, in animala. 168. 
Bepreaentation, and delegation, 204. 
Bepublie, -nmiAM on the term, 198. 
B«waida,8. 

Bighta, and coneaponding dutiea, 
£d, 248, 260, 261, 256; primaiy 

nermmam and m rmi, Ixxz. Ixxxiv, 
Ixxxix; real and peraonia, xdii; 
aancticmin^ righti^ xcriii; axinng 
from civil injuriea, xcriii, c; axinng 
from judgmenti^ ciii; taMwniMet 
of rigbta and dutiea, xd ; lawa cre- 
ating rights, 21 ^ meaninga of the 
term, iS, 60; nghta properly ao 
caUed, 144; 'B^ht ia m^ht,' 
the proporition examined, 266; 
in the aeoae of joatice and law, 
267, 268; righta and obligationa, 
806. 

Koman Law, — iti diTiaion of the 
law of peraona, and of thin^ 
Ixxu; umMrmUdm or coOegta^ 
xd; Koman and Engliah juriapru- 
dence compared, xdv ; the tenn <29- 
Uatf xdv; jm pmbUeum and pri- 
' MteoM, crij the terma MigaHo 
and rf o mj i mrm , Ixxrii; awatet, 
Ixxxir; interdict, Ixxxrii; iighta 
of aenritude, 216. 

Rulea, human condnct guided br, 
42, 44 

Rulea of arty 160. 

Sanctioni^ meaning of the tenn, 6^ 
9; annexed to lawa, 142^ proper 
and immoper, 164; phyaical or 
natural, 166. 

Sayigny, Von, hii work ^De Jure 
Poaseamonia," IxxxriiL 

Scotland, and England, union -c£ 
227; tiie Ohuich of Scotiand, 227. 

Senae, common, 81, 89, 80 : moral, 
tiieoryof,80,86^87,106. 

Sentimenta. aaaoaated with rulea, 
44; and calculation^ 46; con- 
traated with command^ 80; mo- 
ral aenttmenti^ 86. 

Serritude, riffhta o^ 216. 

SermUUf of tiie Botnan law, Ixxxiy. 

Sidney, on the poweia of a gOTem- 
ment, 247. 

SlaTery, leoal righta of; 286. 

Sodety, mrided into determinate 
and indetenninate bodiea, 188, 
teg,; independent politicaL 170, 
177, 180, 191, 192, 217, 242; ao- 
Tereign portion o^ 171 ; obedience 
eaaential to, 178, 268; in a aUte 
of nature, 176, 184; nmnber ea- 
aential to a pditical aodety, 182; 

338 

INDEX. 

B«Dt}iAii]'s mvn on, 186; sn- 
pr^fiie goremnient in, 191; "uni- 
versiil and particular, 264; per* 
m&nent ffovcmmt^nt based on iia- 
bituid obedience of people, 971 ; 
imporiiuice of popular politicAl 
knowledge, 274 ; hiude of a civit^iSf 
278. 2^6^ a civil p«ct, 27a 

Sovcrttign. not inve^ud witli ft po- 
litical ifrt&i* or conditionB, ex; 
the Boverei^ om individual or 
Ofw body of individual 218 ; Uw© 
Bolf-im posed by aoTetBigna, 226; 
dutieA of BOTer^tgtii and eubjects. 
281, 283, 287, 288^ 292. 

Sovereignty, aualyeii of th© tewm^ 
169 ; its relatton to subjection, 
ITl; definition of, 178, 186, 188; 
poarks of, ISO; aupreme, 190; 
monarcby and amtocrac^ diitin- 
guisbed, 192^ dietinctions of^ 105 ; 
&Diit«d mooarcby, 196; the tarm 
ftOT-ereign, 198 ; distioction of so- 
vereign powere, 200 ; legisIatiTe 
and ereculi?6 powers ^ 207 ; half- 
soTemgn States, 210 ; under a fe- 
deral compact, 221 ; in the United 
States goTemment, 222; limits of 
BOTereign power, 225; tbo term 
aoTereigtity miccmstituliotial ap- 
plied to Acta of a flOTereign, 220 ; 
sovereijni power l^aUy abitolut*, 
341, 247; rigbts of aoTerei^ ^o- 
vemment conferred by the Uivme 
Uw^ 269; legal righta pursued 
agamat, 262; cbief purpose of, 
W&; popular obedience to, 268; 
consent of the people ncceaaaij to, 
£72 ; dutiee and rigbts of subjects, 
276; poiitiTe law under, SI 3; in- 
stitute by an independent poli- 
tical society, 280 j endi of a so- 
vereign goreroment, 2^, s^, ; forms 
of, according to Kant, 328, 

State, meanings of the t^rm, 108 ; 
half-sovereign states, 210. 

^iatut, or conditions, private, poli- 
tical, and profeesiooal, cvi ; Hale 
ou private and political relations. 
eviii; a sovereign not inveated 
with political Mlatusj ex; daUu 

'r€ipt4biiemj maaningi of tbe temii 
19S>. 
Suarei^ on the law of perso&i and 

things^ Ljcxiv. 
Subjects, on the duties of, 260, 
SuccesHion, testamentary, xcv; unl- 

veisttl, :icTi. 
Bnpenority, definition of the term, 

15. 
Swiss conrederatioo, tte, 224, 
Sjmpfttby, confounded with moral 

aense, 106; Hartlej*i hypothcssis 

106. 

Tefltamentary succ^saioD, xer* 

Testimony, results tsJcen upon, 56L 

Theory and practice, 43, 

Tbibaut^ Professor, mL 

ThingSj the law of, Ixxi-bodv, Ixrrii, 

lx£i, Ixxriv, xc, xdii, cvi, cviii. 
Trust, important influeaee of, 66; 

trust-flubstitution, xcvi. 

Ulpian, tm the na fMiunUef 161; 
bifi derivation oijuif 23S, 

Unconstitutional, and illegal, dii^ 
tinction of the terms, 228 ; apphsd 
to the acts of a soverei^^ 230. 

Union of England and Sootlaiid, 
227. 

United States, constitution of the 
222, 

Unvv^miie* of rights and duties 
xci. 

Usucapion, IxxxidiL 

Utility, theory of; 3L S4, 91, 9*. 
104; principle of, 37, 101; objec- 
tions to the principle answered, 
' mi, 61, 63 ; index to the Bivmc 
command*, 46, 97; te^t of, 48, 
61, 63, 73; objections to, 72, 7S, 
76; hypotheses of utility and ^ 
a mom sense^ 92- miisconoepdrttit 
of the theory ol^ 96, 103; prin- 
ciple of public good, 99; Ben- 
tbam on, 104; Paley^s theoTTT 
106; primdple of, the bdez u 
the Divine Law, 2^. 

Mrtue and vicse, explained by Locks. 

152, 

^^ 

M>r»v 

'^ 

■s) 

ACME 

BOOKBIIKHNG CO. tHC 

NOV 2 71985 

100 cAMBRiDGe srnsrr 

CHARUESTOWN, MAi*S, 

ACME 

BOOmiKHNG CO. IHC 

NOV a 71988 

100 CAMBRIDGE STneCT 
CHARIJESTOWN, MAHS,