A Treatise on the Canon of Medicine of Avicenna (Avicenna, trans. O. Cameron Gruner, 1930)
==========================================================
Gruner's 1930 English translation of Book One of Avicenna's Canon of Medicine — the first English rendering of the medical encyclopedia that ruled East and West for six centuries. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

< pu A
= Ad . r
ee


a pg pa py pM pg pp pin pn


4
d
Be ry


This ts copy number


oy


of The Classics of Medicine Library
edition of
pn han
THE CANON OF MEDICINE
OF AVICENNA
oe. hs


in the Library of


K. D. Fortes Mayer


ne
ie
ie
Ne
oe
Ze oie
ae
ae
ne
Ne
Ne


Reproduced by permission of the Trustees of the British Museum.


A physician and his patient.
From an early Persian MS. (Add. 27,261, f. 371b)


‘A great sage—a reader of ancient books, Greek, Persian, Latin,
Arabian, and Syriac ; and skilled in medicine and astronomy, both
with respect to their scientific principles and the rules of their
practical applications; he was experienced in all that healeth
and hurteth the body ; conversant with the virtues of every plant,
dried and fresh, the baneful and the useful. He was versed in the
wisdom of the philosophers, and had compassed the whole range
of medical science and other branches of the knowledge-tree.’’


(4th Night—Burton; Lane.)


aed AERPERRR AHR
OS CSRS Cleo Co COS Goer Gos crane


2
o IPCI IO IO NOOO ACOA
TOE IP IEEE PPE EEE EER EEE EEN
THIS SPECIAL EDITION OF
THE CANON OF MEDICINE
OF
AVICENNA


HAS BEEN PRIVATELY PRINTED
FOR THE MEMBERS OF


THE CLASSICS OF MEDICINE LIBRARY


ZR RR RAD RE


SOE:


ee
xt


THE Cuassics OF MEDICINE LIBRARY
EDITORIAL ADVISORY BOARD


Morton D. Bogdonoff, M.D.

John K: Crellin, Pho D., ER.C.P NLR.CS.
Robert A. Good, Ph.D., M.D., D.Sc.
John P. McGovern, M.D., Sc.D.
Lawrence C. McHenry, Jr., M.D.
Sherwin B. Nuland, M.D., F.A.C.S.
Morris H. Saffron, Ph.D., M.D.
Eugene A- Steady Jr., M.D., DSc.
Frank Vellios, M.D.

Richard J. Wolfe, M.L.S.
Norman R. Zinner, M.D., M.S., F.A.C.S.


PUBLISHER


Leslie: Bx Adatns; [revi Ag, [2D ELD:


Special Edition Copyright © 1984
THE Ciassics OF MEDICINE LIBRARY
Division of Gryphon Editions, Ltd.
P.O. Box 76108, Birmingham, Alabama 35253
All Rights Reserved
Printed in the United States of America


A TREATISE ON
THE CANON OF MEDICINE


OF


AVICENNA


INCORPORATING A TRANSLATION
OF THE FIRST BOOK


BY


O. Cameron Gruner, M.D. (Lond.)


LONDON
AMAL AG foe OCG
Pom ATeRUosShUU STREET, W.Cg
1930


‘Man has been truly termed a ‘ microcosm,’ or little world in
himself, and the structure of his body should be studied not only by
those who wish to become doctors, but by those who wish to attain
to a more intimate knowledge of God, just as close study of the
niceties and shades of language in a great poem reveals to us more
and more of the genius of its author.”’


GHAZZALI, Alchemy of Happiness
(Wisdom of the East edition).


Printed and Engraved in Great Britain
at the BurLEIGH PrEss, Lewin’s Mead, BrisTou,


PREFACE


THE purpose of the present treatise is two-fold :

(1) To furnish a translation of the First Book of the
Canon of Medicine of Avicenna. The section on Anatomy
has been omitted in favour of the first half of the De viribus
cordis. ‘This assists in the second object of this treatise. Dis-
tinctively large type is used for the translation.

(2) To present a study of its mystical philosophy (sas-
sawuf), especially showing where this and modern biological
knowledge are reciprocally illuminative.

The words of the late Prof. E. G. Browne may be quoted
here: ‘‘ Even if we rate the originality of Arabian medicine at
the lowest, I venture to think that it will deserve more careful
and systematic study.”

Furthermore, the Thomistic philosophy of human nature
is specially discussed, and its applicability to the Medicine
of the future is definitely enunciated.

- A grateful acknowledgment is made to the School of
Oriental Studies, London Institution (University of London)
for signal help in the acquisition of the Arabic, Persian, and
Chinese essential to the purposes of the treatise.


O. CAMERON GRUNER.
London, December, 1929.


CONTENTS
A. THe TREATISE


PAGE
Preliminary Thesis. The Canon of Medicine in relation to
modermithougnts <0, - <=) vas VF) el I
I. The intellectual culture contemporary with Avicenna
1-6 ey Gh eee oc ee 2
: a In the central Saracen empire. (6) ln the
western Saracen empire. (c) Among the
Chinese.
II. The knowledge presented by the Canon, as compared
with that of to-day (§ 7-18) Leas a ee eee ee 5
(a) The Canon is a précis. (6) The word “ Canon.”
(c) The word “ knowledge.” (d@) Mystical
insight.
III. The basic difference between the Canon and Modern
Medicine (§ 196-22) = << 2 =) = = Ee 8
IV. Special differences between the Canon and Modern
Medicine(@23=37)) =" = = a ee =
(2) Conceptions known to Avicenna; not now
recognised. (4) Conceptions known to modern
medicine, but not to Avicenna. (¢) Know-
ledge common to Avicenna and modern
medicine.
V. Of interéstto the Scholar (§ 38) = = = - 25a) oaneae
VI. Brief survey of the Intention of this treatise (§ 40-44) I9
The doctrine of Matter and Form (§ 55 oo ye ae
Death and Destiny (§ 111-115) - a Jaa Loe Tg
The Humours (§ 116, 117) - oo et-lorile #6
The basis of Anatomy i in the Caren (§ 1184127) +5 => SSR ROZ
The doctrine of the Breath (§ 136-150) =) Se ie
Scholastic psychology (§ 155-165) =I, OS. a eee
Coloured Plate representing the corporeal and psychical Faculties facing p. 143
The Bath-house (§ 198, 109)) =) == 0 ee ee
Expiative causes of Disease (§ 201) = = = "= = meee
Chinese sphygmology (§ 208-224, 234, 235)- = : = - 285


Table of Terminology relative to the Pulse (Latin, Arabic, Chinese) facing p. 289
The doctrine of the pulse (§ 218-220, 225- 230; 231-233) - 293-308


Urinalysis, ancient versus modern (§ 238-239) - - - - 349
Dietetics (§ 195, 248-253) 3 = 92S 4 2 23) Sigeaia
Ornamental Plate, with special portraits = : = - facing p. 553
Concluding Survey (§ 267-300) - - - - - - = 553
Plate: Rembrandt, ‘‘ The Raising of Jairus’ daughter ”’ - facing p. 567
Appendix: I. Progress; II. Facts—Knowledge—Truth - 569
lily @iie Materia Medica of the Canon Sie

References ~ 5 RS Oe eens


vi


CONTENTS vil


B. Tue TRANSLATION PAGE
Introductory words (4-5) 8 ee ee ee Sees 8

BOOK I

FAK LT <1
THEsIs I. DEFINITION AND SCOPE OF MEDICINE (6-18) - 25
THESIS II. | CoSMOLOGY (19-25) i ee ee
THESIS III. THE TEMPERAMENTS (26-66) sip Seis er 57)
THESIS IV. THE Humours (67-118) eee = Se 96
THESIS V. ANATOMY (114-135) ay a et ep tay GE OS
THESIS VI. GENERAL PHYSIOLOGY Be L78 re a0 fA Are to7
PSYCHOLOGY (174-183) -— - + ae ae REE

PART II

DISORDERS OF HEALTH
THESIS I. DEFINITION OF TERMS (191-230) - - 156
THESIS II. THE CAUSES OF DISEASE. Eas (231-451) 173
A.—Unavoidable Causes - - 176
(i) Extracorporeal.

The influence of seasonal changes on the body - 183


Climate: (a) Latitude, (6) Altitude, (¢) Mountains,
(Z) Seas, (e) Winds, 7) Soil, (g g) Marshes


(305— 332) - 195
(ii) Lounoredl. Causes femal ale hemanne physio-

logical. ee ee ae 250
Dietetics (347-360) -  - eee lA
The various kinds of drinking water (361- 392) - 221
B.—Facultative Causes of Disease - DED
Balneology (400-414) - - - - - - = - 232

THESIS III. THE EVIDENCES OF DISEASE.
memeiology (40ea-B11). = = = an es = RET,
Sphygmology (615-602) - - - - - - - - 283
Urinoscopy (603-674) - SO i eS ON Pee
The Alvine Discharge (675— 677) SES tT a ORS ee et

PART-II
THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH (678-904) Si deere ey
Dietetics (759-814, 855-859) - - - - - - 394,432
PAR TELV

THE TREATMENT OF DISEASE (905-1085) - - - - - 460
BOOKS II-V. BrieF LIST OF CONTENTS - 32


5
Translation of ‘‘ De Viribus for 3 OND 1086-1130) wae 534
INDEX nb eetSs 579


PRELIMINARY THESIS


THE RELATION BETWEEN THE CANON OF MEDICINE OF AVICENNA
AND MODERN THOUGHT


zy] ONSIDERATIONS are not wanting which entitle
a| the Canon of Medicine of Avicenna to an esteemed
4| position in modern thought. In the first place, there
is the outstanding intellectual culture of the Saracen
Empire during the period of history to which Avi-
@|cenna belongs. Secondly, in the case of much of his
#25) teaching, it may be said that the difference from ours
is largely only that his speechis alien, and is apt to be
misunderstood. In these days, the great complexity of the language
with which we express our scientific thought corresponds with the
intricacy of the instruments wherewith facts are elicited. Thirdly,
many of the advances of modern times offer the solutions to the very
theorems and propositions of former times. Finally, ideas are to be
found in his work which provide suggestions for useful research in
the future.

§ 1. The importance of idea over material achievement is not
to be forgotten. The achievements of any age are subject to decay
with the lapse of centuries, but the ideas which gave rise to them
remain living through all cycles. Therefore to propose a real place
for Avicenna in modern thought is not to propose a return, as it were,
to old architecture, or the costumes of long ago. It is rather to
render accessible to-day the picture which he painted, and so enable
it to renew its still vital message. It is to play over again the music
which he expressed, and enable perhaps one or two to rejoice in it.
And this without obscuring the issue by discussing nationality, or
schools of thought, or evolution of ideas, or technical methods.

If it appear to some a fault that the master appears to have used
passages from other works, and this without full acknowledgment,
it should be remembered that after all a painter may use pigments
which someone else has manufactured, and is allowed even to employ
other persons (usually pupils) to execute certain portions of his
picture. Indeed, even after his decease, it is not improper that some
may have been entrusted with the delicate task of touching up faded
portions of the canvas which he bequeathed.

I B


2 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The place for Avicenna in modern thought is gained when it is
agreed that he shall be viewed as one who entered this world entrusted
with a mission independently to express for that age, by means of
those various tools which he then found in it, the wisdom which is
unchanging and impersonal. So also there is the need to-day that
this same wisdom should be re-expressed for this age by means of the
new data which lie to our hands.


I


TuE INTELLECTUAL CULTURE CONTEMPORARY
WITH AVICENNA


§ 2. (a) Intellectual Culture in the Central Saracen Empire.
Carra de Vaux, in his monograph “‘ Avicenne,’’ +3 furnishes particu-
larly striking comments, as follows (p. 156) :—

‘“The more we investigate the enormous literary output of the
Arabian empire, and come into intimate appreciation of the master
minds of the middle epoch and of antiquity, the more we become
aware of their sincerity.

““ We should, we think, offer our salutations to these great
personalities of that day, whose works and lives were equally
encyclopaedic.

‘““Our own times do not show more worthy figures; we com-
placently assume that there are no more worthy than ourselves
because science, so greatly developed to-day, cannot be held all
within one single head. That may be. But it is only right to admit
that science has less unity and harmony to-day than formerly it had ;
that it is less pure than it was under the grand peripatetic discipline.
Our attitude towards that is neither humble nor sincere.

““In these days we are concerned too much to have our name
blazoned forth than to grasp a great extent of science. We are
more anxious to uphold the profession than to have a passion for
study ; we seek titles and reputation rather than real knowledge ;
and in order to appear more specialistic than our ancestors we expose
ourselves to the judgment of posterity as having smaller minds,
and fettered souls.”

§ 3. (6) As to the state of civilization in the western Saracen
empire, we have the very illuminating description of Ameer Ali in
his “‘ The Spirit of Islam ” 2 (p. 392) :—

“The Arabs covered the countries where they settled with
networks of canals. To Spain they gave the system of irrigation by
flood-gates, wheels and pumps. Whole tracts of land which now lie
waste and barren were covered with olive groves, and the environs
of Seville alone, under Moslem rule, contained several thousand oil-
factories. They introduced the staple products, rice, sugar, cotton,
and nearly all the fine garden and orchard fruits, together with many
less important plants, like ginger, saffron, myrrh, etc. They opened
up the mines of copper, sulphur, mercury, and iron. They
established the culture of silk, the manufacture of paper and other


THE CANON OF MEDICINE a


textile fabrics ; of porcelain, earthenware, iron, steel, leather. The
tapestries of Cordova, the woollen stuffs of Myrcia, the silks of
Granada, Almeria, and Seville, the steel and gold work of Toledo,
the paper of Salibah, were sought all over the world. The ports of
Malaga, Carthage, Barcelona and Cadiz were vast commercial
emporia for export and import. In the days of their prosperity, the
Spanish Arabs maintained a merchant navy of more than a thousand
ships. They had factories and representatives on the Danube.
With Constantinople they maintained a great trade which ramified
from the Black Sea, and the eastern shores of the Mediterranean, into
the interior of Asia, and reached the ports of India and China, and
extended along the African coast as far as Madagascar.

“In the midst of the tenth century, when Europe was about in
the same condition that Caffraria is now, enlightened Moors, like
Abul Cassem, were writing treatises on the principles of trade and
commerce. In order to supply an incentive to commercial enterprise,
and to further the impulse totravel, geographical registers, gazetteers,
and itineraries were published under the authority of Government,
containing minute descriptions of the places to which they related,
with particulars of the routes and other necessary matters. Travellers
like Ibn Batuta visited foreign lands in quest of information, and
wrote voluminous works on the people of those countries, on their
fauna and flora, their mineral products, their climate and physical
features, with astonishing perspicacity and keenness of observation.

“ The love of learning and arts was by no means confined to one
sex. The culture and education of the women proceeded on parallel
lines with that of the men, and women were as keen in the pursuit of
literature and as devoted to science as men. They had their own
colleges (for instance, at Cairo, established in 684 A.M. by the daughter
of the Mameluke Sultan Malik Taher); they studied medicine and
jurisprudence, lectured on rhetoric, ethics, and delles-lettres and
participated with the stronger sex in the glories of a splendid
civilization. The wives and daughters of magnates and sovereigns
spent their substance in founding colleges and endowing universities,
in establishing hospitals for the sick, refuges for the homeless, the
orphan and the widow.”

§ 4. (c) Cordova, the most celebrated western university of
the Empire at the time of Avicenna.—This is well known as an
instance of the high degree of culture of the day. Ameer Ali,?
speaks of “‘ that wonderful kingdom of Cordova, which was the
marvel of the middle ages, and which when all Europe was plunged
in barbaric ignorance and strife alone held the torch of learning
and civilization bright and shining before the western world.”
The greatness of the city is indicated by its population, which is given
by Haeser2® (i. 662) as. 300,000, and by Campbell’? (p. 57) as one
million ; and by the library of ‘‘ about 200,000”’ volumes. To see
the city to-day, traversed as it can be from wall to wall, within half
an hour on foot, and to read of an extent of ‘‘ 24 miles one way, and
six in the other” (Ameer Ali!, p. 517) shows that the word “ king-
dom ”’ conveys a truer idea of its greatness. To read of “ innumer-


4 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


able libraries, 3,800 mosques, 60,000 palaces and mansions, 200,000
houses inhabited by the common people, 700 baths, 80,000 shops,
besides hostels and serais ”’ is to wonder how so much can have come
to be now represented by so little.* Nevertheless, the “ srand
mosque” alone, which is still at any rate externally intact (and
interiorly is still surely one of the wonders of the world despite its
mutilation) stands sponsor for the rest; and no doubt many of
the existing imposing buildings—now devoted to very different
uses—stand for the palaces and mansions. As to the literary
treasures, these have been traced at least in part from Spain to Fez,
as shown by Horne** (p. 32, 61), with the Roud E/ Qartas as his
authority ; and he then points to years of pilfering from the library
of the great mosque of E] Karouiyan at Fez, as having scattered these
works for ever out of ken.

§s. A study of thestreet names, and even the place names and
current dialect in ‘‘ Moorish Spain’”’ to-day also confirms the story
of past greatness. But the mystical knowledge displayed in the
dispositions of the decorative designs and their poetic inscriptions
on the walls. of the Alhambra halls, state-rooms, and private
apartments can leave no doubt of unsurpassed artistic power, where
every sense-impression was deliberately drawn on. Lights and
shadows, and colours changing with the hours of the day ; musical
effects of simultaneous diversity of disposition of flowing water ;
perfumes ; courting of the prevailing breezes ; interior architectural
form; and furnishings, animate and manufactured—all these were
combined for the achievement of a perfect representation of (divine,
over and above human) Beauty.

§6. (d) Among the Chinese. The bearing of Chinese philoso-
phical thought on the subject of Avicenna lies in the fact that we here
meet with a notable example of intimacy of relation between world-
conception and Medicine. The writings which are so carefully
studied to-day by so many sinologists were extant at the time of
Avicenna, and are still held in the highest esteem by Chinese thinkers.
The modern Chinese philosopher is supposed to say to the Westerner
(Somerset Maugham*): ‘‘ What is the reason for which you deem
yourselves our betters? Have you excelled us in arts or letters ?
Have our thinkers been less profound than yours? Has our
civilization been less elaborate, less complicated, less refined than
yours? Why, when you lived in caves and clothed yourselves with
skins, we were a cultured people. ...”’ The attitude towards
western learning so displayed may be blamed by many, but is
certainly praised by those who have studied the philosophy most
deeply. As long ago as 1876 we read conclusive evidence (by Sir
Henry Howarth*®) that much of our vaunted civilization actually
came from that ancient race. If some students discuss their
philosophy with a certain cynicism (Forke?’), others (Bruce!!,
Wilhelm?) see into the justice of their conceptions. As. Carus!®
remarks : ‘‘ We need not be blind to the many errors and absurdities


d * ‘\ Every dwelling-place, even if it has been blessed ever so long, will one
ay become a prey.’”’—(Old saying quoted by Ameer Ali, p. 125.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 5


of the ancient occultism to understand and grant the truth that
underlies its system.’’ These words are exactly applicable to the
Canon of Medicine of Avicenna.

It should be added that errors and absurdities are apt to be ascribed to ancient
authors which really arose from misunderstandings and ignorance on the part
even of contemporary pupils. The subsequent generations perpetuated the errors,
and even in these days the attempt to represent the real meaning of ancient texts


by translations exposes one to unexpected extraordinary pitfalls. Our idiom is
so diverse from the technical Chinese.


II


THE NATURE OF THE KNOWLEDGE PRESENTED
BY THE CANON


§ 7. (a) The Canon is a précis, and not a sum-total of Avicenna’s
knowledge. Numerous passages occur in the Canon which show
that this is the case, that it is a series of notes or skeleton outlines of
thought not too lengthy to be memorized by his students (5)—much
as they would memorize the Quran. Thus: (2) “ to the full extent
necessary, and yet with apt brevity,”’ (16) ‘“‘ do not place in medicine
what does not belong to it,’’ (84) “ having discussed the equable
temperaments suficzently,” (80) “I purposely omit reference to
certain other problems relative to the fluids of the body’: ‘‘ just as
much as is necessary to enable you to practise medicine intelligently.”
Many passages also refer to others of his own works for further
details, to avoid confusing the purely medical issue of the Canon.
These (philosophical) works are gradually becoming more widely
known.

“Generally speaking, the saying of the saints and sages are
terse, presenting only the germs of truth; these are developed by
later teachers and then expanded and added to. We must seeé
to it, however, that we get at the original meaning of the saints
and sages.” (Chu Hsi?°, p. 168.)


“ Books are only words, and the valuable part of words is the thought therein
contained. That thought has a certain bias, which cannot be conveyed in words,
yet the world values words as being the essence of books. But though the world
values them, they are not of value; as that sense in which the world values them
is not the sense in which they are valuable.”” (Chuang Tzu, Giles trans. p. 170).

§8. To say that a work is the product of the age in which an author lives
is certainly often an error, for it is to confuse the person’s insight with the tools
(the language at his command) available to express himself with. Similarly to work
out the relation between a literary work and the religious belief of the author, as
for instance to show the relation between Islamic science and the Koran carries the
same fallacy withit. The Prophet says “‘ every soul when born is a faithful follower ;
it is afterwards that he becomes unfaithful ’’—which is to say that the form of.re-
ligious belief is a secondary implantation, whereas the spirit of a sincere life can be
traced to the original being.

Avicenna’s medicine, like Indian medicine, has been.traced to the. Greek
system. But it has been proved that the great works of Charaka and Susruta
were available in Arabic, under the title of Kitab-Shawshura-al-Hindi, from the
seventh century (“ Ayurveda,” 1924, i. 1; and see also Weber, Hist. of Indian
Lit.) —Similarly, the view that the Chinese borrowed their philosophy of the five
elements from.the Turks has been sufficiently disposed of by Forke. (p 242, 243).
—lIt is beside the purpose of this treatise to take up such questions.


6 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


9. The common notion that progress or stagnation in secular knowledge
has a causal relationship with (a certain) religion is typically yoiced in his address
on “ Medicine and the Church,” by Sir Farquhar Buzzard*** (1927). The comment
to make is: ‘“‘ post hoc sed non propter hoc.’ The advances in the science of medicine,
as in all other sciences, are surely a part of the (divine) plan for mankind ; whereas
the collateral abandonment of religious fundamentals remains a human respon-
sibility.


§10. (6) The word “‘ Canon” (Qanun).—Equivalent words :
code of laws; series of principles. Tao 3 (cf. Forke**), Prir-
ciple is defined as “‘ something antecedent, which exercises a real
positive influence upon the consequent ” — Causes (four kinds, 13)=
Reasons.

In view of this it is clear that the Canon is not properly to be
regarded as an ‘“‘ encyclopedia ”’ of the knowledge of the time, or
to be contrasted, for instance, with the now classical ‘‘ Osler.”

S11. (c) The word “ knowledge.’ Knowledge is not simply
an assemblage of “‘ facts”’; nor is it to be made synonymous with
“ truth ’—certainly not Absolute Truth, of which all human
knowledge falls short (see diagram in Appendix), although one single
word is capable of containing or implying all knowledge, as in
mathematics a single term may be equated with an infinite number of
terms summed together. But even the mathematical sciences can
only afford approximate truth (Hume, quoted by Maher®®: p. 238).
We may recall the words, ‘“‘if he attain to all knowledge, he is far
off still’ /{(a: Kempis °*, ti.:11):

§ 12. Facts, as S. Thomas®, G. 53) explains, are what our
intellect regards external objects as, and as we judge of them only
in terms of our sense-organs, these objects may be different. God
knows them as they are. Our intellect depends on our imagination,
and that depends on our senses, and our senses only convey discrete
fragments which we gather into one continuous impression regardless
of intervening points.” We live as it were in a network only the
nodes of which are evident to the senses.

§ 13. (a) Mystical Insight——There is a distinction between
knowledge gained in the ordinary manner and that gained by
“mystical insight’ (Kashf). The writer of Gulshan-i-Raz*® (couplet
299, p. 30) advises his readers to follow this, saying :


“ Straightway lift yourself above time and space,
Quit the world and be yourself a world for yourself.”’
And:
“The moment we are enlightened within,
We go beyond the voidness of a world confronting us.’’
—Seng-ts’an, quoted by Susuki,** p. 185.


As this ‘“ opens up all of a sudden a world hitherto undreamed of, it


is an abrupt and discrete leaping from one plane of thought to
another ”’ (ib. p. 200).


“ Real science is seeing the fire directly,
Not mere talk, inferring the fire from the smoke.
Your scientific proofs are more offensive to the wise
Than the urine and breath whence a physician infers.” *?


—(p. 306.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 7


“Man looks at the surface of the ocean. Yet he is so small that he cannot
even be compared to one of its drops, limited as he is in intellect and in his know-
ledge. It is only to those who, having just touched creation, bow to God, forgetting
their limited self, that God has remained. These through whom God has spoken
are the only beings who have been able to give any truth to the world.” **—(Rose-
garden, ist ed., 120.)

§ 14. “ The mind is not like a horizontal door which has to be
made larger by force. You must clear away the obstructions arising
from creaturely desire, and then it will be pure and clear with no
limit to its knowledge. Heng Ch’u said: ‘‘ When the Mind is
enlarged it can enter into everything throughout the universe ”’
Chu Hsi?° (i. 182). ‘‘ He who praises God knows about Him.”

This attitude towards Nature is to be claimed for Avicenna, on
the plain evidence of his other writings, including the “‘ Al Najat ”’
which appropriately appears in the Arabic version of the Canon
printed at Rome in 1593, and of the Libellus on the powers of the
heart* (real authorship disputed) which Arnold of Villanova trans-
lated into Latin (ca. 1235-1312)—and is included in the Latin
edition of the Canon, 1595.

The acquisition of knowledge by this process demands nothing
more than a keen observation of the life around us, and was as much
within his reach as ours. Such knowledge is not too restricted to
one period of history, one language, or to one or two universities.
And if it should seem that because our civilization is so different
his opportunities were much less, we may pause to reflect that the
difference between our age and his is chiefly one of mechanical
appurtenances and phraseology ; and that even to this day we need
not travel far (e.g., the old streets of Cordova and Granada, or more
definitely, to northern Africa) to see much the same sort of scenery
as he was accustomed to, much the same sort of life as is drawn in the
‘“toor Nights.”’ In any case, what is human life, at bottom, but a
matter of buying and selling, receiving and giving, seizing and
relinquishing, constructing and demolishing, acquiring learning and
losing it, seeking power and breaking it, bidding and forbidding,
covenanting and comminating, giving in marriage and seeking to
obtain in marriage, birth and death.


§15. The significant phrase “‘ seeing into one’s own Nature’”’ (Hui-neng:
Susuki,®? p. 203, in which most admirable work occur many passages by way of
explanation) gives a graphic description of that which gives Avicenna his superiority.
The Canon is simply the medical garb in which the one Truth is expounded. It is
for us also to perceive it in whatever idiom it might be described—Western,
Eastern—Islamic, Confucian or Buddhist, e.g.

It would then seem as if the mind were now able to float as it were round alk
the concepts man has ever given to the world, or round all the most familiar events
of one’s daily life, and perceive clearly that which can never be set forth in words.
We should then also quote the words (given in 2b., p. 223, in reference to satori—
enlightenment) “‘ I perceive of it that it is something, but what it is I cannot per-
ceive. Only meseems that, could I conceive it, I should comprehend all truth.”


§ 16. Further than this, to find that some of the statements in
the Canon are certainly erroneous, and that modern investigations
have placed us at an infinitely greater advantage, does not invalidate
the work as a whole, Its possibilities for suggesting thoughts of
real value to-day are more realized the more one reads ‘ between
the lines,” and the present treatise does not claim to exhaust them.


8 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


“ Tet not the authority of the writer offend thee, whether he be
of title or great learning, but let the love or pure truth entice thee to
read’ (a Kempis®, i. 5).

§ 17. Insight into eternal truths.—A person may (a) glimpse them, (5) under-
stand them moderately, (c) understand them fairly thoroughly. But in describing
them to another, he may explain them (i) imperfectly (no one can explain them
properly !), (ii) inadequately or incompletely, (iti) wrongly, because of (a) imperfect
education, (6) educational bias, (c) religious or anti-religious bias, (d) inherently
erroneous methods of thought, (e) restriction to logic. Such truths, again, may be
denied by persons being told of them, for because in their turn they misunderstand,
or understand only in part, either through careless attention, and (a) to (¢).

§ 18. Insight versus Intuitional Knowledge.—A note should here be made that
the term “ insight ’’ as used here bears a rather different meaning to that pertaining
to the term “ intuitive knowledge,’ which S. Thomas*® ascribes solely to the angelic
mind, and defines as “‘ the attainment of the truth of a thing at a single glance
without the aid of reasoning ”’ (liv; lv. 2; lviii.3, 4 ;** vol. 3, p. 51-87; Pegues,’s
p. 18). On the other hand this mode of perceiving truths need not be disallowed
a rudimentary commencement among the powers of the human soul, just as the
“brute ’’ mind must be allowed to contain rudiments of those high mental capacities
which characterize the human being. Throughout all orders of creation, the lower
are endowed with the scaffolding for the manifestation of successively more exalted
capacities of the higher.


III
THE BASIC DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ‘“‘ THE CANON ”
AND MODERN MEDICINE


The Canon treats of Modern Medicine consists of


I. Speculative ‘‘ Medicine.”
Certain fundamental principles
(Cosmology, psychology, meta-
physics)
II. Practical Medicine.
Medicine


A. Application of I to the study
of (i) health, (ii) disease (ten-
dency, predisposition, threshold
stage, declared disease, (iii) ces-
sation of life.


B. Actual treatment of ‘ disease ”’
by (i) regimen, (ii) drugs, (iii)
operative interference.


A. Principles of
Theory : The application of the
facts. of chemistry, physics,
anatomy, biology to the sys-
tematic description of innumer-
able ‘‘ diseases’ classified as
far as possible on the basis of
the microbic theory.
Symptomatology. Etiology.
Diagnosis.

B. Practice of Medicine.

(a) Laboratory work.

(6) Therapeutics, pharmacol-
ogy and dietetics.

(c) Surgery.

(2) Gynaecology and Obstetrics.

(e) State Medicine : Hygiene
in all its branches.

(f) Psychological Medicine:
Treatment of insanity.

(g) Legal medicine, etc.


SSS re Leeann ot


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 9


Modern medicine is based on the conception of the universe as
a conglomeration of dead matter out of which, by some unexplainable
process, life may become evolved in forms. To Avicenna the whole
of the universe is the manifestation of a universal principle of life,
acting through the instrumentality of forms. Or, again, in modern
medicine, the forms are the source of life ; to Avicenna they are the
product of life. Space itself is an aspect of the one life (Hartmann,
on Paracelsus, 78a, p. 217).

§ 19. In this way the difference between Avicenna’s conception
of “ principles,” and that of modern medicine is easily shown. To
the school-boy ‘“science’’ would consist of (a) ‘‘ bookwork,”
(6) laboratory work, which his teachers would insist is the basis of (a).
Similarly, the medical curriculum begins with lectures, though these
are more and more inclined to become laboratory demonstrations ;
and goes on to laboratory and hospital work.

§ 20. Inshort, Avicenna’s medicine, and all ancient medicine, is
intimately bound up with philosophy, to wit, that of human nature—
a philosophy which proves to be virtually identical with ‘“‘ modern
scholastic philosophy,” no doubt partly because the Quranic account
of the origin of Man tallies with the Christian.

§ 21. Modern Medicine, on the other hand, assuming the title
and rank of a positive science, emphatically discards and excludes
it. Hence we read: “the physiologist’ (said Burdon Sanderson)
“can pursue philosophy if he has a turn for it, but must understand
that the moment he enters the field of philosophy he leaves his tools
behind him ”’ ; or “‘ it is unfortunate that the limitations of scientific
thought were often ignored by men of science in their writings .
the result diverts those who know, but befogs the unsuspicious
reader who will probably put the blame on his intelligence’ (Ed.
Hughes ®°).

“According to Positivism, science cannot be as Aristotle
conceived it, the knowledge of things through their ultimate causes,
since material and formal causes are unknowable, final causes (are)
illusions, and efficient causes (are) simply invariable antecedents,
while metaphysics under any form is illegitimate ’’ (Sauvage,’, xii.
313). Or, expressed more boldly, ‘‘ philosophy ”’ is considered to be
the exact antithesis of the truth which modern medicine gives us,
and is therefore inherently inadmissible to medicine.

The ignorance which accounts for this attitude is only met by
insisting. on proper definitions of terms. The following apply here :
Philosophy is ‘‘ the science which is concerned with first causes and
principles ; it is the profound knowledge of the universal order, and
the duties which that order imposes on man (Mercier, Logique,
1904; de Wulf17: xii. 26). Again, philosophy is the true perception
and understanding of cause and effect.—Metaphysics is ‘that
portion of philosophy which treats of the most general and funda-
mental principles underlying all reality and all knowledge ” (Maher®®,
p. 520).—Psychology is ‘‘ the science which treats of the soul and its
Operations ’’—and, therefore, clearly, must be the real foundation of
Medicine. |


IO THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§ 22. It is in modern scholastic philosophy that the student
finds ample exposure of the fallacy in positivism and its cognates,
enabling him to detect the difference between false and true, expressed
with enough force of logic to satisfy the most meticulous. This
queen of all the sciences amply proves positivist science (including
Medicine) to be incomplete knowledge when taken alone. The
knowledge of movement or change must be supplemented by
mathematical and metaphysical view-points. (Cf. Mercier,°*, pp.
35, 36; and especially Wundt1’: xii. et 35). Such men as Albertus
Magnus and Roger Bacon were convinced of the necessity of linking
the sciences with philosophy?’ (xii. 38).

When medicine has in this way become ennobled it reaches
its highest degree of perfection, in that it penetrates to the very
depths of reality®® (p. 9), admitting this knowledge to need, even
then, a further complement to make it complete—namely, knowledge
in relation to God (‘‘ Christian wisdom ’’).


“ Sapientia est scientia que considerat causas primas et universales causas.
Sapientia causas primas omnium causarum considerat ”’ (In. Met. I., lect. 2). “ Ile qui
cognoscit causam altissimam simpliciter, que est Deus dicitur sapiens simpliciter,
in quantum per regulas divinas omnia potest judicare et ordinare’’ (Sum. Theol.
ILII. q. 45, art. i.c). ‘“‘ Non acquiritur studio humano, sed est deursum scendens
(ibid., ad 2). ‘‘Cum homo per res creatas Deum cognoscit, magis videtur hoc
pertinere ad scientiam, ad quam pertinet formaliter, quam ad sapientiam ad quam
pertinet materialiter : et e converso cum secundum res divinas judicamus de rebus
creatis, magis hoc ad sapientiam quam ad scientiam pertinet (7b. q. 9, a. 2, ad 3).


As St. Thomas®! said in his day, ‘“ they think that nothing exists
besides visible creatures’ (C.G., ii. 3, lp. 5) [N.B.—“‘ Creatures ”
are (@) animate, (4) inanimate] ; “‘ they think that things proceed not
by the divine will but by natural necessity’ (ib.). So even in those
days time and fortune were expended on researches which sound
philosophy would have shown to be inherently futile.


We may reflect for instance on the reiterated search for a location of the soul,
which the pioneer anatomists prosecuted, and also on the commonly repeated
announcement to successive students of anatomy that the pineal gland is now no
longer regarded as the site of the soul. There is the sub-conscious suggestion to the
student that scientific research has effectively disposed of the medieval belief in
the soul, whereas history only proves that the revolt against the precise teachings
of the Council of Trent** (1545-1563) necessarily came to naught. The very defini-
tion of “ soul’ which this council laid down makes a search for its location ludicrous.


IV


SPECIAL DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE CANON AND MODERN
MEDICINE


A. Conceptions known to Avicenna; not now recognized.


23, There are four main conceptions belonging to the Canon,
but not recognized by modern Medicine. To use S. Thomas’
words** ** (i, 32; art. 1; p. 270) they can be shown to be “ not


impossible’; that is, the discoveries of modern science do oz
abrogate them.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE ct


_ These conceptions are relative to (a) the nature of the human
being as a whole, (4) the constitution, (c) the “‘ breath,” (d) the
“elements.” Each of these is dealt with in some detail under the
corresponding sections of the Canon, but some of the salient points
are suitably referred to at this stage.

§ 24. (@) The conception of the nature of the human being as a
whole.—The varieties of views on this point which people in every
country and race exhibit both in conversation and in literature,
numerous though they are, are capable of classification under one of
three headings :

Gi) The frst—the Platonic view—regards the human being
as “‘ soul within a body,” while admitting “ soul ”’ to be indefinable,
and beyond the power of location. This view, widely supposed to be
“ Christian,” is well known as “‘ pagan”’ to students of folklore.

(ii) The second—the sczentific or rationalistic and modern view—
takes the physical body as the fundamental, seeing in it the outcome
of known or at least knowable forces. The facts of anatomy,
physiology, etc., convey their own inevitable conclusions. This
view makes its immediate appeal. From the first lesson the pupil
is able to feel a grasp of some tangible knowledge, whereas the
alternative third view entails a long study before the intricacies of
abstract philosophy can be mastered. The difference between
experience and “ poring over books”’ is only too obvious. The
possibility of interweaving the two methods is not on the horizon.
In its answer to “ religion,’’ this scientific view has no objection to raise to
its votaries retaining a private belief in the Platonic view, if their temperament


demands it. But this “ pious belief’’ must not be allowed to vitiate procedure
when scientific research is undertaken.


_ This modern conception regards the body as an aggregate of
“ spare parts ”’ which are “‘ assembled ”’ well, or ill ; can be repaired,
or remedied. According as the assembling is good or bad, and
according to the “fuel,” so is there health, or susceptibility to
infection by organisms. The kind of assembling is a matter partly
heredity and partly of environment.


The following remarks in a review on a recent article in Science—by Lillie—
may be quoted from the Times, Oct. 24th, 1927, p. 19. They present the idea in
technical language :—

“ Physiology finds the organism to be a nexus of physicochemical determina-
tion; differing only from non-living systems in its complexity. . . . Speaking of
freewill, one argument against ‘indeterminism ’ is that ‘ the energy balance sheet
of a man shows us there is no creation of energy within the body.’ To assume
will-power ‘ we conflict with Newton’s first law.’ . . . The ultramicroscope alone
suggests indeterminism, and even this may be only because we do not know enough
about Brownian movement, etc, Protoplasm is a ‘ heterogeneous system.’ In
heredity submicroscopical units determine the details of inheritance—but an event
originating in an ultramicroscopic particle can spread to the whole cell or organism.
On this view, a human action appearing entirely spontaneous and voluntary to the
actor and spectator would exhibit itself as a succession of mechanically determined
events capable of study and prediction in all its microscopic details. But traced
inwards it would ultimately resolve itself into certain ultramicroscopic events in
the interior of the nerve-cell.’”” But ‘‘ even the freedom of the ultramicroscopic
particle may be no more than a subtler kind of determinism beyond the reach of
present analysis.” §64 contradicts these remarks.

It may be noted, in passing, that the doctrine of vitalism is really only another
form of rationalism, as will appear when the scholastic doctrine is duly investigated.


12 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§2s. The third view—scholastic, Thomistic—presented by
modern scholastic philosophy, has the Aristotelian basis. Its
soundness is best appreciated by careful study prolonged until the pre-
valent inadequate and illogical conceptions of the universe are clearly
exposed. Briefly, the view is expressed in the words : “ the human
being is a material body vivified by a life-principle, the two together
constituting the rational human soul.”” As S. Thomas *4 says: “‘It is
not my soul that thinks, or my body that eats, but ‘I’ that do both”
(p. 25). In other words, again: The body and “ soul” form one
complete whole—one “‘ single being’’® (p. 53); °° (p. 302, 306).

It is this view which underlies the whole Canon, and is expounded
in connection with the corresponding parts of the text. It is this
view that makes the ancient work fall in line with the most “‘ modern.”
Its consequences are far-reaching. The externa! configuration of the
body, including the physiognomy, is a reflection of the functional
capacity of the internal organs and general make-up of the individual.
The character, talents, physical form, shape of individual features,
general development, and indeed every detail of the physique, length
of limbs, of fingers, cutaneous markings, contour of the eyes and
ears, etc., are all part and parcel with the functional conformations
of the viscera, and the mental characters ; a study of the visible will
inform of the nature of the internal conformation. (Cf. 107)


§ 26. The idea that from a study of external features and general habit one
should deduce conclusions as to functional capacities* is generally opposed by
academic Medicine.; as is voiced by F. v. Miller (1921, quoted by Kolle, Mitt.
Ggeb. Med., 1926, 40, 371) when he says “‘ we must steadfastly avoid drawing any
far-reaching conclusions about the functional behaviour of the organism from a
study of the external characters of the body.”

While it may be urged that the external features are usually misread, it may
also be admitted that even the customary “‘ physical examination” of a patient
does not yield uniform results when practised, as it necessarily is, by persons of
varying talent. Surely, the remedy is to exert greater care. We may, for instance,
observe how a skilled weaver will detect the site of a flaw in the “set-up”’ of a
So py a mere glance, whereas a novice discovers it only after laborious search.

e § 163.

On the other hand, the biochemical tests for functional capacity of organs—
so much the vogue, and so much exploited, and so duly impressive on patients
and their friends—are clearly inadequate in the light of the scholastic doctrine.
It is true that the attempt to force the intangible to yield to mathematical formule,
rules, and weights and measures (as, for instance, in blood-cholesterol analyses)
is Sincere enough, to judge by the time, energy and money expended so freely.
But what is to be the verdict once it is realized that the anatomical organs are not
functionally discrete or amenable to distinctive “ specific ’’ tests? A just appreci-
ation of the intimacy of relation inherent in the conception of the human being
insisted on here suffices to show the futility of those labours and studies whether
made upon man or upon the various orders of animals taken instead.


More than this, there is the conception that the internal organs
belong to one another beyond the anatomical limits. The heart, to
anatomy, 1s a circumscribed organ ; to Avicenna it is part of a force
occupying the whole body. ‘“ Man’s heart is both corporeal and
incorporeal as (Chu Hsi!®, i. p. 162). So, again, the liver is simply
a visible portion of a “liver? whose operation pervades the whole


* The relation between characte d physi Stee 5 :
the Chinese 450 B.c. (Cf. Wieger.) r and physique was scientifically studied by


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 13


body.* Or, to combine modern with ancient knowledge, the physical
heart, the arterial vessels, and the sympathetic nervous system,
including the connections between this and the sensorium and that
which corresponds to the “ sensitive soul ’’ in its emotional aspect,
for instance—all this is one great composite ; and its state is also
reflected in many subtle indications which offer themselves to the keen
observer of the patient.


The modern research on diseases of the brain and insanity is based on the
assumption that the material brain is the source of all nervous activities, which
are correlated with definite biochemical, physicochemical and even structural
changes in brain substance. Mental disease is the outcome of similar changes.
The Platonists would consider mental disease as apart from the “‘soul.’’ The
Thomistic view leads to much more subtle conclusions, capable of lasting influence.


(6) The doctrine of “ the constitution.”

§27. The term “constitution” conveys different ideas to
different minds. The laity regard the term as synonymous with
“temperament ’”’ or ‘‘ make-up,’’ at least in part, and consider a
description of a patient as having a nervous temperament, a delicate
constitution, etc., quite adequate. With this goes the conviction
among the lay that the medical curriculum leaves the graduate fully
able to “ understand his constitution’ whereas in actual fact the
subject is never discussed. The study of physique is quite superficial,
and is admittedly made solely to establish a diagnosis of ‘specific
“‘ diseases.’’ Hence the term, in conversation, is actually nothing
more than platitudes.

To modern medicine, regarding the body as corporeal, constitu-
tion is a matter of physique, resistance to disease, mode of reaction
to various stimuli (including psychic stimuli). Classifications of
varieties of constitution on this basis are afforded by various writers
in all countries—e.g., a classification into athletic, leptosomic and
dysplastic ; into arthritic, endocrine, lymphatic, asthenic, infantilistic,
chlorotic, etc. (Current medical journals).

In the Canon, Avicenna establishes ‘“‘ constitution ’’ in terms of
humours, temperaments (hot, cold, dry, moist) and “ elements ”’
(whose proportions are set for every individual.—47). If we go
further, and apply to this term the method which Rumi 3” (p. 169), the
great Persian sage demanded of students of the Quran, we shall not
regard a patient’s constitution as understood until we have studied
the matter much more intimately.


’


“ Know the words of the Koran are simple,
But within the outward sense is an inner secret one.
Beneath that secret meaning is a third,
Whereat the highest wit is dumbfounded.
The fourth meaning has been seen by none
Save God, the Incomparable and All-sufficient.
Thus they go on, even to seven meanings, one by one,
According to the saying of the Prophet, without doubt.”


* Cf. Paracelsus, de viribus membrorum (Hartmann, p. 219).—Moreover,
each individual ‘“‘is a member of the great organism of the world’”’. . . “not
a separate being isolated from Nature.’ (Ib. p. 51). Individual: human world :
one leucocyte : one human being.


14 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


‘“‘T know,” said Tawaddud, the lady most learned, ‘‘ the sublime
Koran by heart and have read it according to the seven, the ten,
and the fourteen modes ” (438th Arabian night).

Therefore, to draw a lesson for our study out of these indications,
we shall see that the aim in view is to formulate a person’s constitu-
tion out of a number of components, none of which must be omitted
from the series. ‘To express the whole picture many modern aspects
must be studied—histological, biochemical, psychological, without
neglecting factors (metaphysical, etc.) accepted by the ancients. but
almost forgotten to-day. For instance, the past events in the
ancestral history of the patient must be included, and all the factors
coming into play even from the time of quickening may not be over-
looked.

The insight afforded by the true conception of the nature of the
human being in this way leads us on to an understanding of
individual constitutions which should be amply satisfactory.


(c) The doctrine of “ the breath.”


§ 28. This subject is discussed in the course of the text (§ 136).
The term “ breath’ found in Eastern writings is taken as the exact
equivalent of Avicenna’s conception, and is understood properly
only when the “ elements ”’ are understood (see § 73).

Equivalent terms: life-principle ; hayat ; Sam ; the breath
of life; virtus vitalis; spiritus; vitality; Hu (in Persian mys-
ticism*) ; Ch’i ${ ; nafas (also used for “ soul,” “ individuality ’’).

It may be conceded that many of these words are used
synonymously with much confusion in consequence. Thus the old
doctrine of vitalism, supported by vitalists, is not the antithesis of,
but strictly speaking, another form of rationalism. In Paracelsus
we read “ the first matter of the elements is nothing else than life. ...
The soul of the elements is the life of all created things. . . . There is
again a difference between the soul and the life. Fire if it lives,
burns. But if it be in its soul, that is, in its element, it lacks all
power of burning ”’ (Opera ii. 264). Errors of this kind are avoided
by a careful study of the scholastic philosophy.


(d) The doctrine of ‘ the elements.”


§29. This is fully entered into at the end of the e i i
RC aC Pe ogy of the corresponding chapter in

The conception of the universe in terms of four, or five, elements has been
found among all peoples. To argue in favour of the doctrine almost compels an
attempt at harmonization of its different forms (Aristotelian, Indian, Persian,
Chinese, forinstance). Suppose a number of people each set out to paint one certain
landscape ; that each is of different nationality ; that each is restricted to a certain
limited number of pigments ; that each is a true artist. The final picture presented
by each willbe striking and inspiring. But it would be out of place to begin and com-
pare stick with stick and stone with stone. If we understand, we shall learn—from
each. The modern futurist may excite ridicule in his attempts to depict a landscape
in terms of psychic forces, which he claims to discern, but to the mind of a student


CO TREN what Chinese, I, is not the exact equivalent, through being used more
for the act of expiration—unless there is a mystical sense attached to the term.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 1s


his work would have a different effect. These varying forms of one conception
are amenable to intelligent understanding. (Cf. note to 20.)

§ 30. Carus'§ (p. 34) writes: ‘‘ An explanation of the universe which derives
all distinctions between things, conditions, relations, etc., from differences of mixture
must have appeared very plausible to the ancient sages . . . even to-day Western
scientists of reputation attempt to explain the universe as a congeries of force-
centres, acting either by attraction or repulsion in analogy to positive and negative
electricity. On the ground of this fact the educated Chinese insist with more than
a mere semblance of truth that the underlying idea of the Chinese world-conception
is fully borne out and justified by the results of Western science.’’ Elsewhere the
intimacy, in fact unity, between this philosophy and everyday life (Forke,** pp.
239, 269) is referred to as the justification for so often quoting Chinese thought in
expounding Avicenna.


B. Conceptions known to modern medicine ; but not to Avicenna.


§ 31. Among the most important of these are:

(a) the anatomy of the circulation of the blood. (6) the rate of
that circulation. (¢c) The details found in Quain’s anatomy; the
microscopic anatomy; such complexities as form the theme of
Bayliss’ Physiology. These details might be expressed as those of
“the mechanics of the body.” (d@) Interactions in the tissues :
chemical and cellular metabolism. (e) In pathology—the microbic
theory ; the endless and always increasing number of “‘ diseases ”’ ;
the laboratory diagnosis of dysfunction of organs ; (albuminuria was,
of course, unknown) ; symptoms as evidences of disordered reflexes.
(f) In treatment: the use of antisera and specific anti-substances of
organisms ; hypodermic medication ; complex drug treatment has
passed out of vogue. Surgery.

§ 32. Considerations which suggest that these instances of
ignorance are not as grave as is supposed, and do not invalidate the
standing of ancient medicine in regard to actual practice :—

Ad (a). Circulation of a kind was propounded in the case of
the “‘ breath,” the elements, and the body-fluids, though not along
anatomical channels. The Chinese recognized a process of “‘ revolu-
tion,’’ a succession of cyclical changes, an ebb and flow. Indeed, it
is suggested in Duhalde?® (p. 184) that the Chinese knew of the
circulation of the blood itself some hundred years B.C.


Wieger (p.309, on Su-Wén), discussing whether the Chinese knew of the cir-
culation of the blood twenty centuries before Harvey or not, decides truly that
“their knowledge of the circulation of the blood in the human microcosm was
intuitive, not experimental, conjectured in imitation of the circulation of the vital
principle in the universal microcosm, in which they believed. They guessed the
fact, and they never verified it. . . . During more than twenty centuries, the how
of the guessed circulation never worried their mind. The yin-yang circulates
in a ring, the five agents do the same, the blood the same. Thatisall.. .’’*


Ad (6). The rapidity of the changes was certainly not realized.
The Chinese apparently believed that the circulation was completed
only fifty times in one day (there is however room for fallacious
translation).


Lest there should be over-satisfaction with ourselves, it may be suggested
that the rapidity of the movement of the lymph was not realized before about 1908,


* But if a doctrine which is common to Taoism and esotericism (that of micro-
: ; Mecca ib
cosm and macrocosm) is allowed to be valid, the words " intuitive knowledge
cannot be made synonymous with “ conjecture, guess.


16 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


and is perhaps not fully realized by many practitioners to-day ; the rapidity of
' passage of food-materials down the small intestine was not known fillthe advent
of the “ bismuth” meal. The circulation of bacteria (cf. Arch. Exp. Med., 1923, 33)
is not realised ; the existence of a circulation of nerve-impulses is not yet admitted.


Ad (c). The capillaries of the liver are referred to in 88;
in the body in general in 85. True, what Avicenna calls capillaries
are larger than those we see with the microscope. But he knew that
the blood passes from large trunks into the liver, traverses “ capil-
laries ” in the liver, and re-emerges by large trunks.

Ad (d). Interactions in the tissues were conceived of as
taking place with an ebb and a flow (which is correct); lymph
exudes. into the tissue-spaces. Interactions take a considerable
time (true). Digestion goes on within the blood-vessels in various
parts of the body. .

Ad (e). “Fermentation”? was the counterpart of bacterial
growth as we knowit. The term is used sufficiently specifically in the
text (e.g. 78, 79). Diseases were regarded chiefly as parts of a
process; and there were but few processes (which is quite true:
nine processes: see § 172). Urinalysis was carried out in order to
assess the functional state of the liver (605).

§ 33. Ad(f). Modern medicine claims its title to superiority
by its successes, and judges the medicine of the past by its failures.*
But what would the judgment be if this method were reversed ?
Suppose we accepted the verdict of those among the laity—not so few
—who are dissatisfied with their experiences of orthodox medicine
and have turned to the ‘‘ unqualified ” of one kind or another ? or
those of other countries who prefer their native doctors still ? or even
those Europeans who have experienced triumphant success from
native doctors, after modern methods had failed? After all, the
ancient medicine is still practised from Cairo to Calcutta, and a
medicine not very different holds sway through the Far East. The
late Sir Charles Pardy Lukis (Ind. Med. Services) is quoted as
saying “ Many of the empirical methods of treatment adopted by
hakims are of the greatest value, and there is no doubt whatever
that their ancestors, ages ago, knew many things which are nowadays
being brought forward as new discoveries (Ayurveda, 1924, 2, i. 1).

_ Drug-treatment.—The complexity of prescriptions of former
times has given place to simple and short ones, and the tendency is
to discard them altogether... But the reasons for the ancient method
are given in the Canon, and Avicenna’s choice of remedies depended
on a careful consideration of the constitution of the remedies, as well
as of the patient and his idiosyncrasies. Thus, certain ingredients
would be allowed or disallowed in a given standard confection
according to the nature of the particular patient. ‘‘ The presence
or absence, and the amount, of nardus, ginger, fennel-seed, anise,

* Tn his address, ‘“ Medicine and the Church,” already referred to, Sir Farquhar
Buzzard'* says, “ During more than 5,000 years the claim of those who practised
medicine was to cure their patients of disease . .. we have gradually realized that no
claim of that kind can’ be maintained . . . we make no claim to cure, either during


the heat of battle or after victory has been won, should that be the result.”” This
modest standpoint ’’ can surely hardly be said to be really general ?


THE CANON OF MEDICINE Is


piper, cyperus rotundus, must be according to the season, and the
age of the patient” 8° (p. 91).

§ 34. Hartmann?’ (Chinesische Heilmethoden, Miinch, Med.
Woch., 1927, June 3rd, 935) describes the accuracy of native
diagnosis (from the pulse. § 204) as ‘‘ disconcerting,’ * and describes
certain forms of treatment (auto-chemotherapy, Bier treatment) as
being practised in a manner only different in outward appearance
from the technique which we pride ourselves as being absolutely the
““Jatest.” ‘“ No wonder,” he says, ‘‘ that the Chinese are proud of
their art, considering how long they have known that which we have
only recently discovered.’’+

§ 35. The cynical mind cannot be upheld which passes off the
reputed successes during the Middle Ages as coincidences, and over-
looks the modern crowded out-patient departments as evidences of the
limitations of our current therapy and theory ; nor can the sceptic
be much noticed who denies miraculous cures rather than admit
scientific theories to be in any sense inadequate.

§ 36. Nevertheless, it is obvious that the principles of the Canon
could not be taught over a hospital bed or in the out-patient depart-
ment. It is true that they cannot cater for the wholesale require-
ments of the hospital or clinic. It should be clear to the candid that
our modern technique does not avail for 100 per cent. of cases ; for
those who do not benefit at least an experiment with other systems
of treatment should not be denied. If the fault is laid at the feet of
over-strenuous routine work, the more leisured may yet find an
advantage in a system which puts the details of a person’s constitution
in all its aspects into the forefront, where there is no question of
teaching it either to classes or even to possibly indifferent individuals.
The words of Paracelsus may be recalled, where he says: ‘the
doctor who loves his art does not undertake twenty cases but five,
knowing that no one person can conscientiously treat more than a
certain number. No one person could ever make the whole world
sound,”

C. Knowledge common to Avicenna and Modern Medicine.

§ 37. A perusal of the text of the Canon will show many
passages which apply quite well, without explanation, in these days.
Thus, the following may be specified: the close relation between
emotions and physiological states (shown to be even closer than
modern research has realized).—The classification of people into
sanguine, phlegmatic, bilious, saturnine, frigid, ‘‘hot.’—The
physiology of sleep, and how posture may remedy insomnia.—


* The same wonder at their practice is recorded in A.D, 1253, when the friar
William of Rubuck visited their country.

+ These words can be fully endorsed, if only from a study of the Chinese classic
on the pulse** (80 volumes), discussed under the heading of ‘‘ The Pulse ”’ in the
present treatise (§ 208). Among other ancient Chinese medical works (first seen by
the present writer in the very extensive collection in the Library of M'Gill University,
Montreal) reference may be made to the astonishing accuracy of representations
of medicinal and other plants, and the almost dramatic representations of various
diseased states in the I tsung chin ch’un by Hung Chou—extant in Avicenna’s time.
This work was reprinted between 1904 and 1924, and an older edition is in the
Library of the School of Oriental Studies (London Institution). A


18 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Choice of location for dwellings.—The choice of a good drinking-
water.—Health resorts. Climatic influences on health and illness—
Plethoric maladies.—Dietetics.—Hydrotherapy.—Regiminal treat-
ment.—The uses of counter-irritation.—Bier treatment.—The intro-
duction of remedies into the urethra.—The use of vaginal tampons.—
The use of anesthetics by the mouth (medicated wines: scopola-
mine !).—Testing the strength of a drug by animal experiment
(Vol. 5).—The treatment of insanity by malaria (228).—The following
paragraphs are interesting among many others: 106, 115, 255.

No doubt the great difference between the ancient and modern
is one of outlook, which accounts for the difference of topic. That
which appeared interesting and even important in those days is
passed over by modern physiology and pathology. Each century
has its own interests. The mistake made is to suppose that the older


interests were ‘‘ wrong,” “‘ incorrect,” ‘‘ useless” ; and to label them
as “ out of date.”’ True, fashions of all kinds come to be out of date,
but the epithets “right,” “ wrong” do not apply. The more


carefully we observe modern science the more evident does it become
that just its terminology and subject of conversation is different.
Things are seen from new angles, and things only surmised at then are
amenable to tangible description now.

In fact, there occur moments, even at this day, when suggestive
thoughts might be drawn from the Canon, to help in studying the
individual, tedious, or baffling case, especially where the practice is
far distant from the laboratories and appliances of modern medicine.


V
OF INTEREST TO THE SCHOLAR.


§ 38. The present translation is based on the Latin versions
published at Venice in 1608 and 1595, supported by a study of the
Arabic edition printed at Rome in 1593 and the Bulaq edition.

It is true that as E. G. Browne® (p. 34) pointed out, ‘‘ the Latin
Qanun swarms with barbarous words which are not merely tran-
scriptions, but in many cases almost unrecognisable mistranscriptions
of Arabic originals,” and that Hirschberg and Lippert®® regard
the Latin as almost unintelligible, though they admit the ‘‘ slavish
adherence”’ of the Latin to the Arabic. Campbell!? (p. 139)
states that there was a “‘ society of translators’? at Toledo, about
1130 A.D., “whose method of translating from Arabic to Latin
was to put the Latin equivalent over the Arabic words, ° dis-
regarding the sense of the original.” It is true that in many passages
the obscurity is similar to the effect which would result if one were at
this day to render idiomatic French word for word into English.

___ It is important to point out that the Latin of Volume I is very
different from that of Vols. III-V; so different that the translation
must have been the work of different persons. While the criticisms
are justified with regard to these three volumes, they do not apply to


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 19


the first, whose Latin is very close to the Arabic, and hardly to be
improved. The difficulty really is that the Arabic itself is so con-
densed that the meaning can only be clearly represented in English
by the use of many more words, whether to help out the meaning
itself, or to make a presentable reading.

__ It may well be said, as did E. G. Browne® (p. 26, 27): ‘‘ he who
judges Arabian Medicine only by the Latin translation will inevitably
under-value it and do it a great injustice. Indeed it is difficult to
resist the conclusion that many passages in the Latin version of the
Qanun of Avicenna were misunderstood or not understood at all by
the translator, and consequently can never have conveyed a clear idea
to the reader.”

§ 39. The following aids to clearness have been utilized. (a)
The study of Avicenna’s other works, and of contemporary philo-
sophical writings, in the existing translations. (6) The study of
various Latin terms as understood by modern scholastic philosophy
in its exposition of the medizval nomenclature. (c) The use of
modern terms when there is no reasonable doubt of their referring to
the same idea, though the literal term in the Latin is obsolete. The
careful study of the original Arabic has here been of special
importance, for words in the Latin version, which are evidently
technical there, become merely colloquial when translated into
English, whereas in the Arabic version, such words at once take on
their proper character in the Arabic-English and Persian-English
dictionaries. (d@) The use of tabulation of the matter. There are
instances where this proves possible without omitting even a single
Arabic word. (e) The use of paraphrase for certain passages.
These are marked (f). A certain freedom of rendering has been
inevitable in view of the importance of bringing the fu// meaning of
the text to the reader’s notice without subjecting him to the need of
reflecting deeply on passage after passage—as is requisite with the
original Arabic.*


VI


§ 40. The main purpose of this treatise will now be seen to
centre in the idea that in the ancient philosophy there is material
capable of useful application to-day. The selection of the work of
Avicenna is not intended to provide an apologium for that one
author, but is specially appropriate for these reasons: (1) his
acknowledged excellence; (ii) his greater accessibility among
medizval medical writings; (ii) a certain indefinable charm of
expression peculiar to himself. But above all, (iv) the fact that his
central theme is a conception of the nature of the human being really
identical with that of Thomistic philosophy, and in these days
specially stressed and developed by “ modern scholastic philosophy.”
As these are related, so might Avicenna be related to a modern


* To have dealt with the work from the point of literature would have entailed
giving the preference to safeguarding against likely criticisms at the hands of pure
scholarship.


20 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


scholastic medicine, which would aim at reasons for health and ill-
health far deeper than those given by the microbic and cognate
theories.

With Mercier®* ‘‘ we do not regard the Thomistic philosophy
. . . as a boundary which sets limits to personal activity of thought
. . . but make use of his” (in this case, Avicenna’s) “ teaching as
a starting-point from which we may go further afield”’ (footnote,


1);

3 ith Maher 5° we “. . . resuscitate and ” (apply to Medicine)
““ . . a psychology that has already survived four and twenty
centuries, and has had more influence on human thought and human
language than all other psychologies together. My desire, however,
has been not merely to expound, but to expand this old system . . .
to make clear to the student of modern thought that this ancient
psychology ” (and Medicine) ‘“‘is not so absurd, nor these old
thinkers as foolish, as current caricatures of their teaching would lead
one to imagine. . . . To trespass (on the soul) . . . is assumed by
(many writers) to be the gravest of professional delinquencies.”’

§ 41. Therefore Avicenna is allowed once more to present his
theme. To the questions we are constrained to ask of him, we find
our answers (1) in his other writings ; (2) in contemporary literature ;
(3) in the writings of modern Eastern thinkers ; (4) in the works of
S. Thomas; (5) in modern scholastic philosophy. If some truths
are crudely expressed or perhaps faultily explained, it is our privilege
to re-express and re-explain with those aids.

§ 42. Those who may have failed to identify one single Truth
under different garbs are not obliged to accord these garbs an un-
friendly reception upon the stage of our modern world. To recall a
favourite Indian metaphor, the danseuse has so robed herself, and
displays such diversities of art that under the ever-changing coloured
beams of light it is difficult to believe there can be only one and the
same artiste before us. Should it prove impossible to verify this, at
least the very exhibition of the art should serve so to refresh that we
can resume our work and ambitions with an added zest—now
confident that the future realization of our desires is not so intangible
as at first appeared.


“T deemed life was tranquillity and rest,
I find it but a never-ending quest ;
And I, who sat in quietude and peace,
Toil on a journey that shall never cease.’ (Shamshad.?*?)


“Why should the Cosmos turn its wheel of worlds
If not to search for Thee eternally ?
Why should the tireless Sun arise each morn
If not to look for Thee ?” (Zauq.*)


“ How can I win that Hidden One Who sits within the secret place,
For even in my very dreams She wears the veil upon Her face.” (Jurat.**)


“ For long, throughout the world, I sought for Thee,
Through weary years and ages of unrest ;
At last I found Thee hidden in my arms
Within my breast! ”’ (Zauq.**)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 21


§ 43. That which is spread before us, beneath the unceasing
surge and change of the crowded life of the thoroughfares of great
cities, as well as beneath the panorama of Nature herself, was surely
understood by those who insisted “‘ there is no second Cause,” and by
Chu Hsi1# in saying ‘‘ the innumerable laws (of Nature) all proceed
from one source” (p. 137). In this the thought is not pietistically of a
Creator, but of a living Reality met (passively or receptively) or
encountered (actively or contestingly) by us all at all times. That
Reality must be understood before we handle the problem of our
patient with real efficacy.

§ 44. In the intention of this work, then, there comes into
consideration that greater Art of Medicine—not an ethical Hippo-
cratic ideal, but something of the divine—an Art as real to Avicenna,
philosopher, poet, musician, the worker among the great and the
small, aware of the dramatic in Life, as it should be to us. So we
step out of the world of the modern critic, the scholar, and the medical
historian, indeed of modern medicine itself, into one in which we
stand, as it were, hand in hand, with the great Master of the East—
almost with his very eyes gazing upon and scrutinising this ever open
book of Life of ours—divested of the false notions of “* progress ” and
“‘time.”’ His language is thus no longer alien—and, incidentally,
he lives again !


Introductory Words


N the first place we render thanks to Allah, for
the very excellence of the order of His creation,
and the abundance of His benefits. His
mercies are upon all the prophets.
» SS 2. In the next place, I may say that it
ALY is at the request of one of my very special
friends,* one whom I feel most bound to
consider, that I prepare this book on Medicine, setting
forth its general and particular laws to the full extent
necessary, and yet with apt brevity.

8. My plan is to deal with the general aspects of each of
the two divisions of medicine—the speculative and the practical.
Then I shall treat of the general principles applicable to the
diagnosis of the properties of the simples, following this with a
detailed account of them. ‘Then I shall take up the disorders
which befall each individual member, beginning with an account
of its anatomy, and that of its auxiliary. The anatomy of the
several members and their auxiliaries is dealt with in the first
book. Having completed the account of the anatomy, I shall
show how the health of the member is to be maintained.

4, This subject being completed, I proceed to a general
discourse about general diseases—their causes, the signs by
which they are recognized, and the modes of treatment. After
this, I pass on to the special diseases and will point out in as
many cases as possible—(i) the general diagnosis of their
characters, causes and signs, (ii) the special diagnostic features,


* Was it Al-Jiizjani ? (cf. E. G. Browne,’ p. 157).

The portrait in the heading reproduces a painting in oils hanging in an ante-
hall of the Seville University.

The designs in this and many other headings through this work are adapted
from or copied from, Arabic and Persian sources. For others, taken from manu-
scripts, etc., the author is indebted to the kindness of Messrs. Luzac & Co. Initial
letters are taken from the 1608 edition in Latin, the 1523 edition of Haly Abbas,
and various medieval illuminated books.


22


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 24


(i1) the general rules of treatment, (iv) the special methods of
treatment by (a) simples, (2) compounded medicines.

I include specially designed tables under the subject of
simples to enable you to survey the facts rapidly as to the adju-
vants for treating disease by simples.

Compounded medicines, and their adjuvants, and how to
mix them I have deemed it best to consider separately in a
“Formulary.” This it is my intention to compose after the
special subjects are dealt with. Disorders not confined to one
member are described in this book ; the cosmetics are spoken
of ; and the knowledge set forth in previous books is assumed.
Allah helping me to complete this volume, the formulary will
be added to it.

5. Every follower of my teachings who wishes to use
them profitably should memorize most of this work, even though
he do not quite understand it all.

It is my intention to prepare further volumes if Allah
should prolong my life still further, and if circumstances prove
propitious.

SCHEME OF CONTENTS


Book I. General matters relative to the science of medicine.
1. The definition and scope of medicine. Health.
2. The classification of diseases ; their general causes and
symptoms.
_ 3. The preservation of health and regiminal treatment.
4. The classification of the modes of treatment in general.
Book II. Materia medica.
Book III. Special “* pathology ” (Medical and Surgical).
Book IV. Special diseases involving more than one member.
‘The cosmetic art.


Book V. Formulary.


CONTENTS OF BOOK I*


ParT I comprises six theses :—

The definition of medicine. The topics of medicine.
2. The imponderable elements.

3. The temperaments and constitutions.

4. The fluids of the body, and how they arise.

5

6


Hw


The members (bones, muscles, nerves, arteries, veins) (= tissues and
organs).
The faculties of the body: vegetative, sensitive, vital. The power of
locomotion. The functions and operations of the body.
PART 2 comprises three theses :—
1. Ill-health :
(a) Causes, symptoms.
(b) States of the body; types of disease,
(c) Disorders of configuration.


* The Latin text is abridged here.


24 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(d) Loss of continuity.
) Diseases of the composition.
) Disfigurements.
) The phases or cyles of disease.
2. The causes of disease :
(a) Atmospheric, seasonal, winds, localities; the sun.
(b) Vegetative functions.
(c) Food and drink.
(d) Other factors.
(ec) Enumeration of the causes of each of the corporeal conditions.
3. The evidences of ill-health in (a) the pulse, (b) the urine, (c) the feces.
Part 3 comprises five theses :—
zt. Nutrition. Regimen from birth to childhood.
. 2, Regimen from childhood to old age; Exercise, gymnastics, bathing,
dietetics, fatigue.
3. Regimen for the aged.
4. Regimen appropriate to the various constitutions and habits of body.
5. Seasons.
An epitome giving the regimen in special circumstances of life.
Part 4. The treatment of disease.
(There are 263 chapters in all.)


K


a ft iy ie ns
N Git py
iS | Th \ Se


f Pr, ND Ty TCNGD Alam
A adallecs COrak


“In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Clement.”


Ay ‘\
rer ay fll


STO ae ty y my) / yy \" sa
Pg a ne (|
Ne” amt” aN Oi s
ily = A Unt \


BOOK I


““ Whoever has mastered the first book of the Qanun, to him nothing
will be hidden of the general and fundamental principles of medicine.””—
Chahar Magala.’


Part J


ot es ho nal


1. Tue Derinition oF “ Mepicine”’


EDICINE (6) is the science by which we
learn, (a) the various states of the human
body, (i) in health, (i1) when not in health,
(2) the means by which, (1) health is likely
to be lost, and (ii) when lost, is likely
to be restored to health. In other words,
it is the art whereby health [the beauty of
the body—long hair, clear complexion,

fragrance and form (Chahar Maqala)] is conserved and

the art whereby it is restored, after being lost.

7. Although some divide “medicine” into a
speculative (theoretical) and a practical (applied) part, you
have assumed that it is wholly speculative ‘ because ”
you say “‘ it is pure science.” But truly every science has
both a speculative and a practical aspect. Philosophy
has a speculative and a practical side. So has medicine.
The difference between the two need be explained only
in the case of medicine. ‘Thus—


25


26 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


When, in regard to medicine, we say that practice proceeds
from theory, we do not mean that there is one division of
medicine by which we know, and another, distinct therefrom,
by which we act. We mean that these two aspects belong
together—one deals with the basic principles of knowledge ; the
other with the mode of operation of these principles (within the
body). The former is theory ; the latter is applied knowledge.

8. ‘Theory ” of medicine is that which, when mastered,
gives us a certain kind of knowledge, apart from any question
of treatment. Thus we say that “ there are three forms of fever
and nine constitutions.”

9, ‘Practice’? of medicine is not the work which the
physician carries out, but is that branch of medical knowledge
which, when acquired, enables one to form an opinion upon
which to base the proper plan of treatment. Thus it is said :
‘for inflammatory foci, the first agents to employ are infrigi-
dants, inspissants, and repellants ; then we temper these with
mollificants ; and, finally, when the process is subsiding,
resolvent mollificants will accomplish the rest. But if the
diseased focus contains matter which depends for its expulsion
on the integrity of the principal members, such treatment is
not applicable. Here the theory guides to an opinion, and the
opinion is the basis of treatment.

Once the purpose of each aspect of medicine is understood,
you can become skilled in both, even though there should
never come a call for you to exercise your knowledge.

10. Another thing—there is no need to assert that
“there are three states of the human body—sickness, health,
and a state which is neither health nor disease.” ‘The first two
cover everything. Careful consideration of the subject will
make it clear to the physician either that the threefold grouping
is unnecessary or that the group which we reject is unnecessary.

The first two states really cover everything. Careful
consideration will convince the physician that the third state is
dual—on the one hand an infirmity, and on the other a habit of
body [some ugliness of form, for instance] or a condition
which cannot be called strict health although the actions and
functions of the body are normal. One must not risk defining

health ” in an arbitrary fashion, and include in it a condition
which does not belong to it (p).
However we do not propose to argue this matter out,


because a disputation of that kind does not really further
medicine.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE ye


§45. Joannitius't, Hunayn ibn Ishaqal-‘Ibadi (E. G. Browne’, p. 147)—
defines Medicine as “‘ the science which informs us about the states of the human
body in health, or when it deviates from health ; how to retain health; how to
regain it.”

It is concerned with the following :—

1, That which is integral in the nature of the human being. The seven
“notes ’”’ of the healthy human being—four being material, essential,


and three formal. The four “‘ accidental’’ notes.

2. That which is apart from the nature of the human being.

3. The preternatural or abnormal, to which belong the diseases, their
causes and signs.


; § 46. THE SCOPE AND DEFINITION oF MEDICINE AS A PROFESSION; the
motives underlying.


I. MEDICINE AS AN EXTERIOR LIFE OR CAREER.

(a) The pursuit of a science. Medicine may be taken up as a science in itself,
for the sake of science—namely, “‘ that science which treats of the prevention or
cure of disease.” . . . This work entails the study of cognate sciences. Love of know-
ledge may be the chief motive ; that is, it is an intellectual pursuit ; though other
motives may be associated.

Many branches of medical science are separated off as distinct pursuits—exter-
nal, internal, state, psychological, pathological, legal, medicine, etc. As a Career,
it may be orthodox, that is obedient to the laws about practice, etc. ; in which case
it is also obedient solely to the microbic theory of disease—or unorthodox in various
degrees, through following different “‘ systems,’’ many of which are unauthorized,
and lead to some form of illegal practice.

If Medicine be regarded as concerned with the nature and constitution of man
(as a matter of the first importance in learning how to maintain health and alleviate
the distresses of ill-health), it is defined virtually in the same way as Avicenna, and
conforms also to modern scholastic philosophy. In this case the practitioner
would centre his attention on the individual, the patient himself, rather than on some
disease or infection, or over and above the disease or infection; the constitution
being primary in causation.

(6) The pursuit of a practical avt. The scientific aspect is here made subsidiary
to practical utility and success.

(i) Inits primary motive, this form of pursuit is of course the pursuit of a live-
lihood, and medicine is a form of commercial life. Its success would then be
measured by the bank balance. Admittedly this is seldom of the degree called
wealth. After a long life of hard work, such a one might grieve at his lack of success
did he not simultaneously have motive (ii). For these words then apply: “‘ The
only compensation which medicine offers to wealth is the spiritual pleasure of
sacrifice, that solemn sweetness which floods our being when we see the fruit of our
pain. The dependence of the soul on the Creator, brings our obligation to Him in
dealing with those under our care. This is what makes the weary dispensary clinic
blossom with a fullness of solace surpassing all expectations” (Flagg. **)

(ii) Pursuit primarily for humanitarian motives—the alleviation of suffering,
especially of physical pain; and of various disabilities. (The actual cure of disease
is often supposed to be within human scope, though an impartial judgment
must surely modify such an idea.) Preventive medicine is based on the same
motives.

§ 47. 2. MEDICINE AS AN INTERIOR Lire. Motives in the strict sense.

(a) “ Worldly motives ’’—pursuit as a means of satisfying a certain egoism or
ambition on the part of the doctor himself or of his relations ; pursuit as a trade or
business.

(b) As a form of devotion to Fellow-man. Philanthropy. (i) The relief of pain,
disability, suffering, etc. (ii) Socio-political motives—the efforts of legislation and
research : sanitary medicine; state medicine. . Industrial medicine. Organization
of ‘‘team’’ work both for research and the “ panel.’”’ The devotion is more to


28 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Man in the abstract, the individual not receiving personal contact, as he does
under (i). ;

(c) As a form of devotion to God. :

(i) The study of medicine may be made the means of studying God both
in Nature and in Man, and indeedin all Life, to perceive the purpose of God
therein.

(ii) The pursuit of practice (2) as a penance or means of mortification “in the
cell of your heart.” So, Avicenna the Sufi seeing through the Quran how daily life
is a disciplinary (Massignon,**ii. 515). (6) A means of reaching personal perfection.
“‘ Every soul is on the way to sanctification, after all, and God leads each according
to the means He selects as best ” (Tanquery,*‘ p. 976). This is the practitioner’s
“unitive way.” To achieve one single act in the whole life would be to achieve
the desire. (c) A means of realization of the love of God. ‘ The fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom ’”’ (Medicine as a “ religious life ’’ being capable of in-
clusion under this title)—culminating, not through personal will, but through
divine will, in a consciousness of the presence of God throughout every organ
and tissue, so that the state (‘‘ Hal’’) of recollection may finally become
actual. (d) A means of expiation. It is possible that expiation may be accom-
plished through the instrumentality of the physician, and without his being aware
of the fact. He may be the instrument whereby the patient is released from ill-
nesses arising from causes indicated in §199. On the other hand, he may fulfil
a deeper intention, especially when both skill and devotion are great, for in him
the devotion of God to man may become capable of expression,—he may become
the vehicle of God’s intention. As the master virtuoso is just one voice of God
heard from among the sea of musicians, and is only able actuaJly to utter one or two
of the voices of thousands of composers in his recital, so also is the utterance of that
expiation rare and restricted. One wave alone comes into prominence and then
breaks, but it is with thorough purpose, not at random. Even so, God, in that
wave, may wish to express Himself in that manner if only once and through one
individual in one generation.

§ 48. This, the highest aim of the pursuit of medicine as an art receives a dual
reward : the subtle intangible but far-reaching influence upon the patients, benefiting
them unknowingly ; the influence upon the physician by the spirit of divine love
whereby is imparted the gift of imsight into the realms of absolute realities—into that
which underlies deeply the appearances of this kaleidoscopic world; the gift of
ability to counsel the patients along the road of their own life, whereby those for whom
this counsel is intended shall proceed towards the common goal of Man. Neither
physician nor patient may be conscious of this gift. Yet the former may recognize
in the illnesses or persistent ill-health some decree, some divine purpose related to
that particular soul, which it may be for the physician to intervene or not, whether
he perceives the holy ground on which that patient momentarily stands or not.
No treatment will cure till the expiation is accomplished.

To the despondent and over-tired and weary practitioner, these motives reveal
the same life and vision of Paradise as belonged to the author of the Canon; once
viewed, its warmth and happiness may still accompany him as he resumes his daily
round, and thereafter his enforced departure upon the tasks of the day need evoke
no sigh of regret.

As Ibnu ’1-Farid (A.D. 1182-1235) reveals in his Tatiyya** (p. 180), there is the
power of lifting oneself into the sphere of the infinite and eternal, whereby the daily
task becomes transformed ‘‘ all breathing human passion far above.”

§ 49. In these days, mass-production of all kinds, and in great cities. In
those days, individual craftsmanship and artistry in secluded places. In these
days, the organization of modern medicine for wholesale achievement in all its
departments ; team-workers and the rush of the highways, with a certain scorn
for the isolated. In those days, a placid and leisurely solitude, in which could be
attained a quiet seership of Life.

In thought, we of this day may step aside from the rush of the highways and
lanes, and in our wayfaring find ourselves back in those times, meeting with a solitary
and forgotten seer, stay quietly awhile with him, and through him gain a glimpse


of Something which nothing else can reveal, Whose very truth is abiding and
irresistible.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 29


2. Tue Supyect-Marrer or Mepicine


11, To medicine pertains the (study of the) human body
—how its health is maintained; how it loses health. To know
fully about each of these we must ascertain the causes of both
health and sickness.

12. Now as health and sickness and their causes are
sometimes evident to the senses and soimetimes only perceived
by means of the evidence afforded by the various symptoms,
we must in medicine gain a knowledge of the symptoms of health
and sickness.

It is a dictum of the exact sciences that knowledge of a thing
is attained only through a knowledge of the causes and the origins
of the causes—assuming there to be causes and origins. Con-
sequently our knowledge (of health and sickness) cannot be
complete without an understanding both of symptoms and of
the principles of being.


Symptoms: the word includes our modern “signs’’ and
“symptoms.” Principles of being: this is the topic of scholastic
metaphysics. Only through a knowledge of causes :—compare
the following :—

“Tt is impossible to know a thing perfectly unless we know its
operation; since from the mode and species of its operation we
gauge the measure and quality of its power, while the power of a
thing shows forth its nature: because a thing has naturally an
aptitude for work according as it actually has such and such a
nature.

‘“‘ Now the operation of a thing is twofold, as the Philosopher
teaches (9 Metaph., D.8, viii. 9) ; one that abides in the very worker
and is a perfection of the worker himself, such as to sense, to under-
stand, and to will; and another that passes into an outward thing,
and is a perfection of the thing made, that results from it, such as to
heat, to cut and to build.” (Contra Gent.*, il. 1).


13. There are four kinds of “‘ cause” (of health and sick-
ness) :—

1. The material cause—namely, the human subject in a
state of health or disease. The immediate subject 1s : the
members and the breath. The more remote is : the humours.
The most remote is : the (imponderable) “elements.” The
humours and the elements are composites, and they are liable


30 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


to vary. But though they are subject to a variation of com-
position and change they show a certain constant unity, to which
they converge—namely, a unity of “constitution, or of “form.
The constitution is in relation to the “‘ change” ; whereas the
“form ”’ is related to the ‘‘ composition.” ha, 2

2. The efficient causes are such as change or maintain the
states of the human body. Namely :-—


Extrinsic: the air and affiliated agents :
localities, countries, habitable regions and the like:
comestibles, potables, and the like.

Intrinsic: movement and its opposite—repose of body and mind ;
including sleep and its opposite—the waking state ;
evacuation of secretions and excretions ; and its opposite
—retention thereof :
the changes at the different periods of life -
occupations ; habits and customs :
descent (race, nationality).

Agents affecting the human body by contact, whether contrary to
nature or not.


The formal causes: the constitutions ; the composi-
tions ; the faculties proceeding from the constitutions.


§ 50. Costaeus, the Annotator of the Canon (1608 ed.) passes
on to speak of health as a “‘ harmony of the composite, the formal
cause of the human body.’ Galen also defined temperament as the
formal cause of the human body. It is exactly here that we find the
issue between theology and rationalism, for the former defines the
formal cause of the human being to be what is called “‘ the rational
soul.”

The refutation of the statements is adequately made by S.
Thomas* (Ixiii), thus :—

““ Harmony cannot move a body or govern it, as neither can a
temperament. A harmony and a temperament also admits of
degrees. The notion of harmony rather befits qualities of the body
than the soul ; thus health is a harmony of the humours ; strength is
a harmony of muscles and bones ; beauty is a harmony of limb and
colour. . . . Harmony may mean either the composition itself or
the principle of composition. Now the soul is not a composition,
because then every part of the soul would have to be the composition
of the parts of the body. . . .” (1, p..166).

Just as the medizval physicians fell into the rationalistic error
so ably and thoroughly exposed throughout the ‘‘ Contra Gentiles,”
when they “ freed” themselves from stereotyped teaching, so with
modern teaching.

_ The physical and chemical facts which were discovered in the
nineteenth century appeared finally to controvert both the statements
of the Canon and those of the scholastic metaphysicians ; but it is


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 31


Sepiually becoming clear to more and more thinkers that this is not
the case.


4. The final causes: the actions or functions. A know-
ledge of these presupposes a knowledge of the faculties and
the breaths (which are the subjects of the faculties) as we shall
show.

14, These, then, are the subjects which pertain to
medicine. Familiarity with them gives one insight into how the
body is maintained in a state of health, and how it becomes ill.
A full understanding of how health is conserved, or ill-health
removed, depends on understanding the underlying causes of
each of these states and of their “instruments.” For example—
the regimen in regard to food, drink, choice of climate, regula-
tions regarding labour and repose, the use of medicines, operative
interference.

Physicians treat of all these points under three headings,
as will be referred to later—health, sickness, and a state inter-
mediate between the two. But we say that the state which they
call “‘intermediate”’ is not really a mean between the other two.

15. ‘Now that we have enumerated these groups of causes
(of health and sickness) we may proceed to discuss whatever
Medicine has to say concerning (a) the elements ; (4) the con-
stitutions ; (c) the fluids of the body ; (d) the tissues and organs
—simple and composite ; (¢) the breaths and their natural,
sensitive and vital faculties ; (f) the functions ; (g) the states of
the body—health, sickness, intermediate conditions; and
(A) their causes—food, drink, air, water, localities of residence,
exercise, repose, age, sex, occupation, customs, race, evacuation,
retention. ‘The external accidents to which the body is exposed
from without ; (4) the regimen in regard to food, drink,
medicines ; exercises directed to preserving health; (/) the
treatment for each disorder.

16. With regard to some of these things there is nothing a
physician can do, yet he should recognize what they are, and what
is their essential nature—whether they are really existent or not.
For a knowledge of some things, he depends on the doctor of
physical science ; in the case of other things, knowledge is
derived by inference [reasoning]. One must presuppose a
knowledge of the accepted principles of the respective sciences
of origins, in order to know whatever they are worthy of credence
or not [criteriology] ; and one makes inferences from the other
sciences which are logically antecedent to these. In this manner
one passes up step by step until one reaches the very beginnings


72 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


of all knowledge—namely, pure philosophy; to wit, meta-
physics. :

Hence, if a doctor undertakes the proofs of the existence
of the ‘‘ elements”? and the “‘ constitutions ” and their deriva-
tives from medicine itself he errs, for medicine cannot make
these things clear, belonging as they do to the domain of natural


science.


§s1. In regard to this last sentence note: “It is not the
concern of physical science (incl. medicine: Tr.) to study this first
origin of all things ; that study belongs to the metaphysician, who
deals with being in general and realities apart from motion ”’ (Contra
Gent. ii, c. Xxxvii). j

In reference to the same, note also the following passage by
J. Rickaby, S.J., 79 (p. 103): ‘‘ motions, molar and molecular,
vibrations and transferences chemical, biological, mechanical or
cosmic—are the subject-matter of the professor of physical science ;
but the Creator and the creative act are above motion . . . the range
of physical science is narrower and lower than that of literature. . . .
When a physicist pronounces on a religious question either for or
against religion, he is sutor supra crepidam: he has overshot his
subject. Of course he ought to overshoot his subject. . . . Wherever
physical science becomes the staple of education, to the setting aside
of Latin and Greek, it will be found necessary . . . in the interests of
religion to insist upon a parallel course of metaphysics, psychology
and ethics . . . trained on physical science without literature and
philosophy, the mind suffers atrophy of the religious faculties, a
disease which some seem anxious to induce upon mankind—a painful
fe ra nevertheless, productive of much restlessness and _irrit-
ability.”


17, List of what the physician aims at having a clear
notion of ; what each is, and whether the non-manifest actually
exist or not.

1. The elements. Do they exist ? How many are there ?
In what modes are they ? What are they ? How do they arise ?

2. The temperaments and constitutions. What are they ?
How many are there ?

3- The fluids of the body. Do they exist ? How many
are there ?

4. ‘The members and the sense-organs. [The science of
anatomy.

5. ‘The faculties. Do they exist ? How many are there ?

6. The functions. [The science of physiology.]

7. The breaths. Do they exist ? How many are there ?
Where are they? What changes in state do they undergo?
What are the causes of retardation (lagging) of the breath


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 33


(Or : the changes in the affective faculties ; and the cause of
their persistence.)

8. ‘The causes. How many are there ?

18. The physician must also know how to arrive at
conclusions concerning (1) the causes of illnesses and the indi-
vidual signs thereof ; (2) the method (most likely to) remove
the disorder and so restore health. Wherever they are obscure,
he must be able to assign to them their duration, and recognize
their phases.


THESIS II]. THE ELEMENTS
LEMENTS. 19. ‘The elements are simple


bodies. They are the primary components
of the human being throughout all its parts,
as well as of all other bodies in their varied and
diverse forms. ‘The various orders of beings
i) depend for their existence on the intermixture
of the elements.


Elements : Equiv.: cosmic elements ; imponderable elements ;
primordial essences ; first-principles ; elementary principles ; grades
of radiance.

It is important to note that these elements are zoz¢ “‘ matter,” but
have only a virtual existence, as explained more fully below (§ 73;
309).

ue Formae elementorum sunt in mixto virtute, non actum motu. §%


(76. 4. 4. m.)


“T am in water, and earth, and fire, and air.
These four around me, yet of these four I am not.”
(Shamsi Tabriz, ** T.{235, 5, p. 220.)


A difference must therefore be observed between them and the
literal earth, water, air and fire.

Each of the latter, it must be noted, contains all four elements,
imponderable elements, the correspondingly named element being
‘merely preponderant (cf. § 143).

Simple bodies.—That is, simple in the scholastic sense ;
indivisible. ‘‘ Simplicity is that quality in virtue of which a substance
has neither constitutive nor quantitative parts ’’ (Mercier, ®® ii. 523).


20. Natural philosophy speaks of four elements and no
more. ‘The physician must accept this. Two are light, and two


are heavy. The lighter elements are Fire and Air ; the heavier
are Karth and Water.


Four elements and no more.—In Chinese, Buddhist, and Ayur-
veda philosophy there are five. In theosophy also, a fifth, named
“ether,” is given. The alchemists gave three. Aristotle discussed
a fifth saying “‘ the heaven is not of the nature of the four elements,
but is itself a fifth body, existing over and above these ’—quoted by
S. Thomas * (68, i. p. 218). These various statements are not
actually mutually contradictory (cf. § 29).


34


THE CANON OF MEDICINE ae


Light: equivalents: weak, male (because conferring or
inceptive), positive, active. Heaven.

Heavy: equivalents: strong, female (because recipient),
negative, passive. Earth.


“Heaven is man, and earth woman in character ;
Whatever heaven sends it, earth cherishes.
When earth lacks heat, heaven sends heat ;
When it lacks moisture and dew, heaven sends them.”
(Mesnavi,*” p. 161.)


21. Tue Eartu. The Earth is an ‘‘ element” normally
situated at the centre of ‘all existence (see scheme in § 54).
In its nature it is at rest, and all others naturally tend towards it,
at however great a distance away they might be. ‘This is because
of its intrinsic weight. It is cold and dry in nature, and it appears
so to our senses as long as it is not interfered with by extraneous
agencies, and obeys its own peculiar nature. It is by means of
the earthy element that the parts of our body are fixed and held
together into a compacted form; by its means the outward
form is maintained.


“The Earth is the warp and weft of thy body.”—(Mesnavi, *” p. 41.)


“ Earth’ is understood in respect of its principal property of
dryness** (69, i. p. 234).


22. Tue Warer. The Water is a simple substance
whose position in nature is exterior to the (sphere of the) Earth,
and interior to-(that of) the Air. This position 1s owing to its
relative density. In nature it is cold and moist. It appears so
to our senses as long as there are no influences to counteract it.
Its purpose in (the world of) creation lies in the fact that it
lends itself readily to dispersion, and consequently assumes
any shape without permanency. In the construction of things,
then, it provides the possibility of their being moulded and spread
out andattempered. Being moist, shapes can be readily fashioned
(with it) and as easily lost (and resolved). Dryness, on the other
hand, permits forms to be assumed only with difficulty, and they
are resolved with similar difficulty. When dryness and moisture
alternate, the former is overruled by the latter, and thus the object
is easily susceptible of being moulded into a form ; whereas if
the moisture were overruled by dryness, the form and features of
the body would become firm and constant. Moisture serves to
protect dryness from friability ; dryness prevents moisture from


dispersing.


36 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


“ Verily the likeness of this present life is no other than as water
which we send down from heaven, and wherewith the produce of
the earth is mixed, of which men eat, and cattle also, until the earth
hath received its vesture and is adorned. The inhabitants thereof
imagine that they had power over the same, but our command
cometh unto it by night or by day, and we render it mown (as reaped
seed-produce: Woking trans.), as though yesterday it had not
abounded with fruits.” Quran, x. 24. (p. 51, Gulshan*®.)

Again, more specific still, Quran 18. 45. shows that Water
enters into the plants, and only as long as it is there do they live.
“ The parable of the life of this world: like water which We send
down from the cloud so the herbage of the earth becomes Juxuriant
on account of it”: (Woking trans.) “‘ min assama fa khatalatabihi

.” mingled with—or, as one may paraphrase (cf. the sevenfold
interpretation of the Quran): ‘‘ water is the channel of life” ; and
note that the water came from the cloud, to which it was itself drawn
by the solar heat !

‘‘ Water has especially a life-giving power, since many animals
originated in water, and the seed of all animals is liquid. Also the
life of the soul is given by the water of baptism”? *4 (ib. 74, 1ii, p. 273).
“‘ Augustine holds ‘ water’ to mean ‘ formless matter.’ ”’

Water may be understood here in the sense of “‘ radical moisture ”’
(Paracelsus), which is absolutely essential to life, “‘ H,O”’ being thus
as it were an instrument or substrate. The plant cannot shoot out
leaves, flowers and fruit without it ; so man cannot thrive without this
radical moisture, or innate moisture. Moreover, on this view, the
moisture is conserved by a medium which has “ material ”’ humidity
—a concept which brings us to the domain of chemistry.

The watery nature may be called “ fluid nature”’; pliability ;
living character. °°

So, in the Chinese conception, Forke®? (p. 271) explains, that
the “ fluid”? of water is yang, arid its substance yin; the fluid of
earth is yang, and its “‘ substance”? yin; whereas the “ fluid”’ of
fire is Yin, and its ‘‘ substance’? Yang. Yin is here understood in
a procreative sense, Yang in a destructive sense.


23. Tue Arr. Air is a simple substancé, whose position
in nature is above the sphere of Water, and beneath that of Fire.
This is due to its relative lightness. In nature it is hot and
moist, according to the rule which we have given. Its effect,
and value, in (the world of) creation is to rarefy, and render
things finer, lighter, more delicate, softer, and consequently
better able to move to the higher spheres.
See also under “‘ atmospheric air ” (264).


The air-“ element,” entering into the ‘“ breath,” is that which
enables us to stretch and contract, and also makes possible the
involuntary movements throughout the body. 8


THE CANON OF MEDICINE a


24, THe (SPHERE OF THE) Fire.
“ Ignis est causa omnium ignitorum.’’—(St. T.,** iii. 46.)


Fire is a simple substance, which occupies a position in
nature higher than that of the other three elements—namely
the hollow of the sublunary world, for it reaches to the (world of
the) heavens. All things return to it. This is because of its
absolute lightness. In nature it is hot and dry. The part
which it plays in the construction of things is that it matures,
rarefies, refines, and intermingles with all things. Its penetra-
tive power enables it to traverse the substance of the air ; by
this power it also subdues the sheer coldness of the two heavy
cold elements ; by this power it brings the elementary properties
into harmony.


The difference between the “‘ element ”’ fire, and fire as usually understood is
shown in describing flame, for instance, as ‘“‘ material’ fire, and vesicants like
cantharides, urtica, as ‘‘ essential’’ fire. Or, as stated under “ air,’’ there is a
“fluid ” of fire and a “substance’”’ of fire. Just as ‘“‘ water’’ is “radical” or
“ substantial,’ ‘‘ material.’


25. The two heavy elements enter more into the con-
struction of the members (and fluids of the body, Costaeus), and
contribute to repose. The two light elements enter more into
the formation of the breaths and contribute to their movement
as well as to the movement of the members—always remember-
ing that it is the form that is the motor (and not the breath.
The form initiates the breaths and through them moves the
organs of the body and the limbs.) So much for the elements.


“Elementa subtiliora predominantur in mixto, secundum virtute; sed
grossiora secundum quantitatem.’’—(Sum. Theol.,** 71, I, 2m; 91, I, c. 3m.)

Fire, Air, Aether; the nourishing flame which imparts heat, life, sense and
intelligence’? (xiv. 153).


§52. ‘‘Itis the form thatis the motor and not the breath. ”’—
In this sentence is contained the crux of the whole subject. ‘‘ Form,”’
used in the scholastic sense, has a subtly specific meaning when
applied to the human being. This meaning is gone into in the accom-
panying exposition. Briefly, the form when associated with the
solid, fluid, and gaseous components (earth, water, air) of the ‘‘ body”’
is called a ‘‘living human being,” and it accounts for the continual
movement of the ‘‘ breaths’’ (life-principle) which manifests to the
onlooker that that human being really is living.

§ 53. Positionin nature.—If the names of the elements are taken
as synonymous with the corresponding words describing mundane
nature, it is evident that earth (land) zs higher than “‘ water’’; and
that ‘‘air’’ is above both. The fire (solar heat) is above all. But
mystically speaking there is such a relation apart from the geo-
graphical one.


38 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


. In the following scheme the classification of “‘ worlds” is set out
ee to the various se flee of thought (Koranic, Persian, Ptolemaic, etc.)
prevailing in the middle ages. The literal discrepancies are simply due to the stand-
point having been taken differently—sometimes theological, sometimes philosophical,
sometimes scientific—by the several schools of thought.


”


SCHEME OF THE POSITION OF THE SEVERAL “ WORLDS” AS
CONCEIVED BY THE ANCIENTS.


The Vacuum. Al-Khala; la Khala wala Mala. ‘‘ Neither vacuum nor plenum”
(E. G. Browne,* 118). .

Eleventh Heaven. The Empyrean. The seventh heaven of S. Thomas,*‘, “‘ wholly
luminous ” (68, p. 228). ‘ f

Tenth Heaven. The Primum mobile (because it originates the motions of the
lower “spheres.” The Plain. The starless Heaven. Al Falaku’l-Atlas.
Ptolemy’s Empyrean. :

(* Ch. Magq,’ p. 4, makes this the ninth heaven.)

Ninth Heaven. The Crystalline. The sixth heaven of S. Thomas, or “ Aqueous ” ;
‘‘ wholly transparent.” The Celestial sphere. The Highest Heaven. ‘“Arsh**
(p: 22). The movements in this accounts for the irregularities of movement
in the fixed stars.

Eighth Heaven. The Zodiacal Sphere. The Throne, al-‘Arsh (Quran). The
fixed stars. The zodiacal heaven is the confine of the material universe.
The fifth Heaven of S. Thomas: the starry heaven with eight spheres, the
first being that of the fixed stars.

Seventh Heaven to First Heaven: “‘ The sphere of the Planets.”

“‘TInto seven heavens did He fashion it ’’*5 (W., p. 22).

“‘ He made them complete seven heavens ”’ (Q., 2, 29). ‘‘ Every sama (Heaven)
is a heaven in relation to what is beneath it, and earth in relation to what is
above it.” Raghib. quoted in Woking trans. of Quran.

‘*There are seven corporeal heavens in all, in the opinion of Rabanus ’’*¢
(68, 4, p. 228). Here comes the Angelic Kingdom (good and bad angels).

Seventh. Saturn: Black. The first to be created.

Sixth. Jupiter: Blue. Presided over by Michael. Formed from the
light of himma (meditation).

Fifth. Mars: Blood-red. Presided over by Azrael. Formed from the
light of Wahm (judgment).

Fourth. The Sun. Presided over by Israfil, Formed from the light of
Qalb (heart).

Third. Venus. Yellow. The world of similitudes. Formed from
Khayal (phantasy).

Second. Mercury. Grey. Formed from Fikr (reflection).

First. Moon. White, then silver. Made from Aether.
“The heaven of the moon.’ Jili®* (p. 122)

(Here comes ‘‘ the horizon between matter and spirit.’’*+)

Sublunary world :** The “ world of growth and decay.’

Fourth Interspace (Furja’?). The Human Kingdom,

Fourth Elemental Sphere. Igneous sphere. Fire.

Divided by Rabanus into an upper region, the fiery heaven, and a lower, the
Olympian heaven.

Third Interspace, The Animal Kingdom.

Third Elemental Sphere. Aerial sphere. Air.

Divided by Rabanus into an upper region, the ethereal heaven, and a lower,
the aerial heaven.

Second Interspace. The Vegetable Kingdom.

Second Elemental Sphere. Aqueous sphere. Water.

First Interspace. The Inorganic World (chiefly E. and W.; aided by A. and ES) 3

First Elemental Sphere. Terrestrial sphere. Earth.

Jili refers to seven limbos of the earth*? (p. 124).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 39


EXPLANATORY EXTENSION OF THEsIS II


1. Preliminary remarks.

2. The doctrine of matter and form: (a) Considered statically ; (b) Con-
sidered dynamically.

3. The doctrine of imponderable elements: (a) Considered statically ;
(b) Considered dynamically.

4. Application of the doctrine to biochemistry, histology, etiology, etc.


I. PRELIMINARY REMARKS


§ 55. Thesis II is the foundation of the whole Canon, but so
entirely has the doctrine and world-conception of Avicenna been
superseded by modern scientific teaching that the whole of his work
may be said to fall with it.

The fact that for millions of intelligent people this world-
conception (scheme of things, theory of life, Weltanschuung) is an
intense reality in their daily lives (Forke,** p. 239) does not usually
signify, and yet even a training in Western universities does not
dispose them to abandon it.

. So too, the daily-recited Breviary still contains the Benedictte
opera omnia, in which the four “‘ elements’ sing their praise, just
as for S. Francis, in his Song of the Sun they were an instruction
for us to do likewise.

Their immediate dependence for existence upon the continuously
exercised will of the Creator is spoken for both by S. Thomas Aquinas,
in the West, and by the Persian Sage inthe East. ‘‘ Even air, water,
earth, and fire draw their sustenance from Him, both winter and
summer ’”’ (Mesnavi). As the mighty servants of God (“‘ to us they
seem lifeless, but to God living,’’ Mesnavi,5’ p. 15) they offer Him
praise (Quran) and service (Mesnavi).

The modern world-conception sets out that the universe is
composed of chemical elements grouped into compounds, aggregated
into masses varying from the size of vast nebulz to the smaller but
still vast ‘‘ suns,’’ down to the fragments of dust beneath our feet ;
whereas the modern scholastic philosophy sees in our space-time
world only a fringe (Cf. Job xxvi. 14), and allows that the ancient
idea of ‘‘ heaven beyond the blue ”’ evidenced understanding and not
superstition. In short, the doctrine underlying Avicenna is capable
of justification.


40 THE CANON OF MEDICINE:


2. THE DOCTRINE OF “ MATTER” AND “ FoRM”
A. Considered Statically

§ 56. Inanimate matter, in a state of rest, is the outcome of
two principles, neither of which exists apart from the other. These
are: the principle of inertia, or passivity ; the principle of activity.
The former receives the scholastic term ‘‘ primary matter’; con-
veniently abridged to m. It is the “‘ material cause”’ of a thing.
The second principle is termed “‘ form,” “formal cause ’’; con-
veniently abridged to f. It is non-material.

-“ Man is the result of the combined operation of heaven and earth, of the
union of two principles ’’ (Li Ki ”, vii. 3. 1).

Every object has its f, but every f is not corporeal, for while
some /’s are intrinsically dependent on matter, others can exist apart
from matter.

§ 57. m remains indifferent and undetermined; it will take
an infinite number of active principles f. But as soon as a given m
has taken a given /, it ceases to be indifferent, for it has become m/.
The union of m and f results in a concrete object—‘ matter,’ as
ordinarily understood. In other words, it is said that when 7 receives
f, a physical or corporeal substance (object) appears. / is said to
‘in-form ’’ m#; when that has happened, we have mf, ‘‘ substantial
form,’”’ the physical substance, “‘in-formed matter.’’ So / is called
the ‘‘ formal cause”’ of a thing. /f is also called a “‘ determining
principle.” It ‘‘ perfects’ or completes m. So, we say, “‘ when m
is completed by /, a physical substance appears.” fis also called
“essential form.’’ Correspondingly, it is said to give rise to mf,
the “‘ essence.”

f imparts distinctive nature to m and fixes the character and
properties and activities resulting from the union. f provides the
““ deep intrinsic reason ”’ for wf.

mf, mf’, mf", mf" . . . mf" would represent as many different
objects, whether living or non-living.

§ 58. mf, then, stands for the following concepts: (1) physical
substance, corporeal substance. ‘‘ Corporeal’’ because evident to
our senses. ‘“‘ Substance’’ because viewed in its “‘ static’’ state—
inactive, stationary. Every chemical substance is a different mf.
(2) ‘“‘ nature.” Here it is viewed in reference to its powers of activity.
(3) “ essence ”’ : here we describe what it is, and say what distinguishes
one mf from another, from all other mf’s. In other words, it has

transcendental properties’’—being, essence, unity, distinction
from other beings, truth, and good. Every object is a being. Every
object is a “creature.” Every object perceptible by our senses is a
material being. (4) ‘‘ Constitution.”” Here we study mf from the
point of view of how it came into being.

§ 59. Every object has three causes for its existence : material,
formal, and efficient. That which brings about the union of m
(material cause) and f (formal cause) is called the “ efficient cause.”
There is another cause called the “ final cause ’’—namely the reason
for its existence, the reason for its creation.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 41


§60. As soon as mf exists, certain qualities become manifest
to our senses, by which we are enabled to form a mental image of the
object—over and above the ‘transcendental properties’? just
referredto. These qualities are called “‘ accidents.”” Inthe formula,
we represent them by the italic @. A concrete object is therefore
represented more accurately by the symbol m/.a, the dot
showing that mf forms one essence. To be more exact, then, the
different objects around us would be represented by the formule m/.a,
fe taf a", ef a nf Ba.

§61. A further scholastic term is introduced if we say that
“when mf (‘ potentiality ’) becomes ‘ actuality,’ it is #zfa.’’—This is
another way of saying that until a substance actually exists, it has no
“ accidents,”’ or ‘‘ qualities.”’


§62. The same symbol—mf.a—stands equally for a chemical
atom, a chemical compound—inorganic or organic—however
complex ; for a whole mineral ; for a histological ‘‘ cell ’’ (microbe,
protozoan, cell-colony, simple or complex), for a whole plant or
animal, or for a human being asa whole. Any object in the universe
—water, stone, tree, mountain, herb, sun—can be represented by
this same symbol. Every object is a ‘‘ creature’ in the Thomistic
sense. Every object is ‘“‘in-formed’’ matter. The differences
between them all depend on the /.


§ 63. ‘‘ Human nature ”’ is “ informed matter,”’ bearing certain
properties or marks, and endowed with “ existence.’”’ Each organ
in the body is “informed matter.” Every tissue is ‘‘ in-formed
matter.’’ The blood, the lymph, the urine, etc., are each of them
“‘in-formed matter.’’ Every microscopic cell of which the tissues
are composed is merely “‘in-formed matter.’’ So also is every
chemical entity which composes the cells, and the whole person also
is just ‘‘informed matter.”


§ 64. Inthe case of a living human being there is this complica-
tion that each particle of matter of which he is composed is represented
by m/f.a, and the body itself, as a whole, is representable by m/.a. To
picture the whole person more satisfactorily we should employ a capital
letter—say //—to stand for the actual matter of the body; and the
human “‘ form’”’ would be representable by another capital letter F,
for the human ‘‘ form”’ differs from all other forms. Hence the
human being is symbolized by WF, rather than by mf.f’ or mf+f’—
both of which would be inaccurate. M=ux.mf.a. When death occurs,
MF becomes Mand F; M becomes x.mfa again—simply a collec-
tion of chemical inanimate substances. M/F stands for ‘a human
soul.” F is not “‘soul.’’ # does not exist without J/ in the first
instance, but after death it does exist without 47. However, the
great and important fact is that at the time of death Fis no more like
F at birth; being different, it is correct to symbolize it as F’.

The object of life is not to alter one’s character, but to contyol it so that the
passions never come tolight. Itis not for us to try and “‘ add a cubit to our stature ””
(Mt. 6, 27) but to direct our unchangeable “ character ’’ into the very highest al-


truistic direction. The object of life is to prevent the character from determining
the form of one’s actions, See §164 iv.


42 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Many of the laws operating in the non-living substance m/.a
also occur in M/F, though every separate J/F follows its own laws.
The laws peculiar to the chemical substances of which the body is
composed necessarily apply in M/F, as well as those pertaining to
his being a particular MF. The mere fact of MF being altogether
more elaborate than its component .m/f.a’s (which together make M)
does not abrogate the applications belonging to those component
mf’'s—a fact which is often overlooked. Rationalism, for instance,
assumes that because the lower are still present, the higher must
simply be a variety of them.


“ In theliving conscious being, this qualitative determining factor (the germinal
principle) takes a still higher form, its range of activity is wider, its power of
applying, directing, and disposing of the energy stored in the organism is more
varied and more flexible, but it cannot alter the quantity of the capital funded
in the self-moving machine. If, then, it be the quality of the forces distributed in
the nervous system which the directive power of the soul immediately determines,
the liberation and control of a man’s physical activity by his thoughts and volitions
need not necessarily conflict with even the most rigid fulfilment of the law of the
constancy of the quantity of energy.”” (From P. Couailhac, La Liberte etla con-
servation de l’Energie, Paris, 1897, Livre iv. ; quoted by Maher‘, p. 523).

“‘ Tf an angel or a demon set a barrel rolling down a hill by even a slight push,
the action of such a spirit would involve the invasion of the system of the material
universe by a foreign energy. But this is not the way the soul acts, according to
the philosophy of S. Thomas and Aristotle. Here the soul is part of the living
being, a component principle capable of liberating and guiding the transformation of
energies (it selects and stores up) in the constitution of the material organism, which
along ae its compounds goes to forma single complete individual being.’’ (Maher®®,
Pp. 429).

Again, not in virtue of its rationality is the forma animale, but through the
vegetative and sentient faculties. (Aristotle, quoted in 1’, ix. 239).

§ 65. There is an important passage on “ matter’’ in the Summa Theol.**
(Q. 85, Art. 1, p. 185-6) which brings out the distinction between the ponderable
and the imponderable: the interested reader should really study the whole section
of the Summa, on the ‘“‘ Understanding.’”’—‘‘ Matter is twofold, common and signate
or individual ; common, such as flesh and bone; and individual as this flesh and
these bones. The intellect therefore abstracts the species of a natural thing from
the individual sensible matter, but not from the common sensible matter... .
Mathematical species, however, can be abstracted by the intellect from sensible
matter, not only from individual, but also from common matter; not from com-
mon intelligible matter, but only from individual matter. For sensible matter is
corporeal matter as subject to sensible qualities, such as being cold or hot, hard or
soft, and the like; while intelligible matter is substance as subject to quantity.
Now it is manifest that quantity is in substance before other sensible qualities are.
Hence quantities, such as number, dimension and figures, which are the termina-
tions of quantity, can be considered apart from sensible qualities; and this is to
abstract them from sensible matter. . . . But some things can be abstracted even
from common intelligible matter, such as being, unity, power, act, and the like; all
these can exist without matter, as is plain regarding immaterial things.”


B. Considered Dynamically. Change
“ The kettle is silent, though it is boiling all the while.” (Mesnavi*, p. 261.)


§ 66. _It is natural to consider the objects of the material world
as being if the first place stationary ; that is, in a state of static being.
But actually they all undergo change, from the highest to the lowest.
There is movement either in the object itself, or at the instance of


some other object. Hence we now consider the dynamic changes
in mf.a., MF.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 43


§67. Changes are of two kinds—‘ substantial change,”
“accidental change.’’ The example of the former is the chemical
change occurring in the course of chemical reactions. mf.a becomes
mf.'a’. The example of accidental change is, for instance, when
water becomes steam ; when a person or plant grows ; when a person
becomes emaciated, or an object sHrinks in size.

§68. The nature of substantial change is most important in
regard to physiology and pathology. The first step is associated
with a disappearance of the old f, the process called ‘‘ corruption”’
by the scholastics; in modern words, ‘‘ disintegration.’’ There
is then a new /’—the new “ form,’’ whose appearance is called
‘* generation.” *

§ 69. From the point of view of the causes at work, there are
three steps—an external agent or material cause, a receptive function,
whereby the old m receives a new /’, and the efficient cause which
brings /’ into union with 7.


§ 70. In the view of modern science, of course, the properties of ‘“‘ water ”’
for instance, appear at the moment when the H, and O meet and unite; the ap-
pearance of NaCl and H,O, again, is adequately explained simply from the union
of NaOH and HCl in appropriate proportions. But Thomistic science perceives
the need of something further. The water-molecule, or complex of molecules, is
something more than the two H atoms linked to oxygen, and this something is the
inert principle of matter m, which releases the old f and accepts the new f*. As
Rahilly explains, a molecule or a complex of molecules such as an organism, presents
not only “‘colligative or summational properties, but also indiscerptible specific
qualities of the whole which cannot be distinctively predicated of or portioned out
among the parts.’”’ “‘ We must therefore conceive—not imagine !—a spatially
complex and disparate aggregate as being in some fundamental sense, one “ being.’’f


§ 71. The causes of substantial change (the efficient causes) in
inanimate “‘ beings’’ are the well-known familiar extrinsic ‘‘ forces
of nature’’; but in the case of living beings, the efficient causes are
the intrinsic ‘‘ faculties’’ which they possess. Some of the latter
account for changes of substance, while others have to do with a
change of position—locomotion ; and others again excite a move-
ment in the mind.

§ 72. Inthe human being, the immediate efficient cause of an
outwardly visible act consists of the muscles and nerves ; behind that
is the more remote efficient cause—the sensuous appetition or desire ;
and behind that is the sensuous cognition, which is an integral
property of 1/F—a passive act, itself a “‘ faculty.” Behind that,
peculiar to the human being, is the all-important final cause. This is
philosophically described as ‘‘ the means by which perfection of life
is reached ’’—whether that ‘ perfection’”’ be relative or absolute,
whether the interests of the physical body are served, or the intellectual
life, or whether the highest perfection (i.e. of soul) is the goal in view—
where WF uses WV as the “ innocent creature of God,” in order to
attain true perfection.


¢


*“ God is an Abaser and an Exalter. Without these two processes nothing
comes into being.’”’ Mesnavi’, p. 300.

+Rahilly, appendix to ‘‘ Modern Scholastic Philosophy ’’** ie '

In animalibus quae movent seipsa est magis quaedam colligatio partium
quam perfecta continuatio (St Thomas, Im VIII. Physic. 1. 7).


44 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


3. THE DOCTRINE OF IMPONDERABLE ELEMENTS
A. Considered statically


§ 73. (1) Relation of the imponderable elements to ‘ matter”
and‘ form.’—Do the elements belong to ‘‘ primary matter ”’ or to
“form’’ ?

This problem was discussed in so masterly a fashion by St.
Thomas that his words are still applicable and unsurpassable. His
perfect understanding of the nature of matter is combined with a
precision of explanation which should satisfy every student. The


‘


following quotations may be made: ‘‘ By the words earth and water
(in Gen. i.)primary matter itself is signified ’’ and not literal water or
earth (Augustine®4, p. 194, S. T. 66, 1). ‘‘ The ancient material


philosophers maintained that primary matter was some corporeal
thing in act, as fire, air, water, or some intermediate substance ad
(ib. p. 192) ‘‘ Corporeal matter was impressed with the sub-
stantial form of water, and with the substantial form of earth”’
(p. 231) ‘‘ The power possessed by water or earth of producing all
animals resides not in the earth and water themselves, but in the
power originally given to the elements of producing them from
elemental matter’ (ib. 71, i, p. 251).

In the note to 19 it is seen that the four elements cannot be
assigned to literal matter. But they cannot be assigned to “ form”
either, as they have no being until literal matter has itself come into
being. Hence, while the chemical elements are #/, the imponderable
elements are neither 7 nor /, for they are inseparable from m/f, and
the primary qualities of a thing do not appear until it exists—that is,
till 7 and f have become mf.—‘‘ The two exist because of the one,
but hold not even to this one’ (Seng-ts’an, in Susuki®, p. 184)—
words used in another connection, but equally applicable.

§74. ‘‘ Humidity’ says Paracelsus ®* (ii. 264) is not “an
element of water, or burning an element of fire. An element is not
to be defined according to body, substance, or quality. What is


visible to the eyes is only the subject or receptacle.” . . . “ Fire
which burns is not the element of fire as we see it . . . the element of
fire can be present in green wood no less than in fire. . . . Whatever


grows is of the element of fire, but in another shape. Whatever is
fixed is of the element of earth. Whatever nourishes is from the
element of air, and whatever consumes is from the element of water.
Growth belongs to the element of fire’”’ (Cf. ‘innate heat” § 140)

Where that element fails, there is no increment. Except the
element of earth supplied it there would be no end to growth. This
fixes it; that is to say, it supplies a terminus for the element of fire.
So, also, unless the element of air were to act, no nutrition could be
brought about ’’ (Cf. oxygen) ‘‘ By the air alone all things are nour-
ished. Again, nothing can be dissolved or consumed unless the
element of water be the cause. By it all things are mortified, and
reduced to nothing ” (ib. 266). ‘‘ The invisible elements need to be
Sustained, nourished and increased by some visible thing, and at
length they perish with them.’ In other words, the ‘“ elements ”


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 45


only exist as long as there is mf. ‘‘ Both are interdependent and
related, though their activity goes on without waste or loss.” .. .
“ Each invisible attracts to itself its own. Stones come forth from the
strong spirit of the earth ”’ (ib. ii. 279).


; Such passages, often supposed to be meaningless, become intelligible in the
light of Thomistic philosophy, though according to biographers, Paracelsus would not
have wished to appear to subscribe to that.


§ 75. The imponderable elements must not, however, be con-
fused with “‘ accidents’ (a). ‘‘ Primae quatuor qualitates non sunt
habitus elementorum”’ (S. T.83, 49, 4, 1). These primary qualities
form the link between the object and our own consciousness, for our
knowledge of the universe is really simply a knowledge of those
qualities (heat, cold, moist, dry) with that of secondary qualities
(subtility, thickness, lightness, heaviness, rarity, density, translucence,
opacity, brilliance, dullness, etc.). ‘‘ Sensible matter is corporeal
matter as subject to sensible qualities, such as being cold or hot, hard
or soft, and the like ” (ib. 84, 85, i, p. 186).

§ 76. So all the concrete objects of this world—from the granite
mountain to the microscopic protozoon—are related to one another
in virtue of the imponderables. And in virtue of the same, they are
related to extra-mundane objects (sun, moon, stars). ‘‘ The matter
of the heavenly bodies and of the elements agree in the character of
potentiality ” (ib. 84,66, 2,p.199). Since matter cannot exist without
them, the human body itself must also manifest them.

§77. (2) The analogy between the four elements and vibration-
rate. The earth element may be compared with a slow vibration-
rate, the water element with a more rapid rate, and the remaining
elements with still quicker vibration rates. The slower rates are
| coarser, and the more rapid) ones are’,“' finer.’’ . Hence,, as
Avicenna says, the earth and water are ‘‘ heavy’’ and the others
are ‘‘light.’”” The meaning of the imponderable elements is made
more intelligible through the idiom of modern science. But in
making such an analogy we must avoid the common error of equating
things capable of being analogized withthe samething. Tocompare
the ‘‘ elements ”’ with vibration-rate, is to compare them with light.
“Soul,” ‘“‘ radiance,’’ “‘ spirit,’’ “‘ breath ’’ have all been compared
with light (“‘lux’’). But to pass on to indentify them in any sense
with ‘‘lux perpetua,” and then with ‘‘ Universal Intellect’ is
indefensible, yet even modern thought is not immune from the
fallacy. Paracelsus?? explains ‘‘element’’ as “‘spirit’’ (meaning
“ form,”’ no doubt), which “ lives and flourishes ”’ in the visible objects
of Nature “‘as the soul in the body”. . . ‘not indeed,” he explains,
“that it is of precisely the same essence as a soul, but it corresponds
with a certain degree of resemblance. There is a difference between
the elemental and the eternal soul. . . . For the first matter of the
elements is nothing else than life, which all created creatures possess.
The soul of the elements is the life of all created things ”’ (i. 264).
Averrhoes said “‘ of all things the soul is most like light.”’

The perfect reasoning in dealing with these errors, which is given


46 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


by S. Thomas in ‘‘ Contra Gentiles ”’ should be studied by all who
are inclined to award the last word to scientifictheories.

§ 78. (3) Applications of the doctrine.—The application of the
doctrine to the subject-matter of Medicine is simple when the elements
are represented by their corresponding “tendencies.” A few of the
relations are shown in tabular form, by way of illustration. Thus :—


ne


Corres-
bei Ten- ye Excre- | Special pact taie bebe ponding
MCN i e. ; mental
ay, Genes yaa tee sg body. mind. state.
Earth | Spread-| Skeletal | Faeces | Touch | Gives Mental Obstinacy.
ing shape torpor Fear. |
Water | Droop- | Muscular} Urine | Taste Nutrition | Lympha- | Submis-
ing tic sive
Down- Affec-
ward tionate.
Fire Rising | Liver. Sweat | Smell Digestion | Optimistic) Anger ;
Blood. Physical irate Vex-
move- ation (and
ments weeping)
Air To and | Vascular | Saliva | Hearing} Respira- | Cheerful | Humour
fro Cutan- tion
eous
Aether | Still- Nervous.| Semen | Vision | Reason- Reflective | Sadness
ness The hair ing


§ 79. The correspondence between body and mind, in virtue
of the pervasion of the whole being by the “‘ elements,”’ is specially
elaborated, in a particularly interesting manner, by Chu Hsi??
(p. 214), where the five elements are taken as the “‘ physical’ counter-
parts of “‘ five ethical principles’’ (love, righteousness, reverence,
wisdom, sincerity), which are present in all beings, just as are the
elements.


§ 80. The Buddhist exposition of the human being as composed of five
elements—‘ matter,’ “‘ sensation,’’ “‘ thought,” “‘ action,’’ and ‘‘ consciousness ”
(e.g. in Honen**, p. 314)—though raising another question—shows how generally
the establishing of an intimacy of relation between body and mind is sought after,
in all periods of history.


§ 81. Through the doctrine of the elements, the existence of a
subtle indispensable link between tissues, organs, fluids, and mental
attributes becomes intelligible. The methods of reasoning peculiar
to different peoples and individuals, their changes of mood, their
personal behaviours are all to be worked out on this basis, as, in
his succeeding chapters, Avicenna works out the nature of tempera-
ment, humours, and constitution.

“The ‘ether’ in the constitution of the creature differs in the
degree of its clearness and translucence. When the ether with which
the individual is endowed is clear and translucent . . . but neither
pure nor complete, some entanglement with creaturely desire is un-
avoidable ; but it can be overcome and got rid of, and then we have
the wise man. When the ether with which the individual is endowed
is blurred and turbid, there is the beclouding with creaturely desire


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 47


to such an extent that it cannot be shaken off, and we have the foolish
and degenerate ”’ (Chu Hsi !9, i. 117).

§ 82. (4) Associated factors. Since the primary qualities
belong to the elements, the laws of action and “ passion ”’ apply.
Various aspects of this law are described by the terms: strength—
weakness ;_ jelal-jemal (Persian); qada-qadr (Arabic). These
determine the phenomena of human life, and therefore call for con-
sideration under the dynamic aspects of the doctrine. Statically
they are significant to the physician because they reveal themselves in
variations of functional capacity of organs. With the dominance
of the several elements we may expect corresponding vigour of the
several systems of the body—e.g. the nutritive faculty, and the liver-
function ; renal functions, etc. The emotional make-up, character,
and even talents for art, crafts, literature, politics, etc., attitude towards
life in general—all these are “‘ coloured ’’ by the dominant ‘‘ element.”’
The study of the patient’s features, gestures, voice, posture, hands
acquires an added meaning, as informing about the strength or
weakness of the several systems and faculties—to a degree which is
not so very inferior to the information afforded by the expensive
instruments of modern clinical research.

See also under “destiny.” (§§ 111-115)

‘*Strength is the manifestation of the positive ether, and weakness
of the negative. Each of these again is either positive, and then
‘good,’ or negative, and then ‘evil.’ Strength when good is
righteous, straightforward, resolute, majestic, firm ; when evil, harsh,
proud, soft, irresolute, and false. The Mean (the ideal) is the main-
tenance of these principles in equilibrium.” Bruce?, p. 111.


B. Considered Dynamically.


“The five elements move unceasingly, succeeding one another in predomin-
ance, in turn, though all always exist simultaneously’ (Li Ki’, vii, 2, 3).


“The earthy sign (of the Zodiac) succours the terrestrial earth,
The water sign (Aquarius) sends moisture to it.
The windy sign sends the clouds to it,
To draw off unwholesome exhalations,
The fiery sign (Leo) sends forth the heat of the sun,
Like a dish heated red-hot in front and behind.
The heaven is busily toiling through the ages,
Just as men labour to provide food for women.
And the earth does the woman’s work, and toils
In bearing offspring and suckling them.”
Mesnavi5?


§ 83. The movement of the elements is mutually opposite
(Sum. Theol.84 66; p. 197). Change is continually taking place
within the human being. This change is either cyclical or pro-
gressive. The former characterizes the ordinary phenomena of
physiology, and the latter manifest as “growth.” The cyclical
changes of physiology (in its biochemical aspect) may be described
in terms both of the chemical elements and of the imponderable
elements. To do so by the pictorial title of “the dance of the


48 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


elements’’ is at once to bring up the atmosphere of the East, and the
very scenery of Avicenna’s mind.


“ All the four elements are seething in this caldron (the world),
None is at rest, neither earth nor fire nor water nor air.
Now earth takes the form of grass, on account of desire,
Now water becomes air, for the sake of this affinity.
By way of unity, water becomes fire ;
Fire also becomes air in this expanse, by reason of love.
The elements wander from place to place like a pawn,
For the sake of the king’s love, not, like you, for pastime.”
Shamsi Tabriz** (p. 338).


The changes are the important things ;—not the things in
themselves, for matter, after all, only exists in virtue of the ceaselessly
acting creative power of God. Did He withhold the power, at that
instant the matter would cease; it has no reality apart from His
intention. It would not be a case of the world being ‘‘ destroyed,”
but one of ‘‘ ceasing to be.”” We are apt to be deceived by “ matter,”
and devote our thoughts to this instead of to the changes; and
perhaps the ‘‘ moment of nascence ” (§ 91) is even more important
than the changes themselves. The greatness of the ancient “‘ Book
of Changes ”’ (Yi King) is due to the recognition of this principle.

§ 84. The advantage of this simile is that it brings out not only
movement of a certain orderly kind, but also rhythm and mof#f;
the thought being of such primitive native dances in which the
action requires only two dancers (male and female, of course) who
are in the presence of many spectators.. Each dancer performs
entirely different movements, and the two mever come into actual
contact. The movements are harmonized by the music, which is
itself as characteristic and essential as either of the performers.

Further, it will be clear that the feelings of the dancers themselves
do not concern the watchers ; behind their emotions there is the real
meaning of the dance, and whether the dancers discern that or not,
the observer should strive to discern it. There may be special
affinities or attractions between the dancers of the minuet; but
neither their pleasure, their displeasure, their steps, nor the music,
are the basic reality.

Moreover, the skill of the dancers is not always of the same
degree. Artistic genius may produce greater pleasure in the
watchers, but there is something greater even than skill.

§85. The phenomena of physiology and pathology may be
viewed as a series of changes of analogous character, the cycle of
changes in chemical elements, tissue-cells, and other rhythmic
phenomena being studied without neglecting the conception of the
imponderable elements.

§ 86. From the doctrine of matter and form it is clear that
with the changes from one chemical compound to another in the
course of the cyclical phenomena, there is a dropping of the ‘‘ form.”
Also, the imponderable elements rearrange, and blend into new
modes at the same time. As the author of Gulshan-i-Raz*® (lines
250-255 and footnote) says:


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 49


“ The elements, water, air, fire and earth,
Have taken their station below the heavens ;
Each serving diligently in its own appointed place,
Before or behind which it never sets its foot.
Though all four are contrary in their nature and position,
Still one may see them ever united together.
Inimical are they to each other in essence and form,
Yet united into single bodies by fiat of necessity.
From them is born the three-fold kingdom of Nature,”


§ 87. To present a simple example, for illustration—Glucose,
for instance, would be described as WA?/", each letter representing
the corresponding ‘imponderable element. When this substance
is broken up into alcohol and CO.,, by the dispersal of the ‘‘ cohesive
force between the three elements (e.g., by the influence of an “ op-
posite ’’: the yeast-ferment), two portions of WF? result, the “‘ air”’
having escaped, and the “ fire-water’’ of the aborigines being left
behind. This may be represented pictorially thus:


Ap ds
oo


The germination of seeds may be described in similar terms.
Thus, it would be said that the ethereal undulations from the sun
penetrate the loosened earth round the seeds, and by their successive
shocks affect the particles of matter composing the germinal centre of
the seed. The readjustments of atoms and compounds with oxygen
result in the generation of vital energy. The “earth’’ (mineral
substances, and remnants of animal and vegetable matter) mingled
with ‘‘ water ”’ (moisture) forms the factor of “‘ heavy elements” (20).
The “ air” (its oxygen content), “ fire’ (solar heat), and ‘ aether ”
(sunlight) make up the factor of “ light elements.” The two series
together affect the starch in the seed, bring about its change into
glucose, whereby the seed swells until the plumule emerges, and the
rootlets begin to penetrate the soil in search of “ water ” and “ earth,”
while the leaves expand to take in the “ air,” and “ aether ”’ by the
aid of “ fire.”

§ 88. Expressed in another way, there has been a change of
vibration-rate. Or we might regard the imponderable elements as
compulsorily riding upon the chemical elements during their
metabolic interchanges, although the fire, water, earth or air cannot
be thought of as retaining a sort of identity throughout. It would
be better to use another idiom: the noumenal is coterminous with
the phenomenal. Or, comparing it with wave-motion, it is as if
there were two superimposed curves. When the two curves tally,
every dip of one meets a dip in the other. The iittala dips


50 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


down, as it were, into the world of matter, illuminating the “ ocean
of physical matter’ according to the mode (intensity of vibration)
in which it touches the lower curve. At each rise of the wave, the
former returns into the metaphysical ‘‘ ocean,” and in doing so,
the physical matter returns to (momentary) inactivity.

The breaking down and building up of substance, in the course
of metabolism, is the same as the scholastic “‘ corruption ’’ (disin-
tegration), and ‘‘ generation’ (reconstruction) ; and is concurrent
with the changes in the imponderable elements. In Avicenna the
process is thought of in their terms, whereas to the physiologist
the process is worked out in terms of the material chemical elements.

So, in Chinese philosophy, we are introduced to the alternating
opening and closing operations of Nature, which are controlled by
the ‘“‘ Law,” as the pivot controls the opening and closing of a
door” (p. 134). (Cf. with urooj-nasool in Sufic philosophy.)

§ 89. Hence we find that Thesis IIT is working out the dynamic
consideration of the imponderables, under the title of “‘ tempera-
ment.’’ It is the action and “ passion’’ between the opposites
which results in ‘‘ temperament.’’ This conception carried through
all aspects of man provides the explanation of the diversity which
characterizes the unity—one human being.

Akhlak-i-Jalali?® says: ‘In truth there is one and the same
principle, which, if prevailing in the attempered elementary par-
ticles is equipoise of temperament, if produced in musical tones is
excellent and delightful intervals, if apparent in the gestures is
grace, if found in language is eloquence, if produced in the human
limbs is beauty (‘ Though their beauty charm thee,’ Quran, Sura
33, V. 52), if in the qualities of the soul equity. Of this principle the
Soul is enamoured and in search, whatever form it may take, whatever
dress assume ”’ (Verses 625-630 of Gulshan-i-Raz ; many other pas-
sages in this poem are equally applicable).

This therefore forms the introduction to Thesis III.


4. APPLICATIONS OF THE DOCTRINE
(a) To biochemistry.


§90. Starting with the conception of matter so far detailed,
both statically and dynamically, and applying the dynamic aspects
of the imponderable elements designated as a “‘ dance,”’ we may pro-
ceed to trace the chemical elements and compounds through the
body, entering as they do in the form of solid and fluid articles of
diet, or by means of respiration. The chemical elements are seen
to be in a form which is sometimes ‘‘ fixed ”’ or ‘‘ bound ”’ (combined),
sometimes “‘ free.’’ They pass into the tissues, and linger there for
a longer or shorter time before passing out again. During prac-
tically the whole of this time they are combined, but at the actual
moments of chemical interchange they become free or ‘‘ nascent ”’
—the moments when f becomes /’.

§91. It maybe said that that moment of mascence is the focus,
or the whole purpose, of the cycle of changes which occur in the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 52


body—anabolic and katabolic. _That one moment is the opportunity
for vital actions to actualize. That moment finds its location in
this or that histological unit or tissue-element, which itself is, in a
certain real sense, itself the actualization of that moment! This
moment achieved, they become bound once more and steadily
descend the ladder of metabolism until they are found once more
outside the body. To quote from a deep thinker of the early
Victorian age: ‘‘Nitrogen, like a half-reclaimed gipsy from the
wilds, is ever seeking to be free again, and, not content with its
own freedom, is ever tempting others not of gipsy blood to escape
from their thraldom’’ (Religio Chemici,?® p. 149).

§92. At this same vital moment of the cycle, there is a change
of the pzvot of function in the substances concerned. All the sub-
stances with which the subject of metabolism deals belong to the
carbon compounds, whose structure is well known to be described
with the terms straight chain, double-chain, ring-compounds, etc.
With these forms of ‘‘skeleton’’ are associated the various ‘‘ side-
chains’ which are to the others as the limbs to the body. All the
familiar groups of biochemistry (paraffins, primary and secondary
alcohols, aldehydes, acids, amides, ketones, ethers, sulphonic acids,
albumoses, leucins, purins, diaminoacids, sugars, etc.) may be
thought of as presenting a sort of individuality which depends more
on the side-chains than on the skeletons, and yetthe radicles of which
these side-chains are composed owe their character more to stereo-
chemical position or other relations than to the elements which
belong to them. With change of formula there is no doubt a change
of physical state (colloid, crystalloid), of electrical reaction and so
forth. But the fact of change (Cf. § 83) is still more important,
even than the change of personality or individuality (so to speak).
The pivot of function changes from one element—carbon, e.g.—
to another (nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, e.g.). The important
thing is that from being carbon-centric, the physiological processes
are nitrogen-centric, sulpho-centric, phospho-centric. Or, uni-
centricity gives place to duo-centricity (e.g. sulpho-ferro-centric), or
perhaps multi-centricity (e.g. in albumen), because the function
cannot pass on to a new pivot unless two or more other elements have
come into special association.

For instance, in oxy-centricity, a compound constructed on the
straight-chain skeleton (-C-C-C-C-) may become oxycentric, because
the new basis is -C-O-C- (formation of anhydrides, esters, etc.).
Here the important thing is that the centre of function is -O- and
no longer -C-. In nitro-centricity, the change is associated with the
appearance of -C-/V-C-, the centre of function being now -/V-, which
is important. In sulpho-centricity, a compound with a group
-C-S-O;H (thio-ethers, allyls, etc.) may arise; this is quasi-patho-
logical for the human body, and however insignificant the -S- may
be to the chemist maybe it is evident to the senses in virtue of a
distinctive odour. Such compounds as sulphocyanides, taurocho-
lates, indoxylsulphates, melanin, various mucins, lardaceous sub-
stances, hair, and the horny skin have an importance of their own,


52 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


and some of them form the links between nitro-centric and sulpho-
centric compounds. In phospho-centricity, the dominance of the
phosphorus atom is the culmination of the purpose of the metabolic
change. Sothe author of Religio Chemict (p. 149) said phosphorus
is in the active condition at the centres of vital action and in the
passive (allotropic) state at the outlying points.” In the case of
lecithin, there are variations of centricity. Its nitrogen, phosphorus,
or hydroxyl may be dominant according to the metabolic circum-
stances, and the subsequent linkages and fate of each successive
derivative is according to those circumstances.

- Other elements may come to form important pivots of function,
under more or less exceptional conditions (e.g., arsenic, silicon, etc.).

§ 93. Itis clear then, that we can watch the metabolic processes
from the chemical side as a sort of pageant or procession. But if we
view it as the-chemist does, according to syntheses and analyses,
oxidations and reductions, and according to the intermediate products
which he discovers when he arrests that pageant, as one might stop
a dance in order to be sure that a certain individual was present or
not, we may easily come to conclusions quite at variance with the
living truth. Stop the dance, and the illusion is destroyed. The life
has gone !

The living cell does not necessarily follow the programme of the
laboratory. Indeed it might be doubted whether any substances as
such ever appear except attheend. The actual process might well be
like a shuffling of cards, whereby the order of the cards is altered
and the order or relative position is the important thing. On the
anabolic side there is always the face ; on the katabolic side there is
always the back. Between the two there are always the same atomic
personalities which remain as it were in the same room but change
about to receive different ranks with respect to one another.

Each element may be traced through its various phases, through
compound after compound, its behaviour being modified by the side-
chains, and its importance altered, so that now it has a regal position,
with the others as its slaves, and now is reduced to slavery, sub-
servient to another element which has now assumed the royal
position. Eachin turn receives homage from its fellows ; each enjoys
a brief reign upon the throne.

§94. Such is the chemistry of life, viewed mystically. It is an
incessant movement. Interchanges proceed continually, and not
only in one substance at a time, but in a thousand at a time ; not one
element only (C, H, N, O, S, P) but all of them simultaneously—
not necessarily one ruler, but sometimes co-rulers, in the various
substrates of action; not all at the same rate, but at different rates
and with different rhythms.

§95. (4) In histology.—These pictures of biochemical pro-
cesses must be linked up with what we actually see with the naked eye
and with the microscope. Morphological changes are all mani-
festations of the unseen or invisible biochemical cycles. Not

structure first, then function.’’? Not ‘‘ function first, then struc-
ture.”’ The two are inseparable both in time and place. Hence,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 53


however exact his histological knowledge, the physician must hold
clearly before him the activities which only the mind can hold and
piece together and watch. The histological appearance shows us the
processes arrested at a particular moment when some group is
dominant and another “‘ recessive.”” Its very appearance is artificial,
the produce of reagents acting upon a dead “‘ fixed ’”’ protoplasm ;
a reaction between complex dyes and the chemical substances
produced by the fixatives. That which appears to be the permanent
substrate for functions, a definite scaffolding, is quite otherwise.
In the picture given of the dance of the elements in the body, the
$ 3 S ; : : ;

skeleton ’’ seems a base from which side-chains arise and give
purchase for the “‘ dancing’”’ element; but as a matter of fact the
skeleton, the side-chain, and the element are mutually necessary.
The whole structure is altering the whole time. So with the tissue.
The change of chemical substances entails a change from solid to
colloid, colloid to fluid, fluid to gas or back to colloid ; and while so
doing they becomeperceptible under the microscope as ceill-substance,
cell-fluid, cell-juice, tissue-juice ; fluids aggregate and condense into
* cells’ (colloid phase); cells constantly dissolve or “ splay out ”’
into fluid, or undergo partition from larger and larger particles into
submicroscopic and finally into visible microscopic particles, or else
undergo partition into ‘supernatant fluids’ of simpler chemical
composition. In the course of these changes solids and the like
separate out; and these last are usually but faultily regarded as
products of metabolism comparable to the goods manufactured in a
factory. The appearance of granules rather than fluid, or precipitate
rather than solution in the tissue, depends on the kind of elements
concerned (mineral atoms, ordinary atom-groups), and the direction
of interchange. See § 125.

Some examples of the steps of the cycle towards visibility ;


ae ; Submicroscopic | Microscopic
Fluid phase. | Colloid phase. PLaniee. appearance. Fate.
Homogeneous Cell-substance | Spongioplasm | Tissue cell Excretable
“humour ” as a whole substance and
protein deriv-
atives.
 pnecuial: are | Atrabilious Less colloidal | Coarse part- Inexcretable
“ bumour.” humour icles (insol- | without
uble) medicamentous
aid.
Tissne-duid Serum-protein | Aminoacids Bioplasm ; Urea, etc.
occasional
crystalline
deposit
Eaiphar . Colloid Sulphur] Larger parti- | Cell-granules, | Sulphur
potentially cles of Sulphur] cell-wall derivatives ;
excretable sulphonic
phase. acids, etc.


54 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§ 96. It is not possible to prepare a fully exact correlation be-
tween the carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulphur series and
structure seen under the microscope. Broadly speaking, the carbon
series is related to the cell-substance ; the nitrogen and phosphorus
series are associated with the nuclear structure. Certain kinds of
cells are associated more with some elements than with others.
Moreover one must always bear in mind that the movement is all
through the cell, all through the whole histological unit. The
fulfilment of the functions of such a unit implies the simultaneous
movement of all the elements concerned, and each cycle proceeds at a
different rate.

§ 97. It is lesseasystill to present a picture of the movement in
a whole tissue inthese terms. Only here and there does some product
emerge which is identifiable by the physiologist and biochemist.
Endless intermediate steps and changes find their concrete expression
in the one product which we perceive as some detail of cell-structure
under the microscope. We maytrace various isolated substances in
certain parts of certain cells of the body, and yet are not able to
dogmatize about them, because in the process of life in the tissue
there is a constant flow of matter, the visible becoming invisible,
and then again visible. That is, the visible food material taken in,
the invisible changes and interchanges of elements and atom groups
(the ‘‘ metabolism ’’) and their changing pivots of function ; and the
finally visible product of excretion. If there be a range of variation
from a “‘ normal ”’ in the steps of this ‘‘ dance’ there is at least-no
doubt that ill-health comes of a change of rhythm when the “ foot-
falls ’’ are out of time, or some of the “‘ steps ”’ omitted.

§ 98. Itis clear that if the changes in the imponderable elements
should chance to fail to run concurrently with the breaking down and
building-up of substance (the scholastic corruption or disintegration
and generation or reconstruction), this would also mean a break in the
rhythm ; the wave-motion would not be symmetrical, to use the
previous simile; and the body would be “‘ill.”? But it may be
added, in passing, that the varying dispositions exhibited by people
are the manifestations of lack of perfect symmetry and synchronism ;
perfect symmetry would show among other things as ‘‘ a cheerful
disposition.”

§99. The histology of an organ is the visible sum total of
chemical units, with the atom groups of ponderable elements
successively formed in the cells and tissues. These constitute the
stage and scenery of the metaphysical ‘‘ dance ’’—that of the im-
ponderable elements which interweave and complete the picture of the
living processes. But to understand the picture itself, and:see its
meaning, brings us to questions which must be deferred at this point.


§ 100, The wonderful insight into the processes taking place in the human
body which is afforded by the conception of ‘“‘ macrocosm’’ and “ microcosm ”
used by the alchemists of old, and still rightly used by many thinkers, is sufficient
justification.

In nature we see, for instance, a crowd of human beings, composed of hundreds
of units which have aggregated for a relatively few moments. We may call it
simply “ a crowd,” or we may specify and say what kind of acrowd. As one watches


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 55


it, people come up to it; others leave; others walk by without deviating their
steps. Perhaps in five minutes it has all dispersed.

What of it? What was its purpose ? What was its effect ?—here or perhaps
elsewhere? Perhaps it is subversive of order, anarchical, pathological; perhaps
it is simply mechanical, obstructive, congestive.

Such may be observed under the microscope, but we call the components
cells or perhaps excretory products or foreign bodies. To some, such analogising
is fanciful and useless. But that Avicenna found this method of enquiry vastly
productive and helpful there is no doubt. As a faithful Moslem, too, he would
realize the voice of the Quran, saying, ‘‘ these things are to you for asign.”’ Words
belonging not only to the moral law, but also to the law of Nature in all its ramifica-
tions—for the Artificer and the Lawgiver are one.


§1o1. By the time we have grasped these several aspects and
associated them with the chemical aspect of life, we have formed a
nearer approximation to the true picture of life at that moment of
time. But it has already passed on to something different! NHow-
ever, there is no way of keeping pace with that except by under-
standing the cycle of changes in each and every case. Cycles of
incipience, of growth, of maturation, of decay. The veason, or
cause of the change, is to be understood before one can keep pace.

§ 102. The causes at work in the dance of the imponderable
elements.—The mutual attraction and repulsion which underlies all
change is to be found inherent in the imponderable elements, as it
were by definition. The active and passive qualities of the separate
elements come into play when they are compounded, and (because
they necessarily occur in the same ‘‘ geographical”’ spot, and are
only separable by mental analysis) they have to do even with physical
state (solid, fluid, colloid, gaseous) and form (granular, amorphous,
crystalline) and physical property (solubility and insolubility ;
positive or negative electrical charge). Hence they may be said to
affect the dzrection of movement, whether to less colloid state, or
more colloid, to differentiation or de-differentiation, clearness or
sharpness of reaction, or to confused state.

§ 103. This doctrine may be brought beside the Chinese
principle of Yang and Yin.


To the Yang principle belong the ideas: anterior, south, rising, fecundating,
expanding, growth, advancing, strength, order, heat, motion, cheerfulness, life.

To the Yin principle belong: posterior, north, falling, breeding, contracting,
decay, retarding, weakness, confusion, cold, rest, anger, death.

In relation to the body: Yang belongs to the breath, the head, the speech,
the eyesight, exhaling ; the shape of the body. Yin belongs to the blood, the feet,
the vital force, silence, inhaling; the ‘‘ body ’’ itself. , ‘

Yang is active, flowing, fullness, straightness, music. Yin is passive, tending
to inertia, emptiness, crookedness of form, ceremonial.

There are relations between yang and yin, and hardness or softness, and the
organs of the body. (Forke*, 216). }

““ When the ether has the proportions of the yin, and the yang correct and
harmonious, there is perfection of the ether, and it is equally permeable by all
five elements, as in the case of man. When the proportions are unequal, there is
imperfection of the ether, the manifestation of the elements is unequal, as in the
case of animals.’—Brvuce,?!° footnote: i. 115.


§ 104. The idea of Yang and Yin swinging as a pendulum
may add to our conception of life. The rocking of the cradle has the
subtle purpose of throwing the yang and yin into rhythm, and the


56. THE CANON OF MEDICINE


movement of the infant’s breath into rhythm, which, once started,
will continue for at least an hour or two. (See 698.)

§ 105. Urooj: Nasool.*® Rise and Fall. The anabolic

5 s 6c ”

process belongs to the former ; the katabolic (formation of “ effete
substances, their removal from tissues and organs—whether by
deposition in tissues, as atheroma, or by discharge from the body)
belong to the latter. These terms in Persian mysticism emphasize
the fact of changes and movements running in cycles. Each
individual has his own characteristic cycle of changes; the move-
ment of the ‘‘ breath’ goes by cycles. The life as a whole shows its
cycle, being sometimes 75 years, sometimes more, more often much
less. In addition there are the smaller cycles—waxing and waning
of vital force in a certain rhythm peculiar to the person, and. carrying
with it susceptibility or resistance to infection, and the like.

§ 106. Other principles: these would be expressed as laws,
which can be classified into various groups—those belonging to nature
in general; those belonging to human nature; those belonging to
our conceptions of life, health, and disease. Law of qada and qadr;
construction and destruction ; of distribution ; of interdependence ;
of intention ; of compulsory visibility (discontinuous functions, etc) ;
of desires. Note § 82.

§ 107. Cause of synchronism: namely between the two
dancers in the simile ; these dancers being the material element and
the imponderables respectively. This lies in the conception of
‘breath’ or “ life-principle,’’? with its cycles.

§ 108. (d) Extramundane and extracorporeal infiuences on the
human body in virtue of the common content of the ‘‘ four elements.”’

That there are definite extracorporeal influences on the meta-
bolic workings of the human body should now be intelligible. The
effect of heat, cold, wet climate, dry climate is well enough known but
is widely ignored, as evidenced by elaborate researches into chronic
articular “‘ rheumatism ”’ being apparently made in every direction
but this.

To go further, and agree with the ancients that epidemics and
the like had relation to planetary influences, is not necessary ; nor is
it necessary to dismiss their possibility off-hand. It is not safe to
argue that there is no relation between the planets and stars and life
on this earth simply because some relation once thought to be true is
now discredited. If the whole universe is one organic whole, there
cannot but be some relation.

The relation between seasonal irregularities and the interactions
of the “‘elements’’ is referred to by Forke?* (p. 298, footnote), in show-
ing how the Chinese associated each season with the dominance of a
given element.

According to the influences prevailing at the time of birth, so
is the endowment of the person born ‘‘ with such an ether.” If
“ toward, the disposition is bright and good . . . if untoward, not.”
Chu Hsi?°, 85. In time, and with constant self-culture, ‘‘ the
inequality of etherial endowment will of itself disappear.’’ ib., 86.


THESIS III


26. 1. Ture TEMPERAMENTS


Gen A oe) EMPERAMENT is that quality which results

Nea) || from the mutual interaction and interpassion
of the four contrary primary qualities residing
within the (imponderable) elements.

There is a fight between the qualities; a
combat (Costaeus’ annotation). ‘‘ The temper-
ament is something set up by contrary qualities
as a kind of mean between them.”’ (S. Thomas, *?
Ixiii. p. 165, where ‘‘complexio”’ is rendered
“temperament ”’ as it is throughout the present work.)


“How strange that the elements should be so contrary,
And yet be forced to live together.”’


Gulshan-i-Raz,?° p. 26.


27. These elements are so minutely intermingled as
each to lie in very intimate relationship to one another. Their
opposite powers alternately conquer and become conquered
until a state of equilibrium is reached which is uniform through-
out the whole. It is this outcome that is called “ the tempera-
ment.”


““Elementum aliquod oportet predominari in omni mixto.”’ *%
49, 6, 1. mj; 79, 2, 2m.
“‘ This is a drawn battle.’’ (Costaeus 1%.)


In the design forming the heading of this page, four transparent discs are
shown superposed. The discs represent the primary qualities. The tinted seg-
ments represent the imponderable elements. The central ring marks off the super-
posed discs as viewed together in one ‘‘temperament.’’ As each disc revolves,
different tints come into new positions, and thus represent different temperaments
as met with in different individuals.—The lateral figures serve to recall the principles
of the ‘‘ Book of Changes.”


The initial letter is taken from a French manuscript of the twelfth century.


7
Bye


58 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


28. Inasmuch as the primary powers in the aforesaid
elements are four in number (namely, heat, cold, moisture,
dryness), it is evident that the temperaments in bodies under-
going generation and destruction (ana-, kata-bolism) accord
with these powers. yO és

80. A simple rational classification is into two modes :
(a) Equable or balanced. Here the contrary qualities are present
to exactly equal degrees of potency—neither of them being in
excess or deficiency. This temperament has a quality which is
exactly the mean between two extremes. (4) Jueguadle or un-
balanced. Here the quality of the temperament is not an
exquisitely exact mean between the contraries, but tends a little
more to one than to the other. For example, to hot more than to
cold ; to moist more than to dry ; or contrariwise.


‘‘ One or other proves victorious.’’ (Costaeus.)

‘‘ Fire, water, earth, and air, the four elements of which bodies
are compounded, lose their individual qualities in the compound
bodies, and equipose (equity) is what unites them into homogeneous
compounds.” (Lahiji,?® p. 61),

‘“ When... the elements attain equilibrium, the beams of the
spirit world fall upon them.”’ (J/é., couplet 615.)

‘““When it is said that the nature of a man or thing is hot and of
another is cold, such statements include both the physical element
and the immaterial principle with which they are endowed.” Chu
Hsi?®, i. 94.

The idea of “ balance ” may be applied to a variety of phenomena
in health and disease—both of body and mind. Lack of balance
brings sickness, and explains death. Examples :—atony ; hyper-
tonicity ; hyperacidity ; excessive trichosis ; the various phenomena
nowadays ascribed to loss of balance in the domain of endocrine
secretions, and hormones. The body may be too cold (subnormal
temperature) ; the mind may be ‘‘cool”’; the heart may be too
‘““warm.” There may be inadequate repose after mental activity,
leading to loss of mental balance. There is dynamic balance as well
as static balance.


31. (It is to be noted that) a temperament, as understood
by Medicine, is never strictly equable or strictly inequable.
The physician should abide by the philosopher who is aware
that the really “ equable” temperament does not actually exist
in the human being any more than it exists in any “‘ member.”
Moreover the term “‘ equable,” used by doctors in their treatises,
does not refer to weight but to an equity of distribution. It is
this distribution which is the primary consideration—whether
one is referring to the body as a whole, or only to some individual


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 59


member ; and the average measure of the elements in it, as to
quantity and quality, is that which (standard) human nature
ought to have—both in best proportion and in equity of distribu-
tion.

As a matter of fact, the mean between excess and deficiency
of qualities, such as is characteristic of man, actually is very
close to the theoretical ideal.


The fact that temperament is concerned with the primary qualities and not
with secondary ones should enable one to avoid the idea of weight (pondus) in regard
to the subject. In the annotation of the 1608 edition there is a reference to Aver-
rhoes, as agreeing with this point. However, if one realises that the ‘‘ elements ’’ are
“imponderables,’’ it becomes self-evident that Avicenna’s dissertation is correct, and
that he himself quite realised the attitude claimed for him in this treatise.


32. Eight varieties of equipoise :—Human beings show
eight varieties of equable temperament. Equipoise of this kind
does not occur in animals, nor do these even approach to the
equable state we describe for man.


See also § 109 and the quotations there given, which insist on the fundamental
difference between man and animals.


The eight varieties are as follows :—

A. In relation to beings other than man. (1) the equability
of temperament seen in man as compared with other creatures ;
(ii) that which is found in different human beings ; (iii) that which
is taken in relation to external factors, such as race, climate,
atmosphere ; (iv) one taken in comparison with the tempera-
ment of extremes of climate.

B. In relation to the individual himself.

(v) as compared to another person ; (vi) as compared with
the states of one and the same person ; (vii) as compared, one
member with another ; (viii) as compared with the states of
one and the same member at different times.

383. We now discuss each of these modes in turn.

i. Equability of temperament as found in man taken in
comparison with that of other animals. The range is too wide
to be comprehended in one definition, although there are certain
definite limits, upper and lower, beyond which one cannot pass
without the temperament ceasing to be a human one.

ii. This is one which is between the two extreme limits of
the range of temperament shown by a person throughout his
life (p)—namely that shown at the period of his life at which
growth has reached its limit. This, of course, is not the equilib-
rium referred to at the outset of this chapter as only theoretical,
and practically never found in practice—though approximating
i:


60 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


closely to that. Such a person is so near to approximate equa-
bility only as far as corresponds to the co-equation of his members,
or the interchanging contra-action of his hot members (e.g. heart),
with his cold ones (e.g. brain) ;_ moist ones (e.g. liver) with
dry (e.g. bones). Were all these of equal influence, the resulting
condition would be very near to one of ideal equability, though
not so as regards each individual member, except in the case
of the skin itself, as will be explained later. In regard to the
breaths and principal organs, the temperament cannot possibly
approximate to this exquisite equability ; it oversteps this in
the direction of heat and moisture. ‘The heart and the breath
are the root of life, and they are both very “‘ hot ”—indeed to
excess. For life itself depends on the innate heat, and growth
depends on the innate moisture. Indeed the heat is present in
and maintained or “ nourished”? by moisture.*

In the case of the principal organs, of which there are three,
as we shall show in the appropriate place—the brain is cold, but
its coldness does not modify the heat of the heart and liver.
The heart is dry or nearly so, yet its dryness does not alter the
moisture of the brain and liver. Neither is the brain absolutely
and entirely cold, nor the heart absolutely and entirely dry. The
heart is dry compared with the other two; and the brain is
“cold ” compared with the other two.

iii. The limits of the third mode are narrower than those of
the first, although still quite wide. This is a special equability
peculiar to the race, climate, geographical position or atmosphere.
The Hindus, in health, have a different equability to the Slavs,
andsoon. Each is equable in regard to their own race, but not
in regard to others. So if a Hindu were to develop the tempera-
ment of a Slav he would probably fall ill, and might even die.
So, too, if the temperament of a Slav should come to be that
of the Hindu, for the state of his body is contrary. So it
seems that the various inhabitants of the earth have received
a temperament appropriate for the conditions of their particular
climate, and in each case there is a corresponding range between
two extremes.

iv. ‘The fourth mode is one which is a mean between the
two limits of the range of the climatic temperament. It is more
attempered than the temperaments of the third mode.

v. ‘The fifth mode presents a much narrower range than the
first or third mode. It is the temperament peculiar to each


* Fire “feeds on” air. So innate heat consumes the innate moisture
(Costaeus 18).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 61


separate a hear in that he is alive, and also in health. It shows
a range between two extremes—upper and lower. One must
realize that every individual person has a temperament entirely
peculiar to himself, and it is impossible for any other person to
have an identical temperament, or even to approximate thereto.

vi. The sixth mode is intermediate between those two
limits. When the person has this mode of equability of tempera-
ment it will be the most suitable for him.

vii. The seventh mode is the equability of temperament
characteristic for each of the several members of the body, for
each is different from the other. In the case of bone, the
equable temperament has dryness more than other qualities ;
in the case of the brain, moistness is more conspicuous ; in
the case of the heart, warmth ; in the case of the nerves, coldness.
Here also there is a range—upwards or downwards—consistent
with equability, but less than in the before-named modes.

vill. The eighth mode is that form of equable temperament
which is proper for each given member. When it has this par-
ticular temperament it is in the best state possible to it.

34. When we study the matter we find that of all beings,
man is most near to the ideal equable temperament. Of all
races of men, those who live in countries within the equinoctial
circle, away from mountains and seas, approach the ideal equable
temperament more closely than others, and those living in other
countries. It is asserted that the more nearly overhead the sun
is [i.e. in the torrid zone], the greater does the temperament of
the people deviate from the ideal equability. But this is false, for
when the sun is overhead it is less harmful, and alters the atmos-
phere less there than it does with us, or less for those at greater
latitudes than for us—though of course we do not have it
overhead.

In the case of peoples living in the equinoctial zone, the
states of the body are in all cases more like the ideal; the
atmosphere in these regions exerts no evident deleterious
effects, but is always in harmony with their temperaments.
We have already (elsewhere) expressed our agreement with
this opinion.

In the case of peoples living in the fourth climate, they are
more attempered. Thestin’s rays are not overhead long enough
to scorch them, but are not as oblique as in the second and third
zones of the earth. Such people are not exposed to cold from
great obliquity of the sun’s rays, as occurs in the case of peoples
living at the extreme edge of the fifth climatic zone.


62 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


35. It has already been stated that the chief organs do not
approach closely to the ideal equability of temperament. Of
all members the flesh comes nearest to the ideal ; the skin
comes next, for it is hardly affected by attempered water
(i.e. water prepared by mixing equal parts of snow water and
boiling water). It may be that the flesh is so well attempered
because the heat of the breath and blood within it is balanced
by the coldness of the nerves. And there is also the fact that
it is not subject to the influence -of the body itself, for the fact
that drier and moister elements are equally present in 1t accounts
for it being well attempered. We know too that its absence of
sensation is another reason why it is not subject to the influence
(of the body). It is only subject to intrinsic factors, or dissimilar
qualities. For, as we know, when things have a common origin,
but are opposite in nature, mutual interaction results, whereas
a thing is not affected by anything whose quality is similar to
itself (p).

36. The most attempered part of the skin is that of the
hands. The most attempered part of the skin of the hands is
that of the palms and soles. ‘The most attempered part of the
skin of the palms of the hands is that of the finger-pulps. The
most attempered part of the skin of the finger-pulp 1s that of the
index. The pulp of the tip of the index-finger is the most
sensitive, and that of the other finger tips is more sensitive than
other parts, because they judge of the nature of tactile qualities.
There must be a lessening of sensitiveness from the middle
outwards in order that one can perceive a deviation from equa-


bility.


“The more the organ of touch is reduced to an equable com-
plexion, the more sensitive will be the touch.” (S.T.,84 76, 5; p. 44,
trans.)


37. In saying a medicine is of equable temperament, we
do not use this expression in the absolute sense, because that
would be an impossibility. Nor do we mean that it is attempered
correspondingly to the human temperament, for in order to be
that the medicine would have to be actually composed of human
substance. We mean this—that when the medicine is exposed
to the action of the innate heat within the human body, its quality
will not over-reach either of the limits (of equable temperament)
proper to the human being. Consequently it will not produce
an effect beyond those limits. ‘Therefore, in regard to its actions
within the human body it is attempered, of equable temperament.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 63


Similarly, when we say a drug is hot or cold, we do not
mean an absolute heat or coldness of substance, or that it is
hotter or colder in substance than is the human body. Otherwise
it would imply that the drug has a temperament like that of man—
equable. What we mean by the statement is that. through the
drug hotness or coldness comes to the body, in a degree over and
above that degree of heat or cold which is in the body already.
Consequently a medicament may be at the same time cold—
that is, compared with the human body—and hot—that is,
compared with the body of a scorpion ; it may be at the same
time hot—that is, compared with the human body—and cold—
that is, compared with the body of aserpent. More than that, a
medicament may be hotter towards the body of Peter than it is
to the body of Paul. It is important to know this when choosing
medicines with the object of altering the temperament. One
must take care not to employ a medicament which from its very
nature could not ha¥e the effect desired.

38. Now that we have explained the subject of equable
temperament sufficiently we pass on to consider she inequable
temperaments (‘‘ intemperaments,” dyscrasias).

They are classified according to race, individual, and organs.
There are eight variants, all of which agree in being contrary
to the eight equable temperaments named above.

(A) the simple types show a deviation from the normal
equipoise only in respect of one contrary.

(B) the compound types show a deviation from the normal
equipoise in respect of two contraries at once.

39. A. The simple intemperaments are as follows :—

(a) where it is an active contrary quality which is in excess :

(i) hotter than it should be, not moister or drier.
Hot intemperament. ;

(ii) colder than it should be, not moister or drier.
Cold intemperament. eb

(2) where it is a passive contrary quality which is in excess :

(iii) drier than it should be, but not hotter nor colder.
Dry intemperament.

(iv) moister than it should be, but not hotter nor
colder. Moist intemperament.

These four intemperaments are only temporary, for when
too hot, the body becomes drier than it should be ; when too
cold, the body becomes moister than it should be, by assuming
extraneous moisture ; when much too moist, coldness supervenes
more rapidly than dryness would. If the dryness be not very


64 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


great, the body may remain in that temperament for a con-
siderable time, though ultimately it will become colder than
it should be.

It will be clear, then, -that equipoise and health depend
more upon heat than upon cold.

So much for the four simple intemperaments.

40, The compound intemperaments. ‘The four compound
intemperaments are those in which there is a departure from
equability in respect of two contraries. Thus, the temperament
may be at the same time hotter and moister than it should,
hotter and drier than it should, colder and moister than it
should, colder and drier than it should. Obviously it cannot
be simultaneously hotter and colder, or drier and moister.

41. Each of these intemperaments is further subdivisible
into two forms (thus making sixteen intemperaments). (a)
Those apart from any material substance—(qualitative ; formal),
Here the temperament is altered only in regard to one quality,
because the fluid pervading it has the same quality as that
towards which the body is being changed as a whole. Yet
it does not do so unless it be in virtue, e.g., of heat (in fever)
or cold (extraneous cold).

(2) Those in which some material substance is concerned
(material). Here the body is only affected by the quality of
the intemperament in virtue of the increased amount of some
particular body-fluid. For instance, the body is cooled by
vitreous serous humour ; heated by leek-green choleric humour.

42. Examples of the sixteen intemperaments are given
in the third and fourth volumes.

43, Intemperaments in which some material substance is
concerned occur in two modes : a member may be pervaded
by the material substance entering from without, or it may be
pervaded by the material substance which has reached the
tissues of the body and fails to get out through the orifices of
the channels or from the cavities of the body. Such retention of
material may be the beginning of the formation of an inflam-
matory mass.

This completes the chapter on intemperaments.

44, The physician is again reminded that he must seek
an explanation of the deeper intricacies of this subject in
[esoteric] philosophy, for they are not self-evident.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 65


2. Tue TEMPERAMENT OF THE SEVERAL MEMBERS


45.


LLAH most Beneficent has furnished every
animal and each of its members with a
temperament which is entirely the most ap-
propriate and best adapted for the perform-
ance of its functions and passive states.—
The proof of this belongs to philosophy


and not to medicine.


‘ An artificer produces divers works of art. (S. Thos, 84
65, p. 186.) .

‘““ Every creature exists for its own proper art and per-
fection.” (Jd., p. 184.)


46. In the case of man, He has bestowed upon him the
most befitting temperament possible of all in this world, as well
as faculties corresponding to all the active and passive states
of man. Each organ and member has also received the proper
temperament requisite for its function. Some he has made
hotter, others colder, others drier, and others moister.


§ 109. ‘‘ The human body is the most noble of all lower bodies,
and by the equability of its temperament is most like the heaven
which is free from all contrariety.’’** (i. 70, p. 178 trans.)

‘’ He gave each thing its limits and all things their disposition,”
(0., 11°26, p. 49:)

‘God makes man after one type and a horse after another ;
the types of things are manifold in the divine mind.” (2., i. 54,

. 118).

‘* Lord, Thou hast ordered all things in number, weight and
measure.” (Wisd. xi. 21.)

“There is diversity and inequality in things created—not by
chance, not as a result of diversity of matter, not on account of
certain causes or merits intervening, but from God’s own intention ;
in that He willed to give the creature such perfection as it was possible
for it to have.’”’®? (i, xlv, p...108)

We may also quote from the Chinese.—‘ All beings possess the
five imponderables, but only man has them in perfect balance as the
constitution of his Nature.’’ ‘‘ That which differentiates man from
the brute is his possession of the Mean or Equilibrium, that perfect
balance of the elements in the constitution of his Nature of which
Tzu-Ssu teaches in his famous classic—the Doctrine of the Mean.”
(Chu Hsi,44 214, 217;)

‘Tn the life of men and other creatures, the Nature with which
they are endowed differs from the very beginning in the degree of


66 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


its perfection. But even within the differing degrees of perfection
there is the further variation in respect of clearness and translucence.”


(Chu; Hsifeas, p. 572) thy ot

‘‘ When the ether received is limited, the immaterial principle
received is also correspondingly limited. Thus, the physical constitu-
tion of dogs and horses being as it is, their functions are correspond-
ingly limited in their range.” (2d., p. 60.) “ Man receives the ether
in its perfection, and the ethical principle permeates it completely
and without impediment ; while in the case of other creatures, in
which it. is imperfect, the ethical principle is impeded and un-
intelligent. He receives the ether of the universe in its perfection,
and therefore possesses moral and intellectual faculties.’”’ (p. 67.)

‘‘In birds and animals, though they possess the Nature, it is
restricted by the corporeal element, which creates an impenetrable
barrier" "(p- O1


47, In order of degree of Heat.

1. The Breath is the hottest, and the heart in which it
arises.

2. The Blood. Though this is generated in the liver, it
derives more of its heat from the heart than from
the liver, the two organs being in continuity.

3. The liver, which may be looked upon as concentrated
blood.

4. The “ flesh,” which would be as hot as the liver were
it not for the nervous tissue (cold temperament !)
which pervades it.

s. The muscles which are cooler than the “flesh”
because of their tendons and ligaments, as well as
the nerves.

6. The spleen. The faex of the blood makes this colder.

. The kidneys contain relatively less blood.

. The walls of the arteries. ‘These are warm in spite
of the nerve substance present, because they receive
heat from the blood and the breaths within them.

9. The walls of the veins, which owe their heat to the
blood alone.
10. The skin of the palms and soles.
48. In order of degree of Coldness. .
1. The coldest thing in the body is the serous humour. —

2. Next in degree, the hairs.—3. The bones.—4. The Carti-

lage.—5. The ligaments.—6. Tendon.—7. The membranes.

8. The nerves.—g. The spinal cord.—10. The brain.—11.

Fat.—12. The oil of the body.—13. The skin.

(In general, organs rich in blood are of hot temperament ;
those poor in blood are of cold temperament.—Aegineta.)


cont


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 67
49, In order of degree of Moisture.


1. The serous humour is the most moist constituent of
the body.—2. The blood.—3. The oil.—4. The fat.—
5. The brain.—6. The spinal cord.—7. The breasts and
testicles. —8. The lung.—g. The liver.—io. The spleen.—
11. The kidneys.—12. The muscles.—13. The skin.

The order here given is that of Galen, but in the case of
the lung the moisture is not inherent in its nature but is derived
from the nourishment which comes to it. The lung is fed by a
very “ hot” blood, because there is much bilious humour in the
blood going to the lung. A great excess of moisture accumulates
in the lung from the gaseous products of the whole body as well
as from the materials which flow down to it from the “ head.”

In actual fact the liver is intrinsically moister than the lung,
whereas the lung is as it were constantly sprinkled with moisture ;
it is the fact that the moisture lingers in it that makes it so soft
(to the feel).

One should conceive of the states of the serous humour
and blood in a similar way. ‘The serous humour is moist in that
it is as it were sprinkled with moisture. In the case of the blood
the moisture interpenetrates, pervades, and grows through its
very substance. It is true that the serous humour, watery in
nature, generally possesses much more moisture in itself than
the blood does. And if the digestive changes in the blood proceed
inadequately it loses not a little moisture—namely, the moisture
of the naturally watery serous humour, which has become part
of the blood. As we shall see later, the normal serous humour
is nothing more than imperfectly digested blood.

50. In order of Dryness.

1. The driest thing in the body is the hair, for this comes
from the ethereal element carrying up with it the material
dispersed to it from the rest of the body, which is then left
behind in the hair as pure fumosity. ,

2. The bone. ‘This is the hardest of all the members.
It is however moister than hair, because bone is derived from the
blood, and its fume is dry, so that it dries up the humours
naturally located in the bones. This accounts for the fact that
many animals thrive on bones, whereas no animal thrives on
hair—or at least it would be a very exceptional thing if hair
ever did provide nourishment. Some think that bats can digest
hair and live on it. The proof that bone is moister than hair ts
that when equal weights of bones and hair are distilled in a retort,
more water and oil will flow and less “‘ faex ”’ will remain.


68 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


3. Cartilage.

4. Ligaments.

5. Tendon.

6. Serous membranes.
7. Arteries.

8. Veins.

g. Motor nerves.

10. Heart.

11. Sensory Nerves.
12. Skin.


The motor nerves are colder and drier at the same time,
and are therefore in equipoise. ‘The sensory nerves are colder
but not drier in proportion, and are probably very nearly in
equipoise, since their coldness is not very far distant from that of
the motor nerves.

§110. Link between soul, passions, temperament. S.Thomas*
writes (ii. 63, p. 166): ‘‘ The soul rules the body, and curbs the
passions that result from the temperament. For by temperament


some are more prone than others to desire or anger, and yet refrain
more from these things.”


3. THe TEMPERAMENTS BELONGING TO AGE
Sex, Piace oF RESIDENCE, OCCUPATION


51. There are four periods of life.


Period. Title. Name. Years of age.
I. | The period of growth. | Adolescence. Up to 30.
II. | The prime of life. Period of beauty. | Up to 35 or 40.
III. | Elderly life. Period of decline. | Up to about 60.
Senescence.
IV. | Decrepit age. Senility. To the end of
life.


_ In the third period, the best vigour has passed, and the
intellectual power begins to decline.
_In the fourth period, vigour and intellectual power both
obviously decline.
52. The First Period of Life.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 69


Sub-


eeaian Name. Distinctive Characters.
First. Infancy The period before the limbs are fitted for
walking.


Second. | Babyhood. The period of formation of teeth. Walking
has been learnt, but is not steady. The
gums are not full of teeth.

Third. | Childhood. The body shows strength of movement.
The teeth are fully out. Pollutions have
not yet appeared.


Fourth. | Juvenility. The period up to the development of hair
“* Puberty.’ on the face and pubes. Pollutions begin.
Fifth. Youth. The period up to the limit of growth of the


body (to the beginning of adult life).
|__ Period of athletic power.


The temperament during the whole of this period of life
is almost equable as regards “‘ heat,’ but “‘ moisture ”’ is in
excess. There has been not a little controversy among older
writers about the degree of heat during the period of juvenility
as compared with that of youth. Some argue that the heat is
greater in the former than the latter, and that this accounts for
their growth, and for the fact that their natural functions of
appetite and digestion are greater in vigour and persist longer.
This, it is considered, is due to a condensation of the innate heat
derived from the sperm.

53. Others argue that the innate heat. of youth is far
greater than that of juvenility, because (a) their blood is much
more plentiful and is thicker—evidenced by the frequency with
which nose-bleeding occurs ; (0) their temperament approaches
that of bile, whereas that of juvenility approaches that of serous
humour. (The evidence of an undue proportion, of bilious
humour in a temperament is (1) that the diseases in such a person
are “‘ hot ’’—e.g. tertian fever ; (ii) the vomitus is bilious ; (111)
other facts.) (c) The movements of the body are more energetic
in youth; and bodily movement requires plentiful innate
heat. (d) Digestion is better and more vigorous ; and this
entails expenditure of heat. The signs of a vigorous digestion
are: absence of feeling of nausea ; absence of fermentative
vomiting ; absence of crudity or aversion to food. These occur
in juveniles when their digestive power is disturbed. (e) The
appetite is less in youth than in juvenility. This shows that the
innate heat is greater, for the appetite is better in a cold tempera-
ment. A dog’s appetite is often accounted for by cold tempera-


70 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


ment. (f) The process of growth, greater in juveniles, requires
adequate moisture rather than heat. (g) The diseases to which
juveniles are liable are usually cold and moist ; and when fevers
occur in them, they are pituitous. If vomiting occurs it 1s usually
serous.

These then are the two theories and the facts on which they
are based.

54. Galen’s teaching.—Galen is opposed to both. In
his opinion the heat is actually the same in each. The difference
is that in puberty its quantity is great but its acuity is less. In
youth the heat is less in quantity but greater in acuity. As he
says—let us imagine first a single measure of “ heat,” or a subtle
body of unit heat, penetrating into an abundance of moist
substance—as it might be, water. Then imagine a unit of
heat penetrating into a small bulk of stone. The heat in the
water would then be large in quantity but soft in quality, whereas
the heat in the stone would be less in amount but of great acuity.
This is analogous to the state of affairs in regard to the heat of
juvenility and of youth.

55. Juveniles derive their (innate) heat from the sperm,
which is very “ hot.’”” ‘This initial innate heat is being steadily
used up, but the loss is made up by the progressive growth ;
indeed it is more than made up.— But during the period of youth,
there is nothing to make good such loss of innate heat. On the
contrary, the degree of innate moisture is lessening both in
quantity and quality,—this being the mechanism by which the
innate heat remains at a constant level up to senescence. Ulti-
mately, the moisture is in too small a proportion to enable the
innate heat to be maintained constant. During all this period
there is no corresponding growth.—At the outset of life, the
innate moisture suffices for the two requirements—maintenance
of innate heat ; growth. But there comes a time when one or
other or both must fail. Innate heat must be adequate to enable
growth to take place, yet the basis of growth—innate moisture—
is failing. So how can growth possibly continue? It is clear
then, that growth must cease, for it cannot be that the innate heat
should be sacrificed. This is “‘ the tongue of the case ’’!% (iii.
347) during the period of youth. (p.)

06. As regards the second theory—that during juvenility
growth is in virtue of moisture rather than in virtue of heat—This
cannot be true because moisture (m) is the material cause of.
growth and m does not unfold or construct itself ; it is not a self-
created “ Jeing” : it only changes in virtue of a formative power


THE CANON OF MEDICINE WA


(f) acting upon it. Asa matter of fact this formative power is -—
the “ soul,” or “‘ nature ’’—that which is in the decree of Allah
(umr-i-Allah). This “ nature” requires an instrument where-
with to work, and this instrument is the innate heat.

57. So, when people assert that the voracious appetite of
juveniles proceeds simply from their cold temperament, this
also is wrong. A morbid appetite due to coldness of tempera-
ment cannot result in good digestion and nutrition. As a
matter of fact the digestion during the age of juvenility is usually
of the very best. Growth of the body as a whole implies that
more food is being assimilated than is used up. When digestion
is faulty, the cause is either (a) gluttony, eating food voraciously
or inordinately ; or (4) errors of diet—partaking of a diet badly
designed and including articles of food which are unwholesome,
or moist in temperament, or in excess ; (c) neglect of the move-
ment of the bowels and other emunctories, whereby effete matters
accumulate and become knit together in them (which is an
indication for purging)—(d@) other emunctories: the lungs
especially need ‘“‘purgation”’ by making the respiration deeper and
quicker ; although its power 1s never as great as it sometimes is
in the second period of life.

This completes Galen’s teaching about the temperaments
of juvenility and youth.

58. One must also bear in mind that the innate heat of
the body begins to fail after the prime of life, because the ambient
air dries up the moisture of the body—and the moisture is m of
of the body.*

The innate heat also helps to dry up this moisture. So
also does the effort involved in the performance of the corporeal
and emotional activities inevitably associated with life.

59. Drying up of the moisture is also aided by the failure
of the “‘ nature ”’ to withstand the steadily and silently increasing
dissipation of the faculties. All the faculties of the body are
finite in duration, as is well-known to natural science. So also
the innate heat is not being replaced for ever. Even were the
innate heat infinite in duration and always bringing about its
changes in the body, so as to maintain a renewal equal to the
loss, the fact that the loss is increasing steadily day after day
inevitably leads to a limit beyond which the loss could not be
made good. A fixed state of dryness would be bound to come.
How much sooner would not this time arrive did both factors
contribute simultaneously towards it ?


* The body is admittedly 95 per cent. water !


q2 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


60. We see then that the m, the moisture of the body,
must inevitably come to an end, and the innate heat become
extinguished—and the sooner if another contributory factor to
its destruction be present ; to wit, the extraneous excess of
humour arising out of imperfect digestion of food. This
extinguishes the innate heat (2) by smothering it, enclosing it,
and (4) by providing the contrary quality. This extraneous
humour is called the “‘ cold serous humour.”

61. This is the death of “nature” to which every person is
destined, and the duration of life depends on the original tempera-
ment, which retains a certain degree of power to the end by
fostering its intrinsic moisture. ‘This is the person’s appointed
end, and the diversity of temperaments accounts for the different
durations of each one’s life. These are the natural terms of
life. (There are of course, also, premature deaths, brought
about through other causes, though even these are also in accor-
dance with Divine Decree.)


“ All things have We created after a fixed decree.’’ (Q. 54, 49.)


“The four elements are as birds tied together by the feet ;

Death, sickness and disease loose their feet asunder.

The moment their feet are loosed from the others,

The bird of each element flies off by itself.

The repulsion of each of these principles and causes

Inflicts every moment a fresh pang on our bodies.

That it may dissolve these composite bodies of ours,

The bird of each part tries to fly away to its origin ;

But the wisdom of God prevents this speedy end,

And preserves their union till the appointed day.”
Mesnavi, *’ p. 162.


§ 111. The “death of nature’’ may also be explained on the
basis of wrooj and nasool (§§ 105, 137), for when the positive and
negative phases in the cycle of the elements and of the breath clash—
that is, enter the phase of £ema/ (Persian term) the bodily functions all
cease. The kemal phase may be reached long before the allotted
span.

§ 112. The presence of this phase, and its probable duration
before death actually occurs, may be discerned in practice, if the law
be understood. This fact throws a significant light on the state-
ments in the Chinese work on the pulse, where the time of death
is foretold from the study of the pulse and other factors—assigning
not a number of hours, or days, but a particular period in the lunar
cycle. Chu Hsi,!1 in ascribing the varying fortunes of individuals
during their life to differences of endowment of Ether (p. 217)
betrays a knowledge of the cyclical changes pertaining to body and
mind, as well as to the outer world at large.


§ 113. It would be fallacious to argue from this that skil-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE ao


ful prognostication of this kind would render medical treatment
superfluous. The value of realizing these phases lies in the under-
standing with which measures are applied in order to tide over the
patient during the dangerous period of inertia of vitality, breath, or
other factors.

This would not dispense with the constant sense of “ fiat
voluntas Tua,” both on the part of the lay and of the profession.

Quotations from the Chinese, for instance, in whom the con-
ception or belief in Fate is vivid and almost dominant, brings no
conviction tothose many who claim to have no belief in Fate whatever.
Nevertheless a. few proverbs may be quoted, as expressing the
conception usefully : ‘‘ there is a day to be born, and a time to die ”’ ;
“before life has been, death has been appointed.”’ ‘‘In the beginning
it was decided whether one should have long or short life ; whether
one should have honour or poverty.’”’ ‘‘ The swallow living in the
hall does not know the great building is about to be burned.” “A
physician may cure disease, but he cannot heal Fate.”’ ‘‘ The lucky
physician sees the patient at the end of the disease; the unlucky
physician sees the patient at the beginning of the disease.”’
(Plopper,7®, chap. xi.)

No doubt where a possibility of ‘‘ destiny ”’ is to be admitted for
one form of circumstance, the application of the same principle to
many details of human life is not so readily conceded, That it is
allowable for much more than is customarily accepted will be credible
when the existence of occult and inscrutable chains of causes or
attractions operating together is realized.

Fate is supposed by some to be blind ; by others to be the decree
of a far-off Potentate. It is neither. It is the manifestation of a
series of combinations of conditions which by “ natural ’’ courses
of sequences operate in the individual human life. Everyone shares
in the weaving of his own web. The web is a by-product in some
great scheme which we need not question, Fate ceases to signify
for such as rise into the Scheme itself. For, to them, their life is as
the throwing of the stone unerringly into the bull’s-eye ; the inter-
vening events, the débris, what of them ?

§ 114. Rather than criticize severely the idea of the length of in-
dividual human lives being preordained, Anwari®® rightly asks (p. 54)


“If destiny be not the arbiter of mundane affairs,
Wherefore are men’s states contrary to their wishes ?”’


‘ Who, then can say, ‘ I am an individual, independent and free,
I can think what I wish, and I can do what I wish’? You are not
doing what you wish... thinking what you wish! There are
various thoughts around you in the form of men and animals, who
influence your mind and feeling and thought ; you cannot escape
them. . . . There is always some person stronger than you and
always someone weaker than yourself, ,.. Our lives are tied
together and there is a link in which we can see one current running
through all.’”’ Rosegarden,*® 1st ed., p. 52. '

§ 115. No doubt ‘‘destiny”’ is often supposed to negative


74 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


~  freewill,”’ which is so much insisted on as man’s prerogative.
Destiny belongs to the body, freewill to the soul. Or, to be more
accurate, it is our Will which is important and not the body, or its
length of life. Or, to be still more accurate, by employing the
algebraic symbols already fixed on—we are born MF; from that
moment, with each further reception of (feeding on) sights and sounds
or other sense-impressions, we become M/F’. But the purpose of
human life has been shown to rise quite beyond this, and our goal is
to become I/F” before we die. Ineach case M goes into corruption,
but the position of F’ and F”’ is vastly different.

‘‘ The voices of Nature are the mother of the soul.” /”” is the
outcome of a consistent usage of ‘‘ freewill’’ by the Will in a certain
direction—namely supernatural, combined also with a “ feeding ”’
(to use the same term as above) on supernatural impressions.

To quote from theology, in which domain we are brought,
“supernatural ’’ does not refer to superstitions, evil practices, and
hypothetical experiences ; it is a term used in the sense of “ super-
natural grace.’’ The ordinary human being is body plus rational
soul in the natural order; but it has been intended that he shall be
body plus rational soul in the natural order plus soul in the super-
natural order (Irenaeus). ‘‘ There should be no clash between the
natural order and the supernatural, for both own God for their
Author, and one great function of grace is to supernaturalize the
natural life of man by the love of Christ.” (OQ. R. Vassall-Phillips,
C.SS.R.,°8 p. 31, 32.) Wherein lies the importance for a proper
attitude by the physician towards his patient, in regard to the serious
moments of life (among others), when deceit, equivocation, and
concealment of the gravity of the malady are to be deprecated.


62. To sum up, the equable temperament of the period
of juvenility and youth is ‘“‘ hot,” whereas that of the last two
periods of life is “cold.” ‘The body in juvenility is additionally
of a moist (equable) temperament, in that growth is proceeding ;
the moistness is shown by the softness of their bones, nerves and
other members, and by the fact that at this age it is not going to
be long before the semen and ether will come to manifestation.
Old persons and those in the “‘ decrepit ” age are not only colder
but drier in temperament. This is evidenced by the hardness
of their bones, the roughness of their skin, and the long time which
has elapsed since they produced semen, blood, and the vaporal
(ether) breath.

The fiery quality is in equipoise during juvenility and youth,
but the airy and agueous quality is more abundant in juveniles.
In old persons and in the decrepit, the earthy element is more
predominant than in the other ages. ‘This element is most
marked during the decrepit age.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE Ws


Earth says to the earth of the body: return to thy root.” (Mesnavi, *
p. 162).

The temperament of youth is nearer to equipoise than that
of juveniles, but, compared with them, its temperament is dry ;
compared with the third and fourth periods of life, the tempera-
ment of youth is moist.

The temperament of the decrepit period is drier than in
youth and that of the third period of life in regard to the single
members, but more moist than either in regard to extraneous
moisture.

68. TEMPERAMENT IN RELATION To Sex.

The female is of colder temperament ; that is why the
female is smaller than the male. The female is also moister.
The coldness of temperament, as well as the habit of staying at
home and taking so little exercise, accounts for the accumulation
of excrementitious matters in the female. Their ‘‘ flesh”’ is
more fine in ‘“‘substance’’ (texture) than that of the male, though
the flesh of the male is more rarefied in virtue of that which is
admixed with it. The denseness of male flesh renders permeation
through its veins and nerves more difficult.

64. ‘TEMPERAMENT IN REGARD TO GEOGRAPHICAL
Postrion.—The temperament is moister in the peoples inhabiting
northerly countries, colder in those living in southerly countries.

65. ‘TEMPERAMENT IN REGARD TO OccuPATION.—
The temperament is moister in those who follow a maritime
occupation ; others are contrary.

66. Tue SicNns oF THE TEMPERAMENTS are discussed under
the general and special signs and symptoms.


Vi


THESIS IV. THE HUMOURS


UMOURS: Fluids of the body. § 116. The word

‘‘humour’’ does not now bear the sense which
formerly made it an exact equivalent of humor.
In German, “‘ Saft’? would still apply, but ‘‘juice”’
is unsuitable for the present translation. The term
‘fluids of the body’”’ has been selected though
requiring some qualification. Thus, the humour
named ‘‘sanguineous’’ (72), or, simply, ‘‘ blood,” is not to be
regarded as identical with the fluid drawn, say by venesection,
and studied before or after clotting. The phlegma is not properly
represented by either ‘‘ phlegm,” ‘‘ mucus,” or ‘‘ lymph,” though
having some resemblances to each. ‘‘ Serous humour ” has been
preferred to the older ‘‘ phlegmatic humour.’ Similarly, ‘“ yellow
bile’ in the Canon may not be restricted to the fluid in a normal
gall-bladder ; and ‘‘ black bile’? cannot be made synonymous with
(black) pathological gall-bladder contents.

Furthermore, it should be said that the “‘ humours ”’ are quasi-
material. In many passages of the Canon it would seem that when
“matter”? is spoken of, in connection with disease, “‘ humour ’’ is
often meant, and particularly a morbid humour. But it is also clear
that behind the humour there is what Paracelsus would call an
“essence,” or “‘ radical humour,” which itself governs the nature of
the humour and whether or not it is going to become morbid. On
such a view health depends on the maintenance of the essential
humour in a state of purity.

Again, we may say that the blood is the “salt principle” of
the body, the serous humour the ‘‘ sweet principle,’’ the bilious
humour the “ bitter principle,’ and the atrabilious humour the “‘ sour
principle ” of the body. According as one or other of these is pre-
dominant in a person, so is his constitution or temperament. In
addition to this, the view of the nature of a humour may be extended
by suggesting, for instance, that fatty acid is an essential of choleric
humour, whereas neutral fat is an essential of sanguineous humour ;
that sulpho-centric substances are an essential of atrabilious humour.

§117. The idea belonging to the doctrine of the humours is
not affected by biochemistry or cytology, any more than the theory of
‘‘ four elements ”’ is really affected by modern chemistry. To retain
the idea is to claim a practical value in drawing a distinction between

humours” and the body-fluids. In 104 Avicenna speaks of the
blood as a product of the liver, the material for its manufacture being
derived almost directly from the food itself. As to the blood-cells,
76


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 77


had he known of them he might justly still regard them as incidentals ;
as forces accresced for a time, and always changing in substance.
After all, they are importations into the blood ; . whatever tissue be
their real source, whether their origin is local or widespread, they
are not the real trouble in anemia. Remedies will increase their
numbers, but do not touch the real disorder. From Avicenna’s point
of view, it might be said that the glamour of the revelations of the
microscope has only diverted attention from the vea/ ‘‘ sanguineous
humour ’”’ and its ultimate sources and similar subtleties, thereby
leading treatment away to “‘ attacks’? on the red and white cell
forming organs.- For the blood is itself living—not a mere chemical
conglomerate. Hence in this field there is a need for reverting to
the old paths. The constant endeavour also to reduce everything to
terms of cellular individualities, as opposed to one single complex—
the human being, the one single 1//— inevitably carries errors in its
train.

When S. Thomas wrote “ Health is a harmony of the humours ”’
(Sanitas est quaedam harmonia humorum) *1-®? (ii. 64, p. 166) he
was so near the truth as to maintain his place even in these days of
excessively refined details of knowledge.


1.—Wuat A Bopy-F.Luip (Humour: AKHLAT) Is, AND HOW


MANY KINDS THERE ARE.


67. A body-fluid, or “humour” is that fluid moist
“body ” into which our aliment is transformed.

Healthy, or “ good” humour (whether present in the ali-
ment in a pure state or admixed) is such as has the capacity for
becoming transformed into actual body-substance, either by
itself or in combination with something else. In short, it is
that which replaces the loss which the body substance (con-
tinually) undergoes.


From the above definition, it is clear that “ body-fluid ’’ is not synonymous
with “‘humour.’’ Urine, too, though a fluid, is not a humour.—In a sense, body-
fluids are the meeting-places between various opposed forces or elements, and their
chemical composition is the mode in which such forces or elements are expressed.
In this sense, the term body-fluid does not conform to the wording of the above


paragraph.


68. The residue from such, the “ superfluity,” is called
unhealthy or “bad”? humour. This is contrary in capacity to
the former, and is only exceptionally convertible into good
humour. It is proper that it should be expelled from the body
instead.


The familiar phrases ‘‘ good-humoured,” ‘‘ bad-humoured ”’ of modern con-
versation may not have the same significance to the speakers as they had in
Shakespeare’s day, but retain their value.


78 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


69. Some of the fluids are primary ; some are secondary.
The primary fluids of the body are: the sanguineous
humour, the serous humour, the bilious humour, and the
atrabilious humour.
The secondary fluids of the body are :—
(a) non-excrementitious : )
i. located at the orifices of the minutest channels
near the tissues, and thus irrigating them.
ii. permeating the tissues like a dew and capable
of being transformed into nutriment as required.
iii. an almost congealed fluid.
iv. a fluid existent among the tissue-elements from
birth.
(6) excrementitious. ‘‘ Superfluity.” Forms of the re-
spective primary fluids.


70. As regards the non-excrementitious fluids, these
have not yet been subjected to the action of any of the simple
members ; not till they reach the tissues for which they are
destined, are they changed. (p).

Of the four varieties above named, the second moistens
the tissues according to the requirements which active move-
ments entail, and it comes into play if there is anything likely to
dry up the tissues. The third variety forms a nutriment
which will be changed into the substance of the tissues,
whether to the extent of entering into their temperament,
or to the extent of changing into their very essence, thereby
attaining an entire likeness to the member. The fourth type
accounts for the continuous identity of the member or of the body
throughout life ; it arose with the sperma. It is however true


to say also that the semen (both male and female) arises out of the
humours.


71. Tue Four Bopy-FLturps or Humours Proper.
1. The sanguineous humour, the most excellent
of all.
2. The serous humour.
3. The bilious humour (lit. “‘ red bile ”’).
4. The atrabilious humour (lit. “‘ black bile ”’).


72, ‘Tur Sancuinsovs Humour.


In nature (that is, considered dynamically) the blood is hot
and moist. In character it either conforms to its nature or it
does not. That is (we may say) it is “ normal ” or “‘ abnormal.”


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 79


Normal “ blood.” is red in colour, has no unpleasant odour,
and has a very sweet taste.

When blood is abnormal, itis either (2) because the good
temperament has become intrinsically altered or vitiated—
i.e. has become colder or hotter ; but not from admixture with
any foreign matter, or (4) because an unhealthy body-fluid is
admixed with it. This may happen (i) by an unhealthy fluid
coming to it from without, penetrating it and so causing decom-
position in it, or (11) by a putrescent change in a portion of itself
—the rarefied product becoming bilious humour, and the denser
product becoming atrabilious; either one, or both together, may
remain in the blood. Abnormal blood of type (i) is named
according to (a) that which is admixed with it—whether serous
humour, or atrabilious, or simply bilious fluid. That of type (ii)
is named according to (4) its colour and wateriness—sometimes
it is turbid, sometimes attenuated, sometimes very dark from
much blackness, sometimes pale, (c) taste and odour—bitter,
salt, or sour.


§r17a “ Blut ist ein ganz besondrer Saft.’


The blood may well be regarded as comprising : sanguineous
humour, corpuscles, the canalicular system of the whole body, and
the tissue-elements abutting thereon; that is, as including the
lymphatic channels and their floating cellular population. In
addition, there are the blood-forming centres, which are the meeting-
point of two vitalities—the livingness of the blood and the livingness
of the tissues. The haemopoietic centres are foci disseminating
* vital force,’’ as also are the endocrines, the abdominal ganglia, etc.
The energies so well-known as chemical, physical, osmotic, etc., are
not primary, but conversions from the living force of these centres.
When the blood changes, or its cell-formula changes, it is because the
vital force is changing its mode: instead of radiating in one way, it is
disintegrating in other ways, and it involves some one organ more
than usual. The balance of action on organs, and the balance in
interchange now ceases to be “ just,’ and the organ or organs
concerned therein are then apt to receive the brunt of the physician’s
attention.


73. Tue Serous Humour.

In nature, this is cold and moist. We describe a normal
form and an abnormal.

Normal (‘‘ sweet”) serous humour is such as is capable of
transformation into blood at any time, seeing that it is in fact
an imperfectly matured blood. It is a sort of “ sweet ”* fluid
which is not in too cold a state; that is, it is cold compared with


* We may note that it is still correct to call a discharge “ sweet.”


80 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the blood and bilious humour, but hardly at all cold compared
with the body as a whole. A “sweet” serous humour may
change into one which is insipid, and abnormal, as we shall
describe presently. This happens when there is normal blood
admixed—as occurs often in catarrhal exudates or discharges,
and saliva.

Sweet serous humour (lymph) has no special locus or recep-
tacle in the body, any more than the two bilious humours have.
Yet the serous humour resembles blood closely in this that it is
equally necessary for all tissues, who receive it along with the
blood.

The tissues absolutely require serous humour for two reasons
—one being essential, and the other accessory.

The essential function is two-fold: (a) that it should be
near the tissue (cells) in case they should be deprived of their
habitual nutriment (viz., healthy blood) by reason of retention
of the material in the stomach or liver from some cause. ‘This
material is normally acted upon by the vegetative faculties, which
change and digest it and are themselves maintained thereby.
The transformation of lymph into blood is achieved by the innate
heat. Alien heat would only putrefy the material and decompose
it. This kind of relationship does not obtain in the case of the
two bilious fluids, because neither of them turns into blood at any
time, as the serous humour does, under the influence of the
innate heat ; but they resemble the serous humour in under-
going putrefaction and decomposition under the influence of
“alien ”’ heat.*

(2) it must be admixed with sanguineous humour before it
can reach and nourish tissues of lymphatic temperament. When
the serous humour is present in the blood for subserving nutri-
tion, it must be in definite proportion before it reaches the parts
to be nourished ; e.g. the cerebrum. It is the same in the case
of the two bilious humours.

The accessory function is that of moistening the joints and
tissues and organs concerned in movement, for otherwise the
heat of the friction of the movement would produce dryness of
their surfaces. This function is within the range of necessity.


* For “alien heat ’’ we should now read ‘ bacterial infection.”


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 81


74, TasLe or Forms or Srrous Humour.


t. Normal.
Sweet.
it. Abnormal
A.—ARRANGED ACCORDING TO THE TASTE.
No. Description. Remarks, Temperament,
I Sweet, (i) Outcome of action of the vegetative | Hot and moist.
faculties ;
(ii) Due to admixture with blood.
OF Salt. Due to admixture with bile, ‘‘ bilious | Hot and dry.
serous humour.’’
3 Acid or Sour (i) Intrinsic in origin ; Cold and dry.
(ii) due to admixture with acrid atra- ;
bilious humour.
4 Bitter (i) From undue infrigidation ;
(ii) from admixture with atrahbilious
humour.
5 Insipid. Attenuated serous humour. Cold and moist
B,—ARRANGED ACCORDING TO ESSENTIAL NATURE.
No. Description. Remarks.
6 Watery. Attenuated serous humour. This may be salty if


there arise in it some sort of putrescence.
7 Excrementitious | A superfiuity of foreign nature, and evident as such
or Mucilaginous. to the senses as a mucilaginous material.
8 Crude. This is a subvariety of the preceding; to the senses
it appears to be the same as the preceding, but
actually is different.


9 .| Vitreous. Glasslike in texture; taste sometimes sour, sometimes
absent.
10 | Calcareous. Opaque white. Denser than tke “ crude”’ form.


The attenuated part has been dispersed; that which
is denser than all the others therefore lingers too
long in the foramina and joints.


(This table is constructed out of the statements in the text in conjunction with
the table devised by Joannitius**). The additional matter does not therefore follow
the same order as the Latin text, though including all the information therein.)


The abnormal forms of serous humour (see also 74).


75. Salty serous humour (No. 2 in table), is warmer, drier
and lighter than any of the others. It is salty because oxidized
earthy matters of dry temperament and bitter taste are admixed
with the watery (nearly or quite insipid) “ moisture,” in equal
proportions. I say “equal”’ (i.e. in potency, not weight. ey)
because if the earths were in excess, the taste would be bitter
rather than salt. The same sort of process accounts for the origin
of the salts in all the salty waters found in Nature.

76. Salts may be obtained artificially also, by boiling


ashes, soap ashes, or chalky matter, etc., in water. Then strain,
G


82 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The salt will then separate out from the water, either at once,
or on standing. ye

77, Attenuated serous humour (No. 5, 6) is similar. This
may be insipid or have only a slightly salt taste. This taste
results from the admixture with an equal amount of oxidized
bile, which is dry and bitter; and the resultant heating
salty fluid is called “ bilious serous humour.” Though Galen
believed that this kind of serous humour owed its saltiness to
admixture with putrescence or wateriness, my teaching: is that
the putrescence makes it salty by setting up oxidation in it, in
consequence of which an ‘“‘ash” becomes admixed with the
moisture. Aquosity by itself is insufficient to render serous
humour salty; some other factor must be present, either as well
or on its own account.

78. Serous humour (No. 4) becomes Jitter if (i) atra-
bilious humour (which is bitter) be admixed with it, or (41) too
much infrigidation takes place, whereby the taste changes from
sweet to bitter.

The process consists in a congealing and degradation of the
watery element into something dry, and therefore earthy in
character. The degree of heat is too small to ferment it and
make it sour. A strong heat would completely alter it (into
something else altogether).

79. Sour or acid (No. 3). As in the case of sweet humour
there are two forms—one where the sourness is intrinsic in
origin ; and one where it is introduced from without. In the
second case it is acrid atrabilious humour that is the extraneous
factor. We shall speak of it later. When the sourness is
intrinsic, it is comparable with the change that takes place when
the other juices go sour. In other words, it is sour because the
humour has fermented and then gone sour.

80. No.6. See under No. 2. (No. 7 and 8 are described
in the table.)

81. The vitreous kind of serous humour (No. 9) is dense
and closely textured, and resembles glass in viscosity and weight.
It is sometimes sour to the taste and sometimes tasteless.

When a humour like this is closely textured and insipid,
it either is “ crude,”’ or changes into a crude serous humour.
The vitreous humour was originally a watery humour, and
““cold”’; and remained so without undergoing putrescence,
or having any other thing admixed with it. All this time it is not
manifest to the senses. It becomes evident only when it thickens
in texture, and develops coldness.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 83


3. Tue Brtious Humour.

In nature this is hot and dry. It also occurs in a normal
and an abnormal form.

82. Natural bilious humour is the ‘‘ foam” of blood. It
is bright red in colour. It is light and pungent. The redder its
colour, the hotter itis. It is formed in the liver, and then pursues
one of two routes—either it circulates with the blood, or it
passes on to the gall-bladder. The part which passes into the
blood-stream subserves two purposes—(i) it enables the blood
to nourish those-certain tissues or organs which need the presence
of a suitable amount of bilious humour in a dispersed form : as
holds in the case of the lung. (ii) a mechanical one. It attenuates
the blood (i.e., diminishes its surface tension !) and thus enables
blood to traverse the very minutest channels of the body.

The part which passes to the gall-bladder subserves two
purposes : (ii1) the removal, in this form, of a certain portion
of the effete matter of the body. In so doing it nourishes the
walls of the gall-bladder.

(iv) a dual function (a) it cleanses the food-residues and
viscous serous humour from off the walls of the bowel, (4) it
stimulates the muscles of the (lower) intestine and anus, thereby
enabling them to perceive when it is necessary to go to stool.

83. Any obstruction to the flow of bile from the gall-
bladder through the duct into the intestine is liable to cause colic.

84. Types of Bilious Humour.


Group.| Variety. | No.| Description. Site. Origin. Quality.
A Normal. Clear and pure} Liver ; blood |} Foam of blood. Hot.
B Abnormal | 1 | Citron-yellow | Liver. The alien sub- | Less hot.
by ad- stance is attenu-
mixture ated serous
with alien humour
substance, (added to A).
2 | Vitelline-yel- | Liver. Dense (coagulat- | Less hot.
low, colour of ed) serous humour
egg yolk. added to A.
3 | Oxidised bile,| Liver ; blood | Simple admixture} Less de-
type b. Itis with atvabilious | leterious
ruddy-yellow, humour. than 4
not transpar-


ent, resembles
blood, but is
Ven Ww Oms.
Various other
colours may
appear in it.


4 | Oxidised Gallbladder. | Spontaneous More _
bile, type a. Oxidation of | deleterious
bile =attenuated | than 3.
part + ash, But
this ash does not
separate out.


84. THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Group.| Variety. |No.| Description. Site. Origin, Quality,
Cc Abnormal | 5 | Hepatic form. | Liver. Oxidation of at- | Mod.
by inter- tenuated part of | toxic.
nal change blood. The denser
of sub- part of the blood
stance, separates out as
atrabilious
humour.
6 |Leekgreen Stomach. Oxidation of Less
bile. vitelline bile. toxic.
Gastric type a
7 | Mildew. or Stomach. Intense degree of | v. hot,
verdigris oxidation of vitel- | extremely
green bile. ; line bile till all | toxic.
Gastric type b moisture is lost.


i


No. 7 is possibly derived from No. 6 by an increase in the
degree of oxidation, whereby all the moisture is dried up. The
fact of becoming too dry accounts for the whitish colour. For
we know that when heat is applied to a moist substance, it first
turns black, until all the moisture has vanished, and after that the
blackness changes into whiteness. When the moisture is less
than half and half, whiteness begins to be visible. Thus, wood
is first charred and finally becomes a white ash. Heat applied to
a moist body makes it black ; applied to a dry body it makes it
white. Cold applied to a moist body makes it white, and applied
to a dry body makes it black. Such is our opinion about the
leekgreen and verdigris-green biles.

Verdigris-green form of bile is both hotter and more
depraved, and more deadly than all other kinds of bile. It must
therefore be classed as one of the toxic substances.


4. Tue Atrasitious Humour.


85. This is cold_and dry in nature. There is a natural
or normal form of this effete substance, and also an abnormal or
morbid form.

86. ‘The zormal form is the “ faex’”’, or sediment of good
blood, an effete matter. In taste it is between sweetness and
bitterness. It arises in the liver and then divides into two
portions, one of which enters the blood, and the other goes to
the spleen.

87. The portion which enters into the blood subserves two
purposes. (a) It takes parts in the nourishment of those members
which need a trace of atrabilious humour to complete their


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 85


temperament. Ex.: the bones. (4) It bestows stamina, strength
and density and consistence upon the blood.

88. The portion which passes to the spleen is such as is
no longer of any use to the blood. Its primary use as regards the
body as a whole is that it clears the body of so much effete
matter. Its use in regard to one special organ is that it supplies
nourishment to the spleen. Its secondary use is that by travelling
to the mouth of the stomach by a sort of milking movement, (a)
it gives it tone and makes it tighten up and thicken, (4) its
bitterness irritates (tickles) the mouth of the stomach and sets
up a sense of hunger and so arouses the appetite.

89. You must remember that the part of the bilious
humour which passes to the gall-bladder is something no longer
needed by the blood, and that the part which emerges from the
gall-bladder is something no longer needed by that either. It
is much the same with the atrabilious humour. ‘That part
which goes to the spleen is such as is no longer needed by the
blood, and that part which emerges from the spleen is such as is
no longer needed by the spleen.

And besides that, just as the bilious humour, in passing
through the intestine, arouses peristalsis and so helps to get
food away from the stomach, so the atrabilious humour passing
from the spleen arouses appetite and leads to the drawing in of
food down into the stomach.

Wherefore thanks be to Allah the best Artificer of all
things, and unending the praise.

90. The abnormal form of atrabilious humour is not a
sort of precipitate or “‘faex’”’; it is really a form of oxidized
material, or ash formed from an oxidation of the commingled
bilious humour. Thus, when moist things are admixed with
earthy ones, the earthiness separates out (1) as a sediment.
This is exemplified in the case of the blood, of which normal
atrabilious humour is a sediment. (2) as an ash, or oxidation-
product. In this case the rarefied portion disperses and the
dense portion remains behind. Thisis exemplified in the humours,
of which excrementitious atrabilious humour is the segregate.

91. Blood is the only body-fluid which yields a precipitate
of this kind. Serous humour does not do so because of its
viscosity; it behaves like*oil. Bilious humour does not do so
because it is attenuated and is deficient in earthy matters, and it is
also constantly moving. ‘This is because the blood separates
out only very little; nothing which needs attention; besides, if a
substance should separate out, it would soon putrefy or be


86 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


expelled from the body. If it putrefied, the attenuated part
would disperse, and the denser part remain behind. It is this
denser unprecipitated part that is the oxidized atrabilious


humour.


The abnormal atrabilious humour is hotter and lighter than the
natural form, and it has in itself a strong penetrative power of moving
from the upper parts to the lower, and also a destructive action


(Joannitius).


92. Excrementitious atrabilious humour is of four kinds :
(2) the ash derived from bilious humour. This is bitter. The
difference between this and oxidized bilious humour is that in
the latter the ash is only admixed, whereas in the other the
ash separates out after dispersal of the attenuated portion ;
(4) the ash derived from the oxidation of serous humour. The
ash becomes salty if the serous humour is too attenuated and
watery; otherwise the ash is acid or bitter ; (c) the ash derived
from the oxidation of sanguineous humour. This is salty and
faintly sweet ; (d) the ash derived from normal atrabilious
humour. If this humour be attenuated, the ash will be very
acrid, like vinegar. ‘That is, when vinegar (and the like) is
sprinkled upon the earth it ‘ boils ” and acquires an acrid odour,
so that flies and insects of all kinds shun it. If the atrabilious
humour were dense the ash will have less acrimony and be only
slightly bitter.

98. ‘There are three kinds of morbid atrabilious humour :—
(1) Oxidised bilious humour, whereby the attenuated portion
is removed. ‘There are two varieties of this.

94. Lnjurious Actions, (2) Sero-atrabilious humour is less
injurious and acts at a slow rate. (3) Choleric-atrabilious hamour
is more injurious, and undergoes decomposition very readily.
(2) This form is more amenable to treatment than the other.
(2) There is another form which is more acrid, and more in-
jurious. Still, if treatment be begun more early, it will be more
quickly amenable thereto. (c) A third form effervesces less
when dropped upon earth and penetrates the tissues less easily,
and is more slowly destructive. On the other hand it is very
difficult to disperse, or mature or treat by any remedial measures.


These then are the several kinds of normal and excrementi-
tious humours.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 87
95. Galen regards the blood as the only normal body-fluid,


for he considers that all others are excrementitious and quite use-
less. But if the blood were the only nourisher of the various
organs of the body, it would be as much as saying they are all
alike in temperament and nature. Bone would not be harder
than flesh were it not for the hardness in the atrabilious humour
present in the blood. Brain would not be softer than the flesh
were it not for the presence in the blood of the soft serous humour
which nourishes the brain. So we conclude that in the blood
there are other humours, which leave it (in the various organs).

96. Moreover, we see how when blood is withdrawn
into a vessel, it contracts and allows various portions visibly to
separate out—a foam (the yellow bile), a turbid faex (the atra-
bilious humour), a part like egg-white (the serous humour),
and a watery part (the aquosity), which passes out through the
urine. One does not count the aquosity among the body-fluids
because it is not a nutrient, even though it is true it is taken
in as drink. Its purpose is to dilute the aliment and enable it to
permeate the tissues. A humour, on the other hand, is a nutrient,
derived from both food and drink. By the word “ nutrient,” I
mean that which is assimilable into the likeness of the human
body—a complex substance, and not a “simple”? body. Water,
of course, is a “ simple ”’ body.

* * *

97. Some think that strength of body depends on abun-
dance of blood ; that weakness is associated with paucity of
blood. But it is not so. It is rather this, that the state of the
body determines whether the nutriment will be beneficial to it
or not,

Others again, believe that whether the humours be increased
or lessened in amount, the maintenance of health depends on
the preservation of a certain quantitative proportion between the
several humours, one to another, peculiar to the human body.
But that is not exactly correct. The humours must, besides that,
maintain a certain constant quantity. It is not a matter of the
composition of one or other humour, but of (the body) itself ;
but the proportions which they bear one to another must also be
preserved.

98. I purposely omit referring to certain other problems
relative to the humours, because they pertain to philosophy and
not to medicine.

Tentatively to draw up correlations between modern biochemical data and the


humours as above described would not be quite a useless exercise. From the
description, it is clear that any given sample of blood contains: (1) all four normal


88 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


humours; (2) a certain proportion of immature humours—that is, under-oxidised
digestive products; (3) excrementitious humours—the tissue-wastes or. effete
substances; the by-products of complete oxidation. In diseased states, it may
also contain (4) certain depraved humours, including (a) over-oxidised products ;
(b) putrefactive substances of various kinds. | :

To (1) belong: as regards the sanguineous humour—serum-globulins and
serum-albumen, neutral fat, glucose, and the salts concerned in maintaining the acid-
base equilibrium; as regards the bilious humour: bile-pigments, cholesterin,
and perhaps lecithin and volatile fatty acids; to atrabilious humour: neutral
sulphur, nitrogen compounds when in colloidal form, certain mucoids.

To (2) belong: glycogen, animal gum, soaps, various salts. To (3): the
non-protein-nitrogen group (urea, ammonia, creatinin, etc.) To (4) : the products
of bacterial growth, various auto-intoxications, diamines, etc.

To complete the correlatioris, some idea should be formed as to the morphol-
ogical place to which the substances are severally to be assigned, as doubtless the
humours occupy blood-corpuscles and other particulate components of the blood.


2. Tue Mope oF ORIGIN OF THE FLUIDS OF THE Bopy.


99. Aliment undergoes a certain amount of digestion
during the act of mastication. The lining of the mouth being
continuous with that of the stomach, there is as it were one
continuous digestive surface. When that which has been.
masticated comes in contact with it, a certain change at once
takes place in it—namely under the influence of the saliva,
whose action, in virtue of the innate heat within it, is digestive.
That is how it is that when wheat is masticated it procures the
maturation of furuncles and abscesses, but has no such effect
when simply rubbed with water, or even if boiled with water.

Some assert that the sign which shows us that food is
already beginning to be altered after mastication is that prior
to this act there is neither odour nor taste in it.

100. Once the aliment has entered the stomach, true
digestion goes on—not so much by reason of the heat of the
stomach as by reason of the heat of the enveloping members—
namely :

On the right: the liver.

On the eft: the spleen. This not warm in virtue of its own

substance, but in virtue of its blood-supply.

In front: the omentum, whose fat easily retains heat and

reflects it on to the stomach.

Above: the heart, which warms the diaphragm and so

warms the stomach.

_ 101. The first stage of digestion yields the essence of the
aliment, which, in many animals, becomes “‘ chyle ” by the help of
admixture with the fluid which one has consumed. ‘The chyle
is of the consistence of a ptisan (broth), that is, as thick as sodden
barley.

102. The portion of this chyle which is thus diluted is


drawn from the stomach into the intestines, and then is caused


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 89


to enter into the roots of the mesenteric vessels which are found
all along the intestinal tract. These vessels are slender, and firm.
Having entered these channels the nutriment passes into the
portal vein, enters the gateway of the liver, and then travels
along finer and ever finer divisions until it comes to the capillaries
(lit., the very fine hair-like channels), which are the ultimate
sourse of the vena cava emerging from the convexity of the liver.

The passage of the nutriment through these very narrow
channels could not take place were it not admixed with water
consumed in excess of the strict requirements of the body.

By being distributed over the whole liver in this way, the
chyle is exposed to the digestive function of the whole organ,
and the function of the liver is thus accomplished most vigor-
ously, energetically, and speedily. The change of nutriment into
blood is now complete.

103. The various products and by-products of digestion
up to this point may be tabulated as follows (p) :


TABLE OF DIGESTIVE-PRODUCTS.
(a) In healthy digestion—
(i) the blood itself.
(i1) By-products :
(a) a foam ae te ons .. the bilious humour.
(b) a sort of precipitate .. oe .. the atrabilious humour.
(6) In unhealthy digestion—
(iii) By-products :
(c) An oxidation product, where digestion is carried too far :


1. Attenuated portion .. ..» morbid bilious humour.

2. Dense portion 4 .. morbid atrabilious humour,
(d) A product when digestion is not

carried far enough sd -. serous humour.


104. As long as it stays in the liver, the blood which the
liver forms is more attenuated than it should be, because the
wateriness is in excess, for the reason already given. But when
the blood leaves the liver the excess of water is removed, for it is
taken to the renal vessels, and so provides the kidneys with the
quantity and quality of the blood best suited for their nutrition.
The “‘ fat’ of the blood nourishes the kidneys, and the super-
fluous wateriness and a certain degree of sanguineous material
passes down to the bladder and so away from the body.

105. The good blood ascends into the superior vena cava,
and its subsequent course is into smaller and smaller veins :
and finally into the finest hair-like channels. Having reached
these hair-like channels it ‘‘ sweats out ” through their orifices
and bathes the tissues, according to the decree of Allah.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


90
106. ‘TasLe or THE Causes oF Humours.
|
Name of Blood. Bilious Serous Atrabilious
Cause. Humour Humour. Humour.
Material Those parts of | The attenuated |The dense hu-|The very dense
Cause. the solid and | hot, sweet, oily | mid, viscid,cold} by-product of
fluid aliment|and sharp by-| by-product of | the aliments,
which are of] product of ali-| the aliments. very deficient in
equable +tem-| ment. moisture,and ex-
perament. ceeding in heat.
Formal Exact and good | Digestion verg- | Imperfect Precipitative
Cause. digestion. ing on excess. | digestion. tendency, pre-
venting the flow
or dispersal.
Efficient Attempered Attempered| Feeble heat. Medium heat ;
Cause, heat. heat, for nor- i€;, a) beaker
mal bilious hu- oxidation which
mour (‘ foam’). surpasses the
Undue heat, for limits of equi-
abnormal. bili- poise.
ous humour.
Site: liver
Final To nourish the | Primary : Primary and | Primary and
Cause. body. nutrition ; Secondary pur-|secondary pur-
attenuation of | poses named in | poses named in
blood. 87.
Secondary : Nutrition.
cleansing bowel Inspissation of
wall; desire for blood.
stool (see 82). Nourishment of
spleen.
Tone to stom-
ach.
Aid to appe-
tite.


107.


Further details regarding the efficient causes :


1. Action of heat and cold. One must not forget. that the


most fundamental agents in the formation of the humours are
heat and cold. | When the heat is equable, blood forms ;
when heat is in excess, bilious humour forms; when in great
excess, so that oxidation occurs, atrabilious humour forms.
When the cold is equable, serous humour forms ; when cold
is in excess, so that congelation becomes dominant, atrabilious
humour forms.

Il. The faculties. There is also a proportionate relation
between the active and passive faculties (which has to be con-
sidered in thinking of the formation of the humours).

III. The temperaments. One must not get the idea that every
temperament gives rise to its like and never to its opposite. A
temperament often gives rise to its exact opposite, indirectly


THE CANON OF MEDICINE gl


(of course) ; it cannot do so directly. A cold and dry
temperament may give rise to visible moisture, though this
would not be beneficial, but would indicate that the digestion is
feeble. : A person with such a temperament would be thin, with
supple joints, and hairless skin, cold to the touch, the surface
veins narrow, and he would be gentle and apprehensive (timid)
innature. He would be like the old person, who makes too much
serous humour and is cold and dry in temperament.

108. Circumstances which make the atrabilious humour
plentiful.

(1) Immoderate degree of heat in the liver.

(2) Weakness of the spleen.

(3) A degree of cold sufficient to be congelative and cause
marked and long-continued constriction.

(4) The existence of various long-standing or often repeated
diseases whereby the humours are reduced to ash.

When the atrabilious humour is plentiful, it lodges (not
literally, but virtually) between the liver and stomach, with the
result that the formation of blood and healthy fluids is interfered
with, and less blood is formed.

* * *


109. Third digestion.—The blood and that which circulates


with it undergoes a third digestion in the blood-vessels.


This is a truth worth noting. The tissue-foods carried by the blood, and the
tissue wastes discharged into it, undergo treatment within it, which is only efficient
if certain salts and acid bases are present ; otherwise conversion of such substances
into available form fails to occur; and deposition in various: tissues, fascie, and
joints, and even in the vessel-walls (atheroma, e.g.) and nerve-sheaths occur with ill
effect. These deleterious substances may be thought of as composed of particles
too large to permeate the (‘‘ invisible’’) pores of the tissue-boundaries referred to,
and the pathological condition of ‘“‘ obstructions’’ which looms so largely in the
Canon here finds its vaison d@ étre.


110. Fourth digestion. When the nutriment has reached
the various members, giving each its appropriate ‘‘ element,”
a fourth digestion takes place.

111. The fate of the residues. ‘The residues from the first
digestion (namely that in the stomach)—pass out by way of the
intestines as excrement. ‘Those from the second digestion
(namely, in the liver)—pass out chiefly by the urine, though
some go to the spleen and gall-bladder. The residues from
the other two digestions are discharged partly by the skin as
insensible perspiration and external sordes ; partly through
visible orifices—the nostrils and ears ; partly through the invisible
orifices scattered over the whole body ; sometimes through


92 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


unnatural channels in the form of inflammatory matter ; some-
times as appendages like the hair and nails.

If the body-fluids become attenuated, they are readily
dispersed and discharged from the body, especially when the
pores dilate. The loss of such fluids produces great weakness,
not only by the fact of the loss but also by the dispersion and loss
of breath which (necessarily) occurs simultaneously.

112. Lastly, it must be clearly understood that not only
the causes of origin, but also the causes of movement of the
humours must be taken into consideration.

Exercise and heating agents set in motion the sanguineous
humour, the bilious humour, and even the atrabilious humour
(which is strengthened thereby). Repose sets the serous humour
in motion and strengthens it. Repose also strengthens some
kinds of atrabilious humour.

Even imagination, emotional states and other agents cause
the humours to move. ‘Thus, if one were to gaze intently at
something red, one would cause the sanguineous humour to
move. ‘That is why one must not let a person suffering from
nose-bleeding see things of a brilliant red colour.


‘‘ Anger, joy, and passions of a like nature are accompanied
by a change in the body.”” (Sum. Theol. 75, 3; p. 11, trans.)

The temper of a cow frequently determines the quantity of the
milk it yields, if it gives milk at all. But under the influence of such
passions as anger, rage, fury, the milk changes in quality, and
develops noxious or poisonous properties. Even the flesh may
become poisonous if the animal suffered intensely or protractedly,
either mentally or physically. Overdriven cattle may thus yield meat
which contains toxic substances injurious to the human consumer
(Lindasy, ** ii. 270, etc.).

Effects of colours on bodily functions——Red and yellow are
injurious to the eye. Blue light soothes the movement of the blood,
while red light stimulates it. Morning light aids nutrition. Colours
vary in their effect according to their intensity. Conversely, dark-
ness benefits various conditions ; it helps to induce inactivity and
sleep Pereira.?*; Babbitua


)


_ Light in another sense has an effect on the emotions: for instance, the light
of intelligence converts fear (earth element) into caution, affection (water element)
into benevolence.


118. This completes all we propose to say at present about
the humours and their mode of formation. ‘There are other
aspects of the subject whose discussion and justification pertain


to the philosopher.


(See also the composite Chart at the end of the Volume.)


2
5 2
t= eres ‘J
8 a


THESIS V. THE MEMBERS


1. WHat A MeEmBER IS AND WHAT ARE ITS COMPONENTS


114, The members of the body are derived primarily
from the commingling of the humours, just as the humours are
derived primarily from the commingling of the aliments, and
the aliments are primarily composed of commingled ‘“‘ elements.”

115, There are simple members and compound members.
The simple members are those whose structure is homogeneous
throughout, so that their name describes them in all parts :
e.g. flesh, bone, nerves, and the like.* ‘The compound members
are those in which one and the same word is not a correct descrip-
tion of all the parts. For instance, in the case of ‘‘ hand,” “‘ face,”’
—a part of the face is not ‘“‘face’’; a part of the hand is not
“hand.” ‘These members are called ‘“‘ instrumental ’’ because
they are the instruments whereby the passions and actions of
the mind (“soul ’’) are achieved.


TABLE OF THE MEMBERS.


AUXILIARY ORGAN SENSE ORGANS LuNG STOMACH CONSTITUENTS OF
Afferent AND HuMouRS
uh 5 > INTESTINE
BS
£] 8 V
aa BS VEINS
<,
V V V V
PRINCIPAL BRAIN HEART LIVER REPRODUCT-
ORGAN (Animal (Vital (Natural IVE GLAND
breath) breath) breath)
o
=a RS)
8
o
V V
IMMEDIATE NERVES ARTERIES GALL-BLADDER, Ducts AND


AUXILIARY ORGAN SPLEEN, KIDNEY GENITAL ADNEXA


Efferent hes
EIB
ale
A
| s
o
REMOTE Bones, CARTILAGES, |
AUXILIARY ORGAN } LIGAMENTS, Musc es, | ‘‘ FLESH ’’ INTESTINAL
(Elementary FasciaE, TENDONS, Fat TRACT
Tissues) MEMBRANES


* Equivalent to the modern term Elementary tissues. Cf. ““ homoiomenous ”’


parts.
93


94 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


416, Tuer Simpte Memsers (the “ elementary tissues.”’)


“Simple’?: Cf. the scholastic sense—homogeneous; _ in-
divisible. (See § 19.)


1. The Jone. This is sufficiently hard to form the founda-
tion of the body as a whole, and provide the purchase needed for
its movements. .

2. The cartilage. Being softer than bone, this can be bent,
and yet it is harder than all the other members. It was made for
the purpose of providing a cushion between the hard bone and
the soft members, so that the latter should not be injured when
exposed to a blow or fall, or compression. This is shown in the
case of the shoulder-blade and the bones over the praecordia,
and the ribs ; and in the case of the epiglottis and xiphisternum.
In the case of joints, it prevents the tissues from being torn by
the hard bone. It gives a purchase for a muscle to obtain ex-
tension in places where there is no bone to give attachment or
support (for instance the muscles of the eyelids), and also gives
attachment to muscles without being too hard for them (for
instance, the epiglottis).

3. The nerves. These are structures arising from the brain
or spinal cord. They are white, soft, pliant, difficult to tear, and
were created to subserve (a) sensation, (4) movement of the
limbs.

4. The tendons. ‘These form the terminations of the
muscles. They resemble nerves in appearance. They are
attached to movable members, and when the muscles contract
and relax, the parts to which the tendons are attached move to and
fro. They may sometimes broaden when the muscle expands,
and then become narrow again on their own account, lengthening
and shortening apart from the lengthening and shortening of the
muscle. Sometimes this is through the intervention of ligaments.
The upper part of the muscle is called ‘‘ flesh”; that which
leaves the flesh and passes to the joint, bringing the two close
together, is the ‘“‘ tendon.”

5. The /igaments. These structures have the appearance
and feel of nerves. They are of two kinds : true and false. The
latter extends to the muscle. The former does not reach as far
as the muscle, but simply joins the two ends of the bones of a
joint firmly together. This false ligament has not the feel of
ligament, and is not painful when moved or rubbed. The


auxiliaries of the ligaments are the structures attached to them,
as has been explained.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 95


6. The arteries. These structures arise from the heart.
They are hollow, elongated, fibrous, and of ligamentous con-
sistence. Their movements consist in expansion and contrac-
tion, which distinguishes them from the veins. They were
created in order to enable the heart to be ventilated, fuliginous
vapour to be expelled therefrom, and the breath* distributed
by their means to all parts of the body.

7. The veins. ‘These resemble arteries except in so far as
they arise from the liver and do not pulsate. Their purpose is
to carry the blood away from all parts of the body.

(As the text stands, it will equally read “ to all parts of the body.”” As we know,
the belief was that blood left the heart to all parts of the body, and also left through
the veins to all parts of the body. The arteries carried the breath. The veins
carried the aliment. The heart therefore drove blood away from it on both sides.
The distribution into minute capillaries was known for both series of vessels. But it
did not seem to occur that the two flows were in opposite directions, and that as much
went out of the heart as came into it. The conviction that the two quantities were not
€qual was the real reason for not going on to the truth of the literal circulation.


At bottom, it was the equality of the two quantities which Harvey had to prove
in order to establish the fact of the circulation.)


8. The membranes. These structures are formed of
extremely minute interwoven filaments which are extremely
delicate. Their object is (a) to form the external covering for
other structures and thereby (4) preserve the form and outline
of these structures, (c) to support the members, (¢d) by means of
their fibres to bind together the nerves and ligaments with the
members ; for instance they hold the kidneys in position, (e) to
impart sensation to members which, are themselves insensitive,
since by providing a sensitive covering they enable the member
to be aware of anything befalling it. For instance: the lung,
the liver, the spleen, the kidney ; all of which are in themselves
insensitive, and would not feel being touched were there not a
membrane over them.t A flatulent distension or an inflammatory
deposit in the organ is felt by us only because the enclosing
membrane, being stretched, feels it; or, in the case of an
inflammatory mass, is aware of the weight.

g. The flesh. “ Flesh” includes muscles, fasciae, tendons,
ligaments, connective-tissues, and so forth all together. Flesh
is that which fills up the spaces left within the members, thus
imparting firmness and solidity.

117. In every member there is a natural faculty (the
vegetative faculty) which subserves its own nutrition. This


* Nowadays we would say “‘ oxygen ”’ instead of “ breath.” i Vett
+ We know to-day that the viscera are only sensitive to touch and pain via
their peritoneal covering (Tr.).


96 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


faculty is the power by which attraction, retention, assimilation,
union with nutriment, and expulsion of effete matter are secured.
Members may therefore be classified accordingly. But besides
that, some members possess a further faculty which passes from
them to another member, while others have not such a faculty.
Other members again have still another faculty which passes
into them from another member, and some have not such another
faculty.

The following associations may therefore be assumed :—

(a) receiving and also giving a faculty.

(6) giving and not receiving a faculty.

(c) receiving and not giving a faculty.

(d) neither giving nor receiving a faculty.

118. There can be no doubt about the existence of the
first-named. All agree that the brain and the liver each receive
their power of life, natural heat, and breath from the heart, and
that each of them is also the starting-point of another faculty
which it sends out to other organs. But there is a disagreement
about the second. Thus in the relation between the brain and
sensation, is sensation confined to the (literal) brain, or not? In
the relation between the faculty of nutrition and the liver, is it
integral in the liver, or not ?

119. Then, too, in regard to the heart. There is a great
disagreement between the philosophers and the physicians. The
great Philosopher said that the heart is a member which gives
and does not receive ; that it is the first root of all the faculties
and gives the faculties of nutrition, life, apprehension, movement,
to the several other members,—whereas physicians (and some
of the ancients) considered these faculties to be distributed among
several members (the faculty of nutrition in the liver ; of vital
power in the heart ; the mental faculties in the brain) ; and that
hence there can be no such thing as a member giving without
receiving. However plausible the physicians are, careful con-
sideration shows that the argument of the Philosopher is much
nearer the truth.


“There are the minds of the cells of the liver, and the liver-mind—the mind
that regulates the activities of the liver-cells. Above the liver-mind and above
the stomach-mind and the heart-mind is the general physical mind ; and, above that
general physical mind, and also above the intellectual mind is a higher mind still.
There is a hierarchy and kingdom within us.’’—(Miles,**3, p. 92).


120. As to the third association, we consider that there
can be no doubt about the fact that some members receive and
do not give. Thus, the flesh receives the power of sensation and
life, but has not the power of imparting another faculty in return.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 97


121. As to the fourth—there is also a disagreement both
among physicians and among philosophers. On the one hand
it is thought that the non-sentient bone and flesh and the like
could not continue to live unless these powers were residing in
them, and that therefore they do not need to receive ;—that the
power provided by the aliments conveyed to them is adequate,
and that therefore they neither furnish a power for another
member nor does another member furnish them with a power.
The opposite opinion is that the powers in those members are
not residing in them, but are formed in the liver and heart ;
and when they reach these members they come to rest within
them. There is no means of deciding between the two views
by argument but the inability to do so is no hindrance in practice.
As to the first of these two views, one must realize that it does
not matter whether the heart be the source of sensation and volun-
tary motion in the brain, or not ; whether the source of the
nutritive faculty be in the liver, or not. It is of no significance
whether the brain has in itself the source of the powers of the
soul, or whether these powers only come by way of the heart.
In any case it is only a re/ation. If the liver is the starting-point
of the nutritive faculty, that too is only in relation to other
members.

Then as to the second of the two views, one must realize
that it does not matter whether the natural faculty in a member
like bone is innate in it in virtue of its temperament, or whether
it arose in the liver first, or whether neither is true. One must
rather realize that the faculty could not be there at all were it
not for the liver, and that therefore if the path were obstructed
the bone would cease to receive the necessary nutriment, and
its functions would cease—exactly as holds in the case of move-
ment when some nerve-connection with the brain is severed.
There is the natural faculty in the bone as long as its tempera-
ment is maintained.

122, The whole discrepancy is removed by regarding
some members as principal or vital, some as auxiliary, and some
as neither vital nor auxiliary.


123. Classification of Members into Principal (or, Vital)
and Auxiliary.

The principal (or, vital) organs are those in which the
primary faculties of the body arise—t.e. the faculties necessary
either to the life of the individual or to the life of the race.


“ In the body is a part which being sound the rést is sound, and which being
unsound, the rest is unsound. And this is the heart.” (Burton: Night eh:


98 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The principal organs necessary for the life of the individual
are three in number :

1—The heart, the source or starting-point of the vital
power, or innate heat.

2—The brain, the seat of the mental faculties, sensation and
movement.

3—The “iver, the seat of the nutritive or vegetative faculties.

The organs concerned in the maintenance of the life of the
race are: the three just named, and :

4—The generative organs, some of which are essential and
others auxiliary. The essential function is that of forming
generative elements; the auxiliary functions are those of
giving the masculine and feminine form and temperament.
These functions are inseparable from the race, and yet play no
part in the essence of life.

The auxiliary members are of two kinds : (a) preparative,*
(6) purely or absolutely auxiliary. The former come into
operation before the principal members can come into play.
The purely auxiliary members come into operation after the
principal members have functioned. This is conveniently shown
in the following table :


Preparative member. | Member subserved. | Auxiliary member.


Lung. Heart. Aorta.


Stomach. Liver. Veins.


Liver, with other nutri-


ent members and the | Brain, Nerves.
guardians of the
breath.
Testis or ovary. Generative organs.| Penis and erectile tis-


sues (and ducts.)

Female organs car-
rying the semen to
the site of concep-
tion. Uterus as per-
fector of the virtue
of the semen.


* These are the ‘‘ adnexa,”’


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 99


124. Classification of the members according to action.—
Galen classified the members into those which effect an action
(e.g. heart), those which assist the action (e.g. lung) and those
which achieve both (e.g. liver). But for my part, I consider as
“action ” that particular kind of action by means of which a given
member accomplishes the maintenance of the person’s life or
the perpetuation of the species. Thus, the heart gives rise to
the breath. Action is assisted when one member is prepared
for receiving the action of the other member, thereby completing
the process either of giving life to the individual, or of propagating
the race. Thus, the lung prepares the air. The liver carries out
the first digestion so far as to prepare for the third and fourth
digestion. The more perfectly the liver functions in regard to
the second digestion, the more likely is the blood so made to
be adequate for nourishing the tissues. Hence in this respect
the liver effects an action ; and, in so far as the liver assists in ac-
complishing a further action, so it is preparative for that action.

125. Classification of the members according to their origin.—

Some members take their origin from the semen: namely,
members composed of like parts, except the flesh and the fat.
Other members come from the blood: namely the flesh, and the
fat. Other members come from both male and female “ sperm.’’*
According to the teaching of philosophy, the process of genera-
tion may be compared with the processes which take place in the
manufacture of cheese. Thus the male “ sperm” is equivalent
to the clotting agent of milk, and the female ‘‘ sperm ”’ is equiva-
lent to the coagulum of milk. The starting point of the clotting
is in the rennet ; so the starting-point of the clot “‘ man ”’ is in
the male semen (“‘ We made the life-germ a clot ’—Q.23.14).
Just as the beginning of the clotting is in the milk, so the begin-
ning of the clotting of the form of man lies in the female “ sperm.”
Then, just as each of the two—the rennet and the milk—enter
into the ‘‘ substance ”’ of the cheese which results, so each of the
two—male and female sperm—enters into the “ substance ”
of the ‘“‘ embryo.”


*The word ‘‘Sperma” is here really more exact than “semen.”
Semen = x + sperm. Therefore it is not incorrect to speak of a ‘‘ female sperm.”
Note that only a portion of the spermatozoon enters into the new human being,
and not all the ovum.

Paracelsus wrote that the ‘‘ sperm ”’ is not the visible seminal fluid of man,
but rather a semi-material principle contained therein, or an ‘‘ aura seminalis,”
to which the semen serves as a vehicle (De generatio hominis : Hartmann, *, p. 72).
In another place he says “ the matrix attracts the seed of both persons, mixed with
the semen, and afterwards expels the semen, but retains the sperm. Thus the
seed comes into the matrix. The matrix does not merely mean the womb of a
woman ; the whole body of the woman is a mother, a matrix.‘‘—(De morbo. matric).


100 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Galen gives a contrary account. He considers that each of
the sperms has both a coagulative power and a receptive capacity
for coagulation ; so he says that the coagulative power is stronger
in the male than it is in the female, but the receptive capacity
for coagulation is stronger in the female than the male.

But the real truth of the matter is expounded in our own
works dealing with the fundamental principles of natural science.

126. Relations between the female menstrual blood and the
embryo.

1. During pregnancy, the blood which is otherwise dis-
charged from the female at the time of menstruation becomes
nutriment (for the embryo) in three ways. One portion is
changed into the likeness of the substance of the sperm and the
members derived therefrom. ‘This is the nutriment which
enables growth to take place. Another portion is not nutriment
of that kind, but is capable of being aggregated into the material
which fills up the interstices in the principal members and
becomes flesh and fat.

A third portion is effete material, and not utilizable for
either of the two preceding purposes. It remains in the same
situation until the time of birth, and is then expelled with the
infant.

After birth, the blood which the liver of the infant makes
takes the place of the maternal blood. So it arises from an organ
which itself was formed out of the maternal blood.

127. The flesh of the infant is derived from the gross
blood, congealed by heat and dryness [cf. the fact that a moderate
degree of heat coagulates egg-white]. The fat of the infant is
derived from the aquosity and unctuosity of the blood, which
cold has congealed and heat dispersed.

128. Repair of damaged members.—(a) Members derived
from the sperm.

Should a loss of continuity arise in the members derived
from the sperm, restoration can only occur, and then only in a few
of them, and if the individual is spare in habit, and has not passed
the age of juvenility. These members are : the bones, the small
branches of veins ; medium-sized veins and arteries. For when
disseverance occurs in such members as bone and nerves, they
will not grow again.

(b) Members derived from the blood.

If the members which are derived from the blood are
damaged, they are renewed out of like substance. E.g. the flesh.

(c) Members derived from both blood and sperm.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE IOI


If the member which is damaged arises both from blood
and sperm, then, as it is not very long since the sperm was there,
it will be reconstructed (Ex.; the teeth at the age of juvenility)
unless meanwhile the blood has undergone a change of tempera-
ment. In that case re-construction would not take place.


129, Sensation and movement is sometimes conveyed to a
member through one single nerve, sometimes through several
nerves. In each case the nerve is the source of the power.


130. The membranes which cover the internal organs.—
These all arise either from the pleura or the peritoneum. Those
members in the thorax, which derive their covering from the
pleura, are : the diaphragm, the veins and arteries ; the lung.
These organs in the abdomen are covered from the peritoneum
which covers the muscles of the abdominal wall.


131. Texture of members. All members are either fleshy
in texture or fibrous (like the flesh found throughout muscles),
or are devoid of fibrous texture (e.g. liver). Fibrous texture
goes with power of movement—voluntary in the case of voluntary
muscles ; involuntary in the case of the uterus and veins. Com-
pound movements, like that of deglution, depend on the direction
of the fibres being various—longitudinal, oblique, transverse.
The longitudinal fibres produce in-drawing ; the oblique fibres
expel or force onwards ; the transverse fibres grip and hold.

Even where a member has only one coat, as is true in the
veins and bladder, there are still three kinds of fibres which inter-
weave one with another. Members which have two coats have
the cross fibres externally, and the others on the inner side.
The longitudinal fibres tend towards the inner surface. The
purpose of this arrangement is that in-drawing and expulsion
should not occur simultaneously, whereas there is no objection
to the acts of in-drawing and holding and gripping occurring
together—except in the case of the intestines, where much
retention is disadvantageous, whereas in-drawing and expulsion
are all-important.

132. Hollow (tubular) members which contain substances
different from their walls have sometimes one coat, sometimes
two. The presence of two coats serves the following purposes :

(1) to provide the necessary strength to the walls, so that
there is no risk of the proper power of movement failing at any
time. Ex.: arteries.


102 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(2) to ensure that the contents shall not dissipate or escape.
One coat would not suffice to retain so tenuous a substance
as the breath which the arteries contain ; and it would make the
risk of rupture or severance in injuries too great, in which case
death would be very liable to occur because the blood would then
drain out.* This is a very great danger.

(3) where there is a demand for vigorous suction and ex-
pulsion, it is beneficial to have a separate instrument available
for the performance of both actions rather than to distribute both
powers over the one coat. This applies in the case of the stomach
and intestines.

(4) where each coat of a member subserves its own action ;
or each action requires its own particular temperament. Thus,
in the case of the stomach, there is a need of a power of sensation
(which can only exist in a tissue containing nerves) and also a
power to execute the movements of digestion (for which a fleshy
tissue is needed). Hence each need is supplied by its own coat—
the nerve-containing tissue for the power of sensation ; the
fleshy coat for the power of executing the movements entailed
in the work of digestion. Nature made the inner coat capable of
sensation, and the outer coat fleshy. ‘The operation of sensation
requires actual contact with the nervous tissue, as is true in the
case of the sense of touch ; but the movements necessary to enable
digestion do not require contact of the material to be digested
with the fleshy walls.


133. Certain members (e. g. the flesh) have a temperament
so near to that of blood that the latter needs to undergo little
change in order to subserve nutrition. Consequently there is
no need for apertures or for spaces or cavities in these members,
wherein to retain nutrient material pending its transformation
into their own substance. In such members the nutrient at once
becomes identical with their substance.

184, But other members (e.g. the bones) have a tempera-
ment which is very different from that of the blood. Therefore
before these can be nourished, the blood must needs undergo a
series of successive transformations before becoming like to them
in substance. That is why spaces were made in which nutriment
can be retained long enough to enable the conversion to take
place. This is true in the case of the femur and humerus. In the
case of the lower jaw bone numerous apertures are seen scattered
through it. In this way more nutriment can be accommodated.


* Note this proof that Avicenna knew the arteries contain blood.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 103


than is necessary for the moment, and the transformation into
their own likeness can take place little by little.

135. Lastly, strong members expel their waste matters
into the adjacent weaker members. Thus the heart to the axilla ;
the brain to the tissues behind the ears ; the liver to the groins.


§ 118. The next four subsections of the text are omitted. They
deal with the anatomy of the bones, muscles, nerves and blood-
vessels, and are naturally inadequate in comparison with modern
Anatomy.


Ancient anatomy has been criticized for allowing as a basis the dissections
of monkeys and other animals, apparently overlooking the important factor of
circumstance, in order to give the impression of lack of acumen in those days. But
in our days, ability and acumen being taken for granted, it is considered allowable
to base conclusions in the domain of physiology and pathology upon laboratory
reactions obtained from the same kinds of animals. Some workers are alive to the
possible insufficiency of data so obtained, but make a virtue of necessity. This
may also be claimed for Avicenna.


Avicenna was seeking to express a certain truth in these sub-
sections as well as in other parts of the Canon, and it is profitable
to abstract it and develop it further in the light of modern knowledge.
The following are some of the considerations in mind.

§ 119. The variations of anatomical structure which are
observed throughout the animal kingdom are the expression of the
differing nature and requirements of the respective animal-types.
But in dealing with comparative anatomy it is usual to regard
evolution as the essential factor, and a false meaning to the phenomena
is thereby instilled. We speak of animals as ‘“‘ higher ’’ and “‘ lower ”’
for convenience, but strictly all are equal, because ‘‘ each creature
has such perfection as it was possible for it to have.’’ (St. Thomas, ®?
p. 108), and its place is in accordance with the “‘ end ”’ for which it was
brought into being, the word ‘‘end’’ bearing the scholastic sense.
The proper use of the theory of evolution in comparative anatomy, like
that of Ehrlich’s theory in regard to immunity, is that it enables
many discrete facts to be memorized. To raise either to the dignity
of “‘ truth ”’ necessitates an overlooking of the fundamental properties
of the nature of being.

§ 120. Deformities. These may be explained on an evolution-
ary basis, using the ideas of ‘“‘ reversion,’’ ‘‘ atavism,”’ etc. When the
individual is studied in regard to his ‘‘ end ”’ (in the scholastic sense)
a different conception comes to light. But as this brings in the
question of events belonging to the category of morals (“‘ to the third
and fourth generation’), the problem is at once evaded. Such a
conception would not be vitiated by the existence of deformities
among animals.

§ 121. The intimate structure of the body is always changing
although the anatomical structures appear to remain unchanged.


104 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


- Hence it is possible to see in these structures merely a locus for the
various faculties and functions pertaining to the physical, mental
and emotional life of the individual. Compared with his existence
in the scheme of things, the anatomical details are mere ‘‘ moments
musicales.”’


To take a special example, one might regard the blood-forming centres as the
(momentary) point of meeting of two vitalities. (Cf. §147.)


§ 122. Relation between structure and function. This formed
the subject of a classic in medical literature—that in which Galen
regards anatomy as the expression of the ¢vovs. Such a teleo-
logical view is not in favour to-day, and, indeed mistakes (as
Galen did) the root principle emphasized in these pages. To use the
symbolism given in § 56, 64, 7 is not the ‘“‘expression”’ of #. In
associating structure with function this must always be remembered.
The examples available for Avicenna, striking as they seemed to
him, are surpassed by those possible through modern knowledge.
Thus, harmonious succession of events, both in time and place, is to be
discerned throughout the body. The output of the various digestive
juices, separately achieved, yet co-ordinated as to time is also
co-ordinated as to place. The output of bile, for instance, is fitful—
sometimes a delicate trickle, sometimes in spurts, sometimes in larger
quantities ; and this in co-ordination with the activity of the muscular
bundles beneath the membranes which secrete the digestive fluids—
in which both nervous and vascular variations play an intimate part.

Out of many other instances, the following may be given. The
adrenal vein joins the inferior vena cava at a given point, in order to
secure that the adrenal secretion shall enter the blood in time to
receive the activating substances supplied for it by the liver defore
it becomes exposed to the oxygen contributed by the respiration ;
for otherwise the activation would be nullified. (Cf. Sajous?#®.)

§ 123. Transcendence of organs, fluids, and the like, beyond
anatomical boundaries.—This has already been referred to in the
opening chapter. Thus (a) “ heart’ includes the arterial system
and something more; ‘‘liver’’ includes the venous system and
something more ; “‘ brain”’ similarly goes beyond the organ within
the cranium to the cutaneous nerve-endings. This is why a “‘ function
test ’’ for a given organ is never satisfactory. (4) Vascular channels
and tissue spaces are simply demarcations of fluids from adjoining
tissues. The river exists because there is water to flow, and in-
cidentally is an ‘‘ anatomical feature ”’ of the country,serving various
purposes. Its presence is the indication of, and continues only as
long as, certain incessant changes occur in Nature at large. To use
other words, the vascular channels are the materialization of the
stream of blood; or, the current of ‘“‘ life’? made the blood-vessels
become demarcated. (c¢) The humours of the body circulate also in
the subtle fashion suggested thus: the sanguineous humour is not


only in the blood vessels but also in lymph channels: the serous.


humour moves in the connective-tissue spaces as well as in anatomical
lymphatics, and appears also in the form of the ‘‘ eau de constitution ”’


hit ti es


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 10S


(Vallery-Radot*) of the tissues: the bilious humour may be
followed in the track of cholesterin (and other constituents.) The
constant loss of hair, nails, teeth, should also be recognized as being
part of the constant separation of ‘‘ superfluities.” (Cf. Paracelsus?®).
(@) If we realize that tissue-spaces and cavernous tissues are forms of
channels, it will be clear that the whole body is really an aggregate
of “‘ tubes ”’ of some sort. It may then be said further, that disease
always starts from tubes,—namely when their lumina are blocked or
when their “ walls” become semipermeable or quite impervious.

§ 124. Anatomical structures depend for their existence on
chemical structure. Water, for instance, may be said to come into
visibility in the form of an anatomical structure. Conversely, other
substances are only visible as long as they are not yet an integral part
of the living substance of the body, and others are visible because
they have ceased to be such.

As soon as microscopic visibility is attained, the visible thing
has ceased to be “‘living.’’ Stability of form entails the stagnation
of certain substances, and also implies that they have been rejected
from the cycle of life in order to provide the substrate or platform or
points @’ appuz for the actual living substance (i.e., the life-principle) to
manifest its faculties during a certain (often limited) period of time.
Ci55 f21.

§125. Histology (i.e. microscopic anatomy) and function.
From the preceding consideration, when a tissue is observed through
the miscroscope, the thought should be “ that is the spot where this
or that substance has emerged into visibility at this moment.”’ This
conception is specially applicable to the case of the blood-cells.
Cf. § 95-99.

§ 126. Anatomy as the expression of strengths and weaknesses.
It is clear that the relative development of different parts of the body,
from head to foot, reveals its physical strengths and weaknesses.
Where one part is strong, another is compensatorily weak. But it is
less obvious, and less realized, that anatomical conformations are also
revelations of strengths and weaknesses of mental make-up. Here
also, the strength of one feature goes with deficiency of some other.
The root principle of jelal and jemal already referred to (§ 82) holds
good throughout, and in a multitude of directions. Mental
capacities and activities affect the vegetative processes just as do the
emotions, for their influence lasts throughout life. As S. Thomas
says: (a) ‘‘every operation of the sensitive soul belongs to the
composite ”’ (S.T., 75, 3,84 p. 10). (0) ‘‘ There are certain operations
common to the soul and the body, such as fear, anger, sensation, and
so forth ; for these happen by reason of a certain transmutation in a
determinate part of the body, which proves that they are operations
of the soul and body together ”’ (C.G., ii. 57, 88 p. 139). (¢) “‘ We
find in the intellective appetite, which is the will, operations specifi-
cally similar to those of the sensitive appetite, differing in this, that in
the sensitive appetite they are passions, on account of its connection
with a bodily organ, whereas in the intellective appetite they are pure
operations. For just as by the passion of fear which, in the sensitive


106 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


- appetite, one shuns a future evil, so without passion, the intellective
appetite has a like operation ’’ (2d., 8? 90, p. 190).

§127. From all this it is clear that much is to be learned from
external anatomy (head, face, hands, joints, skin markings, etc.) as
to the strength and weakness, not only of the body as a whole, but of
the several organs in particular. Were the study of internal anatomy
combined with the external, the associations would be more appre-
ciated. The ‘‘case”’ is not really finished when a ‘‘ handful”’ of
viscera has been studied in the autopsy-room or even in the labora-
tories attached thereto. The remaining ‘“‘shell’’ passes on into
oblivion bearing its wonderful secrets with it, for its language is such
that however loudly it ‘‘ speak,” there are few with ears to hear, and
perhaps none with ability to interpret.


LHESISEY.1


Tue Facutties oF THE Bopy


“LIFE appears through various operationsin different de f livi ings ”’
(S. Thomas, S. Th. q. a6, art. i): : 5) tate eae tee


I. GENERAL DiscouRsE ABOUT THE SEVERAL Kinps or FacuLty


‘ a ACULTIES (486) are to be distinguished from
(Ngee, functions. The difference is that the former
originate the latter. But as each function depends
on its own special faculty they can be treated together.


Faculty: the name of a property whereby the phenomenon of life is mani-
fested. Function: actualized potentiality.

Faculty =power =potentiality. Faculty is not force ; itis potential power ; it
is static. Power is the faculty in a state of activity ; it is dynamic.

The tout ensemble of faculties is ‘‘ the soul.”

The tout ensemble of functions is “‘life.’”’ See § 150.

Weakness of faculty corresponds to “‘ hypofunction.”” Plethora of faculty
corresponds to ‘‘ hyperfunction ”’.


137. There are three kinds of faculty, and therefore of
functions proceeding therefrom. Namely, the vital (haywaniat) ;
the natural (tady ‘yat) and the animal (vafsaniaz).


§ 128. These three terms, derived from the Latin version, only
properly express the meaning of the Arabic if they are taken in
their original sense. The third term is rendered “ psychical” by
some translators,!®? but is open to objection because its modern
usage does not sufficiently correspond to the idea of nafsanzat.

Other words are preferred in the course of the present trans-
lation. The familiar ‘‘ vitality”? is convenient for the first term.
The words “ vegetative’? and “ sensitive,’ employed in the
Dominican translation of the Summa, ** are satisfactory renderings
for the other two terms, and are to be understood strictly in the
Thomistic sense. The term ‘‘ natural” is reverted to in 551 for
reasons there given.

The variations in scope exhibited by these and allied terms are
conyeniently indicated in the following table.

107


108 THE CANON OF


MEDICINE


§129. ANALYSIS OF CERTAIN TERMS APPLIED TO LIVING THINGS :—1.€., BEINGS


ENDOWED WITH “ LIFE.”
A. B.
Vegetable. Animal.
I, Distinctive
quality.» : p
1. In Modern Vegetative. Sentient.
language. Organic. (Lower) mental
powers.
Organo-vegetative
(Martinet)
2. Platonic term. Nutritive. Appetitive.
3. In Avicenna.? | Vital.* |Natural.¢ Animal.*
4. Scholastic Vegetative (life or |Sensitive (life or
terms. soul). soul).


II. These terms are
based on—
(a) the faculties
pertaining to each
(i) Pre-modern
thought.


Plants have only
nutrition, growth,
and reproduction.

But modern re-
search (cinemato-
graph, etc.) shows
sensory and mo-
tor powers.

Unconscious life.


(ii) Modern
thought.


(iii) In terms of
Consciousness.

On essential As As “ nature.”’
manifestations |‘‘ breath’’¢

(3. Avicenna).


(0)


(c) On fundamen- ‘Effected by means


tal causes. of a corporeal
(4. Scholastic organ, in virtue of
basis.) a corporeal qual-
ity.
(d) on theological
considerations. Mortal.


im-


tion,”’** 78, i. p.78)


Sensuous
(Necessarily
plies “ appeti-

Animals have also


sensation and
movement.

But some animals
exhibit intellec-
tual powers often
supposed to be
purely human.’
Subconscious -life
and lower con-
scious life.

As sensation,move-
ment, and cogita-
tive power.’


Effected by means
of a corporeal or-
gan, but not in
virtue of a qual-
ity.

Deals with parti-
culars.


Mortal.


Ill. Chief organ


concerned.
1, In modern All vegetative or-
thought. gans equally im-


portant (Bio-
chemical process-
es in general).


2. Platonic. Liver.


3. Avicenna. Heart.* |Liver (and Gonads)


4. Scholastic. All viscera.

No special organ
because “life ”’
belongs to all.


Nervous system
(automatic and


central).


Heart.®

Brain.

Nervous system,
but also the whole
ee being. ”?


ce
Human.


Rational; intellec-
tual, Higher men-
tal life, Psychic
powers.


Rational.


Ratiocinative
faculty.
Rational (life
soul).


or


Human beings have
also intellect or
intelligence.

But this is not so
for some races of
men, and in some
cases of disease of
the brain.

Fully conscious life


As capacity for ab-
stract concepts.


Is_ effected apart
from a corporeal
organ or quality.


Deals with univer-
sals S42 (76, ap.
78).

Immortal: (a) ab-
solutely (Scholas-
tic view) ; (6) con-
ditionally (some
creeds).


Brain (Grey matter
of cortex.)


Brain.


No material organ.


eee


THE CANON OF MEDICINE —_1cg
Notes on points arising out of this table:


1 Boundaries of the Three Kingdoms :—These are admirably set out in Chahar
Magqala’ : ‘‘ When the vegetable kingdom was produced, God gave it the four forces
and the three faculties. When the animal kingdom was produced, God added
two more faculties—that of perception (with five external senses and five internal
senses), and of movement. When the human kingdom was produced, God added
a capacity for abstract concepts (intelligence).”

* Avicenna’s division: this is determined by medical requirements.

* Vital faculty.—This is not specifically mentioned by S. Thomas, because


implied in the word “ life.’”” He refers to it thus: “ The vital operation...
whereby something is shown to be living ’’*¢ (liv. 2. p. 44). ‘‘ Life-principle”’ has
a wider scope than implied in “‘ vital faculty ’’ :—‘‘ The vital principle is the ‘ form ’


or determining principle of the living being. Coalescing with the material factor it
constitutes the living being. It unifies the material elements into one individual.
It holds them together . . . as a mass of chemical compounds, many of them
most complex and in very unstable equilibrium, constantly undergoing change and
tending to dissolution into simpler and more stable compounds. When life ceases,
the process of disintegration sets in with great rapidity. The function, then, of
this active informing principle is that of a unifying, conserving, restraining char-
acter, holding back, as it were, and sustaining the potential energies of the organism
in their unstable condition.’ (Maher"’, p. 427). ;

4 Natural faculty.—i.e., ‘‘ pertaining to the ‘nature.’ That is, (a) the mere
fact of living atall, (b) powers in common with laws of Nature in general. Compare
the term ‘“‘ natural science,” “‘ natural philosophy” (used before the present era)
applied to the modern chemistry, physics and their subdivisions. The ancients
recognised that physiological phenomena in regard to the ‘“‘natural’’ life were
kin to those of our chemistry and physics.

Note also the meaning of “‘nature’’ in: “the natural appetite is that in-
clination which each thing has, of its own nature, for something. Wherefore by
its natural appetite each power desires something suitable to itself.’”’** (p. 78).

5 Animal faculty—The word “animal”’ really denotes simply “a thing
with ananima’”’; hence manisananimal. But different people among all nations
use the word (in their own language) entirely vaguely, and thus give rise to perennial
confusion of thought when applying it in daily life. The following meanings are
assigned to it:

(i) Generally or collectively, it refers to the presence of life: e.g., anima-te ;
in-anima-te.

(ii) Specifically or particularly. (a) indefinitely as (a’) “soul” (a’’) “mind”
(a’’’) “spirit”? (quaecumque substantia invisibilis’’**—i. 41, 3, 4). (b) More
definitely = duxyn = lower soul, as opposed to animus, the higher soul, whose seat
is the ‘‘ heart,’’ the centre of cognitive and emotional life.17 (xiv. 153). See §150,
I5I.

: ‘ Manifestation as ‘‘ breath ’’; or, by means of the breath. See §161. Breath
= spiritus, which is defined by S. Thomas as “an instrument of the soul, tenue,
lucidum, calidum, ex puriore sanguine’’ (i. 41. 3. 4). cf. preceding note, under
pespinits

ap S. Thomas recognized such powers in animals: ‘‘ Cogitative and memorative
powers are not distinct, but the same, yet more perfect (in man, that is) than in other
animals.’’*¢ (78. i. p. 90).

* The hearyt.—In the platonic view it is the chief organ of the appetitive soul ;
in Avicenna it is that of the breath. See §§ 136-141. But this would make the ap-
petitive soul equivalent to the vital faculty, which it is not. Another objection
to the platonic view is explained by S. Thomas** (p. 145).


§ 130. ‘‘ Only three powers or parts of the soul are commonly
assigned—namely, the vegetable soul, the sensitive soul, and the
rational soul. . . . There are five genera of powers of the soul—
the vegetative, the sensitive, the appetitive, the locomotive, and the
intellectual. Of these, three are called souls, and four are called
modes of living.” . . . The reason of this diversity lies in the various
souls being distinguished accordingly as the operation of the soul
transcends the operation of the corporeal nature in various ways ; for


110 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


~ the whole corporeal nature is subject to the soul, and is related to it as
its matter and instrument. There exists, therefore, an operation
of the soul which so far exceeds the corporeal nature that it is not even
performed by any corporeal organ ; and such is the operation of the
rational soul. Below this, there is another operation of the soul,
which is indeed performed through a corporeal organ, but not through
a corporeal quality, and this is the operation of the sensitive soul ;
for though hot and cold, wet and dry, and other such corporeal
qualities are required for the work of the senses, yet they are not
required in such a way that the operation of the senses takes place
by virtue of such qualities : but only for the proper disposition of the
organ. The lowest of the operations of the soul is that which is
performed by a corporeal organ, and by virtue of a corporeal quality.
Yet this transcends the operation of the corporeal nature ; because
the movements of bodies are caused by an extrinsic principle, while
these operations are from an intrinsic principle ; for this is common
to all operations of the soul, since every animate thing, in some way,
moves itself. Such is the operation of the vegetative soul; for
digestion and what follows is caused instrumentally by the action of
heat, as the Philosopher says.’”’—Sum Theol. ®? Q. 78, art. 1:
iancae = pa 7 5) 70:


138. Many philosophers, and all physicians who follow
Galen, consider that each faculty has its own principal member,
which forms its storehouse, and from which its functions emerge.
On this view the rational faculty resides in the brain, and its
functions proceed from the brain. (Cf. § 130).

139. The natural or vegetative faculty is twofold, and in-
cludes (1) the zutritive faculty, which is concerned with the welfare
and preservation of the individual, and secures nourishment to
it to the end of life. ‘This faculty resides in the liver, and its
functions emerge therefrom. (ii) the reproductive faculty, which
ensures the propagation of the race. This subserves the process
of generation, and separates the substance of the sperm from the
humours of the body and fashions the new body according to the
decree of Allah. The seat of this faculty is the generative organs,
and its functions proceed from them.

140. The vital faculty preserves the integrity of the
breath, and is the vehicle of sensation and movement, and makes
the breath able to receive these impressions (of sensation and
movement), and, having reached the brain makes it capable of
imparting life, and then spreads in every direction. ‘The seat
of this faculty is the heart, and its function proceeds from this.
(See 162-167).

141. Now the great philosopher Aristotle believes that
the heart is the source of all these functions, though they are


ee ee aS SO eee eer eer:


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 111


manifested in the several principal organs. But physicians still
keep to the opinion that the brain is the chief seat of sentient
life, and that each sense has its own distinct member whereby
it manifests function. But if physicians thought over the whole
matter as thoroughly as they should, they would take Aristotle’s
view instead. ‘They would find that they have been only re-
garding appearances instead of realities, taking non-essentials
for essentials. (Cf. 119, 165). The establishment of this truth
is for the philosopher and natural scientist, and not for the doctor
as doctor. But the latter, looking on members as being initiators
of the faculties instead of as their manifestation—thus despising
or ignoring philosophy—fails to see which things are prior,
and accordingly overlooks the proper basis for the treatment of


diseases, and for the remedying of bodily defects (p).


“ There is in the body no one beginning, but all parts are alike beginning and
end; for a circle has no beginning.”” (Hippocrates).


112 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


2. Tue Naturat Facu.ries


142. The xatural faculties are divisible into two groups :
(a) dominant or directing, (4) subservient or obedient.

The dominant faculties are twofold : (i) concerned with the
preservation of the life of the individual ;—the nutritive faculty
and the augmentative faculty (power of growth), (i1) concerned
with the preservation of the race :—the generative faculty ; and
the formative or plastic faculty.


§ 131. Classification of the Natural Faculties.
Dominant Subservient eet
General Quali- ponding
purpose, oe eed Synonyms. ties. Element) “Mental
(hadima) Khadama. process.
: i, Attractive] Apposition. | Hot and | Fire. Percep-
d Jadhiba Presentation dry. tion.
3 (147) Prosthesis.
BS Gn Meera a ease os
+ /| ii. Retentive | Agglutinative| Cold and | Earth | Memory.
&|| Masika (148) | Adhesion. dry.
° Prosphysis.
wn ee po oe eS Se
Nutritive = iii. Alterative| Transforma- | Hot and | Air. Cogitation
(ghazia) §£\| Hadima tive.
The (143) q (149) petri el moist.
Individual al ae
Ss (e.g. haemo-
& hd poietic). BZ 4
|| iv. Expulsive | Propulsive Cold and| Water | Expres-
= Dafi‘a Expeditive. moist. sion.
. (150)
Augmenta- Auxetic. Acquisi-
tive Plastic. tion
(namfia) Incremental. of know-
(143) ledge.
Generative The mascu- Aether | Creative
(muwallida) line factor. and Inven-
_ (145) (Er) tive facul-
(1) in the ties.
strict sense
(2) primary
transforma-
The Race. | tive faculty
(mughayyara)
Informative Plastic. Construc-
(masawwira) Operates in tive
(145) utero. The faculties.
feminine
factor (Tr.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 113


143. The faculties pertaining to the preservation of the life
of the individual.

The nutritive faculty is that whereby the aliments are
transformed into the likeness of the thing nourished, thereby
replacing the loss incidental to the process of life.

The augmentative faculty is that whereby the increase in
size of the body in all directions in just proportion is secured.
This is brought about by means of the substances derived from
the aliments. The nutritive faculty is subservient to this
augmentative faculty in so far as it enables the preparation of the
requisite substances from the aliments, but growth will not occur
unless more is supplied than is lost. However the supply of
more substances than are lost does not necessarily produce
growth. Growth implies an increase in all directions in the
proper proportions. To become fat or obese with advancing
years, after being slim, is not growth. It is not growth unless
the increase is in all dimensions and in natural proportions,
so as to culminate in a state of perfection of growth. Adiposity,
for instance, is not a perfection of growth before adult age,
any more than itis a perfection for the figure to be very slim after
maturity to a greater degree than natural.

144, There are three special functions in the process of
nutrition. (i) the apposition of the altered material, namely,
the blood, or a humour which is potentially like the tissue to be
nourished. If this process is defective, as may happen in disease,
there is “‘ atrophy,” which is a defect of nutrition. (11) agg/utina-
tion—a later stage. Here the nutriment apposed to the tissue
is now fully united up to it, and made a part of it. This may be
lacking owing to disease, and then occurs what ts called “ fleshy
‘dropsy.”’ (iil) “rue assimilation—a stage still further where that
which has been made into a part of a member becomes absolutely
like it in all respects, in essence and colour. This fails in such
conditions as leprosy and vitiligo, in which cases the first two
functions are achieved, but not the third.

These three procedures are the work of the transformative
power. ‘This is really a single faculty, though distributed among
the respective members. For in every member this faculty is
corresponding to its temperament, and so transforms the aliment
into the likeness (ad-similis) of that member; 1in each case it
differs from that which transforms aliment into the likeness of
the various other members (or tissues). So (we may say) the
transformative faculty of the liver ramifies throughout the whole
body.


ni


114 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


145. The faculties pertaining to the preservation of the race.—
The generative faculty is two-fold. (1) That which gives rise to the
male and female ‘‘ sperm,”’ the reproductive units, (ii) the forma-
tive power (i.e., in the male element) which separates from one |
another the various faculties in the sperm and rearranges themin
such a way that each member (and tissue) receives the tempera-
ment appropriate to it—thus, to nerve, its distinctive tempera-
ment ; to bone, its distinctive temperament. The one“ sperm,
apparently homogeneous, opens out in all these directions. This
is called the primary transformative faculty. ;

The informative or plastic faculty (lit. as in making a sculpture
painting) is that (in the female element, Tr.) whereby, subject or
to the decree of Allah, the delineation and configuration of the
members is produced, with all their cavities, foramina, positions
and relations to one another, their smoothness or roughness, and
so on—all being controlled up to the final limits of their natural
growth (dimensions). Subservient to this faculty, in regard to
that part of the nutriment which serves for the preservation of
the species, are the nutritive faculty and the power of growth.


§ 132. From the annotations by Costaeus: reproduction implies a plastic
faculty; and that implies transformative power, and that depends on the four
qualities. Growth cannot occur without nutrition ; nutrition cannot occur without
agglutination or assimilation; agglutination cannot occur without apposition ;
assimilation cannot occur without transformation; transformation cannot occur
without retention ; and retention cannot occur without affinity. Each successive
step entails the removal and excretion of the products and by-products of the
preceding steps, for these are hindrances to reproduction, nutrition and growth.


3. Tue Facurtizs Supservient To THE Naturat FacuLties
(VeceTaTive Lire)


146, Vecrrative Lire (i.e. the natural faculties) is sub-
served by four faculties : attractive,* retentive, transformative,t
expulsive.

147, The attractive faculty was created so that the body
could draw to itself whatever nutriment is required for its
preservation. The longitudinal fibres in an organ form the
instrument used for the purpose. The liver attracts the chyle
from the stomach by sucking, as it were, the purer parts thereof
by way of the mesenteric veins.

148. The retentive faculty was made so that the material
so drawn in could be held (in position) during the time that the


* The word attractive, in the original, is primarily with the thought of the


attraction of (female) beauty and has a peculiarly appropriate application in
consequence.


t “Ferment” actions of the body belong here.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE IIs


alterative (transformative) faculty is engaged in preparing sound
nutritive substances from it. The instrument employed for this
are the oblique, and in part, the transverse fibres. (In the case
of the liver, the chyle is retained in it long enough to enable the
sanguificatory power to act upon it.)

149. The alterative or transformative faculty is that which
alters the material attracted and held by these two powers. It
transmutes the material from its former state until it has become
worked up into a temperament such as enables it to become
efficient nutrient material. ‘This process is “‘ digestion ” in the
SULICE Sense.

At the same time it produces a change in the superfluities
so that they can be easily discharged from the member containing
them. This process is called ‘‘ maturation.” By its means three
things happen : (1)—the texture of the superfluities becomes
attenuated, when it is inspissation that hinders expulsion ;
(2)—the texture of the superfluities becomes thickened, when it is
attenuation that prevents their discharge ; (3)—the superfluities
are entirely broken up, if it be viscidity that hinders expulsion.
It is a mistake to use the terms “ digestion ”’ and “‘ maturation ”
as synonymous.

150. The expulsive faculty is that whereby the superfluities
from digestion are expelled. Superfluities are such as are
unsuitable as nutriment, or are in excess of requirements (and
therefore “‘ superfluous ’’’). By means of this faculty, the waste
matter is expelled into the bladder as urine, and other excreta
through their several appropriate organs and apertures. Where
there are no orifices, the wastes are transferred by this faculty
from noble to less noble organs ; from hard structures to soft
ones. And if there is a diversion of waste matter from the proper
route, the expulsive faculty cannot remove as much as otherwise.

151. Lnter-relations between the faculties and the qualities.—

These four natural faculties are subserved by the four
primary qualities—heat, cold, dryness, moisture. Strictly
speaking, heat is the underlying factor in all the subservient
faculties.

152. Action of cold.—While cold aids all four faculties
it does so indirectly and not directly—except in so far as
it is the contrary of all’ the faculties. For all the facul
ties act in virtue of movement, which is shown not only as
attraction and expulsion, but even in the transformative
process (digestion proper); for the latter consists in the
separation of gross and aggregated particles from one another,


116 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


and in the condensation together of the finer and separated
particles. The movements of dispersion and aggregation
are simultaneous. Movement is also concerned indirectly
in the retentive faculty, because the transverse muscular
fibres come into play. Coldness enfeebles, stupefies, and morti-
fies, and hinders this faculty in all its functions ; yet, indirectly,
it helps it by fixing the fibres in the position referred to. There-
fore it is not directly concerned with the faculties ; it simpl
causes their instruments to be in a state which will help their
functions to be maintained.

Coldness aids the expulsive faculty (1) by preventing the
dispersal of the gases which favour peristalsis, (2) by keeping the
particles of the aliment coarse, (3) by its astringent action upon the
transverse muscular fibres. In these ways coldness renders the
instruments of the faculty in an appropriate state. Evidently,
then, it only helps the faculty indirectly. Did it act directly, it
would obstruct and weaken the movements.

153. Action of dryness.—Dryness is directly instrumental
in the functions of two faculties—namely the alterative and re-
tentive. It is auxiliary in the case of the other two—the attractive
and expulsive. This is because dryness delays the movement of
the breath, enabling it to take on with it those faculties which it
has encountered with a vehement impact. It also prevents the
moisture present in the substance of the breath or its instrument
from flowing away. Dryness helps the retentive faculty because
it favours (muscular) contraction (i.e. upon the contents of the
organ). ‘The transformative faculty needs moisture (and not
dryness).

154. Comparative relations between the qualities and the
faculties.—lf one compares the degree of active and passive
quality requisite for the various faculties, one finds that the
retentive faculty needs more dryness than heat. This is because
more time is required for a movement to come to rest than is
needed to start a contractile movement’ of the transverse fibres.

155. Heat is necessary for movement, and it takes only a
short time to produce its effect, so that the remainder of the time
is occupied in holding the material and coming to a state of rest.
This explains why the temperament of juveniles tends to moist-
ness, for their digestive power is weaker.

156. The attractive faculty needs more heat than dryness
because the chief feature of attraction is movement, and move-
ment demands heat. The organs concerned must move rather
than be at rest and contracted (for which dryness is needed).


lh ltt Se te oil


THE CANON OF MEDICINE I17


Not that much movement is required for this faculty, though at
times violent activity becomes necessary. Attraction is brought
about (2) by an attractive faculty—as when a magnet attracts
iron, (4) by heat, as when oil is drawn up in a lamp.—Some
physicists assert that the last-named is really an example of filling
up of a vacuum.

Heat increases the power of the attraction exerted by the
attractive faculty.

157, The expulsive faculty requires less dryness than the
attractive and retentive faculties, because there is not the need
of the muscular contraction requisite for retention, nor for the
apposition necessary for attraction; nor a need to maintain
contraction upon an object until the next stage of the process
is reached. Nor is there a need for repose ; but, on the contrary,
there is a need of movement, and also a small amount of inspissa-
tion—just enough to ensure that degree of compression and
expulsion which is necessary to make the contracted viscus an
instrument. Lastly, whereas the retentive faculty requires a long
period of time and the attractive power only a short period—
namely that necessary to bring one thing in contact with another —
so there is less need of dryness.

158. The transformative faculty requires more heat than
the other three. It does not need dryness but moisture, for by
moisture the nutrients are rendered fluid and so become able to
enter the pores and become moulded into the conformation of the
channels to be traversed. But one must not suppose that because
moisture aids digestion, juveniles (whose temperament is moist)
can digest hard or indigestible foods. ‘This can be done in
youth, but here the reason is not to be found in their moisture ;
it is because at that period of life the “nature”’ is similar to that
of the foods in question. Foods of hard nature are not appropriate
for the juvenile temperament (which 1s soft), and therefore their
transformative faculty cannot cope with such food; their
retentive faculty cannot hold it, and their expulsive faculty rapidly
expels it. In the case of youth, on the other hand, such hard food
is quite suitable for nourishment.


118 THE CANON OF MEDICINE
159. The following brief table gathers together these


points :


Duration of muscular | Amount of longitudinal
contraction. movement achieved.

Attractive Faculty. | Quite short Marked.

Retentive Faculty. | Long; continued. Moderate.

Alterative Faculty. | Continued. None.

Expulsive Faculty. | Momentary. Considerable, but
superadded from
without.


The alterative faculty needs liquefaction and commingling


of substances.
160. So the various faculties make use of these four


qualities in diverse ways and to different extents.


§ 133. Thus, the attractive faculty is not equalin degree in all organs. Heat
is stronger in the liver than in the stomach and intestines, in arteries than in veins.
The liver at one time is hotter (and therefore the attractive faculty is greater) than
at another. So also in the case of the stomach. Hence, if the stomach is empty
and the liver is hot, the stomach will draw out the serous humour and bile from the
liver. Just as a strong person can take something out of the hands of a weak
person if he wants to, or, on another day, the weak person is the stronger* (Cf.
Galen, Daremberg,?® ii. p. 307).


“The operation of the vegetative principle is performed by means of heat,
the property of which is to consume humidity.’ —(Sum. Theol.** 75, p. 81.)


4. THe Virat Facutrty.


161. The power which the members receive before they
can acquire the capacity for the faculties of sensation and move-
ment, and for accomplishing the various functions of life, is
called the “vital faculty.” Closely related to this (subject)is
(that of) the “ breath,” and therefore also of the emotions of
fear and anger, because they coincide with the expansion and
contraction of the breath. (p.)


§ 134. Vitalfaculty = virtus vitalis = vitality = innate heat =
spirits ’’ (corporeal, vital, natural, animal) = breath (which is its
manifestation) = Spirit = ‘‘ refined form of bodily substance or


* There is a striking parallel to this passage in the “ I t’ung chéng mo ”’ (circa
A.D. 1056), on page 25 of the subdivision ‘‘ Mo Chueh Chih Chang”: referring
to the changing dominance of the types of “ breath ’’ in the various organs, per-
ceptible by a study of the pulse. The author states: ‘“‘ it is just like the case of the
king of Wu, who obtained the supremacy over the dominion of Chu, and then ne-
glected his own defences. The king of Yu seized the advantage of his unprotected
state, and in turn obtained the possession of his territories,”’


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 11g


fluid believed to act as a medium between mind and the grosser
matter of the body.’’!7_ (xv. 220) = ‘‘a kind of very subtle body
which penetrates all parts of the material body and infuses them like
the essence of a rose, oil in sesame, butter in milk ”’ (Motazelite view,1%)

Cf. § 118, § 136; and see 167-173.

In part it corresponds to ‘‘ life principle,’ and also in part to
‘substantialform.” Butitis ofthe ‘‘ soul’”’ ; it is one of the powers
of the soul; the soul is a ‘‘ bundle of life’ ; i.e., a bundle of faculties
and powers which complete the material body. Soul: body::
vibration : atom.


162. We now proceed to enlarge this brief statement.
On the one hand there are bodies of dense substance—the organs
and tissues—which are derived from the dense particles of the
humours of the corresponding temperament ; and on the other
there is the “‘ breath,” derived from the rarefied attenuated
particles of the humours of corresponding temperament.

163. Physicians regard the /iver as the seat of manufacture
of the dense part of the humours, and the Aeartas that of the rarefied
part. Really speaking, as soon as the breath and the appropriate
temperament meet, the vital power comes into being, and thus
all the members are rendered capable of receiving all the other
faculties (of the soul)—-sensitive and otherwise. ‘The sensitive
faculties do not appear in the breath and members until this vital
power has come into being, and so even should the sensitive
faculties in a given member be lost, life will remain in the part
until the vital power has forsaken it. Does one not find in prac-
tice, how a limb is devoid of sensation from paralysis (whether
as a result of a temperament which renders it incapable of re-
ceiving sensation or showing movement, or because of some
obstruction to the current from the brain and nerves into the
limb) yet continues to live ? and does one not find that a limb
which has lost the vital power loses also sensation and movement,
dies, and undergoes putrescence and decomposes ? That shows
that the power which renders a member living is still there even
in the paralysed member, so that sensation and movement would
return again, could the obstruction be removed. In fact, the
intact possession of this vital power makes the limb always
ready to receive the attributes in question. That which obstructs
these attributes does not interfere with the power of receiving
vital breath ; the member itself is not dead.

Further, it is not the nutritive faculty that prepares a member
for receiving sensation and motion. It is not the nutritive
faculty that is fundamental for the life of amember. One cannot
say that a member perishes as soon as the nutritive faculty is


120 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


abolished. ‘The statements just made about a paralysed limb
apply equally to the nutritive faculty. For sometimes the
nutritive faculty ceases in a member and still the member
continues to live. Sometimes the nutritive faculty is unimpaired
and nevertheless the member tends towards death.

Then again, if it be the nutritive faculty which provides the
power of sensation and movement, should not plants also share in
these powers ?

164. Hence it is clear that there is something else preparing
(the members for these powers), something akin in temperament
to itself—and this something is the vital faculty. This is that
faculty which appears in the breath at the very moment at which
the breath develops out of the rarefied particles of the humours.
As the philosopher Aristotle says, from that moment the breath
receives its first beginning and all the other faculties flow out
from it. Not that the activities of these faculties are directly
derived from the breath, any more than the sensation (as doctors
agree) proceeds from the animal breath in the brain until the
sense-impression has passed the crystalline lens, or the tongue,
or the other sense-organs. It is when the particular portion of
the breath reaches the appropriate parts of the brain that it
becomes impressed with the temperament of the brain and there-
by becomes adapted for the operations of the faculties proceeding
from and reposing in it.

‘ The same applies in the case of the liver and reproductive
organs.

165. The opinion of physicians differs from this. They
state that unless the temperament of the breath becomes altered
in the brain the breath is not capable of responding to the soul
(anima, nafs), the source of sensation and movement. But they
admit that the initial temperament of the breath plays a part in
enabling it to receive the primary vital faculty. The same thing
holds for the liver, and other principal members. From this
point of view, however, there would have to be a separate soul
(anima) for every kind of action; the soul would have to be really
an aggregate of various souls, instead of being one single agent
from which the several faculties emanate.


§ 135. Scholastic argument against such a conclusion.—‘ If
man is to be understood as three or two (souls) using a body, it
follows that man is not one thing, but two or three, for he is three
souls or at least two. And if this be understood of the intellective
soul only, so that the sensitive soul be understood to be the body’s
form, and the intellective soul, using the animated and sensified
body, to be a man, this would again involve absurdities, namely that


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 121


man is not an animal, but wses an animal; and that man does not
sense but uses a sentient thing. And since these statements are
inadmissible, it is impossible that there be in us three souls differing
in substance, the intellective, the sensitive, and the nutritive.”
(S. Thomas ® p. 144).


If the primary temperament helps the breath to receive the
primary faculty, then the vital powers, the breath and the
faculties are its perfection. The primary vital faculty is not
sufficient by itself to enable the breath to respond to the other
faculties, but needs an appropriate temperament first. "The
physicians also claim that this faculty, besides paving the way
for “life,” itself initiates the movement of the attenuated
spiritual substance (the breath, that is) towards the various
members (organs), and is the agent which brings about the con-
traction and expansion of respiration and pulse. In that it
assists life it is “‘ passion’”’ ; in that it assists the activity and
functions of mind and pulse it is “ action.”

166. ‘The vital faculty resembles the natural faculties in
that its actions are beyond the scope of the will. It resembles the
animal (sensitive) faculties in carrying out contrary actions—
namely, it dilates and contracts at one and the same time, effecting
two contrary movements at once.

167. The diverse use of these terms in philosophy and
medicine.-—When the ancients use the word “soul” (nafs),
they refer to the earthly or corporeal soul, the perfection of the
corporeal body, which is its instrument ; the source of all those
faculties upon which the movements and various bodily opera-
tions depend. The natural faculty, in medicine, thus corresponds
to the ‘‘ animal ” faculty in philosophy. The soul (nafs) is not
understood in this sense but is “‘ the power which originates
understanding and voluntary movement.” ‘The natural faculty,
in philosophy, means “‘ every faculty from which any bodily
function proceeds.’ But this is not the “animal faculty ”
of medicine but a natural faculty of a higher order than that
named ‘‘ natural’ in medicine. So, if natural faculty is defined
as “‘ that which is concerned in nutrition whether for the preserva-
tion of the individual or of the race,” then another, and third
term would be required to represent this other faculty. Anger,
fear, and similar emotion§ are passions of this same faculty,
and admittedly arise from the senses, the judgment and the
apprehensive faculties. ;

The proof of the existence of this third faculty, and of its
being single or multiple, is a question for natural science, which


is part of philosophy.


x22 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Expressed in another form,—


Term in Philosophy | Corporeal Soul Natural Faculty | Animal Faculty
( = lower reason)
Corresponding term | Animal Faculty (Higher) natural Natural Faculty
in Medicine Faculty
Scope of term Seat of movement, | Seat of passions Vegetative
action, operations | and starting point Functions


of ‘ apprehension.’


The important subject of the ‘‘ breath’ needs further elucidation at this
point. The continuity of the ‘‘Canon”’ is therefore here interrupted by introducing
the opening passage of ‘“‘ De viribus cordis,’’ and an explanatory extension.


THE BREATH


Its Orici1n, Forms, Sources, AND RELATION TO THE BEING


168. 1. THE ORIGIN OF THE BREATH.


created the left side of the heart,
and made it hollow in order that
it should serve both as a store-
house of the breath and as the
seat of manufacture of the breath. He also
created the breath to enable the faculties of the
_ “soul” to be conveyed into the corresponding
} members. In the first place the breath was to
™ ~ be the rallying-point for the faculties of the soul,
and in the second place it was to be an emanation into the
various members and tissues of the body (whereby these could
manifest the functions of those faculties).

169. Now He produced the breath out of the finer particles
of the humours, and out of igneity ; and at the same time pro-
duced the tissues themselves (the visible body) out of the coarser
and terrene particles of these humours. In other words, the
breath is related to the attenuated particles as the body is related
to the coarser particles of the same humours. Just as the
humours are intermingled to produce a temperamental “ form,”
whereby the members of the body are enabled to receive a physical
appearance, impossible were they separate ; so the attenuated
portions of the humours, being intermingled into a temperamental
form, enable the breath to receive the powers of the soul—
impossible were the humours separate.

170. ‘The beginning-of the breath is as a divine emanation
from potentiality to actuality proceeding without intermission
or stint until the form (lit. preparation, state) is completed and
perfected. Each member, though derived from the self-same
substance of the humours, nevertheless has its own particular
temperament—for the proportional quantities of the (denser

123


124 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


portions of the) humours and the form of their commixture are
peculiar to each member. Similarly, although derived from
the same attenuated portions of the humours, nevertheless
each of the three breaths (natural, animal and vital) has its own
particular temperament, for the proportional quantities of
the more attenuated portions of the humours, and the manner
of their commixture are peculiar to each breath.

171. Although the body consists of several members, there
is one from which they all originally arose. As to what this
member actually was, there are various opinions. The fact
remains that one member necessarily came to light before other
members could arise out of it. Exactly the same is true
in the case of the breaths. ‘There is one single breath which
accounts for the origin of the others ; and this breath, according
to the most important philosophers, arises in the heart, passes
thence into the principal centres of the body, lingering in them
long enough to enable them to impart to it their respective
temperamental properties. Lingering in the cerebrum it receives
a temperament whereby it is capable of receiving the faculties
of sensation and movement (sensitive faculties); in the liver, it
receives the faculty of nutrition and growth (vegetative
faculties) ; in the generative glands it acquires a temperament
which prepares it for receiving the faculty of generation (re-
production).

172. ‘The foundation or beginning of all these faculties
is traceable to the heart, as is agreed upon even by those philoso-
phers who think that the source of visual, auditory and gustatory
power lies in the brain.

178. Some philosophers consider that the breath is made
able to receive these faculties, and so be perfected, in other
members (than those named). ‘Thus, visual power results from
the union of the temperament of the breath with the moist
temperament of the crystalline lens ; that the auditory power
results from the union thereof with the temperament of the
auditory nerve ; that gustatory power is produced by the
mediation of the moist temperament afforded by the soft
spongy sub-lingual glands.

Others reject this view and consider that the breath carries
the faculties from the brain, and receives nothing from the
temperament of the member to which it travels, as nothing is
necessary to perfect it. The member itself is an instrument well
adapted for the action of the vegetative faculty, and contributes
nothing of its own essence.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 125


Other philosophers have claimed that the breath acquires
all its powers in the heart, emerging therefrom in a state of per-
fection ; hence the liver and brain do not add to it.

However, a careful enquiry into the truth shows that all such
views are untenable. The only possible view is that the breath
obtains the perfection of the given faculty in that member which
is the instrument of such faculty.


The continuation of the translation of De vivibus cordis is resumed at 1058.


EXPLANATORY EXTENSION OF THE SUBJECT OF “ THE BREATH.”


§ 136. Synonyms.— The breath of life’”’ (Gen. 2.7; Quran
32-9) Souffle de vie; Ruach (Heb.); Ruh (Persian, Arabic) ;
Hu (Sufi); Ch‘i (Chinese); Prana (Hindu)*; Hauch (German) ;
Spirit (as a translation of “‘ spiritus,” for which “ breath ” is the better
equivalent: see § 134, and § 129, footnote; spiritus is the Latin
translation of the Arabic nafs).

Primordial aura (Bruce, p. 101); “ether”; vivifying prin-
ciple ; vital fluid; vital (cosmic) force.

Definition: that which binds the vegetative and sensitive life
into one connected whole. It is common to, and like in, a// living
things.

“ That which centres in the cardio-pulmonary centre.” (Baraduc.!?°)

“Tt is a subtle vapour which rises from the blood, diffuses itself
to the remotest arteries, and resembles the sun in luminosity. (Ch.
M.? p. 8.)

Negative definition.— Breath” is xot “ respiration,” ‘ breath-
ing,’ drawing in breath. Therefore it is not the equivalent of
anhelitus, nafas, anfas, Atem.

The expression ‘“‘he breathed his last”’ actually describes
the departure of the ‘“‘ breath,” but there are two events taking
place simultaneously, and the literal respiration is only one of
them.

It is mot “‘soul’?=anima. The latter is the Latin translation
of the Arabic ruh in various passages.

It is mot “‘ vitality,” for this is the manifestation of breath.


* The Hindu system of physiology recognises five breaths as supporting the
body. They are : Prana (the air inhaled), Apana (has a downward course), Samana
(essential to digestion), Udana (has an upward course, or passes into the head),
Vyana (pervades the whole body and moves in various directions, transverse and
otherwise; therefore, equivalent to the “ breath ’’ of the present section.) But
Prana includes the rest, ordinarily speaking.—E. A.‘C., Kaviratna, Charaka Samhita,
ll, 20,


126 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Vitality stands for the vegetative soul. Thus, enfeebled vitality
means lessening of the ability of the vegetative soul to accomplish
some or all of its faculties. —Therefore it is 07 “life.” (‘‘ Allah made
life to be in breath.” Night 913, Burton, 1°4 v. 422).—It is not the
“vital air’? of the 18th century chemists. It is not even “ vital
faculty.”” It is not amenable to either physical or chemical methods
of investigation. It is not a force at all, and therefore not analogous
to electricity, magnetism, heat, etc, though in the course of its
activity it manifests all such phenomena.

Breath is mot “‘ individuality.”

Description by analogy. Being immaterial, and representing
a notion foreign to Western thought, breath is almost indefinable,
whereas to the Eastern mind there seems little difficulty in the con-
ception. Analogies—such as to flame, a pendulum, a ladder or lift
to a higher plane of being, a chain linking the three aspects of the soul,
to light, to vibrations, and so on—are necessarily misleading.

By picturing the breath as a sort of aura pervading the body,
with a polarity correspondent with the cosmic ether (its source, whence
it individualized into the human being), the conception of orientation
(in time and space) becomes feasible. Angle of incidence is then to
be considered, both in regard to every direction of space and to time
of day. Thus an infinite variety of constitution in these respects
becomes obvious.

§ 137.—The substance of the breathThis is mentioned in
several passages in the Canon. Though immaterial, the breath needs
a material basis or substrate. The substance is described as twofold :
(a) an aqueous vapour, in the case of healthy breath, as occurs when
the humours—the source of the substance of the breath (169)—are
healthy. (4) A fuliginous vapour, like the mist of the early morning
landscape, if the breath be unhealthy—namely because superfluities
are present in the humours.

A more tangible idea of the substance of the breath is furnished
by taking it as partly consisting of oxygen, for the functions of oxygen
in the body are the same as those attributed to the breath which it
carries. Thus to quote L. S. Beale, “ oxygen is necessary to dis-
integrate the soft formed material and combine with some of its
constituents.’’—That is, breath=2f, where m is oxygen.


In the Hindu system, there are ten substrates for the life-breaths.—Charaka, i.
402.—But these are anatomical,


The “ primordial substance ”’ of Chinese philosophy, the ground
of all phenomena, physical and psychical, fulfils the theory of the
breath. It is invisible and intangible, but manifests as matter (solid,
fluid, gaseous), as psychic existence, and as spiritual existence. This
substance agrees with “‘ breath ’’ in showing cyclical changes, passing
from energy to inertia, from activity to passivity, incorporeality to
corporeality. The incorporeal is “ the rule of existence implanted in
every living being”; and ‘‘ Li” is the Nature implanted by the
Decree. This principle of activity appears in modernist philosophy
as “‘mind.”’ (Cf. Bruce,!! p. 109.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE £27


§ 138. Zhe constant activity of the Breath. Were the breath
not in constant activity, the body would be ‘‘ dead.’ The activity
consists of (i) changes in quality, (ii) movement from place to place.
Actually, both occur simultaneously, but description would be im-
possible without taking each form separately.

(i) Changes in quality. This is a rhythmic waxing and waning
in intensity ; a change from a strong phase to a weak one, and back
to a strong one; a change from positive to negative ; an ebb and
flow; a condensation or concentration (‘‘inspissation’’) and an
expansion or rarefaction (attenuation’’). In the one phase there is
attraction of energy from without, symbolized by inhaling air; in
the other, there is repelling of energy from within, symbolized by
exhaling air.

These phases of movement are represented by the terms jelal,
jemal (Persian); jalal, jamal (Arabic); shiva, shakti (Urdu) ;
Yin and Yang (Chinese);?* masculine, feminine ; active, passive ;
etc. The rise is called Urooj in Persian terminology, and the fall,
Nasool ; it is a rise from no intensity (incipience) to great intensity ;
there is a period of maximum intensity (maturation) and a fall from
thence to no intensity (decay, defervescence, decline).

This cycle of the breath is continuous, but varies in rate—hourly,
two-hourly, twice-daily, daily,* weekly, monthly, seasonal. Accord-
ing to its changes, so does the feeling of well-being of the person
change ; according to its changes, so are there differences of bodily
vigour in one and the same person. Every family, every race has its
type of ‘‘ breath.”” Wherever we turn in living Nature we can see the
traces or signs of this “‘ pulse of life ’»—in vegetable life, in animal
life, even the greater range of human history itself, the rise and fall
of nations, the rise and fall of pandemics; the solar and planetary
cycles—all show the traces of this activity, though no doubt many
would consider the connection with “‘ breath”’ very intangible in
these instances.

The explanation of this activity. This is to be found in the fact
of the cyclical changes in the imponderable elements, for the two
phenomena, as already suggested, are part and parce! of the same
phenomenon. Thus, breath, conceived as a vibration rate, is now
slow, nowejuick, now coarse, now fine. The range and changes of
vibration from “‘ earth’ (slow, coarse) to “‘ ether ’’ (quick, fine), and
back, as has been intimated, are associated with changes of activity
of the breath. These elements are, as it were, the poznts d’appui of
the breath, and they constitute an ‘‘ immaterial” circulatory-system.

§ 139.—Relation of breath to temperament and the emotional
character.—So close is the relation between “ breath,” “ imponder-
able elements ’’ and ‘‘ temperament” that description of the one
readily lends itself to being a description of one or both the others. If
we trace changes in “‘ earth,” “‘ water,” etc., we are at the same time
tracing changes in the activity of the ‘‘ breath,”’ and we use words
which apply to both ‘‘ temperament ”’ of the old sense, and emotional
character as spoken of to-day. Dominance of ‘‘ water ’’ isas muchas


* Chloride-retention has a cycle of three or four days (Vallery-Radot +4 p, 308).


128 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


to say ‘‘ the breath remains in the ‘ water ’ phase over a longer period
of time than in other phases—in this person.” It also goes with
‘‘jemal”’ type of character, the exact form of manifestation varying
according to other factors in the ‘“‘ make up ’’—e.g., quiet endurance,
silent submission to pain, ardour of esthetic emotion, keen sense of
beauty, love of certain kinds of music, certain colours, flowers, etc.
(Note, then, how intimate ¢hzs zdea of “‘ constitution” becomes.)
The construction of a graph to represent possible variations may
be helpful, as long as its essentially schematic character is realized.


The dotted area represents the
supposed temperament used in the
sense of 26, sqq. If it were ideal, it
would be an exact square.

Note the necessity for four scales.
Reflection on this diagram, in the light
of the text, should bring out many
points which otherwise require lengthy
description. Strictly, no doubt, the
diagram would be improved if it could
be conceived in “ solid form.”


DIAGRAM OF A PERSON’S TEMPERAMENT.


To give another illustration—dominance of “fire.” The
following are its modes: (1) the vibration-rate of the “‘ breath”
remains longer in the ‘‘ fiery’’ phase than in other phases and in
other persons*; or, weeks elapse before it reaches its climax (kemal
stage) ; (2) the temperament is “ fiery,” ; (3) the person is called “ of
hasty disposition,” ‘‘ hot-tempered,” he is ‘‘ prone to anger ”’ ; (4) the
climax of the fire-element may be reached suddenly: e.g., persons of
‘explosive’ temperament or disposition; the blood “ boils” ;
(5) the associated character is of jelal type, taking different forms
according to the manner in which the patient reacts to the circum-
stances of life: e.g. (@) possession of great physical strength,
(4) pugilistic power, (¢) courageous in danger, (@) irascible char-
acter, (¢) originality of thought, (f) ambition, (g) a person with
unshakable gentleness, despite opposition (e.g., in some “ saints ”’),
(A) proneness to enthusiastic beneficent arts, (¢) zealous char-
acter, (7) cruelty of certain kinds (other cruel persons are called
“cold-blooded ’’), (&) strong desire. The whole range of human
activity can be drawn on for opposite examples.

So also a slow rhythm of breath goes with tranquillity of mind,
and a liking for poetry and music. A moderate rhythm goes with an
active mind, keen to accomplish. A quick rhythm goes with energy,
forcefulness, and activity to a degree liable to lead to confusion of
mind and premature exhaustion of the body.

§ 140. Relation of quality of breath to will-power. The will-
power should dominate the breath. But it cannot do so consciously
if the individual is ignorant of the existence of “‘ breath’’ ; persons of
vigorous will-power will dominate it unconsciously. It would be


«The “ira” type, where “ira’’ is not simply the passion (anger), but a
definite jelal-type.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 129


easy to see that dominance of will-power by the breath should be very
common, with the corollary that actions supposed to be initiated by
the personality are really quasi-automatic.

The will-power may be used to ‘‘ develop the breath’; that is,
the way the breath flows through the body, through the various
(nerve) centres.

§ 141. (6) Relation to ‘‘innate heat.’ The subject of innate
heat is very prominent in the pages of the Qanun ; it is closely linked
with “vitality”? (popular sense of the word) ( e.g., ‘‘ enfeebled
vitality,’ “‘ has very little vitality’”’; ‘full of ‘vim’’’). The close
relation to ‘‘ breath’ is expressed by saying that as the breath wanes
(nasool phase), the innate heat lessens ; as the innate heat is restored
in the course of nutritive processes, so the breath “‘ waxes” (urooj
phase). The rate of waxing and waning of the innate heat varies with
the individual and shows a relation with the similar phases of activity
of the breath. Innate heat is expended simultaneously with “ breath,”’
and at the same time comes that indefinable phenomenon—real
enough nevertheless—called ‘‘ atmosphere,” “‘ personality,” “ radi-
ance.’ ‘Laura:

This subject bears on the theory regarding the appearance of
pathological changes in the humours. Normally, the innate heat
is the agent which separates normal effete matters from healthy
humours. But in disease—that is, when the cycle of the breath is
not in harmony with the process of formation of the humours—
injurious effete matters (acrid, coriosive, etc.) appear as by-products
of the abnormal humoral state ; the latter being the result either of a
change in the innate heat or of a conflict between this and “ foreign
heat” (i.e. bacterial products: 485: § 283).

§ 142. (c) Relation to metabolic changes spoken of (§ 83)
under the picturesque title ‘“‘ dance of the elements.’’ The picture of
imponderable elements dipping down into the world of ponderable
elements (or, to be precise, the individual human being), and entering
into the changes of metabolism expressed as changes of pivot of
function from C to O, or H, or N, or S, or P in compound after
compound, and break-down into CO, or H,O, etc, or as formation of
tissue cells and their subsequent necrobiosis, etc.—all this is com-
pleted by the view of the breath, passing from phase to phase, from
strong to weak, not merely in one organ, but in every particle of the
whole being. With the ascending phase of the breath come the
formation of increasingly complex substances,—“ generatio’’ ;
with the descending phase, goes the disintegration into simpler sub-
stances—“‘corruptio.”’ Viewed as life-principle, we may think of the
breath as controlling the vegetative faculties of the soul, which are
associated by an intimate mutual relationship.

In this connection, the observation may be here noted that
change of electric potential arising from the metabolism of the salts
is necessary to the formation of active (as opposed to inert) fat in the
body.

Hence physiological action—that is, anatomy in motion—is not
merely a question of the behaviour of C, H, O, N, S, P, in the various


-130 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


side-chains, etc. Itis asum of potentialities possessed by the separate
imponderables and by their varying combinations, in the particular
individual at any given time. The common denominator or collec-
tive formula which represents this sum adequately is necessarily very
complex, and yet it is really essential that it be elucidated before one
could be said truly to grasp the real basis of a person’s ill-health,
or intelligently work out the fundamental bases of prognosis.

§ 143. (ii) The activity of movement.—The second mode of
activity of the breath consists of a cyclical movement, a movement tn
place, a movement comparable with a circulation. During the
course of this movement, the breath comes successively into relation
with the several tissues and organs, one after the other until it re-
appears at the starting-point.

The movement may be anti-clockwise as well as clockwise in the
various parts of the body.

But there are two paradoxes here. Firstly, there is no
period of time when the breath can be said to have passed a given
point. It is not like an object going round and round, like e.g., an
imaginary drop of blood. The breath is all through the body all the
time. It is more as if there were a series of lights in an electric
circuit, and they burning the whole time, but the intensity is changing
successively from point to point. The breath is always in the great
centres of the body (the “‘ chakras, pranas ’’), but it is brightest in the
liver at one moment, and the brain at the next and so on—yet
following a certain order.*

§ 144. Secondly, the citculation has no anatomical boundaries.+
Not only this, but it is flowing left-sidedly or right-sidedly. This is
transparently non-anatomical. Many would reject the possibility
and even an attempt at proof would be unsatisfying. The justifica-
tion for the statement that the breath is now left-sided, now right-
sided, flowing down each side separately, depends on subtle observa-
tions which are beyond the scope proposed for this work. It will
suffice to suggest just this: the peculiar attitudes adopted by all
creatures (animals as well as men) during sleep ; when standing or
sitting ; when exercising or at repose; also the different moods
shown by a given individual—these and similar phenomena,
carefully watched, furnish adequate indications of the truth of the
statement. There is also a circulation along such intangible
“channels ”’ as the temperaments of the organs.

§ 145. However, there is an actual relation to anatomical
organs as well. There is no ambiguity about this. The passage of
the breath from liver to brain, from heart to tissues is orderly, and
deliberately specified not only in the Qanun but in the De viribus
cordis, lest the unwary should be misled by the faulty ideas of
Avicenna’s predecessors and contemporaries. The heart as the
centre of life, and the seat of formation of the breath, is no mere


* This was realized also by the Chinese physicians as shown in the Classic on the
Pulse (vol. 1xxx, p, 28 ae

+ Possibly this idea underlies the seemingly impossible Chinese statement : “the
blood is inside the vessels, the ‘spirits’ outside,”


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 131


fancy. To speak of the flow of the breath through the major organs
“awakening ” each “ centre’ in turn (cerebral, thoracic, digestive,
genital) and then necessarily reaching the lesser organs (including the
tissues and cellular elements) is to give a true picture of life. To
insist also that in meeting the ‘‘centres”’ the breath is altered; that
it receives ; and then proceeds in that altered or renewed form to the
lesser tissues, is to fulfil the great law—the law of giving and receiv-
ing ; both together ; simultaneous ; balanced in degree. Both are
true. To omit one is to speak inaccurately because one represents
only in part.

§ 146. Application to physiological histology.—As has been sug-
gested, physiological histology is microscopic anatomy in motion.
It is the blackboard on which can be demonstrated the reality of
the truths of the scholastic conceptions. So, in studying the tissues
microscopically we must remember to introduce the conception of the
flow of the breath through the tissue-spaces, the juice-canals, which
are also the channels of the breath. Synchronous with this flow
there is an attenuation of cell-substance into fluids; and a disinte-
gration of complex chemical substances into simpler ones. At the
same time, one must say ‘“‘ the change in the breath zs attenuation
and aggregation of such substances.”

Substances pass from the colloid to the fluid state; from the
colloid to the crystalloid state ; from complex to simple; and vice
versa. They pass by aggregation from fluids into cell-substance
(‘‘assimilation’’). It is all one single process. That which we see
with the aid of the microscope is the ‘‘ visible ’’ manifestation of
cyclical changes in atom-groups, of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, etc. The excrescence which we can
see on the nuclear contour of the leucocytes, for instance, zs this
dominance of the several chemical elements—whether the change be
the outcome of “‘ attenuation ’’ or of ‘‘ aggregation.’’ Not only this,
but the excrescence of the nucleus is also the effect of the change in
the breath which at different times belongs to different chemical
elements, and so to different morphological histological appear-
ances.

The conception of the blood-forming centres as the meeting-
point of two vitalities has already been suggested (§ 121).

§ 147. Application of the conception to pathology. (a) Disease
as the result of znterference with the freedom of flow of breath, not
only round the body, but also away from the body altogether.—It
is clear that an actual obstruction in a tissue (whether it can be seen
with the naked eye, or felt with the hand, or whether it is in so minute
a channel that the microscope is needed to demonstrate it) prevents
the flow of tissue-fluids and is the forerunner of a morbid condition—a
“disease.” But it exerts this effect primarily because the flow of the
breath is obstructed and its rhythm degraded. Could the two series of
events occur independently, the fact is that the former, the material
obstruction, would not suffice to set up such a morbid condition.

The following are useful concrete examples of diseases produced
in this way : i


132 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The dire effects produced by hysterectomy in young persons,
once in much vogue for instance for severe dysmenorrhcea ; and the
persistent ill-health which appears when it is done in older persons
round the prime of (child-bearing) life. The explanation is to be
found in the destruction of the ‘‘ channels” of the breath—the
severance of non-medullated nerve-fibres, and even the actual removal
of important nerve-ganglia. This indefinable vital component of the
being, which must “ circulate,”’ goes so far, and then finds a void, and
its activity is turned back on itself; there is a revulsion; and the
patient is aware of a great distress which nothing will (or can)
relieve.

(ii) Jejunal ulcer following gastro-enterostomy, or excision of
gastric ulcer.

(6) Disease as a result of disturbance in the rhythm of the breath.
A change of rhythm, or an ataxy of the breath, would suffice to
initiate a loss of immunity to bacterial agents. Since there must also
be an outflow of breath, any associated interference with its current
would have the effect of holding back any of the isolated micro-
organisms which are always to be found in the tissues.*

In this way the organisms would have time to develop into active
colonies. Structural organic changes then appear in the body.

When Paracelsus said that “‘ life-principle may decompose and
become a strong poison, furnishing life to innumerable, invisible
(i.e., microscopic) existences, by which infectious diseases are caused,”
he was not speaking foolishly.*® (p. 155).

(c) Loss of balance between the normal qualities of the breath and
the functions of the body may initiate disease.

(2) The relation between the intracorporeal cycles of the breath
and the cycles in the outer world is a factor for consideration in regard
to the study of bacterial cycles in Nature, outside the bodies of animals
and other human beings.

(e) Sudden recovery from incurable diseases should be intelligible
in view of the nature of the breath. Remembering the existence of
polarity, and a point of penetration into the corporeal being, and
considering the fact that in disease there is a distortion of the ‘‘ shape ”
of the breath, it is not difficult to conceive that some outer force or
power breaks through and restores the polarity to normal, in which
event the sick person would be once more in proper relation to his
terrestrial conditions, and be freed from the interference (analogous
to the interference of light) which has previously occurred in the
activity of the breath. The event of such a revulsion occurring at
all, whether the subsequent physical recovery be instant or only
reached by gradual stages, would bring the case within the category
of miraculous cure.

§ 148.—Changes of quality of activity of the breath are simul-
taneous with its movement from place to place within the body.—
The two aspects of the activity of the breath must be considered
simultaneously, for they are not actually separate. Thus, to sum up,


* This fact was again called attention to recently by Sir Charles Ballance.
(October, 1929; Lancet, 1929, 324.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 3


we picture the breath circulating from nutritive organs to those
of the sensitive life, awakening as it does so the lower passions
(the nutritive=“ appetite”; the reproductive = “ desire ’’: see
§ 160; and then the higher (the emotions, the ‘ atmosphere,”
the “‘inspiration’’). The faculties of each organ are “‘ activated ”’
as the breath traverses them; their vitality augments, and the
breath itself concurrently receives something from each “ centre.”
The ‘ natural’’ breath is the phase, then, when the breath is con-
sidered in regard to the natural or vegetative processes of the body,
and is “‘ located’ in the liver, and is associated with venous blood.
The “‘ vital’ breath is the phase when it is located in the heart, and
is associated with arterial blood. The “animal”’ (or sensitive)
breath is associated with the nerve-fibres. Yet there are not three
breaths, but one breath—“ not three souls but one soul.’’ And the
“breath ”’ is ot the “ soul.’’

The changing activities of breath are associated with changes in
the composition in regard to the cosmic elements ; with changes in
chemical composition. Movement of quality (type, rate, primary
quality) goes with movement in regard to place.

The expressions ‘“‘a matter-of-fact person’’; an ‘‘ emotional
person’”’; a “‘ neurotic person,” in the light of the considerations
presented at such length, are seen to be capable of interpretation in
terms of corresponding types of ‘‘ breath,” which are dominant in
the given individual (§ 138).

§ 149. All these changes have been analogized with a ‘‘dance.”’
The breath is the controller of both aspects of the dance. It is the
music of the dance which holds the dancers together. When the
music ceases the dance ceases, or degrades into a meaningless
disorder. And the ceasing of the dance is ‘death’; and the
degradation is the subsequent decomposition processes.

The player of the music, and the movements of the two dancers
should blend harmoniously to make the perfect dance. What if there
be inattention on the player’s part? What if he should not corres-
pond to the capacities and capabilities of the dancers ? What if the
giving and receiving between the music and the dancers should fail
at any moment? Surely, then there is disease. Whatever modern
medicine has to say about etiology, this fact remains at the root of the
phenomena of all disease. In health, the dancers depend on the
player, and their dance is so perfect that they always respond to his
tune. But there comes the time when the (hidden !) Improvisor of
the music cries out ‘‘ Halt!”


134 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§ 150.—The following repetition of some of the important facts so far discussed
is justifiable for still greater precision. :

Abbreviations: a, animal; b, breath; B, body asa whole; C, vital centres
(heart, liver, brain, gonad) ; f, faculty; h, heart ; 4 , vegetative ; LE alite:?? anes
life-principle ; m, mind ; , natural ; 7, rational ; s, sensitive or sentient, or sensuous ;
S, soul in the Platonic sense; sp., spirit. v, vital.


(a) General Statements :—
L exhibits jf, sf, vf, and vf.
But Lis not the same as 7f, sf, vf, and vf; or the same as (j.s.) /.
L is not = jf+sf+rf+uf.
L is not the same as S,
S is not the same as L; or m; or sp.
S includes L, b, jl, sl, rl, vf.
b is not J, or L, though almost equivalent to /.
Zimplies b.
af (Avicenna) belongs within the domain of sf and rf (scholastic).
4l (scholastic) comprises vf and nf together (Avicenna).
sl (scholastic) comprises uf, nf, and some af (Avicenna).
sl (scholastic) is equivalent to wf. uf. (af—rf) (Avicenna),
vl (scholastic) comprises uf, nf, af (Avicenna).
vl (scholastic) includes 7/ and s/ (scholastic).
(b) Special Statements.
(i) The three chief views of the nature of a “ person ”’ are:


Modernist, or scientific or rational : Bom.
Popular or Platonic. S and B, or S+B.
Aristotelian. SEB OLR Ke


(ii) The scholastic view may be thus expressed :

“Nature’’ is L.B.; the ‘ vegetable nature”’ is 7/].B; the “ animal nature”
is jl.s1.B ; ‘‘ human nature ” is 7/. sl. vl. B.

(ili) Comparing the description given by Avicenna, with that given by
S. Thomas, we have:
Avicenna (b, nf, af), B (C)
S. Thomas LL.B ; or (i, st, v1) B


* * *


gs. Tue Animat Facutties (Sensitive Lire)


174. The animal faculties comprise those of (a) perception
(2) locomotion. The former comprises (i) external senses, (ii)
interior senses. Each of these exhibit five faculties.


“Now the ‘ Perceptive faculty’ (Mudrika) is subdivided into ten branches,
five of which are called the ‘ External Senses,’ and five the ‘ Internal Senses.’ The
former are Touch, Taste, Sight, Hearing, and Smell.’’—(Ch. M.7)

These faculties may be also designated faculties of the lower mind, or lower
reason.

“ Augustine says that the higher reason is that which is intent on the con-
templation and consultation of things eternal . . . but he calls the lower reason
that which is intent on the disposal of temporal things. Now these two—namely,
éternal and temporal—are related to our knowledge in this way, that one of them
is the means of knowing the other.”’ (* p. 112).—The whole subject is to be found
treated in a masterly manner in this and adjoining sections of that work.


175. A division of external senses into eight is obtained
by regarding “ touch ”’ as including four senses in itself, for this
is performed by more than one organ. ‘Thus the tongue not only
tastes but has asense of touch. This view follows the philosopher.


These senses are not further discussed in the Canon. ‘The following quotation
from Chahar Magqala (E. G. Browne’s translation’) may be therefore added.

“ Hearing is a sense located in the nerve which is distributed about the auditory
meatus, so that it detects any sound, which is discharged against it by undulations
of the air compressed between two impinging bodies, that is to say, two bodies striking
against one another, by the impact of which the air is thrown into waves and becomes
the cause of sound, in that it imparts movement to the air which is stationary in
the auditory meatus, comes into contact with it, reaches this nerve, and gives rise
to the sensation of hearing.—Sight is a faculty located in the optic nerve which
discerns images projected on the crystalline humour, whether of figures or solid
bodies, variously coloured, through the medium of a translucent substance which
extends from it to the surfaces of reflecting bodies.—Smell is a faculty located in a
protuberance situated in the fore part of the brain, and resembling the nipple o
the female breast, which apprehends what the air inhaled brings to it of odours
mingled with the vapours wafted by air-currents, or impressed upon it by diffusion
from the odorific body.’’ It is really a very delicate kind of taste. The sense of
taste detects soluble nutriments in those objects which come in contact with the
tongue, discriminating between sweet, bitter, sharp, sour, etc. The sense of touch
is distributed throughout the skin and flesh of the animal, the nerves thereby
perceiving and discerning anything which comes in contact with them—such as the
four primary qualities: dryness, moisture, heat and cold; and the secondary
qualities of roughness, smoothness, harshness, softness.

The five sounds, the five tastes, the five colours, are simply manifestations of
the five elements (cf. Forks?*, p. 238). ‘‘ Your taste, your seeing, your hearing,
etc.—these are the elements; so say not they exist not!”


176. ‘Tue INTERIOR SENSES.—
There are five groups of interior faculties : the composite,
the imagination, the-apprehensive or instinct, the retentive or
135


136 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


memory, and the ratiocinative. The first two are taken together
by the physician, but not by the philosopher.

177. The Composite sense (= Common sense: Hiss-i-mushtarik)
is that which receives all forms and images perceived by the ex-
ternal senses, and combines them (into one common mental
picture).


Site: Anterior Ventricle of Brain (Ch. M.)


The sensations of sight, smell, touch, afforded by an object
are conjoined, and the qualities perceived by the different senses
become gathered into one single percept. This faculty exists in
virtue of the fact that all sensation and muscular action are two
aspects of one process. With the exercise of every sense-organ there
goes an exercise of muscular action, and the latter cannot occur
without at the same time arousing muscular sensations, because
sense-organs for muscular senses are everywhere present along the
fibres of which the muscles are composed.


178. Imagination.—(Phantasy.) ‘This preserves the per-
cepts of the composite sense after they have been so conjoined,
and holds them after the sense-impressions have subsided. The
common sense is the recipient and the imagination is the pre-
server. The proof of this belongs to the philosopher.

The chief seat of the activities of these two faculties is the
anterior part of the brain.


§ 151. Regarded from the scholastic point of view, the imagina-
tion may be distinguished into (a) sensuous, (6) rational, or intellectual
The former is equivalent to Avicenna’s term, for it concerns itself
with natural objects. The second form is concerned with ideas, is
creative or productive, and manifested as “invention ’’ (artistic,
mechanical, scientific, etc), whereas sensuous imagination is simply
reproductive. But in both cases the faculty is defined as ‘‘ the power
of forming mental images or representations (‘‘ phantasms’”’) of
material objects apart from the presence of the latter ’’ (Maher, p. 163).


Source of the images : (a) the sensations, emotions and actions of the body ;
(b) trains of thought, which are chiefly on the higher plane of rational life; (c) the


intellect ; (d) other external influences, such as other minds, whether human or
angelic.


The difference from ‘‘common sense”’ is that the latter only
deals with objects whzle present.


179. The Cogitative Faculty.—The faculty which medicine
calls cogitative is taken in two senses in philosophy. Itisregarded
sometimes as ‘‘imaginative faculty’ [mutakhayyal: animal]
and sometimes as “‘ cogitative faculty’ [musafakkira : human].


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 137


In the view of the philosopher, the former is where the appre-
hensive faculty (q.v.) comes into play, and the latter is where
reason controls or decides that a given action is advantageous.
There is also the difference that the imagination deals with sense-
form percepts, whereas the cogitation uses the percepts which have
been stored in the imagination and then proceeds to combine
and analyse them, and construct quite different images: e.g.
a flying man, an emerald mountain. The imagination does
not present to you anything but what it has already received
through the sense-organs. (p.)

The seat of this faculty is in the mid-portion of the brain.


It combines or separates, as the mind selects, those particular percepts which
are stored in the imagination.
It is clearer to place the cogitative faculty into the higher “‘ plane ’”’ of rational
life. It really belongs partly to the intellectual imagination, and partly to the
rational faculty, the understanding.


180. The apprehensive faculty.—This faculty is the in-
strument of the power called instinct in animals. (“ Animal
prudence.) By it, for instance an animal knows that a wolf is an
enemy, and the kid distinguishes its dam as a friend from whom
he need not flee.* Such a decision is not formed by
the reasoning powers, but is another mode of apprehension.
Friendship and enmity are not perceived by the senses, nor do the
senses comprehend them ; and they are not perceived by the
reason either. Man employs the same faculty on very many
occasions exactly as does an irrational animal.

Apprehensive faculty v. imagination.—The former executes
a judgment ; the latter simply stores sense-perceptions.

Apprehensive faculty v. cogitative faculty.—The former relates

to one single act ; the latter does not make a judgment, but
opens the way to a series of discursive processes and decisions.
The cogitative faculty is concerned with the synthesis and
analysis of sense-impressions whereas the apprehensive faculty
makes a judgment on the super-sensuous ideas in the particular
sense-percepts. ‘The cogitative faculty is concerned with forms
perceived by the senses ; the apprehensive faculty deals with
derivatives therefrom (“suprasensuous forms.”
* 1 Some writers however call the apprehensive faculty “ cogita-
tive”’ as a matter of cdénvenience, saying that the terms are
unimportant as long as one understands the things themselves
and the primary differences between them.


*Or, as a child distinguishes between a spotted rope and a serpent, and dis-
covers the suprasensual ideas existing in particular percepts. (Ch. M.’).


138 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§ 152. Clearly, the apprehensive faculty of the text covers both
“lower reason”? and ‘‘reason’”’ as ordinarily understood. The
former is also called ‘‘instinct.’’ The difference between the two is
easily defined in theory, but difficult to apply in practice. Instinct is
“the sense of what makes for the well-being of the individual.”
“Concrete relations are perceived without an abstract conception
being formed. Instinct therefore differs from reason in the absence
of abstract universal knowledge. At either end of the scale, the
external manifestations are clear and absolute.’’®° :


$153. Instinctive actions may be described as highly complex reflexes,
the movements being spread over a (variably) long time-period, and appearing
after a (variably) long interval. Thus we have:

(a) sensory stimulus—>lower nerve-centres—>immediate reflex movement;
(b) the stimulus of a perception—>higher nerve-centres—>a series of com-
plex movements.
(a) need never reach consciousness ; (b) goes on without a consciousness of the general
(not “‘ particular ’’) end or purpose of the movements.

While the subject of instinct is always discussed in regard to the actions of
animals, it should be admitted that nine-tenths of our daily actions really belong
exactly to the same plane or order. The use of the expression “ lower reason ”
enables a vast number of particular instances of animal behaviour to be classified
along with many similar actions performed by man, perhaps especially during
childhood.

Much of the difficulty about instinct versus reason in animals is avoided in
this way. It is also to be noted that while speech and language exist in various
orders of creatures, articulate speech occurs in man alone (Bock?!?*). Animals can
express their own emotions to one another, and can understand our speech in thatit
conveysemotion. But that is different from the reasoning processes which scholastic
philosophy limits to man.


181. The apprehensive faculty need not be considered
much by the physician because disorders in it are always conse-
quent on disorders in the prior faculties of imagination, and
memory, as we shall show later on. Itis only necessary to consider
those faculties the disturbances of whose functions bring on
disease. It is enough to know that the lesions in one which are
interfering with the other arise in the temperamental state of the
member or in depravity of its constitution. For on this know-
ledge depends the selection of the remedy and how to guard
against the disease. Not to know about tne state of a faculty
which is affected only indirectly is of less moment compared
with accurate knowledge about a faculty which 1s affected
directly.

182, The Retentive Faculty. Memory (Hafiza, Dhakira).
The power of memory is as it were a treasury or repository for
those supra-sensuous ideas discovered by the apprehensive
faculty, just as the imagination is the treasury or repository for
the sense-impressions of forms and sensible images (formed by
the common sense). The seat of this faculty is in the posterior
region of the brain. |


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 139


The philosopher discusses whether apprehension and
memory are to be taken together or separately. Is apprehension
merely a treasury of reflection ? To the physician this problem
is irrelevant because the same noxa, be it an intemperament or a
depraved constitution, would affect both and in either case the
seat of disease would be in the same region of the brain.


The apprehensive faculty : memory :: common sense: imagination. But the
composite sense preserves forms, and memory preserves ideas—the ideas discovered
by judgment (Wahm). (Ch.M.’).


§ 154. In scholastic philosophy, the memory is two-fold—
sensuous and rational. Sensuous memory is the power of retaining,
reproducing and recognizing the representations of past experiences,
and of referring an event to its place in time. The concrete objects
of memory under this category are: memory of size, form, position,
weight, sounds, rhythm, scent, colour, faces, persons and of certain
events. The degree of capacity for memory in regard to each of these
varies widely, producing various “‘ types,’”’ such as auditory, visual,
motor, etc.

The memory of emotional states is called “‘ affective’? memory.

Rational memory, the power of recollection, reminiscence, the
power of active recall, volitional memory.—This is restricted to man
(Maher,®° p. 180).


183. There is still one more faculty distinguishable in the
mind, namely, the ratiocinative ; the understanding. Physicians
do not concern themselves with this any more than they do with
the cogitative faculty, and for the same reason. They only study
the operations of the four other faculties.


§ 155. Charts devised in order to co-ordinate various ter-
minologies applied to the sensitive and rational faculties.


5. Ratiocinative Faculty 5. Thinking
o i ees
% @| s
~~ | 3. Cogitative ot p Sy
x Faculty = S 6 oe
4. Memory 5 g g,

sas —_| A a Gi

4 vel hensi f ;

3 pprehension a Ke
5 3 : ‘
Es 2. Imagination BS 2. Imagination
8 8
4 4

1. The Common Sense 1. The Common Sense


I. AvICENNA. _ II, Arasic (Nt. 449).


140 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


EGO


Identifying


Kemal


HEART CONSCIENCE


Feeling, Reslhetics \ Reasoning ; Moral


III. (Modern) SuFi**


Thought (of God)


Reasoning
Heart : sirr G qalb : ruh seme ee te wees aeht eee eee ee ee eee
Intelligence (caql) 2 Concentrating power
fe)
tm | <t | sOw| 5 Peters Volition. uasag
pe] B aie | ASm| ¢ 0 Conduct
oe Booed & Q ¢ Higher SPWNS Sct caver eee ess ee
we. <8 Be io | will: Ideation
5 @ op Attention ween eee eco st eee eee eeneee
09, 8, Bp Elan ssociation of Ideas
IO @ °
22, A g, ae
S ct
ry <
S . .
= Sense- Instinct | Emotion
< 2 memory
Phan- 9
tasy Memory a
Per- | Khayal | (ofideas) | Lower 3 Perception
cep- Dhakira Will 3
tion | Imagin- Nafs Se
ation Memory. Stereognosis
Musaw- | Hafiza
wira
Parcent V. MopERN?!*
eption GN:
Mudrika (Psychiatric)


IV. Jrris? (p. 110)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 141


UNDERSTANDING
Intellect
g Power of thought
E
x Supra- Supra-
sensuous. Reason sensuous
¥ WIALINALLON « Nose») Sort acaveres irks Memory
ec
ry :
a Sensuous Instinct Sensuous
Fs
<


The Common Sense
Perception


VI. ScHOLASTIC®°®


Notre.—These and innumerable other views regarding the faculties of the
“mind ”’ are partly accounted for by difference of purpose in view. In ancient
Medicine, everything was related to the cosmic elements; in modern medicine,
anatomy is all-important. In regard to mental diseases, cortical structure (strata
of types of nerve-cell) is naturally a basis of interpretation. Many modern text-
books of psychology consider principles of education of the young. Moral phil-
osophy has another object in view. Eastern mystics regarded the matter in terms
of the problem of attaining elevation of the soulto God. Standard modern Catholic
teaching envisages all such aspects, without making clear the links between “ theoreti-
cal” faculties and the actual microscopic anatomy and histological physiology
of the human body. But these links are the essential interest in this treatise, and
are outlined in the special chart described and discussed in §§ 157 sqq.


6. Tue Power or Locomotion


184. This power is that which contracts and relaxes the
muscles whereby the members and joints are moved, extended
or flexed. This power reaches the limbs by way of the nerves and
there are as many forms of power as there are of movement.
Each muscle has its own peculiar purpose and it obeys the decree


of the composite sense.


§156. That the soul is endowed with a locomotive faculty is simply an
ultimate fact. Our life-long experience assures us that mind and body do interact,


but how we cannot tell. (Maher 220).

The skeletal system is the instrument of animal life.

Movement occurs in plants, but so slowly that it was not positively discerned
till recent years, and is not a “ locomotion ”’ (see § 128).


7. "THE Functions (oF THE Bopy)


185. Some of the functions are carried out by one single
faculty ; others by two together. The former is exemplified
by digestion, the latter by the appetite for food, where there is
(1) the vegetative faculty of attraction, (2) the faculty of sensation
located at the mouth of the stomach. The faculty of attraction
is achieved by a contraction of the longitudinal fibres which
draw the object inwards and extracts from the humours that
which is required. The faculty of sensation enables the organ
to be aware of the acridity of the atrabilious humour, for this
it is which excites appetite. In saying that this one function


142 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


is achieved by two faculties together, one relies on the fact that
a nocument befalling the faculty of sensation destroys that
“« desire’ which is called hunger and appetite. Even the need
of nutriment does not account for “ desire.”

186. The function of swallowing is another instance of a
dual faculty—that of attraction and that of propulsion. The
faculty of attraction is achieved by the longitudinal fibres at the
orifice of the stomach and oesophagus ; that of propulsion is
achieved by the voluntary muscles of swallowing. Loss of either
power renders deglutition very difficult ; even retarded activity,
without actual loss, renders the act difficult. Every one knows
that lack of appetite for a substance makes swallowing difficult.
If a thing is repugnant, and yet we wish to swallow it, our appetite
and. power of attraction is so frightened away that the function of
voluntary deglutition is made difficult.

187. The function of transmission of nutriment along the
alimentary tract is achieved by the faculty of propulsion forwards
of the portion containing the nutriment. It is associated with the
faculty of attraction exerted by the succeeding portion.

188. The discharge of waste matters 1s also a two-fold
function. Sometimes both sensitive and vegetative faculties
initiate the function simultaneously.

189. In some cases a faculty is associated with a quality.
Thus co/d holds material, and also arrests the flow of humour (or
intestinal contents) either absolutely by repressing its formation
or relatively by driving it back. Cold restrains by (1) congealing
the material (rendering its particles closely aggregated), or (2)
narrowing the pores. Incidentally it has a third action—(3)
that of obliterating innate heat (which is concerned with the
faculty of attraction).

190. Heat. Heat attracts by the ways already mentioned.
Heat and the urge occasioned by (relative) vacuum first attracts
the attenuated matter, and later the denser matter. The vegeta-
tive faculty of attraction only attracts the things most appropriate
for it, or things whose nature it is to be attracted. Consequently
it might happen that the denser (more concentrated) matter, being
more suitable and appropriate, and responsive, is attracted first.


PER-NAT


PCTIVE = UINTELCECT


Intell gence


PASSIVE INTELLECT


= LOWER REASON
INSTINCT


pS ES Se Se eee
ue PERCEPTION


aL 45°


O


S$v0j}0 ms


ro, |
-S
P Sj


VEGETATIVE LIFE (Natwalis)


To face page 143


THE CORRELATION OF THE VARIOUS FACULTIES.


(Summary and extension of Thesis VI.)


§ 158. The correlation between the various faculties with the
inter-connections between the visible bodily organs is usefully
indicated by means of a suitable map or chart.

The following considerations are necessary in studying
the accompanying map. (1) There are no actual boundaries between
the faculties, even in the case of the discrete viscera. ‘ The internal
senses are “‘ merely diverse aspects or phases of a single sensuous
faculty’? (Maher,®® p. 96) as Aristotle perceived. To name
“departments ”’ of the mind, it must therefore be constantly remem-
bered, is simply to help the memory, and assist analysis of the various
mental operations. (2) Subdivision of faculties into ‘‘ animal ”’ and
““human ”’ is to be avoided. (3) The enumeration of mental faculties
given by phrenology is not vitiated by the fact that phrenological
charts are not anatomically correct. (4) Since the strength of one
faculty involves a corresponding weakness of some other, even the
very existence of the faculty may be virtual.

§159. BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE CHART.

Six discrete ‘‘ planes ’’ are represented, and are named according
to certain terms selected from those used in various classifications.
The vertically placed plane serves to indicate a close relation between
this and each of the horizontal ones.

Plane I.—This refers to the vegetative life, and shows the various
organs and their inter-connections, as well as their relations tothe
superposed planes. Connection with the lower extremity of the
vertical plane indicates the existence of ‘‘ unconscious appetition ”’
in this sphere of life. This, the so-called ‘‘ natural appetite,” is
defined as ‘‘ the inclination towards a thing which is in concord with
its nature, without any knowledge of the reason why such a thing
is appetible ’’!7 (I, 656). It is inherent in the nature of “ being ”’
on this plane.


Appetite is (a) natural (hunger, thirst, sleep, exercise, sex) (b) sensitive (reflex,
instinctive), (c) rational. The two former depend on organic conditions, which are
not regulated by reason. The sensitive appetite is under the control of the will,
and can be strengthened or checked thereby.?? (i. 656). Appetite, in the sense of
sinful desire, belongs to another aspect of the subject.


Plane II.—This refers to the sensitive life. Sensitive life
comprises the ‘‘ power to know”’ (i.e., the faculties already discussed


143


144 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


in 176-183 of the Canon, and shown in the charts in §155), and *the
“power to love ’’?(= ‘‘ appetition’’ = ‘‘the power of loving that
which is the good for the individual”’ =appetitive faculty = desire).
The power to know is represented by Plane II and the power to love is
represented by the lower part of the vertical plane. Both find
their realization in organs depicted on Plane I.


“Tower’’ is used as equivalent to “animal” (as opposed to human). Scholastically
itis the antonym of “ higher.”” ‘ Reason,” again, is made equivalent to “ instinct ”
because popularly the latter word is taken to be the same thing as automatism.
In scholastic philosophy the phenomenon of instinct is appraised properly. Hence
“lower reason ’’ comes to be applicable for a certain series of phenonena, for that
which scholastically is called instinct is that which in modern life is called “ lower
reason.’ The word reason should however be applied strictly to those higher
operations which scholastics define with masterly precision.


Coincident with the mental representation of the thing—whether
it be good or evil for the individual—there is an agreeable or dis-
agreeable passive state of consciousness, and this is called an


‘‘ emotion.’ Emotions are subdivided into ‘‘ concupiscible’’ and
‘‘irascible.”’ The former imply attraction or repulsion, and are:
love, hatred; desire, abhorrence; delight, sadness. The latter
concern the sense of self-preservation. They are: hope of ac-


quiring an object which it is difficult or dangerous to obtain ;
despair of so doing; fear of a threatening evil or danger, with
impulse to flee; courage, when there is an impulse to remain;
anger.

The objects of each of these emotions are: concrete objects,
whether inanimate or living; muscular activity; experience
(excitement, adventure) ; emotion itself. For example, there may be
fear of hunger, cold, lack of necessaries of life (clothing; etc.); of
illness ; of death ; of punishment, of reproaches, of tears ; of loss of
prestige or reputation, of being misjudged or considered eccentric ;
fear of failure.

Planes III and IV together refer to the rational life. They
appear separated in order to bring out the idea of active and passive
intellect. They stand for: the ‘‘ power to think.” The vertical
EES, belongs with these two planes as representing ‘‘ the power to
will.

The power to think, or Understanding, is regarded as two-fold—
speculative and practical. ~The former, under the influence of the will
produces the act of contemplation, the object in question being purely
ideal (poetry, music, art, refinement, taste). It sees resemblances,
sees the “‘ simplicity ” of creation, and makes even the most thorough
difference seem quite secondary and_ insignificant. It includes
foresight, research, ‘‘ wisdom.’ The practical understanding, under
the influence of the will, and by the use of the physical body, accom-
plishes constructive work.

The power to will, or ‘‘ rational appetite,’ precedes voluntary
movement. The inclusion of the terms “‘ attention,’ ‘‘ conscious-
ness,’’ ‘‘ heart,’’ ‘‘ego,”’ on the vertical plane, is for convenience and
does not imply synonymity in every respect.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 145


Plane V, as representing the ‘‘ supernatural” life, is only
introduced for completeness, and its relation with the ‘ lower ”’
planes, though intimate, is purposely not specified. Its necessity was
perceived by Jili (taken as a representative of Islamic mysticism, by
Nicholson ®*) when he discusses the ‘‘ perfect ”’ or ‘‘ ideal ’’ man, and
some of its features appear in the chart representing his views (§155).
The subject belongs primarily to theology.

§ 160.—DETAILS REGARDING THE EMOTIONS.

(1) It will be seen that there is no separate account of the
Emotions in the Qanun. They are only referred to incidentally,
except in the chapter on the Pulse (601) which describes the effect of
five particular emotional states on the Pulse.

(2) While classification of the emotions is unsatisfactory, as
Maher®® points out, the short list given by Avicenna is convenient
in practice, because every patient may be regarded as fundamentally
governed by one or other, the others being relatively unimportant.

In this section such emotions as esthetic and moral feeling are
not considered. The self-regarding emotions are referred to under


“Ego” (§ 164, IV).


(3) EMOTIONS AND THEIR CORRELATIONS.


ig JO, QL, TV VE
Latin name .-| Gaudium Laetitia Tristitia | Ira Timor
Arabic name... Surir Lazzat Gham Ghadab | Faz‘
Chinese name ..| Hsi Ai‘ Ai Nu Chit
Translation --| Joy Delight Sorrow Anger Fear
Concupiscence* Hatred*
Corresponding |
Element :

Sufic ..| Aether Air Earth Fire Water

Chineset ae |, Hane Earth Metal Wood Water
Corresponding

phase of breatht} Jelal Jemal Jemal Jelal Jemal
Dominant

Humour a8

corresponding | Sanguineous Sanguineous Atra- Bilious | Serous

bilious


‘


(4) Relation between the emotions and the ‘‘ elements.’ —There
is not a strict relation between individual emotions and individual
elements. As has been explained, all the elements occur together,
though one may be said to be more frequently dominant than another.


* The Chinese speak of seven chief emotions, concupiscence and hatred being
the two additional ones. Instead of ‘‘ delight,” ‘‘ liveliness,” and “‘love”’ are
equivalents of “ ait” ‘

+ In theosophical language this relation is expressed by saying that emotions
belong to the “ astral’’ plane.?* (p. 167).

+ Su-Wén (Forke*?; Wieger!**), 4


146 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The same applies to the phases of the ‘‘ breath ’”—the degree of
vitality. Every emotion goes through three phases of activity—
rising, acme, falling,—as do the types of breath. Hence different
words are required to describe each emotion according as it is weak,
strong, balanced, pure or mixed. (See § 139, § 164, II.)

This complexity is illustrated by the following instance—the
relation between “ anger”? and “‘ fire.’—“ Fire varies from dull
smouldering to a red-heat, and so to flame—flicker, lambient, gentle,
pale, lurid, sudden flare, continued light of different degrees of
intensity, fierce burning, ferocious fire. The phrases: one’s blood boils,
he flared up,—and so on, are graphic enough. Actually, the vessels
engorge, the muscular power is intercepted, the mind becomes
confused ; the bile is set in motion, and may be expelled from the
gall-bladder, leading to relief (bodily as well as mentally), or enters
the blood more freely, engendering heat, and increasing both the
acid and the bitter throughout the body. Whether a person is
irascible, or is difficult to rouse to anger, whether the passion will
smoulder (and hence show as a resentment, and spirit of vengeance)
will depend on whether the humours are mixed or whether one or
other is definitely preponderant in the resting state.

An angry person gives out a definite atmosphere, a feeling of
being ‘fon edge.” The effect on bystanders depends on their
dominant emotional state ; in some it provokes quarrelsomeness, in
others perplexity owing to the discovery that the person is unapproach-
able. Silence and appropriate interior exercises are indicated,
Angry words produce mental “ sores’’ ; they may heal, or they may
be kept going, or they may be re-opened, or become incurable.

An outburst of anger may be provoked by a clash of interests.
These vary widely. Thus, two wills may clash; the function of one
organ may clash with that of another (e.g. menstrual irritability or
outbursts of temper); clash of duty with self-will. The intensity of
the outburst is according to the principle of jelal-jemal.

Anger may be manifested as a “liver-storm’’ (variable dura~
tion), ‘‘ storms’ from stagnation in connective-tissue spaces (longer
duration), “‘ nerve-storms ”’ (short duration), ‘‘ mind-storms ”’ (lead-
ing to criminal acts). These phenomena may come on unawares.

(5) Physical effects of emotional disturbance.—The effect of
anger on bodily functions has been referred to. Fear may manifest
as gastric trouble, indigestion, constipation. Panic-fear may provoke
diarrhcea, and polyuria. The blood becomes flooded with toxins,
and the kidneys are taxed in consequence.

The dlood-state is altered during the sway of emotions (Cf. 1090.)
The dlood-cell formula may also alter.

_ The humoral formula changes during emotional phases, but there
is no rigid relation to be assigned. Those given in the table are not
absolute.


Analysis of a total emotional process.—Viewed as a complex process, the following
components must be considered in regard to a total emotional process: (i.) A cog-
nitive state associated with a nervous change in the cerebral centres (a), (ii.) a con-
scious appetency or impulse excited by (a) associated with a diffused outgoing


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 147


process along motor nerves (b), (iii.) bodily commotion caused by ii. + 6; this
reaches consciousness through sensory nerves (c). Psychically, the emotion is
made up ofi + ii. + iii. ; physically itcomprisesa + b+ c. (After Maher,*°, p. 446).


§ 161.—DETAILS CONCERNING SOME OF THE FACULTIES AND
PHENOMENA PERTAINING TO RATIONAL LIFE.

The term ‘‘ Mind” is variously defined. It is taken as synony-
mous with (qa) intellect ; (4) intelligence ; (¢) consciousness, conscious
_ intelligence ; (d) the nervous system ; (e) the brain (thus, behaviour-
ists employ ‘‘ mind ”’ for “ brain”’ from a dislike of the materialistic
sound of that word1**) , (f) the entire psychical being. It is defined
as (i) a sum-total of the mental processes (Howell’s Physiology) ;
Gi) that which thinks, feels and wills; (iii) “the terminus of an
evolutionary progress from reflex and tropism by way of memory and
imagination to intellect and reason ”’ ; (iv) “‘ mind is to be interpreted
in biological terms, as an organism, an organ of adjustment,
a structural fabric’ (Purposive school of psychology).15* ‘‘ Mind”
is analogized with a room, in which the soul lives; with a
mirror which reflects every thought coming into it. The purpose of
this analogy is to illustrate differences between individuals just as
there are different kinds of rooms, styles of decoration, coloured
windows.

The scholastic definition of the mind is that it is the proximate
principle of understanding, and designates rational life as opposed
to sense-knowledge. Mind is not a special power over and above
the memory, intelligence, and will, but is a potential whole comprising
these three. It includes all those powers which in their operation are
entirely removed from matter and from material conditions. (St.
Thomas, Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, x. 1; and ad 12;
Sums Theol..77, a. 5.)

Activity of mind.—This may be considered in three aspects :
mobile, rhythmic, and chaotic. The former is shown in gentleness,
generosity, gratitude, goodwill, easy-going disposition. Rhythmic
activity is shown in reason and logic; in business-like character ;
moderation in love and hate, likes and dislikes. Chaotic activity is
shown in intolerance, suspicion, imprudence.


A. The Intellect, (Plane III, I1V).—The active intellect is defined as the
power of abstracting, whereby the object obtained by the senses (the image stored
in the imagination) is disengaged from its individual conditions and rendered in-
telligible. It ‘‘ abstracts from the representations of concrete things or qualities,
the typical ideal essential elements, leaving behind the material and particular ”’!”
(I. 74), ‘‘ manipulating them like algebra without immediate reference to the con-
crete.” It considers things apart from quantity, quality, place, and time. ;

Relation of intellect to corporeal organs.—Intellect is a function of the mind
alone ; it is not exerted by means of any organ (Maher*®, p. 239, 240). Intellectual
activity depends extrinsically, or per accidens, on the organic faculties, as the school-
men said (ib. p. 241). Intellect is a spiritual faculty. :

Whereas sensations of touch, or phantasms of colour are possible only to
a soul that informs a body, and can only be elicited by modification of an animated
system of nerves, intellectual judgments are not the results of a stimulus of a sense-
organ, but are products of purely spiritual action. ‘‘ The inferior mode of mental
life is awakened by the irritation of sentient nerves, the superior activity is due toa
higher reaction from the unexhausted nature of the mind itself; and the ground
for this reaction lies in the fact that the same indivisible soul is the root of both
orders of faculties.” (ib. p. 242).


148 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


B, Perception. Imagination.—These are shown on both the II and the III
plane. (Cf. § 155). nee

C. Concepts v. Images.—The formation of concepts must be distinguished from
that of phantasms, or images. The concept is a representation of objects of a
class; the image pictures only one particular colour, shape, size, €ic..- The concept
is fixed, immutable, and has no relation totime. The image is unstable, contingent,
and fluctuates. The concept represents the nature or essence in an abstract. con-
dition, “‘ ignoring or prescinding all accidental individualising conditions.’ The
image reproduces the object clothed with these concrete determinations.’’ (Ib. p.
237).

oe D. Thought.—This cannot be called a “‘ sensation, ’’as shown by the question
raised by Balmez (quoted in Maher, p. 243): “‘ Is the perception of the difference
of the smell of the rose and that of the pink a sensation ? If we answer that it is
not, we infer that the judgment is not the sensation transformed, for it is not even a
sensation.”

The mechanism of thought.—‘‘ The external objects stimulate the senses and
effect a modification of the sensuous faculties.’”’ The result is a sensuous percipient
act. ‘‘ A sensuous phantasm arises in the imagination. The intellect now acts
and abstracts the essence, thereby generating the concept which expresses the
essence of the object. This abstract concept is then viewed by ‘reflection’ as
capable of representing any member of the class. A formally universal idea is now
constituted ’’*° (p. 311). ‘“‘ By comparison, reflection and generalization, the idea
is elaborated till we attain to the distinct and precise concepts or ideas which accurate
science demands ’”’ (Maher?’ : vii. 633). ;

E. Reasoning.—tThis is defined as a process in which a succession of cognitive
acts representing the various “notes’’ of a thing are unified, through relations
being established between them. It is the opposite process to intuition. By
intuition, one single act conveys all that can be known of a thing. The faculty
of reason seeks new and differential characteristics. The most minute differences
are essential. It includes: discerning power, sense of discrimination, classifying
power, sense of proportion ; observing power for (a) things, to see analogies and
resemblances between them ; (b) persons: e.g., character reading ; (c) ideas, which
link this faculty to that of the intellect. It also includes the attributes of order-
liness, method, sense of absurdity, and therefore merriment, humour, wit, sarcasm,
ridicule ; curiosity, mimicry, character-interpretation as by actors; arguing, and
reasoning power pure and simple.


F. Intuition, or intuitive knowledge.—This term is variously used. In the
present volume it is intended to refer to a particular kind of knowledge obtained
through the yse of the intellect, as applied to many of the topics of medicine.
That which is called esoteric knowledge, or ‘‘ wisdom,’”? may be included under this
heading. Foresight, so-called mystical interpretation, insight are obtained by the
use of the intellect influenced by mature experience. In medicine, as well asin daily
life, we may

“Look with spirit-eyes, and lo! shall see
Glory in every leaf o’erwaves the head.”
(Night 94; Burton ii. 39).


“The spirit of faith is the habit of seeing everything in God, and God in
everything.”’ Fr, Plus,


From the Scholastic point of view, the following are proper propositions :

(r) All knowledge begins in the data furnished by sense-experience.

(2) Primary principles are known by intuition.

_(3) Abstraction and discursive reasoning are the instruments wherewith
we discern the nature of the data of sense-experience, their laws and causes. Through
these two servants of intuition the mind gains a scientific and philosophical knowledge
of things (Sum. Theol. i. 58, a. 3; II-Ila. 49, a. 5, ad2m.). Through the same two
servants of intuition we arrive at the notion of immaterial beings and of God Him-
self*? (i, 12) *4 (1, 84-88)

(4) “ Concepts and reasoning, therefore, are in themselves inferior to intuition 5
but they are the normal” (i.e., usual, or most widespread) “‘ processes of human
knowledge.”

“For the Schoolmen, the intuitive act of intellectual knowledge is by its
nature the most perfect act of knowledge, since it is an immediate apprehension
of and contact with reality in its concrete existence, and our supreme reward in the
supernatural order will consist in the intuitive apprehension of God by our intelli-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 149


gence: the beatific vision. But in our present conditions of earthly life our know-
ledge must of necessity* make use of concepts and reasoning ”’ (Sauvage”’ vii., p. 83)


§ 162. OCCULT PHENOMENA AND PoweErs.—I. Common
usage applies the term “occult” to such phenomena as psychic
power, healing power, thought-reading, telepathy, clairvoyance,
crystal-gazing, fortune-telling, discernment of the future, interpreta-
tion of dreams and visions, medium-ship, character-delineation
(e.g. palmistry), divination, magic, sorcery, hypnotism, obsession,
“willing” another who is at a distance to perform some desired
personal service. Such phenomena are studied in theosophy,
hermetic science, astrology (and medical astrology), spiritualism,
Christian science, and also figure in new-thought movements and
many other revivals and elaborations of ancient pagan pursuits.1?
fi. 10.. Xi. 199.)


Whereas in all these cases there is the suspicion of trickery, deception, fraud,
charlatanry, the term “occultism’’ is quite properly applied in an entirely
different manner,—namely, to the investigation, by the use of reason and logic,
of the occult (i.e., hidden, not self-evident) causes and effects operative in ordinary
human affairs. The events of one’s own daily life, and those of one’s fellows, are
all natural sequences of previous behaviour. This is not realized, and wrong
conclusions are apt to be drawn—such as ascribing good or ill fortune to “ fate,”’
or an extramundane agency, or to the deliberate ill-will of others. Better know-
ledge of such a subject would enable one to avoid misjudging others, and to help
them better, by realising that every soul has his own way to go and his own manner
of proceeding on that way, toward the one final goal of all.


II. Occult phenomena in the common meaning of the term
are (a) true, (4) false. The latter are achieved by deception, or
illusion, charlatanry, or may be evidence of self-deception, or of
disease (hysteria, neurasthenia, mental disorder, insanity). The
former belong to two categories : (i) Impersonal; that is, explicable
according to physical laws, though at present only imperfectly
understood. Such phenomena manifest sometimes in inanimate
objects, sometimes in organized beings—animal or human (in virtue
of their possession of a receptive nervous system). (2) Personal.
(i) Natural; that is, manifested in human “ nature” (a) actively
—in the case of phenomena of the kind referred to in § 163; ()
passively—in which case the phenomena manifested in one person
originate in another or in numerous others (e.g. crowd-psychology),
or in “supernatural” beings. (ii) Supernatural agencies: (a) so-
called disembodied spirits ; (4) angelic beings—good and beneficent,
or bad and malevolent, evil, satanic; (¢) the Supreme Being.

III. The word ‘ supernatural” has another application which
is properly and accurately explained only in Catholic philosophy (see
Cuthbert,117 p. 28, sqq.; Poulain,?>4, chap vi; Vassall-Phillips®® :
etc.). Ordinarily, the human being lives a “ natural” life, however
cultured, unselfish, altruistic, pious, virtuous. He may live a
‘supernatural ”’ life, by entering a ‘“‘state of grace,’ so that the
human nature is transcended (suger), as indicated by Plane V in the


* The lives of the saints, however, show that for them at any rate there was
very often not such “ necessity.”


150 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Chart. While living such a life, phenomena may become manifest
(e.g. visions, revelations) which must not be confused with those called
Soccenulis,

IV. Emotional states as a basis of occult phenomena.—Strong
emotional states may impress places and things sufficiently to affect
other persons in the absence of the original impressor. Obsessions
and haunted places are accounted for in this way. “A place or
thing such as a weapon or article of furniture, almost anything in fact
which has played a part in events that aroused very intense emotional
activity on the part of those who enacted them becomes itself satur-
ated as it were with the emotions involved. So much so that it can
influence people of exceptional sympathetic powers and enable them
to observe the original events more or less perfectly as if they were
enacted before them. Thus in some cases the person will see the
occurrence as if taking place before his eyes.” (Pater,1**; cf.
Benson. !®7)

~ V. Occult powers natural to human beings~—Some of the
powers enumerated in the previous section are inherent in the human
organization. They remain latent, or they develop more or less
unwittingly as life advances, or they are developed by suitable
training. In a few persons they are naturally so decided as to
constitute a special talent, which may have been inherited.

The possession of psychic powers (clairvoyance, telepathy, thought-reading
etc.) is sometimes looked on as evidence of special favour, or “ spirituality,”
or of superiority (being a ‘“‘ very advanced soul’’) to be emulated. Such powers
are taken as evidence of sainthood in Islam*? and among Buddhists**. In the
case of Christian saints, such phenomena are regarded as incidental, and not a


criterion of sanctity. Not only is there no relation between the presence or absence
of such powers and the virtue of the individual, they are attainable apart therefrom.


VI. The éasts in the human constitution upon which such
powers depend is fivefold :

(1) The vital faculty (161; § 134): vitality” .. ..  Wegetative Life.

(2) Instinct (180; §153) .. $c ac ee Sensitive Life.

(3) The emotional make-up (159, 1641?) :

(The scholastic concupiscible and irascible phenomena) Sensitive Life.

(4) The imagination bc see 4c aR Sensitive Life.

(5) The reasoning powers ; deductive logic oe -- Rational Life.

§ 163. The following powers are specially pertinent to medicine:

(i) Adbzlity to read character—Fundamentally, this is the
instinctive discernment of friend from foe. It exists from infancy,
and is to be observed among domestic animals. With the develop-
ment of reason, the consciousness becomes more and more aware of
the attractions and repulsions produced by another individual,
whether actually present or only thought of. As life proceeds,the
contact with relations, friends, acquaintances, and strangers, leads
to better knowledge of character, though perhaps nothing more than
a form of “ worldly wisdom.” The reasoning power may be deliber-
ately brought to bear, since delineation of character is amenable to
rule, and can be studied, and taught to others.*


* The Chinese sought to establish a relation between character and physique
as long ago as 450 B.c. (Wieger, 144).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE IS1


As in business, so in medicine, it is a subject worthy of attention.
Indeed it is always imprudent to neglect it.

(ii) Telepathy. Thought-reading.—These depend on the first
three of the above-named powers, and not on reason. They cannot
be learned from books, and the experience cannot be taught to
others. The most striking examples of genuine powers of this kind
are furnished between (a) parent and offspring, when there is intense
mother love ; (4) persons between whom there is special friendship ;
(c) husband and wife, when there have been years of unbroken
mutual understanding.

Since they are powers inherent in human nature, they may be
developed gradually by concentration and will-power, exerted—not
over others, but over oneself. (Cf. P’u Sung-Ling.153)

(iii) Healing power.—(a) Involuntary. Success or failure in the
handling of many cases in ordinary practice is usually ascribed to
the concrete methods employed or the appliances used. Yet it is
often thought that the personality of the doctor (whether he be
specialist or not) has at any rate something to do with the efficacy of
the treatment.


The following factors contribute: inspiring confidence, the bodily state being
influenced through the emotions; possession of great vitality, which favourably
influences a debilitated state through the vegetative powers, even apart from actual
personal contact ; will-power even if used unconsciously has a bracing effect on the
patient ; psychic power, even when the owner is unaware of it, may directly influence
endocrine and hormonic (e.g.) activities beneficially, and the vegetative life in general.
A disharmonious person will actually drain vitality from a weakly person.

The mother’s touch takes away the bodily pain of her little boy.


(6) Voluntary.—Among the laity there is sometimes a deliberate
attempt made to develop so-called specific psychic healing powers,
through healing circles, and the like (theosophy, Christian science,
ete:)c


The fact that such practice is at the expense of exact anatomical and physio-
logical knowledge and is exalted above medical training, cannot but arouse condem-
nation. Medicine herself is not a little responsible for the rising up of ‘‘ healers,”’
in her lack of appreciation of the insistent reality to many patients of the sufferings
which she cannot explain or find a physical basis for. On the other hand, if the
“ psychics ’’’ possessed genuine powers, they would not lose them by going through
the proper doors of the medical curriculum, and their patients would be the gainers.


(c) Miraculous healing.—By this term is meant supernatural
intervention apart from human instrumentality.


Of this it might be said that Medicine would not suffer by candidly acknow-
ledging its occurrence through her leading voices. Not to do so exposes her to
disrepute in the minds of those who have experienced the cures, or have personally
met with such cases. Though ignorance in various forms (prejudice, intolerance,
party spirit) is inevitably in her ranks, it should not be chargeable to Medicine
herself.

‘The sectarian thinks that he has the sea ladled into his private pond.”
(Tagore, Fireflies, 209).


§ 164. Lists OF TERMS APPLICABLE TO MENTAL FACULTIES


AND AFFECTIONS


Individuals may be described in terms of a series of “ notes ’»—
the physique, the emotional make-up, the temperament, or disposition,


ee: THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the character, and the talents or intellectual capacities. These
together make up the “ individuality.”

The following lists under each “ note ”’ do not attempt complete-
ness, and some of the descriptive words might be placed equally under
other headings than those given.


I, Puysique.—(i) Geneval—Robust, spare, wiry; strong or delicate
( constitution ’’) ; good or deficient. ; 7 ;

(ii) Special —Classified according to the nine systems of Dr. Abbott’s*** classi-
fication ; or according to such types as these (Stanton*1**)—-vegetative, thoracic,
glandular, muscular, osseous, nervous, etc. Basis : features of the faces, size
and shape of head, hands, fingers, feet, etc. Throughout, it is necessary also to
specify the qualities of strength and weakness in their degrees (i., slight, or minimal ;
2, moderate; 3, normal, average, mean, or “ equable’’; 4, well-marked; 5, very
well-marked or excessive). :

II. EmotionaL MaKe-up.—Classification according to the five headings
of the table in §160. Basis: the character and phase of the breath; the degree
of vitality; the dominant imponderable element; the dominant humour. To
draw up a formula to represent the emotional make-up conveniently for clinical
work,the initial letters of the (Latin) names of the emotions may be used,the dominant
emotion being expressed by a capital letter. Degrees of intensity are indicated
by index figures drawn up as in the preceding paragraph. For example, a “ Timor ’’-
person might be represented by the formula g*1* tr+it T*: an “ Ira’’-person might
be represented) by eel? tr+ 1" tt

List oF WorDS DESCRIPTIVE OF THE SEVERAL Emotions.—These are arranged
alphabetically, and not according to order of severity. In some cases the words
apply also to mental states or attributes sometimes associated with the given
emotional-type.

Joy: blissful, buoyant, ecstatic, enraptured, enthusiastic, entranced, exalted,
excited, gleeful

Delight : affectionate, amorose, cheerful, contented, eager, excited, gay,
inquisitive, lively, love of (a) objects (collecting spirit), (b) wealth in various forms ;
(c) opposite sex ; pleasure; sentimentality ; sympathetic. (Some of these convey
ideas associated with this emotion).

Sorrow: aching heart, affliction, anguish, anxiety, bitterness, broken-hearted,
chagrin, cheerless, dejected, depressed, despondent, discontented, displeased,
disquieted, distressed, fretting, gloom, grief, infelicitous, inquietude, languishing,
low-spirited, miserable, mournful, sense of (a) desolation, (b) disgust, (c) dryness,
or aridity, (d) repugnance, (e) uselessness, solicitude, sorrow, stricken, tepidity,
tribulation, troubled, unhappy, weak, wretched.

Anger: acrimonious, aggressive, ambitious, bellicose, bitter, boiling, bold,
bristling, cantankerous, capricious, captious, caustic, choleric, churlish, contentious,
contrary, cross, cynical, daring, desperate, displeased, easily offended, exasperated,
exceptious, excitable, fierce, fiery, fractious, fuming, furious, hasty, having hatred,
impetuous, indignant, infuriate, irate, irritable, irritated, jealous, passionate, peevish,
petted, petulant, pugnacious, quarrelsome, querulous, rabid, raging, relentless,
resentful, severe, shrewish, sore, storming, sulky, sullen, suspicious, tart, testy,
vengeful, vexed, vindictive, violent; virulent, wrathful.

Feary: afraid, aghast, alarmed, anxious, apprehensive, astounded, brow-
beaten, cowardly, cowed, coy, craven, daunted, despairing, despondent, diffident,
discouraged, dismayed, disquieted, dreading, envious, faint-hearted, faltering,
fearful, fidgety, flinching, flurried, frightened, fussy, gentle, harassed, hesitating,
horrified, horror-struck, irresolute, irritable, jealous, mistrusting, nervous, panic-
stricken, penitent, perturbed, pious, pusillanimous, quailing, quaking, quavering,
repentant, restless, scared, scrupulous, shrinking, shuddering, shy, skulking, sly,
solicitous, startled, suspicious, temperate, terrified, terror-struck, timid, timorous,
trembling, trepidation, unmannered, weak-hearted, whining, worrying.

Moods. Moodiness. Disposition. ‘‘ Moods are the waves rising in your
heart.”” They are due to the changes in the breath from hour to hour or day to day.
The rate of change varies in different persons. When the change is comparatively
frequent, the person may be described as ‘‘ moody,’”—changeable. This character
may occur more at some periods of life than others, in the same person, Thus,
it is more frequent at puberty and during youth. It is possible to rise above the


cycle of moods, by the exercise of self-restraint. Moods change with surroundings
(places and people)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE ne4


III. TEMPERAMENTAL TYPE, OR DISPOSITION.—Basis ; the humoral formula,
This is expressed outwardly in differences of (a) texture—varying solidity of the
tissues of the body ; (b) development of the various parts of the body; (c) rate
of activity of (i) vegetative processeés—nutrition, waste, formation of germinal
cells, etc., (ii) expenditure of nervous energy ; (d) tonicity of muscles and nerves.
The words descriptive of temperament often apply also to II. Examples: aggres-
sive, amiable, austere, buoyant, capricious, cheerful, chilling, churlish, complacent,
conservative, courageous, depressed, despondent, discontented, energetic, enthusi-
astic, excitable, fastidious, forbearing, fretful. forward, gushing, harassed, impetu-
ous, indolent, intolerant, irascible, irritable, jealous, malicious, moody, obstinate,
petulant, querulous, rebellious, reckless, remorseful, ruffled, secretive, spiteful,
stubborn, submissive, suspicious, taciturn, tranquil, tyrannical, uncompromising,
unforgiving, verbose, vindictive, zealous.

Many of these terms also apply to the description of II and IV.

It is worth noting that among these types there are many which are sup-
posed to be evidence of high human aspirations, and yet strictly belong to the
“lower mind.’”’ Hence it has been very truly said: ‘‘ Those sweet affections which
incline the heart to God ... come from the sensitive temperament, or bodily dis-
position, rather than from the solid piety of reason, and are carnal rather than
spiritual ”’ (Lasance!**),—‘‘ Things that are apparently of the highest order in know-
ledge and art and sentiment are not things of the spirit, but things of the senses,
alike in the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas and in the modern researches in the
domain of the brain ’”’ (Vonier®’).

IV. CHARACTER.—This is really a collective term, since all the other “‘ notes ”
contribute to it. The terms which describe character may be grouped under
sensuous, intellectual, moral, and esthetic groups, or under the five sub-divisions
of Mind in Sufi terminology (Ego, Memory, Mind, Heart, Conscience). Many
terms have more than one component, and therefore do not belong strictly to one
group alone.

Ego: Positive: acquisitive, amative, approbative, artful, artless, avaricious,
arrogant, boastful, churlish, domineering, gluttonous, grasping, grouching, inquisitive,
jealous, lewd, licentious, loud, obdurate, obstinate, pugnacious, quarrelsome,
sociable, superstitious, vain, voluptuous, worldly. Negative : abstemious, apathetic,
hasty, indolent, indulgent, miserly, shy, timid, unselfish, weak.

Heart ; Positive : accessible, adaptable, affable, altruistic, ardent, benevolent,
contemplative, emotional, charming, compassionate, facetious, fascinating, frivolous,
gay, harmonious, hospitable, lively, peaceable, philanthropic, sincere, simple,
tranquil. Negative : tepid, meek, lenient.

Conscience: Positive: ascetic, austere, blameless, brave, conscientious,
conservative, courageous, diligent, exacting, fastidious, humble, industrious, per-
severing, scrupulous, sensitive, strong-willed, thorough, truthful, well-balanced.
Negative : deceitful, defiant, flippant, impetuous, impulsive, imprudent, malicious,
pusillanimous, resentful, slow, treacherous, unforgiving, ungrateful, unsociable,
untruthful, vindictive. (The moral sense may be absent),

Mind. Agnostic, ambitious, brusque, censorious, cunning, enterprising,
foreseeing, intellectual, loquacious, methodical, opinionated, orderly, plausible,
practical, prejudiced, refined, reticent, satirical, sceptic, serious, stilted, subtle,
superstitious, uncompromising.


It should be noted that character is (a) native and unalterable
(whatever some educationists say) ; (6) capable of being fashioned hy
the will of the person himself or by that of the persons amongst
whom he lives. To have a “ strong character ’’ is considered the
highest ideal by many; (6) is therefore much advocated. But this
idea is not necessarily true. Animals have character in that different
kinds of ego are asit were personifiedinthem. (cf. Paracelsus”®, p. 209).

Character is necessarily intimately related to physique,
emotional type and temperamental type. Hence character de-
lineation is possible from a close study of those aspects.

The skeletal system (bones, joints, ligaments, muscles, etc.) is
the expression of the character of the cerebral nervous system.
The viscera are the expression of the character of the vegetative


154 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


system. Hence it happens that the usual autopsy discusses the
least important part of the “ case.” (See §127.)


Intevests, Ex,: personal interests: the preservation of one’s life and
health and general welfare; interests of the family; of the social circle, etc.
Interests manifested in the us¢ of the various talents.

V. TaLents.—These are best classified according to the subject-matter
to which the mind is directed; though they may be classified according to the
faculty concerned.

Mechanical ; constructiveness ; architecture, etc.; technology.

Scientific ; all branches of learning; mathematics, sciences, logic, analytical
talents; calculating powers. Domestic science. Administration,

intellectual ; all branches of knowledge. Philosophy, history, sciences.

| Esthetic: arts and crafts, music, sculpture, designing, painting, poetry,
literary art, dramatic art ; wit ; women’s crafts of all kinds ; poise.

Imaginative : originality ; inventiveness.

Moral : perseverance, concentrating-power, law.

Other talents: language; intuitive perception; foresight; pedagogy ;
rhetoric ; vocal.

Social : domestic interests; love of children, of home.

Political. Military. Sport (athletics, acrobatic art, adyenturesomeness).
Commercial life. Agriculture, Husbandry.

Much overlapping is necessarily present in preparing such a list. It might
be extended to include all the subjects taught in universities, and schools of all
kinds, for persons of all ages.


§ 165. INTERACTIONS BETWEEN THE VARIOUS ASPECTS OF THE SouL.


J, IntTELLEcT.—Acts on vegetative life via emotions. (Effect of emotions on
bodily functions: § § 139, 160)

Is acted on by—

(a) Vegetative life : physical desires, sense-impressions, especially in dream
states and the like.

(b) Sensitive life: psychical desires, either in oneself or from others. The
imagination influences it in hypnosis.

(c) The will > compelling attention or forcibly diverting attention.

(d) Other wills : ditto, includes angelic intelligences as well as human.

II. Rerason.—Acts on vegetative life via the emotions, with their desires
and fears:

Is acted on by sensitive life. Emotions strongly affect the reason in people
of certain dispositions.

III. THe Wirt.—Acts on vegetative life—effecting exterior actions.

Acts on sensitive life. Through sensuous cognition it acts on the emotions ;
feeds or starves or fails to starve the sensitive appetite, and so acts in the same
three ways on the emotional states, aided by reason.

Acts on the practical understanding : with the aid of bodily mechanism it
leads to the performance of useful or artistic work.

Acts on the speculative understanding : produces acts of judgment, or worship,
or contemplation.

Acts on the intellect : ‘‘ concentration.”

Acts on the memory : ‘‘ recollection,’’ watchfulness.

Acts on itself: brings perseverance in the performance of a design conceived
and elaborated by the intellect.

Actions upon the will :

Intellect ; as when this propounds to the will what is the greatest good ;
conveys sense-impressions to the will.

__ Emotions : anger is very powerful in nullifying will to good, and increasing
will to evil. So also, fear of another person, fear of an idea, fear of a thing. Passions
hinder the judgment, and so affect the will. Emotions can be sublimated by inter-
action with Plane V.

Sensitive appetite: this acts directly on the will. If the objects of both
appetite and will coincide, the will is strengthened; otherwise it is weakened.
“The passions modify the organic conditions and this influences all cognitive
faculties, and their intensity may prevent the mind from applying itself to the
higher operations of the intellect and will’’ (**9, 10, 77; 17 I., p.656). ;

Vegetative life : the corporeal state affects the will.

Environment ; circumstances of life, personal atmosphere of neighbours,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 156


etc. ; presence of persons of strong will, all interfere with or modify the actions of
the (patient’s) will.


Diseases of the Will.—Inconstancy, irresolution (lack of energy), impulsiveness
(excess of energy ; excitability), and “ mortal sin’? (domain of moral philosophy).


IV. PRACTICAL APPLICATION.—The fact that feelings, im-
aginations and thoughts influence the character is of the greatest
practical importance, but by using the will-power to control them all,
one becomes also master of one’s life and ‘‘ fate.” Each emotional
“note’”’ has its own effect on body and mind, and can be over-
ruled by the will. The influence of the imaginations is implied in
the phrases ‘ looking on the bright (or dark) side of things.’”” Cheer-
ful, gloomy, constructive, destructive, upright, deceitful thoughts all
affect the sum-total of the conduct, the attitude of the mind towards
others, and can all be over-ruled by the will.

“If the endowment is great in one direction, it is at the expense
of some corresponding defect in another direction, as when tender-
hearted men are lacking in judicial faculty, while men in whom the
judicial faculty is prominent tend to be tyrannical’’ (Chu Hsi,?° p. 59).

The study of all such interactions as are suggested by the lists
of synonyms above given affords a better idea of what constitutes
ideal ‘‘ balance ”’ in regard to the various components of the human
being. A more graphic and tangible idea is at the same time
obtainable in this way of much of the subject-matter of ethical and
moral philosophy. To assign a distinct place for it in the domain of
Medicine is not to disown the precedence of religion.


B3333331I


|


THESIS I. DISORDERS OF HEALTH


1. DerFIniTIon oF THE Terms: Cause, DrsEasz, SYMPTOM


191.° Causzr.—The word
“Cause,” in medical works,
refers to that which initiates a
given state of the human body,
or maintains a fixity of such a
state.


§ 166. It is to be noted, says Costeus, that the term cause does not refer to
“ efficient ’’ cause, for disease, not being a definite entity, does not require an efficient
cause. In other words, disease is not in-formed matter.—This applies equally
in modern thought. If the changes of disease are modified biochemical reactions,
they cannot be considered in terms of matter and form. But formal causes, and
substantial causes, as well as the differences between qualities and dispositions,
tendencies, passive and active states, and fixed morbid conditions, are all better
understood under the precise thought of modern scholastic philosophy.—A cause
may be understood as anything which effects, or assists, or maintains, or imparts a
(morbid) function, whether actively or passively—morbid, because this part of
the Canon is concerned with disease.


Human body. Not an animal body. The teaching to be presented does not
necessarily apply to veterinary medicine.


fixity of state—Note that some states are labile, and others are stable or fixed.


Labile states are more or less easily curable, but fixed states are very difficult to
resolve or cure.


State.—We must distinguish carefully between cause, disposition, state, habit,
symptoms.


192. Duszasze.—This is an abnormal unnatural state of the
human body, in virtue of which injurious effects result. This
injurious effect is the beginning of the disease. Such an ab-
normal state is either (a) an intemperament, or (4) an abnormal


composition (see 205, 281.).


§ 167. It may be noted that on this view the state is primary,
and the disease secondary. To the modern view, the disease comes
first, and the state is its result. The state is ‘‘ the reaction to the
causal noxious agent.’”’ Such a state is (i) detrimental to the body,
(a) by an “ aggressive’ action upon the tissues by the agent, (4)


156


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 157


as an unfortunate by-effect, producing degenerations of various
kinds and degrees—sometimes mechanically (pressure on parts,
interference with vascular supply)—sometimes incidentally, in the
form of late toxic actions of the microbic poisons, (ii) beneficial to
the body—though indirectly, since it is certainly damaged in the
process—as tending to destroy the invading organisms or at least
neutralizing the poisonous products.

In Avicenna’s view, however, both agent and state are equally
important. One cannot speak of a “‘ reaction,” any more than one
would say (for instance) that sodium carbonate is a reaction to
hydrochloric acid. Unless both substances are there, there is no
reaction. So, without an abnormal state, there is no malady.

Note also that “ poisoning ”’ (“‘ intoxication ’’) is not a disease.


§168. The following classification of words often used indifferently for
“ disease,’ as if they were really synonymous, will help to a more precise usage.
A.—tTerms bearing primarily a general sense.

Ill-health : not used specifically ; there may or may not be a diagnosable
meciscacc

Illness: the state of being ill; sickness. Vaguely used for anything
from slight disability to a fatal condition. More definite in meaning
than “ ill-health.”

Malady: (lit. ill condition; male habitus). A synonym for “ an illness,”
appearing in polite literature for conditions not necessarily organic,
or for conditions which have not been diagnosed, and yet may prove
fatal.

Ailment. This may be some definite morbid condition, or simply imply
discomfort (possibly short of actual pain). Literally, is synonymous
with “a sickness,” “ an illness.’’

Disorders, in general. (cf. 198.) This term is used still more specifi-
cally, as a rule. See under B.

Disease (Morbus. Marad) in general. This word is technical, whereas the
other words have a more popular application.


B.—Terms bearing a special sense, whether used in that manner or not.
(i.) Any condition in which an organic lesion—some macro-
scopic change in the body—is present, is - - -— “ disease.”
This word implies a more or less serious disturbance, and
even suggests the risk of death. The lesions present
often determine the distinctive name of each separate
disease. Where the etiology is still unknown, the


disease may be provisionally named - “ sickness.”
(ii.) Conditions in which there is not necessarily any organic
lesion, or where such a lesion has not been detected.
These conditions do not receive distinctive names; are
not necessarily serious; are probably not fatal. The
mame of each condition originally bore a _ distinct

meaning :

(a) arising out of the temperament - - - - “ distemper,’’*
(b) arising out of the disposition or state. Now
means simply ‘‘not fit’’; or, vaguely, “ ill-

health.” - - - - - “indisposition,”’


(c) implies involvement of bodily functions. May be
sub-classified according to the “system’”’ in-
volved. Or, vaguely, means simply ‘ some-
thing is out of order.” = - - - - - “ disorder.”

(ad) implies involvement of the nerves, or nervous
system. (I.e., almost equivalent to “ functional ”’
as opposed to ‘‘ organic ’’ (Lat. passio). Implies ;

a certain amount of pain - - - “* affection.”


* Now only applied to a specific disease in veterinary surgery.


158 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(e) A condition in which pain is the chief feature,
whether general, or in some special region ; but
the pain is presumably not very severe. Sub- s Ke 2
classification according to the region or organ - complaint.


193. Symptom. ‘This is a phenomenon consequent upon
this non-natural state of the body. Some symptoms are entirely
abnormal phenomena, like the pain of colic. Others are (ex-
aggerations) of a natural phenomenon, like the intense flush on
the cheeks seen in peri-pneumonia.


§ 169. A lengthy discussion about what is to be regarded as a symptom is
here given by Costeus. He shows that the word ‘‘symptom ”’ is derived from the
Greek to indicate something which occurs simultaneously with the disease producing
it. He also discusses the exact meanings of the terms: weakness, impaired func-
tion, loss of function, abolition of function, ‘‘ affections,’ preternatural excretions
and retentions (cf. ‘‘ retained ’’ placenta). The question is also raised as to whether
a given symptom is directly due to the disease, or is indirect, or is collateral, or is in
no real relation to the disease.

Avicenna’s brief statement really covers all these points. As regards our
modern ways of thinking, one gathers together all the phenomena which are ever
found to occur in a case of a given disease, and we simply arrange them as far as
possible into the immediate effects, the remote effects, and those phenomena whose
nature is not absolutely certain—they may be caused by the disease; they may be
sequels; or they may be concurrent because some other morbid condition is, or
happens to be, simultaneously present.


194. A short table of examples.


Example of its Example of the
Example of a cause. corresponding malady. | corresponding symptom
Decay ; putrescence. Fever. Thirst, headache.
Fulness of lacrymal sacs from | Obstruction of uvea. Loss of vision.
developmental error.
Acrid “ flux.’’ > Ulcer’ in lane: Flushed cheeks ; curved
nails.


195. (a) The difference between ‘‘ symptoms” and “ signs.”
We speak of a symptom in regard to its own intrinsic character,
or in relation to that to which it belongs. A “sign” is that
which guides the physician to a knowledge of the real essential
nature of the disease.


It is asked : Are symptoms to disease as shadow is to object ? The answer is,
that the two are associated but are not inseparable. In other words, the symptom
is a (scholastic symbolism, of §56, sqq.) and not m.f. The term ‘“‘ “ symptom ”’
refers to many phenomena, some of which are really the direct consequence of the
disease, while others are only indirectly its result. This question would never
arise were it not for the custom of supposing ‘‘ diseases’ are entities of some kind.


(2) One disorder may originate a second. ‘Thus colic pro-
uces syncope, or paralysis, or spasms and convulsions.


Costzeus says: To the patient, ‘colic’ is ‘‘ pain.’”” The distension is the
cause of the pain. The pain interferes with or even arrests the vitality of the part,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 159


and in that sense produces the syncope. Pain is: the contact of disordered
disorganised function upon the consciousness. It is a form of ‘‘ touch.” The
consciousness ‘‘ touches’’ the impaired function. “ Paralysis’”’ is ‘‘loss of the
faculties of movement and sensation.” ‘‘ Convulsions’? = “ depravity”’ of the
faculties of movement and sensation.

There is, therefore, a certain literal truth in the general statement.


(c) A symptom may be the cause of a disorder. Thus, violent
pain causes the suffering of colic, and syncope is the effect of the
pain. The violent pain of an inflammatory mass is due to the
descent of the matters to that spot.


Costzeus adds :. Pain interféres with the “‘ breath,’’” and may even arrest it.
In consequence, a “‘ refrigeration of the heart’’ takes place. That is, the tempera-
ment of the heart becomes below normal in regard to “‘cold.’’ But this is a disease.
This change of temperament accounts for the syncope.

Descent of matter (inflamm. exudate) as a cause of pain.—The acridity and
similar qualities of the exudate do actually irritate the nerve-endings, and therefore
produce pain in addition to that due to tension.


(2) A symptom may be at the same time a malady. 'Thus
headache is an effect of fever, but may also last so long as to
amount to a “ disease.”


§ 170. Costeeus adds: Pain such as headache may simply
be a symptom, that is, evidence of an “‘ intemperamental state,” or
“solution of continuity.” But, to the patient, it is the thing; it zs
the malady.—Little does it concern the patient that there is an
underlying cause to be treated if the practitioner proves unable to
relieve his pain.

Further, persistent pain impairs vitality ; in this sense a pain is
a disease.

§171. Symptoms are still confused with diseases in our text-
books. Thus, “ jaundice”’ appears amongst the diseases, instead of
being placed separately along with a number of other characteristic
symptoms, such as ascites, which is not taken as a specific disease
even by the lay. Originally, symptoms were explained in terms of
changes of quality and the like. This theoretical explanation was
abandoned owing to a degradation of (metaphysical) knowledge.
The symptoms then became “ diseases.’’ ‘The diseases were then
investigated, and found to be more numerous than the symptoms
(which was already understood). Subdivisions were then made, and
particular diseases specified and defined, and the multiplicity of
causation emphasized. The exact succession of processes revealed
by the microscope and biochemistry was elucidated. These succes-
sive procedures are the evidence of “ advance” and “ progress.” All
the while the fact is overlooked that the same processes occur in every
“* disease,” and that when the whole subject, treated from pathology,
is reduced to its least common multiple that range reveals itself as
much the same as that of ancient lore. Cf. also § 173.


(e) One and the same thing may be at once “ disease,”
“* symptom”? and ‘‘ cause.” Considered in relation to the present,


160 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


it is ‘‘ disease”; considered in relation to the past, it is ““cause’’ 5
considered in relation to the future, it is ‘symptom.’ —Ex-
amples: the fever of consumption is the sign of ulceration of the
lung. Considered in itself, it is the disease. Considered in its
effect, it is the “‘ cause” of gastric weakness. Again, the head-
ache which fever gives rise to (in those cases where fever causes
headache) (esp. meningeal disease) may remain behind (after
the subsidence of the fever) and be itself the “‘ disease.” To
particularize, the malady itself sets up inflammation of the


meninges, and this sets up headache.


2. [Tue STaTes OF THE Human Bopy. ‘THE TypeEs oF
DisEasEe*


196. There are three states of the human body, according
to Galen :—

(3) Health—a state in virtue of which the human body
presents that particular temperament and configuration whereby
all its functions shall proceed unembarrassed.

(ii) Disease—a state which is exactly contrary to (1).

(1) 4 third state which is neither health nor disease.
There are three variants of this :—(a) the health is not perfect
and yet there is no actual illness. Ex. : the state in old persons,
and in juveniles, and in those convalescent from illness. (b)
Both states occur simultaneously in the same member : either
in two quite different respects (as when the temperament
of a person is normal, but there is compositional abnormality ;
or in two respects which are related to one another (as when a
person is healthy in form, but there is error in size or position of
a member ; he may be healthy in regard to two passive qualities,
but not in regard to two active ones). (c) Both states occur in
one person, but at different times of the year (as when a person
is well in winter but ill in spring).

197. Some disorders are simple, and others compound.

The simple disorders are where there is (1) one single kind
of intemperament, (2) an isolated abnormality of configuration.

The compound (composite, compositional) disorders are
where there are two or more kinds together, which together
appear as one single malady.

198. The simple disorders comprise three groups :—

1. Disorders of Temperament.—In this case the members
affected are formed of similar parts, but the temperament is


* Costeus believes that Chapter I of the original should come in here, the
present chapter being the real opening of this Thesis.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 161


depraved. ‘The term is not used unless the disorder is primarily
in these essential parts, and then applies even if composite
members are affected secondarily [#.e., temperamental disorders
are distinguished from compositional (205)].

Disorders of temperament may actually occur in an
compound members one may think of, provided these are
formed of homologous tissues.

There are sixteen kinds of disorders of temperament, as has
been already stated. (41).

2. Disorders of Configuration. 'The members affected are the
locomotive organs (the instruments whereby actions and functions
are performed). These organs are formed of similar parts.

3. Solution of Continuity and Dislocation. ‘The members
affected have similar parts. It occurs in organs which are
instruments. The disorder is one in which the function of being
an instrument is interfered with. Such a solution of continuity
occurs at a joint ; here we see that the separate members which
go to make up the joints are not affected. The same thing
applies in the case of nerves, bones, veins.

Any malady which depends on any of these three groups is
named accordingly.


3. DisorDERS oF CONFIGURATION.


199. These are comprised in four main groups :—(i)
Errors of development (malformations). (ii) Errors in bulk.
(iii) Errorsin number. (iv) Displacements.


(i) Errors of Development.


Group. Subvarieties. Examples.


1, Errors in form.
Here the form is
changed from its
natural grace, to an
extent which impairs
its utility.


Deviation from a natural
straightness.


Straightness of a naturally
curved line.

Squareness where there
should be roundness.

Rotundity where there
should be squareness.


Head broad and round, with


ossified sutures to an ex-


tent hindering mental
power.
Curved shinbones ; genu
valgum; clubfoot.


Pupils congenitally elongate
or slit-like or small.

Great rotundity of abdo-
men.


2. Errors in passages.


Too wide.


Too narrow.


Occlusion.


Wide pupils; varices ;
aneurysms; the dilated
blood-vessels in pannus,

Small pupils; narrowed
eyes ; stricture of trachea
or bronchi; stricture of
oesophagus.

Of venous orifices, e.g., in
liver. Atresia (Tr.).


M


162


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Group,


3. Errors in cavities


or Sacs.


4. Errors of surfaces.


Subvarieties.
Too large (distended).
Too small (contracted).
Obstructed and overfull.


Emptied.


The normal roughness re-
placed by smoothness.
The normal smoothness be-

comes rough.


Examples.
Scrotum.
Contracted stomach; con-
tracted cerebral ven-


tricles in epilepsy.
Obstruction in cerebral ven-
tricles in apoplexy.
Cardiac cavities emptied of
blood by reason of ex-
cessive joy or extreme
pain.


At the orifice of the stomach;


also in lienteric diarrhea.
Trachea; fauces (hoarse-
ness).


(ii) Errors in bulk. (a) Increase: as in elephantiasis,
unduly large penis (priapism) ; macroglossia. The disease
which befel Nicomachus, whose body became so huge that he
could not be moved. (4) Decrease : shortness of tongue so that
it cannot reach the other parts of the mouth (tongue-tie).
Atrophied and wasted members ; general “ decline.’’*

(iii) Errors in number. (a) Increase: (a) in normal
organs—additional teeth ; supernumerary fingers; (f) en-
tirely abnormal—warts, calculus, enlarged glands. (4) Decrease:
(a) in normal organs—congenital absence of a finger ; (A)
accidental—loss of a finger through amputation (accidental or
surgical).

(iv) Displacements. (a) Displacement from the proper
anatomical position. (a) Replaceable: e.g., hernia of the
intestine ; tremor (which occurs through a quite unnatural to
and fro involuntary movement). (8) Not replaceable: e.g.,
fixation of a joint in a new position, as in gout where joints are
hardened (ankylosed). (4) Displacement from the normal
position in regard to neighbouring anatomical structures.
This results in their being too near together or too far from one
another. In such a case one part cannot move towards another
as it should ; for instance, adjoining fingers cannot touch one


* Decline.—Dhebul.—The term refers to a condition in which the body seems
to wither or fade away without obvious reason, or in spite of taking food. The term
refers primarily to the causeless losing of flesh by horses, whereby they come to be
in an ill-conditioned state. The same word would apply to the wilting of cut
flowers or the withering of plants from lack of water, or from reduction of their
vitality to such a point that they will not imbibe water any more; that is, they
cannot be “‘re-vived.”” Such a condition in man is noted by the laity, but is only
referred to in medicine when its pathological basis is visualised ; as, for instance,
in wasting from tabes mesenterica, or tabes dorsalis,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 163


another. Or, one part cannot be moved away from another,
either at all, or only with very great difficulty. For instance, in
the case of joints flabby because of paralysis, or in the case of the
eyelids, There may be a difficulty in opening the hands or in
opening or raising the eyelids.


§ 172. Museum classification of errors of development.
(Abbott,?% p. xv.)
Foetal structures normally not persistent.
Incomplete development.
Reduction in size (hypoplasia).
Reduction in number (subdactylism, etc.).
Persistent foetal structures.
Excess of size.
Excess in number.
Malposition ; aberrant structures.
Anomalies due to foetal disease.


© PI ARRAY Ym


4. SOLUTION oF CONTINUITY.


200. ‘The following members may undergo solution of
continuity.

1. The skin (and the flesh beneath it): as excoriation,
scarification, wounds. If pus is not formed or discharged, it is
called a wound ; if a discharge of pus is present, it is called an
“ulcer.” The presence of pus is due (a) to effete matters
(“ superfluities ’”) being discharged at that spot ; for the reason
that it is weak. (4) The tissue is not able to digest all the
nutriment which is brought to it, the excess being changed into
pus.

The terms “ wound,” “ulcer”? may also be applied to
solution of continuity in places other than skin and flesh.

2. Bone. A fracture into two parts, large or small; or
longitudinally in the form of a fissure.

3. Cartilage. ‘The fracture may be in any of these three
ways.

4. Nerve. ‘Transverse section from incised wounds ;
longitudinal, and over a short distance, as “ scission.” Longi-
tudinal and also extensive—in a contusion.

5. Muscle. If near the ends, or in the tendon : attrition.
If transverse : severance, or incision. If longitudinal, but small
in extent, with the formation of a deep hollow, it is called
cavitation. If multiple, with the appearance of several swellings
and hollowings, it is attrition with contusion. If the solution of
continuity is in the belly of the muscles, it is called attrition or
incision, or contusion, whatever be the direction of the injury.


164 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


6. Arteries and Veins. When these undergo solution ot
continuity, they are “‘ opened.” If the injury is transverse, it is
an incision ; if longitudinal, it is called fission. They may be
punctured (perforation). There may be a partial solution of
continuity, whereby the blood escapes into the surrounding
tissue-spaces, until their pressure arrests its further progress ;
this is called an aneurism.

7. Membranes (including the diaphragm) : disruption.

Note that not every member can undergo solution of
continuity with impunity. For instance, in the case of the
heart, death ensues.

201. If one of two parts of a composite member be
separated from the other, such that there is no actual injury to
either, it is called a dislocation. A nerve may be twisted out of
place, and this is also called a dislocation. It is also called a
contorsion.

202. When a solution of continuity occurs where there
are foramina, it may widen them. When it occurs in a place
where there are no foramina, such may come into existence.

208. Any solution of continuity, whether it be in the form
of an ulcer or the like, will heal quickly if the temperament of the
member be good. But if the temperament be not good, healing
may be delayed for a long time. Healing is specially delayed in
persons with dropsy, or cachexia, or suffering from lepra.

204. If wounds are tightly bandaged, they may end in a
very deep ulcer. Ulcers appearing in summer may last on into
‘winter, and exhaust the strength.

Resolution of continuity is referred to in detail later.


5. Composite Disgases.


205. Definition.—By the term “‘ composite diseases ”’ we
mean—not that several diseases are conjoined—but that a
number of morbid states concur, and out of them there emerges
one single disease. This is exemplified by cutaneous swellings
of inflammatory nature (including boils, pustules). Boils are
small inflammatory masses, and ordinary inflammatory masses
are large boils.

The following kinds of morbid state go together to make
up an inflammatory mass*: (1) a disorder of temperament, this
being associated with matter ; (2) a perversion of form ; (3)
unhealthy configuration—one never meets with an inflammatory
deposit without there being disfigurement, change of size, and


* Hence the popular name for a local inflammatory condition—‘ gathering,”


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 165


there is often displacement as well ; (4) loss of continuity.
This is the necessary accompaniment of the discharge of super-
fluities into the tissue-spaces, penetrating as they do into them all,
and separating one from the other in order to make space for
themselves.

206. Site.—Swellings occur in soft members, and some-
times also in bone, in which case the cavities in the bone widen
and the exudate accumulates in them.

It is not surprising that a tissue which can accommodate
nutrients should also accommodate waste materials if these
should by chance penetrate into it, or should form in it.

207. Causation.—(a) The primary cause may not be
evident, the corporeal change showing that material has been
removed from one tissue to another (at a lower level). This is
called a “catarrh.” (46) The material cause from which
boils and other inflammatory swellings arise may be immersed
within other humours, without being deprived of its own harm-
ful qualities.

Good humours may be discharged either by natural
processes (as, for instance, in the case of women at the times of
parturition and lactation), or by unnatural processes (as when
good blood is lost through a wound). The bad humours,
however, remain and continue to be harmful ; Nature then
expels them. If the discharge is by the skin, pustules form.

208. Classification of Swellings.—Swellings may be classi-
fied according to the different kinds of matter of which they
are made up ; namely according to the six kinds of material
cause—the four humours, wateriness,gas. ;

There are both hot and cold inflammatory swellings. But
the fact of their being hot does not say they are derived from
bilioushumour or blood. Any material intrinsically of hot
nature, or any material which has become hot because of putre-
faction, can give rise to a hot inflammatory mass.


Swelling =waram =apostema =tumour (used in a general sense) ; any “ lump”
or excrescence or protuberance. Intumescence, tumefaction, new-growth, nodosities
—these are special kinds of swelling. In most passages an inflammatory swelling or
mass is meant; waram or apostema is translated accordingly. It may be noted
that an apostema is more likely to be coloured, and to feel warm to the touch,
whereas a swelling which can be called a tumefaction is colourless and does not fee
warm; that is, it is a ‘‘cold’’ swelling. (211).


209. While it is possible to subdivide these swellings
according to the humours concerned, it is better to use special
names in special cases. ‘Thus, a mass derived purely from the


?


blood is called ‘‘ phlegmon” ; one derived solely from bilious


166 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


humour is called ‘‘ erysipelas.”” When the origin is compound,
or dual, a double name is allotted. Thus, phlegmon erysipela-
todes, if phlegmon is the chief feature ; erysipelas phlegmonodes,
if the erysipelas is the chief feature. Whena collection of actual
fluid has gathered, it is named an “ abscess.” This may occur
in lymph-nodes (axilla ; behind the ears ; in the groins) which
are then nothing but “‘ corrupt” matter ; and this is called a
* bubo.’?

210. Hor Swerirncs.—The following are the phases of
the hot swellings :

i. The onset. The humour makes its way to the surface,
and increases in size, until the cavity is so distended as to be
evident. ii. The rise: the size and tension increase. i. The
acme : the height of the malady, and stationary period. iv. The
decline : (a) stage of softening from digestion of the contents
and resolution or (4) maturation into pus*; or (c) a conversion
into a hard or indurated mass.


211. Coip Swe tinos (lit. “‘ swellings which are not hot ’’):


1. Composed of atrabilious humour :
i. induration (generally autumnal).
ii. cancert (generally autumnal).
iii. glandular: scrofulous, other nodules and nodosities.
2. Composed of serous humour :
iogpdax:
ii. soft glands; and winter swellings.
3. Composed of watery fluid: e.g., dropsy, hydrocephalus ;
hydrocele, and the like.
4. Composed of gases: tumefaction; puffiness; distension.


Puffiness. This stands for tahabbuj (Rome edition), or tahayyuj (Bulaq) ;
cachexia (Venice edition) = tumefaction. The Latin glossary explains that it is
meant specially as that which results from liver disorder ; when it appears in the
limbs it has a different origin. The puffiness of the eyes from lack of sleep or from
too much sleep is also different.


212. The difference between the glandular form and the
other two kinds of atrabilious swellings. ‘The former is either
quite loose within the tissues among which it lies, and is therefore
easily moved to and fro by the finger ; or there is adhesion,
simply to the skin (as in strumous swellings). The other two
kinds of swelling are intermingled with, and interfused with,
the substance of the tissues among which they lie.

* Note that pus is only one kind of ‘‘ matter.”’

+ Cancer appears in the Canon as a disease associated with change in the


atrabilious humour. Therefore one condition for the production of this disease
is the entry of S into the metabolic cycle in a pathological manner (cf. § 147).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 167


213. The difference between cancerous swelling and indur-
ation. The latter is a slumbering silent mass which destroys
the sensation (so that the part is numb), and is painless, and sta-
tionary. It may produce weakness of the part. A cancerous
swelling progressively increases in size, is destructive, and
spreads roots which insinuate themselves amongst the tissue-
elements. It does not necessarily destroy sensation unless it
has existed for a long time, and then it kills the tissues and
destroys the sensation in the part. It would seem that indura-
tions and cancerous swellings differ less as to substance than in
the inseparable accidental qualities.*

214. The hard swellings arising from atrabilious humours
are usually hard from the outset. They are often autumnal.
They often become “ indurations,” especially if there be san-
guineous humour present.—The same sort of change may take
place in the swellings arising out of serous humour.

215. Swellings arising out of serous humour. ‘These are
of two varieties. They are either diffuse or circumscribed
(nodular). The difference lies in the fact that the latter form is
discrete among the surrounding tissues, whereas the other form
is intermingled with them, and is therefore not discrete, but
diffuse. Swellings formed of serous humour often arise in
winter (the rainy season, or time of stormy weather). (Even) if
they are “ hot,”’ they are white in colour.

216. The difference between soft glands and “ ganglia.”
The latter are more adherent to the surrounding tissues ; they
feel nodular to the touch ; they always slip back to the original
position after manipulation ; but they may be dispersed by cer-
tain strong medicaments, without compression, and then dis-
appear permanently. ‘They are often produced by toil. The
application of a very heavy weight such as lead may disperse
them.

217. Swellings arising out of serous humour vary in
consistence according to the density of the contained fluid.
They may be soft, thin, lax, or hard, or resemble the atrabilious
type of swelling, or resemble the gaseous form. ‘Tenuous serous
humour flows down along the course of the nerve-fibres, and
so reaches the muscles beneath the epiglottis and larynx.

218. Watery swellings. Examples: dropsy, hydrocele,
hydrocephalus, and such-like. [Cysts.]

219. Gaseous swellings. These are of two different kinds:
tumefaction ; inflation. ‘These differ both in essence and in


* Hence some cases of “‘ Induration’”’ may have been what is now called
“scirrhus.”


168 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


mode of commixture. In tumefaction, the gas is intimately
mixed with the substance of the tissue. In inflation it is aggre-
gated, tense, tumescent, and discrete from the substance of the
tissue. The former feels soft ; the latter feels more or less
resistant.

220. Papular swellings. These show the same subdivi-
sions as inflammatory swellings in general. They are formed of
(1) blood or sanguineous humour (true pustules) ; (2) purely of
bilious humour : miliaria, sudamina, certain forms of eczema ;
(3) both serous and atrabilious humour (morbilli, myrmecia,
clavus, scabies, warts, and the like) ; (4) watery fluid (bulle,
vesicles) ; (5) gaseous material (emphysema).

The points of distinction which apply in regard to the kinds
of pustules will be adequately dealt with in the fourth Book,
should Allah be willing for its accomplishment.


6. DisFIGUREMENTS


221. There are some states which are not “ disease,”’ but
are classed as such. ‘These are conditions in which the beauty
of the form of the body is impaired, either in respect of hairiness,
colour, odour, or form.

1. Affections of the hair. Alopecia ; stumpiness ; scanti-
ness ; shortness ; scission ; fineness ; coarseness ; curliness ;
lightness ; colour-changes, such as greyness.

2. Affections in which there is an abnormal colour of the body.

i. Due to an intemperament :

(a) material : jaundice.
(4) non-material :
(1) very cold intemperament : chalkiness ;
(2) very hot intemperament : citron-yellowness.

i Due to extraneous agents: scorching sun, extreme
cold ; much exposure to wind ;

iui, The presence of unnatural colours in the skin : (a)
brought into the skin (vitiligo nigra), (4) arising in it (freckles,
macule) ;

iv. Relics after the healing of scars: pock-marks ; old
ulcers.

3. Affections associated with bad odours; Ex.: foetor of
the mouth, or objectionable odour of the whole or of portions
of the body.

4. Disfigurements. Ex.: Great emaciation; excessive
bulk ; undue thinness and fatness. (Malformations.)


e Excessive corpulence and excessive leanness are especially worthy of con-
demnation ” (Charaka-Samhita’®*: i, 233).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 169


7. Tue Staces or Diszasz

222. Many diseases show four stages—onset, increment,
acme, and decline. These are distinct from the phases of health.

In speaking of “ time of onset,’’ and ‘“‘ increment,” we do
not wish to convey the idea that there are two extremes during
which a state of disease is indiscernible. Each stage can be
detected by the senses, and each has its own characteristic signs.

1. The “onset” is that period of time during which the
disease is becoming manifested, and its characters are commenc-
ing to develop. “There is no evident change in degree.


“ Latent ’’ disease belongs here ; “‘ occulta ’’ as compared with the other three
stages, which are “ declared,’’ “‘ visibilia.”’


2. The “‘ increment ” is the period during which the degree
of illness is hourly becoming more and more decided.

3. The “ acme”’ is that period during which all the
characters of the illness have become manifest, and remain so.

4. The “‘decline”’ (defervescence ; terminal stage) shows
abating of the signs of illness ; and the further this period
advances, the more nearly is there freedom from the symptoms
of the diseases.

These stages may be applied both to the illness as a whole,
and in regard to each of its component attacks or paroxysms.
In regard to the whole course of the disease, they are called
“general”? ; in regard to each of the attacks which occur
in its course, they will be called “ special” or “ particular ”’ or
* individual ”’ phases.


8. ConctupING REMARKS oN Morpsip STATES


223. Diseases are named : (1) according to the member
affected (e.g. pleurisy, pneumonia, sciatica, podagra, nephritis,
arthritis, ophthalmia, etc.) ; (2) according to the chief symptom
(epilepsy, spasm, tremor, paralysis, palpitation, cephalalgia,
otalgia, cardialgia, odontalgia, neuralgia, etc. (3) From the
originating humour (e.g. atrabilious disorder) ; (4) from resem-
blances to animals which the disease produces (e.g. leontiasis,
elephantiasis, satyrism) ; (5) from the first historical example of
the disease; ‘Telephic ulcer—Telephus, son of Hercules
wounded by Achilles’ spear, but healed by its rust ; Chironia
ulcer—Chiron, the first who successfully treated ulcers medically ;
(6) according to the substance and essential nature of the disease
—fever, inflammatory swelling.

224. Galen classified diseases into: (a) manifest, or
evident to the senses ; (4) hidden, or internal : (1) easy to recog-


170 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


nize (e.g. gastric pains, lung pains) ; (ii) difficult to recognize
because not evident to any of the senses (e.g. diseases of the liver
or of the air passages within the lung) ; (iii) only discernible
by careful judgment (disorders of the urinary passages).

225. Diseases may occur in single members or in more
than one. In the latter case there are the following possible
relations : (i) association by natural connections ; ex.: stomach
and brain, which are associated through nerves ; the uterus
and breast which are connected by the veins.

(ii) One member is the channel for the other. Thus, the
groin is the natural channel for inflammation to travel into the
leg. The weaker of two of so related members will take up
the excrementitious matters from the stronger ; for instance,
the axillary region from the heart.

(iii) Simple contiguity ; e.g. the neck and the brain.

(iv) One member initiates the function of another. For
instance, the diaphragm is concerned in the drawing of air into
the lungs. (v) One member is the servant of another ; thus,
the nerves serve the brain. (vi) Some third member 1s associated
with two related organs. ‘Thus, the brain is related to the kidney,
and both these organs are related to the liver. (Disease in one
is likely to have deleterious effects on the others.) (vii) Vicious
circles. Disorder of the brain affects the activity of the stomach
and impairs the digestion ; consequently the stomach supplies
morbid vapours and imperfectly digested aliment to the brain,
so increasing the disorder of the brain. Hence from the original
illness, the malady spreads and continues, and runs in a circuit.

226, ‘There are the following six degrees, ranging from
health to disease :

1. Blameless health.

2. Not absolute health.

3. A state neither of health nor of disease, as people assert.

4. Potential illness ; where the body is on the verge of

illness.

§. Slight ill-health.

6. Declared disease.

227, Diseases are curable or incurable. A curable
disease is one which offers no resistance to treatment. An
incurable disease is one in which there is some impediment to
complete cure, so that whatever the doctor applies, the desired
effect is not reached. For instance—headache which is due to
“rheumatism.” A disease is more likely to be curable when the
temperament, the age, and the season are in proper relation.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 171


If not, there must be a serious causal agent at work. One
can only hope to cure or disperse the diseases of one season
during the contrary season.

228. Some diseases turn into new ones, and so themselves
disappear. This is very satisfactory. Ouxe disease becomes the
medicament for curing another. ‘Thus, quartan malaria often cures
epilepsy [cf. G.P.1.] also podagra, varices, and arthralgias.
A spasmodic disease may be cured by scabies, pruritus, and
furunculosis. A certain type of diarrhoea is cured by inflam-
mation of the eyes. Lienteria cures pleurisy. Bleeding piles
removes atrabilious disorders, including sciatica, renal and
uterine pain.

But the passage from one disease to another may be a serious
matter. For instance, when an empyema spreads into the sub-
stance of the lung ; when meningitis becomes lethargia.

229. Transmission of disease from person to person.

A. Transmission by infection. (i) From one house to an
adjoining one. Here belong, lepra, scabies, variola, pestilential
fever, septic inflammatory swellings and ulcers ; (ii) froma house
in the wind-track to another ; (il) when one person gazes
closely at another (e.g. ophthalmia) ; (iv) fancy : e.g. when a

erson’s teeth chatter because he thinks of something sour ;
(v) such diseases as phthisis, impetigo, leprosy.

B. Hereditary transmissions. Vitiligo alba; premature

baldness ; gout ; phthisis ; lepra.


Place in Family as a factor in the causation of disease (Lancet, 1928).


C. Racial transmission.

D. Endemic transmission. The sweating sickness of
Anglia; elephantiasis in Alexandria; aurigo in Apulia ;
endemic goitre, and many the like.

230. Do not forget that weakness of members, and a frail
body may supervene upon intemperaments.


§173. This classification of the types of disease still holds good to-day.
The nomenclature is rather different, because now made more definitely in accord
with pathological findings.

Some confusion as to the scope of the various terms still exists even in the minds
of those who are no longer students. Clinical and pathological conceptions do not
agree in scope. On the one hand, there is an underlying endeavour to specify
“diseases,” and to separate out new entities in accordance with variations in the
clinical manifestations. In pathology, the distinction between general and special
is more clearly adhered to, and the latter is described as much as possible according
to the former—which is proper.

In regard to an actual case before us, however, the pathology cannot be
elucidated at once; the clinical manifestations therefore receive the chief con-
sideration. But such manifestations are limited in range, are of general character
(universal, not particular), and should rank with genera in natural history; the
pathological character or process would furnish the specific name. Clinically,


09) THE CANON OF MEDICINE


diseases naturally comprise swellings, deformities, discolorations, displacements,
ulcerations, various solutions of continuity, aches and pains, and the like. Patho-
logically, there are only four main groups of lesions—inflammations, new-growths,
nutritional changes (degenerations and hypertrophies), and errors of development.
(The short list presented by Avicenna is not a real fault, when considered from
such a point of view.) If such a system cannot be allowed either by academic
medicine or the laity (who insist on a “‘ name ”’ for a “‘ disease ’’) it has at least the
advantage of enabling one to visualize from the first what is important to the patient
and to concentrate on it.

The opposite procedure—that which rules the day—is that of describing
diseases in all their forms and types, typhoid fever being awarded the crown. The
literature is always receiving reports on new types of disease. This method has the
advantage of being capable of unlimited extension, for the number of types is (as
should be obvious) exactly the same as the number of individuals affected thereby.
In other words, all these types are simply the expressions of the individual’s make-up
and have nothing whatever to do with the infective organism, except in so far as it
varies in virulence (i.e., in the composition of its ‘ excreta ’’).

The idea that treatment cannot be correct unless the “‘ disease ’’ is correctly
named is also very widely spread, and has the same effect—that of blinding the mind
to the real simplicity of truth. The unknowing abhors simplicity ; he ever seeks to
“improve ’’—that is, to introduce more and more complexity.


’


a


—— i a


THESIS IIl.—THE CAUSES OF DISEASE
ETIOLOGY


“ Correlation, adverse or absent or excessive, between time, mental faculties,
and objects of the senses, constitute in brief the threefold causes of disease affecting
either the body or mind.’’—(Charaka-Samhita?®, i. 5.)

“If the activity of the life-principle takes place in a harmonious and regular
manner, unimpeded by any obstacles, such a state is called ‘ health.’ If its activity
is impeded by some cause, and if it acts abnormally, or irregularly, such a state is
called ‘ disease.’ ’’—(Paracelsus**, p. 181.)


1. DerFIniTIon oF TERMS


231. There are three groups of causes
of those states of the body which have been
referred to as: health, disease, a state
intermediate. These groups are: (1)
Primitive, or extra-corporeal causes. These
befall the body from without (trauma, heat,
cold). (2) Antecedent causes. These befall
the body from within (repletion, starvation).
(3) Conjoined causes. Here disease is pre-
sent only as long as two causes occur at the same time. When
either is absent, the diseased state comes to an end (e.g. sepsis,
in fevers).

The primitive causes are extra-corporeal ; namely: (a)
from exterior agents, such as blows, exposure to very hot air,
use of hot or cold viands ; (4) from the mind, which is here
considered as distinct from the body. Here belong the causes
of states of anger, fear, and the like.


Other examples : privation of food, shelter, covering ; environment (monotony,
solitude, restraint, neglect, subjection, and their opposites). These are predisposing
causes.


Resemblances.—The primitive causes resemble the ante-
cedent in that there is a certain intermediate condition between
each and the three states.of the body named above. The
primitive causes sometimes resemble the conjoined, in that there
is no intermediate condition between them and the three states
of the body. The antecedent and conjoined causes resemble
one another in both being corporeal, or humoral ; that is, either
temperamental or compositional.

173


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Differences.—The antecedent differ from the primitive
causes in being corporeal and in requiring an intermediary
between them and the bodily state. Such an intermediary is
not necessary in the case of the primitive causes.—The conjoined
causes differ from the primitive in being corporeal, but without
an intermediary between them and the bodily state. An inter-
mediary may occur, but is not essential in the case of the primitive
causes.—JThe antecedent differ from the conjoined causes in
that with the former the state does not become immediately
manifest, but only after a number of other intermediate causes
have come into operation, these being nearer to the state than
are the antecedent causes.


The above groupings of causes are the expression of a mode of
thought now foreign to us. We seek more practical statements, and
rightly. But when he thinks of causes, Avicenna goes back to
fundamentals. This patient is before him, and the illness owes its
origin to external factors which that patient cannot escape—the
atmosphere, the weather, the climate, the drinking-water, the soil
over which he lives and works; or to factors operating within the
body, producing aberrations in the physiological processes.

The external factors naturally fall under the categories of the
four elements (five, if we include ‘‘ ether,’ represented by sunlight),
and the memory is securely aided by thinking of each in turn.—
The internal factors are classified according to the qualities—heat,
cold, moisture, dryness. These also serve as aids to memory, since
many aberrations in physiological processes amount to disturbances
in these several qualities in the different parts of the body.

Changes of vitality as causes of disease are not here specified
because they are secondary to the other causes. It is true that
disease is evidence of loss of vitality, of loss of radiance of the
“breath,” but this is the effect of ‘antecedent ’’ causes—repletion
with humours; depletion of humours; and these again can be
traced back to interactions of qualities and changes in the proportions
of the “ elements.”

The following table is added for clearness :


174


Name of Nature, Relation to Examples.
Cause. bodily state. F
1, Primitive. Non-corporeal. May be direct,or may} Solar heat. a


only be through an} Violent exercise.

intermediate state. | Heating articles of
food (e.g., garlic).
Sadness.
Wakefulness. Blows.
Cataract. Fever.


2. Antecedent. | (1) Corporeal (i.e., | 1s indirect, via an in-| Suffusion of the orbits.


a humour). termediate state. Lachrymation.
(2) Temperamental. Repletion in fever.
(3) Compositional.
3. Conjoined. Corporeal. Direct ; immediate. | Blockage of an aper-


ture by a humour.
Blindness from  ob-
struction of the optic
nerve.
Sepsis with fever.
VSS


THE CANON OF MEDICINE [75


232. Essential causes are such as pepper, which warms ;
opium, which cools. Accidental causes are such as cold water,
which warms because it closes the pores of the skin, and hence
the heat is retained ; hot water, which cools because it opens
the pores and liberates the heat ; scammony which cools by
expelling the calefacient humour.


An essential cause is one which alters the “‘ nature’”’; that is, that on which
the primary qualities of the body (heat, cold, moisture, dryness) depend.


233. It does not follow that a causal agent will alter the
body even if it reaches it. Before the agent can act one of three
conditions must be fulfilled. (1) The agent must be powerful
enough ; (2) the preparatory power of the body must be ade-
quate ; (3) there must be an appropriate time-factor. The agent
must be exposed to the causative agent long enough for the
latter to act. ‘The states of the causes vary in their results. One
single causal agent may give rise to quite different diseases in
different persons, or at different times.

The Time-factoy.—The time occupied before a given agent can produce its
effect varies with different individuals, just as some persons have a long digestive
time-factor and others a short one. This was spoken of very long ago (Charaka'*,


li. 793) ; the lesson being, in the case of digestion, that the number of meals per
day should depend on the time-factor and not on popular custom.


A. UNAVOIDABLE CAUSES OF DISEASE
| (i) ExrraAcoRPOREAL


2. Tue ATMosPHERIC AIR AND ITS INFLUENCE WITHIN THE
Bopy


R (234) is an element which is in our body and
in our breath (ruh). It is also continually
being contributed to the breath. It is the
agent which modifies the breath, not simply as
element, but in virtue of its constructive and
attempering nature.

235. We have made it clear already, and
emphasize it again here, that she term “‘ breath” is not synonymous
with what philosophers (and theologians) term “ soul.”

286. There are two processes whereby the breath reaches
its attempered state from the air—namely depuration and ven-
tilation. Ventilation is the means whereby the temperament of
the breath is modified in respect of the undue warmth which is


176 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


usually the effect of condensation and imprisonment of the breath.
(By temperament we mean that relative temperament which has
been defined for you.) ‘Thisattempering is attained by means of
the air drawn in at the lungs and the pores of the skin, and by
means of the distribution of that air through the arteries by means
of their pulsation.


237. Compared with the temperament inherent in the
breath, the air around us is very much cooler than it is compared
with the temperament arising from the imprisonment or con-
densation of the breath. When the outer air enters the breath,
it drives it on and mingles with it, and so prevents its trans-
formation into the astringent fire-element ; for such a transform-
ation would render the temperament of the breath faulty and
unfitted for receiving the impressions of the sensitive soul
(i.e. for maintaining life), and would interfere with the dispersal
of the moist vapour of the substance of the breath.

238. Depuration is the process going on during expiration,
and by it the separation of the fuliginous vapour in the breath is
secured. The fuliginous vapour is to the breath what superfluous
humour is to the body, and it is expelled (as bad air). During in-
spiration, the air enters into, pervades, and aerates the breath ;
during expiration, the breath is purified into the air. (In this way
the temperament of the breath is maintained.)


239. When the air is first drawn in, it necessarily cools
the breath, but after the air attains the quality of the breath,
through continued contact with its heat, it ceases to be an
adjuvant, and is superfluous. Hence new air is needed, and
when breathed in supplies the place of the other. The old air
must be expired in order to give place for the new, and at the


same time remove with it the superfluities of the substance of
the breath.*


240. As long as the air is attempered and pure, and has no
substances admixed which would be contrary to the temperament
of the breath, health will come and remain. Otherwise the
contrary occurs.


241. The air is liable to natural as well as non-natural
changes, and may even undergo preternatural changes. The
natural changes are those of the seasons. At every season the
air changes to a new temperament.


* It appears that the idea of gaseous interchange within the lung was not
grasped. What we know as “ residual air’’ comes to be what Avicenna speaks ‘of


as “breath ’”’ (ruh). Hence the description in the text is right in idea, but lacking
in exactitude.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 177


Antyllus remarks that the air is different in character (a) at the seasons of the
year, (b) at the changes of the moon, (b") at the rising and setting of the stars (Aegineta),
(c) at the hours of the day and the night, (d) according to its thickness or tenuity,
(e) during movement or repose (winds or calm), (f) if admixed with terrene exhala-

tions, (f+) admixture with mists (Aegineta), (g) the kind of country, and its physical
characteristics (Aegineta).


(@) NATURAL MUTATIONS
3. Tue INFLUENCE oF THE SEASONS ON THE ATMOSPHERE


242, The word “Season” has a different meaning for
the physician than for the astronomer. According to the
astronomer, there are four seasons, which are reckoned according
to the position of the sun in the zodiac. According to the
physician, spring-time, in temperate climates, is the time when
warm clothes are less necessary, and yet no precautions are
required against heat. The trees begin to leaf at this season.
It is the time of flowers and leaves, and the beginning of the
formation of fruits. ‘To be more exact, it is the portion of the
year between (or about, or slightly before, or slightly after)
the vernal equinox and that at which the sun has reached the
middle of Taurus.

Autumn is the opposite portion of the year in our latitude.§


§ This chapter is taken by Andreas de Alpago Bellunensis as the proof that
Avicenna was a native of Persia. (cf. footnote to 369).


It is the time of change of colour in the leaves, and the
beginning of their fall from the trees.

In some countries spring may come sooner and autumn
later.

The summer and winter, from the point of view of medicine,
are the portions of the year remaining—and the interval between
spring and autumn is much shorter than that between autumn
and spring.

Summer is the whole of the hot season, and winter the whole
of the cold season. It is the season opposite to summer, being
less or greater in duration according to the latitude.*


“ ,


Summer and winter are the
“weak ’’ seasons.


strong ’’ seasons, spring and autumn are the:


243. The temperament of spring is equable, and not hot
and moist as some think. The proof of this rests with natural
philosophy.


The temperament of summer is hot, because the sun 1s


* This passage is slightly rearranged.
N


178 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


nearly vertical, over our heads, at this period. The power of
the rays of the sun may be thought of as being concentrated in
summer because instead of being refracted they form only a
very acute angle, or are reflected back along the line of incidence
itself. ‘The effect is different according as the solar ray is axial,
like the axis of a column or pyramid (in which case the ray is
thought of as coming from the centre of the sun into an exactly
opposite spot on the earth’s surface), or is oblique. The axial
ray is stronger because its impression is added to by the incoming
rays from all other points. The oblique rays are the weakest
(because in this case rays from other points do not join and add
to them). In summer we are exposed to rays almost or quite
axial. This is the longest season in our (southerly) climes. In
winter the rays are nearly circumferential (tangential, oblique).

244. In summer the light is very intense, and yet the sun
is more distant from the earth, for the sun is on the increase.
However, I discuss the subject of the distance or nearness of
the sun in the astronomical section of my book on mathematical
philosophy. The proof of the intensity of the heat and of the
light of the sun is set forth in my book on natural philosophy.

245. Influence of summer. Summer makes the air hot and
dry, because (1) its great heat disperses the water vapour ;
(2) it attenuates the “‘ substance ” of the air, and makes it more
like “‘ fire’ ; (3) there is little in the air at this season to separate
out as rain or dew.

246. Influence of winter. Winter makes the air cold
and moist, for contrary reasons.

247. Influence of autumn. \n autumn, the heat subsides
and the cold is not yet at its greatest because we live at a latitude
where the rays are between the equatorial axis already referred
to and the circumference. That is why the temperament of the
air is between hot and cold, but not between moisture and dryness.
When the sun has rendered the air dry, how could there remain
behind in the air any humectants which would counteract the
source of desiccation ?

248. AQ state of the air tending towards coolness is not
like one tending to moisture, because the change to cold is only
slight, whereas the change to moisture is further. The change
towards moisture which coolness induces is not as easily effected
as one towards dryness, which heat induces. The latter is facili-
tated by heat because heat itself is a drying agent. Coldness is
not a humectant. Humectation is facilitated by a certain degree
of heat provided there is some substance present which possesses


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 179


a certain degree of coldness. A certain amount of heat allows
evaporation, but does not disperse (water vapour) ; and there
is a certain amount of cold which is inadequate for bringing about
inspissation, cohesion, or union.

249. Consequently, the state which enables the air of
spring to remain at the same degree of moisture as in winter is not
like the state which enables the air of autumn to remain at the
same degree of dryness as in summer. The moisture of the air
in spring is attempered by heat as much as the dryness of air
in autumn is not: modified by cold. Moisture and desiccation,
therefore, are alike in regard to the action of “ habit” and
privation but not in regard to the action of their respective
contraries. For, in this case, desiccation is simply “ destruction
of moist substance”’ ; but humectation is not “ destruction of
dry substance,” but “‘ acquisition of moisture.”

250. In speaking here of air as being “‘ moist” or ‘dry’
we do not, of course, refer to “form” or “ natural quality.”
Such a question is remote from our present purpose. In calling
air “ moist’ we mean that much aqueous vapour is admixed
with it, or that its density has reached that of aqueous vapour.
In calling air “dry,” we imply (i) that the aqueous vapour
formerly present has been dispersed, or (ii) that the air has
become rarefied or attenuated until it comes to resemble the
substance of Fire, or (ii!) an air with which earthy vapours
(which resemble Earth in being dry) are admixed.

251. Consequently, the moisture in the atmosphere
which remains over from the winter is lessened in spring by a
certain amount of heat accruing to it by the fact that the sun is
approaching the middle of the heavens, and coming to be nearly
overhead. But the dryness which remains over from the autumn
does not encounter any moisture from the approaching coldness
of the winter.

252. Further, would dry things become moist as quickly
in cold air as moist ones would become dry in hot air, supposing
the ratio between the cold and coldness to be about the same as
that between heat and hotness? Obviously there would be a
difference.

253. A third and better argument is that moisture cannot
remain longer in hot air than in cold unless it were continually
being reinforced by further additions of watery vapours. Dry-
ness, however, needs not such continual emanation for its main-
tenance.

254. The reason why moisture disappears from bodies


’


180 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


exposed to the air, or from the air itself, unless there is a continual
reinforcement with further moisture, is that air is only cold in
comparison with our body. It is not sufficiently cold in the places
we inhabit to enable the moisture to be dispersed from the
atmosphere. It is the power of the sun and the stars which
disperses it. Consequently, though the supply of moisture
ceases, the dispersal goes on until a state of dryness is rapidly
reached. .

255. The atmosphere in spring. In spring, there is more
loss by dispersal than by evaporation. The reason is (1) there
is little heat, and that is dispersed widely in the atmosphere ;
(2) much heat is shut up in the bowels of the earth. Hence
rarefied vapours are continually being breathed out towards the
earth’s surface.*

256. The atmosphere in winter. During winter the amount
of heat concealed within the earth is very great—as is proved in
treatises on natural science—whereas there is only a negligible
amount of heat in the atmosphere. So there are two factors which
together contribute to moisten the air—sublimation and con-
densation. ‘This is the more so, because the substance of the air
in winter is so cold that it becomes more dense, and adaptable
for evaporation.

257. In spring, attenuation (dispersion) in the atmosphere
exceeds evaporation. ‘There is much less heat concealed in the
earth. ‘This is clear from the fact that something suddenly
comes to the earth’s surface at this timef which is more potent
than the evaporating or the rarefying agent. This great access
of material delays the evaporating process, and brings the
(moisture) longer into contact with the abundant atmospheric
heat ; and this completes the dispersion of the moisture.

This is the chief explanation of the fact that the vernal
air fails to retain the bulk of the winter. moisture, and that the
autumnal air fails to retain the bulk of the summer dryness—
apart from other reasons over and above what we have named.

Furthermore, there is not enough material to replace what
has been sublimated and rarefied. ‘The result is that the nature
of spring necessarily tends to an equipoise between moisture and


* Note the accuracy of this conception.

The fancy or jest that summer-heat and winter-cold are the result of “‘ the
greatness of the boiling of ‘ Hell’ (i.e., the interior of the earth) makes a breathing
twice a year, expiring in summer and inspiring in the winter ”’ (Night, 487, Burton}
may be here recalled.

} “The vapours of the sky descend, and vapours rise up out of the earth ”*


(in spring). ‘‘ The two co-operate in the work of renascence of vegetable life ’””
(Tea DV, In ray


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 181


dryness, as much as it does to one between heat and cold. Still,
one cannot deny that in spring there is at first a tendency to
a certain degree of moisture. But in spring the moisture is
nearly at equipoise, just as in autumn the dryness is nearly at
equipoise. Even if there is in autumn not an exact equipoise
between heat and cold, it will not be far from that, because in
autumn the periods of the day just before and just after noon are
like those in summer. The autumnal air, you see, is very dry,
and can readily become warm and fire-like, summer having
already disposed it to be so. But the nights and morning hours
in autumn are frosty, owing to the obliquity of the sun’s rays, and
also because the tenuous matter in it is well disposed to undergo
infrigidation.

Spring air has these two qualities in almost exact equipoise,
because its air does not take up the heat and cold which the
autumnal air so easily receives. That explains why the autumn
night is not very different from the autumnal day. And if
anyone should ask for why is an autumn night colder than a
Spring night, as one would expect the atmosphere to be then
hotter, because it is so attenuated—he may have the reply that
extremely attenuated air becomes hot or cold more quickly,
exactly as does extremely rarefied water. For, if you heat
water, and then wish to freeze it, it will do so more quickly than
cold water would, because the cold penetrates more easily
between the particles separated from one another by the pre-
ceding heat.

258. The human body is not as sensitive to the cold of
spring as it is to that of autumn, because in spring the body
passes from a coldness to which it 1s already acclimatised, to an
increasing warmth. In autumn, the reverse is the case, for
after being relaxed by the summer heat, the body is suddenly hit
by cold ; this in spite of the fact that autumn approaches winter,
whereas spring recedes from it.

259. Change of seasons has to do with the kind of diseases
peculiar to each climate. Consequently the prudent physician
will carefully study his own climate (atmospheric conditions
day by day and month by month) and country in order the
better to treat the diseases and maintain his patient’s health by
an appropriate mode of life, and (in order the better to choose)
the regiminal measures appropriate to that climate and
country.

260. Sometimes one day of a season is like some one day
of another season ; and sometimes it is not. Some days in


182 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


winter are spring-like ; some spring days are summer-like ;
some days in autumn are hot and cold during the course of a


single day.


§ 174. The changes which the seasons produce on the human
body are ascribed in this chapter at least in part to the changes which
the seasons produce in the ground itself. We are introduced to
the idea of ‘ ground-air,” “ ground-water,” “‘ ground-fire ”’ (mod.
ground-temperature). That which the Canon here hints at is
found to be entirely accurate in the light of modern investigations.

§175. Movement of ground-air. In the interstices of the
soil there is an abundance of ‘‘ vapour,” which moves in and out of
the earth into the atmosphere, as the ground-water moves up and
down. We may rightly picture the earth as a huge lung. It
exhales ground-air into the air we breathe, and if the former is
humid, owing to a high ground-water level, the exhaled air will be
“damp”; if the temperature of the earth be low, the exhaled air
will be cold; if the ground-air be polluted the air we breathe will
become fouled. The conception of the earth as a lung is given in
almost those very words by Avicenna (255).

§ 176. Movement of ground-water. The ground-water may
move merely up and down, or it may travel horizontally even to great
distances. Its height varies with the rains, the season, the nature
of the rock beneath, the character of the subsoil, and the presence of
vegetation (crops, undergrowth, woodland, forestland). The move-
ment up and down may be compared with tidal movements. The
“waters under the earth’’ move, as do the seas. Clearly, then,
floods and droughts, swampland and gravelly land, all have wide
effects. The interference with vegetation also alters natural con-
ditions, whether beneficially or detrimentally to human welfare.
Lane-Notter (Enc. Brit. 25, p. 348), states that it has been estimated
that an acre of cabbages will absorb from the land, and transpire
from its leaves more than ten tons of water per day, when the weather
is fine. The destruction of trees arrests the upward movement of
ground-water, which previously was carried high up into the air
as if by so many chimneys, and so affects other places at considerable
distances.

§177. Practical bearing of these facts. Innumerable living
things pass the whole, or part of their lives in the ground-water.
They are carried along with it, both to the surface, and horizontally
underground, possibly to great distances. The following groups
may be specified: (1) Bacteria. These are derived from (a) the
earth’s surface from refuse in the neighbourhood of habitations, from
excreta, trade-effluents, slaughter-houses, (6) deeper strata: cess-
pools, which do not necessarily filter off the organisms. (2) Protozoa.
(3) Moulds and spore-bearing organisms generally. (4) Inverte-
brates of many orders.

These all flourish according to the presence of putrefactive


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 183


matters in the soil (vegetable or animal), according to the ground-
temperature, and according to degrees of anzrobic state (which has
to do with cycles of development).


“The earth is a great stomach, in which everything is dissolved, digested and
transformed, and each being draws its nutriment from the earth; and each living
being is a stomach that serves as a tomb for other forms, and from which new forms
spring into existence.’’—(Paracelsus, Paramirum’, p. 205.)


Organisms gain access to the human body (a) directly from the
surface soil, from the drinking water, from insufficiently cleansed
vegetable foods, in partly decayed vegetables or vegetables which have
become stale in the markets, from the inhalation of infected dust
(especially the dust of earth pulverised by being parched in times of
drought), (6) indirectly, by contamination of food by insects whose
larve infest the soil to an extraordinary extent ; by use of vegetables
infected by invertebrates which themselves harbour pathogenic
organisms.

§ 178. Déseases associated with ground-water. Damp soil
favours putrefaction, with ultimate pollution of the air. Phthisis is
favoured in such localities. When the soil is actually wet, from the
rising of the ground-water, typhoid epidemics have been noted
(Pettenkofer). Fleas on rats which burrow into soil polluted by
plague-infected ground-water become infected themselves.

§ 179. Diseases associated with variations of earth-temperature.
Cold soil favours bronchitis and other chest complaints. Warm soil
favours the multiplication of certain organisms—those which
flourish best at certain temperatures, and anzrobically. (Favoured
by admixture of the soil with manure.)

§ 180. The subject is therefore plainly of importance both in
regard to the study of pandemics, epidemics and endemic diseases
and in regard to the daily condition of the individual patient, the
progress of his disease, and even the exact form which a disease takes
in his case. As Avicenna says, the practitioner would benefit by
noting the successions of weather-changes, the type of the season and
the seasonal cycles, especially interpreted in terms of movements of
the water, air, and “‘ fire”’ in the earth.


4. THe INFLUENCE OF SEASONAL CHANGES ON THE Bopy


261. When a season is harmonious* for a person of
healthy temperament, it is appropriate for him, but not so if the


* “ Harmonious.”’—Cf. ‘‘ conformity with the laws of nature’’ (Li Ki,‘ VI,
P. 535). In this case the season is,considered as the variable, and the human tem-
perament the constant. But it may be noted that the whole of our life is a matter
of ‘‘ conformity with the laws of nature,’’ from highest to lowest. If the “ Govern-
ment ’’ conforms in all respects, thus exhibiting the Great Conformity—requiring’
master minds and master wills—and if each individual in turn conforms, the society
would become the ideal state. The application in regard to the incidence of disease:
in the individual being is very wide, and this section of the Canon becomes sug-
gestive to a most interesting extent when the Classic just quoted is considered in.
association with it,


184 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


person is of unhealthy temperament. But* if deviation from
equipoise be marked, then the season will be harmonious or not
correspondingly, but the person may become debilitated.t
When a season is appropriate for a person of unhealthy tempera-
ment, the contrary holds.

262. When the nature of two seasons at the commence-
ment is opposite to that at their termination, and yet the altera-
tion from the mean is not great (becaw$e not of long duration),
as, for example, when a southerly winter is followed by a norther-
ly spring, the second season will be more beneficial to the human
body than the first, and will attemper the body. This is because
the northerly spring is opposite in action to the southerly winter.
If the winter be very dry and the spring very wet, the latter
modifies the dryness of the former. But if the spring is not
very humid and does not last long, then its modifying moistening
influence will not be deleterious.

263. <A single seasonal change is less injurious to life than
are repeated changes—supposing the change in question is
liable to prove mortal, and not one which reverses a previous
change.

264. Among the temperaments of the atmosphere one
that is hot and moist is more favourable to putrefactive pro-
cesses.

265. Atmospheric changes are common in some regions,
especially in the depths of the valleys ; they are only rare on
hills and high mountains.

266. It is better when seasons are normal in character ;
it is better that summer should be hot and the winter cold ; so
with each season. If seasons are not normal in character,
serious maladies will arise.

267. If all the seasons in one year are of uniform quality
(for instance, wet, dry, hot, cold, all through the year) it is a bad
year ; there will be many diseases in conformity with the quality
of the year. ‘The subsequent seasons will be fortunate. If a
single season can arouse much illness of corresponding type, how
much the more will not a whole year arouse ?

268. A person of phlegmatic temperament is liable to
develop epilepsy, paralysis, apoplexy, trismus, convulsions and
the like, in a cold season.

269. A person of choleric temperament may develop
delirium, mania, acute fevers, acute inflammatory swellings in a


* i.e., Taking the human nature as the variable, and the laws of nature as the
constant.


} i.e., A non-proportional season would make a very non-equable person weak.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 185


hot season. Wow much the worse would it not be if the character
of that season persisted throughout a whole year ?

270. With a premature winter, winterly diseases come on
early. With a premature summer, summer diseases arise early.
pe diseases of the corresponding season will change accord-
ingly.

271, An unduly prolonged season predisposes to many
illnesses, especially in the case of summer and autumn.

272, Note that the effects of the changing seasons are not
due to the season. itself, but to the quality which is changed along
with them, for this exerts a marked effect upon the states of the
body. A change from heat to cold in the course of a single day,
produces a change in the body accordingly. '

273. A rainy autumn followed by a temperate winter (not
without some cold, and yet not too cold, considering the geo-
graphical region) is more healthy. A rainy spring followed by
a moderately rainy summer would be more likely to be healthy.


See also 581, where the effect of the seasons on the pulse is discussed.


5. THe Properties oF Heattuy Arr


274. The substance of the air is good when (1) it is not
contaminated with extraneous matter, such as the vapours [from
marshes or lakes, or from canals or open sewers : Aegineta ;
or the gaseous products from chemical works, etc. : modern],
or smoke and soot.* (2) It is open to the sky [i.e. not shut in
by high mountains: Aegineta; and, generally, is able to circulate
freely round us: Nash]. (3) Is not confined in caves [cf.
Grotto del Cane], or between high walls, or shut up in houses (or
in underground cisterns).

275. Once a putrefactive process has begun in the air, it is
more likely to continue if the air is free and exposed than when
it is enclosed and concealed. Except for that, it is better that
air should be free and exposed.

276. Healthy air remains clear unless there be admixed
with it vapours from lakes or from stagnant and deep waters or
marshy lands, or from places where potherbs are cultivated—
especially cabbages and herb rocket ; or where certain resinous
trees or trees of bad temperament (box, yew) grow, or where nuts
or figs grow, or where there are offensive odours and evil-smelling


* One may also add: germ-laden dust, or particles of saliva and exhaled
particles of moisture charged with possibly pathogenic microbes. Note that ex-
haled air contains 0.5 per cent. of organic impurities, which are much more a source
of disease than the carbon dioxide gas produced by respiration.


186 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


winds. In short, the air remains clear if healthy winds, coming
from high or level ground, blow over the district.

Such air is not retained deep in the earth. It becomes
warm quickly after sunrise, and becomes cold quickly after the
sun has set. ‘The air found confined within the walls of recently
built houses, is not likely to be healthy, as the air is not quite dry
owing to the lime in the walls. Boe

‘Air is good when it does not interfere with one’s breathing
or cause the throat to contract.

277. You have already learnt that changes occur in the air
which are (1) in accord with its nature, (2) contrary to its nature
(preternatural), (3) neither the one nor the other.

Of the changes in the atmosphere which are not in accord
with its nature, these are either contrary to or not contrary to it.
Sometimes the changes run in cycles, sometimes not ; they may
occur at certain seasons ; they may be periodic, and sometimes
not.

It is more healthy if the seasons accord with the nature of
the atmosphere, for otherwise illnesses come about.


§ 181. The effects of the different climates (hot, cold, damp,
dry) on the body, and the diseases associated with each are given by
various ancient writers, but the statements often are at variance with
one another. It is sufficient to consider the possibility that, apart
from infective agents, the temperature and humidity of a region
affects the nutrition of the body, the vigour of the body, and is
accompanied by liability of certain organs to disease (gastric,
pulmonary, cerebral, cardiac).

The humidity of the air has been studied in modern times in its
relation to liability to induce disease. The average normal relative
humidity is 75 per cent.; excess of moisture makes the air feel
chilly. Mists are detrimental because they absorb the warming rays
of the sun.

Stagnant air produces “‘ stuffiness,” for instance inrooms. This
is due to the air heated by the skin remaining close to the skin, and
preventing the latter from cooling. The surface circulation fails to
receive its proper stimulus in consequence.!23 (p. 120.)

The following passage in the Su-wéz is of interest: ‘“‘ Huang
Tz asked in what manner cold and heat, dryness and moisture, wind
and fire operated on man, and how they produced the transformation
of all things.” Ch‘? Po replied: “. . . the Five Fluids come for-
ward in turn, and each of them takes precedence once. When they
do not keep in their proper spheres, there is disaster ; when they do,
everything is well ordered,” etc. (Forke,®* p. 250-252.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 187


6. ‘THe INFLUENCE OF THE CHANGES IN THE QUALITY OF THE
ATMOSPHERE ; THE DISEASES INCIDENT TO THE SEVERAL SEASONS
AND Kinps oF WEATHER


278, Hot atmosphere. A hot atmosphere disperses the
breath and has a relaxing effect. A moderate degree of heat
induces redness by drawing blood to the surface of the body.
A great degree of heat results in a yellow colour because it breaks
down (the components of) the blood which has been drawn to the
cutaneous vessels. It also evokes sweating, diminishes the
amount of urine, impairs the digestion and induces thirst.

Cold atmosphere. A cold atmosphere has a constricting
effect. It strengthens the digestion, and increases the amount
of urine. The reason for the latter is that it causes the humours
to become imprisoned, so that only a small portion of them can
become resolved into sweat. Another reason is given presently.
Cold induces constipation because the anal muscles remain
tightly contracted and the rectum does not respond to the call of
the intestines ; hence the faeces linger long in the intestines
instead of descending (out of the sigmoid), and their watery
constituent is re-absorbed and passes into the urine.

Moist atmosphere. ‘This has a softening effect on the skin,
and renders the body moist as a whole.

Dry atmosphere. ‘This has a drying effect on the skin, and
renders it rough and dusky.

279, Fogs.—Foggy air has a depressing effect on the mind,
and disturbs and confuses the humours. This kind of air is not
the same as “‘ dense” air, for the latter is dense in substance,
whereas foggy air is so because the particles with which it is
mingled are coarse (nearly or actually visible). The sign of such
an air is that stars of small magnitude are scarcely seen through
it, and even the brilliance of the planets is reduced to the lumino-
sity of fixed stars. Murky air is produced (when it is very cold)
by the presence of much fuliginous vapour, and of smoke, or by
absence of good winds.

This will suffice about this subject for the present ; we
shall return to it later in speaking of preternatural changes in the
air.


280. Tue Seasons. Every season has its own proper
characteristics. The characters occurring at the end of one
season, and the diseases associated with this, agree with those
occurring at the beginning of the next season.


188 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


CHANGES WHICH SPRING PRODUCES IN THE Bopy.


281. When the temperament of the spring conforms to
type, it is a very healthy season ; its temperament corresponds to
that of the breath and of the blood, although the fact of its being
in equipoise, as already explained, makes it tend towards the
tenuity and enervating character of hot air, and also towards
moisture. It renders the skin ruddy by drawing the blood to the
surface to a moderate degree, and yet it does not effect that degree
of dispersal of the breath which an overhot summer does.

At this season of the year, the humours of the body, hitherto
stagnant, bestir themselves and circulate. Chronic disorders are
therefore met with. In persons of atrabilious temperament the
atrabilious humour comes into activity. Persons who have over-
fed during the winter without taking much exercise, so that the
humours are redundant, are liable to spring-time diseases
because these immature humours now become active and dis-
seminated (through the tissues).

A spring which is prolonged without losing its attempered
character will be followed by few diseases in summer.

282. The diseases of spring. Nosebleeding, effusion of
blood, fermentation in the atrabilious humour or in the bilious
humour. Inflammatory deposits ; carbuncles ; anginas (which
may be of severe type); abscesses of various kinds. Varicose
veins may “‘ burst,”’ there may be haemoptysis, and a cough
becomes increasingly troublesome especially if the early part of
spring be winterly. ‘Those persons who have such disorders,
and most of all, phthisis, will be in a worse state.


[Bronchitis, Bronchopneumonia, Influenza. In early spring: Measles.]


In persons of a phlegmatic constitution, the season of spring
brings movement of the serous humour, and there is a tendency
to apoplexy, paralysis, and joint trouble. Such disorders are
more likely to arise if there be any vigorous corporeal or psychic
movement (emotion), or if calefacient articles of food are included
in the diet, for all these enhance the effect of the atmosphere at
this season.

The most efficient means of averting maladies incident
to Spring: venesection ; purgation ; semi-starvation, or res-
triction of food, increasing the fluids (especially syrups), but
reducing the intoxicating liquors, and even then taking them only
diluted.

283. Relation to periods of life. Puberty and the time of
life thereabout are benefited by spring-time.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 189


CHANGES WHICH SUMMER PRODUCES IN THE Bopy.


284, In summertime* the humours are dispersed ; the
faculties and natural functions are impaired owing to the exces-
sive dispersion. The blood} and serous humour are diminished
in amount ; the bilious humour increases in amount ; and,
towards the end of the summer, the atrabilious humour increases
in amount as a result of the dispersion of the attenuated matters,
whereby the heavier particles stay behind in increasing amount.
This is why old persons and those of similar nature feel stronger
in summer.

The colour of the body becomes citron-yellow as a result of
the dispersal of that which the summer heat draws out of the
(surface) blood.

285, Effect of Summer on the course of diseases.—In summer-
time diseases show shorter stages. For, on the one hand, in
robust persons, the warm air helps to disperse and mature the
disease-matter, and also discharges it from the body. On the
other hand, in weakly persons, the atmospheric heat only
adds to their weakness by its relaxing influence. The sick
person will therefore lose his strength and die. Further-
more, if the summer be hot and dry, illnesses are quickly broken
up ; whereas if it be wet, the humours becomes glutinous in
character, the stages of the diseases are prolonged, and recovery
is delayed. In that case the disease comes to be of long duration.
For instance, a simple ulcer may become obstinate, may spread,
and may deepen. Dropsy and lienteric diarrhoea, and looseness
of the bowels are liable to occur. This is all because of the flow of
redundant humours downwards from the upper parts to the lower.

286. Diseases specially associated with the hot season. If
very hot : tertian, continued, and burning fevers ; emaciation ;
pains in the ears; ophthalmia. If cupping be not done :
erysipelas is common ; also furunculosis. (These are of like
nature to summer.) If spring-like : mild benign fevers, in
which the tongue and fauces do not become rough and harsh,
and there is no dryness of skin. ‘This is because the sweating
continues in plenty, especially at the crisis. For the heat and
moisture co-operate with it—and the former resolves the humours,
the latter softens the skin and opens the pores.

If southerly : deaths are frequent. Variola, morbilli, and
similar serious diseases are common.


* In summer the ground temperature is highest (up to 63 deg. F. at the end of
August or in September). eS
+ The blood is ‘‘ thin’’ in summer; “ thick” in autumn.


190 THE CANON OF MEDICINE
If northerly : this is favourable to health. If diseases


arise, they are diseases of ‘‘ expression ” ; that is, disease-matter
is caused to circulate by the action of the innate heat as well as by
the exterior heat ; then, being exposed to the cold atmosphere,
it is expressed from the body. ‘This occurs in rheumatisms,
catarrhs, and their sequelae.

If northerly and also dry : this is beneficial for persons of
phlegmatic constitution, and also for women. Persons of bilious
constitution are liable to develop eye-trouble, acute fevers of long
duration, and diseases due to the oxidation of an excess of bilious
humour (which has accumulated in such persons), and diseases
arising from a redundance of the atrabilious humour.

(Summer diarrhoea, and bowel diseases, and enteric.]

§182. That the frequency of disease in hot weather is to be partly ascribed
to the multiplication of flies under the favouring influence of the ground heat and
warm air was of course not known in Avicenna’s time. On the other hand,the


cause of souring of milk in hot weather is still not understood, and the incidence of
some febrile conditions is parallel.


CHANGES WHICH AUTUMN PRODUCES IN THE Bopy.


287. The autumn season brings many diseases for these
reasons : (1) there is exposure to a hot sun by day, and the
nights are cold. (2) The humours are vitiated by the following :
(i) abundance of fruits in the dietary. (ii) bad articles of diet.
(111) dispersion of attenuated matter, leaving dense particles
‘behind and these then undergo oxidation. (iv) in summer the
fermenting humours pass to the skin and the natural faculties
can be brought to bear on them so as to disperse and expel
them ; but in autumn, the cold atmosphere causes the humours
to be thrown back into the interior parts, where they accumulate
and are (as it were) imprisoned. (3) The vigour of the body
has been impaired by the preceding summer.

288, In autumn, the blood is much less in amount because
this season is contrary in temperament to the blood. Conse-
quently it cannot help blood to form, and that which the summer
has already dispersed is not replaced. On the other hand, the
bilious humour becomes relatively increased during the summer,
and predominates during autumn. ‘The atrabilious humour is
more abundant at the end of summer because of the oxidation of
the humours during summer, and this produces ash-like
residues, which tend to sediment under the influence of the
autumnal cold.

289. List of autumnal diseases and disorders. (i) Fevers :
composite ; quartan—due to abundance of atrabilious humour
and the agent already described ; associated effects—enlarge-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE Ig1


ment of the spleen, oliguria (the urine only passes drop by drop
owing to the temperament of the blood being diverse—between
heat and coldness), dysuria (partly because the urine only comes
drop by drop), lienteria (because the cold drives the rarefied
portions of the humours into the interior parts of the body) ;
simple hectic fever ; this is more severe during this season
because it is desiccant in character.

[Scarlet fever: diphtheria.]

(i1.) Diseases of the individual organs.—Skin : impetigo,
excoriating scabies; ‘‘ canker”; pustules (especially if the
autumn be dry and the preceding summer was hot).—Throat :
acute “‘choleric”’ angina.


(Cf. the corresponding disease in spring, in this case due to serous humour
the reason of the difference of humour in the two forms lies in the fact that the
season preceding in each case favoured the prevalence of that humour, and it is this
that constitutes the “ soil ’’ upon which the anginal infection thrives.)

Lung: Autumntide is harmful for persons suffering from
phthisis and chronic pulmonary affections. Ifa person had such
a disease latent in him at the onset of autumn, he would show the
signs of it at the end of the season. Brain: apoplexy ; mental
disease 1s common because the bilious humour is unhealthy and
atrabilious humours are admixed with it.

[Intestinal tract: diarrhoea, etc.]

(ii1.) Pains : in the joints ; sciatica; pains in the back
and hips (due to the stagnation and subsequent imprisonment
of the insoluble parts of the humours which summer brought
into circulation).

Worms.—These multiply because digestion is deficient,
and there is lack of expulsive action.

290. Autumn is, so to speak, the foster-mother for the
disorders left by the summer-time. Autumn is more healthy
if the weather be very damp and rainy, and is more unhealthy
if the weather be dry.

291. Relation to Periods of ife.—The first part of autumn
is to some extent beneficial for old people, but the last part
is very injurious for them. (In the first place there is the cold,
in the second place there is the residue of the oxidation of
humours of summer-time).


CHANGES WHICH WINTER PRODUCES IN THE Bopy.

292. Winter is a help for digestion, because the cold
weather as it were embraces the innate heat and fosters it, and
makes it more concentrated and less prone to dispersion.

That is why fruits are scarce, and why people feel the need


46


4h


Jan. Feb, Md. Ap. May Sunt Ily Aug Sept. Och Nov. Dec.


192 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


only of light aliments, and take little exercise after a good meal,
and gather together in warm places.

293. In winter there is much sediment in the urine, as
compared with the summer, and the amount passed is greater.
The bilious humour is lessened in winter because it is cold, and
the day is short and the nights long. The insoluble portions of
the humours are more confined. During the winter, therefore,
the diet should include more incisive and more attenuant aliments.

294, The disorders of wintertime. ‘These are chiefly
phlegmatic in character. The serous humour is plentiful at
this period. ‘Thus, it is very often present in vomited matter ;
inflammatory foci are usually of a whitish colour in winter-
time ; coryza is common, and begins when the autumnal air
is changing. Less common are: pleurisy, pulmonary inflam-
mations, hoarseness and sore throat. Less common still are :
pains in the chest, side, back and loins; nervous disorders
(chronic headache); especially apoplexy; epileptic seizures).
In all these cases the serous humours are aggregated and con-
fined, besides being increased in amount.

295. elation to Periods of Life.—Winter is inimical to
old persons and to those akin to them in nature.* Middle-
aged persons are likely to be in health in this season.


§ 183.—The following curves showing the seasonal variations
in the character of the blood (red cell content; haemoglobin) as
made out by modern investigations, are of interest in connection with


the above (280-295).


Red Cells


Jan. Fib. Meh. Ap May, Tune Tay Avg: Sypr: Oot. Ne. De


a ee Curve vaniegs the variations in red cell count in the same person through-

u year. I-12, the successive months of the ; 3.9-4.8 ili

Coe year ; 3.9-4.8, number of million red
B. Curve showing the variations in hemoglobin content from month to month.


I—I2, as in A: 78—88, percentage of hemoglobi ippi te
Camcmented. tory, me g moglobin. (From Lippincott, Journ.


* Note that i i : ;
Fence gs at in winter the ground temperature is lowest—41 deg. F. at end of


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 193


7. Tue InFLuences oF SEASONAL SEQUENCES
(SzasonaL Cyc es)


296. When a northerly spring follows a southerly winter,
the summer will be very hot, and waters will accumulate, various
matters being carried on from the spring into the summer.
Hence in the following autumn, there will be an increased
death-rate among adolescents ; and dysentery and intestinal
ulcers and tertian fever will be frequent.

297. If the winter was extremely rainy, those due to
give birth in the spring will be liable to abort, but if they carry
to full time, the offspring will be weakly, or suffer from a fatal
or dangerous illness. Men are liable to eye diseases and
haemorrhages. Old persons are liable to catarrhs which pass
down into the interior organs ; indeed they may meet with
sudden death from a sudden obstruction to the flow of the breath
through channels which have become overfull.

298. If the spring is rainy and southerly, following upon
a northerly winter, there will be many cases of acute fever in
the summer, and there will be eye affections, nose-bleeding,
looseness of the bowels. Most of these depend on the flow
of serous humour—imprisoned during the winter—passing
down into the interior organs and then caused to move on by
the heat. This is specially so in persons of moist tempera-
ment, like women. Sepsis and septic fevers are also common.

299. Should the summer become rainy at the time of
the rising of the dogstar, followed by northerly wind, there is
a prospect of good health and of the resolution of illnesses.
Such a season is worse for women and for juveniles, for if they
escape these illnesses, they run the risk of being afflicted with
quartan, because the humours become oxidised, and a sediment
or ash results, upon which dropsy, pains in the spleen, and weak-
ness of the liver supervene. Such risk is only slight in old per-
sons or in persons susceptible to cold.

300. If the.autumn after a dry and northerly summer
is rainy and southerly, it disposes people to suffer from head-
ache, cough, sore throat, and coryza in the winter.

If the autumn after a dry and southerly summer be rainy
and northerly, there will be-many cases of headache, rheumatism,
coughs, sore throat, in the winter.

If the autumn after a southerly summer be northerly,
the prevailing diseases are those of “‘expression”’ (see 286)


and of congestion of humours, as already stated.
)


194 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


301. If both autumn and summer were southerly and
wet, humours will multiply so that the diseases of expression
will appear in winter which we have enumerated (294), and it
will not be long before the disease-matter becomes coherent,
aggregated, and imprisoned ; for not only are the humours
plentiful but there are no vapours to expedite them away from
the body. This produces a risk of septic diseases. The winter
will not fail to bring out many disorders because of this very
cohesion of the undue amount of morbific matter.

Jf both autumn and summer are dry and northerly, the
winter will be beneficial to a person for whom moisture is
injurious, and also to women. Such persons will, however,
be liable to dry eye-affections, prolonged catarrhs, acute fevers,
and mental disorders with depression.

302. A cold and rainy winter produces burning of the
urine.

308. <A very hot and dry summer produces the following
disorders in the following season: anginas (pernicious, and non-
malignant) ; anginas which produce a discharge (these may
burst externally or internally), anginas which do not produce a
discharge; variola; morbilli (both these last two are favourable) ;
eye-affections ; mental depression ; difficult. micturition ; reten-
tion of the menses ; retention of the expectoration ; hemoptysis.

304, Ifa dry spring follows a dry winter, this is bad.
The trees and herbage are liable to decay and they are injurious
to the animals which feed on them ; and, in turn, to the human
beings which feed on them.


§ 184. Abnormal quality of the seasons. This idea is developed
in an interesting manner in the Chinese Classic ‘‘ Li Ki ’’4?7 (VI) as
showing the consequences in terms of weather (storms, floods,
droughts, hurricanes, etc.), and in regard to the prospects in the
crops (maturing too soon, maturing too late to yield any produce,
diseases of crops, or infections by various larve, or insects), as well as
the possibility of pestilential outbreaks, or the prevalence of such
diseases as bronchitis, rheumatism, skin diseases, general ill-health
(debility). Flourishing of certain objectionable weeds among the
grain or cereals,

§ 185. Seasonal cycles have to do with the sequences of develop-
ment noted among the very low forms of lifein Nature, e.g., the growth
of various orders of fungus (saprophytic, parasitic, non-pathogenic,
sub-pathogenic, and pathogenic) in various types of soil, or landscape,
depends on the existence of cold, cold and wet, warmth, warmth and
wet, warmth and dryness, as they are traced through their various
cycles (basidium, with basiodiospores, mycelium with gametes, and
zecidiospores, uredospores and teleutospores). The cyclical changes


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 195


which result in the apparent. transformation of one “ specific”
micro-organism into another “specific” schizomycete require
investigation in the open field of Nature. Bacteriology may be said
to have been imprisoned in the doctrine of immutability of species,
which is only upheld within the limitations of artificial culture-media
and inoculation experiments in warm-blooded animals. Many of the
types so familiar in human bacteriology may be looked on as terminal
phases of cycles, capable of being maintained at the same rank for
almost indefinite periods. The remaining nine-tenths of the cycle are
unknown, from inability to cause the types to re-enter it artificially.


_ (8) INCIDENTAL MUTATIONS
8. - CLIMATE


305. We now proceed to complete the discourse about
the other changes in the quality of the atmosphere, not preter-
natural and yet not natural. That is, changes dependent on the
celestial factors as well as on terrestrial ones.

306. Celestial factors—The changes dependent on celes-
tial bodies, such as the stars, are thus :—if many luminous
Stars rise in one region of the sky, and the sun approaches
towards that region, the people living directly or nearly directly
under the sun’s rays are exposed to greater heat. But if the
rays are oblique, the heating effect is lessened. The effect
of a vertical position of the rays on the head is not nearly so
great, unless they continue vertical for some time, and are
direct. (Joannitius says: the rising and setting of the stars
alters the nature of the atmosphere because when the sun ap-
proaches them or they it, the air becomes hotter. Under
contrary conditions, the air becomes colder),


§ 186. Solar, planetary and stellar influences on man, and
their relation to disease.—The subject may be summarized as follows.
(A) Genuine influences.—(a) Solar. Modern observations (Abbé
Moreux), voiced by H. W. Newton (Quart. Journ. Royal Meteorolog.
Soc., 1928), show that the existence of planetary influences on
this earth is only ridiculed by the ignorant. The observation
of sun-spots shows that there is a relation to the character of the
weather in certain regions, a relation to the development of earth-.
quakes, and also a relation to mental states. This authority
traces an eleven-year cycle of change both in the earth’s magnetic
changes and in the sun-spot cycle. The sun-spots are described
as tornadoes of white hot gas, and affect both ultra-violet ray
activity and electric radiations. He also suggests that there may
be another cause concerned which controls both solar storms and
terrestrial magnetic storms.


196 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(The relation may be made more tangible by suggesting that
after all there are actual flames of fire emerging from the sun and
extending in a tenuous and yet real form right across space into our
own atmosphere, with inevitable effects both in inorganic and
organized worlds. Hence to suggest a relation between sickness,
suicide, and crime and solar storms or even planetary disturbances
is not new and cannot be lightly set aside).

(6) Solar and lunar. Everyday experience shows that the
atmospheric conditions vary according to the time of day and night.
The bearing of this on health has therefore been seen from the
earliest times (Ayurveda, 1924, Aug.; p. 53). (¢) Planetary rise
and setting, Junar phases, positions of stars and constellations
(Arcturus, Pleiades, etc.) are all data for the study of the progress of
the seasons. Hence two kinds of cycles come to notice—the cycle
of climatic changes, with an apparent relation to health and disease,
both in cattle and in man ; (ii) the cycle of extra-terrestrial changes.
Naturally the observers of anciert times, who were so convinced of the
unity of the visible universe, sought to reduce to rule certain coinci-
dences in these cycles. Even if their association is irregular or only
discernible from generation to generation the subject would invite
study. Even nowadays it is unsafe to decide that there is nothing at
all to study in it.

§ 187.—(B) Fictitious relations —(a) Symbolical, permissible,
but superfluous. (i) Stars may be spoken of as “healthy” or
“unhealthy,” ‘ propitious’ or ‘“ unpropitious ”’ (Cantica, i. 104;
Costaeus Annotations to Avicenna), as a convenient abbreviation for
a more or less complex group of concomitant c/zmatzc conditions.
(ii) The names of planets, or constellations may be used to represent
certain types of mental constitution (Modern astrology). Thus,
combativeness (fiery temper), ambition and pride, love and desire,
melancholy, dreaminess, intelligence and wisdom. These are seven
types assigned to as many planets. Again, the term ‘‘ astral’’ may
be claimed appropriate because common to the ‘‘stars’’ and the
“astral form’? of man. The same idea occurs in Paracelsus??
(Hermetic writings, ii. 291), where he speaks of the senses and
intelligence and wisdom of the offspring being its “‘ sidereal body,”
and derived “‘ from the stars.” Such usage of names implies that
there is some specially “‘ deep ” learning being propounded which is
denied to the ordinary student, who has not been initiated into the
inner circle of some cult—hermetic, rosicrucian, theosophical, and
the like. The fact is, however, that the phenomena of the so-
called “ astral plane’ are those of the “‘ sensitive life’ of scholastic
psychology ; careful and thorough study of this will show that the
other obscurities are superfluous. (6) Fallacious—Those who take
the symbology of (ii) to be literally correct are ‘“‘ of the erring people ”
(Q. 6, 78). The poet voiced this error in his words : ‘‘ A moon which
es you if you dare behold” (Night 34, annotated by Burton, in
iv 318),

But in these days it is easier to fall into the error of supposing
that there is zo relation whatever between this world and sun, moon,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 197


and stars, than to mistake purely terrestrial relations for the trans-
cendent.


307. Terrestrial factors. (a) Latitude; (J) Altitude. —

High or low ; (c) Mountainous regions ; (d) Maritime countries ;
(e) Exposure to winds ; (f) Nature of soil.
(a) Influence of Jatitude on Climate.—If the country
in question be between the Tropic of Cancer and that of Capri-
corn, the summer will be hotter than in a country further from
the torrid zone. The countries within the equinoctial zone ap-
proach equipoise, for while the vertical incidence of the sun’s
rays does not make much impression, the fact of this position
being maintained for several hours enhances their effect. The
heat is greater at the middle of the eighth hour (the evening)
than at noon. Consequently, when the sun is at the end of
Cancer or in the beginning of Leo, it is hotter than it is at the
end of its course. When the sun passes from the tropic of
Cancer to a place of less declination, its heat is greater than when
it has not yet reached the tropic of Cancer but is at the same
declination. In the countries in the equinoctial zone, the sun
is only vertical for a few days, and beyond that becomes rapidly
oblique. For the declination increases much more rapidly
towards the two poles than it does in the tropics. Yet, in the
tropics, there is hardly any movement perceptible to the senses
during any three or four days, so long does the sun linger ;
and all that time the heat is continuous. Hence one may con-
sider that countries whose latitude approaches complete declina-
tion are hotter than all others, and next to these countries
lying within fifteen degrees on either side towards the two poles.
In the equinoctial line the heat is not so very excessive as it 1s
in those countries which are within the tropic of Cancer, and
countries which are still further north are still colder.

This concludes what must be discussed in regard to the
latitudes of countries, supposing them to be alike in all other
respects.

(6) Influence of the altitude of a country, whether high or low.—
Lowlands are hotter, highlands are colder. ‘The strata of air
nearer to the earth round here, where we live (Persia) are hotter
because the sun’s rays are more powerful ; the rays are more
oblique on the highlands, which are therefore colder. This is
explained in the work on natural philosophy. Low-lying places
take up more heat, and are therefore hotter.


(c) Influence of mountains on the climate of neighbouring


198 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


country.—The climate of mountainous countries from the point
of view of residence, is discussed in 825,

High mountains influence the climate in two ways: (i)
they reduce the power of the solar rays on the country, and afford
protection from them ; (ii) they serve as a wind-screen. The
former holds good when the mountains are on the northerly
aspect of those countries which are in the north. As the sun
runs its course across such a northerly country its heat is re-
flected from the mountains, and so the country is warmed in
‘spite of its being in the north. The same applies when the
mountains are in the west, leaving the country exposed on the
east. If the mountains are in the east, the heat which the
country receives is less than when they are in the west, because as
the sun rises, hour by hour passes before its direct rays reach the
country, and by the time they fall vertically upon it, the sun is
already about to wane, and the heating quality of its rays de-
clines (p). When the mountains are on the west, however,
the rays are more vertical with every hour.

(11) Windscreens.—A northerly cooling wind may be
screened from a country by a mountain-range, in which case a
southerly warming wind gains the advantage. If a country
lies between two mountain peaks the force of the winds across it
will be much greater than if it were entirely flat. For when
air enters a narrow channel it usually goes on blowing without
ever stopping, just as water and the like would. Natural
science furnishes the explanation of this.

Countries whose climate is rendered mild by mountains are
exposed to some winds, and protected from others. If exposed
on the east and north, they are protected on the west and south.

(d) The influence of the sea on maritime countries. ‘The
atmosphere in such countries is always more humid. If the
sea is on the xorth side of the country, that will help to make
the country cool, for the prevailing north wind is cold in character,
having come over the face of the water. If the sea is on the
south side of the country, a heavy southerly climate prevails,
especially if a mountain range intervenes between the sea and
the country.

If the sea is on the east side, the climate will be more
humid than when it is on the west side, because the sun will not
cease increasing the evaporation of water as it rises in the heavens,
whereas this would not be the case if the sea were on the west.

To sum up, proximity of the sea makes the climate of a
_country dainp, and if there are no mountains to prevent constant


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 199


winds, the air is less liable to undergo putrefactive change.
Were there no winds (because of an intervening mountain-range),
the air would be liable to undergo putrescence (of the organic
matters suspended in it), and the humours of the inhabitants
would also tend to undergo putrescence.

Hence it is clear that it is better for the prevailing wind
to be northerly ; it is next best if the wind is easterly ; then
westerly, and it is worst if the prevailing wind is southerly.

(e) The influence of winds. (i) Ox all countries in general.
In most countries a southerly wind is hot and moist. It is hot
because of the sun’s rays, and it is moist because usually the sea
is to the south, and the strong heat of the sun on the equatorial
seas disseminates water vapours which become carried on by
the winds. This is why southerly winds are relaxing.

The northerly winds are usually cold because they have
traversed mountains and snow-clad territories ; they are also
dry because very little water-vapour is admixed. ‘This is because:
there is very little evaporation of water on the north, and there:
are no seas intervening. On the contrary, they usually traverse:
frozen waters and desert places.

Easterly winds are between cold and hot in character ;
they are drier than westerly winds, because there is less sea in
the north-east than in the north-west, and we live in the north.

Westerly winds are moist in quality because they traverse
seas and the sun, passing over the seas, warms them and evap-
orates the water ; but since the movements of the sun and the
winds are in contrary directions, the evaporation is not as great
as it is in the case of the easterly winds. Added to this is the
fact that easterly winds are strongest at the beginning of the day,
and the westerly winds blow strongest at the close of the day.
That is why the westerly winds are not as hot as the easterly,
and more inclined to be cold. ‘The easterly winds are hotter,
and yet, comparing both east and west with the south and north
winds, they are temperate.

Sometimes the character of winds varies in a given territory
as a result of other factors. It is sometimes an advantage, in
some countries, for the south winds to be cooler, as happens when
there is a snowclad mountain range on the south ; these winds
are cooled in passing over the mountains. When a country
is enclosed in burning deserts, the northerly winds are hotter
than the south winds.

The simooms* are of two varieties: (i) those which have


* Simoom, “ the poison wind,’’ from Samn, poison, venom, (Burton, iv. 36.)


200 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


traversed very hot deserts ; (ii) winds like a sort of smoke,
producing strange “‘ terrifying ” atmospheric effects simulating
flames of fire. They are heavy and sultry. A sort of kindling
and combustion occurs in them whereby the light part is separ-
ated and the heavy part (in which the burning fieriness remains)
sinks down to the lower strata. All these are powerful winds.
‘That is why wise philosophers believe them to arise in the upper
parts of the atmosphere, although the material basis is from
below.* But the movement, the blowing and whirling, begins
in the upper regions of the atmosphere. This is the usual
explanation, and its proof is to be found in my book on natural
philosophy.

(az) The special climatic characters of the several countries.
This subject is deferred to a later chapter (318).

(f) The soil.t Countries present varied characters accord-
ing to the dominant kind of soil. ‘The following varieties of soil
may be enumerated: clay, chalk, sandy (humus), rocky, or
stony, miry or slimy, muddy, evil-smelling. The characters
vary according to the mineral content.

Each kind of soil has its own effect both on the atmosphere
and on the water.

This statement contains an important truth. Certain spas and health-
resorts (Carlsbad, Bath, Droitwich, Baden, Bourbonne-les-Bains, Nancy, Wiesbaden)
owe their virtue not merely to the chemical composition of the water which is taken
by the patients, but also to the locality itself. The radiations which pass outwards
at those parts of the earth produce a beneficent influence upon them as they walk
over the ground.

§ 188. The soil may be described as the breakdown products of
rocks or rock-formations of various kinds. Different kinds of soil
differ in the size of their particles: coarse sands show particles from
0.1-O.2 mm. in diameter; fine sands 0.5-0.05 mm.; silts have
particles varying from 0.04 to 0.004 mm. in diam. A soil composed
of the four groups (sand, clay, chalk, humus) is called “loam”? if
good for crops, and is then specified as clay loam, or sand loam,
according to the dominance of clay and sand respectively. It is the
size of the particles which determines the movements or circulation
of air and water through the soil. The amount of humus determines
the fertility in regard to micro-organisms, whether beneficial to
vegetation, or whether pathogenic to man. The presence of 4
per cent. of moisture in soil is the optimum for processes of decom-
position in it. Cold wet soils favour diphtheritic infection (Lane-
Notter).

Gravel soil is sought after as favourable for dwellings ; but if


* The lower strata are near “earth,’’ and the highest strata of this world
are “ fire’ (see § 54). :
+ The soil may be described as elementary substance with which are intermingled
the decaying remains of animal and vegetable matter.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 201


it be befouled by polluted waters, micro-organisms then flourish more
easily than in other soils, and it becomes more inimical to health.

; § 189. The inorganic elements in plants are really very finely powdered stones
(limestone, iron-stone, magnesium-stone, potash-stone, etc.), which have entered


into a condition of food-substance under the influence of light and heat, and life.—
(Gilbert.)


(g) Misty districts and marshes. Joannitius refers to these,
saying that where there is decomposition in such regions,
diseases and various plagues befall man.


§ 190. The factors on which the climate of a place depends, in
modern thought, are as follows: (1) the earth heat: the range in this
is 41-63 F. in England. When hot, the earth reflects ultra-violet
rays (2) the radiant energy of the sun. ‘‘ Sun-power,” which is
reflected from the sky and sea and earth. The rays are classified as
visible, ultra-violet (actinic or chemical), and infra-red. The ultra-
violet rays are arrested by smoke, mists, window-glass. (3) The
cooling power of the air. This depends on the rate of movement of
the air, as currents artificially induced, or wind; the amount of
humidity ; the actual temperature of the air. Cold air tries the heart
and chest, more heat having to be produced ; hot air tries the diges-
tive organs and kidneys, because of the difficulty of getting rid of the
superfluous heat. (4) Altitude. The air is thin or rare at high
altitudes. (5) Ventilation of the dwelling-house.

To these must be added: prevalent winds; proximity to sea;
scenery; nature of the ground—whether rocky (cold and dry),
fertile (hot and moist), muddy (cold and moist) ; whether porous or
impermeable ; water-holding or not; actual chemical composition.


(c) IMPRESSIONS PRODUCED BY OTHER CHANGES IN THE
ATMOSPHERE


9. Tue EFFEcT oF UNFAVOURABLE CHANGES IN THE AIR
WHICH ARE CONTRARY TO ITS ORDINARY
NATURE


"# SIR (808) may be changed in (1) substance,
‘| (2) qualities.—The substance may become
depraved apart from any increase or de-
crease in some of the intrinsic qualities.
Such an air is named “‘ pestilential.”* One
must remember that putrefactive processes
can*occur in the atmosphere just as they
do in stagnant water.


* Though we now know that “‘ pestilential ”’ air is so because it is germ-laden,
that does not render this chapter “‘ out of date.”” The general principles remain
the same. At the present day it is assumed that the air is always contaminated
from without—from the dust, e.g., on the ground that sunlight destroys germ-
life. However, facts speak otherwise in open Nature.


202 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


309. By the word “ air” we do not mean the simple (impon-
derable) element, but the atmosphere around us. Were the
atmosphere absolutely pure, the word “‘air’’ might be used
synonymously. But elemental substances cannot putresce ;
they can only change from one to another (as “ water ’’ which
changes to “‘air,”’ e.g.), and they do this by a change either in
quality or in substance. The word “‘ air” in this chapter, therefore,
as‘ atmosphere,” is a composite substance, with spatial relations,
composed of true (elemental) air, watery vapour, terrene particles
(both of which form fogs and clouds, and smoke), and fiery
particles—all together. In the same way, when we speak of
sea” as ** water,” ‘‘ lakes” as “‘ water,” and so on, we do not
mean elemental water, but a composite substance, in which
‘‘ water,” though predominant, is mixed with air, earth, and fire.


This carries the reader back to 19-25, and the comments thereon. The writ-
ings of the Chinese philosophers on the one hand, and of European alchemists on the
other, may be interpreted accordingly, as Avicenna would have done. Examples
of ‘“‘earth’’: soil, metals, naked creatures; ‘“‘ water’’: spring water, rain water,
ditch-water, lake water; the sea; millet; shellfish; “ fire’’: wood, oil, stones,
lightning, the glow-worm, will-o’-the-wisp, trees, flowers, beans, feathered creatures.
Seemingly there is very little in common; Forke?* (p. 275, 276) discusses the
subject, at the same time referring to writings by Agrippa von Nettesheim.


310. Theair so present in water may undergo putrescence,
with degradation of its substance, just as the stagnant water in
pools decomposes, with degradation of its substance.

311. Air generally becomes pestilential from putrefactive
changes towards the end of summer and during autumn. The
symptoms which such air produces in the human body will be
referred to later.

312. Change in primary qualities. Heat or cold may become
insupportable by destroying the crops and the fecundity of
nature. ‘This change may be in the same direction as the quality
of the season (for instance, the summer may become fiercely hot),
or it may be in the contrary direction (for instance, a spell of very
cold weather may arise during the summer season).

313, Effect on the human body. Changes in the character
of the atmosphere produce changes in the human body.
Putrescence of air induces septic changes in the body-fluids,
beginning with the pericardial fluid, because this is exposed to
it first.

Flot atmosphere. Great heat in the air renders the joints
flaccid and causes the humours to disperse. There is increase
of thirst, dispersion of the breath, failing vigour and digestion,
all because the innate heat is the instrument used by the vegetative


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 203


soul. A citron-yellow appears in the skin because the sanguineous
humour becomes dissipated and loses its red colour, while at
the same time the bilious humour increases in amount relatively
to the other humours. The heart becomes warmer (over and
above the innate heat), so that the humours flow and undergo
decomposition, and in that state they enter the interspaces of
the body and the weaker members. This is therefore not
beneficial to persons in health. The following diseases are
(however) benefited by this change : dropsy, palsy, cold catarrhs,
tetanus, and certain (humid) spasmodic conditions.

Cold atmosphere. ‘This drives the innate heat into the
interior organs, unless the air has sufficient driving force itself
to penetrate them. This would be morbific. Cold atmosphere
does not interfere much with the circulation of the humours,
or imprison them. But it favours catarrh, and is weakening to
the nerves. It has a very injurious effect on the trachea. If the
atmosphere is not so cold, it strengthens the digestion and all
the interior functions, and improves the appetite. On the one
hand it is more beneficial to a healthy person than a very hot
atmosphere, and on the other hand it is detrimental to nerve-
function. It closes the pores and causes matters within the bones
to pass outwards to the surface.

Moist atmosphere. A moist atmosphere benefits many tem-
peraments. It improves the colour and makes the skin clear
and soft. ‘The pores remain open. However, it favours septic
processes.

Dry atmosphere. A dry atmosphere has contrary effects.


A dry climate, with warm soil, where the sun power is good and
the cooling power is moderate (e.g. places with pine forests and
sheltered valleys) is beneficial for chest cases.—Dry uplands in
places where there are not periods of unsettled weather, and not near
the sea, are beneficial for rheumatic cases.1*%

Choice of food according to climate.—For hot climates: no
meat; use vegetable oils instead of animal fats. For cold climates:
meat, animal fats. For dry climates: fruits are needed. For wet
climates : sugar is needed.123 (p. 1076).

Note that the weather affects animals as well as man. Cold, hot,
damp, dry weather, thunderstorms, affect domestic animals.**


i, 307.)
10. THE INFLUENCE OF THE WINDS ON THE Bopy


In dealing with the changes in the atmosphere, we have
discussed the characters of the various winds. We now proceed
to deal with them from another point of view.


204 THE CANON OF MEDICINE
314, The North Wind braces and hardens the body ; it


prevents the flow of visible excretions ; it closes the pores,
strengthens the digestion, causes constipation, increases the
urine, and makes septic pestilential atmosphere healthy. If
the south wind precedes the north, the south wind excites mucous
discharges, but the following north wind drives these fluids
inwardly. A discharge may appear externally. Hence acatarrh
[-al exudation] may become abundant, and chest troubles are
common.

Diseases liable to occur when the north wind prevails :
neuritic pains, pains in the side of the chest, in the joints, in the
bladder and uterus ; difficult micturition ; racking cough ;
shivering attacks.

815. The South Wind is relaxing for the strength ; it
opens the pores ; makes the humours agitated and confused,
so that they move from within outwards ; the senses become
heavy ; it induces sleepiness. It is one of the causes of breaking
down of ulcers, and makes them itch. It causes diseases to
relapse, and debilitates. It produces itching in podagra. It
excites migraine attacks. It causes fevers to become septic.
It does not, however, induce sore throat.

316. The East Wind.—lf east winds prevail towards
the end of the night, and in the early part of the day, they will
have already been modified by the sun, being made more rarefied
and less humid. ‘They are, therefore, drier and lighter in nature.
But if they occur at the close of the day, and at the beginning
of the night, the reverse is the case. On the whole, east winds
are more beneficial to health than are westerly ones.

317. The West Wind.—l\f west winds prevail at the end
of the night and in the early part of the day, the atmosphere will
not have received the heat of the sun, and is therefore denser
and more heavy. If they occur at the end of the day and at the
beginning of the night, the reverse holds good.


11. THe INFLUENCE oF PLacEs oF RESIDENCE ON THE HUMAN
Bopy


In a previous section we have considered the characters
of certain inhabited regions. | We now consider them from
another point of view, in more detail, without troubling to avoid
some repetitions.

318. Characters upon which the effect of habitable regions
on people depends. |

1. Whether high or low-lying.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 205


2. Type of adjoining country (mountainous, maritime,
open or sheltered).

3- State of soil (clayey, muddy, mineral, damp, marshy).

4. Whether the water is plentiful or scarce, stagnant or
flowing.

5. Local factors (trees, mines, cemeteries, dead animals,
putrescent pools).

6. Purity or impurity of the atmosphere.

As we have also learnt, the temperament of the air is revealed
by the latitude of a territory, its elevation or lowness, proximity of
mountains and seas, the prevailing winds, the kind of soil.

In short, whenever the air becomes quickly cold after
sunset, and quickly warms after sunrise (we know it) is attenu-
ated. If the opposite is the case, the nature of the atmosphere
is the contrary.

The most harmful of all kinds of air is that which con-
tracts the heart and hinders inspiration, and makes breathing
difficult.

We now discuss each kind of locality in turn.

319. Hot countries. ‘The hair becomes dark or black and
frizzly, and becomes gathered into tight clumps like pepper-
flowers ; the digestion is weakened. Old age comes on early,
owing to the great dissipation of breath, and the draining away
of the bodily moisture. This is seen in the land of the blacks
(Ethiopia, Abyssinia). Persons who reside in such countries
become aged at thirty, are timid (as the breath is so much dis-
persed), and the body becomes soft and dark.

320. Cold countries. Persons who go to live in cold coun-
tries become robust and stronger, and bolder and more coura-
geous. The digestion improves. If the climate is also damp
the people will become obese and fleshy and coarse. The veins
will not show under the skin of the hands, and the joints are
indistinct in outline. The body becomes pale and delicate.

321. Damp wet countries. Here the summer is not very
warm, nor the winter very cold. People living in humid coun-
tries have beautiful faces with soft smooth complexions. They
soon get tired with exercise. They are liable to develop pro-
tracted fevers, with looseness of the bowels and menorrhage.
Piles, which are common, often bleed. Septic ulcers, fistulas, and
aphthous and pustular stomatitis are common ; also epilepsy.

322. Here the summer is very hot and the winter very
cold. People who live in dry climates develop a dry tempera-
ment. The skin becomes dry and dusky as a result of the great


206 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


dryness and roughness of the atmosphere. The brain soon
becomes dry in temperament.

323. Residence in rocky and exposed places. ‘The climate
in such places is very hot in summer, and very cold in winter.
The body becomes hardened and sturdy, very hairy, strong,
with large prominent joints. Dryness rules in such persons ;
they are very wide-awake, and resist bad habits, are pertinacious,
warlike, skilful in the arts, and are energetic in character.

824. Residence in high altitudes. People residing in high
altitudes are healthy, strong, and capable of much physical
work ; they are long-lived.


High altitudes are beneficial for nerve cases, but unfavourable for heart cases.


325. Residence in mountains and snow-clad places. People
living in such places resemble those living in cold countries,
being of great stature, strong, fierce, and given to toil, for the
seasons vary much. ‘These countries are windy, the winds being
good as long as the snow lasts, but unhealthy when it
melts, especially if there should be mountains to screen off the
winds. In this case, the place becomes hot and damp.

326. Residence in low-lying countries. ‘The air is very damp ;
and in summer is sultry, without modification by winds. The
inhabitants are therefore unhealthy and debilitated, liable to be
depressed and gloomy in disposition. ‘The climate is unfavour-
able to the functions of the liver. Water is plentiful, and not
cold, especially if it is stagnant, lagunal or marshy. The air is
then unhealthy, as you already know.

327, Residence in maritime regions. ‘The heat and cold
of these regions is modified by their moisture ; hence injury is
resisted, and the body is inreceptive for whatever would otherwise
invade it. As regards moisture and dryness, no doubt, such
regions tend to be damp. Ifthe country faces the north and has
no protection against north winds (the sea being on that side,
and the country being low), the climate will be more temperate.
If it faces to the south, the climate will be hot and insalubrious
(morbific),


Maritime places are beneficial for nerve cases.


328. Residence in northerly countries. Persons who live in
the north resemble in character those who live in cold countries
with cold seasons. Diseases of ‘‘ expression ’’ (286) and those
due to confinement of the humours in the interior parts are
liable to occur. Digestion is usually good. Such persons are


long-lived.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 207


The repletion with, and the lack of dispersion of, the humours
predisposes to epistaxis and rupture of varicose veins. Ulcers
readily heal owing to the vigour of the body and the purity of
the blood ; the external conditions are also favourable to healing,
because there is nothing to relax or moisten (the tissues). The
fact that the innate heat is plentiful in such people prevents
epilepsy from occurring, but if fits should occur they will be
correspondingly severe, for it would have to be a very powerful
agent to bring on such fits at all in these regions.

The great degree of heat in the heart makes such persons
leonine (wolfish) in disposition.

Effect on the female sex. Menstruation is defective owing to
constriction of the channels and the absence of the stimulus to
menstrual flow and to relaxation of the channels. Some assert
that this makes the women sterile; that their wombs do not open.
But this is contrary to experience ; at any rate as regards the
Germans [Turks, Parthians—in other readings]. My opinion
is that the great amount of innate heat makes up for the absence
of the stimulus to flow and to dilate the channels. Abortion,
it is said, is rare amongst women in these climates, and this fact
further supports the opinion that their vitality is great. However,
parturition is not easy because the organs in question remain
hard and will not open easily. If abortion should occur, it must
be ascribed to the cold. ‘The milk will be scanty and thick,
because the cold prevents the blood from flowing easily enough
to the breasts.

When the vitality is impaired, people in these regions
(especially parient women) are liable to develop puerperal
tetanus, and wasting diseases, because the difficult labour makes
them strain so much, and consequently risk tearing the veins
in the chest, and the nerve and muscle-fibres, The former
leads to pulmonary ulcers; and the latter to spasmodic affections.
Another effect of the excessive straining during parturition 1s
ventral hernia.

As regards the age of puberty (in these countries) : hydro-
cele arises, but disappears as the persons grow older. Female
slaves are liable to develop ascites and hydro-uterus ; but these
also pass away as they grow old. Ophthalmia is rare, but is
severe when it does occur.

329. Residence in southerly countries. ‘The climatic features
in these cases are those of hot countries and climates. The pre-
vailing winds are not beneficial to health.

The waters are usually salty. and sulphur-containing.


208 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Moist humours accumulate in the head in people living in these
regions, as that is an effect of the south ; they pass downwards
and render the intestines loose. ‘The limbs are weak and
flabby ; the senses are dulled ; the appetite for food and drink
is enfeebled ; and the lack of heat and weakness of the stomach
accounts for the fact that wine is readily intoxicant. Ulcers heal
and soften slowly.

Effect on the female sex: Menstruation is profuse and is
arrested with difficulty. Pregnancy is rare. Abortion is fre-
quent, simply because illness is so frequent.

Effect on the male sex: There is a liability to severe diar-
thoea ; bleeding of piles; humid ophthalmia. But these are
quickly recovered from. Persons over fifty years of age are
liable to paralysis, which follows on catarrhal conditions. At all
ages there is a tendency to asthma, spasmodic diseases (tetanic
spasm, epilepsy), because there is this tendency for serous
humour to accumulate in the head.

Both sexes are liable to develop fever in which heat and cold
occur simultaneously. Prolonged fevers come on in the winter,
and are nocturnal. Acute fevers are rare because of the liability
to diarrhoea, so that the more attenuated part of the humours is
continuously dispersed.

330. Residence in easterly countries. When a district is
exposed to the east, and is sheltered (by trees) on the west, it is
healthy and the climate is good. ‘This is because the sun is
high over it in the early part of the day, thus rendering the
atmosphere clear. ‘The purified air passes on and gentle winds
blow over it in advance of the rising sun, their direction being
corresponding.

331. Residence in westerly countries. When a district is
exposed on the west, and is sheltered (by trees) on the east, it does
not receive the sun till late in the day, when the rays are already
oblique. Hence the air never becomes rarefied or dry, but re-
mains dense and humid. ‘The prevailing winds are westerly and
nocturnal. ‘The climate of such places is therefore as of damp
countries, and the residents have a moderately hot and heavy
temperament. ‘The climate is heavy because the air is heavy.
Were it not for that, the climate would be spring-like in nature.

Such districts are not as healthy as easterly ones, and they
tend to become more unhealthy. Some say that this kind of
country is spring-like in its character, and very healthy com-
pared with other kinds of country. But to my thinking the
climate has very bad characters, and this is because the sun’s rays


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 209


do not reach them until they are no longer strong enough to
warm the atmosphere ; and then the sun sets at once, and a cold
night then suddenly sets in. As the air is of humid tempera-
ment in such countries, the inhabitants are liable to have husky
voices, especially in autumn ; for they are prone to catarrhs from
stagnation of the serous humour.

332. How to choose a place of residence, and what type of
house should be selected. ‘The choice of a place of residence
depends on : (1) the soil (see 807f) ; (2) position—whether high
or low-lying (atmospheric pressure, see 307b) ; (3) whether
exposed or sheltered, bare or covered with trees or woodlands or
forests (forests harbour moisture and foster the decay of vegeta-
tion) ; (4) the water-supply—its quality, whether the water is
covered in (artificially) or exposed to the air, whether concealed
or deep, marshy, whether thick or limpid, whether flowing from
a height or running over stones ; whether salty or ‘“‘ crude ”’ ;
(5) the prevailing winds—whether exposed to or sheltered from
the sun ; whether salubrious or not ; fresh (cold) and bracing
or dry and sultry (having blown over wide tracts of land), or
moist ; whether cold and healthy ; (6) the neighbouring
country (maritime, marshy, presence of lakes ; mountainous, or
flat ; richin minerals or not ; forests, jungles, etc.) ; (7) whether
the ground air is pure and healthy, impure and unhealthy,
making the natives prone to illness; what sort of illnesses
prevail ; (8) whether the natives are robust, have a good ap-
petite and digestion, and are accustomed to food of good
quality ; (9) the construction of house: whether with large,
roomy or with narrow entrances; good ventilation, wide
chimneys. Do the doors and windows face east and north?
One must be specially careful to arrange to have the easterly
winds able to enter the house and see that the rays of the sun can
enter all day, because the sun’s rays render the air pure.

One should be close to plenty of sweet running water, open
to the sky, frozen in winter, and warm in summer, as all this is
favourable to health. Nearness to stagnant water and that to
which light has no access is unfavourable.

(10) Amount of light ; temperature (hot, warm, cold) ;
rainfall—average humidity of the atmosphere (see 249).


§i19t. Type of house. The importance of this is well-known, but not as often
practically attended to. Overcrowding of houses is well-known to be a source of con-
tinual illness and loss of working capacity, yet only very slowly remedied. It is not
sufficiently realized that the befouling of the air through lack of air-space between
the houses is as dangerous as close contact with the organic emanations from the
human body. Such emanations cling to walls, floors, furniture, fomites, and
foster the multiplication of infective organisms. The relation between mouldy
walls and phthisis was insisted by Nash**® (p. 52). ;


210 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


We have now discussed the atmosphere and the geo-
graphical influences sufficiently. We now proceed with the
corporeal factors.


(ii), CoRPOREAL CAUSES UNAVOIDABLE BECAUSE
PHYSIOLOGICAL.


12. Tue INFLUENCE OF EXERCISE AND REPOSE.


§ 192. There are three kinds of Movement :—(1) Local; successive and
continuous reception of new positions in space; here belong exercise, gymnastics,
bathing ; (2) In quality: alteration ; this consists in the reception of new qualities ;
(3) In quantity (increase or diminution). A certain amount of matter is acquired
or lost. (Mercier®* 2, 517).


388. The effect of exercise on the human body varies
according to (i) its degree (strong, weak) , amount (little, much),
and according to (ii) the amount of rest taken, (111) the movement
of the humours associated.

334. All degrees of exercise (strong, weak, little, or
alternating with rest) agree in increasing the innate heat. It
makes little difference whether the exercise be vigorous or weak
and associated with much rest or not, for it makes the body very
hot, and even if exercise should entail a loss of the innate heat, it
does so only toa small amount. ‘The dissipation of heat is only
gradual, whereas the amount of heat produced is greater than the
loss. If there be much of both exercise and repose, the effect
is to cool the body, because the natural heat is now greatl
dispersed, and consequently the body becomes dry. If the
exercise entail the handling of certain material, that material
usually adds to the effect of the exercise, though often there is a
lessened effect. For instance, if the exercise be in the course
of performing the fuller’s art, there would result an increase of
coldness and moisture. If the exercise be in the course of the
performance of the spelter’s art, there would be more heat and
dryness.

335. Repose always has (a) a cooling effect, because (i) the
envigorating life-giving heat passes away, and (ii) the innate heat
is confined. It has (b) a choking and moistening effect, because
of the lack of dispersal of waste matters.


13. ConpiTions AssocIATED WITH SLEEP AND VIGILANCE.


386. ‘The effect of sleep is very similar to that produced
by repose ; that of vigilance is very similar to that produced by
exercise. In each case we must consider certain properties.

337. Sleep (1) strengthens all natural functions (digestion
of the food and the elaboration of the digestive products into


THE CANON OF MEDICINE a
good blood), by aggregating the interior heat and by relaxing the


sensitive faculties. (These are in abeyance, in sleep). It does
so because it renders the channels of the (mind-) breath moist and
relaxed. (2) It makes the substance of the breath turbid, and
prevents the exit of the vital breath (so that the vital heat accumu-
lates in the interior parts). (3) Sleep removes all types of
lassitude (821) and it restrains strong evacuations. if then
followed by appropriate exercise (gymnastics), the power of
running is increased unless (effete) matters accumulate which
only the skin can remove. (4) Sleep sometimes he/ps to expel
these effete matters, in that it imprisons the interior heat and
procures the dissemination of the nutrients throughout the
body, and the expulsion of the effete matters which are under
the skin, as well as of those which are deep in the interior parts
of the body. ‘These innermost matters push on those which
are in front of them in successive waves, until they finally
reach the subcutaneous tissues and are thence discharged
from the skin. The same action is achieved by wakefulness
to a still greater degree, but in this case the effete matter is
removed by dissipation, whereas sleep removes it by inducing
sweating. (5) Sleep induces sweating. It does this by a
process of overcoming the effete matter, and not by a process of
continuous dispersal of attenuated matter. When a person
sweats heavily during sleep, without obvious cause, nutrients
accumulate in excess of the bodily requirements ; when sleep
encounters matter adapted for digestion and maturation, it turns
it into the nature of blood and warms it, and in consequence
innate heat is engendered, and travels through and warms the
whole body. (6) If there are hot bilious humours, and the
period of sleep is prolonged, the body grows warm by extraneous
heat. (7) If at the time of sleep the stomach is empty, the
sleep will exert a cooling effect, in that it disperses the heat. If at
the time of sleep there is a humour not amenable to the digestive
power, the sleep will exert a cooling effect because of that to
which this humour gives rise.


Factor associated during the time of Effect on body.


sleep.
Profuse sweating. Accumulation of nutrients.
Gastric contents digestible. Completion of digestion and blood-
formation: formation ofinnate heat,
Hot bilious humour. Formation of extraneous heat,
Empty stomach (fasting) Cooled; heat is dispersed.


Indigestible humour. Cooled ; expansion of heat.


Me THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§ 193. Aetius adds: ; ;

Among the good effects of sleep are : forgetfulness of mental sufferings, rectifi-
cation of the distracted powers of reason ; relaxation of contracted tissues.

The best time for sleep is after a meal ; it should end when the food is digested
(shown by percussion over the stomach), after which the bowels should be emptied.

The best time for sleep during the 24 hours is the night, because the humidity
and drowsy stillness of night contribute to perfect digestion. The worst time is
the day-time, because in that case one does not sleep long enough to enable the di-
gestion of the food to be completed. The result is acidity, flatulence, gurgling
in the bowels.


338. The waking state acts in the contrary way in all these
respects. If it occur to an excessive degree, the temperament of
the brain changes to a certain dryness, with weakening and con-
fusion of the reasoning power, oxidative changes in the humours
and acute illnesses resulting. An excessive degree of sleep, on
the other hand, exerts an opposite effect, for it dulls the powers of
the mind, induces heaviness of the head and a cold intempera-
ment. ‘This is owing to the hindrance of resolution which such
sleep brings about.

339. The waking state (1) disperses the matter, and so
increases the appetite and sense of hunger ; (2) disperses the
digestive power, and so impairs digestion.


During the waking state the body becomes hot exteriorly, cold and dry
interiorly (Joannitius).

Insomnia (lit. tossing about in bed), a state between watch-
fulness and sleep, is bad for all the bodily states.

340, Undue somnolence entails an imprisonment of the
innate heat, and makes the body become cold exteriorly. This
is why so many blankets are needed to keep the limbs warm
during sleep, which are not required in the waking state.

The indications furnished by somnolence, and its various


aspects, and states, will be fully dealt with in subsequent volumes,
Allah willing.


14. Tue Inrruence or Perrursations oF MInp.


341, Changing states of mind (nafs), and the associated
motions ”’ of the breath are either interior or exterior, sudden
or gradual.

When there is coldness interiorly, it moves outwards with the
breath ; hence if the breath were suddenly dispersed, the cold-
ness becomes excessive, and both exterior and interior cooling
occur, which may be followed by syncope or even death.

When there is coldness exteriorly, and heat interiorly, the
coldness moves inwards with the breath.

342, Great confinement of the breath, with both exterior
and interior cooling, results in severe syncope and even death.


¢


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 213


Movement of the breath. Direction. Associated emotion.
Sudden and forcible Expansion. | Outward | Anger.
Gentle and gradual 3 Outward | Delight and moderate joy.
Sudden and forcible. Contraction | Inward. Fear, terror.
Gentle and gradual. es Inward. Gloom (‘‘ contracted
heart “’) mental de
pression.


343. Confinement and dispersal of breath only occur
suddenly ; languishing of breath only develops by degrees.
By “languishing ” I mean a slowly progressive confinement or
coarctation of the breath. When I say ‘‘the nature declines,””*
I refer to a gentle, gradual, step by step dispersal of the vitality.

344. If two motions of the mind occur simultaneously,
the breath may move in two directions (contraction within itself,
and enlarging) at once.. This happens (1) when there is fear,
dread, and anxiety about the future. (2) when anger and gloom
occur simultaneously. The two opposite movements may pro-
duce a sense of shame, because there is first the confinement of
the breath in the interior parts, and after that the power of
reason returns, and resolution appears, allowing the contracted
breath to expand again, and bring heat to the surface. The skin
now becomes red.

345. Influence on the body of mental disturbances of a different
category. ‘The state of the mind of the parents affects the body
of the offspring ; as for instance, phantasies. As a rule, it is
some natural object which impresses the body. For instance,
some image of a boy pictured by both parents at the time of
conception may be realised in the infant when born ; or the
infant’s breath may have a “ colour ” very like the colour seen
(mentally) by the mother whilst the seminal fluid was flowing
into her at coitus, or by the father during the time of this flow.t
Many persons hate to believe such things, and suppose they
can understand the states of the body without having realised the
fundamental state. The physician who seeks wisdom does not


deny these and allied things.


* See footnote to 199 (ii). '

+ Superficially, the suggestion that conception is synchronous with coition
would seem an instance of medieval ignorance. Costaeus, in annotating on the
passage, accepts the opinion that a strong desire on the part of either parent to see
self or partner repeated and reproduced is capable of securing that the conception shall
yield a child in whom the desire is ultimately realized. Favourable patency of
the internal ducts (cervix, etc.), whether anatomically or emotionally, in association
with voluntary control of supposedly purely involuntary muscular tissue, are co-
operative factors whereby the above suggestion is not error but sometimes fact. The
law of jelal and jemal plays an important part which is ultimately, in due time,
manifested by the sex of the product of conception. Thus when the male is jelal


214 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


346. Other instances of the influence of the phantasy on
the bodily state : (a2) a movement of the mind which is intent on
considering red things induces a corresponding state of readiness
for a movement of the sanguineous humour. [Exanthems may
be associated with such a movement of sanguineous humour
(Costaeus)]. (b) energetic character: eating acrid things :
hardening of the teeth. (c) introspective character : dwelling
on aches and pains in the limbs : aches and pains in the limbs.
(d) timid character : fearing lest some imagined event should
happen: change of temperament corresponding. [Fear of
catching a certain complaint : actually developing the disease
(Costaeus)]. (e) hopeful disposition : rejoicing in the thought
of something one would like to realise : change of temperament
corresponding.


Dist rabits


15. THe InrLuence oF Foop anp Drink.


“Most illnesses, even those which lead the sufferer to the specialist, arise
solely from long-continued errors of diet and regimen.”


847, Food and drink influence the body in regard to (a)
quality ; (4) material composition ; (¢) ““substance”’ as a whole.
It is essential to define each of these three terms exactly.
(a) Influence in regard to quality—Heating and cooling
food and drink respectively make the body hot in virtue of
their own heat ; cold in virtue of their own coldness ; and
yet these qualities do not become an integral part of the body.
(2) Influence in regard to material composition.—The food
and drink in this case change from their own nature, so as to
receive the “form” of one or other of the human members
(tissues) ; and the matter of which the food is composed receives
the “form ”’ of the member, without losing its own dominant
primary quality right through the whole process of digestion


the product is female, and vice versa,—the jelal or jemal relating not only to physical
affection, but to ‘anguish of love’’ ; and the physiological cycles in the two organisms
have also to do with the chances of conception. The subject is dealt with more
particularly in the fourth Book, in a form which is only apparently obsolete.

The belief that maternal mental states affect the growing embryo, both
physically and psychically, is natural, though rejected by some physicians. It is
a valuable saying that ‘‘ we can control the attributes and thoughts of the offspring
and give it a far more valuable inheritance thereby than by any material fortune.”
It applies as an admonition to both parents.

“The woman produces an offspring like that being upon whom her thoughts
dwell at the time of conceiving.’”’—(Charaka-Samhita, ii. 704.)

By contemplating on beautiful scenes of nature, beautiful pictures, pious
persons, etc., the mother contributes to make her child beautiful and virtuous
and possessed of other desirable qualities (ib. 745)


The whole subject bears on the causation of deformities, or malconforma-
tions (496).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 2S


to the end of assimilation. Thus, the temperament of lettuce is
colder than that of the human body, and yet lettuce becomes
blood, and is thus capable of being converted into tissue. The
temperament of garlic is hotter than that of the human body and
it also becomes blood.

(c) Influence in regard to “‘ substance” as a whole.—The
specific “form.’’—This is an action according to what food
is in itself, as apart from its four primary qualities, and apart
from whether it becomes like the tissues or not, or apart from
whether the body becomes like to it or not. Matter does not
enter into action in virtue of its quality of action. But action
ensues in virtue of its matter when the matter is changed by a
transforming faculty in the body, from the substance it originally
possesses, and (1) first renews whatever has been used up in
the body, and so (2) increases the innate heat in the blood.
Then (3) the effect of the primary qualities which remain
in the food after that comes into play.

348. Action occurs in virtue of the substance when the
“form’”’ of its “species”’—resulting from its temperament
(for the elementary components are intermingled, and one
single thing emerges therefrom)—is made ready for receiving
the species ; a certain “form” is now super-added over and
above the form possessed by the primary qualities. But this
“form” is neither (1) the primary qualities of the matter,
nor (2) the temperament proceeding from those primary qualities.
This ‘‘ form ”’ is that perfection which the pattern of the ailment
receives according to its capacity, and its capacity is the out-
come of its temperament. Example: the attractive faculty
of the magnet ; the nature inherent in the various species of
plants and animals (the nature emerging from the temperament).
Nor is this “‘ form ”’ (3) any of the simple temperaments by them-
selves, for it is not hotness, moistness, dryness, or coldness,
either alone or in combination. _ Really speaking, it is some-
thing comparable with colour, odour, or intellect, soul, or some
other ‘‘ form” imperceptible by the senses.

349. The “form” which arises after the temperament
has formed may be perfected by passive action. In this case
the ‘‘ form” = “ passive property.’ But it may also exhibit
active perfection. In this case “‘ form” = “active property’
(active principle). This active property may be exerted upon
a human being, or it may not.

350. Any property may produce an effect on the human
body which is either desirable (useful, harmonious) or undesir-


216 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


able (inharmonious). Such an effect is not entirely derived
from its temperament ; it is also derived from the specific
“form,” over and above the temperament. Hence we speak of
such an effect as derived from the substance as a whole (that 1s,
the ‘‘ specific form ”’), and not from any of the primary qualities
or from a temperamental intermingling of the qualities. For
instance, the action of peony in annulling epileptic seizures 1s
desirable. The action of aconite in destroying human “ sub-
stance”? is an instance of undesirable action.
* * *


351. Returning from our digression, then, when we say
that a substance which is eaten or is introduced hypoder-
mically (e.g. by inunction) is “hot”? or “cold,” we mean
not only that it is so virtually (not actually), but that it is virtually
hotter or colder than are our bodies.

852. ‘‘ Power,” “‘ potentiality,” is a term with two kinds
of meaning. (a) It may be used in reference to the action of the
innate heat of the body upon it. As soon as the potentiality
encounters the action of the innate heat it submits to that, and so
becomes act.

(b) The word potentiality may also be considered in reference
to its utility or advantage to the body. Thus we say that
sulphur is hot in potentiality (“‘ virtually hot ’’).

853. When we say that a thing is hot or cold, we may mean
that one of the four imponderables is dominant in its tempera-
ment ; and we do not refer to the effect which it has on our
bodies.

354. We may say that a certain medicine has such and
such a potentiality, thereby meaning its utility or otherwise to
the body. Thus, a scribe who has stopped writing still has the
potentiality for writing. So we say that aconite has a destruc-
tive potentiality. In the one case, there is no act till after the
body has become evidently changed. In the other, the action
occurs at once, from the mere presence of the agent (e.g. viper
poison), or some time later, after it has undergone some certain
change in quality (e.g. aconite).

(c) Between these two potentialities there is a third—that
of poisonous medicaments.

* * *


?


8955, There are four orders of medicaments—whether eaten,
or taken in the fluid state, or whether given by inunction.

i. The first degree. The action of the quality of ‘a
medicament on the body is imperceptible to the senses. Thus,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 217


a warming or cooling effect is not perceived by the senses unless
it is given repeatedly, or in larger dose.

2. The second degree. A greater degree of action, without
perceptibly interfering with the functions of the body or changing


their natural course (excepting incidentally, or because given in
large doses).


3. The third degree. ‘There is evident interference with
function, but not markedly enough to produce breakdown or
death of tissue.


4. The fourth degree. Destruction or death of tissue is
produced. This is the degree produced by poisons. A poison
is lethal in all respects (that is, in all parts of its “‘ substance ’’).


§ 194. (Another classification would be (a) medicaments which produce
change without destruction of function or tissue, (b) those which actually destroy
function or tissue. In each case there are two degrees—one imperceptible to the
senses, the other plainly evident.—This is Galen’s grouping. The grouping into
four degrees still survives in the classification of burns.)

Substances which are definitely poisonous may be classified into four groups
as follows:

(1) Corrosives. These produce immediate and violent irritation. Ex.:
mineral acids, alkalis, corrosive sublimate.

(2) Ivvitants: (a) Metallic, such as lead, copper, arsenic, phosphorus ;
(b) Vegetable, such as drastic purgatives (aloes, colocynth, croton oil) ; (c) Animal,
such as cantharides. This group produces effects which simulate natural disease,
such as gastric and intestinal disease, peritonitis, abdominal catastrophe.

(3) Neurotics. Ex.: hydrocyanic acid and the cyanides, opium, strychnine,
aconite, belladonna.

(4) Gaseous. (a) Irritant: halogens, ammonia; (b) Anesthetics; (c) Coal-
gas, carbon monoxide, etc.

There is another group classifiable under 355, 1 and 2, exemplified by common
salt, which is injurious or even toxic in cases of kidney disease (141, p. 390) ; and by
those foods against which some persons have idiosyncrasies, or ‘‘ protein sensitive-
ness’ (shell-fish, fruits, etc.).


356. Fate of medicaments taken into the body.


A,—They are changed by the body (passive change).
(i.) The body itself is not changed nor restored to health


(a) Medicament changed into the likeness of the body - pure nutriment.
(b) Medicament changed, but not into the likeness :
of the body - = - - - - attempered medicine.


(ii.) The body itself is also changed (active action).
(a) Change in medicament produces change in body,
and interferes with or even arrests function.


(a) the change is into the likeness of the body - medicinal food.
(B) not into the likeness of the body - - - pure medicine.

(b) The change in the body continues till life is 7
destroyed - - - - - venomous medicine.


B.—They are not changed at all by the body, but they
produce a (deleterious) change in the body (active ;
action on the body) - - - - - pure poison,


¢


Ad. B.—In saying a medicament is ‘“‘ not changed by our
body ” we do not mean that it does not induce a formation of
heat in the body by affecting the innate heat, for, as a matter of
fact, most poisons only act on the body in that way, thereby


218 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


producing warmth. We mean that its “form” is not changed,
and that in consequence its power continues to influence the body
until the latter has destroyed the “‘ form.” For instance, if the
nature of the medicament be hot, its nature reinforces its pro-
perty of dispersing the breath. Examples: viper venom ,;
aconite. Again, if the medicament be cold, its nature rein-
forces its property by congealing or enfeebling the breath.
Ex. : scorpion venom, hyoscyamus (or, hellebore).

Ad. A. i.a.—Anything that is nutritious will eventually
change the temperament of the body, and in a natural manner.
It warms the body because when it becomes blood that is the
natural effect ; and the body becomes warmer. Lettuce and
gourds warm in this way. So in saying “warm” we do not
mean ‘‘ warm the ‘ form,’ ”’ but “‘ warm that which arises out of
its own intrinsic quality—the ‘ species’ remaining.”

Ad. A. ii. a.—Medicaments which are foods are altered by
the body first in quality, and later in ‘‘ substance.”’ This change
in quality may be in respect of heat, so that the medicament
warms (e.g. garlic) ; or it may be in respect of cold, so that the
body becomes cold (e.g. lettuce). Afterwards, when the
digestion and conversion into good blood has been completed,
the medicament produces warmth to the same extent to which it
has added to the volume of the blood, thereby increasing the
“substance” of the innate heat. How could it do otherwise
than furnish heat when it has itself been made hot, and its cold-
ness thereby abstracted ?

But even after the medicament has been changed in sub-
stance there still remains some of its innate quality (some hot,
some cold). ‘There is some of the coldness of the lettuce left in
the blood which has been made from the lettuce, and there is
some of the heat of the garlic left in the blood which the garlic
has given rise to. This holds good for a certain period of time.

357, Some nutrient medicines are medicinal in quality
rather than nutrient, and others are nutrient rather than medi-
cinal. Some of the latter are more like the ‘‘ substance ”’ of
blood in nature (e.g. wine, egg-yolk, meat-juice), and others are
less so (e.g. bread, meat) and others are entirely different to the
substance of the blood (medicinal foods).

Food changes the state of the body both in quality and
quantity. Changes in quality have been discussed.

358. Changes in quantity are in two directions. Either the
nutriment increases in the body until there is an aversion to
food ; obstructions therefore arise, and putrescence results.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 219


Or it diminishes in amount until the body wastes away, and the
tissues dry up.

An increase in amount of nutriment is always cooling in
effect unless decomposition supervenes in it, so giving rise to
warmth. This warmth, due to putrescent changes, is extran-
eous ; for such changes [in the superfluous nutriment] are the
means by which extraneous heat [as opposed to innate heat}
enters the body.


359. CLassIFICATION OF Foop-Srurrs.


(This passage is arranged in tabular form).


Texture of Nutritious


Bhdcinent: quality. Name of Aliment. Notes.
Rich. Meat juice, wine. These are considered rich
Eggs (raw or lightly in nutriment because
cooked). most of their substance
Rea pecdace Pottage. is utilized by the body.
a Poor. Potherbs. These are attempered in
: Juleb. substance and quality.
Fruits (matian, pome-
granates, and the like).
Rich, Hard-boiled eggs ; veal.
Dense ;
(i.e., thicken Poor. Cheese, salted meat, These are considered poor
the plood). egg-plant and the like. in mnutriment because


only a small portion of
them becomes blood.


360. ARRANGED ACCORDING To QuaLity oF CHYME.


1, Making good chyine: egg-yolk, wine ; meat-juice, are highly nutritious ;
they are attenuated.
Lettuce, matian, and pomegranate are feebly nutritious. These
are attenuated.
Boiled eggs, year-old lamb are highly nutritious. These are dense
Ailebe <tunes
2. Making bad chyme: newly-killed meat of sucklings, pheasant, partridge,
lung; these are highly nutritious, and attenuated.
Radish, mustard, and many other kitchen-herbs ; these are nutrit-
ious, and attenuated.
Veal, duck, horseflesh ; these are highly nutritious, and dense in
texture.
Salt meat is feebly nutritious and dense in texture.


It will be easy to find the foods which occupy an inter-
mediate position between the attenuated and densely textured


foods.


§ 195. The study of food should include the following aspects.
(1) Digestibility. This depends on the density or tenuity of
texture of the food-stuff, as well as on the materials with which it is


220 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


associated. Thus the more fat-content, or fat-addition (from foods
combined with it). the less digestible, because the less permeable.
Again, digestibility may be completely removed by so simple a
procedure as taking certain liquids (among them, pure water) at
an unsuitable time after digestion has begun, or liquids which are
incompatible with certain foods before digestion, or in a state of
partial digestion. Avicenna’s conception of the gastric contents as a
broth”? or ‘‘ emulsion ”’ is legitimate, and if these contents are
“torn off’ the mucosa by foods or fluids taken after the digestion
of the meal has got under way, the whole process may stop beyond
power of renewal. The same holds good for the process in the small
intestine. This idea, ruling in the Canon, can be verified by anyone
in his daily experience.—Palatability has to do with digestibility.

(2) Assimilability. This depends on the kind of chyme which
will result. 4

(3) Nutritive value. This, according to the Canon, will depend
on the kind of ‘‘ humour ” which the food yields ; how much residue
it leaves (therefore, whether constipating or relaxing). Thus we
have the classification of foods, according as they (1) enrich the blood:
cereals ; dairy produce, such as soft boiled eggs, milk; fleshmeat ;
fowl; certain vegetables. (2) Enrich the serous humour: mutton,
pork, one-year lamb, the potherbs atriplex and purslane. (3) In-
crease the amount of bile made, or excite a flow of bile: chicken,
fish with few scales and agile in habits, the potherbs garlic, mustard,
nasturtium. (4) Increase the amount of atrabilious humour:
goatflesh, newly-killed meat, cabbage, lentils. In each class there
would be subdivisions according to the digestibility—whether
digestible within two hours, or four hours, or later.

(4) Physiological value. This is a more general aspect, in that
the other aspects contribute to its assessment. The old division of
foods into proteins, carbohydrates, fats, salts, water is not necessarily
to be rejected in favour of the modern division of foods according to
energy-values, heat values, and ‘‘ accessory factors.’”” Chemical
analysis of foods suffers from the fallacy that the substances so found
do not exist as such in the food—a statement based on the same
principle as will be discussed more carefully under the subject of
““drugs.”’ Moreover, were these substances present as such, they
certainly do not circulate in the body, or function in the tissue cells
in the chemical form found under artificial conditions. Physiological
values may be assessed according to whether an ash is left in the
tissues after oxidation or not. Thus, body-building foods leave
an ash, heat generating foods do not. The important matter is the
formation of ash, because of the risk of this lingering in the body, or
even becoming firmly imprisoned in its tissues. Foods may also be
studied in regard to their depurative properties, according to their
alkalinity or acidity, etc. See also 768, 773, 795, and §§ 248-252.

Thus there are other considerations than the popular ones of
work-production, and the practical objects which rule properly only
in the management of domestic animals. :


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 221


16. Tue Various Kinps or Drinxinc Water.


Note the very great importance which the Moors attached to proper water-
supply. Having been accustomed to the life of the desert, they appreciated the value
of water better than any other peoples.


361. Water is the only one of the elements which has the
special property of entering into the composition of food and
drink—not that it is itself nutriment (although it will by itself
prolong life for some time), but rather that it enables the aliment
to penetrate into the human body and permeate and purify its
substance.

We do not wish to imply that water does not nourish at all,
but we mean that it is not, as nutriment is, potential blood giving
rise ultimately to tissue-substance. As an elementary sub-
stance, it is not changed in state in such a way as to become able
to receive the “form” of blood or of tissue. ‘This can only
occur with a true compound.

362. Water is really a “‘ substance ” which helps to make
aliment fluid and attenuated, so that it can flow easily into the
blood-vessels and out of the excretory channels. Nutrition
cannot be effected without it ; it is the handmaid of nutrition.


There is much to be said as to the part played by water in the
economy. Though apparently simple, its chemical structure is


222 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


complex. It is a mixture of units of varying molecular complexity,
each unit being called a ‘‘ hydrone.” The number of molecules of
hydrone and polyhydrones constantly varies, even at steady tempera-
tures, so that equilibrium regarding them is easily disturbed. The
foreign matter always present in the water of Nature is essential to
life, assimilation being only possible in virtue of such constituents.
Apart from this, water is essential to metabolism—absorption,
digestion (enzyme action depends on it), osmosis, temperature
regulation, the maintenance of the salt concentration of the blood
at a constant level. The necessary reservoir of water in the tissues
is furnished by the muscular tissues, and their depletion has
serious consequences (502, § 274-279), and their repletion entails
important interference with the physiological functions. It may be
noted however, that the idea that plentiful consumption of water
“‘ flushes ’’ organisms out of the body is not reliable. (Hemmeter,
Med. Rec., May 22, 1920.)


363. The various kinds of water differ (1) not merely in
the substance of aquosity, but (2) in admixed matters, (3) their
own individual dominant primary qualities.

364. ‘The best water is that from springs, provided they
arise in places uncontaminated by extraneous qualities. Waters
from rocky places are only good if they are not admixed with
earthy matters of putrescible nature which might cause the
water to putresce. Spring water from the open ground 1s
healthier than water from a rocky place, provided it is flowing.
But not all flowing water is good ; it must be also exposed to the
sun and winds. Water acquires nobility from the region
whence it flows.

365. Stagnant water is not as bad in quality when exposed
to the air as when it is deep underground. Yet running water is
not necessarily exposed to the air ; it is only so when it breaks
out from underground and flows out over the soil. Note, too,
that water running over soil is more wholesome than that which
runs over stones, because the soil cleanses it by filtering off the
admixed extraneous matters in a way which stones do not. But
the soil must be open to the sky ; it must not be fetid or boggy
or nitrous, or the like, for should a large volume of water flow
rapidly over such soil, the admixed matters would pass into its
own nature. If the direction of the flow were eastwards, and
in summer, it would then be reputed as better in quality, especi-
ally the further away from its source it is collected. Such water
readily becomes warm or coldin the body. ‘The next best water
is that which runs northwards. Such water passes slowly
through the stomach and is indigestible, and becomes warm or
cold in the body only slowly. Water which runs westwards or


THE CANON OF MEDICINE n0r3


southwards is bad, especially if the winds are southerly at the
time.

366. Water which comes from high regions and has other
good qualities is more healthy. It is sweet, as it were. It will
not bear being mixed with wine except in small amount, and
unless the wine is light. It quickly becomes cold and quickly
warm because its “‘ substance ”’ is attenuated. That is why it is
cold in winter and warm in summer. It is tasteless and has no
odour. It passes out rapidly as urine, because whatever there
is in it which requires digestion is rapidly digested and dispersed.

367. You must note that the quickest way of assessing the
quality of a water is by its weight. Light water is healthier in all
respects. The weight may be ascertained by measure or by
means of the following procedure. Soak a linen cloth of like
weight in each of two waters to be tested. Dry thoroughly.
Weigh. The water belonging to the cloth which is lighter is


the more satisfactory.


The characters of pure watery, therefore, are: (1) Aspect: limpid,*? clear,
pellucid, “ diaphana.’’** (2) Taste: tasteless, or “ sweet,’’*? pleasant to drink,
and refreshing. (3) Odour: none. (4) Touch: soft, or gentle*?; cool.*? (5) Other
properties ; weight (367) ; vegetables boil quickly in it; the place from which it


,


is obtained is neither too hot nor too cold; “‘ fertilizing’


and ‘‘ calm ’’ (Honen*?,
Pp. 633); passes out of the body quickly (366).


368. Purification of water. Bad water may be purified by
sublimation and distillation. If that is not feasible, boiling will
suffice, for boiled water, as the learned know, is less likely to
cause inflammation and passes more rapidly through the body.
Ignorant persons believe that when water is boiled the attenuated
part is dispersed, and that therefore it is made denser ; hence
they think it is better not to boil water. But as you know, the
very nature of “‘ water’ means that its particles are alike in
attenuation and density. It is pure, simple [in the scholastic
sense], and will not thicken by boiling except in virtue of a cold
quality being dominant in it, and of earthy particles being
plentiful in it, which, although extremely minute, are not easily
separated out or precipitated. They are not plentiful enough
to break the continuity of the water and are too small to separate
out by standing. Hence they are bound to remain admixed
with the substance of the water. Boiling removes the density
which the quality of coldness produced ; the particles of water
are then forcibly rarefied and the substance of the water becomes
more and more rare, until the heavy earthy particles hitherto
suspended burst loose and fall down and sink to the bottom.
A nearly quite pure water remains behind.


biply! THE CANON OF MEDICINE


369. That which has been separated by the distillation is
like (or very nearly like) in texture to that which remains behind,
for the particles of the water which has been distilled off are of the
same tenuity as the particles of that which remains. The
process of boiling does not attenuate or rarefy water directly ;
it does so only because it allows the cold quality to aggregate,
after which the admixed matter settles out. The proof of this is
that if a thick water be left to stand for a long time, hardly
anything settles out of it, but as soon as one boils it there is an
abundant precipitate and the water becomes light and clear,
because the boiling has made it rarefied. So, too, have you not
noticed that the waters of such a big river as the Jihon,* especially
if collected a long way from its source, are very muddy at the
time, but in a short time suddenly clarify by sedimentation, and
if you pour off the cleat water and leave that standing, practically
nothing settles out of it F

370. Some people praise Nile water very highly. They
enumerate four virtues in it : (1) the length of time which has
elapsed since it left its source ; (2) the good character of the soil
of the countries through which it travels ; (3) the fact that it runs
from due south to due north, so that a continual rarefaction of its
waters is taking place ; (4) the incredibly enormous volume of
the water pouring into it.

371. If one should pour bad water every day from one
vessel to another, one would see as much deposit on the last day
as on the first. There is so little deposit during a day that it
never clarifies properly. The reason 1s that the admixed earthy
particles easily separate out from rarefied matter, for that is free
of heaviness, viscosity or oiliness, but not so easily from dense
matter. Boiling increases the rarefaction and so do the shaking-
movements incident to ebullition.


COMMENDABLE WATERS.


372. Rain water is the best of waters, especially when it
falls during summer or during a thunderstorm. (Others say the


* The river Jihon, or Oxus (modern Amu Darya), is one of the great rivers of
Central Asia. It runs through the country of Khorasan, between Samarcand and
the country called Bactria, as stated in the Glossary to the Venice edition.of the
Canon. Arising in the enormous glaciers of the mountainous ranges between East
Turkestan and Afghanistan, and receiving important tributaries from the northern
slopes of the Hindu Kush, it emerges into open country, being here bounded by
Bokhara on the north. It varies from 1,000 yards to a mile in width in this region,
and the stream flows from 2$ to 5 miles an hour. It empties into the Sea of Aral.
So great a river would naturally be prized by the Persians, who regarded it as the
equal of the Nile. The fact that the great trade route of Central Asia from Khorasan
to China joined this river in the above-mentioned region made it well-known to
Avicenna, though virtually unknown to Europe until 200 years later, when Marco
Polo and his companions entered this country.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 22%


rain which falls in the spring, and that which falls during winter
are best, then that which falls during the fruit season, whereas
that which falls in summer is worst.] Rain falling during
stormy weather is very polluted and impure in nature, for at this
time the violent winds agitate those clouds whence the rain comes.

373, Rainwater readily undergoes putrescence in spite of
being called laudable. This is because it is so rarefied that cor-
ruptible terrene matter and air quickly act upon it and set up
decomposition in it; the humours of the body therefore undergo
putrescence, and obstructions arise in the chest and the voice
becomes husky.

374, Some say that the reason for the putrescence is
that rain water is formed from the vapours which evaporate off
from various kinds of moisture. But were this the case, rain
water would not be laudable but uncommendable, and that is not
so. The real reason is that the substance of rain water is very
rarefied and tenuous, and when a substance is tenuous it has
more receptivity (and is therefore liable to putrescence). But if
boiled promptly, this risk of putrescence is lessened. (Aegineta
adds : rain water is very light, sweet and limpid ; it is tenuous
because it has been drawn up by the heat of the sun, and there-
fore only the lightest particles of sea-water, lake-water enter into
it). Rain water is soft to the touch.

375. Well water and water conveyed along aqueducts.
These are of bad quality as compared with spring water, because
they are confined and have been exposed to earthy matter for a
long time, and consequently cannot help being to some extent
putrescent. For in the process of being drawn, they are shaken
up by the power entailed (that is, by the mechanical contrivances
used) or by the influence of gravity rendered possible by the
slope of the channel. Of such waters those which are conveyed
by leaden pipes are more harmful, because they acquire certain
properties from the lead, and this makes them liable to bring on
a form of dysentery.

376. Snow water and water from melted ice. ‘These ate
coarse in texture. When pure and free from admixture with
deleterious substances, such water is good and healthy ; it 1s also
useful for cooling water, either by placing such water in it, or by
adding it to the water. *’ There is little difference in the visible
character of these two kinds of water ; but they are denser in
texture than other kinds of water [because the finest particles are
squeezed out by the freezing (Aegineta)]. ‘This kind of water
is harmful for persons suffering from neuritis. Boiling renders


Q


226 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


such water wholesome. If ice water be made of bad water or if
the snow has attracted some bad property from the places upon
which it has fallen, it would be better to use water free of such
injurious admixture.


River water was preferred before others by Rhazes; Aetius preferred Nile


water to all others (see 370). :
Spring water: the qualities vary according to whether the water comes from
north, south, east or west (Hippocrates).


Non-CoMMENDABLE WATERS.


377. Marshy water: This is of worse quality than well
water because it stays a long time putrefying in the channels of
the decomposing earth, and diffuses out and moves up very
slowly, and then not by its own power, for it is so rich in (alluvial)
matter. Moreover, it only occurs in decomposing decaying
earth. Well-water on the other hand is cleansed by contact
with that which separates out from it and by the gases which
bubble up out of it, thereby keeping it in constant (molecular)
movement. Well-water does not remain in a confined state long
and does not linger in the channels and openings of the earth.

378. Stagnant water: Water in reedy marshes. This is
unhealthy and heavy, especially if in exposed situations, for these
do not become cold in winter unless and only in so far as snow
happens to fallon them. They therefore give rise, in the body,
to serous humour. In summer, the sun makes them hot and so
they putresce and then they will give rise, in the body, to bilious
humour. ‘There are three reasons why they cause disease :
(1) their inspissated character ; (2) admixture with earthy
matter ; (3) dispersion of their subtile particles.

379. The following are the diseases liable to develop after
drinking such water : (a) diseases of the spleen. These result
in heaping up of the viscera and stretching of the peritoneum—
the belly being hard and tense ; wasting of the arms, legs and
neck—for the nutrition fails because of the state of the spleen
despite the excessive appetite and thirst ; constipation ; vomit-
ing is difficult to induce. (b) dropsy : from retention of the
water. (c) inflammatory deposits in the lung and spleen. (d)
dysenteric ailments, with the result that the hands and feet
become dry, and the liver becomes enfeebled and nutrition is
impaired. (e) quartan fevers (in summer). (f) piles, varices,
lax swellings of inflammatory nature, insanity (especially in
winter).

880. The effect of such water on women. Conception and
parturition are both difficult. The offspring will be male and


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 227


will be liable to develop inflammatory masses and then waste
away.—Moles are liable to occur because impregnation is often
faulty ; the offspring is found to have rupture.—Varicose veins
and ulcers of the leg ; these heal with difficulty. The appetite
increases and there is constipation leading to intestinal ulceration.
Quartans are common.

381. Effect on old persons. ‘‘ Ardent ”’ fevers occur, as
accords with the dryness of their nature, and of the stomach.

382. All stagnant waters, from whatever source, are
injurious to the stomach.

383. Channel water. This is very like stagnant water, but
is healthier because it does not linger so long in one spot. If it
is not actually flowing, this was because of some heaviness in it.
In many of these waters (i.e. including water in aqueducts, water
in irrigation channels) there is a certain stypticity, and they
quickly warm the interior organs. Hence they are not utilisable
in cases of fever or for persons in whom the bilious humour is
predominant. They are more applicable for cases of disease
where the treatment is to foster retention and maturation.

384, Waters containing metallic substances. ‘These are
injurious, though in some cases there is a certain value in them.
Thus, ferruginous waters impart strength to the internal organs,
prevent stomach trouble, and stimulate the appetite. They
resolve the spleen and are beneficial for those who cannot cohabit
properly.

‘Waters containing salts of ammonia are aperient, and
carminative. ‘They may be either swallowed as a drink or given
as an enema, or used in a sitz-bath.

Waters containing alum suppress excessive menstruation
and haemoptysis and the bleeding of piles. But they render
persons who are liable to take fevers still more liable to develop
them.

385. Waters in which leeches live. ‘These are injurious.

386. Salt water. This makes the body dry up and
become wasted. Its abstersive power makes it first laxative,
and afterwards constipating—because dry in nature. It
decomposes the blood and so_ gives rise to pruritus and
*“ scabies.”’

387. Acetous watery-added to rain water which has to be
consumed arrests putrefactive changes in the water and provides
immunity from such ill-effects.

888. Milky wazer gives rise to calculus and obstructions,
Hence one should make use of diuretics after it. In fact, one


228 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


should take diuretics after drinking any coarse and heavy waters,
because they linger in the bowel. Fatty and sweet things (e.g.
theriacs) are also correctives for such water. The fact that
milky water brings on constipation makes it of value for some
persons. eyes

389. Cold water.—Water which is only moderately cold
is more healthy than all others, because it stimulates the appetite
and strengthens the stomach. Nevertheless it weakens the
nerves and is harmful for cases of inflammatory disease in the
interior organs.

(Very cold water should be taken after food and then only
in small quantity (Aegineta).]

390. Tepid water incites nausea.

Warm water (that is, water which isa little warmer than tepid
water), taken on an empty stomach, is cleansing both to stomach
and intestines. But it has a weakening effect on the stomach if
taken often.

Hot waiter is beneficial for the following conditions :

(a2) Head: “cold’’ headache; inflammation of the eye ;
parotitis, quinsies; “‘ dry” gums ; postauricular inflammations.
Mental conditions—epilepsy and ‘“ melancholia.”

(2) Chest : asthma, solutions of continuity in the thorax ;
ulcers of the diaphragm.

(c) General: rheumatic pains. Dhiuresis. It relieves
painful micturition.

(d7) Female ailments : it evokes menstruation.

Hot water interferes with digestion and makes the food
swim about in the stomach. It does not quench thirst. It may
lead to dropsy, and hectic fever, and emaciation.

Very hot water is of great value in colic ; it also disperses
flatulence.

391. derated waters: these are useful for certain in-
temperaments.

When various kinds of water, good and bad, are com-
mingled, their effect varies according to which proves dominant.

392, Correction of impure water: ‘The correction of impure
water 1s specially referred to under “‘ regimen for travellers ’?—


see 891.


Note also the following, from Aegineta: (1) add decoction of chick-peas ;
(2) boil wild carrots with some small fish and fennel; (3) beet, gourds, salts and
diluted wine. Marshy, saltish and bituminous water should be strained, Fetid
smelling waters should be boiled or mixed with wine.

When good and bad waters are mingled, the stronger dominates.


Other matters relative to water and its properties and


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 229


modes of action will be discussed in the chapter on “‘ Water as
one of the simples’ in Book II—Allah permitting.


17. THe Resutts or RETENTION AND EvacuatIon.*


393. The following are the causes of retention of waste
matters : (1) weak expulsive faculty, (2) unduly strong retentive
faculty : the latter occurs in (2) weakness of digestive power, so
that aliments remain too long in the stomach, the natural reten-
tive faculty holding them back till they are sufficiently digested,
(5) narrowness and (c) obstruction of the channels, (¢) coarseness
or viscidity of the waste matters. ‘The former holds in the case
of (a) superabundance of the waste matters, so that the expulsive
faculty cannot deal with them, (2) insufficient informing sense for
defecation, this act being aided by voluntary effort. The result
may be that the effete matter is (compensatorily) removed to
other parts of the body by the action of the vegetative faculties.
Thus jaundice follows [gall-stone] colic ; the colic depends on
the retention, the jaundice is the compensatory evacuation.
Again, at the crisis of a fever, there may be retention of urine
and faeces, and a critical evacuation occurs elsewhere.

394, Diseases consequent upon retention of waste matters.—
{i) Compositional : constipation, diarrhoea or laxity of the
bowels, spasmus humidus and the like ; inflammatory processes ;
furuncles. (ii) [temperaments : septic conditions ; imprison-
ment of the innate heat, or mutation of this into igneity. There
may be so marked a coarctation that the innate heat is extin-
guished altogether, and coldness of the body supervenes, with
the transference of too much moisture to the surface of the body.
(iii) General conditions : tearing or rupture of locular spaces and
crypts.
When repletion (as from great plenty during fertile years)
develops after a long period of inanition (as from times of great
famine, in barren years), it is one of the most effective causes of
such illnesses.

395.—The causes of the evacuation (depletion) of matters
which are normally retained. (1) Vigorous expulsive faculty,
(2) defective retentive faculty, (3) unfavourable quality of the
matter: (a) too heavy, because superabundant, (4) too distending
owing to flatulent action, (c) corrosive and acrid in quality,
(d) attenuation of texture making it too mobile and too easily
expelled, (4) widening of the excretory channels. This occurs
in the case of the seminal flow. It also occurs if they are torn


* Cf., repletion and depletion (442, 497, 502).


2.30 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


longitudinally or transversely, or because their orifices become
too patent (in epistaxis) from either extraneous or interior
causes.

396.—The possible effects of evacuation of this type are :

(1) The temperament becomes cold, because the matter is
lost which would otherwise increase that which maintains the
innate heat. (2) The temperament becomes hot, if the evacuated
material is cold in temperament, like serous humour or mucus.
(3) The temperament becomes equable like blood, if there is
undue accumulation of the heating bilious humour, so that the
heat becomes superabundant. (4) The temperament becomes.
dry. This is always intrinsic in origin. (5) The temperament
becomes moist in a manner analogous to that mentioned in
regard to accidental increase in the body-heat. Namely, either
the evacuation of desiccant body-fluid has not been too great, or
the innate heat is too scanty, with the result that the aliment is not
adequately digested, and serous humour becomes relatively
increased, Buta moist temperament of this kind is unfavourable
to the maintenance of the innate heat, and foreign heat will not
serve as a substitute for innate heat, because of the difference of
its nature.

397. The effect of excessive evacuations on the members
of the body.—(1) Coldness and dryness of their substance and
nature ensue, even though they receive extraneous heat, and
moisture beyond their need. (2) Diseases : obstruction of the
vessels due to undue dryness and narrowing of the veins.
Convulsions and tetanic spasms may therefore arise.

398. When retention and evacuation are equally matched,


and occur at the proper times, they are beneficial, and maintain
the health.


§196. Venery. Coitus——Galen placed this in the first rank among the obli-
gatory causes of disease, but most physicians group it partly under “ exercise,’ and
partly under “ evacuations ’’ (excretions).

_ ,__ It causes “dryness’’ of the body; weakens the vegetative faculties; in-
frigidates (usually). Sometimes the concomitant emotional excitement entails
a heating effect. (JoANNITIUS),


Having now given a general description of the obligatory
causes of disease, we proceed to the facultative causes.


B. 18. FACULTATIVE CAUSES OF DISEASE.


We now come to causal agents, not necessarily injurious,
to which the body is not inevitably exposed. They cannot be
classified either as natural or as contrary to nature. They
influence the body from without. Excluding the atmosphere, to


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 232


which one is necessarily exposed, such agents are referred to as
baths, friction, and the like.

399. Influences on the human body from without act
in these ways :


I. By penetration into the body (400-414)
(2) Attenuated matter in the pores enters the body by its
own penetrative power.
(2) The tissues themselves draw it in through the pores.
(c) One of these factors assists the other.


II. The primary quality of the agent itself is able to
produce a change in the body. (415-481.) There are three
aspects of such a quality :


(1) It may be actual, e.g., an epitheme of cooling
character ; a plaster which is calefacient.

(11) It may be potential. Here the innate heat stirs up
the power into actuality.

(111) A specific property.

III. Things acting in both ways (a) producing a harmful
effect both externally and internally. (6) Harmful when applied
externally, but not when taken internally ; and vice versa.

Example of an agent which affects the body when applied
externally, but harmless when taken by the mouth: onions
applied as a plaster cause ulceration ; as food, they are harmless.
Example of an agent of a contrary kind : white lead. This is a
virulent poison when swallowed, but is harmless when applied
as an ointment.

Explanation of this. —(1) When a substance like onions is
taken as food, the alterative faculty breaks it up and changes its
temperament into a weaker one, until it 1s too weak to exert a
harmful influence. Hence there is no internal ulceration.
(2) When taken as food, such a substance is usually admixed
with other foods. (3) Its power is broken by being submerged
in the other moist substances present in the alimentary canal.
(4) A substance applied externally can be kept in one spot, but
when it is within the stomach it is kept moving about. (5) A
substance applied externally is usually applied very tightly and
closely, whereas within the body it is only just in contiguity
without any adhesion. (6) When a substance is taken internally,
its own natural power determines the quick accomplishment of
digestion and quickly expels the excess lett after the bulk has
been converted into good blood.

The reason why the action of white lead is different is that


232 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


white lead is of gross nature and is made of coarse particles.
Hence it cannot penetrate into the channels of the body from
without, and even if it did enter the skin it would not reach as far
as the channels of the breath or the principal organs. Taken in
by the mouth the matter is different, for then its poisonous
nature is at once brought out by the influence of the innate
heat upon it. Such an interaction could not take place ex-


ternally.
We shall probably refer to these considerations again, in


the Book of Simples. (Book IT).


BALNEOLOGY
I


19. Batus. Friction. ExposuRE To THE SUN.


§ 197. Pornts RELATIVE TO WATER-BATHS.


The bath-rooms: temperature of the air in the different rooms (temperate, warm,
hot, cool) ; mural decorations.
The bath-man.
The bath itself :
Quantity of water: fulltoimmersion; partial; sitz, etc.
Temperature of water: hot, tepid, cold.
Duration of stay in the bath: long, short, medium.
Kinds of water employed.
Intrinsic quality (cooling, moistening, etc.)
The person bathing : relation to food : fasting or hungry ; immediately after a meal ;
soon after a meal; at the end of the first stage of digestion.
State of the skin: dry, moist ; dropsical.
State of the humours and their quality (cold, immatured).
Frequency of bathing.
Season for open-air bathing.
Effects of the bath:
On respiration.
On pulse.
On innate heat.
On the strength (relaxing effects ; syncope ; impotence).
On the humours: helping maturation; drawing to surface; diverting super-
fluities to different parts,
On the quality of the body; dry, cold, moist.
On the general nutrition: making the body thin, stout, or weak.
Special purposes of the bath. Treatment of hectic fevers; for affections of the
stomach and spleen, etc,


400. Some say that bath-houses should be ancient fine
buildings, with vaults and arches, and roomy, airy, spacious
galleries, and furnished with sweet water. Others mention that
the bath-men should arrange the degree of heat to suit the tem-
perament of the bather.


§ 198.—The bath-house, the hammam, of Arabian life, agrees in
manner with that described among the ancients (e.g. the Romans).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 233


In Lane’s notes to the “ Arabian Nights,” he gives the following
description :—‘‘ The public bath comprises several apartments, with
mosaic or tessellated pavements, composed of white and black
marble, and pieces of fine red tile, and sometimes other materials.
The inner apartments are covered with domes, having a number of
small, round, glazed apertures, for the admission of light. The
first apartment is the disrobing room (mas/akh, or stripping-place :
Burton). (Tepidarium, because the air is tepid.) In the centre of this
is a fountain of cold water. Next the walls are wide benches or plat-
forms, encased with marble. These are furnished with mattresses and
cushions for the higher and middle classes, and with mats for the
poorer sort. The inner division of the building occupies nearly a
square : the central or chief portion of it is the principal apartment, or
hararah, which generally has the form of a cross. In its centre is a
fountain of hot water, rising from a base encased with marble, which
serves as a seat. One of the angles of the square is occupied by the
ante-chamber of the hararah. A second angle has the fire and the
boiler over it. A third angle has a small chamber, containing
a tank of warm water fed by a spout in the dome (cf. calidarium).
The fourth angle has two taps side by side, one hot, one cold. A
small trough is beneath, and before that is a seat (cf. frigidarium).
The inner apartments are heated by the steam rising from the
fountain and tanks and by the contiguity of the fire. The chamber
of the first-named angle is not as hot as the hararah, and has a
door intervening. This chamber is used for disrobing in cold
weather.

“In their atmosphere, the four apartments of the Hammam
represent the four seasons—Autumn and Summer, and Winter and
Spring.” (Night 452).

*“ The bather enters the hararah wearing wooden clogs, a large
napkin round the loins, a second round the head like a turban,
a third over the chest, and a fourth covering the back. The attendant
removes the towels except the first, and proceeds to crack the joints
of his fingers and toes, and several of the vertebrae of the back and
neck; kneads his flesh, and rubs the soles of his feet with a coarse
earthen rasp, and his limbs and body with a woollen bag which
covers his hand like a glove. After which the bather plunges
into the tank. He is then thoroughly washed with soap and water,
and fibres of the palm-tree, and shaved, if he wish it, in the fourth
chamber. Then he returns to the antechamber, and here he gener-
ally reclines upon a mattress, dnd takes some light refreshment,
while one of the attendants rubs the soles of his feet, and kneads
the flesh of his body and limbs, previously to resuming his dress.
During this period of rest, a pipe and a cup of coffee is often taken.
The operations in the antechamber are the ‘ restorative friction’
of the text and of Greek and Roman baths. Before the dress is
resumed, oils or ointments are rubbed in, and fragrant powders
sprinkled on the skin.”


234 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Rooms in the private baths of the Alhambra Palace. (a) The Sultan’s bath.
Through the archway on the left is seen (b) the Calidarium. The ‘‘rest-room ”’ of
the same suite is shown as an “‘ initial ’’ to 751.


§ 199.—Sir Thomas Arnold, in his recently published work,
‘“‘ Painting in Islam,’’!°? (1928, p.88) quotes some medical authors
who speak of the propriety of mural decorations in the rest-room.
(2) The ideal bath ‘‘ should contain pictures of high artistic merit
and great beauty, representing pairs of lovers, gardens, beds of
flowers, fine galloping horses and wild beasts, for pictures such as
these are potent in strengthening the powers of the body, whether
animal, natural, or spiritual.’’ (6) ‘‘ All physicians, sages, and wise
men are agreed that the sight of beautiful pictures gladdens and
refreshes the soul, and drives away from it melancholic thoughts
and suggestions, and strengthens. the heart more than anything
else can do, because it rids it of all evil imaginings.” (c) “ Beau-
tiful pictures in bright, cheerful colours. These they divide into
three kinds since they knew that there are three vital principles
in the body—the animal, the spiritual and the natural. Accordingly
they painted pictures of each kind, so as to strengthen each one of
these potentialities; for the animal power they painted pictures
of fighting and war and galloping horses, and the snaring of wild
beasts. For the spiritual power, pictures of love and of reflection
of the lover on his beloved, and pictures of their mutual recrimina-
tions and reproaches, and of their embracing one another; and
for the natural power, gardens and beautiful trees and bright flowers.”
(Z) ““ When in a beautiful picture harmonious colours such as
yellow, red and green, are combined with a due proportion in their
respective forms, then the melancholy humours find healing, and the
cares that cling to the soul of man are expelled, and the mind gets
rid of its sorrows, for the soul becomes refined and ennobled by the
sight of such pictures.”’


THE CANON OF MEDICINE an5


401. Natural action of the bath. The air of the bathroom
has a warming action, the water of the bath has a moistening
effect on the body. The first change in the body is to cool and
moisten ; the second is to warm and moisten ; the third is to
make the body warm and dry. It is useless to listen to those who
assert that water taken internally does not moisten the interior
tissues.

402. Changes and later effects of the bath. These are (a)
accidental, (4) essential.

1. Cold air bath.—This disperses the innate heat greatly,
and so dries the substance of the tissues. It disperses the natural
(normal) fluids very greatly, though it increases the extraneous
fluids.

2. Very hot water bath.—The pores close ; there is goose-
flesh. The moisture does not enter the body, and there is not
much dispersal of the innate heat. But the water sometimes adds
to the warmth of the body and sometimes cools it. To have the
former effect, the water must be very hot.

3. Subtepid bath.—This cools and moistens the body. As
the water cools down, the air of the bathroom becomes less
warm, and the effect of the cooling in both directions to which the
body is now exposed is to contract the abdominal viscera.


Cold bath—When taken while fasting, it imparts warmth and moisture. If
taken after a meal, it will make the body cold, and remove moisture.

Hot bath.—When taken while fasting, it is attenuant and refrigerant and does
not impart moisture. If taken after a meal, the bath is heating and moistens the
body.—(Hippocrates.)

Warm bath.—This relieves lassitude, is soothing, and has a warming and
softening effect. It dispels plethora, and removes flatulence from wherever it may
have lodged. It favours sleep, and promotes digestion.—(Haly Abbas.) It opens
the pores. It induces plumpness of the body. It is beneficial for all—men, women,
young, old, rich, poor. The best time for it is before food, and after exercise.—
(Aegineta.)


408. The frequent use of sucha bath will have a refrigerant
effect. ‘This is because (i) water is fundamentally cold in nature,
and even warming of it will not ensure continuance of the
“accidental ’”’ (scholastic significance) heat, the natural quality
remaining, and this natural coldness enters the body and makes it
cold. (ii) Whether hot or cold, water is still “wet,” and wets the
body (interiorly), so, imparting much moisture, it binds the
innate heat even to the degree of extinction.* Consequently
the body becomes cold.

Such a bath may have a warming effect if (a) the aliment
previously taken has not yet digested, (4) there is a cold humour


* As water quenches fire,


236 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


present in the body which is not yet completely matured. For
the bath will help the digestion of the aliment, and the maturation
of the humour.

404, State of skin at the time of the bath.—If the skin be dry
at the time of the bath, dropsy or relaxed conditions would be
benefited. If the skin be moist to commence with, the bath will
have a moistening effect.

405. Duration of stay in the bath.—Dryness results if the
person stay a long time in the bath. This is partly because of loss
of water by the sweating and with the dispersal of the breath so
induced. A short stay in the bath will produce a moistening
effect, if the skin be wiped dry before sweating begins.

406. Relation to meals.—To enter a bath fasting will
render the body extremely dry, and make the person thin and
debilitated. ‘To enter the bath after a heavy meal, on the other
hand, will make a person stout, by drawing the humours towards
the subcutaneous tissues. Moreover it removes the obstructions
by transferring the undigested aliment from the stomach to the
tissues. ‘To enter the bath at the moment when the first digestion
has ended and before a sense of hunger returns is beneficial and
produces a medium degree of stoutness.

407. Special therapeutic uses. Bath treatment of hectic fever.
—If the bath is taken for a moistening effect the person should
be entirely immersed in the water, unless he is too enfeebled, or
his strength will not allow of it. The air of the room should be
temperate—neither hot nor cold, but gently moist. The water
of the bath should be thrown freely about in order to disseminate
the water-vapour through the air and so fill the air with moisture:
The duration of the bath should not be long. The patient should
be lifted out of the water and rubbed down gently, himself
making no exertion ; and he should be laid at once on the couch
(in the bathroom) and there be anointed with oil (to increase the
moisture of the skin and retain in the pores the aquosity which
has already gained entry into the skin, thus fixing it within the
skin), using cool perfumed oil. He should then lie in the
tepidarium (the disrobing room) for an hour until the respiration
subsides to the customary rate. After that, he is anointed, robed,
and taken into a room (dining-room, 1595 ed.) where he may
receive a small draught compounded of humectants, such as
barley water and asses’ milk.

Disadvantages.—Such patients should not stay too long in
the bath, as there is a risk of syncope, because it renders the heart
“hot” (and therefore disperses the “‘ breath”’) and sets the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 237


bilious humour in motion ; it produces nausea ; and other ill-
effects. Itcauses morbific matters to gravitate into the debilitated
organs. It has a relaxing effect and is injurious for the nerves.
It disperses the innate heat. It removes the appetite for solid
food. It weakens the power of sexual intercourse.


[Aegineta says: natural baths are largely desiccant and calefacient, and are
therefore good for people of humid and cold temperament].


408. Action of baths in virtue of mineral constituents in the
water.—Waters of this kind occur in nature, or may be repro-
duced artificially. They are all strongly resolvent and attenuant.
They make the tissues flabby, and prevent humours from passing
into abscesses. They are beneficial for the guineaworm and
““Tndian vein.”


|


7a!
OR
¢


<e


Mineral Baths in the Middle Ages * (p. 270).


Aluminous waters [Alum=MgSO,+FeSO,: “ hair-alum,”
according to Adams?‘] benefit cases of hemoptysis, melaena,
menorrhage, procidentia ani or uteri, repeated causeless mis-
carriage, cachexias, undue sweating, causeless vomiting. They
have a cooling and drying effect.

Bitter waters have a heating and drying effect.

Bituminous waters :(“‘ judaic waters ’’) occasion fulness of
the head. The person must therefore not immerse his head in
the bath or stay too long in it. They render the temperament
warmer, especially that of the uterus, bladder and colon. They
are all harmful and heavy. [They soothe if persevered with:
Aegineta. ]


243 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Chalky waters have a cooling and drying effect.

Copper-containing waters are beneficial for the mouth,
tonsils and uvula; for relaxed ocular tissues ; for humid
affections of the ears.

Ferruginous waters are beneficial for the stomach and
spleen. (They should be entered gradually so as to allow the
impression of the water to sink deeply into the body while it is in
a relaxed state : Aegineta.)

Medicinal baths, prepared with laurel leaves, stavesacre,
juniper berry.

Nitrous (=Na,CO,: Adams?*) baths and saline baths are
beneficial for the head and chest when humours are constantly
flowing into them ; for wateriness of the stomach, for dropsy, for
swellings left after diseases, and for collections of phlegm.

Aerated waters, ferruginous and saline waters are beneficial
for diseases depending on coldness and moisture, for pains in
the joints, for podagra. They benefit relaxed persons, asthma,
renal disease, carbuncles, ulcers ; they are very beneficial in
cases of fracture.

Sulphur baths. These soothe and warm the nerves and
relieve pain, lassitude and convulsions. They cleanse the
surface of the skin from furuncles and old bad ulcers and purple
marks ; they benefit pannus, vitiligo, lepra. They disperse
morbific matters descending into the joints, the spleen and the
liver. They are beneficial for the womb when unduly hard.
‘They reduce the tone of the stomach and banish the appetite.

409. Thermal baths.—Persons desiring to use thermal
baths should bathe quietly, gently, and allow the waters to play
gently over the relaxed body ; laving, not splashing ; and in this
way the interior organs are benefited.


The subject of baths will be considered further in Part III,


and again when discussing the use of cold water as a drink.


20, Tue InFLueNcE or SuNBATHS ; SANDBATHS ; OILBATHS ;


SHOWERBATHS.


410, Immersion in hot sand, oil baths, spraying of water
over the face ; standing or running or walking rapidly, or
jumping in the heat of the burning sun—all these are powerful
agents for removing superfluities, and for producing sweating,
dispersing flatulence, and lax swellings and dropsies. They are


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 239


beneficial for asthma, for orthopnoea. They invigorate the brain
(whose temperament is cold) and relieve inveterate ‘‘ cold”
headache.

If the seat of the bath is dry, and the floor is left wet, the
bath will benefit cases of sciatica, lumbar pain, uterine obstruc-
tion. It has a cleansing effect on the womb.

411.  Sun-baths.—One must not remain too long in the
sun, or else the body will become dry, thick, and hard, as the sun
acts like a cautery upon the pores of the skin, and obstructs the
outflow of the insensible perspiration. The sun burns the skin
more if one stands still in it, than if one moves about, and
so it inhibits the dissipation of the sensible perspiration still
more.

412. Sea-sand baths, in the sun.—These are more efficient
for drying the humours lodged in the skin. Such a bath may be
used in various ways : one may sit on the sand, or bury oneself in
it, or sprinkle it over the body. In whatever way it is employed,
the same beneficial effect is experienced in all the above-named
diseases. If the sand is sprinkled over the body, little by little, it
removes pains and other effects of insolation. In the end, there
is an extremely marked drying effect on the body.

413. Oi/-baths.—These are beneficial in lassitude and
for persons suffering from long-standing cold fevers, especially
if there are pains in the nerves and joints ; for convulsions ; for
spasmodic diseases ; for suppression of urine. The oil must be
made hot outside the room. These baths are more beneficial
for the above conditions if the flesh of the jackal or hyzna is
boiled in it. If made as described, it will be an efficient remedy
for joint-pains and podagra.


Aetius gives: add a fifth part of heated oil to the water. Such a bath is highly
anodyne; it relieves lassitude and nervous pains. Uses: for prolonged fevers ;
for convulsions ; for retention of urine.


414. Shower-baths, Douching, Spraying.—lf water be
sprinkled on the face (or over the body) it restores the vigour of
the breath, when that has been lost by dyspnoea and by the
inflammatory changes in hot fevers. This sprinkling is especially
beneficial for syncope, if rose water or vinegar be used. It
may restore the appetite. .They are injurious to persons suffering
from catarrhs or ‘‘ cold ” headaches.


“ He swooned away, and the Wazir sprinkled rose water on him, till the
Prince came to himself.’’—Night, 720; Burton, iv. 408.


Douching with emollient herbs is referred to in 719, 732,


240 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


I]
Tue AGENTS WHICH ALTER THE SEVERAL QUALITIES OF THE
Bopy.
Calefacients.
Refrigerants.
Humectants.
Desiccants.


Agents causing changes of form.
Agents causing obstructions of channels.
Agents which open up the channels.
_ Agents causing roughness.
Mollificants.
10, Agents causing displacements of parts.
11, Agents preventing apposition of parts.
1z. Agents preventing expansion of parts.
13, Agents causing abnormal movements.
14. Causes of numerical increase.
15. Causes of numerical decrease.
16. Causes of loss of continuity.
17. Causes of ulceration.
18, Causes of inflammatory swellings.
19-26. The subject of pain.
27. Agents producing retentions or evacuations.
28, Causes of over-repletion.
29. Causes of debility; asthenia; lack of vigour in members.


415.—1. Calefacients.


(i) Outward heat in various forms: summer heat; artificial
heat ; baths of moderate temperature (the heating effect is produced
by both air and water); calefacient plasters or local applications.

(ii) Heat produced by movement. Exercise, but not in excess ;
gymnastic exercise which is not too vigorous or beyond the right
measure and duration; moderate friction; light massage with the
hands on the limbs ; dry cupping (wet cupping is infrigidant because
it removes heat from the body).

(iii) Heat introduced by the mouth. Adequate supply of nutri-
ment; hot aliments; hot or heating medicaments (i.e. via
oxidation within the body.)

(iv) Heat arising from emotional states: anger, gloom in a
degree less than would cause infrigidation ; moderated joy. Also
sleep and wakefulness in moderate degree.

(v) Heat derived from putrefactive processes. This is neither
the innate heat nor derived from combustion. The warming from
the innate heat is less in degree than that from combustion; it can
occur apart from putrefaction and prior to a septic state. In the
case of putrefaction the heat from the foreign source lingers in the
body after the agent giving rise to it has left the body. This heat
unites with the moisture of the humours and alters their temperament
(in respect of moisture) in such a manner that it will no longer
respond to the temperament of the natural breath. The difference
between digestion and putrefaction is that in the case of digestion
the heat and moisture which are present in matter are altered ;
that is, instead of being accordant with the original temperament,
they are now accordant with another different one (p).


CANOPY NH


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 241


In oxidation, moist substance is separated from dry by sub-
limation and evaporation, the dryness going into the residue.

In the process of simple calefaction, the humours simply become
warmer without losing their natural breath.

(Galen’s classification into five groups is represented by i, ii,
ili, iv and v of the above list.)

(vi) The state of the body. When there is sclerosis (takathuf)
of the surface, the body tends to become hot because the breath
(lit. the steam, bakhr) is held in or imprisoned. When there is
rarefaction (takhalkhal) within the body, it becomes warm because
the “‘ breath’ (bakhr) then expands throughout the body.


The above section has been partly rearranged. The sub-headings are intro-
duced, as usual, for the sake of clearness.


Sclerosis—This refers to the thickening of the skin, which occurs after long
exposure to the weather; it becomes harsh, coarse, and presumably less pervious.

Steam.—Horses “‘ steam ’’ when they have been hard-worked. The exhaled
air appears like “‘ steam.’’ The urine and shed blood steam when they leave the body.
This steam is the substance of the breath, so that it is permissible to translate the
word accordingly. This steam, which pervades organs and tissues and tissue-
spaces and cavities, is the visible manifestation of the breath.

It is natural to think, then, that if the skin is so hardened that it will not let
this vapour out, the latter will accumulate in the body and make it hot, as happens
after severe exercise until the body “cools down.” It is also natural to reason
that if the vapour is able to expand owing to laxity of the connective tissues, it will
impart a sense of glow to the body ; for everyone has experienced it.

Rarefaction.—When this term is applied to the skin it refers to a condition
opposite to “sclerosis’’; the skin is unduly soft, supple, and is evidently relaxed
instead of tight.

These considerations apply to sub-heading 5 of 416. See also 838.


§200. In modern language, the warmth of the body depends on
the relation between heat loss and heat gain. Heat enters the body
from (a) the external air or surroundings: warm air of summer,
artificially warmed air in winter, baths; (6) heat derived from (i) food
and drink, (ii) exercise, (iii) toxic action of foreign matter (sepsis,
drugs); (c) heat fostered by preventing heat loss: clothing, sleep;
(Zz) local heat (fomentations, etc.); (¢) emotional influence.

Heat is lost from the body by (a) excreta: urine, faeces, skin
action, exhalation by the air expired; (6) external conditions :
cold, wet.

Note that baths vary in their effect, An ordinary hot bath
(105° F.) renders the body warm; a brief immersion has a different
effect, a long continued immersion is depressant.


416. 2. Refrigerants.


1. Artificial cold; thisis a refrigerant in act, as it is cold itself.
2. Potential refrigerants. Thus, when the body is hot at the
time of exposure to the agent, its heat becomes dissipated. Thermal
waters.
3. Calefacients. (a) Excessive: very hot air, thermal waters,
hot plasters and fomentations (which disperse the innate heat by
R


242 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


relaxing the body); (6) moderate: staying too long in the bath ;
(c) agents at present hot but becoming cold later.

4. Excessive exercise: this disperses the innate heat unduly.
Excessive repose aggregates and strangles the innate heat, thereby
having an infrigidant effect. ;

5. Certain bodily states. (@) Great rarefaction relaxes the
body and disperses the innate heat ; (4) extreme spissitude strangles
the innate heat; (c) excessive retention (has the same action); (@)
undue evacuation from the body, which destroys the material basis
of the innate heat and disperses the breath, and allows the effete
matters to become obstructions.

6. Mental states: great gloom, too much fear ; too much joy ;
great delight.

Aliment. Excess of food and drink; cold aliments; too
little food; refrigerant medicines.

8. Mechanical causes: tight bandaging of limbs for some
time, which prevents the innate heat reaching them.

g. Crudity; the opposite of putrefaction.

(Galen’s classification was: 4, I, 3@, 54, insufficient food.)


417, 3. Humectants.


External: baths, especially if taken after a meal.

Diet: food taken to excess; humectant articles of food;
humectant medicaments.

Retention of that which should be evacuated.

Evacuation of desiccant humour.

Repose and sleep.

Joy in moderation.

Infrigidants (these cause the humours to be retained); cale-
facients (slight degree of warmth causes the humours to move).


418. 4. Desiccants,


External: cold congeals the humours and prevents the tissues
from attracting nutritive material ; it also constricts the channels of
the body, and so causes them to be blocked ; in-consequence nutrient
material cannot reach it.


Great heat disperses moisture. Hence too frequent hot baths
have this effect.


Bathing in styptic waters has a desiccant effect.


Diet: insufficient food ; dry aliments; desiccant medicaments.
Violent evacuations ; coitus.
Exercise.


Wakefulness.


Frequent emotional disturbance.


419, 5. Agents causing deformity.


Some of these agents come into play from the beginning of life,
because of a defect in the formative power of the sperm. Others


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 4.7


come into force later in life—namely at parturition, during the act
of traversing the maternal passages. Others operate after birth
(tight binders and wrappings). Others operate in infancy, before
the limbs are hard enough to enable the infant to walk (letting the
baby fall; blows).

Diseases which characteristically produce deformities : leprosy,
paralysis, nerve-lesions, phthisis.

Excessive deposition of fat; an excessive degree of emaciation
(due to inflammation, or malposition, or from the coalescence of
ulcers).


420. 6. Agents causing obstruction of the channels.


(i) Foreign bodies in a channel: calculus. (ii) Too great a
quantity of material in a channel: loading with faeces. (iii) Altera-
tion in quality of material: grossness, viscosity, leech-like coagula
of blood. (iv) Formation of matter within the channels, whether
removable therefrom or becoming fixed therein. (v) Obliteration
of the orifices, (a) by cicatrisation after healing of an ulcer; (4) by
formation of new tissue (e.g. proud flesh, fleshy warts) ; (¢) by com-
pression by an inflammatory mass in the vicinity; (@) by the
astringent effect of great cold or dryness (styptics); (e) by unduiy
marked retentive power; (/) by tight bandaging.

Obstructions are common in winter, because that is the season
when effete matters are largely retained, and because the cold itself
has an astringent effect.


421. 7. Agents which open up the channels.


Channels become dilated either from lack of retentive power
or from an excessive action of the expulsive faculty. For example,
holding the breath. Medicines which are relaxing, hot, moist,
aperient and detergent.

In short, all agents contrary to Group 6.


422, 8. Agents producing harshness of the body.


A medicinal agent may render the body harsh by its sharpness
(acidity), like vinegar and acetous waste matters; or by dispersion
(ike halcyonium=coral) and acrid waste matters; or by styptic
action (which produces roughness because it is dry; ex.: bitter
substances).

Infrigidants have this effect, by inspissation,

Terrene substances sprinkled over a limb like a dusting-powder
may exert such an effect.


423. 9. Mollificanis.


(Fatty or) glutinous substances act in virtue of their viscidity ;
agents which mildly disperse the humours by attenuating them,
cause them to flow, whilst at the same time they carry off the dense
particles of matter in the apertures on the surface of the member.


2.44 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


424, 10. Agents which produce displacements and luxations.


Displacements of parts are produced (1) by extension—a force
dragging on the member and pulling upon it until it is dislocated ;
(2) by some unexpected violent movement, aided by the throwing
of the whole weight of the body upon the member (e.g. luxation of
the foot) ; (3) by some laxity or moistness in a part. This happens
in tearing, in corrosion, or septic change or destruction of the sub-
stance of a ligament or nerve—e.g. in elephantiasis, sciatica. |


425, 11. Agents which prevent parts from becoming
apposed.


Here belong——congenital factors ; grossness ; viscosity ; loose-
ness of joints; dryness of humour in a joint; spasm; ulcers which
are only partially healed; calculus.


426. 12. Agents which prevent parts from expanding.


Here belong—congenital factors, coarseness, spasm, cicatrisation
after healing of ulcers.


427, 13. The causes of abnormal movements.


(1) Dry intemperament may cause weakness (e.g. dry tremor)
or spasm (e.g. dry hiccoughs, or spasm). (2) Effete matters which
heat, or cool the surfaces of the muscles. (3) Interception of the
power which should have access to a member owing to some form of
obstruction. (4) Nocumental effete matter acting in virtue of its
coldness (e.g. rigor), or in virtue of pricking property (e.g. shivering),
or in virtue of interference with the innate heat, making it either
scanty or submerged, so that the surfaces of the muscles become cold,
and gaseous matter forms which seeks to be dispersed or expelled.
(Ex. : jerkiness, jactitation.)

In such nocumental matter, further, gaseous matter may be
deficient. This gives rise to the desire to stretch oneself. Or,
gaseous matter may be in excess ; and in this case, if the matter be
quiescent, one form of lassitude arises; if the matter be mobile,
other forms of lassitude will arise, which we shall describe later (821).
If the nocumental character of the matter be more decided, shivering
ensues. If very strong, rigors and spasmodic contractions come on.
Should such matter which is held back in the muscles be gaseous,
jactitation or pulsatile movements arise.


428. 14. Causes of increase in size of body.


Abundant supply of aliments; great vigour of attractive
faculties acided or not by friction or by calefacient plasters (e.g.
plaster of pitch and the like). A powerful formative faculty will
increase both the size and the number of tissue-components: e.g.
proud flesh, supernumerary fingers. If pathological material* be
formed, tumours, ganglia, “‘ atheromas,”’ steatomas, and warts will
form. (Costaeus, quoting Galen.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 24.5


15. Causes of numerical decrease.


(1) Congenital: matter* lessened in amount; faulty or defective
formative power. (2) Acquired: lack of nutrition during lactation
or later; direct injury—cutting wounds, blows, mechanical destruc-
tion of tissue; frostbite; internal causes—eroding ulcers, septic
processes.


429, 16. Causes of loss of continuity.


(1) Intrinsic: Pathological body-fluids, having a consuming,
burning, moistening, relaxing, drying or cleaving action. Fluids
which pierce and force themselves into tissues and stretch them apart.
Gaseous matters also may force their way into, and stretch, tissues.
In each of these cases, the effect produced depends on (a) the force
of movement, (6) the abundance of the fluid or gas, (c) the greatness
of the expulsive power.

Similar in action to these are: vociferation, leaping exercises ;
opening of abscesses.

(2) Exterior. Traction by a rope or weight; incision by a
sword; burning by fire; contusion by a stone; rupture of a sac
by contusion ; perforation by an arrow ; punctured wounds (scorpion
wounds) ; bites by a mad dog, a viper, or a human being.


430. 17. Agents producing ulceration.


The rupture of an inflammatory mass; of a pustule; of an
abscess. The bursting out of an ulcer.


431. 18. The causes of inflammatory swellings.


Causes relative to the material in a member: superabundance
of the four humours; aquosity; gaseous matter.

Causes in regard to the condition of a member. (1) Expulsive
power. (2) Weak retentive faculty, which disposes it towards har-
bouring waste matters. This varies with (a) the nature of the organ
or tissue (e.g. the skin is so created); (6) the texture of the member
(the looseness of the flesh behind the ears, in the neck, axilla, and
groin is favourable—to deposition of matter); (¢) the width of the
passages and orifices—too great and too narrow respectively ;
(d) low position of outlet ; (¢) small outlet, so that the food residues
cannot get away. Some nocument may impair the power to digest
the food material coming to the part. Blows may cause the matter
to be retained in a member. Lack of exercise may prevent matters
from being dispersed as they usually would be. Too much heat
in a particular region may’attract inflammatory processes—whether
it be the natural heat of the flesh or an unnatural heat (causing pain)
or heat produced by excessive exercise, or by some calefacient agent.

Inflammation may follow fracture, if the limb has also been
contused or crushed or stretched when setting the bone-ends.


* i.e., humours.


246 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Inflammations often occur in connection with the teeth, as food
may collect in them, undergo infusion, and so become putrefied.
This may lead to an abscess,


19-26. The subject of pain.


These separate Chapters are here gathered into one, with the following sub-
divisions :—
i. General discussion of the causes of pain.
ii. Theory of the nature of pain. '
iii: List of the types of pain, and the explanation of each.
iv. Agents which alleviate pain.
v. The effect of pain on the body.
vi. The causes of pleasurable sensations.
vii. How movement brings on pain.
viii. How depraved humours evoke pain.
ix. How gaseous substances produce pain.


432. General discussion of the causes of pain.


31 AIN is one of the unnatural states to which the
y4 animal body (as a sensitive and living thing) is
| liable. We begin with a general discourse
gM about it.

Pain is sensation produced by something
| contrary to the course of nature, and this
sensation is set up by one of two circumstances
(a) a very sudden change of the temperament ; or the bad
effect of a contrary temperament, (4) a solution of continuity.
In saying ‘“‘ the bad effect of a contrary temperament ”’ we
mean : the substance of the members of the body has a constant
temperament, and then a foreign temperament of contrary
character (hotter or colder) supervenes. The sensitive faculties
become aware of the change ; this is “ pain.’’ The law is that
there is no pain save as the sensation of contrariety produced by a
contrary thing. A temperament which is constantly unhealthy
does not produce pain, or arouse any sensation. ‘That is to say,
if the temperament residing in the substance of the members is
bad, it destroys the original temperament so that the member is
as if it had always had this unhealthy temperament ; consequently
it neither produces pain nor is aware of it. The reason is that
before sensation can occur, the sense organ must become affected
by that which is sensed. But in this case the condition persists.
There is no change. So there is no pain. Suffering will only
occur 1f some contrary enters which is able to alter the tempera-
ment to one not previously present.
That is why a person suffering from hectic fever does not
suffer as much as one who has a one-day or a tertian fever, despite


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 247


the fact that the heat of the first is greater than that of the others.
In the case of hectic fever the heat is persistent and situated in the
substance of the principal members ; in the case of tertian, the
heat comes from a hot humour, and so reaches those members
which retain their natural temperament. Should the humour
recede, the natural temperament will continue in the member, the
heat not being fixed in it unless the fever become hectic.

No inequable intemperament persists in a member except
according to a certain rule. Such a state may arise during the
best of health.. Thus, should a person plunge into a bath in
winter, and lave himself with tepid water, he would shiver ;
which shows that it is harmful. For the primary quality of the
body is far from that of the water, and indeed contrary. After-
wards, however, it is beneficial and produces subjective satisfac-
tion. The cold influence lessens step by step until no longer
evident to the senses.

But suppose the person were to sit in the bath-house
another hour, the water would make his body hotter. And yet in
spite of that, if this same tepid water of the above bath were
suddenly thrown over him unexpectedly, shivering would result
and the water would seem cold to him.

If we study such things carefully, it will be clear that though
unhealthy inequable intemperaments form one of the groups of
causes of pain, yet not every one of such intemperaments actually
does so. A hot temperament is in itself able to cause pain, and
so can a cold one; but a dry temperament causes pain only
secondarily, and a moist one is painless. For heat and cold are
both active qualities ; dryness and moisture are passive. So that
in one case the impression on the body is active, in the other it is
passive.

Dryness is a cause of pain secondarily, if another kind of
agent comes into play, as e.g., loss of continuity. Dryness itself
may be a cause of loss of continuity, in virtue of its power of
producing great constriction of a channel.

433. Theory of the nature of pain. According to Galen, all
this can be reduced to the one essential thing —loss of continuity
and nothing more. A hot thing only causes pain by breaking
continuity of a part ; a cold thing also only causes pain by
breaking the continuity of function or of a part ; it exerts such an
astringent and aggregating effect that the particles are drawn
together towards a certain place and agglutinated 2 EWaNG i he)
consequence separated off from their surroundings. In some of
his writings, he seems to hold the opinion that all sensibles are


248 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


deleterious from the very fact that in order to experience a
sensation there must be a cleavage of particles one from another—
agglutination of some entailing cleavage of others ; the fact of
cleavage accounting for the sensation called ‘ pain.” A black
object which gives a painful impression to the sense of sight does
so because its blackness is due to an extremely close aggregation
of particles ; whiteness is due to the particles being widely
discrete. .

A bitter, salt, or sour thing, which gives a painful impression
to the sense of taste, does so because such things produce vigorous
dispersion of particles. Pungent things do so because they
ageregate very vigorously, and are therefore no doubt followed
by dispersion. So too, with odours ; and sounds—where the
movement of the air impinging in the external auditory meatus
gives rise to a painful sensation.

To explain it according to my own view :—It is the trans-
mutation of the temperament of a part which determines the
presence of, and the kind of, pain proceeding therefrom, whether
there is loss of continuity or not. This is best proved by Natural
Science, but the following brief explanation may be given here.
We may therefore say :—

Pain occurs in a member which is of homogeneous structure.
Solution of continuity cannot occur except in members which are
not of homogeneous structure. Pain occurs in states of the body
where there is no loss of continuity of particles. Hence loss of
continuity 1s not a condition on which the appearance of pain
depends, An intemperament will produce it. Cold produces
pain if it constricts and agglutinates particles, and the part is
cold throughout its substance ; solution of continuity does not
occur at the site of infrigidation but at the distal parts of the
infrigidated places. Again, pain is the sensation of a sudden
impression by the contrary qualities. It is the fact that they are
contrary, that accounts for the pain.

Does one not observe how a person who experiences cold to
a degree enough to alter the temperament will sense the change
in his temperament and also feel pain without there being any
question of loss of continuity ? where indeed such a loss is
impossible ? It is clear then that a sudden change of tempera-
ment will cause pain just as loss of continuity does. Pain
arouses heat, and affects the innate heat, and this makes the pain
greater still.

After the pain has subsided, there remains a something
which provokes the sensation of pain. But it is not really pain,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 249


It is a sum-total of things which are undergoing spontaneous
breakdown.

A doctor ignorant of all this, and striving to relieve the pain,
may make wonderful mistakes, and fail in his object.

434, List of the types of pain and the explanation of each.
There are fifteen kinds of pain* (rearranged alphabetically) :


1. Boring 6. Heavy pain. 11. Relaxing.
2. Compressing. 7. Incisive. 12. Stabbing.
3. Corrosive. 8. Irritant. 13. Tearing.
4. Dull. g. Itching. 14. Tension.
5. Fatigue-pain. 10. Pricking. 15. Throbbing.


1. Boring pain. ‘The cause of this pain is the retention
of gross matter or of gas between the tunics of a hard and gross
member (e.g., the colon) and so continually goading it and
tearing its parts asunder, boring into the interstices like a
gimlet.

2. The pain of compression. ‘This is produced by fluid or
gas, when it is confined in too small a space in a member, and so
compresses or squeezes the tissues.

3. Corrosive pain proceeds from the presence of material
between the muscle-fibres and their sheaths, stretching it till it
breaks not only the continuity of the membrane, but also that of
the muscle therewith.

4. Dull pain, ‘The cause is threefold : (1) the tempera-
ment may be too cold; (2) occlusion of the pores so that the
breath (of the sensitive faculties) which should come to the
member cannot do so ; (3) overfulness of the (locular spaces or)
cavities.

5. Fatigue-pain, ‘This is produced (1) by undue toil—
laborious toil, (2) by a humour which produces tension (in
tensive lassitude), (3) by a gaseous substance which produces
inflative lassitude, (4) a humour of biting properties (ulcerative
lassitude). These pains may arise out of various composite
states, as has already been stated in the appropriate places.


* In regard to the kinds of pain, it is of interest here to recall the eight kinds
of pain inherent in human life, giyen in the Nirvana Sutra: (1) Birth pangs (Shoku :
Japanese ; jatir-duhkham : Sanskrit) ; (2) The pains of age (Roku : jara-duhkham) ;
(3) The pains of disease (Byoku; vyadhi-duhkham) ; (4) The pain of death (Shiku ;
marana-duhkham) ; (5) The pain of parting with loved ones or things (Aibetsuriku ;
priyaviprayoge-duhkham); (6) The pain of meeting with what one dislikes (Onzoeku ;
apriya samprayoge-d) ; (7) The pain of not obtaining what one seeks (Gufutokku) ;
(8) The pain of the five elements ; that is, the body itself produces pain (Goonjoku).
(The Sanskrit of the last two terms is lengthy).—Ishizuka’s notes to Honen. **


p- 446.


250 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Lassitude as a result of several combined states, is called in
flammatory lassitude, which is a composite of tensive and
ulcerative lassitude (see 824).

6. Heavy pain. In this case there is an inflammatory
process in an insensitive member such as the lung, the kidney or
spleen. The weight of the inflammatory deposit drags on the
tissues and surrounding sentient fascia and on its point of
attachment. As the member is dragged on, the fascia and its
point of attachment experience the sensation. The cause of
the pain may be that a sentient member has had its sensation
destroyed by the disease, so that the weight is felt, but actual
pain cannot be felt any longer (e.g., cancer at the mouth of the
stomach).

7. Incisive pain. ‘This proceeds from a humour of sour
quality.

8. Irritant pain. ‘This is produced by a certain type of
change in the humours (harshness, roughness).

g. Jiching pain. ‘This is produced when a humour is acrid,
sharp, or salt.

10. Pricking pain. ‘The agent producing this is material
similar to that which causes boring pain ; it is retained in an
organ of similar type (to that which 1s the seat of boring pain)
for a time and then ruptures it.

11. Relaxing pain proceeds from matters accumulating in
and stretching the belly of a muscle—not its tendon. It is only
called relaxing if the belly of the muscle is more lax than the
nerve, tendon, or enveloping membrane.

12. Stabbing pain. ‘This is the result of transverse
stretching in membranes, as if their continuity were being
separated, by a humour. It may be an equal or an inequal
sensation. In the former case, all the members of the body are
uniformly affected. In the latter case, there are four possibilities :
(1) Inequality in hardness or softness between the tissue with
which the membrane is-covered and the membrane itself. Ex.:
the clavicle or costal pleura ; in a case of inflammatory process
travelling from the pleura towards the upper parts of the chest,
the pain is felt in the collar-bone. (ii) Inequality of movement
of the component parts (e.g., the diaphragm and the pleura or
peritoneum over it). (iii) Inequality of nature between the parts
and the member. (iv) Unequal distribution of nocument among
the parts and the member affected, in that it affects one and not
another.


13. Tearing pain, Proceeds from the interposition of


THE CANON OF MEDICINE Dor


humour or gas between bone and periosteum, or from cold which
strongly constricts the periosteum.

14. Tension pain, This is produced by a humour or gas
stretching the nerve-fibres or muscle fibres asunder.

15. Throbbing pain. ‘The cause is a hot inflammatory
process. A cold inflammatory process, of whatever type, is either
hard or soft, but sets up no pain unless it changes into a hot
inflammation. Throbbing pain arises in a hot inflammatory
process if the adjoining member is sentient, and has pulsating
arteries round it. A member which is healthy does not sense
their movement, because they are deeply situated, but their
pulsation sets up pain as soon as an inflammation arises in the
member.

435, Agents which alleviate pain. ‘There are three groups
of agents which alleviate pain : (1) Some contrary to the cause of
pain—which removes the cause. Ex. : anethum, linseed, made
into a poultice and applied over the painful place. (2) Any
agent which counteracts the acrimony of the humours, or soothes,
induces sleep, or dulls or soothes the sensitive faculties and
lessens their activity. Ex. : inebriants, milk, oi], aqua dulcis,
etc. (3) An agent which infrigidates and dulls the sensation in
the painful part. Ex. : all narcotics and somniferous drugs.
The first of the three is the most certain.


This subject is referred to again at the end of Part IV.


436. The effect of pain on the body. Pain dissipates the
bodily strength and interferes with the normal functions of the
organs. The respiratory organs are inhibited from drawing the
air in, and consequently the act of breathing is interfered with,
and the respiration becomes intermittent, or rapid, or altogether
unnatural in rhythm.

The organs are first made hot, then cold ; this is because
some of the breath and vitality is dispersed and escapes.

437. The causes of pleasurable sensations, ‘The agents which
produce pleasurable sensations fall into two groups. (1) Where
an intemperament suddenly becomes equable and the senses
become aware of the change. (2) Where there is a sudden
restoration of the natural continuity.

Sensation depends on sudden change, whether painful or

leasurable. Pleasurable sensation is to sense harmoniously ;
and this act of sensation is performed by the sensitive faculties.
It is a passive act. One experiences pleasure or pain according
as the sensation is harmonious or disharmonious. ‘The fact that
the sense of touch is the most elementary (crude) of all these


PL) THE CANON OF MEDICINE


senses accounts for it retaining the harmonious or disharmonious
impress longer. When that which comes to the sense of touch
is harmonious with nature, the pleasurable sensation is greater ;
and if the agent is disharmonious, the painful sensation 1s greater
than would be the case with the other faculties.

438, How movement brings on pain. Movement and
exercise induce pain when nerves are stretched thereby, or when
muscles become contused or lacerated thereby. .

489, How depraved humours evoke pain. Depraved
humours evoke pain either by reason of their qualities (for
instance, acridity), or by reason of their being abundant (thereby
stretching the fibres of a tissue or making the organ heavy) ; or
for both reasons together.

440, How gaseous substances produce pain. Accumulations
of gas may become painful when they cause a part to be greatly
distended. Gases may accumulate in (2) hollow viscera (e.g., in
the stomach ; gastrectasis) ; (4) the membranes over organs, or
nerves (e.g., colicky pain from stretching of the nerves of the
intestinal wall) ; (c) the sheaths of muscles, serous membranes,
or periosteum ; (d@) the subcutaneous tissues (the place between
the muscles and the loose fascia or skin); (e) internal members
(e.g., the muscles of the thorax).

Gas may be dispersed rapidly, or only after a time. This
depends on the amount, and whether coarse or fine, and whether
the member itself is dense or rarefied in structure.


27. AGENTS WHICH BRING ABOUT RETENTION oR DISCHARGE.


441, It is easy to know the causes of retention or discharge
if one ponders well over what has already been said about reten-
tions and evacuations. The reader should therefore turn back
and carefully re-read what has been written about it.


28. ‘THe Causes oF Over-REpPLeTION (PLETHORA).


___ Plethova.— Passive congestion ”’ is over-repletion with blood ; it is associated
with stasis.—“ Active congestion ’’ is the equivalent of ‘ waram,’ ‘‘ apostema.”—
Oedema is over-repletion with lymph (serous humour) ; it is associated with stasis
in the lymphatic channels or serous cavities. The practical result is that the chan-
nels cannot drain or empty within the available time.—Hypertension is a form of
plethora.—Corpulence is over-repletion with fat, namely in the connective-tissue
spaces. One practical result of this is that supervening disease produces greater
affliction than otherwise, as was written in the Charaka'*® (i. 236).—Plethora of the
connective tissue spaces with a mucoid change in the fluid may produce the appear-
ance of obesity. This peculiar change is met with in the female sex; it fluctuates
in degree from time to time, and may appear or disappear within a few days.

Intestinal stasis is over-repletion of the large intestine.
It may be noted that the effect of stasis anywhere is to interfere with that


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 253


flow of breath which is essential to health, or even life. The breath is ‘‘ choked ”’
or “strangled.” The faculties are also at a disadvantage, for their free operation
is conditional on free flow of breath through all parts of the body.—In modern
terms, Oxidative processes are retarded or arrested.


442. ‘The causes are extrinsic and intrinsic.

1. Extrinsic (primitive). (a) A dietary (fluids as well as
solids) which gives rise to much moisture beyond the needs of the
body ; matter accumulates in the body, and interferes with the
action of the emunctories. (4) Taking baths frequently, especially
after meals. (c) Repose ; ceasing to take exercise ; ceasing to
secure the usual evacuations. ‘These prevent the resolution of
material in the body. (d) Improprieties in eating and drinking ;
depraved regimen.

2. Intrinsic. (1) Lack of digestive power, so that the aliments
are not completely utilized. (11) Feebleness of expulsive faculty.
(111) Undue vigour of retentive faculty, so that humours are
caused to linger in the body. (iv) Narrowing of the excretory
channels.


29. THe Causes oF AsTHENIA AND Depitity oF A MEMBER.


443. Weakness may affect (1) the body of the member
itself ; (ii) the breath, which conveys power to it ; (111) the faculty
of the member.

(i) The following produce weakness in the member itself :

(2) A persisting intemperament, especially a cold one.
For even though the member receive some heat, the cold tn-
temperament produces an effect like stupor in it, because it
breaks up the temperament of the breath—just as happens when
a person stays too long in the bath, and especially when such a
procedure brings on syncope. A dry intemperament has an
inspissating effect, and acts by preventing the faculties from
functioning in the member. A moist intemperament relaxes and
obstructs.

(2) One or other of the composite diseases.

(c) The most important in all (in man) 1s neither nocument,
nor malady, nor pain. It is an attenuation of texture in the peri-
pheral nerve-fibres of the member, for both vegetative and
voluntary actions depend for their achievement on these fibres
in all their ramifications. ‘The retentive power which is necessary
to secure efficient digestion depends on the condition of these
fibres in the stomach. |

(ii) Weakness of the breath itself. ‘This will occur if it be of
bad temperament. There may also be dissipation of the breath,


254 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


after an evacuation corresponding. It is also weakened by an
abnormal mode of depletion.

(iii) Weakness of the faculty. ‘This depends on the number
of actions and the number of times they are repeated. The breath
is dispersed at the same time. Moreover loss of breath accom-
panies every agent which produces asthenia.

444, The causes of asthenia may be classified in another.
way, so as to include the remote causes with them—the causes
of causes. We then consider (i) causes of intemperament ;
(ji) causes arising from decomposition changes in the air, in
water, and in the aliment ; (iii) causes which cause the breath to
escape, or become confused, or, as it were, shaken up.. Nothing
disturbs the breath, or causes it to escape as effectively as does a
bad smell, such as the fetor from putrid water, or the presence
of poisonous vapours in the air, or in the body. [Under such
circumstances, the instinctive action is immediately to “ hold the
breath.’’]

445, Evacuations as a cause of weakness. For instance, loss
of blood ; diarrhoea, especially of thin attenuated fluid ; the
sudden withdrawal of copious dropsical effusions by paracentesis ;
the opening of a large abscess with sudden withdrawal of much
pus—whether the opening is by nature or by surgical inter-
ference ; excessive sweating ; severe exercise.

446, Severe pain disperses the breath and may alter its
temperament. The chief kind of pain likely to have this effect is
that from distension, or incisive pain—especially in the pit of
the stomach. Any pain in the region of the heart will disperse
the breath.

447, Fevers should also be included among the causes of
asthenia. ‘They act either by dispersing the breath, or by loss of
blood, or through producing a change of temperament.

448. Widening of the pores often aids in producing
asthenia. Long continued semi-starvation has the same effect.

449, Weakness in one member or in a part of a member
may cause weakness of the whole body, as is seen in the case of
defective function of the cardiac orifice of the stomach, which
produces general weakness of the body. Or, if a person. suffers
severely from some cardiac or cerebral trouble, shortness of
breath rapidly supervenes on very slight provocation.

450. Further, a cause of weakness may be that one has
endured many illnesses.

451. When one member is weaker than another from
birth, or when it is by nature weaker in itself (e.g., the lung, or


THE CANON OF MEDICINE apeik


brain), then it is receptive for matters which the stronger mem-
bers reject or discard, or eliminate. The brain would suffer in
this way were it not for its position, whereby nothing comes to it
which it cannot tolerate, even its virtues cannot persist there.


END) OF) THESIS Li


C. Retributive or Exptative Causes of Disease.


§ 201. The idea that illnesses were a form of “ judgment ”’ or
punishment, or retribution for misdeeds, was formerly widespread,
but is not regarded seriously in modern Medicine. In the case of all
peoples who hold the Buddhist belief in karma, this ancient idea
holds good because every event, good or bad, in the individual life
is believed to be the outcome of events in a past life—whether in this
particular existence or in a previous incarnation. Wherever the
theosophical teachings hold, the same view would be held. Moreover,
in Islam there is no difficulty in the idea because “‘ there is no second
cause,’ and as is written in the Mesnavi, in speaking of Izrail, the
angel of death, God is said to ‘‘ operate by disease and sickness, and
men will not look for any cause beyond these diseases ’’—in virtue of
the truth of text (Quran 56, 84) ‘‘ He is nearer to you than ye are;
yet ye see Him not.”


Ghazzali, in his ‘‘ Alchemy of Happiness ’’ says: “illness is, so to speak, a
cord of love by which God draws to Himself the saints concerning whom He has
said, ‘I was sick and ye visited Me not.’ Illness itself is one of those forms of
experience by which man arrives at the knowledge of God. As He says, ‘ sick-
nesses themselves are My servants, and are attached to My chosen.’ ”’


During medizval Christian times pandemics were regarded as
the manifestations of divine wrath, and the incidence of illnesses is
sometimes still explained in similar terms in modern Christianity, the
microbic and other tangible causes of disease being taken simply as
the instruments whereby the event is achieved. (Cf. § 113.)

As in the case of the idea of “‘ fate’ and “‘ destiny,” the subject
is apt to be viewed incorrectly. Illnesses are sometimes evident
warnings; sometimes they belong to the category of expiation,
whether in relation to others or to the victim himself. In any case,
diseases may be regarded as in some way connected with that
experience of life which the sufferer has himself to undergo. In
Thomistic terms, such would be the “ final cause ”’ of disease.

In the life of Saint Lydwine of Shiedam,'** we read how a cele-
brated physician, Godfried de Haga, endorsed and deferred to “ the
divine law that every malady is an expiation; that if God does not


256 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


regard the expiation as satisfied, the course of the illness cannot be
altered by the art of medicine. Cure cannot result from his treatment
unless his intervention coincides with the completion of the expiation
which has been imposed on the patient by his Lord.” *

In modern times this belief is manifested as a conviction in the
pastoral instructions to the Catholic medical man that he is not
entitled to continue his ministrations on a patient gravely ill unless
his (Catholic) patient has fulfilled his spiritual duties within a certain
number of days of the onset of the severe symptoms.

‘‘ Hay muchos decretos eclesiasticos que prohiben a los medicos
visitar mes de tres veces, si el enfermo no se ha confesado.’’—
(Vilarifio, 142, p. 645.)

The following advice to the patient himself is less harsh to
appearance: “‘ first when thou feelest any indisposition, accept it


as a dispensation of the love of My Heart. . . . Afterwards, unite
thy sufferings with Mine. . . . If thy infirmity increases offer to
Me thy body as a living victim. . . .” (Arnold, xvi)


This teaching leaves no room for doubt about the true answer
to the oft-aired question, ‘‘ should the doctor tell ?”’ (his patient that
his illness is likely to prove mortal).


* * *


*It was subsequent to the named physician’s life-time that Paracelsus wrote the
words actually quoted, adding ‘‘ when the time for redemption has come, the patient
will then find the physician through whom God will send him relief.’’ Paracelsus
classified the causes of disease under five headings: those arising in morbid states
of the body; those belonging to the category of poisons (intoxications) ; those
arising from “astral’’ origins; spiritual causes (passions, disordered thoughts,
morbid imagination) ; and retributive.**a (p. 199, 221).


THESIS THI OTHE EVIDENCES OF DISEASE,


I. GENERAL REMARKS ABOUT SYMPTOMS AND SIGNS


“ The science of the diagnosis of disease by internal symptoms is founded upon
six canons : (1) the patient’s actions, (2) the waste of the body, (3) the nature of the
pain, (4) the site of the pain, (5) swelling, (6) the effluvia given off by his person.””—
Night 451.4

“A physician who is a man of understanding looketh into the state of the body
and is guided by the feel of the hands, according as they are firm or flabby, hot or
cool, moist or dry.’’—Night 450.


452.


~, Y means of the symptoms and signs of the three
| main states of the body (health, illness, neutrality),
“ we obtain information as to the present, the past
_ and the future of the patient’s state. Knowledge
| of his present state, says Galen, is of advantage
_ to the patient alone, showing him what he must
do ; knowledge of the past is advantageous to
the physician alone, as proving him to excel in
his art, so that his advice becomes worthy of respect (because
reliable) ; knowledge of the future serves both purposes—it
is advantageous to the patient because it guides him along the
road he should follow, and it is advantageous to the physician
in showing him to excel in his art.

The signs belonging to the first category are called “ demon-
strative ”’ ; those of the second category are ‘‘ commemorative ”’ ;
those of the third are named “ prognostic.”’

453, The signs of health. (1) Those which denote an
equable temperament. ‘These are referred to in 494, (2) Those
which denote equability of the composite : (a) substantial :
creaturely form, position, quantity, number ; (4) accidental
comeliness, beauty ; (c) final : (i) that is, fulfilling functions ;
(ii) fulfilled function.


Every organ is healthy whose functions are adequately
performed.


257 Ss


258 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The evidences that the functional state of the principal organs
is adequate is shown by studying their activities. Thus the
state of the brain is shown by the state of the voluntary power
of movement, by the state of the sense-organs, by the acts of
judgment ; the state of the heart by pulse and respiration ; the
state of the liver by the character of the excreta and urine.
(If the urine appear like the washings of fresh meat it shows that
there is deficient liver-function.)

(454. The signs of disease. 1 Some signs are pathognomonic
of disease—thus : rapid pulse-rate, in fever, itself indicates
fever. 2 Other signs indicate the position of the disease. Thus
a hard pulse denotes diaphragmatic pleurisy ; undulant pulse
denotes inflammation in the substance of the lung. 3 Other
signs indicate the cause of the disease. For instance, the signs of
plethora, or of depraved states in their various forms.

4. Some symptoms are essential to the illness, as they begin
and end with it. (For instance, acute fever, piercing pain,
dyspnoea, cough and serrine pulse—essential to pleurisy.)
Other symptoms show no time-relation of this kind ; they some-
times coincide with the disease and sometimes not (e.g. headache
in fever). Other symptoms appear only towards thé close of the
illness—as for instance, the symptoms of crisis, of maturation,
of delayed maturation ; the signs of death. These symptoms
are often associated rather with acute illnesses.

5. Other symptoms concern the state of the members.
Some of them are discernible by the special senses—colour,
hardness, softness, heat, cold, and the like. Others are dis-
cernible by all senses together—the form of the member, its
position (posture, attitude), its size, its movements, or stillness.
Some symptoms point to an interior state, as when tremor of the
lower lip reveals nausea. Changes in measure and number
reveal internal states ; for instance, shortness of fingers denotes
small liver.

6. Morbid states are discernible by the special senses. Thus
a black or yellow colour of the excrement reveals a morbid state.
Black or yellow jaundice of the whole body reveals an obstruction
in the biliary passages.

7. States manifested to the sense of hearing.—Eructations
reveal gastrectasis, and defective digestive power.

8. Odours and tastes also enable one to become cognisant
of morbid states.

g. Other visible evidences ; curved nails denote ulceration


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 259


in the bronchi, phthisis and “‘ hectic.”” Redness of the cheek-
bones suggests inflammatory deposit in the lung.

455. 10. Movements (gestures, postures, attitudes).—The
states of the body are revealed by its movements, or absence of
movement. (1) Motionlessness of the body as a whole—in
apoplexy, epilepsy (coma), syncope, palsy. (2) Unusual move-
ments: shivering, tremor, twitching, sneezing, yawning,
stretching, cough, trembling, spasms (especially note in which
member this begins); (i) some of these are physiological
(hiccough) ; (ii) others are symptomatic (convulsion or spasm,
tremor) ; (ill) some are voluntary (tossing about in bed ; turning
from side to side) ; (iv) others are partly voluntary, partly involun-
tary (cough, micturition, defecation) ; in some of these the
voluntary 1s overruled by the involuntary (cough), while in others
the voluntary overrules the involuntary (micturition and defeca-
tion, occurring too slowly owing to interference by the will) ;
(v) involuntary movements. Some of these are evident to the
senses (e.g. shivering), others are not (e.g. quivering, jactitation).
These movements vary (a) in regard to their nature ; thus,
cough is intrinsically more energetic and powerful than quiver-
ing; (f) in extent: thus, the act of sneezing entails the use of
more muscles than the act of coughing does; coughing is
accomplished simply by the movements of the chest, sneezing
entails movements of the head as well as of the chest; (y) in
degree of associated mental anxiety. Dry hiccough is associated
with. a greater degree of mental anxiety than the movement of
coughing, though the latter is more vigorous, being reinforced
by the natural faculty. In some cases the movement is aided by
an essential primary instrument ; thus, defecation 1s aided by the
abdominal muscles ; in other cases the aid is extraneous : thus,
the natural act of coughing may be aided by the atmosphere;
(8) in origin. These movements vary (2) according to the member
(cough, nausea) ; (4) according to the faculties involved (jacti-
tation originates in the vegetative faculties ; the act of coughing
originates in the sensitive faculties); (c) according to the humour
concerned (thus, cough proceeds from an excretion ; twitching
from a gaseous agent).

These are all evidences of conditions in the members and
are chiefly external in character. Some of them reveal internal
conditions ; as, for instance, redness of the cheeks is a sign of
pulmonary inflammation. i

There are also (internal) evidences of external conditions,
and to discern these a perfect anatomical knowledge is necessary.


260 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


456. One must have a proper knowledge of :—

(i) the essential structure of each member ; whether fleshy
or not ; what is its normal form. One must know (a) whether
the swelling for instance is according to the proper form of the
member or not; (4) whether it is proportioned or not; (c)
whether it is possible for anything to be retained within the
given member or not; (d) whether that which is within (e.g.
jejunum) can escape; (¢) whether there can be retention in
and also escape from the member ; (f) what the material is
which can be retained in it or discharged from it.

(ii) Its site. From this one judges whether pain or swelling
is actually in the part or at some distance from it.

(iii) Its relations. By this knowledge one judges whether
pain is arising per se or reflexly from the surroundings, or whether
the matter in an inflammatory mass arose in it or has entered
into it from neighbouring parts. If it be a “‘ superfluity ” which
escapes, is this the matter itself or is the affected member merely
the channel by which the matter finds egress from the body ?

(iv) How to decide whether the discharge could have come
from the supposedly affected member or not.

(v) The’ normal function of a member.—From inter-
ference with function one recognizes the diseased state.

This is the purpose of the study of anatomy. And a knowledge
of anatomy is also necessary to enable the doctor to control
diseases involving the interior organs.

457. The study of the significance of the symptoms of
internal diseases should follow the following six headings :

1. Interference with function.. ‘The functions have already
been described in regard to their qualities and degrees. The
indications here are primary and constant.

2. The discharges. ‘The indications here are constant but
not primary. They are constant in that they are always associated
with morbid states. ‘They are not primary because they denote
maturation, or interference’ with maturation.


Relea

4. Swelling These are neither primary, nor
5. Altered position constant.

6. Special symptoms


458. Details about these headings.


1. Interference with function, When a function does not
proceed normally, it shows that the agent at work is attacking the
faculty itself, and the loss of function is secondary to disease of


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 261


the organ subserving that function. There are three ways in
which function is interfered with : (a) impairment (e.g. failing
eyesight, near sight, digestion impaired in rate or degree) ; (2)
alteration (as when the eye sees that which is not there or per-
ceives incorrectly ; when the stomach digests food wrongly
and causes it to decompose) ; (c) destruction (as when there is
entire loss of vision ; entire loss of digestive power).


2. Significance of discharges and retentions.
A. Retention of that which is normally discharged :
retention of urine or feces.
B. ‘Abnormal discharge :
(1) From the substance of a member

(a) itself diagnostic: Ex.: when a piece of
cartilaginous tissue is coughed up ; this is a
proof of deep ulceration in the air-passages ;

(2) diagnostic by reason of its dimensions or
amount : passage of flakes in dysentery ; if
they are large flakes, the ulcer is in the large
intestine ; if fine fragments, the ulceration is
in the small intestine ;

(c) colour of the discharge. If urinary sediment
is red, it shows the disease is in the fleshy
organs such as the kidney ; if white it shows
the disease is in a muscular organ like the
bladder.

(ii) Not from the substance of a member :

(2) entirely unnatural. Thus healthy humours
or blood should not be discharged at all ;

(2) abnormal in quality. ‘Thus depraved blood
may be discharged physiologically, or not ;

(c) abnormal in substance ; e.g. calculus ;

(d) abnormal in quantity : e.g. polyuria, oliguria,
excess of fecal discharge, paucity of faces :

(a) abnormal in quality: black feces,

black urine ;

(6) discharge by unsuitable or unnatural
channels: e.g. passage of faces by
the mouth in cases of strangulated
hernia.


3. Significance of pain.
(a) Its site : If right-sided, examine the liver ; if left-sided,
the spleen.


262 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(2) Its type, which reveals its cause (see 434 ; and the
doctrine of causes). Severe pain indicates inflammation in a
non-essential member, or in a member which has lost sensation,
but has become greatly distended by foreign matter. Incisive
pain shows that the diseased material is sharp, acid or acrid.

4. Significance in regard to inflammations.

(2) As to essence: erysipelatous inflammation denotes
bilious humour; “‘scirrhus”’ (induration) denotes atrabilious
humour.

(2) As to position : whether on the right side or the left
(liver, or spleen). Piet

(c) As to shape: a moon-shaped swelling in the right
hypochondrium points to the liver; an elongated swelling
refers one to the overlying muscles (rectus and adnexa).

5. Significance of site and relations.

The site may be self-evident. The relations vary in sig-
nificance according to the morbific agent. Thus a lesion in
the fingers may result from injury to the brachial plexus in the
neck,

6. Significance of special symptoms: e.g. of wasting, of
black tongue, burning fever.


Joannitius gives a rather different classification of symptoms and signs,
though summarizing from the same text. It may be said that every classification
is a matter of personal convenience. There is not necessarily any principle involved,
for the subject comprises so great a variety that a strictly logical classification serves
no special purpose. In some cases symptoms are characteristic of a cause, in others
of an error of function, in others of a special disease. To adhere consistently to one
tule of classification necessarily entails the relegation of some symptoms which are
important in actual practice to a subsidiary or insignificant position in the list.

Hence it may be said that Avicenna’s classification will ho'd gcod as well as
any. The student obtains his knowledge from his own experience, and not from
memorizing a given list.


§ 202. The following list of simple ailments, or evidences of disease, may
be offered at this point.®5

Pain.—The first evidence of disease or ill-health. Its localization is very signi-
ficant, and charts depicting its possible sites and their meaning are of great use.
Thus, headache is very commonly simply a sign of indigestion (gastric or intestinal)
or constipation. The type of pain is most important. Thus pain in the abdomen,
relieved by pressure, suggests gaseous distension due to abnormal fermentation of
food, whereas pain increased by pressure suggests inflammation.

_Abnormal discharges——Abnormal in quantity (increased or diminished), such
as diarrhoea, polyuria; abnormal in quality, such as nose-bleeding, hemoptysis,
expectoration, nasal discharge, salivation ; abnormal in manner, such as incontinence.

__, Abnormal acts.—Vomiting, Coughing, Hiccough, Eructations, Yawning,
Sighing, Shivering, Sleepiness, Insomnia, Altered gait, Altered posture (from palsy,
exhaustion, collapse), Tremors, Twitchings, Convulsions, etc.

Abnormal subjective sensations.—In special senses: floating specks before the
eyes in dyspepsia ; ringing in the ears in cases of nervous debility, or after certain
drugs, or from wax ; bitter taste in dyspepsia ; dizziness arising from nerve derange-
ment, or circulatory errors. In general: nausea, palpitation, throbbing, laboured
breathing ; altered appetite, thirst ; sense of lassitude or asthenia ; irritability ;
loss of memory.

_ Outward signs.—Discoloured or “heavy” eyes. Offensive breath in indi-
gestion and constipation. Wasting or obesity. Hot and dry skin in fevers, or


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 263


states of mental excitement, or from excess of salt in the diet. Cold sweating from
exhaustion, etc. Altered colour of skin. (Edema of skin. Skin-eruptions.—
Signs derived from examination of the mouth: Pale tongue and gums from blood-
deficiency ; bleeding gums from excess of salt in diet and other causes; coloured
line on gums in metallic poisonings; coated tongue in digestive disturbances ;
loosened teeth from errors of diet, or the use of adulterated foods, etc.


2. Tue DisTiIncTION BETWEEN THE DISEASE IN ITSELF AND ITS
SECONDARY EFFECTS


459. Diseases may affect a member primarily, or only
secondarily. Thus, a disease of the stomach may become associ-
ated with one in the head. Hence it is necessary to distinguish
between the two conditions, as being respectively primary and
secondary. ‘To do this, note which arises first, and then note
which of the two morbid conditions persists. The former is
judged to be primary; the one which develops later is considered
to be secondary. Conversely, the disease is secondary which
comes after the first, and ceases when the first is relieved.

460. Errors may arise, however, because a primary disease
may escape the senses (being painless) at first, and its effect may
not become manifest till after the secondary disease has appeared.
Moreover the primary disease may not be able to be perceived
until after the secondary one has developed, and so one is liable
to regard the secondary one as primary, and overlook the real
root of the disease.

481. To guard against this mistake, the physician must
know the anatomical inter-relations of the organs, and also the
several affections which each member may show. . Some of these
are evident to our senses, others are not. He must also avoid
giving a definite diagnosis of the root of the disease until he has
had time to consider the possibility of some of the states being
secondary or not.

462, Therefore the physician will diligently question the
patient in order to discover signs indicative of the various affec-
tions which can possibly occur secondarily in the neighbouring
or related organs. If these are not painful (tender), the patient
is unaware of them, and the various signs and symptoms may be
only distantly related in his mind. He cannot know the relation
between remote symptoms and the real root of the disease. The
wisdom of the physician alone can determine this.

463, It is easier if one recalls the various points to memory
under the heading of hindrances to function. If these are prior
in time, the malady is secondary.

464, Some affections of organs are usually secondary to


264 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


others. Thus an affection of the head is usually secondary to
one or other of the morbid states of the stomach. The converse
is only very rarely true.

All the signs of the primary and secondary temperaments
will be set forth in a general way now, leaving the signs of each
special organ to its appropriate place. The visible signs of a
composite disease are detected by the senses, but the internal
symptoms of the body as a whole cannot be described in a general
way except with diffiiculty—with the exception of the signs of
plethora, of obstructions in passages, of inflammatory masses,
and of loss of continuity. It is best to describe all these together
when we describe them under their specific organs.


3. Tue Diacnostic Sicns oF THE TEMPERAMENTS.


465. Signs from which the variety of the temperament is
discernible.-—These can be arranged under ten groups.


i, THE, FEEL OF THE» PATIENT


By means of the touch one notes whether the feel of the
patient corresponds to health in temperate climes and temperate
atmosphere. If it corresponds, the temperament is equable.
If the physician is himself healthy in temperament and finds the
patient cold or hot, softer or harder or rougher than normal,
and this is not to be explained by the state of the atmosphere or
of a previous cold water bath, or some other contingency render-
ing the body soft or rough, though normal—he then knows the
finding is due to an intemperament.

466. The state of the finger-nails should be noticed.
Softness or dryness of the nails, not due to an extraneous agent,
informs one of the state of the temperament. These qualities
are not in themselves a sufficient criterion. ‘There must be signs
of balance between heat and cold. For (a) heat, by its resolving
effect, would modify hardness and roughness of feel, and make
the patient seem to be attempered and his nature seem soft and
moist. Or, (4) cold—i.e. the opposite—by reason of the great
congelation and inspissation it induces, would make the softness
of feel in an attempered person seem hard, and give the im-
pression that his nature was dry. For instance, take snow and
the sun. Snow congeals and causes coagulation ; the sun causes
aggregation of particles. Many persons with a cold tempera-
ment are soft to the feel, and also spare in habit owing to the
presence of much crudity in them.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 265


II. THE STATE OF THE MUSCLES, FLESH AND FAT


467. Plentiful muscular development denotes moist tem-
perament, and warm temperament if the muscles are firm.
Scanty muscular development with very little fat shows that the
temperament is dry. Oiliness and fat always denote cold tem-
perament, and the muscles are then also flabby.

If at the same time there is constriction of the veins and lack
of blood, and if there is weakness from lack of food (because
there is too little blood to enable it to furnish the requirements
of the tissues), this shows that this temperament is inborn and
habitual. But if these other signs are absent, it shows the
temperament to be an acquired one.

468. Lessening of the amount of oil and fat in the sub-
cutaneous tissues always indicates a hot temperament, because
the substance of oil and fat is the oiliness of the blood, and that
is derived from cold. Hence these things are less plentiful in
the liver-region, and more plentiful over the intestines. There is
not more oil and fat over the heart than over the liver, except
as to matter ; it is not temperament or “form” which ac-
counts for this ; it is simply that the “nature” of the heart
depends for its maintenance on the presence of such-like
samatter..”

Congelation of oil and fat over the body is greater or less
according as the heat is more or less in degree.

If the body is fleshy, and the amount of fat and oil not
great, the temperament is hot and moist.

If the body is very muscular, and there is much oil, but
little fat, this denotes excessively humid temperament. If ex-
tremely fleshy, this denotes superfluity of moisture and cold.
It is evidence that the body has become cold and moist.

469. The more spare the body is in habit, the more likely
is it to be cold and dry ; or (less likely) hot and dry ; or, dry,
for such a body is attempered as to heat and cold. Or, hot,
because such a body is attempered as to moisture and dryness.


tit THE HAIR


The points to note are: rate of growth ; amount ; fine-
ness or coarseness of texture, straightness or curliness, colour.

470. Rate of growth. Slow growth, or absence of growth,
without evidence of lack of blood—denotes extremely humid
temperament. More rapid growth denotes a less humid tem-
perament, rather tending to dryness. (Heat and coldness of


266 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


temperament are shown by other signs —given above—than the
hair.)

If the temperament is both hot and dry the hair grows much
more rapidly, and the individual hairs are numerous and coarse.
Abundance of hair means heat, coarseness much fumosity.
Hence the hair is more plentiful in youthful persons than at
puberty, as the humours of the latter are vaporose, not fumose.

The opposite characters denote the respective contraries.

471. Form of the hair. Curly hair : denotes hot and dry
temperament. It may be that there is tortuosity of the minute
channels and pores : and this cannot change even if the tempera-
ment changes. But the two primary causes would change if
the temperament changed. S¢raight hair denotes cold and moist
temperament.


472. Colour of the hair.


Corresponding
Colour temperament. Remarks.
Black. Hot. In such cases oxidative processes are in
excess of the mean (Joannitius).
Brown. Cold.
Tawny and red. | Equable. There is an excess of “‘ unburnt heat,’”’ so
that the hairs always grow red_ (J).
Hence the proneness to anger (a form ‘of
“heat ’’).
Very fair. Cold and Note how plants lose their dark or green
very moist. colour when dried, and become grey or
Grey. Cold and white. In man, this change is produced
very d ry. towards the close of desiccant. diseases.


473. Cause of grey hair. Aristotle stated that hair turns
grey because it takes on the colour of serous humour. (Joan-
nitius ascribed it to decomposition changes in the serous humour
occurring in old age ; greyness, he says, means excess of atra-
bilious humour.) Galen ascribed it to a mustiness accompanying
the nutriment supplied to the hair, which retards its movement
and penetration into the pores (of the hair) (i.e. hair-sac).

As a matter of fact there is little difference between the
two views, because the whiteness of the serous humour is
physically due to the same cause as the whiteness of the mustiness.
The subject really belongs to physics.

474, Observation also shows that atmosphere and geo-
graphical situation affects the hair. One would not expect to
find the hair red (which denotes equable temperament) in a


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 267


black person even though his temperament were equable ; nor
would one expect to find black hair (which denotes hot tempera-
ment) in a Slav, even though his temperament were hot.

475. Relation of character of the hair to the age. In puberty
the hair is as in northern countries ; in youth, as in southerly
countries ; after the age of fifty it is between the two. Abund-
ance of the hair at puberty reveals the future temperament. As
the person grows, it precedes the formation of atrabilious humour,
and in the elderly person it shows that atrabilious humour is
actually present.


IV. THE COLOUR OF THE BODY


476. Colour. Temperament. Accompanying features.
Pallor. Cold. Lack of blood.
Yellowish. Hot. Lack of blood; increase of bilious humour.
Ruddiness. Hot. Abundance of blood; sanguine or bilious
temperament.
Sub-ruddiness. Hot. Dominance of bilious humour. Occasionally


it denotes lack of blood, provided there is
no bilious humour present in the blood,
as is the case in convalescents.


ark Brown. This is because sanguineous humour is
ere Sgneiatatd dominant, and there is deficient coagul-
cold. ability of the blood and it darkens and


alters the colour of the skin at the same
time [Joannitius ascribed blackness to the
atrabilious humour].


Brown. Hot.
Colour of Egg- Cold and The heat is such as follows upon pure atra-
plant fruit* dry. bilious humour.
Chalky. Cold. Serous humour in excess (J. ascribes white-
5 ness to the serous humour).

Leaden. Cold and Atrabilious humour is only slightly in excess.
ist This is because there is a trace of green in
moist. the whiteness ; the latter depends on the
serous humour and moistness of tempera-
ment. The greenness depends on con-
gelative change in the blood, for this tends
to a blackness which, mingled with serous

Grey padi hite Gola humour, produces a greenish tint.
Ivory White Cold Serous humour in excess, and the choleric


humour scanty.


477. Colour of the eyes.


It is not easy, but it is possible, to assess the temperament
of the brain from the colour of the eyes.


* Egg-plant ; brinjall; solanum melongena, or black brinjall. The colour
is a purple-black. The fruit is referred to as a colour in Night 357: “a flabby
nose like a brinjall’’ (Burton). ‘‘ The vegetable is held to be exceedingly heating,
and thereby to breed melancholia and madness ’’ (ib.).


268 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The following details are from Joannitius :

Black: due to: smallness of crystalline lens; setting of the
crystalline lens too far back; abundance of aqueous humour ;
turbidity thereof; uvea redundant; peculiarity of the visible
“breath” (scanty, or confused).

Brown: due to the contraries of the above—crystalline lens large
or further forward ; paucity of albugineous humour ; clearness
of this; deficient quality of uvea; the visible breath plentiful
or clear.

Intermediate colours (black and brown mixed). The visible breath

varies in amount and clarity.

Grey: visible breath less plentiful.


478. Changes of Colour


Change to yellow (yellowish-white) : suspect disorder of
the liver.

Change to yellowish-black : suspect disorder of the spleen.

Change to yellowish-green : suspect piles (this does not
always hold good (marginal reading). These suggestions only
apply for the moment when the change of colour takes place.


479, Colour of the Tongue


It is not easy to assess the temperament of the stomach and
intestines and veins from the colour of the tongue, any more
than it is to assess the temperament of the brain from the colour
of the eyes.

There may be two different colours simultaneously in two
members, in consequence of a disease. ‘Thus, the tongue may
become white and the countenance dusky. This occurs in
jaundice, when this is due to an intense acridity of the bilious
humour.


480. LExtraneous causes of Colour Change


Cold climate (e.g. in Scotchmen), hot climate (e.g. negroes).
Emotional changes : fear, rage, sadness, etc.


V. THE FORM OF THE MEMBERS


481. Hot temperament : big broad chest ; large limbs ;
no narrowing or shortening of the hands or feet ; conspicuous
full veins ; big strong pulse ; the muscles round the joints large
(for growth and the form of composite structures requires heat).

Cold temperament : the contraries of all the above. The
natural faculties and the formative faculty are impaired by cold,


so that the natural functions are not perfectly carried out.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 269


Dry temperament : roughness, curvature of form ; joints
conspicuous. Adam’s apple prominent. Nasal cartilages con-
spicuous ; nose of medium size.

Moist temperament : the contraries.


Joannitius adds: fleshiness (excess of heat and moisture in the tem-
perament) ; Fatness (excess of moisture and intense coldness); Leanness (hot
temperament, and intense dryness) ; Delicate build—cold and very dry ; Massive
build—cold and very moist, or very cold and very moist; Justness of form—well-
balanced humours,


VI. RAPIDITY WITH WHICH MEMBERS RESPOND TO HEAT AND COLD


482. If a member becomes “hot” rapidly and easily,
it shows that it is hot in temperament, because change in the
direction of its own temperament is more readily undergone
than in the opposite direction. Similarly, if the member behaves
in the contrary way, it will be of cold temperament.

483. Some assert that it is otherwise, because we know
(they say) that a thing only reacts to its contrary and not to its
like. But if that were the case, it would follow that a thing would
react more strongly to its like. But the reply to this is that two
things are only really alike when one does not interact with the
other; we then know that their respective qualities are of like
“species” and “nature.” Of two things A and B, if B is
less hot than A, we cannot speak of it as being “‘ like A.” As
long as one of the two is hotter, they cannot be called “ alike.”
One is cold compared with the other. So an interaction (on the
part of the body) is possible. B would be cold compared with A
—not hot. B, too, may react with something else whichis colder
than itself [say C] besides reacting with “cold” [say D]. C or
D may enhance the intrinsic quality of B, according as they are
stronger than B or not. It is easier for it to change towards that
which enhances this quality of B, or neutralizes the opposite
quality of B, on condition that the new causative agent harmonizes
with A and B, and neutralizes the temperamental nature (p).

Therefore it is clear that when the nature is of hot tempera-
ment heat will not show any action on it until the influence of
the contrary cold has first been removed ; and this is achieved
by preventing the calefaction (which tends to be produced by a
hot temperament) from becoming greater. The result is that
if both events occur simultaneously, and the inhibiting agent is
destroyed, they will mutually help one another in producing
heat, and the two qualities will thus reach an acme.

When the body is exposed to foreign heat, however, the
balance of temperament is likely to be destroyed. The innate


270 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


heat of the body is all-important for resisting this. We depend
on our innate heat for the neutralization of ‘‘ hot” poisons, and
for their expulsion and for the dissolution of their substance.

484, The innate heat, therefore, is the instrument of
(human) “ nature” for combating the injurious action of extra-
neous or foreign heat. By its means, the breath gets rid of it,
expels it, disperses it, and oxidizes its material basis (m). Further,
it combats the injurious action of foreign “cold,” expelling it
“‘by contrary.” Coldness has not this power. It is only the
contrary to coldness—i.e. foreign heat—which can combat or
repress it. Coldness cannot combat extraneous “cold.” The
innate heat does.

485. Innate heat is that which protects the natural humours
from being overruled by foreign calorific agents. Jf the innate
heat is strong, the natural faculties are able to work through it,
upon the humours, and so effect digestion and maturation, and
so maintain them within the confines of the healthy state. The
humours move according to its ministration. Extraneous or
foreign “‘ heat’? cannot interfere with this movement, and so
they do not undergo putrefactive decomposition. Jf the innate
heat is feeble, the natural faculties are harassed in the regulation
of the humours. For the instrument—the intermediary between
the natural faculties and the humours—is enfeebled. Stagnation
sets in and foreign heat now finds the humours no longer opposed
to its action. It overcomes them. It utilizes them in its own
way, and imparts a foreign movement to them ; and the result
is what is known as “‘ putrefaction.”’

486. Hence it is clear that the innate heat is the instrument
of all the faculties, whereas coldness can only help them second-
arily. ‘That is why one speaks of “innate heat,” but not of
“innate cold” ; and why that which is proportionate to heat
is not comparable with cold.


§ 203. This passage is evidently an attempt to explain the nature of bacterial
action and infection without -the knowledge of the actual bacteria themselves.
The description is so ingenious that it requires little change to modernize it.

The following may be amplified accordingly :

1. The meaning of innate heat.

2. The nature of “ foreign heat, “ foreign cold.”

3. The meaning of the term ‘‘ hot poisons.”’

4. The meaning of hot and cold, as relative terms.

(1) Innate heat. This term, particularly in this passage, is equivalent to
“vitality.” This word describes a complex concept. Though regarded as vague
and quite unsatisfactory to-day, it may be said to be amenable to reduction to a
formula—and a formula into which several factors enter. The condemnation of the
term is due to the non-recognition of this fact and non-recognition that many well-
known and freely-accepted data belong to it.

(2) The nature of ‘‘ foreign heat’’; ‘‘ foreign cold.’’ These refer to material
agents, now known as pathogenic micro-organisms. The material substance,
which is stated by Avicenna to be oxidised by “‘ innate heat,” is the bacterial sub-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE agi


stance, which as we know undergoes lysis in the course of the immunising processes
of the body. The “ heat”’ refers to what we know as the bacterial toxins which
act upon the thermogenic centres, and produce numerous other effects on the
tissues. The word “heat’’ thus comprises two things. The pyrexia produced
by bacterial invasion may be theoretically distinguished from the innate heat, but
practically speaking the rise of temperature is generally admitted to be part of the
so-called defensive mechanism against infections. The destruction of the bacteria,
and of their products by anti-substances—these events are comprised in the words
“dispersing the foreign heat.’’ After all, both bacteria and products are “ dis-
persed.”” We are only being told the same fact in different language.

In the case of foreign cold, here the organisms and products differ. But if
the temperature becomes subnormal, the immunizing process is not ascribed to the
lowered temperature. Recovery from the infection still depends on the “ innate
heat’ or “ vitality ’’—that is, a series of processes of immunization which take
place whether the patient develops fever or not.

Avicenna considers that the formation of septic products is more likely if there
is not much pyrexia, on the ground that in such a case the bacteria, as we should say,
meet with less resistance, and are enabled to produce those decompositions of the
body fluids which we know to take place readily as soon as the vitality of a part
is lowered.

(3) The meaning of the term “ hot poisons.’ Clearly the word poison must be
understood as covering both bacterial agents and their products. The toxic products
may produce rise of temperature, and are therefore reasonably called ‘‘ hot’”’;
others do not have this effect.

(4) The meaning of hot and cold, as relative teyms. In this passage a thing is
hot or cold according to its effect on the bodily sensations, or its effect on the heat
centres of the body. Taken in its literal or surface meaning, of hot temperature,
cold temperature, the passage is of course pedantic and useless. It should be evident
that the words “ hot” and “cold’”’ cannot possibly have meant literal heat and
cold.


VII. SIGNS DERIVED FROM SLEEP AND WAKEFULNESS


The sensitive faculties make use of these things frequently,
in a manner corresponding to the primary qualities. Thus we
say that in the wakeful state the body is the instrument of the
soul.”

487, If there is equipoise between sleep and wakefulness,
it means that the temperament (especially of the brain) is equable.
If sleep dominates, it denotes a cold and moist temperament
(of the brain), whereas if wakefulness dominates, it shows a dry
and hot temperament (especially in the brain).


A strong inclination to sleep denotes debility—a loss of tone of the muscular
power. Histologically, sleep depends on a break in the ideation-zone of the cerebral
cortex ; if there is a break in the layer below that, the sleep will be that of stupor
or coma. The break in this situation is marked in amentia and dementia.—Wake-
fulness, or insomnia, denotes: poisons circulating in the blood, powerful sensory
impulses (pain), or powerful emotions.

VIII. SIGNS DERIVED FROM THE STATE OF THE FUNCTIONS*


488. LEgquable temperament: the activities of the body
proceed fully and perfectly and naturally.
Hot temperament: there is over-activity, exaggerated


* Functions may be weakened, exalted, depraved, obstructed in their action
or abolished.


DN THE CANON OF MEDICINE


activity. Rapid growth of stature ; increased rate of growth
of hair ; early eruption of the teeth.

Cold temperament : the activities lessen and become sluggish
and delayed, but a hot temperament may cause weak and sluggish
activity though only if a deviation from the natural course is
associated with weakness.

489, Many natural functions may slow down or lessen
owing to heat. Thus in the case of sleep, sometimes there is
insomnia or lack of sleep from the effect of the heat of a hot
temperament. Similarly some of the natural states may be
intensified by cold. ‘Thus, again, in the case of sleep, though this
is not strictly the outcome of natural functions, but only an effect
conditional upon some causal agent. For the necessity for
sleep for life and health is not absolute ; (a) it enables the breath
to separate off from its impeding factors—the fatigue-substances;
(2) there is need for a recumbent posture after a meal ; (c) one
cannot achieve two (contrary) things at the same time. Hence
the need for sleep is simply some impotency. It is not included
in “‘ natural necessity.’’ And if its exclusion be “ natural ”’ in
the sense that it is inevitable, this is only because the word “ natu-
ral” is here used for “‘ the inevitable.’’ One word is being made
stand for two things. But the most accurate application of the
term is to “‘ equable temperament,”’ for it is this upon which
equability of functions and their final completion depends.
To use the term in regard to the four qualities—heat, coldness,
dryness, moisture—is only hypothetical (takhmini).

490. Among the“ strong ” (“ jelal ’’) actions which denote
a hot temperament are: powerful voice; harsh or coarse
voice ; rapid way of talking ; constantly talking ; anger ;
rapid gestures ; blinking of the eyelids. Before deducing a
hot temperament from these, one must make sure there is no
local cause for them, and that they are not confined to one
particular member.


IX. SIGNS DERIVED FROM THE EXPULSIVE FACULTY AND FROM THE
QUALITY. OF DISCHARGES


491. ‘The temperament is hot: (1) if the waste matters
are retained ; (2) if the feces, urine, sweat, etc., are strong in
odour, acrid, of normal colour, and show the normal degree of
oxidation and maceration—in the case of matters which normally
undergo such changes.

If the signs are contrary, the temperament is cold.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


x.


SIGNS DERIVED FROM THE STATES OF THE MIND,


ACTION AND PASSION


273


DURING


“Every expression is the sign of a state of mind; that state is as the hand,
and the expression is the instrument.’’—(Mesnavi,** p. 29).


Name of Temperament corresponding.


492. Evidence.
Hot. Dry.
. I — (Shameless)* | Infatuation ; love-
Concupiscible 2 | Excitable passion.
3 | Lively
Vivacious
Emotional a —_——
aspect I | Hopefulness Brooding
Trascible 2 | Courage ; temerityt
3 |Easily provoked to Anger lasts some time
anger
Duration Short Long*
Intellectual power | Good Imaginative es
Mental Power of observa- Good _ a
capacity tion
Capability Good — ig
Talent Conspicuous Memory good
Stern Gentle


Moral aspects


Virility of morals and
manners

Diligence

Much flexibility of
opinion}


Ego faculty


Love of good opinion
Not easily perturbed
or downcast


Takes things to heart


Movements and gestures


Rapid


Dreams


Of warming oneself at
a fire ; sitting in the
hot sunt


Cold temperaments show the opposites to those given for


hot temperaments ;


moist, the opposites to those given for dry.


The whole of the above, or at any rate the major part of it,


refers to the congenital or innate temperament.


Now we rater


to acquired temperaments (“ intemperaments oat


* In the case of the moist tentperament, the duration of emotional disturbance


is short.


+ In the case of a cold temperament, the dreams are of being in the cold, out
in the snow, or of being immersed in cold water.
In short, the character of the visual images in the dream is related to the char-
acter of the dominant humour, partly because the dream varies with the state of the


“breath ”’ at the time.


{ These represent negative or weak aspects.


Aap THE CANON OF MEDICINE


493, EVIDENCES OF THE FOUR PRIMARY INTEMPERAMENTS


Evidence, Hot. | Cold. Moist.* Dry.


Inflammatory Fevers related — —
Morbid states to] conditions be- | to the serous
which there is a) coming febrile. humour.
tendency Rheumatism. ’
Loss of vigour. —_ Lassitude. —-
Functional Deficient energy. |Deficient diges-|Difficult ——
Power tive power. digestion.
Bitter taste in — Mucoid saliva- —
mouth. tion.
Subjective Excessive thirst. |Lack of desire oo —
sensations. Sense of burning} for fluids.
at cardiac orifice. — Sleepiness. Insomnia,
| Wakefulness
Pulse extremely |Flaccid joints. |Diarrhcea Rough skin.
quick and. fre- Swollen Spare habit
Physical signs. quent ; approach- eyelids (acquired not
ing the (weak) inborn).
type met within
lassitude.


Calefacients are |Infrigidants are|/Moist articles |Dry regimen


all harmful. all harmful. of diet are harmful.
Foods and harmful.
medicines. $f —_____—__
Infrigidants 'Calefacients Humectants
benefit. benefit. benefit.


Relation to
weather Worse in summer.! Worse in winter. Bad in autumn
(i.e., season). |


4. Tue Evipences oF EquaBLle TEMPERAMENT
(i.e., the evidences of symmetry, beauty of form, and good conformation.)


494, In addition to the signs of normal temperament
already given, there are :

1. ‘To the feel, the body imparts sensations mean between
hotness, coldness, dryness, moisture, softness, hardness.


The skin feels moist and warm, and has a beautiful smooth and elastic surface.
The complexion is clear.


2. In colour, the body shows a balance between whiteness
and redness.

3. In build, the body is neither bulky nor spare, though
on the whole inclined to be bulky. (Robust Habit of Body.’)
‘Tallness and straightness of stature ; quick growth.

4. ‘The veins of the skin are neither prominent nor sub-
merged ; they are separated and spread.

* The signs of moist intemperament include those of the cold.


+ Hot water, rarefied oils are beneficial to the dry temperament and are
avidly taken up,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE aE Ns


5. The hair is neither profuse nor sparse, thick nor thin,
curly nor straight, black nor white. During puberty they tend
to a tawny shade rather than black, in youth they tend to black-
ness. [Full hair where hair should be.]

6. Equally inclined for sleep and for wakefulness.


Sleep quiet, uninterrupted, and followed, on waking, by cheerfulness, and a
contented mind.


7. Agreeable dreams arousing hopefulness, with fragrant
perfumes and alluring voices, visions and agreeable com-
panionship. :

8. Mental faculties : vigour of imagination, intellectual
power, and memory. Emotions balanced between excess and
deficiency—e.g., between courage and timidity, between anger
and patience, between sternness and clemency, between vacilla-
tion and perseverance.

g. Perfection in all functions (185).


Therefore no conscious feeling of digestion, or discomfort of any kind.
Micturition painless, the urine not feeling hot, having an odour neither sweet nor
sour, amber-coloured, and forming no deposit. Defecation without soiling the skin,
the feces firm, but not hard.—The appetite according to genuine hunger, and for
natural foods ; thirst only for water.—Mouth closed when breathing. Adaptability
to climate and to season (Ch. M.’).


10. Movements of the limbs deft. (Skilful.)


495. A person with such a temperament will have a happy
expression, will be lovable and contented, moderate in desire
for food and drink, possessing a good gastric digestion, good
hepatic and venous digestion, and good alterative and assimila-
tive power all through the tissues. The waste matters will be
moderate in amount and will be discharged through the proper


channels.


5. Tue INDICATIONS AFFORDED BY CONGENITAL
MaAlL-CONFORMATION OF THE Bopy.

(i.e., asymmetry, misproportion, unshapeliness, ugliness, and the like.)

496. In brief, there is non-uniformity of temperament
among the members ; or, perchance, the principal members
depart from equability and come to be of contrary temperament,
one deviating towards one, another to its contrary. If the
components of the body are out of proportion, it 1s unfcrtunate
both for talent and reasoning power. ‘Thus, (1) a tall person
with a large abdomen and short face and round head, and short
fingers ; (2) a person of small stature, with small head, much
flesh in the face and forehead, and even in the neck and feet—
the face like the full-moon ; the jaws rounded and massive.


276 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Similarly, (3) if the head and forehead were round, but the
face very round (long, marginal reading), and the neck very
thick, and if the eyes are sluggish in movement. Such persons
would be the very last of people to be classed as in good health.


6. Tue Sicns or PLeTHORA


497. Regarding plethora there are two aspects. ‘There is
the plethora in regard to the cavities, tubes, and juice canals ;
and there is the plethora in regard to power or strength (vitality).

1. Plethora of the channels of the body consists of an undue
amount of humours or of breath. These may be healthy in
quality, and merely superabundant in quantity, so that the
channels are overdistended and overfilled. In such a case
movements become dangerous, the vascular channels running a
risk of rupture, followed by a flux towards the regions where
there is back-pressure, and choking of these parts may occur,
with subsequent apoplexy or epilepsy. To relieve such, the
local plethora must be rapidly relieved by venesection.

2. Plethora of strength of faculties. In this case the error
is not in quantity of humours, but in unhealthiness of quality,
whereby the faculties are embarrassed, and they become inefficient
for the processes of digestion and maturation. A person who
is in this state 1s in danger of putrefactive disorders.

498. Speaking in general she signs of plethora of the first
type are:

Objective: red face; full veins; tightness of skin ;
sluggish movements (gestures) ; full pulse. High-coloured
urine ; dense urine ; scanty appetite.

Subjective : sense of weight in the limbs ; weak vision ;
dreams in which there is a sense of weight—as when one dreams
one is unable to move, or is carrying a heavy weight, or cannot
give utterance to words. This kind of dream may be compared
with that associated with attenuation of humours, or where the
humours are moderate in amount for here one dreams one is
flying through the air, or moving at a great speed.


The modern term “ hypertension’’ is covered by the old term of plethora or
repletion. The correspondence is verified by some of its symptoms. Thus, hemor-
thagic phenomena occur—in the nose, retina, cerebrum, meninges, labyrinth, the
skin; and as hematuria and hemetemesis simulating organic disease. Hyper-
tension causes fatigue of the heart shown by: dyspnoea, palpitation, quick pulse,
anginal attacks, nocturnal pseudo-asthma, bruit de galop'*? (p. 348).


499. The signs of plethora in respect of faculties : Heaviness;
sluggishness; loss of appetite (these are also present in the pre-


ceding type). Disinclination for exertion. Sense of burden-
someness.


fter


ross
‘The dreams consist


277
in is not
h cases


But in the case of
its signs are manifest.


inant in suc


qyuoureteduis} SNOTASIg
+ * WOr}asoUaA 4Se] JO OJeC
ne - zea JO U0SeIS


There is no lassitude except a


ns which now follow.
13 DoMINANT


THE CANON OF MEDICINE
If the plethora of the faculty is unaccompanied by plethora


of humours, the veins are not as distended, and the sk


d by the sig


Tue EvipDENCES WHICH SHOW WHICH OF THE Humours


Which of the humours it is which is dom


iscerne
500


d
plethora of faculty, illness ensues before all


of sensations of itching, stinging, burning, and of fetid odours.
H.


as tense, or the pulse as full and large, or the urine as g


(dense) or as red in colour.
undue movement and exercise and activity.


1S


A . - +310 a6 oe ae svqry
9}ON 9}ON 3}ON 930N a ut pear] Aq1[290°]
suotjzedns09
UdTIT SOY
—+ $10}0ej SuIpIoo01Ig
q ‘ : 3 ‘snue ‘9sou
“sigo{N JIAa ‘ eaoydiour osTe suorqeyonia sun. ; aie
¢ *eooylIeIp o1aAo joe pue wuoljsesip yeep, | wry Ajipear yNo sMOY poolg q
‘mo00 ua}jO SIepiostp o1ueTds yiretp iS | Pt Pp ies ce ole
jO yoeq Ul JYsIEM Jo VSUIS A eyorpeeyy
—_ *syorido~peeu UI0Iy SY _ — Ysepesoor
«XN PLOe ,, Santo
= e [Iq uses pue AMOT[e —_ _— T}TUIO A
= Pees Ms Ae — “yueselg 2% vasneN
—: euswiousyd [ewiouqy
“apnyisse] ‘ssou
‘apnyeqa -palt} ‘ssourze] ‘aoueTouuIo *ssoUISMOIP TeNuT}UOD
SsoUTNjoyeM + Sg JO esmeS ee Epedeet | best jock : “MOJS SUIT} UOTPOLOY, “sor}Noes [eUOTIEY,
e “SuIpoO}eI}s ‘SuIUME A (samyso8) syUSTIOAOTL
‘oqo ‘uns joy £ qyeq
yoy { uoTJeIsepUoD .e ! MOT ay] OY} pue ‘pooyq ur Surur


sSurq} yorsq SutAjI1103
famn}10} jo ‘ssouyiep jo 1e9,J


*sSursuo] Anes ‘ paavidaq


*yoeulo}s
jo yynour ye SuruMq JO ssuag


-a4 zeodde Moya jou syool
-qo {s3ey MoTeA ‘sary seg


*rapuny} ‘ploo ‘urer
‘mous ‘SIdATI ‘sIa}eM S29


“squat yO Ayrprooryy


-wirms yo { Apoq 9y} jO yNO

SuruI09 pooyq ‘ sduly} per sees
‘uoljiexe Aq

IO} poJuNOsOe JOU ssouTIeS\


sumeaiqg


9u0} IeMOsNyy


*AysIIyL
“100g


‘ayse} JoWIG


‘gjdoad pjo ut ‘dso
‘uaye} ST eS sseTun Juesqy


*T[QNp sesues
‘qyNoul UT ssoujeaMs Tensnuy)


ping 10; ejyeddy
pooj 10; ajtqoddy


a}se} 2 sosuas TeTIadS
—! SoT}[NOR} SATTSUeS


a sa00k J

‘asuap ! YOR IO peiNojoo yreq mabe our)
= ‘pidey | pue Mo[s aq 0} spuez ‘jos easing

— ‘Arp pue ysnoy — -= S[IIJSON

‘Arp pue ysnoy = “poy onsuoy

‘ayse} Jo}Ig *eartes ANOT}s Juepunqy ‘satnysnd 0} Aqypiqery yInoyw


—! SoT}NOKF BAT} L}OSIA.


*AITe “AILEY *yuni} uo JuesqYy rey
nate *sopounin
afqeyoujur pue suorjdnis - }
ae eM can eae Uys — —_ ‘Surqqnr uo sueppexy ++ uTys 94} JO 0781S
“prey Ys] t *“TOOo puke 30S “aay YseTyt Apog 24} JO [284
‘Airey pue yep *eaTpount
suises Apoq afoyMm ‘Aysnq | -W0o pue UTys UT asut} MOEA ‘aped A[npug, “Appny BROOD
ae So a Si a3V
*poreaoo-[[am s}urol
*pozy eeu” ‘oSiey szurof $ uve | ‘1apues seuoq ‘ e}euTWIEy A ‘poor |** onbrshyd [erouer +: Loaasy
“SHOITIAVULY “snouas *SQOUNINONVS *HONAGIAG


‘prey pue YyOryL


*OINDIOHD


*payotaysu0g,


Tt


SUIOA BORJINS


278 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


501. Additional remarks :


The age of the patient gives a clue to the kind of humour
likely to be dominant.


Excess of sanguineous humour is shown by signs akin to
those of plethora, and some of the signs given are accounted for
by simple plethora.


When the atrabilious humour is in excess, the blood is
dusky and heavier than normal. Atrabilious humour is seldom
in excess in pale and slight persons.


One or two of the data given (under general physique ; on the hair; the sur-
face veins) are from Rhazes. ;

Note the patient at rest (in repose) and in activity (gestures, attitude).

Note that the signs of his temperament are accentuated when he is ill. The
type of reaction to infection is determined by his temperament.


8. SiGNs oF OBSTRUCTION (TO THE FLOW OF THE Humours)


502.


BSTRUCTION is known to be present if
“. there are signs indicative of accumulation
AG of matters, and the patient experiences the
“ sensation of fullness throughout the body
Frys without there being any of the signs of
Z general plethora.

If the obstructions are in those channels
through which much fluid is bound to flow, there is
a feeling of weight or heaviness. Thus, in hepatic
obstructions, the material from the aliments cannot enter the
organ, and therefore accumulates and is retained, so as to
produce a much greater ‘‘encumbrance”’ than an inflammatory
swelling would. ‘The difference from the latter consists in the
great heaviness and the absence of fever.

Obstructions in other channels do not lead to such a
sensation of heaviness, but only one of overfullness and of
stretching and tenseness.


503. Obstruction in venous channels causes the skin to
become tinged with yellow, since the blood does not then gain
access to the surface (layers of the skin).


The subject of “ obstructions’ is capable of great expansion.
(i) The symptoms differ :—
(a) With each of the humours. Thus, serous humour obstruction is manifested


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 279


as cedema of the glottis, cedema of the lung, nasopharyngeal hypersecretion, oedema
of the kidney tissue, of the blood itself; vomiting, diarrhoea, headache (too much
cerebro-spinal fluid), convulsions; delirium, coma, Cheyne-Stokes respiration,
amaurosis.

(b) With the different substances. Thus in nephritis, obstruction of the
channels in the skin prevents the wastes leaving the body by that route, with conse-
quent manifestation as arthritis, anginas, otitis, etc. —

(c) With the atom groups. Thus obstruction to the outlet of nitrogen
(azotemia) manifests as hypertension, vomiting, diarrhoea, sialorrhcea, stomatitis,
parotitis, retinitis, anemia of plasmatic type; arthralgia ; fibrillar tremors ; coma ;
loss of appetite for meats.

Viewing diseases in this way, the important thing is to find both site of obstruc-
tion, and substance or atom-groups concerned.

(ii) The symptoms may be monosyndromic or polysyndromic. (Vallery-
Radot,14! p. 296-299.)

(iii) Obstruction. to the flow of “ breath.”

(iv) The “ pores’? which may become obstructed vary in size from that
of the orifices of the body down to the smallest channels, whether visible to the
naked eye or only with the microscope, or whether sub-microscopic or “ ultra-
microscopic.’’ The pores vary in shape and consistence, resilience, elasticity, dis-
tensibility. Fluids may traverse them in both directions, but when there is ob-
struction, they may be able to pass only in one direction or not at all.


g. Tue Sicns or Gaszous DISTENSION


504. Gaseous distension is recognized (1) by means of
pain experienced in the sentient members. ‘This is because the
gases produce a severance of continuity in the tissue-elements ;
(2) by the movements which take place in the sentient members ;
(3) by sound ; (4) by touch.

1. The pain of stretching is a sign of gaseous distension,
especially if the painful tissues are soft to the touch. ‘The evi-
dence will be complete if the pain afterwards ceases, for this
could not occur without there being a loss of continuity. In
members like bone or glandular tissues, gaseous distension is
not manifested by pain, even if such distension arises in
bones which have been fractured (unless the skin has been torn
by the fractured ends).

2. The movements which point to gaseous distension are :
fidgeting, tossing about (peristalsis). They are produced by the
gaseous materials making their way through the organs out of
the body. ;

3. Noises may be produced, e.g., gurglings, rumblings.
These may be evoked by manual compression, percussing—as
is done for distinguishing between dropsy (ascites) and tym-
panites. }

4. Touch enables one to distinguish between distension
with gas and other nodular swellings. Gaseous distension
stretches the part and yields to pressure. That is not the case
with fluid distension (liquid, viscous, mucoid).

505. The difference between inflation and gaseous dis-
tension is not in substance but in form. The form or shape,


280 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


of the distended area is different when standing or lying down
and manipulation will alter its position.


10. Tue Evipences oF SoLip SWELLINGS


506. The presence of external tumours is easily demon-
strated to the sense of sight. Deeply placed inflammatory
swellings are revealed by accompanying fever, as well as by a sense
of heaviness, if the affected member be devoid of sensation, or of
stabbing pain as well as heaviness if the member be sentient.
Interference or hindrance to function and movement of a part
affords a further sign of the presence of a “‘ tumour.”’ A certain
degree of intumescence of the overlying part is a very important
sign of an inflammatory mass, if sensation has access to it.

Cold swellings are not accompanied by pain.

507. It is difficult to describe the signs of tumours in a
general manner. Even if one could do so it would be at the
expense of wearisome words. ‘That is why it is simpler to defer
details to the special chapters. It will suffice for the present to
say that wherever heaviness and not pain are perceived, and the
signs of dominance of the serous humour are present, this leaves
no doubt about the swelling being of pituitous nature.

If there are signs of dominance of the atrabilious humour,
and the swelling is hard to the touch, it will be an atrabilious mass,
because induration is pre-eminent among the signs of this form
of swelling.

508, Inflammatory swellings in muscular organs are
extremely painful, and fever is intense ; the nerves are stretched
early (causing the pain) and there is delirium. Such swellings
interfere with the movements of contraction and expansion. —

509. Swellings in any of the inward parts of the body
cause the abdominal wall to become wasted. If they are in-
flammatory and undergo suppuration and track outwards, they
cause extremely severe pain, with fever ; the tongue becomes
very rough, and there 1s great wakefulness, and the symptoms
become more and more severe—notably the sense of heaviness and
weight and stiffness in the affected part. Induration and tension
become evident. Sudden emaciation of the body, with hollow-
ness of the eyes may develop. But when the process of sup-
puration has attained maturity, fever is high, pain lessens, the
pulse softens, throbbing subsides, and itching replaces the pain.
If there was much redness and induration, the redness lessens,
and the induration is less noticeable. Pressure on neighbouring
organs lessens, and all the causes of pain subside, along with


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 281


the great sense of heaviness. When finally the abscess bursts
there is a rigor (produced by the acridity of the sanious matter) ;
fever increases again (because of the movement and discharge
of the pus), and the pulse becomes “‘ empty,” unequal, weak,
infrequent, small, broad, and slow. ‘There is loss of appetite ;
often the extremities grow warm.

The pus may also be discharged through ordinary routes —
the expectoration, the vomit, the urine, or the feces.

510. The following signs after the bursting of an abscess
are good : subsiding fever, easy breathing, return of strength,
quick evacuation of pus through its proper channels.

511. Sometimes, however, in deep abscesses, pus passes
from one member to another ; and this transference is sometimes
beneficial, sometimes detrimental. It is beneficial when it passes
from a principal member to a subordinate one ; as for instance,
when it passes from the brain to the tissues behind the ears, and
from the liver to the groins. It is detrimental if it passes from
an ignoble organ to a noble one, or to a weaker or less resistant
organ, as for instance when pleurisy involves the heart or
lung.

512. The passage of latent or hidden inflammation and
abscesses and eruptions to higher or lower regions affords (dis-
tinctive) signs. If they pass downwards, this is shown by difficult
breathing and other respiratory trouble, and tightness of the
chest. There is a burning sensation beginning below and passing
to the upper parts. ‘There is heaviness in the region of the
clavicle ; and headache. Evidence may also be obtained from
the clavicle and forearm.

If it should pass upwards, and the brain become involved
in inflammation, it is a bad and very grave sign. But if the
inflammation passes into the loose tissues behind the ears, there
is hope of recovery.

Epistaxis is a good sign in such a case, as it is in all inflam-
mations of the internal organs.

A more careful account of all kinds of swelling will follow
later, at the same time as we deal with the morbid states of the
several internal organs.


11. Tue Eviptncrs or Loss or Continuity


518. Loss of continuity in a visible member 1s readily
evident to the senses. In the case of interior organs, loss of
continuity 1s shown by


282 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(1) Pain—boring, stabbing, tearing.

(2) Especially if there is 20 fever.

(3) Often there is the flow of some humour—such as (4)
hemoptysis ; (2) effusion into a roomy cavity of the body ;
(c) outburst of purulent matter : in the cases where loss of con-
tinuity follows the maturation of an abscess, with bursting of
the abscess. If the suppurative process has matured, the fever
will subside and the pus be discharged, and the sensation of
heaviness and pain will subside. Otherwise the pain would in-
crease, and the other symptoms become more severe.

(4) In some cases, loss of continuity is revealed by complete
luxation of the member, or partial displacement from its proper
position (e.g. hernia).

(5) Diversion of discharges from normal to other channels,
or into some cavity, which has itself been produced by the break
of continuity. Ex. : traumatic rupture of the intestines, whereby
the fzcal contents cease to leave the body; (false aneurysm).

(6) In some cases, the existence of loss of continuity escapes
detection by these general signs. Special signs peculiar to each
member must then be utilized ; such as: loss of sensation;
inability to retain the fluids normally entering the part; rigid or
fixed position resulting from displacement of the part from its
proper position ; lack of rigidity ; inability to retain relation
to another member from which it has become displaced.

514, Prognosis. As you are aware, both loss of continuity
and the presence of (inflammatory swellings) are more grave
when they occur in very sensitive fibromuscular members.
In fact, such loss of continuity may prove fatal from syncope
or spasm. ‘The syncope is due to the violence of the pain ;
the spasms are due to the irritation of the nerves in which the
parts are so rich.

Next in severity comes loss of continuity near joints,
because restoration can only be slow considering the undue
mobility of the parts, and the fact that spaces are opened up in
and round the joints, and matters readily flow into these spaces.


We now proceed to expound the subjects of the Pulse and
the Urine, as affording general evidence of morbid states.


THE PULSE


/ “Tt is necessary to enquire diligently into the properties of the pulse, for
diagnosis and for the use of drugs.’’—Duhalde. *°
“Every important variety of pulse revealed by the sphygmograph was re-
cognized, described, and named, before the Christian era. . . . We count the beats
and note their force and volume to ascertain the strength of the sufferer and the
effect upon him of the disease. . . . Many of the indications obtained from the pulse
do not depend on a knowledge of the circulation at all.’’* Broadbent, ‘‘ The Pulse,”’
1890, p. 32.
515. Definition. The pulse is a movement in the heart
and arteries (the receptacles of the breath) which takes the form
of alternate expansion and contraction, whereby the breath


becomes subjected to the influence of the air inspired.


In modern language, “it is the change of shape from the
flattened condition impressed on the vessel by the finger which the
artery assumes under the distending force of the blood within it,
which constitutes for us the pulse.” (Broadbent, ib. p. 20.)


The subject of the pulse may be considered (1) generally,
(i1) in regard to each of the several diseases. We defer the latter
till a later period when we speak of the diseases themselves.
At this stage we discuss the subject generally.

516. Description.—Every beat of the pulse comprises
two movements and two pauses. Thus,

expansion : pause : contraction : pause.

One movement could not pass at once into another in an
opposite direction. There must be a boundary or “ limit of an
act,’ as is expounded in the work on natural science.

Many doctors consider that it is impossible to perceive the
movement of contraction. Others. are able to perceive it—as
“strength ’’—if the pulse is strong ; as “ degree of expansion ”’
in a large pulse, as “ great resistance’ in a hard pulse, and, in a
slow pulse, by the long period of time occupied by the movement.

Galen also says: ‘“‘ For many years I was doubtful about
clearly discerning the movement of contraction by touch, and I
shelved the question until such time as I should learn enough to
fill the gap in my knowledge. After that, the doors of the pulse


* The following section on Sphygmology is therefore not obsolete, but of real
value to the modern practitioner.


283


284 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


were opened to me. Whoever should study these things as I
did will perceive that which I perceived [as it were, a brilliant
light shining suddenly out from behind total darkness. Whoever
allows these words to be true and not fabulous will benefit very
greatly ; despair will not touch him or frighten him from the
pursuit of his study, even though he makes no progress for
many years.”] Nevertheless there are conditions in which this
movement cannot be perceived. ;

517. Reason for feeling the pulse at the wrist. (4) It 1s
readily accessible ; there is little flesh over it ; (2) the patient is
not distressed by exposing this part.


§ 204. This reason is important in the East where the doctor
may not expose a female patient in any way. This interdiction
accounts for the extraordinary erudition attained in the art of feeling
the pulse, for instance in China. ‘‘ The old Chinese doctors are
remarkably good diagnosticians. Although the study of the patient
is restricted to the examination of the two radial pulses, and noting
the state of the eyes and tongue, the diagnosis is disconcertingly
accurate.”’ (Hartmann.?®)

William of Rubruk, a Franciscan friar (1253) recorded: ‘‘ The
Cathayans .. . are first-rate artists in every kind, and their phy-
sicians have a thorough knowledge of the virtues of herbs, and an
admirable skill in diagnosis by the pulse’ (quoted in Encycl. Brit.,
vi. 189, by Prof. Giles, who also states “ the variations of the pulse
have been classified and allocated with a minuteness hardly credible ”’
(p228).

Eusebius Renaudot!#§ (p. 209), in 1733, wrote: ‘‘ They are so
sure of the disease that they tell all the precedent symptoms to a
Micehy..


(3) The artery runs in a straight course (which is no small
help towards accuracy of diagnosis : Galen).
(4) The distance from the heart is not great.


§ 205. The heart and arteries all pulsate with the same rhythm,
so that any artery can be used for feeling the pulse. But most arteries
are embedded in flesh and cannot be distinctly felt. The order of
clearness is: wrist, soles, behind ears, along arms.

Arteries within bones cannot, of course be-felt ; nor can arteries
be made use of which have other bodies in front of them except in
emaciated persons, where for instance the aorta or limb arteries
become palpable for the first time.


518. Technique in feeling the pulse. (1) The position of the hand.
If the palm be turned upwards the pulse will appear wider, less
high and less long, especially in thin persons. If the hand be
palm down, the pulse seems higher, longer and narrower.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 285


§ 206. (2) If the patient be a male, use the left hand: if a
female, the right.°* This ancient Chinese idea, that the pulse of
one side has a different significance to that of the other, is also met
with, in a different form, in recent literature. Thus, Jones (see Bibl.)
states that the pulse at the right wrist informs of the state of the con-
stitution, or vitality, and that of the left wrist informs of the local
disease, and the real and true condition of the patient. He further
states that when both pulses are fully strong and regular, after an ill-
ness, the patient is nearly well—Baraduc,?"° on the basis of biometric
observations of an elaborate kind, asserts that reactions obtained
with the right hand belong to changes in the physical or material
vitality of the body, whereas those obtained with the left hand belong
to the psychic vitality —These statements are of interest in relation
to the ancient Chinese idea.

(3) The position of the observer’s hand.—This must be adapted
according to the position of the patient. The middle finger must be
placed exactly at the junction of carpus with lower end of radius.
The other two fingers are now allowed to rest upon the artery, one
on either side (2b.}. The index finger should be nearest the heart.
(Broadbent, p. 39.)


(4) Emotional state of the patient. ‘The pulse should be felt
at a time when the patient is not in a state of excitement or anger,
or affected by exertion, or under the influence of the emotions,
or in a state of satiety (which renders the pulse heavy), or of
hunger ; nor must it be a time when usual habits are neglected
or new ones are being formed.


§ 207. (5) The state of the observer. The observer must be ina
calm state of mind. He must be very attentive and free from the
least distraction of thought. The body must be tranquil, and the
posture at ease. The respirations should thus be unimpeded and
regular. His own state of health should be good (Duhalde.?°).

Comparison with a normal pulse is thus possible.


§ 208. (6) Other instructions given in the Chinese system of Sphygmology.

The instructions for feeling the pulse include the following: first apply the
fingers gently, touching the skin very lightly at the three places corresponding to
the three fingers—named C (for cubitus, or lower end of radius), G for “ gate,’’ and
W (for wrist), the successive fingerpulps being in contact with those three places.
The character of the pulse is now noted in reference to the vital organs.

The next step is to apply the fingers a little harder, but not hard enough to
feel the bone. The attention should now be directed to the state of the pulse at G.
The third step consists in applying pressure till the bone can be felt, and then making
tests with a view to deciding on the state of each of the five main organs.

If the wrist be long, the fingers need not be readjusted ; but if short, readjust-
ment of the fingers must be made several times, moving to juxtapositions each time.

The attention must not be allowed to wander from the search in question—
the five vital organs and the six viscera. The sensation imparted to each finger is
noted for the purpose. Greatyexactitude must be observed. The observation
will evidently occupy a considerable period of time.

“ Fine though these distinctions are, the sedulous physician will perceive
and remember them.”

A copy of one of the numerous diagrams in the work quoted is here appended,
substituting a translation for the actual accompanying text.*


* For guidance in the translation of this passage and many parts of the work
quoted, grateful thanks may be here expressed to Prof. J. P. Bruce and Mr. Li.


286


The EARTH Element
is in the ascendant in the cycle.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Large Intusting Stomeh 3 Gntris


loin to ankle.
Deep pressure: from heart to head,
Superficial : stomach, oesophagus,
Deep: spleen.
Superficial : chest.
Deep : lungs to head.


(Orrin tc pressure, to learn state from


The left side is studied with reference
to the state of the heart, small intestine,
liver, bile, kidney.

The right side, with reference to the
lung, large intestine, spleen, stomach,
generative system.

Wrist : heart, small intestine.

Left Gate : liver, bile. ;
Cubit: (medium pressure) : kidney

and bladder.

ibis lung, large er

: ate : spleen, stomach.

Right Cubit: heart and three vital

| centres.

This is the classical and authoritative

statement.


The following conditions are emphasized in this Chart: (1) It is
summer; (2) the time-factor (including time of day) is 5, 11; (3) Yinis
excessive at Ch'iian, small on the right side ; (4) Yang is small on the left


The Season is SUMMER.


side. The pulse corresponding to this is at the right “cubit’’: full or
heavy ; fine or small; andit is not responsive (to the “ ether ”),. Another
time-factor is 9, 5, 9, II.


WITH THE


FACSIMILE OF TWO PAGES IN THE CHINESE CLASSIC ON THE PULSE.


(TRANSLATED) TEXT ARRANGED AS IN THE ORIGINAL,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 287


§ 209. Some noteworthy theoretical considerations arising out
of the Chinese work may be added as applicable to the Arabian
conceptions, without attempting to outline their full system.

We must study the subtler aspects of the nature of the human
being by invading the domain of ‘‘ occult’ science (by some con-
sidered to be forbidden), if we are to understand the real position not
only of the great Chinese work, but also that of the Canon itself.
With such a key, many of the passages acquire an entirely new aspect
and value. The expansion and retraction of “‘ the breath ’’—so
important in regard to the subject of the nature of the pulse, respira-
tion and other periodic movements—are part and parcel with
diurnal and other changes in what is called the ‘‘ cosmic ether.”
By working out the formule embodying the behaviour of the human
vibrations, using biometric methods, Baraduc?!® makes concrete that
which is usually passed over as unauthenticated and apocryphal.

The interpretation of the pulse depends on the interpretation of
the body itself. The latter follows ‘‘ world-conception” rather than
concrete anatomy. The natural phenomena of the patient harmonize
with those of nature in general, and the two must be taken con-
jointly.

According to the classical style—‘‘the two ideas—‘ urge,’
‘ change ’—how important they are!’’ They provide the key to
physiological processes, and also to the understanding of the pulse.
They represent something deeper than our modern idea “ forces of
Nature’; they are over and above the ordinary course of Nature, as
expressed in the Latin “‘ praeternaturalis.’’ These two ideas provide
the purpose of study as the physician sits with his hand on the pulse,
and his mind stilled for no small period of time.* The relation between
the root factors of life and those of the patient is to be elucidated ;
and they find their expression in terms of functional activity of the
several organs of the body. Hence this science of sphygmology pays
regard to the seasonal variations, the age, the sex, the personal
constitution, the dominant ‘ element,’ its phase (rise or fall), and
especially the character of the vital force—active, passive, negative,
positive (see Figure). It aims at forming an opinion as to whether
the illness is slight or deep-seated, easily curable or incurable, fatal
or not, and if fatal in how long a time.

The permutations and combinations—the five ¢sang. pulses,
the six fu pulses, the seven pyau pulses, the eight /7 pulses and the
nine zau pulses—all these afford ample scope towards a system which
may encounter ridicule but is too rich in minutie to be lightly put
aside.

For, quoting Broadbent again: “ It is impossible to examine
with attention a large number of pulses, whether among the healthy
or the sick, without being.struck by the extraordinary diversity of
frequency, size, character, tension, and force met with. This
diversity prevails quite independently of disease in both sexes and
with all ages, especially in regard to diameter of vessel and tension


* See Frontispiece.


288 THE CANON OF MEDICINE we


and force of pulse. . . . Taking everything into account, there must,
when we compare the small, short compressible pulse of one man with
the large, firm and long pulse of another be great differences in the
velocity and energy of the movement of blood through the capillaries
in different individuals, and clearly there are great differences in the
circulation of the same person at different times. . . . The fact that
such differences are compatible with health and vigour is conclusive
evidence that nutrition and functional efficiency, even of the nerve-
centres, are not in such close relation with and intimate dependence
upon the blood-supply as we are sometimes apt to suppose.”

_ The endless diversity in the pulse is not an incident, it is funda-
mental; the ancients sought to reduce it to a science because they
(rightly) believed there was a law underlying this diversity. This.
goes with the fact that the various organs of the body actually vary
greatly from the standards adopted by the pathological anatomist.
The amount of blood discharged from the heart at each beat is very
different in various persons. The state of health is as it were some-
thing over and above the ordinary physiological mechanisms so fully
expounded in modern textbooks. The attempt to reduce nutrition to
mechanical laws is an attempt to bind to mechanics that which is
beyond mechanics.

Hence the study of the Chinese system, and of their world-
conception affords additional justification not only for contending that
corporeal form, corporeal phenomena, and mental phenomena—
features, contours, build, mannerisms, talents—all belong together and
are mutually illuminative, but also for proceeding to the formulation
of these associations and inter-relations.

If in so doing, a Medicine is built up in which disease takes a very
minor place, and “ soil ’’ (a rather tiresome, though expressive word)
a first place, which it is the object of the physician to elucidate and
continuously realize, It will at least be a guide to something approach-
ing universality of application, and cease to attempt multi-specific
therapy.


§210. The idea that different sensations can be imparted to adjoining fingers
by one and the same pulse may be discussed briefly here. It must be assumed
that there are potential waves of different lengths passing along the artery at the
same time. Long waves reach one finger, but not another. The long sweep of an
artery can actually be seen in thin subjects. The waves usually thought of are the
short ones induced by the force of the impacts of the heart wall on the blood. Long
waves consist of changes of tension in a spiral direction, and careful concentrative
observation will allow such an accession to be felt.

§ 211. The relation between pulse and special organs is not to be regarded as
fanciful, when one obvious instance alone will justify it—the influence upon cardiac
activity and force of beat which the state of the stomach exerts.

§ 212. The frequency of missed beats, and the number of misses ‘compared
with number of respirations, exemplifies another very widely neglected aspect of
the study.

§ 213. The names given to pulses are of interest, but it is difficult to assign
Chinese terms to particular Arabic or Latin names. It will suffice to present the
following comparisons of pulse-types with natural objects, and human actions.

Natural objects : Blade of small onion, solid within ; stone bullet shot out of a
crossbow ; drop of water; down; drum-head ; grate ina passage; holeina flute ;
filament of hair; scattered leaves; a pestle; pills; a silk thread; the handle
of a staff or spear; untwisted string ; worn-out cloth.


ve


wer


TABLE OF TERMINOLOGY


A.—GENERAL


TERMS.


(Arranged in pairs of opposites.)


Sec-
& . | tion T A Term in Latin Term in Bulaq Term in
oS in a te Boas Wests Text. Chinese Text.
© |trans
(1) | 521 |Long—Short Longus—Curtus Tawil '—qasir* ch‘ang-tuan
Broad-—Slender Latus-—Strictus ‘arid *-dayyiq‘
Deep-—Elevated Profundus—Elevatus |munkhaffad*—mushrif* ch‘éng-fu
522 |Large-Small Magnus—Parvus ‘azim’—-saghir® ta—hsiao
Thick—Slender Grossus—Subtilis ghaliz*—daqiq’°
(2) | 528 |Strong-Weak Fortis—Debilis qawi’?}—da‘if?? li-jao
Vehemens*—Imbecillus hung
Validus*—Languidus
(3) | 524 |Swift-Slow Velox—Tardus sari‘ 1*-bati’*¢ k’uai-ch‘ih
(Rapid-—Sluggish) ; e
(4) | 525 |Hard—Soft Durus—Mollis salb'*-layyin'* shih-juan
(Compressible— Lenis* (Ké)
Incompressible)
(5) | 526 |Full-Empty Plenus—Vacuus mumtali’!’—khali'* man—kung (hsii)
(6) | 527 |Hot—Cold Calidus—frigidus harr?*—barid *°
(7) | 528 |Hurried-Infrequent|Frequens—Rarus mutawatir?!—mutafawut??  |chieh(?)-huan(?)
Brisk-Sluggish Continens—Resolutus /mutadarik?*-mutakhalkhil **
“ Dense ’’—‘ Rare ’’|Spissust—Lassus mutakaéif**-mutarakhi**; {mi (chin)-san
(&) | 529 |Equal-Unequal Aequalis—Diversus mustawi?'khtilaf** jun-k‘ou
(Regular—Irregular) (mukhtaf)
(9) | 580 |Orderly—Disorderly|Ordinatus—Inordinatus| Muntazim **-mukhtalif*°
(10) | 583 |Rhythmic- Pondus—arrythmus Wazn-arda’l-wazn** ting-tai
Arhythmic


* Synonymous words occurring in older Latin editions.

§ These synonyms all appear together in the one (Bulaq) text.

+ In the Latin the term “ spissus”’ is often used as the opposite of “ rarus.”’
In the Arabic, the latter is mutafawut, to which mutawatir is opposite.


In the


passages in which spissus is used, the Arabic is often mutawatir and not mutakadif.
There is actually a slight difference between frequens and spissus, for the former
has the thought of an abrupt rise in the pulse-beat, accoraing to group-number 2,
whereas spissus conveys the idea of beats very close together. Rarus may be taken
as the counterpart of either thought: if it means a leisurely risc, it is in accordance
with group-number 3; if it means “ spaced,” this is also the idea in mutafawut.
The Arabic distinguishes the two ideas of rarus, by using mutarakhi for sluggishness.
The words rapid, hurried, brisk—slow, sluggish, leisurely, rare, and the words
frequens, spissus, velox —rarus, tardus, languidus, are apt to be misleading, and it
is diffcult to avoid inconsistency, both in the Latin and the English, for in some
cases one word conveys a better idea of a shade of meaning, and in others another,
whichever Arabic term is employed.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 289


Actions seen in nature : a bird pecking; a bubbling spring; the branches
of a willow tree in a gentle zephyr in spring; drops of water dripping through a
crack in the roof; frisking fish; feathers agitated by the wind ; a bird flying low;
liquid being constantly gulped down; rolling of thunder; scattered leaves;
swimming on the surface of water ; the pace of a toad embarrassed by weeds ; water
simmering in a kettle over a fire ; waves running into one another.

Human actions; Throwing earth over an object; going by stealth; the
strokes of a knife-point ; a knife scraping bamboo; puffing and blowing in going
upstairs; turning back.

§ 214. Ayurvedic Sphygmology.—Sarangadhara gives eight or nine verses
showing how to examine the pulse, and gives the characteristics belonging to derange-
ments of Vayu, Pitta and Kapha singly or in combinations. But this interesting
subject is necessarily not dealt with here,


519. Ten features in the pulse. Ne say that there are ten
features in the pulse from which we are able to discern the
states of the body. Some group them under only nine headings.

(1) Amount of diastole ; estimated in terms of length,
breadth, and thickness.

(2) Quality of impact (lit. knocking at) imparted to the
finger of the observer at each beat.

(3) Duration of time occupied in each movement.

(4) Consistence of the artery (resistance to the touch).

(5) Emptiness or fullness of the vessel between the beats
(modern : compressibility).

(6) The feel—whether hot or cold.

The remaining features concern several beats :

(7) Duration of time occupied by the pauses.

(8) Equality or inequality of force in successive beats.

(9) Regularity or irregularity ; orderliness or disorderliness.
Presence of intermissions.

(10) Metre; rhythm; harmony ; measure ; accent.


§ 215. Additional points ; frequency, or number of beats per minute ; number
of beats to each respiratory movement (inspiration plus expiration ; mode of rise,
mode of fall, and kind of pause at C.G. and W. as one tests from skin to bone and
back ; the number of beats which occur before there is an intermission (an inter-
mission is almost certain to occur in everyone) ; the comparison of the patient’s
pulse with one’s own, or with that of a person of definitely equable temperament ;
the comparison of the pulse with that which should be present at a given season.


DETAILS


520. (1) Amount of Expansion.—TVhe kind of pulse in
terms of the three dimensions: length, breadth and thickness.
There are nine variations in regard to one dimension alone, and
these are called ‘‘ simple,” and there are nine compound varieties.


§ 216. Broadbent remarks (‘‘ Pulse,’’'15 p. 7 footnote) that the classification of
pulses according to length, breadth and thickness is superfluous. ‘‘ Deserting the
path of observation, Galen did not see that a cylindrical tube would expand equally
in all directions, and that there could not be any difference between its breadth and
depth. . . . The permutations and combinations of large, moderate and small pulses,
to the number of 27 varieties of pulse—an over-refinement on purely theoretical or
transcendental grounds, which led to extreme confusion.”

U


290 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§ 217. A careful consideration of the text of the Canon, in conjunction
with the Chinese writings, suggests that something more was in mind. One is
dealing with waves, not with cylindrical tubes merely. There is a subtle distinction
between breadth and thickness. Every tiny portion of an artery is fluctuating
continuously both in health and disease in virtue of its vasomotor endowment ;
and itis this that is sought. Here, as inso many matters in regard to the living
being, the simple mechanistic conception leads to error (and to scepticism about the
existence of unthought-of detail). It is possible in the physiological laboratory to
reduce the (experimental) animal into something very nearly a mechanism, or
actually into a mechanism, and in that way secure results which triumphantly
prove the contentions offered ; but the living human being with the full possession
of all his faculties constitutes a very different ‘‘ proposition.”” Moreover, observa-
tions on the more subtle vibrations, as by biometric study, go to suggest that there
may be reason in the ideas in question (cf. Baraduc*?*).


_ 521. The simple pulses are: the long, the short and the
mean ; the broad, the slender and the mean ; the deep, the
elevated and the mean.

The long pulse is one which is longer than normal. This
is the type appropriate to a person of equable temperament or
else approximating to this. The difference between the natural
and the equable has been already made plain.

The short pulse is contrary to the preceding.

The mean between these two extremes completes the first
group of three. The remaining six can be understood on the
same lines.

Short pulse: Impact sudden ; acme momentary ; subsidence of wave abrupt,
dicrotic wave present ; artery large ; tension low.

Long pulse : Impact deliberate ; acme persisting ; subsidence of wave gradual ;
artery contracted.

Normal pulse: impact sudden, acme moderately high; subsidence of wave
gentle; tension moderate.

522, As regards the compound pulses, some have received
distinctive names and some have not. A pulse which is increased
both in length and breadth as well as in depth is called “ large.”
When all these dimensions show diminution, it is a ‘‘ small”
pulse. The moderate pulse is the mean between these two.

A small pulse may seem to be a large one in a wasted subject ; hence the pulse


may be palpable in arteries in which it is not usually felt. The aorta may be felt.
A pulse may seem small because carelessly felt in a person with a thick wrist.


A pulse which is increased both in breadth and depth is
called ‘‘ thick’ ; one which is diminished in these two dimen-
sions is called “slender.”” ‘The medium pulse is the mean
between the two. .

523, (2) Quality of impact. The varieties are three :
strong—this resists the finger during expansion ; weak—the
opposite character ; and the intermediate.

Strong or violent pulse.—Impact strong; acme high ; artery incompressible.


Occurs temporarily in emotional states, or after the bath. It is habitual in persons
of passionate nature (Aeg).


aie i


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 291


Weak or feeble pulse.—Impact faint; acme low; artery between beats is
compressible,


524, (3) Duration of cycle. ‘There are three variants :
rapid or short or swift—-where the movement is completed in a
short space of time ; slow or sluggish or long—the contrary ;
and the intermediate, or moderately quick pulse.

525, (4) Consistence of artery. ‘There are three variants:
soft or easily compressible ; hard, firm or incompressible ; and
one of moderate compressibility.

526. (5) Fullness or emptiness. The full (high) pulse seems
to be overfull of humour and gives the impression that it needs
liberating. ‘The empty (low) pulse is contrary in character.
There is an intermediate between the two.


Empty pulse: the artery feels as if it contained bubbles of air, so that the
re seem to fall on an empty place (Aegineta). (Chinese simile: “‘ the hole in
the flute.’’)


527. (6) The feel of the pulse. Hot, cold or intermediate.

528. (7) Duration of pause. Hurried (“ dense ”’), where
the period between the two successive beats is short ; sluggish
(“ rare’), where the period is prolonged. And there is a mean.
This period of time is recognized from the contraction-period, but
if contraction cannot be perceived it is estimated from the
period between two expansions. In this case it is reckoned
from the times of the two extremes.

529. (8) Equality or inequality. ‘This 1s reckoned according
as the successive pulses are similar or dissimilar, there being a
difference of size (large or small), strength (strong or weak),
swiftness (rapid or slow; prompt or sluggish), hardness or soft-
ness, until it happens that the second expansion of the first pulse
is overtaken by the first of the next (due to excess of innate heat),
or is weaker than the next (excess of weakness).

If desired, one could expand this discourse and consider
the equality or inequality in regard to the three variants in the
other features of the pulse already named. But it is sufficient
to consider them only in regard to strength.

Regular (“equal ’’) pulse in the strict sense is one which
is regular in all these respects ; if it is regular only in one feature,
it is so specified. Thus we speak of a pulse as regular (“‘ equal ’’)
in strength or regular inspeed. In the same way a pulse is irregu-
lar either in all respects or only in one.

Equal pulse: this is always regular.
Unequal pulse is not altogether irregular. Supposing it to have no equality,


and yet to preserve a certain period, such, e.g., as to extent of diastole, if there are
two great and one small, then again two great and one small, and so on, such a pulse


292 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


is unequal but regular. If it not only had no equality, but also no order in its in-
equality, such a pulse would be not only unequal, but also irregular.—So, too, with
the other kinds.

“ Not only may an inequality in the time of motion take place in regard to one
pulsation in one part of an artery, but also in regard to the strength of the power ;
not so, however, in regard to the extent of dilation (for it is impossible that the same
pulse in the same place should be great and small at the same time), nor in regard
to the other kinds of pulses. But in different places different parts of an artery
may exhibit a double inequality in one pulsation. For the motion may continue
constant, and be swifter at one finger, and slower at another; or it may intermit,
and one finger may perceive it, and another not. And also, in regard to the extent
of the diastole, the same inequality becomes apparent in different places.”’

Irregular pulse.—Sometimes there is altogether an irregularity, observing no
periods whatever. Sometimes there is regularity as to periods, but, having no
continued order, they may in this respect be called irregular, but in so far as they
observe a certain period regularly, they are regular as to their periods. E.g., two
great, two small, three great, three small, and so on. (Aegineta, after Galen.)


530. (9) Orderliness or disorderliness. ‘There are two forms :
the pulse may be irregularly orderly or irregularly disorderly.
The orderly pulse maintains orderly succession. ‘This occurs
in one of two modes. ‘The orderliness is absolute, where there
is every feature maintained ; or cyclical, where there are two or
more irregularities which keep on repeating in cycles, as if there
were two cycles simultaneously, or superposed, so that the
original order reappears.

In this way it becomes evident that the tenth feature belongs
here, in a certain sense ; so that those who restrict the features
to nine instead of ten are justified.

531. For one must now see the musical character of the pulse.
For in the art of music sounds are juxtaposed in orderly relations
of loudness and softness which keep on repeating at regular
intervals ; rates of utterance vary—some sounds coming close
to,one another, and others being further apart; the attack
may be abrupt or gentle, sharp or dull. The notes may be
sounded clearly or be indefinite ; they may be strong or weak ;
the volume may be full or “ thin.” The rhythm of the sequence
of the sounds may be regular or irregular.

In feeling the pulse, all these features are also to be met with.
The intervals between the beats, or the successions, may be
harmonious or inharmonious. So, too, the irregularities may be
orderly or disorderly. It is orderly when there is a proper
relation of strength and weakness. It is disorderly if there is not.

All this belongs to the question of order and regularity.

532, Galen indeed discussed the metre of the pulse, or its
rhythm along the lines of musical nomenclature. Thus we would
have double time, three-four time, common time, four-five time,
five-six time, and so on. For those who have a sensitive touch
and a keen sense of rhythm, with a training in the musical art,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 293


such minutize of observation could be correlated in the mind.
I am surprised to think how many of such relations could be
perceived by the sense of touch, and yet I am confident that it
can be done if one is habituated to the use of it, and can apportion
metre and beats of time. On the other hand, since these varia-
tions all belong to inequality and disorderliness it is not necessary
to define them particularly.

The analogy between pulse and musical time is found in the Chinese work
as well as in Avicenna. The fact that they compare certain beats with those pro-
duced on particular musical (stringed) instruments shows that they had something
in mind like that suggested above. The Kin pulse is so named after a musical


instrument of that name; another pulse is compared with the vibration of the
thirteen stringed instrument named Tseng.


533. (10.) Mezre. Evenif the preceding details cannot be
perceived, at least the relation between period of expansion and
period of pause can be appreciated, as well as the relation be-
tween the total duration of beat and the total duration of pause.
Under this heading, then, we place : first total period of pulse :
next total period ; period of expansion: period of pause ;
period of expansion plus period of pause : period of contraction
plus period of pause ; period of expansion : period of contrac-
tion. A relation of period of expansion : period of contraction ;
or, period of first pause : period of second pause, is not important.

534, Metre (rhythm, “ beat,” accent) is good (eurhythm)
or bad (arhythm) according to the musical analogy. ‘There are
three kinds of arhythm : (i) pararhythm, where the beat is altered
only slightly, and temporarily. Ex.: where the adult has a
metre which is only natural in youth ; where a child shows a
rhythm proper to an adult. (11) Heterorhythm. This is a change
greater in degree. Ex. : where a youth has a metre proper to
an old man. (iii) Etrhythm. Here the change is to something
altogether different, as where the metre does not conform to
the human type at all. A great change of metre denotes great
change of bodily state.


§ 218 Relation between beats to musical time may be equally
exemplified from Arabic poetry, for the richness of the poetic metres
gives a simple and ample parallel. Cadences, pauses (corresponding
to intermissions of beat) of various lengths produced by the words
and phrases and intonations belonging to emotional expression
being natural sequences with evident relations to physiological
variations. A short passage of poetry may sometimes be sufficient
basis for a correct impression of the whole, but it is better to hear
the whole. So, in feeling the pulse, much may be learnt from
the observation of the beats for a minute or two, and yet it is better to
study a long series of beats in order to be sure there is no inter-


294 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


mission at all. This thought is applied in Chinese sphygmology. (See
/§ 220). '

§219. Rhythmical successions of words—musical rhythm—
—effects on emotional state and on physiological processes.—The
effect of words uttered in rhythm resembles that of musical suc-
cessions of sounds. The different forms of rhythm which are
adopted in different kinds of poetry have each their own effect
on the emotional state, and tend to produce in the brain all the
concomitants of the emotional state which they themselves belong to.
Therefore the reciter is able to produce specific effects on the minds
of his hearers. For this reason, the idea of rhythm and cadence can
be pursued both in Arabian poetry and in Arabian music; and it can be
pursued with respect to both aspects of esthetics in any country or
language, though some languages are more potent in their influence,
according as they are intrinsically more, or less, musical.

We may note that as the rhythm, whether of words or musical
notes, evokes an influence on the pulse-rate in the course of their
effect on the ear itself—both internal ear and the ear of the mind—
so the emotional effect will be produced even though the hearers are
not purposely or specially receptive. This emotional effect may be
inevitable, or it may be deliberate. To quote from numerous
passages in the “ Nights,’’—‘“‘ touched with it a masterly touch, at
once exciting to sadness and changing sorrow to gladness...
went on to sing . . . to many and various modes, till our senses
were bewitched, and the very room danced with excess of delight
and surprise ’’ (163); ‘‘ meseemed the doors and the walls and all
that was in the house answered and sang with him ”’ (688) ; “ played
a measure which made all hearts yearn” (37) (Burton, ii. 291 ;
ihe 22 | 133 78

When the effect is deliberately sought, it is stronger the more
thoroughly worked out the principle is—which explains why some
composers meet with more response than others, and why some
compositions are considered more perfect or attractive than others.
Yet a great composer may still be in ignorance of why that par-
ticular music should meet the need; he may be guided by the
effect which the thought of the particular music has on his own
organization ; or he may even work according to stereotyped lines
elaborated by theoretical developments and studies, without having
even “intuitive” feelings of his own. (Cf. Frederick Corder, 158,
p. 7). Music, the composer, the listener—all three show the same
possible aspects: the purely artistic, the emotional, the scientific or
intellectual; and, more rarely, the inspirational and the celestial.
The number of listeners whom he will attract depends on the type
of music which the composer employs: In this way, for some
the pleasure is in the stirring-up of desire to accompany the music
with the bodily movements of various dances ; for others the pleasure
is through the feelings ; for others it is through the intellect (e.g.
the fugue); for others it is through some glimpse of the Abstract
Truth which such music renders possible, even though they under--
stand not what it is doing. But the last-named does not need


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 295


music in the ordinary sense of the word (i.e., instrumental) ; it
is that of which it has been said: ‘‘ The music of God is everywhere
for those whose hearts are open to hear it.”

We may also note that it is not only the pulse-rate and the
manner of the pulse beat which is influenced by the musical rhythm ;
the effect pervades the body*, because all the vibrations which belong
to the secretions and excretions, and to the nervous system throughout
are affected, and tend to harmonize, each in their own way—the
successive waves becoming set so that all reach the same phase at
some same moment which recurs every so often. The movements
belonging, for instance, to the emergence of secretory granules from
a salivary or peptic cell, or an adrenal cell, alter in rhythm during
the time the music lasts—and possibly for some time after. That
these movements are essential in the vital phenomena is easily
verified by studying such cells, e.g., in invertebrata, with the ultra-
microscope, or even by studying saliva itself.


§ 220. Additional remarks on Rhythm.

Let a and ¢ represent the heart-sounds, and 6, d the pauses. The ratio b/d is
remarkably constant, whatever the number of beats per minute. Exercise, excite-
ment, fever, etc., increase the rate, yet do not alter this ratio.

The normal rhythm is ab/c/d; that is, “ triple time.”’

Double-time is ab /cd ; where the sound is “ tick-tack,’’ b is the same length
as d (for instance, owing to shortening of d). Such is what occurs in palpitation or
tachycardia.

If, however, b becomes long, it shows that the peripheral resistance is greater.
If a is stronger, b is longer. If the time is still triple, it necessarily implies that the
pulse-rate is slower. Butif this rhythm now becomes double-time, it shows that the
resistance is too great for the heart, and that the heart is dilating or dilated. This
happens for instance in chronic renal disease, or acute renal dropsy associated
with myocardial change.

Four-time.—t1. ab|c/d/d]. The contraction is quick, the resistance is low.
This occurs in fever or in excitement. This rhythm tends to return to triple by
shortening of c to: abc/d/d/. The pulse is short.

Such a pulse may follow on a double-time pulse ; for instance in chronic renal
disease. The prognosis is then grave.

A similar effect is produced if the cardiac contraction is not completed either
because the muscle is too weak or the resistance too high. To find such a pulse
forewarns the physician of cardiac asthenia forty-eight hours beforehand.

2. aalb/c/d. This is met with where the systemic and the pulmonary
pressure are not equal. The former may be too high from renal disease ; the latter
may be too high from pulmonary or bronchial disease. Where the heart is hyper-
trophied, such a rhythm denotes failing heart.

The second ‘‘a’”’ is not usually loud, but it may be as loud as the first “ a.
In such a case one could feel both ventricles beating separately over the apical
region. ab/c/c/d may appear simply by holding the breath. It may also appear in
mitral stenosis, in bronchitis with emphysema, in pericarditis, in pleural effusion
and in cases of cerebral tumour.

Five-time: alb|cfc/d; djbjc|c/d; alfb/ct/c/d; or a/b/c/ct/d. These are
all variants of ‘‘ bruit de galop.’’ The problem to solve in each patient is: which
is the source of the second c? Isitthe pulmonary valve? The causes are the same
as of the preceding. Pulsus bigeminus: db /c'd//ab [cd | /db /c1d, etc., in the case of
the heart, but db /cd /ab /cd | db /cd/ etc., in the pulse at the same time. This type
is found in mitral stenosis under treatment. Another form: ab /cd | /ab /cd | /ab /cd | }
etc., in the case of the heart and ab /cd/d/d//ab|cd /d/d] in the case of the pulse.
This type is found in more advanced cases, and in cases of epileptiform attacks.
It simulates alternate action by the two ventricles. Pulsus trigeminus ;
ab |cd | |ab [cc |d | Jab |d |d| |


”?


* Bearing on this is a recent paper by Swale Vincent and J. H. Thompson :
“‘ the effects of music upon the human blood pressure.’”’ (Lancet, March 9, 1929, 534.)


296 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Some heart-beats are too weak to reach the wrist ; or, in some cases too little
blood enters the heart. The pulse may therefore be irregular though the heart is
regular; or the pulse may be more irregular than the heart.


2. Tue REGULAR AND THE [RREGULAR PULSE


585. Some say that irregularity (dissimilarity) of the pulse
applies to a succession of beats or to any individual beat. But
when the irregularity is in the individual beat the various com-
ponents are diverse,—whether in the various places where one
applies one’s fingers, or only at one particular point of appli-
cation.

536. When the irregularity is in regard to several pulsa-
tions there may be a regular succession of events. This begins
with one pulsation and there is a change to a greater or lesser,
following on regularly step by step until a maximum or minimum
is reached, after which there is a break, and the original cycle is
resumed. Or, the beats continue at the same level for a time,
and there is then an intermission and the original cycle is
resumed.

The whole cycle may show only one irregularity or it may
show two or more. In this case, it is as if there were two cycles,
distinct from one another, and yet keeping to one order, so that
the whole seems to be just one single cycle.

The irregularity may consist in the occurrence of a pause
when one expects a beat, or in the occurrence of a beat in the
middle of a pause.

5387. When the irregularity refers to several components
of one single pulsation, this may be in regard to relative position
or to movement. And as there are six components there will be
corresponding irregularities : (a) expansion swift or sluggish ;
(2) premature or delayed expansion ; (c) strength or weakness ;
(d) largeness or smallness. All of this may be orderly and regular
or may vary by exaggeration or by deficiency—in two components
or in three or in four.

This may all be worked out for oneself.

538, Irregularity of the pulse in one section* is shown as
an intermitting or as a recurrent or as a continuous pulse.

The intermitting pulset : one component is separated from
the next only by a short interval and a pause is interposed
in another, so that the two extremes of the pulsation vary in swift-
ness, sluggishness, and the like.


* Juz’: a section of the Quran,
+ Intermitting pulse: a smaller beat occurs after one or more great pulsations :
sometimes even the smaller beat is wanting. Intercurrent pulse: this is the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 297


The recurrent pulset : here a large pulse becomes small in
one component and then becomes slowly large again. In this
case there may be two kinds of pulse passing into one another,
so that, for instance, one pulse, by its irregularity, comes to appear
like two, or two pulses come to appear like one. Opinions
about this differ.


“When the radial artery is completely closed by one or more fingers till the
direct pulse is arrested, a feeble and retarded beat can be felt in the distal part of
the vessel. This is because the blood-pressure is low, and the arteries are relaxed,
and the force of the heart strong.” 11* ((p. 52.)


The continuous pulse is one in which the expansion is con-
tinual and unbroken. There is a steady increase from slowness
to swiftness, and from swiftness to slowness ; from equality
to inequality; from largeness to smaller, and so on. There is
no break in the change, for it is continuing the whole time.
Sometimes there is more irregularity in regard to some of the
components and sometimes there is less.


§221. Brief summary :—

Variations in vate of expansion : Sudden ; deliberate ; second expansion quick ;
or slow; first sudden and then tardy, or vice versa.

Rate of fall or contraction of the vessel: abrupt, or gradual and gentle.

Variations of degree of expansion : large, small, moderate ; forceful or feeble ;
alike in every beat or unlike.

Variations of duration of expansion : first short, then long, or vice versa ;
momentary; persisting; or mean.

Variations of duration of pause ; first short, then long, or vice versa. Pause
when there should be a beat ; beat when there should be a pause.

Variations of size of successive beats or between the beats : first diminished and
then increased ; first increased, then diminished. ‘The size of the artery between
the beats informs of the constant pressurein the artery. To ascertain it, rollthe artery
transversely between the beats ; it should not be palpable between the beats unless
the skin is soft and flexible and thin. Inability to feel the pulse between the beats
means low tension ; if easy to feel, the tension is high.

Variations in successive beats ; the fourth beat may be irregular in one or other
respect, or the fifth or the sixth or the seventh, Every beat may be different
(irregular disorderliness).


3. Tue Varreties oF [IRREGULAR PULSE WHICH HAVE RECEIVED
Distinctive Names


589. Gazelle Pulse: [Syn.: goatleap pulse ; modern
“jerking”; ‘‘pulsus bisferiens””]. The expansion is inter-
rupted and occupies a longer time than usual and remains at a
certain height and is succeeded by a swift increase to the full
height.


Just before the wave begins to subside a second heat is felt (Broadbent)—“a
swifter spring than before’ (Aegenita)—The two phases of the one beat are unequal.


c


opposite. When we are expecting an interval of rest, a supernumerary pulsation
occurs. (Aeg.)

These two pulses denote impairment of the cardiac power, the degree being
greater in the intermittent than in the recurrent.


298 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Cause: febrile heat. If the commencement of the diastole is feeble, and there
is increase in velocity towards the end and beginning of the systole, this shows that
putrefaction is prevailing, nature hastening on the discharge of the fuliginous
superfluities. But if, on the other hand, the commencement of the systole is feeble,
and the speed is towards the diastole, this means that heat is prevailing.

In fever cases, such a pulse is accompanied by density, and sometimes by
largeness, if the artery is not too rigid. (Aeg.)

(This pulse is characteristic of pericarditis.)


540. Undulatory [ bounding” (modern) ; “ like rolling
waves”’]. The irregularity is in respect of largeness and small-
ness of artery, of degree of rise, and of breadth, and in the position
of the beginning of the beat (whether too soon or too late), and
also in softness. It is not very small ; it has a certain breadth,
recalling the movement of waves, which follow upon one another
in orderly fashion and yet vary in the extent of upward rise and
downward fall, and-in swiftness and slowness.

Aegineta says: “‘ The whole artery is not expanded at once, but first under the
first finger, then under the second and so on ; like a series of waves. The wave may
be carried on straight or obliquely ; it may be high but short, low but long, broad or
narrow, unequal in speed and force.”

Rhazes says: “ It is one which in breadth takes up much space of the finger ;


with this it is soft and full, but there is not much rise or fall; one rise seems to join
to another until it resembles waves, one following the other.”


‘


541. Vermicular {modern “ creeping ”’]. This resembles
the preceding, but is small, soft, feeble, and very hurried.
The closeness of the beats causes it to be mistaken for a swift
or rapid pulse.

The feel is that of a worm wriggling. It is a weak form of the undulatory
pulse. The size of the artery is not of the same inequality at all times. There


are waves of pulsation, the whole artery not being distended at the same time
(Broadbent). See 572.


542. Formicant Pulse. ‘This is the smallest, most feeble
and hurried of all the pulses. [It is not a quick pulse,
though apparently swift. (Aeg.)] It differs from the vermicular
pulse in the great ease with which upward rise, anteposition of
beat or postposition is perceived. Irregularity of breadth is not
discernible. [It is a weak form of vermicular pulse ; and allied
in character to the “‘ hectic’ pulse.]

543, Serrate Pulse. ‘This [modern “ harsh ”’] pulse resem-
bles the undulatory in the inequality of the various components
of the beat—upward rise, breadth, anteposition and postposition.
It differs, however, in appearing harder, and in its components
being of unequal hardness. This pulse is quick, hurried, hard.
The irregularity is in respect of size of expansion, of hardness
and of softness (see 565).

044, Mousetail. There is progressive inequality of the
components—from decrease to increase, from increase to de-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 299


crease. This may apply to several beats or only to one beat or
only to a part of a beat. The inequality is in respect of volume,
or of slowness (changing to swiftness), or of weakness (changing
to strength).

The artery, says Aegineta, feels swollen to the index finger, and very slender to
the last finger. He speaks of a “‘ failing or swooning myurus, where the smallness
of the last beat is maintained ; and of a recurrent myurus, where the pulse resumes
its original amplitude.”

545, Recurrent [modern “ flickering ”’ pulse]. This passes
from minuteness to a certain volume, and then fails progressively
until it reaches its former minuteness. It is like two myuri
placed together end to end.

“ Your first finger feels it small, your middle finger feels it large and swelled,
and your little finger feels it small; the expansion is only slight.’’—(Aegineta.)

Cause: weakness of arterial wall, and wasting of the tissues round the artery.


Significance : extreme debility ; wasting from unresolved inflammation or any other
cause.


546. Dicrotic. Doctors are divided in opinion about this.
pulse. Some regard it as a single beat in which antecession and
post-position are unequal ; others regard it as a double pulse,
one beat following the next too quickly to give time for the second
to produce full expansion. However, the presence of two beats
does not make two distinct pulses. A pulse which makes a partial
expansion and then resumes it, would not be dual. It would
only be dual if the artery were to fill first, and then pause and then
contract and again refill ; but otherwise it would virtually be a
jerking pulse.

§ 222. Asregards the dicrotic pulse, some have regarded it as a wave reflected
from the periphery, but it is really the elastic recoil of the aorta that accounts for it.
It is most distinct if the peripheral resistance is low. The semilunar valves form the
fulcrum of the rebound (Broadbent, p. 26).

The first beat of the pulse is large, the artery rising strongly to the finger ;
then it stops and recedes ; the second beat is small. The artery is as if repelled at
the first beat and then trembles a little, and then quickly resumes its beat but less
strongly, and at too short an interval.

547. Fading or falling pulse. Were there is a pause in the
middle of the pulsation, as there is in the gazelle pulse. But in
the gazelle pulse the second beat begins before the first is finished;
in the falling pulse the first beat is completed before the second
begins.

548. The spasmodic, thrilling and twisted pulse. ‘The latter
is compared with a twisted thread ; there is here an irregularity
between the precession and the later parts of the pulsation, both
in position and in breadth.

The spasmodic (or “‘tense ’’’) pulse suggests that the artery is being stretched
and dragged and pulled by its extremities like a cord (Aeg).


The “ thrilling ’”’ (modern term), or tremulous pulse is hard, quick and frequent.
It suggests the quivering of arrows thrown with great force (Aeg.).


300 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


549. The chord-like pulse feels like a twisted cord (or sinew),
and is similar to the thrilling pulse. But in the chord-like pulse
the expansion is less conspicuous ; the departure from regularity
of position of rise is less evident ; but tension is evident ; the
twisting is sometimes only in regard to one portion of the pulsa-
tion. ‘The two kinds of pulse are really equally common, and
equally liable to occur in “ dry” diseases.

All the above are simple pulses.

550. The varieties of compound pulse (that is, where there
is more than one form of inequality or irregularity at once) are
almost innumerable. In any case they have received no special


names.
ADDITIONAL NOTES


§223. 1. The pulse is visible under the following circumstances: when
the radial artery follows an abnormal course, immediately under the skin ; when
the patient is spare, and the skin is thin; when the tension is very high, and the
blood-vessels are enlarged and tortuous; and (entirely pathologically) in aortic
regurgitation—where the artery is empty and collapsed between the beats, and the
blood rushes in with extreme suddenness and violence, especially if the hand is
raised. Sucha pulse may be audible as well, and at the same time there is conspicu-
ous throbbing of the carotids and temples and facial artery. The tension is here very
low indeed.

Visibility is not mentioned in the Qanun; and whether the ‘‘ empty ”’ pulse
is comparable at all with the “‘ Corrigan’”’ or not, is not clear. It seems hardly
likely that so striking a pulse should not have been observed, even though they
could not know its explanation.

§224. 2. Hectic pulse. This occurs in marasmus and phthisis. The
components do not vary greatly. The pulse suggests “ being entangled, and never
getting free,’ because the state of disease is actually diffused throughout the body.
This pulse therefore agrees with the Chinese type named “like a toad embarrassed
by weeds.”’ This may be simply a form of the “ thrilling ”’ pulse.

§ 225. 3. Pulse-vate. (Broadbent,**’, etc.)

Increased pulse-vate.—Lowered resistance quickens the pulse rate. Diurnal
variations : the pulse-rate is greater in the evening, and slower in the early morning.
The fact of the latter explains the following: morning headache; tendency to
depression of spirits; to awake tired; the tendency to asthmatic attacks and
epileptic fits (the blood-pressure is now minimal). Posture ; the erect posture adds
eight beats to the minute. Emotions : the rate is increased by fear (the force is
feeble), and anger (force violent) ; the explanation is that the tension is increased
by the emotions. Evercise: at first the rate is increased as well as the force and
the pulse becomes ‘“‘ vehement.’’ The explanation is threefold—(a) nervous
factors ; (b) muscular action drives more blood to the heart and fills up the right side ;
the heart has to beat quickly and strongly to get it through the lungs ; (c) accumula-
tion of blood in the lungs produces breathlessness and panting. Food: the rate
is increased after food, and the vessels are relaxed. Drugs, etc.: stimulants
increase the rate and cause greater relaxation of the vessels; alcohol and ether
belong to this category. They lower the peripheral resistance by acting on the cen-
tral nervous system, and also stimulate the heart directly ; nitrites increase pulse-
rate, and at the same time cause great relaxation of the artery. Pungent essential
oils and ammonia increase the rate and through the peripheral nerves relax the
vessels. Belladonna and atropin also increase the rate. External warmth; slight
increase of rate and slight relaxation of the vessels. Respiratory movements—cause
irregularities.


§ 226. Increased pulse-rate in relation to morbid states :—


These diseases in which the rate is increased, show the same rate, even in
repose, but exertion makes the rate increase inordinately, out of all proportion.
Emotional disturbance has the same effect. Z


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 301


In pyrexia : the rate rises according to the degree of fever, but chiefly according
to the effects on the system and according to the patient’s reaction to the disease.
The peripheral resistance falls. The force may be increased (sthenic fever: pulse
frequent, sudden, vehement, large, short, dicrotous) or diminished (pulse weaker,
less sudden, less large, dicrotous). Towards the end of the illness, the weaker the
patient, the greater the rate; even a few beats more per minute are serious. In
septic fevers (septicemia: modern term) a quick rate forewarns of shock, and a
fatal issue (in puerperal cases). A ‘‘racing’’ pulse is a danger sign.

Among special fevers: scarlet fever is characterized by a very quick pulse-
tate (120-200).

§ 227. Specially quick pulse-vates—In young people: overstrain from
athletics ; the “irritable heart” (the blood-pressure is high), In older people:
sudden single acts of excessive exertion (sudden dilatation of the heart). Special
cases : paroxysmal tachycardia: due to flatulence, emotions, gout ; gastric trouble.
The pulse is frequent, short, variable in fulness and strength, not vehement, occasion-
ally irregular. The heart-sounds are confused and short, and cannot be analysed.
May arise suddenly from a fright or sudden noise, or violent emotion.

(In this condition the motion of the blood is-not accelerated. Itisa vibratory
alternation of pressure with little onward movement. The left ventricle is not
dilated. It may be that the ventricle is not expanding properly. Cf. auricular
fibrillation ; auricular flutter. This form of pulse must be among those described
by the Chinese, but certain identity has not been reached).

The quick pulse of ‘‘ Graves’ disease’’ might be included here.

Middle-aged and elderly women : here the occurrence of throbbing aorta may
be referred to, though it is not a true “‘ quick pulse’; it arises from lack of tone in
the aortic wall.

§ 228. Decreased pulse-vate. Increased resistance slows down the pulse.
Habitually low pulse-rate (bradycardia) forewarns of the risk of cramp when
swimming. In this category belong—the slower rate of jaundice ; of fatty degener-
ation of the heart (not often met with here) ; the special pulses: pulsus bigeminus
and pulsus trigeminus: heart-block.

§229. 4. Intermissions. Irregularity.

On the one hand there is a variation of force between successive beats; on
the other hand there is a drop of a beat, or an interposition of a beat.

Intermissions may be habitual or constant, the person being unconscious of
it except during exercise or excitement. It is accentuated when the body is fatigued
or the disposition is nervous. The patient is conscious of it during pyrexia.

Occasional intermissions are produced in shock ; in hypochondriasis after the
use of tobacco; in fatty degeneration of the heart. In these cases the heart itself
is beating, though hurriedly and imperfectly.

Irregularity is habitual in mitral regurgitation, where it is produced by the
variations of pressure dependent on breathing. Inspiration forces blood into the
left ventricle, expiration sucks it out of the left auricle. A similar occurrence
is found when the heart is dilated, and under nervous conditions.

Irregularity is occasional as a result of flatulence of the colon, or stomach,
which disturbs the action of the diaphragm ; as a result of tobacco.

Irregularity is usually more serious than intermission,

Rules in regard to intermission found in Chinese textbooks :—Omission of
one beat after forty shows a lack in one of the five “‘ noble”’ organs: “ death will
follow in four years, in spring.’ If there are no intermissions within fifty beats, the
health is perfect. But if there is an intermission then, it has a similar significance
to the preceding and shows “ death will follow five years later.’’ (See § 218.)

Other rules cannot be presented without also discussing the theory of the
relation between pulse-type and physiological value of the several organs. Thus
an intermission of one in 12, or 19, or 26 (and so on), beats differs in significance
according as the pulse-type is ‘‘ heart,”’ “ lung,” “liver,” “ kidney,’ and so on.—
After all, such a classification is justified, and it should be easily understood that
intermissions under such circumstances might have distinct significances.

§ 230. 5. Relation of pulse-vate to respiration-vate. In the Chinese works
this form of observation replaces our own habit of estimating the number of beats
per minute, and also the number of respirations per minute. In health there should
be four beats to one respiration ; five beats in the same period is allowable as consis-
tent with health. But over five is pathological, and eight beats is a bad prognostic
sign. A reduction to three or two is pathological and a reduction to two isa bad sign.
When death is imminent there may be only one beat to two respirations. Full
details are stated to be given in ‘‘ the book of eighty-one difficulties.”


302 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


- ’
4. THe Putsz DESIGNATED as ““ NATURAL.”


551. Each of the above-named varieties (of pulse) neces-
sitates a distinction into “‘ increased ”’ and “‘ diminished.” And
that which is ‘‘ natural” among them is the “ equable”’ pulse,
except in the case of the strong sort. For (here) the “ natural”
pulse is excessive as to strength. But in other cases, the increase
is in natural proportion to the increase in force, so that, for ex-
ample, as it becomes greater, it is “‘ natural” for it also to be
forcible. mi

As for the sorts (of pulse) in which there is no possibility
of increase and diminution, in such cases the “ natural” pulse
is the one which is even (equable), regular (orderly), and of good
rhythm (weight).*°

PARAPHRASE.

Amongst all the varieties of pulse which have now been des-
cribed, there are two classes. (i) Those which show degrees of
qualities : namely, increase above, and diminution below, a ‘‘ mean.”
(See 521-528). Gi) Those which do not. Thus, a dicrotic
pulse cannot be more, or less, or intermediately dicrotic; an ir-
regular pulse cannot show a “ mean”’ irregularity.

The ‘“‘ natural”’ pulse in the first group is one which shows a
mean quality in respect of every feature except that of strength (528)
for the natural pulse zs strong (forcible).

The ‘“natural’”’ pulse in the second group is one which is
uniform, regular (orderly), and eurhythmic.


This rendering brings out the real meaning of the word “ natural ’’—tabi‘yya.
It is not synonymous with “ normal,”’ but refers strictly to ‘“‘ the nature ’’—i.e.,
the state of the vegetative soul, when in health.

In short, a pulse which is ‘‘ mu‘tadil ”’ is not therefore necessarily ‘‘ normal ”’ ;
still less is it necessarily ‘‘ natural.’’

A pulse may be (a) natural and normal, (6) not natural, yet not abnormal,
{c) not natural, and also abnormal.


es Tue Factors CONCERNED IN THE PRODUCTION OF THE


PULSE

052. The factors concerned in the production of the pulse

are (1) essential and integral in the constitution of the pulse.
These are called ‘“‘contentive’’ factors; (ii) non-essential :
comprising two groups, (a) inseparable—that is, if they were
altered, the type of the pulse would be altered ; (2) separable ;


a]
* It may be noted that the close resemblance between the Latin version and the
corresponding passage in Galen makes it seem as if Avicenna had simply introduced
a translation into Arabic from Galen, But in the Greek the natural pulse is simply
a mean between extremes, and is so called presumably because usual in health;
whereas with Avicenna this is not so; he speaks of a distinct kind of pulse, and is
truly consistent to his usage of the term “ nature ’’—the outcome of the great.
thesis “the body is a unity’’—throughout his physiology, pathology, and
sphygmology. : .


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 303


that is, a change may be produced in them without affecting
the type of the pulse.

There are three contentive factors :

1. The (vital) power of the heart, producing the
expansion.

2. The elasticity of the artery.

3. The resistance, or urge.

The last-named is, in Avicenna, taken to be a question of the degree of innate
heat, and its relation to heat-loss ; not a question of peripheral resistance as a factor
in producing blood-pressure.

The influence of the three factors varies with the non-
essential factors which may be associated with them at the given
time.

553. List of non-essential factors :

1. Natural (i.e. pertaining to the nature)—Age (manhood,
youth) ; temperature of air (hot seasons ; hot localities) ; tem-
perament (hot temperament).

2. Non-natural : exposure to very hot atmosphere ; use
of hot baths ; vigorous exercise or gymnastics ; influence of
food and wine ; influence of calefacient medicines.

3. Preternatural: emotional states ; secretiveness (hiding
anger, concealing the fact of having taken a heating medicine
in spite of the physician’s enquiry) ; cunning persons who easily
conceal matters relative ; habits of the patient ; “‘ hot” intem-
peraments ; decompositions occurring in the fluids (in the
stomach or tissues).


6. Tue Errecr oF THE CONTENTIVE FACTORS UPON THE
PuLsE


554, Large Pulse. If the arterial wall is at the same time
yielding, and the vital power is strong, and the resistance
excessive, the pulse will be large. The resistance is the chief
factor in the production of a large pulse, for should the power
fail, the pulse will naturally weaken ; and if the arterial wall
were also hard, and the resistance lowered, the pulse would be
even smaller.

An unyielding artery will also make the pulse small. But
the difference between a small pulse due to inelastic artery and
one due to weakness is that in the former the pulse is hard and
not weak or short or low as in the latter.

Low resistance also makes a small pulse, but it is not weak.
Weakness is the chief cause of all three forms of small pulse.
Granted the power is constant, lack of hardness of the artery


304 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


has more eftect than lack of resistance, for there is nothing to
prevent the artery from expanding. _ ;

The temperament has not much influence unless the resist-
ance be lowered.

If the resistance be great and the power strong, and the
artery inelastic, the pulse becomes swift. The swiftness makes
up for lack of size of pulse. But if the power be not adequate,
and the pulse is therefore unable to become large, and therefore
not swift, it necessarily becomes brisk, and this briskness makes
up for the lack of volume and swiftness. Several beats of this
kind would become equivalent to the effect of one adequately
large beat, or of two swift beats.

555. Itis like a man wishing to carry a very heavy weight ;
if he is able to do so, he will carry it in one journey, though with
difficulty ; or he may divide it into two, thus making each
journey more easily ; or, if he cannot manage even that, he will
divide the load into many portions, and carry each one as leisurely
or as quickly as he wishes. He need not rest himself between
the journeys, though he may choose to linger. But if he were
very weak, he would stop and rest awhile between the loads,
and as-he becomes tired with the journeys would perform them
more slowly.

556. If the vital power be strong, and the artery responsive,
and the resistance moderate, the effect of the power would be
to make the pulse more swift and of greater volume. But if the
resistance were greater, there would be briskness as. well as large
volume and swiftness.

557. The factors which go to make a large pulse also go
to make a long pulse, if rise and fall are hindered in any way.
For instance, a hard artery cannot widen, and tough flesh and
skin, especially if the tissues be wasted, prevents the artery from
rising to the finger.


Variants of Large Pulse, and their causes (Aeg.) :—

Large and also soft: hot baths.

Large and also hard: hot intemperament, especially if there is dryness of the
system.

Large and mean between hard and soft: massage; exercise.

Large and vehement: wine; anger.

Large and unequal: concealing anger; deceiving the doctor in regard to
definite questions, as to possibility of heating factors.

Large and also a hasty contraction: putrefactive changes in humours,

Large and also quick and dense: increase of heat in the heart from various
causes.

Large only in appearance: emaciated state of the tissues at the wrist.


598. The Causes of Pulses bearing Distinctive Names
Broad Pulse. Emaciation may make a pulse appear broad.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 305


Emptiness of vessel also makes a pulse appear broad,
because the two walls come into apposition. A very soft artery
gives the same effect.

Causes of broad pulse: redundance of humidity from natural causes or from
external causes, such as a soft artery (Aeg.).

559. Hurried pulse. The causes of a hurried pulse are :
weakness ; great resistance ; heat.

560. S/uggish pulse. The causes of a sluggish pulse are :
power relatively greater than resistance ; great coldness due to
resistance ; great loss of vital power ; approach of death.

561. Feeble pulse. The causes of feeble pulse are : loss of
natural power by lack of food ; emaciation ; excessive discharges;
insomnia ; too much exercise ; solicitude ; morbid change in
the humours ; movement of the humours, especially into a very
sensitive member, or into a member which is 1n relation with the
heart ; any source of intemperament ; pain (producing syncope);
sadness, grief and other mental states or cares; any factor
whereby the vitality is markedly depressed. (Note also: age,
season, locality ; temperament.)

Cause of change from feeble pulse to strong pulse: (a) when the vitality
becomes strong again, after being enfeebled from lack of food, wakefulness, im-
moderate evacuations, grief, cares, syncope, or any cause of intemperament.
(6) When humours are matured ; when noxious substances are excreted, when there
is passion, when an intemperament is rectified ; also after use of certain foods,
of wines; after exercise. (Aeg.)

562. Hard pulse. The causes of hard (“tense’’) pulse
are: dryness of the arteries and great stretching of the arteries ;
intense cold. The pulse may become very hard at the crisis of
an illness owing to the intensity of the conflict between the person
and his disease, for all the members are implicated. (This pulse
is usually also small, quick, and sometimes frequent.)

Hard pulse must be distinguished from a strong pulse. The latter is usually
also large, swells up and strikes the finger forcibly. A hard pulse cannot be large,
for the artery is unyielding; a hard pulse is also small, quick, and sometimes dense.
Vee of hard pulse: hardness of artery; this is due to immoderate cold,
dryness, or tension of inflammation, or spasm. (Aeg.)

Cause of strong pulse: the force of natural vitality, associated with hardness
of the artery (Aeg.).

563. Soft pulse. The causes of soft pulse are: “ natural
agents with an emollient action, such as aliments (more abundant
diet ; liquid food). ‘Morbid states which tend to emollient
effect : e.g. dropsy, sleepy-sickness, coma, disorders arising from
or in a serous humour. Mental states, such as hilarity. Agents
which are neither “natural”? nor morbid: e.g. bathing (to
€XCess).


‘ ”»


x


306 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Other causes (Aeg.) : humid state of artery due to (a) preternatural causes :
“coma, lethargy, dropsy, affections related to the serous humour. (6) Non-preter-
natural causes: more liquid food, much sleep, a more abundant diet, immoderate
baths ;_ hilarity. =>

564. Irregular pulse. If the vital power be maintained, the
cause will be heaviness [in substance] of the food, or of some
humour. If the vital power be weak, it shows a contest between
causative agent [of the illness] and the tissues. Other causes :
(a) overfullness of the vessels. ‘This would be remedied by
venesection. (4) Viscidity of the blood. In this case the breath
becomes choked in the vessels. This form of pulse is especially
liable to occur when the breath is also imprisoned in the cardiac
region—e.g. by an over-full stomach, which produces this effect
very rapidly ; or by anxiety ; or by pain.

If the stomach contain depraved humour, the irregularity
increases until cardiac tremor comes on, and a thrilling pulse
(tachycardia !) results.

If the irregularity is orderly, it betokens lesser constitu-
tional injuries ; if disorderly, it shows that there are more
serious constitutional defects to deal with.

565. Harsh pulse. ‘This pulse shows a varying consistence
of the artery which is produced by changes in the composition
of the (circulating) humours, whereby decomposition products,
“* crudities,” or products of maturation diffuse through the vessel
wall and affect its mode of expansion. Inflammatory deposits in
fibro-muscular organs (e.g. diaphragm, pleura: Rhazes) also
render the pulse harsh.

If the harshness be slight, it shows that the inflammation is mild; if more


marked, it means that the case is severe and dangerous, with a danger of empyema
or tuberculous change (Aeg.). See 548.


566. Dicrotic pulse. Vital power is strong ; the artery is
hard ; the resistance is considerable. ‘The artery does not at
once yield to the force. It suggests a person wishing to sever
something at one blow, but failing to do so until helped out, for
instance by a sudden dire need to achieve it. (Significance :
approaching crisis).

567. Mousetail. Such a pulse is produced when the vital
power is weak, as a person who ceases manual labour, or is re-
suming it after a rest. If it is constant, it shows that the loss of
power is greater. However, as long as the pulsation is mousetail
in type (and the similar forms) it shows that there is some vitality
left. But it is apt to pass on to the terminal mousetail, then to
continuous mousetail, and finally end in the grave “ recurrent.
mousetail ’’ (“* swooning ”’ pulse).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 307


Recurrent mousetail means: (a) failing vital powers, with a greater or less
degree of prostration ; (b) weak power, which is still struggling on in face of the
odds (Aeg.).

568. Fading or falling pulse. The vital power is enfeebled
or waning, and inadequate. It is also produced by a sudden
change in the “‘ nature” and in the mind.

569. The spasmodic or tense pulse. This is produced when
there are non-natural movements in the vital power or when the
artery is itself unhealthy.

_ Significance: inflammatory changes at the nerve-origins (meningitis, acute
eae It can be felt after death has taken place, while the body is still warm
eg.).

570. Thrilling pulse. "ere the vital power is strong ; the
artery is hard ; the resistance is great. Without these conditions
it cannot arise.

It denotes inflammation in fibro-muscular tissues which are well supplied


with nerves. A strong expansion is required, with adequate vital power. The
hardness of the artery prevents adequate expansion.


571. Undulatory pulse. ‘This usually means chiefly a lack
of vital power, expansion being hardly achieved, if at all, and
then only little by little. If the artery is soft, this would itself
suffice to produce the effect of waves, even though the power
were not much reduced. A soft and moist artery does not respond
to an impact, and does not allow every part to be expanded ;
whereas a dry and hard artery does—dryness being responsive
to impact and tremor. An artery which is both hard and dry
will transmit expansion at once ; the soft and moist artery will
only do so at the beginning of the pulsation, expansion and alter-
ation of form of the vessel subsiding suddenly so that the other
fingers do not perceive any movement.


The beats are indistinct ; the dicrotic waves blend. At the same time the first
cardiac sound disappears.

Significance ; crisis approaching by sweat (Rhazes, Haly Abbas), or by
bowels ; humid affections like sudden dropsy, lethargy, peripneumonia (Aeg.) ;
typhoid fever; and malaria; extreme cardiac asthenia (Broadbent).


572. Vermicular and formicant pulse are produced by great
weakness, and so the pulse is sluggish, the intervals between
the beats are short, and the components are unequal. This 1s
because the artery is unable to expand at once, but only little


by little. (See 541.)


Significance : sudden loss of vital power due to excessive haemorrhage, diar-
rhoea, cholera, etc. Failing life (Galen).

In the formicant pulse the powers of life are at a still lower ebb than in the case
of the vermicular pulse (Aeg.).

Chinese simile: to a silk thread (§ 214).


308 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


573. Pulse of faulty rhythm. Wf this occurs during a time of
repose, it is due to an increased resistance. If it occurs during
exercise, there is an increased weakness (of vital power) or de-
ficient degree of resistance. ‘The pulse of exercise produced by
swiftness of expansion is something different to this.


The duration of the pause is lessened in old age. Equality between expansion
and pause denotes a normal temperament of the body. It occurs in early life.
If the pause is greater in duration than the expansion, the temperament. is hot
(e.g., adult). If the pause is less than the expansion, it shows that the temperament
is cold (e.g., the aged). ;

Change of rhythm changes the rate and frequency of the pulse. (Aegineta.)


The causes of full, empty, hot and cold, deep (high) and


low pulses are evident.


Full pulse is produced by plethora from food or wine ; or any mere abundance
of fluid-intake ; empty pulse is produced by lack of nourishment, or undue dis-
charges. The pulse feels warm (a) if there is great heat in the heart—the rest of the
body being cold; (b) if the artery is in a sort of spasmodic state ; (c) in catalepsy,
and in persons who are becoming comatose. (Aegineta, quoting Archigenes.)

§ 231. The influence of low resistance upon the pulse. There is a sudden
impact ; the acme is brief; the subsidence rapid and the dicrotic wave is present.
As it subsides quickly under the fingers it is called hurried. If at the same time the
heart beat is forcible, the pulse is “ full and bounding ’’—large, sudden impact,
vehement; artery easily flattened. If the heart is beating feebly, the artery is
narrow ; the pulse is small, easily compressed ; the impact is not sharp, and there-
fore the fingers must be applied very lightly in order to be able to feel the pulse.
An extreme degree of this kind of pulse constitutes the “ running’”’ pulse. Sphyg-
mographic variants are: hyperdicrotic, and ‘‘ anacrotic’’ (which is a form of
‘gazelle ain

: Clinical causes of low resistance: (a) congenital. (6) transient: after a hot
bath, in fatigue, in exhaustion ; after a meal, especially a hot meal; lack of nitro-
genous aliments ; alcohol. (c) Emotional: anxiety, depression. (d) Morbid states :
obesity, fever; flatulence; constipation; sleeplessness; headache; nervous
conditions ; chlorosis; fatty degeneration of heart.

Other facts.—A low resistance occurring in a person with a high tension is
a bad sign; a person suffering from habitual constipation, and having a low blood-
pressure, should not be given purgation, much less mercurial purgation.

§ 232. The influence of high resistance (high tension) on the pulse. This
depends on the force of the heart. The pulse is full between the beats ; the artery
feels like a tendon or the vas deferens; or is even visible under the skin. The
artery is large or small. It may be thrown into a curve; there may be nodosities
along the artery. The wave is gradual; lasts too long ; subsides too slowly ; seems
weak, but is more plain when one presses harder. There is no dicrotism. —

A variant, called ‘‘ virtual tension,”’ is where the artery is large and full be-
tween the beats ; moderate pressure does not make the pulse seem stronger ; it is.
compressible ; the impact is sudden, the acme is short, and the subsidence is sudden.
Such a pulse shows that the heart is unable to cope with the resistance.

Clinical causes ; excitement ; exertion ; external cold (which drives the blood
from the surface); migraine; early meningitis; early acute nephritis (the water
cannot get out through the kidney) ; plethora; presence of certain-waste products.
in the blood which cause the small vessels to contract.


§ 233. TYPES OF PULSE AND VARIOUS CONDITIONS (MODERN),


Sleeplessness.—Two types of pulse. (a) Impact gradual ; acme long ; may sub-
side suddenly ; artery large or small; full between beats, and usually not easily
compressible. It may be weak and yielding. The condition in this respect depends
on the state of the heart. (b) Impact sudden; acme short; artery full between
the beats ; low tension. A sleepless person with such a pulse will be able to sleep
readily in the daytime ; he may be able to sleep sitting up though unable to do so:
lying down. The pulse is unstable,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 309


Emotional excitement.—Impact strong; rate increased.

Fevers :—

Catarrhal. The pulse varies according to the degree of obstruction to the
pulmonary circulation (bronchitis, e.g.).

Pneumonia. Pulse frequent, large, vehement, dicrotic, not short, not com-
pressible. The pulse can be felt with the third finger after pressing hard with the
index finger, because the pulsation goes round the radial arch. When the lungs
become engorged more and more, the artery is small, the beat is weak, but the heart
itself is very forcible, working hard to get the blood round the lungs. Violent
heart action and weak pulse! (Venesection indicated !)

Diphtheria. At first the pulse is weak and small especially if the heart is
affected. The heart rhythm is ab/c/d/d or ab /c/d/d/d /d.

Erysipelas. Large, soft, very dicrotic; tends to become undulating.

Septicaemia. Artery small; pulse rate 140-200; beat sharp; compressible ;
“ tick-tack ’’ heart. .The pulse varies much in different cases.

Pyaemia, Pulse frequent, and sharp, apart from the degree of pyrexia. The
pulse is that of shock.

Acute rheumatism. The character of the pulse varies with the degree of in-
flammation in the joints, etc.

Inflammation of serous membranes. First, small, long, frequent, hard, full
between beats ; not easily compressible. Later—shock: very small, weak, com-
pressible ; “‘ wiry ’’ or ‘‘ thready ’’ pulse due to the filling up of the abdominal vessels.
These characters are more noticeable with peritonitis than with pleurisy.

Cerebral conditions :—

Tumour. Rate slow; artery full between beats. Later on the impact is
very weak, and the acme short; the artery small; the artery empty between beats
{denoting feeble heart and relaxed arteries).

Coma. The pulse varies with the state of the heart.

Convulsions. Impact strong; rate increased; tension lowered; the blood-
pressure is sometimes increased, sometimes low.

Epilepsy. Low tension is a bad sign; if a high pressure is present and con-
tinues, the case is tractable. The tension is always high in senile cases.

Meningitis. Early cases show the “hesitating” pulse; the force is not
quite constant; the time is not quite regular. The impact is deliberate, the acme
long; the artery is contracted. The rate is slow. Later on, the rate becomes
quick; there is no tension (owing to compression of the brain).


7. Tue Errecr oF AGE AND SEX ON THE PuLsE


574, Male Sex. ‘The pulse is larger and much stronger,
because the vital power and the resistance are both marked. ‘The
pulse is slower and more sluggish than in women because the
degree of resistance is so great.

If the vital power is maintained, and the pulse is brisk, it
must needs be swift. Swiftness comes before briskness. Hence
the pulse of males is slow, and is necessarily also sluggish.

575. Late childhood (7-14). The pulse is softer because the
temperament is moist at this period. It is weaker and more brisk
because the innate heat is abundant. The vital power is not great,
for growth has not yet become complete. Considering the small
size of the body at this age, the pulse is large. ‘This is because
the artery is very soft and the resistance strong, and the vital
power is not small—considering the small bulk of the body (at
this age). Compared with the pulse of adult life the pulse at
this age is not large but quick and more brisk (due to the resist-
ance). This is because at this period of life there is a greater


310 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


ageregation of ‘“‘fumosities,”* consequent on eating so
often and so liberally—wherefore more frequent evacuation
becomes called for and ‘‘ ventilation’? of the innate heat is
desirable.

576. Early adult life (21-35). The pulse is large, not very
swift—indeed inclined to be slower and less brisk; the
tendency is to become sluggish. At the beginning of this

eriod of life the volume of the pulse is greater ; and at the
middle of the period it is stronger. The innate heat, as we have
stated, is about the same in adolescents and in young adults ;
there is therefore about the same resistance in each. The vital
power is greater at this period, and the greater volume of pulse
therefore compensates for the lack of swiftness and frequency.
Vital power is the main reason for the pulse being large at this
time of life. The resistance is next in importance, and the state
of the arterial wall is the contributory factor.

577. Elderly persons. ‘The pulse is here smaller because
of the weakness of the vital power ; the swiftness is lessened
both because of this and because of the lessened resistance. Such
a pulse is therefore more sluggish.

578. Old age. In advanced years of life, the pulse becomes
small, sluggish, slow. If it be also soft this is because of extra-
neous, and not natural, humours.

§ 234. From the Chinese.—In the male sex, the pulse at W should be more
brisk than at C; in the female sex it should be more brisk at C than at W. From
deviations of normal character of the pulse in women one may become aware of
menstrual errors ; of the presence or not of pregnancy, and the size of the pregnancy.
The C pulse is noted for these purposes, and the right arm is used.—The exact
details required for diagnosis require the application of the special nomenclature
of pulses which is richer in variety and subtlety than that of the list of § 213.

Age. Bloom of life: pulse firm and full; persons of nurture may show a


slow thin, even soft, pulse, uniform at C, W, and G; if not uniform, such a pulse
is a sign of shortness of life.

Old age : the pulse is slow and weak. Some old men have “ the pulse of long
life ’—-strong, firm, fairly swift, not skipping. (The presence of a skipping or
hesitating character would show that the strength of the person is outward, and
that life would not reach an extreme length.)


8. Tue PuLtse In THE VARIOUS TEMPERAMENTS


579. Hot temperament. ‘The resistance is great. If the
vital power and artery correspond, the pulse will be large. But
if one of them do not correspond, the pulse will vary in the manner
already described.

If the heat is not due to an intemperament, but is natural,
the vital power will be very strong, and the heat increases. But
one must not suppose that the increase of innate heat, to however


* Dukhani; lit. smoke or mist,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 434


great an extent, will lessen the vital power. For, on the contrary,
the power of the breath becomes greater, and the mental qualities
show more boldness.

If the heat arises from intemperament, the greater the
degree of heat, the greater the weakening of vital power.

Cold temperament. ‘The pulse is reduced in breadth, and so
becomes small, slowand infrequent (sluggish). Ifthe arteryis soft,
the pulse increases in width, and also becomes slow and infre-
quent. But if the artery be hard, the breadth will lessen. The
weakness produced by a cold intemperament is greater than that
produced by a hot intemperament because the heat of the latter,
for instance, is then more correspondent (i.e. in slowness or
activity) than is the innate heat.

Moist temperament. The pulse is here soft and wide.

Dry temperament. The pulse becomes hard and wiry.
If the vital power be strong and the resistance great, the pulse
will become dicrotic, or spasmodic, or thrilling.

These remarks will suffice in regard to the relation between
the several temperaments and the simple types of pulse. The
effect on composite pulses can be worked out from the principles
already explained.

580. It may happen that a person may have a dual tem-
perament, one side being cold and the other hot. The pulse will
then be different on the two sides, according to the heat and cold
respectively. In the one case it will be like the pulse in hot
temperament ; in the other like that in cold temperament.
From this we learn that the expansion and contraction of the
pulse is not merely an effect of the ebb and flow of cardiac action,
but there is also an expansion and contraction of the arterial
wall itself.


g. THe EFFECT OF THE SEASONS ON THE PULSE


581. Spring. The pulse is equable in all respects except
in strength, which is above the mean.

Summer. ‘The pulse is quick and brisk, because of the re-
sistance. It is small and weak because the vital power is dispersed
by the dispersal of the breath (which in its turn is due to domin-
ance of undue external atmospheric heat).

Winter. ‘The pulse is more sluggish, slow, weak, and
therefore small. This is because the vital power is lessened.
In some people the heat is retained interiorly and aggregated
together, thus making the vital power stronger. This is espec-
ially so if the temperament is hot, for then the external cold is


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


overruled and prevented from passing inwardly, as would other-
wise occur.

Autumn, The pulse is unequal and tends to a certain weak-
ness. ‘The inequality is due to the frequent changes of tem-
perament which occur during this season owing to the fluctu-
ations of temperature. The temperament is now hot, now cold
accordingly. [he weakness is due to two causes : (4) a contrary
temperament always renders the injurious effect of a nocument
greater than a similar but equable temperament would, even
though that be a morbid one ; (4) autumn 1s a season antagonistic
to life because at this period the innate heat 1s lessened and dry-
ness dominates.

At periods between the seasons, the pulse corresponds to
the adjoining season.

The pulse at each season also has its own appropriate
rhythm.


B12


§ 235. The following details from the Chinese work are tabulated for con-
venient survey :—
Dominant
Month and Season. element Type of Pulse.


| (Chinese name).


First Spring mu Tremulous : long.

Second Spring mu 5 s

Third Fifth tu Moderately slow : strong: hard.
Fourth Summer huo Superficial: strong: “ scattered.”
Fifth Summer huo ss ¥ =
Sixth Fifth tu Mod. slow: strong: hard.
Seventh Autumn chin Superficial ; short ; brisk.
Eighth Autumn chin 53 Ee fs

Ninth Fifth tu Mod. slow: strong: hard.
Tenth Winter shiu Deep: soft: slippery.

Eleventh Winter shiu ae os ae

Twelfth Fifth tu Mod. slow: strong: hard.


If the pulse proper to one season is met with during a different season, this
is usually to be regarded as morbid, and may betoken a long or a short or a fatal
illness according to the particular inversion. The autumn type in spring; the
winter type in summer; the summer type in autumn, are grave signs.

It is to be noted that the third, sixth, ninth, and twelfth months form a fifth
season, and are not counted under the corresponding season. These months there-
fore correspond to those named in Avicenna “ periods between the seasons.’’ The
pulse changes are definitely specified in the above table, though only spoken of
generally in the Canon.


10.


582. Some regions are temperate and vernal ; some are
hot and aestival ; some are cold and winterly ; some are dr
and autumnal. The character of the pulse will follow the
statements made in regard to seasonal influences upon the pulse.


Tue Errects oF LocaLiry oN THE PULSE


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 313


tI. Tue Errects or Foop anp DRINK


583. Aliments (lit. substances entering the body from with-
out) alter the condition of the pulse according to their quality
and quantity. (2) By quality, one refers to the calefacient or
infrigidant nature of the substance in question, which has a
corresponding effect upon the pulse. (4) As regards guantity—
if the amount of aliment is moderate, the pulse shows an increase
of volume, swiftness and frequency, owing to the increase of
vital power and innate heat resulting ; this change in the pulse
lasts a considerable time.

If the amount be unduly great, the pulse will become
irregular and disorderly, because the burden of the food overrules
the vital power ; any overloading renders the pulse irregular.
Archigenes thought that the swiftness of the pulse exceeded
the frequency, as long as the excess of food existed. When the
excess came to be less, the pulse would show an orderly irregu-
larity.

If the amount be unduly small, the pulse becomes irregular
both in volume and swiftness. In this case the duration of the
change would be short because so small an amount of food
would be rapidly digested.

If the vital power is weakened, whether the amount of food
taken be small or large, the pulse corresponds in smallness and
slowness until the digestion of the meal is completed.

_If the natural (vegetative, digestive, maturative) faculty be
strong, the pulse will be equable.

584. Effect of wine on the pulse. ‘Nine has a notable effect
on the pulse, in that if taken plentifully, being attenuated in
nature, it gives rise to an irregular pulse, but not to so great an
extent as other similarly nutrient aliments. This is because its
substance is too rare, attenuated, and light. Being in actuality
cold, wine, like other cold things, lessens the pulse-rate and
makes it slow and infrequent in proportion to the rapidity with
which it enters the body. Once it has become warmed by the
body the initial effect passes off.

The heating effect of wine. ‘The heating effect which wine
produces is not very different from that of the innate heat, for
wine is rapidly distributed through the body, especially if taken
warm, and it undergoes rapid dissipation or resolution. If
taken cold, it exerts an injurious effect on the pulse of a kind not
shared by other cold articles of food, for the latter become warm


only gradually and do not reach the blood as quickly as does


314 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


wine, and they are therefore warm when they do so. But
wine is absorbed so quickly that it has to be warmed by the
blood itself, and this constitutes a noxa for such persons as are
sensitive to cold. This injurious effect is not as great in degree
if the wine is taken warm, because the natural faculty then
counteracts it by breaking it up, distributing it through the body
and finally dispersing it.

The cooling effect of wine. Nine has a cooling effect when
it causes the natural power to fail, so that the pulse loses its
strength before the wine has become broken up, distributed and
dispersed.

Such is the manner in which the use of wine in quantity
produces a heating or a cooling effect.

585. When we study the question of how the use of wine
can make the pulse strong, other factors must be considered.
Its own intrinsic character invigorates healthy persons ; it
enhances the vital power by securing a rapid accession to the
“substance ”’ of the breath.

Although the heating and cooling effects above explained
are injurious to most persons, there are some whose temperament
is suited by it. Cold things, for instance, are tonic for persons of
hot intemperament. For, as Galen truly said, the juice of pome-
granate is strengthening for persons of hot intemperament ;
honey-wine is tonic for those of cold temperament.

Wine may therefore be considered to be hot in nature, in
that it is tonic for persons of hot temperament ; cold in nature
in that it is tonic for those of cold temperament. Still, this
question is aside from our purpose. We are concerned with the
fact that is speedily accedes to the breath, as an intrinsic property ;
and that from that point of view it is always invigorating.

The pulse becomes stronger if either the invigorating effect
is exerted or the warming effect. It becomes weaker if neither
occurs. By warming the body the resistance [i.e. the blood-
pressure] is increased ; by cooling the body the resistance is
diminished. But the usual action is that the pulse becomes
stronger. Moreover, resistance [blood-pressure] is never in-
creased without rendering the pulse more swift.

086. Water, Water has a similar invigorating effect to
wine, because it is the means by which the aliment is enabled
to permeate all through the body. But as it induces cold


rather than warmth, it does not increase the resistance as much
as does wine.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 315


12. Tue Errecr oF SLEEP AND THE ACT oF WAKING ON THE
Putse


587. The characters of the pulse during sleep vary according
to the stage of sleep and the state of digestion.

At the beginning of sleep, the pulse is small and weak,
because the innate heat is then in process of retracting and with-
drawing inwardly,* instead of expanding and travelling to the
surface.

588. Difference between the “‘ heat” in the first stage of
sleep and that produced by exercise.—During the time of sleep,
the innate heat is withdrawn inwards by the vegetative faculty
in order to procure the digestion of the aliment and the matura-
tion of effete substances. The heat is therefore, as it were,
mastered and forced into service. ‘The pulse is therefore more
slow and sluggish in spite of the fact that the contraction and
imprisonment of the heat in this region means a local increase
of heat. For, in amount, this local heat is not so much as exists
during the waking state, with its associated movements and
exercise.

Thus, exercise is apt to create undue heat and “ inflam-
mation”’ up to an intemperamental degree, whereas there is
only a moderate aggregation of heat when the innate heat is
imprisoned, and so “ inflammation ”’ is less feasible. You know
that this is so, because of the fact that exercise makes breathing
laboured (forced), and hurried, incomparably more than when the
innate heat is constricted and imprisoned by some other agent
similar to sleep. For instance, to be submerged in tepid water
brings about such an imprisonment of innate heat, and produces
rapid respiration, yet not nearly to the extent produced by toil
and exercise. Careful consideration shows that nothing increases
the heat as much as these do. But it is not the mere exercise
which accounts for this, as if resting would bring about a ces-
sation of heat production. It is rather that the heat produced
by exercise simply moves on the breath to the exterior parts,
as long as generation of the breath takes place.

589. During the stage of sleep following the completion
of digestion, the pulse becomes stronger. This is because vital
power is added to by the.digested aliment. The heat which had
passed to the inward parts now returns towards the surface in
order to regulate the nutrients passing thither, and also returns
towards its source. This fact, and the fact that the temperament


* i.e., into the abdominal viscera, in whose veins the blood has now collected.


KPa THE CANON OF MEDICINE


is made hotter by the products of nutrition explains why the pulse
becomes of increased volume, and the arterial wall is softer
because of the addition of the appropriate nutrients. There is
no increase in swiftness and briskness along with the increase
of volume, because mere increase of volume does not alter blood-
pressure (lit. increase the resistance) either directly or indirectly ;
that is, by restoring the factors which directly raise the blood-
pressure (lit. increase the resistance).
* * *

The thought underlying this passage may be expressed as
follows :—The person is supposed to have gone to sleep shortly
after completing his meal. The body-heat is now concentrated
round the digestive organs in order to render digestion possible.
The surface of the body becomes cold. Later, when the first
digestion is accomplished, the products are distributed to the
various parts of the body. The heat now leaves the interior
parts (i.e. the splanchnic system), and may be pictured as
passing to the surface again, whence it had come (mabda’), so as
to be ready to receive these digestive-products. Once more
does it preside (lit. regulate, tadbir), or brood over them so as to
render possible the further (third and fourth) digestion which
they are about to undergo in this new situation.

The pulse is strengthened by two factors : (a) the access of
body-heat which has now left the abdomen; (4) the food-products.
The latter affect the pulse in two ways : (i) indirectly, by making
the temperament more hot ; (ii) directly, by making the arterial
wall soft.

The person, it will be borne in mind, is supposed to be
still sleeping. If he continues to sleep, the pulse will change
in the manner next to be described ; if he awakes, the conditions
also change, and the pulse alters as described below.

* * *

590. If sleep continues after the completion of digestion,
the pulse again becomes weak owing to the aggregation of innate
heat and the choking of the vital power by the undue prepon-
derance of those effete substances which now await evacuation by
channels only possible during the waking state—namely exercise,
and the insensible perspiration. |

591. Ifthe body were fasting when sleep began, and there
is nothing awaiting digestion, the temperament would tend to-
wards coldness, and consequently the pulse would not only
remain small, slow and sluggish but would become more so. —

092, The act of waking has certain effects on the pulse.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 317


When a sleeping person awakes, the pulse steadily gains volume
and swiftness until it reaches the natural state for that person.
But if the wakening is sudden, the change in the pulse will be
sudden ; it will become rapidly weak, because the act of wakin
overrules the vital power. ‘The previous large volume will
reappear later, and the pulse will become quick, brisk and
irregular (up to “‘thrilling”’). The quasi-violent movement
introduces great heat. The sudden stirring up of the vital power
to meet the sudden change accounts for the irregularity and
trembling of the pulse. However, the pulse does not remain
long in this condition; it rapidly becomes regular again.
Seemingly potent though the agent is, its duration is so short
that all trace of its effect is soon lost.


13. THE Puts—E purinc (ricorous) ATHLETIC EXERCISE


Note: the word “ Exercise ’’ includes (a) athletic sports of all kinds: running,
endurance tests, sprinting, gymnastics of all kinds, military exercises, laborious
manual or physical work ; (b) work in the fields ; (c) necessary exercise and walking
exercise taken for health’s sake and recreation ; (d) mental.


598, At the outset, as long as the exertion is moderate,
the pulse is large and strong. This is because the innate heat
increases, and is strong. The pulse is also swift and brisk. This
is because the resistance becomes greatly increased by the
exertion.


(The pulse is frequent, strong, and the artery is moderately contracted : !5)


594. As exertion continues and increases, even if it be
intense for only a short time, the pulse weakens, and, with the
dispersal of the innate heat, becomes small. The pulse remains
swift and brisk for two reasons: (1) the degree of resistance
(i.e. blood-pressure) is further increased ; (2) the vital power
progressively fails until it is insufficient. After this, the swiftness
steadily and progressively lessens ; and the briskness increases
correspondingly to the lessening of vital power.


(Violent, but not excessive exercise, renders the pulse frequent, strong, sudden,
vehement, large, short, dicrotous :*?°)


Still further prolongation of the exertion weakens the pulse
until it becomes formicant and very brisk.
(Exhaustion produces a frequent, sudden, short, not vehement, very dicrotous


pulse. It is large unless the heart is very weak. Fatigue makes the pulse slightly
slow; the force is diminished, the arteries are relaxed.1?)


595, Finally, if the exercise has been carried on to an
extremely excessive extent, it leads to astate akin to death, acting


318 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


like all resolvents—that is, it renders the pulse vermicular, very
brisk, slow, weak and small.


14. THe Errect oF BATHING ON THE PULSE


596. (1) Hor bath. If one bathes in hot water, the first
effect is to make the pulse strong and raise the pressure. When
the bath has brought about a dispersal of the vital power, the
pulse becomes weak. Galen says it is small, slow in beat and
sluggish. But while agreeing that it is weak and small 3; we
say that the hot water acts first by increasing the interior heat
of the body, like any extraneous heat, i.e. only temporarily.
After a while the water resumes its cooling effect*—its natural
quality. This cooling effect may persist. As long as its action
as extraneous heat holds the field, the pulse becomes swift and
brisk. But when its own natural character is resumed, the pulse
will be slow and sluggish. If the incidental quality (of being hot)
lead to so much loss of strength that syncope is imminent, the
pulse becomes slow and sluggish.

(2) Cold baths. If the cold reaches to the interior parts,
the pulse becomes weak, small, sluggish, slow. If it does not do
so, but has the effect of aggregating the innate heat in the
interior, the volume of the pulse will increase as the power
increases, and the swiftness and briskness decrease.

(3) Bathing in natural thermal waters. If these have desiccant
properties, the pulse becomes harder and its volume diminishes.
If they impart warmth, the swiftness increases. If they dispel
the vital power the pulse will come to be as described above.


1g. ‘THe Putse 1n Precnancy


597. ‘The resistance is specially great in pregnancy, because
the foetus shares in the mother’s respiration. Both mother and
embryo have their own resistance (blood-pressure), and there is
as it were a double respiration. Nevertheless there is no doubt
about the fact that the vital power is neither increased nor
lessened, except to a degree consistent with a slight lassitude
proceeding from the mere weight of the foetus. Hence the in-
crease of resistance overrules the moderate amount of. vital
power, and the pulse is made of greater volume and becomes
swift and brisk.

§ 236. The Chinese say: a pulse at C which is constantly superficial (or


i swimming ’’) or deep in an otherwise healthy woman, with amenorrhoea, betokens
pregnancy ; so also a high strong C pulse; a ‘‘slippery’”’ pulse at C is a certain


* On the nervous system.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 319


sign. An overflowing and high or deep and full pulse at the left C goes with a male
pregnancy ; a superficial and high pulse at the right C betokens a female pregnancy,
number of other rules are given, the changes in the character of the pulse

during the successive months of pregnancy being specified. Thus, first month:
W pulse small, C pulse brisk. Third month: pressure with the finger makes the
pulse seem to disperse. Sixth month: pressure does not alter the typical character,
Seventh-eighth month: full, hard, strong pulse betokens a good jabour. A deep
and slender pulse forewarns of difficult labour.

Death of the foetus makes the pulse long and tremulous.

If the C pulse is continually small, weak, and sharp, and the nature is cold,
with a tendency to shiverings, pregnancy will never be possible.


16. Tue Putse in Pain


598. Pain changes the character of the pulse according to
{1) its intensity ; (2) its duration ; (3) its situation—whether
the member affected is a vital one or not.

At first, pain stirs up the vital power, making it resist and
counteract the pain ; at the same time the cause of the pain
increases the heat of the body. The pulse is therefore of large
volume, swift and very brisk, the effort entailed in immobilizing
the body [the reflex effect of the pain] accounting for the volume
and swiftness. When the pain becomes less unbearable in one
or other of the ways we have already explained, the pulse steadily
declines in fullness until it has lost its size and swiftness ; but
these features are replaced by very marked briskness and small-
ness of beat, and hence the pulse becomes formicant and ver-
micular.

If pain becomes more and more severe, it makes the pulse


sluggish and finally extinct.


17. THe Putsze 1n (INFLAMMATORY) SWELLINGS


599. The formation of certain swellings is associated with
fever, either because of their size, or because they affect some
vital organ. ‘The pulse varies with the changes induced in the
body as a whole by the fever, as we shall explain in its proper
place.

Afebrile swellings alter the pulse of the member itself, from
their very nature. The pulse in the rest of the body may be
altered secondarily—not because they are swellings, but because
they produce pain (and restrict movement. eg.)

In sthenic fever, the pulse is frequent, sudden, vehement, large, short,
dicrotous. In asthenic fever it is frequent, sudden, not vehement, large (unless the


heart is weak), short, and very dicrotous. In peritonitis, the arteries are extremely
contracted. (Broadbent.)


600. When an inflammatory mass causes a change of the
pulse, it does so either according to (1) kind of swelling, (2) its


320 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


phase, (3) its bulk, (4) the organ in which it occurs, (5) associated
effects.

1. Relation to variety of mass. (a) If “hot,” the pulse
becomes harsh, and coarsely, and then finely thrilling ; swift,
brisk. (4) If, however, there is an antagonistic humectant agent
at work, the pulse ceases to be harsh and becomes undulatory.
It is also always tremulous—coarse or fine tremor—and swift
and brisk. Not only are there agents which will alter a hard
pulse, but there are also agents which make a harsh pulse more
decided. (c) If the mass be soft, the pulse is undulatory.
(d) If very cold, the pulse becomes slow and sluggish. (e) If
hard, the harsh pulse becomes still more harsh.

When abscess formation comes on, the pulse ceases to be
harsh and becomes undulatory. This is because suppuration
goes with moisture and softness. The pulse also becomes
irregular owing to the weight of the mass, and the rate of brisk-
ness lessens owing to the fact that heat-formation ceases with
maturation of the pus.

2. Relation between phase of inflammatory process and
character of pulse. The larger the “hot” inflammatory mass
becomes, the more harsh does the pulse become. The hardness
and tension in the mass increases steadily, and as the pain in-
creases, tremor appears in the pulse. At the acme, all the
features of the pulse become more marked, except those depend-
ing on force ; the force of the pulse lessens and the briskness
and swiftness increase. If the acme is prolonged, the swiftness
lessens and the pulse becomes formicant. After the swelling
subsides, whether by natural processes or by surgical interference,
the pulse becomes strong in proportion as the tension in the
swelling lessens ; and the pulse ceases to be thrilling because
the pain ceases with the fall of tension in the tissues.

3. Relation between bulk of inflammatory mass and the
pulse. A large mass denotes marked inflammation ; the pulse
becomes larger in all respects, and each beat is prolonged.
When the mass is only small, the pulse is smaller and more
sluggish.

4. Effect of the position in the body. When the inflam-
matory process is situate in an organ or tissue rich in sensory
nerves, the pulse becomes hard, and approaches the “‘ harsh ”
type. If the organ is rich in blood-vessels, there is an increase
in size of the pulse, and in force ; and it is very irregular. If
arteries predominate—as in the spleen and lung—the volume
is not maintained unless the force is maintained as well.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 82a


When it is situate in moist soft members (like the brain
and lung) the pulse becomes undulating.

5. Effect of secondary results of inflammation. An inflam-
matory mass in the lung has a choking effect, and hence the pulse
becomes thrilling ; in the liver, atrophy is produced and the
pulse becomes like that found in wasting diseases ; in the kidney,
strangury is produced, and there is suppression of urine, which
alters the pulse accordingly. In members which are rich in
sensory nerves (stomach, diaphragm), the pulse becomes
spasmodic and swooning.


18. Errect oF vARIOUS EMOTIONAL STATES* ON THE PULSE


601. dxger. Anger stirs up the vital power and causes
the breath (ruh) to expand all at once. Hence the pulse is large,
rises high, is swift and brisk. It is not necessarily irregular
because the passion does not change—unless there is fear present
as well, in which case anger would prevail at one time, and fear
at another. Irregularity may also occur if shame is associated,
for the intellect warns the person to be silent and not yield to
the same evil as did the person who has excited one to anger.

Excitement apart from anger.—The pulse is frequent, strong, and the artery
is moderately contracted.—Note also the modern observation that “‘ excitement


always increases the blood-concentration, sometimes by as much as Io per cent.”
(Barbour and Hamilton, Journ. Am. Med. Assoc., 1927, p. 91).


Delight. Here the movement is gradual and outwards.
The pulse does not become as speedy and brisk as in the case of
anger, but its volume is adequate for the resistance, and therefore
the pulse is slow and infrequent.

joy. ‘The pulse is similar to the preceding, because usually
large in volume, and soft ; it becomes slow and infrequent.

Grief. Here the heat is extinguished, or choked, nearly to
obliteration, and the vital power is weakened. Hence the pulse
is small, weak, sluggish and slow.

Fear. If of sudden origin, the pulse becomes quick,
irregular, disorderly. If the state is prolonged, or more or less
habitual, having begun insidiously, the pulse varies with the
varying shades of anxiety.

Love.—‘‘ Now the lover’s,pulse is variable and irregular, especially when he
sees the object of his affections, or hears her name, or gets tidings of her. In this
way one can discover, in the case of the one who conceals his love and the name of


his beloved, who is the object of his passion. . . .’’—(Dhakhira-i- Khwarazm-shahi,
Book vi. Guftar i, Juz’ 2, ch. 3; E. G. Browne’s translation,’ p. 89.)


* Nafsaniat. See § 160 iii, iv, and 174 sqq.


300 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


19. Brier SUMMARY OF THE CHANGES PRODUCED BY AGENTS
ANTAGONISTIC TO THE NaTuRE OF THE PuLsE


602. When the pulse is changed by such agents, it 1s
either (1) because of an intemperament ; and you know the effect
of each of these upon the pulse ; or (2) by confining the vital
power, whereby the pulse becomes irregular. If the restriction
be unduly great, the pulse becomes also disorderly and arhythmic.
The degree of confinement varies with the amount of morbid
material, whether there be an inflammatory mass or not. Or,
(3) by dispersal of the vital power, whereby the pulse becomes
weak. Here belong such agents as: severe pain, affections of
the mind which produce a profound loss of vital power, severe
or protracted diarrhoea.

§ 237. Pulse zn convalescence from acute disease ; the rate is normal or slightly


slow ; the force of the heart is diminished and the arteries are relaxed. The force
of the heart and the arterial tone increase as convalescence advances. (Broadbent,
Pp. 51.)

The “renal pulse’’ : the frequency is normal or slightly diminished. The
force of the heart beat is increased. The arterioles are contracted (ib.).


THE URINE


I. GENERAL REMARKS


PRECAUTIONS NECESSARY IN COLLECTING THE URINE, BEFORE
ForMING AN OPINION as TO ITS CHARACTER


603. 1. It must be collected in the early morning* ; it
must not have been kept over from the night before.t

2. ‘The person must not have taken either food or drink
before passing it.

3. The previous food must have been free from colouring
agents like crocus and cassia fistula (these render the urine lemon
yellow or ruddy), and from potherbs (which make the urine a
greenish tint), and from salted fish (which renders the urine dark),
and from intoxicating wines (which tend to render the colour
of the urine similar to themselves).

4. The patient should not have been given an agent which
expels some humour (a cholagogue or phlegmagogue) by the
urine.

5. Physiological state. The patient should not have under-
taken severe exercise or toil, or be in a praeternatural mental
state ; for in each case the colour of the urine may alter. E.g.,
fasting, wakefulness,f toil, anger, dread—for all these cause the
urine to become more lemon-yellow or redder in tint. Coitus
also alters the urine, rendering it oily. Vomiting and defecation
alter both colour and texture of the urine. ‘The same happens
if the urine is kept standing a while. This is why some advise
urine not to be left standing more than six hours before exam-
ination, for otherwise the significance is altered ; the colour
changes ; the sediment goes partly into solution; and the
density increases. Personally I think that such changes begin
within an hour.

6. The whole of the urine should be collected into one


* Because digestion, whose efficacy the urinoscopy determines, will then have
had time to be completed in a normal person.
+ The patient must have slept through the night.


323


324 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


single vessel lest anything should be spilt out of it ; one should
allow it to settle before scrutinizing it. .

+. The urinal must be clean. For instance, alkanna will
impart its colour to the urine; this is a dye used by some
people for tinting their skin and finger-nails.

8. The vessel used for the specimen must be clean, and
the previous sample must have been rinsed out of it.

g. The material of which the vessel is made should be
clear white glass or crystal.

10. The urine must not be exposed to the sun or wind
or freezing cold, until the sediment has separated out and the
various characters have properly developed. The settling is not
immediate even if the digestive processes are normal.

11. The sample must be inspected in a light place where
the rays do not fall directly upon it, as otherwise the brilliant
light would interfere with the colours and give rise to erroneous
deductions.

12. ‘The nearer one holds the sample to the eye, the denser
does it appear. The further away it is, the clearer does it seem.
In this way one can distinguish urine from other fluids brought
to the doctor in a falsified state.

604, There is little advantage to be derived from the study
of the urine in childhood, and still less in infancy, because their
nourishment consists solely of milk, and the very little colouring
matter there is in the urine is lost to view ; their “ nature ’”’ is
also very feeble in view of the fact that they pass so much time
in sleep, which abolishes the evidénces of digestion.

605. The first and foremost object of observing the urine
is to form an opinion about the state of the liver, the urinary
passages and the blood-vessels. The various disorders of these
organs are revealed by it. But the most precise information


to be obtained is that concerning the functional capacity of the
liver. :


Inspection oF Urine. (TarsiRa.)


The name “‘ tafsira ’’ is given to “ inspection ”’ because it “‘ explains ’’ (tufassir)
and makes manifest to the physician; it is an indication or guide (dalil) to the
patient’s condition.* 7


606. The following are the points to observe in a
sample of urine :
I. quantity (665)
2. odour (645)


* Dict. of the Technical Terms used in the Sciences of the Mussulmans 18, and
Browne ’”, p. 142.


betes ee


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 325


colour (609)
foam (649)
texture (627)
clearness (632)
sediment (652)

Some persons add other two : the feel and the taste, but
we reject them as objectionable.

By colour we understand the various shades of colour
perceived by the sense of sight—whiteness, darkness, inter-
mediate shades.

By texture we refer to the coarseness or fineness.

By clearness or turbidity we refer to the ease or otherwise
with which light traverses it (translucence).

607. ‘There is a difference between texture and trans-
lucence, for a urine may be coarse and yet as clear as egg-white
or liquid fish-glue ; and a rarefied urine may be turbid (e.g.
turbid water is more rarefied than white of egg).

608. Turbidity depends on the presence of certain vari-
ously coloured particles—-opaque or dark, or tinted with other
colours which are imperceptible to the sense of sight and yet are
impervious. Sediment differs from turbidity in that the particles
are readily visible to the eye, whereas particles cannot really be
distinguished in the case of turbidity. Sediment appears imme-
diately after the passage of the urine ; turbidity does not clear
up on standing. ‘Turbidity differs from coloration in that the
latter pervades the whole substance of the urine, whereas tur-
bidity is less intimately admixed.


Dabo


=


2. Tue SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CoLouR OF THE URINE


609. ‘THE DEGREES OF YELLOWNESS. Among the shades
of yellow colour are: (1) straw-yellow ; (2) lemon-yellow ;*
(3) orange-yellow ; (4) flame-yellow, or saffron-yellow ; that
is, a very deep yellow ; (5) clear reddish-yellow. All except
the first two denote a hot intemperament, in degrees varying
with the amount of exercise, pain, fasting, and abstinence from
water. The fourth variety denotes predominance of the bilious


humour.


If the urine is plentiful also, it shows that a crude humour


{Variants of (1). that
If there is also a sediment which is white, smooth,


is being excreted by the urine.


* Lemon-yellow (utruj).—Orange-yellow (naranja).—Reddish-yellow (shuqrat).
—The latter is the yellowish colour of a chestnut horse.—Another yellow, with a
reddish shade, is called jujube colour (unnabi); this is not in the text, though
enumerated with dyers’ colours (cf. Night 933)..


326 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


equable and plentiful, it shows that the digestion is good. If thicker, and a sediment
is present, it shows that the digestion is not altogether bad. If gritty, scaly, fur-
furaceous, with black, livid, green or fetid sediment, this shows entire lack of diges-
tive function (Aegineta).]


610. II. TH: DEGREES OF REDNESS. (1) rose-red or roseate ;
(2) very dark red ; (3) purple red, which has a brilliance about
it like a certain rose ; (4) smoky red or dull red. All these
denote dominance of the sanguineous humour, for dullness
of colour points that way. A flame-yellow shows the presence
of more ‘‘ heat” than dull red because it shows there is bilious
humour in it, and this is hotter than sanguineous humour.

The urine tends to saffron-yellow and flame-yellow in acute
maladies described as “‘ burning”; but if the urine is at all
inclined to be clear, it shows a certain degree of “ digestion,’”’
namely that this process has actually begun, but its products
have not yet appeared in the substance of the urine.

611. Deepening of colour from lemon-yellowness towards
a flame-yellow shade shows that the innate heat is steadily
increasing. ‘The colour then ceases to be yellow, and attains a
pure clear red. If the urine now begins to clarify it shows that
the (pathological) heat is beginning to subside.

In acute diseases of a haemorrhagic character, the urine
may be tinged with blood without any evident rupture of blood-
vessels having occurred. ‘This would indicate an excessive
plethora. A gradual loss of blood by the urine, associated with
a bad odour, 1s a sign to be dreaded because it informs us that
there is haemorrhage proceeding from congested parts. ‘The
prognosis is still worse if the urine becomes thinner and more
offensive in odour.

_ 612. Admixture of the urine with blood may be a good
sign—namely in acute composite fevers—for it shows that
crisis is about to take place, and recovery will follow. The only
exception is if the urine becomes suddenly transparent (its colour
becoming normal, 1.e.) before the crisis is due. Such a phenome-
non would be a forerunner of arelapse. But thin urine appearing
before the crisis may be equally unfavourable unless the change
has been gradual and progressive.

613. In jaundice, if the urine becomes of a deeper red
until it is nearly black, and its stain on linen can no longer be
removed, it is a good sign ;—the better the deeper the red.
But if the urine becomes white or slightly reddish, and the jaun-
dice is not subsiding, the advent of dropsy is to be feared.

__ Fasting is among the conditions which render the urine
high-coloured and of marked acridity.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 327


614, III. Tur pecrees of GREEN cotour. (1) A colour
approaching that of pistachios* ; (2) the colour of verdigris ;
(3) rainbow green ; (4) emerald green ; (5) leek-green. The >
first denotes a cold intemperament, as do all things the shade
of whose green is not (2) or (5). These (2, 5) denote extreme
combustion, but (5) is not as unhealthy as (2). If it shouldbe
met with after physical labour it denotes ‘‘ spasm.” A green-
coloured urine in adolescence points to the same condition.

Rainbow green usually denotes an extremely cold intem-
perament. In this respect it comes next to (1). Some say
that it shows that poison was present in the fluid taken as drink,
and that if there be a sediment present there is a hope of recovery;
if no sediment, death is likely to take place. Verdigris green
colour of urine forewarns of death (destruction of innate heat).

615. IV. THE DEGREES OF BLACKNESS. (1) Dark-urine ap-
proaching blackness, through a saffron colour. This occurs in
jaundice, for instance. It denotes (a) denseness and oxidation of
the bilious humour; (4) atrabilious humour derived from
bilious humour ; (c) jaundice. (2) Deep-brown-black. This
shows the presence of sanguineous atrabilious humour. (3)
Greenish-black. ‘This shows the dominance of pure atrabilious
humour.

(Speaking generally) dark or black urine denotes (a) extreme
oxidation ; (4) great cold; (c) extinction of the innate heat
(i.e. death) ; (d) crisis ; (e) evacuation whereby the effete sub-
stances from the atrabilious humour are expelled.

616. (The details about each of these are :) (a) dark urine
due to extreme oxidation is recognized by its causing scalding, and
being previously yellow or red. ‘The sediment is discrete (not
coherent), not homogeneous, discontinuous, not very dark,
but tending to a saffron, lemon-yellow, or dark brown. If the
colour of the sediment tends to be lemon-yellow, it strongly
suggests jaundice.

(2) When darkness of the urine is due to great cold, the
urine would previously be tending to a green tint or a livid tint.
The sediment is here slightly coherent, and looks dry, and is
more purely black in colour. Ifa dark urine 1s also very offensive,
it shows that the temperament is hot. If it be odourless, or has
only a slight odour, it shows that the temperament is cold. This
is because no odour emanates from urine unless the innate heat
overrules the cold.


* Cf. the passage in Night 933: ‘I can dye various kinds of green, such
as grass green, olive green, pistachio green, parrot green.’ (Burton, v. 483.)


328 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(c) When darkness of urine is due to extinction of the innate
heat this is recognized by the dispersion of vitality.

(d) When the darkness arises from a critical change in a fever
(“critical polyuria’) one of the following conditions may be
supposed : the termination of a quartan fever ; the resolution
of a splenic disease ; the termination of a fever associated with
the atrabilious humour ; the termination of a fever prevailing
by night and by day ; subsidence of pains in the back and
womb ; retained menses ; retained blood 1n a case of piles—both
the latter two occurring especially when nature is assisted by art.
It occurs in women in whom the menses are retained, because the
effete matters of the blood cannot be disposed of by nature. This
is shown in the urine by its being watery previously. When the
effete matters are finally discharged from the body, the urine at
the same time becomes very abundant.

617. Prognosis. If at the critical periods the urine do not
become dark, it is an ominous sign, especially in acute diseases,
the more so if at the same time (a) the quantity of urine be small
(for scanty urine is evidence that the humour has already become
destroyed by oxidation) ; (4) the sediment be coarse-textured ;
the coarser, the more depraved ; the finer, the less.

Dark urine is a good sign in acute diseases.

If the urine is limpid [as well as dark] and a deposit is
suspended in it at different layers, this denotes cephalalgia, wake-
fulness, deafness, mental confusion. If the urine is secreted
only by drops, and a sediment forms slowly, and the odour is
pungent, and there is fever—all this would be strong evidence
of the above. But when there is wakefulness, deafness, delirium,
and headache—such urine would show that epistaxis is pending.

Dark or dull red urine which is passed after drinking wine
of that colour or after taking certain medicines need cause no
alarm. ‘The wine has simply passed unchanged through the
body.

Dark urine may be evidence of renal calculus. As Rufus
says, “ black urine is good in infirmities of the kidneys and in
stone in the bladder, and also in maniacal cases, for they are
diseases proceeding from gross humours. But it is a grave sign
in acute diseases’. On the other hand, he says that black urine
is a bad sign in diseases of the kidneys and bladder if at the same
time it is extremely scalding. ‘Therefore one must take all such
signs into consideration.

When dark urine occurs 1n aged persons, it is not a good
sign because in such persons, as you know, it can only denote


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


great destruction of tissue.


329


In puerperal women, the appearance


of dark urine is premonitory in convulsions.

In brief, the appearance of dark urine is serious at the onset
of fevers as well as at their close, if there is neither crisis nor any
abatement of symptoms at the same time.


618, WHuitTeE URINE.


The word “


whiteness ”’


is applied


in two ways: mere translucence, as the laity calls anything which


is translucent ‘‘ white.”
‘ white.”’
urine is “ thin ”’


lucent.


Translucence implies absence of all colour.
and translucent.
ness, like that of milk or parchment.


Thus, clear glass, clear crystal, are


Such
Secondly, there is true white-
Such urine is not trans-


Whiteness in the first sense shows that the intemperament


is altogether a cold one, and that digestion is good.


If the urine


be at the same time coatse, it shows that the serous humour is


abundant.
sarily coarse.


619.


Variety of Whiteness.


A urine which is white in the second sense is neces-


Significance.


(a) Mucilaginous.


{b) Waxlike.
(c) Greasy, soapy.


(d) Musty whiteness :
(1) Tinted with blood and pus.


‘ (ii) Not tinted with blood.


(e) Semen-like :
(i) Critical in form,


(ii) Not critical in form and no
inflammation.
(iii) Continuous throughout a fever.
(f) Lead-white ; no sediment.
(g) Milk-white ; in acute diseases.
{h) Previously coloured ;


(i) Sudden change from red to white in
the course of a fever.

(7) Whiteness persisting in a person ap-
parently healthy.

(k) Whiteness like buttermilk, in acute
fevers.


in acute fevers.


Excess of serous humour, and crude
humour.

Liquefaction of adipose tissue.

Liquefaction of serous humour; or it


may denote diabetes, active or latent.


Ulcers discharging into the urinary
passages.

Great excess of crude non-matured
matter; vesical calculus.


Crisis in an inflammation arising in
serous humour.


Diseases associated with vitreous serous


humour.
Seminal emission.
Forewarns of apoplexy and palsy.


The fever will soon become quartan,

Bad.

Ominous.

This shows that bilid6us humour has
descended to some member about to
develop an inflammation (e.g., the
abdomen, or, which is worse, the head).

The patient will become delirious.


Absence of digestion (esp. in the venous
system: Ch.M.’); and in diabetes.
Fatal issue; or wasting.


620.


When the intemperament is hot because of the


dominance of the bilious humour, the urine may appear white


B30 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


[contrary to expectation]. When the intemperament is cold
because of dominance of the serous humour, the urine may
appear red [contrary to expectation]. If the bilious humour
passes down the urinary passages without being admixed with
the urine, the latter remains white. Hence it 1s necessary to
study white urine with care. For, if its colour were brilliant,
and if the deposit is plentiful and coarse, and the urine itself 1s
rather thick, it shows that the whiteness arises from a cold
intemperament, with predonuinance of the serous humour.
Again, if the urine be not clear and bright, and there is not much
deposit, and if the whiteness tends to a brownish tint, it shows
that there is bilious humour concealed therein. Whiteness in
the course of an acute disease, the signs of recovery being
present, with no fear of maniacal delirium, and the like, indicates
that the bilious humour has passed out by some other channel,
such as the intestine, causing constipation.


Brilliant—Arabic; mushriq; lLatin: clarus——This term
describes the colour-effect produced in urine by the presence of
bile-pigment (as shown by its use in the next paragraph, where it
is evidently equivalent to our “ dichroic’). Other equivalents are :
bright, shining, refulgent, lustrous, luminous. In this passage
Avicenna seeks to warn the reader that a urine is not necessarily
free of ‘‘ bilious humour ”’ because it happens to be very pale (white).

Brilliance, however, may be taken as evidence of health, for
when metabolism proceeds quite normally, the urine assumes a
peculiar clear shining colour when viewed in the light. In this case,
we may think of the various stages of catabolism proceeding without
the formation of irregular intermediate substances, or by-products.
The moments of nascence (§91) are “ sharp” throughout.


621. If urine is red in the course of “cold ’”’ maladies,
it means one of four things—(1) that there is severe pain which
disperses the bilious humour (ex. : colic without the signs of
inflammation) ; (2) there is so much serous humour in the
bileducts as to give rise to obstruction there, and the bilious
humour is in consequence diverted from the intestine into the
urinary passages. (3) Hepatic insufficiency, especially in regard
to separating off water from the blood, as occurs in “‘ cold”
dropsy. The urine comes to look like the washings of raw meat.
(4) Some form of putrefactive process in the veins subsequent
to obstruction in the ducts; here the serous humour in the
vessels undergoes a change of colour. The urine is rendered
watery, and the sediment is of a kind already described—
faint in colour, and not refulgent. The presence of bilious
humour renders a colour refulgent (i.e. dichroic).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 331


622. Urine is often white at the onset of a disease, and
becomes dark and offensive in odour later. So it is in jaundice.

623. Urine becomes white after a meal, and remains so
until digestion is nearly completed. It then begins to assume
colour.

624. During the waking state, the urine is white—partly
because of dispersal of the innate heat—but it is not refulgent.
It tends to be dusky if there is an associated defective digestion.

625. Prognosis. A red colour is better than a watery-
white one, in the case of acute diseases. But a white colour is
better if intrinsic—not due to wateriness.

Redness due to blood is not as dangerous as redness due
to bilious humour. Redness from bilious humour is not as
serious if the bilious humour is quiescent ; it is very ominous
if it begins to move about.

Red urine is very bad in the case of renal disease because it
is a sign that there is a “‘ hot” inflammatory process there. If
it occurs in diseases associated with (intense) headache, it por-
tends delirium.

When a urine begins to turn red in an acute disease, and
stays so, without forming a sediment, it is an ominous sign
because it points to an inflammatory swelling in the kidneys.
If such urine becomes turbid, and stays so, it points to an inflam-
matory mass in the liver, with lack of innate heat.


Unusual coloration of the urine, produced by eating saffron or cassia fistula
must be borne in mind; tricksters may alter their urine thus (Alsaharavius).


So much for the simple colours of the urine.
626. THE COMPOUND COLOURS OF THE URINE.


(1) Like raw meat washings (i.e. blood-stained water).
This means hepatic insufficiency due to plethora of blood or
to any form of intemperament, resulting in deficient digestive
power and dispersal of the vitality. Were the vital power
adequate, it would show that there is plenty of blood, even to
great excess ; and in such a case, the secretory power would be
hardly adequate for dealing with it.

(2) Oleaginous. Oily. Thefat of the bodyis being destroyed.
The appearance is like a lemon-yellow tinged with the green-
ness of the mistletoe growing on larches. It is called oleaginous
because it is viscid and translucent, and also has the lustre of fat,
and shows a certain brilliance or refulgence in spite of a certain
opacity. It is not a good sign in many states, not to say it is
bad. For it shows there is neither maturation, nor a change for


B32 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the better. In rare cases it indicates the critical evacuation of
unctuous matter, but for it to mean this alleviation must follow.

If such urine be also fetid and scanty in amount, it is a very
ominous sign. It is also serious if it be admixed with material
like meat washings, as might happen in the course of dropsy,
phthisis, and intestinal obstruction.

If oleaginous urine replaces a black urine, it is a good sign.
But if such a urine appear on the fourth day of an acute disease
it forewarns of the patient’s death on the seventh day. (Very
dark oily urine forewarns of collapse and death. Theophilus.)

In brief, there are three kinds of oleaginous urine. (1) All
fat, throughout. (2) Fat only in the lower part. (3) Fat in the
upper layers. ‘The first is oleaginous only in colour ; it occurs
in phthisis, hectic fever, and wasting diseases, especially at their
outset. [he second is oleaginous only in “substance.” The
third is oily in both respects—e.g. in diseases of the kidney,
at the acme and termination of phthisis.

(3) Purple (-black). ‘This is a very bad sign. It means
oxidation of both bilious and atrabilious humour.

(4) Ruddy colour admixed with a tinge of blackness. This
occurs in composite fevers and in fevers arising from gross
superfluities. If it clarifies, and the darkness settles down from
the surface, it denotes an inflammatory mass in the lung.


3. THE SIGNS AFFORDED BY THE Density, Qua.ity, CLEARNESS
or TuRBIDITY OF THE URINE


627. Urine may be transparent or opaque, or intermediate
in density.


§237a. The “density” here spoken of is not the equivalent of ‘‘ specific
gravity,’ though many of the statements in the text would apply equally even in


the modern sense.

The difference in specific gravity shown by the morning and evening urine
(1005, 1015 respectively, for health) was not discernible with unaided senses, but the
general rule still holds that a persistently dense urine (sp. gr. over 1022) indicates
a need for depurative foods (greens, acid fruits).


TRANSPARENT (LIMPID) URINE


628. Whatever be the state, a urine of limpid consistence
denotes: (a) deficient digestion (lack of maturation) ; (é)
venous congestion ; (c) renal insufficiency (for the kidneys
only separate out fine matter, or if they attract other matter,
they fail to discharge it until it has been rarefied or rendered capa-
ble of excretion ; (d) excessive fluid-intake ; (e) a very cold or ©
a dry intemperament.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 333


When it occurs in the course of an acute illness, it denotes
deficient digestive power, and inability to complete digestion
(absence of maturation: cf. above). It may indicate that the
weakness of the other faculties is so marked that they cannot
influence water at all, and hence it passes through the body
unchanged.


629. Prognosis. It is worse for urine to be very transparent
at puberty than in adolescence, because during the former period
of life urine is naturally more opaque than in adolescence. Being
more moist in their temperament, their bodies attract moisture
more readily, and, in addition, moisture is essential for their
growth. Hence, if acute fevers arise during the age of puberty,
the urine is decidedly abnormal if it is transparent ; and, should
it continue of that character, it would be a very ominous sign.
Should it continue and favourable symptoms should not appear,
and should the vitality not be maintained, it would be a sign
that an abscess is forming below the liver.

630. If urine continue to be transparent for a long time
without any variation in a person otherwise healthy, should he
experience pain one will know that an inflammatory mass is
forming in the situation of the pain. The pain is usually lumbar
when the urine is of this character, and that is the usual site for
an abscess.

If there is no localized pain in such a case, but a general
pain and heaviness, this points to the widespread formation of
small pustules.

If the urine is transparent at the crisis of an illness, contrary
to rule, it forewarns of a relapse.


OPAQUE (THICK) URINE


631. If the urine is very opaque, it shows that maturation
has failed to take place ; or, more rarely, it denotes the matura-
tion of “‘ gross’ humours, such as occur at the height (status)
ot humoral fevers, or after the opening of abscesses. In acute
fevers, the appearance of opaque urine is usually a bad sign,
though not as bad as a persistently transparent urine. ‘The fact
that urine is opaque shows that there is a certain degree of diges-
tion proceeding, because digestion adds to the opacity of urine
to a certain extent, and shows that there is some power of expul-
sion (of effete matter). But it is a bad sign in so far as it denotes
the breakdown of, and abundance of, humours, and that the
evacuation of the separated materials is hindered.


G34 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


To ascertain which of the two is dominant, notice whether
improvement or increased weakness follows.

Prognosis. When opaque urine is passed in the course
of fevers, it is a less serious sign if it be poured out quickly and
plentifully. When excreted slowly it denotes a redundance of
the (serous, Ch.M.”) humours and an enfeebled vitality. A sign
which is still less serious is that a urine of medium density should
go with a simultaneous improvement in the general condition.

A very dense urine sometimes denotes that digestion is unduly excessive
(Ch. M.”).

When the urine is transparent in an acute illness, and then
becomes thick, and there is no improvement in the condition of
the patient, it denotes colliquation [of tissues].

Persistent opacity of urine in a presumably healthy person
forewarns of fever should headache and mental confusion arise.
Opaque urine also occurs after excessive evacuations, after the
opening of an abscess, or owing to ulcers in the urinary passages.

Transparent and opaque urine cannot both denote lack of
digestion (maturation) unless there is an intermediate degree of
density associated with the maturation. Dense substances are
rendered thin or limpid by the process of digestion, and the urine
changes from transparency to opacity.


CLEARNESS AND TURBIDITY


632, Thick urine, as has been already stated, is sometimes
clear and translucent, sometimes turbid and opaque ; and yet
there is a marked difference between thick and limpid translucent
urine. When the former is shaken, it does not easily break up
into little portions—it only forms large portions ; and the par-
ticles move slowly ; and if it makes a foam, its foam is composed
of numerous bubbles which do not coalesce for along time. Such
a urine is the outcome of an adequate digestion of the serous
humour, or of the vitelline bilious humour (if there be any tint
suggestive of yellowness in it) ; or of the resolution of vitreous
serous humour (if there be not any tint of yellowness in it).
The last-named variety is often found in the urine of epileptics.

But a well-coloured transparent urine owes its colour not
to digestion but to admixture with bilious humour. For other-
wise digestion would be supposed to affect only the “‘ substance ”
until a mixture of colours had been brought about, whereas the
process of digestion effects a change of “‘ substance” first, and
of colour secondarily. Digestion concerns ‘‘ substance,” not
“colour.” Hence if a transparent urine is yellow, and there is


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 335


no abatement of the acute illness, that is a bad sign, for it shows
the digestive faculties are dormant.

The appearance of alternating redness and yellowness in a
limpid urine points to inflammatory changes dependent on toil.
If it be limpid and shows scale-like objects in it, and if the bladder
is healthy, that is a sign of oxidation of the serous humour.

In brief, a thick urine in acute febrile states may denote
predominance of various humours, and at the same time point to
colliquative processes (in the body). Should such processes
persist during the whole phase of a disease, the urine would
become more opaque (denser, thicker).

Lastly, turbid urine denotes earthiness as well as the presence
of gas and wateriness. For when these qualities are combined,
turbidity is the result. When they are separated again, the urine
becomes clear.


633. The following three states should be noted


1. The urine is clear at the time of passing, and then
becomes opaque. ‘This shows that maturation is dificult ; that
the matter (of the food) has not yet succumbed to the vegeta-
tive powers (“nature”). It may denote colliquation in the
tissues.

2. The urine is opaque when passed, but then becomes
clear. The coarse matters settle and separate out. This shows
that the vegetative powers (‘‘ nature’’) have already overcome
the material (of the food) and matured it. The clearer it grows,
the greater the amount of sediment, and the more rapidly the
sediment falls, the more complete is the digestion.

3. A state between the above two. In this case the vege-
tative powers improve, as long as the vitality is maintained. It
shows that maturation is not progressing to completion. But
if the vitality is not maintained, it would mean that the matura-
tive processes are not likely to reach completion. Should this
condition persist a long time without the feared symptoms (of
loss of vitality) appearing, then it is likely that headache will
develop, for it shows that there is much gas formation.

In modern language we should say :—

Urine which is clear when passed, but is turbid on standing ; if acid, the deposit
is (a) urates, which are not soluble in the cold ; or (b) bacterial decomposition,
stellar and triple phosphates separating out.—We should heat the specimen
also; a cloud in an acid urine would be albumen.

Urine which is turbid when passed or becomes turbid on standing ; if alkaline,
the deposit is earthy phosphates (magnesium and calcium). It is met with
after a rich protein meal or vegetable meal. Such a urine may become


cloudy on heating, from the deposition of (calcium) phosphates, which are
soluble again if acétic acid be added. ©


336 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


It is a better sign for a clear urine to become turbid than
for it to remain turbid for several hours after being passed.

Urine may become turbid because of loss of vitality, apart
from expulsion of “ the nature.”

If urine is watery when voided, and remains so, it shows that
digestion has entirely ceased.


634. Good signs


(a Opaque urine easily voided, whose sediment falis easily :
when occurring in palsy, etc.

(4) Urine opaque when voided but then becoming trans-
parent and plentiful.

(c) Limpid plentiful urine following upon thick turbid
urine or thick and scanty urine.

_(d) Opaque turbid urine passed at a slow rate, and then
becoming suddenly abundant and easy to void. (This means
that recovery is about to take place, whether it be an acute fever
or any other plethoric disorder, or a plethora about to manifest
as actual disease). But this kind of urine is rarely met with.

635, If the urine is of natural colour, and its opacity be
great, it is evident that much (effete) matter is passing through,
and that there is no hindrance to their outflow. But it is usually
a bad sign because it shows that the humours are superabundant,
and the vitality deficient. Such a urine is scanty and difficult
to void.

Opaque urine is a good sign if it occurs at the crisis in
“splenic ” diseases and “* mixed ”’ fevers, in which the emunctory
powers cannot come into play, or equipoise be restored.

Lastly, turbid urine denotes that the humours are over-
abundant and that the vegetative powers are inadequate for their
digestion. .

636. Diagnostic points. Opaque urine, with a sandy sedi-
ment, denotes calculus. Opaque urine, with pus, a bad odour,
and scaly particles separating out, denotes rupture of an abscess.
A thick urine, with the clinical evidences of an inflammatory
mass or of an ulcer in the bladder, kidney, liver or chest, shows
that there is an abscess about to burst.

If the urine prior to that were like the washings of raw meat,
it would show that there is unhealthy blood flowing from the
liver ; and if the faeces were also similar, it would show there is
an inflammatory mass in the interior of the liver. If prior to
this there was shortness of breath, with a dry cough, and a
stabbing pain in the chest, then one knows that an abscess has


—_—- > =


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 337


ruptured which arose in the chest or (round the) aorta. If the
pus is “ mature,” it is satisfactory.

637. Discharge of urine resembling pus may benefit a
person who takes no exercise and lives in an unhygienic manner.
It clears the whole body, and removes the laxity resulting from
the lack of exercise. It may be that there are obstructions in
the liver and adnexa, and when the obstructions are removed,
the urine which is voided is dense owing to the matter which
passes out with it. Such “ matter’ is not “ pus.” It is only pus
if it appears in the urine after the bursting of an abscess ; the
urine is then not only thick but dark. If at this time there be
pain in the left side, then one knows that the abscess was in the
spleen. Ifthe pain is in the upper part of the abdomen, one knows
the abscess was in the stomach. The usual site for the abscess
is in the liver and in the urinary organs.

638. Turbid urine often denotes loss of vitality ; coldness
dominates in the temperament as much as if the whole body
were exposed to external cold.

639. Turbid urine of the appearance of poor wine, or of
chick-pea-water, may occur during pregnancy, and may be met
with in persons with long-standing internal “ hot’”’ inflam-
matory masses.

640. Urine which has the extremely turbid appearance of
asses’ urine or the urine of other cattle, arises from the very
marked agitation which is going on in the humours, especially
the serous humour, a certain amount of heat coming into play
so as to set up that agitation. Hence this kind of urine is a fore-
runner of headache or [coryzal] catarrh in the head. If it persists,
it forewarns of lethargia.

641. If the urine resembles the colour of some member
for some time, it forewarns that disease is about to arise
there.

642. Some say that if the lower layers of the urine show a
powdery or nebulous appearance, it means that the illness will
be of long duration ; and that if it persists throughout the whole
illness, it presages death, or the formation of “ crude” serous
humour, which is distinguished from pus by its fetor.

643. If the urine separates into several layers, the more
there are the stronger isthe natural faculty, and the more open
are the pores.

644, Threads floating in the urine denote that it was passed
immediately after completing coitus.


338 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


4. Tue SIGNS DERIVED FROM THE OpouR oF THE URINE


645. Some people assert that no sick person ever passes a
urine which has a healthy odour. But we say that if the urine is
quite odourless, it denotes (2) a cold intemperament ; (4) exces-
sive “‘ crudity ”’ ; (c) extinction of the innate heat, in the case
of acute diseases.

646. Fetid odour. A fetid odour, with signs of maturation in
the urine indicates ulcers in the urinary passages, or “scabies.”
‘These are identified from their own signs. If with the fetid odour,
there are no signs of maturation, the cause of the odour may be
merely putrefaction.

Such a urine, in acute fevers, without disease in the urinary
organs, is a bad sign. If it is present in acute fevers, and there is
a tendency to acridity, it denotes putrefaction in humours which
are of a cold nature, when there is a predominance of the extra-
neous heat.

If such a urine appears in acute diseases, it forewarns of
death by extinction of the innate heat and predominance of the
extraneous cold.

647. Sweetish odour. Vhis denotes predominance of the
sanguineous humour. If also very fetid, a predominance of the
bilious humour.

648. Puirid odour. If this tends to sourness it shows
predominance of the atrabilious humour.

An extremely fetid odour of the urine which continues in
spite of seeming health denotes (a) that a fever arising from
putrefaction is coming on ; (4) expulsion of retained putrescent
matters. ‘The latter will show whether the case may be expected
to recover. Ifa fetid urine appears in an acute illness, and then
suddenly ceases to be fetid, without subsidence of the symptoms,
it shows a destruction of vitality.


A moderately fetid urine denotes defective digestion: Haly Abbas.

Offensive odour may be ammoniacal, as in alkaline fermentation. Sweet
odour may be “ fruity ’”’ or like new-mown hay in diabetes. Specific odours result
from the use of certain drugs. (Modern.)


5. Tne INDICATIONS AFFORDED BY THE Foam on URINE


649. Foam arises from the moisture and the gases forced
inte the urine as it is passed into the urinal. The vapour which
leaves the body with the urine doubtless adds to the consistence
of the urine, especially if gases predominate in it, as occurs in
cases of obstructions. The urine then shows many bubbles.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 339


650. One notices the following points in regard to the
foam :

(1) Colour : it is dark or reddish in jaundice.

(2) Size of bubbles : large ones indicate viscidity.

(3) Number of bubbles : if numerous it denotes viscidity
and much gas.

(4) Rate of bursting of the bubbles: if slow, it indicates
viscidity, and coarse glutinous humour.

651. Proguosis. Hence if small bubbles persist in a speci-
mien, in cases of kidney disease, it shows that the illness will be
of long duration.

In brief, viscous humours in the course of kidney diseases
are of bad omen ; they show that the humours are depraved,
and cold in temperament.

The significance of small bubbles has already been stated.


6. Vue INDICATIONS DERIVED FROM THE Divers KINDS oF
SEDIMENT


652. Definition. In the first place one must specify the
meaning of the term “sediment.” It is not “‘ that which sinks
to the bottom of the vessel.” Jt is ‘‘ that whole substance (denser
in essence than wateriness) which separates out from the wateri-
ness—tregardless of whether it settles down or not, floats or not,
sinks or not.”

Therefore we may say that there are various characters
pertaining to the sediment—its “ structure,” its quantity and
quality, the arrangement of its components, its position, duration,
and mode of permixture.


I, STRUCTURE


[Structure ; consistence ; texture ; essential substance ;


matter ; jawhar. |
A, NATURAL SEDIMENTS


653. A sediment 1s natural, laudable, evidence of normal
digestion and maturation, when it is white, sinks to the bottom
of the vessel, when its particles are in continuity [1.e. not discrete],
uniform, and all alike. In contour it is rounded. It is light,
homogeneous, delicate, like the deposit which forms in rosewater.

Its relation to the maturation of the various matters of the
whole body is comparable to that to the maturation of pus.
But whereas it is white, light, and of homogeneous nature and
delicate in the former, in the case of pus it 1s coarse.


340 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


654, A sediment betokens good digestion even though
devoid of colour and homogeneity.* But ancient physicians
considered that homogeneity was a more important test than
colour. A homogeneous deposit—even though not altogether
white, or even if reddish in tint—is a better sign than a deposit
which is white but not homogeneous, and composed of coarse
particles. The sediment-may or may not assume the same colour
as the urine. If it does not, it is better that it should be white,
next best red, then lemon-yellow or saffron-yellow, and the least
good is that it should be like arsenicum in colour, or of a colour
like that of lentils.

However, I counsel you not to regard what others say. I
say that—whiteness does not necessarily have a relation to the
state of digestion ; homogeneity is always related to the (eficiency
of) maturation. A thorough mingling of gaseous constituents
will produce a white effect.

If a sediment presents an unhealthy appearance, it is more
favourable that it should be discrete than continuous.

655. Good sediments resemble pus and crude serous
humour when they are tenuous. But pus is different in possessing
fetor, crude serous humour is different in (rendering the deposit)
compact and not homogeneous. A good sediment differs from
both because it is finely textured and light.

656. One would not expect to find such a deposit in a person
who is healthy ; it occurs in the sick person because matters are
kept back in his blood-vessels, and they undergo (putrefactive)
breakdown if they cannot be subjected to maturation. In health,
the blood need not necessarily contain a humour which ought to
be removed, but if there were such a humour present, it would
be better if it were disposed of by way of the faeces (the indi-
gestible excess in the aliments) than if it emerge by way of the
urine as a sediment—whether such humour have undergone
maturation or not.

In thin persons, the sediment of the urine is scanty and it
sinks down differently according to the state of health, especially
if the persons are accustomed to exercise or to practise laborious
arts.


The sediment is abundant only in obese persons and in those


of bad habits.
_ 657, Hence one does not expect to find as much sediment
In sick persons who are lean as in those who are stout. For


_ * The general significance of a sediment is that there is an excess of soluble
or insoluble toxic substances in the blood.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 341


disease in the former often resolves without any sediment forming
at all. At most there may be a tiny particle floating or swimming
in it. In other cases the sediment falls immediately after
micturition unless there is good maturation—in which case
very little deposit is to be expected.


B. ABNORMAL SEDIMENTS


658. Varieties. (1) Flaky or squamous ; (2) fleshy ; (3)
fatty; (4) mucoid or slimy; (5) purulent (ichorous) ; (6) hair-like;
(7) resembling pieces of yeast infused in water ; (8) sandy or
gritty ; (9) cineritial ; (10) hirudiniform.

1. Flaky or squamous. ‘This is composed of large red o
large white particles. They are usually supposed to come from
the urinary organs. If white, they come from the bladder
(ulceration, desquamation, erosions) ; if red or fleshy, they come
from the kidney. If brown or dark coloured, or like the scales
of fishes, they are a very bad sign, worse than all which we have
named. They suggest the shedding of mucous linings. Parti-
cles from the bladder or kidneys may not be of moment ; in
fact, if vesical they are a sign of recovery. Some say that can-
tharides causes white flakes to appear, which are like the mem-
brane within eggs ; these dissolve when the specimen is shaken
and impart a reddish tint to the urine. This would be evidence
of healing and recovery.

Another form resembles the scrapings frora intestines ;
the particles being less broad and of dense consistence. If
reddish coloured it is called orobeal [or tare-like or grumous]
sediment ; otherwise it is called furfuraceous. ‘The former
recalls the appearance of decorticated orobs [ervum ervilia], and
are reddish ; this indicates the presence of oxidized particles*
which are derived from (a) the liver, (4) the kidney, or (c) blood.
When they come from the kidney, the particles are more con-
tinuous and fleshy, whereas in the other cases they are more
friable. When the colour is decidedly yellowish (one knows
that) they are of renal origin ; if dusky red (that) they are of
hepatic origin. But sometimes particles of hepatic origin may
resemble those of renal origin.

Another form, more strictly scaly, consists of small bodies
like the husks or hulls of grain. Such a sediment denotes (1)
bladder trouble, or (ii) grave colliquative disorder of the system
asa whole. We diagnose (i) bladder trouble if (1) there 1s itching

* The mineral constituents which are attached to the organic substances in


the urine are (1) perfectly oxidized, (2) partly oxidized and partly unoxidized, (3) en-
tirely unoxidized.


342 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


at the root of the penis, and (2) the urine is fetid, especially if
(3) pus is passed first. Such a state is more probable if (4) there
are other evidences of maturation in the urine, (5) if the veins
over the bladder are healthy, and there is no macula there. We
diagnose (ii) liquefaction of humour if there is fever, weakness,
difficulty of micturition, and the sediment is brownish in colour.

Another form, in which the deposit is like coarse particles
of barley flour may mean one of four things : (1) oxidation of
the sanguineous humour—if there is a tendency to redness ;
(ii) colliquative changes in the membranes and their components
—if it be white ; (iii) local bladder disease—in a few cases. The
difference between this and the others is readily made out from
what has already been said ; (iv) oxidation of the blood, espect-
ally in the spleen.—Here the colour tends to be black.

Squamous deposits other than those of vesical or renal
and ureteral origin, occurring in acute diseases, have a grave
significance.

2. fleshy sediments. These, as you already know, are
usually of renal origin. They are not so if the flesh is healthy
and there is no breakdown in the body. If the evidences of
complete digestion are present in the urine, it shows that the
blood-vessels are healthy. Tor the urine can show evidence of
maturation even if the kidneys are diseased, seeing that. this
process begins “‘ above’ the kidneys.

3. Fatty sediment. ‘This, like the preceding, denotes
colliquative processes in the body. It is more serious if it resem-
bles “‘ gold water” in appearance. There are two chief types—
either it is abundant and discrete (this being derived from the
renal fat) ; or scanty and admixed (this being derived from the
fat of a more distant place). ‘There is no fever, in the former case.

A white particle like a pomegranate seed may be seen in
the urine. This will be derived from the renai fat. It denotes
that a sanious ulcer has formed, especially in the urethra, especi-
ally if the sediment sinks promptly. (‘‘In ardent fevers, it
forewarns of death.” Hippocrates.)

4. Mucoid sediment. ‘This denotes an unnatural humour,
which is too plentiful within the body and passes out either by
the urinary tract, or a critical hip-gout, or joint pains.
The distinction between them is made by the symptoms—whether
they abate or not.

A dense humour may become rarefied and tenuous, and a
laudable sediment results. Therefore in the course of acute
disease, one must not depend on a laudable sediment appearing


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 343


before the time when maturation (of the disease) is due, or before
its signs have appeared. It may denote that there is a very cold
intemperament of the kidneys.—(A very mucoid and abundant
sediment appearing at the end of an attack of gout or arthritis,
is a good sign).

5. Ichorous sediment. "This differs from a crude sediment
in being fetid. It is preceded by the evidences of abscess. Its
particles easily aggregate and separate again. It may be very
thoroughly mingled with the water ; it may separate out
quickly from the water. A crude sediment, however, is both tur-
bid and thick. It does not readily aggregate, nor separate easily.
The urine is not fetid. ‘The signs of abscess do not precede.

6. Hair-like sediment. ‘This is produced by the coagulation
of any internal humour, which has been exposed to the innate
heat on its way from the kidney to the bladder. It is sometimes
white, sometimes red. It clots in the kidney. The clots may be
as long as the palm of the hand.

7. A sediment having the appearance of yeast soaked in
water, is evidence of gastric and intestinal weakness and of de-
praved digestion (often due to milk and cheese having been taken).

8. Sandy or gritty sediment (“ Gravel”’). ‘This is always a
sign of calculus whether in process of formation or actually
formed, or in process of solution. If red coloured, it shows it
comes from the kidneys ; if white, it shows the origin is in the
bladder.

A gritty sediment, where there are large particles like those
of ground grain, is a bad sign in fevers (Hippocrates).

9. Cineritial sediment. ‘This is a sign that serous humour
or pus has altered in colour through long stagnation and breaking
up of its particles. It may be that it is due to having undergone
oxidation.

10. Hirudiniform. ‘The sediment is of the (appearance and)
colour of leeches. If well mingled with the urine, this denotes
hepatic insufficiency. If less closely intermingled with the urine,
it denotes a trauma in the urinary passages which breaks their
continuity. If discrete, it shows that the lesion is in the bladder
or in the penis. This subject is carefully dealt with in the third
volume, under the heading of “‘ haematuria.”

The appearance of bodies like red leeches in the urine,
associated with evidences of disease in the spleen, denotes a
destructive disease in that organ. (It would seem that strings of
blood clot are here referred to, in which case nowadays we should
think of a villous tumour in the bladder. Tr.)


344 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Note, that in diseases of the bladder, there is generally not
much bleeding because the blood-vessels are few in number,
are slender, and are deeply situated in its wall.


II, QUANTITY OF SEDIMENT


659. According as the sediment is abundant or scanty
so the degree of the efficient cause is great or small. This has
been explained under the previous heading. (It is more
abundant in gross-living persons than in those who are temperate.
It is less abundant in active persons than in those leading a
sedentary life ; hence it is liable to be more abundant in females
than males, children than adults.)


III. QUALITY OF SEDIMENT. COLOUR. ODOUR


660. Black sediment: this is a bad sign, as in the degree
already shown in 617 ; but it is not so bad if the supernatant fluid
is not black. (Haly Abbas says it is a fatal sign if it comes on
after being intensely red.)

Red sediment. ‘This shows dominance of sanguineous
humour (sanguineous plethora) ; it occurs in fasting ; and when
digestion is imperfect. If it continues to be present for a long
time it denotes inflammation of the liver.

Yellow : this denotes great heat, because it is produced by
bilious humour. It may also show an insidious disease.

Green colour: this has the same significance as black sedi-
ment.

White colour: this is sometimes good, sometimes bad.
That is, when it is mucoid, ichorous, or foamy ; because this
shows that the urine is not a completed secretion.

Odour. ‘The indications from the odour have already
been given in describing the other characters.


IV. CONSTITUTION, COHERENCE AND CONSISTENCE OF PARTICLES


661. Softness and homogeneity of the sediment which is
otherwise laudable is more healthy than when met with in a
urine otherwise not laudable. Discreteness of particles points
to flatulence and impaired digestion.


Vv. POSITION


662. A laudable sediment may swim like a cloud or nube-
cula ; may float on the surface ; or be suspended in the middle
layers (which shows that maturation has proceeded further than


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 345


in the first variety.) If it is rugose or fimbriate and tends to
sink, it is better ; if it sinks to the bottom it is a sign of still
more advanced maturation.

When the sediment is not laudable—it is more satisfactory
when it is light and rises to the upper layers ; or, if in the course
of an acute fever, it is black ; when the humour is serous or
atrabilious, it is more satisfactory when it is like a cloud than for
it to sink to the bottom ; the fact of its being like a cloud shows
it is tenuous, unless by chance gas is making it rise.

If the sediment sinks below the surface, but not right to the
bottom it is more satisfactory. It is heat which makes it rise or
float ; or it is gas which carries it upwards.

If a sediment made of coarse discrete particles should float,
it shows it is light. A fine sediment, especially if heavy, will
sink lower.

If the sediment remains suspended as a nubecula right
through an illness from its beginning, it shows that crisis will
come with suppuration.

A nubecula or suspended sediment may never appear in an
illness if the person be slender, as we have stated.

A sediment which is between a cloud and an enaeorema—
made of particles suspended or floating in the middle layers like
a spider’s web (or opaque like a thin pancake—Rome edition)
is an ominous sign. (Such particles may appear like the specks
of oil which one sees in cooled broth ; or like hairs.) But even'a
nubecula may be an anxiety, though it be the beginning of a
change for the better. It sinks to the middle layers and ul-
timately to the bottom. In that case it is not a bad sign. But
ifa “‘bad”’ sediment appears after this, it is certainly ominous.


VI. TIME OCCUPIED IN SEDIMENTATION


663. If the sediment settles rapidly, it is a good sign,
showing that maturation is correct. If it settles slowly, it is not
good, for it shows deficient or absent maturation, according to
its amount.

VII. FORM


664. The significance of this has been described in making
mention of passing blood and fat with the urine.
4, SIGNS RELATIVE TO THE Dartty Quantity or URINE


665. Generally speaking, oliguria means weakness of
vitality. If the amount is less than the fluid consumed, it points


346 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


to great loss by diarrhoea or to a tendency to dropsy. Polyuria
sometimes means colliquation, and the discharge of fluid effete
matters from the body by the urine.

To assess these correctly, one must note the state of the
vitality, as follows : if the urine be of bad colour, it is a bad sign;
but the more plentiful it is, the more likely is recovery to take
place. Ifthe quantity excreted fails, the illness will increase, just
as applies in regard to dark or coarse urine. .

666. Variation of quantity. It is a bad sign if the urine is
at one time abundant, at another scanty, at another suppressed.
It shows that there is a hard conflict between the vitality and the
disease. A plentiful urine in an acute illness, occurring without
any abatement of symptoms, and associated with copious sweats,
shows hectic fever and may be followed by convulsions.

The quantity of night urine (9 p.m. to 7 a.m.) should equal that passed in two
hours during the day. If greater, it denotes arterial disease (Comrie, B.M.J., 1922,


p. 1071). Vallery-Radot states that the day-urine is normally thrice the night
urine, 14?


667. A scanty urine, passed involuntarily, drop-by-drop
in acute diseases, indicates cerebral disease, affecting nerves and
muscles.

If a fever subside and there are other signs of recovery,
one may predict epistaxis. Otherwise delirium will ensue and
death is likely.

When a person is in apparent health, if the amount of the
urine is diminished and it is tenuous in character, and if that
condition persists, and if there is a sense of heaviness and pain
in the loins, this shows that there is a hard inflammatory swelling
in the kidney.

668. When the urine is imcreased in a case of colic, this is
a good sign, especially if it be white and easily voided.


8. Description oF NormMaLt Heattuy URINE


669. The following are the characters of healthy urine :
A medium consistence ; a delicate tint, tending to straw-yellow;
if there be any sediment it is white, light, homogeneous, and has
a rounded contour ; the odour should be moderate, neither
offensive, nor altogether absent.

Some say that if a urine of this kind appear suddenly at
the end of the acme of an illness, health will be restored the
following day.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 347


g. VARIATIONS ACCORDING TO AGE


670. Infancy. The urine tends to the characters of milk,
considering the food and their moist temperament. Hence it is
nearly colourless.

Childhood. ‘The urine is thicker and coarser than in
adolescents, and more turbid. This has already been mentioned.

Adolescence. ‘The urine tends to igneity, and homogeneity.

Later life. The urine tends to be white and tenuous, but
it may be coarse (“‘ thick ’’) because of the effete matters which
are now being evacuated to a greater extent by way of the urine.

Decrepit age. ‘The urine is whiter and still more tenuous.
A similar coarseness to that of the preceding may occur, but this
is rare. If the urine becomes very thick, it intimates liability
to develop calculus.


10. VARIATIONS ACCORDING TO SEx


671. Women. The urine is always thicker, whiter and
less pellucid than in males. The reason is fourfold : In women
there is feebleness of digestion ; abundance of effete matters ;
width of emunctory channels ; material discharged by way of
the uterus, which draws similar material down the urinary
passages also.

Men. When the urine is shaken, it becomes turbid and
the turbidity ascends to the surface, though occasionally it
remains throughout the whole bulk of the urine. When the
urine in women is shaken, it does not become turbid because
the particles are barely discrete, and there is usually a circular
foam on top. Even if such urine becomes turbid, it does so
only to a light extent.

If male and female urine be mingled, a filamentous network
forms at once. (Filaments also appear in male urine if passed
immediately after intercourse.)

672. Pregnancy. ‘The urine is clear and there is a surface
cloud. The colour may approach that of chick-pea water, or
be yellow with a bluish or iridescent tint in it. In either case
there is a sort of “‘ tinted cotton ”’ in the midst of it. Occasionally
there are granules present, which rise and fall. If the iridescence
(‘‘ rainbow tint”) be quite distinct, it is a sign that conception is
beginning. When it gives place to redness, it shows that im-
pregnation is completed, especially if the urine becomes turbid
on being shaken.


348 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Puerperium. The urine is often dark, as if there were a
sootiness or shoemaker’s black in it.


tt. Tue Urine or ANIMALS AND ITS DIFFERENCE FROM
Human URINE


673. It is often desirable for a doctor to know something
about the urine of animals, so that when he is tricked by a
patient, he can quickly and truly discern it, difficult though it be
to do so.

Asses. Some say that the urine is like clarified butter as
to turbidity and coarseness. .

Beasts of burden. ‘The urine is similar to the preceding,
but clearer. The upper middle part of the urine is clear, while
the lower middle part is turbid.

Sheep. The urine is (nearly) colourless, with a yellowish
tendency approximating that of man. But it has either no
“body ” and the sediment is fatty, or it is like oil-lees.

The better the quality of the food, the clearer is the urine.

She-goats. ‘The urine is like human and sheep urine, but
it has no ‘‘ body,” or sediment ; and is clearer than sheep urine.


12. FLuips RESEMBLING URINE, AND HOW TO DISTINGUISH
THEM


674, Acetous syrup and all fluids compounded of water
and honey, water and figs ; fluids coloured with saffron and the
like—in all these the nearer one holds them to the eye the clearer
do them seem, and the further they are held from the eye, the
more opaque do they become. Urine is the opposite.

The foam on hydromel is yellow.

The sediment from fig-water or from herbal decoctions
lodges on the sides of the glass and not in the middle. It has no
definite contour, and does not move its position.


So much suffices for the description of the states of the urine.
The individual varieties are discussed in the volume which deals
with the special diseases. (Book IV.) )


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


§ 238.


349


TABULAR SUMMARY OF THE PRECEDING SECTION.


1. First stage of


Digestion.
Good.


Moderately good.


Absent.


Excessive.


2. Maturation stage :.


Normal


Difficult.


Quite absent.
3. Completed.


Digestion of
Humours.

I. Immaturity in
general.

2. Serous humour,


3. Vitreous serous
humour.


4. Vitelline bilious
humour.


Oxidation of
Humours.
1. Sanguineous.


2. Serous.


ing.


Cold humours putre-


fying.
Fasting State.


Intemperaments.
m ELot.


2. Cold.


Gross humours matur-


Aspect, etc.


Urine plentiful,

rather opaque.
Mod. fetor.
Watery, .limpid.
Very thick.


Opaque first, then
clear.


Clear first, then
opaque.

Opaque.

Clear ; denser.


Turbid.


Opaque or dense
Foam persists?
Plentiful.


Dense.


Limpid.

Thick, opaque.
Offensive odour.
Very acrid.


Dark. Offensive.


White, turbid,
limpid.


No odour.
Limpid.


Colour. Deposit.


White. Homogeneous.

Round contour,
red,

Pale ; or yellowish|Gritty,scaly, black,

(bil. hum.), green, or livid.


White. White, homogene-
ous, delicate,
sinks to bottom.
Tends to be dusky.|Discrete particles,
sinks slowly.
Colour appears. |Rapid, propor-
tional to com-
pleteness of
digestion,


Mucoid.


White. Powdery,

compact, not
homogeneous.
Foam persists


yellow.


Tends to red. Coarse particles


like barley flour,
Mucoid. Scale-like bodies

float in it;

cineritial.
High. Red.


White, if heat due
to dominance of
bilious humour.


Red if serous hum-
our is obstruct-
ing bile ducts.

Other colours.


seo


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Oe —


Vitality :— }

Deficient, because of cold intem- | Turbid.
perament.

Weak. Oliguria.


Innate heat too great.


Innate heat increasing.
Innate heat subsiding.
Innate heat extinguished.


Functional activity of Organs.
Liver-inflammation.


Splenic disease.
Renal inflammation.


Venous congestion.
Stone in bladder.


Colour deepens to red-yellow.


Odoriferous.


Colour deepens to flame yellow.
The urine clarifies.


Urine dark or black;


becomes colourless.


in acute diseases it


Turbid, red urine ; sediment orobeal or tare-
like, or dusky red, or hirudiniform.
‘Sediment hirudiniform.


Red urine ;


no deposit if grave;


otherwise


orobeal, or fleshy, and yellowish.


Limpid urine.
Dark.


Special diseases :
Obesity.
Puerperal convulsions.
Fevers just before crisis.
Fevers at other times, etc.


At the crisis.


Corresponding table from a modern textbook.


Urine abundant.


Urine dark.


Urine may become thin and transparent.


Opaque urine:


depends on which humour is


responsible and on outcome of illness.


| Polyuria ;


Disease. Quantity. | Colour. Odour.
Acute Gout Diminished |High
Acute Nephritis |Diminished |Blood-
or absent stained
Chronic Cystitis |Nochange |Turbid Offensive
Chronic Increased /|Pale
Nephritis
Diabetes mell. |Increased |Pale Sweet
Fevers, general |Diminished |High
and special Turbid
Gastric Catarrh |Normal High
Heart and Lung |Diminished |Dark
Disease
Jaundice Normal Frothy
Greenish-


brown


dark, or black.


(J. K. Watson, p. 156.)


Deposit.
Urates
abundant


Blood casts
urates occ.


Mucoid pus


Scanty


Urates


Urates
Oxalates or
Phosphates


Urates


Varies


Additional
Modern
Facts.


Urea diminished
Albumin


Alkaline
Albumin varies
Tube-casts
Urea, incr:
Glucose
Diacetic acid
Urea incr.


Albumin, blood,
tube-casts


Albumin


Bile present


THE CANON OF MEDICINE ee


§ 239. Considerations arising out of this section.—For the
detection of changes in the composition of the urine, the ancients
were restricted to the evidence afforded by its colour, odour, and what
may be called its “‘ texture’’ (though this term applies usually to
solid substances). The evidence was apt to be fallacious because
wide differences of composition may produce similar appearances,
etc., and differences of appearance do not always denote noteworthy
changes of composition.

On the other hand, the limitations in the utility of these simple
observations were balanced by the relatively vague conception of
the bodily functions. The whole outlook on disease was lacking in
detail without being basically incorrect. Thus, many diseased states
were ascribed to defective digestive processes, a fact often overlooked
to-day in the counter-attraction afforded by the study of diseased
conditions which are not so ascribable. To say that the whole body
is concerned in digestion is, broadly speaking, correct, especially if we
realize that the term digestion covers what we call metabolism. In
the Canon, digestion is viewed in two aspects: (1) that which begins
in the alimentary canal and ends in the liver: (2) that which is called
““ maturation,” which concerns the digestive products in their course
through the body and ending in the tissues. If such maturation is not
completed, surplus substances appear, and may undergo sedimenta-
tion. The phenomena of disease are attributable to this defective
maturation. Consequently, the business of diagnosis and prognosis
comes to be a matter of assessing the efficiency or otherwise of
maturation.

The study of the urine is therefore directed to this assessment, its
different physical properties being noted, both in health and under
various unhealthy conditions. Translucence, opacity, separation out
into visibility of various substances, the appearance of gaseous matter
(in foam), and changes in odour—all these are interpreted in the light
of the two-fold division of digestion above referred to: that cul-
minating in the liver, and that culminating in the tissues.

This basis of study is reasonable, and it is not right that they
should have been superseded as is the case in moderntimes. We are
armed with a knowledge of innumerable chemical details about
the substances met with in metabolism and nutrition in general.
We have within our reach the very answers, in vastly improved
detail and accuracy, to the selfsame questions which were para-
mount to Avicenna. But this technical laboratory knowledge
tends to be sterile. Urinalysis informs us of the presence of ab-


352 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


normal substances, and of the amount both of these and of normal
urinary constituents. By their means we reach conclusions about
the functional capacity of various organs, and decide whether
organic renal disease is present or not. But this is insufficient.
In the first place, these organs belong really only to one system—
the nutritive; and in the second place, the illness has proceeded
to another phase before the information from the analysis is
available.

Moreover, the clinician has already taken up his tale before


the laboratory work can possibly reach completion, so that those ~


whom he instructs naturally receive the impression that such work
is parenthetical, if not purely ritualistic. The clinical aspect of
the case is discussed on its own merits, as might be done with a
museum specimen which is possibly unusual, or with some topic
for a connoisseur. The pathological aspect of the case, again,
has a different, and separate interest.

It is not enough to combine these different aspects. Functional
activities, morbid states, and clinical manifestations must cenxtralise
in the patient, and they do so, not because he happens to exhibit
them all, but because they are one unity—himself. The organs
whose capacity has been assessed are the gateways of entrance and
departure ; the crafts of the body—its real life—proceed in the tissues,
which are the analogues of streets, houses, shops, plazas and bazaars.
There are also the gateways of the senses, and these are direct
routes into the audience-chamber of the presiding sultan himself.
But he is not a separate being. He is zz every member of the
community—organs, tissues, sense-organs. Equity reigns through-
out, and must be considered as much as the invaders of his domain.

So if we visualize in a practical form everything that is relevant,
we must not forget the dynamic aspect of the matter. Changes
are going on hour by hour, and the laboratory cannot keep pace
with them. Consequently, we shall inthe end make use of the self-
same data which Avicenna relied on entirely, and we learn from him
to scrutinize the urine—not merely to find such things as albumen,
blood or pus and casts—but deliberately to know :(1) Is there any in-
sufficiency in the digestive processes in the pre-hepatic stages ?
(2) If not, is there any hepatic insufficiency, and in what direction ?
(3) If so, or if there is trouble in the tissues at large, arising out of an
abnormal condition of one or more of the ‘‘ humours ’’—which is at
fault? In what way is it at fault? Is it entirely morbid or not ?
What degree as well as kind of defect is there—in modern chemical
terms? (4) What is the degree of vitality of the patient (Avicenna
included “ innate heat ” in this) ? is the vitality increasing, or failing,
or inactive ?—recovery from illness, or its duration, or succumbing to
illness is often primarily a matter of vitality. (5) Other questions.

Such fundamental questions the modern practitioner (even in
cities) can still answer from the simple data used of old, and combine
them with the intimate study of the pulse, to realize the nature of the
processes in the organs and tissues of the sick from day to day, and
feel himself actually armed with that vea/ insight into the state of the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 353


particular patient which relatives and friends sometimes incorrectly
assume him to have.

Changes in the urine were further studied in those days to decide
on the presence or absence of inflammatory states in general, on
febrile conditions in general, and to draw a relationship between
these changes and certain symptoms, such as headache, pains in
various parts of the body, palsies. In such cases, the character of
the urine reveals the nature of the pathological changes in the
humours, out of which the disease has arisen.


THE ALVINE DISCHARGE


675. The following are the characters to note: the quan-
tity ; the consistence ; the colour ; the form or shape ; and
the time occupied in the passage of food through the bowel.

1. Quantity. If greater than the amount of food taken,
the reason lies in abundance of humours ; if smaller in amount,
the reason lies in deficient amount of humours, or in a retention
of the food in the caecum or colon (in which case, it is the first
step to obstruction). The reason may also be that the expulsive
power is insufficient.

2. Consistence. Moist excrement denotes defective diges-
tion or obstruction of some form ; weakness of the mesentery,
so that it does not absorb sufficient water from the food; fluxion
from the head ; some constituent of the diet which causes the
dejection to be moist. If the faecal matter is both moist and
viscid, this shows that there is colliquation in the tissues. Fetor
is then present. It usually denotes an excess of depraved and
viscous humours ; and the fetor is then very great. It may
denote the presence of viscous and “ hot” constituents in the
food, with defective digestive power.

Frothy faecal matter indicates an admixture with flatulent
vapours, or exposure to great (innate) heat. ;

Dry stool results from (a) severe toil ; (4) dispersal of innate
heat ; (c) polyuria ; (d) igneous heat ; (e) dry aliments ; (f)a
long delay in the intestines—as will.be explained in the appro-
priate chapter. When the faecal matter is both moist and hard,
the dryness is due to (i) undue delay in the intestines due to
moisture which cannot escape ; (ii) lack of bile, which serves


to help on the excrement.
2A


354 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


If there has been no delay, and there is no evidence of
moisture in the intestines, it shows that there is a continual
dispersion of sanious and pungent effete matter from the liver
into the intestine, until the latter has taken it all up.

3. Cotour. The normal colour is ruddy, owing to the
presence of a slight fieriness. If this colour is more marked,
it shows that the bile is plentiful. If less marked it indicates
defective maturation of the food.

White stool points to obstruction in the biliary passages,
and goes with jaundice. If there is also offensive sanious material
present it shows that an inflammatory mass has ruptured.

A healthy person who does not take exercise often passes a
morbid sanious matter which acts as a purgative and produces a
satisfactory evacuation. For by this means laxity of the tissues
is avoided (tarahhul, the swelling of the flesh, in horses), which
lack of exercise is liable to produce, as we have already explained
when speaking of the urine.

Unduly red colour of stool at the acme of a disease often
denotes maturation ; it often points to a depraved constitution.

The significations of dark-coloured or black stool are similar
to those of dark or black urine. It means (2) marked oxidation ;
(4) maturation of a disease due to atrabilious humour ; (c) an
aliment which colours it ; (¢) a medicament which procures the
discharge of the atrabilious humour. The first is unfavourable ;
the second is merely a staining from admixture with black bile ;
this cannot be clearly discerned from colour alone, but only by
its acridity, bitterness and the churning out of earthy matter
from it. Moreover, among its peculiar properties is this,—
that it glitters (is self-luminous). The fact of black bile leaving
the body, whether it be by the stool or by the vomit, is a bad sign.

Finally, the discharge of pure atrabilious humour per anum
is usually a sign of impending death. But the exit of black
chyme is beneficial because it shows that the tissues are active in
oxidation, and their moisture is used up.


_Blackness of stool also denotes admixture with blood, in cases of disease of
the liver, intestinal ulcer, or rupture of vessels (Aegineta).


Green stool. ‘This denotes extinction of the innate heat.
The colour is due to the verdigris-green type of bile.

Dark-coloured or“ livid”? stool. ‘This also denotes extinction
of the innate heat ; coldness ; considerable mortification in
the interior organs. It is a bad sign.

Parti-coloured stool, ‘This is a bad sign. Reference to this
is made in Book IV.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 355


Fatty stool. This is met with when the fat of the body is
being dissolved out.

G/utinous stool. \n this case other tissues as well as the fatty
tissue are being liquefied. It is a very grave sign.

Purulent stool. ‘The pus comes from the liver, or stomach,
or bowel.

Intensely yellow stool ; when occurring at the beginning of
a disease it is due to bilious humour. If at the acme, it is useful
in that it purges the body (of undesirable substances).

Unusual colours in the stool, and the various colours which
have a bad significance are spoken of in the special volume.

4. Form or sHape. If the faeces are bulky like those of a
cow it is because of flatulence, or gaseousness.

5. TIME OCCUPIED IN PASSAGE THROUGH THE BOWEL.
When the faeces are passed out too rapidly it is a bad sign ;_ it
shows that there is an excess of bile in the gall-bladder, and also
a weakness of the retentive power.

A delay in the passages of faecal matter through the body
denotes a feeble digestion, coldness of the intestines, abundant
moisture ; taking too much sleep ; flatulence.


THe CHarRAcTERS OF NorMAL STOOL


676. The stool should be (1) coherent ; (2) homogeneous
throughout, the water and the solids being intimately admixed ;
(3) soft and honeylike in consistence ; (4) easily evacuated ;
(5) of a colour tending to yellow (if the colour should resemble
that of the food it would mean indigestion) ; (6) of not very
offensive odour, yet not odourless ; (7) of a quality which is
neither sharp nor biting ; (8) it should emerge inaudibly,
neither with gurgling, nor flatus, nor creaking, nor foamy ;
(9) passed at the time customary to the healthy person ; (10) in
bulk nearly equal to that of the food consumed.

Note that neither homogeneity nor softness is necessarily
a laudable character in faeces. "These characters may be the result
of violent maturation throughout the body, or of oxidation or
colliquation. In such cases, these features would be unfavour-
able signs.

Note, too, that a consistence which is tending to tenuity
is not favourable unless’there is no rumbling or discharge of
flatus at stool ; it should not then emerge bit by bit. But one
must also be sure it is not being discharged in that form owing
to the admixture of some irritant which prevents cohesion.


B56 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


677. Many authors proceed from the discussion of urine
and faeces to other excretions, including the sweat. I consider
it more appropriate to deal with these under their appropriate
headings in the volume on special diseases.


THE EXPECTORATION
(From Aegineta ; Haly Abbas)


§240. The expectoration denotes some affection in the organs of
respiration.


Quality. Cause. Disease.
Consistence. Thin and scanty. Attenuated humour. |Not fully developed.
Moderate ; homogen-|Attenuated humour. |Acme of a disease;
eous, white, maturation of mor-
unctuous. bid substances is
complete.
Thick. Density ofhumour. {Is declining.
Indefinite. Failure of maturation.
Colour. Black or dark. Intense heat. Outlook grave.
Yellow, golden, Deficient maturation.|Outlook not entirely
frothy, thin. bad.
Intense yellow,
golden, frothy. Bad significance.
Green. Presence of green
bile.
Verdigris green. Fatal sign.
White. Serous humour.
Red. Sanguineous humour.
Odour. Fetid. Putrefaction. Lung; air-passages.
Mode of Easy. Good sign.
expectoration. \Difficult. Bad sign.


Any colour other than that of blood is a sign of a bad intemperament produced
by pathological heat. Admixture with colours is intermittent.


The sputum may be described as an excrementitious humour which is forced
out through the capillaries of the lung. It is contributed to by proteins which are
imperfectly elaborated (e.g. hemialbumose) because of defective digestion. The
mucoid material within it forms a film over the respiratory mucous membrane, so
that gaseous interchanges are interfered with. This is sometimes shown outwardly
as cyanosis, especially when the amount of expectoration becomes very considerable
—many ounces a day in some cases,


THE SWEAT
“Easterns judge much by the state of the perspiration, especially in horse-
training. The sweat must not taste over-salt, and when held between thumb and
ea and the two are drawn apart, must not adhere in filaments.’’ (Burton,
v. 488.


MENSTRUAL FLUID
This may be mentioned as being one of the excretions. Its characters are
usually only noted in relation to lochial discharge.


Part III


THE PRESERVATION OF HEALTH


CONTENTS
PREFACE - - = = 3 2 “ 4 2 .
I. On NuTRITION. - - ~ - é: c 2 =
II. THE REGIMEN APPROPRIATE FOR THE VARIOUS PERIODS
OF LIFE - - = = = & if x
Ill. THE REGIMEN FOR THE AGED - = = = 2
IV. THE REGIMEN APPROPRIATE FOR VARIOUS INTEMPERAMENTS
V. THE REGIMEN APPROPRIATE FOR CHANGES IN THE CLIMATE
AND SEASONS - - - - - ~ e
VI. THE REGIMEN APPROPRIATE FOR TRAVELLERS, SEAFARERS,


AND THOSE LIVING IN HOT AND COLD COUNTRIES -


oe)
qn
N


PREFACE


On THE Causes oF HEALTH AND DisEasE ; THE NECESSITY OF
DEATH.


678. In the first part of this book it was stated that
Medicine comprises two parts, one theoretical, and one practical,
though both are really simply speculative science. That which
is specially named “ theory ” relates to the formation of opinions
and the showing of the evidence upon which they are based,
without reference to the mode of acting upon them. Thus this
part deals with the temperaments, the humours, the faculties ;
and with the forms, the symptoms, and the causes of disease.
‘That which is specially named “ practical ”’ relates to the mode of
acting upon this knowledge, and the prescription of a regimen.

For instance, it is that part of Medicine which helps us to
understand how the health of the body is to be maintained in this
or that state, and by what means we can heal the diseases with
which the body is afflicted. ‘“‘ Practical’ does not refer to the
performance of surgical operations. It is the ar¢ which teaches
us in what way to procure healing—the “ healing ”’ art.

Having expounded in the first and second parts of this work
the various matters pertaining to this theoretical part of Medicine,
we now proceed to the study of the two subjects pertaining to the
practical part—dealing with them in a general manner.

The two parts which belong to the practical side of Medicine
are (1) The science of regulating the healthy body, so as to
maintain itin health. ‘The science of hygiene. (2) The science
of ruling the sick body so as to enable it to return to a state of
health. The science of healing.


In this part then, the third, we write down fully how the
health is to be maintained.


* * * * * *


358


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 359


679. ‘The human being takes its origin from two things—
(1) the male sperm, which plays the part of ‘‘ factor” ; (2) the
female sperm [menstrual blood], which provides the matter.

Each of these is fluid and moist, but there is more wateriness
and terrene substance in the female blood and female sperm,
whereas air and igneity are predominant in the male sperm. It is
essential that at the outset of the congelation of the two com-
ponents there should be moisture, even though earth and fire are
found in the product. The earth provides the firmness and
rigidity ; the fire provides the maturative power. These give
the coagulum (“‘ He created man from a clot’’—Q. 96, 2) a
certain hardness or firmness. But this hardness is not as great
in degree as that possessed by a stone or metal for glass]. For
these are either not soluble at all or only soluble to a degree
imperceptible to our senses, however long one exposes them to
solvents. Were the hardness comparable to this, the product
of conception would never suffer injury however long or however
persistently a solvent were applied. But that is not so. The
fact is contrary.

680. Our bodies are exposed to injury from two directions
—one exterior and one interior. The interior source of injury
is the dissipation of the moisture from which we are created, and
this dissipation proceeds in an orderly manner. ‘The second
source is the putrefactive breakdown and metamorphosis of the
humour, into a form such that the fermentative phenomena of
life are no longer able to proceed.

The second source of injury differs from the first in that
dryness is here introduced in virtue of depravity of humour ;
and this dryness continues neutralizing the moisture of the body
until the ‘‘ form ” ceases to have a capacity for life.

Finally, the putrefactive breakdown disperses the vitality,
because it first destroys the moisture and then disperses it, and
simply dry ash is left behind.

681. Hence we see that these two sources of destruction
[of the living product of conception] are different from those
arising from other causes—such as, freezing cold, torrid heat,
grave forms of loss of continuity, various maladies. But it 1s in
regard to the first two-named sources of destruction that we find
the more important factors relative to the question of the pre-
servation of health.

Each of them takes origin from extrinsic and intrinsic
agents. ‘The extrinsic agents are, e.g., the atmosphere, which is
a solvent and putrefacient. ‘The intrinsic agents are, e.g., the


360 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


innate heat, which is the agent within us through which moisture

is dispersed : the extraneous heat generated within us from the
aliments, and through other agents which cause putrefactive
changes in the [native] moistures.

All these agents mutually aid one another in rendering the
body dry. And yet it is true that our perfection and soundness
and the power to perform our various actions depend on a due
degree of dryness of the body. But the degree of dryness
becomes relatively greater and greater until we die. Hence
this dryness is inevitable.

682. If we were at the outset essentially composed of
moisture, heat would have to overcome it or else the heat would
be choked by it. ‘Therefore the heat continues to exert its own
effect,—that is, it :produces more and more desiccation. But
whatever degree of dryness there might be at the outset (of life),
it reaches equilibrium, and remains so until the limit of equili-
brium in regard to dryness is reached. The heat remaining
constant, the dryness is now [relatively] greater than before ;
for the “‘ matter ”’ is less, and hence holds more. Hence it is not
difficult to understand that the dryness passes on beyond the
stage of equilibrium, and goes on steadily increasing until the
whole of the moisture of the body is consumed. Therefore (we
may say) that the innate heat is the cause of its own extinction, for
it is itself the reason for its own “ matter” being consumed. We
may compare it to the flame of a lamp ; the light goes out when
all the “* matter ”’ has been used up.

As the dryness increases, the innate heat diminishes. The
loss continues unceasingly till death, and the moisture which is
lost is not restored. ‘The loss goes on more and more.

683. ‘The dryness (of the body) is increased in two ways :
by lessening of the power of receiving ‘‘ matter’ ; by lessening
of the native moisture resulting from dispersal of the (innate)
heat. The heat becomes more feeble because dryness pre-
dominates in the substance of the members, and because the
innate moisture becomes relatively less. The innate moisture
is to the innate heat as the oil of a lamp is to the flame. For there
are two forms of moisture in the flame : water, which holds its
own, and oil, which is used up. So, in.a corresponding manner,
the innate heat holds its own in respect of the innate moisture,
but is used up pari passu with increase of extraneous heat, due,
e.g., to defective digestion, which is comparable with the aqueous
moisture of the flame. As the dryness increases, the innate heat
lessens, and the result is natural death.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 361


684, For the reason why the (human) body does not live
any longer than it does lies in the fact that the initial innate
moisture holds out against being dispersed both by the alien |
heat and by the heat in the body itself (both that which is innate
and that derived from bodily movement). And this resistance
is maintained as long as the one is weaker than the other, and as
long as something is provided to replace that which has been thus
dispersed—to wit, from the aliment. Furthermore, as we have
already stated, the power or faculty which operates upon the
aliment in order to render it useful in this way only does so up to
the end of life.

685. Therefore we may say that the art of maintaining the
health is not the art of averting death, or of averting extraneous
injuries from the body ; or of securing the utmost longevity
possible to the human being. It is concerned with two other
things—(a) the prevention of putrefactive breakdown ; (4) the
safeguarding of innate moisture from too rapid dissipation, and
maintaining it at such a degree of strength that the original
type of constitution peculiar to the person shall not change even
up to the last moment of life.

This is secured by a suitable regimen, namely (a) one which
will ensure the replacement of the innate heat and moisture which
are dispersed from the body as exactly as possible ; and (4) a
regimen which will prevent any agents which would lead to a
rapid dessication from gaining the upper hand—excluding agents
which produce a normal desiccation ; (c) one which safeguards
the body from the development of putrefactive processes within
it and from the influence of alien heat (whether extraneous or
intrinsic).

For all bodies have not the same degree of innate moisture
and innate heat. There is a great diversity in regard to them.

686. Moreover, every person has his own term of life,
during which the desiccation inevitable to his temperament
(constitution) and the degree of innate heat, and of innate
moisture can be withstood.

687. Nevertheless, factors may arise which assist desicca-
tion, or are injurious in some other way. For which reason, many
assert that the former are natural causes of death, whereas the
latter are accidental. Andunder this view, the art of maintaining
health consists in guiding the body to its natural span of life by
paying attention to whatever things conduce thereto. There are
two faculties to be fostered by the doctor in striving for this
object : (1) the nutritive faculty, whereby that is replaced which


362 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


is constantly being lost to the body—namely earthiness and
aquosity ; (2) the sensitive faculty (animal faculty)—that is, the
pulsatile faculty which is concerned with the replacement of that
which is lost to the body by the breath—namely “air” and
igneity. And since aliments are only potentially like the thing
nourished, an alterative faculty had to be created so that they
could be changed actually into the likeness of the thing nourished.
In this way the aliment becomes effective. .

The instruments and channels necessary for this had to be
created also—namely the means by which material is attracted,
expelled, retained, and digested (sequence by sequence, turn by
turn).

688. Therefore we may say that the essential considera-
tions in the art of preserving the health consist in maintaining
equilibrium between all these various concomitant factors. But
there are seven matters concerning which special care must Lz
expended to ensure just proportion :

(1) Equilibrium of temperament.

(2) Selection of the articles of food and drink.

(3) Evacuation of effete matters.

(4) Safeguarding the composite.

(5) Maintaining the purity of the air respired.

(6) Guarding against extraneous contingencies.

(7) Moderation in regard to the movements of the body
and the motions of the mind, with which may be included sleep
and wakefulness.

689. From all these considerations you will now perceive
that there is no single fixed limit to which equilibrium, or health is
to be assigned. None of the temperaments enters into it.
Health and equilibrium vary (in range) from time to time. That
is to say, it is a state comprised within two limits.

_ We therefore begin by discussing first the regimen appro-
priate to the period of infancy, in which the temperament is
continuously at one extreme of equilibrium.


Didi ion |
ON NUTRITION


1. THe Recimen 1n INFANCY —THE PERIOD FROM THE MomeENT
oF BirTH TO THE COMMENCEMENT OF WEANING.


PECIAL chapters discuss the regimen dur-
ing pregnancy and the period when par-
turition approaches.

690. Treatment of the Cord. Many
wise physicians state that when an infant of
equable constitution is born, the umbilical
cord should be severed four fingers’ breadth
from the umbilicus after it has been well but
gently tied with a clean woollen ligature, so as to inflict no pain,
and that an oiled cloth should be placed upon it. To help the
separation of the cord, apply equal parts of the following :
turmeric, dragon’s blood, Persian gum, caraway, sweet scented
moss, myrrh. These are ground together and applied.

691. Treatment of the skin. ‘Then one should hasten to
harden the surface of the skin by the use of slightly salted water
until the cord has desiccated. ‘The best agents to employ for this
purpose are shadanaj (a stone, shaped like a lentil or bloodstone),
bitter costus, sumach, fenugreek, and origanum. But the nose
and mouth must not be exposed to such agents.

The reason for hardening the body in this way 1s that every-
thing hot, cold, or rough is injurious to the sensitive infant’s skin,
and so it needs to be hardened against all things of that kind which
will come in contact with it. Hence, if the process of salting
has to be repeated, so do.

Such treatment is the more indicated if there are sordities
or there is much humidity.

After this, the body should be laved in tepid water, the
nostrils thoroughly cleansed with the fingers, whose nails are cut
short, and a little oil should be instilled into the eyes. The anal


363


364 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


_ orifice should be caused to move by manipulation of its vicinity
by means of the little finger, so that it may open. Care should
be taken that nothing cold comes in contact with it.

After the cord has separated—which should be in three or
four days—the stump should be treated with a measure of bone-
ash or powdered lead oxide in wine.

692. Binding the Infant. In doing this the limbs must be
handled very gently. Every part should be moulded according
to its appropriate form—making wide that which should be wide,
slender that which should be slender, doing all as gently as
possible between the tips of the fingers. This should be done
many times.

The eyes must be carefully wiped with a silken band.

The bladder-region should be pressed to help the exit of the
urine. After this, stretch out the hands towards the knees.
Bind the head, fitting as it were a cap to the head.

693. Sleeping-quarters. ‘The infant must be placed in an
airy room, with not too cool air. The room should also be shady,
or even slightly gloomy so that the eyes are not likely to receive
direct light. While sleeping the head should be at a higher level
than the rest of the body, and someone should watch lest any part
of the body (neck, limbs, back) should get into a twisted position.

694. Bathing the Infant. In summer time it should be
bathed with suave tepid water. In winter the water should be on
the warm side.

The best time to wash the infant is after a long sleep, but it
may be desirable to wash it twice or three times in the day.

In winter, the infant should not be washed unless its body
becomes ruddy and warm thereby. After taking it from the bath,
take care none of the water gets into its ears.

695. The way to hold the infant while washing it: take it
by the right hand, and hold it so that the left arm is over its chest
and not over its belly. After the laving, the palms and soles
should be gently raised (up and down). It should be gently
wiped dry with soft cloths. Then turn it down on to its belly,
then back on its back, rubbing gently all the while, pressing and
moulding [and singing gently to it,—Ch.M.], then back on its
belly to apply the binder. Afterwards instil sweet oil into its
nostrils, and bathe the eyes and lids.


2. THE REGIMEN DURING LacTATION AND WEANING.


696. ‘The following is the mode 1n which the feeding of


the infant is to be arranged. Whenever possible, the mother’s


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 365


milk should be given and by suckling. For that is the aliment of
all others most like in substance to the nutrient material which the
infant received while in the womb—the menstrual nutrients of
the mother. It is these which are changed into milk after
parturition, and such milk is better adapted for the infant.


Macrobius (Saturn, v. 11) gives the following reasons why the healthy mother
should suckle her child. ‘‘ Just as the strength and nature of the semen goes to
fashion the likeness of the body and mind, so the natural dispositions and properties
are conveyed by the milk. And it is not only in man that this is noticed. It
occurs in cattle also. For it is easily shown that when young goats are brought up
on sheep’s milk, their hairs become softer, and when lambs are brought up on goat’s
milk the wool becomes harder.”


Experience shows that merely to place the mother’s nipple
into the infant’s mouth is a great help towards removing whatever
is hurtful to the infant.

697. It should suffice for the infant to suck the breast
twice or thrice in the day at first, and it should not be allowed
to take too much. It is best to wait till the [disturbance in the]
temperament of the mother has subsided somewhat before the
infant is given the breast. It may be give a little honey first, and
the breast later.

The milk which the boy sucks should be drained away two
or three times in the morning, before presenting the nipple,
especially if there be any spots in the milk. Sourish or otherwise
defective milk should not be given while the nurse is fasting.

698. Besides this there are also two other things to be done
to help to strengthen the constitution : gentle (rocking) move-
ments ; humming music or some old song, or prattling to the
infant, as is customary while placing the babe into its cradle.
How much these two practices are to be employed may be judged
[individually] ; the movement is for the benefit of the body, and
the music is for the benefit of the mind.


§ 240a.—Some idea of the cradle-songs actually used in the days
of Avicenna may be formed from the instances recorded by Fox-
Strangeways in his work on the Music of Hindostan (pp. 62-68).
The words of Rama’s lullaby may be quoted: “ In Ayodhya, the
land of kings, It was Vishnu’s self That was born on the lap of
Kaushalya. Little babe, sleep upon my knee !—For the cradle is
wrought of gold, And a Child therein, Of the whole world the Lord
and Master, sleeps. Little babe, sleep, sleep upon my knee !—
In the hand-hold of Kaushalya Is the cradle-cord, And the cord is
the thread of Bodhana (= Knowledge). Little babe, sleep upon
my knee.—And the Devis (= angelic beings) are strewing flowers
From the highest heaven, And with each flower a blessing on the
Child. Little babe, sleep upon my knee! ”’


366 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Another illustration may be quoted to show the beautiful spirit
in these lullabies. In singing such words over her babe, the mother
must surely create an atmosphere around it which is for the benefit
of its mind:


‘Baby mine, light of my eyes,
Here in thy cradle bright with flowers
Through sunny hours I bring thee sleep,

I rock thee and sing thee to sleep

On the wings of my melodies .

Srinangam island rises fair

‘Where the divided Kaveris meet

I lay thee down there at His feet,

At Sriranga raja’s feet

Full sure of His tender care... .

The golden nails no longer move

On which my baby’s cradle swung ;
The song is sung; my ship is borne
Safe home, my ship is borne
Safe on the ocean of love... .


?


699. Inability to nurse the Child. If there be anything to
prevent the mother from giving milk to the babe—for instance,
owing to her weakness or to the defective quality of her milk, or
because it runs too quickly, a wet-nurse should be selected
according to the following rules: (1) age; (2) form or phy-
Sique ; (3) personal character or habits ; (4) the shape of.the
nipples ; (5) the quality of the milk ; (6) the interval of time
which has elapsed since her parturition ; (7) characters of her
own child.

Having found a wet-nurse in whom the requisite conditions
are fulfilled, she must be provided with nourishing foods such as
are given in 708,

700. The characters of a good wet-nurse. (1) The age
should be between 25 and 35, because during this period there is
youth and health and perfection. (2) Form and physique. The
colour should be good, the neck strong, the chest strong and
broad, the flesh muscular and firm,—neither very fat nor very
spare, the proportion of the fat in the flesh being moderate.
(3) Personal character and habits. ‘These should be good and
praiseworthy. She should be only slowly aroused by the bad
passions of the mind, such as anger, gloom, fear, etc. For all
these injure the constitution and may change the milk or pass into


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 367


it, or even prevent its secretion. It is for this reason that some
people reject a nurse who is stupid. Besides this, if the character
be not good, she will not trouble herself over the infant or caress —
it enough. (4) Shape of nipples. They must be firm in con-
sistence and large, but not too large. [On the one hand large
nipples hurt the infant’s gums and impede deglutition, and on the
other they will hold more milk than the infant can take, and some
is then left behind to undergo decomposition, therefore being
injurious at the next feed. If the nipples are too small, the infant
cannot take hold of them, and there will not be sufficient milk :
Aetius.] ‘Therefore the consistence should be between hardness
and softness. (5) Quality of milk. The consistence must be
between coarse and fine ; the colour white (not dusky, greenish,
yellowish or ruddy) ; the odour good, without acridity or
pungency ; the taste sweetish (without any bitterness, saltinesss,
oracridity). ‘The quantity should be ofa certain amount. It must
be homogeneous. It must not be thin, watery, nor very thick or
cheesy ; nor must there be any discrete particles in it. There
should not be much foam.

701. Tests. The consistence may be tested: by allowing
the milk to run over the finger-nail. If it flows easily, it is thin ;
if it does not flow over the inclined nail, it is thick. Again,
place some in a glass vessel, and drop a little myrrh into it, and
stir the two together. The aquosity and the degree of caseity
are then evident. The milk is laudable and attempered if
the watery part and cheesy part are equal.

Should there be some special need to prepare such a milk,
we should prepare it partly from the mother, and partly from
the wet-nurse. From the mother because it is better not to
give thick milk of unhealthy odour until it has been allowed to
stand exposed to the air for a while ; and because it is best
not to give very warm milk to the fasting infant.

702. Diet. If her milk is thick, the wet-nurse should
take oxymel ; and a decoction of attenuants such as wild mar-
joram, hyssop, thyme, savory, origanum montanum, and the
like should also be included in the menu. AA little radish may
be added [old pickle in vinegar and honey : Aeg.]. Vomiting
should be induced with hot oxymel to get rid of the phlegm,
(Suitable) work before meals will help to thin the milk. [Fre-
quent baths: Aetius.]

If the wet-nurse be of hot intemperament she should take
acetous syrup, and a light wine should be taken either at the
same time or separately.


368 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


703. If her milk is thin, one should instruct the nurse to
rest, and avoid exercise or work, and she should be given foods
which thicken the blood. If there is no contra-indication, one
might allow her sweet wine. [The following are also recom-
mended : strong soups or broths (Aeg.), a gruel prepared with
fennel ; green dill boiled in a ptisan with fine bread, pork-flesh,
flesh of kids, or of tender birds: Aetius.] Allow plenty of sleep.

704. Ifthe milk is scanty, one should ascertain the cause :
€.g. is it an abnormal temperament affecting the whole body,
or the breast itself? "To determine which it is one employs
the indications given in preceding chapters. If palpation of
the breasts shows them to be unduly hot, the diet should consist
of such things as barley water, spinach, and the like. If there
are signs of coldness of temperament in the breasts, and of
obstructions, or inadequate attractive power, the diet should
include attenuated aliments tending to a warm nature ; and
cupping instruments should be applied beneath the breasts,
taking care not to press much on the breast. Carrot seed is
also beneficial, and the carrot itself is also very good for such
a condition.

Should the cause be that the nurse has been previously
insufficiently fed, she should be given a broth made with barley,
bran and legumes, and such as the following should be intro-
duced : fennel roots, and seeds, and dill, and nigella. Others
say that the udders of sheep and goats should be eaten with
the milk therein contained, as being helpful in virtue of that
which is of like nature or property in such foods. Others have
recommended the administration of an “‘ ounce ”’ of tree-worms
or dried earth-worms in barley water for several days, saying
they have found it excellent for the purpose. So also the
expressed juice of the heads of salted fish, taken in dill water.

705. List of Galactogogues. (1) One ounce of butter from
cow’s milk placed into a vessel of good wine ;_ taken asa drink.
(2) sesame ground up in a fine mill and mixed with wine ; taken
asa drink. (3) An emplastrum or liniment applied to the breasts,
prepared with the faex of balsam of nard and asses’ milk and oil.
(4) Take one ounce of the interior parts of brinjal (egg-plant),
this being dissolved in wine, by stirring ; it is taken as a drink.
(5) The following is a powerful medicament : dill seed, three
ounces ; seed of blue melilot* (or, lot tree),t of leek, one ounce


* Melilot : a sort of clover. The blue melilot or ‘ curd herb’ gives the odour

and flavour to Schabzieger cheese, the dried flowers being used. :
+ The lot tree: pyrus aria, or white beam-tree (apple tribe) (Lindley and

Moore).132 f


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 369


of each ; clover seed and fennel seed, two ounces of each ; mix
the whole into a drink with fennel juice, honey and butter.
[(6) (Aegineta) : broom leaves taken in dark-coloured wine or
in a ptisan ; sweet gith (melanthium), and the root and seed of
carrots soaked in warm water. Aegineta warns that such reme-
dies are weakening to the body).] (7) Massaging the breasts
frequently with bland hands renders the secretion of milk
plentiful.

706. Anti-galactogogues. If the milk is injuriously abun-
dant, or has accumulated because it is unable to escape owing
to the presence of some form of obstruction, or because the milk
is too thick, one may reduce the quantity secreted (1) by reducing
the amount of food ; (2) by employing those articles of diet
which contain but little nourishment ; (3) by applying a (dis-
cutient) plaster over the chest and breasts, composed of caraway
in vinegar or white clay in vinegar, or of lentils boiled in vinegar ;
this is followed up by a draught of salted water ; (4) by eating
mint.

If the milk has an unpleasant odour, the remedy is to give
as a drink a fragrant wine ; and as food, foods of pleasant odour.

707. (6) Rules regarding the period of time which has
elapsed since the wet-nurse was herself confined.—The birth
should have been recent, namely 14 months at least (two months,
if the child was a male) ; the birth should have occurred at the
proper date and not premature ; nor should there be a history
of habitual premature births.

708. Regimen of wet-nurse.

Diet : the aliments should consist of food giving good
chyme. For example, foods such as wheat, frumenty, lamb, kid
of goats, which are not putrescent or have hard flesh. Lettuce,
almonds, filbert-nuts. Mint. Potherbs which are deleterious:
herb-rocket, mustard, mountain balm—for they cause the blood
to undergo decomposition. [Aegineta also advises against
desiccative, salt, acrid, acid, sour, bitter and heating articles of
food ; foods having an offensive smell ; very fragrant things ;
condiments ; alcohol. ]

Exercise. "This should be moderate. [Aetius says : work
with the hands and shoulders, milling, weaving, carrying the
child about in the arms,

Personal : cleanliness of person (Aetius).] The wet-nurse
should not allow coition, for this disturbs the menstrual blood
and diminishes the quantity of milk and alters its composition,
as shown by change of odour. Moreover she might become

2B


370 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


pregnant, in which case there would be a dual un propitious
influence—to the wet-nurse herself in that whatever is attenuated
in the blood enters into the nutriment of the embryo, and to
the embryo in that it loses as much from the mother’s aliment as
passes on to form milk.

709. During the whole period of lactation, especially
the first lactation, it is advisable to have some of the milk drawn
off to encourage and facilitate its flow ; this is also aided by
massage, otherwise the delicate organs of suction will be injured
and weakened. It is a help to anoint with a little honey each
time before the infant is nursed ; and a little wine may also be
added. It should not be allowed to take much milk at one time.
It is better to feed little and often, at small intervals. For it
may happen that after becoming satiated with the whole of the
contents of the breast the infant suffers from distension, and very
much flatulence, and the urine becomes white [too watery, Aeg. ]
In such a case, the best thing is to’stop the nursing, allowing the
infant to go hungry for some time, and it should be meanwhile
put to sleep till digestion has had time to be completed. [It is
unduly sleepy if over-fed. ]

At first, the infant is allowed the breast three times only in
the day. Should it be necessary to feed it on the first day, it
would be better for someone else than the infant’s mother to do
so, as we have explained.

Should the wet-nurse develop an intemperament or a
painful malady, or have diarrhoea, or be constipated, someone
else should give milk until she is better. The same applies if
it be necessary to administer to her some medicine which has a
decided potency or quality.

The infant is laid to sleep after feeding, but its cradle must
not be rocked vigorously as otherwise one would churn the milk
in its stomach. The rocking must be quite gentle.

It is good for the infant to cry a little before the feed.

710. Duration of lactation. Normally this is two years,
When something additional to milk is required, such addition
should be made step by step. Weaning must not be abrupt.


“He committed the child to the nurse, and he drank milk two
years, after which they weaned him, and he grew up, and throve,
and walked upon the floor.” (Night 250).


After the first two teeth have appeared, a progressively
stronger aliment is to be considered. Hard things, however,
must not be allowed. At first, bread is given which the nurse


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 371


has masticated. Afterwards, bread softened with honey water,
or dilute wine or with milk. This is followed by a little water,
or even a little wine in the water. It must not be allowed to
take food to repletion. Should indigestion or flatulence occur,
and should the urine become white, all food is stopped for a
while, at least until it has been anointed in the bath.

711. Weaning. In weaning the infant from milk, the
aliment must consist of articles which can be sucked up ; and
the replacement of milk by “ acorns ” of bread and sugar should
be gradual. Soft meats may be given. If the infant per-
sistently seek for the breast, crying for it, the best thing is to
prepare a paste to apply to the breast, made of four ounces of
myrrh and smoothly ground pennyroyal.

712. Regimen up to Dentition. ‘To sum up, we may say
that the regimen of the infant is to be humectant, corresponding
to its temperament at this period, for this is necessary both for
nutrition and growth. ‘The infant is also to be exercised gently
correspondingly to the needs of nature, and especially during the
later period of infancy.


,


{The word “exercise’’ includes lulling with music and singing lullabies:
exercises are to be followed by gentle rubbing; and after that comes the bath,
which must not be cold. (Aegineta.)]


When the child begins to creep about, it must not be
allowed to make strenuous efforts, or be encouraged to walk or
sit erect before the natural desire to do so appears ; otherwise
there may be injury done to its legs and back. When it first
sits up or creeps over the ground, it is best to place it upon a
smooth skin, to prevent injury by roughness in the floor. Bits
of stick or any objects able to pierce or cut the skin must be kept
out of its way. Care must be taken that it does not fall off some
elevated place.

713. Hygiene of Dentition. When the canine teeth are about
to appear, the infant must not be allowed to chew at anything
hard lest the material from which these teeth need to be made
should become dissolved by the processes of mastication. The
gums should be rubbed with hare’s brain and cock’s fat, as this
will help their eruption. After the appearance of the teeth,
the infant’s head and neck should be rubbed with oil which has
been shaken up with hot water [to cleanse it], and a little of the
same oil may be instilled into the ears.

As soon as the infant is able to bite with its teeth, it will
show this by trying to bite its own finger. It should then be
given a stick of not too dry liquorice root or inspissated Spanish


KG: THE CANON OF MEDICINE


juice to chew at, for this will be beneficial at this period and will
prevent ulcers from forming in the gums and dull the pain [and
irritation of teething]. The gums may also be rubbed with salt
and honey to relieve the pain.

When the teeth are fully out, the infant may be given a
stick of liquorice or root of liquorice (not too dry) to bite at.
When the canines are fully out it is good also to rub the neck
with some form of sweet oil. Later still, when the infant begins
to talk, its teeth should be rubbed, especially at their bases.


3. Concerninc THE Disgases oF INFANCY


714. The chief mode of treating infants is by controlling
the wet-nurse. If there should be any suspicion of plethora of
blood in her, bleeding or cupping should be done. If there be
plethora of some other humour, that must be drained also.
When it is necessary to bind, or to loosen the bowels, or to pre-
vent the ascent of vapours to the head, or to rectify the respiratory
organs, or to correct an intemperament, the method of treating
this is by way of the food and drink [of the nurse]. If it becomes
necessary [for the nurse] to procure plentiful evacuation by the
bowel, or if this occurs spontaneously ; if emesis needs to be
procured, or if vomiting occurs spontaneously, it is best to give
the infant to someone else to nurse during that period.


715. DISORDERS DURING DENTITION


Inflammation of the gums (gingivitis) may occur during
dentition. Inflammations may also occur in the ligamentous
structures round the mandibles, causing trismus. In such
cases one should gently press the parts with the finger and rub
in one of the oils named in the section dealing with the eruption
of the teeth, or honey which has been well mixed with oil of
chamomile, or with turpentine oil. One may also pour warm
water, in which chamomile and dill have been boiled, over the
top of the head from a height. (Cf. 414.)

For burning pain in the gums apply oil and wax as an epitheme
or use salted flesh which is-a little “ high.”


[Aegineta advises rubbing the gums frequently with the finger alone or anointed
with fowl-grease, while the infant is in the bath. When the teeth are just about to
show anoint the head with sweet oil and drop some into the ears. He recommends
the amount of food to be increased, and advocates warm baths. For itching of the
gums, he says the flesh of an old pickle will relieve.]


Diarrhoea. This is specially apt to arise during dentition.
Some account for it as due to the sucking in by the infant of


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 373


salty sanious effete matters from its own gums along with the
milk. But it is possible that this is not true ; that the real
cause is an interference with the natural faculty, so that digestion
is imperfect and pain results. It is just this that hinders diges-
tion in feebly constituted infants.


Cf. Modern teaching: “ Vomiting and diarrhcea must always be looked upon
as due to some cause other than dentition, particularly to improper feeding. —
Elder and Fowler.1*

If it is only slight, you will not be asked to treat it. If
the parents are afraid it will become injurious, leading to wasting,
one would treat by applying rose-seed, caraway, anise, and
celery (parsley-) seed [sprinkled on wool : Aeg.] to the abdomen,
or apply a plaster prepared with caraway and roses infused in
vinegar, or with frumenty boiled in vinegar. Should this fail,
use a sixth part of a dram of goat-cheese in cold water, taking
care to prevent curdling of the milk in the infant’s stomach
by replacing the milk for that day with the soft yolk of an egg,
or with morsels of bread boiled in water, or ground wheat boiled
in water. [Hot desiccants may be used: Aeg.]

Constipation during dentition. ‘Vhe treatment is by a sup-
pository made with well-cooked honey, or with pennyroyal, or
with iris-root (in the natural state or after scalding). A little
honey may be given in the food. As much oil of turpentine
as makes the bulk of a chick-pea may be gently rubbed over the
abdomen ; or olive-oil ; or some ox-bile may be applied over
the thigh or over the navel. Or maidenweed (bakhiri maryam)
may be applied. [Or the abdomen may be anointed with mint
pounded in honey: Aeg.]

716. Convulsions during dentition. ‘This is generally due
to fermentative changes in the digestion, aided by nervousness,
especially if the baby 1s over-fat and humid in constitution. The
treatment is to use oil of iris, lily, alkanna, or mallow. [Aetius
advises against figs and acid foods. ]

Grave convulsions during dentition; “‘ tetanus.’ ‘This is
treated by water in which cucumber [or heliotrope] has been
boiled ; or by oil of violets admixed with oil of cucumber [or
oil of privet : i.e. calefacients : Aeg.].

If there is reason to suppose that the convulsions are due
to dryness, because they,.develop after fevers, or after severe
diarrhoea, and because they gradually become more pronounced,
then the joints should receive an inunction with violet-oil (alone
or beaten up with a little white wax), and violet-oil may be applied
to the head. ‘The same things should be employed vigorously
if “ dry” tetanus develop.


374 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


To the lay mind, all forms of gastro-intestinal catarrh, skin eruptions and
nervous phenomena (particularly convulsions) are attributed to dentition. Beyond
admitting that there is usually some congestion of the gums, with exaggerated
salivation, some loss of appetite, restlessness, temporary rise of temperature, and
general uneasiness, Elder and Fowler (loc. cit.) teach that these various phenomena
depend chiefly on rickets, and nutritional errors. There is however something
to be said for the lay view.

After the teeth have appeared, Aegineta recommends the infant to be allowed
to bite at a piece of nearly dry decorticated iris root. Butter and honey should
also be inuncted.


717. Incessant crying, with loss of sleep. "The mouth is
constantly whimpering. [The causes of persistent crying are :
heat ; cold ; fleas ; gnats ; hunger ; thirst ; retained urine—
for which give melon-seed and julep to both nurse and child ;
retained faeces—for which give the nurse laxatives, herbs, olive
oil, prunes : Haly Abbas.] For this condition it is necessary
to make it sleep if possible, by giving poppy bark and seed,
and oil and lettuce and apply poppy oil to the temples and vertex.
If this does not suffice prepare the following medicament : Take
bugle seed, juniper berry, white poppy, yellow poppy, linseed,
celandine seed, purslane, plantain seed, lettuce seed, fennel seed,
aniseed, caraway ; some of each is roasted little by little ; then
all are rubbed together. Add one part of fried fleawort seed
which is not powdered. Mix the whole with a like amount of
sugar and give two “ drams’”’ as a potion.

If it is desired to make it still stronger, one should add an
amount of opium equal to a third part of it or less.

718. Night-terrors. ‘These are often due to over-repletion
with food, which undergoes putrefactive change. The stomach
is aware of this. An injurious effect passes on from the sensitive
faculty to the formative and imaginative faculties, wherefore the
terrifying visions arise. It is necessary therefore to see that the
stomach is not full at bed-time ; honey should be given the
infant to lick, and in this way it will digest that which is in the
stomach and displace it.

719. Water on the Brain. ‘This is discussed under the
heading of diseases of the head.

Inflammation in the brain. Siriasis. ‘There is pain in the
eyes and the throat, and the face becomes yellow. [The body is
dry ; the fontanelles are depressed, the orbits sunken : -Aeg.]
Hence the brain must be rendered cool and moist by the use of
cortex of cucumber, parings of gourd, juice of garden nightshade,
and especially purslane juice, and rose oil with a little vinegar,
and rose oil with egg-yolk. Each of these is constantly changed.

720, AFFECTIONS OF THE MOUTH. <Aphthous stomatitis.


Aphthae. Vhrush.—Aphthae are plentiful when the lining


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 375


membrane of the tongue and mouth is too delicate to bear
touching, even by the wateriness of the milk, for it is this that
is injurious to it, and gives rise to the aphthae. The condition
is worse, and dangerous to life, if they remain immature and
black like charcoal. The condition is more favourable if they
are white or yellow. The treatment is to employ some such
gentle medication as is described in special treatises on the
subject. Sometimes triturated violets are sufficient by them-
selves ; sometimes they need mixing with roses, a little saffron,
and carob-bean. Or, again, lettuce-juice, nightshade juice,
purslane juice [and endive-juice] may suffice. If treatment is
still resisted, use bruised liquorice root.


Galen advised cooling astringent washes if the mucous membrane is red;
more refrigerant washes if it is yellow; detergents if it is white, and, according to
Alsaharavius, a powder of myrtle, saffron, and sugar. The strongest discutients
(sandarach, rose-oil) are needed, if the mucous membrane is black.


When aphthae are associated with boils in the gums, it is
beneficial to use myrrh, gall, frankincense bark, thoroughly
ground up and mixed with honey. An acetous rob* of mulberries,
and a rob of unripe grapes may suffice. Sometimes it is advan-
tageous to bathe the gums with honey-water and wine (or, syrup
and honey) and follow this up with some of the desiccatives we
have named.

If a stronger (astringent) medicament is required, use the
leaf-veins and bark of pomegranate, and pomegranate blossoms,
and sumach, six drams of each ; galls, four drams ; aniseed,
two drams. Rub them together and thoroughly powder them
up. Then dust this upon the gums.

721. Tue rye. Prominence of the eyes. Apply juice of
boxthorn made with milk ; then bathe with water in which
chamomile and mountain balm have been boiled.

Whiteness over the pupils, due to much crying, is treated
with nightshade juice.

If the eyelids are affected with d/epharitis, owing to constant
crying, treat this also with nightshade juice.

722. Tur car. Watery discharge from the ears. ‘This 1s
due to an undue degree of moisture in the body, especially in
the brain. An ointment is prepared with wool-fat, honey, wine,
and a little alum, or nitre-or saffron. ‘This is then introduced
into the ears with a syringe. Or it may suffice to dip wool into
a sour wine, or into wine to which a little saffron has been
added, and place this in the ears.


* Lit. juice made thick,


376 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Earache. This may be due to flatulence, or to undue
moistness. It is to be treated by juice of boxthorn, origanum,
salt, white sugar, lentils, myrrh, colocynth seeds, and cedar
[or, savin] seeds. Any of these should be digested in oil and
instilled drop by drop.

723. DistuRBANCE OF THE BREATHING. Difficulty of
breathing. Anoint the roots of the ears and tongue with oil.
It would also be very helpful to press the tongue down so as to
cause the infant to vomit. Warm water may also be dropped
into the mouth drop by drop, and a little linseed and honey be
given it to suck.

Abnormal snoring. ‘This is noticed when the infant is in
very deep sleep. Give linseed ground up in honey, or ground
caraway in honey, to lick.


Snorting, says Aegineta, is due to improper food. The stomach becomes
loaded with phlegm. A linseed linctus is to be given, or honey. If that does not
suffice to stop it, vomiting is induced as above.

(Laryngismus stridulus may correspond to this and the preceding, since the
laryngismus is apt to occur during sleep, and is aggravated by crying, whereas
stridor may disappear under both these conditions. The question of adenoids
would also come to mind).

Constant sneezing. ‘This may bea sign of cerebral disorder.
In such a case this must be treated, cooling the inflammation,
by inunction with infrigidant juices and oils. If there be no
inflammation, some mountain balm may be insufflated into the


nostrils.


Loss of voice in infants is due to constipation. Give cabbage-juice by the
mouth or rectum (Aeg.).

724, Cough and Coryza. Some people advise for this that
the infant’s head should be laved in plenty of warm water, and
that plenty of honey should be smeared over the tongue. After
that, the root of the tongue should be depressed to enable the
infant to expel the abundant phlegm by vomiting, which will
secure recovery. Small doses of the following demulcents may
also be given daily in new milk : gum arabic, gum tragacanth,
quince seed, liquorice juice, brown sugar.

725. Dicxstive pistursance. Weakness of the stomach.
The abdomen should be anointed with musk and rose or myrtle
water. Give a drink containing quince juice and a little clove
or nutmeg, or three-eighths of a dram of nutmeg with a small
quantity of quince-juice.

Severe vomiting. ‘This may be treated with three grains
of clove. A plaster containing weak anti-emetics may be applied
over the stomach.

Fliccough. For this administer coco-nut with sugar.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 377


726. Flatulent distension. The treatment has already been
given in the section on diseases of the head. The following
very useful measure may be here mentioned. ‘Take equal parts
of origanum, castoreum and caraway. Rub them up and mix
together. Give the weight of three barley grains in a draught.

Colic. ‘The infant writhes and cries. Hot water appli-
cations should be made to the abdomen, using also plenty of
warm oil and a little wax.

Griping. ‘This is due to cold. Beneficial for this condition
is the following : three drams of each of nasturtium and caraway;
grind them together. Pass through a sieve. Intersperse them
with old cow butter. Give as a draught with cold water.

727, Prolapsus ani. Give pomegranate bark, fresh myrrh,
inner rinds of acorns (or, chestnuts), dried roses, burnt horn,
alum of Yamen, nails of goats, pomegranate blossoms (unopened)
and nails of fowls. Take equal parts and thoroughly boil them
together in water until all their virtue has come out. Then give
as an enema, tepid.


[Aegineta advises applications of tepid brine or salt water. In modern words:
give astringent enemata.]


728. Hernia. When a child cries very much, a swelling
may form in the groin or navel. This isa hernia. Some advise
that it should be rubbed with cardamon (bishop’s weed) and
sprinkled with egg-white, a thin bandage being applied tightly
over the place. Others advise burnt bitter lupin, as an infusion
in wine and myrrh, placed over the part. Stronger remedies
are : hot styptics (astringents), such as myrrh ; - cypress bark ;
cypress fruit ; aloes ; acacia fruit. [Compresses of alum, galls,
etc. : Aetius.] See also the special chapter on the subject.

729. Formation of an inflammatory mass between the throat
and stomach [= retro-pharyngeal abscess ?]. This sometimes
spreads to the muscles and cervical vertebrae. The treatment
is to cause the infant’s bowels to act, using a suppository. After
that, give mulberry rob and the like.

An inflammatory mass may form in the navel, especially
after the cord has separated. In this case one should use celtic
spice and turpentine ; dissolve them in rape-seed oil. They
may be given internally or applied as a plaster over the navel.

730. Worms. Round worms are very injurious when they
arise in the small intestine. ‘Thread-worms are usually round
the anus. Flat worms are rare. Round worms are treated with
absinthe water (wormwood of Pontus), of which a little is given
in milk, according to its concentration. It may be necessary


378 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


to apply a plaster over the abdomen, made up of Kabul rice,
myrobalan, ox-bile, and colocynth pulp. ‘To treat threadworms
take one part of each of elecampane and madder [chelidontum ;
a kind of cucumber: (other readings)] ; add sugar equal in
bulk to the whole. Give as a draught with hot water.

731. Disorpers oF THE Sk1n.—[Aegineta gives the follow-
ing advice :—(1) Attend to the diet of the wet-nurse. Give sweet
articles of food. (2) Attend to the diet of the child; (@) this
should not be too rich or too spare; (4) avoid constipation: add
a little honey to the food; or, should this prove inadequate, add
turpentine to the bulk of a chick-pea; (c) avoid looseness «f the
bowels: add millet to the food.]

Furunculosis. Pimples forming all over the body. If they
are ulcerating and black it is a fatal sign. If they resemble
aphthae, it is also mortal, especially when they spread out. If
they are white, it is more hopeful. If red, it is also more hopeful.
If they come out freely, it is a better sign.

The treatment in all cases consists in using fine desiccants
dissolved in the bath-water, such remedies as rose, myrtle,
mastic-leaves, tamarisk, and their respective oils being boiled
in the water. [Other remedies recommended by Alsaharavius :
lotions of marjoram, mint, centaury ; ointments of spuma
argenti, ceruse, armenian bole, sulphur, mercury, almonds. ]

If the furuncles are healing, they should be left alone until
they are mature ; and they are then treated.

If they are ulcerated, they need an ointment of ceruse. They
may need bathing with honey-water and a little nitre, as one does
aphthae.

If they scab over it will be necessary to use something
stronger. One therefore bathes them with aqueous borax mixed
with milk, to enable it to be borne.

If they become vesicular, they should be steamed, and have
water poured over them in which myrtle and rose and bogrush


(schoenus), quinsywort (asperula) and the (young) leaves of the
mastic tree have been boiled.


For vesicular eruptions, Rhazes advises: (1) decoction of dates and figs with


fennel-water ; (2) when the rash is fully out, give rose-water baths, myrtle-water


baths, and then rub the skin with oil of roses. ;
Intertrigo. Apply ground myrtle as a dusting powder, or
use powdered liquorice root [or iris root] ; or finely ground-up
rose or galangale, or barley flour, or lentil flour.
Pruritus—Foment and anoint with refined oil; in which a little wax has been
melted (Aeg.). Correct the acrimony of the mother’s milk (Alsaharavius). Sto


all sweets and salts in the mother’s diet, because they inflame the blood. Immerse
the child in a bath of mallows, pearl barley, fenugreek, gourds, etc. (Rhazes).


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 379


732. Fevers. In this case it is best to treat the nurse
by giving her such remedies as pomegranate juice mixed with
oxymel and honey and succus citruli, and a little camphor and
sugar [or, acetous syrup of pomegranate and honey and cucumber
juice, with a little camphor and sugar]. Then induce sweating
by using fresh reeds, which are squeezed so that their juices can
be applied to the head and feet, covering these parts therewith.


4. THE RecGimMen FRoM Inrancy To ADOLESCENCE


733, The great principle here is the inculcation of control
of the emotions. One should take care that they do not give way
to anger and fear, or be oppressed by despondency, or suffer
from sleeplessness. They should therefore be allowed that which
is pleasing and appetizing and one should avoid giving them
anything arousing disgust.

There are two useful objects attained in this way. The first
is that the mind grows from its very start accustomed to favour-
able emotions, and develops a fixed habit for good. ‘The second
is that the body is also benefited. For just as bad habits of thought
supervene on intemperament of the body, so also a physical
intemperament may be traced to habits of mind which are
contrary to the ideal.

Anger is a strong calefacient. Despondency is a desiccant.
Torpor relaxes (retards) the sensitive faculties, and causes the
constitution to tend towards the phlegmatic type. Therefore
in safeguarding the emotions the health of the mind and body
are at the same time maintained.

734. When the child awakes, it should first have a bath.
He should then be allowed to play for an hour. ‘Then he should
have his breakfast. ‘Then he should be left to play for a long time.
Then he should have another bath. Then he should have a
hearty [light : Aeg.] meal, but he must not be allowed to drink
water with his meal, because otherwise insufficiently digested
chyle will become absorbed and disperse all over the body.

735, At the age of six, he may be given tuition by a master
[who is of mild and benevolent disposition : Aeg.], who will
teach him step by step and in order [cheerfully, without con-
straint]. He should not be compelled to stay continuously in
school, [Relaxation of the mind contributes to the growth of
the body : Aeg.] At this age, bathing and rest should be less
frequent, and the exercise before meals should be increased.

Wine must not be allowed. ‘This is specially true if the
temperament is hot and moist, because the injurious effect of


380 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


wine—namely the generation of bilious humour, as is seen in
topers—readily influences the child. The advantage in wine is
that it excites the secretion of urine, thus removing the bilious
humour with it, and that it moistens the joints. Neither of these
effects are necessary at this age, because his bilious humour is
not so plentiful as to need helping out of the body, nor do the
joints need moistening. He should therefore be allowed as
much sweet limpid water to drink as he wishes.

This is the programme up to thirteen years of age. Care
is daily exercised towards lessening the humidities, and increasing
the dryness of the tissues, and hardening the body. [Grammar is
taught now: Aeg.]

The rule therefore is to allow light exercise, and to avoid
whatever entails toil, between boyhood and adolescence. After
this age, the regimen is that usual for maintaining the health


(in early manhood).
_, _ From 14-21, use gymnastic exercise to strengthen the body and prevent
indulgence in carnal desires. Wine should be allowed sparingly. Pursue mathe-
matics and begin philosophy (Aegineta).

We may therefore pass on to the subject of exercise, first
discussing the essentials for the regimen of young adults, and


the subject of gymnastic exercise.


THESIS 11


THE REGIMEN PROPER FOR THE PHYSICALLY
MATURED.


§ 241.—THE RIGHT USE OF ADULT LIFE.


How happy is he who takes advantage of early days, and pays his debt (to God)—
Those days when he has power, health, energy of heart, and strength ;
That state of youth, like a verdant and fresh garden, yielding produce and fruit
unstintingly ;
The springs of strength and eager desire flowing, and the soil of the body verdant
through them.
Masnavi,*" p. 107.


The real object of conserving the energies of the body lies in
the attainment of spiritual development. The actual bodily occu-
pation is itself, if we will it so, the practical means of that attainment.
The energy of will to associate this means of worship with the
subjugation of the vices inherent in our frailty must be employed
during the early years if we are not to find ourselves in old age
powerless to advance along the critical stages of the journey to the
only true Goal. This principle underlies the idea of “ right
Regimen.”


The soil of the “ body ’’ and the “ desires ’’ having been consistently tilled
and purified and tended, the coming of old age cannot but also reveal spiritual
blossoms full of delight for others. “‘ Do not then wait,’ says the Masnavi,

Sat!
The soil becomes barren, dry and poor :
Never do fine plants grow from barren soil ;
When the water of energy, and the water of eager desire cease
He derives no benefit from himself or from others ;
The eyebrows hanging over like a crupper-strap ;
The eyes watery and dim ;
The face through old age like the back of a lizard ;
The articulation and taste defective, and the teeth useless ;
The day late, the ass lame, and the road long; _
The workshop (i.e., the physical body) gone to ruin,
And the work disorganized,
The roots of a bad nature fixed firmly in him,
And the power to tear them up diminished.”

(Ibid., 107-8.)


A picture admirable of the state of affairs in old age; and also
full of significance in regard to the well-being of the soul.
381


02 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


1. Tue GENERAL R&GIMEN FOR THE ATHLETIC AGE. COLLECTIVE
Discourse uPON Bopity EXERCISE


736.

INCE the regimen for maintaining health
consists essentially in the regulation of
(1) exercise, (2) food, and (3) sleep, we may
begin our discourse with the subject of
(gymnastic) exercise. We may define exer-
cise as voluntary movement entailing deep
and hurried respiration.

Once we direct the attention towards
regulating exercise as to amount and time, we shall find there 1s
no need for such medicaments as are ordinarily required for
remedying diseases dependent on [abnormal] matters, or diseases
of temperament consequent upon such. This is true provided
the rest of the regimen is appropriate and proper.

737. We know that this must be so when we reflect how,
in regard to nutriment, our health depends on the nutriment
being appropriate for us and regulated in quantity and quality.
For not one of the aliments which are capable of nourishing the
body is converted into actual nutriment in its entirety. In every
case digestion leaves something untouched, and nature takes
care to have that evacuated. Nevertheless, the evacuation
which nature accomplishes is not a complete one. Hence at
the end of each digestion there is some superfluity left over.
Should this be a frequent occurrence, repetition would lead to
further aggregation until something measurable has accu-
mulated. As a result, harmful effete substances would form
and injure various parts of the body. When they undergo
decomposition, putrefactive diseases arise.* Should they be
strong in quality, they will give rise to an intemperament ; and
if they should increase in quantity they would set up the sym-
ptoms of plethora which have already been described. Flowing
to some member, they will result in an inflammatory mass, and
their “ vapours ”’ will destroy the temperament of the substantial
basis of the breath.

That is the reason why we must be careful to evacuate
these substances.

Their evacuation is usually not completely accomplished
without the aid of toxic medicines, for these break up the nature
of the effete substances. This can be achieved only by toxic


* Bacterial infections.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 383


agents, although the drinking of them is to a certain extent
deleterious to our nature. As Hippocrates says, ‘ medicine
purges and ages.’’ More than this, the discharge of superfluous
humour entails the loss of a large part of the natural humidities
and of the breath, which is the substance of life. And all this
is at the expense of the strength of the principal and auxiliary
members, and therefore they are weakened thereby. ‘These and
other things account for the difficulties incident to plethora,
whether they remain behind in the body or are evacuated from it.

Now exercise is that agent which most surely prevents the
accumulation of these matters, and prevents plethora. The other
forms of regimen assist it. It is this exercise which renews and
revives the innate heat, and imparts the necessary lightness
(airiness !) to the body. For it causes the subtile heat to be
increased and daily disperses whatever effete substances have
accumulated ; the movements of the body help to expel them,
conveying them to those parts of the body whence they can
readily leave it. Hence the effete matters are not allowed to
collect day after day, and besides this, as we have just said,
exercise causes the innate heat to accresce, and keeps the joints
and ligaments firm, so as to be always ready for service, and also
free from injury. It renders the members able to receive the
nutriment, in being free from accumulated effete matters. Hence
it renders the attractive faculty active, and resolves fibrosis in
the tissues, rendering the members light, and the humidities
attenuated, and it dilates the pores of the skin.

To forsake exercise would often incur the risk of “ hectic,”
because the faculties of the members are impaired, inasmuch
as the deprivation of movement prevents the access to them of
the innate breath. And this last is the real instrument of life
for every one of the members.


§ 242.—-VALUE OF EXERCISE.—(1) It hardens the organs
and renders them fit for their functions; (2) It results in a better
absorption of food, aids assimilation, and, by increasing the innate
heat, improves nutrition. (3) It clears the pores of the skin. (4)
It removes effete substances through the lungs. (5) Strengthens
the physique.

Vigorous exercise invigorates the muscular and nervous system.


384 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


2. Tue Various Forms oF EXERCISE.


738. There are two main forms of exercise :
(2) that pertaining to the ordinary human under-
takings ; (4) that which is undertaken for its
own sake, namely for the advantage accruing
4\ from its pursuit. f[i.e., sports, athletics, gym-
nastics, etc. |

There are differences between the two forms.
jee =) One is strong and powerful, the other weak and
light ; one is speedy, the other slow. Athletics implies strenuous
exertion, combining swiftness with energy. Recreative exercise,
undertaken for relaxation, implies leisurely movements. There
are all grades between these extremes, and there is a mean
between them [called moderate exercise].

739. List of the forms of exercise. (i) Strenuous forms.
Wrestling contests. Boxing. Quick marching. Running.
Jumping over an object higher than one foot. Throwing the
javelin. Fencing. Equitation, or horsemanship. [Hunting :
Galen, Rhazes. |


Equitation ‘strengthens the body, especially the stomach, more than any
other mode of exercise. It clears the organs of special sense, and renders them
more acute. But it is most inimical to the chest’ (Antyllus).

The mental excitement of hunting is good for many diseases.


Clapping the two hands alternately before and behind, with
a quick motion while standing on tip-toes. [Dancing (Oribasius),
Swimming (ib)]. These are special forms of individual athletic
exercises.


Dancing, said Hippocrates, is beneficial for amenorrhoea, and has been used
for procuring abortion.


Swimming in the sea.—This has a warming effect, and strengthens the body,
and renders it thin. It is beneficial for dropsy, skin eruptions, elephantiasis. But
it may be injurious for the head and nerves. The body must be rubbed with oil
first. (Oribasius.)

(11) The following are recreative or milder modes of exercise.
Swaying or swinging to and fro, as when being carried in a litter.
Standing or reclining in small boats. Fishing. Sailing. “* Ges-
tation ’’—that is, being driven in horse-carriages, or carried on
camels, or in palanquins, or a horse-litter.

[Military exercises]. Among the more vigorous exercises
are those performed by soldiers in camp, in military sports.
Pleth-running—where a man runs on the campus from end to
end (a sixth of a stadium), to and fro, lessening the distance each
time until finally he comes to stand in the middle. Combat with
one’s shadow. Exercise with the leatherbag [which is filled with


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 385


flour or sand, and hung to the level of the person’s navel ; then
pushing it forwards as far as it will go, the athlete runs rapidly
backwards to escape its recoil : Oribasius]. Long jumping.
High jumping. Play with a large ball [inflated skins or leather].
Play with a small wooden ball on horseback [i.e., polo].


“He took the bat from the Sage and grasped it firmly; then, mounting
steed, he drove the ball before him and galloped after it till he reached it, when he
struck it with all his might, his palm gripping the bat-handle the while; and he
ceased not malling the ball till his hand waxed moist and his skin, perspiring, im-
bibed the medicine from the wood.” (Night 4, Burton i. 42).


Stone-throwing. Lifting heavy stones or weights, either
while standing, or carrying them. Cricket (tibtab). [Scaling
ropes. (Aeg.). Digging (Aeg.)]. Running galloping horses
round in a circle. [Leaping with a weight on the shoulders,
which exercises the spine : Galen. ]

740. ‘There are various forms of wrestling. For instance,
in one form, one of the wrestlers grasps the other and holds him
by the tips of the hands. The other tries to get loose from his
opponent. In another, one wrestler grips the right hand of his
opponent, and takes the left hand with his left, the two facing one
another; then the one raises the other up into the air, and turns
him round, sometimes in the bent position, sometimes in the
upright position. (See drawing at head of this section.) Again,
the two wrestlers may press against one another breast to breast.
Again, one holds the other by the neck to pull him to the ground.
Or, one may twist and press with his feet, twisting his legs
round his opponent, or turn heel to heel. Various other move-
ments of that kind are in vogue among wrestlers.

Exercises involving swiftness. Interchanging places with
a partner as swiftly as possible, each jumping to and fro, either in
time [to music] or irregularly. Another exercise is carried out
with two stakes. ‘The man jumps backwards repeatedly without
moving his position, and plunges the two stakes on either side,
one pace apart, causing the one on the right to go to the left, and
the one on the left to go to the right. This is to be done as
swiftly as possible.

Exercises involving vigour and swiftness should alternate
with mild exercises, or with rest. The manner of the exercises
should also be diversified, so that they are not always performed
in the same way.

741. There is an exercise which is appropriate for each
individual. Gentle exercise (e.g., swinging: rocking in a
swing) is beneficial for those who are debilitated by fevers, and

Xe


386 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


are convalescent, and can neither walk nor sit. Also for those
weakened by a draught of hellebore and the like. Also for those
whose diaphragm has been rendered enfeebled by disease. When
it is done gently, it tends to induce sleep, and disperse flatulence,
relieves various disorders of the head (e.g., stupor, forgetfulness)
—provokes the appetite, and favours movement of the bowels.
“To ride in a litter [horse, camel, palanquin, etc.] is appro-
priate for those afflicted with semitertian fever, composite fevers,
phlegmatic fevers, those who are dropsical, or have gouty pain,
or renal disorder. For this form of exercise renders (effete)
matter in a condition favourable for excretion, and may be made
gentle for the feeble, more vigorous for the more vigorous.
Greater movement is produced in the humours by riding in a
carriage, but when doing so one should face backwards, because
this is better when the eyesight is weak, and it is an advantage
to have the shadow in one’s face.
Fishing.—The absence of mental and bodily excitement is good for certain
conditions (Aetius).

Boating and Sailing.—To go out in a small boat, or in a
larger sailing vessel is beneficial for lepra, dropsy, apoplexy,
dilatation of the stomach and coldness of the stomach. For if the
person is near the shore he is incited to vomit, and then when that
subsides, the stomach is benefited. But to go on the high seas is
more efficient for clearing up such disorders as we have named,
because the mind is diverted by successive gladness and misery,
and the organs of nutrition receive benefit in proportion to the
exercise of the body itself.

742, Each member should be exercised in a manner
appropriate for itself. (1) The hands and feet. ‘The proper way to
exercise these is obvious. (ii) The organs of respiration, and the
muscles of the chest. ‘These may be exercised in various ways.
(2) By singing and “ vociferation.” ‘The voice is sometimes deep,
sometimes loud, sometimes abrupt, sometimes used in all modes
in one exercise. By this means the condition of the mouth,
uvula, lips, tongue is improved. The muscles of the neck are
improved in appearance. ‘The colour of the skin is improved.
The chest is expanded. (4) Exercises in which the expiration is
forced and the breath is held. [i.e., the so-called Yogi exercises. |
These benefit the whole body, because they open up and purify
the channels, including those of the breath.

As shown in § 123, 144, the channels here referred to are not necessarily the


anatomical and histological ones,
Aetius adds that such exercises attenuate the blood.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 387


However, to use a loud voice for a long time is injurious
because by continuing it vigorously too much air is taken in,
which is itself harmful, and by continuing it too long, air must
be expelled unduly, and this alsois harmful. Therefore the rule is
to begin gently, by reading aloud, speaking more and more loudly
up toa certain point and then allowing the voice to sink by degrees.
If the time occupied in this exercise is moderate, it is very help-
ful, but if the time is too long, there is risk of injury to health.


[Reading aloud in a high tone helps to remove redundant humours through
the skin. Reading in a moderate tone helps the insensible perspiration throughout
the body, attenuates effete matters, and gets rid of saliva, mucus and phlegm by
coughing. Frigid people should read aloud frequently because of its warming
effect. This method of exercise requires control and judicious management if the
system is full of depraved humours, or if the stomach is loaded with crudities, because
otherwise noxious gaseous substances are distributed all over the body.

Ritual: First empty the bowels ; then anoint the body ; then sponge the face
and lower parts with water. The tone of the voice should be moderate at first, and
the person should walk about while speaking. Then a louder tone should be used,
and verses should be repeated several times (Aeg.).]

(111) Vision is exercised by inspecting minute objects, and
sometimes by arranging that they are only poorly illuminated.

(iv) Audition is exercised by listening to faint sounds, or
sometimes to loud ones.

(v) Exercises appropriate to each individual member will be
referred to when we speak of the maintenance of the health of
each organ in the special volume.


Among the modern books which describe suitable exercises of the above
kinds, that by Eustace Miles may be here noted (see Bibliography).'%5


743. Whatever the exercise, one must ensure that its
vigour or heating effect is not likely to affect some weak member
directly. Such a member should only bear the brunt of the
exercise secondarily. For instance, a person with varicose veins
should not use an exercise in which the feet are much used. He
should substitute an exercise which employs the upper parts of the
body—the neck, the head, and the hands. In this way the brunt
of the effect of the exercise is borne first by the upper parts, and
by the feet last.

The exercise must be modified if the person is debilitated.
If he is robust it should be made vigorous.

You realize now that every member has its own peculiar
form of exercise. That the exercise for the eye is to gaze upon
something delicate ; that the exercise to strengthen and expand
the chest is vocal, and consists of graduated singing exercises.
Similarly with the teeth and the ear. Every member is con-
sidered in this way in the chapter specially devoted to it.*


* This and other references in the original text are retained, though actually
the subsequent volumes of the Canon are not dealt with in the present treatise.


388 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


3. Tue Best Time ror Commencine Exercises. TH: PROPER
DuraTION, AND OTHER RULES.


744, The time to choose for beginning exercise is when
the body is free from impurities in the internal organs and blood-
vessels, so that there is no risk of unhealthy chyme being dis-
persed through the body by the exercise. Yesterday’s food
should have passed both gastric and hepatic digestion, and also
intravascular digestion,—the time for the next meal now ap-
proaching, as can be ascertained by examining the urine as to its
substance and colour.

§ 243. The urinary signs of the proper time for undertaking exercise
are specified in Aegineta.—The urine should be deep yellow, because this shows that
the digestion has long-since been completed. If the urine is moderately pale, it
shows that the digestion has only just been completed. An evacuation of the


bowels is here indicated. If the urine be watery, it shows that there is still some
undigested chyme in the stomach.


If it is some time before the next meal is due, and there is a
need for more nutriment, and the urine shows “‘ igneity ”’ (i.e., 1s
high-coloured), the natural yellowness having now passed off, it
indicates that exercise at this time would be detrimental, namely
by exhausting the strength.

For this reason, some people say that when vigorous exercise
has to be undertaken, it is best that the stomach should not be
quite empty : that there should still be a little food, and that this
should be substantial in winter, and light in summer.

Moreover, it is better to choose a time for exercise when one
is not hungry, and when one is hot and moist rather than cold and
dry. But the best time is when the state is between the two.
Exercise in a man of hot and dry temperament may lead to illness,
and he will benefit by avoiding it at such a time.

745. Itis necessary, then, for a person who is about to take
exercise that he should first get rid of the effete matters of the
body by way of the intestines and bladder. Should friction be
used in preparation for exercise, with the object of helping the
bowels and opening the pores of the skin, it should be carried
out with a rough towel, and be followed by inunction with sweet
(perfumed) oil made warm by being held in the hollow of the
palm. ‘This inunction is done according to rule until the limbs
show a florid blush ; the massaging should not be too forcible,
nor the penetration too great. It is done with the hands, which
pass over many various positions in order to ensure that every


part of the muscular system has been dealt with. When com-.


pleted, the massage is stopped and exercise may begin.


ae == =


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 389


746. Relation to seasons. In spring, the best time for
exercise is round midday, and it should be done in a moderately
warm room. In summer, the exercise should be done earlier.
In winter, it should be delayed till vespers, but there are other
objections to doing so. Consequently, in winter, the place used
should be made moderately warm, to enable the exercise to be
carried out at a time when the aliment is digested and the effete
matters have been expelled.

747. = Amount of exercise. ‘Three things must be taken into
consideration. (1) The colour. As long as the skin goes on
becoming florid, the exercise may be continued. After it
ceases to do so, the exercise must be discontinued. (2) Move-
ment. [Exercise may be continued as long as the movement is
moderated. (3) The condition of the members. Exercise must
not be continued after they show any puffiness. Should the
insensible perspiration lessen and the visible sweating stop, the
exercise must stop. Should the action of the skin have ceased,
one applies a strongly-diaphoretic oil as an inunction, especially
if the exercise were one which exerted the breathing. (Restorative
friction and massage will be needed: Aeg.)

748, At the conclusion of the first day’s exercise, you will
know the degree of exercise allowable ; and when you know the
amount of nourishment the person can bear, do not make any
change in either on the second day. Arrange that the measure
of aliment, and the amount of exercise shall not exceed the limit
ascertained on the first day.


4. Friction. Massacre. SHAMPOOING


“ Abu Sir came to him and rubbed his body with the bag-gloves, peeling
from his skin dirt-rolls like lamp-wick, and showing them to the King, who rejoiced
therein . . . after which thorough washing, Abu Sir mingled rose-water with the
water of the tank, and the King went down therein, When he came forth, his
body was refreshed, and he felt a lightness and liveliness such as he had never
known in his life.’’ (Night 935). (Burton, v. 488).


749. Varieties. (a) Hard
Friction: this stretches and
contracts, and braces the
a3} body. (4) Soft Friction has
"N/a relaxing effect. (c) Re-

peated friction diminishes
thes tat.so! athe siboay.
(2) Moderately hard fric-


Friction (massage) before (left) and after (right) tion increases the bulk of
the bath. From a woodcut of date 1533 any a d
(Martin®*, p. 171). Ne bDoay.


390 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


: Combination of these will give nine varieties [“‘ much and hard, much and soft,
much and moderate ; little and hard, little and soft, little and moderate ; moderate
and hard, moderate and soft, moderate and moderately hard ”’ (Aegineta).]


(e) Rough friction. This is done with rough towels. It draws
the blood rapidly to the surface. (f) Gentle friction. This is
done with the palm or with soft towels. It draws the blood
together and retains it in one member. ;

The object of friction is to render thin persons heavier, and
heavy persons thinner ; to brace flabby persons, and to modify
those who are not pliable enough (giving tone to the body).

(g) Friction as a preparatory to athletics. The friction
begins gently, and then becomes more vigorous as the time
approaches for the exercise. ,

(h) Friction as a sequel to athletics—Restorative friction.
This produces repose. Its object is to disperse the effete matter
formed in the muscles and not expelled by the exercise. It
causes them to disperse and so removes fatigue [the feeling of
lassitude]. Such friction is soft and gentle, and is best done
with oil [or perfumed ointments : Aeg.]. It must not be hard,
or heavy, or rough, because that would roughen the members.
Young men would be hindered in growth. But for adults it is
less harmful.

750. It is less detrimental to err on the side of hardness
than on that of softness, because it is easier to correct undue
dispersal [of effete matters] than to prepare the tissues (by soft
friction) for the reception of effete substances. On the other
hand, hard and rough friction to an excess in youths is a hindrance
to their growth.

You will learn about this under the heading of ‘the proper
time for friction.” For the present it will suffice to say that
restorative friction should be begun vigorously at first, and with
oil ; that then it should be moderated, but not stopped, until
all roughness has gone. It is best that many persons should do
it together. The person, having been rubbed, now stretches
out his massaged limbs to help to expel the effete matters from
them, and a broad bandage or binder is applied over the regions
to which the muscles concerned belong. He should hold his
breath as long as he can, while relaxing his abdominal muscles ;
he should at the same time make his thoracic muscles tense, if
he can. Finally, he makes his abdominal muscles tense again.
In this way the intestines are given a certain amount of restorative
friction. One may pause to take breath between the exercises ;
or sometimes restorative massage may be given in the middle
of the exercise. Thus, it may be omitted or resorted to, according


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 391


to whether the exercise is to be prolonged or not. A person who
desires restorative friction does not need much preliminary
friction, unless there is something about his condition with which
he is not satisfied. If he does not desire restorative friction he
will undergo more thorough preliminary friction. If fatigue
should be experienced, inunction with oil will be employed, as
we have stated. If he should experience a sense of dryness, the
friction will be increased until the natural mean condition is
attained.

Friction without massage (compression) is beneficial if
sleep is due, because it cheers the body and prevents humid
matters from flowing into the joints.


5. Own Various Uses or THe Hor Batu


751. For the type of person whose
regimen we are discussing, a bath which
induces resolution is not required, be-
cause his body is inwardly pure. A person
does not need the bath except in order to
derive a gentle warmth from it, and a
moderate amount of moisture. That is
why such persons should not stay long
in it.

If such persons employ a full-
length (copper) bath, they should stay
in it only until the colour of the skin be-
comes red, and the skin becomes puffy ; they should leave it
as soon as dispersal (of humours) begins. The surrounding
air should be moistened by a sweet-water spray. The actual
washing should now be quick and the bath left quickly.

A person should not go into the bath immediately after
exercise. He should rest properly first.

752. The forms of bath have already been referred to,
and are dealt with again in another place. At this point we
should state that all who propose to bathe should pass through
the successive rooms of the bath-house according to rule, and
not linger in the hot room long enough to cause harm; they
should stay long enough in the rest-room* to give time for the
dispersal of the effete substances, otherwise there is a risk of
weakness which will interfere with alimentation and leave a
susceptibility to the causes of septic fevers.


* The inset depicts the interior of the rest-room of the Sultan’s private baths
at the Alhambra Palace.


202 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


753. A person who wishes to become stout should take
his bath after a meal, if he is not likely to develop obstructions
in consequence. If he is of hot temperament, he may guard
against the formation of obstructions by drinking oxymel. If
he is of cold temperament, he should take pennyroyal and
capsicum.

If it is desired to reduce fat, and to procure the resolution
of the humours, the person should bathe while fasting, and stay
a long time in the bath.

154. Precautions regarding food and drink. ‘To ensure
against impairment of health the bather should wait till after
the gastric and hepatic digestions are both completed.

Where there is any risk of the bilious humour undergoing
fermentative decomposition, and one wishes to bathe fasting,
the aliment should be attenuant. But a person of hot tempera-
ment, in whom the bilious humour is plentiful, should not enter
the hot chamber at all. The best things for such persons to
take are : bread soaked with the juice of fruits or rose-water.
Cold drinks should not be taken either while in the bath or
when leaving it, for the pores are now open, and coldness would
speedily enter and pass towards the principal organs and damage
their functional capacity. Articles which are very heating
(“hot”) should also be avoided, especially water—because
thereby there is a risk of the warmth penetrating rapidly to the
principal organs and this predisposes to wasting and hectic.
Further, such persons should take care not to leave the bath-
suddenly, or to uncover the head, thus exposing the body to
cold. Ifitis winter, the body should be well covered with towels.

755. A person suffering from fever should avoid the bath
at the febrile period. ‘The same applies to a person suffering
from any form of loss of continuity, or from inflammation.

756. From the above, therefore, it will be clear to you that
baths have the following effects : warming, cooling, humectant,
desiccant, beneficial, harmful.

Beneficial effects : the induction of sleep ; aperient action ;
abstergent action ; resolvent action ; digestive ; drawing nutri-
ment to the surface of the skin. But the resolvent effect only
occurs if that is desired ; the excretory effect occurs only through
the natural channels. Baths are beneficial for constipation and
for removing lassitude.

Injurious effects. ‘The heart is weakened if the person stay
too long in the bath. The bath produces syncope and nausea,
and sets stagnant humours in circulation, and disposes them to


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 393


undergo putrescence, and to pass down into the weaker members,
with consequent inflammatory deposits in both internal and
external members.


6. On ABLUTION wITH CoLD WaTER


§ 244. It may be noted that ablution with cold water constitutes part of the
ritual of Mohammedan prayer, and imparts a sense of cleanliness besides helping
to preserve the physical health.

The medicinal use of affusion, cold sponging, and cold packs will be thought
of under the present heading.

Whereas hot water is debilitating, cold water is strengthening. The addiction
to the hot baths of the Hammans in Turkey has been held by some Mussulman
writers to have been detrimental to the virility of the race.


757, This form of ablution is only beneficial if all the proper
rules are observed, and if the age of the person, his physique
and build, are suitable, and the season* is appropriate (i.e. the
summer). ‘The contra-indications are: nausea, or a feeling
of satiety associated with indigestion ; vomiting ; or diarrhoea ;
or want of sleep ; or nasal catarrh. The person must not be
at the age of boyhood, nor at old age. [Therefore he must be
in the prime of life.] The moment chosen for the ablution
should be one at which the body is light and the movements
appropriate.

Ablution with cold water following upon one with hot water.
—The object of this is to make the external parts stronger, and
to retain the natural heat. For this purpose the water used
should not be very cold, but of a medium temperature.

758. Ablution with cold water after exercise.—Here the
preparatory friction should be more vigorous than usual. ‘The
customary inunction with oil is employed as well before the
exercise, which must be less vigorous than usual. The exercise
completed, the person plunges into the cold water tank, so as
to harden all the members at once. He stays in the cold water
in proportion to his lightness, and as long as he can without
shivering ensuing. Then, having come out of the water, let
him be rubbed as we have described (i.e. till the skin is red),
and let him take more food than drink. ‘The time which elapses
before the natural colour returns to the skin must be noted,
because if the colour returns rapidly, the duration of the cold
bath was reasonable, whereas if there is delay, it shows that the
stay in the water was too prolonged. In this way the person
will know the proper duration of the bath for the future.


* It has been a widespread belief that the atmosphere in springtime affects
open waters, so that it was healing and strengthening to bathe out of doors at this
time. (Martin,**, p. 11).


394 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Should the person wish to re-enter the water after the
friction, and after regaining his colour and normal heat, he must
on this occasion enter the water gradually, and on a hot summer’s
day before the hottest part of the day, and when no wind is
blowing. He must not do so when in a state of lassitude after
coitus, or after a meal which has not had time to digest, or after
emesis, or after evacuation of the bowels, or after gastro-enteritis,
or insomnia, or if the body or stomach be enfeebled.

Cold bathing should not be done after exercise except in
the case of the very robust. Even then the rules which we have
given should be followed. To use cold baths in the ways we
have named drives the natural heat suddenly into the interior
parts, and then invigorates the strength, so that the person
should leave the bath twice as strong as when he entered.


§ 245.—Sea-bathing.—Modern advice follows the same rules
as above. Namely, do not enter the sea too soon after a meal, or
if not feeling quite fit. There is otherwise a risk of cramp. The
sea should not be entered in the early morning unless one is very
healthy.—To enter the sea too often in the day (more than twice)
has a decidedly weakening effect. The best time to bathe in the
sea is the warm afternoon, two hours after a meal. The proper
thing to do after the bathing is to rest—not to run about on the sands.
(Remember sharks.)


7. ‘THE REGIMEN IN REGARD TO Foop anp DRINK


(Comestibles and Potables.)


“The stomach is the house of disease and diet is the head of healing; for the
origin of all sickness is indigestion, that is to say, corruption of the meat in the
stomach” (Night 452).


§ 246-—Meal-times.—Burton (vi. 111) mentions “ breakfast ”’
(Arab. futtir) which is ¢aten immediately after the dawn-prayer, except
in Ramazan. This is a substantial meal of bread and boiled beans,
eggs, cheese, curded milk and the pastry called fatirah, followed by
coffee and a pipe.—Lane1®® (i. 169) mentions “‘ dinner” as being
taken after the noon-prayer, and states that a single meal may be
taken before noon instead of these two meals. The principal meal is
supper, which is taken after the sunset prayers.


759. In seeking to maintain health care must be taken
that the essential basis of the meal is not in medicinal nutrients
like potherbs, fruits, and such-like. For things which are
tenuous in character over-oxidize the blood, and those which
are dense render the blood phlegmatic, and the body heavy.

The meal should include : (1) flesh, especially kid of goats,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 395


veal, and year-old lamb ; (2) wheat, which is cleaned of extra-
neous matter, and gathered during a healthy harvest without
ever having been exposed to injurious influences ; (3) sweets
of appropriate temperament ; (4) fragrant wine of good quality.
Any other kinds of food can only be regarded as a sort of medica-
ment or preservative.


(Cf. the modern (i) animal protein food; (2) vegetable proteins; (3) carbo-
hydrate. Fats and salts complete the list, in place of wine as given above.)


The more nutritious fruits are : figs, grapes (ripe and sweet),
dates from countries and regions in which they are indigenous.
But if superfluity arises after partaking of these fruits, speedy
evacuation should be procured.

760. In winter the food should be hot ; in summer cold
or only slightly warm. A food should not be served either hot
or cold if it is likely to be spoiled thereby.

761. A person should not eat unless hungry. Nor should
he delay his meal until the appetite has passed off. This rule
does not apply in the case of the fictitious appetite met with in
drunkards, or the subjects of nausea. If fasting be continued,
the stomach will fill up with putrescent humours.

Nothing is worse than to eat to repletion during a time of
plenty after having been in a state of starvation during a time
of famine, and vice versa. But the transition period is the worse.
For we often see many people who lack food at a time of famine,
and eat to repletion when a fertile year comes, with fatal result.
Great repletion is very dangerous in any case, whether in regard
to food or to drink. For how often do not people over-eat,
and perish from the consequent choking of the channels of
the body?

762. An error in eating or drinking any of the medicinal
nutrients is to be corrected according to the digestion and
maturation thereof, and the person must be protected from the
intemperament which is likely to arise. ‘To effect this, one takes
the contrary substance until the digestion is completed. ‘Thus,
if the aliment was cold (e.g. cucumber, gourd), temper it with
its opposite (e.g. onions, leek). If the aliment was hot, temper it
with the opposite (e.g. cucumber, purslane). If the aliment
is binding, take some food which will open and evacuate,
and then fast for a suitable period. A person in this state—
and this is true for all who wish to maintain their health—should
not partake of food until there is a definite appetite, and unless
the stomach and upper small intestine have emptied themselves
of the previous meal. For there is nothing more harmful to


396 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the body than to superpose aliment upon incompletely digested
food. ‘There is also nothing worse than nauseative indigestion,
especially when this is the result of bad foods. For if these
are gross, the following symptoms and illnesses arise : pains in
the joints, in the kidneys ; dyspnoea, podagra, indurative en-
largement of the spleen and liver, illnesses in which the serous
or atrabilious humours are concerned. If the foods were
attenuated, then acute fevers, malignant fevers, and grave acute
inflammatory disturbances would develop. .

However, it is sometimes really necessary to give a food
or a substance like food, on the top of another food, by way of
medicine. For example, if one has taken sharp and salty nutri-
ents, one may further take humectant aliments which have no
flavour, before the former have digested completely. The
chyme by which the body is nourished is then rectified. This
is a suitable measure for cases of this kind, and the use of exercise
is not indicated.

The contrary holds good in the case of those who partake
of gross foodstuffs and afterwards admix with them something
which is speedily digested and acrid in taste.

763. A small amount of movement or activity after a meal
allows the food to descend to the fundus of the stomach, especially
if after this there is a desire to sleep. Mental excitement or
emotion ; vigorous exercise ; these hinder digestion.

764. In winter, feebly nutrient foods, like pot-herbs, are
not to be partaken of. The aliments should be stronger and more
solid in texture—such as cereals, legumes, and the like. In
summer, the contrary is true.

765. The quantity of food taken at a meal.—No meal
should be bulky enough to completely satisfy the appetite. One
should rise from the table while some appetite or desire for food
is still present. For such remnants of hunger will disappear
in the course of an hour. Custom is to be regarded in this
regard, for a meal is injurious when it brings heaviness to the
stomach, and wine is injurious when it exceeds moderation,
and swims in the stomach.

If one ate to excess one day, one should fast the next, and a
longer sleep should be taken in some place which is neither hot
nor cold. If sleep refuse to come, one should take gentle walking
exercise and allow neither rest nor recumbent position. A
little pure wine should be taken. Rufus says, “‘ Walking after
a meal is grateful to me, for it gives a good preparation for the
evening meal.”’


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 397


A short sleep after a meal is useful ; one should lie first
on the right side, then on the left, and finally turn back again to
the right side. If the body be covered with a number of wraps
and the neck be raised, this will aid digestion. The limbs should
slope downwards and not upwards.

The standard size of the meal depends on usage and vigour.
A normally robust person should take as much as will not produce
a sense of heaviness, or a sense of tightness of the hypochondria.
There should be no subsequent rumbling in the stomach, or
splashing of the food on bodily movement. Nausea should not
be experienced, nor a canine appetite, nor loss of appetite, nor
great disinclination for exertion, nor sleeplessness. The taste
of the food should not repeat in the eructations. If the taste
of food lingers in the mouth a very long time after the meal,
it shows that the latter was too heavy.

766. Indications that the meal was moderate : the pulse
does not become full ; the breathing does not become shallow.
The latter only occurs if the stomach is compressing the dia-
phragm, thus making the inspirations shallow and short. The
pressure to be met by the heart increases after a large meal, and
as the force of the heart does not diminish, the pulse becomes
large and full.

A person who experiences a sense of heat and flushing
after a meal should not take a whole meal at one sitting, but
partake of the food in small portions at short intervals to avoid
the effects of repletion—such as shivering followed by a sense
of heat like that in a sthenic fever. ‘This is due to the heating
effect of the food. .

A person who cannot digest the amount of food appro-
priate for him should increase the number of articles of diet,
but diminish the quantity.

A person of atrabilious constitution needs a diet which is
very humectant but not very heating.

A person of choleric constitution needs a diet which is
humectant and infrigidant.

A person who generates hot inflammable blood needs
feebly nutritious articles of food, which are cold. One who
generates phlegmatic blood needs feebly nutritious articles of
diet which are hot and attenuant.

767. ‘The order in which the components of a meal are to
be taken.—A person who is desirous of maintaining his health
needs to be watchful of this matter. ‘Thus, one should not take
a tenuous food, which is rapidly digested, after taking a very


398 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


nutritious dish which is slowly digested. An exception to this
rule has been named above. The reason is that the first article
of food will be digested first and therefore float over the other,
unable to enter the blood. Consequently it ferments and decom-
poses, and in addition sets up decomposition of the food next
taken. ‘The reverse order, therefore, is the one to adopt, so
that the labile food will pass on with the other into the intestine,
and then undergo complete digestion.

Fish and similar articles of food should not be taken after
laborious work (or exercise), because they undergo decom-
position and then decompose the humours.

Some persons may be allowed to eat an article of food in
which there is a styptic property as a preparatory to the actual
meal.

768. JIdiosyncrasies. Some persons have an idiosyncrasy
of the stomach in which the foods leave it very rapidly, and do
not stay in it long enough to undergo gastric digestion. This
explains the necessity for taking the idiosyncrasy of the stomach
and its temperament, into consideration [along with other factors
when drawing up a dietary].

There are some persons in whom tenuous food, instead of
being digested quickly as it should, undergoes decomposition
in the stomach, whereas less rapidly digestible foods are digested
more readily. ‘The stomach of such a person is designated
igneous. But other persons are exactly the opposite. ‘Therefore
the rules to be given must be adapted to the peculiarity of each
(patient).

769, ‘Thecountries in which people live have also their own
natural properties, which are distinct from the ordinary rule.
‘This must also be borne in mind, and a test must be made to ascer-
tain what the rule should be. Thus, a food which is often used,
though injurious to a certain degree, may be more appropriate
for a given individual than a food which he does not often take,
though its character is good.

““The best food of every people is that which grows where they live: oats—
that is, porridge—for Highlanders; wheat for the centre of Europe; rice for the
swamps of the Far East; etc. But in these days of easy and quick transport,


any foods can be obtained in any part of the world, and peoples are enabled to
partake of foods unnatural for them.’’!2* (p. 1077),


770, Then again, there is a food which is to be regarded
as appropriate to everyone’s physique and temperament. To
change from such a diet would prove injurious and detrimental
to him. ;

Good and laudable foods may be injurious to some. They


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 399


should therefore avoid them. But persons who are able to digest
“ bad” foods should not be deceived, because (for all they know)
they will some day give rise to bad humours and the consequent
obstinate ailments.

Good food may often be allowed liberally in the case of
persons in whom the humours are unhealthy, so long as diarrhcea
from intestinal weakness does not supervene in consequence.
But if the person be of spare habit, and liable to have the motions
loose, the diet should consist of moist aliments, because they
are digested quickly, even though it is a fact that such persons
can tolerate various heavy foods, and are less liable to be affected
adversely by intrinsic noxae, and are more susceptible to the
antagonistic influence of extraneous noxae.

771. An active person accustomed to take much flesh-
meat needs frequent bleeding. A person inclined to be frigid in
temperament should drink substances which cleanse the stomach,
intestines and the (mesenteric) veins—including confections of
spices and myrobalan electuary.

772, It is a bad practice to combine nutrients of diverse
character in one meal and so prolong it. For by the time the
last portion has entered the stomach, the first portion is already
digested, and therefore the various contents of the stomach are
not all at the same stage of digestion.

773.  Palatability. One should remember too that aliment
is best which has the most agreeable flavour, for the walls of the
stomach and the retentive faculty jointly apply themselves better
to a food of good substance, and the efficiency of the retentive
power is assisted when the principal members all mutually
concur—the temperament of one being not more divergent from
that of another than natural. ‘That is the requisite condition.
The conditions are not fulfilled, for instance, if the temperaments
are not normal, or alike in the respective members. ‘Thus, the
temperament of the liver may differ to an unnatural extent from
that of the stomach.

Among noxious influences arising from the taste of aliments
is that if very gross aliments are tasty, a person may be tempted
to eat too freely of them.

774, In taking successive satiating meals, it is best for a
person to take only one on one day and two on the next (morning
and evening). But one must not be too strict in this rule, for if
a person is accustomed to have two meals a day, and then takes
only one, he will be weakened and his (digestive) faculty will
suffer. A person of weak digestion should take two meals a day,


400 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


lessening the amount partaken. On occasion he may eat once
a day. A person who is accustomed to take one good meal a day
will, on resuming the habit of two meals a day, suffer from weak-
ness, lack of energy, slackness. If he should take no food at
bedtime, he will feel weak ; and if he should take a late meal
he will not be able to digest it, and will have acid eructations,
nausea, bitter taste in the mouth, loose bowels and become moody,
or irritable. ‘This is because he has.put into the stomach some-
thing to which it is not accustomed, and so he is liable to show
some of the symptoms which befall a person whose aliment is not
fully digested.—And these you are now acquainted with.

775. Among the symptoms arising when a person does not
take a late meal are : subjective sensations at the cardiac orifice
of the stomach, gnawing pains, a sensation of a void in the
stomach so that all the interior organs and intestines feel as if
they were suspended, and therefore all clumped together. He
passes scalding urine, and the faeces produce a burning sensation
as they are passed. There may be a feeling of cold in the ex-
tremities owing to the bilious humour being poured out into the
stomach and irritating it and making it congested. ‘This is more
likely in persons of bilious temperament, and in those who have
bilious humour in the stomach but not to an undue extent in the
rest of the body ; these suffer from loss of sleep, and keep turning
over from one side to the other [in bed].

776. Persons then in whom the bilious humour is apt to
accumulate in the stomach should take their meals divided,
thereby taking the food quickly ; the meal is taken before
bathing. In other persons exercise should be taken first, then
the bath, and then the meal. ‘The meal should not precede the
bath in these cases. If circumstances demand that the meal be
taken before the exercise, the food should consist of bread only,
and to an amount no greater than can be easily digested. As it
is necessary that the exercise should not be gentle if taken defore
food, so it is necessary that the exercise should be mild and gentle
if it is taken after the meal.

When the appetite is depraved so that it prefers sharp-
tasting things to sweet or unctuous things, nothing is better than
to procure emesis with such as oxymel with radish after fish.

777. A person who is stout should not eat at once after a
bath, but should wait and take a little nap. He is best advised
to take only one meal in the day.

778. One should not go to sleep immediately after a meal,
with the food still swimming in the stomach, and one should, as


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 401


much as possible, abstain from much exercise after a meal, lest
the food pass into the blood before it is sufficiently digested, or
glide out of the stomach without being digested at all, or under-
goes decomposition, since the exercise disturbs the gastric
temperament.

779. Nor should much water be drunk after a meal, for it
causes the food to leave the coats of the stomach and float about.
One should wait,-and not drink fluids until the food has left the
stomach—which is evidenced by the sensation of lightness in
the upper part of the abdomen. However, if:there were urgent
thirst one may take a modicum of cold water through a straw,
and the colder it is the less one will require. Such an amount
would soothe the stomach and keep the food together.

“Neither drink (water) immediately after leaving the Hammam nor after
eating (except it be after the lapse of fifteen minutes for a young man and forty
for an old man), nor after waking from sleep ”’ (Night 452).

“Tf a man wait awhile after eating, and then drink, the drink is sweeter and
lighter and more digestible to him than at another time, and there ascends to him
a pleasant fragrance and a penetrating,” as quoth the poet: “‘ Drink not upon thy


food in haste, but wait awhile, else thou with halter shalt thy frame to sickness
lead : And patient bear a little thirst from food, then drink.”” (Night 451; Burton.)


780. Tosum up—if a person must drink, it is better only
to take so small an amount, at the end of the meal (not during
the meal), as will spread over and moisten the food, and therefore
not be injurious.

To go to sleep while thirsty, is beneficial to cold and moist
temperaments, but is injurious to those in whom the temperament
is too warm, because of the bilious humour (being too plentiful).
The same is true as regards going to sleep while fasting.

Bilious humour comes to predominate in persons who fast,
and therefore flows into the stomach. ‘Therefore when they eat
any food it decomposes, and the same symptoms occur in them,
whether asleep or awake, as when food corrupts. And, further-
more, there is loss of desire for food.

781. When there is /oss of appetite for food something needs
to be given to counteract this and relax the bowels. For this
purpose something mild, like prune, should be given, or some-
thing which does not suggest nausea, like a laxative fruit-juice
(manna). Meals may be resumed after the appetite has returned.
Those whose tissues are moist in virtue of natural humidity are
liable to speedy aperient action, and are in consequence not able
to fast as long as those whose tissues are dry in virtue of only
a small (degree of natural) humidity :—aunless the latter should
bz rich in humidities other than those inherent to the substance


of the tissues, for these are proper, good and receptive, and in
2D


402 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


consequence the natural faculty is able to change them com-
pletely into (true) nutriment.

782. ‘To take wine after a meal is very unsatisfactory, for
it is rapidly digested and enters the blood quickly and carries food
on into the blood before it is properly digested. Obstructions
and decompositions [in this imperfectly digested aliment
ultimately] arise.

Sweet things readily produce obstructions [in the channels
of the body] because the attractive faculty draws them into the
blood before they have been properly digested. Obstructions
culminate in various diseases, of which dropsy is one.

Heaviness of the air or water, especially that of summer-
time, favours the decomposition of food. In this case, then, it 1s
not harmful to take a tempered wine after a meal, or hot water in
which xylaloes and mastic have been boiled.

788, If a person whose alimentary tract is “ hot” and
strong, should eat heavy food, it will give rise to flatulence in the
stomach and fermentative ailments.

When a person takes a senuous article of food upon an empty
stomach, the latter contracts on it, and if he then takes something
heavy, the stomach abandons the tenuous food and ceases
digesting it, and it undergoes putrescence in consequence. This
would be avoided by allowing an interval of time to elapse
between the two kinds of food. Under these circumstances it is
best to take the heavy food slowly, because then the hold which


the stomach has on the tenuous food is not broken.


§ 247. The principle is that the food should be eld close
to the mucous membrane all the time. This is what is done by the
“attractive faculty.” The stomach “holds” the food close to
its mucosa as a mother holds the babe to her breast; the pylorus
keeps tightly closed until it is time for the gastric contents to pass on,
on the same principle as applies in the case of the os uteri, which does
not open until it is time for the uterus to evacuate itself; or in the
case of the bile-papilla, which remains tight until the time comes for
bile to be passed into the duodenum. The gall-bladder also keeps
(tonically and) accurately applied to its contents in a similar way.
In each case the retentive faculty operates until the expulsive faculty
is called upon, and vice versa. Modern physiology regards it all as
mechanical, comparing everything to the test-tube experiments ; but
it is actually vta/—one might almost say purposive—it is as much
purposive as the grasp with which the coelenterate holds its prey.

Once a gap is allowed to intervene between the food “ attracted ”
or grasped by the mucosa, then digestion stops and the food particles
clump up and swim about in bits in the fluid, and then putrefy.
One might picture the normal process as one of apposition to the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 403


mucosa as the limpet shell is affixed to the rock; that fluid may be

allowed to separate off the film of food from the mucosa by mis-

management, and that when it does so at one spot, the whole film:
will peel off, and folds up or breaks up. Once this has done it is

hopeless to restore it again to its previous position, and “ indigestion ”

is definitely the fate of that meal.


784, When a state of over-repletion exists in regard to
some meal, whether as a result of exercise (which causes undue
hunger), or because a draught has been taken as well, then there
will be a need-for rapid emesis. If this should fail, or one cannot
vomit, the person should sip hot water until the repletionis
displaced and sleep supervenes. The person should therefore lie
down and (compose himself to) sleep. Let him sleep as long as
he will.—But should this not suffice, or should he be unable to
go to sleep, reflect whether the natural course of events is likely
to save you from procuring emesis. If so, good. If not, assist
the natural power by any gentle laxative, such as myrobalan
electuary, confection of roses, or origanum prepared with sugar
or honey ; or by the use of such things as cumin, spiced candies,
asphodel and cabbage ptisan.

It is not as bad to be repleted with wine as with solid food.

785. Among the (aperient) remedies which are suitable
after food are : aloes to the bulk of three chick-peas ; or half a
drachm of aloes, half a drachm of mastic, and a sixth of a dram of
nitre. Mild remedies are : turpentine resin to the amount of
two or three chick-peas ; nitre in equal quantity, or less, if
necessary. Another much praised remedy is to use an epitheme
with wine (821, 839).

If none of these remedies succeed, let the patient sleep for
a long time, and abstain from food for a whole day. ‘Then, if he
feels better, let him bathe, and place a hot blanket over the
abdomen, and see that the aliments are tenuous.

If the food is still not properly digested, in spite of all these
measures, and heaviness, distension, and lack of energy are
experienced, you may know that the veins are already over-
charged with effete matters. Bulky and unneeded nutriment,
even were it digested in the stomach, would hardly undergo the
proper changes in the veins, and so would remain “ crude i
within them, and stretch them, even to bursting point. ‘This is
the explanation of the lack of energy, the heaviness, the desire to
stretch oneself and the yawnings. ‘The treatment in such a case
consists in securing the release of the superfluities from the
blood vessels.


404 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


If these are not the symptoms, but there is only a transient
weariness, followed later by another form of weariness, this
should be treated in the manner to be described.

786. Ifa person should be very advanced in years, and his
body does not derive as much benefit from the food as it did when
he was young, and if his aliments become simply effete matters,
then he should not eat as much as he used to do.

787. Ifa person is accustomed to a heavy diet and then
lightens it by the use of attenuant foods, the new food material
is unable to keep the channels (of the body) as full as before.
So, on resuming the heavy foods, obstructions are brought about.

788. Heating foods. ‘The injurious effects of heating or
calefacient foods can be corrected by the use of syrup containing
acetic acid, especially when made with seeds, for then the syrup
is more efficient. If honey is used however, the simple syrup
will suffice. The injurious effect of “ cold’’ foods is corrected
by the use of hydromel, and its syrup, and caraway.

789. Heavy and Light Foods. ‘To correct aliments which
are heavy, a person having a hot temperament should use acetous
syrup made of strong seeds ; a person with a cold temperament
should use a little capsicum or peppermint.

Tenuous foods are better for the health, but less valuable for
the vegetative faculties and strength. Heavy foods have the
opposite value. Hence, for a person in need of a tonic, aliments
which make strong chyme are necessary, and such as antagonize
the hunger-feeling. But they should not be taken in greater
quantity than can be digested. Heavy foods are better borne
by those who take plenty of exercise or are accustomed to heavy
work. Probably the deep sleep which this favours helps the
digestion. But on the other hand they lose much by sweating.
And as their livers seize whatever of the aliment has not yet
digested fully, this paves the way for fatal illnesses towards the
end of life, or at the beginning of life, the more so because they
trust in their digestive powers too much. ‘This power is really
due to the deep sleep which is customary, and that is lost by
old age.

7190, Fruit. Fresh fruit is only good for those who carry
out hard work, or take much exercise, or for persons with plenty
of bilious humour, or during the height of summer. Fruit
should be taken before a meal,—namely, for instance, chrysomela,
mulberries, melons, peaches, and prunes. But it is better to
regulate oneself by using other articles of food than these, for.
they render the blood too watery, and so it is apt to ferment.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 405


Hence the juices of fruits, unless taken at a seasonable time, pave
the way for putrefactive processes. So, too, any food which comes
to burden the blood with ‘crude’? humour has this effect,
though it is true that sometimes such a food may be beneficial
(e.g., cucumber ; c. anguinalis). That is why people who make
use of such aliments, even though they are primarily infrigidant,
are likely to develop febrile diseases.

You will also realize that it is when watery humour is not
dispersed, but lingers in the blood-vessels, that it usually becomes
toxic. However, when exercise is taken before such aquosities
have become aggregated, and exercise is taken immediately
after eating the fruit, these aquosities will disperse and the noxious
effect of the fruits is thereby lessened.

Note too that the presence of “* crude ”’ serous humour or of
wateriness in the blood prevents the nutrient part of the food
from adhering to the tissues, some of the nutritive value of the
food being lost in consequence.

A person who partakes of fruit must (therefore) take
walking exercise afterwards, and then eat something which will
cause the (aquosities) to flow out.

791. Aliments which give rise to (1) wateriness ; (2)
“ crude,” raw, immature humour ; (3) gross humour, and bilious
humour, give rise to febrile diseases. This is because (1) the
watery parts permit putrescence to occur in the blood; (2)
viscous gross substances close the orifices (of the juice-canals) ;
and (3) the (increase of) bilious humour adds to the heat of the
body, and renders the blood sharp.

Bitter pot-herbs are sometimes very advantageous in
winter-time, just as tasteless herbs are beneficial in summer-time.

792. Correctives of unwholesome foods. If a person 1s
bound to partake of unwholesome aliments, he should do so
seldom and sparingly, and should counteract their action by
combining with them something of contrary effect. Thus, if a
certain sweet food is injurious, he may counteract it by a sour
aliment like vinegar, and pomegranate, and an acetous syrup
prepared with sour wine and quince and the like, and also by
procuring evacuation. Should it be a sour aliment that is
injurious to him, he may follow it up with honey, or old wine,
taking this before the maturation and digestion of the former are
complete. If it be an oily aliment that 1s injurious, this can be
corrected by (a) pungent articles, like chestnut, myrtle-seeds,
carob bean of Syria, the fruit of the sidr tree, medlar ; (4) bitters,
such as conserved elecampane ; (c) salt and sharp substances, like


406 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


capers, onions, garlic [that is, articles usually belonging to the
second course of a meal], and other contraries.

793. If the body is in a state of repletion by unhealthy
humours, this state may be counteracted by a liberal allowance
of commendable attenuant aliments. If the body is one which is.
easily purged, moist and easily digested food should be made
use of.

Galen says that a humid article of food is nutrient when it
is separated from all other qualities, and is as it were tasteless
—being neither sweet nor sour, bitter nor acrid, pungent
nor salt.

794, A heavy food which is divided up into small portions
will be better borne than one which is taken solid.

If dry aliments be taken plentifully, the strength will fail
and the colour will fade, and the “‘ nature’ become dry.

Fatty food produces lack of energy and vim, and creates a
false appetite. “Cold” food produces lack of vim and is
infrigidative (or, attenuant). Sour food has the same effect as old
age ; it dries the body and makes it lean. Sharp and salt food is
injurious to the stomach. Salt food is bad for the eyesight.

If an appropriate aliment is oily, and is followed by an
uncommendable aliment, the latter will decompose it.

Viscous aliment experiences delay in passing through the
intestine. Citrul [a species of cucumber] passes down the
intestine more rapidly if the rind is taken as well than if first
peeled. Bread also passes down more quickly if the crust be
taken as well than if it be deprived thereof by crumbling it
through a sieve.

If a fatigued person, who is accustomed to a mild regimen,
should take heavy foods—as for instance, a dish of rice with
soured milk—after a long fast, it will come about that his blood
becomes sharp in quality and as if ebullient: Hence reducing
regimen would be indicated (e.g., blood-letting), though only to
a moderate extent. A similar remedy is applicable when a person
is angry.*

Note too, that sweet aliment accelerates the ‘‘ nature’
before the food is matured and digested, and the blood is tainted
In consequence.

795.  Incompatibilities between foods. Certain rules must
be noted in regard to combining various articles of food. Indian
observers and others have long taught that (1) milk must not be
taken with sour foods ; (2) fish must not be taken with milk—


>


* Quick-tempered ; the bilious humour easily becomes dominant or astir,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 407


for in that case chronic ailments such as leprosy* may develop;
(3) Pulse must not be taken with cheese or radishes or with the
flesh of flying birds; (4) a polentat of barley-meal should not
follow on a dish of rice made with soured milk ; (5) eatables
should not have oil added, or oil which has stood in a brass
vessel ; (6) fleshmeat should not be taken when it has been
roasted over live coals (with certain herbs).

796. Courses of a meal. 'To have several courses to a meal
is injurious in two directions : (a) the rate of digestion is diverse,
for the part that digests more speedily is admixed with a part
which is not yet digested ; (4) a person may eat too much of one
dish. Already in ancient times, too, persons who had been ex-
ercising themselves avoided this error, being satisfied to partake
of meat alone in the morning, and bread alone at supper-time.

During the summer it is best to take the (main) meal at an
hour when the temperature is cooler.

During a period of fasting the stomach sometimes fills with
unhealthy humours.

Note further that when meat is roasted, and taken with
onions and eggs [a special recipe ‘kabab’§], it is very nutritious ;
but it is slow in passing through the intestines, and lingers in the
caecum. White soup [a Syrian dish containing rice, honey,
onions] is nourishing, and when onion is added it dispels
flatulencies ; if onions are omitted, borborygmi arise.

Some people consider that grapes are good to take after
roasted meats ; but the contrary is really the case ; they are very
bad indeed. So too, 1s a dish containing dates, figs, and the like.
But (dry) pomegranate seeds are good.

Fowl.—The flesh of partridge is dry and constipating ;
but that of chicken is moist and relaxing to the bowels. Roast
fowls are better if they have been prepared (stuffed) in the belly
of a kid or lamb (see § 251) because that preserves their moisture.
Chicken-broth tempers the humours strongly ; more so than
fowl-broth, though the latter is more nutritious.


* Two kinds of leprosy are distinguished by the Arabs :—baras and juzam.
The former is ‘‘ white,’’ and the other “ black,’’ The latter is leprosy of the joints.
Both are ascribed to dietetic errors, especially fish-eating, and milk-drinking. (Burton,
iii, 370). The term used in the present passage is juzam.

+ Polenta =sawiq =ptisane (Lane). This is native frumenty and green
grain (mostly barley), toasted,’ powdered, mixed with dates or sugar, and eaten
on journeys when cooking is impracticable. It is carried in a meal-sac (Burton,
iv. 491).

es ees milk, This is milk artificially soured. It is eaten with rice, and is
a component of salatah, cucumber salad. (Burton, iv. 132 ; who adds, “all nomads
who live on milk never take it fresh.’’)

§ Kabab. This is mutton or lamb cut into small squares and grilled on
skewers. It is the equivalent of our ‘“‘ roast meat.’’ (Burton, iv. 154).


408 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Kid of the goats is better when cold than when warm
because the steam quiesces it. The flesh of lamb is better when
hot because its unsatisfactory odour is thereby dispersed.

Meat boiled in water and vinegar [a Persian dish] should
be served hot, and then needs no saffron in it. But if served
cold saffron must be introduced.

Honey confections may be made with dates or wheat flour
(sweetmeats) ; but they are unhealthy because they cause
obstructions and evoke thirst.

Bread is an unsatisfactory food when it does not digest,
more so than (flesh-food) when it does not digest.


8, Ruies ConNcERNING THE Use oF WATER AND WINES.


797. Warer* is more suitable for attempered constitutions
when it is moderately cold, than when it has been cooled by the
addition of snow, especially if the snow were not pure. Even
with good snow, there remains the objection that that which
passes out from it is harmful to the nerves and the organs of
respiration: and all the internal organs. Moreover a person
‘cannot tolerate it unless he is very full-blooded, and it will do
harm sooner or later, even after the lapse of years.

Certain empirics assert that one must not mingle well-water
with river-water, except by taking the one after the other has
passed out of the stomach.

We have already spoken about the properties and choice of
waters and how to correct them when bad. Addition with
vinegar rectifies unhealthy waters.

798. True and False Thirst. One should remember that it
is very harmful to drink water while fasting, or after exercise, or
after the bath, especially when either of these was carried out on
an empty stomach. It is also harmful to gratify the false thirst of
the night, like that from which drunkards or topers suffer, or
when the vegetative power strives to accomplish digestion in the
face of a preceding satiety with water. If the thirst be very
urgent, the water should be such as has been exposed to cool air,
and rinse out the mouth with cold water. If this is not effective,
some water may be taken out of a vessel with a narrow mouth.
This is sometimes agreeable to a toper, who would not be hurt
by drinking while fasting. If a person cannot avoid drinking

* “ The usual beverage at meals is water, which is drunk from cooling, porous,
earthen bottles, or from cups of brass or other metal. The sherbet is composed of
water made very sweet with sugar, or with a hard conserve of violets, or roses, Or


mulberries, etc.’ (Lane), 15°
A delicious sherbet is made of a conserve of sugar and violet-flowers.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 409


while fasting, let him take water ; especially if he has been taking
exercise. In this case, let him first drink wine diluted with hot
water.

False thirst is relieved by going to sleep without quenching
it with fluid. For during sleep the natural power disperses the
matter which is the cause of the thirst, and it does this more
effectively if the thirst was not yielded to by a draught. To
attempt to allay false thirst by a draught is to interrupt the
digestive power, and the false thirst will return later because the
humour giving rise to it is still there. When there is false thirst,
water should not be taken rapidly and greedily, but through a
straw.

799. It is bad to drink much cold water. If it is very
imperative to do so, defer it till after a sufficient meal.

Tepid water evokes nausea. Water warmer than that, if
drunk frequently, weakens the [tone of the] stomach. But when
taken infrequently, it washes out the stomach and opens the
bowels.

WINE.


Lane!®® describes as the usual “wine”’ a preparation made by
using dry grapes or dry dates in water to extract their sweetness ;
this is allowed to ferment slightly until it acquires a little sharpness
or pungency. It was not kept after the third day. (i, 293).

Wine at parties was rather thick, and required straining before
use. This was because the wine was cured in vessels whose interior
had been coated with pitch (ib. p. 299.)

Virtues of Wine.—‘‘ As to the advantages that be in wine—
it strengtheneth the viscera and banisheth care, and moveth to
generosity and preserveth health and digestion; it conserveth the
body, expelleth disease from the joints, purifieth the frame of corrupt
humours, engendereth cheerfulness, gladdeneth the heart of man
and keepeth up the natural heat ; it enforceth the liver and removeth
obstructions, reddeneth the cheeks, cleareth the brain and deferreth
grey hairs.” (Night 452: Burton).

800. White light wine is best for those who are in a
heated state, for it does not cause headache. But sometimes it is
humectant. It may relieve a headache when that is due to heat
in the stomach.

Instead of a light white wine, one may use a wine which has
been clarified by infusing honey or bread in it, especially if this is
done two hours before the wine is required.

Heavy wine, if it is sweet, is best for a person who wants to
put on weight and become strong. But he must beware of
developing obstructions. Old red wine is best for a person of
cold phlegmatic constitution.


410 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


801. Itis bad to drink wine after any of the various dishes,
for the reason we have already explained. It should not be taken
till after digestion, the food having passed into the small intestine.
To drink wine upon food forming bad chyme, either during the
meal or before it has digested, is bad because it causes the bad
chyme to be absorbed and pass into the remote parts of the body.
The same is true if wine is taken after fruit, especially melons.

It is better to begin with a small amount than a large one.
To take two or even three glassfuls [ =? pint, according to Lane]
upon a meal is not hurtful to anyone accustomed thereto, or to a
healthy person who has been bled.

802. Wine is beneficial for persons with a predominance
of bilious humour, because it gets rid of the excess of this by
provoking the urine. It is good for persons of humid tempera-
ment because it brings humidities to maturity. The better its
aroma (bouquet) and taste, the more beneficial.

Wine is also very efficient in causing the products of
digestion to become disseminated through the body. It “ cuts”
phlegm and disperses it. It separates off the bilious humour and
draws it on into the urine. It renders the atrabilious humours
more mobile and able to leave the system. It counteracts the
harmful influence of this atrabilious humour by contrariety, and
it breaks up all entanglements without the necessity of extraneous
heat.

The varieties of wine have been already enumerated in the
proper place.

808. Wine does not readily inebriate a person of vigorous
brain, for the brain is then not susceptible to ascending harmful
gaseous products nor does it take up heat from the wine to any
degree beyond what is expedient. Therefore it renders his mental
power clearer than before ; other talents are not affected in such
an advantageous manner. The effect is different on persons who
are not of this calibre.

A person who is weak in the chest, to the extent that winter-
time is trying to the breathing, cannot [wisely] take much wine.

804. A person who wishes to take much wine should avoid
taking much food beforehand, and the components of the meal
should include diuretics. If he should become replete with food
or wine, he should procure emesis and take hydromel (= honey
and water); then procure emesis again ; then wash out the
mouth with vinegar and honey, and apply cold water on the face.

805. If wine has an injurious effect on the body and is heat-
ing to the liver, the diet should include some dish containing for


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 411


instance the juice of (sour) unripe grapes, and the like, and the
articles of food which are generally served with the wine after
the end of a meal (dessert) should include such as pomegranate,
and tart things like citron.

If the wine is liable to go to the head, one should take
less and take it dilute and clarified. After the meal, he should
take such as quince with his wine.

If the harmful effect of wine consists in being heating to
the stomach, the dessert should include toasted myrtle-seeds ;
and one should suck a few camphor lozenges and other astringent
and acrid things.


Harmful action of wine. Remedy.

Heats the body and the liver .. | Bitter fruit, e.g., unripe grape-juice; the
dessert should be pomegranate; citron.

Goes to the head... Ws ot Take the wine dilute and clear; as dessert,
cydonia.

Heating to stomach Ar .. | Toasted myrtle seeds; suck a few camphor
lozenges; astringents; acrid things.

Cooling to stomach oe .. | The dessert should include galangale, cloves,
orange-peel.


806. As you know, old wine is like a medicine. It 1s only
feebly nutritious. New wine clogs the liver and produces a
hepatic “ dysentery ”’ by giving rise to much gas.

The best wine to take is that which is clear, white, tending
to a red tinge, of good bouquet, and neither tart nor sweet in
taste, neither old nor new.

A good drink which is widely known is made as follows:
take three parts of marjoram, and one of water. Mix well.
Boil to a fourth.


‘‘and the host set before him, in vessels of gold and silver and crystal, raisin-wine
boiled down to one-third with fruits and spices.’”’ (Night 415, Burton).


807. If a gnawing feeling come on after taking wine,
take pomegranate, cold water and syrup of absinthe next morning.
Enter the bath after partaking of a small meal.

Wine which is thoroughly diluted softens the stomach,
makes it humid and allays thirst. Diluted wine intoxicates
quickly because the watery constituent takes it quickly into the
blood.

808. ‘The wise person will avoid drinking wine when fast-
ing or before the limbs have been refreshed in warm water, or
after vigorous exercise ; for both these entail a strain on the
brain and nerves, and render a person liable to develop cramp and


412 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


amentia ; they produce either actual illness or at least undue
heat.

809. Intoxication. Frequent intoxication breaks down the
constitution of the liver and brain, weakens the nerves, and tends
to produce diseases of the nervous system, apoplexy, and sudden
death.

When wine is taken to excess it is changed, in the case of
some persons, into a bad kind of bilious humour ; or, in the case
of others, into pure vinegar. In both cases, the changes in the
stomach are very injurious.

Some persons claim that it is an advantage to become
intoxicated once or twice a month, for, they say, it allays the
animal passions, inclines to repose, provokes the urine and sweat,
and gets rid of effete matters.

The most detrimental of the effects of wine is that upon
the brain. That is why those who are not strong in that way
should take but the very least amount of wine, and diluted.

Treatment. If called to a person who has drunk wine to
excess, emesis should be procured as speedily as possible.
Failing that he may drink a considerable quantity of water, with
or without honey. When emesis has been procured, he should
bathe in a full length bath. ‘Then he should be thoroughly
rubbed with oil, and left to go to sleep.

810. To give wine to youths is like adding fire to a fire
already prepared with matchwood. Young adults should take it
in moderation. But elderly persons may take as much as they can
tolerate.

Wine is borne better in a cold country than in a hot one.

811. Ifa person wishes deliberately to take his fill of wine,
he must take no food, or anything sweet. The [Persian] ‘‘ white
broth” [made of meat, onions, butter, cheese, etc.] may be
allowed ; also grated bread steeped in broth made with fat meat
cut into pieces. He should have an inunction. He should
avoid physical labour or exercise. Then after the meal, when
he wishes to drink, he should accompany it with almonds, salted
lentils, and a condiment prepared with salted capers.

It is an advantage to include in the menu cabbage boiled
with meat ; olives boiled in water, and the like. For this con-
duces to drinking more wine. Anything which lightens the
fumes of the wine is also helpful—for instance the seeds of
Syrian beet ; cummin, dry rue, pennyroyal, Nabathean salt,
cardamoms ; and more particularly, any aliments which are
viscous and glutinous, for they aggregate the fumes (e.g. oily,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE AT


sweet and viscous articles of food) and prevent inebriety in spite
of drinking so much wine, by restraining the rapidity with which
the wine enters the blood.

- Inebriation is rapid (1) when there is weakness of the brain,
(2) when there is an abundance of humours ; (3) when the wine
is strong ; (4) when the food is scanty ; (5) when the regimen
is itself depraved ; (6) when the wine is taken continuously (for
a long time).

When the cause of the ready inebriation is weakness of the
brain, the remedy is to use the epithemes named in the chapter
on catarrh, and give sedatives, and avoid fluids.

812. The following syrup averts inebriety : one part of
juice of white cabbage; one part of juice of unripe pomegranate, a
half-part of vinegar. Simmer. ‘Take one ounce before taking the
wine. ‘The following is another remedy : pills containing salt,
rue, black cummin. Eat pill by pill. The following is another.—
Take seeds of Syrian beet, cummin, peeled bitter almond,
pennyroyal, absinthe, Nabathean salt, cardamom, dry rue.

A person who is not afraid of a “ hot” mixture, may take
two drams by weight in a draught with cold water, fasting.

813. <dgents which restore from inebriety. Let the person
take water and vinegar several times one after the other, or whey-
water and junket. Let him sniff at camphor and sandalwood.
Put cold repercussives over his head, such as rose oil and wine-
vinegar.

_ The treatment of inebriety is discussed in the special part.


“He said: ‘arouse him, O Sahim.’ So he made him smell vinegar and
frankincense ; and he cast the Bhang from his nostrils and opened his eyes.”’ (Night
649). To this, Burton remarks : ‘‘ acids have ever been and are still administered
as counter-inebriants, while hot spices and sweets greatly increase the effect of
Bhang, opium, henbane, datura, etc.”


814. AwazstueTics. If it is desirable to get a person
unconscious quickly, without his being harmed, add sweet-
smelling moss to the wine, or lignum aloes.

If it is desirable to procure a deeply unconscious state, so
as to enable the pain to be borne which is involved in painful
applications to a member, place darnel-water into the wine ; or
administer fumitory, opium, hyoscyamus (half-dram dose of each) ;
nutmeg, crude aloes-wood (4 grains of each). Add this to the
wine, and take as much as is necessary for the purpose. —Or, boil
black hyoscyamus in water, with mandragore bark, until it
becomes red. Add this to the wine.


414 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Burton,!°4 (ii. 478), commenting on the word tabannuj (hemp),
which is an ‘“ anaesthetic’ adds, “‘ anaesthetics have been used in
surgery throughout the East for centuries before ether and chloroform
became the fashion in the civilized West.’”’ (Night 263.)


-§ 248. Strictly speaking, instructions on diet to the patient
should rest upon practical acquaintance with the culinary art, as
having a prior place over the questions of forbidding and allowing
such and such articles of food, food values, and the like. The
form in which a given article in the dietary is to be given is of real
importance, and the combinations into which the foods enter require
notice at least to the same extent as is done with the ingredients
of a medicinal prescription. Mutual decompositions occur with
foodstuffs either before or after ingestion. Interactions may render
the ‘‘ composite ”’ indigestible, or non-palatable, or actually harmful ;
the use of too little of one ingredient in a recipe or of too much should
be prevented; the temperature to which the mixture is exposed
—the rate at which that temperature is reached, whether too quickly
or too slowly—whether it is maintained steadily or whether through
some mismanagement the ‘“‘ mixture ”’ was allowed to cool noticeably
in the midst of the operations—all such details call for considera-
tion both as to a possible explanation of persistent gastro-intestinal
trouble, and as to guiding the management of any ailment in any
system or organ.

The displacement of materia medica from its ancient throne is
partly to be ascribed to a cessation of attention to detailed knowledge
about herbs* and the part which horticultural skill and care, as
well as climatic conditions and geographical factors play in the
production of efficacious remedies; it is also ascribable to entirely
insufficient attention to the preparation of the recipes—for these
originally were exacting as to manner of compounding ; and both
these types of indifference rest upon a scepticism as to the possibility
of such details being of the least importance. In the absence of
knowledge on these points, the decriers of the use of drugs, and of
complex prescriptions speak unjustifiably.

So, again, in the matter of the preparation of the invalid’s
food, or the dietary for the chronic ailment, it is reasonable to plead
for that care whose real importance is every day proved by ‘those
who, having the means, will desire their meals from some one chef
in preference to some other.

§ 249. In the whole of the preceding chapter Avicenna is
referring to a cuisine which is foreign to us. Perhaps of all European


* It has proved impracticable to include in this volume a translation of the
second Book of the Qanun, which deals with this subject, and provides a text capable
of thorough expansion and adaptation to modern requirements,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE AVG


countries, Spain offers the nearest approach to his. Those who have
been in the East, and have enquired into the practical details in
their cookery recipes—not merely such as may be available in written
form, but also such as are actually carried out in well-to-do estab-
lishments or by the humbler housewife, (for in this country also
there is much difference between ‘‘ Beeton”’ and actual practice)
are more easily able to follow Avicenna’s nomenclature.

§ 250. Very little research suffices to convince the enquirer
of the very great scope of this subject. Interesting as it is, it would
therefore lead too far to attempt proper discussion in these pages.
It must suffice to insist that the names of foods and dishes which
Avicenna gives bear a different meaning to those same names
with which we are familiar. Confusion would only be prevented
by giving the names in the original language. Many of the words
are Persian; some of the dishes are Syrian; others are Indian.

§ 251. ARABIAN DISHES.—The following notes from Lane
and Burton will serve to show the type of dishes which may be
regarded as characteristically Arabian.

‘“Among the more common dishes are the following :—Lamb
or mutton cut into small pieces, and stewed with various vegetables,
and sometimes with peaches, apricots, or jujubes, and sugar;
cucumbers or small gourds, or the fruit of the black or white egg-
plant, stuffed with rice and minced meat, etc.; vine-leaves or
pieces of lettuce-leaf or cabbage-leaf, enclosing a similar composi-
tion; small morsels of lamb or mutton roasted on skewers, called
kabab. (796). Fowls simply roasted or boiled, or boned, and
stuffed with raisins, pistachio nuts, crumbled bread, and parsley ;
and various kinds of pastry and other sweets.

“The repast is frequently commenced with soup, and is gener-
ally ended with boiled rice, mixed with a little butter, and seasoned
with salt and pepper ; or, after this, is served a water-melon or other
fruit, or a bowl of a sweet drink composed of water with raisins,
and sometimes other kinds of fruit, boiled in it, and then sugar, and
with a little rose-water added to it when cool. The meat, having
generally little fat, is cooked with clarified butter, and is so thoroughly
done that it is easily divided with the fingers. A whole lamb,
stuffed in the same manner as the fowls above mentioned, is not a
very uncommon dish. (Lane,!°® Nights, i. 171.)


“They brought him. . . dishes of poultry besides other
birds and brewises, fritters and cooling marinades.”’ (Night 415,
Burton). . . . ‘‘ a mess of cooked pomegranate seed.” (Night, 712.)


“A very common kind of pastry is a pancake, which is made
very thin (662), and folded over several times like a napkin; it is
saturated with butter, and generally sweetened with honey or sugar ;
as is also another kind’’*which somewhat resembles vermicelli.”
(Lane.)


‘Adasiyah: soup of yellow lentils, made by boiling them in water till nearly
dissolved, and then adding vinegar, coriander, and salt.

Fativat: junket: a light food for early breakfast, of which the Fatirah-cake
was a favourite item. (Burton, vi. 160.)


416 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Fruits —Almond, almond-apricot, apple, apricot, banana, bergamot pear,
bitter orange, blood-orange, cherry, citron, date, fig, grape, hazelnut, jujube, lemon,
lime, lote, mulberry, olive, peach, plum, pomegranate, quince, shaddock, sugar-cane,
sweet-orange, sycamore-fig, walnut, water-melon. (Lane, i. 301; Burton, v.
281-287.

aes broth of kid’s flesh, lamb, and fowl seasoned with hisrim, the
juice expressed from the grape while unripe.

Jamar: palm-pith eaten with sugar (Burton, v. 284). ;

Ka‘ak al-‘I’d: “Cake’”’; bun. <A special sweet cake eaten with dates and
sherbets. (Burton, iv. 394.)

Kabab (see 796).

Kundafah: vermicelli cake; a favourite dish of wheaten flour worked some-
what finer than our vermicelli, fried with samn (butter melted and clarified) and
sweetened with honey or sugar. It may be sweetened with bees’ honey (Night 989) in
preference to the frequently used various syrups. (Burton, vi. 150.)

Sawiq. See Polenta (796).

Sikbaj—Acid minced fleshmeat, dressed with vinegar and honey, or with
acid syrup. Raisins, a few figs and chiches were sometimes added. (Lane, i. 435.)

Shurayk.—A cake or bun, the size of the palm of the hand, with two long
cuts and sundry oblique crosscuts, made of leavened dough, glazed with egg and
clarified butter, and flavoured with spices (cinnamon, curcuma, artesmisia, prunus
mahalab, and sundry aromatic seeds—specified by Lane as aniseed, nigella, absin-
thium (Artemisia arborescens) and camphor, etc. (Nights, v. 509.)

Soured milk.—See 796.

Yakhmi.—Stew. A complicated broth prepared from rice and meat. (Burton,
iv. 387.)

Zardah,—A rice dish. Rice dressed with honey and saffron (ib. p. 385).

Zivbaj.—A sour meat dish similar to sikbaj (above).


§ 252. The following scheme serves to distinguish differences
often overlooked in the popular dictionary definitions :—


WorpD. DEFINITION.
1. Aliment - - - Palatable food-material. Raw foods often in their
natural state (Dict. syn: food, nourishment)


= 15 + non-nutrient, 22 6 and c.

- The ingredients of a “dish.” They are sometimes
raw, sometimes prepared or manufactured. Any
“foods ’’ obtainable at the various shops.


2. Article of food


3. Beverage - -  - Any agreeable liquor for drinking (Dict.)

4. Diet - - - - (a) 2; (6) exact order and No. of 8.

5. Diet-drink - -A medicated liquor (Dict.)

6. Dietary - - - A course of diet ; allowance of provisions. (Dict.)
A list of 2.

Ta) Dietetics - - - A science dealing with 4, 2, etc.
Rules for regulating diet (Dict.)

8. Dishes - -  . The product of a recipe as served on the table, whether


cooked or raw (e.g., salad dish, etc.), 2, 4.


90 oDinkables A j General terms for anything not immediately harmful.


Not necessarily harmless after leaving the stomach.

10. Eatables -  - Not nabeachily nutritious. r

11. Food - - - A general term for anything which “ being digested
nourishes the body’ (Dict). Syn. for literary
style ; food-material ; aliment ; nutrient ;
provisions—but only so applicable loosely.

12. Food-stuffs -  - (a) 9, 2 (b) 1

13. Food-material - - Scholast.: a special ex. of ‘“‘ materia.”

14. Meal - - - -A Die r series of dishes—‘ taken at one .time.”
Dict.

15. Nutrient - - - The actual nutritive substances of which 9, 10, 11, 21

. are made, Potential nutriment.
16. Nutriment -  -  - The nutritive subs. which enter the blood (i.e., sep. off:


by digestion in stomach),


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 417


17. Nutritive substance - The chem. subs. known to biochemistry—
Proteins, CHO, fats, salts as general groups ;
aminoacids, glucose, etc., as specific subs.


18. Potables - -  - Same as 3.

19. Ptisan - -  - A special form of beverage, medicinal.

20. Provisions - - ine ee 2,3; more exactly, 2 as found in certain
shops.

21. Victuals. - - - Same ae 17 ; 1.e., certain special forms of 2.

22. Waste matters - ~- (a) Effete matters if after metabolism; (b) Non-
nutrient substances of 1, 2, 10, &c.; (c) entirely
indigestible ; ... never absorbed.


§ 253. Some of the preceding may be grouped as follows :—
2=2 (12) + w’ (12’) or x (48).
12 chemically ‘contains aminoacids, carbohydrates, hydro-
carbons, salts, and metaphysically the four ‘‘elements.”’
2 are taken (a) raw (milk, eggs, salads, fruits) ;

(6) prepared in some way (i.) dairy products,
confectionery, bakery; (ii.) groceries,
spices, condiments; (iii.) flesh food;
fish; fowl; (iv.) vegetables ; pot-herbs ;
(v.) special dishes = 8.

8 contribute to make 14.
After the meal has been taken, the food material becomes
(2) nutriment—nutritious to a varying degree ; (4) effete substances,
or wastes.
After circulating these are classified as (a) true nutrients ;
(6) excrementitious substances (products of metabolism which are
no longer of use to any tissue).


g. ON SLEEP AND THE WAKING STATE.


815. The causes of natural sleep and of lethargy, and
their opposite states—the waking state, and insomnia;* their
effects ; the remedial measures applicable when they are baneful ;
the significance of each ; and all other points about them—all
these have been dealt with in brief in the appropriate place
(836-340). The special treatment will be discussed later.

816. Physiological effects of sleep. At the present, we may
say that sleep in moderation (1) assists the vegetative faculties
in their functions, and (2) brings the sensitive faculties into
repose and in so doing (3) renews and restores them, and thereby
(4) arrests the dissipation of the breath (the vital power). Hence
(1) the digestion of the food in the several stages we have named
is accomplished. Sleep also (3) remedies the weakness due to the
dispersal of the breath (vital power) in various ways; namely,


* Sleeplessness caused by joy.—‘‘ Nor did slumber visit him for the excess
of his joy.”—(Night 779; Burton.)
2E


418 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


by bodily fatigue, by coitus, by anger or violent emotional dis-
~ turbance, and the rest.

Furthermore, a moderated amount of sleep brings about an
equilibrium in regard to quantity and quality of the humours,
and therefore it has a humectant and warming action, which is
specially advantageous for the aged, who need their moisture
preserving and renewing. That is why Galen said “ every night
I partake of a little packet of herbs—lettuce combined. with
aromatics ; the former because they induce sleep, the latter
because they rectify the coldness of the lettuce.” And he said,
‘“‘T am now careful to obtain sleep because I am an old man, and
the humidity which sleep brings is beneficial to me.”

817. This then is the way to obtain sleep. And if a bath be
taken after the digestion of the meal has been completed, and
plenty of hot water is poured over the head, this will be an
additional help. A still more efficient method will be mentioned
under medicaments.

818. Conditions to observe regarding sleep. Wealthy per-
sons should pay attention to the subject of sleep: it must be
moderate, properly timed, and excess must be avoided. And on
the other hand they must avoid the injury resulting to mental and
all other faculties from remaining awake too long.

However a person is often driven to keep awake, and re-
frain from sleep owing to a dread of syncope and loss of strength.

The best sleep is that which is deep ; and that which
occurs after the food has passed on from the upper part of the
imtestine, and after the flatulences and eructations which may have
followed have subsided ; for to sleep on this is detrimental in
many ways, though the person himself may not know of it ; it
keeps him turning from side to side in his sleep ; it hinders
digestion ; and it does injury. For this reason, if the passage of
the food out of the stomach is delayed, he should take a walk for
a little while, and then retire to sleep.

It is also bad to go to sleep-on an empty stomach, as this is
weakening. It is bad to go to sleep after repletion, before the
food has left the stomach, because sleep cannot be deep under
such circumstances, and the sleeper will keep turning from one
side to the other all the time. For when the natural faculties are
busy with the work of digestion at a time when it is accustomed
to be asleep, the fact of being prevented from waking up is
disturbing to the natural faculties ; so they become dulled and
the process of digestion is disorganized.

It is also bad to go to sleep during the day, for in this case’


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 419


illnesses depending on humidity and catarrhal states are brought
about ; the colour of health passes off, the spleen becomes heavy,
the nerves lose their tone ; lack of vim and a poor appetite are
noticed, and inflammatory conditions and fevers often appear.

Among the reasons for the injurious effects are : liability to
sudden interruption of the sleep, whereby the natural faculties
become dulled.

Among the good qualities of sleeping by night are that it
should be continuous and deep. If a person is accustomed to
sleep during the day, he should not suddenly discard this custom,
but do so gradually.


Burton’** explains the following: Aylulah, or ‘“‘ beauty-sleep’’: slumbering
after morning prayers, causing heaviness and idleness. Ghaylulah: dozing about
9 a.m., which leads to poverty and wretchedness. Kaylulah, or ‘‘ forty-winks,”’
about noon; the mid-day siesta praised by the Prophet. Qaylulah: sleeping
before evening prayers. Faylulah: slumbering after sunset. The last two were
held to be highly detrimental (i. 461, footnote).

819. Posture in sleep. ‘The best way to sleep is to begin
on the right side, and then turn round to the left. If one begins
by lying face downwards, it greatly helps the food to digest, for
by this posture the innate heat is conserved and magnified.

It is a bad practice to sleep on the back. It courts the
development of grave maladies like apoplexy, paralysis, and
nightmare, because the effete matters then tend to accumulate
in the tissues of the back, where they are held and prevented from
entering the natural channels—which are~in front, like the
nostrils and palate. Persons who are accustomed to sleep on
their backs often become debilitated, for their muscles and
members become weakened ; also because one side cannot
alternate with the other, seeing that such persons quickly
return to the supine position, the back being more powerful than
the sides. The consequence is that such persons sleep with their
mouth open, for the muscles which keep the jaws closed are too
weak to maintain them in that position.

A special chapter is given on this subject in the Special
Part.


10. On Certain MatTrers LEFT OVER TO A Later PLAceE.


820. We leave over till later the discussion of coitus and
its constitution, and the measures to be taken to correct errors
in this function, though’ strictly they belong to this place. It
is reserved to the Special Part.

At this point also, one would discuss the agents for pro-
curing evacuation of the bowel, and how to deal with any
antagonistic influences towards them. We reserve this subject


420 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


to the section dealing with treatment and the chapter on purga-
tives. However, we may say here that a person who wishes to
maintain his health should procure evacuations by the bowel,
the urine, the sweat, and the sputum.

We shall also explain how one may assist and regulate
the menstrual flow of women, in order that you may become
familiar with this.


11. How THE MEMBERS MAY BE STRENGTHENED. How WEAK
-Prersons May BE Mave Stroncer. How To Gain FLEsuH,
AND INCREASE THE SIZE OF THE Bopy.


821. Members (limbs) which are weakly and undersized
may be strengthened and caused to grow and develop during
the period of growth, up to the final limit for growth, by the
use of a suitable degree of massage and of a suitable form of
exercise, steadily persisted in. Also by the use of pitch plaster
(see 871). An exercise consisting of holding the breath [accord-
ing to proper rules] is also effective, especially for the respiratory
organs (thorax, lungs).

For instance, let us suppose the legs to be underdeveloped ;
the person takes a short running exercise ; then a certain amount
of massage is given ; then a plaster of pitch is applied. Next day
the running exercise is prolonged a little, but the amount of
massage remains the same as on the first day. On the third day,
the massage given is to the same extent as before, but the exercise
is still further lengthened, taking care to stop short of distension
of the vessels, for this would show matters are lodging in them
which might be antecedent to some inflammatory process or
repletion specifically met with in them : varices, and elephanti-
asis being an instance of such. Therefore, should there be any
suspicion of anything of that nature, shorten the exercise to
the original degree, reduce the massage ; enjoin rest in the
recumbent position ; raise the affected member. Thus, if the
persons have a wasted (lit. dried up) leg, raise it by the foot, and
apply massage from its distal towards its proximal end.

To carry this method out for parts related to the organs of
respiration—the thorax, for example—we proceed to apply a
bandage to the lower parts, making it moderately tight, and of
uniform breadth. Then we instruct the patient to exercise his
arms, and to breathe as deeply as possible, uttering a loud sound
the while,* light massage being applied as well.


* This may be assumed to be a singing exercise, a sustained note being pro-
duced for as long as possible at each breath,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 421


This subject will be fully discussed in the Special Part
on Beauty Culture, if Allah will.


12. On THE LassITUDE FOLLOWING EXERCISE.


822. ‘There are three kinds of lassitude, and we may add
a fourth. ‘There are two modes. ‘The three varieties are :
the Ulcerose, the Tensive, and the Inflammative. The fourth
variety which we add is the Desiccative or Arefactive.

823. Udcerose lassitude. ‘This is a form in which the subject
experiences the sensation of ulcers upon the body or in the depths
of the skin. ‘The deeper the sensation the greater is the lassitude.
The sensation may be evoked by contact with the skin ; or it
may be evoked by movement. Sometimes it gives rise to the
sensation of pricking with needles, with a dread of movement,
and the subject lies extended because of the weakness of his
shoulders and arm-pits. If the degree of lassitude is still greater,
there is a goose-skin. When it is still greater, tremors and fever
appear.

The cause of this kind of lassitude consists in an abundance
of tenuous and pungent effete matters, a liquefaction of the flesh
and fat in consequence of the over-vigorous exercise, and, lastly,
the presence of depraved humours in the vessels, which results
in changes in the blood, whereby it loses its healthy character ;
these abnormal products pass into the skin and affect it. This
form of lassitude is the lesser evil which such substances produce.
If-they should become mobile, goose-skin will result. If they
move about still more actively, tremors result. Sometimes
the pungent humours detach themselves from the others, leaving
the ‘‘ crude”? humours in the vessels. Sometimes the “ crude ”’
humours are situated in the flesh.

824. Tensive lassitude. A person in a state of tensive
lassitude has the sensation of the body being broken, of heat,
of tension or being in a stretched condition, and has a dread of
moving himself or straightening his back from the bent position.
This is specially the case when the condition follows physical
labour. ([Cf. the pain of severe lumbago and myalgia.] This
condition arises from the retention of waste matters in the
muscles which are otherwise in themselves normal ; it is not
due to acridity or gaseous matters in them. ‘The fibres are
separated from one another, and there is a state of lightness or
heaviness. This is often the result of want of sleep. When not
associated with want of sleep, the case is different and more
serious. Here the muscle fibres are stretched lengthways.


422 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


825. Inflammative lassitude. Were the body is hotter
than usual. The part is as if distended, being swollen, and of
corresponding colour. Distress is felt when the part is touched,
or when he tries to move, for this brings out the tension or
stretching [which is like the sensation in an inflamed or bruised
tissue : Aeg.]. The deep-seated pain is called ostalgia. The
cause is abundance of waste matters in the muscles.

826. Desiccative lassitude. This is a state wherein one feels
a sensation of being dried up in an unusual degree. It follows
(2) undue exercise, the chyme being normal ; (4) twisting the
body back sharply ; (c) sometimes it is owing to dryness of
atmosphere ; (@) deficient nutrition ; (¢) fasting too much.
[There is great disinclination for any movement: Aeg.]

827. The two modes of lassitude. (a) That following exer-
cise. ‘This is less serious. It is rectified by suitable measures.
(2) Spontaneous. This is a forerunner of illness. Special
measures must be used for its cure.

‘These two forms or modes may be combined, the matters
which give rise to each being present together, both those which
arise spontaneously, and those which result from exercise.

828. Regimen. The regimen for the simple form is known
to you. That for the compound form entails the following rules :
In the first place pay most attention to avoid the danger of the
condition by dealing with the underlying cause. There may be
three sources of danger: severity, the nobility (of the organ), and
the substance involved. If two, or three are concurrent, the
condition is more serious unless the one of them which outstays
the other is more potent and therefore overrules them. For
instance, inflammative lassitude is more severe, and the ulcerose
form is nobler ; but if the substance underlying the ulcerose
is far from equilibrium and from the natural course, it forms a
restraining influence over the two modes of the inflammative
lassitude, in virtue of this nobility and strength, and takes
precedence over it. But if the relation be not so very remote,
the inflammative lassitude would take the precedence.


13. STRETCHING AND YAWNING


829. Stretching comes on when effete substances have
accumulated in the muscles. For this reason the desire to stretch
oneself is often experienced after sleep.

If these humours become superabundant they give rise to
goose-flesh and trembling and shivering. If they increase .
to a still greater degree, fever develops.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 423


Yawning is really a form of stretching, when this takes
place in the muscles of the jaws, lips and chest. Should it arise
without any apparent reason in a person seemingly healthy,
and not at an appropriate time, and to an unusual degree, it is
bad. In such a case, it is best when it comes on at the end of
digestion, because then it is due to the effete substances being
expelled.

Stretching and yawning may be due to external cold, to
thickening of texture of the skin (see 889, ii), whereby exit
of certain humours becomes restricted ; to being awakened
from sleep before it has finished ; to postponing the evacu-
ations.

Moderately diluted wine is good for this condition, pro-
vided there is no contra-indication.


14. On THE TREATMENT OF LassITUDE FOLLOWING EXERCISE
(The First Mode of Lassitude)


830. We may say that the chief object to be attained in
treating lassitude is to prevent it from being followed by many
diseases, including fevers.

Ulcerose lassitude is dealt with by reducing the amount of
exercise if that be the cause. If at the same time there is an
over-abundance of humours, they need to be expelled. If there
be a transient sensation of nausea and satiety, these effects are
counteracted by fasting, evacuation through the bowels, and
dispersal of the humours in the subcutaneous tissues* by the use
of plenty of light massage, carried out with oil devoid of astrin-
gency. Exercise is then resumed. On the first day the nour-
ishment should consist of the usual quality of foods, in lessened
amount. On the second day the diet should consist of humec-
tants. If the vessels be patent, and there be “ crude ”’ serous
humour in the mesentery, friction may help to “ mature ’’ it,
especially if one could bring the virtue of calefacient medicines
(digestives) to bear on it. Very good (calefacients) are : willow
oil, ol. anethi ; oil of chamomile ; and the like. A decoction
of beet-roots in oil, prepared in a double-vessel ; ointment of
mallow-roots ; oil of the roots of cucumber asininus and of
bryony ; oil of sweet-scented moss ; and any oil in which the


* Of the total humours of the body a certain proportion reaches the sub-
cutaneous tissues, and may become stagnant in that situation. They require
dispersal, and the agents used for such purpose are called “‘ discutients.’” Possibly
some of these agents were what are now called diaphoretics. But it must be re-
membered that the theory supposes the existence of matters which are discharged
either in fluid or in gaseous form, the exit being by different “ pores ” in each case.


424 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


latter (moss) has been incorporated. [Galen recommends
- discutients and restorative exercise. ]

831. Tensive lassitude. The object in view in treating this
is to relax the indurated tissues by means of a little gentle
massage with oil heated in the sun ; tepid baths in which the
patient stays a considerable time ; or, better, to take the bath
once or twice a day, followed each time by an inunction ; com-
plete rest. If it becomes necessary to procure an abstersion of
the vessels, or if the oil of the inunction has become dried up,
repeat the inunction and administer moist foods in only small
amount. It is more important that the amount should be small
in this case than in that of ulcerose lassitude. Exercise is sufh-
cient to disperse this kind of lassitude, and cleanse out [the sub-
stances which cause it].

If tensive lassitude have arisen simply by the presence of
gross superfluities, these must be evacuated. If it has arisen
from flatulencies, it is dispersed by the use of such as cummin,
caraway, anise.

832. Inflammatory lassitude. ‘There are three aims in
treatment of this condition: to relax the tense parts, to cool
the heated parts, and to remove the superfluities. These are
achieved by the use of plenty of tepid oil, by vigorous light mas-
sage, by a prolonged stay in a bath of tepid water (on the warm
side), and by sufficient repose [and by repeated inunction: Aeg.].

833. <Arefactive lassitude. First day : the normal regimen
for maintaining health is to be continued, save that the bath-
water should be hotter, because very hot water has a contracting
effect upon the skin. This action is not as detrimental as that
of cold water, for in this case there is a risk of the cold pene-
trating into the body, already dry. The cause of the wasting
(wrinkling, shrivelling of the skin) may also lie in the fact that
the skin is usually relaxed (see 818),

The second day of the restorative treatment consists in
the use of gentle restorative exercise of a light character. The
bath should be carried out in the same way as on the first day,
and the patient should then plunge into cold water, to make the
skin shrivel, and to reduce perspiration to a minimum. In this
way the skin keeps moist. For water will come in contact with
the body as soon as there is sufficient heat in it to counteract
the dryness of the skin. And these two factors mutually assist
one another in combating the injurious effect of the cold. The
injurious effect is greater if the person comes quickly out of the
water into which he has plunged.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 425


834, Those affected with lassitude need wholesome food,
which must contain little moisture, and should be taken at the
end of the first morning hour. Friction may be given on a
later occasion, towards evening. ‘The supper must then be taken
later still. :

The removal of superfluities from the body must also be
procured, using massage with sweet, or willow oil [cf. the modern
ol. betulae, or oil of wintergreen]. The abdominal muscles
are not touched unless lassitude is present in them. In that
case, give light inunction and increase the amount of such food
as is not too heating.

835. One should take care that exercise should stop short
of producing any sign of lassitude. ‘Then proceed to reversion
exercise in order to draw matters towards the skin by the
moderate amount of movement. Having reached the skin,
massage during the time of resting between the exercises will
finally disperse these substances.

836. A person’s condition is the guide, as regards bathing.
If the bath should induce tremor, the last degree of lassitude has
been reached. How much more is this true if fever comes on
after the bath !_ In such a case the bathing must be stopped,
and recourse must be had to evacuation [of various kinds] and
the rectification of the temperament.

As long as the water 1s moderately hot, and the bathing
produces none of these adverse symptoms, one knows that it is
beneficial to bathe.

837. If there were non-matured humours in the vessels,
the first measure to take would be to apply whatever was suitable
for the lassitude, and the next would be to endeavour to make the
crude humours mature and become attenuated, and then to
expel them. If they were plentiful, order rest ; forbid exercise.
For rest is the great digestive. Avoid bleeding because by this
means both pure and crude matters are expelled.

It is injurious to procure purgation before maturation.
There is no harm in inducing diuresis. But avoid drugs which
are very heating, for otherwise the crude humour would be caused
to diffuse throughout the body, and facilitate its action.

838. Diet: include pepper, capers, ginger, vinegar of
capers, vinegar of garlic, vinegar of spurge, and dried dates,
and the well-known confections (i.e. of quince, apples, prunes,
etc.), according to measure.

The appearance of a sediment in the urine informs us that
maturation has occurred. One may now order wine to complete


426 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the maturation and to procure diuresis. [he wine must be
delicate and clear, and must not excite vomiting.


15; On OTHER STATES WHICH MAY FoLLow uPoN EXERCISE


839. We may first speak about the states, and then pass
on to the subject of the regimen applicable for lassitude of
autogenous origin.

(i) Rarefaction of the skin (turgescence, tumescence, relax-
ation, flaccidity, the opposite of (ii). Very often this is the result
of insufficient massage, and of bathing. The treatment consists
in dry friction, tending slightly to rough friction, using an
astringent oil for the purpose.

(ii) Thickening of the skin (induration, constriction, tightness,
tenseness, shrivelling, sclerosis, corrugation ; see 829). This
may be the result of (a) cold, (4) an astringent bath, (c) over-
abundance of effete matters, (¢d) thickening—and aggregation—
of coarse particles of effete matters, (e) change in the effete
matters [or immatured humours] in the direction of viscidity,
in consequence of which they cannot pass through the pores of
the skin, and so block them ; (f) exercise, for this draws the
humours out from the deeper (or remote) tissues, if no other
cause for this has previously been in operation ; (g) residence
in a dusty place ; (4) the use of rough and vigorous friction.

When it is due to cold and astringency, the colour of the
skin is pale [because it is stretched hard and tight], and the
bodily warmth returns only slowly ; sweating is delayed. The
skin becomes red again on resuming exercise.—Such cases should
be treated thus : the stay in the cold room of the bath must be
very short, and the water must not be very cold ; then go into
very hot water ; turn the patient from side to side, then on to
the belly, then on to the back. The slab on which he lies the
while must be of medium heat. Do this until perspiration sets
in. ‘Then anoint with thin [sweet : Aeg.] oils of a hot and
resolvent character [oil of dill, of black poplar : Aeg.].

Cases due to exercise are distinguished by the absence of
the above-named sign. ‘The skin is discoloured by sweat and
sordities. Such cases are treated by getting rid of such super-
fluities as may be present, and then carrying out a bath and
inunction regimen of resolvent character.

Cases due to exposure to fine dust, or due to the use of too
much rough friction, are much more in need of the bath than of
inunction with oils. Soft friction is to be employed both before
and after the bath.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 427


(111) Rarefaction of the skin may be associated with weakness
(asthenia). ‘This may be the result of (a) excessive exercise,
especially if subsequent massage were insufficient ; (4) over-
indulgence in coitus ; (c) too frequently repeated baths. The
treatment of such cases therefore consists in the use of restorative
exercises, and of dry friction, for which an astringent oil is used
in order to obtain a hardening effect. The diet should include
humectants in small amount, which are moderately calefacient
or moderately infrigidant or slightly inclined to be “ hot.”

‘The same sort of treatment is used for asthenia, wakefulness,
sadness, “ dryness ” in the nerves (or the state which follows on
anger). In such cases, if the patient finds the digestive process
of the food is depraved, the reversion exercises are not good ;
indeed no exercises are to be recommended.

When the cause of the weakness is an over-indulgence in
baths, in eating and drinking, and inactivity, the patient suffers
from undue humidity in the tissues (especially the tongue),
and the activity of the limbs is impaired. Should this depend
on some antecedent cause, the special treatment for that will
become necessary.

In the case of any other causes which we have named—
wine, undue inactivity, undue moistening effect of the bath—
the best thing to do is to anoint the body, use vigorous exercise,
employ rough dry friction without oil, or a massage with the
aid of a small amount of a calefacient oil.

_. When a person experiences undue dryness of the skin
of the hands, this belongs to the category of arefactive lassitude.
The treatment is the same as for that condition.


16. THe TREATMENT oF LassITUDE OF SPONTANEOUS ORIGIN


(The Second Mode of Lassitude)


840. The ulcerose state is recognized when the humour
upon which it depends is within or without the vessels. The
humour is shown to be within the vessels by (1) the urine being
fetid, (2) the nature of the previous diet : for some articles of
diet give rise to an undue proportion of superfluous matters
in the blood ; some articles of diet give rise to too few super-
fluous matters ; or these matters are expelled too speedily ; or
medicinal treatment may become necessary for them ; (3) the
character of the fluids taken : if wine, whether clear or thick.

From all such data one comes to the conclusion that the
site is within the vessels ; if they are not found, the condition
is extravascular.


428 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


841. In cases where the lassitude from superfluities is
of extrinsic origin, and the vessels are unobstructed, it is sufficient
to carry out reversion (restorative) exercises, and follow the regi-
men, to an increased degree, which we have indicated for cases
of ulcerose lassitude due to exercise. But if the case belongs
to the other group, one should not order exercise, but inactivity,
sleep, fasting. Then, towards each evening, the abdomen
should be anointed with oil, followed by a bath in moderately
hot water, if his condition is such that he will stand the bath.

842. The diet should be of the character already stated:
one which makes good chyme, fluid or semi-fluid [lit. able to
be sucked, e.g. through a tube or spout], not viscid, and not
particularly nutritious.—Examples of such foods are: barley,
frumenty, game (provided it is delicate), syrupus acetosus with
honey, mead, light white wine. A wine which is matured and
diuretic need not be forbidden, but to begin with one would
prefer to administer a wine which is slightly sour or rather
yellow. Afterwards one changes to a white and light wine.

843. If this regimen proves ineffective it will show that
the excess of humour present needs evacuation. Should it be
the sanguineous humour, do a venesection [or scarify the ankles:
Aeg.]. Otherwise, procure purgation, making your choice
between them according to the proportion of sanguineous
humour which you judge to exist. But take care not to do either
if the vitality is low.

844. To ascertain the kind of humour concerned, one
considers the character of the urine and sweat ; and the ten-
dency towards sleep or wakefulness. It is a bad sign if sleep is
banished in spite of a good regimen.

845. If one has ascertained that there is a deficiency of
good blood in the body, and that the immature acrid humours
are in excess, one must not bleed the patient or purge [or let
him bathe (Aeg.)], but procure complete rest. Order attenuant
foods and fluids ; avoid any fluid nourishment which is cale-
facient, but choose such as has a sharp or biting or incisive
quality : e.g. syrupus acetosus, with honey [acid wines, capers
with vinegar and honey : Aeg.]. If it be necessary to increase
the power of the attenuants, put a little pepper into the food, and
into the barley-water [especially as there is generally hypogastric
flatulence : Aeg.]. Cumin and pepper may be needed to coun-
teract the immaturity of the humours (i.e. acrid matters which
have not been properly digested)—administering them either
before or after a meal, or at bedtime, according as seems best _


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 429


to you. The dose is a small tablespoonful. Pennyroyal is not
so good, for it is over-heating.

846. Now if one is absolutely certain that the immature
humours are not in the vessels but in the tissues (lit. roots of the
members) one orders massage ; laxative oils, especially in the
mornings ; heating drinks—whose heat passes to the skin ; a
long rest ; then a moderately hot bath. Prescribe pennyroyal
fearlessly, whilst being sure to give it before meals and exercise.

847. If it be necessary to aid the gastric digestion before a
meal, do not give a strongly penetrative remedy like pennyroyal,
but choose cumin and pepper in small dose. Quince may also
be used. One could administer more of the latter, if one decides
that the extraneous heat of the body would not be much greater
in degree by giving it. Beneficial remedies : inunction with oil
of chamomile, of aniseed, of sweet marjoram, etc.—whether
given alone or combined in wax. ‘Their action is increased by
resin, alone or with twice its volume of its oil.

848. When one has ascertained thatthe immature humours
are in the vessels, and at the same time outside them, one would
become more anxious. Do not lessen your efforts in conse-
quence. If there be as much within as without, first aim at
procuring the maturation of the humour ; pepper may be used
for this purpose. ‘To that, if one wishes, one may add parsley,
and an equal weight of anise. In this way a greater degree of
diuresis will be procured. Or, if one so desire, one may admix
with it a little pennyroyal, and at the same time lessen the
amount of cumin and pepper. ‘These are lessened step by step
until at last there remains simply nothing but pure pennyroyal.
As soon as the (foreign matter) in the vessels has become digested,
and has passed on out of them, one has to deal with that which
is exterior to them. Pennyroyal will be useful for this purpose,
whereas it was impeditive at first. Where the two conditions
occur concurrently one must take special care not to attract
the impure matter forcibly towards the surface of the body, or
to the interior organs either. Hence one should not risk pro-
ducing emesis too soon, or purging before the humours are
rendered tenuous, and have been ‘“‘ cut” and matured. Exercise
is also not ordered.


‘‘The old woman ceased notto . . . ply him with ptisanes and diet-drinks
and make him savoury broths till, after the twelvemonth ended, his life returned
to him.” (Night 325, Burton.)


849. When the lassitude has passed away, and the colour
of the skin is more healthy, and the urine normal (“ mature ”’),


430 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


plenty of massage is given and exercise in small amount. One
considers whether there is any chance of a relapse, for in that case
one would pause in these measures. If it appears that a relapse
will not occur, the customary life with regard to bathing, in-
unction, massage, exercise, is gradually resumed. Finally the
strength of the ointments used is brought back to the customary.

If a relapse is threatening, with a sensation like that of
ulcerose lassitude, the regimen must be taken up again. If the
relapse threatens without that sensation of ulcerose lassitude,
the treatment is by reversion-exercise.

If the signs are ambiguous, and the sensation of lassitude
is not marked, order rest.

850. The cause of sensive lassitude is: repletion without
depravity of the humour. If the temperament is unhealthy,
order venesection and an attenuant regimen. In the type of
person of which we speak, the treatment is by attenuants and a
certain amount of incisives ; after that one helps the cure by
using appropriate agents.

851. Lnflammative lassitude. ‘Treat by venesection. The
choice of vein depends on the part most affected with lassitude,
or the part in which the condition began; if it be the head, use
the cephalic vein ; if the chest or back, use the basilic vein; if
the other members are chiefly affected, or there is no distinction
of priority, bleed from the median vein of the arm. It may be
necessary to bleed on the second or even the third day. On the
first day, one bleeds as soon as the lassitude appears, otherwise
the condition may become established. The proper time to
bleed on the second or third day is. sunset.

852. Diet. On the first day barley water alone, or juice of
frumenty as long as there is no fever. If there is fever, give barley
water alone. On the second day give a cooling or attempered
oil like almond oil. On the third day give a “‘ salad” made with
lettuce or cucumber (or, members of the gourd family), or garden
mallow [or, ‘ beet” : Aeg.] or sorrel [in cold broth: Aeg.],
and give rock fish in white broth (i.e. a special dish or recipe)
and forbid drinking [cold : Aeg.] water as much as possible
during this day.

If by the third day, the patient feels nausea, or, if he has
an appetite but the stomach cannot digest the food, let him have
mead, or a light white wine, or an attempered white wine. After
the evacuations, take care not to give a great deal of food all at
once, for undigested food will be drawn into the blood. This
is due to three factors: (i) when there is not much food, the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 431


stomach greedily holds it, and its retentive power is antagonistic
to the attractive power of the liver. When food is plentiful,
the stomach is not greedy of it, and then its expulsive power |
helps the attractive power of the liver. The same holds good
with each receptacle in turn in regard to that which comes
next into play ; (ii) when there is much in the stomach, it does
not get digested as well ; (iii) the presence of plenty of food
means that there will be much nutriment for the blood, and the
vessels [greedily absorb the chyle before it is digested: (Aeg.)
and they] themselves are incapable of digesting it.


17. CONCERNING THE REGIMEN IN ‘THE CASES WHERE THE
‘TEMPERAMENT OF THE Bopy 1N DeFECTIVE


853. The temperament (constitution) of the body may be
defective either from some deleterious influence, or from the
natural course of events beginning from birth. In the former
case the temperament was appropriate for a certain length of time,
until persistent faulty regimen has produced a change which
itself remains persistent. In the latter case the defective con-
stitution has been present from the outset (of conception).

In the first group of cases, the error is in quantity or in
quality, and the nature of the case is revealed by a study of the
form of the body [physiognomy in the wide sense ; see also
Kihne!28}. The remedyisto have recourse to the corresponding
contrary.

The second group of cases shows a depravity of the state of
the body, in that there is a change either in the original con-
stitution, or in the course of advancing years of life.

We therefore begin the subject by going into the regimen
of old age.


PIT ESI. Plt


1. GENERAL REMARKS ON THE REGIMEN OF OLD AGE


854. In brief, the regimen appropriate for old people
consists in giving those forms of aliment, drink, and baths which
render the body warm and moist (i.e. moistening, calefacient
food ; warm or hot soft water baths). There should be plenty
of sleep, and the time spent on the couch should be liberal —
more than is legitimate for adults. The flow of urine should be
continually assisted by diluents ; the mucus should be helped out
of the stomach by way of the bowels and urine. The nature
is too soft, and this needs correcting.

Massage : massage with oil, moderated both in quantity
and quality so as to fall short of occasioning lassitude, is beneficial.

Exercise : Walking or horse-riding is taken after the mas-
sage. ‘The choice depends on which is too fatiguing. If both
forms of exercise are fatiguing, repeat the massage once or twice
(instead).

Sleep: the air of the room: some pleasantly redolent
aromatic should be used to perfume the air which is breathed,
using one which is moderately ‘‘ hot.”

After sleep, the body should be anointed with oil in order
to stimulate the sensitive faculties. After this the horse-riding
or walking exercise may be taken.


2. [HE Foop ror Otp PErsons


855. Food should be given in small amounts at a time.
There may be two, or three, meals a day, divided up according
to the digestive power, and according to the general condition—
whether robust or weakly. In the latter case, at the second or
third hour they may partake of well-baked bread, and honey.
At the seventh hour after the bath, they may partake of some one
or other of the foods we shall name later, which are laxative
inaction. At bed-time, some laudable nutriment may be allowed.

When they are robust, old persons may have a rather more
liberal supper, as long as they avoid any gross aliment which is
likely to give rise to atrabilious or serous humour, and avoid all.
hot, sharp, or desiccative foods, such as dishes made with vinegar,


432


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 433


salt or hot aromatics, seasoning, pickles, etc. ‘These may, how-
ever, be allowed as medicaments.

Should some article of food in the first group have been
taken which should have been avoided—such as salted foods,
egg-plant, dried salted animal-game-meat, fish with tough flesh,
smoked fish—then this must be counteracted with water-melon,
and cucumber.

Should one of the other group have been wrongly taken—
dishes made with vinegar, salt and strong aromatics (like “ fish-
jelly,” dishes with pickles, savouries) the remedy is to use the
contraries, and select only attenuant articles if one knows that
there are superfluities in the body.

When the bowels have been opened, give humectant foods,
followed by slightly attenuant foods, as we shall explain. [Olive
oil may be given before the meal.]

For persons who like and can digest milk, it is beneficial.
One knows that it is well-borne if it does not cause fullness over
the liver and epigastrium, or itching, or pain. Milk is good for
old persons because it is nutritious and humectant. Goats’ and
asses’ milk are best. Asses’ milk is recommended because
among its properties is this that it is not cheesy, and it passes
quickly through the intestines, especially if salt and honey have
been added to it. However, one must be sure that the pasturage
is free of pungent herbs, or sharp or bitter herbage and marsh-
mallows, or very salty herbs.

856. Potherbs and fruits specially suitable for old persons :
beets, celery [which is good for persons with a gouty tendency
or tendency to calculus : Aeg.] ; also a little leek, which may
be dished up with tasty aromatics to help digestion ; also olive
oil [and pickles, olives, damascenes seasoned with salt : Aeg.].
This is specially chosen to take before the meal, in order to
obtain a laxative effect. It is also an advantage to partake of
such at bedtime, for they dispose one to sleep.

Ginger, which is really a medicine, is a good condiment
for old persons. And there are various other medicines which
may be taken as heating confections made with liquid extracts,
taking them in sufficient amount to be warming without causing
indigestion or being desiccative. It is essential that the nutrients
should be humectant, without any likelihood of exerting a drying
effect, and that they should be calefacient and help digestion.

857. Among the foods which may be enjoyed are such as
are laxative, and congenial to the elderly body—namely, game-
birds boiled with water and salt and flavoured nicely with

2F


434 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


condiments, and served with oil ; polypody root, which has been
placed in chicken-broth or beet-broth, or in cabbage broth.

Articles of food which have a laxative action, appropriate
for elderly persons.—For summer: figs and prunes; for
winter : dried figs cooked in water and in honey. They must
be taken before food, to have the laxative effect. [Ripe figs are
preferable, unless they cause unpleasant symptoms in the right
hypochondrium: Aeg.] ;

858. If the individual has the peculiarity of being one day
loose, and the next bound, solvent food-stuffs may be omitted.
If the bowels are loose one day, and bound for two days, it will be
sufficient to take such articles of food as cabbage water, and a
(Persian) ptisan of barley containing bastard saffron, or turpentine
gum, to the amount of one, two or three hazel-nuts. All these
have the property of relaxing the bowels, and cleanse the interior
organs without harm. Another good medicine is one compounded
of the kernel of bastard saffron and twice its amount of dried
figs. The dose is the size of a nut ; take in a draught.

859. Purgation in elderly persons. Another good remedy
is an oil enema, for it empties the bowel as well as lubricates
the bowel-walls, especially if sweet oil is used for the purpose.
‘The rectum may simply be lubricated with oil. Strong clysters
must be avoided because they dry the intestine. A moist unctu-
ous clyster is very beneficial in cases where the bowels have
been constipated for several days.

There are also other remedies for procuring gentle motions,
and we shall specify these in the formulary.


[Avoid aloetic pills. Strong purges make the constipation worse. Aeg.]


The evacuations in old and decrepit persons must be
procured with as little depression as possible, for it is greatly
to their advantage to have the bowels opened gently.


If phlegm is engendered in the stomach, remove it by appropriate remedies,
and then at once resume the diluent diet. If serous and mucoid waste matters
accumulate, remove them by diuresis, and give oil before the meals, (Aeg.)


3. WINE For ELpERLy PERsons


860. The wine which is best for elderly persons is old,
red, with warming effect, and diuretic. New and white sweet
wine should be avoided, unless a bath is taken after a meal at
which such wine is taken, and unless there is thirst. In that
case it is allowable to take white wine which is light without:
much body in it, thus taking the place of plain water.


THE CANON OF. MEDICINE 435


Elderly persons must shun sweet wines which are likely to
prove oppilative [but wines prepared with honey may be allowed
even in cases where gout is threatened : Aeg.].


4. Tue Removat oF Osstructions IN OLp Persons


861. Obstructions are very liable to result from the use
of white wine. These may be cleared by the use of pennyroyal,
capsicum, and by sprinkling pepper on the wine. Onions and
garlic may be taken for the same purpose, if the person is accus-
tomed to take. them.

Theriac is also good, especially if the obstruction is recent.

These remedies are to be followed by a bath, by oil, and
such aliments as meat-broth with frumenty and barley. Mead
is beneficial both when there are actual obstructions or they are
merely threatened, and is useful for averting joint-troubles. If
there is a sensation of a block in a given member, or if there
is a premonition of such, one should combine some diuretic
remedy with it, like celery seed.

In cases where the (ureter or) urethra is blocked by a cal-
culus something stronger is advisable, like parsley.

For obstruction in the lung, use hyssop, maidenhair, cassia
wood, and the like.


5. MassacGE FoR ELper.ty Persons


862. Massage must be moderate in amount and quality ;
feeble or tender parts must not be touched. Between the times
of massage, the parts may be rubbed with rough towels (binders),
or with the bare hands [i.e. without oil], in order to ensure that
the members concerned shall not become enfeebled.


6. Exercise IN OLD AGE


863. The factors to consider in regard to exercise in old
age are: (1) the different bodily states [of different people] ;
(2) the sequelae likely to arise from their ailments ; (3) their
previous habits in regard to exercise.

For if towards the end of life the body is still equable it
will be right to allow attempered exercises. If one part of the
body should not be in a first-rate condition, then that part should
not be exercised until the others have been exercised. For
instance, if an ailment begin in the patient’s head (like vertigo,
or epilepsy), or if there is catarrh (nose, throat, etc.], or there is a
liability to suffer from the ascent of “ vapours ” to the head and


436 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


brain—then the exercise should not entail bending the head
down ; the exercise should be of walking, running, horse-riding,
and other exercises involving the lower parts of the body. On
the other hand, if the ailment were in the feet, the exercise should
employ the upper limbs: for instance, rowing, throwing
weights, lifting weights. If the ailment be in the trunk (spleen,
liver, stomach, intestines) the extremities should be exercised,
supposing there is no contra-indication. If the ailment is in the
chest, the lower limbs should be exercised. If the ailment is
in the kidneys and bladder, only the upper limbs may be exer-
cised. In these cases the exercises are not to be graduated
strictly, as if the members were to be strengthened. In this
respect the exercising differs from that for other periods of
life. In early old age the same principles apply as for ordinary
old age. In other periods of life the weaker members are pro-
gressively strengthened by the adoption of exercises for the
purpose.

The exercise of members is sometimes allowable in the
infirm, sometimes not. Thus it is not permissible if the members
are “hot” or “dry,” or if there are matters (in the body)
which might be drawn down into the limbs by the. exercises,
and fail to undergo resolution in them in consequence.


THESIS 1V


Tue RecimMen APPROPRIATE FOR CASES WHERE THE
"TEMPERAMENT 1s Not NorMaA.


I. Own THE RectTiFIcCATION oF Hot INTEMPERAMENT


864. We may say that in the case of a hot intemperament
(i.e. bilious habit or disposition), either there is an equilibrium
of the two passive qualities, or there is either dryness or moisture.
When the two passive qualities are balanced, the degree of heat
will come to a limit ; it will never be predominant, for that would
lead to dryness. If dryness is associated with the heat, the
intemperament may be maintained over a long period of time,
whereas if the heat is associated with moistness, the in-
temperament will be of short duration because the moisture
becomes predominant and obliterates the ‘‘ heat.’”’ However
the heat sometimes comes to predominate and obliterate the
moisture, producing desiccation. Consequently, the condition
of a person whose temperament shows a preponderance of
moisture will become improved towards the attainment of adult
life, and then become equable, whereas later in life the extraneous
moisture begins to increase and the bodily heat to diminish.

Therefore we may summarize the principles upon which
the management of persons with hot intemperament is to be
conducted in these two intentions : (1) to restore equilibrium;
(2) to conserve the existing state of health.

To secure the first, a patient needs training during the
early years of life, the ‘‘ passions” being subdued in a willing
obedience to orderly discipline during all that time. Unless the
discipline is orderly there will be a liability to illness. This
intention is also gained the more easily if care be taken that the
aliment is appropriate for their particular intemperament because
in this way the health recovered is also conserved.

865. Individuals with a hot intemperament who are
attempered in respect of the two passive qualities, are nearly
normal in health at the commencement of life, so that this kind
of intemperament makes the teeth erupt early and the hair grow


43/7


438 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


quickly ; such children will be ready of speech, clear in utter-
ance, and quick walkers. As they grow older, the hotness
becomes dominant, dryness increases, and the temperament
“biting” [sharp-tempered]. Bilious humour is formed to
excess in many of such individuals [as they grow older].

Accordingly, the regimen during the early years is the
same as that of attempered constitutions, and as the temperament
changes the regimen must be correspondingly changed, seeking
to provoke the urine, and help the choleric humour out of the
body either by the bowel, or by emesis [and by the urine]. For
if nature (i.e. the action of the bowels) alone does not suffice
to get rid of the excess of humour, emesis by mild remedies may
help to do so—using such as plenty of warm water, either alone
or with wine. The action of the bowels is secured by the use of
such things as conserve of violet, confection of tamarinds, manna,
and Persian manna.

Exercise should be lightened.

Food : only allow such as yields good chyme.

866. Bazhs : if these are necessary, they may be taken daily
or every third day. But in that case nothing heating should be
allowed (in the food). If the bath be taken after a meal, and it
does not cause distension or heaviness over the liver or epigas-
trium, there need be no anxiety. But if such symptoms should
arise, an aperient should be given. For instance, infusion of
absinthe ; a mixture containing aloes, anise, bitter almond, and
oxymel. The bathing after food should also be stopped [and the
diet should be light, with deobstruents and viscid articles of food
(Galen)]. These aperients are to be given at the end of the first
stage of digestion, and before the second stage is completed.
But there should be a certain interval of time between the aperient
and the next meal—namely the interval between the morning
exercise and the time for the bath. Inunction with oils is required,
and a light white wine should be given. Cold water has a useful
(weakening ; strengthening : marginal reading) influence.

All these suggestions apply specially to those whose tem-
perament has been hot and dry from birth.*


* Galen adds: ‘“‘ If bile passes down plentifully, good ; but if it regurgitates
into the stomach, vomiting will become inevitable, and tepid water should be
taken. Exercises should be done before meals ; and they must be slow and gentle
in character. ;

Gymnastics are not required by persons of very hot temperament ; walking
exercise is enough. The baths may be taken after a meal in such cases.

If the temperament is hot and dry, the regimen should be diluent (succulent
food—bathing—avoid much or strenuous exercise).

_ During the summer, the bath should be taken early, and repeated after (the

main) meal. Cold drinks may be allowed.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 439


867. Those who have a hot and moist temperament show
a tendency to (abnormal) decompositions in the various matters,
which also tend to descend into the limbs. Such persons should
take exercise of a kind which will favour dispersal (of humours),
but is mild enough not to prove over-heating. A degree of
activity likely to cause ‘‘ ebullition”’ in the humours must be
avoided.

A person who is not accustomed to much exercise should
eschew it. Exercise should be taken after the bowels have been
evacuated. Baths should be taken before the meal. Care should
be taken to get rid of all superfluities (quickly).

When spring approaches, moderation should be observed
in bloodletting and purgation.


2. [He REeEcTIFICATION OF A CoLp INTEMPERAMENT


868. There are three kinds of cold intemperament. (1)
When there is a balance between the two passive (qualities), the
intention is to produce more innate heat by means of (a) hot
aliments which are moderately moist and dry; (4) calefacient
inunctions; (c) large electuaries; (d) evacuation of the corres-
ponding humours; (e) baths likely to induce sweating; (/)
exercises contributory to sweating.

(2) At some periods such persons may be attempered in
regard to humidity, and yet it sometimes happens that the
coldness gives rise to humidities.

(3) In those individuals in which there is dryness as well as
the cold intemperament, the regimen should be prescribed as


for old age.


Aegineta adds: “the dry kind is the worst, because this is the form char-
acteristic of old age. Warming agents and diluents are needed (namely, moderate
exercise, moist heating food, heating wines, plenty of sleep). The bowels should
be emptied daily. | Venery should be avoided.

The moist kind is “ bad,’’ because there is a lability to rheumatic affections.
Here avoid bathing, and take light exercise often, and make use of moderately
calefacient inunctions.

If the temperament is dry, avoid: tiring exercise, exposure to the sun ; pro-
longed wakeful state ; cares; venery.

If the temperament be humid, more exercise is necessary, and the digestion
in the stomach needs assistance, and also the urinary secretion. Rheumatic and
plethoric complaints are liable to occur. The bath should be taken before meals,
and twice or three times in the day. Aperients and diuretics should be given
before food. Masticatories, cathartics, and diuretic wines are allowable.


3. THe ReciMEN For Persons PRONE TO ILLNESS


869. When persons are prone to illness, it is because of
(1) repletion ; (2) the presence of immatured humours. In


440 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the former, the quantity requires modification ; in the latter
the quality of the humours needs modification.

(1) The quantity of humours is modified by modifying the
amount of food taken ; by increasing the exercise ; by massage
before the bath (if the person is accustomed to exercise and
massage ; otherwise these must be mild) ; by dividing the meals
so that the food is not all taken at one time, and to satiety. If
the skin acts very readily, and the inducing of sweating is cus-
tomary, this may be procured. If the fact of the meal being taken
slowly does not result in the pouring out of bilious humour into
the stomach, the meal may be taken after the bath. But if it
should do so, the meal should be taken before the bath. In the
former case, the proper time for the meal is after the fourth
hour. :

But if bilious humour pours into the stomach, the meal 1s
taken before the bath, and further, if there are symptoms of
congestion 1n the liver, those among the above-named aperients
which are appropriate to the temperament are administered.
Should there also be symptoms pointing to (congestion in) the
head, walking about is of assistance. If the food undergoes
putrefaction in the stomach, and then passes on, no matter ;
but if it do not pass on, one must administer cumin, or figs mixed
with bastard saffron seeds. An electuary of this is named [in
the Formulary].


4. To Herp Lean Persons To put on. FLesu


870. ‘The chief cause of emaciation, as we have said, is a
dry intemperament, dry mesentery, and dry atmosphere. When
the mesentery is dry, it will not absorb nutriment, and this
renders the degree of dryness and wasting still greater.


Note that emaciation, leanness, or wasting is here understood as including
the condition of a person convalescent after a: long illness.

Other causes of lean habit of body: attenuant regimen, attenuant medicines ;
mental anxiety in a person of dry temperament.

“IT observed a youth wasted with sickness, as he were a worn-out, dried-up
waterskin. And as I looked on him, lo! he repeated these couplets. . . .” (Night
410). The sickness here referred to is a frequent event among the lovers in these
tales, being the effect of abstaining ‘‘ from meat and drink, and being estranged
from the solace of sleep” (Night 114), an effect proportionate to the mental
anxiety arising from the pain of parting. The descriptions are graphic enough,
and are equally applicable to cases of wasting from organic disease.

A warm temperament also predisposes to leanness. Fat persons are of cold
temperament, and are therefore benefited if made ‘‘ warm.”


_ 871. Baths. Before taking the bath, the skin is rubbed
with linen cloths to a degree between rough and gentle, until
the skin becomes red. The rubbing may then be more vigorous.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 441


After that, a pitch plaster is applied* [for three or four days :
Aeg.]. The object of the massage before the application of the
pitch plaster is to prevent the puffing of the tissues from subsiding
again. Exercise is to be moderate. The bath follows at once.
The skin is dried with towels. Then massage is given, using
[emollient (H. A.)] oils. Lastly, a meal of suitable type is given
[fat meat, pulse, almonds, bread : Haly Abbas].

It will be seen that in this regimen, the bath is taken on an empty stomach.


It will be noted that the rules regarding bathing state that a person is made thinner
if he takes his bath after a meal, before the food has digested.


If the age, season, and custom allow of it, cold [tepid : Aeg.]
water may be douched over the person.


Sleep should be encouraged. (Haly Abbas).


Emotional Life-—Pale persons who are poorly nourished would become stouter
if they were aroused to anger, and mental excitement. (Aeg.)

If only a part of the body is wasted, as for instance after fracture, the vital
powers must be stimulated ; moderate friction will encourage the circulation’ in
the part, and warm water is douched over it in small quantities, until the skin
reddens and swells. Suitable exercises are also carried out. Pitching may be
done. If the part feels cold, friction with linen cloths should be done, or some
mild calefacient applied, like thapsia made up with honey or wax. (Oribasius).


The above regimen is almost identical with that which we
have spoken of for increasing the bulk of an undersized member.
The completion of the subject will be found in the fourth book,
when discussing beauty culture.


5. How to Repuce Obesity


872. ‘The regimen which will reduce obesity. (1) Procure
a rapid descent of the food from the stomach and intestines, in
order to prevent completion of absorption by the mesentery.
[One may take saltish things of laxative nature : Rhazes.] (2)
‘Take food which is bulky but feebly nutritious. (3) Take the
bath before food, often. [Take not food immediately after the
bath, anda short sleep ; follow up the bath with massage ; make
a long stay in the bath: Haly Abbas.] (4) Hard exercise.
(5) Resolvent oils. [Rub in oil containing root of wild cucumber,
marshmallows, gentian, all-heal root, birthwort root, poley, and
centaury ; volatile ointments ; oil of dill: Aeg.] (6) Electu-
aries: the lesser myrobalan electuary ; electuary of lacca ;
“theriac.” (7) Take vinegar, and salt, while fasting.


* “ Pitching ’’ consists in rubbing into the skin a preparation made by melting
dried pitch in a little oil, and warming it to a consistence suitable. The skin must
be shaved first. The plaster is then removed before it has quite set. It is then
warmed again and re-applied. Thisis repeated several times. (Aetius).

Bituminous and sulphur baths may be used with advantage. (Rhazes.)


442 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The subject is further discussed under the heading of
beauty culture.


Other details: (Aeg.) :—Meals: only one a day. Drinks: take a fragrant
draught before a meal. Wines: use thin white wines. Sleep: must not be
protracted. Baths: use natural diaphoretic waters; if these are not available,
add flower of salt to a sea-water bath ; or add a large quantity of nitre. Sandbaths.
Massage: dry rubbing with thick towels; rub with rough salts, such as nitre.
Medicinal Agents: attenuants, that is, medicines which attenuate the humours;
wild rue seed and tops of macedonian parsley, various strong diuretics, with or
without pepper, and with or without asarabacca and anise; also the other remedies
named in brackets above. Winter favours the formation of flesh and blood.


THESIS. V


Tue CHANGES IN THE ATMOSPHERE


THE REGIMEN ACCORDING TO THE SEASONS, AND THE VARIATIONS
OF THE ATMOSPHERE


873. Sprinc. At the onset of Spring one has recourse to
bleeding. Cathartics are taken according to requirements and
custom. Emesis should be induced. [Spring fills the system
with humours (Rhazes)]. Diet: avoid very heating and moist-
ening meats and drinks ; use attenuant articles of food. Exercise:
in moderation, but in greater amount than is proper in summer-
time.

Too much food should not be taken at a time ; the meal
should be divided over a period. As to drinks, take diuretic
syrups and robs. Avoid hot, bitter, salt, or sharp things.

874. Summer. [Summer dissolves the humours and
weakens the vitality (Rhazes).] Eat sparingly of foods. Moderate
the drinks. Moderate the exercise. Take sufficient rest.
Use diuretics plentifully. If emesis is possible, it is advisable.
One should keep in the shade, under cover. The food should
be infrigidant. [Avoid wine and venery (Rhazes). ]

875. Autumn ; the season when the weather is change-
able and unsettled. [Autumn engenders bad humours, bilious
and sanguineous (Rhazes).] A more liberal regimen is here
needed, if health is to be preserved. Avoid: desiccant agents ;
sexual intercourse ; drinking much cold water ; cold shower
baths ; sleeping in a cold place (cold enough to excite goose-
flesh) ; retiring to sleep on a full stomach. It is advisable to
protect oneself from the midday heat and the early morning cold
breezes. Fruits are to be avoided, or at least taken only in small
quantity [they supply bad chyme, and engender flatulencies
(even figs and grapes do this) unless taken before food]. In
bathing, only tepid water may be used. [Exercise should be
moderate. |

During the time of the autumnal equinoxes, evacuations


443


444 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


should be procured in order to ensure that the excrementitious
particles shall not be held back in the system all winter. Although
for some persons it is better to see that the humours are kept “ on
the move,” it is usually best they should keep in repose.

As the age advances, emesis must no longer be procured
in autumn lest fever should be encouraged to develop.

Wine must be well-diluted, and restricted as much as
possible.

You may be assured that if the autumn is a wet one, there
will be little likelihood of the usual autumnal disorders coming on.

876. Winter. There should be plenty of physical work.
Eat liberally, if the prevailing wind is northerly. If southerly,
increase the exercise but diminish the amount of food.

Diet. The bread should be made heavier in winter than in
summer. ‘The same applies to flesh-meat, roasted meat, and the
like. Potherbs: take cabbage, beet, celery. Avoid orach,
red barley, purslane, endive.

[Aegineta allows acrid potherbs, and states that heating substances like
pepper, cummin, mustard, rocket, may be taken liberally. As regards wine, he
sayS more wine may be taken this season, using the strong and heating kinds.]

When the body is healthy, illnesses are unlikely to come on
during the winter. Should they do so, however, the appropriate
treatment should be used, including purgation if that is necessary.
Illness will only arise under strong provocation, the agents being
usually of a “ hot” quality. ‘The reason is that the innate heat,
which 1s the determining factor, is very strong during the winter,
because the cold prevents its dissipation, and collects it among
the interior organs. Furthermore all the vegetative faculties
are more efficient at this season.

Hippocrates favoured purgation to blood-letting. He was
against procuring emesis during winter, though approving of it
during summer, on the ground that the humours of the body
are now on the move whereas in winter they tend to stagnate.
One may use this fact as a pattern.

877. When the atmosphere becomes pestilential in
character, the body should be given a desiccant regimen, and the
dwelling-house should be constructed so as to be able to be kept
cool and dry. When contagious diseases are abroad, the air
should be warm, and charged with agents which prevent decom-
position of the air. Things which emit pleasing odours are good,
especially if they are contrary in temperament to that of the
atmosphere.* Besides this, during times of pestilence, one


* “. . . had perfumed the place with musk, and aloes-wood, and ambergris.”
(Night 733.)


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 445


should not allow draughts, but ventilation should be secured
slowly, by means of small fans and ventilators.

Very often air is contaminated from the soil. In this case
it is well to sit on couches (instead of on the ground) and to seek
out dwellings on ground which is as elevated as possible, so
that the winds traverse them.

Very often, too, the air itself is the seat of the beginning of
the decomposition changes—either because it is contaminated
by adjoining impure air, or by some “ celestial’? agent of a
quality at present unknown to man. In that case it is best to
retire to underground dwellings, or to houses enclosed in walls
on all sides, or to caves.

Fumigations may be used to purify the air: sedge (or,
galangale), frankincense, myrtle, rose, sandalwood.

During the time when pestilences are about, one may use
vinegar in both food and drinks, for this preserves one from
the danger.

Other details will be discussed in the special part of this
work, in order to complete the subject.


THES Save


1. THe Symptoms PRrEeMoNITORY OF DISEASES ©


878.
Symptom. Remedy. Danger.

Tremor of the heart continuing — Sudden death.

persistently ;
Nightmare, and vertigo fre- | Evacuate the gross humour] Epilepsy ;

quent. apoplexy.
Jerking movements of the | Evacuate the serous Convulsions ;

whole body. humour. apoplexy.
Ditto, persisting long enough | Ditto. Ditto.

to affect vision and bodily

movements, Also plethora.
Loss of sensation in the limbs | Ditto. Paralysis.
Much twitching of the face .. | Procure cranial depletion. Trismus.


Face becomes very red; tears | Blood-letting purgation, etc.| Insanity ; delirium.
flow; vision fails; head-


ache.
Inexplicable sense of gloom | Evacuate the oxidised Melancholy.
and dread. humour.
Face reddens, swells, and — Lepra.
darkens and keeps so.
Body heavy and relaxed ; veins | Bleeding. Rupture of a vessel;
prominent. apoplexy; sud-
den death.
Face, eyelids and limbs slightly | Treat the liver. Dropsy.
tumid
Great stench from the faeces.. | Treat the putrescencein the | Fever.
vessels.
Offensive urine ers eel) aDLCCOE Ditto.
Lassitude and loss of spirits .. a Fever.
Loss of appetite ; undue ap- Illness (in general).
petite.


In short, when any of the functions are abnormal in some
way—appetite, defecation, urine, sexual desire, sleep, action of
skin, itching, keen mental faculties, violent temper, unusual
tastes, nocturnal pollutions—whether the abnormality is an
increase or a decrease of function, or of quality or of character,
one may be forewarned that some disease is on the point of super-
vening. Unusual events have the same significance. For
instance, bleeding of piles, menstrual flow, vomiting persisting,
nose-bleeding, craving for something, whether bad, or apparently

ood because in a way natural. For this reason one should not
abstain from desired foods or things unless they are entirely
bad, and even then, the abstention should take place gradually.


446


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 447


Some special symptoms denote particular conditions. Thus,
persistent severe headache, and dilation of the pupil warn of
cataract. The following are also forerunners of the same
disease : imagining that there are bodies like insects, etc., in
front of the face when one is sitting still and motionless ; great
impairment of vision.

The following are also noteworthy :


Description. Morbid state corresponding.
Heaviness and stabbing in right side. . .- | Liver disease.


Heaviness and tightness in sacral region an Kidney disease.
lumbar region ; urine abnormal.


Colourless stool .. ao a ar ..-| Jaundice.

Persistently scalding urine ee ee -- | Vesicle or penile ulcers.

Burning pain in anus on defecation = .. | Dysentery.

Anorexia, vomiting, distension, paininlegs .. | Colic.

Pruritus ani, not due to worms .. ae ae |) Piles;

Eruption of many boilsand pimples... .. | Internal imposthumes. Rupture
of an abscess.


Serpiginous eczema (ringworm) .. 3 .. | Leprosy ; black vitiligo; white.
White morphew eo +4 White vitiligo.


2. GENERAL REMARKS ON THE REGIMEN SUITABLE FOR
'TRAVELLERS*


879. A person who is about to make a long journey must
accustom himself to do without many things which are available
in his own home, and must be prepared for hardships and pains.
He must therefore take precautions against many illnesses
[including fevers: Rhazes] to which he is exposed, if Allah
will. He must be specially careful about diet and to avoid
lassitude (a consequence of fatigue).


Persons of humid and phlegmatic temperament are not liable to develop
fever from exposure. (Rhazes.)


880. Preliminary Measures. (i) Bodily state. One should
not set out upon a journey when in a state of sanguineous or
other plethora. A purge should be taken first. [If the journey
is likely to be arduous, a bleeding should be done also: Aeg.
—The body is rubbed with oil (Haly Abbas).] If there is a sense
of nausea, due to indigestion, one should fast, and then sleep
till the nausea has passed off, before proceeding on one’s journey.

(ii.) Hygiene of body: it should be anointed with oil (ib.)

(iii.) Dress: A binder should be worn. This is at least five cubits in length,
and six or seven fingers’-breadth. This is applied round the loins, and the hollow


oftheribs. The head must be covered. Take also a staff, as a help both in descend-
ing and ascending hills. (Haly Abbas).


* The matter in this chapter has been slightly re-arranged.


448 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(iv.) Care of the eyes (from snow and dust): Expose them to the vapours
produced by pouring wine on a heated stone, or to those of chamomile, dill, or


marjoram, (Rhazes.) / ; eae
(v.) Care ofthe feet. Wrap them in cloths smeared with calefacient oils. (ib.)


(vi) Sleeping and Fasting. If it 1s necessary to travel on
without sleeping, the habit of doing with little sleep should be
acquired by preliminary practice. Similarly, if there is a likeli-
hood of long fasts and of long abstinence from fluids, a habitu-
ation to this should be made first. One should also accustom
oneself to the kinds of foods one is likely to be able to obtain
during the journey—foods of high degree of nutritive value,
and taken in concentrated form.

Instructions differ according to the season of the year in which the journey
is being made.—In winter, a purge should be taken before starting. The binder
should be longer than above stated. The body is not to be anointed at the stages


in the journey.—In Summer, the body must be covered to protect it from the sun.
The binder is to be as stated above. (Aeg.)


881. Exertion. The exertion which a journey entails
should be met by making the first day’s work very little more
arduous than that customary ; and so grade the exertion day
after day.

882. Diet. The food must be concentrated and of good
substance, and allotted into rations which are not too bulky, so
that digestion will be well completed, without leading to the
accumulation of effete matters in the blood. Should hunger
be very pressing, let the ttaveller take a snack of a quality
appropriate for his temperament, and unlikely to induce thirst.
This rule applies whether the journey be by night or by day.


Rhazes suggests chewing pickled onions en route, to assuage hunger. Note
that night-time is preferred for travelling across deserts, or in hot countries generally.


Potherbs and fruits are to be eschewed, as also any articles
likely to engender “‘ crude’ humours, unless such articles are
required for medicinal purposes.

883. The traveller should not resume riding immediately after
a good meal, because the food would then undergo decomposition,
and thirst would arise. Then, after quenching the thirst,
rumblings and distension of the stomach would supervene,
and there would be nausea with satiative indigestion. There-
fore, instead of so doing, one should wait till the time for alight-
ing at the hospice, unless there is some special reason for doing
otherwise, as presently to be stated.

884, A person may have to fast so long that the appetite
is lost. ‘To aid one in submitting to this, the following are use-
ful: cold foods prepared from roast livers and the like, pills


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 449


prepared with viscid or glutinous substances, strong fluid fats,
almonds, and almond oil. Certain fats like that of beef will
stave off the feeling of hunger for a long time. There is a story
of a man having swallowed a pound (12 ozs.) of oil of violets
in which fat had been dissolved until the oil was of the consistence
of a plaster ; he is said to have been free of desire for food for
ten days.

885, Precautions against thirst. One may adopt a similar
plan (to the preceding) when one knows one will have to suffer
long from thirst. It is therefore advisable to inform oneself
of those medicinal drinks which will abolish thirst, and are named
in the third Book, in the chapter on“ Thirst.” Aspecially
good medicine of this kind is furnished by dissolving three drams
of purslane seed in vinegar.

Avoid any foods which are likely to evoke thirst. Namely,
such as fish, capers, salted foods, sweets.

Converse as little as possible. Make the rate of walking
gentle.

If there is a shortage of water, it is a good plan to add
vinegar to it, for this allays thirst.


Rhazes gives: ‘‘ Water with polenta sprinkled on it, and a moderate quantity
of salt.” Or, hold cool liquid in the mouth ; pour cold water on the hands and feet.


Fatigue; Lassitude. ‘This must be treated according to
the chapter on that subject.


' At the end of a journey.—Take a comfortable apartment; do not go near
the fire. | Rest.—Do not go to sleep for an hour. After that, the bath may be
taken. Massage is then given till the skin is allruddy. ‘Then the traveller may go
to sleep on a soft couch. (Rhazes).


3. Recimen APPLICABLE WHEN Exposep To Great Heart,
ESPECIALLY WHEN [TRAVELLING ; REGIMEN SUITABLE
FOR THOSE GoING To Hor CLIMATES


886. The things to guard against are: asthenia, loss of
bodily vigour, muscular weakness ; insatiable thirst ; sunstroke.

Therefore the head [and body : Aeg.] must be protected
from the sun. ‘Those who are making journeys must protect
the chest, using an application composed of such things as
mucilage of fleawort ; purslane juice.

Persons about to journey into very hot regions will need
to take something like barley-meal cakes, and fruit syrups,
before starting off, for to ride on horseback (or camels) entails
an unperceived loss of strength and vitality, if the intestines

' 2G


450 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


are empty, with nothing to replace the void. Therefore it is
advisable to partake of such things as we have named in small
amount, and wait awhile to give them time to pass out of the
stomach, and so ensure chat there will not be any splashing
about of its contents.

One should use oil of rose and violets on the journey,
anointing the back with them from time to time.

The injurious effect of travelling in the heat may be alle-
viated by having a swim in cold water, but it is best not to plunge
in suddenly. One should wait a while and enter the water
gradually.

887. If there is a risk of simooms, the nostrils and mouth
should be covered, and one should go about in that way. Before
being exposed to such a danger, one may eat onions with butter-
milk and without butter ; or, better still, onions infused for a
night in the milk ; and one may eat onions by themselves as
well, and take the buttermilk after them. Before steeping the
onions into the buttermilk, deep incisions should be made into
them.

Another remedy is to make use of some fragrant substance
like rose oil, and the oil of gourd-seeds. The latter may be
sucked (as a lozenge) because it mitigates the ill-effects one fears.

888. If the sun-stroke has already occurred, let cold water
be thrown over the limbs, and lave the face with it. Pour cooling
oil like rose oil over the head, and also willow-oil, and cold
juices like that of houseleek. ‘Then lave. Sexual intercourse
must be avoided. The rations should consist of cold pot-herbs.
Salted fish 1s also appropriate, the person resting the while.
Diluted wine is advantageous. If there is no fever, milk is the
best food of all. But if there is fever (not of a putrid type,
but of a one-day type), sour buttermilk should be given. If
there is thirst after sunstroke, rinse the mouth with cold water.
Water should not be swallowed to repletion, because of the risk
of sudden death [from shock] thereby. The rinsing of the
mouth should be done with moderation. If, however, there is
an excessive craving for fluids, allow the patient to sip a little
at intervals. Such thirst being due to the previous exertions,
let him rest, and then drink. But it would be better to take rose
oil with the first portion of water, and take the ordinary water
after that. :

In brief, when exposed to heat stay in a cool place ; lave
the feet and hands with cool water. If thirsty drink cold water.
by sips. The food should be such as is readily digestible.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 4en


4. THe REGIMEN FOR THOSE TRAVELLING IN OR TO CoLD
Cirmates AND Icy Counrrizs


889. I consider that it is a very fearsome thing to travel
in the intense cold, even if one takes great care and protects
oneself by every possible precaution. So how much the more is it
fearsome if the person has made no preparations at all ?

How many travellers have taken every possible precaution
and have yet died from the exposure to cold, and the cold winds,
worse because there is no rain—dying in convulsions, or tetanus,
or were frozen to death ; or died with apoplexy, or died in the
manner of persons who have been poisoned with opium or
mandragore ?

And even if the condition to which they are reduced is not
fatal, they often experience the pangs of hunger, as what is called
bulimia—the treatment for which is described already in the
proper place, along with that for other disorders of the same class.
The best thing to do is to plug the nostrils and other apertures,
and protect the mouth so that the cold air does not enter at once
(into the lungs). The exposed parts must be protected in the
way we shall describe [in 894].

890. When the traveller in bitterly cold places has reached
his halting-place, he should not approach a very hot fire at
once, but gradually by degrees, beginning witha slight warmth,
and slowly going nearer to the fire, though it would be better
not to do that at all. However, even though the need of warmth
is very great indeed, the approach must be still made gradual.

The traveller may push on quickly if he so wish, if the
exposure to cold is not affecting him adversely, or depriving
him of energy.

891. Frostbite. A person who has become frostbitten
must be attended to without delay ; he must be warmed and the
vitality restored by calefacient oils, especially those which possess
the properties of theriac, like oil of lilies.

When the traveller has reached an inn, and is an hungered,
let him partake of something warm ; he will get wonderfully
warm, with fever-like heat.

892. Provisions to take. Certain kinds of provisions would
enable the traveller to endure the exposure to cold more easily.
Thus, any prepared foods containing plenty of garlic, nuts,
mustard: asafoetida. ‘‘ Lactic’’ cheese made up with barley
(meal a special recipe) may be added in order to impart a pleasing
taste to the garlic and nuts. [Pickled onions may be chewed
(Rhazes).] Butter is also a good thing to take, especially if wine


452 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


be drunk afterwards. Wine should be taken instead of water.
One should take rest until the wine has come to rest within the
body, and gives the sense of warmth.* He may then mount
and continue his journey. No one should go out into the (bitter)
cold on an empty stomach ; he should have taken plenty of
nutriment.

Asafoetida is among the things which have a warming
effect, when one is frozen with cold ; especially if wine is given
at the same time. ‘The initial dose is one drachm (12 = I 02.)
of asafoetida to 1 lb. weight of wine.

893. The body may be protected from injury by the exter-
nal cold by the use of epithemes, made with oil (pitch or tar).
[The loins, spine, and chest may be bound with a long swathe,
to protect them (Aeg.).]

Garlic (as an epitheme, 894) is among the things useful for
those exposed to a cold atmosphere.


Care of the eyes and feet. (See 880.)


5. Own ProtecTinG THE LimBs FROM THE INJuRIouSs EFFECTS
oF CoLp. FRosTBITE


894. The limbs should first be rubbed until they grow
warm. ‘Then use a warm liniment compounded with pleas-
antly smelling oils like that of lilies, and oil of myrobalan
(benzoin). Syrup of lily flowers combined with aromatics. If
this is not to hand, take oil, especially oil into which pepper,
or pyrethrum, or euphorbium, or asafoetida, or castoreum have
been placed.

Epithemes may be applied to the limbs to protect them
from the cold, using galbanum, garlic, aided by pix liquida,
for instance.

The foot-wear must not be so tight as to compress the feet,
for freedom of movement is the best means of protection from
cold, whereas restriction of movement interferes with (the circu-
lation) and makes the limb cold. It is also a good plan to cover
the feet with parchment, and wear fur over that.

If the hands or feet are not aware of the surrounding cold,
so that one does not take the proper precautions against it, it is
a sign that the sensation is already being lost, and the frost is
already exerting its harmful action upon it. In such a case
there must be no hesitation in action. For you know that once
the (freezing) cold penetrates into a member, not only is the
innate heat extinguished, but the very substance on which that


* Rhazes advises hot wine as a drink before setting out.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 453


heat depends is destroyed (dissolved, tahallul). The tissues
are then at the mercy of putrefaction. So there is an urgent
need for all those measures which have been discussed in the
chapter on ulcers, especially the grave eroding ulcers. If the
degree of action is still short of the stage of putrefaction, the best
thing is to place the limbs in snow water, or into water in which
figs have been boiled, or cabbage, or myrtle (i.e., odoriferous
things), or into dill water, or chamomile water. All these are
beneficial. A good local application is made with pennyroyal.
Wormwood of Pontus, and betony, and turnip are also good
medicaments for the purpose.

One must avoid exposure to direct. heat.

It is also necessary to walk about quickly, moving the feet
and limbs, doing exercises with these, and also applying friction,
and inunction. Warm water may be poured over the part from
a height, along with the other aforesaid measures.

895. It is important to realize that to allow the limbs to
be still and motionless in the cold air, without exercising them
in any way, is the surest way to subject them completely to the
intense cold. Some people, however, actually make use of cold
water for the purpose of overcoming frostbite, taking away the
ill-effects of the cold just as is done with frozen fruits. For the
plunging into cold water has the effect of drawing out the ice,
and of washing it away, and melting the tissues and restoring
them to a normal temperature, whereas exposure to heat would
simply lead to decomposition. However it be done is no par-
ticular concern of the doctor.

896. If the extremity begins to become dark in colour,
an incision should be made into it, to let the blood out of it ;
the limb is then placed into warm water to prevent the blood from
congealing and so failing to run out of the tissues. ‘The flow is
allowed to continue till it stops of its own accord. After that an
epitheme is applied, using Armenian bole and vinegar blended
together, for this antagonizes the injury done. Pix liquida 1s
also a good adjuvant to this both at the commencement and at
the conclusion.

When the darkness goes on to blackness or greenness,
showing that the mortification is increasing, no time must be
lost in stopping the process, for otherwise the healthy parts
adjoining will become implicated and undergo putrefactive
changes which will surely spread on into the interior organs.
The measures to adopt under these circumstances are described
in the appropriate chapter.


454 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


6. How to PREsERVE THE COMPLEXION WHILE TRAVELLING


897. The face should be treated by applying epithemes
to it, which are prepared with viscid substances, such as mucilage
of fleabane, mucilage of purslane, gum tragacanth in water, gum
arabic in water, white of egg, and such things as rusks of the
finest wheaten flour dissolved in water, Chritan lozenges.

When the face is exposed to biting winds, or cold or the
action of (intense) sun, the measures to be adopted are those
given in the section on “ Beauty Culture.”

Scented face powders of the East are referred to by Burton’, who specifies
one composed of rice-flour or powdered bark of the mango, deodar (uvaria longifolia),


sandal-wood, lign-aloes, or curcuma (zerumbat or zedoaria) with rose-flowers, cam-
phor, civet and anise-seed (v. 257).


7. How to Counteract THE Injurious EFFECTS OF THE
Various WATERS, WHILE ON A JOURNEY


898. ‘The traveller is more exposed to illness from the
diversity of the drinking water than he is from the diversity of
foods. Hence it is necessary to be particular about correcting
the bad qualities of the drinking water, and expend every effort
in purifying it.

1. Procure the rapid passage of water through the body
by inducing sweating.

2. Boil the water, for as we have already pointed out,
boiling sometimes clarifies the water and separates off the im-
purities which are admixed with the intrinsic substance of the
water.

3. The best measure is to disti/ the water. This may be
done by making a wick out of twisted wool, one end of which
is placed in the full vessel and the other into an empty vessel.
Water will then escape from the one to the other drop by drop.


This is a good way of clarifying water when it is necessary to do
so frequently.


Note this original use of the word “‘ distil’’; the water passes from one vessel
to the other steadily drop by drop. When heat came to be used, the water being
placed in an alembic, or nowadays, in a “ retort’’ or ‘‘still’’ (a metal retort), the
water also comes over drop by drop. The coming of the water drop by drop gives
the name to the process of distilling. Poetically, dew “ distils’’ on the flowers
(i.e., drops of water appear on them) ; mercy “ distils.’”’ The retort is the représenta-
tive of the “ twisted ”’ wool, the glass vessel having been bent to form the condenser
of the water vapour.

__ It may be noted that the action of capillarity would ensure the purity of the
distillate, for salts will only travel a certain distance. Bacteria also will not ascend
to the brim of the vessel, except possibly in the case of typhoid bacilli.


When the water is bitter and altogether unwholesome, one:
should boil it, and add pure sand to it while it is boiling. It is


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 455


then distilled over drop by drop by using the wool as mentioned
above.

It amounts to the same thing if the water be shaken with
clean sand, especially when this material has been burnt in the
sun. When the sand has settled, the water will be harmless.

4. Drink wine with the water, for that removes such injur-
ious matter as is of feeble penetrative power.

5. If water is scarce and not attempered, it should be taken
with vinegar, especially in summer-time, because that prevents
one from drinking too much.

899. Salty water: take vinegar with it, and syrupus
acetosus into which has been placed pulse and various species
of myrtle and medlar.

Aluminous and bitter water : take aperients afterwards. It
is also beneficial to take wine after it.

Sour water : take sweet things and oily things, mixed with
julep afterwards. Chick-pea water, taken previously to the water,
will make it harmless before one could wish. The same is true
if one eats chick-peas first.

Stagnant and marshy water : these are putrescent. Do not
take warm foods before drinking it. Afterwards take astringents
made with cold fruits and potherbs, such as quince, apple, and
sorrel.

Thick and turbid waters. Garlic should be taken after such
waters. Among the reagents which will clear these waters is
alum of Yamen (of Arabia).

900. Other things which remove the harmful properties
of various waters : onions, because these act on them like a
theriac ; especially onions and vinegar ; garlic ; and, among cold
things, lettuce.

901. Another good rule in regard to the diversity of waters
which travellers are likely to encounter is this : to carry some of
the water from his home, to mix with it the earths from the inn
in which he has stayed last ; then carry some of the water to the
inn to which he goes next, and mix that with the water he has
brought ; and go on in this manner until he reaches his des-
tination. Similarly he may take some of the clay (sand) from his
own home, and use that to mix with each successive specimen
of water, shaking them with it, until it has cleared them.

902. One should be sure to pass all the drinking water
through a cloth, in order to make sure there are no leeches or
other creatures in it, or any minute particles of evil nature sus-
pended in it. [E.g. incidentally, minute ova !]


456 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


It isa good rule also to take a sour rob with one, to mix with
the various waters one is likely to have to drink.


8, Ruies ror Persons TRAVELLING BY SEA


903. ‘Those who travel by sea often suffer from scotomia
and vertigo, and the motion brings on nausea and vomiting,
especially during the first few days of the voyage, after which
it subsides. It is not wise to allow nausea and vomiting to con-
tinue longer than is required for getting rid of superfluities.*
It should then cease.

904. Measures to prevent sea-sickness. It is justifiable to
endeavour to prevent sea-sickness. "Thus, take fruit such as of
quince, maciana, and pomegranate. Parsley seed made into a
drink will prevent nausea as long as one lies quite still ; and
if one cannot lie still, it soothes the sense of nausea. Absinthe
has the same effect.

Among the things which prevent seasickness are : nourish-
ing the mouth of the stomach with tonic acetous substances,
and such things as prevent ‘‘ vapours ” from rising into the head.
Namely : Lentils in vinegar (or dried and boiled with a little
pennyroyal, or boiled till soft and then triturated and dried and
kept in an earthen vessel : Aeg.) ; juice of sour grapes; a
little pennyroyal, thyme ; bread broken up in weak and fragrant
wine, or in cold water. Thyme is sometimes added to that.

The nostrils should also be smeared over on the inside with
white lead (cosmetic) ointment.

Persistent Sea-Sickness.—Avoid all food. Take a little vinegar and honey
with water in which thyme has been infused, or pennyroyal water with some fine
polenta; or take some weak fragrant wine, with fine polenta. Take antibilious
remedies. (Rhazes).

Simple Precautionary Measures.—(1) Counteract the disagreeable smell of
the ship by sniffing at quinces, thyme or pennyroyal. (Aeg.) (2) Do not look at
the sea. (ib.) (3) Beware of the drinking water (ib.) (4) Note the diet already


mentioned. (5) Have remedies against vermin. Mercury, oil, long birthwort
or wearing wool smeared with oil or mercury ensures against lice. (Haly Abbas).


* The first vomitings which occur at sea are often beneficial, and therefore
need not be interfered with.


END OF PART THREE


§ 254. When prescribing a “ regimen,’ or programme to be
followed by the patient, especially where the ailment is chronic,
or liable to become chronic, the following headings require to be
considered.

I. General.—The conditions regarding Light, Air, the Climate
of the place, and the physical environment—place of residence or
work; the dwelling itself. The season of the year.

II. Spectal.—(1) The age and sex of the patient; (2) The
food, drink, and necessary evacuations; (3) Sleep; (4) Exercise;
(5) Clothing ; (6) Personal habits: bathing, smoking; marital life ;
(7) Occupation or livelihood; (8) Mental environment and social
conditions.

As regards Light: the importance of free access of light is
well-known but is often neglected, and may account for some
of the effects met with in the given case. An excess of exposure
is equally faulty with deficiency.

As regards Air—impurity of the air constantly breathed ;
manufacturing towns; confined rooms, stuffiness of the bedroom
because too small, etc.

As regards Climate, ample suggestions are discussed in §181,
188, 305-322.

The importance of considering the Season is freely discussed
in 261-278, 280-305. The habits as regards food, exercise, sleep,
clothing, etc., must be adjusted according to the season.

Place of Residence.—Here belongs a consideration of the nature
of the soil, of the water supply, of the prevailing winds ; the heating
and lighting; the drainage (322).

The dwelling itself—Here we consider materials of construc-
tion, proximity of other dwellings, the aspect of the several rooms,
point of compass faced, the colour of the walls in the rooms, the
stability of the window-frames ; type of fire-places; cellarage, etc.

The age of the patient is considered in terms of the periods of
life specified in 51. At each period there are certain variations of
function and capacity which account both for the phenomena of
the illness, and affect the efficacy of different modes of treatment—
physical and mental. The sex is necessarily considered.

Food and Drink.—Here it is desirable that the physician
should picture the actual meals he is advocating. It is not enough
to make out a dietary in the form of a list of things allowed and things
forbidden. The foods must be combined. The dishes may often
be specified. The number of meals a day; the place where they
are eaten; the actual time of day chosen; the time occupied over
the several meals ; the quantity taken at a meal ; the kind of cook-
ing—all these things need watching and regulating. The whole

457


458 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


subject of adulteration and contamination of foods must be studied ;
the deleterious effect on foods produced by long keeping in shops
or in refrigerators, etc.; artificial ripening of fruits; artificial
methods of preserving foods; addition of preservative chemicals,
Cruces

It must here be emphasised that the idea of controlling diets by
estimation of calories, and scientific calculation—so much a fetish
in many places—overlooks that important personal factor which
means so much for the ailing and sickly. ‘‘ Manisa living organism,
not a mechanism, and can produce a definite amount of protein
and carbohydrate from a given quantity of food. . . . In practice
the value of a food depends on the physical properties of food-
stuffs, but also on the assimilative power of the digestive organs
and the personal condition of the individual organs. (Muther).**4
“The public are apt to forget that not the quantity of food, but the
efficiency of the gastric organs to digest and assimzlate is the real
criterion to go by.’”’ (ib.) Or, as has been wisely said: ‘‘ Nature
laughs at our scientific food values.”

The actual composition of the meal may be considered from
several aspects: the list of all possible articles which can be bought ;
the chemical composition of each; the food-value composition ;
the taste or palatability; the digestibility; the assimilability ;
incompatibilities ; the effect on the bowels and urine; the per-
sonal idiosyncrasies (including anaphylactic actions); the relation
to temperature of the air, season, age, sex, occupation; the mode
of preparation; the materials used for cooking (water, steam,
butter, margarine, fat, olive oil, etc.) Incompatibilities, both among
solid foods, and among beverages, and between solids and fluids
taken together or successively.

The action of the bowels must be seen to, and secured, as
often it can be, by the proper choice of foods and modes of cooking
rather than the random exhibition of various purges and aperients,
and by exercise.

Sleep.—Here we must go into :—the time of retiring to bed ;
the time of rising; the duration of sleep; the kind of sleeping
apartment ; the position in bed; the kind of bed; the bed-clothes ;
the night-clothes ; the nearness to a meal; the quality of the meal
last taken; the time of day. (Repose taken during the day, re-
laxation of the mind for the time, from cares, business worries,
and domestic anxieties, etc.)

FEixercise.—Special exercises may be prescribed :—breathing-
exercises, stretching exercises; gymmastic exercises: regulate
time of day, relation to food, amount of clothing at the time.—Here
belongs also the question of massage (kneading, stroking, pinching,
tapping, beating, vibration of certain parts of the body: lower
limbs, upper limbs, breast, abdomen, back, scalp, throat, face,
and so on). See 789, sqq.

Clothing.—Adapted to the season; materials used next to the
skin; loose or tight; weight of materials used.

Personal Habits—Prompt attention to calls of nature; clean-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 459


liness of skin. Smoking. Swimming and sea-bathing. Marital
relations may need consideration.

Occupation or livelihood.—This often proves a determining
factor if mistakes in advice are to be avoided. The influence which
the daily occupation has in the commonest of our habits must never
be disregarded. The occupation entails obedience to various
rules impossible in many cases; we must also consider whether
the occupation is agreeable or painful, or entails the repression of
one or other psychical wishes or carries with it restrictions of an
ethical or religious or ambitious or social nature.

Mental environment.—Vhis is provided partly by the occupation;
it also includes-the recreations; the domestic side of life; the
social side of life; amusements; company; friendships; leisure,
Ste;


Part 2L-V


GENERAL THERAPEUTICS


Tue Vartous Moves oF TREATMENT APPLICABLE TO DISEASE
IN. GENERAL


General discourse on the Treatment of Disease.
The Treatment of Disorders of the Temperament.


“‘ Evacuant ’’ and “‘ derivative ’’ treatment.—Purgation, Emesis,
Cupping, Venesection, Leeches.


The use of Liniments and Sprays.
The treatment of “ obstructions.”
Minor Surgery.

The relief of Pain.

Selection of Methods.


460


1. GENERAL DiscouRSE UPON THE TREATMENT OF DISEASE.


905. The subject of treatment com-
prises three headlines : that of the regimen
and diet, that of the use of medicines, and
| that of manual or operative interference.*

By the word “ regimen ’”’ we under-
stand the systematic management of the
several factors which we have enumerated
as being essential to health, and among
them diet has an (important) place. The
prescription of a regimen is based upon
data pertaining to the qualities of the
nutrients to be selected, as well as those
belonging to the qualities which determine the choice of
medicines.

906. Treatment witH Foop. In regard to diet, the
first question to decide is as to the quantity of each article of
food which should be allowed. Sometimes a given article of
food is to be forbidden ; sometimes lessened ; sometimes
no change need be made ; sometimes the amount taken is to
be increased. ‘The physician only forbids a food, or all food,
if he intends that the digestive faculties [throughout the body]
shall be left entirely free to complete the maturation of the
humours. He prescribes a lessened amount of a food, if he
wishes the digestive powers to be conserved. ‘The very fact
of taking nutriment is a tax on the digestive faculties ;_ there-
fore the withdrawal of a certain amount of food means a cor-
responding alleviation for them.

The physician must, also be watchful in regard to two
dangers—one, that the» natural powers should become too
enfeebled ; the second, that an illness should become too


grave.
907. How zo reduce the diet.—This may be achieved


* i.e. dietetics, pharmaceutics, surgery.


461


462 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


- in two directions—it is lessened either in amount, or in quality.
In fact, by combining these two ways, one has a third method
at one’s disposal. ‘To explain more exactly—an aliment may
be bulky but poorly nutritious. For instance, pot-herbs,
fruits. A person may eat plentifully of these without receiving
much nourishment. On the other hand, an aliment may be
small in bulk, but highly nutritious. For example, eggs ; the
testicles of fowls. It is, for instance, necessary to lessen the
nutritive value of food, and increase its bulk, in cases where
the appetite is altogether excessive and “crude ’’ humours
enter the blood. So we lull the appetite by filling up the
stomach, and yet see to it that only a small amount of (nutritive)
matter enters the blood, thereby enabling the digestive products
already in the blood to become ‘“‘ matured”’ (properly disposed
of). And there may be other reasons. On the other hand it
may be desirable to increase the nutritive quality without
adding to the bulk of the food; namely, when we wish to
increase the bodily strength (vitality) and when the digestive
power of the stomach 1s inadequate.

908. Diminution in the amount of food, or stopping food
altogether is usually the line of treatment in acute illnesses.
But sometimes we decrease the amount of food in chronic
maladies also, though not to the same extent as in acute ones.
‘The reason is that in the case of chronic maladies it is more
necessary to see that the bodily strength is maintained, for
we know that a long time will elapse before there can be a
crisis or restoration to health. So unless the strength be main-
tained, the patient will not hold out until the time for crisis
comes, and he cannot digest anything which takes a long time
to digest. But in the case of acute illnesses, the crisis is near at
hand, so we may confidently expect the vitality to hold out
until that time. Did we have any doubt about this, we should
see to it that the diet was not lowered too much.

It is not so necessary to diminish the amount of food in the
earlier stages of an illness, when the symptoms are not very
marked. In this way one conserves the natural powers. But
as the illness progresses and the symptoms become more severe,
so the amount of food is to be lessened according to the principles
already stated. In this way the digestive powers are helped
at the (critical) hour of struggle.

The regimen must also be made definitely attenuant during
the height of the disease. The more acute the malady, and
the nearer the crisis, the more attenuant must the regimen be


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 463


made, unless there should happen to be contra-indications such
as we shall name in the special part.

909. Aliment possesses two functions besides mere
nutrition ; (a) rate of penetration, or absorption : rapid pene-
trative power, as for instance, wine ; slow penetrative power,
as for instance, roast meats and fried meats 3 (2) compactness
of the substance of the digestive products in the blood, and
consequent retention (e.g., this is the feature of the digestive
products from pork and veal); or attenuation of substance,
with consequent speedy dispersal (as is the feature of the digestive
products of wine and figs).

We need to make use of an aliment of rapid penetrative
power when we wish to remedy a loss of vital power, so as to
revive it when there is not sufficient time or (digestive) power to
justify waiting till the aliments are digested in their ordinary
course, slow as that may be. We have also to take care not
to take easily digested food after food which is only slowly
digested, lest the result of the mixture be undesirable in the
way already explained. We should also take care to avoid
foods of solid texture, since we know for a fact that these give
rise to obstructions (in the ducts and tissue channels as well
as in the intestines).

Therefore we will select highly nutritious foods which
digest slowly, when we wish to restore the strength of the patient,
and make him fit to undertake strenuous exercise. We select
a feebly nutritious food for a person whose pores are choked
with dense matter.


910. TREATMENT WITH MEDICINES.


There are three rules to follow in selecting medicines :
(1) selection according to quality—whether hot, cold, moist,
dry; (2) selection of the amount to be given [Dose]. There are
two sub-divisions here : (a) measurement in terms of weight,
(4) measurement of its quality—degree of hot, cold, etc. quality,
(3) the rules relative to the time of poeta cation:

In regard to (1), the choice according to quality, the
decision depends, strictly speaking, upon one’s knowledge
of the type of the malady to be treated. Once one knows the
quality of the malady, the appropriate medicine is that whose
quality is exactly opposite ; just as in the case of health, it 1s
the like wherewith it is maintained.

In regard to (2), there are two factors to consider, in
order to arrive at an arbitrary measure: (a) the nature of the
member, (4) the degree of illness. Over and above these, are


464 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


factors determining the suitability and fitness of the remedy,
namely, species, age, custom, season, geographical position,
occupation, strength, physique.

911. To understand the nature of the member one must
know these four things about it: (i) its temperament; (11) its
construction; (iii) its position and relations; (iv) its strength.

(i) Temperament.—It is necessary to know the normal
temperament of each member because this gives the clue to
the degree of intemperament, by showing to what extent this
has departed from the normal. One would thus form an idea
as to the amount of change which is necessary to restore the
part to health. For example, if the temperament in health
were cold, and the present (intemperament) be hot, then the
change from normal is considerable. A considerable amount of
infrigidation will be necessary. But if both were hot, quite
a trivial degree of infrigidation might suffice to restore health.

(ii) Construction. We have already stated that there
are four modes of construction of a member, and the reader
must study the matter in that place. But in addition it is
necessary to be aware that (a) certain members have been con-
structed with openings of easy ingress, with ample spaces
(receptacles) at the entry and exit (of the channels)* so that the
waste products can be expelled readily by (appropriate) tenuous
and attempered medicines. There are others which are not
so formed, and in these cases stronger medicines become neces-
sary. ()Some members are loosely constructed, while others
are dense in texture. For the former, tenuous medicine will
suffice, whereas for the latter a powerful remedy is necessary.
The strong medicine is the more necessary in cases where there
is neither cavity nor receptacle—either interiorly or externally.
Next in degree of strength of medicine is that which serves
in the case where there is a receptacle in one of the two parts ;
and next to that is the strength of medicine applicable in the
case where there is a receptacle on both sides. Examples of
this : the kidney, which is dense, firm, brawny, and solid in
texture ; the lung, which is loose in texture [and obviously
has pervading channels as well as an exterior orifice].


* These channels comprise (a) the ordinary anatomical inlets and outlets of
the body ; (0) orifices of ducts which open into the alimentary tract, etc., and are
not visible exteriorly ; (c) channels of microscopic size which would not be included
in an ordinary anatomical description ; (d) tissue spaces which are not defined by
limiting membranes, but are traversed by fluid constituents of the body. The
terminal portion of a duct often shows an ampullary dilation, which comes under
the category of a “receptacle ’”’ in the text. (e)Expansions of lumen of this kind
also occur in the vascular channels ; (f) perivascular and peritendinous sheaths.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 465


(ili) Site or position. One knows about the site when one
knows the position and the relations of the member. The
advantage of knowing the anatomical relations of an organ is that
one can then choose the part which will draw the given medicine,
for thus one compe/s the medicine to travel in the desired direc-
tion. For instance : if there is pathological matter in the blood
channels of the liver, one will evacuate it by way of the kidney ;
if it be in the bile ducts, one will evacuate by way of the intestine.
For the former is (physiologically) related to the kidney, and
the latter to the intestine.

912. There is a threefold value in knowing the position
of a part.

(1) Accessibility or remoteness.—If the organ to be
reached is accessible, as is true in the case of the stomach,
an attempered medicine brought to it will act on it (with
certainty), whereas if the organ be distant, like the lung, the
action of an attempered medicine will be nullified (because it
has been changed by digestion) before it can reach the lung
itself. Therefore, a stronger medicine becomes necessary
in this case. When the organ affected is readily accessible
to the medicine, so that the virtues of the latter at once come
into play, the efficiency of the medicine will be directly pro-
portionate to the severity of the malady. But if the medicine
has to travel some distance before reaching the affected organ,
and the malady more deeply seated than can be met by the
penetrative power of the remedy, then the potency must be
higher than usual. For instance, the amount of vinegar needed
is greater when applied in a plaster for sciatica.

(2) One must know what substances to admix with medi-
cines in order to bring them rapidly to the affected organ.
For instance, one must admix diuretics with a medicine for the
urinary tract; and saffron with medicines intended for the
heart.

(3) One must know by what route the medicine is to be
brought to the affected part. Thus, if we have ascertained
that there are ulcers in the lower bowel, we inject remedies by
the rectum ; whereas if we know that the ulcers are in the
small intestine, we give the remedies as fluids by the mouth.

913. Sometimes it, is advantageous to consider both
situation and relations to other organs at the same time. ‘This
applies in the case where the whole of the morbid matter has
been discharged into the member, or when it is in process of


being so discharged. For as soon as we know that it is in process
. 2H


466 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


of descent to the particular spot, we may draw it out of the body
altogether by making use of the following four principles :—

(a) The rule of diversity of parts.—One may draw from
the right side to the left ; from above to the parts below.

(6) The rule of physiological relationship.—Thus, when
the menstrual flow is controlled by applying cupping to the
physiologically related organ—the breasts.

(c) The rule of directness.—Thus, for maladies of the
liver, venesection is done in the right basilic ; in the case of
the spleen, the left basilic vein is used.

(d) The rule of distance.—The member into which the
morbid matters are drawn must not be too near to the one
diseased.

If by chance the whole of the morbid matter has already
been withdrawn, both sides of the body may be used together.
For we may, if we desire, draw the material into the member
itself, or first draw it into an adjoining physiologically related
one, and then from that. For instance, we open both saphenous
veins when treating maladies of the uterus, and we open the one
(median) vein under the tongue, when treating double quinsy.

When you wish to draw morbid matter to another member
to that from which you are drawing it, first allay the pain there.
And take care that in so transferring the matter you are not
crossing a vital organ.

914. (iv) —The value of assessing the power or strength ofa
member lies in three directions: (1) 1t enables us to direct the
treatment in the order of nobility of organs. Thus, one must
not use potent drugs which might act on the principal [vital]
organs to so great an extent as to risk producing a harmful effect
all over the body. So, when it is necessary to withdraw matter
from the brain or liver, one would not attempt to do so at the same
period of the disease, and one must not apply infrigidants too
assiduously. Again, when we wish to apply external applications
over the liver and at the same time introduce resolvent medicines,
we must take care to combine astringent drugs of aromatic
character with them, so as not to risk interfering with the
functional capacity of the organ. The same rule applies when
giving fluid remedies. In applying these rules, the order of
importance of the organ is: heart, brain, liver.

(2) The treatment is directed to an organ of physio-
logically related function, provided the organ selected is not a
vital one, like the stomach and lung. For instance, one does
not give very cold water in cases of fever, when the stomach


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 467


is weak. You are aware, too, that to administer undiluted
remedies, which are relaxing to vital organs or to organs closely
related to them, is simply to imperil life.

(3) One takes the sensibility of an organ into considera-
tion—whether it is keen or dull. That is, one must beware
of giving drugs possessing injurious (mordant, pungent or
toxic) qualities, to very sensitive organs, or organs of special
sense—for instance, plants belonging to the euphorbia group.

915. There are three kinds of medicines in the adminis-
tration of which we must be very cautious. Those which are
extremely resolvent ; those which are cooling ; and those
which are contrary in property. Examples: lead and copper
salts, and the like.

This, then, is how one chooses medicines according to the
nature or character of the organ to be treated.

916. Choice of medicine according to the severity of
the iliness.—For example, when the degree of morbid heat
of the body is unduly great, it must be counteracted by means
of a medicine of strongly infrigidant character. But when the
abnormality consists in a marked degree of coldness, this is
met by exhibiting a strongly calefacient medicine. If the
degree of abnormality is not marked, remedies of weaker quality
will suffice.

917, Choice of medicine according to stage of the disease.—
When we know the stage at which a disease is, we adjust the
treatment accordingly. Thus, if an inflammatory focus is
in the initial stage, we shall apply a remedy which will act
upon it alone. If the disease 1s near the terminal stage, we
may apply a remedy which will resolve it (at that phase). If
the disease is between these two stages, we should combine
both forms of remedy. If the disease be acute, we should
at first aim at attenuation by means of an attempered regimen ;
but at the later stage we should seek to procure attenuation.
In the case of a chronic disease, we should not aim at attenuant
treatment in the early stages, and we should use a modified
attenuation at the later stage, though it is true that an attenuant
regimen disperses many chronic maladies besides fevers. Again,
if a malady is due to active fermentation of the humours, we
procure evacuation [inc], venesection] at the early stages,
without waiting for the ‘“‘ matter’”’ to undergo maturation.
But if the fermentation is only moderate in degree, we wait
till maturation is complete before undertaking the evacuant
measures.


468 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


918. You can easily recognize which factors are favour-
able to the end in view (and how to adapt them accordingly).
Thus, air is the most important of all such, and one needs
to take care that it shall assist the action of the medicinal treat-
ment and not contribute to an aggravation of the illness.

919. In the case of maladies where any delay in treatment
might entail a loss of vitality, or where one wishes to do more
than merely alleviate, we shall begin with a strong medicinal
agent. But if there is no fear of such an eventuality, we may
proceed in orderly fashion, using a milder remedy first and the
stronger one if that proves insufficient.

Further, you must not forsake the direct rule of treat-
ment if you find that there is only a tardy response to it ;
and, on the other-hand, you must not commit the fault of delay
when there is no contra-indication. In addition, you must
not confine yourself to one single medicinal remedy throughout
the treatment, but you must interchange the medicines (all
the time), because when (the tissues) are accustomed to one they
cease to respond, and moreover, the same tissue or member, or
the body as a whole, may react to one given medicine at one time
or phase and not at another.

920. When you do not know the nature of a malady,
leave it to Nature ; do not strive to hasten matters. For either
Nature will bring about the cure or it will itself reveal clearly
what the malady really is.

921. Treatment of pain. When the malady is accom-
panied by pain, whether the pain is the cause or the effect, as in
the case of blows or falls, the first thing to do is to allay the pain.
If it is necessary to induce a stuporose state, do not go beyond
the use of such as white poppy. Its anodyne action is well-known.

When the member is hyper-sensitive, nourish it with such
things as render the blood viscid, as for instance, cooked grain.
If this is not sufficient, and there is no reason to be afraid of in-
frigidation, such things as lettuce may be used.

922. Remember, too, that among the advantageous
contributory factors in treatment is the help afforded by any-
thing which exalts the sensitive and vital faculties : for instance,
joyfulness. In consequence, one sets out to please one’s patient,
and ever tranquillise him by anything which can reasonably
gratify him. Sometimes one may advantageously arouse his
sense of shame, making him blush, and so leading the sick
person to avoid what is harmful for him. (Cf. Anecdotes in
Chahar Maqala’? p. 82, 84). |


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 469


A measure which is akin to the preceding is that of
removing from one country to another, from one climate
to another. Or a change is made from one external form to
another. To do this, one particularises the various forms
and movements which will act upon the given member, or alter
its temperament. ‘Thus one may advise a youth with disorders
of vision to avoid very close writing and looking at very bright
objects ; a person with squint [wry-neck : alternative reading]
should look into a narrow mirror so held that the effort of turning
towards it will help remedy the malposition of face, forehead
or eye.

Another rule to be observed is to omit strong measures
of treatment at the strong seasons, as far as possible. For
instance, one refrains from violent purging, from provoking
emesis, or from opening a part, or applying cautery, during
summer or winter.

923. Gentle treatment is to be applied when two maladies
are conjoined into one, such that contrary measures have to
be carried out at the same time. For instance, if the malady
is infrigidant, and its cause is warming—or conversely—
the malady is to be treated with calefacients and the cause is
to be treated with infrigidants. E.g., fever requires infrigida-
tion, and the obstructions (in the channels) which give rise to
the fever need the application of heat. Again, the indications
in colic are warmth, incisives, and attenuants ; but the pain
to which it gives rise needs cold, and analgesics.

924. Remember, further, that not every case of plethora
is to be treated by its contrary, namely, evacuation (by purging
or by venesection, e.g.) nor is every intemperament to be treated
by inducing a contrary temperamental state. As a matter of
fact, a liberal and good regimen will often suffice by itself to
remedy plethora or intemperament.


2.—TuHE TREATMENT OF DisorDERS OF TEMPERAMENT.


925, When an intemperament occurs without (abnormal
unhealthy) matter, the treatment 1s to alter it; but if there
is abnormal matter, this has to be evacuated. Usually a single
evacuation will suffice to amend the previously existing 1n-
temperal state ; but sometimes it is not sufficient for the pur-
pose, and the intemperament will then require rectification,
after evacuation has been procured.

We may therefore state that the treatment of intempera-
ment comprises several modes of procedure.


470 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


926. An intemperament is either chronic (longstanding),
in which case the treatment is strictly by contrary, and a complete
cure is achievable thereby ; or it appears at the terminal phase of
an illness—in which case the treatment is by anticipation. Thus,
treatment by contraries is instanced by the giving of theriaca for
the putrefactive processes associated with quartan fever, and
of (ice) cold water to abolish the fever of tertian fever. Treat-
ment by anticipation is instanced by the use of evacuation,
namely, by hellebore in the case of quartan, and by scammony
in ‘the case of tertian. The hellebore applies to
atrabilious humour ; the scammony to bilious humour. Our
object is thereby to prevent or forestall the (morbid) changes.

927. If in any given illness you are in doubt as to whether
heat or cold is responsible, and you therefore desire to put the
matter to the test, you must be careful not to overdo this, and
not to be misled by secondary super-imposed symptoms.
You must note that the appropriate moment is the same for
infrigidation as for calefaction. But one is more apprehensive
regarding infrigidation, for heat is the friend of “ nature.”
One is as apprehensive of moistening as of dessication, but the
period during which the former is permissible is longer. More-
over, the state of moistening and desiccation is in each case
maintained simply by fostering the factors which give rise to
them, and they are modified simply by re-inforcing the contraries
of those factors.

928. Heat is re-inforced by the agents already expounded
(415). Putrefication of the passages 1s carried out next, by
procuring the expulsion of wastes, the removal of plethora,
and by opening up obstructions. Finally the heat is to be con-
served by preserving a moderate degree of moisture.

Cold is reinforced by assisting any factors which bring
it about, by repressing the (bodily) heat, and by dispersing the
heat unduly —to which dryness contributes by its essence,
and heat secondarily.

929. In treating undue heat by removing obstructions,
one must guard against producing too much infrigidation,
for in that case there is a risk of rendering the obstruction
still greater by conversion (of the matter) into a stone. One
must also take care not to render a hot intemperament more
marked. Hence the treatment by abstergents should be
entered upon gradually. It is advantageous to use an abster-
gent which is sufficiently cooling (e.g., barley water, and endive),
But if this be not adequate, one makes use of an agent which is


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 471


neither “hot” nor ‘“‘cold” ; and if this is inadequate, one
employs an agent which is warm and tenuous. One need
not be anxious in making use of such a remedy, for it lends
further assistance by provoking diaphoresis, which renders the
body cooler, thereby causing more good than the heating effect
can harm; and anyway, it is easy to remove the heating effect
once the pores have been opened.

930. It may happen that the innate heat is so much reduced
(by such measures) that the digestion of the morbid humours
is interfered with. Yet there are some who boldly pursue this
wrongful method and ignore the fact that undue reduction
of the innate heat means loss of vitality, which is specially to be
expected in persons much weakened by illness. This result
occurs even though the matter is rectified in some other way,
and other maladies follow on, either in the form of simple
intemperaments, or by arising out of “cold”? matters which
are opposite in quality to the temperament. When a cold
intemperament is established, it is as difficult to render it warm
as it 1s easy to do when it is only beginning. ‘To render a
cold intemperament warm at the outset is easier than to render
a hot one cold at the outset. But to render a hot one cold at
the end of the process, though difficult, is nevertheless easier
than to render a cold one hot at the end of the process. The
reason is that excess of cold itself implies complete, or nearly
complete, destruction of the innate heat (cf. 894).

931. Infrigidation is sometimes associated with desic-
cation, sometimes with moistness, and sometimes occurs in-
dependently of either. But dryness is more persistent, if associa-
ted with infrigidation, and moisture is more conducive to the
supervention of coldness. All the factors producing calefaction
aid desiccation if they are preponderant. All the factors
producing infrigidation aid humectation if they are prepon-
derant. Nothing is so likely to have this effect as inactivity,
and constant use of the bath, even the full-length bath.  [L.e.,
domestic as opposed to the Hammam.]—We have already
made this known to you.—Diluted wine is also strongly humec-
tant.

You must note also that if it is an old man who needs
infrigidation and moistening, it is not enough to reduce the
temperament to equability, one must continue till the tempera-
ment is cold and moist beyond the normal, because such a
temperament is acquired secondarily, though quasi-natural to the
old person.


200 THE CANON OF -MEDICINE
932. Note, too, that when changing the quality of a


temperament, it is often necessary to reinforce it by admixing
with the remedy something of contrary quality. Thus we give
vinegar with medicines which are hot towards a given member,
because then their virtues can penetrate into the member ;
we give saffron with cardiac infrigidants, because saffron carries
such remedies to the heart.

933. Oftentimes it happens that a medicine which pro-
duces a very marked change of temperament does not have
a lasting effect ; this is because it is so tenuous that its action
does not pass on to completion. In this case we must admix
with it something which will render it less tenuous and more
stable, even though one risks the production of a contrary
effect. Thus, we mix wax with balsam, and so on. ‘The one
remedy is thereby preserved long enough to ensure its proper
action being accomplished.


3.—How to DrTerRMINE THE ManneER aND MOoMENT FOR
““ EvAcuaTION.”


984. There are ten indications which show when it is
right to procure ‘‘evacuation”’ [i.e., blood-letting, wet-cupping,
purgation, enemas, diaphoresis, use of leeches, etc.] :

(1) Plethora ; (2) vitality; | (3)temperament ; (4) ap-
propriate symptoms (thus, we need not evacuate the bowel in a
case of diarrhoea) ; (5) habit of body or physique ; (6) the age
of the patient ; (7) the time of the year ; (8) the state of the
atmosphere; (9) the geographical situation ; (10) the patient’s
mode of life regarding “evacuation”; and (11) his occupation.

Evacuation should not be carried out when there are
contra-indications in these respects.

1.—Plethora. If the state is the opposite of plethora
(vacuousness), evacuation is obviously contra-indicated.

2.—Strength of Patient. (Vitality). Weakness in any
of the three primary faculties is a contra-indication. Neverthe-
less, we may decide to act in spite of such a weakness, if more
harm is likely to accrue from neglecting evacuation. This
applies to the sensory and motor faculties since we are. more
anxious to avoid injuring them if they are weak. In fact, the
same applies with all the faculties.

3-—Temperament. Contra-indications are: hot and dry
temperament ; cold and moist temperament, in which there
is little or no heat. One may act vigorously, however, if the
temperament is hot and moist.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 473


4.—Symptoms, Certain unfavourable symptoms are contra-
indications—such as endemic diarrhoea and cramp (spasmodic
diseases).

5.—Physique or habit of body.—Excessive leanness or
spareness of build is a contra-indication, because the breath
is so readily dispersed. For the same reason, when a person is
weak and lean, and has much bilious humour in the blood,
he must be treated blandly, and evacuation avoided. The
aliment should be such as will engender good blood, (making
it) incline to coolness and moistness of quality. In this manner
the temperament of the humour will be corrected, after which
the patient wiJl perhaps be strong enough to tolerate evacuant
measures.

Similarly, one must not venture to “ evacuate” a patient
who is accustomed to eat sparingly ; or, at least, one should
postpone such a measure as long as possible.

Obesity is a contra-indication, because one runs the risk
of making the frigidity dominant, and of allowing the flesh
to compress the vessels up to occlusion, thus blocking the flow
of innate heat ; or, of forcing out the effete matters from the
vessels and driving them inwardly.

6.—The Age of the Patient. Avoid evacuant measures
when the fulness of growth has not yet been reached, or when
the patient is nearing the end of decrepitude.

7.—Avoid evacuant measures if the time of the year is
extremely hot or extremely cold. |

9.—Geographical position. A southerly country which 1s
very hot is contra-indicative, for persons with diarrhoea are
usually of hot temperament (“ hot-tempered.”) ‘The association
of two adverse conditions [the extraneous heat and the evacua-
tion] is badly borne, because the bodily faculties are enfeebled
by dispersal of vitality, and because the extraneous heat draws
the ‘‘ matter’ outwardly, and the medicine draws it inwardly.
Being thus drawn in two opposite directions, it tends to remain
where it is.

Avoid evacuant measures in very cold, northerly countries.

10.—Habits; Avoid evacuation when the habit is to
have evacuations infrequently.

11.—Occupation. Avoid evacuant treatment when the
occupation is one which in itself is evacuant in effect, e.g.,
bath-attendants ; carrying (heavy) loads on the back; all
toilsome or arduous physical labour.

985. In procuring evacuation there are five points to


?


474 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


consider.—(1) Removal of that which is to be evacuated, followed
by rest to the parts, unless there is atony (lassitude) in the
receptacular spaces (see 911, footnote), or overheating of the
blood—whether in the form of ephemeral fever or of other
accompanying maladies.—Thus there may be excoriation
of the mucosa, which brings about diarrhcea ; or ulcers in
the bladder. Such things may be advantageous, and yet
not appreciated as such by the patient because of the pain
and suffering they cause him until the symptom has been re-
moved. (2) To choose which organ is to be “evacuated” :
thus nausea is removed by emesis ; burning pain in the abdomen
is eased by purgation. (3) To use as member of egress that
which corresponds to the organ to be evacuated. Thus for
maladies of the liver the right basilic and not the right cephalic
must be used. ‘To make an error in such a matter might
be harmful. [he member chosen for the site of evacuation
must be less important (“‘noble’’) than that which is to be
evacuated, lest the morbid matter pass down into the more
important organ. The channel of exit should also be the
natural one ; thus for the blood-vessels of the liver the urinary
tract ; for the ducts of the liver the intestinal tract.

Sometimes the organ to be evacuated is itself the one to
take as the site for evacuation, and yet it is the seat of chronic or
acute disease. In this case it would be risky to induce the
humours to traverse it, and they should be diverted to another
organ instead.

Sometimes there is a risk of superimposing another malady
on the first, by inducing a superabundance of the humours
in the second part. For instance, if the morbid matter is
drawn downwards from the eye to the throat, choking [cedema
of glottis] might result, and therefore one must proceed with
such a measure carefully and with gentleness.

Nature herself [1.e., the vegetative soul], often acts on the
same principle, and protects a weak member by effecting the
evacuation through a part other than that which would be the
normal one for that member. Very often the part at which
the evacuation actually occurs is quite distant, and opposite
in position, and it comes to be a matter of doubt as to which
member is being drained in this way. Thus the head may be
drained by the anus, or the leg or the foot, and one could not
say whether the evacuation is of the brain as a whole or only
from one ventricle.


(4) To decide on the proper moment to evacuate. In


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 475


chronic maladies, as Galen rightly says, one does not wait for
maturation. You know what is meant by the term “‘ matura-
tion.” ‘Therefore one should give attenuant drinks such as
water of hyssop, of thyme, and herb seeds, before commencing
to carry out the evacuant treatment, and after the maturation
stage has been reached. But in acute maladies, it is best to
wait till the maturation stage has been reached, especially
as long as the humours are stagnant. Once they appear to be
on the move, one must hasten to drain them away, because
the damage accruing from their movement is greater than that
which one risks by evacuating immatured humours—especially
if the humours are tenuous, and especially if within vessels
and not in the tissues in which they arise. When the morbid
humour is confined to one particular member, it will certainly not
move out of it until maturation has occurred in it, and its character
has become modified—as has already been explained for you
in the proper place.

Again, if we feel doubtful as to whether the vitality (of
the patient) will hold out until the time for maturation has
arrived, we shall proceed to procure evacuation, noting care-
fully whether the material to be evacuated is labile or viscid. In
the latter case we must first render the material tenuous. And we
shall know that it is viscid by the fact of the premonitory dyspep-
tic nausea having passed by, or by the existence of tensive pain
under the hypochrondrium, or by the development of an inflam-
matory swelling inwardly. | We must also carefully make sure
that the passages are patent. Having taken these precautions
you will be able to drain the morbid matter by the bowel before
it has become purulent.

(5) The amount to be evacuated. ‘This is judged from (a)
the quantity of material already evacuated, (4) the strength
of the patient, (c) the symptoms which remain afterwards.
If symptoms should still remain, we must either reduce the
amount of evacuation according to the amount already estimated,
or we consider whether the symptom is itself to be treated, as
would apply for instance in the case of plethoric spasmodic
disorders.

(The marginal reading adds that the quality of the material
must be considered, for it ,will not become mobile until it has been
rendered tenuous.)

936. ‘here are two ways of evacuating morbid material
and eradicating it from the place where it has lodged: (1) by
attraction from a distant place, (ii) by attraction to a neighbouring


476 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


place. And the most appropriate time for carrying out the
treatment is when there is no sort of plethora of the humours
in the body, and they are not moving downwards into the member
to which there is attraction.

Let us suppose, for instance, that there is a considerable
flow of blood trom above the mouth in a man, or from piles
in a woman. ‘To remedy this we may, proceed to do one of
two things. Either we draw downwards towards a neighbouring
part of diverse character : that is, we cause the blood to flow
down into the nostrils and emerge from them, in the one case ;
and provoke the menstrual flow from the uterus in the other.
Or we draw to a distant part of diverse character: that 1s,
in the former example we bleed from veins in the lower part
of the body, in the case of the male, and bleed from vzins in
the upper parts of the body, in the case of the female.

937. When the attraction has to be made from a distant
part, one need not undertake to do so from both sides of the body,
but just from that which is corresponding. ‘Thus if the material
is at the upper end on the right side, one would not draw it
away to the lowest part on the left side, but to the lowest part
of the right side (and indeed this would be the most necessary),
or to the upper part of the left side, supposing there were as
much distance between the two as there is between the humerus
and the other, and not a matter of just the two sides of the
head itself. For one would draw morbid material from the
right side of the head down to the lower parts of the body,
and not to the opposite side of the head.

938. Suppose one wishes to draw morbid material to a
distant part—then one first allays the pain in the part, for this
will itself lessen the amount of material by attraction, since
pain exerts an attracting effect. But if it do not move to the
part as soon as desired, avoid violent measures ; for while it is
true that violence would procure the desired movement, yet
the material would become attenuated and not amenable to the
attracting influence, and would simply pass right into the painful
part.

939. It may prove sufficient to draw the material away
without actually evacuating, because the very attraction arrests
its progress to the desired member. But even so, our object
in securing attraction may still have been attained, supposing
that one would be satisfied to have accomplished the attraction
downwards without the additional evacuation. This is done
when one bandages up the opposite member, or applies cupping-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 477


glasses, or rubefacient medicines—in short, any measure which
allays pain.

940. Morbid materials are more readily evacuated when
they are in the vessels than when in the tissues and joints, for
sometimes it is difficult to remove them thence, and evacuate
them. And in evacuating them from such situations one
inevitably evacuates other things with them.

941. A person from whom diseased matter has been
evacuated must not partake of much food or unhealthy articles
of food and anything which has an indigestible nature. If by
chance one is for some reason obliged to do so, one should
do so gingerly and cautiously, in small portions, so that that which
enters the body may be digested and prove harmless accordingly.

942, The drawing of blood is a special method of evacuat-
ing morbid humours which are all increased equally or propor-
tionately. It is not the removal of one humour which is simply
increased in amount or has its own particular quality destroyed.

943. To carry out evacuant treatment to an undue
degree is to bring about febrile conditions.

If the bowels, previously usually loose, are bound, this
condition will give rise to some other malady, and it will be
proper to treat it by repeating the evacuation. For instance,
supposing the discharge of sanious matter from the ears or
mucous passages of the nose should cease, leading to vertigo,
then if the flow be restored the vertigo will be removed.

It is less injurious to leave a little of the morbid matter
behind than to strive to evacuate everything to the most minute
fragment, thereby risking a dispersal of the vitality. Nature
herself often removes the last remnants.

When the humour is of a kind which necessarily exists,
you need not be afraid of how much blood you take as long as
the sick person is able to sustain it. For sometimes one is bound
to evacuate (bleed) up to syncope.

944. When the person is robust, and the humoral matter
plentiful and depraved, evacuation must be done gradually.
Further, if the morbid material is extremely viscid or widely
diffused, or admixed with much blood, it cannot be emptied at
one sitting. ‘This is true in the case of sciatica, longstanding
arthritis, cancer, old-standing skin diseases and obstinate fur-
uncles.

945. Remember also that purgation draws morbid
matters from the upper parts of the body, and discharges them
below. Purging is, therefore, an attractive force in two different


478 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


directions—to the near and to the remote region of the body.
It is most useful when the morbid material is stagnant. There-
fore, when the morbid matter is either above or below, one may
draw it to the opposite direction, away from the position in
which it has lodged. Attraction is procured by emesis ; eradica-
tion by the converse.

946. Furthermore, one varies the kind of blood-letting
according to the positions from which the blood is taken up—
as has been explained.

A person accustomed to a good diet, and having
a healthy digestion, is less in need of evacuant measures than
are most men.

Persons residing in hot countries need little in the way
of evacuant treatment.


4.—THe GeneraL RuLes TO BE OBSERVED IN PROCURING
Emesis oR PurGATION, AND THEIR Mope oF ACTION (UPON
Morsip STATES).


947. Whenever purgation or emesis is to be procured,
the food sufficient for one day should be divided up into portions
to be partaken of in instalments. The aliments and drinks
are diversified accordingly. For under the circumstances the
stomach acquires the desire to expel what is in it, either upwards
or downwards. ‘The stomach is greedy for foods that are not
diversified, and if no other food be taken in addition it holds
its contents very stubbornly, especially if the amount be only
small. ‘This must be borne in mind by those who are naturally
V60se,/

948. Emesis and purgation and the like do not apply
for those who follow a good regimen. This is because a person
who controls himself properly will not need anything but mild
attention, and may be excused even from exercises, bathing,
and massage. If such a person be in a plethoric state, the
humours concerned will be healthy, i.e., sanguineous. Con-
sequently, such a person requires not purgation but blood-
letting, if indications for cleansing the [channels of the body]
should arise.

949. If both blood-letting and purgation (by hellebore and
similar violent medicines) are needed, begin with the blood-
letting, because this precept of Hippocrates in his book on
Epidemics is sound. If, on the other hand, the plethora is
of phlegmatic humours admixed with sanguineous humour,
so that they are viscid and “ cold,” one would begin with pur-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 479


gation, because blood-letting would make the humours still
more coarse, and more viscid.

950. In short, if the humours are in balanced pro-
portion, blood-letting is preferable. Then, if a plethoric con-
dition still persists, purgation is undertaken. If the humours are
not in balanced proportion, first purge the superabundant
humour until balance is restored, and then proceed with the
blood-letting. If the patient should have taken medicine
before the blood-letting (which was an error on his part), he
should defer the subsequent blood-letting for a few days. If
purgation is needed within a short time after the blood-letting,
the appropriate medicine may be given then. Sometimes,
however, the person who has (improperly) taken the draught
of medicine, instead of first undergoing a blood-letting will
develop fever and restlessness before it can be done. If the
restlessness is not allayed by the usual remedies (sedatives), the
blood-letting should be done.

951. Evacuant treatment is not necessary in every case
of excessive plethora, It may be indicated by the severity
of the malady, or by the quality of the plethora, rather than its
degree. (Indeed, a good regimen will often make such measures
unnecessary : marginal reading).

952. It may happen that there is a need for evacuation,
but something intervenes which forms an adequate substitute,
such as fasting, sleeping, correcting the unhealthy state of the
temperament which has been produced by the plethora.

953. Then there is a form of evacuation which itself
serves to protect one for instance from an attack of gout, or
from an epileptic seizure which one knows will occur on a
certain date, especially in spring. In this case one must apply
the evacuant measure before the time is due, choosing the
appropriate method—that is, choosing between blood-letting
and purgation, according to the kind of things to be evacuated
in the given malady. It may be also wise to apply desiccants
externally, and to use absorbents for the purgation as one does
in the case of those afflicted with dropsy.

954. Sometimes the medicine to be chosen as purgative
must have a quality corresponding to that of the humour to be
evacuated. "[hus, scammony is needed for evacuating bilious
humour. A drug which is of a different quality should be mixed
with it as an adjuvant for the purgation without preventing
proper evacuation. For instance, myrobalan. Should the tem-
perament afterwards become unhealthy, one must just correct it.


480 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


955. LEmesis should be procured in cases where there is an
internal inflammatory mass, because such cases are difficult
to purge. But if purgation becomes essential, use such agents
as pellitory, seed of safflower, apozema of polypody, cassia
fistula, and the like. j

956. Hippocrates also says that the best way of cleansing
a person of spare habit, and of a nature such that vomiting
easily takes place, is to procure emesis ; and this should be
done in summer, spring, or autumn, but not in winter. But
if he is of medium habit, it is better to purge. If evacuation
by emesis is necessary, it is better to wait till summer, avoiding
it altogether if it is not really necessary.

957. Prior to procuring purgation or emesis, the humour
to be evacuated’ must be attenuated, and the channels of exit
must be widened, and their outlet opened, in order to save the
body from trouble. The last-named is achieved by an aperient
(aperitive) regimen. ‘That is, the patient accustoms himself
to obey the calls of nature, and to maintain the motions loose.
The actual medicines for purgation and emesis are reserved
till later. Moreover, it is difficult, wearisome, and dangerous,
to procure purgation when the belly is wasted.

§ 255. ARTICLES OF FooD WHICH INCREASE THE ALVINE DISCHARGE

(AEG.) AND PURIFY THE BLOOD.
Mildly aperient foods :—

Soft eggs.

Potherbs; beet, mallows, cabbage, sorrel.

Shellfish soup.


More strongly aperient foods :—
Milk whey, with salt; herb mercury boiled in water with salt.


Honey.
Elder-tree leaves; polypody root (oakfern), two drams sprinkled on pickle


or taken in a ptisan.
Broth of old cock taken with or without 2 drams of bastard saffron.
Aloes to the amount of 3 chickpeas taken at supper-time.
Dodder of thyme in wine, taken after a moderate supper.
Still Stronger :—
Dodder of thyme (one dram) in wine, infused in vinegar and honey, taken
before breakfast in spring time.


958. An emetic may be at the same time a purge (a)
when the stomach is strong or (4) when taken during a state of
prolonged fasting ; (¢) when gastro-enteritis is present ; (@) if
the bowels tend to be loose ; (e) when the patient is not ac-
customed to emesis ; (f) if the medicine is itself actually heavy
(weighty) and passes down the intestines quickly as a result.

9. A purge will act as emetic (a) if the stomach
is enfeebled ; (4) if there is much dryness of the stool ; (c) when
the medicine is very unpleasant ; (¢) when it produces nauseative


dyspepsia.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 481


Should a purgative not act, or should it not remove the
mature humour by its action, it will cause the humour to be
distributed throughout the body; the result will be that other
humours become changed into the same kind of humour, and
the body is flooded with it.

960. There is one of the humours which readily responds
to emesis, namely, the bilious ; and there is one which is resistant
to emesis, namely, the atrabilious. The serous humour
occupies a middle position in this regard.

961. In the case of fever, it is better to purge than to
procure emesis. When the humour is passing downwards,
as in a case of lienteric diarrhcea, emesis is not advantageous.

962. Among purgative medicines, that is most harmful
which is compounded from drugs which show marked variation
in their rate of purgation ; for the result is simply confusion.
The drug acting more speedily comes into play before the next,
and sometimes the one will expel the other before it has come
into operation at all.

963. Should a person take some drink which has a
purgative action or is emetic, at a time when the bowels are
emptied, he is sure to develop vertigo, or colic, and distress.
That which finally is expelled will leave the body with the
greatest difficulty.

964. Lastly, as long as a given drug gets rid of the
superfluities, it will cause no restlessness. If it shouid cause
restlessness, one would know that something more than super-
fluity is being discharged. Moreover, we shall know when the
superfluous humours have actually been got rid of, by the fact
that the humour lost by emesis or by purgation is now changed
into another kind of humour. The cleansing process of the
body will have passed on to a harmful degree if the lining
of the intestines is beginning to be lost, and the stool is black
with a fetid odour. Also, if a prolonged sleep follows the
purging or emesis it will show that the evacuation is complete,
and salutary. Also, if there is great thirst after purging or
emesis, it shows the purgation 13 maximal and satisfactory.

985. Purgative medicines expel humours in co-operation
with the attractive faculty concerned with the given humour;
maybe, attracting the coarse and rejecting the subtle humour.
This happens in the case of expulsion of atrabilious humour.

He who asserts the purgative itself gives rise to that which it
attracts, or that it attracts first that which is tenuous, is in the
wrong. It is true that Galen says so, yet he says accurately

21


482 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


that a purgative medicine which is not poisonous, will, if it do
not purge or undergo digestion, give rise to the same kind
of humour as it ordinarily attracts. | However, an assertion
of that kind is hardly relevant. It would seem that Galen, in
making this assertion, considers that there is an agreement in
substance between the attracting drug and the attracted humour,
and that that is why they mutually come together. But it is
not true to say so, for if like attracted like, then a larger bulk of
iron would attract a smaller, a larger bulk of gold would draw
a smaller bulk of gold to itself. ‘To discuss this is not in the
province of the doctor.

966. You should note that it is the humours in the blood
vessels which become attracted by the purgative or emetic.
This attraction goes on until they reach the stomach and in-
testines, which finally expel them in virtue of their own nature
(i.e, the natural expulsive faculty). It is only rarely that
humours which are drawn out by a purgative should ascend
into the stomach; if they did, they would be expelled by vomit-
ing. If they should fail to ascend into the stomach, it would be
because of one of two reasons—either (1) the purgative medicine
has passed on speedily into the intestines ; or (2) having taken
the purgative drink, the “nature ”’ proceeds to drive it from
the mesenteric vessels to the lower parts of the abdomen and
not to the upper parts—because to do so is nearer and simpler,
and because there is nothing beyond, which will mechanically
impede their progress [1.e., the distal parts of the digestive
tube will not compress or block the proximal parts]. This
indeed will be evident, considering that the ‘‘ nature” will act
by the shortest route of exit.

967. Ifthe medicine possess an attractive power which will
hold the humour, then the expulsive power may still overrule,
assuming that the drug only attracts towards the route indicated.
An emetic is different in this respect. For, when it reaches the
stomach it lingers there, and draws the humour towards itself
out from the intestines, and by its own power overcomes the
resistance offered by the natural power [of peristalsis down-
wards].

968. ‘The humours which medicines draw out are usually
in the vessels or neighbouring structures, because it is in the
veins that the seat of attraction lies. But medicines also draw
humours out which are not in vessels, e.g., the lungs ; in this case
they are drawn to adjoining organs, like the stomach and in-
testines, but not via the vessels.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 483


969. Remember, too, that it is possible to draw humours
from the body by the use of desiccant medicines, using the
attraction, for instance, by way of the nostrils. This applies,
for instance, in the case of dropsy.


5-—PURGATION AND THE RULES RELATIVE THERETO.


970. In the preceding chapter we have shown that the
way to prepare the body for the purgative to be administered
1s to cause the pores to dilate and the “ nature” to relax. This
applies specially in the case of ‘“‘ cold”’ maladies.

In brief, the rule : “ soften the ‘ nature’ before purging ”
ensures safety in all cases except that of gastro-enteritis. In
that case, nothing is to be done, because the disease is itself
the cause of the superfluity present.

971. Something of an emetic character must be admixed
with the laxative agent to prevent the latter from leaving the
stomach before it has done its allotted work. Or, rather,
the two ingredients should be so balanced in power that their
respective functions shall both come into play (in the right order)
—the purgative action in the one direction, the emetic in the
other.

972. People who lisp are liable to gastro-intestinal
catarrh, and such people do not stand strong purges in conse-
quence. All the same, many do run the risk of gastro-enteritis
because of the materials which flow down (‘“‘rheums”’) from
the head.

It is dangerous to administer a purge when the fecal
matter is dried up within the bowels ; in such cases it is best
to get rid of it by means of an enema, or by an emollient
broth,

973. Bathing and Purgation. ‘The use of the bath for
several successive days before purgation is a good preparative
measure, as it is attenuant. ‘There must be no contra-indication,
however. A small interval of time should elapse between the
bath and the draught of medicine, and one should not take
a bath afterwards because the effect of that would be to draw
the morbid material to the skin. "The bath is only of use for
binding the bowels, especially during winter ; for at that
season one need not be’afraid of going straight into the first
room ; the heat will not interfere with drawing out the humours,
and in fact assists in virtue of its emollient effect.

974. Lastly, one should not take the purgative medicine,
while in the hot room of the bath (lit. the air of the room should


484 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


be only moderately warm), lest the medicine should give rise
to sweating and a sense of oppression. ‘This is one of the pre-
cautions which must be noted.

Other adjuvants, or preliminary measures, are : massage
and the inunction of oils.

Avoid the use of violent purges for persons who are
not accustomed to take medicine, or to drink it.

Do not administer a medicine to persons who are-in a
state of ‘“dyspepsia with nausea,”’ or whose humours are viscous,
or who have distension of the hypochondrium, or inflamma-
tion or obstruction [of channels] in the inward parts. In all
such cases, the condition must first be rectified by ordering
emollient aliments, the bath, rest (in bed), and by avoiding
anything likely to arouse disturbance of, or inflammation in,
the humours.

Persons who are accustomed to drink stagnant water,
and have enlarged spleens, will need strong aperients.

975. Sleep and Purgation. If the purgative used be
strong, it is advisable to take it overnight, for by sleeping after
the dose, it will act more efficiently. If the purgative be a
mild one, it is better not to sleep after the dose, because the
vegetative faculty would digest it.

Whether the medicine be strong or weak, one should
not go to sleep when it is about to act.

On the other hand, a person should not immediately
begin to walk about after taking an aperient. He ought at
any rate to rest [long enough] after it to enable the “‘ nature” to
embrace it and insinuate itself into it. For unless this insinuation
takes place, the “ nature ”’ will not be influenced.

976. Nauseating Aperients. When a medicine has a
nauseating odour, one should make use of aromatic agents,
in order to prevent nausea occurring. Examples of these
are : mint, rue, celery, quince, Khurasan earth (Lemnian earth :
marginal reading), sprinkling rose water and a little vinegar on
them. Ifa person greatly dislikes the odour of a medicine, let
him compress his nostrils. If he dreads the medicine in any
case, let him first chew a little tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus),
or pellitory (pyrethrum) to dull both taste and smell. If he is
afraid of being sick after it, the limbs may be bandaged up,
and an astringent taken after swallowing the medicine. In
the case of pills, some doctors give them a coating of honey,
or boiled honey, or boiled sugar. Another useful artifice is
to coat the pills with wax softened in a little oil. Another


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 485


expedient is to fill the mouth with water or the like, and then
swallow the pills with it. Various expedients may be adopted
to meet various temperaments or personal proclivities, thus
enabling the patients to swallow the drug without being aware
of it being a “ medicine.”

Decoctions should be taken tepid. Pills should be taken
with tepid water. If the temperament is cold, the abdomen
and feet should be kept warm.

977. When the patient’s mind has become soothed in this
way, he should take graduated exercise, for bodily movement
favours the action of the medicine. After an interval of time, he
may take warm water, but not enough to dilute the medicine, or
get rid of it or weaken its strength, unless the time has come
to arrest the aperient action. ‘The use of hot water lessens
the harmful character of the medicine.

If the patient has a hot temperament, and a weak
conformation (of humours), and a weak stomach, the medicine
should be preceded by some bland tenuous drink, such as
barley water or pomegranate juice. Or, speaking generally,
the stomach should contain light tenuous aliment. Otherwise
it is better to take the medicine fasting.

978. If the purgative is given ix summer time, fever may
develop. Therefore when the person has taken the medicine
he should not eat or drink until the medicine has exerted its
effect. And if the action is delayed, he should go to sleep
unless he wishes to stop its action altogether.

979. Ifa person cannot tolerate food owing to the stomach
being in a “ choleric” state, bile readily pouring into it, or if he
has had a long extended fast, it is well to take a little bread
which has been soaked in a little wine after he has taken the
(purgative) medicine and before the bowels have acted ;_ this
measure will help the action of the medicine.—The anus should
be laved with hot water and not with cold.

980. Some people assert that if pills are to be adminis-
tered with decoctions one should select those of like character.
Thus, if one orders pills to expel choleric humour, the de-
coction to go with them must be such as fumitory. Pills
chosen for expelling the atrabilious humour require a decoc-
tion, for instance of dodder or polypody, or the like. Pills
for getting rid of serous humour need a decoction of such as
centaury. :

981. When the body to be evacuated is dry in nature
with firm flesh, a strong medicine like hellebore and its allies,


486 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


will be needed, taking great care to associate it with unctuous
aliments to exert a humectant effect*.

982. Finally, powerful medicines like hellebore are to
be avoided because they produce convulsions if the bowels are
empty at the time, and also produce irregular disorderly move-
ments in the moistures if the bowels are over-loaded, besides
drawing into the intestine things which are difficult to expel. Sour
milk will remove the harmful influence in the case of (purgative)
herbs having poisonous milky juices, like mezereon and spurge
(euphorbia group).

83. A medicine often leaves its odour behind in the
stomach, making it appear to be still there. The remedy for
this is to partake of a barley ptisan or barley-meal cake, for this
will have the effect of cleansing the stomach, and is more efficient
than any medicinal powder. Moreover, the ptisan is the
best beverage to take if the medicine fails to act, or if one
wishes to make the action of the bowels mild and gentle.
But if one were afraid about this, it would be better to
administer mead, or syrup of honey, or a solution of nitre in
water, giving either a collyrium or an enema.

984. Causes of failure of action of a purgative; (a) con-
striction of the passages, due to (1) the kind of temperament ;
(2) some lesion of the neighbouring parts. Thus, in_ the
case of persons afflicted with paralysis or apoplexy, the passages
of ingress and egress for the medicines are constricted,t and
purgation is rendered difficult in such persons.

(2) It is dangerous and unprincipled to give two purges
oa the same day.

(c) Afinity—Every purgative medicine which has a
specific affinity for a given humour will produce agitation and
confusion (disorderly movements, cf. 982) if it does not reach
the humour, and the purgation will be difficult. The same
thing happens if a contrary be prescribed with it.

The immediate action of a purgative medicine is to draw
out the humour for which it has affinity ; it then draws out
whatever humour comes next in amount and in degree of at-
tenuation ; and so on in turn with others, with the exception


of blood itself. For the ‘‘ nature’ retains and stores up the
blood to the very last.


* Indiscriminate purgation in dry persons predisposes to phthisis, and to:
dropsy, if the stomach is weak (Alsaharavius).

+ In other words, cardiospasm and pylorospasm, as well as a general contracted
state of the intestines, with atony of the longitudinal coats.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 487


(d) Remoteness of humour.—It is difficult (for a medicine)
to draw out a humour from a distant part (of the body).

(e) One should see to it that there is not much salt in the
food, if one wishes to take a purgative medicine.

If there is a risk of nausea or faintness after taking the
purge, it is well to take radish-water as an emetic for two or
three days before, and to eat radishes.

985. A draught of medicine may induce nausea, oppres-
sion, faintness, fluttering of the heart, griping, especially
if it fail to purge or induce sweating. But it is often necessary
to induce emesis also, and an astringent is then unnecessary.
Barley water may be taken after the purging because it removes
the evil effect of the medicine and cleanses out whatever rem-
nants may have been left behind in the bowel.

986. Persons of cold temperament, in whom the serous
humour predominates over the others, should follow the pur-
gation by nasturtium which has been rinsed with hot water
and oil.

Persons of hot temperament may take fleawort with cold
water, oil of violets, conserve of roses, or julep.

Persons of equable temperament may take linseed after
the purging.

987. Undesirable consequences of purgation. (i) Armenian
bole and pomegranate juice remove the risk of excoriation of the
intestines by the purge. After the medicine has acted, the
things we have named should be taken, though they may not
be retained.

(ii) If fever follows the medicine (“* mixture ’’), barley water
is the best thing to take. Syrupus acetosus should not be
given for two or three days after the purging, because it 1s
excoriative, and one must wait till the intestines have regained
their original strength. But the Hammam may be entered
on the second day after the purging, for if there should happen
to be any residual humour, the bath will get rid of it. If you
find that the idea of a bath is pleasing and that it is agreeable,
you will know that the last remains of humour have been got
rid of, and nothing more need be done ; but if the patient does
not like the bath, and finds it sets up disorderly movements
(or restless feeling) of the bowels, it shows there is still something
to expel.

(iii) Remember that if the intestines are weak, purgatives
excite an unduly violent and unduly prolonged action, so that a
great deal of medicine is needed to arrest it. The same is


488 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


true for old persons, in whom purgation is liable to be in-
jurious.

Fever and agitation of the bowels will follow purgation,
if wine be taken after the medicine.

(iv) Pain in the region of the liver may follow both purga-
tion and blood-letting. This is relieved by a draught of hot
water.

988. Time for taking purgatives. ‘The time of rising of
the greater dog-star; the season during which snow still stays
on the mountains; the season of extreme cold—are times when
purgatives should not be taken. Medicine should be taken
during spring and autumn. Spring is the season during which
the snows melt from the mountain-tops. Then comes the
summer which is a period during which attenuant agents
should not be taken. Autumn is the contrary to spring, and
is an appropriate time for the use of attenuant agents.—If a
person has to take an aperient in winter he should at any rate
make sure the wind is in a southerly direction. Some say that
the opposite rule should hold for summer, but there is a difference
of opinion about this.

989. Care should be taken not to acquire a habit of taking
medicines as emollients for the bowels, for it will prove dis-
advantageous in the end.

Strong purgatives depress those of dry temperament.

Exercise should be avoided after a mild medicine, lest
its potency be impaired. Of weak purgatives, the best are
violets with sugar.

When the purgative which a sick person requires does not
act, he should not move about more but less.

Purgation may excite movement of the sanguineous
humour or make it agitated, and give rise to fever. Blood-letting
may be well under these circumstances.


6.—On Excessive PurGATION, AND THE TIME PROPER FOR
Usinc ASTRINGENTS.


990. Thirst is one of the indications that catharsis is to be
ended. ‘Therefore, if diarrhoea (from drugs) persists without
any thirst one need not be afraid the action is excessive.

But thirst may develop—not from undue purgation, or
excessive purgation, but (a) because the stomach itself is hot
or dry, or both; for these conditions soon lead to thirst ;
(4) because of the character of the medicine—it may be pungently »
hot; (c) because the material itself is ‘‘ hot ”—as, for instance,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 489


bile. In the case of material of this kind it is not long before
thirst comes on. ‘The contraries of these causes delay the
appearance of thirst.

If therefore you find that the thirst is excessive and the
bowels are acting freely, you may apply astringents, especially
if factors which cause thirst to develop quickly are not present.
But if these factors are present one should not delay, but use
astringents as soon as thirst is evident.

Sometimes the time to apply astringents is shown by the
fact of that having been discharged which was intended. Thus
if the bile has been discharged and mucus begins to emerge,
this shows that the medicine has already acted too much. How
much more certain is it that the action has been too prolonged
if ordinary bile in the stool has given place to the appearance of
atrabilious humour ? or to that of blood—which is still more
dangerous ?

If the medicine has given rise to colic, one should proceed
to carry out what is said in the chapter on colic.


7.—How To Restore a Person SuFFERING FROM Ex-
CESSIVE PurGATION To A NorMaL_ STarE.


991. The exhaustion which arises from excessive purga-
tion is accounted for by (1) weakness of the vessels ; (2) undue
patency of their orifices ; (3) the laxative cleansing out the
orifices ; (4) some unhealthy state of temperament arising from
the purgation ; (¢) other such.

Therefore when the purgation has been too free, bandage up
the upper limbs and the lower ones, beginning at the axilla and
groins respectively. | Give a drink containing a little theriac
or “ philonium.” If possible, let the patient be made to sweat
in a bath or in steam (the head being free, the rest of the body
under blankets). After copious sweating has been produced,
give massage and let the patient take astringent drinks. Fragrant
aromatic liniments should be prepared, using myrtle water,
sandalwood, camphor and fruit juices.

The exposed members should also be rubbed, and heat
should be applied in the form of dry cupping over the lower
ribs, and between the shoulder-blades. If deemed necessary, one
may apply plasters prepared with roasted bruised barley and
astringent waters over the stomach and intestines. Oils may be
used in like manner—for instance, quince oil, oil of mastic.

The patient should be protected from cold air because
that helps out (the contents of the bowels) and induces purging ;


490 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


and he should be protected from over-warm or hot air because
that is enfeebling. He should also be invigorated by the use of
fragrant perfumes and by sipping astringents and by giving

lain biscuits or rusks soaked in wine of mild bouquet. But all
these should be given hot, and before giving them give bread
with pomegranate juice, and various kinds of dishes prepared
with roasted barley meal and the ground cortices of white poppy.

A tried formula of this kind is as follows : three drams by
weight of nasturtium seeds are toasted and boiled in butter-
milk until they have clotted. This drink is extremely beneficial.—
Astringent aliment such as is made with the juice of sour grapes
and the like, and made cold with snow 1s to be advised. In
addition any measure which helps to restrain the movement
of the bowels—for instance, the induction of emesis with warm
water, keeping the limbs warm with hot water, and not allowing
the extremities to get cold. Faintness may be averted with
wine, and if this fails to have that effect, narcotics may be given
as a last resource, and other powerful medicines which are
noted in the chapter on arresting diarrhoea.

For all that, it 1s far wiser for the doctor to anticipate
all such events by having ready lozenges and pungent powders
against any need for them, and also to have at hand the appliances
for giving an enema.


8,—THEe PRoceDURE WHEN A PurceE Faits to Act.


992. When a laxative fails to act, and induces colicky
pains and abdominal distress, so that the patient feels ill, and
uneasy, and suffers from impaired vision, dizziness and migrainous
headache, with yawning and stretching, one must have recourse
to enemas, suppositories or a drink of 2 drams—or 3 kirats—
of mastic in tepid water.

The medicine also sometimes behaves in this way because
the patient has taken astringent drinks, or has eaten such things
as quince, apples. Such things cause tightness of the cardiac
sphincter, allay nausea, and forcibly drive the medicine
downwards instead of upwards, and they also reinforce the
natural faculty. .

If the enema is ineffective, and such bad symptons appear
as rigidity, eyeballs moving outwards, or retching, then blood-
letting will become necessary.

Even if untoward symptoms do not appear in spite of the
purgative failing to act, it would still be well to do a blood-—


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 491


letting in two or three days, lest the morbid humours should
pass into one of the vital organs.


g.—Tue States (Hat) or Purcative Mepicrnes.


993. Some purgative medicines are very malignant 1n
character. For instance: black hellebore, the yellowish kind
of turbith (which is not good, like the white variety) ; agaric—
the blackish kind instead of the white and pure kind ; mezereon.

Inasmuch as these are harmful, if they are taken and evoke
bad symptoms, it is best to get rid of the medicine out of the
body as soon as possible, by means of emesis or diaphoresis,
and give antidotes such as (rotted) yellow turbith. The evil
character of many of these drugs and the mental disturbance
they give rise to, may be removed by taking excessively cold
water, or by sitting in it.

Beneficial for this also are (medicines) which antagonise
the acuity (of the purge) by glutinosity, unctuousness and
soothing character.

994, Some medicines are compatible with certain tem-

eraments, but not with others. Thus, scammony will act only
feebly if at all when the patient 1s living in a cold climate, unless
a large dose be administered ; so this is usually done in the
land of the Turks. In some countries, too, one must introduce
into the body only the properties of the medicine, and not the
actual substance.

995. Medicines of pleasing odour must be mixed with
purgatives in order not to risk loss of strength in the members.
Cordials are good adjuvants, for they reinforce the vital breath
in every member in addition to their action in virtue of their
tenuous nature and ease of penetration.

Two medicines are sometimes combined, one of which
expels its corresponding humour rapidly and the other slowly.
In this case the one will complete its action after confining the
other in its corresponding humour, and then impairing its
power. When in due time the second comes into play, it does so
in a feeble manner, so that ineffective straining movements occur.
Something must therefore be admixed to help and hasten its
action. Ginger will serve in the case of turbith, because it
does not dull its action. You must learn how to mix them
properly in order to produce this effect.

Besides this, you must take into consideration all
those principles which we have set forth in speaking of the


492 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


properties of purgatives (laxatives), under the heading of the
general principles regarding the use of simples.
996. Purgatives act in virtue of five kinds of property :
(a) a specific resolvent property (e.g., turbith) ; (4) power of
expression (e.g., myrobalan) ; (c) lenitive property (e.g., manna) ;
(d) lubricant quality (e.g., mucilage of fleawort ; prunes ;
[liquid paraffin!) ; (e) a certain poisonous character, in the case
of the violent purges, which itself produces the purgation by
direct aggressive action upon the natural faculty. Conse-
quently such properties should be met by associating medicinal
agents endowed with the virtues of bezoar stone [specifically
antidotal for poisons]. Bitterness, sharpness, pungency, astrin-
gency, and sourness help the action of a medicine in which
that particular kind of property is present. Thus, bitterness
and sharpness help the resolvent property; pungency and
astringency help the expression ; sourness helps the incisive
property (e.g., of mucus) and paves the way for lubrication.
. To ensure a lubricant action, one must not combine
the drug with one having expressive power, in such a way that
both properties are simultaneous and equal; they must be
arranged so that the one property does not come into action
till after the other. ‘Thus of two medicines, the lenitive one
should be able to exert its own function before the one with the
function of expression ; the latter will then act after the lenitive
effect has been produced. The same principle applies to the
other cases.


+10.—List oF Topics BELONGING To THIS SUBJECT WHICH ARE
To BE Founp Deatr WituH ELSEWHERE.


998. Purgative and lenitive epithemes and potions,
and so forth, are deferred to the Formulary (Book V.) Under
‘““Simples ’’ we give the rules for modifying the respective
simples according to the age of the patient ; how to assist their
action, how to administer them in fluid form.

Pills must not be given if they have become so dry as to
be as hard as stones ; and they must not be given in a soft state
lest they should be absorbed and held within the body. ‘The
proper time to give them is when they are just beginning to
get dry, and yet yield to the pressure of the fingers.


11.—On Enmegsis.


§ 256. What is meant by emesis.—The act of vomiting may
occur (@) from errors of diet; spontaneously (6) from a diseased


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 493


condition either in the stomach or elsewhere; (c) by deliberate
induction. This chapter is concerned with the last-named. There
are two types of emesis under this heading: (a) where a single
act of vomiting is aimed at—the stomach being emptied of its
contents, whether food merely, or contained humours, or humours
drawn into it by a preparatory process of treatment; (4) where the
vomiting is to go on for a period of time—for instance, more than
an hour, on the permissible assumption that a single act will not
necessarily subside much sooner than an hour.


(N.B.—The text has been slightly re-arranged in order to obtain a more
consecutive picture.)


999. Contra-indications—Men who are difficult subjects
for the procuring of emesis are :

(1) So dy nature ; contracted chest ; bad method of breath-
ing ; long, thin neck ; [prominent chest, Rhazes] ; lean habit
—for in such persons the bile should be adequate ; liability to
hemoptysis ; liability to throat inflammations [i.e., pharyngo-
tonsillitis] ; persons with poor digestion (‘‘ weak stomach’) ;
‘very obese subjects ; those with weakness of vision ; epileptics.
In such cases it is better to use purges instead.

(11) So Sy custom. Such persons are not accustomed to
be sick, and if vomiting be induced by powerful emetics, the effect
will not last, and the vessels in the respiratory organs will be
liable to burst, and “ phthisis’”’ will develop.

Another contra-indication.—Pregnancy ; for the menstrual
superfluities in such a person will not be got rid of, and the great
exertion entailed in the emesis may lead to restlessness. One
must allay the vomiting (should it occur during this period). In
other cases, vomiting may be encouraged.

1000. Odjects in Vitew.—[To prevent indigestion after im-
moderate eating; to remedy intoxication after immoderate con-
sumption of wines ; to evacuate phlegm or mucus from the stomach ;
to lighten the head. (Aeg.).]

The immediate intention is to empty the stomach alone,
and not the intestines. ‘The remote intention is to relieve
the head and finally the whole body of humours which are
drawn down and got rid of from the upper parts.x—And you
know that the emesis has been beneficial when it is followed by
relief, good appetite, good breathing and normal pulse ; and
by noting the condition of the other functions of the body.

The treatment of chronic maladies. ‘The following chronic
maladies are benefited, such as:—dropsy, epilepsy, [jaundice:
Aetius]; melancholy, leprosy, | arthritic diseases: Aetius]; gout,
sciatica.


494 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


1001.  Procedure.n—When one is unaware as to how a
given person will respond to an emetic, one should first give a
mild one, and not venture on a strong one like hellebore and the
like until after the effect of the former has been observed.
Should the first one not agree, and it be still necessary to ad-
minister .an emetic, one should adopt preparatory measures
in order to get him accustomed to it. Thus, one orders some
emollient articles of food, made unctuous and sweet ; and then
to desist from exercise, and then take oil with wine ; then give
good food, especially if vomiting is difficult to induce, for if it
fails it is better that the food still in the stomach should be
good than bad. The patient should not masticate the food
much which he is taking before intending to procure emesis.

1002. Rules regarding the food to take after emesis.—lf the
vomiting continues even after the contents of the stomach have
been emptied, the next meal should be postponed until the patient
is very hungry. The thirst should be allayed with a drink of
undiluted syrup of apple or the like, but not with julep or
syrupus acetosus, because these would themselves have an
emetic effect.

An appropriate dish is the special one prepared with fowl;
viz., first boiled awhile and then roasted before the fire. Three
glasses of wine should be taken after it.

The meal should be postponed to midday, and be pre-
ceded by a drink of hot rose water if the vomitus be unusually
sour, and the pulse is suggestive of fever.

Should the vomitus be very dark bile, a sponge soaked
in hot vinegar should be applied over the stomach, and the
next meal should consist of something different from the foods
taken to procure vomiting, for to use the same kind of food
would simply fill up the stomach and excite it to discharge
the food.

If the vomiting has been copious, the best thing to give is
small birds such as chickens or pigeons which are just beginning
to walk. But the patient must take care not to eat up the
leg-bones, for these are heavy for the stomach, and will remain
in it a long time.

1003. Articles of food, etc., which facilitate or induce emesis.
Almonds dipped in honey and the like ; barley water taken
with its faex and honey ;_ fresh pennyroyal ; confection of
bruised beans ; decoction of radishes ; decoction of narcissus
bulb (Aeg.) ; herb rocket ; cucumber root boiled in honey.
(Aeg.) ; green marjoram (Mant.) ; leeks ; meat-fat swallowed


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 495


in lumps (Aeg.) ; oil of privet (Aetius) ; old pickles [onions,
ptisan of pulse made with honey ; rocket ; moistened pompion
seeds and cucumber seeds pounded with honey ; sweet cakes ;
sweet wine ; tepid drinks ; (Aegineta)]; tepid chamomile tea ;
water with butter, and the like.—A special dish prepared with
unleavened bread, oil, melon, cucumber in its seeds or the
roots well ground up, and infused in sweetened water ; soup
made with radish.

A person may elect to use intoxicating wine to procure
emesis, but it will not do so unless a large quantity be drunk.
Ale, also, may act as an emetic, provided it be combined with
honey, and is taken after a bath. It will also prove purgative
as well.

A strong emetic like hellebore should be taken fasting,
unless there is some special contra-indication, and it should be
taken after the second hour, and after the bowels have been
emptied.

1004. Methods of assisting the act of vomiting.—'The use of
a feather will incite the movement. If so, good; if not, the
patient should walk about a little ; and if that fails, he should
go into the bath.- As midday approaches, let him do running
exercises. The feather with which vomiting is induced should
be anointed with, for instance, henna oil. [The throat may be
tickled simply with the finger, which should be smeared with
iris ointment. Aeg.] Should distress in the stomach, and
spasms arise, let the patient take a draught of hot water, or of
olive oil, for that will either bring on vomiting or empty the
bowels.

Another way of helping it on 1s to apply warmth to the
stomach and extremities, because this will induce nausea,

At the time of vomiting, it is a help to bandage the eyes
with a double turn of bandage ; and a light binder may be
applied round the abdomen.

If the effect of the medicine comes on precipitately, the
patient should keep still, inhale pleasant odours, have his limbs
rubbed and compressed ; a little vinegar should be given as
a drink, and he should chew apple and quince with a little
mastic. |

Moving about makes vomiting worse ; repose lessens it.

Nausea is the first premonitory symptom. [Then profuse
salivation. |

1005. Jl/-effects produced by vomiting. ‘The worst effect
which may happen is intense spasm of the stomach, and a burning


496 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


in the stomach. ‘This occurs if a violent emetic like hellebore
be taken. It first produces salivation, after which a copious
discharge of watery fluid appears, and finally a viscid or slimy
fluid. The colicky pain persists, and the other symptoms
pass on to nausea and distress, which increases. The bowels
may begin to act after the movements of the stomach have
quietened down and the patient has lain down to rest.

1006. J/-effects produced if the emetic fails to act.—lf vomit-
ing does not occur and the distress increases, and distension
occurs, and the eyes start out, and get very red, and profuse
sweating comes on, and the voice fails, death will ensue unless
something is done.

The best thing to do in this case is to give an enema,
which you must have ready beforehand, and a dose of honey
prepared with hot water. In his drink, the patient should have
some oil of antidotal character, like oil of lilies ; and this should
be persevered with until emesis occurs ; he will not choke
with it.

Difficulty of vomiting may arise because the humours are too
tenuous. In such a case, they must be thickened, so barley
meal is taken which has been made into a cake with cooked
pomegranate seeds.

1007. Jll-effects often resulting from vomiting in any case.
Sordes form in the mouth and round the teeth. Deafness may
come on. While emesis benefits the body, it is injurious for
the eyes (and see 1011.)

The sign that the cause of the nauseative satiety is passing
down away from the stomach is that it is being expelled by the
bowel after the vomiting is over.

If purgation is followed by vomiting, it shows there is
something still to be expelled.

Blood-letting must not be done consecutively upon emesis.
One should allow three days to elapse, especially if there is
any heaviness in the pylorus, or if there is a humour lodged
there.

1008. Proper time for procuring emesis—The summer-
time is the most appropriate season for inducing emetic treat-
ment, and if a person had to undergo a course of emesis, whose
physique (see 999, i) is not appropriate for this kind of treat-
ment, the summer is the best time in which to undertake it.

The best time of day in summer is midday, because the
air is then hottest.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 497


12.—ITHE TREATMENT FOR ARRESTING VOMITING.


1009. The procedure to follow in order to arrest vomiting
is to rinse the mouth and to lave the face with water, to which
vinegar or sour wine has been added, for this relieves the aching
of the head. A little mastic may be taken in apple-water or
cyder. [A cup of black coffee may be given. Aeg.] He
should abstain from food and water. He should take a long
rest. The abdomen should be anointed [or a mustard plaster
applied over the epigastrium. Aeg.] He may enter the bath,
and make his ablutions rapidly and leave it quickly.

If it is necessary to give any food, let it be of good
flavour, substantial and readily digestible.


Annotations by Costaeus to this chapter refer to sea sickness. In this
case, if much bile is being brought up, all food should be stopped, or only the
merest taste of light food allowed. If the vomitus consist of phlegm, light food
may be allowed. The reason is that in the former case there are sure to be remnants
of the unhealthy humour left behind in the stomach. If the vomitus consisted of
mucus or phlegm, one knows the stomach is empty, and one may consider whether
one should leave the stomach devoid of food or not.

If the emesis is the result of a medicine, food must not be taken unless the
stomach is weak, in which case one may give a little light food with three glasses
of cold water.


13.—THE Apvantacres OBTAINED BY (THERAPEUTIC)
EMgsIs.


1010. Hippocrates advised vomiting to be induced monthly
and.for two consecutive days. On the second day the difficulty
of the first day is obviated and that which has entered the stomach
is fully emptied. Hippocrates claimed that health was con-
served thereby. To exceed this would be harmful.

Emesis carried out in this way gets rid of mucus and bile,
and cleanses the stomach. For in the case of the stomach there
is no. cleansing secretion like that for the small intestine—where
the bile cleanses the mucous membrane as it passes down the
bowel.

Emesis clears heaviness of the head ; clears the vision ;
removes nauseative dyspepsia. It benefits persons in whom
bile is apt to pass into the stomach. and decompose the food.
For, if vomiting precedes the meal, the latter will always enter
the stomach without being contaminated, and so the sense of
loathing is removed which proceeds from oiliness of food, as
also the depraved appetite—namely, the longing for sharp,
sour, or pungent things. :

Emesis is also beneficial for flabbiness of the body, and for

aK


498 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


ulcers of the kidneys and bladder. It has a powerful effect in
(anaesthetic) leprosy ; in persons with an unhealthy colour
of skin ; in gastric epilepsy, jaundice, asthma, tremor, hemiplegia.
It is also an effective treatment in cases of impetiginous skin
diseases in which there are ulcers covered with scabs.

It should be procured once or twice a month—after a
heavy meal. It is well not to follow fixed time intervals.

Emesis is a great help for persons whose temperament is
primarily bilious, and who are lean of habit.


14.—THE Evits wHicu Fo.ttow on Too FREQUENT EMEsIs.


1011. To procure emesis to an undue degree is injurious
for the stomach, and weakens it and renders it susceptible to
(noxious) matters. It is prejudicial to the thorax, and to the
vision, and to the teeth. It is harmful in cases of long-standing
pains in the head, except when these are due to gastric disorder ;
and in cases of ‘‘ epilepsy of the head ”’ when the cause of this is
not in the lower limbs.

The superfluity which explains the excessive emesis is
injurious for the liver, the lung, and the eye ; and it may lead to
rupture of blood-vessels.

The custom of some people of eating to excess even beyond
that which the stomach will tolerate, and then procuring emesis
[to enable more to be taken] is one of the things which ends in
chronic disorders. Such persons must be advised to cease the


habit of repletion, and must take measured amounts of food and
drink.


15.—How to RemMepy THE States INCIDENT oN EmgsIs.


1012. We have already given methods for arresting
vomiting.

Tightness and pain under the hypochrondrium are relieved
by applying upon the stomach-region cloths wrung out of hot
my by the use of lenitive oils, and by dry cupping (using

re).

Persistent Spasm of the stomach is relieved by taking
greasy, easily digestible broths ; the area should be anointed
with oil of violets admixed with oil of mallows [variety not
stated] and a little wax.

Hiccough: If this is persistent, give a sternutatory, and
sips of hot water.

Hemetemesis : ‘This is referred to in the next chapter.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 499


Lethargy, spasmodic diseases (including lockjaw), “ cold”
maladies, loss of voice.—In such cases bandage up the ex-
tremities tightly, apply a cloth over the epigastrium wrung out
of oil in which rue and cucumber (agrestis, or asininus) have
been boiled, and administer honey in hot water as a drink.

Drowsiness, or swooning (trance).—This is treated in a
similar way, and the oil is also instilled into the ear.


16.—ConcERNING ExcessivE VOMITING


1013. Let the sufferer sleep, andas long as he can. The
extremities should be bandaged in the same way as one does for
arresting diarrhoea. Over the stomach apply invigorating
astringent plasters.

If the vomiting is so violent that humours are continually
being discharged and even blood comes, milk should be given,
mixed with wine, to the amount of four glassfuls, because this
antagonizes the evil quality of the medicine, and arrests hemor-
rhage and soothes the “‘ nature.” If you wish to clear the blood
from the breast or stomach so that there is no risk of it clotting,
administer syrupus acetosus in small doses, making it with honey
or sugar, and making it icy cold by means of snow. Lig. ext.
purslane taken with armenian bole, is also beneficial in some
cases.

If you are afraid a person has taken too much medicine
of any kind, purgative or otherwise, procure emesis.

‘Emetic medicines are to be selected according to their
degrees of potency, and according to the mode of administration
applicable to each. These points, and especially the use of
hellebore, are dealt with in the Formulary (Book V) and under
““ simples.”

§ 257. Annotation by Costaeus: The object underlying some of the above
measures is to centralise or concentrate the life-breath in the interior of the body


{i.e., round the solar plexus) and prevent it from being disseminated over the body,
in which case there would not be enough in the vital centres to maintain life.


17.—On ENEMAS


1014. The enema is an excellent agent for getting rid of the
superfluities in the intestinal tract, as well as for allaying pains
over the kidneys and bladder, and for relieving inflammatory
conditions in these organs ; for relieving colic ; and for drawing
superfluities from the vital organs of the upper parts of the body.
Such acute superfluities impair the function of the liver, and are
apt to produce fever.


500 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Among the advantages of enemas is the fact that by their
means the remnants or residues of the evacuants which are left
behind are cleared away.


[Enemas are useful to relieve constipation, when the stomach is weak and
will not tolerate purges. Aeg.]


Form of enema ; the method of giving an enema—see the
chapter on colic in Book IV.

Best posture for giving an enema.—First lie supine ; then
turn over on to the painful side.

Best time for administration.—When the air is cold ;
because heaviness, pain, restlessness and nausea do not then
supervene ; or, if present, they will decrease.

The use of the bath in regard to the administration of
enemas.—The purpose of the bath is to arouse movement in the
humours, so that they may disperse. The property of the enema
is to draw out gases and the imprisoned humours. For this
reason it is best that the bath should not precede the enema. In
a case of intestinal ulceration, if a bath were necessary to relieve
the fever or any other symptom, the risk which there is of the
enema being retained would be met by applying a poultice of hot
millet or frumenty over the epigastrium and umbilicus, or over


the anus and thigh.


§ 258. MATERIALS FOR MAKING ENEMAs.


If the humour in the intestine is sero-mucous: give beet, decoction of dried
figs, dill, honey, nitre, root of wild cucumber.

If the enema is used to remedy undue dryness: give marshmallows, fenugreek,
chamomile, oil, or small quantities of honey—all of which are emollients. A half
hemina of oil (a half-pint) may be given. (Aeg.)

The addition of honeyed water makes the mixture more efficient than plain
water. The mixture must, of course, be tepid.

Astringent enema: vervain (Celsus).


Acrid enema: sea-water with or without oil, nitre or honey. This kind of
enema is very drastic and painful. (Celsus).
The patient must resist the first desire to go to stool. (Celsus).


§259. The modern usage is much more simple. Plain
water, soap-suds, or thin gruel is the usual base, and the amount to
introduce is from a half to three half-pints of fluid. To either of
these bases may be added one ounce of castor oil or glycerin, or
castor oil with a half-ounce of turpentine. Olive oil is some-
times used (6-10 ounces). Half-ounce injections of glycerin are
also popular.


18. On LINIMENTsS


1015. Liniments are among those useful remedies which
reach the diseased condition itself. They belong to two groups
(1) fluid, (2) viscid. The former are more often required than the
latter. If the viscid variety is used to modify the consistence of


THE CANON OF MEDICINE Sor


the fluid variety, a plaster results. The fluid portion will then
penetrate to the affected part, the viscid portion remaining behind.
It is the penetrant part which is beneficial. Example: making a
plaster with coriander and crushed barley, for application upon
scrophulous lesions.

Plasters are akin to liniments, but are solid, whereas the
latter are fluid.

Cloths may be impregnated with liniments, and then applied
over the important organs (liver, heart), if there is no contra-
indication. Cloths impregnated with crude xylaloes are useful,
for they impart an agreeable odour which helps the efficacy of the
liniment.

19.—DovucHING OR SPRAYING


1016. Douching [over the head, usually] is a method of
treatment applicable when there is something to be dispersed
from the head or other members. It is also applicable for the
purpose of altering the temperamental state of a person, when
that is necessary.

In applying the douche in cases where superfluities have not
passed into organs or members, one first prepares it with hot
water, and afterwards with cold water, in order to produce an
astringent effect. If the state of affairs is otherwise, the cold
application is used first.

Note that douching over the head may be done from a jug or similar vessel,
or in the form of a spray or shower. The fluid may fall from a height, or close to
the part. The part treated may be the head, or a limb, or other part. The fluid


employed may be plain water, or medicated. If medicated, it may be mineral
or herbal. If mineral, artificial or natural.


20.—On Broop-Lertine (VENESECTION).


The matter in this, the longest chapter in the whole volume, has been re-
arranged and partly abridged.


1017. Blood-letting is a method of
general evacuation. It removes the
excessive quantity of humours present
in the blood vessels.

1018. General indications. Blood-
letting is only applicable (1) when
the blood is so superabundant that a
disease is about to develop; (2) when disease is already present.
The object in both cases is to remove the superabundant blood,
to remove unhealthy blood, or both.

Cases coming under the first category are such as the
following: incipient sciatica, podagra, or any arthritic disease


502 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


due to abnormal blood-state; danger of hemoptysis from
rupture of a vessel in a rarefied lung, for superabundance of
blood then makes the vessel liable to give way; persons on the
verge of epilepsy, apoplectic seizure, melancholia with super-
abundant blood, pharyngotonsillitis, internal inflammatory
masses, ‘‘ hot” ophthalmia, persons with piles which generally
bleed but now do not; women who fail to menstruate, but do
not show the two colours indicative of a need of venesection,
because they are so dusky, or pale, or greenish. Persons who
suffer weakness from the hot temperament of the interior organs.
(In these cases it is best to do the blood-letting in spring.)

Cases of severe blows and falls need bleeding for fear of
an inflammatory mass developing (for there is a risk of causing
the latter to burst before it has matured), provided there is no
urgency and not too much blood in that part.

Remember, too, that blood-letting is safer when the maladies
to be feared have not yet befallen the patient. It must be avoided
in the initial stages of a disease because it renders the humours
tenuous, and makes them become dispersed throughout the
body and come to be admixed with healthy blood. Sometimes
it happens that the venesection does not remove what was desired,
and it would have to be repeated—which would be enfeebling.
Once the maturation stage has been passed, the disease having
passed its initial stage as well as acme, blood-letting is to be done
unless there is some contra-indication.

Phlebotomy is necessary in the case of a person who sweats
profusely from repletion.


1019.—Contva-indications. Age: Not-before 14, or after 70. Young adults
should be gradually introduced to it by beginning with small blood-abstractions.
(2) Physique: those who are very emaciated; those who are corpulent ;
those who have flabby muscles ; those whose colour is white or yellow ; those who
have often been ill—An exception may be made in the case of adolescents and old
persons, if they have firm muscles, full veins, have a red colour.

(3) Physiological states —The following are contra-indications: (i.) a state of
repletion with food; the stomach full of food ; the bowels still loaded with feces ;
a state of nauseative satiety ; a state of sensitiveness of the pylorus, or weakness
of the sphincter. Explanation: if the stomach is full, the effect of the venesection
will be to draw imperfectly digested matters into the veins to replace the loss from
the vein. If the bowels are full, the veins of the intestines will suck in putrid matters
from the feces. In the former case one waits till the food has had time to pass on;
in the second case, the bowel is emptied by emollient enemas. In the case of nausea-
tive satiety, one must wait till it passes off—(ii.) A state of fasting. When the
pylorus is relaxed and the bile runs into the stomach, producing gastric pain, per-
sistent nausea, vomiting, and a bitter taste in the mouth (for by these signs you
know of the condition), beware of letting blood in the fasting state. (iii.) Tenderness
of the pylorus.—One knows that this tenderness is present, because pain is felt
during the passage of acrid substances through it.—(iv.) Pregnancy.—Avoid letting
blood from a pregnant woman unless there is grave necessity, such as the need for
arresting hamoptysis, and even then not unless the strength is sufficient. (v.)
Miscellaneous.—A resolvent bath should not have been taken shortly before. Coitus
should not precede. A cold temperament is a contra-indication. Caution is
requisite in the case of persons living in cold countries.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 503


(4) Pathological conditions. (i.) Humoral. It is not necessary to let blood
every time you find the signs of plethora which we have given, or rather where there
are signs of repletion with immatured humours. In such a case venesection would
be very disadvantageous, because blood-letting would incur the risk of their not
maturing, with consequent risk to the life of the patient.

It is a good practice to let the blood of a patient with excess of atrabilious
humonr, and to follow it up with a purge. But you must carefully watch the colour
to judge of the patient’s condition, and also the tension, because it is from the state
of tension in the whole body that one can best judge of when to employ venesection.
So if a person’s blood is good and scanty, and his body contains many bad humours,
venesection would extract the good blood and leave the bad humours behind.
If the amount of bad blood were scanty and something passed down into a member
which markedly interferes with the downward passage of the bad blood into it,
and it became necessary to do a blood-letting, one should only take a little, and give
the patient good food, repeating the blood-letting after a few days. It will then
be possible to abstract the bad blood and leave the good behind.

If the blood contain unhealthy bilious humours, the proper thing to do first
is to purge with a tenuous laxative, or use an emetic, or give sedatives and order
rest and inactivity.

If the humours are gross, the ancients advised the patient to take a bath,
and pursue his ordinary occupation. Both before and after venesection, and before
any other form of depletion is undertaken, he was to take drinks of an attenuant
syrupus acetosus, in which hyssop and thyme had been boiled. If done unnecessarily
phlebotomy simply sets the bilious humour in motion,—shown by dryness of the
tongue, etc.

(ii.) Colic. (ii.) When the disease is on the move, neither venesection nor
purgation is to be done, because that is the time when rest is to be ordered, and sleep
is to be aimed at; it is the time when the malady will bestir itself. (iv.) Febrile
states.—Note that blood-letting may be quite unnecessary in fevers. If there is
not much “ matter,’ the “nature ’’ will overcome it unaided. One ascertains
whether this is likely by studying the aspect of the patient, his age, his strength,
and the like-—When the fever is high, or when there is inflammation, blood-letting
is avoided. Also if there is a severe rigor; and if there is spasm or if there are
convulsions. In all such cases, bleeding would deplete the treasury of blood, with
resultant weakness. Moreover, if a febrile person, with headache, suddenly
develops a diarrhoea, phlebotomy, though likely to benefit up till then, has become
superfluous. (See also 1029.)

(v.) Critical period of an illness.—When the crisis has been reached and it is
of long duration, one must in no wise remove much blood. If possible, procure
rest. ‘If that is not possible, a small blood-letting may be done, reserving the treasury
of the blood for a subsequent venesection if such prove to be necessary, and also
conserving the patient’s strength for undergoing the critical stage. If a long time
has elapsed since the blood-letting was done, and if there be a complaint during the
winter season, of a feeling as if one is broken in pieces, one would just do a blood-
letting without touching the main bulk of the blood for the present.

(vi.) Enfeebled strength—If the strength is enfeebled by having much
recourse to blood-letting, it will result in the formation of many humours.

1020. The proper time of day for venesection.—There are two occasions
when venesection may be done ; there is the time of election, and there is the time
of necessity. The time of election is before mid-day, after digestion is completed
and when the bowels are empty. In the other case, the need for the relief of vene-
section is too urgent to wait for the other favourable conditions. (Days of election :
as with evacuants generally ; q.v.—and “southern ”’ days.)

1021. Vessels which may be used for blood-letting.

Both arteries and veins may be used for blood-letting. But arteries are
avoided because of the risk of not being able to staunch the blood, and if a small
hole be made, an aneurism may result. When there does not appear to be this
risk, the use of an artery gives better results in some diseases, unless they are situated
in the vicinity of the artery to be tapped, for that would make the blood thin and
hot. Thevartery to be selected’must be near the diseased part [in the case of
chronic conditions, in the opposite region in acute cases (Aeg.)].

1022. The veins of the upper extremity.

Six of these are made use of: the cephalic, the median, the basilic, the funus
brachii, the vein between the middle and ring finger and that between the thumb
and index finger. The cephalic is much the best to use. The parts drained by these
various vessels are as follows: The cephalic vein drains from the neck, and parts
above that, but very little from the parts below, and none from the liver and hypo-


504 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


chondrium, or from the lower limbs. The basilic vein draws blood from the abdomen
and parts below. The median vein draws blood from regions intermediate between
those drained by the cephalic and basilic. The funis brachii drains the same parts
as does the cephalic. The vein between the right middle and ring finger is used
for conditions of the liver. The left one is used for disorders of the spleen. The blood
from these veins readily clots, so the patient should put his hand into hot water to
keep the blood flowing longer, and to help it to emerge better if inclined to come
out too scantily. (The incision in these two veins should be longitudinal.)

The vein between the thumb and index finger, on the right side is used for
similar purposes as the basilic. It is useful in cases of chronic hepatic pain, and
very efficient in disorders of the diaphragm (as Galen perceived). ,

An artery may be used which goes to the inner part of the palm, and is nearly
as effective.

(1023. The veins of the head.

(i) The frontal veins. These are between the two eyebrows. Phlebotomy
in this situation benefits heaviness of the head, especially occipital heaviness ;
heaviness of the eyes ; long-standing headache.

To make these veins swell, apply fomentations, and also a bandage round the
neck, placing a finger over the windpipe to prevent suffocation. (Aeg.) :

(ii) The supraoccipital veins. Bleeding here is beneficial for megrim, and
ulcers of the scalp.

(iii) The temporal veins, which are tortuous.

(iv) The two veins at the lachrymal angle of the eyes. These can only be
rendered visible by compression of the neck in partial suffocation.

Use: in headache, migraine, chronic ophthalmia, pannus, trachoma,
blepharitis.

Precaution : do not cut deeply lest a fistula be set up, by striking the bone.
Moreover in such an event very little blood will emerge.

(v) Three small post-auricular veins, found at the point which the tip of the
ear touches when pressed back against the hair. One of the three is more conspicu-
ous than the others, and this is opened in cases of glaucoma, ulcers of the ears, neck
and back of the head.

(vi) The veins behind the ears below the nuchal protruberance. This is
beneficial for chronic eye diseases due to thin blood, and for chronic headache.

(vii) The vein at the tip of the nose. It may be made obvious by pressing
the finger upon the tip of the nose so as to make it groove into two. Very little
blood will come from it. (Aeg. advises the inside of the nostrils to be rubbed with
the end of a specillum, or to be tickled with a rough substance.)

Use: for freckles, for dimness of vision, pimples in the nostrils, itching of
the nostrils ; for piles.

Ill-effect : a permanent serpiginous redness of the tip of the nose may result,
which spreads out over and disfigures the face, so that the remedy is worse than the
disease,

(viii) Labial veins. There are four. Use of phlebotomy here: for ulcers
of the gums ; aphthe ; (septic) gingivitis, flabby gums, ulcers, fissures and fistule
in the gums.

(ix) Sublingual vein. This is used in cases of angina, and tonsillar abscess.
Supra- and sub-lingual veins are used in cases of heaviness of the tongue due to
congestion. The incision must be lengthwise as otherwise it is difficult to staunch
the blood.

(x) A vein at the lowest part of the lip. This is opened in order to relieve fetor
of the mouth. It is situate between the chin and lower lip.

(xi) Veins of the gums: these are opened when wishing to act on the mouth
of the stomach.

(xii) The jugular veins. The instrument to use here is one with a sharp
point. Technique: draw the head to the opposite side until the vein is stretched
like a cord. Consider in which direction the vein is likely to slip, and then make
the opening accordingly. The incision must be transverse. (Aegineta says: use
the concave part of the scalpel.) y
' Use : at the onset of lepra ; in severe angina ; in dyspnoea, in “‘ hot ’’ asthma,
in hoarseness ; in abscess of the lung; in dyspnoea due to superabundance of
“hot ’’ blood; in diseases of the spleen and side.

1024. The arteries of the head.


: The following may be opened. (a) The temporal arteries. These are some-
times phlebotomized, sometimes incised, sometimes drawn out, sometimes cauterized.
The object is to influence watery matters in glaucoma. (b) The two post-auricular


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 505


arteries. This is for treating some forms of ophthalmia, incipient glaucoma, pannus;
dimness of vision and long-standing headache.

There is always the risk that coagulation will be very slow.

1025. The veins of the trunk.


There are two to be found coursing over the abdomen. One runs over the
hepatic region, and the other over the splenic. The former is opened in cases of
dropsy, the latter in diseases of the spleen.

1026. Bleeding from vessels in the lower limbs.


(i) The sciatic vein. This vein is opened in the region of the malleolus. The
bandage is applied above, anywhere between the prominence of the hip and the
instep. It will have to be applied tightly. The limb should be bathed in hot water
first. The incision must be longitudinal.

Contingencies.—A deep artery, or one difficult to find: in this case use one
of the branches, such as that which runs between the little and second toe.

Value.—In cases of sciatica, podagra, varices, and elephantiasis.

Repetition.—It is difficult to do a second phlebotomy.

(ii) The saphenous vein. This is opened over the internal malleolus, above
the instep. It is more conspicuous than is the preceding. The incision must be
transverse.

Value.—For emptying the blood from the organs below the liver, and for
causing the blood to descend from upper parts to lower ones. It is a powerful aid
for the menstrual flow. It opens up the pores of piles. While one would expect
either vessel to be equally efficacious, experience actually shows that the use of
the sciatic vessel is more beneficial for sciatic pain.

(iii) The popliteal vein. This is opened behind the bend of the knee. It is as
effective as opening the saphenous vein. For exciting the menstrual flow, however,
it is even more efficient, as well as for pain from piles, and pain in the anus.

(iv) The vein over the heel. The use of this is similar to that of the saphenous,
of which it is a branch.

(v) The vein over the inner toe: this may be used in cases of sciatica and
uterine disease. (Aeg.)

In brief, the veins of the lower extremity are used in cases where matters
descend from the head, and for disorders connected with the atrabilious humour.

Phlebotomy from the feet is more weakening than that from the arms.


1027. Proceduyve in blood-letting. (a) Pre-operative treatment. The stomach
requires to be previously fortified, as there is a risk of death otherwise. If the
stomach is weak and sensitive, give pieces of bread soaked in a rob made with a
vinegar of good odour. If the person is also of cold temperament the bread should
be dipped in sugar water with aromatics, or a syrup of spearmint perfumed with
musk, If bile is regurgitating into the stomach, induce vomiting with plenty of
hot water containing oxymel. Then give the soaked bread, and do not delay with
the operation.—It is disadvantageous to take a bath prior to the blood-letting,
because it makes the skin thick and soft, and the operation is difficult unless the
blood is thick.


(b) Instvumentarium.


I. Several scalpels. Some with broad point, others with
narrow.* The latter are best for
mobile veins like the jugulars. See
that the point is intact, lest you miss
the vein or cause pain, or do injuries
which lead to sepsis.
II. A ball of silk or thread.
III. An instrument to excite vomiting, | Used if vomiting is not spontaneous.
made with a feather or of wood.


IV. Rabbit-hair. ; Used as styptic in arterial hemorrhage.

V. A medicament of aloes and frankin- | Used to keep the preceding in place.
cense and a musk electuary. Also for syncope.

VI. Lozenges of musk. For syncope ; musk is given to smell for


the same purpose,
ee ee ee a ed Re ah ce al he ee


* The tip should be long enough to reach the vein without touching other
structures. ;


506 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(c) Make the veins stand out. A band is tied round the limb for this purpose.
The artery may swell also, in which case the tourniquet should be loosened, and
the swollen vessel rubbed. If the swelling reappears on tying the band, abandon
that vessel and turn to the vessel running over the elbow. On the other hand, a
bandage may obliterate the arterial pulse and lead to a risk of opening this in mistake
for the vein. If the vein remains difficult to see, relax and tighten the band alter-
nately, and rub the vein down and up, up and down, using two fingers for this,
for then the stationary finger feels the blood run in which the other finger forces
down. With very thin veins this will need repeating several times. The band must
be adapted according to the coarseness of the skin, the amount of fat and size of the
muscles. If the band conceals the visible part of the vein, a mark should be made
along the line of the vessel, to enable it to be found afterwards. :

(d) The incision. Take hold of the scalpel between the thumb and middle
finger, so as to leave the index finger free to feel the place to incise. Grasp the
knife by the middle and not by its end, so as to have proper control of the blade.
The point should be so sharp that it will enter the vein by a gentle coaxing.
To have to keep on poking the knife about to find the vein will only do injury. The
blade should have been dipped in oil, and the area of skin should have had oil gently
rubbed into it.

The incision into the vein should be longitudinal, to render clotting less
likely. The opening should be well above the level of the joint. If made at the
level, the blood would not come out freely, and the risk of injuring the nerves and
arteries is great.

(e) Possible mishaps.—(i) Injuries to the vein opened. Since the venesection
has to be repeated on some future occasion, the vessel must not be unduly injured ;
repeated blood-letting is likely to injure it ; hence a second operation should be done
at another spot, thus averting risk of inflaming of the part. (ii) Injuries to other
structures. When using the median vein, the nerve is in danger. There may be
two nerves in the way. Hence one should cut downwards and lengthways. The
nerve may lie over the vein, tense like a string, and injury to this, thinking it is the
vein, will lead to permanent numbness of the fingers. The more distended the
vein, the more prominent is this aberrant nerve. (iii) Injury toa nerve. Should the
mishap take place, the measures to adopt are those for wounds of nerves given in
the Fourth Book. Take care not to let any infrigidant agent touch the wound (like
nightshade and sandalum), but rub warm oil all round. The large basilic vein has
arteries, nerves and muscle beneath it. There are sometimes two arteries with it,
and in thinking one avoids the one, one hits the other. The nerve may also be
mistaken for the vein. Hence in this case it is best to go as low down the arm as
possible, as then the artery is out of the danger-zone. (iv) Injury to an artery.
The sign that one has entered the artery by mistake is that thin red blood comes out
and cannot be staunched. Pressure will stop it. One must quickly put rabbit-
hair into the wound, with a little powdered frankincense and dragon’s blood, and aloes
and myrrh, and a little zinc sulphate. Apply a cold compress and bandage tightly.
If this arrests the bleeding, keep it so for three days, and even then be very cautious
about loosening the bandage. Apply a styptic plaster instead. When the artery
is hit deep down, the flesh may close over it and stop the bleeding. But usually
death from hemorrhage will result. Some have died of the great pain produced
by a ligature sufficiently tight to arrest the bleeding, or from the mortification of the
pee produced by the tight bandage.—Note that the veins may bleed alarmingly
freely.

(v) Inability to find the vein. Do not keep on making attempts to puncture
the vein, especially if the hand. is being used ; repeat a trial at some other level,
or use some other vein, or wait a day or two. Remember that a tight bandage may
have the effect of emptying the vein instead of swelling it. In the case of fat persons,
however, the veins are so slack that it requires a tight bandage to make them show.

(vi) Poor flow of blood. If fat gets into the orifice, do not cut into it, but push
it gently aside. .

Other points.—Some maintain that the operation is less painful if the parts
are made numb with a tight bandage for about an hour previously.


(f) Amount of blood to be removed.—There is a proper time
for arresting the flow in various cases. Some persons, even though
febrile, can bear losing five or six pounds of blood, whereas. others
cannot stand losing even one pound, though apparently in health.

One must consider three points. (@) An impetuous exit of


——— es


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 507


blood or a sluggish flow. (6) The colour of the blood. It is per-
missible to go on drawing blood as long as it is black and thick.
But if it turns pale and is thin, its flow must be quickly arrested,
lest dangerous results ensue. It may be pale and watery at first,
so that one might think one should stop the operation, even though
one knows there are signs of plethora. For the colour of the blood
does not always correspond to what would be expected in cases of
plethora. The colour of the blood is also misleading when there
is an inflammatory mass from which the blood is coming. (c) The
state of the pulse. If the flow of blood fails, and the colour alters,
and the pulse becomes weak, stop the bleeding. Also, if yawning
and stretching, hiccough, or nausea come on. Watch the pulse
if the colour changes quickly and the flow is free, so as to be on guard
against syncope. (See below).

A limited venesection is a great conserver of the strength and
yet it entails the flow of tenuous and sometimes clear blood, with
retention of the thick and opaque blood. Liberal venesection is
very liable to cause syncope, but is more cleansing; it clots more
slowly, but is more efficient in those cases in which it is done prophy-
lactically, and in obese persons. It is better to do a liberal vene-
section in winter, as the blood does not clot; it is better to do a
limited one in summer, if it is needed then at all.

When the blood-letting is done to stop hemorrhage by drawing
blood away from the site of bleeding (e.g., epistaxis, uterine heemor-
rhage, hemoptysis) draw only a small amount, and employ several
sittings rather than one single one, unless the case is very desperate.
(Repeated small bleedings would certainly tend to produce an auto-
hemostatic effect, as we now know).


(g) Syncope.—Syncope rarely occurs during the flow of blood, unless a great
amount is lost. One only bleeds up to syncope in cases of synochal fevers, in in-
cipient apoplexy, in extensive angina or inflammatory swellings, or in cases of
severe pain. Even in such cases one would make sure the strength of the patient
is adequate. ‘

The persons liable to faint as a result of blood-letting are those of hot tempera-
ment, and with lean and flabby bodies. Those with equable temperament, and with
firm flesh, are not likely to faint unless a large amount of blood is withdrawn. Watch
the pulse.

The first blood-letting may be accompanied by syncope if it is carried out
quickly on a person not accustomed to it ; therefore emesis should first be procured
to guard against that, and it may be repeated at the time of the blood-letting.


(h) After-treatment.—(i.) Washing the part.—When washing
the part the skin must be deflected by means of one’s finger, so that
the site of puncture is no longer over the aperture in the vein. Then
wash; dry carefully ; apply a compress. Then allow the skin to
return to its natural position. (ii.) Diet. The loss of blood is
replaced by grilled meat, with its gravy, or by giving forced-meat
balls. Allow only small quantities, for the stomach will not be
able to digest much. Light food should be given first, and the full
dietary only resumed gradually. (iii.) Other points. The patient
should lie supine. A resolvent bath must not be taken. Exercise
must be avoided. (iv.) Suppuration of the wound. The wound may
become inflamed. Apply a plaster of ceruse, and dress with cold,


508 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


wet infrigidants. The other arm would have to be used if vene-
section has to be repeated subsequently.


1028. Repetition of venesection.—(i) Indications: the operation may be re-
peated often if the humours are much in excess, for the operation sets them in motion
(‘‘ causes them to boil’’). But if the blood be rich in atrabilious humour, the blood-
letting should be infrequent. Though soothing at the time, it results in undesirable
disorders, including apoplexy, especially in old persons. (ii) Proper time-interval
before repeating the blood-letting. This depends on the degree of weakness. If
there be no weakness, it may be repeated within an hour, insvhich case the blood
is prevented from clotting by applying bread soaked in oil with a little salt over
the wound, and keeping it in place with a bandage. If much blood has to be taken,
wait aday. Two or three days is the limit for re-opening the wound. (iii) Technical
details regarding the re-opening. Another vein may have to be used, especially if
the hand was used previously. The same place must not be used if a palsy was
accidentally produced previously. Some force may be needed to get into the vein
next time. [A special hammer appears to have been used, instead of using steady
pressure. (Albucasis.)] If the second blood-letting was to be done within an hour,
or during the same day, the first incision should have been transverse; but if a
day or more elapse, a longitudinal cut is best. The movements of the fingers will
keep such an opening patent. The scalpel should be narrow. (iv) Treatment be-
tween the operations.—Sleep hastens clotting, and prevents the superfiuities from
getting into the blood, because they pass into the interior parts of the body during
sleep. Sleeping on the side from which the blood-letting was done tends to damage
the tissues.—The strength of the patient must be maintained proportionately to
the amount of blood evacuated.—The bowels must be kept clear.

1029.—Precautions regarding blood-letting in fevers. (i) Indications. When
the fever is septic, and the inflammation is not great, the ten rules already given are
to be followed. Note the urine. If the urine turns thick and reddish, and if the
pulse is large, and the face swells, and the fever does not quickly improve, blood-
letting may be done, and it should be on a fasting stomach. But if the urine becomes
thin and “ fiery,’ and if the face wastes from the outset of the illness, avoid blood-
letting.—Blood-letting may be done during an apyrexial period.mWhen the fever
does not arise from putrefaction, bleeding without depleting the treasury of blood
will resolve it. But bleeding may kindle up a fever. (ii) When to operate.—lIf the
indications are present, take no notice of those who assert it should not be done
after the fourth day of the illness. It may be done any day, even after forty days,
avoiding only the moment of a fever paroxysm. Otherwise follow the ten rules
already referred to. (iii) Quantity to remove. Do not remove much blood at first
in hemorrhagic fevers, and take plenty at the stage of maturation, for this itself
will often put a stop to the fever.—Stop the flow if you find the blood is pale and
watery. Phlebotomy often disperses fevers, and resolves putrefaction—When
the febrile person is enfeebled, one should divide up the venesection.—Note that as
venesection draws contrarily, it has a constipating effect.


21.—ITHE OPERATION OF CUPPING


1030. The operation of cupping
cleanses the particular part of the skin
more effectively than does venesection.
It withdraws the rarefied rather than the
more viscid blood. It is not much use
for persons with bulky coarse bodies, with
thick blood, for it does not withdraw
any blood from them, even that component which it is de-
sirable to withdraw. It only removes such (matters) as are
extremely tenuous—and even these only with difficulty. It also
produces weakness in the member to which the glasses have


been applied.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 509


1081. The proper time for using cupping-glasses.—Some
authorities advise against applying cupping-glasses at the
beginning of the lunar month, because the humours are then not
yet on the move or in a state of agitation ; also against applying
them at the end of the (lunar) month, because at that period (of
the cycle) the humours are less plentiful. The proper time
(according to them) is the middle of the month (when the humours
are in a state of agitation) and during time when the moonlight
is increasing (when the humours are on the increase also).
During that period the brain is increasing in size within the
skull, and the river-water is rising in tidal rivers.

The time of day proper for using cupping-glasses.—The second
and third hours are best. One must take care not to apply
cupping-glasses after the bath, except in the case of the blood
being thick. If so, the bath is taken first ; then wait an hour ;
then apply the cupping-glasses.

1032. Points of application.—(a) Forehead :_ most people
have a horror of applying cupping-glasses here, as they believe
that the senses and intellect! will suffer thereby.


: Equivalent
Point of scl
Spee in regard to Uses.
ore aet venesection.

(6) Nape of neck? From median Heaviness of eyelids (relieves the lids),

vein. itch of eyes, fetor of the mouth.

(c) Between the From basilic vein. | Pains in upper arms and _ throat ;

shoulder-blades* to relax the cardiac orifice of the
stomach.

(d) Over the two From cephalic vein.| Tremor of head; and for the com-

posterior neck veins‘ ponents of the head (face, teeth,
molars, ears, eyes, throat, nose).

(e) The legs Almost equivalent | Cleanses the blood; provokes men-

to blood-letting. strual flow’.

(f) Under the chin. Teeth, countenance, throat ; cleanses
head and jaws.

(g) Over the loins. Inflammatory masses in upper part
of thigh,—scabies there ; pustules ;
podagra; piles; elephantiasis; blad-
der; uterus; pruritus of back
[renal congestion].

(h) In front of thigh. Orchitis ; leg ulcers.

(i) Behind hips. Inflamm. conditions and ulcers of
buttocks.

(7) In popliteal space. Aneurysm; long-standing abscesses ;
septic ulcer of leg and foot.

(k) Over malleoli. Retained menses ; sciatica ; podagra.

(1) Over loose tissues of Sciatica, podagra; piles; inguinal

outer side of hip. hernia; the structures within the
hip joints.

(m) Over the buttocks, Draws humours from whole body,

towards the anus, from head ; benefits the intestines ;
cures decomposition of menses, and
thereby alleviates the whole body.


510 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Notes.
1. Muhamad says that if placed over the hollow of the


occiput they induce loss of memory (Mgn.).

2. There is a danger of transmitting forgetfulness, for as
some say, the posterior part of the brain has to do with the
preservation of memory, and the cupping enfeebles this faculty,
and the offspring will suffer. Some say that cupping over the
occiput and top of the head is beneficial for insanity, vertigo, and
for preventing the hair from going grey. But we must take it
that this effect on the hair applies only to feeble-minded people
and not to other types of person, for in most cases the use of
cupping in this situation brings premature greyness, and also
dulls the intellect. But it is beneficial for eye-diseases, and indeed
this is its chief value, namely for pustular keratitis and staphy-
loma. But cupping in this situation is harmful for cataract, unless
the proper moment is chosen. It impairs the activity of the
intellect, making the offspring dull and forgetful, with poor
reasoning powers, and permanent infirmity.

Glasses applied over the scapulae as well as between
them are beneficial for hemorrhagic diseases of the chest, and
sanguineous asthma, but are enfeebling for the stomach and set
up palpitation.

4. ‘To prevent tremor of the head occurring, we move the
glasses downwards and then upwards again to over the scapula,
unless the cupping is being done for hemoptysis, in which case
one must move them down but not upwards again.

5. In the case of pale flabby women with watery blood,
cupping of the legs is more advantageous than a venesection from
the saphenous vein.


Note that the use of movable cupping-glasses over an area, and their use
for joint diseases is still practised under the name of Bier’s treatment.


When the cupping is done with heat, whether with or with-
out scarification, it is more efficient. But cupping with scarifica-
tion is more efficient, especially in cases of flatulence (of various
kinds). Cupping without scarification is more applicable for
cold swellings, and whenever the cups are to be moved about over
various places. .


§260. The distinction between wet and dry cupping is not very evident.
In the medieval drawings referred to below, the use of scarifiers with the cupping
seems usual. It will be clear that the action of the two measures is quite different,
dry cupping leading to the formation of autohaemolysins, the wet cupping being
more of the nature of a “ mild evacuation,’’ a less drastic procedure than bleeding
from a vein—perhaps largely because the victim did not see the blood, and because
the quantity of blood withdrawn was necessarily limited in amount.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE ort


1033. Some of the purposes in view in cupping.—(i) to move
materials away from one part to another. Thus menstrual flow
will be arrested if the cupping is done over the breasts.

(1) To draw an inflammatory process from deep parts
towards the surface and so render it accessible to some medica-
ment.

(11) To divert an inflammatory process to a neighbouring
and less important organ.

(iv) To render a member warm, and draw blood into it,
and disperse vapours from it.

(v) To restore a member to its proper position (e.g.,
inguinal hernia).

(vi) To allay pain. Applied over the umbilicus they relieve
violent colic and flatulent distension of the abdomen, and the
uterine pain due to movement of the menstrual fluid, especially
in young women [e.g., dysmenorrhea].

1034. There are three points to note in regard to wet
cupping—(a) the evacuation from the member itself ; (4) the
safeguarding of the basis of the life-breath, so that the latter shall
not leave the body with the humour which is being evacuated ;
(c) the evacuation must not be made from a vital organ.

In wet cupping, the scarification must be deep to ensure
drawing the humours from the deep parts.

Such cupping must not be done over the breasts themselves,
for fear menstrual flow and epistaxis should be set up.

If the region to be cupped is covered with ointment one
should not delay the scarification. The first point of application
should be made light and the cup removed quickly. As the part
is accustomed to the cups, they may be left longer.

The site of the cup may afterwards develop inflammation,
and thus render it difficult of removal. ‘To avoid this a cloth or
sponge soaked in tepid or nearly hot water should be used as a
fomentation round it.

Cupping of the upper parts of the body ensures that morbid
materials will not pass down into the lower parts of the body.

1035. Age.—One should not begin to apply cupping to
infants until they are in their third year; cupping should be quite
unnecessary in the first year of life. It is altogether contra-
indicated after the sixtieth.year.

1086. <After-treatment in regard to food.—In ordinary
persons, a meal may be taken an hour after the cupping has been
completed.

Persons of bilious type should be given the following foods


512 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


after being cupped: pomegranate juice with the seeds; endive
juice with sugar ; lettuce and vinegar.


§261. During the Middle Ages, in Europe, cupping was practised as part
of the ritual of the bath-house. The subject is very fully dealt with by Alfred
Martin (Jena, 1906), who presents numerous illustrations from contemporary
literature. Though the practice has disappeared from our customs, it has done
so only comparatively recently, and may be still practised among other peoples.
The necessity for several attendants during the course of the ritual determines its
restriction to public institutions, only the very wealthy having their own suite
for their own families. Both sexes were employed in the service, which included
most of the operations now confined to the barber ; women were chiefly employed
for fetching and carrying, men for seeing to the heating apparatus. But the service
of cupping and venesection was confined to men, generally the “ bath-men,’”’ who
specialized in the work.

The rules found in the Canon appear to have been conformed to. Thus, the
association of cupping with bathing is found in the pictures representing the bather
in the hot room or calefactorium, sitting on a special bench, with his feet in a hot
bath reaching to the knees, “ to make the blood watery,’ whilst the bath-man is
engaged in applying the cupping glasses (or horns).

The practice of cupping in the ordinary routine of life was an expression
of the universal desire for ensuring prophylaxis against disease. Concurrently it
was applied for the treatment of declared disease, and this use survived the other.
Even in these days it is occasionally employed with advantage, and the method is
deserving of much more attention both by students and practitioners.


§ 262. It is easy to see how and why the subject has fallen
into discredit and then disuse, when we combine the study of habits
and customs with one of the generally changed outlook produced
by modern education. The conclusion, however, that the subject-
matter of this section of the Canon was inherently erroneous or
superfluous must be avoided. Thoughts run along parallel lines
with practice, habits, public opinion. To us, who live to see all
these lines at once, it appears as if one were integrally related to
the other. But even now we may not realize that we are only
viewing one small field of a whole panorama. It is necessary to
look forwards also, for then it becomes clear that theories, ideas,
modes of practice, all really run along their own lines, each justifi-
able in itself; the people of one age seeking to hold all the lines
together and by force making them into a unity which they cannot
possess. So it may be said that the instruction of the Canon in
regard to these various modes of treatment was sound, and remains
sound, but the days of their usage have gone.


22.—AsouT LEECHES


1087. he Indians have specified which leeches are
venomous. One should beware of using those with large. heads
of antimonial and black colour, or green colour ; those with
down on them, like eels (snakefish), and those upon which are
fine streaks of bright colour, or chameleon-like in colour. Ail
these are poisonous, and would give rise to inflammations,
DeIngEDABS fever, syncope, paresis of the limbs, and intractable
ulcers.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE g13


One should not employ leeches taken from unhealthy
water or those whose excrement is black and muddy, and whose
movement immediately darkens water, and renders it offensive
in smell. ‘Take leeches from water whose surface is covered over
with duckweed and in which frogs live. Pay no attention to
those who make out that leeches are bad to use if they come from
water in which frogs live.

The colour should be greenish (like duckweed), and there
should be two longitudinal lines having the colour of orpiment
and ruddy; they should be rounded and liver-coloured. One
may accept leeches which look like little locusts, or like mouse-
tails, with very small heads. But do not accept those with red
bellies and green backs, especially if they were collected from
running waters.

(Aeg. gives : there are six rust-coloured lines on the back, varying from blackish
to greyish green; the under parts are either yellowish-green with black spots and
edging, or brownish-orange without spots, but two lateral black stripes).

A leech is ill if the mouth is soft, if it is covered with dirty slime, if there is


a skin near it as it swims about in the water, and if it lies coiled up in tepid or in
fresh water. (Aeg.)


1038. The blood which leeches remove from the body
comes from deeper down than that obtained by wet cupping.

1039. Procedure of application.—Leeches should be kept
a day before applying them, and they should be squeezed
for have their heads bent down. Aeg.] to make them eject
the contents of their stomachs. If feasible, they should be
given a little lamb’s blood by way of nourishment. ‘The
slime and débris from their bodies should be cleansed off, say,
with a sponge.

1040. Site of application.—The place where the leeches
are to be applied must be [shaved if necessary: Aeg., and]
well laved with nitre-water and rubbed till red. Dry carefully.
Dip the leeches in fresh tepid water [a few drops of white wine
being added if they are sluggish. Aeg.], cleanse and apply
[with one’s freshly-washed hand, or with a soft towel, or in a
test-tube called a “ leech-glass ”—especially if the place in
question is the palate or gums]. ‘The point of application may
be smeared with clay (or moistened with sugar-water or milk) or
scratched with a needle till blood appears, in order to coax them
to take hold,


§ 263. The leech must not be let go until it has taken proper
hold, as one can tell by the sinuous movements of the neck and from
the circumstance that the head forms a right angle to the body.

To ensure that they will not crawl. into the gullet, or nose, or

2L


$14 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


anus, one must draw a thread through the tail end from above
down—not from side to side, otherwise one would injure the large
blood vessels of the animal.

Place chosen for the application.— One must not apply leeches
to unhealthy skin, or to places where there are subjacent large
vessels, or where the skin is very thick (palm of hand; heel), or
in a situation where healing would subsequently be interfered with
because of pus or septic matter flowing over it from near by.


1044. Removal.—When the leeches are full, and you
wish to let them come off*, sprinkle a little salt over them, or
(pepper, or snuff], or ashes or nitre, or burnt bristles, or flax,
or burnt sponge or burnt wool. They will then fall off.

Do not detach leeches forcibly, or else there may be violent
hemorrhage.

1042.  <After-treatment.—After the leeches have fallen off,
the place should be sucked by cupping it, in order to extract
some of the blood at the spot and thereby get rid of the toxic
substances left in the wound. [If one wishes to keep the blood
flowing anyway, one applies warm, dry cloths to the part,
or a warm poultice, or a sponge soaked in warm water. After
the bleeding has stopped, apply a soft, dry compress].

If the blood will not stop flowing, dust the spot with finely
powdered burnt galls, quicklime, ashes, ground-up earthenware
and similar styptics.


§ 264. [Alum, cobwebs, pitch, gunpowder, hydrates, sesquioxide
of iron, or pressing the skin into the folds have been advocated. The
cautery has been necessary as a last resource. All such remedies
should be at hand.

Do not leave the patient till the bleeding has quite stopped,
and if it is a child, watch it the following night as well.

If a leech should have got loose and been swallowed, give salt-
water to drink, copiously. If a leech has wandered into the anus,
give a salt-water enema.


Do not use leeches again if they have been applied to a case of typhoid fever,
cholera, smallpox, or syphilis.]


1043. The use of leeches is beneficial in subcutaneous
maladies like serpiginous ulcers, morphew, impetiginous ulcers,
and the like.


_Annotation by Costaeus : Leeches are very effective also for pleurisy and for
opening the hemorrhoidal veins.


_ _* One may wish to detach them before they are full, because the patient is
fainting or develops cramps.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 515


23.—TuHe RETENTION OF SUBSTANCES DUE TO BE DisCHARGED.


1044. Substances which are due to be discharged may
be retained within the body for the following reasons : (1) the
material may be withdrawn from the part, but not from the
body itself ; (11) the material may be retained, although an
evacuation or discharge is actually taking place at the same
time. (ii1) The retention of these substances itself aids evacua-
tion. The substances here meant are infrigidants, styptics,
glutinous medicines, caustics. (iv.) stricture.

(i) Materials are retained because attracted to a certain
place, and no (outward) evacuation occurs. Ex. the application
of cupping to the breasts,—this relieves uterine hemorrhage.
The action is more decided if the pain in the (diseased) part is
first relieved.

(i1) The retention of substances although an evacuation
is taking place. For instance, venesection from the basilic
vein may serve to arrest emesis in a case of purgation; or
purgation in a case of emesis. Or again, cessation of both dis-
charges if the sweat is (strongly) provoked at the same time.

(iii) The retention of material helps evacuation in the
case where one cleanses the stomach and intestines from glutinous
unhealthy humours by giving lubricant laxatives, using picra; or
where one procures a thorough cleansing of the cardiac orifice
of the stomach by emesis, for cutting up of the material which
remains behind in the stomach.

Styptic medicines aggregate abnormal matter, and contract
up the lumen of the passages.

Infrigidant medicines clot the material, and cause the
orifices to tighten up and become narrow.

Glutinous medicines choke up the orifices of the channels
(of the body), and if they are desiccant as well, and sharp (or hot),
this action will be still more decided.

Caustics produce an eschar or scab, which stays on the
orifices of the passages, and becomes hard and closes them.
But the obstruction may be harmful. The scab may get loose
or break, and the underlying aperture would thereby become
enlarged. Some caustics have a styptic action (e.g., copper
sulphate) and some havernot such an action (quicklime). ‘The
styptic caustics are required when one wants a firm scab ; the
others are used when one wishes the scab to come off before
long. ;

(iv.) Retention of material by stricture.—There are two


516 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


varieties. In one the foramen is closed and contracted, so that
the adjacent parts are fused together. This happens for in-
stance when the artery is opened in mistake for the basilic vein
in doing venesection. The other is where the outlet of a
wound is blocked, and the channel itself is blocked, as when
we insert rabbit hairs into a wound.

We may say, in brief, that if blood is flowing out because
the orifices of the veins are open, we must use styptics to tighten
them up ; but if it is flowing because of rupture of the vessel,
glutinous styptics must be used, like Lemnian earth ; and if it is
due to ulceration (erosion), one must incite the development of
granulations by adding something which will cleanse away
the corrosive substance.


24.—TuHE TREATMENT OF OBSTRUCTIONS.


1045. Obstructions are due to the humours being thick, or
viscid, or over-abundant.

If the humours are simply over-abundant, their injurious
effect is removed by evacuating them either by venesection or
by purgation. Ifthe humours are thick, they must be rendered
thin. If they are viscid, and tenuous, incisives are required.

You have now learnt the difference between a thick or
coarse and a glutinous quality ; it is the difference between
melted glue and clay. Thick or coarse humour requires
attenuation by a resolvent to make its expulsion easy ;_ viscid
or glutinous humour requires an incisive which is able (a) to
cut its way between the fluid and that to which it adheres [the
wall of the passage], thus parting one from the other, and (4)
to break the fluid into small fragments,—because glutinous
matter obstructs both by adhesion to its surroundings and by
the cohesion of its particles.

1046. In resolving thick humour there are two opposite
conditions to guard against. On the one hand, if the resolution
is not sufficient it will render the material watery and at the
same time increase its volume so much that it cannot be resolved
at all, thereby making the obstruction greater still. On the
other hand, the resolution may be carried too far, in which-case
the attenuated portion will dissipate altogether, leaving the
sediment behind as a calcareous mass.

Therefore, when vigorous resolution is necessary, one helps
the action by the use of lenificant tenuous matter free of coarse


particles, and moderately “ hot,’’ for this will assist in removing °


the whole of its obstructive action.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 07


Obstructions in the veins are worse than others. Ob-
structions in the arteries are still worse. Obstructions in the
vital organs are the worst of all.

Therefore it is better to combine astringency and at-
tenuation in an aperient, because the former will counteract
the damage which attenuant substance does to the member.


25—.TuHe TREAYMENT oF INFLAMMATORY SWELLINGS.


1047. As has been explained, some inflammatory swellings
are “‘ hot,” some are cold and soft, and some are cold and
hard. ‘heir causes are either immediate or remote. Plethora is
a remote cause ; blows, falls and bites are immediate causes.
Some of these causes may befall a body which is in a state of
plethora, or one in which the humours are in balanced proportion.

1048. Inflammatory swellings due to remote causes or to
immediate causes associated with plethora occur either in organs
which are adjuncts to vital organs (namely, emunctory organs) or
not. If they are not present in such organs, one must not at first
apply any of the resolvent agents, but simply relieve the (special)
emunctory organ concerned, if there is one. If the particular
vital organ has not its own emunctory the whole body requires
attention with a view to influencing the affected part by recoil
[i.e., using a “ repercussive ’’], drawing the material to a different
organ, and also introducing an astringent influence. Owing toa
difference in the member, an attraction may occur for something
placed in the opposite side, whether by using some appropriate
exercise, or by applying something heavy over the part. ‘Thus,
inflammatory matter may often be drawn away from the hand by
keeping something heavy over the place for an hour.

1049. For acute inflammatory swellings, astringent reper-
cussives must be purely coldin temperament. But if the swelling
is ‘‘ cold,” the remedies must be combined with something
possessing a heating property in addition to being astringent,
such as bogrush, and azfarut-tib [a medicament derived,
according to some, from a certain species of oyster, Indian
Ocean].

During the stage of maturation of the inflammation, the
retentive quality of the treatment must be kept down, and it must
be combined with something resolvent. When the height has
been reached, the two classes of remedy may be given in equal
proportions. Then, during the stage of declination, the remedy
should be simply resolvent and relaxing. Cold relaxing remedies
have a more desiccant effect than hot ones.


518 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


1050. Inflammatory swellings produced by immediate causes
in a person who is not plethoric require an initial treatment with
relaxant and resolvent remedies, otherwise the treatment 1s as
before.

The inflamed organ may be the emunctory of a vital organ,
as is the case if the glands of the neck are inflamed, for these are
related to the brain ; or the glands of the axilla, which are related
to the heart; the glands of the groin, which are related to the liver.
In ail such cases one must certainly not employ repercusstves—
not because it is a wrong treatment for inflammation in these
situations, for it is not wrong—but because in this case we do
not wish to touch the inflammation itself. Our aim is to direct our
energies to enlarging the swelling and convey morbid material to
it from the vital organ itself. We can do no good as long as there
is disease in the vital organ, and our efforts must be directed
towards relieving shat. Were we to employ repercussives, we
should risk returning the morbid material back to the vital organ,
and finally make its state so bad that we cannot possibly mend it.
That is why we aim at drawing the unhealthy material down to an
ignoble member, so relieving the vital organ of which it is
emunctory, and we encourage the inflammatory process in the
ignoble member, even to the extreme of applying cupping or
calefacient plasters which will draw the inflammation thither.

When the inflammatory mass has in this way become fluid,
it may burst of its own accord, especially if it be in an emunctory
organ ; the promotion of maturation will help to bring about
this result. Sometimes both maturation and incision must be
done together. Maturation is favoured by the use of an agent
which both obstructs and agglutinates, for in this way the heat
of the part is maintained. In carrying out such measures one
should watch to see when the innate heat is feeble or the tissues
are breaking down. At that moment the agglutinative and
oppilative remedy must be removed and an aperitive medicine
given, making a deep incision. After that, resolvent and desic-
cative medicines are to be applied which we shall specify in the
Special Part.

When the inflammation is deep-seated it must be drawn
towards the skin, even if to do so we must employ dry cupping.

1051. Hard inflammatory masses. When these are at the
end of the first stage, the treatment is to soften with remedies
which are “ hot” and not very ‘‘ dry,” because one must not
make it so dense as to undergo calcification. Theaim isto dispose
the mass to resolution, increasing the resolvents up to a point,


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 519


and if one is then afraid that the dispersal of the resolved portion
will lead to calcification in the residue, the softening process is
resumed. ‘These alternations are repeated time and again until
the whole is dispersed by the alternate softening and solution.

1052. Gaseous swellings are treated by agents which have a
calefacient effect and rarefy the (gaseous) substance, and open up
the pores. This treatment depends on the view that the swellings
are due to coarseness of the gaseous particles and to closure of the
pores. In addition one must take measures to prevent the
appearance of the material from which the gaseous matter
arises.

1053. Inflammatory swellings with ulceration.—E.g., vesi-
cular or herpetic ulcers. ‘These require infrigidants. If they
are like phlegmon, they do not need emollient treatment
[Margin: humectant treatment, unless they are to be opened]
but desiccant treatment, because the secondary state—the ulcera-
tion of the inflammatory mass—which one feared has actually
happened, and the proper treatment of ulceration is by desiccants,
not emollients [Mgn : humectants].

1054. Lnternal inflammatory masses. ‘The morbid material
in such swellings must be removed by venesection and purgation.
The following must be forbidden: use of baths; wine; bodily
exercise (or movement), avoidable mental emotions, like anger
and the like. In the early stages repercussives must be given and
minimum bulk of food (lit. : not too much, “ superfluity ’’),
especially if the organ affected be the stomach or liver. As the
time of resolution arrives, one must not omit introducing
astringents of agreeable odour, in the manner in which we have
set forth for you in preceding pages. ‘This principle is more
important for the liver and stomach than for the lung.

Emollient medicines, or mild aperients, are to be given to
those cases in which maturation is taking place, for they are
beneficial to inflammatory processes. Ex.: nightshade, cassia
fistula. Nightshade has the power to disperse acute inflammations
in the internal organs. One should give only light food, and not
even then either at the beginning of an attack or during it, unless
the patient is very feeble. The signs of a collection of [pus]
in the internal organs, associated with loss of strength, indicate
that the patient is on the road to death unless nutriment is
given to sustain his vitality. But the giving of food is very risky.
Therefore it will be well if the disease should resolve of itself,
and if the (abscess) bursts [i.e., into the alimentary tract], such
things as honey-water and sugar-water may be given to lave the


520 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


parts, following them with remedies which favour maturation and
are desiccant. Finally, one administers desiccants alone.

This subject is fully dealt with in the Special Part under
the appropriate headings.

1055. Internal inflammatory swellings in the abdomen
may give rise to errors in diagnosis. If the condition is not
inflammation but rupture, there 1s a danger of perforation. Such
swellings are not usually in the omentum, but in the intestine
itself [e.g., appendix], and it is dangerous to give aperients.


26. On Makxinc INCcIsIoNs


1056. When one decides to make an incision or opening
(into the diseased. part) one should take into consideration the
various small and larger folds of the skin. In the case of the
forehead however one would act otherwise, because an incision
along the folds there would divide the muscles and cause drooping
of the eyelids. Similar care must be taken in the cases where the
muscular fibres take a different course to the surface folds. The
surgeon must therefore know the anatomy of the nerves, the
veins, and the arteries, so as not to sever them by mistake. He
also needs various drugs for staunching the blood, plasters to allay
the pain, and the appropriate instruments handy —namelv Galen’s
remedy; rabbit-hair; spider’s web; white of egg; the cautery.
With such agents one is able to arrest the flow of blood if due to an
accidental injury (by the surgeon), or whether it be inevitable,
or the result of emollient medicines which provoke hemorrhage.

Having opened the abscess and extracted its contents, one
should avoid applying oil, or water, or a plaster containing oil, or
““basilicon.”” One should use a plaster made with vitriol, if
something has to be applied. A sponge soaked in astringent
wine may be applied to the part.


27.—GANGRENE. EXCISION


1057. When decomposition occurs in a member, whether
involving humoral matter or not, owing to some depravity of the
temperament, and when wet-cupping or the usually effective
epithemes particularized in the special books fail to benefit,
then one must remove the corrupt flesh. If this can be done
without the use of the cautery-iron, so much the better, because
that is injurious to the nerves supplying the muscles and is
dangerous to the arteries.

If this is unavailing, and the decomposition is spreading


THE CANON OF MEDICINE KOT


still more deeply into the flesh, excision becomes necessary and
one must burn the place with boiling oil to antagonize the viru-
lence of the disease and prevent hemorrhage. The flesh will
fill up again but the skin will shrink and resemble flesh in its
hardness.

1058. When you are about to excise the gangrenous part,
cut along the bones where the flesh is adherent, and still healthy,
and the pain is greatest, this being the indication of the healthy
margin. Any part that is boggy and flabby belongs to the
gangrenous part and must be excised with it.

1059. Should the part you propose excising entirely
surround the bone, involving the foramina where gangrene is
taking place, excision and the use of a saw is required. If you
decide to do this, go in between the place for excision and the site
of perforation and flesh, to avoid causing pain. If bone is
projecting into the part to be excised, and 1s irreducible, and
there is a risk of the tissues next to it undergoing gangrene as well,
we should raise up and tear off the flesh from it, stretching it by
bandages to an adjoining part or using any device for the purpose
which seems best for the occasion. ‘The object is to separate the
diseased part [and its fasciae] from the healthy tissue as far as
possible, after which it can be wholly excised.

1060. If the part affected is large, and with nerves, arteries
and veins in the vicinity (for instance, the thighbone), and if the
gangrenous change is very great, the doctor should leave the case
severely alone.


28. THe Treatment oF Loss or ContTINUITY (INCLUDING
Utcers, Brows, Bruises, DisLocations)


1061. Fracture. Loss of continuity in large members
[e.g., fracture of a long bone] is treated by securing apposition
and applying bandages in a suitable manner, as described in the
Special Instructions given in the appropriate Section. The part
must be kept at rest. The diet should include conglutinant foods
which will supply chondrogenous nutriment to the seat of injury,
and bring about the closure of the edges of the fracture and make
the bone continuous again. Food of this kind can be prepared
from the feet of animals. When a person has reached the prime
of life there is no other’way of procuring reunion of the bone.
But further details on restoring continuity are given in the Special
Part.

1062. Wounds.—There are three principles to follow


when treating loss of continuity in fleshy tissues. (1) Stabilize


522 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the part which is insufficiently firm, arrest the bleeding, and if
there be a discharge strive to reduce its amount ; (2) make the
immobilized part consolidated by administering appropriate
medicines and suitable articles of food ; (3) prevent sepsis ([lit.,
putrefaction] as much as possible. |

If all three cannot be achieved, concentrate on the two which
can. You know from what has already been said how the arrest
of bleeding is achieved. Consolidation of the part is secured by
apposing the edges of the wound, and by applying desiccant.
remedies [which tend to reduce the amount of discharge], and by
taking agglutinative foods.

1063. Uvcers.—In treating ulcers, the aim is to procure
dessication, so that the exposed surface shall dry up. Septic
changes are treated with caustic medicaments such as yellow or
green vitriol (an impure copper sulphate), unslaked lime,
arsenic. If these do not succeed, the cautery may be needed, and
an application prepared with verdigris, wax, and oil; the
verdigris is cleansing ; the oil and wax counteract the undue
causticity ; and so we have a medicine suitably modified or
attempered.

All ulcers are either simple or compound. They are simple
when they are of small size and there is so little loss of substance
that the margins can be reunited, the union being secured by
seeing that no oil [or sand or dirt.—Aeg.] or dust gets in between
the margins during the process of healing. The fact that the
opposite sides will meet ensures that there will be no loss of
substance. When the ulcer is so large that the two sides cannot
be brought together, and there remains a mark, or depression, or
a gap, which is full of sanious matter, there being already an
actual loss of substance, the treatment must be desiccant.

If there is loss of substance, then, healing will necessarily
be by cicatrization. ‘This is induced in the first place by means of
astringents, and in the second by applying acrid [or escharotic]}
substances, for instance—yellow and green vitriol [cf. “ red
lotion ’’], because these assist desiccation and the formation of a
scab without producing further corrosion, and consequent
enlargement of the area of the ulcer.

1064, If the loss of substance be of flesh, as happens
with deep wounds, we cannot hurry the cicatrization. The first
thing to do is to encourage the formation of fleshy granulations,
and this will not occur unless the “‘ dryness ’’ be hardly more than
of the first degree. One keeps a look-out for any conditions
which willexpedite recovery. Thus (i) the state of the temperament


THE CANON OF MEDICINE S25


of the organ concerned as compared with that of the ulcer itself,
—For if the organ in question is very ‘‘ moist ” in temperament
and the ulcer not very ‘‘ moist,”’ a small amount of desiccation —
namely, to the first degree—will be sufficient, for the malady is
very nearly the same in character as the member affected. But if
the member (in which the ulcer is situated) is dry in temperament,
and the ulcer very moist, desiccation to the second, and even the
third degree will be needed before the temperament of the lesion
can be restored to the normal. Cases which are between the two
extremes will need equalization of the respective states.

One must also consider (11) the temperament of the body
as a whole.—If the body is of very dry temperament, and the
diseased member is more humid than normal, we aim to reduce
the humidity to one more nearly approaching equipoise. One
applies desiccant remedies. The converse applies if the
temperament of the body were more humid and the affected limb
were drier. If both the body as a whole, and the affected part
are increased in the same direction, more decidedly dessicant
treatment is indicated if the excess be on the side of humidity,
and less desiccant treatment if the excess be in the direction of
dryness.

One must also consider (iil) the potency of the desiccants.
All desiccants promote the formation of granulation tissue (lit.
flesh), but a powerfully desiccant action is not required. All that
is needed is to hold back any material which is of a character
likely to contribute to the formation of granulations in its passage
down into the affected part. Therefore one searches for a
desiccant agent which is useful for promoting cicatrization rather
than the formation of “‘ flesh,” but one also prefers one which is
abstergent and cleanses away the sanious matter to one which
promotes desiccation. ‘The ideal desiccant promotes cicatriza-
tion, consolidation of the part and restoration of continuity. All
remedies which are desiccant without any caustic (by-) action
can be included among those which promote the formation of
granulations.

1065. Ulcers in situations which are not fleshy, and round
ulcers, cannot be made to heal quickly.

Internal ulcers require the admixture of purifying agents like
honey, or special remedies.for the affected part (e.g., diuretics for
ulcers in the urinary passages) with the desiccant and styptic
preparations needed in any case. matey

To promote cicatrization one may use a remedy which is
viscous as well as astringent or styptic, like Lemnian earth.


con THE CANON OF MEDICINE


1066. Conditions which prevent the healing of an ulcer.—(i)
unhealthy temperament of the affected part. One must endea-
vour to rectify this. (ii) Unhealthy temperament of the blood
supplied to the part. This is to be remedied by diet, choosing
that which will produce good chyme. (iii) Undue abundance of
blood entering the part, rendering it too humid. This is counter-
acted by purgation, by a diluent diet, and exercise as far as is
permissible. (iv) Disease of the underlying bone whereby sanious
matter is constantly (flewing over the ulcer). The only remedy
for this is to deal with the bone-disease : massage can help to
get rid of the diseased bone, otherwise it must be excised; (v)
adductive plasters are often required for the treatment of ulcers
to enable the fragments of bones and foreign objects lodged in
the flesh to be withdrawn, for otherwise they prevent healing; (vi)
more nutritive food may be indicated, in order to provide strength
to the tissues and yet the nutriment may need to be curtailed in
order to lessen the discharge of sanious matter from the ulcer. So
there is a certain difficulty in adjusting these contrary objects,
for sanious discharge is debilitating, and the remedy for this is to
supply more nutritious food; and yet to make the diet more
liberal entails increasing the amount of sanious discharge. The
doctor has therefore to make his decision according to circum-
stances. [(vii) Malignant disease. Cautery and excision are
indicated. }

1067. Bathing —When an ulcer is forming, the patient
must not enter a bath, or use hot water, because this will attract
matters to the ulcer which will lead to the formation of an
inflammatory swelling. But when the ulcer reaches a stationary
stage, and discharges sanious matter it may be permissible.

1068. If an ulcer recurs soon after being healed, it needs
consolidation and is on the way to becoming a fistula. One must
therefore watch the discharge very carefully, and also the colour
of the edges of the ulcer. If the discharge increases apart from an
increase in the amount of food, it denotes maturation.

1069. Dislocations.**—We speak now of the treatment
when tissues are torn, as by dislocation. That is, we speak of
cases in which there is a loss of continuity deep down under the
skin. In such cases, it is evident, the medicinal agents must be
more potent than when the lesion is exposed to view.

These deep tissues are rich in blood, and therefore the
congestion needs relieving, but this must not be at the risk

* Note that the terms employed in the original text are indefinite. The.


use of the words “ dislocation,” “ contusion,’’ “‘ sprains,” represents the apparent
intention of the text, though the context is not consistent therewith throughout,


——


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 525


of undue desiccant action, for in that case the tenuous parts
would be dispersed, and the thick residue would become a
stone.

When we have procured as much dispersal as is necessary,
we apply a consolidative of desiccant character, to enable material
to escape, instead of lodging in the cavity and finally giving
rise to a stone; in such a case it might either decompose or be
removed in some other way, allowing the continuity to be
restored.

If the lesion is still deeper, the place is scarified to enable
the medicament to get in better.

1070. Contusions.—If contusion is associated with loss of
continuity, venesection may suffice. But if the dislocation is
associated with a severe crush, the latter must be alleviated first,
with appropriate medicaments. If the contusion be extensive,
desiccants are used. _If it be circumscribed, like a stab, it need
not be troubled with, unless the wound is a poisoned one, or
unless there is great pain, or the nerves are involved, or if there
is a risk of suppuration supervening, or if aneurysm develops.

1071. Sprains.—A soft bandage is enough, if the con-
dition is not painful. Appropriate medicaments are applied
over the dressing.

In cases of falls and blows, venesection is to be done in some
part of the body, and the diet must be light ; meat and the
like must be avoided. ‘Treat with decoctions and potions.

The subject of loss of continuity of nerves and bones 1s
deferred to a special chapter in the Special Part.


29.—CAUTERISATION (as A THERAPEUTIC Measure).


1072. Cauterisation is a very useful method of treatment,
for (4) it prevents the spread of a destructive lesion, and ()
has an invigorating effect on a member whose cold temperament
we wish to rectify; (c) it breaks up putrefactive matters
imprisoned in a tissue ; (d) it restrains the flow of blood.

A cautery is best made of gold.

The place to be cauterised may be exposed to view, in
which case the cautery can be applied without more ado ; or it
may be deeply situated—for instance, in the nose, the buccal
cavity, the anus. In this last case a special appliance becomes
necessary in the form of a hollow cannula, enclosed in some
material like Samian earth or the “talc’’ of the Arabs, or
chimolean earth (a red clay) or the “ magra” of the Arabs,
soaked in vinegar. Around this, one places cloths wetted with


520 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


extremely cold rose-water or certain juices, and the instrument
is introduced so that these coverings make a little pit to receive
the cautery, whilst protecting the tissues around from injury,
as well as the walls of the meatus down which the cautery will
pass. The diameter of the cautery itself should be less than that
of the cannula, so that when dexterously introduced, it will
reach the exact spot to be treated without touching the sides of
the cannula. .

The person applying the cautery must take care not to
expose nerves, or fascia, or ligaments to the brunt of the burning.
For arresting hemorrhage, great heat is required, with vigorous
cauterisation, so that a firm thick eschar is produced which
will not readily come off. It is this crust forming under the
eschar which stops the blood-flow, and therefore if it became
loose the condition would be worse than ever.

If the cautery is being applied to remove dead flesh (tissue),
pain will show you when you have reached the healthy tissue.

If the cautery is being applied to the bone under the
(dead) flesh, one must prolong the time of cauterising the area
till the dead matter is all completely destroyed.

If the cautery is to be applied to the skull, the application
must be gentle, so as not to risk roasting the brain, or shrivelling
up the membranes of the brain. In the case of other bones,
there is no need to be so anxious.


30.—TuHe Revier or Pain.


1073. You have already learnt that the causes of pain
may be comprehended under two headings : (i) sudden change of
temperament ; (11) loss of continuity. You have also learnt that
the first of the headings comprises hot, cold, moist or dry
intemperaments ; (ii1) and the second occurs apart from deposi-
tion of matter, or as the effect of the presence of chymous,
gaseous or inflammatory exudate.

The relief of pain, therefore, depends on making use of
the contraries of these causes. What the contrary of each is,
you have also already learnt, and you have learnt the way in
which an intemperament and inflammation, and gaseous de-
posits are treated.

When the pain is too intense, it may cause death, this
resulting in the first place from coldness of the body, and
secondly from tremor [of the heart], with a small pulse, which
finally fails, thus bringing death.

1074, In brief, pain is relieved either by altering the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE $27


temperament, or by dispersing the material which produces it,
or by producing insensibility. The last named destroys the
power of sensation in the part concerned. Insensibility of a
part is only produced (2) by making it very “cold”; (4) by
exposing it to the toxic properties which interfere with its
functions. Agents which act by producing relaxation, and
have a gently soothing effect are such things as dill, linseed,
melilot, chamomile, celery seed, bitter almond, and anything
which is hot in the first degree, especially if combined with a
drug of glutinous character like the gum of prunes, starch,
lead carbonate, saffron, gum-resin of cristus, marsh mallow,
cardamom, cabbage, turnip, and their decoctions, pharma-
ceutical adipes, zifa-i-ratab, and the oils specified in the Formu-
lary, laxatives, and all forms of evacuant. Laxatives are to be
given after other methods of evacuation have been tried, if
evacuant treatment is needed, until you have prevented any
further material from passing down into the affected part.
For it is just that that brings an inflammation to a head, or makes
it (burst) open.

1075. The most powerful of the stupefacients is optum.
Less powerful are : seeds and root-bark of mandrake ; poppy ;
hemlock ; white and black hyoscyamus ; deadly nightshade ;
lettuce-seed ; snow and ice-cold water.

1076. One must not overlook an extrinsic cause of pain,
by mistake. ‘Thus, external heat, external cold, a faulty posture
in bed, falls during epilepsy or during intoxication, etc. Search
for intrinsic causes must be otherwise made, by looking for the
signs of plethora (which you now know), or for the causes likely
to produce plethora.

1077. A source of pain which was at first external may
come to be internal, and persist. ‘Thus, drinking of icy water
will cause severe pain in the stomach and liver-region. In
such a case evacuant treatment and the like may not be parti-
cularly indicated, and the use of a bath, and a good sleep after
it may be enough. Or, a person may eat something heating,
and a severe headache may result from it. For this it is enough
to drink cooled water.

1078. Selection of remedies.—Sometimes the method used
for alleviating pain acts so-slowly that there is a risk of its becom-
ing unbearable before the remedy has come into effect. Thus
colic may be cured by purging the small intestine of the material
giving rise to it, but this requires time. On the other hand
one may give relief speedily, but only at the risk of worse harm in


528 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the end. Thus, it is possible to apply remedies which will
in a case of colic at once make the painful part insensible. The
doctor is therefore in a dilemma in such a case, and requires
good judgment so as to decide which is more harmful, to pre-
serve the strength or to allow the pain to persist. He has to
decide which is worse, the pain, or the danger liable to arise
from inducing insensibility of the part. He has to decide
which is the more important to avoid, or which is the lesser of
the two evils. For, should he allow the pain to continue,
there is the risk of it increasing so much as to prove fatal; and
if he makes the part insensible, this danger is averted and yet
some other part is affected adversely. However, one may be
able to remedy that, and then if the pain returns in consequence,
one may repeat the process.

In addition to all this one must select the stupefacient
remedy according to its own temperament, and the ease with
which it exerts its effect. One might administer it in the form
of a compound in theriacs (made with it), unless there is par-
ticular need to secure a powerful action.

1079. Jniernal medication for pain.—Some members, like
the teeth, cannot be treated even by the local application of
narcotics, because this is not a final cure. In this case better
relief is obtained by internal remedies. So, in painful diseases
of the eyes, less harm would result this way than from local
application of the remedy.

In the case of other organs, the harm done them by taking a
draught is easily rectified. The harmful outcome would be
increased, for instance, in a case of colic, because the cold
[the narcotic is “cold’’] increases the amount of “‘ matter,”
and solidifies it and encloses it.

1080. Stupefacients often relieve pain because they
produce sleep—one of the factors whereby pain is relieved,
especially if the patient is fasting, and there is a material cause
of the pain.

Stupefacients are safer when they are compounded with
other drugs as diluents (e.g., theriac), as for instance “‘ philo-
nium,” aromatic electuary or lozenges. But their efficacy is
not as great. ‘The fresh lozenges are more efficient than older
ones, and very old ones have no action at all. ‘Those which are
between the two extremes are intermediate in efficacy.

1081. The pains of flatulence are very severe and are yet
easy to relieve at certain times. Sometimes it is sufficient simply
to pour hot water over the part, though one must take care the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 529


pain is not due to an inflammation (which simulates the pain of
flatulence) before doing so. It would be a serious mistake,
especially at the beginning of (suppurative) inflammation to _
administer a hot water douche (shower). Sometimes such
treatment makes the condition worse, supposing it does not
disperse the gases, or cause them to expand.

1082. Poulticing.—Another sort of remedy for flatulence
is a poultice. A poultice may act better if it is combined with a
desiccant like millet. Poultices are not applicable to some
members; for instance, the eye. In that case cloths are used.

Some poultices are made with hot oil. The most efficient
poultices are those made with flour of orobs boiled in vinegar
and dried before use. Weaker ones are made with bran, treated
in the same way. Steamed salt is burning (scorching); steamed
millet is weaker, and better. A safe and easy way of steaming
a part is from boiling water in a vessel, but it requires careful
control to avoid any of the mishaps we have referred to above.

1088. Dry (hot) Cupping comes under this heading as a
powerful means of allaying the pains of flatulence. By repeating
them over and over again the pain will be entirely abolished.
But this is at the cost of those untoward effects we have already
described.

1084. Osher means of allaying pain.—(1) Walking about
gently for a considerable time. The movement softens or
relaxes the tissues. (2) Fats of thin consistence, and the oils
already named. (3) Agreeable music—especially if it inclines
one to sleep.* (4) Being occupied with something very en-
grossing removes the severity of pain.


31.—T ue Priority or Cuorce or Meruops oF TREATMENT.


1085. When several mala-
dies occur together we should
deal first with that which fulfils
one of the following three con-
ditions :

(1) When the one must be
cured before the other can be
relieved. For instance, if in-
flammation and ulceration occur simultaneously, the former
must be attended to first until the intemperament on which it
depends is remedied. The ulcer will never be healed until that
is put right. The ulcer is then treated.

* Like the mother’s lullaby to her child in pain.


2M


yet) THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(2) When the maladies are related as cause and effect.
Example : obstruction and fever. The former must be treated
first. If the obstruction will only yield to a “ hot”’ remedy,
we shall not be able to cure the fever. We may treat phthisis
(inflammation of the lung) with desiccants, but we shall not cure
the fever, because its cause is beyond our reach. The cause
would be amenable to desiccant treatment, but this would keep
up the fever. .

_ (3) When it is absolutely essential to deal with one of the
maladies. ‘Thus suppose relapsing fever and palsy should
occur concurrently. There is no question about treating the
former, and venesection is the proper treatment. But this will
not cure the palsy.

The disorder and the symptom to which the malady owes
its name may occur together. In such a case one would begin
by dealing with the malady itself. But if the symptom became
urgent, we should turn our attention to it, and leave the disease
itself alone for the time. ‘Thus, in a case of colic, we should
turn our attention first to relieve the violent pain, even though
the condition causing it is thereby adversely affected. Again,
we should postpone a venesection (otherwise indicated) if the
stomach were in a feeble state or if there were diarrhcea, or if
there were nausea.

Sometimes we should do a venesection (for instance)
without hesitation even though that would not remove the whole
trouble. For instance, in a case of spasmodic disease, we should
not empty out all the morbid humour, but we should leave some
behind rather than risk losing some of the healthy humour,
in the hope that this itself would cure the spasmodic movements.


‘THe SEAL of THE WorkK, AND AN AcT oF THANKS.


May this our compendious discourse upon the general
principles pertaining to the science of medicine be found
sufficient.

Our next task will be to compile the work
on Simples, with the permission of
Allah. May He be our
aid, and Him do we
thank for all His
innumerable
mercies.


b af PS = 41 ‘
. Ss: 4 ™ | f oe Feb
if mii! rere ad be! a


o 7 fa ou bo
in <n ‘it “™


oid! Pi
ee ae
‘ rn
, _


<=— — Saees


eae. THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Brier SUMMARY OF THE CONTENTS OF
THE REMAINING BOOKS oF THE CaNon


BOOK.
MATERIA MEDICA, PHARMACOLOGY AND THERAPEUTICS.


PART I.—General Principles. The temperament or constitu-
tion of drugs, and how it is determined (a) by experiment; (6) by
deduction. An account of all the actions which drugs may possess.
The collection and preservation of herbal and other remedies.

PART I].—The properties of each drug taken sertatim—The
properties are classified under the following headings: General
and detailed description, tests for purity, qualities, general actions
in terms of the subject matter of Book I; special actions on each
system of the body, or special diseases; specific actions; antidotal
properties; alternative remedies or adjuvants.


The Latin edition gives 760 names, and the Bulaq gives 802 names. But
the actual number of remedies is rather less, because some of the items are simply
cross-references, the same drug being known under different names.

The second part of “ De viribus cordis’’ fulfils the alternative title ‘“‘ De
medicinis cordialibus’’ in being a careful account of the medicines acting on the
heart, arranged on the same plan as the above, and constituting a useful supple-
ment to the second Book.

The account of the individual drugs includes numerous quotations from various
sources, notably MDioscorides.


BOOK. iff,


SPECIAL PATHOLOGY (in its modern sense). In this Book the
various systems are taken up, and the diseases to which each is
liable are discussed, giving etiology, symptoms, diagnosis, prog-
nosis and treatment.


Special mention may be made of the following Sections :—
1.—Head, Eye, Ear, Nose, Mouth, Throat, Teeth.
2.—Chest, Lung, Heart.
3.—Alimentary Tract: stomach, intestines; liver, gall-bladder and
spleen.
4.—Urinary system.
5.—Conception. Pregnancy. The uterus. Diseases of women.
6.—The Muscles. The Joints. The Feet.
7.—The following special subjects: The intemperaments of the Brain ;
Headache in all its aspects; various diseases of the Brain.
Epilepsy. Paralysis.
Note that the Section on the Eye has been translated into German?° (ref, in
the Bibliography),


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 533


BOOK “IV.


PART I.— Fever (considered in general terms). One-day,
tertian, quartan, septic and pestilential (i.e., epidemic) fevers.
The subject of Crisis. Symptomatology of Fevers. Suppuration.
Lepra.

PART I].—Minor Surgery: Wounds and their general treat-
ment. Injuries of nerves. Fractures. Dislocations. Ulcers.

PART III].—Pozsoning : mineral, vegetable, and animal poisons.
Bites from animals and man.

PART IV.—Beauty Culture—The hair, the nails, the skin.
Wasting. Treatment of offensive odour, or discoloration. Pedi-
culosis, etc.


BOOK V.


THE FORMULARY.—This is a collection of careful recipes,
with copious details on the proper way to prepare “‘ compounded ”


medicines.
This book was translated into German by Dr. Sontheimer. (Ref, in the Biblio-


graphy).


(A copious index and glossary concludes the Latin Venetian edition (1595:
1608) of the Canon, lists of drugs being given according to their action on the body
and according to the diseases for which they may be applied.)


CONTINUATION (FROM 173) OF TRANSLATION OF “ DE VirIBUS CorRDIs.”


2. Tue Nature oF THE BREATH, AND ITS PuRPOSE.


A IFE (1086) and every perfection, and
BS GEIS 4 every good* for which creatures* are
f oe ed destined, comes from nothing but the
a JOP 7~ Primal Most High Truth—the source
(i, of all good, and from the Strong
~ Desire ever proceeding therefrom.
; 1087. Nevertheless, the recipient
%9© thereof requires a specific capacity for

a : reception of the good. A creature*
cannot receive indifferently. For instance, wool cannot be wool
(lit., have the “form” of wool) and at the same time have the
characters of a sword. Water cannot be water (lit., have the
“form” of water) and at the same time receive the “form”
of human nature.

1088. All corporeal bodies may receive life except the four
first principles, and whatever is of like nature to them. For
these are non-living bodies, and are also of negligible bulk. In
fact their bulk is infinitesimal compared with the planets, and still
more strikingly so compared with some of the fixed stars. Indeed
it can be shown that these first-principles in their totality have
not as much bulk as a point compared with the body of Saturn ;


>


how much less then are they when compared with the higher
bodies ?

1089. ‘Those who realize the Truth know the reason. why
these elementary bodies do not receive the ‘“‘form”’ of life.
Even the simplest of living beings is quite different from them ;
and the celestial bodies, adapted as they are to a very wonderful
kind of corporeal life, are very different from them also. The


first-principles are entirely beyond the possibility of life.


* This word is used in the Scholastic sense,


534


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 535


§265. It may be noted that corporeal bodies receive life when they enter into the
composition of living matter, whether of protozoa or the like, or of highly organized
animals and plants. The author does not say that all corporeal bodies are “ forms
of life,’ as some have assumed.—The distinction between matter and form already
discussed (§§55-1¢5) makes clear that which is expressed slightly differently in the
preceding passage. It should be borne in mind that the first principles are really
neither “‘ matter ’’ nor “ form’’; the discussion in the text is relevant only because
the listener is supposed to have failed to realize this. | Although the first-principles
are co-terminous with the “‘ infinity ’’ of the universe, they have not either mass or
Sa : The comparison between a “ point’’ and a “world” is characteristically
medieval.


1090. It is the mingling of substances in the compound
bodies which.accounts for their ability to receive life. The com-
mingling of the components so modifies their contrarieties
(cf. 20) as to produce an ensemble (i.e., the temperament : cf. 27),
in which all the various seeming contraries (nothing is really
absolutely contrary to anything else*) are blended harmoniously.
The more harmonious the blending, the more adapted is the
resultant compound for being the vehicle, not merely of life, but
of a very particular kind of life. Perfect equilibrium and perfect
balance renders possible the manifestation of the perfection of
rational life which celestial beings possess. And it is just this
kind of character which is to be found in the case of the human
breath !

1091. The breath, then, is that which emerges from a
mixture of first- -principles, aad: approaches towards the likeness
of celestial beings. It is a luminous substance. It is a ray of
light.

z 1092. This accounts for the fact that the mind rejoices
when it looks towards the light, and is depressed when exposed
to darkness. Light is in harmony with the breath. Darkness 1s
in discord with it.


3. Tue Cuter Emotions 1n Reration To THE Vitar BReatu.
Tuer First Causes: Potrentiatity ann Disposition.


| AGES (1093), and those physicians who agree
|| with them, are satisfied that joy and sadness,
fear and anger, are passions peculiarly
related to the breath of the heart. Each of
these emotions is maintained or discon-
tinued (1) by the agent} ; (2) by the per-
sistence or cessation of the disposition
exhibited by the substance of the patient.


* A typical Sufi conception. + Scholastic sense.


536 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


1094, Sages perceive a subtle distinction between poten-
tiality and disposition, as represented in this table :


Potentiality. Disposition.
1. Pertains equally to both contraries. Does not.
2. One and the same person can be glad or | Optimism and pessimism can only
sad. exist in distinct persons.
3. Is perfected into a disposition. Is perfection of potentiality to-


wards one or other contrary.


4. To pass one’s life with a breath of sad or | To pass one’s life with a breath of
glad potentiality is one thing. sad or glad disposition is
another.


5. Glad or sad potentiality can harmonize | Glad or sad disposition does not.
equally with the breath.


6. Potentiality for both contraries is in- | Disposition towards a contrary
separably inherent in the breath from (emotion) is not inseparably
the very first. inherent in the breath from

the outset but may appear
under the influence of super-
vening agents.


4. Joy, AND THE Causes oF DELIGHT AND SADNESS.


» OY (1095) is a form of delight. A thing is
delightful when it is the perfection of its
corresponding faculty. For instance: the
perception of a sweet or sapid taste, or a
pleasant fragrance; the overruling of a
feeling of anger by a good judgment; the
realization of some useful outcome of the
reasoning or imaginative faculty.

Meier 1096. There is a certain power accruing
from every perfected delight. It is the perfection of the given
power which produces joy.


“a


“ Delight is a perfection of operation ’’ (Summa contra Gent., xc®*, p. 190),
» ‘“ Joy and delight differ in aspect. For delight is caused by a good conjoined
in reality, while joy does not require this conjunction, because the mere repose of
the will in the thing willed suffices for the notion of joy. Hence delight is only
in a conjoined good, if it be taken in its proper sense ; whereas joy is in a separate
good.”’ (ib. p. 191.)


1097. Some people have expressed the opinion that
“delight” is really nothing but “the departure of abnormal
disposition,” and that there cannot possibly be delight where
there is no possibility of going beyond the natural disposition,
This view has arisen because there are some forms of power which


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 537


cannot bring delight until some abnormal disposition has first
been got rid of. Nevertheless, the opinion is wrong ; it takes a
thing which is per accidens for a thing per se—a fallacy of reasoning
which is mentioned in “‘ the Definitions.”

1098. Delight implies attaining a goal, and the one who
apprehends it can only be aware of the delight because he is
aware of the change. For instance (1) in the case of touch, it is
evident that the quality of tangibility can only provide delight as
long as the tactile organ continues to be in the opposite phase.
Once the polarity has reached equilibrium, the character of
the organ will have become “ set,’’ and cannot provide further
change. From this time there ceases to be any sensation of
pleasure.

(2) In the case of the hectic patient, who does not suffer
from heat subjectively however high the body temperature may
be ; a patient with an acute fever may feel hotter than the other
even though his temperature be not so high. This is because in
the hectic case, heat is already resident 1n tissues of corresponding
constitution ; in acute fevers, it 1s as if the heat flew past, afraid
of the manner in which it may find the elements mingled in
the tissues. Doctors rightly consider the state of the members
of a hectic case as “‘ bad, though balanced”’; and in the
other case regard the quality as “ unbalanced and therefore
bad:”

It is clear then that pleasure ceases as soon as one is accustomed
to’ the completed sense-perception because one can now no
longer be aware of the entry of sense-perceptions. The reason
why pleasure is experienced at the departure of an abnormal
disposition is that one is now sensitive to the slightest change
in the (now) normal disposition. It is possible that this sensitive-
ness to change in the natural disposition may appear syn-
chronously with the departure of the abnormal disposition.
People are then apt to think the latter was the cause of the former,
when it is not so. The real explanation lies in the attainment of
perfect perception. It is this that is the per se—the intrinsic
basis of delight. (cf. The Theory of Pain: 482.)

1099. In other words, the disposition towards delight
depends on the constitution of the participating breaths, and
on the degree to which the disposition is favourable to their
presence, always provided that the substance of the breath is
not diminished, and the disposition likely to be favourable 1s
not an abnormal one.


1100. Lffect of quantity of breath.—Should a breath with a


538 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


tendency towards delight be abundant, its action will be corres-
pondingly powerful. The greater the quantity, the greater its
vigour, and the greater is the amount of it which will persist at the
place of its origin—that is, in its “‘ matrix.” Consequently,
under these circumstances it will radiate out in greater measure
to the various members, and produce that particular state of
expansion which spells joy and pleasure. For, if the breath in
question were only moderate in amount, the substrate concerned
would hold it greedily, and not allow it to expand as freely as
otherwise would be the case.

1101. Effect of the quality of the breath.—The nobler the
character possessed by it, and the nobler its substance, the more
luminous does it become, and the more like celestial substance
will it be.


§ 2066. This passage is characteristically Sufic ; the reference being to the effect
of purification of the ‘“‘ breath’ in the exercises culminating in “ Shaghal’’; the
personal success and accuracy of the physician in his dealing with the sick being
progressively enhanced the more the purification of his “‘ breath’’ is secured. The
rarefaction of the breath, and the replacement of coarseness by fineness, are desir-
able in all, but come from experience and not from study,


1102. Such, then, are the various points about the ten-
dency towards pleasure and joy. As regards sorrow and grief, it
is Just a question of the converse. Once the general sources of
delight and pleasure are thoroughly grasped, the sources of joy
become intelligible, since joy is a form of delight.

1108. By way of summary, it may be said that when
the breath residing in the heart is plentiful (as it is when
there is plenty of that material from which it is rapidly and
constantly being generated) ; when it is balanced in tempera-
ment; when it has a luminous, beautiful and bright substance—
then there is a strong tendency to joy.

When the breath is scanty (as occurs in convalescents, in
long-standing illnesses, and in old persons) ; when it is not
balanced in character (as in morbid states) ; and when it is (a)
very dense and coarse in substance (as in melancholy and old
people)—it cannot arouse joy ; (4) very delicate in substance (as
in convalescents and in women), it will not allow of expansion ;
(c) confused (as in melancholy people)—in all these cases there is
a very strong tendency to depression, sadness and grief.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 539


TABULAR SUMMARY.


Disposition Corresponding character :
of mind. of breath. When met with
Cheerful Quantity : plentiful. He ay
Temperament: balanced.
Substance of breath: brilliant, full
of light.
Gloomy, Quantity : scanty. In convalescence,
In prolonged illness,
In old age.
Temperament: unbalanced. In disease.
Substance: dense and gross. In old age ; in melan-
‘choly.
Attenuated. In women; during
convalescence.
Confused. In melancholy.


5. THe Extrinsic Causzs oF DeLicut anp SaDNEss.


1104, When all the conditions required for a given act are
present, the slightest agent will now suffice to effect the act.
‘Thus, when sulphur is used for kindling, it is because sulphur is
set afire by a moderate amount of heat, whereas wood cannot be
made to burn without twice as much. So, when the mind has a
breath whose tendency to receive the impress of gladdening
agents is complete, a slight agent will suffice to evoke gladness.

1105. Action of wine on emotions and on breath.—This is
shown in the instance of those who drink excellent wine, for in
such persons gladness increases to such a pitch that onlookers
wonder how they can be jovial without reason. Such a thing,
of course, cannot be. No impression is possible without an
impressor.

But the fact is that when wine is taken in moderation, it
gives rise to a large amount of breath, whose character is balanced,
and whose luminosity is strong and brilliant. Hence wine
disposes greatly to gladness, and the person is subject to quite
trivial exciting agents. ‘he breath now takes up the impression
of agents belonging to the present time more easily than it does
those which relate to the future ; it responds to agents conducive
to delight rather than those conducive to a sense of beauty. It
also takes up an impression from agents which are prone to evoke
conjecture rather than from those which are concerned with real
understanding. The explanation of this is that normally the
power of the mind brings about an act in the brain such as will


540 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


expel the breath (when it is in the phase of having a mild degree
of moisture) ; the brain thus becomes able to obey the motions of
the thought and the exercise of the faculty of understanding. In
inebriety, however, there is a very great inclination towards
excess of moisture (which is incompatible with obedience to the
understanding), owing to admixture with ascending and over-
flowing vapours, which render it too humid. This moisture
prevents it from obeying the intellectual faculty and the ten-
dencies of the thought, except in respect of very material and
corporeal topics. It cannot serve in respect of very delicate
spiritual matters. Whether stable or agitated, moisture cannot
take part in the formation or presentation of spiritual affairs ; it
can only respond to corporeal ones.

1106. Stages in inebriety.—The following are the various
steps of degradation of the mind, not arranged chronologically :
First, recognition of truth is impaired, and the operation of the
mind is imperfect. The intellectual power falls in proportion.
The substrate continues to attract breath until the temperament
of one has reached up to that of the other, after which the flow of
breath of course comes to an end.

1107. The power of the mind (which is in the “ heart ’’)
has a greater affinity for joy during the state of drunkenness ; the
gladdening things that come to it do not reach it by the usual
route between the senses and the phantasy (or even the cogitative
faculty), because the sensitive faculties have come into dominance.
The repletion of the breath with moisture has altered its vigour.
The senses now dominate the inner breath, and are more powerful
than the understanding. ‘The understanding (as for instance for
geometry and other exact sciences), meeting as it does a breath
which is so wanton towards it, readily submits to the senses.
Things being so, no wonder that the conception of future, of
beauty, of rational affairs, has become blurred in the intoxicated
person’s mind; the sense-perception of sweet, glad, and
delectable things prevails, and the sense of the present is very
strong. It is the very strength of this tendency that accounts for
the fact that quite a slight agent will evoke gladness and mirth.
Onlookers think that such persons are jovial without reason.
But this cannot be so. Asa matter of fact, some causative agents
of joy and gladness are powerful, while others are weak ; some
are known and obvious, others are not known and occult. Many
of the latter are not known, not because they occur only rarely ;
they occur regularly. The fact is that we notice things less
particularly the oftener we encounter them.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 541


1108. It is now necessary to detail the powerful and
obvious sources of joy and gladness. Instances of sources of joy.
are the following : (1) gazing upon the daylight, among cheerful
people. ‘T’he evidence of this is that being in the dark makes
them sad. (2) Having intercourse with those of like beliefs.
The evidence of this 1s that solitude makes such people sad.
Gladdening influences are such as (1) obtaining that which is
wished for ; (2) satisfying an intention without meeting opposi-
tion ; (3) preferring to do something peaceful ; (4) confidence ;
(5) the memory of past and future joys and hopes ; ; (6) thinking
about ambitious things ; (7) mutual argumentation with kindred
minds; (8) relief from pain; (g) contact with curious (interesting,
unusual, remarkable, new) things ; (10) uplifting of the mind ;
(11) meeting friends and friendly surroundings ; (12) over-
coming deception in small matters : and many similar things to
be found mentioned in books of rhetoric and morals.


Compare also the following: “All the passions of the irascible appetite rise
from the passions of the concupiscible appetite and terminate in them ; for instance,
anger rises from sadness, and having wrought vengeance, terminates in joy’’ (St.
Phomas?* Sr vaw2t;  p: 130):

1109. All these vary in different races according to their
affections, habits and ages. None of them is invariably absent.
If two agents usually having a gladdening effect occur together,
the effect is not so much the greater. All that happens is that
the disposition is more drawn to one than the other. The effect
of one only overrules that of the other if the agent in question be
very powerful, or, if it be weak, only if it be very persistently
at work. (Cf. 1115.) This accounts for delight being able to
persist during the state of inebriation, and for the fact that melan-
choly persons with confused breaths keep sad after agencies pro-
ducing a sense of desolation and sadness—such as the following:
(1) reflecting that one’s fatherland is distant ; (2) pondering over
many injuries already past and done with ; (3) hate and rancour ;
(4) bad health ; (5) difficult circumstances of life ; (6) thinking
terrible things are going to happen in the future ; (7) thinking
of the necessity for death, which natural judgment ignores
because of the obvious fact that we must die ; (8) thinking
about something that it is disturbing to meditate upon ; (9) being
away from an agreeable occupation ; (10) having thoughts that
distract from one’s occupation ; (11) distraction from that which
is desired for and wished for ; (12) many other similar things,
and others which are beyond comprehension. ‘Things of this
sort easily sadden a mind which is disposed to become sad.


54.2 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Moreover, in melancholy persons, the vividness of the
imagination of depressing things itself causes them to appear,
because the thing whose image is represented to the mind is
already there in actuality. Hence depression persists.

1110. Vividness of imagination goes with dryness of the
breath, the movement of which the will has power to correct.
We find that the understanding is drawn away from rational
actions by the senses and by the phantasy, whenever the character
of the breath is perverted ; for the breath moves characteristically
towards that direction in which a lack of congenial disposition
arises, as when the quality of the breath is very bad, and when it
is confused.


6. How racu EMotTION TENDS TO GENERATE ITS OWN LYPE
oF BREATH.


1111. It is not to be thought that every agent tending
towards joy or depression necessarily depends only on the quan-
tity or quality of the substance of the breath. Other agencies
are concerned. For instance, the emotions of the mind have
to be considered. ‘These tend to one or other of the aforesaid,
true though it be that they act through the agency of factors
intrinsic in the breath itself (namely, quantity, quality). They
do this by modifying the temperamental substrate or by rectifying
the breath or by increasing its quantity. Thus, they dispose
towards joy.

On the other hand, an agent of opposite sign will tend to
induce depression.

These are the immediate and remote external factors.

1112. The intrinsic factors are traceable to one single
source, because every act of contrary type, if it be repeated often,
comes to be more efficient in imparting an effect. Every incre-
ment of power carries with it so much more tendency to the
accomplishment of the effect. ‘This is sufficiently plain from a
purely logical point of view. A body which is very heating tends
to impart heat rapidly ; and similarly in the case of cold, rare
and dense bodies. ‘The same holds good in the case of the internal
potencies. This is how it is that a strong character is formed by
repeated practice and repeated experience of emotions. It is in
this way that moral character is acquired.

Perhaps the reason underlying this is that when an emotion
appears, it often makes the substance of the breath become
conducive ; and what is suitable for one thing is unsuitable for
its opposite. ‘The oftener it is repeated, the less does the tendency


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 543


to the opposite become, for that which is conducive to the
opposite, is expelled little by little. This is saying the same thing »
as logic says. It would be tedious to prove it by syllogism by an
acceptable and convincing argument from known premises.

It emerges from the aforesaid that a reiteration of being glad
disposes the breath to a state of gladness ; a reiteration of being
sad disposes it to depression.

1113. Natural enquiry shows the source of increase of
gladness to depend on (1) a strengthening of the natural faculty :
(2) a rarefaction of the breath. The latter is due to the expansion
following gladness.

(1) The strengthening of the natural faculty is contributed
to by three factors, each of which is itself a source of gladness :

(2) the temperament of the breath ;

(4) over-production of breath beyond that which is lost by
dispersal ;

(c) prevention of excessive dispersal of breath.

(2) Rarefaction of the breath is followed by two things :

(1) a tendency towards movement and expansion. ‘This is
related to the fineness (rarefaction) of its substance ;

(11) an attraction to itself of its own particular nutriment.
This is due to the movement of expansion towards a place away
from the movement of the nutriment. This particular attraction
is really the natural corporeal tendency to avoid emptiness.

In its essence, it is the same with any movement which in
itself brings it to pass that the latter things shall take the place
of the former. It is the outcome of this law that very distant
waters are drawn towards their primary source, and that winds
follow the course they do.

1114. ‘Two things follow great depression : (1) weakening
of natural power ; (2) concentration of the breath. The explana-
tion of this is that violent condensation and aggregation of the
breath obliterates the natural heat and results in coldness.

Two opposites follow upon this, as has already been in-
timated.

1115. Itis therefore evident that intense gladness disposes
the breath to gladness, sadness to depression ; that associated
depressants do not make an impression on gladness unless they
are vigorous ; whereas weak stimulants may and do impress
themselves thereon.

It is, of course, the other way about in the case of depressants.


544 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


4. Tue DisTincTION BETWEEN WEAKNESS OF THE HEART AND
CowarDICE; SADNESS AND THEIR OPPOSITES.


1116. Weakness of the heart and sadness, which some
people call ‘‘ contraction of the chest or heart,” are similar and
yet different. The same thing may be said about their opposites
(vigour and gladness of heart), which some people call “ enlarge-
ment of the chest'or heart [cts Psiimr8, 325.2 Corns 6; 11).
The difference between them is difficult to identify because so
commonly one passes into the other. Most people think the
two former are passive dispositions ; others think they are
active. But there is an obvious difference between the extremes
of each.

Firstly, not every weak heart is associated with depression,
nor is depression always accompanied by weak heart. A vigorous
heart is not necessarily accompanied by joy ; and conversely.

Secondly, the dasis is different in each. Weakness of the
heart is a disposition assumed in respect of things-evoking-dread,
because it is incapable of tolerating them. Depression has to do
with saddening things and the heart does not tolerate them much.
Fear concerns the body ; depression concerns the mind.

Thirdly, there is a difference in regard to the mental effect.
Weakness of the heart impels to flight, depression impels one to
stand still for the purpose of either resisting or repelling. This
is the opposite action to flight. Weakness of the heart inhibits
the powers of motion, depression stimulates them. Consequently
there are two emotions associated with weakness of the heart :
(a2) that of threatening injury ; (4) that of desire to prolong
movement. In the case of depression (oppression of the chest)
there are (a) sense of threatening injury ; (4) no desire to flee.
In the event of there being a decision to flee, it is because of some
contingent circumstance rather than because of an intention to
give ground. It is as likely that attack and struggle will be
decided upon in place of flight.

Fourthly, they differ as to the after-effects on the body.
Weakness of the heart and escape from the danger are followed
by loss of natural heat, by cold. Depression, after the particular
cause has passed away, is followed by kindling of the natural
heat.

Fifthly, they differ in regard to the disposing causes. ‘Too
fine and too cold a complexioned breath tends to weakness of the
heart, coarseness and hot temperament of breath tend to
depression.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


8.


545


Tue RELATIONS BETWEEN THE VARIOUS BLoop-STaATES AND


THE SEVERAL Emotions (1117).


Blood.


Plentiful, bright, hot.


Plentiful, bright,


Effect on breath.


Effect on
emotional state.


Oxidative processes active ;
Movement swift.


Abundance of clear breath of


Tendency to anger.


Tendency to delight.


attempered. laudable substance, and at-
tempered.
Bright, watery, cool, Oxidative processes slow; breath | Tendency to fear;
tenuous. heavy; moves centrifugally ; neither joy nor
less is formed; more is dis- anger ; heart tends
persed. to be weak.
Thick, turbid, over- | Breath turbid; as the blood tends | Tendency to sadness
hot. to ‘“‘inflame,’’ the breath and even continual
thickens, and fails to cool vexation.
properly. Therefore the
emotion persists.
Rarefied ; bilious | Breath of intense heat, and rarefied | Anger, which comes
humour _ increased. and goes.
Ditto, but also bright Joy.


and clear.


Not sad, but stron
and bold. Very
little anger be-
cause joy neutral-
ises this (1),


Thick, but not turbid
(rarely met with).


Thick, but not turbid.


Thick, not turbid, cold. | Thick, cold, not turbid. Timid, dull; upright.


Thick, turbid, cold. Gloomy, solitary; a


person of rancour
and resentment ;
anger arises only
at great provoca-
tion (2).


Note 1.—Joy easily overcomes the emotion of anger. It
is sadness that fosters anger. For anger is an impulse to expel.
Happifying things harmonize with pleasure, and pleasure entails
a tendency to attract or gather in. So it will need a big thing to
make such a person angry ; and as a very concentrated breath
will result, there can be.very little fear.

Note 2.—The anger will not last as long as it would in hot-
blooded people (in whom other like conditions are associated),
but longer than it does in persons whose blood is rarefied. So he
comes to be a man of resentment, because the disposition to hate
implies the persistence of hurtful images in the imagination.

2N


546 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


1118. Part played by imagination in emotions.—The per-
sistence of an imagination which is disposed towards taking
vengeance for a thing is related to persistence of anger, although
there is not sufficient propulsive power to execute the vengeance.
The anger is neither marked enough nor mild enough. For it
must be understood that when anger ceases quickly, the hurtful
image does not persist in the imagination, but is quickly
destroyed ; so rancour becomes impossible. ;

In like manner, too much tendency to secure vengeance 1s
countered by two factors : rancour and hate. ‘The one 1s due to
the mind being wholly impelled to vengeance, but prevented
from continually reflecting upon the hurtful conditions by
remembering the things which follow upon having hate fixed
in the memory. The mind naturally hesitates to face impending
hurts. Externals tend to draw away from internals and vice versa.

It must also be remembered that when there is too much
tendency to vengeance in a fearless person, the impression results
as if the imagination had already become possessed of the thing
desired for. In aiming at the realization of a power, and hastening
towards it, the imagination of such a person takes it as actually
handled. ‘The image is impressed on the imagination as if
actually present ; then the image of the thing in which the
purposed action will end is added to the imagination, and the
desire for it ceases to be maintained ; the image is abolished, and
therefore does not linger in the memory. ‘That is how it is that
rancour is not there.

When the noxa is big, as where a sultan or very high digni-
tary (usually looked on with fear) is concerned, then the urgent
anxiety to gain vengeance, coupled with the fear, together
prevent the image of the desire from staying in the mind. ‘The
result is that the picture of the desire and of the noxa are both
abolished from the imagination, whereas the image of the fear
is so much the more dominant to the mind that it evokes a desire
to flee and not attack. Here again, the image of rancour cannot
persist in the mind.

In the case of persons under puberty, or weakly persons,
it is so easy to take vengeance on them, and there is so little fear
entertained of them, that the vengeful mind pictures the ven-
geance as if already accomplished. Excessive ease in securing
vengeance makes it pictured as if already in one’s hand. The
imagination acts not according to what is in the matter at issue,
but according to that which it pictures to itself. So, when ease
of fulfilment arouses the thought that vengeance is attained, the


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 547


weak-minded person takes it as actually attained. So the love
for it vanishes and is entirely obliterated from the mind.

Moreover, that the imagination moves according to that
which is represented to it and not according to the outcome of
things, is shown by the fact that men dislike honey when it is
served up like bilious matter ; and they dislike laudable sapid
foods should their colour be made like repugnant substances :
or even when they are served in the appearance of repugnant
objects, even though such things are not believed to exist at all.

Similarly with this : when a given likeness to the above-
named thing is portrayed (either because of the intensity of the
impulse of the desire, or because of the worthlessness of realizing
the desire—as though it had actually been attained) it has the
same effect as if it had been realized ; therefore there is no
rancour.

From what has been said in the preceding chapter, it is
evident that the last-named kind of temperament is that which is
most disposed towards rancour.


9. How tHE AppropriaTE MEDICINES STIMULATE AND
STRENGTHEN THE BreatuH.


1119. We can now understand how the appropriate
medicines can stimulate. Wine, for instance, restores the
breath by nourishing it ; pearl and silk (which counteracts
disagreeable things) supply the breath with brilliance and
luminosity. Emblic myrobalan, amber, and coral concentrate
the breath or prevent it from dissipating rapidly ; doronicum
modifies the temperament of the breath by giving it heat,
camphor and rose-water do so by imparting cold ; sweet aromatics
strengthen the breath by endowing its substance with agreeable
and sweet fragrance ; bugloss and lapis lazuli act by separating
cff black bile and fumosity. Changes are produced by adding
or removing a drug ; e.g., coral may be joined with amber and
bugloss.

In some cases, gladness is the outcome of the intrinsic
property of the drug. ‘This is so in the case of sumbul. In
other cases, the intrinsic property of the drug produces its
effect indirectly by acting upon one or other of the primary
causes of gladness. "Thus, musk and amber act on the breath
by way of their aromaticity. ‘The juice of matian (859) gives
rise to gladness in virtue of an intrinsic property. But when used
in a case where the temperament of the breath is hot, the stimu-
lant action is effected by way of infrigidation. When the


548 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


temperament of the breath is cold, doronicum acts as stimulant
both in virtue of its intrinsic property and by imparting warmth
to the breath.

1120. In dealing with all these drugs, then, it is necessary
to know whether the properties are general or specific. When
the property is general there is no need to make any modifica-
tions in employing it for weakness or depression of the heart.
An instance of such an agent is afforded by aromaticity. On
the other hand, where the property is specific, it requires modifica-
tion, For instance, the juice or syrup of matianus is cold,
and will stimulate one kind of temperament bat not another.
If it be desired to use matianus to make a person of cold tempera-
ment glad, it is necessary to counteract its coldness by a cale-
facient ; and it would be more efficient to choose a calefacient
which itself is intrinsically a stimulant. For instance, musk
or amber is mixed with syrup of matian, because they supply
both warmth and stimulating power.

Aromaticity and sweetness are potencies which, though
opposite, are yet attracted towards qualities which are agreeable
to the substance of the breath. They supply the taste and frag-
rance which the natural and vital power respectively desire
COmGeCeIVG:

Where two drugs are of equal power, the sweeter and more
aromatic of the two will prove a more efficient adjuvant, because
these properties are more. attractive to the members (especially
the liver). Should nutrient properties be present as well, the
breath is more rapidly nourished ; and being medicinal in
character, it acts more rapidly on the breath.

These indications guide as to which drugs to use to obtain a
more rapid effect.

1121. The essence of aromaticity lies in its rarefaction ;
the essence of sweetness lies in its concentration and earthiness.
This explains why aromatics are so much better adapted to
feed the breath, while sweet substances are better fitted to nourish
the body. Consequently aromaticity is more efficient for the
heart than sweetness, while it is the other way round in the case
of the liver. The heart is the matrix of generation of the
nutriment of the breaths, whereas the liver is the matrix of
generation of the nutriment of the body. That is why it needs less
aromaticity and more sweetness to nourish it than does the
heart. All the same, aromaticity is required by the liver,
because that organ is the matrix of the natural breath—not a
matrix of geveration of breath, only a substrate for the breath


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 549


to reside in (according to those acquainted with the truth ;
not according to those who merely speculate.)

The natural breath has a desire for aromaticity and is
invigorated and refreshed by such. It is easy to see that the
natural faculties will also be invigorated in consequence.


10. Wuat ‘“ Property” Is, anp How Ir Dirrers From
““NaTuRE.”


‘¢


1122. Strictly speaking, the specific ‘“‘ property” of a
thing is the same as its “ nature.” The one term would really
be defined by the same words as the other. The specific property
is the source of movement or rest in whatever things it occurs.

Nevertheless, there is a difference between the two con-
ceptions, in the same way as the particular differs from the
universal. It is not true, as the laity think, that the two terms
belong to opposite things. ‘The truth is that the first-principles
behind all generable and corruptible substances are primary
active or kinetic energies, and occur either simply in fire, air,
water, and earth, or linked to a composite temperament.

1128. There are two views about this: (a) that the
disposition appears synchronously with the production of
physical form ; (4) that the disposition is inherent in Matter
from the outset. Once matter assumes a given physical
form, it can only assume some other form by dispersing the
first form. ‘That is, Matter relapses to the natural power of the
disposition.

1124. Whichever view is correct, it is true that from
such a physical form (whose constituents have become so to say
blended) there emerges a power which could not have appeared
in the several separate constituents. For instance, the attractive
power of iron in a magnet is not in any of its component powers.
It arises out of the divine emanation which pervades all things
and makes latent energies kinetic. This happens in one of
two ways: (i) by means of something primarily inherent in
matter ; (ii) by means of the temperament which itself disposes
it to receive the given power, and is yet itself neither power nor
physical form.

1125. We now have the answer to the questions, what is
“specific property’? What is “nature”? If one asks,
“Why does fire burn?” one must needs answer “ because
the thing burning has a combustible nature.” If one asks,
“why does a magnet attract iron ?” it can only be said, “it has


550 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


an attractive power by nature.” To say that fire burns because
of heat is no better than saying a magnet attracts iron because
of having the power and nature to attract iron ; we may say the
nature of the energy called “‘ heat ” is to burn up in fire, and call
this “‘ combustible nature,” ‘‘ combustible power,” but there
is no name for the other. The giving of a name has not
imparted complete knowledge about the matter; to know
the name does not remove the real lack of knowledge about a
dificult phenomenon.

1126. But people are not usually satisfied by the
preceding answer because they want to believe that every
property arises out of the “heat,” “cold,” ‘‘ dryness,’’ or
“moisture” of a body, in virtue of heaviness or lightness
or movement or of any of the things which are obviously really
dependent upon the components. When they find that actions
are not to be atrributed to any of the aforesaid, and that the
real reason for an act is not apparent, they come to the con-
clusion that every one of the first beginnings is inscrutable.
That is not true. Actions proceed either from natural or vital
or intellectual or accidental (contingent) properties.

1127. We may pass over as untrue the other theories
held about magnetic force—that it attracts iron because of (1)
heat; (2) cold; (3) a spirit residing in the magnet itself ;
(4) sending out hook-shaped bodies ; (5) likeness between the
nature of the magnet and the nature of the iron ; (6) a vacuum
in the iron. ‘The fallacy in all these ideas is easily seen when we
reflect on how a green twig acquires nutritive properties from
its Constitution, which is the same sort of thing as the reception
of magnetic properties from a constitution in the iron. What is
not understood 1s why the magnetic power is so much greater
in iron than in any other thing ; yet this ignorance is no greater
than that which exists in reference to other matters.

1128. This ignorance is in two directions : (1) we do not
know the initial factors which go to produce this attractive power.
Neither do we know them in regard to any other force. (2)
we do not know why this body is more disposed to take on
magnetic power than any other body. But neither do we know
more in regard to other phenomena. We are in exactly the
same case concerning colours, fragrance, powers of the mind,
and such like matters. Of course we can say that all such
phenomena arise out of the active principles originally blessed
by God, and we can allow that the basis of the disposition
which comes from the particular constitution is due to a re-


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 551


arrangement of Matter. But though we may guess that it is the
proportions of ingredients which account for the existence
of a temperament, it is quite another thing to be definite about
the absolute proportions of this commixture, and we shall be
ignorant of this as long as we live in this world. So it is evident
that our ignorance of the real causes of the power in the magnet
is not as remarkable as our ignorance of the real causes which
dispose the corporeal or mental body to redness or yellowness.

1129. The fact is that we take little interest in the com-
mon things of life; the mind neglects to study them; so
often is it true that the rare things are the ones to excite admira-
tion and be enquired after and their causes speculated about.

11380. Conclusion.—* Specific property ”’ 1s the “ nature ”’
met with in compound substances after a characteristic tem-
perament (and its correspondingly special and characteristic
state) has been initiated in them out of the supreme and limitless
“influence.” ‘This is the real truth about “ specific property ”
(individuality).

In spite of this being so, it is common for people to say that
specific property differs from “ nature”’ in that the former ap-
pears in complex bodies after a special act has occurred to make
its nature manifest. On the other hand, the “nature” of a
thing is said to be the power by which simple bodies are operated.
This is as far as the laity and feeble searchers-after-truth can see.

_ Now, if Fire is a difficult thing to make, and 1s carried
from distant places, surely the laity might wonder at the specific
properties of this more than of other things, and look more
closely into the causes of its specific property than they do into
those of other phenomena that appear to be more remarkable.
To think how Fire removes visible forms, cannot be touched,
rises upwards, makes the things over which it can prevail ascend,
can be generated from a small quantity in large amounts within
an hour, destroys whatever it meets and transmutes it into its
own essence, is not lessened by however much is taken from it !
—surely these facts are more wonderful than the attraction of
iron by a magnet, or than other specific-properties.

But, being so common, seen so much every day, these things
evoke no admiration. There is no interest displayed in seeking
their explanation. ‘The action of the magnet seems extra-
ordinary and receives universal wonder, and everyone is inter-
ested to enquire into its nature, and origin.


552 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(This completes the first part of this tractate. The second part presents a
classification of the drugs acting on the heart, and a description in detail of their
characters and properties and uses, and shows how to combine them in the best
manner appropriate for the varying temperaments which the physician is likely to
meet. The plan is the same as that of the Second Book of the Canon, so that the
two would be usefully considered together. But an attempt to do this in this
treatise would unduly add to its bulk, for which reason the translation necessarily
closes here.)


i)
-
- *
‘
ge
]
Py
= — 1
an
er et ae 4 at
- “ a
oh PS iy
oy ve x
- Lee
— os


Frontispiece


CONCLUDING SURVEY
I


URING (§267) the past fifty years, the
popular imagination has been stirred by a
succession of important discoveries in the
domain of medicine and surgery. The
triumphs of the latter field have been
spectacular to a degree. Those of medi-
cine have been much less conspicuous,
chiefly because the mind must enquire into
them before it can properly appreciate
them. How much does not humanity owe to the steadily con-
tinued researches in bacteriology, and the painstaking observa-
tions which have revealed the life-cycles of many of the parasites to
which tropical and other diseases are due? and to the whole pro-
cedure of immunotherapy, the just pride of scientific as distinct from
clinical medicine, and the outcome of all these researches ?

§ 268. As compared with all this, the speculative subtleties of
former times appear both futile and unworthy of resuscitation. But
the ancient system was not as valueless as is so generally supposed.
Taking as an adequate criterion the first book of the Canon of Medi-
cine of Avicenna, which is here presented almost in its entirety, and
is fairly representative of the whole work, we find in its pages refer-
ences to many departments of human knowledge*—cosmology,
anatomy, physiology, and psychology; the various branches of
clinical medicine—etiology, semeiology, diagnosis, and prognosis ;
the departments of therapeutics—hygiene, dietetics, balneology, and
climatology, in addition to materia medica, pharmacology, and phar-
macy. Moreover, the reader is presumed to be conversant with
logic, criteriology, and metaphysics.

§ 269. The presence of obvious literal errors in the work must
not lead us to commit the more serious mistake of overlooking the
fact that it is entirely built up upon a sound philosophy of human
nature, which is as vitally important to-day, though largely ignored,


* Though it might be objected that all these departments of knowledge are
now separate sciences, each requiring its own professorial staff, its own literature, and
journals, and that they are not mentioned under the special names with which we
are familiar, their existence in those days cannot be denied.


553


554 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


as in former times. The ancient medicine was concerned essentially
with the given patient now before us ; whereas now it is simply the
science of diseases which it is our duty to diagnose accurately, prevent
if possible, and treat on lines capable of wholesale application. To
Avicenna, the determination of the constitution of the patient was
of the very first importance, for on it depended the character, course,
and duration of his illness, and upon that again depended the choice
of remedies.

§ 270. After all, from the patient’s point of view, the real
object of consulting a medical man is to be restored to a state of well-
being. It is little comfort to be (virtually) told that 85-90 per cent.
of cases of his complaint are cured by the treatment adopted in his
case, only to find that he proves to be one of the remaining 10-15
per cent. for whom there is litle or nothing to be done. True, his
sighs are drowned in the shouts of the fortunate, and fail to reach the
clinical laboratory, surgical wards, consulting room or research
councils.

If in the interests of these few, chance leads us to the pages of
this ancient work, it would seem that suggestions occur in it which
enable us to understand their plight, and thereby help them to under-
stand it also. Even if the enemy is not put out of action, his enmity
is less evident when he is understood.

§ 271. Ithas been the aim of this treatise to elaborate Avicenna’s
central theme by references to the various philosophies extant in his
time—Sufic, Vedantic, Buddhistic, Chinese; to Persian writings
subsequent to his time (Rumi, Sa‘di, Shabistari, etc.) ; and to views
presented by various modern philosophies, including western theo-
sophy.

But these various directions of thoughts are not drawn upon in
order to elaborate a composite system after the fashion of theosophical
eclecticism. On the contrary, readers accustomed to various modes
of thought are invited across a bridge leading from their various
starting-points, across the chasm of modernism, until they reach the
concise teaching of Thomistic philosophy, wherein all other aspects
of the one truth receive their proportionate places. The inclusion of
ideas from writers who appear to be altogether in bye-ways may
torment a few, but may also help a few to see the greater thing, and
thereafter be content to stay upon the broad highway to which the
several paths have converged.*

Science has been removed from its usual réle of master, and has
been pressed into service; and that service is to illuminate the
subject of human nature. To quote a recent paper (Altounyan,
Lancet, 1928, ii, 684) : “ under the great swelling flood that represents
the growing complexity of modern medicine, let us not allow ourselves


* This aim is represented in pictorial form on the Plate introducing this survey.
The upper left portrait reproduces one of Avicenna ; the upper right portrait is of a
famous ancient Chinese doctor. The bottom portrait is one of the late Inayat
KXhan, to whom the author owes his introduction to the subject of the Canon some
years ago. The centre of the plate fitly gives a portrait of St. Thomas Aquinas [by
Luini, Milan, taken from ‘‘ Dominicana,” March, 1927]. In this way the scholastic
philosophy is suggested as the natural end of varied but converging lines of thought.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 555


to be submerged. Let us hold fast to that great life-saving conception
of the essential unity of the human body. Let us oppose fearlessly
those currents of medical thought that tend to isolate, arbitrarily and
to the detriment of true knowledge, the various segments of this one
great subject. Let us welcome all methods, all discoveries, that
help the one man in charge of the one patient to broaden the base of
his attack, to widen the sweep of his beneficent vision.’”’ These words
were possibly expressed with a different object, but apply well to
the theme of this treatise. The old teaching about ‘“ constitution ”
should undergo a mutual intergrowth with the knowledge of modern
science, pervaded throughout with the fundamental teaching of
Thomistic philosophy, when there would emerge the beginnings of
a possible system of modern scholastic medicine—thoroughly logical,
plain, free of mystery, free of materialism, but not ignoring the so-
called ‘‘ occult’ and metaphysical ; with the knowledge of the nature
of the constitution of the individual patient as its central and dominant
theme.* Were the whole medical training along such lines, the student
would be able to approach his clinical instruction thoroughly aware
that the individuality of the patient comes first, and that the ailment
from which he suffers is but part and parcel of one single story, and
not merely an accidental superposition. But the student would
constantly need guidance to ensure his over-riding the disregard
or ignorance, if not actual rejection, of scholastic principles which
characterizes the concrete modern teaching of pathology in its
various departments.


II


_§272. The following brief survey of the most important
teachings of the Canon reinterprets them under three headings:
(1) the general notion of the nature of the human being; (2) the
notion of the constitution of any individual when in health; (3) the
notion of the nature of the state of disease. These together provide
that clear mental idea of “‘ the patient before me” which is essential
before I can effectively treat him.

(1) The general notion of the nature of a human being.

The following three propositions belong to it: (@) The human
being (WF) is composed of matter and a principle of life, the two
together making him “ he”; or, he is “‘ a single substance endowed
with a natural tendency to realize and maintain the conditions of its
organization.”’—(ii) This principle of life comprises three main
groups of potential and actual activities—the vegetative, the sensitive
and the rational. This multipotentiality of the principle of life
is represented in the expression “bundle of life.”’—(iii) The
organs of the body are the material manifestations (the actualities)
of the several potentialities. The vegetative organs belong to the
“ vegetative soul,’ the sense-organs and appurtenances belong to the
‘sensitive soul.’’? The intelligence and will belong to the rational


* This sketch of the scope of medicine ona scholastic basis purposely excludes
reference to ethical principles.


556 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


soul, which has not literal organs but acts through the instrumentation
of the organs of the vegetative and sensitive systems. All these
components ‘belong intimately together apart from macroscopic or
microscopic boundaries.

These propositions are further defined by the following negative
statements: (2) The human being is zot a collection of molecules
and forces ; he manifests chemical, electrical, and other phenomena,
which are mof causes, but effects. (6) The organs are mot distinct
from the powers they exhibit. (c) The brain is zot the producer of
thought.* Thought is produced by the activity of the rational soul ;
the changes in the brain—whether chemical, cytological, or other-
wise, are zo¢ causes, but the visible effects of the activity. (d) There
is xo bridge over the gulf between rational life and the vegetative-
sensitive life; the distinctions are radical. (e) The life-principle is
not subject to the laws of inheritance, those which govern matter ;
it is xot divisible into organs, or parts, or elements. As soon as it
ceases to operate, there is left behind the material body, which
though apparently the same is actually quite different from the
animate person recently before me.

(2) The notion of the constitution of any given individual when
in health.

This notion should be made as tangible as possible. Extending
the remarks of § 27, the constitution may be expressed in terms of a
number of formule} to be taken together—a series of “ notes,”
some of which are constants, and others variables.

I.—THE CONSTANTS. (A) The dody. (a) General physique
{good, poor; robust, spare; strong, delicate]. (6) Dominant
“element” [Ex.: E?W?F®A8]. (c) Dominant ‘‘ humour,” shown in
the humoral formula [Ex.: S*L'B®°A?—for sanguineous, serous
(lymphatic), bilious, and atrabilious] : this formula is really descrip-
tive of the “ temperament,” but the latter word bears a different
meaning in modern popular usage. (@) The absolute or relative
strength or weakness (functional capacity) of the several organs ;
hypo-, hyper-function. Example: V‘4T*M?O°N?!G%, for vegetative
(i.e. alimentary), thoracic (i.e. respiratory and circulatory), muscular
(incl. skeletal), osseous (incl. genito-urinary!’), nervous (incl. sym-
pathetic system) and glandular (incl. haemopoietic, endocrine, and
hepatic) types.1%8. (e¢) The emotional make-up, or formula. Example:
G®L?T1T> (gaudium, laetitia, timor, ira: § 160, III), from which the


* The remarkable actions which man achieves by his complicated mechanical

contrivances are distinct from himself, whereas in the human being the mechanism
and the manipulator are the selfsame. Even when there is as grave mechanical
interference with organs as occurs in hemiplegia, or in the cortical lesions of insanity,
the rational soul remains untouched, though no longer able to communicate its
activities to the outer world.—To quote St. Thomas : “ the intellect, being a power
that does not make use of a corporeal organ, would in no way be hindered in its act
through the lesion of a corporeal organ, if for its act there were not required the act
of some power that does make use of a corporeal organ.’’*¢ (p. 177.
_, .t In the supposititious formule given, the qualities are represented by the
initials of their corresponding names; the quantities are represented by index-
numbers from 1 to 5, to stand for slight, moderate, normal, marked, and very marked
respectively.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 557


dominant passion and its modifiers are noted. The modern use of
the word “ temperament” belongs here.


The difference in capacity is partly explained by considering the time-factor
(233, 768, § 247), and partly as a fundamental difference (45). All the material
brought to an organ, whether nutritive, or excretory, is not at once taken up in
its entirety ; only a certain proportion is removed and the remainder passes on, so
that the blood has its composition at a certain level. The modern “ threshold
values ’’ recognize this fact. The time-factor is of very great importance.


(B) The mznd. Here comes the description of the disposition,
the type of mind, or mental make-up (§§ 78, 161, 164). Mental
capacity may be expressed in terms of the relative or absolute
strength or weakness of the various faculties, enumerated under
“talents”? (which are simply developments of particular faculties
above the average) in § 164(V).* The mental attitude towards things,
which emerges from the character, is also to be noted, for sometimes
this may explain the cause of the illness (e.g. wanton exposure to
infections in spite of warnings), and will show whether the patient is
suppressing relevant facts, will respond to treatment, or is secretly
concerned with some fear or doubt which is the real object of his
visit to the doctor. Moreover, knowledge of this aspect of character
will safeguard the physician himself, either by making him aware
of the patient’s possible cynical opinion about a profession he is
unfortunately obliged to deal with, or, more important, by enabling
him to avoid offering advice which is palpably foolish to an intelligent
patient.

II.—THE VARIABLES. (i) The degree of vitality. In the text,
this is also spoken of as strength of innate heat. See also under
“ breath” §§ 136, 141; and its phases and cycles (§§138, 209).
(ii) Deviations from the functional capacities normal to the individual.
(iii) The nature or degree of ‘‘ resistance.’ In terms of the Canon,
this would be expressed in the “‘ humoral formula,” and in terms of
‘“‘ obstructions ’’ of various kinds. These account for the “ soil”
which renders declared disease (a) possible, (6) amenable to alter-
ation by artificial means. (iv) Other cycles (296-301, § 138, 183).

Foreign though such data are to modern clinical work, they are
often actually employed in ordinary conversation, as when one
describes a person as sanguine, or bilious, or phlegmatic, or as of
saturnine temperament. Some adjective descriptive of the emotional-
make-up is not infrequent in case-reports. Degrees of vitality are
spoken of, seriously by the laity, diplomatically by the practitioner.
In so far as they provide a simple means of codifying tentative know-
ledge upon complex and elusive individual characteristics which it
is our duty to notice, the data are all worth consideration.


*“ The better the disposition of a body, the better the soul allotted to it;
which clearly appears in things of different species: and the reason thereof is that
act and form are received into matter according to matter’s capacity ; thus because
some men have bodies of better disposition, their souls have a greater power of
understanding. . . . This occurs in regard to the lower powers of which the intellect
has need in its operation: for those in whom the imaginative, cogitative and
memorative powers are of better disposition, are better disposed to understand.”’
(Sum. Theol.®¢ p. 203.)


558 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


(3) The notion of the nature of the state of disease.

273. The vegetative processes associated with digestion and
absorption of food may be first briefly referred to. As suggested in
§ 27, the picture of the whole nutritive cycle is comprehended in
the idea of the “‘ liver.” We trace the food-constituents through the
columnar cells of the intestinal mucosa, across the areolar tissue
into the vascular roots of the portal and lacteal system ; then into the
liver-unit itself (comprising phagocytic secretary cells, fundal cells,
cubical excretory cells, and the hepatic arterioles and lymphatic
clefts related to the sinusoids). Then into the general blood-stream,
and finally out of the body through various organs, including the
goblet cells of the intestinal mucosa, the bile-ducts, the pancreas,
etc. The extra-hepatic portion of the cycle is nearly co-terminous
with the rest of the body.

To complete this picture we first remember the relation between
quality of food and quality of chyme ; then we consider how the
ultimate components of the food travel (N-compounds, glucose,
fat, phosphorus, sulphur, iron, and the like)—during rest, exercise,
sleep, etc.; and according to the character of the diet as a whole,
the fluids taken, and the state of the bowels, etc. We may realize
that they are manifested in the blood in the form of alkaline tide,
viscosity, fibrin-content, and the various morphological changes
revealed by blood-examination. We picture also the innumerable
chemical interchanges and physical transformations in various parts
of the cycle; the formation of waste-substances, and the factors on
which the whole of the processes depend. (§§ 88, 105). In brief,
then, our picture of the body is that of a complex of tubes and
channels (potential as well as actual), which vary in size from the
obvious alimentary-canal, air-passages, and great blood vessels,
down to the finest ramifications of the latter, the cavernous tissues
(both macroscopic and microscopic), the serous cavities, and the intra-
cellular channels. All these form one continuous labyrinthine
system, through which we may trace the ingested food materials,
the metabolic, secretory and excretory products. As long as these
channels are patent throughout, and as long as these various sub-
stances (including the “‘ breath of life’’) can flow freely through
them, and the vital energy has a free play outwards, so long is the
body in a state of health.

But as soon as there is a continued interference with the freedom
of movement, even though it be merely an ebb and flow that is
affected, in any part of the canalicular system, then a state of disease
arises, culminating in histological anatomical changes. Hence, when
we observe a case of illness, we may be sure there is some ‘‘ ob-
struction” in some channels in some part of the body—not neces-
sarily in that where the symptoms occur.


E.g.: The nasal discharge of “ cold in the head,” the bronchial expectoration


in bronchitis, the serous effusion into the pleura, the respiratory phenomena in an


attack of asthma, are manifestations in the respiratory system of obstructions
elsewhere,


§ 274. The next addition to the picture of the sick person’s


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 559


state is furnished by the causes of the obstruction. Avicenna con-
sidered these under two groups, the ‘‘ material” (i.e. those in which
“matter”? is concerned) or ‘‘ humoral diseases,’ and the non-
material. To the latter group would belong cases of gross obstruc-
tion, such as by compression from without, or such as by obstruction
with calculi; and those in which there is a functional disorder—
hypo-function, hyper-function, dysfunction. For instance, in renal
disease, the loss of functional capacity may render the normal ebb
and flow of substances disorderly.1*

§275. The group of humoral diseases is predominant in
Avicenna’s pathology, and if we bear in mind what the ‘‘ humours ”’
really are, this position becomes quite reasonable. Perverted meta-
bolism is associated with changes of physical state in the fluids of the
body. Limpid fluids may become viscid, viscous substances may
become mobile or ‘“‘ tenuous.’’ In the ancient work, these chemical
changes were thought of, not in ‘‘ equations,” but under interchanges
between the imponderable elements ; as being subject to the laws of
urooj, nasool, jelal, jemal, qada, qadr, the rhythm, phases and rate
of movement of the “ breath”’; and the fluctuations of degree of
innate heat. Concrete examples are such as: precipitation of
urates in tissues, altered reaction of tissue-juices in rheumatoid
arthritis, cardio-renal disease, tuberculosis ; variations of content of
Ca, Na, Mg, etc., in the tissue-water, so that the flow from tissue
to blood and vice versa is impeded. (Cf. Bechold, 12a, Schade,13’a,
Pearson and Wyllie,1®° and many other authorities).

The Canon often insists on the presence of ‘‘ superfluities ”’ as a
cause of “‘ obstructions’ of the canalicular system—not only in the
tangible four humours, but also in regard to the “ Breath” (“‘ fuli-
ginous superfluities,”’ 288). In the latter case, the substance of
the breath (i.e. water-vapour) ceases to be “ bright,” and “ clear,”
and its odour becomes offensive, and its freedom of flow is im-
paired.

§ 276. Finally, adding from modern knowledge, there are the
changes in the fluids of the body produced by bacterial or putre-
factive breakdown, whether this begins in intestinal stasis, or arises
in the course of specific bacterial infections. There are then obstruc-
tions not only in the old sense, but in the form of the successive
histological lesions consequent—vascular, nutritional, and inflam-
matory. Materials are deposited more or less permanently (irre-
versible reactions), as e.g. solid oedema, collagenous tissue, scar-
formation, fibrosis and hyalo-fibrosis, adipose tissue, hyperplastic
formations. Loss of anatomical patency is superadded to loss of
functional perviousness.

§ 277. Clearly, whereas we give first place to the bacterial
invasion, Avicenna gave it to the habits of life. He was so deeply
impressed by the obvious fact that the quality of food determines
the kind of chyme, that the kind of chyme determines the quality
and amount of the four humours, 106, 360, 791, § 195 (3). The
quality and amount of humours determine the quality and quantity
of the waste effete products (i.e. the superfluities). These affect


560 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


the freedom of flow through the diffuse canalicular system of the body.
As they accumulate in the stagnating tissue-juices they come to
exercise a noxious action; they come to be beyond the capacity of
the third and fourth digestions (tissue-digestion), and with their
stagnation the ever-circulating bacteria (taken up with the food)
also settle and multiply and wandering-cell infiltrations gather to-
gether. The beginnings of disease are laid down. The functional
disturbance has been succeeded by anatomical lesions (222, 226).

§ 278. The following chart illustrates this notion of the nature
of the state of disease. The amount of disease-substance or “ super-
fluity ’ is plotted out, say from day to day, and shows an irregular
line. As long as this line does not reach higher than a certain level,
say 6, the person appears to be in perfect health. Ifthe accumulation
of morbid matter, with associated ‘‘ obstruction,”’ is at a higher level,
but below the heavy line c, he may feel ill, but has no definite lesions.
If the superfluity curve reaches above c, there is some lesion which
can be definitely diagnosed. There is a concrete diseased state.
The height of the curve, and its nearness to the danger level, 4,
can be determined by the use of reasoning, aided by the various
‘* indications.”


slate of healt,


afapere | state of


tMok- actually ‘]
f zhhness
W/A 7:


Time


§ 279. Finally, Avicenna enlarges his view of humoral disease
by noting the influence of many extracorporeal factors (234, sqq.)
as well as the period of life, not to mention the ‘‘ decree of Allah”
(61). Thus, one and the same kind of food taken at the “ warm ”’
period of life in the “ warm’”’ season may contribute more to the
formation of a given humour than at another.

If we knew the patient’s formula, and how the climatic and other
conditions are likely to affect it, and whether they are compatible or
not with susceptibility to the agents at work, our composite picture
of the patient’s state would be of great value, and illnesses often
inexplicable would lose their mystery. How much more efficient
might not the treatment be, if the remedial measures in contemplation
were selected to harmonize with them ?


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 561


No doubt only a fanatic would note the barometer, thermometer, humidity,
hours of sunshine, wind-direction and velocity, the character of previous seasons,
the clues afforded by the migrations of insects, rodents, and birds, the presence or
prevalence of certain parasites in a district, and the many other points noted in 191
to 451, before prescribing the regimen for the patient. But it would seem that some
Eastern physicians of bygone times conscientiously strove to learn from such factors.


III
THE GUIDES TO THE DIAGNOSIS OF THE STATE OF THE PATIENT


§ 280. The patient before us is as a manuscript written in some
highly complex language which it is our business to decipher. The
alphabet is furnished by the several colours, the simple observations
of size, shape, consistence, contour, texture, and the like. The
vocabulary consists of the external features both in repose and ani-
mation, and of the physical signs as taught to-day. The grammar lies
in the “ general guides” (sphygmology, urinoscopy, examination of
faeces and blood). The language is to be translated into: states of
natural (vegetative), sensitive, and emotional faculties, functional
capacities, plethora, obstructions, solutions of continuity, etc.—
that is, the state of the whole composite, in all aspects. This task
can only be accomplished imperfectly at the best, even by the most
skilled and most learned. Our silent teachers, or guides, the ‘‘ indi-
cations ”’ (“‘dalil’’) always enable us to ascertain something, and we
must perforce be content with that on the present occasion and be
determined to use this experience as the guide to better success on
tie: ext.

§ 281. One of the guides suggested in the Canon lies in one’s
own state of health. Properly to interpret what we observe, we must
ourselves have no disharmony of functions arising from errors of
diet, no deposit in the urine, no weight in the bowels, no obstructions
in our own brain, no mental fatigue, no emotional pre-occupation,
no rigid notions regarding etiology or prognosis; there must be
clear channels for the breath, and the breath must be under the
control of the will ; it must be kept pure by recollection, by devotion,
and observance of prayer. The reason for this is that under such
conditions, long persevered in, we are enabled to receive an ‘ im-
pression’ from the patient ; we become aware of his atmosphere,
aura, or personality in the form of an idea of his degree and kind of
vitality. But unless this impression is registered rapidly, namely
at the first approach of the patient, it will be confused and illegible
by reason of the mutual inter-impression of one’s own vitality with
his. In another idiom, we observe “ with the eye of a Taoist.’’ In
our own idiom, we make use of sound reasoning power, common
sense, and a certain kind of ‘‘ intuition,” or “ clinical sense.”’


§ 282. The guides furnished by general observation of the patient are, in
brief: (1) External features in vepose: (a) Colours: of face, hair, skin, eye (sclerae,
iris). (6) Odours and'savours. (c) Form of the body (i) as a whole ; (ii) in detail.
The features, the hands, the limbs; the relative proportions (length, breadth, and
thickness) of nose, cheeks, upper lip, lower lip, chin, mouth, ears, orbit, eyebrows.


20


562 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


forehead, etc.; the character of the neck, shoulders, etc.* (II) Features when
animated: (a) Expression: gaze, look, facial gestures (vivacity, sleepiness ; languid-
ness) (b) Deportment, or attitude (455): gestures, carriage, specific acts or manner-
isms, definitely morbid movements or defective movements. (c) Voice: tone of
voice, manner of speech (clear, loud, or the opposites) ; clues to the physical and
mental type, and the degree of energy and vitality. (The observation of the voice
simply in relation to the diagnosis of aneurysm is quite insufficient.)


§ 283. The ‘‘ general” guides. Our use of these differs
noticeably, from that revealed in the Canon. To follow Avicenna,
(i) when one places the hand on ¢he pulse, one absorbs oneself in it,
without the distraction of a watch, until one has found out how it
runs—minute after minute. Even if it misses, without an intermission
of the heart, because the patient gives a twitch of the finger or begins
to talk, one learns even from that. The study of the circulation is
more than the study of the heart’s action. (ii) When one examines
the urine, even with all the apparatus of modern chemistry, we must
remember that it is first and foremost the guide to the state of diges-
tion—especially its ‘‘ second stage’ (that in the liver) as well as in
the “‘ third’ stage (that in the small vessels). We are misled by the
search for albuminuria and glycosuria, for many would make these
abnormalities into diseases. Thus, the number of persons in whom
albuminuria is zot evidence of renal disease far outnumber those in
which it is; the presence of such a substance in the urine should lead
to the questions: is some substance not being dealt with? if so,
why ? can only the kidney handle it? To follow a useful rule, the
real trouble is remote. It may lie in the brain, in the emotional state
(cf. Graves’ disease, e.g.). Pentosuria, cystinuria, alkaptonuria also
break the current ideas about urinalysis.1® (iii) As regards the guide
furnished by the faecal matter, again, our knowledge is much greater
than was Avicenna’s and we do not apply it in his terms. We are
apt to lose ourselves in fat analyses, nitrogen estimations, occult
blood tests, B. coli classifications. Negative results in each case are
taken to mean “nothing of note,’ regardless of the continual
secretory and excretory changes proceeding in the intestinal mucosa,
and the vitality of nerve-ganglia, etc. Essential and definite derange-
ments may occur without conspicuous deviations from the restricted
standards usually laid down.

§ 284. The guide furnished by an examination of the blood
may be spoken of as the most notable modern addition to Avicenna’s
three general guides. The data obtained from it—physical, physico-
chemical, cytological, serological—are very numerous, but are lost
more often than not by restriction to the diagnosis of the various


* Space does not allow of any attempt to furnish precise details of the external
signs of functional capacity of internal organs. The principle is exemplified thus :
the lower part of the nose is part of the respiratory system, and shares in the degree
of development of the whole system ; therefore wide nostrils with well-formed ale
go with good development of the whole respiratory function, whereas narrow delicate
nostrils and small ale refer the observer to some other system as well-developed.
Large mouth, thick lips, large masseters, and generally well-developed lower part
of the face go with good development of the digestive tract throughout. Moreover,
development or capacity above the average in one system denotes relative weakness
and functional deficiency in another system,—The subject is extensive.128


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 563


““ blood-diseases.” When properly applied, all the data obtained
from the blood inform us of the functional state of all the organs,
and of the existence of the main groups of pathological state (§ 173).


IV
TREATMENT


“The healing art, as it is described in books, is far inferior to the practical
experience of a skilful and thoughtful physician.”’(Rhazes.)


“ He went forth and hired himself a house in the city for the better storage
of his books and scrolls, his medicines and his aromatic roots. Then he set to work
choosing the fittest drugs and simples.’”’ Night 49. (Burton.)


“Many are healed by the action of nature without the art of medicine.”
(Summa contra Gent.*? ii. 75, p. 204.) ‘‘ Man teaches by outward ministration, but
God by inward operation : even so the physician is said to minister to nature when he
heals.’’(ib. p. 205.)


§ 285. APPLICATION of the principles of the Canon to modern
practice would seem superfluous. The common ailments, especially
those of minor surgery, are nowadays treated in stereotyped fashion,
which appears to be beyond improvement. It is not with such cases
that reference to the Canon is suggested. It is the general principle
which may be reviewed in the mind, and lines of treatment such as
were once in vogue may be quite usefully applicable in a few cases
which do not well respond to modern methods. Moreover, the
conscience of even the most careful may not be altogether clear in
regard to the immemorial rule: “ tuto, cito, et ucunde.”

The subject may be briefly considered under two headings :
plan of treatment; methods of treatment.


(1) The plan of treatment


§ 286. Choice of a plan of treatment depends on the view which
is taken as to the cause of the illness. It is no new or modern thing
to say ‘‘ treat the cause.” The distinction between new and old is
in regard to the idea of the nature of the cause. In these days nearly
every illness is ultimately due to an infection or intoxication, and the
aim of treatment is to destroy the one and render the other innocuous.
To Avicenna, illness was primarily an abnormal state of condition,
to which many factors contributed, and the scheme of treatment must
therefore envisage them all. To facilitate this, the practitioner of
those days would advisedly mentally review the whole of the Second
Part (191-451).

§ 287. Indeed, if we scrutinize the subject more closely, it will
appear that Avicenna’s plan is after all very proper. For, even if
we could attack the microbic cause specifically, there would still
remain the lesions which it has produced, and the lowering of the
vitality (= interferences with the flow of vital currents, in Paracelsus’
idiom?®). A condztion remains to be combated; the condition is
uppermost as far as the patient is concerned. Even in those relatively
few cases in which the disease is bound up with a particular organ,


564 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


so that the name of the disease is according (e.g. gastric ulcer,
cerebral hemorrhage), it is the condition we have to face. The
cause, even when known, has done its work, and gone.


§ 288. Itis true that many other interpretations of disease and corresponding
plans of treatment are put forward in various quarters from time to time, especially
by the intellectually anarchistic. This occurrence is partly the outcome of the
arbitrary attitudes towards patient and friends sometimes exhibited by some of the
representatives of academic medicine and would be best met by frank and courteous
enquiry into lay opinions. Not everyone subscribes to the restrictions of medical
ethics, and the patient is too often treated as if illness ipso facto at once deprives him
of ordinary intelligence. After all, he seeks medical help for a distinct object, and
remuneration for the services is presumed, so that he is entitled to go elsewhere, at
his own choice, if unfortunately in his particular case the plan and method of treat-
ment proves unsuccessful. But this view is not subscribed to by those who assume
that the whole of the knowledge needed for every case is comprehended within the
orthodox teaching of the day, and that every individual possesses it.


(2) The methods of treatment


§ 289. Even the methods of treatment set forth in the Canon
are still resorted to at times. No doubt, we would do well to follow
them more frequently. Thus, systematic purgation is often called for,
but not carried out as radically as of old. Cuppzug is still of value
for such conditions as lumbar myositis, acute (hemorrhagic) neph-
ritis, and those diseases amenable to autohemolysins. Venesectzon
is sometimes effectively applied for cases of high blood-pressure,
threatened apoplexy ; it is incidentally used in the course of obtaining
blood-tests.

§ 290. Drug Treat-
ment.—The steady decline
of drug treatmentin modern
medical practice is evi-
denced in several direc-
tions. (a) The steady
removal, in successive edi-
tions of the British Pharma-
copeeia of herbal remedies
which are supposed to have
no action because labora-
tory animals appear to be
unaffected by them. (6) The infrequency with which medicines are
ordered for hospital patients. (c) The penalization of panel prac-
titioners for “ over-prescribing.’’ (@) The desire on the part of
many lay persons to banish “ drugs ”’ as being “‘ unnatural.”

Inconsistencies are frequent. There is the strange perversity
which (through legislation) denies facilities for the use of the few
drugs whose potency is quite unquestionable. There is the subter-
fuge of resorting to placebos (which often cost no more than the
bottle containing them). Those among the lay who decry drugs are
pleased to employ “ herbal ’’ remedies. Where there is a popular
demand for the latest remedies, this is met by a never-ending stream
of new synthetic and other preparations, and costly manufactured
products, which also the medical world submits to. Truly the mind


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 565


ever seeks in the relatively inaccessible, and the expensive, that which
lies all the time, and without price, at our feet. It describes as
progress ”’ that which better knowledge would render superfluous.
§ 291. The truth is that we know far too little about the herbal
remedies of the Canon. To begin with, we forget that they cannot
be efficient without careful attention to the conditions of their culti-
vation (soil, climate, season, etc.), the times proper for their collection,
the details of their preservation, and the laws governing the formation
and circulation of the active principles during the life-cycles of the
various plants. We do not individually know how to identify adulter-
ations, whether accidental or deliberate. We leave to wholesale
manufacture that which was once properly undertaken individually,
since personal artistic skill may be the real condition for pharmaco-
logical efficiency. We adopt the short cut of standardization of drugs
as the remedy for the loss of potency inevitable after neglect of such
various factors.—But even if the purity and potency of remedies be
granted, by recourse to the best sources, they must be employed with
deliberate care. As Avicenna shows in the second book of the Canon,
there must be a knowledge of the constitution or individuality of the
plants which yield the drug; harmony with the constitution of the
patient must be aimed at. Out of a number of drugs of like action,
some will accord better with one person’s constitution than with
another’s. One remedy may soothe and ease without its specific
action being at all diminished, whereas another performs its work
harshly and unpleasantly; another may be overpowered by the
personal factor. The scope of the subject is great, and its study,
with intent to serious practical application, should not require an
“ apologia.”


§ 292.—-Such considerations as these open the door of Romance. ‘The discovery
that all Nature is a living Whole, always at work, earnestly, steadily, continuously
developing an idea, would arouse a new and intensely absorbing interest—that of
watching the Unseen Worker ; though His hands are not to be discerned, that which
He does is ever proceeding before us as a continual motion-picture ; and we may
become aware not only of the merely superficial fact of the movements, but also of the
purpose unfolding. Watching the medicinal trees and shrubs and herbs in this way,
and seeing their properties by their forms, and colours and odours, and their changes
in character with the changes of the seasons, and alternations of drought and plenty
(variations of rate of growth, of activity of flowering and fruiting),—how great is the
wonder of the work of Nature! We note how substances are being elaborated into
plants which we, wanting their help, know how to take at the crucial moment—
“ now we must draw the resin ; now we must take these flowering tops,” and so on.
But we are not the only watchers. The bees have been waiting, and the birds, the
slugs, the ants, the herbivora—all these and many others wait to draw from such
supplies that which is applicable to their several requirements. Nature Herself also
waits for all these things to be collected from Her treasury. Everything has been
worked out; the interactions are arranged for ; they all belong to the purpose of the
Designer ; and He Himself is waiting for that over which He incessantly broods, with
entire and complete intention. He too waits to draw out of Creation that which was
His object in making it ! ;

§ 293. No doubt it is true that few of the ancient physicians entered fully into
this inner life of the world of which they formed a part. Few even of those who
learnt the Qanun by heart may have applied it effectively at all times and on all
occasions; few may have meditated sufficiently to consider the soul-life of the
patient they were called upon tohelp. But the Life was there then, as it is here now.
It could be read then, as it should be now. The entry to the infinite treasure-house
of Nature was not locked then, and it is not locked now. Indeed, the entry was not


566 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


merely through one door ; there was a portal of entry on every side. Doors so large
as to be discernible from afar ; doors so small that few could find them; but even
through the smallest there was the same ability to enter the treasure-hall. Travellers
in those days might fear imagined ogres, jinn, and terrifying guardians to counter
talismans ; but the keys of safety were everywhere to hand, for all these beings were
amenable to caresses—the caresses of a heart which approached them with reverence
and affection; asking questions but never injuring; always treating everything
within the treasury (for it is living) as gently as one should approach to watch a
sleeping babe.

§ 294. It is for us ourselves not to pass these things by. If we did nothing
more than study the materia medica of those days to see what products were avail-
able, we should have ample material for thought, and become cognisant of the links
between that age and this. The drugs are still cultivated, and still used in the East
in the manner of the past, and the history of their names adds to our understanding
of their uses. While it is true we can supply our needs through an order to the
apothecary based on information imparted to us through various intermediaries, we
may some day find that in doing so we have omitted to look inside the treasure-house.
To go back to the old paths, watching Nature and studying the uses of the living
plants, is not to lose the definite therapeutic effects we seek. Far from it ; and there
is the added insight into that universal Life which needs transference from the
inexhaustible abundance of Nature at large into the thirsting lack of the patient in
particular.—It would then be not simply as a “relaxation’’ from the exacting
labours of the city that one would go abroad into the country-side. It would be for
the purpose of retiring to watch, and meditate upon the manifestations of the quiet
persistent surging life of creatures below the level of man, thereby to learn something
of the secret through which the equilibrium of health is to be restored to the needy
and also oneself to receive from the fountains of life.


§ 295. Dietetic treatment.—In these days, this form of treat-
ment is increasingly to the fore. But whereas modern thought is in
terms of food-values and the like, the Canon insists (and rightly)
on the necessity for studying physiological and psychological incom-
patibilities in regard to each component of the diet, and for selecting
the various articles of food according to their constitution, so that
they shall be in harmony with the constitution of the patient.

§ 296. Regiminal treatment.—The term “ regimen’ has a
wide range. This has already been sufficiently indicated at the end
of Part III (§ 254). The consideration of the specific constitution
of the patient, of his present state, and of the conditions which are
likely to arise during the various successive phases of his illness,
must pervade every detail of the prescription of the regimen, to ensure
that the correspondences between the state and the various measures
adopted shall throughout be as harmonious as possible.


§ 297. In this way, the great importance of individual artistry
in treatment is constantly insisted on, by contrast with the prevalent
stereotyping of therapeutic methods, whether in regard to State-
regulated practice in its various branches, or in the provision of
medical relief on a wholesale scale, or in the efforts to subject as much
as possible to the output of team-work. The atmosphere thus created
helps the student to realize that the last word has not been said when
the clinician’s discourse over the hospital bed is ended, and the
protocols, and therapeutic orders have been set upon the bedsheet.


__§298. The following may be quoted here, from Bauer'*: : ‘“ It is true, there is
a difference between the pure medical science and the art of its practical application
at the patient’s bedside. This art is somewhat more, indeed, than this application ;
it requires more than a complete knowledge of all scientific details ; it is and will be


After Rembrandt.) [Photo by Elliott & Fry,


To face page 567


THE CANON OF MEDICINE 567


always an art which never will be transformed into an exact science, as the complete
understanding of one person’s psychophysical machinery never will permit us to
understand a second man’s personality just as well by a pure analogy, because of the
practically infinite variability of the individual constitution. The individual analysis —
must start always anew, and what science of the human constitution may help, is
only to establish certain groups of more or less pronounced common characteristics

. 1t will never replace entirely the doctor’s art to... take the individual
particularities of his patient into consideration . . . in constructing his diagnosis
and in applying the fitted treatment.”


§ 299. The clinical handling of a case is guided from time to
time by the experience which has been concentrated into aphorisms.
Like many ancient medical works, the Canon abounds in these also,
and some of them will no doubt be found among the modern col-
lections of aphorisms which are available. In this way, too, it may be
true to say that the conduct of a modern case sometimes receives
the personal guidance of the wisdom of the past.

§ 300. But the time has come to close the ancient book. As we
do so, we are conscious that our range of vision is widened, and our
sense of responsibility deepened. We may pass back to labour along
the sick, seeing things anew in the light thrown upon them by the
company of the great Persian Sage, better aware of our own short-
comings, and more convinced that we are ourselves individually
to gain our own discernment into the intimate state of the people
with whom we must deal. We face more confidently the exceptions
to academic lore which are so much commoner than the rule.


Deeper insight into the nature of man, and the wider outlook
of a true philosophy does away with notions of superiority of new
over old, making clear, as it does, the necessity for combin-
ing and welding the two into one corporate whole.
But over and above all this, this ancient work
reminds us that the change of state of the
patient from illness to health is always
ultimately among the counsels of the
Divine Physician, who alone
overrules our ideas of cause
and effect, when He
utters the words—

‘‘T say unto thee,

Oi rise.”?


APPENDIX


i. PROGRESS


ProGRESS is a relative term. The common error is to assume that it is an end in
itself. Things which can be described as “‘ up to date,’”’ or cast aside as “‘ out of
date,”’ do not belong to the real basis of human life. The idea of progress is associated
with the introduction of mechanical improvements of all kinds ; with mass produc-
tion of manufactured articles ; with the standardization of existence. Inthe domain
of medicine, it is more particularly associated with an increasing knowledge of
concrete facts, with specific discoveries in etiology and treatment, and with a new
nomenclature.

To illustrate the relative character of “ progress’’ one may call to mind that
many discoveries and inventions are simply actualizations of ideas previously current
among thinkers, but perhaps not noticed at the time, or even repudiated or attacked
as heretical. Further, as to the changes in nomenclature which occur as time goes
on: because our language and idiom is different, many are apt to think the old
statements were necessarily incorrect.—In medieval books dealing with materia
medica, they said for instance: ‘‘ dissolved in vinegar, the action is so-and-so,”
whereas we say simply: “‘acetum—, action and uses: . . .’’—In chemistry, they
might say “‘ fire produces yz,’ whereas we say “ on heating Z, the result is Y and
X.’’—In medical text-books there are innumerable diseases which are not mentioned
in old works; and some diseases of the old books do not appear in modern ones.
This is partly explained by the undoubted fact that we have diseases which once did
not exist, whereas other conditions, very common in those days, certainly never
occur now.—The methods of teaching are different. In these days we convey
information much more quickly and readily by diagrams, charts, tables, styles of
print, not to mention experiments, and moving-pictures. This fact does not prove
that the learning of those days, acquired so laboriously, was faulty.

That which is called ‘“‘ progress ’’ is also sometimes merely “ fashion.’’ The
search for an elixir of life, for instance, has not ceased in the least. The gland
therapy for restoring youth is perhaps the most conspicuous of modern variants of
ancient research. Cupping and venesection were habitually used solely with the
idea of ‘‘ keeping fit ’’ ; they have given place to the vogue of athletics and sport.—
New treatments for various conditions are introduced from time to time, and seem
to be great advances because they are often conspicuously successful at first. How
often do they not give place to still newer methods, and perhaps finally pass into
entire oblivion ? The fashion changes, and the old is supplanted.


2. Facts—KNOWLEDGE—TRUTH


It is suggested in § 11 that knowledge is not simply “ acquaintance with an
assemblage of facts’’; and that facts in the aggregate do not suffice to constitute
“truth.’’? There is a tendency to extol the acquisition of facts, as ‘‘ adding to the
sum of knowledge,” and as being evidence of ‘‘ progress.’” There are different forms
of knowledge: human, angelic, divine. The perfection of knowledge is wisdom.
There are different forms of truth: scientific, logical, moral, ontological, philoso-
phical, theological, etc. But as to “ Ultimate Truth,” this is humanly unattainable,
as may be illustrated by the accompanying diagram.


569


570 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


The observer and the thing observed are shown in plan, as being separated by a
straight semi-transparent screen. The letters A to I represent the position of as
many observers. For the purpose of illustration these are supposed to be of different
nationalities and not necessarily acquainted with one another's language ; they also
belong to different periods of life (childhood, youth, etc.). The observer at A may
be supposed only to be able to see the part of the object marked A; the observer at
B, similarly, may only be able to see the part marked B; and soon. But even if
any of the observers could see several parts, evidently there still remain some areas
which are out of the range of vision of all persons, as marked K. L, M. No one can
comprehend the whole, under the restrictions given. (Cf. § 293.)


This conception may be applied to the interpretation of terms applied even to
familiar objects. In studying the Canon, for instance, it is not enough to know the
dictionary equivalent of an Arabic or Latin word, for the full meaning is not always
adequately conveyed thereby. The word ‘“‘ Akhlat ’’ may be taken as an example.
It is rendered humor, humour, body-fluid, juice (cf. rutibat), Saft. The impression
conveyed by each equivalent varies according to ideas commonly associated with the
word and the circumstances under which we first heard it. The conception of the
word ‘‘ humour ”’ was necessarily different in the mind of the ancient Greek physician,
of the Hindu sage, of the erudite philosophical Chinese, of the alchemist of the Middle


Ag Bet Ted) sp Eee tle gn Lee


Ages, of the characters in Shakespeare, of the modern laity, of the student of
esotericism, and of the modern bio-chemist. But even if we could combine all these
conceptions, there must remain the K, L, and M necessary for a complete under-
standing.


; It has been said that we shall reach Truth by whatever road we take. But this
is not so. There is really only one path which will take us there direct. All the
others are devious and arduous, and in the end only bring us to the confines of Truth.
We may trace out every separate road as outlined for us by as many separate thinkers
of the past or present; we may pursue the highway which modern science has
opened out ; we may decide also to study the tracks with which we are furnished
by Nature Herself. But even after all these have been slowly and laboriously
ee by (spiritual) insight (Kashf), the best we can attain is but the fringe of
eality.

The irregular figure in the diagram, which serves to stand for ‘‘ Truth ’’ may
also be thought of as the plan of a palace with many halls and courts. We may enter
it through various portals, marked A to I, and we may leave it again to resume our
ordinary duties. At some other time, on returning to the study of the contents of
the various chambers, we may chance to find our way into some of the veiled portions
(marked K. L. M), and perhaps gain a passing glimpse of what is beyond. Where-
upon we shall not only rejoice in the enchantment of those unexpected revelations,
but we shall see the world around us with new eyes. For this world is the palace.
Through the visible things of this world we reach the invisible ; and through the
invisible things we dimly discern the Life which is our ultimate goal.


“The face of all the world is changed . . .
Since first I heard the footsteps of Thy Soul.”


APPENDIX 571


3. THe Marterta MEDICA OF THE CANON


The following list gives those of the Simples discussed in the Second Book of |
the Canon which are still in use. Those marked with an asterisk are Pharmacopeial ;
many of the others are found in the Catalogue of Messrs. Heath & Heather, Ltd.
(St. Albans).

A. Acacia gummi,* aconiti radix,* acorn, adeps,* agrimony, amygdala,*
aloe,* alumen* (native), (ambergris), ammoniacum,* amylum* (from rice), anethi
fructus et oleum,* anisi fructus et oleum,* antimonium,* anthemidis flores et oleum,*
armenian bole, asafetida,* ash-tree, asphalt.

B. Barberry bark, banana, barley, bay-tree and berries, beech-tree (bark),
beeswax (cera*), betony, bile (fel bovinum*), bistort (black hellebore), bone-marrow,
borax* (impure), bran, brown sugar, brooklime, white bryony root, black bryony root,
bugloss, buttermilk.

C. Calamint, calamus, calx,* calcii hydras,* chamomile, camphor,* cane-
sugar, cannabis indica,* cantharides,* capsici fructus,* carui fructus et oleum,*
cardamomi semina,* carrot, cascara, cassiae fructus,* castor oil,* catechu,* cayenne
pepper, chirata,*, chicory, cinchonae rubrae cortex,* cinnamoni cortex et oleum,*
cloves and oil,* cochlearia armoracia, cocoanut, colchici cormus et semina,*
colocynthidis pulpa,* colophonium (‘‘ resina,’’*), conii folia, convolvulus turpethum, *
copper and copper sulphate (impure), coral, coriandri fructus et oleum,* cotton
(gossypium,* and gossypii radicis cortex*), couch-grass (triticum), creasotum,*
croton oil,* cubebae fructus et oleum,* cucurbita semina praep* (cyperus rotundus,
cypress-turpentine tree fruit).

D. UDates, dried and fresh; dragon’s blood.

E. Egg-plant, elecampane, elaterium, embelia.*

fF. Foeniculi fructus ; ferrum*; filix mas*; fuller’s earth.

G. Galls, garlic, gelatinum,* gentianae radix,* germander ginger,* gly-
cyrrhizae radix,* gold, grapes (unripe), green vitriol, groundpine, gum tragacanth.

H. -Hartstongue fern, hellebore, hemlock,* hyoscyami folia,* honey, humulus
lupulus flowers,* horehound, hydrargyrum.*

I. Iron-rust, isinglass, ivy.

J. Jalapa,* jalapae resina,* juniper berries, and oil.*

kK. Kaolin.*

L. Lard ( =adeps*), lavender, lead carbonate and oxide, lemon, lime (“ calx ’’)
linseed and oil (long pepper, lote tree, lupin). :

M. Mace, maidenhair, marsh mallow, mandrake root, manna, marjoram,
meadow-sweet, mercury (=hydrargyrum*), mistletoe, mouse-ear, mugwort, myro-
balanum,* myrrh.* :

N. Naphtha, nigella, nitre, nutmeg,* nux vomica* (or, wintercherry ).

OQ. Oakbark, olive oil,* opium,* orange-peel,* orangeflower water,* orpiment,
oxymel*,; many essential oils.

P. Parsley, pearl barley, pearlashes, pellitory root, pennyroyal, ,, pepper
(confectio piperis*), pepper-mint oil,* pepsin (tripe), pine resin (‘‘ resina,’’*), pix
liquida,* polygonum root, pomegranate bark, poppy (white), black poplar bark, red
poppy petals (rhoeados petala*), Pterocarpi lignum,* pyrethri radix.*

Q. Quicklime (= calx), quillaiae cortex.*

&. Rapeseed, rhubarb rhizome,* rice, rosemary, rue. —

S. Saffron flowers, sage, sal ammoniac (crude), santoninum,* scammony root
and gum,* sealingwax, seaweed, sennae folia et fructus,* sesame oil,* sevum prae-
paratum,* silver, soapwort, sodium chloride,* sorrel, southernwood, spearmint
(ol. menth, virid.*), sponge, stavesacre seeds,* styrax praeparatus,* stramonii folia,
sulphur,* sunbul. ;

T. Talc, tamarindus,* taraxaci radix,* thyme, tin, tragacanth,* truffle,
tumeric, turpethum.* : ;

V. Valerianae rhizoma,* verbascum, verdigris (copper acetate), vervain,
viola odorifera. f

W. Walnut, water-cress, white water-lily root, wax, whey, white lead,
willow bark, wormwood ( = absinth).

Z. Zinci oxidum* (but impure) ; zingiber.*


Bak ee


REFERENCES


The numbers correspond to those given in the text when quoting from this list,


Ameer Ali, Syed : A short history of the Saracens. Macmillan & Co., Ltd.
London, 1921.

Ameer Ali, Syed: The Spirit of Islam. Christophers, London, 1923; also,
els Life and Teachings of Mahommed,” Williams & Norgate, London,
1873.

Avicenna, Danish-nama, quoted by E. G. Browne, ref. 6.

Avicenna, Traités Mystiques ; see Mehren.

Brockelmann, Carl. Geschichte der arabischen Litteratur. Weimar, 1898.

Browne, E. G.: Arabian Medicine. Cambridge, University Press, 1921.

Browne, E. G.: Chahar Maqala, translation—E. J. W. Gibb Memorial, xi, 2.
Luzac, London, 1921.

Browne, E. G. A history of Persian Literature under Tartar Dominion,
‘Cambridge University Press, 1920.

Browne, E. G.: Literary History of Persia. Cambridge University Press,
1902.

Bruce, J. P.: Chu Hsi, Philosophy of Human Nature; translation and
commentary. Probsthain’s Oriental Series, London, 1922.

Bruce, J. P.: Chu Hsi and his masters. Probsthain’s Oriental Series,
London, 1923.

Campbell, D.: Arabian Medicine and its influence on the middle ages. 2 vols.
Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co., Ltd., London, 1926.

Carra de Vaux: Avicenne (Les Grands philosophes). Felix Alcan, Paris, 1900,

Carra de Vaux: Gazali. Felix Alcan, Paris, 1902.

Carus, Paul: Chinese thought. Kegan Paul, Triibner Co., Chicago, 1907.

Catechism of the Council of Trent: trans. J. McHugh and C. J. Callan.
Joseph F. Wagner, Inc., New York, 1923.

Catholic Encyclopedia. (In quoting from this, the number of the volume is
indicated.)

Costzus : Annotations to Avicenna, in the Venetian edition of 1595, or 1608.

Daremberg: Céuvres de Galien. J. B. Bailliére, Paris, 1854.

Duhalde ; Description of China ; trans. by Hervieu ; Section on “‘ The Pulse.”
1779.

Dutt, U. Chand: The materia medica of the Hindus, compiled from Sanskrit
medical works. Thacker, Spink & Co., Calcutta, 1877.

Flagg, P. J.: The patient’s point of view. Milwaukee.

Forke, A.: The world-conception of the Chinese. Probsthain’s Oriental
Series, London, 1925.

Forke, A.: Chinesische Mystik. Karl Curtius Verlag, Berlin, W.35; 1922.

Gulshan-i-Raz; the mystic rose garden: Trans. by E. H. Whinfield. Triibner
& Co., London, 1880.

Heser : Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Medizin. Jena, 1875.

Haly Abbas: Liber Regius, Kitabul-Maliki, Cairo edition, 1877 ; Latin trans,
printed at Lyons in 1523. Also, Kamilus-sina’a.

Hartmann: Chinesische Heilmethoden. Miinch. Med. Woch., 1927, 935.

Hartmann, F.: The Life of Paracelsus, and the substance of his teachings.
Kegan Paul, Tribner & Co., London (no date).

Hirschberg and Lippert: Die Augenheilkunde des Ibn Sina. Veit & Co.,
Leipzig, 1902. :

Holmyard and Mandeville : Avicenne, Kitab al-Shifa. Paul Geuthner, Paris


1927.
ay 3


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Honen the Buddhist Saint: trans. by Coates and Ishizuka by Imperial
request. Chionin, Kyoto, Japan, 1925.

Horne, J.: ‘‘ Many days in Morocco.”’ Philip Allan & Co., London, 1925.

Horten, M.: Die Metaphysik Avicennas. (Das Buch der Geneesung der
Seele, eine philosophische Enzyklopedie Avicennas). Rudolf Haupt,
Leipzig, 1909.

Howarth, Sir Henry: History of the Mongols, 1876-1888.

Hughes, Ed.: Lancet, 1920, 63.

Hyrtl: Das arabische und hebraische in der Anatomie. Vienna, 1879.

Inayat Khan: various writings and saying. Sufi Publishing Society, South-
ampton, 1915-1929. ;

Inayat Khan: ‘In an Eastern Rose-garden.” Sufi Publishing Society,
Southampton.

ib.: The Mysticism of Sound. (ib.)

ib.: Diwan; Gayan. (ib.)

ib.: Hindustani Lyrics; Inner Life, etc. (ib.)

Iqbal: The development of Metaphysics in Persia. London, 1908.

Joannitius (Hunayn ibn Ishaqal ‘Ibadi):. Some writings included in the
Latin Venetian edition of the Canon, 1608.

Leclerc, L.: Histoire de la Médicine Arabe ; quoted by Campbell; ref. 12,
Pp. 153, footnote.

Legge, James: The Sacred Books of China. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1899.

Li Ki, trans. by S. Couvreur, S.J. Ho Kien Fou, Catholic Press, 1913.

Lindsay, W. Lauder : Mind in the Lower Animals. 2 vols. Kegan Paul & Co.,
1879.

Nei Campbell: The Romance of the Human Body. Wells Gardner,
Darton & Co., Ltd., London, 1917.

Maher, Michael, S.J.: Psychology. Stonyhurst Philosophical Series. Long-
mans, Green & Co., 1925.

Markam, Sir Clements : Colloquies on the simples and drugs of India, of Garcia
da Orta. Sotheran & Co., London, 1913.

Martin, Alfred: Deutsches Badewesen in vergangenen Tagen. Eugen
Diederich, Jena, 1906.

Massignon, L.: La Passion d’Al-Hallaj, martyr mystique de l’Islam. 2 vols.
Geuthner, Paris, 1922.

Maugham, W. Somerset: ‘‘On a Chinese Screen.’’ Traveller’s Library,
No -31.

Mehren, M. A. F.: Traités Mystiques d’Abot Ali al-Hosain b. Abdallah b.
Sina ou d’Avicenne. 4 fascicules, E. J. Brill, Leyden, 1889-1899.

Mercier, Cardinal: Manual of Modern Scholastic Philosophy. Kegan Paul,
Tribner & Co., 1921.

Masnavi. Trans. by E. H. Whinfield. _Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co.,
Ltd., London, 1898.

Masnavi. Trans. by C. E. Wilson. Probsthain & Co., London, toro.

Mih King: Ten volumes on the Pulse by Wang Shuh-Ho. McGill Library,
Montreal.

Mo hsueh ch‘i chéng. The Science of the Pulse; printed during the Ming
Dynasty.

Fox-Strangeways, A. H.: The Music of Hindostan. Oxford, Clarendon
Press, 1914.

Nicholson, R. A.: Studies in Islamic Mysticism. Cambridge University
Press, 1921.

Nicholson, R. A.: Studies in Islamic poetry. Cambridge University Press,
Ig2t.

Nicholson, R. A.: The Kashfu’l-Mahjub of ‘Ali b. ‘Uthman al-Jullabi al-
Hujwiri. Gibb Memorial publications. Luzac & Co., London, rort.

Nicholson, R. A.: The Kitab al-Luma‘ fi’l-Tasawwuf. Gibb Memorial
publications. Luzac & Co., London, tor4.

Nicholson, R. A.: The Literary History of the Arabs. T. Fisher Unwin,
London, 1907.

Nicholson, R. A.: The Mystics of Islam. Bell & Sons, Ltd,, London, 1914.

Nicholson, R. A.: Selected poems from the Divani Shamsi Tabriz. Cam-
bridge, 1898.

Nicholson, R. A.: The idea of Personality in Sufism, Cambridge University
Press, 1923.

O’Leary, De Lacy Evans: Arabic thought and its place in history. Triibner’s
Oriental Series, 1922.


7
fea
73-
74-
75-
76.
77-
78.
per.
8o.


Dike
82.


$3.
84.
85.
86.
87.
88.
89.
90.


ol.
92.


93.
94.


95.
96.


97.
08.


99.
100,


101.


102,
103.
104.
105.


106.
107.
108,
10g.
I1O,


Lit.
LEZ


REFERENCES 7s


McNabb, Vincent, O.P.: The Catholic Church and Philosophy. (Calvert
Series). Burns, Oates & Washbourne, Ltd., 1927.

Paracelsus: Hermetic and alchemical writings. Trans. by A. E. Waite.
2 vols. London, 1894. ;

Paracelsus : summary of teachings. See under Hartmann, F.

Paulus Aegineta. Trans. by F. Adams, Sydenham Society, London, 1846.

Pégues, R. P. T., O.P.: Catechism of the Summa Theologica of St. Thomas
Aquinas. Burns, Oates & Washbourne, Ltd., London, 1922.

Plopper, C. H.: Chinese religion seen through the Proverb. China Press
Shanghai, 1926.

Randall, A. G.: Optimistic Medicine. F. A. Davis Co. Philadelphia, 1924.

Religio Chemici: by G. Wilson. Macmillan, 1862.

Rickaby, Joseph, S.J.: Of God and His Creatures. Burns & Oates, London,
1905.

Rickaby, Joseph, S.J.: Moral Philosophy. Stonyhurst Philosophical Series.
Longmans, Green & Co., 1912.

St. Thomas Aquinas : Summa contra Gentiles. Rome, 1894.

St. Thomas Aquinas : Summa contra Gentiles. Dominican translation, 1923.
Burns, Oates & Washbourne, Ltd.

St. Thomas Aquinas : Summa Theologica, especially Part I, questions 50-102.
Rome, 1894.

St. Thomas Aquinas: Summa Theologica. Dominican translation (vol. 4),
1922. Burns, Oates & Washbourne, Ltd.

Sandford, Alex. E.: Pastoral Medicine, a handbook for C. Clergy. J. F.
Wagner, New York, 1904.

Sauter, C.: Avicenna: Bearbeitung der Aristotelischen Metaphysik. Herder,
Freiburg im Breisgau, 1912.

Schlimmer : Terminologie Medico-pharmaceutique. Francaise-Persane,
Tihran, 1874.

Singer, C. and D.: The scientific position of Girolano Fracastoro. Annals
of Med. History, 1918.

Sontheimer: Zusammengesetzte Heilmittel der Araber. Herder, Freiburg
im Breisgau, 1845.

Susuki, D. T.: A brief history of early Chinese Philosophy. Probsthain & Co.,
London, 1914.

Susuki, D. T : Essays in Zen Buddhism. Luzac & Co., London, 1927.

Susuki and Carus: T‘ai Shang Kan Yin P‘ien. Open Court Publishing Co.,
Chicago, 19006.

Tagore, Sir Rabindranath: Gitanjali, and other works. 1920, etc.

Tanquery, Ad.: Précis de Theologie Ascetique et Mystique, 5th ed. Desclée
et Cie, Paris, and Rome, 1923.

Thomas 4 Kempis: Imitatio Christi.

Vassall-Phillips, O.R., C.SS.R.: The supernatural life. Cath. Truth Soc.
Do. 85.

= rey ee Anscar, O.S.B.: Life of the World to Come. Burns, Oates &
Washbourne, 1926. The Human Soul. B. Herder, London, 1920.

Wan K‘an t‘ang: 1056-1064 a.D. Complete guide to the human pulse.
80 vols. Reprinted at Pekin, 1923.

Whinfield : translations. See 25 and 57.

White King, Sir Lucas: Tayyibat; Odes of Sa’di. Published by Luzac &
Coe London, £926;

Wilhelm, Richard: I Ging, Das Buch der Wandlungen, aus dem chinesischen.
Eugen Diederich, Jena, 1924. r

Withington, E. T.: Medical history from the earliest times. London, 1894.

Buzzard, Sir Farquhar. Lancet, 1927, 1003.

Burton, Lady: edition of the 1001 Nights. (Six volumes.) 1886.

Abbott, Maude: Descriptive Catalogue of the Medical Museum of M'Gill
University, Part IV, section 1. Oxford, 1915.

Arnold, Fr. : Imitation of the Sacred Heart, 1846.

Arnold, Sir Thomas: Painting in Islam. Oxford University Press, 1928.

Ayurvedic writings and works: publishers of Ayurveda Journal. Calcutta.

Ayurveda, notes on: Brit. Med. Journ., 1923, 477-479. ws

Baraduc: Les Vibrations de la vitalité humaine. J. B. Bailliére et Fils,
Paris, 19045 ;

Barton and Castle: British Flora Medica. Chatto & Windus, 1877.

Beale, Lionel S.: various works, especially: Bioplasm; Microscope in
Medicine, How to Use the Microscope; The Liver. 1878, 1880.


576


112a.
113.


114.
II5.
116.


I16a.


BL 7e
118.


119.
120,
1204.
P20.


122.
723%
124.
I25.
126.
127.


128.
129.


130.
T30s
1325
133.
134.
135.


136.
137.


137d.
138.


139.
140.
I4I.
142.
143.
144.
145.


146.


147.
148.


149.


150.
I5I.


152.
153.


THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Bechold : Die Kolloide in Biologie u. Medizin. Theodor Steinkopff, Dresden,
IgI2.

Bier. August: Gedanken eines Arztes tiber die Medicin. IV. Die Seele,
Minch. Med. Woch., 1927, 684-688.

Bock, Carl: Das Buch vom gesunden und kranken Menschen, Leipzig, 1893.

Broadbent: ‘‘ The Pulse.’’ Cassell & Co., London, 1890.

Bullock, T. L.: Progressive exercises in the Chinese Written Language.
Crosby, Lockwood & Son, London, 1923.

Coppens, C., S.J., and Spalding, J., S.J.: Moral Principles and Medical
Practice. Benziger Bros., New York, 1921.

Cuthbert, Fr., O.S.F.C.: God and the Supernatural. Longmans, Green & Co.,
London, 1920.

Dictionary of Technical terms used in the sciences of the Mussulmans.
Bibliotheca Indica, Calcutta, 1862.

Fernie: Herbal Simples. John Wright & Sons, Ltd., Bristol, 1914.

Fonahn, Adolf: Zur Quellenkunde der Persischen Medizin. Leipzig, 1910

Gilani: Commentary on Qanun, I. 1519. MS. in India Office Library.

Gilbert, J. W.: The Gospel of health and healing in all ages. Philadelphia,
IgIQ.

Giles, H. A.: Chuang tzu. Quaritch, Ltd., London, 1926.

Harmsworth Home Doctor. Educational Book Co., 1928 (six vols.).

Huysman, J. K.: St. Lydwine de Schiedam. Kegan Paul, 1922.

I tsung chin ch‘ien, by Hung Chou. (General Medicine.)

Jack’s “‘ Modern Family Doctor,” T. C. & E. C. Jack, Ltd., London, 1923.

Jones, Eli M.: Medical Times, 1918, March 9; and “ Definite medication.”
Therapeutic Pub. Co. Inc., Boston, Mass., 1911.

Kihne, Louis: (a) The science of facial expression; (b) The new science of
healing. Pub. Benedict Lust, New Jersey, 1917. (From a German work.)

Lasance, F. X.: (a) Thoughts on the religious Life; (b) Blessed Sacrament
Book. Benziger Brothers, New York, 1907.

Lavater: Essays on Physiognomy, 1855.

Lepicier: Tractatus de prima hominis formatione. Rome, 1909.

Lindley and Moore: Treasury of Botany. Longmans, Green & Co., 1876.

Miles, Eustace : Self-health asa habit. J. M. Dent & Sons, Ltd., London, 1923.

Muther: Practitioner, June, 1916, 613.

Naegeli: Allgemeine Konstitutionslehre, in naturwissen-schaftlicher und
medizinischer Betrachtung. J. Springer, 1927.

Nash, J. T.: Evolution and Disease. J. Wright & Sons, Bristol, 1915.

Roger, G. H.: Introduction a l’étude de la Medicine, Collection de Précis
Medicaux, Masson et Cie. Paris, 1922.

Schade: Minch. Med. Woch, 1909, 5, etc.

Stanton, M. O.: An encyclopedia of face and form reading. F. A. Davis
Co., Philadelphia; 8th ed.

Stoddart: The Mind and its disorders. H. K. Lewis & Co., Ltd., London.
5th ed., 1926.

Swindells, B. J.: Life and its origins. R 83, Cath. Truth Society Pamphlets.

Vallery-Radot: Précis de Pathologie Medicale, Tom. iv. Masson et Cie,
Paris, 1922.

Vilarifio, P. R., S J.: Devocionario de religiosos. Bilbao, 1924.

Watson, J. K.: A Handbook for Nurses, 6th ed. Scientific Press, Ltd.,
London, 1921.

Wieger, L., S.J.: History of Religious Beliefs; trans. by E. C. Werner.
Hsien-hsien Press, 1927.

Allen, Charles: ‘Curious Observations about the Teeth,” 1687. Bale
Danielsson, Ltd., London, W.1.

Pater, R.; Mystic Voices. Burns, Oates & Washbourne, 1923.

Laloy, Louis: La musique chinoise. H. Laurens, Paris. No date.

Renaudot, Eusebius : Ancient account of India and China. London, 1733.

Sajous, C. E.: The internal secretions and the principles of medicine. Phila-
delphia, 1922.

Elder and Fowler: Diseases of Children. Edinburgh, 1899.

Bere E. D.: Principles of Light and Colour. East Orange, New Jersey,
1896.

Pareira: Materia Medica. Longmans Green, 1850.

P’u Sung-Ling, Seltsame Geschichten. Berlin, Alf. Hager, Verlag, 1924.
(Also trans. to English, H. A. Giles, Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio.
T. Werner Laurie, Ltd., London, 1916.)


REFERENCES Leu


Senate : The Graces of Interior Prayer. Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Co.,

td., 1921.

Charaka-Samhita ; trans. by K. A. C. Kaviratna. Calcutta, 1896.

McGonagh, S.: Dominicana, Dec., 1928, p. 299.

Benson, Mgr. R. H.: Light Invisible, and other writings.

Corder, Frederick : Modern Musical Composition. J. Curwen & Sons, Ltd.,
Berners St., London, W. (No date.)


Lane’s translation of the Arabian Nights. Aldus Edition de Luxe, New York.
(No date.)

Pearson and Wyllie: Recent Advances in Diseases of Children, Churchill,
1928,


Bauer, J. Ann. Int. Med., 1928, ii, 127.

Garrod, Sir A.: The Huxley Lecture on Diathesis. Lancet, 1927, Nov. 26,
Pp. £113.

Meyerhof, Max, M.D.: The book of the ten treatises on the eye ascribed to
Hunain ibn is-haq (809-877 a.pD.). Government Press, Cairo, 1928,


Hiibotter, Fr.: Die chinesische Medizin. Verlag der Asia Major, Leipzig, 1929.


This masterly work, to hand in November, 1929, contains considerable sections


on the Pulse (pp. 157-193, 198-210). The following lines in the Preface find assent
in the pages of the present treatise: ‘‘ The real greatness of Chinese Medicine lies
in its endeavour to unify the human microcosm and its disorders and diseases with
the macrocosm, the heavenly Tao. Even though the edifice so reared is really
largely a castle in the air, the basic idea itself is grand and infrangible.”’


2P


iven =, fis >
i ¥ Fi


~ P —— @ =e =


\ ~ ies =e op


> A a ea
~ 7 * wiaaaed ey
~ ; -_— = é


INDEX


F A study of this index furnishes the best idea of the range of subjects discussed
in the First Book of the Canon.

The numbers refer to the paragraphs in the text. Heavy figures show that
the subject is dealt with in the text of the Canon; italic figures refer to the para-
graphs of the interspersed Treatise, commentary, and notes.


A


Abdominal inflammatory masses, treatment of, 1055

Ablution with cold water, 757; after exercises, 758, 244

Abnormal forms of atrabilious humour, 90; of serous humour, 74

Abnormal movements, causes of, 427

Abnormality of blood, its source, 72

Abnormal sediments in urine, 658 (1-10)

Abscess: effect on pulse, 600

Abscess explained, 209

Abscess of liver, urine in, 636

Abundance of hair at puberty, meaning of, 475

Accessory function of lymph, 73, 106; of bile, 82

Accidental causes of disease, examples of, 232

Accidental change, 67

Accidents, definition of, 60

Acid serous humour, two forms of, 79

Aconite, action of, 350, 354, 356 B

Action and passion, 89

Active and passive qualities, ro2

Active principle of food, 349

Activity of cyclical changes in the breath, explained, 138

Acute inflammatory swellings, treatment of, 1049

Adenoids, 723

Adiposity ; see obesity. Hot baths after meals, for, 406

Adolescence, 51; urine in, 670

Adrenalin and its mode of entry into the blood, 122

Adulteration of urine with saffron, 625

Adult life, urine in, 670

Aerated water, action of, 391; utility of, 408

Aeration of breath, 238

Affectionate disposition, and water element, 78

Affusion, 757, 758

After-taste of purgative, how to remove, 983

After-treatment, after leeching, 1042; after venesection, 1027, h

Age and pulse, 575-578 ; 234

Aged persons, diet of, 786

Age of patient a guide to evacuant treatment, 934 (6)

Age of wet-nurse’s babe, 707

Age, variation of urine according to, 670 ; i

Agents, alleviating pain, 435; altering the qualities of the body, 415-430 ; Causing
deformity, 419; causing obstruction of channels, 420; opening up channels,
421; producing hardness of the body, 422; producing displacements and
luxations, 424; preventing apposition, 425; preventing expansion, 426

Ailment, definition of term, 168 A :

Air, see atmosphere

579


580 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Air, changes of, are dual, 308; contamination with stagnant water, etc., 276; de-
finition of, 23, 309 ; infections, to avoid, 877 ; its moisture and dryness defined,
250; not ‘breath,’ 234; properties of, 23; putrefaction in, 275; versus
‘atmosphere,’ 309

Alhambra, secret of, 5

Alien heat, 78 (see Foreign heat)

Aliment, two functions of, 925

Alleviation of pain, agents for, 435

Al Najat referred to, 14

Alterative faculty, 149

Altitude and climate, 307B

Alum in water, effect of, -384

Aluminous and. bitter waters, antidote for, 899; diseases benefited by bathing in,
408; how to purify for drinking, 876

Ammonia salts in drinking water, effect of, 384

Anabolism and katabolism, 142

Anemia, treatment of, 845

Anesthetics, 814; Burton’s note, 7b.

Analgesics, 435

Analogy between changes of breath and events of Chinese history, 133; between
the four elements and the vibration-rate, 77

Analysis of terms applied to living beings (table), 728

Anatomy as the expression of strengths and weaknesses, 126 ; necessary to diagnosis,
456, 461; proper purpose of, 456; three-fold value of knowledge of, 912

Anatomical relations, 911; structure, cause of variation, 179

Ancient and modern medicine compared, 19, sqq.; ve urinalysis, 239

Ancient anatomy, key to object of, 178

Ancient medicine may succeed when modern methods fail, 35 ; still practised, 35

Aneurysm, signs of false, 513 (5)

Anger: and the fire element, 78, 160 (4) ; and the atmosphere of a person, 1b. ;
is calefacient, 415; cause of outburst, 160 (4); effect on blood and breath,
1117; effect on pulse, 601; meaning of, 490; synonyms, 164 (II)

Anginas in autumn, 289 (i)

Anguish of love, 345 (footnote)

Animal breath a phase, 148; faculties, 174; animal faculties defined, r29 (5) ;
prudence, 180

Ankylosis, 199 (12)

Anorexia, diet in, 781

Antecedent canses, 281

Antigalactogogues, 706; anti-inebrients, 811; amnti-inebrient syrup, 812

Aperient foods, 785, 254

Aphorisms, use of, 299

Aphthous stomatitis, 720

Apoplexy commoner in winter, 294

Appetite, and breath, 148; and waking state, 339; due to-acridity of atrabilious
humour, 185 ; fictitious, 761 ; kinds of, 159 ; of youth, why big, 57; rational,
159; stimulated by atrabilious humour, 88, 106

Appetites classified, 158

Appetitive faculty, 159 (II)

Appliance for cauterising mucous membranes, 1072

Application : of Canon in modern clinical diagnosis, 280 ; in modern treatment,285;
in pathology, 273; of doctrine of elements, 78 ; to histology, 95; to climate,
180; to bio-chemistry, 90-94

Application of study of interactions, 165 (IV)

Apprehensive faculty, 180 ; not very important for physician, 181 ; versus cogitative
faculty, 180; versus imagination, 180.

Aqueduct water, 375

Arab drinks, see 800; fruits, 252; sherbets, 797

Arabian civilisation in Middle Ages was of high order, 3: classification of faculties
(diagram), 155 (II); meals, 251

Arduous labour and evacuant measures, 9384 (11)

Arefactive lassitude, 833

Arguments as to innate heat during youth, 58; as to vital faculty being necessary
to sensation, 163

Arms, veins of, for venesection, 1022

Aromatic drugs, mode of action, 1120

Aromaticity and its importance to the heart, 1121


INDEX 581


Arhythm of pulse, 534; cause of, 573

Arteries contain blood, 116 (6), 182, 37; description of, 118 (€) ; function of, 116

Articles of food which help emesis, 1003; which increase alvine discharge, 254 ;
which purify the blood, 254 ~

Articulate language, versus ‘“‘ speech,” 153

Artificer and lawgiver, 100

Ash of atrabilious humour, 92

Asses’ urine, 640, 673

Asthenia and rarefaction of skin, 839 (iii) ; cause of, 443

Asthma, classification of causes, 444; in southerly countries, 329

Astringents, intestinal, indications for, 990

Astrology, 162 (i)

Atheroma, explanation of, 105

Athletic age, regimen for, 736; quick pulse after, 227

Atmosphere, personal, detection of, 28r ; explanation of, r4r

Atmosphere, kinds of, effect on body, 234 sqq., 313 ; in spring, 255, 257; in winter,
256; natural changes, 242 sqq.; preternatural changes, effects of, 308-313 ;
varieties of, 241; and see “‘ air”’

Atmospheric changes, effect on human body, 312, 313; regimen for, 873-877

Atmospheric influences on body, operation of ; quoted from Ch’i Po, r8r

Atrabilious constitution, diet for, 766; description of, 85; dreams in, 500; foods
which increase, 195 (3) ; im feces, significance of, 675; predominant at end of
summer, 288; relation to faculties, appetite, and aspect, 500; signs of domin-
ance, 500; swellings, 212

Atrophy, general, 199 (ii)

Attenuant, attenuate: the word is sometimes loosely used to describe a dilution
of a thick or concentrated solution. A weak solution is ‘attenuated.’ Some-
times it is used to describe a change of consistence. It is a correct term for
expressing a diminution in the degree of cohesion of the particles of a substance.
In a “ dense,” or “ thick’’ fluid, the particles are close together and more or
less firmly coherent. An agent which interacts with such a fluid so as to render
the particles less closely adherent, and therefore further apart, is “ attenuant.”
The consistence alters accordingly, and the optical properties alter from opacity
to more or less translucency. Such a process is one of “ dispersal’’ (e.g., of an
inflammatory mass), or “resolution.” Cf. 275.

Attenuated foods, 359; serous humour, description of, 760

Attitude: of body reveals state of breath, 144; of a member reveals its state,
whether healthy or not, 454 (5), 455

Attraction, mechanism of, 156; analogous to female attraction, 146

Attractive faculty, 147; achieved by longitudinal fibres, 185; co-operates with
purgative principles, 965; not equal in all organs, 133

Augmentative faculty, 143

Aura, meaning of, r4r

Autochemotherapy in Chinese medicine, 36

Autopsy is only a small fraction of ‘‘ the case,” 127

Autumn and the pulse, 581; definition of, 242; diseases of, 289; effect on body,
287-291; effect on atmosphere, 247; regimen appropriate for, 875; why
it predisposes to illness, 287

Auxiliary members, 123 ‘

Avicenna knew Indian medicine, 8 ; his medicine is based on a definite conception
of human nature, 20; his terms for the three faculties, 129

Ayurvedic philosophy, 20; sphygmology, 214


B


Babyhood, definition of, 52; hygiene of, diseases of, etc., see ** Infants ”

Bad effects of hot bath, 407 : :

Balance: application of principle of, 30; application to character delineation,
165 (IV); between evacuation and retention constitutes health, 398; between
organs, 72

Bandaging, tight, 420 f., 416 (8) ; is dangerous, 204 ‘

Basis: of occult powers in human constitution, 162 (vi); of terms applied to the
three faculties, 129

Bath attendant, his work, 198 ’

Bath-house, 75 (2), 244; characters of good, 400; described, 198, 199; rest-room
mural decorations, 199


582 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Bathing in relation to administration of enemas, 1014; of purgation, 973; for
lassitude, 836; in cases of ulceration, 1067; in the spring, 757, 281; up to
age of 13,735; in infancy, 694

Baths as humectants, 447; beneficial effects of, 756 ; copper, 751; effect of accord-
ing to skin-state, 402; effect of the different temperatures, 402 s effect of
duration of, 405; for cases of hot intemperament, 866 ; for emaciation, 871 ;
forms of, 751; full length, 751; hot, effect of, on pulse, 596 ; injurious effects
of, 756; in winter, object of, 432; mames of various kinds, 751; natural
action of, 401 ; rules re cases of induration of skin, 839 (ii) ; rules re meals, 406 ;
sometimes warming, sometimes depressant, 198 ; to make thin persons fat, Sil
when not needed, 751 .

Bath treatment of hectic fever, 407; warming effect of, explained, 403

Bazaar life, a picture of the processes within the body, 00, 239

Beauty-culture, 872, 897; in the application to Truth, 89 ; loss of, 221 ; -sleep, 818

Bedroom, choice of, for old age, 854 ‘

Bile arouses desire for stool, 106 ; cleanses bowel, 106; diminishes surface tension,
82, 106; functions of, 82, 106; how secreted, 122

Biliary passages, obstruction of, urine in, 621

Bilious constitution and the hot season, 286 .

Bilious humour: description of, 82; effect on dreams, 500; on rational and vegeta-
tive faculty, appetite, aspect, etc., 500; foods which increase, 195 (3) ; in the
fasting stomach, 780; predominant in autumn, 288; set moving by hot bath,
407 ; signs that it is dominant, 500; table of types, 84 <

Bilious temperament,—and purgation, 980; benefited by wine, 802; diet for, 766

Binder, rules about, 692

Biochemical tests sometimes fallacious, 25

Bitter serous humour, explanation of, 77

Bituminous baths, effect of, 408

Blankets, why more are necessary in sleep, 340

Bleeding should be frequent if much flesh-meat is taken, 771

Black chyme, 675 (3)

Black: kinds of, 615; black stools, 675 (3); black urine, meaning of, 615

Bleeding in cases of lassitude, 837

Blepharitis in infants, 721

Blood : in urine, meaning of, 612; colour when atrabilious humour plentiful, 501 ;
foods which enrich, 195 (3) ; oiliness of, 468; purpose of studying, 284. See
‘“sanguineous humour ’

Blood-forming centres: what they are, r2I, 147

Blood-letting, see Venesection ; also 1017 ; in fevers, precautions concerning, 1029 ;
when preferable to purgation, 950

Blood-states and emotions, 1117

Blood-vessels the materialisation of the blood-stream, r23

Blushing, a means of cure, 922

Boating, 741

Bodily exercise, general discourse, 736

Bodily strength does not depend on quantity of blood, 97

Body: and soul forms one single being, 25; -fluids different from humours, 117;
not a make-up of spare parts, 23 (11)

Boiling to purify water, 368

Books—words—thoughts, 7

Bone, 116; very different from blood, 134

Boundaries of the three kingdoms, 129 (1)

Brain, effect of wine on, 808 ; inflammation of, 719; not the source of activities, 25;
signs of functional adequacy, 453; water on, 719

Breakfast, Arab, 251

Breath, 134; aeration of, 288; and emotions, 139, 160 (4); and passions, 1093;
and pulse (in Chinese science), 209 ; and syncope, 842; application to histology,
46 ; a luminous substance, 1091; a ray of light, ib. ; changes of quality, 138 ;
ditto, simultaneously with changes in composition, 148; choked in cases of
plethora, 442; concentration and condensation of, 2837; confinement of, in
emotions, 342; confused, effect of, 1108; course of through body, 171; de-
finitions of (positive and negative), 736; depuration of, 286; dispersed by hot
bath, 407 ; dispersed with humours, 111; diverse theories about, 1733 effect
of coarseness of, 1103; effect of confusedness, in daily life, 1109; effect on
emotion varies according to amount, quality, and substance, 1108; effect of
poisons on, 356 B; effect of scantiness, 1103; effect of sleep on, 837; effect
of strong emotional states on, 1115 sqq.; five, in the Hindu system, 136;


INDEX 583


fuliginous component, 238; heart made to receive it, 168 ; how it begins, 171 ;.
in Chinese philosophy, 737 ; in pathology, 147 ; is not “ soul,’’ 285 ; its activity,
138; its constitution, is important to medicine, 23; languishing of, 343;.
motions of, in relation to mind-states, 341; movement in two opposite direc-
tions at once, 344; nature of, 136; not necessary to movement (argument:
from paralysis), 163; pervades body, 136; purification of, 264; quality of,
effect of, 1101; quantity of, effect of, 1100; relation to anatomical organs,
I45; relation to atmospheric air inhaled, 286; relation to innate heat, rar ;
to life, 165; to metabolic changes, rg2; to cycles of the outer world, 147(d) ;
of oxygen to, 137; to temperament, 171, 739; to will-power, rgo; retained
by a rarefaction of skin, 415 (vi) ; source in the finer particles of the humours, 169 ;
state of, influence on faculties and talents, 1109, 1110; substance of, is water,
237, 137 ; synonyms, 28, 129 (6), 136; types of, associated with blood-states,
1117; type depends on the emotion, 1111; versus organs, ve humours, 162 ;
weakness of, 448 (ii)

Breathing, difficulty of, in infants, 723

Breaths, three—natural, animal, vital, 170

Brevity consistent with deep knowledge, 7

Broad pulse, characters of, 558

Bronchitis in winter, cause of, 179

Bubo, what it is, 209

Bulky stools, 675 (4)

Bursting of abscess into sputum, vomit, urine, feces, 509


CG


Cachexia = tumefaction with gas, 211 (4)

Cadence in Arabian poetry. effect of, 219

Calcareous serous humour, 74

Calculus, 420, 425; urine in, 636

Calefacients, 415, 830; as refrigerants, 416 (3)

Cancer, a condition of, is entry of S into cycle, 213, 147

Cancerous swelling, 213

Canon: applied to modern clinical diagnosis, 280; to modern treatment, 285 ;
to pathology, 273; is a précis, 7; would sometimes help in modern practice,
37 ; meaning of the word, ro; to be memorised, 7; useless for modern out-
patient department or ward teaching, 34; written at the instance of a friend, 2

Capacity for life, conditions necessary for, 1090; for rational life, ditto, 1090

Capillaries of liver, 102; described by Avicenna, 32 (c)

Carbon-centric v. oxycentric compounds, etc., 92

Cartilage, functions of, 116 (2)

Cataract, signs forewarning, 878

Cause, definition of, 191 ; in medicine is not an efficient cause, 166; and malady and
symptom, examples, 194; of compositional disease, 207; of death, 61; of
delight and sadness, extrinsic, 1104; of failure of innate heat, 58; of humours
(Table), 106; of increase of atrabilious humour, 108; of movement of the
humours, 112; of numerical decrease, 428

Causes: concerned in the “ dance of the elements,’’ ro2; four kinds of, 18; must
be understood before knowing how to preserve health or remove ill-health, 14 ;
of disease, facultative, classification, 399; of disease, list of, according to
Paracelsus, 199, footnote; three groups of, 231; three steps in substantial
change, 69

Caustics, mode of action, 1044 : ;

Cauterisation, general principles and objects, 1072; of skull, precautions in, 1072

Celestial factors, on climate, 306

Cells are changing physical things as well as chemical, 95

Cerebral diseases, effect on pulse, 233

Chalky waters, baths of, action of, 408

Chalybeate waters, 384, 408

Channel water, 383 .

Channels, agents for opening, 421; of the body, 911 (footnote). See obstructions

Change (dynamic) is universal, 66; from one physical state to another as well as
chemical, 95; in the human being, 83; of diet, ill effects of, if from light to
heavy, 787; of mode of vital force accounts for changes in organs, 72; which
the liver makes in the blood, 104; of elements exemplified in chemistry (glucose
to alcohol), 87


584 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Character: and emotional type belong together, 164 (IV); and physique, 163 (i),
164 (IV); delineation, 162 (i), 163 (i); is inherent and unalterable, 164 (IV) ;
inherited, may depend on breath of parents, 345 ’ : 5

Characters of good (human) milk, 700 ; of good wet-nurse, 700 ; of inhabited regions,
318; shown in outward form, 25 ;

Character-types : Sufic classification, 164 (IV) ; versus physique known to Chinese 25,

Chart: of mind, description of, 159 ; of correlation of faculties, 158 ; co-ordinating
terminologies, 155; of Chinese pulse, 208

Cheerfulness belongs to air element, 78 :

Chemical changes in body correspond to an Eastern court, 93; exemplified, 87

Chemical structure determines anatomical structure, 124

Chemistry of life viewed mystically, 93, 94

Childhood, definition of, 52; urine in, 670

Chinese: cosmogony and Avicenna, 30; diagnosis disconcertingly accurate, 36;
did not borrow from the Turks, 8; philosopher’s view of Western world, 6 ;
studied character and physique, 163 (i) (footnote) ; world-conception not lightly
to be rejected, 30 :

Choice of drugs for a given case, 290, 29r, 1120; of food according to climate, 313
sqq.; of various methods of treatment, rules for, 1051

Choking of breath = retarded or arrested oxidative processes, 442 ; in plethora, 442
(footnote), 590

Choleric atrabilious humour, 94

Chord-like pulse, 549

Chronic intemperament, treatment of, 926

Chyme, quality of, according to food, 360

Chyle taken up by liver, 102

Cineritial urinary sediment, 658 (9)

Circulation long known of, but not anatomically visualised, 32; Chinese idea of,
32 (Wieger) ; circulation of breath not anatomical, r44; rate of, not realised
by Chinese, 32 (b) ; and by few persons to-day, ib. ; the old idea, 116

Clarified butter, 673

Classification: of disease (Galenic), 224; of errors of development (Abbott), 192 ;
of members into simple and compound, 115; of members according to action,
124; of members into principal and auxiliary, 123; of members according to
faculty, 117; according to their origin, 125; into preparatory and auxiliary
(table), 128; of temperaments, 30; varies with personal taste, 173

Clay-coloured stools, 675 (3)

Clear urine, significance of, 620

Climate, 305, sqq.,; and body, r8r; as part of regimen, 254; factors on which it
depends, r9o ; icy, travelling to, 889; of one’s locality to be studied by the
physician, 259 ;treatment of disease by, 313 (rheumatic cases), 324 (nerve and
heart), 327 (nerve)

Clot, man created of, 679 ; source of life-germ, 125

Clothing—as part of regimen, 254, rules, 254

Coats of hollow organs, purpose of, 1314

Cogitative faculty, 179; seat of, 179; difference from inspiration, 179; more
perfect in man (St. T.), 129

Coitus, 820; effect of, on body, 196

Cold : action of, 152, 189, 448 ; as a helper of attractive faculty, 189; atmosphere,
effect of, 278; on body, 318; bath, effect on pulse, 596; countries, effect on
body, 320

Cold intemperament : and urine, 620; odour of urine in, 645; of kidneys, sediment
in urine, 658 (4) ; rectification of, 868

Cold: intense, why it kills, 894; relation of, to faculties, 152

Cold seasons, diseases of, 268; cold swellings are painless, 506; classification of,
211 ; cold temperament, degrees of, in the various organs, 48 (and see ‘“‘ intem-
perament ’’) ;

Cold temperament, foamy urine in, 651; food suitable for, 771; functions in, 488
purgation in, 986 ; regimen for, 868; signs of, from form, 481

Cold, treatment by, 911

Cold water, plunging into, for frostbite, 872; action of, 388

Collective formule for body, r42

Colic due to biliary obstruction, 83; colic in babies, 726; urine in, 668

Colour, abnormal, a sign of disease, 454 (6), 282

Colour and movement of humours, 346a


INDEX 585


Colour: change of body as a whole, meaning of, 478; disfiguring—causes of, and
cae A of, 221 (a) ; indicates the temperainent, 476; guide for treatment,

Colour of hair, a sign of temperament, 472

Colour of urine: black, 615; compound, 626; grccu, 614; red, 610; white, 618;
yellow, 609; of urinary sediment, significance, 660

Colours affect the movement of the humours, 112

Colours, taste for, depends on breath, 139

Combinations of dishes, 772

Commemorative signs, definition, 452

Commendable waters, 372

Common sense (scholastic term), 177; site of, 177; versus magination, 1517

Complexion, care of, when travelling, 897

Composite disease, definition, 205

Composite sense, 177

Compositional diseases due to retention, 394

Compound: colours of urine, 626; fracture, 431 ; intemperaments, classification
of, 40; pulses, 522

Compulsory visibility, law, 106, 125

Conception: and emotional influence on product, 845; factors in production,
345, footnote

Conceptions in Canon not recognized in modern medicine, 23; in modern medicine
not known to Avicenna, 3I

Concepts versus Images, r6r (c)

Conditions requisite before causal agent effects illness, 233

Configuration, disorders of, 199

Conflict between self and disease, 562

Congenital intemperament, 853

Conjoined causes, 231

Conscience, list of adjectives relative to, 164 (IV)

Consistence of faeces a sign of disease, 675 (2) ; of sediment of urine, 661

Constants and variables for each person, 270

Constipation and diarrheea alternating, treatment of in old persons, 858

Constipation : due to drinking stagnant water, 380 ; during dentition, 715 ; habitual,
a sign of intemperament, 491; produced by cold, why, 278

Constitution : current ideas on, 27; formule descriptive of 272(2); in terms of
m and f, 58; only known when numerous factors are known, 27; meaning of
term, 27; not understood by modern practitioners, 27; versus “‘ make-up,”
‘27; versus temperament, 27; view of Paracelsus, 183. See “ teinperament,”’

Contamination of air by noxious trees, vegetables, trades, 276

Contentive factors of pulse, 552, 554, sqq.

Continuous pulse, 538

Contrary maladies conjoined, treatment of, 923

Contusions, treatment of, 1070 :

Convulsions: due to dryness, 716; teething, 716

Cordial medicines, mode of action, 1119

Corpulence = plethora of fat, 442

Correction of intemperaments, 930, 931, 932

Correctives : for unwholesome food, 792; for heavy foods, 789 ; for repletion, 793 ;
for wine, 805

Correlation : between modern biochemistry of blood and humours, 98; of various
faculties, 158, sqq.

Corruption, r44; and generation, 68, 88, 98

Coryza in infants, 724

Cosmology : of Avicenna, 19-25, 268 ; ancient, 54

Cough in infants, 724

Counter-inebriants, 813

Courses of a meal, 796

Cradle-song, 698; example, 712, 2404

Creeping pulse, 541

Crisis of fevers, urine in, 238

Critericlogy necessary to medicine, 16

Critical polyuria, 616 (@)

Crude serous humour, explanation of, 80 ;

Crude humours in blood-vessels, 837 ; and in lassitude, 823

Crying, incessant, or persistent, in infants, 717 ©

Cuisine of Arabs not unlike Southern Spanish of to-day, 249


586 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Cupping, 1030 :—age limit for, 1035; breasts for uterine trouble, 1044 ;—glasses,
points of application, 1032 ; time to use, 1034 ; time of day for, 1031; in
middle ages, 261 ; purposes in view, 1033 ; uses in various parts of body, 1032 ;
versus venesection of saphenous vein, 1032 (5)

Cuprous waters, effect of, 408 ; sae

Curability and incurability, 227; which diseases are, 327; depends on expiative
factors, 20r

Curly hair denotes hot and dry temperament, 471

Curved nails denote long-standing disease of bronchi, 454 (9)

Cycle of pulse, duration of, 524 ; ;

Cycles, bacteriological, 187; of breath, 105, 138; planetary versus climatic, 194;
seasonal, effect on body, 296-301

Cyclical changes in atmosphere, 277 ; in physiology, 83, 85; disorder of pulse, 530


D

Daily actions largely instinctive, 153

Damp countries, effect on body, 321

Dance of elements, 83, 95, 99, 142, 149; and death, r49; and disease, 149 ; when
it stops, all ceases,-93; dancers’ feelings not the concern of composer or con-
ductor, S4

Dancing causes abortion, 739 ; without personal contact, a type, $4

Darkness useful for certain maladies, 112

Dead body carries its secrets with it, even after autopsy, 127, 164 (IV)

Death due to failure of innate heat, 684; explained, 681-2; produced by intense
pain, 1073

Debility, causes of, 443

Debul, 343 ; 199 (ii) footnote. See Decline

Deception of doctor by patient, attempted, 673

Decline, 343 ; what it is, 221 (4). See Debul

Decree and duration of life, 61, rrr-zr5 ; decree of Allah, 56, 300

Decrepit age, 51; urine in, 670

Deepening of yellow colour in urine, significance of, 611

Deep-seated inflammations, treatment of, 1050

Deep ulceration, three rules for treatment, 1064

Deformities, scholastic explanation of, 720; agents which cause, 419; as com-
positional diseases, 205

Degrees of diseases (weakness, depravity, abolition, or hindrance to function), 488 ;
226

Delay in treatment, danger of, 918, 919

Delicate build of body denotes cold and dry temperament, 202

Delight depends on breath-type, 1099; effect on pulse, 601; erroneous view
regarding, 1097; relative, 1098; synonyms, 164 (II)

Demonstrative signs, definition, 452

Density of urine, definition, 627, 237a

Dentition, disorders of, 715

Depraved humours as cause of pain, 439; injurious effect of, 680

Depression, emotional, versus timidity, 1116

Depuration of breath, 236

Description of a pulse-beat, 516

Dessicants, 418

Desiccation of objects in the air, explained, 254

Desire, 759 (II) ; and breath, r48; due to loss of balance, r47 (c) ; not due simply
to need for nutriment, 185; the source of all life, 1086

Destiny, 22, 199; and freewill, rr5; decreed, rr3, 174, 115

Developmental errors, 199 (1)

Diagnosis: difficulty of ve primary and secondary symptoms, 460; of character-
type is like reading a foreign language, 280; of inflation, 505; of nature of
swelling in terms of its humour, 507

Diagnostic signs of temperaments, are ten, 465

Diagrams : illustrating the composition of glucose, 87; the incomprehensibility of
Ultimate Truth, appendix 2; the nature of disease, 278; of the faculties,
according to Avicenna, Arabic, Sufic, Jili, modern and scholastic philosophies, 1755

Diaphragmatic pleurisy, pulse in, 454

Diarrhoea: as cause of weakness, 445; in dentition, 715; protracted, effect on
pulse, 602

Dicrotic pulse, 546, 566, 222


INDEX 587


Diet : according to season, 760, 764; after cupping, 1036; as mode of treatment,
906, 295; during evacuant treatment, 944 ; for hot countries, 886; for lassitude,
834, 838, 842; for old age, 855; for people with good digestion, 783; in inflam-
matory lassitude, 851 ; in spontaneous lassitude, 842; inspring, 873 ; in winter,
876; of wet nurse, 699, 702, 708; reducing, 907; the head of healing, 759;
when travelling, 882

Dietetic errors : account for most diseases, 347; and culinary art, 248

Dietetics, 759-792, 248-253

Difference: basic, between the Canon and modern medicine (table), rg ; between
ancients and moderns is (a) outlook, (b) topic, 37 ; between instinct and reason
I52; between waters, 363 ; forms of anger, 739

Digestibility of foods, 195 (1)

Digestion: aided by sleep, 337; better in winter, 292; defective, fetid odour in,
648 ; defective, urine in, 628; depraved, urinary sediment in, 658 (7); dis-
turbance of, in infants, 725; good, urinary sediment in, 653; in stomach,
theory of, 247 ; poor, sign of moist temperament, 473; produced by heat of
members enveloping stomach, 100; sensu strictiori, 149; urine during, 628,
624; variations in urinary characters during, 238 ; within blood-vessels, 32 (d)

Dilated heart due: to joy, 199 (i. 3); to pain, 7b.

Discharges, abnormal, classified, 458; as sign of disease, 458

Discharge of waste matters, mechanism of, 188

Discontinuous functions, 106

Discussion as to whether brain or heart is more important, 118-122

Discutients, 830

Disease: a personal matter, r99 ; arising from drinking marshy water, 879 ; classi-
fication of the synonymous terms, 168 ; compositional, cause of, 207 ; definition
of, 192, 231; degrees of, 226; due to altered rhythm of the breath, 147 (b) ;
due to interference with flow of breath, 147 (a); due to retention of wastes,
394; expiative, 199 ;—germs carried underground, 177 ; in one organ involves
another, 225; is not in-formed matter, 166; may cure disease, 228; modern
and ancient views contrasted, 167, 273; not areaction, 167 ; retributive, r9qg ;
signs of, classified, 454; stages of, 222; stages of, bearing on treatment, 917 ;
symptoms and cause may be all one thing, 195 (e); transmission of, 229;
treatment of, general rules for, 905

Diseases : associated with variations of earth temperature, 779; of ground water,
178; benefited by cold atmosphere, 313; by hot atmosphere, 313; causing
deformity, 419; dependent on direction of wind, 314-317; following a very
hot and dry summer, 303 ; number of, limited in reality, 173 ; modification of, by
summer, 285; of autumn, 289; of cold season, 268; of expression, 286, 294,
800; of hot season, 269, 286; of infancy, 714; of southerly countries, 329 ;
of spring, 282, 282; of winter, 294; which cure diseases, examples, 228

Disfigurements, 221

Dishes, Arabian, 251

Disinclination for exercise, meaning of, 499.

Disintegration, 68, 142

Dislocation, 198 (3) ; definition, 201; treatment of, 1069

Disorderly irregularity of pulse, 564; pulse, 530

Disorders: of configuration, 198; of imagination, 181; of temperament defined,
198; of temperament, treatment of, 911, 925-933

Displacement of parts, causes, 424 ;

Disposition: 1094, 1123; St. Thomas on relation of, to quality of soul, 272 (2)
footnote ; see also under ‘‘ character’’; states of body and mind.

Distemper, definition of, 168, B. 1i

Distillation of water, 369, 898

Distinction between congenital and acquired temperament, 467

Diurnal variations of pulse, 225

Divergent views about relation between temperament and breath, 165

Diversity of perfection, intended, rog

Doctor should be himself healthy to feel pulse properly, 207

Doctrine : of imponderable elements, 73 ; considered statically, 73-82 ; dynamically,
83-89; of Mean, rog

Dominant element colours all parts of the being, 82

Douches, 1016; to increase fat, 871; over head, 1016; with herbs as showerbath,
414

Drastic purges, how to mitigate, 993

Drawn blood separates into four layers, 96


588 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Dreams: agreeable in equable temperament, 494; of fetid urine denote plethora
of faculty, 499 ; show character of dominant humour, 492, 500; show kind of
temperament, 492; show state of health, 492; warming oneself, 492; which
show plethora, examples, 498

Drinking at meals, 780; rules regarding, 780, 799

Drinking-water, see Water, and 898; precautions ve, on journeys, 898-902 ; puri-
fication when travelling, 7b.

Dropsical swelling, 241 (3)

Drowsiness, a sign that sanguineous humour is dominant, 500

Drug treatment, based on elaborate considerations, 37, 277, 1119-1121

Drugs and pulse, 225; cordials, action of, 1119 sqq.

Drugs, list of, in Canon, which are still used, Appendix 3

Dry air defined, 250

Dry atmosphere, effect of, 278; on body, 313

Dry cupping for pain of flatulence, 1083

Dry hiccough, 455

Dry intemperament, rectification of, 867

Dryness, action of, 153; as cause of pain, 432; of nerves, 839 (iii) ; part played by,
in digestion and nutrition, 153

Dry skin, 839 ‘


Dry stool, 675
Dry temperament, degrees of, in the various members, 50; in regard-to purgation,


981 ; signs of, from the form, 481
Dual functions of bile and atrabilious humour, 89
Dusty air, effect on body, 839
Dwelling, choice of, 254
Dynamic aspect of matter and form, 66-72
Dyscrasias, 38
Dysentery from drinking ‘ lead’’-water, 375
Dysmenorrheea, treatment by cupping, 1033 (vi)


E


Ear, diseases of, in infants, 722


Earache, in infants, 722
Earth: a lung, 775; breathes out vapours, 255; definition and characters, 21;


dominates in old persons, 62; in winter, heat concealed in, 256; a great
stomach (Paracelsus), 777; not the literal earth, 73; provides firmness and
rigidity to parts, 679; purpose of, 21

East winds: effect, 307 (e), 316

Easterly countries, effect on inhabitants, 330

Eastern city, life of, a picture of life within the body, 239

Ebb and flow, a law, 32 (d)

Education up to thirteen years of age, 733-735

Effect : of atmosphere on colour of hair, 474; of conception on lactation, 708; of
diseases, primary and secondary, 459-464

Effeminate build denotes dominance of serous humour, 500

Effete matter of gall-bladder, what it is, 82

Efficient causes, 13 (2) ; defined, 58; are the faculties, 77; in the human being, 72;
of humours, 106

Ego, types of, 164 (1V)

Elderly persons may take wine, 810

Electric potential, change of, versus breath, 142

Elementary bodies have not capacity for life, 1089


Elementary tissues, the, 116

Elements: all four in each, 19; and functions in body, 78; and mental states,
78, 160 (III) ; and systems of body, 78 ; are virtual, not material, 19; defined,
19; doctrine of, 29, 55-ro8 ; five versus five ethical principles, 79 ; formula of
constitution in terms of, 772 (2) ; four form a cosmogony, 29 ; ‘‘ four, or five?”
20; light and heavy, 20; imponderable, a fundamental conception with
Avicenna, 23; examples, list of, 309 ; lose their individuality in the compound,
30; position in nature, 53; synonymous words, 19; the mighty servants of
God, 55; various manifestations of, 309

Elephantiasis, 199 (ii), 424; is endemic in Alexandria, 229 (3)

Emaciation : cf. debul. 221 (4) ; morbid, 7b. ; remedy for, 870; a sign of dominance
of atrabilious humour, 500

Embryo, source of nutriment, 708


INDEX 589


Emesis : applicable to thin persons, 956 ; articles of food which assist, 1003; bye-
effects and their treatment, 1012; contra-indications, 999 ; disadvantages of,
1010 ; effects on blood-state, 1117; evil effects of, 1011; failure of, ill-effects
of, 1006; food and, 1002; ill-effects of, 1007; influence of, on breath-type,
1111; not to be habitually used for repletion, 1011 ; objects of, 1000 ; proce-
dure, 1001 ; proper time for, 1008; symptomatic bye-effects, 1012; what is
meant by the term, 256.

Emetics which are also purges, 958

Emotion: defined, 159

Emotional: depression, effect of, 1114; disturbance as desiccant, 448; make-up,
formule for, 164 (II) ; state and pulse, 518 (4) ; states as calefacient, 415 (iv) ;
states as basis of occult phenomena, 162 (iv)

Emotions: and breath, r48; 3414-346, 1098; and humoral formula, r6o0 (5); and
pulse, 225, 233; change quality of mother’s milk, 700; details regarding, r60,
1092-1118 ; effect on body, 345; interact with intellect, 165 (I); interact
with reason, 165 (III) ; interact with Will, 165 (III); list of, 164 (IJ); list
of words descriptive of, ib.; as refrigerants, 416 (6); objects of, 159; part
played by imagination, 1118; physical effects of, 160 (5); relation to blood-
state, 160 (4); relation to elements, 160 (4); tabulated, r60 (3); theory of,
in relation to breath, elements, humours, 160, 1090 sqq.

Empty pulse, 526

Enzorema, 662 (last paragraph)

Encumbrance due to obstruction, 502

Endemic elephantiasis, 229 (7) ; endemic goitre, 229 (D)

Endowments ; one is at expense of another, 165 (IV)

Environment, kinds of, 165 (III)

Enemas: 1014; advantages of, 1014; best time for, 1b.; for old persons, 859 ;
materials for, 258; modern usage, 259

Environment, kinds of, 165 (III)

Epilepsy, urine in, 632

Epileptic attack: warded off by evacuant treatment, 953; annulled by peony, 350

Epistaxis a good sign in internal inflammations, 512

Equable: scope of term in medicine, 31; temperament, definition, 30; tem-
perament, evidences of, 494; — functions in, 488; — what it is and what it
is not, 31, pulse, 529

Equal pulse, 529

Equilibrium, the ideal mean, 82

Equitation, 739

Equivalents of the heavy elements, 20; of the light elements, 1b.

Erroneous views as to primary source of functions, 141 ; of ancients only apparent, 6.

Errors of development, tables, 199 (i)

Erysipelas, definition, 209

Essence, definition, 58

Essential : causes of disease, examples, 232; considerations in the art of preserving
health, 688

Ether, and Yin and Yang, 103; — of the constitution, 8r; (ether = light).

Ethical principle of man, 109

Evacuation : amount to go to, 985; choice of, eleven factors, 934; choice of time
for, 935; five rules regarding, 985; of humours, modes of, 936 ; of pathological
matter, 395; of retained matter, effects of, 396; as cause of weakness, 445

Every animal has its own temperament, 45

Evidence of proper functioning of organs, 453

Example of stage of cycle towards visibility, 95

Excessive evacuations, effect on body, 397

Excrementitious atrabilious humour, varieties of, 92

Excrementitious: fluids, 69 (b) ; — form of atrabilious humour, 90; — serous
humour, 74. See Superfluities

Exercise : after meals, 763; amount of, rules regarding, 747; an evacuant, 737 ;
appropriate for elderly persons, 863; as part of regimen to prescribe,
254; definition of, 593; degrees of, 334; duration of, 744; effect
on body, 838, 834; effect on pulse, 225; excessive, effect of, 416 (4);
features of, in effect on body, 333 ; for lassitude, 835; for old age, 854, 863 ;
for wet-nurse, 708; general discourse, 736; graduation of, 748 ; in hot intem-

eraments, 866; in relation to meals, 776; in spring, 873; lack of, as cause of
inflammation, 431; moves the humours, 112; of infants, described, 712;
precautions ve, before taking, 745; regulation according to season, 746; rules


590 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


and regimen, 254, 747; value of, 242; various forms of, 738, 739; why
necessary, 737

Exhaustion from excessive purgation, remedies for, 991

Expansion of parts, agents which prevent, 426

Expiative causes of disease, 20r ;

Expression, diseases of, 286, 294, 300; sign of state of mind, 492

Expulsive faculty, 150; versus dryness, 157

External anatomy, a guide to internal function, 127

External and internal features of body belong together, 25 : P

External: senses, 175; signs of hot intemperament, 865; swellings, signs of, 506

Extracorporeal causes, 234, sqq. :

Extramundane influences on human body, explained, ro8

Extraneous causes of colour change, 480; extraneous heat from putrescence, 358

Eye, diseases of, in infancy, 721; colour of, a guide to the temperament, 477, 282.
Eye of Taoist: i.e. mystical perception of the truths of Nature, 28z


F

j, symbol of “ form,” 56-72

‘Face-powder, scented, 897

Factors concerned in production of the pulse, 552

Factors which destroy the body, 681; which govern the healthiness of a place, 318

Facts, what they are and are not, 72; Appendix 2

Faculties : as efficient causes, 77 ; depend on flow of breath, 442 ; have not priority,
but relation, 121 ; in relation to formation of humours, 107 (II) ; of generation,
145; to foster, in treating a case, 687; versus function, 136

Faculty: alterative (al-mughayyira), 1731, 149; animal (psychical'**), (an-naf-
saniyya), 174; attractive (al-jadhiba), r3z, 147; apprehensive, 180 ; cogitative,
179; expulsive (al-dafi‘a), r3z, 150; generative (al-muwallida), r3z, 145;
growing (auxetic) (al-murabbiyya), 73z, 143; natural (al tabi‘iyya), 737, 142;
nutritive (al-mughadhiyya), r3z, 148; perceptive (al-hiss), 176; reasoning
(siydsa), 176 ; retentive (al-masika), 137, 148 ; three kinds of, 137 ; vital (al-haya-
waniyya), 187, 729, 140 ; weakness of =hypofunction, plethora of =hyperfunction
136, 628

Fading pulse, 547, 568

Feces, characters of, in health and disease, 675, 676

Fallacious argument ve errors of diagnosis from external features, 25

False occult phenomena, 162 (II); false thirst, treatment of, 798

Familiarity with things goes with ignorance about them, 1127

Famine and plenty, ill-effects, 761

Fat and oil of body reveals temperament, 468

Fat of blood nourishes kidneys, 104

Fate: 20r ; Chinese proverbs on, 173; as destiny, 686; not untrue but pursued
too far, 1b.; explanation of, rr3; life-term fixed, 686; of food-residues, 111

Fatigue in travelling, 885; fatigue-pain, 434 (5)

Fatness means moist and cold temperament, 202

Fats, action of, 423

Fattening regimen, 870

Fatty : food, objections to, 794; sediment in urine, 658 (3); stools, 675 (3)

Fear: breath in, 344; earth element, 78; effects of on body, 346 (d); effects on
body and mind, 1116; effect on pulse, 601; objects of, 159; refrigerant, 416 ;
synonyms, 764 (II)

Feeblemindedness in offspring after cupping parents, 1032

Feeble pulse, 528, 561

Feel of patient, 465

aoe ‘eee Bae blood and embryo, relations between 126; sperm, part played
by, 679 i

Fermentation : in humours, 32 (e) ; in stomach from bad food, 767

Ferruginous waters, use of for baths, 408; effect on body, 384

Fetid odour of urine, 646, 648

Fevers: blood-letting in, rules for, 1029; faulty diet predisposes to, 791; in
infants, 732; pulse in, 233; urine in, 238

Few able to interpret the secrets of the autopsy, 127

Fictitious appetite, 761

Fidgeting, sign of gaseous plethora, 504

Fig-water, distinction from urine, 674

Filaments in urine, 671


INDEX 5gl


Filtration of water through sand, 898

Final cause, defined, 59, 18 (4); of disease includes retiibutive causes, 201; of
humours, 106

Finger-nails, a sign of the temperament, 466

Fire: and breath, 139 ; characters of, 24; definition of, 24; some equivalents, 78 ;
from air, 237; nature of, 24; penetrative power of, 24; provides maturative
power of body, 679; St. Thomas on, in Sum. Theol., 24; 78, i., p. 77. Note:
“ digestive fire ’’ (Charaka'**) ; innate heat,

First period of life, 52

First principles have not capacity for life, 1088

First stage of digestion, 101

Fishing, a form of exercise, 744

Fistula formation, 1068

Fixed and bound chemical elements, 90

Fixed states of body, 166

Flatulence in infants, 726

Flatulent pain, relief of, 1081; treatment of by dry cupping, 1083

Flesh : akin to blood, therefore does not need spaces or cavities, 183 ; description of,
116 (9) ; list of components, ib. ; receives but does not give, 120; used synony-
ees with ‘nature,’ “ vice,’ and “ passibility’’ (i.e. perception of pain)
in ele

Fleshiness denotes a kind of temperament, 468; denotes hot and moist tempera-
ment, 468

Fleshy sediment, in urine, 658 (2)

Flickering pulse, 545

Flow of humour, sign of loss of continuity, 513

Fluids falsified to simulate urine, 603 (12)

Fluids of the body: circulate in B.V., C.T. spaces, as “‘ eau de constitution ’’ of the
tissues, aS various substances, 723 (c); versus humours, rr6

Foam of blood, 82; of urine, significance, 649-651

Feetor as a “ disfigurement,” 221 (3)

Fogs, effect on mind, 279

Food and drink, 347-392; effect on pulse, 5838; regimen, 759-814; should be pre-
scribed, 254

Food: and emesis, 1002; best for people, 195, 769; cycle, in terms of visibility,
77; effect on body, 3857; for one’s physique, 770; ‘“‘ hot’ and “ cold,’”’meaning
of 351, 353; must be in apposition with gastric mucosa, 185 (1) ; of the nation


the best, 769; quality of, effect on body, 347 (a); — stuffs classified, 359 ;
. substance of, effect on body, 847 (d); value according to amount of residue,
195 (4).


Foods: and medicines in intemperaments, 493; choice of, according to rate of
absorption, 909; classification according to humour produced, 195 (4); to
quality of chyme, 360; depurative properties, 195 (4); making bad chyme,
360; physiological value, 195; which increase alvine discharge, 255.

Footwear, when travelling in cold countries, 894

Forces of nature = efficient causes, 7I

Foreign heat, meaning of, 203; stands for bacterial action, r4r, 283, 485; effect
on temperament, 483 é

Form = property (active or passive), 349, 1123; and assimilation, 347, 348; is
motor, and not breath, 52; is not a quality, 348, 265

Form (f/f): of food, part played by, 348; of medicament, part played by, 356 (B)

Form of members, and temperament, 481

Formal cause, 13 (3); of humours, 106

Formicant pulse, 542, 572

Formule describing the facts of human “ nature,” 150

Four periods of life, 51

Fourth digestion, 110, 277

Fracture, best diet for, 1061; general treatment, 1061

Frailty, due to intemperament, 230

Freckles, 221 (2) (iii)

Freewill and destiny, 115

Frequent bathing, effects of, 403

Friction, 749, 750; in the nights, 750; objects of, 749; procedure for, 750;
restorative, 750; time for, 749; wood-cut illustrating, 749

Frontispiece referred to, 209

Frostbite, 428, 894-896; measures to remedy, 891

Frothy stool, 675


592 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Frozen fruits, 895 songs

Fruit: value of, objections to, 790; nutritious, 759; various, in dishes, 25Z

Fuliginous component of breath, 238

Full pulse, 526; causes of, 573 :

Function: coterminous with structure, 95; hindrances to in diagnosis, 463; kinds
of interference with, 458; — testing via urine, 239; versus faculty, 136

Functional capacity : of liver, urine in, 621, 626 (1), 658 (1), 238; of organs, 82;
of organs is a time-relation, 272 (2); of spleen and kidney, 82

Functional efficiency, meaning of, re temperament, 488

Functions: of atrabilious humour, 87; of body, 185; of serous humour, 73, 106

Furfuraceous sediment, 658 (1) ‘

Furunculosis in infants, 731


; G

Galactogogues, list of, 705

Gall-bladder bile is effete matter, 82

Gall-stone colic, 393

Ganglia, characters, and treatment (by a blow), 216

Gangrene: bone involvement in, treatment of, 1059; excision of healthy margin,
1058; from frostbite, treatment, 896; treatment, 1057, 1060

Garlic and lettuce, fate in body, 356, A, ii, (a)

Gaseous distension, signs of, 504: — matter in swellings, 431: — swellings, 219;
treatment of, 1052

Gastrectasis, 440

Gazelle pulse, 539

Generation and corruption, 142; versus temperament, 28

Generation compared with cheese-making, 125

Generative organs, 123 (4)

Gentleness, goes with dry temperament, 492

Genu valgum, 199 (i)

Geographical position a factor in the choice of kind of evacuation, 934 (9)

Germination of seeds, description in terms of ‘‘ elements,’’ 87

Gestures: reveal kind of humour dominant, 501, 280, 282; rapid, denote hot
temperament, 492

Ginger, for old people, 856

Gingivitis, 715

Glandular swelling, v. ganglia, 216

Glutinous medicines, effect of, 1044 (iii)

Goal of life, 241

Goats, urine of, 673

Golf-stick : see Polo, 739

Good-humoured, real meaning of, 68

Good memory, a sign of dry temperament, 492

Good power of observation, significance of, 492

Good prognostic signs from urine, 634

Goose-skin, meaning of, 823

Gout attack warded off by evacuant treatment, 953

Graduated exercises, 748

Grapes, 796

Gravel, 658 (8)

Green, shades of, 614; stools, 675 (3)

Grey hair, cause of, 473

Grief, effect of, on pulse, 601

Griping in infants, 726

Gritty urinary sediment, 658 (8)

Ground air, movement of, 775 ; and choice of house, 332

Ground-water, diseases associated with, 178 ; movement of, 176

Growth, 3; faculty of, 143; nature of, ib.


H


Habits a factor in choice of mode of evacuation, 934 (10)
Habits and customs account for cupping, 262
Hematuria, 658 (9)

Heemopoietic centres, what they are, 72


INDEX 593


Hair: and nails as excrement, 111; affections of, 221 (1); as guide to kind of
temperament, 470; is ether, 50; — like sediment, 658 (6); rate of growth
indicates kind of temperament, 470

Hand : position of when feeling pulse: patient’s, 518; doctor’s, 206 (3)

Hands: the clue to the state of the body, 452 (heading) ; the most attempered, 36

Hard inflammatory masses, treatment of, 1051

Hard pulse, cause of, 557, 562

Harmful effects of evacuants, treatment of, 943

Harmonious succession of events, meaning of, 122

Harmonious, definition of, 261 (footnote)

Harmony between various forms of doctrine of elements, 29

Harsh pulse: causes, 565; due to inflammation in tender parts, 600 (4)

Harshness of body, causes of, 422

Hastening treatment, danger of, 920

Head, veins of, for venesection, 1023 r

Headache as a disease, 195 (d); 170

Headaches, “ cold,’’ showerbaths for, 444

Healing, science of, 678, 285, sqq.

Healing: power, 162, 1; 163, lii; miraculous, 163, iii.c; of solution of continuity,
cause of delayed, 203; through vitality, 287

Health: a harmony of the humours, 1r7 ; conditional on pure air, 240; requires
persistent proper proportions in humoral formula, 97; evidence of balance
between inflow and outflow, 398 ; (illustrated by diagram in 278); not a rigid
state, but a range, 689; of doctor must be good, 207, 281; preservation of,
essential considerations, 688 ; principles of maintaining, 685 ; signs of, classified,
453, 494; healthy air, characters of 274-277

Hearing, 175

Heart: and arteries the receptacle of the breath, 515; is both corporeal and non-
corporeal, 25; centre of body, 123; centre of life, of breath, 145; enlargement
of, 1116 ; gives rise to breath, 124; is more than the anatomical organ, 123 ; is part
of a composite, 25; seat of formation of the rarefied humours, 163 ; soundness
of body conditional on soundness of heart, 123, 119; source of all faculties of
breath, 172; source of all functions ,141; meaning of, three schools, 129 (8) ;
root of faculties, 119 ; types of, 164 (IV)

Heat: action of, 190; and cold, action of in formation of humours, 107 (I) ; heating
foods, 788; exposure to great, when travelling, 886; from putrescence
(extraneous), 358; necessary to attractive faculty, 156; necessary to move-
ment, 155; regulation of, 203; use of, in treating disease, 911

Heavens, the seven and the twelve, 54

Heaviness, sense of, a sign of obstructions, 502; significance of, 499

Heavy elements and light elements, 77

Heavy foods, correctives for, 789 .

Hectic fever not as painful as tertian, 432; bath treatment of, 407; pulse in, 224

Hellebore, uses of, 926

Hemetemesis from protracted emesis, 1012

Hepatic disease, urinary sediment in, 658 (1)

Hepatic insufficiency, urine in, 621, 626 (1)

Herbage decays if dry season after dry winter, 304

Herbal baths, 408; decoctions, distinction from urine, 674; douching with, 414
719, 732

Heredity, diseases of (errors of development), 199 ; see Malconformation

Hernia in infants, 728

Heterorhythm of pulse, 534

Hiccough, 427, 455; in infants, 725; post-emetic, 1012

High resistance (of pulse), effect, 232 ; clinical causes, 232

High altitudes, living at, 324

Hippocrates quoted, 876, 956

Hirudiniform urinary sediment, 658 (10) _

Histology: and function, 725; application of doctrine of four elements to, 953
importance of, 911 (footnote); of an organ the visible sum-total of chemical
units,

Homosencley of feces, 676; of urinary sediment, 654

Honey confections not good, 796

Hope, effect on temperament, 346

Hopefulness, meaning of, 492 . .

Hot: atmosphere, effect of, 278; on body, 813; baths, action of, 402 (2) ; baths,

29


aot THE CANON OF MEDICINE


bad effects of, 407; effect on pulse, 596; countries, effect of, 319 ; explanation
of, in regard to poisons, 483; food, meaning of, 351; intemperament, con-
genital, 864; ditto, physical evidences, 865 ; ditto, regimen for, 864; poisons,
203 (3), 483; pulse, 527; season, diseases of, 269 ; temperament, degrees of,
in various organs, 47; ditto, functions in, 488 ; ditto, purgation in, 977, 986 ;
ditto, shown by jelal actions, 490; ditto, signs from the form, 481; water,
action of, 390

House: material used for, 8382; types of, choice of, 332

Human being: tabulation of distinctive characters, 129, 272 (2) ; Buddhist view, 80

Human life always the same at bottom, r4

Humanitarian motives for practising medicine, 46 (ii)

Human nature is in-formed matter, 63

Humectants, 417

Humidity of air, effect of, r8r ; choice for house, 332 (10)

Humoral: disorders, venesection for, 1018 ; formula, 272 (2)

Humours: agitated by southerly winds, 315; are quasi-material, 176; as “© prin-
ciples’ of the body, 176; definition of, 67, 176 ; decomposing, cause harsh
pulse, 565; discharge of — natural and unnatural, 207; how extracted from
body: by purgation, 966, by emetics, and by desiccant medicines via nostrils,
969; immature, remedy for, according as they are intra- (848) or extra- (846)
vascular ; in autumn, 287, 288; influenced by wine, 802; inrainy season, 299 ;
in summer, 284; in winter, 293; kind of, diagnosis of, in lassitude, 844; move
in spring, 281; not the same as humidities (rutiba), Appdx.; as body fluids,
67; oxidised by waking state, 338; which are extravascular are amenable to
purges, 968

Hunger, 185; to quell, 884

Hurried pulse, 528; cause, 559

Husky voice, from drinking rain-water, 373

Hydrocephalus, 719

Hydromel, 804

Hygiene: of dentition, 713; of infancy, 690-713 ; of Jactation, 709; of period after
dentition, 710; science of, 678

Hyperfunction, 136

Hypofunction, 136

Hysterectomy, why harmful, 147 (a)


iL

Ichorous sediment of urine, 658 (5)

Icy climate, travelling to, regimen for, 889

Ideal temperament in man, 34

Ideal underlying: both the study and practice of medicine, 292, 294, 300, appdx. 2 ;
Moorish architecture, 5

Idiosyncrasies against food, 768

Ignorance about fundamental matters, 1128, which are familiar, 1127

I King, a great book, 83

Ill-effects on infant, of over-suckling, 709

Ill-health due to change of rhythm, 97, 98

Illness ; precedes signs, in the case of plethora of faculty, 499 ; a relation to radiant
life and breath, 231 ; severity of, a factor in treatment, 916

Images, source of, in imagination 15z

Imagination: 178; effect on emotions, 1118; intellectual, 157; makes humours
move, 112; position in chart, 761, B; rational, r5z ; scholastic view, 151; seat
ree ; sensuous, 157; versus apprehensive faculty, 180; vivid if breath dry,
11 ;

Imaginative : faculty, 179; person, meaning of, 492

Imponderables form a bond throughout nature, 76

Importance of soil, re bacteria, 209

Impressions : maternal, paternal, 345; on foetus, 345

Impure water, purification of, when travelling, 899-902

Inability to nurse baby, 699

Incessant talking, explanation of, 490

Incisions, rules concerning, 1056

Incompatibilities between drugs and constitution, 29r; between foods, 195 (4),
672, 795 ; between foods and constitution, 295; to be considered in prescribing
regimen, 296

Increase in size of body, causes, 428

Incurable headache, 227


INDEX 595


Indigestion the origin of all sickness, 759; secondary effects, 762

Indisposition, definition of, 169, B, ii (b)

Individuality, what it is, 1130

Induration, 213; of skin, 839

Inebriation : how to procure, 811; cause of rapid, 811; preventatives, 811

Inebriety : agents which remove, 818; correctives for, 812; stages of, in regard to
mind, 1106; state of mind in, 1107

Inequable temperament, definition of, 30; evidences of, 496

Inequality of pulse-beats, 529

Infancy, definition of, 52; diseases of, 714; hygiene of, 709, sqq.; urine in, 670

Infant: bathing, 694; cord, treatment of, 690; hygiene of, 690-713 ; must be put
on skin-rugs when it crawls, 712; skin, treatment of, 691, sleeping quarters,
693; treatment via wet-nurse, 714

Infant’s blood, source of, 127; mouth injured by bad nipples, 700

Infatuation, meaning of, 492

Infection from soil, 777 : transmission of disease by, 229

Infirmities versus disease, 10

Inflammation: signs of, 508

Inflammative lassitude, treatment, 851

Inflammatory: masses: effect on pulse, 600; four stages of, 210; swellings:
causes of, 431; guides to treatment of, 1048; ditto, due to immediate causes,
1050; treatment of, 1047; with ulceration, treatment of, 1053

Influence of atmosphere on body, 234 sqq.

Informative faculty, 145

Infrigidants, effects of, 1044 (iii)

Infrigidation associated with desiccation, as factor in treatment, 912

Injuries to which body is exposed, 680

Innate cold, why non-existent, 486

Innate heat: a factor in treatment, 980; and exercise, 384; and moisture, 33, ii;
and undue sleep, 340; and vitality, 203; dispersed by hot bath, 407; effect
of bath on, 403 ; effect of repose on, 335; function of, 484; increased by food,
347 (2); in youth, 52, 53; loss of progressive, 683; part played by, 484;
strangled by exercise, and repose, 416 (4) ; substance of, increased by certain
foods, 356, A, ii (a) ; destroyed by intense cold, 894, 930; versus breath, r4r

Innocent creature of God, 72

Insanity and malaria, 228

Insight into eternal truths, degrees and modes of, r7 ; versus intuitional knowledge,
18; Appendix 2

Insomnia, bad for bodily state, 389 ; meaning of, 487

Instinct, 180, 153; definition of, 152, 180; difference from reason, 152

Instinctive actions, 153; character reading, 163 (i)

Intellect, interactions of, 165 (1) ; definition of, r6r A; relation to corporeal organs,
r6r, A

Intellectual imagination. r5r

Intemperaments, action on breath, 448 ; cause of weakness in, 448 ; cause of pain in,
432; classification of, 38, 41; due to retentions, 394; from matter, are twe-
fold, 43 ; may lead to asthenia, 443 ; table of signs of, 493; urinary characters,
238; various regimen for, 864

Interactions between various aspects of soul, 165

Interests, examples of, 164 (IV)

Interior senses, 176

Intermissions of pulse, 229 ; Chinese prognosis from, 2b,

Intermittent pulse, 538

Internal inflammatory masses, treatment of, 1054

Internal symptoms can only be discussed “ specially,’ 464

Internal ulceration, treatment of, 1065

Interrelations between faculties and qualities, 151

Intertrigo, in infants, 731

Intimate structure of body always changing, r2r

Intoxication: effect on organs ; treatment of, 809

Intuition, definition of, 767, F

Intuitive knowledge, scholastic definition of, r6r F

Invisible elements and visibilia, 74, Appendix 2

Involuntary healing power, 162 (iii)

Inward enlightenment, 13

Iridescence in urine, 672 :

Irregular pulse, 529, 535-538, 546; modern, 229 ; Chinese, 229


207


596 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


‘Irregularities of pulse, components of, 537
Irritability due to indigestion, 774 .
Itching, dreaming of, denotes plethora of faculties, 499


J

Jactitation, 455; cause, 457 A : : : .

Jaundice, due to stone, 393 ; nota disease, strictly speaking, r7z ; sign of, in tongue,
479 ; urine in, 613, 622 ,

Jelal actions, list of 82, 490; jelal-jemal, 345 (footnote) ; 82, 126, 138, 1, 275

Jerking pulse, 539 :

Jili’s classification of faculties ; diagram, 155 (iv)

Joannitius’ classification of symptoms and signs, 200

Joint-pains, in autumn, 289 (iii) ; oil-bath for, 443

Joints, loss of continuity in, prognosis in, 514

Joint-troubles in the aged, remedy for, 861

Joy, definition of, 1095; effect on pulse, 601; a humectant, 417; synonyms,
r64 (II

omeeny Penciinene of, versus young adults, 158; versus old age, 62


K

Ka’ak al-’Id, 257 (bun)

Kabab, 796 (roast meat)

Keen observation of Nature a characteristic of Avicenna, 14, 292

Kettle silent, 66

Kidney, abscess in, 637

Kidneys nourished by fat of blood, 104

Knowledge : common to Avicenna and modern medicine, 37 ; perfect, how to reach,
12; to be gained from study of urine, 239; what it is, and what not, rz,
Appendix 2

Kunafah, 257 (vermicelli cake)


L

Labile versus fixed states, 166

Lactation, duration of, 710; rules for, 696-711; regimen during, 16

Large and small cycles, 105

Large pulse, causes of, 567 ; list of variants, 557

Lassitude: after exercise, treatment of, 830; arefactive, 826; ditto, treatment,
833; bathing, 836; bleeding, 837; desiccative, 813, 826; diet, 834, 838;
exercise, 835 ; forms of, 427, 822; inflammatory, 825, 851; ditto, treatment,
832 ; in travelling, 885; regimen for, 840; sign of moist intemperament, 498 ;
spontaneous, treatment of, 840 ; tensive, 824, 831 ; two modes of, 827 ; ulcerose,
823, 830. In general, 822, 434 (5)

Latent disease, 222

Latin version of Canon has many merits, 38, but best understood in conjunction with
the Arabic, 7b.

Latitude and climate, 307 (a)

Law: of action and passion, 89; of attraction in breath and nature, 1113, of com-
pulsory visibility, 88, 91, 95; the pivot of the opening and closing operations in
Nature, 88

Laxative foods for old people, 857

Lead pipes damage the water, 375

Leanness denotes hot dry temperament, 202

Leeches: after-treatment of, 1042; areas from which they drain blood, 1038;
characters of, 1037; conditions in which they are of value, 1043; in water,
385; in drinking water, 879; procedure of application, 1089; removal of,
1041 ; sites of application, 1040

Leek-green bile, 84

Leprosy and fish, 795 (2) ; two kinds of, 795

Lessening of friction, is the object-of lymph, 73

Lethargy, 336-340, 815

Liability to illness, regimen for, 869

Lienteric diarrhoea, 199 (i), 961; in autumn, 289 (i)

Life : as viewed by St. Thomas, lines preceding 136, 161 ; —- breath, concentrated
round solar plexus, 257; compared to lamp, 681; depends on innate heat,
33 (ii) ; definition, r29 (5); meaning of, 294, Appendix 2; original source of,


INDEX 597


1086 ; principle, 734; ditto, breaks up into similar life, 147, (b) ; ditto, cycles
of, ro7; ditto, in relation to vegetative faculties, 142; ditto, versus vital
faculty, 129; spent with sad or glad breath, 1094; use of adult, right, 24r

Ligaments, difference between true and false, 116 (5)

Light in summer is intense, 244; effect on functions, 112

Li Ki, 56, 83, 196, 257

Limbs, how to remedy malformed, 821; to strengthen, 7).

Limits of range of temperament, 33

Link between soul, passions, temperament, rro

Liniments, two kinds, 1015

Liquorice-stick, for teething, 713

Lisping goes with liability to gastro-intestinal catarrh, 972

List: of data to go on for diagnosis of dominance of humours, 500; of drugs in the
Canon which are still used, Appendix 3; of the four humours, 71 ; of necessaries,
17, 18; of words descriptive of emotions, 164 (II); of terms applied to mental
faculties, 164

Literal errors do not vitiate the Canon, r6

Literary treasures of Arabs, their fate, 4

Liveliness, meaning of, 492

Liver: seat of formation of dense humours, 163 ; signs of functional.adequacy, 458 ;
state of, informed of by urine, 605, 621, 626 (1), 658 (1), 238

Locality: and pulse, 582; of residence, effect on body, 318-332

Locomotion, power of, 184

Lodgment of atrabilious humour between liver and stomach, 108

Long pulse, 521

Loss of continuity, causes of, 428; signs of, 518

Loss of sensation denotes loss of continuity, 513

Lote tree, 705

Lovable disposition with equable temperament, 495

Love, effects on pulse, 601

Lower limbs, venesection from, 1026

Low-lying countries, effect of on health, 326

Lower reason: definition, 159 (ii); versus reason, 152

Low resistance (B.P.), clinical causes of, 23r

Lullaby, 695, 698, 712, 2404

Lumbago, 824

Lumbar pain, urine in, 630

Luminosity of urine, 620

Luxation of member, signs of, 518 (4)

Lymph, transformation into blood, 73


m, symbol of matter, 56-72

mfa, and the laws relative thereto, 64

MF, symbol of human being, 64

Macrobius on lactation, 696

Macrocosm and microcosm, I00

Macroglossia, 199 (ii)

Malady defined, 168 A; versus symptom, examples, 194

Malaria cures general paralysis, 228

Malconformation, 199

Male sperm, part played by, 679

Malformations, meaning of, 911

Man affected by meat he eats; animals by herbs they eat, 304

Manner of evacuation, rules for, 934-946

Maritime countries, effect on inhabitants, 327

Marshes, effect of, 307 (9)

Marshy water, 371; how to make drinkable, 876 ;
Massage, 749-750 ; for lassitude, 834; for old age, 854, 862; for ulcerose lassitude,
830, 846; of infants while washing, 695; of the breasts, 705

Massive build shows cold and moist temperament, 202

Mass production versus isolated craftsmanship, 49

Mastery over “ fate,’’ 165 (IV) ‘

Material: cause, 13 (i) ; diseases, 274 (diseases of ‘‘ matter’’) ; of humours, 106
Matrix of breath, 1100


598 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Matter, St. Thomas on, 65; and form, doctrine of, 56-72; and form and life, 1089
(note to), 265; would cease if God stopped doing, 83; used synonymously
with humours, 205; six kinds of: the four humours, gas and water, 208

Maturation, explanation of, 149 ; of abscess, 210 ; time of, for evacuation of, 935 (4)

Meals divided into portions, 766 ; number in a day, 7174 ; size of, 765 ; their com-
position, in prescribing regimen, 254; to be divided in certain people, 776

Meaning of hot and cold, in regard to drugs, 37

Medizval successes not coincidences, but genuine, 33 : .

Medicaments, four orders or degrees of, 855; fate of in body, classification, 356

Medicinal treatment, 910; four rules for, 911 Wise

Medicine as a career, 46 (i) ; an art in the strict sense, 44; as an expiation, 47 (4) ;
as an exterior life, 46 (i); as an intellectual pursuit, 46 (i) (a); as an interior
life, 47 (2) ;. cannot furnish proofs for things in other domains, 16 ; definition
of, 6; definition (Joannitius), 45; highest aim for practising, 48; imperfect
without scholastic philosophy, 22 ; pursuit of as devotion to God, 47 (c) ; scope
of, as profession, 46; speculative and practical, 7, 678 ' :

Medicines, potentialities, 854; selection of, 910; types of, in treating intempera-
ments, 493 ‘

Members: covering internal organs, 180; derived from sperm heal differently to
those derived from blood, 128; derived from humours, 114; made of heavy
elements, 25; table of, 115; which comes first, 171

Membranes, functions of ; are insensitive, 116 (8)

Memory, 182; scholastic definition, 154; sensuous, 154; rational, 154 :

Menstrual ; blood utilised in four directions, 126; excretion, 240; flow, regulation
of, 820; fluid, 240

Menstruation, regulation of, 820

Mental: anxiety, 455; environment and regimen, 254; factor in treatment, 922 .
faculties, classification of, 155 (V); ditto, in equable temperament, 494; lists
of terms of, 164; processes corresponding to natural faculties, r3z; states and
pulse, 563; states and refrigerants, 416 (6)

Mesnavi, earth warp and weft, 24 ; heaven is male, 20; kettle silent, 66 ; God abases
and exalts, 68, 83, 241

Mess of cooked pomegranate seed, 257

Metabolic processes as a pageant or procession, 93

Metaphysics, Catholic definition of, 22; necessary for medicine, 5z 268

Metaphysical dance, 99; ocean, 88

Metre of pulse, 532-534, 218-220,

Microscopic structure not co-terminous with C,N, P, 5S, 96

Military exercises, 739 (ii)

Milk, cow’s, becomes toxic if animal frightened or exhausted, 112

Milk, first, to be drained, 697 ; in dietary for old persons, 855; of cow affected by its
temper, 112; quality of, changed by emotions, 700; too scanty, 704; too
thick, 702, 706; too thin, 703; unpleasant odour, remedy for, 706

Milky water, action of, 388; antidote for, 899

Mind: kinds of activity of, 161; list of adjectives pertaining to, 164 (IV); of
brutes, 78 ; mind-soul-spirit, 129 ; of liver-cell, 119; should be soothed when


giving purges, 977; states of, and breath, 341; types and the elements, 78 ;
scholastic definition of, r6z


Mineral baths, action of; list of, 408
Miraculous: cures, 147 (e) (explanation of) ; healing, 163 (iii) (c)


Misquotations and mistranslations account for disrepute of ancients, 6
Mistletoe-green urine, 626 (2)


Mists and marshes, effect of, 807 (g)

Mitigation of after-effects of purgatives, 985

Modern and medieval medicine contrasted, 268, 269

Modern medicine not free of failures, 35

Modern scholastic philosophy of paramount importance in medicine, go; ‘versus
positivism (modern science), 22

Modern thought as to the three faculties, r29

Mode of origin of the fluids of the body, 99-113

Moist : air defined, 250; atmosphere, effect of, 278; atmosphere, effect on body,
313 ; temperament, degrees of, in organs, 49 ; temperament, signs of, from the
form, 481

Moisture : forms of in the body, 49; necessary to transformative faculty, 187 ;
purpose of, 22; = rutibat, which is not synonymous with “ humour ”’


Moles (abortion), due to drinking stagnant water, 380
Mollificants, 423


INDEX 599


Moments musicales, r2r

Moment, of nascence, gr; to choose for evacuation, 935 (4)

Moodiness, 164 (II)

Moods, 164 (ii)

Moonlight, effect of, 186 B (b)

Moral causes of disease, 199

Morbid atrabilious humour, three kinds of, 93

Mother love, power of, 163

Movement: as cause of pain, 488; in plants, difference from locomotion, 156 ;
of breath, 743; kinds of, 192; of contraction in artery in the pulse, 516 ; abnor-
mal, causes of, 427 See ‘ Dynamic’

Mountains, effect of living on, 325

Mousetail pulse, 544, 567

Mucoid sediment, 658 (4)

Mural decorations in bath-houses, 199

Murky air as depressant, 279 ; difference from ‘‘ dense’’ air, 279

Muscles: furnish evidence of temperament, 467-469 ; development of, shows moist
temperament, 467

Music, 531; effect on pulse and bodily functions, 219; for relief of pain, 1084;
kinds of, 219; quotations ve, 219; taste for, depends on breath, 139

Musical instruments and the pulse, 532

Mutations, incidental, in atmosphere, 305-307 ; of the atmosphere, 242 sqq.

Mutual interaction and repulsion, 483

Myalgia, 824

Mystical insight, 73; view of chemistry of life, 93, 94


N

Names of disease, basis of, 223

Narcotics, 435

Natural: breath a phase, 148 ; cure of disease, 920; faculties are four, 146 ; classi-
fication of ditto, 142, 131; ditto defined, 129 (4); pulse, 551; term of life, 61

Nature: definition of, 56, 58; of bacterial action, 203; of human being, true
conception of, fundamental to modern medicine, 23; what it is, 56; meaning
of, 551

Nature = the natural world; must not be overlooked, 293, 294, Appendix 2; like
a palace, Appendix 2

Nauseating aperients, rules regarding, 976

Nauseative indigestion, 762

Negative definitions of ‘‘ human nature,” 272

Nerve as source of power of a membrane, 129

Nerves: description of, 116 (3); dryness of, 839 (iii)

Neuritis, ice water bad for, 376

Neurotic, meaning of, in terms of breath, 148

Nichomachus’ disease, 199 (ii)

Night: terrors, 718; travelling, 882; urine, normal quantity of, 666

Nile water, 370

Nitrogen, part played in body, 9r

Nitrous baths, use of, 408

Nobility of human body shown in its temperament, r09

Non-commendable waters, 377

Non-excrementitious fluids, four varieties, 69 (a)

Normal blood, description of, 72

Normal functions, knowledge of, necessary to diagnosis, 456

Normal stool, characters of, 676

Northerly countries, effect of living in, 328

Northern climate, effect on women, 328

Notes of the individual, 164, 272 (2)

Notions, three, for scholastic medicine, 269

Noxious agent, as cause of change of ‘‘ state,’ 167; may be harmless externally,
why, 399

Nubecula, significance of, 662 ‘

Number of meals a day, 774; of members which are diseased together, 225

Nutriment changed into blood, 102; versus medicine and poison, 356.

Nutrition, the faculties subserving, 146, sqq.

Nutritive faculty, definition of, 143; seat of, 139

Nutritive value of food, 195 (3)


600 THE CANON OF MEDICINE
fe)


Obesity, how to reduce, 872; regimen for, 7b.; urine in, 657

Objective signs of plethora, 495 F

Object of life not to alter character, 64; of this treatise, 4o

Obsession, 162 (1)

Obstruction: of various humours in modern language, 503; of channels, agents
causing, 420; signs of, 502, sqq.; arterial, worse than venous, 1046 ; associated
with intemperament, treatment of, 929; due to excess of food, 358; due to
imperfect digestion in the blood-vessels, 109 ; in old persons, treatment of, 961 ;
removed by bath after meal, 406; treatment of, 1045. 274-279

Occult: definition of, 162 (I); phenomena, 162; ditto, emotional basis, 162 (IV) ;
powers, 162 (1), 163; ditto, basis of in human beings, 162 (VI) ; ditto, in man,
as a criterion of sainthood, 162 (V) ; ditto, natural to some persons, 1b.

Occupation a guide to choice of evacuant method, 934 (11) ; and regimen, 254

Odours, abnormal, a sign of disease, 454 (8)

(dema = plethora of lymphatics, 442

Offspring, character of, and maternal impression, 345; kind of, and emotions, 345

Oil-baths, value of, 413

Old age: diet, 855, 857 ; errors of diet, remedy, 855 ; exercise in, 854, 863 ; massage
in, 854, 862; mental state, depicted, 24r ; obstructions in, treatment of, 861 ;
purgation for, 859; regimen for, 854; wine for, 860

Oleaginous urine (three kinds), 626 (2)

Oliguria, significance of, 667

Opacity of urine, persistent, meaning of, 631

Opaque = thick, urine, 631

Opening and closing operations of Nature, 88

Opening up channels, agents which effect, 421

Operation of vegetative soul (St. Thomas’ account), 130

Opium, use of for pain, 1075

Oppilations : see Obstructions, 502, sqq.

Orderly pulse, 530

Order of severity of causes of loss of continuity, 514

Organs derived from blood, 125; derived from both male and femaJe sperm, 124;
derived from semen, 125; differ in temperament, 35; functional capacity of,
82; round stomach like fire round a cauldron, 100; transcend anatomy, 25

Origin of all sickness, 759; of human being, 679

Orobeal sediment of urine, 658 (1)

Ostalgia, 825

Outward form clue to character, and functional capacities, 25

Over-repletion, causes of, 442; with food, treatment, 784

Oxidative processes retarded = choking of breath, 442

Oxidized atrabilious humour, nature of, 91; bile, two types, 84

Oxus, water of, 360

Oxymel syrup, how to tell from urine, 674


ue


Peony, action of, 350

Pain, alleviation of, 435; character of, in loss of continuity, 513; definition of, 482;
discussion, 432 ; due to gaseous distension, 440, 504; effect on body, 486; effect
on respiratory organs and pulse, 561-599 ; how it causes disease, 195 (c) (note) ;
impairs vitality, 170; internal medication for, 1079 ; nature of, theory of, 482,
433 ; over liver after purgation, 987 ; relief of, 1073 ; ditto, by cupping, 1038 (vi);
ditto, by music, 1084 ; requires treatment, 921 ; selection of remedies for, 1078 ;
significance of, 458 (3) ; treatment according to site of cause, 1076, 1077 ; types
of, list of, 434; versus disease, 195 (b)

Palatability of food, 773

Palpation to distinguish gaseous from other swellings, 504

Pancakes, 251; urinary sediment resembling, 662

Papular swellings, varieties of, 220

Paresis, 199 (iv)

Parturition .difficult in northern climates, 328

Bey : affect the constitution, 700; the milk, 700; and breath, 1093, subduing,

Passive congestion, 442


[INDEX 601


Pathological: classification of disease, advantages, 173; retention of excreta,
causes, 1044

Perception, localization, chart to, 161 (B)

Perceptive faculty, 174

Percussion distinguishes between ascites and tympanites, 504

Perfumes, to restore cases of exhaustion, 991, during venesection, 1027

Periodic changes in state of atmosphere, 277

Periods of life, four, 51

Personality, explanation of, rgr, 28r

Pestilential air, 308; how produced, 811; regimen in, 877

Phantasies, effect on offspring, 345

Phantasy, 178; effect on bodily state, 346

Pharmaceutics, 905

Pharmacology, modern versus ancient, 271

Phases of disease, 222; of hot swellings, 210

Phenomena of outer world reveal the inner, roo

Philosophy, Catholic definition of, 22

Phlegm in stomach in old people, 859

Phlegmatic constitution, diet for, 766; diseases of, in spring, 282

Phlegmon, definition, 209

Phosphorus, part played in body, 92

Physical geography and climate, 307 (c)

Physician must be healthy, to detect patient’s temperament, 465 (i)

Physiology is anatomy in motion, r42; is rationalistic (quotation to prove), 24

Physique a guide to treatment, 984 (5)

Picture of movement in a whole tissue, 97, 269 (3)

Pictures and paintings in bath houses, r99

Pills, administration of, rules, 998

“Pitching,” 871

Pitch plaster a remedy for leanness, 871

Pivot of function, changes of, 92

Place of residence and regimen, 254

Plagues, atmosphere during, regimen ve, 877

Planetary cycles, 738; influences, ro8, 186 (B ii)

Planets and mind, 186 (B) (ii)

Plastic faculty, 145

Platonic view of nature of human beings, 24 (i)

Pleasurable sensations, theory of, 437

Plethora = passive congestion ; a guide to evacuation, 934; cause of, 442 ; evacuant
treatment not always needed, 951; in the channels of the body, 497, 273; not
necessarily treated by evacuation, 924, 951; of faculties, 499; ‘‘ overfulness of
the vessels,’ 564; signs of, 497

Pleurisy, essential symptoms of, 454 (4)

Pneumonia, pulse in, 454

Poetry, Arabic, and musical time, 218, 219

Poisons: classification of, modern, 194; of toxicity, 194; definition of, 355 (4) ;
to kidney, but not poisonous per se, 194

Polo, 739

Polyuria, 665; critical, 616 (d)

Positive and negative ether, 82

Positivism, objections to, 2z ; refutation of by modern scholasticism, 22; quoted, 2r

Posture and pulse, 225; as evidence of disease, 454 (5), 455; in sleep, 819

Potential action of medicines, 354; of food, 352

Potentiality and actuality, 61

Potentiality of food, meaning of, 852; versus disposition (table), 1094

Poulticing for pain, 1082

Power accruing from delight, 1096

Practical medicine, meaning of term, 678

Practical understanding, defined, 159 (II1)

Pranas, 136

Prattling to the infant, 698 ;

Precautions: about baths, in relation to meals, 754; about cold bathing, 758 ;
about drinking-water when travelling, 898-902; about exercise, 743, 745;
about feeling the pulse, 518, 206; about purgation, 974; about resolving
thick humours, 1046

Predisposition, 233


602 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


_ Pregnancy and emesis, 999 ; pulse in, 597, 236 ; urine in, 672; urinary turbidity
in, 639 :

Preliminary treatment to purgation and emesis, 973 ; to venesection, 1027

Premature summer, effect on incidence of disease, 270; winter, ditto, 270

Pre-modern thought in terminology, 129

Preternatural impressions, atmospheric, 308-313

Prevailing winds and residence, 332

Prevention of apposition of parts, 425

Primary fluids of the body, 69

Primitive, or primary causes, 231

Principal organs, list of, 123 ‘

Principles = ‘‘ theory”, 19; four, applicable to drawing humours out of members,
913

Procedure in emesis, 1001 :

Prognosis from dark-coloured urine, 617; intermissions of pulse, 229; opaque
(thick) urine, 582; red urine, 625, white urine, 625

Prognosis in cases of loss of continuity, 514

Prognostic signs, definition, 452

Programme of the Canon, 3, 4 :

Progress, meaning of term, discussed, 267; is relative, Appendix 1

Prolapse of anus in infants, 727

Proof that arterial wall itself contracts and expands, 580

Property of a drug, wherein it lies, 1122

Prophylactic evacuation, 953

Prophylaxis against spring diseases, 283

Protection from icy cold, 893

Provisions to take when travelling to icy countries, 892

Pruritus in infants, 731

Psychical faculties, 174 (see “‘ sensitive life ’’)

Psychic power, 162 (7), 163 (iii)

Psychology, Catholic definition of, 22

Puberty benefited by spring, 267; definition, 52

Puerperal convulsions, urine in, 238, ; eclampsia, urine in, 617; tetanus in northern
countries, 328

Puerperium, urine in, 672

Puffiness, varieties of, 211

Pulmonary abscess, urine in, 626 (4)

Pulse, 515 onwards; knowledge of circulation not necessary for, 515; accurately
understood in ancient times, 515; reveals length of life (Chinese teaching), rr2 ;
classification of, 519, 520-538, 589-550; definition of (Avicenna, and modern),
515; diagnosis from (Chinese), 204; diurnal variations of, 225; duration of
cycle, 524

Pulse: effect of: age and sex, 574, 234; bathing, 596; convalescence, 237;
drinking water, 586; drugs, 225; emotions, 601, 225; exercise, 588, 598, 225 ;
food, 225; food and drink, 583; high resistance, 232 ; inflammatory swelling,
599 ; locality, 582; low resistance, 231; pain, 598; pregnancy, 597; preter-
natural agents, 602; respiratory movements, 225; satiety or hunger, 518 (4) ;
season, 587, 235; sleep, 587, 588; time of day, 225; various temperaments,
579; wine, 584

Pulse : feeling the, precautions to take, 518, 206, 207, 209 ; repose of body and mind
essential, 209, 283; missed beats, 2r2; musical character of, 5381; modern,
definition of, 515; rate versus respiration rate, 230; rate increased (modern
facts), 225; specially quick, 227; slow, 228; minute classification of (Chinese ;
Giles), 204; of both sides differ apart from anatomy, 206 ; technique in feeling
518 ; ten groups of features, 519; tsang, fu, pyau, li, and tau, 209

Pulse-types : bounding, 540; broad, 558; chord-like, 549; creeping, 541; deep,
215; dicrotic, 546; elevated, 215; extraordinary variety of (Broadbent), 209 ;
— because human body not a machine, but ever-changing, 217; factors con-
cerned in, 552; falling, 547, 568; feeble, 561; formicant, 542, 572; gazelle,
539 ; hard, 562; harsh, 543, 565; hectic, 224; hurried, 559; irregular, 564;
jerking, 5389; large, 554; mousetail, 544, 567; natural, 551; recurrent, 545;
recurrent mousetail, 567; renal, 237; serrate, 543, 565; short, 2175; sluggish,
560 ; soft, 563 ; spasmodic, 548,569; tabulated, 2r5 ; tense, 562, 569 ; thrilling,
548, 570; undulatory, 540, 571; visible, 223

Pulse, why felt at wrist, 517

Pungent things, 433

Pure water, characters of (Buddhist), 366


‘


INDEX 603


Purgation: adjuvants to, 977; and bathing, 973; and sleep, 975; better than
emesis in fevers, 961; for young persons of hot temperament, 865; general
rules, 947, sqq. ; in elderly persons, 859 ; in people with hot temperament, 977 ;
necessary in youth, 57; of morbid humours, theory of, 945; rules relative to,
970; to attract matter from upper parts of body, 945 ; undesirable after-effects,
987; when undesirable, 958-964

Purgatives : choice of according to temperament, 994; according to humour to be
evacuated, 954; explanation of action of, 996; failure of action, 992; ditto,
causes of, 984; operate on intravascular humours, 966; preferably avoided by
taking sufficient exercise instead, 737; proper time for taking, 988; selective
action on humours, 984

Purgative spurges, how to mitigate, 982

Purge may act as emetic also, 959

Purification of drinking-water, when travelling, 898

Purification of water, 368; by distillation, 898

Purposes of bilious humour, 82

Pus in feces, 675 (3); in urine, distinction from simulacra, 687, 655

Pustules denote bad humours emerging, 207

Putrefaction, explanation of, 485; in marshy water, 377

Putrefactive : breakdown of body, 680; of matters in urine, 656; in lymph, 73;
disorders, precursors of, 497; processes as calefacients, 415 (v)

Putrescence is an extraneous source of heat, 858; from excess of food, 358; in
blood, 72; in serous humour, 76; in rain water, 373, 874

Putrid odour in urine, 648

Pyuria, diagnosis of, sediment of, 637, 655


Q

Qada and qadr, 82, 106, 275

Quantity of feces, 675 (i); of food at a meal, 765; of daily urine, 665; of urine,
variation of, significance of, 666

Quality: of air, changes of, effect of, 812; of atmosphere, effect of changes of,
278; of body, agents which alter, 415-430; of food, influence of, 347 (a); of
spring air, 257

Quick-tempered persons and the bilious humour, 794 (and footnote)


R

Racial temperament, 38 (iii)

Rain water, properties of, 372 :

Rainy : and dry seasons, effect on body, 296-301, 273; weather and the formation
of serous humour swellings, 215

Rancour, effect on imagination and blood-state, 1118 ;

Rapidity : of gestures, significance of, 490; of food-passage through intestine not
grasped till this century, 32 (bd)

Rare things excite undue notice, 1129

Rarefaction of skin, causes of, 839

Rational : faculty, table showing relations, 129 ; imagination, r5z ; life, defined, 159

Reaction of body to cold air in spring and autumn, 258 ©

Reading: aloud as an exercise, 742; the Koran according to seven modes, 27

Reality beneath unceasing change, 43 ‘ '

Reasons for choosing Avicenna for the treatise, go; for different classifications of
faculties, 155 (note) ty d

Reasoning: faculty, interactions of, 165 (II); definition, r6r (E); list of sub-
faculties, r6z (E)

Receptacles, 911 (ii)

Receiving and giving faculty, 117

Recurrent pulse, 538, 545

Red cheek bones denote lung disease, 454 (9), 455

Red hair denotes equable temperament, 472

Red, shades of, 611

Reducing diet, 907 .

Red urine in cold maladies, significance, 621; prognosis, 625

Refrigerants, 416

Regeneration of members, 128 ; '

Regimen: according to the seasons, 873 and 876; defined, 905; discussion of full
programme, 254; for congenitally hot intemperament, 864; for defective


604 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


temperament, 853, 864; for elderly people, 854; for infants up to dentition,
712; up to adolescence, 783-735; for old age, 854-863 ; for travellers, 879 ;
in lassitude, 828; of wet-nurse (diet, exercise, personal), 708; prescribing,
254; ve food and drink, 759-814

Regiminal treatment, 296

Regular pulse, 529, 535

Reinforcements to treatment, 928-930 :

Relapse, foretold from urine, 630; of spontaneous lassitude, treatment of, 849

Relation between autumn and periods of life, 291; between faculty and duration
of muscular contraction, 159; between ‘‘ form” and change, 86; between
qualities and faculties, 154; between season and temperament, 261-278 ;
between soul-activity and law of conservation of energy, 64; between structure
and function, 122; of breath to anatomical organs, 745; of character of hair
to.age, 475 ; of elements to natural faculties, 131; of periods of life to winter,
295; of organs and tissues, necessary to know, 456; to meals, baths, 406

Relaxing effect of summer, 285

Religion does not hinder progress in knowledge, 9

Remedies for inebriety, 813 ; which soothe pain, 1074

Remote symptoms, distinction from immediate, 462 ;

Renal: calculus, urine in, 617; disease, red urine in, prognosis, 625; disease,
urinary sediment in, 658 (i); insufficiency, urine in, 628

Repair: of damaged muscles, 128

Repercussives for internal inflammatory masses, 1054; use of, 1050

Repletion as cause of susceptibility to illness, 869; in northerly countries, 328

Repose, effect of on body, 385; undue, as cause of repletion, 442

Reproduction, faculties subserving, 139, 145 ‘

Researches apt to be futile if philosophy faulty, 22; directed to the curious rather
than the everyday, 1127; still hindered by prejudices, Appendix 1

Residence, how to choose, 382

Resolvent medicines, cautions necessary regarding, 915

Response to heat and cold, 482

Rest strengthens the serous humour, 112

Restlessness produced by purgative drugs, 964

Restorative exercises, 829, 832, 840; treatment, 833

Retained menses, urine in, 616 (d)

Retention as sign of disease, 458; of wastes, causes of, 393;

Retentive faculty, 148; same as memory, 182

Retributive or expiative causes, 207

Retropharyngeal abscess, 729

Revelations and visions, 162 (iii)

Reward for medicine, 46 (i) (b) ; 48; kind of, which is certain, 48

Rhythm, 84

Riding, when best not, 883

Right use of adult life, 24r

Rigors, cause of, 427

Rob, use of, antidotal to impure waters, 720, 902

Rocking of cradle, 698; to throw yang-yin into rhythm, ro4; ill-effects, 709

Rocky exposed places, effect of residence in, 323

Romance of Nature, 292, Appendix 2

Roughness of body, agents causing, 422

Rough skin denotes dominance of atrabilious humour, 500

Rules, five, in procuring evacuation, 935 ; four, for understanding nature of amember,
911-914 ; for selection of wet-nurse, 699 ; for treating children, 733 ; ve bathing,
403-407 ; ve drawing morbid matter from part to part, 936-939; ve influence
of seasonal change on temperament and vice versa, 261-273; ve procuring
emesis, etc., 947-964, etc.

Rupture: of intestines, signs of, 513 (5); of vessels from repletion, 497


S


Sadness belongs to ether element, 78 ; see table in 160 (iii)

Saffron helps cardiac drugs, 912

Saline baths, use of, 408

Salt water, action on body, 886

Salty water, antidote for, 899; to purify for drinking, 898

Salty serous humour, description of, 75; compared with salty waters, ib.


INDEX 605


Sandbaths, action, 410

Sanguineous humour: described, 71, 72; signs of predominance, 500; dreams in,
1b.; relation to rational and vegetative faculties, etc., ib.

Satori, mystical insight, 15

Sawik, 251 (‘‘ meal-sack’’)

Scammony, use of, 926, 954

Scantiness of milk, diet to rectify, 704

Scars, disfiguring, 221 (2, iv); from ulcers, 426

Scheme of study of patient (modern and ancient), 270; of position of the ‘‘ worlds,”


54

Scholastic : classification of faculties, diagram, 155 (IV); definitions, r29; medi-
cine, 271; nomenclature considered in studying the Latin Canon, 39; philo-
sophy alone refutes errors, 28, 50 ; philosophy often caricatured by its opponents,
40; to be expanded and not merely expounded, 4o; view of human nature,
formula, 756. See ‘‘ Thomistic ’”’

Science is incomplete knowledge, 22

Scientific view of human nature, 24 (ii)

Scirrhus, 458 (4)

Scorpion—serpent—human, 87

Sea-bathing, 245

Sea: effect of, on climate, 307 (d) ; sea-sandbaths, value of, 412

Sea-sickness, all about, 256; to prevent, 904; persistent, 904; precautionary
measures, simple, 904

Sea-voyages, regimen for, 903

Seasons : abnormal quality of, 186 ; and intemperament, 493; and pulse, 581,235
and blood, 284; change of, determines kind of diseases, 259 ; change of influence
on body, 261-273, 174; characteristics, effect of, 280-295 ; diet according to,
760, 764; effect on atmosphere, 245, 247; effect of sun and moon on, 244;
exercise according to, 746; food according to, in old persons, 857; influence
on body, 242; medical definition of, 242; modification of treatment according
to, 922 ; represented in the four rooms of the Hammam, 798 ; strong, and weak :
summer, winter—spring, autumn, 242; temperament of, 242, sqq. L

Seasonal cycles and bacteria, 187 ; effect on body, 296-301 ; on pulse, 581; irregu-
larities (according to Chinese), 108

Secondary fluids, 69

Sediment of urine defined, 652; position of, 662; signs derived from, 652

Selection of medicines, 910

Selective action of purgatives un humours, 984

Self-culture and ethereal endowment, 108

Senescence, 51

Senility, 51; likes summer, 284

Sensation in tubular members, 132

Sensitive faculties = psychical faculties,1** See 174

Sensitive life, 174; chart of, 759 (II)

Sensitiveness to good opinion, a sign of hot and dry temperament, 492

Sensuous imagination, 15r

Sepsis common in spring, 298

Septicemia, urine in, 621 iG ‘

Septic : changes in humours, effect of, on urine, 238 ; conditions due to retention, 394

Serous humour: dreams due to, 500; appetite in, 500; aspect, ib.; foods which
increase, 195 (3); description of normal, 73; forms of (table), 74; produced
by marshy waters, 378 ; signs of predominance, 500; faculties when dominant,
500; why it preponderates in body with age, 60

Sero-atrabilious humour, 94

Serrate pulse, 543

Severity of illness as factor in treatment, 916 f

Sex and pulse, 574, 234; variation of urine according to, 671

Shaghal, 264

Shampooing, 749

Sheep, urine of, 673

Shiva-shakti, 738 (1)

Shivering, 455; causes of, 427 } Mig We

Short fingers denote small liver, 454 (5); pulse, 521; stature with massive jaws,
denotes inequable temperament, 496 :

Shower-bath, use of, 414; value of, 414; douching head, 724; with herbs, 782:
also 817, 894

Shrivelling of skin, 833


606 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


_Sicbaj, a sour minced flesh-meat, 251

Sickness, definition of, 168 B (i)

Sight, faculty of, 175 : : :

Signs indicating that purgation is complete, 990; of air being bad, 276; of good
health, 10, 240; of internal inflammation and abscess, 509 ; of liver disorder,
478; of spleen disorder, 478; produced by inflammation moving up or down,
512; remaining after bursting of abscess, 510; that emesis has benefited, 1000 ;
versus symptom, 195 (a)

Simooms, 807 (e), 887 : ,

Simple : bodies, definition of, 19 ; disorders, dualincharacter,197 ; intemperaments,
list of, 39; members, 116; pulses, 521

Singing exercises, 821

Siriasis, 719 :

Six canons of diagnosis by internal symptoms: heading to 452

Skeletal system the instrument of normal life, 156 ; expresses character of nervous
system, 164 (IV)

Skin diseases in autumn, 289 (ii); in infants, 731; induration of, causes of, 839 ;
rarefaction and tumefaction of, 839

Sleep, 336-340, 815; after food, 778; and fasting when travelling, 880; and
purgation, 975; and. wakefulness as signs of temperamental state, 487; best
time for, 193, 818; causes of, 815 ; conditions to be observed regarding, 818 ;
during day is bad, 817; effect on body, 336, 337 ; four times for, 818; functions
during, 489; how to procure, 817; interrupted, 817; is calefacient, 415;
not absolutely necessary, 489; physiological effects of, 816; posture in, 819;
pulse during, 587; purpose of, 489; rules regarding, 817, 254; seven actions
of, 837; time of, after food, effect on pulse, 589-591; 587, 817

Sleepiness, meaning of, 487; of infant due to overfeeding, 709; sign of moist
intemperament, 493; after meals, 765; quarters of infant, 693; when travel-
ling, 880

Sleeplessness: and pulse, 233; due to joy, 815

Sleepy sickness, and pulse, 563

Slender pulse, 522

Sluggish pulse, causes of, 560

Smell, sense of, 175; see Odour

Sneezing, 455; constant, in infants, 723

Snoring, in infants, 723

Snowclad places, as residence, 325

Snow water, 376

Softness of feel of patient, 466

Soft pulse, causes of, 563; water, 374

Soil, as guide to choice of residence, 332; and bacterial growth, 188; effect of,
on climate, 307 f.; effect on waters, ib.; kinds of, ib.; nature of, r88; various,
effect of, 318

Solar heat is material, 185

Solution of continuity, 198 (3) ; in various members, 200

Somnolence, undue, imprisons innate heat, 340

Song of the Sun, 55

Sordes a form of excretion, 111

Sorrow and grief, 1102

Sorrow, synonyms, 164 (II

Soul: a bundle of life, 734; and light, 77; cannot have “location,” 22; diverse


meanings of term, 167 ; —mind—spirit, 729 ; most like light (Averrhoes), 77 ;
the decree of Allah, 56; versus body, 130; ditto, Scholastic view, 735 ; versus
breath, 736


Sounds, abnormal, sign of disease, 454 (7); and elements, 175

Source of atrabilious humour, 80; of good blood, 105; of images of the imagination,
51; infant’s fat, 127; of innate heat in juveniles, 55; of joy and gladness
(examples), 1108; of increase of gladness, 1112, 1113

Soured milk, 795

Sour serous humour, in two forms, 79; sour water, antidote for, 899

Southerly countries, effect of residence in, 829 ; effect on women, 329; and men, ib. ;
water of, 329

Spasm, cause, 427

Spasmodic pulse, 548, 569; after inflammation in sensitive parts, 600 (5)

Special symptoms, significance of, 458 (6)

Specific : capacity of creatures, 1087; property, definition, 1122; erroneous ideas
as to, 1126, 1127; versus nature, 1122; what it is, 1125


INDEX 607


Speculative understanding defined, 159 (III)

Sperm discussed, 125; male and female, 145, 679

Spheres, position of elemental, 54

Sphygmology, 515; Ayurvedic, 214; Chinese, discussed, 208 ; esoteric, 209

Spirit : A346 meaning of term, 736; as used by Paracelsus, 77 ; versus soul and
mind, 129

Spleen, abscess in, 637; atrabilious humour related to, 88

Splenic disorders liable if atrabilious humour dominant, 500

Spontaneous lassitude, tensive, causes of, 850; treatment of, 840

Sprains, treatment of, 1071

Spraying, 1016

Spring: air contrasted with winter air, 257; air, why moist, 248, 249; and pulse,
581 ; days may be summer-like, 260; changes produced in body, 281; open-air
bathing in, 757; regimen for, 873; temperament of, 243; -time, defined, 242;
water, 376 -

Sprinkling remedies over infants’ head, 715, 724

Sputum, 240; is the humour forced out of the lung, ib.

Squamous urinary sediment, 658 (i)

Stabbing pain, 484 (12)

Stability of form in changing physiology, 124

Stages of disease, 222; treatment depends on, 917

Stagnant air, bad effect of, r8z ; water, antidote for, 899; effect on old people, 381 ;


on stomach, 382; on women, 380; purification of, 365, 378, 899
Stars and disease, 183


States of human body, three, 196, 452

States of mind in hot and cold temperaments, 492

Stern character, significance of, 492

Stoddart's classification of faculties, 155 (V)

Stomach: abscess in, 637; holds food, 247; injured by stagnant water, 382; the
house of disease, 759

Stomatitis, aphthous, 720

Stout persons, rules ve meals, 777

Straight hair, sign of cold moist temperament, 471

Straining water through cloth before drinking, 902

Strength of a member, assessment of, 914

Strength of one organ entails deficiency of another, 126

Strengthening the members, method, 821

Stretching, 455; and yawning, 829

Stricture of cesophagus, 199 (i)

Strong members expel waste into weak, 135

Strong pulse, 523; causes of, 562; versus large pulse and hard pulse, 516

Structure: and function, inter-relations, 122; of a member, must be learnt, 911;
of sediment in urine, 652; related to phase of metabolism, 95, 273

Strumous swellings, 212

Stupefacients, 1075; rules in administration, 1080

Styptics, effect of, 1044 (iii)

Subdivision of compound intemperaments, 41

Subheadings with which medicine deals, 15

Subject-matter of medicine, 11

Sublunary world, position of, 54

Substance: defined, 58; of air, signs of goodness, 274; of breath is water-vapour,
237; ditto, effect of sleep on, 837; ditto, superfluities of, 239; of food, influ-
ence of, 347 (c); of urine versus colour, 632 %

Substantial change, 67; causes of, 77; of nutritious medicaments, 356 (A) (ii) (a)

Suckling, rules, ve 696-713

Sufic classification of faculties, 155 (iii) ; doctrine of contraries illustrated by, 1057

Sulphur baths, use of, effect of, 408

Summer: definition of, 242; and pulse, 581; disease due to flies, 182; effect of
on body, 284-286 ; effect on atmosphere, 245 ; heat ascribed to Hell, quotation
from Nights, 255; proper meals for, 796; purgation in, dangerous, 978; regi-


men for, 874
Sun; baths, 441; effect on climate, 306, 785; sun-power, 790; sun-stroke, 888
Superfluities, 200 (i), 456 (ii); see also ‘‘ Toxic substances 7 sare. eitete matters


200 (i); of substance of breath, 239; visibly separated off as hair, nails,
teeth, 123 (c); what they are, 68, 150; see also diagram in 278; see also
‘‘excrementitious fluids ’’


608. THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Supernatural: agencies acting on human beings, 162 (ii), (iii) ; life, in Chart, r59 ;
meaning of in Catholic philosophy, 162 (iii) ; proper meaning of, 115

Susceptibility to disease, regimen to correct, 869

Swallowing, mechanism of, 186 :

Sweat, 240; as an excretion, ib.; examination of, 844; and sleep, 337 (5)

Sweating sickness, 229 (D)

Sweetish odour of urine, 647

Sweets after food, bad, 782

Sweet wine for old people (to be avoided), 860

Swellings: a “‘ composite’’ disease, 205; arising from serous humour, 215; atra-
bilious, 212; cancerous, 213; classification of, 208; cold, 211; difference
from induration, 218; gaseous, 219; glandular, 212; hot, 210; papular, 220;
site, 206; special names, 209; strumous, 212; watery, 218

Swooning pulse, 567; in inflammation, 600 (5) ‘

Symptoms: as a cause of disease, 195 (c) ; of health and sickness, 12; and signs,
difference, 195 (a) ; definition of, 12, 198, 169 ; due to late meal, 775 ; essential
to the illness, 454 (4); list of, 201; may be a disease, 195 (d); of internal
disease, six classes, 457; premonitory of disease (table), 878; terminal, 454;
versus disease, as shadow to object, 195 (a); versus malady and cause,
examples, 194

Synchronism of dancers, cause of, 107

Syncope: and emotion, 341; fatal, in cases of injury to sensitive members, 514;
from hot bath, 407; from purgation, and its remedy, 991; from severe pain,
514; from venesection, 1027 (G)

Synonyms: relating to the natural faculties, r3z; between the names of pulse-
types in Arabic, Latin, and Chinese, 213; table of, 215


_


Table of digestive products, 103; of members, 115; of terms applied to dietetics,
252; of names of pulses, 275

Tachycardia, 564

Talents, classification of, 164 (V); list of, 7b.; meaning of, 492

Tallness and short fingers together denote inequable temperament, 496

Taoist eye = mystical insight into Nature, applied to clinical diagnosis, 28r

Taste, sense of, 175

Technique of venesection, 1027

Teething, measures to adopt during, 713; troubles mostly digestive, 715

Teleological view of structure, r22

Telepathy, r62 (I), 163 (II)

Telephic ulcer, 223

Temper explained, 139

Temperament: a guide to treatment, 934; knowledge of, necessary, 911; and
character, 865; as applied to medicine, 37; changed by nutriment, 356 (A)
(i) (a); cold and dry, regimen for, 868; congenital versus acquired, 467 ;
definition of, 26, 27; diagram of, 139; disorders of, treatment of, 925-938 ;
effect on, of undue evacuation, 396; equable, eight varieties of, 82; hot and
moist, regimen for, 867 ; innate versus acquired, 492; in regard to geographical
position, 64; in regard to sex, 63; is noted in matter-disease, 205; of food,
bearing of, 348; of juveniles, 155; of the decrepit, 82; of the several members,
45-50 ; of torrid zone inhabitants, 34; one single thing, emerging from com-
ponents, 348 ; relation of breath to, 739 ; variations in different organs, 38 (vii) ;
versus occupation, 65

Temperamental disorder, 198; types, 164 (iii)

Temperaments as explaining humoral formula, 107 (iii) ; belonging to age, sex, etc.,
51; classification of, 30

Temperature, variations of, seasonal and daily, effect on body, 261-273

‘Tendons, 116 (4)

Tense pulse, 562, 569

Tensive lassitude, causes of, 850; treatment, 824, 831

Tenuous foods, 789; overoxidize the blood, 759

Tepid water, action of, 390; as drink, use of, 799

Term of life, is allotted, 686

Terminology of dietetics, 252

Terrestrial factors on climate, 807

Tests for purity of homan milk, 701; of water, 367


INDEX 609


Tetanus and teething, 716

Texture of members, 481; of urine, defined, 606

Theories about the “ breath,’’ 173; about relative likeness and difference, 483;
about change of quality, in regard to the atmosphere, 248, 249; scope of, in
medicine, 678

Theory versus practice, scope of each, 7-9

Thermal baths, rules regarding use of, 409

Thermal waters, bathing in, effect on pulse, 596

Thick milk, diet to rectify, 702; other measures, 706

Thick pulse, 522; skin, 839 (ii)

Thin milk, diet to rectify, 703

Things of every-day importance, 1127

Third digestion, 109; third state of health, 196

Thirst, precautions regarding, 885; how to avoid, when travelling, ib.

Thirst, true and ‘false, 798; various causes of, 990

Thomistic : account of human nature, 25; basis essential to medicine, 22, 40, 271 ;
science perceives more than modern science, 70. See also ‘“‘ Scholastic ”’

Thought: definition of, r6z (D) ; mechanism of, ib.; — reading, 162 (i), 163 (ii)

Threads in urine, 644

Three: groups of causes, 231; powers of soul, 730; states of body, 452; steps in
change, 69

Thrilling pulse, 548, 570; meaning of, 570

Throbbing pain, cause of, 434 (15)

Thrush, 720

Time-factor : in aspects of life, ror ; in digestion, 796, 233, ror; in going to stool,
675 (5) ; in relation to variations of strength and weakness of organs and their
functional capacity, 272 (2) ; in sedimentation of urine, 663; one of the three
essentials in causing disease, 283; in exercises, 744; in regard to birth and
“ether,’’ ro8; in regard to venesection, 1020

Time of year the guide to choosing evacuants, 984 (7)

Timidity, basis of, 1116

Tissue inter-actions, take time, 32 (d)

Toil, effect of, on body, 334

Tongue, colour of, significance of, 479

Tooth abscesses, 431

Tossing about in bed, 455

Touch, sense of, 175; what information it gives regarding the patient, 465

Toxic actions: types of, 194

Trance, after vomiting, 1012

Transcendence of organs beyond anatomical boundaries, 123

Tranquillity, cause of, 139

Transformation of air into fire, 2837; of matter, 348

Transformative: faculty, 149; acting on food, 347 (c); needs heat, 158; power is
threefold, 144

Translucence of urine, versus texture, 606, 607

Transmission of disease, 229

Transparent urine, 628-630 :

Travellers, regimen for, 879-885-904 ; rules ve water-supply, 898-902 ; preservation
of complexion, 897 ‘ :

Travelling: by sea, rules regarding, 903, 904; usually by night, in the East, 882

Treatment : adjustment according to (a) the constitution, 29r, 911; (b) severity of
illness, 916; (c) stage of disease, 917; (d) strength of a given organ, 914; (¢) tem-
perament, 911; — contributory factors, 922; dietetic treatment, 295, and
see Regimen; general discourse upon, 905; general rules for, 905 ; methods of
treatment, 289, sqq.; —— of disorders of temperament, 925-933; plan of, 286 ;
“ quack,” 288; regiminal, 296, and see Regimen ; restorative, 833 ; tule of, to
be persevered with, 919; varied according to season and climate, 922, 279

Trees and ground-water, 176

Tricking the doctor with the urine-specimen, 673

Trismus in gingivitis, 715

Tropical heat, exposure to, regimen for, 885, 887

True occult phenomena, classification of, 162 (II)

Trunk, veins of, for venesection, 1025 :

Truths inadequately expressed by Avicenna, re-stated, 41

Truth in different garbs, 42

Truth underlying ancient Chinese occultism, 6


610 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Truth versus knowledge, rr

Tubes of body: (the whole body is made of tubes), 123 (d), 273

Tubular members, structure of, 132 ; : wee

Turbidity, difference from sediment, 608 ; of urine, cause of, ib, ; significance of,
632, 638; versus opacity, 632

Turbid water, rectification, 899

Type of house, importance of, rgr

Type of pulse in various conditions (modern), 233.


U


Ugliness is disproportion of build, 496 tx ‘ 2

Ulcers, bathing for, 1067 ; causes of, 480; conditions which prevent healing, 1066 ;
healing by cicatrisation, 1068; by granulation, 1064; objects in treatment,
1063 ’

Ulcerose lassitude, 823; diet of, 842; treatment, 830

Umbilical abscess, 729

Unceasing movement, 83

Understanding, the, 183

Undigested food in blood, 778

Undulatory pulse, cause of, 571, meaning of, 540, 561

Unhealthy : digestive products, 103; water, rectified with vinegar, 797

Uniformity of seasons leads to disease, 267

Unwholesome foods, corrective for, 792

Urge in the Chinese system of sphygmology, 209

Urinal, precautions in use of, 603 (7, 8, 9)

Urinalysis, carried out to test liver-function, 32 (e) ; to test kind of humour at fault
in lassitude, 844

Urinary sediments, list of, 658 ; in lassitude, 838

Urine, 603-674: adulteration of, 603 (12) ; changes produced in, by food, 603 (3) ;
characters of, guide to time for exercise, 243 ; clear, and becoming turbid, 633 ;
foam, meaning of, 649-651; good prognostic signs, 634; in childhood, 694;
in pregnancy, 672; in puerperium, ib.; inspection, 606; interpretation of
findings, 283; in winter, 293; layer formation in, meaning of, 643; normal
healthy characters, 669 ; object of study, 605; odour, signs derived from, 645-
648 ; of cattle and asses, 640, of animals, 673; precautions in collecting, 603 ;
prognostic points, 617; ditto of transparent urine, 629; putrid odour, 648 ;
quantity of, significance of, 665; signs showing time of undertaking exercises,
243; tabular summary, 238; turbidity, meaning of, 632; variations with age,
670 ; with physiological state, 603 (5) ; with sex, 671; white, 618; significance
of white, 619

Urooj-nasool, 88, ro5, 138 (i), 275; and death, rrr


Vv


Vapours rise out of the earth in spring, 257

Variations of equipoise, eight, 32; of anatomical structure, causes of, rrg; in
action of innate heat, according to its degree, 485

Vegetables suitable for old persons, 856

Vegetative: faculty, 117, 146; life, in chart, r59 (i); relation to faculties, r42;
principle, action achieved by means of heat, 733; soul, its operation, r3o0

Veins : 116 (7) ; choice of, for venesection, 1021; drainage areas, 1022

Venesection : 1017; contra-indications, 1019 ; frequency of, 1028; in fevers, 1029;
mishaps during, 1027 (e) ; modern use of, 289 ; procedure, 1027 ; proper time for
1020 ; repeated, 1028 ; syncope during, 1027 G

Verdigris-green bile, explanation of, 84

Vermicular pulse, 544, 572

Vibration-rate, and the elements, 77

Vicious circles, 225

View that each faculty has its own member, 138

Views (three) as to nature of human being, 24

Vinegar helps to get a drug into the tissues, 932

Violent exercise, effect on pulse, 595

Viper venom, 354, 356, B

Virtues of Nile water, 370


INDEX 611


Viscera express character of vegetative system, 164, IV

Viscid blood causes irregular pulse, 564

Viscous foods, value of, 794 ;

Visible and invisible cycle, 97 ; visible pulse, 223; visible breath in some phases, 146

Vital air is not breath, 136

Vital breath is a phase, r48

Vital faculty (al-quwwa al-hayawaniyya): 161, 134; defined, 129 (3); explained,
163, 164; purpose of, and seat of, 140; versus natural faculty, 166

Vitalism is really rationalism, 24, 28

Vitality, 734, 273; a guide to evacuation, 984 (2); degree of, effect on urine, 238 ;
dispersed by putrefactive break-down, 680; impression of, given by patient,
281 ; strong or weak, meaning of, r4z ; versus breath, 136

Vitelline bile, 84; effect on urine, 238

Vitiligo, 221 (2, iii)

Vitreous serous humour, 74, 80; effect on urine, 238

Vivaciousness, significance of, 492

Vociferation, 429, 742

Vomiting: excessive, treatment of, 1013; how to arrest, 1009; ill-effects produced
by, 1005 ; methods of assisting, 1004; severe, in infants, 725


W


Wakefulness, a sign of dry intemperament, 493

Waking, effect of, on pulse, 592; on body, 338, 339

Walls and doors answer the lute (Quotation), 279

Warm pulse, cause of, 573

Wasting, relation to food, 358

Watching Nature, 292

Water: after meals, 779; and earth not literal, 73; as beverage, 797; bad, signs
of, 371; waterbaths, points to note, 197; definition of and properties, 22 ;
does not become tissue-substance, 361; — drinking when travelling, pre-
cautions, 898; effect on pulse, 586; from snow and ice, 376; function in-:body,
361, the handmaid of nutrition, 362 ; has life-giving power, 22 ; how to counter-
act harmful characters, 900 ; in various particular cases, 899 ; in nature, which
is best, 365; in southerly countries, 329; is formless matter (Augustine) 22 ;
of Nile, virtues of, 370; of Oxus, 369; properties of pellucid, 361 ; purification
by boiling or distilling, 868, 369, 898; purpose of, 22; tests of purity, 367;
varieties: aerated, 391; acetous, 387; aluminous, 384, 899; ammoniacal,
384; aqueduct, 875; channel, 383; cold, 389; containing metals, 384;
commendable, 372; hot, 390; ice, 376; marshy, 377; milky, 388; non-
commendable, 377; river, 376; salt, 386, 899; snow, 376; spring, 376;
stagnant, 378; tepid, 390; well, 375

Water-supply of houses, 332

Watery swellings, 218

Wave-motions, superimposed, a picture of changes in elements, 88

Waxing and waning of breath, 738, i

Ways of evacuating morbid material, 936

Weak pulse, 523

Weakness, due to diarrhcea, 445, opening abscess, ib ; severe pain, 446 ; fevers, 447 ;
many illnesses, 450; of body and breath, causes of, 443; of one member a
danger, 451

Weaning, 710; quotation from Nights, 710 } :

Weather, effect on animals, 313; stormy, serous humour swellings arise during, 215

Weight, carried in instalments, an analogy, 555; of water, 367

Well-water, 375

West wind, effect on body, 371

Westerly : countries, effect of, 331; winds, effect of, 307 (¢)

Wet Cupping, 1034; and dry, 260

Wet-nurse, characters of good, 700

Wheat chewing for acne, 99 ’

White: broth, 812, 851; fzces, 675 (3); lead, why poisonous internally but not
externally, 399; meaning of, 618; urine, 618

Why light rejoices the mind, 1092 :

Will, diseases of, 165, III; interactions, 2b.

Will-power and breath, 240 : A

Wind, constant exposure to, effect on skin, 221, 2, ui


612 THE CANON OF MEDICINE


Winds: effect on body, 314-317; prevailing, effect on climate, 307 (e) ; prevailing
in the season, and health, 296-301

Windscreens and climate, 307, ii

Wine: action on breath, 1105; on emotions, 1105; beneficial in bilious tempera-
ment, 802; best only after digestion is complete, 801 ; contra-indications ve
age, 810; cooling effect, 584; correctives for, 805; definition, note preceding
800; effect on humours, 802; for children, 785; for elderly persons, 860 ;
for lassitude, 838 ; good action of, 800; heating effect, 584; intoxicating effect
explained, 807, 809; ill-effects, 808; mew, action on liver, 806; not after
meals, 782; not before thirteen years old, 735; not when fasting, 808; old,
806; on pulse, 584; properties of, in body, 802; relieves headache, 800;
remedies against, 805; rules concerning, 800, sqq.; white versus red, 800

Winter: and pulse, 581; effect on atmosphere, 246; changes produced in body
by it, 292-295; diseases of, 294; obstructions are common in, 420; regimen
for, 876

Wisdom, 159; greater than science, 22; Appendix 2

Wolfish disposition in inhabitants of the north, 328

Woman: as a whole is a matrix (Paracelsus), 125; effect of northern climate on, 328

Wonderful every-day facts not understood, 1130; mistakes made, 433

Wonders of Nature, Appendix 2

Words and their exact equivalents, 37, Appendix 1

World-conception, modern versus ancient, 55; see Cosmology

World of space and time a fringe, 55

Worlds, position of, scheme of, 54

Worms, 730; in autumn, 289 (ili)

Wounds, 429; principles of treatment, 1062

Wrestling, 739 (ii)

Wryneck, treatment, 922


x"
Yakhmi, stew, 251
Yang and Yin, 103, 104
Yawning, 427, 455, 829; and stretching, 427; explanation of, 829
Yellow, shades of, 609
Yellowing of skin from exposure to hot atmosphere, explanation, 278, 313
Yi King, 83, etc.
Youth, definition of term, 52


Zardah, a rice-dish, 257


: aS
- - _ - - a - a 7 - _
a oe oe cae Seale


= : “<8.


—
POW LH FG, as PE ee RE ae:


Pet) aie “Bee - "it ae ee
Te ma :
yu@ueet ' J A
fo # oa ? 3
easy .
= ag Wi, 4
la
(| - —_
bY -


46 = J
af za
- :


SRR SACRO CRA


SEGRE CRS Pee co


This special edition of


THE CANON OF MEDICINE
OF AVICENNA


has been privately printed for the members of
The Classics of Medicine Library by The John
D. Lucas Printing Company. Film was pre-
pared from the first English edition of 1930,
translated by O. C. Gruner. New type matter
was composed by P & M Typesetting, Inc. in
Caslon Old Face. The text paper was especially
made for this edition by the S. D. Warren Pa-
per Company. The volume has been bound in
genuine top-grain cowhide by R. R. Donnelley
&F Sons Company. Endleaves are a specially
commissioned original marbled design of Richard
J. Wolfe. Edges are gilded and covers are brass-
die stamped in 22-karat gold. Cover stampings
and design of the edition by Daniel B. Bianchi
and Selma Ordewer.


a pot sir emai’ ee


(SF ey gallina Silke ten hy eet hie |S
: ee Ge ee eed > 0 ee Saee


: ; =a ee | hi a ee

ee ee Be Ar Ltt wes
w aT  .f on " es | aitee
ae << 2 bg he _


>


A-S_2f Whey wie, cur whe


P ~
errs.) tel
~> a a
-
4
>
eG
es os
™“
ae
a
~
—~


: e.
