Ashvaghosha's Discourse on the Awakening of Faith
=================================================
Ashvaghosha's Discourse on the Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana, translated by D. T. Suzuki (Chicago: Open Court, 1900), public domain. Suzuki's pioneering English rendering of the foundational Mahayana philosophical treatise. Scan via Internet Archive.

ayo 


ca { ‘ ti 
f : - is 


rat 7 stiterwts 
anin Mian testi 


neat 
me oa 

i i 
sitse 5 i ait 
Ethie it} 


si 
ay 
ite 


+~ rit 


ais 


sears iy ‘ Sai : 
oe 


bebrtee od 
was 


+s 
= 


73 
be bri erat 
~. 


+48 i : ; 
Sv EVES sere) Gere br, The re 
Sle eleye fre: 
tke Diao ey : 
nig 


Otrerhes, 
eer Poot at 
shore 


eee eit 
bis ae SEALE 
at 














ORIENTAL WORKS 


History oF THE Devic. By Dr. Paul Carus. Large 8vo, 500 pages, 
311 illustrations. Cloth, $6.00. 

AGVAGHOSHA’S DiscouURSE ON THE AWAKENING OF FAITH IN THE 
Manayana. ‘Translated by 7eztaro Suzuki. 176 pages. Cloth, 
$1.25 net. 

Tue GospEL oF BuppHA. By Dr. Paul Carus. Sixth edition. 
Pages, xiv, 275. Cloth, gilt top, $1.00 (ss.). German edition, $1.25, 

BuDDHISM, AND ITS CHRISTIAN Critics. By Dr. Paul Carus. 311 
pages. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 

Karma: A Story of Early Buddhism. By Dr. Paul Carus. Third 
Japanese art edition. Crepe paper, tied in silk. Quaintly illustrated. 
75 cents. 

NirvAna: A companion story to Karma. By Dr. Paul Carus. 
Illustrated by Japanese artists and printed in Japan. Crepe paper. 
$1.00. 

Lao-Tze’s Tao-Teu-Kinc: Chinese-English. By Dr. Paul Carus. 
With Introduction, Transliteration, and Notes. 360 pages. Cloth, 
$3.00 (155s.). 

SOLOMON, AND SoLtomonic LITERATURE. By Dr. Moncure Daniel 
Conway. Pages, viii, 243. Cloth, $1.50 net (6s.). 

History OF THE PgopLe OF IsRAEL. By Prof. Carl Hetnrich Cor- 
ntl?. Second edition. Pages, vi, 325. Cloth, $1.50 (7s. 6d.). The 
same in German, 8 marks ($2.00). 

‘THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A Novel. By Prof. Richard 
Garbe. 96 pages. Laid paper, veg. parchment binding, gilt top. 
Price, 75 cents (3s. 6d.). 

THe PuitosopHy OF ANCIENT INDIA. By Prof. Richard Garbe. 
Second edition. 90 Pages. Cloth, 50 cents (2s. 6d.). 

TRAVELS IN TARTARY, THIBET, AND Cu1na of the Christian Missionaries 
MM. Huc and Gabet. (1844-1846). By MW. Huc. Translated from 
the French by W. Hazlitt. roo Illustrations. New reprint edition. 
Two vols. Pages 28,660. $2.00 (10s.). 1 vol., cloth, net, $1.25. 

ANCIENT INDIA: Its Language and Religions. By Prof. H. Olden- 
berg. Second edition. Pages, ix, 110. Cloth, 50 cents (2s. 6d.). 

CHINESE PuiLosopHy. By Dr. Paul Carus. Paper, 25c. (1s. 6d.). 

CuINESE Fiction. By Dr. George T. Candlin. With illustrations 
from original Chinese works. 51 pages, paper, 15c. (gd.). 


THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING CO. 
324 DEARBORN STREET CHICAGO, ILL. 
Lonpon: Paternoster House, Charing Cross Road. 








ez 


Ange? 
~-. 
0 
4 


yee 





Buddha. 
Bodhisattva Samanta Bhadra, 


Bodhisattva Manjueri, 
Representing the principle Representing the principle 
of particularity or of universality or 
love. wisdom. 
Ananda. 


Mahakacyapa. 


A TYPICAL REPRESENTATION OF THE MAHAYANA FAITH 


ACV AGEIOSHA’S DISCOURSE 


ON THE 


AWAKENING OF FATTH 


IN THE 


MAHAYANA 


K Ae HE 1s ati 


TRANSLATED FOR THE FIRST TIME FROM THE 
CHINESE VERSION 


BY 


TEV AROOSU ZUR 





CHICAGO 
THE OPEN COURT PUBLISHING COMPANY 


LONDON AGENTS 
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co., LTD. 
1900 


0 Wiha Uitte, eae 
Bogus f- i 


SG 
APP? 
iio ae 
Li Oe 


PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. 


CVAGHOSHA is the philosopher of Bud- 

dhism. His treatise on 7he Awaken- 

ng of Farth is recognised by all Northern 

schools and sects as orthodox and used even 

to-day in Chinese translations as a text-book 
for the instruction of Buddhist priests. 

The original Sanskrit text has not been 
found as yet, and if it should not be discovered 
somewhere in India or in one of the numerous 
libraries of the Buddhist vihdras, it would be 
a great loss; for then our knowledge of Acva- 
ghosha’s philosophy would remain limited to 
its Chinese translation. 

Acvaghosha’s treatise on 7he Awakening 
of Faith is a small booklet, a monograph of 
the usual size of Chinese fascicles, comprising 
in its Chinese dress no more than about 
10,800 characters, and may be read through 
in a few hours. But the importance of this 
monograph stands in no relation to its brev- 


1V PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. 


ity, and it is very strange that no translation 
of it has appeared as yet in any European lan- 
guage. I was therefore exceedingly glad that 
Mr. Teitaro Suzuki, a Japanese Buddhist and 
a disciple of the Rev. Shaku Soyen, the dis- 
tinguished Abbot of Kamakura, who was one 
of the delegates of the Parliament of Reli- 
gions at Chicago in 1893, undertook the work 
of rendering Acvaghosha’s monograph into 
English form. I watched the progress of his 
translation and my interest in the work in- 
creased the more I became familiar with the 
thoughts of the great philosopher of Bud- 
dhism. Not only is my own interpretation 
of Buddhism, as stated in the Gospel of Bua- 
dha and elsewhere, here fully justified, but. 
there are striking similarities between the 
very terms of Acvaghosha’s system and ex- 
pressions which I have used in my own phil- 
osophical writings. The main coincidence 
is the idea of Suchness, which is pure form, 
or the purely formal aspect of things, deter- 
mining their nature according to mathemat- 
ical and mechanical laws.’ 


1 This coincidence of some salient points need of course not 
exclude disagreements in other important matters. 


PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. Vv 


Suchness, according to Acvaghosha, is the 
cosmic order or Gesetzmdassigkert of the world ; 
it is the sum total of all those factors which 
shape the universe and determine the destt- 
nies of its creatures. It is the norm of exist- 
ence and is compared to a womb in which all 
things take shape and from which they are 
born. It is Plato’s realm of ideas and Goethe’s 
‘‘Mothers’’ of the second part of Faust. 

Suchness which in its absolute sense means 
the total system of the abstractly formal laws, 
including the moral order of the universe, 1s 
contrasted with the realm of Birth and Death. 
This realm of Birth and Death, is the material 
world of concrete objects. While Suchness is 
the domain of the universal, the realm of Birth 
and Death is the domain of the particular; 
and itis characteristic of the Mahayana school 
that the bodily, the particular, the concrete is 
not rejected as a state of sin, but only char- 
acterised as impure or defiled, imperfect, and 
implicated with sorrow and ‘pain, on account 
of its limitedness and the illusions which na- 
turally attach to it. 

Suchness and the realm of Birth and Death 


V1 PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. 


are not two hostile empires but two names of 
the same thing. ‘There is but one world with 
two aspects describing two opposed phases of 
one and the same existence. ‘These two as- 
pects form a contrast, not a contradiction. 
Suchness (or the good law, the normative fac- 
tor) dominates the realm of Birth and Death, 
which latter therefore, in a certain sense, be- 
longs to Suchness throughout in its entirety 
as well as in its details. 

But sentient beings are apt to overlook the 
significance of the universal, for the senses 
depict only the particular. Thus to a superfi- 
cial consideration of sensual beings, the world 
presents itself as a conglomeration of isolated 
objects and beings, and the unity that consists 
in the oneness of law which dominates all, is 
lost sight of. It is the mind (or spiritual in- 
sight into the nature of things) which traces 
the unity of being and learns to appreciate 
the significance of the universal. 

Universals, i. e., those factors which con- 
stitute the suchness of things are not sub- 
stances, not entities, but relations, pure forms, 
or determinants, i. e., general laws. Thus 


PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. Vil 


they are not things, but ideas; and the most 
important one among them, the suchness of 
man or his soul, is not a concrete self, an At- 
man, but ‘‘name and form.”’ 

It is well known what an important rdéle 
the denial of the existence of the atman plays 
in the Abhidharma, and we need not repeat 
here that it is the least understood and most 
misrepresented doctrine of Buddhism. 

Thus the essential feature of existence, of 
that which presents itself to the senses, is not 
the material, but the formal; not that which 
makes it concrete and particular, but that 
which constitutes its nature and applies gen- 
erally; not that which happens to be here, so 
that it is this, but that which makes it to be 
thus; not its Thisness, but its Suchness. 

Particularity is not denounced as evil, but 
it is set forth as limited; and we might add 
(an idea which is not expressed in the Maha- 
yana, but implied) that the universal would 
be unmeaning if it were not realised in the 
particular. Absolute Suchness3 without ref- 
erence to the world of concrete Particularity 
is like a Pratyekabuddha, and the Pratyeka- 


Vill PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. 


buddha, a sage whose wisdom does not go out 
into the world to seek and to save, is regarded 
as inferior to the Bodhisattvas, who with in- 
ferior knowledge combine a greater love and 
do practical work that is of help to their 
fellow beings. 

How highly Particularity is considered ap- 
pears from the Mahayana picture in which it 
stands contrasted to Universality on perfectly 
equal terms.’ 

The world-process starts in ignorance, 
perhaps through ignorance or at least through 
some commotion void of enlightenment, but 
from the start it is enveloped by the good law 
of cosmic order. Suchness, the norm of being, 
guides its steps. It is shaped in the womb of 
the Tathagata and is in the progress of evolu- 
tion more and more tinged, or, as Acvaghosha 
says, perfumed, with the cognition of Such- 
ness. Thus life will necessarily march onward 
to Buddhahood, actualising in the course of 
its development the eternal in the transient, 
the omnipresent in the special, the universal 
in the concrete and particular, and unchange- 


1 See the frontispiece, 


PUBLISHER’S PREFACE. 1x 


able perfection in the imperfect haphazards of 
the kaleidoscopic world of changes, in which 
things originate by being compounded, and 
perish according to the law that all compounds 
are doomed to dissolution. Hence it becomes 
apparent that the realm of Birth and Death is 
the realisation only of that which in itself is 
immortal; it is the appearance in time and 
space, the actualisation, the materialisation, 
the incarnation, of that which is everlasting 
and permanent in the absolute sense. Says 


Goethe: 


‘' Alles Vergangliche 
Ist nur ein Gleichniss, 
Das Unzulangliche 
Hier wird’s Ereigniss.”’ 


The reading of Acvaghosha’s treatise may 
in some of its parts present difficulties, and 
Western thinkers would undoubtedly express 
themselves in other terms than this thinker of 
India who lived almost two thousand years 
ago; but the underlying ideas of his philos- 
ophy will be found simple enough, if the 
reader will take the trouble patiently to con- 
sider the significance of every sentence in its 


relation to the whole system. 
PAUL CARUS. 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


HE study of Buddhism has recently made 
gigantic strides, on this side of the At- 
lantic as well as on the other. Not only is the 
importance of the science of comparative re- 
ligion making itself felt, but the advance of 
our Pali and Sanskrit knowledge has greatly 
contributed to a better understanding of things - 
Oriental. Even Christians who were without 
sympathy for ‘‘heathen’’ religions have now 
taken up the study of Buddhism in earnest. 
Nevertheless, it appears to me that the teach- 
ings of Sakyamuni are not yet known in their 
full significance and that they do not yet com- 
mand just appreciation. Though intolerant 
critics lose no chance of vigorously and often 
wrongly attacking the weak points of Bud- 
dhism, which are naturally seen at the sur- 
face, clear-sighted people have been very slow 
to perceive its innermost truth. This is espe- 
cially the case with the Mahayana school. 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. X1 


The main reasons for this are, in my opin- 
ion, evident. While the canonical books of 
the Hinayana Buddhism have been systemat- 
ically preserved in the Pali language, those of 
the Mahayana Buddhism are scattered pro- 
miscuously all over the fields and valleys of 
Asia and in half a dozen different languages. 
Further, while most of the Sanskrit originals 
have been destroyed, their translations in Tib- 
etan, Mongolian, and Chinese have never been 
thoroughly studied. And, lastly, the Maha- 
yana system is so intricate, so perplexingly 
abstruse, that scholars not accustomed to this 
form of thought and expression are entirely 
at a loss to find their way through it. 

Among the false charges which have been 
constantly poured upon the Mahayana Bud- 
dhism, we find the following: Some say, ‘‘It 
is a nihilism, denying God, the soul, the world 
and all’’; some say, “‘It is a polytheism: 
Avalokitecvara, Tara, Vajrapani, Mafijucri, 
Amitabha, and what not, are all worshipped 
by its followers’’; still others declare, ‘‘It is 
nothing but sophistry, quibbling, hair-split- 
ting subtlety, and a mocking of the innermost 


X11 TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


yearnings of humanity’’; while those who at- 
tack it from the historical side proclaim, ‘‘ It 
is not the genuine teaching of Buddha; it is 
on the contrary the pure invention of Nagar- 
juna, who devised the system by ingeniously 
mixing up his negative philosophy with the 
non-atman theory of his predecessor’’; or, 
‘The Mahayana is a queer mixture of the 
Indian mythology that grew most freely in 
the Tantric period, with a degenerated form of 
the noble ethical teachings of primitive Bud- 
dhism.’? Though no one who is familiar with 
Mahayanistic ideas will admit these one-sided 
and superficial judgments, the majority of 
people are so credulous as to lend their ear to 
these falsified reports and to believe them. 
The present English translation of Acva- 
ghosha’s principal work is therefore dedicated 
to the Western public by a Buddhist from 
Japan, with a view to dispelling the denuncia- 
tions so ungraciously heaped upon the Maha- 
yana Buddhism. ‘The name of Agvaghosha is 
not very well known to the readers of this 
country, but there is no doubt that he was the 
first champion, promulgator, and expounder 


TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. X111 


of this doctrine, so far as we can judge from 
all our available historical records. Besides, 
in this book almost all the Mahayanistic 
thoughts, as distinguished from the other re- 
ligious systems in India, are traceable, so that 
we can take it as the representative text of 
this school. If the reader will carefully and 
patiently go through the entire book, unmind- 
ful of its peculiar terminology and occasional 
obscureness, I believe he will be amply and 
satisfactorily repaid for his labor, and will find 
that the underlying ideas are quite simple, 
showing occasionally a strong resemblance to 
the Upanishad philosophy as well as to the 
Samkhya system, though of course retaining 
its own independent thought throughout. 

In conclusion let me say a word about the 
difficulty of translating such an abstruse re- 
ligio-philosophic discourse as the present text. 
It is comparatively easy to translate works of 
travels or of historical events or to make 
abstracts from philosophical works. But a 
translator of the Mahayanistic writings, which 
are full of specific phraseology and highly ab- 
struse speculations, will find himself like a 


X1V TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE. 


wanderer in some unknown region, not know- 
ing how to obtain any communicable means 
to express what he perceives and feels. To 
reproduce the original as faithfully as possible 
and at the same time to make it intelligible 
enough to the outside reader, who has perhaps 
never come in contact with this form of 
thought, the translator must be perfectly ac- 
quainted with the Mahayanistic doctrine as it 
is understood in the East, while he must not 
be lacking in adequate knowledge of Western 
philosophy and mode of thinking. The pres- 
ent translator has done his best to make the 
Mahayanistic thoughts of Acvaghosha as clear 
and intelligible as his limited knowledge and 
lack of philosophic training allow him. He is 
confident, however, that he has interpreted the 
Chinese text correctly. In spite of this, some 
errors may have crept into the present trans- 
lation, and the translator will gladly avail 
himself of the criticisms of the Mahayana 
scholars to make corrections in case a second 
edition of the work is needed. 
TEITARO SUZUKI. 
LA SALLE, ILE Mag, wOR: 


TABLE OF CONTENTS: 


PAGE 
PTEROMER EDOM areata wy te ee te tas ale red Seedy teu Res ak aa 
Date, 2; Nativity and Peregrination, 17; Appellations, 20; Conver- 
sion, 24; Lists of Patriarchs, 32; As an Artist, 34; Works in Chi- 
nese Translations, 36; Chinese Translations of the ‘‘ Discourse on 
the Awakening of Faith,’’ 38; Outlines of the ‘‘ Discourse on the 
Awakening of Faith,” 41. 

Adoration. . Me Wa os ee ory Ree er sete meee ie eA 
rmcriesemen ste Oy eke Sooke et hones Tet ee ene A 
I, Introductory, 49; II. General Statement, 52; III. The Explana- 

tion, 55; IV. Practice of Faith, 127; V. Benefits, 146. 
GOSS cask ba tah See dis ac A cae ead abe Syst al cval eka ee AT meee 


rid earner rita, kG is Db. eran ip a nl Gy | OR Rt OE 


NOTE. 


The method of transliteration for Sanskrit words adopted in 
the present book is one used in Whitney’s Sanskrit Grammar, 
but from lack of type sk has been substituted for s, » for the 
vowel 7, 2 for all the different kinds of nasal 2's, and m for m. 
Further, no distinction has been made in the footnotes between 
the dentals and the cerebrals; c and ¢ are also often used indis- 
criminately there. 

As to the method of transliteration for Chinese words, almost 
every Sinologue has his own; but the one used in this book is that 
of Sir T. Wade, which I think has been adopted more generally 
than others. 


INTRODUCTION, 


CVAGHOSHA, the first expounder of the Maha- 
yanistic doctrine and one of the deepest think- 

ers among the Buddhist patriarchs, is known to most 
Western Buddhist scholars simply as the author of 
the Buddha-caritakdvya,' the famous poem on the life 
of Buddha. The accounts of his life and of the sig- 
nificance of his philosophy are so few that the impor- 
tant influence exercised by him upon the development 
of the Mahayana Buddhism has been left almost en- 
tirely unnoticed. That he was one of the most emi- 
nent leaders among earlier Buddhists; that he was in 
some way or other connected with the third convoca- 
tion in Kashmir, probably presided over by the Bhik- 
shu Parcva; that he had a wonderful poetical genius 
which rendered great service in the propagation of 
Buddhism,—these facts sum up almost all the knowl- 
edge possessed by scholars about Acvaghosha. The 
reason why he is not known as he ought to be, is prin- 
cipally that the Sanskrit sources are extremely mea- 
17he Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XLIX. Beal's English 


translation of the Chinese translation 7ze Yo sho hing tsan king, 
Sia ake WG, Ne DOK. 


2 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


gre, while the accounts obtainable from Chinese and 
Tibetan traditions are confusing and full of legends. 

This fact has led Professor Kern to say that Acva- 
ghosha was not an historical man, but a personifica- 
tion of Kala, a form of Civa.! But the sources from 
which the Professor draws his conclusion are rather 
too meagre and I fear are not worth serious consider- 
ation. In the following pages we shall see by what 
traditions Acvaghosha’s life is known to the Bud- 
dhists of the East. 


DATE. “ 


Let us first decide the date, which varies accord- 
ing to different authorities from three hundred to six 
hundred years after the Parinirvana of Buddha. 

1. The £2 tai san pao chi (fas.. 1),;7 quoting the 
Record of the Sarvastivadin school, says: ‘‘A¢vagho- 
sha Bodhisattva was born a Brahman in Eastern In- 
dia some three hundred years after the Nirvana. After 
he abandoned his worldly life, he refuted all the doc- 
trines held by the tirthakas (heathen),? and writing 


1Der Buddhismus und setne Geschichte in /ndien, author- 
ised German translation, Leipsic, 1884, Vol. II., p. 464. 

4 FET = =F 8. Records of the Triratna Under Successtve 
Dynasties, compiled by i ei: Fe Chang-fang, A. D. 597; 15 
Fascicult. 

3 Tirthaka, which literally means ‘‘ascetics,” was first ap- 
plied to a definite sect, viz., the naked ascetics of the Jains, but 
was later on extended to all dissenters and has therefore been 
translated ‘‘ heretics or heathen.’ The Chinese translation of the 
term literally means ‘‘[followers of] a doctrine other than Bud- 
dhism.” 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 3 


the Mahd-alamkéra-céstra* in several hundred verses 
(ghdtds) greatly propagated the teachings of Bud- 
dha.” 

2. Hui-yuen? states in his commentary (/as. 1) on 
the Mahd-prajné-paramita-césira,® on the authority of 
Kumarajiva Bett (A. D. 339-413), that Ac¢vagho- 
sha flourished about three hundred and seventy years 
after the Nirvana. 

3. In the Life of Vasubandhu,* Acvaghosha is men- 
tioned as a contemporary of Katydyana who is said in 
the same book to have been living in the fifth century 
after the Nirvana. 

4. The writer® of the preface to the second Chi- 
nese translation of the Mahédydna-craddhotpdda-céstra ® 
says that this Castra ‘‘is the deepest of the Mahayana 
texts. Five hundred years after the Nirvana, Acva- 


ghosha appeared in the world. He was numbered. 


1 Translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva, circa A. D. 405. 15 
fas. 


2 232 A. D. 333-416. The leader of the Pai lien she (White 
Lotus Society), first Sukhavati sect movement in China. 


3 Treatise on the Great Wisdom- Perfection, by Nagarjuna. 
A Chinese translation by Kumarajiva, A. D. 402-405. 100 fas. 


4 The original Sanskrit author is unknown. The present Chi- 
nese translation is by Paramartha who came to China from Wes- 
tern India A. D. 546. ‘ 


5 The writer’s name is not mentioned there, nor the date; but 
judging from the knowledge he shows in treating the subject, as 
we shall see later, he must have been living either at the time of 
this second translation or immediately after it. 


6 Discourse on the Awakening of Faith in the Mahéyéna, 
the principal work of A¢vaghosha. 
Pp 12 eS 


4 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


among the four suns [of Buddhists], and his teach- 
ings stood most prominently [among the doctrines 
prevailing] in the five countries of India.” 

5. Sang-ying! states in his preface to the Chinese 
translation of the Mahd-prajnd-péramitd-castra that 
Acvaghosha appeared towards the end of the period 
of Orthodoxy, i. e., five hundred years after the Nir- 
vana. 

6. The Fu tsou t‘ung chi* (Vol. V.) says that it was 
the fulfilment of the Tathagata’s prophecy that six 
hundred years after the Nirvana the Dharma was 
transmitted to Acvaghosha. 

7. This six hundred year prophecy is adopted as 
if it were an unquestionable fact, by Fa-tsang,® a 
learned commentator of the Craddhotpddacdstra (Dis- 
course on the Awakening of Fatth). 

8. Chih-k‘ai #{%, who was the copyist for Para- 
martha when he translated the Craddhotpadacdstra, 
also adheres to the six hundred year tradition in his 
preface to the book just mentioned, saying that some 
six hundred years after the Nirvana of the Tathagata, 
many devilish heretical leaders clamorously protested 


their false doctrines against the good law of Buddha, 


1ff BL A. D. 362-439. One of the four famous disciples of 
Kuméarajiva. 

245 i 4 €2 A history of Buddhism, compiled by Chih-p‘an 
as #, a Chinese priest, during the latter half of the thirteenth 
century. 54 fas. 

°643-712. A most prominent leader of the Avatamsaka sect 
in China. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 5 


when a Cramana of very high virtue, called A¢vagho- 
sha, thoroughly versed in the philosophy of the Maha- 
yana Buddhism and highly compassionate for those 
ignorant people, wrote this Discourse (the (raddhot- 
paddacdstra), in order that he might increase the bril- 
liancy of the Triratna, etc., etc. 

g. The six hundred year tradition is very popular 
among Chinese and Japanese Buddhists. The Fa ¢su 
li tat tung tsai+ (fas. 5) also follows it. 

to. The prophecy above referred to (see No. 8), 
which is doubtless a later invention, appears in the 
Mahdmiéyéd sitra? (fas. 2) as follows: 

‘After the death of Buddha, Mahamaya asked 
Ananda if Buddha had ever told him in his life any- 
thing concerning the future of Buddhism. Respond- 
ing to this, Ananda said: ‘I heard one time Buddha 
say this with regard to the future decline of Bud- 
dhism: ‘‘After the Nirvana Mahakacyapa with Ananda 
will compile the Dharma-pitaka, and when it is settled 
Mahakacyapa will enter into a Nirodha-samapatti in 
the Lang chi shan [i.e., Mount of Wolf’s Track, Kuk- 
kurapadagiri], and Ananda too obtaining the fruit 


1 Hs TH RE FR SER A Lestory of Buddha and the Patriarchs 
Through Successive Dynasties, by Nien chang 4 fs, A. D. 1333. 
36 fas. 

2 The Sfitra is also called the S#tra on Buddha's Ascent to 
the Trayastrimsa Heaven, to Teach the Dharma to [His Mother 
2 fas. A second Chinese translation by Shih T‘an-ching 223% 
of the Ch‘i dynasty #% (A. D. 479-502). His nationality and life 
both are unknown. 


6 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


of enlightenment will in turn enter into Parinirvana, 
when the right doctrine will be transmitted to Upa- 
gupta who will in an excellent manner teach the es- 
sence of the Dharma. . .. When five hundred years 
are passed [after Buddha’s death] a Bhikshu named 
Pao-tien [Ratnadeva?] will in an excellent manner 
teach the essence of the Dharma, converting twenty 
thousand people and causing all sentient beings in 
the eight creations to awaken the Anuttarasamyak- 
sambodhicitta [most-perfect-knowledge-mind]. The 
right doctrine will then go to decline. When six hun- 
dred years [after Buddha’s death] are expired, ninety 
different schools of the tirthakas will arise and pro- 
claiming false doctrines, each will struggle against 
the other to destroy the law of Buddha. Then a 
Bhikshu, Acvaghosha by name, will in an excellent 
manner teach the essence of the Dharma and defeat 
all the followers of the tirthakas. When seven hun- 
dred years [after Buddha’s death] are expired, a 
Bhikshu, Nagarjuna by name, will in an excellent 
manner teach the essence of the Dharma, destroying 
the banner of false philosophy and lighting the torch 
of the right doctrine.” ””’ 

11. Referring to the statement of the above men- 
tioned Siitra, Nagarjuna, a famous Buddhist philoso- 
pher who wrote a commentary on Acvaghosha’s work, 
called Craddhotpddacdstra, claims that there were six 
Acvaghoshas at different times, to fulfil the prophecy 
of Buddha and that the author of the book on which 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 7 


he writes a commentary! was one who appeared on 
earth according to the prophecy in the Mahdmdyd 
sutra. Nagarjuna even states that he was a disciple 


of Acvaghosha, but the work itself is regarded as spu- 


1The Sanskritised title is the A/ahdydana-adstra-vyékhyé, 
trans. into Chinese by Pa-ti-mo-to 4% 4% H &, an Indian priest, 
A. D. 401-402. 10 fas. The statements in full run as follows: 

‘‘In all there were six Acvaghoshas, owing to different pre- 
dictions in the sfitras; each of them appeared to fulfil his mission 
according to the necessity of the time, and there is no contradic- 
tion in them.” 

The author then proceeds to make particular references to 
those sfitras: 

‘‘When we examine all different predictions in the sfitras 
taught by Buddha through his whole life, we find six different 
[personages all called A¢vaghosha]. What are those six? (1) Ac- 
cording to the K #8 A i 32 Tar ch'éng pén fa ch't ching 
(Maha) dnaptrvadharmasttra?) we have the following: When 
the peerless, great, enlightened, honored one was speaking about 
his intention of entering into Nirvana, Acvaghosha rising from the 
seat knelt down, saluted Buddha's feet, and respectively joining 
his hands together turned towards Buddha, the world-honored 
one, and said this in verse: ‘ The peerless one whose heart is filled 
with great love and whose immeasurable virtues have been accu- 
mulated through zons which are like a boundless ocean, the Bud- 
dha, only on account of love and compassion for all sentient be- 
ings, now speaks about his entering into Nirvana, and I and all 
the other members of the Samgha feel an unspeakable despair, 
utterly confused in mind and spirit. If even the world-honored 
one, full of great love, is going to another world, leaving his own 
children behind him, why then could not I who am not yet full of 
love and compassion go to another world following Buddha’s steps? 
Who can blame me?’ When finished uttering these words, Acva- 
ghosha gazed at the pupil of Buddha’s eye and gradually passed 
out of life. (2) The # 46 Dj & 32 #® Pren ‘hua kung té chit 
ching (Vikriyapunyasttra?) says: Then the Bhagavat said to 
Acvaghosha: ‘Three hundred years after my Nirvana thou shalt 
obtain an inspiration from me and with various methods (wAdéva) 


8 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


rious, on account of some obvious contradictions, 
though the followers of the Mantra sect (Shingonshyu) 
insist on its genuineness, because they are anxious to 
have an ancient authority for their own mystic doc- 


trines, which are here supported. 


benefit and make happy all beings in coming generations. When 
thou dost not have any inspiration from me, thou canst not do 
this by thyself.’ (3) The 2 i BBS 22 Mahdméayéasttra says 
as follows: ‘When six hundred years are passed after the dis- 
appearance of the Tathagata, ninety-six different schools of the 
tirthakas will arise, and professing false doctrines, each will strug- 
gle against the other. to destroy the law of Buddha. A Bhik- 
shu called Acvaghosha, however, will in an excellent manner pro- 
claim the essence of the Dharma and defeat all followers of the 
tirthakas. (4) In the ®M#=R RE Change té san met chit 
ching (Sitra on the Samadhi of Eternal Merit) we read: In the 
eight hundredth year after the Nirvana there will be a wise man, 
Acvaghosha by name. Among the followers of the tirthakas as 
well as those of Buddhism, he will refute all those who cherish 
heretical views and will establish the Dharma taught by Buddha. 
(5) In the BS vé Ys YF 32 HK Mo ni ch'ing ching cht ching (Mani- 
vimdlasttra?) is said thus: About one hundred years after the 
Nirvana of Buddha, A¢vaghosha Mahasattva will appear on earth 
protect the right doctrine and safely hoist the banner of Buddhism. 
(6) In the RR TB £28 Shéng ting wang cht ching (Crimtr- 
dhardasttra?) is said thus: On the seventeenth day after the 
enlightenment of Buddha there was a tirthaka called im St i 
#8 X BB Chia-lo-no-chiu-shih-to (KAlanakshita ?), who transform- 
ing himself into the figure of a great ndgardja (i. e., snake-king) 
with 86,000 heads and 86,000 tongues, simultaneously proposed 
86,000 contradicting questions and asked the Tathagata [for the 
solution]. He then gave him a triple answer explaining all those 
paradoxes. The nagaradja then proposed tenfold questions, again 
asking the Tathagata [for their solution], to which he gave a hun- 
dredfold answers and explained their paradoxes. When this dia- 
logue came to an end, Buddha said to the nagaraja: ‘Very good, 
very good, O Acvaghosha Cramana! in order to guard the castle 
of the Dharma, thou hast assumed this form of destruction, estab- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 9 


Deeply absorbed in metaphysical speculation, the 
inhabitants of India paid very little attention to his- 
tory, and whenever we endeavor to ascertain the date 
of important historical figures we are sure to find our 
way to certainty barred. So we cannot decide which 
of the conflicting traditions above enumerated is to 
be considered as authentic. When taken indepen- 
dently of other historical events which are connected 
with them and whose dates have been already fixed, 
they have no value whatever. Besides it should be 
observed, the chronology of Buddha, to which every 
one of the traditions makes reference, is as yet un- 
settled and must have been still more so at the time 
when those traditions were current in India as well as 
in China. If they differed as to the date of Buddha, 
they might have maintained the same date for Acva- 
ghosha; no one can tell. We have to seek a light 
from another source. | 

Another group of traditions centering around Ac- 
vaghosha is his connexion with a most powerful king 
of Yiieh chih 4 iM, who established his extensive 
kingdom in Northwestern India. Who was this king? 
In the #¢ %jR#E Zsa pao tsang ching (Samyuktaratna- 
lishing the doctrine of Buddha. Be eae be patient, always 
discipline thyself in this way, always behave thyself in this way, 
do not go round in a small circle, but make a universal tour.’ The 
nagdradja then abandoning his assumed beast-form revealed his 
own real character and approaching the peerless, honored one and 


saluting him said rejoicingly in verse, etc., etc, This is the sixth 
Acvaghosha,”’ 


10 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


pitaka-stitra?)}, fas. 7, we read: ‘‘A king of Tukhara, 
Candana Kanishtha? (or Kanita? Chinese #4 #4 jgj WWE IE 
chan-tan-chi-ni-ch‘a) had a close friendship with three 
wise men: the first one was a Bodhisattva, called 
Acvaghosha; the second, a minister of state called 
Mo-cha-lo (Mathara or Madara?); the third, an expe- 
rienced physician called Ché-lo-chia (Cafaka). With 
these three the king was on most intimate terms and 
treated them with the utmost cordiality, permitting 
them to approach his person. Acvaghosha said [one 
day] to him that if he [the king] would follow his ad- 
vice, he would obtain in his coming life everything 
that was good, eternally put an end to all his misfor- 


tunes and forever be free from evil.”.. .? 


1 Sutra on the Casket of Miscellaneous Jewels. The original 
Sanskrit author is unknown. Translated into Chinese by Chi- 
chia-yeh (3 31 % Kimkara ?) of the Western country and T‘an- 
yao 2s lf, A.D. 472. 8 fas. The original text is said to have 
existed at the time when the Chéng-yiian Catalogue ICE was 
compiled (A. D. 785-804) by Yiian-chao {Aj $4, a Buddhist priest 
of the Tang if dynasty (A. D. 618-907). 


2Does Kanishtha, which literally means ‘‘ youngest,” refer to 
the youngest of the three brothers who successively governed the 
Tukhara district of India? If so, there is no question about the 
identity of him and King Kanishka. 


3The Fu fa tsang ch'uan (Transmission of the Dharma- 
pitaka), fas. 5, also seems to refer to the same tradition, for it is 
stated that when a king of Tukhdra (probably Kanishka) was very 
much afflicted on account of his having committed many atrocious 
deeds in the war with Parthia (Eastern Persia), A¢vaghosha told 
him that if he would follow the Dharma with a sincere heart, his 
sin would gradually be attenuated; and also that the same king 
had a physician called Caraka ‘‘ who thoroughly understood phar- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. EI 


Acvaghosha’s relation with King Candana Kanish- 
tha (or Kanita? Chinese Chi-ni-ch‘a) is told also in 
the fu fa tsang yin ytian ch‘uan,' fas. 5: 

“TAt that time] the king of Tukhara was very 
powerful. He was called Candana Kanishtha [or 
Kanita? Chinese Chi-ni-ch‘a]. Being very ambitious 
and bold, and far superior in courage to all his con- 
temporaries, every country he invaded was sure to be 
trampled down under his feet. So when he advanced 
his four armies towards Pataliputra [Hua shih ch‘éng 
in Chinese], the latter was doomed to. defeat in spite 
of some desperate engagements. The king demanded 
an indemnity of 900,000,000 gold pieces, for which 
the defeated king offered Acvaghosha, the Buddha- 
bowl and a compassionate fowl, each being consid- 
ered worth 300,000,000 gold pieces. The Bodhisattva 
Acvaghosha had intellectual powers inferior to none; 
the Buddha-bowl having been carried by the Tatha- 
gata himself is full of merits; the fowl being of com- 
passionate nature, would not drink any water with 
worms in it,—thus all these having merits enough to 


keep off all enemies, they are on that account worth 


macy, and who was clever, learned, intelligent, elegant, meek, and 
compassionate,” etc. = 


1 A 3: HRB BE PR Accounts Relating to the Transmission of 
the Dharmapitaka. 6 fas. The original Sanskrit author is un- 
known. The third Chinese translation now existent is by Chi- 
chia-yeh (Kimkara?) of the Western country, A. D. 472. The 
original text is said to have been existing when the Chéng yiian 
Catalogue (A. D. 785-804) was compiled. 


TZ ACVAGHOSHA’S 


g00,000,000 gold pieces.! The king [of Tukhara] was 
greatly pleased at receiving them, and immediately 
withdrawing his army from the land went back to his 
own kingdom.” 

We have the same legend stated in a brief biogra- 
phy? of Acvaghosha as follows: 

“After that a king of the smaller Yiieh chih coun- 
try [i. e., Tukhara] in North India invaded the Mid- 
dle country [i. e., Magadha]. When the besieging 
had continued for some time, the king of Central In- 
dia sent a message [to the invader] saying: ‘‘If there 
be anything you want, I will supply it; do not disturb 
the piece of my people by thus long staying here,’ to 
which this reply was given: ‘If you really ask a sur- 
render, send me 300,000,000 gold pieces; I will re- 
lease you.’ The [besieged] king said: ‘Even this 
entire kingdom cannot produce 100,000,000 gold 
pieces, how can I supply you with 300,000,000?’ The 
answer was: ‘There are in your country two great 
treasures: (1) the Buddha-bowl,! (2) a Bhikshu of 


1 This is a comical feature of the legend, for if these treasures 
could ward off all enemies why did they not protect the unfortu- 
nate king of Pataliputra against Kanishtha ? 

2Life of Acgvaghosha B65 7% §F fh, translated into Chinese 
by Kuméarajiva. Very short. The author is unknown. The origi- 
nal Sanskrit text is stated in the Chéng yuan Catalogue to have 
been existing at that time Cf. Wassijew’s Auddhismus, German 
edition, p. 231 et seq. 

®Fa-hien 7 2 states that Kanishka (which is transliterated 
by him into Chinese Chi-ni-chia f&j fg #2, corresponding to San- 
skrit Kanika) as if a different person from the king of Yiieh chih 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 13 


wonderful talent (i. e., Acvaghosha). Give them to 
me, they are worth 300,000,000 gold pieces.’ The 
[besieged] king said: ‘Those two treasures are what 
I most revere, I cannot give them up.’ Thereupon 
the Bhikshu said to the king in explanation of the 
Dharma: 

«© <All sentient beings are everywhere the same, 
while Buddhism, deep and comprehensive, aims at 
universal salvation, and the highest virtue of a great 
man consists in delivering [all] beings. As our tem- 
poral administration is very liable to meet obstruc- 
tions, even your rule does not extend itself outside of 
this one kingdom. If you, on the other hand, propose 
a wide propagation of Buddhism, you would naturally 
be a Dharmaraja over the four oceans. The duty of 
a Bhikshu is to save [fall] the people and not to give 
preference to one or the other. Merits lie in our 
heart; truth makes no distinction. Pray, be far- 
sighted, and do not think only of the present.’ 

‘¢The king who was from the first a great admirer 
of him, respectfully followed his advice and delivered 
him to the king of Yiieh chih who returned with him 
to his own kingdom.” 

Comparing all these traditions, we are naturally 
led to the conclusion that Acvaghosha, who was num- 
bered as one of the four suns! of Buddhism, must have 


who invaded Gandhara to get the Buddha-bowl. Vide Legge’s 
translation of Fa-hien, pp. 33 and 34. 

1 Hsiien-tsang’s % Be Records of Western Countries, Beal’s 
English translation, Vol. II., p. 302. 


14 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


had a very powerful influence over the spiritual India 
of the time, that the king who wished to have him as 
a spiritual adviser must have been a very devoted Bud- 
dhist so as to accept a Bhikshu instead of an enor- 
mous sum of money, and that such a devoted Buddhist 
king, ruling over the vast domain which extended 
from the bank of the Indus towards the lower Ganges, 
must have been living sometime between the third 
and sixth century after the Nirvana, whatever the 
authentic date of Buddha might be. The next con- 
clusion we can advance therefore will be the identifi- 
cation of this king who is called Candana Kanishtha 
or Kanita in the above stories, with Kanishka,! the 
originator of the third Buddhist convocation in Kash- 
mir. 

As to the difference of the name, we have to say 
this. While Hsiien-tsang’s transliteration for Kanishka 
is Chia-ni-shé-chia {4 which is quite an approx- 
imate reproduction of the original sounds, the Chinese 
method of transliteration before his time by the so- 
called ‘‘old translators’ was rather irregular, loose 
and therefore often misleading. Add to this the liabil- 
ity to error on the part of local dialects, and we do not 
improperly identify Chi-ni-ch‘a, with Kanishka, while 
the former may be Sanskritised Kanishta or Kanita.? 

1A. D. 85-106, according to M. Miiller. 

2 One objection to identifying Chi-ni-ch'a fijWEIL (Kanishtha 
or Kanita) with Kanishka #2 fa if is a single Chinese character 


appearing in the Wahdlamkdaragastra (Book of Great Glory), the 
work ascribed to Acvaghosha. In /as. 3 as well as fas. 6 of the 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. ES 


In further support of this view, we quote from the 
Journal of the Buddhist Text Society, Vol. 1., Part 3, 
an article on King Kanishka, taken from a Tibetan 
source, which bears a more historical appearance than 
the legends above referred to. The abstract is: 


‘Kanishka, king of Palhava and Delhi,! was born 
four hundred years after the Nirvana. When he learned 
that Simha, king of Kashmir, abandoned the worldly 
life to become a Buddhist priest under the name of 
Sudarcana and obtained Arhatship, he went to Kash- 
mir and heard a sermon delivered by Sudarcana.? At 


that time a Mahayana priest who held a most prom- 


same book referring to Candana Kanishtha or Kanita, the writer 
Says 6! 42 ey ee Bl it F2  WE NE Wo hast chiang wén, chan-t'an 
chi-nt-ché wang,” i. e., ‘‘I heard of old that King Candana Ka- 
nishtha,” etc. (in fas. 6., chia-ni-ch‘a), etc., etc. The Chinese 
character /sz usually means ‘‘of yore” or ‘‘in olden times,”’ but it 
also signifies the past indefinitely, near as well as distant. If we 
thus understand the term in the sense of ‘‘some time ago,” or simply 
‘‘once,” there will be no difficulty in demonstrating that Acvagho- 
sha was an elder contemporary of Kanishka, though we cannot ap- 
parently accept the Chinese tradition which says they were inti- 
mately known to each other. Because in that case Acvaghosha 
would not refer to the king in such a hearsay manner as stated in 
the book above mentioned. Taking all in all, this does not prevent 
us asserting that they were contemporaneous. 


1Cf. A. Schiefner’s German translation of Taranatha’s Ais 
tory of Buddhism, p. 89: ‘‘Nachdem Ké6nig Critschandra die 
Herrschaft ausgeiibt hatte, waren viele Jahre vergangen, als im 
Westen im Lande Tili und Malava ein an Jahren junger Kénig 
Kanika in die Herrschaft gewahlt wurde.” 

*Taranatha’s statement differs from this. According to him 
Kanika and Kanishka are not the same king, the former being that 
of Tili and Malava, while the latter that of Jalamdhara. V7de 
pp. 58 andgo. Tdarandtha might have confused them. 


16 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


inent position in northern countries was called Acva- 
ghosha. His influence in the spiritual world was as 
incomparable as the temporal power of Kanishka who 
conquered Kashmir and Jalamdhara. The king sent 
a message to Acvaghosha to come to his kingdom, 
who, however, owing to his old age, could not accept 
the invitation, but sent him a leading disciple of his 
called Jianayaca, accompanied with a letter treating 
the essential points of Buddhism.’’} 

Though the Tibetan tradition considerably differs 
in many respects from the Chinese accounts above 
mentioned, they both agree in this point that Acva- 
ghosha and Kanishka had some intercourse, or that at 
least they were contemporaneous and known to each 
other. So we may take it as an established fact that 
Acvaghosha, the author of the & 3 #2 {3 i Wahdydana- 
craddhotpada-castra (Discourse on the Awakening of 
Faith in the Mahdydna), was living at the time of Ka- 
nishka.? 

I do not think there is any need here to enumerate 
all different opinions about the time of Kanishka, 
which has been already approximately fixed by the 
untiring investigation of European scholars, such as 


Princep, Lassen, Cunningham, Wilson, Fergusson, 


1Tarandtha also states this event (Geschichte des Buddhis- 
mus, p. 92). But the king is not Kanishka, but Kanika; and the 
name of the disciple is not Jidnayaga, but Dschnanakriya. 

*A further corroboration of this view will be met with when 
we treat later on of the conversion of A¢vaghosha by Parcva or his 
disciple Punyayacas. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 7 


Max Miller, and others.! So long as our present 
aim is to assign the time of Acvaghosha more def- 
initely than stating vaguely some three or five hundred 
years after the Nirvana of Buddha, suffice it to say 
that he lived at the time extending from the latter half 
of the first century before Christ to about 50 or 80 
A. D. If we fix the date of Buddha’s death in the fifth 
century before Christ, Acvaghosha must be said to 
have lived during the six hundredth year after the Nir- 
vana. At the very most his time cannot be placed 
later than the first century of the Christian era. 

I have spared no pains, even at the risk of tedious- 
ness, in gathering all the information obtainable from 
Chinese sources relative to the date of Acvaghosha, 
because this date is of paramount importance when 
we enter into the discussion of the development of the 
Mahayana Buddhism, which is commonly and erro- 


neously considered to be the sole work of Nagarjuna. 


NATIVITY AND PEREGRINATIONS. 


There is not so much discordance in the traditions 
about the wanderings of Acvaghosha as about his date, 
though indeed we do not have as yet any means of 


ascertaining his birth-place, other than the statements 
! Max Miiller’s opinion, as stated before, is that Kanishka lived 
A. D. 85-106; Lassen thinks the Gondopharean dynasty was suc- 
ceeded by Kanishka, king of the Yiieh chih, about one hundred 
years before Christ ; Princep places his reign during the first cen- 
tury A. D.; Cunningham thinks his consecration was 58 A. D.; 
Fergusson, 79 A. D.; Rhys Davids, about 10 A. D., etc. 


18 ACVAGHOSHA S 


of discordant authorities. According to Taranatha,} 
he was a son of a rich Brahman called Samghaguhya 
who married the tenth and youngest daughter of a 
merchant in Khorta. As a youth, when thoroughly 
familiar with every department of knowledge, he went 
to Odivica, Gaura, Tirahuti, Kamarfipa, and some 
other places, defeating everywhere his Buddhist oppo- 
nents by his ingenious logic. 

All these places are situated in Eastern India, and 
among the Chinese traditions the Record of the Tri- 
ratna (Li tai san pao chi) as well as the Accounts of 
Buddha and the Patriarchs (fo tsu tung chi) agree with 
Taranatha in placing Acvaghosha’s native land in the 
East; but the Life of Vasubandhu makes Acvaghosha 
a native of Bhashita in Cravasti, while in Nagarjuna’s 
work, the Mahdydnacdstravydkhyd FREE A i  ~CSAth mo 
ho yen lun), he is mentioned as having been born in 
Western India, Loka being the father and Ghona the 
mother. The Record of Buddha and the Patriarchs Un- 
der Successive Dynasties (Fo tsu lt tat t‘ung tsat) agrees 
with neither of the above statements, for it says (/as- 
cicult 5): ‘‘The twelfth patriarch, Acvaghosha Maha- 
sattva was a native of Varanasi.” A further contra- 
dicting tradition is pointed out by Prof. S. Murakami 
in one of his articles on the history of Buddhism,? 
quoting the Shittanzd % Byx (fas. 1), which makes 
Acvaghosha a man of South India. 


1 Geschichte des Buddhismus, p. 90. 
*The Bukkyd Shirin, Vol. 1., No. 6. 1894. Tokyo, Japan. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 19 


A majority of the traditions place his native coun- 
try in East India; but there is no means of confirm- 
ing these. One thing, however, seems to be certain, 
namely, that Acvaghosha was not born in the northern 
part of India, which place is supposed by most West- 
ern Buddhist scholars to be the cradle of the Maha- 
yana school. 

Wherever the native country of Acvaghosha may 
have been, both the Chinese and Tibetan records agree 
that he made a journey to Central India, or Magadha. 
It seems that every intellectual man in India, the peo- 
ple of which, living in affluence, were not occupied 
with the cares of making a living, sought to gain 
renown by dialectics and subtle reasonings, and Acva- 
ghosha, as a Brahman whose ‘‘intellectual acquire- 
ments were wonderfully deep,” and whose <<‘ penetrat- 
ing insight was matchless,” could not resist the 
temptation. Not satisfied with his intellectual cam- 


paign against commonplace Buddhists in his neighbor- 
hood, who were crushed down as ‘‘ rotten wood before 


a raging hurricane,’’? he went, according to a Chinese 
tradition, to Pataliputra, and according to the Tibetan, 
to Nalanda. The Life of Acvaghosha evidently refers 
to this fact when it states that Par¢va, the eleventh 
patriarch and eventual teacher of Acvaghosha, on be- 


ing informed of the paramount influence of the Brah- 


1The Transmission of the Dharmafpitaka (Fu fa tsang 
ch'uan, fas. 5). 


2 The same as above. 


20 ACVAGHOSHA § 


man tirthaka (i. e., Acvaghosha) in Central India and 
of the fact that his conquest over Buddhists had si- 
lenced the bell (gian¢fa) in some monastery (vzhdra), 
journeyed from Northern India to convert the bitterest 
opponent into a faithful follower of Buddha. He adds 
that Acvaghosha left his home and lived henceforth in 
Central India. But according to the 7ransmission of 
the Dharmapitaka (fu fa tsang ch‘uan, fas. 5) we find 
Acvaghosha even after his conversion still in Patali- 
putra, from which he was taken by King Kanishka to 
the latter’s own capital, Gandhara, in the Northwest 
of India. 

Thus all that we can say about the birth-place and 
wanderings of Acvaghosha is: (1) he was a Brahman 
by birth either of South, or of West, or of East, but 
not of North India; (2) he acquired in Central India 
his highest reputation as a Brahman disputant, and, 
after his conversion, as the greatest Buddha follower 
of the time, intellectually as well as morally; (3) his 
later life was spent according to the Chinese authority 
in the North where he wrote probably the d/ahélam- 
kidra-sitracdstra (Book of Great Glory) which describes 


matters mostly relating to Western India. 


APPELLATIONS. 
The author of the Mahdydnacraddhotpidacastra 
(Discourse on the Awakening of Faith in the Mahdydna) 
is most commonly known in the Chinese Buddhist 


literature by the name of Acvaghosha. But according 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 21 


to his Zzfe he was also called Kung-té-jih #4 (i. e., 
merit-sun; in Sanskrit, Punyaditya?). For he was 
not only a philosopher, but a preacher and an organ- 
iser, for ‘while in North India he widely propagated 
the doctrine of Buddha, led and benefited the masses, 
and through good and excellent [missionary] methods 
perfected the merits of the people.” The Record of 
Buddha and the Patriarchs (Fo tsou tung tsaz), where 
it is stated that his other name was Kung-chang 9 # 
(Punyacrika?), can be said almost to agree with the 
above. While thus no other name or appellation of 
his is known in China, Taranatha mentions nine more 
names: Kala (Time), Durdarsha (Hard-to-be-seen), 
Durdarshakala (Hard-to-be-seen-time), Matrceta 
(Mother-child), Pitrceta (Father-child), Cara (Hero), 
Dharmika-Subhiti (Virtuous-mighty), and Maticitra 
(Intelligence-bright) .1 

In I-tsing’s Correspondence from the South Sea (Nan 
hai cht kuet ch‘uan,? Chap. 32, ‘‘On chanting”), the 
name Matrceta is mentioned, but I-tsing does not 
identify him with Acvaghosha, though the legend 
attached to the former closely resembles that of the 
latter toldin Taranatha. Taranatha states that when 
Acvaghosha became a sthavira and advocate of the 


1 Geschichte des Buddhismus, p. 90. 

2 HH te Sy GTR by I-tsing #€ HF who left China A. D. 671 for 
a pilgrimage to India and came back A. D. 695. The book is a 
work on the vinaya as observed by the Sarvdstivddin, which the 
pilgrim witnessed in India as well as in Ceylon. An English trans- 
tion by J. Takakusu, London, 


22 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Tripitaka, he had a dream one night in which the ven- 
erable Tara gave him the instruction to write hymns 
on Buddha for the expiation of his former sinful deeds ; 
that according to this admonition he wrote many 
hymns praising the virtues of Buddha, amongst which 
one containing one hundred and fifty clokas! is the best 
of all; that the hymns composed by him are full of 
benediction like the very words of Buddha, because 
he was predicted by the Blessed One to be a hymnist.? 

Compare the above with this from I-tsing: 

‘¢The venerable Matrceta (Mother-child) was a 
man of great intellect, of excellent virtue, eminently 
standing above all sages in India. A traditior says 
that when Buddha was taking a walk one time with 
his kinsmen, disciples, and many other people, a night- 
ingale (?), observing his personal feature as elegant 
and majestic as a gold mountain, uttered in the wood 
some pleasant, harmonious notes that sounded like 
praising the virtues of Buddha. Buddha then turning 
towards the disciples said: ‘The bird overcome by 
the joy of seeing me utters a pitiful cry. By this merit 
it will after my death obtain a human form, Matrceta 
BB GENE HIE by name, and praise and adore my intrinsic 
virtues with a number of hymns.’ This man first fol- 


lowed the doctrine of a tirthaka worshipping Mahec- 


1Schiefner notes: Catapantschacatika nama stotra, Tandjur 
B. 1, unter den Stotra’s. 
2 Geschichte des Buddhismus, p. 91. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 23 


vara/ and composed many hymns to adore him. But 
in the meantime he came across his own name recorded 
[in a Buddhist writing]; inspired by this, he took re- 
fuge in Buddha, changed his garb, abandoned his 
laymanship, and in many ways praised, honored and 
adored Buddha. Regretting his misbehavior in the 
past and desiring to perform good deeds in the future 
and also lamenting the unfortunate fate that prevented 
him from having a personal interview with the Great 
Teacher rather than bowing before his bequeathed 
image, he at last decided with all his rhetorical talent 
and in solemn fulfilment of the Lord’s prophecy, to 
praise his virtues and merits [in hymns]. He first 
composed four hundred clokas and then one hundred 
and fifty clokas ;? all of which describe the six Para- 
mitas [Perfections] and state the excellent virtues 
possessed by the World-Honored-One,” etc. 

At the end of the same Chapter (1. e., ‘Chap. 32) 
in I-tsing’s Correspondence he refers to Acvaghosha and 
Nagarjuna both of whom composed some beautiful 
and popular hymns that were sung by Buddhists 
throughout India at the time of his pilgrimage. But if 


the Tibetan statement is reliable, I-tsing may have 


1Cf. the following statement in Tdranatha, p. go: ‘‘ Als er 
(Acvaghosha) in den Mantra- und Tantra-Formeln und in der Dia- 
lektik sehr bewandert wurde, gab ihm Maheg¢vara selbst Anlei- 
tung.” 

2«* Hymn of One Hundred and Fifty Clokas” (CatapaficAshad- 
buddhastotra), translated into Chinese by I-tsing during his stay in 
the Nalanda-vihara, Central India. At the time of the compilation 
of the Chéng yiian catalogue the original is said to have existed. 


24 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


been mistaken in recording Acvaghosha and Matrceta 
as different characters. The Tibetan and Chinese 
version of the one hundred and fifty cloka hymn being 
still existent, the comparison of which, however, I 
have not yet been able to make, will furnish an in- 
teresting testimony for the identification. 

Many legendary explanations have been invented 
about the name of Acvaghosha, as might be expected 
of the imaginative Indian mind, but not being worth 
while quoting from the materials at my command, no 


reference will be made to them here. 


CONVERSIONS. 


A consensus of traditions both Tibetan and Chinese 
maintains that Acvaghosha was in his earlier life a 
most powerful adherent of Brahmanism, though we 
are tempted to discredit it on the ground that later 
Buddhist writers may have wished to exaggerate the 
superiority of Buddhism to all other Indian philosoph- 
ical and religious doctrines, by chronicling the con- 
version of one of its strongest opponents to their side. 
Whatever the origin of the legend may be, how did 
his conversion take place? By whom was he con- 
verted? About these points the Tibetan and the 
Chinese tradition by no means agree, the one standing 
in a direct contradiction to the other. While the 
Tibetan account is full of mystery and irrationality, 
the Chinese is natural enough to convince us of its 


probable occurrence. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 25 


According to Taranatha! Aryadeva, the most em- 
inent disciple of Nagarjuna, defeated and proselyted 
Acvaghosha,? not by his usual subtlety in dialectics, 
but by the superiority of his magical arts. Acvaghosha 
made use of every tantric formula he could command, 
in order to free himself from the enchantment in which 
he was held by his enemy, but all to no purpose what- 
ever. Thus when he was in an utterly desperate con- 
dition, he happened to read the Buddhist Stitra which 
was kept in his place of confinement and in which he 
found his destiny prophesied by Buddha,’ he was 
seized with deep regret for his former hostile attitude 
toward the Dharma, and immediately renouncing his 
tirthakism, professed the doctrine of Cakyamuni. 

The Tibetan tradition presents some unmistakable 
indications of a later invention: the use of tantric 
formule, the so-called prophecy of the Tathagata, and 
the anachronism of Aryadeva. On the other hand, 
the Chinese records are worth crediting, though they 
are not unanimous as to how the conversion took 
place and who was the proselytist. 

According to the Life of Acvaghosha, Parcva‘ was 


1 Geschichte des Buddhismus, German translation by Schief- 
ner, pp. 84-85. < 

2 He is mentioned there by the name of Durdarshakala. 

3 Cf. this with the accounts of Matrceta-A¢vaghosha told in 
I-tsing. 

4 The conversion of Ac¢vaghosha by Par¢va as here stated may 
be considered an addition to the proof already demonstrated for 
the contemporaneousness of A¢vaghosha and King Kanishka; for 


26 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


the man who converted him. They agreed at their 
first meeting that on the seventh day thence they 
should have the king, ministers, crdmanas, tirthakas 
and all great teachers of the Dharma gathered in the 
Vihara and have their discussion there before all those 
people. ‘‘In the sixth night the sthavira entered into 
a samadhi and meditated on what he had to do [in 
the morning]. When the seventh day dawned, a great 
crowd was gathered like clouds. The Sthavira Par¢va 
arrived first and ascended a high platform with an 
unusually pleasant countenance. The tirthaka [1. e., 
Acvaghosha] came later and took a seat opposite 
him. When he observed the cramana with a pleasant 
countenance and in good spirits, and when he also 
observed his whole attitude showing the manner of 
an able opponent, he thought: ‘May he not be Bhik- 
shu Chin? His mind is calm and pleasant, and be- 
sides he bears the manner of an able antagonist. We 
shall indeed have an excellent discussion to-day.’ 
‘‘They then proposed the question how the de- 
feated one should be punished. The tirthaka [Acva- 
ghosha] said: ‘The defeated one shall have his tongue 
cut out.’ The sthavira replied: ‘No, he shall become 
a disciple [of the winner] as the acknowledgement of 
defeat.’ The tirthaka then replied: ‘Let it be so,’ 
and asked, ‘Who will begin the discussion?’ The 


Par¢va, according to the Tibetan as well as the Chinese authority, 
was a co-operator at least, if not the president, of the third Bud- 
dhist convocation promoted by the King of Kashmir. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 27 


Sthavira Parcva said: ‘1 am more advanced in age; 
I came from afar for the purpose [of challenging you]; 
and moreover I was here this morning earlier than 
you. So it will be most natural for me to speak first.’ 
The tirthaka said: ‘Let it be so. Following the sub- 
ject of your argument, I shall completely baffle you.’ 

‘<The Sthavira Par¢va then said: ‘What shall we 
have to do, in order to keep the kingdom in perfect 
peace, to have the king live long, to let the people 
enjoy abundance and prosperity, all free from evils 
and catastrophies?’ The tirthaka was silent, not 
knowing what to reply. As now according to the rule 
of discussion one who could not make a response is 
defeated, Acvaghosha was obliged to bow [before the 
opponent] as a disciple of his. He had his head 
shaved, was converted to a cramana, and instructed 
in the perfection-precepts. 

‘When he [Acvaghosha] was alone in his room, 
he was absorbed in gloomy, unpleasant reflexion as 
to why he, possessing a bright intellect and far-sighted 
discretion, and having his reputation widely spread 
all over the world, could be defeated with a single 
question and be made a disciple of another. Parcva 
well knew his mind and ordered him to come to his 
room where the master manifested*himself in several 
supernatural transformations. Acvaghosha now fully 
recognised that his master was not a man of ordinary 
type, and thus feeling happy and contented, thought 
it his duty to become one of his disciples. 


28 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


‘*The master told him: ‘Your intellect is bright 
enough, hard to find its equal; but it wants a final 
touch. If you study the doctrine I have mastered, 
attend to my capability and insight into the Bodhi, 
and if you become thoroughly versed in the method 
of discussion and clearly understand the principle of 
things, there will be no one who can match you in 
the whole world.’ 

‘«The master returned to his own country [North 
India]; the disciple remained in Central India, mak- 
ing an extensive study of the Siitras, seeking a clear 
comprehension of the doctrine, Buddhistic as well as 
non-Buddhistic. His oratorical genius swept every- 
thing before him, and he was reverentially honored 
by the four classes of the people, including the king 
of [Central] India who treated him as a man of dis- 
tinction.”’ 

According to the Zransmission of the Dharmapitaka 
(Fu fa tsang chuan), however, Acvaghosha was not 
converted by Pareva, but by his disciple and patri- 
archal successor, Punyayacas. Though the two works, 
Life of Acvaghosha and the book just mentioned, differ 
in some other points, they are evidently two different 
versions of the one original legend. As the book is 
not as yet accessible to English readers, I here pro- 
duce the whole matter translated from the Chinese 
version. The comparison will prove interesting. 

‘‘Fuil of a proud and arrogant spirit that speedily 
grew like a wild plant, he [Acvaghosha] firmly be- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 29 


lieved in the existence of an ego-entity and cherished 
the ultra-egotistic idea. Being informed that an 
Acarya called Punyayacas, who, deep in knowledge 
and wide in learning, proclaimed that all things are 
relative [=cznya, lit. empty], there is no dtman, no 
dudgala; Acvaghosha’s arrogant spirit asserted itself, 
and presenting himself to Punyayacas challenged 
him saying: ‘I confute all [false] opinions and doc- 
trines in the world, as hailstones strike tender grass. 
If my declaration prove false and not true, I will have 
my own tongue cut out in acknowledgment of defeat.’ 
Thereupon Punyayacas explained to him that Bud- 
dhism distinguishes two kinds of truth, that while 
‘practical truth’ hypothetically admits the existence 
of an d¢man, there is nothing conditional in ‘pure [or 
absolute] truth,’ all being calm and tranquil, and that 
therefore we cannot prove the ego as an absolute 
entity. . 
‘‘Acvaghosha would not yet surrender himself, 
because being over-confident of his own intellectual 
power he considered himself to have gained the point. 
Punyayacas said: ‘Carefully think of yourself; tell 
not a lie. We will see which of us has really won.’ 
‘‘Acvaghosha meanwhile came to think that while 
‘practical truth’ being only conditional has no reality 
at all, ‘pure truth’ is calm and tranquil in its nature, 
and that therefore these two forms of truth are all 


unobtainable, and that if they have thus no actuality 


30 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


[or existence], how could they be refuted [as false] ? 
So feeling now the superiority of his opponent, he 
tried to cut out his tongue in acknowledgement of the 
defeat. But Punyayacas stopped him, saying: ‘We 
teach a doctrine of love and compassion, and do not 
demand that you cut out your tongue. Have your 
head shaved instead and be my disciple.’ Acvaghosha 
thus converted was made a cramana by Punyayacas. 

‘¢But Acvaghosha who felt extremely ashamed of 
his [former] self-assumption was thinking of attempt- 
ing his own life. Punyayacas, however, attaining 
arhatship, entered into a samadhi and divined what 
was going on in the mind of Acvaghosha. He ordered 
him to go and bring some books out of the library. 
Acvaghosha said to the Acarya: ‘The room is per- 
fectly dark; how can I get in there?’ To this Punya- 
yacas answered: ‘Just go in, and I shall let you have 
hie den the Acarya through his supernatural 
power stretched far into the room his right hand 
whose five fingers each radiating with light illumi- 
nated everything inside of the walls. Acvaghosha 
thought it a mental hallucination, and knowing the 
fact that a hallucination as a rule disappears when 


one is conscious of it, he was surprised to see the 


1The reasoning is somewhat unintelligible. The passages 
must be defective, and although I might venture to supply the 
necessary words to make them more logical and intelligible to the 
general reader who is not acquainted with the ¢@yatda philosophy. 
I have not tried to do so, thinking that it is enough here if we see 
in what the subject of the discussion consisted. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 31 


light glowing more and more. He tried his magical 
arts to extinguish it till he felt utterly exhausted, for 
the mysterious light suffered no change whatever. 
Finally coming to realise that it was the work of no 
other person than his teacher, his spirit was filled 
with remorse, and he thenceforth apphed himself dil- 
igently to religious discipline and never relapsed.’’! 

The Record of Buddha and the Patriarchs (Fo tsou 
tung tsat) agrees with the Zransmission of the Dharma- 
pitaka (Fu fa tsang chuan) in making Punyayagas, in- 
stead of Parcva, the master of the conversion. But 
the former does not state how Acvaghosha was con- 
verted. 

Though so far it remains an open question who 
was the real master of Acvaghosha, we can be sure of 
this, that he had intimate spiritual communication 
with both Parcva and Punyayacas. Parcva, who was 
an older contemporary of Punyayacas, was probably 
already advanced in age when Acvaghosha came to 
be personally acquainted with him, and so he did not 
have time enough to lead the young promising dis- 
ciple to a consummate understanding of the doctrine 
of Buddha. After the demise of this venerable old 
patriarch, Acvaghosha therefore had to go to Punya- 
yacas for a further study of his religion, till he was 
capable of forming his own original thoughts, which 
are set forth in his principal work, the Déscourse of 


1The 7ransmission of the Dharmapitaka (Fu fa tsang 
chuan) fas. 5. 


32 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


the Awakening of Faith (Craddhotpida-c¢astra). This 
assumption is justified when we notice that Acvagho- 
sha in the Book of Great Glory pays his homage to 
Parcva as well as to Punyayacas. 

Now by way of a supplementary note to the above, 
let us say a word about Wassiljew’s observation,1 
which states that while Hinaydnists or Cravakas as- 
cribe the conversion of Acvaghosha to Parcva, the 
Mahayanistic record says that Aryadeva converted 
him. This assertion is evidently incorrect, for the 
Life of Acvaghosha as well as the Zransmission of the 
Dharmapitaka (Fu fa tsang chuan) in which the honor 
of his conversion is given to the successor of Parcva 
as aforesaid, do not certainly belong to the work of 
the Hinayana school. It is the Tibetan tradition only, 
and not the general Mahdyanist statement, that Arya- 
deva converted Acvaghosha, and there is no ground 
at all for the assertion of Wassiljew, which practically 
leads us to take everything Tibetan for Mahayanistic 


and everything Chinese for HinayAnistic. 


LISTS OF PATRIARCHS. 


The incorrectness of the Tibetan story, as to the 
conversion of Acvaghosha by Aryadeva above referred 
to, is further shown by a list of the Buddhist patri- 
archs in India appearing in various Buddhist books 
either translated from Sanskrit into Chinese or com- 


1Buddhismus, German edition, p. 222, and also see TAara- 
natha, translated by Schiefner, p. 311. 


33 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 


In every one of 


piled in China from sundry sources. 


them Acvaghosha is placed after Pargva or Punya- 


eaod 
eunlieseNn 


eyeIvUINy 
eysoyseasy 
eaAsieg 
euysiyy 
e1}IUINseEA 
euekedAyey 
eAdIPIL I 
eydnsed 
espaeurs) 
eynupsype 
epueuy 
ededSexeyry 


NIGVA-ILSVAUVS 


eysoyy 
eysoyseasy 
easieg 
euysiy 
eI}IUINSE A 
evuedkedAyey 
eydnsed 
esparue’) 
eynugAqpe 
epueuy 


TVuaadvHAVHGGNGA 








eunliesen 
ejeuide yy 
eysoyseasy 
seseAvAtng 
easieg 

es Meg pPNS 
ipuvueyppngd 
Bae QoorN 
eye}Id 
eydnsedy 
espaeue’) 
epueuy 
ededSeyeyr 


NVNHO 
ONVSL Vi NA AHL 





eAopeury 
eunliesen 
idey 
eysoyseasy 
sesedvdkung 
eAsieg 
eayrMey ppng 
ipueueyppug 
eyeqoor 
eyelid 
eydnsedQ 
espaeue’) 
epueuy 
ededSexeqe iy 


(eaopedry) 
eAopeury 
eunliesen 
ejewmidey 
eysoyseasy 
seSekeAung 
easieg 
eayeyppng 
Ipueugyppug 
eI}IUINSe A 
eye] 
eyxejyid 
eydnsed¢ 
esgaeues 
epueuy 
edvdS5eyeqen 


OI 


EIN OS eth) WO) ES GO! 6) 





IHO ONO,L 
ASL Od FHL 


IVSL ONA,L 
ASL Od AHL 


1 He was a native of Kapilavastu and came to China A D. 406. 


A translator of many Sanskrit works. 


His list belongs to the Sar- 


vastivadin, though it is a little different from the succeeding one. 


jk EB4E by @ iG (Nanjo’s 


—= 
_— 
— 


The former contains fifty-four and the latter fifty-three patriarchs. 
See the Ch'u san tsang chi chi 


Catalogue, No. 1476). 


34 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


yacas, and before both Nagarjuna and Aryadeva, the 
most brilliant disciple of the former. The list on the 
opposite page, therefore, as noticed elsewhere, will fur- 
nish good material for fixing the time of Acvaghosha. 
It does not make any practical difference whether he 
was converted by Parcva himself or his immediate 
successor and disciple Punyayacas, because it is most 
probable they all were contemporaneous. The list 
generally gives twenty-three or twenty-eight patri- 
archs beginning with Mahakacyapa, but not deeming 
it necessary to give a complete list, I have cut it short 
at Deva. 

Chieh-sung! refutes in his Chuan fa chang tsung lun 
44%: TE Fé itt (A Treatise on the Right Transmission of 
the Dharma) the authority of the Zransmuission of the 
Dharmapitaka (Fu fa tsang chuan), but he agrees with 
it down to the seventeenth patriarch. The principal 
point of his refutation is simply that Bodhidharma, 
the founder of the Chinese Dhyana school, should be 
included in the list. 


AS AN ARTIST. 
We cannot conclude the accounts concerning 


Acvaghosha without mentioning an anecdote from a 
Chinese source.” The Craddhotpadacastra ( Lhe Awak- 


1 48 Sf, a priest of the Dhyana school who died A. D. 1071 or 
1072. He wrote among other works one on the fundamental iden- 
ticalness of Confucianism and Buddhism. 

2The Zransmission of the Dharmafpitaka (Fu fa tsang 
chuan, fas. 5). 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 35 


ening of Faith,) proves he was a philosopher of a high 
grade; the Buddhacaritakdvya (The Life of Buddha) 
and the Mahdalamkéracastra (The Book of Great Glory) 
reveal his poetical genius; and the following story in- 
dicates that he was a musician :! 

‘‘He [Acvaghosha] then went to Pataliputra for 
his propaganda-tour, where he composed an excellent 
tune called Lai cha huo lo (RAMEE Réstavara?), 
that he might by this means convert the people of the 
city. Its melody was classical, mournful, and melodi- 
ous, inducing the audience to ponder on the misery, 
emptiness, and non-atman-ness of life. That is to say, 
the music roused in the mind of the hearer the thought 
that all aggregates are visionary and subject to trans- 
formation; that the triple world is a jail and a bond- 
age, with nothing enjoyable in it; that since royalty, 
nobility, and the exercise of supreme power, are all 
characterised with transitoriness, nothing can prevent 
their decline, which will be as sure as the dispersion 
of the clouds in the sky; that this corporeal existence 
is a sham, is as hollow asa plantain tree, is an enemy, 
a foe, one not to be intimately related with ; and again 


that like a box in which a cobra is kept, it should 


1 The fact agrees well with Tarandtha’s statement which in its 
German translation reads as follows: ‘‘Die von ihm verfassten 
Loblieder sind auch in allen Landern verbreitet ; da zuletzt Sin- 
ger und Possenreisser dieselben vortrugen und bei allen Menschen 
des Landes mit Macht Glauben an den Buddha entstand, erwuchs 
durch die Loblieder grésserer Nutzen zur Verbreitung der Lehre.” 
Geschichte des Buddhismus, German translation, p. 91. 


36 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


never be cherished by anybody; that therefore all 
Buddhas denounce persons clinging to a corporeal 
existence. Thus explaining in detail the doctrine of 
the none-atman and the cényatdé, Acvaghosha had the 
melody played by musicians, who, however, not being 
able to grasp the significance of the piece, failed to 
produce the intended tune and harmony. He then 
donned a white woolen dress, joined the band of musi- 
cians, beating the drum, ringing the bell, and tuning 
the lyre, and this done, the melody in full perfection 
gave a note at once mournful and soothing, so as to 
arouse in the mind of the audience the idea of the 
misery, emptiness, and non-atman-ness of all things. 
The five hundred royal princes in the city thus moved 
all at once were fully awakened, and abhorring the 
curse of the five evil passions abandoned their worldly 
life and took refuge in the Bodhi. The king of Patalli- 
putra was very much terrified by the event, thinking 
that if the people who listen to this music would 
abandon their homes [like the princes], his country 
would be depopulated and his royal business ruined. 
So he warned the people never to play this music 
hereafter. 


WORKS IN CHINESE TRANSLATIONS. 


The works ascribed to Acvaghosha and still exist- 
ing in Chinese translations are eight in number. They 
are: (1) The % ¥¢ ft (2 @ Tai shéng ch‘t hsin lun (Maha- 
yanacraddhotpadacdstra): discourse on the awakening of 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 37 


faith in the Mahdyéna. It is the principal work of. 
Acvaghosha, and through this we are able to recognise 
what an important position he occupies in the devel- 
opment of the Mahayanistic world-conception and the- 
ory of final emancipation. Its outlines and the ac- 
counts of its Chinese translation will be given below. 
(2) The KRih YR AR Ta sung tt hstian wen pén lun, 
a fundamental treatise on the spiritual stages for reaching 
final deliverance. The book has a decided tendency to 
mysticism, explaining a gradual development of reli- 
gious consciousness through fifty-one different spir- 
itual stages. It may be considered a precursory work 
out of which Vajrabodhi’s Mantrism finally made a 
full manifestation. It was translated by Paramartha 
between A. D. 557-569. Twenty fasczculi, forty chap- 
ters. (3) The KAi£ iy # Za chuang yen lun ching 
(Mahélamkérasitracastra), the Book of Great Glory, or 
a compilation of stories illustrating the retribution of 
karma. The stories relate mostly to the events that 
occurred in Western India. Beal translated some of 
them in his Buddhist Literature in China. The Chinese 
translator is Kumé§rajiva, circa A. D. 405. Fifteen 
fascicult. (4) The ‘ih pr tt# Lo shu hing tsan (Buddha- 
caritakadvya), a well known poem on the life of Buddha. 
The Chinese translation is by Dharmaraksha between 
A. D. 414-421. Five fasciculi, twenty eight chapters, 
Beal’s English translation forms Vol. XIX. of The 
Sacred Books of the East; and Cowell’s translation from 
Sanskrit, Vol. XLIX of the same. (5) The ER+ 


38 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


FA 4me FR SE HS LV han tzti wén wu wu i ching, a sitra on 
a Nirgrantha’s asking about the theory of non-ego. The 
book foreshadows the Madhyamika philosophy of 
Nagarjuna, for the two forms of truth are distinguished 
there, Pure Truth (Parmdartha-satya) and Practical 
Truth (Samortti-satya),1 and the Céinyaté theory also is 
proclaimed. (6) The -} 4 33 338 * Shih pu shan yeh tao 
ching, a stra on the ten no-good deeds. (7) The #aize # 
+ ay Sith shih fa wu shih sung, fifty verses on the rules 
of serving a master or teacher. (8) The \ mi 37% 
Lu tao lun ‘hut ching, a sitra on transmigration through 
the six states of existence. These last four works are 
very short, all translated by Jih-ch‘éng (Divayacas?), 
between A. D. 1004-1058. 


CHINESE TRANSLATIONS OF > THE: “‘DISCOURSE-_ ON 
THE AWAKENING OF FAITH.” 


Let us give here some remarks on the Chinese 
translations of Acvaghosha’s principal and best known 
work Zhe Awakening of Faith. The Sanskrit original 
is long lost, probably owing to the repeated persecu- 
tions of Buddhism by Chinese emperors at different 
times. According to the Chéng yan catalogue & Ft & 
(compiled between A. D. 785-804) the Sanskrit text 
is said to have existed at that time. It is a great pity 


that such an important Buddhist philosophical work 


1 Notice Agvaghosha’s discussion with Punyayacas as above 
mentioned. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 39 


as the present castra can be studied only through 
translations.! 

There are two Chinese translations still existing 
in the Tripitaka collection. The first translation was 
made by Paramartha (g#2x%Pé), otherwise called 
Kulanatha (#7 yee ), of Ujjayana (or Ujjayini, mod- 
ern Oujein) in Western India. He came to China 
A. D. 546 and died A. D. 569 when he was 71 years 
old. Among many other translations, the present one 
came from his pen on the tenth day of September, 
A. D. 554. 

The second one is by Cikshananda (# R#6é), of 
Kusutana (Khoten), who began his work on the eighth 
of October, A. D. 7oo. He died in China A. D. 710 
at the age of 59. 

As to the problem whether the original of the two 
Chinese translations is the same or different, my im- 
pression is that they were not the same text, the one 
having been brought from Ujjayana and the other from 
Khoten. But the difference, as far as we can judge 
from the comparison of the two versions, is not funda- 
mental. 


In the preface to the second translation of the Kao 


1An inquiry has been made by the present English translator 
as to whether the original Sanskrit copy could be found either in 
India or in Nepal; but Prof. Satis Chandra Acharyya, of the Bud- 
dhist Text Society, Calcutta, with whom he has been communicat- 
ing on the subject, informs him that as far as India is concerned 
there is almost no hope of securing it, and also that his friend in 
Nepal has been unable so far to discover the original, 


40 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


li edition, the unknown writer states to the following 
effect: ‘‘The present Castra has twotranslations. The 
first one is by Param4rtha and the second one is from 
the Sanskrit text brought by Cikshananda who found 
also the older Sanskrit original in the Tz‘u an tower. 
As soon as he had finished the rendering of the Ava- 
tamsakasiitra into Chinese, he began a translation of 
his own text with the assistance of several native Bud- 
dhist priests. The new translation occasionally de- 
viates from the older one, partly because each trans- 
lator had his own views and partly because the texts 
themselves were not the same.”’ 

Though the Chéng yan 4 35t & as well as the K‘az 
yuan BY 53C #% catalogue affirm that the two transla- 
tions were from the same text, this can only mean that 
they were not radically divergent. For if any two 
editions differ so slightly as not to affect the essential 
points, they can be said to be practically the same text. 

Which of the two translations then is the more 
correct? To this question we cannot give any definite 
answer as the originals are missing. The first trans- 
lation has found a more popular acceptance in Japan 
as well as in China, not because it is more faithful to 
the original, but because a most learned and illus- 
trious Buddhist scholar called Fa tsang 3% je (A. D. 


1A catalogue of Buddhist books collected in the K‘ai yiian 
period (A. D. 713-741) of the Tung Dynasty, by ® @ Chih-shang, 
A. D. 730. Its full name X'az yiian shih chiao lu. Twenty fas- 
ctcult, 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 41 


643-712) wrote a commentary on it. And on that 
account the commentary is more studied than the 
text itself. Fa tsang assisted Cikshananda in prepar- 
ing the second translation, but he preferred the first 
one for his commentary work, partly because the first 
one had already found a wide circulation and some 
commentators before his time, and partly because 
both translations agreeing in all their important 
points, he did not like to show his ‘‘partiality,” as a 
commentator on Fa tsang says, to the one in the 
preparation of which he himself took part. 

The present English translation is made from the 
second Chinese version by Cikshananda, but the first 
version has been carefully compared with it, and 
wherever disagreements occur between them they 


have been noticed in footnotes. 


OUTLINES OF THE ‘‘DISCOURSE ON THE AWAKENING 
OF FAITH.” 

I cannot help saying a few words here about the 
importance of Acvaghosha’s main work which is 
scarcely known in the West, and if so, wrongly. Even 
Samuel Beal who is considered one of the best author- 
ities on Chinese Buddhism, makes a misleading refer- 
ence to our author in his Buddhism in China. The 
following quotation from the same apparently shows 
that at least when he wrote it, in 1884, he had a very 
insufficient knowledge of the subject. He says (page 


138): 


42 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


‘¢His (Acvaghosha’s) writings still survive in a 
Chinese form, and when examined will probably be 
found to be much tinged by a pseudo-Christian ele- 
ment. ... But there is one book, the X‘?t-sin-lun, or 
‘Treatise for Awakening Faith,’ which has never yet 
been properly examined, but, so far as is known, is 
based on doctrines foreign to Buddhism and allied to 
a perverted form of Christian dogma.” The incorrect- 
ness of this statement will readily be seen by the 
reader when we proceed further on. 

Wassiljew, another of the highest Western author- 
ities on the subject, seems to be entirely ignorant of 
the existence of the present work. It is very strange 
that those who are considered to be quite well ac- 
quainted with the development of the Mahay4nistic 
thought, do not place in the right light a prominent, 
if not the principal, actor, who, so far as is known to 
us, practically initiated this great spiritual and intel- 
lectual movement in India. Wassiljew says in his 
Buddhismus (pp. 83-84): 

‘¢Zu welcher besonderen Schule Acvaghosha ge- 
hérte, wird nicht mit Bestimmtheit tiberliefert: aus 
der Legende, nach welcher er sich bei der Abfassung 
der Vibhasha betheiligte, dirfen wir jedoch den 
Schluss ziehen, dass er zu den Repradsentanten der 
Vaibhaschika’s gerechnet ward.” 

It is true that in the Zzfe of Vasubandhu Acvagho- 
sha is said to have taken part in the compilation of 


the Vibhasha, but it is of no account whatever in the 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 43 


face of the present book in which we can clearly trace 
almost all elements of the thought fully developed 
afterwards by Nagarjuna and other later Mahayana 
representatives. 

I wish here, in order to show the significance of 
Acvaghosha, to call the attention of the reader to the 
three most salient points in his doctrine which will 
distinguish him from all Hinayana schools. The three 
points constituting the gist of this (astra then are: 
(1) the conception of suchness (Biztatathatd); (2) the 
theory of the triple personality; (3) the salvation by 
faith or the Sukhavati doctrine. 

The conception of suchness assumes other names, 
namely, The Womb of the Tathagata (Zhatdgata- 
garbha), when considered from its embracing all pos- 
sible merits, and the All-Conserving Mind (A/aya- 
vijnaina), when it becomes the principle of evolution 
and is said to have developed from the teaching of 
Buddha as expounded in the old canonical sitras, 
such as the Lankdvatara and the Crima/d. Whatever 
the origin of the idea of suchness might have been, 
its ‘‘absolute aspect” evidently foreshadows the (an- 
yat@ philosophy of the Madhyamika school. It is 
very doubtful whether Nagarjuna, as told in a Chinese 
tradition, was a personal disciple of Acvaghosha, but 
it is highly probable that he was much influenced by 
him in forming his system. 

The second thesis, the theory of the triple person- 


ality, that is one of the most distinctive characteris- 


44 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


tics of the Mahayana Buddhism, seems to have been 
first established by Acvaghosha. The pantheistic idea 
of suchness (idétatathaté), and the religious con- 
sciousness which always tends to demand something 
embodied in infinite love (Aaruné) and infinite wisdom 
(jraéna), and the scientific conception of the law of 
causation regulating our ethical as well as physical 
world, or in short the doctrine of karma,—these three 
factors working together in the mind of Acvaghosha, 
culminated in his theory of the triple personality. 

The doctrine of salvation by faith whereon the 
Japanese Shin Shyti (True Sect) and J6d6 Shyi (Pure 
Land Sect) laid down their foundation also, appears 
first in the present castra. If the quotation in the 
Mahéyinacraddholpéda actually refers to the Sukhha- 
vati Siitras, as we may fairly assume, there is a great 
probability in the statement that during the first four 
centuries after the Nirvana there was already a variety 
of free interpretations about the teaching of the Mas- 
ter, which, commingled with the other religio-philo- 
sophical thoughts in India, eventually made a full de- 
velopment under the generel names of the Mahayana 
and the Hinayana schools. 

A supplementary point to be noticed in Acvagho- 
sha is the abundance of similar thoughts and passages 
with those in the Bhagavadgita. The coincidence be- 
tween the latter and the Saddharmapundarika has been 
pointed out by Kern in his Buddhismus und seine Ge- 


schichte (Vol. II., p. 500, footnote). While it is an 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 45 


open question which of the two has an earlier date, 
the Mahayana Buddhism as a whole must be permitted 
to have some common points with the canonical book 
of Civaism. 

In conclusion I wish to state that as this book, 
the Awakening of Faith, is of paramount importance 
in its being the first attempt of systematising the fun- 
damental thoughts of the Mahayana Buddhism, as 
well as in its forming a main authority of all the Maha- 
yanistic schools, those who study the doctrinal history 
of Buddhism cannot dispense with it; and that, in 
spite of its highest importance, no attempt has yet 
been made to make it accessible to the reader who is 
not familiar with the Chinese language, and so I here 
offer to the public an English translation of the entire 


text. 


ADORATION. 


DORATION to the World-honored Ones (Bhaga- 

vat) in all the ten quarters, who universally 

produce great benefits, whose wisdom is infinite and 
transcendent, and who save and guard [all beings]. 


[Adoration] to the Dharma? whose essence and 


1 There are ten appellations most commonly given to a Bud- 
dha: (1) 7athégata (the one who thus comes, or he who has been 
expected and fulfils all expectations, the perfect one); (2) Avhat 
(the worthy one, but according to Nagarjuna’s Mahdprajndpéra- 
mitacastra, Chinese translation by Kuméarajiva, Vol. III., p. 17, 
_ one who has destroyed all enemies of evil passions, or one who is 
revered by gods and men, or one who will not be reborn; see also 
Vol. II., p. 20); (3) Samyaksambuddha (one who is perfect by 
enlightenment); (4) Vidydcaranasampanna (one who is perfect in 
knowledge and conduct); (5) Sugata (one who goes well); (6) Zo- 
Ravid (one who knows the world); (7) Azuttara (one who has no 
superior); (8) Purushadamyasérathi (the tamer of all beings); 
(9) Céstédevimanushydndm (the teacher of gods and men); (10) 
Buddha (the enlightened one). When Zokavid and Anuttara are 
considered to be one title, as in the Sutra on the Ten Afpellations, 
Bhagavat is added to make the tenth. 


“According to a general interpretation of Mahayana Buddhists 
dharma means: (1) that which exists; (2) the object of under- 
standing. Dharma may therefore be rendered in the first sense by 
‘‘object,” or ‘‘thing,” or ‘‘substance,” or ‘‘being,”’ including 
everything mental as well as physical in its broadest sense, and 
so sarvadharma will designate all possible existences in the uni- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 47 


attributes are like the ocean, revealing to us the prin- 
ciple of anatman and forming the storage of infinite 
merits. 

[Adoration] to the congregation (samgha) of those 
who assiduously aspire after perfect knowledge (sam- 
vaksambodht ). 

That all beings (sarvasativa) may rid themselves 
of doubt, become free from evil attachment, and, by 
the awakening of faith (¢raddha), inherit Buddha- 


seeds, I write this Discourse.! 


verse; while dharma in the second sense may safely be rendered 
by ‘‘law” or ‘‘doctrine” as generally understood by Western 
Buddhist scholars, to most of whom, however, the first significance 
of the term is strangely unknown. Max Miiller fitly remarks in 
his introduction to the English translation of the Vajracchediké, 
p. xiv: ‘‘Dharma in its ordinary Buddhist phraseology may be 
correctly rendered by law. Thus the whole teaching of Buddha is 
called the good law, Saddharma. But in our treatise dharma is 
generally used in a different sense. It means form (eidoc) and 
likewise what is possessed of form, what is therefore different from 
other things, what is individual, in fact, what we mean by a thing 
or an object. This meaning has escaped most of the translators, 
both Oriental and Western, but if we were always to translate 
dharma by law, it seems to me that the whole drift of our treatise 
would become unintelligible.” In this translation dharma is ren- 
dered sometimes by ‘‘ thing,” sometimes by ‘‘law,” sometimes by 
‘‘truth” or ‘‘doctrine,’’ according to the context. But when it is 
synonymous with suchness (b/a¢tatathatéd), I have retained its 
original Sanskrit form, capitalised. 


1An almost similar passage is repeated in the succeeding para- 
graph, while it does not occur in the older translation It may be 
a mistake on the part of the new translation, but I have left it as 
it stands in the text. 


DISCOURSE. 


OR the purpose of awakening in all beings a pure 
faith in the Mahayana,! of destroying their doubts 
and attachment to false doctrines, and of affording 
them an uninterrupted inheritance of Buddha-seeds, 
I write this Discourse. 
There is a principle whereby the root of faith in 
the Mahayana can be produced, and I shall explain it. 


The explanation consists of five parts: 


1The term Mahdydna here seems not to have been used as it 
usually is in contrast to the Hinayana. Ag¢vaghosha adopts it sim- 
ply to denote the greatness of suchness (bh@¢atathaté) as well as 
to prove its being the safest and surest means of salvation. It is 
therefore the name given to the first principle itself, and not to 
any philosophical system or religious dogmatics. But the term 
used in this wise by Agvaghosha and perhaps in earlier Mahayana 
texts gradually lost its original sense in the course of the develop- 
ment of this progressive religious view. It was then transferred to 
distinguish the system at large from that of the so-called Cravakas, 
to which the followers of the former gave in contrast to their own 
the rather humiliating name Hinaydna. At the time of Agvaghosha 
the controversy between them was probably not as vehement as it 
proved later on. And this fact may be seen from the tolerant 
spirit shown in the third convocation under the reign of King Ka- 
nishka. By the Mahayana followers Acvaghosha is unanimously 
recognised as the forerunner of Nagarjuna by whose marvellous 
genius the system was brought to maturity. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 49 


I. Introductory. 
II. General Statement of Principles. 
III. The Explanation Itself. 
PVs The Practice,of Faith: 
V. Benefits [derived therefrom]. 


I. INTRODUCTORY. 


There are eight inducements [to write this Dis- 
course]: 

1. A general object, 1. e., that the author might 
induce all beings to liberate themselves from misery 
and to enjoy blessing, and not that he might gain 
thereby some worldly advantages, etc. 

2. That he might unfold the fundamental truth of 
the Tathagata and let all beings have a right compre- 
hension of it. 

3. That he might enable those who have brought 
their root of merit (Avga/amd/a) to maturity and ob- 
tained immovable faith, to havea philosophical grasp 
of the doctrine of the Mahayana. 

4. That he might enable those whose root of merit 
is weak and insignificant, to acquire faith and to ad- 
vance to the stage of immovable firmness (avaivartz- 
katva).} 

5. That he might induce all beings to obliterate 


14vaivarttkatva means literally ‘‘never retreat.” Faith is 
said to become immovably firm when one enters into the group of 
those who cannot be shaken in the possession of absolute truth 
(samyaktvantyataragz). For a further explanation see the ref- 
erence in the Index to samyaktvantyataragz. 


50 ACVAGHOSHA S$ 


the previously acquired evils (durgati or karmdvarana), 
to restrain their own thoughts, and to free themselves 
from the three venomous passions.! 

6. That he might induce all beings to practise the 
orthodox method of cessation [or tranquilisation ¢a- 
matha| and of intellectual insight (w:dargana),? to be 
fortified against the commission of mental trespasses 
due to inferiority of mind. 

7. That he might induce all beings in the right 
way to ponder on the doctrine of the Mahayana, for 
thus they will be born in the presence of Buddhas,?® 
and acquire the absolutely immovable Mahdayana- 
faith. 

8. That he might, by disclosing those benefits 
which are produced by joyfully believing in the Maha- 
yana, let sentient beings become acquainted with the 
final aim of their efforts. 


Though all these doctrines are sufficiently set forth 


1 They are: (1) covetousness (lobha); (2) malice (dvesha); (3) 
ignorance (7oha). 

2Camatha and Vidarzana or Vifagyana constitute one of 
the five methods of discipline, for whose full explanation see the 
reference in the Index to these terms. 

3 This passage, which is considered to bea reference to the 
Sukhdvati Sfitras, such as the Larger and the Smaller Sukhdvati- 
vytha, or the Amztdyur-dhydna, seems to prove that some of the 
Mahayana texts of the Pure Land Sect had been in existence be- 
fore the time of Acvaghosha who gives towards the end of his Dis- 
course a quotation apparently taken from one of the above-men- 
tioned Sfitras. The Sfitras therefore must be at least one or two 
hundred years older than Acvaghosha, in order that they might be 
quoted as an authentic teaching of Buddha. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. a 


in the Mahayana Sitras,! yet as the predispositions 
and inclinations of the people? are not the same, and 
the conditions for obtaining enlightenment vary, I 
now write this Discourse. 

There is another reason for doing so. At the time 
of the Tathagata the people were unusually gifted, 
and the Buddha’s presence, majestic both in mind 
and body, served to unfold the infinite significances 
of the Dharma with simplicity and yet in perfection. 
Accordingly there was no need for a philosophical 
discourse (¢éstra). 

After the Nirvana of the Buddha there were men 
who possessed in themselves the intellectual power 


to understand the many-sided meanings of the Siitras,? 


1The view here proposed by A¢cvaghosha, which is called by 
Chinese Buddhists the theory of the evolution of the Tathagata- 
garbha, is considered to be an elucidation of the doctrine taught 
by Buddha in such Mahayana Sitras as the Lankévatéra, Ghana- 
vytha, Crimalé, etc. 

2 Literally, those who are to be converted. 


3 There are twelve divisions called Angas in the Mahayanist 
writings, while in the Pali only nine are counted. The twelve 
angas are: (1) s#tra (aphorisms); (2) geva (verses in which the 
same thing is repeated as in the prose part); (3) vydkarana (Bud- 
dha’s prophecy about Bodhisattva’s attainment of Buddhahood in 
the future); (4) gdthd (independent verses); (5) wdéna (sermons 
on Buddha’s own account); (6) nidéna (sermons as the occasion 
required); (7) avaddéna (legends, but according to Chinese inter- 
pretation parables); (8) ztvwkta (speeches relating to the former 
deeds of Bodhisattvas); (9) 7@taka (accounts of Buddha’s own for: 
mer lives); (10) vazfulya (doctrines of deep significance); (11) ad- 
bhutadharma (extraordinary phenomena); (12) ufadega (exposi- 
tions). 


52 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


even if they read only a few of them. There were 
others who by their own intellectual powers could 
understand the meanings of the Siitras only after an 
extensive reading of many of them. Still others lack- 
ing in intellectual powers of their own could under- 
stand the meanings of the Sitras only through the as- 
sistance of elaborate commentaries. But there are 
some who, lacking in intellectual powers of their own, 
shun the perusal of elaborate commentaries and take 
delight in studying and cultivating enquiries which 
present the many-sidedness and universality of the 
doctrine in a concise form. 

For the sake of the people of the last class I write 
this Discourse, in which the most excellent, the deep- 
est, and the most inexhaustible Doctrine of the Ta- 
thagata will be treated in comprehensive brevity. 


II. GENERAL STATEMENT. 


In what does the general statement consist? 
The Mahayana can be briefly treated as to two 
aspects, namely, What it is, and What it signifies. 


1«« What is” and ‘‘ What signifies’’ are respectively in Chi- 
nese yu fa AIK and fa Y, but in the older translation fa %# 
andz ¥%. This isa little puzzling, but if we bear in mind that in 
Chinese as well as in Sanskrit fa or dharma means both the sub- 
stance itself and its attribute or significance, or law that regulates 
its movements, we will understand that Param4rtha, the first trans- 
lator, used fa here in the sense of substance or ‘‘ what is,”’ while 
Cikshadnanda, the second translator, used the word in the sense of 
significance or that by which a thing is conceived, the ordinary 
meaning of z. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 53 


What is the Mahayana? It is the soul? of all sen- _ 
tient beings (sarvasattva), that constitutes all things 
in the world, phenomenal and supra-phenomenal ; 2 
and through this soul we can disclose what the Maha- 
yana signifies. 

Because the soul in itself, involving the quintes- 
sence of the Mahayana, is suchness (dhétatathatéa), 
but it becomes [in its relative or transitory aspect, 
through the law of causation] birth-and-death (sam- 
s@ra) in which are revealed the quintessence, the at. 
tributes, and the activity of the Mahayana. 

The Mahayana has a triple significance.® 

The first is the greatness of quintessence. Be- 


cause the quintessence of the Mahayana as suchness 


1**Soul’’ is not used here in a dualistic sense, but as Dr. Paul 
Carus defines it in the last chapter of Zhe Soul of Man. Speaking 
of the soul of the universe he defines the term as ‘‘the formative 
principle which gave and still gives shape to the world” (/oc. czt., 
first edition, p. 437). The literal translation of the Chinese char- 
acter Jt» iszn is kernel, or heart, or essence of all things. The 
Chinese #szz, however, is rather indiscriminately used in our text 
for both Sanskrit terms, 4ydaya (kernel or heart) and Cz¢ta (mind, 
the thinking faculty). These terms are more or less synonymous, 
especially from A¢gvaghosha’s standpoint, that does not allow the 
transcendental existence of a metaphysical soul-entity. In this 
translation soul denotes the absolute aspect of suchness, and mind 
its relative aspect, wherever this distinction is noticeable. 


2This is a literal translation of the Chinese chu shz chien 
i i fl. It signifies anything transcending conditionality or 
worldliness. 

3 This triad which has a striking similarity to Spinoza’s con- 
ception of substance, attributes and modes, also reminds us of the 
first principles (Jaddértha) of the Vaigeshika philosophy, that is, 
substance (dravya), qualities (gua), and action (karma). 


54 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


exists in all things, remains unchanged in the pure as 
well as in the defiled, is always one and the same 
(samaté), neither increases nor decreases, and is void 
of distinction. 

The second is the greatness of attributes. Here we 
have the Tathagata’s! womb? (¢athégatagarbha) which 
in exuberance contains immeasurable and innumer- 
able merits (funya) as its characteristics. 

The third is the greatness of activity, for it [1. e., 
Mahayana] produces all kinds of good work in the 
world, phenomenal and supra-phenomenal. [Hence 
the name A/ahédyana (great vehicle). ] 

[Again this Dharma is called the Mahayéua ;] be- 
cause it is the vehicle’ ( yéza) in which all Buddhas 


1 Tathagata literally means one who thus or truly comes. That 
the omnipresent principle of suchness could come or go appeared 
contradictory and seemed to render an explanation necessary. The 
Vajracchedtka-Satra, Max Miiller’s English translation, Chap. 
XXIX: ‘‘And again, O Subhiti, if anybody were to say that the 
Tathagata goes, or comes, or stands, or sits, or lies down, he, O 
Subhiti, does not understand the meaning of my preaching. And 
why? Because the word Tathagata means one who does not go 
anywhere, and does not come from anywhere; and therefore he is 
called the Tathagata (truly come), holy and fully enlightened.”’ 


2Cf. the Bhavadgitd (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. VIII., 
Chap. XIV., p. 107): ‘‘The great Brahman is a womb for me, in 
which I cast the seed. From that, O descendant of Bharata! is 
the birth of all things. Of the bodies, O son of Kunti! which are 
born from all wombs, the main womb is the great Brahman, and I 
am the father, the giver of the seed.”’ 

83Cf. the Saddharma-pundartka, Chap. II. (Sacred Books 
of the East, Vol. XXI., p. 40): ‘‘By means of one sole vehicle, to 
wit, the Buddha-vehicle, Cariputra, do I teach creatures the law; 
there is no second, nor a third.”’ 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 55 


from the beginning have been riding, and Bodhisatt- 
vas! when riding in it will enter into the state of Bud- 
dhahood. 


Ill. THE EXPLANATION. 


In what does the explanation of the general state- 
ment consist? 

This part consists of three subdivisions : 

1. The Revelation of the True Doctrine. 

2. The Refutation of False Doctrines. 

3. The Practice of the Right Path. 


I. The Revelation of the True Doctrine. 


In the one soul we may distinguish two aspects. 
The one is the Soul as suchness (dhzé¢atathaté), the 
other is the soul as birth-and-death (samsdéra). Each 
in itself constitutes all things, and both are so closely 
interrelated that one cannot be separated from the 
other. 

A. The Soul as Suchness. 

What is meant by the soul as suchness (dh2tata-~ 
that@), is the oneness of the totality of things (dhar- 
madhéatu),* the great all-including whole, the quintes- 

1 Literally, one who seeks perfect enlightenment, or one who 


is full of wisdom and compassion. 


2S. Beal in his English translation of A¢vaghosha’s Buddha- 
carita (Sacred Books of the East, Vol. XIX., p. 324, footnote) 
considers dharmadhédtu to be ‘‘the mystic or ideal world of the 
Northern Buddhists” and says it means literally the ‘‘limit of 
dharma.” The interpretation is evidently wrong, not only because 
ahétu according to the Wadhyanta-vibhiga-rastra by Vasubandhu 


56 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


sence of the Doctrine. For the essential nature of 
the soul is uncreate and eternal. 

All things, simply on account of our confused sub- 
jectivity (smrzz),1 appear under the forms of individ- 
uation. If we could overcome our confused subjec- 
tivity, the signs of individuation would disappear, and 
there would be no trace of a world of [individual and 
isolated] objects.? 

Therefore all things in their fundamental nature 
are not namable or explicable. They cannot be ade- 


quately expressed in any form of language. They are 


(two Chinese translations: one by Paramartha A. D. 557-569, and 
the other by Hsiian-tsang A. D. 691) means root, base, cause, or 
principle; but because Dharmadhdatu, fa kat t& § in Chinese, 
is not used by the Northern Buddhists in the sense that Beal gives. 
It means on the other hand this actual world considered from the 
point of its forming the basis of the law; or, to use modern scien- 
tific terminology, it is existence in its organised totality. Ag¢va- 
ghosha uses the term here in this sense. 


1 The term is usually rendered by recollection or memory, but 
Acvaghosha uses it apparently in a different sense. It must mean 
subjectivity, or the perception of particularity, or that mental ac- 
tivity which is not in accordance with the suchness of things; if 
otherwise, the whole drift of the present Discourse becomes totally 
unintelligible. Smzrtz is in some degree obviously synonymous 
with Avzdya (ignorance) which is more general and more prim- 
ordial than the former. Ignorance appears first and when it starts 
the world-process, ‘‘subjectivity’’ is evolved, which in its turn 
causes particularisation to take place. Particularisation does not 
annihilate suchness, but it overshadows the light of its perfect 
spiritual wisdom. 

2 Schopenhauer who says, ‘‘no subject without object,’’ seems 
to express a similar idea that without subjectivity, ‘‘the objective 
world,” i. e., ‘‘the world as Vorstellung, as representation of ob- 
jects’’ would vanish. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 57 


without the range of apperception. [They are uni- 
versals.] They [things in their fundamental nature] 
have no signs of distinction. [They are not particu- 
lars.] They possess absolute sameness (samaté). 
[They are universals.] They are subject neither to 
transformation, nor to destruction. They are nothing 
but the one soul, for which suchness is another desig- 
nation. Therefore they cannot be [fully] explained 
by words or exhausted by reasoning. 

While all words and expressions are nothing but 
representations and not realities, and their existence 
depends simply on our confused subjectivity, such- 
ness has no attribute [of particularity] to speak of. 
But the term suchness is all that can be expressed in 
language, and through this term all other terms may 
be disposed of. 

In the essence of suchness, there is neither any- 
thing which has to be excluded, nor anything which 
has to be added.? 


1Tf I understand Acvaghosha correctly, he intends to say that 
to the sentient subject the world consists of a number of isolated 
objects. The nature of subjectivity is sense-apperception ; and in 
sense-apperception the particular things are represented in the 
particularity only, not in their suchness as momentarily material- 
ised universals. We must overcome subjectivity in order to dis- 
cover suchness ; but when suchness is recognised, it is at once un- 
derstood to constitute the essence and only true reality of things. 


*The older translation has: ‘‘In the essence of suchness, 
there is nothing to be excluded, for all things are true; nor is there 
anything to be added, for all things are such as they are. Beit 
known therefore that as thus all things are undemonstrable and 


58 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Now the question arises: If that be so, how can 
all beings conform to and have an insight into [such- 
ness]? 

The answer is: As soon as you understand that 
when the totality of existence is spoken of, or thought 
of, there is neither that which speaks nor that which 
is spoken of, there is neither that which thinks nor 
that which is thought of; then you conform to such- 
ness ; and when your subjectivity is thus completely 
obliterated, it is said to have the insight. 

Again there is a twofold aspect in suchness if 
viewed from the point of its explicability. The first 


is trueness as negation (¢ényatd),1 in the sense that 


unrepresentable [by our confused understanding], they are called 
suchness.”’ 

1The term ¢@nyaté which means literally void or emptiness, 
has suffered a great deal of misunderstanding by those who are 
not well acquainted with Buddhist phraseology. If Mahaydanists 
used the term, as imagined by some critics, in the sense of ab- 
solute nothingness, denying the existence of everything condi- 
tional as well as unconditional, relative as well as independent, 
how could they speak about the highest truth (faramdrthasatya) 
or the most excellent perfect enlightenment (axuttarasamyak- 
sambodhz) which all conveys the sense of affirmation? What the 
Cfinyata doctrine positively insists on, is the denial of sensational- 
ism, and the annihilation of the imagination that weaves a dualistic 
world-conception. If this could be called a nihilism, every intel- 
lectual attempt to reach a unitary view of the universe would be 
nihilistic, for it declares the untenability of a separate existence of 
matter and thought, me and not-me, etc. It is odd enough that 
such a self-evident truth should have escaped the keen observance 
of Christian critics. Agvaghosha here states that the bhfitatathata 
is at once ¢inya and agfinya. It is ¢inya because it transcends 
all forms of separation and individuation; it is agfinya because 
all possible things in the world emanate from it. Even Nagarjuna 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 59 


it is completely set apart from the attributes of all 
things unreal, that it is the real reality. The second 
is trueness as affirmation (a¢zénya?d), in the sense that 
it contains infinite merits, that it is self-existent. 

And again by trueness as negation we mean that 
in its [metaphysical] origin it has nothing to do with 
things defiled [i. e., conditional], that it is free from 
all signs of distinction existing among phenomenal 
objects, that it is independent of unreal, particularis- 
ing consciousness. 

Thus we understand that suchness (dhé¢atathata) 
is neither that which is existence, nor that which is 
non-existence, nor that which is at once existence and 
non-existence, nor that which is not at once existence 
and non-existence; that it is neither that which is 
unity, nor that which is plurality, nor that which is at 
once unity and plurality, nor that which is not at once 
unity and plurality.! 
who is supposed to be the founder of the nihilistic Prajiapadramita 
system by Christian students of Buddhism, says in his W/édhya- 
mika-castra, Chap. XXII., that the idea of ¢finyata and that of 
a¢tinyata are both wrong, but that from the deficiency of language 
to denote the exact state of things he has made use of these terms. 
(Observe that Acvaghosha says the very same thing in the preced- 
ing passages.) Nagarjuna therefore apparently had something in 
his mind to define, but that something having nothing in common 
with things we daily encounter in our sense-world, he designated 
it cinya, empty, and he hoped by thus abnegating all phenomenal 


existences, we could reach the highest reality, for ignorant minds 
are deeply saturated with wrong affirmations and false judgements. 

1Cf. Nagarjuna’s ‘‘ Eight No’s”’ doctrine which says: ‘‘There 
is no production (wtféda), no destruction (wccheda), no annihila- 
tion (7zrodha), no persistence (¢égvata), no unity (ekdrtha), no 


60 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


In a word, as suchness cannot be comprehended 
by the particularising consciousness of all beings, we 
call it the negation [or nothingness, ¢vnyara]. 

The truth is that subjectivity does not exist by it- 
self, that the negation (¢zémazt@) is also void (¢énya) 
in its nature, that neither that which is negated [viz., 
the external world] nor that which negates [viz., the 
mind] is an independent entity. 

By the so-called trueness as affirmation, we mean 
that [as soon as we understand] subjectivity is empty 
and unreal, we perceive the pure soul manifesting 
itself as eternal, permanent, immutable and com- 
pletely comprising all things that are pure. On that 
account we call it affirmation [or reality, or non- 
emptiness, acényatd]. Nevertheless, there is no trace 
of affirmation in it, because it is not the product of a 
confused subjectivity, because only by transcending 


subjectivity (smrtz) can it be grasped. 


b. The Soul as Birth-and-Death. 


The soul as birth-and-death (samséra) comes forth 
[as the law of causation] from the Tathagata’s womb 


(Tathégatagarbha). But the immortal [1. e., such- 


plurality (zdénértha), no coming in (¢gamana), no going out (727- 
gama)."" The statement means that pure truth (faramértha) 
transcends all modes of relativity. (See the first chapter of the 
Méadhyamtka-¢astra.) 


1In the Kantian sense of ‘‘things in themselves.”” The Ma- 
dhyamika school would say they are all Atyanta-ganyatd, com- 
plete void, meaning that things are subject to transformation and 
have no absolute existence. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 61 


ness] and the mortal [i. e., birth-and-death] coincide 
with each other.! Though they are not identical, they 
are not a duality. [Thus when the absolute soul as- 
sumes a relative aspect by its self-affirmation] it is 
called the all-conserving mind (@/aya-vijwdna).* 

The same mind has a twofold significance as the 
organiser and the producer of all things. 

Again it embraces two principles: (1) Enlighten- 
ment; (2) Non-enlightenment. 

Enlightenment is the highest quality of the mind; 
it is free from all [the limiting] attributes of subjec- 
tivity (smrzz). As itis free from all [limiting] attri- 


1Cf. the Bhagavadgitd, Chap. 1X., p. 84: ‘‘I am immortality 
and also death; and I, O Arjuna! am that which is and that which 
is not.” See also Chap. X., p. go. 


2 4laya or Alaya comes from the root 7, which means: ad- 
here; melt, dissolve; sit upon, dwell in, stay in, etc.; while its 
nominal form /aya means: act of clinging; melting, fusion, solu- 
tion, dissolution; rest, repose; place of rest, residence, house, 
dwelling. According to Paramartha, who belongs to the so-called 
‘*Older Translators,” the original Sanskrit equivalent of the ‘‘all- 
conserving mind”’ seems to be alaya or alzya, for he translates it 
by Wu mo shth, not-disappearing mind, in the sense that this 
mind retains everything in it. But Hsiian-tsang, the leader of the 
‘‘ New Translators,”’ renders it by tsang shth, that is, the mind 
that hoards or preserves, or dwelling-mind or receptacle-mind, 
according to which the original seems _to be @aya, or /aya with 
the prefix @ instead of its negative form with the particlea. The 
ultimate significance of the term in question, however, does not 
materially differ, whether it is wz mo, not-disappearing, or tsang, 
house, place of keeping things. My translation of the same is 
rather liberal, in order to make it more intelligible to the general 
reader. Some other names given to the élaya-vijndéna are citta, 
mind; éddéna, the supporting; é¢raya, foundation or seeds. 


62 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


butes of subjectivity, it is like unto space (éké@g¢a), 
penetrating everywhere, as the unity of all (dharma- 
dhétu). That is to say, it is the universal Dharma- 
kaya? of all Tathagatas. 

On account of this Dharmakaya, all Tathagatas 
are spoken of as abiding in enlightenment a przorz. 

Enlightenment a frzorz is contrasted with enlight- 
enment a fosteriort. Through enlightenment a@ jos- 
teriort is gained no more than enlightenment @ przorz. 

Now we speak of enlightenment @ posteriort; be- 


cause there is enlightenment a friorz, there is non- 


1 There seems to be a general misconception about the exact 
significance of the term Dkarmakéya which constitutes the cen- 
tral point of the Mahdydna system. Most Western Buddhist 
scholars render it the Body or Personality of the Law, understand- 
ing by law the doctrine of Buddha. This may be correct in the 
Southern Buddhism as well as in its historical sense, because after 
the Nirvana of Buddha it was quite natural for his disciples to 
personify the doctrine of their teacher, as their now only living 
spiritual leader. But in the course of time it acquired entirely 
different significance and ceased to mean the personification of the 
Doctrine. Now dharma, as aforesaid, does not only mean law or 
doctrine, but also it means an individual object, an idea, a sub- 
stance, or, when it is used in its broadest sense, existence in gen- 
eral. A@ya means a body or person, but not in the sense of an 
animated, sentient being; it denotes a system in which parts are 
connected, a unified whole, that which forms a basis, etc. Dharma- 
kdya therefore signifies that which constitutes the ultimate foun- 
dation of existence, one great whole in which ail forms of individ- 
uation are obliterated, in a word, the Absolute. This objective 
absolute being meanwhile has been idealised by Mahaydanists so 
that that which knows is now identical with that which is known, 
because they say that the essence of existence is nothing but intel- 
ligence pure, perfect, and free from all possible worries and evils. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 63 


enlightenment, and because there is non-enlighten- 
ment we can speak of enlightenment a@ fosterzort. 

Again, when the mind is enlightened as to its own 
ultimate nature, it is called perfect enlightenment ; 
when it is not enlightened as to its ultimate nature, it 
is not perfect enlightenment. 

Common people! (prthagjana), who, becoming 
conscious of errors that occur in a succession of their 
mental states, abstain from making conclusions, may 
be spoken of as enlightened; but in reality theirs is 
non-enlightenment. 

Cravakas,? Pratyekabuddhas, and those Bodhi- 


1 Prthagjana has a technical sense in Buddhism, for any one 
that is ignorant of the doctrine of non-atman and commits all 
those actions which lead one to a constant transmigration, is 
counted among the frofanum vulgus, to distinguish him from the 
Cravaka, Pratyekabuddha, and Bodhisattva. 


2The Saddharmapundarika-Sitra contains an explanation 
of these terms generally adopted by Mah4y4nists, which read as 
follows (see Kern’s English translation of the same, Chap. III., p. 
80): ‘‘Now, Cariputra, the beings who have become wise have 
faith in the Tathagata, the father of the world, and consequently 
apply themselves to his commandments. Amongst them there are 
some who, wishing to follow the dictates of an authoritative voice, 
apply themselves to the commandment of the Tathagata to acquire 
the knowledge of the four great truths, for the sake of thezr own 
complete Nirvana. These one may say to be those who, coveting 
the vehicle of the disciple (Cravaka), fly from the triple world.”... 
This is the definition given to the Cravakayana. We proceed next 
to that of the Pratyekabuddhaydna: ‘‘Other beings, desirous of 
the science without a master, of self-restraint and tranquillity, ap- 
ply themselves to the commandment of the Tathagata to learn to 
understand causes and effects (t. e., the twelve chains of rela- 
tzon) for the sake of thezv own complete Nirvana. These one may 
say to be those who, coveting the vehicle of the Pratyekabuddha, 


64 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


sattvas who have just entered their course, recognis- 
ing the difference between subjectivity and the trans- 
scending of subjectivity both in essence and attri- 
butes, have become emancipated from the coarse form 
of particularisation. This is called enlightenment in 
appearance. 

Bodhisattvas of the Dharmakaya,! having recog- 
nised that subjectivity and the transcending of sub- 
jectivity have no reality of their own [i. e., are rela- 
tive], have become emancipated from the intermediate 
form of particularisation. This is called approximate 
enlightenment. 

Those who have transcended the stage of Bodhi- 
sattvahood and attained the ultimate goal, possess a 


consciousness which is consistent and harmonious; 


fly from the triple world.” ...Those who belong to these two 
classes desire to achieve only the salvation of their own, and not 
that of all mankind, in which respect Bodhisattvas stand far supe- 
rior to them. We read in the same Sitra to the following effect : 
‘‘Others again, desirous of the knowledge of the all-knowing, the 
knowledge of Buddha, the knowledge of the self-born one, the sci- 
ence without a master, apply themselves to the commandment of 
the Tathagata to learn to understand the knowledge, powers, and 
freedom from hesitation, of the Tathagata, for the sake of the 
common weal and happiness, out of compassion to the world, 
for the benefit, weal, and happiness of the world at large, both 
gods and men, for the sake of the complete Nirvana of all be- 
ings. ‘These one may say to be those who, coveting the great 
vehicle (mahdaydana), fly from the triple world. Therefore they are 
called Bodhisattva Mahdsattva.” (The italics are mine.) 

1Those who have recognised the all-prevailing Dharmak4ya, 
but who have not as yet been able to perfectly identify themselves 
with it. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 65 


they have recognised the origin from which conscious- 


- ness [or mentation] starts.! This will truly be called 


ee 


enlightenment. 







Having transcended the attributes of enlighten- 
ment and the subtlest form of particularisation, they 
i. e., Buddhas] have gained a perfect and eternal in- 
ight into the very nature of the soul [1. e., suchness], 
because the latter now presents itself to them in its 
absolute and immutable form.? Therefore they are 
called Tathagatas, and theirs is perfect enlighten- 
ment; and therefore it is said in the Sitra® that those 
who have an insight into the non-reality of all subjec- 
tivity, attain to the wisdom of the Tathagata. 

In the preceding statement we referred to the origin 
from which consciousness [or mentation] starts ac- 
cording to the popular expression. In truth there is 
no such thing as the origin of consciousness [or men- 
tation]; for consciousness [being purely subjective] 
has no absolute [but only a phenomenal] existence. 
How can we then speak of its origin? 

The multitude of people (dahujana) are said to be 

1Consciousness, i. e., mentation or mental activity, is tran- 


sient, it takes place in time, and must not be confused with soul, 
or suchness, or eternal wisdom. 


2In the older translation these passages are somewhat sim- 
plified. 


3 The Lankdvatdra Sitra. There are three Chinese transla- 
tions of the same still extant among the Japanese Tripitaka col- 
lection: (1) by Gunabhadra, A. D. 443, four fasciculi; (2) by Bo- 
dhiruci, A. D. 513, ten fasciculi; (3) by Cikshananda, A. D. 700- 
704, seven fasciculi 


66 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


lacking in enlightenment, because ignorance (avdya) 
prevails there from all eternity, because there is a 
constant succession of confused subjective states 
(smrtz) from which they have never been emancipated. 

But when they transcend their subjectivity, they 
can then recognise that all states of mentation, viz., 
their appearance, presence, change, and disappear- 
ance [in the field of consciousness] have no [gen- 
uine] reality.1 They are neither in a temporal nor in 
a spatial relation with the one soul,? for they are not 
self-existent. 

When you understand this, you also understand 
that enlightenment @ posteriori cannot be manufac- 
tured, for it is no other thing than enlightenment 
a priori [which is uncreate and must be discovered].® 

And again enlightenment a@ priori, when impli- 
cated in the domain of defilement [1. e., relativity], 
is differentiated into two kinds of attributes: 

(1) Pure wisdom ( grajvaé?) ; (2) Incomprehensible 
activity (karma?).4 

1 The older translation differs a little, but agrees in the main. 

* The older translation reads: ‘‘ The four states of mentation 
are simultaneous [they belong together in time, i. e., they are in 
uninterrupted succession], but have no self-existence, because en- 
lightenment a Zrvzorz always remains in its sameness.” 

3 This passage is wanting in the older translation. 

* The differentiation of enlightenment into two distinct qual- 
ities, wisdom and action, or, according to the terminology of later 
Mahayanists, wisdom and love, constitutes one of the principal 
thoughts of the Mahayana Buddhism and shows a striking sim- 


ilarity to the Christian conception of God who is considered to be 
full of infinite love and wisdom. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 67 


By pure wisdom we understand that when one, 
by virtue of the perfuming! power of the Dharma, dis- 
ciplines himself truthfully [i. e., according to the 
Dharma], and accomplishes meritorious deeds, the 
mind [i. e., @/aya-vijnéna] which implicates itself with 
birth-and-death will be broken down, and the modes 
of the evolving-consciousness? will be annulled; while 
the pure and genuine wisdom of the Dharmakaya 
manifests itself. 

Though all modes of consciousness and mentation 
are mere products of ignorance, ignorance in its ulti- 
mate nature is identical and not-identical* with en- 
lightenment a priori; and therefore ignorance in one 
sense is destructible, while in the other sense it is in- 
destructible. 

This may be illustrated by [the simile of] the water 
and the waves which are stirred up in the ocean. Here 
the water can be said to be identical [in one sense] 
and not-identical [in the other sense]° with the waves. 
The waves are stirred up by the wind, but the water 
remains the same. When the wind ceases, the mo- 
tion of the waves subsides; but the water remains 


the same. 


1 This term will be explained later on. See p. 84. 

2 For the explanation see below, p. 76. 

3 Note that the Dharmakdaya is not the ‘' Body of the Law,” 
but suchness (b/@tatathaté) itself, which transcends the limits of 
time and space as well as the law of causation. 

*Literally, ‘‘neither identical nor not-identical.”’ 

° Literally, ‘‘ neither identical nor not-identical.”’ 


68 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Likewise, when the mind of all creatures which in 
its own nature is pure and clean, is stirred up by the 
wind of ignorance (avidya), the waves of mentality 
(vimana) make their appearance. These three [i. e., 
the mind, ignorance, and mentality], however, have 
no [absolute] existence, and they are neither unity nor 
plurality. 

But the mind though pure in its essence is the 
source of the awakened [or disturbed] mentality. 
When ignorance is annihilated, the awakened men- 
tality is tranquilised, whilst the essence of the wisdom 
remains unmolested.? 

Incomprehensible activity which we know proceeds 
from pure wisdom, uninterruptedly produces all ex- 
cellent spiritual states. That is to say, the person- 
ality (Adya) of the Tathagata,? which in exuberance 
contains immeasurable and ever-growing merits, re- 
veals itself to all beings according to their various 
predispositions [or characters], and accomplishes for 
them innumerable [spiritual] benefits. 

Further there is a fourfold significance in the na- 


1 That is, they are one in one sense, but different in the other 
sense. 

2 In the older translation the last two paragraphs read : 

‘Likewise the mind of all beings though clean and pure in its 
own nature is disturbed [or awakened] through the wind of ignor- 
ance. Neither the mind nor ignorance has any form and attribute 
[of its own]. They condition each other. But the mind itself 
not being the principle of disturbance its movability will cease 
when ignorance is gone, though its essence, wisdom, remains un- 
molested.” 

3Or the Zathégatagarbha. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 69 


ture of enlightenment whose purity may be likened 
unto space or a bright mirror. 

The first great significance which may be likened 
unto space and a bright mirror, is trueness as nega- 
tion (¢ényatd), in the sense that enlightenment is ab- 
solutely unobtainable by any modes of relativity or by 
any outward signs of enlightenment. 

The second great significance which may be likened 
unto space and a bright mirror, is trueness as affirma- 
tion (acényatd), in the sense that all things [in their 
ultimate nature] are perfect and complete, and not 
subject to destruction ; in the sense that all events in 
the phenomenal world are reflected in enlightenment, 
so that they neither pass out of it, nor enter into it, 
and that they neither disappear nor are destroyed ; 
that they are in one eternal and immutable soul which 
by none of the defiled things can be defiled and whose 
wisdom-essence enveloping immeasurable and innu- 
merable merits, becomes the cause of perfuming the 
minds of all beings. 

The third great significance which may be likened 
unto space and a bright mirror, is the affirmation as 
free from the hindrances (@varana), in the sense that 
enlightenment is forever cut off from the hindrances 
both affectional (A/ecévarana) and intellectual (jreyé- 
varana), as well as from the mind [1. e., @/aya-vijnana] 
which implicates itself with birth-and-death, since it 
is in its true nature clean, pure, eternal, calm, and 
immutable. 


70 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


The fourth great significance which may be likened 
unto space and a bright mirror, is the affirmation as 
unfolding itself, in the sense that on account of a lib- 
eration from the hindrances, it transforms and unfolds 
itself, wherever conditions are favorable, in the form 
of a Tathagata or in some other forms, in order that 
all beings might be induced thereby to bring their 
root! of merit (Auca/amizla) to maturity.? 

By the so-called non-enlightenment, we mean that 
as the true Dharma [i. e., suchness] is from all etern- 
ity not truthfully recognised in its oneness, there is- 
sues forth an unenlightened mind and then subjectiv- 
ity (smrdz). But this subjectivity has no self-existence 
independent of enlightenment a@ frzorz. 

To illustrate: a man who is lost goes astray be- 
cause he is bent on pursuing a certain direction; and 
his confusion has no valid foundation other than that 
he is bent on a certain direction. 


It is even the same with all beings. They become 


1 Max Miiller renders the term by ‘‘stock of merit,’ but I think 
‘*stock"’ is not very fitly adopted to denote the sense usually at- 
tached to it by Buddhists. According to them, karma, be it meri- 
torious or not-meritorious, has an efficient power to bear the fruit; 
therefore every act done by us like the root of a plant has a regen- 
erative force potentially reserved within itself, and does not, like a 
stock of things which are not necessarily alive, remain dormant 
lacking productive powers in it. 

2 According to the older translation, the first significance is 
called the ‘‘ mirror of transcendental (or empty) trueness’’; the sec- 
ond, the ‘‘mirror of the perfuming principle”; the third, the 
‘mirror of the dharma of liberation’’; and the fourth, the ‘‘ mir- 
ror of the perfuming cause.”’ 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 7 it 


unenlightened, foster their subjectivity and go astray, 
because they are bent on enlightenment. But non- 
enlightenment has no existence of its own, aside from 
its relation with enlightenment @ priorz. And as en- 
lightenment a priort is spoken of only in contrast to 
non-enlightenment, and as non-enlightenment is a 
non-entity, true enlightenment in turn loses its sig- 
nificance too. [That is to say, they are simply rela- 
tive. | 

In blindness! there arose non-enlightenment of 
which three aspects are to be noted. These three are 
not independent. 

The first aspect is ignorant action (avidyakarma?).? 
A disturbance? of the mind [1. e., @/aya-vijwana] caused 
by non-enlightenment characterises the beginning of 
karma. When enlightened, the mind is no more dis- 


1 Rather ‘‘carelessness."’ This is missing in the older trans- 

lation. 
2 The term ‘‘ignorant action’’ reminds us of Schopenhauer’s 
‘‘blind will” and we might translate the Chinese terms Au chiao 
ARE ignorant or unconscious, by ‘‘blind.” On the other hand, 
the expression reminds one of Goethe’s words in Faust: ‘‘ Im Anfang 
war die That,” i. e., in the beginning there was karma; and this 
karma starting in an unenlightened condition was blind or ignor- 
ant, it was as yet unconscious of its goal which is the attainment 
of the eternal truth, the discovery of enlightenment a frzorz. Cf. 
also the Chadndogya Upantsad, VI, 2. 

3 By ‘‘disturbance” is meant that the mind or soul, awaking 
from a state of perfect sameness and tranquillity, discriminates the 
subject and the object, me and not-me. The ‘‘disturbance’”’ it- 
self, however, is neither good nor bad; the fault lies in clinging 
to this dual aspect of existence as absolute, utterly ignoring their 
fundamental identity. Efface the clinging from your mind, and 
you are purified and saved. 


72 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


turbed. But by its disturbance misery (duhkha) is 
produced according to the law of causation. 

The second aspect is that which perceives [i. e., 
the ego or subject]. In consequence of the disturb- 
ance of the mind there originates that which perceives 
an external world. When the mind is not disturbed, 
perception does not take place. 

The third aspect is the external world. Through 
perception an unreal external world originates. Inde- 
pendent of that which perceives [1. e., the ego or sub- 
ject], there is no surrounding world [or the object].! 

Conditioned by the unreal external world, six kinds 
of phenomena arise in succession. 

The first phenomenon is intelligence [i. e., sensa- 
tion]. Being affected by the external world the mind 
becomes conscious of the difference between the agree- 
able and the disagreeable. 

The second phenomenon is succession [1. e., mem- 
ory]. Following upon intelligence, memory retains 
the sensations agreeable as well as disagreeable in a 
continuous succession of subjective states. 

The third phenomenon is clinging. Through the 
retention and succession of sensations agreeable as 
well as disagreeable, there arises the desire of cling- 
ing. 

The fourth phenomenon is an attachment to names 


1This is the idealistic phase of the Mahayana Buddhism. 
Berkeley says: ‘‘Take away the perceiving mind and you take 
away the objective world.” 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 73 


[or ideas, samara], etc.1 By clinging the mind hy- 
postasises all names whereby to give definitions to all 
things. 

The fifth phenomenon is the performance of deeds 
(karma). On account of attachment to names, etc., 
there arise all the variations of deeds, productive of 
individuality. 

The sixth phenomenon is the suffering due to the 
fetter of deeds. Through deeds suffering arises in 
which the mind finds itself entangled and curtailed of 
its freedom. 

Be it therefore known that all defiled things do 
not exist by themselves, for all of them have arisen 
from ignorance. 

Now there is a twofold relation between enlighten- 
ment and non-enlightenment: (1) identity; (2) non- 
identity. 

The relation of identity may be illustrated by the 

1 Here is again a strange agreement with Western philosophy. 
The nominalists speak of names as mere flatus voczs and the things- 
in-themselves (i. e., what is conceived by names) are declared to 
be unknowable by Kant. Dr. Paul Carus goes one step further by 
declaring that there are no things-in-themselves, but forms-in- 
themselves, viz., the eternal types of beings or Plato’s ideas. The 
clinging to names is based on the metaphysical error of interpret- 
ing names as entities or things-in-themselves, which exhibits the 
nominalistic phase of Buddhism. On the other hand, the strong 
emphasis laid on the reality of suchness, or what Dr. Carus calls 
the purely formai, shows the realistic phase of Buddhism. The 
word ‘‘hypostasises’”’ used in the next passage means literally in 
the younger translation ‘‘ firmly builds a basis for,” in the older 


one we read literally ‘‘one sets separately forth what is unreal, 
i. e., names and words.” 


74 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


simile of all kinds of pottery which though different 
are all made of the same clay. Likewise the undefiled 
(andcrava)' and ignorance (avzdya) and their various 
transcient forms come all from one and the same en- 
tity. Therefore Buddha teaches? that all beings are 
from all eternity ever abiding in Nirvana.? In truth 
enlightenment cannot be manufactured, nor can it be 
created ; it is absolutely intangible; it is no material 
existence that is an object of sensation. 

The reason why enlightenment nevertheless as- 
sumes tangible material form is that it suffers defile- 
ment‘? which is the source of all transient forms of 
manifestation. Wisdom itself has nothing to do with 


material phenomena whose characteristic feature is 


1A dharma not subject to the transformation of birth and 
death is called 4 Y§ wz Zou in Chinese and anégrava in Sanskrit. 
It is commonly used in contrast to A a yu lou and ségrava, which 
means ‘‘ defiled”’ or ‘‘ conditional.” 

2 This teaching is set forth in the fourth chapter of the Vzma- 
lakirtinirdeza Satra, one of the most popular Mahayana texts in 
China as well as in Japan. There are several Chinese translations 
still extant, the earliest of which was produced during the first 
half of the third century of the Christian era. 


3 Observe that Nirvana is here used as a synonym of suchness 
(dhatatathata). 


That is to say, being mixed up in the material world. ‘‘ De- 
filement”’ does not necessarily mean evil or immorality. Anything 
that does not come directly from the fountain-head of suchness, 
but is in some way or other ‘‘ perfumed”’ by ignorance, the prin- 
ciple of individuation, is called defiled or impure. From the eth- 
ical point of view it may be good or bad, according to our subjec- 
tive attitude towards it. All that should be avoided is a clinging 
to the phenomenal existence. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 75 


extension in space, and there are no attributes there 
by which wisdom can become tangible. This is the 
meaning of Buddha’s brief statement just referred to. 

The relation of non-identity may be illustrated by 
the difference that obtains among the various kinds 
of pottery. The relation among the undefiled and 
ignorance and their various transient forms of mani- 
festation is similar to it. 

And again, by the law of causation (hetupratyaya) 
in the domain of birth-and-death (samsdéra) we mean 
that depending on the mind [i. e., @/aya-vijfwaéna] an 
evolution of the ego (manas) and consciousness (wv/- 
wana) takes place in all beings. 

What is meant by this? 

In the all-conserving mind (@/aya-vijfdna) ignor- 
ance obtains; and from the non-enlightenment starts 
that which sees, that which represents, that which 
apprehends an objective world, and that which con- 
stantly particularises. This is called the ego (manas). 


'Manovijnéna in the older translation. Now wzjndna (or 
manovindna), manas and citta are to a certain extent synonym- 
ous and interchangeable, as all designating that which feels, thinks 
and wills, or what is commonly called mind. According to a gen- 
eral interpretation of Mahay4nists, the following distinction is 
made among them: cz¢¢a, mind, is more fundamental, somehow 
corresponding to the conception of the soul, for it has the inherent 
capacity for ideation as well as for the power of storing up within 
itself the results of experience; the most characteristic feature of 
the mamnas, the ego, is to constantly reflect on itself and to un- 
consciously assert the existence of the ego; the vzjmdéna, conscious- 
ness, is principally the faculty of feeling, perceiving, discriminat- 
ing, judging, etc., in short, general mental activity or consciousness. 


76 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Five different names are given to the ego [accord- 
ing to its different modes of operation]. 

The first name is activity-consciousness (Xarma- 
vijniana?) in the sense that through the agency of ig- 
norance an unenlightened mind begins to be disturbed 
for awakened]. 

The second name is evolving-consciousness [ pra- 
urtti-vijndna, i. e., the subject], in the sense that when 
the mind is disturbed, there evolves that which sees 
an external world. 

The third name is representation-consciousness, 
in the sense that the ego (manas) represents [or re- 
flects] an external world. Asaclean mirror reflects 
the images of all description, it is even so with the 
representation-consciousness. When it is confronted, 
for instance, with the five objects of sense, it repre- 
sents them at once, instantaneously, and without any 
effort. 

The fourth name is particularisation-conscious- 
ness, in the sense that it discriminates between differ- 
ent things defiled as well as pure. 

The fifth name is succession-consciousness [i. e., 
memory], in the sense that continuously directed by 
the awakening consciousness [or attention, manaskara] 
it [manas] retains and never loses or suffers the de- 
struction of any karma, good as well as evil, which 
had been sown in the past, and whose retribution, 
painful as well as agreeable, it never fails to mature, 


be it in the present or in the future; and also in the 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. vig | 


sense that it unconsciously recollects things gone by, 
and in imagination anticipates things to come. 

Therefore the three domains! (¢7z/oka) are nothing 
but the self-manifestation of the mind [i. e., éaya- 
vijndna which is practically identical with suchness, 
bhitatathaté|.* Separated from the mind, there would 
be no such things as the six objects of sense. 

Why? 

Since all things, owing the principle of their ex- 
istence to the mind (d@/aya-vijidna), are produced by 
subjectivity (sm7zz), all the modes of particularisation 
are the self-particularisation of the mind. The mind 
in itself [or the soul] being, however, free from all 
attributes, is not differentiated. Therefore we come 
to the conclusion that all things and conditions in the 
phenomenal world, hypostasised and established only 
through ignorance (avédya) and subjectivity (smrtz) 
on the part of all beings, have no more reality than 


the images in a mirror.2 They evolve simply from 


1 They are: (1) Domain of feeling (Rdmaloka); (2) Domain of 
bodily existence (7@faloka); (3) Domain of incorporeality (ar@pa- 
loka). 


2The mind or @laya-vijnéna is suchness (or, as Dr. Carus 
would say, ‘‘ purely formal thought,”) in its operation, where it 
may be called the rational principle in ‘nature or the Gesetzmds- 
sigkett of the cosmos. It manifests itself not only in human rea- 
son, but appears also as the principle of individuation, determin- 
ing all particular forms of existence, as will be explained in the 
following lines. 


3 Compare Schopenhauer’s conception of the world as Vor- 
stellung. 


78 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


the ideality of a particularising mind. When the mind 
is disturbed, the multiplicity of things is produced; 
but when the mind is quieted, the multiplicity of 
things disappears. 

By ego-consciousness (manovijidna) we mean that 
all ignorant minds through their succession-conscious- 
ness cling to the conception of / and not-J [1. e., a 
separate objective world] and misapprehend the na- 
ture of the six objects of sense. The ego-conscious- 
ness is also called separation-consciousness, or phe- 
nomena-particularising-consciousness, because it is 
nourished by the perfuming! influence of the preju- 
dices (@¢rava), intellectual as well as affectional. 

The mind [or consciousness, vzj#déna] that starts 
from the perfuming influence of ignorance which has 
no beginning cannot be comprehended by the intel- 
lect of common people (grthagjana), Cravakas and 
Pratyekabuddhas. 

It is partially comprehended by those Bodhisattvas 
at the stage of knowledge-and-practice, who discipline 
themselves, practise contemplation and become the 
Bodhisattvas of the Dharmakaya; while even those 
who have reached the highest stage of Bodhisattva- 
hood cannot thoroughly comprehend it. 

The only one who can have aclear and consum- 


mate knowledge of it is the Tathagata.’ 


1 The term will be explained later. 


2The same idea is expressed in the Criméala Satra as well as 
in the Lankdvatara Satra where Buddha preaches the unfathom- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 79 


Why? 

While the essence of the mind is eternally clean 
and pure, the influence of ignorance makes possible 
the existence of a defiled mind. But in spite of the 
defiled mind, the mind [itself] is eternal, clear, pure, 
and not subject to transformation. 

Further as its original nature is free from particu- 
larisation, it knows in itself no change whatever, 
though it produces everywhere the various modes of 
existence. 

When the oneness of the totality of things (dharma- 
dhétu) is not recognised, then ignorance as well as 
particularisation arises, and all phases of the defiled 
mind are thus developed. But the significance of this 
doctrine is so extremely deep and unfathomable that 


ableness of the nature of suchness which, though pure in its es- 
sence, is yet subject to defilement or conditionality,—-the mystery 
that can be comprehended only by a fully enlightened mind. Re- 
ferring to this incomprehensibility of the relation of suchness and 
ignorance, let me quote what Herbert Spencer says in his /zrst 
Principles (American ed., p. 45): ‘‘ For every religion, setting out 
though it does with tacit assertion of a mystery, forthwith proceeds 
to give some solution of this mystery; and so asserts that it is not 
a mystery passing human comprehension. But an examination of 
the solutions they severally propose, shows them to be uniformly 
invalid. The analysis of every possible hypothesis proves, not 
simply that no hypothesis is sufficient, but that no hypothesis is 
even thinkable. And thus the mystery which all religions recog- 
nise, turns out to be a far more transcendent mystery than any of 
them suppose—not a relative, but an absolute mystery.” Is not 
the relation of suchness and ignorance the very mystery to which 
Spencer makes the allusion here? Agvaghosha’s solution is that 
only Buddha can grasp it. 


80 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


it can be fully comprehended by Buddhas and by no 
others. Now there are six different phases of the 
defiled! mind thus developed : 

1. Interrelated [or secondary] defilement by at- 
tachment, from which Cravakas, Pratyekabuddhas 
and those Bodhisattvas at the stage of faith-adapta- 
tion can be freed. 

2. Interrelated [or secondary] defilement by suc- 
cession, from which Bodhisattvas with strenuous efforts 
at the stage of faith, can partially be freed, and at the 
stage of pure-heartedness, completely. 

3. Interrelated [or secondary| defilement by the 
particularising intelligence, from which Bodhisattvas 
are gradually freed during their advancement from the 
stage of morality to the stage of wisdom, while upon 
reaching the stage of spirituality, they are eternally 
freed from it. 

4. Non-interrelated [or primary] defilement by be- 


1 The defilement which is the product of the evolution of the 
adlaya-vijnéna, is of two kinds, primary and secondary. The pri- 
mary defilement is a #rzor7z, originating with the birth of the mind. 
There is as yet no distinct consciousness in it of the duality of the 
subject and the object, though this is of course tacitly asserted. 
Ag¢vaghosha calls the primary defilement ‘‘non-interrelated,’’ mean- 
ing that there is no deliberate reflexion in the ego to assert itself. 
The secondary defilement called ‘‘ interrelated” on the other hand 
explicitly assumes the ego in contradistinction to the non-ego and 
firmly clings to this conception, which brings forth all selfish de- 
sires and actions on the part of the defiled mind. The former 
being more fundamental than the latter is completely effaced from 
the mind only after going through all different stages of religious 
discipline. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH 81 


lief in an external world, which can be exterminated 
at the stage of matter-emancipation. 

5. Non-interrelated [or primary] defilement by be- 
lief in a perceiving mind, which can be exterminated 
at the stage of mind-emancipation. 

6. Non-interrelated [or primary] defilement by the 
fundamental activity, which can be exterminated in 
entering upon the stage of Tathagatahood, passing 
through the highest stage of Bodhisattvahood. 

From not recognising the oneness of the totality 
of things (dharmadhdtu), Bodhisattvas can partially 
be liberated by passing first from the stage of faith 
and the stage of contemplation to the stage of pure- 
heartedness ; while when they enter upon the stage 
of Tathagatahood, they can once for all put an end 
[to the illusion]. 

By ‘‘interrelated”” we mean that there is [in this 
case] a distinction [or consciousness of a duality] be- 
tween the mind in itself and particularisation, that 
there is [here] a distinction [or consciousness of a 
duality] between the defiled and the pure, [and there- 
fore] that there is [here] an interrelation between that 
which perceives and that which determines. 

By ‘‘non-interrelated”’ we mean that the mind [in 
this case] is perfectly identified with non-enlighten- 
ment, so that there is no distinction [or consciousness 
of a duality] between these two, [and therefore] that 
there is no consciousness of interrelation between that 


which perceives and that which determines. 


82 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


The defiled mind is called affectional hindrance 
(klecdvarana), because it obscures the fundamental 
wisdom of suchness (diétatathaté@). Ignorance is called 
intellectual hindrance (j#eydvarana), because it ob- 
scures the spontaneous exercise of wisdom from which 
evolve all modes of activity in the world. 

What is meant by this? 

On account of the defiled mind attachment affirms 
itself in innumerable ways; and there arises a dis- 
tinction [or consciousness] between that which appre- 
hends and that which is apprehended. Thus believ- 
ing in the external world produced by subjectivity, 
the mind becomes oblivious of the principle of same- 
ness (samaté@) that underlies all things. 

The essence of all things is one and the same, per- 
fectly calm and tranquil, and shows no sign of be- 
coming ; ignorance, however, is in its blindness and 
delusion oblivious of enlightenment, and, on that ac- 
count, cannot recognise truthfully all those conditions, 
differences, and activities which characterise the phe- 
nomena of the universe. 

Further we distinguish two phases of the self- 
manifestation of the mind [1. e., @/aya-vijwdna, under 
the law of causation] as birth-and-death (samséra). 
The first is the cruder phase, being the state of an in- 
terrelated mind ; the second is the more refined phase, 
being the state of a non-interrelated mind. The crud- 
est phase is the subjective condition of common peo- 


ple (prthagjana); the more refined of the crude or 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 83 


the cruder of the refined is the subjective state of a 
Bodhisattva.! These two phases [of the d@/aya-vijiana 
as the principle of birth-and-death] originate through 
the perfuming power of ignorance. 

The birth-and-death (samsdra) has its raison ad étre 
(Aetu) and its cause [or condition, fratyaya]. Non- 
enlightenment is the ratson d’étre, and the external 
world as produced by subjectivity is the condition. 
When the razson d’étre is annihilated, the condition is 
annihilated [1. e., loses its conditioning power]. When 
the condition is annihilated, the state of an interrelated 
mind is annihilated. When the razson d’étre is annihi- 
lated, the state of a non-interrelated mind [too] is 
annihilated. 

It may be asked: If the mind be annihilated, how 
can there be mentation? If mentation really occurs, 
how can there be annihilation? | 

In reply we say that while the objection is well 
founded, we understand by the annihilation, not that 
of the mind itself, but of its modes [only]. 

To illustrate: the water shows the symptoms of 
disturbance when stirred up by the wind. Have the 
wind annihilated, and the symptoms of disturbance 
on the water will also be annihilated, the water itself 
remaining the same. Let the water itself, however, 
be annihilated, the symptoms of disturbance would 
no more be perceptible; because there is nothing 


1 The older translation adds: The most refined of the refined 
is the spiritual state of a Buddha. 


84 AGVAGHOSHA’S 


there through which it can show itself. Only so long 
as the water is not annihilated, the symptoms of dis- 
turbance may continue. 

It is even the same with all beings. Through 
ignorance their minds become disturbed. Let ignor- 
ance be annihilated, and the symptom of disturbance 
will also be annihilated, while the essence of the mind 
[i. e., suchness] remains the same. Only if the mind 
itself were annihilated, then all beings would cease to 
exist, because there would be nothing there by which 
they could manifest themselves. But so long as the 
mind be not annihilated, its disturbance may continue. 

A constant production of things defiled and pure is 
taking place on account of the inter-perfuming of the 
four different powers which are as follows: the first is 
the pure dharma, that is, suchness (dha¢atathatad); the 
second is the principle of defilement, that is, ignor- 
ance (avidya); the third is the subjective mind, that 
is, activity-consciousness (karmavijndna?); the fourth 
is the external world (véshaya) of subjectivity, that is, 
the six objects of sense. 

By “ perfuming”’ we mean that while our worldly 
clothes [viz., those which we wear] have no odor of 
their own, neither offensive nor agreeable, they acquire 
one or the other according to the nature of the sub- 
stance with which they are perfumed. 

Now suchness is a pure dharma free from defile- 
ment. It acquires, however, a quality of defilement 


owing to the perfuming power of ignorance. On the 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 85 


other hand, ignorance has nothing to do with purity. 
Nevertheless, we speak of its being able to do the 
work of purity, because it in its turn is perfumed by 
suchness. 

How are defiled things continually produced by 
perfuming? 

Determined by suchness [in its relative aspect], 
ignorance becomes the vazson d’étre of all forms of 
defilement. And this ignorance perfumes suchness, 
and, by perfuming suchness, it produces subjectivity 
(smrtz). This subjectivity in its turn perfumes ignor- 
ance. On account of this [reciprocal] perfuming, the 
truth is misunderstood. On account of its being mis- 
understood, an external world of subjectivity appears 
[viz., a conception of particulars as particulars]. 
Further, on account of the perfuming power of sub- 
jectivity, various modes of individuation are produced. 
And by clinging to them, various deeds are done, and 
we suffer as the result miseries, mentally as well as 
bodily. 4 

There are two senses in what we call ‘‘the per- 
fuming power of the external world of subjectivity”: 
(1) that which strengthens particularisation ;1 (2) that 
which strengthens attachment. _ 

There are again two senses in what we call ‘‘the 


perfuming power of the subjective mind”: (1) that 


1The older translation has ‘‘subjectivity”” instead of ‘‘ par- 
ticularisation.” These two terms are synonymous and frequently 
interchanged in the later translation as well as in the older one. 


86 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


which strengthens the fundamental activity-conscious- 
ness, whereby Arhats, Pratyekabuddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas are subject to the miseries of birth and death ; 
(2) that which strengthens the phenomena-particu- 
larising-consciousness, whereby all common people 
( prthagjana) are subject to the miseries of being fet- 
tered by prior deeds (Aarma). 

There are also two senses in what we call ‘‘the 
perfuming power of ignorance’: (1) a fundamental 
perfuming, in the sense that the activity-consciousness 
is thereby actualised ; (2) a perfuming of intellect and 
affection, in the sense that the phenomena-particular- 
ising-consciousness is thereby actualised. 

How are pure things constantly produced by per- 
fuming? 

- Suchness perfumes ignorance, and in consequence 
of this perfuming the mind involved in subjectivity is 
caused to loathe the misery of birth and death! and 
to seek after the blessing of Nirvana. This longing 
and loathing on the part of the subjective mind in 
turn perfumes suchness. On account of this perfum- 
ing influence we are enabled to believe that we are in 
possession within ourselves of suchness whose essen- 
tial nature is pure and immaculate; and we also rec- 
ognise that all phenomena in the world are nothing 
but the illusory manifestation of the mind (daya- 
vijndna) and have no reality of theirown. Since we 


1 Birth and death do not necessarily refer to our life only, but 
in their widest sense to the phenomenal world. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 87 


thus rightly understand the truth, we can practise the 
means of liberation, can perform those actions which 
are in accordance [with the Dharma]. Neither do 
we particularise, nor cling to. By virtue of this dis- 
cipline and habituation during the lapse of innumer- 
able asamkhyeyakalpas,! we have ignorance annihi- 
lated. 

As ignorance is thus annihilated, the mind [i. e., 
dlaya-vijnina| is no more disturbed so as to be sub- 
ject to individuation. As the mind is no more dis- 
turbed, the particularisation of the surrounding world 
is annihilated. When in this wise the principle and 
the condition of defilement, their products, and the 
mental disturbances are all annihilated, it is said that 


we attain to Nirvana and that various spontaneous 


displays of activity are accomplished.? . 


1 Literally, countless ages, but it has a technical meaning. 
Childer’s Pali Dictionary, swb voce: ‘‘The term alfa is given to 
certain vast periods or cycles of time, of which there are three, 
Mahékalpa, Asamkhyeyakalpa and Antarakaipa. All the Cak- 
ravatas are subject to an alternate process of destruction and 
renovation, and a Mahdkalpa is a period which elapses from the 
commencement of a cakravdta to its complete destruction. Each 
Mahéka/pa is subdivided into four Asamkhyeyakalpds.... Each 
Asamkhyeyakalpa contains twenty Antarakalpfés, an Antara- 
kalpa being the interval that elapses while the age of man in- 
creases from ten years to an asamkhyeya, and then decreases 
again to ten years; this period is of immense duration.” See also 
the third Xogathéna (chapter) of the Abhidharmakoga by Vasu- 
bandhu. 


* Notice that Nirvana is not inactivity or nothingness as com- 
monly supposed. It is, according to A¢vaghosha, the annihilation 


88 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


There are two senses in what we call ‘‘the perfum- 
ing of the subjective mind”: (1) the perfuming of the 
phenomena-particularising-consciousness, whereby all 
common people (frthagjana), Cravakas, and Praty- 
ekabuddhas are induced to loathe the misery of birth 
and death, and, each according to his own capacity, 
to step towards the most excellent knowledge (d0dh1- 
parinishpatt?); (2) the perfuming of the ego (manas), 
whereby courageously making up their minds, Bodhi- 
sattvas unhesitatingly step towards and enter into 
Nirvana, that has no fixed abode. 

There are also two senses in what we call ‘‘the 
perfuming of suchness’’: (1) essence-perfuming, and 
(2) activity-perfuming. 

The Essence-Perfuming.—Embracing in full from 
all eternity infinite spotless virtues (amé@crava) and in- 
comprehensibly excellent spiritual states that can effi- 
ciently exercise an eternal and incessant influence 
upon all beings, suchness thereby perfumes the minds 
of all beings.! 

In consequence of this perfuming power, they are 
caused to loathe the misery of birth and death, and 
to long for the blessing of Nirvana, and believing that 
they are in possession within themselves of the true, 


of the ego-conception, freedom from subjectivity, insight into the 
essence of suchness, or the recognition of the oneness of existence. 


1The older translation: ‘‘(1) Embracing from all eternity 
things spotless and possessing in full some inconceivable activity 
and (2) being capable to objectify itself, suchness through these two 
attributes constantly and eternally exercises its perfuming power.” 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 89 


valid Dharma, to call forth their aspiration (czt¢otpdda)} 
and to discipline themselves. 

Here a question arises: If all beings are uniformly 
in possession of suchness and are therefore equally 
perfumed by it, how is it that there are some who do 
not believe in it, while others do; and that there are 
such immeasurable stages and inequalities among 
them, which divide the path from the first stage of as- 
piration up to the last stage of Nirvana, while accord- 
ing to the Doctrine all these differences should be 
equalised? 

In reply we say this: Though all beings are uni- 
formly in possession of suchness, the intensity [of the 
influence] of ignorance, the principle of individuation, 
that works from all eternity, varies in such manifold 
grades as to outnumber the sands of the Ganges. And 
it is even so with such entangling prejudices (A/eca or 
dgrava) as the ego-conception, intellectual and affec- 
tional prejudices, etc. [whose perfuming efficiency 
varies according to the karma previously accumulated 
by each individual],—all these things being compre- 
hended only by the Tathagata. Hence such immeas- 
urable degrees of difference as regards belief, etc.? 


1 This has a technical sense and is explained below. 


2 The view here set forth is illustrated in the fifth chapter of 
the Saddharma-pundartka Stttra by the relation of the rain and 
plants. ‘‘Then, Kacyapa, the grasses, shrubs, herbs, and wild 
trees in this universe, such as have young and tender stalks, twigs, 
leaves, and foliage, and such as. have middle-sized stalks, twigs, 
leaves, and foliage, and such as have the same fully developed, all 
those grasses, shrubs, herbs, and wild trees, smaller and greater 


go ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Further, there is made in the doctrine of all Bud- 
dhas a distinction between raison d’étre (hetu) and 
cause (pratyaya). When both are fully satisfied, the 
final goal [of Buddhism] is attained and actualised. 

To illustrate: the combustible nature of the wood 
is the vatson d’étre of a fire. But if a man is not ac- 
quainted with the fact, or, though acquainted with it, 
does not apply any method [whereby the potential 
principle can be actualised], how could he produce a 
fire and burn the wood? 

It is even so with all beings. Although they are 
in possession of suchness as the perfuming vrazson 
d’étre, yet how could they attain to Nirvana, if they 
do not happen, as the cause, to see Buddhas or Bodhi- 
sattvas, or good sages, or even if they see them, do 
not practise good deeds (cary@), do not exercise wis- 
dom ( prajvd), do not destroy prejudices (A/e¢ga) ? 

Conversely, by the cause alone, i. e., by their mere 
happening to see all good sages, it is not sure for 


them that they will be induced to loathe the misery 


(other) trees will each, according to its faculty and power, suck 
the humid element from the water emitted by that great cloud, 
and by that water which, ad/ of one essence, has been abundantly 
poured down by the cloud, they will each, according to its germ 
[i.e., karma], acquire a regular development, growth, shooting up, 
and bigness; and they will produce blossoms and fruits, and will 
receive, each severally, their names. Rooted in one and the same 
soil, all those [different] families of plants and germs are 
drenched and vivified by water of one essence throughout." 
(Kern’s English Translation, p. 119. The italics and words in 
brackets are by the present translator.) 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. gi 


of birth and death and to long for the blessing of Nir- 
vana, unless indeed they were in possession within 
themselves of the intrinsic perfuming principle as the 
raison d’étre. It is, therefore, only when both the 
ratson d@’étre and the cause are fully actualised that 
they can do so. 

How are the raison d’étre and the cause to be fully 
actualised ? 

Now, there is an inherent perfuming principle in 
one’s own being, which, embraced and protected by 
the love (maztri)) and compassion (Aarund) of all Bud- 
dhas and Bodhisattvas, is caused to loathe the misery 
of birth and death, to believe in Nirvana, to cultivate 
their root of merit (Augalamd/a), to habituate oneself 
to it, and to bring it to maturity. 

In consequence of this, one is enabled to see all 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and, receiving instruc- 
tions from them, is benefited, gladdened, induced to 
practise good deeds, etc., till one attain to Buddha- 
hood and enter into Nirvana. 

The Activity-Perfuming.—By this is meant nothing 
else than the perfuming influence of the external cause 
over all beings. It asserts itself in innumerable ways. 
Briefly speaking we may distinguish two kinds of it: 
(1) individual; and (2) universal. 

The Individual Cause.—All beings since their first 
aspiration (citZotpdda) till the attainment of Buddha- 
hood are sheltered under the guardianship of all Bud- 
dhas and Bodhisattvas who, responding to the re- 


g2 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


quirements of the occasion, transform themselves and 
assume the actual forms of personality. 

Thus for the sake of all beings Buddhas and Bodhi- 
sattvas become sometimes their parents, sometimes 
their wives and children, sometimes their kinsmen, 
sometimes their servants, sometimes their friends, 
sometimes their enemies, sometimes reveal them- 
selves as devas or in some other forms. 

Again Buddhas and Bodhisattvas treat all beings 
sometimes with the four methods of entertainment,! 
sometimes with the six paramitas,? or with some other 
deeds, all of which are the inducement for them to 
make their knowledge (d0d¢h7) perfect. 

Thus embracing all beings with their deep com- 
passion (mahdékaruné), with their meek and tender 
heart, as well as their immense treasure of blissful 
wisdom, Buddhas convert them in such a way as to 
suit their [all beings’] needs and conditions; while 
all beings thereby are enabled to hear or to see Bud- 
dhas, and, thinking of Tathagatas or some other per- 
sonages, to increase their root of merit (Au¢alamila). 

This individual cause is divided into two kinds: 
(1) that which takes effect immediately, enabling one 
without delay to attain to Buddhahood ; (2) that which 
takes effect gradually, enabling one to attain to Bud- 
dhahood only after a long interval. 


1\Catvdri-sangrahavastént in Sanskrit. They are (1) déna, 
charity; (2) przyavacana, endearing speech; (3) avthacaryéd, be- 
neficial action; (4) samdéndrthé, co-operation. 

2 This is explained below. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 93 


Each of these two is further divided into two 
kinds: (1) that which increases one’s root of merit; 
(2) that which induces one to enter into the path 
(marga). 

The Universal Cause. — With universal wisdom 
(samatéjvdna?) and universal wishes (samatéprant- 
ahdna?)all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas desire to achieve 
a universal emancipation of all beings. This desire 
is eternal and spontaneous on their part. And now 
as this wisdom and these wishes have the perfuming 
power over all beings, the latter are caused to think 
of or to recollect all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, so 
that sometimes hearing them, sometimes seeing them, 
all beings thereby acquire [spiritual] benefits (Az¢azé@). 
That is, entering into the samadhi of purity, they de- 
stroy hindrances wherever they are met with, and ob- 
tain all-penetrating insight,! that enables one to be- 
come conscious of the absolute oneness (samaté) of 
the universe (sarva/oka) and to see innumerable Bud- 
dhas and Bodhisattvas.? 

Again, this perfuming of the essence and the ac- 
tivity may be divided into two categories: (1) that 
which is not yet in unison [with suchness]; (2) that 
which is already in unison [with suchness]. 

By that perfuming which is not yet in unison [with 


suchness] we understand the religious discipline of 


1 Literally, an unimpeded eye. 


*The older translation differs a little, but without any con- 
siderable change in the meaning. 


94 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


common people (frthagjana), Cravakas, Pratyeka- 
buddhas, and novice Bodhisattvas. While their 
strength of faith (¢vaddhébala) perfumed by the ego 
(manas) and the ego-consciousness (manovyjfdna) en- 
ables them to continue their religious discipline, they 
have not yet attained to the state of non-particulari- 
sation, because their discipline is not yet in unison 
with the essence of suchness; nor have they yet at- 
tained to the spontaneity of action (svayamkarma?)', 
because their discipline is not yet in unison with the 
activity of suchness. 

By that perfuming which is already in unison [with 
suchness], we understand the religious discipline of 
Bodhisattvas of the Dharmakaya. They have attended 
to the state of non-particularisation, because their 
discipline is in unison with the self-essence of all Ta- 
thagatas ; they have attained to the spontaneity of ac- 
tion, because their discipline is in unison with the 


wisdom and activity of all Tathagatas. Allowing them- 


1 The spontaneity of action means action without attachment 
or free from the ego-conception. It is somewhat similar to Lao- 
Tze’s idea of wz wez, non-assertion. Cf. also the following pas- 
sages from the bhagavadgitd, Chap. IV., p. 59: ‘‘Actions defile 
me not. I have no attachment to the fruit of actions.’’ P. 60: 
‘‘ He is wise among men, he is possessed of devotion, who sees in- 
action in action and action in inaction.” ... ‘‘ Forsaking all at- 
tachment to the fruit of action, always contented, dependent on 
none, he does nothing at all, though he engages in action.” P. 64: 
‘‘He... who identifies his self with every being, is not tainted 
though he performs (action).’’ ‘‘Action in inaction and inaction in 
action’ exactly coincides with the practical side of Acvaghosha's 
doctrine of suchness (bhftatathaté). 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 95 


selves to be influenced only by the power of the 
Dharma, their discipline acquires a nature of spon- 
taneity and thereby perfumes suchness and destroys 
ignorance. 

Again the incessant perfuming of the defiled 
dharma [1i. e., ignorance] from all eternity works on; 
but when one attains to Buddhahood, one at once 
puts an end to it. 

The perfuming of the pure dharma [i. e., such- 
ness] works on to eternity, and there is no interrup- 
tion of it. Because by virtue of the perfuming of the 
Dharma, that is, suchness, subjectivity is on the one 
hand annihilated, and the Dharmaka4ya is on the other 
hand revealed, and the perfuming process of the ac- 


tivity [of suchness] thus originated forever goes on. 


c. The Threefold Significance of the Mahéyéna Explained. 


Again the quintessence and the attributes of such- 
ness (dhétatathat@) know no diminution or addition, 
but remain the same in common people (prthagjana), 
Cravakas, Pratyekabuddhas, Bodhisattvas, and Bud- 
dhas. It was not created in the past, nor is it to be 
annihilated in the future; it is eternal, permanent, 
absolute ; and from all eternity it sufficingly embraces 
in its essence all possible merits (punya). 

That is to say, suchness has such characteristics 
as follows: the effulgence of great wisdom; the uni- 
versal illumination of the dharmadhatu [universe]; 


the true and adequate knowledge; the mind pure and 


96 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


clean in its self-nature; the eternal, the blessed, the 
self-regulating and the pure;! the tranquil, the im- 
mutable, and the free. And there is no heterogeneity 
in all those Buddha-dharmas which, outnumbering 
the sands of the Ganges, can be neither identical 
(ekértha) nor not-identical (zdndrtha) [with the essence 
of suchness], and which therefore are out of the range 
of our comprehension. Accordingly suchness is called 
the Tathagata’s womb (¢athégatagarbha) or the Dhar- 
makaya.? 

It may be questioned: While it was stated before 
that suchness is devoid of all characteristics (/akshana), 
how can it now be said without contradiction that it 
embraces in full all such merits? 

In reply it would be said that though suchness in 
truth abundantly embraces all merits, yet it is free in 
its nature from all forms of distinction ; because all 
objects in the world are of one and the same taste, 
are of one reality, have nothing to do with the modes 
of particularisation, and are not of dualistic character. 
Depending on the principle of birth-and-death, such 
as the activity-consciousness (karmavijnina?), etc., 
however, all signs of difference and individuation ap- 
pear. 


1 These four qualities are usually considered by Mahay4nists 
to be those of Nirvana as well. 


2 Observe here again that Dharmak4ya is used in a sense quite 
different from its ordinary interpretation as the ‘‘ Body of the 
Law.” 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. Q7 


How are those qualifications to be assigned to 
suchness? 

Though all things in their [metaphysical] origin ~ 
come from the soul alone and in truth free from par- 
ticularisation, yet on account of non-enlightenment 
there originates a subjective mind [1. e., @/aya-vijndna] 
that becomes conscious of an external world (wishaya). 
This we call ignorance (avidya). Nevertheless the 
essence of the mind for the soul] is perfectly pure, 
and there is no awakening of ignorance in it. Thence 
we assign to suchness this quality, the effulgence of 
great wisdom. 

If the mind being awakened perceive an external 
world, then there will be something that cannot be 
perceived by it. But the essence of the mind has 
nothing to do with perception [which presupposes the 
dual existence of a perceiving subject and an object 
perceived]; so there is nothing that cannot be per- 
ceived by it, [that is, the world of relativity is sub- 
merged in the oneness of suchness]. Thence we as- 
sign to suchness this quality, the universal illumination 
of the universe (dharmadhitu). 

When the mind is disturbed, it fails to be a true 
and adequate knowledge; it fails to be a pure, clean 
essence ; it fails to be eternal, blissful, self-regulating, 
and pure; it fails to be tranquil, etc. On the con- 
trary, it will become transient, changeable, unfree, 
and therefore the source of falsity and defilement, 


while its modifications outnumber the sands of the 


98 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Ganges. But when there is no disturbance in the 
essence of the mind, we speak of suchness as being 
the true, adequate knowledge, etc., and as possessing 
pure and clean merits that outnumber the sands of 
the Ganges. 

When the mind is disturbed it will strive to be- 
come conscious of the existence of an external world 
and will thus betray the imperfection of its inner 
condition. But as all infinite merits in fact constitute 
the one mind which, perfect in itself, has no need of 
seeking after any external things other than itself, so 
suchness never fails to actualise all those Buddha- 
dharmas, that, outnumbering the sands of the Ganges, 
can be said to be neither identical nor non-identical 
with the essence of the mind, and that therefore are 
utterly out of the range of our comprehension. On 
that account suchness is designated the Tathagata’s 
womb (/athégatagarbha) or the Tathagata’s Dharma- 
kaya. 

What is meant by the activity of suchness is this: 
all Buddhas, while at the stage of discipline, feel a 
deep compassion (mahékarund) [for all beings], prac- 
tise all paramitas, the four methods of entertainment 
(catvari-sangrahavastini), and many other meritorious 
deeds; treat others as their own self, wish to work 
out a universal salvation of mankind in ages to come, 
through limitless numbers of kalpas ; recognise truth- 


fully and adequately the principle of equality (sama/é) 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 99 


among people; and do not cling to the individual ex- 
istence of a sentient being.! 

By virtue of such a great wisdom that works means 
of emancipation (wpdyajrd?),? they annihilate ignor- 
ance that knows no beginning ; recognise the Dharma- 
kaya in its original purity; spontaneously perform in- 
comprehensible karma? as well as various unfettered 
moral activities ; manifest themselves throughout the 
universe (dharmadhdtu), identify themselves with 
suchness, and leave no traces of compulsion. 

And how is this? 

Because all Tathagatas are the Dharmakaya it- 
self,° are the highest truth ( paraméarthasatya) itself, 


! The older translation reads: ‘‘ For they consider all sentient 
beings as their own self and do not cling to their individual forms. 
How is this? Because they know truthfully that all sentient be- 
ings as well as their own self come from one and the same such- 
ness, and no distinction can be established among them.”’ 


2 Cf. the second, third, fourth, fifth, and seventh chapter of 
the Saddharma-pundarika Sétra, in which Buddha preaches 
about the means of salvation. 


3 That is, ‘‘action in inaction and inaction in action.” 


* Acvaghosha’s conception of religious life as identical in its 
essence with poetry or fine art, I think, closely resembles that of 
Kant who says in his Crztigue of Judgment that the production 
of fine art should appear as if the work of nature. To quote his 
own words: ‘‘Als Natur aber erscheint ein Produkt der Kunst da- 
durch, dass zwar alle Piinktlichkeit in der Uebereinkunft mit Re- 
geln, nach denen allein das Produkt das werden kann, was es sein 
soll, angetroffen wird, aber ohne Peinlichkeit, d.i., ohne eine Spur 
zu zeigen, dass die Regel dem Kiinstler vor Augen geschwebt und 
seinen Gemiithskraften Fesseln angelegt habe.” (Avztik der Ur- 
thetlskraft, Kirchmann’s edition, p. 169.) 


5 Cf. Vajracchedtké, Chap. XVII: ‘‘And why, O Subhiti, the 


100 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


and have nothing to do with conditionality (samvrtt7- 
satya) and compulsory actions; whereas the seeing, 
hearing, etc. [1. e., the particularising senses] of the 
sentient being diversify [on its own account] the ac- 
tivity of Tathagatas. 

Now this activity [in another word, the Dharma- 
kaya] has a twofold aspect. The first one depends 
on the phenomena-particularising-consciousness, by 
means of which the activity is conceived by the minds 
of common people (frthagjana), Cravakas, and Prat- 
yekabuddhas. This aspect is called the Body of 
Transformation (xirmdnakéya). 

But as the beings of this class do not know that 
the Body of Transformation is merely the shadow [or 
reflection] of their own evolving-consciousness ( pra- 
vriti-viyndna), they imagine that it comes from some 
external sources, and so they give it a corporeal limi- 
tation. But the Body of Transformation [or what 
amounts to the same thing, the Dharmakaya] has 
nothing to do with limitation and measurement.! 

The second aspect [of the Dharmakaya] depends 
on the activity-consciousness (karmaviyndna) by means 


of which the activity is conceived by the minds of 


name of Tathagata? It expresses true suchness (bhitatathaté). 


... It expresses that he had no origin. .. . It expresses the de- 
struction of all qualities (dharma)... . It expresses one who had 
no origin whatever... . Because, O Subhfiti, no-origin is the high- 
est goal.” 


1 The older translation reads simply: ‘‘ They cannot thoroughly 
understand it [i. e., the true nature of the Vzrménakéya. |” 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. IOI 


Bodhisattvas while passing from their first aspiration 
(cttlotpdda) stage up to the height of Bodhisattva- 
hood. This is called the Body of Bliss (sambhoga- 
kiya). 

The body has infinite forms. The form has infinite 
attributes. The attribute has infinite excellencies. 
And the accompanying rewards! of Bodhisattvas, that 
is, the region where they are predestined to be born 
[by their previous karma], also has infinite merits 
and ornamentations. Manifesting itself everywhere, 
the Body of Bliss is infinite, boundless, limitless, un- 
intermittent [in its action], directly coming forth from 
the mind.? 

All these merits being actualised through the per- 
fuming of such spotless deeds as the paramitas’, etc., 
as well as through the incomprehensible perfuming 


power [of enlightenment @ grzor7], the Sambhogakaya 


1 Buddhists distinguish two kinds of the retribution which we 
receive as the fruit of karma previously accumulated by ourselves: 
the first one called ‘‘ principal” is our bodily existence; the sec- 
ond called ‘‘accompanying” is the region where we are destined 
to be born. 


2The older translation has: ‘‘It is boundless, cannot be ex- 
hausted, is free from the signs of limitation. Manifesting itself 
wherever it should manifest itself, it always exists by itself and is 
never destroyed or lost.” 


3The six Pdramitéds are commonly enumerated: (1) charity 
(dana); (2) morality (¢2/a); (3) patience (Asdztz); (4) energy (virya); 
(5) meditation (dkydna); (6) wisdom (frajnd@). When we speak of 
the ten Paramitds, the following four are to be added: expediency 
(upadya); prayer or vow (franidhdna); strength (6a/a); knowledge 
(jndéna). An explanation of the six Paramitds is given below. 


102 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


embraces infinite attributes of bliss and merit. There- 
fore it is also called the Body of Reward. 

What is recognised by common people ( prthag- 
jana), etc., is the coarsest form of the activity of the 
Dharmakaya. There is a variety of it according to 
the six different states of creation.! It has no attri- 
butes of infinite merits and blessings. 

What is recognised by Bodhisattvas at the first 
stage is a finer form of the activity of the Dharma- 
kaya. As they firmly believe in suchness, they can 
have a partial insight into it, and understand that the 
Body of the Tathagata is not departing, is not com- 
ing, is free from arrest? [i. e., the Tathagata’s work 
is eternal and constant], that every thing is but a re- 
flected shadow of the mind, not independent of such- 
ness. But these Bodhisattvas have not yet freed 
themselves from the finest form of particularisation, 
because they have not yet entered into the order of 
the Dharmakaya. 

Bodhisattvas at the stage of pure-heartedness are 
able to recognise the finer form of the activity [of the 
Dharmakaya]. Their insight is more penetrating than 
the former. When they reach the height of Bodhi- 
sattvahood their insight becomes perfect. 

By the finer form of the activity we understand 

1The six states of creation (gatz) are: (1) Deva (gods); (2) 
Manushya (men); (3) Adsurva (demons); (4) Preta (ghosts); (5) 7727- 
yagyont (animals); (6) Véraka (inhabitants of hell). 


2Cf. the Vajracchedikad Satra, Chap. XXIX (Sacred Books 
of the East, Vol. XLIX., p. 142). 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 103 


the Body of Bliss (sambhogakéya). As long as they are 
possessed by the activity-consciousness, they would 
conceive the Body of Bliss.!. But when they are libe- 
rated from it, all traces of individuation would become 
obliterated. Because all Tathagatas come from [one 
and the same] Dharmakaya, have no distinction of 
this-ness and that-ness, have no corporeal forms that 
are characterised by reciprocal limitation. 

A question arises here: If the Dharmakaya of Bud- 
dhas is devoid of variously differentiated corporeal 
forms, how is it that it can manifest itself in various 
corporeal forms at all? 

In reply we say: The Dharmakaya can manifest 
itself in various corporeal forms just because it is the 
real essence of them. Matter (vzpa) and mind (c?¢¢a) 
from the very beginning are not a duality. So we 
speak of [the universe as] a system of rationality 
( prajnakiya), seeing that the real nature of matter 
just constitutes the norm of mind. Again we speak 
of [the universe as] a system of materiality (dharma- 
kaya), seeing that the true nature of mind just consti- 
tutes the norm of matter.? 

Now depending on the Dharmakaya, all Tathaga- 


tas manifest themselves in bodily forms and are inces- 


1The last two sentences are missing in the older translation. 


2 Cf. the following passages from the Prajnd-péramita-hrdaya 
Saitra: ‘‘Form (rapa) is emptiness (¢@2yatd), and emptiness is 
indeed form. Emptiness is not different from form, form is not 
different from emptiness. What is form that is emptiness, what is 
emptiness that is form.” 


104 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


santly present at all points of space.! And Bodhisatt- 
vas in the ten quarters, according to their capabilities 
and wishes, are able to manifest infinite Bodies of 
Bliss and infinite lands of ornamentation, each one of 
which, though stamped with the marks of individual- 
ity, does not hinder the others from being fused into 
it, and this [mutual fusion] has no interruption. 

But the manifestation of the Dharmakaya in [in- 
finite] bodily forms is not comprehensible to the 
thought and understanding of common people; be- 
cause it is the free and subtlest activity of suchness.? 

Again, in order that all beings might be induced 
to step forward from the gate of birth-and-death to 
that of suchness, we endeavor to let them understand 
that those modes of existence such as matter (rzfa), 
etc. [i. e., the five skandhas]? are imperfect. 

Why are they imperfect? 

When we divide some gross [or composite] mat- 
ter, we can reduce it to atoms (azz). But as the atom 
will also be subject to further division, all forms of 
material existence, whether gross or fine, are nothing 
but the shadow of particularisation produced by a 
subjective mind, and we cannot ascribe any degree of 
[absolute, or independent] reality to them. 

The older translation: ‘‘Therefore it is preached that the 


Dharmakaya is omnipresent. The corporeal forms by which it 
manifests itself have no limitation.” 


* This passage is missing in the older translation. 


° They are matter (72fa); sensation (vedané); idea (samjnd); 
action (samskdra); and consciousness (v2z77dna). 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 105 


Let us next go over to and examine the other 
skandhas [that have temporal existence]. We find 
there too that we can gradually reduce them to ksha- 
nas [1. e., infinitesimal divisions of time], whose na- 
ture, however closely scrutinised, does not give any 
sign of [indivisible] oneness. 

It is even the same with the objects of non-aggre- 
gate (asamskrta-dharma).1 They cannot have their 
own existence independent of the universe (dharma- 
adhéiu). Be it therefore understood that the same may 
be said in regard to all objects without exception in 
the ten quarters of space.? 


As a lost man who takes the east for the west, 


1All phenomena in the world, physical as well as mental, are 
divided into two great classes: (1) Samskrtadharma, i. e., that 
which consists of parts temporal or spatial; (2) dsamskrtadharma, 
i. e., that which does not consist of parts. The first class is sub- 
divided into four principal departments which are also subject to 
a further subdivision, seventy-two in the Hinayana system (accord- 
ing to the Abhidharmakoga-¢aéstra), and ninety-four in the Maha- 
yana (according to the Vijndnamdtrasiddhi-castra). The four 
principal departments are: (1) R#fa (physical phenomena); (2) 
Citta (thought or understanding); (3) Cazttadharma or Cittasam- 
prayuktasamskéra (mental phenomena); (4) C7ttaviprayukta- 
samskdra (that which does not belong to the former, namely, 
relation that obtains among things). As for the second class, 
Asamskrtadharma, Mahayanists subdivide it into six while Hina- 
yanists subdivide it into three. For details see the two CAstras 
above mentioned. 


* The last five paragraphs are missing in the older translation 
which has simply this instead: ‘‘ The external world which consists 
in the six objects of sense does not exist independently of our mind, 
and the mind having no forms and attributes cannot be grasped 
even if we search for it throughout the ten quarters.” 


106 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


while the quarter is not changed on account of his 
confusion, so all beings, because of their misleading 
ignorance, imagine that the mind is being disturbed, 
while in reality it is not. 

But when they understand that the disturbance of 
the mind [i. e., birth-and-death] is [at the same time] 
immortality [viz., suchness], they would then enter 


into the gate of suchness. 


2. The Refutation of False Doctrines. 


All false doctrines invariably come out of the 4t- 
man-conception. If we were liberated from it, the 
existence of false doctrines would be impossible. 

There are two kinds of the atman-conception: (1) 
Belief in the existence of a personal atman [or ego- 
soul]; (2) Belief in the existence of 4tman in things 


[or things-in-themselves].? 


a. Five False Views Held by Those Who Believe in a 
Personal Atman. 


There are five different views springing from it 
[belief in the ego], which are held by common people 


( prthagjana). 
First, hearing that it is said in the Sitra? that the 


1 This denial of the existence of things-in-themselves is one of 
the principal features of the Mahayana as distinguished from the 
Hinaydna Buddhism. 

2Tt is not exactly known to what Sitra or Sfitras this refers, 
but the analogy of this kind is frequently met with in most of the 
Mahéyana texts. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 107 


Dharmakaya of the Tathagata is perfectly tranquil and 
may be likened unto space (ékésa), yet not under- 
standing its purport, ignorant people cling to the view 
that the nature of the Tathagata is eternal and omni- 
present in the same sense as space is. 

In order that this clinging to the false doctrine 
may be eliminated, be it clearly understood that 
space is nothing but a mode of particularisation and 
that it has no real existence of its own. Where there 
is a perception of space, there is side by side a per- 
ception of a variety of things, in contradistinction to 
which space is spoken of as if existing independently. 
Space therefore exists only in relation to our partic- 
ularising consciousness. 

Further since matter (vzfa) as stated before, is 
merely a particularisation of the confused mind, it is 
clear enough that space cannot have any independent 
existence. Ina word all modes of relative existence, 
our phenomenal world as a whole, are created simply 
by the particularisation of the confused mind. If we 
become dissociated from the latter, then all modes of 
relative existence vanish away by themselves; while 
the soul alone, in its truth and suchness, pervades the 
whole universe. The soul, therefore, that constitutes 
the essential nature of the Tathagata, cannot be com- 
pared with space, though the latter may be said to be 
in a certain limited sense eternal and real. 

Secondly, hearing that it is said in the Sitras 


that all things in the world without exception are per- 


108 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


fect emptiness (a¢yantacényatéd), that even Nirvana! or 
suchness is also perfect emptiness, is devoid in its true 
nature of all characteristics (dakshan@), yet not under- 
standing its purport, ignorant people cling to the view 
that Nirvana or suchness is a nothing, devoid of con- 
tents. 

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be 
it clearly understood that suchness or Dharmakaya in 
its self-nature (svabhdva) is not a nothing (¢ényazd) but 
envelopes in full immeasurable merits (guua) which 
make up its true nature. 

Thirdly, hearing that it is said in the Siitras? that 
the Tathagata’s womb (/athégatagarbha) envelopes in 
full all kinds of merits which constituting its true na- 
ture do neither suffer augmentation nor diminution, 
yet not understanding its purport, ignorant people 
cling to the view that there is in the Tathagata’s 
womb itself an inherent and fundamental distinction 
between the two objects, matter (7z#ga) and mind 
(citta). 

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be 


1Fa-tsang, a commentator of the present Discourse, quotes 
the Mahdprajna-paramita-Sitra as here referred to. The Sfitra 
says: ‘‘Even Nirvana is like a mirage, like a dream. Nay, if there 
be something superior to Nirvana, I declare it is also like a mirage, 
like a dream.” 

2For instance, we read in the second volume of the Lanka- 
vatara Sfitra (translated into Chinese by Ciksananda): ‘‘ The 
Tathdgatagarbha is in its intrinsic nature pure, clean, eternal, 
permanent, unintermittent, and immutable; it embraces the thirty- 
two excellent qualities, and abides within the body of all sentient 
beings,”’ etc. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 10g 


it clearly understood that suchness (dAétatathazd@) has 
nothing to do with any form of distinction produced 
by defilement, and that even in case we speak of its 
possessing innumerable meritorious characteristics, 
they are free from the traces of defilement. 

Fourthly, hearing that it is said in the Sittras! 
that even all impure and defiled things in the world are 
produced through the Tathagata’s womb (¢athégata- 
garbha), and that all things in the world are not at 
variance with suchness, yet not understanding its 
purport, ignorant people imagine that the Tathagata’s 
womb all-containingly envelopes all objects of defile- 
ment in the world. 

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be 
it clearly understood that the Tathagata’s womb all- 
containingly envelopes pure and spotless merits (gua) 
which, outnumbering the sands of the Ganges, are not 
at variance with suchness; that the prejudices (dé¢rava 
or &lega) and defiled objects, which also outnumber 
the sands of the Ganges are nothing but non-entity, 
have from the first no self-existence (svabhdéva), have 
never been in correspondence with the Tathagata’s 
womb; that there is no reason to suppose that the 
Tathagata’s womb had been corresponding with de- 
filed objects, but has now by virtue of intellectual in- 


tuition been freed from falsity and defilement. 


Though not exactly known to what Sfitra or Siitras the ref- 
erence is made here, we can easily find similar passages in the 
Mahayana texts, such as the Zankdvatara, the Crimdldé, etc. 


IIO ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Fifthly, hearing that it is said in the Sitras! that 
depending on the Tathagata’s womb, there is birth- 
and-death (samsdra) as well as the attainment of Nir- 
vana, yet not understanding its purport, ignorant peo- 
ple imagine that depending on the Tathagata’s womb 
there is a beginning for birth-and-death, and that 
since there is the beginning, Nirvana is in turn sub- 
ject to extinction. 

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be 
it clearly understood that as the Tathagata’s womb 
has no beginning, ignorance and birth-and-death de- 
pending on it have also no beginning; that it isa view 
held by the tirthaka? [i. e., the followers of the Vaice- 


1 These are not also exactly known. 


2It is not precisely known how many philosophical schools, 
called tirthakas by Buddhists, were flourishing just at the time 
of Acvaghosha. The Mirvéna Sattra and the Vimalakirttinir- 
dega Satra mention six of them which were existing at the time 
of Buddha: (1) Pirana Ka¢yapa; (2) Maskarin GocAliputra; (3) 
Safijayin Vairattiputra; (4) Ajita Kecakambala; (5) Kakuda Katy- 
dyana; (6) Nirgrantha Jiiatiputra. In a commentary on the /7- 
*nadnamatra-castra, however, which is a later production than this 
Discourse, twelve different tirthaka schools are enumerated. They 
are: (1) the Samkhya school; (2) the Vaicesika school; (3) the 
school which believes in Mahecvara as the creator; (4) the school 
which believes in Mahabrahma as the creator; (5) the school 
which maintains that Time is the creator; (6) the school which 
maintains that Space is the creator; (7) the school which maintains 
that Water is the creator; (8) the school which says that the world 
exists by itself; (g) the school which says that the creation comes 
from Quarters; (10) the school which maintains that the Ego is 
the principle of existence; (11) the school which maintains the im- 
mortality of articulate sounds, i. e., the Mimamsa school; (12) the 
Lokayatika school, an Indian materialism. For further references 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. SpE 


sika] and not taught by the Buddha, to say that there 
are outside of the three worlds! (¢7z/oka) some other 
beings coming into existence; that the Tathagata’s 
womb has no future [i. e., time of extinction]; and 
that those who have an insight into it, will eternally 
destroy the seeds of birth-and-death and attain to 
Nirvana which has also no future [1. e., time of extinc- 
tion]. 

These four? erroneous views have thus arisen from 
the conception of a personal 4tman, and so we have 


laid down the four refutations as above mentioned.?® 


b. Belief in the Existence of Atman in Things. 


As the World-honored One (Lhagavat ), consider- 
ing the inferior intellectual calibre of Cravakas and 
Pratyekabuddhas, taught them only the doctrine of 
non-personal atman, [and did not make any further 


see Dr. Enry6 Inouye’s Gedo Tetsugaku (Philosophical Systems 
of the Tirthakas), 1897, Tokyo, Japan. 


1 They are the world of desire (kdmaloka), the world of form 
(raipaloka), the world of formlessness (ar#faloka). (See also p. 
77). The kémaloka is divided into hells (zaraka), region of ghosts 
(preta), animal life (¢z7yagyonz), human life (manushyaloka), and 
region of gods (deva); the r@pfaloka into 17 heavenly abodes corre- 
sponding to the three stages of Dhyana; the ar#faloka into four 
heavenly abodes. For details see the second chapter of the 4b/z- 
dharmakoga-Castra, by Vasubandhu. 


* The number ‘‘four” in this paragraph should be ‘‘ five,” for 
the author enumerates five misunderstandings and their refuta- 
tions, as we have seen. 


3 The whole passage is missing in the older translation. 


Pr2 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


demonstration of the doctrine], the people have in 
the meantime formed a fixed idea on the transitori- 
ness of the five skandhas,! and, being terrified at the 
thought of birth and death, have fanatically craved 
for Nirvana. 

In order that this clinging may be eliminated, be 
it clearly understood that the essence of the five 
skandhas is uncreate, there is no annihilation of them ; 
that since there is no annihilation of them, they are 
in their [metaphysical] origin Nirvana itself; that if 
one be absolutely freed from particularisation and at- 
tachment, one will understand that all things both 
pure and defiled have only relative existence. 

Be it therefore known that all things in the world 
from the beginning are neither matter (7#fa), not 
mind (cz¢éa), nor intelligence (frajvd@) , nor conscious- 
ness (vyfidna), nor non-being (adhdva), nor being 
(dhdva); they are after all inexplicable. The reason 
why the Tathagata nevertheless endeavors to instruct 
by means of words and definitions is through his good 
and excellent skilfulness [or expediency, wpdya-kau- 
calya|.* He only provisionally makes use of words 
and definitions to lead all beings, while his real object 


is to make them abandon symbolism and directly enter 


1See p. 104, footnote. 


2 See the second chapter of the Saddarmapundarika Sttra, 
in which Buddha teaches how the only one ydna (vehicle) is split 
through his transcendental updya (skilfulness or expediency) into 
three yanas : Cravakayana, Pratyekabuddhaydna, and Bodhisattva- 
yana. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 113 


into the real reality (¢at#/va). Because if they indulge 
themselves in reasonings, attach themselves to soph- 
istry, and thus foster their subjective particularisation, 
how could they have the true wisdom (¢attvajndna) 


and attain to Nirvana? 


3. Ways of Practising the Right Path. 


By this we mean that all Bodhisattvas, by their 
aspiration (c7ttotpdda)' and discipline (carydcarana), 
will be able to attain to the reason that made all Ta- 
thagatas perceive the path (mérga). 

Briefly stated, there are three kinds of aspira- 
tion: (1) Aspiration through the perfection of faith ; 
(2) Aspiration through knowledge and practice; (3) 
Aspiration through intellectual intuition. 

By whom, and by which deeds, can faith (¢raddhé) 
be perfected and can the aspiration be awakened? 


Now the people who belong to the group of incon- 


1Aspiration which does not exactly correspond to the Chinese 
fah hsin and Sanskrit czttotpéda, has been retained for lack of 
a fitter term. It has a technical sense in Buddhism. Literally, 
fah or utféda means producing, raising, or awakening, while 
Asin or citta as noticed elsewhere is mind, thought, or conscious- 
ness. Czttopéda, however, is more than the raising of one’s thought 
to a higher religious life; it means the recognition of the truth that 
one is in possession within oneself of the highest perfect knowl- 
edge (samyaksambodht ) ; it is the birth within oneself of a higher 
ethical impulse constituting the essence of religion. A fuller form 
of fah hsin is fah bodhi hsin or fah anuttarasamyaksambodht 
hsin. See the Mahayana Siitras such as the Saddharma Punda- 
vika, Vajracchedthké, Sukhdvati Vyuha, Lankévatara, Ava- 
tamsaka, etc. 


114 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


stancy (aniyatardc7 ),1 by virtue of their root of merit 
(Aucalami/la), which has a perfuming power, firmly be- 
lieve in the retribution of karma, practise the ten vir- 
tues (dacakucalénz),* loathe the sufferings of birth and 
death, seek after the most excellent enlightenment 
(Samyaksambodhi ),and seeing Buddhas and Bodhisatt- 
vas they wait on them, make offerings to them, disci- 
pline themselves in many [meritorious] deeds; and 
after the lapse of ten thousand kalpas (eons), their 
faith will finally be perfected. 

Since then either by virtue of the instruction re- 
ceived from Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, or on account 
of their deep compassion (mahékaruné), or from their 
desire to preserve the right doctrine (saddharma) 
against its corruption, their aspiration [to the highest 
truth] will be awakened. 

After having awakened the aspiration they will 


1There are three groups of people: (1) Those who are con- 
stantly abiding in absolute truth (samyaktvantyata-rdgz); (2) 
Those who are constantly abiding in falsehood (mzthydtvantyata- 
ragz) ; (3) Those who are inconstant (anzyata-rdagr). 

2 The ten virtues (dagakucalént) consist in not committing the 
ten evils (dagékugaldénz) which are as follows: (1) Killing a living 
being ( prdnatipada) ; (2) Stealing (adattédddna) ; (3) Committing 
adultery (kdmamithyacéra) ; (4) Lying (mrshadvdda) ; (5) Slander 
(pazgunya) ; (6) Insulting speech (fdrushya) ; (7) Frivolous talk 
(sambhinnapralapa); (8) Avarice (abhidhya); (9) Evil intent 
(vyadpada); (10) False view (mzthyadrshthi). The ten evils here 
enumerated should be avoided by the lay members of Buddhism. 
For the Cramaneras there is a different set of precepts specially 
intended for them, called the Dasgagzkshapada, with which the 
ten virtues must not be confused as they are by some. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. UES 


enter into the group of constant truth (samyakivantz- 
yata-réci) and never relapse, always abiding in the 
essence of the Buddha-seed and identifying themselves 
with its excellent principle. 

There is, however, a certain class of people whose 
root of merit (kucalamé/a) from time immemorial is 
poor, and whose prejudices (A/eca or d¢rava) are in- 
tense, deeply veiling their minds. Such people, even 
if they see Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, wait on them, 
and make offerings to them, will sow merely the seeds 
of men (manushya) and gods (deva) [1. e., they will be 
born in the future as men or gods], or the seeds of 
the enlightenment of Cravakas and Pratyekabuddhas 
[i. e., their attainment would not be higher than that 
of Cravakas or Pratyekabuddhas]. 

Some of them may even aspire to seek after the 
Mahabodhi,* but owing to the instability of their char- 
acter, they will ever osciliate between progress and 
retrogression. 

Some of them, happening to see Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas, may make offerings to them, wait on 
them, practise many [meritorious] deeds, and, while 
ten thousand mahakalpas (eons) are not yet elapsed, 
may meantime come into some favorable circum- 
stances and thereby awake aspiration. What are 
those favorable circumstances? For instance, they 
may witness the personal figure of a Buddha, or may 
make some offerings to the congregation of priests 


1 The older translation reads ‘‘ Mahayana.”’ 


116 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


(samgha), or may be instructed by Cravakas or Pra- 
tyekabuddhas, or may be moved by seeing others as- 
pire [to the highest truth]. 

But this kind of aspiration as a rule is not con- 
stant. In case they come into unfavorable circum- 
stances, they may happen to fall down to the stage of 
Cravakahood or Pratyekabuddhahood. 

Now, briefly speaking, three faculties of the soul 
will be awakened by the perfection of faith: (1) right- 
ness of comprehension [lit., right, straight mind], for 
it truthfully and intuitively contemplates suchness 
(dhutatathaté); (2) profundity of virtue [lit., deep, 
heavy mind], for it rejoices in accumulating all good 
deeds ; (3) greatness of compassion (mahékarund), for 
it desires to uproot the miseries (duhkha) of all be- 
ings. 

It may be asked whether there is ever any need 
for one to discipline oneself in all good deeds and to 
try to save mankind, since all sentient beings (sarva- 
sattva) as well as all things (sarvadharma) in the world, 
abiding in the oneness of the universe (dharmadhétu) 
that has no second, will, as can be logically inferred, 
have nothing to do but calmly to contemplate such- 
ness. 

In reply we say, yes. Because the mind may be 
likened unto a precious jewel which is pure and bright 
in its essence but buried in a gross veinstone. Now 
there is no reason to suppose that one can make it 


clean and pure only by contemplating it, and without 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 1 


applying any means [of purification] or a degree of 
workmanship. 

It is even the same with suchness. Though it is 
pure and bright in its essence and sufficiently envel- 
opes all merits (guna), yet it is deeply buried in in- 
finite external defilements. And there is no reason to 
suppose that aman can make it pure and clean only 
by earnest contemplation on it, and without trying 
any means [of emancipation] or of discipline. 

It is therefore an urgent necessity that all good 
deeds should be accumulated, that all beings should 
be delivered, that those infinite external defilements 
and impurities should be cast off, that the true doc- 
trine should be revealed. 

With regard to ‘‘means” [or ‘‘skilfulness,” wAdya] 
there are, briefly stated, four kinds. 

The first one is called the means of practising the 
fundamental [truth, mz/a]. That is to say, by con- 
templating the true essence of all dharmas, which, be- 
ing uncreate and free from imagination, is not con- 
cerned with the metempsychosis of birth and death, 
and by contemplating the truth that all things origi- 
nate from the co-operation of the principle (Ae/u~) and 
the causes (fratyaya), and that the retribution of 
karma is irrevocable, one will evoke deep compassion, 
discipline oneself in all good deeds, embrace and con- 
vert all beings, and not dwell in Nirvana, since such- 
ness [in its absolute aspect] has nothing to do with 
Nirvana or with birth-and-death. As this attitude 


118 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


[towards all objects] is in accord [with the nature of 
suchness], it is called the means of practising the 
[fundamental] truth. 

The second one is called the means of abeyance. 
That is, by feeling shame and remorse, one may put 
an end to all evils and not let them grow, since such- 
ness is free from all marks of imperfection. Thus to 
be in accord with suchness and to put an end to all 
evils is called the means of abeyance. 

The third one is called the means of strengthening 
the root of merits (kucalamzla). By raising reveren- 
tial feelings toward the Triple Treasure (¢vzratna), one 
will revere, make offerings to, pay homage to, praise, 
rejoice in, and beseech the Triple Treasure; and there- 
upon one’s orthodox faith being strengthened, one will 
at last awake a desire for the most excellent knowl- 
edge (dodhiparinishpatti). Through the protection of 
the majestic power of the Buddha, Dharma, and Sam- 
gha, one’s karma-hindrances (karmévarana) will now 
get purified and one’s root of merit firmly established ; 
because suchness is free from all hindrances and en- 
velopes all merits. Thus to be in accord with such- 
ness and to practise good deeds is called the means of 
strengthening the root of merits. 

The fourth one is called the universal means of 
great vows (mahdapranidhdna). That is, one may make 
the vow that in ages to come all beings should uni- 


versally be delivered and take refuge at ease in the 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH I1g 


Anupadhicesa Nirvana,! because the true nature of all 
objects is free from relativity, is one and the same, 
making no distinction between this and that, and is 
absolutely calm and tranquil. Thus to be in accord 
with the three attributes [i. e., non-relativity, same- 
ness, tranquillity] of suchness and to make such a 
great vow is called the universal means of great vows. 

[Now to return to the former subject], when the 
Bodhisattva thus aspires to the highest truth, he is 
able to have a partial insight into the Dharmakaya of 
the Buddha; and according to the power of the vow 
(pranidhénavaca), he performs eight things, to wit, 


his descent from the palace in the Tushita heaven? 


1 Mah4ay4nists in general distinguish four aspects of Nirvana; 
(x1) Nirvana that is pure and spotless in its self-nature, i. e., abso- 
lute suchness, possessed equally by all beings; (2) Nirvana that 
has remnant (wdadhzsesa), i. e., a state of relative suchness, which, 
though freed from the affectional hindrance (Alegé@varana), is still 
under the fetter of materiality, which causes suffering and misery; 
(3) Nirvana that has no remnant (axupfadhzgesa), i. e., a state of 
relative suchness which is free from the misery of birth and death, 
being entirely liberated from the fetter of materiality; (4) Nirvana 
that has no fixed abode, i. e., a state of suchness in its spontaneous 
activity which is free from the intellectual hindrance (jxeyé- 
varana) and full of love and wisdom, believes neither in birth- 
and-death nor in Nirvana, but eternally abiding in the suchness of 
things benefits all sentient beings. Cravakas and Pratyekabuddhas 
can recognise the first three aspects of Nirvana, but the last one is 
known only to Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. For further details see 
the tenth volume of the Vzjndnaméatrasiddhi Céstra, translated 
into Chinese by Hiian-tsang. 

2One of the six heavenly abodes of the Xdmaloka (world of 
desire). The heavenly abodes are: (1) Region of the four kings 
of the cardinal points (mahdrdjakéytka) ; (2) that of the thirty- 


10°. ACVAGHOSHA’S 


[to this world], his entrance into the human womb, 
his stay therein, his birth, his renunciation, his attain- 
ment of Buddhahood, his revolution of the Dharma- 
wheel (dharmacakra), and lastly his Parinirvana. 

He is not, however, as yet to be called absolute 
Dharmakaya, for he has not yet completely destroyed 
the impure! karma that has been accumulated during 
his numberless existences in the past; perchance by 
the influence of the evil karma he may suffer a little 
amount of misery. But he suffers it only for a short 
time, and this not because of his being fettered by the 
evil karma, but because of his own vow-power (pra- 
nidhanavaga) [which he made for the universal eman- 
cipation of mankind]. 

It is sometimes said in the Siitra? that even those 
Bodhisattvas who aspired [to the highest truth]through 
the perfection of their faith might relapse and fall 
down to the evil creation (aféyagatz).2 But this was 
three gods (¢vdyastringa); (3) the Ydmd; (4) the Tushita; (5) 
the Vzrmdénatis ; (6) the Paranirmita-vazavatins. Seealso the 
note to Triloka, p. 77. 

The term zmfure does not mean immoral, but relative, con- 
ditional, dualistic or material, in contradistinction to pure, abso- 
lute, unconditional, spiritual, etc. 

* For instance, it is stated in the second fasciculus of the Bo- 
adhisattva-kusumamila-phrvakarma Sttra (? P'u-sa ying-lo 
pén-yeh Ching in Chinese, translated by Fo-nien towards the end 
of the third century) that those Bodhisattvas who have not yet en- 
tered on the eighth stage (there are ten stages) of Bodhisattvahood 
may happen to relapse in his religious course, if not be able to 
receive instruction in the Dharma from some fully enlightened 


teachers. 
® Three of the six gatzs are the aféyagatz (evil path): Hell 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. I2ZI 


only said to encourage those novices who are apt to 
give themselves up to indulgence and so may fail to 
enter into the right order [i. e., samyaktvantyata], 
though they may not really fall down [into the evil 
path]. 

Further the Bodhisattva has since his first aspira- 
tion disciplined himself in those deeds which are ben- 
eficial both to himself and others, and thereby his 
heart has become free from timidity, inasmuch as he 
would not shudder even at the thought of falling down 
to the stage of Cravakahood or Prayekabuddhahood, 
any more than to the evil creation (apédyaga?7). 

If he learn that he is able to attain to Buddha. 
hood only after an assiduous observance of various 
rules of austerity and mortification during immeasur- 
able asamkheya-kalpas,! he will never be frightened 
nor will he falter. How then could he ever raise such 
thoughts as cherished by Cravakas or Pratyekabud- 
dhas? Howthen could he fall down to the evil crea- 
tion (apdyagatz)? He has a firm faith in the truth 
that all things (sarvadharma) from the beginning are 


in their nature Nirvana itself.? 


(zdraka); ghost (freta); and animal life (¢2~yagyonz). Some- 
times demon (aszra) is added to make the fourth. 
1For an explanation see. 87, footnote. 


*The same monistic idea is expressed also in the following 
famous phrases : “Acravas (desires or prejudices) are nothing but 
Bodhi (enlightenment), and birth-and-death (or this world of trans- 
formation) is nothing but Nirvana.” Individuation is the product 
of subjectivity ; the universe in reality is one great whole. 


122 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


This sort of aspiration (c7ttotpdda) is more excel- 
lent than the former, because the first asamkheya- 
kalpa of Bodhisattvas of this class is approaching to 
an end, because they have attained a thorough knowl- 
edge of suchness, because all their acts are performed 
without any stain of attachment. 

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being 
free from the trace of covetousness, is the perfection 
of pure and stainless charity (dénapdramitéd), they in 
conformity to it practise charity (ddnapdramitéa). 

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being 
free from the influence of the five sensual passions, 
and, having nothing to do with immorality, is the per- 
fection of pure and stainless morality (célapéramitéa), 
they in conformity to it practise morality (¢z/apéra- 
mtd). 

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, hav- 
ing nothing to do with grievance and being free from 
malice, is the perfection of pure and stainless patience 
(kshantipdramitéd), they in conformity to it practise pa- 
tience (kshéntipadramité). 

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being 
free from physical and mental limitations and having 
nothing to do with indolence, is the perfection of pure 
and stainless energy (viryapdramité), they in conform- 
ity to it practise energy (v/ryapdramité). 

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, hav- 
ing nothing to do with disturbance or confusion, is 


the perfection of pure and stainless tranquilisation 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 123 


(dhyénapdéramité), they in conformity to it practise 
tranquilisation (dhyanapdramita). 

As they know that the nature of the Dharma, being 
free from the darkness of ignorance, is the perfection 
of pure and stainless wisdom ( prajndpéramitd), they 
in conformity to it practise wisdom (frajndpdramité). 

What is the object of which the Bodhisattva 
from the stage of pure-heartedness up to the height 
of Bodhisattvahood has attained an intellectual intui- 
tion? The object is no less than suchness itself. We 
call it an object on account of the evolving-con- 
sciousness ( pravrtti-vijnéna). But in truth there is 
no object in perfect intellectual intuition, neither is 
there a subject in it; because the Bodhisattva by 
means of his wisdom of non-particularisation intui- 
tively perceives suchness (dhdétatathat@) or Dharma- 
kaya, which is beyond the range of demonstration and 
argumentation. : 

Thus he is able in a moment to go over all the 
worlds in the ten quarters and to make offerings 
to all Buddhas and to beseech them to revolve the 
Wheel of the Dharma (darmacakrapravartana). His 
sole desire being to benefit all beings, he does not 
care for any melodious sounds or words [which he can 
enjoy in his heavenly abode].! In order to encour- 


age weak-hearted people, he shows great energy and 


1TIn the older translation we read: ‘‘ Having in view only the 
emancipation and beneficence of all beings, he [Bodhisattva] does 
not rely on words and characters.” 


124 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


attains to perfect enlightenment (anuttarasamyaksam- 
bodhi), all at once annihilating the lapse of immeas- 
urable asamkheyakalpas. Or in order to instigate in- 
dolent people, he sometimes attains to Buddhahood 
only after long discipline and mortification through 
the period of immeasurable asamkheyakalpas. The 
reason why he achieves in this wise infinite methods 
(upaya) [of salvation] is that he wishes thereby to 
benefit all beings.! 

But in fact the intrinsic nature, the faculties, the 
aspiration, and the intellectual attainment of all Bo- 
dhisattvas are equal [in value] and there is not any 
scale of gradation in them. Because they will all 
equally and assuredly attain to the most perfect en- 
lightenment, only after the elapsing of three asam- 
kheyakalpas. Yet as there are differences in various 
states of existence regarding their objects of seeing, 
hearing, etc., as well as regarding their faculties, their 
desires, and their character; so there are correspond- 
ingly many different forms of religious discipline [des- 
stined to] them. 

Three different operations of the mind are revealed 
in this aspiration by means of intellectual intuition: 
(1) Pure consciousness originating in the mind as it 
becomes free from particularisation; (2) moral con- 


sciousness [lit., wpdya-cit/a?] originating in the mind 


1 The older translation reads: ‘‘It is out of [human] compre- 
hension that he [Bodhisattva] can achieve such innumerable meth- 
ods [of salvation].”’ 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 125 


as it spontaneously performs those deeds which are 
beneficent to others ; (3) unconscious activity (Larma- 
vyndnacitta) originating in the mind as it achieves a 
most hidden mode of activity. 

Again the Bodhisattva, having attained to the per- 
fection of bliss and wisdom, which are his two marks 
of adornment, has in reaching the height of evolution 
(akanishtha) also obtained the most venerable and ex- 
cellent body in the whole universe. By means of that 
knowledge which intuitively identifies itself [with en- 
lightenment @ przor7], he has all at once uprooted 
ignorance; and thus obtaining omniscience (sarvaké- 
rajndna),| he spontaneously achieves incomprehensible 
[or divine] deeds (acintyakarma), reveals himself in 
immeasurable worlds in the ten quarters, and works 
out the universal emancipation of mankind. 

A question arises here. As space is infinite, worlds 
are infinite. As worlds are infinite, beings are infinite. 
As beings are infinite, the modes of mentation are also 
infinitely diversified. And as all these objects and 
conditions (véshaya) have no limits, they can hardly 
be known or understood [in all their multitudinous- 


ness]. If, now, ignorance being destroyed, all modes 


1A distinction is sometimes made between Sarvékérajnéna, 
Sarvajnéna and Mérgajnana: Sarvakérajnéna is the knowl- 
edge by which we are enabled to know all forms and manifesta- 
tions in their fundamental oneness; Sarvajndna is simply the 
knowledge of all things, or omniscience; A/érgajnéna is the 
knowledge by which we can recognise the path leading to final 
emancipation. But they are practically the same. 


126 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


of mentation are entirely annihilated as well, how 
can the Bodhisattva understand all things and com- 
plete his omniscience (sarvékérajndna) ? 

In reply we say: All so-called illusory phenomena 
are in truth from the beginning what they are; and 
their essence is nothing but the one soul [or mind]. 
Though ignorant minds that cling to illusory objects 
cannot understand that all things are in their nature 
the highest reality ( paraméartha), all Buddha-Tatha- 
gatas being free from clinging [or particularising] are 
able to have an insight into the true nature of things. 
And by virtue of their great wisdom they illuminate 
all distinctions between the defiled and the pure; 
through their immeasurable and inexhaustible sources 
of expediency (upéyakaucalya), which is good and ex- 
cellent, they benefit and gladden all beings according 
to the latters’ various necessities and capabilities. 
Therefore the mind that is saturated with subjectivity 
is annihilated, while all things are understood and 
omniscience (sarvékdrajnana) is attained.} 

1 The older translation reads: ‘‘In reply we say: All phenom- 
enal objecs (vzshaya) are from the beginning [or in their metaphys- 
ical origin] of the one mind which is free from imagination and 
subjectivity. As all beings illusively perceive the existence of the 
phenomenal world (wzshaya), they impose limitations on the mind. 
As they thus illusively cherish imagination and subjectivity, which 
are not in accordance with the nature of the Dharma, they cannot 
thoroughly understand it. All Buddha-Tathagatas are, however, 
free from illusive perception, and [therefore their knowledge is] 
omniscient, because the mind constituting the principle of all things 


is true and valid. The self-essence [of all Buddhas] illuminates 
all illusive phenomena, possesses a great wisdom-activity and in- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 127 


Another question presents itself here: If all Bud- 
dhas who are in possession of infinite expediencies 
(upaéya) can spontaneously benefit all beings in the 
ten quarters, why is it that the latter cannot always 
see Buddhas in person, or witness their divine trans- 
formations, or hear their instructions in the Doctrine? 

The reply is: Tathagatas are really in possession 
of those expediencies, and they are only waiting to 
reveal themselves to all beings as soon as the latter 
can purify their own minds.! 

When a mirror is covered with dust, it cannot re- 
flect images. It can do so only when it is free from 
stain. It is even the same with all beings. If their 
minds are not clear of stain, the Dharmakaya cannot 
reveal itselfin them. But if they be freed from stain, 


then it will reveal itself. 


iV: PRACTICE OF FATEH. 


In what does the practice of faith (¢raddhé) con- 
sist? 

This part of the Discourse is intended for those 
beings who have not yet entered into the order of con- 
stant truth (samyaktvantyata-réc¢?). 


numerable means [of salvation], whereby, according to the intel- 
lectual capacity of all beings, they can reveal to them various 
significances of the Doctrine. Therefore it is called the Sarwé- 
kadrajnéna.”’ 


‘In the older translation we read: ‘‘The Dharmak4ya of all 
Buddha-Tathagatas is universal (samazdé)and pervades every thing; 
it is free from compulsion and therefore spontaneous, manifesting 
itself through the minds of all beings.” 


128 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


What is meant by faith? How should one prac- 
tise faith? 

There are four aspects of faith. [As to faith in 
general]: (1) To believe in the fundamental [truth], 
that is, to think joyfully of suchness (dhé¢atathaté). 
[As to particular faiths:] (2) To believe in the Bud- 
dha as sufficingly enveloping infinite merits, that is, 
to rejoice in worshipping him, in paying homage to 
him, in making offerings to him, in hearing the good 
doctrine (saddharma), in disciplining oneself according 
to the doctrine, and in aspiring after omniscience 
(sarvajnvana). (3) To believe in the Dharma as having 
great benefits, that 1s, to rejoice always in practising 
all paramitas. (4) To believe in the Samgha as ob- 
serving true morality, that is, to be ready to make 
offerings to the congregation of Bodhisattvas, and to 
practise truthfully all those deeds which are beneficial 
at once to oneself and others. 

Faith will be perfected by practising the following 
five deeds: (1) charity (déva); (2) morality (¢é/a); 
(3) patience (Ashdntz); (4) energy (virya); (5) cessa- 
tion [or tranquilisation, ¢amatha] and intellectual in- 
sight (vidarcana or vipacyana). 

How should people practise charity (déna)? 

(1) If persons come and ask them for something, 
they should, as far as their means allow, supply it 
ungrudgingly and make them rejoice in it. (2) If they 
see people threatened with danger, they should try 


every means of rescuing them and impart to them a 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 129 


feeling of fearlessness (vazcdradya). (3) If they have 
people who come to them desiring instruction in the 
Doctrine, they should, so far as they are acquainted 
with it, and, according to their own discretion, de- 
liver speeches on religious discipline. 

And when they are performing those three acts of 
charity, let them not cherish any desire for fame or 
advantages, nor covet any worldly rewards. Only 
thinking of those benefits and blessings that are at 
once for themselves and others, let them aspire to the 
most excellent, most perfect knowledge (anutfarasam- 
yaksambodnt ). 

How should they practise morality (¢z/a) ? 

Those Bodhisattvas who have families [1. e., lay 
members of Buddhism] should abstain from killing, 
stealing, adultery, lying, duplicity, slander, frivolous 
talk, covetousness, malice, currying favor, and false 
doctrines. 

In the case of Cramanas, they should, in order to 
vanquish all prejudices (A/eca or d¢rava), retire from 
the boisterousness of worldly life, and, abiding in 
solitude (avanya), should practise those deeds which 
lead to moderation and contentment as well as those 


of the Dhitaguna.? Even at the violation of minor 


=~ 


1 Acvaghosha evidently refers to the ten virtues (dacakuca- 
lant), for which see p. 114, though this list counts more than ten. 
* There are twelve dhiitagunas or dhfitagangas to be observed 
by Bhikshus ; dkf#ta means shaking off, that is, shaking off the 
dust of evil passions: (1) Pazndapdtika, the rule to live on what- 
ever food they can get by begging from door to door, that they 


130 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


rules (¢z/a) they should deeply feel fear, shame, and 
remorse. Strictly observing all those precepts given 
by the Tathagata, they should not call forth the blame 
or disgust of the outsider, but they should endeavor 
to induce all beings to abandon the evil and to prac- 
tise the good.! 

How should they practise patience (Ashdntz) ? 

If they meet with the ills of life they should not 


may become free from egotism. (2) Zrvazctvarzka, the rule allow- 
ing the possession of three clothings: Samghdtz, dress made of 
scraps; Uttarasamghéatt, outer robe; Antaravdsaka, something 
like skirt. (3) Khalupagcédbhaktitka, the prohibition of taking 
any food or beverage when the proper time is over, lest their 
attention should be disturbed. (4) Vazshadhytka, to be in a sitting 
attitude while sleeping, that they may not become over-indolent: 
(5) Yathésamstarika, spreading a night-couch where they happen 
to be. (6) Vrkshamitizka, sitting under atree. (7) Ekdésantka, 
taking one meal in a day, that their mental energy may not be 
weakened by eating too often. (8) 4dhyavakédgika, living in an 
unsheltered place. (9) Avanyaka, leading a solitary, retired life 
in the wood. (10) Cmdgdédnaka, abiding in or by a cemetery, that 
they may constantly ponder on the transiency and uncleanli- 
ness of bodily existence. (11) Pdmsktlika, the wearing of the 
dress made of rags or remnants, that they may have no attach- 
ment to luxury. (12) Wématika, wearing cloth made of hair. 
There isa Sitra named 7welve Dhtittagunas among the Chinese 
collection of the Tripitaka. The list in that book is a little different 
from what we have here; the fifth and twelfth are dropped and 
instead of them we have the rule of begging in due order, corre- 
sponding to Safadéna-cériké in the Pali list, and the rule of pro- 
hibiting taking too much food at one time, which overtaxing the 
stomach will obscure the clearness of mind. 


! The reference is to the threefold precept (¢7zvzdhagtla) which 
is (1) the precept of good behavior (sambhédragila) ; (2) the precept 
of accumulating virtues (kugalasamgréhagila) ; (3) the precept of 
being benevolent towards all beings (sattvarthakrtyagtla). 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. I31 


shun them. If they suffer sufferings, they should not 
feel afflicted. But they should always rejoice in con- 
templating the deepest significance of the Dharma.! 

How should they practise energy (virya)? 

Practising all good deeds, they should never in- 
dulge in indolence (Aausidya). They should think of 
all their great mental and physical sufferings, which 
they are now vainly suffering on account of their hav- 
ing coveted worldly objects during their existences in 
innumerable former ages (fa/fa), and which do not 
give the least nourishment to their spiritual life. 
They should, therefore, in order to be emancipated 
from those sufferings in the future, be indefatigably 
energetic, and never raise the thought of indolence, 
but endeavor, out of deep compassion (mahékaruna), 
to benefit all beings. Though disciplining themselves 
in faith, all novice Bodhisattvas, on account of the 
hindrances of their evil karma (Larmdvarana) produced 
by the violation of many important precepts in their 
previous existences, may sometimes be annoyed by 
evil Maras, sometimes entangled in worldly engage- 
ments, sometimes threatened by various diseases. As 
these things will severally disturb their religious course 
and make them neglect practising good deeds, they 
should dauntlessly, energetically, unintermittently, all 


1The older translation reads: ‘‘ Patiently bearing evils in- 
flicted by others, they should not cherish any idea of revenge. 
They should also bear such [worldly vicissitudes] as prosperity 
and decline, reprehension and commendation, renown and defama- 
tion, worry and ease, etc.”’ 


132 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


six watches, day and night, pay homage to all Bud- 
dhas, make offerings (f#7@) to them, praise them, re- 
pent and confess (kshamd) to them, aspire to the most 
excellent knowledge (samyaksambodhi), make great 
vows (mahipranidhina); and thereby annihilate the 
hindrances of evils and increase the root of merit 
(kucalamila). 

How should they practise cessation [or tranquili- 
sation, ¢amatha] and intellectual insight (vidarcana 
Or vipacyana) ? 

To bring all mental states that produce frivolous 
sophistries to a stand is called cessation. To under- 
stand adequately the law of causality and transforma- 
tion is called intellectual insight. Each of them should 
be practised separately by the beginner. But when 
by degrees he obtains facility and finally attains to 
perfection, the two will naturally become harmonised. ! 

Those who practise cessation should dwell in soli- 
tude (évanyaka) and, sitting cross-legged,? rectify the 

1 Observe that cessation should be practised by the beginner, 
and for a time only, for the purpose of affording the mind an ap- 
preciation of suchness in its purity; the conception of this state of 
abstraction should then be harmonised with intellectual insight. 
Observe also that the methods of Indian recluses, such as fixing the 
breath and going into trances by fixing the thoughts on objects, are 
rejected as improper. The practice should assist a beginner to 
understand that suchness, though all particulars are dependent on 
it, is in its purity a reality. 

*Those who practise this have to place the left leg above the 
right with both close to the body, so that the toes of the left foot 


shall rest on the right thigh, and those of the right foot on the left 
thigh, while the soles are turned upwards. This posture is con- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 133 


attitude and pacify the mind.! Do not fix the thoughts 
on the breath (4@ndpdnasmrtz)*; do not fix the thoughts 
on the forms (samjfa)®? and colors; do not fix the 


sidered to be the best adapted for meditation or for obtaining men- 
tal equilibrium. 


1 Among the followers of the Dhyana sect both in Japan and 
China, it is customary, while sitting cross-legged and meditating 
on religious subjects, to expand the abdomen outwards and to 
breathe very slowly, by which they can, in their opinion, most 
effectively concentrate their attention and gain perfect mental equi- 
librium. Prof. J. M. Baldwin in his J/ental Development says in 
connexion with bashfulness and modesty, p. 205 footnote: ‘‘ The 
only way that I, for one, can undo this distressing outgo of energy, 
and relieve these uncomfortable inhibitions, is to expand the ab- 
domen by astrong muscular effort and at the same time breathe 
in as deeply as I can. . . . The comparative relief found in expand- 
ing the abdominal muscles is probably due to the fact that it allows 
the contents of the body to fall, and so relieves the heart from any 
artificial pressure which may be upon it from the surrounding or- 
gans. Further the increased heart-action which is itself a part of 
shyness requires all the space it can get.” 


2One of the eight subjects of recollection (axusmrtz), or of 
the five methods of mental pacification. The eight subjects are: 
(1) Buddha; (2) dharma; (3) samgha; (4) ¢#/a, morality; (5) céga 
or tyéga, liberality ; (6) deva, gods; (7) dnadpdna, regulation of 
inspiration and respiration ; (8) arvana, death. The five meth- 
ods are: (1) Agubhabhavand, contemplation on the impurity of 
the body; (2) maztrtkarund, love and compassion ; (3) éna@péna- 
smrtt, the regulation of inspiration and respiration; (4) 2zdéna, 
law of transformation ; (5) buddhasmrtz, recollection on Buddha. 


3 There are nine Acbhasamjnas, notions arising from the con- 
templation of the impurity of a dead body, which is intended to 
convince one of the fact that our body is not worth while clinging 
to: (1) Swelling (vyédhmataka) ; (2) fissuring from decay (uv7fa- 
yaka); (3) bloody (wzlohita); (4) festering (wzZadumaka); (5) 
blackish (vwzntlaka) ; (6) being devoured by animals (vwzkhdditaka); 
(7) scattering (vzkshipftaka) ; (8) bone (asthz) ; (9) burned up (zz- 
dagdhaka). The Pali Acubhas count one more. 


134 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


thoughts on space (ééca) ;1 do not fix the thoughts 
on earth, water, fire, and ether;! do not fix the 
thoughts on what you see, hear, learn, or memorise 
(vijndnakrtsndyatana)'. All particularisations, imagi- 
nations and recollections should be excluded from 
consciousness, even the idea of exclusion being ex- 
cluded; because [the suchness of] all things is un- 
create, eternal, and devoid of all attributes (a/ak- 
shana). 

[Now in the constant flux of thoughts, ] that which 
precedes [i. e., a sensation] has been awakened by an 
external object ; so the next [step to be taken by the 
practiser] is to abandon the idea of an external world. 
Then that which succeeds [in that constant flux of 
thoughts] is elaborated in his own mind; so he should 
in turn abandon reflexion [or thought]. In short, as 
his attention is distracted by the external world [outer 
vishaya], he is warned to turn it to inner consciousness 
[inner cz¢ta]; while as his retrospection in turn calls 
forth a succession of thoughts [or ideal associations], 
he is again warned not to attach himself to the latter ; 
because, independent of suchness, they [thoughts] 
have no existence of their own. 


At all times, while moving, standing, sitting, or 


1 These constitute the ten Avts@yatanas which are: (1) Blue 
(ztla); (2) yellow (fétta); (3) red (lohita); (4) white (avaddta) ; 
(5) earth (frtzvt); (6) water (af) ; (7) fire (¢e7as); (8) air (vdyze) ; 
(9) space (@kdsa) ; (10) consciousness (vzjnzdna). The term A7r¢sd- 
yétana means an universal object or element on which the atten- 
tion of a samddhi-practiser is to be fixed. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 135 


lying, the practiser should constantly discipline him- 
self as above stated. Gradually entering the samadhi 
of suchness,! he will finally vanquish all prejudices 
(kleca or derava), be strengthened in faith (¢raddhé), 
and immediately attain to the state of never-returning 
(avaivartikatva). But those who are sceptical, sacri- 
legious, destitute of faith, encumbered with the hin- 
drances (dévarana) of karma, arrogant, or indolent, are 
not entitled to enter therein. 

And again when the practiser by virtue of his sa- 
madhi? attains an immediate insight into the nature 
of the universe (dharmadhaétu), he will recognise that 
the Dharmakaya of all Tathagatas and the body of all 
beings are one and the same (sama/é), are consub- 
stantial (ekalakshana). On that account it is also called 
the samadhi of oneness (ekalakshanasamédht). By dis- 
ciplining oneself in this samadhi, one can obtain in- 


1 That is, perfect identification of oneself with suchness. 


2 Samadhi is commonly rendered by ecstasy, trance, concen- 
tration, or meditation, all of which are misleading. The term 
means mental equilibrium, and the reasons why Buddhism recom- 
mends the practising of it are, that it helps us in keeping our minds 
free from disturbance, that it prepares us for a right comprehen- 
sion of the nature of things, that it subjugates momentary im- 
pulses, giving us time for deliberation. Ecstasy or trance, instead 
of producing those benefits, will lead‘us to a series of hallucina- 
tions, and this is the very opposite of mental quietude. Rhys 
Davids thinks samadhi corresponds to faith in Christianity (.S. 2B. 
£., XI., p. 145), and S. Beal agrees with him in his translation of 
Acvaghosha’s Buddhacarita; but I doubt its correctness for the 
above-stated reasons, 


136 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


finite samadhis, because suchness is the source of all 
samadhis. 

Some people scantily supplied with the root of 
merit (Aucalamidéla) may yield to the temptation of 
Maras, tirthakas, or evil spirits. [For instance] those 
evil ones sometimes assuming horrible forms may 
frighten the practiser; sometimes manifesting them- 
selves in beautiful figures, they may fascinate him ;! 
sometimes appearing in form of a deva, or of a Bod- 
dhisattva, or even of a Buddha with all his excellent 
and magnified features,? they may speak about dha- 
rani? or the paramita, or may give instructions about 
various means of emancipation (mwuk7z), declaring that 


there is no hatred, no friendship, no causation, no 


1 The older translation has the following passage inserted here: 
‘If he [the practiser] remembers that these are merely subjective, 
the phenomena will disappear by themselves and will no more 
trouble him.”’ 


2 Buddha is supposed to have thirty-two general and eighty 
minor marks of bodily perfection. For particulars see the Dhkar- 
masamgraha, pp. 18, 19, 51 et seq., edited by Kasawara Kenjiu. 


3 Dhéranz, which comes from the root dv, meaning to hold, 
to maintain, to retain, to support, etc., is the name given to any 
concise statement describing Buddha's virtue, or stating some es- 
sential points of Buddhist teachings, or expressing supplication, or 
containing the exclamations of a vehement feeling; and it implies 
many significances in a few words, it is a kind of epigram. But 
later Buddhists came to use the term in quite a different sense; 
they called a dharani any tantric expression which was consid- 
ered to have some mysterious, supernatural powers to bring wealth 
to destroy enemies, to keep away calamities, etc., etc. Here dhd- 
rant means simply any epigrammatic proposition which will serve 
as a key to the deep significance of the Doctrine. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. P37 


retribution, or declaring that all things in the world 
are absolute nothingness (atyantacényaté), that they 
are in their essence Nirvana itself. Or they may re- 
veal to the practiser his own past and future states of 
existence, they may teach him to read the thoughts 
of others,! may grant him incomparable power of 
eloquence, may induce him to crave covetously for 
worldly fame and advantages. 

Further, through the influence of those evil ones 
the practiser may sometimes be inordinately suscept- 
ible to dissatisfaction or delight; he may sometimes 
be too misanthropic or too philanthropic; he may 
sometimes be inclined to enjoy drowsiness; he may 
sometimes not sleep for a long time; he may some- 
times be affected by diseases; he may sometimes re- 
main discouraged and indolent; he may sometimes 
rise all on a sudden with full energy, but only to sink 
down again into languor; he may sometimes, being 
over-sceptical, not believe in anything ; he may some- 
times, abandoning the excellent religious observance, 
enjoy himself in frivolous occupations, indulge in 
worldly affairs, gratify his desires and inclinations; 

1 Some of these miraculous powers here mentioned are consid- 
ered to be possessed by the Arhat. Six supernatural faculties 
(abhijnaé) are commonly enumerated: (1) divine eyes (divyacakshu) 
by which the Arhat perceives all that is occurring in the world; 
(2) the divine hearing (dzvyagrotra), by which he hears all sounds 
in the world; (3) reading the thoughts of others ( Jaracittajnana); 
(4) memory of his former lives ( A@rvantvdsdnu-smriz); (5) mirac- 


ulous powers (rddhz); (6) knowledge how to destroy evil passions 
(a@¢ravakshaya). 


138 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


he may sometimes attain to the samadhi of heretics 
[i. e., tirthaka] and, remaining in a state of trance a 
day or two, or even seven, and being supplied imagin- 
arily with some palatable food and drink, and feeling 
very comfortable mentally and physically, he may have 
no sensation of hunger or thirst;1 he may sometimes 
be induced to enjoy female fascinations; he may 
sometimes be very irregular in taking meals, either 
too much or too little; he may sometimes look either 
very handsome or very ugly in appearance. 

If the practiser get enraptured by those visions 
and prejudices (A/eca), he will lose his root of merit 
(Aucalamé/a) accumulated in his previous existences. 
Therefore he should exercise a deep and thorough 
contemplation, thinking that all those [heretical states 
of samadhi] are the temptations of Maras or evil spir- 
its that take advantage of his deficiency in merits and 
his intensity of karma-hindrances (karmévarana). 

After this thought he should make another thought, 
viz., that all these are nothing but mental hallucina- 
tions. When he makes these thoughts, the visions 
and imaginations will instantly disappear, and, be- 
coming free from all attributes [of limitation], he 
will enter into the true samadhi. He has then not 
only liberated himself from all modes of subjectivity, 
he has also effaced the idea of suchness. Even when 


1 This apparently alludes to the Yoga-praxis, by which man is 
said to be able to perform several sorts of miracles beside those 
mentioned here. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 139 


he rises up from a deep meditation, no visionary im- 
ages, no prejudices will take possession of in his mind, 
since he has destroyed the root of illusion through the 
power of the samadhi. On the contrary, all the ex- 
cellent and virtuous deeds which are in conformity 
with suchness will be constantly performed by him, 
while all hindrances without exception will be removed 
by him, who now exhibiting great spiritual energy will 
never become exhausted.! 

Those who do not practise this kind of samadhi 
will not be able to enter into the essence of the Tatha- 
gata, for all other samadhis practised in common with 
the tirthakas have invariably some attributes [of im- 
perfection] and do not enable one to come into the 
presence of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. Therefore let 
Bodhisattvas [who aspire to the highest knowledge] 
assiduously apply themselves to the discipline and 
attain to the perfection of this samadhi. 


1 The two preceding paragraphs read in the older translation 
as follows: ‘‘On this account, the practiser, always exercising in” 
tellectual insight, should save his mind from being entangled in 
the netting of falsity; he should, dwelling in right contemplation, 
not cling or attach [to any object], and thereby he will be able to 
liberate himself from all kinds of karma-hindrance. It should be 
known that all samadhis practised by heretics [i. e., tirthaka] are 
invariably the production of the [egoistic] conception and desire 
and self-assumption, that they are hankering after worldly renown 
advantages, and reverence. The samadhi of suchness [on the 
other hand] has nothing to do with subjectivity and attachment. 
If one is free from indolence even when rising from meditation 
one’s prejudices will by degrees get attenuated.”’ 


140 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Those who practise this samadhi will procure in 
their present life ten beneficial results: 

1. They will always be remembered and guarded 
by all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in all quarters. 

2. They will not be molested by Maras or evil 
spirits. 

3. They will not be led astray by false doctrines.? 

4. They will be free from disparaging the deepest 
Doctrine ( gambhiradharma). Their serious misdemean- 
ors as well as their karma-hindrances will be attenu 
ated. 

5. They will destroy all doubts, sinful recollec- 
tions, and contemplations. 

6. They will be strengthened in their belief in the 
spiritual state of Tathagata. 

7. They will be liberated from gloomy remorse; 
they will be courageous and unflinching in the face of 
birth and death. 

8. Being free from arrogance and presumptuous- 
ness, they will be meek and patient and will be re- 
vered by all the world. 

g. If not practising deep meditation, those preju- 
dices (é¢rava) which are now getting weaker, will not 
assert themselves in them. 

10. While practising meditation, they will not be 
disturbed by any external objects, such as voices, 
sounds, etc. 


1 The older translation reads: ‘‘the ninety-five heretical doc- 
trines.” 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. I4I 


But mind: when the practiser is trained only in 
cessation (camatha), his mind will sink down into stu- 
pidity, and acquiring a habit of indolence, cannot re- 
joice in doing good acts, as he will estrange himself 
from deep compassion (mahékaruna). Accordingly 
he should discipline himself in intellectual insight 
(vidarcana) as well. 

In what does this discipline consist? 

The practiser should contemplate that all things 
in the world are subject to a constant transformation, 
that since they are transient they are misery, that 
since they are misery they are not things-in-them- 
selves [i.e., dtman].} 

He should contemplate that all things in the past 
are like a dream, those in the present are like the 
lightning, those in the future are like clouds that spon- 
taneously come into existence. 

He should contemplate that all that has a body is 
impure, being a lodging place of obnoxious vermin 
and the intermixture of prejudices (d¢rava). 

Contemplate that ignorant minds, on account of 
their groundless imagination, take the unreal as they 
see it, for reality. 

Contemplate that all objects which come into ex- 
istence by a combination of various causes ( prat- 


! The idea is: that which is transient is dependent, conditional 
and not self-regulating ; and that which is without freedom is nec- 
essarily miserable, that is to say, it has no self-regulating atman 
within itself. 


142 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


yaya) are like a chimera, having [only a transitory ex- 
istence and] no [genuine] realness at all. 

Contemplate that the highest truth ( paramértha- 
satya) is not a production of mind [or subjectivity], 
cannot be [fully] illustrated by analogy, cannot be 
fexhaustively] treated by reasoning.} 

Contemplate that on account of the perfuming 
power of ignorance (avzdya) all beings from eternity 
suffer great mental and physical sufferings in im- 
measurable ways; that those immeasurable and in- 
numerable sufferings are suffered in the present and 
will be suffered in the future; that while it is extremely 
difficult to disentangle, to emancipate themselves from 
those sufferings, all beings always abiding in the midst 
of them are not conscious of the fact, and this makes 
them the more pitiable. 

After these contemplations the practiser should 

wake positive knowledge [or unerring understand 
ing], feel the highest and deepest compassion (Aaruna) 
for all suffering beings, rouse dauntless energy, and 
make great vows (mahdpranidhina) as follows: 

‘¢May my mind be freed from all contradictions ; 
may I abandon particularisation; may I personally 
attend on all Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, whom I shall 
pay homage to, make offerings to, revere and praise, 
and to whose instructions in the good Doctrine (sad- 
dharma) {1 shall listen; may I truthfully discipline my- 
self according to their teachings, and to the end of 


1 The last three clauses are missing in the older translation. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 143 


the future never be negligent in self-discipline; may I 
with innumerable expediencies (wpéya) [of salvation] 
deliver all beings who are drowned in the sea of mis- 
ery, and bring them to the highest bliss of Nirvana.” 

After these vows the practiser should at all times, 
so far as his energy permits, practise those deeds 
which are beneficial both to himself and others. While 
moving, standing, sitting, or lying, he should assidu- 
ously meditate what should be done and what should 
be avoided. This is called the practising of intellectual 
snsight (wdargana or vipagyana). 

And again when the practiser disciplines himself 
only in intellectual insight his mind may lack tran- 
quilisation, and becoming too susceptible to scepti- 
cism, may not be in accord with the highest truth, 
may not attain to the wisdom of non-particularisation. 
Therefore cessation and intellectual insight should be 
practised side by side. He should consider that noth- 
ing is self-existent (svadhéva), and things [in their 
essence] are uncreate, eternally tranquil, and Nirvana 
itself. But at the same time let him not forget to re- 
flect that karma and its retribution, both good and 
evil, being produced by a co-operation of principle 
and conditions, will neither be lost nor destroyed. 
He should thus ponder on the law of causation, both 
in its good and evil karma and retribution, but at the 
same time let him not forget to perceive that all 
things, though in their essence uncreate, have no self- 
existence, etc., they are Nirvana. 


144 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


By practising cessation, common people (prthag- 
jana) will be cured of finding pleasures in worldli- 
ness, while Cravakas and Pratyekabuddhas will be 
cured of feeling intimidation at the thought of birth 
and death. 

By practising intellectual insight common people 
will be cured of not cultivating their root of merit 
(ALucalamila), while Cravakas and Pratyekabuddhas 
will be cured of narrow-mindedness whereby they can- 
not raise deep compassion [for mankind]. 

Therefore, cessation and: intellectual insight are 
supplementary to, not independent of, each other. 
If one of the two is wanting, the practiser will surely 
be unable to attain to the most excellant knowledge 
(6odhiparinishpattt ). 

And again when those novice Bodhisattvas who 
are living in this present life [sahdlokadhdtu, 1. e., the 
enduring world of actual existence], may sometimes 
suffer misfortunes that are caused by climate, weather, 
unforeseen famine, or what not; and when they wit- 
ness those people who are immoral, fearful, infatuated 
with the three venomous passions (akugalamd/a), cling 
to false and self-contradictory doctrines, desert the 
good law and acquire evil habits ; they [that is, novice 
Bodhisattvas], living in the midst of them, may feel 
so discouraged that they may come to doubt whether 
they can see Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, whether they 
can actualise their pure and spotless faith (¢raddha). 


Therefore, it is advisable for those novices to cher- 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 145 


ish this thought: All Buddhas and Bodhisattvas in 
the ten quarters having great, unimpeded supernat- 
ural powers (aé/ij#d), are able to emancipate all suf- 
fering beings by means of various expediencies that 
are good and excellent (upayakaucalya). 

After this reflexion, they should make great vows 
(mahapranidhéna), and with full concentration of spir- 
itual powers think of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas 
When they have such a firm conviction, free from all 
doubts, they will assuredly be able to be born in the 
Buddha-country beyond (éuddha-kshetra), when they 
pass away from this present life, and seeing there 
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, to complete their faith and 
to eternally escape from all evil creations (apéya).} 

Therefore, it is said in the Sitra? that if devoted 


1The same idea of salvation is expressed in the Bhagavad- 
gitéd, Chap. VIII., p. 78: ‘‘And he who leaves this body and de- 
parts (from this world) remembering me in (his) last. moment, 
comes into my essence. There is no doubt of that... . Therefore 
at all times remember me... . Fixing your mind and understand- 
ing on me you will come to me, there is no doubt He who thinks 
of the supreme divine being, O son of Pritha! with the mind not 
(running) to other (objects), and possessed of abstraction in the 
shape of continuous meditation (about the Supreme) goes to him.’ 


“It is not exactly known from what Sitra this passage is taken, 
but it is not difficult to discover similar passages in the Siitras 
which constitute the canonical books of the Sukh4avati sect, i. e., 
in the larger or smaller Sukhavatt-vytha, or in the Amztdyur- 
adhydéna. I here quote such a passage from Max Miiller’s English 
translation of the larger Sukhdvati-vytha-Sttra, Sec. XXVII.: 
‘And if, O Ananda, any son or daughter of a good family should 
wish—What ?—How then may I see that Tathagata Amitabha vis- 
ibly, then he must raise his thought on to the highest perfect knowl 
edge, he must direct his thought with perseverance and excessive 


146 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


men and women would be filled with concentration of 
thought, think of Amitabha Buddha in the world of 
highest happiness (su&hdvatz) in the Western region, 
and direct (farindéma) all the root of their good work 
toward being born there, they would assuredly be born 
there: 

Thus always seeing Buddhas there, their faith will 
be strengthened, and they will never relapse therefrom. 
Receiving instruction in the doctrine, and recognising 
the Dharmakaya of the Buddha, they will by gradual 
discipline be able to enter upon the state of truth 
[i. e., Buddhahood] (samyaktva-ré¢z). 


V. BENEFITS. 


In what does this part [treating] of the benefits 
consist ? 

Such as above presented is the spiritual signifi- 
cance of the Mahayana, and I have finished elucidat- 
ing it. 

Those who, desiring to produce pure and spotless 
faith in, and knowledge of, the deepest spiritual con- 


desire towards that Buddha country, and direct the stock of his 
good works towards being born there."’ As I noticed elsewhere, if 
those Mahayana texts had been considered at the time of Ac¢va- 
ghosha, that is, in the first century after or before Christ, as a gen- 
uine teaching of Buddha, then it would have to be admitted, it 
seems to me, that the Mahayana system existed at an early stage 
of the development of Buddhism, most probably side by side with 
Hinaydnism, which is generally supposed by Pali scholars to be 
more primitive. But the history of Buddhism in India as a whole 
is still veiled with dark clouds of uncertainty, in spite of the fact 
that quite a few original Sanskrit texts have been recovered. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 147 


dition and the greatest Dharma of the Tathagata, so 
that they have no hindrances in entering upon the 
Mahayana path (mérga), will diligently pursue this 
brief discourse, contemplate it, discipline themselves 
in it, and thus they can surely and unhesitatingly at- 
tain to the knowledge of all forms and manifestations 
(sarvakarajnana). 

And if they do not awake a feeling of fear in hear- 
ing this Doctrine, they will surely be qualified to in- 
herit the Buddha-seeds and immediately receive the 
prophecy (vidkarana)' from the Buddha. Even if 
there be a person who could convert all beings in three 
thousand great chiliocosms (triséhasramahéséhasra),’ 
and could induce them to observe the ten precepts of 
morality (dacakucalamarga), his merits will not be su- 


1This is not a mere prophecy of one’s destiny, but Buddha's 
assurance for those Bodhisattvas who, having accumulated suffi- 
cient amount of merits, are qualified to attain in the future the 
most excellent, perfect knowledge and to achieve final salvation 
both for themselves and for all other beings. See how five hun- 
dred disciples received this assurance from Buddha in the Sad- 
dharmapundartka Sttra, Chap. VIII. 


2 Our earth which was supposed by ancient Indians to be flat, 
infinitely extending in space, is not the only region inhabited by 
sentient beings; but there are innumerable worlds outside of this 
Manushyalokadhétu, which exist above as well as below us. Now 
according to the Abhidharmakoga-¢astra by Vasubandhu, a small 
chiliocosm (séhasralokadhdtu) consists of one thousand of Ripa- . 
lokas and of the first Dhydna heavens, and one thousand of small 
chiliocosms make a middling chiliocosm, a thousand of which in 
turn making a great chiliocosm. So we may take the great chilio- 
cosm (mahdsdhasralokadhdtu) as including all possible heavenly 
bodies which fill up this boundless space. 


148 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


perior to those of the person who will truthfully com- 
prehend this Doctrine even for a second ; because the 
merits of the latter immeasurably and infinitely sur- 
pass those of the former. 

If one practise this doctrine as it is instructed for 
one whole day and night, the merits thereby produced 
will be so immeasurable, infinite, inconceivable that 
all Buddhas in the ten quarters could not exhaust 
them, even if each of them continued to praise them 
for innumerable asamkheyakalpas.! As the merits of 
suchness have no limits, so the merits of the discip- 
line are also without limit. 

Those who slander this doctrine, on the other hand, 
commit immeasurable faults and suffer great suffer- 
ings for asamkheyakalpag Accordingly all beings 
should cherish a firm faith in the Doctrine and never 
slander it, for this will lead to the destruction of one- 
self as well as others, nay, even to the destruction of 
the seeds of the Triple Treasure (¢rzratina). 

By practising this Doctrine all Buddhas have at- 
tained the most excellent knowledge (anuttarajnand). 
By practising this Doctrine all Bodhisattvas have ob- 
tained an insight into the Dhamrakaya of the Tatha- 
gata. 

By practising this Doctrine Bodhisattvas in the 
past consummated, Bodhisattvas in the future will 
consummate, pure and spotless faith (¢7addhd) in the 
Mahayana. Therefore those who desire to practise 


1 For an explanation see the footnote to Xa/Za, p. 87. 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH. 149 


those excellent virtues that are beneficial at once to 
themselves and others should diligently study this 
Discourse. 


I have now finished elucidating 

The deepest and greatest significance [of the 
Dharma]. 

May its merit be distributed among all creatures, 

And make them understand the Doctrine of Such- 


ness. 





GLOSSARY. 


Activity-consciousness 2 iik yeh shih, karmavijndna? the asser- 
tion of the '‘ Will to Live.” 

Affectional hindrance JA 1H [i fan nao chang, klegdvarana, hin- 
drance to the attainment of Nirvana, arising from the asser- 
tion of the ‘‘ Will to Live.” 

Affirmation, or Non-emptiness, A ZS pu kung, aghinyata, such- 
ness as constituting the basis of reality ; it is equivalent to the 
Tathagata’s Womb. 

All-conserving mind, The, [J Hi HB di a laz ya shih, or tsang 
shih, or WHHZEBR a U ya, MUR mu mo shih, dlaya-viy- 
nana, a stage in the evolution of suchness, in which conscious- 
ness is awakened to recognise a distinction between suchness 
and birth-and-death. 

Aspiration > fa hsin, cittotpéda, desire to attain the most 
perfect knowledge. 

Atman #% wz, (1)ego-soul; (2)noumenon or thing-in-itself. Andt- 
man is a negative form of the same. 

Birth-and-death 4 ¥& shéng mieh, samséra, the material prin- 
ciple in contradistinction to the formal principle, suchness. 

Consciousness fax shth, vijnéma, mentation in general. 


Defilement 34 jan, a cognisance of dual aspect of suchness; not 
necessarily moral or intellectual fault. 

Dharma % /a, (1) that which subsists, or substance; (2) law, doc- 
trine, or regulative principle. 

Dharmakdya i & fa shén, absolute being, or absolute knowledge 
when considered from the idealistic point of view. 

Ego ee 7, manas, the subjective mind which believes consciously 
or unconsciously in the existence of the ego-soul. 


152 ACVAGHOSHA’S 


Ego-consciousness && git 7 shth, manovijndna, egocentric thoughts 
in general; the mind that makes a deliberate assumption of a 
dualistic existence of the ego and the non-ego. 


Enlightenment %% chiao (buddhi?), another name for suchness, 
psychologically considered. 


Evolving-consciousness #4 fae chuan shth, pravrtti-vijnéna, a 
state of suchness out of which mentation in general evolves. 


Ignorance 4& AA wee ming, avidya, a state of suchness in its evo- 
lution; practically the same as birth-and-death. 


Intellectual hindrance if #0 f& so chth chang, jneyévarana, the 
hindrance to the attainment of Nirvana, which arises from 
intellectual prejudices. 


Interrelated defilement 48 fE ¥ zstang ying jan, a conscious as- 
sertion of dualism. 


Karma-hindrance, yeh chang, karmdvarana, the hindrance in 
the way to Nirvana, that is brought forth by evil deeds done 
in previous lives. 


Mahayana AF tai chang, literally, great conveyance, another 
name for suchness. 

Means, or expediency Fi 8! fang pien, updya, when philosoph- 
ically considered, the process of evolution, whereby the uncon- 
ditional suchness becomes conditional. 


Mind «> hsin, crtta, relative aspect of suchness. Soul, mind, and 
suchness are to a certain extent synonymous, but in this trans- 
lation the following distinction is made: Suchness, when un- 
qualified, signifies its absolute aspect and is practically the 
same with the soul, while the term mind is used to denote a 
state of suchness in its operation or evolution. 


Negation, or emptiness 2 ‘ung, ¢anyatdé, an aspect of suchness 
as transcending all forms of relativitity. 


Nirvana 424 nich pian, the recognition of the truth or suchness. 


Non-enlightenment # & pu chiao (ntrbuddhz?), another name for 
ignorance, psychologically considered. Non-enlightenment, 
defilement, birth-and-death, and ignorance, are more or less 
synonymous and interchangeable. 


Non-particularisation 3% 3? 3'] wu fén pieh, the subjective atti- 
tude that is free from a deliberate assertion of dualism; i 
is similar in a sense to Lao-Tze's ‘‘ Non-assertion.” 


THE AWAKENING OF FAITH 153 


Not-interrelated defilement 7 #8 fG% pu hsiang ying jan, an 
unconscious assertion of dualism. 


Particularisation-consciousness Jf §!] Hk fen preh shth, the con- 
sciousness that adheres to the dual aspect of existence; a syn- 
onym of phenomena-particularising-consciousness. 

Prejudice JH {§ fan nao, agrava or klega, the subjectivity that 
averts the due exercise of will and intellect. 

Samadhi = BR san mez, or ‘XX ting, literally equilibrium, a state 
of consciousness in which all modes of mental activity are in 
equilibrium. 

Soul «> sin, hrdaya or citta, that which constitutes the kernel 
of things, but not in the Christian conception of the word; a 
synonym of absolute suchness. 

Soul as birth-and-death, a> FE th sin shéng mieh, relative aspect 
of suchness as material principle; a synonym of ignorance. 

Soul as suchness % S42 2N Asin chen ju, absolute aspect of such- 
ness as purely formal. 

Subjectivity % @ wang nien, or € Ara wang nien hsin, or 
> & sin nien, or simply @ nzen, smrti, literally, recol- 
lection or memory, or 9p §'] fén fzéh, particularisation; the 
mentation that is not in accordance with the conception of 
suchness. 

Suchness JA Rn chén ju, bhitatathaté, the highest reality, or the 
‘‘purely formal” aspect of existence. 

Tathagata’s womb #2K9K ju lac tsang, tathdgata-garbha, a 
state of suchness as containing every possible merit. 

Totality of things %& 9B fah chieh, dharmadhétu, literally, the 
basis of things, that is, the universe as a whole. 


Vow FA yan, or 2 FA shih yuan, pranidhdéna, commonly trans- 
lated prayer, but not in the Christian sense, for Buddhists 
think that a vow or vehement desire has power enough to 
achieve what is desired, according to their idealistic concep- 
tion of the world. 


CORRIGENDA. 


Page 3, line 2, read géthé for ghétds. 


hak, 
ee SEZ 
er), 
LE oF 
24, 
aS a8G: 


ce 60, 
66 60, 


8, 
13, 
20, 
22, 
12, 

4; 

5: 


Fo for Fa. 

peace for piece. 

efor 4. 

fasciculus for fascicul?, 
conversion for conversions. 
non-dtman for none-dtman. 
canyaté for canjata. 


10, insert that after understanding. 
1, read Anupadicesha for Anupadhizesa. 


17 


ce 


latter's for latters’. 


INDEX. 


Acbhasamijfias, 133. 

Activity, incomprehensible, 66 
et seq.; spontaneous, 87; un- 
conscious, 125. 

Activity-consciousness, i. e., the 
subjective mind, 76, 84, 96, 
100, 103, 151; strengthened, 
86. 

Activity-perfuming, 91. 

Acvaghosha, as an artist, 34 et 
seq.; his conversion, 24 et 
seq.; his date, 2 et seq.; his 
different names, 20 et seq.; 
his discussion with Parcva, 
25 et seq.; his nativity and 
wanderings, 17 et seq.; his 
patriarchal order, 34; his 
works in Chinese translations, 
36 et seq.; the first expounder 
of Mahaydnism, 1. 

All-conserving mind, 43, 61, 75, 
isle 

Amitabha-Buddha, 145. 

Ananda, 5 

Anatman, 47, I5I. 

Aryadeva, Zr 32, SA. 

Aspiration, 89, 113 et seq., 122; 
its three forms, 113 et seq:; 
through’ faith; 113 et seq; ; 
through knowledge and prac- 


tice, 113, 122; through intel- 
lectual insight, 113, 123 et 
seq. 

Atman, 29, 151; in things (or 
things-in-themselves), 106; 
personal (or ego-soul), 106. 

Atman-conception, 106. 

Atman-theory, the non-personal, 
III. 

Attachment to names, 72-73. 

Awakening of Faith, The, its 
Chinese translations, 38 et 
seq., 45; its philosophy out- 
lined, 41 et seq. 


Benefits of the study of the 
Mahayana, 145 et seq. 
Bhagavadgita, 44, 61, 94, 145. 
Bhagavat, 46. 
Birth-and-death, 53, 75; its 
vatson d’étre and cause, g3. 
Bliss, Body of, 101, 103, 104. 
Bodhisattva, 55, 64. 
Buddha, 128. 
Buddha-carita-kavya, 1, 35, 37- 
Buddha-country, 145. 
Buddha-dharmas, 95, 98. 
Buddha-seeds, 47, 48, 145. 
Buddha, thirty-two marks of 
perfection of, 135. 


156 


Causation, the law of, 75. 
Cessation, 50, 128, I41, 144; 
how to practise, 132 et seq. 

Charity, 122, 128 et seq. 

Chiliocosms, 145. 

Chimera, 142. 

Cikshananda, 309. 

Clinging, 72. 

Clouds, 141. 

Compassion, 91, 92, 98, 114, 
TL, 120, 131, 141i, £42: 

Compulsion, 99. 

Compulsory actions, 100. 

Consciousness (or mentation), 
65, 75- 

Craddhotpdda-castra. See ‘‘Ma- 
haydna-craddhotpada-castra.” 

Cravaka, 63. 

Creation, six different states of, 
102. 

Cross-legged, sitting, 132. 

Cinya or Cinyata, 29, 58, 60. 

Cira, another name for Acva- 
ghosha, 21. 


Deeds, the five, perfecting faith, 
128. 

Defiled mind, its six phases of 
defilement, 80 et seq., 82. 

Defilement (or relativity), 66, 
151; interrelated (or second- 
ary), 80, 152; not-interrelated 
(or primary), 80 et seq., 153. 

Dharani, 135. 

Dharma, The, 25, 46, 51, 57, 95, 
122, 128, 131; greatest, 145; 
its perfuming power, 67; true, 
70; valid, 89. 

Dharmadhatu, 55, 62, 79, 81, 
105; its oneness, 116. (See 
also ‘' Universe.”’) 


INDEX. 


Dharmakdaya, 62, 67, 95, 96, 98, 
99, I00, 102, 103, 104, I19Q, 
127, 145, 148; absolute, 120; 
not a nothing, 108; not like 
space, 107. 

Dharma-wheel (or wheel of), 
120, 123. 

Dharmika-Subhfti, another 
name for A¢vaghosha, 21. 

Dhitaguna, the twelve, 129. 

Dhyana sect, 132. 

Doctrine, the, 56, 89; the deep- 
est, 140; the good, 142: 

Dream, 141. 

Durdarsha, another name for 
Acvaghosha, 21, 

Durdarshak4la, another name 
for Acvaghosha, 21. 


Ego, 75, 94; as an aspect of ig- 
norance, 72. (See also Glos- 
sary, sub voce ‘‘ Ego."’) 

Ego-consciousness, 78, 152. 

Energy, 122; how to practise, 
129. 

Enlightenment, 61, 152; and ig- 
norance, 67; a posteriori, 62, 
63, 66; a priorz, 62, 63, 66, 
70, 71, 101; differentiated, 66 
et seq.; its twofold relation to 
non-enlightenment,73; likened 
unto space and a mirror in 
its four aspects, 69 et seq.; 
perfect, 65; the most excel- 
lent, 114; why subject to de- 
filement,74. (See also‘‘Knowl- 
edge" and ‘‘ Wisdom”’). 

Entertainment, four methods 
of, 92, 98. 

Essence of things, free from 
limitation, 112. 


INDEX. 


Essence-perfuming, 88 et seq. 

Evil creation, 120, 121. 

Evolving-consciousness, 67, 76, 
123, 152: 

Expediency (or skilfulness), or 
expediencies, 112, 126, 127, 
143, 145. (Seealso ‘‘ Means.”’) 


Faith, 128; immovable, 49 (see 
also ‘‘ Never-Returning”’); the 
Mahayana, 50. 

False doctrines, the refutation 
of, 106 et seq. 

Fire and wood, simile of, go. 


Ganges, sands of the, 89, 95, 
98, 108. 


Hindrances, affectional, 69, 82, 
151; intellectual, 69, 82, 152. 

Hymn of One Hundred and 
Fifty Clokas, 23. 


Ignorance, 66, 67, 77, 78, 82, 
97, 106, 142, 152; annihilated, 
87; as the defiled dharma, 95; 
disturbs the mind, 84; how 
it is produced, 79 (see also 
‘‘ Non-Enlightenment’’); its 
perfuming power, 83,86; puri- 
fied, 85; the principle of de- 
filement, 84. 

Ignorant action, 71. 

Inconstancy, group of, 113, 114. 

Individual cause, gi et seq. 

Intellectual insight, 50, 128, 141, 
143; how to gain, 132 et seq. 

Intelligence (or sensation), 72. 

‘Interrelated,” explained, 81. 


Jewel, simile of, 116. 


157 


Kala, another name for Acva- 
ghosha, 21. 

Kalpa, 87. 

Kanishka, 12. 

Kanishtha (or Kanita), Can- 
dana, 50, Ti: 

Karma, 76, 129; hindrances of 
118, 135, 138; impure, 120; 
retribution of, 117. 

Katyayana, 3. 

Knowledge, perfect, 47; posi- 
tive, 142; the most excellent, 
88, 118, 129, 144; of all forms 
145. (Seealso‘‘Omniscience.’’) 

Krtsdyatanas, 134. 

Kulanatha, another name for 
Paramartha, 38. 

Kung-chang, another name for 
Acvaghosha, 21. 

Kung-té-jih, another name for 
Acvaghosha, 21. 


Lightning, 141. 

Love, and compassion, 91; and 
wisdom, 44. _ 

Lu tao lun ‘hut ching, 38. 


Mahabodhi, The, 115. 

Mahéakacyapa, 5. 

Mahalamkara-cdstra (or Maha- 
lamk4arastitra-castra), 3, 20 
355-37: 

Mahayana, The, 48, 49, 50, 146, 
148; its being and significance, 
52 et seq.; its literal meaning 
explained, 54; three signifi- 
cances of, 95 et seq. 

Mahayana Buddhism, 1, 43, 44, 
45. 

Mahaydna-craddhotpada-castra, 
3, 4, 6, 20, 36-37. 


158 


Mahéayana path, 145. 

Mahecrava, 22. 

Maras, 129, 135. 

Materiality, system of, 103. 

Maticitra, another name for 
Acvaghosha, 21. 

MAtrceta, another name for Ac- 
vaghosha, 21, 22. 

Matter, 103, 108, 112; as a par- 
ticularisation of the confused 
mind, 107. 

Means (or skilfulness, or expe- 
diency), four kinds of, 117 et 
seq. 

Methods (updya), 124. (See also 
‘‘Means” and ‘‘Expediency.’’) 

Mind (or alaya-vijfiana), 53, 67, 
O85 7s 7577 7 on LOO 112, 


152; its essence not annihi- 
lated, 87; its identity with 
suchness, 106; its illusory 


manifestation, 86; its self- 
manifestation, 82; its three 
different operations, 124; like 
a jewel, 116, 117; perfect in 
itself, 68, 79, 98. (See also 
Souls) 

Mirror, 76, 77; covered with 
dust, 27. 

Morality, 122; how to practise, 
129; the ten precepts of, 147. 


Nagarjuna, 6, 7, 23, 34, 38, 43. 
Never-returning, the state of, 
135. (See also ‘‘ Immovable.’’) 
Nirvana, 74, 86, 87, 137, 143; 
anupadhicesha, 119; attain 
to, 113; attainment of, 110; 
its pantheistic conception, 112; 
immortal, 111; not to dwell 
in, 117; that has no fixed 


INDEX. 


abode, 88; the essence of all 
things, 121. 

Non-aggregate objects. 105. 

Non-enlightenment, 61, 70, 75, 
97; as the vazson d'étre of 
birth-and-death,83; compared 
to a man who is last, 70; its 
three aspects, 71: its twofold 
relation to enlightenment, 73. 
(See also ‘‘Ignorance” and 
Glossary.) 

‘‘Not-interrelated,” explained 
81. 

Non-particularisation, 94, 152; 
wisdom of, 123, 143. 

Nothingness, absolute, 137. 


Omniscience, 125, 126. 
also ‘‘ knowledge.’’) 
Order of constant truth, 127. 


(See 


Parcva, +2; 1963062 s3ceasa 
teacher of Acvaghosha, 25 et 
seq. 

Paramita, 23, 38,.98, 101, 226 
135; the six, 92, 122 et seq. 

Particularisation, 64, 65, 87, 97 


102,504; aS agr ts sinensis 
142. 

Particularisation-consciousness 
76, 153. 

Passions, three venomous, 50, 
144. 

Patience, 122; how to practise 
129. 


Patriarchs, Lists of, 33. 
Performance of deeds, 73. 
‘‘Perfuming,” explained, 84. 
Phenomenal world, as a phase 
of ignorance, 72. 
Phenomena-particularising con- 


INDEX. 


sciousness, 78; strengthened, 
86, 100. 

Pitrceta, another name for Ac- 
vaghosha, 21. 

Pottery, simile of, 74, 75. 

Powers, supernatural, 145. 

Practical truth (samvrtti-satya), 
29, 38. 

Pratyekabuddha, 63. 

Precept, the threefold, 129. 

Prejudices, 89, 90, 109, I15, 129, 
140, 141; their perfuming in- 
fluence, 78. 

Prophecy, 145. 

Prthagjana (common people), 
63. 

Pudgala, 29. 

Punyayagcas, 28, 31, 33; his dis- 
cussion with Acvaghosha, 29 
et seq. 


Rationality, system of, 103. 

Reality, the highest, 126. 
also ‘‘ Truth.”’) 

Recollection, subjects of, 132. 

Representation-consciousness, 
76. 

Reward, Body of, 102. 

Right order, 121, 

Right path, the practising of, 
EL3 Cl Seq: 

Root of merit, the, 49, 70, 91, 
G2, 2185, F932, 135, 135, b44 5 
its perfuming power, 114; 
strengthened, 118. 


(See 


Samadhi, 138; the power of, 
139; of heretics, 138: of one- 
ness, 135; of purity, 93. 

Sambhogakaya, ror. 

Sameness, principle of, 82. 


159 


Sense, six objects of, as consti- 
tuting the external world, 84. 

Separation-consciousness, 78. 

Shame and remorse, 118. 

Skandhas, the five, 104, 112. 

Soul, 53, 60, 97; as birth-and 
death, 55, 60 et seq.; as such 
ness, 55, 57; its three facul- 
ties awakened by faith, 116; 
the essence of the Tathagata 
107. 

Space, simile of, 69, 107. 

Spontaneity of action, 94. 

Subjective mind, its perfuming 
power, 88. 

Subjectivity, 56, 57, 66, 70, 71, 
77, 85, 138, 153; annihilated, 
95; as the condition of birth- 
and-death, 83. 

Succession (or memory), 72. 

Succession-consciousness (or 
memory), 76, 78. 

Suchness, 43, 44, 53, 134, 139; as 
the inherent perfuming prin- 
ciple, 91; as the razson d’étre 
go; defiled, 84; faith in, 128; 
free from imperfection, 118; 
its absolute aspect, 59 et seq.; 
its activity, 98; its character- 
istics described, 95; its differ- 
entiation, 89; its identity with 
the soul, 57; its negative as- 
pect, 58; its positive aspect, 

59; its perfuming powers, 388, 
93 et seq.; its three attributes, 
I1g; not a nothing, 108; not 
concerned with defilement, 
108; possessed by all, 86; 
simple in its nature, yet sub- 
ject to defilement, 96; to con- 
template, 116; the doctrine 


160 


of, 149; the gate of, 106; the 
idea of, 138; the pure dharma, 
84, 95. 

Suffering, 73. 

Sukhavati theory, 43-44, 145. 

Supernatural faculties, the six, 
EGE 

Siitra, 51; quotation from, 106, 
107, 109, II0, 120; quotation 
from the Lankavatara, 65; 
quotation from the Sukhavati, 
145; quotation from the Vi- 
mala-kirti-nirdeca, 74; the 
Mahayana, 51. 


Tara. 22; 
Ta sung ti hsiian wén pén lun, 
37: 


Tathagata, 49, 107, 139, 140; 
as a manifestation of enlight- 
enment, 70; Body of, 102; 
personality of, 68; wisdom 
and activity of, 94. 

Tathagata’s Wisdom, 65. 

Tathagata’s Womb, 43, 54, 60, 
96, 98, 108, 109; immortal, 
III; its relation to birth-and- 
death, rio. 

Things, defiled, 59; how pro- 
duced, 85; non-entity of, 73; 
pure, how produced, 86. 

Things-in-themselves, 141. 

Tirthakay 2)°6; -135;.130: 

Tranquilisation, 122, 123, 143. 

Transformation, Body of, roo. 

Trikaya. (See ‘'‘ Triple Person- 
ality.’’) 


INDEX. 


Triloka (three worlds), 111; as 
a manifestation of the mind, 
77: 

Triple Personality, 43-44. 

Triple Treasure, the, 118, 148. 

Truth, 99; (absolute, or pure, or 
highest = paramdartha-satya), 
29, 38, 99, II9, 142. 

Tukhara,. King ef 20,24, 52: 
(See also ‘‘ Yiieh chih.’’) 

Tushita Heaven, 119. 


Undefiled, the, 74. 
Universal cause, 93 et seq. 
Universal wisdom, 93. 
Universal wishes, 93. 
Universe, its oneness, 93. 
Upagupta, 6. 


Vaiceshika school, the, 110. 
Virtues, spotless, 88 (see also 
‘‘Undefiled’’); the ten, 114. 

Vow-power, or the power of 
vow, IIQ, 120. ; 
Vows, 132; great, 118, 142, 145. 


Water, the wind, and the waves, 
simile of, 67, 83. 

Wisdom, 74, 90, 123; pure, 66 
et seq.; the true, 113; which 
works out emancipation, 99. 

World of highest happiness, 


145. 


Yoga-praxis, 138. 
Yiieh chih, King of, 9, 12, 13. 
(See also ‘‘ Tukhara.’’) 


CATALOGUE OF PUBLICATIONS 


OF THE 


OPEN COURE PUBLISHING CO. 





COPE, E: D: 
THE PRIMARY FACTORS OF ORGANIC EVOLUTION. 
121 cuts. Pp. xvi, 547. Cloth, $2.00 (ros.). 


MULLER, F. MAX. 
THREE INTRODUCTORY LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF 
THOUGHT. 
128 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THREE LECTURES ON THE SCIENCE OF LANGUAGE. 
112 pages. 2nd Edition. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


ROMANES, GEORGE JOHN. 

DARWIN AND AFTER DARWIN. 
Three Vols., $4.00. Singly, as follows: 
1, THE DARWINIAN THEORY. 460 pages. 125 illustrations. Cloth, $2 00. 
2. Post-DARWINIAN Questions. Heredity and Utility. Pp. 338. $1.50. 
3. Post-DARWINIAN QuEsTIons. Isolation and Physiological Selection. 

Pp. 181. $1.00. 

AN EXAMINATION OF WEISMANNISM. 
236 pages. Cloth, $1.00. 

THOUGHTS ON RELIGION. 
Third Edition, Pages, 184. Cloth, gilt top, $1.25. 


SHULE DR: D. KERFOOT. 
FIRST BOOK IN ORGANIC EVOLUTION. 
9 colored plates, 39 cuts. Pp. xvi+285. Price, $2.00 (7s. 6d.). 


MACH, ERNST. 
THE SCIENCE OF MECHANICS. 
Translated by T. J. McCormack. 250 cuts. 534 pages. $2.50 (12s. 6d.). 
POPULAR SCIENTIFIC LECTURES. 
Third Edition. 415 pages. 59 cuts. Cloth, gilt top. $1.50-(7s. 6d.). 


THE ANALYSIS OF THE SENSATIONS. 
Pp. 208. 37 cuts. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 


LAGRANGE, JOSEPH LOUIS. 
LECTURES ON ELEMENTARY MATHEMATICS. 
With portrait of the author. Pp. 172. Price, $1 00 (5s.). 


DE MORGAN, AUGUSTUS. 
ON THE STUDY AND DIFFICULTIES OF MATHEMATICS. 
New Reprint edition with notes. Pp. viii+288. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 
ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND 
INTEGRAL CALCULUS. 
New reprint edition. Price, $1.00 (5S.). 


FINK, KARL. .: 
A BRIEF HISTORY OF MATHEMATICS. 
Trans. by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith. Pp., 333. Cloth, $1.50 (5s.6d.) 


SCHUBERT, HERMANN. 
MATHEMATICAL ESSAYS AND RECREATIONS. 
Pp. 149. Cuts, 37. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 


HUC AND GABET, MM. 
TRAVELS IN TARTARY, THIBET AND CHINA. 
100 engravings. Pp. 28+ 660. 2vols. $2.00 (10s.). One vol., $1.25 (5S.) 


CARUS, PAUL. 
THE HISTORY OF THE DEVIL, AND THE IDEA OF EVIL. 
311 Illustrations. Pages, 500. Price, $6.00 (30s.). 
EROS AND PSYCHE. 
Retold after Apuleius. With Illustrations by Paul Thumann. Pp. 125. 
Price, $1.50. 
WHENCE AND WHITHER? 
An Inquiry into the Nature of the Soul. 196 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE ETHICAL PROBLEM. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 351 pages. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
FUNDAMENTAL PROBLEMS. 
Second edition, revised and enlarged. 372 pp. Cl., $1.50 (7s, 6d.). 
HOMILIES OF SCIENCE. 
317 pages. Cloth, Gilt Top, $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 
THE IDEA OF GOD. 
Fourth edition. 32 pages. Paper, 15c (gd.). 
THE SOUL OF MAN. 
anded. 182cuts. 482 pages. Cloth, $1.50 (6s.). 
TRUTH IN FICTION. TweELve TaLeEs with A MorAL. 
White and gold binding, giltedges. Pp.111. $1.00 (5s.). 
THE RELIGION OF SCIENCE. 
Second, extra edition. Pp. 103. Price, 50c (2s. 6d.). 
PRIMER OF PHILOSOPHY. 
240 pages. Second Edition. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 
THE GOSPEL OF BUDDHA. According to Old Records. 
Fifth Edition. Pp. 275. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.).. In German, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
BUDDHISM AND ITS CHRISTIAN CRITICS. 
Pages, 311. Cloth, $1.25 (6s. 6d.). 
KARMA. A Story oF EARLY BUDDHISM. 
Illustrated by Japanese artists. Crépe paper, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
NIRVANA: A SrTory oF BupDHIST PSYCHOLOGY. 
Japanese edition, like Karma. $1.00 (4s. 6d.). 
LAO-TZE’S TAO-TEH-KING. 
Chinese-English. Pp. 360. Cloth, $3.00 (15s.). 


CORNILE, CARL HEINRICH. 
THE PROPHETS OF ISRAEL. 
Pp., 200 Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 
HISTORY OF THE PEOPLE OF ISRAEL. 
Pp. vi+ 325. Cloth, $1.50 (7s. 6d.). 


POWELL, J. W. 
TRUTH AND ERROR; or, the Science of Intellection. 
Pp. 423. Cloth, $1.75 (7s. 6d.). 


RIBOT:: TE. P 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF ATTENTION. 
THE DISEASES OF PERSONALITY. 
THE DISEASES OF THE WILL. 
Cloth, 75 cents each (3s. 6d.). dl set, cloth, $1.75 (9s.). 
EVOLUTION OF GENERAL IDEAS. 
Pp. 231. Cloth, $1.25 (5s.). 


WAGNER, RICHARD. 
A PILGRIMAGE TO BEETHOVEN. 
A Story. With portrait of Beethoven. Pp.40. Boards, 50c (2s. 6d.). 


HUTCHINSON, WOODS. 
THE GOSPEL ACCORDING TO DARWIN. 
Pp. xii+241. Price, $1.50 (6s.). 


FREYTAG, GUSTAV. 
THE LOST MANUSCRIPT. A Novel. 
2vols. 953 pages. Extra cloth, $4.00 (21s). One vol., cl., $1.00 (5s.). 


MARTIN LUTHER. 
Illustrated. Pp. 130. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 


TRUMBULL, M. M. 
THE FREE TRADE STRUGGLE IN ENGLAND. 
Second Edition. 296 pages. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
WHEELBARROW: ARTICLES AND DISCUSSIONS ON THE LABOR QUESTION 
With portrait of the author. 303 pages. Cloth, $1.00 (5s.). 


GOETHE AND SCHILLER’S XENIONS. 
Translated by Paul Carus. Album form. Pp. 162. Cl., $1.00 (5s.). 


OLDENBERG, H. 
ANCIENT INDIA: ITS LANGUAGE AND RELIGIONS. 


Pp. 100. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 


CONWAY, DR. MONCURE DANIEL. 
SOLOMON, AND SOLOMONIC LITERATURE. 
Pp. 243. Cloth, $1.50 (6s.). 


GARBE, RICHARD. 
THE REDEMPTION OF THE BRAHMAN. A TALE oF Hinpu LIFE. 
Laid paper. Gilt top. 96 pages. Price, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF ANCIENT INDIA. 
Pp. 89. Cloth, 50c (2s. 6d.). 


HUEPPE, FERDINAND. 
THE PRINCIPLES OF BACTERIOLOGY. 
28 Woodcuts. Pp. x +467. Price, $1.75 (9s.). 


LEVY-BRUHL, PROF. L. 
HISTORY OF MODERN PHILOSOPHY IN FRANCE. 
23 Portraits. Handsomely bound. Pp. 500. Price, $3.00 (12s.). 


TOPINARD, DR. PAUL. 
SCIENCE AND FAITH, or MAn As AN ANIMAL AND MAN AS A MEMBER 
OF SOCIETY. 
Pp. 374. Cloth, $1.50 (6s. 6d.). 


BINET, ALFRED. 
THE PSYCHOLOGY OF REASONING. 
Pp. 193. Cloth, 75c (3s. 6d.). 
THE PSYCHIC LIFE OF MICRO-ORGANISMS. 
Pp. 135. Cloth, 75 cents. 


ON DOUBLE CONSCIOUSNESS. 
See No. 8, Religion of Science Library. 


THE, OPEN COURS. 
A Monthly Magazine Devoted to the Science of Religion, the Religion of 
Science, and the Extension of the Religious Parliament Idea. 
Terms: $1.00 a year; 5s. 6d. to foreign countries in the Postal Union. 
Single Copies, 10 cents (6d.). 


THE MONIST. 


A Quarterly Magazine of Philosophy and Science. 
Per copy, 50 cents; Yearly, $2.00. In England and all countries in 
U.P.U. per copy, 2s. 6d.: Yearly, gs: 6d. 


CHICAGO: 


Tre OPE N-COURT PUBEISHING CO, 


Monon Building, 324 Dearborn St. 
LONDON: Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Company. 


The Religion of Science Library. 


A collection of bi-monthly publications, most of which are reprints of 
books published by The Open Court Publishing Company. Yearly, $1.50. 
Separate copies according to prices quoted. The books are printed upon 
good paper, from large type. 

The Religion of Science Library, by its extraordinarily reasonable price, 
will place a large number of valuable books within the reach of all readers. 

The following have already appeared in the series: 


. The Religion of Science. By'Paut Carus. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 
. Three Introductory Lectures on the Science of Thought. By F. Max 


MULLER. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 


. Three Lectures on the Science of Language, F. Max Miter, 25¢ (1s.6d.). 


The Diseases of Personality. By Tu. Ripot. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 
The Psychology of Attention. By Tu. Rigor. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 
The Psychic Life of Micro-Organisms, By ALFRED BINET. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 


. The Nature of the State. By Paut Carus. 15c (9d.). 

. On Double Consciousness. By ALFRED BINET. 15C (gd.). 

. Fundamental Problems. By Paut Carus. 50¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. The Diseases of the Will. By Tu. Rigor. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. The Origin of Language. By Lupwic Notre. 15c (gd.). 

. The Free Trade Struggle in England. M.M. TRUMBULL. 25¢ (1S. 6d.) 
. Wheelbarrow on the Labor Question. By M. M. TRUMBULL. 35C (2S.). 

. The Gospel of Buddha. By Paut Carus. 35¢ (2S.). 

. The Primer of Philosophy. By Paut Carus. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. On Memory, and The Specific Energies of the Nervous Systent. By PRoF 


EWALD HERING. 15C (gd.). 


. The Redemption of the Brahman. Tale of Hindu Life. By RicHARD 


GARBE. 25C (1S. 6d.). 


. An Examination of Wetsmannism. By G. J. RoMANES. 35€ (2S.). 

. On Germinal Selection. By AUGUST WEISMANN. 25C (1S. 6d.). 

. Lovers Three Thousand Vears Ago. By T. A. Goopwin. (Out of print. 
. Popular Scientific Lectures. By ERNST Macu. 500 (2s. 6d.). 

. Ancient India: Its Language and Religions, By H. OLDENBERG. 25C 


(1s. 6d.). 


. The Prophets of Israel. By Pror. C. H. Cornity. 25¢ (1. 6d.). 

. Homilies of Science. By PaAut Carus. 35C (2S.). 

. Thoughts on Religion. By G.J. ROMANES. 50C (2s. 6d.). 

. The Philosophy of Ancient India. By PROF. RICHARD GARBE. 25C (1S. 6d.) 
. Martin Luther. By GUSTAV FREYTAG. 25¢ (1S. 6d.). 

. English Secularism, By GEORGE JACOB HOLyoakE. 25C (1S. 6d.). 

. On Orthogenests. By TH. EIMER. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. Chinese Philosophy. By Paut Carus. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. The Lost Manuscript. By GusTAvV FREYTAG. 60C (3S.). 

. A Mechanico-Physiological Theory of Organic Evolution. By CARL VON 


NAEGELI. 15c (gd.). 


. Chinese Fiction. By Dr. GEORGE T. CANDLIN. 15¢ (9d.). 

. Mathematical Essays and Recreations. By H. SCHUBERT. 25C (18. 6d.) 
. The Ethical Froblem. By PAuut Carus. 50¢ (2S. 6d.). 

. Buddhism and Its Christian Critics. By PAuL CARuS. 50¢ (2s. 6d.). 

. Psychology for Beginners. By HiraM M. STANLEY. 20C (Is.). 

. Discourse on Method. By DESCARTES. 25¢ (IS. 6d.). 

. The Dawn of a New Era. By Paut Carus. 15¢ (9d.). 

. Kant and Spencer. By PAUL CARUS. 20C (IS.). 

. The Soul of Man. By Paut Carus. 75¢ (3S. 6d.). 

. Worla’s Congress Addresses. By C.C. BONNEY. 15C (9d.). 

. The Gospel According to Darwin. By Woops HuTcHInson. 50€ (2s. 6d.) 
. Whence and Whither. By Paut Carus. 25¢ (1s. 6d.). 

. Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding. By DaviD HUME. 25¢ 


(1s. 6d.). 


THE OPEN “COURT PUBLISHING ©@,. 


CHICAGO: 324 DEARBORN STREET. 
LONDON: Kegan Paul, Trench, Triibner & Company 





Phi tS oe 











Date Due 


Library Bureau Cat. No. 1137 












Smee SN th mae 


rn 5 we 


AHA 
soe elt 


a 
: ] : . 
Paces Rath 2a 


t 
fatste 


sf 
ate 


Nietedy 
4 ithe oF 
Wee 
tee ; Reavetee tetra iat siesta of rave 
iris i < i. i - ay 


es ; 
get Hy 


. ct 


int z ia ata ao ; if . . ba bi
