THE SHIP OF FOOLS
By Sebastian Brant, 1494. Translated by Alexander Barclay (1509); edited by T. H. Jamieson (Edinburgh: William Paterson; London: Henry Sotheran, 1874). Complete in two volumes: Vol. 1 from Project Gutenberg ebook #20179, Vol. 2 from the Internet Archive scan (https://archive.org/details/shipoffools02bran).
Public domain.
From Project Gutenberg ebook #20179 (https://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/20179).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Produced by Frank van Drogen, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


Transcriber's note: A few typographical errors in the 1874 introduction
have been corrected: they are listed at the end of the text. In the spirit
of that edition, the text of the Ship of Fools itself has been retained
exactly as it stands, even to the punctuation.

[Illustration]

THE SHIP OF FOOLS

TRANSLATED BY

ALEXANDER BARCLAY

[Illustration]

VOLUME FIRST

EDINBURGH: WILLIAM PATERSON

LONDON: HENRY SOTHERAN & CO.

MDCCCLXXIV.

PREFATORY NOTE.

It is necessary to explain that in the present edition of the Ship of
Fools, with a view to both philological and bibliographical interests, the
text, even to the punctuation, has been printed exactly as it stands in the
earlier impression (Pynson's), the authenticity of which Barclay himself
thus vouches for in a deprecatory apology at the end of his labours (II.
330):--

 "... some wordes be in my boke amys
  For though that I my selfe dyd it correct
  Yet with some fautis I knowe it is infect
  Part by my owne ouersyght and neglygence
  And part by the prynters nat perfyte in science

  And other some escaped ar and past
  For that the Prynters in theyr besynes
  Do all theyr workes hedelynge, and in hast"

Yet the differences of reading of the later edition (Cawood's), are
surprisingly few and mostly unimportant, though great pains were evidently
bestowed on the production of the book, all the misprints being carefully
corrected, and the orthography duly adjusted to the fashion of the time.
These differences have, in this edition, been placed in one alphabetical
arrangement with the glossary, by which plan it is believed reference to
them will be made more easy, and much repetition avoided.

The woodcuts, no less valuable for their artistic merit than they are
interesting as pictures of contemporary manners, have been facsimiled for
the present edition from the _originals_ as they appear in the Basle
edition of the Latin, "denuo seduloque reuisa," issued under Brandt's own
superintendence in 1497. This work has been done by Mr J. T. Reid, to whom
it is due to say that he has executed it with the most painstaking and
scrupulous fidelity.

The portrait of Brandt, which forms the frontispiece to this volume, is
taken from Zarncke's edition of the Narrenschiff; that of Barclay
presenting one of his books to his patron, prefixed to the Notice of his
life, appears with a little more detail in the Mirror of Good Manners and
the Pynson editions of the Sallust; it is, however, of no authority, being
used for a similar purpose in various other publications.

For the copy of the extremely rare original edition from which the text of
the present has been printed, I am indebted to the private collection and
the well known liberality of Mr David Laing of the Signet Library, to whom
I beg here to return my best thanks, for this as well as many other
valuable favours in connection with the present work.

In prosecuting enquiries regarding the life of an author of whom so little
is known as of Barclay, one must be indebted for aid, more or less, to the
kindness of friends. In this way I have to acknowledge my obligations to Mr
Æneas Mackay, Advocate, and Mr Ralph Thomas, ("Olphar Hamst"), for searches
made in the British Museum and elsewhere.

For collations of Barclay's Works, other than the Ship of Fools, all of
which are of the utmost degree of rarity, and consequent inaccessibility, I
am indebted to the kindness of Henry Huth, Esq., 30 Princes' Gate,
Kensington; the Rev. W. D. Macray, of the Bodleian Library, Oxford; W. B.
Rye, Esq., of the British Museum; Henry Bradshaw, Esq., of the University
Library, Cambridge; and Professor Skeat, Cambridge.

For my brief notice of Brandt and his Work, it is also proper to
acknowledge my obligations to Zarncke's critical edition of the
Narrenschiff (Leipzig, 1854) which is a perfect encyclopædia of everything
Brandtian.

T. H. JAMIESON.

 ADVOCATES' LIBRARY,
  EDINBURGH, _December_ 1873.

 * * * * *


Volume I.

INTRODUCTION

NOTICE OF BARCLAY AND HIS WRITINGS

BARCLAY'S WILL

NOTES

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL CATALOGUE OF BARCLAY'S WORKS

THE SHIP OF FOOLS

 * * * * *

Volume II.

THE SHIP OF FOOLS (CONCLUDED)

GLOSSARY

CHAPTER I. OF THE ORIGINAL (GERMAN), AND OF THE LATIN, AND FRENCH VERSIONS
OF THE SHIP OF FOOLS

 * * * * *


INTRODUCTION.

If popularity be taken as the measure of success in literary effort,
Sebastian Brandt's "Ship of Fools" must be considered one of the most
successful books recorded in the whole history of literature. Published in
edition after edition (the first dated 1494), at a time, but shortly after
the invention of printing, when books were expensive, and their circulation
limited; translated into the leading languages of Europe at a time when
translations of new works were only the result of the most signal merits,
its success was then quite unparalleled. It may be said, in modern phrase,
to have been the rage of the reading world at the end of the fifteenth and
throughout the sixteenth centuries. It was translated into Latin by one
Professor (Locher, 1497), and imitated in the same language and under the
same title, by another (Badius Ascensius, 1507); it appeared in Dutch and
Low German, and was twice translated into English, and three times into
French; imitations competed with the original in French and German, as well
as Latin, and greatest and most unprecedented distinction of all, it was
preached, but, we should opine, only certain parts of it, from the pulpit
by the best preachers of the time as a new gospel. The Germans proudly
award it the epithet, "epoch-making," and its long-continued popularity
affords good, if not quite sufficient, ground for the extravagant eulogies
they lavish upon it. Trithemius calls it "Divina Satira," and doubts
whether anything could have been written more suited to the spirit of the
age; Locher compares Brandt with Dante, and Hutten styles him the new
law-giver of German poetry.

A more recent and impartial critic (Müller, "Chips from a German Workshop,"
Vol. III.), thus suggestively sets forth the varied grounds of Brandt's
wonderful popularity:--"His satires, it is true, are not very powerful, nor
pungent, nor original. But his style is free and easy. Brant is not a
ponderous poet. He writes in short chapters, and mixes his fools in such a
manner that we always meet with a variety of new faces. It is true that all
this would hardly be sufficient to secure a decided success for a work like
his at the present day. But then we must remember the time in which he
wrote.... There was room at that time for a work like the 'Ship of Fools.'
It was the first printed book that treated of contemporaneous events and
living persons, instead of old German battles and French knights. People
are always fond of reading the history of their own times. If the good
qualities of their age are brought out, they think of themselves or their
friends; if the dark features of their contemporaries are exhibited, they
think of their neighbours and enemies. Now the 'Ship of Fools' is just such
a satire which ordinary people would read, and read with pleasure. They
might feel a slight twinge now and then, but they would put down the book
at the end, and thank God that they were not like other men. There is a
chapter on Misers--and who would not gladly give a penny to a beggar? There
is a chapter on Gluttony--and who was ever more than a little exhilarated
after dinner?

There is a chapter on Church-goers--and who ever went to church for
respectability's sake, or to show off a gaudy dress, or a fine dog, or a
new hawk? There is a chapter on Dancing--and who ever danced except for the
sake of exercise? There is a chapter on Adultery--and who ever did more
than flirt with his neighbour's wife? We sometimes wish that Brant's satire
had been a little more searching, and that, instead of his many allusions
to classical fools (for his book is full of scholarship), he had given us a
little more of the _chronique scandaleuse_ of his own time. But he was too
good a man to do this, and his contemporaries were no doubt grateful to him
for his forbearance."

Brandt's satire is a satire for all time. Embodied in the language of the
fifteenth century, coloured with the habits and fashions of the times,
executed after the manner of working of the period, and motived by the
eager questioning spirit and the discontent with "abusions" and "folyes"
which resulted in the Reformation, this satire in its morals or lessons is
almost as applicable to the year of grace 1873 as to the year of
gracelessness 1497. It never can grow old; in the mirror in which the men
of his time saw themselves reflected, the men of all times can recognise
themselves; a crew of "able-bodied" is never wanting to man this old,
weather-beaten, but ever seaworthy vessel. The thoughtful, penetrating,
conscious spirit of the Basle professor passing by, for the most part,
local, temporary or indifferent points, seized upon the never-dying follies
of _human nature_ and impaled them on the printed page for the amusement,
the edification, and the warning of contemporaries and posterity alike. No
petty writer of laborious _vers de societe_ to raise a laugh for a week, a
month, or a year, and to be buried in utter oblivion for ever after, was
he, but a divine seer who saw the weakness and wickedness of the hearts of
men, and warned them to amend their ways and flee from the wrath to come.
Though but a retired student, and teacher of the canon law, a humble-minded
man of letters, and a diffident imperial Counsellor, yet is he to be
numbered among the greatest Evangelists and Reformers of mediæval Europe
whose trumpet-toned tongue penetrated into regions where the names of
Luther or Erasmus were but an empty sound, if even that. And yet, though
helping much the cause of the Reformation by the freedom of his social and
clerical criticism, by his unsparing exposure of every form of corruption
and injustice, and, not least, by his use of the vernacular for political
and religious purposes, he can scarcely be classed in the great army of the
Protestant Reformers. He was a reformer from within, a biting, unsparing
exposer of every priestly abuse, but a loyal son of the Church, who rebuked
the faults of his brethren, but visited with the pains of Hell those of
"fals herytikes," and wept over the "ruyne, inclynacion, and decay of the
holy fayth Catholyke, and dymynucion of the Empyre."

So while he was yet a reformer in the true sense of the word, he was too
much of the scholar to be anything but a true conservative. To his
scholarly habit of working, as well as to the manner of the time which
hardly trusted in the value of its own ideas but loved to lean them upon
classical authority, is no doubt owing the classical mould in which his
satire is cast. The description of every folly is strengthened by notice of
its classical or biblical prototypes, and in the margin of the Latin
edition of Locher, Brandt himself supplied the citations of the books and
passages which formed the basis of his text, which greatly added to the
popularity of the work. Brandt, indeed, with the modesty of genius,
professes that it is really no more than a collection and translation of
quotations from biblical and classical authors, "Gesamlet durch Sebastianu
Brant." But even admitting the work to be a Mosaic, to adopt the reply of
its latest German editor to the assertion that it is but a compilation
testifying to the most painstaking industry and the consumption of midnight
oil, "even so one learns that a Mosaic is a work of art when executed with
artistic skill." That he caused the classical and biblical passages
flitting before his eyes to be cited in the margin proves chiefly only the
excellence of his memory. They are also before our eyes and yet we are not
always able to answer the question: where, _e.g._, does this occur? ...
Where, _e.g._, occur the following appropriate words of Goethe: "Who can
think anything foolish, who can think anything wise, that antiquity has not
already thought of."

Of the Greek authors, Plutarch only is used, and he evidently by means of a
Latin translation. But from the Latin large draughts of inspiration are
taken, direct from the fountainhead. Ovid, Juvenal, Persius, Catullus, and
Seneca, are largely drawn from, while, strangely enough, Cicero, Boethius,
and Virgil are quoted but seldom, the latter, indeed, only twice, though
his commentators, especially Servetus, are frequently employed. The Bible,
of course, is a never-failing source of illustration, and, as was to be
expected, the Old Testament much more frequently than the New, most use
being made of the Proverbs of Solomon, while Ecclesiastes, Ecclesiasticus,
and the Sapientia follow at no great distance.

The quotations are made apparently direct from the Vulgate, in only a few
cases there being a qualification of the idea by the interpretation of the
Corpus Juris Canonici. But through this medium only, as was to be expected
of the professor of canon law, is the light of the fathers of the Church
allowed to shine upon us, and according to Zarncke (Introduction to his
edition of the Narrenschiff, 1854), use of it has certainly been made far
oftener than the commentary shows, the sources of information of which are
of the most unsatisfactory character. On such solid and tried foundations
did Brandt construct his great work, and the judgment of contemporaries and
posterity alike has declared the superstructure to be worthy of its
supports.

The following admirable notice from Ersch and Grüber (Encyclopädie) sums up
so skilfully the history, nature, and qualities of the book that we quote
at length:--"The Ship of Fools was received with almost unexampled applause
by high and low, learned and unlearned, in Germany, Switzerland, and
France, and was made the common property of the greatest part of literary
Europe, through Latin, French, English, and Dutch translations. For upwards
of a century it was in Germany a _book of the people_ in the noblest and
widest sense of the word, alike appreciated by an Erasmus and a Reuchlin,
and by the mechanics of Strassburg, Basel, and Augsburg; and it was assumed
to be so familiar to all classes, that even during Brandt's lifetime, the
German preacher Gailer von Kaiserberg went so far as to deliver public
lectures from the pulpit on his friend's poem as if it had been a
scriptural text. As to the poetical and humorous character of Brandt's
poem, its whole conception does not display any extraordinary power of
imagination, nor does it present in its details any very striking sallies
of wit and humour, even when compared with older German works of a similar
kind, such as that of Renner. The fundamental idea of the poem consists in
the shipping off of several shiploads of fools of all kinds for their
native country, which, however, is visible at a distance only; and one
would have expected the poet to have given poetical consistency to his work
by fully carrying out this idea of a ship's crew, and sailing to the 'Land
of Fools.' It is, however, at intervals only that Brandt reminds us of the
allegory; the fools who are carefully divided into classes and introduced
to us in succession, instead of being ridiculed or derided, are reproved in
a liberal spirit, with noble earnestness, true moral feeling, and practical
common sense. It was the straightforward, the bold and liberal spirit of
the poet which so powerfully addressed his contemporaries from the Ship of
the Fools; and to us it is valuable as a product of the piety and morality
of the century which paved the way for the Reformation. Brandt's fools are
represented as contemptible and loathsome rather than _foolish_, and what
he calls follies might be more correctly described as sins and vices.

"The 'Ship of Fools' is written in the dialect of Swabia, and consists of
vigorous, resonant, and rhyming iambic quadrameters. It is divided into 113
sections, each of which, with the exception of a short introduction and two
concluding pieces, treats independently of a certain class of fools or
vicious persons; and we are only occasionally reminded of the fundamental
idea by an allusion to the ship. No folly of the century is left
uncensured. The poet attacks with noble zeal the failings and extravagances
of his age, and applies his lash unsparingly even to the dreaded Hydra of
popery and monasticism, to combat which the Hercules of Wittenberg had not
yet kindled his firebrands. But the poet's object was not merely to reprove
and to animadvert; he instructs also, and shows the fools the way to the
land of wisdom; and so far is he from assuming the arrogant air of the
commonplace moralist, that he reckons himself among the number of fools.
The style of the poem is lively, bold, and simple, and often remarkably
terse, especially in his moral sayings, and renders it apparent that the
author was a classical scholar, without however losing anything of his
German character."

Brandt's humour, which either his earnestness or his manner banished from
the text, took refuge in the illustrations and there disported itself with
a wild zest and vigour. Indeed to their popularity several critics have
ascribed the success of the book, but for this there is no sufficient
authority or probability. Clever as they are, it is more probable that they
ran, in popularity, but an equal race with the text. The precise amount of
Brandt's workmanship in them has not been ascertained, but it is agreed
that "most of them, if not actually drawn, were at least suggested by him."
Zarncke remarks regarding their artistic worth, "not all of the cuts are of
equal value. One can easily distinguish five different workers, and more
practised eyes would probably be able to increase the number. In some one
can see how the outlines, heads, hands, and other principal parts are cut
with the fine stroke of the master, and the details and shading left to the
scholars. The woodcuts of the most superior master, which can be recognized
at once, and are about a third of the whole, belong to the finest, if they
are not, indeed, the finest, which were executed in the fifteenth century,
a worthy school of Holbein. According to the opinion of Herr Rudolph
Weigel, they might possibly be the work of Martin Schön of Colmar.... The
composition in the better ones is genuinely Hogarth-like, and the longer
one looks at these little pictures, the more is one astonished at the
fulness of the humour, the fineness of the characterisation and the almost
dramatic talent of the grouping." Green, in his recent work on emblems,
characterizes them as marking an epoch in that kind of literature. And
Dibdin, the Macaulay of bibliography, loses his head in admiration of the
"entertaining volume," extolling the figures without stint for "merit in
conception and execution," "bold and free pencilling," "spirit and point,"
"delicacy, truth, and force," "spirit of drollery," &c., &c.; summarising
thus, "few books are more pleasing to the eye, and more gratifying to the
fancy than the early editions of the 'Stultifera Navis.' It presents a
combination of entertainment to which the curious can never be
indifferent."

Whether it were the racy cleverness of the pictures or the unprecedented
boldness of the text, the book stirred Europe of the fifteenth century in a
way and with a rapidity it had never been stirred before. In the German
actual acquaintance with it could then be but limited, though it ran
through seventeen editions within a century; the Latin version brought it
to the knowledge of the educated class throughout Europe; but, expressing,
as it did mainly, the feelings of the common people, to have it in the
learned language was not enough. Translations into various vernaculars were
immediately called for, and the Latin edition having lightened the
translator's labours, they were speedily supplied. England, however, was
all but last in the field but when she did appear, it was in force, with a
version in each hand, the one in prose and the other in verse.

Fifteen years elapsed from the appearance of the first German edition,
before the English metrical version "translated out of Laten, French, and
Doche ... in the colege of Saynt Mary Otery, by me, Alexander Barclay," was
issued from the press of Pynson in 1509. A translation, however, it is not.
Properly speaking, it is an adaptation, an English ship, formed and
fashioned after the Ship of Fools of the World. "But concernynge the
translacion of this boke; I exhort ye reders to take no displesour for y^t,
it is nat translated word by worde acordinge to ye verses of my actour. For
I haue but only drawen into our moder tunge, in rude langage the sentences
of the verses as nere as the parcyte of my wyt wyl suffer me, some tyme
addynge, somtyme detractinge and takinge away suche thinges as semeth me
necessary and superflue. Wherfore I desyre of you reders pardon of my
presumptuous audacite, trustynge that ye shall holde me excused if ye
consyder ye scarsnes of my wyt and my vnexpert youthe. I haue in many
places ouerpassed dyuers poetical digressions and obscurenes of fables and
haue concluded my worke in rude langage as shal apere in my translacion."

"Wylling to redres the errours and vyces of this oure royalme of England
... I haue taken upon me ... the translacion of this present boke ... onely
for the holsome instruccion commodyte and doctryne of wysdome, and to
clense the vanyte and madness of folysshe people of whom ouer great nombre
is in the Royalme of Englonde."

Actuated by these patriotic motives, Barclay has, while preserving all the
valuable characteristics of his original, painted for posterity perhaps the
most graphic and comprehensive picture now preserved of the folly,
injustice, and iniquity which demoralized England, city and country alike,
at the beginning of the sixteenth century, and rendered it ripe for any
change political or religious.

 "Knowledge of trouth, prudence, and iust symplicite
  Hath vs clene left; For we set of them no store.
  Our Fayth is defyled loue, goodnes, and Pyte:
  Honest maners nowe ar reputed of: no more.
  Lawyers ar lordes; but Justice is rent and tore.
  Or closed lyke a Monster within dores thre.
  For without mede: or money no man can hyr se.

  Al is disordered: Vertue hath no rewarde.
  Alas, compassion; and mercy bothe ar slayne.
  Alas, the stony hartys of pepyl ar so harde
  That nought can constrayne theyr folyes to refrayne."

His ships are full laden but carry not all who should be on board.

 "We are full lade and yet forsoth I thynke
  A thousand are behynde, whom we may not receyue
  For if we do, our nauy clene shall synke
  He oft all lesys that coueytes all to haue
  From London Rockes Almyghty God vs saue
  For if we there anker, outher bote or barge
  There be so many that they vs wyll ouercharge."

The national tone and aim of the English "Ship" are maintained throughout
with the greatest emphasis, exhibiting an independence of spirit which few
ecclesiastics of the time would have dared to own. Barclay seems to have
been first an Englishman, then an ecclesiastic. Everywhere throughout his
great work the voice of the people is heard to rise and ring through the
long exposure of abuse and injustice, and had the authorship been unknown
it would most certainly have been ascribed to a Langlande of the period.
Everywhere he takes what we would call the popular side, the side of the
people as against those in office. Everywhere he stands up boldly in behalf
of the oppressed, and spares not the oppressor, even if he be of his own
class. He applies the cudgel as vigorously to the priest's pate as to the
Lolardes back. But he disliked modern innovation as much as ancient abuse,
in this also faithfully reflecting the mind of the people, and he is as
emphatic in his censure of the one as in his condemnation of the other.

Barclay's "Ship of Fools," however, is not only important as a picture of
the English life and popular feeling of his time, it is, both in style and
vocabulary, a most valuable and remarkable monument of the English
language. Written midway between Chaucer and Spenser, it is infinitely more
easy to read than either. Page after page, even in the antique spelling of
Pynson's edition, may be read by the ordinary reader of to-day without
reference to a dictionary, and when reference is required it will be found
in nine cases out of ten that the archaism is Saxon, not Latin. This is all
the more remarkable, that it occurs in the case of a priest translating
mainly from the Latin and French, and can only be explained with reference
to his standpoint as a social reformer of the broadest type, and to his
evident intention that his book should be an appeal to all classes, but
especially to the mass of the people, for amendment of their follies. In
evidence of this it may be noticed that in the didactic passages, and
especially in the L'envois, which are additions of his own, wherever, in
fact, he appears in his own character of "preacher," his language is most
simple, and his vocabulary of the most Saxon description.

In his prologue "excusynge the rudenes of his translacion," he professes to
have purposely used the most "comon speche":--

 "My speche is rude my termes comon and rural
  And I for rude peple moche more conuenient
  Than for estates, lerned men, or eloquent."

He afterwards humorously supplements this in "the prologe," by:--

 "But if I halt in meter or erre in eloquence
  Or be to large in langage I pray you blame not me
  For my mater is so bad it wyll none other be."

So much the better for all who are interested in studying the development
of our language and literature. For thus we have a volume, confessedly
written in the commonest language of the common people, from which the
philologist may at once see the stage at which they had arrived in the
development of a simple English speech, and how far, in this respect, the
spoken language had advanced a-head of the written; and from which also he
can judge to what extent the popularity of a book depends, when the
language is in a state of transition, upon the unusual simplicity of its
style both in structure and vocabulary, and how far it may, by reason of
its popularity, be influential in modifying and improving the language in
both these respects. In the long barren tract between Chaucer and Spenser,
the Ship of Fools stands all but alone as a popular poem, and the
continuance of this popularity for a century and more is no doubt to be
attributed as much to the use of the language of the "coming time" as to
the popularity of the subject.

In more recent times however, Barclay has, probably in part, from
accidental circumstances, come to be relegated to a position among the
English classics, those authors whom every one speaks of but few read. That
modern editions of at least his principal performance have not appeared,
can only be accounted for by the great expense attendant upon the
reproduction of so uniquely illustrated a work, an interesting proof of
which, given in the evidence before the Select Committee of the House of
Commons on the Copyright act in 1818, is worth quoting. Amongst new
editions of standard but costly works, of which the tax then imposed by the
act upon publishers of giving eleven copies of all their publications free
to certain libraries prevented the publication, is mentioned, Barclay's
"Ship of Fools;" regarding which Harding, the well known bookseller, is
reported to have said, "We have declined republishing the 'Ship of Fools,'
a folio volume of great rarity and high price. Our probable demand would
not have been more than for a hundred copies, at the price of 12 guineas
each. The delivery of eleven copies to the public libraries decided us
against entering into the speculation."

A wider and more eager interest is now being manifested in our early
literature, and especially in our early popular poetry, to the satisfaction
of which, it is believed, a new edition of this book will be regarded as a
most valuable contribution. Indeed, as a graphic and comprehensive picture
of the social condition of pre-Reformation England; as an important
influence in the formation of our modern English tongue; and as a rich and
unique exhibition of early art, to all of which subjects special attention
is being at present directed, this mediæval picture-poem is of unrivalled
interest.

 * * * * *


NOTICE

OF THE

_Life and Writings of Alexander Barclay_,

THE TRANSLATOR OF BRANDT'S SHIP OF FOOLS.

 * * * * *


ALEXANDER BARCLAY.

Whether this distinguished poet was an Englishman or a Scotchman has long
been a _quæstio vexata_ affording the literary antiquary a suitable field
for the display of his characteristic amenity. Bale, the oldest authority,
simply says that some contend he was a Scot, others an Englishman, (Script.
Illust. Majoris Britt. Catalogus, 1559). Pits (De Illust. Angliæ Script.,)
asserts that though to some he appears to have been a Scot, he was really
an Englishman, and probably a native of Devonshire, ("_nam_ ibi ad S.
Mariam de Otery, Presbyter primum fuit"). Wood again, (Athen. Oxon.), by
the reasoning which finds a likeness between Macedon and Monmouth, because
there is a river in each, arrives at "Alexander de Barklay, seems to have
been born at or near a town so called in Somersetshire;" upon which Ritson
pertinently observes, "there is no such place in Somersetshire, the onely
Berkeley known is in Gloucestershire." Warton, coming to the question
double-shotted, observes that "he was most probably of Devonshire or
Gloucestershire," in the one case following Pits, and in the other
anticipating Ritson's observation.

On the other hand Bale, in an earlier work than the _Catalogus_, the
_Summarium Ill. Maj. Britt. Script._, published in 1548, during Barclay's
life time, adorns him with the epithets "Scotus, rhetor ac poeta insignis."
Dempster (Hist. ecclesiastica), styles him "Scotus, ut retulit ipse Joannes
Pitsæus." Holinshed also styles him "Scot"! Sibbald gives him a place in
his (MS.) Catalogues of Scottish poets, as does also Wodrow in his
Catalogues of Scots writers. Mackenzie (Lives of the Scots writers) begins,
"The Barklies, from whom this gentleman is descended, are of a very ancient
standing in Scotland." Ritson (Bib. Poetica), after a caustic review of the
controversy, observes "both his name of baptism and the orthography of his
surname seem to prove that he was of Scottish extraction." Bliss (Additions
to Wood) is of opinion that he "undoubtedly was not a native of England,"
and Dr Irving (Hist. of Scot. Poetry) adheres to the opinion of Ritson.

Such contention, whatever may be the weight of the evidence on either side,
is at any rate a sufficient proof of the eminence of the individual who is
the subject of it; to be his birthplace being considered an honour of so
much value to the country able to prove its claim to the distinction as to
occasion a literary warfare of several centuries' duration.

We cannot profess to have brought such reinforcements to either side as to
obtain for it a complete and decisive victory, but their number and
character are such as will probably induce one of the combatants quietly to
retire from the field. In the first place, a more explicit and
unimpeachable piece of evidence than any contained in the authors mentioned
above has been found, strangely enough, in a medical treatise, published
about twenty years after Barclay's death, by a physician and botanist of
great eminence in the middle of the sixteenth century, who was a native of
the isle of Ely, at the Monastery of which Barclay was for some time a
monk.

It is entitled "A dialogue both pleasaunt and pietifull, wherein is a
godlie regiment against the Fever Pestilence, with a consolation and
comforte against death.--Newlie corrected by William Bullein, the author
thereof.--Imprinted at London by Ihon Kingston. Julij, 1573." [8vo., B.L.,
111 leaves.] "There was an earlier impression of this work in 1564, but the
edition of 1573 was 'corrected by the author,' the last work on which he
probably was engaged, as he died in 1576. It is of no value at this time of
day as a medical treatise, though the author was very eminent; but we
advert to it because Bullein, for the sake of variety and amusement,
introduces notices of Chaucer, Gower, Lidgate, Skelton, and Barclay, which,
coming from a man who was contemporary with two of them, may be accepted as
generally accurate representations.... Alexander Barclay, Dr Bullein calls
Bartlet, in the irregular spelling of those times; and, asserting that he
was 'born beyond the cold river of Tweed,' we see no sufficient reason for
disbelieving that he was a native of Scotland. Barclay, after writing his
pastorals, &c., did not die until 1552, so that Bullein was his
contemporary, and most likely knew him and the fact. He observes:--'Then
Bartlet, with an hoopyng russet long coate, with a pretie hoode in his
necke, and five knottes upon his girdle, after Francis tricks. He was borne
beyonde the cold river of Twede. He lodged upon a swete bed of chamomill,
under the sinamum tree; about hym many shepherdes and shepe, with
pleasaunte pipes; greatly abhorring the life of Courtiers, Citizens,
Usurers, and Banckruptes, &c., whose olde daies are miserable. And the
estate of shepherdes and countrie people he accoumpted moste happie and
sure." (Collier's "Bibliographical Account of Early English Literature,"
Vol. 1., P. 97).

"The certainty with which Bulleyn here speaks of Barclay, as born beyond
the Tweed, is not a little strengthened by the accuracy with which even in
allegory he delineates his peculiar characteristics. 'He lodged upon a bed
of sweet camomile.' What figure could have been more descriptive of that
agreeable bitterness, that pleasant irony, which distinguishes the author
of the 'Ship of Fools?' 'About him many shepherds and sheep with pleasant
pipes, greatly abhorring the life of courtiers.' What could have been a
plainer paraphrase of the title of Barclay's 'Eclogues,' or 'Miseries of
Courtiers and Courtes, and of all Princes in General.' As a minor feature,
'the five knots upon his girdle after Francis's tricks' may also be
noticed. Hitherto, the fact of Barclay having been a member of the
Franciscan order has been always repeated as a matter of some doubt; 'he
was a monk of the order of St Benedict, and afterwards, as some say, a
Franciscan. Bulleyn knows, and mentions, with certainty, what others only
speak of as the merest conjecture. In short, everything tends to shew a
degree of familiar acquaintance with the man, his habits, and his
productions, which entitles the testimony of Bulleyn to the highest
credit.'" (Lives of the Scottish Poets, Vol. I., pt. ii., p. 77).

But there are other proofs pointing as decidedly to the determination of
this long-continued controversy in favour of Scotland, as the soil from
which this vagrant child of the muses sprung. No evidence seems to have
been hitherto sought from the most obvious source, his writings. The writer
of the memoir in the Biographia Brittanica, (who certainly dealt a
well-aimed, though by no means decisive, blow, in observing, "It is pretty
extraordinary that Barclay himself, in his several addresses to his patrons
should never take notice of his being a stranger, which would have made
their kindness to him the more remarkable [it was very customary for the
writers of that age to make mention in their works of the countries to
which they belonged, especially if they wrote out of their own];[1] whereas
the reader will quickly see, that in his address to the young gentlemen of
England in the 'Mirror of Good Manners,' he treats them as his
countrymen,") has remarked, "It seems a little strange that in those days a
Scot should obtain so great reputation in England, especially if it be
considered from whence our author's rose, viz., from his enriching and
improving the English tongue. Had he written in Latin or on the sciences,
the thing had been probable enough, but in the light in which it now
stands, I think it very far from likely." From which it is evident that the
biographer understood not the versatile nature of the Scot and his ability,
especially when caught young, in "doing in Rome as the Romans do."
Barclay's English education and foreign travel, together extending over the
most impressionable years of his youth, could not have failed to rub off
any obvious national peculiarities of speech acquired in early boyhood, had
the difference between the English and Scottish speech then been wider than
it was. But the language of Barbour and Chaucer was really one and the
same. It will then not be wondered at that but few Scotch words are found
in Barclay's writings. Still, these few are not without their importance in
strengthening the argument as to nationality. The following from "The Ship
of Fools," indicate at once the clime to which they are native, "gree,"
"kest," "rawky," "ryue," "yate," "bokest," "bydeth," "thekt," and "or," in
its peculiar Scottish use.[2] That any Englishman, especially a South or
West of England Englishman, should use words such as those, particularly at
a time of hostility and of little intercourse between the nations, will
surely be admitted to be a far more unlikely thing than that a Scotchman
born, though not bred, should become, after the effects of an English
education and residence had efficiently done their work upon him, a great
improver and enricher of the English tongue.

But perhaps the strongest and most decisive argument of all in this
much-vexed controversy is to be found in the panegyric of James the Fourth
contained in the "Ship of Fools," an eulogy so highly pitched and
extravagant that no Englishman of that time would ever have dreamed of it
or dared to pen it. Nothing could well be more conclusive. Barclay precedes
it by a long and high-flown tribute to Henry, but when he comes to "Jamys
of Scotlonde," he, so to speak, out-Herods Herod. Ordinary verse suffices
not for the greatness of his subject, which he must needs honour with an
acrostic,--

 "I n prudence pereles is this moste comely kynge
  A nd as for his strength and magnanymyte
  C oncernynge his noble dedes in euery thynge
  O ne founde or grounde lyke to hym can not be
  B y byrth borne to boldnes and audacyte
  V nder the bolde planet of Mars the champyon
  S urely to subdue his ennemyes echone."

There, we are convinced, speaks not the prejudiced, Scot-hating English
critic, but the heart beating true to its fatherland and loyal to its
native Sovereign.

That "he was born beyonde the cold river of Twede," about the year 1476, as
shall be shown anon, is however all the length we can go. His training was
without doubt mainly, if not entirely English. He must have crossed the
border very early in life, probably for the purpose of pursuing his
education at one of the Universities, or, even earlier than the period of
his University career, with parents or guardians to reside in the
neighbourhood of Croydon, to which he frequently refers. Croydon is
mentioned in the following passages in Eclogue I.:

 "While I in youth in Croidon towne did dwell."

 "He hath no felowe betwene this and Croidon,
  Save the proude plowman Gnatho of Chorlington."

 "And as in Croidon I heard the Collier preache"

 "Such maner riches the Collier tell thee can"

 "As the riche Shepheard that woned in Mortlake."

It seems to have become a second home to him, for there, we find, in 1552,
he died and was buried.

At which University he studied, whether Oxford or Cambridge, is also a
matter of doubt and controversy. Wood claims him for Oxford and Oriel,
apparently on no other ground than that he dedicates the "Ship of Fools" to
Thomas Cornish, the Suffragan bishop of Tyne, in the Diocese of Bath and
Wells, who was provost of Oriel College from 1493 to 1507. That the Bishop
was the first to give him an appointment in the Church is certainly a
circumstance of considerable weight in favour of the claim of Oxford to be
his _alma mater_, and of Cornish to be his intellectual father; and if the
appointment proceeded from the Provost's good opinion of the young
Scotchman, then it says much for the ability and talents displayed by him
during his College career. Oxford however appears to be nowhere mentioned
in his various writings, while Cambridge is introduced thus in Eclogue
I.:--

 "And once in Cambridge I heard a scoller say."

From which it seems equally, if not more, probable that he was a student at
that university. "There is reason to believe that both the universities
were frequented by Scotish students; many particular names are to be traced
in their annals; nor is it altogether irrelevant to mention that Chaucer's
young clerks of Cambridge who played such tricks to the miller of
Trompington, are described as coming from the north, and as speaking the
Scotish language:--

 'John highte that on, and Alein highte that other,
  Of o toun were they born that highte Strother,
  Fer in the North, I cannot tellen where.'

"It may be considered as highly probable that Barclay completed his studies
in one of those universities, and that the connections which he thus had an
opportunity of forming, induced him to fix his residence in the South; and
when we suppose him to have enjoyed the benefit of an English education it
need not appear peculiarly 'strange, that in those days, a Scot should
obtain so great reputation in England.'" (Irving, Hist. of Scot. Poetry).

In the "Ship" there is a chapter "Of unprofytable Stody" in which he makes
allusion to his student life in such a way as to imply that it had not been
a model of regularity and propriety:

 "The great foly, the pryde, and the enormyte
  Of our studentis, and theyr obstynate errour
  Causeth me to wryte two sentences or thre
  More than I fynde wrytyn in myne actoure
  The tyme hath ben whan I was conductoure
  Of moche foly, whiche nowe my mynde doth greue
  Wherfor of this shyp syns I am gouernoure
  I dare be bolde myne owne vyce to repreue."

If these lines are meant to be accepted literally, which such confessions
seldom are, it may be that he was advised to put a year or two's foreign
travel between his University career, and his entrance into the Church. At
any rate, for whatever reason, on leaving the University, where, as is
indicated by the title of "Syr" prefixed to his name in his translation of
Sallust, he had obtained the degree of Bachelor of Arts, he travelled
abroad, whether at his own charges, or in the company of a son of one of
his patrons is not recorded, principally in Germany, Italy, and France,
where he applied himself, with an unusual assiduity and success, to the
acquirement of the languages spoken in those countries and to the study of
their best authors. In the chapter "Of unprofytable Stody," above
mentioned, which contains proof how well he at least had profited by study,
he cites certain continental seats of university learning at each of which,
there is indeed no improbability in supposing he may have remained for some
time, as was the custom in those days:

 "One rennyth to Almayne another vnto France
  To Parys, Padway, Lumbardy or Spayne
  Another to Bonony, Rome, or Orleanse
  To Cayne, to Tolows, Athenys, or Colayne."

Another reference to his travels and mode of travelling is found in the
Eclogues. Whether he made himself acquainted with the English towns he
enumerates before or after his continental travels it is impossible to
determine:

 CORNIX.

 "As if diuers wayes laye vnto Islington,
  To Stow on the Wold, Quaueneth or Trompington,
  To Douer, Durham, to Barwike or Exeter,
  To Grantham, Totnes, Bristow or good Manchester,
  To Roan, Paris, to Lions or Floraunce.

 CORIDON.

  (What ho man abide, what already in Fraunce,
  Lo, a fayre iourney and shortly ended to,
  With all these townes what thing haue we to do?

 CORNIX.

  By Gad man knowe thou that I haue had to do
  In all these townes and yet in many mo,
  To see the worlde in youth me thought was best,
  And after in age to geue my selfe to rest.

 CORIDON.

  Thou might haue brought one and set by our village.

 CORNIX.

  What man I might not for lacke of cariage.
  To cary mine owne selfe was all that euer I might,
  And sometime for ease my sachell made I light."
 ECLOGUE I.

Returning to England, after some years of residence abroad, with his mind
broadened and strengthened by foreign travel, and by the study of the best
authors, modern as well as ancient, Barclay entered the church, the only
career then open to a man of his training. With intellect, accomplishments,
and energy possessed by few, his progress to distinction and power ought to
have been easy and rapid, but it turned out quite otherwise. The road to
eminence lay by the "backstairs," the atmosphere of which he could not
endure. The ways of courtiers--falsehood, flattery, and fawning--he
detested, and worse, he said so, wherefore his learning, wit and eloquence
found but small reward. To his freedom of speech, his unsparing exposure
and denunciation of corruption and vice in the Court and the Church, as
well as among the people generally, must undoubtedly be attributed the
failure to obtain that high promotion his talents deserved, and would
otherwise have met with. The policy, not always a successful one in the
end, of ignoring an inconvenient display of talent, appears to have been
fully carried out in the instance of Barclay.

His first preferment appears to have been in the shape of a chaplainship in
the sanctuary for piety and learning founded at Saint Mary Otery in the
County of Devon, by Grandison, Bishop of Exeter; and to have come from
Thomas Cornish, Suffragan Bishop of Bath and Wells under the title of the
Bishop of Tyne, "meorum primitias laborum qui in lucem eruperunt," to whom,
doubtless out of gratitude for his first appointment, he dedicated "The
Ship of Fools." Cornish, amongst the many other good things he enjoyed,
held, according to Dugdale, from 1490 to 1511, the post of warden of the
College of S. Mary Otery, where Barclay no doubt had formed that regard and
respect for him which is so strongly expressed in the dedication.

A very eulogistic notice of "My Mayster Kyrkham," in the chapter "Of the
extorcion of Knyghtis," (Ship of Fools,) has misled biographers, who were
ignorant of Cornish's connection with S. Mary Otery, to imagine that
Barclay's use of "Capellanus humilimus" in his dedication was merely a
polite expression, and that Kyrkham, of whom he styles himself, "His true
seruytour his chaplayne and bedeman" was his actual ecclesiastical
superior. The following is the whole passage:--

 "Good offycers ar good and commendable
  And manly knyghtes that lyue in rightwysenes
  But they that do nat ar worthy of a bable
  Syns by theyr pryde pore people they oppres
  My mayster Kyrkhan for his perfyte mekenes
  And supportacion of men in pouertye
  Out of my shyp shall worthely be fre

  I flater nat I am his true seruytour
  His chaplayne and his bede man whyle my lyfe shall endure
  Requyrynge God to exalt hym to honour
  And of his Prynces fauour to be sure
  For as I haue sayd I knowe no creature
  More manly rightwyse wyse discrete and sad
  But thoughe he be good, yet other ar als bad."

That this Kyrkham was a knight and not an ecclesiastic is so plainly
apparent as to need no argument. An investigation into Devonshire history
affords the interesting information that among the ancient families of that
county there was one of this name, of great antiquity and repute, now no
longer existent, of which the most eminent member was a certain Sir John
Kirkham, whose popularity is evinced by his having been twice created High
Sheriff of the County, in the years 1507 and 1523. (Prince, Worthies of
Devon; Izacke, Antiquities of Exeter.)

That this was the Kirkham above alluded to, there can be no reasonable
doubt, and in view of the expression "My mayster Kyrkham," it may be
surmised that Barclay had the honour of being appointed by this worthy
gentleman to the office of Sheriff's or private Chaplain or to some similar
position of confidence, by which he gained the poet's respect and
gratitude. The whole allusion, however, might, without straining be
regarded as a merely complimentary one. The tone of the passage affords at
any rate a very pleasing glimpse of the mutual regard entertained by the
poet and his Devonshire neighbours.

After the eulogy of Kyrkham ending with "Yet other ar als bad," the poet
goes on immediately to give the picture of a character of the opposite
description, making the only severe personal reference in his whole
writings, for with all his unsparing exposure of wrong-doing, he carefully,
wisely, honourably avoided personality. A certain Mansell of Otery is
gibbeted as a terror to evil doers in a way which would form a sufficient
ground for an action for libel in these degenerate days.--Ship, II. 82.

 "Mansell of Otery for powlynge of the pore
  Were nat his great wombe, here sholde haue an ore

  But for his body is so great and corporate
  And so many burdens his brode backe doth charge
  If his great burthen cause hym to come to late
  Yet shall the knaue be Captayne of a barge
  Where as ar bawdes and so sayle out at large
  About our shyp to spye about for prayes
  For therupon hath he lyued all his dayes."

It ought however to be mentioned that no such name as Mansell appears in
the Devonshire histories, and it may therefore be fictitious.

The ignorance and reckless living of the clergy, one of the chief objects
of his animadversion, receive also local illustration:

 "For if one can flater, and beare a Hauke on his fist,
  He shalbe made parson of Honington or Clist."

A good humoured reference to the Secondaries of the College is the only
other streak of local colouring we have detected in the Ship, except the
passage in praise of his friend and colleague Bishop, quoted at p. liii.

 "Softe, fooles, softe, a little slacke your pace,
  Till I haue space you to order by degree,
  I haue eyght neyghbours, that first shall haue a place
  Within this my ship, for they most worthy be,
  They may their learning receyue costles and free,
  Their walles abutting and ioyning to the scholes;
  Nothing they can, yet nought will they learne nor see,
  Therfore shall they guide this our ship of fooles."

In the comfort, quiet, and seclusion of the pleasant Devonshire retreat,
the "Ship" was translated in the year 1508, when he would be about
thirty-two, "by Alexander Barclay Preste; and at that tyme chaplen in the
sayde College," whence it may be inferred that he left Devon, either in
that year or the year following, when the "Ship" was published, probably
proceeding to London for the purpose of seeing it through the press.
Whether he returned to Devonshire we do not know; probably not, for his
patron and friend Cornish resigned the wardenship of St Mary Otery in 1511,
and in two years after died, so that Barclay's ties and hopes in the West
were at an end. At any rate we next hear of him in monastic orders, a monk
of the order of S. Benedict, in the famous monastery of Ely, where, as is
evident from internal proof, the Eclogues were written and where likewise,
as appears from the title, was translated "The mirrour of good maners," at
the desire of Syr Giles Alington, Knight.

It is about this period of his life, probably the period of the full bloom
of his popularity, that the quiet life of the poet and priest was
interrupted by the recognition of his eminence in the highest quarters, and
by a request for his aid in maintaining the honour of the country on an
occasion to which the eyes of all Europe were then directed. In a letter of
Sir Nicholas Vaux, busied with the preparations for the meeting of Henry
VIII., and Francis I., called the Field of the Cloth of Gold, to Wolsey, of
date 10th April 1520, he begs the cardinal to "send to them ... Maistre
Barkleye, the Black Monke and Poete, to devise histoires and convenient
raisons to florisshe the buildings and banquet house withal" (Rolls
Calendars of Letters and Papers, Henry VIII., III. pt. 1.). No doubt it was
also thought that this would be an excellent opportunity for the eulogist
of the Defender of the Faith to again take up the lyre to sing the glories
of his royal master, but no effort of his muse on the subject of this great
chivalric pageant has descended to us if any were ever penned.

Probably after this employment he did not return to Ely; with his position
or surroundings there he does not seem to have been altogether satisfied
("there many a thing is wrong," see p. lxix.); and afterwards, though in
the matter of date we are somewhat puzzled by the allusion of Bulleyn, an
Ely man, to his Franciscan habit, he assumed the habit of the Franciscans
at Canterbury, ('Bale MS. Sloan, f. 68,') to which change we may owe, if it
be really Barclay's, "The life of St Thomas of Canterbury."

Autumn had now come to the poet, but fruit had failed him. The advance of
age and his failure to obtain a suitable position in the Church began
gradually to weigh upon his spirits. The bright hopes with which he had
started in the flush of youth, the position he was to obtain, the influence
he was to wield, and the work he was to do personally, and by his writings,
in the field of moral and social reformation were all in sad contrast with
the actualities around. He had never risen from the ranks, the army was in
a state of disorganisation, almost of mutiny, and the enemy was more bold,
unscrupulous, and numerous than ever. It is scarcely to be wondered at
that, though not past fifty, he felt prematurely aged, that his youthful
enthusiasm which had carried him on bravely in many an attempt to instruct
and benefit his fellows at length forsook him and left him a prey to that
weakness of body, and that hopelessness of spirit to which he so
pathetically alludes in the Prologue to the Mirror of good Manners. All his
best work, all the work which has survived to our day, was executed before
this date. But the pen was too familiar to his hand to be allowed to drop.
His biographers tell us "that when years came on he spent his time mostly
in pious matters, and in reading and writing histories of the Saints." A
goodly picture of a well-spent old age. The harness of youth he had no
longer the spirit and strength to don, the garments of age he gathered
resignedly and gracefully about him.

On the violent dissolution of the Monasteries in 1539, when their inmates,
the good and bad, the men of wisdom and the "fools," were alike cast adrift
upon a rock-bound and stormy coast, the value of the patronage which his
literary and personal popularity had brought him, was put to the test, and
in the end successfully, though after considerable, but perhaps not to be
wondered at, delay. His great patrons, the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Kent, Bishop Cornish, and probably also Sir Giles Alington, were all dead,
and he had to rely on newer and necessarily weaker ties. But after waiting,
till probably somewhat dispirited, fortune smiled at last. Two handsome
livings were presented to him in the same year, both of which he apparently
held at the same time, the vicarage of Much Badew in Essex, by the
presentation of Mr John Pascal, to which he was instituted on February 7th,
1546, holding it (according to the Lansdowne MS. (980 f. 101), in the
British Museum) till his death; and the vicarage of S. Mathew at Wokey, in
Somerset, on March 30th of the same year. Wood dignifies him with the
degree of doctor of divinity at the time of his presentation to these
preferments.

That he seems to have accepted quietly the gradual progress of the reformed
religion during the reign of Edward VI., has been a cause of wonder to
some. It would certainly have been astonishing had one who was so unsparing
in his exposure of the flagrant abuses of the Romish Church done otherwise.
Though personally disinclined to radical changes his writings amply show
his deep dissatisfaction with things as they were. This renders the more
improbable the honours assigned him by Wadding (Scriptores Ordinis Minorum,
1806, p. 5), who promotes him to be Suffragan Bishop of Bath and Wells, and
Bale, who, in a slanderous anecdote, the locale of which is also Wells,
speaks of him as a chaplain of Queen Mary's, though Mary did not ascend the
throne till the year after his death. As these statements are nowhere
confirmed, it is not improbable that their authors have fallen into error
by confounding the poet Barclay, with a Gilbert Berkeley, who became Bishop
of Bath and Wells in 1559. One more undoubted, but tardy, piece of
preferment was awarded him which may be regarded as an honour of some
significance. On the 30th April 1552, the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury,
London, presented him to the Rectory of All Hallows, Lombard Street, but
the well-deserved promotion came too late to be enjoyed. A few weeks after,
and before the 10th June, at which date his will was proved, he died, as
his biographers say, "at a very advanced age;" at the good old age of
seventy-six, as shall be shown presently, at Croydon where he had passed
his youth, and there in the Church he was buried. "June 10th 1552,
Alexander Barkley sepult," (Extract from the Parish Register, in Lyson's
Environs of London).

A copy of his will, an extremely interesting and instructive document, has
been obtained from Doctors' Commons, and will be found appended. It bears
in all its details those traits of character which, from all that we
otherwise know, we are led to associate with him. In it we see the earnest,
conscientious minister whose first thought is of the poor, the loyal
churchman liberal in his support of the house of God, the kind relative in
his numerous and considerate bequests to his kith and kin, the amiable,
much loved man in the gifts of remembrance to his many friends, and the
pious Christian in his wishes for the prayers of his survivors "to
Almightie God for remission of my synnes, and mercy upon my soule."

Barclay's career and character, both as a churchman and a man of letters,
deserve attention and respect from every student of our early history and
literature. In the former capacity he showed himself diligent, honest, and
anxious, at a time when these qualities seemed to have been so entirely
lost to the church as to form only a subject for clerical ridicule. In the
latter, the same qualities are also prominent, diligence, honesty, bold
outspokenness, an ardent desire for the pure, the true, and the natural,
and an undisguised enmity to everything false, self-seeking, and vile.
Everything he did was done in a pure way, and to a worthy end.

Bale stands alone in casting aspersions upon his moral character,
asserting, as Ritson puts it, "in his bigoted and foul-mouthed way," that
"he continued a hater of truth, and under the disguise of celibacy a filthy
adulterer to the last;" and in his Declaration of Bonner's articles (1561,
fol. 81), he condescends to an instance to the effect that "Doctoure
Barkleye hadde greate harme ones of suche a visitacion, at Wellys, before
he was Quene Maryes Chaplayne. For the woman whome he so religiouslye
visited did light him of all that he had, sauinge his workinge tolas. For
the whiche acte he had her in prison, and yet coulde nothing recouer
againe." Whether this story be true of any one is perhaps doubtful, and, if
true of a Barclay, we are convinced that he is not our author. It may have
arisen as we have seen from a mistake as to identity. But apart from the
question of identity, we have nothing in support of the slander but Bale's
"foul-mouthed" assertion, while against it we have the whole tenor and aim
of Barclay's published writings. Everywhere he inculcates the highest and
purest morality, and where even for that purpose he might be led into
descriptions of vice, his disgust carries him past what most others would
have felt themselves justified in dealing with. For example, in the chapter
of "Disgysyd folys" he expressly passes over as lightly as possible what
might to others have proved a tempting subject:

 "They disceyue myndes chaste and innocent
  With dyuers wayes whiche I wyll nat expres
  Lyst that whyle I labour this cursyd gyse to stynt
  I myght to them mynyster example of lewdnes
  And therfore in this part I shall say les
  Than doth my actour."

Elsewhere he declares:

 "for my boke certaynly
  I haue compyled: for vertue and goodnes
  And to reuyle foule synne and vyciousnes"

But citation is needless; there is not a page of his writings which will
not supply similar evidence, and our great early moralist may, we think, be
dismissed from Court without a stain on his character.

Indeed to his high pitched morality, he doubtless owed in some degree the
great and extended popularity of his poetical writings in former times and
their neglect in later. Sermons and "good" books were not yet in the
sixteenth century an extensive branch of literature, and "good" people
could without remorse of conscience vary their limited theological reading
by frowning over the improprieties and sins of their neighbours as depicted
in the "Ship," and joining, with a serious headshaking heartiness, in the
admonitions of the translator to amendment, or they might feel
"strengthened" by a glance into the "Mirrour of good Maners," or edified by
hearing of the "Miseryes of Courtiers and Courtes of all princes in
generall," as told in the "Eclogues."

Certain it is that these writings owed little of their acceptance to
touches of humour or satire, to the gifts of a poetical imagination, or the
grace of a polished diction. The indignation of the honest man and the
earnestness of the moralist waited not for gifts and graces. Everything
went down, hard, rough, even uncouth as it stood, of course gaining in
truth and in graphic power what it wants in elegance. Still, with no
refinement, polish or elaboration, there are many picturesque passages
scattered throughout these works which no amount of polishing could have
improved. How could a man in a rage be better touched off than thus ("Ship"
I. 182, 15).

 "This man malycious whiche troubled is with wrath
  Nought els soundeth but the hoorse letter R."

The passion of love is so graphically described that it is difficult to
imagine our priestly moralist a total stranger to its power, (I. 81).

 "For he that loueth is voyde of all reason
  Wandrynge in the worlde without lawe or mesure
  In thought and fere sore vexed eche season
  And greuous dolours in loue he must endure
  No creature hym selfe, may well assure
  From loues soft dartis: I say none on the grounde
  But mad and folysshe bydes he whiche hath the wounde

  Aye rennynge as franatyke no reason in his mynde
  He hath no constaunce nor ease within his herte
  His iyen ar blynde, his wyll alwaye inclyned
  To louys preceptes yet can nat he departe
  The Net is stronge, the sole caught can nat starte
  The darte is sharpe, who euer is in the chayne
  Can nat his sorowe in vysage hyde nor fayne"

For expressive, happy simile, the two following examples are capital:--

 "Yet sometimes riches is geuen by some chance
  To such as of good haue greatest aboundaunce.
  Likewise as streames unto the sea do glide.
  But on bare hills no water will abide.
 . . . . . .
  So smallest persons haue small rewarde alway
  But men of worship set in authoritie
  Must haue rewardes great after their degree."--ECLOGUE I.

 "And so such thinges which princes to thee geue
  To thee be as sure as water in a siue
 . . . . . . .
  So princes are wont with riches some to fede
  As we do our swine when we of larde haue nede
  We fede our hogges them after to deuour
  When they be fatted by costes and labour."--ECLOGUE I.

The everlasting conceit of musical humanity is very truthfully hit off.

 "This is of singers the very propertie
  Alway they coueyt desired for to be
  And when their frendes would heare of their cunning
  Then are they neuer disposed for to sing,
  But if they begin desired of no man
  Then shewe they all and more then they can
  And neuer leaue they till men of them be wery,
  So in their conceyt their cunning they set by."--ECLOGUE II.

Pithy sayings are numerous. Comparing citizens with countrymen, the
countryman says:--

 "Fortune to them is like a mother dere
  As a stepmother she doth to us appeare."

Of money:

 "Coyne more than cunning exalteth every man."

Of clothing:

 "It is not clothing can make a man be good
  Better is in ragges pure liuing innocent
  Than a soule defiled in sumptuous garment."

It is as the graphic delineator of the life and condition of the country in
his period that the chief interest of Barclay's writings, and especially of
the "Ship of Fools," now lies. Nowhere so accessibly, so fully, and so
truthfully will be found the state of Henry the Eighth's England set forth.
Every line bears the character of truthfulness, written as it evidently is,
in all the soberness of sadness, by one who had no occasion to exaggerate,
whose only object and desire was, by massing together and describing
faithfully the follies and abuses which were evident to all, to shame every
class into some degree of moral reformation, and, in particular, to effect
some amelioration of circumstances to the suffering poor.

And a sad picture it is which we thus obtain of merrie England in the good
old times of bluff King Hal, wanting altogether in the _couleur de rose_
with which it is tinted by its latest historian Mr Froude, who is ably
taken to task on this subject by a recent writer in the Westminster Review,
whose conclusions, formed upon other evidence than Barclay's, express so
fairly the impression left by a perusal of the "Ship of Fools," and the
Eclogues, that we quote them here. "Mr Froude remarks: 'Looking therefore,
at the state of England as a whole, I cannot doubt that under Henry the
body of the people were prosperous, well-fed, loyal, and contented. In all
points of material comfort, they were as well off as ever they had been
before; better off than they have ever been in later times.' In this
estimate we cannot agree. Rather we should say that during, and for long
after, this reign, the people were in the most deplorable condition of
poverty and misery of every kind. That they were ill-fed, that loyalty was
at its lowest ebb, that discontent was rife throughout the land. 'In all
points of material comfort,' we think they were worse off than they had
ever been before, and infinitely worse off than they have ever been since
the close of the sixteenth century,--a century in which the cup of
England's woes was surely fuller than it has ever been since, or will, we
trust, ever be again. It was the century in which this country and its
people passed through a baptism of blood as well as 'a baptism of fire,'
and out of which they came holier and better. The epitaph which should be
inscribed over the century is contained in a sentence written by the famous
Acham in 1547:--'Nam vita, quæ nunc vivitur a plurimis, non vita sed
miseria est.'" So, Bradford (Sermon on Repentance, 1533) sums up
contemporary opinion in a single weighty sentence: "All men may see if they
will that the whoredom pride, unmercifulness, and tyranny of England far
surpasses any age that ever was before." Every page of Barclay corroborates
these accounts of tyranny, injustice, immorality, wretchedness, poverty,
and general discontent.

Not only in fact and feeling are Barclay's Ship of Fools and Eclogues
thoroughly expressive of the unhappy, discontented, poverty-stricken,
priest-ridden, and court-ridden condition and life, the bitter sorrows and
the humble wishes of the people, their very texture, as Barclay himself
tells us, consists of the commonest language of the day, and in it are
interwoven many of the current popular proverbs and expressions. Almost all
of these are still "household words" though few ever imagine the garb of
their "daily wisdom" to be of such venerable antiquity. Every page of the
"Eclogues" abounds with them; in the "Ship" they are less common, but still
by no means infrequent. We have for instance:--

 "Better is a frende in courte than a peny in purse"--(I. 70.)
 "Whan the stede is stolyn to shyt the stable dore"--(I. 76.)
 "It goeth through as water through a syue."--(I. 245.)
 "And he that alway thretenyth for to fyght
  Oft at the prose is skantly worth a hen
  For greattest crakers ar nat ay boldest men."--(I. 198.)
 "I fynde foure thynges whiche by no meanes can
  Be kept close, in secrete, or longe in preuetee
  The firste is the counsell of a wytles man
  The seconde is a cyte whiche byldyd is a hye
  Upon a montayne the thyrde we often se
  That to hyde his dedes a louer hath no skyll
  The fourth is strawe or fethers on a wyndy hyll."--(I. 199.)
 "A crowe to pull."--(II. 8.)
 "For it is a prouerbe, and an olde sayd sawe
  That in euery place lyke to lyke wyll drawe."--(II. 35.)
 "Better haue one birde sure within thy wall
  Or fast in a cage than twenty score without"--(II. 74)
 "Gapynge as it were dogges for a bone."--(II. 93.)
 "Pryde sholde haue a fall."--(II. 161).
 "For wyse men sayth ...
  One myshap fortuneth neuer alone."
 "Clawe where it itchyth."--(II. 256.) [The use of this, it occurs again in
 the Eclogues, might be regarded by some of our Southern friends, as
 itself a sufficient proof of the author's Northern origin.]

The following are selected from the Eclogues as the most remarkable:

 "Each man for himself, and the fende for us all."
 "They robbe Saint Peter therwith to clothe Saint Powle."
 "For might of water will not our leasure bide."
 "Once out of sight and shortly out of minde."
 "For children brent still after drede the fire."
 "Together they cleave more fast than do burres."
 "Tho' thy teeth water."
 "I aske of the foxe no farther than the skin."
 "To touche soft pitche and not his fingers file."
 "From post unto piller tost shall thou be."
 "Over head and eares."
 "Go to the ant."
 "A man may contende, God geueth victory."
 "Of two evils chose the least."

These are but the more striking specimens. An examination of the "Ship,"
and especially of the "Eclogues," for the purpose of extracting their whole
proverbial lore, would be well worth the while, if it be not the duty, of
the next collector in this branch of popular literature. These writings
introduce many of our common sayings for the first time to English
literature, no writer prior to Barclay having thought it dignified or worth
while to profit by the popular wisdom to any perceptible extent. The first
collection of proverbs, Heywood's, did not appear until 1546, so that in
Barclay we possess the earliest known English form of such proverbs as he
introduces. It need scarcely be said that that form is, in the majority of
instances, more full of meaning and point than its modern representatives.

Barclay's adoption of the language of the people naturally elevated him in
popular estimation to a position far above that of his contemporaries in
the matter of style, so much so that he has been traditionally recorded as
one of the greatest improvers of the language, that is, one of those who
helped greatly to bring the written language to be more nearly in
accordance with the spoken. Both a scholar and a man of the world, his
phraseology bears token of the greater cultivation and wider knowledge he
possessed over his contemporaries. He certainly aimed at clearness of
expression, and simplicity of vocabulary, and in these respects was so far
in advance of his time that his works can even now be read with ease,
without the help of dictionary or glossary. In spite of his church training
and his residence abroad, his works are surprisingly free from Latin or
French forms of speech; on the contrary, they are, in the main,
characterised by a strong Saxon directness of expression which must have
tended greatly to the continuance of their popularity, and have exercised a
strong and advantageous influence both in regulating the use of the common
spoken language, and in leading the way which it was necessary for the
literary language to follow. Philologists and dictionary makers appear,
however, to have hitherto overlooked Barclay's works, doubtless owing to
their rarity, but their intrinsic value as well as their position in
relation to the history of the language demand specific recognition at
their hands.

Barclay evidently delighted in his pen. From the time of his return from
the Continent, it was seldom out of his hand. Idleness was distasteful to
him. He petitions his critics if they be "wyse men and cunnynge," that:--

 "They shall my youth pardone, and vnchraftynes
  Whiche onely translate, to eschewe ydelnes."

Assuredly a much more laudable way of employing leisure then than now,
unless the translator prudently stop short of print. The modesty and
singleness of aim of the man are strikingly illustrated by his thus
devoting his time and talents, not to original work as he was well able to
have done had he been desirous only of glorifying his own name, but to the
translation and adaptation or, better, "Englishing" of such foreign authors
as he deemed would exercise a wholesome and profitable influence upon his
countrymen. Such work, however, moulded in his skilful hands, became all
but original, little being left of his author but the idea. Neither the
Ship of Fools, nor the Eclogues retain perceptible traces of a foreign
source, and were it not that they honestly bear their authorship on their
fore-front, they might be regarded as thoroughly, even characteristically,
English productions.

The first known work from Barclay's pen[3] appeared from the press of De
Worde, so early as 1506, probably immediately on his return from abroad,
and was no doubt the fruit of continental leisure. It is a translation, in
seven line stanzas, of the popular French poet Pierre Gringore's Le Chateau
de labour (1499)--the most ancient work of Gringore with date, and perhaps
his best--under the title of "The Castell of laboure wherein is richesse,
vertu, and honour;" in which in a fanciful allegory of some length, a
somewhat wearisome Lady Reason overcomes despair, poverty and other such
evils attendant upon the fortunes of a poor man lately married, the moral
being to show:--

 "That idleness, mother of all adversity,
  Her subjects bringeth to extreme poverty."

The general appreciation of this first essay is evidenced by the issue of a
second edition from the press of Pynson a few years after the appearance of
the first.

Encouraged by the favourable reception accorded to the first effort of his
muse, Barclay, on his retirement to the ease and leisure of the College of
St Mary Otery, set to work on the "Ship of Fools," acquaintance with which
Europe-famous satire he must have made when abroad. This, his _magnum
opus_, has been described at some length in the Introduction, but two
interesting personal notices relative to the composition of the work may
here be added. In the execution of the great task, he expresses himself,
(II. 278), as under the greatest obligations to his colleague, friend, and
literary adviser, Bishop:--

 "Whiche was the first ouersear of this warke
  And vnto his frende gaue his aduysement
  It nat to suffer to slepe styll in the darke
  But to be publysshyd abrode: and put to prent
  To thy monycion my bysshop I assent
  Besechynge god that I that day may se
  That thy honour may prospere and augment
  So that thy name and offyce may agre
 . . . . . .
  In this short balade I can nat comprehende
  All my full purpose that I wolde to the wryte
  But fayne I wolde that thou sholde sone assende
  To heuenly worshyp and celestyall delyte
  Than shoulde I after my pore wyt and respyt,
  Display thy name, and great kyndnes to me
  But at this tyme no farther I indyte
  But pray that thy name and worshyp may agre."

Pynson, in his capacity of judicious publisher, fearing lest the book
should exceed suitable dimensions, also receives due notice at p. 108 of
Vol. I., where he speaks of

 "the charge Pynson hathe on me layde
  With many folys our Nauy not to charge."

The concluding stanza, or colophon, is also devoted to immortalising the
great bibliopole in terms, it must be admitted, not dissimilar to those of
a modern draper's poet laureate:--

  Our Shyp here leuyth the sees brode
  By helpe of God almyght and quyetly
  At Anker we lye within the rode
  But who that lysteth of them to bye
  In Flete strete shall them fynde truly
  At the George: in Richarde Pynsonnes place
  Prynter vnto the Kynges noble grace.
 Deo gratias.

Contemporary allusions to the Ship of Fools there could not fail to be, but
the only one we have met with occurs in Bulleyn's Dialogue quoted above, p.
xxvii. It runs as follows:--_Uxor_.--What ship is that with so many owers,
and straunge tacle; it is a greate vessell. _Ciuis_.--This is the ship of
fooles, wherin saileth bothe spirituall and temporall, of euery callyng
some: there are kynges, queenes, popes, archbishoppes, prelates, lordes,
ladies, knightes, gentlemen, phisicions, lawiers, marchauntes,
housbandemen, beggers, theeues, hores, knaues, &c. This ship wanteth a good
pilot: the storme, the rocke, and the wrecke at hande, all will come to
naught in this hulke for want of good gouernement.

The Eclogues, as appears from their Prologue, had originally been the work
of our author's youth, "the essays of a prentice in the art of poesie," but
they were wisely laid past to be adorned by the wisdom of a wider
experience, and were, strangely enough, lost for years until, at the age of
thirty-eight, the author again lighted, unexpectedly, upon his lost
treasures, and straightway finished them off for the public eye.

The following autobiographical passage reminds one forcibly of Scott's
throwing aside Waverley, stumbling across it after the lapse of years, and
thereupon deciding at once to finish and publish it. After enumerating the
most famous eclogue writers, he proceeds:--

 "Nowe to my purpose, their workes worthy fame,
  Did in my yonge age my heart greatly inflame,
  Dull slouth eschewing my selfe to exercise,
  In such small matters, or I durst enterprise,
  To hyer matter, like as these children do,
  Which first vse to creepe, and afterwarde to go.
 . . . . . . . .
  So where I in youth a certayne worke began,
  And not concluded, as oft doth many a man:
  Yet thought I after to make the same perfite,
  But long I missed that which I first did write.
  But here a wonder, I fortie yere saue twayne,
  Proceeded in age, founde my first youth agayne.
  To finde youth in age is a probleme diffuse,
  But nowe heare the truth, and then no longer muse.
  As I late turned olde bookes to and fro,
  One litle treatise I founde among the mo
  Because that in youth I did compile the same,
  Egloges of youth I did call it by name.
  And seing some men haue in the same delite,
  At their great instance I made the same perfite,
  Adding and bating where I perceyued neede,
  All them desiring which shall this treatise rede,
  Not to be grieued with any playne sentence,
  Rudely conuayed for lacke of eloquence."

The most important revelation in the whole of this interesting passage,
that relating to the author's age, seems to have been studiously overlooked
by all his biographers. If we can fix with probability the date at which
these Eclogues were published, then this, one of the most regretted of the
lacunæ in his biography, will be supplied. We shall feel henceforth
treading on firmer ground in dealing with the scanty materials of his life.

From the length and favour with which the praises of the Ely Cathedral and
of Alcock its pious and munificent bishop, then but recently dead, are sung
in these poems (see p. lxviii.), it is evident that the poet must have
donned the black hood in the monastery of Ely for at least a few years.

Warton fixes the date at 1514, because of the praises of the "noble Henry
which now departed late," and the after panegyric of his successor Henry
VIII. (Eclogue I.), whose virtues are also duly recorded in the Ship of
Fools (I. 39 and II. 205-8), but not otherwise of course than in a
complimentary manner. Our later lights make this picture of the noble pair
appear both out of drawing and over-coloured:--

 "Beside noble Henry which nowe departed late,
  Spectacle of vertue to euery hye estate,
  The patrone of peace and primate of prudence,
  Which on Gods Church hath done so great expence.
  Of all these princes the mercy and pitie,
  The loue of concorde, iustice and equitie,
  The purenes of life and giftes liberall,
  Not lesse vertuous then the said princes all.
  And Henry the eyght moste hye and triumphant,
  No gifte of vertue nor manlines doth want,
  Mine humble spech and language pastorall
  If it were able should write his actes all:
  But while I ought speake of courtly misery,
  Him with all suche I except vtterly.
  But what other princes commonly frequent,
  As true as I can to shewe is mine intent,
  But if I should say that all the misery,
  Which I shall after rehearse and specify
  Were in the court of our moste noble kinge,
  I should fayle truth, and playnly make leasing."--ECLOGUE I.

This eulogy of Henry plainly implies some short experience of his reign.
But other allusions contribute more definitely to fix the precise date,
such as the following historical passage, which evidently refers to the
career of the notorious extortioners, Empson and Dudley, who were executed
for conspiracy and treason in the first year of the new king's reign.

 "Such as for honour unto the court resort,
  Looke seldome times upon the lower sort;
  To the hyer sort for moste part they intende,
  For still their desire is hyer to ascende
  And when none can make with them comparison,
  Against their princes conspire they by treason,
  Then when their purpose can nat come well to frame,
  Agayne they descende and that with utter shame,
  Coridon thou knowest right well what I meane,
  We lately of this experience haue seene
  When men would ascende to rowmes honorable
  Euer is their minde and lust insaciable."

The most definite proof of the date of publication, however, is found in
the fourth Eclogue. It contains a long poem called The towre of vertue and
honour, which is really a highly-wrought elegy on the premature and
glorious death, not of "the Duke of Norfolk, Lord High admiral, and one of
Barclay's patrons," as has been repeated parrot-like, from Warton
downwards, but of his chivalrous son, Sir Edward Howard, Lord High Admiral
for the short space of a few months, who perished in his gallant, if
reckless, attack upon the French fleet in the harbour of Brest in the year
1513. It is incomprehensible that the date of the publication of the
Eclogues should be fixed at 1514, and this blunder still perpetuated. No
Duke of Norfolk died between Barclay's boyhood and 1524, ten years after
the agreed upon date of the Elegy; and the Duke (Thomas), who was Barclay's
patron, never held the position of Lord High Admiral (though his son Lord
Thomas, created Earl of Surrey in 1514, and who afterwards succeeded him,
also succeeded his brother Sir Edward in the Admiralship), but worthily
enjoyed the dignified offices of Lord High Steward, Lord Treasurer, and
Earl Marshal, and died one of Henry's most respected and most popular
Ministers, at his country seat, at a good old age, in the year above
mentioned, 1524. The other allusions to contemporary events, and especially
to the poet's age, preclude the idea of carrying forward the publication to
the latter date, did the clearly defined points of the Elegy allow of it,
as they do not.

Minalcas, one of the interlocutors, thus introduces the subject:--

 "But it is lamentable
  To heare a Captayne so good and honorable,
  _So soone_ withdrawen by deathes crueltie,
  Before his vertue was at moste hye degree.
  If death for a season had shewed him fauour,
  To all his nation he should haue bene honour."

"'The Towre of Vertue and Honor,' introduced as a song of one of the
shepherds into these pastorals, exhibits no very masterly strokes of a
sublime and inventive fancy. It has much of the trite imagery usually
applied in the fabrication of these ideal edifices. It, however, shows our
author in a new walk of poetry. This magnificent tower, or castle is built
on inaccessible cliffs of flint: the walls are of gold, bright as the sun,
and decorated with 'olde historyes and pictures manyfolde:' the turrets are
beautifully shaped. Among its heroic inhabitants are Henry VIII., ['in his
maiestie moste hye enhaunsed as ought a conquerour,' no doubt an allusion
to the battle of the Spurs and his other exploits in France in 1513],
Howard Duke of Norfolk, ['the floure of chiualry'], and the Earl of
Shrewsbury, ['manfull and hardy, with other princes and men of dignitie'].
Labour is the porter at the gate, and Virtue governs the house. Labour is
thus pictured, with some degree of spirit:--

 'Fearefull is labour without fauour at all,
 Dreadfull of visage, a monster intreatable,
  Like Cerberus lying at gates infernall;
 To some men his looke is halfe intollerable,
  His shoulders large, for burthen strong and able,
 His body bristled, his necke mightie and stiffe;
  By sturdy senewes, his ioyntes stronge and stable,
 Like marble stones his handes be as stiffe.

  Here must man vanquishe the dragon of Cadmus,
 Against the Chimer here stoutly must he fight,
  Here must he vanquish the fearefull Pegasus,
 For the golden flece here must he shewe his might:
  If labour gaynsay, he can nothing be right,
 This monster labour oft chaungeth his figure,
  Sometime an oxe, a bore, or lion wight,
 Playnely he seemeth, thus chaungeth his nature,

 Like as Protheus ofte chaunged his stature.
 . . . . . . .
  Under his browes he dreadfully doth loure,
 With glistering eyen, and side dependaunt beard,
  For thirst and hunger alway his chere is soure.
 His horned forehead doth make faynt heartes feard.

  Alway he drinketh, and yet alway is drye,
 The sweat distilling with droppes aboundaunt,'
 . . . . . . .

"The poet adds, 'that when the noble Howard had long boldly contended with
this hideous monster, had broken the bars and doors of the castle, had
bound the porter, and was now preparing to ascend the tower of Virtue and
Honour, Fortune and Death appeared, and interrupted his progress.'"
(Warton, Eng. Poetry, III.)

The hero's descent and knightly qualities are duly set forth:--

 "Though he were borne to glory and honour,
  Of auncient stocke and noble progenie,
  Yet thought his courage to be of more valour,
  By his owne actes and noble chiualry.
  Like as becommeth a knight to fortifye
  His princes quarell with right and equitie,
  So did this Hawarde with courage valiauntly,
  Till death abated his bolde audacitie."

The poet, gives "cursed fortune" a severe rating, and at such length that
the old lady no doubt repented herself, for cutting off so promising a hero
_at so early an age_:--

 "Tell me, frayle fortune, why did thou breuiate
  The liuing season of suche a captayne,
  That when his actes ought to be laureate
  Thy fauour turned him suffring to be slayne?"

And then he addresses the Duke himself in a consolatory strain,
endeavouring to reconcile him to the loss of so promising a son, by
recalling to his memory those heroes of antiquity whose careers of glory
were cut short by sudden and violent deaths:--

 "But moste worthy duke hye and victorious,
  Respire to comfort, see the vncertentie
  Of other princes, whose fortune prosperous
  Oftetime haue ended in hard aduersitie:
  Read of Pompeius," [&c.]
 . . . . . .
 "This shall be, this is, and this hath euer bene,
  That boldest heartes be nearest ieopardie,
  To dye in battayle is honour as men wene
  To suche as haue ioy in haunting chiualry.

 "Suche famous ending the name doth magnifie,
  Note worthy duke, no cause is to complayne,
  His life not ended foule nor dishonestly,
  In bed nor tauerne his lustes to maynteyne,
  But like as besemed a noble captayne,
  In sturdie harnes he died for the right,
  From deathes daunger no man may flee certayne,
  But suche death is metest vnto so noble a knight.

 "But death it to call me thinke it vnright,
  Sith his worthy name shall laste perpetuall," [&c.]

This detail and these long quotations have been rendered necessary by the
strange blunder which has been made and perpetuated as to the identity of
the young hero whose death is so feelingly lamented in this elegy. With
that now clearly ascertained, we can not only fix with confidence the date
of the publication of the Eclogues, but by aid of the hint conveyed in the
Prologue, quoted above (p. lv.), as to the author's age, "fortie saue
twayne," decide, for the first time, the duration of his life, and the
dates, approximately at least, of its incidents, and of the appearance of
his undated works. Lord Edward Howard, perhaps the bravest and rashest of
England's admirals, perished in a madly daring attack upon the harbour of
Brest, on the 25th of April, 1514. As the eclogues could not therefore have
been published prior to that date, so, bearing in mind the other allusions
referred to above, they could scarcely have appeared later. Indeed, the
loss which the elegy commemorates is spoken of as quite recent, while the
elegy itself bears every appearance of having been introduced into the
eclogue at the last moment. We feel quite satisfied therefore that Warton
hit quite correctly upon the year 1514 as that in which these poems first
saw the light, though the ground (the allusion to the Henries) upon which
he went was insufficient, and his identification of the hero of the elegy
contradicted his supposition. Had he been aware of the importance of fixing
the date correctly, he would probably have taken more care than to fall
into the blunder of confounding the father with the son, and adorning the
former with the dearly earned laurels of the latter.

It may be added that, fixing 1514 as the date at which Barclay had arrived
at the age of 38, agrees perfectly with all else we know of his years, with
the assumed date of his academical education, and of his travels abroad,
with the suppositions formed as to his age from his various published works
having dates attached to them, and finally, with the traditional "great
age" at which he died, which would thus be six years beyond the allotted
span.

After the Ship of Fools the Eclogues rank second in importance in a
consideration of Barclay's writings. Not only as the first of their kind in
English, do they crown their author with the honour of introducing this
kind of poetry to English literature, but they are in themselves most
interesting and valuable as faithful and graphic pictures of the court,
citizen, and country life of the period. Nowhere else in so accessible a
form do there exist descriptions at once so full and so accurate of the
whole condition of the people. Their daily life and habits, customs,
manners, sports, and pastimes, are all placed on the canvas before us with
a ready, vigorous, unflinching hand. Witness for instance the following
sketch, which might be entitled, "Life, temp. 1514":--

 "Some men deliteth beholding men to fight,
  Or goodly knightes in pleasaunt apparayle,
  Or sturdie souldiers in bright harnes and male.
 . . . . . . . .
  Some glad is to see these Ladies beauteous,
  Goodly appoynted in clothing sumpteous:
  A number of people appoynted in like wise:
  In costly clothing after the newest gise,
  Sportes, disgising, fayre coursers mount and praunce,
  Or goodly ladies and knightes sing and daunce:
  To see fayre houses and curious picture(s),
  Or pleasaunt hanging, or sumpteous vesture
  Of silke, of purpure, or golde moste orient,
  And other clothing diuers and excellent:
  Hye curious buildinges or palaces royall,
  Or chapels, temples fayre and substanciall,
  Images grauen or vaultes curious;
  Gardeyns and medowes, or place delicious,
  Forestes and parkes well furnished with dere,
  Colde pleasaunt streames or welles fayre and clere,
  Curious cundites or shadowie mountaynes,
  Swete pleasaunt valleys, laundes or playnes
  Houndes, and suche other thinges manyfolde
  Some men take pleasour and solace to beholde."

The following selections illustrative of the customs and manners of the
times will serve as a sample of the overflowing cask from which they are
taken. The condition of the country people is clearly enough indicated in a
description of the village Sunday, the manner of its celebration being
depicted in language calculated to make a modern sabbatarian's hair stand
on end:--

 "What man is faultlesse, remember the village,
  Howe men vplondish on holy dayes rage.
  Nought can them tame, they be a beastly sort,
  In sweate and labour hauing most chiefe comfort,
  On the holy day assoone as morne is past,
  When all men resteth while all the day doth last,
  They drinke, they banket, they reuell and they iest
  They leape, they daunce, despising ease and rest.
  If they once heare a bagpipe or a drone,
  Anone to the elme or oke they be gone.
  There vse they to daunce, to gambolde and to rage
  Such is the custome and vse of the village.
  When the ground resteth from rake, plough and wheles,
  Then moste they it trouble with burthen of their heles:

 FAUSTUS.

  To Bacchus they banket, no feast is festiuall,
  They chide and they chat, they vary and they brall,
  They rayle and they route, they reuell and they crye,
  Laughing and leaping, and making cuppes drye.
  What, stint thou thy chat, these wordes I defye,
  It is to a vilayne rebuke and vilany.
  Such rurall solace so plainly for to blame,
  Thy wordes sound to thy rebuke and shame."

Football is described in a lively picture:--

 "They get the bladder and blowe it great and thin,
  With many beanes or peason put within,
  It ratleth, soundeth, and shineth clere and fayre,
  While it is throwen and caste vp in the ayre,
  Eche one contendeth and hath a great delite,
  With foote and with hande the bladder for to smite,
  If it fall to grounde they lifte it vp agayne,
  This wise to labour they count it for no payne,
  Renning and leaping they driue away the colde,
  The sturdie plowmen lustie, stronge and bolde,
  Ouercommeth the winter with driuing the foote ball,
  Forgetting labour and many a greuous fall."

A shepherd, after mentioning his skill in shooting birds with a bow,
says:--

 "No shepheard throweth the axeltrie so farre."

A gallant is thus described:--

 "For women vse to loue them moste of all,
  Which boldly bosteth, or that can sing and iet,
  Which are well decked with large bushes set,
  Which hath the mastery ofte time in tournament,
  Or that can gambauld, or daunce feat and gent."

The following sorts of wine are mentioned:--

 "As Muscadell, Caprike, Romney, and Maluesy,
  From Gene brought, from Grece or Hungary."

As are the dainties of the table. A shepherd at court must not think to
eat,

 "Swanne, nor heron,
  Curlewe, nor crane, but course beefe and mutton."

Again:

 "What fishe is of sauor swete and delicious,--
  Rosted or sodden in swete hearbes or wine;
  Or fried in oyle, most saporous and fine.--
 The pasties of a hart.--
  The crane, the fesant, the pecocke and curlewe,
  The partriche, plouer, bittor, and heronsewe--
  Seasoned so well in licour redolent,
  That the hall is full of pleasaunt smell and sent."

At a feast at court:--

 "Slowe be the seruers in seruing in alway,
  But swift be they after, taking thy meate away;
  A speciall custome is vsed them among,
  No good dish to suffer on borde to be longe:
  If the dishe be pleasaunt, eyther fleshe or fishe,
  Ten handes at once swarme in the dishe:
  And if it be flesh ten kniues shalt thou see
  Mangling the flesh, and in the platter flee:
  To put there thy handes is perill without fayle,
  Without a gauntlet or els a gloue of mayle."

"The two last lines remind us of a saying of Quin, who declared it was not
safe to sit down to a turtle-feast in one of the city-halls, without a
basket-hilted knife and fork. Not that I suppose Quin borrowed his bon-mots
from black letter books." (Warton.)

The following lines point out some of the festive tales of our ancestors:--

 "Yet would I gladly heare some mery fit
  Of mayde Marion, or els of Robin hood;
  Or Bentleyes ale which chafeth well the bloud,
  Of perre of Norwich, or sauce of Wilberton,
  Or buckishe Joly well-stuffed as a ton."

He again mentions "Bentley's Ale" which "maketh me to winke;" and some of
our ancient domestic pastimes and amusements are recorded:--

 "Then is it pleasure the yonge maydens amonge
  To watche by the fire the winters nightes long:
  At their fonde tales to laugh, or when they brall
  Great fire and candell spending for laboure small,
  And in the ashes some playes for to marke,
  To couer wardens [pears] for fault of other warke:
  To toste white sheuers, and to make prophitroles;
  And after talking oft time to fill the bowles."

He mentions some musical instruments:

 " . . . . Methinkes no mirth is scant,
  Where no reioysing of minstrelcie doth want:
  The bagpipe or fidle to vs is delectable."

And the mercantile commodities of different countries and cities:--

 "Englande hath cloth, Burdeus hath store of wine,
  Cornewall hath tinne, and Lymster wools fine.
  London hath scarlet, and Bristowe pleasaunt red,
  Fen lands hath fishes, in other place is lead."

Of songs at feasts:--

 "When your fat dishes smoke hote vpon your table,
  Then layde ye songes and balades magnifie,
  If they be mery, or written craftely,
  Ye clappe your handes and to the making harke,
  And one say to other, lo here a proper warke."

He says that minstrels and singers are highly favoured at court, especially
those of the French gise. Also jugglers and pipers.

The personal references throughout the Eclogues, in addition to those
already mentioned, though not numerous, are of considerable interest. The
learned Alcock, Bishop of Ely (1486-1500), and the munificent founder of
Jesus College, Cambridge, stands deservedly high in the esteem of a poet
and priest, so zealous of good works as Barclay. The poet's humour thus
disguises him.--(Eclogue I., A iii., recto.):--

 "Yes since his dayes a cocke was in the fen,
  I knowe his voyce among a thousande men:
  He taught, he preached, he mended euery wrong;
  But, Coridon alas no good thing bideth long.
  He all was a cocke, he wakened vs from slepe,
  And while we slumbred, he did our foldes hepe.
  No cur, no foxes, nor butchers dogges wood,
  Coulde hurte our fouldes, his watching was so good.
  The hungry wolues, which that time did abounde,
  What time he crowed, abashed at the sounde.
  This cocke was no more abashed of the foxe,
  Than is a lion abashed of an oxe.
  When he went, faded the floure of all the fen;
  I boldly dare sweare this cocke neuer trode hen!
  This was a father of thinges pastorall,
  And that well sheweth his Church cathedrall,
  There was I lately about the middest of May,
  Coridon his Church is twenty sith more gay
  Then all the Churches betwene the same and Kent,
  There sawe I his tome and Chapell excellent.
  I thought fiue houres but euen a little while,
  Saint John the virgin me thought did on me smile,
  Our parishe Church is but a dongeon,
  To that gay Churche in comparison.
  If the people were as pleasaunt as the place
  Then were it paradice of pleasour and solace,
  Then might I truely right well finde in my heart.
  There still to abide and neuer to departe,
  But since that this cocke by death hath left his song,
  Trust me Coridon there many a thing is wrong,
  When I sawe his figure lye in the Chapell-side,
  Like death for weping I might no longer bide.
  Lo all good thinges so sone away doth glide,
  That no man liketh to long doth rest and abide.
  When the good is gone (my mate this is the case)
  Seldome the better reentreth in the place."

The excellence of his subject carries the poet quite beyond himself in
describing the general lamentation at the death of this worthy prelate;
with an unusual power of imagination he thus pictures the sympathy of the
towers, arches, vaults and images of Ely monastery:

 "My harte sore mourneth when I must specify
  Of the gentle cocke whiche sange so mirily,
  He and his flocke wer like an union
  Conioyned in one without discention,
  All the fayre cockes which in his dayes crewe
  When death him touched did his departing rewe.
  The pretie palace by him made in the fen,
  The maides, widowes, the wiues, and the men,
  With deadly dolour were pearsed to the heart,
  When death constrayned this shepheard to departe.
  Corne, grasse, and fieldes, mourned for wo and payne,
  For oft his prayer for them obtayned rayne.
  The pleasaunt floures for wo faded eche one,
  When they perceyued this shepheard dead and gone,
  The okes, elmes, and euery sorte of dere
  Shronke vnder shadowes, abating all their chere.
  The mightie walles of Ely Monastery,
  The stones, rockes, and towres semblably,
  The marble pillers and images echeone,
  Swet all for sorowe, when this good cocke was gone,
  Though he of stature were humble, weake and leane,
  His minde was hye, his liuing pure and cleane,
  Where other feedeth by beastly appetite,
  On heauenly foode was all his whole delite."

Morton, Alcock's predecessor and afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury
(1486-1500), is also singled out for compliment, in which allusion is made
to his troubles, his servants' faithfulness, and his restoration to favour
under Richard III. and Henry VII. (Eclogue III.):--

 "And shepheard Morton, when he durst not appeare,
  Howe his olde seruauntes were carefull of his chere;
  In payne and pleasour they kept fidelitie
  Till grace agayne gaue him aucthoritie
  Then his olde fauour did them agayne restore
  To greater pleasour then they had payne before.
  Though for a season this shepheard bode a blast,
  The greatest winde yet slaketh at the last,
  And at conclusion he and his flocke certayne
  Eche true to other did quietly remayne."

And again in Eclogue IV.:--

 "Micene and Morton be dead and gone certayne."

The "Dean of Powles" (Colet), with whom Barclay seems to have been
personally acquainted, and to whom the reference alludes as to one still
living (his death occurred in 1519), is celebrated as a preacher in the
same Eclogue:--

 "For this I learned of the Dean of Powles
  I tell thee, Codrus this man hath won some soules."

as is "the olde friar that wonned in Greenwich" in Eclogue V.

The first three Eclogues are paraphrases or adaptations from the Miseriæ
Curialium, the most popular of the works of one of the most successful
literary adventurers of the middle ages, Æneas Sylvius (Pope Pius II., who
died in 1464). It appears to have been written with the view of relieving
his feelings of disappointment and disgust at his reception at the court of
the Emperor, whither he had repaired, in the hope of political advancement.
The tone and nature of the work may be gathered from this candid exposure
of the adventurer's morale: "Many things there are which compel us to
persevere, but nothing more powerfully than ambition which, rivalling
charity, truly beareth all things however grievous, that it may attain to
the honours of this world and the praise of men. If we were humble and
laboured to gain our own souls rather than hunt after vain glory, few of
us, indeed, would endure such annoyances." He details, with querulous
humour, all the grievances of his position, from the ingratitude of the
prince to the sordour of the table-cloths, and the hardness of the black
bread. But hardest of all to bear is the contempt shown towards literature.
"In the courts of princes literary knowledge is held a crime; and great is
the grief of men of letters when they find themselves universally despised,
and see the most important matters managed, not to say mismanaged, by
blockheads, who cannot tell the number of their fingers and toes."

Barclay's adaptation is so thoroughly Englished, and contains such large
additions from the stores of his own bitter experience, as to make it even
more truly his own than any other of his translations.

The fourth and fifth eclogues are imitations,--though no notice that they
are so is conveyed in the title, as in the case of the first three,--of the
fifth and sixth of the popular eclogue writer of the time, Jo. Baptist
Mantuan, which may have helped to give rise to the generally received
statement noticed below, that all the eclogues are imitations of that
author. The fourth is entitled "Codrus and Minalcas, treating of the
behauour of Riche men agaynst Poetes," and it may be judged how far it is
Barclay's from the fact that it numbers about twelve hundred lines,
including the elegy of the Noble Howard, while the original, entitled, "De
consuetudine Divitum erga Poetas," contains only about two hundred. The
fifth is entitled "Amintas and Faustus, of the disputation of citizens and
men of the countrey." It contains over a thousand lines, and the original,
"De disceptatione rusticorum et civium," like the fifth, extends to little
more than two hundred.

In the Prologue before mentioned we are told (Cawood's edition):--

 "That fiue Egloges this whole treatise doth holde
  To imitation of other Poetes olde,"

Which appears to be a correction of the printer's upon the original, as in
Powell's edition:--

 "That X. egloges this hole treatyse dothe holde."

Whether other five were ever published there is no record to show; it
appears, however, highly improbable, that, if they had, they could have
been entirely lost,--especially considering the popularity and repeated
issue of the first five,--during the few years that would have elapsed
between their original publication and the appearance of Cawood's edition.
Possibly the original reading may be a typographical blunder, for Cawood is
extremely sparing of correction, and appears to have made none which he did
not consider absolutely necessary. This is one of the literary puzzles
which remain for bibliography to solve. (See below, p. lxxix.)

The next of Barclay's works in point of date, and perhaps the only one
actually entitled to the merit of originality, is his Introductory to write
and pronounce French, compiled at the request of his great patron, Thomas
Duke of Norfolk, and printed by Copland in 1521. It is thus alluded to in
the first important authority on French grammar, "Lesclarissement de la
langue Francoyse compose par maistre Jehan Palsgraue, Angloys, natyf de
Londres," 1530: "The right vertuous and excellent prince Thomas, late Duke
of Northfolke, hath commanded the studious clerke, Alexandre Barkelay, to
embusy hymselfe about this exercyse." Further on he is not so complimentary
as he remarks:--"Where as there is a boke, that goeth about in this realme,
intitled The introductory to writte and pronounce frenche, compiled by
Alexander Barcley, in which k is moche vsed, and many other thynges also by
hym affirmed, contrary to my sayenges in this boke, and specially in my
seconde, where I shall assaye to expresse the declinations and
coniugatynges with the other congruites obserued in the frenche tonge, I
suppose it sufficient to warne the lernar, that I haue red ouer that boke
at length: and what myn opinion is therin, it shall well inough apere in my
bokes selfe, though I make therof no ferther expresse mencion: saue that I
haue sene an olde boke written in parchement, in maner in all thynkes like
to his sayd Introductory: whiche, by coniecture, was not vnwritten this
hundred yeres. I wot nat if he happened to fortune upon suche an other: for
whan it was commaunded that the grammar maisters shulde teche the youth of
Englande ioyntly latin with frenche, there were diuerse suche bokes
diuysed: wherupon, as I suppose, began one great occasyon why we of England
sounde the latyn tong so corruptly, whiche haue as good a tonge to sounde
all maner speches parfitely as any other nacyon in Europa."--Book I. ch.
xxxv. "According to this," Mr Ellis (Early English Pronunciation, 804)
pertinently notes: "1º, there ought to be many old MS. treatises on French
grammar; and 2º, the English pronunciation of Latin was moulded on the
French."

To Barclay, as nine years before Palsgrave, belongs at least the credit,
hitherto generally unrecognised, of the first published attempt at a French
grammar, by either Frenchman or foreigner.

"The mirror of good manners, containing the four cardinal vertues,"
appeared from the press of Pynson, without date, "which boke," says the
typographer, "I haue prynted at the instance and request of the ryght noble
Rychard Yerle of Kent." This earl of Kent died in 1523, and as Barclay
speaks of himself in the preface as advanced in age, the date of
publication may be assigned to close upon that year. It is a translation,
in the ballad stanza, of the Latin elegiac poem of Dominicus Mancinus, _De
quatuor virtutibus_, first published in 1516, and, as appears from the
title, was executed while Barclay was a monk of Ely, at "the desire of the
righte worshipfull Syr Giles Alington, Knight." From the address to his
patron it would seem that the Knight had requested the poet to abridge or
modernise Gower's Confessio amantis. For declining this task he pleads,
that he is too old to undertake such a light subject, and also the sacred
nature of his profession. He then intimates his choice of the present more
grave and serious work instead--

  Which a priest may write, not hurting his estate,
  Nor of honest name obumbring at all his light.

"But the poet," says Warton, "declined this undertaking as unsuitable to
his age, infirmities, and profession, and chose rather to oblige his patron
with a grave system of ethics. It is certain that he made a prudent choice.
The performance shows how little qualified he was to correct Gower."
Instead of a carping criticism like this, it would have been much more to
the point to praise the modesty and sensibility of an author, who had the
courage to decline a task unsuited to his tastes or powers.

He professes little:--

  This playne litle treatise in stile compendious,
  Much briefly conteyneth four vertues cardinall,
  In right pleasaunt processe, plaine and commodious,
  With light foote of metre, and stile heroicall,
  Rude people to infourme in language maternall,
  To whose vnderstanding maydens of tender age,
  And rude litle children shall finde easy passage.

Two editions of the work are sufficient evidence that this humble and
praiseworthy purpose was, in the eyes of his contemporaries, successfully
carried out.

The only remaining authentic production of Barclay which has come down to
us, is a translation of the Jugurthine War of Sallust, undertaken at the
request of, and dedicated to, his great patron, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and
printed also at Pynson's press without date. The Latin and English are
printed side by side on the same page, the former being dedicated, with the
date "Ex cellula Hatfelde[=n] regii (_i.e._, King's Hatfield,
Hertfordshire) in Idus Novembris" to Vesey, the centenarian Bishop of
Exeter, with this superscription:--"Reueredissimo in Christo patri ac dno:
dno Joanni Veysy exonien episcopo Alexander Barclay presbyter debita cum
obseruantia. S." The dedication begins, "Memini me superioribus annis cu
adhuc sacelli regij presul esses: pastor vigilantissime: tuis suasionibus
incitatu: vt Crispi Salustij hystoria--e romana lingua: in anglicam
compendiose transferrem," &c. Vesey was probably one of Barclay's oldest
west country friends; for he is recorded to have been connected with the
diocese of Exeter from 1503 to 1551, in the various capacities of
archdeacon, precentor, dean, and bishop successively. Conjecture has placed
the date of this publication at 1511, but as Veysey did not succeed to the
Bishopric of Exeter till August 1519, this is untenable. We cannot say more
than that it must have been published between 1519 and 1524, the date of
the Duke of Norfolk's death, probably in the former year, since, from its
being dated from "Hatfield," the ancient palace of the bishops of Ely,
(sold to the Crown in the 30th of Henry VIII.; Clutterbuck's Hertfordshire,
II.) Barclay at the time of its completion was evidently still a monk of
Ely.

By his translation of Sallust (so popular an author at that period, that
the learned virgin queen is reported to have amused her leisure with an
English version), Barclay obtained the distinction of being the first to
introduce that classic to English readers. His version bears the reputation
of being executed not only with accuracy, but with considerable freedom and
elegance, and its popularity was evinced by its appearance in three
additions.

Two other works of our author are spoken of as having been in print, but
they have apparently passed entirely out of sight: "The figure of our holy
mother Church, oppressed by the Frenche King," (Pynson, 4to), known only
from Maunsell's Catalogue; and "The lyfe of the glorious martyr, saynt
George translated (from Mantuan) by Alexander Barclay, while he was a monk
of Ely, and dedicated to N. West, Bishop of Ely," (Pynson, 4to), (Herbert,
Typ. Antiquities.) West was Bishop of Ely from 1515 to 1533, and
consequently Barclay's superior during probably his whole stay there.
Whether these two works were in verse or prose is unknown.

There are two other books ascribed to Barclay, but nothing satisfactory can
be stated regarding their parentage except that, considering their subject,
and the press they issued from, it is not at all unlikely that they may
have been the fruit of his prolific pen. The first is "The lyfe of the
blessed martyr, Saynte Thomas," in prose, printed by Pynson, (Herbert, Typ.
Ant. 292), regarding which Ant. Wood says, "I should feel little difficulty
in ascribing this to Barclay." The other is the English translation of the
Histoire merveilleuse du Grand Khan (in Latin, De Tartaris siue Liber
historiarum partium Orientis) of the eastern soldier, and western monk,
Haytho, prince of Georgia at the end of the 13th, and beginning of the 14th
centuries. The History which gives an account of Genghis Khan, and his
successors, with a short description of the different kingdoms of Asia, was
very popular in the 15th and 16th centuries, as one of the earliest
accounts of the East, and the conjecture of the Grenville Catalogue is not
improbable, though there is no sufficient evidence, that Barclay was the
author of the English version which appeared from the press of Pynson.

Bale further enumerates in his list of Barclay's works "Contra Skeltonum,
Lib. I.; Quinq: eglogas ex Mantuano, Lib. I; Vitam D. Catherinæ, Lib. I.,
[Libros tres, Pits]; Vitam D. Margaritæ, Lib. I.; Vitam Etheldredæ, Lib.
I.; Aliaq: plura fecit." Tanner adds: "Orationes varias, Lib. I.; De fide
orthodoxa, Lib. I."

Of these various fruits of Barclay's fertility and industry no fragment has
survived to our day, nor has even any positive information regarding their
nature been transmitted to us.

The "Orationes varias," probably a collection of sermons with especial
reference to the sins of the day would have been historically, if not
otherwise, interesting, and their loss is matter for regret. On the other
hand the want of the treatise, "De fide orthodoxa," is doubtless a relief
to literature. There are too many of the kind already to encumber our
shelves and our catalogues.

The Lives of the Saints, the work, it is stated, of the author's old age,
were, according to Tanner, and he is no doubt right, translations from the
Latin. Barclay's reputation probably does not suffer from their loss.

"Quinque eglogas ex Mantuano," though Bale mentions also "De miserijs
aulicorum; Bucolicam Codri; Eglogam quartam," apparently the five, but
really the first four of the eclogues known to us, are, I am strongly
inclined to believe, nothing else than these same five eclogues, under, to
use a bibliographical phrase, "a made up" title. That he mentions first,
five from Mantuan, and afterwards adds "Bucolicam Codri" and "Eglogam
quartam," as two distinct eclogues, apparently not from Mantuan, while both
titles must refer to the same poem, an imitation of Mantuan's fifth
eclogue, is proof enough that he was not speaking with the authority of
personal knowledge of these works.

Johannes Baptista Spagnuoli, commonly called from his native city, Mantuan,
was the most popular and prolific eclogue writer of the fifteenth century,
to which Barclay himself testifies:--

 "As the moste famous Baptist Mantuan
  The best of that sort since Poetes first began."

Barclay's Eclogues being the first attempts of the kind in English, Bale's
"Ex Mantuano," therefore probably means nothing more than "on the model of
Mantuan;" otherwise, if it be assumed that five were the whole number that
ever appeared, it could not apply to the first three, which are expressly
stated in the title to be from Æneas Sylvius, while if ten be assumed, his
statement would account for nine, the "quinque eglogas" being the five now
wanting, but if so, then he has omitted to mention the most popular of all
the eclogues, the fifth, and has failed to attribute to Mantuan two which
are undoubtedly due to him.

The loss of the "Contra Skeltonum," is a matter for regret. That there was
no love lost between these two contemporaries and chief poets of their time
is evident enough. Skelton's scathing sarcasm against the priesthood no
doubt woke his brother satirist's ire, and the latter lets no opportunity
slip of launching forth his contempt for the laureate of Oxford.

The moralist in announcing the position he assumes in opposition to the
writer of popular tales, takes care to have a fling at the author of "The
boke of Phyllyp Sparowe":--

 "I wryte no Ieste ne tale of Robyn Hode,
  Nor sawe no sparcles, ne sede of vyciousnes;
  Wyse men loue vertue, wylde people wantones,
  It longeth nat to my scyence nor cunnynge,
  For Phylyp the sparowe the (Dirige) to synge."

A sneer to which Skelton most probably alludes when, enumerating his own
productions in the Garlande of Laurell, he mentions,

 "Of Phillip Sparow the lamentable fate,
  The dolefull desteny, and the carefull chaunce,
  Dyuysed by Skelton after the funerall rate;
  Yet sum there be therewith that take greuaunce,
  And grudge thereat with frownyng countenaunce;
  But what of that? harde it is to please all men;
  Who list amende it, let hym set to his penne."

The following onslaught in Barclay's Fourth Eclogue, is evidently levelled
at the abominable Skelton:

 "Another thing yet is greatly more damnable:
  Of rascolde poetes yet is a shamfull rable,
  Which voyde of wisedome presumeth to indite,
  Though they haue scantly the cunning of a snite;
  And to what vices that princes moste intende,
  Those dare these fooles solemnize and commende
  Then is he decked as Poete laureate,
  When stinking Thais made him her graduate;
  When Muses rested, she did her season note,
  And she with Bacchus her camous did promote.
  Such rascolde drames, promoted by Thais,
  Bacchus, Licoris, or yet by Testalis,
  Or by suche other newe forged Muses nine,
  Thinke in their mindes for to haue wit diuine;
  They laude their verses, they boast, they vaunt and iet,
  Though all their cunning be scantly worth a pet:
  If they haue smelled the artes triuiall,
  They count them Poetes hye and heroicall.
  Such is their foly, so foolishly they dote,
  Thinking that none can their playne errour note;
  Yet be they foolishe, auoyde of honestie,
  Nothing seasoned with spice of grauitie,
  Auoyde of pleasure, auoyde of eloquence,
  With many wordes, and fruitlesse of sentence;
  Unapt to learne, disdayning to be taught,
  Their priuate pleasure in snare hath them so caught;
  And worst yet of all, they count them excellent,
  Though they be fruitlesse, rashe and improuident.
  To such ambages who doth their minde incline,
  They count all other as priuate of doctrine,
  And that the faultes which be in them alone,
  And be common in other men eche one.
  Thus bide good poetes oft time rebuke and blame,
  Because of other which haue despised name.
  And thus for the bad the good be cleane abject.
  Their art and poeme counted of none effect,
  Who wanteth reason good to discerne from ill
  Doth worthy writers interprete at his will:
  So both the laudes of good and not laudable
  For lacke of knowledge become vituperable."

It has not hitherto been pointed out that Skelton did not disdain to borrow
a leaf from the enemy's book and try his hand at paraphrasing the Ship of
Fools also. "The Boke of three fooles, M. Skelton, poete laureate, gaue to
my lord Cardynall," is a paraphrase in prose, with introductory verses, of
three chapters of Brandt, corresponding to Barclay's chapters headed, Of
yonge folys that take olde wyme to theyr wyues nat for loue but for ryches
(I. 247); Of enuyous folys (I. 252); Of bodely lust or corporall
voluptuosyte (I. 239). Skelton's three fools, are, "The man that doth wed a
wyfe for her goodes and her rychesse;" "Of Enuye, the seconde foole"; and,
"Of the Voluptuousnes corporall, the third foole;" and his versions are
dashed off with his usual racy vigour. He probably, however, did not think
it worth while to compete with the established favourite. If he had we
would certainly have got a very different book from Barclay's.

Notwithstanding his popularity and industry, Barclay's name appears to be
but seldom mentioned by contemporary or later authors. As early as 1521
however, we find him placed in the most honourable company by Henry
Bradshaw, "Lyfe of Saynt Werburghe," (1521, Pynson, 4to). But the
compliment would probably lose half its sweetness from his being bracketed
with the detested Skelton:--

  To all auncient poetes, litell boke, submytte the,
  Whilom flouryng in eloquence facundious,
  And to all other whiche present nowe be;
  Fyrst to maister Chaucer and Ludgate sentencious,
  Also to preignaunt Barkley nowe beying religious,
  To inuentiue Skelton and poet laureate;
  Praye them all of pardon both erly and late.

Bulleyn's repeated allusions to Barclay (see above, pp. xxvii., liv.),
apart from the probability that, as contemporaries resident in the same
provincial town, Ely, they were well acquainted with each other, leave
little doubt that the two were personal friends. Bulleyn's figurative
description of the poet, quoted at p. xxvii., is scarcely complete without
the following verses, which are appended to it by way of summary of his
teachings (similar verses are appended to the descriptions of Chaucer,
Gower, &c.):--[Barclay appears] saying

 "Who entreth the court in yong and teder age
  Are lightly blinded with foly and outrage:
  But suche as enter with witte and grauitie,
  Bow not so sone to such enormitie,
  But ere thei enter if thei haue lerned nought
  Afterwardes Vertue the least of theyr thought."
 _Dialogue against the Fever Pestilence._

In another passage of the same Dialogue[4] the picture of the honourable
and deserving but neglected churchman is touched with so much strength and
feeling that, though no indication is given, one cannot but believe that
the painter was drawing from the life, the life of his friend. The
likeness, whether intentional or not, is a most faithful one: "The third
[picture] is, one whiche sheweth the state of learned men, labouring long
time in studie and diuine vertue, whiche are wrapped in pouertie, wantyng
the golden rake or gapyng mouth. This man hath verie fewe to preferre hym
to that promotion, he smiteth himselfe upo the breast, he wepeth and
lamenteth, that vice should thus be exalted, ignoraunce rewarded with
glorie, coueteous men spoilyng the Churche, by the names of patrones and
geuers, whiche extorcioners and tellers, they care not to whom, so that it
be raked with the golden racke. Wel, wel, God of his mercie, amed this
euill market."

In one of the many humorous sallies which lighten up this old-fashioned
antidote to the pestilence, Barclay again appears, dressed in the
metaphorical colour of the poet or minstrel--green, which has probably here
a double significance, referring no doubt to his popularity as the English
eclogue writer as well as to his fame as a poet and satirist. In
introducing "Bartlet, grene breche" as the antithesis to "Boner wepyng,"
allusion was also probably intended to the honourable position occupied by
Barclay amongst the promoters of the Reformation, compared with the
reapostacy, the career of brutal cruelty, and the deserved fate of the
Jefferies of the Episcopal bench.

Thus discourse _Civis et Uxor_.--

"_Uxor._ What are all these two and two in a table. Oh it is trim. _Civis._
These are old frendes, it is well handled and workemanly. Willyam Boswell
in Pater noster rowe, painted them. Here is Christ, and Sathan, Sainct
Peter, and Symon Magus, Paule, and Alexader the Coppersmith, Trace, and
Becket, Martin Luther, and the Pope ... bishop Cramer, and bishop Gardiner.
Boner wepyng, Bartlet, grene breche ... Salomon, and Will Sommer. The cocke
and the lyon, the wolfe and the lambe." This passage also necessarily
implies that Barclay's fame at that time was second to none in England.
Alas! for fame:

 "What is the end of fame? 'Tis but to fill
  A certain portion of uncertain paper."

In the seventeenth century Barclay still held a place in the first rank of
satirists, if we accept the evidence of the learned Catholic poet of that
time, Sir Aston Cokaine. He thus alludes to him in an address "To my
learned friend, Mr Thomas Bancroft, upon his Book of Satires. By Sir Aston
Cokayne."

 "After a many works of divers kinds
  Your muse to tread th' Aruncan path designs:
 'Tis hard to write but Satires in these days,
  And yet to write good Satires merits praise:
 . . . . . .
  So old Petronius Arbiter appli'd
  Corsives unto the age he did deride:
  So Horace, Persius, Juvenal, (among
  Those ancient Romans) scourg'd the impious throng;
  So Ariosto (in these later times)
  Reprov'd his Italy for many crimes;
  So learned Barclay let his lashes fall
  Heavy on some to bring a cure to all."

In concluding this imperfect notice of one of the most remarkable of our
early writers, we cannot but echo the regret expressed by one of his
biographers, that "What ought most to be lamented is, that we are able to
say so very little of one in his own time so famous, and whose works ought
to have transmitted him to posterity with much greater honour."

 * * * * *


THE WILL OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY.

EXTRACTED FROM THE PRINCIPAL REGISTRY OF HER MAJESTY'S COURT OF PROBATE.

_In the Prerogative Court of Canterbury._

IN THE NAME OF GOD. AMEN.--The xxv^{th} day of July in the yere of our
Lorde God a thousande fyve hundreth fyftie and one.... I ALEXANDER
BARQUELEY Doctor of Divinitie Vicar of myche badowe in the countie of Essex
do make dispose and declare this my pute testament conteyning my last Will
in forme and order as hereafter followethe That ys to saye First I
bequeathe my soule unto Almightie God my maker and Redemer and my bodye to
be buried where it shall please God to dispose after de[=p]ting my soule
from the bodye Also I bequeathe to the poore people of the said [=p]ish of
Badowe fyftie shillings to be disposed where as yt shall appere to be most
nede by the discrescon of myne Executours And also I bequeathe towardes the
repacons of the same Churche vj^s viij^d Item I bequeathe to the poore
people of the [=P]ish of Owkley in the Countie of Somersett fiftie
shillings likewise to be distributed And towardes the repacons of the same
Churche vj^s viij^d Item I bequeathe to Mr Horsey of Tawnton in the saide
Countie of Somersett one fether bed and a bolster which I had of hym or els
twentie shillings in redye money Item I bequeathe to Edword Capper
otherwise called Edwarde Mathewe of Tawnton aforesaid xxxiij^s iiij^d of
currant money of England Item I bequeathe to Johane Atkynson the daughter
of Thomas Atkynson of London Scryvener one fetherbed wheruppon I use to lye
having a newe tyke with the bolster blanketts and coverlett tester pillowe
and two payer of my best shetes Item I bequeth to the same Johane Atkynson
eight pounds current money of England to be receyved of the money due unto
me by Cutbeard Crokk of Wynchester to be paide in two yeres (that is to
saye foure poundes in the first yere and foure poundes in the secounde
yere) Item I bequeathe to the saide Johane a flocke bed a quylte and all my
pewter and brasse and other stuf of my kechen Item I give and bequeathe to
Jeronymy Atkynson the daughter of the saide Thomas Atkynson vj^{li} xiij^s
iiij^d currant money of England to be receyved of the said Cutbeard Crok in
two yeres that is to saye every yere fyve markes Item I bequeathe to
Tymothy and Elizabeth Atkynson the daughters of the said Thomas Atkynson to
everye of theym five pounds currant money of England to be receyved of the
said Cutbeard Croke so that the eldest of thes two daughters be paide the
first two yeres and the other to be paide in other two yeres then next
following Item The rest of the money whiche the saide Cutbeard Croke oweth
to me amounting in the hole to the some of four score poundes I bequeathe
to be devyded amonge poore and nedye [=p]sones after the discretion of myn
Executours and manely to such as be bedred blynde lame ympotent wydowes and
fatherless children.... Item I bequeathe to Syr John Gate Knight S^r Henry
Gate Knight and to M^r Clerke to everye of theym fouer angell nobles to
make every of theym a ringe of golde to be worne by theym in remembraunce
of me Item I give and bequeathe to Hugh Rooke of London Scryvener to Henry
bosoll of London Gold Smythe to Thomas Wytton of London Screvener and to
the wief of Humfrey Stevens of London Goldsmythe to Humfrey Edwards Clerke
to John Owhan of the [=P]ish of Badowe aforesaid to every of them one
angell noble of gold or ells y^e valew therof in sylver Item I bequeathe to
M^r Thomas Clerk of Owkey aforesaid to Thomas Edey Gentelman and to the
said Thomas Atkynson to every of them foure angell nobles to make therof
for every of them a ringe to were in remembraunce of oure olde
acquayntaunce and famyliarytie Item my will is that my Executours shall
distribute at the daye of my buriall among poore and nedy people sixe
pounds fyftene shillings Item I bequeathe to Parnell Atkynson the wief of
the said Thomas Atkynson my cosyn thirtenne pounds thirtene shillings and
foure pence of currant money of England Item I bequeathe to John Watson of
London Clotheworker three angell nobles to make a ring therof to be worne
in remembraunce of oure olde famyliaritie Also I desire all suche as have
or shall hereafter have eny benyfytt by thes my legacies and all other good
chrestian people to praye to Almightie God for remission of my synnes and
mercy upon my soule Item I bequeath to Johan Bowyer the syster of the said
[=P]nell my cosen fourtie shillings Item I bequeathe to the said Thomas
Atkynson Tenne pounds currant money of England whome with the said Thomas
Eden I constitute the executours of this my last Will to whome I bequeathe
the rest and residue of all my goodes chattells and debts to be distributed
at their discrescion in works of mercy to poore people not peny mele but by
larger por[=c]on after theyr discrecon namely to [=p]sons bedred maydens
widowes and other ympotent [=p]sons Item I ordeyne and desire the said M^r
Rochester to be the Overseer of this my last Will to be well and truely
[=p]formed and fulfilled to whome for his labor and paynes I bequeathe fyve
marks currant money of England In wytnes of whiche this my last Will I the
said Alexander Barqueley hereunto have set my seale and subscribed the same
with my owne hands the day and yere fyrst above written [p=] me. ALEXANDRU
BARQUELEY.

 PROBATUM fuit Test[=m] coram d[=n]o ca[=n]t Archie[=p]o apud London
 decimo die mensis Junij Anno d[=n]o mille[=m]o quingentesimo
 quinquagesimo secundo Juramento Thome Atkynson E[=x] in hmoi testamento
 noiat Ac Approbatu et insumatu et comissa fuit admotraco om[=n] bonoru
 &^c d[=c]i deft de bene et &^c ac de pleno Inv^{ro} &^c exhibend Ad
 sancta dei Evangelia Jurat Re[=s]rvata [p=]tate Thome Eden alteri e[=x]
 &^c cum venerit.

 * * * * *


NOTES.

 * * * * *

[1] BARCLAY'S NATIONALITY

The objection raised to claiming Barclay as a Scotsman, founded on the
ground that he nowhere mentions his nationality, though it was a common
practice of authors in his time to do so, especially when they wrote out of
their own country, appeared to me, though ingenious and pertinent, to be of
so little real weight, as to be dismissed in a parenthesis. Its importance,
however, may easily be overrated, and it may therefore be well to point out
that, apart from the possibility that this omission on his part was the
result of accident or indifference, there is also the probability that it
was dictated by a wise discretion. To be a Scotsman was not in the days of
Henry VIII., as it has been in later and more auspicious times, a passport
to confidence and popularity, either at the court or among the people of
England. Barclay's fate having led him, and probably his nearest relatives
also, across that Border which no Scotsman ever recrosses, to live and
labour among a people by no means friendly to his country, it would have
been a folly which so sensible a man as he was not likely to commit to have
displayed the red rag of his nationality before his easily excited
neighbours, upon whose friendliness his comfort and success depended. The
farther argument of the Biographia Brittannica, that "it is pretty
extraordinary that Barclay himself, in his several addresses to his
patrons, should never take notice of his being a stranger, which would have
made their kindness to him the more remarkable," is sufficiently disposed
of by the succeeding statement, that the Duke of Norfolk and the Earl of
Kent, Barclay's principal patrons, "are known to have been the fiercest
enemies of the Scots." Surely a man who was English in everything but his
birth could not be expected to openly blazon his Scottish nativity, without
adequate occasion for so doing, in the very face of his country's chiefest
enemies, who were at the same time his own best friends. His caution in
this respect, indeed, may be regarded as an additional proof of his
Scottish origin.

[2] BARCLAY'S VOCABULARY

Some of the words, stated in popular fashion to be Scotch--they are of
course of Saxon origin--the usage of which by Barclay is adduced as an
evidence of his nationality, are also to be found in Chaucer, but that does
not invalidate the argument as stated. The employment of so many words of
northern usage must form at least a strong corroborative argument in favour
of northern origin.

[3] THE CASTLE OF LABOUR

It ought to be stated that the modesty of the young author prevented him
from affixing his name to his first production, The Castle of Labour. Both
editions are anonymous. Bale, Pits, Wood, &c., all include it in the list
of his works without remark.

[4] BULLEYN'S DIALOGUE

A notice of the history of this once popular Dialogue, its ever recurring
disappearance, and ever recurring "discovery" by some fortunate antiquary,
would form an interesting chapter in a new "History of the transmission of
ancient books to modern times." Its chances of preservation and record were
unusually favourable. It must have been disseminated over the length and
breadth of the land in its day, having run through four editions in little
more than a dozen years. Maunsell's Catalogue (1595) records the edition of
1578. Antony Wood (1721), and Bishop Tanner (1748) both duly give it a
place in their notices of the productions of its author, without any
special remark. But the Biographia Brittanica (1748) in a long article upon
Bulleyn, in which his various works are noticed in great detail, introduces
the Dialogue as "_this long neglected and unknown treatise_," and gives an
elaborate account of it extending to about five columns of small print. The
now famous passage, descriptive of the early poets, is quoted at length,
and special notice of its bearing on Barclay's nationality taken, the
writer (Oldys) announcing that the dispute must now be settled in favour of
Scotland, "Seeing our author (Bulleyn), a contemporary who lived in, and
long upon the borders of Scotland, says, as above, he was born in that
kingdom: and as much indeed might have been in great measure gathered from
an attentive perusal of this poet himself."

The next biographer of Bulleyn, Aikin (Biog. Memoirs of Medicine, 1780),
makes no discovery, but contents himself with giving a brief account of the
Dialogue (in 1½ pages), in which the description of Chaucer, &c., is duly
noticed. Three years later, in spite of this, and the appearance of a
second edition of the Biographia Brittanica (1778), another really learned
and able antiquary, Waldron, in his edition of Jonson's Sad Shepherd
(1783), comes forth triumphantly announcing his discovery of the Dialogue
as that of a hitherto totally unknown treasure; and in an appendix favours
the curious with a series of extracts from it, extending to more than
thirty pages, prefacing them thus: "Having, among the various Mysteries and
Moralities, whether original impressions, reprinted, or described only by
those writers who have given any account of these Embrios of the English
Drama, _never met with or read of any other copy of the Dialogue, or
Morality, by Bulleyn, than the one_, [which I have used], an account of and
some extracts from it may not be unpleasing." The passage regarding the
poets is of course given _ad longum_.

The next notice of the Dialogue occurs in Herbert's Ames (1786), where two
editions, 1564 and 1578, are entered. Dibdin (1819), in addition, notices
the edition of 1573. In the biographical accounts of Bulleyn in
Hutchinson's Biographia Medica (1799), Aikin's General Biog. Dict. (1801),
and its successor, Chalmers's Biog. Dict. (1812), due mention is preserved
of the Dialogue in enumerating the works of its author. Sir Walter Scott
alludes to it in the Introduction to the Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border
(1802) as a "mystery," but his only knowledge of it is evidently derived
from Waldron. Chalmers's Life of Lindsay (Poetical Works, 1806) has also
kept it prominently before a considerable class of inquirers, as he gives
that part of the description of the poets relating to Lindsay a conspicuous
place, with the following note: "Owing to the very obliging temper of Mr
Waldron I have been permitted to see that _rare book_ of Dr Bulleyn, with
the second edition of 1569, which is remarkably different from the first in
1564." To this use of it by Chalmers we owe the references to it in Lord
Lindsay's Lives of the Lindsays, i. 261 (1849), Seton's Scottish Heraldry,
480 (1863), and Notes and Queries, 3rd s., iv. 164 (1863). It was also
probably Chalmers that drew the attention of the writer of the Memoir of
Barclay in the Lives of the Scottish Poets (1822), to the possibility of
there being also in the Dialogue notice of that poet. At any rate, he
quotes the description of the early poets, showing in his preliminary
remarks considerable familiarity with Bulleyn's history, pointing out the
probability of his having known Barclay at Ely, and arguing that whether or
not, "from living in the same neighbourhood he had an opportunity of
knowing better than any contemporary whose evidence on the subject is
extant, to what country Barclay was, by all about him, reputed to belong."
He precedes his quotations thus: "As the whole passage possesses
considerable elegance, and has been so _universally overlooked_ by the
critics, the transcription of it here will not probably be deemed out of
place." No mention is made of the title of the book from which the
"Allegorical Description of the Early English Poets" is taken; hence it is
impossible to say whether the quoter made use of a copy of the Dialogue, or
of Waldron's Notes. The spelling is modernised.

In various well-known bibliographical publications the existence of this
fugitive Dialogue is carefully registered, and its title, at least, made
known to all inquirers,--in Watt's Bibliotheca Britt. (1824), in Lowndes'
Bibliog. Manual (1834), and in Atkinson's Medical Bibliog. (1834); and by
the published Catalogues of the British Museum (1813), the Douce Collection
(1840), and the Bodleian Library (1843), it is made known that there are
copies of it preserved in these great collections. In Warton's Hist. of
Eng. Poetry (ed. 1840), it is also recorded by Park, in his notes to the
chapter on Gower, in which he refers to Bulleyn's visionary description of
that poet. Cooper's Athenæ Cantabrigienses, art. Bulleyn (1858), also
carefully notes the Dialogue and its editions. And in 1865 Collier's
well-known Bibliographical Account of Early English Literature again gives
an account (two pages long) of the much neglected production, in which the
passage relating to the poets is once more extracted in full, with the
preliminary remarks as quoted at p. xxvii. _supra_, but without the usual
announcement that the work has hitherto been unknown.

But in 1873, by the very last man from whom we might have expected it (F.
J. Furnivall, the Atlas on whose shoulders all our projects for the
preservation of our early literature rest, in Notes and Queries, 4th s.,
xii. 161), we are again introduced to this ever disappearing, ever
reappearing Dialogue as a fresh find in early English literature: "Few
things are pleasanter in reading old books than to come on a passage of
praise of our old poets, showing that in Tudor days men cared for the
'makers' of former days as we do still. To Mr David Laing's kindness I owe
the introduction to the following quotation from a rare tract, where one
wouldn't have expected to find such a passage," and then follows once more
the whole passage so often quoted for the first time. Dr Rimbault, in an
interesting note in a succeeding number of Notes and Queries (p. 234), is
the first one acquainted with the Dialogue to state that "this amusing old
work is perfectly well known, and has often been quoted from." So
henceforth we may presume that this interesting and long-fertile field of
discovery may be regarded as finally worked out.

[Illustration]

 * * * * *


A

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL CATALOGUE

OF

BARCLAY'S WORKS.

CONTENTS.

 * * * * *

  I. THE CASTELL OF LABOURE.
  II. THE SHYP OF FOLYS.
  III. THE EGLOGES.
  IV. THE INTRODUCTORY.
  V. THE MYRROUR OF GOOD MANERS.
  VI. CRONYCLE COMPLYED BY SALUST.
  VII. FIGURE OF OUR MOTHER HOLY CHURCH.
  VIII. THE LYFE OF SAYNT GEORGE.
  IX. THE LYFE OF SAYNTE THOMAS.
  X. HAYTHON'S CRONYCLE.

I. THE CASTELL OF LABOURE.--Wynkyn de Worde. 1506. Small Quarto. Black
letter.

 The title, "The castell of laboure," is within a scroll above a woodcut
 of men over a tub: on the verso, a cut of a man sitting at a desk. At
 sign. a ii. (recto) "Here begynneth the prologue of this present
 treatyse." [The Brit. Mus. copy has this on the verso of the title
 instead of the cut, a peculiarity which may entitle it to be called a
 separate edition, though it appears to agree otherwise with the copy
 described.] There are many curious woodcuts. Colophon on the reverse of
 sign. i iii. (51^b): "Thus endeth the castell of labour, wherin is
 rychesse, vertue, and honour. Enprynted at London in Fletestrete in the
 sygne of the sonne. by Wynkyn de worde. Anno d[=n]i M.ccccc.vi." There
 is no indication of authorship. Signatures: a b c d e f g h,
 alternately 8s and 4s, i 4; 52 leaves, not numbered. The British Museum
 and Cambridge University Library copies of this book have been
 collated, but as the former ends with H 3 and the latter wants the last
 leaf, that leaf must remain undescribed. Mr Bradshaw, however, says,
 "it almost certainly contained a woodcut on the recto, and one of the
 devices on the verso."

 A copy of this very scarce book was sold among Mr. West's books in 1773
 for £2.

I.a. THE CASTELL OF LABOURE.--Pynson. No date. Small Quarto. Black letter.

 The title, "Here begynneth the castell of laboure," is over a woodcut;
 and on the reverse is a woodcut; both the same as those in the previous
 edition. In the body of the work there are 30 woodcuts, which differ
 from those of the first edition, one of these (at G 6) is a repetition
 of that on the title page. Colophon: "Thus endeth the castell of labour
 wherin is rychesse, vertue and honoure. Enprynted be me Richarde
 Pynson." After the colophon comes another leaf (I 6), on the recto of
 which is the printer's device, and on the verso a woodcut representing
 a city on the banks of a river. Without indication of authorship.
 Signatures: A, 8 leaves; B--I, in sixes.

 "Neither Ames nor Herbert appear to have seen this rare volume; which
 is probably a reprint of Wynkyn de Worde's impression of 1506."
 (Dibdin's Typ. Antiq., II. 557.) There is a copy in the Library of H.
 Huth, Esq.

 * * * * *

II. THE SHIP OF FOLYS OF THE WORLDE.--Pynson. 1509. Folio.

 On the recto of the first leaf there is a large woodcut of Pynson's
 arms, or device No. VII., similar to that which is on the reverse of
 the last leaf of each of the volumes of his edition of Lord Berners'
 translation of Froissart's Chronicles; on the back of the first leaf is
 the translator's dedication to "Thomas Cornisshe, bishop of Tine, and
 suffragan bishop of Bath;" on the next leaf begins "The regyster or
 table of this present boke in Englyshe," (all as on pp. cxiii.--cxx.),
 succeeded by a Latin table. Then on sign. a i. and fol. i. a large
 woodcut, the same as is used for the title page of Cawood's edition
 (and on p. 313, Vol. II.), with a Latin description in the margin.
 Beneath is the title in Latin. On the back, "Alexander Barclay
 excusynge the rudeness of his translacion," followed with "An
 exhortacion of Alexander Barclay." Then on fol. ii., etc., follow in
 Latin, "Epigramma," "Epistola" in prose, and various "Carmina." On the
 back of fol. v. "The exhortacion of Brant to the fools" in Latin verse,
 followed by Barclay's version with the heading "Barclay the Translatour
 tho the Foles." On fol. iiii. the "Prologus Jacobi Locher ... incipit,"
 followed by its translation into English. On fol. ix., etc.,
 "Hecatastichon in proludium auctoris et Libelli Narragonici" and the
 English translation, "Here begynneth the prologe." On xii. "The
 Argument" in Latin and English, and then on xiii. commences the first
 chapter, "De inutilibus libris," in Latin, and then in English, which
 is the order throughout, with the cuts at the beginning of either the
 one or other as the page suited. The book concludes with a ballad in
 honour of the virgin Mary, consisting of twelve octave stanzas: at the
 end of which is the colophon in a stanza of seven lines. On the verso
 of the last leaf is the printer's device, No. v.

 The Latin is uniformly printed in the Roman type, and the English in
 the Gothic. Herbert supposes the diphthongs to be "the first perhaps
 used in this kingdom."

 The cuts are rude, coarse, English imitations of those in the original
 editions. They are, including the preliminary one, 118 in number. The
 cut illustrating the chapter, "Of them that correct other," etc., fol.
 liii. has been exchanged with the cut of the succeeding chapter. The
 cut illustrating "The unyuersall shyp and generall Barke," fol.
 cclxii., is repeated at the succeeding chapter. The one illustrating
 Barclay's new chapter "Of folys that ar ouer worldly" is an imitation
 of the illustration of "De singularitate quorundam novorum fatuorum" in
 the Latin edition of March 1497. The cut illustrating the ballad of the
 Virgin appears in the original at the head of "Excusatio Jacobi Locher
 Philomusi," and illustrates, according to the margin, "Derisio boni
 operis."

 The word "Folium" is on the left hand page, and the number, in Roman
 capitals, on the right throughout the book; the last is cclxxiiii.
 Including the dedication and table (4 folios) there are 283 folios. The
 numbering is a model of irregularity: iiii. is repeated for vi., xx.
 stands for xv., xviii. is repeated, xx. is wanting, xxii. is repeated,
 xxiv. is wanting, xxx. is repeated, xxxvi. is wanting, xxxix. is
 repeated in place of xliv., xlviii. is wanting, xlix. is repeated, lvii
 is repeated after lxi., lviii follows twice, lix., lx., lxi. being
 repeated in succession after lviii., lxvii., lxviii. are repeated after
 lxviii., lxxxii. is wanting, lxxxiii. is repeated, lxxxii. stands for
 lxxxvii., lxxxiii. succeeds for lxxxviiii, cclxv. succeeds for lxxxix.,
 lxxxxii. is repeated for lxxxxvii., [in the Grenville copy this leaf is
 correctly numbered], cxxxii is wanting, cxl. stands for cxxxviii.,
 cxlxi. stands for cxlvi., clxxiv. is wanting, clxxxxxi. stands for
 cci., ccxii. is repeated for ccxvii., ccxxxviii. is wanting, cclx.
 stands for ccl., cclviii. is repeated for cclx.

 The numeration by signatures is as follows: + iiij; a, 8; b--p, 6 s; q,
 7; r, s, t, v, x, y, z, &, 6 s; A--Y, 6 s.

 The book is extremely rare. There is a fine copy in the Bodleian
 Library among Selden's books, another in the British Museum, Grenville
 Collection, and another in the Library of St. John's College, Oxford.

 The following are the more notable prices: Farmer, 1798, £2. 4s.;
 Sotheby's, 1821, £28; Dent, £30. 9s.; Bib. Anglo-Poetica, £105;
 Perkins, 1873, £130.

 The following amusing note on prices is taken from Renouard's
 "Catalogue d'un Amateur." "Les premières éditions latines de ce
 singulier livre, celles des traductions françoises, toutes également
 remplies de figures en bois, ne déplaisent pas aux amateurs, mais
 jamais ils ne les ont payées un haut prix. La traduction angloise faite
 en 1509, sur le francois, et avec des figures en bois, plus mauvaises
 encore que leurs modèles, se paye en Angleterre 25, 30 et mème 60
 guinées; c'est là, si l'on veut, du zèle patriotique, de l'esprit
 national."

II.a. STULTIFERA NAUIS.... THE SHIP OF FOOLES..... With diuers other
workes.... very profitable and fruitfull for all men.... Cawood. 1570.
Folio.

 A large cut of vessels filled with fools (the same as on p. 313, Vol.
 II.) is inserted between the Latin and English titles. This edition
 omits the ballad to the Virgin at the end. The English is in black
 letter, and the Latin in Roman, in the same order as in the preceding
 edition. On the recto of leaf 259: Thus endeth the Ship of Fooles,
 translated ... by Alexander Barclay Priest, at that time Chaplen in the
 Colledge of S. Mary Otery in the Countie of Deuon. Anno Domini 1508. On
 the back "Excusatio Iacobi Locher Philomusi," in Sapphic verse. On the
 next page five stanzas by Barclay "excusing the rudenes of his
 Translation." Lastly, an Index in Latin, and then in English. Then,
 follow the "diuers other workes," the Mirrour of good maners, and the
 Egloges. Colophon: Imprinted at London in Paules Church-yarde by Iohn
 Cawood Printer to the Queenes Maiestie. Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum
 solum.

 The woodcuts, including the one on the title-page, number 117. They are
 the same as those of Pynson's edition, but show occasional traces of
 the blocks having been chipped in the course of their preservation in a
 printer's office for 60 years or so. The borders only differ, being of
 a uniform type, while those of the previous edition are woodcuts of
 several patterns.

 The numbering is a little irregular; the preliminary leaves (12) are
 unnumbered. The folios are numbered in figures on the left hand page,
 'folio' being prefixed to the first six, 16 is repeated for 17, 13
 stands for 31, [in one of the Adv. Lib. copies the latter irregularity
 is found, though not the former; in the other, 17 and 31 are numbered
 correctly], 96 is repeated for 99, 188 for 191, 100 for 200, and 205
 for 201. The last number is 259, and there are three extra leaves, thus
 making 274 for the Ship. The supplementary works are not numbered. The
 signatures are as follows: _The Ship_, ¶ six leaves; ¶¶ six leaves; A
 to U u, in sixes; X x, four leaves; _Mirrour of good manners_, A--G, in
 sixes; _Egloges_, A to D, in sixes; in all 680 pp.

 This book was licensed to Cawood in 1567-8, and is said to be the only
 book he had license for. It is now very rare.

 Prices: Digby, 1680, 4s. 4d. Bernard, 1698, 1s. 10d. Gulston, 1783, £1,
 16s. White Knights, £8, 12s. Roxburghe, £9, 19s. 6d. Fonthill, £13,
 13s. Bib. Anglo-Poet, £12, 12s. Heber, £8, 12s. Sotheby's, 1873, £48,
 10s.

 * * * * *

 A complete bibliography of the various editions and versions of the
 Ship of Fools will be found in Zarocke's edition of the original, or in
 Graesse's Trésor de livres rares et précieux. A notice is subjoined of
 the two editions of the English prose translation, and of the two other
 publications bearing the title.

 The abridged prose translation, by Henry Watson, from the French prose
 version of Jehan Droyn, appeared from the press of De Worde in the same
 year in which Barclay's fuller poetical version was issued. In both
 text and illustrations it is a much inferior production to the latter.
 As the existence of the first edition has been, and still is, denied,
 it being frequently confounded with Barclay's book, we transcribe the
 following description of the only known copy from Van Praet's
 "Catalogue des livres imprimés sur vélin de la Bibliotheque du Roi."

The Shyppe of Fooles, translated out of frenche, by Henry Watson. London,
Wynkyn de Worde, 1509, petit in--4.

 Edition en lettres de forme, sans chiffres ni réclames, avec
 signatures, figures et initiales en bois; à longues lignes, au nombre
 de 32 sur les pages entierès; cont. 169 f.; les 7 premiers renferment
 1. le titre suivant, gravé audessus d'une figure qui représente le
 navire des fous:

 ¶ The shyppe of fooles.

 2. Le prologue du traducteur; 3. la préface; 4. la table des chapitres.

 Au recto du dernier f. est cette souscription:

 ¶ Thus endeth the shyppe of fooles of this worde. Enprynted at London
 in Flete strete by Wynk[=y] de worde prynter vnto the excellent
 pryncesse Marguerete, Countesse of Rychemonde and Derbye, and grandame
 vnto our moost naturall souereyne lorde kynge Henry [=y] viii. The yere
 of our lorde. M.CCCCC. ix. ¶ The fyrste yere of the reygne of our
 fouerayne lorde kynge Henry the viii. The. vi. daye of Julii. On
 aperçoit au verso le monogramme et la marque de William Caxton, au bas
 desquels on lit ces mots: Wynken de Worde."

 This beautiful copy upon vellum is the only example of this edition
 known.

The grete Shyppe of Fooles of this worlde. W[=y]kyn de Worde. 1517. Quarto.

 This is the second edition of Watson's translation. Colophon: "Thus
 endeth the shyppe of fooles of this worlde. Jmprynted at Londod in
 flete strete by W[=y]kyn de Worde. ye yere of our lorde M.CCCCC. &
 xvii.

 ¶ The nynthe yere of y^e reygne of our souerayne lorde kynge Henry y^e
 VIII. The xx. daye of June." It contains G G 6, fours and eights
 alternately (the signatures ending on G G iij.), besides 6 leaves, with
 the prologue, prolude and table, before signature A.

 Extremely rare. Roxburghe, £64.

The Ship of Fools Fully Fraught and Richly Laden with Asses, Fools,
Jack-daws, Ninnihammers, Coxcombs, Slenderwits, Shallowbrains, Paper-Skuls,
Simpletons, Nickumpoops, Wiseakers, Dunces, and Blockheads, Declaring their
several Natures, Manners and Constitutions; the occasion why this Ship was
built, with the places of their intended Voyage, and a list of the Officers
that bear Command therein.

  If for this Voyage any have a mind,
  They with Jack Adams may acceptance find,
  Who will strain hard ere they shall stay behind.

 Licensed, Roger L'Estrange.
 [A large woodcut of the Ship.]

London, Printed by J. W. for J. Clark, at the Bible and Harp in
West-Smithfield. n. d. [Circa 1650.] 4to. 4 leaves.

 "This book, or rather tract, has nothing in common with Barclay's Ship
 of Fools, except the general idea. It is entirely in prose. My copy has
 nothing to show to whom it formerly belonged."--(Letter of H. Huth,
 Esq.) The last sentence was elicited by the inquiry whether Mr Huth's
 copy were the one formerly belonging to Mr Heber.--See _Bibliotheca
 Heberiana_, Part IV., No. 752.

Stultifera Navis ... The modern Ship of fools. Lond. 1807, 80. Pp. xxiv.,
295.

 A wretched production in verse, in imitation of Barclay's Ship of
 Fools, published anonymously by W. H. Ireland, the Shakesperian forger.

 * * * * *

III. THE EGLOGES OF ALEXADER BARCLAY, PREST.--The first three, without
printer's name or device. No date. Quarto. Black letter.

 "Here begynneth the Egloges of Alexader Barclay, prest, wherof the
 fyrst thre conteyneth the myseryes of courters and courtes of all
 prynces in generall, the matter wherof was translated into Englyshe by
 the sayd Alexander in fourme of Dialogues, out of a boke named in latyn
 Miserie Curialiu, compyled by Eneas Siluius, Poete and oratour, whiche
 after was Pope of Rome, & named Pius." This title is over a cut of two
 shepherds, Coridon and Cornix, the interlocutors in these three
 eclogues. On the back is a cut of David and Bathsheba. At the end of
 the third egloge: "Thus endyth the thyrde and last egloge of the mysery
 of court and courters, composed by Alexander Barclay, preste, in his
 youthe." A cut of the two shepherds and a courtier fills up the page.
 Without date, printer's name, or device. Contains P 6, in fours, the
 last leaf blank.

III.a. THE FOURTHE EGLOGE OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY.--Pynson. No date. Quarto.
Black letter.

 It is entitled, "The Boke of Codrus and Mynaclus," over the cut of a
 priest, with a shaven crown, writing at a plutus. It concludes with
 "The discrypcion of the towre of Vertue & Honour, into whiche the noble
 Hawarde contended to entre, by worthy acts of chiualry," related by
 Menalcas, in stanzas of eight verses. At the end, "Thus endeth the
 fourthe Eglogge of Alexandre Barcley, coteyning the maner of the riche
 men anenst poets and other clerkes. Emprinted by Richarde Pynson priter
 to the kynges noble grace." On the last leaf is his device, No. V.
 Contains 22 leaves, with cuts.

III.b. THE FYFTE EGLOGE OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY. --Wynkyn de Worde. No date.
Quarto. Black letter.

 "The fyfte Eglog of Alexandre Barclay of the Cytezen and vplondyshman."
 This title is over a large woodcut of a priest, sitting in his study.
 Beneath, "Here after foloweth the Prologe." On the verso of A ii. are
 two cuts of two shepherds, whole lengths, with this head-title,
 "Interlocutoures be Amyntas and Faustus." There are no other cuts.
 Colophon: "Here endeth the v. Eglog of Alexandre Barclay of the Cytezyn
 and vplondysshman. Imprynted at London in flete strete, at the sygne of
 [the] Sonne, by Wynkyn de worde." Beneath, device No. v. Contains A 8,
 B 4, C 6; 18 leaves. There is a copy in the British Museum.

 With the first four Eclogues as above, Woodhouse, 1803, (Herbert's
 copy), £25.; resold, Dent, 1827, £36.; resold, Heber, 1834, £24. 10s.
 At Heber's sale this unique set, containing the only known copy of the
 first edition of the first four Eclogues, was bought by Thorpe; further
 I have not been able to trace it.

III.c. THE EGLOGES.--John Herforde. No date. Quarto.

 "Here begynneth the Egloges of Alex. Barclay, Priest, whereof the first
 three conteineth the Miseries of Courters and Courtes." "Probably a
 reprint of Pynson's impression," Dibdin. Contains only Eclogues I.-III.
 Herbert conjectures the date to be 1548; Corser, 1546; Hazlitt, 1545.

III.d. THE EGLOGES.--Humfrey Powell. No date. Quarto. Black letter.

 "Here begynneth the Egloges of Alexander Barclay, priest, whereof the
 first thre conteineth the miseries of courters and courtes, of all
 Princes in general ... In the whiche the interloquutors be, Cornix, and
 Coridon." Concludes: "Thus endeth the thyrde and last Eglogue of the
 Misery of Courte and Courters, Composed by Alexander Barclay preest, in
 his youth. Imprinted at London by Humfrey Powell." Contains only
 Eclogues I.-III. Collation: Title, A 1; sig. A to P2, in fours; 58
 leaves not numbered.

 This is an edition of extreme rarity. It is very well printed, and the
 title is surrounded with a woodcut border with ornamented pillars at
 the sides. Herbert conjectures the date to be 1549, the Bib.
 Anglo-Poetica, Lowndes, and Corser, 1548. There is a copy in the
 Cambridge University Library, and another in the possession of David
 Laing, Esq.

 Prices: Inglis, £6. 2s. 6d.; Bright, 1845. £10. 10s.; Bib.
 Anglo-Poetica, £15.

III.e. CERTAYNE EGLOGES OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY PRIEST.--Cawood. 1570. Folio.
Black letter.

 Appended to Cawood's edition of the Ship of Fools. No title-page, cuts,
 or pagination. The above heading on A i.

 Colophon: Thus endeth the fifth and last Egloge of Alexander Barclay,
 of the Citizen and the man of the countrey. Imprinted at London in
 Paules Church-yarde by Iohn Cawood, Printer to the Queenes Maiestie.
 Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

 Contains A--D, in sixes.

III._f_. THE CYTEZEN AND UPLONDYSHMAN: an Eclogue [the fifth] by Alexander
Barclay.

 Printed from the original edition by Wynkyn de Worde. Edited, with an
 Introductory Notice of Barclay and his other Eclogues, by F.W.
 Fairholt, F.S.A. London; printed for the Percy Society [vol. XXII.],
 1847. 8vo. Pp. + 6, lxxiv., 47.

 * * * * *

IV. THE INTRODUCTORY TO WRITE AND TO PRONOUNCE FRENCHE. Coplande. 1521.
Folio. Black letter.

 'Here begynneth the introductory to wryte, and to pronounce Frenche
 compyled by Alexander Barcley compendiously at the commaudemet of the
 ryght hye excellent and myghty prynce Thomas duke of Northfolke.' This
 title is over a large woodcut of a lion rampant, supporting a shield,
 containing a white lion in a border, (the same as that on the title of
 the Sallust, VI.), then follows a French ballad of 16 lines in two
 columns, the first headed, "R. Coplande to the whyte lyone, and the
 second, "¶ Ballade." On the recto of the last leaf, 'Here foloweth the
 maner of dauncynge of bace dauces after the vse of fraunce & other
 places translated out of frenche in englysshe by Robert coplande.'
 Col.: Jmprynted at London in the Fletestrete at the sygne of the rose
 Garlande by Robert coplande, the yere of our lorde. M.CCCCC.xxi. y^e
 xxii. day of Marche.' Neither folioed nor paged. Contains C 4, in
 sixes, 16 leaves.

 In the edition of Palsgrave (see above, p. lxxiii.), published among
 the "Documents inédits sur l'histoire de France," the editor says of
 this work of Barclay's: "Tous mes efforts pour découvrir un exemplaire
 de ce curieux ouvrage ont été inutiles." There is a copy, probably
 unique, in the Bodleian; it was formerly Herbert's, afterwards Douce's.

 All the parts of this treatise relating to French pronunciation have
 been carefully reprinted by Mr A. J. Ellis, in his treatise "On Early
 English Pronunciation" (published by the Philological Society), Part
 III., p. 804.

 * * * * *

V. THE MYRROUR OF GOOD MANERS.----Pynson. No date. Folio. Black letter.

 'Here begynneth a ryght frutefull treatyse, intituled the myrrour of
 good maners, coteynyng the iiii. vertues, callyd cardynall, compyled in
 latyn by Domynike Mancyn: And translate into englysshe: at the desyre
 of syr Gyles Alyngton, knyght: by Alexander Bercley prest: and monke of
 Ely. This title is over a cut, the same as at the head of Barclay's
 preface to his translation of Sallust, a representation of the author
 in a monkish habit on his knees, presenting a book to a nobleman. The
 text begins on back of title. The original is printed in Roman letter
 in the margins.----Colophon in a square woodcut border: Thus endeth the
 ryght frutefull matter of the foure vertues cardynall: Jmprynted by
 Rychard Pynson: prynter vnto the kynges noble grace: with his gracyous
 pryuylege the whiche boke I haue prynted, at the instance & request, of
 the ryght noble Rychard yerle of Kent. On the back, Pynson's device,
 No. v. It has neither running titles, catch-words, nor the leaves
 numbered. Signatures; A to G, in sixes, and H, in eights; 100 pp.

 In the British Museum, Grenville collection, from Heber's collection.
 "This edition differs materially from that used by Herbert, which has
 led Dr Dibdin to the conclusion that there were two impressions." So
 says a MS. note on the copy, (quoted in the Bib. Grenv.), but Dibdin
 does not commit himself to the conclusion, his words being these: "This
 description is given from a copy in the possession of Mr Heber; which,
 from its varying with the account of Herbert, Mr H. supposes, with
 justice, must be a different one from Herbert's." I have failed to
 discover the difference.

 Prices: Perry, £9.; Roxburghe (last leaf wanting), £10. 10s.;
 Bibliotheca Anglo-Poetica, £12. 12s.; Sykes, £16. 16s.

 To the above edition must belong the fragment entered in Bohn's Lowndes
 under "Four," thus: "Four Vertues Cardinal. Lond. R. Pynson, n.d.
 folio. Only a fragment of this Poem is known; it was printed at the
 request of Rychard Erle of Kent."

V._a._. THE MIRROUR OF GOOD MANERS.----Cawood. 1570. Folio. Black letter.

 Appended to Cawood's edition of the Ship of Fools. No title page,
 pagination, or cuts. The above heading on A 1. The Latin original
 printed in Roman by the side of the English. Contains A-G, in sixes.

 It may be useful to give here the bibliography of the other English
 translations of Mancyn.

Mancinus de quattuor Virtutibus. [The englysshe of Mancyne apon the foure
cardynale vertues.] No place, printer's name, or date, but with the types
of Wynkyn de Worde, circa 1518. 4to, a-d, in eights. Bodleian.

 Following the title occurs: Petri Carmeliani exasticon in Dominici
 Mancini de quattuor cardineis virtutibus libellum. The Latin portion is
 in verse, printed in Roman letter, with marginal notes in black letter,
 of a very small size, and the English in prose.

 The English part, in black letter, is entitled: The englysshe of
 Mancyne apon the foure cardynale vertues. n.p. or d. This portion has a
 separate title and signatures; the title is on A 1. On sign. F ii.
 occurs, "The correccion of the englysshe," and on the verso of the same
 leaf is printed, "The correction of the texte." A, B, C, and D, 8
 leaves each; E, 6 leaves; and F, 4 leaves; 42 leaves altogether. A copy
 of this is in the British Museum. Only two perfect copies are known.

A Plaine Path to Perfect Vertue: Deuised and found out by Mancinus, a
Latine Poet, and translated into English by G. Turberuile, Gentleman.

 Ardua ad virtutem via.

 Imprinted at London in Knightrider-strete, by Henry Bynneman, for
 Leonard Maylard. Anno. 1568. 8vo., 72 leaves. Black letter, in verse.
 Dedicated "To the right Honorable and hys singular good Lady, Lady
 Anne, Coutesse Warvvicke." There is also a metrical address to the
 reader, and 8 4-line stanzas by James Sanford in praise of the
 translator.

 Freeling, 1836, No. 911, £7., bought for Mr Corser: now in the British
 Museum. Supposed to be unique.

 * * * * *

VI. CRONYCLE compyled in Latyn, by the renowned Sallust.----Pynson. No
date. Folio.

 "Here begynneth the famous cronycle of the warre, which the romayns had
 agaynst Jugurth, vsurper of the kyngdome of Numidy. which cronycle is
 compyled in latyn by the renowmed romayne Salust. And translated into
 englysshe by syr Alexander Barclay preest, at comaundement of the right
 hye and mighty prince: Thomas duke of Northfolke." There are two
 editions by Pynson of this book.

 I. In this edition the lower half of the title page has a square
 enclosed by double lines containing the Norfolk arms, a lion rampant,
 holding a shield in his paws, on which is another lion, a cut which
 also appears on the title of The Introductory. There is a full page cut
 of the royal arms with portcullis, &c., on the back, followed by five
 pages of Table. The preface to his patron, in English,----together with
 a Latin dedication to Bishop Veysy, in parallel columns,----begins on
 the verso of signature A iiii, under a cut of the author presenting his
 book to him, the same as that which appears on the title of The myrrour
 of good maners. [See the cut prefixed to the Notice of Barclay's life,
 which is confined however to a reproduction of the two principal
 figures only, two other figures, evidently of servants, and some
 additional ornamentation of the room being omitted.] At the end of this
 preface is another cut of the author, writing at a desk; also on the
 back of the leaf is a cut of the disembarking of an army. There are no
 other cuts, but the volume is adorned throughout with very fine woodcut
 initials. Catchwords are given irregularly at the beginning, but
 regularly towards the end, at the bottom of the left hand page only,
 but the preface has them to every column. Colophon:----"Thus endeth the
 famous cronycle of the war ... imprented at London by Rycharde Pynson
 printer vnto the kynges noble grace: with priuylege vnto hym grauted by
 our sayd souerayne lorde the kynge." On the back of the last leaf is
 Pynson's device, No. v. The date is erroneously conjectured in Moss's
 Classical Bib. to be 1511. It was probably 1519, certainly between 1519
 and 1524. Contains 92 numbered leaves, and one leaf unnumbered, besides
 eight leaves of preliminary matter: numbering quite regular:
 signatures; a 8, A--O, 6 s, P, Q, 4 s. In the British Museum, Grenville
 Collection, the Bodleian, and the Public Library at Cambridge.

 Prices: Roxburghe, £23, 12s.; Sykes, £8, 12s.; Heber, £5, 15s. 6d.;
 Sotheby's, 1857, £10.

 II. In this edition, the title page is the same as in the other with
 the exception of a semicolon for a full point after Numidy, the
 succeeding which having an e added, and romayne being without the e,
 but on the back instead of a cut of the royal arms The table commences;
 the preface begins on the recto of sign. a 4, under the cut of the
 author presenting his book to the Duke of Norfolk, and ends without the
 leaf of woodcuts which is appended to the preface of the first edition.
 Pynson's device at the end of the book is also wanting in this edition.
 It contains only fol. lxxxvi., with six leaves of preliminary matter;
 the pagination is a little irregular, xxi. and xxii. are wanting but
 xxiii. is given three times, and lxxvii. is repeated for lxxviii.; the
 British Museum copy is deficient in folios lxii. and lxv.: signatures;
 a 6, A--N, 6 s, and O, P, 4 s. The initials are the same as those in
 the first edition in the great majority of cases, but appear much more
 worn. There are catch-words only at the end of every signature
 throughout the book, except to the preface, which has them to every
 column. In the British Museum, and the Public Library, Cambridge.

 Both editions have the Latin in Roman letter in the margins, and
 running-titles. Ames mentions an edition with cuts, which must be the
 same as the first of these.

VI._a._ CRONICLE OF WARRE. Compiled in Laten by Saluste. Corrected by
Thomas Paynell. Waley, 1557. Quarto.

 "Here begynneth the famous Cronicle of warre, whyche the Romaynes hadde
 agaynst Jugurth vsurper of the kyngedome of Numidie: whiche Cronicle is
 compiled in Laten by the renowmed Romayne Saluste: and translated into
 englyshe by syr alexander Barklaye prieste. And nowe perused and
 corrected by Thomas Paynell. Newely Jmprinted in the yere of oure Lorde
 God M.D.L vij." On the verso of the title begins Paynell's
 dedication--"To the ryghte honorable Lorde Antonye Vycounte Mountegue,
 Knyghte of the ryghte honorable order of the garter, and one of the
 Kynge and Queenes Magesties pryuie counsayle." "The prologue" begins on
 a 1. Barclay's preface and dedication are omitted, as well as the Latin
 of Sallust. Col.: "Thus endeth the famouse Cronicle of the warre ...
 against Jugurth ... translated... by syr Alexander Barkeley, prieste,
 at commaundemente of ... Thomas, duke of Northfolke, And imprinted at
 London in Foster lane by Jhon Waley." Signatures; H h, 4 s, besides
 title and dedication, two leaves: the pagination commences on a 4, at
 "The fyrste chapter," the last folio being cxx.; xxi. is repeated for
 xxii., xxiii. for xxiv., xix., stands for xxix., lvii. is repeated, and
 lxxiv. is repeated for lxxv.

 This edition forms the second part of a volume having the following
 general title page: The Conspiracie of Catiline, written by Constancius
 Felicius Durantinus, and translated bi Thomas Paynell: with the
 historye of Jugurth, writen by the famous Romaine Salust, and
 translated into Englyshe by Alexander Barcklaye.

 * * * * *

VII. ALEX. BARCLAY HIS FIGURE OF OUR MOTHER HOLY CHURCH OPPRESSED BY THE
FRENCHE KING. Pynson. Quarto.

 This is given by Herbert on the authority of Maunsell's Catalogue, p.
 7.

 * * * * *

VIII. THE LYFE OF THE GLORIOUS MARTYR SAYNT GEORGE. Translated by Alexander
Barclay, while he was a monk of Ely, and dedicated to N. West, Bp. of Ely.
Pinson [Circa 1530.] Quarto. [Herbert, 289].

 * * * * *

IX. THE LYFE OF SAYNTE THOMAS. Pynson. No date. Quarto. Black letter.

 "¶ Here begynneth the lyfe of the blessed martyr saynte Thomas." This
 title is the headline of this little treatise; at the beginning of
 which is indented a small woodcut of a man in armour, striking at the
 bishop, with his cross-bearer before him. It begins "The martir saynte
 Thomas was son to Gylberde Bequet a burgeys of the Cite of London. And
 was borne in y^e place, whereas now standeth the churche called saynte
 Thomas of Akers." It concludes, "¶ Thus endeth the lyfe of the blessed
 martyr saynt Thomas of Caunturbury. Jmprynted by me Rycharde Pynson,
 prynter vnto the kynges noble grace." Contains eight leaves. There is a
 copy in the British Museum. Assigned to Barclay on tne authority of
 Wood.

 * * * * *

X. HAYTHON'S CRONYCLE. Pynson. No date. Folio. Black letter.

 "Here begynneth a lytell Cronycle, translated & imprinted at the cost &
 charge of Rycharde Pynson, by the comaundement of the ryght high and
 mighty prince, Edwarde duke of Buckingham, yerle of Gloucestre,
 Staffarde, and of Northamton," over a large woodcut. Colophon: "Here
 endeth, [_&c_.] Imprinted by the sayd _Richarde Pynson_, printer unto
 the Kinges noble grace." Date conjectured to be between 1520 and 1530.
 Pynson's device, No. 5, at the end. Collation: A--E, and H, in sixes; F
 and G, and I, in fours; forty-eight leaves.

 On the verso of fol. 35, "Here endeth y^e boke of thistoris of thoriet
 partes copyled by a relygious man frere Hayton frere of Premostre
 order, sotyme lorde of court & cosyn german to the kyng of Armeny vpon
 y^e passage of the holy lande. By the comaudement of y^e holy fader y^e
 apostle of Rome Clemet the V. in y^e cite of Potiers which boke I
 Nicholas Falcon, writ first in French ... I haue traslated it in Latyn
 for our holy father y^e pope. In the yere of our lorde god M.CCC.VII.
 in y^e moneth of August. Deo gras."

 "The travels of Hayton into the Holy Land and Armenia, and his history
 of Asia, is one of the most valuable of the early accounts of the east.
 The present is the only translation into English, and from the
 circumstances of its being printed by Pynson and having been (when in
 Mr Heber's collection) bound with two other works (Mirrour of good
 Maners and Sallust) both translated by Barclay, was probably also
 translated by him. It is a book of extraordinaiy rarity, no perfect
 copy that can be traced having previously occured for sale."
 (Bibliotheca Grenvilliana, vol. I.)

 Heber's copy (the one above mentioned), £40. 9s. 6d.

 * * * * *


THE SHIP OF FOOLS.

[Illustration]

_Venerandissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino: domino Thome Cornisshe
Tenenensis pontifici ac diocesis Badonensis Suffraganio vigilantissimo, sue
paternitatis Capellanus humilimus Alexander Barclay suiipsius
recommendacionem cum omni summissione, et reuerentia._

_Tametsi crebris negocijs: varioque impedimentorum genere fatigatus paulo
diutiùs quàm volueram a studio reuulsus eram. Attamen obseruandissime
presul: Stultiferam classem (vt sum tue paternati pollicitus) iam tandem
absolui et impressam ad te destinaui. Neque tamen certum laborem pro
incerto premio (humano. s.) meis impossuissem humeris: nisi Seruianum illud
dictum (longe anteaqam inceperam) admonuisset. Satius esse non incipere
quàm inceptum minus perfectum relinquere. Completo tamen opere: nec
quemquam magis dignum quàm tua sit paternitas existimaui cui id dedicarem:
tum quia saluberrima tua prudentia, morum grauitas, vite sanctitas
doctrineque assiduitas: errantes fatuos mumdanis ab illecebris ad virtutis
tramites: difficiles licet: possint reducere: tum vero: quia sacros ad
ordines per te sublimatus et promotus, multisque aliis tuis beneficiis
ditatus non potui tibi meum obsequium non coartare. Opus igitur tue
paternitati dedicaui: meorum primicias laborum qui in lucem eruperunt Atque
vt tua consuluerit paternatis: autoris carmina cum meis vulgaribus
rithmicis vná alternatim coniunixi: et quantum a vero carminum sensu
errauerim, tue autoritatis iudicium erit. Fateor equidem multo plura
adiecisse quam ademisse: partim ad vicia que hac nostra in regione
abundantius pullulant mordacius carpenda: partimque ob Rithmi
difficultatem. Adieci etiam quasdam Biblie aliorumque autorum concordancias
in margine notatas quo singula magis lectoribus illucescant: Simul ad
inuidorum caninos latratus pacandos: et rabida ora obstruenda: qui vbi quid
facinorum: quo ipsi scatent: reprehensum audierint. continuo patulo gutture
liuida euomunt dicta, scripta dilacerant. digna scombris ac thus carmina
recensent: sed hi si pergant maledicere: vt stultiuagi comites classem
insiliant. At tu venerande Presul Discipuli tui exiguum munusculum: hilari
fronte accipito, Classemque nostram (si quid vagum, si quid erronium: si
quid denique superfluum emineat: optimam in partem interpretando: ab
inuidorum faucibus: tue autoritatis clipeo tucaris. Vale. Ex Impressoria
officina Richardi Pynson. iij. Idus Decembris._

¶ THIS PRESENT BOKE NAMED THE SHYP OF FOLYS OF THE WORLDE WAS TRANSLATED IN
THE COLLEGE OF SAYNT MARY OTERY IN THE COUNTE OF DEUONSHYRE: OUT OF LATEN,
FRENCH, AND DOCHE INTO ENGLYSSHE TONGE BY ALEXANDER BARCLAY PRESTE: AND AT
THAT TYME CHAPLEN IN THE SAYDE COLLEGE. TRANSLATED THE YERE OF OUR LORDE
GOD. M.CCCCC.VIII. IMPRENTYD IN THE CYTE OF LONDON IN FLETESTRE AT THE
SIGNE OF SAYNT GEORGE. BY RYCHARDE PYNSON TO HYS COSTE AND CHARGE: ENDED
THE YERE OF OUR SAUIOUR. M. D. IX. THE. XIIII. DAY OF DECEMBER.

TABULA.

¶ THE REGYSTER OR TABLE OF THIS PRESENT BOKE IN ENGLYSSHE.

[VOLUME I.]

¶ Alexander Barclay excusynge the rudenes of his translacion, y^e first
lefe Barclay y^e translatour to y^e folys.

A prologe in prose shewynge to what intent this Boke was firste made, & who
were the first Auctours of it.

Another Prologe: in Balade concernyng the same.

In what place this Boke was translate and to what purpose it was
translatyd.

¶ Here begynneth the Folys and firste of inprofytable bokys.

¶ Of euyll Counsellours Juges & men of lawe.

Of couetyse and prodigalyte.

Of newe disgysynges in apparayle.

¶ A lawde of the nobles and grauyte of Kynge Henry the eyght.

Of olde Folys encresynge foly with age.

Of negligent Fathers ayenst their Children.

Of taleberers: & mouers of debate.

Of nat folowers of good counsel.

Of vngoodly maners, and dysordred.

Of the hurtynge of frendshyp.

Of dispysers of holy scripture.

Of folys inprouydent.

Of disordred & venerious loue.

Of them that synne trustynge vpon the mercy of almyghty god.

Of folys y^t begyn great byldynge without sufficient prouysion.

Of glotons, and droncardes.

Of ryches vnprofytable.

Of folys that wyl serue two lordes both togyther.

Of superflue speche.

Of them that correct other, them self culpable in the same faut.

Of folys that fynde others good, nat restorynge the same to the owner.

¶ The sermon or doctryne of wysdom.

Of Folys bostyng them in fortune.

Of the superflue curyosyte of men.

Of great borowers, & slacke payers.

Of vnprofitable vowers & peticions.

Of negligent stodyers.

Of them that folvsshly speke ayenst the workes of god.

Of lewde Juges of others dedes.

Of pluralytees of benefyces.

Of synners that prolonge from daye to day to amende theyr myslyuyng.

Of men that ar Jelous.

Of auoutry, and specially of suche as ar bawdes to theyr wyues.

Of suche as nedys wyll contynue in theyr foly nat withstandynge holsom
erudicion.

An addicion of the secundaries of Otery saynt Mary, in Deuynshyre.

Of wrathfull folys.

Of the mutabylyte of fortune.

Of seke men inobedient.

Of to open councellers.

Of folys that can nat be ware by y^e mysfortune nor take example of others
damage.

Of folys that force or care for the bacbytynge of lewde people.

Of mockers and fals accusers.

Of them that despyse euerlastynge blys for worldly thynges & transitory.

Of talkers and makers of noyse in the Chirche of god.

Of folys that put them self in wylful ieopardy and peryll.

Of the way of felycyte, and godnes and the payne to come to synners.

Of olde folys y^t gyue example of vyce to youth negligent & vnexpert.

Of bodely lust or corporall voluptuosyte.

Of folys that can nat kepe secrete theyr owne counsell.

Of yonge folys that take olde wymen to theyr wyues nat for loue but for
ryches.

Of enuyous Folys.

Of impacient folys disdaynynge to abyde and suffer correccion, for theyr
profyte.

Of folysshe Fesicians vsynge theyr practyke without speculacyon.

Of the ende of worldly honour & power and of folys y^t trust in them.

An addicion of Alexander barclay.

Of predestinacyon.

Of folys that aply other mennys besynes leuynge theyr owne vndone.

Of the vyce of ingratytude or vnkyndnes and folys that vse it.

Of Folys that stande to moche in theyr owne conceyte.

Of folys that delyte them in daunsynge.

Of nyght watchers.

Of the vanyte of beggers.

[Illustration]

Alexander Barclay excusynge the rudenes of his translacion.

  Go Boke: abasshe the thy rudenes to present.
  To men auaunced to worshyp, and honour.
  By byrthe or fortune: or to men eloquent.
  By thy submyssion excuse thy Translatour.
  But whan I remember the comon behauour
  Of men: I thynke thou ought to quake for fere
  Of tunges enuyous whose venym may the dere

  Tremble, fere, and quake, thou ought I say agayne.
  For to the Redar thou shewest by euydence
  Thy selfe of Rethoryke pryuate and barayne
  In speche superflue: and fruteles of sentence.
  Thou playnly blamest without al difference
  Bothe hye and lowe sparinge eche mannes name.
  Therfore no maruayle thoughe many do the blame.

  But if thou fortune to lye before a State
  As Kynge or Prince or Lordes great or smal.
  Or doctour diuyne or other Graduate
  Be this thy Excuse to content theyr mynde withal
  My speche is rude my termes comon and rural
  And I for rude peple moche more conuenient.
  Than for Estates, lerned men, or eloquent.

  But of this one poynt thou nedest not to fere
  That any goode man: vertuous and Just.
  Wyth his yl speche shal the hurt or dere.
  But the defende. As I suppose and trust.
  But suche Unthriftes as sue theyr carnal lust
  Whome thou for vyce dost sharply rebuke and blame
  Shal the dysprayse: emperisshinge thy name.

An exhortacion of Alexander Barclay.

  But ye that shal rede this boke: I you exhorte.
  And you that ar herars therof also I pray
  Where as ye knowe that ye be of this sorte:
  Amende your lyfe and expelle that vyce away.
  Slomber nat in syn. Amende you whyle ye may.
  And yf ye so do and ensue Vertue and grace.
  Wythin my Shyp ye get no rowme ne place.

Barclay the translatour tho the Foles.

  To Shyp galantes the se is at the ful.
  The wynde vs calleth our sayles ar displayed.
  Where may we best aryue? at Lyn or els at Hulle?
  To vs may no hauen in Englonde be denayd.
  Why tary we? the Ankers ar vp wayed.
  If any corde or Cabyl vs hurt, let outher hynder.
  Let slyp the ende, or els hewe it in sonder.

  Retourne your syght beholde vnto the shore.
  There is great nomber that fayne wold be aborde.
  They get no rowme our Shyp can holde no more.
  Haws in the Cocke gyue them none other worde.
  God gyde vs from Rockes, quicsonde tempest and forde
  If any man of warre, wether, or wynde apere.
  My selfe shal trye the wynde and kepe the Stere.

  But I pray you reders haue ye no dysdayne.
  Thoughe Barclay haue presumed of audacite
  This Shyp to rule as chefe mayster and Captayne.
  Though some thynke them selfe moche worthyer than he.
  It were great maruayle forsoth syth he hath be.
  A scoler longe: and that in dyuers scoles
  But he myght be Captayne of a Shyp of Foles

  But if that any one be in suche maner case.
  That he wyl chalange the maystershyp fro me
  Yet in my Shyp can I nat want a place.
  For in euery place my selfe I oft may se.
  But this I leue besechynge eche degre:
  To pardon my youthe and to bolde interprise.
  For harde is it duely to speke of euery vyce.

  For yf I had tunges an hundreth: and wyt to fele
  Al thinges natural and supernaturall
  A thousand mouthes: and voyce as harde as stele.
  And sene all the seuen Sciences lyberal.
  Yet cowde I neuer touche the vyces all.
  And syn of the worlde: ne theyr braunches comprehende:
  Nat thoughe I lyued vnto the worldes ende.

  But if these vyces whiche mankynde doth incomber.
  Were clene expellyd and vertue in theyr place.
  I cowde nat haue gathered of fowles so great a nomber.
  Whose foly from them out chaseth goddys grace.
  But euery man that knowes hym in that case
  To this rude Boke let hym gladly intende.
  And lerne the way his lewdnes to amende.

 * * * * *


[The Prologe of James Locher.]

After that I haue longe mused by my self of the sore confounded and
vncertayne cours of mannys lyfe, and thinges therto belonginge: at the last
I haue by my vigilant meditacion found and noted many degrees of errours:
wherby mankynd wandreth from the way of trouth I haue also noted that many
wyse men and wel lettred haue writen right fruteful doctrines: wherby they
haue heled these dyseses and intollerable perturbacions of the mynde: and
the goostly woundes therof, moche better than Esculapius which was fyrst
Inuentour of Phesyke and amonge the Gentyles worshypped as a God. In the
contrey of Grece were stodyes fyrst founded and ordeyned in the which began
and sprange holsom medicyne which gaue vnto infect myndes frutful doctryne
and norisshinge. Amonge whome Socrates that great begynner and honourer of
wysdom began to dispute of ye maners of men. But for that he coude nat
fynde certayne ende of goodnes and hyest felicite in naturall thinges: nor
induce men to the same, he gaue the hye contemplacions of his mynde to
moral vertues. And in so moche passed he al other in Philosophy moral that
it was sayde that he called Philosophy down from the Imperial heuen. whan
this Socrates perceyued the mindes of men to be prone, and extremely
inclyned to viciousnes he had gret affeccion to subdue suche maners.
Wherfore in comon places of the Cyte of Athenes he instruct and infourmed
the peple in such doctrynes as compasith the clere and immaculate welles of
the moste excellent and souerayne gode. After the disces of Socrates
succeded ye godly Plato whiche in moral Philosophy ouerpassed also a great
part of his tyme And certaynly nat without a cause was he called godly. For
by what stody myght be more holely or better socour mankynde than by suche
doctrynes as he gaue. He wrote and ordeyned lawes moste egal and iust He
edityed vnto the Grekes a comon welthe stable, quyet and commendable. And
ordeyned the societe and company of them most iocund and amyable. He
prepared a brydel to refrayne the lust and sensualyte of the body. And
fynally he changed the yl ignorance feblenes and negligence of youth vnto
dylygence, strength and vertue. In tyme also of these Phylosophers sprange
the florisshynge age of Poetes: whiche amonge lettred men had nat smal
rowme and place. And that for theyr eloquent Retoryke and also for theyr
mery ficcions and inuencions. Of the whiche Poetes some wrote in moste
ornate termes in ditees heroycal wherin the noble actes and lyues both of
dyuyne and humayne creatures ar wont to be noted and writem. Some wrote of
tylling of the grounde. Some of the Planetes, of the courses of ye sterres:
and of the mouynge of the heuyn and fyrmament. Some of the Empyre and
shameful subieccion of disordred loue. And many other of the myserable
ruyne and fal of Kynges and princes for vice: as Tragedies. And some other
wrote Comedyes with great libertye of speche: which Comedies we cal
Interludes. Amonge whome Aristophanes Eupolis and Cratinus mooste laudable
Poetes passed al other. For whan they sawe the youth of Athenes and of al
the remanent of Grece inclyned to al ylles they toke occasion to note suche
myslyuinge. And so in playne wordes they repreued without fauour the vyces
of the sayd yl disposyd peple of what condicion or order they were: Of this
auncient wrytinge of Comedyes our laten Poetes deuysed a maner of wrytinge
nat inelegant. And fyrst Lucilius composed one Satyre in the whiche he
wrote by name the vices of certayne princes and Citezyns of Rome And that
with many bourdes so y^t with his mery speche myxt with rebukes he correct
al them of the cyte that disordredly lyued. But this mery speche vsed he
nat in his writing to the intent to excercyse wanton wordes or vnrefrayned
lascyuyte, or to put his pleasour in suche dissolute langage: but to ye
intent to quenche vyces and to prouoke the commons to wysdome and vertue,
and to be asshamed of theyr foly and excessyfe lyuynge. of hym all the
Latyn poetes haue takyn example, and begynnynge to wryte Satyrs whiche the
grekes named Comedyes: As Fabius specifyeth in his X boke of institucions.
After Lucilius succeded Horacius, moche more eloquent in wrytynge whiche in
the same deseruyd great laude: Persius also left to vs onely one boke by
the whiche he commyttyd his name and laude to perpetuall memory. The last
and prynce of all was Juuenall whiche in his iocunde poemys comprehendyd al
that was wryten most eloquent and pleasaunt of all the poetis of that sorte
afore his tyme: O noble men, and diligent hertes and myndes, o laudable
maners and tymes, these worthy men exyled ydelnes, wherby they haue
obtayned nat small worshyp and great commodyte example and doctryne lefte
to vs theyr posteryours why begyn we nat to vnderstonde and perceyue. Why
worshyp nat the people of our tyme these poetis why do nat they reuerence
to ye interpretours of them do they nat vnderstonde: that no poetes wryte,
but outher theyr mynde is to do pleasure or els profyte to the reder, or
ellys they togyther wyll doo bothe profyte and pleasoure why are they
dyspysed of many rude carters of nowe a dayes which vnderstonde nat them,
And for lacke of them haue nat latyn to vtter and expresse ye wyl of their
mynde. Se whether poetes ar to be dispised. they laude vertue and hym that
vseth it rebukyng vices with the vsers therof, They teche what is good and
what is euyll: to what ende vyce, and what ende vertue bringeth vs, and do
nat Poetis reuyle and sharply byte in their poemys all suche as ar vnmeke,
Prowde, Couetous, Lecherous, Wanton, delycyous, Wrathfull glotons, wasters,
Enuyours, Enchauntours, faythebrakers, rasshe, vnauysed, malapert, drunken,
vntaught foles, and suche lyke. Shulde theyr writyng that suche thinges
disprayse and reuyle be dyspised of many blynde Dotardes y^t nowe lyue
whiche enuy that any man shulde haue or vnderstonde ye thyng whiche they
knowe nat. The Poetes also wyth great lawdes commende and exalt the noble
folowers of vertue ascribyng to euery man rewardes after his merytes. And
shortly to say, the intencion of al Poetes hath euer ben to repreue vyce:
and to commende vertue. But syns it is so that nowe in our dayes ar so many
neglygent and folysshe peple that they ar almost innumerable whiche
despisynge the loue of vertue: folowe the blyndenes and vanyte of this
worlde: it was expedient that of newe some lettred man, wyse, and subtil of
wyt shulde awake and touche ye open vices of foles that now lyue: and blame
theyr abhomynable lyfe. This fourme and lybertye of writinge, and charge
hathe taken vpon hym the Right excellent and worthy Mayster Sebastian Brant
Doctour of both the Lawes and noble Oratour and Poete to the comon welthe
of al people in playne and comon speche of Doche in the contrey of Almayne:
to the ymytacion of Dant Florentyne: and Francis Petrarche Poetes heroycal
which in their maternal langage haue composed maruelous Poemes and
ficcions. But amonge diuers inuencions composed of the sayde Sebastian
brant I haue noted one named ye Shyp of Foles moche expedient and necessary
to the redar which the sayd Sebastian composed in doche langage. And after
hym one called James Locher his Disciple translated the same into Laten to
the vnderstondinge of al Christen nacions where Laten is spoken. Than
another (whose name to me is vnknowen) translated the same into Frenche. I
haue ouersene the fyrst Inuencion in Doche and after that the two
translations in Laten and Frenche whiche in blaminge the disordred lyfe of
men of our tyme agreeth in sentence: threfolde in langage wherfore wylling
to redres the errours and vyces of this oure Royalme of Englonde: as the
foresayde composer and translatours hath done in theyr Contrees I haue
taken vpon me: howbeit vnworthy to drawe into our Englysshe tunge the sayd
boke named ye shyp of folys as nere to ye sayd thre Langages as the parcyte
of my wyt wyll suffer me. But ye reders gyue ye pardon vnto Alexander de
Barklay If ignoraunce negligence or lacke of wyt cause hym to erre in this
translacion his purpose and synguler desyre is to content youre myndes. And
sothely he hathe taken vpon hym the translacion of this present Boke
neyther for hope of rewarde nor lawde of man: but onely for the holsome
instruccion commodyte and Doctryne of wysdome, and to clense the vanyte and
madnes of folysshe people of whom ouer great nombre is in the Royalme of
Englonde. Therfore let euery man beholde and ouerrede this boke: And than I
doute nat but he shal se the errours of his lyfe of what condycyon that he
be. in lyke wyse as he shal se in a Myrrour the fourme of his countenaunce
and vysage: And if he amende suche fautes as he redeth here wherein he
knoweth hymself gylty, and passe forth the resydue of his lyfe in the order
of good maners than shall he haue the fruyte and auauntage wherto I haue
translatyd this boke.

 * * * * *


Here begynneth the prologe.

  Amonge the people of euery regyon
  And ouer the worlde, south north eest and west
  Soundeth godly doctryne in plenty and foyson
  Wherin the grounde of vertue and wysdome doth rest
  Rede gode and bad, and kepe the to the best
  Was neuer more plenty of holsome doctryne
  Nor fewer people that doth therto enclyne

  We haue the Bybyll whiche godly doth expresse
  Of the olde testament the lawes mysticall
  And also of the newe our erour to redresse
  Of phylosophy and other artes liberall
  With other bokes of vertues morall
  But thoughe suche bokes vs godly wayes shewe
  We all ar blynde no man wyll them ensue

  Banysshed is doctryne, we wander in derknes
  Throughe all the worlde: our selfe we wyll not knowe
  Wysdome is exyled, alas blynde folysshenes
  Mysgydeth the myndes of people hye and lowe
  Grace is decayed, yll governaunce doth growe
  Both prudent Pallas and Minerua are slayne
  Or els to heuyn retourned are they agayne

  Knowledge of trouth, Prudence, and iust Symplicite
  Hath vs clene left: For we set of them no store.
  Our Fayth is defyled loue, goodnes, and Pyte:
  Honest maners nowe ar reputed of: no more.
  Lawyers ar lordes: but Justice is rent and tore.
  Or closed lyke a Monster within dores thre.
  For without mede: or money no man can hyr se.

  Al is disordred: Vertue hathe no rewarde.
  Alas, Compassion: and Mercy bothe ar slayne.
  Alas, the stony hartys of pepyl ar so harde
  That nought can constrayne theyr folyes to refrayne
  But styl they procede: and eche other meyntayne.
  So wander these foles: incresinge without nomber.
  That al the worlde they vtterly encomber.

  Blasphemers of Chryst; Hostlers; and Tauerners:
  Crakars and bosters with Courters auenterous,
  Bawdes and Pollers with comon extorcioners
  Ar taken nowe adayes in the worlde moste glorious.
  But the gyftes of grace and al wayes gracious
  We haue excluded. Thus lyue we carnally:
  Utterly subdued to al lewdnes and Foly.

  Thus is of Foles a sorte almost innumerable.
  Defilynge the worlde with syn and Vylany.
  Some thynkinge them self moche wyse and commendable
  Thoughe al theyr dayes they lyue vnthryftely.
  No goodnes they perceyue nor to no goode aplye.
  But if he haue a great wombe, and his Cofers ful
  Than is none holde wyser bytwene London and Hul.

  But to assemble these Foles in one bonde.
  And theyr demerites worthely to note.
  Fayne shal I Shyppes of euery maner londe.
  None shalbe left: Barke, Galay, Shyp, nor Bote.
  One vessel can nat brynge them al aflote.
  For yf al these Foles were brought into one Barge
  The bote shulde synke so sore shulde be the charge.

  The sayles ar hawsed, a pleasant cole dothe blowe.
  The Foles assembleth as fast as they may dryue.
  Some swymmeth after: other as thycke doth rowe
  In theyr small botes, as Bees about a hyue
  The nomber is great, and eche one doth stryue
  For to be chefe as Purser and Capytayne
  Quarter mayster, Lodesman or els Boteswayne.

  They ron to our shyp, eche one doth greatly fere
  Lyst his slacke paas, sholde cause hym byde behynde
  The wynde ryseth, and is lyke the sayle to tere
  Eche one enforseth the anker vp to wynde
  The se swellyth by planettes well I fynde
  These obscure clowdes threteneth vs tempest
  All are nat in bed whiche shall haue yll rest

  We are full lade and yet forsoth I thynke
  A thousand are behynde, whom we may not receyue
  For if we do, our nauy clene shall synke
  He oft all lesys that coueytes all to haue
  From London Rockes almyghty god vs saue
  For if we there anker, outher bote or barge
  There be so many that they vs wyll ouercharge

  Ye London Galantes, arere, ye shall nat enter
  We kepe the streme, and touche nat the shore
  In Cyte nor in Court we dare nat well auenter
  Lyst perchaunce we sholde displeasure haue therfore
  But if ye wyll nedes some shall haue an ore
  And all the remenaunt shall stande afar at large
  And rede theyr fautes paynted aboute our barge.

  Lyke as a myrrour doth represent agayne
  The fourme and fygure of mannes countenaunce
  So in our shyp shall he se wrytyn playne
  The fourme and fygure of his mysgouernaunce
  What man is fautles, but outher ignoraunce
  Or els wylfulnes causeth hym offende:
  Than let hym nat disdayne this shyp, tyll he amende.

  And certaynly I thynke that no creature
  Lyuynge in this lyfe mortall in transytory
  Can hym self kepe and stedfastly endure
  Without all spot, as worthy eternall glory
  But if he call to his mynde and memory
  Fully the dedys both of his youthe and age
  He wyll graunt in this shyp to kepe some stage

  But who so euer wyll knowlege his owne foly
  And it repent, lyuynge after in sympylnesse
  Shall haue no place nor rowme more in our nauy
  But become felawe to pallas the goddesse
  But he that fyxed is in suche a blyndnesse
  That thoughe he be nought he thynketh al is well
  Suche shall in this Barge bere a babyll and a bell

  These with other lyke may eche man se and rede
  Eche by themselfe in this small boke ouerall
  The fautes shall he fynde if he take good hede
  Of all estatis as degres temporall
  With gyders of dignytees spirituall
  Bothe pore and riche, Chorles and Cytezyns
  For hast to lepe a borde many bruse theyr shynnys

  Here is berdles youth, and here is crokyd age
  Children with theyr faders that yll do them insygne
  And doth nat intende theyr wantones to swage
  Nouther by worde nor yet by discyplyne
  Here be men of euery science and doctryne
  Lerned and vnlerned man mayde chylde and wyfe
  May here se and rede the lewdenes of theyr lyfe.

  Here ar vyle wymen: whome loue Immoderate
  And lust Venereall bryngeth to hurt and shame.
  Here ar prodigal Galantes: wyth mouers of debate.
  And thousandes mo: whome I nat wel dare name.
  Here ar Bacbyters whiche goode lyuers dyffame.
  Brakers of wedlocke, men proude: and couetous:
  Pollers, and pykers with folke delicious.

  It is but foly to rehers the names here
  Of al suche Foles: as in one Shelde or targe.
  Syns that theyr foly dystynctly shal apere
  On euery lefe: in Pyctures fayre and large.
  To Barclays stody: and Pynsones cost and charge
  Wherfore ye redars pray that they both may be saued
  Before God, syns they your folyes haue thus graued.

  But to thentent that euery man may knowe
  The cause of my wrytynge: certes I intende
  To profyte and to please both hye and lowe
  And blame theyr fautes wherby they may amende
  But if that any his quarell wyll defende
  Excusynge his fautes to my derysyon
  Knowe he that noble poetes thus haue done.

  Afore my dayes a thousande yere ago
  Blamynge and reuylynge the inconuenyence
  Of people, wyllynge them to withdrawe therfro
  Them I ensue: nat lyke of intellygence
  And though I am nat to them lyke in science
  Yet this is my wyll mynde and intencion
  To blame all vyce lykewyse as they haue done.

  To tender youth my mynde is to auayle
  That they eschewe may all lewdenes and offence
  Whiche doth theyr myndes often sore assayle
  Closynge the iyen of theyr intellygence
  But if I halt in meter or erre in eloquence
  Or be to large in langage I pray you blame nat me
  For my mater is so bad it wyll none other be.

 * * * * *


[The Argument.]

Here after foloweth the Boke named the Shyp of Foles of the world:
translated out of Laten, French and Doche into Englysse in the Colege of
saynt Mary Otery By me Alexander Barclay to the felicite and moste holsom
instruccion of mankynde the whiche conteyneth al suche as wandre from the
way of trouth and from the open Path of holsom vnderstondynge and wysdom:
fallynge into dyuers blyndnesses of ye mynde, folysshe sensualytees, and
vndlawful delectacions of the body. This present Boke myght haue ben callyd
nat inconuenyently the Satyr (that is to say) the reprehencion of
foulysshnes, but the neweltye of the name was more plesant vnto the fyrst
actour to call it the Shyp of foles: For in lyke wyse as olde Poetes
Satyriens in dyuers Poesyes conioyned repreued the synnes and ylnes of the
peple at that tyme lyuynge: so and in lyke wyse this our Boke representeth
vnto the iyen of the redars the states and condicions of men: so that euery
man may behold within the same the cours of his lyfe and his mysgouerned
maners, as he sholde beholde the shadowe of the fygure of his visage within
a bright Myrrour. But concernynge the translacion of this Boke: I exhort ye
reders to take no displesour for y^t it is nat translated word by worde
acordinge to ye verses of my actour. For I haue but only drawen into our
moder tunge, in rude langage the sentences of the verses as nere as the
parcyte of my wyt wyl suffer me, some tyme addynge, somtyme detractinge and
takinge away suche thinges a semeth me necessary and superflue. wherfore I
desyre of you reders pardon of my presumptuous audacite trustynge that ye
shall holde me excused if ye consyder ye scarsnes of my wyt and my vnexpert
youthe. I haue in many places ouerpassed dyuers poetical digressions and
obscurenes of Fables and haue concluded my worke in rude langage as shal
apere in my translacion. But the speciyl cawse that mouethe me to this
besynes is to auoyde the execrable inconuenyences of ydilnes whyche (as
saint Bernard sayth) is moder of al vices: and to the vtter derision of
obstynat men delitynge them in folyes and mysgouernance. But bycause the
name of this boke semeth to the redar to procede of derysion: and by that
mean that the substance therof shulde nat be profitable: I wyl aduertise
you that this Boke is named the Shyp of foles of the worlde: For this
worlde is nought els but a tempestous se in the whiche we dayly wander and
are caste in dyuers tribulacions paynes and aduersitees: some by ignoraunce
and some by wilfulnes: wherfore suche doers ar worthy to be called foles.
syns they gyde them nat by reason as creatures resonable ought to do.
Therfore the fyrst actoure willynge to deuyde suche foles from wysemen and
gode lyuers: hathe ordeyned vpon the se of this worlde this present Shyp to
contayne these folys of ye worlde, whiche ar in great nomber. So that who
redeth it perfytely consyderynge his secrete dedys, he shall not lyghtly
excuse hym selfe out of it, what so euer good name y^t he hath outwarde in
the mouth of the comontye, And to the entent y^t this my laboure may be the
more pleasaunt vnto lettred men, I haue adioyned vnto the same ye verses of
my Actour with dyuerse concordaunces of the Bybyll to fortyfy my wrytynge
by the same, and also to stop the enuyous mouthes (If any suche shal be) of
them that by malyce shall barke ayenst this my besynes.

 * * * * *


Here begynneth the foles and first inprofytable bokes.

[Illustration: I am the firste fole of all the hole nauy
To kepe the pompe, the helme and eke the sayle
For this is my mynde, this one pleasoure haue I
Of bokes to haue grete plenty and aparayle
I take no wysdome by them: nor yet auayle
Nor them preceyue nat: And then I them despyse
Thus am I a foole and all that sewe that guyse]

  That in this shyp the chefe place I gouerne
  By this wyde see with folys wanderynge
  The cause is playne, and easy to dyscerne
  Styll am I besy bokes assemblynge
  For to haue plenty it is a plesaunt thynge
  In my conceyt and to haue them ay in honde
  But what they mene do I nat vnderstonde

  But yet I haue them in great reuerence
  And honoure sauynge them from fylth and ordure
  By often brusshynge, and moche dylygence
  Full goodly bounde in pleasaunt couerture
  Of domas, satyn, or els of veluet pure
  I kepe them sure ferynge lyst they sholde be lost
  For in them is the connynge wherin I me bost.

  But if it fortune that any lernyd men
  Within my house fall to disputacion
  I drawe the curtyns to shewe my bokes then
  That they of my cunnynge sholde make probacion
  I kepe nat to fall in altercacion
  And whyle they comon my bokes I turne and wynde
  For all is in them, and no thynge in my mynde.

  Tholomeus the riche causyd longe agone
  Ouer all the worlde good bokes to be sought
  Done was his commaundement anone
  These bokes he had and in his stody brought
  Whiche passyd all erthly treasoure as he thought
  But neuertheles he dyd hym nat aply
  Unto theyr doctryne, but lyued unhappely.

  Lo in lyke wyse of bokys I haue store
  But fewe I rede, and fewer understande
  I folowe nat theyr doctryne nor theyr lore
  It is ynoughe to bere a boke in hande
  It were to moche to be it suche a bande
  For to be bounde to loke within the boke
  I am content on the fayre couerynge to loke

  Why sholde I stody to hurt my wyt therby
  Or trouble my mynde with stody excessyue
  Sythe many ar whiche stody right besely
  And yet therby shall they neuer thryue
  The fruyt of wysdom can they nat contryue
  And many to stody so moche are inclynde
  That utterly they fall out of theyr mynde

  Eche is nat lettred that nowe is made a lorde
  Nor eche a clerke that hath a benefyce
  They are nat all lawyers that plees doth recorde
  All that are promotyd are nat fully wyse
  On suche chaunce nowe fortune throwys hir dyce
  That thoughe one knowe but the yresshe game
  Yet wolde he haue a gentyllmannys name

  So in lyke wyse I am in suche case
  Thoughe I nought can I wolde be callyd wyse
  Also I may set another in my place
  Whiche may for me my bokes excercyse
  Or else I shall ensue the comon gyse
  And say concedo to euery argument
  Lyst by moche speche my latyn sholde be spent

  I am lyke other Clerkes whiche so frowardly them gyde.
  That after they ar onys come vnto promocion
  They gyue them to plesour theyr stody set asyde.
  Theyr Auaryce couerynge with fayned deuocion.
  Yet dayly they preche: and haue great derysyon
  Against the rude Laymen: and al for Couetyse.
  Though theyr owne Conscience be blynded w^t that vyce.

  But if I durst trouth playnely vtter and expresse.
  This is the special cause of this Inconuenyence.
  That greatest foles, and fullest of lewdnes
  Hauynge least wyt: and symplest Science
  Ar fyrst promoted: and haue greatest reuerence
  For if one can flater, and bere a hawke on his Fyst
  He shalbe made Person of Honyngton or of Clyst.

  But he that is in Stody ay ferme and diligent.
  And without al fauour prechyth Chrystys lore
  Of al the Comontye nowe adayes is sore shent.
  And by Estates thretened to Pryson oft therfore.
  Thus what auayle is it, to vs to Stody more:
  To knowe outher scripture, trouth, wysedom, or vertue
  Syns fewe, or none without fauour dare them shewe.

  But O noble Doctours, that worthy ar of name:
  Consyder our olde faders: note wel theyr diligence:
  Ensue ye theyr steppes: obtayne ye such fame,
  As they dyd lyuynge: and that by true Prudence.
  Within theyr hartys they planted theyr scyence
  And nat in plesaunt bokes. But nowe to fewe suche be.
  Therefore in this Shyp let them come rowe with me.

THE ENUOY OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY TRANSLATOUR EXORTYNGE THE FOLES ACCLOYED
WITH THIS VICE TO AMENDE THEYR FOLY.

  Say worthy doctours and Clerkes curious:
  What moueth you of Bokes to haue such nomber.
  Syns dyuers doctrines throughe way contrarious.
  Doth mannys mynde distract and sore encomber.
  Alas blynde men awake, out of your slomber
  And if ye wyl nedys your bokes multyplye
  With diligence endeuer you some to occupye.

 * * * * *


Of euyl Counsellours, Juges and men of lawe.

[Illustration: He that Office hath and hyghe autorite.
To rule a Royalme: as Juge or Counsellour
Which seynge Justice, playne ryght and equyte
Them falsly blyndeth by fauour or rigour
Condemnynge wretches gyltles. And to a Transgressour
For mede shewinge fauour. Suche is as wyse a man
As he that wolde seeth a quycke Sowe in a Pan.]

  Right many labours nowe, with hyghe diligence
  For to be Lawyers the Comons to counsayle.
  Therby to be in honour had and in reuerence
  But onely they labour for theyr pryuate auayle.
  The purs of the Clyent shal fynde hym apparayle.
  And yet knowes he neyther lawe good counsel nor Justice.
  But speketh at auenture: as men throwe the dyce.

  Suche in the Senate ar taken oft to counsayle
  With Statis of this and many a other region.
  Whiche of theyr maners vnstable ar and frayle
  Nought of Lawe Ciuyl knowinge nor Canon.
  But wander in derknes clerenes they haue none.
  O noble Rome thou gat nat thy honours
  Nor general Empyre by suche Counsellours.

  Whan noble Rome all the worlde dyd gouerne
  Theyr councellers were olde men iust and prudent
  Whiche egally dyd euery thynge descerne
  Wherby theyr Empyre became so excellent
  But nowe a dayes he shall haue his intent
  That hath most golde, and so it is befall
  That aungels worke wonders in westmynster hall.

  There cursyd coyne makyth the wronge seme right
  The cause of hym that lyueth in pouertye
  Hath no defence, tuycion, strength nor myght
  Suche is the olde custome of this faculte
  That colours oft cloke Justyce and equyte
  None can the mater fele nor vnderstonde
  Without the aungell be weyghty in his honde

  Thus for the hunger of syluer and of golde
  Justyce and right is in captyuyte
  And as we se nat gyuen fre, but solde
  Nouther to estates, nor sympell comonte
  And though that many lawyers rightwysnes be
  Yet many other dysdayne to se the ryght
  And they ar suche as blynde Justycis syght

  There is one and other alleged at the barre
  And namely suche as chrafty were in glose
  Upon the lawe: the clyentis stande afarre
  Full lytell knowynge howe the mater goose
  And many other the lawes clene transpose
  Folowynge the example, of lawyers dede and gone
  Tyll the pore Clyentis be etyn to the bone

  It is not ynough to conforme thy mynde
  Unto the others faynyd opynyon
  Thou sholde say trouthe, so Justyce doth the bynde
  And also lawe gyueth the commyssyon
  To knowe hir, and kepe hir without transgressyon
  Lyst they whome thou hast Juged wrongfully
  Unto the hye Juge for vengeaunce on the crye.

  Perchaunce thou thynkest that god taketh no hede
  To mannes dedys, nor workes of offence
  Yes certaynly he knowes thy thought and dede
  No thynge is secrete, nor hyd from his presence
  Wherefore if thou wylt gyde the by prudence
  Or thou gyue Jugement of mater lesse or more
  Take wyse mennys reade and good counsayle before

  Loke in what Balance, what weyght and what mesure
  Thou seruest other. for thou shalt serued be
  With the same after this lyfe I the ensure.
  If thou ryghtwysly Juge by lawe and equyte
  Thou shalt haue presence of goddes hyghe maiestye
  But if thou Juge amys: than shall Eacus
  (As Poetis sayth) hell Juge thy rewarde discusse

  God is aboue and regneth sempiternally.
  Whiche shall vs deme at his last Jugement,
  And gyue rewardes to echone egally
  After suche fourme as he his lyfe hath spent
  Than shall we them se whome we as violent
  Traytours: haue put to wronge in worde or dede
  And after our deserte euen suche shall be our mede

  There shall be no Bayle nor treatynge of maynpryse
  Ne worldly wysdome there shall no thynge preuayle
  There shall be no delayes vntyll another Syse
  But outher quyt, or to infernall Gayle.
  Ill Juges so iuged, Lo here theyr trauayle
  Worthely rewarded in wo withouten ende.
  Than shall no grace be graunted ne space to amende.

THE ENUOY OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY THE TRANSLATOUR.

  Therfore ye yonge Studentes of the Chauncery:
  (I speke nat to the olde the Cure of them is past)
  Remember that Justyce longe hath in bondage be
  Reduce ye hir nowe vnto lybertye at the last.
  Endeuer you hir bondes to louse or to brast
  Hir raunsome is payde and more by a thousande pounde
  And yet alas the lady Justyce lyeth bounde.

  Thoughe your fore Faders haue take hir prysoner
  And done hir in a Dongeon nat mete for hir degre
  Lay to your handes and helpe hir from daungere
  And hir restore vnto hir lybertye
  That pore men and monyles may hir onys se
  But certaynly I fere lyst she hath lost hir name
  Or by longe prysonment shall after euer be lame.

 * * * * *


Of Auaryce or Couetyse and prodygalyte.

[Illustration: Ye that ar gyuen ouer moche to Couetyse
Come nere, a place is here for you to dwel
Come nere ye wastfull people in lyke wyse
Youre rowme shall be hye in the Topcastell
Ye care for no shame, for heuen nor for hell
Golde is your god, ryches gotten wrongfully
Ye dame your soule, and yet lyue in penury.]

  He that is besy euery day and houre
  Without mesure, maner, or moderacion
  To gather riches and great store of treasoure
  Therof no ioy takinge, confort nor consolacion.
  He is a Fole: and of blynde and mad opynyon
  For that which he getteth and kepeth wrongfully
  His heyre often wasteth moche more vnthryftely.

  While he here lyueth in this lyfe caduke and mortal.
  Ful sore he laboureth: and oft hungry gothe to bed
  Sparinge from hymselfe: for hym that neuer shal
  After do hym goode. thoughe he were harde bested.
  Thus is this Couetous wretche so blyndly led
  By the fende that here he lyueth wretchydly
  And after his deth damned eternally.

  There wandreth he in dolour and derknes
  Amonge infernall flodes tedyous and horryble
  Let se what auayleth than all his ryches
  Ungracyously gotyne, his paynes ar terryble
  Than wolde he amende but it is inpossyble
  In hell is no order nor hope of remedy
  But sorowe vpon sorowe, and that euerlastyngly.

  Yet fynde I another vyce as bad as this
  Whiche is the vyce of prodygalyte
  He spendyth all in ryot and amys
  Without all order, pursuynge pouertye
  He lyketh nat to lyue styll in prosperite
  But all and more he wastyth out at large
  (Beware the ende) is the leste poynt of his charge.

  But of the couetous somwhat to say agayne
  Thou art a fole thy soule to sell for riches
  Or put thy body to labour or to payne
  Thy mynde to fere, thy herte to heuynesse
  Thou fole thou fleest no maner cruelnesse
  So thou may get money, to make thy heyr a knyght
  Thou sleest thy soule where as thou saue it myght

  Thou hast no rest thy mynde is euer in fere
  Of mysauenture, nor neuer art content
  Deth is forgoten, thou carest nat a here
  To saue thy soule from infernall punysshement
  If thou be dampned, than art thou at thy stent
  By thy ryches which thou here hast left behynde
  To thy executours, thou shalt small comforte fynde

  Theyr custome is to holde fast that they haue
  Thy pore soule shall be farthest fro theyr thought
  If that thy carkes be brought onys in the graue
  And that they haue thy bagges in handes cought
  What say they, than (by god the man had nought)
  Whyle he here lyuyd he was to lyberall
  Thus dampned is thy soule, thy ryches cause of all

  Who wyll denay but it is necesary
  Of riches for to haue plenty and store
  To this opynyon I wyll nat say contrary
  So it be ordred after holy lore
  Whyle thy selfe leuest departe some to the pore
  With thy owne hande trust nat thy executours
  Gyue for god, and god shall sende at all houres

  Rede Tullius warkes the worthy Oratour.
  And writen shalt thou fynde in right fruteful sentence
  That neuer wyseman loued ouer great honour.
  Nor to haue great riches put ouer great diligence
  But onely theyr mynde was set on Sapience
  And quyetly to lyue in Just symplycite.
  For in greatest honour is greatest ieoperdye.

  He that is symple, and on the grounde doth lye
  And that can be content with ynoughe or suffisaunce
  Is surer by moche than he that lyeth on hye.
  Nowe vp nowe downe vnsure as a Balaunce.
  But sothly he that set wyll his plesance
  Onely on wysdom and styl therfore labour.
  Shal haue more goode than all erthly tresour.

  Wysdom techeth to eschewe al offence.
  Gydynge mankynde the ryght way to vertue.
  But of couetyse Comys all Inconuenyence.
  It cawseth man of worde to be vntrue.
  Forswerynge and falshode doth it also ensue.
  Brybery and Extorcion, murder and myschefe.
  Shame is his ende: his lyuyinge is reprefe.

  By couetyse Crassus brought was to his ende.
  By it the worthy Romayns lost theyr name.
  Of this one yl a thousand ylles doth descende.
  Besyde enuy, Pryde, wretchydnes and Shame.
  Crates the Philosopher dyd Couetyse so blame:
  That to haue his mynde vnto his stody fre.
  He threwe his Tresour all hole into the see.

  But shortly to conclude. Both bodely bondage.
  And gostly also: procedeth of this couetyse.
  The soule is damned the body hath damage
  As hunger, thyrst, and colde with other preiudice.
  Bereft of the ioyes of heuenly Paradyse.
  For golde was theyr god and that is left behynde
  Theyr bodyes beryed the soule clene out of mynde

THE ENUOY OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY TRANSLATOUR.

  Therefore thou couetouse thou wretch I speke to the.
  Amende thy selfe ryse out of this blyndenes.
  Content the wyth ynoughe for thy degre.
  Dam nat thy soule by gatheringe frayle riches
  Remembre this is a Uale of wretchednes.
  Thou shalt no rest nor dwellynge place here fynde.
  Depart thou shalt and leue it al behynde.

 * * * * *


Of newe fassions and disgised Garmentes.

[Illustration: Who that newe garmentes loues or deuyses.
Or weryth by his symple wyt, and vanyte
Gyuyth by his foly and vnthryfty gyses
Moche yl example to yonge Comontye.
Suche one is a Fole and skant shal euer thee
And comonly it is sene that nowe a dayes
One Fole gladly folowes anothers wayes.]

  Drawe nere ye Courters and Galants disgised
  Ye counterfayt Caytifs, that ar nat content
  As god hath you made: his warke is despysed
  Ye thynke you more crafty than God onipotent.
  Unstable is your mynde: that shewes by your garment.
  A fole is knowen by his toyes and his Cote.
  But by theyr clothinge nowe may we many note.

  Aparayle is apayred. Al sadness is decayde
  The garmentes ar gone that longed to honestye.
  And in newe sortes newe Foles ar arayede
  Despisynge the costom of good antiquyte.
  Mannys fourme is disfigured with euery degre
  As Knyght Squyer yeman Jentilman and knaue,
  For al in theyr goynge vngoodely them behaue

  The tyme hath ben, nat longe before our dayes
  Whan men with honest ray coude holde them self content.
  Without these disgised: and counterfayted wayes.
  Wherby theyr goodes ar wasted, loste, and spent.
  Socrates with many mo in wysdom excellent.
  Bycause they wolde nought change that cam of nature
  Let growe theyre here without cuttinge or scissure.

  At that tyme was it reputed to lawde and great honour.
  To haue longe here: the Beerde downe to the brest
  For so they vsed that were of moste valour.
  Stryuynge together who myht be godlyest
  Saddest, moste clenely, discretest, and moste honest.
  But nowe adayes together we contende and stryue.
  Who may be gayest: and newest wayes contryue.

  Fewe kepeth mesure, but excesse and great outrage
  In theyr aparayle. And so therin they procede
  That theyr goode is spent: theyr Londe layde to morgage.
  Or solde out right: of Thryft they take no hede.
  Hauinge no Peny them to socour at theyr nede.
  So whan theyr goode by suche wastefulnes is loste.
  They sel agayne theyr Clothes for half that they coste.

  A fox furred Jentelman: of the fyrst yere or hede.
  If he be made a Bailyf a Clerke or a Constable.
  And can kepe a Parke or Court and rede a Dede
  Than is Ueluet to his state mete and agreable.
  Howbeit he were more mete to here a Babyl.
  For his Foles Hode his iyen so sore doth blynde
  That Pryde expelleth his lynage from his mynde.

  Yet fynde I another sort almoste as bad as thay.
  As yonge Jentylmen descended of worthy Auncetry.
  Whiche go ful wantonly in dissolute aray.
  Counterfayt, disgised, and moche vnmanerly
  Blasinge and garded: to lowe or else to hye.
  And wyde without mesure: theyr stuffe to wast thus gothe
  But other some they suffer to dye for lacke of clothe.

  Some theyr neckes charged with colers, and chaynes
  As golden withtthes: theyr fyngers ful of rynges:
  Theyr neckes naked: almoste vnto the raynes
  Theyr sleues blasinge lyke to a Cranys wynges
  Thus by this deuysinge suche counterfayted thinges
  They dysfourme that figure that god hymselfe hath made
  On pryde and abusion thus ar theyr myndes layde.

  Than the Courters careles that on theyr mayster wayte
  Seinge hym his Uesture in suche fourme abuse
  Assayeth suche Fassion for them to counterfayte.
  And so to sue Pryde contynually they muse.
  Than stele they; or Rubbe they. Forsoth they can nat chuse.
  For without Londe or Labour harde is it to mentayne.
  But to thynke on the Galows that is a careful payne.

  But be it payne or nat: there many suche ende.
  At Newgate theyr garmentis ar offred to be solde.
  Theyr bodyes to the Jebet solemly ascende.
  Wauynge with the wether whyle theyr necke wyl holde.
  But if I shulde wryte al the ylles manyfolde.
  That procedeth of this counterfayt abusion
  And mysshapen Fassions: I neuer shulde haue done.

  For both States, comons, man, woman, and chylde
  Ar vtterly inclyed to this inconuenyence.
  But namely therwith these Courters are defyled.
  Bytwen mayster and man I fynde no dyfference.
  Therfore ye Courters knowledge your offence.
  Do nat your errour mentayne, support nor excuse.
  For Fowles ye ar your Rayment thus to abuse.

  To Shyp Galauntes come nere I say agayne.
  Wyth your set Busshes Curlynge as men of Inde.
  Ye counterfayted Courters come with your fleinge brayne
  Expressed by these variable Garmentes that ye fynde.
  To tempt chast Damsels and turne them to your mynde
  Your breste ye discouer and necke. Thus your abusion
  Is the Fendes bate. And your soules confusion.

  Come nere disgysed foles: receyue your Foles Hode.
  And ye that in sondry colours ar arayde.
  Ye garded galantes wastinge thus your goode
  Come nere with your Shertes brodered and displayed.
  In fourme of Surplys. Forsoth it may be sayde.
  That of your Sort right fewe shal thryue this yere.
  Or that your faders werith suche Habyte in the Quere.

  And ye Jentyl wymen whome this lewde vice doth blynde
  Lased on the backe: your peakes set a loft.
  Come to my Shyp. forget ye nat behynde.
  Your Sadel on the tayle: yf ye lyst to sit soft.
  Do on your Decke Slut: if ye purpos to come oft.
  I mean your Copyntanke: And if it wyl do no goode.
  To kepe you from the rayne. ye shall haue a foles hode.

  By the ale stake knowe we the ale hous
  And euery Jnne is knowen by the sygne
  So a lewde woman and a lechcrous
  Is knowen by hir clothes, be they cours or fyne
  Folowynge newe fassyons, not graunted by doctryne
  The bocher sheweth his flesshe it to sell
  So doth these women dampnyng theyr soule to hell

  What shall I more wryte of our enormyte
  Both man and woman as I before haue sayde
  Ar rayde and clothyd nat after theyr degre
  As nat content with the shape that god hath made
  The clenlynes of Clergye is nere also decayed.
  Our olde apparale (alas) is nowe layde downe
  And many prestes asshamed of theyr Crowne.

  Unto laymen we vs refourme agayne
  As of chryste our mayster in maner halfe asshamed
  My hert doth wepe: my tunge doth sore complayne
  Seing howe our State is worthy to be blamed.
  But if all the Foly of our Hole Royalme were named
  Of mys apparayle of Olde, young, lowe, and hye,
  The tyme shulde fayle: and space to me denye.

  Alas thus al states of Chrysten men declynes.
  And of wymen also disfourmynge theyr fygure.
  Wors than the Turkes, Jewes, or Sarazyns.
  A Englonde Englonde amende or be thou sure
  Thy noble name and fame can nat endure
  Amende lyst god do greuously chastyce.
  Bothe the begynners and folowes of this vyce.

THE ENUOY OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY YE TRANSLATOUR.

  Reduce courters clerly vnto your rembrance
  From whens this disgysyng was brought wherein ye go
  As I remember it was brought out of France.
  This is to your plesour. But payne ye had also.
  As French Pockes hote ylles with other paynes mo.
  Take ye in good worth the swetnes with the Sour.
  For often plesour endeth with sorowe and dolour.

  But ye proude Galaundes that thus yourselfe disgise
  Be ye asshamed. beholde vnto your Prynce.
  Consyder his sadnes: His honestye deuyse
  His clothynge expresseth his inwarde prudence
  Ye se no Example of suche Inconuenyence
  In his hyghnes: but godly wyt and grauyte.
  Ensue hym: and sorowe for your enormyte.

  Away with this pryde, this statelynes let be
  Rede of the Prophetis clothynge or vesture
  And of Adam firste of your ancestrye
  Of Johnn the Prophete, theyr clothynge was obscure
  Uyle and homly, but nowe what creature
  Wyll then eusue, sothly fewe by theyr wyll
  Therfore suche folys my nauy shall fulfyll

 * * * * *


Of old folys that is to say the longer they lyue the more they ar gyuen to
foly.

[Illustration: Howe beit I stoup, and fast declyne
Dayly to my graue, and sepulture
And though my lyfe fast do enclyne
To pay the trybute of nature
Yet styll remayne I and endure
In my olde synnes, and them nat hate
Nought yonge, wors olde, suche is my state.]

  The madnes of my youthe rotyd in my age
  And the blynde foly of my iniquite
  Wyll me nat suffer to leue myne old vsage
  Nor my fore lyuynge full of enormyte
  Lame ar his lymmys, and also I can nat se
  I am a childe and yet lyuyd haue I
  An hundreth wynter, encresynge my foly.

  But though I myght lerne my wyll is nat therto
  But besy I am and fully set my thought
  To gyue example to children to mysdo
  By my lewde doctryne bryngynge them to nought
  And whan they ar onys into my daunce brought
  I teche them my foly wysdome set asyde
  My selfe example, begynner, and theyr gyde.

  My lewde lyfe, my foly and my selfwyllyd mynde
  Whiche I haue styll kept hytherto in this lyfe
  In my testament I leue wryten behynde
  Bequethyng parte both to man childe and wyfe
  I am the actour of myschefe and of stryfe
  The foly of my youth and the inconuenyence
  In age I practyse, techynge by experyence

  I am a fole and glad am of that name
  Desyrynge lawde for eche vngracious dede
  And of my foly to spred abrode the same
  To showe my vyce and synne, as voyde of drede
  Of heuen or hell. therfore I take no hede
  But as some stryue disputynge of theyr cunnynge
  Right so do I in lewdnes and myslyuynge.

  Somtyme I bost me of falshode and dysceyt
  Somtyme of the sede that sawyn is by me
  Of all myschefe, as murder flatery debate
  Couetyse bacbytynge theft and lechery
  My mynde is nat to mende my iniquyte
  But rather I sorowe that my lyfe is wore
  That I can nat do as I haue done before

  But syns my lyfe so sodaynly dothe apeyre
  That byde I can nat styll in this degre
  I shall infourme and teche my sone and heyre
  To folowe his fader, and lerne this way of me
  The way is large, god wot glad shall he be
  Lernynge my lore with affeccion and desyre
  And folowe the steppys of his vnthryfty syre

  I trust so crafty and wyse to make the lad
  That me his father he shall pas and excell
  O that my herte shall than be wonder glad
  If I here of may knowe, se, or here tell
  If he be false faynynge sotyll or cruell
  And so styll endure I haue a speciall hope
  To make hym scrybe to a Cardynall or Pope.

  Or els if he can be a fals extorcyoner
  Fasynge and bostynge to scratche and to kepe
  He shall be made a comon costomer
  As yche hope of Lyn Calays or of Depe
  Than may he after to some great offyce crepe
  So that if he can onys plede a case
  He may be made Juge of the comon place.

  Thus shall he lyue as I haue all his dayes
  And in his age increas his folysshenes
  His fader came to worshyp by suche ways
  So shall the sone, if he hym selfe addres
  To sue my steppes in falshode and lewdnes
  And at leste if he can come to no degre
  This shyp of folys shall he gouerne with me

BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Awake age alas what thynkest thou be
  Awake I say out of thy blynde derkenes
  Remembrest thou nat that shortly thou shalt dye
  Aryse from synne amende thy folysshenes
  Though thy youth reted were in vyciousnes
  Aryse in age is full tyme to leue it
  Thy graue is open thy one fote in the pyt

  Leue thy bostynge of that thou hast done amys
  Bewayle thy synnes, sayeng with rufull mone
  Delicta iuuentutis mee deus ne memineris
  Amende the or thy youth be fully gone
  That sore is harde to hele that bredes in the bone
  He that is nought yonge, procedynge so in age
  Shall skant euer his vyciousnes asswage

  What thinge is more abhomynable in goddes syght.
  Than vicious age: certaynly no thynge.
  It is eke worldly shame, whan thy corage and mycht
  Is nere dekayed, to kepe thy lewde lyuynge.
  And by example of the, thy yonge children to brynge.
  Into a vicious lyfe: and all goodnes to hate.
  Alas age thus thou art the Fendes bate.

 * * * * *


Of the erudicion of neglygent faders anenst theyr chyldren.

[Illustration: That fole that suffreth his Chylde for to offende
Wythout rebukynge, blame, and correccion.
And hym nat exhorteth, hymselfe to amende.
Of suche fawtes as by hym ar done.
Shal it sore repent: god wote howe sone
For oft the faders foly, fauour, and neglygence
Causeth the Chylde for to fall to great offence]

  A myserable Fole euermore shal he be.
  A wretche vnauysed, and a Catyf blynde.
  Whiche his chyldren fawtes forseth nat to see
  Hauynge no care for to induce theyr mynde
  To godly vertue: and vyce to leue behynde.
  For whyle they ar yonge fereful and tender of age
  Theyre vyce and foly is easy to asswage.

  Two dyuers sortes of these foles may we fynde.
  By whome theyr chyldren ar brought to confusion.
  The one is neglygent. the other is starke blynde.
  Nat wyllynge to beholde his childes yl condicion.
  Whyle he is in youthe: But for a conclusion
  He is a Fole that wyl nat se theyr vyce.
  And he that seyth: and wyl it nat chastyce.

  Alas thou art a cursed counselloure
  To wanton youth that tender is of age
  To let them wander without gouernoure
  Or wyse mayster, in youthes furious rage
  Get them a mayster theyr foly to asswage
  For as a herdles flocke strayth in Jepardy
  So children without gyde wandreth in foly.

  To moche lyberty pleasoure and lycence
  Gyuen vnto youth, whether it be or age
  Right often causyth great inconuenyence
  As ryot mysrule with other sore damage
  Theyr londe and goodes solde or layde to gage
  But thou folysshe father art redy to excuse
  Thy yonge children of theyr synne and abuse

  Thou sayst they ar ouer tender to eschewe
  Theyr folysshe maners and they haue no skyll
  To knowe the wayes of goodnes or vertue
  Nor to discerne what is gode, what is yll
  Thou blynde dodart these wordes holde thou styll
  Theyr youth can nat excuse thy folysshenes
  He that can yll as well myght lerne goodnes

  A yonge hert is as apt to take wysdome
  As is an olde, and if it rotyd be
  It sawyth sede of holy lyfe to come
  Also in children we often tymes se
  Great aptness outwarde and syne of grauyte
  But fyll an erthen pot first with yll lycoure
  And euer after it shall smell somwhat soure

  So youth brought vp in lewdnes and in sin
  Shall skant it shrape so clene out of his mynde
  But that styll after some spot wyll byde within
  A lytell twygge plyant is by kynde
  A bygger braunche is harde to bowe or wynde
  But suffer the braunche to a byg tre to growe
  And rather it shall brake than outher wynde or bowe

  Correct thy childe whyle he is lyke a twygge
  Soupyll and plyant, apt to correccion
  It wyll be harde forsoth whan he is bygge
  To brynge his stubron herte to subieccion
  What hurtyth punysshement with moderacion
  Unto yonge children, certaynely no thynge
  It voydeth vyce, gettynge vertue and cunnynge

  Say folysshe fader haddest thou leuer se
  Thy sonnes necke vnwrested wyth a rope.
  Than with a rod his skyn shulde brokyn be.
  And oft thou trustest: and hast a stedfast hope
  To se thy son promoted nere as hye as is the Pope
  But yet perchaunce mourne thou shalt ful sore.
  For his shameful ende: fortuned for lacke of lore.

  Some folowe theyr chyldrens wyl and lewde plesour
  So grauntinge them theyr mynde: that after it doth fal
  To theyr great shame: they sorowe and dolour
  As dyd to Priamus a Kynge Imperial
  Whiche suffred his men: his son chefe of them al
  By force from Grece to robbe the fayre Helayne.
  Wherby both Fader and son were after slayne.

  With noble Hector and many thousandes mo.
  The Cyte of Troy vnto the ground clene brent.
  I rede in the Cronycles of the Romayns also
  Howe Tarquyne the proude had shame and punysshment
  For rauysshynge chaste Lucres agaynst hyr assent.
  Wherfore hyrselfe she slewe hyr seynge thus defiled.
  For the which dede this Tarquyn was exiled,

  From Rome: wandrynge in the Costes of Italy.
  Dyd nat the traytour Catelyne also conspyre
  And many mo sworne to his cruel tyranny
  Agaynst the Romans to oppresse theyr Impyre,
  But he and all his were murdred for theyr hyre,
  And nat vnworthely. Beholde wherto they come
  Which ar nat enfourmed in youth to ensue wysdom.

  The son oft foloweth the faders behauour
  And if the fader be discrete and vertuous.
  The son shal suche wayes practyse both day and hour.
  But if that the fader be lewde and vicious
  By falshode lyuynge: and by wayes cautelous.
  The son also the same wayes wyl ensue
  And that moche rather than goodnes or vertue

  Therfore it nedeth that better prouysion.
  Were founde for youthe by sad and wyse counsayle
  Far from theyr faders of this condicion.
  And other lewde gydes which myght theyr myndes assayle
  Greuously wyth syn. So were it theyr auayle
  From theyr faders frawde and falshode to declyne
  And them submyt to some lawdable mannys doctryne.

  Peleus, somtyme a noble and worthy kynge
  Subdued Achylles vnto the doctryne
  Of phenix whiche was both worthy and cunnynge
  Wherfore Achyllys right gladly dyd enclyne
  With his hert and mynde vnto his disciplyne
  Wherby his name so noble was at the last
  That all Asy in worthynes he past

  Ryght so Philippus a kynge worthy of name
  Ouer all Grece made great iniquicion
  To fynde one wyse, sad and laudable of fame
  To Alexander his sonne for to gyue Instruccion
  Founde was great Aristotyl at the conclusion
  Disciple of Plato. whiche in euery Science.
  Infourmed this chylde with parfyte diligence.

  Whiche Alexander afterward had so great dignyte.
  What by his strength, his cunnynge, and boldenes.
  That he was lorde both of Londe and See.
  And none durst rebel aganst his worthynes.
  Lo here the lawde, the honour, and nobles.
  Which dothe procede of vertue and doctryne
  But few ar the faders that nowe hereto inclyne

  Fewe ar that forceth nowe adayes to se
  Theyr chyldren taught: or to do any cost
  On som sad man, wyse, and of auctorite:
  Al that is theron bestowed thynke they loste.
  The folyssh Fader oft tymes maketh great boste.
  That he his son to habundant riches shal auance
  But no thynge he speketh of vertuous gouernance.

  The feder made but smal shyft or prouysion.
  To induce his Son by vertuous doctryne.
  But whan he is dede and past: moche les shal the son
  To stody of grace his mynde or hert inclyne.
  But abuse his reason: and from al good declyne.
  Alas folysshe faders gyue your aduertence
  To Crates complaynt comprysed in this sentence.

  If it were graunted to me to shewe my thought
  Ye follysshe faders Caytifes I myght you cal
  Whiche gather riches to brynge your chylde to nought.
  Gyuynge him occasion forto be prodigal.
  But goode nor cunnynge shewe ye hym none at all.
  But whan ye drawe to age, ye than moste comonly.
  Sorowe for your suffrance. But without remedy.

  An olde sore to hele is oft halfe incurable
  Ryght so ar these Chyldren roted in myschefe
  Some after euer lyueth a lyfe abhomynable
  To all theyr Kyn great sorowe and reprefe.
  The one is a murderer the other a fereles thefe,
  The one of god nor goode man hath no fors ne care.
  Another so out wasteth that his frendes ar ful bare.

  Some theyr londe and lyuelode in riot out wasteth,
  At cardes, and, tenys, and other vnlawful gamys.
  And some wyth the Dyce theyr thryft away casteth.
  Some theyr soule damnes, and theyr body shames.
  With flesshly lust: which many one dyffamys.
  Spendynge the floures of youth moche vnthryftely.
  On dyuers Braunches that longe to Lechery.

  Another delyteth hymselfe in Glotony.
  Etynge and drynkynge without maner, or mesure:
  The more that some drynke: the more they wax drye.
  He is moste Galant whyche lengest can endure.
  Thus without mesure ouercharge they theyr nature.
  So that theyr Soule is loste theyr body and goode is spent.
  For lacke of doctryne, Norture and punysshment.

  Se here playne prose, example and euydence
  Howe youthe which is nat norysshed in doctryne.
  In age is gyuen vnto al Inconuenyence.
  But nought shall make youthe soner forto inclyne.
  To noble maners: nor Godly dysciplyne:
  Than shal the doctryne of a mayster wyse and sad:
  For the rote of vertue and wysdome therby is had.

  Without dout Noblenes is moche excellent
  Whiche oft causeth youth to be had in great honour.
  To haue the name, and lawde they ar content.
  Thoughe it be nat gotten by theyr owne labour.
  But what auayleth them this lewde obscure errour
  Of suche hye byrthe them self to magnyfy.
  Sythe they defyle it with vice and Uilany.

  Why art thou proude thou foul of that nobles
  Whyche is nat gotten by thyne owne vertue.
  By thy goode maners, wyt nor worthynes:
  But this forsothe oft tymes fynde I true
  That of a goode beste, yl whelpes may weshewe.
  In lyke wyse of a Moder that is bothe chast and goode.
  Often is brought forth a ful vngracious Brode.

  But though the childe be of lewde condicion
  And of his nature frowarde and varyable
  If the fader be slacke in the correccion
  Of his childe, he onely is culpable
  Whiche wyll nat teche hym maners commendable
  Thus is the fader a fole for his suffraunce
  And the sone also for his mysgouernaunce

THE ENUOY.

  Auoyd faders your fauour and suffraunce
  Anenst your children in theyr faute and offence
  Reduce ye clerely vnto your remembraunce
  That many a thousande inconuenyence
  Haue children done by theyr faders negligence
  But to say trouth brefely in one clause
  The fader's fauour onely is the cause

 * * * * *


Of tale berers, fals reporters, and prometers of stryfes.

[Illustration: Of folys yet fynde I another maner sorte
Whiche ar cause of brawlynge stryfe and deuysion
Suche ar dowble tongyd that lesyngys reporte
Therby trustynge to come to great promosion
But suche lewde caytyfes at the conclusion
Bytwene two mylstons theyr legges puttes to grynde
And for rewarde, theyr confusion shall they fynde.]

  Some ar that thynke the pleasoure and ioy of theyr lyfe
  To brynge men in brawlynge to discorde and debate
  Enioynge to moue them to chydynge and to stryfe
  And where loue before was to cause mortall hate
  With the comonty, and many great estate
  Suche is moche wors than outher murderer or thefe
  For ofte of his talys procedeth grete myschefe

  Within his mouth is venym Jeperdous and vyle
  His tonge styll laboryth lesynges to contryue
  His mynde styll museth of falshode and on gyle
  Therwith to trobyll suche as gladly wolde nat stryue
  Somtyme his wordes as dartis he doth dryue
  Agaynst good men: for onely his delyte.
  Is set to sclaunder to diffame and bacbyte.

  And namely them that fautles ar and innocent.
  Of conscience clene, and maners commendable
  These dryuyls sclaunder, beynge full dilygent.
  To deuyde, louers that ar moste agreable
  His tonge Infect his mynde abhomynable
  Infectyth loue and ouertourneth charyte
  Of them that longe tyme haue lyuyd in amyte

  But he that accused is thus without all faute
  And so sclaundred of this caytyf vnthryfty
  Knowyth nought of this ieoperdous assaute
  For he nought dowteth that is no thynge fauty
  Thus whyle he nought feryth comyth sodaynly
  This venemous doloure distaynynge his gode name
  And so gyltles put to rebuke, and to shame.

  Thus if one serche and seke the worlde ouerall
  Than a backbyter nought is more peryllous
  His mynde myscheuous, his wordys ar mortall
  His damnable byt is foule and venemous
  A thousande lyes of gyles odyous
  He castyth out where he wolde haue debate
  Engendrynge murder whan he his tyme can wayt

  Where as any frendes lyueth in accorde
  Faythfull and true: this cowarde and caytyf
  With his fals talys them bryngeth to dyscorde
  And with his venym kepeth them in stryfe
  But howe beit that he thus pas forth his lyfe
  Sawynge his sede of debate and myschefe
  His darte oft retourneth to his own reprefe

  But nat withstandynge, suche boldely wyl excuse
  His fals dyffamynge: as fautles and innocent.
  If any hym for his dedes worthely accuse
  He couereth his venym: as symple of intent.
  Other ar whiche flater: and to euery thynge assent.
  Before face folowynge the way of adulacion,
  Whiche afterwarde sore hurteth by detraccion.

  The worlde is nowe alle set on dyffamacion.
  Suche ar moste cherisshed that best can forge a tale.
  Whych shulde be moste had in abhomynacion.
  And so they ar of wyse men without fayle.
  But suche as ar voyde of wysdom and counsayle
  Inclyneth theyr erys to sclander and detraccion,
  Moche rather than they wolde to a noble sermon.

  But euery Sclanderer, and begynner of stryfe.
  Lousers of loue, and infecters of Charite.
  Unworthy ar to lyue here at large in this lyfe.
  But in derke Dongeon they worthy ar to be.
  And there to remayne in pryson tyl they dye.
  For with there yl tunges they labour to destroy
  Concorde: whiche cause is of loue and of ioy.

  An olde quean that hath ben nought al hyr dayes.
  Whiche oft hath for money hyr body let to hyre
  Thynketh that al other doth folowe hyr olde wayes.
  So she and hyr boul felawes syttinge by the fyre.
  The Boule about walkynge with theyr tunges they conspyre
  Agaynst goode peple, to sclander them wyth shame.
  Than shal the noughty doughter lerne of the bawdy dame.

  By his warkes knowen is euery creature
  For if one good, louynge, meke and charitable be.
  He labours no debates amonge men to procure.
  But coueyteth to norysshe true loue and charite.
  Where as the other ful of falshode and iniquyte
  Theyr synguler plesour put to ingender variaunce.
  But oft theyr folysshe stody retournes to theyr myschaunce

  Therfore ye bacbyters that folke thus dyffame
  Leue of your lewdnes and note wel this sentence.
  Which Cryist hymself sayd: to great rebuke and shame
  Unto them that sclandreth a man of Innocence.
  Wo be to them whych by malyuolence
  Slandreth or dyffameth any creature.
  But wel is hym that wyth pacience can indure.

 * * * * *


Of hym that wyll nat folowe nor ensue good counsell, and necessary.

[Illustration: Of folys yet another sorte doth come
Vnto our shyp rowynge with great trauayle
Whiche nought perceyue of doctryne nor wysdome
And yet dysdayne they to aske wyse counseyll
Nor it to folowe for theyr owne auayle
Let suche folys therat haue no dysdayne
If they alone endure theyr losse and payne]

  He is a fole that dothe coueyt and desyre
  To haue the name of wysdome and prudence
  And yet of one sought thorugh a cyte or a shyre
  None coude be founde of lesse wysdome nor science
  But whyle he thynketh hym full of sapience
  Crafty and wyse, doutles he is more blynde
  Than is that fole whiche is out of his mynde

  But though he be wyse, and of myght meruaylous
  Endued with retoryke and with eloquence
  And of hym selfe both ware and cautelous
  If he be tachyd with this inconuenyence
  To dysdayne others counseyll and sentence
  He is vnwyse, for oft a folys counsayle
  Tourneth a wyse man to consort and auayle

  But specially the read and auysement
  Of wyse men, discrete, and full of grauyte
  Helpeth thyne owne, be thou never so prudent
  To thy purpose gyuynge strength and audacyte.
  One man alone knowys nat all polycye
  Thoughe thou haue wysdome cunnynge and scyence
  Yet hath another moche more experience

  Some cast out wordes in paynted eloquence
  Thynkynge therby to be reputed wyse
  Thoughe they haue neyther wysdome nor science
  Suche maner folys them self do exercyse
  A plughe and teame craftely to deuyse
  To ere the path that folys erst hath made
  The trouth vnder glose of suche is hyd and layde

  For why, they trust alway to theyr owne mynde
  And furour begon whether it be good or yll
  As if any other, no wyser read coude fynde
  Thus they ensue theyr pryuate folysshe wyll
  Oft in suche maters wherin they haue no skyll
  As did Pyrrus whiche began cruell Batayle
  Agaynst Orestes refusynge wyse counsayle

  But folowyd his owne rasshe mynde without auayle
  As blynde and obstynat of his intencion
  Wherfore he was disconfyted in Batayle
  Hymselfe slayne, his men put to confusyon
  If that the Troyans in theyr abusyon
  With false Parys, had confourmed theyr intent
  To Helenns counsayle Troy had nat ben brent.

  For that Priamus his mynde wolde nat aply
  To the counseyll of Cassandra Prophetes
  The grekys distroyed a great parte of Asy
  Hector also by his selfwyllydnes
  Was slayne with Peyn for all his doughtynes
  Of Achylles in open and playne Batayle
  For nat folowynge of his faders counsayle

  If Hector that day had byddyn within Troy
  And vnto his fader bene obedient
  Perchaunce he sholde haue lyuyd in welth and ioy
  Longe tyme after and come to his intent
  Whereas his body was with a spere through rent
  Of the sayd Achyllys cruell and vnkynde
  Alas for suynge his owne selfwyllyd mynde

  I rede of Nero moche cursed and cruell
  Whiche to wyse counsayle hymself wolde nat agre
  But in all myschef all other dyd excell
  Delytynge hym in synne and crueltye
  But howe dyde he ende forsoth in myserye
  And at the last as wery of his lyfe
  Hymselfe he murdred with his owne hand and knyfe

  The Bybyll wytnessyth howe the prophete Thoby
  Gaue his dere sone in chefe commaundement
  That if he wolde lyue sure without ieoperdy
  He sholde sue the counsayle of men wyse and prudent
  The story of Roboam is also euydent
  Whiche for nat suynge of counseyll and wysdome
  Lost his Empyre, his scepter and kyngdome

  If that it were nat for cawse of breuyte
  I coude shewe many of our predecessours
  Whiche nat folowynge counceyll of men of grauyte
  Soone haue decayed from theyr olde honours
  I rede of Dukes, Kynges, and Emperours
  Whiche dispysynge the counsayle of men of age
  Haue after had great sorowe and damage.

  For he suerly whiche is so obstynate
  That onely he trusteth to his owne blyndnes
  Thynkynge all wysdome within his dotynge pate
  He often endyth in sorowe and dystres
  Wherfore let suche theyr cours swyftly addres
  To drawe our Plough, and depe to ere the ground
  That by theyr laboure all folys may be founde.

THE ENUOY OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY THE TRANSLATOUR.

  O man vnauysed, thy blyndnes set asyde
  Knowledge thy owne foly thy statelynes expel
  Let nat for thy eleuate mynde nor folysshe pryde,
  To order thy dedes by goode and wyse counsel
  Howbeit thou thynke thy reason doth excel
  Al other mennys wyt. yet oft it doth befall.
  Anothers is moche surer: and thyn the worst of all.

 * * * * *


Of disordred and vngoodly maners.

[Illustration: Drawe nere ye folys of lewde condicion
Of yll behauoure gest and countenaunce
Your proude lokys, disdayne and derysyon
Expresseth your inwarde folysshe ignoraunce
Nowe wyll I touche your mad mysgoueraunce
Whiche hast to foly, And folysshe company
Treylynge your Baybll in sygne of your foly]

  In this our tyme small is the company
  That haue good maners worthy of reuerence
  But many thousandes folowe vylany
  Prone to all synne and inconuenyence
  Stryuynge who sonest may come to all offence
  Of lewde condicions and vnlefulnesse
  Blyndnes of yll, and defylyd folysshenesse

  All myserable men alas haue set theyr mynde
  On lothsome maners clene destytute of grace
  Theyr iyen dymmyd, theyr hertes are so blynde
  That heuenly ioy none forceth to purchace
  Both yonge and olde procedeth in one trace
  With ryche and pore without all dyfference
  As bonde men subdued to foly and offence

  Some ar busshed theyr bonetes, set on syde.
  Some waue theyr armys and hede to and fro
  Some in no place can stedfastly abyde
  More wylde and wanton than outher buk or do
  Some ar so proude that on fote they can nat go
  But get they must with countenaunce vnstable
  Shewynge them folys, frayle and varyable

  Some chyde that all men do them hate
  Some gygyll and lawgh without grauyte
  Some thynkes, hymselfe a gentylman or state
  Though he a knaue caytyf and bonde churle be
  These folys ar so blynde them self they can nat so
  A yonge boy that is nat worth an onyon
  With gentry or presthode is felowe and companyon.

  Brybours and Baylyes that lyue upon towlynge
  Are in the world moche set by nowe a dayes
  Sergeauntis and Catchpollys that lyue upon powlynge
  Courters and caytyfs begynners of frayes
  Lyue styll encreasynge theyr vnhappy wayes
  And a thousande mo of dyuers facultyes
  Lyue auauntynge them of theyr enormytees.

  Within the chirche and euery other place
  These folys use theyr lewde condicions
  Some starynge some cryeng some haue great solace
  In rybawde wordes, some in deuysyons
  Some them delyte in scornes and derysons
  Some pryde ensueth and some glotony.
  Without all norture gyuen to vylany

  Theyr lyfe is folysshe lothsome and vnstable
  Lyght brayned, theyr herte and mynde is inconstant
  Theyr gate and loke proude and abhomynable
  They haue nor order as folys ignorant
  Chaungyng theyr myndes thryse in one instant
  Alas this lewdnes and great enormyte
  Wyll them nat suffer theyr wretchydnes to se

  Thus ar these wretchyd caytyfes fully blynde
  All men and wymen that good ar doth them hate
  But he that with good maners endueth his mynde
  Auoydeth this wrath hatered and debate
  His dedes pleaseth both comonty and estate
  And namely suche as ar good and laudable
  Thynketh his dedes right and commendable

  As wyse men sayth: both vertue and cunnynge
  Honoure and worshyp grace and godlynes
  Of worthy maners take theyr begynnynge
  And fere also asswagyth wantones.
  Subduynge the furour of youthes wylfulnes
  But shamefastnes trouth constance and probyte
  Both yonge and olde bryngeth to great dignyte.

  These foresayde vertues with charite and peas.
  Together assembled stedfast in mannys mynde.
  Cawseth his honour and worthynes to encreas.
  And his godly lyfe a godly ende shal fynde
  But these lewde caytyfs which doth theyr myndes blynde
  With corrupt maners lyuynge vnhappely.
  In shame they lyue and wretchedly they dye.

 * * * * *


Of brekynge and hurtynge of amyte and frendshyp.

[Illustration: He that iniustyce vseth and greuance
Agaynst all reason lawe and equyte
By vyolent force puttynge to vtteraunce
A symple man full of humylyte
Suche by his lewdnes and iniquyte.
Makyth a graue wherin hym selfe shall lye.
And lewdly he dyeth that lyueth crudlye.]

  A Fole frowarde cruell and vntrewe
  Is he whiche by his power wrongfully
  His frendes and subiectes laboures to subdewe
  Without all lawe, but clene by tyranny
  Therfore thou Juge thy erys se thou aply
  To right Justyce and set nat thyne intent
  By wrath or malyce to be to vyolent.

  It is nat lawfull to any excellent
  Or myghty man, outher lawyer or estate
  By cruelnes to oppresse an innocent
  Ne by pryde and malyce Justyce to violate
  The law transposynge after a frowarde rate
  With proude wordes defendynge his offence
  God wot oft suche haue symple conscience

  O that he cursed is and reprouable
  Whiche day and nyght stodyeth besely
  To fynde some meanes false and detestable
  To put his frende to losse or hurte therby
  Our hertes ar fully set on vylany
  There ar right fewe of hye or lowe degre
  That luste to norysshe trewe loue and amyte

  Alas exyled is godly charyte
  Out of our Royalme we all ar so vnkynde
  Our folys settyth gretter felycyte
  On golde and goodes than on a faythfull frynde
  Awake blynde folys and call vnto your mynde
  That though honest ryches be moche commendable
  Yet to a true frende it is nat comparable

  Of all thynges loue is moste profytable
  For the right order of lowe and amyte
  Is of theyr maners to be agreable
  And one of other haue mercy and pyte
  Eche doynge for other after theyr degre
  And without falshode this frendeshyp to mayntayne
  And nat departe for pleasour nor for payne

  But alas nowe all people haue dysdayne
  On suche frendshyp for to set theyr delyte
  Amyte we haue exyled out certayne
  We lowe oppressyon to sclaunder and bacbyte
  Extorcyon hath strength, pyte gone is quyte
  Nowe in the worlde suche frendes ar there none
  As were in Grece many yeres agone.

  Who lyst thystory of Patroclus to rede
  There shall he se playne wryten without fayle
  Howe whan Achyllys gaue no force nor hede
  Agaynst the Troyans to execute batayle
  The sayd Patroclus dyd on the aparayle
  Of Achylles, and went forth in his steade
  Agaynst Hector: but lyghtly he was dede.

  But than Achylles seynge this myschaunce.
  Befallen his frende whiche was to hym so true.
  He hym addressyd shortly to take vengeaunce.
  And so in Batayle the noble Hector slewe
  And his dede cors after his charot drewe.
  Upon the grounde traylynge ruthfully behynde
  Se howe he auengyd Patroclus his frende.

  The hystory also of Orestes dothe expresse
  Whiche whan agamenon his fader was slayne
  By egystus whiche agaynst rightwysnes
  The sayde Orestis moder dyd meyntayne
  The childe was yonge wherfore it was but vayne
  In youth to stryue, but whan he came to age
  His naturall moder slewe he in a rage

  And also Egystus whiche had his fader slayne
  Thus toke he vengeaunce of both theyr cruelnes
  But yet it grewe to his great care and payne
  For sodaynly he fell in a madnesse
  And euer thought that in his furiousnes
  His moder hym sued flamynge full of fyre
  And euer his deth was redy to conspyre

  Orestes troubled with this fereful vysyon
  As franatyke and mad wandred many a day
  Ouer many a countrey londe and regyon
  His frende Pylades folowynge hym alway
  In payne nor wo he wolde hym nat denay
  Tyll he restoryd agayne was to his mynde
  Alas what frynde may we fynde nowe so kynde.

  Of dymades what shall I lawde or wryte.
  And Pythias his felawe amyable
  Whiche in eche other suche loue had and delyte
  That whan Denys a tyrant detestable
  And of his men some to hym agreable
  Wolde one of them haue mordred cruelly
  Echone for other offred for to dye

  Ualerius wrytyth a story longe and ample
  Of Lelius and of worthy Cipio.
  Whiche of trewe loue hath left vs great example
  For they neuer left in doloure wele nor wo
  I rede in thystory of Theseus also:
  Howe he (as the Poetes fables doth tell)
  Folowyd his felawe perothus in to hell.

  And serchynge hym dyd wander and compas
  Those lothsome flodys and wayes tenebrous
  Ferynge no paynes of that dysordred place
  Nor obscure mystes or ayres odyous
  Tyll at the laste by his wayes cautelous
  And Hercules valyaunt dedes of boldnesse
  He gat Perothus out of that wretchydnesse.

  Alas where ar suche frendes nowe a dayes
  Suerly in the worlde none suche can be founde
  All folowe theyr owne profyte and lewde wayes
  None vnto other coueytys to be bounde
  Brekers of frendshyp ynough ar on the grounde
  Whiche set nought by frendshyp so they may haue good
  All suche in my shyp shall haue a folys hode

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye cruell folys full of ingratitude.
  Aryse be asshamyd of your iniquyte
  Mollyfy your hertes vnkynde stuberne and rude
  Graffynge in them true loue and amyte
  Consyder this prouerbe of antyquyte
  And your vnkyndnes weray ban and curse
  For whether thou be of hy or lowe degre
  Better is a frende in courte than a peny in purse

 * * * * *


Of contempt, or dispisynge of holy scripture.

[Illustration: He that gyueth his erys or credence
To euery folys talys or talkynge
Thynkynge more wysdome and fruytfull sentence
In theyr vayne talys than is in the redynge
Of bokes whiche shewe vs the way of godly lyuynge
And soulys helth: forsoth suche one is blynde
And in this shyp the anker shall vp wynde.]

  Suche as dispyseth auncyent scripture
  Whiche prouyd is of great auctoryte
  And hath no pleasoure felycyte or cure
  Of godly Prophetis whiche wrote of veryte
  A fole he is for his moste felycyte
  Is to byleue the tales of an olde wyfe
  Rather than the doctryne of eternall lyfe

  The holy Bybyll grounde of trouth and of lawe
  Is nowe of many abiect and nought set by
  Nor godly scripture is nat worth an hawe
  But talys ar louyd grounde of rybawdry
  And many blynddyd ar so with theyr foly
  That no scripture thynke they so true nor gode
  As is a folysshe yest of Robyn hode.

  He that to scripture wyll not gyue credence
  Wherin ar the armys of our tuycion
  And of our fayth foundacion and defence
  Suche one ensueth nat the condycion
  Of man resonable, but by abusyon
  Lyuyth as a best of conscyence cruell
  As saue this worlde were neyther heuen nor hell.

  He thynketh that there is no god aboue
  Nor nobler place than is this wretchyd grounde
  Nor goddes power suche neyther fere nor loue
  With whom all grace and mercy doth abounde
  Whiche whan hym lyst vs wretches may confounde
  Alas what auayleth to gyue instruction
  To suche lewde folys of this condycion.

  It nought auayleth vnto them to complayne
  Of theyr blyndnes, nor enfourme them with vertue
  Theyr cursed lyfe wyll by no mean refrayne
  Their viciousnes, nor their erroure eschewe
  But rather stody theyr foly to renewe
  Alas what profytis to suche to expresse.
  The heuenly ioy, rewarde of holynesse.

  Alas what auayleth to suche to declare
  The paynes of hell, wo dissolate and derke
  No wo nor care can cause suche to beware
  From their lewde lyfe corrupt and synfull warke
  What profyteth sermons of any noble clarke
  Or godly lawes taught at any Scolys
  For to reherse to these myscheuous folys.

  What helpeth the Prophetis scripture or doctryne
  Unto these folys obstynate and blynde
  Their hertis ar harde, nat wyllynge to enclyne
  To theyr preceptis nor rote them in theyr mynde
  Nor them byleue as Cristen men vnkynde
  For if that they consydred heuen or hell
  They wolde nat be so cursed and cruell

  And certaynly the trouth apereth playne
  That these folys thynke in theyr intent
  That within hell is neyther car nor payne
  Hete nor colde, woo, nor other punysshement
  Nor that for synners is ordeyned no turment
  Thus these mad folys wandreth euery houre
  Without amendement styll in theyr blynde erroure

  Before thy fete thou mayst beholde and se
  Of our holy fayth the bokys euydent
  The olde lawes and newe layde ar before the
  Expressynge christes tryumphe right excellent
  But for all this set is nat thyne intent
  Theyr holy doctryne to plant within thy brest
  Wherof shold procede ioy and eternall rest

  Trowest thou that thy selfe wyllyd ignoraunce
  Of godly lawes and mystycall doctryne
  May clense or excuse thy blynde mysgouernaunce
  Or lewde erroure, whiche scorne hast to inclyne
  To theyr preceptis: and from thy synne declyne
  Nay nay thy cursed ignoraunce sothly shall
  Drowne thy soule in the depe flodes infernall

  Therfore let none his cursydnes defende
  Nor holy doctryne, nor godly bokes dispyse
  But rather stody his fawtes to amende
  For god is aboue all our dedes to deuyse
  Whiche shall rewarde them in a ferefull wyse
  With mortall wo that euer shall endure
  Whiche haue dyspysyd his doctryne and scripture

BARCLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Out of your slomber folys I rede you ryse.
  Scripture dyuyne, to folowe and inbrace
  Be nat so bolde it to leue nor dispyse
  But you enforce it to get and purchase
  Remember mannys consort and solace.
  Is holy closyd within the boke of lyfe
  Who that it foloweth hath a speciall grace
  But he that doth nat a wretche is and caytyfe

 * * * * *


Of folys without prouysyon.

[Illustration: He is a fole forsoth and worse
That to his saddyll wolde lepe on hye
Before or he haue gyrt his horse
For downe he comys with an euyll thee
But as great a fole forsoth is he
And to be lawghed to derysyon.
That ought begynneth without prouysyon]

  Of other folys yet is a moche nomber
  Whom I wolde gladly brynge to intellygence
  To auoyde their blyndnes which sore doth incomber
  Theyr mynde and herte for lackynge of science
  Suche ar vnware and gyuen to neglygence
  Mad and mysmyndyd pryuate of wysdome
  Makynge no prouysyon for the tyme to come.

  If any mysfortune aduersyte or wo
  As often hapnyth, to suche a fole doth fall
  Than sayth he I thought it wolde nat haue be so
  But than ouer late is it agayne to call
  It is nat ynough thou fole to say I shall
  For this one daye prouyde me by wysdome
  A wyse man seyth peryll longe before it come

  He is vnwyse and of prouysyon pore
  That nought can se before he haue damage
  Whan the stede is stolyn to shyt the stable dore
  Comys small pleasoure profyte or vauntage
  But he that can suche folysshenes asswage
  Begynnynge by counsayll, and fore prouydence
  Is sure to escape all inconuenyence

  Whan Adam tastyd the appyll in Paradyse.
  To hym prohybyte by dyuyne commaundement
  If he had noted the ende of his interpryse
  To Eue he wolde nat haue ben obedyent
  Thus he endured right bytter punysshement
  For his blynde erroure and improuydence
  That all his lynage rue sore for his offence.

  Hymselfe dryuyn out from Paradyce all bare
  With Eue, into this vale of wretchydnes
  To get theyr lyuynge with laboure payne and care
  And also if Jonathas by errour and blyndnes
  Had nat receyued the gyftis of falsnes
  Unto hym gyuen of Tryphon by abusyon
  He sholde haue escapyd great confusyon

  If that he before had notyd craftely
  His ennemyes gyftis of frawde full and of treason
  He myght haue sauyd hymselfe from ieoperdy
  And all his people by prouydence and reason
  Where as he blynde was as at that season
  And to a cyte broughte in by a trayne
  Where he was murdred and all his people slayne

  Julius Cesar the chefe of conquerours
  Was euer warre and prudent of counsayle
  But whan he had obteyned great honours
  And drewe to rest as wery of Batayle
  Than his vnwarnes causyd hym to wayle
  For if he had red with good aduysement
  The letter whiche to the counselhous was sent

  He had nat gyuen his owne iugement
  As he dyd by his foly and neglygence
  For whiche he murdred was incontynent
  Without respect had vnto his excellence
  Alas se here what inconuenyence
  Came to this Emperour hye and excellent
  For nat beyng wyse dyscrete and prouydent

  If Nichanor before had noted well
  The ende of his dedes he had nat be slayne
  By Judas and the children of Israell
  His hande and tunge cut of to his great payne
  And than his hede, as the bybyll sheweth playne
  Thus may all knowe that wyll therto entende
  Wherto they come that caryth nat the ende

  But he that begynneth by counsayll and wysdome
  Alway procedynge with good prouysyon
  Notynge what is past and what is for to come
  Suche folowys godly scripture and monycion
  In happy wayes without transgressyon
  Of goddes lawes, and his commaundement
  And often tymes comys to his intent.

  Thus it appereth playne and euydent
  That wyse prouysyon, prose and good counsayle
  Are moche laudable, and also excellent
  And to mankynde great profyte and auayle.
  Where as those folys haue often cause to wayle
  For theyr mysfortune, in sorowe vexed sore
  Whiche ought begyn nat prouydyd before

THE ENUOY OF ALEXANDER BARCLAY.

  O man remember thou canste nat abyde
  Styll in this lyfe therfore moste specially
  For thy last ende thou oughtest to prouyde.
  For that prouysion forsoth is most godly
  And than next after thy mynde thou ought aply
  To fle offence, and bewayle thyne olde synne
  And in all workes and besynes worldly
  What may be the ende marke well or thou begynne

 * * * * *


Of disordred loue and veneryous.

[Illustration: Here drawe we folys mad togyther bounde
Whom Uenus caught hath in hyr net a snare
Whose blynde hertes this forour doth confounde
Theyr lyfe consumynge in sorowe shame and care
Many one she blyndeth alas fewe can beware
Of hyr dartes hedyd with shame and vylany
But he that is wondyd can skant ynde remedy]

  O cruel Uenus forsoth who doth insue
  Thy flaterynge gylys and proude commaundement
  And hastyth nat the dartis to eschewe
  Of blynde Cupido but folowys his intent
  Suche folys endure moche sorowe and turment
  Wastynge theyr goodes dishonestynge their name
  As past fere of god and sekynge after shame

  Howe many yllys, what inconuenyence
  Howe great vengeaunce, and howe bytter punysshement
  Hath god oft takyn for this synne and offence
  Howe many Cytees hye and excellent
  Hath Uenus lost, destroyed, and alto brent
  What lordes and howe many a great estate
  Hath loue lost, murdred, or els brought in debate

  The noble Troyans murdred ar and slayne
  Theyr cyte brent, decayde is theyr kyngdome
  Theyr kynge pryant by pyrrus dede and slayne
  And all this by Parys vnhappy loue is come
  Whiche voyde of grace and blynde without wysdome
  To fyll his lust, from Grece rubbyd Helayne,
  But this one pleasour was grounde of moche payne

  Also Marcus a Prynce of the Romayns
  Called Antonius by another name
  After that he had ouercome the persyans
  To Rome retournyd with tryumphe lawde and fame
  And there (whiche after was to his great shame)
  With cleopatra in loue was take so in blyndnes
  That he promysyd to make hir empresse

  So this blynde louer to fyll his interpryse
  Caused his men two hondred shyppes ordayne
  And toke the see wenynge in suche fourme and wyse
  His lewde desyre: to perfourme and obteyne
  But shortly after was he ouercome and slayne
  Of Cesar: and whan he this purpose vnderstode
  He bathed his Corse within his lemmans blode

  For two serpentis that venemus were and fell
  Were set to the brestis of fayre Cleopatray
  So this cruell purpose had punysshement cruell
  For theyr intendynge theyr countrey to betray
  And worthy they were, what man can it denay
  Thus it apereth playne by euydence
  That of false loue cometh great inconuenyence

  For he that loueth is voyde of all reason
  Wandrynge in the worlde without lawe or mesure
  In thought and fere sore vexed eche season
  And greuous dolours in loue he must endure
  No creature hym selfe may well assure
  From loues soft dartis: I say none on the grounde
  But mad and folysshe bydes he whiche hath the wounde

  Aye rennynge as franatyke no reason in his mynde
  He hath no constaunce nor ease within his herte
  His iyen ar blynde, his wyll alwaye inclyned
  To louys preceptes yet can nat he departe
  The Net is stronge, the fole caught can nat starte
  The darte is sharpe, who euer is in the chayne
  Can nat his sorowe in vysage hyde nor fayne

  Rede howe Phedra hir loue fixed so feruent
  On ypolitus in prohybyte auowtry.
  That whan he wolde nat vnto hir consent
  To hir husbonde she accused hym falsly
  As if he wolde hir tane by force to vylany
  Ipolitus was murdred for this accusement
  But Phedra for wo hanged hyrself incontynent

  The lewde loue of Phasyphe abhomynable
  As poetis sayth) brought hir to hir confusyon
  Nero the cruell Tyrant detestable.
  His naturall mother knewe by abusyon
  Uenus and Cupido with their collusyon.
  Enflamyd Messalina in suche wyse
  That euery nyght hir selfe she wolde disgyse

  And secretly go to the brothelhous
  For to fulfyll hir hote concupyssence
  What shall I wryte the dedes vicious
  Of Julia or, hir cruell offence.
  What shall I wryte the inconuenyence
  Whiche came by Danythys cursed auowtry
  Syth that the bybyll it shewyth openly

  What shall I wryte the greuous forfayture
  Of Sodom and Gomor syns the Bybyll doth tell
  Of their synnes agaynst god and nature
  For whiche they sanke alyue downe into hell.
  Thus it aperith what punysshement cruell.
  Our lorde hath taken both in the olde lawe and newe
  For this synne: whiche sholde vs moue it to eschewe

ALEXANDER BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye folys inflamyd with loue inordynate.
  Note these examples, drawe from this vyce your mynde
  Remember that there is none so great estate
  But that false loue hym causeth to be blynde
  Our folysshe wymen may nat be left behynde
  For many of them so folowys in this way
  That they sell theyr soules and bodyes to go gay

  The graceles galantes, and the aprentyce pore
  Though they nought haue, themselfe they set nought by
  Without they be acquaynted with some hore
  Of westmynster or some other place of rybawdry
  Than fall they to murder theft and robery.
  For were nat proude clothynge, and also flesshely lust
  All the feters and gyues of Englonde shulde rust.

  Therfore folys awake, and be no longer blynde
  Consyder that shame, seknes, and pouertye
  Of loue procedeth: and drawe from it your mynde
  Suffre not your soules damned and lost to be
  By vayne lust and carnall sensualyte
  For thoughe the small pleasure do make the fayne
  The ende oft is worldly wo and myserye
  Or amonge the fendes eternall payne

 * * * * *


Of them y^t synne trustynge vpon the
mercy of god.

[Illustration: Who that styll synneth without contricion
Trustynge goddes mercy and benygnyte
Bycause he sparyth our transgressyon
And he that thynketh iustice and equyte
Is nat in god as well as is petye
Suche is forsoth without discressyon
Syns he thus synneth upon presumpcion]

  The wynde is up our Nauy is aflote
  A bande of Folys a borde is come yet more
  Theyr cursed maners and mad I shall nowe note
  Whose herte for synne is neyther contryte ne sore
  Nat mornynge (as they ought to do) therfore
  Without fere styll lyuynge in theyr vyciousnes
  No thynge inclyned to godly holynes

  They thynke no thynge on goddes rightwysnes
  But grounde them all, on his mercy and pyte
  For that he redyer is vnto forgeuenesse
  Unto all people, than them punysshed to se
  Trouth it is that the great enormyte
  Of the worlde hathe nat aye worthy punysshement
  Nor he nat damnyd that doth his synne repent

  Put case he gyuyth nat aye lyke iugement
  On mannys mysdede, nor yet mundayne offence
  And though he be gode meke and pacyent
  Nor shortly punyssheth our inconuenyence
  Put case also he gyue nat aduertence
  To all mundayne fawtes synne and fragylyte
  Yet none sholde synne in hope of his mercy

  But these folys assembled in a companye
  Sayth eche to other that oft it is laufull
  To perseuerant synners lyuynge in iniquyte
  Yo trust in god syns he is mercyfull
  What nedeth vs our wyttis for to dull
  Labourynge our synne and foly to refrayne
  Syns synne is a thynge naturall and humayne

  Than sayth another forsoth thou sayst playne
  And also our fore Faders and progenitours
  Before our dayes offendyd haue certayne.
  As well as we, in many blynde errours
  But syns they haue escapyd all paynes and dolours
  Of hell; and nowe in heuyn ar certayne
  What nede haue we to fere infernall payne.

  Than comys in an other with his dotysshe brayne
  By god sayth he I knowe it without fable
  That heuyn was made neyther for gose nor crane
  Nor yet for other bestes vnresonable
  Than of the Scripture doth he Chat and bable
  Alleggynge our forefaders whiche haue mysdone
  Saynge that no synne is newe in our season

  A myserable men destytute of reason.
  That thus on hope do synne vnhappely
  Remember the synne of our forefaders done
  Haue neuer ben left vnpunysshed fynally
  And that somtyme, full sharpe and bytterly
  For euer more all synne hath had a fall
  With sorowe here, or els wo infernall

  The synne of Sodom foule and nat natural
  The Pryde of rome, whiche was so excellent
  The offence of Dauyd Prophete and kynge royal
  The furour of Pharao fyers and violent
  Haue nat escaped the rightwyse punysshment
  Of God aboue, the celestial and highe Justice
  Which fyrst, or last punyssheth euery vyce.

  Remember Richarde lately kynge of price
  In Englonde raynynge vnrightwisely a whyle.
  Howe he ambycion, and gyleful Couetyse
  With innocent blode his handes dyd defyle
  But howbeit that fortune on hym dyd smyle
  Two yere or thre: yet god sende hym punysshment
  By his true seruant the rede Rose redolent.

  Therfore remember that god omnypotent
  Oft suffreth synners in theyr iniquyte
  Grauntynge them space and tyme of amendement
  And nat to procede in their enormyte
  But those synners that byde in one degre
  And in this lyfe their synne wyll nat refrayne
  God after punyssheth with infernall payne

  As I haue sayde (therfore) I say agayne
  Though god be of infynyte pety and mercy
  His fauour and grace passynge all synne mundayne
  Yet iustice is with hym eternally.
  Wherfore I aduyse the to note intentifly
  Though pyte wolde spare, iustyce wyll nat so
  But the here rewarde, els with infernal we.

ALEXANDER BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Syghe synners, syghe, for your mysgouernance.
  Lament, mourne, and sorowe for your enormyte.
  Away with these Clowdes of mysty ignorance
  Syn nat in hope of goddys hyghe petye
  And remember howe ye daily punysshed be
  With dyuers dyseases both vncouthe and cruel
  And all for your synne, but suche as escapeth fre
  And styl lyue in syn, may fere the peynes of helle

 * * * * *


Of the folisshe begynnynge of great
bildynges without sufficient prouision.

[Illustration: Come nere folys and rede your ignorance
And great losse procedynge of your owne foly
Whiche without gode and discrete purueaunce
Any great werke wyll bylde or edefye.
All suche ar folys what man wyll it deny
For he that wyll bylde before he count his cost
Shall seldome well ende, so that is made is lost.]

  Who euer begynneth any worke or dede
  Of byldynge or of other thynge chargeable
  And to his costes before taketh no hede
  Nor tyme nat countyth to his worke agreable
  Suche is a fole and well worthy a babyll
  For he that is wyse wyll no thynge assay
  Without he knowe howe he well ende it may.

  The wyse man counteth his cost before alway
  Or he begyn, and nought wyll take in honde
  Wherto his myght or power myght denay
  His costes confourmynge to the stynt of his londe
  Where as the fole that nought doth vnderstonde
  Begynneth a byldynge without aduysement
  But or halfe be done his money clene is spent.

  Many haue begon with purpose dilygent
  To bylde great houses and pleasaunt mansyons
  Them thynkynge to finysshe after theyr intent
  But nede disceyuyd hath theyr opynyons
  Their purpose nat worth a cowpyll of onyons
  But whan they se that they it ende nat can
  They curse the tyme that euer they it began

  Of Nabugodosor that worthy man.
  What shall I wryte or the story to the tell
  Syth that the Bybyll to the expresse it can
  In the fourth chapter of the prophete Danyell
  Was he nat punysshed in paynes cruell
  For his great pryde and his presumpcion
  Whiche he toke it in the byldynge of Babylon

  His golde and treasoure he spendyd hole theron
  Enioynge hym in his Cyte excellent
  Right so Nemroth by his inuencion
  The towre of Babylon began for this intent
  To saue hym, if the worlde agayne were drent
  But the hye god consyderynge his blynde rage
  His purpose let by confusyon of langage

  His towre vnperfyte to his losse and domage
  His people punysshed, hymselfe specyally
  Thus it apereth what great disauauntage
  On theyr hede falleth that byldeth in foly
  Thus he is folysshe that wolde edefy
  Any great worke without ryches in excesse
  For great byldynges requyreth great rychesse

  But many folys ar in suche a blyndnesse
  That hereon nought they set their mynde ne thought
  Wherfore to them oft commyth great distresse
  And to great pouerty often ar they brought
  Laughed to scorne, their purpose cometh to nought
  And truely I fynde in bokes wryten playne
  That our olde faders haue neuer set theyr brayne

  On great byldynge, ne yet of them ben fayne:
  It longeth to a lorde a Prynce or a Kynge
  That lacke no treasoure theyr werkes to mayntayne
  To set theyr myndes on excellent buyldynge
  Therfore who so euer wyll meddle with this thynge
  Or any other, before let hym be wyse
  That his myght and ryches therto may suffyse.

  Lyst all men do mocke and scorne his interpryse
  For if he ought begyn without prouysyon
  And haue nat wherby his byldynge may up ryse
  All that is lost that is made and begon
  And better it is sothly in myn intencion
  Nought to begyn, and spare laboure and payne
  Than to begyn and than, leue of agayne

  Who euer he be that so doth certayne
  He shall haue mockis mengled with his damage
  Therfore let suche folys sharpe theyr brayne
  And better intende to theyr owne auauntage
  Consyderynge that processe of tyme and age
  Theyr curyous byldynges shall at the lest confounde
  And Roufe and wallys make egall with the grounde.

BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye folys blyndyd with curyosyte
  Whiche on great byldynge set so sore your mynde
  Remember ye nat that doutles ye shall dye
  And your gay byldynges and howses leue behynde
  Thynke ye your conforte alway in them to fynde
  Or whan ye dye, them hens with you to haue
  Nay nay the laste hous gyuen to mankynde
  Is the course grounde and walles of his graue.

 * * * * *


Of glotons and dronkardes.

[Illustration: That gloton or dronkarde, vyle in goddes sight
Shall hardly escape the weyght of pouertye.
Whiche drynketh and deuoureth both day and nyght
Therin onely settynge all his felycyte
His lothsome lust and his bestyalyte
Shall brynge vnto destruccion fynally
His soule, his godes and his wretchyd body.]

  Within our nauy he nedes shall haue a place.
  Whiche without mesure on lothsome glotony
  Setteth his pleasure and singuler solace
  His stomacke ouerchargynge, vyle and vngodely
  And to none other thynge his mynde doth he aply
  Saue depest to drynke, suche force nat of theyr soules
  But labore in rynsynge pecis cuppis and bowles

  The madnes of dronkennes is so immoderate
  That greuous sores it ingendreth and sykenes
  It causeth often great foly and debate
  With soden deth and carefull heuynes
  In thynges no difference putteth dronkennes.
  It febleth the ioyntis and the body within
  Wastynge the brayne makynge the wyt full thyn

  It engendreth in the hede infirmyte
  Blyndynge the herte wyt and discression
  The mynde it demynyssheth, coloure and beaute.
  Causynge all myschef, shame and abusyon
  It maketh men mad, and in conclusyon
  Causeth them lyue without lawe or measure
  Suynge after syn defylynge theyr nature

  The people that are acloyed with this synne.
  On no thynge els theyr myndes wyll aply:
  Saue to the wyne and ale stakes to renne
  And there as bestes to stryue and drynke auy
  Than ar they outher gyuyn to rybawdry
  Or els to brawle and fight at euery worde
  Thus dronkennes is the chefe cause of discorde

  But namely dronkennes and wretchyd glotony
  By their excesse and superfluyte
  Engendreth the rote of cursed Lechery
  With murder, thefte and great enormyte
  So bryngeth it many to great aduersyte
  And with his furour the worlde so doth it blynde
  That many it bryngeth to a shamfull ende

  This vyce (alas) good maners doth confounde
  And maketh man ouer besy of langage
  And hym that in all ryches doth abounde
  It ofte in pryson bryngeth and in bondage
  It causeth man to his great sorowe and domage
  Disclose his secrete and his preuey counsayle
  Whiche causeth hym after sore to mourne and wayle

  Nought is more lothsome, more vycyous nor vyle
  Than he that is subdued to this vyce
  His lyfe shortynge his body he doth defyle
  Bereuynge his soule the ioy of Paradyse
  Howe many Cytees and lordes of great pryce
  Hath ben destroyed by dronken glotony
  And by his felawe, false loue, or lechery.

  The sone of Thomyr had nat ben ouercome
  Nor slayne by Cyrus for all his worthynes.
  If he hym selfe had gydyd by wysdome
  And the vyce auoydyd of blynde dronkennes
  The great Alexander taken with this madnes
  With his swerde, whan he was dronken slewe
  Suche of his frendes as were to hym most trewe

  I rede also howe this conquerour myghty
  Upon a season played at the Chesse
  With one of his knyghtes which wan ynally
  Of hym great golde treasoure and rychesse
  And hym ouercame, but in a furyousnes
  And lade with wyne, this conquerour vp brayde
  And to his knyght in wrath these wordes sayde

  I haue subdued by strength and by wysdome
  All the hole worlde, whiche obeyeth to me
  And howe hast thou alone me thus ouercome
  And anone commaundyd his knyght hanged to be
  Than sayde the knyght by right and equyte
  I may apele. syns ye ar thus cruell
  Quod Alexander to whome wylt thou apell

  Knowest thou any that is gretter than I
  Thou shalt be hanged thou spekest treason playne
  The knyght sayd sauynge your honour certaynly
  I am no traytoure, apele I woll certayne
  From dronken Alexander tyll he be sober agayne
  His lorde than herynge his desyre sounde to reason
  Differryd the iustyce as for that tyme and season

  And than after whan this furour was gone
  His knyght he pardoned repentynge his blyndenes.
  And well consydered that he shulde haue mysdone
  If he to deth had hym done in that madnesse
  Thus it apereth what great unhappynes
  And blyndnes cometh to many a creature
  By wyne or ale taken without measure.

  Se here the inconuenyence manyfolde
  Comynge of dronkennes as I wrytyn fynde.
  Some ar so starynge mad that none can them holde
  Rorynge and cryeng as men out of their mynde
  Some fyghtynge some chydynge, some to other kynde
  Nought lyuynge to them selfe: and some dotynge Johnn
  Beynge dronke thynketh hym as wyse as Salomon

  Some sowe dronke, swaloynge mete without mesure
  Some mawdelayne dronke, mournynge lowdly and hye
  Some beynge dronke no lenger can endure
  Without they gyue them to bawdy rybawdry
  Some swereth armys nayles herte and body.
  Terynge our lord worse, than the Jowes hym arayed
  Some nought can speke, but harkenyth what is sayd.

  Some spende all that they haue and more at wast
  With reuell and reuell dasshe fyll the cup Joohnn
  Some their thryft lesyth with dyce at one cast
  Some slepe as slogardes tyll their thryft be gone
  Some shewe theyr owne counsell for kepe can they none
  Some are Ape dronke full of lawghter and of toyes
  Some mery dronke syngynge with wynches and boyes

  Some spue, some stacker some vtterly ar lame
  Lyeng on the grounde without power to ryse
  Some bost them of bawdry ferynge of no shame
  Some dumme, and some speketh. ix. wordes at thryse
  Some charge theyr bely with wyne in suche wyse
  That theyr legges skant can bere vp the body
  Here is a sort to drowne a hole nauy.

BARKLAYE TO THE FOLYS.

  Alas mad folys howe longe wyll ye procede
  In this beestly lyuynge agayst humayne nature
  Cease of your Foly: gyue aduertence and hede
  That in eche thynge ought to be had measure
  Wyne ne ale hurteth no maner creature
  But sharpeth the wyt if it be take in kynde
  But if it be nat, than I the ensure
  It dulleth the brayne, blyndynge the wyt and mynde

  Rede all bokes and thou shalt neuer fynde
  That dronkennes and wysdome may togyther be
  For where is dronkennes, there madnes is by kynde
  Gydynge the hauer to all enormyte
  And where as is madnes thou shalt neuer se
  Reason ne wysdome take theyr abydynge
  In one instant, wherfore lerne this of me
  That dronkennes is mortell enmy to cunnynge.

 * * * * *


Of ryches vnprofytable.

[Illustration: Yet fynde I folys of another sorte
Whiche gather and kepe excessyfe ryches
With it denyeng their neyghboures to conforte
Whiche for nede lyueth in payne and wretchydnes
Suche one by fortune may fall into distres
And in lyke wyse after come to mysery
And begge of other, whiche shall to hym deny.]

  It is great foly, and a desyre in vayne
  To loue and worshyp ryches to feruently
  And so great laboure to take in care and payne
  Fals treasoure to encrease and multyply
  But yet no wonder is it sertaynly
  Syth he that is ryche hath gretter reuerence
  Than he that hath sadnes wysdom and scyence

  The ryche mannes rewardes stande in best degre
  But godly maners we haue set clene asyde
  Fewe loueth vertue, but fewer pouertye.
  Fals couetyse his braunches spreddeth wyde
  Ouer all the worlde, that pety can nat byde
  Among vs wretches banysshed is kyndnes
  Thus lyeth the pore in wo and wretchydnes

  Without conforte and without auctoryte
  But he only is nowe reputed wyse
  Whiche hath ryches in great store and plente.
  Suche shall be made a sergeant or Justyce
  And in the Court reputed of moste pryse
  He shall be callyd to counseyll in the lawe
  Though that his brayne be skarsly worth a strawe

  He shall be Mayre baylyfe or constable
  And he onely promotyd to honoure
  His maners onely reputed ar laudable
  His dedys praysyd as grettest of valoure
  Men laboure and seke to fall in his fauoure
  He shall haue loue, echone to hym shall sue
  For his ryches, but nought for his vertue

  Se what rewardes ar gyuen to ryches
  Without regarde had to mannys condycyon
  A strawe for cunnynge wysdome and holynes
  Of ryches is the first and chefe questyon
  What rentes what londes howe great possessyon
  What stuffe of housholde what store of grotz and pens
  And after his gode his wordes hath credence.

  His wordes ar trouth men gyue to them credence
  Thoughe they be falsly fayned and sotell
  But to the pore none wyll gyue aduertence
  Though that his wordes be true as the gospell
  Ye let hym swere by heuyn and by hell
  By god and his sayntes and all that god made
  Yet nought they beleue that of hym is sayde

  They say that the pore men doth god dispyse
  Thouhe they nought swere but trouth and veryte
  And that god punyssheth them in suche wyse
  For so dispysynge of his hye maiestye
  Kepynge them for their synnes in pouerte
  And theyr ryche exaltyth by his power and grace
  To suche ryches, worldly pleasour and solace

  The ryche ar rewarded with gyftis of dyuerse sorte
  With Capons and Conyes delycious of sent
  But the pore caytyf abydeth without confort
  Though he moste nede haue: none doth hym present
  The fat pygge is baast, the lene cony is brent
  He that nought hathe, shall so alway byde pore
  But he that ouer moche hath, yet shall haue more

  The wolfe etis the shepe, the great fysshe the small
  The hare with the houndes vexed ar and frayde
  He that hath halfe nedes wyll haue all
  The ryche mannes pleasour can nat be denayde
  Be the pore wroth, or be he well apayde
  Fere causeth hym sende vnto the ryches hous
  His mete from his owne mouth, if it be delycious

  And yet is this ryche caytyf nat content
  Though he haue all yet wolde he haue more.
  And though this gode can neuer of hym be spent
  With nought he departyth to hym that is pore
  Though he with nede harde vexed were and sore.
  O cursyd hunger o mad mynde and delyte.
  To laboure for that whiche neuer shall do profyte

  Say couetous caytyfe what doth it the auayle
  For to haue all and yet, nat to be content
  Thou takest nat this sore laboure and trauayle
  To thy pleasoure but to thy great turment
  But loke therof what foloweth consequent
  Whan thou art dede and past this wretchyd lyfe
  Thou leuyst behynde brawlynge debate and stryfe

  To many one ryches is moche necessary
  Whiche can it order right as it ought to be
  But vnto other is it vtterly contrary
  Whiche therwith disdayneth to socoure pouerte.
  Nor them relefe in theyr aduersyte
  Suche shall our lorde sore punysshe fynally
  And his petycion rightwysly deny

BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye great estatis and men of dignyte
  To whome god in this lyfe hath sent ryches
  Haue ye compassion, on paynfull pouertye
  And them conforte in theyr carefull wretchydnes
  God hym loueth and shall rewarde doutles
  Whiche to the nedy for hym is charitable
  With heuenly ioy, whiche treasour is endeles
  So shall thy riches to the be profytable.

 * * * * *


Of hym that togyder wyll serue
two maysters.

[Illustration: A fole he is and voyde of reason
Whiche with one hounde tendyth to take
Two harys in one instant and season
Rightso is he that wolde vndertake
Hym to two lordes a seruaunt to make
For whether, that he be lefe or lothe
The one he shall displease, or els bothe.]

  A fole also he is withouten doute
  And in his porpose sothly blyndyd sore
  Whiche doth entende labour or go aboute
  To serue god, and also his wretchyd store
  Of worldly ryches: for as I sayde before
  He that togyder wyll two maysters serue
  Shall one displease and nat his loue deserue

  For he that with one hownde wol take also
  Two harys togyther in one instant
  For the moste parte doth the both two forgo
  And if he one haue: harde it is and skant
  And that blynde fole mad and ignorant
  That draweth thre boltis atons in one bowe
  At one marke shall shote to hye or to lowe

  Or els to wyde, and shortly for to say
  With one or none of them he strykis the marke:
  And he that taketh vpon hym nyght or day
  Laboures dyuers to chargeable of warke.
  Or dyuerse offycis: suche wander in the darke
  For it is harde to do well as he ought
  To hym that on dyuerse thynges hath his thought

  With great thoughtes he troubleth sore his brayne
  His mynde vnstable, his wyt alway wandrynge:
  Nowe here nowe there his body labours in payne
  And in no place of stedfast abydynge.
  Nowe workynge now musynge now renynge now rydynge
  Now on see nowe on londe, than to se agayne
  Somtyme to Fraunce, and nowe to Flaunders or Spayne

  Thus is it paynfull and no thynge profytable
  On many labours a man to set his mynde
  For nouther his wyt nor body can be stable
  Whiche wyll his body to dyuers chargis bynde
  Whyle one goth forwarde the other bydes behynde
  Therfore I the counseyll for thyne owne behoue
  Let go this worlde and serue thy lorde aboue

  He that his mynde settyth god truly to serue
  And his sayntes: this worlde settynge at nought
  Shall for rewarde euerlastynge ioy deserue
  But in this worlde, he that settyth his thought
  All men to please, and in fauour to be brought
  Must lout and lurke, flater, lawde, and lye:
  And cloke a knauys counseyll, though it fals be

  If any do hym wronge or iniury
  He must it suffer and pacyently endure
  A dowble tunge with wordes lyke hony
  And of his offycis if he wyll be sure
  He must be sober and colde of his langage
  More to a knaue, than to one of hye lynage

  Oft must he stoupe his bonet in his honde
  His maysters backe he must oft shrape and clawe
  His breste anoyntynge, his mynde to vnderstonde
  But be it gode or bad therafter must he drawe
  Without he can Jest he is nat worth a strawe.
  But in the meane tyme beware that he none checke
  For than layth malyce a mylstone in his necke

  He that in court wyll loue and fauour haue
  A fole must hym fayne, if he were none afore
  And be as felowe to euery boy and knaue
  And to please his lorde he must styll laboure sore
  His manyfolde charge maketh hym coueyt more
  That he had leuer serue a man in myserye
  Than serue his maker in tranquylyte

  But yet whan he hath done his dylygence
  His lorde to serue as I before haue sayde
  For one small faute or neglygent offence
  Suche a displeasoure agaynst hym may be layde
  That out is he cast bare and vnpuruayde.
  Whether he be gentyll, yeman grome or page
  Thus worldly seruyce is no sure herytage

  Wherfore I may proue by these examples playne
  That it is better more godly and plesant
  To leue this mondayne casualte and payne
  And to thy maker one god to be seruaunt
  Whiche whyle thou lyuest shall nat let the want
  That thou desyrest iustly, for thy syruyce
  And than after gyue the, the ioyes of Paradyse.

BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Alas man aryse out of Idolatry.
  Worshyp nat thy ryches nor thy vayne treasoure
  Ne this wretchyd worlde full of mysery.
  But lawde thy maker and thy sauyour
  With fere, mekenes, fayth, glory, and honoure
  Let thy treasoure onely in his seruyce be
  And here be content with symple behauoure
  Hauynge in this lorde trust and felycyte

 * * * * *


Of to moche spekynge or bablynge.

[Illustration: He that his tunge can temper and refrayne
And asswage the foly of hasty langage
Shall kepe his mynde from trowble, sadnes and payne
And fynde therby great ease and auauntage
Where as a hasty speker falleth in great domage
Peryll and losse, in lyke wyse as the pye
Betrays hir byrdes by hir chatrynge and crye.]

  Ye blaberynge folys superflue of langage
  Come to our shyp our ankers ar in wayde
  By right and lawe ye may chalange a stage
  To you of Barklay it shall nat be denayde
  Howe be it the charge Pynson hathe on me layde
  With many folys our Nauy not to charge.
  Yet ye of dewty shall haue a sympyll barge

  Of this sorte thousandes ar withouten fayle
  That haue delyte in wordes voyde and vayne
  On men nat fawty somtyme vsynge to rayle
  On folysshe wordes settynge theyr herte and brayne
  They often touche to theyr owne shame and payne
  Suche thynges to whiche none wyll theyr mynde aply
  (Saue suche folys) to theyr shame and enuy

  Say besy fole art thou nat well worthy
  To haue enuy, and that echone sholde the hate
  Whan by thy wordes soundynge to great foly
  Thou sore labrest to engender debate
  Some renneth fast thynkynge to come to late
  To gyue his counsell whan he seeth men in doute
  And lyghtly his folysshe bolt shall be shot out

  Is it nat better for one his tunge to kepe
  Where as he myght (perchaunce) with honestee
  Than wordes to speke whiche make hym after wepe
  For great losse folowynge wo and aduersyte
  A worde ones spokyn reuoked can nat be
  Therfore thy fynger lay before thy lypes
  For a wyse mannys tunge, without aduysement trypes

  He that wyll answere of his owne folysshe brayne
  Before that any requyreth his counsayle
  Shewith hym selfe and his hasty foly playne
  Wherby men knowe his wordes of none auayle
  Some haue delyted in mad blaborynge and frayle
  Whiche after haue suffred bytter punysshement
  For their wordes, spoken without aduysement

  Say what precedeth of this mad outrage
  But great mysfortune, wo and vnhappynesse
  But for all theyr chattynge and plenty of langage
  Whan to the preste they come them to confesse
  To shewe theyr lewde lyfe theyr synne and wretchydnes
  Whan they sholde speke, and to this poynt ar come
  Theyr tunges ar loste and there they syt as domme

  Many haue ben whiche sholde haue be counted wyse
  Sad and discrete, and right well sene in scyence
  But all they haue defyled with this one vyse
  Of moche spekynge: o cursyd synne and offence
  Pyte it is that so great inconuenience
  So great shame, contempt rebuke and vylany
  Sholde by one small member came to the hole body

  Let suche take example by the chatrynge pye.
  Whiche doth hyr nest and byrdes also betraye
  By hyr grete chatterynge, clamoure dyn and crye
  Ryght so these folys theyr owne foly bewraye.
  But touchynge wymen of them I wyll nought say
  They can nat speke, but ar as coy and styll
  As the horle wynde or clapper or a mylle

  But that man or woman or any creature
  That lytell speketh or els kepeth sylence
  Ar euer of them selfe moste stedfast and sure
  Without enuy, hatred or malyuolence.
  Where as to suche comys moche inconuenyence
  Sorowe vpon sorowe, malyce and dysdayne
  Whiche wyll no tyme, his speche nor tunge refrayne

  Fayre speche is pleasaunt if it be moderate
  And spoken in season, conuenyente and dewe
  To kepe scylence, to pore man or estate
  Is a great grace, and synguler vertue
  Langage is lawdable whan it is god and true
  A wyse man or he speke wyll be wyse and ware
  What (to whome) why (howe) whan and whare

BARKLAYE TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye bablynge brybours, endeuer you to amende
  Mytygat by mesure, your prowde hasty langage
  Kepe well your tunges so, shall ye kepe your frende
  For hasty speche ingendreth great damage
  Whan a worde is nat sayd, the byrde is in the cage
  Also the hous is surest whan the dorys be barryde
  So whan thy worde is spokyn and out at large
  Thou arte nat mayster, but he that hath it harde

  If thou take hede and set therto thy brayne
  In this world thou shalt fynde thynges thre
  Whiche ones past, can nat be callyd agayne.
  The firste is (tyme lost) by mannes symplycyte
  The seconde (youth) reuoked can nat be
  The thyrde (a worde spoken) it gooth out in the wynde
  And yet is the fourth, that is (virginyte)
  My forgetfull mynde, had lefte it nere behynde

 * * * * *


Of them that correct other and yet them
selfe do nought and synne worse than
they whom they so correct.

[Illustration: He lacketh reason and vnderstandynge to
Whiche to a towne or Cyte knoweth the way
And shewyth other howe they may thether go
Hym selfe wandrynge aboute from day to day
In myre and fen, though his iourney thether lay
So he is mad whiche to other doth preche and tell
The wave to heuyn, and hym selfe goth to hell.]

  Nowe to our Nauy, a sorte maketh asaute
  Of folys blynde, mad Jugys and Iniust
  Whiche lyghtly noteth another mannes faute.
  Chastynge that synne, whiche theyr owne mynde doth rust
  By longe abydynge, and increas of carnall lust
  They cloke their owne vyce synne and enormyte
  Other blamynge and chastynge with moche cruelte

  They mocke and mowe at anothers small offence
  And redy ar a faute in them to fynde
  But of theyr owne foly and inconuenyence
  They se no thynge, for fully ar they blynde
  Nat notynge the vyce rotyd in theyr owne mynde
  Theyr greuous woundes and secrete malady
  For theyr owne yll they seke no remedy

  The hande whiche men vnto a Crosse do nayle
  Shewyth the waye ofte to a man wandrynge
  Whiche by the same his right way can nat fayle
  But yet the hande is there styll abydynge
  So do these folys lewde of theyr owne lyuynge
  To other men shewe mean and way to wynne
  Eternall ioy themselfe bydynge in synne

  He sertaynly may well be callyd a sote
  Moche vnauysed and his owne ennemy
  Whiche in a nothers iye can spye a lytell mote
  And in his owne can nat fele nor espye
  A moche stycke, so is he certaynly.
  Whiche noteth anothers small faute or offence
  To his owne great synnes gyuynge none aduertence

  Many them selfe fayne as chaste as was saynt Johnn
  And many other fayne them meke and innocent
  Some other as iust, and wyse as Salomon
  As holy as Poule, as Job als pacyent
  As sad as senecke, and as obedyent
  As Abraham, and as martyn vertuous
  But yet is theyr lyfe full lewde and vycious

  Some lokyth with an aungels countenaunce
  Wyse sad and sober lyke an heremyte
  Thus hydynge theyr synne and theyr mysgouernaunce.
  Under suche clokys lyke a fals ypocryte
  Let suche folys rede what Cicero doth wryte
  Whiche sayth that none sholde blame any creature
  For his faut, without his owne lyuynge be sure

  Without all spot of synne faut or offence
  For in lyke fourme as a phesycyan.
  By his practyse and cunnynge or scyence
  The sekenes curyth of a nother man
  But his owne yll nor dyseas he nat can
  Relefe nor hele so doth he that doth blame
  Anothers synne: he styll lyuynge in the same

  Many ar whiche other can counseyll craftely
  And shewe the peryll that may come by theyr synne
  But them selfe they counseyll nat: ne remedy.
  Nor take no waye whereby they heuyn may wynne
  But lye in that vyce that they rotyd ar in
  Leuynge the way that gydyth to ioy and rest
  Their owne sensualyte ensuynge as a beest

  Wherfore ye prestis that haue the charge and cure.
  To teche and enfourme the rude comonte.
  In goddys lawes groundyd in scripture
  And blame all synnes sparynge no degre
  Whyle ye rebuke thus theyr enormyte
  Lyue so that none may cause haue you to blame
  And if ye do nat: it is to your great shame

  For without doute it is great vylany
  A man to speke agaynst any offence
  Wherin he well knowyth hym owne selfe gylty
  Within his mynde and secrete conscience
  Agaynst hymselfe suche one gyueth sentence
  Howe god ryght iuge, by rightwyse iugement
  Shulde hym rewarde with worthy punysshement

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye clerkes that on your shulders here the shelde
  Unto you graunted by the vnyuersyte.
  Howe dare ye auenture to fyght in cristes felde
  Agaynst synne, without ye clere and gyltles be
  Consyder the Cocke and in hym shall ye se:
  A great example, for with his wynges thryse
  He betyth hym selfe to wake his owne bodye
  Before he crowe, to cause other wake or ryse.

 * * * * *


Of hym that fyndeth ought of another
mannys it nat restorynge to the owner.

[Illustration: He that ought fyndyth outher by day or nyght
Usynge it as his owne, as thynge gottyn iustly
And thynketh that he so may do by lawe and right
Suche is disceyuyd, and thynketh wrongfully
For why the deuyll our goostly ennemy
Doth hym so counseyll and in his erys blowe
Disceyuynge in his bondes, as he doth many mo]

  The feruour of ryches and disordred loue
  Whiche many haue, doth me bynde and constrayne.
  Within my shyp them sharply to reproue
  That pen nor hande, themselfe wyll not refrayne
  Of couetyse nowe I wyll nat speke agayne
  But of them that kepeth by force and by myght
  That thynge wherto they haue nat come, by ryght

  Some fyndeth treasours other mennys good
  And in theyr owne vse suche good they occupy.
  Whiche of theyr myndes ar so blynde and wode.
  And so reted in theyr errour and foly
  That oft they say (say) ye and dare byde by
  That some saynt whome they worshypped haue
  Haue sende, them the same theyr honestee to saue

  They haue no force nor care, nor they none haue wyll
  To whome the ryches so loste dyde apertayne
  That fortune hath gyuen they holde fast and kepe styll
  Neuer hauynge mynde it to restore agayne
  Suche folys fere no thynge euerlastynge payne
  Nor note nat, that without true restytucion
  It small auayleth to haue made confessyon.

  Here me fole with thy immoderate mynde
  Here me and do thy herte therto aply
  If thou by fortune any ryches fynde
  Callynge it thyne: thou lyest therin falsly
  If thou haue wyt thou canst nat well deny
  But that gode nat gyuen, nor gottyn by laboure
  Can nat be rightwyse: thus mende thy blynde erroure

  If thou ought fynde that longeth nat to the
  Than is it anothers, the case is clere and playne
  Wherfor thou ought of lawe and of dewte
  Unto the owner it soone to yelde agayne
  But if he be dede, to whome it dyd attayne
  Thou ought nat yet to kepe it nere the more.
  But to his sectours or heyres it restore

  Put case that they also be past and dede
  Yet ought thou nat to keep it styll with the.
  The lawe commaundyth, and also it is mede.
  To gyue it to suche as haue necessyte.
  With it releuynge theyr paynfull pouertee
  And so shalt thou discharge thy conseyence.
  Helpynge the pore, and auoyde great offence

  But he that others godes tourneth to his owne vse
  Spendynge and wastynge that thynge that neuer was his
  Suche certaynly his reason doth abuse
  And by this meane greuously doth amysse
  Wherby he lesyth eternall ioy and blysse
  His soule drownynge depe within hell flodes
  For his myspendynge of other mennys goodes

  But to be shorte, and brefe in my sentence
  And sothe to saye playne as the mater is
  Forsoth I se nat right great difference
  Bytwene a thefe, and these folys couetys
  Both wrongly kepeth that thynge that is nat his
  Thynkynge that god doth nat therto aduerte
  Whiche notyth thy dedys, thy mynde thought and herte

  Wherfore if thou haue a rightwyse conscyence
  Thou wylt nought kepe whiche longeth nat to the
  The lawe so commaundeth in payne of great offence
  For of gode that thou kepest agaynst equyte
  Thou shalt make accompt after that thou shalt dye
  To thy great payne in hell for euer more
  If thou no restytucion make before.

  Here myght I touche executours in this cryme.
  Blamynge theyr dedys dysceyte and couetyse
  If it were nat for wastynge of my tyme
  For mende they wyll nat them in any wyse
  Nor leue no poyntes of theyr disceytfull gyse
  Let them take parte of that whiche I here note
  And be partynge foles in this present bote.

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY THE TRANSLATOR TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye false executours whome all the worlde repreuys
  And ye that fynde mennes goodes or treasoures
  I call you as bad as robbers or theuys
  For ye by your falshode and manyfolde errours
  Kepe falsly that thynge whiche is none of yours
  And wast here the goodes of hym that is past
  The soule lyeth in payne, ye take your pleasours.
  With his ryches, damnynge your owne soule at the last

 * * * * *


Of the sermon or erudicion of wysdome
bothe to wyse men and folys.

[Illustration: He that delyteth in godly sapience
And it to obtayne puttyth his besynes
Aboue all folys shall haue preemynence
And in this worlde haue honour and rychesse
Or a worthy crowne in heuyns blessydnesse
Or els bothe welthe here, and after ioy and blysse
Where as a fole of bothe the two shall mysse]

  Wysdome with voyce replete with grauyte
  Callyth to all people, and sayth o thou mankynde
  Howe longe wylt thou lyue in this enormyte
  Alas howe longe shalt thou thy wyt haue blynde
  Here my preceptis and rote them in thy mynde
  Nowe is full tyme and season to clere thy syght:
  Harkyn to my wordes, grounde of goodnes and ryght

  Lerne mortall men, stodyenge day and nyght
  To knowe me wysdome, chefe rote of chastyte
  My holy doctryne thy herte shall clere and lyght
  My tunge shall shewe the ryght and equyte
  Chase out thy foly, cause of aduersyte.
  And seke me wysdome whiche shall endewe thy mynde
  With helth and welth wherby thou lyfe shalt fynde

  Aryse I say agayne to the mankynde
  And seke me wysdome that am well of goodnes
  Let nat this worlde thy conscyence farther blynde
  Nor to synne subdue for loue of false rychesse
  Blynde nat thy herte with mondayne wretchednes
  I am worth golde and worth all good mundayne:
  And to mankynde counselloure souerayne

  No maner Jowell is to me lyke certayne
  Ne so profytable to mortall creature
  I passe all ryches and cause a man refrayne
  His mynde from synne, and of his ende be sure
  There is no treasoure nor precious stone so pure
  Carbuncle Ruby ne adamond in londe nor see
  Nor other lapydary comparable to me:

  And shortly to speke wysdome is more laudable
  Than all the worlde or other thynge mundayne
  There is no treasoure: to wysdome comparable
  But it alone is a vertue moste souerayne
  Hauynge nought lyke in valoure nor worth certayne
  No fole is so ryche, nor hye of dignyte
  But that a wyse man pore is more worthy than he

  Wysdome preserueth men in auctoryte
  Prynces promotynge by counseyll prouydent
  By it pore men somtyme, and of lowe degre
  Hath had the hole worlde to them obedyent
  It gydeth Cytees and countrees excellent
  And gouerneth the counseyll of prynce lorde and kynge
  Strengthynge the body the herte enlumynynge

  It gydyth lordes and from bondage doth brynge
  Them whome foly hath brought in to captyuyte
  Hir gyftys to mankynde frely offrynge
  Gydynge hir discyples from all aduersyte
  Wysdome stondynge vpon a stage on hye
  Cryeth to mankynde with lowde voyce in this wyse
  I trouth exalte: and vycious men dispyse

  Lerne of me wysdome cast out your couetyse
  For by my myght craft and wyse prouysicion
  Kynges vnto their dygnyte dothe ryse
  Theyr septers gydynge by my monycion
  I gaue them lawes to gyde eche regyon
  In welthe defendynge and in prosperyte
  Them and theyr royalmes whyle they gyde them by me

  All maner nacyons that doth to me inclyne
  I gyde and gouerne by lawe and equyte
  In me is right, godly wyt and doctryne
  What blynde foly, and howe great aduersyte
  Do they auoyde that gyde them selfe by me
  And he that me louyth with worshyp and honour
  Shall knowe my loue my grace and my fauour

  He that me folowyth shall auoyde all dolour
  I shall hym folowe promotynge in suche case
  That none shall be before hym in valour
  I godly ryches in my power inbrace
  Whiche man by me may esely purchase
  And he that wyll his way by me addresse
  I shall rewarde with heuenly ioy endles

  The father of heuen of infynyte goodnesse.
  Me comprehendyth within his deytee
  Of hym my firste begynnynge is doutles.
  And heuen and erth he create hath by me
  And euery creature bothe on londe and se
  The heuen imperyall all planetis and firmameut
  God neuer thynge made without my true assent

  Therfore mankynde set thy mynde and intent
  To me wysdome to be subiect and seruaunt
  To my preceptis be thou obedyent
  And heuenly ioy thou shalt nat lacke nor want
  For doutles they ar mad and ignoraunt
  And folys blyndyd who so euer they be
  That wyll nat gladly be seruauntes vnto me

THE ENVOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Aryse folys of myndes darke and blynde.
  Receyue the gyftes of godly sapyence
  Here hir perceptis and plant them in your mynde
  And rote out the gaffys of your olde offence.
  Call to your myndes what inconuenyence
  Howe sodayne fallys, what sorowe and turment
  Hath come to many a myghty lorde and prynce
  For nat folowynge of hir commaundement.

 * * * * *


Of bostynge or hauynge confydence
in fortune.

[Illustration: He is a fole whiche settyth confydence
On frayle fortune vncertayne and mutable
His mynde exaltynge in pryde and insolence
Because that she somtyme is fauorable
As if she wolde so be perdurable
Suche folys oft whan they thynke them most sure
All sodaynly great mysfortune endure]

  Amonge our folys he ought to haue a place
  And so he shall for it is resonable
  Whiche thynketh hymselfe greatly in fortunes grace
  Bostynge that she to hym is fauorable
  As if hyr maner were nat to be mutable
  In this vayne hope suche theyr lyfe doth lede
  Tyll at the laste theyr hous borne oure theyr hede

  He shakyth boost and oft doth hym auaunte
  Of fortunes fauoure and his prosperyte
  Whiche suffreth hym nought of his wyll to wante
  So that he knoweth nought of aduersyte
  Nor mysfortune nor what thynge is pouertee.
  O lawles fole, o man blyndyd of mynde
  Say what suretye in fortune canst thou fynde

  To what ende or vnto what conclusyon
  Shall fortune frayle vnrightwyse and vnsure
  Lede the blynde fole by hyr abusyon.
  Howe darest thou the in hir blyndnes assure.
  Syns she vnstable is and can nat longe endure
  Hir gyftis changith, she is blynde and sodayne
  Thoughe she firste lawghe hir ende is vncertayne.

  Thou shakest boste ofte of hir foly in vayne
  For he is most happy whiche can auoyde hir snare
  If she exalte some one vnto welth mundayne
  She bryngeth another to payne sorowe and care
  Whyle one is ladyd to the others backe is bare
  Whyle she a begger maketh in good abounde
  A lorde or state she throweth to the grounde

  But nat withstandynge hir mutabylyte.
  Thou bostest thy gode and to moche abundaunce
  Thou bostest thy welth and thy prosperyte
  Thy good auenturs, and plentyfull pleasaunce
  Alas blynde fole amende thy ygnoraunce
  And in thy welthe to this saynge intende
  That fortune euer hath an incertayne ende

  Fals fortune infect of countenaunce and of face
  By hir iyen clowdy and varyable vysage
  Hath many for a whyle taken to hir grace
  Whiche after by hir whele vnstable and volage
  Hath brought them to wo mysfortune and damage
  She ruleth pore and riche without difference
  Lewdnes exaltynge and damnynge innocence

  Thus is that man voyde, of all intellygence
  Whom fortune fedyth, with chaunche fortunable
  If he therin haue ouer large confydence
  And thynke that sure that euer is mutable
  That fole is sonne, to the fende abhomynable
  That foloweth ryches, and fortune that is blynde
  His sauyour lefte, and clene out of mynde

  Whan the foule fende, father of vnhappynes
  Pore man purposyth by falshode to begyle
  He sendeth hym welth worldly, and fals ryches
  And causeth fortune, awhyle on hym to smyle
  Whiche with hir blyndenes doth mankynde so defyle
  That whyle they trust in hir fauour to sore.
  They damme theyr soules in hell for euermore

  By large examples thou eche day mayste se
  The chaunge of fortune and the ende vncertayne
  Wherfore to boste the of hyr commodyte
  It is great foly and also thynge in vayne
  From this lewdnes thy mynde therfore refrayne
  And be content with fortune moderate
  Nor boste the nat of thy welth or estate

  This day thou art ryche and despysest the pore
  Yet so may it fall, that for thy lewde lyuynge
  To morowe thou beggest thy brede from dore to dore
  Therfore remembre that blynde fortune wandrynge
  Hath nat in hyr handes power, nor gydynge
  The rewardes of welth, nor of felycyte
  But god them gydeth by his great maieste

  And all thynge chaungeth as is to hym plesaunt
  His dedes to wysdome alwaye agreable
  Wherfore blynde fole be nat so ignoraunt
  To prayse fortune whiche is so varyable
  And of rewardes vnsure and chaungeable
  But thoughe she smyle trust nat to hir intent
  For amonge swete herbes ofte lurkyth the serpent

BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye folys that haue in fortune confydence:
  And boste you of welth and of prosperyte
  Leue of your foly, and note by euydence:
  Hir cours vnsure: and hir mutabylyte
  None in this lyfe can byde in one degre
  But somtyme hye, than after pore and lowe.
  Nowe nought set by, nowe in auctoryte
  Nowe full nowe voyde as waters ebbe and flowe

  I am remembred that I haue often sene
  Great worldly ryches ende in pouertye
  And many one that hath in fauour ben:
  And hye promotyd in welth and dignyte.
  Hath sodaynly fallyn into calamyte
  Thus is it foly to trust in fortunes grace
  For whyle the Se floweth and is at Burdews hye
  It as fast ebbeth at some other place

 * * * * *


Of the ouer great and chargeable
curyosyte of men.

[Illustration: Unto mo folys here ordayne I a barge
Whiche medlyth with euery mannys besynes
And nat intendeth to their owne losse and charge
Great payne and wo suche folys oft oppresse
And let them lerne with pacyent mekenes
To suffer sorowe for why they shall none lacke
Syns they alone, the hole worlde take on theyr backe]

  He that wyll coueyt to bere more than he may
  And take on his sholders more than he can sustayne
  Suche is a fole, his dedys wyll not deny
  And with his owne wyll gooth to peryll and payne.
  He is vnwyse whiche is ioyous and fayne
  To offer his necke to bere that without fere
  Whiche were ynoughe for dyuers men to bere

  That man that taketh vpon his backe alone
  The heuy weght of the large fyrmament
  Or any burdeyne whiche maketh hym to grone
  Whiche to sustayne his strength is ympotent
  No meruayle is if he fall incontynent
  And than whan he lowe on the grounde doth lye
  He oft repentyth his purpose and foly

  We haue in storyes many examples great
  Shewynge the lewde ende of this curyosyte.
  I rede of Alexander that dyd often sweate
  In great peryls to augment his dignyte
  He was nat content with europe and asye
  Nor all the grounde under the fyrmament
  At the last ende, cowde nat his mynde content

  As if all the erth were nat suffycyent
  For his small body by curyouse couetyse
  But at the last he must holde hym content
  With a small cheste, and graue nat of great pryce.
  Thus deth vs shewyth what thynge sholde vs suffyce
  And what is the ende of our curyosyte.
  For dethe is lyke to hye and lowde degre

  What shall a kynge at his last endynge haue
  Of all his realme and infynyte treasoure
  Saue onely his towmbe, and the grounde of his graue
  But thoughe it be of great pryce and voloure
  As is conuenyent to his hye honoure.
  Yet lytell conforte to his soule shall it gyue
  But cause of bostynge to them that after lyue

  Thus whan man vnto his last ende is come
  He nought with hym bereth of his dignytees
  Wherfore cynicus a man of great wysdome
  Lorde grettest of Grece in londes and Cytees
  Hathe lefte great example vnto all degrees
  For his great ryches his herte dyd neuer blynde
  But worldly pompe set clene out of his mynde

  He forced of no castels nor excellent byldynge
  Dispysynge charges and besynes worldly
  But gaue his mynde to vertue and cunnynge
  And namely to the scyence of astronomy
  Consyderynge that great rest of mynde and of body
  With hym abydeth whiche with bolde herte is fayne
  To folowe vertue, and leue charges mundayne

  He that so doth no weght doth vndertake
  Vpon his backe of so great a grauyte
  That his small strength must it agayne forsake.
  Where he that attempteth grettest thynges, and hye:
  Great weyght of charges and moche dignite
  Must lerne to suffer payne thought and vexacion
  By his great charges of perturbacion.

  What auayle is it the worlde to obtayne
  In one mannys power, and all other to excell
  To suffer trouble, and vayne charges sustayne
  And at the last his pore soule gooth to hell
  There toren and tourmented in paynes cruell
  It were moche better to kepe a quyet mynde
  And after our deth eternall rest to fynde

  He that taketh thought for euery besynes:
  And caryth for that whiche doth nat apertayne
  Nor longe to his charge, he is full of blyndnes
  And no houre shall rest, but styll in thought and payne
  Care for thy owne charges, theron set thy brayne
  For he a fole is that caryth or doth intende
  For another mannys charge whiche he can nat amende

  Therfore lyue in rest after thy degre.
  Nor on suche thynges do nat thy mynde aply
  Whiche ar no thynge apertaynynge vnto the
  If thou so do thou shalt fynde rest therby
  Auoyde thou the charge of worldly mysery
  For godes take no thought great care ne trauayle.
  Whiche after deth shall do the none auayle

BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Fole clere thy iyen and of thy selfe beware
  Care moste for thy owne besynes and charge
  For other mennes take no great thought nor care
  If thou thy conscience mayst therof discharge
  A curyous man that of his tunge is large
  Talkynge or carynge of other, his place is best
  Hye in the fore top of our folysshe barge
  For in that place is small quyet or rest

 * * * * *


Of them that ar alway borowynge.

[Illustration: A man that is besy both euyn and morowe
With rauysshynge clawys and insaciable
Of his frendes and neyghbours to begge and to borow
To the deuourynge wolfe is most lyke or semblable
Suche in our shyp shall nat want a babyll
For he that styll borowes shall skant hym quyte or redde
And as a wretche the asse shall hym ouer tredde]

  That fole that hym selfe a dettour doth make
  To dyuerse men, and is borowynge alway
  Right ponderous charges on hym doth take
  Borowynge of one another therwith to pay
  Thoughe he be glad to haue longe terme and day
  To hym assygned to make his payment
  It nought auayleth, for soone the tyme is spent

  But in the meane tyme deuourynge vsurye
  Spoylyth makynge pore many a borewer
  Where they two borewed they promys to pay thre
  Their day of payment lenger to defarre.
  Thus doth oft borowynge many thousandes marre
  Yet some get malyce for that gode that they len
  And where they lent twenty gladly taketh ten.

  I wyll nat say but that it is mede certayne
  To lene frely to one that is in nede
  And wyll be glade it to content agayne.
  But he that lenyth to haue rewarde or mede
  Or more than he lent, may of hell payne haue drede
  And he that so boroweth gayne can haue none
  Therby in this lyfe, but hell whan he is gone

  Therfore in this satyre suche wyll I repreue
  And none that borowe nor lene on amyte
  The vsurers: fals cristen men in theyr byleue
  Folowe the waren way of theyr iniquyte
  Prohybyte by lawe iustyce and equyte
  Theyr vnclene hertes, and mynde, vnhappely
  On lucre settynge, comynge by vsury

  They hepe theyr synne in quantyte horryble
  Labowrynge that lewde burthen gretter to make
  And that sore weght tedyose and terryble
  With a great rope vpon theyr shulders take
  The weyght vp taken all theyr hole ioyntes quake
  Thus these caytyfs with this rope and burthyn heuy
  Them selfe hange damnynge theyr soule eternally

  A wretchyd man, alas make clere thy reason
  Remember thoughe god the suffer thus longe tyme
  He graunteth that space to amende the in season.
  And nat dayly to encreas thy synne and cryme
  Somtyme he punyssheth with infernall abhyme
  Shortly for synne, somtyme thoughe one mysdo
  He suffreth longe: but yet truste nat therto

  The longer vnpunysshed, the sorer is the payne
  And if thou wylt nat gyue to me credence
  Of sodome and Gomor the Bybyll sheweth playne
  Howe God rightwysely ponysshed theyr offence
  And also Solym, towne of great excellence
  For vyciousnes god ponysshed bytterly
  Whiche sholde vs cause for to lyue rightwysely.

  The rightwyse god also dyd sore chastyce
  Tthe Nilicolyans and them vtterly destroy
  For theyr contynuynge in theyr syn and vyce
  And theyr lynage longe kepte from welth and ioy
  In great trouble whiche dyd theyr hertis noy:
  Howe be it that they were good and innocent
  For theyr fathers faute they suffred punysshement

  But to our purpose to retourne agayne.
  He that ought boroweth whiche he can nat pay
  Of a wolfe rauysshynge foloweth the trayne
  But though he all swolowe yet can he by no way
  Deuoure the tyme nor the prefyxed day
  Wherfore if he than disceyue his credytour
  He oft hym chastyth with iustyce and rygour

  Ryght in lyke wyse our lorde omnipotent
  In this worlde to lyue grauntyth vs tyme and space
  Nat styll to synne, but vnto this intent
  To leue our vyce, and folowe the way of grace
  But if we styll contynue in one case
  And haue done no good to pay hym at our day
  In hell pryson he iustly shall vs lay

BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Thou fole mysmyndyd to large of sconscyence
  To the I speke that art a lewde dettour
  Borowe thou no thynge, noble grote ne pens.
  More than thou mayst agayne pay thy credytour
  Right so endeuer the to pay thy sauyour
  His right and dewty, with a glad wyll and fayne
  That is true seruyce, with glory and honour
  Than shalt thou surely escape infernall payne.

 * * * * *


Of inprofytable and vayne prayers vowes
and peticyons.

[Illustration: That man whose herte vnhappy synne doth blynde
And prayth gasynge into the fyrmament
Or he that setteth nat his herte and mynde
Upon his wordes, theyr sentence or intent
And he that desyreth thynge nat conuenyent
Suche folys shall nat theyr peticion obtayne
For without the herte the tonge laboureth in vayne]

  Here we repreue (reperue) ye and reuyle.
  A sorte of folys lewde of condicions
  Whose herte and tunge theyr soules doth defyle
  By theyr blynde prayers and yll peticions
  Suche folowe no techynge nor gode monysyons
  For often many of them with tunge doth pray
  Theyr mynde, abstract nat knowynge what they say

  Man oft desyreth with great affeccion
  That thynge of god, whiche thynge if god wolde graunt.
  Sholde be at last vnto thyer destruccyon
  Examples hereof thou canst nat lacke nor want
  The great Medas somtyme kynge tryumphant.
  Of Phrygye By his owne folysshe desyre
  With paynfull hunger, his lyfe breth dyd expyre

  This kynge Mydas of whom I haue you tolde
  Of god desyred with prayer dylygent.
  That all that he touchyd tourne myght vnto golde
  His prayer was harde, he obteynyd his intent
  But nat to his welth, but mortall punysshement
  For whan he brede or drynke tast or touche sholde
  Incontynent was it tourned in to golde

  Thus was his prayer to his owne damage
  For at the laste he dyed in wo and payne
  For no golde coude his sore hunger asswage
  Nor his desyre coude he nat call agayne.
  Thus his peticion desyred was in vayne:
  And where he wenyd great welth to get therby
  He dyed in shame hunger and mysery.

  Some dayly pray with marueylous besynes
  Cryeng and syghynge to god omnypotent
  For to haue plenty of welth ioy and ryches
  And to be made ryche myghty and excellent.
  O cursyd lyuers, o blynde men of intent
  On suche desyres they set theyr mynde and thought
  Whiche thousandes vnto shamefull ende hath brought

  What profyted the myghty edefyces:
  Of Lycynus, or lyuelode of excesse:
  What profyteth the money gotten in vyces
  Of riche Crassus, or cresus, great ryches
  They all ar dede by theyr vnhappynes
  And that lewdely, nat by deth naturall
  Theyr blynde desyres chefe rote and cause of all

  Another whiche is in youthes prosperyte
  For strength and myght often to god doth pray
  Some of theyr lyfe to haue prolyxyte
  Desyreth god, and here to byde alway
  In riches welth, ioy and solempne aray
  But yet they in glotony take suche custome
  That they slea them selfe longe or theyr day be come

  Alas mad fole why prayest thou for age
  Syns it so greuous is and ymportable
  Unstable and full of dolour and damage
  Odyous to youth and intollerable
  Say folysshe man whiche art of mynde vnstable
  Is it nat great foly to any creature
  To pray for that thynge, whiche he can nat endure

  Peleus, and Nestor and many other mo
  As Itackes and laertes, sore haue complayned
  For to longe age, euer full of payne and wo
  Wherwith theyr bodyes sore haue ben constrayned
  And with great sorowes and dyuers often payned:
  And to conclude brefly in one sentence
  Oft to age falleth moche inconuenyence

  Yet ar mo folys whiche ought repreued be
  And they ar suche whiche styll on god doth call
  For great rowmes, offyces and great dignyte
  No thynge intendynge to theyr greuous fall
  For this is dayly sene, and euer shall
  That he that coueytys hye to clym aloft
  If he hap to fall, his fall can nat be soft

  Some other pray for bewty and fayrnes
  And that to a cursyd purpose and intent
  Wherby they lese the heuenly blyssydnes:
  Theyr soule subduynge to infernall turment
  O ye mad folys of myndes ympotent
  Pray your Pater noster with deuoute herte and mynde
  For therin is all that is nedefull to mankynde

  Our sauyour criste whyle he was on this grounde
  Amonge vs synners in this vale of mysery
  Taught his disciples this prayer whiche doth sounde
  Nere to this sentence, nor greatly doth nat vary
  (Our father wiche art in heuen) eternally
  Thy name be halowyd (graunt that to thy kyngdome)
  All we thy seruauntis worthely may come

  In heuen and erth thy wyll be done alway
  And of thy great grace and thy benygnyte
  Our dayly brede graunt vnto vs this day
  Forgyuynge our synnes and our iniquyte:
  As we forgyue them that to vs detters be
  And to auoyde temptacion thy grace vnto vs len
  And vs delyuer from euery yll amen.

  Whan thou hast clensyd thy mynde from syn before
  And sayd this prayer to thy maker deuoutly
  Thou nedyst nat of hym to desyre more
  Yet mayst thou pray and desyre rightwysly
  For helthe of soule within thy hole body
  For stedfast fayth and yll name to eschewe.
  And chastely to lyue (by his help) in vertue

  Thus sholde thou pray thou wretche both day and nyght
  With herte and mynde vnto thy creatoure:
  And nought by foly to asshe agaynst right
  To hurte or losse to thy frende or neyghboure
  Nor to thy fo by yll wyll or rygoure
  But if god to thy prayers alway sholde enclyne
  Oft sholde come great sorowe to the and to all thyne

 THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Man clere thy mynde or thou begyn to pray
  Els though thy prayer be iust it is but vayne
  And kepe togyther thy hurte and tonge alway
  Or els doutles thou lesest all thy payne
  From lewde peticions thy mynde thou ought refrayne
  If thou desyre yll to thy fo by malyce
  At thy peticion god shall haue dysdayne
  For though thou be wrothe god is nat in lyke wyse

 * * * * *


Of vnprofytable stody.

[Illustration: He that vayne stody doth haunt or exercyse
And lesyth his tyme, of fruyte voyde and barayne
Resortynge to ryot whiche cunnynge doth dispyse
And that of doctryne (in maner) hath disdayne
Suche shall in age of his madnes complayne
And seynge that he lesyth his tyme thus in foly
Let hym come to our folysshe company.]

  Nowe in this Nauy many them selfe present
  Of this our roylame and from beyond the see
  Whiche in theyr stody or lewde and neglygent
  Lesynge theyr tyme at the vnyuersyte
  Yet count they them selfe of great auctoryte
  With theyr proude hodes on theyr neckes hangynge
  They haue the lawde: but other haue the cunnynge

  They thynke that they haue all scyence perfytely
  Within theyr hertes bostynge them of the same
  Though they therto theyr mynde dyd neuer aply
  Without the thynge, they ioy them of the name
  But suche mad folys to theyr great losse and shame
  Whyle they sholde norysshe theyr myndes with science
  They seke theyr pleasour, gyuen to neglygence

  They wander in euery inconuenyence
  From strete to strete, from tauerne to tauerne
  But namely youth, foloweth all offence
  No thynge intendynge the profyte to dyscerne
  Nor fruyte of cunnynge wherby they myght gouerne
  Them selfe by reason, but suche thynges they ensue
  Wherby they neyther get good maners nor vertne

  But he that intendeth to come to the science
  And godly wysdome of our elders: certayne.
  He must sore stody, for without dilygence
  And besy laboure no man can it obtayne
  None ought to cesse: though it firste be a payne.
  In good perseueraunce getteth great ryches
  Where no good cometh by sleuthfull ydelnes.

  But moste I marueyll of other folys blynde
  Whiche in dyuers scyencis ar fast laborynge
  Both daye and nyght with all theyr herte and mynde
  But of gramer knowe they lytyll or no thynge
  Whiche is the grounde of all lyberall cunnynge
  Yet many ar besy in Logyke and in lawe
  Whan all theyr gramer is skarsly worth a strawe

  If he haue onys red the olde dotrinall
  With his diffuse and vnparfyte breuyte
  He thynketh to haue sene the poyntis of grammer all.
  And yet of one errour he maketh two or thre
  Precyan or sulpice disdayneth he to se
  Thus many whiche say that they theyr grammer can
  Ar als great folys as whan they firste began

  One with his speche rounde tournynge lyke a whyle
  Of logyke the knottis doth lows and vndo
  In hande with his sylogysimes, and yet doth he fele
  No thynge what it menyth, nor what longeth therto
  Nowe sortes currit: Nowe is in hande plato
  Another comyth in with bocardo and pheryson
  And out goeth agayne a fole in conclusyon

  There is nought else but Est and non est
  Blaberynge and chydynge, as it were beawlys wyse
  They argue nought els but to proue man a beest
  Homo est Asinus is cause of moche stryfe
  Thus passe forth these folys the dayes of theyr lyfe
  In two syllabis, not gyuynge aduertence
  To other cunnynge doctryne, nor scyence.

  I wyll nat say but that it is expedyent
  The to knowe of Logyke the chrafte and connynge
  For by argument it maketh euydent
  Moche obscurenes, somtyme enlumynynge
  The mynde: and sharpynge the wyt in many a thynge
  But oft yet by it a thynge playne bryght and pure
  Is made diffuse, vnknowen harde and obscure

  It is ynoughe therof to knowe the grounde
  And nat therin to wast all thy lyfe holly
  Styll grutchynge lyke vnto the frogges sounde
  Or lyke the chaterynge of the folysshe pye
  If one afferme the other wyll deny
  Sophestry nor Logyke with their art talcatyfe
  Shewe nat the way vnto the boke of lyfe

  With suche folyes tender youth is defylyd
  And all theyr dayes on them they set delyte
  But godly doctryne is from theyr myndes exylyd
  Whiche sholde the body and soule also profyte
  They take no layser, pleasur nor respyte
  To other scyences, pleasaunt and profytable
  But without ende in one thynge chat and bable

  One rennyth to almayne another vnto fraunce
  To parys padway Lumbardy or spayne
  Another to Bonony, Rome or orleance
  To cayne, to Tolows, Athenys or Colayne
  And at the last retournyth home agayne
  More ignorant, blynder and gretter folys
  Than they were whan they firste went to the scolys

  One bostynge the name of a lawer or deuyne
  His proude hode hye vpon his stately necke:
  Thus muste a gode clerke vnto a foule enclyne
  Lowt with the body and with obedyence becke
  And thoughe it tourne to theyr rebuke and checke
  Yet nowe a dayes ouer many suche there be.
  Whiche in stede of cunnynge vseth audacyte

  The hode must answere for the follysshe student
  Theyr tyme hath ben lost frutles and barayne.
  Theyr frendes godes on suche folyes ar spent
  To their damage thought hunger and payne:
  Thus to conclude: me thynke it is but vayne
  The frendes to labour the dayes of theyr lyue
  To spare for suche scolers whiche shall neuer thryue

  The great foly, the pryde, and the enormyte
  Of our studentis, and theyr obstynate errour
  Causeth me to wryte two sentences or thre
  More than I fynde wrytyn in myne actoure
  The tyme hath ben whan I was conductoure
  Of moche foly, whiche nowe my mynde doth greue
  Wherfor of this shyp syns I am gouernoure.
  I dare be bolde myne owne vyce to repreue

  Howe be it I knowe my wordes shall suche greue
  As them selfe knoweth fawty and culpable
  But if they be wroth: take they me by the sleue
  For they shall bere the hode and I wyll the bable:
  But firste ye studentis that ar of mynde vnstable
  Ye wasters and getters by nyght in felde or towne
  Within my Nauy wolde I set you to a cable
  If I not fered lyst ye your selfe wolde drowne

  Also I fere lyst my shyp sholde synke for syn
  If that Cupido and Uenus seruytours
  On the vnsure se my shyp entred within
  Or all the folys promotyd to honours
  I none receyue can of hye progenytours
  My shyp is nat dressyd for them conuenyent
  And to I fere lyst theyr cruell rygours:
  Sholde rayse to my shyp some tempest or tourment

THENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Fy studentis clens your myndes of this cryme
  Gyue ones your hertis to parfyte dylygence
  Howe longe in Idelnes, wyll ye lese your tyme
  In pryde and ryot, with all other offence
  Alas what profyte get ye by neglygence
  But spende your goodes in all iniquyte
  And where your frendes thynke, ye labour for scyence:
  Ye lese your tyme bryngynge them to pouertee

  Leue of suche stody as is vnprofytable
  Without fruyte outher godly discyplyne
  And gyue your myndes to scyences lawdable
  Where ye may your herte set and inclyne:
  To Arystotyls or Platoys doctryne
  And nat alway on logyke or Sophestry
  I wyll nat say but it is a thynge dyuyne
  And moche worth to knowe Phylosophy

 * * * * *


Of them that folysshly speke agaynst
the workes of god.

[Illustration: Here note we fowlys whiche can nat be content
With goddes worke, and ordynaunce dyuyne
Thynkynge theyr owne wyll moche more expedyent
Nat wyllynge theyr myndes to his wyll to enclyne
But suche folys often sholde come to ruyne
And wo with sorowe and losse sholde they fynde
If god sholde conforme his workes to theyr mynde]

  He is a fole and laboreth in vayne:
  Whiche with small brondes of fyre flamynge bryght
  Entendyth with laboure besynes and payne
  Of the shynynge sonne for to encrease the lyght
  Suche one assayeth a thynge passynge his myght
  And is a fole to set thought or delyte
  To mende that thynge whiche god hath made perfyte

  But yet is he a moche gretter fole truely
  Whiche wyll correct that thynge whiche god hath done
  And doth nat his herte his wyll and mynde aply
  To goddes workes and deuyne prouysyon
  Of all other maddest is his condycion
  And more frantyfe forsoth I may hym call
  Than they that ar vext with furyes infernall:

  (Thou fole) the myght of god omnipotent
  In vertue and wysdome so largely doth extende
  His maiesty, and power is so excellent
  His glorious godhede his workes doth defende
  So that no mortall man can them amende
  Wenest thou mad fole that thou amende cannest ought
  That he hath done: whiche made all thynge of nought

  He that hath made the heuen and firmament
  The londe, the se, and euery other thynge
  Is so discrete, so wyse, and prouydent
  Before his presence parfytely seynge
  All thynge to come that neuer hath had beynge
  His workes and dedys ar so perfyte and ryght
  That none can increas nor yet decreas his myght

  He doth all thynge dispose moderate and dispence
  Knowynge our mynde, and what is to vs most mete
  All thynge is open and playne in his presence
  Our inwarde thought must he nedes knowe and wete
  And euery fortune is playne before his fete
  He hath all thynge by lawe and order drest
  And doth no thynge but it is for the best

  Therfore whether he gyue thunder snowe or rayne
  Wynde or wether, tempest or tourment
  Frost lyghtnynge, fayre wether, outher storme sodayne
  Mystes or clowdes, yet man sholde be content
  And nat with worde nouther inwarde intent
  Agaynst god grutche, but euery day and houre
  Magnyfye the dedys of god his creatoure

  It were moche better thou fole that thou were dome
  Than to cast lewde wordes agaynst thy lorde in vayne
  Thou fole he worketh no thynge but by wysedome
  And yet art thou nat content but dost complayne
  Thou sekest vengeaunce (for thy synne) and payne
  In hell for euer, thynkynge thy selfe so wyse
  To teche thy god, and his warke to dispyse

  It is nat lawfull for any, hye nor lowe
  To be so bolde so blynde or so cruell
  Grutchynge wordes agaynst his god to throwe
  Thughe to theyr plaseour a thynge nat fortune well
  Take example by the children of Israell
  Whiche oft for this synne suffred great payne and wo
  Slayne and distroyed, so haue ben many mo

  Many a lewde body without wysdome or rede
  Grutche in theyr myndes, and openly do blame
  Almyghy god, whan theyr children ar dede
  Where rather they ought to enioye of the same
  For it myght fortune that great rebuke and shame
  Myght to theyr frendes haue come by theyr synne and cryme
  Soone after: if they had nat dyed at that tyme

  Wherfore this one clause is my conclusyon
  That god our maker is wyse and prouydent
  Blame nat his workes by thyne abusyon
  For all that he doth is for the best intent
  But if that god sholde alwaye assent
  To our desyres and euer perfourme our wyll
  Our owne requestis sholde tourne vs to great yll

ALEXANDER BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  O ye mad myndes that no thynge vnderstonde
  O man presumptuous and vnobedyent
  Howe darest thou be so bolde to take on honde
  To repreue the workes of god omnipotent
  Wylt thou hym teche, as more wyse and prouydent
  Than he is (whiche made all thynge of nought)
  Leue of this thy foly, and holde thy selfe content
  For thou art a fole to set theron thy thought

 * * * * *


Of them that gyue jugement on other.

[Illustration: Who that reputyth hym selfe iust and fawtles
Of maners gode, and of lyuynge commendable.
And iugeth other (parchaunce that ar gyltles)
To be of a condicion reprouable
Hymselfe nat notynge, thoughe that he were culpable
He is a fole, and onys shall haue a fall
Syns he wyll other iuge, hym selfe yet worst of all.]

  Many fallyth in great peryll and damage
  And greuous deth by the vyce of folysshnes
  Perseuerantly bydynge in theyr outrage
  Theyr soule infect with synne and viciousnes
  And though that deth hym alway to them addres
  Yet hope they in longe lyfe and prosperyte
  And neuer asswageth theyr blynde iniquyte

  The tyme passeth as water in a ryuere
  No mortall man can it reuoke agayne
  Dethe with his dartis vnwarely doth apere
  It is the ende of euery man certayne
  The last of all ferys and ende of worldly payne
  But thoughe we knowe that we all must haue an ende
  We slepe in synne disdaynynge vs to amende

  Some thynke them gode, iust and excellent
  Myghty stronge and worthy of preemynence:
  Charitable, chast, constant and innocent
  Nat doutynge deth nor other inconuenyence
  But yet ar they wrappyd sore in synne and offence
  And in a vayne hope, contynue in suche wyse
  That all the worlde (saue them selfe) they dispyse

  They take on them the workes of god omnipotent
  To iuge the secrete of mannys mynde and thought
  And where no sygne is sene playne and euydent
  They iuge a man saynge, his lyfe is nought
  And if deth one hath vnto his last ende brought
  (As mad) they mende nat theyr mysgouernaunce
  Nat thynkynge that they ensue must the same daunce

  Suche folys fayne causes and often tymes say:
  That he that is dede vsed ryot and moche foly
  Whiche causyd hym to dye before his day
  And that he was feble, or full of malancoly
  Ouer sad, or prowde, disceytfull and pope holy
  Uiciously lyuynge in couetyse and gyle
  Wherfore god suffred hym lyue the shorter whyle

  Lo these blynde folys saciat with vyce
  Jugeth hym that perchaunce dyd nat amys
  Whyle he here lyuyd, and is in paradyce
  Rewardyd for his workes in endles ioy and blys
  Where as this lewde Juger, here in this worlde is
  Styll lyuynge in synne, suffrynge great payne and wo
  And though he thynke hym gode shall neuer come therto

  He that in synne here lyeth fettered fast
  And iugeth the deth of his frende or neyboure
  Whiche from this lyfe is departed and past.
  Let hym beware, for onys come shall the houre
  That he must fele dethis dolorouse rygoure.
  And after that endure infernall punysshement
  For iugynge and mysdemynge of people innocent

  The terme and day, of deth is moche vnsure
  The deth is sure, the houre is vncertayne
  Deth is generall to euery creature
  Theder we must all, be it pleasour or payne
  Wherfore wysdome wyll that we shulde refrayne
  From folysshe demynge and nons deth discus
  After deth god wot howe it shall be with vs

  Alas full often a iust man gode and true
  Of mynde innocent sad sober and sympyll
  Passynge his tyme in goodnes and vertue
  Is of these folys thought and demyd for yll
  And he that is nought, frowarde of dede and wyll
  Of these folys blynde frantyke and wode.
  Without all reason is iugyd to be goode

  Wherfore I proue that a blynde fole thou art
  To iuge or deme a mannys thought or intent
  For onely god knoweth our mynde and hart
  Wherto we gree and to what thynge we assent
  But who that is rightwyse iust, and innocent
  And louyth god with honour and with reuerence
  Than, may he boldely iuge anothers offence

ALEXANDER BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Amende you folys: do way these folysshe wayes
  Take ye no charge: nat mete for your degre.
  And note these wordes: whiche criste our sauyour sayes
  Juge nat another, and thou shalt nat iugyd be
  It longeth onely to the hye dyuynyte
  To iuge our mynde: for he is true iustyce
  All thynge discernynge by right and equyte
  No man sholde deme, whyle hym selfe is in vyce

 * * * * *


Of pluralitees that is to say of them whiche
charge them selfe with many benefycis.

[Illustration: That myller is a fole and here shall haue a barge
And as a mad man shall fast therin be bounde
Whiche his Asse wyll with so many sackes charge
That the pore beste for payne fallys to the grounde
Many in the chirche lyke hym may be founde.
Whiche so many benefycis labour to procure
That their small myght can nat the charge endure.]

  Amonge our folys delytynge them in vyces
  Is yet another sorte of the speritualte
  Whiche them ouerchargeth with dyuers benefyces
  And namely suche that lowest ar in degre
  Of byrth and cunnynge, of this condycion be
  Defylynge goddes rentis and the chirches goode
  Them selfe ouer ladynge, as men frantyke and wode

  The weght is so great they can it nat endure
  Theyr myght is small, theyr cunnynge is moche lesse
  Thus this great charge wherof they haue the cure
  To infernall Fenn doth this pore Asse oppresse
  And to an Asse moste lyke he is doutles
  Whiche takynge on his backe sackes nyne or tenne.
  Destroyeth hymselfe them leuynge in the fenne

  But though one prebende were to hym suffycient
  Or one benefyce his lyuynge myght suffyse
  Yet this blynde fole is nat therwith content
  But labowreth for mo, and alway doth deuyse
  Fals meanes to come therto by couetyse
  He gapeth with his wyde throte insaciable
  And neuer can content his wyll abhomynable

  So for the loue of the peny and ryches.
  He taketh this charge to lyue in welth and eas.
  Howe be it that sole that hath suche besynes
  And dyueres charges fyndeth great disseas
  Neyther shall he god, nor yet the worlde pleas
  And shall with his burthyns his mynde so vex and comber
  That halfe his cures, can he nat count nor nomber

  These carefull caytyfs, that ar of this same sort
  With cures ar ouerchargyd so that of theyr mynde.
  Rest haue they none, solace, pleasour nor conforte
  Howe be it they thynke therby great welth to fynde
  They gape yet euer, theyr maners lyke the wynde
  Theyr lyfe without all terme or sertaynte
  If they haue two lyuynges, yet loke they to haue thre

  The folys whose hertis vnto this vyce ar bounde
  Upon theyr sholders bereth aboute a sacke.
  Insaciable without botome, outher grounde:
  They thynke them nat lade though all be on theyr backe.
  The more that they haue (the more they thynke they lacke)
  What deuyll can stop theyr throte so large and wyde
  Yet many all waste aboute Ryot and pryde

  But yet is this moche more abhomynable
  That asses vntaught without wysdome or scyence
  Haue theyr proude myndes moste vnsaciable
  Nat commynge to worshyp by vertue nor prudence
  Yet counte they them worthy of this excellence
  Courters become prestis nought knowynge but the dyce
  They preste not for god, but for a benefyce

  The clerke of the kechyn is a prest become
  In full trust to come to promosyon hye
  No thynge by vertue cunnynge nor wysdome
  But by couetyse, practyse and flatery
  The Stepyll and the chirche by this meane stand awry
  For some become rather prestis for couetyse.
  Than for the loue of god or his seruyce.

  Alas oft goddes goodes and cristis herytage
  Of suche folys is wastyd and spent in vayne
  In great folyes mundaynes and outrage
  Where it decreed, and ordeyned is certayne.
  That prestis sholde helpe pore people that lyue in payne
  And with suche goodes kepe hospytalyte
  Whiche pryde ryot and Uenus suffreth nat to be

  Thus is the grettest parte of the spiritualte
  Pore preste, persone, vicayr, relygyon and prelate
  With couetyse acloyde outher prodigalyte
  And folys promotyd causyth good clerkis haue hate
  Say lordes and bysshops with other of estate
  What mouyth you so gladly, suche to promote
  Whiche haue no cunnynge their wyt skant worth a grote

  Wyll ye alway the folysshe asse ouercharge
  With suche burthyns wherwith it can nat fare
  And suffer other to walke and ren at large
  And where they best myght bere theyr backes ar left bare
  And that is worst of all, suche folys can nat be ware
  But whan they ar promotyd after theyr owne entent.
  Yet theyr insaciable mynde can neuer be content.

  Some make exchanges and permutacions
  Some take to ferme, and some let out agayne
  Other folys for hope make resignacions
  And some for one god scosyth gladly twayne
  Some lyueth longe in hunger and in payne
  And in the somer day skarsly drynketh twyse
  Sparynge monay therwith to by a benefyce

  Some for no wages in court doth attende
  With lorde or knyght, and all for this polecy
  To get of his lorde a benefyce at the ende
  And in the meane tyme ensueth rybawdry
  And somtyme laboureth by chraft of symony.
  He playeth a fals cast, nat cessynge to coniure
  Tyll of some benefyce he at the last be sure

  Than if this lorde haue in hym fauoure, he hath hope
  To haue another benefyce of gretter dignyte
  And so maketh a fals suggestyon to the pope
  For a Tot quot outher els a pluralyte
  Than shall he nat be pleased with .II. nouther thre
  But dyuers wyll he haue ay choppynge and changynge
  So oft a fole all and a gode clerke no thynge

  These of nought force so that they may haue gayne
  And golde ynough to spende on rybawdry and pryde
  They haue the profyte, another hath the payne
  The cure of the soulys of them is set asyde
  And no meruayle, for howe sholde they abyde.
  To teche their parysshynges vertue wysdome or grace
  Syns no man can be atonys in euery place

  Alas these folys our mayster criste betray
  Of mannes soule wherof they haue the cure
  And settynge in their stede syr Johnn of garnesey
  They thynketh them selfe dischargyd quyte and sure
  These folys note nat that euery creature.
  Whiche here of soulys doth cure or charge take
  At domys day a compt for them shall make

  But if I sholde touche all the enormytees
  The immoderat couetyse and desyre of dignyte
  That nowe is vsed amonge all the degrees
  Of benefycyd men ouer all the spiritualte
  I fere displeasour, and also I often se
  That trouth is blamed, and nat ay best to tell
  But he that in this lyfe wyll alway besy be
  To get dyuers prebendes shall haue the last in hell

THENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  What meane ye gyders of Christis herytage
  Shall ye neuer leue this your deuowrynge mynde
  Shall ye no tyme your couytyse asswage
  Whiche in goddes seruyce your hartis sore doth blynde
  Let this fals traytour no place amonge you fynde
  Graunt hym no rowne in churche nor in quere.
  For this is sure ye shall all leue behynde
  We haue no Cyte, nor place abydynge here

 * * * * *


Of them that prolonge from day to day
to amende themselfe.

[Illustration: He that cras cras syngeth with the crowe
Deferrynge the tyme of his amendement
Amonge our folys, in this our shyp shall rowe
For his presumpcion, dull mynde and blynde intent
What knowe these folys whether god omnypotent
Wyll graunt them to lyue vntyll another day.
Wherfore we ought to mende vs whyle we may.]

  If vnto any almyghty god doth sende
  From heuen aboue by inspyracion dyuyne
  Wyll and gode mynde his synnes to amende
  And with his grace his thoughtes enlumyne
  If that synner wyll nat therto enclyne
  But doth dyffer and dryue frome day to day
  A fole he is, no wyse man wyll denay

  Yet many folowe this inconuenience
  And knowynge theyr owne vyce, and lyfe full of ordure
  The payne therof, and howe euery offence
  And synne is punysshed of eche creature
  Also they knowe that theyr deth is vnsure
  And dye they must knowynge no houre nor space
  Yet synne they styll, nat receyuynge this grace

  They folowe the crowes cry to theyr great sorowe
  Cras cras cras to morowe we shall amende
  And if we mende nat than, than shall we the next morowe
  Outher shortly after, we shall no more offende
  Amende mad fole whan god this grace doth sende
  He is vnwyse whiche trustes the crowes songe
  And that affermyth that he shall lyue so longe

  Syns deth (as I haue sayde) is so vnstable
  Wherfore we ought alway vs to prouyde
  And mende our lyfe and synne abhomynable
  For though that thou be hole at the euyn tyde
  Thou knowest nat sure that thou shall here abyde
  Untyll the morne but if thou dye in that space
  It shall be to late for the to cry cras cras

  Syns it is in thy power that thou may
  Amende thy selfe whan god inspyreth the
  Why shalt thou tary vnto another day
  The longer tary the lesse apt shalt thou be.
  In olde sores is grettest ieopardye
  Whan costome and vse is tourned to nature
  It is right harde to leue: I the ensure

  Therfore if that thou lewdly fall in syn
  By thy frayle flesshe, and the fals fendes trayne
  Take nat the vse, contynue nat therin
  But by confessyon shortly ryse agayne
  Synne alway thretenyth vnto the doer, payne
  And grutche of conscience with moche thought and wo
  Yet alwaye ar we redy and prone therto

  Mannys lyfe on erth is euyn a chyualry
  Agaynst our flesshe fyghtyng whiche often doth vs shame
  Also the deuyll our goostly ennemy
  On his parte labours to get vs in his frame
  Thus oft we fall, and than our foly blame
  Repentynge sore, and wyllynge to refrayne
  But within an houre we fall therto agayne

  Thus euer to vyce ar we redy and prone
  The gyftis of grace we clene from vs exclude
  We haue great cause sore to complayne and mone
  We leue that thynge (our myndes ar so rude)
  That myght vs gyde to helth and beatytude
  Thus our owne foly, and our owne blynde madnes
  Us often ledyth vnto great wretchydnes

  And if it fortune, that at any tyme
  Within our myndes we purpose stedfastly
  For to confesse our synne, excesse, or cryme
  Agayne our thought is changyd by and by
  Away than ren we with the crowys crye
  With one cras, to morowe, perauenture twayne
  Without regarde had, vnto infernall payne

  But in the meane space if that deth vntretable
  Arrest the with his mace, fyers and cruell
  And for thy synne and lyfe abhomynable
  By iustyce damme thy soule for euer to hell
  Than woldest thou gladly (If thou myght) do well
  But there is no grace but doloure payne and sorowe
  Than is to late to crye cras cras to morowe

THE ENUOY OF THE ACTOUR.

  Say what delyte, thou fole or what pleasoure
  Takest thou in synne and voluptuosyte
  It is small sothly, and passeth euery houre
  Lyke to the water, and that in myserye
  Therfore set nat in synne thy felycyte
  This day begyn thy lewde lyfe to refuse
  Perchaunce to morowe sholde be to late to the
  So sholde cras the crwys songe the sore abuse

 * * * * *


Of hym that is Jelous ouer his wyfe and
watcheth hir wayes without cause, or
euydent tokyn of hir myslyuynge.

[Illustration: He that his wyfe wyll counterwayte and watche
And feryth of hir lyuynge by his Jelowse intent
Is as great fole, as is that wytles wratche
That wolde kepe flees vnder the son feruent
Or in the se cast water, thynkynge it to augment
For thoughe he hir watche lockynge with lockys twayne
But if she kepe hir selfe his kepynge is but vayne]

  Orestes was neuer so blynde and mad as is he
  Whiche for his wyfe taketh thought and charge
  Watchynge hir wayes, thoughe that she gyltles be
  This fole styll fereth, if she be out at large
  Lyst that some other his harnes sholde ouercharge
  But for all his fere and carefull Jelowsy
  If she be nought there is no remedy.

  Thou fole I proue, thy watchynge helpeth nought
  Thy labour lost is, thou takest this care in vayne
  In vayne thou takest this Jelowsy and thought
  In vayne thou sleest thy selfe with care and payne
  And of one doute thou fole thou makest twayne
  And neuer shalt fynde eas nor mery lyuynge
  (Whyle thou thus lyuest) but hatered and chydynge

  For locke hir fast and all hir lokes marke.
  Note all hir steppys, and twynklynge of hir iye.
  Ordeyne thy watchers and dogges for to barke
  Bar fast thy dores and yet it wyll nat be
  Close hir in a Toure with wallys stronge and hye
  But yet thou fole thou lesist thy trauayle
  For without she wyll no man can kepe hir tayle

  And yet more ouer breche hir with plate and mayle
  And for all that if she be nought of kynde
  She shall disceyue the (If she lyst) without fayle
  But if that she be chast of dede and mynde
  Hir selfe shall she kepe, though thou hir neuer bynde
  Thus they that ar chast of nature, wyll byde so
  And nought wyll be nought what so euer thou do

  Thus is it foly and causeth great debate
  Bytwene man and wyfe, whan he by Jelowsy.
  His wyfe suspectyth, and doth watche or counterwayt
  Or hir mysdemyth and kepyth in stratly.
  Wherfore me thynke it is best remedy
  For hym that gladly wolde escape the hode
  Nat to be Jelous: but honest lyuynge and gode

  The toure of bras that callyd was darayne.
  Coude nat the damsell (by name Danes) defende
  But that Jupiter fonde a cautell and trayne
  In a golden shoure into hir to discende
  And to be short, at conclusyon and ende
  This mayde for all this Toure was there defylyd.
  And by this lorde was she there brought with childe

  By this example it apereth euydent
  That it is foly a woman to kepe or close
  For if she be of lewde mynde or intent
  Outher preuy or apert there about she goys
  Deuysynge wayes with hir good man to glose
  But specially if that he hir suspect
  With a hode shall he vnwars be ouerdect

  But in the worlde right many other be
  Whiche neuer folowe this fals and lothly way
  We haue example of one Penolope
  Whiche though that she alone was many a day
  Hir husbonde gone, and she vexed alway.
  By other louers: yet was she euer trewe
  Unto hir olde: and neuer changyd for newe

  I fynde that often this folysshe Jelowsy
  Of men; causyth some women to mysdo
  Where as (were nat theyr husbondes blynde foly)
  The pore wymen knowe nat what longyd therto
  Wherfore suche men ar folys and mad also
  And with theyr hodes whiche they them selfe purchace
  Within my shyp shall haue a rowme and place

  For where as perchaunce theyr wyfes ar chaste and goode
  By mannys vnkyndnes they chaunge and turne theyr herte
  So that the wyfe must nedes gyue them a hode
  But to be playne some wymen ar esy to conuert
  For if one take them where they can nat start.
  What for theyr husbondes folysshe Jelowsy
  And theyr owne pleasour: they scars can ought deny

THE ENUOY OF THE ACTOUR.

  Therfore ye wymen lyue wysly and eschewe
  These wanton wowers and suche wylde company
  Get you gode name by sadnes and vertue
  Haunt no olde quenys that nourysshe rybawdry
  Than fere ye nat your husbondes Jelowsy
  If ye be fawtles, chaste and innocent
  But wanton wowers ar ful of flatery
  Euer whan they labour for their intent.

  Be meke, demure, bocsome, and obedyent,
  Gyue none occasyon to men by your foly
  If one ought asshe, deny it incontynent
  And euer after auoyde his company
  Beware of cornes, do nat your erys aply
  To pleasaunt wordes nor letters eloquent
  If that Helena had so done certaynly
  She had nat ven rauysshed by handes violent

 * * * * *


Of auoutry, and specially of them y^t ar
bawdes to their wyues, knowynge and
wyll nat knowe, but kepe counseyll, for
couetyse, and gaynes or auauntage.

[Illustration: A fole blynde, forsoth and wytles is that man
Whiche thoughe his wyfe openly defylyd be
Before his owne face, yet suche a chrafte he can
To fayne hym a slepe, nat wyllynge it to se
Or els he layeth his hande before his iye
And thoughe he here and se howe the mater gose
He snortynge slepyth, and wyll it nat disclose.]

  O what disorder, what shame and what domage
  Is nowe brought in, and right lykely to abyde
  In the sacrament of holy mariage
  The fere of payne and lawe is set a syde
  Faythe is clene lost, and fewe them selfe do gyde
  After theyr othe, but for lacke of punysshement.
  They brake and despyse this dyuyne sacrament

  Alas the lawe that Julius dyd ordeyne
  Agaynst auoutry: is nowe a slepe or dede
  None feryth iustyce punysshement nor payne
  Both man and woman ar past all fere and drede
  Theyr promes brekynge, without respect or hede
  Had to theyr othe, by mariage solemnysed
  The bed defylyd. the sacrament despysed

  Many ar whiche thynke it is a thynge laudable
  Anothers sponse to pullute and dyffame
  And howe beit the synne is moche abhomynable
  They fere nat god, nor dout nat worldly shame
  But rather boldly they bost them of the same
  They note no thynge the mortall punysshement
  Taken on auoutrers in the olde testament

  Yet is another thynge more lothsome and vyle
  That many husbondes knowynge theyr wyues syn
  Absent themselfe and stop theyr iyen the whyle
  Kepynge the dore whyle the auoutrer is within
  They forse no thynge so they may money wyn
  Lyuynge as bawdes, and that to theyr owne wyues
  O cursyd money, this madnes thou contryuys

  O cursyd husbonde thou ought to be asshamyd
  To set so great fors for syluer or for golde
  That thou for them thy wyfe wyll se diffamyd
  And helpe therto: ye: and the dede beholde
  Blame it blynde dryuyll: by the lawe so thou sholde
  And nat therat to gyggyll laghe and Jest
  It is a lewde byrde that fyleth his owne nest

  The Hystory of Atreus expressyth playne
  Howe he (by his owne brother) for auoutry
  Was dryuen from his royalme and his childre slayne
  For his mysdede: without: let or remedy
  These children thus bought theyr faders mad foly
  What shall I wryte the wo and heuynes
  Whiche Tarquyn had for rauysshynge lucres

  I rede in the hystory of one Virginius
  Whiche to thyntent this foule synne to eschewe
  Whan his doughter was desyred by Clodius
  And that by force; the fader his dowghter slewe
  Bytwene the handes of Clodius vntrue
  The fader answered (whan men his dede dyd blame)
  Better is to dye chast: than longe to lyue in shame

  But of auoutry somwhat more to speke
  In it is yre Enuy and paynfull pouertye.
  And also he or she that mariage doth breke
  May fere of deth eternall whan they dye
  And here without welth ioy and rest shall they be
  And well ar they worthy (forsoth) of sore tourment
  In hell: for brekynge this holy sacrament

  But in the meane tyme here shalt thou haue discorde
  And neuer prosper in vertue nor ryches
  And lothsome be before the almyghty lorde
  Thy dedes shall purchace mysfortune and distres
  Thou lyue shalt in shame and dye in wretchydnes
  And if thou procede therin and nat amende
  Some great shame shalt thou haue before thyne ende.

THE ENUOY OF THE ACTOUR.

  O creatures vnkynde leue ye this outrage
  Breke nat your othe whiche ye made solemly
  Eche one to other for to lyue in mariage
  Defyle ye it nat by synne and vylany
  On both partis if ye lyue faythfully
  After your promes: in loue, fayth and concorde
  Than shall ye in erth encreas and multyply
  And after haue syght of the almyghty lorde

  Let all spousys in theyr myndes comprehende
  The lawys and decrees of the olde testament
  Howe they that in auoutry dyd offende
  Were outher stonyd or els openly brent
  Wherfore syns goddes son omnypotent.
  Confermed hath the olde testament with the newe
  Auoutrers nowe deserue that same punysshement
  But well is to them, that stedfast ar and trewe

 * * * * *


Of hym that nought can and nought wyll
lerne, and seyth moche, lytell berynge
away, I mene nat theuys.

[Illustration: He is a fole, and so shall he dye and lyue
That thynketh hym wyse, and yet can he no thynge
And though he myght he wyll nat set nor gyue
His mynde to good maners, vertue nor cunnynge.
So is he a fole that doth to market brynge
His Gese fast bounde, and game or sporte to se
Lowsyth theyr fete, and suffreth them to fle]

  Saynt George to borowe our Nauy is aflote
  Forth shall we sayle, thoughe that it be a payne
  And moche laboure to forge a pryuate bote
  For euery faute: yet shall I nat refrayne
  My hande nor penne: thoughe vnsure be my gayne
  My laboure sure: my wyt and reason thynne
  Than leue a thynge vnendyd better nat begynne

  But in this place shall I a Shyp ordayne
  For that fole: that heryth great doctryne
  Wherby good maners and vertue aperyth playne
  He seth all goodnes, stody, and disciplyne
  And yet wyll nat his mynde therto enclyne
  But though he knowe what thynge is godlyest
  Ouer all the worlde, yet is he styll a beest.

  Many of this sort wander and compase
  All studies, the wonders of the worlde to se
  With vnstabyll wynges fleynge from place to place
  Some seyth lawe and some dyuynyte
  But for all this byde they in one degre
  And if they were Asses and folys blynde before
  After all these syghtes yet ar they moche more

  They se moche nought lernynge, and hauynge no delyte
  In wysdome nor maners vertue nor goodnes
  Theyr tyme is loste, without wysdome or profyte
  Without grace, or other holynes
  But whyle they labour thus with besynes
  If they se ought newe, or any folysshe toy
  That lyghtly they lerne, and set theron theyr ioy.

  By this desyre folys may knowen be
  For wytles men of fleynge mynde and brayne
  Ar best pleasyd with thynges of neweltye
  And them to haue, they spare no cost nor payne
  To dyuers londes to ren but all in vayne
  And so they labour alway from londe to londe
  To se all wonders, but nought they vnderstonde

  Some fle to se the wonders of englonde
  Some to the court to se the maners there
  Some to Wallys, Holonde, to Fraunce or Irlonde
  To Lybye, afryke, and besyly enquere.
  Of all marueyles, and skantly worth a here
  Some vnto Fraunce and some to Flaunders ren
  To so the wayes, and workes of cunnynge men

  And to be shorte ouer all they range
  Spendynge theyr goodes about vnthryftynes
  In countrees knowen, vnknowen and strange
  But whan theyr iourney they homwarde must addres
  As folys vnware, and vagabundes thryftles
  They haue nought lerned, kept, nor with them brought
  Of maners, wysdome or other thynge that is ought

  They that by the se sayle to londes strange
  Oft chaunge the place and planete of the fyrmament
  But theyr mynde nor maners they ne turne nor chaunge
  And namely suche that ar lewde and neglygent
  What euer they se styll one is theyr intent
  Whan he departyd, If that he were a sote
  Agayne anone he comyth in the same mynde and cote

  Say mad folys blynde ouersene, and worthy scorne
  Fayne wolde I knowe what necessyte ye haue
  To go from the place where ye were bred and borne
  Into another londe to lerne to play the knaue
  Your mynde vnstable sheweth playne that ye raue
  Laboure nat so sore, to lerne to be a fole
  That cometh by it selfe without any other scole

  He that is borne in walys or small brytayne
  To lerne to pyke and stele nedys nat go to Rome.
  What nede we sayle to Flaunders or Almayne
  To lerne glotony, syns we may it lerne at home
  Suche lewdnes soon may we lerne of our wombe
  He that wyll lerne falshode gyle or sotelte
  May lerne it here as well as beyonde the se.

  To passe the se to lerne Uenus rybawdry
  It is great foly, for thou mayst lerne thy fyll
  In shoppis Innes and sellers, ye somtyme openly
  At saynt Martyns Westmynster or at the tour hyll
  So that I fere all London, in tyme it shall fyll
  For it is there kept in lyght and in darke
  That the pore Stuys decays for lacke of warke

  But brefely to speke, and this to set a syde
  He that on vyce, and synne wyll set his entent
  May lerne it in Englonde, if he at home abyde
  And that of all sortis: god sende amendement
  But if thou alway wyll nede be dylygent
  To labour in the worlde about from place to place
  Do as dyd Plato, than shalt thou fynde great grace

  This godly plato laboured with dilygence
  To Egypt, and other londes sparynge for no payne
  Where euer he came: augmentynge his scyence
  And at the last retourned to Grece agayne
  His countrey natyf: with laude and name souerayne
  Thus he for all his wysdome laboured besyly
  But that fowle that nought can nought settyth by

  Wherfore that gose that styll about wyll wander
  Moche seynge and herynge, and nought berynge away
  Shall home come agayne as wyse as a gander
  But more fole is he that may lerne euery day
  Without cost or laboure out of his owne countrey
  And whan the well of wysdome renneth by theyr dore
  Yet looth they the water as if that it were soure

ALEXANDER BARKLAY AD FATUOS VT DENT LOCUM OCTO SECUNDARIIS BEATE MARIE DE
OTEREY QUI QUIDEM PRIMA HUIUS RATIS TRANSTRA MERENTUR.

  Soft folys soft, a lytell slacke your pace
  Tyll I haue space you to order by degre
  I haue eyght neyghbours, that firste shall haue a place
  Within this my shyp, for they most worthy be
  They may theyr lernynge receyue costeles and fre.
  Theyr wallys abuttynge and ioynynge to the scoles.
  No thynge they can, yet nought wyll they lerne nor se
  Therfore shall they gyde this one shyp of foles.

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY.

  O vnauysyd, vnwyse and frowarde man
  Great cause thou hast to morne sore and complayne
  Whan no goodnes vertue nor wyt thou can
  And yet to lerne thou hast scorne and dysdayne
  Alas man mende, and spare no maner payne
  To get wysdome, and it thou shalt nat want
  Hym that nought wyll knowe, god wyll nat knowe certayne
  Wo is hym that wylfully is ignorant.

 * * * * *


Of great wrathe, procedynge of small
occasyon.

[Illustration: Assys erys for our folys a lyuray is
And he that wyll be wroth for a thynge of nought
Of the same leuray is nat worthy to mys
For who that by wrathe to suche a wyll is brought
To sle his Asse for hir pas slowe and soft
Shall after his fury, repent his mad foly
For to a clere mynde, mad wrathe is ennemy]

  Come nere, ye wrathfull men, take your rowme and place
  Within our shyp, and to slake our hastynes
  Mount on an Asse slowe of hir gate and pace
  Syns troublous wrath, in you, styreth this madnes
  Often lacke of myght asswagyth cruelnes
  To a wylde cowe god doth short hornys sende
  Wrath is great foly, where myght may nat extende

  O man yll myndyd what helpeth the this yre
  None the commendyth whiche doth thy maners marke
  What doste thou: but the waste with thyne owne fyre
  Narrynge with thyselfe lyke as a dogge doth barke
  Without meke worde and pleasyd with no warke
  Art thou: but thoughe all men be dylygent
  Mad wrathe to please, yet who can it content

  This man malycious whiche troubled is with wrath
  Nought els soundeth but the hoorse letter R
  Thoughe all be well, yet he none answere hath
  Saue the dogges letter, glowmynge with nar nar
  Suche labour nat this mad rancour to defar
  Nor yet his malyce to mytygate or asswage
  But ioyeth to be drede of men for this outrage

  His mouth fomyth his throte out gorgyth fyre
  His ferefull furoure is, his hole felycyte
  By his great yre, doth he coueyte and desyre
  Dowtyd to be: of the pore comontye
  His owne madnes and cruell furyosyte
  Wyll he nat knowe as he were nat culpable
  Of this mad fury and vyce abhomynable

  Hym selfe is blynde, but other well note his dede
  He shall be poynted whether he go or ryde
  Saynge one to other take gode regarde and hede
  Of yonder furyous fole whome reason doth nat gyde
  Beware his wayes fle hym on euery syde
  Who that hym sueth both hurte and shame shall fynde
  Thus other hym notyth but he hymself is blynde

  So his Asse crys to hym ar inuysyble
  He thynkyth to haue pacyence though that he haue none
  And vnto hym it is thynge incredyble
  That suche ar folys whose pacyence is gone
  Thus coueytyth he to kepe his erys alone
  And to wrathfull men he wyll no thynge obiect
  For that hym selfe is with the same infect

  But somwhat to touche the inconuenyences
  Whiche by this wrath procedyth to mankynde
  It is chefe grounde of many great offences
  Destroynge reason blyndynge the wyt and mynde
  By malyce man is to all yll inclynde
  Both symple man, and lordes excellent
  Do that by wrath oft whiche they after repent

  Reuoke thy mynde, somwhat thy herte enclyne
  Unto Archytas a man of hye wysdome
  Borne the the ryche Cyte namyd Tarentyne
  Rede howe that he his malyce dyd ouercome
  For thoughe his seruaunt was fals to hym become
  And he sore mouyd to auenge the same offence
  Yet he refraynyd his wrathe by pacyence

  So socrates so Senyk and Plato
  Suffred great wronge great iniury and payne
  And of your fayth sayntis right many mo
  For christ our mayster dyd great turment sustayne
  What wo or payne cowde saynt Laurance refrayne
  From pacience wherfore it is great shame
  For christen men if they do not the same

  They suffred deth, ye, and yet were pacyent
  And many haue prayed, for suche that haue them slayne
  Where thou mad fole takest greuous punysshement
  For small occasyon, ye come by chaunce sodayne
  Fole thou art blynde, and mad to set thy brayne
  All thynge to venge (by wrath) that doth mysfall
  For he that part hath lost: by wrath oft lesyth all

  And forsoth no meruayle, if suche wyse actours
  Hath wrathes madnes, expelled and set asyde
  For where that wrath doth rayne with his furours
  There can no reason nor wysedome longe abyde
  The wyt it wastyth: so is it a lewde gyde
  Therfore let mesure, this malyce holde agayne
  But pacyence is brydyll his madnes to refrayne

  It longeth nat to any man of hye prudence
  For to be wrothe, yrous, or gyuys to malancoly
  No suche passyon nor inconuenyence
  Can fall to man, ay stedfast wyse and holy
  But folys ar moste troublyd with this foly
  Where as a wyse man for any aduersyte
  Lyueth in quyete mynde and tranquylyte

  A man well manerd, sad sober and dyscrete
  If he be ware, wyse, chrafty and prouydent
  Beholdeth all thynge before his syght and fete.
  Gydynge hym by mesure a vertue excellent
  Where as a fole doth all without aduysement
  And in euery thynge shewyth his folysshnes
  Wroth at eche worde, as mayster of madnes

  Wherfore ye folys se ye no lenger tary
  But on the dull Asse hastely assende
  That a slowe beest may hasty folys cary
  For your mad wrath dowtyth no thynge the ende
  Your madnes can nat your blynde mysdede defende
  For who that one sleyth, angry and feruent
  Ought to be hangyd whan he is pacyent

THE ENUOY OF THE ACTOUR.

  Blynde myndyd man whiche wylt all thynge ouercome
  Reputynge thy selfe, moste souerayne and royall
  If thou be wyse or partener of wysdome
  Labour to ouercome thyne owne selfe firste of all
  Thy wrath asswage thou in especyall
  Let neyther malyce, nor yre with the abyde
  Thou art a fole the chefe or lorde to call
  Of other: whan thou can nat thy selfe well gyde.

 * * * * *


Of the mutabylyte of fortune.

[Illustration: That man whiche hopyth hye vp to ascende
On fortunes whele, and come to state royall
If the whele turne, may doute sore to descende
If he be hye the sorer is his fall
So he whiche trustyth nat therto at all
Shall in moste eas and suerty hymselfe gyde
For vnsure fortune can in no place abyde]

  We dayly proue by example and euydence
  That many be made folys mad and ignorant
  By the brode worlde, puttynge trust and confydence
  In fortunes whele vnsure and inconstant
  Some assay the whele thynkynge it pleasant
  But whyle they to clym vp haue pleasour and desyre
  Theyr fete them faylyth so fall they in the myre

  Promote a yeman, make hym a gentyl man
  And make a Baylyf of a Butchers son
  Make of a Squyer knyght, yet wyll they if they can
  Coueyt in theyr myndes hyer promosyon
  And many in the worlde haue this condicion
  In hope of honour by treason to conspyre
  But ofte they slyde, and so fall in the myre

  Suche lokys so hye that they forget theyr fete
  On fortunes whele whiche turneth as a ball
  They seke degrees for theyr small myght vnmete
  Theyr folysshe hertis and blynde se nat theyr fall
  Some folys purpose to haue a rowme Royall
  Or clym by fortunes whele to an empyre
  The whele than turneth lyuynge them in the myre

  O blynde man say what is thyne intent
  To worldly honoures so greatly to entende
  Or here to make the hye ryche and excellent
  Syns that so shortly thy lyfe must haue an ende
  None is so worthy, nor can so hye ascende
  Nor nought is so sure if thou the trouth enquyre
  But that it may doute to fall downe to the myre

  There is no lorde Duke kynge nor other estate
  But dye they must, and from this wolde go
  All worldly thynges whiche god hath here create
  Shall nat ay byde, but haue an ende also
  What mortall man hath ben promotyd so:
  In worldly welthe or vncertayne dignyte
  That euer of lyfe had houre of certaynte

  In stormy wyndes lowest trees ar most sure
  And howsys surest whiche ar nat byldyd hye
  Where as hye byldynges may no tempest endure
  Without they be foundyd sure and stedfastly
  So gretest men haue moste fere and ieopardy
  Better is pouertye though it be harde to bere
  Than is a hye degre in ieopardy and fere,

  The hyllys ar hye, the valeys ar but lowe
  In valeys is come the hyllys ar barayne
  On hyest places most gras doth nat ay growe
  A mery thynge is mesure and easy to sustayne
  The hyest in great fere, the lowest lyue in payne
  Yet better ly on grounde, hauynge no name at all
  Than hye on a Clyf ferynge alway to fall

  Thus as me thynke it is no thynge lawdable
  On fortunes whele, for one to clym to hye
  Syns the swyft cours therof is so vnstable
  And all must we leue whan we depart and dye
  Of our short lyfe haue we no certayntye
  For lachesys (whan that thou hast lefte drede)
  Of thy lyue dayes shall shortly breke the threde.

  Atropos is egall to pore man and estate
  Defar wyll nat deth by prayer ne request
  No mortall man may his furour mytygate.
  Nor of hym haue one day longer here to rest:
  Content the with measure (therfore) for it is best
  Coueyt nat to moche in honour to excell
  It is a fowle fall to fall from erth to hell

  Unstable fortune exalteth some a loft
  To this intent, them to brynge to an yll ende
  For who that hye clymmeth his fall can nat be soft
  If that mysfortune constrayne hym to dyscende
  Though Julius Cesar his lordshyp dyd extende
  Ouer all the worlde: yet fortune at the last.
  From lyfe and lordshyp hym wretchydly dyd cast

  This hath ben sene, is sene, and euer shall
  That most peryll is in hyest dignyte
  Howe many estatis, howe many men Royall.
  Hath fortune dryuyn downe into aduersyte
  Rede dyuers cronycles, and thou shall playnly se
  That many thousandes hath endyd in doloure
  By theyr immoderate mynde to honoure

  Ouer rede Bochas and than shalt thou se playne
  The fall of prynces wryten ryght compendeously
  There shalt thou se what punysshement and payne
  Haue to them fallen, somtyme by theyr foly
  And oft is moche preuy hatered and enuy
  Had agaynst lordes of the rude comonte
  Where euer they go: they lyue in ieopardye

  Ay dowtynge deth by cursed gyle and treason
  Eche thynge mysdemynge, ferynge to be opprest
  By some mysfortune, with venym or with poyson.
  Thus in great honour is neyther ioy nor rest
  But thought and fere, ye whyle the lyfe doth lest
  Thus who that procuryth great honour to attayne
  Procuryth with all, enuy, peryll, fere and payne

  A lorde or state whom many men doth drede
  With loueles fere, and fayned countenaunce
  Unto hym selfe ought wysely to take hede
  And them to fere, if he wyll voyde myschaunce
  For why a comonty is of suche ignoraunce
  And so enuyous, that both erly and late
  They muse to destroy hym whom, they fere and hate

  A man promotyd vnto hye dygnyte
  Shall haue loue shewyd hym by adulacion
  But no true loue nouther faythfull amyte.
  Good fame nor name, ne commendacion
  Ye though he be worthy great exaltacion
  Pytefull louynge and full of equyte
  Yet harde is to please a folysshe comonte

  Therfore me thynke of all thynge it is best
  Man to be pleased and content with his degre
  For why in mesure, is suerty eas and rest
  And ay moste peryll in hyest dignyte
  Fortune is full of changes and mutabylyte
  Trust nat therto, therby comyth do gode
  But nowe hye nowe lowe, vnstable as a flode

ALEXANDER BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Labour nat man with to moche besy cure
  To clymme to hye lyst thou by fortune fall
  For certaynly, that man slepyth nat sure
  That lyeth lows vpon a narowe wall
  Better somtyme to serue, than for to gouerne all
  For whan the Net is throwen into the se
  The great fysshe ar taken and the pryncipall
  Where as the small escapyth quyte and fre

 * * * * *


Of them that be diseasyd and seke and
ar impacient and inobedyent to the
Phesycyan.

[Illustration: If one be vexed with sore infirmyte
Within his body felynge dyseas and payne
And wyll nat gladly with perfyte mynde agre
To a wyse Phesycian that wolde hym hele agayne
He is a fole, and shall his foly sore complayne
And if that he by his selfe wyll do sterue
It is but well: syns he it doth deserue.]

  He that is feble with sekenes outher wounde
  Wherwith he feleth hym selfe so kept in payne
  That dye he muste but if remedy be founde
  He is a fole, if that he haue dysdayne
  Of wyse Phesycyans: and medecines souerayne
  And wyll nat sue theyr counsell and aduysement
  Wherby he myght haue helth and short amendement

  Thoughe the Phesycyan (of his lyfe) hym assure
  So he be ruled, and vnto his mynde agre
  The pacyent yet kepyth no dyete nor mesure
  In mete nor drynke, and wyll nat gouerned be
  But foloweth Ryot and all superfluyte
  Receyuynge colde water in stede of ale or wyne
  Agaynst read and counsell of crafty medycyne

  What mete or drynke that is most contagious
  And most infectyf to his sekenes or dyseas
  And to hym forbyden, as moste contrarious
  Unto his sekenes. That namely doth hym pleas
  But that thynge that myght hym helpe and greatly eas
  He hatyth moste, and wyll none receyue at all.
  Tyll this small sore, at the last become mortall

  Suche wyll no counsell ensue, nor mesure haue
  Nor temper theym selfe in lesse nor yet in more.
  Tyll theyr yll gouernaunce brynge them to theyr graue
  Retournynge into grounde lyke as they were before
  But who that soone wolde, be helyd of his sore
  Whan it is newe ought to fynde remedy.
  For in olde sorys is greatest ieopardy

  A small sparcle often tyme doth augment
  It selfe: and groweth to flames peryllous
  Right so small wellys whiche semeth to be spent
  With lytell sprynges and Ryuers, ofte so growys
  Unto great waters, depe and ieopadous.
  So a small sore augmentyth, styll preuely
  By lytell and lytell for lacke of remedy

  A small diseas whiche is ynoughe durable
  At the begynnynge, for lacke of medycyne
  At longe contynuaunce becomyth incurable
  The paynfull pacyent bryngynge vnto ruyne
  Wherfore who wyll to his owne helth enclyne
  And soone be helyd of yll without all tary
  To the Phesician ought nat to be contrary

  Obstynat frowarde or inobedyent
  Ought he nat be, but with a pacyent mynde
  Shewe all his soris truly playne and euydent
  To the Phesician if he wyll socour fynde.
  And thoughe his saluys in paynes hym sore bynde.
  Let nat for that, but after his wyll the gyde
  Better a shorte payne, than that doth longe abyde

  No sore can be releuyd without payne.
  Forsake nat the short, the longe payne to eschewe
  To the Phesycian we ought in worde be playne
  And shewe hym our sore, whether it be olde or newe
  For in thy wordes if that thou be nat trewe
  Or kepe ought close, thou dysceyuest be thou sure
  Thy selfe. and nat hym that of the hath the cure.

  In lyke fourme who comyth vnto confessyon
  There to declare howe he his lyfe hath spent
  And shewyth nat his synne lyke wyse as he hath done
  Hymself he disceyuyth, as blynde of his entent.
  Thus many one endureth infernall tourment
  With wo contynuall and payne for euermore
  For kepynge secrete there, of his goostly sore.

  Thus who that is payned in any malady
  Bodely or gostly, ought nat to be callyd wyse
  To the Phesycian without that he aply.
  And his preceptis hant kepe and exercyse
  But now olde wytches dare boldly interpryse
  To intromyt to hele all infyrmyte
  And many them byleue, whiche sothly is pyte

  Suche wytches of theyr byleue abhomynable
  On brest or hede of the paynfull pacyent
  With theyr wytchecraftis shall compasse chat and bable
  Assurynge hym of helth, and short amendement
  Than he that is seke fyxith his intent
  Upon hir errour: to haue helpe of his sore
  But she hym leuyth wors than he was before

  Poule the apostyll doth boldly say and preue
  That they whiche to suche wytches wyll assent
  Ar heretykes, Lolardes and false of theyr byleue
  Brekynge goddes lawes and commaundement
  And oft also by profe it apereth euydent
  That suche as to wytches craftis wyll intende
  By theyr fals Phesyke come soner to theyr ende

  Theyr body dede, theyr soule in ieopardy
  By mysbyleue for euer in paynes infernall.
  Whiche ar rewarde for wretchyd synne and heresy
  But if thou to thy mynde and reason call
  And of this wrytynge perceyue the sence morall
  Whan thou art fallen seke and in dedely syn
  Seke helpe betyme, and byde nat longe therein

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Thou man or woman, that lyest seke in vyce
  To goddes vycayrs confesse thy syn holly
  So shalt thou from thy goostly yll aryse.
  For thy soule fyndynge helpe and remedy
  Without leasynge shewe hym thy synne playnly
  Let nat for shame nor fall nat thereto agayne
  Better shewe thy sore there to one secretely
  Than after openly: and byde eternall payne

  Ensewe the counsell of a wyse confessour
  Take nat colde water in stede of vermayll wyne:
  For moche swetnes, endure thou a lytell soure
  Kepe well the dyet and threfolde medicyne
  Ordayned for synne by spirituall doctryne
  That is confessyon, the next contrycyon.
  With satisfaccion these thre, with grace deuyne
  Ar salues parfyte for all transgressyon

 * * * * *


Of ouer open takynges of counsel.

[Illustration: Who that to clerely layeth his net or snare
Before the byrdes whome he by gyle wolde take
Them playnly techyth of his gyle to be ware
And is a fole whether he slepe or wake
Right so is he (and doth a sauegarde make)
For his foes them (techynge remedy to fynde)
Whiche sheweth them by thretenynge the secret of his mynde]

  Who that intendyth by chraft and polycy
  To take many byrdes, outher small or great
  And layeth before them to playne and openly
  His lynes snarys, his lyme twyggis or his net
  He shall no profyte gayne nor auauntage get
  For if that he his engynes can nat hyde
  The byrdes shall be ware, and lyghtly fle asyde

  So he that wyll openly manace and threte
  With worde and hande, as he wolde sle adowne ryght
  Is oft scant abyll a symple hounde to bete.
  For in his worde is all his force and myght
  And he that alway thretenyth for to fyght.
  Oft at the profe is skantly worth a hen
  For greattest crakers ar nat ay boldest men

  Who that agaynst his ennemy wolde fyght
  And gyueth hym before wepyn and armour.
  Agaynst hym selfe to encreas his foes myght
  Suche one hath reason and wyt of smal valour.
  Ryght so that sole is led in lyke errour
  Which nought can do, of mater les or more
  Without he crake and boste therof before.

  And also suche bosters and crakers comonly
  Whiche doth theyr mynde in hasty wordes declare
  Of other men ar lytell or nought set by
  And by theyr wordes, full often yll they fare
  A man also may ryght easely be ware
  Of folys whiche thus theyr counsell out expres
  Whose thretenyngs to theyr foes is armour and harnes

  But hym call I wyse and crafty of counsell
  Whiche kepeth close the secretis of his mynde
  And to no man wyll them disclose nor tell
  To man nor woman, ennemy nor yet frynde
  But do his purpose whan he best tyme can fynde
  Without worde spekynge, and so may his intent
  Best come to ende, his foo, beynge inprouydent

  And specially no man ought to be large
  Of wordes nor shewe his counsell openly
  In thynges weyghty, of peryll and great charge
  Consernynge a royallue, or helth of his body
  For many ar falsly disceyued fynally
  By lewde tale berers whiche seke the way to fynde
  To knowe the preuy counsell of theyr lordes mynde

  They fawne and flater to knowe his pryuetee
  But they forsoth, that wolde knowe thynges newe
  For the moste part of this condicion be
  No thynge to kepe, but lyghtly it to shewe.
  Thus may the saynge of Salomon be fonde true.
  Whiche sayth that he is wyse, and lyueth happely
  Whiche to hym selfe kepyth his counsell secretely

  I fynde foure thynges whiche by meanes can
  Be kept close, in secrete, one longe in preuetee
  The firste is the counsell of a wytles man
  The seconde a Cyte, whiche byldyd is a bye
  Upon a mountayne, the thyrde we often se
  That to hyde his dedes a louer hath no skyll
  The fourth is strawe or fethers on a wyndy hyll

  A pore mannys dedys may soone be kept close
  His name is hyd, and right so is his dede.
  A ryche mannys dede may no man hyde nor glose
  It fleeth farthest, all men of it take hede
  So that yll fame whome all men ought to drede
  In fleynge about hir myght doth multyply
  Augmentynge to his lynage shame and vylany

  Therfore who that intendyth to be wyse
  Ware and crafty, auoydynge all inconuenyence
  To shewe his counsell ought nat to interpryse
  But do his mynde, kepynge alway sylence
  In seruauntis is small trust or confydence
  He that is nowe thy frende may after be thy fo
  Warne nat thy ennemy of that that thou wylt do

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  O ye that ar put to wronge and Iniury
  If ye intende for to yelde the same agayne
  It is great foly to warne your ennemye
  Or hym to threten with bostynge wordes vayne.
  For oft is sayde, and true it is certayne
  That they that wyll lyue in quyetnes and rest
  Must here and se and hasty wordes refrayne
  All styll with fewe wordes do that they thynke best

 * * * * *


Of folys that can nat beware by the mysfortune
and example of others damage.

[Illustration: Here we expresse, the errour and blyndnes
Of them that se others aduersyte
Theyr wofull fall the ruyne and dystres.
Yet sue they the same, and ware they wyll nat be
Though they by example the payne of other se
Yet leue they nat: thus may they clayme a place
Within my Nauy, as folys voyde of grace]

  We dayly se the mysfortune and damage
  And often fallys, to pouerte and payne
  Whiche folys suffer for theyr synne and outrage
  Some drowned, some maymed, some other wyse slayne
  Yet this example can nat cause vs refrayne
  Our wretchyd lyfe, and seke for remedy
  We marke no thynge anothers ieopardy.

  We se the mockynge scorne and derysyon
  That folys hath ofte tyme whan they offende
  We se theyr losse, theyr shame and theyr confusion
  Howe be it all this can cause vs to amende
  We can no thynge and to nought we intende
  So many folys I fynde that playne I thynke
  Theyr weyghty charge shall cause my shyp to synke

  Suche ar despysyd of men discrete and wyse
  Ye and more ouer these folys ar so blynde
  That echone of them the other doth despyse
  With sharp rebukes, wordes lewde and vnkynde
  Yet in theyr lyfe no difference may we fynde
  And though they haue sene a thousande brough to shame
  For one sore vyce: yet lyue they in the same

  The example of other can nat theyr myndes moue
  Theyr wyttis ar blynde theyr foly is the cause
  Alas mad folys why do ye vyce thus loue
  Rennynge ay to deth without all rest or pause
  Alas, at the last retourne to christis lawes
  Be ware, whan ye other se taken in the snare
  Let anothers peryll cause you to be ware

  Ye do nat so, alas it is great shame
  Your synne hath quenchyd your grace and gostly lyght
  One blynde man another doth chyde and blame
  And yet both stomble, nat goynge euyn or right
  A blynde man hym ledyth that also hath no syght
  So both in the dyche fallyth in suche a wyse
  That one can nat helpe, the other agayne to ryse

  One crab blamys another for hir bacwarde pace
  And yet the blamer sothly can none other do
  But both two ar in theyr goynge in lyke case
  The one goeth bocwarde, the other doth also
  Many of these folys after that maner go
  But who that of his moders doctryne hath disdayne:
  Shall by his stepdame endure wo care and payne

  And perchaunce after abyde the correccyon
  Of the sayde stepdame, in place of punysshement.
  For his synne, sufferynge hir vniust subieccien
  And who that nat foloweth the commaundement
  Of his fader beynge to hym obedyent
  May fortune after in hunger thyrst ond colde
  Obey that stranger, whom he nat gladly wolde

  We fynde Hystories wryten longe and ample
  In dyuers bokes of great auctoryte
  The hole Bybyll sheweth to vs example
  Howe they were punysshed that lyuyd in cruelte
  I fynde also wryten in bokes of Poetrye
  Howe that Pheton was brent with the lyghtnynge
  For his presumpcion, agaynst a myghty kynge

  We haue example also by Icarus
  Whiche contrary vnto the commaundement
  Of his crafty father named Dedalus
  By fleynge to hye his wynges and fethers brent
  And so descendyd and in the se was drent
  Thus these two endynge by theyr lewdnes in care
  By theyr example sholde cause vs to beware

  We dayly se before our syght and our presence
  What mysauenture to many one doth fall
  And that worthely for theyr synne and offence
  Yet ar we blynde, and ar nat ware at all
  But in our synnes lyue vnto them egall
  And where by synne we se one come to shame
  We wyllyngly (alas) ensue the same

  Therfore who sethe a mad fole come to wo
  Or fall in peryll for lacke of a good gyde
  By another way ought craftely to go
  And (by anothers yll) for his helthe to prouyde
  The fox was ware, and peryll set asyde
  And wolde nat enter into the caue, for playne
  Of bestis that entred sawe he none come agayne

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY

  Lerne man, lerne of bestes to be ware
  Of others peryll, by theyr enormyte
  For if one byrde be onys tane in a snare
  The other auoyde as fast as they may flee
  A fysshe byrde or beste that hath in peryll be
  Of net hoke or snare, if that they may escape.
  Wyll after euer beware, but blynde man wyll nat se
  His owne destruccion, but after it doth gape

 * * * * *


Of them that forceth or careth for the
bacbytynge of lewde people.

[Illustration: Whether that a bell be hangyd or lye on grounde
If vnto the same a clapper lacke or fayle
The bell shall make but sympyll noyse or sounde
Though thou in it do hange a Foxys tayle
Right so backbyters that vse on men to rayle
Can nat greatly hurt them that lyue rightwysly
Wherfore it is foly theyr babblynge to set by.]

  Who that within this worlde wolde rest and lyue
  In eas of mynde, peas and tranquyllyte
  Must nat his mynde set, nor his erys gyue
  To the vayne talys, of the rude comonte
  And though some people of suche condicion be
  Oft to dyffame good people true and Just
  Let them nought care, for byde it nede they must

  Let no man care for the lewde hyssynges
  And yll soundynges of this vnhappy rage
  It is great foly to set by the lesynges
  Of cursyde tunges syns none can them asswage
  For who in this worlde wyll come to auautage
  Hym selfe exaltynge to worshyp and honoure
  Shall fynde the swetnes mengled with the sowre

  And he that wyll of his dygnyte be sure
  Or sympyll lyuynge what so euer it be
  Right greuous chargis somtymes must endure
  And with his iyen often beholde and se
  Suche thynges wherwith his mynde can not agre
  And he that wyll with the worlde haue to do
  Must suffer suche trouble as belongeth therto

  Yet some haue pytched theyr tentis stedfastly
  Upon sure grounde, auoyde of all this payne
  Despysynge the worldes wantonnes and foly
  For in the same is nought sure nor certayne
  Nought se we tranquyll in these wawes mundayne
  We se no loue, lawe, fydelyte, nor trust
  But nowe up hye, and nowe lowe in the dust

  To auoyde the worlde with his foly and stryfe
  Many hath left londes townes and ryches
  And yll company lyuynge solytary lyfe
  Alone in desert and in wyldernes
  Ye and that: men of moste wyt and worthynes
  Whiche by that meane dyd best of all eschewe
  All worldly sclaunder and lyuyd in vertue

  He that intendeth to lyue a rightwyse lyfe
  And so procedeth in maners and good dede
  Of worldly sclaunder, complaynt, hatered, and stryfe
  And all yll wyll, he ought nat to take hede
  For he that is iuste ought no thynge for to drede
  A sclaundrynge tonge, ye, be it neuer so wode
  For suche lewde tonges can none hurte that ar gode.

  Lyue well and wysely, than let men chat theyr fyll
  Wordes ar but wynde, and though it oft so fall
  That of lewde wordes comyth great hurte and yll
  Yet byde the ende, that onely prouyth all
  If thou canst suffer truste well that thou shall
  Ouercome thyne ennemyes better by pacience
  Than by hye wordes rygour or vyolence

  If poetis that somtyme vyce blamyd and discommendyd
  And holy Prophetis whiche also dyd the same
  To suche vayne and mortall wordes had intendyd
  They sholde nat haue durst the peoples vyce to blame
  So sholde they haue lost their honour and good name
  Theyr fame and meryt, but nowe they haue nat so
  But spred theyr fame, whiche neuer away shall go

  Forsoth none lyueth within the worlde wyde
  Suche meke so holy, so wyse or pacyent
  Whiche can hym selfe at euery tyme so gyde
  To please eche fole, for none can some content
  Forsoth he myght be named excellent
  Happy and blessyd and lyue in welth and eas
  Whiche euery man cowde serue content and pleas

  But suche is none, and he that wyll assay
  For to content eche folysshe mannes mynde
  Must brake his slepe and stody nyght and day
  And yet alway some fole shall be behynde
  Ye if one lyue well, yet wyll they somwhat fynde
  Behynde his backe hym to sclaunder and diffame
  For beggers and bawdes therin haue all theyr game

  For whether thou dwell in Est west north or south
  Of suche dryuels euer shalt thou fynde plente
  One must haue moche mele, to stoppe eche mannys mouth
  Sclander is the cunnynge of all the comonte
  And in the same suche ay moste besy be
  Whiche lyue them selfe in shame and vylany
  Euen nowe they speke repentynge by and by

  Thus all the cunnynge and stody dilygent.
  Of people vnthryfty is alway to despyse
  And diffame other whiche ar but innocent
  Wherfore let suche as ar discrete and wyse
  Nought set by them that lesyngys doth deuyse
  Nor theyr vayne foly: for he that doth certayne
  Is but, a fole. and euer shall lyue in payne.

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Trouble nat thy selfe (thou man) where is no nede
  And arme thou thy selfe with goodly pacyence
  Be sure it is great foly to take hede
  Unto backbytynge syns that no resystence
  May be founde to withstande his violence
  And take thou this one thynge for thy comfort
  That none wyse, or good, wyll commyt this offence
  But all ar caytyffes, that ar of this lewde sort.

 * * * * *


Of mockers, and scorners, and
false accusers.

[Illustration: Yet ar mo Folys whiche mocke and scorneth fast
Suche as them shewyth wysdome and doctryne
And at theyr hedes (vngoodly) stonys cast
In mynde disdaynynge to wysdome to enclyne
But gladly they ensue the discyplyne
Of folysshe mockers, let wyse men them eschewe
For no correccion can brynge them to vertue]

  O Hertles folys, haste here to our doctryne
  Leue of the wayes of your enormyte
  Enforce you to my preceptis to enclyne
  For here shall I shewe you good and veryte
  Enclyne, and ye fynde shall great prosperyte
  Ensuynge the doctryne of our faders olde
  And godly lawes in valour worth great golde

  Who that wyll folowe the graces manyfolde
  Whiche ar in vertue, shall fynde auauncement
  Wherfore ye folys that in your syn ar bolde
  Ensue ye wysedome and leue your lewde intent
  Wysdome is the way of men most excellent
  Therfore haue done, and shortly spede your pace
  To quaynt your selfe and company with grace.

  Lerne what is vertue, therin is great solace
  Lerne what is trouth sadnes and prudence
  Let grutche be gone, and grauyte purchace
  Forsake your foly and inconuenyence
  Cesse to be folys, and ay to sue offence
  Folowe ye vertue, chefe rote of godlynes
  For it and wysdome is grounde of clenlynes

  Wysedome and vertue two thynges ar doutles
  Whiche man endueth with honour specyall
  But suche hertis as slepe in folysshnes
  Knoweth no thynge, and wyll nought knowe at all
  But in this lytell barge in pryncypall
  All folysshe mockers I purpos to repreue
  Clawe he his backe that felyth ytche or greue

  Mockers and scorners that ar harde of byleue
  With a rugh combe here wyll I clawe and grate
  To proue if they wyll from theyr vyce remeue
  And leue theyr foly whiche causeth great debate
  Suche caytyfs spare neyther pore man nor estate
  And where theyr selfe ar moste worthy of dyrysion
  Other men to scorne is all theyr moste condicion

  Yet ar mo folys of this abusion
  Whiche of wyse men despyseth the doctryne
  With mowes, mockes, scorne, and collusyon
  Rewardynge rebukes, for theyr good disciplyne
  Shewe to suche wysdome, yet shall they nat enclyne
  Unto the same, but set no thynge therby
  But mocke thy doctryne, styll or openly

  So in the worlde it apereth comonly
  That who that wyll a Fole rebuke or blame
  A mocke or mowe shall he haue by and by
  Thus in derysyon, haue folys theyr speciall game
  Correct a wyse man, that wolde eschewe yll name
  And fayne wolde lerne, and his lewde lyfe amende
  And to thy wordes he gladly shall intende

  If by mysfortune a rightwyse man offende
  He gladly suffreth a iuste correccion
  And hym that hym techyth taketh for his frende
  Hym selfe puttynge mekely vnto subieccion
  Folowynge his preceptis and good dyreccion
  But if that one a Fole rebuke or blame
  He shall his techer, hate, sclaunder, and dyffame

  Howbeit his wordes, oft turne to his owne shame
  And his owne dartis retourne to hym agayne
  And so is he sore woundyd with the same
  And in wo endyth, great mysery and payne
  It also prouyd full often is certayne
  That they that on mockes alway theyr myndes cast
  Shall of all other be mocked at the last

  He that goeth right, stedfast sure and fast
  May hym well mocke that goth haltynge and lame
  And he that is whyte may well his scornes cast
  Agaynst a man of ynde, but no man ought to blame
  Anothers vyce whyle he vsyth the same
  But who that of synne is clene in dede and thought
  May hym well scorne whose lyuynge is starke nought

  The scornes of Naball full dere sholde haue ben bought
  If Abigayll his wyfe discrete and sage
  Had nat by kyndnes right crafty meanes sought
  The wrath of Dauyd to temper and asswage
  Hath nat two berys in theyr fury and rage
  Two and fourty Children rent and torne
  For they the Prophete Helyseus dyd scorne

  So myght they curse the tyme that they were borne
  For theyr mockynge of this Prophete dyuyne
  So many other of this sorte often mowrne
  For theyr lewde mockes, and fall in to ruyne
  Thus is it foly for wyse men to enclyne
  To this lewde flocke of Folys for se thou shall
  Them moste scornynge that ar most bad of all

THENUOY OF BARCLY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye mockynge Folys that in scorne set your ioy
  Proudly dyspysynge goddes punycion
  Take ye example by Cham the son of Noy
  Whiche laughyd his Father vnto derysyon
  Whiche hym, after, cursyd for his transgressyon
  And made hym seruaunt to all his lyne and stocke
  So shall ye Caytyfs at the conclusyon
  Syns ye ar nought, and other scorne and mocke

 * * * * *


Of them that dyspyse euerlastynge ioye,
and settyth thynges transytory before
thynges eternall and euerlastynge.

[Illustration: He is a foule that weyeth in one balaunce
The heuen and erth to knowe the heuyest
And by his foly and cursed ignoraunce
He thynketh that this wretchyd erth is best
And thoughe that here be neyther ioy nor rest
Yet had some leuer here styll to remayne
Than to depart to heuen voyde of al payne]

  My hande is wery: fayne wolde I rest a space
  But folys comyth to my shyp so besely
  That to haue rest: they wyll graunt me no grace
  That nede I must theyr lewdnes notefy
  But to recorde this folysshe company
  They ar suche that this worlde so greatly loue
  That they despyse the heuenly Royalme aboue

  They often thynke in theyr mynde preuely
  And by them selfe in this wyse oft they say
  O glorious lorde raynynge eternally
  Graunt me thy grace that I may lyue alway
  To se of this worlde the extreme ende and day
  This is my wyll and synguler askynge
  As for thy royalme, forsoth I set no thynge

  But yet this fole doth nat desyre this tyme
  Of so longe lyfe, and yeres alway newe
  To clens his mynde from all synfull cryme
  Nor for the loue of goodnes or vertue
  But rather that he his pleasour may ensue
  And with his maters and felawes suche as he
  To folowe ryot, delytys and enormyte.

  To lyue in wantonnes and blyndnes lascyuyte
  In pryde in Lechery andin couetyse
  Suche sytteth theyr myndes and theyr felycyte
  Not ferynge hell whiche is rewarde of vyce.
  Those dredefull dennys, in a right ferefull wyse
  With fyres flamynge, and manyfolde tourment
  Can nat suche folys, theyr synnes cause to stent

  O sleuthfull fole say why doste nat thou call
  Unto thy mynde that this worldes wretchydnes
  Is full of sorowe moche more bytter than gall
  Uoyde of all ioy, all pleasour and swetnes
  Why settest thou so moche by frayle delyciousnes
  On vayne pleasours, whiche shall sothly decay
  Lyke as the sone meltyth the snowe away

  Man note my wordes and gyue to them credence
  I say that pleasours and also ioyes mundayne
  As it apereth playne by good euydence
  Ar fylled with sorowe bytternes and payne
  Without all rest quyete or certayne
  And yet alas the worlde so doth men blynde
  That it they loue and caste heuen out of mynde

  Wherfore it hapneth full often as I fynde
  That suche as foloweth shamefull wantonnes
  Ungoodly luste, and statelynes of mynde
  Shall ofte perceyue great shame and wretchydnes
  And them most suffer, with great mundayne distres.
  And better charges, and after must nede endure
  Cruell deth whiche ende is of euery creature

  The worlde shall passe: ye and all ioy mundayne
  Without all doute at last shall haue an ende
  And euery thynge outher fruytfull or barayne
  Shall to the grounde outher firste or last discende
  We se also that none can hym defende
  From dethes dartis. and for conclusyon.
  We dayly se many mennys confusyon.

  We dayly se the fallys innumerable
  And greuous deth aswell of youth as age
  Thus is this wretchyd worlde moche vnstable
  Wherfore me thynke it is a great outrage
  To trust therto, or for an vnsure stage
  Or hye place of welth or worldly honour
  The presence to despyse of our sauyoure

  But without doute the tyme shall come and houre
  Whan all mankynde shall se hym euydent
  Some to theyr ioy, some to wo and doloure
  None shall eskhape that rightwyse iugement.
  But eche be rewardyd as he his tyme hath spent
  So they that vertuously haue lyuyd here
  Despysynge this worlde shall gladly there apere

  But they that here haue led theyr lyfe in vyce
  For to depart ar wo in herte and mynde
  And ferefull to byde that sentence of iustyce
  Syns of theyr synne excuse they can none fynde
  But to conclude forsoth that fole is blynde
  That for worldly welth, from god wolde hym deuyde
  And for vayne clay, the hye heuyn set a syde

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  O blynde man whiche hast thy moste felycyte
  On worldly thinges, alas make clere thy mynde
  What fyndest thou here, but great aduersyte
  Wylt thou for it leue y^t heuenly ioy behynde
  And where thou myght euerlastynge ryches fynde
  Where as is helth, endles lyfe and all goodnes
  Wylt thou forsake it for worldly wretchydnes

  Wylt thou heuyn compare with his paynfull lyfe
  There on to thynke thou art vnwyse certayne
  There is concorde, here is no thynge but stryfe
  There is all rest, and here is care and payne
  There is true loue: here is scorne and disdayne
  There is all goodnes, here all yll and offence
  Nowe chuse the best: here is great difference

 * * * * *


Of them that make noyses rehersynges of
talys and do other thynges vnlaufull
and dishonest in y^e chirche of god.

[Illustration: A fole is he, and hath no mynde deuoute
And gyueth occasyon to men on hym to rayle.
Whiche goth in the chirche, his houndes hym aboute
Some rennynge, some fast tyed to his tayle
A hawke on his fyst suche one withouten fayle
Better were to be thens, for by his dyn and cry
He troublyth them that wolde pray deuoutly:]

  Yet of mo folys fynde I a great nomber
  Whiche thynke that it is no shame nor vylany
  Within the chirche, the seruyce to encomber
  With theyr lewde barkynge roundynge dyn and cry
  And whyle good people ar praynge stedfastly
  Theyr herte to good, with meke mynde and deuout
  Suche folys them let, with theyr mad noyse and shout

  And whyle the prestis also them exercyse.
  In matyns masse sermon or prechynge dyuyne
  Or other due thynges that longe to theyr seruyce.
  Techynge the people to vertue to enclyne
  Than these folys as it were rorynge swyne
  With theyr gettynge and talys of vycyousnes
  Trouble all suche seruyce, that is sayd, more and les

  In to the churche than comys another sote
  Without deuocyon gettynge vp and downe
  Or to be sene, and to showe his gardyd cote
  Another on his fyst a Sparhauke or fawcon
  Or els a Cokow, and so wastynge his shone
  Before the auters he to and fro doth wander
  With euyn as great deuocyon as a gander

  In comys another his houndes at his tayle
  With lynes and leshes and other lyke baggage.
  His dogges barkyth, so that withouten fayle
  The hole churche is troubled by theyr outrage
  So innocent youth lernyth the same of age
  And theyr lewde sounde doth the churche fyll.
  But in this noyse the good people kepe them styll.

  One tyme the hawkys bellys Jenglyth hye
  Another tyme they flutter with theyr wynges
  And nowe the houndes barkynge strykes the skye
  Nowe sounde theyr fete, and nowe the chaynes rynges
  They clap with theyr handes, by suche maner thynges
  They make of the churche, for theyr hawkes a mewe
  And Canell to theyr dogges, whiche they shall after rewe

  So with suche folys is neyther peas nor rest
  Unto the holy churche they haue no reuerence
  But wander about to see who get may best
  In rybawde wordes pryde and insolence
  As mad men they fere nat our sauyours presence
  Hauynge no honour vnto that holy place
  Wherin is gyuen to man euerlastynge grace

  There ar handlyd pledynges and causes of the lawe
  There ar made bargayns of dyuers maner thynges
  Byenges and sellynges scant worth a hawe
  And there ar for lucre contryued false lesynges
  And whyle the prest his Masse or matyns synges
  These folys whiche to the Churche do repayre
  Ar chattynge and bablynge as it were in a fayre

  Some gygyll and lawghe and some on maydens stare
  And some on wyues with wanton countenaunce
  As for the seruyce they haue small force or care
  But full delyte them in theyr mysgouernaunce
  Some with theyr slyppers to and fro doth prance
  Clappynge with their helys in churche and in quere
  So that good people can nat the seruyce here

  What shall I wryte of maydens and of wyues
  Of theyr roundynges and vngoodly comonynge
  Howe one a sclaundre craftely contryues
  And in the churche therof hath hyr talkynge
  The other hath therto theyr erys lenynge
  And than whan they all hath harde forth hir tale
  With great deuocyon they get them to the ale.

  Thus is the churche defylyd with vylany
  And in stede of prayer and godly oryson
  Ar vsyd shamefull bargayns and talys of rybawdry
  Jettynges and mockynges and great derysyon
  There fewe ar or none of perfyte deuocion
  And whan our lorde is consecrate in fourme of brede
  Therby walkes a knaue, his bonet on his hede

  And whyle those wordes of consecracion
  Ar sayde of the preste in goddes owne presence
  Suche caytyfs kepe talys and communycacion
  Fast by the auter, thynkynge it none offence
  And where as the angels ar ther with reuerence
  Laudynge and worshyppynge our holy sauyour
  These vnkynde caytyfs wyll scantly hym honour

  Alas wherto shall any man complayne
  For this foly and accostomed furour
  Syns none of them theyr fautes wyll refrayne
  But ay procede in this theyr lewde errour
  And nat withstandynge that Christ our sauyour
  Hath left vs example, that none sholde mysdo
  Within the chirche, yet inclyne we nat therto.

  Jhonn the euangelyst doth openly expres.
  Howe criste our sauyour dyd dryue out and expell
  From the Temple, suche as vsed there falsnes
  And all other that therin dyd bye and sell
  Saynge as it after lyeth in the Gospell
  Unto the Jues rebuke and great repreues
  That of goddes house they made a den of theues.

  Remember this man, for why thou dost the same
  Defylynge goddes Chirche with synne and vanyte
  Whiche sothly was ordeyned to halowe goddes name
  And to lawde and worshyp the holy trynyte
  With deuout harte, loue, and all benygnyte
  And with all our myght our lorde to magnyfy
  And than after all the heuenly company

  For this cause hath god the holy chirche ordeyned
  And nat for rybawde wordes and thynges vayne
  But by vs chrysten men it is distayned.
  Moche wors than euer, the Jewes dyd certayne
  And if our lorde sholde nowe come downe agayne.
  To dryue out of the churche suche as there do syn
  Forsoth I thynke, right fewe sholde byde within

THE ENUOY TO THE REDERS.

  O man that bostest thy selfe in cristes name
  Callynge the christen, se thou thy synne refuse
  Remember well it is both synne and shame
  The house of god, thus to defyle and abuse
  But this one thynge causeth me oft to muse
  That the false paynyms within theyr Temples be
  To theyr ydols moche more deuout than we

 * * * * *


Of them that wyllynge and knowyngly
put them self in ieopardy and peryll.

[Illustration: He is a fole that wyll purchace and desyre
His owne deth or putteth hym selfe in ieopardy
Lepynge in a well, or in a flamynge fyre
And where he myght lyue so dyeth wyllyngly
Suche suffer theyr destruccyon worthely
And if that they be drowned outher brent
It is to late them after to repent.]

  I fynde mo folys yet. whome I shall note
  Suche ar they whiche pray both day and nyght
  To god and his sayntes cryeng with open throte
  O glorious god helpe me by thy great myght
  That I may clens my herte and clere my syght
  Wherby all foly and synne may fro me fall
  But yet this fole it leuyth nat at all

  Suche folys oft pray for theyr amendement
  Unto our lorde with syghynges sore and depe
  But yet to synne contynually they assent
  And after the same often complayne and wepe
  Than say they playne that god hath had no kepe
  Unto theyr prayer and taken of it no hede
  But theyr owne foly is cause of theyr lewde dede

  They se the peryll before theyr faces playne
  That god hath ordeyned, for foly and for synne
  They pray for helpe, and yet ar they full fayne
  After the folys hode alway to ren
  And besely laboure the same alone to wyn
  So vnto god for helpe they cry and call
  But they them selfe wyll helpe no thynge at all

  Than thynke they theyr prayers to god nat acceptable
  Bycause (anone) they haue nat all theyr wyll
  And for that god is nat sone agreable
  To here theyr cry and it graunt and fulfyll
  These folys in theyr vyce contynue styll
  And put theyr selfe in wylfull ieopardy
  And where they myght they fynde no remedy

  But these folys vnstabyll as the wynde
  Prayeth vnto god and to his sayntis aboue
  Nat knowynge what may content theyr folysshe mynde
  Nor whether theyr askynge be for theyr behoue
  But sothly this dare I both say and proue
  And it auowe after my sympyll skyll
  That neuer man shall syn without his wyll

  If that one with his owne wyll doth fall
  Into a well to assay the ieopardy
  Whan he is there. if he lowde crye and call
  Bothe on god and man for helpe and remedy
  He sekyth that peryll, and dyeth worthely
  So were it foly to gyue hym corde or trayne
  Or other engyne to helpe hym vp agayne

  Whan suche folys ar sure vpon the grounde
  Without all daunger, peryll hurt or fere
  They lepe in the wel and yet fere to be drowned
  Empedocles though he right myghty were
  With suche lyke foly hym selfe so sore dyd dere
  That knowyngly and with his owne consent
  Hymself he lost and by fyers fyre was brent

  He lept hedelynge into the flamynge fyre
  Of a brennynge hyll whiche callyd is Ethnay
  To knowe the trouth, and nature to enquyre
  Whether that same flame were very fyre or nay
  So with his deth the trouth he dyd assay
  But who that wolde hym drawen out of that hyll
  Had ben a fole, syns it was his owne wyll

  For why his mynde was blyndyd so certayne
  That thoughe a man had hym delyuered than
  The same peryll wolde he haue proued agayne
  As mad as he forsoth is euery man
  That is at eas, and hym nat so holde can
  And also he that putteth hymselfe in drede
  Or fere and peryll, where as he hath no nede

  So he that prayeth to god that he may get
  The blysse of heuen, and scape infernall payne
  He is a fole his herte or mynde to set
  On frayle ryches, welth and ioy mundayne
  On stedfast fortune, on lucre or on gayne
  For certaynly these thynges of worldly welth
  Oft man deuydeth away from heuenly helth

  Thus he that prayeth for welth or for ryches
  Or in this worlde hym selfe to magnyfy
  Prayeth for his hurt and cause of viciousnes
  For worldly welth doth vyce oft multyply
  So seke men theyr owne peryll wyllyngly
  But who that prayeth, and can nat as he ought
  He bloweth in the wynde, and shall nat haue his thought

  And who that to honour couetyse to ascende
  Or to lyue in damnable voluptuosyte
  He seketh his peryll for if that he descende
  From welth and worshyp to payne and pouerte
  It is but worthy, and let hym pacyent be
  It to endure with mynde demure and meke
  He is worthy sorowe that wyll it alway seke

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye that fayne wolde escape all ieopardy
  Auoyde suche thynges the whiche myght cause the same
  To proue a peryll, is foly certaynly
  Whether it be done in ernest or in game
  They that so doth may theyr owne madnes blame
  For he that is sure, and to a fray wyll ren
  May fortune come home agayne, nosles or lame
  And so were it better for to haue byd within

 * * * * *


Of the way of felycyte and godnes, and of
the payne to come vnto synners.

[Illustration: Many in this lyfe the cart of syn doth drawe
By payne and labour, alway right dylygent
Norysshynge theyr syn agaynst all right and lawe
And alway lyuynge after one lyke assent
But whan they ar dede than shall theyr punysshement
In hell be dowblyd with cartis of whelys foure
Where as they thought, deth shuld ende theyr laboure]

  God suffreth nat eche vicious fole to knowe
  The wonders that he made hath on this grounde
  And dayly worketh. wherfore theyr syn doth growe
  So that theyr foly them selfe doth confounde
  And here theyr bodyes to great labours ar bounde
  Sparynge no peryll for pleasour and for gayne
  Than after deth haue they euerlastynge payne

  So he that here lyueth in vyce and synne
  Shall extreme dolour after deth endure
  Than what auantage is it for man to wyne
  All orthly tresour, and of hell payne be sure
  But without dowt that wretchyd creature
  Whiche goddes lawes wyll nat here holde and kepe
  Shall after deth haue cause to wayle and wepe

  And suche as here wyll nat knowe theyr sauyour
  Obseruynge his preceptis and commaundement
  Whiche god hathe ordeyned to saue vs from erroure
  And vs commaundyd to kepe with clene intent
  Ouer all the worlde. as rule moste excellent
  To lyue godly. and who so euer he be
  That foloweth in this worlde voluptuosyte

  Or carnall lust ryot or other offence
  Wastynge his tyme in syn and viciousnes
  All suche in this worlde, by theyr blynde negligence
  Drawe styll the cart of greuous besynes.
  With payne and charge and, whan this wretchydnes
  Is past and gone, yet after this they shall
  In hell endure great tourmentis eternall

  There shalt (thou fole) the charet drawe alway
  With dowble paynes both tedyous and cruell
  Wherfore thou fole retourne the I the pray.
  Seke nat the way whiche ledeth vnto hell
  With his foule dennes, more darke than tunge can tell
  And thoughe the way be esy streyght and playne
  The ende is nought, I aduyse the tourne agayne

  The way to hell is greatly occupyed
  The path is playne, and easy to ouergo
  The dore ay open no entre is denyed
  To suche as purpose in mynde to come therto
  But at the ende therof is care and wo
  With syghtis odyous and abhomynable
  Yet in the way ar folkes innumerable

  Thus is no meruayle though this way be playne
  And greatly worne syns it is hantyd so
  By dyuers folys whiche haste them to that payne.
  By way contynuall therto: but none therfro
  The dredefull dore to them that wyll in go
  Both day and nyght is open, it doth forsake
  No folys that wyll theyr iourney thyther take

  But that way that to hye heuen doth lye
  Is way of grace plesour, and all felycyte
  In it suche walke as here lyue vertuously
  And blessyd men, but nat suche as vyciouse be
  Yet is it narowe, and full of difficulte
  There is many a harde flynt brere and thorne
  And no meruayle for it is nat greatly worne

  For why lewde people, whiche is the gretest sort
  Forsake this way for the payne and hardnes
  But godly men therin haue chefe consort
  With all that lyue by grace in ryghtwysnes
  Suche well consyder that heuyns blessydnes
  Can nat be gotten by pleasour rest nor eas
  Wherfore this way can nat suche synners pleas

  God so hath ordeyned that who wyll haue vertue
  Must it obtayne with payne and dilygence
  And great labour, whiche many nowe eschewe
  Without it be to seke synne and offence
  Fewe seke the way to christis hye presence
  Therby it hapneth that many a thousande
  Fast rennyth leftwarde, but fewe on the right hande

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Alas man remembre heuens blyssednes
  And though the way be harde that lyeth therto
  Forsoke it nat for all that great sharpnes
  For at the ende is lyfe and rest also
  Euerlastynge glory with other ioyes mo
  But who that taketh the other way certayne
  Shall fynde at the ende eternall payne and wo
  Thoughe the way thether be easy streyght and playne

 * * * * *


Of the yll example of elders gyuyn vnto
youth.

[Illustration: If that the fader and mother before theyr son
By anger or malyce brake, platter pot, or pan
The son in hande shall take some cauderon
And lerne to breke it if his small power can
Thus oft tyme chyldren haue cause to curse or ban
Theyr frendes for suche example of lewdnes
For soner that they lerne than vertue or goodes]

  Ye aged men rotyd in folysshnes
  And folysshe parentis lewde of your langage
  Vnto our shyp swyftly your selfe addres
  Syns ye be worthy therin to haue a stage
  Nowe cast I repreues agaynst your outrage
  Whiche boldly bost you of your vnthryfty lyues
  Before your maydes, your doughters and your wyues

  Alas the folys of this mad company
  By theyr example cause great inconuenyence
  Before theyr children recountynge rybaudry
  Of suche as they haue had experyence.
  So gyue they to them example of offence
  And in that synne wheron they bost and vant
  They make them perfyte whiche erst were ignorant

  Theyr wordes ar voyde of shame and honestye
  Theyr lyfe is without mesure and reuerence
  But yet they thynke that they moste worthy be
  That moste can tell of this greuous offence
  Thus all the youth that is in theyr presence
  Or that doth here theyr vyce and rybawdry
  Vnto the same with theyr full mynde aply

  Thus theyr yonge children maners lernyth none
  The wyfe hath occasyon to breke hir chastyte
  So is the lyfe defyled of them echone
  And to be playne, we often tymes se
  That of what maners the folysshe husbondes be
  Such ar theyr wyues, children and housholde
  The yonge Cok lerneth to crowe hye of the olde

  A folysshe Father, full hardly shall ensyne
  His sone to good lyfe or to good gouernaunce
  For if the father to foly doth enclyne
  The sone wyll folowe his father in that daunce
  And if the father vse hasarde or the chaunce
  Or any prohybyt and vnlawfull game
  Most comonly the sone wyll do the same

  If that the husbonde be vycious of his lyfe
  Wastfull or dronken, or vyle in his langage
  His sonnes doughters, his seruauntes and his wyfe
  Wyll lerne of hym to passe the same passage
  And if the husbonde breke his maryage
  If the wyfe knowe, in mynde she wyll be wroth
  Without he haue a hode of the same cloth

  An olde prouerbe hath longe agone be sayde
  That oft the sone in maners lyke wyll be
  Vnto the Father, and in lyke wyse the mayde
  Or doughter, vnto the mother wyll agre
  So if the elders vse enormyte
  And before theyr children bost them of the same
  The sone and doughter shall folowe syre and dame

  The monkes thynke it lawfull for to play
  Whan that the Abbot bryngeth them the dyce
  Right so the Father, can nought or lytell say
  Agaynst the sone, nor hym blame or chastyce
  If he hym selfe be taken in that same vyce
  Thus lyues the Father in synne withouten shame
  And after his deth the sone shall do the same

  O wretchyd maners o tyme full of furour
  And full of foly without all hope to stent
  Howe longe shall god our lorde and sauyour
  This synne suffer without greuous punysshement
  Alas it nowe apereth euydent
  That the fathers foly synne and great outrage
  Is left to the sonne as it were herytage

  And no meruayle, for it hath neuer ben seen
  That of a wolfe a shepe hath be forth brought
  Or that a calfe or lambe gendred hath been
  Of a fell tygre: right so if it were sought
  Ouer all the worlde. a Father that is nought
  Sholde scant be founde, whiche coude brynge vp his childe
  With his synne in no maner poynt defylyd

  The yonge crab bacwarde doth crepe or go
  As doth the olde, none can hir cours redres
  These yonge children for the moste part also
  Foloweth theyr fathers synne and his lewdnes
  But they that lyue in maners of mekenes
  In honest lyfe, goodnes grace and chastyte
  May brynge forth children of maners as they be

  I rede howe the Phylosopher Diogenes
  Sayde by a childe whiche dronken was with wyne
  That his Father was in that case doutles
  Whan he it gate, so his hye wyt dyuyne
  Knewe that the childes maners dyd inclyne
  Vnto his Fathers, and so was it founde trewe
  By them whiche well that childes fader knewe

  But though the Father and mother also be nought
  Without dout this one thynge apereth playne
  That the childe is suche as it is vp brought
  And nat lyghtly chaungyd without great charge or payne
  Therfore let euery man hym selfe refrayne
  Within his hous from all thynge worthy blame
  Than shall his children and seruautes do the same

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY.

  Ye that haue children or other great housholde
  Subdued to your seruyce, and your obedyence
  Kepe vertuous lyfe, for that is worth great golde
  And great example to youth to auoyde offence
  But if ye boost you of synne and neglygence
  In rybawde wordes, gyue credence to this clause
  If the herers fall into incouenyence
  Your lewde example is the chefe grounde and cause

 * * * * *


Of bodely pleasour or corporall
voluptuosyte

[Illustration: Wanton wastfull and vayne voluptuosyte
Oft blyndeth attysynge vnto inconuenyence
Many that ar rude, for theyr symplycyte
And them as shepe sleeth for all theyr innocence
But other some it kepyth with myght and violence
As bulles bounde sure to endure great care
And other as byrdes it tangleth in hir snare]

  Drawe nere ye folys to you I crye and call
  Whiche ar of grace clene destytute and bare
  Folowynge your lust and pleasour corporall
  But for your soule ye take no thought ne care
  To whome may I this shamefull lust compare
  Saue to a harlat faynynge, fals and couetous.
  Of whome comyth shame and bytes venemous

  She syttyth in the strete as past both shame and fere
  Hir brestes bare to tempt them that passe by
  Hir face anoyntyd blasynge abrode hir here
  Or els on hir folysshe front enlaced hye
  Hir smocke to garnysshyd so hir dysceytfull iye
  To shamfull lust a thousande doth attyce
  Of youth whiche erst perchuance knewe nought of vyce

  Hir chamber full of flatery and disceyte
  Anone is opened the blynde fole entreth in
  The hoke of deth is hyd vnder the bayte
  Of folysshe lust pleasour and mortall syn
  Hir soule she sellyth ryches therby to wyne
  And what riches: a rewarde sothly full vyle
  The soules damneth and bodyes doth defyle

  The one departyth, another comys in agayne
  Without all shame dare she them boldly pray
  To hir fals pleasours, Thus by hir gyle and trayne
  This folysshe youth to hir wyll nat denay
  But vnto hir some lepe both nyght and day
  Without mesure, rennynge to lese theyr lyfe
  As ox or shepe vnto the bochers knyfe

  The symple lambe his necke doth out extende
  Vnto the Bocher his mortall ennemy
  So doth these folys, sekynge a shamefull ende
  And theyr owne deth, though they myght fynde remedy
  O blynde fole I requyre the to aply
  Vnto my wordes and thou shalt here and se.
  Howe moche thou oughtest this folysshe lust to fle

  The soule it damneth, and drowneth depe in hell
  The wyt it wastyth, and confoundeth the mynde
  It causeth man his londe and good to sell
  And if that he none other mene can fynde
  To rob and stele he oft tyme is inclyned
  Besyde all these this fowle lust is so vyle
  That with fowle sauour it shall thy body fele

  Thoughe of lewde lust the ioy be short and small
  And thoughe the pleasour therof be soon ouer past
  The payne that foloweth it, is eternall
  With wofull dolour menglyd, that euer shall last
  Therfore leue of: do nat thy pleasour cast
  On worldly welth, delyte ioy and pleasour
  For soon they pas and chaunge at euery hour

  Who that in this wretchyd worlde wyll auoyde
  Of voluptuousnes the ioyes frayle and vayne
  And suffre nat hym with them to be acloyde
  Infect or drownyd, shall for the same certayne
  Euerlastynge lyfe, and endles ioy obtayne
  And for his hye tryumphe and dyuyne prudence
  Haue the fruycyon of goddes hye presence

  But who that wyll his carnall lust ensue
  Shall here haue shame, and after payne cruell
  I coude hereof dyuers examples shewe
  But of right many this one I shall you tell
  One Sardanapalus all other dyd excell.
  In carnall lust and so his mynde dyd cast
  On loue prohybyte, that grace was fro hym past

  The loue of vertue was full out of his mynde
  So he concludyd to sue dilyciousnes
  Thynkynge after deth no welth nor ioy to fynde
  For this is the sentence of the prynce of derknes
  But good almyghty seynge his vycyousnes
  His body and soule deuydyd soon in twayne
  From worldly pleasour vnto infernall payne

  By this hystory to vs it apereth playne
  That from worldly pleasour and voluptuosyte
  With all our myght we ought vs to refrayne
  For thoughe the first of them delycious be
  Theyr ende is poyson, and of sournes plente
  Sue wyse men vertue, and set suche lust asyde
  For they ar folys that in it lyue and byde

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Amende mad men your blynde mysgouernaunce
  Subdue nat your necke to the captyuyte
  Of flysshely lust and corporall pleasaunce
  Nor to blynde Venus with hir lasciuyte
  (If ye it note) ye dayly here and se
  The mysfortune of them that it ensue
  And certaynly no man can saued be
  By carnall lust, but by godly vertue

 * * * * *


Of folys that can nat kepe secrete theyr
owne counsell.

[Illustration: Of other Foles a nomber yet I fynde
Which by theyr bablynge wordes and langage
Can nat kepe close the secrete of theyr mynde.
But all theyr counsel out they shewe at large.
So that oft therof procedeth great damage.
As Murder, myschefe, hatered and debate.
That after they repent. But than it is to late]

  He is a naturall fole and vndiscrete
  And to hym selfe ingendryth oft great stryfe
  Whiche can nat hyde his counsell and secrete
  But by his foly it sheweth to his wyfe
  And all that he hath done in his hole lyfe
  Or that to do here after he doth purpose
  To euery man suche a fole wyll disclose

  The noble Sampson moste excellent of myght
  And strongest man that euer was get or borne
  Were nat this foly: sholde nat haue lost his syght
  Nor had his here, by gyle from his hede ofshorne
  And of his ennemyes ben laughyd vnto scorne
  And at the last with herte wrethfull and wo
  His ennemyes murdred and hym selfe also

  Where as he myght haue lyued in honour
  If he had kept his secretes in his mynde
  With his owne wyll he dyed in great dolour.
  By the fals treason of his lemman vnkynde
  We may in dyuers mo examples fynde
  Howe many thousandes haue suffred paynes smart
  And all for shewynge the secretes of theyr hart

  Amphiaraus a Prynce moste excellent
  Shortened the dayes of his pore doutfull lyfe
  For shewynge the preuetees of his intent
  By his owne foly to his disceytfull wyfe
  And thoughe he longe escaped had the stryfe
  And war of Thebes whiche he dyd longe defende
  Yet at the leest his tunge was his owne ende

  Thus olde storyes doth oft recorde and tell
  By theyr examples whiche they vnto vs gyue
  That wymen ar no kepars of councell
  It goeth through them as water trough a syue
  Wherfore let them that quyetly wolde lyue
  No more of theyr counsell to any woman showe
  Than that they wolde that euery man dyd knowe

  Let euery man that is discrete and sage
  Of suche folys with all wysdome be ware
  Whiche shewe theyr counsell by theyr hasty langage.
  To euery man without all thought and care
  For they of wysdome and reason ar but bare
  And who that his owne secrete wyll forth tell
  Howe sholde he hyde another mannes counsell

  Yet other be whiche by theyr flaterynge trayne
  Labour to knowe euery mannys pryuete
  And by and by to shewe it forth agayne
  Of them be ware for they disceyfull be.
  Some other bost them of theyr felycyte
  Bablynge that they haue theyr wyll in euery thynge
  As prosperous welth loue, ryches and cunnynge

  And of great dedes done both on see and londe
  Some by theyr falshode, some by strength and vertue
  But if one laboured the trouth to vnderstonde
  Suche folysshe wordes sholde all be founde vntrewe
  Let neuer man to suche his counsell shewe
  For of one worde these folys makyth twayne
  Whiche tourneth many to losse rebuke and payne

  Wherfore if thou wylt that thy pryuete
  Be kept secrete and nat come out at large
  Be nat so folysshe to showe it unto me
  Or any other if it be thynge of charge
  And if thou do thou shalt be in this barge
  For howe wylt thou thynke that another man
  Can kepe thy counsell syns thou thy selfe ne can

  If the kynge Achab had nat vttred and tolde
  Vnto his wyfe his wyll and mynde so playne
  By hir fals treason, and dysceyt manyfolde
  Vnrightwysly Nabot had nat ben slayne
  But for the same, Achab suffred great payne
  By deth in batayle, and for a punysshment
  His wyfe with houndes was all to torne and rent

  Thus it apereth that he is wyse and ware
  Whiche can his counsell kepe within his hart
  For by that mean may he escape great care
  And suerly lyue without yll wyllys dart
  The Prophete seynge what dyuers paynes smart
  Comyth oft to them whiche doth theyr secret tell
  Eche man exortyth to kepe close his counsell.

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Thou man that hast thy secret in thy brest
  Holde it styll there suffer it nat out to go
  Who that so doth, therby shall fynde great rest
  Ne to thy frende shewe nat thy mynde also
  For if that he after become thy fo
  As often hapneth, than myght he the bewry
  So sholde thy foly tourne vnto thy great wo
  Howe be it suche thynges are prouyd comonly.

 * * * * *


Of yonge folys that take olde wymen to
theyr wyues, for theyr ryches.

[Illustration: Within our shyp that fole shall haue a hode
Whiche an olde wyfe taketh in maryage
Rather for hir ryches and hir worldly gode
Than for pure loue, or hope to haue lynage
But suche youth as mary them selfe with age
The profyte and pleasour of wedlocke lese certayne
And worthely lyue in brawlynge stryfe and payne.]

  Under the Asse tayle thoughe it be no thynge pure
  Yet many seke and grope for the vyle fatnes
  Gatherynge togyther the fowle dunge and ordure
  Suche ar they that for treasour and ryches
  Whyle they ar yonge in theyr chefe lustynes
  An agyd woman taketh to theyr wyfe
  Lesynge theyr youth, and shortynge so theyr lyfe

  They that so do hath neyther rest nor peas
  But besy brawlynge and stryfe contynuall
  They have no pleasour, but thought and great dyseas
  Rebuke out braydynge, and strypes whan they fall
  But theyr owne foly is grounde and cause of all
  For they be maryd unto the vyle treasour
  And precious bagges, but nat for godly pleasour

  They haue no hope of children nor lynage
  Loue is there none, and durynge theyr wretchyd lyfe
  Is nat one day in suche mad maryage
  Auoyde of brawlynge, of hatered and of stryfe
  But that pore man that weddeth a ryche wyfe
  Cast in his nose shall styll hir bagges fynde
  For whose cause he made was made and blynde

  They that ar weddyd nat for loue but rychesse
  Of moryage despysynge the pleasour and profyte
  Suche seldome sauour fortunes happynes
  But oft mysfortune them greuously doth byte
  Thus gone is theyr pleasour theyr ioy and delyte
  And for vayne treasoure suche ar so glad and fayne
  That for the same they them subdue to payne

  They wyllyngly to payne them selfe subdue
  The whiche ar weddyd for wretchyd couetyse
  They take no hede to maners and vertue
  To honeste nor wysdome but lyue ay in malyce
  For if a woman be fowle and full of vice
  And lewde of maners, nought both to man and lad
  Yet good shall hir mary be she neuer so bad

  If that a man of hye or lowe degre
  Wolde spouse his doughter vnto a strange man
  He nought inquyreth of his honestye
  Of his behauour, nor if he norture can
  But if he be ryche in londes and good: than
  He shall be prayed his doughter for to haue
  Thoughe be but a bonde man or a knaue

  The firste enquyrynge and speciall questyon
  Is of the money, that thynge namely they moue
  And last of all aske they the condicion
  So whan they mete they neuer haue perfyte loue
  Wherfore it were better to suche for theyr behoue
  To byde alone in deserte and wyldernes
  Than in wedloke in payne for frayle ryches

  Forsoth it is an vnmete maryage
  And disagreynge and moche agaynst the lawe
  Bytwene fresshe youth, and lame vnlusty age
  The loue bytwene them is scantly worth a strawe
  So doth the one styll on the other gnawe
  And oft the man in mynde doth sore complayne.
  His sede to sowe vpon a grounde barayne

  Than muste he haue another prymme or twayne
  With them to slake his wanton yonge cowrage
  But in that space must he endure great payne
  With hir that he hath tane in maryage
  Hir bablynge tunge whiche no man can asswage
  With wrathfull wordes shall sle hym at the laste
  His other prymes his good shall spende and waste

  Thus who that selleth his youthes lustynes
  For frayle ryches and this mundayne vanyte
  He byeth stryfe, gyle and falshode endlesse
  Suche force nat for fayth true loue nor honestye
  And thoughe that he discende of hye degre
  For hope of money he shall an olde fole wed
  By whose foly he to euery yll is led.

  And so these folys subdue them to bondage
  And worthely endure suche payne and punysshement
  They hope therby to come to auantage
  But that they lese and lyue in sore tourment
  They wast theyr good, and so whan that is spent
  And nought remayneth theyr bodyes to relefe
  Theyr disputacion is nought but hore and thefe

  But if I sholde wryte all the vnhappynes
  The wrath discorde and the great deuysyon
  Wherin they lyue, that mary for ryches
  And nat for loue. I neuer sholde haue done
  Wherfore this say I for a conclusyon
  That he shall neuer thryue ne come to his behoue
  That weddyth a wyfe for gode and nat for loue

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY.

  Alas man myndles what is thyne intent
  To wed for ryches, that weddynge I defy
  Maryage was ordeyned by god omnypotent
  In goddes lawes the worlde to multyply
  Wherfore that man that wyll therto aply
  And wolde haue the profyte of faythfull maryage
  This worldly ryches ought no thynge to set by
  But wed for loue and hope to haue lynage

  Remember ryches is no thynge comparable
  To mekenes vertue and discrete gouernaunce
  And other maners whiche ar more commendable
  Than worldly treasour or suche vnsure substaunce
  Wherfore consyder and call to thy remembraunce
  That better is to haue some woman pore and bare
  And lyue in eas: Than one with habundaunce
  Of great ryches: and euer to lyue in care

 * * * * *


Of enuyous Folys.

[Illustration: Yet ar mo folys whiche greatly them delyte
In others losse, and that by fals enuy
Wherby they suche vnrightwysly bacbyte
The dartis of suche ouer all the wordly flye
And euer in fleynge theyr fethers multyply
No state in erth therfro can kepe hym sure
His sede encreasyth as it wolde euer endure]

  Wastynge enuy oft styreth to malyce
  Folys nat a fewe whiche ar therto enclynyd
  Pryckynge theyr frowarde hertes vnto vyce
  Of others damage reioysynge in theyr mynde
  Enuyes darte doth his begynnynge fynde
  In wrathfull hertes, it wastyth his owne nest
  Nat suffrynge other to lyue in eas and rest

  If one haue plenty of treasour and ryches
  Or by his merytis obteyne great dignyte
  These folys enuyous that of the same haue les
  Enuy by malyce, the others hye degre
  And if another of honour haue plente
  They it enuy and wysshe that they myght sterue
  Howe be it suche folys can nat the same deserue

  These folys desyre agaynst both lawe and right
  Anoters good if they may get the same
  If they may nat by flaterynge nor by myght
  Than by fals malyce they hym enuy and blame
  Outher if one by his vertue hath good name
  By fals enuy these foles hym reproue
  Their wrath them blyndeth so that they none can loue

  The wounde of this malycious, fals enuy
  So dedely is, and of so great cruelte
  That it is incurable and voyde of remedy
  A man enuyous hath suche a properte
  That if he purpose of one vengyd to be
  Or do some mysche, whiche he reputyth best
  Tyll it be done, he neuer hath eas nor rest

  No slepe, no rest nor pleasour can they fynde
  To them so swete, pleasaunt and delectable
  That may expell this malyce from theyr mynde
  So is enuy a vyce abhomynable
  And vnto helth so frowarde and damnable
  That if it onys be rotyd in a man
  It maketh hym lene. his colour pale and wan.

  Enuy is pale of loke and countenaunce
  His body lene of colour pale and blewe
  His loke frowarde, his face without pleasaunce
  Pyllynge lyke scalys, his wordes ay vntrue
  His iyen sparklynge with fyre ay fresshe and newe
  It neuer lokyth on man with iyen full
  But euer his herte by furious wrath is dull

  Thou mayst example fynde of this enuy
  By Joseph whome his bretherne dyd neuer beholde
  With louynge loke, but sharpe and cruelly
  So that they hym haue murdred gladly wolde
  I myght recount examples manyfolde
  Howe many by enuy lost hath theyr degre
  But that I leue bycause of breuyte

  Enuyous folys ar stuffed with yll wyll
  In them no myrth nor solace can be founde
  They neuer laughe but if it be for yll
  As for gode lost or whan some shyp is drounde
  Or whan some hous is brent vnto the grounde
  But whyle these folys on other byte and gnawe
  Theyr enuy wastyth theyr owne herte and theyr mawe

  The mount of Ethnay though it brent euer styll
  Yet (saue itselfe) it brenneth none other thynge
  So these enuyous Folys by theyr yll wyll
  Wast theyr owne herte, thoughe they be ay musynge
  Another man to shame and losse or hurt to brynge
  Upon them sellfe Thus tournyth this yll agayne
  To theyr destruccion both shame great losse and payne

  This fals enuy by his malycious yre
  Doth often, bretherne so cursedly inflame
  That by the same the one of them conspyre
  Agaynst the other without all fere and shame
  As Romulus and Remus excellent of fame
  Whiche byldyd Rome, but after: enuy so grewe
  Bytwene them that the one the other slewe

  What shall I wryte of Cayme and of Abell
  Howe Cayme for murder suffred great payne and wo
  Atreus story and Theseus cruell.
  Ar vnto vs example hereof also
  Ethyocles with his brother: and many mo
  Lyke as the storyes declareth openly
  The one the other murdred by enuy

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Wherfore let hym that is discrete and wyse
  This wrathfull vyce exyle out of his mynde
  And yll on none by malyce to surmyse
  Let charyte in perfyte loue the bynde
  Sue hir preceptis than shalt thou consort fynde
  Loue in this lyfe, and ioy whan thou art past
  Where as enuy thy conscyence shall blynde
  And both they blode and body mar and wast

 * * * * *


Of impacient Folys that wyll nat abyde
correccion.

[Illustration: Unto our Folys shyp let hym come hastely
Whiche in his Bagpype hath more game and sport
Than in a Harpe or Lute more swete of melody
I fynde vnnumerable Folys of this sort
Whiche in theyr Bable haue all they hole confort
For it is oft sayd of men both yonge and olde
A fole wyll nat gyue his Babyll for any golde]

  The grettest synners that man may se or fynde
  In myserable Folys theyr foly to expres
  Is whan they wyll by no mean gyue theyr mynde
  To frendly wordes, to grace or to goodnes
  Suche folys so set theyr mynde on frowardnes
  That though one gyue them counsell sad and wyse
  They it disdayne and vtterly despyse

  But he that is discrete sad and prudent
  Aplyeth his mynde right gladly to doctryne
  He hereth wyse men, his wysdome to augment
  He them doth folowe and to theyr wordes enclyne
  But that fole whiche ay goeth to ruyne.
  And mortall myschefe had leuer be dede or slayne
  Than byde correccyon or for his profyte payne

  Suche haue suche pleasour in theyr mad folysshe pype
  That they dispyse all other melody.
  They leuer wolde dye folys than: byde a strype
  For theyr correccyon and specyall remedy
  And without dout none other Armony
  To suche folys is halfe so delectable
  As is their folysshe bagpype and theyr babyll

  These frantyke folys wyll byde no punysshement
  Nor smale correccion, for theyr synne and offence
  No frendly warnynge can chaunge theyr yll intent
  For to abyde it, they haue no pacyence.
  They here no wysdome but fle from hir presence
  And so it hapnyth that in the worlde be
  Mo folys than men of wyt and grauyte

  O mortall fole remember well what thou art
  Thou art a man of erth made and of clay
  Thy dayes ar short and nede thou must depart
  Out of this lyfe, that canst thou nat denay
  Yet hast thou reason and wyt wherby thou may
  Thy selfe here gyde by wysdome ferme and stable
  Wherby thou passest all bestis vnreasonable

  Thou art made lorde of euery creature
  All thynge erthly vnto thyne obedyence
  God hath the creat vnto his owne fygure
  Lo is nat here a great preemynence
  God hath also gyuyn vnto the intellygence
  And reason and wyt all foly to refuse.
  Than art thou a fole that reason to abuse

  He that is fre outher in subieccion.
  If by his foly he fall into offence
  And than submyt hym vnto correccyon.
  All men shall laude his great obedyence
  But if that one by pryde and insolence
  Supporte his faute and so bere out his vyce
  The hell tourmentis hym after shall chastyce

  Correccyon shall the vnto wysdome brynge
  Whiche is more precious than all erthly ryches
  Than londes rentis or any other thynge
  Why dost thou bost the of byrth or noblenes
  Of ryches, strength beauty or fayrnes
  These often ar cause of inconuenyence.
  Where as all good comyth by wysdome and prudence

  A wyse man onely as we often fynde
  Is to be named moste ryche and of most myght
  Here thou his wordes and plant them in thy mynde
  And folowe the same for they ar sure and right.
  Better is to endure, thoughe it be nat lyght
  To suffer a wyse man the sharply to repreue
  Than a flaterynge fole to clawe the by the sleue

  Thoughe sharpe correccyon at the first the greue
  Thou shalt the ende therof fynde profytable
  It oft apereth, therfore I it byleue
  That man also forsoth is fortunable
  Whiche here in fere lyueth sure and stable
  And in this lyfe is clene of his intent
  Ferynge the sharpe payne of hellys punysshement

  He may hym selfe right happy call also
  Whiche is correct in his first tender age
  And so lernyth in goodes law to go
  And in his yocke, whiche doth all yll asswage
  But these folys bydynge in theyr outrage
  Whiche of correccyon in this lyfe hath dysdayne
  May fere to be correct in hell with endles payne

THE ENUOY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  Ye obstynate folys that often fall in vyce
  Howe longe shall ye kepe this frowarde ignoraunce
  Submyt your myndes, and so from synne aryse
  Let mekenes slake your mad mysgouernaunce
  Remember that worldly payne it greuaunce
  To be compared to hell whiche hath no pere
  There is styll payne, this is a short penaunce
  Wherfore correct thy selfe whyle thou art here.

 * * * * *


Of folysshe Fesycyans and vnlerned that
onely folowe paractyke knowynge nought
of the speculacyon of theyr faculte.

[Illustration: Who that assayeth the craft of medycyne
Agaynst the seke and paynfull pacyent
And hath no insyght cunnynge nor doctryne
To gyue the seke, helth and amendement
Suche is a fole, and of a mad intent
To take on hym by Phesyke any cure
Nat knowynge of man, nor herbe the right nature]

  Yet be mo folys vpon the grounde and londe
  Whiche in our Shyp may clayme a rowme and place
  Suche be Phesycians that no thynge vnderstonde
  Wandrynge about in euery towne and place
  Uysytynge the seke whiche lyue in heuy case
  But nought they relefe of those paynes harde
  But gape alway after some great rewarde

  Suche that haue practyse and nought of speculatyfe
  Whan they go vysyte some paynfull pacyent
  Whan they hym note sure to forgo his lyfe
  Without all hope of any amendement
  Yet say they other than is in theyr intent
  That his diseas is no thynge incurable
  So that the pacyent to hym be agreable

  Sayth the Phesycyan whan he hath his rewarde
  Abyde a whyle tyll I my bokes ouer se
  Wherby I may relyue thy paynes harde
  Than from the pacyent homewarde departyth he
  To se his bokes but if the pacyent dye
  In that meane space the medycyne is to late
  So may he lay it to his owne folysshe pate

  The speculacion sholde he before haue sene
  For that in Phesyke is chefe and pryncypall,
  Yet many ar that vse the craft I wene
  Whiche of the cunnynge knowe lytell or nought at all
  A herbe or wede that groweth vpon a wall
  Beryth in it these folys medycyne.
  None other bokes haue they nor doctryne

  Nor none they rede to haue the true scyence
  Or perfyte knowlege and grounde of medycyne
  They rede no volumes of the experyence
  Of Podalirius nor Mesues doctryne
  Suche folys disdayne theyr myndes to enclyne
  Unto the doctryne of bokes of Auycen
  Of ypocras and parfyte galyen

  But all the substance of theyr blynde faculte
  They take in bokes that speke of herbes only
  Without respect had to theyr properte
  Or operacion so often they them aply
  To fals doctrynes, but first and specyally
  These olde wyues therwith wyll haue to do
  Thoughe they nought knowe that doth belonge therto

  They dare be bolde to take on them the cure
  Of them diseasyd howe be it that they nat can
  Suche thynge descerne as longyth to nature
  What is for woman good, and what for man
  So oft they ende moche wors than they began
  That the pore pacyent is so brought to his graue
  Yet dyuers suters suche folysshe wytches haue

  Suche wytches boldly dare afferme and say
  That with one herbe they hele can euery sore
  Under euery syne plenete, houre and day
  Yet besyde this they boldly dare say more
  That it that helyth a man aged and hore
  Shall helpe also a woman or a childe
  Thus many thousandes oft ar by them begyled

  They say also in this our charge or cure
  What nedes it note the synes or fyrmament
  The cause of thynges, or the strength of nature
  Whether that the seke be stronge or impotent
  They gyue one medesyn to euery pacyent
  And if it fortune it be to colde or warme
  The faythles wytche in hande goth with hir scharme

  Say folysshe Surgyan by what experyence
  Or whose Doctryne discyplyne or lore
  Takest thou on the, nought knowynge of scyence
  With one Salue or plaster, to heale euery sore
  Yet so thou thynkest, I the compare therfore
  Unto a lawyer that of his craft nought can
  And yet presumeth to counsell euery man

  A lawer and a Phesician ar both lyke
  Of theyr condicion and both insue one trayne
  The one begylyth the pacyent and seke
  Takynge his god for to encreas his payne
  The other labours and cauteles oft doth fayne
  To clawe the coyne by craft from his clyent
  Castynge hym of whan all his good is spent

  Thus thryues the lawer by anothers good
  Iniustly gotten, disceyuynge his clyent
  Also some other ar callyd Phesicians good
  Whiche vtterly disceyue the pacyent
  If he haue money than hath he his intent
  And if the seke haue store ynough to pay
  Than shall the cure be dryuen from day to day

  So if the lawer may any auauntage wyn
  He shall the cause from terme to terme defarre
  The playntyf for a player is holde in.
  With the defendaunt kepynge open warre
  So laweyers and Phesicians thousandes do marre
  And whan they no more can of theyr suers haue
  The playntyf beggyth, the seke is borne to graue

  But of these lawyers bycause I spoke before
  Of folysshe Phesicians here onely I intende.
  Somwhat to say: And of lawers no more
  On you Phesicians shall I conclude and ende
  I say no man may hym so well defende
  That he for murder may auoyde punysshement
  Yet may Phesicians, sleynge the pacient

  Thus thou that of Phesycian hast the name
  If thou nought knowe of perfyte medycyne
  It is forsoth to thy rebuke and shame
  To boste the scyence: nat hauynge the doctryne
  Therfore I counsell that thou thy mynde inclyne
  To haue the cunnynge, els certaynly thou shall
  Haue thy blynde craft and lyue a fole with all.

THE ENUOY OF THE TRASLATOUR.

  Thou blynde Phesician that of thy craft nought can
  Leue of thy lewdnes and bolde audacyte
  To take on the: the cure of chylde or man
  For by thy foly the wors myght they be
  And ye that suerly perceyue your faculte
  Be true therin, and auaryce from you cast
  Shame is to brynge a man to pouertye
  And than in paynes to leue hym at the last

 * * * * *


Of the ende of worldly honour and power
and of Folys that trust therein.

[Illustration: On erth was neuer degre so excellent
Nor man so myghty: in ryches nor scyence
But at the ende all hath ben gone and spent
Agaynst the same no man can make defence
Deth all thynge drawyth, ferefull is his presence,
It is last ende of euery thynge mundayne
Thus mannys fortune of cours is vncertayne]

  O creatures of myndes mad and blynde
  I wonder of your hertis proude and eleuate
  Whiche on vayne power set so sore your mynde
  And trust so moche to your vnsure estate
  As of your lyfe were neyther yere nor date
  To worldly worshyp ye stedfastly intende
  As if your lyfe sholde neuer more come to ende

  Alway ye labour to come to dignyte
  And oft by falshode your power to augment
  Alas fewe ar content with theyr degre
  But by extorcion spoyle the pore innocent
  On worldly treasour so set is theyr intent
  And styll to honour as besely to ascende
  As if theyr lyfe sholde neuer more come to ende

  Take thou example by Julius cesar
  That of the worlde durynge a whyle was sure
  And many kynges subduyd by myght of warre
  And of the Empyre had lordshyp charge cure
  But this his myght great space dyd nat endure
  And whyle he trustyd yet hyer to ascende
  By cruell deth he soon came to his ende

  Right in lyke wyse the myghty Darius
  Was kynge of Persy a realme moche excellent
  Yet was his mynde so greatly couetus
  That with the same helde he hym nat content
  But warred on other Royalmes adiacent
  So whan his myght coude nat therto extende
  His owne Royalme he loste and so came to his ende

  And also Xerxes in ryches abundant
  Was longe in peas and great tranquyllyte
  And in his Royalme was hye and tryumphant
  As longe as he was content with his degre
  Than had he pleasour and great felycyte.
  To assay by warre his kyngdome to amende
  But all he lost and so came to his ende

  Whyle Nabugodonosor kynge of Babylone
  In vnsure fortune set to great confydence
  Commaundynge honour vnto hym to be done
  As vnto god: with all humble reuerence,
  God by his power and hye magnyfycence
  Made hym a beste, for that he dyd offende
  And so in proces of tyme came to his ende

  Alexander the great and myghty conquerour
  To whome all the worlde scantly myght suffyse
  Of Grece was the origynall lorde and Emperour
  And all the worlde subdued as I surmyse
  Yet hath he done as is the comon gyse
  Left all behynde, for nought coude hym defende
  But as a symple man at the last came to his ende

  The myghty Cresus with his kyngdomes and store
  Of golde and ryches hym selfe coude nat content
  But whyle he trustyd and laboured for more
  Fortune hym fayled: So lost he his intent.
  What shall I wryte of Cyrus excellent
  Drynkynge his blode by deth whiche fortune sende
  To here of states the comon deth and ende

  All kyngdomes dekay and all estate mundayne
  Example of Rome Cartago and Mycene
  Of Solyme Tyre grace and Troy moste souerayne
  None of these places ar nowe as they haue ben
  Nor none other ouer the worlde as I wene
  Thus shortly to speke and all to comprehende
  All worldly thynges at last shall haue an ende.

THE ENOUY OF BARKLAY TO THE FOLYS.

  O man that hast thy trust and confydence
  Fyxed on these frayle fantasyes mundayne
  Remember at the ende there is no difference
  Bytwene that man that lyued hath in payne
  And hym that hath in welth and ioy souerayne
  They both must dye their payne is of one sort
  Both ryche and pore, no man can deth refrayne
  For dethes dart expellyth all confort

  Say where is Adam the fyrst progenytour
  Of all mankynde is he nat dede and gone
  And where is Abell of innocence the flour
  With adamys other sonnes euerychone
  A: dredfull deth of them hath left nat one
  Where is Mathusalem, and Tuball that was playne
  The first that played on Harpe or on Orgone
  _Ilz sont tous mortz ce monde est choce vayne_

  Where is iust Noy and his ofsprynge become
  Where is Abraham and all his progeny
  As Isaac and Jacob, no strength nor wysdome
  Coude them ensure to lyue contynually
  Where is kynge Dauyd whome god dyd magnyfy
  And Salomon his son of wysdome souerayne
  Where ar his sonnes of wysdome and beauty
  _Ilz sont toutz mortz ce monde est choce vayne._

  Where ar the prynces and kynges of Babylon
  And also of Jude and kynges of Israell
  Where is the myghty and valiant Sampson
  He had no place in this lyfe ay to dwell
  Where ar the Prynces myghty and cruell
  That rayned before Christ delyuered vs from payne
  And from the Dongeons of darke and ferefull hell
  _Ilz sont toutz mortz ce monde est choce vayne._

  Of worldly worsyp no man can hym assure
  In this our age whiche is the last of all
  No creature can here alway endure
  Yonge nor olde, pore man nor kynge royall
  Unstable fortune tourneth as doth a ball
  And they that ones pas can nat retourne agayne
  Wherfore I boldly dare speke in generall
  We all shall dye: _ce monde est choce vayne_.

  Ryches nor wysdome can none therfro defende
  Ne in his strength no man can hym assure
  Say where is Tully is he nat come to ende
  Seneke the sage with Cato and Arture
  The hye Arystotyll of godly wyt and pure
  The glorious Godfray, and myghty Charlemayne
  Thoughe of theyr lyfe they thought that they were sure
  Yet ar they all dede: _ce monde est choce vayne_.

  Where ar the Phylosophers and Poetis lawreat
  The great Grammaryens and pleasant oratours.
  Ar they nat dede after the same fourme and rate
  As ar all these other myghty conquerours
  Where ar theyr Royalmes theyr ryches and treasours
  Left to theyr heyres: and they be gone certayne
  And here haue left theyr riches and honours
  So haue they proued that this worlde is but vayne.

  So I conclude bycause of breuyte
  That if one sought the worlde large and wyde
  Therin sholde be founde no maner of dere
  That can alway in one case suerly byde
  Strength, honour, riches cunnynge and beautye
  All these decay, dayly: thoughe we complayne
  _Omnia fert etas_, both helth and iolyte
  We all shall dye: _ce monde est choce vayne_.

 * * * * *


Of predestynacion.

[Illustration: That man that lokyth for to haue a rewarde
Whiche he hath nat deseruyd to obtayne
And lenyth his body vpon a rede forwarde
Whiche for waykenes may hym nat well sustayne
Forsoth this fole may longe so loke in vayne
And on the Crauys he styll shall bacwarde ryde
Cryenge with the doue, whose flyght shall hym ay gyde]

  It is vnlawfull, man to be dilygent
  Or serchynge goddes workes to set his thought
  Howe he hath made the heuen and fyrmament
  The erth the see and euery thynge of nought
  Yet of some Folys the cause hereof is sought,
  Whiche labour also with curyosyte
  To knowe the begynnynge of his dyuynyte

  These folys forgettynge their owne fragilyte
  Wolde loke to knowe the ende of euery thynge
  Boldly disputynge in goddys pryuete
  And what rewarde is ordeynyd for men lyuynge
  Of many folys this is the moste musynge
  Whiche labour dayly with besy cure and payne.
  To knowe what god doth discerne and or ordayne

  Therfore in this part I shall dispyse and blame
  Unchrafty folys whiche scantly haue ouer sene
  Ought of scripture, if they knowe the bokes name
  Or els a whyle hath at the Scoles bene
  Than bende they the browys and stedfastly they wene
  In theyr conceyt that they ar passynge wyse
  For all scripture newe commentis to deuyse

  They frowardly the sentence do transpose
  And that whiche is wryten, both playne and holely
  By theyr corruptynge and vnlawfull glose
  Oft tyme they brynge to damnable heresy
  Falsly expoundynge after theyr fantasy
  They labour to transpose and turne the right sence
  Thoughe the wordes stryue and make great resystence

  Here what these folys with theyr audacyte
  Dare besely say by theyr fals errour blynde
  Presumynge on goddes secrete and pryuete
  Here what lewde wordes they cast out in the wynde
  They say what man can chaunge or turne his mynde
  To lyue after any other fourme and rate
  But lyke as he is therto predestynate

  They say: if god that rayneth ouerall
  Hath any ordeyned that in this worlde is
  To come to the place and rowme celestyall
  For to be partyner of euerlastynge blys
  Ordeyned for suche as here doth nat amys
  No man can chaunge, not other thynge mundayne
  That thynge whiche god by his myght doth ordayne

  But if that god prefyxed hath before
  Any creature vnto infernall payne
  In derknes to be damnyd for euer more
  No erthly thynge may that sentence call agayne
  Nor hym delyuer: o fole thou mayst complayne
  For this thy foly and also it repent
  Thynkest thou nat god alway omnypotent

  Is god nat rightwyse and grounde of all iustyce
  Rewardynge man after his gouernaunce
  He that hath here nat lyen in synne and vyce
  Hauynge in goddys seruyce his pleasaunce
  Shall of his lorde be had in remembraunce
  And of rewarde worthely be sure
  Where it is worthy that synners payne endure

  Trust well who seruyth his maker stedfastly
  With pure herte kepynge sure his commaundement
  And lawes shall be rewardyd fynally
  With heuenly ioy and scape all punysshement
  Therfore thou fole leue of this lewde intent
  Lyue vertuously and trust in goddes grace
  Than yll desteny in the shall haue no place

  Vnto great ioy god hath vs all create
  And to vs all ordeyned his kyngdome
  And none hath vnto Hell predestynate
  But often whan we folowe nat wysdome
  By ouer owne foly we fall, and so become
  Vnto our maker vnkind: and hym deny
  Whiche them rewardyth that here lyue vertuously

  Therfore thou Fole desyst thy wordes vayne
  And let thy tunge no more suche wordes say
  For god hath vs made all of one stuf certayne
  As one potter makyth of one clay
  Vessels dyuers, but whan he must them lay
  Vpon the kyll with fyre them there to dry
  They come nat all to good, moste comonly

  Doth this erthyn pot his maker dispyse
  Whether it be made of fassyon good or yll
  Saynge why dost thou make me in this wyse
  Wherfore mad man I reade the to be styll
  Blame nat thy maker, for thy vnhappy wyll
  For god hath neuer man nor childe create
  But all he hath to heuen predestynate

  And whyle we lyue here on this wretchyd grounde
  We haue our reason and wyttes vs to gyde
  With our fre wyll and if no faute be founde
  In our demenour, in heuen we shall abyde
  But if we goddes lawes set asyde
  Howe may we hope of hym rewarde to wyn
  So our owne foly is moste cause of our syn.

THE ENUOY OF BARCLAY.

  O creature vnkynde vnto thy creatour
  What carest thou to knowe or to inuestygate
  The pryuetye, of god, leue this thy errour
  To thynke the by hym to be predestynate
  To endles wo and from his blysse pryuate
  For syns thou hast thy reason and frewyll
  Gyuyn the by god, thou art in suche estate
  To take the eleccion outher of good or yll

 * * * * *


Of folys that forget them selfe and do
another mannys besynes leuynge theyr
owne vndone.

[Illustration: Who that wyll suffer his owne hous to bren
Tyll nought of it saue the bare wallys stonde
And with his water hastely doth ren
To quenche the fyre of anothers hous or londe
He is a fole and haue shall in his hande
A folysshe Pype or horne therwith to blowe
For other folys that in my Shyp wyll rowe.]

  Within my Shyp of rowme he shall be sure
  Whiche for anothers auantage and profyte
  Takyth great thought and doth moche payne endure
  Vnto his owne charge takynge no respyte
  But settyth it asyde and hath all his delyte
  With all his stody hym to enforce and dres:
  To care for euery mannys besynes.

  Suche hertles folys to them self neglygent
  In theyr owne charge slepe contynually
  But with open iyen they ar full dylygent
  The worke of other with all theyr myght to aply
  And for others profyte prouyde they besely.
  But whyle these Folys ar glad to take in hande
  Anothers charge, theyr owne styll let they stande

  Wherfore I am so bolde within my boke
  Somwhat to touch these folys mad vsage
  That if it fortune them on the same to loke
  They may therby perceyue in theyr corage
  That labour they ought for their owne auauntage
  Most specyally. for that is the degre
  And the true order of perfyte charite

  For perfyte loue and also charite
  Begynneth with hym selfe for to be charitable
  And than to other after his degre
  Thy owne auauntage is ay moost profytable
  The great Phylosophers of maners ferme and stable
  And also of wysdome godly and dyuyne
  Hath left to vs suche techynge and doctryne

  We haue by Therence the same commaundement
  The same is wryten also as I fynde
  In the holy lawe of the olde testament
  And therfore he that oft wyll set his mynde
  For others maters with care his thought to blynde
  Let hym first se vnto his owne profyte
  Lyst some mysfortune hym after sharply byte

  Let hym turne his labour to his owne auauntage
  And than do for other where as he seeth moste nede
  For who that playeth for mony outher gage
  And on his felawes cast takyth onely hede
  And nat to his owne, suche one shall seldom spede
  And is a Fole. So is he that doth ren
  To quenche another hous, suffrynge his owne to bren

  Suche one of his owne damage hath no fere
  And worthy is his losse and hurte to byde
  So is he that wyll anothers burthen bere
  Or takyth anothers charge at any tyde
  Despysynge his owne werke and settynge it asyde
  If suche haue losse and after it forthynke
  No man shall moche force whether he flete or synke

  He is well worthy to haue a folys pype
  That goth vnbyddyn to rype anothers corne
  And suffreth his owne to stande though it be rype.
  And generally all Folys ar worthy scorne
  Of what maner byrth so euer they be borne
  If they them self put, to losse or damage
  Therby to do some other auauntage

  Say curyous Fole: say what pleasour thou hast
  In others maters thy self to intermyt
  Or theyr great charges thus in thy mynde to cast
  Thy selfe to socour set thou thy mynde and wyt
  Let others maters therfore in quyete syt
  On thy owne profyte of all firste set thy mynde
  And than (if thou mayst) do somwhat for thy frende

  For vtterly that man is moche vnwyse
  That thus takyth thought for anothers charge
  And doth his owne by neglygence despyse
  For suche Folys I forgyd haue this barge
  But of the same suche men I clene discharge
  That first of his pryuate profyte can take hede
  And than helpe a frende and felowe at a nede

THENUOY OF BARKLAY.

  Ye that take charge, thought and besy cure
  For others mysfortune, losse or aduersyte
  First of your self I aduyse you to be sure
  For this is the order of parfyte charyte
  Eche to hym selfe moste louynge ay to be
  And next to his frende, but who that doth dispyse.
  His owne besynes whiche is in ieopardye
  Seynge to anothers forsoth he is vnwyse

 * * * * *


Of the vyce of vnkyndnes.

[Illustration: That Fole can neyther gode nor honeste
Whiche whan one doth to hym a frendly dede
It gladly takyth, thoughe it be two or thre
Lokynge for kyndnes, yet takyth he no hede
To shewe the same agayne in tyme of nede
Let suche Folys be no thing wroth therfore
Thoughe in this Shyp I set them to an ore.]

  He is a Fole that crauynge is alway
  Takynge the seruyce and rewardes of his frende
  And nat remembryth the same agayne to pay
  But as a churle it castyth out of his mynde
  For who that wolde haue one to hym be kynde
  And lyberall, he ought the same to be
  For kyndnes meyntayneth bothe loue and charyte

  He that wyll charge another with cures harde
  And great labours greuous to sustayne
  Ought for his labour hym worthely rewarde
  That the rewarde may be confort to his payne
  It is disworshyp and also shame certayne
  To take the labour of any ryche or pore
  And nat iustly hym to content therfore

  Wherfore the workman ought also to intende
  Vnto his labour to saue his honestye
  And workemanly to brynge it the ende
  If he therby wolde well rewardyd be
  And if the owner therof beholde and se.
  His worke so done, he is a chorle vnkynde
  If he do nat content the workmannys mynde.

  He that wolde gladly that men sholde hym commende
  Must fully purpose and fyx within his mynde
  Lyberall to be and nat euer to intende
  To false Auaryce, whiche many one doth blynde
  And if he purpose hye honours for to fynde
  Or hym auaunce to any great degre
  He must haue mekenes and lyberalyte

  He must of maners also be commendable
  And of his speche als pleasaunt as he can
  For an olde prouerbe true and verytable
  Sayth that good lyfe and maners makyth man
  But euery lawe doth dam and also ban
  The churlysshe vyce and lewde of vnkyndnes
  Whiche dryeth vp the well of bounte and goodnes

  For vnkynde folys if one labour dylygent
  And so brynge theyr worke vnto good conclusyon
  They fynde yet fautis and so ar nat content
  Withdrawynge the rewarde by theyr collusyon
  Wherfore let suche thynke it no abusyon
  Nor haue disdayne ne yet in mynde complayne
  If the pore laborer gyue vp his worke agayne

  These frowarde Folys, doth wronge and iniury
  To suche as to them do profyte and honour
  For kyndnes, they render shame and vylany
  Rebukes sclander extorcion and rygour
  But whyle they hope to come to great valoure
  And by such rygour to honours to aryse
  Theyr hope vanyssheth as doth the snowe or yce

  Wherfore who that puttyth one to besynes
  To charge or labour of body or of mynde
  Ought hym rewarde agayne for his kyndnes
  If he do nat forsoth he is unkynde
  But specyally as I oft wryten fynde
  It is a thynge whiche doth for vengeaunce cry
  A pore laborer to put to Iniury

  What man can wryte the inconuenyence
  Whiche groweth of this lewde and cursyd vyce
  Vnkyndnes causeth great myschefe and offence
  And is repugnynge to reason and iustyce
  Wherfore let suche that wyll be namyd wyse
  Leue it: and folowe lyberalyte
  Whiche is noryssher of loue and amyte

  In dyuers bokes examples we may fynde
  Howe many Cytees hygh and excellent
  Agaynst all lawe and reason were vnkynde
  To suche as dyd theyr dignyte augment
  O vnkynde rome thou was of this intent
  Whiche hast Camyllus exyled in great payne
  Thoughe he euer laboured thy honour to mentayne

  O cruell Athenes by thy ingratytude
  Hast thou nat banysshyd Solon also fro the
  Though he enfourmyd hath thy maners rude
  And gyuyn the lawes of right and equyte
  For his great meryte, loue and benygnyte
  Thou hast hym gyuen exyle and paynes harde
  His labour was nat worthy that rewarde

  Thou vnkynde Sparta: of thy audacyte
  What shall I wryte or thy lewde vnkyndnes
  Hast thou nat banysshed by thy cruelte
  Thy kynge Lycurgus, bycause he dyd redres
  Thy wanton errours by lawe and rightwysnes
  And Scipio whiche his country dyd defende
  Fonde it to hym, vnkynde at the last ende

  A thousande mo whome I can nat expresse
  To suche as haue for them abyde great payne
  Haue done displeasour, and shewed vnkyndnes
  And them disceyued by some cautele or trayne
  Yet none of them great goodnes cowde obtayne
  By theyr vnkyndnes for who that so doth cast
  Vnkyndly shall be seruyd at the last.

THENUOY OF BARKLAY.

  O fals vnkyndnes out on the I cry
  From all goodnes dost thou nat man withdrawe
  Byndynge his herte to gyle and vylany
  Agaynst nature, agaynst both right and lawe
  Thou makest man his maker nat to knawe
  Therfore thou man expell out from thy mynde
  This vyce, for we fynde in an olde sayde sawe
  Wo is hym that to his maker is vnkynde.

  Remember man the great preemynence
  Gyuen unto the by good omnypotent
  Bytwene the and Angels is lytell difference
  And all thynge erthly to the obedyent
  Fysshe byrde and beste vnder the fyrmament
  Say what excuse mayst thou nowe lay or fynde
  Syns thou art made by god so excellent
  But that thou oughtest agayne to hym be kynde.

  God hath the made vnto his owne lykenes
  No erthly creature vnto the comparable
  Thy iyen vpwarde to consyder his hyghnes
  Where other creatures that ar vnresonable
  Goeth on all foure and ar nat other able.
  Theyr loke alway vnto the grounde inclynyd
  Therfore thou ought in vertue to be stable
  And to thy maker neuer to be vnkynde

  Whan man offendyd by disobedyence
  Subduynge hym self to labour care and payne
  And lost the consort of goodes hye presence
  Hath nat christ Jhesu redemyd hym agayne
  Besyde all this thou hast no thynge certayne
  In erth but by hym. wherfore I call the blynde
  And of thy maners vncurtayse and vylayne
  If to thy sauyour thou be nat true and kynde

  Thoughe god hath made the (man) thus excellent
  To lyue (if thou lyst) in ioy eternally
  A lytell thynge shall hym agayne content
  He nought requyreth but thy herte onely
  And that thou defy thy gostly ennemy
  And in goddes seruyce thy herte and body bynde.
  Than shall he rewarde the in heuen right gloriously
  So mayst thou be callyd vnto thy maker kynde

 * * * * *


Of folys that stande so well in their owne
conceyt that they thinke none so wyse,
stronge, fayre, nor eloquent, as they
ar themself.

[Illustration: We haue ouercome the malyce and enuy
Of suche as agaynst our Nauy did conspyre
Wherfore I shall my folys call quyckly
That they my Shyp may aparayle and atyre
Drawe nere ye Folys whiche syttynge by the fyre
Loke ay in a glasse to se your countenaunce
And in your owne dedis haue all your hole pleasaunce]

  Vnto my shyp I call hym to be Coke
  The mete to dresse to other Folys echone
  Whiche in his myrrour doth alway gase and loke
  Whan he may get hym vnto a place alone
  And though of colour and beaute he haue none
  Yet thynketh he hym self fayre and right plesant
  And wyse: thoughe that he be mad and ignorant

  In his owne dedys is onely his delyte
  In his owne conceyte thynkynge hymself right wyse
  And fayre, thoughe he be yelowe as kyte
  Is of hir fete: yet doth he styll deuyse
  His vayne myrrour: that onely is his gyse
  And thoughe he beholde hym self of lothly shape
  He wyll it nat byleue, but in his glasse doth gape.

  Though for his foly all men myght hym repreue
  And that he se it before hym openly
  Within his glasse: he wyll it nat byleue
  But strongly it defende and eke deny
  He seyth nat his erys longe and hye
  Whiche stande vpon his folysshe hode behynde
  His lewde conceyt thus makyth hym starke blynde

  Whan people comon of men of hye prudence
  Or of hye beauty, and strength if men doth tell
  If one suche fole were there in the presence
  He swere durst boldly and that on the gospell
  That he onely all other dyd excell
  And that to gyue councell good and profytable
  Were none in the worldly vnto hym comparable

  These folys bost them selfe of theyr wysdome
  And thynke them selfe to haue preemynence
  Aboue all other that ar in christendome.
  In gyftis of grace as beautye and scyence
  Of strength, gode maners, vertue, and eloquence
  But thoughe they stande in theyr owne conceytis
  Nought is saue foly within theyr folysshe patis

  And thoughe theyr face and vysage stande awry
  And all to reuylde, theyr mouth standynge asyde
  Within theyr myrrour the same can they nat spye
  But in theyr foly contynually abyde
  And whether that they ar styll outher go or ryde
  Labour or be ydyll, they gase styll in theyr glasse
  Yet wyll they nat byleue to haue erys lyke an Asse.

  Oft whan these folys lye in theyr bed vpright
  With tawny loke or els theyr botyll nose
  They haue theyr myrrour alway in theyr syght
  The vayne glasse (of theyr beautye) to apose
  And whan suche a fole into the kechyn gose
  To stere the pot, there whether he syt or stande
  The glasse alway is in the other hande

  Whan he a whyle his glas hath loken than
  If one examynyd hym of his beautye
  He boldly durst swere both by god and man
  That nought were in hym whiche myght repreuyd be
  But all goodnes, fayre shape, and loke of grauyte
  And that his gere gayly vpon his backe doth syt
  He hardly is wyse: if he had any wyt.

  I wryten fynde that great inconuenyence
  As losse, contempt and occasyon of pryde
  Hath fallyn vnto many by this lewde complacence
  Whiche haue nat knowen the way themself to gyde
  The emperour Otho had ay borne by his syde
  In warre and peas (a glasse) for his pleasaunce
  To se his colour therin; and countenaunce

  And to the entent to make his colour gay
  With Assys mylke he noyntyd oft his skyn
  And shauyd his berde onys euery day
  But for that he offendyd god herein
  After was he sharply punysshyd for this syn
  And put vnto extreme rebuke and shame
  To gyue other example to auoyde the same

  It is forsoth a maner femynyne
  And nat for man to be so elegant
  To suche toyes wanton wymen may inclyne
  A yonge mayde may at her forhede haue pendant
  The vayne myrrour to se hir shape pleasant
  Man sholde nought set by to norysshe his beautye
  But onely manhode strength and audacyte

  The wanton mayde may for hir self ordayne
  Hir call hir coyfe, and suche conceytis newe
  As broches fyletes and oyntmentis souerayne
  And clothynge of dyuers colour and of hewe
  But nowe yonge men the same fourme do ensue
  And to content theyr mad and folysshe mynde
  To wymen they compare themselfe agaynst kynde

  Disorder rayneth as I before haue sayde
  The yonge men takyth womans countenaunce
  And hir aparayll, and wymen ar arayde
  As men: agaynst all lawe and ordynaunce
  Thus man and woman ensue mysgouernaunce
  In theyr behauour is small dyuersyte
  Theyr owne conceyt causeth great enormyte

  The poet Ouyde shewyth in a fable
  Howe that one callyd Pygmalyon by name
  A fygure made vnto hymselfe semblable
  Whiche he in marbyll right craftely dyd frame
  And in so moche he worshypped the same
  Tyll at the last his mynde was past and gone
  And he transformed so was in to that stone

  And if the Poetis fables be all sure
  As by theyr subtyle wordes oft we here
  The childe Narcissus was chaungyd of fygure
  Whyle he behelde into the water clere
  For whyle his shadowe vnto hym dyd apere
  Vpon the same so sore he set his mynde
  That he transformyd was to another kynde.

  But to retorne agayne to our purpose
  And of this sort of Folys to conclude
  If god sholde them to other shape transpose
  That thynke them fayre though they be foule and rude
  Into foule fassyon he many sholde include
  For whyle Folys theyr owne beauty magnyfy
  So growyth the nomber and so they multyply

THENUOY OF BARKLAY THE TRANSLATOUR.

  Blynde man inclere thy wylfull ignoraunce
  Stande nat so great in thy owne conceyte
  Ne in thy lewde fassyon set nat thy pleasaunce
  Whether thou be pore or man of great estate
  Another man moche more shall in the wayte
  Of gode and yll than thou thy self canst do
  Therfore be nat cause to thy self of disceyte
  If one the teche: aply thy mynde therto

 * * * * *


Of lepynges and dauncis and Folys that pas
  theyr tyme in suche vanyte.

[Illustration: That fole that settyth his felycyte
In wanton daunces and lepes immoderate
Hath in my Shyp a rowme for his degre
Bysyde the stere for troublynge of his pate
He god dyspleasyth, whiche doth suche foly hate
Suche lese theyr tyme in vayne and oft therin
Ar many hurtis: and cause of dedely syn.]

  Those folys a place may chalenge in my shyp
  Whiche voyde of wysdome as men out of theyr mynde
  Them selfe delyte to daunce to lepe and skyp
  In compase rennynge lyke to the worlde wyde
  In vnkynde labour, suche folys pleasour fynde
  Rennynge about in this theyr furyous vyce
  Lyke as it were in Bacchus sacryfyce

  Or as the Druydans rennyth in vayne about
  In theyr mad festes vpon the hylle of yde
  Makynge theyr sacrafyce with furour noyse and shout
  Whan theyr madnes settyth theyr wyt asyde
  Or whan the prestis of mars all nyght abyde
  Within theyr temple by vse abhomynable
  To theyr ydollys doynge theyr seruyce detestable

  Lyke as these paynyms hath to theyr ydols done
  Theyr sacryfyce wandrynge in theyr madnes
  Theyr bodyes weryenge, in vayne wastynge their shone
  So do these fowlys them selfe to daunsynge dres
  Sekynge occason of great vnhappynes
  They take suche labour without all hope of gayne
  Without rewarde sure, of werynes and payne

  Say Folys that vse this fury and outrage
  What causyth you to haue delyte therin
  For your great labour say what is your wage
  Forsoth ye can therby no profyte wyn
  But seke occasyon (as I haue sayde) of syn
  And for thy werynge thy fete thus in the dust
  Thou gettest no gayne but cause of carnall lust

  But whan I consyder of this folysshe game
  The firste begynnynge and cause orygynall
  I say the cause therof is worthy blame
  For whan the deuyll to disceyue man mortall
  And do contempt to the hye god eternall
  Vpon a stage had set a Calfe of golde.
  That euery man the same myght clere beholde

  So than the Fende grounde of mysgouernaunce
  Causyd the people this fygure to honour
  As for theyr god and before the same to daunce.
  Whan they were dronkon, thus fell they in errour
  Of Idolatry, and forgate theyr creatour.
  Before this ydoll daunsynge both wyfe and man
  Dispysynge god: Thus daunsynge fyrst began

  Suche blynde folyes and inconuenyence
  Engendryth great hurte and incommodyte
  And sawyth sede wherof groweth great offence
  The grounde of vyce and of all enormyte
  In it is pryde, fowle lust and lecherye
  And whyle lewde lepys ar vysd in the daunce
  Oft frowarde bargayns ar made by countenaunce

  What els is daunsynge but euen a nurcery
  Or els a bayte to purchase and meyntayne
  In yonge hertis the vyle synne of rybawdry
  Them fe*trynge therin, as in a dedely chayne
  And to say trouth in wordes clere and playne
  Venereous people haue all theyr hole pleasaunce
  Theyr vyce to norysshe by this vnthryfty daunce

  And wanton people disposyd vnto syn
  To satysfye theyr mad concupyscence
  With hasty cours vnto this daunsynge ryn
  To seke occasyon of vyle synne and offence
  And to expresse my mynde in short sentence
  This vyciouse game oft tymes doth attyse
  By his lewde synes, chast hartis vnto vyce

  Than it in erth no game is more damnable
  It semyth no peas, but Batayle openly
  They that it vse of myndes seme vnstable
  As mad folke rennynge with clamour showt and cry
  What place is voyde of this furyous foly
  None: so that I dout within a whyle
  These folys the holy churche shall defyle

  Of people what sort or order may we fynde
  Ryche or pore hye or lowe of name
  But by theyr folysshnes, and wanton mynde
  Of eche sort some ar gyuen vnto the same
  The prestis and clerkes to daunce haue no shame
  The frere or monke in his frocke and cowle
  Must daunce in his dortor lepynge to play the fole

  To it comys children, maydes and wyues.
  And flaterynge yonge men to se to haue theyr pray
  The hande in hande great falshode oft contryues
  The olde quean also this madnes wyll assay
  And the olde dotarde thoughe he skantly may
  For age and lamenes stere outher fote or hande
  Yet playeth he the fole with other in the bande

  Than lepe they about as folke past theyr mynde
  With madnes amasyd rennynge in compace
  He moste is commendyd that can moste lewdnes fynde
  Or can most quyckly ren about the place
  There ar all maners vsyd that lacke grace
  Mouynge theyr bodyes in synes full of shame
  Whiche doth theyr hertes to synne right sore inflame

  So oft this vyce doth many one abuse
  That whan they ar departyd from the daunce
  On lust and synne contynually they muse
  Hauynge therin theyr wyll and theyr pleasaunce
  Than fall they oft to great mysgouernaunce
  As folys gyuyn to worke vnprofytable
  So in my shyp they well deserue a babyll.

THENUOY OF BARKLAY

  Do way your daunces ye people moche vnwyse
  Desyst your folysshe pleasour of trauayle
  It is me thynke an vnwyse vse and gyse
  To take suche labour and payne without auayle
  And who that suspectyth his mayde or wyues tayle
  Let hym nat suffer them in the daunce to be
  For in that game thoughe sys or synke them fayle
  The dyse oft renneth vpon the chaunce of thre

 * * * * *


Of nyght watchers and beters of the stretes
playnge by nyght on instrumentes and
vsynge lyke Folyes whan tyme is to
rest.

[Illustration: He is a Fole that wandreth by nyght
In felde or towne, in company or alone
Playnge at his lemmans dore withouten lyght
Tyll all his body be colde as lede or stone
These folys knockynge tyll the nyght be gone
At that season thoughe that they fele no colde
Shall it repent and fele whan they be olde.]

  Nowe wolde I of my boke haue made an ende
  And with my shyp drawen to some hauen or porte
  Stryken my sayle, and all my folys sende
  Vnto the londe, a whyle them selfe to sporte
  But this my purpose is lettyd by a sorte
  Of frantyke folys, wandrynge about by nyght
  For often all yll doers hatyth the day lyght

  Whyle (man) beste and euery lyuely creature
  Refresshe theyr myndes and bodyes with rest
  And slepe: without the whiche none can endure
  And whyle all byrdes drawe them to theyr nest
  These dronken bandes of Folys than doth Jest
  About the stretis, with rumour noyse and cry
  Syngynge theyr folysshe songes of rybawdry

  The furyes ferefull spronge of the flodes of hell
  Vexith these vagabundes in theyr myndes so
  That by no mean can they abyde ne dwell
  Within theyr howsys, but out they nede must go
  More wyldly wandrynge than outher bucke or doo
  Some with theyr harpis another with his lute
  Another with his bagpype or a folysshe flute

  Than mesure they theyr songes of melody
  Before the dores of theyr lemman dere
  Yowlynge with theyr folysshe songe and cry
  So that theyr lemman may theyr great foly here
  And tyll the yordan make them stande arere
  Cast on theyr hede, or tyll the stonys fle
  They nat depart, but couet there styll to be

  But yet more ouer these Folys ar so vnwyse
  That in colde wynter they vse the same madnes
  Whan all the howsys ar lade with snowe and yse
  O mad men amasyd vnstabyll and wytles
  What pleasour take ye in this your folysshenes
  What ioy haue ye to wander thus by nyght
  Saue that yll doers alway hate the lyght

  But folysshe youth doth nat alone this vse
  Come of lowe byrth and sympyll of degre
  But also statis them selfe therein abuse
  With some yonge folys of the spiritualte
  The folysshe pype without all grauyte
  Doth eche degre call to this frantyke game
  The darkenes of nyght expellyth fere of shame

  One barkyth another bletyth lyke a shepe
  Some rore, some countre, some theyr balades fayne
  Another from syngynge gyueth hym to wepe
  Whan his souerayne lady hath of hym dysdayne
  Or shyttyth hym out, and to be short and playne
  Who that of this sort best can play the knaue
  Lokyth of the other the maystery to haue

  The folysshe husbonde oft of this sort is one
  With wanton youth wandrynge by nyght also
  Leuynge his wyfe at home in bed alone
  And gyueth hyr occasyon often to mysdo
  So that whyle he after the owle doth go
  Fedynge the Couko, his wyfe hir tyme doth watche
  Receyuynge another whose egges she doth hatche.

  Therfore ye folys that knowe you of this sort
  To gyue occasyon of synne vnto your wyues
  And all other: I you pray and exort
  Of this your foly to amende your lyues
  For longe nyght watches seldome tymes thryues
  But if it be in labour: good to wyn
  Therfore kepe your dorys: els abyde within

  Thoughe I have touchyd of this enormyte
  In englysshe tunge: yet is it nat so vsed
  In this Royalme as it is beyonde the se
  Yet moche we vse whiche ought to be refusyd
  Of great nyght watchynge we may nat be excusyd
  But our watchynge is in drunken glotony
  More than in syngynge or other meledy

  Whan it is nyght and eche shulde drawe to rest
  Many of our folys great payne and watchynge take
  To proue maystryes and se who may drynke best
  Outher at the Tauerne of wyne, or the ale stake
  Other all nyght watchyth for theyr lemmans sake
  Standynge in corners lyke as it were a spye
  Whether that the weder be, hote, colde, wete, or dry

  Some other Folys range about by nyght
  Prowdely Jettynge as men myndeles or wode
  To seke occasyon with pacyent men to fyght
  Delytynge them in shedynge mennys blode
  Outher els in spoylynge of other mennys gode
  Let these folys with suche lyke and semblable
  Drawe to this barge, here shall they here a bable

THENUOY OF BARCLAY.

  Ye folys that put your bodyes vnto payne
  By nyghtly watchynge, voyde of auauntage
  Leue of your foly or els ye shall complayne
  And mourne it sore if ye lyue vnto age
  For though ye thynke that this your blynde outrage
  Is vnto you no hurte nor preiudyce
  It doth your body and goodes great dammage
  And great cause both to you and yours of vyce.

 * * * * *


Of folysshe beggers and of theyr vanytees.

[Illustration: Syns I haue taken the charge one me
Mo botis and Barges for Folys to aparayle
And so agayne of newe to take the se
I feryd lyst company shulde me fayle
Within my folysshe shyppis to trauayle
But nowe doth beggers them selfe to me present
For fewe of them I fynde of good intent]

  A great company of folys may we fynde
  Amonge beggers, whiche haue theyr hole delyte
  In theyr lewde craft: wherfore I set my mynde
  In this Barge theyr maners, brefely for to write
  For thoughe that nede them greuously do byte.
  Yet is theyr mynde for all theyr pouerte
  To kepe with them of children great plente

  And though that they myght otherwyse well lyue
  And get theyr lyuynge by labour and besynes
  Yet fully they theyr myndes set and gyue
  To lede this lyfe alway in wretchydnes
  The clerke, frere, or monke, whiche hath store of ryches
  For all his lyfe. if he it gyde wysely.
  Wyll yet the beggers offyce occupy

  Suche oft complayne the charge of pouerte
  In garmentis goynge raggyd and to rent
  But yet haue they of ryches great plente
  Whiche in gode vse can neuer of them be spent
  Almys is ordeyned by god omnypotent
  And holy churche: for to be gyuyn in dede
  Vnto good vse, and suche as haue moste nede

  Almes is ordeyned by god our creatour
  For men that lyue in nede and wretchydnes
  Therwith their paynfull lyues to socour
  And nat for ryche that lyues in viciousnes
  But yet suche caytyfs boldly in dare pres
  For their lewde lyfe without all maner drede
  This almes takynge from them that haue most nede

  The abbot, the Pryour, and also theyr couent
  Ar so blyndyd with vnhappy couetyse
  That with theyr owne can they nat be content
  But to haue more, they alway mean deuyse
  Ye: in so moche that some haue founde a gyse
  To fayne theyr bretherne tan in captyuyte
  That they may begge so by auctoryte

  They fayne myracles where none were euer done
  And all for lucre: some other range about
  To gather and begge with some fayned pardon
  And at the alehows at nyght all drynkyth out
  So ren these beggers in company rowt
  By stretis tauernes townes and vyllagys
  No place can well be fre of theyr outragys

  Some begge for byldynges, some for relyques newe
  Of holy sayntis of countreys farre and strange
  And with theyr wordes faynyd and vntrewe
  For cause of Lucre, about they ren and range
  But in a sympyll vyllage, ferme or grange
  Where as these beggers moste sympyll men may fynde
  With theyr fals bonys as relykes they them blynde

  Other beynge stronge and full of lustynes
  And yonge ynoughe to labour for theyr fode
  Gyuyth theyr bodyes fully to slewthfulnes
  The beggers craft thynkynge to them moost good
  Some ray theyr legges and armys ouer with blood
  With leuys and plasters though they be hole and sounde
  Some halt as crypyls, theyr legge falsely vp bounde

  Some other beggers falsly for the nonys
  Disfygure theyr children god wot vnhappely
  Manglynge theyr facys, and brekynge theyr bonys
  To stere the people to pety that passe by
  There stande they beggynge with tedyous shout and cry
  There owne bodyes tournynge to a strange fassion
  To moue suche as passe to pyte and compassyon

  Suche yonge laddys as lusty ar of age
  Myghty and stronge, and wymen in lyke wyse
  Wanton and yonge and lusty of cowrage
  Gyueth them selfe vtterly to this gyse
  The cause is that they labour do despyse
  For theyr mynde is in ydylnes to be styll
  Or els in vyce to wander at theyr wyll

  They paciently theyr prouertye abyde
  Nat for deuocion of herte or of mynde
  But to the intent that at euery tyde
  Other mennys godes sholde them fede and fynde.
  But if they a whyle haue ron in the wynde
  And in theyr hande the staf some hete hath caught
  They neuer after shall leue the beggers craft

  Amonge these beggers also is comonly
  Braulynge debate hatered and chydynge
  Great othes, mockes falshode and enuy
  And one with other euer more fyghtynge
  As for theyr dronkennes and vnsure abydynge
  Theyr rebaudry both in dede and communycacion
  These ar chefe poyntis of theyr occupation

  If the begger haue his staf and his hode
  One bagge behynde and another before
  Than thynkes he hym in the myddes of his goode
  Thoughe that his clothes be raggyd and to tore
  His body nere bare he hath no thought therfore
  And if some man cloth them well to day
  To morowe it shall agayne be solde away

  And if these caytyfes fortune to begge or cry
  For mete or money, on woman or on man
  If one to them that, that they aske deny
  And so depart: anone these beggers than
  Whan he is gone, doth wary curse and ban
  And if another gyue them ought of pyte
  At the next alestake dronken shall it be

  But if that I sholde gather in my barge
  All folysshe beggers, and labour or intende
  To note all theyr vyces, to sore sholde be the charge
  And as I suppose I neuer sholde make an ende.
  Wherfore I counsell them shortly to amende
  Or els theyr lewdnes, synne, and enormyte
  Shall cause men withdrawe theyr almes of charyte

THENUOY OF BARCLAY THE TRANSLATOUR.

  O people vnthrifty gyuen to ydlenes
  Spendynge your youth this wyse in vanyte
  What ioy haue ye to lyue in wretchydnes
  Where ye myght come to better rowme and degre
  By worke, and labour: and so auaunsyd be
  Yet begge ye styll hauynge your ioy therin
  Amende your foly, and lerne ye this of me
  That goddes good sholde nat be spent in syn

Corrections made to printed original.

"He shalbe made parson of Honington or Clist." - 'mde' in original.

"a mistake as to identity" - 'indentity' in original.

"the executours of this my last Will" - 'th executours' in original.

"written [p=] me" - 'written[p=]nce' in original.


==============================================================================

VOLUME THE SECOND

THE SHIP  OF  FOOLS.
VOL.  II.


THE  SHIP  OF  FOOLS

TRANSLATED  BY

ALEXANDER  BARCLAY


VOI>UME  SECOND


EDINBURGH:  WILLIAM  PATERSON
LONDON  :  HENRY  SOTHERAN  &  CO.

MDCCCLXXIV,


Digitized

Iby

the  Internet
in  2014

1

Archive

\

https://archive.org/details/shipoffools02bran


TABULA


[VOLUME  II.]


Of  wymens  malyce  &  wrath, .  .  .  i

Of  the  great  myght  &  powerr  of  Folys,  .  .  12

An  addicion  of  Alexander  barclay  in  the  h^  de  of

kynge  Henry  y^  viij.,  .  .  .  16

Of  y^  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy,  .  ,  18

Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  or  inquysycion  of  dyuers

countres  or  regyons,  .  .  .  .23

Of  folys  y*  stryue  agaynst  theyr  betters  nat  wyllynge

to  se  theyr  foly, .  .  .  .28

Of  folys  that  can  nat  vnderstande  sport  &  yet  wyll

haue  to  do  with  folys,  .  .  .  33

Of  folys  that  hurte  euery  man  nat  wyllynge  to  be

hurt  agayne,  .  .  .  .38

Of  folys  improuyndent,  ....  43
Of  folys  that  stryue  in  the  lawe  for  thynges  of  small

valour,  .  .  .  .  .48

Of  dyshonest  folys  in  wordes  of  rybawdry,  or  vyle

langage, .  .  .  .  -53

Of  the  abusion  of  y'=  spiritualte,  .  .  ^7

Of  carde  players,  and  dysers,  ...  69
or  proude,  vayne  and  superflue  bostys  of  Folys,  .  64


VI


Tabula.


A  rehersinge  of  dyuers  sortes  of  Folys  oppressyd  with

theyr  owne  foly, •  •  •  •  75

Of  the  extorcion  of  men  of  warre,  scrybes  and  other

offycers, ,  .  .  .  .80

Of  folysshe  messangers,  ...  86

Of  the  foly  of  Cokes,  butlers,  and  other  offycers  of

housholde,  .....  90
Of  the  pryde  of  Churles  and  rude  men  of  the

countrey, .  .  .  .  -95

Of  folys  that  despise  and  abhorre  pouertye,  .  99
Of  suche  Folys  as  begyn  to  do  well  and  contynue  nat,  1 08
Of  folys  that  despyse  deth  and  make  no  prouysyon

therfore, .  .  .  ,  .113

Of  folys  that  despyse  god, .  .  .123

Of  blasphemers  of  god,  .  .  .  128

Of  the  plage  and  indignacyon  of  god, .  .  136

Of  folysshe  exchaunges,  .  .  .  141

Of  children  that  dysdayne  to  honoure  &  worshyp

theyr  parentis, .  .  .  .147

Of  claterynge  and  vayne  langage  vsyd  of  prestes

&  clerkes  in  y"^  Q^uere,  .  .  .153

<I  Of  the  elacion  or  bostynge  of  pryde,  .  .  158

Of  vsures  and  okerers,  .  .  .  .166

Of  the  vayne  hope  y*^  folys  haue  to  succede  to  heryt-

age  of  men  yet  lyuynge,  .  '  >  .  .  .  170
Of  the  vyce  of  slouthe,  .  .  .184

Of  Folys  that  gyue  &  that  after  repent  of  that  they

haue  gyuen,  .  .  .  . .  179

Of  Folys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye, .  .  174

Of  mysbeleuynge folys  as  Sarrazyns,  Paynems,

turkes  and  other  suche  lyke,  .  .  .  188


Tabula.


Vll


Of  the  ruyne,  inclynacyon  and  decay  of  the  fayth  of

Christ  by  slouthe  of  estatis, .  .  .  192

A  specyall  exhortacion  and  lawde  of  the  kynge

Henry  the  viij.,  ....  205
Of  flaterers  and  glosers,  . " »  .  210

Of  taleberers  &  Folys  of  lyght  credence  vnto  the  same,  2 1 4
Of  marchauntis  and  other  occupyers  y^  vse  falshode

and  gyle, .  .  .  .  .219

Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist, .  .  .224

Of  hym  that  dare  nat  vtter  the  trouthe  for  fere  of

displeasour,  &c., .  .  .  .231

Of  suche  as  withdrawe  &  let  other  from  good  dedes,  235
Of  leuyng  gode  warkes  vndone,  .  .  239

Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdom, .  .  .  244

Of  folys  that  wyl  nat  beware  of  mysfortune,  .  249
Of  bacbyters  of  good  workes  &  ayenst  suche  as  shall

dysprayse  this  boke,  .  .  .  254

Of  the  immoderate  vylenes  in  maners  vsed  at  the

table,  .....  259

Of  folys  disgysed  with  visers  and  other  counterfayt

apparayle, .  .  .  .  .267

The  discripcion  of  a  wyse  man,  .  .  .273

C  Alexander  barclay  to  his  welbeloued  frende  syr

Johnn  Bysshop  of  Excester, ,  .  .  278

Of  folys  that  despyse  wysdome  &  Phylosophy  and

a  commendacion  of  the  same,  .  .  .  281

Of  concertacyon  or  stryuyng  bytwene  vertue  &  vol-

uptuosyte, .  .  .  .  .286

The  obieccion  of  lust  blamynge  vertue, .  .  289

The  answere  of  vertue  agaynst  the  obieccion  of

voluptuosyte,  .  ,  .  .296


Vlll


Tabula.


The  vnyuersall  and  generall  Shyp  or  Barge  :  wherin

they  rowe  that  erst  hath  had  no  charge,  .  306

The  vnyuersall  shyp  of  craftysmen  or  laborers,  .  313
Of  folys  that  ar  to  worldly, .  .  .  317

A  brefe  addicion  of  the  syngularyte  of  some  newe

Folys,  .  .  .  .  .322

C  A  conclusion  of  this  Boke  with  a  Balade  of  our  Lady,  333


Of  the  yre  immoderate,  the  wrath  and
great  lewdnes  of  wymen.


For  wrathfull  men  1  purposyd  to  ordayne
A  slowe  Asse  theyr  hastynes  to  asswage
But  nowe  must  they  forgo  that  beste  agayne
For  wymen  clayme  the  same  by  theyr  great  rage
Theyr  furour  passyth,  in  dede  and  in  langage
All  men  in  erth  :  none  may  with  them  compare
He  is  well  happy  whiche  may  of  them  be  ware.

VOL.  II.  A


2  Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.

My  balade  bare  of  frute  and  eloquence
And  I  also  with  all  my  herte  and  mynde
Wolde  wymen  lawde  and  prayse  with  reuerence
And  namely  suche  as  ar  founde  true  and  kynde
But  of  that  sort,  but  fewe  a  man  shall  fynde
So  the  yll  cause,  and  theyr  nature  cruel!
To  say  the  trouth  doth  me  constrayne  and  bynde
And  of  theyr  vyces  somwhat  brefely  to  tell

I  haue  longe  louyd,  loue  nowe,  and  euer  shall
Them  to  commende  that  in  vertue  haue  delyte
And  that  ar  good  and  chaste  namely  of  all
But  bad,  that  full  of  wrath  ar,  and  despyte
It  is  conuenyent  of  theyr  madnes  to  wryte
And  theyr  condycions  repreue  without  all  drede
So  am  I  bolder  and  redyer  to  endyte
For  no  wyse  woman  shall  these  rebukes  rede

The  mother  of  Graccus. Cornelia  prudent
Chaste  and  discrete,  and  of  beauty  souerayne
Shall  nat  my  Balade  rede  :  for  intent
Was  euer  in  vertue,  hir  honour  to  mentayne
No  godly  woman,  that  doth  from  synne  refrayne
Shall  I  disprayse  but  rather  them  defende
Therfore  in  my  wordes  I  shall  boldly  and  playne
Lawde  iust  and  good,  and  the  yll  discommende

She  that  hath  bene  brought  vp  in  honestye
Fedynge  hir  mynde  with  wysdome  and  prudence
And  kept  hir  gode  name  in  youth  by  chastyte
The  fere  of  God  alway  in  hir  presence


Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewclnes  of  wymen,  3

Suche  ren  nat  lyghtly  to  vyle  synne  and  offence
And  doth  no  thynge,  but  gode  and  commendable
O  that  suche  one  is  worthy  reuerence
Better  than  all  golde,  than  ryches  more  lawdable

A  woman  iust  and  to  goodnes  inclyned
If  wrath  and  yre  hir  husbonde  do  inflame
With  hir  good  counsell  shall  mytigate  his  mynde
And  peas  his  wrath,  an  example  of  the  same
We  haue  by  kynge  Assuerus  by  name
Whiche  coramaundyd  all  the  hebreans  to  be  slayne
But  his  Queue  hester  worthy  of  dede  and  fame
With  hir  fayre  wordes  apeasyd  hym  agayne

The  kynge  Dauyd  despysed  by  Naball

That  wronge  purposyd  to  punysshe  hastely

Yet  was  he  apaysyd  by  a  woman  lyberall

Abygayll  by  name,  whiche  very  womanly

Causyd  hym  that  yre  to  temper  by  and  by

His  hande  withdrawynge,  and  swerde  of  punysshment

So  good  wymen  counsell  well  and  rightwysely

But  yll  gyue  counsell  after  the  worst  intent

Salomon  the  wyse  infect  with  the  foly
Of  wymens  counsell  and  blynde  aduysement
To  his  great  hurte  fell  to  Idolatry
Renounsynge  the  seruyce  of  god  omnypotent
Of  womans  tunge  :  who  can  the  malyce  stent
Forsoth  no  man  :  for  all  theyr  felycyte
Is  set  in  spekynge  of  wordes  imprudent
For  in  theyr  tunge  is  all  theyr  cruelte


4  Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.

Theyr  cruell  tunge  is  sharper  than  a  dart
Therwith  they  hibour  to  brynge  men  to  yll  name
And  with  the  same  they  stryke  some  to  the  herte
With  thoughtful!  wounde,  no  thynge  can  hele  the  same
They  neuer  haue  done,  and  yet  haue  they  no  shame
Without  occasyon  to  chyde  with  noyse  and  cry
In  cruell  wordes  is  all  theyr  myrth  and  game
Sawynge  theyr  sede  of  chatrynge  lyke  the  pye

O  god  aboue :  o  kynge  moste  glorious

Of  heuen  and  erth  the  whiche  hast  rauysshyd  hell

Delyuer  vs  from  the  tungys  venemous

Of  frowarde  wymen,  cursyd  and  cruell

For  a  thousande  mo  myscheuys  than  man  can  tell

Procede  of  theyr  mad  and  disordred  langage

One  woman  chydynge  raakyth  gretter  yell

Than  sholde  an  hundreth  pyes  in  one  cage

The  pore  husbonde  with  some  is  so  bested

That  he  no  rest  hath  one  houre  of  the  day

Nor  in  the  nyght  whan  he  is  in  his  bed

There  she  hym  techyth  a  brawlynge  crede  to  say

And  if  he  there  ought  vnto  hir  denay

She  gronyth  grutchynge,  with  hir  complayntis  styll

Ye  foure  dayes  after  let  hym  do  what  he  may  ■  ■

He  shall  hir  nat  asswage  tyll  she  hath  chid  hir  fyll

Thus  is  hir  chydynge  to  this  pore  man  great  wo
Moreouer  in  woman  is  gyle  and  sotyltye
And  secrete  malyce  whiche  none  can  take  hir  fro
And  for  that  she  wolde  fayne  commendyd  be


wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.  5


She  hym  commaundeth  as  moche  more  wyse  than  he
In  hir  owne  conceyt  despysynge  his  doctryne
And  if  hir  husbonde  to  any  thynge  agre
By  no  maner  mean  wyll  she  therto  inclyne

She  wyll  that  no  thynge  be  perfourmyd  of  his  wyll
All  must  be  rulyd  after  hir  folysshe  mynde
And  that  in  thynges,  wherin  she  hath  no  skyll.
So  oft  the  husbonde  fawtles  great  hurte  doth  fynde
And  also  lossys  whiche  his  herte  sharply  bynde
By  the  lewde  dedys  and  langage  of  his  wyfe
And  though  a  womans  wordes  be  but  wynde
Yet  of  them  growe  bothe  :  murder  losse  and  stryfe

Right  so  Amphyon  of  Thebes  myghty  kynge
For  the  offences :  and  selfe  wyll  of  his  wyfe
Bycause  he  dyd  hir  wyll  in  euery  thynge
For  his  owne  foly  at  laste  he  lost  his  lyfe
Wordes  amonge  wymen  is  comon  and  ryfe
And  fere  of  shame,  from  many  gone  is  quyte
So  one  Calphurnia  in  a  case  playntyfe
Hir  bare  tayle  shewyd  to  the  iuge  in  despyte

But  for  to  speke  of  womans  wrath  and  yre
No  beste  in  erthe  to  wrath  is  so  inclynde
As  she :  hir  wrath  in  hete  passyth  hote  fyre
No  tunge  can  tell  the  rancour  of  hir  mynde
This  wrath  in  woman  is  rotyd  so  by  kynde
That  if  she  be  onys  set  in  hir  madnesse
She  passyth  all  the  cruell  bestis  of  Inde
The  bere  the  wolf  fell  lyon,  and  the  lyones.


6  Of  the  wrath  and  ^reat  lewdnes  of  wymen.


The  cruell  Tyger  to  woman  is  nat  lyke

Whiche  whan  hir  whelpis  from  hir  den  taken  be

Rangyth  about  in  furour  them  to  seke

For  madnes  gnawynge  and  terynge  stocke  and  tre

A  wrathful!  woman  is  yet  more  mad  than  she

Cruell  Medea  doth  us  example  shewe

Of  womans  furour  great  wrath  and  cruelte

Whiche  hir  owne  children  dyd  all  to  pecis  hewe

Progne  also  may  be  to  vs  example

Whiche  sode  hir  owne  childe  after  she  had  hym  slayne

The  story  in  Ouyde  is  wryten  longe  and  ample

But  if  Juuenall  had  nat  wryten  playne

Of  wymen  the  wrath,  theyr  cruelte  and  trayne

The  same  shulde  nowe  haue  wryten  ben  by  me

But  foly  it  is  to  wryte  the  same  agayne.

Therfore  I  leue  it  for  cause  of  breuyte

The  herte  of  woman  is  ay  deuysynge  scornys

Disceyt  and  cautele  falshode  lesynge  and  gyle

It  is  more  sharpe  than  knyfe,  pryckynge  as  thornes

If  she  be  pacient :  it  lastyth  but  a  whyle

Hir  stomacke  swellyth  by  bytter  gall  and  vyle

Hir  body  full  of  rancour  and  madnes

But  where  she  settyth,  man  by  worde  to  reuyle

From  hir  stynkynge  mouth  commyth  all  vnhappynes

No  maner  vyce  shall  she  vntouchyd  leue
She  troubleth  maners  of  men  that  ar  lawdable
And  of  theyr  gode  name  doth  falsly  them  bereue
She  troublyth  right  and  peas  most  profytable


Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.  7

Brakynge  hir  fayth  by  synne  abhomynable
The  bed  defylynge,  Dean  can  nat  withdrawe
Them  from  that  vyse  theyr  mynde  is  so  vnstable
They  take  theyr  pleasour  in  synne  agaynst  the  lawe

She  that  hir  mynde  doth  to  this  vyce  subdue

Gyuynge  hir  body  to  this  mysgouernaunce

To  husbonde,  nor  to  none  other  man  is  true

Yet  kepeth  she  a  solem  countenaunce

As  none  were  lyke  hir  in  Englonde  nor  in  Fraunce

In  all  vertues,  and  knowynge  nought  of  syn

But  if  that  she  were  well  sought  she  is  perchaunce

A  wolfe  or  gote  within  a  Lammys  skyn

A  woman  is  lyke  a  clyster  laxatyf

In  mannys  purs  voydynge  that  is  within

If  man  shulde  euer  be  rulyd  by  his  wyfe

Hir  proude  aparayle  sholde  make  his  thryst  full  thyn

As  well  can  some  spende  as  theyr  good  man  can  wyn

And  moche  faster,  but  if  that  coyne  do  fayle

She  labowryth  nat  to  get  it  without  syn

But  craftely  to  forge  it  with  hir  tayle

I  fynde  in  the  worlde  that  there  be  thynges  thre
Right  harde  to  knowe,  the  fourth  that  no  man  may
Knowe  nor  perceyue,  first,  whan  a  byrde  doth  fle
Alonge  in  the  ayre  :  no  man  can  spye  hir  way
The  way  of  a  Shyp  in  the  se  thoughe  it  be  day
Harde  is  to  se  whiche  way  the  shyp  hath  gone
The  thirde  harde  thynge  as  I  have  oft  heard  say
Is  the  way  of  a  serpent  ouer  a  stone


8 Of  the  wrath  and  p^reat  lewdnes  of  wymen.


But  the  fourth  way  that  of  all  hardest  is
Of  yonge  man  is,  in  youthes  lustynes
A  vycyous  womans  way  is  lyke  to  this
Whiche  after  hir  synne  and  great  vnhappyness
Fedyth  hir  with  mete  of  blynde  delyciousnes
Than  wypyth  hir  mouth  and  sayth  in  audyence
With  mynde  assured  and  past  all  shamefastnes
I  haue  nat  commyttyd  yll,  synne  nor  any  offence

Thre  other  thynges  on  erth  I  fynde  certayne
Whiche  troubleth  the  grounde  and  also  the  see
The  fourth  nouther  see  nor  londe  may  well  sustayne
The  firste  is  a  churle  that  hath  a  bonde  man  be
And  so  by  fortune  come  vnto  hye  degre
The  seconde  is  a  fole  whan  he  is  dronke  and  full.
The  thirde  a  wrathful)  woman,  full  of  cruelte
He  that  hir  weddyth,  hath  a  crowe  to  pull

Yet  is  the  fourth  wors  and  more  eleuate
That  is  a  hande  mayde  lowe  of  hir  lynage
Promotyd  from  a  begger  and  so  come  to  estate
Succedynge  hir  lady  as  heyr  in  herytage
Of  suche  procedeth  moche  malyce  and  outrage
Disdayne  great  scorne,  vilany  and  debate
For  the  frenche  man,  sayth  in  his  langage
No  thynge  is  wors  than  a  churle  made  a  state  •

I  wolde  fayne  cesse  of  womans  gyle  and  treason
And  theyr  great  falshode  whiche  none  can  well  defende
I  nought  wyll  speke,  howe  some  by  mortall  poyson
Theyr  husbondes  brynge  to  sodayne  deth  and  ende


Of  the  wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.

Examples  habunde  :  who  lyst  therto  intende

Of  Agrippina,  and  Poncia  wode  of  mynde

Whiche  on  theyr  husbondes  dyd  mortall  hande  extende

Of  many  suche  we  may  in  wrytynge  fynde

"What  shall  I  wryte  the  cursyd  cruelte  ^
Of  the  susters  of  Danaides  echone
Fyfty  in  nomber,  whiche  by  iniquyte
Slewe  all  their  husbondes  reseruyd  one  alone

0  chast  lucres,  alas  where  art  thou  gone
From  theyr  presence  all  wymen  ner,  the  chace
Thou  art  belouyd,  nowe  almost  of  none

And  bawdy  tays  hath  nowe  thy  rowme  and  place

Fals  Clytymnestra  cruell  of  hir  dede

May  trouble  the  hertis  of  all  men  on  the  grounde

And  cause  them  of  other  suche  to  take  hede

Whose  manyfolde  malyce  doth  mynde  of  man  confounde

The  prudent  Porcia  to  fewe  men  nowe  is  bounde

Or  associat  by  the  way  of  mariage

This  Porcia  kept  hir  body  chast  and  sounde

Trewe  to  hir  husbonde  Cato  the  great  sage

The  Chast  Sabyn  is  nat  weddyd  nowe  a  dayes
To  many  men  :  as  she  was  wont  to  be

1  meane  that  fewe  inclyne,  nowe  to  hir  wayes
"Wherfore  I  say  that  well  happy  is  he

That  hath  a  woman  kepynge  hir  honeste
Pacient  of  mynde,  in  suche  is  great  confort
She  is  a  Jewell  that  louyth  chastyte
It  is  pyte  that  so  fewe,  be  of  that  sort


I  o  Of  the  wrath  and  ^reat  lewdnes  of  wymen.


Ye  gentyll  wymen,  and  other  great  and  small

Be  nat  displeasyd  with  these  true  cours  sentences

For  certaynly  I  haue  nat  wryten  all

The  vyce  of  wymen  theyr  synnes  nor  offences

If  I  had  red  all  the  lyberall  sciences

And  all  my  lyfe  shulde  there  about  intende

Yet  coude  I  neuer  wryte  all  inconuenyences

By  wymen  done,  nor  theyr  malyce  comprehende

But  whyle  I  lyue  the  good  shall  I  commende
And  them  exalt  at  euery  tyme  and  season
I  may  haue  leyser  ynoughe  therto  tyntende
Syns  of  them  is  no  plenty  but  great  geason
But  suche  folys  as  ar  voyde  of  all  reason
And  shame  to  all  wymen  by  theyr  mysgouernaunce
As  powlynge  yre  disceyte  sclaunder  and  treason
Them  shall  I  blame  with  wrathfuU  countenannce

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  translatour.
Ye  wrathfull  wymen  by  vyce  lesynge  your  name
Correct  your  selfe,  and  labour  ye  with  payne
In  your  lyuynge  for  to  deserue  no  blame
Assay  with  mekenes  to  get  your  name  agayne
By  that  mean  may  ye,  all  your  wyll  obtayne
Let  chastyte  you  gyde  and  pacience
For  to  be  frowarde,  (it  is  a  thynge  in  vayne
Vnto  hym  to  whom  ye  owe  obedyence

The  lawe  commaundyth  you  to  do  reuerence
Vnto  your  spousys  with  honour  and  mekenesse


wrath  and  great  lewdnes  of  wymen.  1 1


And  nat  displease  hym  by  your  wylfull  offence
As  hasty  langage  disceyte  and  vnkyndnes
If  ye  lyue  well  than  shall  God  sende  riches
To  you  in  erth,  with  welth  and  ioy  mundayne
And  if  ye  fortune  to  fall  in  to  lewdnes
These  great  gyftis  shall  ye  iustly  lese  agayne


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  of  Foly


Blynde  foly  hath  hir  tentis  abrode  displayde
In  euery  place,  from  them  no  felde  is  fre.
With  hir  madnes,  the  worlde  is  hole  dismayde
She  hath  all  men  in  hir  captyuyte
But  namely  suche  as  ar  of  moste  degre
Of  most  riches  power  lynage  and  myght
Vnder  hir  standard  submyt  them  selfe  to  fyght


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  of  folys. 1 3

Thou  folysshe  man  trustynge  in  thy  ryches
Therby  contendynge  to  haue  preemynence
Howe  be  it  that  thou  art  gyuen  to  viciousnes
And  none  so  bolde  to  shewe  the  thy  offence
The  more  thou  errest  in  thy  blynde  negligence
For  if  that  thou  be  hye  of  rowme  and  name
If  thou  offende  the  more  shall  be  thy  shame

Thoughe  all  thy  wordes  be  full  of  folysshenes

And  all  thy  dedys  to  no  good  ende  do  come

Yet  wylt  thou  be  reputyd  in  ryches

Bebefore  all  other  and  also  in  wysdome

O  howe  oft  tymes  (of  these  folys)  wyll  some

Commende  them  self  and  lawde  their  glorious  name

Whan  they  se  that  none  other  wyll  do  the  same

These  folys  them  boste  of  dedys  of  valyaunce
And  worthy  actis  done  by  them  in  batayle
Howe  be  it  that  lawde  wherby  man  doth  auaunce
Hym  self  by  his  owne  mouth  is  of  but  small  auayle
And  vyle  before  men  of  wysdome  and  counsayle
But  suche  fowlys  that  of  eche  hatyd  be
Them  self  may  commende  by  gode  auctoryte.

These  Folys  say  that  londe  is  fortunate
Whiche  is  gouernyd,  by  ryche  Prynce  or  kynge
But  better  is  that  londe  whiche  longyth  to  a  state
Whiche  is  induyd  with  wysdome  and  cunnynge
Workynge  by  counsell  in  euery  maner  thynge
For  who  that  rayneth  in  wysdome  and  vertue
The  great  Vlixes  shall  scantly  hym  subdue


1 4 Of  the  great  myght  and  power  offolys.

A  wyse  Prynce  gydeth  hymselfe  by  reason

And  his  Realme  by  Justyce  and  equyte

Ordeynynge  eche  thynge,  accordynge  to  the  season

Nowe  with  rygour  :  and  oft  by  benygnyte.

Nat  beynge  parcyall  to  hye  nor  lowe  degre

No  coyne  nor  brybe  can  change  or  turne  his  mynde

But  so  he  iugeth  as  lawe  and  right  doth  bynde

Suche  louyth  vertue,  next  god  omnypotent
And  grace  hym  gydeth  with  godly  chastyte
Wherby  his  Realme  becommyth  excellent
His  londe  increasynge  in  great  prosperyte
His  counsell  discrete  and  full  of  grauyte
Graciously' gydeth  the  subiectis  on  his  grounde
And  so  departynge  this  Prynce  in  heuyn  is  crownde

Well  is  that  londe  and  ioyous  may  it  be
Whiche  is  defendyd  by  suche  a  noble  estate
But  wo  be  that  londe,  whose  crowne  of  royalte
Is  gyuen  to  a  childe,  whose  counsell  drynketh  late
Gyuen  to  the  wombe,  to  Ryot  and  debate
Suche  frowarde  counsell  shall  biynde  his  innocence
And  cause  hym  decay  from  his  hye  excellence

A  fole  promotyd  to  riches  and  renowne
Syttynge  in  his  stage  or  chayre  of  rowme  royal!
Blyndeth  iustyce  tournynge  the  lawes  vp  set  downe
By  vyle  rewardes  and  gyftis  temporall
Another  by  fauour^  letteth  true  iustyce  fall
Damnynge  innocence  by  fals  iniquyte
Thus  talsly  ouerthrowen  is  iust  symplycyte


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  offolys. 1 5


Justyce  ought  be  wayed  in  an  euyn  balance
By  egall  mesure,  all  fauour  set  a  syde
Nat  rygorously  for  wrath  or  displeasaunce
The  fere  of  god  ought  a  iuges  mynde  to  gyde
But  moche  I  fere  lyst  the  fals  sede  abyde
In  erthe  yet  :  of  them  whiche  by  fals  polecy
Vnto  deth  iuged  Susanna  wrongfully

And  of  Andronicus  whiche  hath  Onias  slayne
Thoughe  both  be  dede,  the  sede  of  them  abyde
Wherof  fals  traytours  begyn  to  growe  agayne
Infectynge  falsly  the  worlde  on  euery  side
Maystershyp,  and  money  euery  thynge  doth  gyde
Bynadab  by  gyftis  hath  broke  his  othe  alas
Tryphon  by  the  same  disceyued  Jonathas

In  hope  of  brybes  men  of  great  dignyte
Blyndyth  the  lawes,  and  some  doth  oft  betray
Theyr  kynge  and  countrey  sellynge  theyr  honeste
Example  of  Jugurtha  whiche  oft  by  Rome  dyd  say
Whyle  he  frome  it  departyd  on  a  day
O  Rome  Rome,  who  that  had  store  of  golde
By  thy  owne  gyders,  thou  falsly  sholde  be  solde

Trust  me  (on  grounde,  no  maner  man  we  fynde

Of  so  great  wrath  malyce  nor  rancoure

But  the  holy  Crosse  shall  mytygate  his  mynde

All  men  doth  it  great  worshyp  and  honour

Money  ouer  man  is  like  a  conquerour

No  herte  so  stronge  whiche  it  doth  nat  ouercome

It  is  preferred  both  vertue  and  wysdome


I  6  Of  the  great  myght  and  power  offolys.


Whan  mony  labours  it  leuyth  nought  vndone
It  all  ouercomyth  with  hye  and  lowe  degre
And  shortly  to  speke  for  a  conclusyon
It  thousandes  blyndetli  of  men  of  dignyte
With  dyuers  folyes,  whiche  they  themself  nat  se
Thus  doth  the  nomber  of  Folys  rayne  so  wyde
Ouer  all  the  worlde :  that  no  man  can  them  gyde.

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  Transi.atour.
O  noble  prynces,  in  worshyp  decorate
Infix  your  myndes  to  vertue  and  prudence
Remember  it  is  more  dishonour  to  a  state
Than  to  a  sympyll  man  to  fall  to  vyle  offence
And  where  as  of  God  ye  haue  preemynence
Aboue  lowe  people,  labour  with  full  intent
To  pass  them  in  vertue,  and  so  with  dylygence
Lerne  to  lyue  by  the  rede  Rose  redolent  ,

Though  that  we  Brytons  be  fully  separate
From  all  the  worlde  as  is  sene  by  euydence
Wallyd  with  the  se,  and  longe  ben  in  debate
By  insurreccion  yet  God  hath  made  defence
By  his  prouysion  ordeyned  us  a  prynce.
In  all  vertues  most  noble  and  excellent
This  prynce  is  Harry  clene  of  conscience
Smellynge  as  the  Rose  ay  freshe  and  redolent

Drawe  nere  ye  Prynces  of  myndes  eleuate
Meknes  may  ye  lerne  beynge  in  his  presence  \.
And  godly  wysdome  as  hath  apered  late
In  dyuers  dedys  done,  by  his  excellence


Of  the  great  myght  and  power  of  folys.  i  7


Subduynge  without  blode  great  inconuenyence
Punysshynge  the  proude,  louynge  the  innocent
Wherfore  to  his  dedys  gyue  your  aduertence
Folowynge  the  smell  of  the  Rose  redolent

By  his  reygne  is  all  Englonde  lawreat
With  godly  peas  nat  nedynge  great  defence
Murdred  is  Mars,  and  with  woundes  sawciate
The  bondys  of  peas  hath  dryuen  the  tyrant  hens
Banysshed  is  batayle  by  his  magnyficence
And  peas  confermyd  by  god  omnypotent
The  blynde  Venus  chefe  grounde  of  neglygence
Is  exyled  from  the  rede  Rose  redolent

In  hym  is  iustyce  with  petye  sociate
Vpon  the  poor  he  spareth  no  expence
Nor  on  the  Churche  after  lyke  maner  rate
Promotynge  men  of  wysdome  and  science
Seruynge  his  maker  with  loue  and  reuerence
Wherfore  O  englonde  be  true  of  thy  intent
With  faythfull  herte  do  hym  obedyence
Thanke  god  whiche  hath  the  Rose  vnto  the  sent


VOL.  II.


Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy.


He  is  forsoth  of  purpose  vayne  and  blynde

Of  mynde  mysbeleuynge  and  without  aduysement

Whiche  stedfastly  thynkyth  in  his  mynde

To  knowe  thynges  to  come  playne  and  euydent

Onely  by  the  sterrys  of  the  fyrmament

Yet  chui  lys  voyde  of  cunnynge  and  wysdome

Ar  nowe  a  dayes  Astronomyei  s  become


Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy. 1 9


Here  call  we  to  our  folysshe  company
Suche  folys  as  labour  and  stody  with  great  payne
To  iuge  the  planetis,  by  theyr  Astronomy
And  other  craftis  without  profyte  and  vayne
Come  hyther  Astronomyers  haue  ye  no  disdayne
Ye  planetystis  and  wytches,  and  other  of  this  sort
Whiche  honour  the  sterres  onely :  as  your  confort

Suche  iuge  the  dedys  of  men  both  more  and  les
Expoundynge  the  sterres  by  theyr  vayne  iugement
They  labour  wenynge  by  theyr  folysshnes
To  knowe  the  secrete  of  god  omnypotent
On  this  vayne  stody  so  set  is  theyr  intent
That  what  so  euer  they  in  the  sterres  se
Without  all  dout  they  thynke  the  same  shall  be

On  the  sterrys  is  all  theyr  felycyte
And  in  the  planetis  ar  they  full  dilygent
And  than  vtter  with  great  audacyte
All  that  the  same  do  showe  or  represent
The  preuy  workynges  of  euery  element
And  secrete  causys  of  other  bodyes  aboue.
They  note  to  knowe  to  what  effect  they  moue

Some  gase  vpon  the  wandrynge  of  the  mone
Another  deuysyth  the  cours  of  Phebus  clere
Gasynge  on  the  Sonne  at  mornynge  nyght  or  none
And  by  other  planetis  shewyth  what  doth  apere
Howe  some  of  them  whan  they  do  gyde  the  yere
Engendreth  plenty  pleasour  myrth  and  ioy
And  howe  some  other  doth  man  and  beste  destroy


2  0 Of  the  vayiie  cure  of  Astrojwmy.


Some  techyth  what  thynge  sad  Saturne  doth  manace
And  what  cruell  Mars  doth  note  and  signifye
Some  expoundyth  Venus  with  hir  pleasaunt  face
Howe  she  men  bryngyth  oft  tyme  to  vylany
Another  is  in  hande  to  trete  of  Marcury
Howe  eche  of  these  planetis  doth  men  predestynate
And  howe  Jupiter  theyr  wrath  doth  mytygate

These  folys  say  that  in  theyr  bokes  they  fynde
That  men  borne  vnder  the  constellacion
Of  Saturne  :  to  theft  and  robbynge  ar  inclynyd
Yet  fynde  we  suche  true  ofte  by  probacion
And  gode  and  iust  without  all  decepcion
They  say  that  children  of  Mars  without  fayle
Shall  be  disposyd  and  full  gyuen  to  Batayle

Yet  fynde  we  often  by  playne  experience

That  suche  as  vnder  this  planete  borne  be

Ar  nat  inclyned  after  theyr  sentence

But  gyuen  ay  to  peas  and  tranquyllyte

Right  so  by  Venus  we  often  tymes  se

That  though  she  dispose  hir  children  vnto  lust

And  bodely  pleasour,  yet  ar  they :  chast  and  iust

Thus  it  aperyth  both  playne  and  openly

That  it  is  foly  to  gyue  great  confydence

To  the  vnsure  science  of  Astronomy

Wherfore  haue  done  Just  man,  note  this  sentence

A  man  of  wysdome  vertue  and  science

If  he  the  wayes  of  vyces  set  asyde

Shall  gyde  the  sterris,  and  they  shall  hym  nat  gyde


Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Astronomy. 1 1


Thynke  well  the  sterris  and  eche  elyment
The  hole  firmament  and  planetis  euerychone
Stande  in  the  handes  of  god  omnypotent
None  can  them  gyde  saue  this  hye  lorde  alone
Therfore  mad  man,  let  thy  foly  be  gone
Wylt  thou  knowe  the  secretis  of  thy  creatour
Leue  of  thy  blyndnes,  thy  foly  and  furour

Takest  thou  this  labour  and  charge  vpon  the
As  who  sayth  god  whiche  reyneth  eternall
Wolde  shewe  his  secretis  and  godly  pryuytye
By  sterre  or  planete  to  any  man  mortall
Wherfore  it  is  best  me  thynke  that  we  leue  all
Vnto  the  iugement  and  wyll  of  god  aboue
Whiche  gydeth  all :  howe  euer  the  sterris  moue

He  by  his  myght  hath  made  the  fyrmament

With  all  the  sterres  and  planetis  of  the  same

Whiche  at  his  wyll  ar  euer  obedyent

And  he  them  rulyth,  therfore  what  hurt  or  shame

What  mysfortune  aduersyte  or  blame

Can  all  the  planetis  to  man  or  childe  pretende

If  god  moste  glorious  by  his  myght  vs  defende

Thus  is  it  foly,  voyde  labour  and  vanyte

To  gyue  great  credence  vnto  Astronomy

It  is  great  Foly  also  in  certaynte

To  trust  vnto  fortune,  to  byrth  or  desteny

A  vertuouse  lyuer  may  all  the  same  defye

Lyue  well  and  than  trust  surely  to  goddes  grace

The  sterris  ne  fortune  shall  in  the  haue  no  place.


2  2 Of  the  vayne  cure  of  Asironomy.


Thenuoy  of  Barklay.

Leue  of  your  foly,  whiche  labour  this  science

And  let  this  your  clokyd  errour  be  refusyd

Vnto  the  sterns  gyue  nat  to  great  credence

For  many  one  therby  hath  ben  abusyd.

And  many  one  haue  stodyed  sore  and  musyd

To  wryte  Pronosticacions,  whiche  haue  be  founde

Of  none  effect,  and  than  falsly  excusyd

For  suche  shewe  before  after  as  they  ar  bounde.


Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  and  inquisicion
of  dyuers  contrees  and  regyons.


Who  that  is  besy  to  mesure  and  compace
The  heuyn  and  erth  and  all  the  worlde  large
Describynge  the  clymatis  and  folke  of  euery  place
He  is  a  fole  and  hath  a  greuous  charge
Without  auauntage,  wherfore  let  hym  discharge
Hym  selfe,  of  that  fole  whiche  in  his  necke  doth  syt
About  suche  folyes  dullynge  his  mynde  and  wyt.


2  4  Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  and  inquisicion


That  fole,  of  wysdome  and  reason  doth  fayle
And  also  discression  labowrynge  for  nought.
And  in  this  shyp  shall  helpe  to  drawe  the  sayle
Which  day  and  nyght  infixeth  all  his  thought
To  haue  the  hole  worlde  within  his  body  brought
Mesurynge  the  costes  of  euery  royalme  and  lande
And  clymatis,  with  his  compace,  in  his  hande

He  coueytyth  to  knowe,  and  compryse  in  his  mynde

Euery  regyon  and  euery  sundry  place

Whiche  ar  nat  knowen  to  any  of  mankynde

And  neuer  shall  be  without  a  specyall  grace

Yet  suche  folys  take  pleasour  and  solace

The  length  and  brede  of  the  worlde  to  mesure

In  vayle  besynes,  takynge  great  charge  and  cure

They  set  great  stody  labour  and  besynes

To  knowe  the  people  that  in  the  east  abyde

And  by  and  by  theyr  mesures  after  dres

To  knowe  what  folke  the  west  and  north  part  gyde

And  who  the  sowth,  thus  all  the  worlde  wyde

By  these  folys  is  meated  by  ieometry

Yet  knowe  they  scant  theyr  owne  vnwyse  body

Another  labours  to  knowe  the  nacions  wylde
Inhabytynge  the  worlde  in  the  North  plage  and  syde
Metynge  by  mesure,  countrees  both  fyers  and  mylde
Vnder  euery  planete,  where  men  sayle  go  or  ryde
And  so  this  fole  castyth  his  wyt  so  wyde
To  knowe  eche  londe  vnder  the  fyrmament
That  therabout  in  vayne  his  tyme  is  spent


of  dyiiers  contrees  and  regyons.


Than  with  his  compace  drawyth  he  about
Europe,  and  Asye,  to  knowe  howe  they  stande
And  of  theyr  regyons  nat  to  be  in  dout
Another  with  Grece  and  Cesyll  is  in  honde
With  Apuly,  Afryke  and  the  newe  fonde  londe
With  Numydy  and,  where  the  Moryans  do  dwell
And  other  londes  whose  namys  none  can  tell

He  mesureth  Athlant,  calpe,  and  cappadoce

The  see  of  Hercules  garnado  and  Spayne

The  yles  there  aboute  shewynge  all  in  groce

Throwynge  his  mesure  to  Fraunce  and  to  Brytayne

The  more  and  lesse,  to  Flaundres  and  almayne

There  is  no  yle  so  lytell  that  hath  name

But  that  these  Folys  in  hande  ar  with  the  same

And  regyons  that  ar  compasyd  with  the  se
They  besely  labour  to  knowe  and  vnderstande
And  by  what  cause,  nature  or  propertye
These  doth  flowe,  nat  ouercouerynge  the  londe
So  he  descrybyth  his  cercle  in  his  honde
The  hole  worlde :  leuynge  no  thynge  behynde
As  in  the  Doctrynes  of  Strabo  he  doth  fynde

Whiche  wrote  in  bokes  makynge  declaracion
Somtyme  hym  groundynge  vpon  auctoryte
Howe  eche  Royalme  and  londe  had  sytuacion
Some  in  brode  feldes  some  closyd  with  the  see
But  ye  geometryans  that  of  this  purpose  be
Ye  ar  but  folys  to  take  suche  cure  and  payne
Aboute  a  thynge  whiche  is  fruteles  and  vayne


2  6  Of  the  folysshe  descripcion  and  inquiskion


It  passyth  your  reason  the  hole  worlde  to  discus
And  knowe  euery  londe  and  countrey  of  the  grounde
For  though  that  the  noble  actour  plinius
The  same  purposyd,  yet  fawty  is  he  founde
And  in  Tholomeus  great  errours  doth  habounde
Thoughe  he  by  auctoryte  makyth  mencyon
Of  the  descripcion  of  euery  regyon

Syns  these  actours  so  excellent  of  name

Hath  bokes  composyd  of  this  facultye

And  neuer  coude  parfytely  perfourme  the  same

Forsoth  it  is  great  foly  vnto  the

To  labour  about  suche  folysshe  vanyte

It  is  a  furour  also  one  to  take  payne

In  suche  thynges  as  prouyd  ar  vncertayne

For  nowe  of  late  hath  large  londe  and  grounde
Ben  founde  by  maryners  and  crafty  gouernours
The  whiche  londes  were  neuer  knowen  nor  founde
Byfore  our  tyme  by  our  predecessours
And  here  after  shall  by  our  successours
Parchaunce  mo  be  founde,  wherin  men  dwell
Of  whome  we  neuer  before  this  same  harde  tell

Ferdynandus  that  late  was  kynge  of  spayne

Of  londe  and  people  hath  founde  plenty  and  store

Of  whome  the  bydynge  to  vs  was  vncertayne

No  christen  man  of  them  harde  tell  before

Thus  is  it  foly  to  tende  vnto  the  lore

And  vnsure  science  of  vayne  geometry

Syns  none  can  knowe  all  the  worlde  perfytely


of  dyuers  contrees  and  regyons,  27


Thenuoy  of  Barklay.
Ye  people  that  labour  the  worlde  to  mesure
Therby  to  knowe  the  regyons  of  the  same
Knowe  firste  your  self,  that  knowledge  is  moste  sure
For  certaynly  it  is  rebuke  and  shame
For  man  to  labour, onely  for  a  name
To  knowe  the  compasse  of  all  the  worlde  wyde
Nat  knowynge  hym  selfe,  nor  howe  he  sholde  hym  gyde


hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  owne  folysshe-
nes:  and  that  stryueth  agaynst  his
strenger.


The  folysshe  Maicia  dyd  with  Apollo  stryue
But  he  ouercome  :  loste  sone  the  victory.
And  for  his  foly  was  fleyd  beinge  alyue
For  that  he  comparyd  to  ioyous  Armony.
His  foulysshe  Bagpype  voyde  of  al  melody.
Yet  kept  he  stylle  his  Bagpype  in  his  honde  :
Nat  willynge  his  foly  to  knowe  nor  vndersionde.


Of  hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  folysshenes.  29


Ouer  al  the  worlde  eche  folysshe  Creature.

If  he  by  his  foly,  or  neglygence  ofFende.

Hath  suche  condicion  within  hym  by  nature

That  to  mennys  mockes  nought  wyl  he  intende.

Nor  knowlege  his  foly,  nor  stody  hym  to  amende.

But  as  one  obstynate,  continue  in  his  synne.

O  folysshe  Marcia  :  for  this  thou  lost  thy  skynne.

This  folysshe  Marcia  with  Phebus  dyd  contende.
Comparynge  with  hym  in  songe  of  Armony
But  for  that  Marcia  cowde  nat  his  part  defende
He  fleaed  was  alyue  moche  pyteously.
To  whose  example  we  se  that  comonly
Many  mad  brayned  and  blynde  Foles  ar  alyue
Which  voyde  of  reason,  with  prudent  men  dar  stryue.

And  euery  fole  that  is  voyde  of  dyscressyon
At  al  tymes  thynketh  hymself  wyse  and  prudent.
Though  he  be  destytute  of  wysedom  and  of  reason.
Suche  ar  so  blynde  that  they  can  nat  aduyse.
Howe  men  by  mockes  and  scornes  them  despyce.
Lawghinge  to  derision  theyr  maners  and  lewde  dede.
Yet  se  they  nat  the  foles  erys  vpon  theyr  hede.

Thys  fole  thus  lawghed  to  scorne  and  derision

Taketh  al  in  sporte  lawhinge  with  them  also.

Nat  thynkynge  hym  contemned  for  his  mad  condicion,

Lewde,  and  disordred.  but  where  so  euer  he  go

He  best  is  content  with  them  that  so  wyl  do.

He  loueth  to  be  flatered  and  clawed  by  the  sleue

That  thynge  that  he  wolde  here  :  he  gladly  doth  beleue.


3©  Of  hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  folysshenes.


Who  that  hym  prayseth  in  scorne  and  in  mockage.
And  in  derision  doth  magnyfy  his  name
Anone  he  enclyneth  vnto  that  lewde  langage  :
Auaunsinge  hymselfe  and  presumynge  on  the  same
Stryuynge  with  his  better  to  his  rebuke  and  shame.
So  hangith  on  his  shulders  hys  pype  contynually
Wherby  men  may  his  lewdnes  notefy.

If  suche  a  fole  haue  patrymony  and  londe

Or  in  his  CofFres  great  treasour  and  riches

He  shall  haue  frendes  and  felawys  at  honde

To  egge  hym  forwarde  vnto  vnhappynes

And  sawynge  in  hym  sede  of  moche  vnthryftynes

And  than  to  spoyle  hym :  and  leue  hym  pore  and  bare

"Wherby  he  after  must  lyue  in  payne  and  care

Wastfull  youth  oft  spendeth,  all  his  hole  substaunce
On  suche  Felawys  folowynge  alway  theyr  mynde
Rennynge  hedely  to  vngracious  gouernaunce
But  whan  of  his  good  no  more  is  left  behynde .  -
And  he  theyr  fiilshode  and  preuy  gyle  doth  fynde
He  than  auysyth  hym  of  his  olde  estate
Begynnynge  to  spare,  but  than  it  is  to  late

So  whan  he  by  them  is  brought  to  pouertye

Hauynge  no  thynge  his  bodye  to  sustayne

Than  all  his  frendes  away  fast  from  hym  fle

As  trayters  vntrue  leuynge  the  Fole  in  payne

Than  cryeth  he  on  god,  and  sore  doth  hym  complayne

With  wofull  wordes,  mournynge  with  herte  full  faynt

And  than  forthynkyth  :  but  late  is  his  complaynt


and  that  stryiieth  agaynst  his  strenger.


But  who  that  in  his  costes  is  so  ryfe

That  he  that  spendyth  within  a  yere  or  twayne

Whiche  were  ynoughe  the  dayes  of  his  lyfe

With  honest  rule  his  body  to  mayntayne

He  is  a  fole  spendynge  his  good  in  vayne

But  they  on  whome  he  so  his  good  doth  spende

Shall  more  to  his  money,  than  to  his  loue  intende

Wherot  precedyth  pouerty  and  contempt
Scorne  and  derisyon  nede  and  aduersyte
And  from  all  honour  these  folys  ar  exempt
That  thus  wast  theyr  good  in  prodygalyte
For  who  that  is  of  small  power  and  degre
And  with  his  betters  wyll  in  expence  stryue
Without  all  dout  that  Fole  shall  neuer  thryue

And  also  folys  that  stryueth  in  the  lawe
Agaynst  an  estate  them  passynge  in  ryches
Shall  theyr  owne  flesshe  vnto  the  bonys  gnawe
Or  he  that  is  voyde  of  reason  and  wytles
And  dare  presume  by  his  presumptuousnes
Agaynst  a  man  of  hye  wysdome  and  lore
He  shall  byde  a  fole,  euen  as  he  was  before.

Ye  folys  voyde  of  wysdome  and  scyence
That  wyll  presume  with  cunnynge  men  to  stryue
And  ye  feble  Folys  that  by  your  insolence
Thynke  you  more  stronge  than  any  man  a  lyue
And  ye  pore  Folys  whiche  labour  to  contryue
Mean  to  ouercome  suche  as  better  ar  than  ye
I  you  ensure  that  ye  shalt  neuer  thryue
But  outher  be  brought  to  shame  orpouerte


3  2  Of  hym  that  wyll  nat  se  his  folysshenes.


And  thou  that  art  a  courter  or  a  knaue

Or  a  bonde  chorle,  and  all  thy  hole  lynage

Thynke  well  thou  shalt  but  small  profyte  haue

To  stryue  with  thy  mayster  come  of  hye  parage

I  fynde  it  moste  for  mannys  auauntage

Within  his  bondes  his  body  to  preserue

And  nat  in  riches,  strength  wysdome  nor  langage

To  stryue  agaynst  the  streme,  lyst  he  in  swymmynge  sterue


folys  that  vnderstonde  nat  game  and
can  no  thynge  take  in  sport,  and  yet
intermyt  them  with  Folys.


Who  that  with  Folys  or  children  wyll  play
Or  meddyll  with  suche  as  wyt  and  reason  want
He  ought  them  to  suffer  folowynge  theyr  way
And  them  endure,  as  for  that  small  instant
Lyst  for  his  maners  mad  and  ignorant
I  call  hym  hyther  to  gyde  the  helme  and  sayle
If  the  shyp  brake,  the  les  is  his  auayle


34  Of  fib  ^  ^^^^  vnderstoncle  imt  game

That  man  shall  one  be  of  our  folysshe  sort
Whiche  without  wysdome  and  aduysement
Wyll  besely  with  folys  and  children  sport
And  can  nat  them  indure  with  meke  intent
And  mad  he  is  that  wyll  in  mynde  assent
To  haue  ado  or  accompany  with  boyes
And  can  nat  suffer  theyr  folysshnes  and  toyes

He  is  a  Fole  also,  that  hath  great  game

Whan  childe  or  dronkard  blamyth  one  absent

If  he  can  nat  also  indure  the  same

And  quenche  madnes  with  wordes  pacyent

For  without  dout  who  that  wyll  be  present

And  conuersaunt  with  caytyfs  in  theyr  bourdes

Or  els  with  children,  must  suffer  theyr  lewde  wordes

Yet  some  ar  besy  on  euery  man  to  rayle
With  voyde  wordes,  and  talys  mad  and  vayne
With  scornes  and  mockes  behynde  eche  mannys  tayle
And  yet  disdayneth  to  abyde  the  same  agayne
Theyr  madnes  doth  theyr  myndes  so  constrayne
That  with  euery  Fole  they  gladly  haue  to  do
And  can  nat  suffer  what  doth  belonge  therto

He  that  wyll  labour  a  beast  to  hunt  or  chace
With  his  pleasour  must  take  payne  and  besynes
Folowynge  the  same  about  from  place  to  place
• His  lynes,  colers,  and  lesshes  he  must  dres-
And  often  also  abyde,  full  great  hardnes
So  he  that  wyll  by  yll  worde  man  ouerturne
Must  holde  hym  sure,  lyst  he  vnwarly  spurne


ana  can  no  thynge  take  in  sport.

One  worde  in  sporte  spokyn,  another  lyke  requyrys

Rayle  with  a  Fole,  or  childe  that  can  nat  gyde

Hym  selfe  by  reason,  thy  sportis  lyke,  desyres

He  is  a  fole  whiche  can  it  nat  abyde

For  lyke  wyll  haue  lyke,  if  thou  be  by  the  syde

Or  in  the  company  of  Fole  or  innocent

To  suffer  theyr  foly  thou  moste  be  pacyent

A  fole  hastely  rendreth  yll  for  yll

And  oft  for  good,  and  loue  most  profytable

They  render  hatered  malyce  and  yll  wyll

Whiche  is  a  thynge  wronge  and  intollerable

Yet  this  nature  in  folys  abydeth  stable

That  seldome  or  neuer,  they  goodnes  pay  agayne

They  other  scorne,  of  scornys  hauynge  disdayne

With  suche  Folys  none  wyse  ought  intermyt
But  coueyt  amonge  wyse  men  to  be  conuersaunt
And  so  they  do,  but  Folys  voyde  of  wyt
Takyth  theyr  rowme  amonge  other  ignoraunt
The  company  of  folys  to  folys  is  pleasaunt
For  it  is  a  prouerbe,  and  an  olde  sayd  sawe
That  in  euery  place  lyke  to  lyke  wyll  drawe

A  precious  stone  wrappyd  in  myre  and  fen
Lesyth  his  colour  and  semyth  nat  of  pryce
Right  so  one  good,  amonge  vnthrifty  men
Distayneth  his  name,  with  theyr  yll  name  and  vyce
And  doth  to  hym  selfe  great  wronge  and  preiudice
For  eche  man  is  reputyd  of  the  same  sort
As  is  the  company  wherto  he  doth  resort


36 Offolys  that  vjiderstajide  nat  game


Wherfore  me  thynke  it  best,  for  euery  creature
To  auoyde  the  bandes  and  mad  enormyte
Of  suche  Folys  whiche  can  no  man  endure
By  theyr  blynde  pryde  and  desyre  of  dignyte
They  coueyt  to  gouerne  both  hye  and  lowe  degre
No  dolour  troubleth  a  Folys  mynde  so  sore
As  whan  a  man  of  reason  is  set  hym  before

If  twenty  men  be  in  one  company

Som  of  hye  byrth,  some  wyse,  some  lyberall

If  one  fole  be  amonge  them  certaynly

He  thynkes  hym  selfe  moche  wyser  than  they  all

Thus  shortly  to  speke,  a  folysshe  man  rural!

If  he  a  churle,  a  fole  and  vnthrift  be

The  more  he  lokyth  to  come  to  hye  degre

Suche  folys  promotyd  haue  no  pacience

To  suffer  theyr  folawes,  so  hye  set  is  theyr  mynde

And  to  theyr  betters  they  haue  no  reuerence

They  can  nat  them  endure,  they  ar  so  blynde

So  by  experience  as  we  often  fynde

A  fole  thoughe  he  neyther  haue  wysdome  nor  cunnynge

Yet  thynketh  hym  selfe  aboue  all  worldly  thynge

Hereof  the  Bybyll  examples  doth  expres

Howe  the  fals  Aman  (howe  belt  he  was  vnwyse)

Had  dyuers  statis  of  wysdome  and  riches

To  hym  obeynge,  and  yet  dyd  them  despyse

But  for  that  Mardocheus  wolde  nat  ryse

Out  of  his  place  to  do  to  hym  honour

His  mynde  was  fyllyd  with  malyce  and  dolour


and  can  no  thynge  take  in  sport.  3

In  so  moche  that  he  wolde  haue  had  hym  slayne
For  this  small  faut,  but  god  gaue  remedy
To  mardocheus  for  to  escape  his  trayne
And  so  fals  Aman  his  treason  dyd  abye
And  hanged  was,  for  Mardocheus  worthely
And  that  before  Mardocheus  face  and  iyene
By  the  persuasion  of  Hester  noble  quene

But  of  this  proces  to  drawe  vnto  conclusyon
What  man  that  intendeth  for  to  lyue  quyetly
And  wyse  to  be  callyd  without  abusion
Let  hym  auoyde  mad  and  folysshe  company
But  if  he  nedys  wyll  vnto  suche  aply
Let  hym  mekely  endure  theyr  game  and  sport
Els  shall  he  be  one  of  this  my  folysshe  sort.

Thenuoy  of  Barklay.
O  wyse  man  thou  ought  lewde  company  auoyde
For  it  is  dayly  prouyd  by  experyence
That  with  a  thynge  corrupt,  a  sounde  thynge  is  distroyed
Right  so  good  men  oft  fall  in  to  great  offence
And  iugyd  yll,  though  they  gyde  them  by  prudence
And  that  for  hauntynge  of  company  diffamyd
For  thoughe  one  be  gyuen  to  godly  innocence
As  is  his  company  right  so  shall  he  be  namyd.


Of  them  that  wylfully  offende  nat  takynge
hede  to  the  ende,  and  hurtyth  euery
man  nat  thynkynge  to  haue  theyr
malyce  rendryd  agayne.


That  fole  castyth  a  dart  into  the  ayre

And  gasyth  after  it  without  aduysement

Of  the  fallynge  downe  therof  nat  beynge  ware

Whiche  labouryth  with  dedys  and  wordes  vyolent

To  get  many  foes  hurtynge  the  innocent

And  lokyth  nat  agayne  lyke  to  endure

One  yll  turne  requyreth,  another  be  thou  sure


Of  them  that  wy  fully  offende.


Here  touche  I  folys,  and  men  without  counsell
Whiche  puttyth  many  vnto  besynes  and  payne
And  them  sore  greuyth  by  theyr  dedys  cruell
Nat  thynkynge  to  be  seruyd  with  the  same  agayne
That  fole  forsoth  is  of  a  frantyke  brayne
Whiche  other  men  wyll  hurt  rebuke  and  blame
And  wyll  nat  suffer  of  them  agayne  the  same

Consyder  man,  oft  tyme  within  thy  mynde

The  wronge  that  thou  woldest  do  to  thy  neyghbour

"Whether  thou  myght  in  thy  herte  paciently  fynde

The  same  to  suffer  of  hym  without  rancour

Malyce  or  yll  wyll,  wrath  or  displeasour

For  thou  oughtest  nat  do  to  any  creature

That  thynge  whiche  thou  of  hym  wolde  nat  endure

He  that  wyll  other  men  thurst  by  violence

In  to  a  sak  by  extorcion  and  wronge

Must  in  lyke  maner  arme  hym  with  pacyence

And  suffer  some  blowys  nowe  and  than  amonge

To  one  yll  turne  another  doth  belonge

He  that  is  besy  euery  man  to  displeas

Or  to  indamage  shall  neuer  lyue  in  eas

One  namyd  Peryllus  a  workman  excellent
A  bull  of  bras  forgyd  by  his  subtylte
Wherin  a  Tyrant  myght  put  men  to  tourment
Deuysynge  deth  of  moste  payne  and  cruelte
But  this  workman  to  proue  his  faculte
Was  by  that  Tyrant  put  to  deth  in  lyke  wyse
As  he  for  other  dyd  ordayne  and  deuyse


40  Of  them  that  wy fully  amende


O  vnwyse  Fole  whome  madnes  doth  abuse
Howe  darest  thou  be  so  hardy  for  to  do
That  to  another  whiche  thy  selfe  wolde  refuse
Of  hym  to  be  done,  to  the,  yet  some  do  so
Makynge  a  pyt  to  others  hurte  and  wo
Wherin  hymselfe  is  destroyed  at  the  last
And  some  in  theyr  owne  snarys  ar  taken  fast

So  cursyd  Aman  in  lyke  wyse  dyd  ordayne
For  Mardocheus  a  nianer  of  tourment
Wheron  he  hoped  to  haue  hangyd  hym  in  payne
His  lyfe  consumynge  with  suche  punysshement
But  the  ende  happened  nat  after  his  intent
For  at  the  last  Aman  hym  selfe  with  care
Was  hangyd  vp,  and  that  in  his  owne  snare

On  wronge  and  malyce  yll  wyll  and  iniury
All  moste  all  men  hath  nowe  set  iheyr  intent
Wherfore  let  wyse  men  for  them  fynde  remedy
For  thoughe  that  it  be  a  thynge  conuenyent
To  trust  to  other,  yet  be  thou  prouydent
Of  mannys  gyle  falshode  and  sotelte
So  mayst  thou  escape  oft  tymes,  aduersyte

Suche  men  as  put  to  moche  confydence

In  other  vnknowen,  often  great  domage  wyn

Suffrynge  losse  and  hurt  by  theyr  owne  neglygence

For  whan  thou  lokest  vpon  the  vtter  skyn

Thou  knowyst  full  lytell  what  trust  is  within

For  oft  vnder  flowres  lurketh  the  serpent

So  paynted  wordes  hydeth  a  fals  intent


nat  takynge  hede  to  the  encle.  4 1


Be  nat  a  gest  thou  man  who  euer  thou  art

To  suche  as  louynge  outwarde  thou  seest  apere

Malyciously  within,  and  of  enuyous  hart

He  byddeth  the  ete  and  drynke,  and  make  good  chere

With  loue  as  farre  as  thou  canst  se  or  here.

But  whan  suche  traytours  most  swetly  on  the  smyle

Than  ar  they  besyest  the  falsely  to  begyle

Vnder  fayre  wordes  pleasaunt  and  lyberall
And  smylynges  fals  and  disceyuable
Suche  beryth  venym  to  poyson  the  withall
Auoyde  suche  men :  thou  wyse  man  and  laudable
Theyr  dedes  ar  so  fals  and  so  abhomynable
That  whan  thou  gyuyst  vnto  them  moste  credence
They  shall  the  brynge  to  moste  inconuenyence

Ye :  oft  he  lawygheth  as  he  were  true  and  gode

Grauntynge  thy  wordes  what  euer  thynge  thou  say

Whiche  in  his  mynde :  wolde  fayne  se  thy  herte  blode

And  of  thy  secrete  counsell  the  bewray

Beware  of  suche  men  as  moche  as  thou  may

For  amonge  swete  herbys  oft  growyth  stynkynge  wedes

All  flaterynge  caytyfs  ar  nat  true  in  theyr  dedes

But  whan  these  caytyfes  hath  hurt  a  mannys  name

Or  done  hym  in  body  or  goodes  preiudice

They  thynke  he  ought  nat  to  render  them  the  same

Thoughe  it  may  be  done  by  lawe  and  by  iustyce

But  certaynly  who  that  hym  doth  exercyce

In  doynge  other  losse,  hurt,  or  greuaunce

Shall  lyue  a  fole  and  dye  by  some  myschaunce


42 Of  them  thai  wylfully  offende.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  translatour.
O  men  malycious  fals  and  iniuryous
Whiche  set  your  myndes  fals  meanes  to  deuyse
To  hurte  your  neyghbours  by  malyce  odyous
And  thynke  nat  to  be  seruyd  in  lyke  wyse
Ye  ar  abusyd  therin  I  you  promyse
For  he  that  here  to  his  neyghbour  is  cruell
And  doth  hym  in  dede  or  worde,  hurt  or  despyce
Shall  outher  be  rewardyd  here,  or  els  in  hell.


Of  foles  without  prouysion  :  that  prouyde
nought  in  the  somer  to  lyue  by  in  the
wynter  nor  in  youth  to  lyue  by  in
age.


Who  that  maketh  for  hymselfe  no  purueaunce.
Of  fruyt  and  corne  in  somer  season  clere.
Whan  of  the  same  is  store  and  habundaunce
Shal  after  lyue  in  hunger  all  the  yere
Sowkynge  his  fyngers  lyke  as  the  Bere  doth  here.
And  he  that  in  youth  wyl  nought  for  hym  proayde
In  age  must  the  paynes  of  pouertye  abyde.


44  fi^^^  without  prouys  ion.


Amonge  our  Folys  I  nomber  hym  for  one
Whiche  lyueth  ydylly  and  in  slewthfulnes
Makynge  in  the  somer  no  prouysion
To  auoyde  the  wynters,  payne  and  colde  hardnes
What  man  wyll  nat  curse  and  disprayse  his  madnes
Whiche  at  no  tyme  wyll  for  hym  self  prouyde
Of  sustenaunce,  in  nede  hym  selfe  to  gyde

He  that  begynneth  without  aduysement

Can  nat  prouyde  that  thynge  that  is  to  come

Nor  scantly  that  whiche  must  be  done  present

Thus  ar  his  dedys  done  all  without  wysedome

Of  this  company  yet  fynde  I  other  some

Whiche  nought  wyll  saue  them  self  to  fynde  with  all

But  all  out  wastyth,  by  Ryot  prodygall

These  folys  of  theyr  myndes  ar  so  blynde

That  nought  they  saue  to  theyr  owne  vtylyte

On  wyse  prouysion  they  set  no  thynge  theyr  mynde

But  if  they  be  dryuen  by  extreme  necessyte

As  hunger  thrist  colde,  or  other  aduersyte

So  oft  whan  suche  ar  vexed  with  moste  nede

The  wolde  prouyde,  but  than  they  can  nat  spede

A  fole  of  propertye  that  is  neglygent

For  thynge  to  come  prouydeth  nought  atall

But  on  one  daye  settyth  all  his  intent

So  in  that  space  if  any  nede  do  fall

To  hym.  he  shall  vpon  his  neyghbour  call

For  helpe  and  socour,  and  sore  to  hym  complayne

And  aske  relefe  whiche  he  shall  nat  obtayne


Ofjoles  without  prouyston.  45


Whan  suche  folys  haue  theyr  wombes  full
They  force  no  more,  ne  take  no  farther  thought
Theyr  vayne  myndes  to  farther  thynges  is  dull
Saue  on  that  whiche  from  hande  to  mouth  is  brought
But  he  is  wyse,  and  of  reason  wantyth  nought
Whiche  here  hym  gydeth  by  vertue  and  wysdome
And  so  prouydeth  for  the  tyme  to  come

Wherby  his  wyfe,  his  children  and  ofsprynke
May  without  care  outher  besynes  or  payne
With  honestye  haue  theyr  fode  and  theyr  lyuynge
Without  occasion  theyr  good  name  to  distayne
1  count  hym  wyse  that  thus  doth  set  his  brayne
And  in  the  Somer  can  make  suche  purueaunce
Wherby  all  his  may  haue  theyr  sustenaunce

And  that  in  wynter,  and  the  hardest  of  the  yere

But  hym  I  count  moche  folysshe  and  vnwyse

And  voyde  of  reason,  whiche  makyth  styll  good  chere

And  by  no  men  wyll  the  tyme  to  come  aduyse

But  folys  folowe  moste  comonly  this  gyse

To  slepe  all  Somer  whan  the  season  is  moste  clere

And  labour  in  the  hardest  season  of  the  yere

Suche  no  thynge  labour,  ne  to  no  worke  intende
But  to  ydylnes,  a  vyce  yll  and  damnable
That  whiche  is  gotten  vnwysely  thus  they  spende
So  that  whan  wynter  comys  they  ar  nat  able
To  haue  one  lofe  of  brede  vpon  theyr  table
Nor  other  thynge  theyr  hunger  to  asswage
An  ydell  man  is  worthy  suche  wage


^oles  without  prouysion.


In  wynter  he  abydeth  a  lyfe  myserable
Whiche  in  the  Somer  prouydyd  hath  no  thynge
That  to  his  vse  is  nede  and  profytable
AVho  that  in  July  whyle  Phebus  is  shynynge
About  his  hay  is  nat  besy  labourynge
And  other  thynges  whiche  ar  for  his  auayle
Shall  in  the  wynter  his  negligence  bewayle

And  who  that  can  nat  hym  selfe  wysely  prouyde
Of  wode  and  vytayle  and  other  sustenaunce
Shall  in  the  wynter  nat  knowe  where  to  abyde
For  colde  and  hunger  with  other  lyke  greuaunce
Lerne  man  of  the  symple  Emet  purueaunce
Whiche  gathers  and  puruays  euery  thynge  in  season
Shame  is  to  man  of  beste  to  lerne  reason

For  euery  thynge  god  hath  a  tyme  puruayde
And  gyuen  reason  to  man  hym  selfe  to  gyde
By  good  prouysion,  if  that  his  mynde  be  layde
Vnto  the  same,  and  sleuth  to  set  asyde
But  that  yonge  man  that  wyll  in  age  abyde
Without  prouysion,  wherby  he  myght  hym  fede
Shall  worthely  in  his  age  dye  for  nede

Of  that  Fole  who  shall  haue  compassion
Whiche  by  his  Foly,  great  slouth  and  neglygence
Vpon  hym  selfe  intendyth  to  haue  none
But  all  out  wastyth  by  immoderate  expence
So  to  conclude  in  brefe  and  short  sentence
That  fole  hath  nat  the  way  hym  selfe  to  gyde
Whiche  in  due  season  can  nat  eche  thynge  prouyde


Offoles  without  prouysion,  47


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
O  blynde  man  vnwyse,  wastynge  and  neclygent
Lerne  of  the  Emet  to  labour  craftely
And  in  thy  youth  to  be  so  dylygent
Wherby  in  age,  thou  lyue  mayst  easely
For  he  that  wyll  nat  his  mynde  therto  aply
In  youth  and  Somer  to  labour  without  fere
In  age  and  wynter  shall  lyue  in  penury
And  sowke  his  clawys  for  hanger  lyke  the  here.


great  stryuers  in  the  lawe  for  thynges
of  nought.


He  is  a  fole,  whether  it  be  man  or  wyfe
Whiche  hym  delyteth  in  iugement  and  lawe
And  euer  contendyth  in  discorde  and  in  stryfe
In  small  tryfyls,  and  scantly  worth  a  srrawe
Suche,  theyr  owne  flesshe  vnto  the  bonys  gnawe
And  labour  by  theyr  sotelty  and  gyle
To  blynde  iustyce,  and  the  lawes  to  defyle.


■reat  stryiiers  in  the  law.  49

A  cause  conuenyent  doth  me  bynde  and  constrayne
To  blame  mo  Folys :  and  that  in  myghty  nomber
Whiche  I  haue  suffred  tyll  this  tyme  to  remayne
To  se  if  they  wolde  waken  from  theyr  slomber
Suche  ar  mad  Folys  whiche  other  men  inconber
With  besy  pledynge,  wherby  them  selfe  ar  brought
By  longe  contynuaunce  vnto  the  poynt  of  nought

For  small  occasion  for  lytell  thynge  or  nought
Vnwyse  men  stryue  deuysynge  falshode  and  gyle
Nowe  euery  fole  hath  set  his  mynde  and  thought
To  seke  the  extreme  of  lawe,  but  though  they  smyle
At  the  begynnynge,  after  within  a  whyle
Theyr  laughynge  shall  turne  to  sorowe  and  damage
And  onely  the  lawyers  catchyth  the  auauntage

Yet  ar  these  folys  ioyous  in  theyr  mynde

They  norysshe  stryfe  without  ende,  them  amonge

And  some  by  falshode  can  crafty  meanes  fynde

By  fals  delayes  theyr  mater  to  prolonge

Suche  Folys  drawyth  the  lawe  thus  wyse  a  longe

To  that  intent  that  by  rightwyse  iugement

Transgressours  sholde  nat  haue  worthy  punysshement

These  folys  that  thus  theyr  maters  doth  diffarre

Shall  in  that  space  theyr  owne  goode  waste  and  spende

To  that  purpose  theyr  neyghbour  also  to  marre

So  ar  they  both  made  beggers  at  the  ende

Than  must  they  to  some  agrement  condiscende

Theyr  cause  and  mater  discussed  neuer  the  more

O  mad  Folys  so  sholde  they  haue  done  before

VOL.  II.  D


50  Of  great  stry  tiers  in  the  law


Some  suffer  them  selfe  for  defaut  of  aparaunce
To  be  outlawyd,  and  other  some  suspendyd
Out  of  the  Churche  for  hys  mysgouernaunce
And  yet  nought  caryth,  therfro  to  be  defendyd
Howe  beit  they  myght :  and  haue  theyr  mater  endyd
Suche  assay  by  falshode  to  prouoke  the  lawe
And  than  it  fle.  and  them  therfro  withdrawe

But  suche  Folys  that  thus  so  besely

Pursue  the  lawe,  with  stryfe  and  brawlynge  vayne

Consyder  nat  that  they  ren  in  great  enuy

Amonge  theyr  neyghbours  whiche  shall  them  pay  agayn«

With  theyr  owne  malyce  and  gyle  to  theyr  great  payne

But  in  the  mean  space  the  lawyers  a  made  ryche

Leuynge  these  Folys  and  theyr  mater  in  the  dyche

Thou  besy  fole  intende  vnto  this  clause

That  euery  lawyer  shall  gyue  more  aduertence

To  mony  and  gyftis  than  vnto  thy  cause

For  after  he  hath  set  thy  wordes  and  sentence

In  his  fat  boke,  fyllyd  with  offence

And  there  pryckyd  with  his  couetous  pen

Thou  neuer  shalt  thryue  whyle  thy  name  is  therin

Yet  thou  vnwysely  art  redy  to  intende

Vnto  thy  cause,  and  though  it  fortune  be

Skant  worth  a  grote,  yet  gladly  wylt  thou  spende

Thy  hole  good  theron  so  sekynge  pouerte

For  ho  we  beit  that  the  lawes  ought  be  fre

Yet  sergeaunt  at  turney  promoter  Juge  or  scribe

Wyll  nat  fele  thy  mater  without  a  preuy  brybe


for  thynges  of  nought.


5^


Therfore  thou  acloyest  with  money  or  rewarde
The  kepars  of  the  lawe  to  make  them  to  the  bounde
In  so  moche  that  thoughe  thy  mater  be  but  harde
Yet  money  shall  make  it  haue  moche  better  sounde
And  to  be  playne  that  case  hath  euer  best  grounde
That  is  best  anoyntyd  with  maystershyp  and  golde
Thoughe  it  be  false  it  strongly  is  vpholde

And  without  dout  the  lawyers  dylygence
Is  in  his  pledynge  euer  moste  substancyall
Whan  of  thy  purse  he  hath  had  experyence
And  knowyth  thy  hande  to  hym  fre  and  lyberall
Wherfore  we  often  vnto  our  mater  call
From  far  places  men  of  greatest  disceyt
And  fayrest  wordes  to  prolonge  our  debate

And  with  theyr  fayre  and  paynted  eloquence

To  glose  our  mater  in  wordes  of  no  substaunce

So  that  Juge  that  by  way  of  innocence

Gydeth  the  lawe  in  Just  and  right  balaunce

Of  suche  pleders  is  led  the  blynde  mannys  daunce

So  that  they  playnly  proue  before  his  syght

The  right  to  be  wronge,  and  the  wronge  to  be  right.

Thenuoy  of  Barklay.

0  men  malycious  thus  besy  in  the  lawe

For  euery  mater  and  thynge  of  nought  to  stryue

1  reade  you  your  myndes  from  suche  stryfe  withdrawe
And  from  suche  falshode  as  ye  oft  contryue


5  2 Of  great  stryuers  in  the  law.

Or  I  ensure  you  ye  shall  neuer  thryue
But  wast  your  goodes  therwith  to  get  enuy
Lyuynge  in  discorde  whyle  ye  ar  a  lyue
And  at  the  ende  your  wylfulnes  defye

Alas  mad  Fole,  and  man  vnmerciable
What  menest  thou  thy  neyghbour  to  oppresse
And  for  thynge  of  nought  to  be  so  vengeable
To  put  both  thy  self  and  hym  to  besynes
Wastynge  your  goodes  about  vnhappynes
Leue  man  thy  malyce  and  mytygate  thy  mynde
For  who  that  can  lyue  in  peas  and  quyetnes
Shall  welth  and  rest  both  loue  and  riches  fynde

Where  as  that  Fole  that  is  alway  inclynde

To  stryfe  and  pledynge  for  thynge  of  none  auayle

And  none  occasion :  labours  the  lawe  to  blynde

Becomynge  a  begger  at  last  for  his  trauayle

And  at  the  laste  shall  euery  man  assayle

This  Fole  with  malyce,  for  his  accostomyd  stryfe

So  that  his  foly  he  shall  mone  and  bewayle

And  so  be  wery  of  his  wretchyd  lyfe.


Of  foles  abhomynable  in  fowle  wordes
of  rybawdry.


The  lothsome  wordes  that  nowe  adayes  we  vse
And  shamefull  commonynge,  full  of  wantonnes
Ar  wont  good  maners  to  infect  and  abuse
Indusynge  yll  maners,  yll  lyfe  and  viciousnes
With  countenaunces  and  dedes  of  vnhappynes
For  as  the  wyse  man  sayth  in  a  parable
Fowle  wordes  infectyth  maners  commendable


54  Q/" fries  abhomynable  m


In  our  tyme  nowf  both  waman  childe  and  man
Without  nomber  worshyp  with  humbyll  reuerence
The  festis  abhomynable  of  vyle  grobyan
With  all  theyr  myght  honour  and  theyr  dylygence
Compassynge  his  auters  with  lawdes  and  insence
With  wordes  and  vsys,  Fowle  and  abhomynable
Suche  men  myscheuous  to  hym  ar  acceptable

To  his  vyle  temple  renneth  yonge  and  o!de
Man,  woman,  mayden,  and  with  them  many  a  childe
And  bere  with  them  insence  as  I  before  haue  tolde
Worshyppynge  his  festis  with  theyr  langage  defylde
And  wordes  from  whiche  all  goodnes  is  exylyd
And  with  vyle  langage  of  rybawdry  the  grounde
Whose  yl  example  doth  sympyll  youth  confounde

Shamefastnes  is  exylyd  and  all  his  hole  lynage
And  in  his  place  is  vylenes  byd  behynde
Vngoodly  maners,  vngoodlyer  langage
Whiche  ar  the  clene  destruccion  of  mankynde
Lo  here  a  fole,  that  with  suche  vyce  is  blynde
A  vyle  swyne,  and  foule  ledyth  by  the  ere
His  bestely  lyfe  of  this  vyle  beste  to  lere

These  Folys  also  ar  in  suche  an  outrage

To  rynge  the  bell  of  theyr  mad  rybaudry

That  men  may  knowe  theyr  lyfe  by  theyr  langage

Wherby  they  vtter  theyr  lewdnes  openly

Thus  all  the  Shyppes  of  our  folysshe  company

Ar  led  by  the  wawes  of  this  see  mundayne

By  the  foule  swyne  folowynge  hir  lyfe  and  trayne


fozvie  worcks  of  rybazvdry.


Lyst  our  Folys  of  theyr  right  cours  myght  fayle
Or  by  great  charge  brake  or  els  be  drowned
The  swyne  of  the  se  them  draweth  at  hir  tayle
And  them  nat  suffreth  to  synke  or  stryke  on  grounde
But  if  all  the  Folys  that  of  this  sort  ar  founde
Sholde  drynke  no  ale  nor  wyne  durynge  this  yere
We  nedyd  nat  to  fere,  that  they  sholde  be  moche  der

But  these  Folys  the  trouth  to  determyne
Bycau^e  the  sowe  so  doth  hir  pygges  multyply
Therfore  they  folowe  the  maners  of  the  swyne
In  rybawde  wordes  full  of  shame  and  vylany
Suche  maners  in  this  tyme  doth  men  best  magnyfy
And  them  promotyth  moche  rather  than  wysedome
O  where  ar  honesty  and  shamefastnes  become

They  ar  exyled  and  haue  no  rowme  nor  place
In  erth  at  this  season  with  hye  nor  lowe  dere
But  suche  as  vse  rybawde  wordes  voyde  of  grace
Ar  nowe  promotyd  sonest  to  dignyte
And  howe  be  it  that  they  racche  vnworthy  be
Who  that  of  his  langage  is  moste  obhomynable
Is  taken  in  the  court  as  man  moste  commendable

The  hogge  promotyd  out  of  the  myre  and  dust
Vyle  and  vngoodly  of  body  and  vsage
Promotyth  and  admyttyth  men  after  his  lust
The  vylest  settynge  moste  hye  vpon  his  stage
And  some  ar  so  past  shame  in  theyr  langage
So  fowle  and  lothly,  that  they  moste  comenly
Haue  all  theyr  wordes  in  viciouse  rybawdry


5  6  Of  fowk  words  of  rybawdry.

So  that  if  mad  Horestes  myght  them  se

Hauynge  respect  vnto  theyr  lothlynes

He  myght  well  say  they  were  more  mad  than  he

And  wonder  on  theyr  langage  full  of  viciousnes

For  all  theyr  delyte  is  in  delyciousnes

Glotony  and  drynke,  but  he  hath  gayest  name

Whiche  rybawde  wordes  can  mengle  with  the  same

Thus  who  that  offreth  the  Fende  suche  sacrafyce
With  rybawde  wordes,  foule  and  abhomynable
Gyuynge  occasion  to  youth  to  fall  to  vyce
Suche  in  his  dedes  is  greatly  reprouable
And  shall  as  a  fowle  both  pore  and  myserable
Shamefully  lyue  without  moche  better  ende
Before  his  deth  if  he  hym  nat  amende.

Thenuoy  of  Barklay.
Man  vse  thy  tunge  in  myrth  and  honeste
And  laude  thy  maker  therwith  with  reuerence
To  that  intent  god  gaue  it  vnto  the
And  nat  to  vse  it  is  incouenyence
In  rybawde  wordes  is  great  synne  and  offence
And  to  youth  great  example,  and  damage
But  thoughe  thou  be  clene  of  dede  and  conscience
Yet  men  shall  the  Juge  after  thy  langage.


Of  the  abusion  of  the  spiritualte.


Here  must  I  yet  another  barge  ordayne

For  many  folys  of  the  spiritualte

Whiche  to  the  intent  to  auoyde  labour  and  payne

In  theyr  meane  youth  take  on  them  this  degre

But  after  whan  they  a  whyle  prestis  haue  be

To  haue  forsaken  the  vvorlde  they  repent

Where  firste  they  sholde  better  haue  prouyd  theyr  intent


5  8 Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiritiia/te.


Yet  somwhal  here  remayneth  of  my  charge
Whiche  must  be  touchyd  and  here  of  very  right
Amonge  our  Folys  haue  a  sympyll  barge
And  that  is  this,  As  moche  as  I  haue  insyght
Euery  man  laboures  nowe  with  all  theyr  myght.
Vnto  the  order  of  presthode  to  promote
His  Sonne  :  howe  belt  he  be  a  very  sote

If  he  be  folysshe  or  of  his  wyt  vnstable

Mysshapyn  of  his  face,  his  handes  or  his  fete

And  for  no  besynes  worldly  profitable

For  the  holy  Churche  than  thynke  they  hym  most  mete

And  so  thou  rurall  churle,  a  man  may  wete

Thou  woldest  nat  thy  sone  haue  preste  for  this  intent

To  serue  and  to  pleas  our  lorde  omnypotent

But  to  the  intent  to  lyue  in  eas  and  rest
And  to  auoyde  all  worldly  besynes
And  in  his  lust  to  fede  hym  with  the  best
Contynuynge  in  vyce,  and  moche  vnhappynes
Suche  Folys  haue  theyr  myndes  on  ryches
On  cursyd  lucre  pleasour  ioy  and  welth
Carynge  nought  at  all  for  theyr  soulys  helth

They  care  nought  for  wysdome  vertue  nor  doctryne
Cursyd  raony  troubleth  the  goodly  sacryfyce
And  to  the  same  theyr  mynde  they  so  inclyne
That  it  them  ledyth  to  eche  vnhappy  vyce
And  yet  they  thynke  them  self  to  exercyse
By  way  of  wysdome  and  gouernaunce  laudable
Thoughe  they  be  worthy  a  bagpype  and  a  bable


Of  the  abiision  of  the  spiritualte.  59

The  order  of  presthode  is  troublyd  of  eche  fole
The  honour  of  religion  euery  where  decays
Suche  caytyfs  and  courters  that  neuer  were  at  scole
Ar  firste  promotyd  to  presthode  nowe  adays
O  Numa  Numa  thou  folowyd  nat  suche  wayes
In  thy  olde  Temples  suche  folys  to  consecrate
But  suche  as  were  wyse,  and  with  vertue  decorate

And  suche  as  had  in  cunnynge  be  brought  vp

Godly  of  maners  and  of  lyfe  laudable

But  nowe  biynde  Folys  nought  knowynge  saue  the  cup

Falshode  and  flatery  ar  brought  out  of  the  stable

Sreyght  to  the  auter,  and  without  any  fable

Mo  prestes  ar  made  than  lernyd  men  or  clerkes

As  it  aperyth  playne  by  theyr  folysshe  warkes

From  the  kechyn  to  the  quere  and  so  to  a  state
One  yester  day  a  courier  is  nowe  a  prest  become
And  than  haue  these  folys  theyr  myndes  so  eleuate
That  they  disdayne  men  of  vertue  and  wysdome
But  if  they  haue  of  golde  a  myghty  some
They  thynke  them  abyll  a  man  to  make  or  marre
And  ar  so  presumptuous,  and  proude  as  Lucifarre

O  godly  order  ()  prestly  innocence

O  laudable  lyfe  wysdome  and  humylyte

Alas  why  haue  we  you  put  from  our  presence

And  you  exylyd  with  godly  grauyte

Our  lyfe  is  nowe  led  in  all  enormyte

And  all  by  our  foly  and  amasyd  ignoraunce

The  prelatis  ar  the  cause  of  this  mysgouernaunce


6o Of  the  abiislon  of  the  Spiritfialte.


O  cursyd  hunger  of  syluer  and  of  golde
For  your  loue  and  desyre  immoderate
To  folys  and  boyes  presthode  is  nowe  solde
And  to  men  myscheuous  fyllyd  with  debate
The  godly  honour  longynge  to  a  state
Replete  with  wysdome  cunnynge  and  grauyte
Ar  nowe  nat  ordred  right  as  they  ought  to  be

O  folys  cursyd,  o  men  moche  myserable

Say  say  what  Furour  your  myndes  doth  constrayne

To  this  holy  order  whiche  is  to  you  damnable

If  ye  in  vertue  your  lyues  nat  mentayne

Away  with  this  mynde  withdrawe  your  fete  agayne

Assay  your  lyfe  longe  before  or  ye  begyn

For  it  is  damnable  to  man  ensuynge  syn

Yet  certaynly  I  fynde  by  euydence
That  in  the  worlde  is  no  sort  of  degre
Whiche  is  more  gyuen  to  inconuenyence
Than  ar  suche  Folys  of  this  spiritualte
O  where  is  chastnes  and  dame  humylyte
Alas  they  ar  dede  and  nat  with  vs  aquayntyd
But  flaterynge  falshode  hath  our  facis  payntyd

Alas  our  order  is  fallen  in  eiTour
The  path  is  left  wherin  we  ought  vs  kepe
With  what  relygion  do  we  our  lorde  honour
Alas  the  Shepherd  is  lewder,  than  the  shepe
This  great  disorder  causyth  my  herte  to  wepe
Alas  what  lewdness  is  cloked  vnder  cowlys
Who  can  expresse  the  foly  of  these  folys


Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiritualte. 6 1


O  holy  orders  of  Menkes  and  of  Freres

And  of  all  other  sortes  of  relygion

Your  straytnes  hath  decayed  of  late  yeres

The  true  and  perfite  rule  of  you  is  done

Fewe  kepyth  truly  theyr  right  profession

In  inwarde  vesture,  dyet,  worde,  or  dede

Theyr  chefe  stody  is  theyr  wretchyd  wombe  to  fede

O  holy  Benet  with  god  nowe  glorifyed
O  glorious  Austen,  o  Francis  decorate.
With  mekenes,  the  placis  that  ye  haue  edefyed
Ar  nowe  disordred  and  with  vyces  maculate
Enuy,  Pryde,  Malyce,  Glotony  and  debate
Ar  nowe  chefe  gyders  in  many  of  your  placis
Whiche  grace  and  vertue  vtterly  out  chasys

These  holy  faders  rehersyd  afore  by  name

Composed  rules  holy  and  laudable

For  men  religious,  to  lyue  after  the  same

Whiche  nowe  but  lytell  to  them  ar  agreable

But  in  theyr  lyfe  from  them  moche  varible

O  holy  Benet  Francis  and  Augustyne

Se  howe  your  children  despyseth  your  doctryne

But  to  speke  shortly  and  in  generall

We  fynde  but  fewe  suche  prestis  now  certayne

As  moyses  in  the  olde  lawe  first  of  all

To  serue  in  goddes  Temple  dyd  ordayne

But  vnwyse  men  rasshe,  and  mad  of  brayne

Becomyth  prestis  onely  for  couetyse

Gouernynge  the  Churche  in  a  disordred  wyse


62 Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiriiualte.


Loke  who  that  nowe  of  mynde  is  eleuate
And  that  gentyhnan  that  mysshapen  and  wytles  is
Shall  be  made  a  preste,  and  after  a  prelate
To  gyde  the  Churche,  full  bacwardly  I  wys
But  suche  as  here  the  same  doth  gyde  amys
And  in  theyr  lyfe  them  selfe  nat  gydyth  well
May  after  theyr  deth  abyde  rewarde  in  hell

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  translatour.
Ye  that  ar  gyders  of  goddes  heritage
Be  in  your  dedes  to  hym  faythfull  and  true
Instruct  his  flocke  with  vertuous  langage
And  good  example  to  goodnes  and  vertue
Teche  them  the  wayes  of  lewdnes  to  eschewe
Rather  with  your  workes  than  payntyd  eloquence
For  the  rude  pepyll  moste  gladly  them  subdue
To  that  thynge  wherof  they  se  experyence

Expell  couetyse,  and  desyre  of  dignyte

Beware  of  Venus,  hir  dartis  are  damnable

Take  nat  on  you  the  order  and  degre

Of  presthode :  without  that  ye  be  somwhat  able

For  this  is  often  prouyd  without  fable

That  whan  the  Shepherde  is  folysshe  outher  blynde

Vnto  his  mayster  he  is  nat  profitable

Nor  to  his  flocke :  as  he  shall  after  fynde

The  greattest  rote  of  all  mysgouernaunce
That  nowe  is  vsyd  amonge  the  comonte
Procedith  of  folysshe  prestis  ignoraunce
Whiche  haue  no  wysdome  way  nor  faculte


Of  the  abusion  of  the  Spiritualte.


To  hele  such  shepe  as  they  playne  scabbyd  se
And  straynge  abrode  without  aduysement
They  let  them  alone :  so  spiritually  they  dye
Wherfore  the  kepar  is  worthy  of  punysshement

The  cause  why  so  many  prestis  lackyth  wyt
Is  in  you  bysshops,  if  I  durst  trouth  expresse
Whiche  nat  consyder  what  men  that  ye  admyt
Of  lyuynge  cunnynge  person  and  godlynes
But  who  so  euer  hym  self  therto  wyll  dresse
If  an  angell  be  his  brokar  to  the  scribe
He  is  admyttyd  howe  belt  he  be  wytles
Thus  solde  is  presthode  for  an  vnhappy  brybe


Of  the  prowde  and  vayne  bostynge
of  Folys.


My  hande  is  wery  my  wyt  is  dull  almoste

Fayne  wolde  I  rest  to  refresshe  my  wyt  agayne

But  a  folysshe  bande,  that  vse  them  selfe  to  host

Of  thynge  nat  done  by  them  in  wordes  vayne

To  wiyte  theyr  lewdnes  doth  me  bynde  and  constrayne

For  some  them  host  in  Phesyke  and  the  lawys

Or  in  dedes  of  war  :  howe  beit  they  ar  but  dawes


Of  prowcie  mid  vayne  bostynge.


Here  had  I  purpoysd  as  I  before  haue  sayde

To  haue  stynt  my  tonge  and  seased  for  a  whyle

Or  of  my  boke  here  a  conclusion  made

And  so  these  folys  no  farther  to  reuyle

But  than  aduysement  dyd  me  beholde  :  and  smyle

Saynge  that  my  purpose  was  intendyd  in  vayne

And  I  but  euen  in  the  myddes  of  my  payne

This  worde  to  me  was  halfe  a  di  scon  fort

For  ahnoste  wery  was  I  of  my  trauayle

With  that  of  Folys  I  sawe  a  myghty  sort

Of  dyuers  sortis  and  dyuers  aparayle

Some  rayde  as  knyghtes  in  whyte  harnes  and  mayle

And  other  as  Doctours,  and  gyders  of  some  scoles

But  euer  me  thought  that  they  sholde  be  but  folys

Some  other  Crowned  as  Poetis  lawreat

And  other  as  Doctours  expert  in  medycyne

Of  whose  maners  condicions  and  estate

And  stately  bostynge  of  strength  and  of  doctryne

Here  shall  1  wryte,  who  lyst  therto  inclyne

And  first  I  proue  that  euery  day  we  se

That  bostynge  Folys  leste  of  theyr  dedes  be

Some  is  a  knyght  hym  bostygne  of  his  londes
"With  his  gylt  sporys,  and  other  cognysance
Another  a  Doctour  and  the  lawys  vnderstondes
And  sene  all  the  scolys  of  Italy  and  Fraunce
The  knyght  hym  bostyth  and  boldely  dare  auaunce
Of  his  olde  lynage,  nobles  and  auncetry
Recountynge  the  discent  of  all  his  progeny


66


Of  the  prowde  and


Ye  in  so  moche  that  oft  he  hath  no  shame

Hym  selfe  of  the  stocke  of  the  Romayns  senatours

Or  of  some  kynges  progeny  to  name

Els  other  whiche  hath  ben  myghty  conquerours

And  yet  perchaunce  his  first  progenytours

Came  first  of  all  vnto  theyr  chiefe  estate

By  fals  extorcion,  oppression  or  discayte

Suche  folys  ar  proude  of  suche  noblenes

Whiche  they  haue  neuer  nether  cowde  obtayne

By  theyr  owne  vertue  theyr  strength  or  theyr  boldnes

But  in  the  gettynge  therof  for  to  be  playne

Noblenes  is  gotten  with  dilygence  and  payne

By  iustyce  vertue  strength  and  rightwysnes

And  nat  by  rygour  oppression  or  ryches

Say  folye  by  what  vertue  or  worthynes  ^

Hast  thou  deseruyd  this  renowe  specyall

Or  what  hast  thou  done  wherby  this  noblenes

Wheron  thou  bostest,  is  thus  vnto  the  fall  ■  .'  ■-

If  it  were  sought  I  trowe  no  thynge  atall

Saue  that  thou  lust  suche  folysshe  wordes  to  fayne

Wherby  thy  foly  and  pryde  aperyth  playne

Lo  sayth  a  fole  I  haue  be  longe  in  warre

In  straunge  countrees  and  far  beyonde  the  se

To  dyuers  Nacions  my  dedys  knowen  ar  ''

Both  spayne  and  Egypt  and  Fraunce  spekes  of  me

In  so  many  countrees  in  warrys  haue  I  be

That  all  the  people  of  Est,  west,  North  and  South

My  name  and  laudys  haue  onely  in  theyr  mouth


vayjie  bosty?ige  of  Folys.  67


But  yet  perchaunce  this  fole  that  thus  hym  bostis
Was  neuer  in  war  nor  out  of  his  owne  londe
Some  other  as  Doctours  come  from  strange  costis
Coueytynge  that  name  though  they  nought  vnderstonde.
With  euery  folysshe  thynge  they  ar  in  honde
Spekynge  vayne  wordes  without  wysdome  and  prudence
Yet  count  they  them  wyse  and  of  parfyte  eloquence

They  boste  theyr  stody  and  vant  of  theyr  cunnynge
With  stately  wordes  proude  loke  and  countenaunce
And  thoughe  suche  folys  lernyd  haue  no  thynge
With  theyr  solem  pryde  they  defende  theyr  ignoraunce
As  none  were  wyser  in  all  the  scolys  of  fraunce
If  they  can  reken  and  tell  eche  bokes  name
They  thynke  them  self  great  doctours  by  the  same

So  lede  they  foly  about  fast  by  the  hande
Bostynge  theyr  laudes  and  name  in  euery  place
Howbeit  theyr  owne  dedes  on  se  or  on  lande
Were  neuer  so  noble  suche  lawdes  to  purchace
But  to  be  short  proude  folys  ar  in  that  case
Rotyd  by  nature  that  them  they  moste  auaunt
In  that  wherin  they  ar  moste  ignoraunt

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Desyst  ye  folys  your  bostynge  wordes  and  vayne
Let  other  men  commende  your  honestye
And  godly  lyfe,  for  it  is  foly  playne
To  prayse  your  selfe  though  that  ye  worthy  be
Than  moche  gretter  shame  is  it  to  lye
Bostynge  that  thynge  the  whiche  ye  neuer  had
In  cunnynge  strength  lynage  or  degre
Of  all  bostynge  this  namely  is  moste  bad.


68  Of  prozvde  and  vayne  bostynge.


But  yet  men  olde  of  our  predecessours

In  theyr  olde  prouerbes  often  comprehende

That  he  that  is  araonge  shrewyd  neyghbours

May  his  owne  dedes  laufully  commende

Syns  his  yll  wyllers  wyll  nat  therto  intende

Also  I  fynde  that  there  thre  sortes  be

Of  people  lyuynge,  whiche  may  themselfe  defende

In  lesynge,  for  they  haue  auctoryte  to  lye

The  first  is  pylgrymes  that  hath  great  wonders  sene
In  strange  countres,  suche  may  say  what  they  wyll
Before  tho  men  that  hath  nat  also  ben
In  those  same  places,  and  hath  of  them  no  skyll
The  seconde  ar  men  aged  suche  may  bost  theyr  fyll
Without  repugnaunce. And  men  of  hye  degre
Before  theyr  seruauntis  may  playne  say  what  they  wyll
Yet  ar  they  nought  but  folys  if  they  lye


Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


The  damnable  lust  of  cardes  and  of  dyce

And  other  gamys  prohybyte  by  the  lawe

To  great  offencis  some  folys  doth  attyce

Yet  can  they  nat  them  self  therfro  withdrawe

They  count  theyr  labour  and  los  nat  worth  a  strawe

Carynge  nought  els :  therin  is  theyr  delyte

Tyll  thryft  and  helth  from  them  be  scapyd  quyte


Of  car  cle  players  and  dysers.


Lo  yet  agayne  of  Folys  asserablyth  mo

Vnto  my  shyppys  in  hope  of  auauntage

But  oft  it  hapnyth  or  they  depart  and  go

Theyr  lust  them  turneth  to  losse  and  great  damage

By  theyr  lewde  gamys  furour  and  outrage

Suche  ar  great  gamners  hauynge  small  substance

Whiche  often  fall  to  great  losse  and  myschance

Sayth  poetis  that  in  hell  ar  Furyes  thre

The  folys  to  punysshe  that  ar  sende  to  the  same

For  theyr  nat  lyuynge  here  in  equyte

It  nedyth  nat  them  here  to  count  by  name

The  fourth  Fury  is  encresyd  by  this  game

Whiche  (than  the  other)  is  more  furious  and  bad

For  here  in  erth  it  makyth  folys  mad

But  of  men  gyuen  vnto  this  furiousnes

Of  vnsure  game,  chefe  cause  of  stryfe  and  wo

And  moche  losse :  somwhat  I  shall  expresse

But  first  I  say  some  ar  so  gyuen  therto

That  where  so  euer  they  labour  ryde  or  go

If  they  be  onys  inflamyd  with  the  game

To  theyr  destruccion  theyr  mynde  is  on  the  same

In  hope  to  get  (that  they  haue  lost)  agayne
All  theyr  hole  pleasour  is  set  to  throwe  the  dyse
So  of  one  losse  oft  tymes  make  they  twayne
Wherby  oftyme  they  ren  in  preiudyce
And  get  occasion  of  theft  and  other  vyce
But  thre  dyse  rennynge  square  all  of  one  sort
To  suche  Folys  is  chefe  confort  ioy  and  sport


Of  carde  players  and  dysers.  7  i


Suche  folowe  this  game  stryuynge  nyght  and  day
Tournynge  the  dyse  somtyme  by  polecy
Them  falsly  settynge  assaynge  if  they  may
Some  vyle  auauntage  for  to  obtayne  therby
But  than  if  they  nat  set  them  craftely
Anone  begynneth  brawlynge  and  debate
Blasfemynge  and  othes  the  pot  about  the  pate

Exces  of  watchynge  doth  players  great  damage
And  in  that  space  oft  Venus  doth  them  blynde
Makynge  them  hoore  longe  or  they  come  to  age
Also  this  game  troubleth  oft  theyr  mynde
With  wrath  them  makynge  vnstable  as  the  wynde
Theyr  mynde  it  disclosyth  theyr  wyt  infextynge  to
It  also  theyr  reasons  troublyth  with  inwarde  wo

A  couetous  herte  by  game  is  kept  in  fere
And  styrred  to  yre  euer  whan  it  can  nat  wyn
Whiche  yre  vnto  the  stomake  doth  great  dere
Besyenge  the  mynde  pryuely  within
The  wyt  thus  troublyd  of  wysdome  is  but  thyn
And  so  the  more  that  wrath  doth  hym  inflame
The  more  backwarde  and  lewdly  goeth  his  game

These  folys  vngracious  of  theyr  gouernaunce
Care  for  no  thynge  :  theyr  lust  is  fyxed  fast
On  vnsure  fortune :  and  hir  vncertayne  chaunce
Whiche  them  promotyth  to  beggers  at  the  last
Watchynge  without  season  tyll  theyr  wyt  be  past
Ye  two  nyghtes  or  thre  as  folys  voyde  of  grace
No  thyrst  nor  hunger  can  moue  them  from  that  place


72  Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


But  in  the  mean  season  if  that  any  discorde
Amonge  them  fall,  the  woundes  of  god  ar  sworne
His  armys,  herte  and  bonys,  almoste  at  euery  worde
Thus  is  our  sauyour  amonge  these  caytyfs  torne
And  wordes  of  malyce  myscliefe  and  great  scorne ' '
They  throwe  to  god  renounsynge  oft  his  name
Whan  that  mysfortune  doth  bacwarde  gyde  theyr  game

These  folys  in  furour  vpon  our  lorde  thus  cry

As  if  he  caryd  for  theyr  myscheuous  game

Or  whan  they  for  theyr  lossys  ar  sory

That  god  aboue  sholde  also  be  the  same

But  whyle  these  Folys  blasfeme  thus  christes  name

The  wymen  and  maydes,  whiche  is  abhomynable

In  game  and  othes  to  men  ar  euen  semblable

There  is  almoste  no  maner  of  degre

Man,  childe,  woman,  pore  man,  or  estate,

Olde  or  yonge,  that  of  this  game  ar  fre

Nor  yet  the  clargy,  both  pore  preste  and  prelate

They  vse  the  same  almoste  after  one  rate

Whan  by  great  los  they  brought  ar  in  a  rage

Right  fewe  haue  reason  theyr  madnes  to  asswage

I  wyll  nat  say  but  it  is  commendable

For  recreasion  somtyme  to  vse  suche  sport

So  it  be  done  in  season  and  tyme  laudable

And  amonge  persons  mekely  of  one  sort  ^

And  nat  for  lucre,  but  pleasour  and  confort

Without  all  othes  and  with  perfyte  pacyence

In  losse  and  gayne,  in  suche  game  is  none  offence


Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


But  yet  the  Lucre  that  is  won  therby

Is  nat  allowed  ne  by  the  lawes  approbate

For  to  be  gotten  true  and  rightwysely

For  god  almyghty  doth  suche  yll  getters  hate

And  theyr  wronge  gamys  also,  causynge  debate

Enuy  and  murder,  and  euen  for  the  same  cause

They  ar  prohybyte  also  by  the  lawes

And  to  be  playne  great  inconuenyences
Procedyth  to  many  by  this  vnlawfuU  game
And  by  the  same  oft  youth  doth  sue  offences
To  his  destruccion  and  all  his  frendes  shame
For  whan  all  theyr  good  is  wastyd  by  the  same
Often  some  by  foly  fallyth  to  be  a  thefe
And  so  ende  in  shame  sorowe  and  myschefe

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

Consyder  ye  players  the  great  losse  and  damage
That  comyth  of  this  game  vsyd  vnlaufully
Firste  of  it  comyth  no  maner  auauntage
But  if  one  put  hym  firste  in  ieoperdy
And  that  small  lucre  that  gotten  is  therby
Though  thou  about  the  same  hast  moche  payne
Thynke  well  that  it  is  gotten  wrongfully
The  lawe  the  byndeth :  it  to  restore  agayne

Wherfore  me  thynke  that  man  doth  surest  play
That  with  this  madnes  medlyth  nat  atall
But  in  his  cofres  his  moyney  kepis  alway
For  that  is  sure  howe  euer  the  cardes  fall


74  Of  carde  players  and  dysers.


Or  other  game  as  Tables  dyse  or  ball

And  better  a  lytell  sure  than  moche  in  fere  and  dout

Better  haue  one  birde  sure  within  thy  wall

Or  fast  in  a  Cage  than  twenty  score  without

This  game  also  oft  causeth  wrath  and  othes

And  malyce  where  erst  was  loue  and  amyte

And  moche  falshode,  whiche  god  almyghty  lothes

With  fals  forswerynge  disceyt  and  cruelte

It  causeth  by  watchynge  also  infirmyte

So  men  by  it  (los)  of  goodes  and  body  fynde

Wherfore  let  euery  man  suche  foly  fle

There  was  neuer  wyse  man  that  set  theron  his  mynde.


folys  oppressyd  with  theyr  owne  foly.


Of  folys  1  wot  there  is  great  company

Within  my  boke  in  fygures  and  scripture

But  in  this  Shyp  namely  ar  there  many

Whiche  theyr  owne  foly  can  by  no  meane  endure

Suche  in  this  Barge  shall  of  a  rowme  besure

Thoughe  they  haue  rowme  I  can  graunt  them  no  rest

For  with  the  Asse  they  nidely  ar  opprest


Of  folys  oppressyd


Within  my  shyp :  and  also  on  euery  syde
Ar  so  many  folys  saylynge  before  the  wynde
So  swyftly  that  me  thynke  they  wyll  nat  byde
But  sone  depart,  and  so  leue  me  behynde
The  faute  and  cause  is  in  my  sleuthfull  mynde
But  the  slowe  Asse  hye  on  my  backe  doth  skyp
And  warnyth  me  so  enter  I  the  shyp

The  shyp  I  enter,  and  worthy  am  therto
Amonge  my  folys  my  self  may  clayme  a  place
For  my  great  slouth  in  eche  dede  that  1  do
But  neuertheles  I  am  nat  in  that  case
To  occupy  great  rowme  before  eche  mannys  face
A  lytell  and  strayt  corner  for  me  is  best
That  I  may  slepe  therin  and  take  my  rest

I  coueyt  nat  to  be  in  places  wyde
I  am  content  with  a  corner  of  straytnes
Vpon  the  hatchys  I  coueyt  nat  to  byde
For  there  is  to  moche  labour  and  besynes
And  also  the  Asse  betokenynge  sleuthfulnes
Sholde  haue  to  moche  space  on  me  to  tred
If  I  at  large  about  by  it  were  led

Yet  in  my  sleuth  if  I  coude  be  pacient
And  folowe  the  Asse  without  all  repugnaunce
But  alway  redy  at  his  commaundement
I  sholde  be  put  to  moche  lesse  greuaunce
And  so  haue  hope  to  scape  this  perturbaunce
My  membres  fre,  from  suche  wo  and  payne.
But  well  I  fell  my  trust  is  but  in  vayne


with  theyr  owne  foly.


11


But  this  one  thynge  my  herte  and  mynde  doth  glad
And  in  my  payne  is  the  moste  chefe  confort
That  mo  companyons  by  the  same  Asse  ar  lad.
Of  my  condicion  lyuynge,  and  lyke  sort
Whose  owne  foly,  whiche  they  take  for  a  sport
By  longe  contynuaunce  themself  doth  sore  oppres
Tournynge  theyr  myrth  to  wo  and  wretchydnes

These  ar  they  whiche  wyll  nat  aply  theyr  mynde
To  wyse  mennys  counsell  and  aduysement
Wherby  they  myght  both  welth  and  profyte  fynde
If  to  suche  counsell  they  gladly  wolde  assent
These  ar  suche  folys  as  furious  of  intent
By  wrath  ar  dryuen  to  dyuers  great  offence
For  none  occasion,  without  reason  and  prudence

These  ar  suche  Folys  as  by  stryfe  and  debate

And  other  suche  whiche  lewdly  by  enuy

And  no  cause  gyuen  theyr  neyghbours  hurt  and  hate

And  so  to  malyce  theyr  cursyd  myndes  aply

These  ar  suche  Folys  as  suffer  paciently

For  lacke  of  betynge  theyr  children  folowe  vyce

To  theyr  great  shame,  theyr  losse  and  preiudyce

These  ar  they  that  by  malyce  at  all  hours

Ar  cruell  and  greuous,  and  put  to  losse  and  payne

Suche  as  they  ouer  may  :  both  straunges  and  neyghbours

By  cursyd  lesynges  whiche  they  iniustly  fayne

These  ar  they  that  of  all  men  haue  disdayne

With  dronken  dryuyls  gyuen  hole  to  glotony

These  ar  the  felawes  of  this  mad  company


78  Ofjhiys  oppressyd


Moreouer  into  my  Shyp  shall  they  ascende

That  ar  streght  shoed  whiche  them  doth  sharply  greue

But  yet  they  se  nat  therto,  it  to  amende

Suche  ar  they  that  on  no  goodnes  wyll  byleue

All  wastynge  folys  whiche  to  theyr  great  myscheue

Sell  and  waste  theyr  londes  suche  ar  of  this  sort

And  they  that  more  spende  than  theyr  londes  may  support

These  ar  mad  Folys  and  abhomynable
And  cursyd  of  god  :  that  ar  bawdes  to  theyr  wyues
Lettynge  them  to  hyre,  and  thoughe  that  profytable
This  way  they  thynke,  yet  right  fewe  of  them  thryues
These  ar  mad  Folys  that  lewde  ar  of  theyr  lyues
Knowynge  what  payne  is  ordeyned  for  eche  syn
Yet  moue  they  nat,  but  styll  abyde  therin

These  ar  proude  beggers,  and  other  stately  folys
Sclanderers  lyers,  and  Jurours  of  the  syse
Phesicians  and  lawyers,  that  neuer  went  to  scolys
And  fals  Tauerners  that  reken  one  pot  twyse
Tapsters  and  hostlers  that  folowe  that  same  gyse
These  ar  fals  offycers  that  lyue  vpon  brybes
As  excheters  officials  Counstables  and  scribes

Folys  of  these  sortis  and  mo  than  I  can  tell
For  theyr  myslyuynge  and  great  enormyte
Of  the  slowe  Asse  shal  be  tred  downe  to  hell
If  they  nat  mende  them  self  before  they  dye
But  in  the  mean  tyme  shall  they  be  here  with  me
In  my  folys  Shyp,  on  se  rowynge  with  payne
If  they  amende,  depart  they  shall  agayne


with  theyr  owne  foly.  79


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
O  folys  oppressyd  with  your  mysgouernaunce
Amende  your  lyfe  expell  this  your  offence
Ye  can  nat  excuse  your  self  by  ignoraunce
Ye  ar  taught  to  leue  your  inconenyence
By  godly  Prechers  men  of  hye  prudence
Also  the  punysshement  whiche  god  doth  often  sende
To  other  Folys  shulde  moue  you  to  amende.


the  extorcion  of  knyghtis,  great
offycers,  men  of  war,  scribes  and  prac-
tysers  of  the  lawe.


Whyle  knyghtes  and  scribes  exchetours  and  constables

And  other  ofFycers  whiche  haue  auctoryte

Vnder  the  kynge :  as  Shryfs  by  fayned  fables

Catche  a  rural]  man  rude,  and  of  symplycite

If  he  haue  money,  These  theues  so  cruell  be

That  what  by  crakynge  thretenynge  and  extorcion

They  spoyle  this  pore  man,  so  that  sympyll  is  his  porcion


Of  the  extorcion  of  knyghtis. 8  i


To  our  folysshe  Shyp  I  sommon  and  assyte
Constables  scribes  lawyers  and  Sowdyours
Exchetours  Sheryfs,  and  knyghtes  that  haue  delyte
To  abuse  theyr  offyces,  by  falshode  and  rygours
They  gyue  me  occasion  to  blame  theyr  errours
And  for  that  in  theyr  charge  they  often  tryp
By  false  abusion,  they  shall  be  in  my  shyp

Hast  hyther  I  requyre,  my  Nauy  is  a  flote
Longe  tary  hurtyth,  for  hawsyd  is  the  sayle
The  anker  wayed,  within  borde  is  the  bote
Our  shyp  decked  after  a  homely  aparayle
By  suche  passyngers  I  loke  for  none  auayle
But  fere  displesour,  bycause  I  shall  be  trewe
Yet  shall  I  so.  ensue  what  may  ensue

Good  offycers  ar  good  and  commendable
And  manly  knyghtes  that  lyue  in  rightwysenes
But  they  that  do  nat  ar  worthy  of  a  bable
Syns  by  theyr  pryde  pore  people  they  oppres
My  mayster  kyrkham  for  his  perfyte  mekenes
And  supportacion  of  men  in  pouertye
Out  of  my  shyp  shall  worthely  be  fre

I  flater  nat  I  am  his  true  seruytour

His  chaplayne  and  bede  man  whyle  my  lyfe  shall  endure

Requyrynge  god  to  exalt  hym  to  honour

And  of  his  Prynces  fauour  to  be  sure

For  as  I  haue  sayd  I  knowe  no  creature

More  manly  rightwyse  wyse  discrete  and  sad

But  thoughe  he  be  good,  yet  other  ar  als  bad

VOL.  II.  F


^  2  Of  the  extorc'wn  of  knyghtts.

They  shall  vnnamyd  my  shyppis  haue  in  cure

And  other  ofFycers  who  so  euer  they  be

Whiche  in  extorcion  and  falshode  them  inure

Hopynge  by  the  same  to  come  do  dignyte

And  by  extorcion  to  augment  theyr  dfcgre

Mansell  of  Otery  for  powlynge  of  the  pore

Were  nat  his  great  wombe,  here  sholde  haue  an  ore

But  for  his  body  is  so  great  and  corporate

And  so  many  burdens  his  brode  backe  doth  charge

If  his  great  burthen  cause  hym  to  come  to  late

Yet  shall  the  knaue  be  Captayne  of  a  barge

Where  as  ar  bawdes,  and  so  sayle  out  at  large

About  our  shyp  to  spye  about  for  prayes

For  therupon  hath  he  lyued  all  his  dayes

But  hym  I  leue,  and  so  retourne  agayne

Namly  to  speke  of  the  vnrightwysenes

Of  knyghtes  and  fals  scribes  whiche  fully  set  theyr  brayne

To  brynge  pore  people  into  gretter  wretchydnes

Than  they  were  erst  and  so  them  to  oppresse

For  playnly  to  speke  fals  knyghtes  and  scribes  be

Of  one  maner  lyuynge  practyse  and  faculte

The  scribe  in  wrytynge  with  his  disceytfull  pen
Sytfynge  in  his  syege  acloyde  with  couetyse
By  subtyle  wordes  spoylyth  the  symple  men
Whiche  come  to  hym,  desyrynge  right  iustyce
The  knyght  in  warre  is  gyuen  to  the  same  vyce
Robbynge  and  spoylynge  by  feldys :  preuely
But  the  scribe  oppressyth  the  pore  men  openly


Of  the  extorcion  of  knyghth.


The  knyght  in  warre  in  tyme  of  frost  or  rayne
Or  the  colde  snowe  as  man  masyd  with  rage
Subduyth  his  body  to  ieopardye  or  payne
Damnynge  his  soule  for  brybynge  auauntage
The  iniust  scribe  ensuys  the  same  vsage
Defylynge  his  soule  with  his  pen  and  black  ynke
Whose  couetyse  causyth  his  soule  in  hell  to  synke

The  cursyd  hunger  of  syluer  and  of  golde
After  one  maner  doth  these  two  so  inflame
That  for  the  Lucre  therof  theyr  soules  ar  solde
The  one  a  thefe  without  all  fere  and  shame
In  tyme  of  warre  in  spoylynge  hath  his  game
Murdrynge  men  and  brennynge  towne  and  vylage
Nought  sekynge  but  Lucre  by  spoylynge  and  pyllag

The  pore  chorle  vnexpert  and  innocent
Suspectynge  nought  for  his  true  symplycyte
Is  by  this  scribe  compellyd  by  falshode  vyolent
To  pay  for  his  pennys  tyll  he  a  begger  be
Thus  lyue  knyghtis  and  scribes  after  one  degre
Oppressynge  the  pore,  them  puttynge  to  great  payn
Vnto  them  self  by  falshode  gettynge  gayne

Eche  of  them  askyth  Lucre  and  wynnynge
Nought  carynge  whether  it  be  wronge  or  right
Thus  cursyd  is  the  sort  that  haue  theyr  lyuynge
In  robbynge  pore  people  by  violence  and  myght
But  if  they  had  lustyce  and  mercy  in  theyr  syght
Theyr  ofFyces  mynystrynge  by  lawe  and  equyte
Both  of  god  and  man  rewardyd  sholde  they  be


84


Of  the  extorcion  of  hiyght'is.


Who  that  is  rightwyse  good,  men  shall  hym  commende
And  lawde  his  name,  and  his  dedes  magnyfye
The  knyght  is  ordeyned  by  manhode  to  defende
Wydowhode  and  age  from  wronge  and  iniury
With  fatherles  children,  and  suche  as  lyue  in  penury
And  with  dynt  of  swerde  to  defende  the  comon  welth
Expellynge  theuys,  sauynge  true  mannys  helth

The  scribe  is  ordeyned  hymself  to  exercyse
To  wryte  with  his  pen  iust  lawes  and  verytable
And  shewe  by  his  craft  the  rule  of  right  iustyce
But  nowe  theyr  dedys  ar  moche  varyable
For  knyghtes  and  scribes  by  wayes  disceyuable
By  the  swerde  and  pen  right  cursydly  intende
Them  to  oppres,  whome  they  ought  to  defende

As  wydowes  pore  men  and  children  pryuate
Of  Father  and  mother  and  feble  men  by  age
By  suche  oppression  they  increase  theyr  estate
And  by  successyon  of  all  theyr  hole  lynage
Alas  the  childe  oft  forgoys  his  heritage
Without :  right  longe  or  he  be  of  discression
And  all  by  fals  knyghtis  spoylynge  and  oppression

In  erth  no  gyle,  nor  falshode  is  doutles

Nor  yll  that  is  to  scribes  comparable

But  touchynge  thoppression  and  vnhappynes

Of  other  offycers  it  is  innumerable

And  namely  sowdeours  ar  nowe  raoste  vengeable

And  other  courters :  that  scant  the  kynges  way

Of  theyr  spoylynge  may  be  quyte  by  nyght  or  day


Of  the  extordon  of  knyghtis.


85


"What  shall  I  wryte  of  powlynge  customers
And  spoylynge  serchers  Baylyfs  and  Constables
Sergeauntis  and  catchpollis  and  other  offycers
Whiche  with  others  plate  garnysshe  gay  theyr  tables
Theyr  howsys  stuffed  with  brybes  abhomynbles
Suche  by  oppression  become  thus  excellent
Contynuynge  in  falshode  for  lacke  of  punysshement

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Ye  knyghtes  vnrightwyse  and  offycers  iniust
Auoyde  your  extorcion  done  by  cruelte
Auoyde  this  desyre,  mad  and  myscheuous  lust
Whiche  ye  haue  in  spoylynge  of  the  comonte
Better  is  for  you  to  lyue  in  pouertye
So  plesynge  god  with  vndefyled  name
Than  by  oppression  to  come  to  hye  degre
And  than  after  deth  be  damnyd  for  the  same


Of  folysshe  messangers  and  Pursuyuauntis.


I  am  a  swyft  Pursuyuaunte  or  messangar
None  in  the  worlde  swyfter  as  I  wene
Here  am  I  come  from  londes  strange  and  far
Yet  can  I  nat  (drynkynge)  voyde  my  botell  clene
Tyll  in  the  foles  Shyppes  I  haue  ben
And  to  the  chefe  delyuered  vp  this  byll
Shypman  (tyll  I  enter)  let  thy  shyp  stande  styll


Ofjolysshe  messange?'S.


87


I  had  purposyd  nat  to  haue  tane  on  honde

To  cary  in  my  shyp  any  messangers

Or  pursuyuauntis  that  occupy  on  londe

For  I  myself  and  all  my  maryners

Kepe  on  the  see,  with  our  folysshe  partners

So  far  from  londe,  and  rowynge  with  suche  payne

That  no  messanger  may  vs  reuoke  agayne

Yet  some  of  them  coueyt  to  haue  place

To  them  assigned  within  a  folysshe  barge

And  with  our  folys  to  be  so  moche  in  grace

Of  all  theyr  messages  to  haue  the  cure  and  charge

To  this  intent  to  ren  euer  out  at  large

With  letters  or  Charters,  about  dyuers  londes

Somtyme  in  theyr  mouth  and  somtyme  in  theyr  hondes

Somtyme  other  wyse  them  hydynge  pryuely

To  kepe  them  sure,  from  moystnes  of  the  rayne

And  so  to  go  without  all  ieopardy

In  his  iourney  and  salue  to  come  agayne

But  some  of  these  folys  take  vpon  them  payne

To  execute  more,  than  is  in  theyr  message

To  theyr  owne  scorne,  and  lordes  great  damage

But  yet  oft  tyme  (Howbeit  theyr  promes)
Was  in  all  hast  to  theyr  message  to  entende
They  it  prolonge  by  ouer  moche  dronkennes
Taryenge  theyr  charge,  and  bryngynge  nought  to  ende
By  theyr  slowe  paas,  thus  he  that  dyd  them  sende
Thynkyth  his  mater  well  done  and  brought  to  pas
But  by  theyr  prolongynge  it  is  euyn  as  it  was


88


Offolysshe  messangers


And  often  these  messangers  so  wysely  them  gouerne
That  whyle  they  sholde  be  in  hande  with  theyr  mesage
They  range  about  to  eche  alehous  and  tauerne
"With  the  swete  wyne  theyr  great  hete  to  asswage
Tyll  he  be  brought  into  the  dronken  rage
Than  opyns  he  his  letter  it  redynge  twyse  or  thryse
And  all  for  this  purpose  newe  lesynges  to  deuyse

His  letter  he  openyth  as  fals  and  past  all  shame

To  knowe  the  secrete  therof  to  this  intent

"With  his  fals  tunge  to  glose  vpon  the  same

And  oft  in  his  message  he  is  so  neglygent

To  lese  his  letters,  and  so  as  imprudent

He  can  nat  that  shewe  that  men  to  hym  commyt

Retournynge  without  answere  so  folysshe  is  his  wyt

A  true  messanger  and  of  parfyte  dilygence

Is  moche  worthy,  and  greatly  commendable

For  lyke  as  in  Somers  feruent  vyolence

The  colde  wynde  and  snowe  to  man  is  delectable

And  as  to  men  wery  :  rest  is  moche  confortable

So  a  messanger  spedy  faythfnll  and  parfyte

Retournynge  to  his  lorde  doth  hym  as  great  delyte

Suche  true  messangers  no  man  wyll  discommende
That  is  of  wysdome  mynde  pacient,  or  doctryne
But  folysshe  messangers  here  I  comprehende
Whiche  in  theyr  message  to  folysshe  wordes  inclyne
More  tendynge  to  theyr  botell  full  of  ale  or  wyne
Than  to  theyr  message,  for  this  is  prouyd  playne
That  sende  a  fole  forth, and  so  comys  he  agayne


and  pursiiyiiauntis.

Suche  folys  haue  theyr  mawes  so  feruent
In  hete  by  rennynge,  and  excessyue  langage
Fyllyd  with  foly  :  That  no  drynke  can  it  stent
Nor  with  moystnes  that  feruent  hete  asswage
But  a  faythfull  man  that  doth  truly  his  message
Is  to  be  lawdyd. But  we  dayly  proued  se
That  wyse  wyll  do  wysely,  and  folys  as  they  be.

Thenuoy  of  Barclay  the  actour.
Ye  follysshe  messangers  gyuen  to  neglygence
To  slouth  and  ryot  in  your  besynes
Reduce  your  myndes  to  parfyte  dilygence
So  may  ye  to  your  lordes  do  confort  and  gladnes
Be  true  in  his  myssage,  gyue  you  to  secretnes
If  ye  do  nat  I  Barclay,  shall  certayne
For  eche  of  you  my  folys  lyueray  dres
That  is  a  hode  to  kepe  you  from  the  rayne


89


Of  folisshe  Cokes  and  buttelers  and  other
offycers  of  howsholde  that  wast  theyr
maysters  good  without  mesure.


Lo  nowe  comys  a  sort  by  dosyns  multyplyed
Vnto  my  shyp  :  of  dyuers  cokes  and  buttelers.
A  rowme  to  them  may  nat  be  well  denyed
Nor  to  all  other  suche  howsholde  offycers
These  folys  hast  fast  to  be  my  maryners
Rowynge  with  suche  myght  that  all  the  se  fomes
Suche  increas  our  Nauy,  by  vylenes  of  other  wombes


Of  folisshe  cokes  and  biittelers. 9 1


This  sort  of  seruauntes  whome  thou  dost  here  espy

Gyuen  to  theyr  wombe  by  lust  obhomynable

Of  meat  and  drynke  and  superflwe  glotony

Ar  to  theyr  maysters  but  lytell  profytable.

Oft  Cokes  and  butlers  ar  so  disceyuable

Of  nature,  to  theyr  mayster  and  folowe  this  offence

That  nought  they  set  by  his  losse  by  theyr  expence

These  folys  reuellynge  on  theyr  maysters  coste

Spare  no  expence,  nought  carynge  his  damage

But  they  as  Caytyfs  often  thus  them  boste

In  theyr  glotony  with  dissolute  langage

Be  mery  companyons  and  lusty  of  cowrage

We  haue  our  pleasour  in  deynty  mete  and  drynke

On  whiche  thynge  only  we  alway  muse  and  thynke

Ete  we  and  drynke  we  therfore  without  all  care
With  reuyll  without  mesure  as  longe  as  we  may
It  is  a  royall  thynge  thus  lustely  to  fare
With  others  mete,  thus  reuell  we  alway
Spare  nat  the  pot  another  shall  it  pay
Whan  that  is  done  spare  nat  for  more  to  call
He  merely  slepys  the  whiche  shall  pay  for  all

Thus  fewe  or  none  of  kepars  shall  we  fynde
Trewe  in  theyr  dedys,  and  after  one  intent
Though  maysters  to  theyr  seruauntis  be  full  kynde
Agayne  is  the  seruaunt  fals  and  fraudelent
So  howsholde  seruauntes  though  they  seme  innocent
And  without  falshode  before  theyr  lordes  face
They  wast  all  and  more  in  another  place


92  Of  foils  she  cokes  and  buttelers.


Whan  mayster  and  maystres  in  bed  ar  to  rest

The  hordes  ar  spred,  the  dores  open  echone

Than  farys  the  Coke  and  Butteler  of  the  best

Other  both  togyther,  or  eche  of  them  alone

With  wyne  and  ale  tyll  all  the  best  be  gone

By  galons  and  potels  they  spende  without  care

That  whiche  theyr  lorde  for  his  owne  mouth  dyd  spare

They  ar  nat  content  amonge  them  selfe  to  spende
Theyr  maysters  goodes  in  suche  lyke  glotony  ■
But  also  for  other  glotons  they  do  sende
And  strange  dronkardys  to  helpe  out  theyr  vylany
By  whose  helpe  they  may  the  vessellis  make  dry
And  he  that  hath  way  to  drynke  at  eche  worde
Amonge  these  Caytyfs  is  worshyppyd  as  a  lorde

Amonge  these  wasters  is  no  fydelyte

They  haue  no  hede  nor  care  ne  aduertence.

Of  the  great  losse,  and  the  cause  of  pouertye

Growynge  to  theyr  lorde  by  this  wastfull  expence

But  hym  begyle  behynde  his  backe  and  presence

The  mayster  or  lorde  lyinge  In  his  bed

Full  lytell  knowys  howe  his  howsholde  is  led

But  whyle  the  seruauntes  fals  ryot  thus  ensue
Wastynge  theyr  maysters  good  and  hole  substance
The  mayster  thynkes  his  seruauntes  good  and  true
But  if  it  fortune  after  by  some  chaunce
That  the  mayster  haue  a  desyre  or  plesaunce
Of  his  best  drynke  with  his  louers  to  haue  some
The  vessell  empty  shall  yelde  nought  but  bom  bom


Of foils  she  cokes  and  buttelers.


Than  shall  the  lorde  perceyue  the  great  disceyte

Of  his  wastfuU  seruauntes  and  theyr  fals  abusion

But  his  perceyuynge  than  is  all  to  late

So  it  apereth  that  great  collusion

Comyth  vnto  many,  and  extreme  confusion

By  vntrue  seruauntes  as  Cokes  and  butlers

And  by  all  other  housholde  offycers.

I  thynke  it  shame  to  wryte  in  this  my  boke
The  great  disceyte  gyle  and  vnclenlynes
Of  any  scolyon,  or  any  bawdy  Coke
His  lorde  abusynge  by  his  vnthryftynes
Some  for  the  nonys  theyr  meat  lewdly  dres.
Gyuynge  it  a  tast  to  swet  to  salt  or  stronge
Bycause  the  seruauntes  wolde  eat  it  them  amonge

This  company,  and  bende  vngracious

Ar  with  no  pety  mouyd,  nor  yet  care

They  wast :  and  ete  theyr  mayster  out  of  hous

Deuourynge  his  good,  tyll  he  be  pore  and  bare

And  with  what  meates  so  euer  the  lorde  shall  fare

If  it  be  in  the  kechyne  or  it  come  to  the  hall

The  coke  and  scolyon  must  taste  it  first  of  all

In  euery  dysshe  these  caytyfs  haue  theyr  handes

Gapynge  as  it  were  dogges  for  a  bone

Whan  nature  is  content  fewe  of  them  vnderstandes.

In  so  moche  that  as  I  trowe,  of  them  is  none

That  dye  for  age :  but  by  glotony  echone

But  suche  folys  were  nat  theyr  hasty  lokes

To  my  folysshe  shyp  sholde  chosen  be  for  Cokes


Of  foils  sJje  cokes  ctnd  buttelers.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
In  this  shyp  myght  I  compryse  or  comprehende
Seruauntis  of  euery  craft  and  facultye
Whiche  in  lewde  ryot  theyr  maysters  goodes  spende
Bryngynge  them  therby  to  carefull  pouertye
But  as  for  this  tyme  they  shall  passe  by  for  me
Syns  by  theyr  maysters  folysshe  neglygence
They  haue  occasion  so  ryotous  to  be
By  great  cause  gyuen  of  inconuenyence.

But  to  you  seruauntis  I  tourne  my  pen  agayne
Exortynge  you  to  your  maysters  to  be  true
And  nat  thus  to  spende  and  wast  his  good  in  vayne
And  so  to  harde  nede  therby  hym  to  subdue
Lewde  felawshyp  se  that  ye  euer  eschewe
Beware  of  ryot,  be  content  wyth  your  degre.
For  who  that  agaynst  his  mayster  is  vntrewe
In  his  owne  labour  is  seldome  sen  to  thye.


Of  the  arrogance  and  pryde  of  rude  men
of  the  countrey.


The  rustycall  pryde  of  carles  of  the  londe
Remaynyth  nowe,  whiche  I  intende  to  note
Whiche  theyr  owne  pryde  nat  se  nor  vnderstonde
Wherfore  they  coueyte  with  me  to  haue  a  bote
And  so  they  shall,  but  whan  they  ar  a  flote
Let  them  me  pardon,  for  I  wyll  take  no  charge
Of  them  ;  but  them  touche  and  let  them  ren  at  lar  ge


Of  the  arrogance  and pryde


Of  husbonde  men  the  lyfe  and  the  nature
Was  wont  be  rude  and  of  symplycyte
And  of  condicion  humble  and  demure
But  if  a  man  wolde  nowe  demande  of  me
Howe  longe  agone  is  syns  they  thus  haue  be
I  myght  well  answere  it  is  nat  longe  agone
Syns  they  were  symple  and  innocent  echone

And  so  moche  were  they  gyuen  to  symplenes
And  other  vertues  chefe  and  pryncipall
That  the  godly  trone  of  fayth  and  rightwysnes
Had  left  great  townes  lordes  and  men  royall
And  taken  place  amonge  these  men  rurall
All  vertues :  stedfastnes  iustyce  and  lawe
Disdayned  nat  these  pore  cotis  thekt  with  strawe

There  was  no  disceyt  nor  gyle  of  tymes  longe
Amonge  these  men :  they  were  out  chasyd  and  gone
For  iustyce  (as  I  haue  sayd)  was  them  amonge
And  of  longe  tyme  there  kept  hir  chayre  and  trone
Of  brynnynge  Auaryce  amonge  these  men  was  none
No  wrongfull  lucre  nor  disceytful  auauntage
Infect  the  myndes  of  men  of  the  vyllage

That  is  to  say  they  knewe  none  vsury

No  hunger  of  golde  dyd  theyr  myndes  confounde

They  knewe  no  malyce  :  nor  pryde  of  theyr  body

Nor  other  vyces  that  trowbleth  nowe  the  grounde

They  coueyted  nat  to  greatly  to  abounde

In  proude  aparayle,  lyke  Cytezyns  excellent

But  theyr  hole  lyfe  was  symple  and  innocent


of  rude  men  of  the  count  rey.  97


But  nowe  the  lyfe  of  eche  carle  and  vyllayne.
Is  in  all  maners  chaungyd  euen  as  clene
As  if  the  trone  moste  noble  and  souerayne
Of  rightwysenes  :  amonge  them  had  neuer  bene
Of  theyr  olde  vertues  nowe  is  none  in  them  sene
Wherby  they  longe  were  wont  themself  to  gyde
Theyr  lyfe  is  loste  and  they  set  hole  on  pryde

Theyr  clothes  stately  after  the  courters  gyse

Theyr  here  out  busshynge  as  a  foxis  tayle

And  all  the  fassions  whiche  they  can  deuyse

In  counterfaytynge  they  vse  in  aparayll

Party  and  gardyd  or  short  to  none  auayle

So  that  if  god  sholde  theyr  bodyes  chaunge

After  theyr  vesture  theyr  shape  sholde  be  full  strange

Thus  is  theyr  mekenes  and  olde  symplycyte
Tournyd  by  theyr  foly  to  arrogance  and  pryde
Theyr  rightwysenes,  loue  and  fydelyte
By  enuy  and  falshode  nowe  ar  set  asyde
Disceyt  and  gyle  with  them  so  sure  doth  byde
That  folke  of  the  towne  of  them  oft  lerne  the  same
And  other  newe  yllis  causynge  reprofe  and  shame

Theyr  scarsnes  nowe  is  tournyd  to  couetyse
They  onely  haue  golde  and  that,  in  abundaunce
Theyr  vertue  is  gone,  and  they  rotyd  in  vyce
Onely  on  riches  fixed  is  theyr  plesaunce
Fye  Chorles  amende  this  mad  mysgouernaunce
What  mouyth  you  vnto  this  thyrst  feruent
Of  golde  :  that  were  wont  to  be  so  innocent


Of  arrogance  and  pryde.


What  causeth  you  thus  your  ]yfe  to  change
To  cursyd  malyce  from  godly  innocence
Nowe  Carles  ar  nat  content  with  one  grange
Nore  one  ferme  place,  suche  is  theyr  insolence
They  must  haue  many,  to  support  iheyr  expence
And  so  a  riche,  vyllayne  proude  and  arrogant
Anone  becomyth  a  couetous  marchant

Than  labours  he  for  to  be  made  a  state

And  to  haue  the  pryuelege  of  hye  nobles  -  ■ '

Thus  churlys  becomyth  statis  nowe  of  late

Hye  of  renowne  without  all  sympylnes

But  it  is  great  foly  and  also  shame  doutles

For  Carles  to  coueyt  this  wyse  to  clym  so  hye

And  nat  be  pleasyd  with  theyr  state  and  degre

Tknuoy  of  Barclay  thu  translatour.
Fye  rurall  carles  awake  I  say  and  ryse  „  '-  ■

Out  of  your  vyce  and  lyfe  abhomynable
Namely  of  pryde,  wrath,  enuy  and  couetyse  '
Whiche  ye  insue,  as  they  were  nat  damnable
Recouer  your  olde  mekenes,  whiche  is  most  profytable
Of  all  vertues,  and  be  content  with  your  degre
For  make  a  carle  a  lorde,  and  without  any  fable
In  his  inwarde  maners  one  man  styll  shall  he  be.


Of  the  contempt  and  dispysynge  of
pouertye.


In  this  our  tyme  we  pouertye  out  chase
From  vs,  but  ryches  doth  euery  man  content
The  pore  is  oppressyd  to  grounde  in  eche  place
He  onely  is  mocked  and  countyd  imprudent
As  it  were  a  naturall  fole,  or  innocent
He  that  is  pore,  and  wyse,  must  hym  submyt
Vnto  a  riche  fole  whiche  in  a  trone  shall  syu


loo  Of  the  contempt  and


I  cary  of  folys  within  this  present  barge

A  marueylous  nomber  and  almoste  infynyte

Whiche  on  vayne  ryches  only  haue  theyr  charge

And  hath  on  it  more  pleasour  and  delyte

Than  in  good  vertues  that  myght  theyr  soule  profyt(

They  set  more  store  the  peny  to  posses

Than  of  good,  maners,  worshyp,  or  holynes

All  men  forsaketh  in  this  tyme  to  sustayne
The  weght  and  burthen  of  godly  pouerte
The  cursyd  hunger  of  ryches  doth  constrayne
The  hertis  of  men  and  that  of  eche  degre
Good  lyuers  of  no  valour  countyd  be
If  they  lacke  riches,  theyr  goodnes  to  support
To  theyr  company  none  forsyth  to  resort

They  that  haue  honoured  wysdome  here  before

And  loued  vertue,  and  in  the  same  procede

In  this  our  tyme  promotyd  ar  no  more

To  lawde  and  honour  whiche  ought  to  be  theyr  med

To  rightwyse  men  nowe  no  man  taketh  hede

But  onely  they  haue  bribes  in  plente

That  ar  moste  riche  and  hyest  in  degre

But  syns  it  is  so  that  plenty  and  abundaunce
Of  vayne  riches  and  blynde  and  frayle  treasour
Doth  them  that  hath  the  same  lyghtly  auaunce
To  loue,  to  frendshyp,  to  lawdes  and  honour
And  he  that  lackyth  the  same  is  in  dolour
Therfore  all  men  more  gladly  it  ensue
Than  lawdable  lyfe  gode  maners  or  vertue


dispysynge  of  poiiertye.


lO  I


The  worlde  rennyth  on  suche  chaunce  nowe  adayes

That  none  by  vertue  riches  can  attayne

But  who  that  wyll  be  riche  must  folowe  nowe  suche  wayes

Firste  must  he  flater  and  of  honour  haue  disdayne

He  spare  must  none  othes  though  they  be  fals  and  vayne

And  that  he  hath  sayde  by  and  by  forsake.

Nowe  swere  and  promes,  anone  them  both  to  brake

He  must  promes  and  vowe  both  to  god  and  man

And  neuer  care  nor  force  to  kepe  the  same

By  falshode  or  brybynge  get  what  he  can

His  wordes  and  dedes  both  without  fere  and  shame

By  cruell  delynge  he  must  hym  get  a  name

Nought  must  he  care  for  synne  nor  vyolence

Nouther  present  nor  past,  styll  redy  to  offence

He  must  with  rauysshynge  clawes  exercyse
Vsury,  rubbynge  from  people  innocent
Brybes  and  spoylynges  and  tyme  therfore  deuyse
He  must  bere  talys  faynyd  and  fraudelent
And  with  the  lyes  trouble  myndes  pacient
And  into  the  erys  of  good  men  and  laudable
He  droppyth  venym  by  wordes  vengeable

O  damnable  lyfe  pollutyd  all  with  vyce

O  deuylysshe  maners  alas  we  may  complayne

The  worlde  is  wrappyd  in  suche  syn  by  couetyse

Whiche  doth  all  vertue  and  godlynes  distayne

All  thynge  is  solde,  for  frayll  treasour  and  vayne

Laufull  and  vnlaufull  vertue  lawe  and  right

Ar  solde  for  money  whiche  blyndyth  mannys  syght


I  o  2  Of  the  contempt  and


Were  nat  blynde  treasour  and  vnbappy  ryches

Many  one  for  theyr  synnes  and  olFence

Sholde  worthely  haue  dyed  in  wretchydnes

And  other  escapyd  for  theyr  innocence

The  peny  damnyth  :  somtyme  gyuynge  sentence

So  that  oft  tymes  in  tyme  of  iugement

It  reddyth  murdrers  and  Theues  fro  punysshement

Thus  synnes  greuous  escapyth  quyte  and  fre
By  money,  whiche  is  so  good  an  aduocate
That  it  man  reddyth  what  euer  his  trespas  be
From  deth  and  peryll  if  it  come  nat  to  late
It  gettyth  loue  of  pore  man  and  estate
It  wolues  and  Foxis  delyuereth  from  tourment
And  hangeth  vp,  doues  and  Lambes  innocent

The  ryche  by  oppressyon  augmentyth  theyr  ryches

Whiche  is  at  last  to  theyr  owne  great  damage

Lyke  as  the  Bybyll  playnly  doth  expres

Howe  Achab  wolde  haue  had  the  herytage

Of  Nabeth :  descendynge  to  hym  by  his  lynage

Wherfore  this  Naboth  righiwysly  withstode

The  kynges  wyll  and  that  by  reason  gode

Where  as  this  rightwyse  man  full  wretchydly
By  this  ryche  kynge,  by  oppression  playne
And  his  (^enes  falshode  was  damnyd  wrongfully
For  his  denyenge,  and  so  with  stonys  slayne
For  whiche  thynge  this  kynge  after  had  payne
By  wretchyd  deth  whiche  god  to  hym  dyd  sende
Of  extorcioners  this  is  the  comon  ende


dispysynge  of  pouertye.  103


Thus  the  pore  onely  for  theyr  syraplycite
Is  tred  under  fote  by  suche  as  haue  myght
Thus  bagges  must  be  had  of  pure  necessyte
For  without  them  no  man  can  haue  his  right
But  whan  the  golden  age  the  worlde  dyd  lyght
And  rayned  amonge  men,  than  was  pouertye
Of  great  lawde  and  glory  with  men  of  eche  degre

Than  was  theyr,  fode  seas  theyr  lyuynge  lyberall
Theyr  labour  comon,  they  knewe  no  couetyse
All  thynge  was  coraon  than  amonge  them  all
The  lawe  of  nature  from  them  expellyd  vyce
Without  violence  or  rygour  of  iustyce
But  none  of  all  these  our  firste  progenytours
Theyr  myndes  blyndyd  with  gatherynge  great  treasours

But  thoughe  by  ryches  nowe  men  be  enhaunced
Yet  in  tyme  past  men  haue  by  pouertye
In  lawde  and  glory  theyr  royalmes  hye  auaunsyd
And  come  therby  vnto  so  great  dignyte
That  theyr  hye  name  and  fame  can  neuer  dye
Rome  was  firste  pore,  and  pore  was  the  senate
And  in  Rome  pore  was  many  a  great  estate

Yet  were  they  nobly  disposyd  to  batayle

So  that  whyle  they  lyuyd  in  theyr  symplenes

No  other  Nacion  agayne  them  coude  preuayle

But  after  whan  they  gaue  theyr  myndes  to  ryches

Oft  strange  Nacions  them  sharply  dyd  oppres

By  this  example  it  apereth  openly

That  to  a  good  warrour  ryches  is  ennemy


1 04  Of  the  contempt  ana


The  noble  Curias  in  scarsnes  and  vertue
Rulynge  in  Rome,  at  the  Romayns  desyre
Dyd  the  Samnytyens  manfully  subdue
And  the  Ausonyans  vnto  the  same  empyre
With  all  other  that  durst  agaynst  Rome  conspyre
Of  whome  many  for  his  souerayne  wysdome
Of  theyr  frewyll  dyd  subiect  to  hym  become

What  man  doth  not  Publicola  commende

Whiche  by  scarsnes  deseruyd  hath  honour

And  heuenly  worshyp  whiche  none  can  comprehende

Hystoryan,  Poet,  nor  other  oratour

We  lawde  Fabricius  a  mean  Conquerour

Whiche  the  rewardes  of  Pyrrhus  dyd  despyse

Wherby  men  knewe  he  louyd  no  couetyse

Yet  led  this  Fabricius  his  lyfe  in  scarsyte

With  lytell  riches  to  hym  moche  acceptable

Regulus  also  a  man  of  great  dignyte

For  his  suffysaunce  reputyd  it  laudable

In  small  substance  he  thought  to  lyue  most  stable

Thus  is  that  man  both  wyse  and  excellent

That  with  ynoughe  can  holde  hym  selfe  content

The  firste  begynnynge  and  origynall

Of  all  the  worlde  was  first  in  scarsyte

Therby  were  Cytees  byldyd  firste  of  all

And  kynges  establyd  in  theyr  royalte

With  theyr  kyngdomes. and  men  of  eche  degre.

Pouerte  of  all  the  lawes  was  Inuentryce

Mother  vnto  vertue,  confonderes  of  vyce


dispysynge  of  poiiertye.  105

By  scarsyte  Grece  hath  gotten  suche  a  name
Of  laude  and  worshyp  whiche  neuer  shall  decay
That  all  the  worlde  hole,  spekyth  of  the  same
But  howe  the  lordes  therof  lyued  alway
In  stedfast  vertue  somwhat  shall  1  say
The  iust  Arystydes  inuentour  of  iustyce
Was  euer  pore,  nat  gyuen  to  couetyse

Epamynundas  also  lyued  in  vertue
And  he  beynge  Duke  possessyd  small  ryches
Yet  neuer  kynge  nor  Prynce  coude  hym  subdue
By  suffysaunce  suche  was  his  worthynes
The  noble  Poet  homerus  eke  :  doutles
Whyle  he  descrybed  the  sore  ruyne  of  Troy
Was  pore,  and  set  on  couetyse  no  ioy

Socrates  with  godly  wysdome  decorate
Set  neuer  his  mynde  on  ryches  or  treasour
Yet  was  neuer  kynge  so  ryche  nor  estate
That  was  more  worthy  than  he  was  of  honour
In  all  the  worlde  is  no  thynge  at  this  houre
So  proude  nor  hye  whiche  hath  nat  first  of  all
Had  chefe  begynnynge  of  a  Ryuer  but  small

The  worthy  Cyte  callyd  Tarpye  by  name
Of  small  begynnynge  is  nowe  made  excellent
Rome  hath  also  farre  sprede  abrode  hir  fame
Thoughe  it  were  byldyd  (as  lerned  men  assent)
Of  symple  Shepherdes  pore  and  innocent
O  what  a  Cyte,  and  what  a  se  royall
Hath  had  first  name  of  pore  men  and  rurall


io6  Of  the  contempt  and


Where  as  the  cursyd  hunger  of  ryches

Hath  oft  these  Cytees  destroyed  and  lost  agayne

Hath  nat  the  Romayns  byd  oft  great  wretchydnes

And  for  Couetyse  oppressyd  in  great  payne

For  the  same  vyce  Cartago  hath  certayne

Suffred  ruyne  by  fortune  myserable

Where  as  pouerte  brynges  men  to  ende  laudable

Alas  why  Coueyt  we  so  faruently

Exces  of  ryches  as  men  myndles  and  blynde

Syns  it  so  many  hath  brought  to  mysery

Yet  ryches  gotten  is  vnsure  as  the  wynde

Dyd  nat  proude  Cersus  therby  destruccion  fynde

Endynge  in  payne  great  wo  and  wretchydnes

By  the  immoderate  and  lewde  loue  of  ryches

Wherfore  let  men  of  eche  sort  of  degre
Loue  pouertye  as  thynge  moste  commendable
For  suerly  ryches  is  nought  but  vanyte
Rulyd  by  chaunce  vncertayne  and  vnstable
And  to  the  Hauer  oftentyme  damnable
For  a  ryche  man  settynge  theron  his  mynde
Shal  into  heuen  right  hardly  passage  fynde

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

Withdrawe  your  myndes  men  from  to  great  ryches
Set  nat  your  thought  vpon  vnsure  treasour
Rede  howe  the  Gospell  examples  doth  expres
Of  the  pouertye  of  Christe  our  sauyour


dispysynge  of ponertye.  107


Thoughe  he  of  all  was  lorde  and  creatour
And  seconde  parsone  of  the  holy  Trinite
Yet  he  for  vs  hath  suffred  great  dolour
And  in  all  his  lyfe  wylfuU  pouerte.

Wherfore  blynde  man  make  clere  thy  ignoraunce
Take  here  example  by  god  omnypotent
Holde  thou  thy  selfe  content  with  suffysaunce
Voluntary  scarsnes  is  a  vertue  excellent
That  folowed  the  fathers  of  the  olde  testament
And  also  the  discyples  and  Apostles  in  the  newe
But  to  pouertye  thoughe  thou  wylt  nat  consent
Than  kepe  thou  mesure,  and  couetyce  eschewe


Of  them  that  begyn  to  do  well  and  con-
tynue  nat  in  that  purpose.


Vnto  this  Plough  of  Folys  many  ren
Begynnynge  to  labour  with  dylygence  and  payne
But  they  wyll  nat  contynue  longe  therin
But  shortly  after  cast  of  theyr  worke  agayne
No  maruayle.  for  so  volage  is  theyr  brayne
That  without  reason  they  gyue  moche  gretter  hade
As  wytles  Folys  the  bare  Coko  do  fede


Of  them  that  begyn  to  do  well, 1 09


First  whan  the  Carle  takys  his  ploughe  in  honde

He  is  so  besy  therwith  and  dylygent

As  if  that  he  wolde  Ere  out  his  londe

Vpon  one  day  or  he  leue  of,  or  stent

To  the  first  labour  men  ar  lest  insolent

But  I  shall  tell  the  if  thou  gyue  audyence

Of  this  my  meter  what  is  the  chefe  sentence

Some  men  ar  lyuynge  that  for  awhyle  begyn
To  lyue  well  ynoughe  and  outwarde  represent
For  to  contynue  in  good  lyfe  without  syn
Entrynge  the  way  of  vertue  excellent
But  shortly  after  chaungyd  is  that  intent
They  come  nat  vnto  the  top  of  the  Mountayne
Wherein  is  vertue  and  good  moste  souerayne

These  ar  those  Folys  that  taketh  hastely

The  ploughe  in  hande,  as  for  a  cours  or  twayne

And  than  agayne  it  leuyth  by  and  by

These  Avell  deserue  for  theyr  vnstable  brayne

In  our  lewde  barges  for  to  be  put  to  payne

And  besy  labour,  and  alway  to  trauayle

To  rowe  our  barges  and  hye  to  hawse  the  sayle

The  wyse  man  in  descripcion  of  vertue

Hath  set  the  same  on  the  hyght  of  a  hyll

Whiche  vnto  heuen  a  certayne  way  doth  shewe

To  suche  men  as  with  theyr  full  myndes  wyll

To  that  hyghe  top  theyr  hole  iourney  fulfyll

But  to  this  hyll,  fewe  ar  that  go  forwarde

But  many  thousandes  wolde  clymbe  therto  bacwarde


I  I  o Of  them  that  be^yn  to  do  well


They  ar  suche  that  set  all  theyr  hole  lykyriges
On  ryches  pleasour  and  euery  dedely  synne
And  onely  muse  on  these  lowe  worldly  ihynges  •
As  if  man  myght  hye  goodnes  by  them  wynne
Whiche  haue  no  grace  nor  vertue  them  within
These  men  that  ar  of  mynde  thus  varyable
To  the  children  of  Israeli  ar  most  comparable

Whiche  whan  they  were  delyuered  of  destres
And  out  of  Egypt,  and  past  that  cruell  payne
By  hande  of  moyses,  suche  was  theyr  wylfulnes
That  oft  they  wysshyd  that  they  were  there  agayne
And  all  for  hunger  of  one  day  or  scant  twayne
They  rather  wolde  vytayle  in  sore  captyuyte
Than  with  small  penaunce,  haue  plesaunt  lybertye

These  worldly  thynges  to  Egypt  I  compare
Wherin  mankynde  abydeth  in  bondage
Oft  by  his  foly  suffrynge  great  payne  and  care
But  whan  theyr  mynde  is  red  from  this  outrage
And  they  delyuered,  and  all  theyr  hole  lynage
Forsakynge  the  worlde,  for  vertue  moste  souerayne
Than  for  small  hardnes  anone  they  turne  agayne

Alas  these  people  of  myndes  are  so  rude

That  they  had  leuer  be  in  captyuyte

Of  Faro  the  Fende,  and  his  blynde  seruytude

Than  in  Christis  seruyce  lyuynge  in  lybertye

But  though  the  way  of  Christis  seruyce  be

Harde  to  be  kept  by  blynde  and  frayle  mankynde

Parseuer,  and  thou  shalt  a  Crowne  in  heuen  fynde


and  contynue  nat  in  that  purpose.


But  many  (alas)  retourne  agayne  to  vyce
And  bacwarde  agayne  go  to  theyr  olde  offence
And  he  that  the  seruyce  of  god  dyd  exercyse
In  mekenes  vertue  and  lowe  obedyence
Is  fallyn  nowe  to  all  inconuenyence
Alas  the  state  of  them  is  moche  vnsure
Whiche  chaunge  good  for  yll  agayne  nature

The  quakynge  seke  in  bed  lyenge  prostrate
Halfe  dede  halfe  lyuynge,  by  some  mortall  wounde
And  of  all  his  myghtis  of  manhode  clene  pryuate
Can  nat  be  hole,  but  if  plasters  be  bounde
Vnto  his  grefe  to  clens  it  by  the  grounde
Purgynge  it  by  suche  playsters  mundifycatyue
And  than  it  closynge  by  playsters  sanatyue

And  corrosyues,  somtyme  he  must  endure
To  purge  that  flesshe  whiche  is  putrefyed
Kepynge  and  obseruynge  good  dyet  alway  sure
But  by  this  way  whan  his  payne  is  modefyed
His  wounde  nere  hole,  fresshe  and  claryfyed
Withdrawe  he  his  playsters  for  a  day  or  twayne
His  sore  reneweth  and  rottyth  than  agayne

And  oft  becomyth  wors  than  it  was  before
Corruptynge  the  flesshe  and  skyn.  on  euery  syde
Right  so  it  fortunes  by  a  gostely  sore
In  vertue  we  ought  perseuerantly  abyde
Whiche  to  the  heuenly  regyon  shall  vs  gyde
It  nought  auayleth  thyself  to  boste  and  cry
That  thou  haste  somtyme  lyued  rightwysly


1  I  2 Of  t/je/n  that  heg-yn  to  do  well.


It  is  nat  ynough  from  vyce  the  to  defende
One  day  or  twayne  or  onys  to  haue  done  well
But  that  man  that  contynuys  to  the  ende
Shall  neuer  nede  to  fere  the  paynes  of  hell
For  it  expressed  is  playne  in  the  gospell
Who  that  perseueryth  in  vertue  and  in  grace
To  his  last  ende,  in  heuen  shall  haue  a  place

Therfore  I  pray,  and  humbly  you  beseke  :

Lerne  good  and  vertue,  and  be  therin  actyfe

Nat  onely  for  one  day  nor  yet  one  weke

But  it  contynue  the  dayes  of  all  your  lyfe

Thynges  thus  begone,  of  man,  childe,  mayde,  or  wyfe

Ar  moste  acceptable  to  god  our  sauyour

And  nat  to  do  well,  and  leue  within  an  hour.

Tenuoy  of  Barclay.
O  youth  full  frayle  blynde  youth  I  say  agayne
In  thy  tendernes  stody  thou  to  begyn
To  serue  thy  maker  in  vertues  souerayne
And  se  thou  surely  rote  thy  self  therin
That  thou  the  neuer  pollute  with  dedely  synne
And  if  thou  fall  agayne  ryse  hastely
Than  shalt  thou  sothly  heuen  obtayne  and  wynne
If  thou  perseuer  and  so  lyue  stedfastly.


Of  folys  that  despyse  deth  makynge  no
prouysion  therfore.


O  cruell  deth,  o  fury  fauourl?s
So  fyers  art  thou  of  loke  and  countenaunce
That  thou  nought  sparest  vertue  nor  ryches
Beauty  nor  byrth,  strength  nor  valyaunce
Eche  creature  thou  bryngest  to  vttraunce
Thou  shewest  none  his  season  nor  his  tyde
So  is  he  vnwyse  that  wyll  the  nat  prouyde.

VOL.  II.  H


114


Ofjolys  that  despyse  cleth


O  Brether  in  Christ  conioyned  by  byleue
Our  blynde  presumpcion  doth  vs  sore  abuse
Trust  of  longe  lyfe  our  soules  oft  doth  greue
We  haue  playne  warnynge  and  yet  we  it  refuse
Vnwarely  we  wander,  and  no  thynge  we  muse
On  deth  :  but  despyse  his  furour  intretable
Whiche  sure  shall  come,  though  tyme  be  varyable

Man  dye  thou  shalt  :  this  thynge  thou  knowest  playne

But  as  for  the  tyme,  howe,  where,  and  whan

These  ar  and  shall  be  kept  vncertayne

Fro  the,  and  me,  and  almoste  from  euery  man

Thus  dye  thou  must  prouyde  it  if  thou  can

We  all  must  therto,  olde,  yonge,  yll  and  goode  ;•

Our  lyfe  styll  passyth  as  water  of  a  flode

Ly,  stande,  or  go,  ete,  slepe,  or  drynke
Or  in  what  so  euer  thynge  thou  the  exercyse
Yet  deth  cometh  thoughe  thou  nat  theron  thynke
But  for  that  we  dye  in  suche  varyable  wyse
Thou  this  day  :  if  suche  a  chaunce  doth  ryse
Thy  neyghbour  shall  folowe  outher  first  or  last
Therfore  on  hope  all  men  theyr  myndes  cast

On  hope  to  lyue  set  mortall  men  theyr  mynde
Thoughe  they  be  seke  yet  thynke  they  nat  to  dye
So  this  vayne  hope  doth  them  disceyue  and  blynde
If  deth  them  stryke  in  that  infirmyte
Ye  and  also  we  often  tymes  may  se
That  deth  is  lyke  to  men  opprest  in  age
And  to  yonge  children  and  men  of  hye  corage


makynge  no  proiiys'ion  therfore. i  1 5


Thy  ernest  is  layde,  the  bargen  must  abyde
It  may  nat  be  broke,  but  where  as  synne  doth  growe
And  a  pore  wretche  in  vicious  lyfe  mysgyde
Suche  wretches  thynke  that  deth  is  neuer  to  slowe
And  many  one  in  vyce  habounde  and  flowe
Alway  thoughe  they  that  dye  in  synne  mortall
(As  Dauyd  sayth)  dye  must  rufull  deth  of  all

Deth  is  (as  I  haue  sayd)  so  intreatable

That  all  he  consumeth,  as  his  wyll  doth  aply

Thoughe  one  in  beauty  be  incomparable

In  strength  or  riches,  thoughe  god  hym  magnyfye

It  nought  auayleth :  at  last  yet  must  he  dye

Prolongyd  is  no  tyme,  if  furour  the  submyt

Of  cruell  deth,  thou  must  obey  to  it

Thy  strength  decays,  and  thy  breth  wexeth  short
Thy  vaynes  labours,  and  be  somwhat  colde
Thy  body  wexeth  styf  without  comfort
Anone  thy  beauty  pleasaunt,  semeth  olde
Thy  vysage  chaungynge  by  lokes  manyfolde
Somtymes  Pale  with  colour  chaungeable
Somtyme  as  lede,  from  deth  scant  varyable

Thy  herte  quaketh  thy  vaynes  lesyth  myght
Corrupt  blode  doth  thy  colour  putryfye
Thy  throte  hurtlyth,  thy  wordes,  and  thy  syght
Theyr  naturall  offyce  shall  vnto  the  denye
With  suche  passions  all  mortall  men  shall  dye
For  lyfe  shall  fayle  whan  deth  shall  take  his  place
No  man  of  lyfe  can  charter  here  purchace


1 1 6  Of  folys  that  despyse  deth


O  deth  howe  bytter  is  thy  remembraunce

And  howe  cruell  is  it  thy  paynes  to  indure

To  them  that  in  erth  settyth  theyr  plesaunce -  -  -

On  wretchyd  ryches,  vnstable  and  vnsure

And  on  vayne  pleasours :  yet  euery  creature  '.

Must  from  this  riches  (though  they  be  loth)  depart

"Whan  deth  them  woundeth  with  his  mortall  dart

It  is  thynge  Folysshe  to  trouble  and  encomber '  •

That  man  that  restyth  and  slepyth  quyetly

His  tyme  was  come,  and  we  in  the  same  slomber

Shall  be  opprest :  god  wot  howe  sodaynly  •  •

We  all  must  therto,  there  is  no  remedy

It  hath  to  many  ben  profyte,  and  gladnes

To  dye  or  theyr  day  to  auoyde  this  wretchydnes

And  ende  the  myseries,  and  labours  of  this  lyfe
And  many  one  as  wery  of  this  short  lyfe  and  payne
Them  selfe  hath  murdred  with  theyr  owne  hande  and  knyfe
And  some  with  poyson  also  them  selfe  hath  slayne
With  snare,  with  water  or  with  some  other  trayne
The  cause  why  they  them  selfe  haue  thus  destroyd
Was  worldly  payne  and  mysery  to  auoyde

Yet  better  were  it  lyue  a  lyfe  myserable  . • -  "

Than  thus  to  dye,  yet  so  haue  nat  they  thought

But  naturall  deth  to  some  is  profytable

To  suche  as  therby  out  of  bondage  ar  brought  '

And  paynfull  Pryson,  In  all  the  worlde  is  nought

Concernynge  payne,  dole  wo  and  mysery  -  •

But  that  deth  fyndeth  therfore  a  remedy.


makynge  no  prouysion  therfore.  117


Deth  with  his  fote  doth  worldly  thynges  tred

O  howe  many  that  hath  ben  in  captyuyte

And  bytter  Pryson  doth  deth  clene  quyte  and  red

By  it  all  fetters  and  Chaynes  lowsyd  be

All  worldly  tourment  all  payne  and  cruelte

Is  red  by  deth :  and  they  that  sholde  haue  bene

In  payne  contynuall,  by  deth  ar  quyted  clene

Deth  is  delyuered,  and  from  fortune  lyberall
It  tourneth  downe  the  Castels  and  the  toures
Of  kynges  Prynces  and  other  men  royall
With  lyke  cruelte  of  payne  and  sodayne  shoures
As  pore  mennys  howsis  lyuynge  in  doloures
For  deth  hym  selfe  behaueth  in  one  rate
And  in  lyke  mesure  to  begger  and  estate

And  thoughe  that  fortune  cruell  and  vniust
Exalt  yll  lyuers  and  rightwyse  men  oppres
Deuydynge  honour  and  ryches  where  hir  lust
Deth  all  the  same  doth  order  and  redres
With  egall  payne  by  weght  of  rightwysnes
There  is  no  prayer,  rewarde,  nor  myght  that  may
Of  deth  prolonge  one  houre  of  the  set  day

This  dredfull  deth  of  colour  pale  and  wan

To  pore  and  ryche  in  fauour  is  egall

It  spareth  neyther  woman  childe  nor  man

But  is  indiiferent  both  to  great  and  small

For  as  sayth  Flaccus,  Poet  heroycall

With  one  fote,  it  stryketh  at  the  dore

Of  kynges  palaysys,  and  of  the  wretched  pore


I  I  8  Of  folys  thai  despyse  deth


It  caryth  nought  for  Pryde,  ne  statelynes
Nor  myght,  as  we  se  oft  by  experyence
It  is  nat  peasyd  with  treasour  nor  ryches
With  cunnynge  of  Retoryke  ne  glosyd  eloquence
To  Pope  and  Begger  it  hath  no  difference.
With  throte  lyke  wyde  on  echone  doth  he  gape
None  can  his  clawes  auoyde,  fle,  nor  escape

Yet  he  nat  grauntyth  to  any  creature

As  symple  man  great  Lorde  or  Prynce  souerayne

Of  dethes  hour,  to  be  stedfast  and  sure

To  euery  man  his  comynge  is  sodayne

Except  to  them  that  ar  condemned  playne

Whiche  by  theyr  foly  lewdely  prouoke  theyr  tyme

By  theft  or  murder  or  ellys  some  other  cryme

It  maketh  no  force  :  there  is  no  difference
Whether  thou  dye  yonge  or  els  in  extreme  age  .
For  this  is  sure  eche  creature  shall  hense
Both  state  and  Begger  shall  pas  the  same  passage
Lyue  an  hundryth  wynter  increasynge  thy  lynage
Yet  to  thy  lyfe  deth,  ende  shall  set  and  gyue
But  fewe  ar  that  nowe  one  hundreth  wynter  lyue

And  than  at  last :  whether  he  by  lefe  or  lothe
His  wretchyd  Carcas  shall  the  voyde  graue  fulfyll
And  many  one  also  to  his  ende  gothe
(As  wery  of  his  lyfe)  at  his  desyre  and  wyll
No  man  hath  fauour  (of  deth)  to  byde  here  styll
The  father  dede :  the  sone  shall  after  hastely
And  oft  dyes  the  sone  before  the  Father  dye


makynge  no  proiiysion  therjhre.  119


One  after  other,  out  of  this  lyfe  we  shall

Syster  and  brother,  neuewe  syre  and  dame

Tyll  at  the  last  from  lyfe  we  gone  be  all

And  the  elementis  pourgyd  by  fyry  flame

To  mourne  for  deth  therfore  thou  art  to  blame

Or  crye  for  the  dede,  and  dolefully  to  wepe

Thy  cryenge  (fole)  shall  nat  wake  hym  of  that  slepe

Thynge  worldly  that  to  man  is  delectable

This  deth  disdaynes,  ne  no  commaundement

Can  turne  nor  fere  hym :  his  promys  is  so  stable

His  cruell  daunce  no  man  mortall  can  stent

Nor  lede  his  cruell  cours  after  his  intent

The  pope  nor  Emperour,  if  they  be  in  his  hande

Hath  no  maner  myght  his  sore  cours  to  withstande

The  bysshop,  lorde,  the  Pore  man,  lyke  a  state

Deth  in  his  daunce  ledyth  by  the  sleue

He  oft  causeth  men  them  self  to  fatygate

And  wery  in  his  daunce,  longe  or  they  wolde  byleue

But  thoughe  his  besy  coursys  doth  them  greue

He  gyuys  no  space  to  man  to  stande  nor  syt

But  sue  the  trompe  tyll  he  come  to  the  pyt

There  neuer  was  man  of  so  great  pryde  ne  pompe

Nor  of  suche  myght,  youth  nor  man  of  age

That  myght  gaynsay  the  sounde  of  dethes  trompe

He  makes  man  daunce  and  that  without  courage

As  well  the  state  as  man  of  lowe  lynage

His  cruell  cours  is  ay  so  intretable

That  mannys  myght  to  withstande  is  nat  able


I  2  o  ^ffob^  ^^^^^  despyse  deth


Whan  thou  art  dede,  what  profyte  or  auayle
Hast  thou  in  toumbes  hye  ryche  and  excellent
That  Corps  that  lackes  all  suche  gay  aparayle
Shall  be  ouercouered  with  the  fyrmament
The  blynde,  Arthemisia  yet  was  of  this  intent
A  sumtuous  toumbe  and  ryche  to  edefye
By  vayne  opynyon  hir  name  to  magnyfye

This  toumbe  was  shynynge  with  syluer  and  pure  golde

So  gayly  couchyd  and  set  with  precious  stone

Alayd  with  asure  and  coloures  manyfolde

That  of  the  seuen  wonders  of  kyngdomes  echone

That  ar  vnder  Son  :  that  rekened  is  for  one

Yet  this  gay  tombe  abyll  for  any  kynge

To  hir  pore  soule  profyted  no  thynge

Chemnys  also  as  dyodorus  sayes

Byldyd  a  speere  hye  and  wonderous

To  here  remembraunce  of  his  tyme  and  dayes

This  speere  was  costely  dere  and  sumptuous

And  of  quantyte  so  great  and  marueylous

That  a  thousande  men  and.  iii.  hundreth  fulfyde

In  twenty  yeres  coude  it  skantly  bylde

The  brother  of  the  sayd  chemnys  in  lyke  wyse
Brought  all  his  Royalme  vnto  pouertye
Whyle  he  another  lyke  speere  dyd  deuyse
For  his  vayne  toumbe,  so  that  his  comonte
And  other  workmen  after  one  degre
Were  longe  compellyd  in  this  worke  to  etc
Herbys  and  rotis  for  lacke  of  other  mete


makynge  Jio  prouysion  therfore.  ill


One  Rodopis  callyd  by  suche  a  name

Byldyd  suche  another  vayne  sepulture

The  riche  Amasis  also  dyd  the  same

But  what  was  this,  els  but  a  vayne  pleasure

It  is  great  Foly  to  any  creature

To  make  so  great  expences  and  trauayle

About  vayne  thynges  that  ar  of  none  auayle

So  great  expences,  suche  Folysshe  coste  and  vayne

Is  done  on  toumbes  and  all  by  pompe  and  pryde

That  this  my  shyp  can  it  scarsly  contayne

But  the  soulys  helth  (alas)  is  set  asyde

Whiche  euer  sholde  lyue  and  without  ende  abyde

And  the  caryon  and  fylth :  is  magnyfyed

By  suche  vayne  toumbes  that  nowe  ar  edefyed

Beholde  a  toumbe  and  precious  sepulture

Thought  it  be  gay :  aduyse  what  is  within

A  rottyn  caryon  vyler  than  all  ordure

By  this  proude  toumbe  the  soule  no  welth  can  wynne

But  is  Damnyd  if  the  body  dyed  in  synne

So  is  it  Foly  great  coste  and  vanyte

To  vse  in  Toumbes  suche  curyosyte

Euery  grounde  vnto  god  is  sanctyfyed

A  right  wyse  man  that  well  doth  lyue  and  dye

Shall  in  hye  heuen  in  soule  be  glorifyed

In  what  euer  grounde  his  wretchyd  Carcas  lye

But  where  a  toumbe  is  byldyd  curyously

It  is  but  cause  of  Pryde  to  the  ofsprynge

Helpynge  the  soule  right  lytell  or  no  thynge


12  2  ^ffib^  ^^^^  despyse  deth.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

Man  kepe  thy  body  from  synne  exces  and  cryme
And  if  thou  fall  aryse  shortly  agayne
Be  euer  redy,  prouyde  thy  deth  by  tyme
For  dye  thou  shalt  that  one  thynge  is  certayne
And  oft  deth  stelyth  on  man  by  cours  sodayne
He  warneth  none,  but  who  that  dyes  in  syn
Dyes  worst  of  all,  and  sure  is  of  hell  payne
Thus  is  it  peryll  longe  to  abyde  therin

Vnto  an  Archer  deth  may  I  well  compare
Whiche  with  his  dart  stryketh  somtyme  the  marke
That  is  last  age  delyuerynge  therii  from  care
Of  mundayne  thought,  and  payne  of  worldly  warke
Somtyme  he  shotyth  ouer :  as  he  were  darke
Of  syght,  and  somtyme  to  short :  or  els  asyde
But  well  is  hym  that  takyth  thought  and  carke
At  euery  season  his  dartis  to  prouyde.


Of  Folys  that  despyse  god.


Whan  that  man  synneth  or  therto  doth  assent
Thoughe  god  be  of  moche  mercy  and  great  pacience
SufFrynge  hym  escape  without  punysshement
And  often  is  nat  hasty  to  punysshe  eche  offence
Yet  thou  blynde  Fole  voyde  of  all  prudence
He  gyueth  nat  the  his  berde  to  diaw  and  brast
For  euery  synne  he  punyssheth  first  or  last.


124 0/ Folys  that  despyse  god.


What  man  myght  sufFer  with  mynde  pacieiit
These  folys  that  stryue  agaynst  theyr  creatour
With  wordes  despysynge  our  lorde  oranypotent
And  hym  denyenge  as  nat  theyr  gouernour
Both  day  and  nyght  increasynge  theyr  errour
All  goddes  preceptis  these  folys  thus  confounde
With  vicious  wordes  whiche  doth  theyr  soules  wounJe

They  vtter  wordes,  full  of  all  folysshenes
Agaynst  the  Father  of  heuen  they  hym  nat  drede
No  more  than  he  were,  of  no  myghtynes
Lyke  to  mankynde,  or  come  of  mannys  sede
Of  his  great  power  they  haue  no  fere  nor  hede
Nor  yet  aduertyce  his  rightwyse  iugement
Ne  that  yll  doers  ar  worthy  punysshement

What  menest  thou  by  god  the  Father  eternall
Howe  takest  thou  hym,  howe  countest  thou  his  lawe
Whiche  by  thy  presumpcion  foule  and  infernall
Dare  be  so  bolde  his  berde  this  wyse  to  drawe
By  his  hye  myght  thou  countest  nat  a  strawe
And  than  whan  god,  by  mercy  and  pyte
A  whyle  the  suffreth  for  thy  dede  to  go  fre

And  doth  nat  punysshe  this  synne  in  contynent

Therfore  thou  thynkest  that  god  hath  pardoned  the

Bycause  the  lyghtnynge  or  thounder  vyolent

And  other  tempestous  stormes  whan  they  be

Ouertourneth  downe  an  oke  or  other  tre

And  suffreth  the  and  thy  hows  to  be  vnbrent

Thus  thynkest  thou  :  the  pardonyd  by  god  omnypotent


Of  Folys  that  despyse  god.  125


O  people  of  cursyd  hope  and  confydence
What  ioy  haue  ye :  or  what  a  lewde  delyte
Without  amendement  alway  to  sue  offence
And  more  to  offende,  bycause  ye  haue  respyte
Is  godes  lustyce  (thynke  ye)  decayd  quyte
Nay  god  is  more  rightwyse  than  creature  terrene
All  thynge  he  seys,  no  thynge  can  stop  his  iyen

Thynkest  thou  that  thy  lyfe  shall  euer  endure
That  thou  mayst  haue  longe  tyme  our  lorde  to  pray
And  in  thy  last  age  of  pardone  to  be  sure
O  fole  vnrulyd  lay  this  lewde  mynde  away
Trust  nat  to  lyfe,  for  vnsure  is  thy  day
We  all  must  dye :  but  he  that  styll  doth  syn
In  hope  of  longe  lyfe  he  often  dyes  therin

God  suffreth  the  oftymes  to  offende

And  folowe  thy  wyll  and  sensualyte

To  proue  if  thou  thy  lewde  lyfe  wylt  amende

Expellynge  thy  carnall  and  blynde  fragilyte

But  if  thou  contynue  in  thy  iniquyte

The  more  space  that  thou  hast  had  before

Thy  payne  and  tourment  shall  after  be  the  more

Alas  suche  ar  infect  with  great  offence

That  thus  on  synne  infix  alway  theyr  mynde

They  haue  no  wysdome  grate,  goodnes,  ne  prudence

But  kepe  theyr  herte  in  darke  errour  and  blynde

That  to  true  byleue  it  no  thynge  is  inclyned

Whan  synfull  errour  is  set  in  theyr  intent

They  god  despyse,  and  his  commaundement


12  6 Of  Folys  that  despyse  god.


These  folys  in  nianer  nought  care  for  goddes  myght
Whiche  by  his  worde  hath  made  eche  element
The  Sonne :  the  mone,  the  derkenes  and  the  lyght
The  day,  the  nyght,  the  sterrys  and  firmament
Whiche  knowys  all  tymes  eche  hour  and  eche  moment
Both  the  tyme  past  and  tyme  that  is  to  come
Our  lyfe  and  deth  he  knowys  by  his  wysdome

O  man  myserable :  o  wretchyd  creature  ■  '

Sholdest  thou  agaynst  thy  souerayne  lorde  rebel!

Whiche  to  thyntent :  that  thou  sholde  nat  endure

Eternall  deth.  sende  to  tourment  cruell

His  onely  son  to  red  thy  soule  fro  hell

The  whiche  also  with  his  biode  hath  the  bought

Therfore  loue  hym,  and  turne  this  frowarde  thought

Thou  art  nat  so  redy  to  gyue  the  to  penaunce

And  to  set  thy  mynde  on  vertue  parfytely

Forsakynge  thy  synne  and  olde  mysgouernaunce

But  god  is  als  redy  to  take  the  to  mercy

Thus  mayst  thou  thynke  both  sure  and  stedfastly .  ;

That  if  thou  for  thy  synnes  mourne  and  wayle

God  shall  the  here,  and  quyte  the  thy  trauayle

But  who  that  hath  herte  harde  in  suche  a  wyse '  ;

And  rotyd  in  suche  malyce  and  furour

That  by  the  same  by  worde  he  dare  despyse

His  god,  his  maker,  his  hekh  and  sauyour

By  synne,  contempt  or  lyuynge  in  errour

Suche  (but  if  he  chaunge  his  intent)

Is  damnyd,  to  endure  infernal!  punyssliement.


;j-  that  despyse  god.


127


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.

O  people  proude,  and  of  goodnes  ignoraunt
Enclyne  your  myndes  sore  blyndyd  by  offence
Mollyfy  your  hertis  that  ar  harde  as  adamant
Expell  ye  this  pryde  and  stately  insolence
Presume  ye  no  more  in  worde,  nor  conscience
Your  lord,  defender,  and  maker  to  despyse
For  who  that  doth,  shall  outher  here  or  hence
At  last  be  rewardyd,  and  that  in  ferefull  wyse.


Blasphemers  and  sweres  of  the  name
of  god,  and  of  his  Sayntis.


Nowe  commyth  to  cours  to  wiyte  of  the  errours
Of  men  abhomynable,  of  women  mayde  and  childe
Whiche  agaynst  Christ  ar  newe  tourmentours
His  skyn  terynge,  wors  than  lowes  it  defylyd
O  man  myscheuous  by  whome  Christ  is  reuylyd
Thou  worthy  art  to  dye  in  soule  and  in  body
That  luge  that  it  suffreth  sore  shall  it  abye.


Of  Blasphemers  and  szveres


29


O  Myrthles  myse  of  eloquence  barayne
Cast  out  thy  terys  and  mourne  without  mesure
For  from  sore  waylynge  my  selfe  can  nat  refrayne
Nor  as  I  thynke  none  erthly  creature
Consyderynge  howe  men  in  raalyce  them  inure
If  there  were  reason  within  harde  stele  or  flynt
From  carefuU  terys  I  wot  they  coude  nat  stynt

If  beste  had  reason,  wyt,  or  mannys  brayne
To  note  and  aduyse  mannys  mysgouernaunce
Without  all  dout  I  thynke  it  wolde  complayne
For  mannys  synne,  and  wylfull  ignoraunce
Therfore  all  ye  that  haue  wyll  and  pleasaunce
To  rede  of  the  Folys  of  this  iniquyte
Expell  hye  corage,  and  than  come  wepe  with  me

For  certaynly,  I  trowe  no  man  coude  wryte
The  vyce  nowe  vsed,  agaynst  all  ordynaunce
Nor  yet  that  rede,  whiche  other  men  indyte
Without  sore  waylynge,  and  terys  in  habundaunce
For  well  I  wot  my  herte  is  in  greuaunce
Whan  I  consyder  and  wryte,  thus  wyse  of  syn
Seynge  howe  the  worlde  defylyd  is  therin

But  though  I  haue  had  great  dilygence  with  payne
Before  this,  to  blame  blynde  Folys  abhomynable
Yet  this  my  labour  almoste  was  tane  in  vayne
For  none  to  this  present  sort  ar  comparable
These  folys  in  theyr  dedys  ar  so  detestable
That  all  synne  and  vyce  vnder  the  firmament
Theyr  vicious  hertis  can  nat  pleas  nor  content


130 Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.


Yet  seke  they  wors :  agaynst  our  lorde  aboue
By  theyr  yll  tunge  they  tourment  newe  with  payne
And  though  he  onys  dyed  in  erth  for  mannys  loue
These  caytyfs  hym  tourment  nowe  in  heuen  agayne
These  folys  (with  newe  sperys)  set  theyr  brayne
To  wounde,  our  lorde,  whiche,  can  do  hym  no  grefe
Saue  that  he  seyth  man  seke  his  owne  myschefe

Agaynst  Christ  they  cast  and  throwe  great  othys
Blasphemynge  agaynst  dyuyne  commaundement
Wordes  of  Enuy  whiche  god  almyghty  lothys
They  throwe  agayne  hym  as  trayters  vyolent
O  cursyd  creatures,  with  armour  impotent
That  lorde  that  dyed  to  red  them  out  of  payne
They  haue  good  wyll  to  tere  his  herte  agayne

The  one  blasphemys  by  christis  hede  and  brayne
Grutchynge  and  grennynge  for  symple  thynge  or  nought
Another  Caytyfe,  or  myscheuous  vylayne
By  all  his  holy  membres,  to  swere  hath  lytyll  thought
Another  by  the  blode  wherwith  he  hath  vs  bought
His  Face  his  herte,  or  by  his  crowne  of  thorne
Wherwith  (for  them)  his  skyn  was  rent  and  torne

Another  out  vomytis  wordes  execrable
Agaynst  our  lordes  holy  woundes  fyue
His  handes  his  fete  and  his  crosse  venerable
Wheron  he  dyed  to  make  mankynde  a  lyue
That  fole  that  grettest  othes  can  contryue
Blasphemynge  god,  men  hym  moste  magnyfye
Thus  newe  agayne  our  lorde  they  crucyfye


hsphemers  and  sweres.


O  cruell  Caytyfs  tyrantis  and  tourmentours

O  blynde  blasphemers,  o  men  brought  vp  in  vyce

O  ye  fals  folowers,  and  inherytours

Of  the  cruell  lowes  myschefe  and  malyce

To  moche  immoderate  madnes  doth  attyce

Your  myndes  amasyd  by  othes  to  tourment

The  sayntis  of  heuen  :  and  god  omnypotent

O  ye  blasphemers ;  o  tourmentours  vnkynde
Alas  what  mean  ye  your  maker  thus  to  tere
Syns  in  the  Gospell  we  playnly  wryten  fynde
That  no  creature  iyuynge  ought  to  swere
By  ought  that  god  made,  no  nat  by  a  here
Of  his  owne  hede,  our  othes  ought  to  be
(As  Christ  vs  techyth)  onely  (nay)  and  (ye)

But  nowe  in  our  othes  is  god  omnypotent

With  all  his  membres  and  sayntis  euerychone

All  that  god  made,  and  euery  sacrament

The  fere  of  payne  (alas)  is  from  vs  gone

Our  hertis  harder  than  flynt  or  marbell  stone

Alas  we  tere  our  Lord  that  hath  vs  bought

By  our  blasphemynge,  and  that  for  thynge  of  nought

The  tables,  tenys,  card  is,  or  the  dyce

Ar  chefe  begynnynge  of  this  vnhappynes

For  whan  the  game  wyll  nat  well  aryse

And  all  the  players  troubled  by  dronkenes

Than  suche  Caytyfs  as  ioy  in  this  exces

At  eche  worde  labour  our  sauyour  to  tere

"With  othes  abhomynable  whiche  they  vngoodly  swere


132 Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.


Alas  these  folys  repute  it  but  a  game

To  cast  suche  wordes  agayne  theyr  creatour

Them  selfe  forswerynge,  blasphemynge  christis  name

And  he  that  is  moste  gyuen  to  this  errour

Is  nowe  reputyd  moste  worthy  of  honour

He  shall  no  rule  in  court  nor  kechen  here

(As  this  tyme  goys)  but  he  can  crake  and  swere

The  yonge  (alas)  this  vyce  doth  here  and  lere

With  stody  intentyf,  and  parfyte,  aduertence

Of  suche  as  ar  olde  :  to  blaspheme,  and  to  swere

The  name  of  god  without  all  reuerence

In  so  moche  that  they  thynke  it  none  offence

To  swere  the  holy  Masse,  that  othe  is  nowe  so  ryfe

In  mouth  of  man,  mayden  childe  and  wyfe

It  was  onys  ordeyned  by  constytucion "  ' ■  ;  '  ■

As  I  haue  harde,  that  both  symple  men  and  hye

Sholde  onely  swere  by  that  occupacion

The  whiche  theyr  Faders  dyd  vse  and  occupy

But  nowe'  eche  sweryth  the  Mas  coraonly

Whiche  is  the  prestis  seruyce  and  besynes

So  mennys  others  theyr  Fathers  doth  expres

Alas  no  honour,  laude  nor  reuerence  ■  ■'

Is  had  nowe  vnto  that  blessyd  sacrament • .  '
But  boyes,  and  men  without  all  difference  '
Tere  that  holy  body  of  god  omnypotent
As  it  were  iowes  to  his  passion  they  assent
In  euery  bargayne,  in  ale  hous  and  at  borde
The  holy  Mas  is  euer  the  seconde  worde


Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.  133


And  than  these  houndes  can  suche  excusys  fynde
As  to  theyr  soules  without  dout  ar  damnable
Saynge  it  is  gode  to  haue  the  masse  in  mynde
And  the  name  of  god,  and  his  sayntis  honourable
O  erytykes.  o  houndes  abhomynable
That  is  a  thynge  whiche  god  almyghty  lothys
To  take  his  name  in  thy  foule  mouth  by  othys

Yet  doest  thou  so,  there  is  no  maner  place
Nor  no  order  or  state  that  of  this  vyce  is  fre
For  whiche  (alas)  god  hath  withdrawyn  his  grace
And  oft  vs  chastyth  with  plage  of  cruelte
With  dyuers  dethes,  and  moche  aduesyte
For  this  vyce,  luges  ordayne  no  punysshement
Therfore  is  it  punysshyd  by  god  omnypotent

With  tempest  thunder,  lyghtnynge  hete  or  colde
With  murder  by  pestylence  or  els  by  some  batayle
And  sore  diseasys,  and  paynys  manyfolde
We  oft  by  hunger  haue  cause  also  to  wayle
The  come  destroyed  by  wynde  lyghtnynge  or  hayle
Of  suche  punysshement  we  wretchys  worthy  be
For  god  suffreth  nat  our  synnes  to  go  fre

Sennacheryb  as  the  bybyll  doth  expres
Nychanor  and  fyers  Antyochus  also
Hath  shamely  dyed  for  this  vnhappynes
Nat  only  they :  but  many  thousandes  mo
And  in  our  dayes  I  fere  lyst  payne  and  wo
Be  to  vs  sende  by  ryghtwyse  punysshement
For  swerynge  in  vayne,  by  god  omnypotent


134 Q/" Blasphemers  and  sweres.


O  father  almyghty  our  god  and  creatour
In  thy  hye  maiesty  syttynge  in  thy  trone
"With  blessyd  lesu  thy  sone  our  sauyour
And  o  holy  goste  whiche  ar  thre  in  one
O  god  graunt  thy  grace  to  this  our  regyon
Pardon  vs  synners  differ  thy  vengeaunce
Thoughe  we  deserue  it  by  our  mysgouernaunce

0  glorious  godhed  of  mercy  infynyte
Consyder  howe  mankynde  is  prone  alway  to  vyce
Graunt  vs  good  lord  layser  and  respyte

Out  of  our  slombrynge  sinnes  to  aryse
Let  thy  great  mercy  excell  thy  hye  iustyce
For  if  thy  iustyce  sholde  put  vs  to  vttraunce
We  sholde  be  damnyd  for  our  mysgouernaunce

If  thou  good  lorde  denye  vs  to  socour

On  whome  may  we  wretches  for  socour  cry  or  call

Alas  on  none,  therfore  let  our  errour

And  synfuU  dedes  clene  from  thy  presence  fall

Brynge  vs  vnto  thy  realme  celestyall

Where  in  thy  presence  we  may  set  our  plesaunce

And  so  haue  pardon  of  our  mysgouernaunce.

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
Alas  ye  swerers  mourne,  for  ye  haue  cause
Wasshe  ye  away  your  synne  with  syghes  depe
For  if  I  sholde  vtter  my  mynde  in  one  clause

1  say  your  vnkyndnes  causeth  me  to  wepe
What  god  hath  done  for  you  ye  take  no  kepe
But  tere  his  body  by  swerynge  hym  in  vayne
Thoughe  he  as  a  good  Shepherd,  dyed  for  his  shepe
That  is  for  you,  yet  wolde  ye  hym  sle  agayne


Of  Blasphemers  and  sweres.  135


Alas  blasphemer,  of  clirist  thou  hast  the  name

And  callyd  art  christen,  so  made  by  sacrament

But  sothly  that  name  is  to  thy  vtter  shame

Syns  thou  thy  god,  and  sauyour  dare  tourment

O  iuges  luges  ordayne  ye  punysshement

For  eche  blasphemer  wors  than  is  an  hell  hounde

For  if  ye  do  nat  our  lorde  omnypotent

Shall  vs  with  our  synnes  by  right  iustyce  confounde


Of  the  plage  and  indignacion  of  god,  and
folys  that  fere  nat  the  same.


Some  folys  meruayle  and  thynketh  it  great  wonder
Whan  god  vs  stryketh  for  our  yll  and  offence
With  tempest,  hete,  sekenes,  lyghtenynge  or  thunder
Hunger  or  colde,  outher  sodayne  pestylence
But  certaynly  his  hye  magnyfycence
Vs  worthely  punyssheth  for  our  iniquyte
For  vertue  alas  is  gone  from  eche  degre.


Of  the  plage  a?id  indlgtmcion  of  god.  137


O  folys  abusyd  whome  foly  doth  diffame

Say  what  auauntage  what  profyte  or  what  mede

Is  it  to  you  to  haue  christis  name

Whan  ye  nat  folowe  his  lyfe  in  worde  nor  dede

Of  his  preceptis  alas  we  take  no  hede

Yet  we  repute  vs  condigne  in  our  corage

To  be  callyd  christen,  and  christes  herytage

Who  that  in  vyce  his  dayes  doth  meyntayne

May  here  the  name  of  christ  our  sauyour

But  than  his  name  he  chalangeth  in  vayne

And  tyll  he  amende  led  in  a  blynde  errour

So  we  (alas)  often  forget  our  creatour

Abusynge  and  brakeynge  his  hyghe  commaundement

Nat  carynge  the  decrees  of  faders  auncient

We  take  christes  name,  but  his  doctryne  we  deny

And  from  his  way  (alas)  we  sore  declyne

And  to  all  ylles  our  myndes  we  aply

Whiche  often  doth  vs  brynge  to  perelous  ruyne

We  ioy  of  the  name,  and  the  true  fayth  deuyne

Trustyng  therby  to  eschewe  euerlastynge  payne

But  godly  workes  we  abhor  and  disdayne

lustyce  and  hir  lawes  ar  banysshyd  from  eche  place
Mysrule  amasyd  hir  braunches  doth  extende
All  vertuous  doctryne  away  from  vs  we  chase
Thus  goth  the  worlde  aprochynge  to  the  ende
Our  fayth  oftyme  doth  from  hir  chayre  discende
She  is  nat  so  parfyte  as  she  in  tyme  hath  be
Nor  yet  hir  two  systers  hope  and  charyte


138  Of  the  plage  and  indigJiaciott  of  god.


Alas  we  dayly  without  all  drede  commyt
Moche  cursyd  vyce  somtyme  by  ignoraunce
Somtyme  by  malyce,  somtyme  for  lacke  of  wyt
As  wors  than  the  turke,  in  our  mysgouernaunce
Thus  dame  mysrule  so  ledes  vs  in  hir  daunce
That  our  blynde  youth  with  to  moche  lybertye
Subdueth  our  bodyes  to  all  enormyte

So  all  mankynde  with  vyce  is  violate

Both  yonge  and  olde  stronge  feble  and  ympotent

The  ryche,  the  pore,  the  vylayne  and  estate

That  they  rebel!  agaynst  our  lorde  omnypotent

Howbeit  our  lorde  as  a  father  pacyent

Sayth  man  if  thou  my  lawes  kepe  and  loue

I  shall  the  lede  to  my  hye  Royalme  aboue

But  if  thou  by  malyce  selfe  wyll  or  neglygence
Dispyse  my  lawes  reputynge  them  but  vayne
Thou  shalt  nat  escape  ay  fre  for  thyne  offence
"Without  correccion  punysshement  and  payne
Yet  we  blynde  men  of  these  wordes  haue  disdayne
To  this  great  promes  alas  we  nought  intende
Ne  labour  nat  our  errours  to  amende

Suche  is  our  foly  we  thynke  nat  to  amende
But  styll  procede  in  our  olde  mysgouernaunce
We  ar  so  blyndyd  we  note  no  thynge  the  ende
Wherfore  our  lorde,  by  lustyces  balance
Of  suche  offenders  oft  taketh  vengeaunce
With  dyuers  plagis,  and  punysshement  terryble
As  pockes,  pestylence,  and  other  yll  horryble


and  of  filys  that  Jere  nat  the  same.  139


Though  mercy  sauour,  yet  god  of  his  iustyce
With  dyuers  plages  sundry  sorys  and  sekenes
And  dredfull  dolours  punyssheth  vs  for  vyce
Suche  is  the  order  of  his  hyghe  rightwysnes
Whan  men  contynue  in  theyr  vnhappynes
His  swerde  of  vengeaunce  vpon  them  to  extende
And  that  namely  whan  they  wyll  nat  amende

Cruell  Mars  somtyme  vs  thretenyth  with  batayle
Somtyme  our  bodyes  infect  with  pestylence
The  corne  somtyme  distroyed  with  rayne  or  hayle
Than  hunger  men  consumyth  without  all  difference
This  worthely  we  indure  for  our  offence
With  sore  diseasys  that  neuer  were  sene  before
But  yet  our  synnes  increasyth  euer  more

Somtyme  our  fode  with  hete  is  all  to  brent

Somtyme  by  colde  abyde  we  moche  payne

Some  hath  with  thunder  theyr  bodyes  all  to  rent

Now  frost,  nowe  snowe,  lyghtenynge,  tempest,  or  rayne

Some  with  thunder  boltis  theyr  bodyes  smyt  in  twayne

Some  murdred,  some  hanged  some  hedyd,  some  drownde

And  all  for  offence,  and  synne  done  on  the  grounde

The  dyuers  dethes  whiche  dayly  we  indure
And  dyuers  chaunces  whiche  dayly  on  vs  fall
I  trowe  there  is  none  erthly  creature
That  hath  the  brayne  to  comprehende  them  all
Though  that  his  dayes  were  nere  perpetuall
And  often  se  we  tokens  of  ferefull  punysshement
By  sygnes  and  sterres  of  the  clere  fyrmament


140  Of  the  plage  and  hidignacion  of  god.


We  ought  these  paynes  with  mekenes  to  indure

And  nat  to  grutche  therfore,  nor  god  to  blame

For  our  lewde  lyfe  forsoth  doth  them  procure

And  for  our  synnes  ar  we  worthy  of  the  same

Some  nacions  haue  ben  dryuen  out  in  shame

From  theyr  owne  londe  wandrynge  in  payne  and  stryfe

Whiche  sothly  was  for  theyr  disordred  lyfe

Wherfore  thou  man  thynke  sure  in  thyne  intent
That  synne  accostomed,  by  order  of  iustyce
Of  god  aboue,  cryeth  for  punysshement
Other  here  or  els  in  hell :  for  euery  vyce
Hath  suche  rewarde,  wherfore  let  vs  be  wyse
And  shortly  amende  our  olde  mysgouernaunce
Lyst  god  rightwysely  take  on  vs  vengeaunce

Barclay  the  translatour.  -
O  man  clere  thy  syght,  beholde  thy  owne  offence
And  mende  for  the  loue  of  god  omnypotent
For  if  thy  synne  stynke  alway  in  his  presence
Iustyce  shall  nat  let  the  auoyde  his  punysshement
And  though  mercy  be  nat  to  the  moch  vyolent
Nat  suffrynge  vengeaunce  shortly  on  the  to  fall
Yet  mende  betyme  be  nat  ouer  neglygent
Beware  the  ende  for  that  oft  payth  for  all.


Of  folysshe  exchanges  scorsynges  and
permutacions.


Who  that  hath  a  nedy  iourney  for  to  ryde
And  for  a  bagpype  his  hors  wyll  sell,  playnly
He  is  a  fole  and  lewdly  doth  hym  gyde
And  no  auauntage  shall  he  obtayne  therby.
So  hapnyth  it  to  hym  moste  comonly
Whiche  for  frayle  pleasour  of  one  day  or  twayne
Forsaketh  heuen,  sure  of  euerlastynge  payne


142


^olysshe  exchanp^es


Some  Folys  yet  shall  of  a  rowme  be  sure
Within  this  shyp  a  lowe  or  els  a  hye
Suche  ar  they  that  greuous  charges  wyll  indure
Subduynge  theyr  bodyes  to  labour  besely
Theyr  shulders  with  burthyns  chargynge  heuely
In  worldly  curys  sore  labourynge  in  vayne
Therby  hereafter  to  byde  infernall  payne

They  laboure  here  so  sore  for  wretchyd  goodes

That  whan  theyr  body  departyth  from  this  lyfe

Theyr  soule  is  plungyd  in  infernall  flodys

So  what  auayleth  them  to  be  so  actyfe

In  worldly  labour,  so  thoughtfuU  or  pensyfe

Here  in  this  erth  all  other  to  excell

And  after  toren  by  cruell  houndes  of  hell

He  that  here  labours  in  erth  for  frayfe  ryches

SufFreth  more  sorowe  and  payne  contynually

Than  he  that  lyueth  alone  in  wyldernes

And  hym  in  goddes  seruyce  doth  aply

Abydynge  in  fastynge,  and  praynge  deuoutly

So  worldly  wretchys  (as  it  apereth  playne)

Take  here  sore  labour  to  wynne  euerlastynge  payne

Who  that  serueth  god  with  parfyte  dylygence
Shall  in  this  lyfe  auoyde  moche  worldly  wo
And  be  rewardyd  in  heuen  whan  he  goth  hens
Where  as  he  that  serueth  this  worlde  shall  nat  so
Yet  of  this  sort  fynde  we  right  many  mo
That  to  haue  ryches  all  besynes  employ
Rather  than  to  get  in  heuen  eternall  ioy


scorsynges  and  permutaclons.


Mysrule,  wast,  falshode,  and  also  couetyse,
With  other  vyces  as  pryde  or  statelynes
Vs  sorer  labours  causeth  to  exercyse
Than  vertue  doth :  or  godly  holynes
For  them  fewe  men  wyll  take  great  besynes
Easy  is  the  way  to  vyce  and  men  are  prone
To  folowe  that  cursyd  way  almoste  echone

Before  our  syght  it  dayly  apereth  playne
What  great  labours,  what  charge  and  besynes
Proude  people  indure  theyr  pryde  for  meyntayne
With  dyuers  garnamentis  presentynge  statelynes
Onely  on  clothynge  bestowynge  theyr  ryches
Suche  set  all  vertuous  besynes  asyde
And  onely  labour  for  to  meyntayne  theyr  pryde

Somtyme  suche  dare  set  theyr  lyfe  in  ieopardy
Nat  ferynge  lustyce,  but  the  lawe  to  violate
For  to  meyntayne  theyr  statelynes  therby
By  proude  apparayle,  nat  mete  for  theyr  estate
Right  so^  Couetyse  after  lyke  maner  rate
By  ardaunt  desyre  of  hir  blynde  iniquyte
Draweth  men  to  peryls  both  of  londe  and  se

To  dyuers  peryls  men  boldly  them  subdue

In  hope  frayle  ryches  to  purchace  and  obtayne

But  for  the  loue  of  goodnes  or  vertue

Right  fewe  or  none  wyll  put  them  selfe  to  payne

For  money  man  sayles  the  troublous  se  of  spayne

And  moche  of  the  worlde  he  compasyth  about

Of  ieopardy  and  peryll  without  all  maner  dout


144


Of  folysshe  exchanges


Who  that  by  couetyse  is  drawen  and  opprest
Is  neuer  at  eas  ne  quyetnes  of  mynde
By  nyght  nat  takynge  slepe  ne  naturall  rest
With  fyry  ropys  this  fury  so  doth  them  bynde
They  fere  no  flode,  no  colde,  tempest,  or  wynde,
There  is  no  labour  nor  colde  that  can  them  dere
The  hunger  of  golde  them  maketh  without  fere

O  man  commyttynge  thy  lyfe  vnto  the  streme

Alas  note  well  thy  desyrous  vanyte

Howe  thou  the  auenterest  in  holowe  beame

To  pas  the  see  in  contynuall  ieopardye

And  all  this  thou  doest  of  gode  to  haue  plentye

But  for  the  loue  of  god  thy  creatour

Thou  skarsly  woldest  endure  a  symple  shoure

Some  for  vayne  ryches  folowes  another  vyce
Watchynge  by  myght  in  wynter  sharpe  and  colde
To  encreas  his  purse,  by  cardes  or  by  dyce
There  syttynge  in  paynes  and  peryls  manyfolde
Such  sle  them  selfe  longe  tyme  or  they  be  olde
And  waste  theyr  youth  without  all  auauntage
Theyr  soule  submyttynge  to  Lucyfers  bondage

What  shall  I  say  or  of  the  maners  wryte
Of  dronkardes  or  glotons  Whiche  without  mesure
Onely  in  theyr  wombes  set  theyr  hole  delyte
Corruptynge  and  chargynge  them  self  beyonde  nature
So  whan  the  body  can  nat  suche  rule  indure
Theyr  lyfe  they  ende  and  oft  by  deth  sodayne
And  for  this  labour  rewardyd  with  hell  payne


scorsynges  and  perrniitacions.  145


What  shall  I  say  of  the  paynfull  fantasy
Whiche  he  abydeth  and  suffreth  day  and  nyght
Whiche  for  his  wyfe  taketh  thought  and  ielowsy
Hir  alway  ferynge,  thoughe  she  be  in  his  syght
Howe  by  those  Folys  whiche  settyth  all  theyr  myght
By  force  of  Armys  to  be  Uenus  champyon
Rather  than  to  wyn  the  heuenly  regyon

What  shall  I  wryte  of  the  mad  mysgouernaunce
And  vayne  labour  whiche  men  vpon  them  take
Some  watchynge  in  reuell  and  some  to  ren  and  daunce
Some  for  worldly  pleasour  both  day  and  nyght  to  wake
But  nought  wyll  we  suffer  for  god  almyghtyes  sake
In  whose  seruyce  we  rest  at  ende  myght  fynde
We  labour  here  for  deth  as  bestis  blynde

We  seke  our  destruccion :  for  symple  ioy  mundayne
Our  myndes  ar  so  blynde :  and  we  so  prone  to  yll
That  heuen  we  chaunge  for  euerlastynge  payne
In  good  workes  haue  we  no  pleasour  nouther  skyll
Deuyne  preceptis  we  seldome  tyme  fulfyll
Banysshyd  is  vertue  decayed  is  holynes
And  moche  of  the  worlde  ensue  vnthryftynes

Let  wyse  men  stody  (therfore)  to  obtayne
Vertue  though  the  way  be  in  diffyculte
For  thoughe  that  one  neuer  infyx  his  brayne
To  vyce,  yet  shall  the  way  full  esy  be
But  certaynly  wors  than  a  fole  is  he
Whiche  wyll  in  stede  of  heuenly  blyssydnes
Bye  worldly  pleasour,  endynge  in  wretchydnes

TOL.  II.  K


146  Of  folysshe  exchanges.


Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Remember  Fole  it  is  great  hurte  and  losse
For  worldly  pleasour  to  lese  ioy  eternall
Remember  also  howe  god  dyed  on  the  crosse
Shedynge  his  blode  the  to  redeme  withall
This  payne  he  suffred  for  the  and  for  vs  all
Consyder  his  sorowes,  be  kynde  to  hym  agayne
Lese  nat  ne  change  nat  his  ioy  celestyall
For  folysshe  pleasour,  or  frayll  and  worldly  payne


Of  folysshe  children worshyp  nat  their
fader  and  moder.


Them  also  I  repute  tor  Folys  blynde
Whiche  haue  no  honour  worshyp  ne  reuerence
To  father  and  mother,  but  ar  to  them  vnkynde
And  nat  consyder  what  payne  and  dylygence
What  labour,  thought,  great  costis,  and  expence
Theyr  parentis  had  for  them  in  theyr  yonge  age
But  they  rewarde  the  same  with  great  outrage


148  Of  folysshe  children


That  foule  is  full  of  all  vnhappynes

And  suerly  worthy  of  euerlastynge  payne

Whiche  for  his  frendes  loue  and  great  kyndnes

Rewardeth  them  with  vnkyndnes  agayne

But  hym  I  iuge  a  gretter  fole  certayne

Whiche  on  his  children  bestowys  all  his  substaunce

And  lyues  hym  selfe  (for  nede)  in  harde  penaunce

And  where  as  he  myght  his  age  well  relefe
With  his  owne  goodes  at  euery  tyme  of  nede
There  lyeth  he  gronynge,  in  payne  wo  and  myschefe
His  vnkynde  children  takynge  of  hym  no  hede
And  where  he  labowred  right  sore  his  son  to  fede
Spai-ynge  from  hym  selfe  to  fynde  hym  to  the  scole
In  age  his  son  hym  taketh  for  a  fole

And  where  as  he  ought  his  father  to  honour
To  worshyp  and  loue  by  dyuyne  commaundement
The  vnkynde  caytyf  wyll  do  hym  no  socour
But  sufFreth  hym  abyde  both  pore  and  indigent
And  often  this  Caytyf  with  handes  violent
As  past  all  grace  shame  or  godly  fere
With  strokes  doth  his  Father  hurt  and  dere

Or  suffreth  hym  vtterly  to  dye  for  lacke

Or  els  hym  dryueth  vnkyndly  to  the  colde

With  a  cowpyll  of  croches  a  walet  on  his  backe

Whan  he  hath  spoylyd  hym  of  that  he  wolde

So  whan  the  Father  is  tedyous  and  olde

His  children  thynke  he  lyueth  alto  longe

Oft  wysshynge  hym  to  be  drownyd  outher  honge


j!^  worshyp  nat  theyr  fader  and  moder. 1 49


There  is  no  pyte  that  can  suche  wretches  moue
Anenst  theyr  Faders  wo  and  paynfuU  age
They  shewe  hatered  for  fauour  and  hye  loue
O  folysshe  Fader  consyder  in  thy  corage
Thy  to  great  pyte  thy  olde  and  blynde  dotage
Whiche  to  thy  sonne  hast  gyuen  suche  store  of  gode
Whiche  the  dede  wyssheth  nat  grauntynge  the  thy  fode

He  suffreth  the  to  lyue  with  hunger  harde  bested

And  god  wot  howe  glad  wolde  he  be  in  his  mynde

If  thou  by  cruell  deth  were  from  hym  red

Yet  is  his  owne  lyfe  vnstable  as  the  wynde

And  shortly  shall  dye  leuynge  that  gode  behynde

And  for  his  vylayne,  and  frowarde  vnkyndnes

His  soule  berest  euerlastynge  blessydnes

And  that  worthely,  for  after  my  sentence
He  well  deserueth  an  yll  and  shamefuU  ende
Whiche  wyll  nat  honour,  with  loue  and  reuerence
His  fader  and  mother  as  his  myght  may  extende
And  also  all  them  of  whose  blode  he  doth  discende
And  who  that  agaynst  his  parentis  wyll  rebell
Is  sothly  worthy  to  haue  a  roume  in  hell

And  oft  it  is  sene  by  examples  euydent

That  short  space  they  lyue  and  shamefully  they  dye

Whiche  to  theyr  parentis  ar  nat  obedyent

And  suffreth  them  lyue  in  nede  and  penury

Disdaynynge  them  to  honour  and  worshyp  reuerently

Examples  in  the  Bybyll  we  haue  in  sondry  wyse

Howe  they  haue  endyd  that  doth  theyr  faders  despyse


Of folysshe  children


The  goodly  Absolon  of  beauty  excellent

Of  pleasaunt  fygure  thoughe  he  so  goodly  were

For  beynge  vnto  his  Fader  inobedyent

And  his  purposynge  hym  and  all  his  to  dere

And  to  rob  his  Royalme,  was  hangyd  by  the  here

By  sodayne  chaunce  and  goddes  punysshement

And  with  thre  sperys  his  herte  in  sonder  rent

For  that  Cham  discouered  his  faders  pryuete

As  in  contempt  hauynge  of  hym  disdayne

Was  he  nat  cursyd  by  goddes  maiestye

And  bonde  to  his  bretherne  whiche  was  to  his  great  payne

Thoughe  Sennacheryb  by  his  owne  sonnes  were  slayne

They  hopynge  to  obtayne  his  royalme  for  theyr  mede

Yet  none  of  them  theyr  fader  dyd  succede

Balthasar  kynge  somtyme  of  Babylon
In  sorowfull  yeres  longe  lyued  worthely
For  his  proude  mynde  and  fyers  transgression
Agaynst  his  father,  for  that  he  cruelly
Dismembred  hym  :  but  sothly  if  that  I
Sholde  all  suche  wretches  paynes  comprehende
In  this  my  boke,  I  neuer  sholde  haue  ende

The  bybyll  recordeth  howe  Toby  auncyent
Approchynge  to  deth  almost  in  dethys  hour
Gaue  his  dere  sone  special!  commaundement
With  all  reuerence  his  mother  to  honour
Salomon  therfore  of  sapyence  the  flour
Hauynge  no  respect  to  his  hye  excellence
Vnto  his  mother  dyd  humble  reuerence


worshyp  nat  theyr  Jader  and  moder.  151


Erectynge  hym  vp  from  his  hye  rowme  royall

To  mete  his  mother,  and  set  hir  by  his  syde

On  his  right  hande  as  chefe  and  pryncipall

By  whose  example  all  children  ought  them  gyde

Humbly  to  theyr  parentis  without  all  grutche  or  pryde

But  fewe  alas  nowe  wyll  vnto  this  intende

Whiche  causyth  them  sore  repent  it  at  the  ende

If  Corylaus  had  nat  ben  obedyent

Vnto  his  moder  and  fered  hir.  certayne

By  Rome  he  shoide  haue  suiFred  punysshement

And  by  his  foly  longe  lyued  in  great  payne

The  Bybyll  also  recordeth  to  vs  playne

Howe  the  sonnes  of  Rechab  had  great  preemynence

For  hauynge  to  theyr  fader  loue  and  obedyence

Were  they  nat  lauded  by  god  omnypotent
Yes  certaynly  but  the  chefe  cause  wherfore
Was  for  they  folowed  the  commaundement
Of  Rechab  theyr  fader,  denyenge  nat  his  lore
So  shall  I  conclude  shortly  and  say  no  more
That  he  that  to  Fader  or  moder  is  vnkynde
Shall  here  in  erth  his  soule  to  fendes  bynde

Barclay  to  the  Folys.
Thou  vnkynde  childe  and  inobedyent
Thynke  what  thy  Fader  and  Moder  dyd  for  the
Remember  what  goodes  they  haue  on  the  spent
Or  they  coude  brynge  the  vnto  thy  degre
Endeuer  the  to  them  kynde  agayne  to  be
For  all  the  kyndnes  that  thou  canst  shewe :  certayne
Nor  all  thy  worshyp  nor  thy  humylyte
Can  neuer  be  abyll  them  to  reward e  agayne


152  Of  folysshe  children.


Be  nat  therfore  childe  vnto  them  vylayne
But  take  thou  example  of  Christ  our  sauyour
Howe  he  alway  thoughe  he  were  god  souerayne
His  carnall  moder  benyngly  dyd  honour
And  Joseph  also  whiche  after  the  errour
Of  the  blynde  Jewes  to  hym  was  fader  sayde
Yet  is  he  god  and  gracious  gouernour
Lyke  to  the  Fader  before  the  worlde  was  made

But  thou  aged  man  that  seest  thy  dayes  fade
Thy  strength  decay,  and  thy  colour  fro  the  fall
Thynke  well  that  whan  thou  all  thy  good  hast  layde
Vpon  thy  children  to  auaunce  them  with  all
Whan  thou  hast  nede  perchaunce  none  of  them  shall
Socour  thy  nede,  but  from  theyr  hous  the  cast
Therfore  I  aduyse  the,  nede  nat  on  them  to  call
But  whyle  thou  lyuest  to  holde  sure  that  thou  hast.


Of  the  claterynge  and  bablynge  of  prestis
and  clerkes  in  the  quere.


Of  folys  yet :  may  we  great  nomber  se
In  the  holy  querys  of  chirches  small  and  great
Whose  communycacyon  is  voyde  of  honestye
But  on  vayne  talys  theyr  myndes  clene  ar  set
That  goddes  seruyce  is  oft  hyndred  and  let
By  suche  iapes  and  dedys  of  farre  and  nere
Whiche  they  as  Folys  recount  within  the  quere


154 Of  the  claterynge  and  bablynge


I  haue  before  touchyd  the  great  enormyte
The  foly,  and  disorder,  without  all  reuerence
Whiche  in  the  chirche  dayly  we  may  se
Amonge  lay  folys,  whiche  better  were  be  thens
But  nowe  shall  I  touche  another,  lyke  offence
And  that  is  of  Folys  whiche  in  the  quere  habounde
Nat  saynge  the  seruyce  of  god  as  they  ar  bounde

But  dyuers  toyes  and  lapis  varyable

They  spred  abrode,  encombrynge  the  seruyce

And  namely  with  theyr  tunge  wherwith  they  bable

Eche  one  to  other,  as  if  they  toke  aduyse

And  counsell  togyder  theyr  cartis  to  deuyse

Vnto  our  shyppes  theyr  company  to  cary

For  loth  they  be  to  longe  fro  them  to  tary

O  goddes  temple,  o  godly  ordynaunce
By  holy  faders  ordeyned  to  gyde  the  same
None  labours  you  to  support  nor  auaunce
But  to  decay  they  suffer,  vnto  theyr  shame
The  godly  costomes  ar  tourned  vnto  game
The  Seremonyes  somtyme  kept  stedfastly
Ar  nowe  defyled  by  lestis  of  vylany

The  constitucions  ordeyned  right  holely

In  tyme  past  by  Faders  wyse  and  auncyent

Holy  Chirches  honour  to  meyntayne  therby

Ar  halfe  abusyd,  none  suys  theyr,  right  intent

The  seruyce  also  of  god  omnypotent

Is  nowe  mysusyd :  as  playnly  doth  apere

Nat  in  the  Chirche  so  moche  as  in  the  quere


of  prestis  and  clerkes  in  the  quere.  155


There  be  no  tydynges  nor  neweltees  of  warre
Nor  other  wonders  done  in  any  strange  londe
What  euer  they  be  and  come  they  neuer  so  farre
The  prestis  in  the  quere  at  first  haue  them  in  honde
Whyle  one  recountyth,  the  other,  to  vnderstonde
His  fayned  fable  harkeneth  to  the  glose
Full  lytell  aduertynge  howe  the  seruyce  goes

The  bataylys  done  perchaunce  in  small  brytayne
In  fraunce  or  Flaunders  or  to  the  worldes  ende
Ar  tolde  in  the  quere  (of  some)  in  wordes  vayne
In  myddes  of  Matyns  in  stede  of  the  Legende
And  other  gladly  to  here  the  same  intende
Moche  rather  than  the  seruyce  for  to  here
The  rector  Chori  is  made  the  messanger

He  rennyth  about  lyke  to  a  pursuyuant

With  his  whyte  staffe  mouynge  from  syde  to  syde

Where  he  is  lenynge  talys  ar  nat  skant

But  in  one  place  nat  longe  doth  he  abyde

So  he  and  other  them  selfe  so  lewdly  gyde

Without  deuocion,  by  theyr  lewde  neglygence

That  no  thynge  can  bynde  theyr  tunges  to  sylence

And  in  the  mornynge  whan  they  come  to  the  quere

The  one  begynneth  a  Fable  or  a  hystory

The  other  lenyth  theyr  erys  it  to  here

Takynge  it  in  stede  of  the  Inuytory

Some  other  maketh  respons  antym  and  memory

And  all  of  fables  and  lestis  of  Robyn  hode

Or  other  tryfyls  that  skantly  ar  so  gode


1  c  6 Of  the  clateryii^e  and  habhiip;e


With  tryfyls  they  begyn  and  so  oft  tyme  they  ende
Recountynge  nueltees,  they  waste  theyr  tyme  therin
And  where  as  they  ought  the  seruyce  to  intende
Of  god  almyghty  :  they  spende  the  tyme  in  syn
And  other  some,  vnto  the  quere  doth  ren
Rather  for  lucre  and  cursyd  couetyse
Than  for  the  loue  of  the  dyuyne  seruyce

The  peny  them  prycketh  vnto  deuocyon

But  that  is  outwarde  nat  rotyd  in  the  harte

But  better  were  auoyde  this  hye  promocion

And  surer,  from  the  quere  to  stande  a  parte

Than  thyder  to  presume,  and  if  that  thou  aduert

Thy  owne  order  and  therof  the  excellence

So  shalt  thou  nat  gyde  the  in  goddes  hye  presence

I  thynke  it  better  more  mete  and  profytable
To  stande  afarre  without  the  Chirche  and  quere
Than  there  to  be,  and  so  to  that  bable
That  for  thy  noyse  none  can  the  seruyce  here
And  if  thou  thynke  thy  talys  and  wanton  chere
Or  wordes  superflue  ar  to  our  lorde  pleasaunt
Thou  art  abusyd  and  greatly  ignoraunt

But  certaynly  the  prestis  that  thus  lyue

Disordred  in  the  hous  of  god  our  creatour

Doth  yll  example  vnto  lay  people  gyue

By  theyr  mysrule  to  sue  the  same  errour

But  to  them  selfe  do  they  great  dishonour

And  sclaunder  to  the  Chirche,  so  that  moste  comonly

All  prestis  (of  laymen)  ar  moche  the  lesse  set  by


ofprestis  and  clerkes  in  the  quere.  157


O  folysshe  preste  vsynge  suche  fables  vayne
And  cursyd  cusromes :  thynkest  thou  therby
Of  god  any  mede  or  meryte  to  obtayne
Nay  god  is  nat  pleased  with  suche  lewde  foly
It  is  conuenyent  our  lorde  to  magnyfye
With  parfyte  prayer  lone  reuerence  and  honour
And  nat  with  iapys  and  talys  of  no  valour

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay,
Ye  prestis  and  clerkes  amende  your  myslyuynge
Defyle  nat  the  Churche  with  wordes  of  vanyte
Remember  :  there  is  tyme  and  place  for  euery  thynge
As  tyme  of  myrth,  and  tyme  of  grauyte
In  euery  place  ye  ought  discrete  to  be
That  men  may  commende  your  vertue  and  goodnes
But  namely  in  churche  vse  wordes  of  honestye
That  is  no  place  for  talys,  but  for  holynes


Of  eleuate  pryde,  and  bostynge.


That  lawde  is  vyle  the  whiche  doth  precede

From  mannys  owne  mouth  vttred  in  wordes  vayne

Of  suche  foly  no  wyse  man  taketh  hede

But  by  discression,  doth  hym  selfe  refrayne

But  pompe  and  pryde  whiche  doth  all  men  disdayne

Engendreth  folys :  whiche  thynkynge  to  exell

All  other  in  erth :  at  last  fall  downe  to  hell.


Of  eleiiate  pryde,  and  bosiynge.


Besyde  our  folys  rehersyd  here  before
In  dyuers  barges  almost  innumerable
Yet  stately  pryde  makyth  the  nomber  more
Whiche  is  a  vyce  so  moche  abhomynable
That  it  surmountyth  without  any  fable
All  other  vyces  in  furour  and  vylenes
And  of  all  synne  is  it  rote  and  maystres

The  noblest  hertis  by  this  vyce  ar  acloyed
It  is  confounder,  of  mekenes  and  vertue
So  by  the  same  is  many  one  destroyed
In  soule  and  body  whiche  them  to  it  subdue
Wherfore  let  the  wyse  his  statelynes  eschewe
For  it  hath  be  sene  is  sene,  and  euer  shall
That  first  or  last  foule  pryde  wyll  haue  a  fall

The  first  inuentour  of  this  vnhappy  vyce
As  doth  the  scripture  playne  expres  and  tell
Was  lucyfer,  whiche  to  hym  dyd  attyce
A  cursyd  nomber  both  stately  and  cruell
In  mynde  intendynge  his  maker  to  excell
Or  els  if  he  coude  come  to  his  intent
For  to  be  egall  with  god  omnypotent

Thus  of  all  synnes  pryde  was  the  first  of  all
Bygon  by  Lucifer,  but  god  omnypotent
Percyuynge  his  foly  made  hym  and  his  to  fall
From  heuen  to  hell  to  paynes  violent
In  horryble  shape :  before  so  excellent
Shynynge  in  heuen  before  the  angels  all
Thus  had  his  folysshe  pryde  a  greuous  fall


1 6o Of  eleuate  prycle,  ajid  bostynge.

But  to  be  short, and  to  retourne  agayne
Vnto  my  auctour :  suche  as  ar  stryke  with  pryde
Vse  for  to  host  them  self  with  wordes  vayne
To  spred  theyr  fame  theyr  name  and  lawes  wyde
And  though  that  they  vngraciously  them  gyde
Yet  as  mad  men  they  host  they  vaunt  and  raue
And  of  that  whiche  they  neuer  deserued  haue

Lo  sayth  a  fole  attached  with  this  vyce

I  haue  ben  norsshed  at  the  vnyuersyte

In  dyuers  contrees  and  stodyes  of  great  pryce

Both  in  these  partyes  and  eke  beyonde  the  se

At  bonony,  Parys  and  Padway  haue  1  be

Wherfore  I  ought  to  haue  preemynence

And  the  chefe  place  with  lawde  and  reuerence

Another  bostyth  hym  self  that  he  hath  ben

In  Grece  at  scolys  and  many  other  londe

But  if  that  he  were  aposyd  well  I  wene

The  grekes  letters  he  skant  doth  vnderstonde

But  thou  vayne  boster  if  thou  wylt  take  on  honde

To  stody  cunnynge  and  ydylnes  despyse

The  royalme  of  Englonde  myght  for  the  suifyse

In  englonde  is  sufFycyent  discyplyne

And  noble  men  endued  with  scyence

And  if  thou  lyst  to  aply  to  theyr  doctryne

Thou  mayst  lerne  wysdome  and  noble  eloquence

Haunt  them  that  haue  therin  preemynence

And  to  theyr  Instruccion  with  all  thy  mynde  intende

It  is  no  great  boste  to  haue  sene  the  worldes  ende


Of  eleuate  pryde  and  bostynge. 1 6 1


But  syns  mad  pryde  Enmy  to  all  vertue

Subdueth  the  worlde  vnder  baner  brode  displayde

Thoughe  folys  obey,  let  wyse  men  it  eschewe

For  Lucyfer,  as  I  before  haue  sayde

Corrupt  with  this  vyce,  had  heuen  to  him  denayde

And  as  first  actour  of  this  infectyfe  sore

Was  dryuen  downe  to  hell  with  his,  for  euer  more

And  nowe  hym  folowe  men,  children  and  wymen
Fallynge  from  erth  for  this  myscheuous  pryde
To  infernall  flodes  and  that  darke  dredefull  den
Where  without  ende  in  payne  they  must  abyde
This  fende  with  his  felawes  layeth  on  euery  syde
Theyr  nettis  of  pryde  wherwith  they  goostly  quell
Foles  without  nomber,  drawynge  with  them  to  hell

Let  man  haue  wysdome  and  beautye  souerayne
Strength,  vertue,  cunnynge,  honour  and  ryches
And  this  one  vyce  shall  all  the  same  dystayne
Defylynge  worshyp  by  his  proude  statelynes
But  namely  this  pryde  is  lady  and  maystres
Ouer  womankynde,  whiche  playnly  without  fayle
Apereth  by  theyr  lokes,  and  stately  apparayle

Whiche  wymen  whan  that  they  on  pryde  do  muse
The  same  representynge  outwarde  in  theyr  habyte
Both  yonge  and  olde  of  men  they  sore  abuse
Whan  theyr  frayle  beautye  doth  mennes  hertes  byte
And  to  be  playne :  in  pryde,  wymen  haue  such  delyte
That  if  some  were  as  they  ar  almost  all
The  pryde  in  them  at  last  sholde  haue  a  fall

VOL.  II.  L


162 Of  eleuate  pryde  and  bostyn^e.


As  I  haue  sayde.  whan  wymen  set  theyr  mynde
Them  selfe  to  garnysshe  by  thys  stately  pryde
Men  that  ar  wyse,  make  they  as  folys  blynde
Nat  knowyng  howe  by  reason  them  to  gyde
As  dyd  ludith :  whiche  whyle  she  dyd  abyde
"Were  the  Tent  of  Holofernes  capytayne
By  hir  feble  hande  he  wretchydly  was  slayne

And  all  by  reason  that  he  was  so  inflamyd
By  hir  fayre  shape,  hir  clothynge,  and  beautye
Yet  was  this  ludith  of  lyuynge  nat  dyffamyd
But  yonge  and  olde  euer  kept  hir  chastyte
And  in  lyke  wyse  lesabell,  whan  that  she
Thought  by  hir  beautye  lehu  to  betray
By  pryde  she  payntyd  hir  face  to  make  hir  gay

Betray  I  say,  to  pardon  hir  offence

Agaynst  the  wyll  of  god  omnypotent

Whiche  myght  haue  turnyd  to  inconuenyence

To  noble  lehu,  by  goddes  punysshement

These  thynges  consydered  wysdome  with  voyce  prudent

Both  lowde  and  shyll  (sayth)  cryeng  to  mankynde

From  womans  pryde  and  beauty  drawe  thy  mynde

Of  all  erthly  thynges  enclyne  nat  to  theyr  gyle
For  with  theyr  iyen  replete  with  wantonnes
Pure  hertes  and  chaste  they  enfect  and  defyle
But  suche  as  ar  gyuen  to  vertue  and  goodnes
To  mesure  and  mekenes  expellynge  statelynes
They  worthy  ar  of  lawdes  for  theyr  humylyte
For  seldome  or  neuer  they  breke  theyr  chastyte


Of  eleuate  pryde  and  bostynge. i  63


If  Barsabe  throughe  hir  blynde  neglygence
In  bathynge  had  nat  discoueryd  hir  beauty
Dauyd  had  nat  fallen  to  that  cruel!  offence
Of  murder,  engendred  by  vyle  auoutry
But  to  be  playne,  and  for  to  speke  shortly
Thousandes  ar  disceyued  and  brought  to  wofull  fall
By  pryde,  and  eke  they  folys  abyde  withal!

But  god  almyghty  dispyseth  and  doth  hate
These  stately  folys  blyndyd  witli  ignoraunce
Whose  myndes  ar  so  hye  and  eleuate
That  they  nat  se  theyr  owne  mysgouernaunce
Wherfore  our  lorde  oft  taketh  vengeaunce
Of  theyr  abusyon,  and  with  infernal!  payne
Whiche  is  rewarde  to  fowle  pryde  and  disdayne

O  that  he  is  happy  whome  this  vnthryfty  syn
Of  pryde  or  vayne  glory  with  liis  hasty  furour
Hath  nat  subdued,  ouercome,  nor  entred  in
Nor  the  vayne  desyre,  of  ryches  nor  honour
And  happy  is  he  whiche  thynketh  euery  hour
Of  liowe  great  valour  is  tlie  royalme  celestyal!
Beynge  ware  of  pryde  by  Lucyfers  fall

Suche  one  nat  forsyth  of  honour  no  hye  name
Nat  carynge  in  this  worlde  to  haue  preemynence
Nor  other  exces  longynge  vnto  the  same
Whiche  ar  attysers  of  men  to  a!!  offence.
But  proude  folys  voyde  of  wysdome  and  scyence
By  vayne  pryde  stodyeth  all  other  to  excell
And  than  at  the  last  they  fall  downe  vnto  hell


1 64 Of  eleuate  prycle  and  bostynge.

Of  proude  Lucyfer  thus  they  assay  the  fall
Receyuynge  a  rewarde  for  theyr  statelynes
Drownynge  theyr  proude  hertis  in  flodes  infernall
Where  payne  is  eternall,  wo,  and  bytternes
More  tedyous  than  all  tunges  can  expres
This  is  of  pryde  rewarde  at  the  last  ende
,  A  thynge  of  the  hyest  thus  nedes  moste  descende

Presumptuous  pryde  hath  euer  a  shamefuU  ende

So  haue  they  that  coueyt  other  to  excell

As  we  of  Chore  :  Datan  :  and  Abiron  fynde

Whiche  by  pryde  agaynst  Moyses  dyd  rebell

Wherfore  they  and  theyrs  alyue  sanke  downe  to  tell

Thus  well  is  hym  that  foloweth  vertue

And  that  with  mekenes  can  stately  pryde  subdue.

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
O  men  meke  your  myndes  :  ensue  humylyte
And  also  ye  wymen,  refuse  your  statelynes
For  certaynly  the  more  hyghe  that  ye  be
The  more  ye  ought  to  gyue  you  to  mekenes
For  pryde  is  the  rote  of  all  vnhappynes
Supporter  of  vyce,  and  enmy  to  vertue
Therfore  it  is  sayd  (and  true  it  is  doutles)
That  pryde  goth  before,  but  shame  do  it  ensue

An  exclamacion  ayenst  pryde.
O  pryde  despytous,  o  hasty  tyranny.
Infernall  fury  with  venym  maculate
Fy  on  thy  fraylte,  out  on  the  I  cry
For  with  thy  venym  thou  hast  intoxicate


Of  e  leu  ate  pryde  and  bostynge. 1 65

So  many  kynges,  so  many  a  great  estate
Thou  man  destroyest,  if  thou  may  hym  subdue
Wherfore  we  ought  the  to  desprayse  and  hate
Thou  goest  before  But  shame  doth  the  ensue

By  the  is  Lucyfer  damned  eternally

Expulsed  to  payne,  from  goddes  hyghe  presence

And  all  mankynde  endureth  mysery

For  that  thou  causyd  hym  by  thy  offence

Of  pryde  :  to  desyre  to  haue  suche  excellence

To  knowe  gode  and  yll,  that  all  mankynde  myght  rewe

Tyll  Aue  :  for  Eue  had  made  a  recompence

Thus,  o  blynde  pryde  ay  shame  doth  the  ensue

The  pryde  of  them  that  byldyd  Babylon
Was  nat  asswagyd  without  great  vengeaunce
The  kynge  transformyd  from  mannys  fassyon
Vnto  a  brute  bestis  shape  and  countenaunce
Dyd  nat  Agar  hir  selfe  also  auaunce
By  pryde  despysynge  hir  lady  bycause  she  knewe
Hir  selfe  conceyued,  but  hir  mysgouernaunce
Was  sharply  punysshed,  and  shame  dyd  it  ensue

But  shortly  to  drawe  me  to  a  conclusyon
Thou  hast  made  thousandes  to  ende  in  care  and  wo
By  the,  had  moab  payne  and  confusion
Holofernes,  Aman,  Nichanor,  and  Pharao
Balthasar,  Anthiochus,  Herode  and  many  mo
In  the  olde  testament  and  also  in  the  newe
But  shortly  to  speke,  and  farther  nat  to  go
Pryde  goeth  before,  and  shame  doth  ensue


Of  vsurers,  and  Okerers.


Vnto  our  shyp  let  them  come  hastely

Whiche  by  theyr  ardent  desyre  of  frayle  ryclies

Theyr  myndes  set  on  deuourynge  vsury

These  ar  the  theues  that  by  theyr  cruelnes

Spoyle  the  pore  people  and  greuously  oppres

They  boste  theyr  gaynes  they  bye  they  sell  agayne

Spoylynge  and  oppressynge,  on  gyle  is  all  theyr  brayne.


Of  vstirerSy  and  okerers.  l6y


A  ShamfuU  sort  of  Folys  doth  remayne

Wors  than  all  other  spoken  of  before

Whose  synfull  lyfe  and  fals  disceytfull  trayne

I  shall  reuyle  with  wordes  sharpe  and  sore

This  sort  is  vtter  ennemy  to  the  pore

Full  of  lyes,  couetyse  gyle,  and  foule  vylenes

Content  with  no  treasour,  nor  innumerable  ryches

The  power  of  the  lawe  ought  sharpely  to  chastyce
With  extreme  rygour  and  mortal!  punysshement
This  sort  infectyf  that  foloweth  this  vyce.
This  rauenynge  sort  worthy  paynes  violent
Agaynst  our  lordes  dyuyne  commaundement
By  theyr  vnmekenes,  the  pore  oft  maketh  bare
Of  londe  and  goodes,  than  ieuynge  them  in  care

These  wretchyd  folys  of  mynde  ar  made  so  dull
That  with  theyr  money  gotten  all  by  fals  vsury
Of  corne  and  vytayle  they  stuff  theyr  howses  full
Therby  to  ingender  nede,  and  paynfull  penury
Vnto  the  pore,  that  they  may  wyn  therby
So  of  all  vytayle  these  wretches  get  plentye
To  sell  it  derer,  whan  some  great  darth  shalbe

These  vsurers  alone  haue  all  the  store

Of  wyne  and  vytayle,  whiche  sothly  myght  suffyse

Many  without  nomber,  of  Cytezyns,  ryche  and  pore

No  punysshement  they  drede  ne  fere  in  any  wyse

But  lyue  the  men  that  theyr  maker  doth  despyse

No  feruent  lyghtnynge,  ne  thunder  vyolent

Can  cause  these  wretches  theyr  vsury  to  stent


1 68  Of  vsurers,  and  okerers.


But  by  all  synne,  and  in  all  vnlefulnes

These  wretches  labour  and  syngulerly  gyue  hede

To  multyply  theyr  foule  and  vyle  ryches

They  brynge  forth  hunger  them  selfe  they  onely  fede

SufFrynge  the  pore  (alas)  to  sterue  for  nede

This  sorte,  thus,  to  the  pore  is  so  cruell

That  for  lacke  of  petye  many  one  they  quell

Thoughe  the  lewes  lyue  in  errour  and  derknes
Gyuen  to  vsury  (as  lobourynge  men  oft  sayes)
Yet  ar  they  more  gyuen  to  pytye  and  mekenes
And  almes :  than  christen  men  ar  nowe  adayes
In  vsury  we  ensue  the  lewes  wayes
And  many  other  synnes  fowle  and  abhomynable
Rennynge  without  mesure  whiche  is  intollerable

For  his  vsury,  the  lewe  is  out  exyled

From  christen  costes  yet  of  vs  many  one  ■

With  the  same  vyce  is  infect  and  defyled

The  pore  by  the  ryche  is  etyn  to  the  bone

Almes  is  banysshed,  pytye  is  there  none

Cruell  crauynge  spoyleth  them  that  erst  had  nought

The  pore  is  vexyd  and  to  a  begger  brought

The  weyke  hath  the  weyght,  the  worlde  so  doth  fare
The  spere  of  extorcyon  persyth  throughe  his  syde
He  that  nere  is  naked  shall  be  made  fully  bare
He  skant  hath  rowme  in  any  place  to  byde
But  these  vsurers,  whome  gylefull  gayne  doth  gyde
Desyreth  no  plenty  of  corne  vpon  the  grounde
But  onely  that  theyr  ovvne  garners  may  habounde


Of  vstirers,  and  okerers.  169


These  caytyfs  wysshe  the  feldes  baryne  in  this  wyse
To  theyr  owne  profyte  and  others  great  greuaunce
That  hunger  and  darth  may  by  the  same  aryse
But  for  bycause  that  they  haue  habundaunce
They  laugh  anone  and  haue  a  great  plesaunce
If  there  be  skant  of  corne  and  of  vytayle
By  mouryn,  lyghtnynge,  tempest,  rayne  or  hayle

These  wretchyd  folys  for  theyr  owne  auauntage
Dayly  desyre,  and  fayne  wolde  here  or  se
A  hole  comontye  to  haue  losse  and  damage
But  to  conclude :  those  men  vyle  caytyfs  be
That  seke  lucre,  enhaunsynge  theyr  degre
Or  that  wyll  gather  ryches  by  couetyse
Or  fals  vsury,  to  others  preiudyce

Some  gladly  lene  to  haue  wynnynge  therby
And  some  fell  dere  bycause  the  payment
Is  set  to  longe  day :  yet  thynke  they  verely
Nat  to  perysshe  the  dyuyne  commanndement
Thoughe  that  suche  folys  thynke  them  innocent
If  that  they  nat  mende  a  rowme  they  haue  in  hell
But  in  the  mean  space  in  my  shyp  shall  they  dwell

Barclay  to  the  Folys.
O  mysbyleuers,  o  men  wytles  and  blynde
Gyue  nat  your  myndes  to  gylefuU  vsury
And  thou  of  the  chirche  reuoke  also  thy  mynde
Frome  the  fowle  synne  of  cursyd  symony
And  ye  marchauntis :  that  greatly  occupy
Expell  this  vyce,  for  sore  is  the  offence
Your  ryches  shall  moche  the  soner  multyply
If  pytye  of  the  pore  be  ay  in  your  presence


Of  the  vayne  hope  that  Poles  hath  to
succede  to  herytage  possession  and
ryches.


Some  ar  that  hope  and  hath  gode  trust  alway

Others  goodes  by  succession  to  attayne

Lokynge,  and  gapynge,  hourly  nyght  and  day

Whan  they  shall  perysshe  and  dye  by  chaunce  sodayne

But  this  they  often  tymes  wysshe  in  vayne

For  suche  as  they  moste  gladly  dede  wolde  haue

Etyth  of  that  gose  that  graseth  on  theyr  graue


Of  the  vayjie  hope  that  Poles i  y  i


Who  may  endure  those  Folys  ignoraunce
Whose  myndes  the  feruour  of  wretchyd  couetyse
Maketh  mad,  and  folysshe,  to  such  extreme  vttraunce
That  the  hole  worlde  myght  say  they  ar  vnwyse
Of  suche  mad  foles  this  is  the  comon  gyse
Contynually  to  gape  for  the  succession
Of  others  goodes,  ryches  and  possessyon

Of  heyres  this  is  the  comon  vse  in  dede
Theyr  parentis  deth  to  wysshe  and  to  desyre
To  the  londe  and  ryches  the  soner  to  siiccede
And  often  by  venemous  treason  they  conspyre
But  syth  the  ruler  of  the  heuenly  Impyre
In  no  mannys  handes  putteth  deth  ne  desteny
Oft  se  we  these  folys  before  the  other  dye

I  say  to  suche  as  others  deth  loke  fore
It  often  happeneth,  as  we  may  dayly  se
That  lyghtly  they  theyr  self  departe  before
Wherfore  thou  fole  fyllyd  with  all  iniquyte
Say  :  is  it  nat  great  foly  and  shame  to  the
And  also  madnes,  to  wysshe  thy  frende  damage
Or  deth  :  for  his  vyle  goode  and  herytage

A  frende  lyuynge  is  a  ryches  excellent

Therfore  I  say  he  is  a  fole  doutles

That  in  his  herte  wolde  gladly  be  content

To  se  hym  dede  for  lyuelode  or  riches

Therfore  fole  expell  this  errour  and  blyndnes

For  this  thy  hope  is  full  of  vanyte

What  knowest  thou  whan  thou  thy  self  shall  dye


172


hath  to  sue  cede  to  herytap^e.


Deth  the  assayleth  and  folowetli  hestely
Thy  lyfe  shortnyth  whether  thou  slepe  or  wake
Thy  selfe  shall  dye  :  there  is  no  remedy
And  if  thou  before  canst  no  prouysion  make
Vpon  his  backe  the  dull  Asse  shall  the  take
And  to  our  shyp  the  lede  through  fen  and  myre
For  this  thy  folysshe  hope  and  vayne  desyre

It  is  great  foly  whan  thou  art  farre  in  age
To  loke  dayly  whan  a  yonge  childe  shall  dye
Hopynge  to  succede  hym  vnto  his  herytage
Howbeit  thou  nerer  art  to  thy  deth  than  he
Yet  this  vayne  hope  doth  fede  and  norysshe  the
By  the  whiche  hope  though  many  confort  haue
Yet  oft  it  doth  his  mayster  sore  discayue

Hope  man  confortyth  makynge  hym  glad  and  fayne
Ought  to  obtayne  whan  that  he  doth  intende
But  from  vayne  hope  thou  oughtest  to  refrayne
For  it  disayueth  his  mayster  at  the  ende
So  if  thou  wylt  my  purpose  comprehende
Whether  thou  be  olde,  yonge,  or  of  myd  age
Set  nat  thy  trust  to  moche  on  herytage

For  though  thou  be  yonge :  as  I  before  haue  sayd
Thy  ioyntis  stronge  in  youthes  lustynes
Thy  colour  quycke,  and  pleasaunt  lyke  a  mayde
Thy  skyn  smoth,  and  thy  herte  full  of  boldles
Yet  deth  dayly  steleth  slyely  on  the :  doutles
Both  yonge  and  olde  must  go  the  same  passage
Thus  is  it  foly  to  hope  on  herytage


Possession  and  ryches.


73


Oft  mourneth  the  Fader,  the  sonnes  deth  sodayne
Thus  dyeth  the  yonge  oft  tyme  before  the  olde
Dyd  nat  Pryamus  right  pyteously  complayne
His  sonnes  dede  whyle  they  were  yonge  and  bolde
Them  to  haue  lyued  though  he  right  gladly  wolde
Whyle  absolon  hoped  by  treason  to  obtayne
His  faders  kyngdome  :  he  wretchydly  was  slayne

Pale  deth  and  cruell,  as  it  is  often  sene

Maketh  hym  thy  heyre  by  his  stroke  mortall

Whome  thou  supposyd,  and  thought  sholde  neuer  haue  bene

So  lytell  knoweth  these  folys  what  may  fall

For  this  is  dayly  sene  and  euer  shall

That  god  almyghty,  owner  of  euery  thynge

Chosyth  heyres  at  his  pleasour  and  lykynge

Thenuoy  of  the  actour.
Ye  wytles  men,  full  blyndyd  with  errour
Set  nat  vayne  hope  on  worldly  herytage
But  only  on  god :  lyue  after  his  pleasour
And  so  infourme  your  ofsprynge  and  lynage
It  is  a  vayne  hope,  a  madnes  and  outrage
On  worldly  thynges  to  hope  contynually
Hauynge  small  hope  within  thy  dull  carage
Of  heuen  :  where  thou  myght  byde  perpetually


Of  folys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.


He  that  doth  nat  the  holy  day  honour
With  due  deuocyon,  lawde,  and  reueicnce
But  rather  intendyth  to  couetous  labour
Vayne  talys,  sportis,  or  other  lyke  ofFence
Suche  ought  of  dutye  and  very  congruence
To  clym  as  companyon  vp  to  the  cart  of  Apys
Whiche  (eche  day  lyke)  aplyeth  nought  but  apis.


Of  folys  that  kepe  iiat  the  holy  daye. i  7  5


Alas  for  shame,  howe  wretchedly  mankynde
Wandryth  in  the  way  of  obscure  darkenes
They  haue  no  wysdome,  ne  parfytenes  of  mynde
To  knowe  the  cours  of  godly  ryghtwysnes
Though  god  of  his  grace,  and  infynyte  goodnes
To  true  christen  men  hath  grauntyd  hym  to  knawe
By  the  holy  doctryne  of  his  precept  and  lawe

And  thoughe  they  be  chosen  to  god  and  his  kyngdome

As  men  elect,  callyd  to  the  royalme  celestyall

Yet  of  vs  christen  men  (alas)  ar  some

That  of  his  doctryne  worshyp  nought  at  all

We  let  his  lawes  clene  from  our  myndes  fall

Our  holy  fayth  despysed  half :  and  defyled

Hir  honour  decay es :  the  fere  of  payne  exyled

The  fader  of  heuen  gaue  a  commendement
To  moyses  wryten  in  tables  of  harde  stone
Deuydyd  in  Ten  preceptis,  to  this  intent
Mankynde  to  reduce  whiche  had  mysgone
Amonge  the  whiche  preceptis  this  was  one
The  sabbot  to  Worshyp  and  sanctyfy  alway
The  seuenth  day  of  the  weke  called  the  sonday

This  day  was  ordeyned  in  the  olde  testament
After  worldly  werke  done  all  the  weke  before
To  worshyp  and  to  honour  our  lord  omnypotent
And  bysshops  it  conferme,  and  yet  besyde  this  more
They  haue  decreed  and  ordred  by  holy  lore
Other  festis  of  sayntis  in  heuen  gloryfyed
To  be  on  theyr  dayes  halowed  and  magnyfyed


176  Offolys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.


These  dayes  were  ordeyned  for  men  to  exercyse

Them  selfe  in  prayer,  goodnes  and  vertue

Our  lorde  and  his  sayntis  to  honour :  and  lyke  wyse

Of  worde  and  dede  all  excesse  to  eschewe

But  for  that  we  more  gladly  vs  subdue

To  worldly  tryfyls,  and  bodely  pleasour

We  vyolate  the  fayth  by  our  wylfull  errour

Those  laudable  costomes  we  defyle  and  vyolate
By  the  holy  lawes  (alas)  we  set  no  thynge
But  on  the  holy  day,  mad  ryot  and  debate
Troubleth  the  seruyce  of  the  almyghty  kynge
The  holy  day  we  fyle  with  eche  vnlefuU  thynge
As  fat  festis  and  bankettis  sausyd  with  glotony
And  that  from  mornynge  to  nyght,  contynually

The  heuenly  festis  ar  wasshyd  with  dronkenes

And  whan  quyete  rest  is  gyuen  to  mankynde

By  the  holy  day :  from  worldly  besynes

These  dronken  dastardes  set  nat  theyr  mynde

On  churche  nor  prayer,  but  drynke  tyll  they  be  blynde

And  on  the  holy  day,  we  dayly  se  that  men

Soner  to  the  tauerne  than  to  the  churche  ren

The  tauerne  is  open  before  the  churche  be

The  pottis  ar  ronge  as  bellys  of  dronkenes

Before  the  churche  bellys  with  great  salemnyte

There  here  these  wretches  theyr  Matyns  and  theyr  masse

Who  lysteth  to  take  hede  shall  often  se  doutles

The  stallys  of  the  tauerne  stuffyd  nere  echone

Whan  in  the  churche  stallys  he  shall  se  fewe  or  none


Ofjvlys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.  177


There  one  drynketh  fastynge  without  discression
Another  deuoureth  drynkynge  out  his  iyen
This  ]yfe  they  lede :  and  that  before  or  one
Of  all  the  sort  hath  at  the  churche  bene
But  besyde  this  vyce :  it  euery  day  is  sene
That  on  the  holy  day  suche  workes  we  tende  to
Whiche  on  the  workynge  day  scantly  we  wolde  do

Alas  man  it  is  a  great  shame  certaynly

Whyle  the  prest  precheth  the  deuyne  commaundement

For  the  to  aply  vnto  bestly  glotony

Or  whyle  any  seruyce  of  god  om.nypotent

Is  done  in  the  churche,  me  thynke  in  myne  intent

It  is  great  shame  to  the  to  take  more  hede

To  fede  thy  foule  wombe :  than  thy  soule  to  fede

And  nat  to  the  churche  nor  auter  for  to  come
Without  thou  erst  be  dronken  so  bestely
That  whan  thou  art  there  outher  art  thou  dombe
Or  els  in  prayeng  thou  bokest  vnmanerly
Spuynge  vp  thy  prayers :  god  wot  vndeuoutly
And  where  the  hole  weke  thou  keptest  sobernes
Thou  worshyppest  the  holy  day  with  dronkenes

It  passeth  my  myght,  I  thynke  none  can  ne  may

Wryte  all  the  folyes  synnes  and  offence

Whiche  nowe  ar  vsed  vpon  the  holy  day

For  some  folowe  Idelnes  slouth  and  neglygence

Some  vse  gamys :  grounde  of  great  inconuenyence

Som  bete  the  stretis,  and  to  rybawdry

On  the  holy  day  moste  namely  them  aply

VOL.  II.  M


178 Offolys  that  kepe  nat  the  holy  daye.


Some  slaunder,  some  lye,  what  shall  I  say  more
We  se  some  more  besy  about  theyr  marchaundyse
Than  they  haue  ben  all  the  hole  weke  before
Thus  on  the  holy  day  forborne  is  no  vyce
These  folys  aply  nat  them  in  the  seruyce
Of  god,  but  the  sabbot  defyle  with  vylany
Wherby  theyr  soulys  they  dam  eternally.

Thenuoy  of  the  actour.
Cesse  fule,  and  leue  of  worldly  besynes
Vpon  the  holy  day,  and  rest  of  the  labour
Of  thy  handes  aplyenge  the  hole  to  holynes
With  worde  and  dede  to  lawde  thy  creatour
Sanctyfy  the  sabbot :  so  sayth  our  sauyour
From  terrene  Lucre  that  day  withdrawe  thy  mynde
For  with  clene  herte  thy  maker  to  honour
On  the  holy  day  :  the  scripture  doth  the  bynde


Of  folys  that  repent  of  that  they  haue
gyuen.


He  is  a  Fole  :  and  voyde  of  wyt  cei  tayne

That  mourneth  for  that  whiche  is  past  remedy

And  by  no  mean  may  reuoked  be  agayne

For  vayne  cure  suche  one  vexeth  contynually

Moreouer  that  man  is  folysshe  certaynly

Whiche  gyueth  his  frende  ought  and  after  doth  repent

Suche  lesyth  the  meryte  :  the  gyft  in  vayne  is  spent


i8o


Of  folys  that  repent


If  thou  lyst  to  gyue  :  and  to  be  lyberall
I  shall  the  shewe  what  thynge  it  is  in  dede,
It  is  a  \'ertue  right  great  and  pryncipall
Of  loue,  and  pytye,  if  that  the  same  procede
And  if  it  be  nat  done  for  fere  and  drede
But  of  a  herte  true,  stedfast,  faythfull  and  fre
It  gendreth  confort,  and  grounde  of  amyte

Who  gyueth  his  frende  with  mery  countenaunce

Gyft  or  rewarde  :  and  who  so  euer  he  be

That  a  straunge  man  doth  worthely  auaunce

With  condigne  rewarde,  by  lyberalyte

It  may  be  proued  and  sayde  forsiith  that  he

Is  worthy  lawdes  and  an  excellent  fame

And  for  his  goodnes  of  vertue  to  haue  name

But  he  is  a  fole  and  full  of  vyiany

Whiche  to  his  louer  gyueth  ought  at  all

And  than  agayne  repentyth  by  and  by

Full  of  sorowe  that  he  was  so  lyberall

He  is  also  a  fole  and  a  man  rurall

Whiche  gyueth  with  mynde  neyther  good  ne  glad

With  lokes  pale  :  and  countenaunce  sore  and  sad

And  for  that  this  displeasour  doth  hym  dere

His  frende  :  he  soone  out  braydeth  of  the  same

Hym  self  (for  malyce)  drawynge  by  the  here

So  hath  this  fole,  by  malyce  and  yll  name

His  rewarde  lost,  for  it  rebuked  and  shame

And  no  meruayle  :  for  no  man  that  hath  skyll

Shall  thanke  hym  for  goodnes  done  agaynst  his  wyll


of  that  they  haiie  gyiien.


i8i


Yet  is  he  moche  wors  and  lewder  of  intent
Whichejwhan  he  hath  gyuen  a  thynge  for  goddes  sake
Of  his  dede,  or  gyft  anone  hym  doth  repent
Thynkynge  that  god  wyll  no  recompence  make
Of  that  rewarde  whiche  to  the  pore  they  take
For  that  he  ne^sendeth  to  euery  fole  agayne
Alway,  and^lyghtly  for  one  gyft  thre  or  twayne

Suche  folys  for  kicre,  gayne  and  auauntage

To  haue  great  gyftis  and  dowble  of  valour

Wolde  gyue  small  gyftis :  and  that  with  glad  courage

But^loth  they  ar  to  departe  with  great  treasour

Be  sure  thou  fole  that  god  our  creatour

Shall  nat  thy  rewardes  ne  gyftis  accept  atall

But  thou  gyue  them  with  fre  herte  and  lyberall

Wenest  thou  blynde  man  that  god  omnypotent
Careth  ought  for  the  small  gyftes  of  mankynde
Thou  art  abused  if  thou  be  of  that  intent
God  onely  marketh  the  gode  wyll  of  thy  mynde
And  in  thy  gyftis  deuout  if  he  the  fynde
For  thy  gode  wyll  and  god  deuocyon
He  shall  to  the  graunt  the  heuenly  region

Thus  he  that  of  goodnes  and  lyberalyte

With  mery  face  and  cherefull  countenaunce

Gyuyth  to  his  frende  that  hath  necessyte

And  to  other  men  good  of  theyr  gouernaunce

By  almes  and  pytye  :  his  dede  shall  hym  auaunce

To  worthy  laudes,  and  thankes  manyfolde

A  nd  vnto  a  gode  name :  which  better  is  than  golde


1 82  Ofjblys  that  repent


Those  rewardes  euer  ar  namely  commendable

And  best  of  all,  that  gyuen  ar  with  glad  mynde

But  yet  is  he  moche  vyle  and  reprouable

Whiche  euer  is  takynge :  remaynynge  styll  vnkynde

In  all  the  worlde  nought  vyler  can  I  fynde

Nor  wors,  than  is  a  fals  vnkynde  vylayne

Yet  many  thousandes  ensue  that  bestly  trayne

A  man  that  is  good  hauynge  wysdome,  skyll  and  wyt
Lyghtly  rewardeth  his  frendes  true  kyndnes
Than  moste  the  other  indeuer  hym  to  quyte
The  same  agayne  with  thanke,  and  faythfulnes
But  if  thou  wylt  gyue,  for  to  haue  thanke  doutles
It  moste  be  done  with  mery  loke  and  mynde
Els  shalt  thou  neyther  thanke,  ne  meryte  fynde

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER BaRCLAY  THE  TRANSLATOUR.

Whether  thou  wylt  gyue  rewarde  gyft  or  present

To  god  or  man,  it  must  be  gladly  done

And  with  gode  wyll :  els  thy  rewarde  is  spent

And  loste  vtterly,  with  meryte  small  or  none

Therfore  consyder  with  thy  selfe  alone

To  whome  thou  gyuest :  for  that  is  wyt  and  skyll

And  if  thou  worthy  and  wyse  fynde  the  person

Than  gyue  thy  gyft  with  glad  loke  and  good  wyll

So  shall  thy  kyndnes  rewardyd  be  agayne

But  all  is  lost  that  thou  dost  gyue  to  fynde

Four  sortis  of  people  :  the  first  is  a  vylayne

Or  chorle,  for  agayne  thou  shalt  hym  proue  vnkyn.ie


of  that  they  haue  gyuen.  183

The  seconde  a  childe,  for  his  forgetfull  mynde
Expellyth  kyndnes,  the  thirde  a  man  in  age
The  fourth  a  woman  varyable  as  the  wynde
Beynge  of  hir  loue  vnstable  and  volage  ■


Of  the  vyce  of  slouth.


The  Papy  sede  betokenynge  slouthfulnes  %
Is  sawen  in  the  worlde  and  fast  doth  multyply
The  synne  of  slouth  all  mankynde  doth  oppies
But  namely  seruauntis  them  self  therto  aply
Despysynge  labour,  slepynge  contynually
But  olde  and  yonge  gyue  them  to  this  offence
Chalangynge  theyr  wagis  :  they  voyde  of  dilygence


Of  the  vyce  of  slouth.


■85


Though  that  vyle  slouth  sprenklyd  with  dedely  slomber

Be  destroyer  aud  confounder  of  mankynde

And  in  all  vyce  constrayneth  hym  to  slomber

Yet  many  it  folowe,  and  on  it  set  theyr  mynde

If  thou  take  hede,  thou  clere  and  playne  shalt  fynde

That  damnable  slouth  is  so  corrupt  a  vyce

That  of  his  foule  rote  all  yllys  doth  aryse

Of  slouthys  bosom  out  spryngeth  euery  yll

And  who  that  attachyd  is  with  this  offence

No  vertuous  dede  he  gladly  shall  fulfyll

But  slepyth  ay  in  Idelnes  and  blynde  neglygence

Bytwene  hym  and  the  lame  is  lytell  difference

For  both,  in  maner,  lyueth  in  lyke  case

Nat  vsynge  theyr  membres  but  slepynge  in  one  place

A  slouthfull  man  is  nere  of  that  nature

That  if  he  lay  besyde  a  fyre  brennynge

For  to  be  brent :  he  rather  wolde  endure

Than  take  the  payne  hym  selfe  in  any  thynge

For  to  relefe  by  rysynge  or  mouynge

Thus  is  he  a  Fole,  and  worthy  wretchydnes

To  gyue  other  example,  of  his  lewde  sleuthfulnes

A  slouthfull  creature  is  as  vnprofytable

As  smoke  or  dust,  is  for  a  mannys  iyen

Or  as  a  molle,  or  vant  mete  and  able

For  to  do  profyte  within  a  garden  grene

For  in  no  goodnes  besyed  is  he  sene

Saue  for  to  slepe,  and  watche  the  fyre  alway

Besy  in  no  thynge,  but  in  vayne  sport  and  play


i86


Of  the  vyce  of  slonth.


Amonge  all  other  the  slouthfull  man  onely

Withstandeth  hym  selfe  so  mad  and  blynde  is  he

In  Idelness  lyeng  styll  contynually

By  that  prouysyon  to  purchace  pouertye

But  happy  is  he  whiche  hath  felycyte

To  vse  his  ioyntis  in  workes  iust  and  gode

With  labour  of  his  handes  gettynge  his  dayly  fode

But  our  sauyour  oft  taketh  punysshement

By  godly  iustyce  and  very  rightwysenes

And  that  oft  tyme  with  hell  payne  and  tourment

On  them  that  lyue  alway  in  slouthfulnes

But  them  that  labour  in  lawfull  besynes

He  largely  rewardeth,  and  wryte  doth  testyfy

That  an  Idell  man  to  ete  is  nat  worthy

The  vyce  of  slouth  full  harde  is  to  asswage

Or  to  subdue :  therfore  before  our  dayes

By  it  was  brought  moche  peryll  and  damage

Into  the  worlde.  and  that  by  dyuers  wayes

For  as  Juuenall  the  noble  Poete  sayes

Amonge  the  Romayns  dyd  growe  and  sprynge  therby

The  rote  of  couetyse,  pryde  and  lechery,

And  sothly  slouth  and  wretchyd  Idylnes
By  wayes  remys  and  dranynge  neglygence
Of  all  other  synne  is  rote  and  maystres
Yonge  hartis  attysyth  to  many  a  sore  offence
The  noble  Dauyd,  a  man  of  hye  prudence
Whyle  he  submyttyd  hymselfe  to  Idylnes
Synned  in  adultery  and  murder :  by  blyndenes


Of  the  vyce  of  sloiith.  \  8  7


Whyle  Rome  was  gyuen  to  labour  and  dylygence

They  wan  Cartago,  as  it  is  wryten  playne

But  afterwarde  by  slouth  and  neglygence

That  noble  Cyte  anone  they  lost  agayne

For  whan  the  romaynes  were  voyde  of  care  and  payne

Of  batayle  and  labour,  and  other  besynes

They  gaue  theyr  bodyes  to  slouth  and  ydelnes

They  had  no  warre  to  exercyse  theyr  myght

To  them  obeyed  small,  great,  lowe  and  hye

Enmy  was  none  agayne  whome  they  myght  fyght

Than  gaue  the  youth  them  selfe  to  lechery

"Whiche  lost  theyr  force,  theyr  myght  and  strength  fherby

Amonge  them  selfe  than  began  they  to  conspyre

This  wyse  decayed  theyr  excellent  impyre

For  whyle  the  romayns  straunge  regions  dyd  assayle
Expellynge  faynt  slouth,  and  nedy  Idelnes
By  dedes  of  Armes  and  boldenes  of  batayle
Therin  they  subdued  theyr  hye  cowragyousnes
But  after  by  slouth  vyle  lust  dyd  them  oppres
And  (alas)  so  sore  they  gaue  them  to  the  same
That  vtterly  they  loste  theyr  glorious  name

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
Lerne  by  example  o  man  for  to  beware
Of  faynt  Idelnes  and  of  neglygence
Suffer  uat  that  slouth  take  the  in  hir  snare
For  she  is  rote  of  all  synne  and  offence
Gyue  the  therfore  to  perfyte  dylygence
Be  alway  doynge,  but  se  thy  dede  be  gode
For  as  I  sayde  before  in  a  sentence
An  Idell  man  is  nat,  worthy  of  his  fode.


Of  straunge  Folys  and  infydels  as  sarasyns
paynems,  turkes  and  suche  lyke.


Hytheito  I  haue  me  indeuered  to  repreue

The  folys  of  our  fayth  :  for  theyr  enormyte

But  nowe  shall  I  touche  wretches  of  mysbyleue

Expressynge  theyr  foly  by  theyr  infydelyte

But  thoughe  these  Heretykes  greatly  vnworthy  be

With  vs  christen  men  to  be  :  for  theyr  blynde  slomber

In  errour:  yet  ar  they  of  this  our  folysshe  nomber


Of  straunge  Folys  and  hfydeles.


0  God  aboue :  howe  moche  abundaunt  nomber
Of  folys  rayneth,  from  the  right  way  wandrynge
By  mysbyleue,  wherin  they  slepe  and  slomber
Leuynge  the  right  lawe  of  god  in  euery  thynge
These  ar  fals  Sarasyns,  fals  of  theyr  lyuynge

And  other  mysbyleuers  by  blyndnes  voyde  of  grace
Whiche  in  our  Shyppis  loketh  to  haue  a  place

Of  these  fals  forayns  renneth  so  great  a  bonde

Vnto  our  shyppis  that  the  great  company

Of  them,  ouerspredeth  both  the  brode  se  and  londe

For  of  them  all  nat  one,  is  fautles  verely

These  folys  ar  Forayns :  and  this  is  the  cause  why

For  from  the  folde  of  god  they  falsly  them  withdrav

And  the  trewe  fayth,  despysynge  goddes  lawe

It  were  moche  better  these  wretchys  to  despyse
And  styll  to  leue  them  in  theyr  blynde  darkenes
What  haue  I  to  do  with  the  myscheuous  gyse
Of  them  whome  errour  so  blyndly  doth  oppres
For  they  ar  so  blyndyd  in  theyr  vayne  wyckydnes
That  they  wyll  be  helyd  by  no  medycyne
Nor  from  theyr  vayne  Idolatry  declyne

1  sholde  them  passe  ouer,  for  there  is  no  doctryne
No  gode  monysyon  nor  good  aduysement

That  can  them  moue,  ne  cause  them  to  inclyne
Vnto  the  holy  fayth  of  our  lorde  omnypotent
But  as  blynde  bestis,  of  one  cursed  assent
In  the  lewde  lawes,  they  onely  haue  delyte
Of  theyr  fals  mayster,  diceytfuU  Mahumyte


190 Of  straunge  Folys  and  infy deles.


But  touchynge  the  nomber  and  the  horrible  bende
Of  these  blynde  folys :  they  ar  so  infynyte
That  a  small  volume  can  nat  well  comprehende
Theyr  foly.  who  sholde  the  hole  togyther  wryte
Therfore  after  my  wyt,  my  laysar,  and  respyte
Of  theyr  sectis  onely  I  shall  make  mensyon
For  breuyte  leuynge  theyr  fyrst  inuencion

The  cursyd  lewes  despysynge  christis  lore
For  theyr  obstynate,  and  vnrightwyse  cruelte
Of  all  these  folys  must  nede  be  set  before
The  nacion  of  Turkes  next  to  them  shall  be
The  sarrazyns  next  whose  infydelyte
Is  groundyd  so  blyndly  on  mahumetis  lawe
That  no  instruccion  can  them  fro  it  withdrawe

The  whiche  errour  as  I  in  wrytynge  fynde
Two  partis  of  the  worlde  :  as  afryke  and  asye
With  mysbyleue  full  wretchydly  doth  blynde
And  of  europe  great  part  and  quantyte
Whiche  in  our  shyp  caryed  shall  nedes  be
The  houndes  of  Tartary  ar  of  this  sect  also
With  other  londes  and  Ilys  many  mo

The  Scithians  and  also  they  of  Sarmatyke

And  they  of  Boeme,  by  fendes  fraudolent

Ar  led  and  blyndyd  with  an  errour  lyke  .  -

Despysynge  the  lawes  of  god  omnypotent

Many  ar  the  londes  and  lies  adiacent

Whiche  with  lyke  errour  ar  blyndyd  and  infect

The  owgly  Mauryans  ar  also  of  this  sect


Of  straunge  Folys  and  infy deles. i  9  i


These  with  other  lyke  ar  Folys,  and  blynde  dawes

Hauynge  the  chefe  shyp  of  foly  and  errour

For  that  they  folowe  vayne  doctryne  and  fals  lawes

But  namely  they  that  be  of  siache  furour

Wylfully  to  forsake  god  theyr  creatour

On  fals  enchauntement  whyle  they  theyr  myndes  set

In  the  deuelysshe  scoles :  of  Praga  and  Tolet

Nygromancians,  and  fals  wytches  also
Ar  of  this  sort,  folowynge  lyke  offence
Nat  onely  they  that  wytche  craftis  do
But  they  also  that  gyue  to  them  credence
Or  them  supportyth  with  fauour  or  defence
For  all  suche  Caytayfs  as  vnto  them  assent
Byleue  nat  truly  on  god  omnypotent

It  were  to  moche  and  to  longe  a  labour
To  rehers  all  those  folys  innumerable
Whiche  worshyp  Idollys  and  lyue  in  lyke  errour
As  vayne  sacrifyces,  and  lawes  execrable
Whiche  by  theyr  iugement  moche  abhomynable
Agaynst  the  holy  fayth  of  Christ  dare  obiect
That  it  is  fals,  vayne,  and  of  small  effect

Amonge  these  sayde  folys  plunged  in  hell  payne
I  may  assemble  those  wretched  houndes  of  hell
Whiche  by  dispayre  with  theyr  owne  handes  ar  slayne
By  rope,  water,  knyfe,  or  other  deth  cruell
But  of  these  mysbyleuers  more  to  wryte  or  tell
Or  to  them  enuoy,  theyr  errour  to  counsayle
It  were  but  foly,  and,  payne  without  auayle


Of  the  ruyne,  inclynacion  and  decay  of
the  holy  fayth  catholyke,  and  dymyn-
ucion  of  the  Empyre.


0  christen  Pi  ynces  gydeis  of  Christendome
Whiche  ought  our  fayth  with  manhode  to  defende

1  you  exort,  by  reason  and  wysdome

And  hyghe  discressyon  in  mynde  to  comprehende
The  fall  therof,  and  besely  to  intende
It  to  defende  with  your  labour  dilygent
Leuynge  me  the  hode,  that  I  shewe  here  present


Of  the  ruyne  of  the  holy  fiyth.  193


Whyle  I  remember  the  sore  ruyne  and  dekay

Of  our  christen  fayth,  and  our  parfyte  byleue

Howe  it  decreaseth  to  damage  euery  day

The  causers  therof  I  nedes  must  repreue

Whiche  slouthfull  suffraunce  sothly  me  so  doth  greue

That  with  wete  chekes  by  teres  thycke  as  hayle

I  am  constrayned  this,  harde  chaunce  to  bewayle

My  doleful!  teres  may  I  nat  well  defarre

My  stomake  strykynge  with  handes  lamentable

For  none  with  Trumpet  nor  sounde  betokenynge  warre

This  hurt  out  chaseth,  ne  furour  vengeable

Thoughe  vnto  Prynces  the  dede  were  honorable

To  chace  out  this  hurt  and  inconuenyence

Alas  yet  therto  none  doth  his  dilygence

No  man  is  so  dull,  nor  so  cruell  of  hert

Thoughe  that  his  herte  were  harder  than  the  stone

But  that  this  dolefull  chanse  sholde  cause  it  smert

And  with  inwarde  syghes  sore  to  complayne  and  mone

Seynge  thus  saynt  Petyrs  holy  chare  or  trone

And  the  fayth  decresynge  playne  in  our  presence

By  slouth  of  statis  and  thoughtles  neglygence

The  holy  chayr,  and  apostolyke  See
Lyeth  in  decay,  plungyd  in  fere  and  dout
And  Rome  the  hede,  and  chefe  of  christentye
Thretenyth  ruyne :  and  all  the  londe  about
Tremblynge  for  fere  of  the  vnchristen  rout
Of  cursyd  Turkes  and  other  infydelys
Thus  is  our  fortune  led  forth  on  feble  whelys

VOL.  11.  N


194 ^^'^  rnyjie,  inclynacion  and  decay


All  christen  Royalmes,  and  christis  comonte
Wandreth,  and  ar  cast  in  case  full  myserable
Flowynge,  and  swymmynge  in  the  terapestous  se
And  wawes  of  fere,  abasshyd  and  vnstable
Nat  onely  our  fayth,  and  lawes  honorable
Decreaseth  dayly :  but  also  trouth  to  say
All  holy  ordynaunce  we  dayly  se  decay

But  estatis  as  kynges,  and  other  men  royall
By  theyr  blynde  slouth  and  ferefuU  neglygence
Ar  to  be  blamyd,  for  they  be  cause  of  all
For  though  that  they  be  our  shelde  and  defence
Hauynge  in  theyr  handes,  as  is  sene  by  euydence
The  armour,  and  dartis :  of  warre  and  chyualry
These  peryls  they  beholde :  fyndynge  no  remedy

None  taketh  helme,  spere,  ne  other  armour
With  manly  courage,  and  bolde  audacyte
These  peryls  to  preuent  and  to  socour
Wherfore  o  Rome  :  I  fere  thy  lybertye
Shall  by  thy  enmyes  be  reft  away  fro  the
And  thou  be  brought  to  bondage  payne  and  care
If  that  thy  gyders  be  nat  both  wyse  and  ware

Defence  of  our  fayth  by  slouth  is  left  behynde

Saynt  Peters  shyp  is  cast  from  syde  to  syde

And  all  to  shaken  with  tempest  wawes  and  wynde

Without  respyte  in  eas  and  rest  to  abyde

The  fayth  of  Christ  whiche  all  mankynde  doth  gyde

Vnto  the  hye  Royalme  and  see  celestyall

Declyneth  sore,  ferynge  ruyne  and  fall


of  the  holy  fayth.  19  5


Suche  frowarde  Nacions,  as  ar  of  mysbyleue
Prepareth  armour  in  theyr  mad  crueltye
Agaynst  the  churche,  the  same  to  hurt  and  greue
And  it  to  subdue  to  sore  captyuyte
Whiche  churche  quaketh  ferynge  this  ieopardye
And  skant  goth  fre,  but  if  no  ayde  be  founde
I  fere  sore  lyst  it  shall  be  throwen  to  grounde

The  turke  on  euery  syde  doth  it  assayle
Despysynge  the  fayth  :  demynysshynge  the  same
Whiche  cruell  tyrant  (alas)  if  he  preuayle
Shall  of  them  morder  that  worshyp  christis  name
The  fals  Prophete,  fyllyd  with  synne  and  shame
(I  mean  Mahumet)  by  his  lawes  damnable
Hath  subuertyd  people  almost  innumerable

His  Sectis  infectyf  he  hath  out  cast  and  spred
Nere  ouer  the  worlde,  and  namely  firste  of  all
The  Arabyens  by  his  fals  lawes  ar  led
Next  by  his  venym  dedely  and  mortall
Asye  the  more  obeyeth  (as  bonde  and  thrall)
Vnto  his  lawes,  and  so  in  raaner  lyke
To  his  fals  lawes  obey  they  of  Afryke

The  Soldan  of  Egypt  and  Royalmes  of  Tartary
Ar  of  his  sect,  and  the  fals  Turke  also
"Whiche  to  our  fayth  is  mortall  ennemy,
Our  marchys,  marrynge  as  moche  as  he  may  do
And  moche  of  them  annexeth  his  vnto
Warrynge  dayly  on  christen  royalmes  adiacent
Whiche  with  his  owne  was  wont  to  be  content


196  Of  the  riiyne^  hiclynacion  and  decay


The  londe  of  Trace,  large  in  a  marueylous  wyse
With  the  royahnes  of  Septemtrion  echone
Longynge  to  his  fader :  coude  nat  his  mynde  sn^Fyse
We  lost  haue  the  Nacions  of  lybye  :  echone
Asia  the  lesse :  from  vs  is  reft  and  gone
Whiche  in  tyme  past  was  true  obedyent
To  the  holy  lawes  of  Faders  auncyent

Of  Europe  moche  haue  we  lost  and  forgone  -

Alas  the  excellent  royalme  of  Hungarye

By  this  fals  Turke  had  :  vtterly,  ben  vndone

If  it  had  nat  hym  resystyd  noblye

And  in  lyke  maner  the  men  of  Dalmacye

With  blody  Batayle  and  woundes  wyde  and  depe

Cessyth  nat  they  Royalme,  from  the  fals  Turke  to  kepe

But  in  theyr  dredefull  paynes  and  dolour  '  ^

Theyr  dayly  warre  and  manly  resystence
Seldome,  or  neuer,  haue  they  ayde  or  socour
Of  christen  Sowdyours,  to  be  at  theyr  defence
Thus  by  our  slouth,  and  wylful!  neglygence
Our  fayth  sore  fadeth  (alas)  we  it  despyse
SufFrynge  our  enmyes  to  enter  in  this  wyse

Alas  no  thynge  increasyth  nowe  a  dayes

Vnto  our  fayth  our  londes  to  augment

But  euery  thynge  contynually  decayes

And  namely  our  fayth  and  vertue  excellent

Who  is  so  stuburne  of  stomake  or  intent

Whiche  coude  nat  this  dolefuU  fortune  sore  bewayle

Rendynge  his  here  his  face  and  apparayle


of  the  holy  fayih,  197


Forsoth  I  thynke  so  harde  hertyd  is  none
But  bysyde  these  forsayd  losses  or  damage
From  vs  alas  the  Ilys  of  Grece  ar  gone
Whiche  longe  tyme  kept  our  fayth  and  our  vsage
The  Traciens  from  vs  ar  reft  by  the  outrage
Of  the  Turkes  :  Obeyinge  to  theyr  ydolatry  .
So  doth  Achynus,  and  eke  Masedony

We  Sparta  haue  lost,  by  this  fyers  tyrant
The  cruell  Turke,  and  Tessaly  also
With  his  swete  Laundes  goodly  and  pleasaunt
We  haue  lost  Thebe,  and  dyuers  Cytees  mo
With  dyuers  mo  lies  as  Mysia  :  both  the  two
And  Constantynoble  that  Cyte  excellent
Vnto  the  Turke  nowe  is  made  obedyent

This  noble  Cyte,  worthy  and  lawdable
Condigne  to  be  gouernyd  by  an  eraperour
Vnto  the  noble  Rome  moste  lyke  and  comparable
Is  nowe  in  thraldome,  bereft  his  olde  honour
And  also  the  fayth  of  christ  our  sauyour.
What  shall  I  wryte  farther  of  the  ruyne
And  fall  of  our  fayth,  and  holy  lawe  dyuyne

To  christen  men  it  is  great  vylany
And  shame :  to  suffer  our  fayth  thus  to  decay
The  Turke  hath  all  won  :  by  his  tyranny
Yet  that,  his  mynde  contentyth  by  no  way
But  yet  more  ouer  he  stodyeth  euery  day
Nat  cessynge  his  Army  and  Batayle  to  renewe
Vs  and  our  landes  in  lyke  wyse  to  subdue


198  Of  the  riiyne,  inclynac'wji  and  decay


The  noble  Cecyle  is  dayly  in  great  dout
Istria  :  pannony,  and  also,  Lumberdy
And  dyuers  other  Nacions  there  about
As  Sycyll,  the  Stiryans  Venyce  and  Italy
These  Ilys,  and  regions  quakyth  contynually
The  royalme  of  Naplys  lyueth  also  in  dout
Of  the  fals  Turke  besegeynge  it  about

The  royalme  of  Denmarke  with  his  hyll  ethnay

As  men  sayth,  brennynge  alway  with  flamynge  fyre

Scantly  escapyth  the  leopardous  affray

Of  these  fals  Turkes,  and  theyr  cruell  Impyre

Agaynst  all  christen  royalmes  they  conspyre

But  namely  subdue  they  vnto  captiuyte

Suche  royalmes  as  ioynynge  vnto  theyr  marchys  be

O  holy  Rhodes  thou  nedys  moste  entende
With  thy  noble  knyghtis  thy  manhode  and  vertue
The  fayth  and  Crosse  of  Christ  for  to  defende
And  to  ouerthrowe,  and  manly  to  subdue
The  Turkes,  and  theyr  lawes  moche  vntrue
O  noble  place  thou  moste  the  payne  abyde
Though  thou  assaylyd  be  sore  on  euery  syde

Bagiazit  a  Prynce  moche  proude  and  pyteles
With  his  wylde  people  full  of  crudelyte
Prepareth  armour  our  to  people  oppres
By  batayle  horryble,  dayly  contendyth  he
Our  costes  to  brynge  into  captyuyte
And  onely  that  purpose  fyxeth  in  his  hert
Our  holy  fayth,  by  rygour,  to  subuert


of  the  holy  Jciyth.


199


He  is  throughe  persyd  with  fury  serpentyne
With  madnes  enuyroned  :  and  that  on  euery  syde
Raiiynge  in  his  rage,  as  Bacchus  god  of  wyne
So  that  no  christen  man  dare  hym  abyde
For  with  doleful!  deth,  and  blody  woundes  wyde
He  them  sore  vexeth,  but  suche  as  he  doth  kepe
And  saue  on  lyue :  he  layth  in  pryson  depe

With  no  maner  blode  this  thyrst  is  facyate

Vnto  these  Turkes,  whiche  neuer  ar  content

With  cruell  Batayle  they  bete  agaynst  the  yate

Of  our  christen  Royalmes,  with  strokes  vyolent

Wherfore  o  Rome,  o  Cyte  excellent

O  flour  of  our  fayth,  o  Peters  holy  chear

Be  ware :  for  why  great  cause  thou  hast  to  fear

Beholde  this  Sect  vomyteth  out  madnes

Enflamyd  by  the  fende  with  furour  infernall

Our  holy  fayth,  and  the,  also  doutles

By  ferefull  rygour  for  to  make  bonde  and  thrall-

The  wolfe  (alas)  sore  wastyth  ouerall

The  Innocent  folde,  of  christ  our  sauyour

Drownynge  the  sheepe  in  drede,  wo,  and  dolour

They  al  deuour,  no  man  is  founde  so  bolde
Them  to  withstande,  thus  without  resystence
They  flee  both  man,  and  woman,  yonge  and  olde
Hauynge  no  respect  to  godly  Innocence
Yet  we,  alas,  by  slouth  and  neglygence
Plungyd  in  the  wawes  of  voluptuosyte
Make  no^resystence  to  this  calamyte


2  00  Of  the  ruyne,  hiclynclcion  and  decay


Of  men  and  harnes  whiche  longeth  to  batayle

We  haue  ynoughe  :  and  capytayns  excellent

With  strength  ynough,  bolde  corage  and  counsayle

We  lacke  no  thynge  that  is  expedyent

As  wyt,  and  wysdome,  wyse  practyse  and  prudent

But  yet  suffer  we,  these  turkes  to  procede

And  them  to  resyst  haue  we  no  care  nor  hede

We  lese  our  fayth  (alas)  and  wyllyngly
To  our  great  shame  (forsoth)  and  dishonour
The  cause  is :  for  that  slouth  doth  occupy
The  mynde  of  euery  kynge  and  gouernour
Our  states  slomber,  both  kynge  and  emperour
And  Palynurus  the  hede  of  christente
And  chefe  lodes  man  :  slepyth  in  his  See

Thy  people  Peter  in  ryches  abundaunt
Slepyth  in  lyke  wyse,  and  in  lyke  neglygence
As  if  that  they  were  blynde  and  ignoraunt
Of  this  great  peryll  and  inconuenyence
Our  holy  fayth  without  faut  or  offence
Without  helpe  lyeth  open :  to  the  Turkes  hande
To  be  defyled,  no  man  doth  hym  withstande

None  lettyth  this  cruell  ennemy  to  rage
By  royalmes  and  Cytees,  but  as  we  se  playnly
Theyr  owne  selfe  they  subdue  vnto  bondage
And  ferefull  deth  wyllynge  and  gladly
Therfore  this  turke  (alasj  moche  cruelly
Where  euer  he  comys,  by  batayle  violent
Demynyssheth  the  fiiyth  of  god  oirnypotent


of  the  holy  fayth.  201


And  that  as  a  conquerour  valyent  and  stronge
But  doutles  I  suppose  in  myne  intent
That  the  greuous  synnes  raynynge  vs  amonge
Be  the  chefe  causers  of  this  sore  punysshement
We  it  deserue  :  therfore  god  hath  it  sent
As  scourge  and  penaunce  for  our  vyciousnes
And  that  by  due  order  of  his  rightwysnes

We  worshyp  ryches,  therto  we  vs  subdue
To  golde  and  treasour  we  make  our  sacryfyce
Our  fayth  is  exyled  (alas)  so  is  vertue
With  vs  abydeth  no  thynge,  but  synne  and  vyce
The  execrable  hunger  of  golde  and  couetyse
And  the  vayne  pleasour  of  Folys  fraudelent
Subduyth  our  bodyes  to  worthy  punysshement

The  heuenly  vergyn  from  vs  is  dryuen  hens
I  meane  that  iustice  is  blynde  in  christente
Or  out  of  the  grounde,  disdaynynge  our  presence
With  hir  thre  systers,  strength  or  audacyte
Prudence  and  temperaunce  also  exylyd  be
Charyte  is  banysshyd  also  from  eche  place
For  whose  absence,  alas  we  haue  no  grace

All  christen  Royalmes  ar  thus  corrupt  with  syn

And  gyuen  in  so  moclie  to  slouth  and  ydelnes

That  eche  man  stodyeth  part  of  some  royalme  to  wyn

Suffrenge  the  Turkes  our  fayth  thus  to  oppres

In  tyme  past,  Rome  lanterne  of  worthynes

Chose  four  Susters,  of  Cytees  pryncipall

Felawes  of  the  fayth,  and  in  honour  egall


2  o  2  Of  the  riiyne,  'uiclynacion  and  decay


The  firste  was  Jerusalem  in  holynes  shynynge

The  seconde  Alexander  so  callyd  first  of  all

After  the  name  of  that  moste  noble  kynge

The  thirde  Antyoche,  a  place  or  hold  royall

The  fourth  Constantynoble  whiche  euery  man  dyd  call

Newe  Rome,  and  onely  bycause  of  the  lykenes

But  nowe,  mysbyleuers,  doth  all  the  same  oppres

These  Cytees  nowe  ar  take  from  vs  away
By  the  fals  enmyes,  of  our  godly  byleue
Besyde  all  this  yet  ryseth  euery  day
Newe  sectis  of  gentyles  our  costes  for  to  greue
And  fals  prophetis  whiche  dayly  doth  repreue
And  defyle  our  fayth  in  as  raoche  as  they  may
Yet  fewe,  or  none  at  all  doth  them  gaynsay

So  blynde  ar  our  hertis,  opressyd  in  derkenes
And  also  our  iyen,  this  peryll  wyll  nat  se
Therfore  we  ar  worthy  to  sulFer  this  distres
Suche  is  our  lyfe,  and  our  fragylyte
And  though  we  be  drowned  in  depe  aduersyte
Vnto  vs  denyeth  Christ  socour  for  to  sende
For  that  we  nat  purpos  our  lyues  to  amende

The  Turke  to  his  Idols  hath  gretter  reuerence
And  more  deuocion,  to  his  fals  lawe  and  doctryne
Than  we  christen  men  without  obedyence
Haue  to  our  true  fayth,  and  holy  lawe  dyuyne
Concorde  and  peas  ar  fall  into  ruyne
Vnmekenes  vs  pleasyth :  disceyt  and  vsury
The  pore,  and  good  we,  oppres  by  rebbery


of  the  holy  fayth.


Neyghbour  agayne  neyghbour,  the  son  agayne  nature

Agaynst  the  Fader,  and  echone  nowe  adayes

Anothers  londes  desyreth  to  procure

By  falshode,  oppressyon,  or  suche  disceytfuU  waves

The  states  ar  vexyd  by  foule  dyscorde  and  frayes

But  yet  both  they  and  men  of  lowe  degre

Seke  but  theyr  pryuate  profyte  and  owne  vtylyte

Euery  man  seketh  but  for  his  owne  auayle
Wherby  our  fayth  decayeth  dayly  so
Wherfore  it  is  no  marueyle  without  fayle
Though  we  our  townes  and  Cytees  thus  forgo
Lesynge  our  royalmes,  to  our  great  payne  and  wo
And  namely  suche  as  were  most  auncyent
Best  groundyd  in  the  fayth  of  christ  omnypotent

No  thynge  is  left :  nought  doth  to  vs  remayne

Anone  the  Turke  shall  with  his  hoste  cruell

Enter  on  our  costes  to  our  great  losse  and  payne

Yet  labour  we  nat  his  furour  to  expell

But  namely  suche  as  other  doth  excel  1

In  byrth  and  ryches,  strength  and  audacyte

Labour  leste  to  chalange  and  defende  our  lybertye

The  yate  is  open  :  The  way  is  open  made

"Wherfore  o  Rome,  o  Rome  moste  excellent

I  fere  me  sore  lyst  thy  honour  shall  fade

Thou  skant  shalt  escape,  nor  fle  the  punysshement

The  storme  on  the  comyth  cruell  and  vyolent

A  kynge  the  byldyd  and  eft  a  counsellour

Encreased  thy  name,  and  brought  the  to  hnour


2  04  Of  the  ruyne,  inclynacion  ana  decay


Than  had  this  Cyte  so  hye  a  name  royall

That  through  the  worlde  it  spred  abrode  his  fame

And  also  vp  vnto,  the  Heuen  Iraperyall

Than  after  was  it  subgect  vnder  the  name  <

Of  an  emperour,  to  honour  and  nat  shame

Yet  after  it  was  agayne  admyttyd  fre

But  nowe  may  it  fere,  agayne  in  seruytude  to  be

No  man  resistyth  agaynst  this  vyolence

Our  fayth  also  demynysshyth  euery  day

By  culpable  synne,  and  our  noyson  offence

Whiche  at  the  ende  hath  greuous  payne  alway

O  christen  Prynces  therfore  do  that  ye  may

Our  fayth  to  socour,  out  of  captyuyte

Sauynge  your  owne  londes,  your  lyfe  and  lybertye

O  worthy  prynces  and  lordes  Italyen

Ye  stoberne  Flemynges  and  ye  of  Pannony

O  subtyle  Lumberdes,  Spanyardes  and  Frenchmen

And  o  holy  Fader  the  Pope  moste  specyally

Lay  to  your  handes  by  strength  and  polycy

Our  fayth  to  defende,  and  helpe  ye  shall  nat  want

Throwe  out  your  dartis  with  handes  tryumphant

Expell  your  wrath,  set  statelynes  asyde

Be  stedfast  in  fayth :  keep  ay  in  humylyte

Let  Constance  and  peas  amonge  you  ay  abyde

With  knot  perpetuall  of  loue  and  amyte

Haue  one  assent,  in  Concorde  all  agre

loyn  hande  to  hande,  prepare  you  vnto  warre

Take  soone  your  armour,  and  no  more  tyme  diffarre


of  the  holy  fciyth,  205


If  peas  be  with  vs,  Concorde  and  amyte
We  may  from  our  costis  the  cruell  turke  expell
And  so  kepe  our  fayth  in  stedfast  lybertye
One  hope  we  haue,  our  ennemyes  to  quell
Whiche  hope  is  stedfast  if  we  ourself  do  well
For  Henry  the  eyght  replete  with  hye  wysdome
By  iust  tytyll  gydeth  our  Septer  of  kyngdome

This  noble  Prynce  begynnyth  vertuously

By  iustyce  and  pyte,  his  roylme  to  meyntayne

So  that  he  and  his :  without  mo  company

May  succour,  our  sores  by  his  manhode  souerayne

And  get  with  his  owne  hande  Jerusalem  agayne

He  passyth  Hercules  in  manhode  and  courage

Hauynge  a  respect  vnto  his  tender  age

He  passeth  Achylles  in  strength  and  valyance
His  fame  nere  as  great,  but  as  for  his  larges
And  lyberalyte,  he  shewyth  in  countenaunce
That  no  auaryce  can  blynde  his  rightwysnes
Couetyse  hath  left  behynde  hym  his  ryches
Vnto  the  hyghe  possessyon,  of  lyberalyte
Whiche  with  the  same  shall  kepe,  our  lybertye

Let  go  Pompeius :  and  Camyllus  also

And  Sylla,  for  none  of  them  wyll  I  commende

This  Prynce  I  prayse  alonely  and  no  mo

Whiche  is  moste  abyll  our  fayth  for  to  defende

He  is  moste  worthy  by  honour  to  ascende

Vnto  a  noble  Diademe  Imperyall

So  is  my  hope,  that  he  hereafter  shall


2o6  Of  the  riiyne,  hiclynac'ion  and  decay


Than  shall  he  our  fayth  establysshe  and  make  sure

Defendynge  the  Churche  and  christis  herytage

There  shall  no  Turke  be  abyll  to  indure

His  rampynge  Lyons  rorynge  in  theyr  rage

Nor  none  of  all  the  Sarrazyns  lynage

Thus  may  our  Prynce  be  shelde  of  christendome

By  strength  and  ryches,  but  namely  by  wysdome

His  armys  victorious  shall  ^pred  abrode  theyr  fame
Ouer  all  the  worlde,  for  he  may  wyn  agayne
Jerusalem :  and  the  Crosse  within  the  same
With  the  holy  toumbe  :  for  this  is  my  trust  certayne
That  if  he  begyn  :  he  nought  shall  do  in  vayne
For  god  and  his  sayntis  shall  helpe  hym  for  to  fyght
Saynt  george  our  patrone  shall  eke  augment  his  myglit

But  o  englysshe  states  I  humbly  you  requyre
Vnto  your  kynge  of  hert  and  mynde  be  true
Submyt  your  selfe  gladly  to  his  empyre
So  shall  ye  lyghtly  your  ennemyes  subdue
And  syth  that  all  Christen  prynces  doth  eschewe
Labour  and  payne,  for  the  holy  faythes  defence
In  the  name  of  god  do  ye  your  dylygence

Though  Aufony  slepe  and  also  Italy ■  •  ■
The  kynges  of  Sycyll  and  also  of  Fraunce
And  they  of  the  Churche  for  none  of  them  truly
Defendyth  the  fayth,  but  labour  to  auaunce
Theyr  proper  londes,  suche  is  theyr  gouernaunce
That  christen  kynges  this  wyse  togyder  fyght
Suffrynge  the  fayth  decay  before  theyr  syght


of  the  holy  fayth.  207


They  knowe  the  cause,  hauynge  power  and  myght
Yet  wyll  they  nat  the  holy  fayth  defende
Therfore  lede  ye  your  Host  of  men  forth  right
These  Turkes  to  subdue. If  ye  so  condiscende
Than  be  ye  sure  Christ  shall  you  socour  sende
Of  angels  heuenly  to  your  ayde  and  defence
And  brake  theyr  Tentis  with  his  hande  and  presence

The  noble  Henry  of  Englonde  is  at  hande
Of  kynges  noblest,  of  worthy  auncetrye
Whiche  shall  you  helpe  to  wyn  the  holy  lande
And  brynge  these  tyrantis  vnto  Captyuyte
Enuy  who  wyll :  none  rightwyser  than  he
Is  in  the  worlde  nor  of  more  noblenes
Nor  more  habundant  in  treasour  and  ryches

His  maiestye  presentyth  a  kynges  countenaunce
His  maners  honest,  and  full  of  noblenes
He  seketh  nat  his  kyngdome  to  auaunce
By  gyle  disceyte  :  nor  other  lyke  falsnes
His  mynde  nat  elate  with  scornfull  statelynes
But  in  the  playne  path  of  goodnes  lawe  and  right
The  fere  of  god  alway  before  his  syght

As  longe  as  this  noble  Prynce  shall  be  our  gyde
With  vs  all  honour  godnes  and  ioy  shall  growe
With  perfyte  peas  about  on  euery  syde
In  welth  and  ryches  we  shall  habounde  and  flowe
And  if  there  be  any  of  statis  hye  or  lowe
Whiche  by  yll  councill  wolde  cause  hym  to  mysdo
God  graunt  them  no  myght,  no  space  ne  tyme  therto


2o8  Of  the  ntyne,  inclynacion  and  decay


There  is  no  Prynce  of  greatter  excellence
I  trowe  none  lyuynge  of  hye  nor  lowe  degre
Wherfore  let  them  do  hym  obedyence
As  to  theyr  hede  :  and  moste  of  dignyte
Obey  to  hym  Prynces  than  trust  I  ye  shall  se
That  by  his  manhode,  and  cotmsell  souerayne
All  that  his  lost,  we  shall :  soone  wyn  agayne

And  ye  christen  Prynces  who  so  euer  ye  be
If  ye  be  destytute  of  a  noble  Capytayne
Take  lamys  of  Scotlonde  for  his  audacyte
And  proued  manhode  if  ye  wyll  laude  attayne
Let  hym  haue  the  forwarde,  haue  ye  no  disdayne
Nor  indignacion,  for  neuer  kynge  was  borne
That  of  ought  of  warre  can  shewe  the  vnycorne

For  if  that  he  take  onys  his  spere  in  hande
Agaynst  these  Turkes  strongly  with  it  to  ryde
None  shall  be  abyll  his  stroke  for  to  withstande
Nor  before  his  face  so  hardy  to  abyde
Yet  this  his  manhode  increasyth  nat  his  pryde
But  euer  sheweth  he  mekenes  and  humylyte
In  worde  and  dede  to  hye  and  lowe  degre

In  prudence  pereles  is  this  moste  comely  kynge
And  as  for  his  strength  and  magnanymyte
Concernynge  his  noble  dedes  in  euery  thynge
One  founde  or  grounde  lyke  to  hym  can  nat  be
By  byrth  borne  to  boldnes  and  audacyte
Vnder  the  bolde  planet  of  Mars  the  champyon
Surely  to  subdue  his  ennemyes  echone


of  the  holy  JaytJj.  209


Mars  hath  hym  chosyn  :  all  other  set  asyde

To  be  in  practyse  of  Batayle  without  pere

Saue  ryches  lacketh  his  manful!  myght  to  gyde

He  hath  nat  ,plentye  of  all  thynge  as  is  here

The  cause  is  that  stormes  in  season  of  the  yere

Destroyeth  the  corne  engendrynge  so  scarsnes

Whiche  thynge  moche  hurteth  this  Prynces  worthynes

Let  hym  be  formest,  than  dout  ye  nought  at  all
For  onely  his  loke  (so  bolde  is  his  courage)
The  turkes  pryde  shall  make  decay  and  fall
Lyke  to  a  Lyon  in  dedes  he  shall  rage
Thus  he  beynge  gyde  the  fury  shall  asswage
Of  the  fals  Turkes :  so  that  they  shall  be  fayne
Our  christen  londes  to  vs  to  yelde  agayne

If  the  Englysshe  Lyon  his  wysdome  and  ryches
Conioyne  with  true  loue,  peas  and  fydelyte
With  the  Scottis  vnycornes  myght  and  hardynes
Than  is  no  dout  but  all  hole  christen te
Shall  lyue  in  peas  welth  and  tranquylyte
And  the  holy  londe  come  into  christen  hondes
And  many  a  regyon  out  of  the  fendes  bondes

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER  BaRCJLAY.

O  worthy  estatis  of  Christendome  echone
Consyder  your  power  and  your  habylyte
Let  slombrynge  slouth  away  fro  you  be  gone
Fere  nat  to  fyght  for  your  lyfe  and  lybertye
Let  eche  man  do  after  his  power  and  degre
To  withstande  the  Turke  and  the  fayth  to  defende
If  we  manly  fyght  :  and  all  in  one  agre
Than  without  dout  god  shall  vs  socour  sende^

VOL.  II.  O


Of  flaterers  and  glosers.


He  that  wyll  flater  a  hoi  s  of  hye  corage
Clappynge  or  touchynge  :  if  that  he  stande  to  nye
May  happen  to  haue  the  fote  on  his  vysage
To  his  great  hui  t :  and  who  that  subtylly
Wyll  flater  an  estate  to  get  some  good  therby
He  often  at  the  last  is  cast  out  of  fauour
For  flaterynge  pleaseth  no  wyse  man  of  honour


Ofjiaterers  and  glosers.


2  I  I


Our  folys  yet  encreasyth  more  and  more
But  as  for  those  that  nowe  themselfe  present
I  thought  to  haue  set  them  in  a  shyp  before
Where  as  ar  seruauntis  fals  and  fraudelent
But  by  no  meane  wyll  they  therto  consent
They  coueyt  a  shyp  for  them  selfe  to  attayne
Therfore  for  them  this  shyp  I  nowe  ordayne

Great  lordes  seruauntis,  wyll  nedes  sayle  apart
Alone  by  them  self  they  coueyt  for  to  be
For  they  ne  can  well  vse  theyr  craft  and  art
Of  gyle  and  flaterynge  amonge  the  comontye
And  if  that  ye  wyll  knowe  what  men  these  be
They  ar  fals  flaterers  fyllyd  full  of  gyle
And  fowle  corrupcion  :  as  is  a  botche  or  byle

A  crafty  flaterer,  as  nowe  is  many  one

With  grettest  lordes  coueytis  alway  to  dwell

Also  they  labour  to  knowe  eche  thynge  alone

Yet  can  they  nought  kepe  secrete  in  counseli

But  with  the  comon  Folys  for  that  they  wyll  nat  mell

I  ordoyne  to  them  this  Barge  here  present

Lyst  theyr  fraude  myght  be  theyr  owne  impedyment

The  kynges  Court  nowe  adayes  doth  fede

Suche  faynynge  flaterers :  and  best  they  ar  in  grace

As  chefe  with  theyr  lorde,  by  lyes  gettynge  mede

Some  with  a  fals  herte,  and  a  payntyd  face

In  his  lordes  seruyce  to  haue  chefe  rowme  and  place

Into  his  lordes  erys  yetyth  secretly

Lyes  venemous,  debate  to  multyply


2  I  2


OfJIaterers  and  glosers.


Another  can  pyke  vp  the  fethers  properly
Of  his  maysters  clothys  if  they  syt  nat  right
He  maketh  them  yet  for  to  syt  more  awry
To  take  occasion  them  clenlyer  to  dyght
Another  ay  bydeth  in  his  maysters  syght
Nat  to  his  profyte,  but  to  his  charge  and  coste
But  to  support  hym,  if  he  do  crake  or  boste

These  faynynge  flaterers  theyr  lordes  thus  begyle
Yet  ar  theyr  lordes  therwith  right  well  content
They  laughe  out  lowde  if  that  theyr  lorde  do  smyle
What  euer  he  sayth  they  to  the  same  assent
And  in  so  moche  ar  they  fals  and  fraudelent
That  if  theyr  mayster  say  that  the  crowe  is  whyte
They  say  the  same,  and  haue  therin  delyte

They  flater  theyr  lorde  with  wordes  fayre  and  gay
And  vayne  roundynges  to  cause  hym  to  byleue
That  all  is  trouth  whiche  they  vnto  hym  say
Another  hym  stryketh  and  claweth  by  the  sleue
Another  with  fals  talys  his  neyghbour  doth  greue
Vnto  a  ryche  man  accusynge  hym  falsly
To  syt  at  his  dysshe  and  get  some  mete  therby

Thus  cause  these  flaterers,  malyce  and  discorde.
The  ryche  oft  desyreth  suche  lyes  for  to  here
Eche  flaterer  is  in  chefe  rowme  with  his  lorde
Whan  a  symple  seruaunt  must  nedes  stande  arere
The  playne  man  hungreth,  the  Iyer  hath  the  chere
No  man  in  Court  shall  nowe  a  lyuynge  fynde
Without  that  he  can  bowe  to  euery  wynde


Of  Jlaterers  and  glosers.  2  1 3


The  tre  that  bowyth  to  no  wynde  that  doth  blowe
In  stormes  and  tempest  is  in  moste  ieoperdy
And  often  with  sodayne  blastis  ouerthrowe
Therfore  these  flaterers  to  eche  wynde  aply
And  he  that  can,  vpholde  his  maysters  lye
"With  ye  and  nay,  and  helpe  hym  if  he  tryp
Obteyneth  nowe  grettest  honour  and  worshyp

Many  one  in  flaterynge  cometh  to  great  honour

The  cause  is :  for  grettest  statis  nowe  a  dayes

To  be  disceyued  ar  glad,  and  haue  pleasour

In  a  dowble  tunge  beleuynge  that  it  sayes

None  is  nowe  beloued,  but  suche  as  vse  the  wayes

Of  adulacion,  and  that  can  secretely

Whysper  and  rounde  thynges  ymagyned  falsly

And  they  that  haue  lerned  to  forge  tydynges  newe

Ar  most  made  of  if  they  haue  the  scyence

By  flaterynge  wordes  to  make  them  to  seme  true

None  settyth  by  seruauntis  of  faythfull  dilygence

But  for  that  punysshement  foloweth  eche  offence

We  dayly  se  these  flaterers  harde  bested

And  by  theyr  owne  gyle,  they  vnder  fote  ar  tred

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER  BaRCLAY.

Amende  fals  flaterers  :  it  is  a  folysshe  sport
And  vayne  besynes,  for  a  small  wretchyd  mede
Folys  in  theyr  lyes  to  flater  and  support
And  whan  all  is  done  nat  to  be  sure  to  spede
Thou  shalt  fynde  truly  :  if  thou  take  gode  hede
That  at  the  ende  flaterers  ar  nought  set  by
But  he  that  is  playne,  to  flater  hauyuge  drede
At  last  shall  be  rewardyd  well  and  worthely


Of  tale  berers  and  Poles  of  lyght  credence
vnto  the  same.


He  is  lyght  myndyd,  and  voyde  of  all  prudence
Whiche  alway  is  wont,  without  aduysement
To  all  vayne  talys  sone  to  gyue  credence
Aplyenge  his  erys  therto  :  with  full  intent
For  why  these  brybours  fals  and  fraudelent
And  bablynge  lyers,  by  wordes  wors  than  knyfe.
Amonge  men  sawe  debate  and  greuous  stryfe.


Of  tale  berers.


These  folys  present  I  sholde  haue  callyd  skant
Vnto  my  shyp  to  rowe  amonge  the  mo
But  that  the  Shyp  before  can  them  nat  want
So  these  two  sortis  wyll  nedis  togyther  go
For  thoughe  the  flaterer  hym  selfe  behauyth  so
By  fayned  talys  good  lyiiers  oft  to  grene
They  ar  as  lewde  that  wyll  the  same  byleue

He  is  a  fole  that  his  erys  wyll  inclyne

Lyghtly :  to  his  wordes  that  is  of  suche  vsage

Newe  talys  and  tydynges  dayly  to  ymagyne

And  that  apereth  superflue  of  langage

For  he  showeth  tokyns  of  foly  and  dotage

Whiche  gyueth  his  erys  to  here  suche  wordes  vayne

As  myght  his  neyghbours  honestye  distayne

A  fole  is  ay  lyght,  and  hasty  of  credence
With  erys  open  to  eche  tale  that  is  newe
Wherof  oft  groweth  great  inconuenyence
But  a  wyse  man  suche  talys  can  eschewe
Nat  them  byleuynge  but  if  he  knowe  them  true
He  is  nat  hardy  the  whiche  one  stryketh  sore
Behynde  his  backe  :  nat  warnynge  hym  before

For  who  that  is  vnwarely  strykyn  so

Can  for  the  same  no  helpe  ne  socour  fynde

No  more  can  he  fynde  remedy  therto

That  of  taleberers  is  sclandred  thus  behynde

But  nowe  is  he  a  mayster  that  hath  suche  wyly  mynde

A  rightwyse  man  with  fals  wordes  to  diffame

And  many  vngoodly  gyue  credence  to  the  same


herers.


But  who  so  euer  vsyth  this  adulacion

Or  that  to  vayne  wordes  gyueth  to  sone  credence

Ar  trayters,  and  full  of  abhomynacion

Cursyd  and  iniust  stynkynge  in  the  presence

Of  god  almyght :  for  by  the  same  offence

Is  sawen  the  sede  of  stryfe :  and  mortall  wo

Amonge  great  statis :  and  comontye  also

Therfore  that  man  that  quyetly  wolde  lyue  •-
And  rightwysely  :  with  name  of  honestye  :
To  flaterynge  talys  must  nat  his  erys  gyue
For  a  fals  tunge  fulfyllyd  with  iniquyte
By  mortall  venym  infecteth  eche  degre
Brekynge  the  bonys  (god  wot)  of  many  one
Howbeit  the  tunge  within  it  hath  no  bone

By  this  vyce  :  the  honour  of  hym  that  is  absent
Thoughe  it  were  gotten  by  way  moste  vertuous
Is  hurt  and  distayned  by  worde  malyuolent
Of  it  Cometh  many  a  vyce  full  peryllous
And  it  often  tymes  by  wayes  iniuryous
Jugement  gyueth  on  man  in  his  absence
Fals  and  iniustly  by  to  hasty  credence

By  this  maner,  iustyce  and  lawe  is  vyolate

Vnto  the  absent  moche  noysom,  harde  and  sore

Whan  he  is  falsly  accusyd  by  some  state

Or  some  other  man,  nat  assytyd  before

Howe  can  he  defende  his  cause  well :  whan  no  more

Tary  is  made,  but  forth  right  the  sentence

Vnwysely  is  gyuen  by  to  hasty  credence


Of  tale  berers.  1 1  7


The  wretchyd  A  man  byleuynge  hastely
By  Mardocheus  the  talys  to  hym  tolde
Wolde  hym  haue  put  to  deth  vnrightwysly
If  the  (^ene  hester  durst  nat  haue  ben  so  bolde
The  kynge  to  asswage,  by  wordes  sad  and  colde
Wherby  fals  Aman  in  paynfull  shame  and  care
Anone  was  hanged  :  and  that  in  his  owne  smare

Ouer  hasty  credence  without  aduysement
Sende  Saulis  sone  :  myphiboseth  by  name
Great  care  and  sorowe  by  paynfull  punysshement
The  noble  Alexander  most  excellent  of  fame
"Wolde  neuer  inclyne  his  erys  vnto  the  same
For  well  he  wyst  to  what  inconuenyence
They  fall :  that  ar  to  hasty  of  credence.

Alexander  Barclay  the  translatour.

Consyder  man  wheder  thou  be  lowe  or  hye

What  thynge  thou  herest,  before  thou  thynke  it  true

For  flaterers  ay  speke  fayrest  whan  they  lye

Or  whan  they  lyst  to  brynge  vp  talys  newe

Beware  of  them  :  Theyr  company  eschue

They  shall  the  cause  to  fall  to  suche  offence

That  all  thy  lyfe  thou  shalt  it  after  rue

To  them,  if  thou  be  hasty  of  credence

Therfore  do  thou  as  doth  the  god  palfray
Whan  they  begyn  to  clawe  the  by  the  sleue
Flynge  with  thy  helys :  and  dryue  them  so  away
And  with  sharpe  wordes  be  bolde  them  to  repreue


2l8


Of  tale  berers.


Stop  fast  thy  erys,  or  els  fro  them  remeue
For  be  thou  sure :  to  speke  in  short  sentence
Mo  men  are  marryd,  than  any  wolde  byleue
And  greuously  ofFende  by  to  hasty  credence


Of  falshode,  gyle,  and  disceyte,  and  suche
as  folowe  them.


The  vayne  and  disceytfull  craft  of  alkemy

The  corruptynge  of  wyne  and  other  merchandyse

Techyth  and  shewyth  vnto  vs  openly

What  gyle  and  falshode  men  nowe  do  exercyse

All  occupyers  almost,  suche  gyle  dyuyse

In  euery  chafFar,  for  no  fydelyte

Is  in  this  londe,  but  gyle  and  subtyhe


2  2  o Ofjalsbode,  gyle,  and  disceyte,


O  well  of  muses :  o  pleasaunt  castaly

0  susters  nyne,  with  lowe  benygnyte

1  you  beseke  my  wyt  to  multyply

By  hundred  folde,  and  tunges  of  lyke  plente
Graunt  to  me  strength  to  wryte  the  subtylte
The  fraude,  and  disceyt,  whiche  is  by  gylefull  wayes
Amonge  all  chraftis  vsed  nowe  adayes

Without  a  hundred  tunges  great  wysdome  and  respyte

Contynuall  labour  :  and  stody  without  ende

None  can  theyr  gyles  ne  all  theyr  falshode  wryte

Nor  all  fals  folys  in  balade  comprehende

So  many  be  that  thus  theyr  lyues  spende

That  all  the  shyppes  ne  galays  vnto  Spayne

Nor  myghty  Carakes  can  nat  them  well  contayne

So  they  that  ar  abrode  fast  about  may  range
Rowynge  on  the  see  :  myself  theyr  lode  and  gyde
In  dyuers  contres  farre  and  londes  straunge
And  spred  theyr  namys  about  on  euery  syde
But  dyuers  ar  the  sortis,  that  the  worlde  wyde
In  euery  part  doth  infect  and  defyle
By  fraudes  fayned,  and  fals  myscheuous  gyle

Firste  fals  loue  disceyuyth  and  doth  greue
Both  age  :  and  youthe  both  wylde  and  prodygall
Lernyd  and  lewde  :  if  that  they  it  byleue
For  vnder  his  tunge  is  hyd  venym  mortall
Frendes  and  felawes  faynynge  and  fals  with  all
Also  shalt  thou  fynde  that  of  suche  maner  be
To  speke  fayre  wordes  mengled  with  sotylte


and  suche  as  folowe  them.


22  I


Suche  in  theyr  hertls  haue  no  fydelyte
And  often  we  se  that  wycked  and  fals  counsell
Disceyueth  many  by  fals  lyberalyte
Disceytfiill  wordes,  dissymuled  as  gospell
Doth  many  abuse  and  from  theyr  right  expell
And  no  maruayle,  for  almoste  euery  man
To  his  pryuate  profyte  intendeth  what  he  can

None  is  that  caryth  for  comon  auauntage
Thus  comon  welth  sore  fallyth  into  decay
But  ouerall,  men  ar  fals  of  theyr  langage
By  lyes  auaylynge  them  selfe  all  that  they  may
Brother  begylyth  brother  as  we  se  euery  day
And  the  sonne  the  Fader  desceyueth  oft  also
But  though  he  can  nat  :  yet  is  his  mynde  therto

No  bondes  of  loue,  amonge  men  nowe  doth  byde
Fals  gyle  vs  gydeth,  blyndyd  is  conscyence
And  suche  as  within  the  cloyster  doth  abyde
Fyle  theyr  relygion  oft  by  the  same  offence
Faynynge  them  sayntis  whan  they  ar  in  presence
With  ypocresy  payntynge  theyr  countenaunce
So  clokynge  and  hydynge  theyr  yll  mysgouernaunce

Some  shyne  without  :  and  as  swete  bawme  they  smell
But  yet  theyr  hertis  ar  fyllyd  with  falsnes
And  within  the  skyn  more  yll  than  man  can  tell
As  gyle  and  disceyte,  iust  men  therwith  toppres
And  wolues  rauysshynge  full  of  vnthryftynes
Bere  shepes  skynnes  showynge  nat  that  they  be
Foxys  within  :  shewynge  out  symplycyte


2  2  2  Of Jal shock,  gyle,  a  fid  disceyte,


By  suche  falshode,  they  many  one  begyle

In  vniust  coyne,  is  founde  also  abusyon

And  disceyt :  whiche  doth  all  the  worlde  defyle

By  clyppynge  and  wasshynge,  and  lyke  dymynusyon

Bysyde  all  this,  yet  in  many  a  regyon

Suche  folys  stody  to  mengle  and  multyply

Eche  sort  of  metall  men  do  disceyue  therby

And  in  theyr  wretchyd  ryches  to  abounde
The  clyp,  they  coyne,  and  that :  counterfayt  metall
And  the  right  kynde  of  golde  they  oft  confounde
They  sell  precious  stones  nat  true  ne  naturall
But  counterfayt  (for  true)  men  to  begyle  withall
The  coyne  by  falshode  also  oft  lacketh  weyght
Thus  ouer  the  worlde  is  nought  but  gyle  and  sleyght

What  shall  I  wryte  of  gyle  and  sotyltye
Vsed  in  weyght  nomber,  tale  and  mesure
Howe  they  bye  with  one,  large,  or  weyghtye
And  sell  by  a  les :  theyr  conscyence  is  so  obscure
Marchaundys  also  in  gyle  them  them  selfe  inure
By  dyuers  wayes  makynge  them  to  seme  plasaunt
True  men  to  disceyue  that  therin  ar  ignoraunt

That  whiche  is  nought  they  make  seme  good  and  fyne

But  to  touche  a  teuerners  hye  experyence

Howe  lyghtly  the  knaue  can  brewe  a  bowle  of  wyne

As  who  sayth  that  he  hath  the  craft  and  scyence

To  amende  that  thynge  that  goddes  hye  prudence

Hath  made  parfyte,  but  he  his  owne  to  saue

By  newe  brewyd  wyne,  men  bryngeth  to  theyr  graue


and  sue  he  as  folowe  them.  223


In  no  man  is  trust,  for  euery  man  by  gyle
And  preuy  falshode  hath  suche  a  craftynes
His  occupacion  by  fraudys  fals  to  defyle
Reputynge  hym  selfe  wyse  for  suche  disceytfulnes
Thus  is  there  no  craft,  pore,  ryche,  more  or  les
But  all  ar  vpholden  with  gyle  and  soteltye
Whiche  falshode  causeth  that  many  neuer  thye

But  if  I  sholde  tarry  so  longe  here  to  expres
All  the  fals  wayes  and  gyle  done  wrongfully
In  eche  occupacion,  and  euery  besynes
It  were  to  longe  :  therfore  I  say  shortly
That  he  is  happy  whiche  lyueth  perfytely
Voyde  of  all  fraude :  but  the  trouth  to  reporte
In  worde  and  dede,  but  fewe  be  of  that  sort

ThENUOY  of  ALEXANDER  BaRCLAY.

Thou  that  hast  to  do  with  worldly  besynes
Outher  occupacyon,  in  court  or  marchaundyse
Kepe  clene  thy  conscyence,  beware  disceytfulnes
All  fraude  and  gyle  take  hede  that  thou  despyce
Than  shalt  thou  to  welth,  ryches  and  honour  ryse
And  if  thou  be  fals  :  beware  of  pouertye
Besyde  hell  payne,  for  Christ  sayth  in  this  wyse
That  in  his  owne  mesure  eche  man  shall  serued  be


Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrst.


We  haue  before,  a  shyp  sende  foi  th  to  see
Swyft  and,  well  stuffed  with  many  a  subtyll  i-out
But  of  lyke  folys,  yet  many  one  there  be
On  our  shyp  sydes,  clymmynge  rounde  about
I  speke  with  pacyence :  for  why  I  am  in  dout
Lyst  this  company,  of  proude  speche  :  yll  and  haut
Witli  theyr  sharpe  dartis  my  feble  shyp  assaut


Of  the  Jal shock  of  Antichrist.


22


But  if  thou  aske  who  they  ar  that  me  incomber

And  what  be  theyr  maners  and  conuersacion

Of  whens  they  ar  and  howe  great  is  theyr  noinber

Of  whome  I  intende  to  make  declaracyon

Vnto  thy  questyons  this  is  my  relacion

And  fynall  answere,  that  they  that  thus  me  greue

Ar  fals  Christen  men,  nat  perfyte  of  byleue

And  fals  Prophetis,  nat  folowynge  the  right
"Whiche  with  fals  hertis  vnperfyte  of  credence
Nat  duly  worshyp  the  lawe  of  god  almyght
Nor  his  holy  doctryne,  with  worthy  reuerence
And  other  suche  as  varye  the  true  sence
Of  goddes  lawes,  expoundynge  other  v/yse
Than  it  in  the  text  clere  and  playnly  lyes

Suche  counterfayte  the  kayes  that  Jesu  dyd  commyt

Vnto  Peter :  brekynge  his  Shyppis  takelynge

Subuertynge  the  fayth,  beleuynge  theyr  owne  wyt

Agaynst  our  perfyte  fayth  in  euery  thynge

So  is  our  Shyp  without  gyde  wanderynge

By  tempest  dryuen,  and  the  mayne  sayle  of  torne

That  without  gyde  the  Shyp  about  is  borne

I  mean  that  euery  fals  interpretour
And  vniust  Prophete  accordynge  in  assent
Defyle  the  lawes  of  Christ  our  sauyour
And  also  the  fayth,  but  suche  in  theyr  intent
Whan  theyr  owne  selfe  by  errour  fraudelent
Ar  all  corrupt,  with  synne  agaynst  the  lawe
They  stody  :  yet  mo  to  theyr  errour  to  drawe


2  2  6 Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist,


Many  they  disceyue,  by  theyr  myscheuous  lore
Of  theyr  fals  iawes  castynge  abrode  the  sede
Yet  greuous  paynes  of  Hell  byde  them  therfore
But  suche  Hell  houndes  therof  wyll  take  no  hede
But  certaynly  all  our  byleue  and  crede
The  whiche  is  able  to  saue  vs  from  hell  payne
To  vs  is  gyuen  in  wordes  clere  and  playne

In  our  lawe  ar  founde  no  wordes  disceyuable

No  fals  abusyon,  nor  obscure  hardnes

But  many  folys  of  mynde  abhomynable

For  an  hye  name,  for  honour  and  ryches

Or  for  vayne  pryde  and  fals  presumptuousnes

To  shewe  theyr  cunnynge,  they  men  blynde  and  abuse

Makynge  the  playne  lawe,  obscure,  darke  and  diffuse

They  holy  scriptures  rehers  moche  other  wyse
Than  the  holy  goost  them  vttred  first  of  all
The  cause  is  that  pryde  them  vexeth  to  aryse
To  some  hye  Rowme,  and  a  glory  pryncypall
O  blynde  fole  awake  and  to  remembraunce  call
The  prophetis  saynge.  confermyd  by  the  lawe
And  so  from  errour  thy  synfuU  mynde  withdrawe

Were  it  nat  ynoughe  for  the  to  vnderstonde
The  holy  lawes  :  passynge  in  that  scyence
But  yet  presumptuously  to  take  on  honde
To  turne  frowardly,  the  true  and  rightwyse  sence
Chaungynge  our  fayth,  by  thy  fals  neglygence
Whiche  fayth  was  sende  from  god  omnypotent
By  the  holy  gost  to  our  faders  auncyent


Of  the  falshode  of  Ajitichrist.  ii"]


They  seme  in  handes  to  here  a  fals  balance
Whiche  falsly  techyth  the  lawe  of  god  almyght
Some  poyntis  thynke  they  heuy  and  worthy  penaunce
And  other  some  make  they  but  small  and  lyght
By  glose  thus  turne  we  the  lawe  agaynst  right
Thus  they  that  our  faythis  doctryne  wolde  confounde
Before  Antichrist  set  tentis  here  on  grounde

They  set  no  tentis  agayne  hym  for  to  fyght

But  agaynst  his  comynge  they  ordayne  great  treasour

Other  to  subdue  :  for  to  encreas  his  myght

Them  drawynge  to  his  infaciable  errour

Many  one  assembleth  as  to  a  conquerour

Obeynge  and  berynge  his  cursed  cognysaunce

Assaynge  for  to  put  our  fayth  to  harde  vttraunce

Whiche  trayters  also  them  besely  doth  hast
With  Antichrist  theyr  mayster  and  theyr  lorde
Theyr  cursed  lawes  to  spred  abrode  and  cast
Ouer  all  the  worlde,  for  to  infect  concorde
Bryngynge  theyr  fals  goddes  with  them  at  one  accorde
Suche  folys  ar  nat  drawen  by  scourge  of  punysshement
But  to  Antichrist  of  theyr  owne  mynde  thassent

To  be  of  his  garde  they  yelde  them  wyllyngly

But  some  shall  obey  for  meney  and  treasour

Whome  he  by  lyberall  gyftis  crafty

Shall  so  attyce  hym  lowly  to  honour

Suche  foles  shall  he  bye  and  brynge  to  his  errour

Se  here  howe  money  theyr  soules  shall  defyle

But  some  shall  he  wyn  by  sotylte  and  gyle


2  2  8 Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist.


Some  by  fals  myracles  and  some  by  punysshement

Shall  this  fals  Tyraunt  to  his  seruyce  procure

But  than  by  the  myght  of  god  omnypotent

This  wycked  Nauy  longe  tyme  shall  nat  endure

But  whyle  these  Folys  shall  thynke  them  selfe  most  sure

Theyr  shyppys  shall  dryue  and  shortly  at  the  last

By  myght  of  god  they  all  shall  ryue  and  brast

Togyther  shall  they  fall  vnto  the  pyt  of  hell
And  suche  be  releued  as  they  put  vnto  payne
Antichristis  Charettes  and  Cartis  shall  cesse  theyr  yell
And  the  true  lawe  and  fayth  sprynge  vp  agayne
But  in  the  mean  space,  alas  we  may  complayne
For  the  shyp  of  Peter  in  stormes  and  tempest
Is  throwen  and  cast  clene  destytute  of  rest

The  Mast  nowe  meuyth  the  taklynge  and  the  sayle
O  god  wythsaue  the  wayke  shyp  to  socour
From  the  fals  Herytikes  that  dayly  it  assayle
With  great  violence  and  manyfolde  rygour
For  with  fals  Doctryne,  conteynynge  great  errour
The  holy  scriptures  some  labour  to  expounde
But  the  true  fayth  full  pyteously  is  drowned

Thus  fals  Antichrist,  the  fayth  of  Christ  to  stent
Into  the  wyde  worlde  his  messangers  doth  sende
As  swyfr  Currours,  onely  for  that  intent
His  Tentis  to  prepare,  his  Army  to  defende
And  to  cause  the  Chrysten  to  hym  to  confydence
By  the  fals  sede  of  errour  that  they  sawe
Before  his  comynge  agaynst  our  fayth  and  lawe


Of  the  falshode  of  Antichrist.  229


But  thre  raaner  thynges  I  fynde  that  be  certayne
Whiche  ar  well  worthy  for  to  be  notyd  here
For  they  our  fayth  support,  defende  and  meyntayne
The  firste  is  the  wysdome  and  great  grace  that  apere
From  a  Bysshops  mouth  by  doctryne  playne  and  clere
But  ouer  the  worlde  if  that  poynt  were  well  sought
For  the  most  part  it  slepeth  and  is  set  at  nought

The  seconde  is  of  Bokes  store  and  abundaunce

Whorin  ar  the  lawes  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Whiche  rottyth  nowe,  the  cause  why  in  substaunce

Is  for  they  haue  no  iust  interpretour

Of  the  holy  lawes,  nor  good  exposytour

The  thyrde  is  Doctryne,  wysdome,  and  scyence

But  that  nowe  decayeth  by  slouth  and  neglygence

And  if  that  a  man  haue  cunnynge  parfytely
Tabourynge  by  it  to  make  men  leue  theyr  vyce
The  rude  commontye  shall  set  no  thynge  hym  by
Therfore  we  nowe  our  selfe  moste  exercyse
In  cunnynge  to  wyn  coyne  :  by  blynde  Couetyse
Or  some  other  biyndnes  and  conceytis  newe
Whiche  neyther  sleyth  vyce,  ne  shewyth  vs  vertue

Of  bokis  is  plenty  ynoughe  in  euery  place

And  some  but  pore  theyr  Shoppes  haue  stuifyd  full

But  fewe  or  none  haue  pleasour  nor  solace

The  same  to  stody  theyr  myndes  ar  so  dull

The  ryche  stodyeth,  all,  from  the  pore  to  pull

Disdaynynge  to  set  his  mynde  on  gode  doctryne

For  none  saue  the  pore  doth  nowe  therto  inclyne


230 Of  the  fahhock  of  Antichrist.


Suche  as  ar  noble  and  excellent  of  fame

To  rede  in  bokes  of  wysdome  haue  great  scorne

The  noble  and  holy  lawe  this  wyse  is  lame

And  wytty  Pallas  so  by  the  here  is  torne

I  mean  that  wysdome  hir  greuous  fall  doth  morne

For  they  that  to  hir  doctryne  moste  aply

Can  get  no  laude,  but  malyce  and  enuy

No  mede  ne  rewarde  is  gyuen  to  wysdome
Thus  is  the  labour  of  stody  lost  in  vayne
By  suche  neglygence,  alas  the  tyme  is  come
That  fals  Prophetis  our  holy  fayth  distayne
They  all  shall  turne  if  fauour  them  meyntayne
And  if  they  that  preche  for  mede  and  vyle  rewarde
Shall  them  supportyth  :  our  case  shall  be  full  harde

Thf.nuoy.

O  ye  that  to  Antichrist  disciples  be
Or  fore  messangers  the  chrysten  to  accloy
Corruptynge  the  lawes  by  your  iniquyte
Alas  what  may  I  vnto  you  nowe  enuoy
Your  wycked  errour  your  soules  shall  destroy
Wherfore  I  pray  you  your  herte  therfro  withdrawe
Els  shall  ye  haue  Hell  payne  destytute  of  ioy
Tf'r^r  none  ar  saued  that  corrupt  goddes  lawe.


hym  that  dare  nat  vtter  the  trouth  for
fere  of  displeasour  or  punysshement.


Who  euer  he  be,  that  for  loue,  fere  or  mede
For  fauour,  thretnynge  or  suche  lyke  accydence
Sayth  nat  the  trouth  lyke  as  it  is  in  dede
But  stoppeth  his  mouth,  and  kepeth  so  sylence
To  please  the  people  allowynge  theyr  offence
And  sparynge  theyr  fautes,  it  playnly  doth  apcre
Suche  to  Antichiist  is  frcnde  and  mcssanger


232  Of  hym  that  dare  nat  vtter  the  troiith


Many  hath  a  mynde  redy  prompt  and  clere

To  knowlege,  and  to  preche  the  very  lawe  dyuyne

And  to  say  the  trouth  lyke  as  it  doth  apere

But  oft,  suche,  by  flatery  or  thretenynge  declyne_ ..

From  the  way  of  trouth  and  verytable  lyne

And  so  holy  trouth  and  godly  veryte

By  fere  they  leue,  disdaynynge  it  to  se

Sothly  I  may  say  they  vnderstonde  nat  right
That  for  loue  or  fere  :  dare  nat  the  trouth  expres
But  hydeth  it  away  from  mannys  syght
Doutynge  displeasour  of  them  that  haue  ryches
Thus  is  the  power  of  wordly  wretchydnes
More  in  theyr  myndes  than  the  commaundement
And  chefe  preceptis  of  god  omnypotent

Why  sholde  he  fere  to  preche  and  to  expres
The  lawes  of  god  gyuen  vnto  mankynde
To  whome  our  lorde  of  his  great  goodnes
Hath  sende  chefe  gyftis :  as  reason  of  his  mynde
With  wyt  and  wysdome  :  the  way  therof  to  fynde
To  fayne  or  to  lye  to  hym  it  is  great  foly
Whiche  hath  the  reason  the  trouth  to  fortyfy

But  for  that  flaterynge  so  many  doth  ouercome
And  rewardes,  lettyth  the  trouth  for  to  apere
Therfore  the  Fole,  that  sholde  say  trouth  is  dum
Hackynge  his  wordes  that  no  man  may  them  here
And  if  he  knowe  that  any  one  is  nere
Infect  and  scabbyd,  he  dare  no  worde  let  slyp
But  layeth  his  fynger  anone  before  his  lyp


Jvrjere  of  displeasour  or  punysshement.  i

But  suche  a  wyse  man  as  Vyrgyll  doth  discrybe

Is  stedfast,  fereles,  constant  farme  and  stable

Nat  lettynge,  nor  leuynge  for  fauour,  loue,  nor  brybe

The  trouth  to  shewe,  and  blame  the  reprouable

Ponderynge  the  furour  of  them  that  ar  culpable

And  blamynge  the  same,  playne  and  openly

For  veryte  and  trouth  nat  doutynge  for  to  dye

The  wyse  man  to  vtter  the  trouth  is  nat  aferde
Thugh  he  sholde  be  closyd  within  the  bull  of  bras
Of  Phalaris,  the  tyraunt :  or  if  a  naked  swerde
Henge  ouer  his  necke  his  lyfe  so  to  oppres
For  he  that  is  wyse  perfytely :  doutles
Hath  so  establysshyd  his  mynde  the  trouth  to  say
That  daunger  of  deth  can  hym  no  thynge  affray

No  lorde  nor  man  of  hye  ne  lowe  degre

Nor  thretnynge  wordes,  ne  other  punysshement

Can  cause  suche  one  in  any  poynt  to  lye

He  showyth  out  the  lawes  of  god  omnypotent

In  wordes  playne,  nat  fals  ne  fraudelent

Nat  ferynge  to  touche  the  foly  and  errour

Of  Pope  nor  prelate,  kynge  ne  emperour

Saynt  Johnn  the  baptyst  our  lordes  messanger
Withdrewe  hym  selfe  into  secrete  wyldernes
Nat  wyllynge  amonge  the  people  to  apere
For  theyr  vayne  grutchis  and  wylfuU  frowardnes
Yet  dyd  he  euer  the  very  trouth  expres
As  true  messanger,  the  worlde  to  despyse
Therfore  had  he  grace  our  sauyour  to  baptyse


234  ^^-"^^  ^^'^^^  ^^^^  vtter  the  trouth.


He  that  doth  one  with  pleasaunt  worde  correct
And  colde  pacyence  that  he  may  condiscende
To  lerne  the  wayes  his  vyces  to  abiect
And  take  example  his  lyuynge  to  amende
Vnto  thy  wordes  though  he  nat  than  intende
But  the  beholde  with  Jokes  sharp  and  harde
Yet  tyme  shall  come  whan  he  shall  the  rewarde

If  he  in  hym  haue  any  droppe  of  grace

He  shall  conuerte,  rewardynge  thy  counsell

Therfor  I  say  who  euer  is  in  that  case

For  worldly  ryches,  the  trouth  nat  playne  to  tell

Puttynge  bodely  profyte  before  eternall  well

Suche  shall  dye  a  Fole  blynde  and  ignoraunt

And  may  to  Antichrist  be  callyd  pursuyuaunt.

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  barcly.
O  precher  thou  deth  ought  rather  to  endure
Than  for  loue,  fauour,  fere  or  punysshement
The  veryte  to  cloke,  or  make  the  trouth  obscure
Or  to  hyde  the  lawes  of  god  omnypotent
And  if  that  any  vnto  thy  deth  assent
For  prechynge  trouth :  receyue  it  paciently
So  hath  many  sayntis  theyr  blode  and  lyues  spent
Rather  than  they  wolde  hyde  veryte,  or  lye


Of  folys  that  withdrawe  and  let  other
to  do  good  dedes.


He  that  wyll  walke  in  the  ryght  way  of  vei  tue
And  worshyp  trouth  iustyce  and  rightwysnes
And  stody  all  pleasours  mundayne  to  eschewe
Subduynge  the  flesshe  and  fende  with  his  falsnes
Oft  tymes  suche  one  shall  fynde  contraryousnes
And  byde  and  endure  losse  with  aduersyte
By  enuy  of  them  that  lewde  and  wycked  be


236  Ofjolys  that  w'lthdrawe


He  is  a  naturall  Fole :  and  eke  a  dawe
And  all  his  blode  corrupt  with  folysshnes
Whiche  labours  to  let,  hynder  and  withdrawe
Good  men  and  iust  from  dedes  of  goodnes
I  wyll  nat  say,  but  some,  there  be  doutles
That  assay  to  folowe  good  maners  and  vertue
By  stedfast  lyfe,  all  synne  for  to  subdue

But  than  thou  fole  :  with  all  thy  force  and  myght
Withdrawest  hym  backwarde  full  malyciously
Assaynge  to  hurt  his  wyll  to  good  and  right
Whiche  he  purposyd  to  kepe  contynually
Thou  hym  withdrawest :  this  is  the  reason  why
That  a  Fole  hath  chefe  pleasour  and  confort
To  haue  all  other  lyke  hym  of  the  same  sort

A  fole  is  glad  his  nomber  to  augment
And  euer  is  besy  them  namely  to  pursue
To  hate  and  manace  with  malyce  vyolent
Whiche  iustly  lyue  in  goodnes  and  vertue
But  vyce  hym  pleasyth,  for  that  doth  he  insue
A  fole  fast  stodyeth  to  hym  to  drawe  echone
Lyst  he  of  foly  myght  here  the  name  alone

He  gyueth  counsell  fals  and  reprouable
With  all  his  myght  to  hym  attysynge  mo
Or  els  them  troublyth  by  wordes  moch  vnstable
Whiche  ar  iust  men,  euer  wyllynge  good  to  do
A  prysoner  lyenge  longe  in  payne  and  wo
Hath  consolacion  and  great  confort  certayne
To  haue  many  mo  be  partnes  of  his  payne


and  let  other  to  do  good  dedes.  237


Therfore  if  any  whiche  hath  that  gyft  of  grace
For  to,  despyse  this  worldes  wretchydnes
Withdrawynge  hym  selfe  to  some  solytary  place
Anone  this  Fole  lyuynge  in  viciousnes
Cryeth  out,  and  blamyth  suche  parfyte  holynes
This  iust  man  condemnynge  by  wrongfull  iugement
Bycause  his  lyuynge  is  nat  after  his  intent

Suche  frowarde  folys  all  goodnes  thus  defyle
By  wordes  iniurious,  and  oft  we  here  and  se
That  with  suche  wordes  the  good  men  they  reuyle
Saynge  one  to  other,  lo  yonder  same  is  he
Whiche  without  make  thynketh  hym  wyse  to  be
Secretnes  he  loueth,  and  theder  is  he  gone
Nought  can  hym  pleas,  saue  that  whiche  is  alone

In  christ  and  his  sayntes  he  lyueth  in  dispayre

All  worldly  pleasour  despysynge  vtterly

He  loueth  nat  to  come  in  open  ayre

But  lorkyth  in  cornes  by  fals  Ipocrysy

But  we  with  our  felawes  lyue  alwav  merely

And  though  we  in  erth  oft  tymes  do  amys

Yet  hope  we  hereafter  to  come  to  heuyns  biysse

Who  that  hym  gydeth  by  reason  and  wysdome
Folowynge  the  way  of  parfyte  righwysnes
Intendynge  therby  vnto  hye  heuen  to  come
Shall  here  suche  wordes  of  foly  and  lewdnes
Spoken  of  these  folys  lyuynge  in  viciousnes
And  no  meruayle,  for  thou  shalt  neuer  se
That  synners  shall  with  vertuous  men  agre


238  Offolys  that  let  others  to  do  good  dedes.


Alas  thus  conuersacyon  worldly  or  mundayne
Is  moche  noysom,  and  so  great  preiudyce
-  That  oft  of  vertue  it  maketh  man  barayne
And  hym  corruptyth  with  many  a  greuous  vyce
And  synners  labour  with  all  theyr  myght  to  attyse
Vnto  theyr  lyuynge,  corrupt  and  detestable
Suche  as  of  lyuynge  ar  vertuous  and  laudable

Therfore  if  vertue,  good  lyfe  and  honestye
By  thy  selfwyllyd,  and  owne  malyciousnes
Can  nat  haue  place  ne  rowme  to  be  in  the
Yet  trouble  thou  nat  by  thy  vngraciousnes
Suche  as  ar  good  and  lyue  in  rightwysnes
Fauour  the  good,  and  suffer  hym  precede
That  is  in  the  way  of  vertue  and  good  dede

Alexander  Barclay  to  the  Folys.
Amende  thy  lyfe  man  :  expell  thou  thy  offence
Submyttynge  thy  selfe  vnto  the  true  doctryne
Of  godly  wysdome  ensuynge  hir  prudence
Wherin  is  groundyd  scripture  and  lawe  dyuyne
But  if  that  thou  wylt  nat  therto  inclyne
By  thy  owne  malyce  and  wylfuU  frowardnes
Yet  hynder  them  nat,  that  go  after  the  lyne
Of  good  instruccion,  and  vertuous  goodnes.


Of  the  omyssyon  or  leiiynge  of
good  warkes.


It  is  nat  ynoughe  to  bere  a  lampe  in  hande
But  also  thou  must  haue  oyle  and  lyght  therin
By  whiche  saynge :  this  thynge  I  vnderstande
That,  man  nat  onely  ought  for  to  leue  all  syn
But  also  to  do  good :  suche  shall  heuyn  wyn
Heuyns  yatis  shall  be  opened  to  them  anone
Whiche  do  good  dedys,  after  vyce  fro  them  is  gone


240 Of  the  07nyssyo7i  or  leiiyfige

O  hertis  of  men  in  wylfuU  errour  drowned

And  through  neglygence  oppressyd  sore  in  payne

Though  your  yll  lyuynge  hath  brought  you  to  the  grounde

Seke  the  way  of  helth  :  and  so  ryse  vp  agayne

But  playne  I  se  whiche  causeth  me  complayne

The  myndes  of  all  men  beryed  in  derknes

None  feryth  punysshement  of  goddis  rightwysnes

Alas  mannes  lyfe  graffyd  in  synne  and  vyce
Contynuyth  in  vylenes,  we  plunge  in  the  see
Our  woundyd  hertis :  disdaynynge  to  aryse
Out  of  the  slomber  of  our  iniquyte
Alas  man  it  is  but  small  auayle  to  the
The  deuylles  lawes,  and  vyces  to  eschewe
Without  thou  withall  sue  goodnes  and  vertue

So  to  do  good  dedes  it  is  a  thynge  laudable
As  the  Churche  of  god  to  support  and  meyntayne
In  paynge  tythes  to  be  true  and  verytable
And  in  thy  yonge  age  from  vyces  to  abstayne
Folowynge  vertue  in  dedes  true  and  playne
And  nyght  and  day  to  set  thy  mynde  and  wyll
All  other  poyntis  of  the  lawe  to  fulfyll

But  than  in  age  for  to  go  out  of  kynde

Thy  lyfe  defylynge  with  lewde  mysgouernaunce

It  lytell  auaylyth  as  I  thynke  in  my  mynde

A  whyle  to  lyue  well,  in  suche  inconstance

What  helpeth  it  a  whyle  to  haue  a  short  plesance

The  stedfast  fayth  for  to  folowe  by  vertue

And  nat  in  the  same  alway  to  contynue


of  p;ood  warkes.


Ai  last  whan  god  shall  iuge  all  mankynde
And  that  the  trompes  sounde  shall  them  vp  call
Vnto  his  iugement :  nat  leuynge  one  behynde
Than  shall  there  be  made  a  count  in  generall
And  eche  man  shall  showe  out  his  dedes  all
Bothe  great,  and  small,  receyuynge  theyr  rewarde
Some  of  great  ioy  :  and  some  of  paynes  harde

He  that  wyll  there  haue  ioy  of  god  almyght

Must  haue  his  Lampe  clere  and  yllumynate

And  of  gode  dedes  shewynge  abrode  the  lyght

But  whan  the  Lampe  here  is  voyde  or  maculate

And  in  the  kyndlynge  therof  is  slowe  or  late

As  wyllynge  to  do  well,  whan  his  lyue  dayes  ar  wore

He  often  is  disceyued,  and  abusyd  right  sore

He  is  vnware,  and  clene  without  wysdome

That  doth  no  good  dedes  longynge  to  charyte

Tyll  the  extreme  houre  of  bytter  deth  do  come

So  moche  hopynge,  and  trustynge  euer  is  he

In  hope  of  recoueraynge  from  his  infyrmyte

That  nought  he  caryth  those  wordes  that  Christ  shall  say

Sharply  to  synners  at  Domys  dredefuU  day

But  if  a  wyse  man  by  deth  sodaynly  fall
Whiche  caryth  to  prepare  his  ende  before  he  dye
His  deth  ought  to  be  rewed  nowght  atall
Syth  he  here  hath  lyuyd  well  and  vertuously
And  sende  his  good  dedes  of  pyte  and  mercy
Before  deth  to  make  for  his  soule  purueaunce
O  well  is  hym  that  hath  suche  remembraunce

VOL.  II.  Q


242


By  vertuous  dede  to  prouyde  a  place  before
With  god  in  the  glorious  heuen  Imperyall
Where  as  is  lyfe  that  last  shall  euer  more
Euerlastynge  lyght,  and  ioy  perpetuall
But  that  blynde  fole  shall  haue  a  greuous  fall
Whiche  nat  inclyneth  to  vertue  nor  wysdome
Nor  any  good  dede  tyll  his  last  ende  be  come

Suche  folys  hath  nought  but  foly  them  within

Whiche  vnto  the  ferefull  day  of  iugement

If  they  sholde  lyue,  wolde  alway  lyue  in  syn

Nat  dredynge  infernall  payne  ne  punysshement

But  whan  this  blynde  wretche  hath  thus  his  dayes  spent

The  grounde  hath  his  Carkas,  there  his  Corps  must  dwell

His  sory  soule  beryed  in  the  paynes  of  hell

Alas  we  folowe  mortall  thynges  here
Vnsure  incertayne  :  and  all  without  wysdome
And  as  by  our  folysshe  maners  doth  appere
We  despyse  prouysyon  for  the  tyme  to  come
These  worldly  chargis  doth  folys  thus  ouercome
Fewe  hath  theyr  myndes  on  god  ne  gode,  stedfast
Thus  meruayle  nat,  if  god  despyse  them  at  the  last

Thenuoy  of  the  traslatour.

O  christen  soules  if  ye  wyll  haue  the  syght
Of  glorious  god  in  his  Royalme  celestyall
Whan  ye  haue  syn  ouercome  by  godly  myght
Ye  most  you  indeuer  to  do  good  dedes  withall


of  9-ood  warkes.


243


The  lampe  of  thy  soule  clerely  bren  than  shall
And  at  heuen  gates  knocke,  and  thou  shalt  come  in
For  that  is  rewarde,  with  ioy  eternall
To  them  that  do  good  :  fleynge  from  wretchyd  syn

But  those  wretchyd  folys  whose  lampes  lackyth  lyght
By  remysse  myndes,  slouth,  or  wylfuU  neglygence
May  nat  well  clayme  of  our  sauyour  to  haue  syght
Nor  to  haue  Rowme  or  place  in  his  presence
Therfore  to  my  wordes,  o  man  gyue  aduertence
Do  vertuous  dedes,  and  also  vyce  refrayne
Than  without  dout  for  this  thy  hye  prudence
Thou  shalt  in  heuen  a  glorious  place  obtayne


Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.


Two  wayes  lyeth  before  eche  mannys  syght
Of  the  whiche  wayes  man  nedys  one  must  holde
The  one  lyeth  leftwarde,  the  other  lyeth  right
At  whose  ende  we  oft  may  se  a  crowne  of  golde
But  at  the  leftis,  ende,  ar  erys  many  folde
In  sygne  of  Foly,  and  many  folys  be
Whiche  leftwarde  go,  sekynge  captyuyte


Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.  245


O  Folys  of  pardon  I  you  requyre  and  pray

And  vnto  you  I  shall  also  gyue  the  same

Take  no  displeasour  with  that  that  I  shall  say

And  though  my  balade  your  maners  touche  or  blame.

Nowe  shall  I  wryte  what  laude  what  mede  and  fame

Ar  gyuen  to  wysdome  vertue  and  rightwysnes

And  what  is  rewarde  moste  mete  for  viciousnes

Many  ar  whiche  greatly  desyreth  an  hye  name
And  famous  honour,  or  tytyll  of  dignyte
Some  ar  desyrous,  to  spred  abrode  theyr  fame
To  be  callyd  Doctours,  or  maysters  of  degre
Moste  clere  in  wysdome  of  the  vnyuersyte
But  these  names  coueyt  they  nat  for  this  intent
The  christen  to  infourme,  that  of  wyt  ar  indigent

Nor  in  holy  doctrine  them  self  to  occupy

As  in  scripture  or  lawes  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Or  other  godly  techynge  our  fayth  to  fortyfy

But  onely  they  ar  drawen  and  led  to  this  errour

For  desyre  of  fame,  vayne  lawde,  and  great  honour

Suche  walke  in  the  way  that  is  on  the  left  syde

On  rockes  and  clyfEs  and  hyghe  mountayns  of  pryde

They  leue  the  right  way  of  goodnes  and  vertue
Of  iustyce  and  wysdome,  hauynge  no  thought  atall
Howe  they  myght  ignoraunt  myndes  with  them  endue
And  fede  them  with  that  sauour  delycious  and  royall
And  other  with  theyr  wordes  hye  and  retorycall
Theyr  sentences  paynt  in  fauour  for  to  come
Or  therby  to  purchace  a  name  of  hye  wysdome


246 Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.


But  sothly  all  worldly  wysdome  and  prudence

Vsyd  here  in  erth,  is  before  god  almyght

Of  none  effect,  and  all  worldly  scyence

Is  but  as  foly  in  that  hye  lordes  syght

Thus  many  one  beleue  that  they  go  right

And  towarde  the  right  hande  vnto  the  way  of  helth

By  theyr  vayne  pleasours,  lust  and  worldly  welth

They  suppose  to  walke  in  the  way  of  rightwysnes

Whiche  bryngeth  man  by  gode  labour  contynuall

Vnto  the  endles  ioy,  and  seat  of  blessydnes

Of  the  hye  kyngdome  and  place  celestyll

But  neuertheles,  ignoraunt  foly  with  hir  pall

So  blyndeth  theyr  myndes,  that  they  nat  vnderstande

Mean  to  kepe  duly  the  path  on  the  right  hande

That  way  is  harde,  streyght,  and  full  of  diffyculte ~ '
Whiche  mankynde  ledyth  to  the  heuenly  regyon
But  that  way  is  brode,  easy  and  playne  to  se
Whiche  ledeth  man  to  Hellys  depe  donygon
Therfore  thou  must  stablysshe  thy  intencion
(If  thou  wylt  be  partyner  of  heuenly  ioy  and  chere)
To  despyse  vayne  pleasour  whyle  thou  art  lyuynge  here

Thou  art  vnwyse,  if  that  thou  set  thy  thought
To  wyn  heuenly  ioy  by  worldly  pleasour
Or  to  take  that  thynge  whiche  thou  neuer  bought
Or  aske  rewarde  where  thou  dyd  no  labour
And  surely  he  whiche  lyueth  in  errour
Folowynge  his  foly  in  vyce  without  all  shame
Shall  haue  iust  rewardes  accordynge  to  the  same


rewarde  of  wysdome.  247


Also  the  wyse  that  lyueth  rightwysely
Shall  nat  depart  without  rewarde  and  mede
But  be  rewardyd  right  well  and  worthely
With  gyftis  of  heuen,  whiche  sothly  shall  excede
In  valour,  all  the  worlde  in  lenght  and  brede
This  ioy  that  I  of  speke,  so  passynge  in  valour
Is  the  holy  presence  of  Christ  our  sauyour

So  Plato  dyd  folysshe  company  eschewe

And  all  other  folyes  procedynge  of  the  same

Walkynge  in  the  way  of  goodnes  and  vertue

Wherby  he  wan,  laude  and  immortall  fame

But  nowe  worldly  wysdone  hath  so  corrupt  the  name

That  none  it  makyth  happy  vertuous  nor  wyse

But  hym  that  with  hert  and  mynde  doth  it  despyse

Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barcly

Lerne  man,  lerne,  wysdome  to  vnderstonde
For  trust  me  though  that  the  way  of  viciousnes
And  dedely  synne,  lyenge  on  the  left  hande
Seme  full  of  pleasour  and  wanton  lustynes
At  the  ende  is  dolour  wo  and  wretchydnes
Mysery  vexacion  and  euerlastynge  payne
And  if  sodayne  deth  in  this  way  the :  oppres
To  late  shall  it  be  for  retourne  agayne

Auoyde  thou  therfore  this  left  and  frowarde  way
For  a  short  pleasour  take  nat  eternall  payne
Go  on  the  right  hande  in  as  moche  as  thou  may
And  whan  thou  art  there  retourne  thou  nat  agayne


248 Of  the  rewarde  of  wysdome.


And  though  the  path  be  nat  moche  smothe  and  playne
But  full  of  sharpe  thornes  whiche  shall  the  hurte  and  noy
Yet  at  the  ende,  thou  shalt  come  to  certayne
A  heuenly  castell  replete  with  myrth  and  ioy


Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.


He  is  a  fole  and  greatly  reprouable

Whiche  seyth  and  felyth  suerly  in  his  mynde

That  all  his  dedes  ar  moche  infortunable

And  where  euer  he  go  agaynst  hym  is  the  wynde

But  in  his  mysfortune  yet  is  he  so  biynde

That  he  is  improuydent,  abydynge  wyllyngly

Despysynge  (thoughe  he  myght)  for  to  fynde  remedy


250 Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.


The  greuous  fallys  of  men  from  theyr  degre
The  frayle  chaunsys,  and  aduersyte  sodayne
And  of  vnsure  fortune  the  mutabylyte
Whiche  we  se  dayly,  shewyth  vnto  vs  playne
That  in  all  thynges  that  to  men  apertayne
Is  no  Constance,  trust  or  confydence
Nor  sure  degre,  or  stable  permanence

For  these  vayne  thynges  the  whiche  we  outwarde  se

Syns  they  ar  so  caduke  in  condicion  frayle

Can  none  make  perfyte  in  true  felycyte

But  that  somtyme  he  may  fynde  cause  to  wayle

Nor  no  man  by  preuate  wysdome  or  counsayle

Nor  strength,  or  labour  can  make  a  warke  so  fast

But  that  it  shall  perysshe  and  decay  at  the  last

But  here  I  purpose  of  suche  a  Fole  to  wryte
To  whom  eche  fortune  is  aduers  and  contrary
And  yet  hath  he  chefe  pleasour  and  delyte
With  all  his  mynde  and  herte  for  to  apply
To  thynges  of  fortune,  that  contynually
Of  cruell  chauncis  he  hath  but  lytell  hede
Trustynge  afterwarde  moche  better  for  to  spede

He  is  nat  ware,  but  bare  without  wysdome
That  can  nat  consyder  surely  in  his  mynde
That  whan  one  yll  is  past :  as  bad  may  after  come
If  he  hym  ieparde  to  suche  lyke  storme  and  wynde
Let  suche  nat  thynke  it  thynge  against  kynde
Nor  any  meruayle  if  theyr  shyp  without  ore
Mast  or  sayle,  be  drownyd  rent  and  tore


Of  the  dcspysynge  of  mysfortune.  251


If  any  mysfortune  happen  on  the  to  fall

At  the  begynnynge  of  thynge  that  thou  wolde  do

If  thou  go  farther  may  fortune  that  thou  shall

Haue  after  that  same,  other  yllys  many  mo

For  wyse  men  sayth,  and  oft  it  fallyth  so

As  it  is  wryten  and  sayd  of  many  one

That  one  rayshap  fortuneth  neuer  alone

An  yll  fortune  growyth  alway  more  and  more
The  ende  oft  is  greuous  :  and  euer  vncertayne
And  if  thou  hast  had  one  mysfortune  before
Another  lyke  sone,  may  after  fall,  agayne
Thou  mayst  se  example  before  the  clere  and  playne
By  dyuers  changes  whiche  playnly  thou  mayst  se
By  fallys  contynuall,  full  of  aduersyte

Thus  fortune  floweth  oft  synkynge  at  the  last
And  playne  shall  perysshe  if  thou  the  space  abyde
Thus  happy  is  he  that  is  of  mynde  stedfast
Doynge  his  deuoyr  the  same  ay  to  prouyde
So  muste  he  do  whiche  hath  desyre  to  abyde
In  suertye  and  rest :  for  dayly  thou  mayst  se
Howe  ferefull  fortune  sodaynly  crepys  on  the

Who  that  dare  auenture  or  ieparde  for  to  rowe
Vpon  the  se  swellynge  by  wawes  great  and  hye
In  a  weyke  vessell,  had  nede  that  wynde  sholde  blowe
Styll,  soft,  and  cawme,  lyst  that  he,  fynally
And  also  his  shyp :  stande  in  great  ieopardy
Throwyn  with  the  flodes  on  the  se  depe  and  wyde
And  drowned  at  the  last :  or  rent  the  syde  fro  syde


■2^2 Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.


And  also  he  whiche  hath  no  craft  nor  skyll

And  dare  auenture  on  the  wylde  se  to  rowe

By  his  rasshe  mynde  his  mad  brawne  and  self  wyll

No  meruayle  is  if  the  wawes  hym  ouer  flowe

And  if  he  than  escape  and  be  nat  clene  ouerthrowe

If  he  after  dare  ieoparde  hym  selfe  agayne

To  the  same  peryll :  he  is  a  fole  certayne

But  he  is  wyse,  and  so  men  may  hym  call

Whiche  hath  nat  alway  his  trust  and  confydence

In  vnsure  fortune  and  chaunsys  inequali

And  of  the  same  can  beware  by  prudence

That  man  is  haphy,  and  shall  fle  the  violence

And  furour  of  the  see,  though  it  moche  rughly  moue

And  with  his  shyp  enter  the  heuenly  port  aboue

Thenuoy  &c.
Beware  of  mysfortune,  ye  men,  in  that  ye  may
And  in  that  thynge  that  comyth  vnfortunate
Procede  nat :  but  your  mynde  drawe  ye  away
And  if  by  good  fortune  that  ye  be  eleuate
To  some  hye  rowme  conuenyent  for  a  state
Whyle  ye  ar  there,  ye  ought  you  euen  to  here
For  myshape  prouydynge  both  erly  and  late
And  than  if  it  come  ye  nede  nat  greatly  fere

We  haue  late  sene  some  men  promotyd  hye
For  whose  sharpnes  all  men  fered  theyr  name
But  for  they  toke  on  them  than  theyr  degre
Myght  nat  support :  they  fell  down  in  great  shame


Of  the  despysynge  of  mysfortune.  253


But  well  myght  they  haue  contynued  without  blame
If  they  had  kept  them  within  theyr  boundes  well
By  right  and  iustyce  :  but  oft  full  yll  they  frame
That  wyll  be  besy  with  to  hye  thynges  to  mell


Of  bacbyters  of  good  men  and  of  them
yt  shal  disprayse  this  warke.


Oft  so  it  hapneth  that  he  that  is  vnwyse
With  his  lewde  tunge,  and  mouth  full  of  enuy
Doth  wyse  men  and  iust  sclaunder  and  despyse
About  the  Cattis  necke  suche  men  a  bell  doth  tye
Thynkynge  that  theyr  dedes  may  be  kept  secretely
And  to  haue  no  name  therof  they  thynke  echone
But  yet  the  dogge  cryeth,  stryken  with  the  bone


Of  bacbyters  of  good  men.  255


Nowe  shall  wyse  men  enioy  and  haue  pleasaunce
With  inwarde  myrth  and  also  outwarde  sport
With  mery  lokes  of  chere  and  of  countenaunce
Seynge  that  we  haue  gathred  so  great  a  sort
Of  folys  in  one  boke  :  To  rede  to  theyr  confort
The  wyse  men  shall  enioy  ;  and  they  that  loue  vertue
That  we  by  craft  haue  forged  this  Nauy  newe

Our  shyp  sayleth  nat  abrode  vnto  presence
Vnto  the  rebuke  of  vertuouse  men  and  wyse
For  in  suche  is  small  faut,  synne,  or  oifence
Wherfore  no  man  ought  them  blame  or  despyse
We  coueyte  nat  to  perysshe  theyr  fame  in  any  wyse
But  pray  god  in  ioy  to  contynue  them  a  lyue
And  that  yll  lyuers  may  mende,  or  neuer  thryue

Amende  may  they  well  if  they  lyst  to  take  hede
For  here  haue  we  gyuen  them  holsome  medecyne
To  rule  theyr  lyfe,  also  we  haue  in  dede
Vnto  them  gyuen,  of  maners,  good  doctryne
Who  lyst  them  to  rede,  and  to  them  to  inclyne
If  he  be  wyse  :  he  shall  auoyde  doutles
The  clowdes  of  synne :  and  nettis  of  folysshnes

Suche  I  commende  as  ar  worthy  great  honour
But  other  be  whiche  sore  I  hurt  and  blame
By  my  wrytynge  :  for  theyr  mysbehauour
Syns  that  of  Folys  they  well  deserue  the  name
Yet  may  they  nat  (without  theyr  owne  great  shame)
Disprayse  my  wrytynge  boldly  by  any  way
Nor  rasshly  yll  wordes  ayenst  the  same  to  say


256  Of  bacbyters  of  good  men.


Yet  dout  I  nat|_:  but  surely  knowe  it_^well
That  some  shall  be  whiche  ayenst  my  wrytynge
With  harde  and  frowarde  wordes  shall  rebell
And  it  contynue,  and  hurt  in  euery  thynge
But  if  that  suche  be  wyse  men  and  cunnynge
They  shall  my  youth  pardone,  and  vnchraftynes
Whiche  onely  translate,  to  eschewe  ydelnes

But  if  some  other  be  troubled  by  enuy
As  brybours  to  barke  agaynst  my  besynes
They  ought  to  cesse,  for  my  boke  certaynly
I  haue  compyled,  for  vertue  and  goodnes
And  to  reuyle  foule  synne  and  viciousnes
At  first  begynnynge  lyke  as  I  toke  the  charge
Requyrynge  pardon  if  1  haue  ben  to  large

To  wryte  playne  trouth  was  my  chefe  mynde  and  wyll

But  if  any  thynke  that  I  hyt  hym  to  nere

Let  hym  nat  grutche  but  kepe  hym  coy  and  styll

And  clawe  were  it  itchyth  so  drawynge  hym  arere

For  if  he  be  hasty,  it  playnly  shall  apere

That  he  is  fauty,  gylty,  and  culpable

So  shall  men  repute  hym  worthy  of  a  bable

But  be  they  angry  or  be  they  well  apayde

This  thynge  oft  prouyd  is  by  experyence

He  that  is  gylty  thynketh  all  that  is  sayde

Is  spokyn  of  hym,  and  touchynge  his  offence

I  fele  well  the  hyssynge  and  malyuolence

Of  some  enuyours  whiche  doth  my  warke  disdayne

But  my  playne  Balade  comfortyth  me  agayne


Of  bacbyters  of  good  men.  257


Suche  Folys  namely  agaynst  my  boke  shall  barke

As  nought  haue  in  them  but  synne  and  viciousnes

Leuynge  all  besynes  vertuous  and  good  warke

And  gyuynge  them  selfe  to  slouth  and  ydylnes

Horace  the  poet  doth  in  his  warke  expres

That  both  wyse  and  vnwyse  dyuers  warkes  wryte

Some  to  gode  :  and  pleasour,  and  some  but  small  profyte

But  if  my  warke  be  nat  moche  delactable

Nor  gayly  payntyd  with  termys  of  eloquence

I  pray  that  at  lest  it  may  be  profytable

To  brynge  men  out  of  theyr  synne  and  olde  offence

Into  the  noble  way  of  good  intellygence

I  care  nat  for  folysshe  bacbyters,  let  them  passe

The  swete  Cymball  is  no  pleasour  to  an  asse

Melodyous  myrth  to  bestis  is  vncouthe

And  the  swete  graffis  of  wysdome  and  doctryne

Sauoureth  no  thynge  within  a  folys  mouthe

Whiche  to  the  same  disdayneth  to  inclyne

Cast  precious  stones  or  golde  amonges  swyne

And  they  had  leuer  haue  dreggis  fylth  or  chaffe

No  meruayle  :  for  they :  were  norysshed  vp  with  draffe

Therfore  o  reders  I  you  exort  and  pray
Rede  ouer  this  warke  well  and  intentyfly
Expell  hye  mynde,  put  statelynes  away
Barke  nat  therat :  loke  nat  theron  awry
With  countenaunce  pale  expressynge  your  enuy
If  ought  be  amysse :  of  that  take  ye  no  hede
Tend  to  the  best  than  shall  ye  haue  the  mede

VOL.  II.  R


2  c  8  Of  bacbyters  of  9-ood  men.


Be  pleased  withall,  and  if  that  ye  ought  fynde

Nat  ordred  well,  and  as  it  ought  to  be

Whiche  may  displeas  or  discontent  your  mynde

In  wantonnes,  or  in  to  and  grauyte

Or  sharply  spoken  with  to  great  audacyte

Vnto  your  correccion  all  hole  I  do  submyt

If  ought  be  amys  it  is  for  lacke  of  wyt. :  \

Thenuoy  of  Barclay,
Ye  folys  enuyous  detractynge  eche  good  dede
Expell  your  malyce,  and,  yre,  and  ougly  syn
And  to  your  selfe,  and  your  owne  warke  take  hede
Howe  yll  infect  and  foule  ye  ar  within
Correct  your  selfe  :  so  sholde  ye  first  begyn
And  than  teche  other  to  vertue  to  aply
And  nat  by  malyce  on  them  to  grutche  and  gryn
Or  behynde  theyr  backe  them  sclaunder  by  enuy


Of  immoderate  vylenes,  in  maners,  vs
at  the  table.


It  is  thynge  laufull :  and  nat  vncommendable

To  touche  the  yll  maners,  the  foule  and  lothsome  wayes

Whiche  dyuers  folys  nowe  vsyth  at  the  table

Whiche  ar  so  past  all  shame,  that  nowe  a  dayes

But  fewe  or  none,  there  honest  vvordes  sayes

Of  pleasaunt  norture  they  haue  no  care  nor  hede

But  bestely  intende  as  swyne  theyr  wombe  to  fede


260


Of  immoderate  vyle?ies,


I  thought  that  I  had  fyllyd  sufFyciently

This  boke  with  folys :  and  men  persuynge  syn

And  endyd  my  rebukes  :  but  yet  one  company

(Of  other  folys  doth)  vnto  my  nauy  ryn

Cryeng  with  lowde  voyce :  captayne  abyde,  haue  in

I  kest  an  Anker:  and  restynge  at  that  worde

Sende  forth  a  bote :  them  to  receyue  abrode

But  vnderstonde  ye  what  company  they  be :

I  you  ensure  that  fewe  of  all  the  sort

Ar  gyuen  greatly  to  disceyt  or  sotylte

In  couetyse,  or  gayne  haue  fewe  of  them  comfort

But  they  echone  that  to  this  shyp  resorte

Ar  lothsome  Folys  of  norture  clene  pryuate

Fedynge  at  theyr  mete :  euyn  after  swynys  rate

In  shameful!  vse  :  voyde  of  all  shamefastnes

All  theyr  hole  dedes :  ar  without  reuerence

But  lyke  to  vnresonable  bestis  in  vylenes

Bytwene  them  and  swyne  as  lytell  difference

They  spare  no  coyne,  no  coste,  nor  yet  expence

But  brede,  and  mete,  dayntyes,  here,  ale,  and  wyne

They  drynke,  and  deuour,  lyke  wyse  as  it  were  swyne

The  first  of  this  sort  whome  I  intende  to  blame
Ar  suche  as  intende  theyr  lothsome  wombe  to  fede
Or  theyr  face  be  wasshyd  or  handes  :  and  the  same
Do  they  or  they  say  theyr  Aue,  or  theyr  Crede
As  for  theyr  Pater  noster :  of  it  take  they  no  hede
And  for  the  great  gyftis  that  they  of  god  obtayne
They  render  no  gracis  ne  thankes  to  hym  agayne


in  maners,  vsyd  at  the  table.  261


Theyr  lyppis  ar  foule,  dryuelynge  on  euery  syde
Within  theyr  handes  is  vyle  fylth  and  ordure
Theyr  noses  droppynge,  in  vylenes  is  theyr  pryde
Theyr  iyen  rawky,  and  all  theyr  face  vnpure
By  suche  vylenes  disfygure  they  nature
Theyr  chekis  dyrty  :  Theyr  tethe  by  rustynes
Blacke,  foule,  and  rottyn,  expressyth  theyr  vylenes

No  honestye,  maner,  norture  nor  clenlynes
Is  in  these  wretchys,  for  they  the  same  disdayne
He  is  kynge  of  dronkardes  and  of  dronkenes
Reputyd  of  them  :  the  v^'hiche  is  moste  vylayne
As  gruntynge  and  drynkynge,  rebokynge  vp  agayne
And  that  can  excyte  his  felawes  to  glotony
Techynge  them  the  bowles  and  pottis  to  occupy

Some  drynkes :  some  quaxes  the  canykyn  halfe  full
And  some  all  out,  chargynge  hym  in  suche  wyse
That  the  wyne  semyth  for  to  ryue  his  skull
That  he  hath  no  power  from  the  borde  to  ryse
Than  bokes  he  all  vp  after  the  comon  gyse
(So  longe  he  drynkyth)  yet  other  haue  no  shame
Seynge  all  the  table  couered  with  the  same

Than  drynke  they  about,  euery  fole  to  other

In  order  :  but  he  that  doth  forsake  the  pot

Shall  no  more  be  taken  as  felawe  frende  and  brother

But  cast  out  of  company,  callyd  fole  and  sot

The  other  stryue  drynkynge,  echone  by  lot

It  nought  auayleth  these  caytyfs  to  reuyle

Shewynge  howe  this  vse  theyr  soulys  doth  defyle


262  Of  immoderate  vylenes,


It  weryeth  the  bodye,  by  anger  and  syknes

Styrynge  it  to  wrath,  to  fyghtynge  and  varyaunce

Nought  is  wors  than  contynuall  dronkenes

For  dyuers  sores,  great  sekenes  and  greuaunce

Procedyth  therof  by  longe  contynuaunce

It  lowsyth  the  body,  troublynge  eche  ioynt  and  vayne

The  wyt  it  wastyth,  blyndynge  the  mynde  and  brayne

O  cursyd  maners,  o  vse  abhomynable
O  bestelynes^  agaynst  nature  humayne
Whether  is  become  the  reuerence  of  the  table
The  moderate  honour  of  it  is  lost  agayne
Where  is  Curius  and  abstynence  souerayne
Where  is  olde  Persymony  wont  to  be  so  gode
Where  is  the  olde  mesure  of  mannys  lyfe  and  fode

Where  is  the  bryght  worshyp  therof  nowe  become

Where  is  the  clenlynes,  and  maners  euerychone

Of  the  borde  or  table,  vsed  amonge  some

Of  our  fore  Faders  that  nowe  ar  dede  and  gone

But  we  vse  nought  but  bestelynes  alone

In  worde  and  dede  corrupt  with  vylany

In  stede  of  good  talkynge  vse  we  rybawdry

Gone  is  the  honour  and  costomes  moderate
Mesure  is  despysyd  :  ryght  so  is  honestye
With  bye  and  lowe :  both  pore  man  and  estate
Yet  at  the  table  another  vse  we  se
Whiche  is  vnlaufull,  and  ought  nat  vsed  be
That  folys  at  the  borde  haue  oft  the  hyest  stage
The  boy  lokes  to  syt  before  a  m.an  of  age


In  maners,  vsyd  at  the  table.


263


Thus  is  no  order  obseruyd  at  the  table
Honestye  hath  the  hyest  place  no  more
But  eche  man  is  reputyd  honorable
After  his  ryches,  his  treasour  and  his  store
The  vyle  Churle  shall  syt  and  drynke  before
Thus  at  the  table  is  gyuen  all  honour
Nat  after  vertue,  but  after  vayne  treasour

To  mannys  maners  no  respect  they  haue

They  take  gode  and  yll  almoste  indifferently

A  gentyl  man  somtyme  is  set  beneth  a  knaue

Without  honestye,  and  moche  vnreuerently

But  whan  these  bestis  hath  set  them  selfe  thus  hye

In  handlynge  or  tastynge,  mete,  bere,  ale,  or  wyne

Them  selfe  behaue  they  moche  bestelyer  than  swyne

One  swalloweth  into  his  throte  a  soppe  or  twayne

Another  drunkard,  goth  to,  so  hastely

That  all  together  he  castyth  vp  agayne

Another  with  fyngers  foule  and  vnmanerly

Tossyth  vp  the  mete,  or  lyftyth  it  a  hye

Vnto  his  foule  nose  holdynge  it  to  wete

If  it  may  lyke  hym  :  and  if  the  sent  be  swete

Some  drynketh,  the  lycour  on  euery  syde  rennynge

Of  his  vyle  mouth  pollute  :  foule  and  horryble

Some  whan  the  cuppis  ar  empty  hyely  synge

Some  voyde  mo  cuppis  than  man  wolde  thynke  possyble

And  other  some,  galons :  so  that  theyr  ioyntis  ar  feble

They  vomytynge  agayne,  rorynge  vnmanerly

Troublynge  the  ayre,  with  barkynge,  noyse  and  cry


264  Of  immoderate  vyle?ies,


Some  synge,  and  reuell  as  in  bacchus  sacryfyce

As  rauysshyd  with  furour,  whiche  Bacchus  doth  blynde

Theyr  myndes :  attysynge  them  vnto  euery  vyce

And  loke  whome  this  sort  moste  vngoodly  can  fynde

He  shall  the  horde  haue  ruled  by  his  mynde

He  brastyth  a  glasse  or  cup  at  euery  worde

So  that  the  drynke  ouercouereth  all  the  borde

Some  pull  from  theyr  felawes  with  hande  rauysshynge
And  from  that  mease  that  nere  to  them  doth  syt
They  taste  the  swettest  and  best  of  euery  thynge
Thus  Sardanapalus :  whiche  onely  dyd  commyt
His  mynde  to  vyle  lust :  without  reason  or  wyt
Hath  nowe  many  felawes  :  whome  lust,  corrupt  and  vyle
Fedyth  and  whome  lackynge  of  mesure  doth  defyle

Suche  ar  best  pleasyd  with  thynges  Immoderate
But  what  man  can  wryte  all  vylenes  of  the  table
And  all  the  folyes  vsyd  in  dyuers  rate
Syns  wyse  men  lyue  nat  all  in  way  semblable
Theyr  lyuynge  and  maners  ar  greatly  varyble
For  euery  Nacyon  at  table  hathe  his  gyse
Some  we  commende,  and  other  some  despyse

The  grekis  Latyns,  and  the  men  of  Almayne
In  theyr  behauour  many  other  thynges  vse
Agaynst  the  vse  of  Englonde,  Fraunce  or  spayne
The  Turkes  and  Paynyms  haue  also  in  them  mysuse
And  men  of  ynde  these  wayes  afore,  refuse
Hauynge  other  maner :  yet  other  them  despyce
Thus  euery  Nacion  lyuynge  hath  his  gyse


in  maners^  vsyd  at  the  table.  265


Mennys  maners  ar  moche  dyuers  and  varyable
Theyr  wyll  vnlyke  in  pleasour  and  solace
Eche  royalme  hath  fedynge  dyuers  at  the  table
And  dyuers  is  theyr  lyfe  almost  in  euery  place
Yet  ought  they  all  with  herte  and  mynde  to  embrace
Wyse  talkynge,  and  maners  longynge  to  honeste
Auoydynge  foule  wordes,  and  bestyalyte

The  swynes  lyuynge  we  all  ought  to  eschewe

In  worde  and  dede  we  ought  to  auoyde  excesse

With  communycacion,  of  goodnes,  and  vertue

Folowynge  the  way  of  honest  clenlynesse

And  with  all  our  herte,  our  mynde,  and  lowe  mekenes

Yelde  thankes  and  gracis  to  god  omnypotent

For  suche  goodes,  as  he :  vnto  vs  hath  sent

We  ar  nat  borne  into  this  worlde  here
Alway  to  ete,  as  bestis  vnresonable
And  euery  houre  :  to  vse  suche  bestely  chere
Ouerchargynge  nature  by  vse  abhomynable
But  to  refresshe  vs  by  wayes  mesurable
Our  lyfe  and  body  togyder  to  preserue
And  hour  of  melys,  by  dyete  to  obserue

That  mete  and  drynke  shall  do  all  men  moste  gode

That  is  receyued  without  superfine  exces

To  confort  the  body,  and  to  norysshe  the  blode

Our  soule  is  a  spyryt  as  scripture  doth  expres

Wherfore  it  may  nat  rest  in  place  of  drynes

So  must  we  our  blode  norysshe  and  meyntayne

For  in  the  same  our  spyryte  doth  remayne


2  66  Of  immoderate  vylenes  vsyd  at  the  table.


But  in  euery  thynge  is  ordre  and  raesure
By  to  great  exces,  and  superfluyte
The  soule  and  lyfe,  may  by  no  mean  indure
And  in  lyke  wyse  by  to  great  scarsyte
But  this  we  fynde  that  many  one,  mo  dye
By  glotony,  excesse,  and  lyuynge  bestyall
Than  by  hunger,  knyfe,  or  deth  naturall

In  lordes  courtis  were  wont  vsyd  to  be

Gode  maners,  worthy,  honest  and  commendable

"Wherby  all  other  myght  lerne  honestye

But  nowe  ar  the  maners  there  no  thynge  laudable

But  corrupt,  and  foule,  but  namely  at  the  table

In  dronken  glotony  is  theyr  chefe,  sport  and  game

And  rybaude  wordes  without  all  fere  and  shame

Norture  fro  them  by  suche  vyce  is  exyled

Theyr  olde  name,  and  fame  of  honestye

Ar  vnder  fote,  so  worshyp  is  exylyd

Nat  onely  from  the  court  and  men  of  hye  degre

But  also  from  the  symple  comontee

Both  yonge  and  olde,  vsyth  suche  excesse

At  tables,  without  maners  of  honest  clenlynes.

Thenuoy  of  Barclay.
Ye  men  vnmanerde,  to  whome  intellygence
And  wysdome  ar  gyuen,  by  the  Prynce  celestyall
It  is  to  you  shame,  that  no  maner  difference
Is  bytwene  your  lyfe,  and  maners,  bestyall
And  that  at  the  table  in  chefe  and  pryncypall
It  is  an  olde  saynge  that  man  ought  of  dutye
Behaue  hym  on  hyll,  lyke  as  he  wolde  in  hall
Vsynge  and  accostomynge  hym  to  honestye


Of  folys  disgysyd  with  vysers  and  other
counterfayte  apparayle.


Democritus  laughed  to  scorne  and  dyd  despy  se
These  folysshe  games  and  worldly  vanyte
And  suche  folys  as  oft  them  selfe  disgyse
By  counterfayt  vysers  exprssynge  what  they  be
But  other  wyse  Cynicus  a  man  of  grauyte
Oft  tyme  bewayled  the  bytter  and  harde  chaunce
Seynge  in  the  worlde  of  folys  suche  abundaunce


2  68 Offolys  disgysyd  with  vysers

If  Democritus  sholde  nowe  agayne  be  borne

Or  in  our  tyme,  if  he  lyued  :  doutles

He  sholde,  the  men  nowe  lyuynge  laugh  to  scorne

For  theyr  dyuers  synnes  and  wylfuU  folysshenes

And  Crassus  also,  for  all  his  great  sadnes

Sholde  laugh  to  scorne,  our  folysshe  lyfe  and  wayes

Thoughe  he  neuer  laughed  but  onys  in  all  his  dayes

But  namely  sholde  he  laughe  :  if  that  he  myght  se
The  wayes  of  men  in  this  our  tyme  lyuynge
Howe  they  with  vysers  dayle  disgysed  be
Them  selfe  difFormynge  almost  in  euery  thynge
"Whan  they  ar  disgysyd  to  them  it  is  semynge
That  no  syn  is  gret :  nor  soundynge  to  theyr  shame
Syns  theyr  foule  vysers  therof  can  cloke  the  fame

To  euery  yll :  theyr  lewde  lyfe  doth  them  drawe
They  wander  ragynge  more  madly  in  theyr  vyce
Than  doth  suche  people  as  forsake  goodes  lawe
Whan  to  theyr  ydols  they  make  theyr  sacrifyce
Whose  names  to  tell  as  for  nowe  I  despyse
But  as  for  these  Folys,  arayed  in  theyr  rage
They  kepe  almost  euyn  suche  lyke  vsage

The  one  hath  a  vyser  vgly :  set  on  his  face
Another  hath  on,  vyle  counterfayte  vesture
Or  payntyth  his  vysage  with  fume  in  suche  case
That  what  he  is  hym  selfe  is  skantly  sure
Another  by  pryde  his  wyt  hath  so  obscure
To  hyre  the  busshe  of  one  that  late  is  dede
Therwith  to  disgyse  his  folys  dotynge  hede


and  other  coiinterfayte  apparayle.  269


Some  counterfayte  theyr  tethe  in  a  straynge  wyse
Some  for  a  mocke  hath  on  gowne  of  whyte
And  other  some  in  straunge  londes  gyse
Aray  them  selfe,  eche  after  his  delyte
And  other  some  besyde  theyr  vayne  habyte
Defyle  theyr  faces :  so  that  playne  trouth  to  tell
They  ar  more  fowle,  than  the  blacke  Deuyll  of  hell

Than  cary  they  theyr  instrumentis  musycall
About :  of  theyr  louers  wyllynge  to  be  sene
And  theyr  wanton  hertis  for  to  disceyue  withall
But  happy  is  she  that  can  her  selfe  kepe  clene
From  these  mad  folys :  for  all  that  euer  they  meane
Is  vnder  theyr  deuyls  clothynge  as  they  go
The  deuyllys  workes  for  to  commyt  also

They  disceyue  myndes  chaste  and  innocent
With  dyuers  wayes  whiche  I  wyll  nat  expres
Lyst  that  whyle  I  labour  this  cursyd  gyse  to  stynt
I  myght  to  them  mynyster  example  of  lewdnes
And  therfore  in  this  part  I  shall  say  les
Than  doth  my  actour :  and  that  in  dyuers  clauses
Whiche  is  nat  done  without  suffycyent  causes

Many  one  whiche  hath  nat  done  amys

All  the  hole  yere  :  but  kept  hym  from  all  vyce

Fallyth  vnto  synne  :  whan  this  disgysynge  is

For  some  in  baudy  wordes  them  exercyce

To  venus  warkes  yonge  wymen  to  attyce

But  all  theyr  maners :  if  that  I  sholde  shewe  playne

It  were  to  longe :  and  labour  without  gayne


270 Of  folys  disp^ysyd  with  vysers


These  folys  that  them  selfe  disgyseth  thus
In  theyr  lewde  gestis  doth  outwarde  represent
The  frowarde  festis  of  the  Idoll  Saturnus
And  other  disceytfull,  goddes  and  fraudelent
Or  els  rather :  forsoth  in  myne  intent
That  they  ar  wyckyd  spiritis  I  byleue
Sende  out  of  hell  (to  erth)  mankynde  to  greue

"With  dyuers  fassyons  they  hyde  the  same  vysage
Whiche  god  hath  made  vnto  his  owne  lykenes
And  gyuen  to  Adam  and  all  his  hole  lynage
For  to  remember  his  excellent  goodnes  ,
But  these  lewde  wretchys  by  theyr  folysshnes
Defylyth  nature,  hauynge  a  chefe  pleasaunce
For  to  disfygure  theyr  shape  and  countenaunce

Yet  haue  they  no  fere  of  god :  ne  drede  of  shame
Them  selfe  to  disfygure  this  wyse  agaynst  kynde
But  besyde  this :  some  them  selfe  fayneth  lame
Some  counterfayt  them  as  they  were  fully  blynde
And  yonge  gentylmen  wyll  nat  abyde  behynde
Some  them  disgyse  euyn  as  the  other  do
And  so  go  forth  as  folys  amonge  the  mo

Some  goeth  on  four  disfourmed  as  a  here
Some  fayne  them  croked,  and  some  impotent
Some  with  theyr  fyngers  theyr  iyen  abrode  blere
And  yet  that  is  wors :  and  worthy  punysshement
These  folys  disgysed  moste  set  theyr  intent
On  hyest  dayes,  and  most  solemne  also
In  suche  disfygured  maner  for  to  go


and  other  coiinterfayt  apparayle,  271


As  is  christis  feste  or  his  Natyuyte

At  Ester,  and  moste  speciall  at  wytsontyde

Whan  eche  creature  sholde  best  disposyd  be

Settynge  all  worldly  vanytees  asyde

Than  Venus  stryfes  accompanyed  with  pryde

Ar  led  by  daunsynge,  and  other  them  disgyse

These  holy  festis  alas  thus  they  despyse

Whan  the  bytter  passyon  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Sholde  be  remembred :  these  wretchyd  folys  ryn

To  theyr  disgysynge,  vanyte  and  errour

To  seke  occasyon  therby  of  dedely  syn

Thus  lytell  they  coueyt  the  heuenly  ioy  to  wyn

With  Crist  our  sauyour  alas  suche  ryse  to  late

For  worldly  synne  them  holdyth  in  one  state

Therfore  let  these  Folys  auoyde  this  mad  mysuse
And  folowe  the  right  way  of  vertuous  grauyte
Let  them  these  lewde  disgysynges  clene  refuse
For  nought  is  therin  :  saue  worldly  vanyte
It  is  vnlefull,  It  can  none  other  be
Where  god  made  man  eche  creature  to  excel!
Than  man  to  make  hym  selfe  a  deuyll  of  hell

I  haue  harde  that  a  certayne  man  was  slayne
Beynge  disgysyd  as  a  Fowle  fende  horryble
Whiche  was  anone  caryed  to  hell  payne
By  suche  a  fende. whiche  is  nat  impossyble
It  was  his  right  it  may  be  so  credyble
For  that  whiche  he  caryed  with  hym  away
Was  his  vysage :  and  his  owne  leueray


272  Of  folys  disgysyd  with  vysers.


Thenuoy  of  Alexander  Barclay.
Man  be  content  with  thy  owne  nature
As  god  hath  made  the  of  shape  and  countenaunce
Diffourme  nat  thy  body,  thy  vysage  or  fygure
Nor  yet  hi  vesture :  in  play,  disgyse  or  daunce
Art  thou  nat  made  to  goddes  owne  semblaunce
Than  certaynely  thou  art  greatly  to  blame
By  the  blynde  pryde  of  thy  mysgouernaunce
Presumptuously  to  counterfayt  the  same


The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.


A  man  that  is  gode :  endued  with  sapience

Repreuyth  dedys  nat  good  ne  commendable

He  chastyseth  wordes  :  wherof  myght  growe  offence

And  that  to  the  ere  haue  sounde  abhomynable

But  vnto  the  soule  his  wordes  ar  profytable

He  techyth  vertue:  hauynge  inwarde  regarde

To  his  owne  dedys :  or  he  procede  forwarde


2  74  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.


He  auoydeth  all  yll  and  worldly  vanyte
Sekynge  and  louynge  the  harde  way  of  goodnes
And  his  hole  lyfe  in  that  way  ordreth  he
In  euery  thynge  auoydynge  great  excesse
The  noble  virgyll  in  wrytynge  doth  expresse
A  wyse  man  describynge  his  poyntis  nere  echone
What  maner  man,  in  our  tyme  lyueth  none

Of  Socrates  the  hyghe  maieste  souerayne

In  this  part  had  the  hyghest  degre

And  went  moste  nere  the  hye  name  to  attayne

For  in  his  maners  and  lyuynge  lyke  was  he

To  suche  a  man :  as  we  may  wryten  se

In  the  crafty  Poesye  of  excellent  virgyll

This  worthy  Socrates  was  ruler  of  his  wyll

Within  his  boundys  kepynge  alway  the  same

He  holly  of  hymselfe  dependyd  stedfastly

So  constant  and  parfyte  that  none  coude  hym  blame

Except  it  were  by  malyce  and  enuy

He  was  prouydent  :  gode  and  eche  thynge  wolde  aply

Vnto  the  best :  nat  doynge  to  any  creature

But  that :  whiche  gladly  he  wolde  agayne  indure

And  euery  man  that  is  in  suche  case

Of  this  goodnes  to  kepe  the  godly  way

Within  his  herte  hath  many  gyftis  of  grace

Shynynge  as  bryght  as  is  the  sonny  day

His  owne  dedes  doth  he  iuge  by  rightwyse  way

Nat  carynge  for  the  grutches  of  the  rude  commonte

Takynge  euyn  lyke  welth  and  aduersyte


The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.  275


By  his  prouysyon  he  euer  is  safe  and  sure

From  outwarde  thynges  his  mynde  doth  he  abstayne

He  hath  no  brybes  of  any  creature

To  fauour  syn,  or  yll  men  to  meyntayne

He  euer  is  fre :  lyberall :  true  and  playne

With  stedfast  mynde,  he  vayne  desyre  doth  hate

Desyrynge  no  thynge  :  but  that  is  moderate

He  all  is  foundyd  in  parfyte  stablenes
Nat  gyuynge  hym  selfe  to  rest  in  any  wyse
Before  he  can  by  good  prouysion  dresse
All  thynge  that  to  his  lyuynge  may  suffyce
A  pryuat  profyte,  he  alway  doth  despyse
In  respect  of  the  wele  of  a  hole  comonte
Conioynynge  thynge  honest  with  his  vtylyte

He  euery  day  doth  some  thynge,  great  or  small
Aparteynynge  to  goodnes,  laude  and  honesty e
O  wolde  god  that  suche  fortune  myght  vs  fall
That  in  this  our  tyme,  suche  men  myght  with  vs  be
And  that  men  endued  with  wyt  and  grauyte
Myght  teche  the  same,  to  magnyfy  doctryne
And  that  the  ignoraunt  wolde  to  theyr  lore  inclyne

We  ought  nat  sothly  to  meruayle  in  this  case
That  of  the  folysshe  folke  a  sort  innumerable
Multyplyeth  thus  almoste  in  euery  place
The  cause  is  playne,  for  certis  without  fable
Wysdome  is  banysshed,  as  thynge  nat  profytable
Out  of  the  worlde  with  woundes  on  euery  syde
We  graunt  no  place  to  hir  with  vs  to  byde


2^6 The  clescripcion  of  a  ivyse  man.


Who  that  wyll  labour  in  this  our  wretchyd  tyme

To  lyue  in  wysdome  vertue  and  goodnes

Is  clene  dispysyd  of  them  that  lyue  in  cryme

Gyuen  to  all  synne  and  all  vnthryftynes

They  call  hym  folysshe,  rude  and  full  of  madnes

But  he  that  can  fraude  crafty :  and  gylefull  wayes

Hath  name  of  nobles,  and  wysdome  nowe  adayes

Gode  Aristydes  for  all  his  rightwysenes
In  this  our  tyme  sholde  nat  be  of  great  pryse
Fabricius  and  Curius,  for  all  theyr  hye  goodnes
Sholde  be  despysyd :  and  Cato  sad  and  wyse
Sholde  nowe  be  mocked  of  suche  as  lyue  in  vyce
For  it  is  sayde,  aud  prouyd  true  and  verytable
That  folys  hath  no  pleasour  but  onely  in  they  bable

Of  noble  Plato  :  what  sholde  the  sect  dyuyne
Do  amonge  men  that  nowe  adayes  ar  borne
They  sholde  for  all  theyr  wysdome  and  doctryne
Of  suche  folys  be  laughed  vnto  scorne
And  if  they  trouth  vttred :  be  all  to  rent  and  torne
For  the  lawde  and  glory  of  this  tyme  nowe  present
Ar  gyuen  vnto  folys :  men  fals  and  fraudelent

The  company  of  men  that  lackyth  wyt
Is  best  exaltyd  (as  nowe)  in  euery  place
And  in  the  chayr,  or  hyest  rowme  shall  syt
Promotynge  none :  but  suche  as  sue  theyr  trace
They  ryches  thynke  moste  speciall  gyft  of  grace
But  whan  a  Fole  is  thus  become  a  state
He  shall  with  his  foly  good  myndes  violate


The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.  277


If  the  noble  royalme  of  Englonde  wolde  iiuaance
In  our  dayes :  men  of  vertue  and  prudence
Eche  man  rewardynge  after  his  gouernaunce
As  the  wyse  with  honour  and  rowme  of  excellence
And  the  yll  with  greuous  payne  for  theyr  offence
Than  sholde  our  famous  laude  of  olde  obtayned
Nat  bene  decayed,  oppressyd  and  thus  distayned

If  men  of  wysdome  were  brought  out  of  the  scolys

And  after  theyr  vertue  set  in  moste  hye  degre

My  shyp  sholde  nat  haue  led  so  many  folys

Both  of  men  temporall,  and  of  the  spiritualyte

Whiche  in  the  wawes  of  the  tempestuous  se

Of  this  wretchyd  worlde  moche  payne  and  wo  abyde

For  lacke  of  wyt,  and  reason,  them  to  gyde

But  none  doth  iuge  hym  selfe  for  his  offence
With  godly  wysedome  none  doth  endue  his  mynde
None  parfytely  wyll  serche  his  conscyence
Suche  fautis  expellynge  as  he  therin  doth  fynde
These  worldly  pleasours,  alas  mankynde  doth  blynde
So  sore  :  that  if  the  worlde  hole  were  sought
Fewe  sholde  be  founde  that  lyue  ryght  as  they  ought

And  therfore  in  wordes  both  of  sadnes  and  sport
With  folysshe  Cotis  and  hodes  I  haue  disgysed
Of  these  Folys  a  great  and  meruaylous  sort
Lyke  as  my  mayster  Brant  had  first  deuysyd
But  of  these  Folys  though  good  men  be  despysyd
And  had  as  Folys,  no  meruayle  is  truly
For  in  a  folys  syght  hye  wysdome  is  foly


278 The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  mem.


But  though  these  folys  repute  men  of  wysdome
As  wors  than  they :  yet  let  them  lyue  and  do
As  virgyll  techyth,  wysely,  and  they  shall  come
To  heuen  whan  that  theyr  soule  shall  hens  go
They  nought  shall  knowe  of  mysery  nor  wo
And  for  theyr  lyfe  ledynge  here  in  rightwysnes
Shall  be  theyr  rewarde  the  heuenly  blyssydnes

Thoughe  wysemen  here,  of  folys  be  cpprest
Had  in  derysion  :  and  kept  in  lowe  degre
For  this  theyr  trouble  eternall  ioy  and  rest
In  goddes  hye  presence  to  them  rewarde  shall  be
Wherfore  o  man  1  warne  and  councell  the
Prepare  thy  selfe  to  wysdome  and  prudence
Do  thou  hir  honour  with  loue  and  reuerence

Wysedome  shall  men  auaunce  vnto  honour
So  Barclay  wyssheth  and  styll  shall  tyll  he  dye
Parfytely  pray  to  god  our  creatour
That  vertuous  men  and  wyse  may  haue  degre
(As  they  ar  worthy)  of  lawde  and  dygnyte
But  namely  to  his  frende  bysshop  by  name
Before  all  other  desyreth  he  the  same

Which e  was  the  first  ouersear  of  this  warke
And  vnto  his  frende  gaue  his  aduysement
It  nat  to  suffer  to  slepe  styll  in  the  darke
But  to  be  publysshyd  abrode :  and  put  to  prent
To  thy  monycion  my  bysshop  I  assent
Besechynge  god  that  I  that  day  may  se
That  thy  honour  may  prospere  and  augment
So  that  thy  name  and  offyce  may  agre


The  clescripcion  of  a  wyse  man.  279


Thy  name  to  worshyp  and  honour  doth  accorde
As  borne  a  bysshop  without  a  benefyce
Thy  lyuynge  small :  thy  name  is  of  a  lorde
And  though  thou  nowe  be  stryke  with  couetyse
That  vyce  shall  slake  in  the  if  thou  aryse
(As  I  suppose)  and  lyberalyte
Shall  suche  fortune  for  the  by  grace  deuyse
So  that  thy  name  and  ofFyce  shall  agre

But  if  that  fortune  to  thy  goodnes  enuye

As  though  she  wolde  :  the  nat  honour  to  attayne

Yet  let  hir  passe :  and  hir  fraylenes  defye

For  all  hir  gyftis  ar  frayle  and  vncertayne

If  she  nat  smyle  on  the  but  haue  disdayne

The  to  promote  to  welth  and  dignyte

To  olde  acquayntaunce  be  stedfast  true  and  playne

Than  shall  thy  goodnes  and  thy  name  agre

Let  pas  the  worlde  for  nought  in  it  is  stable
The  greatter  Baylyf  the  sorer  is  his  payne
Some  men  that  late  were  callyd  honorable
Dyd  theyr  promosyon  after  sore  complayne
No  wyse  man  is  desyrous  to  obtayne
The  forked  cap  without  he  worthy  be
As  ar  but  fewe  :  but  be  thou  glad  and  fayne
That  thy  good  name  and  maners  may  agre

In  this  short  balade  I  can  nat  comprehende
All  my  full  purpose  that  I  wolde  to  the  wryte
But  fayne  I  wolde  that  thou  sholde  sone  assende
To  heuenly  worshyp  and  celestyall  delyte


280 'The  descripcion  of  a  wyse  man.


Than  sholde  I  after  my  pore  wyt,  and  respyt,
Display  thy  name,  and  great  kyndnes  to  me
But  at  this  tyme  no  farther  I  indyte
But  pray  that  thy  name  and  worshyp  may  agre.


Of  folys  that  dispyse  wysdome  and  Phylo-
sophy  and  a  commendacion  of  the  same.


With  dolefull  dolour :  it  sorowyd  ought  to  be
That  nowe  adayes  the  wysdome  and  doctryne
Of  wyse  men,  iust,  and  full  of  grauyte
Is  nought  set  by :  but  fallyth  to  ruyne
But  folys  that  to  wysdome  wyll  nat  inclyne
Spyttyth  for  despyte  on  hym  the  whiche  is  wyse
And  all  his  dedys  doth  vtterly  despyse


282  Of folys  that  dispyse


The  rude  commontye,  that  wyt  and  wysedome  lacke
Labouryth  with  all  the  power  that  they  may
Wyse  men  and  gode :  to  thyrst  into  a  sacke
For  vnder  fote  of  Folys  without  nay
Phylosophy  lyeth,  oppressyd  nyght  and  day
Folys  it  repute  nought  worth  ne  profytable
They  haue  delyte :  in  men  to  them  semblable

Who  euer  he  be  that  purposyth  in  mynde
The  holy  Toure  of  wysdome  to  attayne
And  coueytyth  his  rest  in  it  to  fynde
Despysynge  worldly  welth  and  ioy  mundayne
He  must  both  hande  and  tunge  fro  synne  refrayne
Obseruynge  his  body  in  grace  by  chastyte
And  than  of  wysedome  receyued  shall  he  be

Phylosophy  doth  mannys  mynde  compace
With  syghtis  and  iyen  replete  with  holynes
To  man  it  gyueth  right  many  gyftis  of  grace
As  eloquence  :  and  waye  of  rightwysnes
It  man  confortyth  oppressyd  in  sadnes
By  holy  doctryne,  and  it  doth  socour  fynde
For  all  yll  mouynges,  and  fantasyes  of  mynde

It  techyth  man  to  all  vertues  to  inclyne

It  shewyth  the  way  for  to  lyue  vertuously

And  by  suche  lore  and  vertuous  doctryne

It  techyth  them  that  truly  it  aply

The  heuenly  way  :  vnto  the  sterres  a  hye

We  sadnes  and  sorowe  may  fle  by  this  wysdome

And  greuous  chaunces  or  fallys  by  it  ouercome


wysdome  and  Phylosophy.  283

The  father  of  heuen  our  lorde  omnypotent

Of  his  great  grace  and  infynyte  goodnes

Hath  sende  this  scyence  to  people  innocent

To  shewe  them  the  way  of  grace  and  rightwysnes

Ail  hir  aparayle  agreyth  to  holynes

Therwith  she  oftreth  frely  to  cloth  mankynde

Sawynge  hir  sede  of  vertue  in  theyr  mynde

She  coueryth  hir  hede  with  vale  of  chastyte
Hir  body  clothyd  with  pall  of  the  same  sort
The  rosys  purpyll  of  fayre  humylyte
Spredyth  the  grounde  where  as  she  doth  resort
Wherfore  let  euery  wyse  man  haue  confort
Onely  in  wysedomys  presence  and  seruyce
For  where  she  rayneth  subdued  is  euery  vyce

She  fedeth  man  with  the  dylycious  drynke
Of  parfyte  wysdome  :  all  vyce  therby  to  fle
And  vnto  hym  that  euer  on  hir  doth  thynke
She  grauntyth  honour  of  parfyte  lybertye
Whyle  she  is  gyde  the  herte  and  mynde  are  fre
For  she  expellyth  :  vyce  and  mysgouernaunce
Whiche  ar  rote  of  mysfortune  and  mychaunce

She  gyueth  laudes  to  all  them  that  hir  loue
And  by  hir  doctryne  and  worthy  sapyence
The  wyse  ascendyth  to  the  hye  heuen  aboue
And  to  iust  lyuers :  and  men  of  innocence
Heuen  yates  she  opyns  theyr  dedes  to  recompence
Thus  wysdome  is  chefe  gyder  of  our  lyfe
In  blyssyd  rest  :  slakynge  debate  and  stryfe


284  Of  fib  ^  ^^^^^  dlspyse


None  lyueth  so  fyers,  nor  so  cruell  tyrant
But  that  noble  wysedome  by  parfyte  pacyence
Shall  hym  ouercome  :  but  he  that  wyt  doth  want
For  lacke  of  wysedome  oft  fallyth  to  offence
There  is  no  lorde  ne  Prynce  of  excellence
That  can  well  gyde  his  scepter  and  kyngdome
Without  the  helpe  and  counsell  of  wysedome

Wysdome  is  moder  of  fayth  :  and  of  iustyce
And  all  goodnes  doth  of  it  growe  and  sprynge
But  yet  moste  people  nowe  insuyth  vyce
Fulfyllynge  theyr  folysshe  lust  in  euery  thynge
They  foly  folowe,  but  wysedome  and  cunnynge
They  clene  dispyse  :  hauynge  scorne  and  enuy
At  suche  god  men  as  them  to  it  aply

But  leue  this  foly,  o  wretchyd  men  alas

And  both  yonge  and  olde  fast  spede  you  to  obtayne

The  godly  gyftis  of  excellent  pallas

Endeuour  your  selfe  to  drynke  of  hir  fountayne

But  o  disciples  of  wysdome  :  spare  no  payne

To  help  your  moder :  for  if  ye  be  to  slacke

The  rude  comontye  shall  thrust  hir  in  a  sacke

A  LEMENTACION  OF  BARCLAY  FOR  THE  RUYNE  AND
FALL  OF  WYSDOME.

O  synfull  season  :  sore  drownyd  in  derkenes
O  wylfuU  foly  o  thou  proude  ignoraunce
Howe  longe  shall  ye  mankynde  thus  wyse  oppres
That  none  almost  in  wysdome  hath  pleasaunce


wysdome  and  Phylosophy.  285


But  men  myslyuynge  in  mad  mysgouernaunce

Ar  so  with  statis  in  fauour  loue  and  grace

That  with  them  wysdome  can  haue  none  acquayntaunce

But  clene  exyled  and  foly  in  hir  place

Alas  the  tyme  :  that  wyse  men  of  mekenes
Sholde  be  despysyd  :  yet  fallen  is  that  chaunce
Nought  is  set  by  :  saue  treasour  and  ryches
Playne  trouth  is  foly :  and  pouertye  penaunce
Boldnes  and  bostynge  ledyth  all  the  daunce
Venus  all  techyth  for  to  insue  hir  trace
Fals  flatery  the  most  part  doth  auaunce
But  gone  is  wysdome  and  foly  in  hir  place

Foule  falshode  hath  confoundyd  faythfulnes
The  newe  disgyses  hath  left  Almayne  and  Fraunce
And  come  to  Englonde :  and  eche  vnclenlynes
Doth  lede  vs  wretchys,  we  make  no  purueaunce
Agaynst  our  ende  whan  deth  shall  with  his  launce
Consume  this  lyfe  :  we  may  bewayle  this  case
Our  wordes  ar  folysshe  :  so  is  our  countenaunce
Thus  gone  is  wysdome,  and  foly  in  hir  place

Who  can  rehers  eche  sort  of  folysshenes
That  vs  mysgydeth  through  our  mysordynaunce
Lust  is  our  Lady :  and  glotony  maystres
Sobernes  is  gone :  and  stately  arrogaunce
Hath  mekenes  slayne  :  alas  this  is  greuaunce
Vnto  my  herte":  expellynge  all  solace
O  glorious  god  direct  this  perturbaunce
That  wysdome  may  agayne  obtayne  hir  place


A  concertacion  or  stryuynge  bytwene
vertue  and  voluptuosyte  :  or  carnall  lust.


Beholde  here  man  dyrect  thy  syght  to  se
For  in  this  balade  I  shall  vnto  the  shewe
The  stryfe  of  vyce  and  voluptuosyte
Had  in  comtempt  of  goodnes  and  vertue
But  do  thou  so  that  vertue  may  subdue
Foule  carnall  lust  whose  pleasour  is  but  vayne
Firste  full  of  myrth:  endynge  in  bytter  payne


Carnall  lust.


287


Whyle  Hercules  lay  slepynge  (as  I  rede)

Two  wayes  he  sawe  full  of  diffyculte

The  one  of  pleasour  :  at  ende  gyuynge  no  mede

The  other  of  vertue  auaunsynge  eche  degre

But  of  both  these  two  wayes  whan  that  he

Had  sought  the  state  :  the  ende,  and  the  strayghtnes

The  way  he  entred  of  vertue  and  goodnes

Therfore  o  reder  that  hast  wyll  to  inclyne
To  souerayne  vertue  that  is  incomperable
Thy  mynde  aplyenge  stedfast  to  hir  doctryne
Ouer  rede  this  balade  for  it  is  profytable
And  though  thou  thynke  it  but  a  fayned  fable
Yet  red  it  gladly  :  but  if  thou  be  to  haut
Fie  from  it  fast  and  fynde  in  it  no  faut

We  pardon  requyre  where  as  we  do  offend e
Grauntynge  the  same  to  other  vsynge  to  wryte
None  doth  so  well  but  some  may  it  amende
But  namely  if  it  be  done  without  respyte.
None  without  leyser  :  can  voyde  of  faut  endyte
And  mannys  wyt,  as  dayly  doth  apere
Somtyme  is  dull :  somtyme  parfyte  and  clere

With  wordes  playne :  I  viciousnes  confounde
Oppressynge  men  with  fals  flatrynge  semblaunt
And  throwynge  Venus  tentis  to  the  grounde
But  vertue  I  lawde :  as  goodnes  moste  plesaunt
Whiche  with  hir  wepen  most  stronge  and  tryumphaunt
Subduyth  vyce  :  and  all  suche  as  hir  loue
With  hir  she  ledyth  to  the  hye  royalme  aboue


288


A  cojicertacion  bytwene


Therfore  let  euery  man,  mayde,  childe,  and  wyfe

In  theyr  yonge  age  to  vertue  them  inclyne

Lernynge  of  hir  the  way  to  lede  theyr  lyfe

As  of  maysteres  moste  holsome  in  doctryne

Who  hir  insuys  assayeth  no  ruyne

For  hir  rewarde  is  sure,  and  eternall

In  erth  here :  and  in  the  royalrae  celestyall

Thus  shall  he  lyue  in  perpetuyte.

But  let  echone  auoyde  the  viciousnes

To  hym  promysyd  by  voluptuosyte

Hir  warkes  ar  all  oppressyd  with  blyndnes

And  where  as  she  can  wanton  youth  oppres

She  hym  so  rotyth  in  slouth  and  neglygence

That  nede  shall  cause  hym  fall  to  all  offence

Lust  brakyth  the  mynde :  and  as  we  often  se

It  blyndyth  the  vnderstondynge  and  the  wyt

From  mannys  hert  it  chasis  chastyte

AH  mortall  venym  hath  the  chefe  rote  in  it

None  can  be  helyd  that  hath  hir  byt

But  noble  blode  she  most  of  all  doth  blynde

Whiche  more  on  hir  :  than  vertae  haue  theyr  mynde

Therfore  yonge  men  gyue  aduertence  and  hede

Here  shall  ye  se  :  and  so  shall  feble  age

What  yll  of  worldly  pleasour  doth  procede

And  howe  she  bryngeth  some  men  to  great  damage

Than  shall  ye  here  what  good  and  auauntage

What  welth  what  rest,  what  honour  and  ryches

Comys  to  mankynde  by  vertue  and  goodnes


The  obiection  of  lust  blamynge  vertiie.


Lo  gorgays  galantis :  lo  galantis  here  am  I

Lo  here  fayre  lust :  full  enmy  to  vertue

Clothyd  in  laurer  :  in  sygne  of  victory

The  large  worlde  I  hole  to  me  subdue

My  stremynge  standardes  alayd  with  sundry  hewe

In  tryumphe  shynyth  bryghter  than  the  sonne

I  all  the  worlde  to  my  Empyre  haue  wonne


2qo  'The  obiectmi  of  lust  hlamyno-e  vertue.


All  fragaunt  floures  most  pleasaunt :  gay  and  swete

Whose  sundry  sortis  no  lyuynge  man  can  tell

Vnto  my  pleasour  ar  spred  vnder  my  fete

That  all  the  ayre  enioyeth  of  the  smeli

The  vyolet  that  in  odour  doth  excell

About  in  bosom  by  me  alway  I  here

The  same  oft  tyme  inlasyd  with  my  here

All  my  vesture  °.  is  of  golde  pure
My  gay  Chaplet,  with  stonys  set
With  couerture  :  of  fyne  asure
In  syluer  net  my  here  up  knet
Soft  sylke  bytwene  lyst  it  myght  fret
My  purpyll  pall,  ouercouereth  all
Clere  as  Christall :  no  thynge  egall

My  wanton  face  :  louers  to  embrace  :  my  wanton  iye
In  suche  a  case  :  shewe  them  solace:  that  none  ar  fre
So  louers  be  subiet  to  me :  in  euery  plame
My  hye  beautye  :  voyde  of  bounte :  doth  them  inlace
To  hunt  to  chace :  to  daunce  :  to  trace  :  what  one  is  he
That  beryth  face :  or  hath  that  grace  :  on  londe  or  se
In  lyke  degre  hym  selfe  to  se  :  my  pleasaunt  pace
Is  lyght  as  fle :  thus  none  that  be  :  can  me  compace

I  cast  my  pleasours  :  and  hony  swete
Ouer  all  the  worlde  none  can  beware
Nor  loke  so  surely  vnto  his  fete
But  that  I  tangle  hym  in  my  snare
Whan  I  with  youth  can  mete
With  reason  nat  well  replete
In  lust  I  cause  hym  flete
Of  grace  barayne  and  bare


T^he  ohiection  of  lust  blamynge  verttie.  291


What  man  is  he  that  can  beware
Whan  1  my  nettis  abrode  display
Namely  to  youth  I  me  repare
I  blynde  theyr  hertis  sorest  alway
I  take  no  thought  ne  care
Howe  euer  the  worlde  fare
No  season  fre  I  spare
Frome  pleasour  :  nyght  nor  day

With  harpe  in  hande,  alway  I  stande
Passynge  eche  hour :  in  swete  pleasour
A  wanton  bande  :  of  euery  lande
Ar  in  my  tour,  me  to  honour
Some  of  voloure,  some  bare  and  poure
Kynges  in  theyr  pryde,  syt  by  my  syde
Euery  fresshe  flour,  of  swete  odour
To  them  I  prouyde,  that  with  me  byde

Whan  the  stature,  of  my  fygure
With  golde  shynyng,  is  hye  standynge
They  that  inure,  in  my  pleasure
With  herte  wandrynge,  moche  swetely  synge
Garlandes  of  golde,  to  me  olfrynge
And  me  beholde  with  countenaunce
Smylynge,  laughynge  :  eche  wanton  thynge
On  myrth  musynge,  lernynge  to  daunce

Mo  men  me  honour  :  for  my  pleasaunce
Than  worshyp  the  mother  of  the  hye  kynge
I  shewe  them  myrth,  she  harde  penaunce
I  pleasaunt  lust :  She  chast  lyuynge


292 The  obiectwn  of  lust  hlamynge  vertue.

Who  euer  they  be,  that  folowe  me
And  gladly  fle  :  to  any  standarde
They  shall  be  fre  :  nat  sek  nor  se
Aduersyte  :  nor  paynes  harde

No  poynt  of  payne,  shall  he  sustayne
But  ioy  souerayne,  whyle  he  is  here
No  frost  ne  rayne,  there  shall  distayne,
His  face  by  payne,  ne  hurt  his  chere

He  shall  his  hede,  cast  to  no  drede
To  get  the  mede,  and  lawde  of  warre
Nor  yet  haue  nede,  for  to  take  hede
Howe  batayles  spede,  but  stande  a  farre

Nor  yet  be  bounde,  to  care  the  sounde
Of  man  :  or  grounde  :  or  trumpet  shyll
Strokes  that  redounde,  shall  nat  confounde
Nor  his  mynde  wounde  :  but  if  he  wyll

Who  wyll  subdue,  hym  to  insue
My  pleasours  newe :  that  I  demayne
I  shall  hym  shewe  :  way  to  eschewe
Where  hardnes  grewe  :  and  to  fle  payne

The  swetnes  of  loue  he  shall  assay

But  suche  as  my  pleasours  hate  and  dispyse

In  hardnes  lyue  and  bytter  payne  alway

In  dolour  drowned,  and  that  in  greuous  wyse

Endynge  theyr  lyfe  after  a  wretchyd  gyse

By  couetyse,  abstaynynge  theyr  pleasour

Chaungynge  swetnes  for  bytter  payne  and  sour


The  obiection  of  lust  blamynge  vertue.


By  pleasaunt  lust  I  callyd  am  ouer  all
Prynces  pereles  and  glorious  goddes
Of  me  procedyth  pleasour  :  as  is  egall
To  come  of  a  hye  and  noble  Empres
In  me  is  myrth  and  songes  of  gladnes
And  vnder  my  dayes  and  hours  fortunate
Age  hath  first  rote  to  holde  vp  his  estate

The  lusty  Parys,  by  whome  the  ryche  troy

Gaue  place  to  grece,  as  subiect  to  the  same

In  my  seruyce  had  pleasour  and  great  ioy

So  that  by  me  he  spred  abrode  his  fame

Those  pleasours  folowynge  of  whan  I  haue  the  name

And  that  remayneth  in  my  auctoryte

And  proude  Cleopatra  :  was  seruytour  to  me

There  is  no  londe  inclosyd  with  the  se

But  that  they  all  haue  folowyd  my  counsell

As  Afryke,  Numyde  the  other  I  let  be

I  wyll  nat  tary  theyr  namys  for  to  tell

But  fewe  or  none  ar  bytwene  heuen  and  hell

In  hethynes  nor  yet  in  chrystente

But  yonge  outher  olde  they  all  obey  to  me

My  deynteous  dartis  about  full  brode  I  cast
Amonge  all  Nacions  vnto  the  worldes  ende
The  Phylosophers  that  were  in  tymes  past
As  Epicurians  to  me  dyd  condiscende
All  theyr  hole  sect  my  quarell  doth  defende
For  all  theyr  sect  to  this  clause  dyd  assent
That  lust  and  pleasour  was  gode  most  excellent


2  94  ^'^^  ob'iection  of  lust  blamynge  vertue.


Without  corporall  labour  :  my  goodes  shall  profyte

Of  mete  and  drynke  I  haue  welth  and  excesse

I  haue  my  pleasour,  my  icy  and  my  delyte

In  deynty  dysshes  and  swete  delyciousnes  ,

1  lede  nat  lyfe  in  peryll  and  hardnes

Vnder  heuy  helme,  in  felde  from  any  towne

Nat  on  harde  strawe  :  but  soft  and  costely  downe

If  ioy,  and  pleasour,  dyd  me  nat  ay  insue
And  lusty  myrthe,  with  corporall  pkasaunce
So  myghty  kynges  wolde  nat  them  subdue
Vnto  my  tentis,  whose  myght  shall  me  auaunce
That  all  the  worlde  vnder  my  gouernaunce
Shall  it  submyt,  and  dwellers  of  the  same
Shall  here  about  the  badges  of  my  name

It  is  longe  past  syns  that  men  first  dyd  thus
Subdue  tlieyr  myndes  and  bodyes  vnto  me
The  myghty  kynge  callyd  Sardanapalus
Left  dedes  that  longyd  vnto  his  royalte
Folowynge  my  pleasour  and  voluptuosyte
And  rome  victorious  at  last  by  hye  courage
Yeldyd  it  selfe  mekely  to  my  bondage

Eas  welth  and  rest  to  me  alway  is  best
Vnto  my  seruauntis  I  gyue  the  same
And  where  as  nature  aperyth  goodlyest
I  am  moste  besy  the  herte  for  to  inflame
With  fyry  brondes  to  Venus  plesaunt  game
No  colde  ne  hunger  to  yonge  men  shall  I  gyue
But  pleasaunt  rest  :  whyle  they  with  me  do  lyue


The  obiection  of  lust  blamynge  vertiie.  1 95


My  lyfe  I  lede  in  ioyfiiU  Idylnes

Nat  let  nor  troubled  by  any  aduersyte

Therfore  o  youth  that  art  in  lustynes

And  age  also  that  of  bad  maners  be

Tourne  hyther  your  faces  beholdynge  my  beaute

And  you  indeuer  your  erys  to  inclyne

To  my  preceptis,  folowynge  my  doctryne

The  tyme  passyth  dayly  fro  mankynde

Our  dayes  of  lyfe  longe .  whyle  can  nat  indure

Therfore  on  pleasour  establysshe  we  our  mynde

For  in  my  mynde  no  erthly  creature

After  this  lyfe  of  pleasour  shall  be  sure

Therfore  be  we  meiy  the  time  that  we  ar  here

And  passe  we  our  tyme  alway  in  lusty  chere


The  answere  of  vertue  agenst  this  obiec-
tion  of  voluptuosyte.


O  Lothsome  lust :  o  mad  mysgouernour
Of  all  mankynde,  and  rote  of  euery  vyce
With  thy  barayne  balade,  and  corporall  pleasour
Howe  darest  thou  greue  me  thus  in  any  wyse
Thy  wordes  ar  vayne  :  thy  myght  I  clene  despyse
How^dare  thy  cowarde  herte  me  thus  assayle
Syns  thou,  the  bostest :  vnmete  vnto  batayle


The  ajiswere  of  vertue.  297

Haue  done  and  answere  :  disceytfull  trayteres
Howe  darest  thou  wretchyd  men  this  wyse  abuse
Or  them  disceyue  by  thy  chraft  of  falsnes
Why  doth  mankynde  on  thy  vayne  pleasours  muse
Why  doth  the  worlde  goodnes  and  grace  refuse
Rennynge  to  thy  foly,  subduynge  them  in  care
As  fysshe  or  byrde  to  panter,  net  or  snare

Why  Jawdest  thou  thy  lust  and  pleasour  vayne
Thy  wandrynge  wayes  in  syn  and  bestlynes
Who  that  the  folowys,  shall  at  the  ende  certayne
Fynde  no  honour,  but  payne  and  great  distres
Thy  faythfull  felawe  is  bestyall  dronkenes
Thy  pursuyuaunt  is  dredfull  worldly  shame
Fleynge  about  to  spred  abrode  thy  name

Shame  them  subdueth  that  them  submyt  to  the
Thy  beautye  blyndyd  is  by  mysgouernaunce
I  say  nat  nay,  but  fayre  thou  art  to  see
And  alway  wrappyd  in  halters  of  pleasaunce
Thy  iyen  wanton,  with  wanton  countenaunce
Thy  here  glystrynge  or  shynynge  as  golde  bryght
That  many  thousande  destroyed  is  by  thy  syght

Thy  purpyll  garlandes  couchyd  with  precious  stone
Pure  and  resplendaunt  is  all  thy  apparayle
Aleyed  gayly  with  perles  many  a  one
Of  purpyll  colour  of  Tyre  is  thy  mantayle
With  precious  stones  beset  as  thycke  as  hayle
Thy  gyrdyls  gay,  and  rynges  pleasaunt  to  se
But  what  is  this :  but  worldly  vanyte


298


T^he  aiiswere  of  vertew


Thou  art  nat  armyd,  nor  to  no  warre  dost  go
But  standest  naked,  and  all  thy  body  bare
As  chefe  champyon  vnto  biynde  Cupido
Suche  feble  men  that  lacke  wyt  to  beware
Attysest  thou  falsly  into  thy  snare
The  bowe  of  Venus,  and  dartis  lye  by  the
Hedyd  with  shame,  myshap  and  pouertye

In  thy  one  hande  is  the  myscheuous  dart
Of  fleshly  lust :  and  pleasour  corporall
Wherwith  thou  sharply  strykest  to  the  hart
The  olde,  the  yonge :  the  pore  and  pryncipal!
Thy  other  hande  bereth  in  it  venym  mortall
Vnto  the  whiche  if  man  nat  well  attende
With  all  yll  shall  he  be  poysoned  at  the  ende

Of  thy  fayre  forehede  :  the  beauty  and  bryghtnes
And  all  the  fassyon,  and  shape  that  is  in  the
Defyled  and  blyndyd  is,  by  viciousnes
And  flesshely  lust  clene  voyde  of  chastyte
In  thy  vayne  wordes  is  nought  of  honestee
Thou  canst  no  skyll  of  honest  sport  ne  game
But  rybaude  wordes,  soundynge  all  to  shame

Thou  art  distroyer  of  all  mankynde
But  namely  to  suche :  as  sue  thy  trayne
The  wyt  thou  dullyst,  troublynge  thy  mynde
The  honest  name  doste  thou  distayne
Thou  bryngest  man  to  infernall  payne
Wastynge  his  goodes  by  wayes  prodygall
But  his  last  ende,  alas  is  worst  of  all


aQ-emt  this  obiectwn  of  voluptuosyte.  2


By  the,  in  the  worlde  true  loue  is  maculate
By  the,  dull  slouth  doth  pyteously  oppres
The  lusty  bodyes  of  many  a  great  estate
Thou  ar  destroyer  of  vertue  and  nobles
And  youth  descendyd  of  byrth  of  worthynes
Whan  they  theyr  myndes  to  thy  precept  inclyne
To  nought  they  vanysshe,  so  fallynge  in  ruyne

By  the,  we  greuous  sores  oft  sustayne

Infyrmytees,  sore  peryls  and  mortall

By  the,  the  soule  is  drowned  depe  in  payne

In  hell,  amonge  the  fendys  infernall

Thou  makest  man  slouthfuU  and  dull  withall

To  chast  hartis  art  thou  mortall  ennemy

The  wyttis  blyndynge,  or  wastynge  vtterly

Thou  wretchyd  lust  dost  stynt  abate  and  swage

The  strength  of  man,  and  his  audacyte

Thou  bryngest  lowe  the  lusty  hye  corage

Of  manly  youth  in  his  prosperite

Thou  art  the  mete  of  all  aduersyte

And  cursyd  fode  of  payne,  wo,  and  doloure

Both  to  the  pore,  and  men  of  great  honoure

Of  the  hath  mortall  sorys  oft  theyr  rote
And  sore  sekenes,  where  to  no  man  mortall
Can  fynde  no  socour,  no  remedy,  nor  bote
But  for  to  speke  of  the,  in  generall
Recount  all  yll :  and  thou  art  grounde  of  all
Thou  art  the  well,  of  eche  disordred  thynge
Of  whose  hede,  vyle  glotony  doth  sprynge


300


The  a?iswere  of  vertezv


Thou  makest  youth  suche  as  thou  dost  attyse

To  lese  the  vertue  of  manhode  and  boldnes

Theyr  hertis  dullynge  with  ferefull  cowardyse

Thou  makest  age  to  grow  in  viciousnes

Thou  makest  many  to  wander  in  derknes

Of  vicious  lyfe,  attysynge  by  thy  gyle

Nought  chaste  thou  techyst :  but  thynge  vnpure  and  vyle

Thou  hast  no  reason  :  ne  stedfastnes  of  mynde
Of  wysdome  the  purest  grayne  is  fro  the  gone
No  parfyte  wyt  shall  man  within  the  fynde
Of  reasons  sad,  thou  certaynly  hast  none
And  thoughe  at  the  first  thou  shewe  vnto  echone
Pleasour  :  and  hope  vnto  honour  to  ascende
Thou  them  disceyuest  falsly  at  the  ende

The  hande  of  many  great  laude  sholde  haue  obtayned
By  worthy  tryumphe,  auaunsynge  so  theyr  name
If  thou  haddest  nat  theyr  hye  purpose  distayned
Them  by  thy  gyle  withdrawynge  from  the  same
So  by  thy  mean  obscured  is  theyr  fame
And  by  thy  venym  thou  hast  intoxycate
The  noble  hertis  :  of  many  a  great  estate

Thou  hast  ouerthowe  the  wallys  of  noble  Troy

The  Parthyans,  and  dwellers  of  Asy

By  thy  deuowrynge  lust  haue  lost  their  ioy

And  many  a  Cyte  by  the,  on  grounde  doth  lye

The  Cytees  of  Grece  with  wallys  strong  and  hye

Ly  nowe  on  grounde  the  wallys  with  gras  ouergrowe

The  Attyke  royalmes  by  the  ar  nowe  full  lowe


agenst  this  obieciion  of  voluptuosyte.  3  o  \

By  the  was  Sodome  and  other  Cytees  drowned

And  that  in  nomber  mo  than  I  can  name

Hath  ben  destroyed,  and  made  euyn  with  the  grounde

Corynth  (by  the)  was  lost  with  swerde  and  flame

And  moche  parte  of  Egypt  was  the  same

Tarent  also,  Assyria  and  eke  Trace

Thou  hast  destroyed :  and  that,  in  wofull  case

What  nedyth  here  to  name  the  royalmes  all

Or  all  those  Cytees  and  places  excellent

Whiche  thou  hast  made  from  theyr  honour  to  fall

By  punysshement  of  our  lorde  omnypotent

Some  drowned,  and  some  with  fyre  of  heuen  brent

But  to  be  playne  we  dayly  se  doutles

That  all  thy  seruauntis  ende  in  wretchydnes

But  better  is  my  state,  my  fortune  and  degre
For  all  my  seruauntis  that  vnto  me  inclyne
Shall  haue  rewarde  of  ioy  and  blysse  with  me
Whiche  ioy,  in  heuen  abydeth  me  and  myne
Vnto  vs  grauntyd  by  the  grace  dyuyne
By  pacyent  labour  I  pore  men  here  auaunce
To  worldly  welth,  and  good  in  abundaunce

The  yatis  of  heuen  to  man  ar  opened  wyde
And  he  receyued  in  ioy  that  neuer  shall  cesse
So  that  I  be  his  helper  and  his  gyde
To  lede  hym  theder  by  way  of  rightwysnes
My  way  his  harde,  and  full  of  besynes
But  at  the  ende  I  haue  a  restynge  place
Wherin  is  lyfe  euerlastynge  and  solace


302  The  answere  of  veriew


Stronge  Hercules  that  myghty  champyon

And  Julius  Cesar  an  Eraperour  royall

And  Alexander  whose  felawe  found  was  none

Consyderynge  well  his  wyt  and  dedys  all

These  hath  renowne  that  neuer  can  stynt  nor  fall

For  that  they  euer  obeyed  vnto  me

And  many  mo  by  me  brought  to  degre

I  haue  auaunsyd  to  glorious  lawde  and  name

Poule  that  was  consull  of  the  Impyre  romayne

Whiche  dyuers  Nacions  wan  encresynge  his  fame

To  the  sayde  romaynes,  triumphe  and  laude  souerayne

And  thoughe  they  suffred  peryll  and  great  payne

Yet  hath  the  loue,  and  mede  of  me  vertue

Nat  suffred  them  harde  chargis  to  eschewe

By  me  the  honour  of  the  hye  eloquence
Of  Cicero  :  and :  his  parfyte  polecy
Ar  spred  abrode,  shynynge :  for  excellence
And  noble  Virgyll  the  Prynce  of  Poetry
The  romayne  lynage  by  vers  dyd  magnyfy
He  and  Homerus  :  with  Poetis  euerychone
Hath  won  theyr  glory  and  laude  by  me  alone

Arystotyll  ensuynge  my  iust  commaundement
Hath  made  his  name,  and  laudes  immortall
And  also  Plato  moste  noble  and  excellent
The  Phylosophers  all  other,  great  or  small
Hauynge  no  name,  in  goodes  temporall
Hath  left  the  worlde,  with  all  his  vanyte
And  at  the  ende  great  honour  had  by  me


agenst  this  obiection  of  voliiptuosyte.  303

I  clere  the  wyt,  the  speche  I  fortyfye

With  sadnes  reason,  and  pleasaunt  eloquence

T  man  conferme,  augment  and  edefye

With  honour,  laude,  and  knowlege  of  science

And  to  expres  my  myght  in  brefe  sentence

None  may  here  wyn,  but  by  my  socour

Lawde,  fame,  ne  helth,  ryches  nor  honour

In  the  is  pryde  :  and  all  thy  wanton  wyll

Is  set  on  ryot  and  wretchyd  lechery

All  vicious  wordes  doth  from  thy  mouth  dystyll

Thy  hole  delyte  in  lust  and  rybawdry

But  as  for  hym  that  wyll  to  me  aply

I  shall  by  vertue  brynge  hym  to  rightwysnes

And  than  to  glory  by  wysdome  and  ryches

I  shewe  my  seruauntis  true  iustyce  and  pyte
In  the  hye  Heuen  sure  fixyd  is  my  mynde
My  hous  is  kept  ay  clene  by  chastyte
My  god  is  hye :  and  who  that  wyll  hym  fynde
For  to  be  lyght :  his  lust  must  leue  behynde
And  so  by  labour,  and  parfyte  dilygence
He  may  attayne  that  place  of  excellence

In  vertue,  is  besy,  and  dylygent  labour

For  no  good  comys  of  slouthfuU  ydelnes

But  swet  and  payne,  at  ende  shall  fynde  pleasour

And  parfyte  rest :  is  ende  of  besynes

And  he  that  walkes  the  way  of  holynes

And  lyues  in  worshyp,  ought  to  be  glad  and  fayne

This  quyet  rest  by  my  helpe  to  obtayne


3^4


The  an s  were  of  vertew


So  whether  thou  lust  to  wyn  name  of  honour

By  wyt,  or  warre  :  by  wysdome  or  by  myght

Or  in  a  Cyte  for  to  be  councellour

Or  els  by  lawe  to  gyue  eche  man  his  right

Let  me  vertue  alway  be  in  thy  syght

Than  shalt  thou  by  my  mean,  the  way  prouyde

In  euery  case  howe,  thou  mayst  best  the  gyde

Who  that  for  loue  of  vertue  speciall

Endureth  labour,  swet,  payne  and  besynes

The  endles  pleasour  of  ioy  celestyall

Shall  be  rewarde  to  hym  for  his  hardnes

Vertue  alone  is  of  suche  worthynes

That  gyde  it  ought  and,  gouerne  euery  thynge

And  gode  gyftis,  parte,  as  is  to  it  lykynge

But  thou  fals  lust  and  pleasour  corporall
All  men  disceyuest  that  vnto  the  inclyne
Thou  first  art  swete,  at  last  more  soure  than  gall
Thou  many  thousandes  hast  brought  vnto  ruyne
And  namely  suche  as  of  most  noble  lyne
Discendyd  ar  :  for  gettynge  theyr  degre
Defyle  theyr  byrth  :  and  auncyent  name  by  the

Thou  art  so  fyers  :  so  hasty  and  cruell
That  no  wylde  beste :  no  :  nat  the  mighty  here
Can  haue  respyte  within  his  den  to  dwell
Thy  cruell  clawes  so  fyersly  doth  him  tere
That  on  his  skyn  remayned  skant  a  here
Thou  sholdest  his  skyn  I  tiowe  rent  of  also
Ne  had  the  Lyon  :  him  socoured  in  his  wo


agenst  this  obiection  of  voluptuosyte.


Therfore  ye  men  (whyle  ye  haue  tyme  and  space)

Expell  vayne  lust  and  pleasour  corporall

Whiche  dedely  yll  is  barayne  of  all  grace

And  rote  or  sparcle  to  kyndell  synnes  all

Therfore  to  Christ  for  grace  se  that  ye  call

Wherby  ye  may  all  carnall  lust  subdue

And  plant  in  your  myndes  goodnes  and  vertue

So  shall  your  hertis  sauour  the  true  doctryne

And  blessyd  fayth  of  Christ  our  sauyour

Whiche  fayth  shall  brynge  you  to  the  syght  dyuyne

Of  goddes  presence,  and  celestyall  pleasour

But  worldly  welth,  as  riches  and  honour

Shall  in  this  lyfe  be  part  of  your  rewarde

Where  as  vayne  lust  endyth  in  paynes  harde


VOL.  u.


The  vnyuersall  shyp  and  generall  Barke
or  barge

Wherin  they  rowe  :  that  yet  hath  had  no
charge.


Within  my  shyp  ar  folys  innumerable

My  shyppys  dyuers  forgyd  here  before

With  furious  Folys,  in  foly  perdurable

But  nat  the  les  yet  here  I  forge  more

And  if  perchaunce  some  one  hath  had  no  ore

Nor  place  before  :  condigne  for  his  degre

In  this  great  Carake  nowe  shall  he  rowe  with  me


'The  viiyiiersall  shyp.  307


Here  shall  Jacke,  charde,  my  brother  Robyn  hyll
With  Myllers  and  bakers  that  weyght  and  mesure  hate
All  stelynge  taylers  :  as  Soper :  and  Manshyll
Receyue  theyr  rowme :  bycause  they  come  to  late
The  foulest  place  is  mete  for  theyr  estate
A  rowme  for  rascoldes  hard  by  the  pompe  shall  be
That  stynkynge  placis  and  knaues  may  agre

Come  to  Companyons :  ren  :  tyme  it  is  to  rowe

Our  Carake  fletis :  the  se  is  large  and  wyde

And  depe  Inough  :  a  pleasaunt  wynde  doth  blowe

Prolonge  no  tyme,  our  Carake  doth  you  byde

Our  felawes  tary  for  you  on  euery  syde

Hast  hyther  I  say  ye  folys  naturall

Howe  oft  shall  I  you  vnto  my  Nauy  call

Ye  haue  one  confort  ye  shall  nat  be  alone
Your  company  almoste  is  infynyte
For  nowe  alyue  ar  men  but  fewe  or  none
That  of  my  shyp  can  red  hym  selfe  out  quyte
A  fole  in  felawes,  hath  pleasour  and  delyte
Here  can  none  want,  for  our  proclamacion
Extendyth  farre  :  and  to  many  a  straunge  nacyon

But  to  be  playne,  and  speke  as  intende
All  men  ar  folys  that  can  nat  them  selfe  gyde
Thus  all  the  worlde  may  I  well  comprehende
Except  a  fewe  :  whome  I  may  set  a  syde
All  hole  Asia ;  though  it  be  longe  and  wyde
And  farre  from  vs,  and  all  nat  of  our  lawe
Yet  ar  they  redy  our  sayles  vp  to  drawe


308  The  vnyiiersall  shyp


From  the  farre  Costis  and  hote  of  Lybia

The  Mawryans  and  eke  the  men  of  ynde

And  all  the  dwellers  almost  of  Africa

The  Lumbarde  nacion  vntrue  of  dede  and  mynde

All  these  within  our  shyp  wyll  placis  fynde

So  may  the  dwellers  of  Cecyle  and  almayne

Of  Italy  Fraunce,  Flaunders,  Grece,  and  Spayne

The  Pycardes,  Normans  and  Neapolytayns
Come  in  great  clusters,  our  Nauy  to  augment  ^
So  doth  Venycians,  Gascowns  and  Romayns
And  lytell  Brytayne  is  all  of  lyke  assent
And  also  the  great  by  ryches  excellent
Whiche  nowe  is  callyd  plentyfuU  in  Englonde
Comyth  to  our  shyp,  with  Wales,  and  Scotlande

The  out  yles  all  dyspersyd  here  and  there
In  the  mayne  se  :  also  come  in  one  bonde
So  many  comys  that  certaynly  I  fere
Within  my  shyp  they  all  can  nat  well  stonde
Hyther  comys  also  the  dwellers  of  Irelonde
Denys  and  Mawrys,  Patryke,  and  Mackmure
In  mantels  preckyd,  for  lacke  of  precious  furre

In  Englonde  is  no  Cyte,  nor  shyre  towne
Boroughe  ne  vyllage  howe  pore  so  euer  it  be
Nor  noble  Palays  of  suche  a  great  renowne
But  some  maryners  sende  must  they  vnto  come
But  to  be  shorte  and  fle  prolixyte
There  is  no  Nacyon,  ne  regyon  vnder  sonne
But  all  or  some,  to  this  my  shyp  doth  ronne


for  those  that  yet  hath  had  no  charge.  309


Both  yonge  and  olde,  pore  man,  and  estate
The  folysshe  moder :  hir  doughter  by  hir  syde
Ren  to  our  Nauy  ferynge  to  come  to  late
No  maner  of  degre  is  in  the  worlde  wyde
But  that  for  all  theyr  statelynes  and  pryde
As  many  as  from  the  way  of  wysdome  tryp
Shall  haue  a  rowme  and  place  within  my  shyp

My  folysshe  felawes  therfore  I  you  exort

Hast  to  our  Nauy,  for  tyme  it  is  to  rowe

Nowe  must  we  leue  eche  sympyll  hauen  and  porte

And  sayle  to  that  londe  where  folys  abounde  and  flowe

For  whether  we  aryue,  at  London  or  Brystowe

Or  any  other  Hauen  within  this  our  londe

We  folys  ynowe,  shall  fynde  alway  at  hande

No  speciall  place  wyll  I  chose  for  our  rode

But  at  auenture :  where  the  wynde  shall  vs  dryue

But  whyle  we  wretchys,  thus  sayle  and  rowe  abrode

On  this  depe  se,  our  foly  doth  depryue

Our  soule  from  helth  :  and  lond  of  men  alyue

So  that  in  the  wawes  of  this  tempestous  se

Oftyme  we  lyue,  in  doutfull  ieopardye

Our  frayle  bodyes  wandreth  in  care  and  payne

And  lyke  to  botes  trowbled  with  tempest  sore

From  rocke  to  rocke  cast  in  this  se  mundayne

Before  our  iyen  beholde  we  euer  more

The  deth  of  them  that  passed  ar  before

Alas  mysfortune  vs  causeth  oft  to  rue

Whan  to  vayne  thoughtis  our  bodyes  we  subdue


310  The  vnyuersall  shyp


By  dyuers  chauncis  ren  we  to  ieopardy
And  of  our  lyfe,  god  wot  we  ar  vnsure
Oft  of  our  chauncis  we  seke  no  remedy
But  wander  forth  :  our  reason  inoche  obscure
Tempest  we  suffer  :  sore  fallys  we  indure
And  to  our  iournay,  so  symple  hede  we  take
That  in  the  se,  and  Rockis  our  shyppis  brake

A  farre  of  Scylhi :  the  rorynge  we  may  here
Yet  by  our  foly,  our  myndes  ar  so  cruell
That  to  the  peryls  (alas)  we  drawe  vs  nere
And  some  so  wander  without  gyde  or  counsell
That  in  the  hourlynge  pyttis  of  ferefull  hell
Theyr  shyppis  brake,  and  there  alway  remayne
Within  that  gulf,  in  endles  wo  and  payne

We  wander  in  more  dout  than  mortall  man  can  thynke

And  oft  by  our  foly,  and  wylfull  neglygence

Our  shyp  is  in  great  peryll  for  to  synke

So  sore  ar  we  ouercharged  with  offence

We  se  the  daunger  before  our  owne  presence

Of  straytis  rockis,  and  bankis  of  sonde  full  hye

Yet  we  procede  to  wylfull  ieopardye

We  dyuers  Monsters  within  the  se  beholde
Redy  to  abuse  or  to  deuour  mankynde
As  Dolphyns,  whallys,  and  wonders  manyfolde
And  oft  the  Marmaydes  songe  dullyth  our  mynde
That  to  all  goodnes  we  ar  made  dull  and  blynde
The  wolues  of  these  oft  do  vs  moche  care
Yet  we  of  them  can  neuer  well  beware


for  those  that  yet  hath  had  no  charge.  3  i  i


We  se  Polyphemus  that  foule  and  great  Geant
In  his  dredefull  den,  mankynde  also  to  dere
Whome  great  vlixes  both  bolde  and  valyant
Myght  for  his  lokes  drede  :  and  quake  for  fere
A  thousande  Monstres  ar  mo,  mankynde  to  tere
And  to  deuour,  and  brynge  vnto  hell  pyt
Yet  we  (alas)  our  selfe  to  them  submyt

About  we  wander  in  tempest  and  tourment
What  place  is  sure,  where  Foles  may  remayne
And  fyx  theyr  dwellynge  sure  and  parmanent
None  certaynly  :  The  cause  therof  is  playne
We  wander  in  the  se,  for  pleasour  bydynge  payne
And  though  the  hauen  of  helth  be  in  our  syght
Alas  we  fle  from  it  with  all  our  myght

Alas,  therfore  dayly  we  must  indure
Great  payne  and  wo  :  and  well  we  it  deserue
For  he  that  of  rest  (whan  he  lysl)  may  be  sure
And  wyll  none  haue  :  he  worthy  is  to  sterue
We  loue  no  wysdome :  ne  tende  nat  to  obserue
Hir  lore,  and  lawes :  ne  way  of  ryghtwysnes
But  arme  our  selfe  with  foly  and  falsnes

Alas,  alas  the  vyle  and  vayne  goddes

Of  folysshnes :  and  worldly  vanyte

Hath  made  vs  drynke :  so  of  hir  cup  doutles

That  all  our  wyttes  and  reasons  blyndyd  be

A  wysdome  wysedome  great  pyte  it  is  to  se

Howe  fewe  to  thy  preceptis  nowe  inclyne

Thy  name  decayes :  and  fallys  to  ruyne


312


The  vnyuersall  shyp.


Alas  dere  bretherne,  alas  thou  wretchyd  man

O  frowarde  stocke  to  thy  creatour  vnkynde

Expell  thy  foly :  aply  all  that  thou  can

To  folowe  wysdome  with  all  thy  myght  and  mynde

What  ioy  hast  thou  to  wander  in  the  wynde

In  vyce  and  errour,  without  good  wyll  to  stent

Cesse  man  :  and  seke  the :  place  ay  permanent

Set  foly :  errour  (and  vanyte  asyde)
Fie  from  the  wayes :  of  suche  as  sue  offence
Labour  to  obtayne  a  place :  ay  to  abyde
Without  ende  before  goddes  hye  presence
Lyst  that  hell  monsters  by  furyous  violence
Swalowe  vp  thy  soule  to  payne  from  ioy  and  blys
Whyle  in  this  lyfe  thou  errest  or  goest  amys


The  vnyuersall  shyp  of  crafty  men,
or  laborers.


3  1 4  The  vnyiiersall  shyp  of


A  company  gathryd  togyther  in  a  rout
Of  folysshe  men,  and  blynde  by  ignoraunce
Rowe  nowe  in  botis  my  shyppis  all  about
Suche  men  ar  they  that  get  theyr  sustenaunce
With  labour  of  hande,  and  lewde  of  gouernaunce
But  suche  as  labour  truly  for  theyr  fode
I  wyll  nat  blame,  but  them  repute  as  gode

Haste  hyther  laborers :  our  sayles  ar  a  loft

Our  shyp  fleys  swyftly  by  myght  of  ore

But  first  of  all  ye  folys  that  labour  soft

And  lese  the  tyme,  makynge  your  maysters  pore

In  this  shyp  present  shall  ye  be  set  afore

And  than  suche  as  spende  theyr  wage  in  dronkenes

For  dronken  workmen  come  neuer  to  ryches

But  why  these  Folys  vnto  my  shyp  I  call

For  to  be  short  this  is  the  reason  why

For  as  the  state  of  all  men  mortall

And  eche  other  thynge  chaungyth  contynually

Without  condicion,  stable  :  certaynly

So  is  the  state  of  labourers,  disceyuable

And  moche  vnsure,  and  also  chaungeable

The  speciall  vyce  comon  amonge  them  all
Is  that  eche  seruaunt  fayne  wolde  a  mayster  be
Yet  in  his  craft  he  knoweth  nought  atall
But  is  a  Fole  therin  :  and  so  shall  dye
And  many  worke  men  :  as  we  may  dayly  se
Wandreth  as  folys :  in  slouth  and  ydelnes
Hurtynge  theyr  wages  by  theyr  folysshnes


crafty  men  or  laborers.


One  laboureth  fast  for  lytell  or  for  nought

His  felawe  to  put  to  los  or  hurte  therby

Yet  he  hym  selfe  to  pouertye  is  brought

By  his  yll  wyll,  his  hatred  and  enuy

And  for  that  this  vyce  his  herte  contynually

Vexyth  and  troubleth,  for  nought  he  ofFreth  forth

That  worke  or  thynge  that  is  great  treasour  worth

Yet  this  foule  abuse  and  malyce  enuyous
Of  laborynge  men  :  oft  tyme  doth  them  oppres
With  pouertye,  to  all  mankynde  odyous
If  one  sell  for  lytell  another  sellys  for  les
Tyll  both  be  opprest  with  pouertees  hardnes
Echone  despyseth  his  pryuate  auauntage
To  do  another  displeasour  and  damage

Some  make  theyr  ware  iniust  and  disceyuable
Sellynge  it  forth  for  small  and  lytell  pryce
The  trouth  appereth  playne  and  verytable
For  in  gode  ware  the  pryse  doth  ay  aryse
But  contrary  if  thou  the  trouth  aduyse
Where  a  great  thynge  for  lytell  pryce  is  bought
It  sygnyfyeth  that  it  is  stolen,  or  nought

All  suche  as  ceueyt  the  byers  to  begyle

With  flaterynge  wordes  fals  and  dysceyuable

Disceyuynge  other,  disceyue  them  selfe  the  whyle

And  all  other  ar  greatly  reprouable

Whiche  make  theyr  warke  nat  true  and  profitable

But  counterfayte  and  pleasaunt  to  the  iye

And  nought  in  profe :  men  to  abuse  therby


3  I  6 The  vny  tiers  all  shyp  of  crafty  men.


The  pryse  of  eche  ware  decayeth  euery  day

And  yet  the  ware  is  skantly  worth  the  pryse

Amonge  all  marchauntis,  skant  and  vneth  we  may

Fynde  one  or  two  that  trouth  do  ercyse

But  all  ar  blyndyd  so  by  couetyse

That  nought  they  force  of  fals  disceytfulnes

So  that  they,  may  therby  obtayne  riches

Thus  so  great  chaungis :  and  mutablyte  '

Styreth  the  hertis  of  labourynge  men  to  yre  •

That  the  most  part  abyde  in  pouertye

And  to  be  short,  echone  of  them  conspyre

Agaynst  other  by.  malyce,  hote  as  fyre

In  all  theyr  hertis  none,  other  thynge  doth  rayne

Saue  enuy  malyce,  hatered  and  disdayne  :

"What  nede  is  it  in  wordes  to  be  large '  ■ " '  -  •

Or  all  the  vyce  of  chrafty  men  to  wryte

The  payne  were  longe,  and  great  sholde  be  the  charge

And  to  the  same  I  haue  to  small  respyte

For  if  that  any  haue  pleasour  and  delyte

In  this  our  tyme  to  be  constant  and  wyse

The  comontye  shall  hym  hate  and  despyse  .■  '

Therfore  I  leue  them  in  theyr  folysshnes  :

Yet  praynge  god  that  they  may  ones  amende  .  .

And  so  increas  in  trouth  and  rightwysnes

That  I  may  haue  cause  theyr  goodnes  to  commende

Who  iustly  lyueth  iustly  also  shall  ende

And  who  that  in  his  craft  is  iust  and  true

Shall  proue  in  ryches,  and  prospere  in  vertue


Of  Folys  that  ar  ouer  worldly.


Oft  whyle  man  labours  for  to  ascende

By  fortune  frayle  alway  forwarde

And  whyle  alway  he  doth  intende

For  his  sore  labour  to  haue  rewarde

Than  is  his  fortune  so  sharpe  and  harde

To  leue  his  fote,  at  his  moste  nede

And  let  hym  slyp  in  mortall  fere  and  drede


3  I  8 Of  Folys  that  ar  oner  worldly.


Who  that  lenyth  on  braunchys  frayle

Or  taketh  his  holde  by  leuys  lyght

Can  fynde  therby  but  small  auayle

But  to  the  grounde  descende  downe  right

And  though  the  braunches  be  stronge  and  wyght

Whan  thou  begynnest  to  slyp  or  slyde

In  thy  degre  harde  is  to  abyde

And  thoughe  the  braunches  be  hole  and  sounde

And  be  to  wayke  the  to  sustayne

Yet  shalt  thou  downe  come  to  the  grounde

So  if  a  man  take  care  and  payne

To  lyue  in  vertue,  and  good  souerayne

Yet  all  this  shall  be  nought  set  by

But  if  they  be  gyded  craftely

The  strongest  braunche  or  boughe  shall  fayle
Without  good  wysdorae  if  man  ascende
But  vnto  the  top  if  thou  preuayle
Yet  ought  thou  to  thy  fete  intende
Eche  thynge  is  prouyd  at  the  ende
Therfore  man  ought  hym  euen  to  here
In  hyest  rowmes  is  greattest  fere

In  clymmynge  vp  man  hath  great  payne
But  whan  he  at  the  hyest  is
Hauynge  great  hope  there  to  remayne
In  welth  and  pleasour  ioy  and  blys
Yet  of  the  frute  small  part  is  his
For  by  one  blast  of  wynde  sodayne
In  one  instant  he  fallys  agayne


Of  Folys  that  ar  ouer  worldly.  319


If  one  be  in  a  rowme  a  hye

Men  that  ar  lowe  seme  to  hym  small

But  to  say  trouth  and  veryte

Yet  may  theyr  stature  be  egall

In  lyke  wyse  though  a  man  royall

Despyse  them  lyuynge  in  pouerte

Of  one  metall  yet  both  they  be

This  worlde  all  hole  goeth  vp  and  downe
It  ebbes  and  flowes  lyke  to  the  se
Wexynge  and  waynynge  lyke  the  mone
Nowe  in  welthe  and  in  prosperyte
Eft  in  aduers  and  frowarde  pouerte
But  that  man  folowes  hye  wysdome
Whiche  takys  all  thynges  lyke  as  they  come

Thoughe  some  in  treasour  and  welth  abounde
Thynkynge  them  self  wyse  men  alone
Yet  whan  that  they  ar  brought  to  grounde
They  and  the  pore :  is  all  but  one
And  thoughe  thou  suerly  marke  the  bone
Of  begger,  and  hym,  that  kynge  hath  bene
Small  difference  shalt  thou  fynde  bytwene

After  the  day  cometh  the  nyght
So  after  pleasour  oft  comys  payne
He  is  in  prudence,  but  porely  pyght
That  can  nat  both  in  lyke  sustayne
But  if  1  shall  be  true  and  playne
No  erthly  thynge  makes  more  debate
Than  a  vyle  chorle  come  to  a  state


320 Of  Folys  that  ar  oner  worldly.


Whan  suche  a  vilayne  rude  of  his  mynde

A  hye  is  set  on  a  myghty  tre

To  gentyll  blode  can  he  nat  be  kynde

Yet  he  forgettis  his  owne  degre

But  thoughe  the  thycke  leuys  let  none  se

Howe  moche  myschefe  suche  go  about

Yet  at  the  last  it  wyll  come  out

If  dethys  ax  the  tre  downe  throwe  -
And  if  theyr  riches  as  leuys  lyght
Away  fro  them  on  grounde  do  flowe
Than  all  theyr  falshode  is  out  in  syght
But  whyle  the  tre  may  stande  vp  right
The  leuys  of  ryches  hangynge  about
To  lorellys  often  the  lorde  moste  lowt  ^

The  noble  fawcons  ar  oft  opprest
The  Egle  blyndyd,  and  byrdes  small
Ar  spoyled  and  dryuen  from  theyr  nest
Whan  the  gredy  kyte  wyll  rule  all  '
But  if  the  kyte  than  after  fall
By  aduers  fortune  :  or  his  iniquyte
The  fawcons  may  well  haue  ioy  to  se

Thus  well  is  hym  that  can  attende
To  take  his  holde  by  braunchys  stronge
Whan  he  purposeth  vp  to  ascende
And  in  the  top  to  byde  there  longe
Without  wysdome  it  shall  be  wronge
For  who  that  clymmes  by  stately  pryde
For  greuous  wyndes  can  nat  abyde


Of  Folys  that  ar  oner  worldly, 3  2  i


Therfore  man  who  so  euer  thou  be
That  hast  mynde  and  concupyscence
To  brynge  the  into  hye  degre
Or  in  the  seruyce  of  kynge  or  prynce
If  thou  be  brought  to  excellence
Kepe  petye  styll  before  thy  iyen
Vse  iustyce,  mekenes,  and  prudence
Remembrynge  euer  what  thou  hast  ben

To  get  loue  do  thy  dylygence

And  if  thou  wylt  haue  amyte

To  auncient  blode,  do  reuerence

Thoughe  it  be  but  of  lowe  degre

Prouyde  the  in  prosperite

For  mysfortune  :  for  it  is  seae

That  fortune  hath  no  certaynte

So  thynke  thou  euer  what  thou  hast  bene

Serue  god  thy  maker  aboue  all  thynge
And  next  that  with  thy  herte  and  mynde
Be  true  and  loyall  vnto  thy  kynge
And  to  his  subiectis  iust  and  kynde
Let  auaryce  by  no  way  the  blynde
Than  myght  thou  fall  or  thou  wolde  wene
So  that  no  faut  in  the  men  fynde
Care  nat  to  be  as  thou  hast  bene


VOL.  11.


X


A  brefe  addicion  of  the  syngularyte  of
some  newe  Folys.


Here  maketh  myne  Autour  a  specyall  mencion

Of  ypocrytis  nat  parfyte  of  byleue

And  suche  as  abuseth  theyr  relygyon

But  I  shall  nat  so  sharply  them  repreue

I  am  full  lothe  relygious  men  to  greue

Or  discontent :  for  if  I  so  do  wolde

A  myghty  volume  coude  nat  theyr  vyces  holde


Of  the  syngidaryte  of  some  newe  Folys.  32^

I  leue  theyr  pryde :  I  leue  theyr  couetyse
I  woU  nat  touche  theyr  malyce  nor  enuy
Nor  them  that  Venus  toyes  exercyse
I  woll  nat  blame,  nor  touche  openly
It  were  but  foly,  syth  is  no  remedy
But  if  I  sholde  vpon  me  take  the  payne
A  newe  labour  I  sholde  begynne  agayne

I  them  nat  touche  that  cunnynge  men  disdayne

There  were  none  ende  in  blamynge  all  the  folys

The  maners,  rude,  vngoodly,  and  vylayne

And  assys  erys  clokyd  vnder  cowlys

Knowynge  no  thynge,  contemnynge  yet  the  scolys

All  these  to  touche  and  sondry  vyces  mo

It  were  to  sore  a  charge  and  payne  to  do

I  wyll  nat  say  that  they  vse  any  syn
Yet  oft,  forsoth  they  folowe  nat  the  way
Of  the  relygyon  that  they  haue  entred  in
Thoughe  they  the  name  and,  habyte  nat  denay
Yet  of  theyr  lyfe  full  harde  it  is  to  say
But  often  at  ende  it  proueth  euydent
That  vnder  floures  lurketh  the  serpent

The  wolfe  or  Foxe  is  hyd  within  the  skyn
Of  the  symple  shepe  pore  and  innocent
Mekenes  without  :  but  pryde  is  hyd  within
The  wordes  fayre  :  but  fals  is  theyr  intent
No  sort  by  falshode,  or  wayes  fraudelent
May  soner  disceyue  good  folke  by  any  way
Than  the  wyckyd  sort  of  ypocrytis  may


3^4


A  hrefe  addicion


Hange  vp  the  scapler :  the  amys  cowle  and  frocke
Or  other  habyte  of  eche  relygyon
Vpon  a  tre  clene  dede,  or  rottyn  stocke
Suche  ar  those  folys  that  haue  professyon
Leuynge  theyr  right  rule  in  eche  condicion
They  here  the  habyte  the  vesture  or  the  wede
And  eke  the  name,  without  the  thynge  in  dede

And  if  that  one  lyue  well  and  vertuously
In  way  of  grace  :  lyke  as  he  ought  to  go
The  remanent  assayle  hym  with  enuy
And  hym  oppres  with  greuous  payne  and  wo
Vntyll  he  folowe  lyke  as  the  other  do
And  leue  his  way  of  godly  ryghtwysnes
Folowynge  theyr  lyfe  full  of  all  viciousnes

The  gode  ar  good  and  worthy  reuerence

And  whan  the  Shepherde  is  ware  and  dylygent

Rulynge  hym  selfe  by  vertue  and  prudence

Than  grace  and  goodnes  soner  shall  augment

Amonge  the  flocke  by  example  euydent

But  if  the  Shepeherde  by  foly  hurte  his  name

Moste  comonly  the  flocke  shall  do  the  same

Whan  that  the  hede  hath  no  diseas  nor  payne
Than  all  the  membres  greatly  the  sounder  be
But  if  the  hede  be  seke  or  sore  certayne
Than  ouer  the  body  goeth  that  infyrmyte
But  to  be  playne  we  dayly  here  and  se
That  the  comontye,  in  theyr  behauour
Ar  suche  as  is  theyr  lorde  and  gouernour


of  the  syngidaryte  of  some  newe  Folys.  325

Alas  what  lewde  relygion  do  they  take

Or  of  what  sort  is  theyr  professyon

That  of  theyr  wombes  vyle  theyr  goddes  make

As  wytles  bestis,  voyde  of  discressyoii

Thus  it  appereth  that  theyr  ingressyon  -

Into  relygion  is  more  for  welth  and  eas

Than  by  harde  penaunce,  our  sauyour  to  pleas

Thoughe  men  relygious  be  countyd  in  the  lawe
As  dede  and  gone  out  of  this  lyfe  actyue
That  saynge  surely  is  scantly  worth  a  strawe
For  suche  dedys  oft  tyraes  they  contryue
That  it  appereth  playne  that  they  ar  alyue
But  as  for  that  :  a  part  it  shall  be  layde
At  eche  season  :  trouth  ought  nat  to  be  sayde

A  heuenly  lyfe  is  to  be  monke  or  frere
Yet  is  it  nat  ynoughe  to  bere  the  name
Suche  must  they  be  in  lyfe  as  they  apere
In  outwarde  habyte :  accordynge  to  the  same
Than  sholde  none  haue  occasion  them  to  blame
For  certaynly  no  vertuous  man  there  is
That  wyll  hym  blame  that  hath  nat  done  amys

For  he  that  is  of  god  without  all  dout
Wyll  be  full  redy  and  besy  nyght  and  day
The  workes  of  god  almyght  to  go  about
The  deuyllys  seruaunt  kepyth  another  way
In  lust  and  pleasour  walkynge  whyle  he  may
Seruynge  his  mayster :  and  yet  in  euery  place
He  fayneth  vertue  outwarde  in  his  face


326


A  brefe  addicion


Of  suche  a  vyle  and  wretchyd  ypocryte
And  of  his  maners  playnly  as  they  be
At  this  conclusion  brefly  shall  I  wryte
As  it  is  founde  in  good  auctoryte
Leuynge  ray  auctour  for  his  prolyxite
And  to  playne  speche,  and  eke  to  lyberall
For  to  be  drawen  in  langage  maternall

By  these  poyntis  the  whiche  I  shall  expres
Those  ypocrytis  shall  openly  apere
Whiche  outwarde  fayne  vertue  and  holynes
In  worde  and  dede  :  where  men  may  se  or  here
But  whan  that  they  haue  brought  them  selfe  arere
And  out  of  syght,  and  others  audyence
They  ar  moche  wors  than,  other  in  offence

They  outwarde  in  face  present  humylyte

As  if  they  were  holy  and  parfyte  of  lyuynge

Yet  wolde  they  nat  of  men  despysyd  be

They  fayne  them  pore :  yet  wyll  they  lacke  no  thynge

Touchynge  theyr  habyte,  vesture  or  clothynge

They  wyll  the  same  in  costely  maner  dresse

Without  all  care  thought,  trouble  or  besynesse

They  loke  to  be  fed,  well  and  delycyously

Without  labour,  therin  is  no  delyte  '  -

Some  men  they  flater,  but  other  they  enuy

And  other  some,  they  cruelly  bacbyte

Some  men  to  malyce,  by  falshode  they  excyte

As  dogges  they  byte  some  in  playne  audyence

For  synne :  thoughe  they  commyt  the  same  offence


of  the  syngiilaryte  of  some  7iewe  Folys.  327


As  Foxis  full  of  falshode  and  of  gyle

By  sotelte  they  all  theyr  workes  gyde

They  boldly,  other  for  statelynes  reuyle

Yet  as  proude  Lyons,  ar  they  accloyd  with  pryde

And  whyle  that  they  in  company  abyde

They  shewe  them  outwarde  as  Lambes  innocent

Lyke  rauysshynge  wolues  yet  ar  they  of  intent

They  wyll  be  luges  without  auctoryte
And  wytnesses  without  knowlege,  or  syght
They  wyll  be  Doctours  of  passynge  grauyte
Without  processe  in  stody  day,  or  nyght
And  to  be  short,  by  lugement  vnright
They  oft  accuse  good  men,  them  to  oppres
Theyr  selfe  yet  bare  of  vertue  and  goodnes

These  ar  the  tokyns  and  sygnes  euydent
Whiche  in  ypocrytis  men  may  note  and  se
Also  the  religyous  sholde  be  obedyent
And  euer  perseuer  in  fayre  humylyte
Beynge  content  with  wylfull  pouerte
Enclynynge  euer  with  all  his  dilygence
His  chasiyte,  to  kepe  by  abstynence

But  nowe  hath  entred  into  relygyon
In  stede  of  mekenes  and  obedyence
Pryde  and  disdayne,  and  fals  rebellyon
Yll  wyll,  enuy,  and  other  lyke  offence
Wylfull  pouertye,  expellyd  haue  they  thence
And  all  ar  gyuen  vnto  worldly  ryches
Whiche  they  out  wast  about  vnthryftynes


328


A  brefe  addicion


But  of  theyr  chastyte  for  to  be  playne

It  for  to  kepe  is  great  diffyculte

Where  glotony  and  dronkenes  doth  rayne

But  where  as  is  abstynence,  and  scarsyte

It  may  be  kept,  and  best  contynued  be

The  flesshe  agaynst  the  reason  doth  rebell

But  well  is  hym  that  the  ardent  hete  may  quell

But  these  wretchys  haue  moche  gretter  hede
Theyr  wombe  to  fede  tyll  they  be  full  as  swyne
As  for  theyr  soule  they  labour  nat  to  fede
With  godly  wordes  or  holsome  discyplyne
The  greattest  part  to  glotony  inclyne
Whiche  is  the  rote  of  Venus  insolence
Nowe  luge  ye  where  is  theyr  contynence

By  flatery  fayre  I  loke  to  haue  no  mede
Theyr  lyfe  is  godly  that  kepe  theyr  order  true
And  of  theyr  right  professyon  taketh  hede
Passynge  theyr  lyfe  in  goodnes  and  vertue
And  that  the  fendes  workes  wyll  subdue
And  eke  the  Fende,  fader  of  all  iniquyte
By  sobernes  subduynge  theyr  sensualyte

Here  purpose  I  no  farther  to  procede

Let  euery  man  chose  for  hym  selfe  a  place

As  he  shall  in  this  boke  ouerse  or  rede

For  hym  moste  mete  :  man  knoweth  best  his  case

And  here  shall  I  by  goddes  helpe  and  grace

Drawe  all  my  Nauy,  to  hauyns  for  to  rest

For  fere  of  wynter  stormes  and  tempest


of  the  syngularyte  of  some  newe  Folys.  ^2ij

Wysdome  hath  gyuen  me  this  commaundement
My  wyt  is  wery  :  my  hande  and  hede  also
Wherfbre  I  gladly  with  all  my  herte  assent
And  lepe  a  horde,  amonge  the  other  mo
But  in  my  iournay  :  if  that  I  haue  mysgo
By  bytynge  wordes  or  scarsnes  of  scyence
1  yelde  me  vnto  men  of  more  prudence

It  is  no  meruayle  (the  trouth  playnly  to  say)
Syth  I  a  mayster  without  experyence
Of  worldly  thynges,  haue  erred  from  the  way
By  ignoraunce,  or  slouthfull  neglygence
Let  none  be  wroth  for  blamynge  his  offence
For  if  his  lyfe  fro  synne  be  pure  and  clere
No  maner  hurt  is  sayde  agaynst  hym  here

Within  a  myrrour,  if  thou  beholde  thy  chere
Or  shap  of  face  :  if  thy  colour  be  pure
Within  the  myrrour  to  the  it  shall  apere
But  if  that  thou  be  foule  of  thy  fygure
The  glas  shall  shewe  the  same  I  the  insure
Yet  blame  thou  nat  the  myrrour  for  the  same
But  thy  owne  shap  thou  ought  rebuke  and  blame

The  myrrour  showys  eche  man  lyke  as  they  be

So  doth  my  boke,  for  who  that  is  in  syn

Shall  of  his  lyfe,  the  fygure  in  it  se

If  he  with  good  aduertence  loke  therin

But  certaynly  his  reason  is  but  thyn

For  his  yll  lyfe  if  he  my  boke  despyse

For  them  I  laude  that  vertue  exercyse


33°


A  brefe  add'ic  'ion


Let  nat  the  redar  be  discontent  with  this

Nor  any  blame  agayne  me  to  obiect

Thoughe  that  some  wordes  be  in  my  boke  amys

For  though  that  I  my  selfe  dyd  it  correct

Yet  with  some  fautis  I  knowe  it  is  infect

Part  by  my  owne  ouersyght  and  neglygence

And  part  by  the  prynters  nat  perfyte  in  science  ~  •

And  other  some  escaped  ar  and  past  '  .;

For  that  the  Prynters  in  theyr  besynes  -  '.; .  :

Do  all  theyr  workes  hedelynge,  and  in  hast  ?  .

Wherfore  if  that  the  redar  be  wytles

He  shall  it  scorne  anone  by  frowardnes

But  if  the  reder  wyse,  sad  and  discrete  be

He  shall  it  mende  :  laynge  no  faut  to  me  ;

It  is  ynoughe  if  my  labour  may  be  sene

Of  lernyd  men,  and  theyr  mynde  to  content

For  nought  is  pleasaunt  before  a  Folys  iyen

And  to  be  playne  it  was  nat  myne  intent  . . .  '

At  my  begynnynge  to  Folys  to  assent

Ne  pleas  theyr  myndes  by  sparynge  of  theyr  vyce

But  it  to  shewe :  and  that  in  playnest  wyse

Therfore  let  Folys  haue  theyr  wordes  vayne
Whiche  nought  can  do,  but  without  reason  chat
All  others  dedes,  by  lewde  tunge  to  distayne

And  if  theyr  belyes  be  full,  and  chekis  fat .

Let  Clerkes  speke,  and  they  haue  scorne  therat

They  knowe  no  thinge :  yet  wolde,  they  fayne  haue  prayse

And  theyr  owne  dedes  onely  doth  them  please


of  the  syngularyte  of  some  newe  Folys.  3  [


With  suche  Folys  I  ende  my  besynes
Whiche  all  thynge  blame,  and  vtterly  dispyse
Yet  all  theyr  lyfe  they  passe  in  ydylnes
Or  in  theyr  bely  fedynge  in  bestely  wyse
But  this  I  fynde,  that  no  man  can  deuyse
A  thynge  so  crafty,  so  good  and  excellent
Or  yet  so  sure  :  that  may  eche  man  content

What  warke  is  that :  that  may  eche  man  content

No  worldly  thynge :  forsoth  I  trowe  the  same

Thoughe  Virgyll  were  a  poet  excellent

Afore  all  other,  shynynge  in  lawde  and  fame

Yet  some  there  were  whiche  dyd  his  warkes  blame

Jerome  with  other  Doctours  certaynly

Cowde  nat  theyr  warkes  defende  well  from  enuy

Holde  me  excusyd  :  for  why  my  wyll  is  gode
Men  to  induce  vnto  vertue  and  goodnes
I  wryte  no  lest  ne  tale  of  Robyn  hode
Nor  sawe  no  sparcles  ne  sede  of  vyciousnes
Wyse  men  loue  vertue,  wylde  people  wantones
It  longeth  nat  to  my  scyence  nor  cunnynge
For  Phylyp  the  Sparowe  the  (Dirige)  to  synge.


[This  curious  astrological  diagram  to  the  year  1503,  is
prefixed  to  ten  supplementary  leaves  of  verses  (not  trans-
lated by  Barclay)  in  the  Latin  edition  of  the  Ship,  dated
August,  1497.  bears  this  title: — "  De  Corrupto  ordine
uiuendi  pereutibus. Inuentio  noua. Sebastiani  Brant."


The  verses  that  follow  are  chiefly  descriptive  of  the  great
empires  of  antiquity,  and  among  them  occur  twenty  lines
entitled  "Figura  celi,  m.ccccc.iii.,"  in  which  the  conjunc-
tion of  planets,  as  pictured  in  the  cut,  is  predicted  to  be  of
evil  omen  to  the  German  nation.]


A  conclusyon  of  this  Boke  with  a  Balade
of  the  translatour  in  the  honoure  of
the  blessyd  Virgyn  Mary,  moder  of  god.


Concliisyon.


O  Moder  mary  flour  of  all  womankynde

In  beauty  passynge  eche  erthly  creature

In  whome  the  Fende  no  thought  of  synne  coude  fynde

O  blessyd  moder  remaynynge  Mayden  pure

O  lemynge  lampe  in  lyght  passynge  nature

Moste  clere  Crystall  by  clene  virgynyte

O  holy  moder,  and  virgyne  most  demure

Direct  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

O  well  of  mercy  :  o  godly  graffe  of  grace

Bryght  as  the  mone,  and  porte  of  Paradyse

In  whome  Chryst  Jesu  elect  his  dwellynge  place

Chosen  as  the  son,  O  rose  passynge  all  pryce

Plantyd  in  Ann  without  consent  of  vyce

O  noble  fruyte  spronge  of  a  barayne  tre  ■

Syns  to  thy  son  :  thou  art  our  medyatryce

Direct  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

O  ceder  tre  growynge  in  Lybany
O  rod  of  Jesse,  and  spouse  of  Salomon
O  well  of  water  lastynge  eternally
O  gardayne,  closyd,  o  flees  of  gedeon
O  cyte  of  god,  and  sempiternall  trone
Of  god  elect  for  thy  humylyte
To  the  I  call :  o  Lady  here  my  mone
Direct  our  lyfe,  in  this  tempestous  se

O  Mary,  myrrour  clere  and  immaculate
O  tour  of  Dauyd :  with  Pynacles  without  pere
O  pleasaunt  olyue,  with  vertue  decorate
Pyller  of  fayth,  whyle  thou  wast  lyuynge  here


Conclusyon.


335


O  heuenly  starre,  of  gardyns  fountayne  clere
O  plesaunt  Lyiy  moste  goodly  in  beautye
Compalyd  rounde  with  the  sharpe  thorne  and  brere
Direct  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

Hayle  moder  of  mercy  :  Hayle  myrrour  of  mekenes
Hayle  Quene  of  blysse  :  hayle  sterre  celestyall
Hayle  hope  of  synners,  eternall  Emperes
Whiche  by  the  fruyt  of  thy  closet  virgynali
Mankynde  hast  wasshyd  from  synne  orygynall
Lowse  of  our  bondes,  and  make  vs  synners  fre
From  paynfull  pyt  and  dongeon  infernall
Gydynge  our  lyfe  in  this  tempestous  se

O  Queue  vs  red  out,  of  captyuyte

On  the  we  call,  in  the  our  confort  is

That  by  thy  prayer  to  the  hye  Trinyte

All  shall  be  pardonyd  that  we  haue  done  amys

Syns  thou  art  in  eternall  ioy  and  blys

Our  mediatryce  :  before  the  deyte

Our  hope  is  sure :  that  thou  wylt  neuer  mys

Our  lyfe  to  gyde  in  this  tempestous  se

O  glorious  Lady :  o  Quene  most  excellent
Howe  may  I  synner  thy  lawdes  comprehende
My  synfull  mouth  is  nat  sufFycyent
Worthy  nor  able  thy  goodnes  to  commende
My  wyt  ne  reason  coude  nat  therto  extende
Thoughe  euery  member  of  myne  were  tunges  thre
Yet  is  my  trust  that  thou  wylt  euer  intende
To  gyde  vs  synners  in  this  tempestous  se


33^


Conclusyon.


Syns  symiers  stray  here  in  this  se  mundayne
In  dyuers  synnes,  by  errour  and  fraylnes
By  thy  bryghtnes  reduce  our  way  agayne
Shewe  vs  thy  lyght  to  clere  our  thycke  derknes
And  to  subdue  the  Prynce  of  viciousnes
With  all  his  pompes,  his  pryde  and  vanyte
And  come  to  heuen  by  way  of  rightwysnes
Thou  gydynge  vs  in  this  tempestous  se.

O  blessyd  Moder,  set  hye  in  goddes  trone

In  ioy  and  blysse  surmountynge  mannes  mynde

Syns  by  thy  fruyte  we  saued  ar  echone

And  heuen  yatis  opened  to  mankynde

Graunt  that  we  dayly  by  the  may  socour  fynde

Of  soule  and  body  in  eche  aduersyte

Let  thy  lyght.  Lady,  the  Fende  subdue  and  blynde

And  gyde  vs  wretches  in  this  tempestous  se

Thou  art  the  Sterre,  blasynge  with  bemys  bryght
Aboue  these  worldes  wawes  so  violent
Our  synnes  darke  enclerynge  with  thy  lyght
Mannys  mediatryce  to  god  omnypotent
Wherfore  to  the,  o  Lady  I  present
This  symple  Boke  thoughe  it  vnworthy  be
But  pore  and  symple  and  moche  ineloquent
Rudely  composyd  in  this  tempestous  se

O  blessyd  virgyn,  O  resplendaunt  lanterne
Defende  my  Shyp  from  the  malyciousnes
Of  fals  enuy,  withsaue  it  to  gouerne
From  stroke  of  stotme  :  as  most  holy  patrones


Concliisyoii.


337


My  soule  and  body :  to  the  also  Empres
And  all  my  workes  I  submyt  besekynge  the
That  the  foule  Fende  me  neuer  may  oppres
Whyle  I  here  wander  in  this  tempestous  se

And  after  whan  my  soule  is  seperate
From  this  mortall  body,  and  clot  of  clay
With  thy  holy  presence,  o  moder  immaculate
From  me  expell  the  ougly  fende  away
O  moder  of  mercy  syns  thou  well  may
Thy  sonnes  presence  purchace  for  me
By  thy  ayde  and  socour  that  I  may  say
That  I  haue  escapyd  this  stormy  se.


Our  Shyp  here  leuyth  the  sees  brode

By  helpe  of  God  almyght  and  quyetly

At  Anker  we  lye  within  the  rode

But  who  that  lysteth  of  them  to  bye

In  Flete  strete  shall  them  fynde  truly

At  the  George  :  in  Richarde  Pynsonnes  place

Prynter  vnto  the  Kynges  noble  grace.

Deo  gratias.


VOL.  11.


Y


GLOSSARY.


C.  refers  to  Caivood's  edition.


A,  II.,  50,  13,  C  ,  are.

Abhyme,  I.,  135,  12,  abyss.

Abrode,  II.,  270,  24,  widely  dis-
tended.

Abusion,  I.,  212,  8,  abuse.

Abyde,  I.,  284,  2,  endured.

Abye,  II.,  37,  4,  expiate.

AcLOYEST,  II.,  51,  I,  overJoadeth.

AcLOYDE,  II.,  82,  23,  overloaded.

Adamond,  I.,  120,  27,  C.  adamant.

Aduyse,  II.,  29,  18,  see.

Aduertence,  II.,  92,  16,  attention.

Aduesyte,  II,,  133,  12.,  C.  aduer-
sitie.

Alayd,  II.,  289,  5,  mixed.

Alestake,  I.,  305,  14,  a  stake  set
up  before  an  alehouse  as  a  sign.

All  TO, I., 288,  9;  II., 139,  15;  II.,
139,  17  ;  II.,  194,  24,  entirely,
altogether.

Amys,  II.,  324,  I,  amice.

Ann,  II.,  333,  5,  Anna  the  pro-
phetess. See  Luke,  ii.  36.

Any,  II.,  292,  2,  C.  my.

Apayde,  I.,  loi,  5,  satisfied,  pleased.

Apayred,  I.,  35,  8,  impaired.

Apose,  I.,  288,  18,  oppose.

Arere,  I.,  297,  26,  backward,  be-
hind.

AssHE,  I.,  141,  17,  and  I.,  169,

25,  C.  aske.
AssYTE,  II.,  81,  I,  cite.
Atons,  I.,  104,  13,  C.  at  once.
Atonys,  I.,  160,  21,  C.  at  once.
At  turney,  II.,  50,  2  7,  C.  atturney.
Attyse,  I.,  296,  6,  entice.
Attysers,  II.,  163,  25,  enticers.
Attysynge,  I.,  239,  2,  enticing.
Auaunt,  II.,  67,  20,  boast.


Auautage,  I.,  206,  12,  C.  auantage.
Auayle,  II.,  81,  12,  advantage.
AuouTRY,  II.,  163,  4,  adultery.
AuTERS,  I.,  22  1,  20,  C.  aulters.
AuYCEN,  I.,  262,  6,  Avicenna.
Ayenst,  II.,  255,  28,  C.  against.

Babyll,  I.,  133,  5,  bauble.
Bagges,  II.,  103,  3,  badges.
Baylyes,  I.,  64,  I,  C.  BaylifFes.
Beawlys,  I.,  144,  23,  roaring  out.
Becke  I.,  146,  4,  bow,  salute.
Bede  man,  II.,  81,  23,  one  em-
ployed in  praying  for  another.
Bende,  II.,  93,  15,  C.  bande.
Beseke,  II.,  112,  8,  beseech.
Beters,  I.,  296,  (title),  those  who

walk  up  and  down.
Better,  I.,  217,  20,  C.  bitter.
Beware  the  ende  is  the  leste  poynt

of  his  charge,  I., 30, 28,  C.

Not  viewing  the  greatest  point  of

his  charge.
Blaberynge,  I,,  1 44, 2 3,  talking  idly.
Blasinge,  I., 36, 19,  blazoning.
Blasynge  I.,  240,  10,  setting  or

spreading  forth  ; II., 335,  9,

blazing.

Blyndnes,  I.,  216,  22,  C.  blinde.
BoCARDO, I.,  144,  20,  a  term  in
logic.

Bocsome,  I.,  169,  23,  obedient,
Bokest,  II.,  177,  18,  boke,  to  vomit.
Boldles,  II.,  172,  25,  C.  boldnes.
BoNDE,  II.,  189,  8,  C.  bande.
Bote,  II.,  299.  24,  help.
Both,  II.,  15,  28,  C.  before.
Bourdes,  I.,  7,  8,  jokes,  jests,  games.
Brast,  II.,  T23,  6,  break.


Glossary.


Brastyth,  II.,  264,  6,  bursteth.
Bravne,  II.,  1 65,  7,  C.  gayne.
Brawne,  II.,  252,  3,  (misprint  for)
brayne.

Erennynge,  II.,  83,  13,  burning.
Brondes,  I.,  149,  2,  torches,  II.,

294,  26,  C.  brandes.
Brgugh,  I.,  202,  20,  C.  brought.
Brybours, I., 64, I.  robbers,

beggars.

Erynnynge,  II.,  96,  19,  burning.
BuRDEws,  I.,  128,  15,  Bordeaux.
Busshes,  I.,  37,  23,  beards.
Byd,  II.,  106,  3,  invited.
Byde,  II.,  226,  3,  wait.
Bydeth,  II.,  212,  5,  remaineth.
Bydynge,  II.,  311,  12,  enduring.
Byte,  I.,  302,  5,  smart.

Caduke,  II.,  250,  9.  fj-ail,  crazy.
Came,  I.  109,  2i,C.  come.
Canell,  I.,  222,  7,  kennel.
Garage,  IL, 173, 21,  measure,
quality.

Carake,  II.,  306,  7,  a  large  ship.
Care,  II.,  292,  13,  think  about;

II.,  310,  27,  concern.
Carefull,  II.,  94,  4,  sorrowful.
Carke,  II.,  122,  15,  care.
Cartis,  II.,  228,  TO,  chariots.
Caryth,  II.,  50,  4,  C.  careth.
Cast,  I.,  284,  6,  intend,  contrive.
Cause,  I.,  202,  11,  C.  not  cause.
Cautell,  I.,  168,  10,  Cautele,  I.,

284,  4,  a  cunning  trick.
Cautelous,I.,49,  5,  artfully  cautious.
Cersus,  II.,  106,  12,  C.  Croesus.
Certayne,  II.,  248,  3,  certainly.
Cesyll,  II.,  25,  4,  C.  Sicil.
Ceueyt,  II.,  315,  15,  C.  couete.
Chaffar,  II.,  219,  6,  merchandise.
Charettes,  II.,  228,  10,  chariots.
Charge,  I.,  231,  26,  trouble.
Chere,  II.,  292,  8,  countenance ;

295,  14,  entertainment.

Chrafty,  I.,  185,  2,  C.  poHtike.

Clyst,  I.,  22,  14,  Broadclyst,  De-
vonshire.


Commooyte,  I,,  127,  3,  complais-
ance.

CoMON,  I.,  287,  22,  C.  commeii

commune.
Compace,  II.,  290,  22,  encompass.
Compalyd  II.,  333,  23,  hedged.
Compase,  I.,  292,  4,  circle.
Confydence,  II.,  228,  26,  C.  geue

confidence.
Copyntanke,  I.,  38,  13,  copatain,  a

conical  hat.
CoRNES,  I.,  170,  I  ;  II.,  237,  18,

C.  corners.
CosTOMER, I., 43, 24, one  who

collects  customs  or  duties.
CoTis,  II.,  96,  14,  cottages.
CouNTRE,  I.,  298,  16,  encounter,
CouRS,  II.,  10,  2,  C.  course.
CouERTURE,  II.,  290,  10,  covering
Coy,  II. ,  256,  17,  quiet.
Craftely,  I.,  204,  17,  C.  warely.
Crafty,  I.,  193,  14,  C.  holsomej

skilfully  made,  I., 199, i,  C.

prudent;  I.,  200,  9,  C.  prouident^

II.,  274,  13,  skilful.
Crakars,  I.,  12,  16,  bi-aggarts.
Crake,  II.,  132,  7,  brag  or  boast.
Crakynge,  II.,  80,  6,  boasting.
Crauys,  I.,  271,  6,  C.  creuis,  the

craw-fish  or  lobster.
Cunnynge,  I.,  261,  25,  knowledge,
CuRius, II., 262, 12,  Dentatus

Curius,  celebrated  for  liis  fru-
gality.

Damnyd,  II.,  102,  24,  condemned
to  death.

Decke,  I.,  38,  12,  trimmed;  applied

to  "  slut."
Defye,  II.,  52,  4,  reject.
Demayne,  II.,  292,  18,  manage.
Departe,  II.,  181,  II,  part.
Dere, I.,2  2  7,  I9,iniure,hurt;  injury
DtRE, I.,  270,  II; II.,  55,  16,

C.  degree.
Despytous,  II.,  164,  23,  very  angry.
Demynge,  I.,  154,  27,  judging.
Deuyse,  1,74,  18,  C.  iudise;  judge.


Glos


sary.


DeYNTEOUS, II., 293, 22, full  of

dainties.

DiFFAMYD,  II.,  37,20,  of  bad  fame.
DiscEYFULL,  I.,  245,  18,  C.  disceyt-
full.

DiscEYUABLE,  II.,  84,  12,  deceitful.

DissYMULED,  II.,  22  1,  4,  dissembled.

DisTAYNE,  II,,  101,  25,  Stain.

Do,  II.,  82,  4,  C.  to  ;  II.,  ICS,  7,
(misprint  for)  to.

DoDART,  I.,  47,  5,  an  old,  infirm,
confused  person.

DoMAs,  I.,  20,  12,  C.  damas.

Dome,  I.,  150,  15,  C.  dombe.

DoRTOR,  I.,  294,  21,  dormitory.

DoTYssHE,  I.,  86,  8,  foolish.

Dranynge,  II.,  186,  23,  draining.

Drede,  tl.,  292,  9,  fear.

Drent,  I.,  90,  5,  drowned.

Dres,  II.,  24,  17,  direct.

Dresse,  II.,  63,  9,  apply;  II.,  275,
10,  prepare.

Druydans,  I.,  292,  8,  "Druids
de  quibus,  Julius  Cssar,  in  com-
ment." (^Marginal  tiote.)

Dryuyls,  II.,  77,  27,  C.  driuels.

Dyght,  II.,  212,  4,  clean.

Earnest,  II.,  115,  i.,  deposit
money  given  to  bind  a  bargain,  or
on  hiring  a  servant.

Edefye,  II.,  120,  5,  build.

Edityed,  I.,  6.  9,  C.  edifyed.

Eft,  II.,  203,  27,  again.

Egall,  II.,  293,  3,  equal.

Eke,  II.,  326,  6,  also.

Enioynge,  I.,  54,  3,  C.  seking.

Enjoye,  I.,  151,  4,  C.  joye.

Entende,  II.,  87,  23,  attend.

Enuye,  II.,  279,  9,  envy.

Ere,  I.,  98,  27,  C.  eare ;  plough.

Ercyse,  II.,  315,  25,  C.  exercise.

Estate,  IL,  14,  16,  a  wealthy
person.

Excheters,  II.,  78,  21,  executors.

Facyate,  II.,  199,  8,  (misprint  for)
sacyate.


Faro,  II. ,  i  iO,  24,  C.  Pharao.
Fasynge, I., 43, 23,  C.  facing;

bragging.
Fatygate,  II.,  119,  17,  fatigued.
Fell, II.,  169,  16,  (misprint  for)  sell.
Fen,  II.,  35,  22;  Fenn,  I.,  157,

1 1,  mud,  mire.
Ferefull,  L,  218,  17,  full  of  fear.
Ferme,  I.,  159,  23,  rent;  II.,  98,

4,  farm.

Flee,  II.,  199,24,  (misprint  for)  slee.
Flete,  II.,  290,  29,  float.
FoLAWEs,  II.,  36,  16,  C.  felowes.
Force,  I.,  278,  21,  care,  regard.
FcRGE,  IL,  306,  4,  invent.
Forked  cappe,  II.,  279, 22,  the
mitre.

For  it  rebuked,  II.,  180,  26,  C.

with  great  rebuke.
Fors,  I.,  51,  6,  same  as  Force.
FoROUR,  I.,  79,  3,  C.  furour.
Forsyth,  II. ,  100,  14,  C.  forceth  ;

endeavoureth  ; II, 163,  22,

esteemeth,  careth  for.
Forthynke, I.,  278,  20,  grieve,

repent.
Foul,  I.,  52,  8,  C.  foole.
FoYsoN,  I.,  I  r,  ~.,  abundance.
Fragaunt,  IL,  290,  1,  fragrant.
Frantyfe,  I.,  149,  13,  C.  frantike.
Frame,  II. ,  253,  3,  to  set  about  a

thing.

Fyers,  L,  165,  9,  C.  fierce.
Fynde,  I.,  304,  18,  su;)ply.

Gaffys, I, 123, 4, C.  grafFes;
grafts.

Garded,  L,  36,  19;  Gardyd,  II,

97,  12,  girded  or  surrounded  with

a  hem.
Gayle,  L,  27,  18,  jail.
Geason,  II.,  10,  12,  scarce.
Gestis,  II.,  270,  2,  gestures.
Get,  L,  63,  20,  C.  jet,  "  wantonlv

to  goe  in  and  out  with  the  legs,"

to  strut  or  walk  proudly.
Getters,  L,  146,  28,  swaggerers,

braggers.


342


Glossary.


Getteth,  I.,  1 43,  27,  C.  Cometh.
Glose,  I.,  58,  28,  comment;  II.,

51,  16,  interpret.
God,  II.,  217,  23,  good.
GoDE,  I.,  100,  7,  C.  goode.
GooDEs,  I.,  234,  7,  C.  goodnes.
GoosTLY,  II.,  161,  13,  spiritually.
GoRGAYs,  II.,  289,  I,  C.  gorgious.
Graff  YD,  II.,  240,  8,  grafted.
Gre  at,  II.,  34,  8,  C.  great.
Gree,  I.,  155,  II,  agree.
Greuaunce,  II.,  262,  4,  injury.
Grennynge,  II.,  130,  16,  roaring.
Grotz,  I.,  100,  6,  C.  grotes.
Grounde,  II.,  292, 14,  an  old

musical  term  for  an  air  on  which

variations  and  divisions  were  to

be  made.  Nares.
Grutchynge,  I.,  145,  10,  grumbling,

grudging.
Gyders,  II.,  15,  21,  straps  to  draw

together  the  open  parts  of  armour.
Gylefull,  II.,  169,  23,  C.  wilfull.
Gyse,  I.,  287,  12,  fashion.
Gyuys,  I.,  184,  23,  C.  geuen.

Hackynge,  II.,  232,  25,  stammer-
ing.

Hant,  I.,  195,  II,  follow.
Hap,  I.,  140,  14,  C.  chaunce.
Haphy,  II.,  252,  12,  C.  happy.
Haut,  II.,  224,  6;  II.,  287,  13,

proud.
He,  I.,  16,  7,  C.  ye.
Hedelynge, II., 330, 10.,  C.
speedely.

Hell  juge  thy  rewarde,  I.,  27,  7,
C.  hell  thy  just  rewai^de.

Here,  I.,  177,  12,  hair.

His,  I.,  42,  5,  C.  my  ;  II.,  2o8,  7,
C.  is.

HoNYNGTON,  I.,  22,  1 4,  Honiton.
HoRLE,  I.,  109,  28,  C.  whirle.

HoURLYNGE, II., 3  lO, 12,  C.

hurling ;  rumbling.
HuRTE,  I.,  141,  24,  C.  heart.
HuRTLYTH,  II.,  115,  24,  closes  or

clashes  together  with  noise.


Incouenyence,  I.,  238,  14,  C.  in-
conuenyence.

Infaciable,  II.,  227,  II,  (misprint
for)  insaciable.

Infect,  I.,  5,  13,  infected;  I.,  126,
8,  contagious.

Infectyfe,  II.,  161,  16,  contagious.

Infextynge,II.,7i,  13,  C.  infecting.

Intreatable,II.,  1 1 4, 6, not  to  be  en-
treated; II., I  i5,8,C.intollerable.

Inure,  II.,  291,  19,  apply  them-
selves to,  serve.

It,  I.,  187,  28,  C.  he.

Iyen,  II.,  125,  7,  eyes.

Japes,  II.,  153,  6,  jests.

Jeopadous,  I.,  194,  5,C.  jeopardous.

Jonathas,  I.,  77,  4.,  I  Mach.  xii.
{marginal  note),  general  of  the
Jews,  brother  to  Judas  Macca-
beus, treacherously  seized  and  put
to  death  by  Tryphon.

JowELL,  I.,  120,  22,  C.  jewell.

Kepe,  I.,  226,  12,  care.
Kest,  II.,  260,  6,  C.  cast.
Kynde, II., 240, 22,  nature,
natural  disposition.

Lachesys,  I.,  188,  27,  Lachesis.
Lackynge,  II.,  264,  14,  want.
Laurer,  II.,  289,  3,  laurel.
Leasing,  (or  Lesynge),  I.,  196,  12,
lie.

Lefe,  I.,  103,  6,  agreeable;  II.,

118,  22,  leave.
Lefte,  1.,  188,  27,  (misprint  for)

leste.

Lemman,  I.,  244,  18,  mistress.
Lemynge,  II.,  332,  5,  shining.
Lese,  I.,  140,  17,  lose.
L.ESHES, I., 221, 23, thongs  or

strings  by  which  dogs  are  led.
Lesynge,  II.,  6,  18,  lie.
Lesyngys,  I.,  53,  3,  lies.
Lesyth,  II.,  115,  22,  loseth.
Let,  I.,  90,  7,  hindered:  I.,  194,

20,  leave  off.


Glossary


343


Lettyd,  I.,  297,  5,  hindered.

Leuer,  I.,  48,  I,  rather.

Leueray,  II.,  271,  28,  C.  liueray,

Lewde,  I.,  52,  5,  ignorant,  lay,  un-
taught, useless.  Later,  vile,  base,
wicked.

Lewdnes,  I.,  127,  5,  unlawful-
ness.

LoDESMAN,  II.,  200,  14,  pilot,
guide.

LoNGYNGE,  II.,  60,  5,  belonging.
LoRELLYs,  II.,  320,  14,  worthless
fellows.

LoTHLY,  I.,  168,  23,  loathsome.
Lout,  I.,  105,  13  ; Loute,  I.,

1 46,  4,  bend,  bow.
Lowde,  I.,  130,  28,  C.  lowe.
Lowe,  I.,  68,  11,  C.  alowe.
Lusty,  II.,  293,  8,  pleasant.
Lustynes,  II.,  295,  3,  gaiety.
Lycynus,  I.,  139,  9. Licinus,  the

extravagant  governor  of  Gaul.
Lyghtly,  I.,  68,  21,  quickly;  II.,

171,  17,  commonly,  easily.
Lyke,  II.,  263,  21,  please.
Lyst,  II.,  255,  15,  please.
Lyuynge,  I.,  187,  21,  C.  leauing.
Lucres,  II.,  9,  9,  Lucretia.

Made,  I.,  248,  21,  C.  mad.
Make,  II.,  237,  12,  companion.
Mawes,  II.,  89,  I,  stomach.
Mars,  prestis  of,  I.,  292,  12,  "De

quibus  Virgilius, II.,  Georgi-

corum." (^Marginal  note.)
Mas,  II.,  132,  13,  C.  sacrament,

19,  eucharist ;  28,  offering ;  II.,

133,  3,  our  Lord.
Masyd,  II.,  83,  2,  stupified.
Maters,  I.,  216,  20,  C.  mates.
Mean,  II.,  104,  12,  temperate.
Meanes,  I.,  199,  22,  C.  no  meanes.
Mease,  II.,  264,  9,  mess.
Mede,  I.,  134,  15,  reward.
Meke,  II.,  164,  15,  make  meek.
Mell,  II.,  211,  19,  mix.
Men,  II.,  45,  18,  C.  mean.
Mery,  I.,  188,  18,  fair.


Mesues,  I.,  262,  4,  Joannes  Mesue;
there  were  several  famous  Arabic
physicians  of  this  name.

Mesure,  I.,  188,  18,  moderate;  II.,
262,  23,  moderation.

Mete,  I.,  155,  16,  fitting.

Mewe,  I.,  222,  6,  stable.

MocHE,  I.,  112,  26,  C.  great.

MoNYsYON,  II.,  189,  23,  monition.

MoRYAGE,  I.,  248,  23,  C.  mariage.

Most,  I.,  217,  19,  C.  must.

MosTE,  I.,  6,  8,  C.  more.

Mowes,  I.,  212,  10,  mocks,  scorn-
ful grins.

MuNDAYNEs,  I.,  1 59,  3,  worldly.

Myght,  II.,  144,  16,  C.  night.

Mysche,  I.,  253,  27,  C.  mischiefe.

Myse,  II.,  129,  I,  muse.

Myshape,  II.,  252,  21,  mishap.

Mysordynaunce,  II.,  285,  22,  mis-
order,  disorderly  proceedings.

Narrynge,  I., 182,  II,  gnarring,

gnarling,  snarling.
Nay,  II.,  282,  4,  denial.
Ner,  II.,  9,  10,  never.
NiLicoLYANs,  I.,  135,  23,  Egyptians.
NoNs,  I.,  154,  27,  occasion.
Norture,  I.,  249,  1 1,  nurture,  train.
NoTHERS,  I.,  112,  24,  C.  an  others.
NoY,  II.,  248,  2,  annoy,  hurt.
NoYsoN,  II.,  204,  10,  C.  noysome.

Occupy,  II.,  169,  26,  use,  trade.
OccuPYERS,  II.,  219,  5,  tradesmen.
Of,  II.,  164,  7,  (misprint  for)  at;

II.,  195,  II,  of  (misprint  for)  all.
Okerers,  II.,  166,  (title)  usurers.
One,  I.,  199,  23,  C.  no.
On  lyue,  II.,  199,  7,  alive.
Or,  I.,  143,  3,  C.  are.
Or,  II.,  60,  13,  that.
Ordayne,  II.,  57,  I,  order.
Orthly,  I.,  231,  II,  C.  earthly.
Others,  II.,  132,  21,  C.  othes.
OuER,  II.,  77,  24,  C.  ouercome.
Ouersene,  I.,  178,  I,  mistaken.
Our,  I.,  182,  2,  C.  your.


344


Glossary.


Palfray,  II.,  217,  23,  palfrey.
Panter,  II.,  297,  7,  net  or  snare.
Papy,  II.,  184,  I,  poppy.
Parage, II., 32, 4,  parentage,

kindred.
Parcyte,  I.,  9,  24,  smallness.
Partnes,  II.,  236,  28,  C.  partners.
Party,  II.,  97,  12,  parti -coloured.
Parysshyngs,  I.,  160,  20,  C.  par-

ishoners.
Payne,  II.,  316,  10,  labour.
Peas,  II.,  3,  8,  appease.
Pens,  I.,  100,  6,  C.  pence.
Perdurable,  II.,  306,  3,  everlasting.
Pertureaunce,  II.,  285,  27,  trouble.
Perysshe,  II.,  255,  12,  injure.
Pheryson,  I,,  1 44,20,a  term  in  logic.
Plage,  II.,  24,  23,  C.  place.
Plage,  II.,  136,  (title),  afflictive

judgment  or  calamity.
Plame,  II.,  290,  17,  C.  place.
Pleasaunce,  II.,  92,  26,  pleasure.
Podalirius,  I.,  262,  4,  Podaleirius,

skilled  in  medicine.
Pollers,  I.,  12,  17,  robbers.
Pompe,  I.,  19,  2,  poop.
Potels,  II.,  92,  6,  a  measure  of

two  qua:ts.
PouLE,  II.,  302.  9,  Paulus  Emilius.
PowLYNGE, I., 64, 3,  robbing,

cheating.
Practyse,  I.,  158,  25,  artifice.
Preckyd,  II.,  308,  21,  decorated.
Precyan,  I.,  144,  12,  Priscian.
Proue,  II.,  316,  21,  thrive.
Prouysicion,  I.,  121,  23,  C.  pro-

uision.

Prouertye,  I.,  304,  I  5,  C.  pouertie.
Prymme,  I.,  250,  I,  C.  paramour.
Pryuate,  II.,  84,  15,  deprived.
PuRUEAUNCE,  II.,  285, 1 6,  provision.
Pyght,  II.,  319,  24,  placed.
Pykers,  I.,  15,  21,  thieves.
Pyllynge,  I.,  254,  II,  peeling.

Quaxes,  II.,  261,  15,  C.  quates.
Quaynt,  I.,  211,  14,  acquaint,  in-
form.


C^ell,  II.,  168,  7,  kill.

Rampynge,  II.,  2g6,  4,  rushing.
Rawky,  II.,  261,  4,  rawlike.
Ray,  I.,  35,  16,  striped  cloth;  I.,

303,  26,  dress.
Read,  I.,  193,  14,  C.  rede.
Reade,  I.,  26,  28,  counsel,  (C.'s

reading,) "  Take  counsayle  of

learned  and  expert  men  before."
Rebokynge,  II.,  261,  12,  belching.
Red,  II.,  307,  18,  rid,  deprive.
Rede,  I.,  151,  i,  advice.
Reddyth,  II.,  102,  10,  C.  riddeth.
Reduce,  II.,  175,  18,  bring  back.
Refuse,  II.,  164,  16,  deny.
Remys,  II.,  186,  23,  remiss.
Renowe,  II,,  66,  16,  C.  renowme.
Reprefe,  I..  32,  21,  C.  repriefe ;

reproof.

Repugnynge,  I.,  283,  4,  repugnant.
Respyt,  II.,  280,  I  ;  Respyte,  II.,

316,  II,  respect.
Reted,  I.,  44,  12  ;  I.,  1 16,  I  I,  C.

rooted.

Reuylde, I., 288,9, revealed;  shown.
Rewed,  II.,  241,  24,  regretted.
RowME,  II.,  212,  24,  place.
Rode,  II.,  309,  15,  harbour.
Rote,  II.,  293,  7,  root.
Roundynge,  I.,  221,  4,  a  kind  of
dance.

Roundynges,  II.,  212,  16,  whispers.
Rouse,  I.,  91,  14,  hedges.
Rout,  II.,  224,  2,  com])any.
Rov/ne,  I.,  161,  14,  C.  rowme.
Rowme,  II.,  13,  6,  place.
RoYALLUE,  I.,  199,  I  r,  C.  realme.
Ruthfully,  I.,  68,  27,  C.  ruefully.
Ryue,  II.,  261,  17,  split.

Sad,  I.,  109,  16,  sei'ious,  sober.
Salue,  II.,  87,  t8,  C.  safe.
Sauour,  II.,  139,  I,  (misprint  for)
fauour.

ScAs,  II.,  103,  8,  C.  scarce.
Scant,  II.,  84,  27,  scarce.
ScAPLER,  II.,  324,  I,  scapulary.


Glossary.


345


ScARSNEss,  II.,  97,  22,  spaiingness.
ScoNSYENCE,  I.,  1 36,  15,  C.  Con-
science.

ScoRsYNGEs,  II.,  141,  (title)  ex-
changes.

ScosYTH,  I.,  159,  25,  C.  ciioseth.
Sectours,  I.,  117,  7,  executors.
Seke,  II.,  1  1 1,  8,  C.  sicke.
Semblaunt,  II.,  287,  23,  appear-
ance.

Semblable,  II.,  264,  1 8,  like.
Sene,  I.,  109,  16,  learned.
Sentence,  II.,  109,  7,  meaning.
Seruautes, I., 238,  7,  C.  ser-
uauntes.

Set  by,  I.,  198,  24,  treated  with

consideration.
Shelde,  I.,  1 1 4,  15,  shield.
Shent,  I.,  22,  17,  abashed.
Shrape,  I.,  47,  16  ;  I.,  105,  22,  C.

scrape.

Shyll,  II.,  162,  20,  shrill.

Slake,  II.,  279,  5,  subside.

Sle,  I.,  198,  9,  C.  slay.

Slut,  I.,  38,  12,  an  apron,  (Halli-
well.)  Used  by  Barclay  as  sy-
nonymous with  Copyntanke.

Smare,  II.,  217,  7,  C.  snare.

So,  I.,  177,  14,  C.  se.

Soft,  II.,  314,  3,  easily.

Solym,  I.,  135,  19,  Jerusalem.

Some  ar  that  thynke  the  pleasoure
and  ioy  of  theyr  lyfe,  I.  54,  i  ,  C.
Some  there  are  that  haue  pleasure
al  their  life.

SoppE,  II.,  263,  15,  C.  suppe.

Sortes  currit,  I.,  144,  19,  a  term
in  logic.

Sote,  I.,  112,  22,  fool.

Sothly,  II.,  112,  2!,  truly.

Sparcle,  I.,  194,  I,  spark.

Sreyght,  II.,  59,  12,  C.  straight.

Stage,  II.,  262,  27,  position.

Stake,  I.,  299,  18,  alestake,  q.v.

State,  II.,  8,  24,  personage  of  high
rank.

Stent,  I.,  31,  12,  allotted  portion  ;
II.,  89,  3,  stop.


Stere,  I.,  291,  4,  C.  Sterne.
Sterue,  II.,  32,  8,  perish.
Straunges, II., 77, 24,  C.

strangers.
Strenger, II., 28, (title),  C.

stronger.

Stryketh,  II.,  212,  18,  stroketh.
Stuys,  I.,  178,  21,  C.  And  as  the

open  stuesthey  are  set  on  waike.
Stynt,  II.,  65,  2,  stopped.
SuBTYLL,  II.,  224,  2,  fine.

SuCHE,  I.,  208,  2,  C.  so.

SuETH,  I.,  183,  6,  foUoweth.
SuLPicE,  I.,  144,  12,  Sulpicius.
SuPERFLUEjIL,  215,  1 1  jSuperfluous.

SuPPORTYTH, II., 230, 14,  C.

support.

SuRMOUNTYNGE, II.,  335,  2,  Sur-
passing.

SusTERS,  II.,  201,  27,  C.  sisters.
Suynge,  L,  60,  13,  C.  shewing.
SwEREs, II., 128, (title),  C.

swearers.
Syege,  II.,  82,  23,  seat.
Syllaeis,  I.,  144,  27,  C.  syllables,
Syse,  I.,  27,  17,  assise.

Tables,  II.,  131,22,  backgammon.
Tachyd, I., 58, II,  blemished,

spotted.
Tane,  II.,  87,  I,  taken.
Tary,  I.,  194,  13,  delay.
Tays,  II.,  9,  12,  Thais.
Tell,  II.,  164,  12,  C.  hell.  .
Tend,  II.,  257,  28,  attend.
The,  L,  183,  24,  C.  in.  ;  II.,  44,

21,  (misprint  for)  they,
i  Theder,  L,  154,  25,  thither.
Thee,  I.,  75,  4,  thigh.
Thekt,  II.,  96,  14,  thatched.
They,  I.,  255,  29,  C.  thy;  II.,

276,  14,  C.  theyr.
Tholomeus,  I.,  20,  22,  C.  Ptolo-

meus.

Thought,  II.,  121,  16,  C.  though.
Thye,  II.,  94,  16; II.,  223,  7,
thrive.

Thynke,  I.,  172,  15,  C.  thinge.


34^


Glossary.


Thryst,  IL,  7,  1 6,  C.  thrift.

TOPPRES, II., 22  1, 25, C.  to

oppresse.

To  RENT,  I.,  302,  16,  quite  or  com-
pletely, or  all  rent — to,  an  inten-
sive prefix.

To  Tore,  I.,  305,  4,  similar  to  To
rent.

Tour,  IL,  291,  12,  castle.
TowLYNGE,  I.,  64,  I,  beating  with

an  oaken  stick.
Trace,  II.,  276,  25,  track,  path.
Trayne,  I.,  227,  13,  knot;  I.,  245,

1 5, deceit;  II.,  1 16, 19, stratagem.
Trough,  I.,  245,  4,  through.
Tryphon,  L,  77,  5,  Tyrian  general.

See  Jonathas.
TuYcioN,  I.,  25,  24,  C.  tuition.
Tyde,  I.,  304,  17; II.,  113,  6,

time,  season.

Unchrafty,  I.,  272,  16,  C.  unwittie.

Vant,  II.,  185,  24,  a  winter  trap
for  birds.

Varyable,  II.,  114,  7,  1 8,  different.
Vayle,  II.,  24,  1 4,  C.  vayne.
Ven,  L,  120,  4,  C.  ben.
Vengeable,  II.,  52,  7,  revengeful,
cruel.

Vermayll,  I..  196,  17,  red.
Vneth,  IL,  315,  24,  uneath,  un-
easily.

Vnmerciable,  II.,  52,  5,  merciless.
Vntretable,  L,  165,  8,  not  to  be

entreated.
Vnware,  L,  177,  19,  unaware.
VoLAGE, I., 126, II,  changeful,

light,  giddy.
VoLOURE,  II.,  291,  13,  C.  valour.
VoYDE,  II.,  86,  4,  make  empty.
Vylayne,  II.,  323,  10,  wicked.


Ware,  I.,  246,  15,  sensible;  II.,

250,  22,  aware.
Waren,  I.,  134,  25,  cunning.
Wary,  I.,  305,  12,  abuse,  curse.
Wawes,  I.,  206,  26,  waves.
Way,  I.,  155,  15,  away.
Way,  I.,  295,  15,  C.  away.
Wayte,  L,  290,  12,  know.
Wene,  IL,  86,  2,  think.
Wenyd,  I.,  138,  27,  C. wened ;

thought,  supposed.
Weray,  I.,  70,  27,  same  as  Wary.
Were,  II.,  162,  6,  (misprint  for)

Nei-e.

Wete,  I.,  150,  4,  know.
Whan,  II. ,  293,  12,  C.  whom.
WoDE,  I.,  116,  10,  C.  wood;  mad,

furious.
WoMBE,  L,  12,  27,  belly.
WoRDLY,  II.,  232,  12,  C.  worldly.
Worldly,  I.,  287,  28,  (misprint  for)

wordly  ;  C.  world.
WoRTHELY,  I.,  247,  7,  wrathfully.
Wyght,  IL,  318,  5,  strong.
Wynter,  I..  42,  7,  C.  wynters.
Wytches,  I.,  195,  15,  C.  wretches.
Wynnynge,  II. ,  83,  22,  gain.

Yate,  II.,  203,  22,  gate;  Scottish,
yat,  yett.

YCHE,  I.,  43,  25,  I.

Ye,  I.,  138,  I,  yea.
Yetyth,  IL,  211,  27,  C.  putteth.
Yll,  L,  112,  14,  C.  eulll.
Ymportable,  L,  139,  23,  intolerable.
YoRDAN,  I.,  297,  26,  chamber  pot.
Your,  I.,  184,  3,  C.  our.
Yowlynge,  I.,  297,  24,  C.  howling.
Ypocras,  I.,  262,  7,  Hippocrates.
Yresshe  game,  I.,  21,  20,  a  game

similar  to  backgammon.
Yrous,  I.,  184,  23,  irate.


Chapter  I.  of  the  Original  Edition,  and  of  the
Latin  and  French  Versions  of  the
Ship  of  Fools.


I. — Chapter  I.  of  the  original  text  of  the  Ship  of  Fools,
as  given  in  Zarncke's  edition.

VON  VNNUTZEN  BUCHERN.

Den  vordantz  hat  man  mir  gelan
Dann  jch  on  nutz  vil  biicher  han
Die  jch  nit  lyfz,  vnd  nyt  verstan

Das  jch  sytz  vornan  jn  dem  schyff
Das  hat  worlich  eyn  sundren  gryff
On  vrsach  ist  das  nit  gethan
VfF  myn  libry  ich  mych  verlan
Von  bUchern  hab  ich  grossen  hort
Verstand  doch  drynn  gar  wenig  wort
Vnd  halt  sie  dennacht  jn  den  eren
Das  ich  jnn  wil  der  fliegen  -weren
Wo  man  von  kiinsten  reden  dut
Sprich  ich,  do  heym  hab  jchs  fast  gut
Do  mit  losz  ich  beniigen  mich
Das  ich  vil  biicher  vor  mir  sych,
Der  kiinig  Ptolomeus  bstelt
Das  er  all  biicher  het  der  welt
Vnd  hyelt  das  fiir  eyn  grossen  schatz
Doch  hat  er  nit  das  recht  gesatz
Noch  kund  dar  vsz  berichten  sich
Ich  hab  vil  biicher  ouch  des  glich
Vnd  lys  doch  gantz  wenig  dar  jnn
Worvmb  wolt  ich  brechen  myn  synn
Vnd  mil  der  ler  mich  bklimbren  hst


Appendix.


Wer  vil  studiert,  wlirt  ein  fantast
Ich  mag  doch  sunst  wol  sin  eyn  here
Vnd  lonen  eym  der  fiir  mich  ler
Ob  ich  schon  hab  eyn  groben  synn
Doch  so  ich  by  gelerten  bin^
So  kan  ich  jta  sprechen  jo
Des  tUtschen  orden  bin  ich  fro
Dann  jch  gar  wenig  kan  latin
Ich  weysz  das  vinu  heysset  win
Gucklus  ein  gouch,  stuitus  eyn  dor
Vnd  das  ich  heysz  donine  doctor
Die  oren  sint  verborgen  mir
Man  slih  sunst  bald  eins  muUers  thicr


2. — Ch;ipter  I.  of  Locher's  Latin  version  : — ■

DE  INUriLIBUS  LIBRIS.

Inter  precipuos  pars  est  mihi  reddita  stultos
Prima  :  rego  docili  vastaque  vela  manu.

En  ego  possideo  multos,  quos  raro  libellos
Perlego  :  tum  lectos  negligo  :  nec  sa}  i o.

Primus  in  excelsa  teneo  quod  naue  rudentes
Stultiuagosque  sequor  comites  per  flumina  \  a-  ta  :
Non  ratione  vacat  certa  :  sensuque  latent! :
Congestis  etenim  stuitus  confido  libellis
Spem  quoque  nec  paruam  collecta  volumina  praebent  :
Calleo  nec  verbum  :  nec  libri  sentio  mentem.
Attamen  in  magno  per  me  seruantur  honore  :
Pulueris  et  cariem,  plumatis  tergo  fiabellis.
Ast  vbi  doctrine  certamen  voluitur  :  inquam
Aedibus  in  nostris  librorum  culta  supellex:
Eminet :  et  chartis  vino  contentus  opertis  :
Ouas  video  ignorans  :  et  vano  lumine  solor.
Constituit  quondam  diaes  Ptolomeus  :  haberet
Vt  libros  toto  quesitos  vndique  mun do  :
Onos  grandes  rerum  thesauros  esse  putabat  :
Non  tamen  archanelegis  documenta  tenebat :


348


Appendix.


349


Ouis  sine  non  poterat  vite  disponere  cursum.

En  pariter  teneo  numerosa  volumina,  tardus

Pauca  lego  :  viridi  contentus  tegmine  libri.

Cur  vellem  studio  sensus  turbare  frequent!  ?

Aut  tarn  soUicitis  animum  confundere  rebus  ?

Qui  studet,  assiduo  mtotu,  fit  stultus  et  amens.

Seu  studeam  :  seu  non  :  dominus  tamen  esse  vocabor

Et  possum  studio  socium  disponere  nostro  :

Qui  pro  me  sapiat :  doctasque  examinet  artes.

At  si  cum  doctis  versor  :  concedere  malo  :

Omnia  :  ne  cogar  fors  verba  latina  profari.

Theutonicos  inter  balbos  sum  maximus  auctor  :

Cum  quibus  incassum  sparguntur  verba  latina  :

O  vos  doctores  ;  qui  grandia  nomina  fertis  :

Respicite  antiques  patres  :  iurisque  peritos  :

Non  in  candidulis  pensebant  dogmata  libris  :

Arte  sed  ingenua  sitibundum  pectus  alebant.

Auriculis  asini  tegitur  sed  magna  caterua.

3. — Chapter  I.  of  the  French  version  of  Pierre  Riviere,
1497-

DES  LIURES  INUTILZ.

Le  premier  fol  de  la  nef  suis
Les  voiles  regis  de  man  main
A  liures  auoir  me  deduys
Lesquelz  ie  ne  voy  soir  ne  main
De  ceulx  que  iay  leuz  faiz  dedain
Ou  ne  les  entendz.  somme  toute
Tel  cuyde  bien  scauoir  qui  doubte.

Le  premier  suis  en  la  nauire
Les  cordes  ie  tourne  ie  vire
le  suis  des  compaignons  vagans
Ie  suis  des  grans  folz  nauigans
Sur  la  mer  du  monde  parfonde
En  sens  et  raison  raal  me  fonde
Et  suis  bien  fol  de  me  fier
Et  mon  cueur  et  corps  dedier


350  Appendix.


En  la  multitude  des  liures
Combien  que  aux  esperitz  deliures
Ne  donne  pas  petit  espoir
lapete  tous  les  iours  de  veoir
Liures  :  lesquelz  ne  puis  aprendre
Ne  la  substance  deulx  comprendre
Toutesfois  bien  les  contregarde
Et  en  tout  honneur  ie  les  garde
De  pouldre  et  dimmundicite
Car  par  grant  curiosite
Souuent  mes  poulpitres  baloye
La  ou  de  doctrine  tournoye
Tous  les  iours  disputacion
Ma  maison  et  ma  mansion
Est  de  liures  resplendissante
Desquelz  veoir  ouuers  me  contente
Me  confortant  veoir  seulement
Mes  grans  volumes  vainement
Sans  en  comprendre  mot  en  somme.

Ptolomeus  qui  fut  riche  homme
Constitua  quon  luy  serchast
Par  Ie  monde  et  quon  luy  trouuast
Lesquelz  quant  ilz  furent  tous  quis
Pour  grant  tresor  les  maintenoit
Et  toutesfois  il  ne  tenoit
Lenseignement  ne  la  doctrine
De  la  sapience  diuine
Combien  que  sans  celle  ne  peust
Quelques  liures  que  lors  il  eust
Riens  de  la  vie  disposer
Ne  chose  de  bien  composer
Qui  luy  fust  pour  lors  incolume
Comme  leu  iay  en  maint  volume
Ou  ie  regarde  bien  petit
Et  en  passe  mon  appetit
De  veoir  seullement  la  verdure
Dont  est  taincte  la  couuerture
Car  ce  seroit  a  moy  folie
De  mectre  tant  mon  estudie


Appendix.


Es  liures  et  leurs  diuers  sens
Q^e  apres  ien  troublasse  mon  sens
Car  cil  qui  trop  scauoir  procure
Et  trop  es  liures  met  sa  cure
En  deuient  souuent  incense
Aussi  chacun  est  dispense
Soit  bien  lettre  scauant  ou  non
De  porter  de  seigneur  le  nom.

Item  ie  puis  en  mon  lieu  mectre
Quelcun  soit  en  prose  ou  en  metre
Qui  prendra  bein  la  pacience
Daprendre  pour  nous  deux  science
Et  se  pres  clercs  et  litterez
Me  voy  ie  leur  concederez
Leur  dire  soit  tart  ou  matin
Affin  de  ne  parler  latin
Et  que  deulx  ne  soye  repris
De  ce  que  iay  si  mal  apris.

O  docteurs  qui  le  nom  auez
De  scauoir  et  riens  ne  scauez
Pour  euiter  tous  vituperes
Contemplez  que  iadis  noz  peres
Dont  les  corps  sont  mors  et  periz
Qui  furent  es  droiz  si  peritz
Leur  grant  science  ne  comprindrent
En  ces  beaulx  liures  ains  laprindrent
Dung  bon  et  desireux  courage
Sans  auoir  lesprit  si  vollage
Comme  les  clercs  de  maintenant
Dont  leur  est  bien  appartenant
Porter  par  choses  non  pareilles
Des  asnes  les  grandes  oreilles
