ON THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY OF THE CHURCH
By Martin Luther, 1520. Translated by the Rev. R. S. Grignon; in Henry Wace and C. A. Buchheim (eds.), First Principles of the Reformation (London: John Murray, 1883).
Public domain.
Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/india.history.resource.94206).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

ON THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY OF THE
CHURCH


ON
THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY OF THE CHURCH.


0
JESUS.


Martin Luther, of the Order of St. Augustine, salutes his
friend Hermann Tulichius.


Whether I will or not, I am compelled to become more
learned day by day, since so many great masters vie with each
other in urging me on and giving me practice. I wrote about
indulgences two years ago, but now I extremely regret having
published that book. At that time I was still involved in a
great and superstitious respect for the tyranny of Rome, which
led me to judge that indulgences were not to be totally
rejected, seeing them, as I did, to be approved by so general a
consent among men. And no wonder, for at that time it was I
alone who was rolling this stone. Afterwards, however, with the
kind aid of Sylvester and the friars, who supported indulgences
so strenuously, I perceived that they were nothing but mere
impostures of the flatterers of Rome, whereby to make away with
the faith of God and the money of men. And I wish I could

.prevail upon the booksellers, and persuade all who have read
them, to burn the whole of my writings on indulgences, and in
place of all I have written about them to adopt this proposition :

- Indulgences are wicked devices of the flatterers of Rome.

After this, Eccius and Emser, with their fellow-conspirators,
began to instruct me concerning the primacy of the Pope.
Here too, not to be ungrateful to such learned men, I must
confess that their works helped me on greatly ; for, while I
had denied that the Papacy had any divine right, I still
admitted that it had a human right. But after hearing and
reading the super-subtle subtleties of those coxcombs, by which
they so ingeniously set up their idol—my mind being not
entirely unteachable in such matters—I now know and am sure


142 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


that the Papacy is the kingdom of Babylon, and the power of
Nimred the mighty hunter. Here moreover, that all may go
prosperously with my friends, I entreat the booksellers, and
entreat my readers, to burn’all that I have published on this
subject, and to hold to the following proposition :

The Papacy is the mighty hunting of the Bishop of Rome.

This is proved from the reasonings of Eccius, of Emser, and
of the Leipzig lecturer on the Bible.

At the present time they are playing at schooling me con-
cerning communion in both kinds, and some other subjects uf
the greatest importance. I must take pains not to listen in
vain to these philosophical guides of mine. A certain Italian
friar of Cremona has written a “ Revocation of Martin Luther to
the Holy See ”’—that is to say, not that I revoke, as the words
imply, but that he revokes me. This is the sort of Latin that
the Italians nowadays are beginning to write. Another friar,
a German of Leipzig, Lecturer, as you know, on the whole
canon of the Bible, has written against me concerning the
Sacrament in both kinds, and is about, as I hear, to do still
greater and wonderful wonders. The Italian indeed has
cautiously concealed his name; perhaps alarmed by the
examples of Cajetan and Sylvester. The man of Leipzig,
however, as befits a vigorous and fierce German, has set forth
in a number of verses on his title-page, his name, his life, his
sanctity, his learning, his office, his glory, his honour, almost
his very shoe-lasts. From him-no doubt I shall learn not a
little, since he writes a letter of dedication to the very Son
of God; so familiar are these saints with Christ, who reigns in
_ heaven. In short, three magpies seem to be addressing me, one,
a Latin one, well; another, a Greek one, still better; the third,
a Hebrew one, best of all. What do you think I have to do
now, my dear Hermann, but to prick up my ears? The matter
is handled at Leipzig by the Observants of the Holy Cross.

Hitherto I have foolishly thought that it would be an
excellent thing, if it were determined by a General Council, that
both kinds in the Sacrament should be administered to the
laity. To correct this opinion, this more than most learned
friar says that it was neither commanded nor decreed, whether
by Christ or by the Apostles, that both kinds should be
administered to the laity; and that it has therefore been left


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY . 148


to the judgment of the Church, which we are bound to obey,
what should be done or left undone on this point. Thus
speaks he. You ask, perhaps, what craze has possession of the
man, or against whom he is writing ; since I did not condemn
the use of one kind, and did leave it to the judgment of the
Church to ordain the use of both kinds. And this he himself
endeavours to assert, with the object of combating me by this
very argument. I reply, that this kind of argument is a
familiar one with all who write against Luther; namely, either
to assert the very thing which they attack, or to set up a
figment that they may attack it. Thus did Sylvester, Eccius,
Emser, the men of Cologne too, and those of Louvain. If this
friar had gone back from their spirit, he would not have
written against Luther.

A greater piece of good fortune, however, has befallen this
man than any of the others. Whereas he intended to prove
that the use of one kind had neither been commanded nor
decreed, but left to the decision of the Church, he brings
forward Scriptures to prove that, by the command of Christ,
the use of one kind was ordained for the laity. Thus it is
true, according to this new interpreter of Scripture, that the
use of one kind was not commanded, and at the same time was
commanded, by Christ. You know how specially those logicians
of Leipzig employ this new kind of argument. Does not
Emser also, after having professed in his former book to
speak fairly about me, and after having been convicted by me
of the foulest envy and of base falsehoods, confess, when .
about to confute me in his later book, that both were true, and
that he had written of me in both an unfair and a fair spirit?
A good man indeed, as you know!

But listen to our specious advocate of one species, in whose
mind the decision of the Church and the command of Christ
are the same thing ; and again the command of Christ and the
absence of his command are the same thing. With what
dexterity he proves that only one kind should be granted to
the laity, by the command of Christ, that is, by the decision of
the Church! He marks it with capital letters in this way,
“AN INFALLIBLE FOUNDATION.” Next he handles with
incredible wisdom the sixth chapter of the Gospel of St. John,
in which Christ speaks of the bread of heaven and the bread of


144 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


life, which is Himself. These words this most learned man not
only misapplies to the Sacrament of the Altar, but goes farther,
and, because Christ said: “I am the living bread,” and not:
“Tam the living cup,” he concludes that in that passage the
sacrament in only one kind was appointed for the laity. But
the words that follow: “My flesh is meat indeed, and my
blood is drink indeed ;” and again, “ Unless ye eat the flesh of
the Son of Man and drink his blood ”’—since it was evident to
this friar’s brains that they tell irrefutably in favour of

“reception in both kinds, and against that in one kind—he
evades very happily and learnedly in this way: “That Christ
meant nothing else by these words, than that he who should
receive one kind, should receive under this both the body and
the blood.” This he lays down as his infallible foundation of a
structure so worthy of holy and heavenly reverence.

Learn now, along with me, from this man, that in the sixth
chapter of St. John Christ commands reception in one kind,
but in such a manner that this commanding means leaving the
matter to the decision of the Church; and further, that Christ
in the same chapter speaks of the laity only, not of the
presbyters. For to us this living bread from heaven, that is,
the sacrament in one kind, does not belong, but, perchance the
bread of death from hell. Now what is to be done with the
deacons and sub-deacons? As they are neither laymen nor
priests, they ought, on this distinguished authority, to use
neither one nor both kinds. You understand, my dear
Tulichius, this new and observant manner of handling Scripture.
But you must also learn this, that Christ, in the sixth chapter
of St. John, is speaking of the sacrament of the Eucharist ;
though He Himself teaches us that He is speaking of faith in
the incarnate word, by saying: “This is the work of God, that
ye believe in him whom He hath sent.” But this Leipzig
professor of the Bible must be permitted to prove whatever he
pleases out of any passage of Scripture he pleases. For he is
an Anaxagorean, nay, an Aristotelian theologian, to whom
names and words when transposed mean the same things and
everything. Throughout his whole book he so fits together
the testimonies of Scripture, that, if he wishes to prove that
Christ is in the sacrament, he ventures to begin thus: “The
Lesson of the book of the Revelation of the blessed John.” And


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 145


as suitably as this would be said, so suitably does he say
everything, and thinks, like a wise man, to adorn his ravings
by the number of passages he brings forward.

I pass over the rest, that I may not quite kill you with the
dregs of this most offensive drain. Lastly he adduces Paul
(1 Cor. xi.), who says that he had received from the Lord
and had delivered to the Corinthians the use both of the ©
bread and of the cup. Here again, as everywhere else, our
advocate of one species handles the Scriptures admirably, and
teaches that in that passage Paul permitted—not “ delivered ”
—the use of both kinds. Do you ask how he proves it? Out
of his own head, as in the case of the sixth chapter of John ;
for it does not become this lecturer to give a reason for what
he says, since he is one of those whose proofs and teachings all
come from their own visions. Here then we are taught that
the Apostle in that passage did not write to the whole church
of Corinth, but only to the laity, and that therefore he gave no
permission to the priests, but that they were deprived of the
whole sacrament; and next, that, by a new rule of grammar,
“T have received from the Lord ” means the same thing as “ It
has been permitted by the Lord;” and “I delivered to you” the
same thing as “I permitted to you.” I beg you especially to
note this. For it follows hence that not only the Church, but
every worthless fellow anywhere will be at liberty, under the
teaching of this master, to turn into permissions the whole
body of the commandments, institutions, and ordinances of
Christ and the Apostles.

I see that this man is possessed by an angel of Satan, and
that those who act in collusion with him are seeking to obtain
a name in the world through me, as being worthy to contend
with Luther. But this hope of theirs shall be disappointed,
and, in my contempt for them, I shall leave them for ever
unnamed, and shall content myself with this one answer to the
whole of their books. If they are worthy that Christ should
bring them back to a sound mind, I pray him to do so in his
mercy. If they are not worthy of this, then I*pray that they
may never cease to write such books, and that the enemies of
the truth may not be permitted to read any others. It is a
common and true saying: “This I know for certain, that if I
fight with filth, whether I conquer or am conquered, I


146 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


am sure to be defiled.” -In the next place, as I see that they
have plenty of leisure and of paper, I will take care that
they shall have abundant matter for writing, and will keep in
advance of them, so that while they, in the boastfulness of
victory, are triumphing over some one heresy of mine, as it
seems to them, I shall meanwhile be setting up a new one.
For I too am desirous that these illustrious leaders in war
should be adorned with many titles of honour. And so, while
they are murmuring that I approve of communion in both
kinds, and are most successfully engaged on this very important
subject, so worthy of themselves, I shall go farther, and shall
now endeavour to show that all who deny to the laity com-
munion in both kinds are acting impiously. To do this the
more conveniently, I shall make a first essay on the bondage of
the Church of Rome; with the intention of saying very much
more in its own proper time, when those most learned papists
shall have got the better of this book.

This, moreover, I do in order that no pious reader who may
meet with my book may be disgusted at the dross I have
handled, and have reason to complain that he finds nothing
to read which can cultivate or instruct his mind, or at least
give occasion for instructive reflection. You know how dis-
satisfied my friends are that I should occupy myself with the
paltry twistings of these men. “They say that the very
reading of their books is an ample confutation of them, but
that from me they look for better things, which Satan is
trying to hinder by means of these men. I have determined
to follow the advice of my friends, and to leave the business of
wrangling and inveighing to those hornets.

Of the Italian friar of Cremona I shall say nothing. He is a
simple and unlearned man, who is endeavouring to bring mé
back by some thongs of rhetoric to the Holy See, from which I |
am not conscious of having ever withdrawn, nor has any one
proved that Ihave. His principal argument in some ridiculous
passages is, that I ought to be moved for the sake of my
profession, and of,the transfer of the imperial power to the
Germans. He seems indeed altogether to have meant not so
much to urge my return as to write the praises of the French
and of the Roman pontiff, and he must be allowed to testify
his obsequiousness to them by this little work, such as it is.


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 147


He neither deserves to be handled severely, since he does not
seem to be actuated by any malice, nor to be learnedly confuted,
since through pure ignorance and inexperience he trifles with
the whole subject.

To begin. I must deny that there are seven Sacraments,
and must lay it down, for the time being, that there are only
three, baptism, penance, and the bread, and that by the Court
of Rome all these have been brought into miserable bondage,
and the Church despoiled of all her liberty. And yet, if I were
o speak according to the usage of Scripture, I shonld hold that j
‘here was only one sacrament, and three sacramental signs. I
shall speak on this point more at length at the proper time;
but now I speak of the sacrament of the bread, the first of all
sacraments.

I shall say then what advance I have made as the result of
my meditations in the ministry of this sacrament. For at the
time when I published a discourse on the Eucharist I was still
involved in the common custom, and did not trouble myself
either about the rightful or the wrongful power of the Pope.
But now that I have been called forth and become practised in
argument, nay, have been dragged by force into this arena, I
shall speak out freely what I think. Let all the papists laugh
or lament against me alone.

In the first place, the sixth chapter of John must be set
aside altogether, as not saying a single syllable about the
sacrament; not only because the sacrament had not yet been
instituted, but much more because the very sequence of the
discourse and of its statements shows clearly that Christ was
speaking—as I have said before—of faith in the incarnate
Word. For He says: “My words, they are spirit and they are
life;” showing that He was speaking of that spiritual eating,
wherewith he who eats, lives; while the Jews understood

«Him to speak of a carnal eating, and therefore raised a dispute.
But no eating gives life, except the eating of faith, for this is
the really spiritual and living eating; as Augustine says:
“Why dost thou get ready thy stomach and thy teeth?
Believe, and thou hast eaten.” A sacramental eating does not
give life, for many eat unworthily, so that Christ cannot be
understood to have spoken of the sacrament in this passage.

There are certainly some who have misapplied these words

L


148 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


to the sacrament, as did the writer of the decretals some time
ago, and many others. It is one thing, however, to misapply
the Scriptures, and another to take them in their legitimate
sense; otherwise. when Christ says: “‘ Except ye eat my flesh,
and drink my blood, ye have no life in you,” He would be
condemning all infants, all the sick, all the absent, and all
who were hindered in whatever manner from a sacramental
eating, however eminent their faith, if in these words He had
meant to enjoin a sacramental eating. Thus Augustine, in his
second book against Julianus, proves from Innocentius tha
even infants, without receiving the sacrament, eat the flesl
and drink the blood of Christ; that is, partake in the same
faith as the Church. Let this then be considered as settled,
that the sixth chapter of John has nothing to do with the
matter. For which reason I have written elsewhere that the
Bohemians could not rightfully depend upon this passage ir
their defence of reception in both kinds.


CONCERNING THE LORD’S SUPPER


There are two passages which treat in the clearest manner of
this subject, and at which we shall look,—the statements in the
Gospels respecting the Lord’s Supper, and the words of Paul.
(1 Cor. xi.) Matthew, Mark, and Luke agree that Christ
gave the whole sacrament to all His disciples; and that Paul
taught both parts of it is so certain, that no one has yet been
shameless enough to assert the contrary. Add to this, that
according to the relation of Matthew, Christ did not say
concerning thé bread, “Eat ye all of this,’ but did say con-
cerning the cup, “ Drink ye all of this.” Mark also does not
say, “ they all ate,” but “they all drank of it.” Hach writer
attaches the mark of universality to the cup, not to the bread ;
as if the Spirit foresaw the schism that should come, and
should forbid to some that communion in the cup which Christ
would have common to all. How furiously would they rave
against us, if they had found the word “all” applied to the
bread, and not to the cup. They would leave us no way of
escape, would clamour us down, pronounce us heretics, condemn


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 149


us as schismatics. But when the word stands on our side against
them, they allow themselves to be bound by no laws of logic,
these men of freest will, while they change, and change again,
and throw into utter confusion even the things which are
of God.

But suppose me to be standing on the other side and
questioning my lords the papists. In the Supper of the Lord,
the whole sacrament, or the sacrament in both kinds, was
either given to the presbyters alone, or at the same time to the
laity. If to the presbyters alone (for thus they will have it to
be), then it is in no wise lawful that any kind should be given
to the laity; for it ought not to be rashly given to any, to
whom Christ did not give it at the first institution. Other-
wise, if we allow one of Christ’s institutions to be changed, we
make the whole body of His laws of no effect; and any man
may venture to say that he is bound by no law or institution
of Christ. For in dealing with Scripture one special exception
does away with any general statement. If on the other hand
it was given to the laity as well, it inevitably follows, that
reception in both kinds ought not to be denied to the laity ;
and in denying it to them when they seek it, we act impiously,
and contrary to the deed, example, and institution of Christ.

I confess that I have been unable to resist this reasoning,
and have neither read, heard of, nor discovered anything to be
said on the other side, while the words and example of Christ
stand unshaken, who says—not by way of permission, but of
commandment—“ Drink ye all of this.” For if all are to drink
of it, and this cannot be understood as said to the presbyters
alone, then it is certainly an impious deed to debar the laity
from it when they seek it, were it even an angel from heaven
who did so. For what they say of its being left to the decision
of the Church which kind should be administered, is said with-
out rational ground, is alleged without authority, and is as
easily contemned as proved; nor can it avail against an
adversary who opposes to us the word and deed of Christ, and
whose blows must therefore be returned with the word of
Christ ; and this we have not on our side.

If, however, either kind can be denied to the laity, then by
the same decision of the Church a part of baptism or of
penance might be taken from them, since in each case the

1 2


150 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


reason of the matter and the power are alike. Therefore as
the whole of baptism and the whole of absolution are to be
granted to all the laity, so is the whole sacrament of the bread,
if they seek it. I am much astonished, however, at their
assertion that it is wholly unlawful, under pain of mortal sin,
for presbyters to receive only one kind in the mass; and this
for no other reason than that (as they all unanimously say) the
two kinds form one full sacrament, which ought not to be
divided. Let them tell me, then, why it is lawful to divide it
in the case of the laity, and why they alone should not be
granted the entire sacrament. Do they not admit, on their
own showing, that either both kinds ought to be granted to the
laity, or that it is mo lawful sacrament which is granted to them
under one kind? How can the one kind be a full sacrament
in the case of the laity, and not a full one in the case of the
presbyters ? Why do they vaunt the decision of the Church and
the power of the Pope in this matter? The words of God and
the testimonies of truth cannot thus be done away with. —

It follows further that, if the Church can take from the
laity the one kind, the wine, she can also take from them the
other kind, the bread, and thus might take from the laity the
whole Sacrament of the Altar, and deprive the institution of
Christ of all effect in their case. But, I ask, by what
authority ? If, however, she cannot take away the bread, or
both kinds, neither can she the wine. Nor can any possible
argument on this point be brought against an opponent, since
the Church must necessarily have the same power in regard to
either kind as in regard to both kinds; if she has it not as
regards both kinds, she has it not as regards either. I should
like to hear what the flatterers of Rome may choose to say on
this point.

But what strikes me most forcibly of all, and thoroughly
convinces me, is that saying of Christ: “This is my blood,
which is shed for you and for many, for the remission of sins.”
Here you see most clearly that the blood is given to all for
whose sins it is shed. Now who will dare to say that it was
not shed for the laity? Do you not see who it is that He
addresses as He gives the cup? Does He not give it to all?
Does He not say that it was shed for all? “For you,” He says.
Let us grant that these are priests. ‘And for many,” He


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 151


continues. These cannot be priests; and yet He says: ‘“ Drink
ye all of it.” I also could easily trifle on this point, and turn
the words of Christ into a mockery by my words, as that trifler
my opponent does. But those who rest upon the Scriptures
in arguing against us, must be refuted by the Scriptures. ,
These are the reasons which have kept me from condemning
the Bohemians, who, whether they be good or bad men,
certainly have the words and deeds of Christ on their side,
while we have neither, but only that idle device of men: “The
Church hath thus ordered it;” while it was not the Church,
but the tyrants of the churches, without the consent of the
Church, that is, of the people of God, who have thus ordered it.

Now where, I ask, is the necessity, where is the religious
obligation, where is the use, of denying to the laity reception
in both kinds, that is, the visible sign, when all men grant
them the reality of the sacrament without the sign? If they
grant the reality, which is the greater, why do they not
grant the sign, which is the less? or in every sacrament the
sign, in so far as itisa sign, is incomparably less than the reality
itself. What then, I ask, should hinder the granting of the
lesser thing, when the greater is granted ; unless indeed, as it
seems to me, this has happened by the permission of God in
His anger, to be the occasion of a schism in the Church; and
to show that, having long ago lost the reality of the sacrament,
we are fighting on behalf of the sign, which is the lesser thing,
against the reality, which is the greatest and only important
thing; just as some persons fight on behalf of ceremonies
against charity. This monstrous perversion appears to have
begun at-the same time at which we began in our folly to
set Christian charity at nought for the sake of worldly riches,
that God might show by this terrible proof that we think
signs of greater consequence than the realities themselves.
* What perversity it would be, if you were to concede that the
faith of baptism is granted to one seeking baptism, and yet
deny him the sign of that very faith, namely, water.

Last of all stand the irrefutable words of Paul, which must
close every mouth (1 Cor. xi.): “I have received of the Lord
that which also I delivered unto you.” He does not say, as this
friar falsely asserts out of hig own head, “TI permitted to you.”
Nor is it true that he granted the Corinthians reception in


152 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


both kinds on account of the contentions among them. In the
first place, as the text itself shows, the contention was not
about the reception in both kinds, but about the contemptuous-
ness of the rich and the envy of the poor, as is clear from the
text, which says: “One is hungry and another is drunken,” and,
‘Ye shame them that have not.” Then too he is not speaking
of what he delivered as if it were for the first time. He does
not say: “I receive from the Lord and I deliver to you,” but
“TI have received and I have delivered,” namely, at the
beginning of his preaching, long before this contention arose,
thus signifying that he had delivered to them the reception in
both kinds. This “delivering” means “enjoining,” as he
elsewhere uses the same word. Thus the smoke clouds of
assertion which this friar heaps together concerning per-
mission, without Scripture, without reason, and without cause,
go for nothing. His opponents do not ask what his dreams
are, but what the judgment of Scripture is on these points;
and out of it he can produce not a tittle in support of his
dream, while they can bring forward so many thunderbolts in
defence of their belief.

Rise up then in one body, all ye flatterers of the Pope, be
active, defend yourselves from the charge of impiety, tyranny,
and treason against the Gospel, and wrongful calumniation of
your brethren, ye who proclaim as heretics those who cannot
approve of the mere dreams of your brains, in opposition to
such plain and powerful Scriptures. If either of the two are
to be called heretics and schismatics, it is not the Bohemians,
not the Greeks, since they take their stand on the Gospels;
but you Romans who are heretics and impious schismatics, you
who presume upon your own figments alone, against the
manifest teaching of the Scriptures of God.

But what can be more ridiculous, or more worthy of the
head of this friar, than to say that the Apostle wrote thus and
gave this permission toa particular church, that of Corinth,
but not to the universal Church? Whence does he prove this ?
Out df his usual store—his own impious head. When the
universal Church takes this epistle as addressed to itself, reads
it, and follows it in every respect, why not in this part of it?
If we admit that any one epistle of Paul, or one passage in any


one epistle, does vot concern the universal Church, we do


5


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 153


away with the whole authority of Paul. The Corinthians
might say that what he taught concerning faith, in writing to
the Romans, did: not concern them. What could be more
blasphemous or more mad than this mad idea? Far be it from
us to imagine that there can be one tittle in the whole of Paul,
which the whole of the universal Church ought not to imitate
and keep. Not thus thought the Fathers, nor any until these
perilous times, in which Paul foretold that there should be
blasphemers, blind and senseless men; among whom this friar
is one, or even the foremost.

But let us grant this intolerably wild assertion. If Paul
gave permission to a particular church, then, on your own
showing, the Greeks and the Bohemians are acting rightly, for
they are particular churches, and therefore it is enough that
they are not acting against the teaching of Paul, who at least
gives them permission. Furthermore, Paul had not power to
permit of anything contrary to the institution of Christ.
Therefore, on behalf of the Greeks and the Bohemians, I set up


_ these sayings of Christ and of Paul against thee, Rome, and all


thy flattérers ;, nor canst thou show that power has been given
thee to change these things by one hair’s breadth ; much less to
accuse others of heresy, because they disregard thy presump-
tuous pretensions. It is thou who deservest to be accused of
impiety and tyranny. y

We also read the words of Cyprian, who by himself is
powerful enough to stand against all the Romanists, and who
testifies in his discourse concerning the lapsed in the fifth book,
that it had been the custom in that church for both kinds to be
administered to laymen and even to children ; yea, for the body
of the Lord to be given into their hands; as he shows by many
instances. Among other things he thus reproves some of the
people: “And because he does not immediately receive the body
of the Lord with unclean hands, or drink the blood of the Lord
with polluted mouth, he is angry with the priests as sacrile-
gious.” You see that he is here speaking of certain sacrilegious
laymen, who wished to receive from the priests the body and the
blood. Have you here, wretched flatterer, anything to gabble ?
Say that this holy martyr, this teacher of the Church, so highly
endowed with the apostolic spirit, was a heretic, and availed


‘himself of a permission ‘in his particular church !


154 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


He relates in the same place an incident which had oc-
curred in his own sight and presence, when he writes in the
plainest terms that as deacon he had given the cup to an infant
girl, and when the child struggled against it, had even
poured the blood of the Lord into its mouth. We read the
same thing of St. Donatus, whose broken cup how dully does
this wretched flatterer try to get rid of “TI read,” he says,
“that the cup was: broken, I do not read that the blood was
given.” What wonder that he who perceives in the Holy
Scriptures what he wills to perceive, should also read in his-
torical narratives what he wills to read! But can he in this
way at all establish the power of the Church to decide, or can
he thus confute heretics? But enough said on this subject ;
for I did not begin this treatise in order to answer one who is
unworthy of an answer, but in order to lay open the truth of
the matter.

I conelude, then, that to deny reception in both kinds to the
laity is an act of impiety and tyranny, and one not in the

‘power of any angel, much less of any Pope or Council what-
ever. Nor doI care for the Council of Constance, for, if its
authority is to prevail, why should not also that of the Council
of Basle, which decreed on the other hand that the Bohemians
should be allowed to receive in both kinds? a point which was
carried there after long discussion, as the extant annals and
documents of that Council prove. This fact that ignorant
flatterer brings forward on behalf of his own dreams, so wisely
does he handle the whole matter.

The first bondage, then, of this sacrament is as regards its
substance or completeness, which the tyranny of Rome has
wrested from us. Not that they sin against Christ, who use
one kind only, since Christ has not commanded the use of any,
but has left it to the choice of each individual, saying: “This
do ye, as oft as ye shall do it, in remembrance of me;” but
they sin who forbid that both kinds should be given to those
who desire to use this freedom of choice, and the fault is not in
the laity, but in the priests. The sacrament does not belong to
the priests, but to all; nor are the priests lords, but servants,
whose duty it is to give both kinds to those who seek them, as
often as they seek them. If they have snatched this right from
the laity, and forcibly denied it to them, they are tyrants, and


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 155


the laity are free from blame, whether they go without one or
both kinds; for meanwhile they will be saved by their faith,
and by their desire for a complete sacrament. So too the
ministers themselves are bound to grant baptism and absolution
to him who seeks them; if they do not grant them, the seeker
has the full merit of his own faith, while they will be accused
before Christ as wicked servants. Thus of old the holy Fathers
in the desert passed many years without communi¢ating in
either kind of the sacrament.

Tam not, therefore, advocating the seizing by force on both
kinds, as if we were of necessity commanded and compelled to
receive them, but I am instructing the conscience, that every
man may endure the tyranny of Rome, knowing that he has
been forcibly deprived of his right in the sacrament on account
of his sins. This only I would have, that none should justify
the tyranny of Rome, as if she had done right in denying one
kind to the laity, but that we should abhor it, and withhold
our consent from it, though we may bear it, just as if we were
in bondage with the Turk, where we should not be at liberty to
use either kind, For this reason I have said that it would be
a fine thing, in my opinion, if this bondage were done away
with by the decree of a general council, and Christian liberty
restored to us out of the hands of the tyrant of Rome; and if
to each man were left his own free choice about seeking and
using it, as it is left in the case of baptism and penance. Now,
however, by the same tyranny, he compels one kind to be
received year by year; so extinct is the liberty granted us by
Christ, and such are the deserts of our impious ingratitude.

The other bondage of the same sacrament is a milder one,
inasmuch as it regards the conscience, but one which it is by
far the most perilous of all things to touch, much more to
condemn: Here I shall be a Wickliffite, and a heretic under
.8ix hundred names. What then? Since the Bishop of Rome has
ceased to be a bishop and has become a tyrant, I fear absolutely
none of his decrees, since I know that neither he, nor even a
general council, has power to establish new articles of the faith.

Formerly, when I was imbibing the scholastic theology, my
-lord the Cardinal of Cambray gave me occasion for reflection, by
arguing most acutely, in the fourth book of the Sentences, that
it would be much more probable, and that fewer superfluous


156 . LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


miracles would have to be introduced, if real bread and real
wine, and not only their accidents, were understood to be upon
the altar, unless the Church had determined the contrary.
Afterwards, when I saw what the church was, which had thus
determined, namely, the Thomistic, that is, the Aristotelian
Church, I became bolder, and whereas I had been before in
great straits of doubt, I now at length established my con-
science in the former opinion, namely, that there were real
bread and real wine, in which were the real flesh and real
blood of Christ, in no other manner and in no less degree than
the other party assert them to be under the accidents. And
this I did, because I saw that the opinions of the Thomists,
whether approved by the Pope or by a council, remained
opinions, and did not become articles of the faith, even were an
angel from heaven to decree otherwise. For that which is
asserted without the support of the Scriptures, or of an
approved revelation, it is permitted to hold as an opinion, but
it is not necessary to believe. Now this opinion of Thomas is
so vague, and so unsupported by the Scriptures, or by reason,
that he seems to me to have known neither his philosophy nor
his logic. For Aristotle speaks of accidents and subject very
differently from St. Thomas; and it seems to me that we
ought to be sorry for so great a man, when we see him striving,
not only to draw his opinions on matters of faith from Aristotle,
but to establish them -upon-an authority whom he did not
understand; a most unfortunate structure raised on a most
unfortunate foundation.

I quite consent then that whoever chooses to hold either
opinion should do so. My only object now is to remove scruples
of conscience, so that no man may fear being guilty of heresy, if
he believes that real bread and real wine are present on the
altar. Let him know that he is at liberty, without peril to his
salvation, to imagine, think, or believe in either of the two
ways, since here there is no necessity of faith. In the first
place, I will not listen to those, or make the slightest account
of them, who will cry out that this doctrine is Wicklifiite,
Hussite, heretical, and opposed to the decisions of the Church.
None will do this but those whom I have convicted of being
themselves in many ways heretical, in the matter of indulg-
ences, of free will and the grace of God, of good works and


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 157


sins, etc. If Wickliff was once a heretic, they are themselves
ten times heretics, and it is an excellent thing to be blamed
and accused by heretics and perverse sophists, since to please
them would be the height of impiety. Besides, they can give
no other proof of their own opinions, nor have they any other
way of disproving the contrary ones, than by saying: “ This is
Wickliffite, Hussite, heretical.” This feeble argument, and no
other, is always at the tip of their tongue; and if you ask for
Scripture authority, they say: “This is our opinion, and the
Church has decided it thus.” To suchan extent do men who are
reptobate concerning the faith, and unworthy of belief, dare to
propose to us their own fancies, under the authority of the
Church, as articles of the faith.

There is, however, very much to be said for my opinion;
in the first place this—that no violence ought to be done to
the words of God, neither by man, nor by angel, but that, as far
as possible, they ought to be kept to their simplest meaning,
and not to be taken, unless the circumstances manifestly
compel us to do so, out of their grammatical and proper
signification, that we may not give our adversaries any
opportunity of evading the teaching of the whole Scriptures.
For this reason the ideas of Origen were rightly rejected, when,
in contempt of the plain grammatical meaning, he turned the
trees, and all other objects described ag existing in Paradise,
into allegories; since hence it might be inferred that trees
were not created by God. So in the present case, since the
Evangelists write clearly that Christ took bread and blessed it,
and since the book of Acts and the Apostle Paul also call it
bread, real bread and real wine must be understood, just as the
cup was real. For even these men do not say that the cup is
transubstantiated. Since then it is not necessary to lay it
down that a transubstantiation is effected by the operation of
divine power, it must be held as a figment of human opinion ;
for it rests on no support of Scripture or of reason. It is
forcing on us a novel and absurd usage of words, to take bread as
meaning the form or accidents of bread, and wine as the form
or accidents of wine. Why do they not take all other things as
forms or accidents? Even if everything else were consistent
with this idea, it would not be lawful thus to enfeeble the word
of God, and to deprive it so unjustly of its proper meaning.


158 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


The Church, however, kept the right faith for more than
twelve centuries, nor did the holy Fathers ever or anywhere
make mention of this transubstantiation (a portentous word and
dream indeed), until the counterfeit Aristotelian philosophy
began to make its inroads on the Church within these last
three hundred years, during which many other erroneous
conclusions have also been arrived at, such as:—that the
Divine essence is neither generated nor generates; that the
soul is the substantial form of the human body; and other
like assertions, which are made absolutely without reason or
cause, as the Cardinal of Cambray himself confesses.

They will say, perhaps, that we shall be in peril of idolatry if
we do not admit that bread and wine are not really there. This
is truly ridiculous, for the laity have never learnt the subtle
philosophical distinction between substance and accidents; nor,
if they were taught it, could they understand it; and there is
the same peril, if we keep the accidents, which they see, as in
the case of the substance, which they do not see. For if it
is not the accidents which they adore, but Christ concealed
under them, why should they adore the substance, which they
do not see?

But why should not Christ be able to include His body
within the substance of bread, as well as within the accidents ?
Fire and iron, two different substances, are so mingled in red-
hot iron, that every part of it is both fire and iron. Why may
not the glorious body of Christ much more be in every part of
the substance of the bread ?

. Christ is believed to have been born of the inviolate womb
of his mother. In this case too let them say that the flesh of
the Virgin was for a time annihilated; or, as they will have it
to be more suitably expressed, transubstantiated, that Christ
might be enwrapped in its accidents, and at length come forth
through its accidents. The same will have to be said respecting
the closed door and the closed entrance of the tomb, through
both of which He entered, and went out without injury to them.
But hence has sprung that Babylon of a philosophy concerning
continuous quantity, distinct from substance, till things have
come to such a point, that they themselves do not know what
are accidents, and what is substance. For who has ever
proved to a certainty that heat and cold, colour, light, weight,


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 159
and form are accidents? Lastly they have been driven to
pretend that God creates a new substance additional to those
accidents on the altar, on account of the saying of Aristotle,
that the essence of an accident is to be 7m something; and
have been led to an infinity of monstrous ideas, from all of
which they would be free, if they simply allowed the bread on
the altar to be real bread. I rejoice greatly, that at least
among the common people there remains a simple faith in this
sacrament. They neither understand nor argue whether there
are accidents in it or substance, but believe with simple faith
that the body and blood of Christ are truly contained in it,
leaving to these men of leisure the task of arguing as to what
it contains.

But perhaps they will say that we are taught by Aristotle
that we must take the subject and predicate of an affirmative
proposition to signify the same thing ; or, to quote the words
of that monster himself in the 6th book of his Metaphysics,
“An affirmative proposition requires the composition of the
extremes ;” which they explain as their signifying the same
thing. Thus in the words, “This is my body,” they say that
we cannot take the subject to signify the bread, but the body
of Christ.

What shall we say to this? Whereas we are making
Aristotle and human teachings the censors of such sublime and
divine matters, why do we not rather cast away these curious
enquiries; and simply adhere to the words of Christ, willing to
be ignorant of what is done in this sacrament, and content
to know that the real body of Christ is present in it by virtue
of the words of consecration? Is it necessary to comprehend
altogether the manner of the Divine working?

But what do they say to Aristotle, who applies the term
“subject” to all the categories of accidents, although he takes
the substance to be the first subject? Thus, in his opinion,
“this white,” “this great,” “this something,” are subjects,
because something is predicated of them. If this is true,
and if it is necessary to lay down a doctrine of tran-
substantiation in order that it may not be asserted of the
bread that it is the body of Christ; why, I ask, is not a
doctrine of transaccidentation also laid down, that it may not
be affirmed of an accident that it is the body of Christ? For


160 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


the same danger remains, if we regard “this white thing,’
or “this round thing” as the subject. On whatever principle
transubstantiation is taught, on the same ought transacci-
dentation to be taught, on account of the two terms of the
proposition, as is alleged, signifying the same thing.

If, however, by a high effort of understanding, you make
abstraction of the accident, and refuse to regard it as signified
by the subject in saying: “This is my body,” why can you not
as easily rise above the substance of the -bread, and refuse to
let it be understood as signified by the subject; so that “ this
is my body” may be true in the substance no less than in the
accident? Especially so since this is a divine work of almighty
power, which can operate to the same extent and in the same
way in the substance, as it can in the accident.

But, not to philosophize too far, does not Christ appear to have
met these curious enquiries in a striking manner, when He
said concerning the wine, not, “Hoc est sanguis meus,” but
“ Hic est sanguis meus.” He speaks much more clearly still
when He brings in the mention of the cup, saying: “ This cup
is the New Testament in my blood.” (1 Cor. xi.) Does He
not seem to have meant to keep us within the bounds of simple
faith, just so far as to believe that His blood is in the cup?
If, for my part, | cannot understand how the bread can be the
body of Christ, I will bring my understanding into captivity
to the obedience of Christ, and firmly believe, in simple adher-
ence to His word, not only that the body of Christ is in the
bread, but that the bread is the body of Christ. For so shall
I be kept safe by. his words, where it is said: “Jesus took
bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and said, Take, eat, this
(that is, this bread, which He had taken and broken) is my
body.” Paul also says: “The bread which we break, is it not
the communion of the body of Christ?” He does not say that
the communion is in the bread, but that the bread itself is the
communion of the body of Christ. What if philosophy does
not understand these things? The Holy Spirit is greater than
Aristotle. Does it even understand the transubstantiation
which these men speak of, seeing that they themselves confess
that all philosophy breaks down on this point? The reason
why, in the Greek and Latin, the pronoun ¢his is referred to
the body, is that the genders are alike; but in the Hebrew,


4


4


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 161


where there is no neuter gender, it is referred to the bread ;
so that we might properly say: “This (bread) is my body.”
Both the usage of language and common sense prove that the
subject points to the bread, and not to the body, when He
says, Hoe est corpus meum, that is, this bread is my body.

As then the case is with Christ Himself, so is it also with the
sacrament. For it is not necessary to the bodily indwelling of
the Godhead that the human nature should be transubstantiated,
that so the Godhead may be contained beneath the accidents
of the human nature. But each nature is entire, and we can
say with truth: This man is God; this God is man. Though
philosophy does not receive this, yet faith receives it, and
greater is the authority of the word of God, than the capacity
of our intellect. Thus too in the sacrament, it is not neces-
sary to the presence of the real body and real blood, that the
bread and wine should be transubstantiated, so that Christ
may be contained beneath the accidents; but while both bread
and wine continue there, it can be said with truth, “ this bread
is my body, this wine is my blood,” and conversely. Thus
will I understand this matter in honour of the holy words of
God, which I will not allow to have violence done them by the
petty reasonings of men, or to be distorted into meanings alien
to them. I give leave, however, to others to follow the other
opinion, which is distinctly laid down in the decretal, provided
only (as I have said) they do not press us to seep their
opinions as articles of faith.

The third bondage of this same sacrament is that dbus of it
—and by far the most impious—by which it has come about
that at this day there is no belief in the Church more generally
received or more firmly held than that the mass is a good
work and a sacrifice. This abuse has brought in an infinite
flood of other abuses, until faith in the sacrament has been
utterly lost, and they have made this divine sacrament a mere
subject of traffic, huckstering, and money-getting contracts.
Hence communions, brotherhoods, suffrages, merits, anni-
versaries, memorials, and other things of that kind are bought
and sold in the Church, and made the subjects of bargains and
agreements; and the entire maintenance of priests and monks
depends upon these things.

I am entering on an arduous task, and it may perhaps be


162 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


impossible to uproot an abuse which, strengthened by the
practice of so many ages, and approved by universal consent,
has fixed itself so firmly among us, that the greater part of the
books which have influence at the present day must needs be
done away with, and almost the entire aspect of the churches
be changed, and a totally different kind of ceremonies be
brought in, or rather, brought back. But my Christ lives, and
we must take heed to the word of God with greater care, than
to all the intellects of men and angels. I will perform
my part, will bring forth the subject into the light, and will |
impart the truth freely and ungrudgingly as I have received
it. For the rest, let every one look to his own salvation ; I
will strive, as in the presence of Christ my judge, that no man
may be able to throw upon me the blame of his own unbelief
and ignorance of the truth.

~Concerning the Sacrament of the Altar. To begin,—if we
wish to attain safely and prosperously to the true and free
knowledge of this sacrament, we must take the utmost care to.
put aside all that has been added by the zeal or the notions
- of men to the primitive and simple institution; such -as
vestments, ornaments, hymns, prayers, musical instruments,
lamps, and all the pomp of visible things; and must turn our”
eyes and our attention only to the pure institution of Christ;
and set nothing else before us but those very words of Christ,
with which He instituted and perfected that sacrament, and
committed it to us. In that word, and absolutely in nothing
else, lies the whole force, nature, and substance of the mass.
All the rest are human notions, accessory to the word of
Christ; and the mass can perfectly well subsist and be kept up
without them. Now the words in which Christ instituted this
sacrament are as follows:—While they were at supper Jesus
took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to His
disciples, and said : “ Take, eat; this is my body which is given .
for you.” And He took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it
to them, saying: “Drink ye all of this; this cup is the New
Testament in my blood, which is shed for you and for many for
the remission of sins; do this in remembrance of me.”

These words the Apostle Paul (1 Cor. xi.) also delivers to
us and explains at greater length. On these we must rest, and
build ourselves up as on a firm rock, unless we wish to be


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 163


carried about with every wind of doctrine, as we have hitherto
been, through the impious teachings of men who pervert the
truth. For in these words nothing has been omitted which
pertains to the completeness, use, and profit of this sacrament ;
and nothing laid down which it is superfluous or unnecessary
for us to know. He who passes over these words in his medi-
tations or teachings concerning the mass will teach monstrous
impieties ; as has been done by those who have made an opus
operatum and a sacrifice of it.

Let this then stand as a first and infallible truth, that the
mass or Sacrament of the Altar is the testament of Christ, '
which He left behind Him at His death, distributing an inherit-
ance to those who believe in Him. For such are His words:
“This cup is the new testament in my blood.” , Let this truth,
I say, stand as an immovable foundation, on which we shall
erect all our arguments. You will see how we shall thus
overthrow all the impious attacks of men on this sweetest
sacrament. The truthful Christ, then, says with truth, that
this is the new testament in His blood, shed for us. It is not

without cause that I urge this; the matter is no small one, but
must be received into the depths of our minds.

If then we enquire what a testament is, we shall also learn
what the mass is; what are its uses, advantages, abuses. A
testament is certainly a promise made by a man about to die,
by which he assigns his inheritance and appoints heirs. Thus
the idea of a testament implies, first, the death of the testator,
and secondly, the promise of the inheritance, and the appoint-
ment of an heir. In this way Paul (Rom. iv.; Gal. iii., iv.;
Heb. ix.) speaks at some length of testaments. We also see
this clearly in those words of Christ. Christ testifies of His
own death, when He says: “ This is my body which is given ;
this is my blood which is shed.” He assigns and points out
the inheritance, when He says: “‘ For the remission of sins.”
And He appoints heirs when He says: “For you and for.
many ;” that is, for those who accept and believe the promise
of the testator; for it is faith which makes us heirs, as we
shall see.

You see then that the mass—as we call it—is a promise of -
the remission of sins, made to us by God; and such a promise
as has been confirmed by the death of the Son of God. For a

M


164 _ LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


promise and a testament only differ in this, that a testament
implies the death of the promiser. A testator is a promiser
who is about to die; and a promiser is, so to speak, a testator
who is about to live. This testament of Christ was prefigured
in all the promises of God from the beginning of the world;
yea! whatsoever value the ancient promises had, lay in that
new promise which was about to be made in Christ, and on
which they depended. Hence the words, “ agreement, cove-
nant, testament of the Lord,” are constantly employed in the
Scriptures ; and by these it was implied that God was about to
die. “For where a testament is, there must also of-necessity-
be the death of the testator.” (Heb. ix. 16.) God having
made a testament, it was necessary that He should die. Now
He could not die, unless He became a man; and thus in this
one word “ testament ” the incarnation and the death of Christ
are both comprehended.

From all this it is now self-evident what is the use, and
what the abuse, of the mass; what is a worthy or an unworthy
preparation for it. If the mass is a promise, as we have said,
we can approach to it by no works, no strength, no merits, but
by faith alone. For where we have the word of God who
promises, there we must have faith on the part of man who
accépts; and it is thus clear that the beginning of our sal-
vation is faith, depending on the word of a promising God, who,
independently of any efforts of ours, prevents us by His free
and undeserved mercy, and holds out to us the word of His
promise. ‘He sent His word and healed them.” (Ps. cvii. 20.)
He did not receive our works and so save us. First of all
comes the word of God; this is followed by faith, and faith by
love, which in its turn does every good work, because it
worketh no evil, yea, it is the fulfilling of the law. There is
no other way in which man can meet or deal with God but by
faith. It is not man by any works of his, but God, who by
His own promise is the author of salvation ; so that everything
depends, is contained, and preserved in the word of His power,
by which He begot us, that we might bea kind of first-fruits of
His creation.

Thus, when Adam was to be raised up after the fall, God
gave him a promise, saying to the serpent: “I will place
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 165


and her seed; she shall bruise thy head, and thou shalt bruise
her heel.” In this word of promise, Adam with his posterity
was, as it were, borne in the bosom of God, and preserved by
faith in Him; waiting patiently for the woman who should
bruise the head of the serpent, as God had promised. In this
faith and waiting he died; not knowing when and how the
promise would be accomplished, but not doubting that it would
be accomplished. For such a promise, being the truth of God,
preserves even in hell those who believe and wait for it. This
promise was followed by another, made to Noah; the bow in
the cloud being given as a sign of the covenant, believing in
which he and his posterity found God propitious. After this,
God promised to Abraham that in his seed all the kindreds of
the earth should be blessed. This is that bosom of Abraham into
which his posterity have been received. Lastly to Moses, and
to the children of Israel, especially to David, God gave a most
distinct promise of Christ; and thus at length revealed what
had been the meaning of the promise made to them of
old time. v

Thus we come to the most perfect promise of all, that of the
new Testament, in which life and salvation are freely promised
in plain words, and are bestowed on those who believe the
promise. Christ conspicuously distinguishes this testament
from the old one, by calling it the “ New Testament.” The old
testament given by Moses was a promise, not of remission of
sins, nor of eternal blessings, but of temporal ones, namely,
those of the land of Canaan ; and by it no one could be renewed
in spirit, and fitted to receive a heavenly inheritance. Hence ~
it was necessary that, as a figure of Christ, an unreasoning
lamb should be slain, in the blood of which the same testament
was confirmed; thus, as is the blood, so is the testament ; as is
the victim, so is the promise. Now Christ says, “The new
testament in my blood,” notin another’s, but in His own blood,
by which grace is promised through the Spirit for the remission
of sins, that we may receive the inheritance.

The mass then, as regards its substance, is properly nothing
else than the aforesaid words of Christ, “Take, eat,” etc. He
seems to say :—‘ Behold, O man, sinner and condemned as thou
art, out of the pure and free love with which I love thee,
according to the will of the Father of mercies, I promise to


um 2


166- LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


thee in these words, antecedently to any merits or prayers of
thine, remission of all thy sins, and eternal life. That thou
"mayest be most certain of this, my irrevocable promise, I will
confirm it by my very death; I will give my body and shed my
blood, and will leave both to thee, as a sign and memorial of
this very promise. As often ag thou shalt receive them, re-
member me; declare and praisé my love and bounty to thee;
and give thanks.”

From this you see that nothing else is required for a worthy
reception of the mass than faith, resting with confidence on
this promise, believing Christ to be truthful in these words of
His, and not doubting that these immeasurable blessings have
been bestowed upon us. On this faith a spontaneous and most
sweet affection of the heart will speedily follow, by which
the spirit of the man is enlarged and enriched ; that is, love,
bestowed through the Holy Spirit on believers in Christ. Thus
the believer is carried away to Christ, that bounteous and bene-
ficent testator, and becomes altogether another and a new man.
Who would not weep tears of delight, nay, almost die for joy
in Christ, if he believed with unhesitating faith that this in-
estimable promise of Christ belongs to him? How can
he fail to love such a benefactor, who of His own accord offers,
promises, and .gives the greatest riches and an eternal in-
heritance to an unworthy sinner, who has deserved very
different treatment ?

Our one great misery is this, that while we have many masses
in the world, few or none of us recognise, consider, or apprehend
the rich promises set before us in them. Now in the mass the
one thing that demands our greatest, nay, our sole attention, is
to keep these words and promises of Christ, which indeed
constitute the mass itself, constantly before our eyes; that we
should meditate on and digest them, and exercise, nourish,
increase, and strengthen our faith in them by this daily com-<
memoration. This is what Christ commands when He says,
“Do this in remembrance of me.” It is the work of an
evangelist faithfully to present and commend that promise
to the people and to call forth faith in it on their part. As
it is—to say nothing of the impious fables of those who teach
human traditions in the place of this great promise—how many
are there who know that the mass is a promise of Christ?


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 167


Even if they teach these words of Christ, they do not teach
them as conveying a promise or a testament, and therefore call
forth no faith in them. ;

It is a deplorable thing in our present bondage, that nowa-
days the utmost care is taken that no layman should hear
those words of Christ, as if they were too sacred to be com-
mitted to the common people. We priests are so mad that we
arrogate to ourselves alone the right of secretly uttering the
words of consecration—as they are called; and that in a way
which is unprofitable even to ourselves, since we never look at
them as promises or a testament for ‘the increase of faith.
Under the influence of some superstitious and impious notion
we do reverence to these words instead of believing them. In
this our misery Satan so works among us that, while he has
left nothing of the mass to the Church, he yet takes care that
every corner of the earth shall be full of masses, that is, of
abuses and mockeries of the testament of God; and that the
world shall be more and more heavily loaded with the gravest
sins of idolatry, to increase its greater damnation. For what
more grievous sin of idolatry can there be, than to abuse the
promises of God by our perverse notions, and either neglect or
extinguish all faith in them.

God (as I have said) never has dealt, or does deal, with men
otherwise than by the word of promise. Again, we can never
deal with God otherwise than by faith in the word of His
promise. He takes no heed of our works, and has no neéd of
them,—though it is by these we deal with other men and with
ourselves ;—but He does require to be esteemed by us truthful
in His promises, and to be patiently considered as such, and
thus worshipped in faith, hope, and love. And thus it is that
He is glorified in us, when we receive and hold every blessing
not by our own efforts, but from His mercy, promise, and
gift. This is that true worship and service of God, which we
are bound to render in the mass. But when the words of the
promise are not delivered to us, what exercise of faith can
there be? And without faith who can hope? who can love?
without faith, hope, and love, what service can there be?
There is no doubt therefore that, at the present day, the whole
body of priests and monks, with their bishops and all their
superiors, are idolaters, and living in a most perilous state,


- 168 - LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


through their ignorance, abuse, and mockery of the mass, or
sacrament, or promise of God.

It is easy for any one to understand that two things are
necessary at the same time, the promise and faith. With-
out a promise we have nothing to believe; while without faith
the promise is useless, since it is through faith that it is
established and fulfilled. Whence we easily conclude that
the mass, being nothing else than a promise, can be approached
and partaken of by faith alone; without which whatever
prayers, preparations, works, signs, or gestures are practised,
_are rather provocations to impiety than acts of piety. It
constantly happens that when men have given their attention
to all these things they imagine that they are approaching tke
altar lawfully ; and yet, in reality, could never be more unfit
to approach it, because of the unbelief which they bring with
them. What a number of sacrificing priests you may daily see
everywhere, who if they have committed some trifling error,
by unsuitable vestments, or unwashed hands, or by some
hesitation in the prayers, are wretched, and think themselves
guilty of an immense crime! Meanwhile, as for the mass
itself, that is, the divine promise, they neither heed nor
believe it; yea, are utterly unconscious of its existence. O,
unworthy religion of our age, the most impious and ungrateful
of all ages !

There is then no worthy preparation.for the mass, or
rightful use of it, except faith, by which it is believed in as a
divine promise. Wherefore let him who is about to approach
the altar, or to receive the sacrament, take care not to appear
before the Lord his God empty. Now he will be empty, if he
has not faith in the mass, or New Testament; and what more
grievous impiety can he commit against the truth of God than
by this unbelief? Ag far as in him lies, he makes God a liar, .
and renders His promises idle. It will be safest then to go to
the mass in no other spirit than that in which thou wouldst
go to hear any other promise of God; that is, to be prepared,
not to do many works, and bring many gifts, but to believe
and receive all that is promised thee in that ordinance, or is
declared to thee through the ministry of the priest as promised.
Unless thou comest in this spirit, beware of drawing near; for
thou wilt surely draw near unto judgment.


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY -169


T have rightly said then, that the whole virtue of the mass
consists in those words of Christ, in which He testifies that
remission is granted to all who- believe that His body is given
and His blood shed for them. There is nothing then more
necessary for those who are about to hear mass than to
meditate earnestly and with full faith on the very words of
Christ; for unless they do this, all else is done in vain. Jt is
certainly true that God has ever been wont, in all His promises,
to give some sign, token, or memorial of His promise; that it
might be kept more faithfully and tell more strongly on men’s
minds. Thus when He promised to Noah that the earth
should not be destroyed by another deluge, He gave His bow in
the cloud, and said that He would thus remember His covenant. |
To Abraham, when He promised that his seed should inherit
the earth, He gave circumcision as a seal of the righteous- -
ness which is by faith, Thus to Gideon He gave the dry and
the dewy fleece, to confirm His promise of victory over the
Midianites. ‘Thus to Ahaz He gave a sign through Isaiah, to
confirm his faith in the promise of victory over the kings of
Syria and Samatia. We read in the Scriptures of many such
signs of the promises of God.

So too in the mass, that first of all promises, He gave a
sign in memory of so great a promise, namely, His own body
and His own blood in the bread and wine, saying, “ Do this in
remembrance of me.” Thus in baptism He adds to the words
of the promise the sign of immersion in water. Whence we
see that in every promise of God two things are set before us,
the word and the sign. The word we are to understand as
being the testament, and the sign as being the sacrament;
thus, in the mass, the word of Christ is the testament, the
bread and wine are the sacrament. And as there is greater
power in the word than in the sign, so is there greater power
in the testament than in the sacrament. A man can have and
use the word or testament without the sign or sacrament.
“Believe,” saith Augustine, “and thou hast eaten;” but in
what do we believe except in the word of Him who promises ?
Thus I can have the mass daily, nay hourly; since, as often as
I will, I can set before myself the words of Christ, and nourish
and strengthen my faith in them; and this is in very truth
the spiritual eating and drinking.


170 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


Here we see how much the theologians of the Sentences have
done for us in this matter. In the first place, not one of them
handles that which is the sum and substance of the whole,
namely, the testament and word of promise; and thus they do
away with faith and the whole virtue of the mass. In the
next place, the other part of it, namely, the sign or sacrament,
is all that they deal with ; but they do not teach faith even in
this, but their own preparations, opera operata, participations
and fruits of the mass. At length they have reached the very
depth of error, and have involved themselves in an infinity of
metaphysical trifliigs concerning transubstantiation and other
points; so that they have done away with all faith, and with
the knowledge and true use as well of the testament as of the
sacrament; and have caused the people of Christ—as the
prophet says—to forget their God for many days. But do
thou leave others to recount the various fruits of hearing mass,
and apply thy mind to saying and believing with the prophet,
that God has prepared a table before thee in the presence of
thine enemies—a table at which thy faith may feed and grow
strong. Now it is only on the word of the divine promise that
thy faith can feed; for man shall not live by bread alone, but
by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of God. (Matt.
iv. 4.) Wherefore, in the mass, thou must look above all
things most closely to the word of promise as to a most
sumptuous banquet, full of every kind of food and holy
nourishment for thy soul; this thou must esteem above all
things ; in this thou must place all thy trust, and cleave firmly
to it, even in the midst of death and all thy sins. If thou dost
this, thou wilt possess not only those drops ag it were and
littlenesses of the fruits of the mass, which some have super-
stitiously invented, but the main fount of life itself, namely,
that faith in the word from which every good thing flows; as
Christ said, “He that believeth on me, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of living water.” (John vii. 38); and again, “ Whoso-
ever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never
thirst ; but the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting life.” (John iv. 14.)

There are two difficulties which are wont to beset us, and
prevent our receiving the benefits of the mass. ‘The one is,
that we are sinners and unworthy, from our utter vileness, of


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 171


such great blessings. The other is—even if we were worthy—
the very greatness of the blessings themselves, which are such
that weak nature cannot dare to seek or hope for them. Who
would not be struck in the first place with amazement rather
than with the desire for the remission of sins and eternal life,
if he rightly estimates the greatness of the blessings which
come through these—namely, the having God as his Father, and
being a child of God, and heir of all good things? To meet
this double weakness of nature, thou must take hold of the

_word of Christ, and fix thine eyes much more strongly on it,
than on these cogitations of thine own infirmity. For the
works of the Lord are great, and He is mighty to give, beyond
all that we can seek or comprehend. Indeed, unless His works
surpassed our worthiness, our capacity, our whole comprehen-
sion, they would not be divine. Thus too Christ encourages us,
saying: “Bear not, little flock; for it is your Father’s good
pleasure to give you the kingdom.” (Luke xii. 32.) This
incomprehensible exuberance of God’s mercy, poured out on us
through Christ, makes us, in our turn, to love Him above all
things, to cast ourselves upon Him with the most perfect trust,
to, despise all things, and be ready to suffer all things for
Him. Hence this sacrament has been rightly called the
fountain of love.

Here we may draw an example from human affairs. If some
very rich lord were to bequeath a thousand pieces of gold to
any beggar, or even to an unworthy and bad servant, such a
one would certainly demand and receive them confidently,
without regard either to his own unworthiness or to the
greatness of the legacy. If any one were to set these before
him as objections, what do you think he would reply? He
would certainly answer: “ What is that to you? It is not
by my deserving, nor by any right of my own, that I receive
what I do receive. I know that I am unworthy of it, and that
I am_ receiving much more than I deserve; nay, I have
‘deserved the very contrary. But what I claim, I claim by
right of a testament, and of the goodness of another ; if it was
not an unworthy act to leave such a legacy to me who am so
unworthy, why should my unworthiness make me hesitate to’
accept it? Nay, the more unworthy I am, the more readily
do I embrace this free favour from another.” With such


172 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


reasonings we must arm our own consciences against all their
seruples and anxieties, that we may hold this promise of Christ
with unhesitating faith, We must give the utmost heed not
to approach in any confidence in our own confessions, prayers,
and preparations; we must despair of all these and come in a
lofty confidence in the promise of Christ—since it is the word
of promise which alone must reign here—and in pure faith,
which is the one and sole sufficient preparation.

We see from all this, how great the wrath of God has been
which has permitted our impious teachers to conceal from us
the words of this testament, and thus, as far as in them lay, to
extinguish faith itself. It is self-evident what must necessarily
follow this extinction of faith, namely, the most impious super-
stitions about works, For when faith perishes and the word
of faith is silent, then straightway works, and traditions of
works, rise up in its place. By these we have been removed
from our own land, as into bondage at Babylon, and all that
was dear to us has been taken from us. Even thus it has
befallen us with the mass, which, through the teaching of
wicked men, has been changed into a good work, which they
call opus operatum, and by which they imagine that they are
all powerful with God, Hence they have gone to the extreme
of madness; and, having first falsely affirmed that the mass
is of avail through the force of the opus operatum, they have
gone on to say, that even if it be hurtful to him who offers
it impiously, yet it is none the less useful to others. On this
basis they have established their applications, participations,
fraternities, anniversaries, and an infinity of lucrative and
gainful business of that kind.

You will scarcely be able to stand against these errors, many
and strong as they are, and deeply as they have penetrated,
unless you fix what has been said firmly in your memory, and
give the most stedfast heed to the true nature of the mass.
You have heard that the mass is nothing else than the divine
promise or testament of Christ, commended to us by the
sacrament of His body and blood. If this is true, you will see
that it cannot in any way be a work, nor can any work be per-
formed in it, nor can it be handled in any way but by faith
alone. Now faith is not a work, but the mistress and life of all
works. Is there any man so senseless as to call a promise he


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY - 178


has received, or a legacy that. has been bestowed on him, a good
work done on his part towards the testator? What heir is
there, who thinks that he is doing a service to his father when
he receives the testamentary documents along with the inheri-
tance bequeathed to him? Whence then this, impious rash-
ness of ours, that we come to receive the testament of God as
if we were doing a good work towards Him? Is not such
ignorance of that testament, and such a state of bondage of
that great sacrament,a grief beyond all tears? Where we
ought to be grateful for blessings bestowed on us, we come in
our pride to give what we ought to receive, and make a
mockery, with unheard-of perversity, of the mercy of the Giver.
We give to Him as a work of ours what we receive as a gift
from Him; and we thus make-.the testator no longer the
bestower of His good gifts on us, but the receiver of ours.
Alas for such impiety !

Who has ever been so senseless as to consider baptism a
good work? What candidate for baptism has ever believed he
was doing a work which he might offer to God on behalf of
himself and others? If then in one sacrament and testament
there is no good work communicable to others, neither can
there be any in the mass, which is itself nothing but a testa-
ment and a sacrament. Hence it is a manifest and impious
error, to offer or apply the mass for sins, for satisfactions, for
the dead, or for any necessities of our own or of others. The
evident truth of this statement you will easily understand, if
you keep closely to the fact, that the mass is a divine promise,
which can profit no one, be applied to no one, be communicated
to no one, except to the believer himself; and that solely by
his own faith, Who can possibly receive or apply for another
a promise of God, which requires faith on the part of each
individual? Can I give another man the promise of God, if he
does not believe it ? or can I believe for another man? or can
I make another believe? Yet all this I must be able to do if I
can apply and communicate the mass to others; for there are
in the mass only these two things, God’s promise, and man’s
faith which receives that promise. If I can do all this, I can
also hear and believe the gospel on behalf of other men, I can
be baptized for another man, I can be absolved from sin for
another man, I can partake of the Sacrament of the Altar


?


174 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


for another man; nay, to go through the- whole list of their
sacraments, I can also marry for another man, be ordained
priest for another man, be confirmed for another man, receive
extreme unction for another man.

Why did not Abraham believe on behalf of all the Jews?
Why was every individual Jew required to exercise faith in the
same promise which Abraham believed? Let us keep to this
impregnable truth:—where there is a divine promise, there
every man stands for himself; individual faith is required ;
every man shall give account for himself, and shall bear his
own burdens; as Christ says: “He that believeth and is
baptized shall be saved; but he that believeth not shall be
damned.” (Mark xvi. 16.) Thus every man can make the
mass useful only to himself, by his own faith, and can by no
means communicate it to others; just as a priest cannot
administer a sacrament to any man on behalf of another, but
administers the same sacrament to each individual separately.
The priests in their work of consecration and administration
act as ministers for us; not that we offer up any good work
through them, or communicate actively ; but by their means we
receive the promise and its sign, and communicate passively.
This idea continues among the laity; for they are not said
to do a good work, but to receive a gift. But the priests
have gone after their own impieties and have made it a good
work that they communicate and make an offering out of the
sacrament and testament of God, whereas they ought to have
received it as a good gift. a ,

But you will say: “What? will you ever overthrow the
practices and opinions which, for so many centuries, have
rooted themselves in all the churches and monasteries; and all
that superstructure of anniversaries, suffrages, applications,
and communications, which they have established upon the
mass, and from which they have drawn the amplest revenues ?”
L reply: It is this which has compelled me to write concerning
the bondage of the Church. For the venerable testament of
God has been brought into a profane servitude to gain,
through the opinions and traditions of impious men, who have
passed over the Word of God, and have set before us the
imaginations of their own hearts, and thus have led the world
astray. What have I to do with the number or the greatness


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 175


of those who are in error? Truth is stronger than all. If
you can deny that Christ teaches that the mass is a testament
and a sacrament, I am ready to justify those men. Again, if
you can say that the man who receives the benefit of a
testament, or who uses for this purpose the sacrament of
promise, is doing a good work, I am ready and willing to
condemn all that J have said. But since neither is possible,
why hesitate to despise the crowd which hastens to do evil,
whilst you give glory to God and confess His truth, namely,
that all priests are perversely mistaken, who look on the mass
as a work by which they may aid their own necessities, or
those of others, whether dead or alive? My statements, I
know, are unheard of and astounding. But if you look into
the true nature of the mass, you will see that I speak the
truth. These errors have proceeded from that over-security,
which has kept us from perceiving that the wrath of God was
coming upon us.

This I readily admit, that the prayers which we pour forth
in the presence of God, when we meet to partake of the mass,
are good works. or benefits, which we mutually impart, apply,
and communicate, and offer up for one another; as the Apostle
James teaches us to pray for one another that we may be
saved. Paul also exhorts that supplications, prayers, inter- —
cessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; for kings,
and for all that are in authority. (1 Tim. ii. 1,2.) These
things are not the mass, but works of the mass ;—if, indeed, we
can call the prayers of our hearts and our lips works—because
they spring from the existence and growth of faith in the
sacrament. The mass or promise of God is not completed by
our prayers, but only by our faith; and in faith we pray and
do other good works. But what priest sacrifices with the
intention and idea of only offering up prayers? They all
imagine that they are offering Christ himself to God the
Father as an all-sufficient victim ; and that they are doing a
good work on behalf of all men, who, as they allege, will profit
by it. They trust in the opus operatum, and do not attribute
the effect to prayer. Thus, by a gradual growth of error, they
attribute to the sacrament the benefit which springs from
prayer; and they offer to God what they ought to receive as
a gift from Him.


¢


176 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


We must therefore make a clear distinction between the
testament and sacrament itself, and the prayers which we offer
at the same time. And not only so, but we must .understand
that those prayers are of no value at all, either to him who
offers them, or to those for whom they are offered, unless the
testament has been first received by faith, so that the prayer
may be that of faith, which alone is heard, as the Apostle
James teaches us. So widely does prayer differ from the mass.
I can pray for as many persons as I will; but no one receives
the mass unless he believes for himself; and that only so far
as he believes; nor can it be given either to God or to men,
but it is God alone who by the ministry of the priest gives it
to men, and they receive it by faith alone, without any works
or merits. No one would be so audaciously foolish as to say
that, when a poor and needy man comes to receive a benefit
from the hand of a rich man, he is doing a good work. Now
the mass is the benefit of a divine promise, held forth to all
men by the hand of the priest. It is certain, therefore, that the
mass is not a work communicable to others, but the object of
each man’s individual faith, which is thus to be nourished and
strengthened.

We must also get rid of another scandal, which is a much
greater and a very specious one; that is, that the mass is
universally believed to be a sacrifice offered to God. With this
opinion the words of the canon of the mass appear to agree,
such as—“These gifts; these offerings; these holy sacrifices;” and’
again, “this oblation.” There is also a very distinct prayer that
the sacrifice may be accepted like the sacrifice of Abel. Hence
Christ is called the victim of the altar. To this we must add
the sayings of the holy Fathers, a great number of authorities,
and the usage that has been constantly observed throughout
the world.

To all these difficulties, which beset us so pertinaciously,
we must oppose with the utmost constancy the words and
example of Christ. Unless we hold the mass to be the promise
or testament of Christ, according to the plain meaning of the
words, we lose all the gospel and our whole comfort. Let us
allow nothing to prevail against those words, even if an angel
from heaven taught us otherwise. Now in thesé words there is
nothing about a work or sacrifice. Again, we have the example


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 177


of Christ on our side. When Christ instituted this sacrament
and established this testament in the Last Supper, he did not
offer himself to God the Father, or accomplish any work on
behalf of others, but, as he sat at the table, he declared the
same testament to each individual present and bestowed on each
the sign of it. Now the more any mass resembles and is akin to
that first mass of all which Christ celebrated at the Last Supper,
the more Christian it is. But that mass of Christ wag most
simple; without any display of vestments, gestures, hymns,
and other ceremonies; so that if it had been necessary that it
should be offered as a sacrifice, His institution of it would not
have been complete. ;

Not that any one ought rashly to blame the universal

Church, which has adorned and extended the mass with many
other rites and ceremonies; but we desire that no one should
be so deceived by showy ceremonies, or so perplexed by the
amount of external display, as to lose the simplicity of the
mass, and in fact pay honour to some kind of transubstantiation ;
as will happen if we pass by the simple substance of the mass,
and fix our minds on the manifold accidents of its outward
show. For whatever has been added to the mass beyond the
word and example of Christ, is one of its accidents; and none
of these ought we to consider in any other light than we now
consider monstrances—as they are called—and altar cloths,
within which the host is contained. It is a contradiction in
terms that the mass should be a sacrifice; since we receive the
“mass, but give a sacrifice. Now the same thing cannot be
received and offered at the same time, nor can it be at once
given and accepted by the same person. This is as certain
as that prayer and the thing prayed for cannot be the same;
nor can it be the same thing to pray and to receive what we
pray for.

What shall we say then to the canon of the mass and the
authority of the Fathers? First of all I reply :—If there were
nothing to be said, it would be safer to deny their authority
altogether, than to grant that the mass is a work or a sacrifice,
and thus to deny the word of Christ and to overthrow faith and
the mass together. However, that we may keep the Fathers
too, we will explain (1 Cor. xi.) that the believers in Christ, when
they met to celebrate the mass, were accustomed to bring with


178 - LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


_ them portions of food and drink, called “ collects,” which were

distributed among the poor, according to the example of the
Apostles (Acts iv.), and from which were taken the bread and
wine consecrated for the sacrament. Since all these gifts were
sanctified by the word and prayer after the Hebrew rite, in
accordance with which they were lifted on high, as we read in
Moses, the words and the practice of elevation, or of offering,
continued in the Church long after the custom had died out of
collecting and bringing together the gifts which were offered
or elevated. Thus Hezekiah (Isaiah xxxvii. 4) bids Isaiah to lift
his prayer for the remnant that is left. Again, the Psalmist
says: “ Lift up your hands to the holy place ;” and—‘ To thee
will I lift up my hands;” and again—‘ That men pray every-
where, lifting up holy hands.” (1 Tim. ii. 8.) Hence the
expressions “ sacrifice ” or “oblation” ought to be referred, not
to the sacrament and testament, but to the “ collects” them-
selves. Hence too the word collect has remained in use for
the prayers said in the mass.

For the same reason the priest elevates the bread and the
cup as soon as he has consecrated them; but the proof that he
is not therein offering anything to God is that in no single
word does he make mention of a victim or an oblation. This
too is a remnant of the Hebrew rite, according to which it was
customary to elevate the gift» which, after being received with
giving of thanks, were brought back to God. Or it may be
considered as an admonition to us, to call forth our faith in that
testament which Christ on that occasion brought forward and
set before us; and also as a display of its sign. The oblation of
the bread properly corresponds to the words: “This is my
body ;” and Christ, as it were, addresses us bystanders by this
very sign, Thus too the oblation of the cup properly corre--
sponds to these words: “This cup is the New Testament in
my blood.” The priest ought to call forth our faith by the
very rite of elevation. And as he openly elevates the sign or
sacrament in our sight, so I wish that he also pronounced the
word or testament with loud and clear voice in our hearing ;
and that in the language of every nation, that our faith might
be more efficaciously exercised. Why should it be lawful to
perform mass in Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, and not also in
German, or in any other language ?


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY ~— . 179


Wherefore, in this abandoned and most perilous age, let the
priests who sacrifice take heed in the first place that those
words of the major and minor canon, with the collects, which
speak only too plainly of a sacrifice, are to be applied, not to
the sacrament, but either to the consecration of the bread and
wine themselves, or to their own prayers. For the bread and
wine are presented beforehand to receive a blessing, that they
may be sanctified by the word and prayer. But after being
blessed and consecrated, they are no longer offered, but are
received as a gift from God. And in this matter let the priest:
consider that the gospel is to be preferred to all canons and
collects composed by men; but the gospel, as we have seen,
does not allow the mass to be a sacrifice.

Tn the next place, when the priest is performing mass publicly,
let him understand that he is only receiving and giving to others
the communion in the mass; and let him beware of: offering up
at the same moment his prayers for himself and others, lest he
should seem to be presuming to offer the mass. The priest also
who is saying a private mass must consider himself as adminis-
tering the communion to himself. A private mass is not at all
different from, nor more efficient than, the simple reception of
the communion by any layman from the hand of the priest,
except for the prayers, and that the priest consecrates and
administers it to himself. In the matter itself of the mass and
the sacrament, we are all equal, priests and laymen.

Even if he is requested’ by others to do so, let him beware of
celebrating votive masses—as they are called—and of receiving
any payment for the mass, or presuming to offer any votive
sacrifice; but let him carefully refer all this to the prayers
which he offers, whether for the dead or the living. Let him
think thus:—I will go and receive the sacrament for myself
alone, but while I receive it I will pray for this or that person,
and thus, for purposes of food and clothing, receive payment for
my prayers, and not for the mass. Nor let it shake thee in
this view, though the whole world is of the contrary opinion
and practice. Thou hast the most certain authority of the
gospel, and relying on this, thou mayest easily contemn the
ideas and opinions of men. If however, in despite of what I
say, thou wilt persist in offering the mass, and not thy prayers
only, then know that I have faithfully warned thee, and that I

N


180 _ LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


shall stand clear in the day of judgment, whilst thou wilt bear
thine own sin. I have said what I was bound to say to {hee, as
a brother to a brother, for thy salvation ; it will be to thy
profit if thou take heed to my words, to thy hurt if thou neglect
them. And if there are some who will condemn these statements
of mine, I reply in the words of Paul: “ Evil men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse, deceiving, and being deceived.”
(2 Tim. iii. 13.)

Hence any one may easily understand that sen -quoted
passage from Gregory, in which he says that a mass celebrated
by a bad priest is not to be considered of less value than one
by a good priest, and that one celebrated by "St. Peter would
not have been better than one celebrated by the traitor Judas.
Under cover of this saying some try to shelter their own
impiety, and have drawn a distinction between the opus
operatum and the opus operans; that they might continue
secure in their evil living, and yet pretend to be benefactors
to others. Gregory indeed speaks the truth, but these men
pervert his meaning. It is most true that the testament and
sacrament are not less effectively given and received at the
_ hands of wicked priests than at those of the most holy.
Who doubts that the gospel may be preached by wicked
men? Now the mass is a part of the gospel; nay, the very
sum and compendium of the gospel. For what is the whole
gospel but the good news of the remission of sins? Now
all that can be said in the most ample and copious words
concerning the remission of sins and the mercy of God, is all
briefly comprehended in the word of the testament. Hence

also sermons to the people ought to be nothing else but
expositions of the mass, that is, the setting forth of the divine
pronfise of this testament. This would be to teach faith, and
truly to edify the Church. But those who now expound the
mass make a sport and mockery of the subject by figures of
speech derived from human ceremonies.

As therefore a wicked man can baptize, that is, can apply the
word of promise and the sign of water to the person baptized,
so can he also apply and minister the promise of this sacra-
ment to those who partake of it, and partake himself with .
them, as the traitor Judas did in the supper of the Lord.’
Still the sacrament and testament remains always the same; it


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 181


performs in the believer its own proper work, in the unbeliever
it performs a work foreign to itself. But in the matter of
oblations the case is quite different ; for since it is not the mass
but prayers which are offered to God, it is evident that the
oblations of a wicked priest are of no value. As Gregory
himself says, when we employ an unworthy person as an
advocate, the mind of the judge is prejudiced against us. We
must not therefore confound these two things, the mass and
prayer, sacrament and work, testament and sacrifice. The
one comes from God to us through the ministry of the priest,
and requires faith on our part ; the other goes forth from our
faith to God through the priest, and requires that He should
hear us; the one comes down, the other goes upwards. The
one therefore does not necessarily require that the minister
should be worthy and pious, but the other does require it,
because God does not hear sinners. He knows how to do us
good by means of wicked men, but He does not accept the
works of any wicked man, as He showed in the case of Cain.
lt is written: “ The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination
to the Lord.’ ” (Prov. xv. 8); and again: “ Whatsoever is not of
faith is sin.” (Rom. xiv. 23.)

We shall now make an end of this first part of the subject,
but I am ready to produce furjher arguments when any one
comes forward to attack these. From all that has been said
we see for whom the mass was intended, and who are worthy
partakers of it; namely, those alone who have sad, afflicted,
disturbed, confused, and erring consciences. For since the
word of the divine promise in this sacrament holds forth to us
remission of sins, any man may safely draw near to it who is
harassed either by remorse for sin, or by temptation to sin.
This testament of Christ is the one medicine for past, paesent,
and future sins; provided thou cleavest to it with unhesitating
faith, and believest that that which is signified by the words of
the testament is freely given to thee. If thou dost not so
believe, then nowhere, never, by no works, by no efforts, wilt
thou be able to appease thy conscience. For faith is the
sole peace of conscience, and unbelief the sole disturber of
conscience. ~


N 2


182 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM


Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who according to the riches of His mercy has at least
preserved this one sacrament in His Church uninjured and
uncontaminated by the devices of men, and has made it free to
all nations and to men of every class. He has not suffered it
to be overwhelmed with the foul and impious monstrosities of
avarice and superstition ; doubtless having this purpose, that
He would have little children, incapable of avarice and super-
stition, to be initiated into this sacrament, and to be sanctified
by perfectly simple faith in His word. To such, even at the
present day, baptism is of the highest advantage. If this
sacrament had been intended to be given to adults and those
of full age, it seems as if it could have hardly preserved its
efficacy and its glory, in the presence of that tyranny of avaricé
and superstition which has supplanted all divine ordinances
among us. In this case too, no doubt, fleshly wisdom would
have invented its preparations, its worthinesses, its reserva-
-tions, its restrictions, and other like nets for catching money ;
so that the water of baptism would be sold no chéaper than
parchments are now.

Yet, though Satan has not been able to extinguish the
virtue of baptism in the case of little children, still he has had
power to extinguish it in all adults; so that there is scarcely
any Ome nowadays who remembers that he has been baptized,
much less glories in it ; so many other ways having been found
of obtaining remission of sins and going to heaven. Occasion
has been afforded to these opinions by that perilous saying of
St. Jerome, either misstated or misunderstood, in which he
calls penitence the second plank of safety after shipwreck ; as if
baptism were not penitence. Hence, when men have fallen
into sin, they despair of the first plank, or the ship, as being no
longer of any use, and begin to trust and depend only on the
second plank, that is, on penitence. Thence have sprung those


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 183


_ infinite loads of vows, religious dedications, works, satisfactions,
pilgrimages, indulgences, and systems; and from them those
oceans of books and of human questionings, opinions, and tradi-
tions, which the whole world nowadays cannot contain. Thus —
this tyranny possesses the Church of God in an incomparably
worse form than it ever possessed the synagogue, or any nation
under heaven.

It was the duty of Bishops to remove all these abuses, and
to make every effort to recall Christians to the simplicity of
baptism ; that so they might understand their own position,
and what as Christians they ought to do. But the one busi-
ness of Bishops at the present day is to lead the people as
far as possible away from baptism and to plunge them all
under the deluge of their own tyranny; and thus, as the
prophet says, to make the people of Christ forget Him for_
ever. Oh wretched men who are called by the name of
Bishops! they not only do nothing and know nothing which
Bishops ought, but they are even ignorant what they ought to
know and do. They fulfil the words of Isaiah: “His watch-
men are blind ; they are all ignorant; they are shepherds that
cannot understand ; they all look to their own way, every one
for his gain, from his quarter.” (Is. lvi. 10,11.)

The first thing then we have to notice in baptism ig the
divine promise, which says: He who believes and is baptized
shall be saved. This promise is to be infinitely preferred to
the whole display of works, vows, religious orders, and what-
ever has been introduced by the invention of man. On this
promise depends our whole salvation, and we must take heed
to exercise faith in it, not doubting at all that we are saved,
since we have been baptized. Unless this faith exists and is
applied, baptism profits us ‘nothing ; nay, itis hurtful to us, not
only at the time when it is received, but in the whole “course of
our after life. For unbelief of this kind charges the divine pro-
mise with falsehood; and to do this is the greatest of all sins.
If we attempt this exercise of faith, we shall soon see how difficult
a thing it is to believe this divine promise. For human weak-
ness, conscious of its own sinfulness, finds it the most difficult
thing in the world to believe that it is saved, or can be saved ;
and yet, unless it believes this, it cannot be saved, because it
does not believe the divine truth which promises salvation.


184 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


This doctrine ought to have been studiously inculcated upon
the people by preaching; this promise ought to have been
perpetually reiterated; men ought to have been constantly
reminded of their baptism; faith ought to have been called
forth and nourished. When this divine promise has been once
conferred upon us, its truth continues even to the hour of our
death ; and thus our faith in it ought never to be relaxed, but
ought to be nourished and strengthened even till we die, by a
perpetual recollection of the promise made to us in baptism.
Thus, when we rise out of our sins and exercise penitence,
we are simply reverting to the efficacy of baptism and to
faith in it, whence we had fallen; and we return to the pro-
mise then made to us, but which we had abandoned through
our sin. For the truth of the promise once made always
abides, aud is ready to stretch out the hand and receive us
when we return, This, unless I mistake, is the meaning of
that obscure saying, that baptism is the first of sacraments
and the foundation of them all, without which we can possess
none of the others.

Thus it will be of no little profit to a penitent, first of
all to recall to mind his own baptism, and to remember with |
confidence that divine promise which he had deserted ; rejoic-
ing that he is still in a fortress of safety, in that he has been
baptized; and detesting his own wicked ingratitude in having
fallen away from the faith and truth of baptism. His heart
will be marvellously comforted, and encouraged to hope for
mercy, if he fixes his eyes upon that divine promise once
made to him, which could not lie, and which still continues
entire, unchanged, and unchangeable by any sins of his; as
Paul says: “If we believe not, yet He abideth faithful; He
cannot deny Himself.” (2 Tim. ii. 13.) This truth of God
will preserve him; and even if all other hopes perish, this, if
he believes it, will not fail him. Through this truth he will
have something to oppose to the insolent adversary; he will
have a barrier to throw in the way of the sins which disturb
his conscience; he will have an answer to the dread of death
and judgment; finally, he will have a consolation under every
kind of temptation, in being able to say: God is faithful to
His promise; and in baptism I received the sign of that
promise. If God is for me, who can be against me ?


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 185


If the children of Israel,.when returning to God in repent-
ance, first of all called to mind their exodus from Egypt, and
in remembrance of this turned back to God, who had brought
them out—a remembrance which is so often inculcated on
them by Moses, and referred to by David—how much more
ought we to remember our exodus from Egypt, and in remem-
brance of it to return to Him who brought us out through the
washing of the new birth. Now this we can do most advan-
tageously of allin the sacrament of the bread and wine: So
of old these three sacraments, penitence, baptism, and the
bread, were often combined in the same act of worship; and
the one added strength to the other. Thus we read of a
certain holy virgin who, whenever she was tempted, relied on
her baptism only for defence, saying, in the briefest words : “I
am a Christian.” The enemy forthwith felt the efficacy of
baptism, and of the faith which depended on the truth of a
promising God, and fled from her.

We see then how rich a Christian, or baptized man, is;
since, even if he would, he cannot lose his salvation by any
sins however great, unless he refuses to believe; for no sins
whatever can condemn him, but unbelief alone. All other
sins, if faith in the divine promise made to the baptized man
stands firm or is restored, are swallowed up in a moment
through that same ‘faith; yea, through the truth of God,
because He cannot deny Himself, if thou confess Him, and
cleave believingly to His promise. . Whereas contrition, and
confession of sins, and satisfaction for sins, and every effort
that can be devised by men, will desert thee at thy need, and
will make thee more miserable than ever, if thou forgettest
this divine truth and puffest thyself up with such things as
these. For whatever work is wrought apart from faith in the
truth of God is vanity and vexation of spirit.

We also see how perilous and false an idea it is that
penitence is a second plank of refuge after shipwreck ; and
chow pernicious an error it is to suppose that the virtue of
baptism has been brought to an end by sin, and that this ship
has been dashed to pieces. That ship remains one, solid, and
indestructible, and can never be broken up into different
planks. In it all are conveyed who are carried to the port of
salvation, since it.is the truth of God giving promises in the


186 % LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


sacraments. What certainly does happen is that many rashly
leap out of the ship into the sea and perish ; these are they who
abandon faith in the promise and rush headlong into sin. But
the ship itself abides, and passes on safely in its course; and
any man who, by the grace of God, returns to the ship, will be
borne on to life, not on a plank, but on the solid ship itself.
_ Such a man is he who returns by faith to the fixed and
abiding promise of God. Thus Peter charges those who sin
with having forgotten that they were purged from their old
sins (2 Peter i. 9); doubtless meaning to reprove their
ingratitude for the baptism they had received, and the impiety
of their unbelief.

What profit then is there in writing so much about baptism,
and yet not teaching faithin the promise? All the sacraments
were ingtituted for the purpose of nourishing faith, and yet so
far are they from attaining this object, that men are even
found impious enough to assert that a man ought not to be sure
of the remission of sins, or of the grace of the sacraments. By
this impious doctrine they deprive the whole world of its
senses, and utterly extinguish, or at least bring into bondage
that sacrament of baptism, in which the first glory of our
conscience stands, Meatiwhile they senselessly persecute
wretched souls with their contritions, their anxious confes-
sions, their circumstances, satisfactions, works, and an infinity
of such trifles. Let us then read with caution, or rather despise
the Master of Sentences (Book iv.) with all his followers ; who,
when they write their best, write only about the matter and
form of the sacraments, and so handle only the dead and
perishing letter of those sacraments, while they do not even
touch upon their spirit, life, and use; that is, the truth of the
divine promise, and faith on our part.

See then that thou be not deceived by the display of works,
and by the fallacies of human traditions, and so wrong the
truth of God and thy own faith. If thou wilt be saved, thou
must begin by faith in the sacraments, without any works.
Thy faith will be followed by these very works, but thou must
not hold faith cheap, for it is itself the most excellent and
most difficult of all works, and by it alone thou wilt be saved,
even if thou wert compelled to be destitute of all other works.
For it is a work of God, not of man, as Paul teaches. All


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 187


other works He performs with us, and by us; this one work
He performs in us and without us. ;

From what has been said we may clearly distinguish the
difference between man the minister and God the Author of
baptism. Man baptizes and does not baptize; he baptizes,
because he performs the work of dipping the baptized person ;
he does not baptize, because in this work he does not act upon
his own authority, but in the place of God. Hence we ought
to receive baptism from the hand of man just as if Christ
Himself, nay, God Himself, were baptizing us with His own
hands. For it is not a man’s baptism, but that of Christ and
God; though we receive it by the hand of a man. Even so
any other creature which we enjoy through the hand of
another is really only God’s. Beware then of making any
such distinction in baptism, as to attribute the outward rite to
man, and the inward blessing to God. Attribute both of them
to God alone, and consider the person of him who confers
baptism in no other light than as the vicarious instrument
of God, by means of which the Lord ‘sitting in heaven dips
thee in the water with His own hands, and promises thee
remission of gins upon earth, speaking to thee with the voice
of a man through the mouth of His minister.

The very words of the minister tell thee this, when he
says: “I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.” He does not say:
“I baptize thee in my name;” but says, as it were: “ What
I do, I do not by my own authority, but in the place and in
the name of God; and thou must look upon it as if the Lord
Himself did it in visible shape. The Author and the minister
are different, but the work of both is the same; nay, rather it
is that of the Author alone through my ministry.” In my
judgment the expression, “In the name,” relates to the person
of the Author, so that not only is the name of the Lord
brought forward and invoked in the doing of the work, but
the work itself is performed, as being that of another, in the
name and'in the place of another. By the like figure Christ
says: “Many shall come in my name.” (Matt. xxiv. 5.)
And again: “By whom we have received grace and apostle-
ship, for obedience to the faith among all nations, for his
name.” (Rom. i. 5.)


188 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


I most gladly adopt this view; because it is a thing most
full of consolation, and an effective aid to faith, to know that
we have been baptized, not by a man, but by the very Trinity
Itself through a man, who acts towards us in Its name. This
brings to an end that idle contention which is carried on about
the “form” of baptism—as they call the words themselves—
the Greeks saying: “Let the servant of Christ be baptized ;”
the Latins: “I baptize.” Others also, in their pedantic trifling,
condemn the use of the expression: “I baptize thee in the
name of Jesus Christ ””—though it is certain that the Apostles
baptized in this form, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles—
and will have it that no other form is valid than the follow-
ing: “I baptize thee in the name of the Father, and of the
Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen.” But they strive in
vain; they prove nothing; they only bring forward their own
dreams. In whatever manner baptism is administered, pro-
vided it is administered, not in the name of a man, but in the
name of the Lord, it truly saves us. Nay, I have no doubt
that if a man received baptism in the name of the Lord, even
from a wicked minister who did not give it in the name of the
Lord, he would still be truly baptized in the name of the
Lord. For the efficacy of baptism depends not so much on the
faith of him who confers it, as of him who receives it. Thus we
read an instance of a certain player who was baptized in jest.
These and similar narrow questions and disputes have been
raised for us by those who attribute nothing to faith, and
everything to works and ceremonies. On the contrary, we
owe nothing to ceremonies, and everything to faith alone,
which makes us free in spirit from all these scruples and
fancies.

Another thing which belongs to baptism is the sign or
sacrament, which is that dipping into water whence it takes its
name. For in Greek to baptize signifies to dip, and baptism
is a dipping. We have said already that, side by side with the
divine promises, signs also are given us, to represent by a
figure the meaning of the words of the promise; or, as the
moderns say, the sacrament has an effectual significance.
‘What that significance is we shall see. Very many have
thought that in the word and the water there is some occult
spiritual virtue, which works the grace of God in the soul of


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 189


the recipient. Others deny this, and declare that there is no
virtue in the sacraments, but that grace is given by God alone,
who, according to His covenant, is present at the sacraments
instituted by Himself. All however agree in this, that the
sacraments are effectual signs of grace. They are led to this
conclusion by this one argument, that it does not otherwise
appear what pre-eminence the sacraments of the new law would
have over those of the old, if they were only signs. Hence
they have been driven to attribute such efficacy to the
sacraments of the new law, that they have stated them to be
profitable even to those who are in mortal sin; and have
declared that neither faith nor grace are requisite, but that it
is sufficient that we do not place any impediment in the way,
that is, any actual purpose of sinning afresh.

We must carefully avoid and fly from these doctrines, for
they are impious and unbelieving, repugnant to faith and to
the nature of the sacraments. It is a mistake to suppose that
the sacraments of the new law differ from the sacraments of
the old law as regards the efficacy of their significance. Both
are on an equality in their significance; for the same God who
now saves us by baptism and the bread, saved Abel by his
sacrifice, Noah by the Ark, Abraham by circumcision, and all
the other Patriarchs by their own proper signs. There is no
difference then between a sacrament of the old and of the new
law, as regards their significance; provided we understand by
the old law all the dealings of God with the Patriarchs and other
Fathers in the time of the law. For those signs which were
given to the Patriarchs and Fathers are completely distinct
from the legal figures which “Moses instituted in his law; such
as the rites of the priesthood, in relation to vestments, vessels,
food, houses, and the like. These are as different as possible,
not only from the sacraments of the new law, but also from
those signs which God gave from time to time to the Fathers
who lived under the law; such as that given to Gideon in the
fleece, to Manoah in his sacrifice; such also as that which
Isaiah offered to Ahaz. In all these cases alike, some promise
was given which required faith in God.

In this then the figures of the law differ from signs new or
old, that the figures of the law have no word of promise
annexed to them, requiring faith, and therefore are not signs


190 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


of justification, inasmuch as they are not sacraments of faith,
which alone justify, but only sacraments of works. Their
whole force and nature lay in works, not in faith; for he who
did them fulfilled them, even if his work was without faith.
Now our signs or sacraments and those of the Fathers have
annexed to them a word of promise, which requires faith, and
can be fulfilled by no other work. Thus they are signs or
sacraments of justification, because they are sacraments of
justifying faith and not of works; so that their whole efficacy
lies in faith itself, not in working. He who believes them
fulfils them, even though he do no work. Hence the saying :
It is not the sacrament, but faith in the sacrament which
justifies. Thus circumcision did not justify Abraham and his
seed ; and yet the Apostle calls it a seal of the righteousness of
faith, because faith in that promise with which circumcision
was connected did justify, and fulfilled the meaning of circum-
cision. Faith was that circumcision of the heart in spirit,
which was figured by the circumcision of the flesh in the letter.
Thus it was evidently not the sacrifice of Abel which justified
him, but the faith by which he offered himself entirely to God ;
of which faith the outward saciifice was a figure.

Thus it is not baptism which justifies any man, or is of any
advantage; but faith in that word of promise to which
baptism is added; for this justifies, and fulfils the meaning of
baptism. For faith is the submerging of the old man, and the
emerging of the new man. Hence it cannot be that the new
sacraments differ from the ancient sacraments, for they both
alike have divine promises and the same spirit of faith; but
they differ incomparably from the ancient figures, on account
of the word of promise, which is the sole and most effective
means of difference. Thus at the present day the pomp of
vestments, localities, meats, and an infinite variety of cere-
monies, doubtless figure excellent works to be fulfilled in the
spirit; and yet, since no word of divine promise is connected
with them, they can in no way be compared with the signs
of baptism and the bread. Nor can they justify men nor
profit them in any way, since their fulfilment lies in the
very practice or performance of them without faith; for
when they are done or performed, they are fulfilled. Thus
the Apostle speaks of those things, “which all are to perish


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 191 ©


with the using; after the commandments and doctrines of
men.” (Col. ii. 22.) Now the sacraments are not fulfilled by
being done, but by being believed.

Thus it cannot be true that there is inherent in the Sacra-
ments a power effectual to produce justification, or that they are
efficacious signs of grace. These things are said in ignorance of —
the divine promise and to the great detriment of faith ; unless
indeed we call them efficacious in this sense, that, if along with
them there be unhesitating faith, they do confer grace most
certainly and most effectually. But that it is not this kind of
efficacy which those writers attribute to them is evident from
this, that they assert them to be profitable to all men, even
the wicked and unbelieving, provided they put no obstacle in
the way; as if unbelief itself were not the most persistent of
all obstacles, and the most hostile to grace. Thus they have
endeavoured to make out of the sacrament a precept, and out
of faith a work. For if a sacrament confers grace on me,
merely because I receive it, then it is certainly by my own

-work and not by faith that I obtain grace; nor do I apprehend

any promise in the sacrament, but only a sign instituted and
commanded by God. It is evident from this how utterly
the sacraments are misunderstood by these theologians of
the Sentences, inasmuch as they make no account either of
faith or of the promise in the sacraments, but cleave only
to the sign and the use of the sign, and carry us away from
faith to works, from the word fo the sign. Thus, ag I
have said, they have not only brought the sacraments into
bondage, but, as far as in them lay, have entirely done away
with them.

Let us then open our eyes, and learn to look more to the
word than the sign, more to faith than to the work or use of
the sign; and let us understand that wherever there is a
divine promise, there faith is required; and that both of these
are so necessary that neither can be of any effect without-the
other. We can neither believe unless we have a promise, nor is
the promise effectual unless it is believed; while if these two
act reciprocally, they produce a real and sure efficacy in the
sacraments. Hence to seek efficacy in the sacrament inde-
pendently of the promise and of faith is to strive in vain
and to fall into condemnation. Thus Christ says: “He that


192 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


believeth and is: baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth
not shall be damned.” (Mark xvi. 16.) Thus He shows that
in the sacrament faith is so necessary that it can save us
even without the sacrament; and on this account when He
says: “He that believeth not,” He does not add: “and is not
baptized.”

Baptism then signifies two things, death and resurrection ;
that is, full and complete justification. When the minister
dips the child into the water, this signifies death; when he
draws him out again, this signifies life. Thus Paul explains
the matter: “Therefore we are buried with him by baptism
into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in
tewness of life.” (Rom. vi. 4.) This death and resurrection we
eall a new creation, a regeneration, and a spiritual birth; and
these words are not only to be understood allegorically, as
they are by many, of the death of sin and the life of grace,
but of a real death and resurrection. For baptism has no
fictitious meaning, nor does sin die or grace rise fully within
us, until the body of sin which we bear in this life is destroyed ;
for, as the Apostle says, as long as we are in the flesh, the
desires of the flesh work in us and are worked upon. Hence
when we begin to believe, we begin at the same time to die to this
world, and to live to God in a future life ; so that faith is truly
a death and resurrection ; that is, that spiritual baptism in
which we are submerged and emerge.

When then the washing away of sins is attributed to
baptism, it is rightly so attributed; but the meaning of the
phrase is too slight and weak to fully express baptism, which
is rather a symbol of death and resurrection. For this reason
I could wish that the baptized should be totally immersed,
according to the meaning of the word and the signification of
the mystery; not that I think it necessary to do so, but that
it would be well that so complete and ‘perfect a thing as
baptism should have its sign also in completeness and perfec-
tion, even as it was doubtless instituted by Christ. For a
sinner needs not so much to be washed as to die, that he may
be altogether renewed into another creature, and that there
may thus be a correspondence in him to the death and resur-
rection of Christ along with whom he dies and rises again in


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 193


baptism. For though we may say that Christ was washed
from His mortality when He died and rose again, yet it isa
weaker expression than if we said that He was totally changed
and renewed ; and so there is more intensity in saying that
death and regurrection to eternal life are signified to us by
baptism, than that we are washed from sin.

Here again we see that the sacrament of baptism, even in
respect to the sign, is not the mere business of a moment, but
has a lasting character. For though the transaction itself
passes quickly, the thing signified by it lasts even until death,
yea, till the resurrection at the last day. For as long as we
live we are always doing that which is signified by baptism ;
that is, we are dying and rising again. We are dying, I say,
not only in our affections and spiritually, by renouncing the
sing and vanities of the world, but in very deed we are
beginning to leave this bodily life and to apprehend the future
life, so that there is a real (as they call it) and also a bodily
passing out of this world to the Father.

We must therefore keep clear of the error of those who
have reduced the effect of baptism to such small and slender
dimensions that, while they say that grace is infused by it,
they assert that this grace is afterwards, so to speak, effused by
sin; and that we must then go to heaven by some other way,
as if baptism had now became absolutely useless. Do not thou
judge thus, but understand that the significance of baptism
is such that thou mayest live and die in it; and that neither
by penitence nor by any other way canst thou do aught but
return to the effect of baptism, and do afresh what thou wert
baptized in order todo, and what thy baptism signified.
Baptism never loses its effect, unless in desperation thou refuse
to return to salvation. Thou mayst wander away for a time
from the sign, but the sign does. not on that account lose its
effect. Thus thou hast been baptized once for all sacramentally,
‘but thou needest continually to be baptized by faith, and must
continually die and continually live. Baptism hath swallowed
up thy whole body and given it forth again; and so the
substance of baptism ought to swallow up thy whole life, in
body and in soul, and to give it back in the last day, clothed
in the robe of brightness and. immortality. Thus we are
never without the sign as well as the substance of baptism ;


194 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


nay, we ought to be continually baptized more and more,
until we fulfil the whole meaning of the sign at the last
day.

We see then that whatever we do in this life tending to
the mortifying of the flesh and the vivifying of the spirit is
connected with baptism; and that the sooner we are set free
from this life, the more speedily we fulfil the meaning of our
baptism ; and the greater the sufferings we endure, the more
happily do we answer the purpose of baptism. The Church
was at its happiest in those days when martyrs were daily
put to death and counted as sheep for the slaughter; for
then the virtue of baptism reigned in the Church with full
power, though now we have quite lost sight of it for the
multitude of human works and doctrine. The whole life which
we live ought to be a baptism, and to fulfil the sign or
sacrament of baptism; since we have been set free from all
other things and given up to baptism alone, that is, to death
and resurrection,

To whom can we assign the blame that this glorious liberty
of oursand this knowledge of baptism are nowadays in bondage,
except only to the tyranny of the Roman Pontiff? He most of
all men, as becomes a chief shepherd, ought to have been the
preacher and the asserter of this liberty and this knowledge ;
as Paul says: ‘“ Let a man so account of us, as of the ministers
of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.” (1 Cor. iv. 1.)
But his sole object is to oppress us by his decrees and laws,
and to ensnare us into bondage to his tyrannical power. Not
to speak of the impious and damnable way in which the Pope
fails to teach these mysteries, by what right, I ask, has he
‘established laws over us? Who has given him authority to
bring into bondage this liberty of ours, given us by baptism?
One purpose, as I have said, we ought to carry out in our
whole lives, namely, to be baptized, that is, to be mortified,
and to live by faith in Christ. This faith alone ought to have
been taught, above all by the chief shepherd. But now not a
word is said about faith, but the Church is crushed by an
infinite number of laws concerning works and ceremonies; the
virtue and knowledge of baptism are taken away ; the faith of
Christ is hindered.

I say then, neither Pope, nor bishop, nor any man what-


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 195


ever has the right of making one syllable binding on a

Christian man, unless it is done with his own consent. What-
ever is done otherwise is done in a spirit of tyranny ; and thus

the prayers, fastings, almsgiving, and whatever else the Pope

ordains and requires in the whole body of his decrees, which
are as many as they are iniquitous, he has absolutely no right’
to require and ordain ; and he sins against the liberty of the

Church as often as he attempts anything of the kind. Hence

it has come to pass that while the churchmen of the present

day are strenuous defenders of church liberty, that is, of wood,

stone, fields, and money (for in this day things ecclesiastical

are synonymous with things spiritual), they yet, by their false

teaching, not only bring into bondage the true liberty of the

Church, but utterly destroy it; yea, more than the Turk

himself could; contrary to the mind of the Apostle, who says :

“ Be not ye the servants of men.” (1 Cor. vii. 23.) We are

indeed made servants of men, when we are subjected to their

tyrannical ordinances and laws.

This wicked and flagitious tyranny is aided by the disciples
of the Pope, who distort and pervert to this end the saying of
- Christ: “He who heareth you heareth me.” They swell out
these words into a support for their own traditions; whereas
this saying was addressed by Christ to the Apostles when they
were going forth to preach the gospel, and therefore ought to
be understood as referring to the gospel alone. These men,
however, leave the gospel out of sight, and make this saying
fit in with their own inventions. Christ says: “My sheep
hear my voice, but they know not the voice of strangers.”
For this cause the gospel was bequeathed to us, that thé
pontiffs might utter the voice of Christ; but they utter their
own voice, and are determined to be heard. The Apostle also
says of himself that he was not sent to baptize, but to preach
the gospel; and thus no man is bound to receive the traditions
of the pontiff, or to listen to him, except when he teaches the
gospel and Christ; and he himself ought to teach nothing but
the freest faith. Since, however, Christ says: “he who hears
you hears me;” why does not the Pope also hear others? Christ
did not say to Peter alone: “he who hears thee.” Lastly,
where there is true faith, there must also of necessity be the
word of faith. Why then does not the unbelieving Pope listen

: o


196 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


to his believing servant who has the word of faith? Blindness,
blindness reigns among the pontifts.

Others however, far more shamelessly, arrogate to the Pope
the power of making laws; arguing from the words: “ Whatso-
ever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”
(Matt. xvi. 19.) Christ is speaking there of the binding and
loosing of sins, not of bringing the whole Church into bondage
and making laws to oppress it, Thus the papal tyranny acts
in all things on its own false maxims; while it forcibly wrests
and perverts the words of God. I admit indeed that Christians
must endure this accursed tyranny, as they would any other
violence inflicted on them by the world, according to the
saying of Christ; ‘‘ Whosoever shall smite thee on thy right
cheek, turn to him the other also.” (Matt. v. 39.) But I
complain of this, that wicked pontiffs boast that they have a
rightful power to act thus, and pretend that in this Babylon
of theirs they are providing for the interests of Christendom ;
an idea which they have persuaded all men to adopt. If they
did these things in conscious and avowed impiety and tyranny,
or if it were simple violence that we endured, we might mean-
while quietly reckon up the advantages thus afforded us for the
mortification of this life and the fulfilment of baptism, and
should retain the full right of glorying in conscience at the
wrong done us. As itis, they desire so to ensnare our con-
sciences in the matter of liberty that we should believe all that
they do to be well done, and should think it unlawful to blame
or complain of their iniquitous actions. Being wolves, they
wish to appear shepherds ; being antichrists, they wish to be
honoured like Christ.

I ery aloud on behalf of liberty and conscience, and I
proclaim with confidence that no kind of law can with any
justice be imposed on Christians, whether by men or by
angels, except so far as they themselves will; for we are free
from all, If such laws are imposed on us, we ought so to
endure them as still to preserve the consciousness of our
liberty. We ought to know and stedfastly to protest that a
wrong is being done to that liberty, though we may bear and
even glory in that wrong; taking care neither to justify the
tyrant nor to murmur against the tyranny. “Who is he that


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 197


will harm you, if ye be followers of that which is good?”
(1 Peter iii. 13.) All things work together for good to the
elect of God. Since, however, there are but few who under-
stand the glory of baptism and the happiness of Christian
liberty, or who can understand them for the tyranny of the
Pope—I for my part will set free my own mind and deliver
my conscience, by declaring aloud to the Pope and to all
papists, that, unless they shall throw aside all their laws and
traditions, and restore liberty to the churches of Christ, and
cause that liberty to be taught, they are guilty of the death of
all the souls which are perishing in this wretched bondage, and
that the papacy is in truth nothing else than the kingdom of
Babylon and of very Antichrist. For who is the man of sin
.and the son of perdition, but he who by his teaching and his
ordinances increases the sin and perdition of souls in the
Church ; while he yet sits in the Church as if he were God?
All these conditions have now for many ages been fulfilled by
the papal tyranny. It has extinguished faith, darkened the
sacraments, crushed the gospel ; while it has enjoined and
multiplied without end its own laws, which are not only wicked
and sacrilegious, but also most unlearned and barbarous.

Behold then the wretchedness of our bondage. ‘“ How doth
the city sit solitary, that was full of people! How is she
become as a widow! She that was great among the nations,
and princess among the provinces, how is she become tributary !
Among all her lovers she hath none to comfort her; all her
friends have dealt treacherously with her.” (Lam. i. 1, 2.)
There are at this day so many ordinances, so many rites, so
many parties, so many professions, so many works to occupy
the minds of Christians, that they forget their baptism. For
this multitude of locusts, caterpillars, and cankerworms, no man
is able to remember that he was baptized, or what it was that
he obtained in baptism. We ought to have been like babes
when they are baptized, who, being preoccupied by no zeal
and by no works, are free for all things, at rest and safe in the
glory of their baptism alone. We also ourselves are babes in
Christ, unremittingly baptized.

In opposition to what I have said, an argument will perhaps
be drawn from the baptism of infants, who cannot receive the
promise of God, or have faith in their baptism; and it will be

a


=


198 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


said that therefore either faith is not requisite, or infants are
baptized in vain. To this I reply, what all men say, that
infants are aided by the faith of others, namely, that of those
who bring them to baptism. For as the word of God, when it
is preached, is powerful enough to change the heart of a
wicked man, which is not less devoid of sense and feeling than
any infant, so through the prayers of the Church which brings
the child in faith, to which prayers all things are possible, the
infant is changed, cleansed, and renewed by faith infused into
it. Norshould I doubt that even a wicked adult, if the Church
were to bring him forward and pray for him, might undergo

a change in any of the sacraments; just as we read in the

gospel that the paralytic man was healed by the faith of others.
In this sense too I should readily admit that the sacraments

of the new law are effectual for the bestowal of grace, not

only on those who do not place any obstacle in the way, but
on the most obstinate of those whodo. What difficulty cannot
the faith of the Church and the prayer of faith remove, when

Stephen is believed to have converted the Apostle Paul by this

power? But in these cases the sacraments do what they do,

not by their own virtue, but by -that of faith; without which,

as I have said, they have no effect at all.

A question has been raised whether a child yet unborn, but
of which only a hand ora foot appears, can be baptized. On
this point I would give no hasty judgment, and I confess my
own ignorance. Nor do I know whether the reason on which
they base their opinion is sufficient, namely, that the whole soul
exists in every part of the body; for it is not the soul, but the
body, which is outwardly baptized. On the other hand, T
cannot pronounce that, as some assert, he who has not yet
been born, cannot be born again; though it is a very strong
argument. I leave this question to the decision of the Spirit,
and meanwhile would have every man to be fully persuaded
in his own mind.

I will add one thing, of which I wish I could persuade every
one; that is, that all vows, whether those of religious orders,
or of pilgrimaiges, or of works of any kind, should be entirely
done away with, or at least avoided, and that we should remain
in the liberty 4f baptism, full as it is of religious observances
and of good works. It is impossible to express to what an


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 199


extent this far too much extolled belief in vows detracts from
baptism, and obscures the knowledge of Christian liberty ; not
to mention the unspeakable and infinite danger to souls which
is daily increased by this immoderate passion for vows, and
thoughtless rashness in making them. Oh ye most wicked
Bishops and most unhappy pastors, who slumber at your
ease and disport yourselves with your own desires, while
ye have no pity for the grievous and perilous affliction of
Joseph !

It would be well either to do away by a general edict with
all vows, especially those which are perpetual, and to recall all
men to their baptismal vows, or at least to admonish all to
take no vow rasbly; and not only to invite no vows, but to
place delays and difficulties in the way of their being taken.
We make an ample vow at baptism, a greater one than we can
fulfil; and we shall have enough to do if we give all our
efforts to this alone. But now we compass sea and land to
make many proselytes; we fill the world with priests, monks,
and nuns; and we imprison all these in perpetual vows. We
shall find those who will argue on this point, and lay it down
that works performed under the sanction of a vow are better
than those performed independently of vows, and will be
preferred in heaven and meet with far higher reward. Blind
and impious Pharisees! who measure righteousness and holi-
ness by the greatness and number of works, or by some
other quality in them; while in God’s sight they are
measured by faith alone; since in His sight there is no
difference between works, except so far as there is a difference
in faith,

By this inflated talk wicked men create a great opinion
of their own inventions, and puff up human works, in
order to allure the senseless multitude, who are easily led
by a specious show of works; to the great ruin of faith,
forgetfulness of baptism, and injury to Christian liberty. As
a vow is a sort of law and requires a work, it follows that, as
vows are multiplied, so laws and works are multiplied; and by
the multiplication of these, faith is extinguished, and the liberty
of baptism is brought into bondage. Not conten’ with these im-
pious alluremenis, others go further, and assert that entrance into
a religious order is like a new baptism, which may be successively


Pal


200 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


renewed, as often as the purpose of a religious life is renewed.
Thus these devotees attribute to themselves alone righteous-
ness, salvation, and glory, and leave to the baptized absolutely
no room for comparison with them. The Roman pontiff, that
fountain and author of all superstitions, confirms, approves,
and embellishes these ideas by grandly worded bulls and
indulgences ; while no one thinks baptism worthy even of
mention. By these showy displays they drive the easily
led ‘people of Christ into whatever whirlpools of error they
will; so that, unthankful for their baptism, they imagine
that they can do better by their works than others by their
faith.

Wherefore God also, who is froward with the froward, resolving
to avenge Himself on the pride and unthankfulness of these
devotees, causes them either to fail in keeping their vows, or to
keep them with great labour and to continue immersed in
them, never becoming acquainted with the grace of faith and
of baptism. As their spirit is not right with God, He permits
them to continue to the end in their hypocrisy, and to become
at length a laughing-stock to the whole world, always follow-
ing after righteousness, and never attaining to it; so that
they fulfil that saying: “Their land also is full of idols.’’
(Is. ii. 8.)

T should certainly not forbid or object to any vow which a
man may make of his own private choice. I do not wish
altogether to condemn or depreciate vows; but my advice
would be altogether against the public establishment or
confirmation of any such mode of life. It is enough that
every man should be at liberty to make private vows at his
own peril; but that a public system of living under the
constraint of vows should be inculcated, I consider to be a
thing pernicious to the Church and to all simple souls. In the
first place, it is not a little repugnant to the Christian life,
inasmuch as a vow is a kind of ceremonial law, and a matter of
human tradition or invention; from all which the Church
has been set free by baptism, since the Christian is bound by
no law, except that of God. Moreover there is no example of
it in the Scriptures, especially of the vow of perpetual chastity,
obedience, and poverty. Now a vow of which we have no
example in the' Scriptures is a perilous one, which ought to be


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 201


urged upon no man, much less be established as a common and
public mode of life; even if every individual must be allowed
to venture upon it at his own peril, if he will, There are some
works which are wrought by the Spirit in but few, and these
ought by no means to be brought forward as an example, or as
a manner of life. .

I greatly fear, however, that these systems of living under
vows in the religious, are of the number of those things
of which the Apostle foretold: “Speaking lies in hypo-
crisy; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain
from meats, which God hath created to be received with
thanksgiving.” (1 Tim. iv. 2,3.) Let no one cite against me
the example of St. Bernard, St. Francis, St, Dominic, and such
like authors or supporters of religious orders. God is terrible
‘and wonderful in His dealings with the children of men. He
could preserve Daniel, Ananias, Azarias, and Misael holy, even
as ministers of the kingdom of Babylon, that is, in the very
midst of wickedness ; He may also have sanctified the men of
whom I have spoken in their perilous mode of life, and have
guided them by the special working of His Spirit; while
yet He would not have this made an example for other men. It
is certain that not one of these men was saved by his vows or
his religious order, but by faith alone, by which all men are
saved, but to which these showy servitudes of vows are espe-
cially hostile.

In this matter let every man be fully persuaded in his own
mind. I shall carry out my undertaking, and speak on behalf
of the liberty of the Church and of the glory of baptism ; and
I shall state for the general benefit what I have learnt under
the teaching of the Spirit. And first I counsel those who are
in high places in the Church to do away with all those vows
and the practice of living under vows, or, at the least, not to
approve or extol them. If they will not do this, then I
earnestly advise all who desire to make their salvation the
safer—particularly growing youths and young men—to keep
aloof from all vows, especially from such as are extensive and
life-long. I give this advice in the first place because this
mode of life, as I have already said, has, no evidence or
example in the Scriptures, but rests only on the bulls of the
pontiffs, who are but men; and secondly, because it tends to


202 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


lead men into hypocrisy through its singularity and showy
appearance, whence arise pride and contempt of the ordinary
Christian life. If there were no other cause for doing away
with these vows, this one by itself would have weight enough,
that by them faith and baptism are depreciated, and works are
magnified. Now these cannot be magnified without ruinous
consequences, for among many thousands there is scarcely
one who does not look more to his works as a member of a
religious order, thar to faith ; and under this delusion they
claim superiority over each other as being stricter or laxer, as
they call it.

Hence I advise no man, yea, I dissuade every man from
entering into the priesthood or any religious order, unless
he be so fortified with knowledge as to understand that, how-
ever sacred and lofty may be the works of priests or of the
religious orders, they differ not at all in the sight of God from
the works of a husbandman labouring in his field, or of a
woman attending to her household affairs, but that in His eyes
all things are measured by faith alone; as it is written: “In
all thy work believe with the faith of thy soul, for this is the
keeping of the commandments of God.” (Eccles, xxxii. 23.)
Nay, it very often happens that the common work of a
servant or a handmaiden is more acceptable to God than all the
fastings and works of a monk or a priest, when they are done
_ without faith. Since, then, it is likely that at the present day
vows only tend to increase men’s pride and presumption in
their own works, it is to be feared that there is nowhere less of
faith and of the Church than in priests, monks, and bishops ;
and that these very men are really Gentiles and hypocrites,
who consider themselves to be the Church, or the very heart of
the Church, spiritual persons, and rulers of the Church, when
they are very far indeed from being so. These are really the
people of the captivity, among whom all the free gifts bestowed
in baptism have been brought into bondage; while the poor
and slender remnant of the people of the land appear vile in
their eyes. ;

From this we perceive two conspicuous errors on the part of
the Roman Pontifi’, The first is, that he gives dispensations in
the matter of voyws, and does this as if he alone possessed
authority beyond all other Christians. So far does the rashness


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 2038


and audacity of wicked men extend. If a vow can be dis-
pensed with, any brother can dispense for his neighbour, or
even for himself. If he cannot grant such dispensations,
neither has the Pope any right to do so. Whence has he
this authority? From the keys? They are common to all,
and only have power over sins, But since the Pope himself
confesses that vows have a divine right, why does he cheat
and ruin wretched souls by giving dispensations in a matter
of divine right, which admits of no dispensation? He prates
of the redemption of vows, and declares that he has power to
change vows, just as under the law of old the first-born of an
ass was exchanged for a lamb; as if a vow, which requires to
be fulfilled everywhere and constantly, were the same thing
with the first-born of an ass; or as if, because God in His own
law ordered an ass to be exchanged for a lamb, therefore the
Pope, who is but a man, had the same power with respect to
a law which is not his, but God’s. It was not a pope who
made this decretal, but an ass which had been exchanged for a
pope, so utterly mad and impious was he.

The Pope commits a second great error again, in decreeing
that the bond of marriage may be broken through, if one of the
parties, even against the will of the other, desires to enter a
monastery, provided the marriage has not yet been consum-
mated. What devil inspires this portentous decree of the Pope ?
God commands men to keep faith and observe truth towards
one another, and that every man should bring gifts out of his
own substance; for He hates robbery for burnt-offering, as He
declares by the mouth of Isaiah. Now husband and wife owe
fidelity. to each other by their compact, a fidelity which can be
dissolved by no law. Neither can say: “I belong to myself,”
or can do without robbery whatever is done against the will of
the other. Else why not also have a rule that a man who is
in debt, if he enter into a religious order, shall be freed from
his debts, and be at liberty to deny his bond? Ye blind! ye
blind! Which is greater—good faith, which is a command of
God, or a vow, invented and chosen by men? Art thou a
shepherd of souls, O Pope? Are ye doctors of sacred theology,
who teach in this way? Why do ye teach thus? Because ye
extol a vow as being a better work than marriage; but it is
not faith, which itself alone can magnify anything, that ye


204 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


magnify, but works, which in the sight of God are nothing, or
at least all equal as concerns their merit.

I cannot doubt then that from such vows as it is right to
make, neither men nor angels can give a dispensation. But I
have not been able to convince myself that all the vows made
in these days fall under the head of rightful vows; such as
that ridiculous piece of folly, when parents devote their child
yet unborn, or an infant, to a life of religion or to perpetual
chastity. Nay it is certain that this is no rightful -vow; it
appears to be a mockery of God,.since the parents vow what
it is in no wise in their power to perform. I come now to
members of the religious orders. The more I think of their
three vows, the less I understand them, and the more I wonder
how the exaction of such vows has grown upon us. Stilt less
do I understand at what period of life such vows can be taken,
so as to be legitimate and valid. In this all are agreed, that
such vows, taken before the age of puberty, are not valid,
And yet in this matter they deceive a great number of youths,
who know as little of their own age as of what it is they are
vowing. The age of puberty is not looked to when the vows
are taken, but consent is supposed to follow afterwards, and the.
professed are held in bondage and devoured by dreadful scruples
of conscience ; as if a vow in itself void could become valid by
the progress of time.

To me it seems folly that any limit to a legitimate vow
should be laid down by others, who cannot lay one down in
their own case. Nor do I see why a vow made in a man’s
eighteenth year should be valid, but not if made in his tenth or
twelfth year. Thi is not enough to say that in his eighteenth
year a man feels the impulses of the flesh. What if he
scarcely feels them in his twentieth or thirtieth year; or
feels them more strongly in his thirtieth year than in his
twentieth ? Why, again, is not a similar limitation placed on
the vows of poverty and obedience? What time shall we assign
for a man to feel himself avaricious or proud, when even the
most spiritually minded men have a difficulty in detecting
these affections in themselves? There will never be any sure
and legitimate vow, until we shall have become thoroughly
spiritual, and so have no need of vows. We see then that vows
are most es and perilous things. It would be a-


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 205


salutary course té leave this lofty manner of living under vows
free to the spirit alone, as it was of old, and by no means
to convert it into a perpetual mode of life. We have now,
however, said enough on the subject of baptism and liberty.
The time will perhaps come for treating {more fully of vows,
and in truth they greatly need to be treated of.


CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT OF PENANCE


Tn this third part I shall speak of the sacrament of penance.
By the tracts and disputations which I have published on this
subject I have given offence to very many, and have amply
expressed my own opinions. I must now briefly repeat these
statements, in order to unveil the tyranny which attacks us on
this point as unsparingly as in the sacrament of the bread. In
these two sacraments gain and lucre find a place, and therefore
the avarice of the shepherds has raged to an incredible extent
against the sheep of Christ; while even baptism, as we have
seen in speaking of vows, has been sadly obscured among adults,
that the purposes of avarice might be served.

The first and capital evil connected with this sacrament
is, that they have totally done away with the sacrament
itself, leaving not even-a vestige of it. Whereas this, like
the other two sacraments, consists of the word of the divine
promise on one side and of our faith on the other, they have
overthrown both of these. They have adapted to the purposes
of their own tyranny Christ’s word of promise, when He says:
“Whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in
heaven: and whatsoever thou shalt loose on earth shall be
loosed in heaven” (Matt. xvi. 19); and: “ Whatsoever ye shall
bind on earth shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever ye
shall loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven” (Matt. xviii. 18) ;
and again: “‘ Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted
unto them ; and whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained.”
(John xx. 23.) These words are meant to call forth the faith
of penitents, that they may seek and obtain remission of their
sins. But these men, in all their books, writings, and dis-
courses, have not made it their object to explain to Christians


206 LUTHER'S PRIMARY “WORKS


the promise conveyed in these words, and to show them what
they ought to believe, and how much consolation they might
have, but to establish in the utmost length, breadth and depth
their own powerful and violent tyranny. At last some have
even begun to give orders to the angels in heaven, and to boast,
with an incredible frenzy of impiety, that they have received
the right to rule in heaven and on earth, and have the power
of binding even in heaven. Thus they say not a word about
the saving faith of the people, but talk largely of the tyranni-
cal power of the pontiffs; whereas Christ’s words do not deal
at all with power, but entirely with faith.

It was not principalities, powers, and dominions that Christ
instituted in His Church, but a ministry, as we learn from the
words of the Apostle: “Let a man so account of us, as of the
ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.”
(1 Cor. iv. 1.) When Christ said : “ Whosoever believeth and
is baptized shall be saved,” He meant to call forth faith on the
part of those seeking baptism; so that, on the strength of this
word of promise, a man might be sure that, if he believed and
were baptized, he would obtain salvation. No sort of power is
here bestowed on His servants, but only the ministry of baptism
is committed to them. In the same way, when Christ says:
“ Whatsoever ye shall bind,” etc, He means to call forth the
faith of the penitent, so that, on the strength of this word of
promise, he may be sure that, if he believes and is absolved,
he will be truly absolved in heaven. Evidently nothing is said
here of power, but it is the ministry of absolution which is
spoken of. It is strange enough that these blind and arrogant
men have not arrogated to themselves some tyrannical power
from the terms of the baptismal promise. If not, why have
they presumed to do so from the promise connected with
penitence? In both cases there is an equal ministry, a like
promise, and the same character in the sacrament; and it can-
not be denied that, if we do not owe baptism to Peter alone, it
is a piece of impious tyranny to claim the power-of the keys
for the Pope alone.

Thus also when Christ says: “Take, eat, this is my body
which is given for you; this is the cup in my blood,” He means
to call forth faith in those who eat, that their conscience may be
strengthened by faith in these words, and that they may feel


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 207


sure that, when they eat, they receive remission of sins. There
is nothing here which speaks of power, but only of a ministry.
’ The promise of Baptism has remained with us, at least in the
case of infants, but the promise of the Bread and the Cup has
been destroyed, or brought into servitude to avarice, and faith
has been turned into a work and a testament into a sacrifice.
Thus also the promise of Penance has been perverted into
a most violent tyranny, and into the establishment of a do-
minion that is more than temporal.

Not content with this, our Babylon has so utterly done away
with faith as to declare with shameless front that it is not
necessary in this sacrament; nay, in her antichristian wicked-
ness, she pronounces it a heresy to assert the necessity of
faith. What more is there that that tyranny could do, and has
not done? Verily “by the rivers of Babylon, there we sat
down ; yea, we wept, when we remembered Zion. We hanged
our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.” (Psalm
exxxvii. 1,2.) May the Lord curse the barren willows of those
rivers! Amen. The promise and faith having been blotted
out and overthrown, let us see what they have substituted for
them. They have divided penitence into three parts, con-
trition, confession, and satisfaction; but in doing this they
have taken away all that was good in each of these, and have
set up in each their own tyranny and caprice.

In the first place, they have so taught contrition as to make
it prior to faith in the promise, and far better as not being a
work of faith, but a merit; nay, they make no mention of
faith. They stick fast in works and in examples taken from
the Scriptures, where we read of many who obtained pardon
through humility and contrition of heart, but they never think
of the faith which wrought this contrition and sorrow of
heart ; as it is written concerning the Ninevites: “The people
of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on
sackcloth.” (Jonah iii. 5.) These men, worse and more auda-
cious than the Ninevites, have invented a certain “attrition,”
which, by the virtue of the keys (of which they are ignorant),
may become contrition; and this they bestow on the wicked
and unbelieving, and thus do away entirely with contrition.
O unendurable wrath of God, that such things should be taught
in the Church of Christ! So it is that, having got rid of faith


208 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


and its work, we walk heedlessly in the doctrines and opinions
of men, or ratherperish in them. A contrite heart is a great
matter indeed, and can only proceed from an earnest faith in
the Divine promises and threats—a faith which, contemplating
the unshakeable truth of God, makes the conscience to tremble,
terrifies‘and bruises it, and, when it is thus contrite, raises it
up again, consoles, and preserves it. Thus, the truth of the
threatening is the cause of contrition, and the truth of the
promise is the cause_of consolation, when they are believed ; and
by this faith a man merits remission of sins) Therefore faith
‘above all things ought to be taught and called forth; when

faith is produced, contrition and consolation will follow of their

own accord by an inevitable consequence.

Hence, although there is something in the teaching of those
who assert that contrition is to be brought about by the
collection—as they call it—and contemplation of our own sins,
still theirs is a perilous and perverse doctrine, because they do
not first teach the origin and cause of contrition, namely, the
unshakeable truth of the Divine threatenings and promises, in
order to.call forth faith; that so men might understand that
they ought to look with much more earnest attention to the
truth of God, by which to be humbled and raised up again,
than to the multitude of their own sins, which, if they be
looked at apart from the truth of God, are more likely to
renew and increase the desire for sin, than to produce con-
trition. I say nothing of that insurmountable chaos of labour
which they impose upon us, namely, that we are to frame a
contrition for all our sins, for this is impossible. We can
know but a small part of our sins; indeed even our good
works will be found to be sins; as it is written: ‘“ Enter
not into judgment with thy servant: for in thy sight shall
no man living be justified.” (Psalm cxliii, 2.) It is enough
that we sorrow for those sins which vex our conscience at
the present moment, and which are easily recognised by an
effort of our memory. He who is thus disposed will with-
out doubt be ready to feel sorrow and fear on account of all
his sins, and will feel sorrow and fear when in future they
are revealed to him.

Beware then of trusting in thine own contrition, or attribu-
ting remission of sins to thy own sorrow. It is not because


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 209


of these that God looks on thee with favour, but because of
the faith with which thou hast believed His threatenings and
promises, and which has wrought that sorrow in thee. There-
fore whatever good there is in penitence is due, not to the
diligence with which we reckon up our sins, but to the truth
of God and to our faith. All other things are works and
fruits which follow of their own accord, and which do not
make a man good, but are done by a man who has been
made good by his faith in the truth of God. Thus it is
written: “Because he was wroth, there went up a smoke
in his presence.” ‘(Psalm xviii. 8.) The terror of the
threatening comes first, which devours the wicked; but faith,
accepting the threatening, sends forth contrition as a cloud
of smoke.

Contrition, though it has been completely exposed to wicked
and pestilent doctrines, has yet given less occasion to tyranny
and the loveof gain. But confession and satisfaction have been
turned into the most noted workshops for lucre and ambition.
To speak first of confession. There is no doubt that confession
of sins is necessary, and is commanded by God. “They were
baptized of John in Jordan, confessing their sins.” (Matt. iii. 6.)
“Tf we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar,
and his word is not in us.” (1 John i.9, 10.) If the saints
must not deny their sin, how much more ought those who are
guilty of great or public offences to confess them. But the
most effective proof of the institution of confession is given
when Christ tells us that an offending brother must be told of
his fault, brought before the Church, accused, and finally, if he
neglect to hear the Church, excommunicated. He “hears”
when he yields to reproof, and acknowledges and confesses
hig sin.

The secret confession, however, which is now practised,
though it cannot be proved from Scripture, is in my opinion
highly satisfactory, and useful or even necessary. I could not
wish it not to exist; nay, I rejoice that it does exist in the
Church of Christ, for it is the one great remedy for afflicted
consciences; when, after laying open our conscience to a
brother, and unveiling all the evil which lay hid there, we
receive from the mouth of that brother the word of consolation


210 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


sent forth from God; receiving which by faith we find peace in
a sense of the mercy of God, who speaks to us through our
brother. What I protest against is the conversion of this
institution of confession into a means of tyranny and extortion
by the bishops. They reserve certain cases to themselves as
secret, and then order them to be revealed to confessors named
by themselves, and thus vex the consciences of men ; filling the
office of bishop, but utterly neglecting the real duties of a
bishop, which are, to preach the gospel and to minister to the
poor. Nay, these impious tyrants principally reserve to them-
selves the cases which are of less consequence, while they leave
the greater ones everywhere to the common herd of priests,
—cases such as the ridiculous inventions of the bull “In Cena
Domini.” That their wicked perverseness may be yet more
manifest, they do not reserve those things which are offences
against the worship of God,. against faith, and against the
chief commandments, but even approve and teach them; such
as those journeyings hither and thither on pilgrimage, the
perverted worship of saints, the lying legends of saints, the
confidence in and practice of works and ceremonies; by all
which things the faith of God is extinguished, and ‘idolatry is
nourished, as it is at this day. The pontifis we have nowadays
are such as those whom Jeroboam established at Dan and
Beersheba as ministers of the golden calves—men who are
ignorant of the law of God, of faith, and of all that concerns
the feeding of the sheep of Christ, and who only thrust their
own inventions upon the people by terror and power.

Although I exhort men to endure the violence of chase
reservers, even as Christ bids us to endure all the tyrannical
eonduct of men, and teaches us to obey such extortioners;
still I neither admit nor believe that they have any right of
reservation. By no jot or tittle can they prove this; while J
can prove the contrary. In the first place, if, in speaking of
public offences, Christ says that we have gained our brother,
if he hears us when told of his fault, and that he is not to be
brought before the Church, unless he has refused to hear us,
and that offences may thus be set right between brethren;
how much more true will it be concerning private offences, that
the sin is taken away, when brother has voluntarily confessed
it to brother, so that he need not bring it before the Church,


THE BABYLONISH UAPTIVITY *211


that is, before a prelate or priest, as these.men say in their
foolish interpretation. In support of my opinion we have again
the authority of Christ, when he says in the same passage:
‘‘ Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven ;
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be loosed in
heaven.” (Matt. xviii. 18.) This saying is addressed to all
Christians and to every Christian. Once more he says to the
same effect: “Again I say unto you, that if two of you shall
agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven.”
(Matt. xviii. 19.) Nowa brother, laying open his secret sins-to
a brother and seeking pardon, certainly agrees on earth with:
that brother in the truth, which is Christ. In confirmation of °
what he had said before, Christ says still more clearly in the
same passage: “ Where two or three are gathered together in
my name, there am I in the midst of them.” (Matt. xviii. 20.)
From all this I do not hesitate to say that, whosoever
voluntarily confesses his sins privately, in the presence of
any brother, or, when told of his faults, asks pardon and
amends his life, is absolved from his secret sins, since Christ.
has manifestly bestowed the power of absolution on every
believer in Him, with whatever violence the pontifis may rage
against this truth. Add also this little argument, that, if any
reservation of hidden sings were valid, and there could be no
salvation unless they were remitted, the greatest hindrance to
salvation would lie in those things which I have mentioned
above—even those good works and idolatries which we are
taught at the present day by the pontiffs. While, if these
most weighty matters are not a hindrance, with how much less
reason are those lighter offences so foolishly reserved! It is
by the ignorance and blindness of the pastors that these ~
portents are wrought in the Church. Wherefore I would warn.
these princes of Babylon and bishops of Beth-aven to abstain
from reserving eases of any kind whatever, but to allow the
freest permission to hear confessions of secret sins to all -
brethren and sisters; so that the sinner may reveal his sin to
whom he will, with the object of seeking pardon and consola-
tion, that is, the word of Christ uttered by the mouth of his
neighbour. They effect nothing by their rash presumption,


but to ensnare needlessly the*vusciences of the weak, to
P


212° LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


‘establish their own wicked tyranny, and td feed their own
‘avarice on the sins and perdition of their brethren. Thus
they stain their hands with the blood of souls, and children
are deyoured by their parents, and Ephraim devours Judah,
and Syria Israel, as Isaiah says.

To these evils they have added circumstances—mothers,
daughters, sisters, relatives, branches, fruits of sins, all devised
at complete leisure by the most subtle of men, who have set up,
even in the matter of sins, a sort of tree of consanguinity and
affinity. So fertile of results are ignorance and impiety; for
these devices of some worthless fellow have passed into public

law, as has happened in many other cases. So vigilantly do
the shepherds watch over the Church of Christ, that what-
ever dreams of superstition or of new works these senseless
devotees indulge, they forthwith bring forward, and dress them
up with indulgences, and fortify them with bulls. So far
are they from prohibiting these things, and protecting the
simplicity of faith and liberty for the people of God; for what
has liberty to do with the tyranny of Babylon?

I should advise the total neglect of all that concerns circum-
stances. Among Christians there is but one circumstance,
and that is, that a brother has sinned. No character is to
be compared to Christian brotherhood; nor has the observa-
tion of places, times, days, and persons, or any other such
superstitious exaggeration, any effect but to magnify things
which are nothing, at the expense of those things which are
everything. As if there could be anything greater or more
weighty than the glory of Christian brotherhood, they so tie
us down to places and days and persons, that the name of
brother is held cheap, and instead of being freemen we are
slaves in bondage—we to whom all days, places, persons, and
all other outward things, are equal.

How unworthily they have treated the matter of satisfaction.
I have abundantly shown in the case of indulgences. They
‘have abused it notably, to the destruction of Christians in
body and in soul. In the first place, they have so taught it
that the people have not understood the real meaning of
satisfaction, which is a change of life. Furthermore, they so
urge it and represent it as necessary, that they leave no room
for faith in Christ ; but men’s consciences are most wretchedly


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 2138


tortured by scruples on this point. ‘One runs hither, another
thither ; one to Rome, another into a convent, another to some
other place; one scourges himself with rods, another destroys
his body with vigils and fasting; while all, under one general
delusion, say: Here is Christ, or there; and imagine that the
kingdom of God, which is really within us, will come with
observation. These monstrous evils we owe to thee, See of
Rome, and to thy homicidal laws and rites, by which thou hast
brought the world to such a point of ruin, that they think
they can make satisfaction to God for their sins by works,
while it is only by the faith of a contrite heart that He is
satisfied. This faith thou not only compellest to silence’in
the midst of these tumults, but strivest to destroy, only
in order that thy avarice, that insatiable leech, may have
some to whom to cry: Bring, bring; and may make a traffic
of sins.

Some have even proceeded to such a length in framing
engines of despair for souls, as to lay it down that all sins, the
satisfaction enjoined for which has been neglected, must be
gone over afresh in confession. What will not such men dare, —
men born for this end, to bring everything ten times over into
bondage ? Moreover, I should like to know how many people
there are who are fully persuaded that they are in a state of
salvation, and are making satisfaction for their sins, when they
murmur over the prayers enjoined by the priest with their lips
alone, and meanwhile do not even think of any amendment of
life. They believe that by one moment of contrition and
confession their whole life is changed, and that there remains
merit enough over and above to make satisfaction for their
past sins. How should they know better, when they are
taught nothing better? There is not a thought here of morti-
fication of the flesh; the example of Christ goes for nothing ;
who, when he absolved the woman taken in adultery, said ‘to
her: “ Go, and sin no more ;” thereby laying on her the cross
of mortification of the flesh. No slight occasion has been
given to these perverted ideas by our absolving sinners before
they have completed their satisfaction ; whence it comes that
they are more anxious about completing their satisfaction,
which is a thing that lasts, than about contrition, which they
think has been gone through in the act of confession. On the

! : E P 2


{


214 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


contrary, absolution ought to follow the completion of satisfac-
tion, as it did in the primitive Church, whence it happened
that, the work being over, they were afterwards more exercised
in faith and newness of life. On this subject, however, it must
suffice to have repeated so far what I have said at greater length
in writing on indulgences. Let it also suffice for the present
to have said this much in the whole respecting these three sacra-
ments, which are treated of and not treated of in so many mis-
chievous books of Sentences and of law. . It remains for me to
say a few words about the remaining sacraments also, that I
may not appear to have rejected them without sufficient reason.


OF CONFIRMATION.


It is surprising that it should have entered any one’s mind to
make a Sacrament of Confirmation out of that laying on of
hands which Christ applied to little children, and by which
the apostles bestowed the Holy Spirit, ordained presbyters,
and healed the sick; as the Apostle writes to Timothy:
“Lay hands suddenly on no man.” (1 Tim. v. 22.) Why not
also make a confirmation out of the sacrament of bread, be-
cause it is written: “And when he had received meat, he
was strengthened” (Acts ix. 19); or again: “Bread which
strengtheneth man’s heart ’” (Ps. civ. 15.) Thus confirmation
would include three sacraments, of bread, of orders, and of
confirmation itself. But if whatever the apostles did is a
sacrament, why has not preaching rather been made into a
sacrament? -

I do not say this, because I condemn the seven sacraments,
but because I deny that they can be proved from the Scriptures.
I wish there were in the Church such a laying on of hands as
there was in the time of the Apostles, whether we chose to
call it confirmation or healing. As it is, however, none of it
remains, except so much as we have ourselves invented in order
to regulate the duties of the bishops, that they may not be
entirely without work in the Church. For when they had
left the sacraments which involved labour, along with the
word, to their inferiors, as being beneath their attention (on


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 215


the ground, forsooth, that whatever institutions the Divine
majesty has set up must needs be an object of contempt to men),
it was but right that we should invent some easy duty, not too
troublesome for the dajntiness of these great heroes, and by
no means commit it to inferiors, as if it were of little
importance. What human wisdom has ordained ought to be
honoured by men. Thus, such as the priests are, such should be
the ministry and office which they hold. For what is a bishop
who does not preach the gospel, or attend to the cure of souls,
but an idol in the world, having the name and form of a bishop?

At present, however, we are enquiring into the sacraments
of divine institution; and I can find no reason for reckoning
confirmation among these. To constitute a sacrament we
require in the very first place a word of divine promise, on
which faith may exereise itself. But we do not read that
Christ ever gave any promise respecting confirmation, although
he himself laid hands upon many, and although he mentions
among the signs that should follow them that believe: “They
shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.” (Mark xvi. -
18.) No one, however, has interpreted these words of a
sacrament, or could do so. It is enough then to consider
confirmation as a rite or ceremony of the Church; of like
nature to those other ceremonies by which water and other
things are consecrated. For if every other creature is sanctified
by the word and prayer, why may not man much more be
sanctified by the same means, even though they cannot be
called sacraments of faith, inasmuch as they contain no divine
promise? Neither do these work salvation; while sacraments
save those who believe in the divine promise.


OF MATRIMONY.


It is not only without any warrant of Scripture that
matrimony is considered a sacrament, but it has been turned
into a mere mockery by the very same traditions which vaunt
it as a sacrament. Let us look a little into this. I have said
that in every sacrament there is contained a word of divine
promise, which must be believed in by him who receives the


216 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


sign; and that the sign alone cannot constitute a sacrament.
Now we nowhere read that he who marries a wife will receive
any grace from God; neither is there in matrimony any sign
of divine institution, nor do we anywhere read that it was
appointed of God to be a sign of anything; although it is
true that all visible transactions may be understood as figures
and allegorical representations of invisible things. But figures
and allegories are not sacraments, in the sense in which we
‘are speaking of sacraments.

Furthermore, since matrimony has existed from the begin-
ning of the world, and still continues even among unbelievers,
there are no reasons why it should be called a sacrament of
the new law, and of the Church alone. The marriages of the
patriarchs were not less marriages than ours, nor are those of
unbelievers less real than those of believers; and yet no one
calls them a sacrament. Moreover there are among believers
wicked husbands and wives, worse than any Gentiles. Why
should we then say there is a sacrament here, and not among
the Gentiles? Shall we so trifle with baptism and the Church as
to say, like those who rave about the temporal power existing
only in the Church, that matrimony is a sacrament only in the
Church? Such assertions are childish and ridiculous, and by
them we expose our ignorance and rashness to the laughter of
unbelievers.

Tt will be asked however: Does not the Apostle say that
“they two shall be one flesh,” and that “this is a great
sacrament ;” and will you contradict the plain words of the
Apostle? Ireply that this argument is a very dull one, and
proceeds from a careless and thoughtless reading of the
original, Throughout the holy Scriptures this word “ sacra-
mentum,” has not the meaning in which we employ it, but an
opposite one. For it everywhere signifies, not the sign of a
sacred thing, but a sacred thing which is. secret and hidden.
Thus Paul says: “Let a man so account of us, as of the
ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries (that is,
sacraments) of God.” (1 Cor. iv. 1.) Where we use the Latin
term “ sacrament,” in Greek the word “ mystery ” is employed ;
and thus in Greek the words of the Apostle are: “They two
“shall be one flesh; this is a great mystery.” This ambiguity
has led men to consider marriage as a sacrament of the new


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY ‘217


law, which they would have been far from doing, if they had
read the word “mystery,” as it is in the Greek.

Thus the Apostle calls Christ himself a ‘ sacrament,”
saying: “And without controversy great is the sacrament
(that is, mystery) of godliness. God was manifest in the flesh,
justified in the spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the
Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.”
(1 Tim. iii, 16.) Why have they not deduced from this an
eighth sacrament of the new law, under such clear authority
from Paul? Or, if they restrained themselves in this case,
where they might so suitably have been copious in the inven-
tion of sacraments, why are they so lavish of them in the
other? It is because they have been misled by their ignorance
as well of things as of words; they have been caught by the
mere sound of the words and by their own fancies. Having
once, on human authority, taken a sacrament to be a sign,
they have proceeded, without any judgment or scruple, to
make the word mean a sign, wherever they have met with it
in the sacred writings. Just as they have imported other
meanings of words and human habits of speech into the sacred
writings, and transformed these into dreams of their own,
making anything out of anything. Hence their constant
senseless use of the words: good works, bad works, sin, grace,
righteousness, virtue, and almost all the most important words
and things. They use all these at their own discretion,
founded on the writings of men, to the ruin of the truth of God
and of our salvation. ;

Thus sacrament and mystery, in Paul’s meaning, are the
very wisdom of the Spirit, hidden in a mystery, as he says:
“Which none of the princes of this world knew; for had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.”
(1 Cor. ii. 8.) There remains to this day this folly, this stone
of stumbling and rock of offence, this sign which shall be
spoken against. .Paul calls preachers the stewards of these
mysteries, because they preach Christ, the power and wisdom
of God; but so preach him that unless men believe, they
cannot understand. Thus a sacrament means a mystery and a
hidden thing, which is made known by words, but is received
by faith of heart. Such is the passage of which we are
speaking at present: “They two shall be one flesh; this is a


_ 218 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


great mystery.” These men think that this was said concern-
ing matrimony; but Paul brings in these words in speaking of
Christ and the Church, and explains his meaning clearly by
saying: “I speak concerning Christ and the Church.” See
how well Paul and these men agree! Paul says that he is
setting forth a great mystery concerning Christ and the
Church ; while they set it forth as concerning male and female.
If men may thus indulge their own caprices in interpreting
the sacred writings, what wonder if anything can be found in
them, were it even a hundred sacraments?

Christ then and the Church are a mystery, that is, a great
and hidden thing, which may indeed and ought to be figured
by matrimony, as in a sort of real allegory; but it does not:
follow that matrimony ought to be called a sacrament. The
heavens figuratively represent the apostles; the sun Christ; the
waters nations; but these things are not therefore sacraments ;
for in all these cases the institution is wanting and the divine
promise; and these it is which make a sacrament complete.
Hence Paul is either, of his own spirit, applying to Christ the
words used in Genesis concerning matrimony, or else he teaches
that, in their general sense, the spiritual marriage of Christ is
also there declared, saying: “Eveu as the Lord cherisheth the
Church ; for we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones. For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother,
and shall be joined unto his wife, and they two shall be one flesh.
This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the
Church.” (Eph, vy. 29-32.) We see that he means this whole
text to be understood as spoken by him about Christ. He
purposely warns the reader to understand the “Sacrament ” as
in Christ and the Church, not in matrimony.

T admit, indeed, that even under the old law, nay, from the
beginning of the world, there was a sacrament of penitence ;
but the new promise of penitence and the gift of the keys are
peculiar to the new law. As we have baptism in the place of
circumcision, so we now have the keys in the place of sacrifices
or other signs of penitence. I have said above that, at different
‘times, the same God has given different promises and different
signs for the remission of sins and the salvation of men, while
yet it is the same grace that all have received. As it is
written : “ We, having the same spirit of faith, believe, and


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 219


therefore speak.” (2 Cor. iv. 13.) “Our fathers did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink;
for they drank of that spivitual rock that followed them, and
that rock was Christ.” (1 Cor. x. 8, 4.) “These all died in
faith, not having received the promises; God having provided
some better thing for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect.” (Heb. xi. 18,40.) For Christ himself, the same
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever, is the head of his Church
from the beginning even to the end of the world. There are
then different signs, but the faith of all believers is the same ;
since without faith it is impossible to please God, and by it
Abel pleased Him.

Let then matrimony be a figure of Christ and the Church,
not however a sacrament divinely instituted, but one invented
in the Church by men led astray by their ignorance alike of
things and of words. So far as this invention is not injurious
to the faith, it must be borne with in charity; just as many
other devices of human weakness and ignorance are borne
with in the Church, so long as they are not injurious to
faith and to the sacred writings. But we are now con-
tending for the firmness and purity of faith and of Scripture ;
lest, if we affirm anything to be contained in the sacred
‘writings and in the articles of our faith, and it is after-
wards proved not to be so contained, we should expose our
faith to mockery, be found ignorant of our own special business,
cause scandal to our adversaries and to the weak, and fail to
exalt the authority of holy Scripture. For we must make the
widest possible distinction between those things which have
been delivered to us from God in the sacred writings, and
those which have been invented in the Church by men, of
however eminent authority from their holiness and their
learning.

Thus far I have spoken of matrimony itself. But what shall
we say of those impious human laws by which this divinely
appointed manner of life has been entangled and tossed up and
down? Good God! it is horrible to look upon the temerity of
the tyrants of Rome, who thus, according to their own caprices,
at one time annul marriages and at another time enforce them.
Is the human race given over to their caprice for nothing but
to be mocked and abused in every way, and that these men


220 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


may do what they please with it for the sake of their own fatal
gains ?

There is a book in general circulation and held in no slight
esteem, which has been confusedly put together out of all the
dregs and filth of human traditions, and entitled the Angelic
Summary; while it is really a more than diabolical summary.
In this book, among an infinite number of monstrous state-
ments, by which confessors are supposed to be instructed, while
they are in truth most ruinously confused, eighteen impediments
to matrimony are enumerated. If we look at these with the
just and free eye of faith, we shall see that the writer is of the
number of those of whom the Apostle foretold that they should
“ give heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils; speak-
ing lies in hypocrisy; forbidding to marry.” (1 Tim. iv. 1-3.)
What is forbidding to marry, if this is not forbidding it—to
invent so many impediments, and to set so many snares, that
marriages cannot be contracted, or, if they are contracted, must
be dissolved? Who has given this power to men? Granted that
such men have been holy and led by a pious zeal; why does the
holiness of ane ther encroach upon my liberty? Why does the
zeal of another bring me into bondage? Let whosoever will
be as holy and as zealous-as he will, but let him not injure
others, or rob me of my liberty. ;

I rejoice, however, that these disgraceful laws have at length
attained the glory they deserve, in that by their aid the men of
Rome have nowadays become common traders. And what do
they sell? The shame of men and women; a merchandise
worthy of these traffickers, who surpass all that is most sordid
and disgusting in their avarice and impiety. There is not one
of those impediments, which cannot be removed at the inter-
cession of Mammon; so that these laws seem to have been
made for no other purpose than to be nets for money and
snares for souls in the hands of those greedy and rapacious
Nimrods; and in order that we might see in the holy place,
in the Church of God, the abomination of the public sale of
the shame and ignominy of both sexes. A business worthy of
our pontiffs, and fit to be carried on by men who, with the
utmost disgrace and baseness, are given over to’a reprobate
mind, instead of that ministry of the gospel which, in their
avarice and ambition, they despise.


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 221


But what am I to say or do? If I were to enter upon
every particular, this treatise would extend beyond all bounds ;
for the subject is in the utmost confusion, so that no one can
tell where he is to begin, how far he is to go, or where he is
to stop. This I know, that no commonwealth ¢an be pros-
perously administered by mere laws. If the magistrate is
a wise man, he will govern more happily under the guidance
of nature than by any laws; if he is not a wise man, he will
effect nothing but mischief by laws, since he will not know
how to use them, or to adapt them tothe wants of the time. In
public matters, therefore, itis of more importance that good and
wise men should be at the head of affairs, than that any laws
should be passed; for such men will themselves be the best of
laws, since they will judge cases of all kinds with energy and
justice. If, together with natural wisdom, there be learning
in divine things, then it is clearly superfluous and mischievous
to have any written Jaws; and charity above all things has
absolutely no need of laws. I say, however, and do all that in
me lies, admonishing and entreating all priests and friars,
if they see any impediment with which the Pope can dispense,
but which is not mentioned in Scripture, to consider all those
marriages valid which have been contracted, in whatever way,
contrary to ecclesiastical or pontifical laws. Let them arm
themselves with the Divine law which says: What God hath
joined together, let not man put asunder, The union of
husband and wife is one of divine right, and holds good, how-
ever much against the laws of men it may have taken place,
and the laws of men ought to give place to it, without any
seruple. For if a man is to leave his father and mother and
cleave to his wife, how much more ought he to tread under
foot the frivolous and unjust laws of men, that he may cleave
to his wife? If the Pope, or any bishop or official, dissolves
any marriage, because it has been contracted contrary to the
papal laws, he is an antichrist, does violence to nature, and is
guilty of treason against God; because this sentence stands:
Whom God hath joined together, let not man put asunder.

Besides this, man has no right to make such laws, and the
liberty bestowed on Christians through Christ is above all the
laws of men, especially when the divine law comes in, as Christ
says: “The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the


222 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


Sabbath ; therefore the Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath.”
(Mark ii. 27-28.) Again, such laws were condemned before-
hand by Paul, when he foretold that those should arise who
would forbid to marry. Hence in this matter all those rigorous
impediments derived from spiritual affinity, or legal relationship
and consanguinity, must give way, as far as is permitted by
the sacred writings, in which only the second grade of con-
sanguinity is prohibited, as it is written in the book of Leviticus,
where twelve persons are prohibited, namely :—mother, step-
mother, full sister, half sister by either parent, grand-daughter,

father’s sister, mother’s sister, daughter-in-law, brother’s wife,

wife’s sister, step-daughter, uncle’s wife. In these only the

first grade of affinity and the second of consanguinity are pro-

hibited, and not even these universally, as is clear when we
look carefully at the subject; for the daughter and grand-

daughter of a brother and sister are not mentioned as prohibited,

though they are in the second grade. Hence, if at any time

a marriage has been contracted outside these grades, than which

no others have ever been prohibited by God’s appointment, it

ought by no means to be dissolved on account of any laws of
men. Matrimony, being a divine institution, is incomparably

above all laws, and therefore it cannot rightfully be broken

through for the sake of laws, but rather laws for its sake.

Thus all those fanciful spiritual affinities of father, mother,
brother, sister, or child, ought to be utterly done away with in
the contracting of matrimony. What but the superstition of
man has invented that spiritual relationship? If he who
baptizes is not permitted to marry her whom he has baptized,
or a godfather .his god-daughter, why is a Christian man
permitted to marry a Christian woman? Is the relationship
established by a ceremony or by the sign of the sacrament
stronger than that established by the substance itself of the
sacrament? Is not a Christian man the brother of a Christian
sister? Is not a baptized man the spiritual brother of a
baptized woman? How can we be so senseless? If a man
instructs his wife in the gospel and in the faith of Christ, and
thus becomes truly her father in Christ, shall it not be lawful
for her to continue his wife? Would not Paul have been at
liberty to marry a maiden from among those Corinthians, all
of whom he declares that he had begotten in Christ? See,


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 223


then, how Christian liberty has Peon crushed by the blindness
of human superstition !

Much more idle still is the doctrine of legal relationship ;
and yet they have raised even this above the divine right of
matrimony. Nor can I agree to that impediment which they
call disparity of religion, and which forbids a man to marry an
unbaptized woman,neither simply, nor on condition of converting
her to the faith. Who has prohibited this, God or man? Who
has given men authority to prohibit marriages of this kind?
Verily the spirits that speak lies in hypocrisy, as Paul says; of
whom it may be truly said: The wicked have spoken lies to
me, but not according to thy law. Patricius, a heathen,
married Monica, the mother of St. Augustine, who was a
Christian ; why should not the same thing be lawful now? A
like instance of foolish, nay wicked rigour is the impediment
of crime; as when a man marries 2 woman previously polluted
by adultery, or has plotted the death of a woman’s husband, that
he may be able to marry her. Whence, I ask, a severity on the
part of men against men, such as even God has never exacted ?
Do these men pretend not to know that David, a most holy
man, married Bathsheba the wife of Uriah, though both these
crimes had been committed; that is, though she had been
polluted by adultery and her husband had been murdered? If.
the divine law did this, why do tyrannical men act thus against
their fellow servants ? ,

It is also reckoned as an impediment when there exists what
they call a bond; that is, when one person is bound to another
by betrothal. In this case they conclude that if either party
have subsequently had intercourse with a third, the former
betrothal comes to anend, I cannot at all receive this doctrine.
In my judgment, a man who has bound himself to one person
is no longer at his own disposal, and therefore, under the pro-
hibitions of the divine right, owes himself to the former, though
he has not had intercourse with her, even if he have afterwards
had intercourse with another. It was not in his power to give -
what he did not possess; he has deceived her with whom he has
had intercourse, and has really committed adultery. That which
has led some to think otherwise is- that they have looked more
to the fleshly union than to the divine command, under which
he who has promised fidelity to one person is bound to observe


224 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


it. He who desires to give, ought to give of that which is his
own. God forbid that any man should go beyond or defraud
his brother in any matter; for good faith ought to be preserved
beyond and above all traditions of all men. Thus I believe
that such a man cannot with a safe conscience cohabit with a
second woman, and that this impediment ought to be entirely
reversed. If a vow of religion deprives a man of his power over
himself, why not also a pledge of fidelity given and received ;
especially since the latter rests on the teaching and fruits of ©
the Spirit (Gal. v.), while the former rests on human choice?
And if a wife may return to her husband, notwithstanding any .
vow of religion she may have made, why should not a betrothed
man return to his betrothed, even if connexion with another have
followed? We have said, however, above that a man who has
pledged his faith to a maiden is not at liberty to make a vow-of
religion, but is bound to marry her, because he is bound to
keep his faith, and is not at liberty to abandon it for the sake
of any human tradition, since God commands that it should be
kept. Much more will it be his duty to observe his pledge to
the first to. whom he has given it, because it was only with a
deceitful heart that he could give it to a second; and therefore
he has not really given it, but has deceived his neighbour,
against the law of God. Hence the impediment called that of
error takes effect here, and annuls the marriage with the second
woman,

The impediment of holy orders is also a mere contrivance of
men, especially when they idly assert that even a marriage already
contracted is annulled by this cause, always exalting their own
traditions above the commands of God. I give no judgment
respecting the order of the priesthood, such as it is at the
present day; but I see that Paul commands that a bishop
should be the husband of one wife, and therefore the marriage
of a deacon, of a priest, of a bishop, or of a man in any kind of
orders, cannot be annulled; although Paul knew nothing
of that kind of priests and those orders which we have at the
present day. Perish then these accursed traditions of men,
which have come in for no other end than to multiply perils,
sins, and evils in the Church! Between a priest and his wife,
then, there is a true and inseparable marriage, approved by the
divine command. What if wicked men forbid or annul it of their


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY : 225


own mere tyranny? Beit that it is unlawful in the sight of
men ; yet it is lawful in the sight of God, whose commandment,
if it be contrary to the commandments of men, is to be preferred.

Just as much a human contrivance is the so-called impedi-
ment of public propriety, by which contracted marriages are
annulled. I am indignant at the audacious impiety which is
so ready to separate what God has joined together. You may
recognise Antichrist in this opposition to everything which
Christ did or taught. What reason is there, I ask, why, on the
death of a betrothed husband before actual marriage, no relative
by blood, even to the fourth degree, can marry her who was
betrothed to him? This is no vindication of public propriety,
but mere ignorance of it. Why among the people of Israel,
which possessed the best laws, given by God himself, was there
no such vindication of public propriety? On the contrary,
by the very command of God, the nearest relative was com-
pelled to marry her who had been left a widow. Ought the
people who are in Christian liberty to be burdened with more
rigid laws than the people who were in legal bondage? And
to make an end of these figments rather than impediments, I
will say that at present it is evident to me that there is no
impediment which can rightfully annul a marriage already con-
tracted, except physical unfitness for cohabiting with a wife,
ignorance of a marriage previously contracted, or a vow of

- chastity. Concerning such a vow, however, I am so uncertain
even to the present moment, that I do not know at what time
it ought to be reckoned valid ; as I have said above in speaking
of baptism. Learn then, in this one matter of matrimony, into
what an unhappy and hopeless state of confusion, hindrance,
entanglement, and peril all things that are done in the Church
have been brought by the pestilent, unlearned, and impious
traditions of men! There is no hope of a remedy, unless we
can do away once for all with all the laws of all men, call back
the gospel of liberty, and judge and rule all things according
to it alone. - Amen.

It is necessary also to deal with the question of physical’
incapacity. But be it premised that I desire what I have said
about impediments to be understood of marriages already
contracted, which ought not to be annulled for any such causes.
But with regard to the contracting of matrimony I may briefly


226 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


repeat what I have said before; that if there be any urgency
of youthful love, or any other necessity, on account of which
the Pope grants a dispensation, then any brother can also grant
a dispensation to his brother, or himself to himself, and thus
snatch his wife, in whatever way he can, out of the hands of
tyrannical laws. Why is my liberty to be done away with by
another man’s superstition and ignorance? Or if the Pope gives
dispensation for money, why may not I give a dispensation to
my brother or to myself for the advantage of my own salvation ?
Does the Pope establish laws? Let him establish them for
himself, but let my liberty be untouched.
* *


* * *

The question of divorce is also discussed, whether it be
lawful. I, for my part, detest divorce, and even prefer bigamy
to it; but whether it be lawful I dare not define. Christ
himself, the chief of shepherds, says: ‘ Whosoever shall put
away his wife, saving for the cause of fornication, causeth her
to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is
divorced committeth adultery.” (Matt. v. 32.) Christ therefore
permits divorce only in the case of fornication. Hence the
Pope must necessarily be wrong, as often as he permits divorce
for other reasons, nor ought any man forthwith to consider
himself safe, because he has obtained a dispensation by ponti-
fical audacity rather than power. I am more surprised,
however, that they compel a man who has been separated from
his wife by divorce to remain single, and do not allow him to
marry another. For if Christ permits divorce for the cause of
fornication, and does not compel any man to remain single, and if
Paul bids us rather to marry than to burn, this seems plainly to
allow of a man’s marrying another in the place of her whom he
has put away. I wish that this subject were fully discussed
and made clear, that provision might be made for the number-
less perils of those who at the present day are compelled to
remain single without any fault of their own; that is, whose
wives or husbands have fled and deserted their partner, not to
return for ten years, or perhaps never. I am distressed and
grieved by these cases, which are of daily occurrence, whether
this happens by the special malice of Satan, or from our neglect
of the word of God. ,

I cannot by myself establish any rule contrary to the


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 227


opinion of all; but for my own part, I should exceedingly
wish at least to see applied to this subject the words: “ But
if the unbelieving depart, let him depart. A brother or
a sister is not under bondage in such cases” (1 Cor. vii. 15).
Here the Apostle permits that the unbelieving one who
departs should be let go, and leaves it free to the believer
to take another. Why should not the same rule hold good,
if a believer, that is, a nominal believer, but in reality just
as much an unbeliever, deserts husband or wife, especially
if with the intention of never returning? I cannot discover
any distinction between the two cases. In my belief, how-
ever, if in the Apostle’s time the unbeliever who had departed
had returned, or had become a believer, or had promised
to live with the believing wife, he would not have been
received, but would himself have been authorised to marry
another woman. Still, I give no definite opinion on these
questions, though I greatly wish that a definite rule were laid
down, for there is nothing which more harasses me and many
others. I would not have any rule on this point laid down by
the sole authority of the Pope or the bishops; but if any two
learned and good men agreed together in the name of Christ,
and pronounced a decision in the spirit of Christ, I should
prefer their judgment even to that of councils, such as are
assembled nowadays, which are celebrated simply for their
number and authority, independently of learning and holiness.
I therefore suspend my utterances _on this subject, until I can
confer with some better judge.


OF ORDERS.


Of this sacrament the Church of Christ knows nothing; it
was invented by the church of the Pope. It not only has
no promise of grace, anywhere declared, but not a word is
said about it in the whole of the New Testament. Now it is
ridiculous to set up as a sacrament of God that which can
nowhere be proved to have been instituted by God. Not that-
I consider that a rite practised for so many ages is to be
condemned ; but I would not have human inventions established

Q


228 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


in sacréd things, nor should it be allowed to bring in anything
as divinely ordained, which has not been divinely ordained ;
lest we should be objects of ridicule to our adversaries. We
must endeavour that whatever we put forward as an article of
the faith should be certain and uncorrupt and established by
clear proofs from Scripture; and this we cannot show even in
the slightest degree in the case of the present sacrament.

The Church has no power to establish new divine promises
of grace, as some senselessly assert, who say that, since the
Church is governed by the Holy Spirit, whatever she ordains
has no less authority than that which is ordained of God.
The Church is born of the word of promise through faith, and
is nourished and preserved by the same word ; thatis, she herself
is established by the promises of God, not the promise of God by
her," The word of God is incomparably above the Church, and
her part is not to establish, ordain, or make anything in it, but
only to be established, ordained, and made, as a creature. What
man begets his own parent? Who establishes the authority by
which he himself exists ?

This power the Church certainly has—that she can dis-
tinguish the word of God from the words of men, So Augus-
tine confesses that his motive for believing the gospel was the
authority of the Church, which declared it to be the gospel.
Not that the Church is therefore above the gospel; for, if so,
she would also be above God, in whom we believe, since she
declares Him to be God; but, as Augustine says elsewhere,
the soul is so taken possession of by the truth, that thereby
it can judge of all things with the utmost certainty, and yet
cannot judge the truth itself, but is compelled by an infallible
certainty to say that this is the truth. For example, the mind
pronounces with infallible certainty that three and seven are ten,
and yet can give no reason why this is true, while it cannot deny
that it is true. In fact the mind itself is taken possession of,
and, having truth as its judge, is judged rather than judges.
Even such a perception is there in the Church, by the illumina-
tion of the Spirit, in judging and approving of doctrines; a
perception which she cannot demonstrate, but which she holds
as most sure. Just as among philosophers no one judges
of those conceptions which are common to all, but everyone
is judged by them, so is it among us with regard to that


THE BABYLONISH: CAPTIVITY 229


spiritual perception which judgeth all things, yet. is judged
of no man, as the Apostle says.

Let us take it then for certain that the Church cannot
promise grace, to do which is the part of God alone, and
therefore cannot institute a sacrament. And even, if she had
' the most complete power to do so, it would not forthwith
follow, that orders are a sacrament. For who knows what is
that Church which has the Spirit, when only a few bishops and
learned men are usually concerned in setting up these laws
and institutions? I¢ is possible that these men may not be of
the Church, and may all be in error; as councils have very
often been in error, especially that of Constance, which has
erred the most impiously of all. That only is a proved article
of the faith which has been approved by the universal Church,
and not by that of Rome alone. I grant therefore that orders
may bea sort of church rite, like many others which have been
introduced by the Fathers of the Church, such as the consecra-
tion of vessels, buildings, vestments, water, salt, candles, herbs,
wine, and the like, In all these no one asserts that there is
any sacrament, nor is there any promise in them. Thus the
anointing of a man’s hands, the shaving of his head, and other
ceremonies of the kind, do not constitute a sacrament, since
notbing is promised by these things, but they are merely
employed to prepare men for certain offices, as in the case of
vessels or instruments.

But it will be asked: What do you say to Dionysius, who
reckons up six sacraments, among which he places Orders, in
his Hierarchy of the Church? My answer is: I know that he
is the only one of the ancient authorities who is considered
as holding seven sacraments, although, by the omission of
matrimony, he has only given six. We read nothing at all in
the rest of the Fathers about these sacraments, nor did they
reckon them under the title of sacrament, when they spoke of
these things, for the invention of such sacraments is a modern
one. Then too—if I may be rash enough to say so—it is
altogether unsatisfactory that so much importance should be
attributed to this Dionysius, whoever he was, for there is
almost nothing of solid learning in him. By what authority or:
reason, I ask, does he prove his inventions concerning angels in
his Celestial Hierarchy, a book on the study of which curious

Q 2


230 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


and superstitious minds have spent so much labour? Are
they not all fancies of his own, and very much like dreams, if
we read them and judge them freely? In his mystic theology
indeed, which is so much cried up by certain very ignorant
theologians, he is even very mischievous, and follows Plato
rather than Christ, so that I would not have any believing
mind bestow even the slightest labour on the study of these
books. You will be so far from learning Christ in them that,
even if you know Him, you may lose Him. I speak from ex-
perience. Let us rather hear Paul, and learn Jesus Christ and
Him crucified. For this is the way, the truth, and the life ;
this is the ladder by which we come to the Father, as it is
written: “No man cometh unto the Father, but by Me.”

So in his Hierarchy of the Church, what does he do but
describe certain ecclesiastical rites, amusing himself with his
own allegories, which he does not prove, just as hag been done
in our time by the writer of the book called the Rationale of
Divine things? This pursuit of allegories is only fit for men
of idle minds. Could I have any difficulty in amusing myself
with allegories about any created thing whatever? Did not
Bonaventura apply the liberal arts allegorically to theology ?
It would give me no trouble to write a better Hierarchy than
that of Dionysius, as he knew nothing of popes, cardinals, and
archbishops, and made the bishops the highest order. Who,
indeed, is there of such slender wits that he cannot venture
upon allegory? I would not have a theologian bestow any atten-
tion upon allegories, until he is perfectly acquainted with the
legitimate and simple meaning of Scripture; otherwise, as it

. happened to Origen, his theological speculations will not be
without danger.

We must not then immediately make a sacrament of any-
thing which Dionysius describes ; otherwise why not make a
sacrament of the procession which he describes in the same
passage, and which continues in use even to the present day?
Nay, there will be as many sacraments as there are rites and
ceremonies which have grown up in the Church. Resting,
however, on this very weak foundation, they have invented
and attributed to this sacrament of theirs certain indelible
characters, supposed to be impressed on those who receive
orders. Whence, J ask, such fancies? By what authority, by


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 231 .


what reasoning are they established? Not that we object to
their being free to invent, learn, or assert whatever they
please ; but we also assert our own liberty, and say that they
must not arrogate to themselves the right of making articles ©
of the faith out of their own fancies, as they have hitherto
had the presumption to do. It is enough that, for the sake of
concord, we submit to their rights and inventions, but we will
not be compelled to receive them as necessary to salvation,
when they are not necessary. Let them lay aside their
tyrannical requirements, and we will show a ready compliance
with their likings, that-so we may live together in mutual .
peace. For it is a disgraceful, unjust, and slavish thing for a
Christian man, who is free, to be subjected to any but heavenly
and divine traditions.

. After this they bring in their very strongest argument,
namely, that Christ said at the last supper: “Do this in
remembrance of me.” “Behold!” they say, “Christ ordained
them as priests.” Hence, among other things, they have also
asserted that it is to priests alone that both kinds should
be administered. In fact they have extracted out of this text
whatever they would; like men who claim the right to
assert at their own free choice whatsoever they please out
of any words of Christ, wherever spoken. But is this to
interpret the words of God? Let us reply to them that in
these words Christ gives no promise, but only a command that
this should be done in remembrance of Him. Why do they not
conclude that priests were ordained in that passage also where
Christ, in laying upon them the ministry of the word and of
baptism, said: “Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost”? It is the
peculiar office of priests to preach and to baptize. Again,
since at the present day it is the very first business of a priest,
and, as they say, an indispensable one, to read the canonical
Hours; why have they not taken their idea of the sacrament
of orders from those words in which Christ commanded His
disciples—as he did in many other places, but especially
in the garden of Gethsemane—to pray that they might not
enter into temptation? Unless indeed they evade the difficulty
by saying that it is not commanded to pray, for it suffices to


232 LUTHER’S PRIMARY WORKS


read the canonical Hours ; so that this cannot be proved to be a
priestly work from any part of Scripture, and that consequently
this praying priesthood is not of God; as indeed it is not.

Which of the ancient Fathers has asserted that by these
words priests were ordained? Whence then this new interpre-
tation? It is because it has been sought by this device to set
up a source of implacable ‘discord, by which clergy and laity
might be placed farther asunder than heaven and earth, to the
incredible injury of baptismal grace and confusion of evangeli-
cal communion. Hence has originated that detestable tyranny
of the clergy over the laity, in which, trusting to the corporal
unction by which their hands are consecrated, to their tonsure,
and to their vestments, they not only set themselves above the
body of lay Christians, who have been anointed with the Holy
Spirit, but almost look upon them as dogs, unworthy to be
numbered in the Church along with themselves. Hence it is
that they dare to command, exact, threaten, drive, and oppress,
at their will. In fine, the sacrament of orders has been and is
a most admirable engine for the establishment of all those
monstrous evils which have hitherto been wrought, and are
yet being wrought, in the Church. In this way Christian
brotherhood has perished; in this way shepherds have been
turned into wolves, servants into tyrants, and ecclesiastics into
more than earthly beings.

How if they were compelled to admit that we all, so many
as have been baptized, are equally priests? We are so in fact,
and it is only a ministry which has been entrusted to them, and
that with our consent. They would then know that they have
no right to exercise command over us, except so far as we
voluntarily allow of it. Thus it is said: “Ye are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation.” (1 Pet. ii. 9.)
Thus all we who are Christians are priests; those whom we
call priests are ministers chosen from among us to do all
things in our name; and the priesthood is nothing else than a
ministry. Thus Paul says: ‘“ Let a man so account of us as of
the ministers of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God.”
(1 Cor. iv. 1.)

From this it follows that he who does not preach the
word, being called to this very office by the Church, is in
no way a priest, and that the sacrament of orders can be


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 233


nothing else than a ceremony for choosing preachers in the
Church. This is the description given of a priest: “The
priest’s lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the
law at his mouth; for he is the messenger of the Lord of
hosts.” (Malachi ii. 7.) Be sure then that he who is not a
messenger of the Lord of hosts, or who is called to anything
else than a messengership—if I may so speak—is certainly
not a priest; as it is written: ‘“ Because thou hast rejected
knowledge, I will also reject.thee, that thou shalt be no priest
to me.” (Hosea iv. 6.) They are called pastors because it is
their duty to give the people pasture, that is, to teach them.
Therefore those who are ordained only for the purpose of
reading the canonical Hours and offering up masses ate popish
priests indeed, but not Christian priests, since they not only do
not preach but are not even called to be preachers; nay, it is
the very thing intended, that a priesthood of this kind shall
stand on a different footing from the office of preacher. Thus
they are priests of Hours and missals, that is, a kind of living
images, having the name of priests, but very far from being
really so; such priests as those whom Jeroboam ordained in
Beth-aven, taken from the lowest dregs of the people, and not
from the family of Levi.

See then how far the glory of the Church has departed. The
whole world is full of priests, bishops, cardinals, and clergy ; of
whom however, (so far as concerns their official duty) not one
preaches—unless he be called afresh to this by another calling
besides his sacramental orders—but thinks that he amply fulfils
the purposes of that sacrament if he murmurs over, in a vain
repetition, the prayers which he has to read, and celebrates masses.
Even then, he never prays these very Hours, or, if he does pray,
he prays for himself; while, as the very height of perversity, he
offers up his masses as a sacrifice, though the mass is really the
use of the sacrament. Thus itis clear that those orders by
which, as a sacrament, men of this kind are ordained to be clergy,
are in truth a mere and entire figment, invented by men who
understand nothing of church affairs, of the priesthood, of the
ministry of the word, or of the sacraments. Such as is the sacra-
ment, such are the priests it makes. To these errors and blind-
nesses has been added a greater degree of bondage, in that, in
order to separate themselves the more widely from all other


234 LUTHER'S PRIMARY - WORKS
Christians, as if these were profane, they have burdened
themselves with a most hypocritical celibacy.

It was not enough for their hypocrisy and for the working of
this error to prohibit bigamy, that is, the having two wives at
the same time, as was done under the law—for we know that
that is the meaning of bigamy—but they have interpreted it to
be bigamy, if a man marries two virgins in succession, or a widow
once. Nay; the most sanctified sanctity of this. most sacrosanct
sacrament goes so far, that a man cannot even become a priest
if he have married a virgin, as long as she is alive as his wife.
And, in order to reach the very highest summit of sanctity, a
man is kept out of the priesthood, if he have married one who
was not a pure virgin, though it were in ignorance and merely
by an unfortunate chance. But he may have polluted six
hundred harlots, or corrupted any number of matrons or virgins,
or even kept many Ganymedes, and it will be no impediment
to his becoming a bishop or cardinal, or even Pope. Then the
saying of the Apostle: “the husband of one wife,” must be
interpreted to mean: “the head of one church;” unless that
magnificent dispenser the Pope, bribed with money or led by
favour—that is to say, moved by pious charity, and urged by
anxiety for the welfare of the churches—chooses to unite to
one man three, twenty, or a hundred wives, that is, churches.

O pontiffs, worthy of this venerable sacrament of orders! O
princes not of the Catholic churches, but of the synagogues of
Satan, yea, of very darkness! We may well cry out with
Isaiah: “Ye scornful men, that rule this people which is in
Jerusalem” (Isaiah xxviii. 14); and with Amos: “ Woe to
them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the mountain of
Samaria, which are named chief of the nations, to whom the
house of Israel came!” (Amos vi. 1.) O what disgrace to the
Church of God from these monstrosities of sacerdotalism !
Where are there any bishops or priests who know the gospel,
not to say preach it? Why then do they boast of their
priesthood ? why do they wish to be thought holier and better
and more powerful than other Christians, whom they call the
laity? What unlearned person is not competent to read the
Hours? Monks, hermits, and private persons, although laymen,
may use the prayers of the Hours. The duty of a priest is to
preach, and unless he does so, he is just as much a priest as


’


', THE ee es CAPTIVITY 235


iis picture of a man is a man. Does the ordination of such
babbling priests, the consecration of churches and bells, or the
confirmation of children, constitute a- bishop ? Could not any
deacon or layman do these. things? It is the ministry of the


_word that makes a priest or a bishop:


Fly then, I counsel you; fly, young men, if ye wish to live
in safety ; andedo not seek admission to these holy rites, unless
ye are either willing to. -preach the’ gospel, or are able to
believe that ye are not. made any better than the laity by this
sacrament of orders.. To read the Hours is nothing. To offer.
the mass is to receive the sacrament. What then remains in
you, which is not to be found in any layman? Your tonsure
and your vestments? Wretched priesthood, which consists in
tonsure and vestments! Is it the oil-poured on your fingers ?
Every Christian is anointed and sanctified in body and soul
with the oil of the Holy Spirit, and formerly was allowed to
handle the sacrament no less than the priests now do; although
our superstition now imputes it as a great crime to the laity, if
they touch even the bare cup, or the corporal; and not even a
holy nun is allowed to wash the altar cloths and sacred
napkins. When I see how-far the sacrosanct sanctity of these
orders has already gone, I expect that the time will come when’
the laity will not even be allowed to touch the altar, except
when they offer money. I almost burst with anger when I
think of the impious tyrannies of these reckless men, who
mock and ruin the liberty and glory of the religion of Christ
by such frivolous and puerile triflings.

Let every man then who has learnt that he is a Christian
recognise what he is, and be certain that we are all equally
priests; that is, that we have the same power in the word, and
in any sacrament whatever ; although it is not lawful for any
one to use this power, except with the consent of the com-
munity, or at the call of a superior. For that which belongs
to all in common no individual can arrogate to himself, until
he be called. And therefore the sacrament of orders, if it is
anything, is nothing but a certain rite by which men are called
to minister in the Church. Furthermore, the priesthood is
properly nothing else than the ministry of the word—I mean
the word of the gospel, not of the law. The-diaconate is a
ministry, not for reading the gospel or the epistle, as the


236 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


practice is nowadays, but for distributing the wealth of the
Church among the poor, that the priests may be relieved of the
burden of temporal things, and may give themselves more
freely to prayer and to the word, It was for this purpose, as
we read in the Acts of the Apostles, that deacons were
appointed. Thus he who does not know the gospel, or does
not preach it, is not only no priest or bishop,*but a kind of
pest to the Church, who, under the false title of priest or
bishop, as it were in sheep’s clothing, hinders the gospel, and
acts the part of the wolf-in the Church.

Wherefore those priests and bishops with whom the Church
is crowded at the present day, unless they work out their
salvation on another plan—that is, unless they acknowledge
themselves to be neither priests nor bishops, and repent of
bearing the name of an office the work of which they either
do not know, or cannot fulfil, and thus deplore with prayers
and tears the miserable fate of their hypocrisy—are verily
the people of eternal perdition, concerning whom the saying
will be fulfilled: “My people are gone into captivity,
because they have no knowledge; and their honourable men
are famished, and their multitude dried up with thirst.
Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth
without measure; and their glory, and their multitude, and
their pomp, and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it.”
(Isaiah v. 18, 14.) O word of dread for our age, in which
Christians are swallowed up in such an abyss of evil!

As far then as we are taught from the Scriptures, since what
we call the priesthood is a ministry, I donot see at all for what
reason a man who has once been made priest cannot become a
layman again, since he differs in no wise from a layman,
except by his ministerial office. But it is so far from. im-
possible for a man to be set aside from the ministry, that even
now this punishment is constantly inflicted on offending priests,
who are either suspended for a time, or deprived for ever of
their office. For that fiction of an indelible character has long
ago become an object of derision. I grant that the Pope may
impress this character, though Christ knows nothing of it, and
for this very reason the priest thus consecrated is the lifelong
servant and bondsman, not of Christ, but of the Pope, as it is
at this day. But, unless I deceive myself, if at some future


. THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 237


time this sacrament and figment fall to the ground, the Papacy
itself will scarcely hold its ground, and we shall recover that
joyful liberty in which we shall understand that we are all
_equal in every right, and shall shake off the yoke of tyranny
and know that he who is a Christian hag Christ, and he who
has Christ has all things that are Christ’s, and can do all
things—on whith I will write more fully and more vigorously
when I find that what I have here said displeases my friends
the papists.


ON THE SACRAMENT OF EXTREME UNCTION.


To this rite of anointing the sick our theologians have made
two additions well worthy of themselves. One is, that they call
it a sacrament; the other, that they make it extreme, so that
it cannot be administered except to those who are in extreme
peril of life.. Perhaps—as they are keen dialecticians—they
have so made it in relation to the first unction of baptism,
and the two following ones of confirmation and orders. They
have this, it is true, to throw in my teeth, that, on the authority
‘of the Apostle James, there are in-this case a promise and a
sign, which two things, I have hitherto said, constitute a
sacrament, He says: “Is any sick among you? let him call
for the elders of the church, and let them pray over him,
anointing him with oil in the name of the Lord; and the
prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him
up; and if he have committed sins, they shall be forgiven
him.” (James vy. 14,15.) Here, they say, is the promise of
remission of sins, and the sign of the oil.

I, however, say that if folly has ever been uttered, it has
been uttered on this subject. I pass over the fact that many
assert, and with great probability, that this epistle was not
written by the Apostle James, and is not worthy of the
apostolic spirit; although, whosesoever it is, it has obtained
authority by usage. Still, even if it were written by the
Apostle James, I should say that it was not lawful for an
apostle to institute a sacrament by his own authority; that is,
to give a divine promise with a sign annexed to it. To do this


238 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


belonged to Christ alone. Thus Paul says that he had received
the sacrament of the Eucharist from the Lord; and that he
was sent, not to baptize, but to preach the gospel. Nowhere,
however, in the gospel do we read of this sacrament of extreme
unction. But let us pass this over, and let us look to the
words themselves of the Apostle, or of whoever. was the author
of this Epistle, and we shall at once see how those men have
failed to observe their true meaning, who have thus increased
the number of sacraments.

In the first place—if they think the saying of the Apostle
true and worthy to be followed, by what authority do they
change and resist it? Why do they make an extreme and
special unction of that which the Apostle meant to be general ?
The Apostle did not mean it to be extreme, and to -be ad-
ministered only to those about to die. He says expressly: “ Is
any sick among you?” He does not say: “Is any dying?”
Nor do I care what Dionysius’s Ecclesiastical Hierarchy may
teach about this ; the words of the Apostle are clear, on which
he and they alike rest, though they do not follow them. Thus
it is evident that, by no authority, but at their own discretion,
they have made, out of the ill-understood words of the Apostle,
a sacrament and an extreme unction; thus wronging all the
other sick, whom they have deprived on their own authority
of that benefit of anointing which the: Apostle appointed for
them. *

But it is even a finer argument, that the promise of the
Apostle expressly says: “The prayer of faith shall save the
sick, and the Lord shall raise him up.” The Apostle commands
the use of anointing and prayer for the very purpose that the
sick man may be healed and raised up, that is, may not die, and
that the unction may not be extreme. This is proved by the
prayers which are used even at this day during the ceremony
of anointing, and in which we ask that the sick man may be
restored. They say, on the contrary, that unction should not
be administered except to those on the point of departing;
that is, that they may not be healed and raised up. If the
matter were not so serious, who could refrain from laughing at
such fine, apt, and sound comments on the words of the Apostle ?
Do we not manifestly detect here that sophistical folly which,
in many other cases as well as in this, affirms what Scripture


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 239


denies, and denies what it affirms? Shall we not render thanks
to these distinguished teachers of ours? I have said rightly
then, that nowhere have hey displayed wilder folly than in
' this instance.

Further—if this unction is a sacrament, it must be beyond
doubt an effectual sign (as they say) of that which it seals and
promises. Now it promises health and restoration to the sick,
as the words plainly show: “ The prayer of faith shall save the
sick, and the Lord shall raise him up.” Who does not see,
however, that this promise is seldom, or rather never fulfilled ?
Scarcely one among a thousand is restored; and even this no
one believes to be effected by the sacrament, but by the help of
nature or of medicine; while to the sacrament they attribute
a contrary effect. What shall we say then? Hither the
Apostle is deceiving us in this promise, or this unction is not
a sacrament ; fora sacramental promise is sure, while this in
most cases disappoints us. Nay—to recognise another example


of the prudence and carefulness of these theologians—they will —


have it to be extreme unction in order that that promise may
not stand; that is, that the sacrament may not be a sacrament.
If the unction is extreme, it does not heal, but yields to the
“sickness; while if it heals, it cannot be extreme, Thus,
according to the interpretation of these teachers, James must
be understood to have contradicted himself, and to have insti-
tuted a sacrament, on purpose not to institute a sacrament;
for they will have it to be extreme unction, in order that it
may not be true that the sick are healed by it, which is
what the Apostle ordained. If this is not madness, what, I ask,
is madness ?

The words of the Apostle: “ Desiring to be teachers of the
law ; understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they


affirm” (1 Tim. i. 7.), apply to these men; with 80 little —


judgment do they read and draw conclusions. With the same
stupidity they have inferred the doctrine of auricular confession
from the words of the Apostle James: “Confess your faults
one to another.” They do not even observe the command of
the Apostle, that the elders of the Church should be called for,
and that they should pray over the sick. Scarcely one priest
is sent now, though the Apostle would have many to be present,
not for the purpose of anointing, but for that of prayer; as he


240 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


says: “ The prayer of faith shall save the sick.” Moreover, I
am not sure that he means priests to be understood in this case,
since he says elders, that is, seniors in age. Now it does not
follow that an elder must be a priest or a minister, and we may
suspect that the Apostle intended that the sick should be
visited by the men of greater age and weightier character in
the Church, who should do this as a work of mercy, and heal .
the sick by the prayer of faith. At the same time it cannot
be denied, that of old the churches were ruled by the older
men, chosen for this purpose on account of their age and long
experience of life, without the ordinations and consecrations
now used.

I am therefore of opinion that this is the same anointing as
that used by the Apostles, of whom it is written: “They
anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed them.” (Mark
vi. 13.) It was a rite of the primitive Church, long since
obsolete, by which they did miracles for the sick ; just as Christ
says of them that believe: “ They shall take up serpents ; they
shall Jay hands on the sick, and they shall recover.” (Mark
xvi. 18.) Itis astonishing that they have not made sacraments
out of these words also; since they have a like virtue and
promise with those words of James. This pretended extreme
unction, then, is not a sacrament, but a counsel of the Apostle
James, taken, as I have said, from the Gospel of Mark; and one
which any one who will may follow. I do not think that it
was applied to all sick persons, for the Church glories in her
infirmities, and thinks death a gain ; but only to those who bore
their sickness impatiently and with little faith, and whom the
Lord therefore left, that on them the miraculous power and the
efficacy of faith might be conspicuously shown.

James, indeed, has carefully and intentionally provided against
this very mistake, in that he connects the promise of healing and
of remission of sins, not with the anointing, but with the prayer
of faith ; for he says: “The prayer ef faith shall save the sick,
and the Lord shall raise him up; and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgiven him.” (James v. 15.) Now a
sacrament does not require prayer or faith on the part of him
who administers it, for. even a wicked man may baptize
and consecrate the elements without prayer ; but it rests solely
on the promise and institution of God, and requires faith on


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 241


the part of him who receives it. But where igs the prayer
of faith in our employment of extreme unction at the present
day? Who prays over the sick man with such faith as not
to doubt of his restoration? Such is the prayer of faith
which James here describes; that prayer of which he had

said at the beginning of the epistle: “Let him ask in faith,
nothing wavering ;” and of which Christ says: “ What things
soever ye desire, when ye pray, believe that ye receive them,
and ye shall have them.” (Mark xi, 24.)

There is no doubt at all that, if even at the present day isdah

prayer were made over the sick—that is, by grave and holy
elders, and with full faith—as many as we would might be
healed. For what cannot faith do? We, however, leave out of
sight that faith which apostolic authority requires in the very
first place; and moreover by elders, that is, men superior to
the rest in age and in faith, we understand the common herd of
priests. Furthermore, out of a daily or free anointing we make
an extreme unction ; and lastly, we not only do not ask and
obtain that result of healing promised by the Apostle, but we
empty the promise of its meaning by an opposite result.
. Nevertheless we boast that this sacrament, or rather figment,
of ours, is founded on and proved by the teaching of the Apostle,
from which it is as widely separated as pole from pole. Oh,
what theologians !

Therefore, without condemning this our sacrament of extreme
unction, I steadily deny that it is that which is enjoined by the
Apostle James, of which neither the form, nor, the practice,
nor the efficacy, nor the purpose, agrees with ours. We will
reckon it, however, among those sacraments which are of our
own appointing, such as the conseeration and sprinkling of salt
and water. We cannot deny that, as the Apostle Paul teaches
us, every creature is sanctified by the word of God and prayer ;
and so we do not deny that remission and peace are bestowed
through extreme unction s not because it is a sacrament divinely
instituted, but because he who receives it believes that he
obtains these benefits. For the faith of the -receiver does not
err, however much the minister may err. For if he who
baptizes or absolves in jest—that is, does not absolve at ali, as
far as the minister’s part is concerned—yet does really absolve
or baptize, if there be faith on the part of the absolved or


242 '. TLUTHER’S PRIMARY. WORKS


baptized person, how much more does he who administers
extreme unction bestow peace; even though in reality he
bestows no. peace, if we look to his ministry, since there is no
sacrament. The faith of the person anointed receives that
blessing which he who anointed him either could not, or did
not intend, to give. Itis enough that the person anointed hears
and believes the word; for whatever we believe that we shall
receive, that we do really receive, whatever the minister may
do or not do, whether he play a part, or be in jest. For the
saying of Christ holds good : “ All things are possible to him
that believeth ;” and again; “As thou hast believed, so be it
done unto thee.” Our sophists, however, make no mention of
this faith in treating of the sacraments, but give their whole
minds to frivolous discussions on the virtues of the sacraments
themselves ; ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth.

It has been of advantage, however, that this unction has been
made extreme, for, thanks to this, it has been of all sacraments
the least harassed and enslaved by tyranny and thirst for gain ;
and this one mercy has been left to the dying, that they are
free to be anointed, even if they have not confessed or com-
municated. . Whereas if it had continued to be of daily employ-
ment, especially if it had also healed the sick, even if it had
not taken away sins, of how many worlds would not the pontiffs
by this time have been masters—they who, on the strength of
the one sacrament of penance, and by the power of the keys, and
through the sacrament of orders, have become such mighty
emperors and princes? But now it is a fortunate thing that, as
they despise the prayer of faith, so they heal no sick, and, out
of an old rite, have formed for themselves a new sacrament,

Let it suffice to have said thus much concerning these four
sacraments, I know how much it will displease those who
think that we are to enquire about the number and use of
the sacraments, not from the holy Sceiptures, but from the See
‘of Rome ; as if the See of Rome had given us those sacraments,
and had not rather received them from the schools of the
Universities ; to which, without controversy, it owes all that it
has. The tyranny of the popes would never have stood so high |
if it had not received so much help from the Universities; for
among all the principal sees, there is scarcely any other which


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 243


has had so few learned bishops. It is by force, fraud, and
superstition alone that it has prevailed over the rest ; and those
who occupied that see a thousand years ago are so widely
diverse from those who have grown into power in the interim,
that we are compelled to say that either the one or the other
were not pontiffs of Rome.

There are besides some other things, which it may seem that
we might reckon among sacraments—all those things, namely,
to which a divine promise has been made, such as prayer, the
word, the cross. For Christ has promised in many places to
hear those that pray ; especially in the eleventh chapter of the
Gospel of St. Luke, where he invites us to prayer by many
parables. Of the word he says: “Blessed are they that hear
the word of God and keep it.” (Luke xi. 28.) And who
can reckon up how often he promises succour and glory to
those who are in tribulation, suffering, and humiliation?
Nay, who can count up all the promises of God? For it is
the whole object of all Scripture to lead us to faith; on
the one side urging us with commandments and threatenings,
on the other side inviting us by promises and consolations.
Indeed all Scripture consists of either commandments or
promises. Its commandments humble the proud by their
requirements ; its promises lift up the humble by their re-
missions of sin, ;

It has seemed best, however, to consider as sacraments,
properly so called, those promises which have signs annexed to
them. The rest, as they are not attached to signs, are simple
promises. It follows that, if we speak with perfect accuracy,
there are only two sacraments in the Church of God, Baptism
and the Bread; since it is in these alone that we see both a
sign divinely instituted and a promise of remission of sins.
The sacrament of penance, which I have reckoned along with
these two, is without any visible and divinely appointed sign ;
and is nothing else, as I~have said, than a way and means of
return to baptism. Not even the schoolmen can say that
penitence agrees with their definition; since they themselves
ascribe to every sacrament a visible sign, which enables ‘the
senses to apprehend the form of that effect which the sacra-
ment works invisibly. Now penitence or absolution has no
such sign; and therefore they will be compelled by their own

R


24-4 LUTHER'S PRIMARY WORKS


definition either to say that penitence is not one of the
sacraments, and thus to diminish their number, or else to Bring
forward another definition of a sacrament.

Baptism, however, which we have assigned to the whole of life,
will properly suffice for all the sacraments which we are to use in
life; while the bread is truly the sacrament of the dying and
departing, since in it we commemorate the departure of Christ
from this world, that we may imitate Him. Let us then so
distribute these two sacraments that baptism may be allotted
to the beginning and to the whole course of life, and the bread
to its end and to death; and let the Christian, while in this
vile body, exercise himself in both, until, being fully baptized
and strengthened, he shall pass out of this world, as one born
into a new and eternal life, and destined to eat with Christ in
the kingdom of his Father, as he promised at the Last Supper;
saying: “I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit of the
vine until the kingdom of God shall come.” (Luke xxii. 18.)
Thus it is evident that Christ instituted the sacrament of the
bread that we might receive the life which is to come; and
then, when the purpose of each sacrament shall have been
fulfilled, both baptism and the bread will cease.

I shall here make an end of this essay, which I readily and
joyfully offer to all pious persons, who long to understand
Scripture in its sincere meaning, and to learn the genuine use of
the sacraments. It is a gift of no slight importance to “ know
the things that are freely given to us of God,” and to know in
what manner we ought to use those gifts. For if we are
instructed in this judgment of the Spirit, we shall not deceive
ourselves by leaning on those things which are opposed to it.
Whereas our theologians have not only nowhere given us the
knowledge of these two things, but have even darkened them, as
if of set purpose, I, if I have not given that knowledge, have
at least succeeded in not darkening it, and have given others
an inducement to think out something better. It has at least
been my endeavour to. explain the meaning of both sacraments,
but we cannot all do all things. On those impious men, however,
who in their obstinate tyranny press on us their own teachings
as if they were God’s, I thrust these things freely and con-

fidently, caring not-at all for their ignorance and violence. And
yet even to them I will wish sounder sense, and will not


THE BABYLONISH CAPTIVITY 245


despise their efforts, but will only distinguish them from
those which are legitimate and really Christian.

I hear a report that fresh bulls and papal curses are being
prepared against me, by which I am to be urged to recant,
or else -be declared a heretic. If this is true, I wish this little
book to be a part of my future recantation, that they may not
complain that their tyranny has puffed itself up in vain.
The remaining part I shall shortly publish, Christ being my
helper, and that of such a sort as the See of Rome has never
yet seen or heard, thus abundantly testifying my obedience
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
