THE LATIN WORKS AND THE CORRESPONDENCE OF HULDREICH ZWINGLI, VOL. 2
Edited, with introductions and notes, by William John Hinke; published under the auspices of the American Society of Church History (Philadelphia: Heidelberg Press, 1922). Translated by Henry Preble, Walter Lichtenstein, and Lawrence A. McLouth.
Public domain.
Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/latinworkscorres02zwin).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

AD  CAROLVM

ROMANORVM  IMPERATO-

retn  Gcrmania:  comiti'a  Auguftx  Celc=

brantcm,  Fidci  Huldrychi

Zuinglij  ratio.


VBNITB  AD  MB  OHNES Qvi  tABORATIS
cr  onernti  rfb'x,  cr  t^o  rtfidm  mi,

ANNO M.  D.  XXX.  Ha{c\iJi«i

Vinatuoitts,


TITLE  PAGE  OF

ZWINGLI'S  CONFESSION  OF  FAITH

SUBMITTED  TO  THE  EMPEROR  CHARLES  V

.ITLY 3. 1S30


^?.1  OF  Pi?/,V^
/\>"  ^

•  UJL  18  1929

The Latin Works X£^gigalsij^

of

Huldreich Zwingli

Translated  for  the  late

Samuel  Macauley  Jackson

and  Published  under  the  Auspices  of  the

American  Society  of  Church  History


Volume  Two


Edited,  with  Introductions  and  Notes,  by

William  John  Hinke


With  a  Preface  by

William  Walker  Rockwell


Philadelphia

The  Heidelberg  Press

1922


Copyright.  1922

BY THE

AMERICAN  SOCIETY  OF  CHURCH  HISTORY


PREFACE

PFFORTS  to  publish  the  Latin  works  of  Zwingli  in  English
■■— '  translations  have  extended  over  a  number  of  years.  In
1908,  the  Rev.  Prof.  Samuel  Macauley  Jackson,  D.D.,  of  New
York  University,  offered  translations  of  certain  Latin  works  of
Zwingli  in  Ms.  form  to  the  General  Synod  of  the  Reformed
Church  in  the  United  States,  convened  at  York,  Pennsylvania,
for  publication.  The  offer  was  referred  to  a  special  committee,
consisting  of  the  Rev.  Drs.  Good  and  Richards  and  of  the  Elders
Loucks,  Siebert  and  Wood.  They  were  instructed  "to  make
special  efforts  to  carry  the  proposal  into  execution."^  At  the
next  meeting  of  the  General  Synod  of  the  Reformed  Church,
held  in  1911,  at  Canton,  Ohio,  the  committee  reported  that,
owing  to  their  failure  to  secure  a  sufficient  number  of  advance
subscribers,  they  felt  unable  to  proceed,  but  that  Dr.  Jackson
himself  would  publish  these  works  in  a  different  form,  for  which
undertaking  he  asked  the  co-operation  of  the  General  Synod. ^

In  September,  1912,  the  first  volume  of  this  series  left  the
press.  The  page  proof  had  been  read  by  Dr.  Jackson ;  but  he
died  at  Washington,  Connecticut,  on  the  second  of  August,
1912,  a  month  before  the  bound  copies  were  delivered.

In  a  circular  issued  by  Messrs.  G.  P.  Putnam's  Sons  and
signed  by  Dr.  Jackson,  under  the  date  of  March  29, 1912,  he  had
announced :  ''The  undersigned  has  made  arrangements  that  in
case  his  own  editorial  labors  should  be  interfered  with  by  in-
validism or  death,  the  work  will  be  brought  to  completion  under
the  supervision  of  the  American  Society  of  Church  History  and

'  Acts  and  Proceedings  of  the  General  Synod  of  the  Reformed  Church
in  the  U.  S.,  1908,  p.  283.

^  Acts  and  Proceedings  of  the  General  Synod  of  the  Reformed  Church
in  the  U.  -ST.,  1911,  p.  406f.


IV  PREFACE

under  the  immediate  direction  of  the  Secretary  of  this  Society,
the  Rev.  Professor  Wm.  Walker  Rockwell."

At  its  annual  meeting  in  December,  1912,  the  American
Society  of  Church  History  took  action  recorded  in  the  following
extract  from  its  minutes:  ''The  Society  gave  its  formal
approval  to  the  plan  of  the  late  Dr.  Jackson  as  laid  down  in  the
circular  which  he  issued  in  March,  1912,  concerning  the  con-
tinuance of  the  publication  of  the  translation  of  the  Latin
Works,  etc.  of  Zwingll,  under  the  auspices  of  this  Society  and
under  the  editorship  of  its  present  Secretary.  It  was,  however,
voted  that  this  should  not  be  considered  a  publication  of  the
Society,  as  in  that  case  the  Constitution  would  demand  its  free
distribution  to  all  members.  It  was  further  voted  that  the
Society  should  assume  no  financial  responsibility  whatever  for
the  undertaking."^  Had  the  Society  possessed  an  endowment,
it  would  have  been  able  to  act  with  greater  freedom.

Dr.  Jackson's  executors,  Professor  George  T.  Jackson,  M.D.,
and  Frederick  W.  Jackson,  Esq.,  brother  and  nephew  respec-
tively of  the  deceased,  informed  the  undersigned  that  the
testator  had  not  made  the  printing  of  the  Zwingli  translations
mandatory  upon  his  estate.  They  called,  however,  for  esti-
mates of  its  cost,  and  these  seemed  to  be  prohibitively  high.

After  the  death  of  Dr.  George  T.  Jackson,  which  occurred
in  New  York  City  on  Monday,  January  3,  1916,  the  under-
signed continued  negotiations  with  the  surviving  executor.
Through  the  kind  offices  of  George  C.  Sprague,  Esq.,-  a  personal
friend  of  the  late  Samuel  Macauley  Jackson,  an  agreement  was
drawn  up  between  Frederick  W,  Jackson,  Esq.,  as  surviving
executor  and  the  American  Society  of  Church  History,  Inc.
This  was  ratified  at  a  special  meeting  of  the  Council  of  the
Society,  held  in  New  York  City  on  the  16t.h  of  February,  1918 ;
by  the  17th  of  April  it  had  received  the  requisite  signature.^

'  Papers  of  the  American  Society  of  Church  History,  second  series,  vol.
IV  (1914),  p.  ix.  This  action  was  taken  on  the  day  when  the  Society
devoted  an  entire  session  to  addresses  in  memory  of  Dr.  Jackson,  who  had
been  its  Secretary  from  its  foundation  in  1888  till  shortly  before  his  death
{Ibid.,Y>p.  1-20).

'At  its  annual  nioeting  in  191!)  tlie  Society  gave  ^Ir.  Sprague  a  vote
of  thanks.

'Papers,  second  series,  vol.  VI,  1921,  p.  xxxiv.


PREFACE  V

This  agreement  transferred  to  the  American  Society  of  Church
History  all  the  printed  copies  of  the  first  volume  of  the  set
together  with  the  copyright  thereof;  also  the  unpublished
manuscripts  and  the  working  library^  used  in  connection
therewith  and  the  right  to  reprint  any  article  from  Dr.  Jackson's
''Selections  from  Zwingli,"  to  which  he  held  the  copyright.
The  Society,  on  its  part,  agreed  to  "publish  the  remainder  of
the  said  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli,  or  such  parts  thereof  as
in  its  discretion  it  shall  consider  advisable,  at  as  early  a  date  as
is  reasonably  practicable,  in  view  of  the  demand  therefor."  The
Society  agreed  to  continue  the  publications  along  the  general
lines  contemplated  by  the  late  Dr.  S.  M.  Jackson  and  to  cause
his  name  to  appear  on  the  cover  and  title  page  of  each  succeed-
ing volume;  and  to  pay  to  the  estate  of  Dr.  Jackson  fifty  per
cent,  of  the  gross  amount  of  all  sales  of  the  first  volume  of  the  set.
Previous  to  the  signing  of  the  agreement  with  the  surviving
executor,  the  American  Society  of  Church  History  had  entered
into  negotiations  with  the  Rev.  Rufus  W.  Miller,  D.D.,  Sec-
retary of  the  Publication  and  Sunday  School  Board  of  the  Re-
formed Church  in  the  United  States.  In  1917-18  arrangements
were  completed  whereby  the  publication  will  be  continued  by
this  organization  under  its  trade  name  of  the  Heidelberg  Press,
without  involving  the  American  Society  of  Church  History  in
financial  responsibility.

This  happy  solution  of  the  problem  would  never  have
been  reached  had  it  not  been  for  the  interest  taken  by  the
officials  of  the  Heidelberg  Press  and  by  the  Rev.  President
George  W.  Richards,  D.D.,  of  the  Theological  Seminary  of  the
Reformed  Church  at  Lancaster,  Pa.,  and  above  all,  by  the  Rev.
Prof.  James  I.  Good,  D.D.,  of  Philadelphia,  who  as  chairman
of  the  special  committee  of  the  General  Synod  of  the  Reformed
Church,  had  most  effectively  co-operated  with  the  American
Society  of  Church  History  to  make  the  publication  of  the  theo-
logical works  of  Zwingli  possible.  At  the  meeting  of  the  Gen-
eral Synod  of  the  Reformed  Church,  held  in  1917,  at  Dayton,
Ohio,  Dr.  Good  reported  that  sufficient  money  and  pledges  had

*  Twenty  or  thirty  volumes  bearing  on  Zwingli,  consisting  chiefly  of
copies  of  texts  which  Dr.  Jackson  had  been  in  the  habit  of  loaning  to
translators.


VI  PREFACE

been  secured  from  private  individuals  to  warrant  the  publica-
tion of  Zwingli's  largest  and  most  important  work  ''Of  True  and
False  Religion."^  He  had  also  enlisted  the  interest  and  finan-
cial support  of  the  Western  Section  of  the  "Alliance  of  the
Reformed  Churches  holding  the  Presbyterian  System."  As  a
result,  each  of  the  constituent  denominations  of  that  Alliance
contributed  its  share  financially  for  another  volume  of  this
series.  The  latter  volume  is  the  one  now  issued  and  the  follow-
ing denominations  had  part  in  making  its  publication  possible :
The  Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  of  America,  the
Presbyterian  Church  in  the  United  States  (Southern),  the
United  Presbyterian  Church,  the  Presbyterian  Church  in
Canada,  the  Reformed  Church  in  America  and  the  Reformed
Church  in  the  United  States.  The  generous  assistance  of  all
these  churches  is  hereby  gratefully  acknowledged.

These  appropriations  are  simply  to  help  pay  the  cost  of
publication ;  the  very  modest  honorarium  of  the  editors  will  be
met  by  funds  privately  raised  by  Dr.  Good.  If  it  should  seem
desirable  to  prepare  new  translations  of  the  German  Works,  and
to  revise  the  inadequate  manuscript  version  of  the  Correspond-
ence, additional  money  will  be  required.

The  scope  of  the  translation  was  stated  by  Dr.  Jackson  in
his  circular  of  March  29,  1921,  as  follows:  'To  bring  out  a
series  comprising,  in  not  less  than  six  volumes  of  about  100,000
words  each,  printed  in  royal  octavo,  all  the  Latin  treatises  and
also  the  more  important  of  the  German  treatises  of  Zwingli,  and
in  addition  the  complete  Zwingli  correspondence.''

Careful  computations  made  by  the  undersigned  after  Dr.
Jackson's  death,  at  the  request  of  his  executors,  showed  that  the
series  would  be  considerably  longer  and  much  more  expensive
than  Dr.  Jackson  had  estimated.  It  was  decided,  therefore,  to
revert  to  Dr.  Jackson's  original  plan  of  presenting  the  Latin
treatises  of  Zwingli,  and  to  postpone  the  revision  and  printing  of
the  Correspondence,  and  the  translation  of  additional  German
tracts,  until  funds  should  be  available  for  those  purposes.

The  delay  in  the  publication  of  the  critical  edition  of
Zwingli's  Works  by  Egli  and  Finsler  has  raised  an  interesting

'  Acts  and  Proceedings  of  the  General  Synod  of  the  Reformed  Church
in  the  U.  8.,  1917,  p.  30.


PREFACE  VII

methodical  problem  for  the  editors  of  the  present  volume.  Dr.
S.  M.  Jackson  desired  that  it  should  represent  the  latest  critical
text  and  held  back  those  tracts  already  translated  on  the  basis  of
Schuler  and  Schulthess,  for  ten  years,  in  order  to  benefit  by  the
labors  of  Egli  and  Finsler.^

Of  the  Tracts  included  in  the  present  volume  none  have  as
yet  appeared  in  the  critical  edition ;  all  are  based  on  Schuler  and
Schulthess.  As  early  as  1916  the  present  writer,  foreseeing  this
eventuality,  consulted  Professor  Finsler,  who  wrote  a  letter  from
Basel  on  the  27th  of  February,  1916,  saying  (in  German)  :  ''In
my  opinion  you  may  use  for  the  purpose  of  your  translation  in
those  cases  where  Tracts  have  not  yet  appeared  in  our  edition  of
Zwingli,  either  the  original  prints  or  the  edition  of  Schuler  and
Schulthess.  About  the  individual  prints  my  Zwingli-Biblio-
graphie  (Zurich,  1897),  gives  you  exact  information."

Professor  Finsler  went  on  to  say  that  the  "Account  of  the
Faith  of  Zwingli"  would  be  presented  in  volume  V,  number  163 ;
that  the  "Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith"  would  be  in  volume
VI,  number  181 ;  and  that  the  ''Letter  to  the  Illustrious  Princes
of  Germany  Assembled  at  Augsburg"  would  be  in  volume  VI,
number  167 ;  and  these  would  be  ready  in  about  five,  seven  and
six  years  respectively.  He  continued:  "For  these  three  items
there  are  good  original  prints;  and  these  are  also  reprinted  in
such  a  way  in  the  two  complete  editions  and  in  Schuler  and
Schulthess  that  you  may,  in  my  opinion,  calmly  base  your
translation  on  the  said  editions.  I  regret  that  our  own  edition
cannot  be  of  service  to  you  yet."

As  all  but  one  of  these  Tracts  were  printed  in  Zwingli's
lifetime  and  thus  received  Zwingli's  own  imprimatur,  their
printed  text  is  superior  to  any  possible  divergent  manuscript

'The  death  of  Professor  Egli  in  1908,  followed  in  1920  by  that  of
Professor  Finsler  has  thrown  the  burden  of  continuing  the  labors  chiefly
upon  Professor  Walther  Koehler  of  Zurich;  and  post-war  conditions  have
temporarily  arrested  publication.  In  his  valuable  report  on  "Die  Zwingli-
literatur  der  Jahre  1913-1920,"  (Zeitschrift  fiir  Kirchengeschichte,  XXXIX
(Neue  Folge  II),  p.  167,  Lie.  Ernst  Stahelin  points  out  that  the  Tracts
have  been  printed  as  far  as  Bd.  IV,  Lfg.  6,  Suhsidium  sive  coronis  de
eucharistia,  dated  Aug.  17,  1525;  whereas  the  Correspondence  has  progressed
to  the  sixth  installment  of  its  third  volume,  ending  with  a  letter  of  May
17,  1528.  It  is  greatly  to  be  hoped  that  publication  may  be  resumed,  in
which  case  American  subscriptions  would  be  most  appropriate.


VIII  PREFACE

evidence,  which  would  be  of  service  merely  as  correcting  mis-
prints overlooked  by  Zwingli  or  by  his  proofreader.

In  continuing  the  publication  of  the  Latin  Tracts  we  have
rehictantly  decided  to  abandon  the  chronological  order ;  instead
we  present  Zwingli's  Latin  Works  in  topical  groups.  As  will  be
seen  from  its  Table  of  Contents,  the  present  volume  (II)  con-
tains in  the  sequence  of  their  dates  certain  comprehensive
Statements  of  Zwingli's  beliefs,  such  as  An  Account  of  the  Faith
of  Huldrelch  Zwingli  presented  to  Emperor  Charles  V  at  the
Diet  of  Augsburg.  The  inclusion  of  John  Eck's  refutation
thereof  presents  material  indispensable  in  judging  Zwingli's
divergence  from  Roman  Catholicism  as  seen  by  contemporaries.
To  prevent  this  attack  on  Zwingli  from  being  carelessly  mistaken
for  one  of  his  own  productions  it  is  printed  in  smaller  type.

The  translations  in  the  present  volume  were  made  (with
one  exception)  by  Mr.  Henry  Preble,  formerly  an  assistant
professor  of  Latin  in  Harvard  University.  They  have  been
carefully  revised  and  annotated  by  Professor  William  J.  Hinke,
Ph.D.,  D.D.,  of  the  Auburn  Theological  Seminary,  a  well-
known  writer  on  the  history  of  the  Reformed  Church  in  the
United  States.

The  third  volume  will  contain  Zwingli's  longest  systematic
treatise,  Of  True  and  False  Religion  (1525).  This  deserves  a
place  in  the  history  of  Protestant  theology  between  Melanch-
thon's  Loci  of  1521  and  Calvin's  Institutio  of  1536.  In  this
volume  there  will  also  be  presented  in  translation:  Adversus
Hieronymwm  Ejuserum,  canonis  missae  adsertorem,  Huldrychi
Zuinglii  antibolon}  Though  belonging  by  topic  to  the  Writings
on  the  Eucharist,  which  Professor  Robert  Hastings  Nichols,
Ph.D.,  of  the  Auburn  Theological  Seminary  will  edit  as  the
fourth  volume  of  this  series,  the  Antiholon  is  quoted  so
frequently  and  at  such  length  in  Of  True  and  False  Religion
that  it  seems  best  to  us  to  transfer  it  to  the  third  volume,  thus
incidentally  relieving  the  great  pressure  on  the  space  of  the
fourth.

The  third  volume  will  present  translations  by  Mr.  Preble,
revised  during  1917-1921  by  Rev.  Charles  Tupper  Baillie,  B.D.,
formerly  professor  in  the  Canadian  Presbyterian  Theological

'  Egli  and  Finsler.  Ill,  230-287.


PREFACE  ix

College  in  Trinidad,  B.W.I.,  and  now  pastor  of  the  First
Presbyterian  Church,  Plattsburg,  New  York.  The  Latin  texts
translated  for  the  third  volume  have  appeared  in  the  edition  of
Egli  and  Finsler ;  and  the  introduction  and  notes,  to  be  prepared
by  the  undersigned,  will  make  free  use  of  the  material  of
that  edition,  as  authorized  by  the  late  Dr.  Finsler  in  a  letter
published  in  facsimile  in  the  prefatory  matter  of  the  first  volume
of  the  present  work.

William Walker Rockwell.

Union  Theological  Seminary
in  the  City  of  New  York,
August  1st,  1921.


s


CONTENTS


PAGE

PREFACE  ........  iii


DECLARATION  OP  HULDREICH  ZWINGLI  REGARDING  ORIG-
INAL SIN,  ADDRESSED  TO  URBANUS  RHEGIUS.  AUGUST
15, 1526 I

II

AN  ACCOUNT  OF  THE  FAITH  OF  HULDREICH  ZWINGLI,
SUBMITTED  TO  THE  GERMAN  EMPEROR  CHARLES  V,  AT
THE  DIET  OF  AUGSBURG. JULY 3, I53O •  •  • 33

III

REFUTATION  OF  THE  ARTICLES  OF  ZWINGLI  PRESENTED  TO
HIS  IMPERIAL  MAJESTY,  MADE  BY  JOHN  ECK  UNDER
THE  PATRONAGE  OF  THE  MOST  HONORABLE  PRINCE,
LORD  ERHARD,  S.  R.  E.,  CARDINAL  BISHOP  OF  LIEGE.
JULY  17, 1530 62

IV

LETTER  OF  HULDREICH  ZWINGLI  TO  THE  ILLUSTRIOUS
PRINCES  OF  GERMANY  ASSEMBLED  AT  AUGSBURG,
REGARDING  THE  INSULTS  OF  ECK. AUGUST  27, I53O . IO5


REPRODUCTION  FROM  MEMORY  OF  A  SERMON  ON  THE
PROVIDENCE  OF  GOD,  DEDICATED  TO  HIS  HIGHNESS,
PHILIP  OF  HESSE. AUGUST 20, I53O  .  .  . I28


CONTENTS


VI

A  SHORT  AND  CLEAR  EXPOSITION  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  FAITH
PREACHED  BY  HULDREICH  ZWINGLI,  WRITTEN  BY
ZWINGLI  HIMSELF  SHORTLY  BEFORE  HIS  DEATH  TO  A
CHRISTIAN  KING.  THUS  FAR  NOT  PRINTED  BY  ANY-
ONE AND  NOW  FOR  THE  FIRST  TIME  PUBLISHED  TO
THE  WORLD. WRITTEN  JULY, I53I .... 235


ADDITIONAL NOTES


294


The  Works
of  Huldreich  Zwingli


Declaration  of  Huldreich  Zwingli  Regarding  Original
Sin,  Addressed  to  Urbanus  Rhegius.

(August  15,  1526)

[DE  PECCA-  I  TO  ORIGINALI  DECLARATIO  |  Huldrychi  Zuinglij,
Ad  Vrbanum  |  Rhegium.  |  48  unnumbered  octavo  pages,  of  which  pp.  2,
45-48  are  blank.  Signed  on  p.  44:  Tiguri  quintadecima  die  Augusti.
An.  I  M.D.XXVI.  Tigvri.  Ex  Aedibus  Christophori  Froschouer,  i.  e.,
"Zurich,  August  15,  1526.  From  the  press  of  Christopher  Froschouer."
Printed  in  Opera  Zwinglii,  torn.  II,  fol.  115b-122b;  Jo.  Oecolampadii  et
Euld.  Ztcinglii  epist.  libr.  IV  (Basileae,  1536)  fol.  54b-61b;  Schuler  and
Schulthess  ed..  Vol.  Ill,  pp.  626-645;  Finsler,  Zvnngli  Bibliographie,  No.  72.
The  following  English  translation,  based  on  one  made  by  Mr.  Henry
Preble,  was  revised  throughout  by  the  editor.

This  pamphlet  was  in  answer  to  a  letter  of  Rhegius  to  Zwingli,  which
has  not  been  discovered  thus  far.  (See  Zwingli's  Werke,  Vol.  VIII.
(1914),  633,  note  4).  Rhegius  had  some  doubts  as  to  the  soundness  of
Zwingli's  views  regarding  original  sin.  This  appears  from  a  letter  which
he  wrote  on  January  14,  1526,  to  Ambrose  Blaurer  of  Constance,  in  which
he  expressed  himself  rather  vigorously:  "I  am  sorry  Zwingli  was  not  at
Baden  [i.  e.,  the  Baden  Disputation,  May  21-June  18,  1526].  He  would
have  defeated  all  the  Papists  once  for  all,  except  in  the  matter  of  original
sin,  which  he  seems  to  treat  in  a  very  unsound  fashion.  In  regard  to  the
Lord's  Supper,  though  he  might  be  criticized,  he  certainly  could  not  have
been defeated by those counterfeit theologians." Nor was his mind


2  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

altogether  set  at  rest  by  this  treatise,  for  he  expresses  in  a  letter  of  Sep-
tember 28,  1526  (Zwingli'8  Werke,  VIII,  726-8)  the  fear  that  Zwingli  might
be  accused  of  Origenism.  Zwingli  tried  to  remove  his  doubts  by  a  letter
dated  October  16,  1526  (Werke,  VIII,  737-9).]

Huldreich  Zwingli  to  Urbanus  Rhegius,*  Preacher  of
THE  Gospel  at  Augsburg.


/^RACE  and  peace  through  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord.  You
^^-*  wrote  me  very  recently  a  letter  which,  though  it  was  very
long,  was  not  long  enough,  most  learned  Urbanus,  for  it  so
abounded  in  new  and  learned  things  and  showed  with  clearness
that  you  had  been  in  no  way  offended  by  the  letter  which  I  had
combined  with  the  one  in  which  I  discuss  the  Eucharist  with
Billicanus  in  no  unfriendly  wayf,  as  I  think.

Yet  I  have  not  been  able  to  answer  before  those  things  which
I  think  ought  by  no  means  to  be  passed  over  in  silence,  though
I  have  constantly  and  eagerly  desired  to  answer  them.  I  am
so  badly  driven  by  occupations,  nay  by  those  furies,  who,  kind-
ling everywhere  the  fires  of  contention,  will  some  day  suffer  a
punishment  worthy  of  Castor  and  Pollux.  But  now,  having
secured,  or,  if  the  truth  may  be  told  without  shame,  having
stolen,  a  little  leisure  time,  I  will  do  my  best  to  say  at  least
something  if  not  altogether  enough  with  regard  to  the  question
you  raise  in  your  letter.  For  you  are  not  the  only  one  who  thinks
that  I  hold  and  write  an  unusual  doctrine  with  regard  to  the
pollution  of  human  descent.  There  are  other  great  men  who
entertain  the  same  idea.  I  have  myself  seen  letters  of  certain
men  to  myself  and  to  others,  some  of  which  beg  me  to  explain
my  view  more  clearly,  while  others  warn  their  friends  not  to

•The  reformer  Urbanus  Rhegius  (Koenig)  was  born  in  1490  at
Langenargcn.  near  Lindau.  He  studied  at  Freiburg  and  at  Ingolstadt.  At
the  latter  place  he  became  professor  of  poetry  and  rhetoric.  In  the  year
1520,  he  became  cathedral  preacher  at  Augsburg,  where  he  accepted  the
principles  of  the  Reformation.  In  1530,  he  was  called  as  superintendent  to
Celle  and  as  such  was  the  reformer  of  the  Duchy  of  Luncburg.  He  died
March  23,  1541.  His  works  appeared  in  1562  at  Nuremberg,  four  volumes
in  German,  three  volumes  in  Latin.  His  biography  was  written  by  Heim-
buerger (Gotha, 1851) and  by  Uhlhorn (Elberfeld,  1861).

tSee  the  Rcsponsio  H.  Zwinglii,  to  the  letters  of  Theob.  Billicanus  and
U.  Rhegius.  Scbuler  and  Schulthess  ed.,  Ill,  646-670.


On  Original  Sin  3

suffer  themselves  to  be  dragged  to  destruction  by  me.  They  are
both  of  them  overcautious,  not  to  say  anxious.  For  those  to
whom  the  question  is  so  clear  that  they  think  I  need  to  make  a
declaration  of  doctrine,  ought  to  bring  out  publicly  their  own
clear  teaching  forthwith,  for  I  do  differ  somewhat  with  those
who  have  so  far  been  thought  to  have  hit  the  nail  on  the  head  in
this  matter;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  those  to  whom  my  view
seems  so  dangerous  that  they  think  they  ought  to  warn  their
friends  to  beware  of  it,  should  caution  all  men,  or  at  least  try
to  make  me  explain  like  those  who  were  before  me.  I  will,
therefore,  with  the  help  of  Christ,  try  to  make  all  men  see
clearly  that  what  I  have  said  upon  this  matter  briefly  but
plainly,  was  not  said  at  random  or  without  authority  from  the
sacred  Scriptures ;  and  that,  on  the  other  hand,  much  has  been
said  by  many  people  in  regard  to  this  matter  which  has  little
foundation  in  the  truly  sacred  [canonical]  writings.  For  what
could  be  said  more  briefly  and  plainly  than  that  original  sin  is
not  sin  but  disease,  and  that  the  children  of  Christians  are  not
condemned  to  eternal  punishment  on  account  of  that  disease?
On  the  other  hand,  what  could  be  said  more  feebly  or  more  at
variance  with  the  canonical  Scriptures  than  that  this  disaster
was  relieved  by  the  water  of  baptism,  while  through  want  thereof
it  was  intensified,  and  that  it  was  not  only  a  disease  but  even  a
crime?  Therefore,  my  dear  Urbanus,  believe  that  I  treated  such
reasoning  so  concisely  and  lightly  in  my  work  upon  Baptism
and  Catabaptism*  because  otherwise  the  book  would  have  grown
to  interminable  length.  For  I  had  determined  even  then,  to
treat  the  whole  subject  more  at  length  and  with  greater  precision
if  circumstances  should  demand  it.  But  I  had  a  hope  that  the
thing  would  be  settled  by  those  few  words,  for  in  these  days
men's  minds  are  so  happily  constituted  that  if  you  offer  them  a
slight  opportunity  or  give  them  a  handle  to  take  hold  of,  they
straightway  press  on  to  the  very  end.  Yet  some  are  of  a  more
sincere  spirit  than  others.  We  often  say  we  do  not  understand  a
thing  when  we  do  not  want  to  understand  it.  Or  we  are  ashamed
to  appear  ignorant.  We  sometimes  forget  both  God  and  our-
selves,— that  it  is  impossible  for  anything  to  escape  Him  or  for
us  to  know  everything.

But  do  thou,  to  come  at  length  to  the  subject,  most  fair-

*See  Zwingli's  Werke,  Schuler  and  Schulthesg  ed.,  vol.  II,  1,  p.  287.


4  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

minded  priest  of  the  truth,  accept  my  argument  in  this  manner :
Let  us  first  of  all  come  to  an  agreement  as  to  these  terms,  "sin"
and  "disease."  Then  let  us  define  the  disease  itself,  and  attempt
to  discover  the  appropriate  name  for  it,  and  show  how  it  damns
and  whom.  Thirdly,  let  us  show  that  it  cannot  be  cured  by  any
other  medicine  than  the  blood  of  Christ,  the  Son  of  God,  so  far
am  I  from  denying  Christ's  efficacy.  Therewith  I  shall  also
search  out  whether  the  evil  can  be  averted  by  anything  else  than
that  blood,  for  instance,  by  the  water  of  baptism.

That  "sin"  is  properly  used  of  a  wrong  committed  through
negligence  or  thoughtlessness,  I  think  everybody  is  aware,  such
as  the  Greeks  call  irapd-n-Tuna  dirb  Tov  TTTaieij',*  the  Latin  theo-
logians "delictum  a  deliquendo  vel  negligendo,"  the  Hebrews
"asham,"  like.those  wrong-doings  from  which  St.  John  says  no
man  is  freef,  and  which  Christ  bids  us  atone  for  by  constant
prayer,  saying,  "Forgive  us  our  debts."

For  since  they  are  of  daily  occurrence,  they  drive  the  pious
man,  like  constant  goads,  to  self -debasement  and  depreciation  of
his  faults.  Or  it  is  used  for  the  misdeed  which  any  one  com-
mits and  enters  into  knowingly  and  with  his  eyes  open,  after
mature  deliberation  and  thought,  such  as  the  Greeks  call
a.napT'ia,i.  e.,  a  failing  or  fault,  because,  if  we  may  believe  Origen,
it  is  done  "contra  conscientiam,"  in  conscious  opposition  to  con-
science, while  the  Latins  call  it  "scelus,"  "crimen"  or  "flag-
itium."  In  this  category  are  included  highway  robbery,  homi-
cide, war  (voluntary  sins  these),  treason,  excessive  lust,  mer-
cenary judgments,  oppression  of  the  innocent,  and  all  this  class
of  monstrous  wrongs,  such  as  the  sins  of  David,  Ahab  and  Judas.

Now  the  word  "disease"  I  do  not  use  here  according  to  the
pattern  of  those  learned  in  the  law,  who,  as  Gellius  tell  us,t
distinguish  it  from  "defect"  only  in  that  the  first  is  temporary,
the  other  lasting ;  I  use  it  as  combined  with  a  defect  and  that  a
lasting  one,  as  when  stammering,  blindness,  or  gout  is  hereditary
in  a  family.  Such  an  infirmity  or  natural  defect  we  are  in  the
habit  of  calling  "einen  natiirlichen  Bresten"  in  German — a
natural  infirmity.  On  account  of  such  a  thing  no  one  is  thought
the  worse  or  the  more  vicious. For  things  which  come  from

*i.  e.,  a  false  step  from  the  verb  ptaiein,  to  fall.

tProbably  I  John  1 :  8  is  intended.

JA.  Gellii  Noctium  Atticarum  Libri  XX,  Bk.  IV,  2.


On  Original  Sin  5

nature  cannot  be  put  down  as  crimes  or  guilt.

For  this  reason,  I  have  said  that  the  original  contamination
of  man  is  a  disease,  not  a  sin,  because  sin  implies  guilt,  and  guilt
comes  from  a  transgression  or  trespass  on  the  part  of  one  who
designedly  perpetrates  a  deed.  I  will  give  an  example.  To  be
born  a  slave  is  a  wretched  condition,  but  it  is  not  a  fault  nor  a
crime  in  him  who  is  so  born,  for  when  born  one  has  not  yet
committed  any  trespass  or  transgression.  If,  then,  any  one
should  say,  "But  his  ancestors'  acts  caused  them  and  their
descendants  to  be  reduced  to  slavery,  hence  there  was  wrong-
doing involving  fault,  and  slavery  followed  it  as  fine  or  penalty,"
he  would  be  right  assuredly.  I  say  so,  too.  The  sin  involved
in  the  wrong-doing  of  our  first  parent  is  called  "original  sin,"
not  in  the  real  sense  of  the  words  but  metaphorically,  and  is
nothing  else  than  a  condition,  wretched  to  be  sure,  but  much
milder  than  the  crime  deserved.  For  as  prisoners  of  war,  when
they  might  have  been  slain  with  impunity,  have  sometimes  been
saved  through  mercy  and  grace  on  condition  that  they  and  all
their  descendants  shall  be  slaves,  so  the  originator  of  the  human
race,  having  deserved  utter  destruction,*  was  by  the  goodness  of
God  driven  into  exile,  and  made  subject  to  death,  and  so  was
exiled  not  only  from  a  most  charming  garden,  but  from  the
most  delightful  sight  of  the  divine  countenance  and  the  glad
companionship  of  the  angels.

And  this  disaster  fell  upon  his  descendants  also.  For  a
dead  man  cannot  beget  a  living  man,  nor  a  slave  a  free  man.
Adam,  therefore,  being  justly  dead  and  an  exile,  could  not
generate  offspring  who  should  be  living  in  the  sight  of  God  or
a  citizen  or  heir  of  the  heaven  from  which  he  had  utterly  fallen.

Now,  what  I  say  shall  be  proved  by  the  testimony  of  Paul.
In  Romans  5  [ :  14], f  he  says:  "Death  reigned  from  Adam  to
Moses,  even  over  them  that  had  not  sinned  after  the  similitude
of  Adam's  transgression."  By  these  words  it  becomes  plainly
apparent  that  Adam  perpetrated  the  crime  upon  which  the

*  navuXe^pia.  Zwingli  put  the  Greek  words  into  the  text.  We  prefer
to  add  them  as  footnotes.

tThe  verse  division  of  the  Bible,  that  is,  the  numbering  of  the  verses,
was  first  introduced  into  the  Latin  Bible  in  a  small  octavo  edition,  printed
by  Robert  Stephanus,  in  1555.  Hence  the  earlier  quotations  are  usually
by  chapters  only. We  have  added  the  verses  in  square  brackets.


6  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

penalty  of  death  was  so  rigorously  inflicted  that  it  clung  to  all
his  descendants,  but  that  they  who  afterwards  died  in  con-
sequence of  this  defect  of  birth  did  not  sin  as  Adam  had  sinned.
The  disease,  therefore,  and  defect,  brought  upon  man  by  the
fault  of  the  first  parent,  is  what  has  vitiated  the  offspring,  the
offspring  did  not  vitiate  itself.  When,  therefore,  it  is  called
"sin"  in  the  Scriptures,  it  is  clear  enough,  I  think,  that  this  is
done  by  metonymy.  Hence,  when  you  also,  most  learned
Urbanus,  quote  the  testimony  of  Paul,  Rom.  7  [:  17],  "Now
then  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it,  but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me,"
and  show  that  Paul  also  called  that  disease  "sin"  rather  than
serious  disorder,  and  ask  then  why  I,  too,  will  not  suffer  it  to  be
called  "sin,"  as  Paul  and  all  have  called  it,  you  are  right  to  ask
it.  But  now,  I  hope,  you  see  clearly  that  I  am  not  contending
for  a  name,  but  wish  to  bring  out  the  thing  itself  a  little  more
plainly  and  significantly.  I  allow  you,  therefore,  and  every-
body who  is  not  satisfied  with  calling  this  disaster  a  sin  to  call
it  a  heinous,  criminal,  and  disgraceful  offense,  but  on  the  under-
standing that  by  these  terms  are  meant  the  disease,  defect,  or
condition  of  mortality,  and  that  boundless  tendency  to  self-love
of  which  I  shall  speak  later.  And  this  is  not  contradicted  by
what  Paul  again  says,  Eom.  3  [ :  23] ,  "All  have  sinned,"  for  in
the  same  way  the  word  for  sinning  is  used  figuratively,  so  that
the  meaning  is,  "All  are  in  this  wretched  condition  of  having
been  deprived  of  the  glory  of  God  through  the  fault  of  their
first  parent."  Thus  far,  I  think,  we  have  come  to  an  under-
standing or  an  agreement  if  you  prefer,  that  I  shall  suffer  this
defect  of  human  depravity  to  be  called  "sin,"  but  you  shall
understand  by  this  term  a  condition  and  penalty,  the  disaster
and  misery  of  corrupted  human  nature,  not  a  crime  or  guilt  on
the  part  of  those  who  are  born  in  the  condition  of  sin  and  death.
Now  we  have  come  to  the  place  to  define  the  disease  itself
and  to  give  it  a  name  according  to  the  definition,  which  I
undertook  to  do  as  the  second  part  of  my  task.  If,  then,  we  can
find  the  source  of  this  evil,  we  shall  by  one  and  the  same  stroke
reach  the  definition  and  the  name.  The  source,  then,  ah  ovo,
as  they  say,  was  this :  When  the  Creator  of  all  things  had  in-
stalled in  paradise,  as  in  the  palace  of  Alcinous,*  that  man
•The  king  of  the  Phaeacians,  whose  gardens  had  become  proverbial.
Mentioned  in  the  Odyssey,  Bk.  VII,  112-132.


On  Original  Sin  7

whom  he  had  set  over  all  living  things,  He  bound  him  to  Him-
self by  this  law,  "Of  every  tree  in  the  garden  thou  shalt  eat
without  fear,  but  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil  shalt
thou  not  eat,  for  on  the  day  thou  eatest  thereof  thou  shalt  die."
[Gen.  2:16-17].

This  law  he  suddenly  transgressed  in  this  wise.  That
supreme  Architect  had  built  woman  from  a  single  rib  of  Adam
— while  he  slept,  an  exceedingly  unpropitious  omen.  For  what
will  not  woman  dare  in  the  hope  of  deceiving  and  eluding  her
husband,  after  having  at  birth  seen  him  sunk  so  deeply  in  sleep
that  he  did  not  feel  it  when  his  side  was  torn  open  and  a  rib
taken  out?  Having  discovered  her  nature  the  Devil  determined
to  attack  the  man  through  her,  and  though  he  believed  her
capable  of  any  recklessness,  he  yet  saw  that  newly  born  she  was
still  unacquainted  with  wiles.  Hence,  the  clever  pleader  got
around  her  by  the  ambiguity  of  the  name  of  the  tree.  For  in-
asmuch as  God  had  forbidden  them  to  eat  of  the  tree  of  the
knowledge  of  good  and  evil  with  the  intent  that  they  should
never  try  to  know  anything  of  themselves,  but  should  depend
upon  Him  alone  in  all  their  thoughts  and  reflections  and  de-
signs, the  Devil  distorted  the  reason  for  the  name  of  the  tree
into  this,  that  it  received  its  name  of  "the  tree  of  the  knowledge
of  good  and  evil,"  because  he  that  should  eat  of  it  would  straight-
way become  thoroughly  skilled  in  good  and  evil.  He  also
charged  God  with  treachery  in  that  he  had  said  that  immediate
death  would  threaten  those  that  would  eat.  The  foolish  woman,
therefore,  forthwith  began  to  be  suspicious  of  God,  as  if  He  had
been  insincere  in  forbidding  a  thing  from  which  such  advantage
would  arise  and  as  if  He  feared  for  His  dominion.  Beside  this,
the  rare  beauty  of  the  tree  allured  her,  the  fruit  -whetted  her
appetite,  the  desire  to  know  good  and  evil  drew  her  on,  and
being  at  once  insolent,  glad,  and  filled  with  great  hopes,  she
seized  the  apple  and  persuaded  her  husband  to  try  how  these
hopes  would  issue,  having  promised  him  everything  that  was
most  fair.  And  he,  overcome  not  so  much  by  the  blandishments
of  the  woman  as  by  his  eagerness,  both  to  know  good  and  evil
and  to  become  equal  with  God,  put  his  teeth  into  the  fatal  fruit,
and  immediately  his  eyes  were  opened,  not  to  see  what  he  had
hoped,  but  to  gaze  upon  the  whole  band  of  evils  that  awaited
him,  and  straightway  he  fell. What  other  cause  can  we  think


8  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

this  most  indiscreet  act  had  than  self-love  ?  Adam  viewed  him-
self with  admiration,  thought  himself  not  unworthy  of  greater
dominion  than  that  which  he  had,  over  the  beasts  namely,
searched  his  mind  and  found  it  capable  of  more  than  he  thus
far  knew.  Nay,  overstepping  and  surmounting  all  things,  he
represented  himself  in  imagination  as  a  sort  of  judge  and  dic-
tator in  the  matter  of  good  and  evil.  These  expressions  capti-
vated his  ear ;  these  arguments  shattered  the  law  in  regard  to  not
eating;  these  battering-rams  leveled  the  citadel  of  innocence
with  the  ground,  and  the  fate  the  Lord  had  foretold  fell  upon
the  thrice  and  four  times  wretched  creature.  For  he  had  per-
ished utterly,  having  deser\'ed  the  extreme  of  all  punishment,
and  as  the  Hebrews  say,  had  died  the  death,  only  the  Lord  in  His
own  kindness,  rather  than  because  of  Adam's  deserts,  found  a
means  of  propping  up  the  fallen,  of  which  I  shall  speak  in  the
third  part.

We  have  now  the  source  of  the  transgression,  namely
(piXavTia,  that  is,  self-love.  From  this  have  flowed  all  the
evils  which  exist  anywhere  among  mortals.  Given  over  to
death  by  this,  man  must  by  no  means  be  thought  to  have  be-
gotten sons  unlike  himself,  any  more  than  a  wolf  begets  a
sheep  or  a  crow  a  swan.  For  thus  it  is  written,  Gen.  5  [ :  3] ,
"And  Adam  begat  a  son  in  his  own  likeness,  after  his  image,
etc."  The  children  of  the  first  parents,  therefore,  were  in  no
more  excellent  condition  than  they  themselves,  and  so  with  all
their  posterity.  And  Adam  was  made  the  chattel  of  sin  by
transgressing  the  divine  law.  For  he  that  doeth  sin,  is  the  slave
of  sin.  Into  the  same  condition,  therefore,  we  have  all  been  born
after  him.  Hence,  whatever  we  meditate  for  our  own  sakes,
we  consult  only  our  own  interests,  and  simply  walk  through  the
universe  eager  to  have  all  things  our  own,  serving  us,  and  eager
to  be  ourselves  over  all  things.  Hence,  again,  the  Lord  says.
Gen.  6  [:  3],  *'My  spirit  shall  not  always  strive  with  man,  for
that  he  also  is  flesh."  Flesh,  therefore,  scorns  God  and  loves
itself.  And  a  little  later  he  says,  "And  every  imagination  of
the  thoughts  of  the  human  heart  is  only  evil  continually."*
Again  God  reiterates  the  same  thing,  Gen.  8  [ :  21],  "I  will  no
more  curse  the  earth  for  the  sake  of  man ;  for  the  imagination

*Gen.  6:  5,  slightly  changed  by  Zwingli.


\


On  Original  Sin  9

and  thought  of  man's  heart  are  prone  to  evil  from  his  youth."*
All  these  things  tend  to  prove  this  one  point  that  our  nature
was  vitiated  in  our  first  parent,  so  that  it  is  constantly  sinning
through  excessive  self-love,  and  if  God  should  leave  it  to  itself,
could  meditate  nothing  sincere  and  generous,  any  more  than
runaway  slaves.  This  propensity  to  sin,  therefore,  from  self-
love  is  "original  sin;"  the  propensity  is  not  properly  sin,  but  is
a  sort  of  source  of  and  disposition  to  it.

I  have  usedf  as  an  illustration,  a  wolf  still  a  cub.  It  is  in
all  respects  still  a  wolf  as  far  as  its  disposition  is  concerned,  and
is  an  animal  that  would  slaughter  everything  in  its  savageness,
but  it  has  not  yet  carried  off  any  plunder  because  its  age  pre-
vented it.  The  hunters,  therefore,  no  more  spare  it  than  they
spare  the  wolf,  from  whose  jaws  they  rescue  its  prey,  because  its
nature,  though  it  is  so  young,  is  so  well  known  to  them  that  they
are  sure  it  w^ill  follow  the  instincts  of  its  kind  when  it  grows  up.
The  disposition,  therefore,  is  the  original  sin  or  defect,  the
plundering  is  the  sin  which  flow^s  from  the  disposition.  The  sin
itself  consists  in  the  act,  which  recent  writers  call,  ''actual  deed,"
and  this  is  properly  the  sin.  And  this  Paul  explains  most  clearly
of  all  in  the  fewest  words,  Rom.  7  [:  14],  'T,"  he  says,  "am
carnal,"  (here  you  have  the  "flesh"  of  Genesis  and  the  disposi-
tion of  the  young  wolf),  "sold  under  sin,"  (here  you  have  the
condition  of  slave,  the  corrupted  nature,  the  propensity  to  sin,
and,  in  a  word,  the  defect  or  disease).  "For  that  which  I  do,  I
allow  not" — the  Hebrews  use  the  word  for  knowing  all  the
time  instead  of  the  word  for  approving  or  allowing,  J  as  in
Psalm  1  [  :  6] .  "The  Lord  knoweth,"  i.  e.,  approveth,  "the  way  of
the  righteous,"  and  Psalm  36  [ :  18].**  "The  Lord  knoweth  the
days  of  the  upright,"  and  Num.  14:  31,  "and  they  shall  know
the  land  which  ye  have  despised,"  (where  we  read  "et  videbunt,
and  they  shall  see,"  but  wrongly,  for  there  is  the  same  word

*Thus  according  to  the  Vulgate,  which  Zwingli  quotes.

tZwingli  used  this  illustration  in  his  book  on  Baptism,  see  Schuler
and  Schulthess  ed.,  Vol.  II,  pt.  1,  p.  288.

$Paul  was  writing  Greek,  not  Hebrew.  Hence  the  Vulgate  and  English
version  translate  correctly,  "I  know  not."  The  Greek  word  ought  not  to
be  translated  "I  allow  not."

**Psalm  36  in  the  Vulgate;  but  Ps.  37,  in  the  Hebrew  and  English
translations.  The  difference  is  due  to  the  fact  that  in  the  Septuagint  Pss.
9  and  10  are  counted  as  one  Psalm.


10  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

VT'  [to  know]  in  all  the  passages).  "For  what  I  would,  that
do  I  not;  but  what  I  hate,  that  do  I.  If  then  I  do  that
which  I  would  not,  I  consent  unto  the  law  that  it  is  good.  Now
then  it  is  no  more  I  that  do  it"  (that,  namely,  which  I  hate  in
my  inner  man)  ''but  sin  that  dwelleth  in  me.  For  I  know  that
in  me  (that  is,  in  my  flesh),  dwelleth  no  good  thing,  etc."
[Rom.  7:15-18].
y.  Now  the  sin  that  dwelleth  in  us  is  nothing  else  than  the

defect  of  a  corrupted  nature,  which  from  self-love  constantly
desires  things  contrary  to  the  spirit.  For  the  spirit  strives  for
the  general  weal,  the  flesh  for  its  own  particular  welfare.  For
God  does  not  take  thought  for  Himself,  but  for  those  He  has
created,  for  He  needs  nothing  but  all  things  need  Him.  Thus  all
flesh,  however  much  it  pretends  to  be  good,  in  as  far  as  it  is  flesh,
attributes  all  things  as  for  its  own  good;  but  if  it  perceives  a
different  sentiment  in  itself,  it  should  attribute  it  to  God  as
His  blessing  anji  gift.  For  the  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest.
The  flesh,  then,  is  one  thing,  its  works  another,  and  the  flesh  is
;>not  sin,  but  that  which  the  flesh  doeth  is  sin.  The  flesh,  there-
fore, the  disposition  of  man,  the  original  defect  or  sin,  this
propensit}^,  is  that  which  desires  things  contrary  to  the  spirit.
But  this  desire  is  not  without  a  cause,  and  since  no  man  hath
such  desire  except  for  his  own  sake,  this  propensity  can  only
come  from  ^tXaurta,  that  is,  self-love.  When  Catiline  lavishes  his
possessions,  he  is  striving  for  a  reputation  for  liberality ;  when  he
plunders  what  belongs  to  others,  his  aim  is  the  same.  See  by
what  opposite  means  the  defect  pushes  its  way  to  its  own  desires.
In  a  word,  self-love  devises  and  combines  all  these  schemes ;  it
is  itself  the  disease  or  defect  from  which  all  our  ills  come  forth
as  from  a  Trojan  horse.

Now  that  we  have  searched  out  the  source  of  our  ills,  and
the  name  of  the  disease  or  defect,  the  next  thing  is  to  inquire,  as
the  thesis  of  this  second  part  of  our  work,  whether  this  disease
condemns  all  mortals  to  the  woes  of  everlasting  death.  In  con-
sidering this  question  I  think  we  should  not  fail  to  note  the
following: — The  bliss  of  everlasting  life  and  the  pain  of  ever-
lasting death  are  altogether  matters  of  free  election  or  rejection
by  the  divine  will.  Therefore,  all  who  have  ever  discussed  this
question  seem  to  have  drawn  the  lines  rather  incautiously  in
damning  all  infants  or  all  grown  persons  who  have  not  been  cir-


^


On  Original  Sin  11

cumcised  or  washed  with  the  water  of  baptism.  For  what  else  is
Paul  after,  in  Romans  from  the  ninth  to  the  twelfth  chapter,
than  to  show  that  blessedness  cometh  to  those  elected  of  God,
not  to  those  who  do  this  or  that?  For  he  loved  Jacob  and,
according  to  the  words  of  the  prophet  [Mai.  1:3],  hated  Esau,
when  they  were  still  being  formed  in  their  mother's  womb.
Since,  therefore,  everlasting  life  belongs  to  those  who  have  been
elected  to  it  by  God,  why  do  we  form  rash  judgments  about
any,  since  God's  election  is  hidden  from  us?  Were  we  in  His
counsels  when  He  made  the  election,  so  that  He  might  not
rashly  pitch  upon  some  unworthy  person  unawares,  forsooth?

Again,  as  to  those  who  have  grown  to  mature  age,  why  do
we  in  our  indiscretion  damn  those  who  have  not  been  marked
with  the  external  sign?  For  again  Paul  says  in  Romans  2
[:25],  that  he  whose  foreskin  is  intact,  (for  he  calls  him
aKpo^varla,  that  is,  the  foreskin  [or  the  uncircumcision] )  is  pre-
ferred to  and  excels  him  who  boasteth  of  a  circumcised  foreskin,
if  only  he  doeth  what  the  law  enjoins.  For  he  shows  that  the
works  of  the  law  are  written  in  his  heart  when  he  doeth  that
which  the  law  enjoins.  But  who  writeth  upon  the  human  heart
anything  worthy  of  God,  but  He  who  created  him,  as  Jeremiah
31  [:  33]  witnesseth?  When,  therefore,  we  see  the  uncircum-
cision do  what  the  law  directs,  why  do  we  not  recognize  the  tree
by  its  fruit?  Why  do  we  not  perceive  that  God  hath  engraved
the  works  of  the  law  upon  his  heart?  If,  therefore,  he  doeth
the  work  of  God  under  impulse  from  God,  why  do  we  damn
him  because  he  has  not  been  baptized  or  circumcised,  especially
when,  again,  the  apostle  attributes  to  such  accusation  or  absolu-
tion of  conscience  in  the  day  of  judgment  [Rom.  2:15-16],
and  it  is  nowhere  written,  "He  that  is  not  baptized,  is  damned ;"
and  the  words  in  Gen.  17  [ :  14],  "the  uncircumcised  man-child
whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin  is  not  circumcised,  that  soul  shall  be
cut  off  from  his  people,"  were  said  unto  the  people  of  Israel  in
order  that  no  one  should  omit  that  sign,  not  in  order  to  destroy
a  man  (by  whatever  accident  it  was  that  the  sign  had  not  been
received)  nor  to  indicate  that  the  sign  had  any  power.  But  all
things  occurred  to  them  under  figures,  and  God  ordered  rites
of  this  kind  of  them  that  they  might  be  constantly  reminded  of
spiritual  things.  He  demanded  circumcision  of  the  heart,  and
therefore  directed  that  that  member  be  circumcised,  which  was


12  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

the  fittest  symbol  of  the  passions,  that  men  might  be  always
reminded  of  the  internal  circumcision.  He  wished  the  law  to
be  ever  before  their  eyes  in  every  thought  and  every  act,  and
therefore  He  ordered  them  to  make  phylacteries.*

This  nation  alone,  therefore,  which  was  descended  from
Abraham  or  lived  with  his  descendants  and,  confessing  the
same  faith,  made  one  Church  with  them,  was  prohibited  from
omitting  the  sign  of  the  covenant  and  not  because  a  merciful
God  had  so  bound  His  grace  and  spirit  and  election  to  that  sign
that  he  refused  to  draw  unto  Himself  any  but  those  that  were
signed  with  this  sign.

Since,  I  say,  (to  come  back  to  the  main  discourse)  everlast-
ing life  has  nowhere  been  promised  on  the  terms  that  unless  one
has  been  circumcised  or  baptized  he  shall  in  no  wise  attain  it,
there  is  no  reason  why  we  should  at  random  consign  to  the  lower
regions  them  that  have  not  been  marked  by  these  signs.  All
these  things  are  gathered  from  the  second  chapter  of  Paul's
Epistle  to  the  Romans.  Nor  did  Christ  say,  "He  that  is  not
baptized,  shall  not  be  saved."  I  have  brought  forward  these
arguments  for  the  purpose  of  showing  that  they  are  wrong  by
the  whole  diameter  of  heaven  f  who,  even  if  they  have  names  not
only  great  but  ancient,  are  in  the  habit  of  consigning  to  ever-
lasting damnation,  now  the  children  of  Christians  when  they
have  not  been  baptized,  now  all  those  whom  we  call  "the  Gen-
tiles." For  what  do  we  know  of  the  faith  each  one  has  written
in  his  heart  by  the  hand  of  God?

Who  does  not  admire  the  faith  of  that  holy  man  Seneca,
as  his  letter  XXXIV  to  Luciliust  discloses  it?  He  says,  "We
should  certainly  live  as  if  our  lives  were  in  plain  sight,  think  as
if  some  one  could  look  into  our  inmost  souls.  And  some  one
can,  for  what  profiteth  it  that  a  thing  is  kept  secret  from  man?
Nothing  is  closed  to  God.  He  is  present  in  our  minds  and  in
the  midst  of  our  thoughts.  So  in  the  midst  of  them,  I  mean,  as
never  to  depart  from  us." Thus  Seneca.

Who,  pray,  wrote  this  faith  upon  the  heart  of  man?  Let
no  one  think  that  these  things  point  to  the  taking  away  of
Christ's  office,  as  some  men  charge  me  with  doing ;  they  magnify

*They  are  supposed  to  be  referred  to  in  Deut.  6 :  8.

ti.  e.,  they  are  entirely  mistaken.

$In  the  edition  of  Hense  (1914),  it  is  Letter  LXXXIII.


On  Original  Sin  13

His  glory.  For  through  Christ  must  come  all  who  come  to  God.
On  this  a  little  later.  Hence  I  do  not  even  suspect  that  the
father-in-law  of  Moses  came  to  God  by  any  other  way  than
through  Him  who  said,  ''I  am  the  way,  and  the  truth,  and  the
life"  [John  14 :  6] ,  as  also  Moses  and  all  men  came.  For  the
words,  ''He  that  believeth  not  shall  be  damned"  [Mk.  16:  16],
are  not  to  be  understood  absolutely,  but  only  of  those  who
having  heard  the  Gospel  refuse  to  believe.  Hence  children  and
those  who  have  not  heard  the  Gospel  are  not  bound  by  this  law,
but  with  grown  persons  the  point  is  whether  the  law  of  God  is
written  on  their  hearts  or  not.  For  thus  again  they  stand  or
fall  unto  the  Lord,  through  Christ  Jesus  the  only  way  to
salvation.

And  this  is  also  the  case  with  those  who,  like  the  children,
have  not  heard,  Rom.  9  [ :  11] ,  "that  the  purpose  or  ordination*
of  God  according  to  election  might  stand,"  and,  ''I  will  have
mercy  on  whom  I  will  have  mercy"  [Rom.  9 :  15],  and  "It  is  not
of  him  that  willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that
showeth  mercy"  [Rom.  9:16].  For  Christ  himself  says :  "If
I  had  not  come  and  spoken  unto  them,  they  had  not  had  sin"
[John  15 :  22] .  Let  their  ignorance,  therefore,  not  be  counted
against  them  to  whom  none  hath  come  to  preach  the  myt-tery
of  Christ.  They  stand  or  fall  unto  the  Lord.  Paul  treats  the
same  point,  Rom.  10:  18,  (and  this  is  not  against  me,  but  on
my  side) ,  "Have  they  not  heard?  Yes,  verily,  their  sound  went
into  all  the  earth."  This  counterblastf  the  apostle  hurled  at  the
Jews  and  thereby  took  away  from  them  the  opportunity  to
answer  by  making  a  pretext  of  ignorance  and  saying,  "We  have
not  heard ;  w^e  do  not  know."  "The  whole  world,"  he  says,  "re-
sounds with  the  Gospel,  and  ye  have  not  heard?"  In  a  word,
election  is  unshaken  and  the  law  written  on  the  hearts  of  men,
but  so  that  those  who  are  elect  and  do  the  works  of  the  law  in
accordance  with  the  law  written  on  their  hearts  come  to  God
through  Christ  alone.  For  he  is  the  son  for  whom  the  master
of  the  house  prepared  the  wedding  and  invited  many  [Lk.
14:  16].  And  if  any  man  ask  me  whether  we  should  not  make
a  statement  concerning  those  about  whom  we  have  the  declara-

f  avTininrov.


14  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

tions  of  the  divine  word,  I  answer,  "By  all  means,  but  where
have  we  this  word,  'Every  child,  nay,  every  mortal,  who  was
not  circumcised  of  old  or  washed  with  the  water  of  baptism  in
modern  times,  shall  be  consigned  to  the  lower  regions?'  For  it
is  damnation  to  have  been  born  in  this  condition."  To  the  solv-
ing of  this  problem,  I  now  turn  (for  there  was  a  second  part  to
this  thesis) — whether  the  inborn  corruption  condemns  all
mortals  to  the  woes  of  everlasting  death?

To  this  question  I  answer  without  difficulty,  first  of  all  by
the  words  of  the  Lord  Himself,  in  which  He  foretold  that  as
soon  as  man  should  eat  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  he  should  straight-
way die.  He  ate ;  hence,  he  is  dead.  For  as  he  became  the  slave
of  sin  by  transgressing,  he  could  not  beget  children  who  were  in
a  better  condition.  From  a  sinner  we  are  all  descended  as  sinners.
If  sinners,  therefore,  enemies  of  God ;  if  enemies,  therefore,  also
damned.

Again  we  are  damned  by  the  testimony  of  the  prophets,  of
which  I  will  content  myself  with  a  single  example,  Psalm  14 :  2,
"The  Lord  looked  down  from  heaven  upon  the  children  of  men,
to  see  if  there  were  any  that  did  understand,  and  seek  God.
They  are  all  gone  aside,  they  are  become  unprofitable
altogether."  Finally,  Paul  in  many  passages  and  in  many
words  touches  this  question,  especially  in  the  Epistle  to  the
Romans: — "Yea,  let  God  be  true,  but  every  man  a  liar"  [Rom.
3:4].  "All  have  sinned,"  that  is,  have  become  the  slaves  of
sin  and  death  through  the  guilt  of  the  first  parent.  "As  by  one
man  sin  entered  into  the  world,  and  death  by  sin ;  and  so  death
passed  upon  all  men,  for  that  all  have  sinned"  [Rom.  5:  12],
that  is,  have  been  born  in  sin,  or,  as  he  says  in  another  place,
"sold  under  sin"  [Rom.  7:  14]  (by  pollution  of  birth).  And
that  "to  have  sinned"  and  "to  be  dead"  are  used  by  Paul  for  "to
be  damned,"  he  himself  shows,  Rom.  5 :  18  [5 :  16] .  "For,"  he
says,  "the  judgment  was  by  one"  (sin,  namely)  "to  condemna-
tion, but  the  free  gift  is  of  many  offences  unto  justification."
And  a  little  later,*  "Therefore  as  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment
came  unto  all  men  to  condemnation ;  even  so  by  the  righteous-
ness of  one  the  justification  of  life  came  unto  all  men."  As  far,
therefore,  as  the  force  of  sin  is  concerned,  the  first  man  and  all

•Following  the  reading  of  the  Vulgate,  Rom.  5:  18.


On  Original  Sin  15

who  are  descended  from  him  are  damned  by  it.

From  this  answer,  in  which  I  grant  that  by  original  sin
all  that  is  born  infected  with  it  is  damned,  a  two-fold  objection
arises  against  me,  first,  for  what  reason  I  said  a  little  while  ago
that  those  ought  not  to  be  rashly  damned  who  have  not  been
circumcised  or  baptized,  when  they  are  of  tender  years  or  show
by  their  works  that  the  law  of  God  is  written  on  their  hearts,
while  I  now  damn  all  men  altogether,  second,  for  what  reason  I
said  in  the  book  on  Baptism  that  original  sin  does  not  damn.
To  the  first  I  answer  that  I  have  thus  far  spoken  of  the  nature
and  force  of  original  sin  in  such  terms  to  show  according  to  my
poor  ability  what  it  is,  whence  it  is,  and  what  its  power  is;  in
order  that  we  may  understand  thoroughly  that  which  we  are
discussing.  But  I  have  not  yet  begun  to  speak  about  the  remedy
by  which  this  disease  is  met.  However,  justly  do  I  condemn
those  who,  without  having  thoroughly  studied  the  disease  or  the
remedy,  damn  what  they  do  not  know.

Original  sin  damns,  to  be  sure,  so  far  as  its  force  and  nature
are  concerned,  but  a  very  present  remedy  saves  and  supports,
and  it  has  been  applied  not  too  late  but  just  in  time.  We  are  all
going  to  destruction  through  original  disease,  but  we  are  on
the  way  to  restoration  to  safety  through  the  remedy  which  God
has  discovered  against  the  disease.  Given  over  to  the  flesh  we
consider  only  the  things  of  the  flesh ;  filled  with  the  divine  Spirit
we  are  lifted  up  to  the  things  of  heaven.  When  we  speak  of  the
nature  of  the  flesh,  all  is  lost  and  ruined,  nay,  deplorable  and
hopeless ;  when  of  the  grace  and  light  of  the  Spirit,  all  things  are
bright  in  the  gladness  of  sure  hopes.  It  is  not  strange,  there-
fore, if  I  have  said,  that  as  far  as  the  force  of  original  sin  is  con-
cerned all  are  damned  by  it,  but  that,  since  a  remedy  has  been
found  which  restores  every  thing,  they  are  wrong  who  rashly
damn  all  men.  For  I  am  going  to  show  that  this  remedy  has
so  abundantly  restored  all  things  as  the  disease  would  have
ravaged  all  things  far  and  wide,  if  it  had  not  been  checked.  On
this,  therefore,  now  hear  first  my  opinion,  or  rather  the  voice  of
truth.

God  had  said  to  the  man,  "The  day  thou  eatest  thou  shalt
die  the  death"  [Gen.  2:  17].  Thus  spake  the  true  Zeus,  whose
orders  all  the  things  that  are  obey  so  implicitly  that  they  would
rather  be  destroyed  than  not  fulfil  them. The  man,  therefore.


16  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

died,  for  what  He  had  foretold  had  to  be.  Let  us,  then,  grad-
ually trace  the  death  he  died.  It  was  not  that  death  of  the  body
or  flesh  which  an  impious  but  vigorous  speaker  might  perhaps
say  had  been  better  than  propagating  such  a  disaster-laden  race.
For  he  lived  more  than  nine  hundred  years  longer.  Everlasting
death,  therefore,  followed,  as  far  as  the  deed  itself  and  guilt
are  concerned,  that  is,  he  deserved  not  only  the  death  of  the
body  but  everlasting  death.  And  this  his  fear  and  the  display
of  nakedness  show.  For  when  Adam  said,  "I  was  afraid  when
I  heard  thy  voice,  for  I  was  naked"  [Gen.  3:  10],  he  betrayed
by  his  fear  the  guiltiness  of  his  conscience  which  accused  itself
of  its  treachery,  and  in  its  self-love  trembled  at  the  death  of  which
it  felt  itself  worthy.  Yet  he  still  ventured  to  make  up  a  new
pretext,  to  deceive  Him,  forsooth,  who  knew  that  the  man  was
going  to  do  this  before  He  created  him,  and  said,  "I  am  naked."
What  of  it?  He  had  created  him  naked.  ''Let  Him  see  me
naked,"  should  have  been  his  thought.  But  all  this  is  the
reasoning  of  *a  despairing  conscience,  which  by  its  fear  and
vainly-sought  escape  admitted  its  damnation  righteous.

We  have  then  a  transgressor  and  a  runaway  who  is  damned
by  his  own  judgment.  For  if  he  had  not  been  damned  in  his
own  eyes,  he  would  not  have  taken  to  flight.  Then  the  goodness
and  mercy  of  the  Creator  brought  out  the  remedy  which  it  had
provided  before  man  fell.  Through  sinning  he  had  deserved
eternal  death  by  the  righteous  judgment  of  God.  God  had  de-
termined to  satisfy  His  righteousness  by  the  death  of  His  Son
who  cannot  sin,  that  we  might  see  at  once  most  cleayly  His
righteousness  and  His  mercy — His  mercy  in  that  He  hung  upon
the  cross  His  own  Son  for  fallen  man.  His  righteousness  in  that
He  redeemed  him  at  such  a  price,  for  He  shows  that  it  could  not
have  been  satisfied  more  cheaply.  He  thus  enters  upon  the
path  of  clemency,  in  order  to  set  us  the  example  of  doing  nothing
rashly  or  impulsively: — He  turns  immediate  death  into  lasting
disaster ;  He  banishes  from  Paradise,  where  all  things  sprang  up
unsown,*  to  a  rebellious  and  intractable  land,  that  what  should
have  been  at  hand  in  a  moment  might  be  drawn  forth  by  long
toil. For  this  belonged  to  man's  discipline.

But  the  everlasting  death,  for  which  He  found  no  remedy

*  aanapra.


\


On  Original  Sin  17

(since  all  things  in  the  visible  world  were  less  than  man,  and  all
things  in  the  invisible  world  were  less  than  that  price  which  His
inviolate  righteousness  demanded),  He  remedied  with  His  own
Son.  And  that  at  just  the  right  moment,  as  some  prophet —
(or  is  not  a  Christian  poet  a  prophet?  I  say  he  is) — once  sang,
"He  Himself  then  marked  out  the  wood  [the  cross]  to  undo
the  damage  of  the  wood"  [the  tree  in  Paradise].*  Presently,
when  supreme  wisdom  saw  that  man  was  going  to  make  ship-
wreck by  wood,  it  determined  to  throw  him  wood  to  cling  to  and
bring  him  to  shore,  and  promised  that  there  should  be  born  of
woman  one  who  should  bruise  the  head  of  the  general  enemy,
for  through  his  wiles  the  incautious  had  been  ruined.  And
God  would  have  been  unfaithful  to  this  promise,  if  no  fruit  of
the  victory  had  returned  unto  Adam.  For  what  could  it  have
done  but  increase  the  man's  pain  to  know  that  a  deliverer  was
to  come,  but  he  was  to  have  no  part  in  him  ?

Adam  understood,  therefore,  that  this  seed  was  to  bring
salvation  not  only  to  his  posterity  but  to  himself  also;  yet  he
did  not  know  the  particular  time  that  it  was  to  come.  Both  of
these  statements  are  proved  by  the  following  testimony:  Gen.
4:  1,  "She  [Eve]  bare  Cain"  (and  gave  him  this  name)  "and
said,  I  have  gotten  a  man  with  [the  help  of]  the  Lord,"  or
through  the  Lord.  In  these  words  are  seen  as  in  a  mirror  the
desires  of  the  woman.  "I  have  gotten,"  she  says,  that  is,  I  have
found,  obtained,  or  acquired  (for  that  is  the  force  of  the  Hebrew
— "I  have  obtained,"  I  say)  "a  man" — him,  that  is,  whom  God
had  promised  under  the  name  of  "seed," — "with  God,"  or
"through  God,"  that  is,  by  the  goodness  of  God.  Here  you  have
the  view  they  had  of  the  promise  of  God.  Here  also  the  ignor-
ance of  the  time,  for  they  thought  that  he  was  already  at  hand
who  was  hardly  to  come  after  the  course  of  many  years.  In
the  same  book,  5 :  28  and  29,  we  see  the  same  desires  in  Lamech.
When  Noah  had  been  born  to  him,  he  said,  "This  same  shall

•The  Latin  verse :  "Ipse  lignum  tunc  notavit,  Damna  ut  ligni  solveret,"
quoted  by  Zwingli,  is  taken  from  a  hymn  in  honor  of  the  sacred  cross,  by
Venantius  Honorius  Clementianus  Fortunatus,  who  lived  in  the  sixth  cen-
tury. See  his  Miscellanea,  Lib.  II,  cap.  2,  in  Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,
Vol.  LXXXVIII,  col.  88;  also  Wackernagel,  Das  deutsche  Kirchenlied,  Vol.
I,  p.  61.  For  the  life  and  work  of  Fortunatus,  see  DuflSeld,  Latin  Hymn-
writers  and  their  Hymns, (1889),  chap.  IX,  pp.  88-96.


18  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

comfort  us  concerning  our  work  and  toil  of  our  hands,"  think-
ing likewise  that  it  was  he  who  had  been  promised,  because  he
was  the  tenth  and  a  thousand  years  had  now  passed  since  the
creation  of  the  world.  This  pious  man  erred  twice,  but  inno-
cently, for  the  time  was  not  yet  at  hand,  nor  was  this  he  who  was
promised,  but  only  a  type  of  him,  as  Peter  witnesseth  [I  Pet.
3:20-21].

My  object  in  all  this  is  to  show  that  the  promise  made  to  the
first  mortals  was  carefully  kept  in  mind  by  them,  even  if  ex-
pression was  given  to  this  in  few  words,  and  that  the  hope  or
confidence  they  had  in  this  seed  did  not  deceive  them.  On  this
matter  I  shall  speak  more  distinctly  in  the  third  division.  I
have  given  a  foretaste  of  it  here  as  far  as  was  necessary  to  justify
me  in  myself  pronouncing  judgment  when  I  was  forbidding
others  to  do  so.  For  I  do  not  deny  that  the  damnation  of  all
who  had  come  from  so  contaminated  a  source  would  have  fol-
lowed, if  the^  goodness  of  God  had  not  counteracted  the  evil.
Since  it  has  done  so,  the  problem  must  evidently  be  solved  in
this  way — we  must  admit  the  great  power  for  damnation  that
sin  would  have  had,  and  we  must  likewise  recognize  how  much
of  its  strength  has  been  taken  from  it  by  the  remedy  which  God
has  provided.

To  the  second  objection  1  answer  that  I  never  said  without
qualification  that  original  sin  cannot  damn.  For  in  the  book
upon  Baptism  I  bore  witness  that  I  was  speaking  only  of  the
children  of  Christians,  saying  that  the  original  guilt  could  not
damn  them.  The  book  itself  plainly  bears  witness  to  this  in
two  passages.*  Hence  I  was  not  a  little  surprised  at  the  theatrical
cries,  "Do  ye  see  where  Zwingli  is  going  in  the  matter  of
original  sin?"  and  "What  is  this  but  making  Christ  void?"  This
I  have  added  simply  because  I  am  sure  about  the  children  of
Christians,  that  they  are  not  damned  by  original  sin ;  as  to  those
of  others  I  am  less  sure,  though,  to  confess  frankly,  the  view
that  I  have  taught  seems  to  me  the  more  probable  one,  that  we
have  no  right  to  pronounce  rashly  about  the  children  even  of

*See  ed.  of  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  Vol.  II,  1,  p.  287:  "For  what  we
say  here  of  the  original  sin  of  children,  refers  to  the  children  of  believers
only."  Also  p.  288:  "Hence  it  is  clear,  contrary  to  all  theologians,  that
the  children  of  believers  cannot  be  damned  because  of  original  sin,  for  they
do  not  know  the  law."


On  Original  Sin  19

Gentiles  and  those  who  do  the  works  of  the  law  according  to
the  law  written  in  their  hearts  by  the  finger  of  God.  This
conclusion,  then,  that  the  children  of  Christians  are  not  damned
by  the  original  disease,  I  establish  in  the  following  manner:

The  condition  of  those  who  are  born  of  Christian  parents
is  on  a  par  with  that  of  those  who  were  descended  from  Abra-
ham. But  the  original  disease  did  not  destroy  these ;  therefore,
this  disease  will  not  destroy  the  others,  I  mean  ours.  The  first
proposition  I  prove  thus:  Those  who  are  of  the  same  Church
are  under  the  same  condition,  just  as  those  who  belong  to  the
same  commonwealth,  share  the  same  fortunes.  Now  the  Church
which  is  made  up  by  joining  Gentiles  and  Jews  is  one  and  the
same.  Therefore  the  condition  is  one  and  the  same.  Proof  of
this  you  will  find  all  through  the  Scriptures  and  so  richly  that
there  is  no  need  of  tarrying  long  in  setting  it  forth.  Christ
Himself  testifies  that  he  is  the  cornerstone  which  unites  the  two
walls,  Matt.  21 :  42.  Again  He  says  there  is  one  shepherd  and
one  fold,  again,  that  the  vineyard  is  the  same,  and  He  fixes  equal
wages  for  the  husbandmen,  even  though  a  large  part  of  them
had  come  late.  Again,  He  says,  "They  shall  come  from  the
east  and  the  west,  and  shall  sit  down  with  the  God  of  Abraham,
of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob."*  Therefore  we  are  joined  to  them,  not
they  to  us.  Again,  He  says  that  peace t  came  to  the  house  of
Zacchaeus,  because  he  was  a  son  of  Abraham.

Paul,  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  ch.  11  [  :  17],  says  that
they  were  cut  off  that  we  might  be  grafted  in.  In  Gal.  3 :  7,  he
says,  "They  which  are  of  faith,  the  same  are  the  children  of
Abraham,"  and  in  the  same  chapter,  "So  then  they  which  be
of  faith  are  blessed  with  faithful  Abraham."  Peter  teaches  the
same  thing,  I  Peter  2 :  10.  If,  then,  Abraham's  faith  and  ours
are  one  (for  he  trusted  in  God  just  as  much  as  we  do,  through
the  seed  which  had  been  promised  him,  rather  than  because  he
was  now  at  hand  in  whom  they  trusted  when  only  promised),
it  is  clear  that  the  Church  of  both  is  one.  The  lot  and  condition
of  this  Church  will,  therefore,  also  be  the  same.

Now  the  second  proposition,  namely,  that  original  sin  has
not  consigned  to  everlasting  damnation  those  who  were  born

•Matt.  8:  11. The  words  "God  of"  are  not  in  Matthew.
fLuke  19:  9  speaks  of  "salvation,"  not  "peace."


20  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

of  Abraham  according  to  the  promise,  I  estabUsh  thus : — Jacob
was  beloved  by  God  before  he  was  born ;  original  sin,  therefore,
cannot  have  damned  him.  So  Jeremiah,  John  and  others.  If
you  say  that  this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  case  in  hand,  but
concerns  election  and  predestination,  you  are  altogether  right.
Therefore,  blessedness  and  grace  are  from  election,  so  also  is
rejection,  not  from  the  participation  in  signs  or  sacraments.
But  let  us  hasten  to  plainer  facts.  In  Gen.  17 :  7,  God  thus
speaks  unto  Abraham,  "I  will  establish  my  covenant  between
me  and  thee  and  thy  seed  after  thee  in  their  generations,  for
an  everlasting  covenant,  to  be  a  God  unto  thee  and  to  thy  seed
after  thee."  If,  therefore,  He  promises  that  He  will  be  a  God
to  Abraham's  seed,  that  seed  cannot  have  been  damned  because
of  original  guilt,  and  He  is  speaking  of  the  seed  born  to  him
according  to  the  promise.  For  between  those  whose  God  He  is
and  Himself  there  is  established  a  friendship ;  if  there  is  estab-
lished a  friejidship,  no  damnation  because  of  the  condition  of
birth  can  intervene.

Now,  whatever  is  said  of  the  seed  according  to  the  promise,
is  to  be  understood  of  us  likewise  who  are  born  of  Christiati
parents.  For  we  are  sons  of  the  promise  as  Isaac  was.  Gal.  4 :  28.
From  the  initiation  by  the  token  it  is  clear  that  the  children  of
the  Hebrews  had  not  been  damned  because  of  original  sin.  For
the  token  of  circumcision  was  the  token  of  the  covenant.  For
so  it  is  considered.  Gen.  17 :  10-12,  ''This  is  my  covenant  which
ye  shall  keep,  between  me  and  you  and  thy  seed  after  thee;
every  man  child  among  you  shall  be  circumcised.  And  ye  shall
circumcise  the  flesh  of  your  foreskin;  and  it  shall  be  a  token
of  the  covenant  betwixt  me  and  you.  And  he  that  is  eight  days
old  shall  be  circumcised  among  you,  every  man  child  in  your
generations,  he  that  is  born  in  the  house,  or  bought  with
money,  etc."  I  have  quoted  this  passage  at  length  because  there
are  many  profitable  things  contained  in  it,  not  only  for  the
present  argument,  but  for  the  present  day,  all  of  which  I  will
briefly  point  out.  First,  we  see  the  symbol  of  the  testament,
circumcision,  called  here  the  "covenant"  or  "testament."  Why,
then,  do  we  wrangle  so  fiercely  about  the  cup  of  the  Supper  of
thanksgiving,  which  is  a  testament,  since  Christ  [Luke  22 :  20]
called  it  a  "testament"  in  exactly  the  same  way  in  which  cir-
cumcision is called the "testament" here, metaphorically


On  Original  Sin  21

namely,  for  the  name  of  the  thing  signified  is  transferred  to  the
sign.  So  the  bread  is  called  "the  body;"  the  wine,  "the  blood;"
by  metonymy,  because  they  are  symbols  of  these.

Now  it  is  the  Hebrew  habit  to  use  frequent  figures  of  speech
more  than  other  nations.  For  their  language,  though  of  meagre
vocabulary,  is  imposing  through  use  of  tropes.  Indeed,  scanti-
ness of  vocabulary  forces  one  to  turn  to  the  use  of  tropes,  as  it
were.  Why  do  we  devote  study  to  language  if  we  are  to  return
to  the  point  from  which  we  have  driven  the  pontifical  party?
They  refused  to  accept  tropes  when  you  said  there  was  a  trope
in,  "He  that  eateth  my  flesh"  [John  6:  54],  and  "My  flesh  is
meat  indeed"  [John  6 :  55] ,  and  they  kept  insisting,  "The  words
are  clear,  are  simple,  are  in  harmony  with  the  sacraments  of
the  Church."  If  we  ourselves  now  cry  out  in  the  same  way
about  the  words,  "This  bread  is  my  body,"  "We  won't  have  a
trope;  the  words  are  simple,  plain,  inviolable,  clear  as  glass,"
are  we  not  like  unto  them?  Nay,  why  do  we  object  so  mightily
to  their  taking  literally  the  much  clearer  words,  "My  flesh  is
meat  indeed"  (for  they  include  the  distinguishing  mark  "in-
deed"),* when  in  the  passage,  "This  is  my  body,"  we  do  the
same  thing  as  the  pontifical  crowd  themselves?  But  of  this
elsewhere.  This  is  not  the  place  to  speak  more  at  length  than  I
have  done  before  of  this  subject  of  Hebrew  metonymy.

Second,  we  see  the  same  token  called  "a  token  of  the  cov-
enant," which  had  just  been  called  the  "covenant."  Third,  it
is  the  token  of  that  covenant  which  existed  between  God  and
Abraham.  Therefore,  the  infants  were  included  in  the
covenant,  for  the  token  was  given  to  them,  that  it  might  be  an
indication  that  they  were  just  as  much  in  the  covenant  as  Abra-
ham. Therefore,  also,  our  children  are  included  in  the  covenant
just  as  much  as  they  were,  for  we  are  sons  of  the  promise,  as  I
showed  from  Galatians  a  little  while  ago.  Fourth,  even  the
slaves  were  circumcised,  whether  born  in  the  house  or  bought,
whence  we  see  that  the  household  was  counted  with  its  master
or  lord.  And  this  is  very  hard  upon  the  Catabaptists,  but  they
do  not  look  to  the  free  election  of  God,  but  think  salvation  is

•This  point  becomes  still  more  effective  if  we  translate  the  Vulgate:
"My  flesh  is  truly  meat."  The  Greek  text  reads  literally:  "My  flesh  is
true  meat."


22  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwin^li

bound  up  with  symbols,  as  the  pontifical  party  does.

Paul  says,  Gal,  4:26,  "But  Jerusalem  which  is  above  is
free,  which  is  the  mother  of  us  all."  This  mother  is  nothing  else
than  the  liberation  through  Christ.  For  a  little  later  [Gal.  5 :  1]
he  says,  ''Stand  fast  therefore  in  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ
hath  made  you*  free."  If,  therefore,  we  are  not  made  free
from  original  sin,  being  born  of  Christian  parents,  the  condition
of  those  who  are  in  Christ  after  the  coming  of  Christ  is  worse
than  that  of  the  people  of  old,  which  is  even  more  impious  than
it  is  foolish.  For  Paul  is  not  speaking  of  carnal  liberty,  but
liberty  from  the  law.  And  if  we  have  been  freed  from  the  law,
original  sin  cannot  damn  us,  for  that  would  damn  us  through
the  power  of  the  law  that  had  been  transgressed.  Paul  likewise
alludes  so  plainly  to  this  idea  in  Rom.  11 :  16,  that,  though  treat-
ing another  topic,  namely  the  election  of  Jews  and  Gentiles,  he
yet  seems  to  have  held  this  idea  of  mine  most  distinctly  when
he  says,  "If  the  first  fruit  be  holy,  the  lump  is  also  holy ;  and  if
the  root  be  holy,  so  are  the  branches."  And  here  I  am  not  tying
up  the  immunity  of  infants  from  original  sin  with  the  holiness
of  their  parents  but  with  that  of  God  who  elects,  just  as  among
the  ancients  children  had  immunity  from  it,  not  on  account  of
the  special  holiness  of  the  lump  or  dough,  though  they  were
partakers  in  the  testament,  but  in  consequence  of  the  goodness
of  God  who  elects  and  calls.

He  touches  upon  the  same  point  Rom.  5 :  19-21,  and  most
plainly  of  all,  when  after  many  things  that  make  for  this  view
he  says  at  length,  "For  as  by  one  man's  disobedience  so  many  of
us  were  made  sinners,  so  by  the  obedience  of  one  shall  many  of
us  be  made  righteous,"!  (for  "where  sin  abounded,  grace  did
much  more  abound"),  "that  as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,
even  so  might  grace  reign  through  righteousness  unto  eternal
life  by  Jesus  Christ."

Here  I  ask,  whether  origmal  sin  proceeded  from  Adam  or
not?  If  not,  why  is  Pelagius  damned?  But  he  is  rightly
damned  in  accordance  with  this  testimony  and  the  others  of
which  mention  has  been  made  above. If  so,  then  all  the  evil

•The  Greek  text  has  "us"  instead  of  "you."

tQuoted  by  Zwingli  in  a  slightly  different  form  from  that  found  in
the  Revised  Version.


On  Original  Sin  23

Adam  did  in  sinning  has  been  made  good  through  the  grace  of
Christ.  For  the  first  Adam  was  made  a  living  soul,  but  the
second  a  quickening  spirit  [I  Cor.  15 :  45] .  In  a  word,  as
Adam's  sin  so  corrupted  our  birth  that  nothing  is  born  but
what  is  vitiated,  so  Christ's  righteousness  has  renewed  it  so  thor-
oughly that  the  corruption  does  not  harm  us  unless  when  we
have  grown  up  we  again  become  faithless  and  ruin  ourselves  by
our  own  guilt,  acting  in  contravention  of  the  law.  For  they
that  trust  in  Christ  are  not  damned  even  if  they  have  trans-
gressed the  law.  How  much  less  are  they  damned  who  are  in
Christ  and  have  done  no  wrong !  Original  and  actual  sin  must
be  admitted  to  have  been  made  good  through  Christ,  just  as  we
admit  it  to  have  come  about  through  Adam.  The  words  are
in  themselves  so  plain  that  they  resist  much  elaboration.

And  here  it  is  proper  to  ask  whether  Christ  restored  the
whole  race  or  only  the  church  of  the  faithful?  Though  I  might
have  answered  this  question  in  a  few  words  to  the  effect  that
Christ  benefited  by  His  healing  power  exactly  as  much  as  Adam
injured  by  sinning;  that,  further,  Adam  infected  the  whole
lump  with  original  sin,  therefore  Christ  restored  the  whole,  I
have  preferred  not  to  put  forth  this  opinion,  both  because  some
things  seem  to  contradict  it,  and  because  I  do  not  know  whether
anybody  has  held  it.  But  I  have  said  this  only,  that  original
sin  cannot  damn  the  children  of  Christians,  because  although
sin  would,  to  be  sure,  damn  according  to  the  law,  it  cannot  damn
on  account  of  the  remedy  provided  by  Christ,  especially  it  can-
not damn  those  who  are  included  in  the  covenant  which  was
concluded  with  Abraham.  About  these  we  have  other  strong
and  clear  testimony ;  about  the  others,  who  are  born  outside  of
the  Church,  we  have  nothing  but  the  present  testimony,  so  far
as  I  know,  and  things  similar  to  this  fifth  chapter  of  Romans,
by  which  it  can  be  proved  that  those  who  are  born  outside  of
the  Church  are  cleansed  of  original  pollution.

But  if  any  one  shall  say  in  regard  to  these  also  that  it  is
more  probable  that  the  children  of  the  heathen  are  saved  through
Christ  than  that  they  are  damned,  certainly  he  will  diminish  the
work  of  Christ  less  than  those  who  damn  those  born  within  the
Church,  if  they  die  without  the  washing  of  baptism,  and  he  will
have  more  basis  and  authority  for  his  view  in  the  Scriptures
than  those  who deny  this. For  he  would be maintaining


24  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

nothing  more  than  that  the  children  even  of  the  heathen  are
not  damned  in  tender  years  because  of  the  original  defect,  and
this  through  the  blessing  of  Christ,  while  for  grown  persons
there  was  no  grace  left  because  they  did  not  trust  in  Christ.  But
if  they  show  by  their  works  that  the  law  is  written  in  their
hearts,  and  that  without  hypocrisy,  then  it  has  already  been
shown  plainly  enough  that  they  are  to  be  reckoned  among  the
circumcised.  For  where  works  worthy  of  God  are  done,  there
the  fear  of  God  existed  before.  This  is  proved  by  Jethro,  whose
heart  was  so  imbued  with  the  heavenly  wisdom  that  he  was  of
assistance  in  establishing  the  law  even  to  Moses  who  talked
with  God  face  to  face  [Ex.  33]  ;  and  by  Cornelius  the  centurion,
whose  alms  and  prayers  God  regarded  before  the  Gospel  had
been  explained  to  him  [Acts  10:  31].  Should  one  say,  there-
fore, that  their  nature  had  been  renewed  through  Christ,  these
things  that  I  have  said  would  follow.  If,  on  the  other  hand,
only  the  Church  is  restored,  it  will  follow  that  salvation  through
Christ  does  not  extend  so  widely  as  the  ravages  of  the  disease
that  began  with  Adam.  For  no  one,  I  think,  denies  that  the
children  of  the  heathen  are  just  as  much  born  with  inclination
to  sin  as  our  children.  But  however  the  case  may  be  with  the
children  of  the  heathen  (for  one  might  maintain,  and  perhaps
rightly,  that  the  words  of  Paul,  "Where  sin  abounded,  grace
did  much  more  abound,"  and  "as  sin  hath  reigned  unto  death,
even  so  grace  reigneth  unto  eternal  life  by  Jesus  Christ"  [Rom.
5 :20]  and  the  like,  were  said  by  synecdoche  and  are  not  to  be
understood  of  others  than  the  faithful  and  their  children,  and,
therefore,  I  also  attribute  liberation  from  original  sin  to  them
only,  leaving  others  to  the  judgment  of  God),  so  be  it  that  we
poor  mortals  in  our  boldness  consign  to  everlasting  death  some
about  whom  we  have  no  clear  word  of  God;  are  they  on  that
account  really  damned?

This  point  also  arises: — If  a  heathen  shows  by  the  works
of  the  law  that  the  law  is  written  in  his  heart,  and  Paul  really
prefers  him  to  the  circumcised,  then  the  office  of  faith  is  done
away  with  and  everything  comes  back  to  works.  To  this  I
answer,  that  Paul  presupposes  that  he  who  does  the  works  of
the  law,  does  them  in  consequence  of  faith,  for  he  wrestles  with
the  fact  that  many  boasted  the  faith  of  Abraham  on  the  ground
that  they  had  been  circumcised. He  is  proving  that  they  have


On  Original  Sin  25

not  faith  if  they  do  not  the  works  of  faith,  and  so  also  is  James
to  be  understood.  On  the  other  hand,  he  argues  that  if  the
uncircumcised  doeth,  in  consequence  of  faith  to  be  sure  (for
who  could  approve  what  is  done  from  hypocrisy?),  the  works
which  the  law  orders,  he  shows  clearly  that  the  fear  of  God  is
written  in  his  heart  [Rom.  2 :  29] .  He  demands,  therefore,
faith  before  all  things.  And  he  says  this  ''is  not  of  him  that
willeth,  nor  of  him  that  runneth,  but  of  God  that  sheweth
mercy"  [Rom.  9:  16].  Therefore,  the  fear  of  God  and  piety,*
as  well  as  holiness,  are  not  bound  up  with  signs,  although  it  is
fitting  that  those  who  have  been  taught  should  not  be  without
the  signs,  that  they  may  give  evidence  to  the  rest  as  to  whom
they  have  given  their  allegiance,  and  be  enrolled  in  the  unity  of
the  Church.

This  point  must  not  be  passed  over,  either,  that  whether
our  children  only  or  those  of  the  heathen  also,  if  that  view
should  prevail,  are  altogether  restored  in  nature  through  Christ
as  far  as  the  original  pollution  is  concerned,  they  are  in  the
state  of  innocence  as  long  as  they  are  too  young  to  know  the
law,  as  I  have  unhesitatingly  maintained,  relying  for  support
upon  the  authority  of  Paul  to  the  Romans,  4 :  15,  "For  where  no
law  is,  there  is  no  transgression."  And  those  of  tender  years  who
know  not  the  law  are  just  as  much  without  the  law  as  Paul  was.
Therefore,  they  do  not  transgress,  and  consequently  are  not
damned.  And  Paul  says,  Rom.  7 :  9,  that  he  was  alive  without
the  law  once,  but  that  is  to  be  understood  of  no  part  of  his  life
except  infancy  and  boyhood.  At  that  time,  therefore,  sin  was
dead  to  him.  But  when  the  law  had  come  to  life,  he  testifies
that  he  died.  In  the  same  way,  we  ourselves  do  not  sin,  as  long
as  we  are  ignorant  of  the  law  because  of  our  age,  but  when  the
light  of  the  law  has  shone  upon  us,  we  become  liable  to  it.  And
if  faith  is  in  us  we  cease  not  to  strive  for  what  the  law  orders,
and  at  the  same  time  failing  in  all  our  efforts  cry,  "Forgive  us
our  debts,"  and  cling  with  sure  confidence  to  the  Lord,  who
pardoneth  all  things  through  His  Son.

Now  I  will  come  to  the  last  part  of  the  discussion,  in  which
I  undertook  to  prove  this  thesis,  that  the  original  defect  is
removed  only  by  the  blood  of  Christ  and  cannot  be  removed

•  Ev<je(3eia.


26  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

by  the  washing  of  baptism.  The  first  part  I  establish  thus: —
The  ancients  thought  of  everything  in  symbols;  especially  was
this  the  case  with  the  varied  ritual  of  the  animal  sacrifices,  the
mysterious  symbol  of  the  universal  sacrifice  which  was  to  com-
plete the  old  order  in  its  consummation,  as  Daniel  foretells
more  clearly  than  the  other  prophets,  chapters  9  and  12.  [Dan.
9 :  27 ;  12 :  11] .  But  in  these  sacrifices  soundness  and  cleanness
were  the  first  requisites  demanded.  When,  therefore,  God  says
plainly  in  various  passages  of  the  prophets  that  He  is  not  pleased
with  these  offerings,  it  is  clear  that  the  cleanness  of  the  animals
signified  nothing  else  than  that  the  sacrifice  which  was  to  cleanse
our  consciences  must  be  absolutely  clean.  But  what  created
thing  is  so  clean  that  it  can  be  made  a  sacrifice  for  the  unclean  in
the  sight  of  the  Supreme  Good,  or  that  it  would  not  have  become
unclean  by  the  very  fact  of  having  been  offered  in  sacrifice  for
sinners?  For  the  sacrifice  had  to  be  voluntary  and  free,  as  the
free  offerings  of  old  fore-shadowed,  and  Paul  in  the  Letter  to
the  Hebrews,'10  [:  1]  teaches.  Adam  also  had  sinned  volun-
tarily. Since,  therefore,  no  created  thing  could  without  arro-
gance take  this  upon  itself,  it  is  manifest  that  the  divine
righteousness  could  not  have  been  reconciled  by  anything  but
the  Son  of  God  who  had  created  man,  that  he  might  be  restored
through  Him  by  whom  he  had  been  made.

The  first  essential  for  a  physician  is  knowledge  of  the
disease  he  is  to  cure,  as  nobody  denies.  When,  therefore,  the
soul  of  man  was  sick,  none  could  apply  a  remedy  to  it  save  one
who  accurately  understood  the  disease.  And  this  none  could  do
but  God.  For  He  alone  knoweth  the  heart  of  the  sons  of  man,
ni  Kings*  8 :  39.  The  human  heart,  therefore,  could  be
restored  to  health  through  no  other  physician  or  medicine  than
God.

When  the  divine  Baptist  says  [John  1 :  29] ,  "Behold  the
lamb  that  taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world,"  he  shows  plainly
that  there  is  nothing  else  whatever  that  can  atone  for  the  world
but  this  lamb. For  this  is  what  he  means.

Finally  the  Truth  itself  bears  witness  that  He  had  to  die.

•Ill  Kings  in  Vulgate,  but  I  Kings  in  English  Version.  In  the
Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate  the  books  of  Samuel  are  counted  as  I  and  II
Kings.


On  Original  Sin  27

Since,  therefore,  He  had  to  die,  no  other  could  in  any  way
remedy  the  evil.  Thus  Matth.  26 :  24  says,  'The  Son  of  man
goeth  as  it  is  written  of  him."  In  the  same  chapter,  "thus  it
must  be."  Luke  24:  26,  "Ought  not  Christ  to  have  suffered
these  things,  and  to  enter  into  his  glory?"  Mark  8:  31,  "The
Son  of  man  must  suffer."  John  3:  14  and  15,  "The  Son  of  man
must  be  lifted  up ;  that  whosoever  believeth  in  him  should  not
perish,  but  have  eternal  life."  Divine  Providence,  therefore,
determined  to  reconcile  the  world  to  Himself  through  His  own
Son.  Let  it  be,  therefore,  a  sacrilege  to  inquire  whether  the
thing  could  have  been  accomplished  by  other  means  or  another
author.

From  this  it  is  easily  proved  that  absolutely  no  sin  is  taken
away  by  the  washing  of  baptism.  For  Christ  the  Lamb  taketh
away  the  sins  of  the  world.  And  I  John  2:  2,  cries  out  thus:
"He  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but
also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."  Also  chapter  1 :  7,  "The
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  his  son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  He  \^
who  says,  "from  all,"  omits  nothing.  The  blood,  therefore,
cleanseth  from  original  sin  also,  not  the  washing  of  baptism.
If  we  had  not  divine  testimony  to  this,  yet  it  would  be  witnessed
to  by  the  spirit,  the  water,  and  the  blood,  of  which  I  John  5 :  5-8
speaks  thus:  "Who  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but  he
that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God?  This  is  he  that  came
by  water  and  blood,  even  Jesus  Christ ;  not  by  water  only,  but
by  water  and  blood.  And  it  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness,
because  the  Spirit  is  truth.  For  there  are  three  that  bear  witness
— the  spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood;  and  these  three  are
one."  The  water,  therefore,  that  is,  the  heavenly  teaching
which  the  Spirit  maketh  to  grow  in  our  hearts  that  we  may  trust
in  the  blood  of  Christ,  shows  well  enough  that  these  external
things  cannot  cleanse  the  conscience.  Otherwise  the  death  of
Christ  were  superfluous,  if  by  corporeal  things  the  incorporeal
substance  of  the  soul  could  be  purified.  And  we  have  witness
to  this  view  in  Paul's  Letter  to  the  Hebrews,  9 :  9  and  10,  "Which
was  a  figure  for  the  time  then  present,  in  which  were  offered
both  gifts  and  sacrifices,  that  could  not  make  him  that  did  the
service  perfect,  as  pertaining  to  the  conscience ;  which  stood  only
in  meats  and  drinks,  and  divers  washings,  and  carnal  ordinances,
imposed  on  them  until  the  time  of  reformation." By  these


28  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

words  of  the  apostle  we  see  clearly  that  such  externals  have  no
efficacy  towards  perfecting  the  conscience.

Yet  this  must  be  noted  at  the  same  time,  that  baptism  is
sometimes  used  for  the  blood  or  passion  of  Christ.  This,  again,
by  metonymy,  the  name  of  the  sign  being  transferred  to  the
thing  signified,  for  metonymy  is  a  transposition  of  names.  For
instance,  when  I  Peter  3:  20  and  21  teaches  that  we  are  saved
through  baptism  in  the  same  way  that  men  were  saved  of  old
in  the  ark,  we  are  not  to  understand,  by  heaven,  the  washing
of  baptism,  but  Christ  Himself  or  His  blood  and  death,  for  by
these  we  have  been  redeemed,  as  the  apostle  himself  immediately
explains.  We  see  here  again  incidentally  the  sign  used  for
that  of  which  it  is  the  sign.  How  foolish,  therefore,  would  any
one  seem,  who  because  of  these  words  should  maintain  that  we
were  washed  clean  of  our  sins  by  the  baptismal  waters !  Thus,
consequently,  what  is  said  in  Eph.  5 :  26  of  the  washings  of
water  by  the  word,  and  in  Romans  6 :  3  and  4,  is  not  to  be  taken
literally,  but  the  force  of  these  figurative  expressions  is  to  be
judged  by  faith  and  our  knowledge  of  heavenly  things.

And  this  also  we  ought  not  to  suffer  to  go  unnoticed,  that
baptism  is  the  sign  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  just  as  an  army  has
its  sign ;  not  that  this  sign  unites  one  to  the  Church,  but  that  he
who  is  already  united  to  it  receives  the  public  badge,  just  as  no
one  is  enrolled  in  an  army  because  he  has  the  sign  upon  him
(otherwise  enemies  and  traitors,  who  sometimes  exchange  signs
by  stratagem,  would  belong  to  the  army),  but  he  who  has  been
already  enrolled  in  the  army  is  thought  worthy  of  a  public  sign
that  all  men  may  see  that  he  has  promised  allegiance  to  that
leader  under  whom  he  has  agreed  to  serve.  We  have  fine  proof
of  this  view  in  Acts  2 :  44  and  45,  ''And  all  that  believed  were
together,  and  had  all  things  common ;  and  sold  their  possessions
and  goods,  and  parted  them  to  all  men,  as  every  man  had  need,"
etc.  But  those  who  were  together  in  this  fashion,  had  already
heard  preaching  and  had  been  baptized.  There  is  no  doubt  that
their  children  also  were  with  them.  Otherwise  those  first  fruits
of  the  faithful  would  have  been  wilder  than  wild  beasts.  This
gives  me  a  two-fold  argument,  first,  that  these  children  were
reckoned  with  the  Church  just  as  much  as  their  parents;  second,
that  they  were  baptized  equally  with  their  parents,  of  which
more  another  time.


On  Original  Sin  29

Furthermore,  that  by  baptism  nothing  is  achieved  but  the
marking  with  a  sign  him  who  is  counted  a  member  of  the  ^
Church,  is  effectively  testified  to  by  what  Paul  writes  in  I  Cor.
10:  1-4,  "All  our  fathers  were  under  the  cloud,  and  all  passed
through  the  sea ;  and  were  all  baptized  unto  Moses  in  the  cloud
and  in  the  sea ;  and  did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual  meat ;  and  did
all  drink  the  same  spiritual  drink,"  etc.  Now,  it  is  an  accepted
fact  that  they  were  not  initiated  with  the  same  rite  of  baptism
which  we  use.  When,  therefore,  he  says  that  they  were  baptized
by  the  cloud  and  the  sea,  it  is  manifest  that  baptism  has  no  more
power  towards  our  justification  than  the  sea  and  cloud  had
towards  theirs.  Those  who  had  come  out  of  Egypt  and  were
in  the  congregation  of  the  people  of  God  were  moistened  by
these  waters;  in  like  manner  those  who  through  Christ  have
come  out  of  the  bondage  of  the  Devil  are  washed  with  the  water
of  baptism.  For  St.  Augustine  proves*  that  they  had  different
signs  from  ours  but  the  same  faith.  Signs,  therefore,  are  nothing
but  externals,  by  which  nothing  is  effected  in  the  conscience,
but  faith  is  the  only  thing  through  which  we  are  blessed — that
faith  which  clings  truly  and  firmly  to  the  promises  of  God.  The
external  things,  therefore,  are  symbols  of  spiritual  things,  but
they  are  by  no  means  themselves  spiritual,  nor  do  they  perfect
anything  spiritual  in  us,  but  they  are  the  badges,  as  it  were,  of
those  who  are  of  the  spirit.

I  had  purposed  to  put  all  this  together  more  carefully  than
time  allowed.  The  nearness  of  the  market-time  has  forced  me
to  hurry,  and  that  habit  of  postponing  things,  by  which  count-
less occupations  crowd  all  that  I  write  into  some  brief  moment,
in  which  then  I  have  to  fulfil  all  of  a  sudden  what  I  have
promised.

I  will,  therefore,  sum  up  in  a  few  words  by  way  of  con-
clusion. This  is  my  view  in  regard  to  original  sin,  that  it  is  a
defect  and  disease,  which  was  inflicted  upon  our  first  parents  as
a  penalty.  Their  progeny  is  so  polluted  by  their  transgression
that  whatever  is  born  of  them  has  inclination  to  sin,  and,  unless

*This  thought  is  found  in  Augustine's  Homilies  on  the  Gospel  of
John,  Tract  45,  §9:  "See  then  how  that  while  the  faith  remained,  the
signs  were  varied.  There  the  rock  was  Christ;  to  us  that  is  Christ  which
is  placed  on  the  altar  of  God. . .  Under  different  signs  there  is  the

same  faith." See  Schaff,  'Sicene  Fathers,  First  Series,  VII,  252.


30  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Divine  Clemency  had  provided  for  an  effective  remedy  at  the
right  moment,  all  who  have  been  born  from  that  source  would
have  perished.  The  goodness  of  God,  therefore,  met  this  catas-
trophe through  the  death  of  His  own  Son,  so  that,  although  the
remnants  of  original  sin,  namely  the  disposition  to  self-love,*
cling  tenaciously  to  us,  yet  they  cannot  harm  those  who  are  in
Christ  Jesus.  For  original  sin  cannot  damn  in  any  other  way
than  the  law  does,  and  that  can  damn  no  more,  even  if  we  some-
times sin,  for  "there  is  now  no  condemnation  to  them  which
are  in  Christ  Jesus,"  Eom.  8: 1.

Our  birth  is,  to  be  sure,  contaminated  by  inclination  to  sin,
but  the  contamination  harmeth  not,  for  its  poison  has  been  taken
from  it  through  Christ.  And  in  Christ  are  not  only  the  parents
whom  Divine  Mercy  has  brought  into  the  light  and  grace  of
faith,  but  also  their  children,  no  less  than  those  who  were  born
of  Abraham  according  to  the  promise.  For  the  faith  is  the  same
and  the  testament  or  covenant  the  same  as  far  as  the  inner  man
is  concerned.  For  those  men  of  old  leaned  upon  the  mercy  of
God  through  the  promise  of  Christ  just  as  much  as  we  do  now
that  He  has  appeared.  He,  therefore,  by  His  blood  so  thor-
oughly atoned  for  whatever  could  damn  that  there  is  nothing
left  that  can  exercise  tyranny  over  us — not  the  flesh,  nor  the
law,  nor  the  Devil,  the  Prince  of  this  World.  So  completely
also  did  He  obtain  all  things  from  the  Father  by  His  death  that
whatever  we  ask  in  His  name  is  granted.  Hence  no  created  thing
ought  to  be  worshipped  or  held  in  such  esteem  as  if  it  had  any
power  for  the  cleansing  of  our  consciences  or  the  salvation  of
souls.  And  all  this  I  hold  in  such  a  way  that  if  any  man  shall
convict  me  of  manifest  error  by  the  testimony  of  the  really  Holy
Scriptures,  I  am  determined  not  only  to  let  myself  be  torn  from
my  error,  but  to  be  grateful  to  him  who  shall  tear  me  from  it.

This  is  what  for  some  time,  most  learned  Urbanus,  I  have
been  turning  over  in  my  mind  about  original  sin.  I  have  at
times  also  looked  into  the  ancient  writers  on  this  matter,  but
how  dark  and  involved  their  utterances  are,  not  to  say,  based
upon  human  rather  than  celestial  teaching,  I  think  you  also  will
remark  when  you  go  to  them  again.  I  have  had  no  leisure  to  go
back  to  them  for  several  years. For  on  what  testimony  of

*  <t>i?iavTia.


On  Original  Sin  31

Scripture,  pray,  does  it  rest  that  by  baptism  original  sin  is  taken
away  or  grace  conferred,  unless  under  the  symbol  of  baptism  you
understand  Christ  who  is  symbolized  by  it?  For  in  Him  are  all
things  saved  unto  us.  How  much  harsher  is  it  that  the  children
of  Christians,  if  they  have  not  been  baptized,  are  irretrievably
doomed  to  everlasting  damnation,  and  that  without  any
authority  from  Scripture!  For  how  much  I  ask  do  the  Scrip-
tures which  they  twist  differ  from  this  their  opinion !

Let  us,  then,  I  beg,  preach  Christian  piety  with  solicitude
and  purity,  and  let  us  not  be  prematurely  troubled  as  to  the
abolition  of  the  mass  or  the  casting  out  of  the  images,  but  let  us
labor  to  restore  to  their  Creator  the  hearts  that  are  given  over
to  this  world.  The  mass  has  fallen  already ;  the  images  will,  I
think,  disappear  of  their  own  motion.  For  we  shall  banish  in
vain  one  or  the  other  unless  public  piety  ratify  the  decree.
And  when  that  shall  be  done,  all  the  princes  of  the  world  will
try  in  vain  to  restore  them.  For  they  will  get  no  spoil  except  to
run  against  some  wall  like  Balaam  and  hit  their  feet  rather
sharply.  For  he  lieth  not  who  said  "him  that  falleth  upon  this
stone  it  shall  break,  but  upon  whom  it  shall  fall  it  shall  grind
him  to  powder"  [Matth.  21 :  44].  We  must  so  live  under  God's
protection  secure  and  undaunted  that  if  the  world  should  break
into  fragments  the  ruins  would  strike  us  unafraid.  How  many
of  the  heathen  do  we  see  honored  and  glorified  by  that  death
from  which  we  all  flee  when  life  is  prosperous,  but  for  which
all  call  when  life  is  dark!  For  they  have  met  nobly  what  in
the  belief  of  the  crowd  is  the  bitterest  of  all  things.  And  shall
we  hesitate,  we  the  soldiers  of  a  commander  so  faithful  and  so
devoted  to  us  that  He  threw  himself  into  the  danger  before  us,
especially  when  our  hopes  look  not  to  the  empty  gain  of  winning
a  name  but  to  the  possession  of  an  everlasting  inheritance  of  no
mean  order,  unless  those  things  are  trifles  which  God  has  given
us  in  His  only  begotten  Son? For  we  are  co-heirs  with  Him.

Let  us,  therefore,  fight  vigorously  and  prudently  on  a  fair
field,  for  we  are  defending  a  most  righteous  cause,  in  which  we
feel  sure  there  is  no  hidden  wrong.  Let  them  hurl  upon  us
from  the  hostile  camp  those  soldiers'  insults — "traitors,"
"robbers,"  "weaklings."  Let  us  care  nothing  for  them,  trusting
completely  to  our  cause.  Things  have  come,  alas,  to  such  a
pitch  of  boldness  that  we  accuse  others  of  that  of  which  we  are


32  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

ourselves  chiefly  guilty,  by  a  beautiful  anthypophora,*  i.  e.,  a
reply  made  to  a  hypothetical  objection,  anticipating  what  can
fairly  be  hurled  at  ourselves,  that  our  enemy  may  be  kept  busy
caring  for  his  wounds  and  have  no  time  to  strike  back.  But
though  such  weapons  are  sharp,  they  do  not  penetrate  any  more
than  the  beards  of  grain,  than  which  nothing  is  sharper  and  at
the  same  time  less  eflPective.

Do  you,  dear  Brother  in  the  Lord,  take  all  this  in  kind  and
good  part.  Let  us  pray  the  Lord  for  each  other,  that  He  finish
His  work  which  He  has  begun,  and  so  strengthen  our  hearts
that  we  shall  nowhere  lack  His  glory.  Farewell,  and  greet  Rana
and  Agricola,t  whom  I  am  so  far  from  wishing  any  ill  that  I
anxiously  implore  the  Lord  to  make  their  ministry  faithful  in
the  Gospel  and  sustain  them.

Zurich,  August  15th,  1526.

*  av^vTTOKpopd,  is  lit.  something  put  up  against  (ai>Ti)  an  excuse  or  ob.
jection  ( vKOipopQ).

fBoth  of  them  preachers  at  Nuremberg,  along  with  Rhegius,  and
devoted  to  Luther. Rana's  real  name  was  John  Frosch.


II.

An  Account  op  the  Faith  of  Huldreich  Zwingli  Sub-
mitted TO  THE  German  Emperor  Charles  V,  at  the
Diet  op  Augsburg.

(July  3,  1530)

[AD  CAROLVM  |  ROMANORVM  IMPERATO-  |  rem  Germaniae  comi-
tia  Augustae  cele-  |  brantem,  Fidei  Huldrychi  |  Zwingli j  ratio.]  Then  a
woodcut  of  the  Emperor  Charles.  Below:  VENITE  AD  ME  OMNES  QVI
LABORATIS  I  et  onerati  estis,  et  ego  reficiam  uos.  |  Anno  M.D.  XXX.
Mense  Julio.  |  Vincat  ueritas,  |  At  the  end  (p.  39)  Tigvri  apvd  Chri- |
stophorum  Froschouer.  |  40  unnumbered  quarto  pages.  Signed,  p.  39:
Tiguri,  tertio  die  Julij,  M.D.  XXX.  A  copy  of  this  edition  is  in  the  library
of  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York.  A  second  Latin  edition  of  72
octavo  pages  appeared  in  1530,  signed:  Tiguri,  XXVII.  die  Augusti.
Anno  M.D.  XXX.  Two  German  editions  of  52  unnumbered  octavo  pages
appeared  also  in  1530,  the  first  entitled:  Zu  Karoln  RomiscJien  Kei-  |  ser,
jetzund  vff  dem  Rychstag  zu  Augsburg,  |  Bekenntnuss  des  Oloubens,  durch  |
Huldrich  Zuinglium.  |  Then  a  woodcut  of  Charles  V.  Below  the  verse:
Kummend  zu  mir  alle  die  arbeitend  vnd  beladen  sind,  vn  \  ich  wil  iich  ruio
geben.  Christus  Matth.  XI.  |  Die  Warheyt  sol  den  sig  haben.  |  Signed
at  the  end,  p.  51 :  Oetrukt  zu  Zilrich  by  Christoffel  Froschouer.  Finsler,
Zwingli  Bibliographie,  Nos.  92-93.  A  modern  German  translation  appeared
in  R.  Christoffel's,  Huldreich  Zwingli,  ( 1857)  Vol.  II,  pp.  237-262;  an  abbre-
viated translation  in  modern  German  in  Ulrich  Zwingli,  Fine  Auswahl  aus
seinen  Schriften,  Zurich,  1917,  pp.  739-757.  An  early  English  translation
was  published  at  Zurich  in  1543.  Its  title  is  as  follows:  "The  Rekening
and  de-  |  claracion  of  the  faith  and  beleif  of  Huldrik  |  Zwingly,  bischoppe
of  Ziiryk  the  cheif  |  town  of  Heluetia,  sent  to  Charles  V.  that  |  nowe  is
Emprowr  of  Rome:  holdinge  a  |  Perlemente  or  Cownsaill  at  Aus-  |  brough
with  the  cheif  Lordis  &  |  lerned  men  of  Germanye.  |  The  yere  of  our
Lorde  |  M.D.XXX.  In  the  |  monethe  of  |  Julye.  |  Come  ye  to  me  all
that  labour,  &  |  ar  laden:  and  I  shall  refres-  |  she  you.  Mathe.  XI.  |  The
verite  will  haue  the  victory  :  |  Presse  ye  it  down  neuer  so  strongly.  |
Translated  &  Imprynted  at  |  Ziiryk  in  Marche  Anno  |  Do.  M.D.XLIII.  |  68
unnumbered  small  quarto  pages,  of  which five  are  "The  Preface  of  the

33


34  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

translatour,  unto  the  reader."  It  concludes  with  five  pages  of  "The  com-
playninge  Prayer  of  the  pore  persecuted  maryed  Preistis  with  their  wyuea
&  Children  chased  owte  of  Englond  into  sondry  places  of  Germanye  :  cry-
ing vnto  God  in  their  harde  desolate  exyle  and  greuouse  affliccion."  A
copy  of  this  edition  is  in  the  library  of  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New
York  City.  A  later  English  rendering  by  Thomas  Cotsford  appeared  in
Geneva  in  1555.

The  following  English  translation  is  based  on  that  of  Prof.  Dr.  H.  E.
Jacobs,  in  his  Book  of  Concord,  Vol,  II,  pp.  159-179.  It  was  revised
throughout  by  the  editor.

When  Charles  V.  had  concluded  peace  with  the  king  of  France  and  the
Pope,  he  held,  in  the  summer  of  1530,  the  Diet  of  Augsburg,  which  was  of
fundamental  importance  for  the  Reformation  in  Germany.  At  this  Diet  a
confession  of  faith,  known  as  the  "Augustana,"  which  had  been  written  by
Melanchthon  and  signed  by  the  Protestant  princes  of  Germany,  was  sub-
mitted to  the  emperor  on  June  25,  1530.  The  feeling  against  the  adherents
of  Reformed  principles  was  so  strong  that  neither  the  Catholics  nor  the
Lutherans  would  have  anything  to  do  with  them.  On  June  23,  Bucer  wroto
to  Zwingli:  "Nothing  more  intolerant  can  be  imagined  than  the  hatred
which  the  Lutlrerans  have  against  us."  Hence  the  Reformed  cities  of  South
Germany  were  compelled  to  hand  in  a  separate  confession  of  faith.  In  the
name  of  Strassburg,  Constance,  Memmingen  and  Lindau,  Bucer  and  Capito
drew  up  a  confession,  known  as  the  "Tetrapolitana,"  which  was  handed  to
the  emperor  on  July  11th.  Jacob  Sturm  had  sent  Zwingli  a  copy  of  the
Augsburg  Confession  on  May  31st,  and  he  had  expressed  the  hope  that
Zwingli  would  also  submit  to  the  emperor  a  confession  and  defense,  in
which  he  would  "as  piously  as  possible  and  without  ofTending  anybody
give  an  account  of  his  faith."  The  harsh  condemnation  of  the  Reformed
faith  by  Melanchthon  made  such  a  statement  seem  even  more  necessary.
On  June  28th,  Sturm  repeated  his  suggestion  and  added:  "Who  knows  but
that  in  this  way  the  emperor  may  be  led  to  see  the  truth,  which  has  been
wrongly  represented  thus  far  by  the  Papists"  (Zwingli's  Werke,  VIII,  359,
469 ) .  As  there  was  no  time  to  assemble  the  Protestant  Cantons  of  Switzer-
land and  as  silence  might  be  open  to  misconstruction,  Zwingli  was  compelled
to  compose  a  confession  in  his  own  name,  which  he  did  in  three  days.  He
sent  it  to  Augsburg  by  special  messenger.  It  was  handed  to  the  emperor
not  by  one  of  Zwingli's  friends,  but  by  a  most  violent  opponent,  the  provost
of  Waldkirch,  who  was  then  Bishop  Designate  of  Constance  (Zwingli's
Werke,  VIII,  477).  This  was  on  July  8th,  five  days  after  it  came  from
the  press.  About  this  event  Bucer  and  Capito  wrote  to  Strassburg.  on
July  12,  1530:  "On  the  8th  day  of  July  Zwingli's  manly  confession  of
faith  was  handed  to  the  emperor  by  a  special  messenger."  The  Diet  paid
no  attention  to  it,  the  emperor  probably  never  read  a  line  of  it.  The
Lutherans  belittled  it,  while  John  Eck,  the  Catholic  theologian  made  it
the  occasion  of  a  violent  attack.]


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwing-li  35

[An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Huldreich  Zwingli
Submitted  to  the  Roman  Emperor  Charles]

We  who  are  preaching  the  Gospel  in  the  cities  of  a  Chris-
tian State,*  were  anxiously  awaiting,  O  Charles,  holy  Emperor
of  justice,  the  time  when  an  account  of  our  faith,  which  we  both
have  and  confess,  would  be  asked  of  us  also.

While  we  are  standing  in  readiness  for  this,  there  comes  to
us  the  report,  more  by  rumor  than  by  definite  announcement,
that  many  have  already  prepared  an  outline  and  summary  of
their  religion  and  faith,  which  they  are  offering  you.  Here  we
are  in  a  great  dilemmaf ;  for,  on  the  one  hand,  love  of  truth  and
desire  for  public  peace  urge  us  all  the  more  to  do  ourselves  what
we  see  others  doing;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  shortness  of
the  time  deters  us,  not  only  because  all  things  must  be  done  very
speedily  and  as  it  were  superficially,  on  account  of  your  haste,
(for  this  also  rumor  announces)  ;  but  also  because  we,  who  are
acting  as  preachers  of  the  Divine  Word  in  the  cities  and  country
districts  of  the  State  already  mentioned,  are  settled  and  sepa-
rated too  far  apart  to  be  able  to  assemble  in  so  brief  a  time,  and
deliberate  as  to  what  is  most  fitting  to  write  to  your  Highness.
Moreover,  as  we  have  already  seen  the  confession  of  the  others
and  even  their  refutation  by  their  opponents,  which  seem  to
have  been  prepared  even  before  a  demand  was  made  for  them,
I  believed  that  it  would  not  be  improper  if  I  alone  should  forth-
with submit  an  account  of  my  faith,  without  anticipating  the
judgment  of  my  people.  For  if  in  any  business  one  must  make
haste  slowly,  here  we  must  certainly  make  haste  swiftly,  since
by  handling  this  matter  with  careless  neglect  we  run  into  the
danger  of  being  suspected  because  of  silence  or  of  being  arrogant
because  of  negligence.

To  you  then,  O  Emperor,  I  ofi'er  a  summary  of  my  faith,
with  this  condition,  that  at  the  same  time  I  declare  solemnly,
that  I  entrust  and  permit  the  judgment  not  only  of  these  articles,

*Zwingli  refers  to  Zurich,  Berne  and  Basle,  in  whose  name  he  writes.

tLiterally:  "Between  the  sacrifice  and  the  stone  of  slaughter,"  a  Latin
idiom  which  means:  "We  are  in  a  great  dilemma."  For  the  Latin  adage,
inter  sacrum  et  saxutn  stare,  used  by  Plautus  and  other  Latin  writers,  see
Desiderii  Erasmi  Collectanea^  Adagiorum  Veterum,  chil.  I,  cent.  I,  No.  15,
in  his  Opera,  Leyden  1703,  Vol.  II,  p.  33.


36  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

but  of  all  that  I  have  ever  written  or,  by  the  grace  of  God,  shall
yet  write,  not  to  one  man  only,  nor  to  a  few  merely,  but  to  the
whole  Church  of  God,  as  far  as  it  speaks  by  the  command  and
inspiration  of  the  Word  and  Spirit  of  God.

First  of  all,  I  both  believe  and  know  that  God  is  one  and
He  alone  is  God,  and  that  He  is  by  nature  good,  true,  powerful,
just,  wise,  the  Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  things,  visible  and
invisible;  that  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Spirit  are  indeed  three
persons,  but  that  their  essence  is  one  and  single.  And  I  think
altogether  in  accordance  with  the  Creed,  the  Nicene  and  also
the  Athanasian,  in  all  their  details  concerning  the  Godhead
himself,  the  names  or  the  three  persons.

I  believe  and  understand  that  the  Son  assumed  flesh,  the
human  nature,  indeed  the  whole  man,  consisting  of  body  and
soul,  which  He  truly  assumed  of  the  immaculate  and  perpetual
virgin  Mary;  but  this  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  whole  man
was  so  assumed  into  the  unity  of  the  hypostasis  or  person  of  the
Son  of  God,  that  the  man  did  not  constitute  a  separate  person,
but  was  assumed  into  the  inseparable,  indivisible  and  indis-
soluble person  of  the  Son  of  God.  And,  although  both
natures,  the  divine  and  the  human,  have  so  preserved
their  character  and  peculiarity  that  both  are  truly  and
naturally  found  in  Him,  yet  the  distinct  peculiarities  and
activities  of  the  natures  do  not  separate  the  unity  of  the  person
any  more  than  in  man  soul  and  body  constitute  two  persons.
For  as  these  are  of  the  most  diverse  nature,  so  they  function  by
diverse  peculiarities  and  operations ;  nevertheless  man,  who  con-
sists of  them,  is  not  two  persons,  but  one.  So  God  and  man  is
one  in  Christ,*  the  Son  of  God  from  eternity  and  the  Son  of
Man  from  the  time  appointedf ;  one  person,  one  Christ;  perfect
God  and  perfect  man  J ;  not  because  one  nature  becomes  the
other,  or  because  the  natures  are  fused  together,  but  because
each  remains  its  peculiar  self ;  and  yet,  the  unity  of  this  person
is  not  broken  by  this  retention  of  the  peculiarities.

Hence  one  and  the  same  Christ,  according  to  the  character
of  the  human  nature,  cries  in  infancy,  grows,  increases  in  wisdom

*Quoted from  the  Athanasian Creed, art. 37; see Schaff, Creeds of
Christendom,  II,  69.

f/.  e.,  from  the  time  of  his  birth.

IQuoted  from  the  Athanasian  Creed,  art.  32.


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingfli  37


[Luke  2:  52],  hungers,  thirsts,  eats,  drinks,  is  warm,  is  cold,  is
scourged,  sweats,  is  wounded,  is  cruelly  slain,  fears,  is  sad  and
endures  what  else  pertains  to  the  penalty  and  punishment  of
sin,  though  from  sin  itself  He  is  most  remote.  But  according
to  the  peculiarity  of  the  divine  nature,  with  the  Father  He  con-
trols the  highest  and  the  lowest  [i.  e.,  heaven  and  earth],  he
pervades,  sustains  and  preserves  all  things,  gives  sight  to  the
blind,  restores  the  lame,  calls  to  life  the  dead,  prostrates  His
enemies  with  His  word,  when  dead  resumes  life,  ascends  to
heaven  and  sends  from  His  home  the  Holy  Spirit.  All  these
things,  however  diverse  in  nature  and  character,  the  one  and
the  same  Christ  does,  remaining  the  one  person  of  the  Son  of
God,  in  such  a  way  that  even  those  things  that  pertain  to  His
divine  nature  are  sometimes  ascribed,  on  account  of  the  unity
and  perfection  of  the  person,  to  the  human  nature,  and  those
things  that  pertain  to  the  human  nature  are  sometimes  at-
tributed to  the  divine.  He  said  that  He  was  the  Son  of  Man  in
heaven,  [John  3:  13],  although  He  had  not  yet  ascended  into
heaven  with  the  body.  Peter  asserts  that  Christ  suffered  for  us
[I  Peter  2 :  21],  when  the  humanity  alone  could  suffer.  But  on
account  of  the  unity  of  the  person  it  is  truly  said  both  that :  "The
Son  of  God  suffered"  [Lk.  9 :  22],  and  that  ''the  Son  of  Man  for-
gives sins"  [Mk.  2 :  10] .  For  He  who  is  the  Son  of  God  and  of
man  in  one  person  suffered,  according  to  the  peculiar  quality  of
His  human  nature ;  and  He  who  is  the  Son  of  God  and  of  man
in  one  person  forgives  sins,  according  to  the  peculiar  quality  of
the  divine  nature.

It  is  just  as  when  we  say  that  a  man  is  wise,  although  he
consists  of  body  no  less  than  soul,  and  the  body  has  nothing  to
do  with  wisdom,  nay  rather  is  a  poison  and  an  impediment  to
knowledge  and  intelligence ;  and  again  we  say  that  man  is  torn
with  wounds,  when  his  body  alone  can  receive  wounds,  but  his
soul  in  no  way.  Here  no  one  says  that  two  persons  are  made  of
the  man,  when  to  each  part  that  is  attributed  which  belongs  to
it;  and  vice  versa  no  one  says  that  the  two  natures  are  fused
when  that  is  predicated  of  the  entire  man  which,  because  of  the
unity  of  the  person,  belongs  indeed  to  the  entire  man,  but
because  of  the  peculiar  qualities  of  the  parts  to  one  only.  Paul
says:  ''When  I  am  weak,  then  I  am  strong"  [II  Cor.  12: 10].
But  who  is  it  that  is  weak? Paul. Who  at  the  same  time  is


38  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

truly  strong?  Paul.  But  is  not  this  contradictory,  incon-
sistent, intolerable?  Not  at  all.  For  Paul  is  not  one  nature,
although  one  person.  When,  therefore,  he  says,  "I  am  weak,"
the  person  who  speaks  is  undoubtedly  Paul,  but  what  he  says  is
neither  predicated  nor  understood  of  both  natures,  but  of  the
weakness  of  the  flesh  only.  And  when  he  says,  ''I  am  strong
and  well,"  undoubtedly  the  person  of  Paul  speaks,  but  only  the
soul  is  meant.  So  the  Son  of  God  dies,  He  who  according  to  the
unity  and  simplicity  of  His  person,  undoubtedly  is  both  God
and  man ;  yet  He  dies  only  with  respect  to  His  humanity.  Thus
not  I  alone  do  believe,  but  all  the  orthodox,  whether  ancient  or
modern,  did  likewise  so  believe  regarding  the  deity,  the  divine
persons  as  well  as  the  assumed  human  nature.  So  also  believe
those  who  today  acknowledge  the  truth.

Secondly — I  know  that  this  supreme  Deity,  which  is  my
God,  freely  determines  all  things,  so  that  His  counsel  does  not
depend  upon,  the  contingency  of  any  creature.  For  it  is  peculiar
to  defective  human  wisdom  to  reach  a  decision  because  of  pre-
ceding discussion  or  example.  God,  however,  who  from  eternity
to  eternity  surveys  the  universe  with  a  single,  simple  look,  has
no  need  of  any  reasoning  process  or  waiting  for  events;  but
being  equally  wise,  prudent,  good,  etc..  He  freely  determines
and  disposes  of  all  things,  for  whatever  is,  is  Plis.  Hence  it  is
that,  although  having  knowledge  and  wisdom,  He  in  the  begin-
ning formed  man  who  should  fall,  but  at  the  same  time  deter-
mined to  clothe  in  human  nature  His  Son,  who  should  restore
him  when  fallen.  For  by  this  means  His  goodness  was  in  every
way  manifested.

Since  this  goodness  contained  mercy  and  justice  within  it.
He  exercised  justice  when  He  expelled  the  transgressor  from
the  happy  home  of  Paradise,  when  He  bound  him  to  the  mill
of  human  misery  and  by  fetters  of  disease,  when  He  shackled
him  with  the  law,  which,  although  it  was  holy,  he  was  never
able  to  fulfil.  Here,  twice  miserable,  man  learned  that  not  only
his  flesh  had  fallen  into  tribulation,  but  that  his  mind  also  was
tortured  by  the  dread  of  the  law  he  had  transgressed.  For  he
saw  that,  according  to  its  intent,  the  law  is  holy  and  just  and
a  declaration  of  the  divine  mind,  so  that  it  enjoined  nothing  but
what  equity  taught,  yet  he  saw  at  the  same  time  that  by  his
deeds  he  could  not  satisfy  the  intent  of  the  law. Being  thus  con-


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  39

demned  by  his  own  judgment,  having  abandoned  all  hope  of
attaining  happiness,  and  departing  in  despair  from  God's  sight,
he  had  no  prospect  but  that  of  enduring  the  pains  of  eternal
punishment. All  this  was  a  manifestation  of  the  justice  of  God.

Then,  when  the  time  came  to  reveal  His  goodness,  which
He  had  determined  from  eternity  to  display  no  less  than  His
justice,  God  sent  His  Son  to  assume  our  nature  in  every  part,
except  as  far  as  it  inclined  to  sin,  in  order  that,  being  our  brother
and  equal.  He  could  be  a  mediator,  to  make  a  sacrifice  for  us
to  divine  justice,  which  must  remain  holy  and  inviolate,  no  less
than  to  His  goodness.  Thereby  the  world  might  be  sure  both
of  the  appeasing  of  the  justice  and  of  the  presence  of  the  good-
ness of  God.  For  since  He  has  given  His  Son  to  us  and  for  us,
how  will  He  not  with  Him  and  because  of  Him  give  us  all
things  [Rom.  8 :  32]  ?  What  is  it  that  we  ought  not  to  promise
ourselves  from  Him,  who  so  far  humbled  himself  as  not  only
to  be  our  equal  but  also  to  be  altogether  ours?  Who  can  suffi-
ciently marvel  at  the  riches  and  grace  of  the  divine  goodness,
whereby  He  so  loved  the  world,  i.  e.,  the  human  race,  as  to  give
up  His  Son  for  its  life  [John  3 :  16] .

This  I  regard  as  the  heart  and  life  of  the  Gospel;  this  is
the  only  medicine  for  the  fainting  soul,  whereby  it  is  restored
to  God  and  itself.  For  none  but  God  himself  can  give  it  the
assurance  of  God's  grace.  But  now  God  has  liberally,
abundantly  and  wisely  lavished  it  upon  us  that  nothing  further
remains  which  could  be  desired;  unless  someone  would  dare  to
seek  something  that  is  beyond  the  highest  and  beyond  over-
flowing abundance.

Thirdly — I  know  that  there  is  no  other  victim  for  ex-
piating sin  than  Christ  (for  not  even  was  Paul  crucified  for  us)  ;
no  other  pledge  of  divine  goodness  and  mercy  more  certain
and  undisputable  (for  nothing  is  as  certain  as  God)  ;  no  other
name  under  heaven  whereby  we  must  be  saved  than  that  of
Jesus  Christ  [Acts  4:  12].  Hence  there  is  left  neither  justifica-
tion nor  satisfaction  based  on  our  works,  nor  any  expiation  noi
intercession  of  all  saints,  whether  on  earth  or  in  heaven,  who
live  by  the  goodness  and  mercy  of  God.  For  this  is  the  one,  sole
Mediator  between  God  and  men,  the  God-man  Christ  Jesus.
But  the  election  of  God  remains  firm  and  unchangeable.  Those
whom  He  elected  before  the  foundation  of  the  world  He  elected


40  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  them  His  own  through  His  Son ;
for  as  He  is  kind  and  merciful,  so  also  is  He  holy  and  just.  All
His  works,  therefore,  savor  of  mercy  and  justice.  Hence  His
election  also  justly  savors  of  both.  It  is  goodness  to  elect  whom
He  will ;  it  is  justice  to  make  the  elect  His  own  and  to  unite  them
to  Himself  through  His  son,  who  for  us  has  become  the  victim
to  satisfy  divine  justice.

Fourthly — I  know  that  our  primeval  ancestor  and  first
parent,  through  self-love,  at  the  pernicious  advice  suggested  to
him  by  the  malice  of  Satan,  was  induced  to  desire  equality  with
God.  When  he  had  determined  upon  this  crime,  he  took  of
the  forbidden  and  fatal  fruit,  whereby  he  incurred  the  guilt  of
the  sentence  of  death,  having  become  an  enemy  and  a  foe  of
his  God.  Although  He  could  therefore  have  destroyed  him,  as
justice  demanded,  nevertheless,  being  better  disposed,  God  so
changed  the  penalty  as  to  make  a  slave  of  him  whom  He  could
have  punished  with  death.  This  condition  neither  Adam  him-
self nor  anyone  born  of  him  could  remove,  for  a  slave  can  beget
nothing  but  a  slave.  Thus  through  his  fatal  tasting  of  the  fruit
he  cast  all  of  his  posterity  into  slavery.

Hence  I  think  of  original  sin  as  follows :  An  act  is  called
sin  when  it  is  committed  against  the  law ;  for  where  there  is  no
law  there  is  no  transgression,  and  where  there  is  no  trangression
there  is  no  sin  in  the  proper  sense,  since  sin  is  plainly  an  offense,
a  crime,  a  misdeed  or  guilt.  I  confess,  therefore,  that  our  father
[Adam]  committed  what  was  truly  a  sin,  namely  an  atrocious
deed,  a  crime,  an  impiety.  But  his  descendants  have  not  sinned
in  this  manner,  for  who  among  us  crushed  with  his  teeth  the
forbidden  apple  in  Paradise?  Hence,  willing  or  unwilling,  we
are  forced  to  admit  that  original  sin,  as  it  is  in  the  children  of
Adam,  is  not  properly  sin,  as  has  been  explained ;  for  it  is  not  a
misdeed  contrary  to  law.  It  is,  therefore,  properly  a  disease  and
condition —  a  disease,  because  just  as  he  fell  through  self-love,  so
do  we  also ;  a  condition,  because  just  as  he  became  a  slave  and
liable  to  death,  so  also  are  we  born  slaves  and  children  of  wrath
[Eph.  2:  3]  and  liable  to  death.  However,  I  have  no  objection
to  this  disease  and  condition  being  called,  after  the  habit  of
Paul,  a  sin ;  indeed  it  is  a  sin  inasmuch  as  those  born  therein  are
God's  enemies  and  opponents,  for  they  are  drawn  into  it  by  the
condition  of  birth,  not  by  the  perpetration  of  a  definite  crime,


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingrli  41


except  as  far  as  their  first  parent  has  committed  one.

The  true  cause,  therefore,  of  discord  with  God  and  of  death
is  the  crime  and  offense  committed  by  Adam,  and  this  is  truly
sin.  But  that  sin  which  attaches  to  us  is  in  reality  a  disease  and
condition,  involving  indeed  the  necessity  of  death.  Neverthe-
less, this  would  never  have  taken  place  through  birth  alone,
unless  sin  had  vitiated  birth ;  hence  the  cause  of  human  misery
is  sin  and  not  birth ;  birth  only  in  as  far  as  it  follows  from  this
source  and  cause.  This  opinion  can  be  supported  by  authority
and  example.  Paul  in  Romans  5:  6  [read  5:  17]  says:  ''If  by
one  man's  sin*  death  reigned  by  one,  much  more,"  etc.  Here
we  see  that  the  word  "sin"  is  properly  used.  For  Adam  is  the
one  by  whose  fruit  death  hangs  upon  our  shoulders.  In  chapter
3 :  23  he  says :  "For  all  have  sinned  and  come  short  of  the  glory
of  God,"  i.  e.,  the  goodness  and  liberality  of  God.  Here  sin  is
understood  as  a  disease,  condition  and  birth,  so  that  we  all  are
said  to  sin  even  before  we  come  forth  to  the  light,  i.  e.,  we  are  in
the  condition  of  sin  and  death,  even  before  we  sin  in  act.  Thia
opinion  is  irrefutably  strengthened  by  the  words  of  the  same
writer,  Rom.  5 :  14,  "Death  reigned  from  Adam  to  Moses,  even
over  them  that  had  not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of  Adam's
transgression."  See,  death  is  our  lot,  even  though  we  have  not
sinned  as  Adam.  Why?  Because  he  sinned.  But  why  does
death  destroy  us  when  we  have  not  sinned  in  this  way?  Because
he  died  on  account  of  sin  and,  having  died,  i.  e.,  being  con-
demned to  death,  he  begat  us.  Therefore  we  also  die,  by  his
guilt  indeed,  yet  by  our  own  condition  and  disease,  or  if  you
prefer,  by  our  sin,  improperly  so  called.  The  example  [we
spoke  of]  is  as  follows:  A  prisoner  of  war  by  his  perfidy  and
hostile  conduct  has  deserved  to  be  held  as  a  slave.  His
descendants  become  serfs  or  slaves  of  their  master,  not  by  their
own  fault,  guilt  or  crime,  but  by  their  condition  which  was  the
result  of  guilt;  for  their  parent  of  whom  they  were  born  had
merited  it  by  his  crime.  The  children  have  no  crime,  but  the
punishment  and  requital  of  a  crime — namely  a  condition,
servitude  and  the  workhouse.

If  it  please  some  one  to  call  these  a  crime,  because  they  are

•The  Vulgate  has  "unius  delicto,"  hence  the  Authorized  Version  "by
one  man's  offence."  The  Greek  text  reads:  Tip  rov  evo^  napanTuiuari,  hence
the  Revised  Version  translates: "By  the  trespass  of  one."


42  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

suffered  for  a  crime,  I  do  not  object.  I  acknowledge  that  this
original  sin,  through  condition  and  contagion,  belongs  by  birth
to  all  who  are  born  from  the  love  of  man  and  woman ;  and  I
know  that  we  are  by  nature  children  of  wrath,  but  I  doubt  not
that  we  are  received  among  the  sons  of  God  by  grace,  which
through  the  second  Adam,  Christ,  has  repaired  the  fall.  This
takes  place  in  the  following  manner:

Fifthly — It  is  evident,  if  in  Christ,  the  second  Adam,  we
are  restored  to  life,  as  in  the  first  Adam  we  were  delivered  to
death,  that  in  condemning  children  born  of  Christian  parents,
nay  even  the  children  of  heathen,  we  act  rashly.  For  if  Adam
by  sinning  could  ruin  the  entire  race,  and  Christ  by  His  death
did  not  quicken  and  redeem  the  entire  race  from  the  calamity  in-
flicted by  the  former,  then  the  salvation  conferred  by  Christ  is
no  longer  a  match  for  sin.  Moreover  (which  God  forbid)  the
word  is  not  true:  "As  in  Adam  all  die,  even  so  in  Christ  shall
all  be  made  alive"  [I  Cor.  15:  22].  But,  whatever  must  be  the
decision  about  the  children  of  heathen,  this  we  must  certainly
maintain  that,  in  view  of  the  efficacy  of  the  salvation  procured
through  Christ,  those  go  astray  who  pronounce  them  subject  to
an  eternal  curse,  not  only  on  account  of  Christ's  reparation
already  mentioned,  but  also  on  account  of  God's  free  election,
which  does  not  follow  faith,  but  faith  follows  election,  about
which  see  the  following  article.  For  those  who  have  been  elected
from  eternity  have  undoubtedly  been  elected  before  faith.
Therefore  those  who  because  of  their  age  have  not  faith,  should
not  be  rashly  condemned  by  us ;  for  although  they  do  not  as  yet
have  it,  yet  God's  election  is  hidden  from  us.  If  before  Him  they
are  elect,  we  judge  rashly  about  things  unknown  to  us.  How-
ever, regarding  the  children  of  Christians  we  judge  differently
— namely,  that  all  children  of  Christians  belong  to  the  church  of
God's  people  and  are  parts  and  members  of  His  Church.  This
we  prove  in  the  following  way:  It  has  been  promised  by  the
testimonies  of  almost  all  the  prophets  that  the  Church  is  to  be
gathered  from  the  heathen  into  the  Church  of  the  people  of  God.
Christ  himself  said :  ''They  shall  come  from  the  east  and  west,
and  shall  sit  down  with  Abraham,  Isaac  and  Jacob"  [Matth.
8:  11],  and,  ''Go  ye  into  all  the  world,"  etc.  [Matth.  28: 19].
But  to  the  Church  of  the  Jews  their  infants  belonged  as  much
as  the  Jews  themselves. No  less,  therefore,  belong  our  infants


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  43

to  the  Church  of  Christ  than  did,  in  former  times,  those  of  the
Jews;  for  if  it  were  otherwise  the  promise  would  not  be  valid,
as  then  we  would  not  sit  down  with  God  on  the  same  terms  as
Abraham.  For  he,  with  those  who  were  born  of  him  according
to  the  flesh,  was  counted  as  in  the  Church.  But  if  our  infants
were  not  thus  counted  with  the  parents,  Christ  would  be  sordid
and  envious  towards  us  in  denying  us  what  He  had  given  to  the
ancients,  which  it  would  be  impious  to  say.  If  it  were  not  so
with  our  children,  the  entire  prophecy  regarding  the  call  of  the
Gentiles  would  be  void.  Therefore,  since  the  infants  of  Chris-
tians no  less  than  the  adults,  are  members  of  the  visible  Church
of  Christ,  it  is  evident  that  they  no  less  than  the  parents  are  of
the  number  of  those  whom  we  judge  elect.  How  godlessly  and
presumptuously  do  those  judge  who  surrender  to  perdition  the
infants  of  Christians,  when  so  many  clear  testimonies  of  Scrip-
ture contradict  it,  which  promise  not  merely  an  equal  but  even  a
larger  Church  from  the  Gentiles  compared  with  that  of  the
Jews.  All  this  will  be  plainer  when  we  expound  our  faith  con-
cerning the  Church.

Sixthly — Of  the  Church,  therefore,  we  thus  think,
namely,  that  the  word  ''Church"  in  the  Scriptures  is  to  be  taken
in  various  meanings.  It  is  used  for  the  elect,  who  have  been
predestined  by  God's  will  to  eternal  life.  Of  this  church  Paul
speaks  when  he  says  that  it  has  neither  wrinkle  or  spot  [Eph.
5:  27].  This  is  known  to  God  alone,  for  according  to  the  word
of  Solomon  [Prov.  15: 11],  He  alone  knows  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  men.  Nevertheless  those  who  are  members  of  this
church,  since  they  have  faith,  know  that  they  themselves  are
elect  and  are  members  of  this  first  church,  but  are  ignorant
about  members  other  than  themselves.  For  thus  it  is  written
in  Acts  [13:  48]  :  ''And  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal
life  believed."  Those,  therefore,  that  believe  are  ordained  to
eternal  life.  But  no  one,  save  he  who  believes,  knows  who  truly
believe.  He  is  already  certain  that  he  is  elect  of  God.  For,
according  to  the  apostle's  word  [II  Cor.  1:  22],  he  has  the  seal
of  the  Spirit,  by  which,  pledged  and  sealed,  he  knows  that  he
has  become  truly  free,  a  son  of  the  family,  and  not  a  slave.  For
the  Spirit  cannot  deceive.  If  He  tells  us  that  God  is  our  Father,
and  we  confidently  and  fearlessly  call  Him  Father,  untroubled
because  we  shall  enter  upon  the  eternal  inheritance,  then  it  is


44  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwinofli


certain  that  God's  Spirit  has  been  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts.
It  is  therefore  settled  that  he  is  elect  who  has  this  security  and
certainty,  for  they  who  believe  are  ordained  to  eternal  life.  Yet
many  are  elect  who  as  yet  have  no  faith.  For  the  mother  of
God  [Mary] ,  John  and  Paul,  did  not  believe  while  infants,  and
yet  they  were  elect,  even  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.
But  this  they  knew  not,  either  through  faith  or  revelation.  Were
not  Matthew,  Zacchaeus,  the  thief  on  the  cross  and  Magdalene
elect  before  the  foundation  of  the  world?  Nevertheless,  they
were  ignorant  of  this  until  they  were  illumined  by  the  Spirit  and
drawn  to  Christ  by  the  Father.  From  these  facts  it  follows  that
this  first  church  is  known  to  God  alone,  and  they  only  who  have
firm  and  unwavering  faith  know  that  they  are  members  of  this
church.

Again,  the  "Church"  is  taken  in  a  general  sense  for  all  who
are  rated  as  Christians,  i.  e.,  those  who  have  enlisted  under  His
name,  a  large^number  of  whom  acknowledge  Christ  publicly  by
confession  or  participation  in  the  sacraments,  and  yet  at  heart
shrink  back  from  Him  or  are  ignorant  of  Him.  To  this  Church,
we  believe,  belong  all  those  who  confess  Christ's  name.  Thus
Judas  belonged  to  the  Church  of  Christ  and  all  those  who  turned
away  from  Christ.  For  by  the  apostles  Judas  was  regarded  as
belonging  to  the  Church  of  Christ  no  less  than  Peter  and  John,
although  it  was  by  no  means  the  case.  Christ  knew  who  were
His  and  who  were  the  devil's.  This  church,  therefore,  is  visible,
albeit  it  does  not  assemble  in  this  world.  It  consists  of  all  who
confess  Christ,  even  though  among  them  are  many  reprobates.
Christ  has  depicted  it  in  the  charming  allegory  of  the  ten
virgins,  some  of  whom  were  wise  and  others  foolish  [Matth.  25] .
This  church  is  also  sometimes  called  elect,  although  it  is  not  like
the  first  without  spot.  But  as  it  is  considered  by  men  the  Church
of  God,  because  of  known  confession,  so  for  the  same  reason  it  is
styled  elect.  For  we  judge  that  they  who  have  enlisted  under
Christ  are  believers  and  elect.  Thus  Peter  spoke  to  "the  elect
scattered  abroad  throughout  Pontus,"  etc.  [I  Pet.  1:1].  Here
he  means  by  "elect"  all  who  belonged  to  the  churches  to  which
he  is  writing,  and  not  those  only  who  were  properly  elected  of
God;  for  as  they  were  unknown  to  Peter,  he  could  not  have
written  to  them.

Finally,  the  "Church"  is  taken  for  every  particular  con-


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  45

gregation  of  this  universal  and  visible  Church,  as  the  Church  of
Rome,  of  Augsburg,  of  Lyons.  There  are  still  other  meanings
of  the  word  "church,"  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  enumerate  at
present.  Hence  I  believe  that  there  is  one  Church  of  those  who
have  the  same  Spirit,  through  whom  they  are  made  certain  that
they  are  the  true  children  of  the  family  of  God ;  and  this  is  the
first  fruits  of  the  Church.  I  believe  that  this  Church  does  not
err  in  regard  to  truth,  namely  in  those  fundamental  matters  of
faith  upon  which  everything  depends.  I  believe  also  that  the
universal,  visible  Church  is  one,  while  it  maintains  that  true  con-
fession, of  which  we  have  already  spoken.  I  believe  also  that
all  belong  to  this  Church  who  give  their  adherence  to  it  accord-
ing to  the  rule  and  promise  of  God's  Word.  I  believe  that  to  this
Church  belong  Isaac,  Jacob,  Judah  and  all  who  were  of  the  seed
of  Abraham,  and  also  those  infants  whose  parents  in  the  first
beginnings  of  the  Christian  Church,  through  the  preaching  of
the  apostles,  were  won  to  the  cause  of  Christ.  For  if  Isaac  and
the  rest  of  the  ancients  had  not  belonged  to  the  Church,  they
would  not  have  received  the  Church's  token,  circumcision.
Since  these,  then,  were  members  of  the  Church,  infants  and
children  belonged  to  the  primitive  Church.  Therefore  I  believe
and  know  that  they  were  sealed  by  the  sacrament  of  baptism.
For  children  also  make  a  confession,  when  they  are  offered  by
their  parents  to  the  Church,  especially  since  the  promise  offers
them  to  God,  which  is  made  to  our  infants  no  less,  but  even  far
more  amply  and  abundantly,  than  formerly  to  the  children  of
the  Hebrews.

These  are  the  grounds  for  baptizing  and  commending
infants  to  the  Church,  against  which  all  the  weapons  and  war
engines  of  the  Anabaptists  avail  nothing.  For  not  only  are
they  to  be  baptized  who  believe,  but  they  who  confess,  and  they
who,  according  to  the  promise  of  God's  Word,  belong  to  the
Church.  For  otherwise  even  the  apostles  would  not  have  bap-
tized anyone,  since  no  apostle  had  absolute  evidence  regarding
the  faith  of  one  confessing  and  calling  himself  a  Christian.  For
Simon  the  impostor,  Ananias,  Judas,  and  no  one  knows  who,
were  baptized  when  they  declared  their  adherence  to  Christ,  even
though  they  did  not  have  faith.  On  the  other  hand,  Isaac  was
circumcised  as  an  infant  without  declaring  his  adherence  or
believing,  but  the  promise  acted  in  his  behalf. But  since  our


46  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

infants  are  in  the  same  position  as  those  of  the  Hebrews,  the
promise  also  declares  their  adherence  to  our  Church  and  makes
confession.  Hence,  in  reality  baptism,  like  circumcision  (I  am
speaking  of  the  sacrament  of  baptism)  pre-supposes  nothing  but
one  of  two  things,  either  confession,  i.e.,  a  declaration  of  alleg-
iance or  a  covenant,  i.  e.,  a  promise.  All  of  which  will  become
somewhat  clearer  from  what  follows.

Seventhly — I  believe,  indeed  I  know,  that  all  the  sacra-
ments are  so  far  from  conferring  grace  that  they  do  not  even
convey  or  dispense  it.  In  this  matter,  most  powerful  Emperor,
I  may  seem  to  thee  perhaps  too  bold.  But  my  opinion  is  firm.
For  as  grace  comes  from  or  is  given  by  the  Divine  Spirit  (when
I  speak  of  grace  I  use  the  Latin  term  for  pardon,  i.  e.,  indulgence
or  spontaneous  favor),  so  this  gift  pertains  to  the  Spirit  alone.
Moreover,  a  channel  or  vehicle  is  not  necessary  to  the  Spirit,
for  He  Himself  is  the  virtue  and  energy  whereby  all  things  are
borne,  and  has  no  need  of  being  borne;  neither  do  we  read  in
the  Holy  Scriptures  that  visible  things,  as  are  the  sacraments,
carry  certainly  with  them  the  Spirit,  but  if  visible  things  have
ever  been  borne  with  the  Spirit,  it  has  been  the  Spirit,  not  the
visible  things  that  have  done  the  bearing.

^^'  Thus  when  the  rushing  of  the  mighty  wind  took  place
[Acts  2:2]  at  the  same  time  the  tongues  were  conveyed  by  the
power  of  the  wind;  the  wind  was  not  conveyed  by  the  power
of  the  tongues.  Thus  the  wind  brought  the  quails  and
carried  away  the  locusts  [Nu.  ll:31ff;  Ex.  10:4ff];  but  no
quails  nor  locusts  were  ever  so  fleet  as  to  bring  the  wind.  Like-
wise when  a  wind,  strong  enough  to  remove  mountains,  passed
Elijah  [I  Ki.  19:  11]  the  Lord  was  not  borne  by  the  wind,  etc.
Briefly,  the  Spirit  breathes  wherever  it  wishes,  i.  e.,  just  as  the
wind  bloweth  where  it  listeth,  and  thou  hearest  the  sound
thereof,  and  canst  not  tell  whence  it  cometh  and  whither  it
goeth,  so  is  everyone  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit  [John  3:8],  i.  e.,
invisibly  and  imperceptibly  illumined  and  drawn.
'*^  Thus  the  Truth  [Christ]  spake.  Therefore,  the  Spirit  of
grace  is  conveyed  not  by  this  immersion,  not  by  this  drinking,
not  by  that  anointing.  For  if  it  were  thus,  it  would  be  known
how,  where,  whence  and  whither  the  Spirit  is  borne. If  the

"presence  and  efficacy  of  grace  are  bound  to  the  sacraments,  they
work  whithersoever  they  are  carried;  and  where  they  are  not


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  47

used,  everything  becomes  feeble.  Nor  can  theologians  plead
that  the  proper  disposition  of  the  subject  is  demanded  as  a  pre-
requisite [for  the  right  use  of  the  sacraments].  For  example,
the  grace  of  baptism  or  of  the  Eucharist  (so  they  say)  is  con-
ferred upon  him  who  is  first  prepared  for  it.  For  he  who
according  to  their  opinion  receives  grace  through  the  sacra-
ments, either  prepares  himself  for  it  or  is  prepared  by  the  Spirit.
If  he  prepares  himself,  we  can  do  something  of  ourselves  and
prevenient  grace  is  notliing.  If  he  is  prepared  by  the  Spirit  for
the  reception  of  grace,  I  ask  whether  tTiis  be  done  through  the
sacraments  as  a  channel  or  independent  of  the  sacraments?  If
the  sacraments  mediate,  man  is  prepared  by  the  sacrament  for
the  sacrament,  and  thus  there  will  be  a  process  ad  infinitum ;  for
a  sacrament  will  be  required  as  a  preparation  for  a  sacrament.
But  if  we  be  prepared  without  the  sacrament  for  the  reception
of  sacramental  grace,  the  Spirit  is  present  in  His  goodness  be-
fore the  sacrament,  and  hence  grace  has  been  shown  and  is
present  before  the  sacrament  is  administered.

From  this  it  follows  (as  I  willingly  and  gladly  admit  in
regard  to  the  subject  of  the  sacraments)  that  the  sacraments  are
given  as  a  public  testimony  of  that  grace  which  is  previously
present  to  every  individual.  Thus  baptism  is  administered  in
the  presence  of  the  Church  to  one  who  before  receiving  it  either
confessed  the  religion  of  Christ  or  has  the  word  of  promise,
whereby  he  is  known  to  belong  to  the  Church.  Hence  it  is
that  when  we  baptize  an  adult  we  ask  him  whether  he  believes.
And  only  when  he  answers  "yes,"  then  he  receives  baptism.
Faith  therefore,  has  been  present  before  he  receives  baptism,  and
is  not  given  by  baptism.  But  when  an  infant  is  offered,  the
question  is  asked  whether  its  parents  offer  it  for  baptism.  When
they  have  answered  through  witnesses  that  they  wish  it  baptized,
then  the  infant  is  baptized.  Here  the  promise  of  God  precedes,
that  He  regards  our  infants,  no  less  than  those  of  the  Hebrews,
as  belonging  to  the  Church.  For  when  members  of  the  Church
offer  it,  the  infant  is  baptized  under  the  law  that,  since  it  has
been  born  of  Christians,  it  is  regarded  by  the  divine  promise
among  the  members  of  the  Church.  By  baptism,  therefore,  the
Church  publicly  receives  one  who  has  previously  been  received
through  grace.  Hence  baptism  does  not  convey  grace  but  the
Church  certifies  that  grace  has  been  given  to  him  to  whom  it  is


48  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

administered.

I  believe,  therefore,  O  Emperor,  that  a  sacrament  is  a  sign
of  a  sacred  thing,  i.  e.,  of  grace  that  has  been  given.  I  believe
that  it  is  a  visible  figure  or  form  of  the  invisible  grace,  pro-
vided and  bestowed  by  God's  bounty;  i.e.,  a  visible  example
which  presents  an  analogy  to  something  done  by  the  Spirit.  I
believe  that  it  is  a  public  testimony.  Thus  when  we  are  bap-
tized the  body  is  washed  with  the  purest  element;  by  this  it  is
signified  that  by  the  grace  of  divine  goodness  we  have  been
gathered  into  the  assembly  of  the  Church  and  of  God's  people,
wherein  we  should  live  upright  and  pure.  Thus  Paul  explains
the  mystery  in  Romans  VI.  The  recipient  of  baptism  testifies,
therefore,  that  he  belongs  to  the  Church  of  God,  which  worships
its  Lord  in  soundness  of  faith  and  purity  of  life.  For  this  reason
the  sacraments,  which  are  sacred  ceremonies  (for  the  Word  is
added  to  the  element  and  it  becomes  a  sacrament*)  should  be
religiously  cherished,  i.  e.,  highly  valued  and  treated  with  honor.
For  though  they  are  unable  to  bestow  grace,  they  nevertheless
associate  visibly  with  the  Church  us  who  have  previously  been
received  into  it  invisibly ;  and  this  should  be  regarded  with  the
highest  veneration,  since  with  their  administration  the  words  of
the  divine  promise  are  declared  and  pronounced.

For  if  we  think  otherwise  of  the  sacraments,  namely  that
their  external  use  cleanses  internally,  it  would  be  but  a  return
to  Judaism,  which  believed  that,  by  various  anointings,  obla-
tions, offerings,  sacrifices  and  feasts,  sins  could  be  atoned  and
grace  could  be  purchased  and  secured.  Nevertheless,  the
prophets,  especially  Isaiah  and  Jeremiah,  always  most  stead-
fastly urged  in  their  teaching  that  the  promises  and  benefits  of
God  are  given  by  God's  free  goodness,  and  not  with  respect  to
merits  or  external  ceremonies.

I  believe  also  that  the  Anabaptists  in  denying  baptism  to
infants  are  entirely  wrong ;  and  not  here  only,  but  also  in  many
other  points,  of  which  this  is  not  the  place  to  speak.  That  men
might  avoid  their  folly  and  malice,  I  have  been  the  first  to
teach  and  write  against  them,t  not  without  danger,  but  relying

*A  quotation  from  Augustine's  Commentary  on  the  Gospel  of  John,
Tract  LXXX,  §3;  cf.  Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,  XXXV,  col.  1840.

fThe  first  tracts  of  Zwingli  against  the  Anabaptists  were  published  in


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  49

on  God's  help,  with  the  result  that  now,  by  God's  goodness,  this
plague  among  us  has  greatly  abated.  So  far  am  I  from  receiv-
ing, teaching  or  defending  anything  of  this  seditious  faction.

Eighthly — I  believe  that  in  the  holy  Eucharist,  i.  e.,  the
supper  of  thanksgiving,  the  true  body  of  Christ  is  present  by  the
contemplation  of  faith.  This  means  that  they  who  thank  the
Lord  for  the  benefits  bestowed  on  us  in  His  Son  acknowledge
that  He  assumed  true  flesh,  in  it  truly  suffered,  truly  washed
away  our  sins  by  His  blood ;  and  thus  everything  done  by  Christ
becomes  as  it  were  present  to  them  by  the  contemplation  of  faith.
But  that  the  body  of  Christ  in  essence  and  really,  i.  e.,  the  natural
body  itself,  is  either  present  in  the  supper  or  masticated  with  our
mouth  and  teeth,  as  the  Papists  or  some*  who  look  back  to  the
fleshpots  of  Egypt  assert,  we  not  only  deny,  but  constantly  main-
tain to  be  an  error,  contrary  to  the  Word  of  God.  This,  with
the  divine  assistance,  I  will  in  a  few  words,  make  as  clear  as  the
sun  to  your  majesty,  O  Emperor.  First,  by  citing  the  divine
oracles;  secondly,  by  attacking  the  opponents  with  arguments
derived  therefrom,  as  with  military  engines ;  lastly,  by  showing
that  the  ancient  theologians  held  our  opinion.  Meanwhile,
thou  Creator,  thou  Spirit,  be  present,  enlighten  the  minds  of
thy  people,  and  fill  with  grace  and  light  the  hearts  that  thou
hast  created !

Christ  Himself,  the  mouth  and  wisdom  of  God,  saith:
''The  poor  ye  have  always  with  you ;  but  me  ye  have  not  always"
[John  12:8].  Here  the  presence  of  the  body  alone  is  denied,
for  according  to  His  divinity  He  is  always  present,  because  He  is
always  everywhere,  according  to  His  other  word:  "Lo,  I  am
with  you  always,  even  unto  the  end  of  the  world"  [Matth.
28 :20] ,  viz.,  according  to  divinity,  power  and  goodness.  Augus-
tine agrees  with  us.f  Neither  is  there  any  foundation  for  the
assertion  of  the  opponents  that  the  humanity  of  Christ  is  where-
ever  the  divinity  is,  otherwise  the  person  is  divided;  for  this

1525,  see  Zwingli's  TFerfce,  ed.  of  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  Vol.  II,  pt.  I,  pp.
230-303  and  pp.  337-369.

*The  Lutherans.

tSee  Augustine's  Homilies  on  the  Gospel  of  John,  Tract  L,  §13,  where
he  writes:  "In  respect  of  His  divine  presence  we  always  have  Christ;  in
respect  of  His  presence  in  the  flesh  it  was  rightly  said  to  the  disciples,  'Me
ye  will  not  have  always.'  "


50  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

would  destroy  Christ's  true  humanity.  Only  the  deity  can  be
everywhere.  That  humanity  is  in  one  place,  but  divinity  every-
where, divides  the  person  just  as  little  as  the  Son's  assumption  of
humanity  divides  the  unity  of  the  divine  essence.  Indeed,  it
would  be  easier  to  effect  a  separation  in  the  unity  of  essence  if
one  person  of  the  divine  being  would  assume  the  form  of  a
creature  but  the  others  not  at  all,  than  to  separate  the  person  if
the  humanity  be  at  one  place  but  the  divinity  everywhere ;  since
we  see  even  in  creation  that  bodies  are  confined  to  one  place,  but
their  power  and  influence  extend  very  far.  An  example  is  the
sun,  whose  body  is  in  one  place,  while  his  power  pervades  all
things.  The  human  mind  also  surmounts  the  stars  and  pene-
trates the  underworld,  but  the  body  is  nevertheless  in  one  place.

Christ  says  also :  "Again  I  leave  the  world  and  go  to  the
Father"  [John  16:  28].  Here  the  word  "to  leave"  is  used,  just
as  "to  have"  before,  so  that  the  opponents  cannot  say:  "We  do
not  have  Him  visibly."  For  when  He  speaks  of  the  visible
withdrawal  of  His  body,  He  says :  "A  little  while  and  ye  shall
not  see  me,"  etc.  [John  16 :  16] .  Neither  would  we  maintain
anything  but  a  delusion  if  we  were  to  contend  that  His  natural
body  were  present,  but  invisible.  For  why  should  He  evade
sight,  when  He  nevertheless  would  be  here,  who  so  often  mani-
fested himself  to  the  disciples  after  the  resurrection?  "But,  it
is  expedient  for  you,"  He  says,  "that  I  go  away"  [John  16:  7].
But  if  He  were  here,  it  would  be  expedient  that  we  should  see
Him.  For  as  often  as  the  disciples  thought  about  seeing  Him,
He  manifested  Himself  openly,  so  that  neither  sense  nor  thought
might  suffer  in  aught.  "Handle  me,"  He  says;  and  "Be  not
afraid,  it  is  I,"  and  "Mary,  touch  me  not,"  etc.  [Lk.  24:  39;
John  6:20;  20:17].

When  in  departing  He  commended  His  disciples  to  His
Father,  He  said :  "I  am  no  more  in  the  world"  [John  17 :  11] .
Here  we  have  a  substantive  verb  ("I  am  no  more  in  the
world")  ,*  no  less  than  in  the  words :  "This  is  my  body ;"  so  that
the  opponents  cannot  say  that  there  is  a  trope  here,  since  they
deny  that  substantives  admit  of  the  trope.  But  the  case  has  no
need  of  such  arguments,  for  there  follows :  "But  these  are  in  the
world."  This  antithesis  clearly  teaches  that  He  was  not,  accord-
ing to  His  human  nature,  in  the  world  at  a  time  when  His
disciples  were.

*  Kal  OVK  ElfJ.1  kv  T^  KOff/ltfi.


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  51

And  that  we  may  know  when  He  took  His  departure — not,
as  they  invent  rather  than  explain,  when  He  made  Himself
invisible — Luke  says:  "While  he  blessed  them  he  was  parted
from  them,  and  carried  up  into  heaven"  [Lk.  24:51].  He
does  not  say:  "He  vanished,"  or  "rendered  himself  invisible."
About  this  Mark  says :  "After  the  Lord  had  spoken  to  them  he
was  received  up  into  heaven,  and  sat  at  the  right  hand  of  God"
[Mk.  16:19].  He  does  not  say:  "He  remained  here,  but
rendered  his  body  invisible."  Again  Luke  says  in  Acts:
"When  he  had  said  these  things,  as  they  were  looking,  he  was
taken  up ;  and  a  cloud  received  him  out  of  their  sight"  [Acts
1:9].  A  cloud  covered  Him,  of  which  there  would  have  been
no  need  if  He  had  only  removed  His  appearance  but  otherwise
had  continued  to  be  present.  Nor  would  there  have  been  any
need  of  removal  and  elevation.  Again :  "This  same  Jesus,  who
was  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall  so  come  in  like  manner
as  ye  beheld  him  going  into  heaven"  [Acts  1:  11].  What  is
clearer  than  this?  "From  you,"  he  says,  "he  was  taken  up;"
therefore.  He  was  not  with  them  visibly  or  invisibly,  according
to  His  human  nature.  When,  then,  we  shall  see  Him  return
as  He  departed,  we  shall  know  that  He  is  present.  Otherwise
He  sits,  according  to  His  human  nature,  at  the  right  hand  of  His
Father  until  He  will  return  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.

But  since  there  are  some  who  deprive  the  body  of  Christ
of  restriction  to  a  place  and  say  that  He  is  not  in  a  place,  let  them
see  how  clearly,  and  with  closed  eyes,  they  oppose  the  truth.  He
was  in  the  manger,  on  the  cross,  at  Jerusalem  when  his  parents
were  on  their  journey  home;  in  the  sepulchre  and  out  of  the
sepulchre;  for  the  angel  says:  "He  is  risen,  he  is  not  here:
behold  the  place  where  they  laid  him"  [Mk.  16:  6].  And  that
they  may  not  be  able  to  say  that  His  body  is  everywhere,  let  them
hear:  "When  the  doors  were  shut,  Jesus  came  and  stood  in
their  midst"  [John  20 :  19] .  What  need  had  He  of  coming  if
His  body  was  everywhere,  but  invisible?  It  would  have  been
enough  to  come,  but  merely  as  one  who  was  present  to  manifest
Himself.  But  let  such  sophistical  trifles  be  gone,  which  rob  us
of  the  truth  both  of  Christ's  humanity  and  of  the  Holy
Scriptures.

These  testimonies  deny  the  presence  of  Christ's  body  any-
where but  in  heaven,  scripturally  speaking,  i.  e.,  as  far  as  Scrip-


52  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

ture  tells  us  about  the  nature  and  properties  of  the  body  assumed
by  Christ.  And  however  far  the  contradictions,  which  are  in-
volved in  our  propositions  regarding  the  power  of  God,  drive  us,
we  ought  not  to  wrest  it  to  such  a  point  that  we  believe  that  God
acts  contrary  to  His  Word.  That  would  be  a  sign  of  impotence,
not  of  power.  Moreover,  that  the  natural  body  of  Christ  is  not
eaten  with  our  mouth.  He  Himself  showed  us  when  He  said  to
the  Jews,  disputing  about  the  corporeal  eating  of  His  flesh:
"The  flesh  profiteth  nothing"  [John  6:63],  namely,  eaten
naturally,  but  eaten  spiritually  it  profits  much,  for  it  gives  life.

"That  which  is  born  of  the  flesh  is  flesh ;  and  that  which  is
born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit"  [John  3:6].  If,  therefore,  the
natural  body  of  Christ  is  eaten  with  our  mouth,  what  else  than
flesh  can  come  out  of  flesh,  eaten  naturally?  And  lest  anyone
think  lightly  of  this  argument,  let  him  hear  the  second  part:
"That  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit  is  spirit."  Therefore,  that
which  is  spirit,  is  born  of  the  Spirit.  If  then  the  flesh  is  salutary
to  the  soul,  It  should  be  eaten  spiritually,  not  carnally.  This
applies  also  to  the  sacraments,  that  spirit  is  born  of  Spirit,  and
not  of  any  corporeal  matter,  as  we  have  already  indicated.

Paul  announces  that  if  he  once  knew  Christ  according  to
the  flesh,  henceforth  he  would  know  Him  no  more  after  the
flesh  [II  Cor.  5:16].

In  view  of  these  passages  we  are  compelled  to  confess  that
the  words:  "This  is  my  body,"  should  not  be  understood  nat-
urally, but  figuratively,  just  as  the  words :  "This  is  Jehovah's
passover"  [Ex.  12:11].  For  the  lamb  that  was  eaten  every
year  with  the  celebration  of  the  festival  was  not  the  passing  over
of  the  Lord,  but  it  signified  that  such  a  passing  over  had  formerly
taken  place.  Besides  there  is  the  temporal  succession,  in  that
the  Lord's  Supper  followed  the  eating  of  the  lamb;  which
reminds  us  that  Christ  used  words  similar  to  those  employed
at  the  passover,  for  succession  leads  to  imitation.  Moreover,  the
arrangement  of  the  words  is  the  same.  The  time  affords  an
additional  argument,  since  in  the  same  evening  meal  the  pass-
over  was  discontinued  and  the  new  act  of  thanksgiving  was
instituted.  A  further  consideration  is  the  characteristic  of
memorials,  in  that  they  take  the  name  from  the  thing  which
they  commemorate.

Thus  the  Athenians  named  aeiaax^^i-a,  [removal  of  debts]


%


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  53

not  as  though  the  debts  were  remitted  every  year,  but  because
what  Solon  once  did*  they  continually  celebrate ;  and  this  their
celebration  they  dignify  with  the  name  of  the  thing  itself.
Thus  those  things  are  called  the  body  and  blood  of  Christ  which
are  the  symbols  of  the  true  body. Now  follow  the  proofs :

As  the  body  cannot  be  nourished  by  a  spiritual  substance,  so
the  soul  cannot  be  nourished  by  a  corporeal  substance.  But  if
the  natural  body  of  Christ  is  eaten,  I  ask  whether  it  feeds  the
body  or  the  soul?  Not  the  body,  hence  the  soul.  If  the  soul,
then  the  soul  eats  flesh,  and  it  would  not  be  true  that  spirit  is
only  born  of  Spirit.

In  the  second  place,  I  ask :  What  does  the  body  of  Christ,
eaten  naturally,  bring  about?  If  it  be  the  forgiveness  of  sins,
as  one  party  claims,  then  the  disciples  obtained  forgiveness  of
sins  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  therefore,  Christ  died  in  vain.
If  that  which  is  eaten  imparts  the  virtue  of  Christ's  passion,  as
the  same  party  claims,  then  the  virtue  of  the  passion  and  re-
demption was  dispensed  before  it  had  taken  place.  If  the  body
is  fed  for  the  resurrection,  as  another  [Luther]  very  ignorantly
asserts,  much  more  would  the  sacrament  heal  our  body  and
deliver  it  from  sickness.  But  Irenaeusf  wants  to  be  understood
differently,  when  he  says  that  our  body  is  nourished  by  Christ's
body  for  the  resurrection.  For  he  desires  to  show  that  the  hope
of  our  resurrection  is  strengthened  by  Christ's  resurrection.
Behold,  what  an  appropriate  figure  of  speech !

Thirdly — If  the  natural  body  of  Christ  was  given  to  the
disciples  in  the  Supper,  it  necessarily  follows  that  they  ate  it

•Through  seisachtheia,  or  removal  of  debts,  Solon  in  594  B.  C.  rescued
the  peasants  of  Attica.  The  debts,  with  which  the  farms  were  encumbered,
were  cancelled.  Servitude  for  debt  was  annulled  and  Attic  citizens  who
had  been  held  in  slavery  were  set  free  by  the  State  purchasing  their
freedom.  ffEKraxT^eta  is  literally  a  shaking  off  ( crticrfiog )  of  a  burden  (ax'&oc).

tLuther  had  quoted  him  for  his  view.  See  Irenaeus,  "Against  Heresies,"
Bk.  IV,  c.  18,  5,  wliere  he  writes:  "Then  again,  how  can  they  say  that  the
flesh,  which  is  nourished  with  the  body  of  the  Lord  and  with  His  blood  goes
to  corruption,  and  does  not  partake  of  life?  .  .  .  For  as  the  bread,
which  is  produced  from  the  earth,  when  it  receives  the  invocation  of  God,
is  no  longer  common  bread,  but  the  Eucharist,  consisting  of  two  realities,
earthly  and  heavenly;  so  also  our  bodies,  when  they  receive  the  Eucharist,
are  no  longer  corruptible,  having  the  hope  of  resurrection  to  eternity."
Roberts,  Ante-Nicene  Fathers,  Vol.  I,  p.  486.


54  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

as  it  then  was.  But  it  was  then  capable  of  suffering ;  hence  they
ate  a  vulnerable  body,  for  it  was  not  yet  glorified.  For  if  they
say :  They  ate  the  same  body,  yet  not  as  it  was  capable  of  suffer-
ing, but  the  same  as  it  was  after  the  resurrection,  I  reply :  Either
He  had  two  bodies,  one  not  yet  glorified  and  another  glorified,  or
one  and  the  same  body  was  at  the  same  time  capable  of  suffering
and  incapable.  And  so,  since  He  dreaded  death  so  much  He  was
doubtless  unwilling  to  suffer,  but  wanted  to  make  use  of  that
bodily  endowment,  by  virtue  of  which  He  was  free  from  pain.
Therefore  He  did  not  truly  suffer,  but  only  by  appearance ;  in
this  way  Marcion*  is  again  brought  back  by  these  blindfolded
gladiators.  Six  hundred  arguments  could  be  adduced,  0  Em-
peror, but  we  shall  be  content  with  these.

Moreover,  that  the  ancients  agree  with  us  on  the  last  part
of  this  article  I  shall  now  establish  by  two  witnesses,  both  of  the
first  rank,  viz.  :

By  Ambrose,  who  in  the  [Commentary  on  the]  First
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  says  concerning  the  words:  "Ye  do
show  forth  the  Lord's  death,"  etc. :  "Mindful  that  by  the  Lord's
death  we  have  been  freed,  we  signify  in  our  eating  and  drinking
the  flesh  and  the  blood  which  were  offered  for  us,"t  etc.  Now
Ambrose  is  speaking  of  the  food  and  drink  of  the  Supper,  and
asserts  that  we  signify  those  things  which  were  offered  for  us.

By  Augustine  also,  who  in  this  thirtieth  discourse  on  Johnt
affirms  that  the  body  of  Christ  which  rose  from  the  dead  must  be
in  one  place.  Here  the  printed  copies  have  "can  be"  instead  of
"must  be,"  but  incorrectly,  for  in  the  Master  of  the  "Sentences
[Peter  Lombard]  and  the  Canonical  Decrees  [of  Gratian],  in
which  this  opinion  of  Augustine  is  quoted,**  the  reading  is

*Marcion,  a  Gnostic  of  about  150  A.  D.  appears  to  Zwingli  as  a  type  of
docetism,  i.e.,  the  view  that  Christ  had  only  an  apparent  body.

tSee  Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,  XVII,  256.

$See  Migne,  op.  eit.,  XXXV,  1632.

••Augustine  writes:  '"The  body  of  the  Lord,  in  which  he  rose  again
from  the  dead  can  only  be  in  one  place  (uno  loco  esse  potest)  ;  but  his  truth
is  everywhere  diffused."  Commentary  on  John,  Tract  XXX,  §1  (Migne,
Patrol.  Lat.,  XXXV,  1632).  But  instead  of  the  words:  "can  only  be  in
one  place,"  a  number  of  later  Fathers  express  the  meaning  of  Augustine
more  forcibly  when,  in  quoting  these  words,  they  substitute  "must  only  be  in
one  place."  Thus  even  the  Benedictine  editors  remark:  "All  editions  and
Mss.,  which  we  had  the  privilege  of  consulting,  agree  in  reading: uno  loco


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  55

"must."  By  this  we  plainly  see  that  whatever  the  ancients  said
so  excellently  concerning  the  Supper,  they  thought  not  of  the
natural  but  of  the  spiritual  eating  of  Christ's  body.  For  since
they  knew  that  the  body  of  Christ  must  be  in  one  place,  and  that
it  is  at  the  right  hand  of  God,  they  did  not  withdraw  it  thence  to
submit  it  for  mastication  to  the  foul  teeth  of  men.

Augustine  likewise  teaches  in  the  twelfth  chapter  "Against
Adimantus"*  that  the  three  expressions:  "The  blood  is  the  life,"
and  "This  is  my  body"  and  "The  rock  was  Christ,"  were  spoken
symbolically,  i.  e.,  as  he  himself  says,  in  a  figure  and  fig-
uratively. And  among  many  other  things  he  at  length  comes
to  these  words:  "I  can  interpret  that  command  as  given  for  a
sign.  For  the  Lord  did  not  hesitate  to  say:  'This  is  my  body,'
when  He  was  giving  a  sign  of  His  body."  Thus  far  Augustine.
Lo,  a  key  for  us  whereby  we  can  unlock  all  the  declarations  of
the  ancients  concerning  the  Eucharist!  That  which  is  only  a
sign  of  the  body,  he  says,  is  called  the  body.

Let  them  who  wish  go  now  and  condemn  us  for  heresy,
only  let  them  know  that  by  the  same  process  they  are  con-
demning the  opinions  of  the  theologians,  contrary  to  the  decrees
of  the  Pontiffs.  For  from  these  facts  it  becomes  very  evident
that  the  ancients  always  spoke  figuratively  when  they  attributed
so  much  to  the  eating  of  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  Supper ;  mean-
ing, not  that  sacramental  eating  could  cleanse  the  soul  but  faith
in  God  through  Jesus  Christ,  which  is  spiritual  eating,  whereof
this  external  eating  is  but  symbol  and  shadow.  And  as  bread
sustains  the  body  and  wine  enlivens  and  exhilarates,  thus  it
strengthens  the  soul  and  assures  it  of  God's  mercy  that  He  has
given  us  His  Son;  thus  it  renews  the  mind  by  the  confidence
that,  by  His  blood,  the  sins  with  which  it  was  being  consumed
were  destroyed.  With  these  passages  we  shall  now  rest  content,
although  any  one  could  compile  whole  volumes  in  expounding
and  confirming  the  fact  that  the  ancients  are  of  our  opinion.

esse  potest.  However,  Ivonis  Decreta,  pars.  II,  c.  8  (Migne,  CLXI,  151f),
Gratianus,  De  Consecratione,  Dist.  II,  c.  44  (Migne,  CLXXXVII,  1752),  the
Master  of  Sentences,  Bk.  IV,  Dist.  10,  1  (Migne,  CXCII,  860)  and  after
them  Thomas  Aquinas,  Summa,  pars  3,  quaest.  75,  art.  1,  quote  tliese  words,
uno  loco  esse  oportet."

*See  Migne,  op.  cit.,  XLII,  144.


56  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Neither  let  the  pamphlet  recently  published*  concerning  the
opinions  of  the  ancients,  which  it  expressly  promised  to  defend,
move  any  one.  For  in  a  very  short  time  we  shall  see  the  refuta-
tion of  our  very  learned  brother  Oecolampadius,  the  object  of
whose  exordium  it  was  to  defend  the  opinion  of  the  ancients.
But  what  things  should  be  required  in  this  matter  for  its  clearer
exposition  and  the  refutation  of  the  opponents  we  who  hold  this
opinion  have  shown,  I  believe,  abundantly,  in  many  books,
written  to  different  persons.

Ninthly — I  believe  that  ceremonies  which  are  not  through
superstitious  use  contrary  either  to  faith  or  to  God's  word
(although  I  do  not  know  whether  such  be  found)  can  be  toler-
ated by  charity  until  the  light  of  day  shines  clearer  and  clearer.
But  at  the  same  time  I  believe  that  by  virtue  of  the  same  charity
the  ceremonies  mentioned  should  be  abolished  when  it  can  be
done  without  great  offense,  however  much  the  evilminded  may
clamor.  For  Christ  did  not  forbid  Mary  Magdalene  to  pour  out
the  ointment,*  although  the  dishonest  and  evilminded  Judas  made
an  ugly  disturbance.  Images,  however,  which  are  misused  for
worship,  I  do  not  count  among  ceremonies,  but  among  the
number  of  those  things  which  are  diametrically  opposed  to  the
Word  of  God.  But  those  which  do  not  serve  for  worship  and  in
whose  cases  there  exists  no  danger  of  future  worship,  I  am  so
far  from  condemning  that  I  acknowledge  both  painting  and
statuary  as  God's  gifts.

Tenthly — I  believe  that  the  work  of  prophesying  or
preaching  is  most  sacred,  so  that  it  is  a  work  most  necessary,
above  all  others.  For  to  speak  scripturally  or  strictly,  we  see
that  among  all  nations  the  outward  preaching  of  apostles,
evangelists  and  bishops  preceded  faith,  which  nevertheless  we
attribute  to  the  Spirit  alone.  For  alas !  We  see  very  many  who
hear  indeed  the  outward  preaching  of  the  Gospel,  but  believe
not,  because  there  is  a  lack  of  the  Spirit.  Whithersoever,  then,
prophets  or  preachers  of  the  Word  are  sent,  it  is  a  sign  of  God's
grace,  that  He  wishes  to  manifest  a  knowledge  of  Himself  to
His  elect ;  and  to  whom  they  [the  preachers]  are  denied,  it  is  a

•Its  title  was:  Quid  de  Eucharistia  veteres  et  Graeci  et  Latini  senserint
dialogus,  auctore  Jo.  Oecolampadio ;  in  quo  etiam  epistolae  Phil.  Melanch-
thonis  et  Jo.  Oecolampadii  insertae.  8vo.  Tigurae  1526.  It  is  also  found
in  the  Letters  of  Oecolampadius,  fol.  130a-168b.


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  57

sign  of  His  impending  wrath.  This  can  be  inferred  from  the
prophets  and  the  example  of  Paul,  who  was  sometimes  forbidden
to  go  to  some,  and  again  called  to  others.

But  also  the  laws  themselves  and  the  magistrates  can  be
assisted  in  maintaining  public  justice  by  no  other  means  more
effectually  than  by  preaching.  For  in  vain  is  that  which  is  just
taught  unless  they  upon  whom  it  is  enjoined  have  a  regard  for
what  is  just  and  love  equity.  But  for  this  prophets  prepare
minds  as  ministers,  and  the  Spirit  as  leader  both  of  teachers
and  hearers.  This  kind  of  ministers,  namely  those  who  teach,
comfort,  alarm,  care  for  and  faithfully  watch,  we  acknowledge
among  Christ's  people.  That  also  we  recognize,  that  they  bap-
tize, and  in  the  Lord's  Supper  administer  the  body  and  blood  of
Christ  (for  thus  we  also  call  figuratively  the  holy  bread  and  wine
of  the  Supper) ,  visit  the  sick,  feed  the  poor  from  the  resources
and  in  the  name  of  the  Church ;  finally  this  that  they  read  the
Scriptures,  interpret  them  and  make  a  public  profession,  by
which  either  they  or  others  are  prepared  for  presiding  at  some
time  over  the  churches.  But  that  kind  of  ministers,  with
bishop's  mitre  and  staff,  who  are  mere  numbers  and  born  bread
eaters,  we  regard  as  a  useless  burden  on  the  earth  and  illegiti-
mate. They  are  in  the  body  ecclesiastical  what  goiters  and
hunchbacks  are  in  the  human  body.

Eleventh — I  know  that  the  magistrate  when  lawfully  in-
stalled, holds  God's  place  no  less  than  the  prophet.  For  as  the
prophet  is  a  minister  of  heavenly  wisdom  and  goodness,  as  one
who  teaches  faithfully  and  brings  errors  to  light,  so  the  magis-
trate is  the  minister  of  goodness  and  justice.  Of  goodness,  in
that  with  fidelity  and  moderation,  like  God,  he  both  hears  and
determines  concerning  the  affairs  of  his  people;  of  justice,  in
that  he  breaks  the  audacity  of  the  wicked  and  protects  the  inno-
cent. If  a  prince  have  these  endowments,  I  believe  that  no  fear
need  be  entertained  for  his  conscience.  If  he  lack  these,  though
he  make  himself  an  object  of  fear  and  terror,  his  conscience  can
in  no  way  be  cleared,  upon  the  ground  that  he  has  been  lawfully
installed.  Yet,  at  the  same  time  I  believe,  that  a  Christian
should  obey  such  a  tyrant,  until  that  time  comes  whereof  Paul
says:  "If  thou  canst  become  free,  use  it  rather"  [I  Cor.  7:  21].
Nevertheless,  I  believe  that  this  time  is  indicated  by  God  alone,
and  not  by  man ;  and  this  is  done  not  obscurely  but  as  openly  as


58  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

when  Saul  was  rejected  and  David  became  his  successor.  Re-
garding tribute  and  taxes,  to  be  paid  for  protection,  I  am  of
the  same  opinion  as  Paul,  Romans  13.

TwELFTHLY — I  belicve  that  the  figment  of  purgatorial  fire
is  as  much  an  affront  to  the  redemption  of  Christ  freely  granted
to  us  as  it  has  been  a  lucrative  business  to  its  authors.  For  if  it
be  necessary  by  punishments  and  tortures  to  expiate  the  guilt  of
our  crimes,  Christ  will  have  died  in  vain  and  grace  will  have  lost
its  meaning.  Can  anything  more  wicked  be  imagined  in  Chris-
tianity? Or  what  sort  of  a  Christ  do  they  have  who  wish  to  be
called  Christians  and  yet  dread  this  fire,  which  is  no  longer  fire,
but  smoke?  But  that  there  is  a  hell,  where  the  unbelievers,
disobedient  and  public  enemies  are  forever  punished  with  Ixion
and  Tantalus,*  I  not  only  believe,  but  know.  For  when  the
Truth  [Christ]  speaks  of  the  universal  judgment,  He  asserts
that  after  this  judgment  some  will  go  into  everlasting  fire.
[Matth.  25:41].  After  the  universal  judgment,  therefore,
there  will  be  everlasting  fire.  Hence  the  Anabaptists  cannot
cover  up  with  His  [Christ's]  word  their  error,  that  '61am,  or  "for
ever"  does  not  extend  beyond  the  general  judgment.  For  in  this
passage  Christ  is  speaking  of  everlasting  fire  that  will  burn  after
the  judgment  and  will  torment  the  Devil  and  his  angels,  and
the  ungodly  who  despise  God,  and  the  savage  men  who  suppress
the  truth  with  falsehood  and  do  not  mercifully  and  faithfully
aid  the  necessities  of  their  neighbor.

The  above  [twelve  points]  I  firmly  believe,  teach  and  main-
tain, not  by  my  own  utterances,  but  by  those  of  the  Word  of
God ;  and,  God  willing,  I  promise  to  do  this  as  long  as  the  mind
controls  these  members,  unless  some  one  from  the  declarations  of
Holy  Scripture,  properly  understood,  explain  and  establish  the
reverse  as  clearly  and  plainly  as  we  have  established  the  above.
For  it  is  no  less  agreeable  and  delightful  than  fair  and  just  for
us  to  submit  our  judgment  to  the  Holy  Scriptures,  and  the
Church,  deciding  in  harmony  with  these  by  virtue  of  the  Spirit.
We  could  have  explained  everything  more  amply  and  exhaus-

*Ixion,  king  of  the  Lapithae  in  Thessaly,  who,  according  to  Greek
mythology,  boasted  of  having  been  intimate  with  Juno,  was  hurled  by
Jupiter  into  Tartarus,  where  he  was  bound  to  an  ever  revolving  fiery  wheel.
Tantalus,  who  disclosed  the  secrets  of  the  gods,  was  sent  to  the  infernal
regions,  where  he  was  tormented  with  unquenchable  hunger  and  thirst.


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  59

lively,  but  since  opportunity  is  lacking,  we  are  content  with
these  points,  which  we  consider  such  that,  while  some  one  may
readily  pick  flaws,  which  today  is  so  common  and  easy,  none
will  be  able  to  pick  it  to  pieces.  If  nevertheless  anyone  will
attempt  it,  he  will  not  do  it  unpunished.  Then  we  shall  perhaps
draw  forth  what  ammunition  we  have  in  reserve.  Now  we  have
presented  enough  testimony  for  the  present.

Wherefore,  most  excellent  Emperor,  and  ye  other  princes,
rulers,  nobles,  deputies  and  heads  of  States,  I  beseech  and
implore  you,  by  Jesus  Christ,  our  Lord  and  Brother,  by  His
goodness  and  justice,  by  His  judgment,  which  He  will  pro-
nounce on  all  according  to  their  merits,  whom  no  plan  escapes,
who  brings  to  confusion  the  designs  of  princes  that  counsel  and
rule  wickedly,  who  exalts  the  humble  and  overthrows  the  proud,
in  the  first  place,  not  to  despise  the  lowliness  of  the  petitioner.
For  even  the  foolish  have  often  spoken  opportunely,  and  the
Truth  itself  [Christ]  chose  for  the  proclamation  of  its  message
the  weak  and  men  of  low  estate.  Again,  remember  that  you  also
are  men,  who  yourselves  can  err  and  can  also  be  misled  by
others.  For  every  man  is  a  liar  [Rom.  3:4].  And  unless  he
be  taught  something  else  by  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  than
what  he  himself  knows  and  desires,  nothing  can  be  expected  of
him  than  that  he  be  overthrown  by  his  own  arts  and  plans.  For
the  prophet  Jeremiah  says  only  too  truly :  ''Lo,  they  have  re-
jected the  word  of  Jehovah ;  and  what  manner  of  wisdom  is  in
them?"  [Jer.  8:9].

Moreover,  since  you  are  the  overseers  of  justice,  none  should
know  the  will  of  God  more  thoroughly  than  you.  But  where  else
can  this  be  sought  than  in  His  oracles?  Do  not  shrink  back,
therefore,  from  the  opinions  of  those  who  rely  on  God's  Word.
For  we  see  it  happen  every  day  that  the  more  adversaries  oppose
it,  so  much  the  more  does  the  Word  of  God  shine  forth  and
falsehood  is  banished.  But  if,  as  does  not  escape  me,  there  are
those  with  you  who  zealously  defame  us  as  ignorant  and,  if  pos-
sible also  as  malicious,  consider  in  the  first  place,  whether  we
who  adopt  this  view  of  the  Gospel  and  the  Eucharist,  have  ever
so  conducted  our  lives  that  any  good  man  can  ever  doubt  as  to
whether  we  can  be  regarded  as  good  men?  Furthermore,  have
we  from  infancy  been  so  far  removed  from  culture  and  literature
that  all  hope  of  our  being  learned  must  be  given  up? Certainly


60  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

we  boast  of  neither  of  these,  since  even  Paul  was  what  he  was  by
the  grace  of  God  [I  Cor.  15:10].  But  even  if  a  rather  cheerful
life  has  been  our  lot,  it  has  never  degenerated  into  luxury  and
shamelessness,  nor,  on  the  other  hand,  turned  into  cruelty,
arrogance  or  obstinacy ;  so  that  the  designs  of  our  enemies,  often
confounded  by  the  good  report  of  our  life,  have  been  forced  to
sound  a  retreat.  Our  learning,  although  greater  than  our
enemies  can  bear  or  in  the  face  of  their  consciences  can  despise,
is  notwithstanding  far  less  than  our  followers  think  we  possess.

However,  to  come  to  what  we  are  aiming  at,  we  have  for
many  years  made  such  studies  in  sacred  and  likewise  in  profane
letters,  that  what  we  teach  is  not  done  thoughtlessly.  May  we
also  be  permitted  to  praise  the  grace  and  bountifulness  of  God,
so  liberally  bestowed  upon  our  churches!  Truly,  the  churches
that  hear  the  Lord  God  through  us  have  so  received  the  Word
of  God  that  falsehood  and  dishonesty  are  diminished,  pride  and
luxury  subdued,  and  violence  and  wrangling  have  departed.  If
these  are  not  truly  fruits  of  the  divine  Spirit,  what  are  they
then?  Consider  indeed,  most  excellent  Emperor,  and  all  ye
princes  and  nobles,  what  good  fruit  the  so-called  "human  doc-
trine" has  produced  for  us!  The  masses  that  were  bought  in-
creased the  lust  and  the  impudence  of  both  princes  and  people.
Likewise  they  introduced  and  increased  the  luxury  of  the
pontiffs  and  the  excesses  of  the  ministrants  of  the  mass.  Yea,
what  wicked  deeds  have  they  not  kindled?  For  who  can  dis-
tribute the  wealth  accumulated  through  the  mass,  unless  we  tie
up  the  veins,  so  to  speak,  and  stop  them  flowing?*

May  God,  therefore,  who  is  far  better  than  all  of  you —
whom  we  both  gladly  call  and  believe  to  be  most  excellent  men
— grant  that  you  may  undertake  to  cut  the  roots  of  this  and
all  other  errors  in  the  Church,  and  to  leave  and  desert  Rome  with
her  rubbish  which  she  has  thrust  upon  the  Christian  world,  and
especially*  on  your  Germany.  Moreover,  whatever  force  you
have  exerted  against  the  purity  of  the  Gospel  may  you  direct
against  the  criminal  attempts  of  ungodly  Papists,  that  justice,
which  has  been  banished  by  your  indifference  and  our  inno-
cence, which  has  been  obscured  by  artful  misrepresentations,

*Zwingli  seems  to  compare  the  Catholic  Church  to  a  robber,  who  will
not  release  his  ill  gotten  spoils,  unless  he  is  choked  and  rendered
unconscious.


An  Account  of  the  Faith  of  Zwingli  61

may  again  be  restored  to  us.  There  has  been  enough  cruelty,
unless  it  be  not  savage  and  cruel  to  issue  unjust  commands,  to
condemn,  yea  to  slaughter,  kill,  rob  and  outlaw.  Since  this  way
has  not  been  successful,  we  must  certainly  go  another  way.  If
this  counsel  is  from  the  Lord,  do  not  fight  against  God ;  but  if
from  elsewhere,  it  will  fall  to  the  ground  by  its  own  rashness.
For  this  reason  permit  the  Word  of  God  to  be  freely  disseminated
and  to  sprout,  O  children  of  men,  whoever  ye  be,  who  cannot
forbid  even  a  grain  from  growing.  You  see  that  this  seed  is
abundantly  watered  by  the  rain  from  heaven,  neither  can  it  be
checked  by  any  heat  from  men  so  as  to  become  parched.  Con-
sider not  what  you  most  of  all  desire,  but  what  the  world  requires
in  regard  to  the  Gospel.  Take  this  counsel,  such  as  it  is,  in  good
part,  and  by  your  earnestness  show  that  you  are  children  of  God.
Most  devoted  to  your  Majesty  and  all  believers,

HuLDREicH  Zwingli.
Zurich,  the  3rd  of  July,  1530.


III.


Refutation  of  the  Articles  of  Zwingli,  Presented  to
His  Imperial  Majesty,  by  John  Eck,  Under  the
Patronage  of  the  Most  Reverend  Father  and  Most
Honorable  Prince,  Lord  Erhard,  S.  R.  E.,  Cardinal
Bishop  of  Liege,  July  1530.

(July  17,  1530)

[REPVLSIO  AR-  I  TICVLORVM  ZVVINGLII  |  Caes.  Maiestati  obla-
torum.  I  Johanne  Eckio  authore  |  1530  |  in  Julio  |  Sub  Reuerendissimi
patris  &  amplissimi  prin-  |  cipis  D.  Erhardi  S.R.E.  Cardinalis  ac  |  Leo-
diensis  Episcopi  Patrocinio.  |  (Coat  of  Arms).  No  date,  place  or  printer.
72  unnumbered  quarto  pages,  the  last  of  which  is  blank.  A  copy  of  this
tract  is  in  the  library  of  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York.  The  fol-
lowing English  translation  is  based  on  one  by  Mr.  Henry  Preble,  but  it  was
revised  throughout  by  the  editor.

John  Eck,  more  correctly  Johann  Maier,  was  born  at  Eck  (now  Egg,
near  Memmingen,  south  of  Augsburg)  in  Swabia,  November  13,  1486.
When  twelve  years  of  age  he  began  his  studies  at  Heidelberg  and  continued
them  at  Tuebingen,  Cologne  and  Freiburg.  When  fourteen  years  of  age  he
became  Magister  Artium,  when  nineteen  bachelor  of  theology,  when  twenty-
two  priest  at  Strassburg,  and  in  1510,  when  twenty-four  years,  doctor  and
professor  of  theology  in  the  University  of  Ingolstadt.

Having  studied  under  humanistic  teachers  he  advocated  at  first  liberal
views  in  theology  and  philosophy  and  as  early  as  1517  entered  into  friendly
relations  with  Luther.  But  his  unbounded  ambition  to  be  regarded  as  the
leading  theologian  of  German}'  caused  him  to  become  the  defender  of  the
papacy  and  of  Catholic  doctrine.  In  1519,  he  began  his  fight  against
Luther.  In  1520,  he  visited  Rome  at  the  invitation  of  the  Pope,  when  he
presented  to  him  his  work  on  the  Primacy  of  Peter  against  Luther,  Ingol-
stadt 1520,  for  wliich  he  was  awarded  with  the  appointment  as  papal
prothonotary.  When  on  June  16,  1520,  the  papal  bull,  Exsurge  Domine,
appeared,  in  which  forty-one  propositions  of  Luther  were  condemned,  Eck
was  entrusted  with  its  e.xecution  in  Germany.

At  the  Diet  of  Augsburg,  Eck  took  a  leading  part  as  defender  of  the


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  63

Roman  Catholic  position.  He  extracted  404  articles  from  the  works  of  the
reformers  and  with  seventy  other  theologians  collaborated  in  the  Confutatio
pontificia,  in  which  the  Catholic  refutation  of  Protestantism  was  embodied.

Against  Zwingli  and  his  party,  Eck  first  appeared  at  the  public  dis-
putation at  Baden,  in  Catholic  territory,  twelve  miles  northwest  of  Zurich,
on  May  21 -June  18,  1526.  The  affair  ended  in  favor  of  Eck,  who  induced
the  authorities  to  suppress  the  reformation  at  Baden.  The  dispution  of
Berne,  which  was  conducted  in  the  absence  of  Eck  in  January  1528,  was
won  for  the  reformation.

When  Zwingli's  account  of  his  faith  had  been  submitted  to  the  emperor
in  July  1530,  it  was  turned  over  to  Eck  for  answer.  He  sat  down  at  once
and  within  three  days,  as  he  boasts,  he  produced  what  he  intended  to  be  a
crushing  reply.  It  was  completed  on  July  17,  1530,  dedicated  to  the
Cardinal  of  Liege  and  printed  most  likely  in  the  same  month  at  Augsburg.

Eck  was  more  highly  esteemed  as  the  champion  of  the  true  faith  in
Rome  than  in  Germany,  where  he  had  many  enemies.  He  was  accused  of
drunkenness,  immorality,  imbounded  greed  for  money  and  passionate
desire  for  honor  and  preferment.  When  Rome  did  not  gratify  all  his
ambitions,  he  made  overtures  for  peace  to  the  Protestants,  but  they  failed
through  hatred  and  contempt  by  which  he  was  generally  regarded.

But  through  his  scholarly  attainments,  and  controversial  ability,  he
made  himself  the  most  prominent,  and  also  the  most  violent  opponent  of  the
reformation.  He  died  at  Ingolstadt  on  February  10,  1543.  Numerous  works
in  Latin  and  German  testify  both  to  his  ability  and  to  his  violent  temper.]

To  The

Right  Reverend  Father  in  Christ  and  Most  Estimable  Prince  Loud
Erhard  von  Arnberg,*  S.  R.  E.,  Cardinal  Bishop  of  Liege,  His  JIost
Gracious  Lord,  John  Eck  Sends  Greetings  and  Presents  His  Ready
Allegiance.

The  ancients  tell  us.  Most  Worshipful  Father,  that  the  Greeks  made
offerings  to  the  most  eminent  physician  Hippocrates,  as  to  a  present  divin-
ity, because  his  help  and  labors  drove  away  the  contagious  plague,  and  the
grievous  pestilence  that  was  creeping  in  from  Illyricum.  Hercules  also
merited  divine  honors  because  he  overcame  monsters  dangerous  to  man-
kind. Yet far more estimable will be our august and imperial ruler,

*Erhard  de  la  Marck,  bishop  of  Liege  and  Cardinal,  born  at  Sedan  in  the  year
1472,  was  descended  from  a  very  wealthy  family  in  the  Ardennes.  Elected  as  bishop
of  Liege  in  1506,  he  beautified  the  city  with  a  number  of  magnificent  buildings,  among
them  the  Episcopal  palace.  When  the  efforts  of  Francis  I  of  France  to  secure  for
him  the  cardinal's  hat  miscarried,  through  the  intrigues  of  the  Duchess  of  Angouleme,
Erhard  became  a  violent  enemy  of  France.  It  was  mainly  through  his  efforts  that  the
attempts  of  Francis  to  become  emperor  of  Germany,  after  the  death  of  Maximilian,
failed.  He  supported  the  claims  of  Charles  V,  and  when  he  became  emperor,  the
latter  showed  his  gratitude  by  securing  for  Erhard  the  dignity  of  Cardinal.  The
administration  of  his  diocese  was  marked  by  cruelty  and  fanaticism,  for  he  persecuted
the Protestants  relentlessly. He  died  at Liege, February 16, 1538.


64  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Charles  V,  Roman  Emperor,  and  he  will  win  undying  glory  for  his  name,
if,  following  the  example  of  the  great  Constantine,  he  shall  by  his  power
and  piety  suppress  and  do  away  with  the  destructive  commotions  in  the
Church,  more  serious  and  more  widespread  than  we  have  ever  read  of.
For  this  all  Catholics  are  otTering  up  most  devout  prayers,  that  dissension
and  discord  may  be  done  away,  and  peace,  quiet  and  harmony  return  to
Germany,  especially  in  our  sacred  religion,  for  there  is  small  reason  to
hope  that  God  will  be  gracious  to  us,  since  He  is  the  author  of  peace  not
of  dissension,  unless  returning  to  grace  we  come  into  unity  of  faith,  and
all  think  the  words  of  Paul  applicable  to  us  Germans  also,  "Now  I  beseech
you,  brethren,  by  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  that  you  all  speak
the  same  thing,  and  that  there  be  no  schisms  among  you"  [I  Cor.  1:  10].
For  in  consequence  of  our  sin  so  many  schisms  have  arisen  in  the  faith,  that
a  Christian  cannot  even  think  of  them  without  great  distress.  What  Catholic
would  not  bewail  the  breaking  of  his  vows  by  Luther,  the  destruction  of
the  mass  and  eucharist  by  Zwingli,  the  bringing  back  of  Catabaptism  by
Balthasar  [Huebmaier],  the  casting  away  of  the  Old  and  the  New  Testa-
ments by  Ambrosius  Pneumaticus?  If  God  give  us  not  a  godlike  emperor
as  a  Hercules  for  these  monsters,  an  Hippocrates  for  this  pestilence,  alas  for
poor  torn  Germany!

I  have  refuted  Zwingli's  pamphlet  which  he  had  caused  to  be  presented
to  the  Emperor  as  a  confession  of  his  faith,  and  if  I  seem  pretty  harsh  to
any  one  I  beg  him  by  those  above  not  to  judge  that  I  had  bitter  feelings
towards  the  followers  of  Zwingli,  but  with  a  Christian  heart  and  brotherly
love  most  deeply  grieve  for  them  because  so  many  thousand  souls  are
thereby  brought  to  peril,  I  will  not  say,"  destruction,  and  nothing  is  more
truly  my  desire  than  that  they  may  return  to  the  unity  of  the  faith  and
the  primitive  religion.  Though  I  despair  of  the  chief  heretic,  for  not  in
vain  does  St.  Paul  admonish  us  that  such  a  one,  after  the  first  and  second
admonition,  is  to  be  rejected,  yet  I  trust  in  God  the  Father  of  Mercies  and
in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour  that  many  now  wandering  in  the
bypaths  of  error  will  be  turned  wholeheartedly  to  seek  the  Lord  God  again
and  confess  Him  in  the  great  Church  and  praise  Him  in  the  mighty  people
[Ps.  35:  18].  And  this  refutation  of  mine,  a  labor  of  three  days,  I  wanted
to  dedicate  to  Your  Worship,  Right  Reverend  Father  and  glory  of  the
Court,  not  only  that  I  might  show  my  zeal  and  devotion  to  you,  but
because,  through  the  favor  with  our  high  Emperor  Charles  which  your
faith,  power  and  wisdom  give  you,  you  of  all  primates  are  the  wisest  to
whom  to  commend  a  matter  of  the  faith.  May  you  continue  unceasingly,
as  you  do,  to  appeal  to,  admonish,  exhort,  urge  His  Majesty  to  come  to
the  assistance  of  Germany  in  her  trouble  and  danger.  I  know  how  much
His  Majesty  values  your  counsels  and  regards  you  as  his  Nestor.  May  God
Almighty  long  preserve  Your  Gracious  Worship  in  safety.  Farewell,
Ornament  of  Bishops.
Augsburg,  July 17, 1530.

IN  THY  NAME,  SWEET  JESUS
When  I  read  Zwingli's  confession  of  faith,  most  sacred Emperor, I


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  65

do  not  clearly  know  whether  to  wonder  the  more  at  the  man's  ungodliness
or  his  impudence,  for  he  excels  so  in  both  that  one  cannot  easily  decide
upon  which  he  has  spent  more  labor,  trying  with  marked  viciousness  to
outdo  himself  in  them  more  each  day.  He  has  been  for  ten  years  constantly
at  the  task  of  extinguishing  all  the  piety  of  the  Christian  faith  among  the
Swiss,  of  abolishing  divine  worship,  of  ruining,  destroying,  banishing  beyond
Sarmatia  and  the  Caspian  mountains  all  the  rites,  usages  and  customs  of
Church  ceremonies  and  the  entire  Christian  religion.  First  he  championed
the  errors  of  Luther,  and  spread  them  among  the  people.  Soon,  scorning
Luther,  he  withdrew  from  him  in  numerous  tenets,  and  reintroduced
various  sects,  such  as  a  new  sect  of  Capernaites,  a  sect  of  the  Beren-
garians,  of  the  Pelagians,  and  others.  He  thereby  brought  it  about  among
his  people  of  Zurich  that  they  blotted  out  the  ancient  Christian  religion
and  refused  to  listen  to  the  Right  Reverend  Bishop  of  Constance,  when  he
more  than  once  gave  them  fatherly  admonition,  and,  shaking  off  his
regular  jurisdiction,  did  and  disposed  everything  according  to  their  own
sweet  will  independently  of  right  and  wrong,  and  are  to  this  day  so  doing
and  disposing.

They  have  turned  just  as  deaf  an  ear  to  the  pious  admonitions  of  the
Federated  Cantons,  by  whose  aid,  not  to  say  blood,  they  reached  such  a
high  rank  of  dominion  and  grew  to  such  power,  so  that  they  not  only
disregard  the  other  Swiss,  but  scorn  them,  and  try  to  offer  them  violence
and  to  turn  them  away  by  threats  and  force  from  the  true  Christian  faith.
My  spirit  shudders,  my  heart  shrinks  back,  my  limbs  tremble,  mighty
Emperor,  when  I  would  relate  Zwingli's  impious  acts.  Their  number  over-
whelms me  when  I  try  to  count  them  on  my  fingers.  But  do  you,  while  I
do  this  a  little,  put  yourself  into  the  frame  of  mind  that  you  seem  to  hear
me  recounting  to  Your  Majesty  the  deeds  not  of  a  Christian  but  of  some
Turk,  or  wild  Tartar,  or  savage  Hun,  or  ancient  Nebuchadnezzar,  or  An-
tiochus,  or  Heliodorus.  First  he  altered  many  ceremonies  with  the
apparent  purpose  of  reforming  the  Church;  presently  he  abolished  them
altogether.  He  invited  the  people  to  the  Communion  in  both  forms  con-
trary to  the  ordinance  of  the  Church,  then  immediately  cast  away  both
forms  and  took  away  the  whole  consolation  of  the  sacrament  of  the
Eucharist,  exhibiting  in  his  churches,  instead  of  the  most  sacred  body  and
blood  of  Jesus  our  Saviour,  nothing  but  baker's  bread.  And  when  he  had
brought  the  men  of  his  nation  over  to  this  view  of  denying  the  reality  of
Christ's  body  in  the  sacrament,  there  was  no  sin  too  monstrous,  no  crime
too  impious  and  execrable  for  them  to  be  driven  headlong  into  by  Zwingli.

Therefore,  the  administration  of  all  the  sacraments  except  baptism
has  lapsed ;  all  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  have  been  abolished,  the  canon-
ical hours,  the  offices  of  the  Mass,  both  public  and  private,  have  lapsed
in  all  the  churches,  colleges,  and  monasteries,  and  he  who  first  spent  so
much  toil  in  frequent  changes  of  the  Mass  into  now  one  shape  now  another
has  finally  destroyed  and  abolished  all  masses.  The  invocation  of  the
saints,  the  praises  of  God  by  night  and  day  have  ceased  among  them,  no
honor  is  shown  to  the  Virgin  Mary  and  the  rest  of  the  saints,  the  once  well-
filled  church  of  Maria  Einsiedeln  is  deserted. The  anniversary  foundations


66  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

and  other  divine  offices  have  lapsed,  the  altars  are  destroyed  and  overthrown,
the  images  of  the  saints  and  the  paintings  are  burned  or  broken  up  or
defaced.  All  the  ornaments  of  the  churches  are  taken  away,  especially  the
chalices  and  monstrances  and  all  the  gold  and  silver  and  silk  there  was  in
the  churches.  The  revenues  and  incomes  of  the  churches  and  monasteries
have  been  diverted  to  profane  uses,  all  the  monks  and  nuns,  spurning  their
vows,  have  returned  to  the  world  and  given  themselves  over  to  incontinence.
Hence  the  most  holy  foundations  of  the  pious  dukes  of  Austria,  of  the
counts  of  Haspurg,  Kiburg,  Nellenburg,  Tockenburg,  and  especially  of
Charlemagne,  Your  Majesty's  predecessors,  have  been  utterly  destroyed
and  overthrown,  and  everything  has  been  profaned  and  ruined,  so  that
they  no  longer  have  churches  but  rather  stables,  and  the  monasteries  seem
not  places  in  which  perennial  service  is  offered  to  God,  but  temples  of
Venus  or  Bacchus.

After  all  these  impieties,  sacrileges,  plunderings  and  blasphemous
doings,  after  all  the  errors  he  has  spread  abroad  and  all  the  heresies  he
has  introduced,  he  ventures  to  address  a  confession  of  his  faithlessness  to
the  imperial  head  of  the  world,  ventures  to  put  forth  before  the  most  Chris-
tian Emperor  of  the  Roman  Empire  articles  far  from  Christian.  This  mad
recklessness  of  his  ventures,  after  he  has  dragged  the  men  of  Berne,  Basle
and  Schaflfhausen  over  to  his  view,  after  he  has  infected  with  his  own  errors
the  cities  of  the  Holy  Empire,  Constance,  and  Miilhausen,  and  the  town  of
St.  Gall,  and  has  alienated  them  from  the  faith  of  the  House  of  Austria,
after  he  has  torn  and  defiled  the  noble  commonwealth  of  Strassburg  with
his  errors  under  the  leadership  of  Capito  and  Bucer,  after  he  has  stirred  up
insurrection  in  the  realms  of  His  Serene  Highness,  'the  King  of  Hungary
and  Bohemia  and  Archduke  of  Austria,  has  done  many  wrongs  to  the
nobles,  faithful  to  the  Holy  Empire  and  the  House  of  Austria,  and  robbed
them  of  their  goods,  after  he  has  so  often  and  in  such  mean  fashion
expressed  scorn,  derision,  indifference  for  your  absent  Majesty  and  your
sacred  person,*  this  minister  of  sin,  this  leader  of  ungodliness  and  sacrilege,
this  scorner  of  gods  and  men,  ventures,  I  say,  in  addition  to  all  this,  to
present  to  Your  Majesty  a  pamphlet  of  his  faithlessness,  and  to  give  an
explanation  of  his  heresies,  so  that  not  without  reason  a  vast  wonder  has
taken  possession  of  my  mind  whether  Zwingli  is  more  proficient  in  impiety
or  in  impudence.  A  most  stupid  busybody  surely,  who  thinks  he  can
impose  upon  Your  Sacred  Majesty  with  his  deceits,  and  deceive  your  dis-
tinguished watchfulness  with  his  crafty  wiles.  Although,  therefore,  your
most  wise  Imperial  Majesty  will  easily  understand  the  craftiness  of  the
man,  shudder  at  his  impiety,  and  scorn  his  pride  and  arrogance,  yet,  in
accordance  with  the  allegiance  and  obedient  service  I  owe  and  with  the
Christian  office  I  fill,  I  will  examine  the  faithless  confession  of  the  faith-
destroying  heretic,  and  put  it  to  the  test,  trusting  to  the  righteousness  of
your  most  Christian  mind  as  a  faithful  servant  of  God  and  patron  of  the
Church  to  take  wise  measures  to  suppress  and  exterminate  at  length  this
heresy  that  threatens so  many  souls  with  damnation, and  to  restore to

*There  is,  of  course,  no  proof  whatever  for  all  these  wild  assertions.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  67

Cliristian liberty the Catholics oppressed under the dominion of these
people. But  now  let  Zwingli's  Confession  come  in  for  a  castigation !

In  his  preface  he  admits  that  the  companions  of  his  faithlessness  had
waited  anxiously  for  the  time  when  an  account  of  their  faith  should  be
demanded  of  them.  They  are  anxious,  I  imagine,  because  they  fear  to
"come  to  the  light,  lest  their  deeds  should  be  reproved,"  as  Christ  says,
John,  3[:20].*  They  are  anxious,  lest  they  experience  the  rigor  of
imperial  righteousness  according  to  their  works,  for  they  are  not  ignorant
of  Paul's  words,  "But  if  thou  do  that  which  is  evil,  fear:  for  he  beareth  not
the  sword  in  vain.  For  he  is  God's  minister:  an  avenger  to  execute
wrath  upon  him  that  doeth  evil,"  Rom.  13  [:4].t  They  are  anxious
because,  while  there  was  no  limit  to  their  wrong-doings,  they  thought  they
could  do  anything  they  would  with  impunity  since  Your  Imperial  Highness
was  in  Spain,  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  west,  separated  from  the  Empire
by  so  many  lands,  and  was  distracted  by  so  many  vast  and  diflScult  affairs
that  it  would  never  happen  that  you  would  come  back  to  the  Empire.

But  now  that  God  Almighty,  caring  for  His  holy  Church  and  Empire,
has  caused  you,  beyond  all  human  conjecture  and  though  not  contrary  to
hope,  absolutely  contrary  to  expectation,  so  quickly  to  triumph  most
happily  over  all  obstacles  and  difficulties,  and  has  caused  you  to  be  most
gloriously  crowned  with  the  imperial  diadem,  anointing  and  consecration
having  gone  before;  now  that  He  has  restored  peace  to  the  powers  of
Italy  and  has  brought  Your  Imperial,  Sublime  Highness  back  to  Germany,
the  heretics  are  anxious,  yea,  terrified  at  your  imperial  presence,  because
now  every  avenue  is  closed  to  the  lies  by  which  they  were  imposing  upon  the
simple-minded  people,  saying  that  the  divine  Emperor  Charles  was  not  in
Italy,  and  had  not  been  crowned,  and  that  these  things  were  made  up  by
the  Catholics  to  frighten  the  people.  Therefore  are  the  preachers  of  the
heretics  in  very  truth  anxious,  saying  with  the  wicked  in  Isaiah,  "We
have  conceived,  and  uttered  from  the  heart,  words  of  falsehood.  And
judgment  is  turned  away  backward,  and  justice  hath  stood  afar  off:  for
our  wicked  doings  are  with  us;  and  we  have  known  our  iniquities,  in
sinning  and  lying  against  the  Lord,"  etc.  Isa.  59  [:  12-14].$  Yet  in  the
midst  of  such  anxiety,  they  still  flatter  themselves  that  they  stand  erect
when  they  really  lie  sunk  in  such  deep  pits  and  ditches  of  error  and  heresy,
"Woe  to  you  that  are  deep  of  heart,  to  hide  your  counsel  from  the  Lord:
and  their  works  are  in  the  dark,"  Isa.  29  [:  15].

We  must  believe  Zwingli,  therefore,  in  this  place,  when  he  admits  that
they  are  between  the  devil  and  the  deep  sea,  but  presently  he  returns  to
his  usual  lies,  saying  that  he  and  his  associates  were  spurred  on  by  love
of  the  truth  and  desire  for  peace  to  put  forth  the  pamphlet  of  their  confes-

*As  the  verse  division  was  not  introduced  into  the  Greek  New  Testament  till
ISSl,  and  into  the  Vulgate  till  ISSS,  Eck  quotes  the  Bible  by  chapter  only.  We  add
the  verses  in  square  brackets.

fThe  translations  of  the  Scripture  quotations  are  throughout  this  tract  those
of  the  Douay  Version,  the  authorized  English  version  of  the  Catholic  Church.

Jin  the  King  James  version  the  construction  of  the  beginning  is  different  and
the  order  of  the  parts  different.


68  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

sion,  for  everything  applies  to  them  which  Jeremiah  uttered  about  lying
prophets  in  chapter  23.  How  have  they  dared  to  boast  of  love  of  the  truth
before  our  most  pious  Emperor?  For  it  is  in  their  very  character  that
Isaiah  says,  "We  have  placed  our  hope  in  lies  and  by  falsehood  we  are
protected,"  28  [:  15].  With  equal  falsehood  they  arrogate  to  themselves  a
desire  for  peace,  though  they  seem  to  have  been  born  to  overthrow  the  peace
and  quiet  of  the  commonwealth  and  country,  and  are  verily  men  seditious
and  sanguinary,  as  Zwingli  and  his  crowd  showed  in  the  uprisings  at
Ittingen,*  at  Rothweilf  and  elsewhere.  And  the  desire  for  peace  shone
forth  most  brightly  when,  on  account  of  the  burning  of  one  Lutheran  priest
at  Schwyz,t  he  called  the  men  of  Zurich,  Berne  and  Thurgau  to  arms
against  the  five  ancient  Cantons  of  the  Swiss  who  were  most  firm  in  the
Catholic  faith,  and  marched  out  into  the  field  not  far  from  the  town  of
Rapperswyl,  where  much  human  blood  would  have  been  shed  if  Zwingli's
followers  had  listened  to  him,  as  this  herald  of  the  Gospel  strenuously
urged  them  to  join  battle.**  Most  applicable  to  him  and  his  associates  are
the  words  of  Jeremiah,  "They  healed  the  breach  of  the  daughter  of  my
people  disgracefully,  saying:  Peace,  peace:  when  there  is  no  peace,"
8  [:  11].  For  Zwingli  is  of  the  number  of  those  of  whom  David  says,
"Who  speak  peace  with  their  neighbor,  but  evils  are  in  their  heart,"
Ps.  27  [:  3].tt

As  to  Zwingli's  putting  forth  the  pamphlet  of  his  confession  very
hastily,  he  had  first  assigned  as  the  reason  of  its  appearance  a  love  of  the
truth  and  a  desire  for  peace,  but  presently,  forgetting  this  (for  liars  are
apt  to  be  forgetful)  he  gives  a  different  reason,  and  Your  Sacred  ^Majesty
will  easily  understand  that  he  v.^as  rather  goaded  by  the  sting  of  envy  and
stirred  by  contentiousness.  Being  filled  with  undying  hatred  against
Luther  and  attacking  him  with  many  insulting  words,  for  the  peace
patched  up  at  Marburg  was  a  flimsy  affair,  when  he  saw  that  illustrious
princes  and  wise  councillors,  accepting  the  doctrine  of  Luther,  had  presented
to  Your  Majesty  and  the  princes  of  the  Empire  the  articles  of  their  faith,
in  which  the  ungodly  Capernaitic  dogmas  of  Zwingli  and  Oecolampadius  are
frequently  condemned  and  repudiated,  he  plunged  into  this  fray  also,  and
through  an  unknown  messenger, tj  as  I  hear,  got  the  pamphlet  of  his  con-
fession into  Your  Majesty's  hands  by  stealth.  Thus  relying  upon  the
truth  of  the  Gospel,  this  new  preacher  and  bishop  of  Zurich  did  not  dare
to  present  this  document  openly  and  publicly  to  your  Imperial  Majesty,

*This  uprising  arose  because  the  prefect  of  Thurgau  had  seized  by  night  at
Burg,  near  Stein  on  the  Rhine,  a  Reformed  preacher  named  Oechsli  and  carried  him
off  to  Frauenfeld. See  Zwingli's IVerke, Vol. Ill, 1914,  pp. 511-538.

tThe  Catholics  had  driven  the  reformers  from  the  country  and  these  sought
refuge  at  Zurich  and  other  places.

tjacob  Schlosser,  who  had  the  cognomen  Caesar.

**This  refers  to  the  First  Cappel  War,  1529-30,  see  Jackson,  Huldreich  Zwingli,
pp. 299-306.

ttSo  in  the  Vulgate,  but  28:3,  according  to  Hebrew  text  and  the  Authorized
Version;  because  in  the  Septuagint  and  Vulgate,  Ps.  9  and  10  are  counted  as  one  Psalm.

JJZwingli's  Confession  was  presented  to  the  Emperor  through  the  Bishop  De-
signate of  Constance. See  Jackson,  Huldreich  Zwingli,  332.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  69

either  by  his  own  hand  or  by  that  of  any  respectable  man  acting  for  him.
But  how  reverently  Zwingli  looks  up  to  this  imperial  head  of  the
whole  world,  the  tenor  of  his  preface  reveals  clearly  enough,  for  he  seems  to
be  offering  a  pamphlet  of  confession  of  his  humility,  obedience  and  subjection
to  the  Emperor,  as  well  as  of  his  faith,  and  to  recognize  him  as  Roman
Emperor,  but  if  we  examine  its  words  more  thoroughly  we  find
nothing  in  it  but  a  sort  of  arrogance  and  empty  conceit  and  vain  boast-
fulness,  for  the  judgment  of  all  his  writings  he  submits  not  to  any  one
man  nor  to  any  few  men,  but  to  the  whole  Church,  and  even  this  he  does
not  grant  unconditionally,  as  they  say,  but  is  willing  to  listen  to  the
judgment  of  the  Church  only  in  so  far  as  she  judges  in  accordance  with  the
precepts  of  the  Word  of  God  and  the  Spirit.  Lo,  the  fierce  Philistine,  the
great  and  savage  giant,  who  bows  not  to  the  judgment  of  the  Emperor
alone  nor  to  that  of  a  few  assembled  in  holy  synod  nor  even  to  that  of  the
whole  Church,  if  God  should  cause  all  Christians  to  come  together  some
time!  He  demands  the  inspiration  of  the  Spirit  in  her,  as  if  it  could  ever
happen  that  Christ  should  desert  His  Church  to  which  He  has  promised
that  He  will  be  with  her  alway  even  to  the  end  of  the  world,  Matth.  28
[:  20],  as  if  one  did  not  have  to  stand  by  the  decision  and  judgment  of  the
priest,  as  even  the  old  law  proclaims,  Deut.  17  [:  12],  as  if  the  power  of
the  Church,  in  which  even  St.  Paul  boasts,  I  Cor.  10*  and  testifies  more
than  once  that  it  has  been  given  to  him,  did  not  exist,  as  if  for  the  sake
of  one  or  another  rash  assailant  of  the  faith  the  whole  Church  must  be
assembled,  whose  judgment  one  could  still  evade  when  so  impelled  by
frivolous  suspicions  at  his  own  sweet  will,  and  thus  in  Zwingli's  judgment
the  saying  of  Paul  would  fall  to  the  ground,  "The  Church  of  the  living  God,
the  pillar  and  ground  of  the  truth,"  I  Tim.  3  [:15].  Let  none,  therefore,
of  discreet  judgment  take  it  hard  that  this  faith-destroying  leader  of
heretics  is  not  willing  to  defer  to  the  most  Sacred  Emperor,  since  he  even
scorns  and  rejects  the  judgment  of  the  Church  Universal.  And  this  mighty
Ninifod  writes  to  the  Swiss  that  he  will  triumph  over  all  the  doctors  of
the  whole  world  (Ad  Helvetios,  An.  1526),t  and  in  his  book  on  baptism  he
declares  that  it  is  certain  that  his  opinion  will  prevail  and  endure  even  if
the  Avhole  world  oppose  him  (Folio  26).$  How  much  better  Zwingli  would
have  done  if  he  had  listened  to  the  advice  of  the  sage  when  he  says,  "Extol
not  thyself  in  the  thoughts  of  thy  soul  like  a  bull;  lest  thy  strength  be
quashed  by  folly,  and  it  eat  up  thy  leaves,  and  destroy  thy  fruit,  and  thou  be
left  as  a  dry  tree  in  the  wilderness,"  Ecclesiasticus  6  [:  2-3].**

*I  Cor.  10  should  be  II  Cor. 10:  8.

tin  his  letter  to  the  twelve  confederated  cities  of  Switzerland.  Zwingli  declared,
that  if  they  would  hold  a  conference  at  Zurich,  Berne  or  St.  Gall,  he  was  willing  to
meet  not  only  Eck  and  Faber,  but  all  the  doctors  who  opposed  the  Word  of  God.  See
"Ein  freundliche  Geschrift  an  gemein  Eidgenossen,"  ed.  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  Vol.
II,  pt.  2,  p.  428.

tin  his  work  on  Baptism  (e9.  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  Vol.  II,  pt.  I.  p.  258).
Zwingli  actually  wrote:  "In  short,  it  is  certain,  though  the  whole  world  should  under-
take to  fight  against  me,  that  no  outward  element  or  application can purify the soul."

**Thus  in  Vulgate;  somewhat  differently  in  Greek  and  hence  also  in  the  so-called
"Variorum Apocrypha." printed at Oxford.


70  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

But  let  us  examine  Zwingli's  Confession.
ARTICLE  I.

In  the  beginning  Zwingli  wishes  to  seem  a  Christian,  though  he  is
very  far  removed  from  Christianity,  for  he  adopts  a  profession  of  faith  in
general  after  the  pattern  of  both  the  Nicene  and  the  Athanasian  Creed.
Now  this  confession  of  the  holy  Council  of  Nice  the  whole  Orthodox  Church
Universal  adopted  twelve  hundred  and  six  years  ago  and  has  held  to  firmly,
so  that  there  was  no  need  of  Zwingli's  taking  up  the  time  of  His  Imperial
Majesty,  already  overwhelmed  with  other  most  serious  matters,  by  re-
hearsing this  confession  as  if  it  were  new.  But  there  are  many  things  in
this  article  which,  though  true  and  undoubted  among  us  Catholics,  yet  are
wondrously  at  variance  with  Zwingli's  dogmas.  For  what  does  he  mean
by  using  the  Nicene  and  Athanasian  Councils  to  support  the  first  and
chief  article  of  his  Confession,  when  he  is  otherwise  so  hostile  to  the
Councils  and  the  Fathers  that  whatever  is  determined  by  them  he  regards
as  human  traditions,  as  inventions  of  man?  Likewise,  why  does  he  admit
three  persons  in  the  Godhead  when  this  word  "person"  in  this  meaning
is  not  found  in  the  sacred  Scriptures,  and  it  is  a  principle  of  Zwingli  that
nothing  must  be  accepted  in  the  faith  which  is  not  asserted  in  clear  and
plain  passages  of  Scripture?  This  principle  was  also  used  by  the  men  of
Berne*  in  their  disputation  in  January  of  the  year  1528,  held  in  spite  of  the
prohibition  of  the  Imperial  Government. f

Furthermore,  when  he  says  the  Son  put  on  humanity,  he  finds  this
nowhere  in  the  sacred  writings,!  nor  is  the  humanity  of  Christ  man.
That  was  the  pernicious  error  of  the  heretic  Nestorius.  Zwingli  is  right
when  he  admits  that  Mary  is  perpetually  a  virgin,  but  he  has  this,  con-
trary to  his  own  principle,  solely  from  the  tradition  of  the  Church,  as
also  Bucer  of  Strassburg  admitted  at  Berne  (Folio  27),  and  it  will  not
serve  as  a  proof  for  Zwingli  that  he  somewhere  quotes  Isaiah,  "Behold,  a
virgin  shall  conceive,  and  bear  a  son,"  7  [:  14]  for  by  these  words  of  the
Prophet  the  virginal  birth  is  indeed  proved,  which  also  the  heretic  Helvidius
believed,  but  that  she  remained  virgin  after  the  birth  of  her  son  we  learn
from  the  authority  of  the  Church.  In  like  manner  Zwingli  truly  admits
(Damasce,  fol.  119)**  the  indissoluble  union  of  natures  in  Christ,  contrary
to  his  own  principle,  for  he  cannot  prove  by  the  sacred  Scriptures  that
Christ  did  not  lay  down  what  He  had  once  taken  up. So  he  does  well

*HalIer  said  at  Berne  (see  Zwingli's  Werke,  Schuler  and  Schulthess  edition,
II,  1,  p.  109):  "The  Church  of  Christ  has  never  accepted  anything  which  is  not
founded  upon  the  Word  of  God;  the  Church  which  is  not  of  Christ,  has  accepted
much that is outside of the Word of God."

tThis  was  the  Disputation  at  Berne,  January  5-26, 1528.

JBut  see  Phil.  2:  7-8.

**The  marginal  references  of  Eck  are  given  in  the  body  of  the  text,  to  distinguish
them  from  the  notes  of  the  editor  at  the  foot  of  the  page.  Some  of  the  marginal
references  are  obscure  and  enigmatical.  We  reproduce  them  verbatim,  without
attempting  to  explain  all  of  them.  In  the  above  quotation,  Eck  seems  to  have  refer-
ence to  John  of  Damascus,  who  in  his  "Exposition  of  the  Orthodox  Faith,"  Bk.  III.
chaps.  Z-7,  discusses  the  union  of  the  two  natures  of  Christ.  See  Schaff,  Nicene  and
Post-Nicene  Fathers, 2nd Series, Vol. IX, pp. 46-52.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  71

contrary  to  his  own  principle  in  not  confusing  the  natures  in  Christ,  yet
in  the  disputation  of  Berne  they  admitted  the  mixture  of  the  natures  with
the  heretic  Eutyches.  But  it  is  an  innovation  on  Zwingli's  part,  contrary
to  all  Scripture,  contrary  to  the  Fathers,  and  contrary  to  the  usage  of
the  Church,  when  he  says  "ingenium"  instead  of  "idioma,  individual
quality"  or  "genuina  natura  seu  proprietate,  inherent  nature  or  char-
acteristic." For  he  says,  "Christ  in  virtue  of  the  'native  bent'  of  His
human  nature,  cried  as  a  babe  and  grew."

But  Zwingli  consents  to  explicit  heresy  when  he  says  here  of  our  Lord
Jesus  Christ  that  He  increased  in  wisdom,  for  which  he  has  given  elsewhere
(Berne,  Folio  125)  as  the  reason  that  Christ  is  subject  to  limitation  and
measure  in  His  human  nature.  But  this  is  the  heresy  of  Nestorius  that
arose  from  a  misunderstanding  of  Luke's  words,  "And  Jesus  advanced  in
wisdom  and  age,"  2  [:  52].  But  the  Church  has  learned  from  St.  John,
who  with  John  the  Baptist,  recognized  that  Christ  is  full  of  grace  and
truth,  John  1  [:  17],  and  that  to  Him  was  given  the  spirit  not  by  measure,
John  3  [:  34].  St.  Paul  testifies  that  in  Christ  "are  hid  all  the  treasures
of  wisdom  and  knowledge,"  Col.  2  [:  3].  Therefore  Isaiah  foresaw  in  the
spirit  how  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  understanding  should  rest  upon  Him,
Isa.  11  [:  2].  Hence  this  part  of  the  Confession  is  to  be  absolutely  rejected,
since  the  whole  Church  admits  that  Christ  even  according  to  His  human
nature  is  omniscient.  Therefore,  as  far  as  this  part  is  concerned,  Zwingli
wrongly  attributes  to  the  orthodox  a  view  with  which  they  are  altogether
at  variance.

ARTICLE  II.

In  the  second  section  Zwingli  confesses  the  providence  of  God,  since  it
determines  freely  about  all  things  and  His  designs  wait  not  on  the  exigencies
of  created  things.  Then  he  takes  off  the  point  of  this  by  adding,  Thus  free
will  falls  to  the  ground.  But  although  all  of  us  orthodox  attribute  to  God
providence  over  all  things— "for  so  much  then  as  thou  art  just,  thou
orderest  all  things  justly,"  as  the  Sage  says,  Wisdom  12  [:  15] — ^yet  to
deny  free  will  on  that  account  is  the  heresy  of  Manichaeus,  or  to  say  that
all  things  take  place  according  to  absolute  necessity  is  the  heresy  of
Wycliffe,  condemned  at  the  Council  of  Constance.  For  the  Sage  testifies
to  both  the  providence  of  God  and  free  will  at  once:  "God  of  my  fathers,
.  .  .  who  hast  made  all  things  with  Thy  word,  and  by  Thy  wisdom  hast
appointed  man,  that  he  should  have  dominion  over  the  creature  that  was
made  by  Thee,  that  he  should  order  the  world  according  to  .  .  .  justice,
and  with  an  upright  heart,"  etc. Wisdom  9  [: 1-3].

Only  how  could  he  order,  how  show  uprighteousness  of  heart,  if  he  had
no  free  will,  as  this  new  Manichaeus  declares?  And  since  Zwingli  himself
does  so  many  things  according  to  his  own  depraved  free  will,  one  must
assuredly  wonder  why  he  so  shamelessly  denies  free  will,  since  to  him  and
to  Oecolampadius  are  most  truly  applicable  the  words  of  Isaiah,  "Thou
hast  done  evil  things,  because  thou  has  been  able,"  Isaiah  56.*  Verily
*The  reference  ought  to  have  been  to  Jer.  3:  S.


72  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Zwingli  is  a  blockhead,  a  dolt,  a  dunce,  who  denies  free  will.  Let  him  hear
even  God  saying  by  the  mouth  of  Isaiah,  "If  you  be  willing,  and  will
hearken  to  me,  you  shall  eat  the  good  things  of  the  land.  But  if  you  will
not,  and  will  provoke  me  to  wrath,  the  sword  shall  devour  you,"  Isa.
1  [:  19-20].*  And  lest  our  opponent  grumble,  I  will  quote  even  Christ's
words  against  him,  "Jerusalem,  .  .  .  how  often  would  I  have  gathered
together  thy  children,  as  the  hen  doth  gather  her  chickens  under  her  wings,
and  thou  wouldest  not,"  Matth.  33  [:37].t  Do  you  hear,  Manicliaeus,
when  God  would  gather  them,  men  would  not?  And  how  are  all  of  us
Christians  to  take  the  statement  with  composure  that  thus  free  will  falls
to  the  ground  when  we  are  sure  from  the  words  of  St.  Paul,  who  framed  his
course  firmly  in  his  own  heart,  not  being  bound  but  having  power  to
follow  his  own  will,  Rom.  7.$  Granting,  therefore,  divine  providence  which
all  of  us  Christians  frankly  confess,  it  was  not  on  that  account  necessary  to
reject  and  deny  free  will  with  the  heretic  Manichaeus  and  the  stupid
philosophers  Empedocles,  Critolaus,  Diodorus  and  the  rest,  who  were
hissed  and  driven  out  even  by  the  heathen.

Nor  is  Zwingli  free  from  guilt  when  he  charges  the  fathers  of  the  Old
Testament  with  the  most  serious  sins,  that  they  saw  themselves  damned  in
their  own  judgment,  that  they  cast  off  all  hope  of  attaining  felicity,  and
that  they  went  in  despair  from  the  sight  of  God  because  their  only  thought
was  that  they  were  going  to  suffer  the  pain  of  everlasting  torture,  when
really  the  fathers  of  the  Old  Testament  relied  on  the  greatest  of  hopes
and  awaited  with  incomparable  faith  the  mediator  between  God  and  man.
In  this  faith  St.  Paul  says,  the  elders  had  witness  borne  to  them  [Hebr.
11:  2].  St.  Paul  brings  forward  Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  Sara:  "All
these  died  according  to  faith,  not  having  received  the  promises,  but  behold-
ing them  afar  off,  and  saluting  them,  and  confessing  that  they  are  pil-
grims and  strangers  on  the  earth.  For  they  that  say  these  things,  do
signify  that  they  seek  a  country."  Hebr.  11  [:  13-14].  He  bears  witness
of  Moses  that  "he  looked  unto  the  reward,"  and  having  enumerated  several
fathers  St.  Paul  sums  up  with  the  words,  "by  faith  conquered  kingdoms,
wrought  justice,  obtained  promises,"  [11:  33].  Since,  therefore,  the  chosen
vessel  attributes  so  much  faith  and  such  good  works  to  the  fathers,  who  is
going  to  believe  Zwingli  when  he  attributes  to  them  a  sort  of  despair  and
other  execrable  sins?  The  assertions  of  Zwingli  in  the  rest  of  this  article
are  rather  obscure  and  put  in  very  general  terms,  and  I  will  therefore
postpone  routing  their  mists  imtil  the  cataracts  of  his  errors  shall  be
let  loose.

ARTICLE  III.

Zwingli  here  brings  forward  Christ  as  the  one  and  only  victim  for  our
sins,  and  reasons  cunningly  from  this  that  there  is  no  justification  by
works,  no  atonement.  Though  it  does  not  escape  me  what  impieties  and
heaps  of  errors  Zwingli founds  upon  this  article, yet,  since  they  are  all

*This  is  the  reading  of  the  Vulgate. The  King  James  Version  differs  somewhat.

fA  misprint  for  23.

{Where  did  Paul  make  such  a  statement  in  Romans,  chap.  7  ?


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  73

wrongly  deduced,  I  want,  for  the  present,  only  to  defend  that  which  Zwingli
repudiates  here,  for  as  to  the  justification  by  works,  that  not  only  takes
nothing  from  the  excellence  of  the  victim,  that  is  Christ,  but  makes  it
especially  necessary,  and  since  I  have  brought  forward  elsewhere  much  to
support  this,  let  it  suffice  now  to  quote  the  testimony  of  St.  Peter  when  he
says,  "Wherefore,  brethren,  labor  the  more  that  by  good  works  you  may
make  sure  of  your  calling  and  election"  II  Pet.  1  [:  10].*  So  also  I  have
proved  atonement  from  the  Scriptures,  for  that  holy  soul  John  in  the
Apocalypse  says  to  the  Church  at  Ephesus,  "Be  mindful  therefore  from
whence  thou  art  fallen,  and  do  penance,  and  do  the  first  works,"  Rev.
2  [:  5].  John  does  not  say,  "There  is  one  victim  for  expiating  sin,  namely
Christ,  and  there  is  no  need  of  making  atonement,"  but  he  bids  us  repent
and  do  works.

So  also  St.  Paul  well  knew  how  grateful  and  accepta\)le  the  oflfering  of
Christ  was,  yet  he  does  not  fail  to  note  that  justification  by  works  is  neces-
sary, saying  of  the  coming  of  our  Saviour,  "who  gave  himself  for  us,  that
he  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  might  cleanse  to  himself  a
people  acceptable,  a  pursuer  of  good  works,"  Titus  2  [:  14].  Christ  did
not,  therefore,  wish  to  make  us  idle  by  His  holy  offering,  but,  as  St.  John
the  Baptist  preached,  he  wishes  us  to  "bring  forth  fruits  worthy  of
repentance,"  Matth.  3  [:  8].  This  it  seems  to  me  David  indicated  beauti-
fully in  the  Psalms,  especially  when  he  said,  "Blessed  are  they  whose
transgressions  are  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered,"  Ps.  31  [:  l],t
signifying  that  it  is  not  enough  that  sins  be  forgiven.  They  must  also  be
covered  by  atonement.  For  thus  St.  Ambrose  skilfully  explains  this
passage.  Zwingli  is  too  near  the  Novatian  heretics  who  deny  the  value  of
repentance,  for  he  rejects  atonement  which  is  no  mean  part  of  it.  Hence
the  complaint  fits  him  which  St.  Cyprian  addressed  to  Pope  Cornelius  in
the  matter  of  the  Novatians: — "They  labor  to  prevent  divine  clemency
from  healing  the  wounded  in  His  Church,  they  corrupt  the  repentance  of
the  wretched  men  by  the  deceitfulness  of  their  lies,  that  it  may  not  satisfy
an  offended  God,  that  one  who  has  been  ashamed  or  afraid  to  be  a  Christian
may  not  afterwards  seek  Christ  his  Lord,  nor  he  that  had  withdrawn  from
the  Church  return  to  her.  They  put  forth  efforts  that  sins  may  not  be
atoned  for  with  just  satisfaction  and  lamentations,  that  the  wounds  may  not
be  washed  away  with  tears."  (Book  I,  Epist.).$  I  might  bring  forward
other  most  certain  proofs  had  I  not  determined  carefully  to  shun  and  avoid
overdoing  things.  I  have  treated  briefly  of  this  testimony  in  another
answer,  and  if  by  the  one  mediator  Zwingli  meant  to  repudiate  the
invocation  of  the  saints,  I  have  refuted  his  view  in  the  same  answer.

ARTICLE  IV.

Zwingli  brings  out  his  view  on  original  sin  in  such  uncertain  words

•The  best  Greek  Mss. omit  the  words  "good works."

fPsalm  32:  1 in  the  Authorized  Version.

tMigne,  Patrologia  Latina,  Vol.  Ill,  839/;  12th  epistle,  §13.  See  also
Cypriani  Opera,  Oxford  edition.  Letter  LIX.  §13;  Vol.  I,  839;  Ante-Nicene  Christian
Library,  Edinburgh. 1868,  VIII, 171.


74  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

that  in  one  breath  he  asserts  it,  in  the  next  denies  it.  In  his  little  book  on
baptism*  he  altogether  denied  that  the  original  blemish  was  a  sin,  it  was
just  a  natural  defect  like  stammering.  Here  he  both  admits  and  denies
original  sin.  But  before  we  examine  this  article,  the  Catholic  doctrine
must  be  set  forth,  namely  that  all  the  descendants  of  Adam  contracted
original  sin  except  those  who  by  special  privilege  were  preserved  guiltless,
for  to  say  the  contrary  was  the  heresy  of  the  Pelagians,  condemned  first
in  the  Council  of  Mileve,t  afterwards  in  the  Roman  Council.  The  Holy
Scriptures  also  plainly  prove  this.  David  cries  out,  "Behold,  I  was  con-
ceived in  iniquities;  and  in  sins  did  my  mother  conceive  me,"  Psalm
50  [:  7].$  Paul,  the  apostle,  cries  out,  "we  were  by  nature  the  children
of  wrath,  even  as  others,"  Eph.  2  [:  3].  He  also  writes  to  the  Romans,
"For  all  have  sinned,  and  do  need  the  glory  of  God,"  Rom.  3  [:  23],  and
again,  "As  by  one  man  sin  entered  into  this  world,  and  by  sin  death;  and
so  death  passed  upon  all  men,  in  whom  all  have  sinned,"  Rom.  5  [:  12],  and
below,  "As  by  the  disobedience  of  one  man  many  were  made  sinners,"  etc.,
Rom.  5[:  19].  This  heresy  was  destroyed  by  those  two  hammerers  of
heretics,  St.  Augustine  and  St.  Jerome.  Let  us  now  hear  how  Zwingli
raves.  "Sin,"  he  says,  "properly  taken,  is  guilt,  a  crime,  offense,  or  wrong-
doing," and  in  this  way  he  denies  that  original  sin  is  sin,  and  straightway
forgetting  himself  he  admits  that  we  are  born  into  slavery,  as  sons  of
wrath,  and  subject  to  death.  But  now  I  challenge  Zwingli  and  all  Zwing-
lians  to  say  whether  to  be  subject  to  wrath  and  death  does  not  mean
wrong-doing,  and  since  they  will  not  venture  to  deny  this  if  they  have
any  brains,  it  follows  that  original  sin  is  properly  speaking  sin,  which
Zwingli  distinctly  repudiated  in  the  beginning.

Moreover,  what  he  adds  about  the  necessity  of  death  being  original  sin
is  wide  of  the  truth.  Otherwise,  since  in  the  case  of  the  baptized  the
necessity  of  death  remains,  original  sin  would  also  remain,  but  to  say
that  would  be  to  invalidate  the  truth  of  the  faith  and  the  efficacy  of  the
sacraments,  as  Luther  does,  for  St.  Peter  declares  that  we  have  been
"regenerated  unto  a  lively  hope,  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  unto
an  inheritance  incorruptible,"  I  Pet.  1  [:  3-4],  whence  St.  Paul  calls  baptism
the  washing  of  regeneration  and  renovation  of  the  Holy  Spirit.**  Therefore
Zwingli  belabors  St.  Paul,  twisting  his  above  quoted  utterances,  as  is
plainly  evident  from  Augustine,  "On  the  Merits  and  Remission  of  Sin."tt
Hence  Zwingli's  view  is  impious,  that  we  die  in  consequence  of  another's
guilt  but  through  our  own  condition,  nor  will  he  get  any  support  from  the
Theologians  (Li.  2.  def.  32),$$  who  hold  that  original  sin  is  the  habitual  sin
of  Adam,  for  they  are  far  from  explaining  it  as  Zwingli  does,  as  can  be
easily  seen  in  the  Theological  Commentaries, (in  the  articles  at  the  end).

•See  ed. Schuler  and Schulthess,  II, 1, p.  287/.

tThe  Synod  of  Mileve,  Numidia,  was  held  in  416  A.  D.

JPs. SO:  7 in  Vulgate,  but  51:  S in  King  James  Version.

**Titus 3:  5.

ttSee  Migne,  1.  c.  XLIV,  110199;  SchaflE,  Nicene  Fathers,  1st  Series,  V,  15-78.

tJEck  has  here  reference  to  Peter  Lombard's  Sentences,  Bk.  II,  Dist.  32,  in
which  the  Master  of  the  Sentences  discusses  the  question  of  original  sin  and  how  it
is removed through baptism.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  75

Let  us,  therefore,  admit  that  children  have  not  only  the  penalty  of  sin  but
also  its  guilt.

But  one  point  Zwingli  passes  over  in  silence,  namely,  what  he  heralded
forth  so  loudly  at  Zurich,  that  the  young  children  of  Christians  are  saved
without  baptism.*  Thus,  contrary  to  Christ's  decree,  one  not  "born  of
water  and  of  the  Spirit,"  John  3  [:  5],  could  enter  into  the  kingdom  of
heaven.  He  should  have  added  where  in  the  sacred  writings  he  found  his
distinction  between  the  young  children  of  Christians  and  those  of  infidels.
Finally  let  him  show  how  he  is  in  harmony  with  the  Church  of  Strassburg,
where  Bucer  writes  that  original  sin  is  a  stain  upon  mankind,  such  that
unless  it  be  cleansed  by  the  blood  of  Christ  one  cannot  attain  salvation.
For  how  can  he  be  saved  whom  deadly  disease  holds  in  its  grasp?  Thus
shall  the  kingdom  divided  against  itself  be  made  desolate,  Matth.  12  [:  25].
All  the  points  he  makes  therefore  in  his  fifth  article  fall  to  the  ground.  In
it  he  not  only  openly  champions  the  Pelagian  heresy,  but  draws  the
unwarranted  inference  from  the  Apostle's  words  that  young  children  of
the  class  that  die  without  baptism  are  saved,  because  St.  Paul  writes,  "As
in  Adam  all  die,  so  also  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made  alive,"  I  Cor.  15  [:  22],
by  which  he  means  that  even  young  children  are  restored  to  life  in  Christ.
But  here  it  becomes  clear  to  everybody  in  what  spirit  Zwingli  handles  the
sacred  Scriptures,  nay  distorts  and  mangles  them,  for  while  St.  Paul  is
speaking  in  this  passage  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead  after  the  manner
of  Christ,  this  perverter  of  the  sacred  writings  has  the  effrontery  to  twist
it  into  meaning  the  resurrection  from  sin  through  grace.  But  if  he  wanted
to  do  this  at  all,  why  did  he  not  make  a  statement  about  the  young  children
of  infidels,  since  St.  Paul  puts  their  case  and  life  on  the  same  footing —
"as  in  Adam  all  die."  This  certainly  is  proclaimed  to  unbelievers  also.
Why,  then,  does  only  what  follows,  "so  also  in  Christ  shall  all  be  made
alive,"  not  apply  to  the  same  individuals  ?  With  the  like  lack  of  knowledge
he  argues  from  the  children  of  the  Jews.  For  I  want  the  Scripture  passage
for  his  assumption  that  the  uncircumcised  infants  of  the  Jews  belonged  to
the  Church  of  God,  since  according  to  the  view  of  Augustine  as  it  was  said
of  the  Church — "Unless  a  man  be  born  again,"  etc.,  John  3  [:  3], — so  also
to  the  ancients  it  was  said,  "The  male,  whose  flesh  of  his  foreskin  shall
not  be  circumcised,  that  soul  shall  be  destroyed  out  of  his  people;  because
he  hath  broken  my  covenant,"  Gen.  17  [:  14].  This  pamphlet  of  confession
is  therefore  to  be  rejected,  being,  as  it  is,  so  often  at  variance  with  the
Church,  with  the  Catholic  faith  and  with  the  sacred  Scriptures.  I  might
also  reproach  him  with  contradicting  wholly  Luther  and  the  Lutherans
who  declare  that  original  sin  is  properly  speaking  sin.

ARTICLE  VI.

Zwingli  tries  to  explain  here  what  the  Church  is,  but  after  the  manner
of  Anaxagoras  confuses  the  whole  thing  and  makes  it  more  involved.  And
not  this  only.  He  mixes  in  errors  and  heresies  all  through  it,  for  his
articles  are  strewn  with  flowers  and  gems  of  the  kind. Let  us  run  through

*Zwingli  discusses  this  point  in  his  tract  "On  Original  Sin,"  see  above  p. 18f.


76  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

them  cursorily  and  mark  with  a  dagger  the  things  not  to  be  believed.

In  the  first  place,  I  wonder  that  he  says  "Church"  is  used  in  different
senses  in  the  Scriptures,  since  otherwise  he  scorns  and  jeers  at  the  dis-
tinctions of  the  theologians.  But  let  us  see  how  he  classifies  the  varieties.
First  he  says  "Church"  is  used  for  those  elect  who  have  been  destined  by
the  will  of  God  to  eternal  life,  the  Church  of  which  Paul  speaks  when  he
says  it  has  neither  spot  nor  wrinkle,  Eph.  5  [:  27].  In  this  statement  there
are  about  as  many  errors  as  there  are  words.  For  it  is  a  damnable  error
that  the  Church  consists  only  of  the  predestined,*  an  error  condemned  in
both  the  Roman  Council  and  the  Council  of  Constance,  and  I  have  refuted
it  elsewhere,  nor  can  he  ever  prove  his  assertion  from  the  sacred  writings,
as  I  shall  show  presently  by  laying  bare  the  perversion  by  which  he  has
distorted  St.  Paul's  words.  I  admit,  therefore,  that  to  the  perfect  Church
belong  by  number  and  right  the  righteous  only,  for  the  Sage  says,  "The
sons  of  wisdom  are  the  church  of  the  just  :  and  their  generation,  obedience
and  love,"  Ecclesiasticus  3  [:  l].t

Secondly,  he  did  not  quote  St.  Paul  appropriately  whom  he  mangled
so  badly.  For  St.  Paul  says,  "Christ  loved  the  Church,  and  delivered  him-
self up  for  it,  that  he  might  sanctify  it,  cleansing  it  by  the  laver  of  water  in
the  word  of  life,  that  he  might  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  church,
not  having  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any  such  thing;  but  that  it  might  be  holy
and  without  blemish,"  Eph.  5  [:  25-27].  If  one  pays  attention,  he  notices
that  Paul  does  not  declare  that  the  Church  is  without  wrinkle  or  spot.
But  he  teaches  at  least  for  the  time  being,  that  it  is  undergoing  sanctifica-
tion  and  cleansing  by  Christ,  that  he  may  present  it  to  himself  a  holy  and
glorious  church.  For,  if  it  had  been  holy  and  without  spot  before,  there
would  be  no  need  of  cleansing,  but  the  heavenly  husbandman,  as  Christ
says,  will  purge  every  branch  that  beareth  fruit,  that  it  may  bring  forth
more  fruit,  John  15[:2].  These  words  St.  Augustine  well  explains  of
purification  in  this  life.  The  Church  is  not,  therefore,  at  present  withoiit
wrinkle  or  spot  but  it  is  daily  undergoing  purification  and  purging  by
Christ,  that  he  may  be  able  to  present  it  to  himself  a  glorious  church, — at
the  time,  namely,  "When  he  shall  deliver  up  the  kingdom  to  God,  even  the
father,"  I  Cor.  15  [:  24].

Let  me  add  also  that  Zwingli  in  this  article  contradicts  both  the
Catholics  and  the  Lutherans.  I  say  the  Lutherans  (Luther  in  Assert.  Art.
31), J  because  though  they  maintain  (albeit  wrongly)  that  the  righteous
man  sins  in  all  his  works,  and  that  all  the  works  of  men,  however  praise-
worthy in  appearance,  are  works  absolutely  vicious  and  sins  worthy  of
death,  (Melanchthon  in  Loots  Communibus) ,  Zwingli,  on  the  other  hand,
has  the  effrontery  to  set  up  a  church  without  wrinkle  or  spot  made  up  out
of  his  saintlets. Moreover,  the  orthodox  and  Zwingli  do  not  agree, for

*Eck  refuses  to  make  the  distinction  between  visible  and  invisible  Church.

tThis  passage,  found  in  the  Vulgate,  is  missing  in  the  Septuagint  and  the
English  version  based  on  the  latter.  It  goes  back  to  a  secondary  Hebrew  text.  See
Charles,  Apocrypha.

$The  reference  is  to  Luther's  "Assertio  omnium  articulorum  M.  Lutheri  per
bullam Leonis  X," 1520. See Luther's  IVerke,  Weimar  edition.  Vol. VII,  p. 37.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  77

though  they  deny  that  the  righteous  man  sins  in  all  his  works,  yet  sin
creepeth  daily  upon  the  righteous,  "for  there  is  not  a  just  man  upon  earth,
that  .  .  .  sinneth  not,"  Eccles.  7  [ :  20] ;  and  all,  however  saintly,  pray
daily,  "And  forgive  us  our  debts,"  Matth.  6  [:  12],  so  that  the  Council  of
Mileve,  according  to  the  rule  of  the  faith,  rightly  condemned  the  Pelagians
in  this,  to  whom  and  to  Zwingli  St.  John  also  is  opposed  when  lie  says,
"If  we  say  that  we  have  no  sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not
in  us,"  I  John  1  [:  8].  Let  Zwingli  be  off,  then,  with  his  righteous  man-
nikins  that  have  no  wrinkle  nor  spot.

We,  on  the  contrary,  in  the  Church  know  our  Mother,  and  as  lawful
offspring  recognize  her  when  she  says,  "I  am  black,  but  comely,"  (she  calls
herself  black  because  of  sin)  "as  the  tents  of  Kedar,"  Song  of  Solomon
1  [:  5]  (which  belong  to  Ishmael,  who  did  not  inherit  with  the  son  of  the
free  woman,  as  Paul  says,  Gal.  4  [:  23])  ;  she  calls  herself  black  "as  the
curtains  of  Solomon,"  sprinkled  with  daily  spots,  but  since  many  in  her
shine  brilliantly  in  Christian  love,  she  also  ventures  to  call  herself  comely.
It  is  clear,  therefore,  in  how  many  things  Zwingli  is  blind  here,  though  he
wishes  to  seem  so  clearsighted  to  the  Emperor.  It  is  as  if  we  heard  the
monster  himself  belching  forth  his  harangues  to  the  ignorant  and  mad
populace. But  let  me  proceed  to  the  rest  of  his  errors.

Zwingli  lays  it  down  besides  that  this  Church  is  known  only  to  God,
for  according  to  Solomon's  words  He  only  knoweth  the  hearts  of  the
children  of  men,  III  Kings  8  [:  39].*  I  shall  show  later  that  this  view
also  is  without  truth,  but  Zwingli  himself,  I  may  say  in  passing,  contradicts
and  destroys  his  own  statements  here,  for  having  said  that  the  church  of
the  predestined  was  known  to  God  alone,  he  yet  forgets  himself  and  says
further  that  those  who  are  members  of  the  church  when  they  have  faith,
know  that  they  are  elect  and  are  members  of  this  first  Church.  Forsooth,
what  do  I  hear?  This  holy  church  of  Zwingli  is  known  only  to  God,  and
yet  it  is  at  the  same  time  known  to  the  Zwingli  saintlets.  They  that  have
faith  know  according  to  Zwingli  that  they  are  elect,  but  according  to
Scripture  and  the  Church  they  do  not  know  it,  for  the  Preacher  says,
"Man  knoweth  not  whether  he  be  worthy  of  love  or  hatred."t  Eccles.  9  [:  1],
and  St.  Paul  says,  "Wherefore  he  that  thinketh  himself  to  stand,  let  him
take  heed  lest  he  fall,"  [I  Cor.  10:  12].

Now  this  godlessness  Zwingli  owes  to  his  teachers,  Luther  and  Melanch-
thon,  although  in  his  pride  he  disdains  to  acknowledge  them,  for  one  writes,
( Melanchthon,  in  Locis  Communibus)  "It  is  a  perfectly  certain  proposition
that  we  are  always  perfectly  certain  of  the  forgiveness  of  sin.  The  holy
know  that  they  are  in  favor,  and  that  their  sins  have  been  pardoned,"  and
the  other  says,  (Luther  on  Gal.  5  and  Psal.  5)  :  "Let  the  Christian  beware
of  ever  feeling  any  uncertainty  as  to  whether  he  is  in  God's  favor,  or
whether  his  works  are  pleasing  to  God.  For  he  that  doubts  thus  sins,
and  loses  all  his  works."  From  this  sink  Zwingli  drew  a  cup  of  error,  and
is  sure  of  his  salvation,  but  the  devout  sons  of  the  Church,  even  though

*I  Kings  in  Authorized  Version.

tThus  in  Vulgate. Slightly  different  in  Authorized  Version.


78  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

they  "have  confidence,  hope  being  set  before  them,"  as  Job  says,  11  [:  18],
are  yet  not  without  fear,  because  "he  that  is  without  fear  cannot  be
justified,"  says  the  Sage,  Ecclesiasticus  1  [ :  28],*  and  on  this  account  all
the  days  of  their  lives  are  they  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  because  they  shall
have  hope  on  the  last  day.

It  is  a  very  small  point  but  it  shows  the  marked  ignorance  of  Zwingli
that  quoting  the  passage  from  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  "and  as  many  as
were  ordained  to  life  everlasting  believed,"  Acts  13[:48],  he  turns  it
about  and  says,  "Therefore  those  that  believe  are  ordained  to  eternal  life,"t
which  is  a  most  pernicious  error,  arising  here  from  the  fallacy  of  the
consequent.  For  tliough  it  is  true  that  all  those  ordained  believe,  yet  we
may  not  turn  this  into  the  statement  that  all  believers  are  thus  ordained,
although  Bucer  sticks  tenaciously  to  this  heresy,  and  at  Berne  burst  out
(Folio  43)  into  the  impiety  that  he  who  has  once  believed  that  Christ
Jesus  has  redeemed  him  has  the  seal  of  the  Holy  Ghost  and  never  can
commit  deadly  sin.  Luther,  driven  by  the  same  madness,  raves  that  there
are  no  works  of  a  believer  in  Christ  so  bad  that  they  can  accuse  and  condemn
him  (De  votis  et  in  ser.  Sic  deus  dilexit,  etc.),  while  St.  Paul  contradicts
them  in  the  words,  "And  if  I  should  have  all  faith,  so  that  I  could  remove
mountains,  and  have  not  charity,  I  am  nothing,"  I  Cor.  13  [:  2].

Then  Zwingli  comes  down  to  the  other  two  uses  of  the  word  "Church."
For  secondly,  "church"  is  used  universally  for  all  who  have  given  allegiance
to  Christ,  and  thirdly  "church"  is  understood  of  any  particular  company
of  any  individual  church,  as  the  Roman  Church,  the  Augsburg  Church,  etc.
But  here  I  challenge  Zwingli,  since  we  Christians  ought  to  speak  according
to  a  fixed  rule  in  the  opinion  of  Augustine,  and  it  is  clear  from  Scripture
that  this  second  use  of  the  word  "Church"  is  the  really  proper  one, — I
challenge  him  to  show  why  he  abandons  this  and  goes  over  to  his  own
visions  and  concoctions  about  his  new  church  of  saintlets,  when  otherwise
he  is  so  hard  upon  the  heavenly  saints  as  to  declare  that  they  are  not
members  of  Christ  (Berne,  146),$  whence  it  follows  that  in  his  opinion
they  are  not  members  of  the  Church,  which  the  orthodox  would  shudder
to  admit.  And  that  this  is  the  true  and  proper  meaning  of  the  word
"church"  is  clearly  seen  from  Christ's  words,  for  a  guest  came  to  the
wedding  "who  had  not  on  a  wedding  garment,"  Matth.  22  [:  11],  and  the
kingdom  of  heaven  is  "like  unto  ten  virgins,  who  taking  their  lamps,  went
out  to  meet  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride,**  and  five  of  them  were  foolish,"
Matth.  25  [l-2],tt  and  in  the  Lord's  field  there  grow  both  good  grain  and
cockle,  Matth.  13  [:  26],  and  in  the  net  of  the  Church  both  good  fish  and
bad  are  taken.  St.  John  the  Baptist  bears  witness  that  Christ  will  find
both  chaflF  and  wheat  upon  His  threshing  floor,  Matth.  3  [:  12].

•Thus in  Vulgate; but 1:22 in  "Variorum  Apocrypha."
tThe  text  has  "fidem,  faith,"  but  that  must  be  a  slip  for  "vitam,  life."
tWhat  Zwingli  actually  said  was,  that  Paul's  reference to  one body, which has
many  members,  in  I.  Cor. 12:  12,  did  not  include  the  saints  in  heaven,  but  only  those
in  this  world. See  Zwingli's  JVerke,  ed.  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  II, 1,  p. 169.

**The  words,  "and  the  bride,"  omitted  in  the  King  James  Version,  appear  in
the  Vulgate,  as  well  as  in  several  Greek  Mss.

ttThe  text  has  Matth. 20,  a  misprint  for  25.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  79

Since,  therefore,  Christ  has  so  often  taught  us  how  we  ought  to  speak
of  the  Church,  why  does  Zwingli  depart,  along  with  Luther,  from  the  Gospel
form  of  speech,  and  in  order  to  bring  a  new  error  into  the  Church,  make  use
of  a  new  method  of  speaking  also,  at  variance  with  the  Church  ?  For  as  in
the  natural  body  there  are  good  and  bad  humors,  so  in  the  body  of  Christ,
which  is  the  Church,  are  there  good  and  bad,  and  as  in  hell  there  are  only
bad,  in  heaven  only  good,  so  in  the  middle  sphere,  namely  the  Church,
there  are  both  good  and  bad.  That  there  is  this  mixture  in  the  Church  all
Scripture  testifies,  all  the  faithful  admit,  save  only  these  new  teachers  of
churches  who  take  to  themselves  more  than  the  Apostles,  the  pillars  of
the  Church,  fancying  that  they  can  separate  the  tares  from  the  wheat  even
before  the  time  of  the  harvest,  Matth.  13  [:  30].

Having,  therefore,  destroyed  the  foundations  of  this  article,  it  is  easy
to  demolish  what  the  foolish  man  Zwingli  thus  builds  upon  the  sand,
Matth.  7  [:  26].  For  as  to  his  including  the  Roman  Church  among  his
examples  as  a  particular  church,  that,  I  think,  not  even  the  Pontiff  will
deny  him,  who  when  he  goes  out  of  the  confines  of  the  diocese  of  Rome
dates  his  letters  from  the  individual  churches  where  he  happens  to  be
tarrying.  But  if,  with  his  usual  viciousness,  Zwingli  means  by  this  to
assert  that  "Roman  Church"  is  never  to  be  understood  of  that  which  is
universal,  I  do  not  allow  that  for  it  is  not  in  accordance  with  the  truth,  as
I  have  abundantly  shown  in  my  three  books  on  the  Primacy  of  Peter.  For
the  Christian  world  of  Europe,  as  it  now  exists,  belongs  properly  to  the
Roman  Church,  not  only  because  the  Chief  PontiflF  presides  over  that,  but
also  because  he  is  the  real  Patriarch,  nay  the  Roman  patriarchate  was
once  far  larger  than  Christianity  is  now,  since  there  were  under  it  all  the
bishops  of  Africa,  Numidia,  Mauretania,  also  of  Greece,  for  whom  he  had
as  vicar  the  Bishop  of  Thessalonica.  But  a  great  portion  of  the  earth  has
now,  for  our  sins,  been  taken  away  from  the  Roman  patriarchate,  nay
from  Christianity,  and  serves  a  wretched  slavery  under  the  Mohammedan
yoke  or  the  cruel  Turks  or  the  barbarous  kings  of  Tunis,  Fez,  Morocco
and  others.

Thus  Zwingli  narrows  too  much  the  church  which  cannot  err,  by
confining  it  to  that  which  is  without  spot,  but  of  this  further  on.  Let
Zwingli  himself  consider  how  far  he  has  wandered  with  the  Lutherans
from  the  one  visible  Church,  since  the  pamphlets  of  their  confessions,
though  not  at  all  agreeing  with  the  Catholic  Church,  differ  very  greatly
from  each  other,  as  in  the  Appendix  he  controverts  the  confession  of  the
Anabaptists  on  the  subject  of  the  baptism  of  the  infants  of  Christians.  Yet
Zwingli  forgets  that  elsewhere  (In  Articul.  &  de  Baptismo*)  he  expressed
the  opinion  that  it  is  far  better  that  infants  be  not  baptized  until  they
grow  up,  and  Baltliasar,t  the  father  of  the  Anabaptists,  bears  witness  that
he  had  a  writing  of  Zwingli  in  which  he  urged  him  to  this  heresy.t

*In  his  book  on  Baptism,  Schuler  and  Schulthess  edition,  Vol.  II,  p.  1,  p.  24S.
But  Zwingli  confesses  that  he  had  been  misled into  this  error.

fBalthasar Huebmaier, born 1480, burned at the stake 1528.

JHuebmaier  related  (as  quoted  by  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  1.  c,  1,  p.  245  note  a)


80  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

But  let  us  press  Zwingli  a  little  closer  here.  Since  he  mentions  a  triple
use  of  the  word  "Church,"  why  does  he  pass  by  with  ears  stopped  up,  so
to  speak,  the  "church  representative,"  which  is  recognized  in  the  General
and  the  Oecumenical  Councils?*  But  I  know  what  obstacle  prevented  him.
He  denied  once  that  the  congregation  of  the  Pontiff,  Cardinals,  Bishops,
Prelates  and  Doctors  was  the  Church,  for  he  was  afraid  of  being  crowded
by  the  authority  of  the  Councils,  and  he  thought  that  in  this  way  he  could
break  the  authority  of  the  Synods,  and  not  be  pressed  too  hard.  This  is
plain  in  his  Zurich  articles.  This  error  of  his  was  tenaciously  held  by
Haller,  the  corrupter  of  Berne,  by  Bucer  and  others.  (Art.  8  Fol.  3,  etc.)
But  after  the  fashion  of  heretics  Zwingli  is  at  variance  not  only  with  the
Church  but  with  himself,  for  in  his  Subsidium  de  Eucharistia,  written  to
the  Mail,  those  Capernaites,  he  says  among  other  things, f  "Certain  people
slander  us  in  regard  to  the  usage  of  the  Two  Hundred  (that  is  the  two
hundred  senators ) ,  saying  that  we  allow  things  which  ought  to  belong  to
the  whole  Church  to  be  managed  by  two  hundred,  when  the  Church  in  the
whole  city  and  neighborhood  numbers  seven  thousand,  more  or  less."
Afterwards  he  makes  further  statements  about  The  Two  Hundred,  that
they  act  in  the  name  of  the  Church,  and  concludes  with  the  words,  "Thus
we  use  at  Zurich  the  Senate  of  Two  Hundred,  which  is  the  supreme
authority,  in  place  of  the  Church."  Since,  then,  Zwingli  asserts  the  church
representive  at  "^lurich,  why  does  he  deny  it  in  other  places,  in  provinces
and  kingdoms,  and  even  in  the  whole  Roman  Empire?  Why  does  he  not
mention  among  the  meanings  of  "church,"  this  meaning  also  of  church
representative?  Since  this  use  also  of  "church"  is  based  upon  the  sacred
writings,  it  is  wrongfully  passed  over  by  Zwingli  here.

I  want,  therefore,  to  prove  the  church  representative  at  this  point.
We  read  in  the  Book  of  Kings  in  regard  to  Solomon,  "The  king  turned  his
face,  and  blessed  all  the  assembly  of  Israel  :  for  all  the  assembly  of  Israel
stood,"  etc..  Ill  Kings  [I  Kings]  8  [:  14].  We  have  heard  the  Holy  Spirit
speaking  of  the  Church;  what  it  spoke  of  the  Church  Representative,  is
plain  from  the  beginning  of  the  same  chapter,  where  we  read,  "Then  all
tlie  ancients  of  Israel,  with  the  princes  of  the  tribes,  and  the  heads  of  the
families  of  the  children  of  Israel  were  assembled  to  King  Solomon,"  [8:  1].$
Not,  therefore,  all  the  people  of  the  Jews  assembled  unto  King  Solomon,
but  the  princes,  the  heads,  and  the  ancients,  who  represented  all  Israel.

ARTICLE  VII.

Presently  he  adorns  the  seventh  article  with  the  boldness  of  a
Hercules — "I  believe,  nay,  know  that  all  the  sacraments  are  so  far  from

that  Zwingli  confessed  to  him  personally,  when  they  took  a  walk  along  the  moat  one
day,  that  infant  baptism  was  not  right,  before  the  children  were  instructed  in  the  faith.

*Zwingli  refers  to  this  "representative  church,"  in  his  book  "De  canone
epicheiresis."  see  IVerke,  ed.  Egli  and  Finsler,  II,  571,  where  he  discusses  the  different
meanings  of  the  Church;  see  also  his  "De  vera  et  falsa  religione,"  in  Zwingli's  Werke,
ed. Egli  and  Finsler, III.  747-751.

tSee  ed.  of  Schuler  and Schulthess,  Vol.  Ill,  p. 339.

JThus  in  the  Douay  Version;  slightly  different in  the  Authorized  Version.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  81

bestowing  grace,"  etc.  While  Zwingli,  not  only  believing  but  also  knowing
(perhaps  he  had  been  carried  off  with  St.  Paul  into  the  third  heaven)  that
the  sacraments  do  not  bestow  grace,  has  involved  himself  in  the  greatest
impiety — for  a  heretic  was  excommunicated  for  holding  a  view  about  the
sacraments  other  than  that  taught  by  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  (C.  Ad
abolendam  de  heret.) — this  article  has  been  condemned  by  Pope  Leo  X,
of  blessed  memory,  against  Luther.  For  this  article  denies  the  virtue  of
the  passion  of  Christ,  from  which  all  the  sacraments  derive  their  force
and  efficacy.  It  takes  all  comfort  from  the  faithful,  whose  consciences,
otherwise  troubled,  are  refreshed  by  the  mystery  of  the  sacraments,  and,
what  is  most  abhorrent  to  the  feelings  of  the  faithful,  to  say  that  the
sacraments  do  not  bestow  grace  is  just  the  same  as  if  one  said  a  sacrament
was  not  a  sacrament.

The  expounding  of  this  article  involves  Zwingli  in  so  many  errors  that
he  depicts  himself  plainly,  what  ignorance  and  lack  of  knowledge  he  brings
to  the  treatment  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.  He  uses  the  word  "gratia"
[grace]  in  Latin,  in  place  of  "pardon"  and  "indulgence."  This,  because
some  one  from  the  school  of  Priscian  and  Perotus  ventures  to  usurp  the
chair  of  St.  Paul.  This  Rhadamanthus*  among  theologians,  Zwingli,
refuses  to  accept  anything  unless  it  agrees  with  the  sacred  Scriptures,  yet
here  he  is  diametrically  opposed  to  Holy  Scripture,  because  the  little
grammatical  pettifogger  does  not  yet  know  in  what  sense  the  Holy  Spirit
used  this  word  "gratia."  St.  John  says  of  Christ,  "we  beheld  his  glory,
etc., — full  of  grace  and  truth,"  John  1  [:  14].  Yet  Christ  by  no  means
needed  indulgence  and  forgiveness  of  sins.  So  often  does  Paul  testify  of
grace  given  to  him  and  to  others,  I  Cor.  3  [:  10] ;  15  [:  10],  as  we  see  upon
almost  every  page,  and  he  writes  to  the  Corinthians,  "Now  there  are
diversities  of  gifts,  but  the  same  spirit."t  Therefore  the  holy  Fathers
understand  by  "gratia"  a  gift  given  by  God,  which  either  is  given  "gratis,
freely,"  or  makes  one  "gratum,  acceptable,"  to  God.  I  know  what  deceived
our  grammarian-theologian  Zwingli.  He  happened  to  hear  from  the
theologians  that  sins  were  remitted  by  the  grace  of  God,  and  being  unskilled
in  things  theological  he  did  not  know  that  sin  was  not  remitted  by  a
general  law  without  the  bestowal  of  an  exceptional  gift  which  is  called
grace. It  is  from  this  that  Zwingli's  error  arose.

When,  furthermore,  he  says  that  the  sacrament  is  not  a  vehicle  of  the
Spirit,  if  I  mistake  not,  he  is  looking  to  the  followers  of  Luther,  who  in
the  pamphlet  of  their  confession,  presented  by  their  most  illustrious
princes,  conceded  that  the  Spirit  is  given  by  the  sacraments  and  by  the
Word  as  by  an  instrument. (Article  5).$

Zwingli  is  here  trying  to  upset  this  article,  on  the  ground  that  the
Spirit  does  not  need  a  vehicle.  Certainly  Zwingli  is  a  most  stupid  seer  who
in  the  bluntness  of  his  perceptions  does  not  yet  understand  how  the  Fathers

*Rhadamanthus  was  a  judge  in  the  infernal  regions.

tl  Cor.  12:  4.

{Article  5  of  the  Augsburg  Confession,  reads:  "For  by  the  Word  and  Sacra-
ments, as  by  instruments,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  given."  See  Schaff,  Creeds  of  Christen-
dom,  Vol. Ill,  p. 10.


82  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

say  that  the  Spirit  is  given  by  the  sacraments.  The  Spirit  does  not  drive
in  on  a  chariot,  but  God  alone,  by  His  almighty  power,  infuses  grace  into
the  human  soul  by  visible  signs  made  efficacious  by  Him.  The  water  is  not
in  itself  effective  unto  grace  in  the  soul  of  the  child  except  as  an  indis-
pensable accompaniment,  but  God  Himself  creates  grace  in  the  soul  of
the  child.  But  I  speak  to  deaf  ears,  for  the  thing  is  above  Zwingli's  com-
prehension, as  is  evident  from  his  inappropriate  raillery  about  preparation
for  the  sacrament.  For  he  says  like  a  parrot,  since  there  is  not  a  uniform
method  of  preparing  for  the  different  sacraments,  "And  it  is  necessary  for
the  Holy  Spirit  to  precede  the  reception  of  the  sacrament  by  grace  given
freely,  making  him  acceptable  before  he  receives  grace,  yet  in  the  case  of  a
child  nothing  of  this  kind  is  demanded,  if  he  makes  no  objection."*

It  remains  to  show  how  wrongly  he  maintains  that  the  sacraments
are  given  as  a  testimony  only.  How  near  is  Zwingli  now  to  the  Anabaptists,
whom  nevertheless,  like  a  new  Phalaris,t  he  torments  to  death  in  the
WellenburgI  and  tortures  limb  by  limb!  For  they  too  deny  all  the  sacra-
ments and  admit  them  only  as  signs  and  witnesses  without  efficacy,  and.
taught  by  the  impious  Carlstadt,  father  of  the  Capernaites,  dare  to  call
the  holy  mysteries  of  the  Church  "Sekerment,"  and,  copying  the  faithless-
ness of  the  Jews,  say  a  sacrament  is  a  lie  and  vanity  and  deception.  How
far,  therefore,  from  the  Anabaptists  is  Zwingli  when  he  recklessly  proclaims
here,  "The  Church  by  baptism  publicly  receives  him  who  has  been  previously
received  through  grace?"  Why  then  did  Christ  say,  "Unless  a  man  be
born  again  of  water  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  etc.,  John  3  [:  5]  ?  If  he  has
previously  been  washed  by  grace  and  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  would  not
have  to  be  born  again.  Not,  therefore,  of  past  grace  is  the  sacrament  the
sign,  but  of  present  grace,  bestowed  upon  the  baptized  through  the  Holy
Spirit  present  in  the  sacrament.

It  is  therefore,  empty  jeering  when  Zwingli  says  here  in  his  sleep  that  a
boy  has  already  been  baptized  when  he  is  brought  up  for  baptism,  because
the  divine  promise  has  preceded,  but  let  this  profaner  of  all  sacraments
come  forward  and  make  us  believe  that  that  promise  has  been  made  that
the  boy  should  receive  faith  before  baptism  has  been  submitted  to.  Let  him
show  clear  Scripture  for  that  promise,  and  not  spit  out  in  a  demoniacal
spirit**  whatever  his  own  mad  brain  suggests  to  him.  He  quotes  the
Apostle  to  the  Romans,  but  in  both  cautious  and  Zwinglian  fashion
suppresses  some  of  his  words,  for  if  he  brought  them  forth,  his  view  would
suffer  great  loss.  Paul  says,  "All  we  who  are  baptized  in  Christ  Jesus,
are  baptized  in  his  death,"  Rom.  6[:3],  which  words  are  so  far  from
siipporting  Zwingli  that  they  utterly  confute  him.  For  to  be  baptized  in
the  death  of  Christ  means  that  through  the  virtue  of  His  passion  we  attain
the  grace  of  God  in  baptism.  Otherwise, — if  baptism  bestowed  no  grace
and  the  grace  of  God  were  given  previously,  how  could  St.  Paul  have  said

*This  is  a  perversion  rather  than  a  quotation  of  Zwingli's  confession.
tA  tyrant  of  Agrigentum,  Sicily,  570-554  B.  C.

JThat Catabaptists were tortured in the Wellenburg, the prison at Zurich, at
Zwingli's  demand,  cannot  be  proved,  though  he  was  an  onlooker.

**For  "phytonico"  we  read  "pythonico,"  from  pytho,  "demon."


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  83

that  we  are  baptized  in  the  death  of  Christ,  all  we  who  are  baptized?  And
all  this  St.  Augustine  confirms  most  strongly  by  the  testimony  of  the
sacred  Scriptures,  but  for  brevity's  sake  I  will  not  quote  his  words.

Let  Zwingli,  therefore,  go  to  perdition  with  Oecolampadius,  Bucer,
Zwick,  and  Haller,*  who  with  reckless  impiety  calls  the  Christian  view  of
the  sacraments  Judaism,  as  if  the  holy  mysteries  of  our  faith  were  no
more  efficacious  than  the  shadowy  and  figurative  ceremonies  of  the  Jews.
I  laugh  at  the  empty  boasting  of  Zwingli  that  he  was  the  first  to  teach
and  write  against  the  Anabaptists,  since  I  am  aware  that  it  was  Zwingli
who  by  his  counsel  and  advice  really  founded  this  lost  sect,  and  was  goaded
more  by  jealousy  than  love  of  the  truth  in  his  pursuit  of  Balthasar  the
Catabaptist,  as  all  his  neighbors  testify.  Wherefore  let  no  good  man
believe  Zwingli  even  under  oath  when  he  says  that  he  has  not  accepted  nor
taught  any  of  the  doctrines  of  this  seditious  party,  for  his  published  books
convict  him  of  lying.  For  we  read  in  his  articles  (Art.  18,  Fol.  71),t
"Although  I  know,  as  the  ancients  tell  us,  that  in  old  times  infants  were
sometimes  baptized,  yet  this  was  not  so  very  frequent  as  in  our  day.  They
were  taught  together  publicly  after  they  were  old  enough  to  use  their
reason, — and  on  that  account  they  were  called  catechumens, — and  when
they  confessed  with  their  lips  that  faith  was  firmly  implanted  in  their
hearts,  then  they  were  admitted  to  baptism,  and  this  fashion  of  teaching
I  want  to  see  revived  in  these  days  of  ours."  Similarly  in  the  book  De  vera
et  falsa  Religione,  he  writes  (Fol.  159 )|  "Because  even  the  ancients  bap-
tized only  those  who  were  in  the  death  struggle,  and  did  not  always  baptize
infants."  Balthasar  the  Catabaptist  also,  in  a  pamphlet  published  at
Nikolsburg  in  Moravia  had  words  of  Zwingli's  printed  which  advised
against  the  baptism  of  infants,  and  said  in  a  note  that  he  had  a  writing
to  that  effect.  Since,  therefore  Zwingli  has  been  so  prominent  in  the  harm
done  by  this  sect,  how  does  he  dare  before  our  sacred  Emperor  to  say  so
wantonly  that  he  is  guiltless  of  this  sin?  Now  let  us  hasten  on  to
other  points.

ARTICLE  VIII.

This  article  forms  the  head  and  front  of  Zwingli's  impiety;  in  it  he
denies  the  real  presence  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in
the  venerable  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist.  Before  going  on  to  examine
this  blasphemous  article,  I  establish  the  Catholic  opinion  upon  a  solid  basis
from  the  beginning.  In  Matthew,  Luke  and  Paul  where  the  institution  of
this  most  venerable  sacrament  is  described  and  where  Christ  is  reported  to
have  made  the  simple  statement:  "And  taking  bread,  he  gave  thanks,  and
brake,  and  gave  to  them,  saying :  This  is  my  body,  which  is  given  for  you.
Do  this  in  commemoration  of  me,"  Matth.  26  [:  26],  Mark  14  [:  22],  Luke
22[:19],  I  Cor.  11:  [:  23-24].  Since,  therefore,  the  Evangelists  have
shown  such  close  agreement  in  describing  the  institution  of  the  sacrament,

*John Zwick was preacher and reformer in Constance, Bercfitold Haller was
the  reformer  of  Berne.

tSee  Zwingli's  Werke,  Vol.  II,  1908,  p.  123.

tSee  Zwingli's  Werke,  Vol.  Ill,  1914,  p.  823. Not  a  literal  quotation.


84  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

without  any  suggestion  of  a  trope  or  metaphor  anywhere,  it  is  a  reckless
thing  to  overturn  by  means  of  tropes  the  pure  and  simple  statement  of
Christ  out  of  one's  own  brain  and  in  opposition  to  the  understanding  and
agreement  of  the  whole  Church  Universal.  Besides  Christ  promised  in
John,  "And  the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh,  for  the  life  of  the
world,"  John  6  [:  52].*  He  promises  that  He  will  give  the  bread  which  he
did  give  at  the  Supper,  and  He  tells  what  this  bread  is,  namely  that  it  is
"my  flesh. "t  And  lest  some  falsifier  should  twist  the  word  "flesh"  into  some
other  meaning.  He  added  clearly  "for  the  life  of  the  world,"  as  much  as  to
say,  "the  bread  that  I  will  give  is  that  same  flesh  that  I  shall  give  on  the
altar  of  the  cross  for  the  salvation  of  the  whole  world."  This  is  also
manifest  from  St.  Paul,  for  he  wrote  to  the  Corinthians  among  other  things,
"The  chalice  of  benediction,  which  we  bless,  is  it  not  the  communion  of  the
blood  of  Christ?"  I  Cor.  10  [:  16].  He  does  not  say  "the  communion  of
wine,"  but  when  we  take  the  sacrament  of  the  cup,  we  take  part  in  the
communion  of  the  blood  of  Christ.  And  below,  "For  we,  being  many,  are
one  bread,  one  body  :  all  that  partake  of  one  bread"  and  one  cup,$
I  Cor.  10  [:  17].  Now  it  is  evident  that  we  are  not  all  partakers  of
one  baker's  bread,  but  the  one  bread  is  the  body  of  Christ  which  is  at
once  in  heaven  and  in  all  churches.  This  view  of  the  orthodox  Paul  con-
firms to  the  same  Corinthians  when  he  says,  "But  let  a  man  prove  himself,
and  so  let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  chalice.  For  he  that
eateth  and  drinketh  unworthily,  eateth  and  drinketh  judgment  to  himself,
not  discerning  the  body  of  the  Lord,"  I  Cor.  11  [:  29].  He  sins  in  partak-
ing of  Christ's  body  unworthily  because  of  the  presence  of  Christ's  body.
For  how  could  he  be  "guilty  of  the  body"  of  Christ,  if  he  did  not  eat  that,
and  all  opportunity  to  get  away  from  this  is  removed  by  what  St.  Paul
adds,  "not  discerning  the  Lord's  body" — not  distinguishing  the  sacrament
of  the Eucharist  from  baker's  bread  or ordinary food.

Thus  all  the  councils,  all  the  holy  Fathers,  the  whole  Church  Universal
have  always  regarded  it.  And  Zwingli  himself  held  it  as  absolutely
established  even  at  the  time  when  he  left  the  Church  and  gave  adherence
to  Lutheranism.  For  he  says  in  putting  forth  his  articles,  (Fol.  75)  **  "Let
the  simple-minded  know  that  it  is  not  brought  into  controversy  here
whether  the  body  of  Christ  and  His  blood  are  eaten  and  drunk,  for  on
that  point  no  Christian  has  any  doubt."  And  below,  (Folios  76,  78  and  97)
"Christ  has  by  His  own  words  taught  that  we  are  to  eat  His  body  and
drink  His  blood. For  this  it  means  in  both  the  Greek  and  the  Latin. "tt

*So  in  the  Vulgate,  but  John  6:51,  in  Authorized  Version.

t Augustine  may  be  quoted  to  explain  these  words:  "E.xcept  ye  eat  the  flesh
of  the  son  of  man,"  says  Christ,  "and  drink  His  blood,  ye  have  no  life  in  you."  This
seems  to  enjoin  a  crime  or  a  vice;  it  is  therefore  a  figure,  enjoining  that  we  should  have
share  in  the  sufferings  of  our  Lord,  and  that  we  should  retain  a  sweet  and  profitable
memory  of  the  fact  that  His  flesh  was  wounded  and  crucified  for  us.  Augustine,
Christian  Doctrine,  III,  16,  §24;  in  Schaflf,  Nicene  Fathers,  1st  Series,  II.  563.

|The  last  three  words  "and  one  cup,"  are  neither  in  the  Vulgate,  nor  in  any
Greek  text.

•*Zwingli's  Werke,  Voll.  II,  1908,  p. 128.

ttZwJngli's  Werke,  Vol.  II,  1908,  p.  132. How  these  words  are  to  be  understood


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  85

And  he  adds  how  God  might  have  spoken  more  briefly  or  more  literally  or
clearly,  and  these  clear  words  he  testifies  are  known  to  all  Christians.
Thus  more  than  a  score  of  times  is  repeated  in  his  books  the  assertion  of
the  truth  of  the  presence  of  the  body  of  Christ,  even  at  the  time  when  he
had  sent  back  the  messenger  of  the  Church.  But  certainly  the  words  of
John  are  most  true,  "he  that  is  filthy,  let  him  be  filthy  still,"  Rev.  22  [:  11].
Having,  therefore,  become  dirty  and  filthy  with  Luther's  mud,  Zwingli  after-
wards remained  filthy  with  the  mud  also  of  Berengarius,  deacon  of  Angers,
whose  heresy  has  been  very  frequently  condemned — in  the  Council  of  Turin,
in  the  Council  of  Worms,  and  finally  in  the  Council  of  Rome  under  Pope
Nicholas.  Therefore  he  does  wrong  to  the  most  reverend  Synod  who  persists
in  bringing  up  again  and  publicly  disputing  what  has  been  once  decided
and  duly  settled,  says  the  Emperor  Martian.  (L.nemini  c.  de  sum.tri.  &  fid.
Cathol.)  Let  the  sacred  Emperor,  Charles  V,  execute  the  law  of  this
Catholic  Emperor  in  regard  to  this  and  other  errors,  and  everlasting
renoAvn  will  be  his.  Now  let  us  hear  Zwingli  himself  sounding  the  charge
of  the  forces  of  impiety.

Stoutly  vaunting  his  heresy  and  shamelessly  condemning  the  Catholic
doctrine,  this  great  Goliath  with  vast  arrogance  sings  a  paean  of  triumph
before  victory,  and  promises  the  sacred  Emperor  that  he  will  in  a  few
words  make  the  matter  as  clear  as  the  sun.  How  religiously  he  follows  in
the  footsteps  of  his  grandfathers  and  great  grandfathers !  For  "all  heretics
are  in  the  habit,"  says  Gregory,  "of  promising  the  truth  at  the  very  moment
that  they  teach  error."  Then  he  arms  himself  from  the  Gospel  wrongly
imderstood,  draws  therefrom  captious  and  clearly  illogical  arguments,
vitiates  and  mangles  the  opinions  of  the  doctors  of  old.  Although  this
impious  mockery  has  already  been  answered  by  the  learned  Bishop  John
of  Rochester,*  in  most  scholarly  and  complete  fashion,  yet  I  will  in  a  very
few  words  demolish  his  ill-taken  points.

In  the  first  place  he  quotes  Christ's  remark,  "The  poor  you  have  always
with  you  :  but  me  you  have  not  always,"  Matth.  26  [:  11],  and  "here,"
says  Zwingli,  "the  presence  of  the  body  is  denied,  for  as  far  as  His  divine
nature  is  concerned  He  is  always  present.  Augustine  agrees  with  me,
and  there  is  no  reason  why  my  opponents  should  plead  that  the  human  part
of  Christ  is  everywhere  where  His  divine  part  is."  But  who  does  not  under-
stand in  what  spirit  Zwingli  handles  the  sacred  Scriptures?  It  is  true
that  Christ  spoke  of  the  presence  of  the  body,  but  not  of  every  kind  of  its
presence. For  He  does  not  deny  mysterious  presence,  but  the  visible  pres-

is  clear  from  a  later  passage  (p.  143):  "Behold  then,  O  pious  Christian,  the  body  and
blood  of  Christ  differs  in  nothing  from  the  word  of  faith,  that  is,  His  body,  slain  for
us.  and  His  blood,  shed  for  us,  has  redeemed  us  and  reconciled  God  to  us.  If  we
firmly  believe  this,  our  soul  has  eaten  and  drunk  the  flesh  and  blood  of  Christ.  More-
over, in  order  that  He  might  make  the  essence  of  the  testament  more  easily  compre-
hensible to  the  simple-minded.  Christ  gave  to  His  body  an  eatable  form,  namely  for  His
body  the  bread  and  for  His  blood  the  cup  or  the  drink,  that  they  might  be  confirmed
in  faith  by  a  visible  action,  just  as  in  baptism  the  dipping  into  water  does  not  wash
away  sin.  unless  the  one  baptized  believes  in  the  salvation  of  the  Gospel."

*John  Fisher,  bishop  of  Rochester (1459-1535). The  book  to  which  Eck  refers
is  entitled  "Assertionis  Lutheranae  Confutatio," 1523.


86  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

ence  of  human  intercourse  in  a  body  endowed  with  feeling.  The  man  who
does  not  understand  this  is  blind.  But  let  us  put  the  matter  plainly  before
us.  Hilary  says,  "The  meaning  of  a  remark  or  speech  should  be  found  in
the  reason  for  making  it."  If  then  we  look  more  sharply  at  the  reason  for
making  the  remark  here,  there  is  no  difficulty  about  the  meaning.  Mary
poured  ointment  on  our  Saviour's  head;  Judas  asks  indignantly  why  it
was  not  given  to  the  poor;  Christ  defends  her  with  the  words,  "the  poor
you  have  always  with  you;"  Luke  adds,  "and  whensoever  you  will  you  may
do  them  good,"  Luke  22.*  Therefore  we  have  not  Christ  with  us  as  Mary
anointed  Him,  and  as  we  do  good  to  the  poor  who  dwell  among  us  in  want,
for  He  does  not  dwell  among  us  to  sense,  nor  is  His  body  henceforth  capable
of  kindly  care  of  this  sort.  This  and  nothing  else  is  what  Christ  meant.
And  in  citing  Augustine  he  acts  after  his  usual  fashion.  For  Augustine
puts  forth  absolutely  nothing  on  Zwingli's  side.f  He  makes  two  state-
ments. The  first  applies  to  Judas  and  the  wicked,  that  they  have  not
Christ,  just  as  Zwingli  has  not.  The  second  statement  is  that  though
as  far  as  the  presence  of  His  Majesty  is  concerned  we  have  Christ  always,
as  far  as  the  presence  of  His  flesh  is  concerned,  it  was  right  to  say  to  the
disciples,  "but  me  you  have  not  always."  Thus  Augustine.  But  that
Augustine  does  not  deny  sacramental  presence  but  only  the  presence  of  sense
is  shown  by  what  follows, — "he  only  grasps  by  faith,  he  does  not  see  with
his  eyes."!  And  certainly  it  is  great  perverseness  on  Zwingli's  part  to  drag
Saint  Augustine  over  to  his  view,  when  he  avowedly  holds  and  embraces
most  unequivocally  the  Catholic  view,**  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  in  the
Eucharist  as  a  real  presence.  But  of  this  more  below.  It  is  marked,
ignorance  combined  with  malice  when  he  foists  upon  the  orthodox  the
assertion  that  the  human  part  of  Christ  is  everywhere,  just  like  His
divine  part.  For  this  is  a  dream  of  Zwingli,  not  of  any  Catholics.  For  to
be  everywhere  belongs  exclusively  to  God.  But  the  body  of  Christ  is  in
many  places  by  repetition  through  the  divine  will,  which  can  effect  this,
"for  with  God  nothing  is  impossible,"  Luke  I  [:  37].

Zwingli  quotes  further  the  words  of  Christ  in  John,  "Again  I  leave  the
world,  and  I  go  to  the  Father,"  John  16  [:  28].  But  this  bears  the  same
meaning  as  the  former  quotation,  and  this  is  not  impugned  by  Zwingli's
impious  rejoinder,  "And  we  should  only  promote  a  juggler's  trick  if  we
maintained  that  His  natural  body  was  present  but  invisible."  This  impiety
is  a  suggestion  of  Lucifer,  who  ventures  to  call  the  highest  mystery  of  our
faith  a  juggler's  trick.  For  without  reason  and  without  Scripture,  he
babbles  out  this  in  sheer  recklessness. And  that  Christ  is  speaking  solely

*The  quotation  should  be  Mark  14:  7.

tSee  Augustine,  "On  the  Gospel  of  John,"  Tract  L, §13.

JAugustine's  words  are:  "In  respect  of  His  presence  in  the  flesh  it  was  rightly
said  to  the  disciples,  'Me  ye  will  not  have  always.'  In  this  respect  the  Church  enjoyed
His  presence  only  for  a  few  days;  Now  it  possesses  Him  by  faith,  without  seeing  Him
with  the  eyes." These  words  certainly  favor  Zwingli's  view.

**Impartial  modern  historians  admit  that  Augustine  does  not  hold  the  Catholic
view  of  transubstantiation.  Thus  Harnack  says:  "Augustine  deals  with  the  elements
symbolically."  See  Harnack,  History  of  Dogma,  Engl.  Trans.,  Boston,  1903.  Vol.  V,
p. 159.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  87

of  visible  leaving  of  the  world  and  human  intercourse,  He  Himself  openly
declares  when  He  says,  "A  little  while,  and  you  shall  not  see  me,"  John
16  [:  16].  And  His  showing  Himself  in  visible  and  palpable  shape  later,
after  the  resurrection,  contributed  to  strengthening  faith  in  the  resurrec-
tion, as  Luke  bears  witness  "To  whom  also  He  shewed  Himself  alive  after
His  passion  by  many  proofs,  for  forty  days  appearing  to  them,  and  speak-
ing of  the  kingdom  of  God,"  etc.,  Acts  1  [:  3].  This  same  point  St.  Paul
treats  at  length  to  the  Corinthians,  "For  if  Christ  be  not  risen  again,  our*
faith  is  vain,"  1  Cor.  15  [:  17].  Therefore  the  truth  in  the  matter  of  the
resurrection  of  Christ  had  to  be  well  established,  and  after  it  was  estab-
lished it  was  expedient  for  Him  not  to  appear  visibly  any  more  but  to  be
veiled  in  mysteries.  "For  human  faith  has  no  merit  when  human  reason
furnishes  experimental  proof,"  says  Gregory.

Thirdly  Zwingli  quotes  Christ's  words  thus  :  Ego  post  hac  non  ero  in
mundo  :  hi  sunt  in  mundo,  i.  e.,  "Henceforth  I  shall  not  be  in  the  world,  but
these  are  in  the  world,"  John  17  [:  11].  "This  antithesis  plainly  shows  that
He  was  not  in  the  world  in  a  human  sense  at  the  time  when  the  disciples
still  lived,"  says  Zwingli.  But  Christ  is  here  also  speaking  of  bodily
presence,  as  to  which  He  was  going  to  leave  the  world  and  human  inter-
course. Why  does  he  not  bring  up  Augustinef  here?  He  says:  "Thus  He
speaks,  like  a  man  to  men,  according  to  the  custom  and  usage  of  human
speech."  But  it  is  a  fair  and  beautiful  spectacle  to  see  Zwingli,  the  famous
boaster,  talking  Greek  in  the  presence  of  the  sacred  Emperor.  He  quotes
John  in  Greek,  "Kal  ovk  en  e'lfil  kv  t<J)  Koafii^^  and  now  I  atn  no  more  in
the  world,"  but  as  he  plainly  alters  the  text,  he  is  easily  seen  to  be
a  falsifier  and  subverter.  For  while  Christ  says,  "iwk  el^i.  i.  e.,  I  am
not,"  Zwingli  vitiates  it  and  reads,  "non  ero,  i.  e.,  I  shall  not  be,"
and  while  Christ  says,  "  en,  "  which  points  to  present  time,  Zwingli
mangles  it  into  the  future  "henceforth."  Hence  the  translator  whom  the
Church  employsj  is  more  correct  in  his  reading,  "Et  iam  non  sum  in
mundo,"  i.  e.,  "and  now  I  am  not  in  the  world."  This  is  the  reading  of
Augustine,  of  Chrysostom,  of  Theophylactus,  but  Zwingli,  in  order  to  shut
out  future  presence  in  the  Sacrament,  has  dared  to  change  the  writing  of
the  Holy  Spirit — evident  impostor  and  worthless  deceiver  that  he  is!

Furthermore  he  brings  in  Mark  and  Luke  in  both  the  Gospel  and  the
Acts  to  testify  that  Christ  was  received  up  into  heaven,  was  taken  up  and
carried  into  heaven,  and  would  return,  Mark  16  [:  19],  Luke  24  [:  51],  Acts
I  [:  9].  But  who  denies  this?  Such  a  one  would  be  to  us  as  a  pagan  and
a  publican.  For  Christ  is  no  longer  with  us  in  visible  bodily  presence  and
human  intercourse,  having  left  the  world,  but  He  will  return  in  the  same
visible  form  to  judge  the  quick  and  the  dead.  But  as  to  this  crafty  de-
stroyer of  the  vineyard  of  the  Lord  pretending  there  are  some  who  say
that  the  human  part  of  Christ  is  everywhere  or  nowhere,  that  is  trifling

*The  King  James  version  has  "your,"  as  has  also  the  Vulgate.

tAugustine,  "On  the  Gospel  of  John,"  Tract  CVII,  §4.  In  this  paragraph
Augustine  says  also:  "He  declared  that  He  was  no  longer  in  the  world,  that  is  to
say, in His bodily presence."

tjerome in the Vulgate.


88  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

and  nonsense.  Neither  is  asserted  by  the  Catholics.  Perhaps,  though,
Zwingli,  being  wholly  ignorant  of  all  theology,  has  failed  to  get  at  the
meaning  of  some  doctor.

We  have  seen  how  far  from  accomplishing  anything  Zwingli  was
against  the  reality  of  the  body  of  Christ  in  the  sacrament,  however  much
he  vaunted  the  passages  quoted.  Let  us  examine  what  follows,  in  which
he  tries  to  discredit  the  communion  of  the  Eucharist,  on  the  ground  that
when  the  Jews  disputed  about  bodily  eating  of  the  flesh  of  Christ  He  said,
"The  flesh  profiteth  nothing,"  John  6  [:  63],  namely,  as  far  as  physical
eating  is  concerned.  But  Zwingli  plainly  shows  himself  here  to  be  a  new
Capernaite.  For  when  Christ  had  spoken  to  them  of  eating  His  body,  they
murmured  and  said,  "This  saying  is  hard,  anr  who  can  hear  it?"  John
6  [:  60].  "They  looked  upon  flesh,"  says  Augustine  (August,  tract  57),*
"as  it  is  torn  asunder  in  the  case  of  a  carcass  or  sold  in  the  market  place."
No  one  may  eat  the  body  of  Christ  in  this  Turkish  fashion.  Hence  it  is  a
blasphemous  idea  of  Zwingli  that  when  the  body  of  Christ  is  eaten  by  our
mouths,  nothing  comes  of  the  flesh  save  flesh.  For  the  flesh  of  Christ  is
not  eaten  physically,  so  as  to  pass  into  the  stomach,  be  changed  by  the
natural  heat,  assimilated  by  the  liver  and  sent  out  to  nourish  the  members.
What  ugly  and  ill-omened  notion  is  this,  to  have  any  such  idea  about  the
glorious  body  of  Christ  that  can  experience  no  sensation?  The  body  of
Christ  is  taken  in  mystically  in  its  real  and  true  essence  veiled  under  the
sacramental  forms — without  any  breaking,  any  separation,  any  change,  any
suffering.  When,  therefore,  Christ  says,  "The  flesh  profiteth  notliing,"  who
will  say  that  the  flesh  of  Christ,  in  which  He  wrought  the  salvation  of
the  whole  world,  is  valueless?  For  if  the  flesh  profiteth  nothing,  the  word
would  not  have  been  made  flesh  (says  Augustine),  to  dwell  among  us.
For  if  the  flesh  of  the  Apostles,  from  which  the  sound  of  their  voice  has
come  into  all  the  earth  to  us,  has  profited  us,  how  should  not  the  flesh  of
Christ  have  profited  us?

Therefore  we  must  extract  a  deeper  meaning  from  Christ's  words  than
their  grammatical  form  would  suggest.  But  heaven-taught  Zwingli  fills
out  Christ's  words — The  flesh  profiteth  nothing,  "namely,  as  far  as  physical
eating  is  concerned."  Lo,  the  man  who  scorns  and  rejects  all  glosses,  now
thrusts  upon  us  a  gloss  of  his  own,  which,  if  he  understands  it  in  St.
Augustine's  sense,  I  do  not  reject.  But  this  one-eyed,  half-blind  fellow  in
the  matter  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  knows  only  two  ways  of  eating,  the
physical  and  the  spiritual;  he  cannot  see  the  genuine  and  special  way  of
eating  the  Eucharist,  which  is  sacramental  and  mystical. t  But  I  will  ask
him  whether  he  does  not  believe  that  the  flesh  even  as  eaten  is  of  value?
For Christ said, "Whoso  eateth my  flesh,  and drinketh  my blood,  hath

*It  ought  to  be  Augustine,  "On  the  Gospel  of  John."  Tract  XXVII,  §5.

tit  is  interesting  to  compare  with  Eck's  explanation  that  of  Augustine  on
John  6:54:  "Understand  spiritually  what  I  have  said;  ye  are  not  to  eat  this  body
which  ye  see;  not  to  drink  that  blood  which  they  who  will  crucify  me  shall  pour  forth.
I  have  commended  unto  you  a  certain  mystery,  spiritually  understood  it  will  quicken.
Although  it  is  needful  that  this  be  visibly  celebrated,  yet  it  must  be  spiritually  under-
stood." Schaff,  Nicene  Fathers, 1st  Series,  VIII,  486.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  89

eternal  life,"  John  6[:54] — certainly  a  thing  of  the  greatest  value,  to
have  eternal  life.  Vain  and  vicious,  therefore,  is  all  that  Zwingli  has
brought  up,  and  I  most  amply  refuted  Zwingli's  wrong  understanding  of
the  subject  in  the  disputation  at  Baden  against  Oecolampadius.

He  next  brings  in  St.  Paul, — "and  if  we  have  known  Christ  according
to  the  flesh,  but  now  we  know  Him  so  no  longer,"  II  Cor.  5  [:  16].  This
passage  Zwingli  also  vaunted  prodigiously  in  the  disputation  at  Berne,
but  who  does  not  see  his  ignorance  and  carelessness  in  thinking  that  "to
know  according  to  the  flesh"  is  to  know  in  bodily  shape?  Therefore,  when
St.  Paul  says,  "Henceforth  we  know  no  man  according  to  the  flesh,"  that
means  according  to  Zwingli's  interpretation  of  it  that  he  did  not  know  in
the  body  Peter,  Titus,  Timothy,  Luke,  Aquila,  Gaius  and  other  dear  friends.
But  who  can  be  so  stupid?  Therefore  a  higher  meaning  must  be  extracted,
and  this  the  holy  Fathers  have  handed  down  to  us.  St.  Paul  means  by
knowing  after  the  flesh  to  know  with  fleshly  longing,  "for  even  the  Apostles
were  too  eager  for  the  bodily  presence  of  Christ,  and  took  His  going  away
greatly  to  heart,"  says  Augustine  against  the  Manichaeans,  and  this  was
to  know  after  the  flesh.  But  Christ,  wishing  to  turn  them  away  from  this
eagerness  and  raise  them  to  higher  things,  says,  "But  I  tell  you  the  truth:
It  is  expedient  to  you  that  I  go,"  John  16  [:  7].  They,  therefore,  had
known  Christ  after  the  flesh  who  wanted  so  much  the  intercourse  of  His
bodily  presence,  but  when  they  had  seen  the  glory  of  His  resurrection  and
ascension,  they  ceased  to  be  so  keen  for  intercourse  of  His  bodily  presence.
This  meaning  is  hinted  at  in  St.  Paul's  previous  words,  "that  they  who
live,  may  not  now  live  to  themselves,  but  unto  him  who  died  for  them,  and
rose  again,"  II  Cor,  5  [:  15].  I  omit  the  explanation  of  certain  persons
who  understand  "knowing  after  the  flesh"  of  observance  of  the  Law.

At  length  our  counterfeit  theologian,  stuffed  with  jeerings  and
sophistries,  comes  forward  and  maintains  that  "est,  is,"  has  the  force  of
"significat,  it  signifies."  He  tries  to  prove  it  by  its  being  so  used  in  Exodus
12  [:  11],  "hoc  est  paessa,"  that  is  "it  signifies  paessa,  which  is  the  passage
of  the  Lord."  For  since  the  Supper  took  the  place  of  the  Paschal  lamb,  the
fact  suggests  that  Christ  used  similar  words.  Then  he  supports  the  view
from  the  quality  of  memorials  that  they  take  the  name  of  the  things  they
commemorate.  But  these  things  do  not  at  all  support  Zwingli's  impious
contention,  for  in  the  first  place  the  braggart  wishing  to  seem,  in  our  sacred
Emperor's  eyes,  conversant  even  with  the  Hebrew  tongue,  gives  a  fine
example  of  this,  reading  HDS.  paessa,  contrary  to  all  Hebrew  usage,
since  it  does  not  have  a  dagesh  in  the  samech,*  and  has  the  aspirate  "h"
at  the  end,  whence  it  would  have  been  more  correct  to  read  "Pesach,"  which
we  call  "Pascha."  Now  Pesah  signifies  both  the  Paschal  lamb  and  the
feast  of  the  Paschal  lamb.  It  is  used  often  for  the  lamb,  especially  when  it
is  called  a  victim,  but  is  used  oftener  for  the  feast  in  the  book  of  Chronicles
— "Josias  kept  a  passover,  phase,  to  the  Lord  in  Jerusalem,"  II  Chron.
35  [:  1],  and  below:  "The  children  of  Israel  that  were  found  there  kept
the  phase,  passover,  at  that  time,  and  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread  seven

*The  edition  of  Schuler  and Schulthess,  IV,  13,  reads  Paesa.


90  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

days.  There  was  no  phase  like  to  this  in  Israel  from  the  days  of  Samuel
the  prophet,"  II  Chron.  35  [:  17-18].  Here  it  is  clear  that  "pesah"  is  used
for  the  feast.  When,  therefore,  Zwingli  brings  forward,  "This  is  Paessa,"  I
answer,  "Pasah"  is  used  here  for  the  feast  not  for  the  lamb,  and  with  what
the  interpreter  added  about  the  Lord's  passage,  he  wished  to  indicate  that
from  which  tlie  name  was  given,  but  primary  scliool  boys  know  that  the
thing  from  which  and  the  thing  for  which  a  name  is  given  are  diflferent.
We  do  not,  therefore,  want  Zwingli  to  spoil  the  text  for  us  and  interpret
"est,  is"  as  "significat,  signifies,"  as  the  Sophists  do  in  official  documents.
It  is  used  in  the  simple  demonstrative  sense,  and  that  this  is  true  I  prove
from  the  fact  that  in  the  Hebrew  this  verb  "is"  in  which  Zwingli  works  up
his  trope  does  not  occur,  but  only  the  pronoun  in  ,*  which  has  the  force  of
"ipsum,  self,"  so  that  the  meaning  is,  "a  passover  itself  unto  the  Lord,"  or
"to  the  Lord."  The  Chaldaic  Targum  reads  "before  the  Lord,"t  and  that
is  in  accordance  with  my  explanation  that  it  is  used  for  the  feast,  for  the
feast  is  kept  unto  the  Lord  or  before  the  Lord.  As  to  his  adding  further-
more that  the  form  of  speech  is  similar  in  the  case  of  the  type  and  that  of
the  reality,  first,  it  never  was  established  in  the  case  of  the  typical  lamb
that  "is"  was  used  for  "signifies;"  second,  even  if  we  grant  him  this,  he
will  not  make  out  that  the  same  form  of  speech  was  observed  in  the  case
of  the  Eucharist.  For  who  does  not  know  that  baptism  took  the  place  of
circumcision?  ^et  in  the  proclamation  of  circumcision  [Gen.  17:  10-14],
the  words  are  to  be  understood  of  the  actual  foreskin  and  of  actual  and
literal  circumcision,  while  in  the  case  of  baptism  the  expressions  are  not
used  in  like  manner.  For  when  Christ  said,  "Unless  a  man  be  born  again,
he  cannot  see  the  kingdom  of  God,"  Nicodemus  understood  the  words
literally  of  actual  rebirth  and  said,  "How  can  a  man  be  born  when  he  is
old?"  Now  it  is  as  clear  as  the  sun  how  Zwingli's  reasoning  falls  utterly
flat.  But  in  mentioning  a  memorial  Zwingli  destroys  Zwingli  here.  It  is
an  old  saying  that  a  liar  hath  need  of  a  good  memory.  For  this  sternest  oi
iconoclasts  once  wrote  to  Valentine  Compar  of  Uri,  (Fol.  33)$  wildly  for-
bidding that  images  or  statues  or  memorials  be  called  by  the  names  of  the
things  they  commemorated,  but  now  he  imposes  upon  us  as  a  law  what  he
previously  forbade — this  new  Vertumnus**  asserting  everything  at  will,
when  it  seems  to  champion  his  own  side.  What  sort  of  a  memorial,  how-
ever, the  Eucharist  is  in  the  Church  Zwingli  no  longer  knows, — renegade
from  the  faith  as  he  is.  It  is  the  sign  of  the  present  body  of  Christ  and  a
memorial  of  the  passion  of  Christ  and  of  redemption  and  all  the  benefits
of  God.- -such  a  memorial,  I  say,  as  David  exulting  in  spirit  foresaw  when

*It  should  be  Kin.  The  correct  rendering  is,  of  course,  "A  passover  it  is  to
Jehovah."  In  a  nominal  sentence  the  subject  and  predicate  are  expressed  by  a  noun
or  pronoun. See  Gesenius,  Hebrew  Grammar,  §141,  2d.

tEck  means  the  Targum  of  Onkelos,  see  Etheridge,  The  Targum  of  Onkclos  and
Jonathan  Ben  Uzziel  on  the  Pentateuch,  Vol. 1,  p.  370.

tSee  Schuler  and  Sehulthess  edition,  II,  1,  p.  34.  Zwingli  objects  to  calling
"impotent  blocks  of  willows,"  by  the  name  of  saint  so  and  so,  because  it  indicates
higher  veneration  than  the  wood  deserves  and  suggests  the  thought  that  saints  can
help  men,  and  that  men  should,  therefore,  have  saints.

**An  Etruscan  deity,  the  god  of  the  changing  year.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  91

he  sang  "He  hath  made  a  remembrance  of  his  wonderful  works,  being  a
merciful  and  gracious  Lord."  Ps.  110  [:  4].*  And  what  were  these  won-
derful works  to  be  remembered?  That  "He  hath  given  food  to  them  that
fear  Him,"  not,  therefore,  baker's  bread,  but  the  living  bread  which  was
given  upon  the  cross  for  the  world,  John  6  [:  51].

THERE FOLLOW NOW THE  ARGUMENTS OF THAT
GREAT  DEBATER,  ZWINGLI.

First  he  asks  whether  when  the  Eucharist  is  partaken  of  the  body  is
fed  or  the  soul.  If  the  soul,  then  the  soul  feeds  upon  flesh,  which  is
absurd.  But  who  would  not  laugh  at  this  doughty  fighter?  If  he  has
such  confidence  in  these  arguments,  why  did  he  not  come  to  the  disputation
at  Baden  according  to  the  request  of  the  twelve  Cantons,  accompanied  by
a  safe-conduct?  I  should  surely  have  beaten  him  and  stripped  him  of  all
his  arms,  and  now  I  will  break  his  bow  and  the  arms  in  which  he  puts  his
trust.  For  I  will  reply  to  his  dilemma  that  the  soul  is  fed  by  the  Eucharist.
If  he  thinks  that  absurd,  I  should  like  to  have  him  bring  forward  his
Scripture  proofs.  Furthermore,  is  not  also  the  spirit  of  Christ  in  Christ's
body,  unless  one  is  infected,  like  Luther,  with  the  Nestorian  heresy?  Has
he  not  read  Chrysostom,  Ambrose,  Cyril  on  the  partaking  of  the  body  of
Christ,  or  at  least  St.  Augustine's  description  of  the  efficacy  of  the  food
in  question — "I  shall  be  changed  into  thee,  not  thou  into  me,"  etc.  A
farmer's  reasoning,  therefore,  is  this  of  Zwingli — "The  sensual  man  per-
ceiveth  not  the  things  that  are  of  the  Spirit  of  God,"  I  Cor.  2:  [:  14];
therefore  the  soul  is  fed  by  the  sacramental  partaking  of  the  flesh  of  Christ.

So  also  the  second  argument  with  which  he  tries  to  floor  us,  is  empty —
as  to  the  effect  of  the  Communion,  that  it  will  either  effect  the  remission  of
sins  or  dispense  the  virtue  of  the  passion  of  Christ;  therefore  the  virtue
of  the  passion  was  dispensed  before  it  took  place.  Who  would  not  be
astonished  at  such  ignorance  of  Holy  Writ  in  a  man  who  claims  for  himself
a  new  sect  in  religion?  As  to  his  contention  about  the  effect  of  the  Com-
munion, I  admit  that  the  blood  was  shed,  the  body  was  offered  for  the
remission  of  sins.  For  Christ  bears  witness  to  this  of  the  blood  in  Matthew
26  [:  28].  But  the  Sacrament  of  the  Eucharist  was  not  ordained  in  the
first  place  to  wash  out  mortal  sin,  since  the  Sacrament  of  Penance  was
instituted  to  that  end,  as  Baptism  was  in  the  case  of  original  sin.  It  is
partaken  of  in  atonement  for  sin,  for  the  increase  of  grace,  for  the  acquir-
ing of  blessings  and  merits,  and  is  offered  in  order  to  appease  God  in
individual  emergencies.

Having  denied,  therefore,  the  first  part  of  the  dilemma,  it  is  clear  that
I  admit  the  second.  For  beyond  a  doubt  God  gave  increase  of  grace  at  the
Supper  to  the  disciples  who  worthily  partook  of  it.  It  is  a  defect,  there-
fore, in  so  great  a  master  in  Israel  not  to  have  known  to  what  end  the
sacraments  were  instituted  by  Christ.  But  as  to  Zwingli's  considering  it
absurd  that  the  power  of  the  passion  was  poured  out  upon  men  before  it

*Ps.  110  in  the  Vulgate,  but  111 in  the  Hebrew  and  in  King  James  Version.


92  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

took  place,  our  great  theologian  is  not  aware  that  all  who  have  been  saved,
all  who  have  been  made  just,  all  who  have  gone  down  into  the  limbo  of
the  fathers,  were  justified  through  having  foreseen  the  passion  of  Christ,
just  as  we  are  through  His  passion  having  been  manifested.  Hence  the
fathers  are  said  by  St.  Paul  to  "have  the  same  spirit  of  faith,  as  it  is
written,  I  believed,  for  which  cause  I  have  spoken,"  Ps.  115  [:  10]*  and
II  Cor.  4  [:  13].  Therefore  he  says,  they  "did  all  eat  the  same  spiritual
food,  and  all  drank  the  same  spiritual  drink,"  I  Cor.  10  [:  3-4].  For  from
whom  had  circumcision  the  efficacy  of  its  meaning  if  not  from  Christ,  as  also
baptism  has  now?  And  all  the  just  men  in  the  Old  Testament  had  it
from  the  virtue  of  the  passion  of  Christ,  although  they  had  not  received
the  promises,  says  St.  Paul,  Hebr.  11  [:  13],  for  the  price  had  not  yet  been
paid.  They  could  not  fly  forth,  because  the  gates  of  heaven  had  not  yet
been  opened  unto  them.  As  to  what  Zwingli  finally  says  about  the  food  of
the  body,  I  leave  it  out  as  a  dream  unworthy  of  notice.

Zwingli's  third  sophistry  is,  what  sort  of  a  body  did  the  disciples  eat
at  the  Supper,  one  capable  of  sensation  or  one  incapable  of  sensation?  If
one  incapable  of  sensation,  then  Christ  had  two  bodies.  This  sophistry
shows  up  Zwingli  as  unskilled  in  dialectics  also,  and  I  will  play  him  with
the  like  quibble.  If  one  of  my  hands  moves,  while  the  other  is  at  rest,  I
ask  him  whether  my  soul  moves  in  my  hand  which  is  shown  to  be  at  rest  or
not.  If  not,  then  there  are  two  souls,  one  which  moves  in  the  right  hand,
and  one  which  is  motionless  in  the  hand  at  rest.  This  is  the  cradle  stage
of  dialectics.  Let  Zwingli  answer  if  he  can,  and  he  will  see  that  this  quibble
has  no  substance;  it  is  a  pure  and  absurd  sophism.  I  answer  Zwingli,
therefore,  that  the  disciples  partook  of  the  same  body  which  Christ  had,
and  he  had  one  capable  of  sensation  and  of  being  hurt.  Therefore  it  is  a
dream  on  Zwingli's  part  that  the  disciples  partook  of  such  a  body  as
Christ  had  after  the  Resurrection.  And  I  would  say  this  to  Zwingli,  which
is  beyond  his  comprehension,  that  the  apostles  partook  of  Christ's  body,
capable  of  sensation,  in  a  manner  not  involving  sensation,  because  they  did
it  sacramentally;  for  although  this  body  was  capable  of  sensation,  yet  it
was  now  without  sensation  under  the  form  of  the  Eucharist.  For  the
capability  of  sensation  demands  limitation  in  space  on  the  part  of  the
thing  feeling  the  sensation.  The  body  of  Christ  is  not  now  limited  in
space  in  the  sense  that  a  portion  of  place  corresponds  to  a  portion  of  the
thing  placed,  but  in  this  I  talk  to  a  deaf  man,  as  far  as  Zwingli  is  con-
cerned, for  a  pig  cares  nothing  for  perfume.t  Now  all  these  things  follow
from  Scripture,  and  having  laid  as  the  foundation  what  Christ  said —
"This  is  my  body,"  Matth.  26 :  26 — I  have  shown  how  that  is  not  impossible
with  God,  as  Zwingli  in  his  folly  imagines.

*Ps.  116:  10  in  Authorized  Version.

tEck  quotes  here  a  part  of  a  Latin  proverb  which  is  found  in  full  in  Aulus
Gellius,  Noctium  Atticarum  Libri  XX,  pref.  19.  It  reads:  "For  a  jay  cares  nothing
for  music  nor  a  pig  for  perfume."  It  has  the  same  sense  as  the  N.  T.  proverb  "to
cast  pearls  before  swine."  Eck  means  that  such  fine  theological  distinctions  as  he  is
making,  between  spiritual  and  sacramental  presence,  are  beyond  Zwingli's
comprehension.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  93

As  a  reserve  line  Zwingli  leads  out,  not  without  injustice  to  the
Fathers  to  be  sure,  Ambrose  and  Augustine  as  champions  of  his  impious
views.  He  quotes  from  Ambrose  on  the  First  Epistle  to  the  Corinthians
[I  Cor.  11],  in  which  he  says,  "For  since  we  have  been  set  free  by  the
Lord's  death,  being  mindful  of  this,  we  signify  in  our  eating  and  drinking
the  flesh  and  blood  which  were  offered  up  for  us."*  But  if  Zwingli
were  not  blind  and  bereft  of  reason  he  would  surely  never  have  quoted  these
words  of  Ambrose,  which  invalidate  his  own  view  by  their  plain  testimony
that  we  are  mindful  of  this  tiling  (the  Lord's  death,  namely)  in  eating  and
drinking  the  flesh  and  blood.  But  Zwingli  refers  "the  flesh  and  blood"
to  the  last  word  "significamus,  we  signify."t  But  this  is  to  twist  and  do
violence  to  the  words  of  Ambrose,  since  St.  Paul  spoke  of  showing  the
death,  about  which  Ambrose  also  speaks.  Therefore  the  meaning  of
Ambrose's  words  is,  "because  we  have  been  set  free  by  the  Lord's  death,
mindful  of  that  death  when  we  eat  in  the  Eucharist  the  flesh  and  blood
which  were  offered  up  for  us,  we  plainly  signify  or  show  the  same  death
of  the  Lord,"  I  Cor.  11  [:  26].

And  that  our  opponent  may  not  mutter  here,  it  is  incontrovertibly  true
from  other  places  that  this  was  the  purport  of  Ambrose's  words.  Just
before  the  words  already  quoted  he  had  said,  "The  celebrating  of  the
mystery  of  the  Eucharist  while  suffering  shows  that  it  is  not  a  supper;
it  is  a  spiritual  medicine  which  taken  with  reverence  purifies  the  faithful."
Zwingli's  followers  have  nothing  but  a  supper;  their  baker's  bread  is  not
a  spiritual  medicine,  and  does  not  purify  the  faithful.  Furthermore  in  his
Book  on  the  Mysteries  (last  chapter),  Ambrose  says,  "This  sacrament
which  you  receive  is  made  what  it  is  by  the  words  of  Christ.  If  the  words
of  Elijah  had  power  to  bring  down  fire  from  heaven,  shall  not  the  words  of
Christ  have  power  to  change  the  nature  of  the  elements?" J  And  below,
'Why  do  you  seek  here  the  order  of  nature  in  Christ's  body,  when  contrary
to  the  course  of  nature  He  was  born  of  a  virgin  ?"  And  again,  "The  words
of  Christ  which  were  able  to  make  out  of  nothing  that  which  was  not,  can
they  not  change  things  which  already  are  into  what  they  were  not?"
Here  he  asserts  the  body  of  Christ  and  transubstantiation.  Further,  in  his
book  on  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's  Incarnation  Ambrose  says,  "For  if  you
believe  that  flesh  was  taken  up  by  Christ,  you  will  also  offer  the  body  to  be
transfigured  upon  the  altar."**  And  on  Psalm  118,  "Now  am  I  admitted  to
the  honor  of  the  heavenly  table. For  my  feast  the  rain  does  not  pour  down

*Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,  XVII,  256.

fZwingli's  interpretation  is  perfectly  correct.  This  is  shown  by  the  sentence
that  follows  the  passage  quoted  from  Ambrose,  "The  Covenant  was  established  by  blood,
inasmuch  as  blood  is  a  witness  of  the  Divine  mercy.  For  a  type  of  which  we  take  the
mystic  cup  of  the  blood  for  the  protection of our body and soul."

jMigne,  Patrologia  Latina,  Vol.  XVI,  Col.  424;  and  SchafI,  Nicene  Fathers,
Second  Series,  Vol.  X,  p.  324.

**Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,  Vol.  XVI,  col.  859,  Chap.  IV.  Eck  overlooks
the  fact  the  both  the  tract  on  the  "Mysteries,"  as  well  as  the  tract  on  the  "Sacrament
of  the  Lord's  Incarnation"  are  probably  not  by  Ambrose.  See  Wm.  Goode,  The
Nature  of  Christ's  Presence  in  the  Eucharist,  London,  1856,  Vol.  I,  p.  493/;  also  Hugh
Watt,  on  "Eucharist,"  in  Hastings,  Encyclopaedia  of  Ethics  and  Religion,  V,  SSL


94  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

nor  do  the  beasts  of  the  earth,  nor  the  fruits  of  the  trees  toil,  nor  are
rivers  or  springs  to  be  sought  for  to  supply  me  with  drink.  Christ  is  my
food,  Christ  is  my  drink.  The  flesh  of  God  is  my  food,  and  the  blood  of  God
is  my  drink."*  What  more  do  we  ask  of  Ambrose?  And  this  villainous
Zwingli  has  the  effrontery  to  fasten  falsely  upon  so  holy  a  man  this
impious  view  of  a  Berengarius.  Credence  is  given  to  all  that  I  have  quoted
by  the  fact  that  Ambrose  speaks  of  the  thing  again,  confirming  it  by  a
miracle,  in  his  book  about  his  brother's  death. t  His  brother  Satyrus,  having
the  Eucharist  tied  up  in  his  neckerchief,  was  once  saved  from  shipwreck."
Fiirthermore  Zwingli  quote's  Augustine  (Tract.  30)  with  no  less  injustice
than  Ambrose.  First,  commenting  on  John,  he  asserts  that  the  body  of
Christ  which  rose  from  the  dead  must  be  in  a  particular  place,  and  because
in  the  copies  examined  "potest,  can,"  is  read  instead  of  "oportere,  must,"
he  quotes  from  the  Master  of  the  Sentences  and  from  a  decree  of  Gratian
that  "oportet,  must,"  is  what  should  be  read.  But  if  Zwingli  saw  how  Peter
the  Lombard  and  Gratian  read  the  word,  why  did  he  not  also  see  their
explanation?  Why  does  he  correct  the  manuscript  of  Augustine  in
accordance  with  theological  "Sentences"  and  a  decree,  when  otherwise  he
attributes  no  authority  whatever  to  them?  Why  does  he  venture  to  quote
Augustine  in  support  of  his  view,  when  he  did  not  blush  to  write  to  the
King  of  France  to  this  effect: — "Augustine,  who  was  keen  and  prudent
beyond  other  men,  did  not  venture  to  state  the  truth  plainly  about  the
Sacrament  in  his  time."  (Commen.,  Folio  282).$  If  he  did  not  dare  to
state  it,  since  the  opinion  of  the  bodily  presence  in  the  Sacrament  had
become  firmly  established,  why  does  he  venture  to  claim  that  Augustine's
statement  is  on  his  side?  I  say,  therefore,  to  Augustine,  with  the  Master
of  the  Sentences,  (Dist.  10,  quarti.)  :**  The  body  of  Christ  must  be  imder-
stood  to  be  in  a  particular  place  in  so  far  as  it  is  anywhere  visibly  in
human  form,  but  His  truth,  that  is,  His  divinity,  is  everywhere.  His  truth
also,  that  is,  His  true  body,  is  on  every  altar  where  the  Mass  is  celebrated,
though,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  Augustine  may  have  been  speaking  of  the
truth  of  the  Gospel  spread  through  the  world  by  the  Apostles.  While
quoting  Gratian,  Zwingli  might  have  glanced  at  Bernard's  statement  on
this  point: — "The  body  of  Christ  must  be  in  a  particular  place  in  so  far
as  it  has  a  form  and  manifestation  in  which  it  can  be  submitted  to  the
bodily  human  senses;  for  though  it  is  on  every  altar  in  its  true  form
which  it  took  from  the  Virgin,  yet  it  is  not  there  submitted  to  the  bodily

*See  Ambrose  on  Psalm  CXVIII,  Sermon  XVIII,  526,  in  Migne,  Patrologia
Latina,  XV,  1537.  Over  against  these  passages  we  read  in  these  same  tracts,  ascribed  to
Ambrose,  that  the  elements  in  the  Supper  are  "a  figure  of  the  body  and  blood  of  our
Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  (De  Sacr.  IV,  5)  and  again,  "we  signify  in  our  eating  and
drinking  the  flesh  and  blood  that  were  offered  for  us,"  (Com.  on  I.  Cor.  XI,  26)  and
also,  "before  the  blessing  of  the  heavenly  words  another  nature  (species)  is  spoken
of, after  consecration the Body is  signified," (On the Mysteries, IX, 54).

tSee  "De  Excessu  Fratris  Sui  Libri  Duo,"  Bk.  1,  §43;  printed  in  Migne.
Patrologia  Latina,  XVI, 1361.

JSee Zwingli's Werke, Vol. Ill, 1914, p. 811.

**Peter  Lombard,  "Sententiarum  Libri  Quatuor."  Lib.  IV.  Dist.  10;  in  Migne,
Patrologia  Latina.  Vol.  CXCII,  col.  860.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  95

senses."  So  in  quoting  Augustine  against  Adimantus,  (Cap.  12.)  he  is
carrying  coals  to  Newcastle,  for  all  of  us  Catholics  to  this  day  agree  \vith
Augustine:  "The  Lord  did  not  hesitate  to  say,  'This  is  my  body,'  when
He  gave  a  symbol  of  His  body."  For  the  Catholic  Church  teaches  and  has
always  taught  that  the  forms  of  bread  and  wine  are  sense  symbols  of  the
most  sacred  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord.  For  how  could  the  Eucharist  be  a
sacrament  if  it  were  not  a  symbol  of  a  sacred  thing?  And  by  reason  of  the
symbol  the  holy  Fathers  sometimes  mention  the  sign  or  symbol,  meanwhile
always  confessing  the  thing  itself  in  the  sacrament,  that  is,  the  reality  of
the  body  and  blood  of  Christ.  Therefore  it  is  absolutely  false  that  we
condemn  Augustine,  and  it  is  equally  false  when  this  slanderer  says  in
conclusion  that  the  ancients  always  spoke  symbolically  when  tliey
mentioned  the  body  and  blood  in  the  Lord's  Supper.  And  to  make  our
opponent  blush,  I  set  Augustine  over  against  him  speaking  of  the  Lord's
words  (Aug.  Ser.  28)  : — "When  I  was  treating  of  the  sacraments  I  said  to
you  that  before  Christ's  words  that  which  is  offered  is  called  bread;  when
Christ's  words  have  been  uttered,  it  is  no  longer  called  bread  but  is  named
the  body.  Why,  therefore,  in  the  Lord's  Prayer,  which  comes  afterwards,
does  He  say,  'Our  daily  bread'?  He  said  'bread,'  to  be  sure,  but  kTviovffiov,
that  is,  supersubstantial.*  This  is  not  the  bread  that  goes  into  our  bodies,
but  that  bread  of  eternal  life  which  supports  the  substance  of  our  souls."
Here  Augustine  plainly  shuts  out  Zwingli's  tropes  and  symbols.  So  also
he  says  to  Count  Julian,  "Let  the  piety  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  free  us
from  these  and  may  He  give  Himself  to  us  to  eat,  who  said,  'I  am  the  living
bread  which  came  down  from  heaven.  Whoso  eatetli  my  flesh,  and
drinketh  my  blood,  hath  eternal  life.'  But  before  any  one  receives  the  body
and  blood  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  let  him  examine  himself,"  etc.  Augus-
tine says  moreover  in  another  place  (On  Psalm  33),  "And  He  was  borne
in  His  own  hands,t  but  who  can  understand,  brethren,  how  this  could  be  in
the  case  of  a  man?  For  who  is  carried  in  his  own  hands?  A  man  can  be
carried  by  the  hands  of  others,  no  one  is  carried  by  his  own  hands.  We  do
not  see  how  this  can  be  understood  literally  in  the  case  of  David  himself,  but
do  see  in  the  case  of  Christ.  For  Christ  was  borne  in  His  own  hands  when
commending  His  body  He  said,  'This  is  my  body.'  For  He  bore  that  body
in  His  own  hands."i Through  these  perfectly  clear  w^ords**  it  is  manifest

*So  the  word  "daily"  is  translated  in  the  Vulgate,  Matth.  6:  11.

fin  illustration  of  the  historical  situation  calling  forth  Ps.  33,  Augustine  quotes
here  I  Sam.  21:  13,  where  he  reads:  "He  was  carried  in  His  hands,"  instead  of  the
Hebrew,  "He  feigned  himself  mad  in  their  hands."

JMigne,  Patrologia  Latina,  XXXVI,  306.  Augustine  qualifies  his  words  b>
what  follows:  "How  was  He  borne  in  His  own  hands?  Because  when  He  delivered
His  own  body  and  blood,  He  took  into  His  hands  what  the  faithful  know,  and  He  Him-
self in  a  certain  manner  carried  Himself,  when  He  said: 'This  is  my  body.'  "

**The  words  of  Augustine  are  made  clear  by  another  passage:  "How  many  even
now  in  the  Supper  itself,  although  they  have  not  seen  that  table  which  then  was  [i.  e.,
the  table  at  which  the  Lord  presided],  nor  seen  with  their  eyes,  or  tasted  with  their
jaws  the  bread  which  the  Lord  carried  in  His  hands,  yet  inasmuch  as  that  which  is  now
prepared  is  the  same,  how  many  even  now,  in  the  Supper  itself,  eat  and  drink  dam-
nation to  themselves."  Sermon,  112,  §4.  Hence  there  is  no  transubstantiation,  the
bread  remains  bread.


96  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

to  any  Catholic  that  the  impostor  Zwingli  does  injustice  to  this  holy  Father
in  twisting  his  words  and  distorting  them  into  the  error  of  the  Caper-
naites,  and  still  less  ought  Oecolampadius,  the  apostate,  to  do  this,  for  he
once  swore  allegiance  to  the  rule  of  Augustine  in  the  order  of  St.  Brigitta.
Zwingli  vaunts  the  books  of  Oecolampadius  here.  I  oppose  to  all  their
writings  the  Bishop  of  Rochester  to  whom  they  have  not  made  answer  by
a  syllable  these  three  years  and  more.

ARTICLE  IX.

Zwingli  here  casts  out  two  things  from  the  Church  which  have  always
been  a  great  bulwark  to  the  feeble  and  unlearned,  raising  their  hearts
more  towards  God,  church  ceremonies,  namely,  and  images.  He  decrees
that  ceremonies  are  to  be  tolerated  if  they  are  not  through  their  supersti-
tious character  opposed  to  the  faith  and  the  word  of  God.  Although  I
grant  that  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  are  of  this  character,  being  based
upon  the  sacred  writings,  or  designed  to  rouse  the  hearts  of  the  faithful  to
faith  through  piety  and  to  draw  their  emotions  thither,  as  it  would  not  be
difficult  for  me  to  show  of  them  individually,  as  Thomas  of  Walden  did
two  centuries  ago  against  the  followers  of  Wycliffe,  yet  as  Zwingli  does
not  tell  us  which  he  tolerates  and  which  he  casts  out,  I  pass  them  by  also.
But  as  to  the  images,  in  regard  to  which  he  is  at  variance  with  Luther,  the
Capernaites  have  started  up  here  the  ancient  heresy  of  the  Iconoclasts  (In
imaginum  fractores)  which  was  condemned  in  the  Second  Council  of
Nicaea,  in  that  of  Constantinople  under  Irene,  and  in  three  councils  of
Rome,  under  Gregory  II  and  III,  and  Stephen  II.  This  heresy  got  into
Germany  through  a  certain  presbyter  named  Felix,  whence  it  was  called
the  Felician  heresy,  but  the  Emperor  Charles  the  Great  (who  founded
Zurich)  presently  called  together  the  Synod  of  Frankfurt  and  crushed  it
out,  and  now  the  Zurichers,  forgetful  of  their  founder,  restore  it  with
great  impiety.  The  Emperor  Charles  had  written  four  books  against  this
heresy.  Serenus,  Bishop  of  Marseilles  spread  it  in  Provence,  but  Gregory
the  Great  (In  regist. ),  promptly  suppressed  it.  It  is,  therefore,  a  heresy
many  times  condemned  that  Zwingli  is  now  reviving,  so  that  the  Lord  may
truly  complain  of  him  and  his  companions  by  the  mouth  of  the  prophet,
"My  people  have  done  two  evils.  They  have  forsaken  me,  the  foundation
of  living  water,  and  have  digged  to  themselves  cisterns,  broken  cisterns,  that
can  hold  no  water,"  Jer.  2  [:  13].  For  what  else  does  Zwingli  do  but  hew
out  the  fetid  pools  of  ancient  heretics,  and  bring  up  their  old  rubbish?  If
the  use  of  images  were  new,  he  might  perhaps  have  an  excuse  and  something
to  take  hold  of,  but  since  it  is  very  old,  Zwingli  shows  that  he  is  one  of  the
false  prophets  who  are  to  rise  up  in  the  last  days,  Matth.  24  [:  24].  For
John  of  Damascus  declares  that  we  have  the  use  of  images  from  the  tradi-
tion of  the  Apostles.  St.  Athanasius  tells  of  a  miracle  certainly  worthy  of
respect  which  happened  with  an  image  of  the  Crucified  at  Beirut  in  Syria,
and  testifies  that  this  cross  belonged  to  Nicodemus,  who  went  to  Jesus  by
night,  John  3  [:  2],  and  showed  himself  so  devoted  to  Him  in  the  burial.
Athanasius (after  having  told  what insults the  Jews had heaped upon


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  97

the  image  of  the  Crucified,  and  how  one  had  smitten  his  right  side  with  a
spear),  says,  "And  when  this  great  outrage  had  been  perpetrated,  a  strange
and  exceedingly  marvellous  thing,  never  heard  of  at  any  other  time,  sud-
denly took  place.  The  place  of  the  wound  immediately  began  to  flow  with
water  and  blood,  and  just  as  once  at  the  passion  of  the  Son  of  God,  the
Saviour  of  the  world,  it  happened  that  the  heavens  trembled,  so  now  the
same  thing  occurred  afresh  by  the  ordinance  of  God.  For  verily  at  this  act
not  only  the  elements  of  the  world  might  have  been  shaken  but  the  powers
above  shuddered  at  such  a  deed."  Eusebius  of  Caesarea  tells  of  miracles
which  were  wrought  in  Caesarea  by  an  image  of  Christ,  which  the  woman
mentioned  in  the  Gospel,  Luke  8  [ :  43-44],  as  having  been  healed  by  touching
the  hem  of  His  garment,  had  set  up  in  that  city.  Since,  therefore,  images
edify  the  simple,  serve  as  reminders  to  the  educated,  and  have  an  effect
upon  all,  the  Catholics  are  right  to  use  them,  and  all  risk  of  idolatry  is
easily  avoided,  if  according  to  the  teaching  of  the  great  Basil  all  worship
is  directed  to  their  originals.

ARTICLE  X.

In  this  article  Zwingli  testifies  to  the  office  of  preaching,  which  was
instituted  by  Christ  and  first  entrusted  to  the  Apostles  in  Judaea.  After
the  Resurrection  He  appointed  them  to  go  out  into  the  whole  world,  and
entrusted  to  them  the  oflice  of  baptizing  and  preaching.  (Matth.  10  &  28,
Mark  16,  Luke  9.)  But  Zwingli  has  in  many  places  before  this  done  the
opposite,  making  the  ministry  of  the  word  and  preaching  of  small  account.
For  he  has  often  borne  witness  that  he  did  not  wish  to  be  taught  by  men,
but  by  God  alone,  as  in  the  book  published  against  the  Canon,  [of  the  Mass]
(Fol.  23),*  and  in  the  Second  Acts  of  Zurich  (Fol.  59),t  and  he  rolls  up
this  stone  all  through  the  book  "On  the  Clearness  of  the  Word  of  God."t
And  finally  Zwingli  pours  forth  venom  in  jeering  at  the  Bishops — that
they  are  legion  and  born  to  devour  the  harvest,  are  a  useless  weight  upon
the  earth,  are  in  the  Church  what  goiters  and  hunchbacks  are  in  the  human
body.  This  is  the  way  this  evangelical  gentleman  is  in  the  habit  of  raining
abuse  and  vomiting  forth  heaps  and  mountains  of  insult,  in  accordance
with  long  suff"ering,  with  love  of  one's  neighbor,  with  a  gentle  Christian
heart.  But  the  whole  Church  has  a  far  different  opinion.  It  was  the  heresy
of  the  Arians  not  to  distinguish  a  bishop  from  a  plain  priest,  as  Augustine
is  a  witness.  Christ  by  no  means  appointed  disciples  only  but  also
apostles,  Luke  10  [:  1].  Bishops  succeeded  the  apostles,  priests  the  dis-
ciples, as  Bede  explains,  and  this  the  whole  Church  has  always  observed

•While  criticising  Zwingli  for  every  slight  deviation  from  the  authorities  which
he  quotes,  Eck  himself  is  very  careless  in  quoting  Zwingli.  Thus,  in  this  case,  the
actual  words  of  Zwingli  were:  "After  I  perceived  that  there  is  nothing  more  wily
and  deceitful  than  human  reason,  I  learned  to  assert  those  things  only  that  we  have
learned  out  of  the  mouth  of  God."  See  Zwingli's  "De  canone  missae  epicheiresis,"  in
his  Werke,  ed.  Egli  and  Finsler,  II,  594.  At  the  second  disputation  at  Zurich,
Zwingli  said:  "For  all  things  which  God  has  not  taught  but  come  from  men,  are
never  good." See  Werke,  ed.  Egli  and  Finsler,  II,  739.

tThe  Acts  of  the  Second  Disputation  at  Zurich,  October  26-28,  1523.

Jit  is  the  book: "Von  Klarheit  und  Gewissheit  des  Wortes  Gottes," 1522.


98  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

from  the  very  times  of  the  Apostles.  For  St.  Dionysius,  the  disciple  of  the
Apostle  St.  Paul,  wrote  of  the  consecration  of  a  bishop,  and  a  priest,  and  a
deacon,  and  that  the  title  of  the  Civil  Law  also  indicates  this — Of  the
Bishops  and  Clergy,  in  the  Code.  The  High  Priest  as  well  as  the  Priest  also
figured  under  the  old  law;  why  should  the  Church,  the  bride  of  Christ,  have
less  honor?  Why  should  there  be  a  smaller  number  of  ministrants  in  her?
But  Zwingli  covets  the  title  of  Bishop,  and  rejoices  when  he  is  called
Bishop  and  Antistes  of  Zurich  by  his  companions  in  error.

ARTICE  XI.

In  defining  the  civil  magistrate  as  deputy  of  God  Zwingli  does  rightly.
For  Holy  Writ  teaches  this  in  various  passages,  and  Paul  enjoins  it  upon
the  Romans,  Rom.  13  [:  1].  But  I  fear  he  says  this  more  from  a  desire  to
flatter  than  from  love  of  the  truth,  for  if  he  were  not  afraid  of  their  power,
he  would  inveigh  against  them  as  violently  as  he  does  against  the
ecclesiastics,  whose  jurisdiction  is  just  as  much  founded  upon  divine  right
as  that  of  the  secular  authorities.  Otherwise  perhaps  he  would  even  cry
out  with  Luther:  "The  secular  government  lies  as  thoroughly  prostrate  as
does  that  of  the  tyrants  of  the  Church,"  (De  potestate  saeculari,  Folio  25).
How  long  till  one  worthless  wretch  shall  perish  with  the  other?

ARTICLE  XII.

Zwingli  repudiates  the  fire  of  purgatory  as  a  myth  and  a  thing  in-
sulting to  the  redemption  given  through  Christ.  It  will  be  well  first  to
prove  a  purgatory  and  then  to  answer  objections.  For  purgatory  is
expressly  asserted  by  St.  Paul  when  he  writes  to  the  Corinthians  on  build-
ing upon  a  foundation,  and  adds,  "If  any  man's  work  burn,  he  shall  suffer
loss;  but  he  himself  shall  be  saved,  yet  so  as  by  fire,"  I  Cor.  3  [:  15].  For
this  passage  was  understood  of  purgatory  by  Ambrose,  Jerome,  Augustine,
Gregory.  Thus  also  St.  Gregory  reasons  from  the  words  of  Christ,  "He
that  shall  speak  against  the  Holy  Ghost,  it  shall  not  be  forgiven  him,
neither  in  this  world,  nor  in  the  world  to  come,"  Matth.  12  [:  32].*  From
this  it  is  clear  that  even  in  the  world  to  come  some  sins  are  forgiven,  and
this  can  only  happen  in  purgatory.  This  also  Judas  Maccabaeus  believed
before  the  birth  of  Christ.  For  we  read  in  the  Church,  "That  brave  leader
Judas  Maccabaeus,  having  made  a  collection,  sent  twelve  thousand  drachms
of  silver  to  Jerusalem  for  sacrifice  to  be  offered  for  the  sins  of  the  dead,"t
II  Mace.  12[:43],  and  below,  "It  is,  therefore,  a  holy  and  wholesome
thought  to  pray  for  the  dead,  that  they  may  be  loosed  from  sins,"  II.  Mace.

*Gregory  the  Great,  who  has  been  called  "the  real  inventor  of  the  doctrine  of
purgatory,"  (Hagenbach,  History  of  Christian  Doctrine,  II,  97)  infers  from  Matth.
12:  32,  that,  while  "some  sins  are  forgiven  in  this  life,  others  can  be  forgiven  in  the
future  life,"  but  he  limits  these  latter  to  "light  sins,"  the  hay,  straw  and  stubble  of
I.  Cor.  3.  These  can  be  purged  away  on  condition  that  good  works  have  been  done
in  this  life.  Gregory,  Dialogorum  Libri  IV,  §39,  in  Migne,  Patrologia  Latino,
LXXVII,  396.

tXhus  in  the  Douay  Version;  somewhat  differently  in  the  so-called  "Variorum
Apocrypha,"  and  the  sum  is  stated  there  as  2,000,  not 12,000  dr.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  99

12  [:  45].  If  the  book  is  canonical  in  the  Church,  and  the  Church  has
admitted  it  into  the  canon,  as  St.  Augustine  testifies,  this  custom  of  having
a  care  for  the  dead  has  obtained  in  the  whole  Church,  and  upon  this  usage  of
the  Church  St.  Augustine  based  his  argument  in  a  book  especially  devoted
to  this  matter  eleven  hundred  years  ago.*  John  of  Damascus  testifies  that
this  custom  of  praying  emanated  from  the  traditions  of  the  Apostles.
Tertullian  mentions  the  anniversary,!  Ambrose  the  first,  seventh  and  thir-
teenth, though  the  usage  of  all  the  Churches  was  not  the  same.  Some  took
eight,  others  forty  days.  Monica,  the  mother  of  St.  Augustine,  asked
that  prayers  be  made  after  death, t  and  the  opposite  was  condemned  as  the
heresy  of  the  Waldenses  and  Picards.  Recently  also  this  article  of  Luther's
has  been  condemned  by  Pope  Leo  X,**  of  blessed  memory,  simply  because  he
maintained  that  purgatory  could  not  be  proved  from  Scripture.  Also  I
attack  Zwingli  in  an  argument  ad  hominem.  He  wrote  in  the  declaration
of  his  articles  (Fol.  93),  "No  one  can  subvert  the  teaching  of  that  powerful
and  brave  servant  of  Christ,  Luther."tt  This  I  say  he  taught  and  promul-
gated in  print  in  the  year  of  our  Lord  1523,  and  yet  before  this  Luther  had
said  in  public  disputation  at  Leipzig  in  the  year  of  grace  1519  on  the  8th
day  of  July,  "I  who  firmly  believe,  nay,  I  will  venture  to  say,  know  that
there  is  a  purgatory,  am  easily  persuaded  that  mention  of  it  is  made  in
the  Scriptures."  He  had  also  said  then  that  the  Book  of  Maccabees  was
an  authority  for  the  faithful.  If,  therefore,  he  praised  Luther  so  heartily,
why  does  he  subvert  his  teaching?  Why  does  he  not  believe  him  when  he
declares  that  he  knows  there  is  a  purgatory?  Why  does  he  not  accept  the
Book  of  Maccabees,  which  is  authoritative  for  the  faithful,  unless  he  prefers
to  be  considered  unfaithful  himself  and  a  deserter  from  the  Church?

But  now  let  us  hear  how  he  tries  to  invalidate  the  doctrine  of  the
Church  in  regard  to  purgatory.  "If,"  he  says,  "it  is  necessary  to  wash
away  the  eff'ects  of  sin  by  punishment,  Christ  died  in  vain,  and  grace  is
void."  In  this  trap  most  of  those  are  caught  who  are  unwilling  to  make
reparation  for  the  faults  they  have  committed,  thinking  the  passion  of
Christ  suflicient  for  them.  But  they  are  very  much  mistaken.  For  although
Christ  made  reparation  for  sin,  so  far  as  to  remove  its  guilt,  so  far  as  to
change  its  eternal  punishment  into  temporal  punishment,  it  does  not  there-
fore follow  that  He  broke  the  force  of  all  punishment.  For  in  the  first
place  He  did  not  remove  punishment  and  guilt  in  such  fashion  that  they

*The  tract  of  Augustine  referred  to  is  entitled,  "De  Cura  pro  mortuis  gerenda,"
cf.  Migne,  Patrologia  Latina, XL, 591  flf.

fTertullian  traces  the  custom  to  pray  for  the  dead  to  a  command  of  Christ
(mandatum  a  Domino)  and  says,  "we  bring  offerings  for  the  dead  on  the  anniversary
day,"  see  Tertullian,  De  Corona  mititis,  Cap.  3,  in  Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,  II,  99.

Jin  his  Confessions,  Bk.  IX,  chap.  XI,  Augustine  reports  his  mother  to  have
said  to  him,  shortly  before  her  death:  "Lay  this  body  anywhere,  let  not  the  care
for  that  any  way  disquiet  you;  this  only  I  ask  of  you,  to  remember  me  at  the  Lord's
altar,  wherever  you  be."

**In  the  bull  of  Leo  X,  Exsurge  Domine,  §37.

ttin  the  57th  article  of  the  First  Disputation  at  Zurich,  Zwingli  had  declared
(Werke,  II,  414):  "The  truly  Sacred  Scriptures  know  nothing  of  purgatory  after
this  life."  When  Zwingli  spoke  of  Luther  as  a  powerful  and  brave  servant  of  God
(Werke  II, 149) he  had  no  reference  to  purgatory.


100  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

did  not  still  remain  in  the  case  of  Judas  and  of  Pilate.  Therefore,  the  mere
reparation  of  Christ,  though  absolutely  sufficient  in  itself  for  sin,  "not  for
ours  only  but  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"  I  John  2  [:  2],  yet  is  not
efficacious  unless  one  becomes  a  partaker  in  it,  namely  through  the  sacra-
ments, through  fervid  devotion,  and  through  good  works.  And  that  the
reparation  of  Christ  did  not  remove  all  punishment  is  clear  from  the  death
that  we  all  suffer,  is  clear  from  all  our  infirmities  and  hard  condition,  is
clear  from  the  sin  of  David,  the  sin  of  which  was  destroyed  by  repentance,
though  the  punishment  due  the  sin  remained,  for  the  prophet  said  to  him,
"The  Lord  hath  put  away  thy  sin,"  II  Samuel  12  [:  13].  This  putting
away  cannot  be  understood  of  the  guilt,  since  "the  son  shall  not  bear  the
iniquity  of  the  father,"  Ezek.  18  [:  20].  The  putting  away  must,  there-
fore, be  understood  of  the  punishment.  Why,  therefore,  do  our  opponents
and  enemies  of  the  Church  venture  to  deny  that  after  the  guilt  has  been
done  away  in  the  case  of  a  penitent  a  certain  amount  of  temporary  punish-
ment due  to  sin  generally  remains?  There  follows  in  the  same  place,
"Nevertheless,  because  thou  hast  given  occasion  to  the  enemies  of  the  Lord
to  blaspheme,  for  this  thing  the  child  that  is  born  to  thee  shall  surely
die,"  II  Samuel  12  [:  14]. Let  this  be  enough  for  the  present.

Zwingli  finally  adds  an  appendix  on  the  everlasting  fire  of  hell,  with
which  I  have  no  fault  to  find  except  that  with  regard  to  his  boastful  asser-
tion that  he  not  only  believes  but  also  knows  that  the  fire  of  hell  exists,  I
would  ask  him,  how  he  knows.  I  am  satisfied  with  the  simple  faith  that  it
is  so,  and  I  thereby  even  believe  that  unless  Zwingli  makes  recantation  of
his  errors,  he  will  learn  by  experience  the  violence  of  that  fire  which  he  is
feeding  and  nourishing  at  so  great  a  loss  to  so  many  thousands  of  wretched
souls.

He  ends  his  confession  without  mentioning  various  errors  and  heresies
of  his.  For  he  does  not  touch  at  all  on  penance,  on  the  vows  and  celibacy
of_  the  clergy,  on  fasts  and  Lent,  on  the  ordination  of  priests,  on  the
ritual  of  the  Mass,  and  many  other  things.  If  he  had  I  should  have  liked
not  only  to  puncture  his  utterances  but  to  slash  them  utterly  asunder  with
"the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of  God,"  Eph.  6  [:  17].  Even
though  that  savage  giant  threatens  still  more  wildly,  if  any  one  should  try
this  he  would  come  off  badly,  if  he  is  so  recklessly  eager  for  revenge  instead
of  showing  the  patience  taught  by  the  Gospel,  why  did  he  not  take  vengeance
for  our  disputation  at  Baden,  as  he  has  so  often  promised?  Why  does  he
not  avenge  the  injury  done  to  the  disputation  of  Berne  by  our  powerful
refutation?  Why  does  he  not  give  vent  to  his  ^vrath  in  answering  the
Bishop  of  Rochester  or  the  Parisian  theologian  Clithoveus?*  He  is  trying
to  catch  the  popular  breeze,  and  does  everything  by  uproar  and  violence.
He  babbles  much  stupidity  without  wit,  without  learning,  and  destroys
innocent  paper,  so  that  as  often  as  I  read  what  he  writes  I  am  reminded  of
Aesop's,  "What  a  head  and  no  brain ! "  and  of  what  the  fox  said  about  the

*This  is  Jodocus  Cljchtovaeus,  who  in  1523  wrote  a  book  entitled:  "De
veneratione  sanctorum  libri  duo  Judoci  Clichtovei  Neoportuensis,"  Paris,  1523,  to
which  Zwingli  refers  in  his  "De  vera  et  falsa  religione,"  see  note  of  Finsler  in
Zwingli's IVerke,  III (1914),  839.


N


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  101

captured  nightingale — "  a  voice  and  nothing  more."

At  last  Zwingli  winds  up  his  address  to  our  most  Sacred  Emperor  and
the  princes  of  the  Empire  by  asking  them  first  not  to  disregard  his  humble
person.  It  would  be  a  bad  thing  for  the  Empire  if  such  an  important  man
were  disregarded.  Then  because  the  princes  have  perhaps  forgotten  that
they  are  men,  he  recalls  it  to  their  memory  that  they  must  remember  that
they  are  men  and  may  be  deceived  because  all  men  are  liars.  Verily
Zwingli  is  the  biggest  liar  of  all,  having  the  effrontery  to  deny  before  the
cantons  of  the  Swiss  what  he  had  put  before  the  whole  world  to  read  in
print,  and  falsely  declaring  that  it  was  made  up  by  me  to  make  him
unpopular  in  high  places.  And  this  was  the  nature  of  the  thing.  He  had
written  ( Fol.  25 ) ,  Against  the  Canon  of  the  Mass,  "The  frequent  making
of  the  sign  of  the  cross  has  a  terrifying  eflfect  upon  the  mind,  as  the  signs
used  by  necromancers  terrify  the  ignorant  when  used."*  Therefore  he  thinks
we  should  refrain  from  so  many  crosses  in  the  celebration  of  the  Mass.
Afterwards  in  writing  to  the  Swiss  he  says  that  he  did  not  write  anything
of  this  kind,  but  that  I  made  it  up.  I  have  been  the  more  willing  to  bring
this  up  again  here  because  he  vaunts  again  here  as  the  inspiration  of  the
Deity  what  is  certainly  entirely  foreign  to  the  revelations  of  God  and
rather  inspired  by  a  lying  spirit. f

He  asks  the  princes  of  the  Empire  not  to  shrink  away  from  the  views
of  those  who  rely  upon  the  word  of  God.  The  princes  will  be  right  to
obey  him  in  this  even  without  being  asked,  as  is  in  accordance  with  their
Christian  and  Catholic  ideas  and  sympathies,  but  the  more  they  rely  upon
the  word  of  God,  the  more  they  will  shrink  away  from  the  false  interpreta-
tions, distorted  views,  and  corruptions  of  Holy  Writ  which  Zwingli,  Oeco-
lampadius,  Bucer,  Zwick,  Haller  and  men  of  that  type,  having  made  ship-
wreck of  faith,  are  thrusting  upon  the  untaught  people  as  the  real  and
true  interpretation  of  the  word  of  God.  But  to  make  this  faithless  con-
fession of  his  seem  more  probable,  he  would  make  himself  out  such  a  saint
that  no  good  man  ever  had  any  doubt  about  his  goodness. But  I  make  no

*The  exact  title  of  this  tract  of  Zwingli  is,  "De  Canone  missae  epicheiresis."
For  the  passage  quoted  above  see  Zwingli's  Werke,  Egli  and Finsler  edition,  II,  597.

tAs  Eck  accuses  Zwingli  here  of  lying,  it  is  but  fair  to  Zwingli  to  give  his  side
of  this  incident.  In  his  reply  to  "some  untrue  and  unchristian  answers  which  Eck
made  at  Baden"  (Zwingli's  Werke,  ed.  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  II,  2,  498),  Zwingli
writes:  "After  this  Eck  has  invented  many  articles  and  has  called  them  'Pseudologiam
Zwingli,'  but  they  should  properly  be  called,  'The  book  of  lies  regarding  Zwingli.'  For,
in  the  first  place,  he  does  not  give  the  passages  where  I  have  used  such  words,  so
that  his  lies  can't  be  quickly  detected.  Then  he  tears  some  passages  out  of  their
proper  places,  falsifies  their  meaning,  detracts  from  some,  adds  to  others,  still  others
he  perverts  entirely,  in  some  he  criticises  me,  when  they  express  the  true  Christian
faith.  In  one  instance  he  says,  that  I  stated,  'when  man  makes  the  sign  of  the  cross
on  himself,  he  was  terror  stricken.'  This  is  an  invention."  The  actual  remarks  of
Zwingli,  in  his  book,  "De  canone  missae  epicheiresis,"  which  called  forth  this  state-
ment of  Eck,  were:  "The  frequent  making  of  the  sign  of  the  cross  terrifies  the  mind,
as  the  signs  of  the  magicians  terrify  the  ignorant  people,  if  they  are  at  any  time
admitted  to  them,  wherefore  they  should  stay  away."  But  Zwingli  adds:  "We  do  not
despise  the  making  of  the  sign  of  the  cross,  but  I  would  have  the  disciples  of  the
Lord  inclined  oftener  to  meditate  upon  what  took  place  on  the  cross  than  to  make
crosses  in  the  air." See  Zwingli's  Werke,  ed.  Egli  and  Finsler,  II,  597.


102  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

attack  upon  his  life,  although  many  people  declare  it  is  not  so  altogether
guileless.  In  this  "to  his  own  lord  he  standeth  or  falleth,"  says  the
Apostle,  Rom.  14[:4].  Therefore  far  be  it  from  me  to  pass  any
unfavorable  judgment.  I  will  only  say  that  he  might  better  have  left  this
praise  of  the  innocence  of  his  life  to  his  neighbors.  For  the  Sage  says,  "Let
another  praise  thee,  and  not  thine  own  mouth;  a  stranger,  and  not  thine
own  lips,"  Prov.  27  [:  2].

In  his  satisfaction  with  his  own  learning  he  exhibits  conduct  worthy
of  a  heretic.  "For  they  are  in  the  habit  of  boasting  of  their  knowledge  of
the  Scriptures,  and  associating  it  with  secular  learning,"  says  St.  Jerome,
(On  Isaiah  19)*  and  again  "they  are  generally  strong  in  oratory,  and
thus  seduce  poor  souls,  for  they  are  swollen  and  puffed  up  with  high-
sounding  words  ."  (On  Hosea  10). t  Does  not  St.  Jerome  paint  Zwingli  in
his  proper  colors?  Does  not  Zwingli  swell  up,  claiming  for  himself  an
amount  of  learning  that  his  enemies  cannot  withstand,  though  his  equipment
in  knowledge  is  so  scanty  that  he  did  not  dare  to  come  out  into  the  field
when  his  opponents  were  there?  This  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  when  the
twelve  Cantons  summoned  him  to  the  town  of  Baden  to  meet  me  in  a
discussion  upon  the  articles  of  faith,  and  sent  him  a  safe-conduct  for  that
purpose,  which  would  be  enough  even  for  a  prince,t  he,  a  native,  refused  to
come  three  miles,  when  I,  a  stranger,  had  come  thirty-three  miles  to  get
there.  (1526  A.  D. )  Which,  therefore,  could  not  withstand  the  learning
of  the  other?  If  he  continues  in  his  pride  and  arrogance,  I  am  ready  to  try
again  before  His  Imperial  Majesty  and  the  princes  of  the  realm  whether
Catholic  truth  is  not  mightier  than  the  heresy  of  a  Zwingli,

At  length  with  his  accustomed  arrogance,  Titus  1  [:  10],  he  boasts  of
the  fruits  of  his  Gospel,  that  it  makes  men  so  true,  so  holy,  so  free  from  all
stain,  that  one  might  think  them  saints  in  life.  St.  Jerome  bears  witness
that  this  is  a  special  characteristic  of  heretics,  saying,  "But  because  their
belly  is  their  God,  for  the  sake  of  base  gain  they  desire  to  win  disciples
of  their  own,  that  they  may  be  supported  like  teachers  by  their  followers."
But  we  can  also  understand  this  expression  "for  the  sake  of  base  gain"
otherwise,  and  regard  the  common  saying  that  all  heretics  while  teaching
error  are  in  the  habit  of  declaring  themselves  gainers  of  men,  though  it
is  no  gain  but  ruin  to  kill  the  souls  of  their  dupes.  This  is  what  Zwingli
is  doing  now.  The  fruits  of  his  Gospel  I  have  described  in  such  a  way  in
my  introductory  remarks  to  His  Imperial  Majesty  that  no  right-minded
man  will  judge  the  tree  of  much  value  from  its  fruits,  Matth.  7  [:  16].

Oh,  is  not  Zwingli  ashamed  to  ask  the  princes  who  will  scatter  the
wealth  which  has  been  heaped  up  by  means  of  the  Mass?  As  if  you  and
your  associates  did  not  know — ^you  who  under  the  guise  of  some  public
chest  seize  the  gifts  of  kings  and  princes,  the  benefactions  of  counts  and
nobles, the  alms of  the  citizens, and  heap  them  all up for  yourselves,

*See  Migne,  Patrologia  Latino,  XXIV,  261.
tSee  Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,  XXV,  958.

JSuch safe-conduct might be absolutely worthless, for many Catholics taught
that  a  safe-conduct  given  to  a  heretic  could  be  broken.


Refutation  of  Zwingli  by  Eck  103

neglecting  meanwhile  the  servants  of  Christ,  neglecting  the  poor!  Luxur-
iously live  these  false  prophets,  these  apostates,  these  breakers  of  vows,
and  all  their  ilk.  All  the  ceremonies  of  the  Church  have  perished  among
you,  but  tithes  meanwhile  are  rigorously  exacted.  All  the  dues  and
revenue  are  paid  to  the  last  penny  to  the  colleges,  the  monasteries,  the
foundations — these  institutions,  I  say,  are  not  abolished.  And  where  before
many  of  the  neighbors  were  supported  by  the  monasteries — peasants,
artisans,  poor  people — now  some  bloated  prefect  consumes  it  all,  takes  all
for  himself  alone,  and  marches  into  Zurich,  fat,  obese,  bloated  and  stuffed
with  the  wealth  of  the  Church.  When  they  have  drunk  generously  and  are
filled  with  wine,  they  treat  the  sacred  chalices  as  cups  and  the  platters  as
plates  in  their  banquets,  if  facts  agree  with  the  report,  and  boastingly
vaunt,  like  new  Belshazzars,  the  profanation  of  the  sacred  vessels,  Dan.  5.
Does  the  perjured  Zwingli  still  venture  to  ask  who  will  scatter  the  wealth
which  has  been  heaped  up  by  means  of  the  Mass?  I  may  seem  rather  too
bitter  because  my  words  have  such  a  sting  here,  but  Zwingli  looked  for  it
and  has  found  it.  Zwingli,  made  Councillor  of  the  Emperor  and  the  whole
Empire,  comes  to  the  Council,  contrary  to  Cato's  principle,  even  when  not
asked,  and  advises  that  all  the  errors  in  the  Church  be  cut  out  from  their
roots.  Therefore,  in  his  own  judgment  Zwingli  must  be  cut  out,  Oeco-
lampadius,  Capito,  Zwick,  Bucer,  Simpert,  and  their  associates  must  be
cut  out,  and,  like  withered  branches,  be  cast  into  the  fire  at  the  Lord's
command.  Luke  3  [:  9];  John  15  [:  6].  He  bids  us  abandon  Rome — like
Jeroboam  who  bade  the  people  not  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  I  Kings,  12  [ :  28],
but  the  eloquent  Zwingli  does  not  know  that  Lactantius  Firmianus,  the
Christian  Cicero,  wrote  that  the  desolation  of  Rome  was  the  sign  of  the
coming  desolation  of  the  whole  world.*  But  how  finely  and  fittingly  he
praises  our  august  Emperor  and  the  other  princes  of  the  Empire  because
they  have  used  their  powers  against  the  purity  of  the  Gospel,  because
through  their  sluggishness  justice  is  banished  and  innocence  is  smeared
with  the  paint  of  imposture,  bestowing  upon  the  princes  the  savage  cruelty
of  giving  orders  and  condemnation  contrary  to  truth,  nay  of  killing  and
slaying,  plundering  and  proscribing!

Who  will  say  now  that  Zwingli  is  not  the  most  learned  of  orators
whom  his  enemies  cannot  withstand,  when  he  winds  up  his  speech  of
confession  so  skilfully  and  kindly,  and  adds  an  epilogue  so  neatly  as  to
soften  the  hearts  of  all  his  hearers  and  judges,  turn  their  minds  and  win
their  favor,  especially  as  he  judges  the  princes  rebels  against  God  if  they
do  not  accede  to  his  wishes?  But  what  lover  of  the  Christian  faith,  nay,
of  virtue,  would  not  be  disgusted  at  such  a  monster  of  sycophancy  and
condemn  it?  Our  holy  Emperor,  most  serene  King  and  the  other  princes
of  the  Empire  cannot  do  anything  more  acceptable  to  God,  more  adapted  to
enhance  their  own  fame,  more  conducive  to  the  peace  and  quiet  of  their

*Firmianus Lactantius in his "Divine Institutes," Bk. VII, chap. 25, writes:
"When  the  capital  of  the  world  shall  have  fallen . .  who  can  doubt  that  the  end

has  now  arrived  to  the  affairs  of  men  and  the  whole  world."  See  Migne,  Patrologia
Latina,  VI,  812-13;  translated  in  Roberts  and  Donaldson,  Ante-Nicene  Fathers,  VII,
220.


104  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

subjects  than  to  crush,  destroy,  and  banish  as  far  as  possible  from  the
Holy  Empire  these  sects  of  perdition  and  their  lying  teachers.  God
Almighty  deign  in  His  mercy  to  grant  unto  His  Imperial  Majesty  and  the
other  princes  of  the  Empire  this  purpose  and  a  peaceful  means  of  carrying
it  out.

Let  it  be  done,  good  Jesus,
Let  it  be  done.

Accept,  holy  Emperor,  this  short  refutation  of  Zwingli's  Confession.
It  might  fairly  have  been  attacked  more  at  length  and  repudiated  more
vigorously,  but  I  have  taken  special  pains  to  be  brief,  and  have  excluded
much  that  presented  itself  spontaneously,  lest  the  refutation  should  be
overlong.  I  have  followed  the  thread  of  his  articles,  but  have  suppressed
much  and  passed  over  much  in  silence  that  I  might  properly  have  said  in
objection  to  him.  For  his  books  teem  with  errors  which  I  have  frequently
refuted  in  previous  years.  But  since  Zwingli  does  not  confine  himself  to
his  own  province  but  constantly  plots  to  take  away  and  despoil  the  flocks
of  others — for  the  word  of  heretics  "spreadeth  like  a  canker,"  says  St.
Paul,  II  Tim.  2  [:  17] — this  seducer  has  invaded  several  cities  of  the  Holy
Empire  already,  as  I  mentioned  in  my  introduction,  and  this  pestilence  has
extended  even  to  my  neighbors  of  Memmingen.  And  it  will  spread  further
if  it  is  not  restrained  by  your  holy  Imperial  Majesty.  "Arius  was  a  little
flame  at  Alexandria,"  says  the  blessed  Jerome,  but  because  it  was  not
quickly  quenched,  it  devastated  the  whole  world.  Perform  the  function  of
an  excellent  prince,  therefore,  august  and  invincible  Emperor,  and  save
thy  holy  empire  from  this  godlessness,  that  those  who  are  faithful  to  thee
and  to  the  Empire  may  serve  God  worthily  in  peace  and  quiet,  may  follow
thee  bravely  through  Greece  and  Asia,  to  recover  the  tomb  of  our  Savioiir,
and  shake  ofif  the  Turkish  yoke.  May  the  Lord  God  be  the  guide,  protector
and  director  of  Your  Majesty,  to  the  glory  of  His  holy  name  and  the  peace
and  safety  of  the  whole  Empire.

Amen.
To  the  cities  that  accept  the  teachings  of  Zwingli.

I  adjure  you,  magistrates  and  people  of  the  cities,  not  to  take  in
bitterness  the  sharp  things  I  have  put  forth  against  the  arch-heretic
Zwingli.  Reflect  that  unless  your  salvation  were  dear  to  me,  unless  I
wished  you  very  well,  unless  the  happiness  of  your  souls  goaded  me  on,
I  never  should  have  wielded  so  sharp  a  pen  against  Zwingli.  For,  taught
by  Paul,  I  have  little  hope  left  of  his  salvation,  but  I  have  a  large  hope  of
converting  you.  And  let  not  the  abuses  which  exist  in  the  Church  be  a
stumbling  block  to  you.  The  faults  in  things  should  be  removed,  not  the
things  themselves,  and  the  true  ancient  Christian  religion  should  endure.
God  Almighty  bring  you  back  as  speedily  as  possible  into  the  fold  of
the  Church.

Amen.


IV.

Letter  of  Huldreich  Zwingli  to  the  Most  Illustrious
Princes  of  Germany  Assembled  at  Augsburg,  Regard-
ing THE  Insults  of  Eck.

(August  27,  1530)

[AD  ILLUSTRIS-  |  SIMOS  GERMANICAE  PRIN-  |  cipes  Augustae
congregates,  De  Conui-  |  tiis  Eccij,  epistola  Huldr.  Zwinglij.  |  TIGVRI
APVD  CHRISTOPHORXJM  |  FROSCHOVER,  ANNO  M.D,  XXX.  ]  32
unnumbered  quarto  pages,  signed  on  p.  31,  Tiguri  XXVII.  die  Augusti.
Anno  M.D.  XXX,  i.  e.,  "Zurich,  on  the  27th  of  August  1530."  Printed  in
Opera  Zwinglii,  Tom.  II.  fol.  545a-550a;  Schuler  and  Schulthess  ed.,  Vol.
IV.  pp.  19-41.  Finsler,  Zwingli  Bibliographie,  Nos.  96-97.  At  the  same  time
a  German  edition  appeared  entitled:  "An  die  durchliichtigen  |  Fiirsten
Tiltscher  nation  zu  Oug-  |  sburg  versammlot  ein  sendhrieff  |  Huldrych
Zwinglis,  die  schelck-  |  wort  Eg  gens  so  er  wider  die  |  icarheyt  vssgossen-  |
hetreffendt,  [  i.  e.,  "A  Letter  of  Huldreich  Zwingli  to  the  illustrious  Princes
of  the  German  nation,  assembled  at  Augsburg,  regarding  the  calumnies  of
Eck,  which  he  poured  out  against  the  truth."  40  unnumbered  quarto  pages.
A  copy  of  this  edition  is  in  the  library  of  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New
York  City.  The  following  English  translation,  based  on  one  by  Henry
Preble,  was  revised  throughout  by  the  editor.

While  Zwingli  refused  to  dignify  the  scurrillous  attack  of  Eck  with  an
answer,  he  felt  that  he  owed  it  to  his  position  to  defend  more  at  length  the
two  principal  points  to  which  Eck  had  taken  exception,  that  no  grace  was
conferred  by  the  sacraments  and  that  Christ  was  not  bodily  present  at
the  Lord's  Supper.  These  two  points  he  elaborated  in  a  letter  addressed  to
the  princes  of  Germany.  Vadian,  who  was  at  Augsburg  during  the  sessions
of  the  Diet,  and  who  was  in  continual  correspondence  with  Zwingli,  notified
Zwingli  of  the  appearance  of  Eck's  answer  of  the  16th  of  August.  Shortly
afterwards  Zwingli  wrote  his  reply,  which  was  signed  on  August  27,  1530.]

T  TPON  the  Most  Illustrious  Princes  of  Germany,  assembled  at
^^  the  Diet  of  Augsburg,  Huldreich  Zwingli  implores  grace
and  peace  from  God  the  Father  and  His  Son,  our  Redeemer

105


106  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Jesus  Christ.  As  far  as  I  am  concerned,  Most  Illustrious
Princes,  I  might  have  passed  by  Eck's  insults  without  any  sor-
row, both  because  our  Saviour  comforts  us  with  the  words
"Blessed  are  ye  when  men  revile  you,"  and  because  wise  men
teach  that  no  insult  exists  except  where  the  recipient  so  takes  it.
For  if  he  so  strengthens  his  soul  as  to  make  himself  invulnerable
from  such  missiles,  they  will  have  no  more  effect  upon  him  than
upon  a  rock.  But  since  Eck  sets  to  work  to  overturn  piety  with
impunity  by  lies  and  to  strike  down  the  ancient  city  of  Zurich,
I  should  fail  in  piety  itself  if  I  did  not  use  sling  and  stone  to
attack  that  alien  in  his  proud  trampling  upon  the  truth.
Furthermore  he  is  certainly  either  cracked  or  hide-bound.  For
whether  he  brought  all  those  loud  insults  out  of  his  own  mind
(a  mind  stretched  so  violently  to  such  a  monstrous  spouting  of
abuse  must  be  bursting  or  breaking  up  mentally)  or  whether  he
did  not  of  himself  indulge  in  the  debauch,  so  that  no  danger
threatens  him  from  such  an  uncommon  birth  of  revilings,  each
reason  is  sufficient  for  my  not  writing  anything  to  him.  For  if
he  is  mad,  he  would  tear  up  and  not  read  the  letter,  and  if  he  is
not  mad,  but  thundering  so  mightily  from  hypocrisy,  he  would,
after  his  fashion,  not  weigh  what  I  say,  but  distort  my  sane
words  with  insane  slanders  and  accusations.

Hence  it  is  that  I  let  him  go  and  address  myself  to  Your
Highnesses,  depending  on  nothing  else  than  my  confidence  in
your  wise  fair-mindedness,  through  which  I  hope  that  with  true
German  steadfastness  and  faithfulness  you  will  lend  your  ears
just  as  attentively  to  one  setting  forth  his  view  and  case  in  sin-
cerity as  to  the  slanderers,  however  they  try  to  overwhelm  you
with  their  din  or  insinuate  themselves  into  your  good  graces.
For  though  in  themselves,  perhaps,  the  matters  in  question  do
not  present  so  very  much  difficulty,  yet  through  eagerness  of
contention,  they  have  grown  to  such  proportions  that  unless  you
show  yourselves  to  the  contentious  as  unapproachable  and  just
judges  who  do  not  pronounce  an  opinion  until  the  whole  case
has  been  examined  on  all  sides,  some  uproar  is  likely  to  be
caused  by  a  disagreement  of  no  small  extent,  though  it  sprang
from  small  beginnings.  And  since  among  all  the  things  in  the
exposition  of  my  faith  which  Eck  not  so  much  criticises  as
tramples  under  foot,  running  amuck  like  a  wild  boar,  nothing,
please  the  gods,  is  so  obnoxious  to  the  Romanists  as  these  two:


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  107

"That  the  sacraments  do  not  bestow  or  dispense  grace,"  and,
"That  in  the  holy  supper  of  our  Lord  Christ's  natural  body  is
not  eaten" — nay,  not  only  to  the  Romanists  but  also  to  some  of
those  who  seem  to  be  upon  the  side  of  the  Gospel — it  has
seemed  to  me  worth  while  to  send  forth  a  few  words  upon  these
points  as  a  sort  of  reinforcement,  in  the  hope  that  if  anything
seems  to  any  one  to  have  been  said  somewhat  obscurely  it  may
become  more  transparent.  I  will,  therefore,  do  this,  with  God's
help,  on  the  understanding  that  I  am  not  to  make  answer  to
the  adversary's  raving  nor  add  a  spur  to  it,  but  to  show  my  view
in  these  matters  more  and  more  clearly  to  Your  Highnesses.
Thus:—

In  sacraments  two  factors  in  general  are  to  be  considered,
the  thing  and  the  sacrament  or  sign  of  the  thing.  The  thing  is
that  for  the  sake  of  which  the  sign  is  instituted  which  we  call  a
sacrament.  In  circumcision  the  thing  is  belonging  to  the  people
of  God,  the  sign  of  this  sacred  thing  is  the  cutting  of  the  fore-
skin. In  the  feast  of  the  passover  the  thing  is  giving  thanks
for  liberation  from  the  Egyptian  bondage,  the  sign  of  this
sacred  thing  is  the  roasted  lamb  with  the  other  things  that  were
customary  in  that  thanksgiving.  So  in  baptism  the  thing  is
belonging  to  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  sacrament  is  dipping  into
water  with  holy  words.  In  the  eucharist  the  thing  is  giving
thanks  in  accordance  with  faith  for  Christ  delivered  to  us  by
God  and  crucified  for  our  sins,  the  sacrament  is  the  giving  of
bread  and  wine  with  the  holy  words  of  the  Lord.

Since  then  all  sacraments  agree  in  this  respect,  it  happens
that  the  names  of  the  things  of  which  they  are  the  signs  are
given  to  the  sacraments.  Hence  circumcision  is  called  a  cov-
enant, when  the  covenant  was  that  the  nation,  born  of  Abraham,
should  be  the  peculiar  people  of  God,  and  circumcision  was  the
sign  and,  as  it  were,  external  seal  of  this  covenant.  The  lamb  is
called  the  passover,  since  the  passing  was  the  passing  over  by
which  the  smiting  angel  passed  over  Israel  when  he  slew  the
Egyptians,  and  the  lamb  was  the  external  sign  of  that  passing
over.  And  the  names  of  the  things  are  rightly  given  to  the  signs
on  account  of  analogy  of  meaning.  For  when  the  sign  of
circumcision  was  given  to  those  who  were  of  the  people  of  God,
that  sign  signified  the  thing,  namely,  that  he  who  had  been
circumcised  was  of  the  people  of  Israel. For  this  is  common  to


108  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

all  rites  and  ceremonies  that  the  signs  and  ceremonies  receive
the  names  of  the  things  of  which  they  are  signs.  The  written
instrument  is  called  a  testament,  but  the  thing  itself  which  is
bequeathed  and  assigned  by  the  testament,  namely,  money,
gold,  silver,  raiment,  furniture,  houses,  lands,  the  whole
inheritance,  whether  undivided  or  in  parts,  that,  I  say,  is  the
thing  of  the  testament.  The  writing  is  the  sign  and  assurance
of  these  things.  For  the  bequeathing  preceded  and  was  com-
pleted in  the  mind  of  the  testator  when  he  declared  and
solemnized  his  purpose  to  bequeath  the  things.  And  the  sign
of  this  solemn  declaration  by  which  the  wish  of  the  testator  is
disclosed  to  others  is  the  writing,  in  which  the  things  bequeathed
are  contained  in  name  but  not  in  fact.  Yet  the  writing  is  called
the  testament  though  this  is  really  the  thing  bequeathed  accord-
ing to  the  wish  of  the  testator.  When  the  keys  are  presented  to
a  prince  or  emperor  upon  his  ascending  the  throne,  they  are  the
sign  of  delivering  into  his  power,  though  the  delivering  itself  is
the  offering'and  handing  over  of  the  things.  But  though  the
keys  are  not  the  things,  when  it  is  said,  "Such  and  such  a  city  or
fortress  presented  the  keys  to  the  prince,"  we  understand  that  a
surrender  to  or  a  reception  of  the  monarch  is  made,  which  was
determined  upon  before  the  sign  of  the  surrender  or  reception
was  given.

In  contracts  and  agreements  the  terms  are  the  things  of
the  contract  or  agreement.  The  sign  of  these  terms  is  the
clasping  of  hands,  whence  we  say  that  a  thing  has  been  agreed
upon  by  clasping  hands  to  show  that  it  cannot  be  repudiated
after  that  sign.  When,  therefore,  we  call  the  clasping  of  hands
a  contract  or  agreement  we  give  the  name  of  the  thing  to  the
sign.  For  the  clasping  of  hands  cannot  be  a  contract,  but  a
contract  is  a  thing  in  accordance  with  certain  terms  previously
made.  The  clasping  of  hands  is  only  the  sign  of  the  contract.
But  this  sign,  though  it  is  not  the  thing,  yet  strengthens  the
thing  when  added  as  a  sort  of  witness  and  confession  that  it
may  not  be  invalidated.  For  the  rest,  if  breach  of  faith  did
not  have  to  be  feared,  the  mere  settlement  of  the  terms  of  the
contract  between  two  parties  would  be  enough.

In  this  way  also  we  ought  to  regard  the  sacraments.  In
baptism  the  thing  is  belonging  to  the  church  and  the  people  of
Christ. Baptism  is  a  sacrament,  indicating  this  thing,  namely


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  109

that  the  recipient  belongs  to  the  Church.  Not  that  baptism
bestows  the  thing,  but  that  it  bears  witness  to  the  multitude  of
the  previous  bestowal  of  the  thing.  In  the  Eucharist  the  thing
is  giving  thanks  according  to  faith  to  the  Lord  for  the  benefits
that  He  has  bestowed  in  redeeming  us  through  His  Son.  The
partaking  of  bread  and  wine,  sacred  symbols  sanctified  by  God's
word,  is  the  sacrament  of  this  thing.  Neither,  therefore,  the
giving  of  thanks  nor  the  remission  of  sins,  nor  the  bread  and
wine  is  the  natural  body  of  Christ,  but  they  only  symbolize  the
thing  and  as  it  were  bring  it  into  actual  presence  by  representing
it  and  oflPering  it  to  the  contemplation  of  faith.  For  if  they
bestowed  the  thing  or  were  the  thing,  they  would  be  things  and
not  a  sacrament  or  sign.  But  every  sacrament  is  a  sign,  as  also
the  Master  of  the  Sentences  [Peter  Lombard]  *  has  it.  If  they
are  only  the  sign  of  a  thing,  they  are  not  the  thing  itself.
Nor,  when  we  give  signs,  do  the  names  of  the  things  thereby
pass  over  into  things  nor  things  into  signs.  But  the  use  of
Bigns  or  sacraments  for  the  things  themselves  is  combined  with
much  grace  in  speech.  And  in  this  figurative  use  the  apostles
also  followed  after  Christ.  How  often  does  Paul  call  his  nation
"the  circumcision,"  because  that  nation  was  God's  nation !  How
often  by  the  same  right  does  he  call  the  unbelievers  "the  fore-
skin," though  the  retention  of  the  foreskin  was  no  sacrament!
But  since  circumcision  was  a  sacrament,  which  is  taken  some-
times in  the  sense  of  the  circumcised,  sometimes  in  that  of  the
covenant  itself,  and  retention  of  the  foreskin  is  the  opposite  of
circumcision,  the  power  of  using  words  freely  with  grace  is  so
great  that  "foreskin"  is  put  for  the  uncircumcised,  though  the
retention  of  it  is  not  a  sacrament.  Not  that  circumcision  is  the
same  thing  as  circumcised  or  foreskin  the  same  as  uncircum-
cised, but  it  is  correct  to  use  the  names  of  the  sacraments  for  the
names  of  the  things.

Paul  likewise  speaks  thus  to  Titus,  "But  after  that  the
kindness  and  love  of  God  our  Saviour  toward  man  appeared,  not
by  works  of  righteousness  which  we  have  done,  but  according
to  his  mercy  he  saved  us,  by  the  washing  of  regeneration,  and
renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly
through  Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour"  [Titus  3 :  4-6] . Who  does

*See  Sentences  Bk.  IV,  dist.  1,  2:  "A  sacrament  is  the  sign  of  a  sacred
thing."


110  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

not  see  that  there  is  attributed  here  to  the  washing  of  regener-
ation that  which  really  and  truly  belongs  only  to  the  divine
Spirit?  For  though  Paul  said  first  that  we  were  renewed  by
the  washing  of  regeneration,  yet,  that  he  might  be  the  more
clearly  understood,  he  immediately  added  an  explanatory
''and,"  meaning  ''and  by  the  washing  of  the  renewing  of  the
Holy  Ghost."  Or  does  not  the  regeneration  belong  really  and
truly  to  the  Holy  Ghost?  When,  therefore,  baptism  is  called
the  washing  of  regeneration,  does  not  the  sacrament  receive  truly
the  name  of  the  regeneration  of  the  Spirit?  But  how  graceful
it  is  when  not  the  symbol  is  called  the  washing,  but  the  internal
working  and  renewing  of  the  divine  Spirit  which  is  indicated  by
the  sacrament  is  called  the  washing!  Thus  the  names  of  the
things  and  their  symbols  are  in  turn  borrowed  from  each  other.
Paul  brought  out  the  same  meaning  in  the  epistle  to  the
Ephesians  but  in  a  less  transparent  and  more  involved  figure,
"That  he  might  sanctify  and  cleanse  it  with  the  washing  of
water  by  the  word"  [Eph.  5:  26].  Not  to  mention  here  that
the  Hebrews  use  "word"  for  "thing"  and  put  "in"  for  "with,"*
is  the  Church  washed  with  anything  but  the  blood  of  Christ?
What,  then,  is  the  baptismal  washing  but  the  sacrament  of  this
original  and  real  washing?  But  besides  this,  who  can  imitate
this  grace  of  speech  by  which  he  put  the  sacrament  for  the
thing  itself  of  which  it  is  the  sacred  sign  ?  Nay,  who  would  not
embrace  the  sacraments  as  sacred,  joyful  and  venerable  things,
since  they  not  only  indicate  such  high  things  to  us,  but  even  in
a  sense  present  them  to  our  eyes  and  senses  ?  For  when  a  child
or  a  catechumen  is  taught  or  asked  to  confess  belief  in  these
divine  things,  are  not  the  divine  mysteries  proclaimed  and
represented  even  through  the  words?  When  he  is  dipped,  are
not  the  death  and  burial  of  Christ  placed  before  his  eyes?  When
he  comes  out,  the  resurrection?  When  in  the  Lord's  Supper
His  death  is  proclaimed  not  only  by  the  words  of  the  officiating
priest  but  in  the  glad  thanksgiving  of  the  faithful  soul,  is  not
the  divine  bounty  set  forth  and  brought  to  mind  with  the
giving  of  thanks?  And  when  the  bread  and  wine,  consecrated
by  the  very  words  of  the  Lord,  are  distributed  among  the
brethren,  is  not  the  whole  Christ  presented  as  it  were  in  visible

*The  Hebrew  for  cum  verbo  is  bidebharo,  but  this  cannot  mean  in  this
connection  "with  the  thing,"  as  Zwingli  seems  to  think.


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  111

form  to  the  senses?  (I  say  more,  if  words  are  demanded,  than
is  commonly  said).  But  how?  Is  the  natural  body  itself  to
be  handled  and  masticated?  Certainly  not.  It  is  presented
to  the  mind  for  contemplation,  and  the  sacrament  is  the  part
that  appeals  in  visible  form  to  the  senses.  For  the  mind  works
most  freely  and  quickly  when  it  is  not  distracted  by  the  senses.
When,  therefore,  the  senses  have  presented  to  them  what  is
most  like  that  on  which  the  mind  is  working,  the  assistance  of
the  senses  is  by  no  means  slight.

And  besides,  a  point  of  no  small  importance,  these  signs
were  so  instituted  by  Christ  Himself,  that  by  their  very  analogy
they  might  be  especially  effective  for  bringing  one  to  the  con-
sciousness of  the  actual  thing  through  faith  and  contemplation.
Hence,  since  the  sacraments  were  instituted  to  give  teaching,
suggestion,  delight  through  the  senses  just  as  much  as  the
external  word,  it  happens  that,  when  given  the  names  of  the
things  of  which  they  are  the  signs  and  which  are  themselves
the  real  refreshment  of  the  mind,  they  kindle  the  mind  more
effectively  than  any  one  can  do  by  contemplating  the  divine
goodness,  however  faithfully  it  may  be,  without  the  signs.
And  since  this  is  so,  the  most  learned  and  holy  men  have
rightly  made  frequent  use  of  the  sacraments  for  the  things  of
which  they  are  the  sacraments  and  signs,  being  well  aware  how
much  must  be  attributed  to  each.

This  is  evident  from  the  example  above  from  Paul  about
cleansing  with  the  washing  of  water  by  the  word.  For  it  is  the
blood  of  Christ  alone,  which,  offered  on  the  altar  of  the  cross
and  sprinkled  upon  the  four  quarters  of  the  globe  and  poured
out  upon  the  foundations  of  the  whole  earth,  purified  the  world.
But  when  these  things  are  contemplated  the  sacraments  not  only
set  them  before  our  eyes,  but  even  enable  them  to  penetrate  to
the  mind.  But  what  leads  the  way?  The  Spirit.  For  when  we
baptize  a  catechumen,  unless  faith  shall  have  previously  taken
possession  of  his  heart,  so  viewing  the  things  that  it  has  them
actually  present  before  it  as  it  were,  neither  external  declaration
nor  visible  representation  is  of  any  avail.

In  the  baptism  of  infants  the  faith  of  the  parents  is  enough,
or,  if  that  fails,  the  faith  of  the  Church.  But  I  do  not  believe
that  this  contemplation  by  faith  is  great  enough  unless  it
grasps  the  thing  itself  as  surely  and  undoubtingly  as  if  it  were


112  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

shown  to  the  natural  eye.  Hence  the  ancient  writers  said  that
Christ's  body  was  really  present  in  the  Supper,  and  this  in
view  of  two  things,  first,  because  of  this  clear  contemplation  by
faith  I  have  spoken  of,  which  sees  Christ  dying  for  us  on  the
cross  as  vividly  as  Stephen  with  his  fleshly  eye  saw  Him  reign-
ing at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father.  (And  I  dare  assert  that  this
revelation  to  the  senses  was  made  to  Stephen  as  an  illustration
to  us  that  He  would  ever  be  thus  present  to  the  faithful  who
suffered  for  Him,  not  indeed  to  the  eye  of  sense,  but  in  the
contemplation  and  consolation  of  faith.  For  are  there  not  many
endowed  with  such  unshaken  faith  that,  when  dragged  to
punishment,  they  see  the  presence  of  Christ  so  vividly,  that,
though  no  visible  manifestation  appears  to  them  from  above,
they  have  no  need  of  any  such?).

Secondly,  in  view  of  the  human  nature  truly  assumed  by
the  Son  of  God.*  For  Marcion  worried  the  ancients  on  this
point,  since  the  general  mass  of  Christians  did  not  know  how  to
distinguish  clearly  between  the  attributes  and  works  of  the  two
natures  in  Christ,  and  yet  could  see  there  were  some  things
among  these  that  did  not  at  all  harmonize  with  a  real  body.
These,  Marcion  either  could  not  or  would  not  refer  to  the  divine
nature.  Therefore  he  found  it  easier  to  argue  among  the
ignorant  that  Christ's  body  was  not  real  and  natural  but  spiritual
and  imaginary.  To  meet  this  error  successfully  the  Fathers
offered  the  supper  in  which  Christ  had  instituted  the  sacrament
of  His  body — His  real  and  natural  body — to  represent  not  a
spiritual  or  imaginary  body,  but  a  real  one.  For  this  reason,
therefore,  they  said  that  Christ's  body  was  really  present  in  the
Supper,  but  only  sacramentally.  And  I  have  never  denied  that
Christ's  body  is  present  in  the  Supper  sacramentally  and
mysteriously,  both  with  a  view  to  the  contemplation  of  faith
and  to  the  whole  working  of  the  symbol,  as  I  have  said.  And
this  assertion  and  exposition  of  mine  can  be  found  in  Tertullianf

*Zwingli  stated  above  that  the  ancient  writers  said  that  Christ's  body
was  present  in  the  Supper  for  two  reasons.  He  has  given  the  first  reason
in  the  preceding  paragraph. He  adds  the  second  reason  now.

tZwingli  was  probably  thinking  of  the  following  passages  in  Tertullian's
treatise  "Against  Marcion."  In  Book  I,  chap.  14,  he  writes:  "Indeed  up  to
the  present  time,  he  has  not  disdained  the  water  which  the  Creator  made
wherewith  He  washes  His  people;  nor  the  oil  wherewith  He  anoints  them;


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  113

without  trouble.

Since,  therefore,  this  presence  amounts  to  nothing  without
the  contemplation  of  faith,  it  belongs  to  faith  that  the  things  are
or  become  present,  and  not  to  the  sacraments.  For,  however
much  they  lay  hold  on  the  senses  and  lead  to  reverence  for  the
things  that  are  done,  these  handmaidens  can  yet  effect  nothing
unless  their  mistress,  faith,  first  rules  and  commands  on  the
throne  of  the  heart.  Hence  it  is  apparent  that  the  sacraments
cannot  justify  nor  give  grace,  for  we  know  no  other  justifica-
tion than  that  of  faith.  It  follows  also  that  grace  is  not  bound
up  with  the  sacraments.  This,  in  fact,  needs  no  proof.  For
if  it  were  bound  up  with  the  sacraments,  they  would  profit  and
renew  wherever  they  were  celebrated.  Since,  however,  that  is  at
variance  with  the  truth  (for  there  are  those  who  in  consequence
of  lack  of  faith  eat  and  drink  judgment  upon  themselves),  it  is
apparent  that  grace  is  not  bound  up  with  the  sacraments,  and
consequently  they  do  not  justify  or  dispense  justification,  but,
acting  as  a  sort  of  a  stimulant,  call  into  action  the  faith  or
promise  which  is  already  there  and  bear  witness  to  the  other
members  of  the  Church.  All  this  will  become  clearer  when  we
have  heard  two  confirmatory  passages  from  St.  Augustine.

Augustine  on  the  Trinity,  Book  15,  Chap.  26:  "Nor  did
any  one  of  His  disciples  give  the  Holy  Ghost,  since  they
prayed  that  it  might  come  upon  those  upon  whom  they  laid
their  hands,  they  did  not  give  it  themselves.  And  the  Church
preserves  this  custom  even  now  in  the  case  of  her  rulers.  Finally,
when  -Simon  the  Sorcerer  offered  money  to  the  apostles,  he  does
not  say,  "Give  me  also  this  power  that  I  may  give  the  Holy
Ghost,"  but  that  "Upon  whomsoever  I  lay  hands,  he  may
receive  the  Holy  Ghost"  [Acts  8: 19].  For  the  Scripture  had
not  said  before,  "And  when  Simon  saw  that  the  apostles  gave
the  Holy  Ghost,"  but  it  had  said,  "And  when  Simon  saw  that
through  laying  on  of  the  apostles'  hands  the  Holy  Ghost  was
given" [v.  18]. Therefore  also  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself  not

nor  that  union  of  honey  and  milk  wherewithal  He  gives  them  the  nourish-
ment of  children;  nor  the  bread  by  which  He  represents  His  own  proper
body,  thus  requiring  in  his  very  sacraments  the  'beggarly  elements'  of  the
Creator."  Again  he  writes  in  Bk.  IV,  chap.  40 :  "He  made  the  bread,  which
He  took  and  distributed  to  His  disciples,  His  own  body,  by  saying,  'This
is  my  body,'  that  is,  a  figure  of  my  body."


114  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

only  gave  the  Holy  Ghost  as  God,  but  also  received  it  as  man,
and  was  therefore  said  to  be  full  of  grace  [John  1 :  14] .  And  it
is  written  even  more  plainly  of  this  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles:
"Since  God  anointed  Him  with  the  Holy  Ghost"  [Acts
10:38].  Certainly  not  with  visible  oil,  but  with  the  gift  of
grace,  which  is  symbolized  by  the  visible  ointment  with  which
the  Church  anoints  the  baptized.  Nor  was  Christ  anointed  with
the  Holy  Ghost  at  the  time  when  He  descended  upon  Him  as  a
dove,  after  He  had  been  baptized.  For  at  that  time  He  deigned
to  prefigure  His  body,  that  is.  His  church,  in  which  pre-
eminently the  baptized  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,"  etc.*

In  this  passage  of  Augustine  we  have  to  consider  three
things. First,  since  he  says  that  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  given
by  the  disciples,  that  they  only  prayed  for  it,  much  less  is  it  true
that  the  bestowal  of  the  Holy  Ghost  is  bound  up  with  the  sacra-
ments administered  by  the  clergy. Secondly,  that  the  bestowal
of  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  bound  up  with  the  laying  on  of
hands,  which  I  do  not  deny  is  a  sacrament. For  since  they  only
prayed  that  the  Holy  Ghost  might  be  given  to  those  upon  whom
they  laid  hands,  they  had  no  power  to  promise  this  by  laying  on
of  hands. Finally,  when Augustine  says, "In which  pre-
eminently the  baptized  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,"  he  is  speaking
symbolically  (for  he  does  not  use  the  word  "preeminently"  to
indicate  a  certainty  that  they  who  receive  baptism  necessarily
also  receive  the  Holy  Ghost,  but  in  a  sense  like  that  of  "to  wit,"
"namely,"  etc.,— in  the  sense,  "the  church,  namely  the  one  in
which  the  baptized  receive  the  Holy  Ghost"). Thus  receiving
the  Holy  Ghost  is  not  the  effect  of  baptism,  but  baptism  is  the
effect  of  having  received  the  Holy  Ghost. And  Francis  Marof
was  looking  to  this  in  his  annotations  to  the  arguments  when  he
said,  "The  second  argument  is  that  if  the  sacraments  themselves
by  their  own  efficiency  produced  grace,  then  the  ministers  who
administer  them  would  give  the  Holy  Ghost." Hence  it  is  plain
that  under  whatever  scheme  or  figure  of  speech  any  working  of
the  Holy  Ghost  is  attributed  to  the  symbols  or  sacraments,  a
metonymy  appears,  by  which  the  name  of  the  original  thing  is
transferred  to  the  symbol. For  Augustine's  remark  that  Christ

*See  Schaff,  Nicene  Fathers,  First  Series,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  224.
fA  scholar  of  the  order  of  Friars  Minor  writing  about  1320. A  large
collection  of  his  theological  works  was  published  at  Basel  in  1498.


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  115

received  the  Holy  Ghost  before  His  baptism,*  and  that  the
apostles  do  not  give  the  Holy  Ghost,  shows  that  there  is  no
intimate  connection  of  the  Holy  Ghost  with  the  minister  or  the
sacrament.  From  this  it  follows  at  once  that  the  language  is
used  symbolically  and  not  in  its  simple  sense  when  that  which
belongs  to  the  Spirit  is  attributed  to  the  sacraments.  And  this
will  be  made  plainer  by  the  second  quotation.

Augustine  in  the  third  book  of  the  Questions,  Quest.  84,
sayst,  "We  must  notice  how  often  He  says,  'I,  the  Lord,  who
sanctify  him,'  speaking  of  the  priest,  and  having  also  said  to
Moses,  'And  thou  shalt  sanctify  him'  [Ex.  29 :  24] .  How  then
does  Moses  sanctify  and  the  Lord?  For  Moses  does  not  act
instead  of  the  Lord,  but  he  sanctifies  with  the  visible  sacraments
through  his  ministry,  while  the  Lord  sanctifies  with  invisible
grace  through  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  which  is  all  the  efficacy  of
the  visible  sacraments.  For  what  do  the  visible  sacraments
profit  without  this  sanctification  of  invisible  grace?  And  it  is
also  fair  to  ask  whether  this  invisible  sanctification  without  the
visible  sacraments  with  which  a  man  is  visibly  sanctified,  is
equally  ineffectual?  This  is  absolutely  absurd.  For  it  would
be  more  sensible  to  say  that  the  sanctification  does  not  exist
without  the  sacraments  than  to  say  that  though  existing  it
profits  nothing,  for  all  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments  depends  on
this  sanctification.  But  we  must  also  consider  whether  there  is
any  ground  for  saying  that  it  cannot  exist  without  the  sacra-
ments. Certainly  visible  baptism  profited  Simon  the  Sorcerer
nothing,  since  he  lacked  the  invisible  sanctification.

''But  those  whom  the  invisible  sanctification,  being  present,
profited,  had  received  also  the  visible  sacraments  and  had  been
similarly  baptized. Nor  is  it  shown  where  Moses,  who  visibly

♦Augustine,  "On  the  Trinity,"  Bk.  XV,  chap.  26,  §46,  writes:  "And
Christ  was  certainly  not  then  anointed  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  when  He
as  a  dove  descended  upon  Him  at  His  Baptism.  .  .  .  But  He  is  under-
stood to  have  been  then  anointed  with  the  mystical  and  invisible  unction,
when  the  Word  of  God  was  made  flesh.  .  .  .  For  it  is  most  absurd  to
believe  Him  to  have  received  the  Holy  Spirit  when  He  was  near  thirty  years
old;  for  at  that  time  He  was  baptized  by  John;  but  that  He  came  to  baptism
as  without  sin  at  all,  so  not  without  the  Holy  Spirit."  See  Schaflf,  Nicene
Fathers,  First  Series,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  224.

tAugustine,  "Questions  on  Leviticus,"  Bk.  Ill,  Question  84,  cf.  Migne,
Patrologia  Latina,  XXXIV,  712.


116  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

sanctified  the  priests,  was  himself  sanctified  through  sacrifices
or  oil.  Yet  who  would  venture  to  deny  that  he  was  invisibly
sanctified  whose  grace  excelled  all  others.  The  same  can  be  said
of  John  the  Baptist.  For  he  appeared  as  a  baptizer  before  being
baptized  [Matth.  3 :  11-14] .  Hence  we  cannot  possibly  deny
that  he  was  sanctified.  Yet  we  do  not  find  that  done  visibly  to
him  before  he  came  to  the  ministry  of  baptizing.  Also  of  the
thief  to  whom,  when  crucified  with  Him,  the  Lord  said,  ''Today
shalt  thou  be  with  me  in  paradise"  [Lk.  23 :  43] .  For  he  was
not  given  this  great  blessing  without  invisible  sanctification.
Accordingly  it  is  argued  that  invisible  sanctification  has  been
bestowed  upon  certain  men  and  profited  them  without  the
visible  sacraments,  which  are  changed  to  suit  the  varying  con-
ditions of  different  ages  and  were  different  in  the  olden  days
from  what  they  are  now,  but  the  visible  sanctification  which  is
conferred  by  visible  sacraments  can  be  present  without  the
invisible,  but  cannot  profit.  Not,  however,  is  the  visible  sacra-
ment to  be  despised  on  that  account.  For  he  who  despises  that
cannot  possibly  be  invisibly  sanctified.  Hence  Cornelius  and
his  people,  though  evidently  already  sanctified  by  the  Holy
Ghost,  were  yet  baptized  [Acts  10:44-48],  and  the  visible
sanctification  was  not  considered  superfluous,  though  the  in-
visible had  preceded  it." Thus  Augustine.

To  what  purpose  should  we  now  treat  in  detail  this  opinion
of  Augustine,  clearer  than  light  as  it  is?  It  must  be  clear  to
every  one  that  Augustine  in  the  early  days  held  the  same  view
that  I  hold  today,  namely  that  the  sanctification  of  the  Spirit
is  the  real  sanctification,  which  is  by  itself  sufficient  for  justi-
fication without  the  external,  provided  this  be  not  despised,  as
may  be  seen  in  the  case  of  the  thief,  and  indeed  that  the  external
is  nothing  without  the  internal.  Furthermore,  that  no  one  ought
to  despise  and  neglect  the  external  justification  of  the  sacra-
ments. Nay,  he  who  has  faith  cannot  neglect  or  despise  the
external  when  occasion  offers.  For  who  can  disdain  the  things
of  love?  And  is  not  the  love  of  God  and  of  one's  neighbor  eager
to  call  to  mind  the  goodness  of  God  and  to  praise  and  magnify
Him  with  thanksgiving?  Is  it  not  eager  to  be  united  to  its
neighbor  by  the  bond  of  the  Spirit,  and  to  bear  witness  thereto
openly?  Does  it  not  desire  to  have  its  faith  propped  up  and
restored,  when  it  sees  it  wavering? And  where  in  the  world  can


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  117

he  hope  to  find  that  better  than  in  the  celebration  of  the  sacra-
ments, as  far  as  visible  things  are  concerned?  For  grant  that
all  created  things  invite  us  to  the  contemplation  of  the  deity,
yet  this  invitation  is  an  altogether  dumb  one.  In  the  sacraments
we  have  a  living  and  speaking  invitation.  For  the  Lord  Himself
speaks,  the  elements  speak,  and  they  speak  and  suggest  to  the
senses  the  same  thing  that  speech  and  the  Spirit  do  to  the  mind.
But  all  these  visible  things  are  nothing  unless  the  invisible
sanctification  of  the  Spirit  go  before  them.

Thus,  not  to  be  too  lengthy,  I  will  suffer  myself  to  be
thrown  back  with  all  my  opponents  upon  Augustine  as  umpire
and  mediator  in  this  controversy  over  the  sacraments  and  their
efficacy.  For  nothing  can  be  said  about  the  sacraments  so
grandly  eloquent  as  to  offend  me,  provided  we  take  as  symbolical
what  is  said  symbolically  and  give  the  glory  to  God,  and  not
to  the  holiness  of  the  ministers  nor  to  the  efficacy  of  the  elements
or  sacraments.  For  since,  as  is  incontrovertible  in  baptism  and
the  eucharist,  that  which  is  symbolized  by  the  sacraments  is  at
hand  before  we  use  the  sacraments,  what  in  the  world  is  the
reason  why  we  should  attribute  to  the  sacraments  what  we  had
before,  when  the  sacraments  simply  make  confession  of,  bear
witness  to,  and  call  into  use  what  we  have  before?  How  far
shall  we  tempt  the  Spirit  of  God  in  so  evident  a  matter?  Or  is
not  he  at  length  admitted  to  baptism  who  through  faith  or
promise  of  it  has  been  previously  counted  in  the  Church?  Is
not  the  man  who  has  not  proved  his  faith  before  offering  himself
at  the  table  of  the  Lord's  Supper  refused  by  the  apostle?

Are  the  sacraments,  then,  in  vain?  By  no  means,  as  has
been  said.  For  they  proclaim  salvation  from  God,  turn  the
senses  to  it  and  thus  exercise  the  faith  which  they  also  promise  to
the  neighbor,  drawing  us  to  brotherly  love.  And  one  and  the
same  Spirit  worketh  all  these  things,  sometimes  without,  some-
times with,  the  external  instrument,  inspiring  whom  it  will  and
drawing  him  whither  and  as  it  will.

I  spoke  above  of  the  sanctified  and  consecrated  bread,  and
this  I  do  not  wish  in  any  way  understood  in  the  sense  of  the
Papists,  as  if  the  bread  were  converted  into  the  real  and  natural
body  of  Christ.  It  is  converted  into  His  sacramental  body.
Grant  that  daily  bread  is  blessed  by  the  word  and  by  prayer,
then  much  more  is  that  bread  which  before  was  common  bread


118  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

but  now  is  changed  so  as  to  be  the  sacramental  body  of  Christ,
made  divine  and  sacred  by  blessing  and  consecration,  exactly  as
the  ancients  said  it  was  changed  and  blessed,  not  so  that  the
susbstance  of  bread  passed  over  into  the  substance  of  Christ's
body,  but  so  that  the  bread  became  Christ's  sacramental  body.
And  what  Christ's  sacramental  body  is,  there  is  no  need  for  me
to  tell  you  who  know.  Only  let  us  not  impose  upon  the  ignorant
in  the  very  name  of  the  sacrament,  but  let  signs  be  signs.  But
if  any  one  says  to  me,  "If  you  subscribe  to  the  opinion  of
Augustine  in  regard  to  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments,  what
reason  is  there  why  you  should  not  return  to  harmony  with  the
Papists?"  I  answer,  "The  bulk  of  the  controversy  remains."
For  they  attribute  to  the  sacraments  the  power  of  working
wherever  they  are  administered,  as  if  divine  efficacy  were  bound
up  with  them.  For  this  increases  their  wealth,  as  they  have  all
the  gifts  of  God  for  sale,  nay  they  sell  God  Himself  at  a  far
higher  price  than  Judas  did.  I,  however,  say  that  the  sacraments
do  not  bestow  grace,  but  call  it  into  activity  and  testify  to  it  when
already  bestowed — these  sacraments  which  are  bought  for  a
price  in  proportion  to  the  grace  possessed.  But  that  which  is
already  possessed  is  not  bought,  and  the  active  manifestation  of
it  cannot  be  acquired  from  any  body  except  as  an  external  thing
which  without  the  internal  grace  of  faith  is  without  value.  "Let
a  man  prove  himself,"  says  Paul  [I  Cor.  11 :  28],  not,  "Let  every
one  prove  somebody  else,"  or,  "let  one  sanctify  another,"  So
much  for  the  efficacy  of  the  sacraments.

Now  I  will  treat  of  the  Eucharist  in  shorter  compass.  For
these  are  the  two  pillars,  as  it  were,  upon  which  the  greed  of
Rome  rests.

The  strife  about  the  Eucharist  Eck  himself  would  have
brought  to  an  end,  if  one  could  trust  what  he  said  when  he
spoke  of  the  body  of  Christ  being  eaten  in  the  Supper  myster-
iously. For  I  say  the  same  thing.  And  then  he  said  that  the
body  is  eaten  indeed  in  the  Supper  but  not  physically.  I  again
say  the  same  thing.  But  when  he  says  "mysteriously,"  he  lays
a  snare  with  this  word  "mysteriously;"  he  does  the  same  with
the  word  "physically."  He  does  not  understand  that  a  mystery
was  to  the  Greeks  about  the  same  thing  as  a  sacrament  to  the


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  119

Romans.*  Thus  when  the  people  of  old  said  that  the  body  of
Christ  was  eaten  they  understood  this  in  the  same  way  as  if  one
said  "mysteriously"  or  '^sacramentally."  If  Eck  understood
it  so,  harmony  would  have  been  completely  established  between
us.  All  controversy  would  have  been  equally  brought  to  an
end,  if  he  took  "physically"  in  the  sense  of  "materially"  or
,  "substantially."  But  since  they  have  invented  some  third  thing
between  the  real  and  material  body  of  Christ  and  His  sacra-
mental body,  not  that  spiritual  body  which  we  eat,  but  a  kind
of  thing  that  does  not  exist,  being  neither  material  nor  sacra-
mental, that  is  symbolical  and  significative, — I  see  clearly
enough  what  stand  they  would  take  if  one  should  meet  them  a
hundred  times.  They  have  two  retreats  into  which  to  flee.  One
is  that  the  man  who  does  not  understand  that  body  they  have
invented  is  a  blockhead.  The  other  is  that  words  are  able  to
effect  the  thing  they  say.  To  this  last  I  simply  oppose  (for  I
will  attack  their  first  retreat  afterwards),  "Let  Eck,  then,  say
to  me  or  to  that  devil  by  whom  he  maintains  I  am  possessed,  'Be
still  and  come  out  of  him,'  "  and  he  will  see  how  still  I  become
while  he  lies  so  shamelessly  and  rends  the  truth  so  godlessly.  For
there  is  no  reason  why  he  should  refuse  me  this  request.  I  am
among  the  living,  I  am  still  awaiting  the  bridegroom,  my  hope
of  pardon  is  still  secure,  hence  this  is  due  me  in  charity.  He
cannot  plead  inability,  for  words  are  able  to  effect  the  thing
they  say,  and  these  are  Christ's  words.  But  let  us  put  this  aside
and  come  to  the  examination  of  the  body  of  Christ,  with  sup-
pliant prayer  to  Him  that  He  will  disclose  himself  to  us.

I  have  no  quarrel  with  any  man  as  to  the  words  of  the
Supper,  as  if  I  would  have  them  changed  as  some  falsely  charge,
or  absolutely  done  away  with,  as  others  slanderously  assert.
For  when  the  words  are,  "This  is  my  body,''  they  give  the
sacrament  a  more  impressive  character  than  if  we  said,  "This
symbolizes  my  body."  So  I  would  not  have  them  changed  at  all.
And  how  can  I  want  words  utterly  done  away  with,  which  I
do  not  even  wish  changed?  My  opponents  have  these  words,
therefore,  and  I  have  them.  Let  the  words  stay  unaltered  with
them,  for  they  shall  stay  unchanged  with  me: — "This  is  my

*So  TertuUian  uses  sacrament  in  the  sense  of  the  Greek  word  "mystery."
See  Rogers,  Peter  Lombard  and  the  Sacramental  System,  New  York,  1917,
p.  10.


120  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

body  which  is  given  for  you,"  and  "this  is  my  blood"  and  so
forth.  My  opponents  say  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  offered  here.
I  also  say  the  same  thing.  Where  then  is  the  difference?  It  is
here.  My  opponents  say  the  material  and  substantial  body  of
Christ  is  offered,  I  say  the  sacramental.  Hence  the  strife.  Let
them  answer,  therefore,  whether  they  desire  to  understand
physically  or  spiritually  the  words,  "This  is  my  body,"  that  is, .
whether  He  offered  His  body  to  be  eaten  physically  or
spiritually.  For  between  material  or  physical  and  spiritual
there  is  no  middle  term.  Though  you  put  together  everything
there  is,  both  creator  and  created  things,  you  will  have  either
gpirit  or  body.  To  this  combat,  therefore,  I  challenge  them.
Did  Christ  offer  His  body  to  be  eaten  materially  and  physically
or  spiritually?  If  they  say,  "spiritually,"  they  withdraw  from
their  opinion  and  come  over  to  mine.  If  they  say,  "physically,"
they  deny  their  own  postulates.  For  they  say  body  is  eaten  but
not  physically,  which  is  a  difference  of  words  and  not  of  things.
For  if  Christ^s  body  is  physically  and  materially  body  and  they
eat  His  material  body,  they  eat  it  physically.  To  talk  about
eating  it  otherwise  is  mere  trifling.  For  I  have  no  use  for  that
notion  (of  which  Eck  declares  me  ignorant)  of  a  real  and  true
body  that  does  not  exist  physically,  definitely  and  distinctly  in
some  place,  and  that  sort  of  nonsense  got  up  by  word  triflers.

I  go  to  the  root  of  things  when  I  say,  "If  the  body  of  Christ
is  finite, — indeed,  if  it  is  a  clarified  body,  such  as  ours  shall  also
be,  it  exists  physically  and  truly  after  the  manner  of  clarified
bodies.  It  is,  therefore,  eaten,  as  it  exists,  if  it  is  eaten  in  a
material  sense.  For  the  manner  or  quality  cannot  be  taken
away  from  a  material  body.  If  you  take  it  away,  the  body  is
no  longer  material  but  spiritual."  And  again  we  conquer.  You
can  in  the  mind  abstract  the  quality  from  the  thing,  but  in
actual  fact  it  cannot  be  separated  from  it.  For  everything  that
is  has  the  qualities  peculiar  to  its  kind  and  inseparable  there-
from, and  without  them  the  thing  never  does  exist  or  can  exist
as  long  as  the  kind  endures,  whatever  our  minds  take  away  or
add,  put  together  or  put  asunder.  This,  perhaps,  Eck,  led
astray  by  sophistry,  fails  to  understand.  But  I  understand  and
know  that  I  say  what  is  true  and  sound,  for  I  am  supported  both
by  the  testimony  of  Holy  Scripture  and  by  the  opinion  of  St.


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  121

Augustine,*  who  assigns  the  body  of  Christ  to  some  particular
place  in  heaven  according  to  the  fashion  of  real  body.  If  the
real  body  of  Christ  has  the  character  of  body  so  that  it  occupies
some  particular  place  in  heaven,  Augustine  attributes  to  it  its
appropriate  and  inseparable  characteristic.  I  shall,  therefore,
compel  those  who  wish  to  eat  the  material,  substantial,  or  real
body  of  Christ,  materially,  substantially  and  really,  to  eat  it
also  physically  in  accordance  with  all  the  necessary  properties
of  body.  For  without  those  properties  it  would  not  be  real  body,
as  I  am  constantly  proclaiming  and  constantly  in  vain.

The  passion  of  hatred,  ignorance,  and  vainglory,  having
overpowered  a  man,  holds  his  eyes  fast  as  the  tyrant  does  the
free  man.  As  he  dares  not  speak  out  what  is  true,  so  the  eye
bewitched  by  such  passions  fails  to  see  what  is  true  and  sound,
so  that  you  should  not  trust,  most  wise  princes  of  Germany,  any
of  the  scholars  who  in  this  day  have  fallen  into  this  controversy.
But  we  must  pray  the  Lord  to  make  firm  the  wavering.  For
you  see  clearly  what  trivial  explanations,  what  distortions  of
language  they  concoct,  appealing  now  from  the  sacred  Scrip-
tures to  the  Fathers,  and  again  from  the  Fathers  to  the  naked
Word,  as  they  say,  in  their  efforts  not  to  seem  beaten.  Question
your  faith  and  your  mind  and  your  heart  and  they  will  tell  you
that  what  satisfies  here  is  simply  the  spiritual.  If  you  admit
this,  what  quarrel  have  we? I,  too,  believe  and  confess  the  same.

Furthermore,  that  the  sacrament  not  only  should  be  called
body,  but  be  its  representative  and  symbol  to  the  senses,  to
suggest  to  our  senses  and  hold  them  bound,  gives  me  no  ofifense,

•Augustine  refers  to  this  thought  repeatedly.  Thus  he  says  in  Sermon
361,  §7:  "According  to  the  presence  of  His  glory  and  divinity  He  is  always
with  the  Father;  according  to  His  bodily  presence,  He  is  now  above  the
heavens  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father;  but  according  to  the  presence  of
faith,  He  is  in  all  Christians."  Again  in  his  Letter  187,  to  Dardanus,  he
writes:  "Doubt  not  that  Christ  is  wholly  present  everywhere  as  God,  and
is  in  the  same  temple  of  God  as  indwelling  God,  and  in  some  one  place  of
heaven  on  account  of  the  measure  (or  limit)  of  a  true  body."  (c.  XIII,  or
§41).  In  the  same  letter,  c.  Ill,  or  §10,  he  writes:  "As  respects  this  form
He  is  not  supposed  to  be  spread  abroad  everywhere.  For  we  must  take  heed,
that  we  do  not  so  maintain  the  divinity  of  the  man  as  to  take  away  the
truth  of  the  body .  . For  God  and  man  is  one  person,  and  both  make

one  Christ  Jesus;  He  is  everywhere  by  that  which  is  God,  but  He  is  in
heaven  by  that  which  is  man."  See  also  his  Commentary  on  John,  Tract
XXX,  1,  quoted  p.  54,  note  **.


122  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

nor  shall  I  be  angry  even  if  all  that  the  Spirit  works  be  attributed
to  the  external  sacrament,  provided  we  understand  such
language  symbolically,  as  the  Fathers  used  it.  It  is  silly  to
wrangle  about  words  when  we  do  not  differ  about  the  thing.  I
have  long  been  saying  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  in  the  Supper
to  the  eye  of  faith.  Now  whichever  way  my  adversaries  turn
they  will  find  no  way  of  dragging  it  into  the  Supper  otherwise.
What  unfairness  it  is,  to  be  dragged  into  side  issues  by  noisy
contentious  fellows  1  But  to  end  this  complaint  I  will  give  a
short  illustration  in  which  my  view  about  the  Eucharist  shall  be
outlined  as  it  were.

The  master  of  the  house  on  the  point  of  starting  upon  a
long  journey  and  handing  to  his  wife  a  splendid  ring  with  his
image  cut  upon  it,  and  saying,  "Here  am  I,  your  husband,  for
you  to  keep  and  delight  in  my  absence,"  typifies  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ.  For  He,  when  going  away,  left  to  His  spouse,  the
Church,  His  own  image  in  the  sacrament  of  the  Supper.  As  He
is  the  strong  "foundation  of  our  hope,  so  does  the  bread  strength-
en mankind,  and  as  wine  refreshes  the  heart  of  man,  so  does  He
raise  up  the  despairing  soul.  He  gave  us  His  image  with  the
words,  "This  is  my  body,"  sacramentally  and  symbolically,  like
the  ring  of  the  master  of  the  house.  "Do  this  in  remembrance
of  me,  giving  thanks  and  offerings  and  pouring  out  prayer  and
praise  because  I,  the  spouse  of  your  souls,  have  redeemed  you."
In  saying  "Here  am  I  myself,"  the  master  of  the  house  gave
much  more  than  if  he  had  said,  "Here  is  my  ring,"  even  though
he  did  not  actually  and  physically  give  himself,  being  now  on
the  point  of  going  away.  By  these  words,  he  gave  himself
wholly — all  that  he  represented  of  conjugal  faithfulness  and
love — as  though  he  would  say,  "I  want  you  to  be  sure  not  only
of  my  faithfulness  and  love  towards  you,  but  that  I  am  wholly
yours,  and  for  this  I  give  you  this  ring,  the  one  chief  thing  I
own,  as  a  sign  and  symbol,  that  as  often  as  you  look  upon  it  you
may  have  me  as  it  were  present  before  you  and  call  to  mind  my
face  and  faithfulness."  So  in  the  Eucharist  that  noble  man,
when  going  away  to  a  distant  country,  gave  Himself  to  us  in  the
bread  and  wine  far  more  vividly  and  intimately  when  He  said,
"This  is  my  body,"  than  if  He  had  said,  "This  is  a  symbol  of
my  body,"  though  He  was  going  to  take  away  His  material
body  and  place  it  in  heaven. Yet  by  these  words  He  gave  Him-


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  123

self  just  as  entirely,  as  far  as  faith  and  grace  are  concerned,  as
if  He  had  said,  "Now  I  am  going  to  death  for  you,  and  a  little
later  I  shall  go  away  from  here  again,  but  I  do  not  want  you  to
doubt  of  my  love  and  care  for  you.  I  am  wholly  yours  in  all
that  I  am.  In  witness  of  this  I  entrust  to  you  a  symbol  of  this
my  surrender  and  testament,  to  awaken  in  you  the  remembrance
of  me  and  of  my  goodness  to  you,  that  when  you  see  this  bread
and  this  cup,  held  forth  in  this  memorial  Supper,  you  may
remember  me  as  delivered  up  for  you,  just  as  if  you  saw  me
before  you  as  you  see  me  now,  eating  with  you  and  presently  to
be  taken  away  from  you  to  suffer  for  you,"  etc.

Thus,  I  say,  we  have  the  Lord's  Supper  distinguished  by
the  presence  of  Christ.  But  in  all  this  is  not  the  presence  of  the
body  of  Christ  sacramentally  to  the  eye  of  faith,  as  I  have
always  said,  the  gist  of  the  whole  matter?  For  as  her  husband's
ring  is  no  common  gold  to  the  wife  but  more  than  all  the  gems
of  the  Indies,  so  to  us  is  this  sacrament,  the  food  and  drink  of
the  Lord's  Supper,  sweeter  than  the  flavor  of  the  finest  viands.
And  as  the  ring,  though  not  itself  the  husband,  has  a  touch  of
the  husband's  value  because  it  was  given  by  him  as  a  sign  of
undying  love,  and  because  it  recalls  his  form  whenever  it  is
looked  upon,  so  the  repast  of  the  Supper,  though  not  Christ's
material  body,  rises  to  high  value  because  it  was  given  and
instituted  as  an  everlasting  sign  of  the  love  of  Christ,  and  because
as  often  as  it  is  celebrated  it  brings  Him  who  so  loves  us  before
us  so  vividly  that  we  gaze  upon  Him  with  the  eye  of  the  mind
and  adore  and  worship  Him.  And  as  this  contemplation  by
faith  is  far  more  precious  than  even  the  touch  of  that  body  (for
many  touched  it  in  the  flesh  to  their  own  destruction,  while  none
ever  contemplated  it  thus  by  faith,  as  I  have  said,  without  salva-
tion), so  is  this  contemplation  or  partaking  the  one  thing
needful  in  the  Supper.  Paul  bids  us  prove  our  faith,  not  our
credulity  or  opinion,  to  see  whether  we  doubt  about  physical
eating.

This,  too,  should  be  by  no  means  passed  by  here,  that  the
wife  will  value  her  husband's  ring  in  proportion  to  her  love  for
him.  So  in  the  Supper  the  body  of  Christ  is  the  more  vividly
present  to  the  eye  of  faith,  the  greater  is  one's  faith  and  love
towards  Christ.  Hence  arise  such  expressions  as,  "He  was  taken
up  by  their  hands,"  just  as  the  husband  offered  himself  to  his


124  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

wife — '*He  was  at  once  fellow  banqueter  and  banquet,"  for  He
presented  himself  to  them  sacramentally,  and  also  sat  and  ate
with  them  in  the  flesh.  Thus,  I  say,  do  I  understand  the  highly
figurative  and  hyperbolic  language  regarding  the  Eucharist.
And,  as  I  have  often  borne  witness,  I  can  easily  put  up  with  all
expressions  of  this  kind,  provided  we  do  not  go  on  to  understand
physically  the  thing  said  of  spiritual  partaking,  and  understand
symbolically  what  is  said  symbolically  in  the  way  that  Augustine
also  was  in  the  habit  of  speaking.

Furthermore  as  to  Eck  himself,  his  refutation  is  so  weak
and  feeble  that  my  confession  of  faith  needs  no  defense  against
it.  And  where  his  followers  had  a  right  to  expect  something,  he
is  utterly  dull,  namely,  where  he  tries  to  draw  out  from  me
ancient  and  exploded  arguments.  Who  is  not  minded  to  laugh
when  he  gives  to  Augustine's  words,  "For  the  Lord  did  not
hesitate  to  say,  'This  is  my  body,'  when  He  offered  a  symbol  of
His  body,"  the  explanation,  'The  properties  without  the  sub-
stance are  the  symbol  of  Christ's  body."  I  say,  "Then  the
properties  are  the  sacrament,"  for  symbol  is  used  here  for
sacrament.  Therefore  Augustine  said  that  Christ  gave  His
disciples  properties,  for  he  adds,  "when  He  offered  a  symbol."
Then  when  they  say,  "Christ's  body  is  in  the  sacrament  of  the
altar,"  they  really  say,  "Christ  is  in  the  properties."  Therefore
it  is  false  what  they  teach,  that  Christ's  body  is  identical  with
the  sacrament  and  is  the  substance  of  the  sacrament,  since  the
properties  are  the  sacrament,  or  else  Christ's  body  is  to  them  only
a  property.  But  who  could  count  the  silly  and  ridiculous  things
that  would  follow  from  Eck's  utterances  and  explanations?
This,  too,  is  charming,  when  he  brings  forward  about  two  hands
ruled  by  one  soul, — and  he  a  philosopher,  please  the  gods !  As
if  he  would  admit  that  Christ  had  two  bodies  at  once,  just  as
there  are  two  hands.  For  as  to  the  soul  of  Christ  and  the  number
of  members  it  rules  at  once,  we  have  never  had  any  dispute.
Or  as  if,  when  he  will  have  it  that  Christ's  soul  ruled  two  bodies
at  once,  which  is  irreverent,  Eck  would  allow  that  these  two
bodies  were  equal  and  like  unto  each  other,  as  one's  two  hands
are  alike,  when  I  had  said  that  if  Christ  had  two  bodies  at  once,
they  must  have  been  unlike,  and  one  subject  to  death,  the  other
immortal ! But  I  will  not  discuss  these  absurdities  further.

Furthermore  as  to  his  slanders  and  lies,  I  say  they  are  so


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  125

many  and  so  extensive  that  if  you  take  them  out  of  the  book
there  will  not  be  enough  left  to  throw  into  the  fire,  where  alone
the  book  belongs,  even  if  there  were  any  truth  in  it,  that  such
wholesale  madness  may  not  go  unpunished  and  sometime
become  a  precedent.

Examples  are,  that  I  alienated  certain  cities  from  allegiance
to  the  House  of  Austria;  that  I  roused  seditions  at  Rottweil,  a
place  I  never  visited,  and  at  Ittingen,  for  whose  sake  I  have
suffered  and  borne  many  hardships ;  that  I  drew  Balthasar  the
Catabaptist  into  heresy  by  a  letter,*  when  I  never  wrote  to  the
man  except  once,  when  I  took  him  sharply  to  task  for  the  heresy
he  had  taken  up,  for  both  his  character  and  his  company  were
always  suspicious  to  me.  The  first  time  he  met  me  he  told  me
how  closely  he  was  associated  with  Eck.t  I  had  no  doubt  then
that  the  viciousness  of  the  man,  who  was  overweening  enough  in
himself,  had  quickly  been  increased  by  that  companionship.
Hence  I  never  admitted  him  into  close  relationship,  so  that  he
finally  expostulated  with  me  and  upbraided  me  for  wrongfully
snubbing  such  a  man  as  himself.

*Huebinaier  relates  the  following  conversation  with  Zwingli  about
baptism:  "In  1523  ...  I  conferred  with  you  in  Graben  street  upon  the
Scriptures  relating  baptism;  then  and  there  you  said  I  was  right  in  saying
that  children  should  not  be  baptized  before  they  were  instructed  in  the
faith;  this  had  been  the  custom  previously,  therefore  such  were  called
catechumens.  You  promised  to  bring  this  out  in  your  'Exposition'  of  the
Articles,  as  you  did  in  Article  XVIII,  on  Confirmation  [See  Zwingli's
Werke,  ed.  of  Egli  and  Finsler,  II,  123].  Any  one  who  reads  it  will  find
therein  your  opinion  clearly  expressed  ...  So  you  confessed  in  your
book  on  the  "Unruly  Spirits,"  that  those  who  baptize  infants  could  quot«
no  clear  word  of  Scripture  ordering  them  to  baptize  them  [See  Zwingli's
Werke,  ed.  of  Egli  and  Finsler,  III,  409].  From  this  learn,  friend  Zwingli,
how  your  conversation,  writing,  and  preaching  agree."  Quoted  by  Prof.
Vedder,  in  his  Balthasar  Huhmaier,  p.  126f.  In  the  latter  passage  Zwingli
adds  that,  as  there  was  no  clear  command  to  baptize  children  in  the  New
Testament,  it  was  necessary  to  go  back  to  the  Old  Testament  custom  of
circumcision,  of  which  baptism  was  the  N.  T.  counterpart.

tBalthasar  Huebmaier  was  a  pupil  of  Eck,  who  studied  under  him  at
Freiburg,  taking  the  master's  degree  there  probably  in  1511,  at  which
occasion  Eck  delivered  an  oration.  When  Eck  was  called  to  Ingolstadt,
Huebmaier  followed  him  and  took  the  doctor's  degree  there  on  September
29,  1512,  when  Eck  again  delivered  an  oration,  in  which  he  gave  a  sketch  of
the  candidate's  scholastic  life.  See  H.  C.  Vedder,  Balthasar  Hiibmaier,
pp.  32-34.


126  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Moreover,  that  I  was  ever  averse  to  infant  baptism  or  was
tinged  with  Catabaptism,  no  lover  of  the  truth  and  right  ever
said  of  me.  For  I  can  bring  forward  witnesses  of  no  ordinary-
sort  who  know  how  I  suppressed  the  foolish  gossip  which  some
persons  had  started  about  not  baptizing  infants,  two  years  after
the  Catabaptists  came  on  the  scene,  doing  it  in  a  not  unfriendly
way  and  reminding  them  that  the  meaning  of  Scripture  in  this
matter  was  at  variance  with  their  contention.  If  Balthasar  had
that  writing  of  mine,  no  doubt  his  executioners  found  it  upon
him,  or  he  left  it  to  the  Catabaptists.  Let,  therefore,  those  who
have  it  show  it,  and  convict  me  of  treachery  or  high  treason.

Of  the  same  character  is  his  statement  that  I  thrust  some-
thing into  the  mouths  of  the  ancient  orthodox  writers,  as  if
they  had  written  that  Christ's  body  is  everywhere.  What  I  said
as  an  absurdity  in  regard  to  the  crosses  in  the  mass,  by  way  of
refutation  and  with  a  view  to  dissuasion,  he  declares  I  said  in
sober  argument.  This  I  deny  with  the  utmost  possible
emphasis.  But  who  would  be  a  greater  fool  than  I,  if  I  should
continue  to  review  all  the  lies  of  this  lying  person?  So  much
for  what  pertains  to  teaching,  for  his  other  carpings  of  this  sort
show  not  a  scholar  but  a  purblind  creature,  and  the  leeches  will
protect  us  from  harm  from  that  source.

The  most  ancient  city  of  the  Zurichers  (early  history  and
especially  the  Eoman  consul,  Lucius  Cassius,  whom  they  slew,
have  borne  witness  to  their  character  for  all  these  ages)  he  not
only  refers  to  Charles  the  Great  as  founder,  uninformed  in
history  as  he  is,  but  attacks  with  such  lying  statements  before
the  whole  world  that  he  could  not  be  more  shameless  towards  a
city  he  had  reason  to  hate  utterly.  And  this  though  it  is
acknowledged  that  no  city  in  these  times  or  in  ancient  times  ever
devoted  itself  to  the  Roman  Empire  so  faithfully — none,  I
say — and  through  the  services  of  none  has  greater  profit  come
to  the  House  of  Austria  and  to  the  Empire  itself.  Therefore,  I
call  to  witness  next  to  the  ancient  historical  records  the  annals  of
the  emperors  and  of  the  dukes  of  Austria.  I  tell  the  truth  when
I  say  that  this  city  has  drained  its  treasury  in  the  service  of
the  Gospel,  but  has  not  diverted  one  of  the  monasteries  to  the
uses  of  its  own  treasury.  They  all  either  remain  for  the  support
of  those  who  had  been  destined  for  the  monasteries  or  appointed
to  teach  there,  or  are  turned  into  funds  for  the  poor. We  have


Letter  to  the  Princes  of  Germany  127

no  chest  and  have  not  learned  to  steal.

Therefore,  Your  Highnesses,  notice  what  this  champion  of
the  Pope  is  aiming  at.  He  shows  with  perfect  clearness  that  the
Eomanists  under  the  guise  of  a  synod — general  synod,  doubt-
less— are  going  to  control  your  assembly,  he  calls  the  Emperor
openly  to  arms.  How  all  this  will  turn  out  is  for  Your  High-
nesses to  consider.  Dangers  threaten  on  all  sides,  but  the  Lord
will  dissipate  them  all,  if  you  lay  hold  upon  truth  and  righteous-
ness. To  take  a  stand  against  truth  is  destruction,  to  yield  to  her
is  the  first  essential  of  safety.  God  Almighty  grant  that  we  may
reverence  her  and  see  her  through  a  glass  in  this  world,  but  see
her  face  to  face  and  embrace  her  in  the  world  to  come ! Amen.

Zurich,  August  27th,  1530.


V.

Reproductiox  from  Memory  of  a  Sermon  on  the
Providence  of  God,  Dedicated  to  His  Highness,
Philip  op  Hesse.

(August  20,  1530)

[AD  ILLV-  I  STRISSIMVM  CATTORVM  PRIN-  |  cipem  Philippum,
sermonis  De  providentia  |  Dei  Anamnema.  VENITE  AD  ME  OMNES
QUI  LA-  I  boratis  et  onerati  estis,  et  ego  reficiam  vos.  Matth.  XI.  Tigvri
apvd  Christopkorvm  |  Froschouer,  Anno  M.D.  XXX.  ]  160  octavo  pages,
numbered  by  leaves  (2-80).  Signed  on  p.  159  :  Tiguri  XX.  Augusti  M.D.
XXX.  Opera  Ztcinglii,  Tom.  I,  fol.  352a-379b;  Schuler  and  Schulthess  ed.
Vol.  IV,  pp.  79-144.  A  German  edition,  translated  by  Leo  Juda  and  printed
by  Froschouer  in  1531,  has  the  following  title:

An  den  Durchliichtigesten  Fiirsten  vnd  Herren,  Herrn  Philippen,
Landgraff  in  Hessen,  Von  der  Filrsichtigkeyt  Gottes,  ein  biichlin  inn  Latin
heschrihenn  durch  Meister  Euldrich  Zwinglin.  Vertiitschet  durch  Leo
Jud.  Matth.  XL  At  the  end,  on  p.  221 :  Getruckt  zu  Ziirich  by  Christoffel
Froschouer.  M.  D.  XXXI.  224  unnumbered  octavo  pages.  Finsler,  ZicingU
Bihliographie,  Nos.  94  and  95.  The  following  English  translation  is  based
on  one  by  Mr.  Henry  Preble. It  was  revised  throughout  by  the  editor.

The  work  of  Zwingli  "On  the  Providence  of  God"  is  a  free  reproduction
from  memory  of  a  sermon,  delivered  by  Zwingli  at  IMarburg  during  the
Marburg  Colloquy,  October  1-4,  1529.  As  rewritten  by  Zwingli  the  sermon
has  become  a  philosophical  treatise.  In  his  philosophy  he  follows  prin-
cipally Aristotle  and  the  Stoics.  The  doctrine  of  God,  starting  from  the
conception  of  the  Highest  Being,  is  developed  into  a  cosmological  argu-
ment for  the  Being  of  God.  Upon  this  basis  the  discussion  of  the  Divine
Providence  proceeds,  culminating  in  the  question  of  Divine  Predestination.
It  is  the  most  abstruse  as  well  as  the  most  penetrating  Latin  work  of
Zwingli.]

HuLDREiCH  Zwingli  to  His  Highness  Philip  of  Hesse

GRACE  and  peace  from  our  Lord  and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ.
You  ask  a  thing,  most  pious  Prince,  which  you  might

128


On  the  Providence  of  God  129

fairly  have  claimed  or  demanded — the  sermon  that  I  delivered
in  your  castle  at  Marburg.  I  would  be  as  quick  to  give  it  as  you
to  ask  it,  if  my  memory  listened  to  my  inclination.  For  why
should  not  the  abilities  of  all,  who  try  to  advance  our  religion  by
preaching  or  teaching,  spontaneously  put  themselves  at  the
service  of  Your  Highness?  For  you  alone  strive  frankly  to
have  the  infancy  of  religion  nourished  conscientiously  and
allowed  to  develop  peacefully.  You  alone  have  duly  considered
that  save  God  alone  none  duly  knoweth  all  things ;  that,  there-
fore, all  things  are  not  wisely  ordered  according  to  the  dictum  of
one  man.  You  alone,  seeing  among  the  servants  of  the  Chris-
tian religion  the  power  of  rivalry  and  jealousy,  nay,  to  speak
with  full  frankness  and  openness,  the  power  of  error  and  lust  of
glory,  take  anxious  care  to  prevent  that  band  of  followers,
emulating  the  defects  of  their  master,  from  breaking  forth  in
their  zeal  into  some  discord  or  disturbance.  You  alone  under-
stand that  if  we  truly  hold  fast  to  the  chief  point  of  religion,
difference  of  opinion  upon  other  points  is  not  of  such  moment  as
to  justify  us  in  breaking  for  their  sake  that  cord  of  charity
which,  like  the  red  cord  of  the  Athenian  assembly,  brings  us
together  in  one  spirit  and  one  mind.  You  alone,  though  fully
convinced,*  and  sure  in  regard  to  a  matter  as  to  which  others
still  dispute  somewhat  unmannerly  and  ignorantly,  by  a  sort  of
holy  hypocrisy  pretend  to  waver  and  be  in  doubt,  that  as  a  com-
panion of  the  erring  ones  you  may  tear  them  from  their  error
through  your  friendship  and  gentle  kindness,  through  the  pro-
tection of  your  name  and  the  hope  of  security,  when  they  see  you
steadfastly  embracing  the  truth  that  has  dawned,  and  that  you
may  free  them  from  fear  when  they  behold  in  you  a  haven  to
which  they  may  hasten  if  any  danger  threatens  from  a  change
of  their  opinion.  This  is  indeed  to  be  a  peacemakerf,  this  is
rightly  and  really  to  know  the  ways  of  Christian  peace,  this  is
to  show  one's  self  a  pious  prince.

Moreover  you  make  yourself  an  example  not  only  to  the
learned  but  to  all,  both  peoples  and  princes,  to  be  looked  up  to
and  imitated,  because  you  alone  rule  your  subjects  with  such
moderation  and  gentleness  that  you  alone  seem  to  point  out  to

*  ■KlT]po(f>oprj-&Eig. The  Greek  words  which  Zwingli  inserts  into  the  text
we  add  in  the  notes.
I  eip7jvoT:oLelc-dac.


130  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

the  rest  the  way  by  which  rulers  may  learn  to  command  willing
subjects,  and  subjects  to  obey  just  commands.  This  courage,
fidelity  and  wisdom  of  yours,  I  say,  young  though  you  are,*
show  that  those  who  do  not  reverence  you  either  have  not  yet  seen
the  radiance  of  your  glory,  or,  having  seen,  maliciously  envy  it.
If  you  go  on  as  you  have  begun,  God  who  giveth  the  increase  will
make  you  grow,  contrary  to  their  hopes,  to  be  a  noble  example  of
constancy  and  piety  to  the  present  generation  and  to  posterity.

But  now  I  come  back  to  myself.  If,  I  say,  my  memory
could  recall  all  that  I  said  in  word  and  order  of  arrangement,
nothing  would  delight  me  more  than  this  opportunity  of  com-
plying with  your  wishes.  Since,  however,  the  faithful  retentive-
ness  of  memory,  through  which  perhaps  a  Cato  or  a  Seneca
might  recover  it  all,  has  been  denied  me,  I  will  do  this :  I  will
write  a  short,  but  I  think  substantial,  summary  regarding  Pro-
vidence, dividing  it  into  not  more  than  seven  chapters.  When
you  examine  them  I  think  you  will  admit  that  you  have  received,
if  not  the  sermon  itself,  at  least  the  same  material  and  line  of
argument — all  in  homely  and  plain  workmanship.  Do  then,
brave  hero,  meantime  so  cultivate  goodness  and  the  knowledge
of  holy  things  that  we  shall  all  rejoice  that  the  Prince  of  Hesse f
is,  according  to  the  precept  of  Christ,  our  Saviour,  as  wise  as  a
serpent  and  as  harmless  as  a  dove.  May  He  long  preserve  you  to
His  cause!  Amen.^
Ziirich,  1530.

FIRST  CHAPTER

Providence  must  exist,  because  the  supreme  good  necessarily
cares  for  and  regulates  all  things.

*Philip  of  Hesse  was  born  in  1504.

tThe  play  upon  words  involved  in  "Cattorum  principem"  and  "catum
serpentem"  seems  impossible  of  reproduction.

$Bucer  wrote  to  Zwingli  of  this  preface^  "You  slashed  them  [tlie
Lutherans]  more  than  offensively  in  the  preface  to  the  Prince  of  Hesse.
You  ought  not  by  this  ill-omened  preface  to  have  exposed  to  odium  a  work
so  fine  and  worthy  of  immortality."  For  Bucer  was  already  treating  with
Luther  and  his  associates  with  regard  to  certain  formulas  that  might
satisfy  them  and  yet  leave  a  loop-hole  for  the  understandings  of  those  who
thought  differently.  Zwingli  was  opposed  to  this  scheme  of  clever  compro-
mise. See  Letter  of  Bucer  to  Zwingli,  Sept.  18,  1530,  ed.  Schuler  and
Schulthess,  Vol.  VIII,  pt.  2,  p.  516.


On  the  Providence  of  God  131

The  supreme  good  is  not  so  called  because  it  is  above  all
goods,  as  if  there  were  some  goods  that  were  good  in  their  own
nature  but  were  surpassed  by  this  good,  just  as  gold  surpasses  the
value  of  silver  though  both  are  valuable.  It  is  called  the
supreme  good  because  it  is  the  only  thing  good  by  nature,  and
every  good  that  can  be  imagined  is  itself  really  this  supreme
good.  This  Christ  set  forth  by  the  words :  "Why  callest  thou
me  good?  There  is  none  good  but  God"  [Matth.  19: 17].  In
these  words  we  see  that  God  alone  is  good  in  the  sense  of  being
an  absolutely  and  perfectly  good  being,  and  that  consequently
there  can  be  nothing  good  which  is  not  He,  and,  in  short,  that
the  things  which  are  called  good,  as  "all  that  he  had  made  was
very  good,"  and  "every  creation  of  God's  is  good,"  are  good  not
by  nature  but  by  sharing  His  goodness,  or  rather,  by  derivation.
That  is,  they  are  good  in  so  far  as  they  are  from  that  supremely
good  being  and  in  that  good  being  and  to  the  glory  of  that  good
being.

Now,  to  go  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  it  follows  necessarily
that  what  is  good  by  nature  and  good  in  the  highest  degree,  and
whatever  is  good  in  itself,  must  also  be  true.  And  this  the
philosophers  knew  when  they  attributed  at  the  same  time  the
quality  of  truth  to  the  good  and  only  one.*  For,  of  course,  the
One  must  be  good,  they  said,  but  cannot  be  good  unless  it  is
likewise  true,  that  is,  pure,  genuine,  clear,  complete,  simple  and
unchangeable.  For  all  these  belong  to  the  conception  of  the
true.  For  that  which  changes  is  not  simple,  nor  complete,
clear,  genuine  and  pure.  For  however  much  we  conceive  the
elements  as  simple  in  our  imagination,  they  are  in  fact  mixed.
For  fire  could  not  travel  unless  it  were  set  aflame  by  the  air,
and  whither  would  water  run  without  the  air?  How  could  it
draw  in  and  pour  out  again  its  whirlpools?  How  through  drink
fill  us?  Without  the  air  the  earth  could  not  emit  its  vapor  nor
bring  forth  fruit,  nor,  finally,  absorb  the  salt  sea  like  a  sponge,
and  sifting  it  through  its  internal  arteries,  as  it  were,  make  it
come  out  fresh  and  sweet.  And  the  air  itself  which  is  the  guide
and  author  of  all  motion  and  movement,  how  could  it  come
warm  and  hot  from  the  south  or  colder  than  ice  from  the  north

*Tlius  e.  g.,  Plato  in  his  "Republic,"  Bk.  VI,  507,  "That  which  imparts
truth  to  the  object  and  knowledge  to  the  subject  is  what  I  would  have  you
term  the  idea  of  good."


132  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

unless  it  were  mixed  with  fire  or  water?  Since,  therefore,  these
things  which  we  beheve  or  assume  to  be  simple  in  order  to  refer
the  origin  and  beginning  of  things  to  some  primary  cause,  are
in  reality  not  simple,  and  are  consequently  subject  to  change,  it
follows  that  only  the  one  supreme  good  is  true  that  is,  simple,
pure  and  unalloyed,  since  that  alone  is  unchangeable.  And,
conversely,  since  only  that  one  supreme  good  is  unchangeable,
it  follows  that  it  alone  is  true,  that  is,  pure,  genuine  and  so  forth.

Now  that  which  is  supreme  and  true,  simple,  pure  and  com-
plete, must  first  of  all  know  and  understand  all  things.  For  in
whatever  quarter  it  failed  in  understanding  anything,  it  would
not  be  clear  and  lucid,  nor  complete  and  pure,  which  qualities
belong  to  the  nature  of  the  true.  Secondly,  that  which  is
supreme  and  true,  must  also  have  power  over  all  things.  For
as  to  the  supreme,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  it  cannot  be  supreme
unless  it  is  first  and  supreme  in  might  and  power.  But  it  will
perhaps  be  a  task  to  prove  that  what  is  true  is  also  powerful  over
all  things,  except  that  I  have  already  said  that  we  are  speaking
of  the  supreme  good  which  is  by  nature  as  true  as  it  is  good,  and
it  is  the  supreme  good,  because  whatever  belongs  to  the  nature
of  the  good  is  itself  that  Divinity  of  which  we  are  speaking  and
that  to  a  supreme  degree.  That  is,  if  power  and  strength  are
good,  our  Divinity  is  supremely  powerful,  if  truth  is  good,  it  is
supremely  true,  and  so  on.  Thus  the  supreme  good  is  supreme
and  indeed  unlimited  power,  is  supremely  true,  that  is,  is  truth
in  its  essence,  so  that  there  is  not  anywhere  power  and  strength,
no  truth,  simplicity,  genuineness,  purity,  which  is  not  from  this
foundation  of  truth,  nay,  is  not  this  very  truth  itself.

Hence  I  conclude,  if  the  Supreme  Divinity  is  the  supreme
good,  and  truth  belongs  to  the  nature  of  the  good,  so  that  the
supreme  good  cannot  be  such  unless  it  is  true  and  indeed  truth
itself,  I  conclude,  I  say,  that  the  supremely  true  is  also  supreme
might  and  power.  Let  us  now  join  these  three  and  with  the
understanding  of  faith  weld  together  the  Supreme  Divinity,
that  is,  supreme  power  and  might,  secondly  the  supreme  good,
that  is,  the  whole  sum  and  essence  of  the  good,  finally  essential
truth,  that  is,  simplicity,  purity,  light,  genuineness  and
unchangeableness.

As  a  result  we  shall  see  both  that  Providence  must  exist  and
that  it  cares  for  and  regulates  all  things. For  since  it  is  of  the


On  the  Providence  of  God  133

nature  of  supreme  truth  to  see  through  all  things  clearly,
inasmuch  as  that  which  is  divinity  must  see  all  things,  and
since  it  is  of  the  nature  of  supreme  might  to  be  able  to  do  what
it  sees,  nay,  to  do  all  things,  and,  finally,  since  it  is  of  the  nature
of  the  supreme  good,  to  will  by  its  goodness  to  do  what  it  clearly
sees  and  can  do,  it  follows  that  he  who  can  do  all  things,  must
provide  for  all  things.  For,  suppose  that  being  able  to  do  all
things  he  should  allow  some  things  to  go  at  random.  Then
either  the  things  that  go  this  way  escape  his  notice,  or,  if  noth-
ing can  be  hidden  from  him,  he  abandons  or  turns  away  from
the  care  of  them  out  of  disinclination.  If  anything  escapes  his
notice,  he  would  fail  to  fulfill  the  nature  of  the  true  and  would
not  be  the  supreme  good,  supreme  truth  or  truth  itself,  but
rather,  inasmuch  as  he  did  not  notice  this  or  that,  would  be
obscurity,  darkness,  and  ignorance.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  he
neglects  anything  from  disinclination,  he  is  not  the  supreme
good,  because  he  turns  away  from  the  care  of  things  created  by
himself,  while  brutes,  to  say  nothing  of  man,  care  for  their
young.  For  it  cannot  be  that  God  should  create  or  cause  to  come
into  existence  anything  which  before  it  was  born  He  should
think  would  be  good,  but  which  afterwards,  when  born,  should
deceive  the  expectation  of  its  Maker,  so  that  He  would  have  to
say,  ''I  had  not  thought  so."  For  this  is  the  mark  of  the  foolish,
not  of  Him  who  is  truth  and  whom  nothing  can  escape  or  evade,
who  is  the  light  that  shines  upon  and  illumines  all  things,  who
is  a  limpid  fountain,  or  a  mirror  overhanging  all  things  so  that
everything  that  was  or  is  or  shall  be  is  reflected  in  Him.

Suppose,  in  the  second  place,  that  being  the  supreme  good,
he  inclines  with  favor  towards  the  things  he  has  made  but  is  not
able  to  regulate  or  help  them.  Then  he  is  no  longer  the  supreme,
nor  that  might  which  has  power  over  all  things.  Therefore,  he
is  not  God.  And  if  he  is  not  God,  he  is  not  the  supreme  good  nor
the  very  truth.  Suppose,  finally,  that  he  is  indeed  the  truth
which  sees  thoroughly  into  all  things,  but  that  he  either  cannot
or  will  not  care  for  the  things  which  are  objects  to  his  knowledge.
Could  any  one  imagine  such  a  poverty-stricken  and  envious  yet
wise  being,  who  foreseeing- the  needs  of  his  creatures  yet  from
lack  of  power  and  means  could  not  establish  nor  help  them,  or,
if  he  could,  would  not  because  of  jealousy?  You  make  God
powerless,  weak,  infirm,  as  well  as  jealous,  gloomy  and  cruel.


134  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Such  a  being  is  so  far  from  being  God  that  under  such  a  defini-
tion we  include  the  evil  spirit  or  even  that  blind  reckless  spirit
the  Greeks  called "Attj  *.

I  think  it  is  now  established  that  Providence  exists  and
must  exist,  since  it  has  been  proved  that  the  Supreme  Divinity
is  light,  sincerity,  purity,  simplicity,  completeness,  that  is,
truth.  For  since  He  sees  all  things,  unless  He  also  regulates  all
things,  it  is  because  of  lack  of  power  or  of  good  intention.  But
since  this  same  Divinity  is  both  all  power  and  in  all  respects  good
and  kind,  it  is  clear  that  He  not  only  knows  all  things,  but
regulates,  orders  and  disposes  all  things.  Of  this  more  at  length
by  and  by.  Meantime  I  can  easily  show  that  the  things  we
attribute  to  the  Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,  who  are  yet  one
God  and  Divinity,  derive  their  origin  from  this  source.  For  in
the  sacred  Scriptures  omnipotence  is  attributed  to  the  Father,
grace  and  goodness  to  the  Son,  truth  to  the  Holy  Ghost.  Yet  all
these  we  know  belong  to  one  and  the  same  divine  being, f  just
as  here  I  have  shown  that  power,  goodness,  and  truth,  though
distinguished  in  conception  and  definition,  are  yet  to  be  con-
sidered as  one  and  the  same  supreme  good.

As  the  Father  is  almighty,  the  Son  gracious  and  the  earnest
of  mercy,  the  Holy  Ghost  the  spirit  of  truth,  and  all  three  by
nature  are  one  God,  so  is  the  Divine  Being  omnipotent,  good  and
true  by  nature.

SECOND  CHAPTER

What  Providence  is  and  how  it  differs  from  Wisdom.

Having  shown,  in  order  to  make  the  philosophers  better
disposed  towards  us,  that  Providence  not  only  exists  but  must
exist,  I  have  next  to  show  what  It  is.  For  those  men  say  that  the
natural  and  true  order  with  problems  is  first  to  establish  whether
a  given  thing  exists,  then  to  establish  the  nature  of  the  thing  we
have  already  discovered  to  exist.  We  know,  then,  that  even  in
the  sacred  Scriptures  "wisdom"  and  "discretion"  are  used  inter-
changeably, although  there  is  no  little  difference  between  them
when  the  proper  significance  of  each  is  carefully  considered.

*Ate  was  the  goddess  of  mischief  and  of  all  blind  actions,
t  ovcia.


On  the  Providence  of  God  135

For  "wisdom"  is  the  kind  of  thing  the  philosophers  call
Swa/jLis,  that  is,  a  power  or  ability;  ''discretion"  is  what  they
call  Trpd^is  rj  kpkpyeia,  that  is,  an  action  or  performance.*  This
will  be  clearer  from  an  example.

The  sense  of  hearing,  for  instance,  is  a  power  or  an  ability.
So  also  is  sight.  But  seeing  and  listening  are  actions.  The
sleeper  possesses  sight  and  the  sense  of  hearing,  but  the  act  of
seeing  and  of  hearing  cannot  be  predicated  of  him,  for  these
exist  only  when  we  see  or  hear  something.  So  wisdom  is  the
energy  and  power  of  the  Supreme  Intelligence  (which  is  truth,
light,  and  purity)  by  which  It  knows  all  things;  discretion  is
the  effective  skill  in  managing  and  regulating  what  It  knows
and  sees.  Thus  discretion  connotes  rather  an  activity,  wisdom
an  energy  and  power.  But,  as  I  have  said,  "discretion"  is  used
for  "wisdom"  and  vice  versa,  on  account  of  their  resemblance  in
meaning.  And  that  no  one  may  think  what  I  say  frivolous,  I
will  adduce  the  authority  of  Scripture.

In  Genesis  41 :  33,  we  have :  "Now  therefore  let  Pharaoh
look  out  a  man  discreet  and  wise"  and  so  forth,  where  the
Hebrews  have  ]^22  and  D3n,  nabon  and  hacham,  and  our
translators,  as  if  by  agreement,  render  by  "intelligentes"  and
"sapientes,"  "understanding"  and  "wise,"  except  Jerome,  who
used  "sapientem"  and  "industrium,"  "wise"  and  "diligent,"  and
we  easily  see  that  this  keen  judge  of  words  put  "industrium,
diligent"  here  for  "prudentem,  discreet."  The  Septuagint
rendered  the  words  by  (ppovL/wv  Koi  awerov,  that  is,  "discreet
and  sagacious"  or  "wise."  I  do  not  wish  to  thrust  upon  this
passage  a  sense  different  from  the  one  that  belongs  to  it  and  has
been  accepted  by  the  translators,  but,  as  far  as  the  words  are
concerned,  I  would  rather  say  "virum  sapientem  et  prudentem,
a  man  wise  and  discreet."  For  there  are  people  who  have,  to  be
sure,  clearsightedness  in  abundance,  but  who  are  absolutely
helpless  in  respect  to  forming,  perfecting  and  carrying  out  any
plan  of  action.  A  discreet  man,  then,  if  we  wish  to  speak
properly,  is  a  wise  man  who  is  skilled  and  sagacious  in  deliber-
ately carrying  out  what  he  sees  is  going  to  be  expedient.  And
such  a  man  was  needed  for  the  work  of  which  Joseph  was

*The  term  "energy"  is  taken  from  Aristotle,  see  his  "Metaphysics,"
Bk.  VII,  chap.  2.


136  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

speaking  before  the  king.  Diogenes  was  wise,  as  was  also
HeracHtus.  I  am  inchned  to  doubt  whether  they  ought  to  be
called  discreet,  since  they  took  no  care  to  urge  the  things  which
they  saw  were  best  for  mankind.  But  Joseph,  Moses,  Josiah,
were  discreet,  for  they  devoted  themselves  with  all  their  might
to  the  accomplishment  of  what  through  their  wisdom  they  saw
was  likely  to  be  of  service  to  their  countrymen  and  religion.
Thus  wisdom  signifies  clear-sightedness  especially,  discretion
adds  to  wisdom  activity  in  carrying  out  a  purpose.  Yet
although  we  sometimes  use  "discreet"  for  "wise,"  we  are  hardly
accustomed  to  use  "providence"  for  "knowledge"  or  "wisdom,"
especially  when  speaking  of  the  Deity.  When  we  hear  the  word
"Providence,"  we  understand  that  wisdom  which  foresees,  and
having  foreseen,  regulates  all  things.

Hence,  I  define  Providence  thus,  "Providence  is  the
enduring  and  unchangeable  rule  over  and  direction  of  all  things
in  the  universe."  By  rule  I  mean  the  power,  authority  and
dignity  of  the  Deity,  of  which  I  said  enough  before  in  showing
how  the  supreme  good  must  have  power  over  all  things.  But
since  this  power  is  not  one  of  violence,  troublesomeness  and
tyranny,  and  therefore  hateful  and  unbearable,  I'  added
dignity  and  authority  in  defining  "rule,"  for  I  would  show
the  rule  of  the  Deity  to  be  so  conscientious,  holy,  acceptable,  and
delightful  that  everybody  willingly  obeys  it,  who  has  gotten  even
the  merest  taste  of  a  knowledge  of  it.  And  I  appended  the  word
"direction,"  both  on  account  of  the  character  of  the  sway,  that
none  might,  as  I  have  said,  suppose  it  to  be  monstrous,  and  on
account  of  the  abundance  of  things  in  the  universe.  For  God
does  not  command  as  men  command,  who,  having  acquired
power  over  things,  demand  that  all  things  be  supplied  them
necessary  for  their  care  and  attention  to  the  affairs  of  state.  He,
however,  freely  supplies  all  with  all  things,  asking  nothing  in
return  except  that  we  shall  take  with  gladness  and  gratefulness
the  gifts  of  His  bounty.  For  since  He  is  in  need  of  nothing,  is
rich  in  all  things,  and  is  good  and  kind,  nay,  is  the  father  of
the  things  He  has  made,  it  follows  that  He  cannot  be  wearied  or
exhausted  through  giving,  that  He  rejoices  in  giving,  that  He
cannot  help  giving.  For  the  more  and  the  oftener  He  gives,  the
better  known  His  kindness  becomes.

Then  I  said  this  rule  and  direction  were  enduring. Not


On  the  Providence  of  God  137

that  I  took  "enduring"  in  the  sense  in  which  some  people  use
it  to  make  a  distinction  between  "eternal,"  as  that  which  never
had  a  beginning  and  never  has  an  end,  and  "enduring,"  as  that
which  once  had  a  beginning  but  never  has  an  end.  I  took
"enduring"  in  the  sense  of  "eternal."  Thus  this  sway  is  eternal
as  far  as  power  is  concerned.  For  the  Deity  can  have  no  begin-
ning. And  after  created  things  have  come  into  being,  the
government  and  regulation  of  all  things  becomes  also  enduring.

Moreover,  I  called  the  direction  and  regulation  unchange-
able for  this  reason,  that  I  might  show  that  the  opinion  of  those
who  declare  that  man's  will  is  free  is  not  altogether  well
grounded,  and  that  the  wisdom  of  the  Supreme  Deity  is  too
unerring  to  allow  the  possibility  that  anything  can  happen
without  its  notice  and  force  it  afterwards  to  reverse  or  change  its
design.  Providence,  is  therefore,  immovable,  because  the  Deity
is  infallible  and  unerring,  because  His  power  is  unwearying,
because  His  goodness  is  uninterrupted.

Finally,  I  defined  Providence  as  the  rule  over  and  direction
of  all  things  in  the  universe.  For  if  anything  were  guided  by
its  own  power  or  insight,  just  so  far  would  the  wisdom  and
power  of  our  Deity  be  deficient.  And  if  this  happened,  the
wisdom  of  the  Deity  would  not  be  supreme,  because  it  would  not
include  and  comprehend  all  things.  Nor  would  His  might  be
all  powerful,  because  there  would  be  a  might  independent  of  its
power  and  therefore  different  from  it.  Thus  there  would  be  a
force  which  was  not  the  force  of  the  Deity,  and  light  and  intel-
ligence which  were  not  the  wisdom  of  that  Supreme  Deity.  And
then,  if  that  second  light  and  power  were  said  to  have  been
created,  it  could  not  have  been  created  except  by  the  Deity,  and
if  it  is  from  the  Deity,  power  and  wisdom  of  its  own  cannot
rightly  be  attributed  to  it.  For  it  would  have  these  by  derivation
from  the  Deity,  like  all  created  things,  nay  the  light  and  power
would  belong  to  the  Deity  Himself.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  that
light  and  power  were  said  not  to  have  been  created,  then  they
would  be  a  God,  and  we  have  a  multiplication  of  gods  brought
in  again.  For  all  power  is  either  created  or  uncreated.  If  un-
created, it  is  Deity  and  God.  If  created,  it  must  be  the  creation
of  that  Deity.  Yet  this  so-called  created  power,  since  all  power
is  the  power  of  the  Deity, — for  there  is  nothing  which  is  not
from  that,  in  that  and  through  that  Deity,  nay  is  not  a  part  of


138  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Himself, — this  power  is  said  to  have  been  created,  I  say,  because
it  is  a  manifestation  of  the  general,  all-embracing  power  in  a
new  individual  form.  Moses,  Paul,  Plato,  Seneca  are  witnesses.
There  is  then,  nothing  which  is  not  ruled  by  the  Deity,
nothing  so  high  or  powerful  that  it  can  avoid  the  sway  of  our
Deity,  nothing  so  lowly  or  humble  that  it  is  abhorrent  to  His
care.  All  this  will  be  set  forth  more  at  length  and  clearly  in
the  sequel.  It  is  enough  in  the  present  chapter  to  have  shown
that  wisdom,  goodness,  and  might,  that  is,  to  use  the  original
terms,  truth,  goodness,  and  power,  are  what  necessarily  con-
stitute Providence,  and  that  Providence  is  the  eternal  and
unchangeable  government  and  direction  of  all  things  in  the
universe.

THIRD  CHAPTER

Secondary  causes  are  not  properly  called  causes.  This  is
of  fundamental  importance  for  the  understanding  of
Providence.

But  that  the  matter  may  be  the  plainer,  I  will  trace  the
origin,  existence,  and  working  of  all  things  from  the  beginning.
Not  one  of  the  things  exposed  to  our  senses  has  its  origin  in  itself.
This  I  will  prove  by  the  highest  and  the  lowest,  that  is,  by  the
stars  and  the  earth.  Of  man  I  will  treat  separately.  To  come,
therefore,  as  quickly  as  possible  to  an  understanding  of  the
truth,  how  could  the  earth,  that  dull  thing  without  feeling  or
intelligence,  create  itself  or  from  what  seed  could  it  produce
itself?  If  it  produced  itself  from  nothing,  it  existed  before  it
did  exist — as  that  which  called  itself  forth  from  nothing.  But
if  it  comes  from  something  else,  it  comes  from  it  either  as  cause
or  as  material.  If  as  material,  the  material  of  the  earth  is  dif-
ferent and  this  is  either  of  the  same  kind  as  the  present  or  of  a
different  kind.  If  it  is  of  the  same  kind,  then  the  parent  earth
next  to  ours  must  also  have  a  mother  of  its  own,  the  grand-
mother, to  wit,  of  ours.  Then  the  grandmother  must  needs  have
a  great  grandmother,  the  great  grandmother  a  great  great  grand-
mother, she  a  great  great  great  grandmother  and  so  on,  until
we  come  to  that  crowd  of  earths  and  worlds  of  which  the  so-
called Great  Alexander indignantly, if the thing be true.


On  the  Providence  of  God  139

lamented  that  he  had  not  yet  conquered  one.*

This  view  was  brought  to  light  and  exploded  by  the
philosophers  at  an  early  date.  For  we  should  thus  assent  to
infinite  and  eternal  worlds.  But  the  one  which  we  ourselves
occupy  is  not  yet  ended;  how  much  less  those  which  are  its
authors !  Moreover,  if  they  grow  up  in  this  fashion,  each  earth
and  world  being  born  out  of  another  one,  then,  as  with  all  pro-
cesses of  generation,  the  decrepit  worlds,  now  ready  for  the
grave,  must  die,  and  young  ones  step  into  their  places.  For  if
they  do  not  die,  there  would  long  ago  have  been  infinite  worlds.
But  I  will  leave  this  nonsense.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
material  from  which  the  earth  is  born  is  of  a  different  kind
from  its  daughter — the  so-called  equivocal  generation  of  the
more  recent  philosophers  and  theologians — we  are  driven  into
the  same  corner  as  before.  For  there  will  be  a  different  material
for  this  material,  and  still  another  for  that  one,  and  so  on  till
we  are  plunged  into  infinity.  Nor  can  the  earth  maintain  its
place  among  the  elements.  For  that  other  material  takes  its
place  which  is  the  mother  of  our  mother  earth,  nay  the  mother
of  this  also,  nay  the  great  grandmother  and  so  forth,  finally  no
material,  for  there  is  really  no  material  than  the  one.

Now  I  come  back  to  the  principal  division.  If  the  earth
comes  from  another  cause,  it  must  have  been  created.  For  we
have  just  seen  that  it  does  not  come  from  a  material  cause.
Therefore  it  must  come  from  nothing.  For  what  is  put  together
from  nothing  so  as  to  exist  is  created.  For  this  is  the  definition
of  creation,  ''to  be  out  of  nothing"  or  "to  be,  not  having  been
before,  but  not  coming  from  something  else  as  material."  There-
fore, not  to  hurry  so  much  as  to  pass  by  this  point,  the
philosophers  failed  in  circumspection  when  they  raised  the  ques-
tion whether  the  universe  was  created  or  uncreated,  f For,  see-

*This  is  an  allusion  to  the  story  found  in  Plutarch's  tract,  "On  the
Tranquility  of  the  Mind,"  which  is  as  follows:  "Alexander  wept  when  he
heard  from  Anaxarchus  that  there  was  an  infinite  number  of  worlds,  and
his  friends  asking  him  if  any  accident  had  befallen  him,  he  returns  this
answer:  Do  you  not  think  it  a  matter  worthy  of  lamentation,  that,  when
there  is  such  a  vast  multitude  of  them,  we  have  not  yet  conquered  one?"
See  Plutarch's  Morals,  translated  by  Wm.  W.  Goodwin,  Boston,  1871,  Vol.
I,  p.  140.

tAristotle  (Physics,  I.  10,  8)  teaches  that  matter  is  eternal  or  "un-
produced." Plato  held  the  same  view.


140  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

ing  that  those  two  vast  subdivisions  of  the  universe,  the  earth  and
the  heavens,  were  without  sensation  and  intelligence  and  yet
maintained  positions  and  motions  of  their  own,  they  set  over
them  an  outside  mover  and  guardian,  and  said  that  he  was
endowed  with  a  mind  and  soul,  but  they  did  not  at  the  same  time
/duly  consider  that  this  mind  must  be  either  prior  to  the  universe
'or  contemporary  with  it.  If  it  was  prior  to  the  universe,  then  the
universe  has  a  beginning  and  was  created.  For  the  argument  I
made  above  about  the  creation  of  the  earth  always  holds  good.
But  if  the  mind  is  contemporary  with  the  universe,  who  gave
the  mind  dominion  over  the  universe?  For  the  universe  would
be  just  as  everlasting  as  the  mind,  and  we  cannot  conceive  a
thing  as  being  subordinate  unless  marked  by  inferiority  or
posteriority,  and  so  the  co-eternal  cannot  be  the  lesser.  For  the
eternal  is  infinite,  and  things  which  are  co-eternal  are  beyond
a  doubt  equally  infinite.  But  if  this  mind  of  which  we  are
speaking  is  eternal  and  the  universe  is  contemporary  with  it,  as
the  mind  is  infinite  so  will  the  universe  be  infinite;  and  how
absurd  this  is,  even  sense,  to  say  nothing  of  the  mind,  can  see.
But  since  there  can  be  only  one  single  thing  that  is  infinite,  and
the  universe  cannot  be  infinite,  since  its  parts  all  have  to  be
infinite,  (for  however  great  anything  is,  if  it  consists  of  parts,  it
must  be  finite  unless  the  parts  also  are  infinite,  which  is  again
perfectly  absurd — for  if  one  part  is  infinite  whither  can  another
stretch  its  own  infinity  or  immensity?),  since  the  universe,  I
say,  consisting  of  parts,  must  be  finite,  it  is  proved  that  that  mind
which  the  philosophers  call  the  original  mover  is  the  infinite
we  are  after. And  this  is  our  Deity  and  God.

Having  learned,  therefore,  that  to  have  had  a  beginning  is
of  the  nature  of  the  finite,  and  never  to  have  had  a  beginning  is
of  the  nature  of  the  infinite,  that,  accordingly  there  is  only  one
single  being  that  is  infinite  and,  properly  speaking,  eternal,  and
having  seen  that  the  universe  and  all  its  parts  are  finite  and,
therefore,  temporal  and  not  eternal,  the  philosophers  should  open
their  eyes  and  see  that  the  universe  is  finite  and  created,  and  not
eternal.  Whether  it  be  enduring,  this  is  not  the  place  to  discuss,
because  we  are  seeking  for  the  beginnings,  not  the  endings,  of
things,  and  because  the  divine  Scriptures  satisfy  the  faithful
upon  this  point,  namely  that  the  world  shall  pass  away.* Since

*See  Matth.  24:  35.


On  the  Providence  of  God  141

then,  to  come  back  from  the  philosophers  to  myself,  the  universe
had  a  beginning,  it  is  evident  that  our  mother  earth  is  not  of
eternal  existence  nor  lasting  by  nature,  unless  by  autonomasia
you  understand  nature  to  be  the  Deity  of  which  we  have  been
speaking,  which  is  being  and  power  unto  all  things.  Nor  does
the  earth  come  from  itself.  It  must  have  come  into  being  and
have  been  produced  out  of  nothing.

Now  I  ascend  to  the  stars  to  investigate  whether  they  come
from  themselves.  The  human  mind,  which  is  slower  and  duller
in  understanding  things  than  it  thinks  it  is,  might  fancy  that
the  earth  could  be  admitted  to  have  been  created,  both  because  of
its  grossness  and  darkness  and  because  of  its  inertness  and  slug-
gishness. For  gross  and  impenetrable  to  light,  dark  in  its  depths
and  conscious  of  nothing,  as  it  is,  it  simply  lies  there  and
suffers  itself  to  be  cleft  and  manipulated  and  dug  and  turned
up.  It  is  so  inert  and  sluggish  and  incapable  of  moving  that  if
air  gets  into  its  caverns  and  is  stirred  up  in  any  way  so  that  it
has  to  burst  forth,  by  which  the  earth  is  disturbed  and  shaken,
it  is  regarded  as  a  sign  that  the  earth  has  moved.  Every  one  is
so  thoroughly  persuaded  of  its  inertia,  that  its  motion  seems  a
miracle.  Hence  it  may  well  seem  unendurable  that  any  one
should  deny  that  it  had  been  produced  or  created.  But  the  stars,
whose  bodies  are  so  vast  and,  therefore,  of  such  unusual  force,  so
rapid  that  their  motion  surpasses  all  speed,  so  bright  that,  though
so  far  away  from  us,  they  yet  penetrate  to  us  and  blind  our  gaze
— the  stars,  I  say,  may  be  imagined  not  to  have  been  created,  on
the  ground  that  by  their  movements  and  power  things  endowed
with  sensation  suffer  increase  or  diminution,  and  they  seem  in
general  of  more  divine  and  noble  quality  than  the  earth  and  its
inhabitants.

To  this  reasoning  we  may  first  answer,  as  was  done  in  the
case  of  the  earth  and  its  parts,  that  the  stars,  however  vast,  rapid
and  bright  their  bodies  are,  either  come  from  themselves  or
from  something  else.  If  from  themselves,  they  either  took
beginning  from  themselves  or  have  existed  by  themselves  from
eternity.  If  they  took  beginning  from  themselves,  they  existed
before  they  did  exist,  for  they  brought  themselves  into  existence.
^/Nothing  cannot  beget  anything.  If  they  have  existed  from
eternity,  they  are  infinite,  for  only  the  infinite  is  eternal,  infinite
and  eternal  are  convertible  terms,  that  is,  are  equal  or  rather


142  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

actually  identical.  But  since  the  stars  are  not  infinite  (for  what
an  army  of  them  that  little  organ,  the  eye,  can  take  in  at  a
glance!),  it  follows  that  they  come  from  some  one  else  and  that
some  one  else,  the  mover  and  author  of  all  things,  is  their  God
and  father.  For  though  we  listen  to  the  philosophers  discussing
about  their  heavens,  about  spheres  and  circles  and  their  powers,
yet  we  must  at  last  come  to  one  only  and  original  mover*,  as
our  starting  point. This  is  the  Deity.

Secondly,  I  answer  the  argument  that  appeals  to  the  simple :
that  the  stars  have  bodies  quite  the  opposite  of  the  earth's,  to
wit,  that  they  are  rapid  in  motion,  while  it  is  sluggish  and  dull,
that  they  are  very  bright  while  it  is  dark  and  black,  no  more
proves  that  their  original  generation  is  of  themselves  than  if
one  should  maintain  that  plants  are  of  original  self-generation,
because  they  increase  and  grow,  bloom,  bear  fruit,  wither  and
die,  while  the  earth  does  none  of  these,  basing  this  argument  on
the  ground  of -their  superiority  of  endowment  over  the  earth  in
power  and  action.  For  they  spring  from  the  earth  and  are
nourished  and  supported  by  her,  as  nearest  cause.  So  untrue  is
it  that  greater  perfection  of  activity  can  remove  the  fact  of
creation,  though  the  more  perfect  a  thing  is,  the  more  it  pro-
claims and  bears  witness  to  the  perfection  of  its  maker.

Since,  then,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  earth  and  stars
were  produced  or  created,  and  that  they  and  all  things  emanate
equally  from  one  and  the  same  source,  the  next  thing  is  to  show
by  virtue  of  what  power  all  things  exist.  As  it  is  futile  to  believe
that  there  are  many  creators  of  the  universe,  so  it  shows  an
unskilled  and  inexperienced  mind  to  hold  that  anything  can
be  or  exist,  except  it  have  its  being  and  existence  in  that  and

^from  that  which  alone  is.  For  since  the  first  essential  of  things
is  that  they  exist  (what  and  how  they  are  comes  later) ,  existence
is  in  the  first  place  given  them  by  Him  who  is  the  source  and
origin  of  all  things  that  are.  But  this  existence  which  is  given
to  things  by  Him,  did  He  get  it  from  Himself  or  borrow  it  from
some  one  else  to  give  them? If  He  borrowed  it,  we  meet  two

.  difficulties,  one,  that  created  beings  would  then  be  more  justly
set  down  to  the  credit  of  that  creditor  from  whom  their  existence
was  borrowed,  that  is,  created  being  should  properly  be
accredited  to  Him  from  whom  they  had  really  received  exist-


On  the  Providence  of  God  143

ence,  the  second,  that  the  Deity  which  is  the  origin  of  all  things
would  not  be  the  original  and  supreme  good,  and  therefore
would  not  be  God.  For  that  good  from  which  things  received
their  existence  would  be  richer  and  more  powerful,  and,  there-
fore, would  also  be  the  Deity,  and  this  God  of  ours  would  be  only
by  derivation  or  by  metonymy,  and  not  really,  the  Deity.  And
what  a  foolish  thing  to  say  this  is,  even  a  fool  can  see.  _

If,  on  the  contrary.  He  took  from  Himself  this  existence
which  he  gave  to  His  works  and  creatures,  everything  that  is,  ia
in  Him  and  through  Him  and  a  part  of  Him.  For  since  there
must  be  some  one  original  existence,  everything  which  has  come
into  existence,  came  into  it  from  this  original.  Not  as  though
the  existence  of  created  beings  were  so  utterly  different  from  that
of  the  Deity,  but  of  the  same  kind,  from  the  same  source  and
parent.  This  I  want  understood  in  this  way :  If  any  one  should
reject  our  disjunction  that  the  existence  given  to  things  must  be
either  borrowed  from  something  else  than  the  Supreme  Deity  or
derived  from  this  Deity  Himself,  maintaining  that  this  dis-
junction was  not  exhaustive  because  a  new  kind  of  existence  ^
might  have  been  given  to  things  by  the  Deity  which  He  did  not
take  from  His  own  nor  borrow  from  another,  which  new
existence  of  the  creature  was  different  from  the  existence  of  the
Deity,  he  shall  have  this  answer,  that  there  is  only  one  thing
infinite  by  nature.  For  if  two  different  essences  were  declared
to  be  infinite,  no  less  difficulty  would  follow  than  if  one  main-
tained that  light  was  darkness.  For  in  whatever  direction  one  of
the  infinites  was  stretched  out  and  extended,  there  the  other
would  have  to  be  curtailed  or  removed.  Now  since  the  infinite,
as  a  fact,  is  so-called  just  because  it  is  infinite  in  essence  and
existence,  it  is  clear  that  outside  of  this  infinite  there  can  be  no
existence.  For  whatever  such  you  grant,  where  this  outside
existence  is,  there  the  infinite  will  not  be,  and,  therefore,  it  will
not  be  infinite.  Since,  therefore,  there  is  but  one  infinite,
nothing  can  exist  outside  of  it.  And  from  this  it  follows  that
whatever  is,  is  in  it,  nay,  what  is  and  exists  comes  from  it,  and
since  it  does  not  come  from  it  in  the  sense  that  its  being  and
existence  is  different  from  its  own,  it  is  certain  that  as  far  as
being  and  existence  are  concerned,  there  is  nothing  which  is  not
of  the  Deity. For  it  is  the  being  of  all  things.


144  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

This  opinion,  treated  rather  philosophically,*  as  it  has  been
(although  why  call  that  philosophical  which  is  sacred  and
according  to  religion,  except  that  some  people  do  not  hesitate
to  make  the  truth  odious,  attributing  it  to  the  philosophers  and
not  noting  that  the  truth,  wherever  found  and  by  whomever
brought  out  is  from  the  Holy  Spirit),  this  opinion,  I  say,  I  will
support  first  by  an  example  and  then  by  Scripture.

The  example  is  this.  Take  the  earth,  a  plant,  an  animal,
anything  you  will,  except  man  (for  of  him  I  will  treat
separately,  as  I  said) ,  and  consider  the  thing  you  have  taken  as
regards  its  essence  and  existence,  not  as  regards  its  particular
substance  or  kind,  but,  as  has  been  said,  as  regards  its  essence  and
existence  alone;  you  will  see  that  each  of  these  exists  forever.
For  though  the  animal  breathe  out  its  life,  it  returns  into  the
air  and  as  it  were  pays  back  what  it  had  received ;  when  it  lays
aside  its  body,  it  presently  ceases  to  be  an  animal,  but  it  does
not  cease  to  be.  For  it  suffers  the  body  which  it  has  returned  to
the  earth  to  be  with  her,  nay  to  be  earth  until  some  new  form  is
brought  forth  from  it,  which,  afterwards,  also  loses  its  form,
returns  to  the  earth,  and  again  produces  something  new,  and
this  continues  as  long  as  the  earth  keeps  the  character  with
which  it  is  now  endowed.  The  earth,  having  once  begun  its
existence,  never  loses  it,  for  though  it  shall  put  on  sometime
another  form,  yet  it  will  never  cease  to  be.

Hence  I  believe  that  palingenesis,!  or  the  doctrine  of
rebirth,  of  the  Pythagoreans,  was  unjustly  made  the  object  of
so  much  ridicule.  They  recognized  its  necessity,  since  they  saw
that  everything  that  is,  is  from  that  which  is  existence,  and
must  therefore  always  have  some  existence.  But  the  others,  who
either  philosophized  rather  badly  or  wished,  by  unfair  distortion
of  their  teachings,  to  seem  to  offer  something  new,  held  them  up
maliciously  to  derision,  as  if  they  had  maintained  that  the  same
species  endured  and  at  the  same  time  was  constantly  passing
over  into  another. Hence  that  immoderate  laughter^  at  the

*  0tAoffO0i«OT£/UWf.

t According  to  Porphyry,  Life  of  Pythagoras,  §19,  the  only  teachings
that  can  with  certainty  be  attributed  to  Pythagoras  himself  were  palin-
genesis (or  metempsychosis),  the  periodic  cycle  and  the  kinship  of  all
living  creatures.

J  GvyKpovaiog,


On  the  Providence  of  God  145

notion  of  Pythagoras  that  he  had  been  Euphorbus  and  a  cock
and  so  forth,  which  thing  he  probably  did  not  say  himself.  It
was  more  likely  put  maliciously  into  his  mouth  by  the  scoffers.*

So,  too,  their  metempsychosis,  migration  of  souls,  which
they  did  not  maintain  in  the  sense  that  the  soul  of  Euphorbus
passed  into  the  soul  of  a  cock,  for  that  would  be  to  change  one
species  into  another,  but  they  meant  that  the  uXt;,  or  matter,
over  which  the  soul  of  Euphorbus  had  once  ruled,  after  its  return
to  the  earth  and  after  losing  its  previous  form,  might  furnish
material  for  fashioning  body  and  infusing  life  into  a  cock,  in
spite  of  the  difference  in  form  both  as  far  as  body  and  as  far  as
spirit  are  concerned.  And  this  is  really  metempsychosis,  that  is,
an  exchange  of  spirit,  not  a  transformation,  a  succession,  not  a
continuance.  For  while  he  who  was  Euphorbus  had  been
endowed  with  a  soul  which  understood,  drew  inferences,  and
remembered,  and  with  a  body  that  represented  the  human  form,
it  came  about  that  after  this  body  had  crumbled  in  the  earth,  a
new  form  of  body,  namely  that  of  a  cock,  came  forth  from  it
after  many  changes.  Here  you  have  palingenesis.  And  this
form  presently  received  the  spirit  which  belongs  to  a  cock,  not
the  soul  of  Euphorbus  with  which  he  had  fought  so  heroically
at  Troy.  Here  you  have  metempsychosis,  that  is,  an  exchange
of  spirits,  and  a  succession,  not  a  transmutation  or  transforma-
tion of  one  form  of  spirit  into  another  form  while  still  remaining
the  same  spirit.

Finally  [they  deride  unjustly]  Gains  Pliny  who  said  that
that  which  we  call  God  was  the  power  of  nature,  f  For  being  a
most  learned  man  he  revolted  at  a  multiplicity  of  gods  and
accordingly  at  the  nomenclature  involved. Hence  he  denied

*According  to  Diogenes  Laertes,  in  his  life  of  Pythagoras  (ed.  H.
Stephanus,  1570,  p.  310)  Pythagoras  claimed  that  he  was  first  Aethalides,
secondly  Euphorbus,  who  was  slain  by  Menelaus  before  Troy  (Iliad,  17,  59),
which  Pythagoras  proved  by  recognizing  the  shield  of  Euphorbus,  hung  up
in  the  temple  of  Apollo;  next  Hermotimus;  then  Pyrrhus  and  lastly
Pythagoras.  Ovid  in  his  Metamorphoses  (XV,  160ff.)  represents  Pytha-
goras as  making  the  same  claim.  The  story  of  Euphorbus  changing  into  a
cock  is  found  in  Lucian's  satire  on  transmigration,  as  given  in  his  Gallus,
§18f;  see  Works  of  Lucian,  tr.  by  Thomas  Franklin,  London,  1781,  Vol.
Ill,  318fr.

tSee  Pliny's  Natural  History,  Bk.  II,  eh.  5:  "By  these  considerations
the  power  of  Nature  is  clearly  proved,  and  is  shown  to  be  what  we  call  God."


146  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

that  there  were  gods,  but  he  did  not  really  deny,  indeed  he
asserted,  the  existence  of  the  Deity.  For  what  he  called  nature
we  call  the  Deity.  For  where  is  that  nature  whose  power  he
proclaims  as  so  vast?  Are  we  to  suppose  that,  according  to  the
habit  of  the  atheistic  philosophers,  he  was  speaking  of  that
nature  which  belongs  to  each  thing  individually?  Who  then
could  establish  peace  and  harmony  in  the  vast  discord  of  things?
Who  prevent  a  chaotic  confusion  of  all  things?  Especially
when  we  see  that  not  only  men  but  the  elements  are  so  mutually
antagonistic  that,  unless  you  harmonize  them  by  means  of  some
neutral  mediator,  you  will  never  succeed  in  making  fire  and
water,  for  instance,  work  together.  If,  then,  any  one  believes
that  Pliny  means  by  nature  the  natural  characteristic  of  in-
dividual things,  we  shall  find  everything  in  chaos.  For  every-
thing is  so  antagonistic  to  its  opposite  that  without  some  outside
force  nothing  can  exist.  For  what  Prometheus  has  brought  fire
to  the  cuttle-fish  in  the  depths  of  the  sea  and  to  the  other  fishes
to  warm  their  blood?  It  must  have  some  kind  of  warmth,  since
it  is  red  and  flows.

Even  the  original  elements,  therefore,  are  by  their  nature
daTTovka,  that  is,  incapable  of  leaguing  and  uniting  them-
selves together.  Thus  it  is  not  this  that  Pliny  means  when  he
calls  the  power  of  nature  what  we  call  God.  For  thus  no  two
things  could  unite  together  so  that  a  third  would  result  from
their  union,  since  the  natures  of  things  are  so  antagonistic  that
no  one  will  receive  a  second  unto  it,  unless  compelled  by  some
stronger  outside  force.  He  seems,  therefore,  to  understand  by
nature  that  power  which  moves  and  unites  or  separates  all
things.  And  what  is  that  but  God?  This  most  learned  man
saw  that  dull  mortals  are  as  far  as  possible  from  the  truth,  each
one  making  a  god  of  whatever  he  desired  or  hated.  Hence  he
became  disgusted  with  gods  as  a  shameless  and  senseless  inven-
tion. But  he  saw  that  there  must  be  some  power,  by  whose
might  and  intelligence  the  universe  was  formed  and  maintained,
and  this  power  he  preferred  to  call  nature  rather  than  the  gods
of  whom  he  saw  there  could  not  be  a  plurality.

The  earth,  the  stars,  plants  and  animals,  therefore,  exist
because  they  are  from  that  and  in  that  which  always  and  alone
exists,  and  this  is  such  that  if  you  should  happen  to  fancy  it
non-existent  (which  is  impossible),  as  soon  as  that  Deity  did  not


On  the  Providence  of  God  147

exist,  nothing  at  all  would  exist.  All  substances,  all  bodies,
stars,  earth  and  seas,  in  short,  the  whole  structure  of  the  universe
would  collapse  in  an  instant,  and  be  reduced  to  nothing.

Now  I  will  bring  in  the  testimony  in  support  of  this  view,
as  I  promised,  having  first  called  attention  in  passing  to  the  fact
that  from  them  is  proved  the  immortality  of  the  thinking  soul.
For  since  things  never  cease  to  be,  after  they  have  begun  to  be,
how  could  it  happen  that  that' mind  should  perish  which  is  so
lively,  unwearying  and  active  a  substance  that,  following  its
author,  it  has  a  right  to  the  name  evreXex^ia,  complete  reality.*
For  not  even  an  ox  or  a  pig  perishes  so  completely  as  absolutely
to  cease  to  be. But  I  will  come  to  the  testimony.

When  Moses  asked  the  name  of  God,  the  answer  came
from  heaven,  ''I  AM  THAT  I  AM,"  and  God  added,  'Thus
shalt  thou  say  unto  the  children  of  Israel,  *I  AM  hath  sent  me
unto  you.'  "  These  words  are  to  be  understood  in  the  sense
that  the  second  "am"  of  the  expression  I  AM  THAT  I  AM
shall  have  its  force  heightened  Kar'  empaaiv,  by  special
emphasis.  If  this  is  not  done,  you  have  the  most  lifeless  and
empty  form  of  speech  possible,  as  when  you  say,  ''A  man  is  a
man,"  "an  animal  is  an  animal,"  and  the  like.  For  what  light
do  they  convey  to  the  human  understanding?  What  do  they
tell?  The  second  "am"  then,  has  this  emphasis  "that  really
am,"  or,  "that  am  the  very  being  of  all  things,"  as  the  fathers
divinely  inspired,  have  explained  it  before  me.  And  this  very
thing  is  also  shown  by  the  fact  that  presently  He  calls  Himself
"The  I  exist"  as  it  were,  as  the  one  who  not  only  Himself  exists,  v
but  who  bestows  existence  upon  all  things  that  exist.  For  if
anything  existed  by  its  own  powers,  God  would  have  said
nothing  more  than  if  one  declared  himself  to  be  the  lieutenant
of  one  who  existed.  He  calls  Himself  "The  I  exist,"  then  for
this  reason  that  He  both  exists  of  Himself,  and  furnishes  unto
others  the  foundation  and  basis  of  being  and  existence,  so  that
nothing  is  or  exists  which  does  not  have  its  being  and  existence
of  Him  and  in  Him.  I  should  certainly  shrink  from  coining  an
unheard  of  word,  unless  I  saw  that  he  really  says  more  who  calls

*Rudolf  Eucken,  in  his  Geschichte  der  philosophischen  Terminologie,
p.  25,  defines  entelecheia  as  a  condition  of  completion,  a  real  existence  and
activity,  as  over  against  a  mere  capability  and  potentiality.  The  term  itself
is  derived  from  Aristotle,  see  the  latter's  Metaphysics,  Bk.  X,  chap.  9.


148  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

God,  "Existonem,"  'The  I  exist,"  than  "existentem,  ''the
Existing,"  and  unless  this  form  approached  more  nearly  the
spirit  of  the  Hebrew  word  nTIS  ,  "I  am."  Since  then  "to  be"
and  "to  exist"  are  prior  to  "to  live"  or  "to  act,"  nay  are  the  basis
^of  these,  it  follows  that  all  that  lives  and  acts,  has  its  life  and
activity  from  Him  and  in  Him,  from  whom  and  in  whom  it  has
its  being  and  existence. Of  which  more  clearly  later.

When  the  apostle  Paul,  in  writing  to  the  Romans,  had
fallen  into  this  line  of  reasoning,  he  expressed  his  view  in  the
words  "For  of  him,  and  through  him,  and  in  him,  are  all
things"  [Rom.  11:  36].  I  know  that  this  last  phrase  "in  him"
is  given  in  the  Greek  as  els  o-vtov,  that  is  "in  ipsum,  to  him"
rather  than  "in  ipso,  in  him,"  but  the  divine  heart  of  the  apostle
tried  to  proclaim  thus  vigorously  by  the  more  active  form  of
speech  the  truth  of  the  existence  of  all  things  in  God,  and  not  so
much  to  say  that  all  things  were  ordered  unto  God  as  in  Him
and  with  Him,  that  is,  existed  according  to  His  power  per-
sonally present  and  in  His  very  might.  Thus  eis  avrov,  was
used  for  cv  auT<?  /cat  dj/xj  ^tt'  ai)T<?,  that  is  "in  ipsum"  for  "in
ipso"  and  "apud  ipsum."  And  this  the  old  translator,  who
was  by  no  means  always  asleep,  saw,  when  he  rendered  the
phrase  by  "in  ipso,  in  him."*  From  God,  therefore,  as  from  a
fountain  source  and  (if  one  may  speak  so)  substance  matter,
all  things  come  forth  into  existence.  Through  God's  power  all
things  exist,  live,  and  act,  nay  all  things  are  in  Him,  who  is
everywhere  present,  and  of  Him,  who  is  the  being,  existence,  and
life  of  all  things.

Also  when  beginning  to  preach  the  gospel  at  Athens,  he
says  of  the  Deity,  "God  that  made  the  world  and  all  things
therein,  seeing  that  he  is  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  dwelleth
not  in  temples  made  with  hands;  neither  is  worshipped  with
men's  hands,  as  though  he  needed  anything,  seeing  he  giveth
to  all  life,  and  breath  and  all  things ;

"And  hath  made  of  one  blood  all  nations  of  men  for  to
dwell  on  all  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  hath  determined  the
times  before  appointed,  and  the  bounds  of  their  habitation;

"That  they  should  seek  the  Lord,  if  haply  they  might  feel
after  him,  and  find  him,  though  he  be  not  far  from  every

*The  Authorized  Version  has  "to  him."


On  the  Providence  of  God  149

one  of  us;

'Tor  in  him  we  have  our  being,  and  live,  and  move;  aa
certain  also  of  your  own  poets  have  said,  For  we  are  also  his
offspring.

''For  as  much  then  as  we  are  the  offspring  of  God,  we  ought
not  to  think  that  the  Godhead  is  like  unto,"  etc.  [Acta
17:24-28].

By  these  words  Paul  fortifies  and  strengthens  what  was
said  above,  so  that  it  is  superfluous  to  say  more,  except  that  I
would  not  omit  to  state  that  in  the  sentence,  "For  in  him  we
have  our  being,  and  live,  and  move,"  the  order  of  the  words  in
the  Acts  is  not  as  I  give  it.  It  is  a  Hebrew  hysteron  proteron,*
and  the  word  for  being,  which  naturally  belongs  first,  is  there
put  last.

Since  Jerome  and  others  (as  I  have  shown  in  my  Isaiah)
often  correct  inconveniences  of  this  kind  by  restoring  the
natural  order,  I  have  allowed  myself  to  think  it  proper  to  do  as
the  case  demands.  Nor  does  man  alone  have  his  being,  and
live,  and  move  in  God ;  all  the  things  that  are,  have  their  being,
and  live  and  move  in  Him.  Nor  of  man  alone  did  Paul  speak
when  he  said:  "In  him  we  have  our  being,  and  live,  and
move ;"  he  spoke  by  synecdoche  of  all  created  things.  For  since
man  alone  among  the  creatures  that  have  sensation  is  endowed
with  intellect  and  speech,  he  alone  of  all  speaks  as  a  sort  of
patron  and  champion.

But  man  is  not  alone  the  offspring  of  God;  all  creatures
are  so,  though  one  differs  from  another  in  nobility  and  freedom.
They  are  by  birth  of  God  and  in  God,  and  the  nobler  any  one
is,  the  more  it  proclaims  the  divine  glory  and  power.  Do  not
the  creatures  of  the  species  of  rodents  proclaim  the  wisdom  and
providence  of  the  Godhead?  The  hedgehog  when  with  its  spines
he  most  cleverly  carries  a  large  quantity  of  fruit  to  its  dwelling
place,  by  rolling  over  the  fruit  and  planting  its  spines  in  it.
Alpine  rats  or  marmots,  which  we  now  call  the  mountain  rats,
station  one  of  their  number  upon  an  elevation,  that,  as  they
run  about  intent  upon  their  work,  no  sudden  danger  may
fall  upon  them  without  his  timely  cry  of  warning,  while
meantime  the  rest  of  the  band  carry  off  the  softest  hay  from  all
around.  And  since  they  have  no  wagons,  they  turn  themselves
into  wagons  by  turns,  one  lying  upon  his  back  and  holding

*It  inverts  the  natural  order  of  words.


150  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

fast  with  all  his  feet  the  hay  loaded  upon  his  stomach  and  chest,
while  another  seizes  by  the  tail  his  comrade  thus  transformed
into  a  wagon,  and  drags  him  with  the  plunder  to  their  dwelling
place  to  enable  them  to  sleep  through  the  inclemency  of  the
harsh  winter  season.  The  squirrel,  dragging  a  broad  bit  of
wood  to  the  shore  by  its  mouth,  uses  it  as  a  boat  to  cross  the
water,  hoisting  its  bushy  tail,  and  being  thus  driven  by  the
favoring  breeze,*  needs  no  other  sail.

What  word,  what  speech,  pray  can  proclaim  the  divine
wisdom  as  well  as  these  creatures  which  are  among  almost  the
humblest  of  living  things?  And  do  not  things  without  sensa-
tion f  bear  witness  that  the  might,  goodness  and  lifegiving
power  of  the  Godhead  are  ever  present  with  them?  The  earth
that  nourishes  all  things  forgets  the  wounds  inflicted  by  hoe  and
plow,  and  refuses  not  to  furnish  rich  provision ;  the  dew  and
rain  so  rouse  and  fill  and  replenish  all  the  streams  which  by  their
increase  stay  the  ravages  of  drought  that,  by  the  wondrous  growth
of  all  vegetation,  they  bear  witness  to  the  presence  of  the  divine
power  and  life.  The  mountains,  dull,  clumsy,  lifeless  mass  that
they  are,  hold  fast  and  strengthen  the  earth  as  bones  do  the
flesh ;  they  bar  the  way  to  passage  or  make  it  difficult ;  though
heavier  than  the  surface  of  the  earth,  they  rest  upon  it  and  sink
not  in ;  do  they  not  proclaim  the  invincible  power  of  the  God-
head, and  the  solidity  and  vastness  of  His  grandeur?

In  all  these  things,  then,  not  less  than  that  of  man,  we
discover  the  presence  of  the  divine  power  by  which  they  have
their  being,  and  live,  and  move.  Christ  Himself  declares  that
the  hairs  of  our  head  are  numbered,  nay  that  not  even  sparrows,
two  of  which  are  sold  for  a  farthing,  fall  to  the  ground  without
the  knowledge  of  the  Deity  [Mt.  10 :  29,  30] .  By  this  we  learn
that  even  the  things  which  we  call  fortuitous  or  accidental  are
not  fortuitous  or  random  happenings,  but  are  all  effected  by  the
order  and  regulation  of  the  Deity.  His  mind  is  not  degraded
by  attention  to  lowly  things^,  but  His  goodness  and  perfection
are  made  plain  by  His  scorning  nothing  that  He  has  made,  and
by  the  absolute  wisdom  and  power  with  which  He  works,  seeing
all  things,  watching  over  all  things,  loving  all  things,  and  that

without  toil  and  reasoning.

IS

f  avaia^rjTa.


On  the  Providence  of  God  151

If  I  bring  in  testimony  from  outside  the  Scriptures,  I
shall  not  be  utterly  dismayed  at  carping  criticism  on  the  part
of  any  one  who  has  not  yet  learned  that  writings  are  properly
called  sacred  when  they  proclaim  the  thought  of  the  holy,  pure,
eternal  and  infallible  mind.  If,  then,  you  find  in  Plato  or
Pythagoras  what  you  scent  as  flowing  from  the  fountain  of  the
divine  mind,  this  is  not  to  be  disregarded  because  a  mortal
embraced  it  in  his  records,  but  all  the  more  must  we  press  on  to
communion  with  the  Deity,  that  we  may  see  the  light  of  truth
more  and  more  clearly,  as  we  find  that  men  who  did  not  venture
to  profess  the  religion  of  the  one  God,  yet  had  it  in  them.  This
is  from  the  Deity  wherever  one  is,  even  though  one  dwells
among  the  beasts.

I  am,  therefore,  especially  glad  to  place  here  Seneca's  words
about  Plato's  views,  because  all  that  I  have  said  and  all  that  I
am  going  to  say  in  this  book  is  derived  from  one  source,  namely
from  the  nature  and  character  of  the  Supreme  Deity.  This
source  Plato  also  tasted,  and  Seneca  drank  from  it.  These  are
his  words  on  ideas  in  the  sixty-sixth*  letter  to  Lucilius:  "God
has  within  Himself  these  patterns  of  all  things  and  comprehends
in  His  mind  the  harmonies  and  measures  of  the  totality  of
things  that  are  to  be  carried  out.  He  is  filled  with  these  forms
which  Plato  calls  "ideas" — imperishable,  unchangeable,  not
subject  to  decay  and  therefore,  though  men  die,  humanity  itself
(or  the  idea  of  man)  according  to  which  man  is  moulded,  lasts
on,  and  though  men  toil  and  perish  it  sufifers  no  changes.

Accordingly  there  are,  as  Plato  says,  five  kinds  of  causes,  f
that  of  which,  that  by  which,  that  in  which,  that  according  to
which,  and  that  on  account  of  which,  finally  we  have  the  result
of  all  these.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  a  statue  (since  we  were  speak-
ing of  this),  that  of  which  [it  is  made]  is  bronze,  that  by  which
is  the  sculptor,  that  in  which  is  the  form  which  is  adapted  to
the  material,  the  model  is  the  pattern,  imitated  by  the  artist,  that
on  account  of  which  is  the  purpose  of  the  maker,  and  finally,

•The  65th  letter  in  the  edition  of  Otto  Hense,  Leipzig,  1914,  p.  205.  See
English  translation  in  Loeb's  Classical  Library:  Seneca,  Ad  Lucilium  Epis-
tolae  Morales,  Vol.  I,  p.  449.

tThe  four  categories  as  established  by  Aristotle,  plus  the  "idea"  ot
Plato.  The  five  causes  are  the  material,  the  artist,  the  form,  the  model
and  the  purpose.


152  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

the  result  of  all  these  is  the  statue  itself.  The  universe  also  as
Plato  says,  possesses  all  these  elements.  The  maker  here  is  God,
that  from  which  is  matter,  the  form  is  the  shape  and  arrange-
ment of  the  visible  universe,  the  model  that  according  to  which
God  made  this  great  and  beautiful  work,  and  the  purpose  that
on  account  of  which  He  made  it.  Do  you  ask  what  God's
purpose  is?  It  is  goodness.  So  at  all  events  Plato  says.  What
was  God's  reason  for  making  the  universe  ?  He  is  good,  what  He
has  made  is  good,  and  no  good  person  is  ever  grudging  of
anything  that  is  good."

And  a  little  later,  referring  all  things  to  one  cause,  he  says :
"But  we  are  now  searching  for  the  original  and  general  cause.
This  must  be  simple,  inasmuch  as  matter  is  simple.  We  ask,
what  is  the  cause?  It  is  surely  creative  reason,  that  is,  God.
For  indeed,  those  to  which  you  referred  are  not  several  indepen-
dent causes;  they  all  hinge  on  one  alone  and  that  will  be  the
creative  cause.  Do  you  maintain  that  form  is  a  cause?  This
is  only  what*  the  artist  stamps  upon  his  work ;  it  is  part  of  a
cause,  but  not  the  cause.  Neither  is  model  a  cause,  but  a  neces-
sary tool  of  the  cause.  A  model  is  as  necessary  to  the  artist  as
the  chisel  and  the  file ;  without  these  art  can  make  no  progress.
But  for  all  that,  these  things  are  neither  parts  of  art  nor  the
cause  of  it.  "Then,"  perhaps  you  will  say,  "the  purpose  of  the
artist,  that  on  account  of  which  he  undertakes  to  create  some-
thing, is  the  cause.  True  it  is  a  cause,  but  not  the  efficient
cause.  It  is  an  accessory  cause.  Of  such  there  are  a  vast
number,  but  we  are  discussing  the  general  cause.  In  making
that  other  statement,  that  the  whole  universe,  the  completed
work  is  a  cause,  they  [Plato  and  Aristotle]  did  not  display  their
usual  penetration.  For  there  is  a  great  difference  between  a
work  and  the  cause  of  a  work."

And  somewhat  further  on  he  justifies  and  recommends  in
the  following  fashion  the  consideration  both  of  the  original  and
only  real  cause  and  of  the  condition  and  order  of  the  universe.
"Do  you  forbid  me  to  contemplate  the  universe?  Do  you
compel  me  to  withdraw  from  the  whole,  and  restrict  me  to  a
part?  May  I  not  ask  what  are  the  beginnings  of  things,  who
fashioned  things,  who  separated  the  general  mass  wrapped  up
in  dull  matter?  May  I  not  inquire  who  is  the  Master-Builder  of
this  universe,  how  its  vast  bulk  was  brought  under  law  and


On  the  Providence  of  God  153

order,  who  gathered  together  the  scattered  atoms,  who  separated
the  disordered  elements  and  assigned  an  outward  form  to
elements  that  lay  in  one  vast  shapelessness.  Or,  whence  all  this
light  was  shed?  And  whether  it  be  fire  or  something  brighter
than  fire?  Am  I  not  to  ask  these  questions?  Must  I  not  know
the  heights  whence  I  descended?  Whether  I  am  to  see  this
world  but  once  or  to  be  born  many  times?  Whither  I  am  to
go  hence?  What  abode  awaits  my  soul,  when  freed  from  the
laws  of  human  slavery  ?

"Do  you  forbid  me  to  have  a  share  in  the  heaven,  that  is,
do  you  bid  me  live  with  my  head  bent  down?  I  am  greater
[above  such  existence]  and  born  for  greater  destiny  than  to  be
the  bondman  of  my  body,  and  I  look  upon  this  body  as  a  chain
which  shackles  my  freedom.  Therefore,  I  present  it  as  a  shield
against  the  blows  of  fortune,  and  shall  suffer  no  wound  to
penetrate  to  my  soul.  For  my  body  is  the  only  part  that  can
suffer  injury  in  me.  In  this  vulnerable  dwelling,  exposed  to
peril,  my  soul  lives  free.  Never  shall  this  flesh  drive  me  into
fear  nor  into  any  pretence  unworthy  of  a  good  man.  Never
shall  I  lie  in  order  to  honor  this  poor  body.  When  it  seems
proper  I  shall  sever  my  connection  with  it.  At  present,  while
we  are  bound  together,  our  alliance  shall  not  be  one  of  equality.
The  soul  shall  bring  all  quarrels  before  its  own  tribunal.  Con-
tempt of  the  body  is  sure  freedom.

"To  return  to  our  subject;  this  freedom  will  be  greatly
helped  by  the  contemplation  of  which  we  were  just  speaking.
Verily  all  things  are  of  matter  and  of  God.  God  controls  matter,
which  encompasses  Him,  and  follows  Him  as  its  guide  and  leader.
That  which  creates,  in  other  words,  God,  is  more  powerful  and
precious  than  matter  which  is  acted  upon  by  God.  The  soul
occupies  in  man  the  place  that  God  occupies  in  this  universe.
What  matter  is  there,  the  body  is  in  us.  Let,  therefore,  the
inferior  serve  the  higher,"  etc.

Thus  speaks  Seneca,  that  unparalleled  cultivator  of  the
soul  among  the  Gentiles,  not  only  eloquently  but  religiously,  in
regard  to  the  condition  and  government  of  the  universe.  And
here  we  must  note  that  he  does  not  assign  matter  to  God  like
clay  to  a  sculptor,  as  if  matter  existed  or  had  its  being  through
itself,  and  God  then  applied  a  moulding  hand  to  it  as  a  thing
already  existing. For  this  divine  soul  [Seneca]  had  no  diffi-


154  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

culty  in  mounting  to  the  height  of  understanding  that  the
matter  of  the  universe,  that  is,  the  visible  world  (for  even  the
sacred  writers  often  use  the  term  "visible"  instead  of  "sensible"
or  "natural")  must  have  been  made  in  order  to  be  matter.

He  does  not,  therefore,  deny  that  matter  was  created  out  of
nothing,  matter  which  the  mouth  of  God  calls  IT]^  [tohu]
and  ins  [bohu],  and  the  poets  of  the  heathen*  call  chaos,
before  form  was  given  to  things  made  of  it,  but  that  after  the
world  began  to  be,  and  the  matter  of  the  universe  was  first  made
and  became  visible,  the  hand  of  God  was  laid  upon  His  creation
in  activity  and  skill,  and  thence  forward  is  constantly  laid  upon
it,  creating  all  things  and  governing  them  when  created.  Thus
he  declares  that  the  Deity  manipulates,  performs,  sets  in  motion,
keeps  in  operation  all  that  takes  place  with  the  matter  of  the
universe  rather  than  makes  matter,  as  a  thing  originating  of
itself,  equally  with  God  the  cause  of  the  Universe.

And,  secondly,  we  must  also  note  that  man  also  was  created
from  matter  and  is  a  type  of  the  whole  universe,  so  that  as  that
is  ruled  and  regulated  by  God,  so  is  he  by  the  soul,  not  by  a  soul
that  is  different  from  God  or  exists  of  itself,  but  one  which  is
subject  to  and  dependent  upon  God,  is  inspired,  fostered,  ruled,
and  fed  by  God,  consisting  of  the  Spirit  of  God. Of  this  later.

Supported,  then,  by  divine  oracles  on  all  sides  (for  whatever
is  true,  holy,  and  infallible  is  divine.  God  alone  is  true.  Hence
he  who  speaks  the  truth,  speaks  from  God,  and  he  who  in  this
way  climbs  with  his  understanding  from  the  things  visible  to  the
contemplation  of  the  unseen  God,  does  a  thing,  according  to  the
testimony  of  Paul  [Acts  17:  24ff.],  worthy  of  God  and  himself,
useful  and  not  without  divine  illumination.  I  venture,  there-
fore, to  call  a  thing  borrowed  from  the  heathen  divine,  if  only
it  is  holy,  religious,  and  irrefutable.  For  it  must  come  from
God,  whatever  the  quarter  from  which  it  comes  directly  to  us)
— supported  thus,  I  say,  by  divine  oracles,  we  must  admit  that
there  is  only  one  true  cause  of  all  things.  Other  things  are  not
truly  causes  any  more  than  the  representative  of  a  potentate  is
truly  the  potentate,  or  than  the  chisel  or  hammer  of  the  artificer
is  the  cause  of  a  drinking  cup,  the  beast  of  burden  of  husbandry.
Who  would  attribute  to  the  representative  the  name  of  his
prince,  to  the  chisel  the  making  of  the  cup,  to  the  ox  the  plowing
*See  e.  jr.,  Ovid  in  his  Metamorphoses,  Bk.  I,  3.


On  the  Providence  of  God  155

of  the  field?  Although  we  are  in  the  habit  of  saying,  "The
king's  legate  demanded  satisfaction,"  yet  the  action  is  not  the
legate's  but  the  king's.  And  though  the  silversmith  himself
sometimes  attributes  the  work  of  a  platter  to  the  hammer,  say-
ing, "This  platter  is  the  work  of  this  hammer,"  yet  the  hammer
is  not  truly  and  properly  the  cause,  but  the  silversmith.  So  the
farmer  calls  his  ox  the  tiller  of  many  acres,  when  he  says,  "That
ox  plowed  this  great  field,  however  much  the  plowing  was
done  by  the  plow."  Yet  the  farmer  himself  is  the  author
of  the  whole  business  of  husbandry,  for  he  reared  the  ox  for  it,
trained  him  and  guided  him,  and  bought  the  plow  to  which
equally  with  the  ox  is  attributed  what  does  not  rightly  belong
to  it.  The  plow  breaks  up  the  earth,  we  say.  If  it  did,
husbandry  would  go  back  to  the  blacksmith,  nay  to  the  anvil
itself  as  its  source.

It  is  established,  therefore,  that  secondary  causes  are  not
properly  called  causes,  though  I  have  always  determined  not
to  fight  obstinately  about  words,  provided  agreement  as  to  the
truth  of  the  matter  is  attained.  For  we  often  use  words  in  a
somewhat  varied  sense  on  different  occasions  and  from  different
considerations.  Thus  we  even  speak  of  a  man  who  has  con-
ferred some  great  benefit  as  a  god,  not  because  we  wish  to
designate  him  by  the  name  of  God,  but  though  God  is  the  only
effective  force,  and  He  alone  can  do  and  does  do  all  things,  yet
when  we  have  received  a  blessing  from  a  man,  we  speak  of  him
by  hyperbole*  as  a  god,  either  from  a  feeling  that  God  has
blessed  us  through  him  or  because  he  has  benefited  us  as  God
is  wont  to  do.

Whatever  means  and  instruments,  therefore,  are  called
causes,  are  not  properly  so  called,  but  by  metonymy,  that  is,
derivatively  from  that  one  first  cause  of  all  that  is.  It  is  the
same  thing  as  when  what  is  attributed  to  an  angel  does  not
belong  to  the  angel,  but  to  God  who  sent  the  angel.  Hence  the
constant  assertion  in  Exodus  that  Moses  saw  God  in  person  and
face  to  face,  while  in  the  same  place  the  sight  of  God  is  declared
impossible  to  mortal  eye.f  What  then?  Did  he  see  God  or
did  he  not?  As  far  as  form  goes,  he  saw  the  angel,  not  God,
except  so  far  as  He  is  in  the  angel  and  in  every  created  thing.

*  KCi^'  vTzep^o'Xrjv.

tCompare  Ex.  33:  11  with  33:  20.


y


156  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

But  as  far  as  authority  and  real  cause  are  concerned,  he  saw
God.  Hence  Paul  says  [Gal.  3:  19]  that  the  law  was  given
into  the  hand  of  the  mediator  Moses  by  the  angels,  that  is,  the
angels  were  the  deputies  and  officers  in  charge,  while  in  Exodus
the  law  is  said  to  have  been  given  to  Moses  by  God  in  person
talking  in  a  friendly  way  with  Moses  after  human  fashion.
It  is  for  the  same  reason  that  we  assign  to  the  sun  and  the
stars  things  that  belong  to  God  alone.  For  He  is  in  the  stars
themselves,  nay,  the  stars,  being  of  Him  and  in  Him,  have  not
their  own  essence,  power,  and  activity,  but  God's.

They  are,  therefore,  instruments  by  which  the  power  of  the
Godhead  shows  its  active"  presence.  For  it  was  for  this  that
He  created  things,  that  He  might  use  them  for  the  mutual
benefit  of  each  other,  so  that  that  wonderful  example  of  the
divine  wisdom,  man,  might  everywhere  contemplate  the  Deity,
and  in  all  things  and  in  himself  still  more  closely  perceive  God
existing,  living  and  working,  as  he  gazed  upon  His  power  and
activity  and  nature  in  all  the  things  that  are  or  take  place.

Thence  it  comes  that  to  man  is  ascribed  what  belongs  only
to  God  alone.  Thus  remission  of  sins  is  credited  to  the  apostles,
though  God  alone  remits  sins,  and  the  apostles  themselves
preach  that  pardon  for  sins  is  given  only  through  Christ.  For
the  Godhead  was  present  in  them,  and  illumined  their  minds  so
that  they  could  clearly  see  the  truth.  He  gave  courage  to  their
hearts,  so  that  they  boldly  proclaimed  the  truth  they  had  seen,
and  so  kindled  the  souls  of  the  hearers  that  they  absorbed
straightway  by  the  Spirit  and  fed  upon  the  teaching  of  the
Spirit.

Do  we  not  see  here  that  the  apostle  and  the  word  which  he

I  uses  for  the  setting  forth  of  the  truth  are  instruments,  not

I  causes,  and  that  the  one  cause,  by  which  even  the  apostle  exists

/  and  preaches,  is  the  Deity? And  to  put  it  briefly,  the  ground

I does  not  bring  forth,  nor  the  water  nourish,  nor  the  air  fructify,

nor  the  fire  warm,*  nor  the  sun  itself,  but  rather  that  power

which  is  the  origin  of  all  things,  their  life  and  strength,  uses

the  earth  as  the  instrument  wherewith  to  produce  and  create.

And  since  created  things  are  preserved  by  food,  that  power  feeds

and  gives  them  to  drink  by  water,  quickens,  fills  and  increases

them  by  air,  purifies,  beautifies,  refines  and  perfects  them  by  fire

*  oi)  "^aXnei  irb  irvp.


On  the  Providence  of  God  157

and  sun.  For  unless  that  power  had  appointed  these  instru-
ments for  this  purpose,  that  is,  had  made  and  fashioned  them  in
order  to  use  them  for  this  work,  what  would  they  be  but  useless
and  the  refuse  of  other  things?

Furthermore,  since  they  are  lifeless  by  nature,  and  yet
through  them  and  from  them  the  divine  bounty  supplies
nourishment  unto  all  living  things,  it  is  clear  thatihey  are  more
properly  called  instruments  than  causes^  For  there  can  be  but
one  cause.  For,  as  the  origin  of  all  thmgs  is  one,  so  must  the
cause  be  one.  And  because  things  minister  unto  each  other,
and  all  unto  man,  although  the  power  of  God  could  by  its  very
life  and  presence,  without  the  aid  of  the  aforesaid  means,  support
and  nourish  man  and  all  his  dominion  (for  he  was  set  over  all
the  things  that  are  on  the  earth  or  in  the  sea  or  the  air,  to
govern  them),  as  indeed  it  did  support  Moses  forty  days  with-
out food,*  it  is  clear  that  All  these  things  by  which  we  are
nourished  and  supported  are  instruments  of  the  divine  working,
not  causes.^  For  even  some  philosophers  have  been  reluctant  to
admit  matter  into  the  realm  of  causes,  as  a  thing  that  does
nothing  active,  but  suffers  itself  to  be  manipulated,  and  receives
upon  itself  the  blows  of  the  worker.  And  we,  knowing  that
matter  and  all  power  flow  from  one  source,  see  that  it  is  an
unassailable  fact  that  all  working,  fashioning,  and  preserving
are  from  that  source,  and  that  the  things  which  are  nearer  and
accordingly  better  known  to  us,  cannot  really  be  causes,  though
w^e  call  them  so,  but  are  instruments  of  the  one  actual  cause.

Thus  when  we  look  upon  the  fostering  earth  pouring  forth
her  grain,  the  tree  its  fruit,  the  sun  its  light  and  warmth,  we
see  the  hand  of  God  at  work  just  as  when  a  kind  father  puts  a
cherry  into  his  little  boy's  palm.  It  is  the  kindly  power  of  the
Deity  that  giveth  all  things ;  the  earth,  the  tree,  the  sun,  and  the
rest  are  the  stalk  and  branches  which  hold  that  bounty  and
supply  it  to  us.

But  it  is  now  time  to  summarize  and  then  continue.  In
this  entire  chapter  I  have  been  aiming  to  prove  that  since  all
things  have  their  being,  existence,  life,  movement  and  activity
from  One  and  in  One,  that  One  is  the  only  real  cause  of  all
things,  and  those  nearer  things  which  we  call  causes,  are  not
properly  causes,  but  the  agents  and  instruments  with  which  the


158  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

eternal  mind  works,  and  in  which  it  manifests  itself  to  be
enjoyed.

From  this  conclusion  we  learn  in  brief  that  nothing
happens  by  chance  or  at  random,  however  much  philosophers
and  theologians  dispute  that  point,  for  that  chief  Intelligence
has  numbered  the  hairs  of  our  heads.  Nay,  even  though  we
pass  by  the  authority  of  Scripture,  it  yet  must  be  that  that
Intelligence  which  is  the  beginning  and  the  origin  of  all  light
and  all  knowledge  and  is  Itself  wisdom  and  light,  knows  all
things.  For,  otherwise,  however  insignificant  the  thing  which
It  did  not  know,  It  would  not  be  chief  and  supreme,  since  It
would  not  know  all  things.

And  we  also  learn  that  that  Intelligence  must  regulate,
care  for,  and  manage  all  things.  For  if  It  did  not  care  for  what
It  saw,  this  would  happen  either  from  jealousy  or  from  lack  of
power.  But,  since  It  is  good  and  almighty,  It  cannot  help  caring
for,  regulating,  and  ordering  all  things.  Nothing,  therefore,
■>  can  happen  By  chance.  This  conclusion  is  so  certain  and  secure
that  whoever  denies  Providence  in  all  things,  by  the  same  state-
ment denies  the  existence  of  God.  For  if  there  is  a  God  (as
there  is ;  I  am  only  arguing  against  atheists,  that  is,  those  w^ho
do  not  believe  in  a  God) ,  it  is  He  who  sees  all  things,  cares  for
and  regulates  all  things,  puts  and  keeps  all  things  in  operation.

On  the  other  hand,  if  anything  takes  place  by  chance  and
at  random,  if  anything  exists  of  its  own  right  and  independently
of  the  direction  of  the  Deity,  then  everything  is  at  random  and
drifts  along  by  chance,  and  accordingly  all  the  wisdom,  thought
and  reason  of  all  intelligent  beings  is  empty  and  vain.  For  if
anything  exists,  lives,  and  moves  beyond  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Deity,  man  can  with  equal  right  be  said  to  be  beyond  God's
jurisdiction.  Therefore,  intelligence,  reason,  thought  will  count
for  nothing.  All  things  will  be  at  their  own  sweet  will,  so  that
everything  will  obey  chance  and  fortune,  and  nothing  intelli-
gence, reason  and  thought.  Thus  there  will  simply  be  no  Deity.
And  how  godless  and  wicked  it  is  even  to  imagine  this,  is
sufficiently  shown  by  the  contemplation  of  the  universe,  where
whatever  you  gaze  upon  is  so  incomplete  and  small  and  feeble
that  it  cannot  come  from  itself.  Thus,  since  the  universe  must
come  from  something  else,  we  are  brought,  whether  we  will  or
no,  to  the  one  and  only  source  of  all  things,  from  which  every-


On  the  Providence  of  God  159

thing  runs  forth  as  if  from  the  starting  place  of  a  race  course.
But  now  I  come  to  man.

FOURTH  CHAPTER

Regarding  man  and  why  the  law  was  given  to  him  when
all  things  are  directed  by  Divine  Providence.

Abdallah,  the  Mohammedan,*  said  that  man  is  the  most
wonderful  of  all  the  things  seen  upon  the  stage  of  the  world.  If
any  one  should  ask  me,  I  should  answer  that  he  is  the  most
peculiar  and  most  wonderful  of  creatures,  and  more  wonderful
than  the  beauty  of  the  angels.  Just  as  if  you  compare  a  cock
and  a  steer,  though  you  will  find  the  steer  more  imposing,  yet
you  will  never  be  tired  of  wondering  at  the  royal  adornment  of
the  cock,  his  splendid  courage,  his  proud  gait,  his  indefatigable
watchfulness,  his  eminent  characteristics  of  leader  and  com-
mander, ruling  as  he  does  over  a  vast  brood  of  hens.  So  the
angel  is  of  noble  substance,  to  wit,  a  pure  spirit,  but  if  you  con-
sider man  beside  him  how  will  you  not  be  struck  at  this  being
both  heavenly  and  earthly?  In  all  the  hosts  of  spirits  you  will
not  find  one  clothed  with  an  earthly  and  visible  body,  (unless
it  happens  to  be  put  on  for  a  little  while  and  laid  aside) ,  and  in
all  the  vast  multitude  of  animals  of  all  sorts  you  will  find  none
in  which  an  intelligent  mind  acts  as  ruler  and  director.

Thus  we  easily  infer  that  God,  the  creator  of  the  universe,
made  man  not  only  that  there  might  be  an  image  and  copy  of
Himself,  but  that  from  among  the  creatures  made  from  the  earth
there  might  be  one  to  enjoy  God  through  fellowship  and  friend-

*This  quotation  is  taken  most  likely  from  the  opening  sentence  of
Giovanni  Pico  della  Mirandola's  remarkable  oration  on  the  dignity  of  man,
with  which  he  planned  to  open  the  great  disputation  at  Rome,  to  which
he  had  challenged  all  scholars:  "Legi,  patres  colendissimi,  in  Arabum
monumentis  interrogatum  Abdalam  Sarracenum;  quod  in  hac  quasi
mundana  scaena  admirandum  maxime  spectaretur,  nihil  spectari  homine
admirabilius  respondisse;"  i.  e.,  "I  have  read,  Most  Reverend  Fathers,  in  the
monuments  of  the  Arabs,  that  Abdalla,  the  Sarracen,  having  been  asked
what  could  be  seen  on  this  earthly  stage  that  was  most  to  be  wondered  at.
answered  that  nothing  could  be  seen  more  wonderful  than  man."  Prof.
George  L.  Burr,  of  Cornell  University  located  this  quotation.  For  the
passage  quoted  see  Pici  Mirandulae  opera  novissime  revisa,  Argentorati,
1504,  fol.  846;  also  in  Opera  omnia  Pici  Mirandulae  Concordiaeque  comitis,
Basileae  [1572],  p.  313.


160  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

ship  here,  through  possession  and  most  intimate  contact  in  the
hereafter.  Also  that  He  might  foreshadow  in  a  sense  that
intercourse  with  the  world  into  which  He  was  going  to  enter
through  His  Son.  For  how  could  we  have  been  more  clearly
brought  to  the  understanding  of  the  incarnation  of  the  Son  of
God  than  through  seeing  from  the  beginning  an  intelligent
spirit  planted  in  a  dull  body?  And  His  wisdom  was  to  shine
forth  in  this  creation  like  that  of  the  artificer  (I  cannot  recall
his  name)*  in  the  shield  of  Achilles.  He  made  the  strength  of
that  wonderful  work  so  depend  upon  a  little  bolt,  displaying  his
own  image,  that  he  who  loosened  that  scattered  the  whole  shield
apart.  So  he  who  should  take  man  out  of  the  world,  would
bereave,  debase  and  defile  all  the  visible  universe.  For  take  man
away ;  will  there  be  any  one  of  all  the  creatures  of  sense  to  enjoy
God,  to  know  Him,  to  have  intercourse  with  Him?

Man  is,  therefore,  to  the  world  what  God  is  to  man.  God
is  the  lord  and  director  of  the  human  mind ;  man  is  the  lord  of
the  world.  All  that  we  see  was  made  for  him  and  his  good.
Take  him  away  from  them,  and  have  you  not  left  all  things
bereft  like  the  widow  and  orphan?  Whom  will  the  sun  warm,
for  whom  the  fructifying  zephyrs  and  breezes  blow?  For  the
brutes?  Whose  advantage  will  the  brutes  serve ?  For  whom  has
the  earth  spread  out  its  broad  expanse?  There  will  be  no  one
who  understands  how  he  ought  to  make  use  of  things.

It  was  necessary,  then,  that  this  lord  and  master  of  such  a
vast  realm  should  have  in  him  something  from  that  realm  over
which  he  was  to  be  set,  and  it  was  also  necessary  that  he  should
be  endowed  with  some  surpassing  endowment,  by  which  he
could  conquer  and  break  the  rebellious  spirit  of  things.  He  was,
therefore,  given  a  body  as  he  was  marked  out  to  be  the  chief  of
all  bodily  beings,  and  he  was  also  given  a  soul,  as  he  alone  of
all  bodily  creatures  was  to  have  kinship  and  fellowship  with
God  and  all  other  spiritual  beings — a  body  and  a  soul,  two  most
widely  different  things.  For  what  differs  more  widely  from  the
clearness  and  light  of  the  mind  and  intelligence  than  the  dull
inactivity  of  the  earth  and  the  body?  But  when  the  great
Master  Workman  was  going  to  insert  a  soul  into  this  clay,  see
how  He  softened  and  shaped  it  in  order  not  to  dishonor  a  worthy
guest  through  an  unworthy  dwelling.  The  lion  had  come  forth
•He  had  Hephaistos  in  mind,  see  Iliad,  XVIII,  478-608.


On  the  Providence  of  God  161

with  hairy  breast  and  terrible  teeth  and  claws,  the  bear  had  crept
forth  shaggy  in  all  his  body  and  powerful  of  paw,  the  stag  had
leaped  forth  with  branching  horns,  with  shaggy  hair,  and
having  his  foot  fortified  with  an  invincible  hoof,  and  all  the  rest
had  their  own  peculiar  armaments  of  spikes,  spears  and  shields.
But  how  remote  from  all  roughness,  O  Lord,  does  the  human
body  appear !

Some  regard  this  as  a  misfortune ;  I  think  it  a  mark  and
omen  of  happiness.  For  since  he  was  born  to  enjoy  God  and  all
created  things,  it  was  fitting  that  he  should  be  adapted  to  gentle-
ness, peace  and  friendship.  Hence  this  coarse  earth  of  which
man  is  made  had  to  be  softened  rather  carefully  in  order  not  to
produce  sharp  claws  and  fierce  teeth,  and  scales  or  iron-like  hide
to  lead  to  stubbornness  and  force.  Therefore  this  abode  of  the
celestial  soul  was  made  pliant  and  smooth  and  clean  on  all  sides.
Other  creatures  drop  down  on  four  feet,  this  body  of  ours  stands
upon  two,  that  man's  gaze  might  be  fastened  more  directly  upon
that  heaven  of  which  he  aims  to  become  heir.  But  why  go  on?
The  beauty  and  loveliness  of  the  human  body  is  indescribable  if
you  compare  it  with  other  living  beings.

Nevertheless,  though  the  human  body  has  been  created  in
such  form  and  a  heavenly  mind  has  been  entrusted  to  it,  yet
each  part  preserves  its  own  nature  and  character.  The  mind
loves  the  truth  and,  therefore,  worships  the  Deity,  from  whose
substance  it  derives  its  kinship.  It  aims  for  justice  and  integrity.
The  body  inclines  to  its  native  clay,  and  follows  the  nature  of
the  flesh.  Thus  if  you  wish  to  compare  man  with  something,
he  would  seem  like  nothing  so  much  as  a  lump  of  muddy  earth
plunged  into  a  very  clear,  pure  brook.  The  stream  which  had
flowed  with  limpid  waters  now  becomes  clouded  and  we  cannot
even  hope  for  the  former  clearness  as  long  as  the  lump  of  earth
stays  immersed  in  it.

So  it  is  with  man.  His  mind  is  a  clear,  limpid  stream,
flowing  forth  from  the  Godhead  itself.  Hence  it  is  so  eager  for
truth  and  right  and  so  devoted  to  them  that  if  you  could  consider
it  apart  from  the  dull  mass  of  the  body,  as  the  angels  are,  you
would  detect  nothing  base,  disturbing,  or  defiling  in  it.  The
body  is  clay,  taken  from  the  earth,  and  when  you  attach  this  to
the  soul  it  is  like  letting  a  wild  boar  into  a  liquid  spring.  Thus
what  the  soul  by  itself  would  see  clearly  and  would  follow  readily


162  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

and  without  hesitation,  it  now  sees  dimly,  on  account  of  the
grossness  of  the  clay  being  like  a  mist  upon  it,  and  is  held  bound
by  the  weight  of  that  clay  as  by  fetters,  so  that  it  can  no  more
pursue  the  perfect  course  than  Tantalus  could  seize  his  fruit.
Hence  that  sort  of  internal  war  in  which  the  mind  and  the
body  are  engaged  against  each  other.  When  the  mind  begins
to  contemplate  God,  to  talk  and  commune  with  Him  about  the
things  it  has  in  common  with  Him,  suddenly  the  flesh,  fash-
ioned from  clay,  draws  it  back.  "Fool,"  it  cries,  "Where  are
you  going?  There  is  no  Deity;  much  less  one  that  cares  for
our  affairs."  Thus  each  part  of  man  constantly  looks  back  upon
its  origin.  The  mind  yearns  for  light,  purity  and  goodness,
inasmuch  as  its  nature  is  light,  its  substance  pure  and  devoted
to  the  right,  seeing  that  it  derives  its  origin  from  the  Godhead ;
the  body  inclines  to  idleness,  laziness,  darkness  and  dullness,  as
it  is  lazy  and  indolent  by  nature,  and  without  reason  and  in-
telligence, seeing  that  it  consists  of  earth.

Hence  it  is  that  neither  part  ever  carries  off  so  fortunate  a
victory  that  the  conquered  part  does  not  constantly  rebel.  For
if  the  spirit  gains  the  upper  hand,  does  not  the  flesh  rebel,  how-
ever sternly  it  sees  its  king  and  commander  hold  destruction
over  its  head?  For  who  distributes  his  goods  among  the  poor
for  God's  sake,  without  the  flesh  sometimes  repeating:  "So  you
will  come  out  distinguished,  so  you  will  make  for  yourself  a
name,  so  you  will  be  able  to  aim  at  the  presidency  or  some  other
office?"  And  though  it  is  fair  to  suppose  from  the  skill  and
watchfulness  of  some  people  that  they  forthwith  overcome  and
throw  down  the  enemy  stealing  in  by  this  sort  of  scaling  ladder,
yet  the  flesh  does  not  lay  down  its  boldness,  but  struggles  none
the  less  obstinately  and  mixes  some  disturbing  element  in  with
good  beginnings,  so  that  its  persistency  is  like  a  woman's
obstinacy.  But  however  much  the  flesh  refuses  to  listen  to  any
counsel  but  what  the  belly  dictates,  whenever  it  succeeds  in  get-
ting the  ascendency  over  the  spirit,  yet  the  nobler  and  kindlier
spirit  never  ceases  to  warn,  advise  or  dissuade  as  occasion  offers.
For  it  is  certain  that  that  phenomenal  drunkard  Torquatus  did
not  so  drown  himself  in  drink,  nor  Heliogabalus  bury  himself  in
ostrich's  brains,  nor  Nero  so  shamelessly  indulge  himself  with
harlots,  matrons,  and  lewd  men,  nor  Dionysius  or  Phalaris  so
savagely  drink  human  blood,  nor  dread  Hannibal  so  ruthlessly


On  the  Providence  of  God  163

lay  waste  cities  and  fields  and  districts,  provinces  and  kingdoms,
without  each  one  of  them  and  their  likes,  worn  out  at  last  with
indulgence,  saying  to  himself,  "But  who  art  thou?  What  now?
Where  wilt  thou  stop?  Are  not  these  men ?  Why  art  thou  now
sad?  How  bloodless  and  feeble  thou  art!  What  will  happen
if  each  man  goes  on  doing  to  others  according  to  his  own
caprice?"

The  soul  is  never  so  kept  under  that  it  forgets  itself  for-
ever, it  is  never  so  down-trodden  by  the  arrogant  tyranny  of  the
flesh  as  not  to  give  warning  however  late.  On  the  contrary  the
spirit  is  like  a  gentle  father  following  his  children  with  the
utmost  faithfulness  and  indulgence.  Hence  also,  to  come  back
to  the  subject,  the  flesh  not  only  growls  at  the  spirit,  but  in  a
spirit  of  pretence  and  mockery  copies  its  works.  By  uprightness
and  purity  of  life,  the  soul  admonishes  us,  the  favor  of  the
Deity  is  to  be  won ;  by  white  raiment,  says  the  flesh.  The  spirit
gives  up  its  dwelling  place,  the  blood  namely,  for  the  sake  of  its
lord,  the  flesh  declares  that  the  purple  mantle  in  which  it  wraps
itself  is  sufficient.  The  mind  sighs  for  God  and  expects  all
things  from  His  bounty,  not  from  its  own  deserts;  the  flesh,
even  though  it  thunders  and  roars,  announces  that  all  things
are  due  to  itself.  Hence,  to  reach  the  conclusion  more  quickly,
there  arises  so  much  superstition,  hypocrisy,  and  deceit.  For
the  flesh  imitates  the  spirit  like  an  ape.

Here  arise  for  us  two  very  great  questions.  First,  why,
then,  did  God  create  man  so  unhappy  a  being,  who  is  never  at
peace  with  himself?  Second,  why  is  the  spirit  given  over  to
everlasting  torment  when  it  is  overcome  and  kept  under  by  the
flesh,  though  the  flesh  is  just  as  much  a  part  of  man  as  the
spirit,  and  he  received  both  from  God  the  Creator  Himself?

To  the  first  question  Paul  would  answer,  may  not  the  potter
make  different  kinds  of  vessels  from  the  same  lump  [Rom.
9:  21]  ?  Has  God  not  the  right  to  join  spirit  and  clay?  Man
can  mould  clay  into  varied  forms,  but  he  cannot  give  them
breath  and  make  them  live.  Unless  God  could  make  a  living
being  from  the  dull,  senseless  matter,  He  would  be  no  way
superior  to  any  artisan.  But  as  it  is,  when  He  makes  earth  not
only  living  but  also  intelligent  and  attentive  to  the  divine  (let
both  body  and  soul  ever  keep  their  peculiar  characteristics,
provided  the  nature  of  each  is  treated  separately),  He  shows  how


164  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

He  is  above  the  skill  and  wisdom  of  all.  Oh,  the  depth  of  the
wisdom  and  bounty  of  God!  Oh,  on  the  other  hand,  how
ignorant  and  inexperienced  in  things  we  poor  mortals  are,  who,
asking  why  God  created  man  in  his  present  condition,  have  not
yet  learned  that  this  question  is  suggested  by  the  flesh,  which
does  not  only  demand  an  account  of  the  spirit,  which  is  bound
by  a  certain  weight  and  check,  but  ventures  to  demand  even  of
God  the  reason  of  His  actions !  Why  madest  Thou  me  so?  Yet
no  mortal  knows  the  sources  of  any  art  or  science  so  well  as  not
to  be  ignorant  of  some  things  that  belong  to  it,  and  nothing
that  we  see  is  so  gross  and  coarse  and  big  that  we  can  give  a
reason  for  its  formation  in  detail.

The  elephant  is  an  immense  creature.  Though  you  see
its  trunk  and  tusks  and  consider  their  use,  yet  you  do  not  know
why  God  fashioned  them  thus  for  those  uses.  The  wild  boar
has  tusks  projecting  on  both  sides  and  a  snout,  and  uses  these.
God  might,  then,  have  made  an  elephant  like  a  boar,  you  say.
He  might,  I  answer,  but  the  boar  was  not  destined  to  be  an
elephant.  And  He  was  pleased  to  show  variety  in  making  many
creatures,  that  man  also  might  be  pleased.  The  boar  plunges
either  tusk  without  distinction  into  any  kind  of  food;  the
elephant  uses  only  one  of  his  tusks  to  dig  up  the  roots  which  he
feeds  upon,  and  keeps  the  point  of  the  other  intact  for  battle.
Why  did  the  Deity  bestow  this  care  upon  him?  What  is  the
object,  when  not  only  men  kill  each  other  with  steel,  but  even
elephants  go  about  with  their  sharp  pointed  instrument  with
which  to  extinguish  the  life  both  of  each  other  and  of  men?
Here  surely  we  must  call  a  halt.  It  so  pleased  Him  to  whom
whatever  pleases  Him  is  lawful  and  whom  nothing  pleases
which  is  not  good  and  holy  and  just.  Man,  therefore,  was  made
after  the  fashion  that  pleased  God,  and  that  will  please  all  who
are  endowed  with  power  of  reason  and  intelligence.  All  things
have  their  own  order  and  class.  Here  the  spotted  leopard,  there
the  savage  tiger,  here  the  helpful  ox,  there  the  intelligent  horse.
Here  the  rapacious  eagle  threatens,  there  the  crafty  vulture
hangs  over  its  prey.  Here  the  merry  nightingale,  there  the
tuneful  blackbird  sings.  Here  the  one-eyed  tunny-fish  swims,
there  the  happy  dolphin  leaps.  Here  the  idle  mussel  opens  its
mouth,  there  the  band  of  polypi  lay  their  fangs  and  cleverly
tear  off  the  mussel's  flesh. But  who  could  enumerate  all  the


On  the  Providence  of  God  165

species  of  creatures,  when  there  come  forth  daily  new  ones  not
seen  before  or  at  least  forgotten,  so  that  man  has  not  had  time
from  the  creation  of  the  world  to  acquire  a  knowledge  of  all  of
them?  Man,  therefore,  stands  first  in  the  company  and  circle
of  all  creation,  having  in  common  with  the  immortal  existences
reason  and  a  soul,  in  common  with  mortals,  earthly  life  and  a
body.  The  Deity  willed  to  make  him  so,  and  for  Him  to  have
so  willed  it  is  enough. So  much  for  the  first  question.

To  the  second,  why,  when  sin  is  due  to  the  allurements  or
the  impetuous  nature  of  the  flesh,  is  the  soul  damned?  I  answer
briefly,  because  the  law  is  sinned  against.  For  the  law  is  enacted
that  transgression  be  not  committed,  and  where  there  is  no  law,
there  is  no  transgression.  They  cannot  offend  against  the  law,
to  whom  no  law  is  given.  This  is  shown  by  experience.  Dogs
tear  each  other  to  pieces,  but  they  are  not  brought  to  trial  for
assault.  Wolves  plunder,  but  no  one  demands  restitution  of
them.  Storks  and  eagles  cast  off  the  inefficient  among  their
young,  but  no  one  charges  them  with  cruelty  of  treatment.  The
stallion  openly  covers  all  the  mares  of  a  neighborhood,  but  no
one  brings  him  up  for  adultery.  And  all  this  is  simply  because
they  have  no  law.  But  since  a  law  has  been  given  unto  man,
and  he  offends  against  the  law,  he  is  properly  punished  as  the
law  orders.  Man,  therefore,  is  damned,  because  he  has  resisted
the  law  and  rashly  stirred  up  rebellion  against  it.

But  now  a  more  serious  question  arises,  namely,  why  then
did  God  give  man  a  law  against  which  he  can  offend?  Why
did  He  not  rather  suffer  him  to  live  without  the  law,  like  the
other  living  creatures,  especially  when  all  things  are  ordered  by
Divine  Providence  and  accomplished  by  the  power  of  the  same  ?
Before  I  answer  this  question,  I  want  to  consider  what  a  law  is.
Some  define  it  sometimes,  starting  from  its  form,  as  when  Paul
says,  "The  law  is  spiritual"  [Rom.  7:  14],  sometimes  from  its
purpose,  as  when  Paul  says,  "By  the  law  comes  knowledge  of
sin"  [Rom.  3 :  20] ,  that  is,  the  law  is  the  indicator  of  sin,  and
when  Chrysippus*  in  "De  legibus  et  senatus  consultis  et  longa

*Zwingli's  quotation  is  from  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis,  the  Code  of
Justinian,  see  Digest,  lib.  I,  cap.  3,  entitled:  "De  legibus  senatusque  con-
sultis et  longa  consuetudine."  It  reads  as  follows:  "Marcianus,  in  his  first
book  of  the  Institutions,  also  Demosthenes,  and  also  the  philosopher  of  the
highest  Stoic  wisdom,  Chrysippus,  thus  began  his  book,  which  he  wrote


166  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

consuetudine,"  i.  e.,  "On  the  Laws  and  the  Decrees  of  the  Senate
and  Ancient  Custom,"  defines  law  thus,  "Law  is  the  knowledge
of  things  divine  and  human,"  i.  e.,  "Law  leads  us  to  learn  things
divine  and  human,"  yet  no  one  has  defined  it  from  the  point  of
view  of  its  material  substance — what  the  law  really  and  in
essence  is.

This  fountainhead  of  law  (with  your  permission)  I  will
open  up,  and  define  the  divine  law  thus : — The  law  is  the  divine
order,  expressing  His  nature  and  will.  If  one  wishes  to  put  it
more  concisely  he  may  say,  the  law  is  the  constant  will  of  God,
though  I  want  to  set  forth  the  former  that  the  latter  also  may  be
made  plain.  Thus  I  touch  first  upon  the  source,  in  referring
the  law  to  the  Deity,  and  secondly  upon  its  nature,  in  calling  it
an  order,  I  wish  order,  however,  to  be  taken  in  a  wide  sense,
so  that  it  shall  include  what  is  forbidden  as  well  as  what  is  pre-
scribed. Finally  we  see  what  the  law  is  in  essence,  namely  the
will  and  nature  of  the  Deity,  so  that  when  we  hear  the  law,  we
know  what  God  wills  and  that  He  is  Himself  of  the  nature  of
that  which  he  shows  us.  And  this  is  so  true  that  even  in  those
crudest  laws.  Thou  shalt  not  kill.  Thou  shalt  not  steal,  Thou
shalt  not  commit  adultery,  we  learn  that  God's  nature  is  such
that  He  hates  violence,  injustice  and  wrong.  For  unless  His
nature  were  such,.  He  would  expose  Himself  to  the  charge  of
duplicity  in  ordering  one  thing  and  wishing  another.  There-
fore it  is  evident  that  since  the  law  is  the  order  of  God,  it  is  the
expression  of  His  will,  and  since  it  is  His  will,  He  also  gives  His
approval  to  that  which  He  enjoins  upon  us,  and  this  is  what  the
second  definition  has  in  view.  Hence  it  is  clear  that  at  our  time
some  persons  of  the  first  importance*,  as  they  think,  have  spoken
without  sufficient  circumspection  about  the  law  in  saying  that
the  law  is  only  to  terrify,  damn,  and  deliver  over  to  torments.
In  reality,  the  law  does  not  do  that  at  all,  but,  on  the  contrary',
sets  forth  the  will  and  nature  of  the  Deity. And  what  can  be

'Regarding  the  Law':  'The  law  is  the  king  of  all  things  divine  and  human.
He  must  of  necessity  be  the  patron  of  the  good  and  bad,  as  well  as  their
ruler  and  leader.'  "  In  Mommsen's  edition  of  the  Corpus,  Digest,  p.  5.  It
is  possible  that  Zwingli  had  another  reading  in  his  edition  of  the  Corpus.
in  place  of  the  word  "king,"  on  which  his  word  "notitia,"  or  "knowledge,"
is  based.  The  editor  owes  the  identification  of  this  quotation  to  the  kind-
ness of  Prof.  George  L.  Burr,  of  Cornell  University.
*He  means  Luther.


On  the  Providence  of  God  167

compared  with  that?  If  a  king  or  emperor  entrusts  his  views,
plans,  and  nature  to  a  councillor  or  commander,  how  that
official  leaps  and  exults  for  joy!  When  God  by  the  promulga-
tion of  the  law  discloses  His  will  and  nature  to  us,  do  we  venture
to  make  light  of  it?

Paul  used  such  commonplace  sayings  more  clearly  and
more  discreetly.  In  Romans  he  carefully  avoids  using  such
strong  commonplace  sayings  as  ''the  law  damns,"  "the  law
sentences  to  hell."  In  general  his  effort  is  to  preach  the  sanctity
of  the  law,  calling  it  now  "spiritual"  and  again  "good,"  as  when
he  says,  "Was  then  that  which  is  good  made  death  unto  me?"
"God  forbid,"  he  says.  "But  sin,  that  it  might  appear  sin,"
that  is,  that  it  might  be  recognized  as  sin,  "worketh  death  in  me
by  that  which  is  good"  (that  is,  by  the  law  which  he  calls  that
which  is  good  here),  "that  (thus)  sin"  (which  of  course  was  not
yet  recognized  since  the  law  was  not  known),  "by  command-
ment might  become  exceeding  sinful,"  (that  is,  that  the  magni-
tude and  monstrousness  of  sin  might  be  made  plain)  [Rom.
7 :  12] .  See  how  well  he  guards  against  making  the  law  detested,
as  he  would  do  if  he  assigned  damnation  and  death  to  it.  I  do
not  mean  by  this  that  I  consider  it  irreverent  to  use  common-
place sayings  of  that  kind  on  occasion.  But  since  there  are
some  persons  who  claim  for  themselves  alone  the  right  to  explain
divine  Scripture,  although  one  sees  them  both  in  the  passage
quoted  and  in  many  other  passages  stumble  like  children  from
sheer  ignorance  of  rhetoric,  which  nevertheless  they  avowedly
arrogate  to  themselves,  I  would  like  to  direct  their  attention  to
modesty  and  to  themselves — to  modesty,  that  they  may  cease  to
seem  to  despise  the  law,  which  is  the  everlasting  will  of  God,  to
themselves,  that  they  may  learn  that  they  are  men,  whose  char-
acteristic it  is  to  err,  be  ignorant,  stumble,  be  deceived  and
deluded. For  these  things  happen  to  them  as  well  as  to  others.

There  are,  moreover,  in  the  argument  of  Paul  above  men-
tioned most  charming  figures  of  speech  and  personifications,  as
when  sin  is  made  a  geometer  and  measurer,  the  law  a  plumb-line,
or  again  when  sin  is  made  exceeding  sinful  or  a  sinner,  like  a
thief  caught  in  the  very  act,  or  as  when  we  are  said  to  be  delivered
from  the  law,  when  the  law  can  no  more  be  abolished  or  cease
to  be  (I  am  speaking  of  the  spiritual  law,  not  the  law  of  cere-
monials) than  can  God  Himself, — when  we  are  delivered  not


168  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

from  the  law  but  from  damnation,  which  is  rightly  due  to  us  for
our  contempt  of  the  law.  And  when  he  presently  calls  the  law
"spiritual,"  he  shows  clearly  that  the  law  cannot  in  any  way
be  abolished.  These  figures,  being  either  not  recognized  or
neglected,  force  those  great  men  either  to  leap  over  things  that
they  have  undertaken  to  expound,  or  to  babble  out  something
obscure,  ambiguous,  and  high  sounding,  to  hide  their  ignorance,
so  that  you  may  not  understand  that  they  do  not  themselves
understand  what  they  are  talking  about.  Forms  of  expression
like,  "the  law  damns,"  "the  law  convicts  of  sin,"  are  true  only  in
the  same  way  that  one  may  say  it  is  true,  if  any  one  should  bring
a  light  into  an  assembly  of  deformed  people  and  they  should

^  cry,  "Do  not  bring  a  lamp.  It  will  make  us  all  deformed."  A
light  certainly  cannot  make  them  deformed,  but  it  makes  their
deformity  visible.  So  the  law  does  not  damn,  but  human  vile-
ness  is  brought  forth  by  the  agency  of  the  law. The  law,  there-

*-  fore,  is  light.  If  it  is  light,  it  is  the  mind,  intelligence,  and  will
of  God.  Thus,  then,  to  come  back  to  my  purpose,  I  think  I  have
sufficiently  expounded  and  supported  my  definition  of  the  law.
Now  I  will  add  a  few  illustrations  and  exceptions  as  an
exposition  of  the  above  statement.  "Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord
thy  God  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all
thy  mind,  and  with  all  thy  strength"  [Deut.  6 :  15] .  These
words  directed  to  man  are  a  law  by  which  he  first  learns  that
our  God  and  Lord  is  to  be  loved  above  all  things,  and  that  because
of  His  natural  goodness  peculiar  to  Him.  What  knowledge  can
be  nobler  or  more  useful  to  the  mind  of  man  than  this?  What
more  welcome  message  than  that  God  announces  Himself  as
that  which  is  to  be  cherished  and  loved  above  all  things?  When,
therefore.  He  presents  Himself  to  be  loved,  it  is  certain  that  He
Himself  also  loves.  For  unless  He  loved  us,  why,  pray,  should
He  disclose  Himself  to  us?

We  learn,  therefore,  from  this  law  in  the  second  place,  not
only  that  it  is  God  whom  we  ought  to  love  above  all  things,  but
also  that  He  by  His  nature  loves  not  only  man  but  all  His  crea-
tures. For  unless  He  loved  them.  He  would  not  create  them,
sustain  them,  live  and  Avork  in  them.  Only  there  is  this  dis-
tinction that  what  God  loves  He  loves  as  a  father.  For  He  has
no  one  above  Him  to  look  up  to  with  wonder  and  reverence.  But
we  love  Him  as  our  Creator  and  Father. Hence  it  follows — and


On  the  Providence  of  God  169

that  belongs  to  the  exception — that  what  is  law  to  us  is  not  law
to  God.  For  who  should  make  a  law  for  Him  who  is  the
Highest,  or  who  should  enlighten  Him  who  is  the  Light?  What
is  law  to  us  is,  therefore,  nature  and  character  to  Him.  When
He  commands,  "Thou  shalt  love  me  only,"  we  learn  first  that
He  loves  not  in  consequence  of  the  law,  which  none  can  impose
upon  Him,  but  by  His  nature  and  character.  Secondly  we  learn
that  we  also  ought  duly  to  love  Him.  Thus  He  is  above  the  law,
we  are  under  the  law ;  He  is  the  love  which  is  commanded  of  us.

Now  I  will  add  another  illustration  by  which  the  above  will
be  more  clearly  explained,  and  this  exception  that  God  is  not
under  the  law  will  become  more  evident.  When  it  is  com-
manded, ''Thou  shalt  not  kill"  (the  killing  of  men,  not  of  beasts,
is  forbidden  thereby),  we  learn  first  that  God  loves  justice  and
abhors  violence,  we  learn  secondly  that  it  is  right  for  us  to
refrain  from  violence,  following  His  example.  Then,  when  He
slays  according  to  His  will.  He  is  no  murderer,  because  He  is  not
under  the  law,  and  not  being  under  the  law  He  does  not  sin.
''But  what  is  law  to  us,"  some  one  says,  "you  said  was  nature  to
Him.  If,  therefore,  by  nature  He  killeth  not,  He  is  on  the  same
footing  as  they  who  kill  not  because  of  the  prohibition  of  the
law.  If  He  does  kill,  though  He  does  not  offend  against  the  law,
He  yet  seems  to  act  inconsistently  with  His  nature.  For  if  what
is  law  to  us  is  nature  to  Him,  you  will  have  to  admit  either  that
He  contradicts  Himself  when  He  kills  or  that  murder  is  not
contrary  to  His  will,  or  if  He  is  not  inconsistent  with  Himself
nor  in  contravention  of  the  law  and  yet  kills,  then  killing  does
not  infringe  upon  the  law."

This  objection  I  easily  overcome  by  saying  that  God  is  not
a  murderer,  because  when  a  judge  has  heard  a  case  and  passed
sentence  he  is  not  a  murderer.  He  only  is  a  murderer  who  kills
a  man  under  the  influence  of  some  wrong  personal  emotion,  aa
anger,  hate  and  greed.  If  a  judge  yields  to  influences  of  this
sort,  he  also  is  a  murderer  however  imposingly  he  sits  upon  his
seat.  On  the  other  hand,  when  such  motives  are  absent,  even  a
private  person  is  absolved  from  the  charge  of  murder,  as  when
one  restrains  force  by  force  or  slays  a  wicked  and  godless  foe  in
open  war.  And  since  God  cannot  be  exposed  to  influences  of
that  kind,  He  cannot  commit  murder.  The  law  and  the  divine
nature  are  again  reconcilable  in  this  way. To  kill  in  accordance


170  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

with  law  is  not  forbidden  to  man.  Therefore  to  kill  is  not  con-
trary to  the  nature  of  God.  For  if  the  law  may  kill,  the  Deity
also  may  kill.  When  a  judge,  the  guardian  of  justice  and  right,
sentences  one  to  death  with  judicial  impartiality,  he  is  free
from  any  stain  of  guilt,  and  can  God,  who  is  the  essence  of
justice  and  whose  are  all  things  in  the  universe,  commit  murder
when  He  slays  a  man?  He  can  do  naught  but  what  is  just  and
holy.  It  is  true,  then,  that  the  law,  when  we  look  at  it  closely,
is  in  essence  God's  character,  will,  and  nature.

Therefore,  whenever  the  law  of  God  is  proclaimed  it  has  a
wonderfully  quickening  effect  upon  whatever  possesses  the
knowledge  of  God.  Hence  it  follows  that  those  creatures  who
have  not  the  knowledge  of  God  derive  no  satisfaction  or  advan-
tage from  the  hearing  of  the  law.  When,  therefore,  God  com-
municates His  will  to  man  by  the  law,  by  this  communication
He  assures  us  of  two  things,  one,  that  we  are  born  to  attain  to  a
knowledge  of  God,  the  other,  that  we  are  destined  to  enjoy  Him.
These  things  are  manifest,  because  if  we  were  not  born  to  attain
to  a  knowledge  of  God,  He  would  not  present  and  manifest
Himself  to  us,  and  when  He  discloses  Himself  to  us,  He  gives
proof  enough  that  we  ought  to  lay  hold  on  Him.  This  part  of
the  matter  is  readily  comprehended  by  anybody.

The  other,  though  thus  far  not  expounded,  is  yet  easily
deduced  from  the  first,  namely : — If  man  had  not  been  created
to  enjoy  God,  it  would  be  superfluous  to  have  a  knowledge  of
Him.  For  the  same  end  would  await  man  and  beast.  Man  would
get  nothing  from  the  knowledge  of  God  more  than  the  mere  fact
of  having  lived,  if  after  this  life  he  did  not  live  and  enjoy  God.
and  that  is  the  lot  even  of  the  brute.  But  since  God  manifests
Himself  unto  us,  and  presents  Himself  for  a  more  intimate
comprehension,  this  is  done  not  vainly,  but  to  the  end  that  we
shall  possess  Him,  and  fully  comprehend  Him  with  whom  we
have  begun  fellowship  here.  And  if  a  good  part  of  mankind
are  bound  over  to  everlasting  imprisonment  and  chains,  and
though  they  deserve  that  for  their  rebelliousness,  yet  they  were
born  by  Divine  Providence  to  the  end  that,  being  made  examples
of,  they  might  proclaim  His  justice.  For  even  the  Evil  Spirit,
damned  because  of  his  pride,  does  he  not  commend  to  us  the
justice  of  God,  as  soon  as  we  consider  him?  Equally  so,  there-
fore, do  the  rest  who  are  damned  by  the  same  judgment.


On  the  Providence  of  God  171

That  man  was  born,  then,  to  know  and  enjoy  God  follows
of  necessity,  from  the  fact  that  God  by  the  law  communicates
His  will  and  character  to  man.  No  other  living  creature  has
such  knowledge  and  understanding  of  Him,  and  yet  they  all
exist  and  live  and  manifest  their  activity  in  Him.  And  since,
as  I  hinted  a  little  while  ago,  that  which  has  no  knowledge  of
God,  revolts  from  His  law  and  will,  and  the  flesh  is  the  property
of  those  that  have  not  the  knowledge  of  God,  it  follows  that  the
spirit  is  receptive  for  holy  things,  but  the  flesh  resists,  as  I  have
said.  For  the  maker  reserved  intact  unto  each  part  its  own
character,  that  man  might  be  a  wonderful  work.  For  if  the  flesh
laid  aside  its  dullness  and  rebelliousness  at  the  coming  of  the
spirit,  or  if  the  spirit  upon  union  with  the  flesh  sank  to  its  level,
man  would  be  either  an  angel  or  a  brute.  In  order  that  man
remain  a  special  kind  of  creature,  each  part  of  him  must  retain
its  special  characteristics.  Hence,  while  we  are  willing  to  em-
brace the  law  according  to  the  desire  of  the  mind,  another  law
which  has  been  written  upon  our  members,  that  is,  the  flesh,
resists,  so  that  through  the  wickedness  of  the  flesh  we  perform
not  what  in  the  integrity  of  the  spirit  we  really  desire.  And
since  the  strength  of  each  is  not  its  own  but  God's  in  it,  who  is
the  being,  existence  and  power  of  all  things,  it  comes  to  pass
that  of  His  will  and  knowledge  the  flesh  growls  at  the  spirit,
just  as  the  spirit  desires  to  obey  His  commands.  Thus  the  law
seems  to  be  given  in  vain,  since  the  ever  rebellious  flesh  rejects
it  and  can  never  be  so  tamed  and  subdued  as  not  to  revolt  again,
and  the  spirit  seems  wrongfully  damned  for  the  wantonness  of
the  flesh,  since  whatever  the  flesh  does,  it  does  of  and  through
God.

After  having  thus  set  forth  many  statements  I  would  make
answer  to  this  objection,  which  is  the  real  gist  of  this  chapter,
or,  rather,  I  would  sum  up  the  answer  already  given  more  at
length,  and  say,  ''So  difficult  a  problem  must  be  approached
with  a  reverent  and  religious  spirit."  Even  Paul,  the  chosen
instrument  of  God,  coming  to  consider  the  problem  closely,
exclaimed  in  view  of  its  vastness,  "Oh  the  depth  of  the  riches
both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of  God!"  [Rom.  11:  33].
How  much  more  is  it  to  be  treated  with  fear  and  trembling  by
the  average  preacher,  such  as  I  do  not  yet  call  myself !  But  hav-
ing learned  that  to  the  believer  nothing  is  impossible  and  that


172  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

the  truth  maketh  the  believer  free,  I  am  set  free  by  the  truth
from  fear  though  not  from  religious  awe,  and  shall  venture
reverently  to  try  to  answer  the  question.

Enough  and  more  has  been  said  to  show  how  each  part  of
man  retains  the  character  of  its  own  class.  The  mind,  therefore,
has  to  be  inspired  from  above  in  order  to  be  maintained  in  its
appropriate  life,  that  is,  in  light  and  the  knowledge  of  God,  just
as  much  as  the  body  has  to  be  supplied  by  the  power  of  the  same
deity  with  its  being,  existence  and  life.  In  order,  therefore,  that
man  should  be  man  and  not  beast,  he  must  be  illumined  by  the
divine  Spirit  just  as  the  pure  dew  drops  from  above  in  pearls.
Hence  it  is  clear  that  the  law  and  the  setting  forth  of  the  divine
will  are  not  superfluous  simply  because  the  flesh  refuses  to
receive  them.  Eather  the  more  the  flesh  resists,  the  more  neces-
sary is  a  reinforcement  of  the  spirit  which  is  brought  in  unknown
to  the  flesh.  For  unless  the  spirit,  thus  fortified  by  this  aid,
held  out  agaijist  or  frustrated  the  attacks  of  the  flesh,  man  would
not  be  man  but  a  brute,  even  though  he  retained  his  human
form.  Take  from  man  the  knowledge  and  care  of  divine  things,
and  his  skill  and  care  in  human  things  will  not  take  him  out
of  the  ranks  of  the  brutes.  For  the  brutes  all  have  a  care  for
themselves  and  their  kind,  and,  as  Cicero  says,  protect  them-
selves, their  bodies  and  lives.*  If,  therefore,  man  sees,  cares  and
hopes  for  nothing  more,  the  care  of  human  things  is  not  a
whit  different  from  that  of  the  brutes.  In  order  to  be  man,  then,
and  not  a  brute,  man  must  have  a  care  for  and  knowledge  of
things  nobler  and  better,  and  only  when  that  is  given  him  from
above  does  he  become  man.  For  that  creature  which  is  to  be
neither  simply  angel  nor  simple  brute  must  have  a  spirit  and  a
body.  But  that  God  supports  and  maintains  the  obstinate  flesh,
though  it  war  constantly  against  the  soul,  happens  for  the  same
reason  the  soul  is  inspired  from  above.  For  man  must  be  a
wonderful  creature  by  just  this  fact  that  he  aspires  to  the  divine
and  makes  use  of  the  body.

*The  passage  of  Cicero  Zwingli  refers  to  is  probably  the  following,
De  Officiis,  Bk.  1,  §4,  "Nature  hath  implanted  in  animals  of  every  kind,  a
disposition  to  preserve  life  and  health  to  avoid  injury,  and  to  pursue  and
procure  the  means  necessary  to  any  prolongation  of  their  being."  But  the
idea  that  animals  tend  to  perseverare  in  esse  suo,  appears  in  all  of  Cicero's
philosophical  writings.


On  the  Providence  of  God  173

Hence  it  is,  to  touch  the  point  in  passing,  that,  save  the  one
Son  of  God,  no  one  is  so  perfectly  learned,  wise  and  just  that  he
does  not  in  something  betray  that  he  is  man.  We  wonder  that
some  men  err,  when  not  to  err  is  the  wonderful  thing.  We
wonder  when  they  show  ignorance  of  anything  who,  with  their
little  bit  of  learning,  we  foolishly  imagined  knew  all  things,
when  not  only  no  one  man  but  not  even  the  whole  company  of
men  and  angels  knows  all  things ;  for  that  belongs  to  God  alone.
We  wonder  that  some  men  fall  from  righteousness,  when  it  is
impossible  to  live  with  this  flesh  without  defilement.  You  might
as  well  expect  a  person  whom  you  had  ordered  to  sit  down  in
dirty  mire  to  come  out  with  garments  bright  and  clean  as  to
demand  spotless  righteousness  of  man.  The  flesh  is  mire ;  hence
whatever  comes  from  man  is  stained.  The  Cumaean  lion  shows
his  ears  somewhere.*

Today  there  is  a  dispute  as  to  whether  the  body  of  Christ  is
eaten  in  the  Eucharist  essentially  or  physically  and  actually.
There  are  menf  who  distinctly  declare  this,  whom  the  Lord
knows  so  well  that  unless  He  gave  them  life  and  strength  for
this  and  other  things,  they  would  not  even  be  alive,  much  less
indulge  in  discussions.  But  by  such  errors  He  shows  us  that
those  are  but  men,  whom  we  are  beginning  to  regard  as  some-
thing more  than  human,  that  we  may  see  that  unchangeable-
nesst  and  infallibility  are  His  alone.

Since  then,  God  shows  Himself  as  a  friend  to  man,  by
revealing  His  will  and  character  to  him  through  the  law,  when
man  in  his  boldness  disobeys  either  from  the  negligence  of  the
spirit  or  the  violence  of  the  body,  he  is  rightly  condemned.  To
live  exempt  from  the  law  has  in  no  wise  been  permitted  to  man.
For  he  who  is  exempt  from  law  knoweth  not  the  will  of  God,  and

*This  is  an  allusion  to  the  well-known  fable  of  the  ass  in  the  lion's
skin.  It  is  given  at  length  by  Erasmus,  in  his  Adagia,  chil.  I,  cent.  Ill,
prov.  66;  cf.  also  the  proverb,  Asinus  apud  Cumanos,  Erasmus,  Adagia,
chil.  I,  cent.  VII,  prov.  12.  Zwingli  alludes  to  this  fable  elsewhere,  see  his
Wei-ke,  ed.  Egli  and  Finsler,  Vol.  II,  1908,  p.  156.  One  form  of  this  fable
is  found  in  the  Fables  of  Avianus,  written  in  the  4th  century  A.  D.,  see  the
edition  by  Robinson  Ellis,  Oxford,  1887,  No.  5,  p.  7;  the  town  Cuma  is
added  in  Lucian's  Piscatores,  see  the  Works  of  Lucian,  ed.  London,  1781,
Vol.  II,  p.  30.

tThe  Lutherans.

JThe  text  reads  avalv'rov^  a  misprint  for  avaTiurov.


174  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

that  which  knoweth  not  the  will  of  God  was  not  created  for  His
friendship  and  companionship.  Man,  therefore,  would  be
counted  among  the  host  of  the  beasts,  if  he  were  not  through
the  law  and  the  knowledge  of  God  placed  in  the  company  of
the  angels  and  the  blessed.

Herewith  I  think  it  has  been  shown  that  the  law  also  is
the  gift  of  Divine  Providence,  though  that  Providence  cares
for  all  things  and  orders  even  those  upon  whom  no  law  is
imposed.  For  It  determined  by  means  of  the  law  to  indicate
Its  will  to  man,  and  to  guide  and  educate  him  by  means  of  it
as  by  means  of  a  teacher,  in  such  a  way  that  the  law  is  the
knowledge  of  God  itself,  by  which  He  is  known  to  be  the  Lord
and  Moderator  of  all  things.  Nor  are  governing  by  providence
and  educating  by  the  law  two  processes.  Providence  gives  the
law  in  order  rightly  to  regulate  that  most  remarkable  of  crea-
tures, the  race  of  man.  This  will  be  made  clearer  in  what
follows.

FIFTH  CHAPTER

Divine  Wisdom  was  not  making  a  mistake,  either  in  creat-
ing man  or  in  teaching  him  by  the  law  when  it  knew  he  would
fall.

Now  one  might  grant  the  admission  that  the  law  was  not
superfluous  after  man  had  been  thus  created  out  of  mind  and
body,  but  he  might  hold  that  the  very  wisdom  of  God  had  made
an  error  in  creating  such  a  being.  For  if  He  knew  that  man
was  going  to  fall.  His  divine  goodness  comes  under  suspicion.
Why  did  He  not  guard  against  the  fall?  If  He  did  not  know
it,  man  must  suffer  because  of  his  ignorance,  like  a  person  who
is  lame  because  his  broken  leg  was  not  properly  set  through
carelessness  or  ignorance  on  the  part  of  the  surgeon.  This  point
must  not  be  passed  over,  although  it  seems  to  belong  rather
to  the  subjects  of  wisdom  and  goodness  than  that  of  Providence.
For,  having  in  the  beginning  shown  that  Providence  is  neces-
sarily implied  in  truth,  wisdom,  goodness  and  omnipotence,  it
will  not  be  irrelevant  to  settle  a  question  in  which  the  goodness
and  wisdom,  which  go  to  make  up  Providence,  are  involved.
For  if  they  fall.  Providence  collapses.

As  to  goodness,  therefore,  I  will  say  that  the  divine  good-


On  the  Providence  of  God  175

ness  did  not  cease  to  act  when  it  did  not  guard  against  the  fall
of  man,  but  manifested  itself  in  a  two-fold  manner,  in  creating
man  and  restoring  him  when  created.  In  creating,  because,
since  God's  natural  and  inmost  cause  for  creating  is  goodness
(since,  influenced  by  this,  He  made  the  universe  and  was  favor-
able towards  it  that  it  might  enjoy  Him),  goodness  must  have
had  its  share  in  the  creation  of  man  as  well  as  of  other  things.
This,  with  the  aid  of  that  goodness,  I  will  show  a  little  more
clearly.

The  whole  vast  creation  is  divided  into  two  classes  of
creatures,  those  endowed  with  intellect,  and  those  without  in-
tellect. Those  endowed  with  intellect  again  comprise  two
classes,  those  destined  to  live  without  a  body  and  those  destined
to  live  with  a  body.  The  first  class  consists  of  the  angels,  the
second  of  men.  Both  of  these,  angels  as  well  as  men,  were
endowed  with  intellect,  that  they  might  know  first  the  supreme
good  and  secondly  the  things  created  by  it.  But  since  the  good-
ness of  God,  of  which  mention  has  been  made  above,  contains
in  itself  justice  and  righteousness  as  well  as  kindness  and  mercy,
it  was  necessary  that  when  the  intellects  of  both  angels  and  men
were  to  be  created  they  should  be  so  made  as  to  recognize  God's
righteousness  just  as  much  as  His  kindness.  But  how  can
righteousness  be  recognized  if  there  be  not  also  unrighteousness  ?
So  kindness  and  gentleness  cannot  be  known  unless  there  be
violence  and  fierceness.  For  what  good  is  cannot  be  known
unless  there  be  evil,  by  comparing  and  judging  which  one  gets
the  notion  of  the  good.  No  one  would  ever  have  sought  the
sweet  so  eagerly,  unless  astonished  by  the  taste  of  the  bitter,
he  had  learned  that  the  one  was  preferable  to  the  other.  This
the  philosophers  knew  when  they  taught  that  virtue  would  have
amounted  to  nothing  if  vice  and  wickedness  had  not  shown  how
pleasant  and  profitable  virtue  was,  and  the  philosopher
Demetrius,  according  to  the  testimony  of  Seneca,  wisely  called
a  life  without  care  and  free  from  the  inroads  of  fortune  a  "dead
sea."*  And  since  the  Deity  could  not  posssibly  show  us
unrighteousness  in  His  own  person,  inasmuch  as  He  is  by

*Seneca,  in  his  "Epistolae  Morales,"  Letter  67,  §14,  writes:  *1n  this
connection  I  think  of  our  friend  Demetrius,  who  calls  an  easy  existence,
untroubled  by  the  attacks  of  Fortune,  a  'Dead  Sea.' "  See  the  edition  of
Otto  Hense,  Leipzig, 1898,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  215.


176  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

nature  perfectly  true,  holy  and  good,  He  produced  an  example
of  unrighteousness  by  means  of  a  created  being,  not  as  if  the
created  being  produced  it  of  itself,  since  it  has  neither  being,
life,  nor  activity  without  the  Deity,  but  the  Deity  is  Himself  the
author  of  that  which  to  us  is  unrighteousness,  though  not  in  the
least  so  to  Him.

Since,  therefore,  both  angel  and  man  were  to  know
righteousness,  and  this  without  its  opposite,  unrighteousness,
would  be  obscure  and  unintelligible,  He  prescribed  unto  both
what  is  right  and  holy  and  forbad,  on  the  other  hand,  what  was
wicked  and  wrong.  There  was  no  unrighteousness  yet,  because
no  one  had  yet  transgressed  the  law.  Both,  therefore,  trans-
gressed, because  both  had  to  know  what  righteousness  and  in-
tegrity were,  and  as  soon  as  they  transgressed  they  saw  the  face-
of  righteousness.  One  [the  angel]  was  driven  from  the  abode
of  the  blessed  and  given  over  to  everlasting  fire;  the  other
[man]  was  deprived  of  his  happy  home,  but  yet  was  saved
through  mercy,  just  as  one  who  might  be  killed  by  the  law  of
war  is  yet  saved  and  made  a  slave.  God  wrought  both  of  these
things,  but  by  means  of  an  instigator  as  instrument,  in  the  case
of  the  angel,  his  ambitious  spirit,  in  the  case  of  man,  the  flesh
and  the  devil.  Yet  He  is  not  Himself  unrighteous,  nor  is  what
He  did  unrighteousness  as  far  as  He  is  concerned,  for  He  is  not
under  the  law.  When  He  commanded  the  angel,  "Thou  shalt
obey  me.  Thou  shalt  worship  me,"  and  commanded  man,
"Thou  shalt  abstain  from  this  fruit  and  worship  me,"  it  is  easy
to  see  that  the  Deity  is  not  bound  by  these  laws.  When,  there-
fore. He  makes  the  angel  and  man  transgressors.  He  still  does
not  stand  forth  as  a  transgressor  Himself,  since  the  law  is  not
applicable  to  Him.  Therefore  what  God  did  is  not  sin,  but  to
man  and  the  angel  it  is,  for  the  law  pursues  and  accuses  them.
God  may  deal  freely  with  His  creatures,  as  a  householder  may
with  his  property  or  a  potter  with  his  clay.  Though,  therefore.
He  instigate  the  creature  to  this,  or  drive  him  to  that,  so  far  is
it  from  His  sinning  that  He  does  not  do  these  things  without
some  distinct  good,  though  meantime  man,  to  whom  the  law
has  been  given,  sins,  even  when  he  is  instigated  thereto,  for  he
acts  in  contravention  of  the  law.

This  will  become  clearer  through  two  illustrations.  The
head  of  the  family  has  given  certain  domestic  laws  to  keep  his


On  the  Providence  of  God  177

children  from  dainties  and  laziness.  He  who  touches  a  jar  of
honey,  shall  be  whipped.  He  who  does  not  put  on  his  shoes  as
he  should  or  who,  having  put  them  on,  takes  them  off  without
suitable  occasion  or  loses  them,  shall  go  barefoot.  And  the  like.
Now  if  the  good  wife  or  the  grown  up  children  not  only  touch
the  honey  but  use  it,  they  are  not  straightway  whipped.  For
they  are  not  bound  by  the  law.  But  the  children  are  whipped  if
they  touch.  For  the  law  has  been  given  to  them.  If  a  steer
covers  and  impregnates  a  whole  herd  it  is  accounted  a  merit  in
him.  If  the  owner  of  the  steer  knows  a  single  woman  besides
his  wife,  he  is  accused  of  adultery.  The  reason  is  that  upon
him  has  been  imposed  the  law,  "Thou  shall  not  commit
adultery."  No  law  restrains  the  other.  So  Paul  expressed  the
fundamental  thought  of  this  argument  briefly  and  truly,  as  he
does  all  things,  when  he  says,  "Where  there  is  no  law,  there  is
no  transgression"  [Rom.  4 :  15] .  Upon  God,  as  upon  the  head
of  the  family,  no  law  has  been  imposed.  Therefore  He  sinneth
not  when  He  does  in  man  that  which  is  sin  to  man  but  not  to
Himself.

When,  therefore,  to  return  to  the  question,  angel  and  man
were  to  be  created  to  contemplate  His  truth  and  righteousness,  it
was  necessary  foi:„them  that  there  should  be  falsehood  and
unrighteousness.  For  the  good,  therefore,  of  angels  and  men
both  were  so  fashioned  that  they  could  fall.  For  by  the  fall  of
the  angel  faithlessness  and  falsehood  made  their  appearance,  by
the  fall  of  man,  unrighteousness  and  sin.  And  these  show  their
faces  to  both  classes  as  a  sort  of  guide  to  truth  and  faithfulness,
integrity  and  righteousness.  Thus  by  creating  man  so  that  he
could  fall,  God  manifested  His  goodness.  For  by  the  fall  the
splendor  of  the  divine  righteousness  was  made  apparent.  Thus
it  appears  again  incidentally  that  the  wretched  proclaim  the
glory  of  God,  for,  being  illustrations  of  His  righteousness,  what
more  could  they  render  unto  Him?

We  have  as  witnesses  to  this  truth  not  only  men  and
angels  of  whom  I  have  already  spoken,  but  all  other  living  crea-
tures also.  For  they  are  all  either  gentle  and  kind  or  savage
and  cruel.  The  tiger  and  the  crocodile  proclaim  the  majesty  of
God  just  as  much  as  do  the  ox  and  the  sheep.  For  as  the  one
pair  exhibits  His  goodness  so  the  other  shows  His  righteousness,
not  as  if  their  dispositions  aimed  at  anything  in  harmony  with


178  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

righteousness  or  like  unto  it,  but  because  all  they  do  smacks  of
violence  and  injury.  They  cruelly  tear  to  pieces,  and  live  not
by  honest  toil,  but  by  plunder,  nor  do  they  commit  their  de-
predations in  fair  and  open  battle,  but  circumvent  their  victims
with  stealth  and  treachery  as  it  were.  And  do  not  the  most
wicked  of  men  abominate  their  ways?  Why?  On  account  of
their  cruelty,  violence,  and  unrighteousness,  to  be  sure.  The
most  unrighteous,  therefore,  bear  witness  to  righteousness,  in
thus  condemning  in  the  wild  beast  that  was  created  to  live  by
plunder  the  bloodshed,  robbery,  depredations,  plundering,
burning,  pillaging,  plots  and  treachery  which  they  allow  to
themselves.  For  thus  even  the  most  worthless  of  men  are  warned
to  correct  in  themselves  that  which  they  abhor  in  the  brutes.

When,  therefore,  these  brutes  by  their  natures  bring  un-
righteousness before  our  eyes,  in  picturing  unrighteousness,
without  which  the  face  of  righteousness  cannot  be  recognized,
they  manifest  the  righteousness  of  God  just  as  much  as  the
domestic  cattle  that  proclaim  His  goodness.  Thus  all  creatures,
reduced  to  two  classes — those  which  profit  and  those  which
injure  man — equally  extol  the  righteousness  and  kindness  of
God.  It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  the  goodness  of  God  shone
forth  and  did  not  lie  dormant  when  He  so  created  man  that  he
could  fall.  For  in  this  way  he  came  to  the  knowledge  of  the
divine  righteousness.

In  the  second  place,  His  goodness  displayed  itself  in  the
restoration  of  man.  For  when  He  might  have  restored  the
fallen  in  any  way  He  pleased,  He  preferred  to  adopt  none  other
than  that  by  which  He  who  had  been  man's  Creator  became  his
Redeemer,  that  there  might  be  no  less  goodness  and  righteous-
ness in  the  redemption  than  in  the  creation.  This  goodness
appears  in  the  creation,  in  that  man,  created  to  enjoy  God,  falls
into  unrighteousness  in  order  to  recognize  righteousness.  This
goodness  also  appears  in  the  redemption,  in  that  He  who  had
freely  created  man  out  of  kindness  frees  him,  and  frees  him  in
order  that,  when  freed,  he  may  enjoy  God.  When  the  Righteous
redeems  the  unrighteous,  so  that  redeemed  he  recognizes  that
God  only  and  alone  is  righteous,  and  sees  how  great  a  thing
sin  and  unrighteousness  are,  so  great,  namely,  as  to  have  needed
an  atonement, — and  when  our  unrighteousness  has  been
expiated  by  the  Son  of  God,  it  is  plain  that  nothing  is  so  re-


On  the  Providence  of  God  179

pugnant  to  God  as  sin,  and  on  the  other  hand  nothing  is  so
pleasing  to  Him  as  devotion  to  righteousness  and  integrity.
This  much  to  show  that  the  divine  goodness  was  not  jeopardized
when  He  created  man,  knowing  that  he  was  going  to  fall.

Now  we  must  show  that  His  wisdom  did  not  make  a  mis-
take either,  as  if  man  had  come  out  otherwise  than  it  had  deter-
mined. I  say,  then,  that  what  has  been  said  before  applies  to
this  part  of  the  subject  also.  For  it  is  the  part  of  wisdom  to  find
a  way  by  which  to  bring  a  thing  out  into  clear  light.  Hence  it
belongs  to  wisdom  to  prepare  a  way  for  man  to  the  knowledge  of
righteousness.  Then  also  that  wisdom  was  not  deceived  is  clear
from  the  fact  that  man's  redemption  was  not  determined  upon
as  an  afterthought  to  his  creation.  For  whatever  the  Deity  has
must  be  everlasting.  But  He  has  wisdom.  Hence  it  is  ever-
lasting. Hence,  the  redemption  was  determined  upon  from
eternity  just  as  much  as  the  creation.  But  the  redemption  could
not  have  been  determined  upon,  unless  wisdom  had  seen  that
man  was  going  to  fall.  For  who  appoints  a  remedy  for  a
disease  he  knows  not  of?  Divine  wisdom,  therefore,  could  not
fail  to  know  that  man  was  going  to  fall,  for  it  provided  a  remedy
therefor.  And  since  the  Deity  cannot  do  anything  new  as  an
afterthought,  it  is  evident  that  the  redemption  was  determined
upon  from  eternity  and  that  wisdom  had  an  insight  into  the
disease  which  needed  the  remedy  of  the  redemption.  Man  is,
therefore,  not,  if  we  consider  anything  carefully,  a  work  of
ignorance  but  of  the  wisdom  which  knoweth  all  things  and
knoweth  the  course  of  all  things  from  the  beginning  to  the  end.

Therefore,  we  ought  not  to  put  to  this  wisdom  the  ques-
tion why  it  made  man  so,  or  any  other  thing  whatever,  but  we
ought  to  reflect  that  since  man  has  been  made  so,  he  must  have
been  so  made  with  perfect  wisdom,  just  as  we  do  not  ask  of  the
stars  why  they  were  so  made  or  why  they  keep  their  particular
course,  but  when  by  long  obsen^ation  we  have  discovered  their
limits  and  power  we  bear  witness  that  they  were  wisely  made.
So  to  take  God  to  task  on  account  of  the  creation  of  man  is
arrogant,  impudent  and  rebellious,  but  to  be  moved  by  the  study
of  man  to  wondering  appreciation  of  the  divine  wisdom  is  pious
and  holy.  For  who  could  imagine  the  reasons  of  man's  creation
and  redemption,  to  say  nothing  of  understanding  them  before
these  took  place? When  we  see  him  created  and  redeemed,  we


180  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

contemplate  the  fact  with  reverence  and  cannot  praise  enough
the  wisdom,  goodness,  power,  and  providence  of  the  Creator  in
all  things.  The  Deity  is  to  be  reverenced  by  us,  not  taken  to
task  nor  asked  the  reason  of  His  acts.  His  work  is  to  be  studied
and  His  wisdom  and  power  in  it  to  be  admired  wuth  gratitude,
not  found  fault  with,  improved,  or  set  aside.  For  nothing  can
come  from  that  Good  Being  which  is  not  absolutely  and  per-
fectly adapted  to  the  use  for  which  it  was  made.  He  sees  all
things  even  before  they  take  place.  He  orders  all  things  as
they  ought  to  be  done  and  accomplished.  He  considers  and
decides  nothing  that  is  not  sure  and  enduring.  This  will  become
clearer,  when  I  treat  of  election  from  the  words  of  the  Apostle
which  will  bring  testimony  in  support  of  all  that  has  been  said.

SIXTH  CHAPTER

On  Election,  which  the  Theologians  call  Predestination;
that  it  is  sure' and  unchangeable,  and  that  its  source  is  goodness
and  wisdom.

That  I  treat  this  part  of  the  subject  at  length  is  not  acci-
dental. I  do  it  to  make  clear  that  not  only  justice,  as  the  theo-
logians have  generally  held,  is  the  source  of  predestination,  but
also  goodness,  and  that  recognizing  Providence  thus  is  not  to
shield  the  wicked,  as  Chrysostom  complains,  but  to  damn  them.
Thus,  to  make  a  brief  recapitulation  of  the  preceding  serve  as
an  introduction  to  what  is  to  follow,  God  is  all-knowing,  all-
powerful,  and  good.  Hence  nothing  escapes  His  notice,  nothing
evades  His  orders  and  His  sway,  nothing  which  He  does  is
anything  but  good.  When  He  was  upon  the  point  of  creating
man,  an  animal  with  intellect,  that  he  might  know  and  enjoy
Him,  He  saw  how  he  must  be  taught  the  knowledge  of  His
righteousness.  He  saw  how  he  was  going  to  fall.  He  saw  ho%v
that  fall  was  going  to  open  his  eyes,  so  that  at  one  glance  as  it
were  he  would  recognize  both  the  righteousness  of  God  and  his
own  unrighteousness.  For  as  soon  as  he  had  run  counter  to  the
command  of  the  law,  he  feared  the  voice  of  God  calling  to  him
as  that  of  the  righteous  person  whom  he  had  offended.  And
when  God  foresaw  this  and  did  not  guard  against  it,  this  was
from  goodness,  not  from  malignity  or  ignorance.  For  not  to
have  learned  the  righteousness  in  Him  would  be  to  remain  in


On  the  Providence  of  God  181

ignorance  of  His  highest  endowment  and  the  most  excellent
part  of  His  character.  And  since  what  this  righteousness  is
could  not  be  shown  except  for  its  opposite,  unrighteousness,  man
fell  for  his  own  good,  namely  in  order  to  come  to  the  knowledge
of  righteousness.  For  man  had  to  be  such  that,  consisting  of
soul  and  body,  he  might  contemplate  the  divine  and  heavenly
with  his  soul,  and  live  with  the  brutes  with  his  body.  And  that
the  spirit  might  not  go  over  to  the  brutes  and  sink  to  their  level,
if  the  rebellious  flesh  should  rush  into  continual  resistance
unrestrained  by  fear  of  the  law,  the  law  was  given  as  a  guard
which  the  spirit  ever  listens  to  and  follows,  but  which  the  flesh
ever  resists  and  seeks  to  evade.

All  these  things  were  so  ordered  for  man's  good.  For  he
among  all  creatures  had  to  be  of  the  nature  of  a  heavenly
creature  such  as  there  is  none  beside  him.  From  this  we  clearly
gather  that  goodness  is  the  source  of  these  things,  as  a  sort  of
genus  comprehending  justice  and  kindness  or  mercy,  not  justice
alone,  so  far  as  it  is  a  species  of  goodness.  But  if  we  make
justice  a  sort  of  genus,  like  goodness,  so  that  justice  shall  contain
in  itself  mercy  and  kindness,  as  the  holy  Scriptures  often  use
it,  as  in  "In  thy  justice  deliver  me"  [Ps.  31 :  1],  then  I  have  no
objection  to  the  doctrine  that  justice  is  the  origin  of  election
and  predestination.  For  justice  and  goodness  will  then  be  the
same.  And  if  this  seems  to  anybody  rather  overdone  or  too
subtle,  he  ought  to  reflect  that  I  am  only  trying  to  show  that  all
of  God's  doings  in  regard  to  man  savor  of  goodness  no  less
than  of  justice.  For  since  man  was  made  the  kind  of  creature
he  is,  he  must  have  been  well  and  wisely  made  by  Him  who  can
do  nothing  but  what  is  good,  so  that  the  things  that  we  consider
to  be  evils  are  really  done  for  our  good.  Of  this  I  shall  speak
later  by  examples.

In  the  second  place,  I  treat  this  matter  at  such  length  in
order  that  no  one  may  be  influenced  by  the  complaint  of
Chrysostom.  As  if  I  were  wrong  to  put  punishment  upon  the
wicked,  while  attributing  all  things  to  Divine  Providence,  and
the  rest  of  the  numerous  complaints  he  makes  so  rhetorically.
For  inasmuch  as  the  law  has  been  given  to  man,  he  always  sins
when  he  runs  counter  to  the  law,  however  true  it  is  that  man
neither  exists  nor  lives  nor  displays  activity  except  in  God,  of
God,  and  through  God. But  what  God  brings  about  through


182  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

man's  agency  is  imputed  a  crime  to  man,  but  not  also  to  God.
For  the  one  is  under  the  law,  the  other  is  the  free  spirit  and  mind
of  the  law.  And  when  we  say  that  Divine  Providence  did  this
or  that  wrong  which  one  man  or  another  has  perpetrated,  we
speak  improperly.  For  in  so  far  as  God  does  it,  it  is  not  sin,
because  it  is  not  against  the  law.  The  law  has  certainly  not  been
imposed  upon  Him  as  the  Righteous  One.  For  ''the  law  is  not
made  for  a  righteous  man,"  according  to  the  view  of  Paul
[I.  Tim.  1:9].  One  and  the  same  deed,  therefore,  adultery,
namely,  or  murder,  as  far  as  it  concerns  God  as  author,  mover
and  instigator,  is  an  act,  not  a  crime,  as  far  as  it  concerns  man,
is  a  crime  and  wickedness.  For  the  one  is  not  bound  by  the
law,  the  other  is  even  damned  by  the  law.

What  God  does.  He  does  freely,  uninfluenced  by  any  evil
emotion,  therefore,  also,  without  sin.  David's  adultery,  so  far
as  concerns  God  as  the  author  of  it,  is  no  more  a  sin  to  God,  than
when  a  steer  covers  and  impregnates  a  whole  herd.  And  even
when  He  slays  a  man  whom  He  kills  by  the  hand  of  a  robber
or  of  an  unjust  judge,  He  sins  no  more  than  when  He  kills  a
wolf  by  means  of  a  wolf  or  an  elephant  by  means  of  a  dragon.
For  all  things  are  His,  and  He  has  no  wrong  feeling  towards
anything.  Therefore  He  is  not  under  the  law,  because  he  who
cannot  be  influenced  by  any  evil  emotions  has  no  need  of  law.
But  man  sins.  For  he  has  need  of  a  law,  because  he  yields  to
emotions  and  when  he  transgresses  the  law,  he  becomes  liable
to  punishment.  Hence,  the  same  deed  which  is  done  at  the
instigation  and  direction  of  God,  brings  honor  to  Him,  while  it
is  a  crime  and  sin  to  man.  Therefore  it  is  right  that  the  guilty
be  punished  whether  here  by  the  judge  or  on  the  other  side  by
the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.  For  they  have  sinned
against  the  law,  not  as  principals,  but  as  accessory  instruments,
which  God  can  use  as  He  will  more  freely  than  the  father  of  a
family  may  drink  water  or  pour  it  out  upon  the  ground.  And
although  He  impels  men  to  some  deed  which  is  a  wickedness
unto  the  instrument  that  performs  it,  yet  it  is  not  such
unto  Himself.  For  His  movements  are  free.  Nor  does  He  do
wrong  to  the  instrument,  since  all  things  are  His  more  than  any
artisan's  tools  are  his  own,  and  to  these  he  does  no  wrong  if  he
turns  a  file  into  a  hammer  or  a  hammer  into  a  file.  He  instigates
the  robber,  therefore,  to  kill  even  the  innocent  and  those  un-


On  the  Providence  of  God  183

prepared  for  death. For  the  hairs  of  our  heads  are  numbered
in  His  sight  [Matth.  10 :  30] . How  much  more  our  souls !

No  one  shall  say  here,  "Why  does  He  slay  the  righteous
and  innocent  man  at  the  hands  of  the  robber?"  He  does  not
slay  him,  but  gives  him  life.  For  He  transports  him  hence  to
the  abode  of  the  blessed.  It  has  been  appointed  that  man  shall
die  once.  He,  therefore,  summoned  this  man  at  the  time  when
it  seemed  suitable  to  Him.  Nor  should  any  one  say,  "The
robber,  therefore,  is  innocent,  for  he  killed  at  the  instigation  of
God."  He  sinned  against  the  law.  "But,"  you  will  say,  "he
was  forced  to  sin."  I  grant  that  he  was  forced  to  sin,  but  for
this  purpose,  that  the  one  should  be  translated,  the  other  nailed
to  the  cross.  Here  the  champions  of  free  will,  the  logical
opponents  of  Providence  are  under  a  delusion.  They  stop  when
they  have  said,  "If  the  robber  killed  at  the  instigation  of  God,
he  is  wrongfully  punished,"  when  they  ought  always  to  go  on,
as  Providence  Itself  never  rests,  and  to  say,  "The  robber  smote
at  the  instigation  of  God  to  this  end  that  the  smitten  might  pass
hence  to  heaven,  or,  if  he  too  is  wicked,  to  hell,  and  that  the
robber  might  be  sentenced  to  the  cross  by  the  judge."  For  the
same  Providence  does  all  this.  It  not  only  influences  and  impels
men  until  murder  takes  place,  but  goes  further,  and  forces  the
judge  by  the  law,  goads  him  with  the  sting  of  conscience,  drives
him  by  the  example  of  cruelty  to  bind  the  robber  and  raise  him
upon  the  cross.  The  answer,  therefore,  is  ready,  when  the
opponents  of  Infinite  Providence  say,  "If  there  is  no  freedom  of
decision  in  man,  we  are  forced  to  admit  that  thefts,  murders,
and  all  kinds  of  crimes  are  committed  by  Divine  Providence.
For,  I  say,  I  recognize  Providence  as  caring  for  and  doing  all
things."  But  do  not  stop,  when  you  have  said,  "Providence
influenced  the  robber."  Go  on,  and  say,  "He  influenced  the
robber,  but  He  also  influenced  and  roused  the  judge  against  the
robber,  that  an  example  may  be  made,  and  the  wicked  mind
that  had  been  hidden  may  be  revealed  to  the  world."  In  short,
God  instigated  the  killing,  but  He  instigates  the  judge  just  as
much  to  sacrifice  the  slayer  to  justice.  And  He  who  instigates,
does  it  without  any  suspicion  of  crime.  For  He  is  not  under
the  law.  But  he  who  is  instigated  is  so  far  from  being  free  from
guilt,  on  the  contrary  he  does  practically  nothing  without  being
bespattered  with  stains,  because  he  is  under  the  law.


184  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

After  this  preamble  I  proceed  to  the  subject  of  election.
This  I  will  first  define,  then  expound  the  definition,  finally
present  confirmatory  evidence  from  Paul  and  others.  Election,
then,  is  the  free  disposition  of  the  divine  will  in  regard  to  those
that  are  to  be  blessed.  This  definition  contains  the  generic  term
disposition,  which  I  take  in  the  sense  of  decree,  determination,
or  even  appointment,  though  otherwise  it  means  also  decision
or  resolution,  which  I  do  not  wish  to  use  as  the  generic  term,
because  they  are  generally  subject  to  necessity.  For  a  decision
is  adopted  in  regard  to  some  action  when  some  necessity  shows
itself  which  bids  us  adopt  the  decision  that  the  situation  de-
mands, not  the  one  we  are  most  inclined  to.  "Disposition,"
therefore,  is  more  appropriate  to  the  divine  authority  and
majesty,  which  have  no  need  of  long  deliberation.  And  as
legislators  and  princes  can  freely  dispose  of  things  in  accordance
with  what  is  fair  and  just,  so  the  Divine  Majesty  is  free  to
determine  what  is  in  accordance  with  Its  own  nature,  which  is
the  essence  of  goodness.  Therefore  to  "disposition"  I  have
added  "free,"  that  we  may  understand  that  this  disposition  is
free,  not  dependent  upon  nor  following  our  arranging  and
disposing.

And  this  I  want  understood  thus: — The  view  of  Thomas
Aquinas*  upon  predestination,  if  only  I  remember  his  doctrine
correctly,  was  this: — God,  seeing  all  things  before  they  take
place,  predestined  man's  fate  at  the  time  when  by  His  wisdom
He  saw  what  he  was  going  to  be  like.  This  opinion  pleased  me
once,  when  I  cultivated  scholasticism,  but  when  I  abandoned
that  and  adhered  to  the  purity  of  the  divine  oracles,  it  displeased
me  very  greatly.  For  St.  Thomas  believes  that  God's  disposition
in  regard  to  us  follows  our  own  disposition.  After  He  saw  by
His  wisdom  what  we  were  going  to  be  like,  that  is,  how  we  were
going  to  act  and  decide,  then  and  then  only,  did  He  pronounce
his  decision  regarding  us.  What  else  is  this  than  making  God's
decision  and  disposition  like  unto  the  judgment  and  decision  of
a  human  judge?  He  does  not  pronounce  judgment  until  he  has
heard  the  case,  because  he  cannot  see  before  that  what  the  right
and  wrong  of  the  matter  in  question  is. Therefore,  he  must  de-

•See  Thomas  Aquinas,  Summa  Theologiae,  Pars  I,  Quaest.  XXIII,
art.  5,  1 :  Ergo  videtur  quod  praesentia  meritorum  sit  causa  pracdestina-
tionis.


On  the  Providence  of  God  185

pend  upon  the  exposition  of  the  case.  Such  a  judge  they  make
out  God  to  be  for  us,  who  in  this  fashion  make  predestination
to  follow  judicial  examination.  Moreover,  they  inadvertently
bring  God's  goodness  and  omnipotence  into  danger.  For  if
God  before  the  creation  of  the  world  saw  what  Adam,  Cain,  or
Judas  was  going  to  be  like,  and  did  not  take  measures  to  prevent
them  from  falling  into  crime.  He  would  seem  to  have  forgotten
His  goodness.  If,  on  the  other  hand.  He  could  not  prevent  the
fall  which  he  foresaw,  though  He  would  gladly  have  done  so,
His  power  does  not  keep  pace  with  His  will,  and  accordingly  His
omnipotence  is  called  in  question.

Besides,  if  predestination  followed  our  decision,  we  should
be  or  become  something  of  ourselves  before  God  determined
about  us,  and  I  have  shown  already  what  a  groundless  conten-
tion that  is.  And  though  I  am  well  aware  that  the  Deity's
attributes,  namely,  wisdom,  knowledge,  prudence  and  the  rest,
are  such  that  whatever  is  one  of  them  is  also  the  other  ( for  that
which  is  deity  is  absolutely  simple  everywhere,  with  all  its  en-
dowments and  powers),  yet  there  is  a  sort  of  natural  order  in
these  things,  that  is,  they  are  naturally  grasped  one  after  another
by  the  human  understanding,  which  is  not  made  to  see  all  things
together  at  one  glance,  as  God  sees  them.  Thus  those  who  follow
Thomas's  opinion  can  easily  say,  that,  though  we  know  wisdom,
or  prescience  in  their  nomenclature,  it  does  not  actually  precede
predestination,  yet  adapting  ourselves  to  the  natural  order  of  our
perception,  we  make  wisdom  the  basis  of  predestination.  In
saying  this,  I  claim,  they  are  disputing  with  words  when  they
maintain  that  naturally,  that  is,  according  to  our  understanding,
wisdom  predestines  after  having  foreseen  our  actions,  though
actually  this  sequence  does  not  exist.  For  both  I,  or  rather
Paul,  himself  and  I  with  Paul,  hold  that  predestination  is  the
free  disposition  of  God  with  regard  to  us,  and  without  any
respect  to  good  or  evil  deeds.  Of  this  somewhat  later  when  we
come  to  the  confirmatory  illustrations.

To  come  now  to  another  part  of  the  definition,  this  disposi-
tion is  the  work  of  will  as  its  principal  cause,  not  of  wisdom,
though  the  Divine  Will  never  acts  blindly  without  wisdom,  as
man's  will  is  always  blinded  by  passions  so  that  it  pursues  and
seeks  what  the  mind  and  understanding  disapprove.  For  among
God's  endowments  there  is  no  discord. The  Deity  is  simple.


186  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Hence  nothing  can  be  done  by  Him  to  which  all  His  attributes
do  not  equally  contribute.  For  they  are  yet  one  simple  and
indivisible  thing,  however  much  distinctions  are  made  between
them  in  our  understanding.  Yet  to  no  one  attribute  or  another
is  attributed  what  belongs  to  all,  just  as  certain  special  character-
istics are  attributed  to  the  individual  persons,  though  they
belong  to  all  three.  Thus  the  creation  of  the  whole  world  as
well  as  of  man  is  attributed  to  wisdom,  though  providence  and
will  had  no  less  a  part  in  it  than  wisdom.  Care  and  provision
for  things  are  attributed  to  providence,  though  wisdom  and  will
are  no  less  concerned  in  them  than  is  providence.

Election  and  predestination  to  the  life  of  the  blessed  are
attributed  to  will,  though  wisdom  and  providence  equally  con-
tribute thereto.  But  meanwhile  a  special  work  is  attributed  to
each,  that  the  attributes  of  the  Deity  may  be  the  clearer  to  us,
and  the  works  proceeding  from  Him  better  known.  For  is  not
His  wisdom  manifested  in  the  creation  of  the  whole  world,  and
does  not  the  creation  of  all  things  rouse  the  greater  wonder  and
admiration  when  we  see  they  were  made  by  infinite  wisdom,
aided,  to  be  sure,  by  goodness,  justice,  righteousness,  power,
foresight,  and  inclination  or  will,  though  wisdom,  as  the  mis-
tress, as  it  were,  claims  the  credit  of  the  work  for  herself?
Although  the  handmaids  are  such  that  they  did  no  less  labor
than  the  mistress  herself,  they  cannot  get  the  glory  of  the  crea-
tion of  the  world  for  this  reason  especially,  because  wisdom  is
the  first  requisite  for  such  work.  So  in  destining  men  to  salva-
tion, the  Divine  Will  is  the  first  power,  but  attended  by  the
handmaidens  wisdom,  goodness,  righteousness,  and  the  other
attributes.  Therefore  it  is  attributed  to  will,  not  to  wisdom,
(otherwise  God's  gift  and  disposition  would  seem  to  depend
upon  our  acts,  as  I  indicated)  not  to  righteousness,  (for  ever-
lasting bliss  would  then  be  again  the  result  of  the  works  of
righteousness) ,  nor  to  divine  bounty.  Thus,  whichever  way  you
turn  among  the  individual  attributes  of  God,  the  work  of  elec-
tion belongs  to  will,  as  chief  mistress  here.

The  last  part  of  the  definition  is,  "with  regard  to  those  who
are  to  be  made  blessed."  Thus  election  is  attributed  to  those
only  who  are  to  be  blessed,  but  those  who  are  to  be  damned  are
not  said  to  be  elected,  though  the  Divine  Will  makes  a  dis-
position with  regard  to  them  also,  but  He  rejects,  expels  and


On  the  Providence  of  God  187

repudiates  them,  that  they  may  become  examples  of  His
righteousness.  Election,  therefore,  is  the  free  but  not  blind  dis-
position of  the  Divine  Will,  as  the  principal  cause,  though  not
alone,  but  accompanied  by  majesty  and  authority,  and  applying
to  the  blessed,  not  the  damned.

Now  I  pass  on  to  the  testimony  of  Scripture,  by  which  not
only  the  definition  of  election  is  confirmed,  but  the  whole  matter
of  Providence  is  set  before  our  eyes.  "Miseror,"  says  the  Lord  to
Moses,  Exod.  33:  19,  "quem  voluero;  et  benignus  sum  ei  cui
voluero."  For  that  is  the  meaning  in  Latin — [in  English:  "I
pity  whom  I  have  willed  and  am  kind  to  whom  I  have  willed"]
— of  those  Hebrew  forms  of  expression  which  we  render  by  "I
will  shew  mercy  on  whom  I  will  shew  mercy,"  and  "will  be
gracious  to  whom  I  will  be  gracious,"  though  the  Hebrew  seems
to  be  more  forcible  than  the  Latin.  For  what  else  is  it  to  say,
''I  will  shew  mercy  on  whom  I  will  shew  mercy,"  than  to  make  a
fixed  proclamation  after  the  fashion  of  rulers,  ''I  bestow  mercy
according  to  my  pleasure;  not  according  to  the  prayers  of
suppliants  nor  the  misery  of  those  that  wail,  but  according  to
the  gift  and  grace  of  election."  For  even  the  impious  sometimes
supplicate  for  help.

This  view  will  be  more  clearly  understood,  when  we  weigh
the  words  of  the  Lord  Himself  when  He  encouraged  Moses — "I
will  harden  Pharaoh's  heart,"  He  says,  ''and  multiply  my  signs
and  my  wonders  in  the  land  of  Egypt.  But  Pharaoh  shall  not
hearken  unto  you,"  Exod.  7 :  3,  4.  And  this  language  He  re-
peats often,  not  threatening  by  hyperbole,  as  some  people  say,
but  admonishing  and  telling  man  beforehand  the  secrets  of  His
ordination  by  which  He  had  decreed  to  make  clear  to  the  world
by  Pharaoh's  rebelliousness  and  wickedness  his  rejection  and
damnation,  which  He  had  ordained  in  His  heart  before  He
created  the  world.  For  the  Lord  says  also,  Exod.  9:  16,*  "And
in  very  deed  for  this  cause  have  I  raised  thee  up  for  to  shew  thee+
my  power ;  and  that  my  name  may  be  declared  throughout  all
the  earth."  By  this  we  are  clearly  given  to  understand  that  the
Lord  shows  both  His  power  and  His  righteousness  to  the  world
by  means  of  such  examples  of  boldness  and  obstinacy. For

•The  text  has  17.

tZwingli  reads  tibi,  "to  thee,"  following  the  Hebrew  and  not  the
Vulgate.


188  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

when  He  hardens  them  so  that  they  resist  Him,  there  is  no
doubt  that  He  does  it  simply  to  set  them  up  before  the  world
as  examples  of  His  righteousness.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  plain,  that  when  He  makes  Moses
leader  of  the  people  and  David  king,  when  He  shows  mercy  on
the  thief  dying  upon  the  cross  and  on  Peter  not  only  abandoning
his  Lord  in  time  of  danger  but  wantonly  denying  Him,  He  puts
forth  examples  of  His  goodness.  Whence  also  St.  Paul  says,
"Whom  he  will  he  pitieth,  and  whom  he  will  he  hardeneth,"
[Rom.  9 :  18] .  What  else  does  he  show  by  these  words  than
that  election  and  rejection  are  the  work  of  God's  free  will?

These  first  proofs  from  Scripture,  then,  confirm  the  second
part  of  my  definition  of  election,  namely  that  the  disposition  of
election  is  the  work  of  will.  Paul  also  speaks  in  the  same  pass-
age in  these  words,  ''When  Rebecca  was  with  child  from  our
father  Isaac,  and  the  twins  had  not  yet  been  born"  (so  far  were
they  from  having  done  either  good  or  evil,  that  the  purpose  of
the  divine  election  might  remain  inviolate,  coming,  as  it  does,
not  from  works  but  from  the  one  who  elects),  "it  was  told  unto
her  that  the  elder  should  serve  the  younger,"  etc.  [Rom.  9 :  10-
12].  By  these  words  of  Paul  in  the  first  place  all  controversy
about  the  merit  of  our  works  is  done  away  with.  In  the  second
place  the  view  of  the  followers  of  Thomas  is  refuted,  according
to  which  they  believed  that  election  was  not  determined  by  God
until  He  had  seen  what  kind  of  people  the  individuals  were
going  to  be.  For  Paul  says  distinctly  that  so  far  is  it  from  being
true  that  election  has  to  do  with  our  disposition  or  determination,
that  Rebecca's  twins  were  elected  before  they  were  born.  Nay,
they  were  elected  according  to  the  inviolable  purpose  of  God
before  they  were  conceived,  in  fact  before  the  world  was  made.
Then  he  says  with  equal  distinctness  that  election  does  not  come
from  works  but  is  due  to  Him  who  elects.  By  this  we  under-
stand first  that  the  disposition  of  God  is  free,  not  depending  upon
any  secondary  consideration  or  cause,  which  is  the  second  part  of
our  definition.  Secondly,  we  see  that  the  merit  of  our  works  is
overthrown.  For  either  free  election  must  fall  or  our  merit
must.  For  if  blessedness  is  bought  by  works,  it  is  no  longer
given  free.  If  it  is  given  free,  it  is  not  the  reward  of  good  works,
as^the  same  Paul  plainly  says  in  Rom.  11 :  6.

Since,  all  the  same,  the  Holy  Scriptures  so  often  promise


On  the  Providence  of  God  189

blessedness  as  the  reward  of  our  works,  it  happens  that  the  un-
trained fall  into  the  evil  of  contention.  Hence  that  strife  about
free  will  and  merit  which  arising  long  ago  still  continues,  one
side  seeing  that  Providence  and  the  free  gratuitous  election  of
God  are  the  essential  thing,  the  other  side  declaring  that  it  is
freedom  of  will  and  the  reward  of  good  works.  This  evil  strife
could  be  concluded  immediately,  if  men  would  once  turn  to  the
contemplation  of  the  Deity  as  the  safest  bulwark  of  religion.  The
supreme  good  is  the  Deity.  All  that  is,  is  from  Him,  and,  being
from  Him,  needs  His  power  in  order  to  be  and  exist.  On  the
other  hand,  the  Deity  needs  no  one's  help,  exists  by  His  own
might,  rejoices  from  native  goodness  that  whatever  is,  shares
His  bounty,  wishes  well  to  all,  cares  for  all,  is  the  light  of  all
knowledge,  nay  is  the  only  source  of  understanding.  Henee
whatever  we  see  live,  understand,  and  act,  lives,  understands,
and  acts  in  Him.

How,  therefore,  can  we  give  the  credit  for  anything  to  our-
selves, who  do  not  even  exist,  much  less  live  or  act  without  Him?
Since,  therefore,  nothing  is  or  exists  by  its  own  power,  nor  lives,
nor  acts,  nor  understands,  nor  deliberates,  but  the  present  power
of  the  Deity  does  all  these  things,  how  could  human  will  be  free  ?
To  be  and  to  live  undoubtedly  precede  the  power  and  act  of
understanding.  Since,  then,  even  the  poets  of  the  heathen
recognize  that  they  depend  upon  the  Deity  alone,  why,  alas,  do
not  the  cultivators  of  true  piety  rise  to  the  height  of  seeing
that  all  the  activity  of  all  their  faculties  and  powers  is  from  the
same  source  whence  the  whole  universe  flows?

And  there  is  no  reason  why  the  fact  that  Holy  Scripture
still  holds  out  rewards  for  our  works,  should  be  a  stumbling
block,  since  we  have  already  heard  that  through  the  bounty  of
the  Deity  it  happens,  as  with  human  things,  that  what  truly
belongs  to  the  originator  and  master-builder  is  credited  to  the
instrument.  Thus  remission  of  sins,  as  I  have  said,  is  attributed
to  the  apostles  who  only  proclaim  it,  when  God  alone  can  pardon
sins  and  by  His  Spirit  give  us  the  sure  consciousness  of  pardon
granted.  So  to  external  things,  namely,  sacraments  and
symbols,  is  attributed  what  nothing  but  the  Divine  Power  can
give,  to  baptism  which  is  the  first  pledge  and  bond  of  member-
ship in  the  Christian  army,  is  attributed  the  washing  away  of
sins,  when  atonement  is  made  only  by  the  blood  of  Christ,  and


190  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

grace  given  only  by  His  bounty;  to  the  eueharist  is  attributed
the  atonement  itself  when  that  was  made  only  at  the  time  when
the  God-man  Christ  was  sacrificed  for  human  nature,  while  in
the  eueharist  there  is  nothing  but  the  calling  to  mind  of  this
atonement  and  thanksgiving  for  it.  Although  the  gift  and
bounty  of  the  divine  goodness  are  extolled  therein,  they  are  not
brought  to  us  by  the  power  of  the  symbols,  except  in  so  far  as
the  symbols  and  the  words  of  the  preacher  proclaim  them.  For
it  is  alone  the  Spirit  that  draws  the  mind  to  that  fountain  by
which  the  soul,  that  has  pined  away  through  despair  over  its
sins,  is  refreshed  and  renewed  in  youth.  For  if  the  celebration
could  do  anything  of  this  kind,  Judas  would  have  returned  to
his  senses,  and  not  have  gone  off  to  betray  his  leader,  scorning
the  fellowship  of  his  companions.  Nay,  those  very  blood-
thirsty villains  who  brought  Christ  to  the  cross  or  vilified  Him
as  He  hung  upon  it,  would  have  changed  their  purpose  and  kept
their  wicked  hands  off  from  Him,  if  external  things  brought
faith  or  remission  of  sins.  For  they  saw  not  only  represented  by
symbols  but  accomplished  before  their  own  eyes  that  by  which
the  sins  of  the  whole  world  were  atoned.  But  nothing  of  the
sort  happened.  Only  those  repented  whom  the  Spirit  illumined
within  so  that  they  recognized  that  this  was  the  Saviour,  and
whom  the  Father  drew  to  come  to  Him  and  accept  Him.

Since,  furthermore,  externals  can  do  nothing  more  than
proclaim  and  represent  (and  when  faith  is  brought  into  activity
by  them,  certainly  a  faith  is  thus  brought  into  activity  which
was  there  before),  and  since  faith  is  a  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  it
is  clear  that  the  Spirit  operated  before  the  external  symbols  were
introduced.  Nevertheless,  Christ  Himself  does  not  disdain  to
call  the  bread  His  body,  which  to  quote  Augustine's  words,  is
only  the  sign  of  His  body.*  And  holy  men,  following  the
example  of  their  master,  f  represent  the  eueharist  as  all  that  for
which  we  return  thanks  in  that  celebrated  service  of  praise.
They  call  it  the  body  of  the  Lord,  because  in  it  is  commemorated
the  fact  that  Christ  took  upon  Himself  flesh  and  died  for  us.
They  call  it  the  remission  of  sins,  because  we  return  thanks  for
the  forgiveness  of  our  sins  through  the  death  of  Christ. They

•Augustine  says: "The  Lord  hesitated  not  to  say,  'This  is  my  body,'
when  he  was  giving  a  sign  of  His  body."  Against  Adimantus,  chap.  12,  §3.


On  the  Providence  of  God  191

call  it  the  food  of  the  soul,  because  He  who  alone  is  the  sure
pledge  of  our  hope  is  praised  in  it.  Not  as  if  the  material
bread  were  the  material  body  of  Christ,  or  as  if,  when  eaten  and
digested,  it  washed  away  the  poison  of  sin,  or  as  if  the  material
bread  or  the  material  body  of  Christ  could  feed  the  soul,  but
because  the  Divine  Goodness  is  so  pleasant  and  friendly  to  us
that  It  deigns  to  present  even  to  our  senses  certain  shadowy
forms  of  internal  and  spiritual  things,  which  are  called  by  the
same  name  as  the  things  themselves  for  the  reason  that  they  are
the  sacraments  and  representations  of  the  real  things.

Hence  also  the  holy  Fathers*  said  that  the  sacraments  con-
sisted of  two  things,  the  sign  and  the  thing  signified,  the  visible
and  the  invisible,  the  perceptible  and  the  spiritual.  Not  as  if,
to  take  the  eucharist  as  an  illustration  again,  the  bread  of  the
Supper  were  at  once  sign  and  thing  signified,  bread,  namely,  and
the  material  body  of  Christ,  as  certain  men  ignorant  of  real  piety
and  learning  think,  but  because  the  bread  is  a  sign,  and  the
thing  itself  is  Christ  who  was  really  delivered  up  and  made  an
offering  for  us,  and  this  thing  is  proclaimed,  preached  and
believed  by  those  who  celebrate  the  Lord's  Supper,  yet  the  bread
is  but  a  symbol  of  this  thing  which  is  presented  to  the  senses,  the
thing  itself  is  present  to  the  mind.  Not  as  if  the  bread  were  at
once  material  and  visible  bread  and  the  material  but  invisible
body  of  Christ,  but  because  the  bread  is  material  and  visible,
while  that  which  feeds  the  soul,  namely  the  fact  that  God  gave
His  Son  wholly  for  us,  is  invisible,  and  the  bread  is  a  sign  of
this  invisible  thing.  Not  as  if  the  bread  were  at  once  material
and  natural  bread  and  spiritual  power,  but  because  the  natural
bread  typifies  the  spiritual  renovation  of  the  mind,  and  unless

*Tlius,  e.  g.,  Augustine  says :  "In  sacraments  it  is  always  considered,  not
what  they  are,  but  what  they  exhibit;  since  they  are  signs  of  things;
being  one  thing,  and  signifying  another."  (Contra  Max.  Arian.,  Bk.  II,
e.  22,  §3).  Again  he  says:  "How  is  the  bread  His  body?  And  the  cup,
or  that  which  the  cup  contains,  how  is  it  His  blood?  These  things,
brethren,  are  therefore  called  sacraments,  because  one  thing  is  seen  in
them,  another  is  understood.  That  which  is  seen  has  corporal  form,  that
which  is  understood  has  spiritual  fruit."  (Sermon  272).  And  again:
"Discoursing  on  signs,  I  make  this  remark,  that  no  one  must  fix  his  atten-
tion in  them  on  what  they  are,  but  rather  that  they  are  signs,  that  is,  they
signify  something.  For  a  sign  is  a  thing,  which,  besides  the  form  it
presents  to  the  senses,  causes  something  else  external  to  itself  to  come  into
the  mind." (De  Doct.  Christiana,  Bk.  II,  c.  1,  §1).


192  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

this  has  first  taken  place,  he  who  is  about  to  celebrate  the  supper
approaches  it  to  his  danger;  for  it  is  written: — "Let  the  man
prove  himself,"  etc.

It  is  no  wrong,  therefore,  that  godly  men*  spoke  thus  by
periphraset  both  because  they  followed  the  example  of  their
teacher,  Christ,  and  because  they  saw  that  the  divine  benefits
could  not  be  worthily  proclaimed  by  any  word  painting.  But  it
is  wrong  for  us  to  be  so  dull  as  to  attribute  to  a  material  thing
what  belongs  to  God  alone,  and  to  turn  the  Creator  into  the
creature  and  the  creature  into  Creator.  Clear  and  sure  knowl-
edge of  the  truth  is  not  a  thing  to  let  itself  be  deceived  by  the
artifice  of  words.  Thus  it  ought  not  to  be  a  stumbling  block  to
us  that  that  is  promised  as  the  reward  of  works  which  is  bestowed
gratuitously  by  the  Divine  Goodness.  For  this  comes  not  from
the  nature  of  the  thing,  but  from  the  Divine  Goodness,  which
disdaineth  not  to  let  that  be  attributed  to  us  which  is  really  its
own  alone.  To  our  merit,  therefore,  is  credited  what  is  received
only  as  the  gift  of  divine  bounty.  This  will  be  made  clearer  by
the  illustration  of  faith,  and  when  I  have  treated  that,  the  sub-
jects of  election  and  of  providence  will  both  be  rendered  plainer.

REGARDING  FAITH

"Faith,"  says  the  Apostle  [Hebr.  11:  1],  is  the  essence  of
things  hoped  for  and  the  evidence  of  things  invisible."  For
thus  I  translate  word  for  word  the  Greek  eo-n  5e  irlaTis
cXTTifo/xci'coj/  viroffTaais  Trpayfiaruv  eXcYXOS  oi  ^Xeironkvicp.  In  this
definition  I  translate  virotxTaais  by  "essence,"  not  by  "sub-
stance," for  the  reason  that  "substantia"  in  Latin  is  more  readily
ambiguous  than  "essentia/'  like  uTroo-rao-ij  in  Greek,  which
word  the  heretics  once  distorted  so  cleverly  that  Jerome  said*
poison  lay  hid  in  it.  I  have  no  objection  however  to  the  term
"substantia." The  meaning  of  the  Apostle  is,  therefore,  that

*  ^Effniovg  avdpag.

•j-  KO)?' vnepoxTiv.

$  Jerome,  in  Letter  XV,  3,  writes:  "I  ask  them  (the  Arians)  what
three  hypostases  are  supposed  to  mean.  Tliey  reply  three  persons  sub-
sisting. I  rejoin  that  this  is  my  belief.  They  are  not  satisfied  with  the
meaning.  They  demand  the  term.  Surely  some  secret  venom  lurks  in  the
words."  Migne,  Patrologia  Latitia,  XXII,  356;  also  Schaff,  Nicene
Fathers,  Second  Series,  Vol.  \^,  p.  19.


On  the  Providence  of  God  193

faith  is  the  essence  or  substance  of  things  hoped  for,  that  is,
the  essential  thing  to  the  soul,  not  a  cursory  notion  that  pops
lightly  into  a  mind  that  wavers  and  believes  or  thinks  now  this,
now  something  else.

It  is  the  firm  and  real  confidence  of  the  soul  by  which  it
trusts  wholly  in  the  things  to  be  hoped  for,  that  is,  in  the  thing
for  which  solely  and  only  it  hopes  without  fear  of  disappoint-
ment. Thus  '1,hings  hoped  for"  is  a  periphrase  for  the  Supreme
Deity  in  whom  alone  hope  is  rightly  placed.  Yet  the  Apostle
said  "things  hoped  for"  in  the  plural  number,  after  the  fashion
«)f  the  Hebrews,  who  much  like  the  Germans,  use  the  plural
number  for  amplification.  They  use  DTl^K  [Elohim],  that
is,  gods,  for  one  God,  not,  by  heaven,  as  if  they  desired  to  in-
troduce the  notion  of  a  plurality  of  gods,  but  because  in  this  way
they  honor  and  magnify  the  name  of  the  Deity  according  to  the
idiom  of  their  language.  Intentionally  I  did  not  want  to  trans-
late : — "Faith  is  that  firm  and  real  thing  in  the  soul  by  which  it
is  led  to  God,  in  whom  it  hopes  without  fear  of  disappointment,"
though  this  is  the  sense  of  the  words.  For  those  words  iXvL^onkvoiv
vTroaraais,  that  is,  "the  essence  of  things  hoped  for,"  have  still
another  force,  namely,  they  emphatically  express  the  idea,
"Faith  is  that  real  and  firm  quality  in  our  souls  which  was  given
by  Him  who  is  the  reality  and  object  of  our  hope."  I  therefore
translated  indefinitely  "essence"  or  "essential  fact  of  things
hoped  for,"  that  both  meanings  might  be  included.

Secondly,  I  used  "evidence"  to  translate  the  Greek  eXeyxos,
the  word  most  often  used  by  Greek  writers  for  "demonstration,
evidence,  and  certainty,"  such  as  rises  upon  a  firm  foundation
from  reasoning.  So  I  translated  "evidence,"  to  indicate  a  cer-
tainty clear,  sure  and  plain  to  us.  And  this  unshaken  evidence
and  certainty  explains,  as  it  were,  the  previous  part  of  the
definition,  namely,  that  faith  is  a  real  and  substantial  thing,
that  is,  the  clear  light  and  certainty  of  the  soul.

Finally  I  used  "things  invisible"  as  the  translation  of
irpayncLTuv  ov  ^Xeirofikvuv.  How  thoroughly  are  these  words
misunderstood  by  many.  Some  twist  them  so  far  that,  whatever
tale  they  bring  forward  in  which  you  refuse  to  have  faith,  they
say:  "You  must  believe.  For  the  things  of  faith  are  not
visible."  In  this  way  any  lie  which  a  hypocrite  invents  can  be
thrust  upon  us  by  this  definition. Hence  all  this  license  to  lie.


194  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

At  one  time,  fictitious  stories  of  saints  are  brought  forward,
which  they  declare  must  be  believed  even  if  all  history  cries  out
against  them,  because  ''faith  is  of  things  invisible."  At  another
time,  wonders  sufficiently  miraculous  in  themselves  and  made
more  miraculous  by  the  clumsiness  and  shamelessness  of  the
liars,  are  defended  as  credible  by  the  same  shield,  though  they
were  never  known  in  art  or  literature  or  history,  for  "faith  is  of
things  invisible."

Others,  like  the  sacramentarians,  (those  are  justly  called
sacramentarians,  who  attribute  to  the  sacraments  what  they  do
not  contain,  and  by  high-sounding  but  false  and  made-up
promises,  lead  men  away  from  simple  trust  in  the  one  God  to
belief  in  the  power  of  symbols.  Therefore  if  any  one  hereafter
finds  "sacramentarians"  in  my  writings,  I  want  him  to  under-
stand that  class  of  men  who  attribute  to  symbols  what  belongs
only  to  Divine  Power  and  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  personally  working
in  our  souls,  which  symbols  and  the  external  word  only  pro-
claim and  represent),  the  sacramentarians,  I  say,  either  not
understanding  or  not  wishing  to  understand  the  usage  and
meaning  of  our  Lord's  words,  twist  this  language  so  far  as  to
venture  to  assert  that  the  things  themselves  are  really  and
materially  conveyed  by  the  sacraments  by  virtue  of  the  words
joined  with  the  elements,  and  they  defend  their  error  by  saying,
"Faith  is  of  things  invisible."  "You  do  not  see  grace  in  bap-
tism," they  say,  "but  it  is  certainly  conveyed  by  virtue  of  the
words,  as  soon  as  the  clergyman  has  said,  'I  baptize  thee  in  the
name  of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost.'  "
When  you  demand  proof  of  this  proposition,  they  say:  "Faith
is  of  things  invisible."

They  fail  to  notice  that  baptism  is  not  given  to  any  one
unless  he  first  confesses  that  he  has  faith,  if  he  is  a  grown  person,
or  unless  he  has  the  promise  in  virtue  of  which  he  is  counted  a
member  of  the  Church,  if  he  is  a  child.  Thus  this  thing  which
the  sacramentarians  maintain  is  conveyed  invisibly  by  the
sacrament  was  actually  conveyed  before.  For  he  who  confesses
faith  had  it  before  he  confessed  it  and,  therefore,  before  he  was
baptized.  For  confession  precedes  immersion.  Thus  the  faith
which  was  given  by  the  light  and  gift  of  the  Spirit  was  there
before  the  candidate  was  admitted  to  the  sacrament,  or  if  he
did  not  have  faith,  it  is  certainly  not  brought  to  him  by  baptism.


On  the  Providence  of  God  195

For  neither  Judas  nor  Simon  the  sorcerer,  who  were  without
faith  when  they  were  baptized,  received  faith  by  baptism.  But
if  an  infant  is  to  be  baptized,  since  he  cannot  himself  confess
faith,  he  must  have  the  promise  which  counts  him  within  the
Church.  The  promise  is,  that  the  Gentiles,  when  they  have
obtained  the  knowledge  of  God,  and  true  religion,  shall  be  just
as  much  of  the  church  and  people  of  God  as  the  Hebrews.  This
all  the  prophets  heralded  and  Christ  Himself  most  plainly
promises.  ''They  shall  come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,
and  shall  recline  with  the  God  of  Abraham  and  Isaac  and
Jacob."*  And  "The  last  shall  be  first,"  and  "The  vineyard  shall
be  given  to  other  husbandmen,"  and  "There  shall  be  one  shep-
herd and  one  fold."

Since,  therefore,  the  children  of  the  Hebrews  have  always
been  counted  with  the  Church  with  their  parents,  and  the  divine
promise  is  sure,  it  is  clear  that  the  children  of  Christians  belong
to  the  Church  of  Christ  just  as  much  as  their  parents.  This
promise  is  not  conveyed  in  baptism,  but  he  to  whom  it  has  been
previously  given  is  baptized,  that  by  a  visible  sign  he  may  bear
witness  that  he  is  of  the  number  of  those  who  through  the  good-
ness of  God  are  called  the  people  of  God.  Here  surely  nothing
new  is  brought  in,  but  that  which  has  been  previously  given  is
recognized  by  a  religious  rite,  and  the  name  is  given  when  the
symbol  and  pledge  have  been  received.

So,  too,  in  regard  to  the  Eucharist  they  err  from  ignorance,
when  they  assert  that  the  material  body  of  Christ  is  conveyed  by
the  words,  "This  is  my  body."  "The  word  conveys,"  they  say,
"we  must  believe  the  words."  And,  when  you  point  out  the
contradiction  with  other  words  of  Christ,  as,  "The  flesh  profiteth
nothing,"  and,  "Hereafter  I  shall  not  be  in  the  world,"  and
others  of  this  kind,  they  defend  themselves  with  this  weapon,
"Faith  is  of  things  invisible;  these  things  take  place  in  some
inexplicable  and  incomprehensible  way."  As  if  any  juggler
and  even  the  Roman  pontiff  could  not  say  of  any  juggling  of
his  own,  "This  that  I  promise  takes  place,  but  invisibly  and  in-
comprehensibly. For  faith  is  of  things  invisible  and  incom-
prehensible !"  Cannot  the  Roman  pontiff  just  as  well  defend  the
doctrine  that  the  bread  is  transubstantiated  into  the  body  of

*Matth.  8:  11;  cf.  Matth.  19:  50;  21:  41;  John  10:  16. But  the  word
"God  of"  is  omitted  in  the  Greek  as  well  as  in  the  Vulgate.


196  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Christ,  by  saying  in  the  same  way,  "This  happens  incom-
prehensibly and  invisibly,  for  faith  is  of  the  invisible,"  as  the
sacramentarians,  when  they  say  that  the  natural  body  of  Christ
is  conveyed,  defend  themselves  on  the  basis  of  this  statement
that  faith  is  of  things  invisible?

All  the  detrimental  errors  of  this  kind  come  from  not  seeing
that  the  part  of  the  definition  of  faith,  "things  invisible,"  is  a
Hebrew  periphrase  for  the  one  God,  whom  they  call  "things
invisible"  in  the  plural  number  after  their  own  fashion  of
amplification.  For  they  constantly  bestow  upon  God  this
epithet,  "unseen  and  not  visible,"  as  in  Col.  1 :  15,  "Who  is  the
image  of  the  invisible  God,"  and  in  I  Tim.  1 :  17  ["Now  unto
the  King  eternal,  immortal],  invisible,  the  only  wise  God,"  etc.
Hence  arises  that  kind  of  periphrase  by  which  "things  in-
visible" is  put  for  God,  the  Creator  of  all  things,  and  "things
visible"  is  put  for  the  creation.  Thus,  Rom.  1:  20,  "For  the
invisible  things  of  him  from  the  creation  of  the  world  are  clearly
seen,  being  understood  by  the  things  that  are  made,  even  his
eternal  power  and  Godhead,"  and  II  Cor.  4:  17-18,  "For  our
light  affliction,  which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a
far  more  exceeding  and  eternal  weight  of  glory ;  while  we  look
not  at  the  things  which  are  seen,  but  at  the  things  which  are
not  seen;  for  the  things  which  are  seen  are  temporal;  but  the
things  which  are  not  seen  are  eternal."  Here  in  both  places
"things  invisible"  is  put  by  periphrase  for  God  Himself  and  all
His  power,  which  is  nothing  else  than  Himself.  For  nothing
invisible  is  offered  man  to  look  at  save  God  alone.  Thus,  also
in  this  passage  "things  invisible"  is  a  periphrase  for  God,  so
that  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  definition  of  faith: — "Faith  is
that  real  and  unwavering  thing  given  man  by  the  Deity  in  whom
alone  he  has  the  right  to  hope,  by  which  he  firmly  and  surely
trusts  in  the  invisible  God."

So  faith  is,  furthermore,  Tr\r]po(popla,  that  is,  full,  clear
and  sure  knowledge  of  God  and  hope  in  Him.  And  this  is  the
meaning  of  the  Apostle,  as  the  whole  epistle  indicates,  especially
the  part  where  before  our  definition  he  says,  "Let  us  approach
with  true  hearts,  with  Tr\rjpo(popla,  that  is,  with  sure,  evident,
and  fixed  faith"  [Hebr.  10 :  22] .  This  is  also  shown  by  the
fact  that  the  apostle  exhorts  us  to  bear  adversity  through  faith,
and  declares  that  all  who  suffer  shipwreck  in  faith  have  been


On  the  Providence  of  God  197

driven  from  the  haven  of  happiness,  and,  finally,  because  he
interprets  the  words  of  the  prophet,  "The  just  man  shall  live  by
faith,"  to  mean  that  the  life  of  the  just  man  is  regulated  by
faith  in  God,  since  faith  is  so  efficacious,  present  and  life-giving
a  medicme  that  he  who  drinketh  of  it  is  saved  and  secure.

Since,  therefore,  faith  is  that  light  and  security  of  the  soul
by  virtue  of  which  it  knows  that  its  recognition  of  the  one  true
God  is  its  salvation  and  horn  of  plenty,  and  that  this  God  is  so
rich  that  He  has  all  things  and  can  do  all  things,  and  is  so
bountiful  and  kind  that  He  gives  willingly  and  delights  to  give
(for  He  delivered  up  His  son  to  us,  that  we  might  become  sharers
in  His  riches), — since,  I  say,  faith  is  this  light  and  food  of  the
soul,  nothing  else  can  happen  than  that  faith  should  be  to  the
just  man,  that  is,  the  man  who  thus  has  faith  and  security  in
regard  to  the  goodness  of  God  and  his  inheritance  therein, —
that  faith  should  be  his  life  and  strength,  through  devotion  to
which  he  is  defended  against  all  adversity.  But  this  power  is'
not  from  man  (for  otherwise  every  one  would  wish  to  have  the
greatest  faith  possible),  since  all  have  not  faith,  but  is  from  God
alone.  Paul  attributes  it  to  the  Holy  Spirit  [Gal.  5 :  22] .  For
those  who  are  of  the  earth,  have  the  thoughts  of  the  earth,  but
those  who  have  been  regenerated  from  above  have  the  thoughts
of  heaven.  Surrender  man  to  himself,  and  whence  will  he
acquire  faith  and  get  it  for  himself,  since  his  thoughts  and
desires  are  of  the  earth? It  is,  therefore,  God's  gift  alone.

Since,  therefore,  faith  is  God's  gift  (for  none  cometh  to
Christ  save  him  whom  the  Father  hath  drawn  thither  [John
6:44]),  how  is  it  that  everlasting  bliss  and  salvation  from  sin
are  attributed  to  faith  in  so  many  passages  of  Scripture  ?  For  if
faith  is  a  gift,  and  forgiveness  of  sin  is  attributed  to  faith,  then
one  gift  is  thus  attributed  to  another.  To  return  to  our  path,
then,  we  ought  to  examine  and  see  just  to  whom  faith  is  given.
For  we  have  already  concluded  that  it  is  the  free  gift  of  God.
Faith  is  given  to  those  who  have  been  elected  and  ordained  to
eternal  life,  but  so  that  election  precedes,  and  faith  follows  elec-
tion as  a  sign  of  it.  For  Paul  says,  Rom.  8 :  30,*  ''Whom  he  did
predestinate  (or  ordain),  them  he  also  called;  and  whom  he
called,  them  he  also  justified  (or  absolved)  ;  and  whom  he
justified,  them  he  also  glorified."  This  statement  of  Paul  brings

*The  text  has  v.  29.


198  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

a  wonderfully  clear  light  into  our  argument.  For  he  wishes  to
show  that  the  decision  and  ordination  of  God  are  the  origin  and
cause  of  our  being  given  everlasting  glory.  When  this  decision
or  ordination  had  been  made,  man  was  called  by  God,  not  only
with  that  general  summons  which  makes  the  external  preaching
of  the  apostles,  but  also  with  that  call  by  which  the  Spirit  takes
the  elect,  so  to  speak,  by  the  ear,  so  that  they  desire  to  listen  to
what  God  orders  or  promises.  ''And  whom  he  calls,  them  he
also  justifies"  or  absolves  from  sin.  For  the  Hebrews  use  the
word  justification  instead  of  absolution.

Now,  what  other  justification  is  there  than  that  of  faith?
For  Christ  and  the  apostles  make  the  whole  aim  of  their  teaching
to  show  that  there  is  no  other  justification  or  absolution  than
that  of  faith.  Those  who  have  faith  are  heirs  of  the  everlasting
glory.  By  all  this  we  learn  that  faith  is  given  to  those  who  have
been  elected.  And  those  who  have  faith  are  justified,  that  is,
absolved,  so*  that  no  damnation  awaits  them.  Not  as  if  faith
were  a  work  to  which  forgiveness  of  sins  was  due  as  a  reward,
but  because  those  who  have  faith  in  God  know  beyond  all
question  that  God  has  become  reconciled  to  them  through  His
Son,  and  the  record  of  their  sin  has  been  blotted  out  [Col.
2 :  14] ,  for  it  is  only  sin  which  precludes  and  shuts  us  out  from
entering  upon  the  heritage.  If  that  be  taken  away,  we  return
into  favor  with  God,  just  as  bodies  of  water  rush  together  if  the
space  or  barrier  between  them  be  removed.

When,  therefore,  the  mind  of  man  has  been  so  taught  by
God  as  to  know  that  His  Son  was  made  an  offering  for  our  sins,
it  is  so  charmed  by  the  taste  of  the  Divine  Goodness  as  to  trust
in  that  only  and  alone  which  has  wiped  away  the  poisonous
effect  of  sin.  Finally  it  becomes  so  devoted  to  God  only  and
alone  that  it  is  just  as  ready  to  die  as  to  live  for  Him.  Then
there  is  nothing  which  can  damn  the  soul  of  man.  For,  how-
ever much  the  Roman  pontiff  hurl  his  anathema,  the  sure
knowledge  of  faith  will  presently  leap  forth  as  its  champion
with  the  weapon,  "Thou  knowest  God  is  thine.  For  His  Son  is  a
pledge  of  the  reconciliation  of  His  goodness  and  righteousness.
The  accusation  this  man  now  brings  is,  therefore,  a  slander.
Who  shall  bring  anything  to  the  charge  of  the  elect,  especially
when  he  who  is  accused  knows  by  what  covenant  and  faith  he
has  God  as  his  bondsman?" Let  sin  accuse  him,  which  is  so  in-


On  the  Providence  of  God  199

timately  connected  with  us  that  if  we  boast  of  freedom  from  it
we  are  vain  fools;  straightway  the  light  of  faith  takes  up  the
defense,  declaring  that  sin  is  not  such  that  on  its  account  God
refuses  His  kindness,  if  only  we  frankly  confess  our  fault  and
are  ashamed  of  it.  For  the  sins  of  the  whole  world  could  not
prevent  Him  from  leading  His  Son  to  the  altar  to  atone  for
them.  Let  the  devil  accuse  us;  faith  will  charge  forward  with
all  its  strength,  and  will  not  only  rout  the  enemy,  but  so  turn
him  to  flight  that  however  often  he  return,  accompanied  by
seven  others  worse  than  himself,  he  cannot  win  the  day.  For
he  that  hath  real  faith  trusteth  the  Lord,  and  feareth  not  what
all  the  assaults  of  flesh  will  do  unto  him.

He,  then,  who  is  thus  protected  by  the  shield  of  faith,
knows  that  he  is  elect  of  God  by  the  very  security  based  on  his
faith.  And  this  is  the  pledge  by  which  the  Spirit  binds  our  souls
to  Himself,  so  that  we  give  to  Him  alone  our  love,  our  reverence,
and  our  trust.  This  is  that  bread  which  he  that  eateth  shall
neither  hunger  nor  thirst.  This  is  the  water  which  he  that
drinketh  shall  be  refreshed  and  revived  forever.  And  he  who
has  not  this  certainty  so  that  he  feels  it  stand  forth  dauntless  and
immovable,  in  the  veins  of  his  soul,  as  it  were,  nay  leap  also  to
meet  any  adverse  fortune,  he,  I  say,  should  pray  daily,  ''Thy
kingdom  come,"  and,  "Lord,  increase  our  faith."  For  they  that
possess  the  light  and  power  of  this  faith  are  sure  that  neither
death  nor  life  can  take  from  them  that  treasure  for  which  they
have  sacrificed  all  to  buy  it.  And  their  election  is  such  that  it  is
known  not  only  to  God  but  also  to  the  elect  themselves.

There  follows  now  another  piece  of  testimony,  by  which
we  learn  that  faith  is  given  to  the  elect  only,  so  that  we  shall  not
believe  that  that  is  really  faith  which  some  men  pretend  to  have,
when  they  confess  God  in  prosperity,  but  desert  and  betray  Him
when  temptation  comes.  In  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles,  chapter
13:  48,  it  is  written,  "and  as  many  as  were  ordained  to  eternal
life  believed."  Lo!  those  who  were  destined  and  ordained  to  a
life  of  happiness  believed.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  those  who
believe  know  that  they  are  blest.  For  those  who  believe  have
been  elected.  Election,  therefore,  precedes  faith.  Hence  those
who  have  been  elected  and  do  not  come  to  a  knowledge  of  faith,
like  infants,  attain  everlasting  happiness  none  the  less.  For  it
is  election  which  gives  the  happiness,  and  this  is  so  absolutely


200  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

free  that  no  account  is  taken  in  it  of  our  works  or  merits,  as  I
think  has  been  firmly  enough  established  above.  Also  they
who  hear  the  message  of  faith  and  accept  it  not  are  destined  and
ordained  to  everlasting  punishment.  For  those  who  believed
the  preaching  of  the  apostles  had  been  ordained  to  eternal  life.
On  the  other  hand,  those  who  did  not  believe,  as  Christ  says
Himself  [Mk.  16:  15],  when  the  Gospel  has  been  preached  and
heard  (for  the  words,  "preach  the  Gospel  to  every  creature,"
precede  this),  are  damned  altogether,  and  unbelief  is  just  as
sure  a  sign  of  this  as  faith  is  of  election.  Accordingly,  be  it
said  in  passing,  the  divine  oracles  ought  to  be  carefully  exam-
ined, for  they  speak  by  synecdoche  when  they  say  of  the
believers  that  they  only  shall  be  saved.  For  only  those  believers
are  comprised  under  this  law  who  have  heard  and  believed.

So  it  is  with  the  damnation  of  the  unbelievers.  Those
only  are  understood  who  have  heard  and  not  believed.  About
the  others  w£  cannot  pronounce  an  opinion,  because  we  do  not
know  about  the  election  of  any,  partly  because  Paul  promises
that,  if  uncircumcision  [the  heathen]  do  the  works  of  the  law,
it  shall  become  circumcision  (for  they  show  the  law  of  God
written  upon  their  heart),  and  because  Abraham,  Isaac,  and
Jacob,  the  Virgin  Mother  of  God,  Peter  and  Paul  were  elected
of  God  when  they  were  still  infants  and  had  not  faith,  nay
before  the  world  was  made.  It  is  not,  therefore,  a  universal  rule
that  he  who  has  not  faith  is  damned,  but  him  who  has  heard
the  doctrine  of  faith  expounded  and  remains  and  dies  in  un-
belief, we  can  perhaps  count  among  the  wretched.  For  many
have  not  believed  immediately  upon  hearing,  but  only  when
laid  hold  on  by  the  Spirit  and  drawn  to  belief,  like  Paul.  There-
fore we  may  pass  judgment  only  on  those  who  remain  in  un-
belief to  their  death.  Although  some  give  plain  signs  by
their  cruelty  or  lust  that  they  are  rejected  of  God,  yet,
since  so  often  the  worst  men  have  returned  to  the  right
way,  we  ought  not  to  condemn  any  one  before  his  end,  or
his  passing  away,  as  the  poet  says.* And  in  this  way  are  recon-

•Zwingli  is  here  thinking  of  a  passage  in  Ovid's  Metamorphoses,  III,
135,  which  reads:  Ultima  semper  expectanda  dies  homini  est,  dicique
beattis  Ante  ohitum  nemo  supremaque  funera  debet,  i.  e.,  "The  approach  of
your  last  day  always  attend,  And  call  none  happy  till  his  death  and  end."
It  is  based  on  the  famous  remark  of  Solon  to  king  Croesus,  as  given  by
Herodotus,  see  his  History,  I,  32,


On  the  Providence  of  God  201

ciled  these  two  statements,  "He  that  believeth  not  is  damned"*
and  "If  the  uneircumcision  doeth  the  righteous  works  of  the  law,
its  uneircumcision  is  turned  to  circumcision,"  etc.,  or  "For
when  the  heathen  who  have  not  the  law  do  by  nature  what  is  in
accordance  with  the  law,  they  are  a  law  unto  themselves,  though
they  have  not  the  law ;  for  they  show  the  work  of  the  law  written
upon  their  hearts,"  etc.  [Rom.  2 :  14, 15] .  For  nothing  prevents
God  from  choosing  from  among  the  heathen  men  to  revere  Him,
to  honor  Him,  and  after  death  to  be  united  to  Him.  For  His
election  is  free.

I  certainly,  if  the  choice  were  given  me,  should  prefer  to
choose  the  lot  of  Socrates  or  Seneca,  who,  though  they  knew
not  the  one  Deity,  yet  busied  themselves  with  serving  Him  in
purity  of  heart,  than  that  of  the  Roman  pontiff  who  would  offer
himself  as  God  if  there  were  only  a  bidder  at  hand,  or  the  lot  of
any  king,  emperor  or  prince,  who  serves  as  defender  of  such  a
little  tin  god.  For  though  those  heathen  knew  not  religion  in
the  letter  of  it  and  in  what  pertains  to  the  sacraments,  yet  as
far  as  the  real  thing  is  concerned,  I  say,  they  were  holier  and
more  religious  than  all  the  little  Dominicans  and  Franciscans
that  ever  lived.  These  for  a  long  time  have  been  so  far  from
humbling  themselves  and  giving  God  the  glory  for  their  holi-
ness that  there  is  no  need  of  the  touchstone  of  the  "Word  of  God
to  detect  their  hypocrisy.  Their  boldness,  luxury,  unrestrained
recklessness,  unbelief  and  cruelty  show  that  their  hearts  are
without  God  so  completely  that  no  one  is  so  ignorant  and  boorish
as  to  fail  to  see  it  clearly.

Therefore,  when  the  gaining  of  eternal  salvation  is  attrib-
uted to  faith,  that  is  attributed  to  the  secondary  thing  and  the
seal,  as  it  were,  which  belongs  to  the  primary  and  the  instru-
rnent.  Faith  is  the  sign  of  the  election  by  which  we  obtain  real
blessedness.  If  election  as  a  blossom  had  not  preceded,  faith
would  never  have  followed.  So  also  merit  is  attributed  to  works,
which  even  if  they  are  of  faith,  like  the  works  of  Abraham,  yet
do  not  merit  salvation.  This  is  set  forth  by  Paul  so  strongly  in
Romans  and  Galatians  that  there  is  no  need  of  further  con-
firmation of  it  now.  And  when  Scripture  says,  "Do  this  and
thou  shalt  live"  [Luke  10:  28],  "If  thou  wouldst  enter  into  life,
keep the commandments" [Matth. 19: 17], we ought to

•Mark  16:  16  and  Rom.  2:  26.


202  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

understand  that  these  things  and  things  like  them  are  said  by
synecdoche,  that  is,  they  put  the  effect  for  the  cause.  For,  as
justification  and  salvation  are  attributed  to  faith,  when  they
belong  only  to  the  divine  election  and  bounty,  while  faith  so
follows  election  that  those  who  have  it  know,  by  seal  and  pledge
as  it  were,  that  they  have  been  elected,  so  those  who  do  the  works
of  faith  give  proof  to  themselves  and  others  when  they  act
bountifully  and  from  love  of  God  and  their  neighbor,  not  from
vain  glory,  that  they  worship  God,  that  is,  that  they  have  faith.
For  it  is  just  as  certain  that  where  faith  is,  there  are  good  works
also,  as  it  is  that  a  furnace  gives  out  warmth  when  a  fire  has
been  kindled  in  it.

Accordingly  merit,  about  which  we  dispute  so  much  in
these  days,  is  a  name  rather  than  a  thing,  that  is  Divine  Bounty
suffers  Its  gifts  to  be  called  the  reward  of  merit,  and  shows  Itself
so  altogether  friendly  to  us  that  it  suffers  that  which  belongs  to
Itself  alone  tp  be  ascribed  unto  us.  Forgiveness  of  sin  It  at-
tributed to  the  apostles,  also  the  blessings  of  miracles  which  can
belong  to  nothing  but  the  power  of  God.  No  wonder,  then,  that
that  is  promised  as  a  sort  of  reward  for  good  works  which  belongs
only  to  God's  greatness  and  excellence.  For  it  is  He  who  not
only  moves  us  to  action,  but  gives  us  life,  and  not  only  gives  it
but  preserves  it.  Thus  will  the  human  heart  more  effectively
aspire  to  love  of  Him,  when  He  thus  makes  us  sharers  and  heirs
of  what  is  His,  and  not  only  enriches  us,  but  advances  us  in
honor,  when  He  promises  to  our  works  what  He  gives  from  His
own  bounty.

Free  will  or  merit  can,  therefore,  in  reality  not  be  main--
tained,  though  no  one  can  deny  that  they  are  named  and  men-
tioned in  the  Holy  Scriptures,  but  assuredly  only  as  the  names
of  things  which  belong  to  God  only,  but  are  given  to  us  as  a
sort  of  gracious  accommodation,  proving  his  friendship,  or
loans,  as  it  were,  given  to  us  chiefly  because  all  things  are  of
Him  and  to  Him.  For  nothing  can  be  lost  to  Him,  and  pious
men  recognize  in  this  sharing  on  God's  part.  His  goodness  rather
than  their  own.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  there  is  no  hyperbole
in  statements  like,  "The  hairs  of  your  head  are  numbered,"
[Matth.  10:  30],  ''not  even  a  sparrow,  two  of  which  are  sold  for
a  farthing,  falls  to  the  ground  without  the  knowledge  of  your
Father"  [Matth.  10:  29],  and  others  of  the  sort,  as  a  certain


On  the  Providence  of  God  203

genius  at  word-tinkering*  has  tried  to  persuade  the  world  in
our  time.

On  the  other  hand  things  like  the  following  are  exaggera-
tions and  hyperboles — ^'If  thou  wouldst  enter  into  life,  keep  the
commandments"  [Matth.  19:17],  ''He  who  doeth  the  will  of
my  Father,  is  my  brother,"  etc.  [Matth.  10 :  50] ,  and  all  the
other  promises  made  to  our  works.  They  are  true  only  by
consequence,  so  to  speak,  if  you  insist.  For  we  are  made  brothers
of  Christ  not  by  our  actions,  but  by  recognizing  and  embracing
Him  in  consequence  of  election.  For  who  would  do  anything
without  cause  and  purpose?  Faith,  then,  is  not  acquired  by
deeds,  but  works  by  faith.  For  those  who  do  the  will  of  God,
show  by  their  deeds  as  the  fruit  thereof  that  they  are  filled  with
God.  But  if  you  consider  the  thing  rather  than  words,  the  kind
of  promise  by  which  the  divine  wealth  in  things  pours  out  upon
and  attributes  to  us  what  belongs  only  to  Itself  is  really  a
hyperbole.

I  will  add  this  one  thing.  When  Paul  writes  to  the  Romans
[Romans  10:  17]  that  faith  comes  from  hearing  [the  Word]
he  attributes  in  the  same  way  to  the  nearer  cause  that  is  better
known  to  us  what  belongs  only  to  the  Spirit,  not  to  external
preaching,  as  the  sacramentarians  are  apt  to  contend.  And
this  is  so  true  that  it  is  not  only  gathered  from  such  testimony
in  the  Holy  Scriptures  as,  "No  one  cometh  to  me  except  my
Father  draw  him,"t  and,  "To  another  is  given  faith  by  the  same
gift  of  the  Spirit,"  and  the  like,  but  is  also  learned  by  experience.
For  we  see  daily  certain  men  hear  the  preaching  of  the  Gospel,
yet  not  believing  any  more  than  before.

Paul's  meaning,  then,  is  only  that  it  is  necessary,  as  far  as
is  shown  by  Scripture  examples,  that  the  Word  be  preached,  in
order  that  then  God,  who  giveth  the  increase,  may  plant  the
seed  of  faith  by  means  of  this  tool,  as  it  were,  but  with  His  own
hand  as  the  immediate  cause.  For  the  apostle's  work  also  is
from  the  hand  of  God,  but  indirectly,  the  internal  drawing  is
the  work  of  the  Spirit  acting  directly.

The  sum  total  of  the  whole  matter  is  that  all  things  which
have  to  do  with  man,  either  as  to  his  body  or  as  to  his  soul,  are  so
completely  from  God  as  their  only  real  cause,  that  not  even  the

•Erasmus  of  Rotterdam.

tJohn  6:  44;  and  I  Cor. 12:  8  ff.


204  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

work  of  sin  is  from  any  one  else  than  God,  though  it  is  not  sin
in  Him,  as  I  said  early  in  the  discussion.  When  we  attribute
anything  to  the  nearer  instrument  or  cause,  it  really  comes  from
these,  if  you  look  at  the  matter  closely,  no  more  than  the  harvest
from  the  husbandman.  If  that  came  from  him,  what  would
hinder  his  taking  care  to  have  his  granaries  always  overflowing
with  plenty?  Why  should  he  not  keep  want  afar  off?  No,  it  is
Another  who  furnishes  all  things,  however  much  the  farmer
may  not  withdraw  his  hand  from  the  plow  and  rest.  Thus
whatever  we  do  or  think  is  of  God,  the  Doer  and  Disposer  of  all
things.

And  let  not  this  question  about  infants  trouble  anybody,
— since  all  the  elect  were  elected  before  the  creation  of  the
world,  and  the  infants  of  the  faithful  are  of  the  Church,  there
is  no  doubt  that  when  these  infants  die,  they  are  received  into
the  number  of  the  blest  according  to  election,  which  the  Apostle
says*  remains  sure.  Are  we  then  all  elect  while  we  are  infants,
or  not?  I  am  speaking  of  us  who  are  born  and  live  within  the
Church.  For  we  are  sons  of  the  line  of  Isaac,  the  heathen,  of
the  line  of  Ishmacl.  If  we  are  all  elect,  and  election  remains
sure,  however  we  live  or  believe  after  we  are  grown  up,  we  yet
attain  salvation.  For  he  who  has  once  been  elected,  remains
always  elect.  If  not,  those  who  die  in  infancy  and  have  not  been
elected  are  sentenced  to  eternal  punishment,  without  having  de-
served anything  of  the  kind,  since  they  have  been  delivered
from  original  sin  through  the  mediation  of  Christ,  and  they
have  themselves  done  no  wrong.

In  order  that  what  I  mean  may  be  clearly  understood,  I
raise,  for  the  sake  of  an  illustration,  the  following  question : —
Jacob  and  Esau,  when  infants,  were  both  counted,  as  belonging
to  the  Church.  For  both  had  been  introduced  into  it  by  the
symbol  of  circumcision.  Since,  then,  Esau  had  been  rejected
by  the  will  of  God  before  he  was  conceived  in  the  womb,  would
he  have  been  received  into  the  number  of  the  blest,  if  he  had
died  in  infancy,  or  not?  If  he  would  have  been  received,  re-
jection was  not  permanent,  consequently  neither  is  election.  For
Esau  had  not  been  elected,  and  would  have  had  to  be  elected
afterwards.  If  he  would  not  have  been  received  among  the
saints,  to  be  counted  within  the  Church  and  to  have  been
♦Romans  9:11.


On  the  Providence  of  God  205

marked  with  its  sign  would  have  profited  nothing.  Thus  to  be
counted  within  the  Church  would  be  no  sure  sign  that  we  are
the  sons  of  God.

Nevertheless,  this  question  seems  to  be  of  the  class  of  those
which  seem  to  be  begotten  of  curiosity  rather  than  of  piety
(for  we  ought  rather  to  recognize  what  is  done  by  the  Lord  as
rightly  and  properly  done  than  to  demand  reasons  why  He  did
so),  yet,  since  there  is  no  godlessness  in  contemplating  with
wondering  admiration  the  things  which  we  unequivocally
acknowledge  as  done  rightly  by  the  Lord,  and  then  in  searching
from  experience  for  the  reasons  why  they  were  done  or  were  so
done  (for  the  Deity  Himself  gives  the  reasons  why  He  created
the  sun  and  the  moon*),  it  will  not  be  irreligious  to  satisfy  the
minds  of  those  who,  while  not  without  religion,  are  endowed
with  so  meagre  an  appreciation  of  things  that  they  find  a  casual
stumbling  block,  not  in  religion  itself,  in  which  they  remain
steadfast,  even  if  ignorant  of  much  that  is  clear  to  others,  but  in
the  light  or  knowledge,  which  is  not  the  least  part  of  the  con-
templation of  God's  works.  And  this  stumbling  block,  although
not  able  to  injure  faith,  yet  often  keeps  the  intellect  troubled.
For  though  to  believe  that  there  is  only  one  Deity  and  to  trust
in  Him  belongs  to  all  who  have  true  religion,  yet  the  knowledge
of  the  ways  and  characteristics  of  the  Deity  belongs  only  to  the
experienced  and  those  endowed  with  a  clear  understanding,  nay
to  those  more  intimately  taught  by  God.  So,  then,  I  answer,
that  neither  Esau  nor  Jacob  could  have  died  in  infancy,  how-
ever much  they  were  under  the  general  law  of  mortality.  For
before  the  creation  of  the  world  Divine  Providence  had  just  as
much  determined  about  their  acts  and  life  as  about  their  creation
and  birth.  For  if  the  hairs  of  our  head  are  numbered,  if  nothing
can  escape  Divine  Wisdom,  if  Providence  is  nowhere  at  rest,  if
Goodness  neither  neglects  nor  postpones  anything,  it  is  clear
that  what  follows  life  and  existence  is  just  as  much  regulated  as
the  bestowal  of  these.  For  among  causes,  these  two  are  the  chief,
the  efficient  and  the  final.  And  since  nothing  can  be  done  by
Divine  Wisdom  without  reference  to  its  end,  it  follows  that
nothing  is  created  by  Divine  Wisdom  of  which  the  end  and  all
the  attending  circumstances  to  the  end  have  not  been  foreseen
and  settled  long  before  they  take  place. Life  and  activity,

•Gen.  1:  16.


206  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

therefore,  are  just  as  much  arranged  by  Divine  Providence  for
every  man  as  are  his  birth  and  generation.

On  the  other  hand,  death  and  the  cutting  of  the  thread  of
life  are  just  as  much  ordained  as  creation  and  the  course  of
life.  For  these  are  properly  the  end.  Hence  it  is  to  be  inferred
that  no  one  dies  in  infancy  whose  fate  has  not  been  determined
from  eternity,  and  no  power  can  effect  that  he  for  whom  this  or
that  limit  has  been  fixed  can  overleap  it.  The  fifteen  years  that
the  Lord  granted  to  Hezekiah  [II  Kings  20 :  6]  as  an  addition
had  been  put  down  as  an  addition  before  the  establishment  of
the  world.  For  what  has  once  been  arranged  remains  fixed
forever.  Hezekiah's  end,  therefore,  had  been  so  arranged  that
the  years  should  be  added  in  this  way,  and  only  after  them
should  Atropos*  really  cut  the  thread  which  she  had  only
tlireatened  to  cut  before.

Since,  then,  neither  Esau  could  have  died  in  infancy,  be-
cause the  Lord  had  arranged  differently  in  his  case,  nor  that
little  son  of  David,  whom  he  begot  in  faithless  and  wicked
adultery,  could  have  lived,  because  the  Lord  had  determined  to
slay  him,  it  is  evident  that  when  the  infant  children  of  the
faithful  die,  it  is  a  sign  of  their  election  and  summons  to  the
glory  of  the  blessed.  For  they  are  taken  away  that  wickedness
may  not  stain  their  souls,  that  is,  that  they  might  not  by  a
wicked  life  betray  their  rejection  to  the  world,  as  they  would  do
if  they  had  been  rejected.

Those  who  survive  and  become  intractable  and  rebellious
like  Esau,  are  saved  for  this,  that  their  rejection  and  casting  out
may  be  made  manifest  by  their  godless  life.  But  those  who
survive  and  remain  pious  and  obedient  to  God,  like  Jacob,  are
saved  for  this,  that  by  their  good  deeds  the  kindness  of  God
and  their  own  election  may  be  made  evident.  Meantime,  as
long  as  they  are  counted  within  the  Church  as  infants  or  young
children,  and  we  cannot  tell  how  they  are  going  to  turn  out,
whether  they  be  destined  to  life  or  death,  we  follow  the  same
rule  of  judgment  as  with  grown  persons,  namely,  that  they  are
of  the  Church  and  are  elected  of  God,  as  long  as  they  do  not  by
monstrous  deeds  of  shamelessness  show  that  they  are  un-
regenerate.  As  there  are  among  grown  persons  many  who  are
not  discovered  by  us  to  be  unregenerate  until  they  betray  it  by
*One  of  the  three  goddesses  of  Fate.


On  the  Providence  of  God  207

great  wickedness,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  many  who  after  living
some  time  in  wickedness,  return  to  the  right  way,  and  by  re-
pentance and  honesty  of  life  show  that  they  have  been  elected
by  the  Lord,  so,  in  general,  all  the  children  of  Christian  parents
(for  of  these  we  have  the  clear  promise  of  the  Word)  are
included  by  us  in  the  number  of  the  sons  of  God.  Meantime
God  either  shows  their  election  by  an  early  death  or  by  a  longer
life  of  integrity,  so  led  in  consequence  of  faith,  or  makes  plain
their  rejection  by  their  long,  but  profligate  life.

Thus  there  are  none  of  whose  election  we  are  more  sure
than  of  those  children  who  are  taken  away  young,  while  still
without  the  law.  For  the  life  of  men  is  sometimes  not  really,
but  only  in  appearance,  upright,  but  in  children  who  are  born
of  believing  parents,  there  can  be  no  blemish.  For  original  sin
has  been  atoned  for  by  Christ  [Rom.  5 :  15]  (for  as  in  Adam  we
all  die,  so  in  Christ  we  are  all  restored  to  life,  we,  that  is,  who
believe  or  who  are  of  His  Church  according  to  the  promise) ,  and
no  stain  of  wicked  deeds  can  defile  them,  for  they  are  not  yet
under  the  law.  And  since  no  cause  but  sin  separates  from  God,
and  they  are  without  all  sin,  it  is  clear  that  no  one  is  so  incon-
trovertibly  known  to  be  among  the  elect  as  those  children  who
finish  their  days  while  young.  For  dying  is  just  as  much  a
sign  of  election  in  them  as  faith  is  in  grown  people.  And  those
who  are  unregenerate  and  have  been  rejected  of  God  do  not  die
in  this  condition  of  innocence,  but  are  preserved  by  Divine
Providence  that  their  rejection  may  be  made  known  by  their
wicked  life.  That  this  is  true  all  that  precedes  proves,  unless  one
denies  Providence,  and  with  such  I  have  nothing  to  do.  So
much  about  man,  how  he  and  all  the  details  of  his  life  are  just
as  much  regulated  by  God  as  are  the  things  without  minds  and
souls.

SEVENTH  CHAPTER

A  Confirmation  of  all  that  precedes  by  examples.

It  is  now  evident  enough  that  God  is  not  like  man.  For
man's  plans  often  turn  out  so  unsuccessfully  that  he  says,  ''I
didn't  think  of  that,"  or  "It  did  not  succeed  this  way,  let  us  try
another."  God  can  form  no  plan  without  full  knowledge.
Therefore,  what  He  determines  upon  remains  unchanged,  be-


208  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

cause  He  foresees  everything  so  that  nothing  can  happen  to
interfere  with  or  prevent  what  He  undertakes.  His  decrees
remain  unalterable,  because  He  is  Himself  unalterable  and  un-
changeable. Hence  we  may  infer  that  what  God  once  was
towards  His  creatures,  He  is  also  today,  so  that  if  He  ever
showered  His  goodness  upon  the  good  and  pursued  the  wicked
with  righteousness.  He  maintains  the  same  attitude  today  also  in
the  freedom  of  His  will.  Therefore,  as  He  once  was  toward  the
elect,  so  He  is  now,  and  likewise  toward  the  rejected.  As  He
was  in  the  beginning  toward  all  His  creatures,  so  is  He  still
toward  all.

First,  then,  I  will  bring  forward  illustrations  by  which  it
will  be  shown  that  the  things  lower  than  man  do  not  happen  by
chance  but  are  regulated  by  Providence,  although  the  deluge  in
the  time  of  Noah  seems  to  have  fallen  upon  and  overflowed
things  as  if  nature  (as  the  philosophers  call  it)  had  brought  it
on.  For  it  is  said  that  the  floodgates  of  heaven  broke  loose  and
rain  fell  continuously  for  forty  days.  Yet  no  nature  did  this,
but  the  Author  of  all  things,  who  is  the  real  nature  and  power
of  all  that  is.  He  could  not  only  have  commanded  the  rivers  to
swell  and  overflow  their  banks  and  drown  everything  without
any  rain,  but  could  have  destroyed  everything  with  one  word,
nay  have  reduced  everything  to  nothing  by  withdrawing  His
power.  But  He  preferred  in  this  way,  by  rain,  namely,  to  put  a
new  aspect  upon  the  world.  When  we  have  comprehended  that
He  had  decided  upon  this,  we  see  without  any  trouble  that
whether  He  brought  on  the  rain  naturally,  according  to  the
order  of  things  once  established,  or  whether  He  called  it  forth
out  of  the  natural  course,  it  did  not  rain  by  accident  when  the
world  was  submerged.  How  much  less  does  it  rain  by  accident
when  the  earth  is  moistened  for  the  good  of  man !  For  though
we  grant  that  all  things  above  and  below  worked  together  in
natural  course  at  that  time  to  produce  all  that  quantity  of  water,
yet  this  had  preceded:  Divine  Providence,  when  It  created  the
world,  foresaw  and  arranged  things  so  that  everything  should
take  place  in  proper  course  and  time.  Things  were  bound  to
happen,  therefore,  according  to  the  way  Divine  Providence  had
determined  from  eternity  to  punish  mankind,  which  was  to
become  very  bad  at  Noah's  time,  by  submerging  it  in  the  flood.
Hence  it  follows, — whether  things  above  had  been  so  arranged


On  the  Providence  of  God  209

as  to  pour  out  that  quantity  of  water  in  natural  course  at  that
time,  or  whether  the  water  was  sent  down  by  a  new  miracle, —
it  follows,  I  say,  that  either  event  was  so  patent  to  Divine  Provi-
dence when  It  created  the  world  that  It  so  regulated  the  course
and  order  of  things  above  that  they  should  pour  out  all  that
water  at  the  time  when  the  wicked  were  to  be  destroyed,  or  so,
that  while  things  above  kept  their  own  special  course,  a  new
miracle  should  overwhelm  the  evildoers  with  water.

When  at  the  prayer  of  Elijah  rain  was  given  after  so  long
a  course  of  years,  a  little  cloud  not  bigger  than  a  man's  hand
appeared,  then  grew  as  clouds  are  wont  to  do,  and  poured  out
such  generous  showers  that  all  things  were  restored  [I  Kings
18 :  44,  45] .  If  this  rain  was  accidental  or  given  by  the  power
of  nature,  not  by  Providence,  who  could  have  made  Elijah  sure
of  its  coming,  when  he  promised  rain  so  persistently,  especially
in  so  weighty  a  matter  in  which  he  had  brought  forward  the
rain  as  witness  that  his  Lord  who  had  given  the  promise  was
God?  Since,  then,  the  rain  fell  by  the  Providence  and  arrange-
ment of  God,  it  is  immaterial  to  us  whether  it  was  poured  out  by
a  combination  of  natural  forces  adapted  to  do  this  at  the  time
or  by  a  new  miracle,  provided  we  understand  that  before  the
foundation  of  the  world  Providence  so  foresaw  all  things  and
had  all  things  so  clearly  before  It,  that  It  knew  that  the  conjunc-
tion of  the  natural  forces  which  should  produce  all  that  abund-
ance of  water  would  coincide  with  the  wickedness  of  the  world
which  It  wiped  out  by  the  waters  at  the  time  of  Noah.

So  also  with  the  plentiful  showers  that  were  brought  on
after  the  long  drought.  For  whether  these  things  occurred  in
regular  course  or  out  of  course,  the  warning  and  prophecy  about
them  show  that  they  were  done  by  Providence.  For  if  they
happened  in  regular  course,  if  a  flood  in  natural  course  coin-
cided with  the  wickedness  of  man.  Divine  Wisdom  and  Provi-
dence are  reflected  from  them.  If  the  waters  were  poured  forth
out  of  course,  again  we  see  both  these.  Righteousness  as  well  as
Power.  For  God  does  miracles  out  of  the  ordinary  course  of
things,  that  the  astronomers*  and  those  who,  like  them,  wage
war  against  the  sovereignty  of  the  Deity  like  the  giants,  may  not
be  able  forever  to  attribute  everything  to  some  force  of  nature,
but  may  be  compelled  to  recognize  a  greater  force  than  visible
*Zwingli  refers  to  the  end  of  the  world,  predicted  for  the  year  1524.


210  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

things  possess,  whether  they  will  or  no,  when  they  see  fire  fall
from  heaven  and  suddenly  engulf  five  cities  by  its  flames  [Gen.
19 :  24] ,  or  the  sun  at  one  time  stand  still  in  mid  course  [Josh.
10: 13],  when  Joshua,  Israel's  leader,  needs  light  to  pursue  the
enemy,  or  at  another  time  lay  aside  its  light  and  be  darkened,
when  Jesus,  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  oveTcomes  the  enemy  by
His  death.

If,  then,  those  rains,  by  which  the  flood  and  the  re-
freshment of  the  earth  were  brought  about,  were  poured
forth  by  Providence,  why  should  we  attribute  any  rain  to
some  natural  force?  Does  that  Providence  which  is
the  essence  of  being  sometimes  wake  and  sometimes  sleep?
If,  on  the  other  hand,  rain  is  brought  on  by  chance,
why  is  rain  alone  poured  forth  by  chance  and  not  all
things?  If  everything  comes  by  chance,  Providence  is  done
away  with,  and  if  Providence  is  done  away  with,  the  Deity  also
is  done  away  with.  For  if  anything  goes  by  chance,  then  every-
thing must  go  by  chance.  For  if  Providence  were  idle  in  one
single  thing,  It  would  not  be  Providence.  It  must  apply  to  all
things,  because  the  power  of  the  Deity  is  over  all,  and  if  it  were
not  over  all.  He  would  not  be  the  Deity.  And  if  His  power  were
over  all,  and  not  also  His  providence,  all  the  attributes  of  the
Deity  would  not  be  equal,  and  accordingly  the  Deity  would  not
be  the  Supremely  Simple.  Hence,  if  one  shower  is  poured  out
by  Providence,  all  are  poured  out  from  the  same  source.  Rains,
therefore,  are  just  as  much  showered  upon  the  world  by  appoint-
ment of  the  Deity  now  as  they  used  to  be,  and  so  with  droughts,
with  abundance  of  harvests  and  with  scarcity.

It  is,  therefore,  clear  that  the  movements  and  arrangements
of  the  things  above  are  ordered  by  Providence,  not  by  nature,
unless  you  take  nature  for  the  Deity,  by  antonomasia.*  If
Elijah's  rain  was  given  in  accordance  with  an  arrangement  of
heavenly  bodies  determined  before,  not  by  a  new  miracle,  it
must  have  been  given  by  Providence,  who  before  the  creation  of
the  world  saw  that  this  arrangement  of  the  stars  and  this  press-
ing need  of  mankind  would  coincide.  If  it  was  given  by  a  new
miracle,  this  was  done  by  Providence.  For  who  can  do  miracles
but  He  who  can  regulate  and  rule  all  things?  Though  eclipses,
earthquakes  and  lightnings  were  accounted  as  miracles  when
the  world  was  still  ignorant,  they  have  been  found  to  take  place

•That  is,  the  substitution  of  a  general  for  a  specific  term.


On  the  Providence  of  God  211

in  natural  course,  that  is,  according  to  the  arrangement  of
heavenly  bodies,  as  nearer  and  better  known  cause,  and  this  dis-
covery has  taken  away  abnormal  wonder  at  them,  though  they
are  just  as  much  brought  about  by  the  power  of  the  Deity  alone
as  are  those  miracles  which  take  place  out  of  the  natural  course
of  events.  And  they  are  more  wonderful  as  the  result  of  an
established  order  which  maintains  and  performs  its  functions
forever  than  are  those  things  which  are  done  only  for  the
moment  and  occasion.  Although,  therefore,  showers  poured
out  in  natural  course,  that  is,  according  to  an  order  established
in  the  beginning,  seem  to  be  produced  by  agencies  nearer  and
better  known  to  us,  yet  they  are  just  as  much  the  work  of  Provi-
dence as  when  they  occur  miraculously.

I  will  give  an  illustration  from  our  own  time.  The  as-
tronomers threatened  a  flood  and  the  general  break  up  of  the
universe  for  the  year  fifteen  hundred  and  twenty-four,  and  the
preachers,  especially  among  the  Christians,  are  still  proclaiming
that  the  end  of  the  world  is  upon  us.  The  one  based  their  cal-
culations upon  the  conjunction  and  clashing  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  the  others  upon  the  wickedness  and  corruption  of  the
times,  and  when  the  latter  have  invaded  human  society  the
preachers  become  more  certain  that  the  divine  vengeance  is  at
hand,  than  any  astronomers  are  from  their  scheme  of  lucky  and
unlucky  years.  That  year  has  gone  by  and  left  the  earth  for  us
still  further  to  dwell  upon,  and  though  there  were  freshets  in
some  places,  the  streams  of  Switzerland  were  lower  than  for  many
years.  But  there  is  reason  to  fear  that  this  jungle  of  wrongs,
suppression  of  public  justice,  pride,  luxury  and  the  utter  shame-
lessness  of  all  evil  will  bring  on  a  far  more  destructive  deluge
than  one  in  which  the  bodies  of  men  and  brutes  should  be
drowned.  In  this  the  preachers  predicted  much  more  correctly
than  the  astronomers.  Meanwhile  they  despise  each  other
vigorously,  when  they  ought,  on  the  contrary,  to  have  more  re-
gard for  each  other.  When  the  astronomers  saw  the  stars  in  a
sinister  and  threatening  position,  they  ought  to  have  looked  with
admiring  wonder  upon  the  wisdom  of  the  Deity,  which  from
the  creation  of  the  firmament  had  so  regulated  the  course  of  the
heavenly  bodies  that  a  fatal  calamity  should  be  threatened  by
them  at  the  period  when  all  things  had  become  thoroughly
corrupt. The  preachers  are  right  in  disparaging  the  wanton  and


212  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

unrestrained  divination  of  the  astrologers,  but  they  ought  not
to  scorn  the  benefits  of  astronomy  any  more  than  they  should  the
stars  themselves.  For  as  these  are  instruments  by  which  the
Divine  Power  pours  Itself  out,  so  the  knowledge  of  their  course
is  nothing  else  than  the  knowledge  of  the  course  of  the  divine
activity.  Hence  the  preachers,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  should  re-
spect astronomy  as  highly  as  any  branch  of  knowledge.

The  disturbances  by  which  the  world  is  shaken  at  present
are  not  caused  by  chance  or  by  the  anger  of  the  stars,  but  by
Divine  Providence,  which  so  orders  all  things  that  the  preachers
are  able  to  threaten  divine  vengeance,  and  the  astronomers  to
foretell  coming  calamity.  Both  of  these  things  are  manifested  by
the  goodness  of  God,  that  the  way  to  repentance  and  salvation
be  opened  more  clearly  before  us.  So  far,  therefore,  is  it  from
the  truth  that  the  stars  run  outside  of  the  course  appointed  for
mortals  that  rather  since  the  foundation  of  the  world  their  power
and  course  have  been  adapted  to  the  course  of  human  affairs.
And  when  we  now  see  that  these  have  been  such  that  the  might
of  the  stars  has  evidently  been  angry  with  mortals,  corresponding
to  the  wrath  of  God,  and  the  stars  are  nothing  but  instruments  of
the  Divine  Power,  it  is  clear  that  they  are  continuously  under
the  sway  and  rule  of  God's  beck  and  call,  and  never  do  anything
at  random.  For  if  any  one  thing  were  done  by  them  at  random
and  without  God's  providence,  by  the  same  fact  everything  w^ould
take  place  at  random.  For  he  who  thinks  that  Providence
neglects  one  single  thing,  does  away  with  Providence  altogether,
as  has  been  shown  before.  And  if  the  theologians  and  the  as-
tronomers will  both  reflect  upon  this,  there  will,  I  hope,  be  no
more  quarrels  between  them  hereafter.  The  one  class  [astro-
nomers] will  refrain  from  trivial  divination,  and  the  others
[theologians]  will  not  decline  to  defend  Providence,  because
they  failed  to  regard  these  as  instruments  of  the  Divine  Power,
so  constituted  by  the  Divine  Wisdom  that  they  are  ever  obedient
to  the  call  of  the  Deity,  and,  stopping  with  the  stars  them-
selves, things  without  life,  and  not  reverencing  their  author  and
mover,  have  limited  Providence  too  boldly.

The  astronomers,  may,  therefore,  give  warning  according
to  the  fixed  and  indubitable  axioms  of  their  science,  that  is,
propositions  and  principles  demanding  immediate  acceptance,
but  they  may  not  set  limits  to  things,  partly,  because  many


On  the  Providence  of  God  213

trivial  things  have  crept  into  their  science,  and  partly  because
the  Deity,  the  soul  of  the  stars,  regulates  them  at  His  will,  and
through  them  works  what  He  will,  and  gives  them  what  He  will,
not  what  we  wish  or  teach  is  given  them.  On  the  other  hand,  the
theologians  can  more  plainly  recognize  Providence  when  they
regard  the  stars  not  as  some  special  thing  apart  from  the  Deity
but  as  the  instruments  of  His  power.

So  much  about  the  movements  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  In
these  I  want  included  the  celestial  phenomena,  the  constella-
tions, as  they  are  called,  the  lightning  flashes  and  thunderbolts,
what  goes  down  and  comes  up,  the  changes  of  the  wind,  earth-
quakes and  storms,  and  everything  above  or  below  that  takes
place  by  the  influence  of  the  heavenly  or  upper  bodies,  because
all  these  things  which  come  from  the  heavens  are  done  by  the
providence  and  immediate  power  of  the  Deity.

Nor  should  we  think  that  the  stars  do,  at  God's  command
and  ordination,  to  be  sure,  many  things  that  it  is  still  not  neces-
sary for  God  Himself  to  know  or  pay  attention  to.  As  if  that
power  which  is  the  Deity  could  be  wearied  or  could  wear  out
under  excessive  labor,  so  that  we  must  spare  it,  lest  by  seeing,
ordering,  and  doing  all  things,  it  became  weary  and  need  some
Atlas  to  put  his  shoulders  under  the  burden,  while  it  takes
breath.  Such  is  the  nature  and  power  of  the  Deity  that  it  con-
sists of  activity  and  is  absolutely  foreign  to  rest.  For  where  rest
is  needed,  there  is  need  of  taking  breath.  Where  taking  breath
is  necessary,  there  labor  is  oppressive.  Where  labor  is  oppres-
sive, fatigue  follows.  Where  there  is  fatigue,  there  is  also  weak-
ness, and  this  must  be  absolutely  foreign  to  the  Deity.  Divine
Power  is  not,  therefore,  exhausted  by  doing,  surveying,  and  ar-
ranging all  things.  It  delights  in  it,  loves  it,  is  used  to  it,  that
means,  its  nature  requires  it.  For  when  it  is  made  clear  in
regard  to  chance  happenings  that  the  Deity  takes  account  of
them,  as  I  shall  presently  show,  will  there  be  anything  from
which  He  can  withhold  His  hand?

The  name  "chance  happenings"  is  inconsistent  with  real
religion.  For  nothing  can  happen  by  accident  of  fortune,  if
all  things  are  regulated  by  Providence.  Furthermore,  when  I
have  shown  that  the  things  which  are  believed  to  be  accidental
proceed  from  the  direct  action  of  the  Deity,  I  hope  that  though
the  name  ''chance  happenings,"  or,  as  the  new  school  says.


214  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

"contingent  happenings,"  remain,  it  will  be  plain  that  the  things
which  are  attributed  to  fortune  or  chance  are  the  work  of  God
in  reality.  \

In  approaching  this  matter,  I  shall  first  bring  forward
illustrations  from  the  realm  of  inanimate  things  or  things  with-
out intelligence,  where  yet  the  evident  work  and  care  of  the
Deity  are  discoverable,  and  afterwards  illustrations  that  have
to  do  with  man.  When  the  hatchet  of  the  prophet's  pupil  slipped
from  its  shaft  and  fell  into  the  river  [II  Kings  6:5],  it  was,  at
first  sight,  an  accident.  But  when  the  prophet  teacher  threw  in
the  piece  of  wood  to  bring  back  the  metal  and  it  obediently
floated  back  from  the  bottom,  we  see  both  from  the  strangeness
and  the  greatness  of  the  miracle  that  the  metal  fell  in  for  the
purpose  of  making  plain  the  prophet's  holiness  and  his  close
relationship  with  God.

The  straying  asses  [I  Sam.  9 :  3] ,  in  search  of  which  Saul
had  left  his  father's  house,  show  clearly  enough  that  they  went
astray  at  the  ordination  of  God,  since  the  son  sought  asses  and
found  a  kingdom  that  he  had  not  sought,  and  the  father  got  not
only  the  asses  he  was  troubled  about  but  a  king  for  a  son,  which
he  had  never  thought  of.  Will  the  ass  that  stood  with  the  colt
[Matth.  21 :  2]  at  the  cross  roads  for  the  use  of  the  poor  bp
believed  to  have  been  driven  thither  by  chance,  when  the  King
of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords  mounted  it  to  enter  Jerusalem.
according  to  the  words  of  the  prophets?  Shall  we  say  that  the
small  cords  which  Christ  gathered  at  random  in  the  temple
[John  2 :  15]  and  made  into  a  scourge  lay  there  at  random,  since
with  them  He  drove  the  money  changers  from  the  sacred  edifice?
Shall  the  fig  tree  [Matth.  21 :  19] ,  which,  sterile  by  nature  or
worn  out  with  bearing,  stood  there  with  nothing  but  leaves,  be
thought  to  have  been  planted  accidentally  all  those  years  before,
since  Christ  cursed  it  with  such  indignation  as  an  everlasting
illustration  of  His  detestation  of  hypocrisy?  The  fish  certainly
had  not  kept  away  from  Simon's  net  all  night  by  accident,  when
they  rushed  into  it  in  crowds  after  Christ  came  [Lk.  5 :  4-6]  and
bade  him  be  of  good  cheer.  For  they  were  the  instruments  for
the  great  miracle,  by  which  such  a  vast  quantity  of  fish  was
caught.  The  five  barley  loaves  and  two  fishes  [John  6:9]
were  not  at  hand  by  chance,  nor  the  honey  in  the  honeycomb,
with  the  portion  of  cooked  fish  left  over  [Lk.  24:  42],  since  in


On  the  Providence  of  God  215

both  cases  the  miracle  which  followed  bears  witness  to  Provi-
dence. But  I  shall  be  overloaded  with  abundance  of  testimony
rather  than  refuted  by  the  want  of  it,  so  full  of  illustrations  is
everything.  I  pass  by  the  clear  testimony  of  Scripture,  by  which
we  see  that  everywhere  the  things  we  say  occur  by  accident  are
done  and  regulated  by  Providence.  I  pass  on,  therefore,  to  the
illustrations  which  have  to  do  with  man.

The  case  of  Joseph  is  altogether  of  such  a  kind  that  more
than  anything  else  it  shows  the  hand  of  Providence  in  all  things.
It  is  no  accident  that  as  a  boy  he  was  clothed  with  the  coat  of
many  colors.  For  afterwards  it  was  more  surely  recognized,
although  it  had  been  so  soaked  with  the  blood  of  goats  that  it
presented  the  appearance  of  a  garment  torn  by  a  wild  beast.  He
has  a  dream ;  it  is  no  accident,  for  he  rouses  the  hatred  of  hi?
brothers  against  himself  in  consequence  of  his  interpretation,
and  foretells  what  was  some  time  to  come  true.  He  falls  un-
wittingly into  his  brothers'  wicked  machinations ;  it  is  no  acci-
dent, for  when  he  relates  the  crime  to  his  father  [Gen.  37:  2],
he  displays  the  magnanimity  of  his  nature  and  incites  his
brothers  to  doing  what  God  had  determined.  When  on  his
way  to  see  his  brothers  as  they  pastured  their  herds  in  the  fields,
he  loses  his  way  and  is  brought  back  to  the  path ;  it  is  no  acci-
dent, for  thus  is  manifested  the  alertness  of  the  still  young  lad
and  the  care  of  Providence  which  gave  him  a  guide  to  set  his
wandering  steps  in  the  right  road.  What  need  of  lengthy
detail?  He  is  thrown  into  the  pit,  drawn  out,  sold,  the  Ishmael-
ites  pass  by.  What  is  accidental  in  these  things?  We  see
clearly  that  the  traders,  a  class  of  men  not  always  useful,  took
their  journey  to  the  best  advantage  through  the  region  in  which
they  bought  a  Joseph,  a  man  who  was  one  day  to  be  the  father
of  his  country.  He  is  charged  with  adultery,  and  languishes
among  prisoners.  Others  have  a  dream  which  becomes  the
occasion  of  his  deliverance.  He  shows  by  his  interpretations
that  even  dreams  are  never  so  vain  that  they  are  not  sent  by
Providence  for  some  purpose.

Now,  to  say  nothing  of  the  physicians  who  easily  discover
the  constitution  of  the  body  from  dreams,  to  say  nothing  also  of
those  kinds  of  dreams  by  which  something  important  is  told  or
taught  or  by  which  the  drunkard  condemns  his  drunkenness  or
the  passionate  man  his  rage  or  lust,  if  we  got  nothing  else  from


216  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

dreams  than  the  fact  that  remembering  them  we  discover  that
the  soul  is  immortal  (for  since  it  does  not  rest  even  in  sleep,
but  fashions  phantom  shapes,  even  as  animals  also  do,  which,
though  it  [the  soul]  generally  discovers  them  to  be  vain,  yet
cling  to  the  memory  afterwards,  while  they  vanish  for  the
animals,  by  which  manner  is  it  not  proved  that  real  being  is
ours,  that  is,  substance  whose  nature  is  unresting  and  unweary-
ing?)— if,  I  say,  we  brought  away  from  dreams  this  advantage
only,  it  would  be  enough  to  show  that  not  even  such  a  trifling
thing  as  a  dream  makes  its  appearance  without  Providence.
Thus  Joseph's  whole  life  is  nothing  else  than  a  testimony  to
the  fact  that  all  things  are  done  by  Providence.  There  is  no
event  in  it  which  has  not  been  shown  to  have  taken  place  at  its
own  good  time  by  command  and  ordination  of  God.

But,  having  made  this  little  digression  about  dreams,  J
know  that  there  will  be  people  who  say  that  this  reasoning  is  too
thin  and  even  vain,  chiefly  on  the  ground  that  some  dreams  are
so  trivial  and  others  so  vile  that  it  seems  wicked  to  drag  Provi-
dence down  to  such  low  things.  Let  them  have  this  answer : —
Since  Providence  Himself  has  condescended  (for  nothing  is  too
much  for  His  kindness ;  consider  in  detail  the  humanity  which
the  Son  of  God  actually  put  on) — condescended,  I  say,  to  de-
clare important  things  by  dreams,  why  should  any  one  venture
to  accuse  me  of  boldness,  when  I  attribute  dreams  as  well  as
everything  else  to  Providence,  especially  when  in  this  matter  the
argument  from  one  to  all,  from  the  individual  to  the  universal,
is  sound?  For  it  is  a  logical  argument: — Providence  has  once
been  found  to  have  decreased  the  harvest  by  drought  and  again
to  have  restored  it  by  rain ;  therefore  Providence  always  has  a
care  for  the  harvest.  Therefore  He  never  neglects  the  things
that  pertain  to  this  care,  whether  He  wills  to  withhold  or  to  pour
out  abundantly.  For  one  instance  of  neglect  would  utterly  do
away  with  both  the  clear  vision  and  the  power  of  Providence,
as  has  been  sufficiently  shown  above.

Then  again,  from  what  dreams  can  it  be  said  that  nothing
results,  even  if  we  look  only  at  the  foolish  telling  or  thinking
about  the  dream,  nay  a  vain  effort  to  remember  it?  The  man
who  tells  a  vain  dream  to  others  sometimes  interrupts  serious  or
harmful  discourse,  and  this  God  uses  for  some  good  purpose,
although  we  may  sometimes  not  discover  the  good  until  later,


On  the  Providence  of  God  217

sometimes  never.  Or  he  gives  himself  or  others  occasion  for  re-
peated reflection.  So  the  man  who  recalls  a  dream,  brings  hia
attention  to  something  good  or  bad  which  Providence  wishes
him  to  think  about.  And  if  he  seeks  in  vain  and  cannot  bring
up  again  a  dream  that  has  disappeared,  this  also  happens  not
without  profit,  calling  him  from  harm  or  relaxing  him  for  the
lighter  things  of  life.  For  all  these  things  tend  to  advance  or
stimulate  men's  plans  and  thoughts,  and  deeds  follow  plans.

See  how  things,  whose  importance  we  do  not  rightly  esti-
mate, are  not  necessarily  of  no  consequence.  We  fancy  that  the
swarms  of  bugs,  lice,  and  fleas,  since  these  are  hateful  to  man,
are  unworthy  of  Divine  Providence,  but  if  we  consider  the  de-
cayed matter  from  which  they  are  produced  for  the  purpose  of
delivering  us  of  it  without  harm,  we  shall  see  that  cruel  plagues
are  sometimes  averted  by  these  insignificant  things.  The  in-
sects produced  from  the  decayed  matter  of  the  wild  fig  tree
soften  the  figs  unto  ripeness.*  These  facts  have  been  discovered
to  be  such.  Others  though  not  equally  understood  are  equally
sure,  namely  that  from  rottenness  and  decay  are  produced
things  into  which  these  pass  and  are  thus  prevented  from
causing  greater  harm.

Every  one  admits  that  this  is  the  proper  view  of  worms,
flies,  gadflies,  roaches,  spiders,  locusts,  and  that  kind  of  little
insects,  namely,  that  they  are  produced  from  poisonous  rotten-
ness that  would  do  harm  unless  it  passed  into  the  little  beast
which  is  made  to  deliver  man  from  it  without  injury.  Since,
therefore,  the  things  outside  of  man  are  thus  changed  and  puri-
fied for  his  good,  how  much  more  are  the  things  within  man,
namely,  thoughts,  dreams,  visions,  counsels,  interests,  and  in-
differences, not  without  purpose  but  always  taken  up  or  allowed
to  drop  for  some  good  end !

I  do  not  regard  this  as  pointing  to  our  being  unduly  care
less  of  ourselves,  though  this  itself  is  from  the  Deity.  On  the
contrary,  we  ought  to  understand  that  a  man  does  all  things
according  to  his  election  or  rejection.  He  who  has  been  rejected
of  God  directs  all  his  schemes  to  getting  riches  and  pleasures,
and,  wishing  to  acquire  or  striving  to  retain  the  name  of  a  good
man,  he  conceals  all  his  w^rong  doings  by  hypocrisy  or  parades

•For  the  correct  interpretation  see  Driver  in  "Cambridge  Bible,"  The
Book  of  Amos,  p.  207f.


218  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

them  with  polish  and  adornment  as  virtues.  Who  will  regard
plans  of  this  kind  a  little  thing?  They  are  as  much  greater
than  works  as  the  cause  is  superior  to  the  work  that  follows  from
it.  For  unless  planning  goes  before,  no  works  will  follow.  If
anything  is  accomplished  without  the  thought  of  the  doer,  it  is
not  credited  to  him,  so  much  higher  is  purpose  reckoned  than
achievement.  We  grant  that  the  works  of  the  unregenerate  and
accursed  are  done  by  Providence,  shall  we  deny  this  of  their
plans?  Now,  if  we  grant  the  plans,  why  should  we  not  with
equal  propriety  attribute  all  that  belongs  to  the  plans  to
Providence?

He  who  has  been  elected  of  God  turns  all  his  zeal  toward?
acquiring  real  virtue,  not  counterfeit,  not  on  his  own  account,
but  to  the  glory  of  God  and  the  good  of  his  neighbors.  He  de-
votes his  efforts  to  their  advantage,  not  his  own.  It  is  his  highest
pleasure  to  give  glory  to  God  or  win  advantage  for  his  neighbor.
Whatever  he"  listens  to,  thinks  upon,  undertakes,  he  manages
skillfully,  is  undaunted  and  does  not  retreat.  Whatever
happens,  he  recognizes  must  happen  so,  and  understands  that
by  these  events  the  goal  at  which  he  is  aiming  is  to  be  attained.
Who  would  deny  that  all  his  designs  and  thoughts  and  efforts
are  from  God,  since  he  regards  and  reverences  the  Deity  in  all
things,  even  when  he  sins  through  weakness,  he  interprets  even
his  sin  to  the  glory  of  God,  as  will  presently  be  made  clear  in
the  case  of  David?

Nothing,  therefore,  is  done  or  achieved  which  is  not  done
and  achieved  by  the  immediate  care  and  power  of  the  Deity.  I
pass  by  willingly  and  knowingly  both  the  dream  which  the
Midianite  told  to  his  fellow  soldiers  on  awaking  [Jdg.  7:  13],
and  the  chance  coming  of  the  reconnoitering  Gideon  to  him.
In  these  things  we  see  that  the  dream  which  in  form  was  most
absurd  did  not  come  by  accident,  and  that  Gideon,  without  his
own  knowledge  to  be  sure,  but  not  without  God's  providence,
came  upon  that  place  where  he  found  evident  hope  of  accom-
plishing his  whole  purpose.

Bathsheba  seems  to  have  gone  accidentally  to  bathe  and
David  to  have  been  an  accidental  spectator  thereof  [II  Sam.
11 :  2],  but  when  we  hear  the  tragic  end  of  the  story,  are  we  not
seized  with  wondering  horror?  David  had  violated  the  wife  of
his  most  faithful  champion,  and,  having  inflamed  rather  than


On  the  Providence  of  God  219

satisfied  his  lust,  formed  the  wicked  design  of  destroying  the
innocent  husband  who  had  no  thought  of  vengeance,  and  of
thus  being  able  to  satisfy  his  desire  for  the  woman  to  his  heart's
content.  Everything  proceeded  according  to  his  wish,  so  that
the  prophet  expressed  in  two  words  the  greatness  of  the  crime,
which  no  words  were  adequate  and  strong  enough  to  describe
fully — Thou  hast  ravished  and  killed.  Then  David,  coming
to  himself,  was  so  humbled  and  cast  down  that  this  great  fall
was  a  bar  to  any  self -exaltation  on  his  part  that  might  have  led
to  his  death.  David  was  elected  of  God,  and  was  a  man  after
His  own  heart.  Therefore,  this  great  sin  turned  out  well  for
him.  But  what  other  thought  can  we  believe  that  he  had  all
his  life  than  this: — "The  Lord,  thy  God,  willed  that  thou
shouldst  fall  into  this  sin,  that  thou  mightest  recognize  that  thou
art  but  a  man.  He  gave  thee  first  the  gift  of  prophecy.  He  gave
thee  strength,  greatness  of  soul,  a  crown,  a  kingdom,  riches,  and
promised  thee  a  Saviour.  All  this  might  have  turned  thy  head
if  He  had  willed,  but  He  is  kinder  to  thee  than  thou  wouldst
thyself  have  been.  He  has  humbled  thee  by  this  monstrous
crime,  that  thou  mightest  not  think  of  thyself  as  something
greater  than  man.  Thus  does  thy  God  make  thee  an  example  of
His  bounty  and  His  mercy."  For  so  long  as  the  world  lasts
when  we  want  to  encourage  any  one  who  sees  himself  a  sinner,
we  shall  hold  up  before  him  the  case  of  David  as  an  illustra-
tion of  pardon,  like  a  mirror  or  painting  from  which  he  may
learn  the  readiness  of  the  Lord  to  show  mercy.  Shall  we  say,
then,  that  all  these  things  happened  by  accident,  when  they
furnish  such  instructive  examples?

I  will  add  another  illustration  to  corroborate  the  above.  In
the  last  chapter  of  the  second  book  of  Samuel  is  written,  ''And
again  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  against  Israel,  and  he
moved  David  against  them  to  say.  Go,  number  Israel  and
Judah"  [II  Sam.  24:  1].  No  passage  can  be  adduced  to  show
more  plainly  than  this  that  not  only  our  deeds  and  works  but
our  thoughts  and  plans  are  suggested  and  inspired  by  the  Lord,
whether  they  be  good  or  whether  they  be  evil.

What  sort  of  man  Jeroboam  was  from  his  early  years  until
he  divided  Israel  and  brought  in  idolatry,  I  do  not  need  to  ex-
pound. But  however  wicked  and  reckless  he  was,  he  was  yet
installed  as  it  were  in  royal  power  by  the  prophet  Abijah,  when


220  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

he  cut  his  cloak  into  twelve  parts  and  gave  ten  to  the  future
king  of  the  ten  tribes  [I  Kings  11 :  30,  31] .  Since,  therefore,  he
had  set  up  golden  calves  to  be  worshipped,  why  did  God  not  only
suffer  but  order  him  to  seize  the  kingdom?  It  so  pleased  Him.
He  was  going  to  reject  Israel.  He  undertook  this  affair,  there-
fore, with  these  methods,  that  we  might  see  that  things  are  done
according  to  His  will  and  not  according  to  our  decisions.

Be  it  enough,  therefore,  to  have  brought  forward  all  these
examples  in  proof  of  the  fact  that  everything  that  is  done,
whether  we  call  it  accidental  or  premeditated  and  determined
upon,  is  done  by  the  immediate  providence  of  God,  whether  it
has  to  do  with  inanimate  things  or  with  things  endowed  with
life,  mind  and  understanding — however  much  we,  being  im-
mersed in  such  deep  darkness  of  ignorance,  on  account  of  the
gross  sluggishness  of  the  flesh,  fail  to  see  all  this  clearly.  And
if  to  any  it  is  given  to  look  at  these  things  from  a  somewhat
higher  point  of  view,  good  Lord,  what  delight  they  feel,  when
they  detect  everywhere  the  wisdom  and  goodness  of  the  Deity,
60  that  the  contemplation  of  the  universe,  beautiful  as  it  is,  is  a
sordid  thing  beside  the  delightf  ulness  that  meets  them  when  they
mount  to  God,  and  consider  the  architect  of  the  structure  of  the
universe !  For  what  wondering  admiration  do  you  think  enters
the  pious  heart,  when  (to  offer  several  confirmatory  illustrations
of  this  gracious  dispensation  also)  it  considers  the  aforesaid
Jeroboam  who  was  ordained  by  God  to  separate  Israel  into  two
kingdoms,  and  presently  abandoned  him  whom  He  had  in-
stalled, after  he  had  set  up  golden  calves  to  be  worshipped !  This
thing  first  brought  Israel  and  then  Judah  to  destruction,  for  it
was  an  unworthy  deed  to  lead  men  away  from  the  true  God  to
idolatry,  but  it  would  have  been  an  ill  considered  plan  on  God's
part  to  raise  a  man  like  this  to  the  throne  who  was  going  to
revolt  against  him,  unless  He  had  determined  to  use  his
treachery  for  the  thing  that  he  was  preparing.

When,  I  say,  piety  considers  what  follows,  so  far  is  it  from
passing  judgment  against  God  that  it  even  wonders  and  extols
His  ways.  Supreme  Goodness  had  determined  to  give  up  the
Jewish  race  at  last  and  choose  the  nations  given  over  to  idols
That  downfall,  therefore,  which  It  was  going  to  bring  upon
Israel,  It  paved  the  way*  for,  by  means  of  Jeroboam. For

*  TrapaoKEvdl^erai.


On  the  Providence  of  God  221

from  this  point  Israel  began  to  totter  until  she  fell  into  the
Babylonian  and  Roman  captivities.  But  the  peoples  of  the
Gentiles,  put  in  her  place,  then  triumphed  in  the  knowledge  of
the  Deity.  When  the  religious  heart  sees  this  so  clearly,  is  it  not
carried  away  with  a  wonderful  joy?

Consider  also  the  value  of  the  lesson  that  by  this  deed  a
warning  is  set  before  our  eyes  showing  whither  dissension  and
division  lead  and  how  sure  a  sign  it  is  of  an  angry  God  and
impending  loss  of  freedom  when  violent  and  irreligious  men
are  set  over  afifairs.  If  we  had  looked  at  this  lesson,  we  should
long  have  had  a  clear  view  of  the  pitiable  downfall  of  the
Christian  cause.  When  effeminate  and  reckless  men  rule  the
Church,  and  boys,  not  to  say  anything  worse,  govern  kingdoms,
what  sign  is  lacking,  not  of  a  tottering  but  of  an  already  falling
Christianity?  What  hope  is  left  us?  How  often  has  any  people
remained  in  safety  after  discipline  and  religion  have  collapsed?
The  preachers  are  at  the  head  of  religion.  These  have  now  be-
come ''fawning  tails"  [Isa.  9:15],  to  use  the  words  of  the
prophet.  The  magistrates  as  guardians  of  justice  are  the  main-
tainers  of  good  order.  May  I  perish  if  you  can  go  through
Europe  and  find  that  there  have  ever  been  any  rulers  more
corrupt,  unjust,  and  violent  than  those  of  today.  But  I  talk  to
deaf  ears.  They  do  not  listen  to  a  warning,  nor  look  at  whole-
6ome  lessons,  nay,  nor  attend  to  an  accusing  conscience  that
trembles  with  fear.

These  things  are,  therefore,  sure  signs  of  the  wrath  of  God
and  that  He  is  going  to  visit  us  with  dire  punishment  as  He  did
those  of  old.  The  poet  says*  that  "nothing  can  be  said  which
has  not  been  said  before,"  but  I  believe  that  nothing  is  done
which  has  not  been  done  before.  Since,  then,  the  Deity  is
always  of  the  same  character,  what  madness  is  it  not  to  see  that
in  equalling  the  ancients  in  our  sins  we  are  also  bound  to  meet
equal  punishment!  So  useful  to  us  would  be  the  lessons  of
ancient  times  if  we  would  only  look  at  them.  But  godlessness
drags  us  elsewhere.

*Zwingli  was  probably  thinking  of  the  words  of  Terence:  "Nihil
dictum  quod  non  "dictum  prius,"  see  Terence,  Eunuchus,  Prol.  10.  But  the
form  of  his  sentence  seems  to  be  influenced  by  a  saying  of  Cicero:  "Nihil
tam  absurdum  did  potest  ut  non  dicatur  a  philosopho,"  for  he  writes:
"Nihil  did  perhibet  Poeta  posse,  quod  non  olim  quoque  dictum  sit."


222  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwin^li

But  I  return  to  my  subject.  This  much  good  followed  the
insurrection  of  Jeroboam  that  the  Jews  then  began  to  be  an
example  of  faithlessness  and  afterwards  of  divine  rejection,  and
the  door  was  opened  to  the  Gentiles  for  the  knowledge  of  God.
For  after  the  Babylonian  captivity  the  Jews  never  came  to  their
own,  and  finally  under  the  Romans  were  utterly  ruined  on
account  of  the  crucifixion  of  Christ.

That  God  made  man  to  let  him  fall  fills  many  with  wonder,
but  when  they  consider  that  matter  more  deeply  and  see  how
at  the  time  He  determined  to  fashion  man.  He  also  decermined
to  redeem  him  through  His  Son  (for  as  soon  as  He  began  to
think  of  fashioning  man,  He  saw  how  he  was  going  to  fall,  to
speak  as  we  must  after  the  manner  of  men) ,  they  at  once  under-
etand  that  it  was  an  inestimable  blessing  that  man  was  so  made
that  he  could  fall.  Otherwise  the  Son  of  God  would  never  have
put  on  human  nature.  Thus  good  always  follows  from  the
works  of  God,  even  though  the  beginnings  may  not  be  free  from
some  marked  crime.

Jacob  lamented  that  his  son  Joseph  had  been  torn  to  pieces
by  wild  beasts,  when  his  brothers  had  committed  their  capital
offence  against  him.  But  what  a  glad  ending  came  to  the  mat-
ter as  a  whole !  The  father  believed  he  w^ould  be  killed  by  his
grief,  but  to  him  and  to  all  his  many  descendants  that  event
became  a  source  of  life  which  in  the  beginning  had  been  so
wicked.  Nor  is  God  acting  unjustly  and  violently  when  He
afflicts  the  father  with  grief  and  the  son  with  disaster.

Who  would  accuse  the  husbandman  when  of  the  forest
which  he  maintains  he  keeps  part  for  timbers  and  beams  and
posts,  with  which  to  build  a  house,  and  uses  part  to  feed  a  fire?
Is  not  the  use  of  both  parts  profitable  and  advantageous,  nay,
even  necessary  to  the  owner?  Indeed,  is  not  the  part  which  is
consumed  in  the  fire  more  necessary  than  that  which  goes  into
the  building?  So  the  pitiable  misfortunes  of  Jacob  and  Joseph,
most  righteous  of  men,  do  not  convict  God  of  cruelty  and
violence,  partly  because  all  things  are  His  more  completely  than
the  wood  is  the  husbandman's,  partly  because  all  His  works
turn  out  happily,  not  at  the  time  we  desire,  but  at  the  seasonable
time  which  He  alone  knows.

Herod  perpetrated  an  atrocious  deed  when  he  slaughtered
the  young  and  wailing  children  [Matth.  2: 16],  but  two  bless-


On  the  Providence  of  God  223

ings  came  therefrom  for  us, — first,  that  in  Christ's  escaping  the
plot,  we  see  that  God  was  guarding  and  leading,  and  that  it  is
vain  to  fight  against  God,  and,  secondly,  that  an  illustration
was  left  us  that  impotent  anger,  cruelty,  and  fear  of  losing  the
kingdom  raged  in  vain.  Would  that  the  princes  of  this  cen-
tury would  of  tener  take  that  to  heart !

In  short,  two  sparrows  which  are  bought  for  a  farthing
[Matth.  10:  29],  are  not  separated  so  that  one  falls  to  the  earth
without  God's  providence,  and  this  we  see  applies  to  all  the
chance  events,  as  we  call  them.  Again,  the  hairs  of  our  heads
are  numbered  [Lk.  12:  7],  and  this  applies  to  the  smallest  and
humblest  and  most  indifferent  of  all  things.  Nothing,  there-
fore, however  worthless  in  our  judgment,  is  of  too  little  value
for  God's  providence  to  have  a  care  for  it.  Nothing  can  escape
Him.  As  the  householder  who  has  his  house  filled  with  all
kinds  of  goods  and  arms  and  furniture  and  instruments  of  the
most  varied  assortment,  yet  knows  where  each  thing  is  and  in
what  condition,  whether  worn,  bright  or  covered  with  rust,
whether  whole  or  broken,  now  brings  out  one  thing  to  use  and
leaves  another  put  away  so  that  none  can  complain  that  it  is
used  too  much  or  too  little  nor  can  find  fault  with  the  house-
holder that  he  uses  the  thing  already  worn  oftener  than  that
which  is  going  to  pieces  from  disuse ;  so  God,  the  householder  of
the  whole  universe,  must  know  all  the  things  that  are  in  His
house  and  cannot  neglect  to  look  after  them.  He  knows  how
one  is  dull  through  idleness  and,  as  Cato  says,  perishes  from
lack  of  use.  He  knows  how  another  is  worn  out  with  constant
labors  and  calamities  and  yet  uses  him  more  and  more.  Ho
employs  one  constantly  for  His  glory  and  His  work,  then  puts
him  aside,  and  takes  into  His  hand*  another,  yet  cannot  be
accused  meanwhile  of  any  injustice  or  lack  of  knowledge.  Milo
is  banished,  t  Cato  suffers  defeat,  David  is  prevented  from  enter-
ing his  kingdom,  Caleb,  easily  the  bravest  of  all  the  Hebrews,
is  the  last  to  meet  his  fate.  Thus  it  pleases  Providence  to  use
until  they  are  used  up  and  consumed ;  while,  meantime,  Clodius
and  Piso,  Manasseh  and  Absalom  decline  through  pleasure  and
riotous  living,  and  are  ruined  with  the  rust  of  idleness.  Peter's

fThis  is  Titus  Annius  Milo,  banished  from  Rome  in  52  B.  C,  in  spite
of  Cicero's  defense.


224  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

mother-in-law  and  Timothy,*  both  constant  in  the  work  of  the
Lord,  fall  ill  with  fever;  Herod  and  Nero,  both  unclean  with
all  lewdness,  revel  in  health.  Thus  is  Providence  that  disposes
all  things  free  to  use  the  one  constantly  for  the  general  good,
setting  up  a  pattern  of  living  virtue  and  showing  what  a  great
thing  virtue  is  and  how  it  is  acquired,  or  to  show  others  as  a
sink  and  sewer  of  vices  into  which  they  all  discharge  their  foul
filth.

A  man  complains  that  he  has  been  confined  to  his  bed
many  months  and  learns  shortly  after  how  much  good  it  brought
to  him  or  how  much  harm  he  has  escaped.  A  house  is  burned
but  a  better  one  is  raised  in  its  place,  and  he  to  whom  this  dis-
aster happened  is  humbled  by  it.  Girls  dance,  some  to  learn  to
move  their  limbs  with  proper  grace,  others  to  advertise  by  un-
seemly gesture  to  an  admirer  that  their  chastity  is  for  sale.  Cato
becomes  drunk  for  a  month,  to  relieve  the  burden  of  his  cares
and  thoughts.,  Anthony  prolongs  last  night's  intoxication,  to
plunge  into  lust  and  riot  and  destroy  himself.  Caesar  seizes  a
monarchy,  Brutus  destroys  one,  the  first  sending  headlong  to
ruin  the  Roman  power  already  tottering  to  its  fall,  the  other
to  tear  out  the  tyranny  of  a  Tarquin  and  make  room  for  justice
in  a  future  democracy.  So  God  uses  for  good  all  deeds  both  good
and  ill,  though  with  the  distinction  that  He  turns  to  good  for
the  elect  even  the  evil  they  do,  and  the  contrary  for  the  rejected,
while  we  meanwhile  complain  through  impatience  or  ignor-
ance. Thus  all  things  happen,  because  all  things  are  done  by
His  dispensation  and  command.

EPILOGUE

Now  that,  having  been  borne  over  a  vast  sea  of  wonderful
things,  which  we  have  just  touched  with  the  tips  of  our  oars,
because  our  fear  made  us  fly  rather  than  sail,  w^e  see  at  length
some  harbor,  it  is  time  to  haul  in  the  sails.  I  will,  therefore,
gather  up  the  gist  of  all  the  above  into  a  brief  epilogue  in  the
form  of  aphorisms  as  it  were.  And  I  will  do  it  in  such  a  way
that  one  proposition  will  seem  to  follow  necessarily  from  the
other.

*Paul  speaks  of  Timothy's  infirmities,  I.  Tim.  5:  23,  but  there  is  no
reference  to  fever.


On  the  Providence  of  God  225

If  the  Deity  exists  (and  He  must  exist,  for  there  is  one  first
principle  of  all  things,  and  this  we  call  God),  Providence  also
must  exist.

Now  this  Deity  or  First  Principle  must  be  intelligent,  good,
and  powerful.  For  unless  He  were  intelligent,  how  could  He
create  intellects  or  produce  works  in  certain  shapes?  If  He
were  not  good,  how  could  He  exist  by  virtue  of  His  own  excel-
lence? The  cause  of  destruction  and  decay  is  to  have  had  in
one's  constitution  something  unsound  and  defective.

And  He  must  exist  of  Himself.  For  if  He  depended  upon
something  else,  that  something  else  would  be  the  supreme.  I
am  speaking  of  the  supreme  above  which  nothing  exists  or  can
be  imagined.  If  He  were  not  powerful,  He  would  not  be  the
supreme  good  nor  intelligent.  For  intelligence  is  power  and
moral  excellence,  and  the  good  is  nothing  but  the  moral  excel-
lence, and  moral  excellence  is  nothing  but  right  working.  In
general,  unless  that  supreme  thing  which  is  God  were  supreme
moral  excellence  and  power,  it  would  not  be  God.

That  intelligence  must  be  supreme  just  as  much  as  the
power.  Intelligence  is  not  supreme  unless  it  knoweth  all  things.
So  also  power  is  not  supreme  unless  it  means  the  ability  to  do
all  things,  as  far  as  lawful  ability  is  concerned.  The  ability  to
do  ill  or  to  supplant  one's  self  or  to  turn  like  a  foe  upon  one's  self
or  to  be  inconsistent  with  one's  self  is  weakness,  not  power.

Since,  therefore,  He  knows  all  things.  He  has  the  ideas  of
all  things  within  Him,  and  since  He  can  do  all  things,  power
over  all  things  is  at  His  command.  Since,  at  the  same  time.  He
who  knows  all  things  and  can  do  all  things  is  as  truly  and
simply  good  as  He  is  intelligent  and  powerful,  we  have  Provi-
dence at  once  before  us.  For  He  who  knows  all  things  and  can
do  all  things  would  not  be  good,  unless  He  cared  for  all  things
in  accordance  with  His  wisdom  and  power.

And  as  He  cares  for  all  things,  it  must  be  that  all  things
are  of  Him  and  in  Him.  Indeed  it  follows  from  His  goodness
and  power  that  all  things  are  of  Him,  through  Him  and  in  Him.
For  the  things  he  cares  for  are  certainly  His.  If  they  were  an-
other's, there  would  be  two  deities  at  the  head  of  the  universe.
But  in  admitting  that  Providence  is  at  the  head  of  all  things,
we  ought  not  to  understand  this  in  so  confused  a  manner  a.*'
certain  of  the  theologians  do,  who,  while  recognizing  Provi-


226  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

dence  with  their  lips,  yet  in  speaking  of  man  allow  him  some
freedom,  albeit  very  little,  which  little  they  insist  upon  having  to
some  extent  defined.

But  we  ought  to  recognize  Providence  as  so  broad  of  scope
and  so  complete  that,  if  there  were  anything  which  escaped  Its
notice  or  could  evade  It,  the  Deity  would  either  not  be  supreme
intelligence  or  not  be  supreme  power.  For  in  whatever  quarter
He  failed  to  know  anything,  at  that  point  there  would  be  a  lack
of  supreme  and  perfect  wisdom,  and  at  whatever  point  He  could
not  do  anything,  therein  there  would  be  a  lack  of  supremely
effective  excellence.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  He  passed  by  any-
thing knowingly  and  of  His  own  will,  or  neglected  anything
from  idleness  and  laziness  when  He  had  the  power  to  do  it.  He
would  not  be  the  supreme  good.  The  latter  must  be  so  good
that  absolutely  no  good  can  be  imagined  which  is  not  from  it,
in  it  and,  in  fact,  itself.  For  as  the  Deity  exists  of  Himself,  so
there  is  nothing  else  which  is  of  itself  and  not  of  Him.  To  be  of
the  universe  is,  therefore,  to  be  of  the  Deity.  Hence  the  opinion
of  those  philosophers  is  no  absurdity  who  said  that  all  things  are
one,  if  we  only  understand  them  rightly,  namely,  in  the  sense
that  to  be  of  all  things  is  to  be  of  the  Deity,  in  that  all  things  are
endowed  and  maintained  by  Him.  Hence  nothing  can  be
neglected  by  Him.  For,  since  all  things  are  of  Him  and  in  Him,
there  can  be  nothing  of  Him  or  in  Him  which  is  either  un-
known to  or  esteemed  lightly  by  Him.  His  wisdom  and  good-
ness forbid  it.  From  this  we  may  infer  that  nothing  so  humble
exists  that  it  has  not  existence  from  Divine  Providence,  and
nothing  so  humble  can  be  thought  of,  nay  dreamed  of,  that  it  is
not  thought  of  by  Divine  Providence.  That  we,  however,  dis-
regard many  things,  are  ignorant  of  many  things,  in  short,
despise  many  things,  comes  from  the  fact  that  we  are  not  the
Deity.  To  Him  nothing  is  mean,  because  He  cannot  be  in-
fluenced by  loathing.  To  be  subject  to  loathing,  is  to  be  miser-
able. The  Deity  cannot  be  miserable,  and  therefore  cannot  be
influenced  by  loathing  for  anything.

And  since  Providence  cares  not  only  for  things  themselves
and  their  end,  but  also  for  the  series  of  things,  namely,  the
course  of  action,  life,  performances,  thoughts,  and  what  leads
to  or  attends  their  end  (for  unless  He  did  so,  He  would  again
fall  under  suspicion  of  lack  of  knowledge  or  lack  of  good  will),


On  the  Providence  of  God  227

it  is  clear  that  there  is  nothing,  however  worthless  in  our  judg-
ment, that  is  not  thoroughly  worthy  in  its  kind  and  valuable
in  His  sight.

How  much  more  is  that  rarest  of  all  works,  man,  not
pitiable,  as  far  as  his  kind  is  concerned!  For,  being  endowed
with  intellect,  he  is  raised  in  dignity  above  all  the  things  that
have  sensation.  For  all  except  man  are  without  the  intellect
which  is  chief  among  the  prime  endowments  of  the  Deity.
Since,  therefore,  man  has  it  in  common  with  the  Deity,  albeit
as  a  loan,  he  is  as  much  nobler  than  other  creatures  endowed  with
sensation,  as  the  light  is  than  darkness,  the  bird  than  the  reptile,
the  soul  than  the  body.  Man  so  made  that  he  can  fall  is,  there-
fore, not  the  work  of  inattention  or  displeasure  upon  God's  part,
and  we  must  hold  the  same  view  of  the  angels.  For,  since  these
two  alone  share  with  the  Deity  that  intellect  which  is  the  su-
premely divine  endowment,  and  nothing  is  so  weak  and  lowly
that  it  is  not  thoroughly  good  and  valuable  in  its  kind,  man
must  have  been  made  by  Divine  Providence  most  perfect  in  his
class.  What  we  thoughtlessly  put  down  as  misfortune  is,  there-
fore, really  a  blessing.  The  ability  to  fall  has  been  implanted
by  the  Deity.  Therefore  it  was  for  the  sake  of  some  marked
good.

Now,  since  the  fall  brought  disaster,  the  fall  itself  was  evi-
dently not  a  blessing,  nor  can  the  disaster  which  followed  from
it  be  called  a  blessing  either.  But  when  we  consider  that  which
dawned  upon  man  in  consequence  of  the  fall,  namely,  the
knowledge  of  righteousness,  which  could  not  be  learned  except
by  gazing  upon  the  face  of  unrighteousness,  and  this  God  could
not  show  in  His  own  person,  we  see  that  the  fall  was  imposed
upon  our  race  for  our  good,  that  we  might  learn  by  the  fall  and
by  erring  what  could  not  have  been  done  by  earnest  striving  and
endeavor.

Hence  we  may  infer  that  man's  nature  was  so  constituted
by  the  Deity  that  he  should  learn  more  clearly  by  his  own  fall
what  the  true,  the  right,  and  the  holy  were.  But  if  Divine  Good-
ness had  not  provided  a  remedy  for  the  fall  of  man  at  the  time
when  It  saw  he  was  going  to  fall  in  this  way,  he  would  have
been  created  with  his  endowment  of  intellect  to  no  purpose.  For
what  would  have  been  the  use  of  an  intellect  to  him,  if  he  was
to  perish  like  cattle  or  to  be  carried  off  to  condign  punishment?


228  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

But  since  man  has  been  endowed  with  mind,  it  is  clear  that
he  was  so  endowed  in  order  to  have  intercourse  with  the  Supreme
Mind.  But  all  hope  of  such  intercourse  would  have  been  cut  off,
if  Providence  had  not  provided  a  remedy  for  the  fall.  Nay,  it
would  have  been  a  random  work  for  Providence  to  make  man,
unless  He  had  determined  to  redeem  him,  at  the  time  He  saw
he  was  going  to  fall.  The  counsels  of  God  are  everlasting.
Therefore  the  plan  of  redemption  is  just  as  eternal  as  that  of
creation.

The  election  of  God,  therefore,  stands  secure  and  immov-
able, though  he  ordained  to  take  the  elect  to  Himself  by  means
of  His  Son.  For  when  righteousness  was  to  be  learned  through
its  opposite,  unrighteousness,  and  unrighteousness  had  not  yet
been  born,  though  righteousness  existed  from  everlasting,  it
could  have  been  forced  out  prematurely  through  transgression
of  the  law,  and  when  it  came  forth,  it  had  no  real  vital  force.
Whatever  was  born  of  it,  therefore,  must  have  the  same  condi-
tion, so  that  in  the  innermost  heart  of  Providence  the  redemp-
tion must  have  been  conceived  as  early  as  the  creation  of  man.

If  now  election  and  redemption  are  co-eternal,  election
remains  sure,  even  though  the  elect  fall  into  such  monstrous  sins
as  characterize  the  godless  and  rejected.  Only  to  the  elect  they
are  an  incentive  to  regeneration,  to  the  rejected  a  reason  for
despair.  David,  Paul,  Mary  Magdalene,  the  thief,  and  others
are  witnesses.  Therefore,  for  the  same  reason,  the  course  of  our
lives  is  foreseen  and  arranged  from  eternity,  so  that  Esau,
though  mortal,  yet  under  the  guardianship  of  Providence,  could
not  die  until  by  his  heinous  crimes  he  had  given  proof  of  his
rejection,  and  Abel  could  not  possibly  have  been  saved,  since
Providence  had  ordained  to  transport  him  hence  as  a  spotless
victim,  sacrificed  by  the  murderous  hand  of  his  brother.

Therefore,  all  the  fortunes  of  life  are  to  be  borne  with
equanimity,  but  we  must  not  explain  Providence  so  as  to  say,
"I  will,  therefore,  indulge  my  inclinations.  If  I  am  elect,  I
shall  attain  felicity  however  I  live."  Men  who  speak  thus  give
evidence  either  that  they  are  not  elect  or  that  they  have  not  yet
acquired  faith  and  the  knowledge  of  God.  For  those  who  have
the  knowledge  of  God  know  that  life  must  be  ordered  according
to  God's  will,  and  those  who  have  faith  know  that  they  are  elect.
And  the  elect,  knowing  this,  cannot  help  seeing  that  they  must


On  the  Providence  of  God  229

refrain  from  whatever  the  law  forbids.  All  things,  therefore,
work  together  for  good  to  the  elect,  all  things  that  have  to  do
with  them  are  done  by  Divine  Providence,  and  there  is  nothing
trivial  enough  to  be  trivial  in  God's  dispensation  and  activity.
Though  the  Catabaptists,  who  pretend  to  be  so  directed  by  the
Spirit  that  if  they  stand  still  suddenly  or  go  forward  suddenly,
they  put  it  down  to  the  Spirit,  are  not  wrong  (for  we  do  not  live,
much  less  move,  without  the  action  of  the  Deity),  yet  however
much  things  of  this  kind  are  done  by  God's  impulse,  they  are,
nevertheless,  done  to  publish  the  rejection,  hypocrisy,  and  folly
of  these  people.

In  a  word,  the  proper  recognition  of  God's  providence  is  to
the  pious  and  God-fearing  the  greatest  and  most  helpful  anti-
dote against  the  evils  of  both  prosperity  and  adversity.  For  if
riches,  beauty,  good  health,  children,  honors  and  office  fall  to
our  lot,  and  we  recognize  them  as  given  by  the  blessing  of
Providence,  what  a  sense  of  rest  and  also  of  responsibility  is
called  forth  in  our  hearts !  The  first,  when  we  see  that  even  the
good  things  of  the  body  are  given  by  the  Deity  and  may  be
enjoyed,  the  second  in  that  we  can  never  guard  enough  against
dispensing  in  a  miserly  manner  what  we  have  so  generously
received.  From  the  one  spring  feelings  of  thankfulness,  from
the  other  watchfulness  and  the  strictest  integrity  of  life.

If,  on  the  other  hand,  poverty,  ugliness,  illness,  childless-
ness, lack  of  appreciation  and  defeats  fall  to  our  lot,  and  we
attribute  them  to  Providence,  what  comfort  it  brings  us  amid
such  hard  lines !  With  what  high  spirit,  think  you,  such  a  man
rises  above  the  world  and  scorns  what  is  below  him!  Having
said  to  himself,  "These  things  are  given  me  by  Divine  Provi-
dence. The  cup  must  be  drained,  therefore,  and  the  battle  won
by  endurance  with  undaunted  soul.  You  are  God's  tool.  He
wills  to  wear  you  out  by  use,  not  by  idleness.  Oh,  happy  man,
whom  He  calls  to  His  work !",  he  is  ready  to  lay  down  his  life,
seeing  that  the  whole  world  can  promise  nothing  but  varied
misfortunes  and  hardships.  Would  not  our  friend  gladly  and
willingly  suffer  the  whole  world,  if  he  possessed  it,  to  be  taken
from  him  again  ?  Who  would  not  give  up  a  farm  whence  there
was  no  return  but  profitless  toil?  To  this  point  the  religion  of
Providence  leads.  For  when  we  see  the  things  we  are  in  the
habit  of  calling  goods  of  fortune,  so  variable  and  uncertain  that


230  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

they  cannot  remain  in  any  fixed  place,  we  shall,  unless  un-
balanced in  mind,  bend  all  our  efforts  to  standing  firm  ourselves
and  not  tossing  about  with  them,  just  as  a  ship  seeks  shelter
from  the  blast  behind  some  headland,  gets  ready  and  casts
anchor  there.  Hence,  what  can  strengthen  us  against  the
buffetings  of  these  misfortunes  but  the  contemplation  of  Provi-
dence? It  suggests  to  the  stoutest  heart  the  thought,  "Believe  not
that  these  things  happen  by  accident.  They  are  done  at  my
command.  They  had  to  be.  They  could  not  be  otherwise.  If
you  bear  them  bravely,  you  will  win  a  splendid  triumph,  not
in  the  eyes  of  those  who  applaud  even  the  most  wicked,  if  he
only  achieves  some  bloody  deed,  but  in  the  assembly  of  the  blest,
where  of  all  the  righteous,  and  brave,  and  wise,  and  learned,
and  pious,  that  have  been  since  the  foundation  of  the  world,  not
one  fails,  where  recklessness  cannot  sell  itself  for  bravery,  hypoc-
risy for  religion,  chatter  for  learning,  empty  oratory  for  wis-
dom. For  there  assemble  only  those  who  have  sought  the  real
gold  of  virtue,  not  dross.  There  presides  a  master  of  the  contest
whom  none  can  deceive,  and  who  himself  cheats  and  deceives
none.  But  if  from  idleness  or  despair  you  shun  toil,  none  will
be  more  disgraced  than  you.  For  the  leader  whom  you  betray
cannot  be  deceived.  He  knoweth  the  secret  recesses  of  the
human  heart.  Your  guilt  cannot  be  denied  or  put  upon  some
one  else.  For  He  sees  written  upon  our  foreheads,  whatever  we
have  done,  and  knows  all  the  types  of  all  things,  so  that  no
change  or  falsification  in  the  superscription  of  the  laws  is  pos-
sible. No  hiding  place  can  conceal  the  murder  done  by  Cain
and  Romulus,  the  crime  of  David  or  Aegisthus.  Hence,  though
before  men  you  can  give  your  sin  another  name,  you  cannot
before  God."

Balaam's  example  can  give  the  strongest  support  to  the
wavering  against  this  instability,  through  which  our  souls  fail
to  put  sufficient  trust  in  the  knowledge  of  Providence.  Balak
had  summoned  him  to  curse  the  people  of  Israel,  and  made  him
no  mean  promises.  But  God  forbad  him  to  undertake  or  utter
anything  against  this  people  [Nu.  22:  12].  See  what  conflict-
ing emotions  rend  his  soul!  God  says  that  his  prophecy  and
curse  shall  have  no  force,  and  he  believes  God  without  question.
On  the  other  side  are  pressing  upon  him  the  king,  heaping  up
promises,  and  greed  like  a  dropsy  forever  thirsty  and  forever


On  the  Providence  of  God  231

drinking,  and  they  pull  the  man  in  different  directions,  so  that
however  vigorously  he  declares  he  will  not  go,  yet  his  greed
urges  him  just  as  vigorously.  At  length  God  allowed  him  to
set  out,  but  on  this  condition,  'Thou  shalt  contrive  nothing
against  Israel."  When  they  came  to  the  real  scene  of  action,
jvhat  efforts  are  made  both  by  the  king  and  the  prophet !  They
gaze  now  upon  part,  now  upon  the  whole,  of  the  Israelite  army
in  vain  attempts  to  bewitch  it.  But  whatever  is  devised  by  the
one  in  his  fear  of  losing  his  kingdom  or  by  the  other  in  his  fear
of  losing  his  reward,  the  cursing  comes  out  according  to  the
command  and  providence  of  God,  not  the  desires  of  man.

Thus,  I  say,  we  struggle  and  waver  in  the  matter  of  Provi-
dence. When  It  presents  Itself  before  our  eyes  so  plainly  that
we  are  forced  even  against  our  will  to  see  It,  regard  It,  and
execute  Its  commands,  we  yet  bid  ourselves  to  hope  for  results
according  to  our  own  desires.  This  recklessness  sometimes  goes
so  far  that  it  promises  us  the  treasures  of  the  Indies  even  in
spit€  of  the  Deity.  But  however  we  clamor  and  whatever  we
devise,  the  plans  of  God  remain  unchanged.  Tyrants  scheme,
and  restless  peasants,  far  less  skillful  and  happy  in  plotting
than  they,  also  scheme,  the  one  to  strangle  the  sprouting  germ
of  the  Gospel,  that  the  boundless  extortions  with  which  they
keep  up  every  lewdness  and  luxury  may  not  be  brought  to  light,
nor  the  distinction  between  right  and  wrong  be  seen,  lest  the
wiles  of  their  crooked  lives  and  words  be  discovered,  and  they
be  no  longer  able  to  cover  up  their  violence  with  the  name  of
righteousness,  if  ever  the  people  understand  what  force  and  right
are,  the  others  to  see  how  under  pretense  of  championing  the
Gospel  they  can  aim  at  unrestrained  wantonness  rather  than  at
the  liberty  of  a  free  man.  Does  not  greed  urge  them  on  as  much
as  it  did  Balak  and  Balaam?  But  what  purpose  will  finally
succeed?  Certainly  not  Balak's,  however  much  he  rages  and
fears  for  his  kingdom,  for  the  camp  of  Israel  will  be  safe  under
the  protection  of  the  Lord;  nor  the  purpose  of  Balaam  boiling
with  greed,  for  the  Gospel  of  Christ  seeketh  not  wantonness  nor
wrong.  But  the  purpose  of  the  Lord  will  be  victorious,  in
accordance  with  which  He  has  determined  to  cleanse  His
Church  of  the  worst  rubbish,  not  to  introduce  it  therein.

But,  "why,"  you  say,  "did  the  Lord  allow  Balaam  to  set
out,  when  He  was  going  to  bring  his  journey  to  naught?"  That


232  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

we  poor  fools  might  see  that  plans  are  vain  when  formed  at  the
instigation  of  greed.  For  though  they  advance  for  a  time
towards  success,  they  yet  fail  in  the  end.  And  also  that  we
might  see  that  this  enmity  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit  can
never  be  composed  nor  any  agreement  be  reached  that  shall
prevent  either  from  working  against  the  other  according  to  its
obstinate  rebelliousness  or  its  steadfast  perseverance  respectively.
The  angel  blocks  Balaam's  way,  the  ass  balks,  and  dashes  her
rider's  foot  against  a  wall.  Why  are  these  things  done  in  this
way  by  Providence,  especially  when  he  might  have  destroyed
the  rebellious  prophet  with  one  word?  We  might  just  as  well
ask  why  He  made  man  to  suffer  so  many  hardships.  Nay,  why
does  He  not  take  him  to  the  realms  above,  as  soon  as  he  is  born  ?
But  why  do  I  say  as  soon  as  he  is  born?  Why  does  He  suffer
him  to  be  born,  especially  since  there  is  hardly  any  distress
equal  to  that  of  the  birth  of  man?

Trees  ar^  things  of  beauty,  but  since  they  do  not  move,  they
are  not  of  so  high  a  class  as  the  things  that  move.  So  the  world
was  not  made  for  no  one  to  use  it.  And  to  whom  has  the  use  of
it  been  assigned?  To  man.  If  he,  as  I  showed  early  in  my
remarks,  had  never  come  into  the  world,  would  not  that  great
work  be  in  vain?  Who  would  turn  all  these  things  upside
down  with  building  and  tearing  down,  plowing  and  sowing?
Man's  course  and  constitution,  then,  have  been  so  ordained  by
Providence  that  he  tarries  a  while  in  this  world  like  the  fruit  on
the  trees,  and  as  that,  when  ripe,  is  gathered  and  stored  away,
so  he,  after  the  vicissitudes  of  this  world,  is  stored  in  the  heavenly
granary.  Meantime  the  flesh  rebels.  This  must,  therefore,  be
restrained,  now  by  blows,  now  by  gifts  and  rewards.  By  the  one
is  offered  to  it  the  taste  of  future  blessings,  by  the  other  that  of
future  woes.  Hence  the  terror  or  the  comfort  that  visions  bring.
At  one  time,  angels  bring  their  comfort,  that  man  may  see  how
he  is  regarded  by  the  Deity.  Then  again,  the  doings  of  evil
spirits  and  goblins  display  their  terrors,  that  man  may  not  be
indifferent  to  the  warnings  of  the  Deity  and  go  over  to  the  side
of  the  perverted  spirits.

In  general,  if  we  do  not  assign  the  will  of  the  Deity  as  the
reason  why  everything  has  been  made,  we  say  either  that  it  was
enough  for  God  to  delight  in  Himself  without  any  created
things,  since  they  are  of  no  use  to  Him,  or  that  there  is  no  Deity.


On  the  Providence  of  God  233

For  that  anything  should  owe  its  origin  to  any  one  in  a  sort  of
random  way  only  argues  imperfection  in  him,  and  if  the  Deity
is  imperfect,  He  is  no  Deity.  Both  of  these  notions  are  equally
wicked  and  foolish.  For  this  also  is  altogether  incontrovertible,
either  Providence  cares  for  all  things  and  is  nowhere  idle  or
listless,  or  there  is  no  Providence  at  all.  And  if  there  is  no
Providence,  there  is  no  Deity.  And  how  wicked  and  foreign
to  man  that  is,  everybody  can  see.  For  to  what  end  would  he  in
that  case  have  been  endowed  with  a  soul?  To  what  end  under-
stand and  know  the  true,  the  right,  and  the  holy?  If  we  lived
and  died  like  cattle,  we  should  not  be  endowed  with  intelligence
nor  with  aspirations  towards  the  right  and  just.  But  since  we
are  such,  there  is  an  object  for  which  we  are  such.  That,  there-
fore, must  be  something  beyond  all  the  things  in  this  world.
Nay,  unless  the  supreme  good  is  supreme  intelligence  and
supreme  moral  excellence,  it  will  not  satisfy  the  human  mind.
It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  by  ascending  in  this  way  from  our
intelligence  we  arrive  at  the  Deity,  and  when  we  have  reached
Him  we  have  searched  out  Providence  also.  I  pray  that  He  may
show  Himself  more  and  more  to  them  that  worship  Him  and
are  eager  to  see  Him,  and  after  the  exile  of  this  world  vouchsafe
to  them  the  blessing  of  companionship  with  Him, Amen.

Therefore,  to  conclude  at  last,  do  you,  Most  Christian
Prince,  and  ye  other  brethren  who  serve  under  the  banner  of
Christ,  turn  often  to  the  contemplation  of  Providence.  There
you  will  find  rest  and  deliverance  from  all  storms  and  blasts.
It  may  be  that  all  that  I  have  said  may  seem  to  have  been  said
hurriedly,  and,  as  it  were,  cursorily,  and  that  I  have  made
larger  use  of  argument  than  of  the  testimony  of  Scripture,
though  this  is  not  lacking  on  occasion  and  is,  indeed,  the
foundation  for  the  whole  argumentation  which  can  in  no  wise
be  shaken.

I  hope,  however,  that  I  have  offered  to  beginners  and  the
inexperienced  something  to  help  them  to  a  clearer  appreciation
of  the  subject.  I  was  forced  to  write  and  to  read  over  my  words
in  sections.  Hence  it  is  that  on  reading  them  over  I  find
numerous  repetitions,  which  yet  I  have  not  wished  to  expunge.
For  experienced  men  know  what  happens  to  those  who  are
every  moment  distracted  by  the  call  of  new  duties,  so  that  I
doubt  not  you  will  take  it  all  in  good  part. Do  you,  excellent


234  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Prince,  continue  to  live  up  to  your  reputation,  and  may  Divine
Providence  preserve  you  safe  and  sound  to  His  Church.  I
frankly  recognize  that  you  demanded  this  service  of  me,  that
either  some  elucidation  or  my  folly  might  come  to  light.

Zurich,  August  20,  1530.


VI.


A  Short  and  Clear  Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith
Preached  by  Huldreich  Zwingli,  Written  by  Zwingli
Himself  Shortly  Before  His  Death  to  a  Christian
King  ;  Thus  Far  Not  Printed  by  Anyone  and  Now  for
THE  First  Time  Published  to  the  World.  Matth,  11 :
"Come  Unto  Me,"  etc.,  1536.

(Written  July,  1531.)

[CHRISTIA-  I  NAE  FIDEI  A  HULD-  |  RYCHO  ZVINGLIO  PRAE-
DICA-  I  tae,  brevis  et  clara  expositio,  ab  ipso  Zuin-  |  glio  paulo  ante  mortem
eius  ad  Regem  |  Christianum  scripta,  hactenus  a  ne-  |  mine  excusa  et  nunc
primum  |  in  lucem  aedita.  |  Matth.  11.  |  M.  D.  XXXVI.  |  88  octavo
pages,  numbered  by  leaves  2-43.  Signed  p.  58,  Tiguri  Mense  Julio,  Anno
1531;  pp.  59-85,  containing  an  appendix:  De  Eucharistia  et  Missa,  pp.  86-88
blank.  Printed  also  in  Opera  Zwinglii,  Tom  II,  fol.  5506-5646;  Schuler
and  Schulthess  ed..  Vol.  IV,  pp.  42-78.  A  German  edition,  printed  by
Froschauer  without  date,  but  apparently  in  the  same  year,  had  the  follow-
ing title:  Eyn  kurtze  klare  sum  vnd  erklarung  des  Christenen  gloubis,
von  Huldrychen  Zwinglin  geprediget,  vnd  vnlang  vor  synem  tod  zu  eynem
Christenen  Kiinig  geschriben.  At  the  end:  Oetruckt  zu  Zurich  by  Chris-
toff  el  Froschouer.  144  octavo  pages,  numbered  by  leaves;  on  pp.  3-6  a
dedication  of  Leo  Juda  to  Werner  Steyner.  A  copy  of  this  edition  is  in
the  library  of  Union  Theological  Seminary,  New  York  City.  A  partial
modern  German  translation  in  Vlrich  Zwingli  eine  Ausicahl  aus  scinen
Schriften,  Zurich  1918,  pp.  797-816.  The  following  English  translation,
made  by  Mr.  Henry  Preble,  was  revised  by  the  editor.

As  early  as  1526  Zwingli  had  commended  the  reform  of  the  Church  to
King  Francis  I  of  J'rance,  in  the  letter  prefixed  to  his  Commentary  on  the
True  and  False  Religion.  From  the  beginning  of  the  year  1530  the  French
ambassadors  Paisrigault  and  Maigret  were  in  negotiation  with  the  magis-
trates of  Zurich,  both  for  the  purpose  of  avoiding  a  religious  war  and  in
the  hope  of  luring  them  into  an  alliance  with  France.  These  ambassadors
appeared  to  favor  the  Reformation.  In  the  hope  of  opening  a  wider  field
for  the  Reformation  in  France,  Zwingli  entered  into  the  scheme  and  pre-

235


236  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

pared  an  outline  of  the  advantages  to  be  gained  by  the  cities  of  Protestant
Switzerland  making  an  alliance  with  the  French  King  for  fifteen  or  twenty
years  for  the  defense  of  the  Christian  religion.

When  Maigret  asked  Zwingli  to  send  the  King  an  exposition  of  his
teaching,  in  order  to  remove  the  prejudice  against  it  which  had  taken  pos-
session of  the  King's  mind,  Zwingli  complied  with  his  request.  This
exposition  was  taken  to  Paris  in  the  summer  of  1531  by  Rudolph  Collin,
delegate  of  Zurich.  Simmler  in  his  collection  of  manuscripts.  Vol.  XXIX,
has  a  note  upon  a  copy  of  this  book  to  the  effect  that  the  original  copy
written  by  Zwingli  still  exists  in  the  Royal  Library  in  Paris.  "At  the
suggestion  of  Master  Maigret,  Royal  Ambassador  to  the  Swiss,  an  exposi-
tion of  the  Christian  Faith  was  written  by  Zwingli  in  the  month  of  July,
1531. It  was  published  by  BuUinger  in  the  month  of  February,  1536."

Because  Zwingli  in  this  pamphlet  counted  among  the  saints  in  heaven
even  heathen  of  noble  character  and  called  them  blessed  and  holy,  the
pamphlet  caused  great  offense  to  the  theologians  of  his  own  time  as  well  as
to  those  of  later  times.  Luther  was  among  the  most  severe  in  branding
this  view  as  infamous,  while  few  besides  Bullinger  and  the  Swiss  Reformers
praised  it.

A  copy  of  the  "Exposition."  at  one  time  belonging  to  the  library  of
J.  J.  Breitinger,  the  distinguished  antistes  of  Zurich,  1613-43,  contains
some  additions,  taken  from  an  autograph  ms.  of  Zwingli.  These,  noted  at
their  proper  places  by  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  have  been  retained.

H.  Bullinger,  Zwingli's  successor,  who  after  Zwingli's  death  published
the  booklet  in  1536,  prefixed  to  it  this  prefatory  note:

TO  THE  PIOUS  READER  GREETING.

Though  that  most  faithful  herald  of  the  Gospel  and  most  steadfast
champion  of  Christian  liberty,  H.  Zwingli,  was  clear,  careful,  and  trans-
parently plain  in  all  he  said,  yet  in  this  pamphlet  he  surpassed  himself,  as
it  were,  and  sang  a  sort  of  swan-song  upon  the  true  faith  when  near  his
death.  He  sets  forth  lucidly  and  briefly  what  true  faith  and  pious  religion
are.  He  also  makes  answer  to  slanderers  who  defame  the  evangelical  faith
and  preaching,  and  furnishes  unto  all  Christian  kings  and  princes  a  kind
of  complete  defense  of  the  true  faith  and  religion.  I  was  not  willing  to
deprive  you  of  so  rich  a  treasure;  do  you  receive  in  candid  spirit  what  is
offered  with  sincerely  good  purpose.  The  whole  work  has  been  copied  from
the  autograph  manuscript  of  the  author  himself.  This  I  state,  because  the
pamphlet  comes  out  five  years  after  its  author's  death.  It  has  all  been
faithfully  copied.  Farewell.  Zurich,  in  the  month  of  February,  of  the
year  1536.]

PEEFACE

OF  ALL  the  things  that  are  rising  up  in  this  tumultuous
age,  nothing  comes  forward  more  auspiciously  than  in-
auspicious falsehood,  most  pious  King,  either  because  the  evil


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  237

spirit  is  always  trying  to  crush  out  the  Ufe  of  every  good  seed
at  the  start,  or  because  the  heavenly  husbandman  of  souls  as  it
were  sharpens  and  promotes  virtue  and  faith  by  means  of  vice
and  faithlessness,  just  as  the  Spartans,  having  taken  some  town
by  storm  with  much  expenditure  of  toil  and  blood,  ordered  it
not  to  be  utterly  destroyed,  that  they  might  not  lack  a  grind-
stone and  stake,*  as  it  were,  by  which  to  train  their  soldiers.  So
also  the  Lord  suffers  us  to  be  tried  and  troubled  in  manifold
ways  that  we  may  prove  our  mettle  to  Him.  For  how  can  one
become  brave  and  temperate  save  in  the  midst  of  perils  and  an
abundance  of  luxury?  In  the  same  way  the  truth  that  has
begun  to  raise  her  head  becomes  brighter  and  rises  higher  under
the  attacks  of  falsehood.  For  as  this  thrusts  at  her  from  all
sides  and  pours  out  all  its  poison  upon  her,  she  is  forced  to  shake
herself  free,  wipe  off  the  stains  and  defend  her  limbs,  and  thus
it  comes  to  pass  that  the  mask  of  falsehood  and  the  charming
face  of  truth  herself  are  more  and  more  displayed  and  show
themselves  as  they  are. But  enough  of  preface.

The  fear  has  befallen  me  that,  by  the  more  than  empty  and
lying  insinuations  of  certain  faithless  persons,  your  clemency
may  be  sorely  tried,  for  I  know  it  cannot  be  really  provoked.
The  more  faithless  they  are,  the  more  they  do  not  report  but
mangle  the  truth  to  many.  And  they  report  us  in  countless
ways  as  treading  religion  under  foot  and  treating  with  scorn
the  holy  office  and  dignity  of  kings  and  magistrates.  How  true
all  that  is  I  beg  your  fairness  to  pronounce  when  you  have  heard
me  set  forth  to  the  best  of  my  ability  the  sources  of  our  faith,  the
laws  and  customs  of  our  churches,  and  our  reverence  for  our
rulers.

And  there  is  nothing  so  well  within  a  man's  power  as  the
task  to  set  forth  his  faith.  For  since  faith  is,  as  the  apostle
defines  it,  that  power  of  the  soul,  that  assurance  and  certainty,
with  which  one  trusts  unwaveringly  in  the  unseen  God,  who
can  be  so  dull  and  slow  as  not  to  know  how  to  set  forth  whether
he  has  trust  in  a  thing  or  not,  especially  as  faith  is  the  daughter
of  truth?  Every  man  trusts  in  that  which  he  knows  to  be
absolutely  true.  And  since  God  alone  is  true,  if  any  one  feels
and  experiences  that  he  recognizes  this,  how  shall  he  not  be

*The  Spartan  soldiers  learned  to  fight  by  attacking  a  stake  set  in  the
ground.


238  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

able  to  set  forth  this  trust  in  a  few  words? This,  then,  is  my
thought  in  regard  to  God  and  divine  things :


[CHAPTER  I]
REGAEDING  GOD  AND  HIS  WORSHIP

I.  All  the  things  that  are  are  either  created  or  uncreated.
The  one  and  only  uncreated  thing  is  God,  for  there  can  be  but
one  uncreated  thing.  If  there  were  several  uncreated  things,
there  would  be  several  eternals,  for  the  uncreated  and  the  eternal
are  so  closely  allied  that  as  one  is  so  is  also  the  other.  For  if
there  were  several  eternals,  there  would  be  several  infinites,  for
these  are  so  like  unto  and  allied  with  each  other  that  whatever  is
eternal  is  also  infinite  and  whatever  is  infinite  is  also  eternal.
Now,  since  there  can  be  only  one  infinite  (for  as  soon  as  we
admit  two  infinite  substances  each  becomes  finite) ,  it  is  certain
that  the  one  and  only  uncreated  thing  is  God.  On  this  depends
also  the  origin,  source  and  foundation  of  the  first  article  of  our
faith,  that  is,  when  we  say,  "I  believe  in  one  God,  the  Father
Almighty,  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth,"  we  confess  and  declare
that  we  have  an  infallible  faith,  since  it  is  one  resting  securely
upon  one  only  Creator.  The  heathen  and  the  unbelievers  who
trust  in  created  things  are  forced  to  confess  that  they  may  be
deceived  in  their  faith  or  belief,  seeing  that  they  trust  in
created  things.  But  they  that  trust  in  the  Creator  and  Source
of  all  things,  who  never  began  to  be,  but  called  all  other  things
into  existence,  these  cannot  be  convicted  of  error.  This  also  is
certain,  that  nothing  which  is  a  created  thing  can  be  the  object
and  basis  of  that  unwavering  and  indubitable  power  which  is
faith.  For  whatever  has  begun  to  be  at  some  time  was  not.
When,  therefore,  it  was  not,  how  could  anyone  have  trusted  in
what  did  not  yet  exist?  Things,  then,  that  have  had  a  begin-
ning cannot  be  the  natural  object  or  basis  of  faith.  Only  the
eternal,  infinite,  and  uncreated  Good,  therefore,  is  the  true  basis
of  faith.

Hence,  all  that  confidence  falls  to  the  ground  by  which  cer-
tain people  lean  thoughtlessly  upon  even  the  most  sacred  of
created  things  or  the  most  holy  of  sacraments. For  that  in


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  239

which  one  should  trust  with  absolute  assurance  must  be  God.
But  if  one  should  trust  in  a  created  thing,  then  the  created
thing  would  have  to  be  the  Creator,  and  if  in  sacraments,  then
the  sacraments  would  have  to  be  God,  so  that  not  only  the  sacra-
ment of  the  Eucharist,  but  baptism  and  the  laying  on  of  hands
also  would  be  God.  How  absurd  that  is  to  learned,  to  say
nothing  of  pious  men,  not  only  the  learned  but  any  one  endowed
with  intelligence  can  judge.  In  order,  therefore,  to  help  the
theologians  reach  the  truth,  I  shall  gladly  hold  this  torch  be-
fore them.  "When  they  say,  created  things  are  to  be  employed
but  only  God  enjoyed,  they  say  nothing  else  than  what  I  also
say,  if  they  do  not  unthinkingly  put  a  foreign  meaning  into
their  own  words.  For  if  God  alone  is  to  be  enjoyed.  He  alone
also  is  to  be  trusted,  for  that  is  to  be  trusted  which  is  to  be
enjoyed,  not  that  which  is  to  be  employed.

II.  From  this,  most  gracious  King,  you  see  clearly  that
we  do  not  dismiss  the  saints  nor  the  sacraments,  nor  move  them
from  their  place,  as  some  men  say  that  we  do,  but  that  we  keep
and  guard  them  in  their  proper  place  and  dignity,  that  no  man
may  use  them  wrongly.  We  do  not  insult  Mary,  the  Virgin
Mother  of  God,  when  we  forbid  that  she  be  adored  with  divine
honors;  but  when  we  would  attribute  to  her  the  majesty  and
power  of  the  Creator,  she  herself  would  not  permit  such  adora-
tion. For  true  piety  has  one  and  the  same  character  among  all
men  and  is  the  same  in  all,  because  it  originates  by  one  and  the
same  Spirit.  It  cannot  even  be  imagined,  therefore,  that  any
created  being  should  at  the  same  time  be  pious  and  suffer  the
worship  due  the  Deity  to  be  offered  to  himself.  So  also  the
Virgin  Mother  of  God  will  as  much  the  less  accept  the  worship
due  the  Deity  as  she  is  high  above  all  created  beings  and  rever-
ently devoted  to  God,  her  Son.  It  is  a  mark  of  insanity  in
godless  men  and  demons  when  they  allow  divine  honors  to  be
paid  to  them.  This  is  proved  by  the  images  of  demons  and  the
arrogance  of  Herod,  of  whom  the  first,  by  teaching  worship  of
themselves,  deceived  the  world  to  its  destruction,  and  the  second,
not  refusing  the  divine  honors  offered  him,  was  struck  with
phthiriasis,*  that  he  might  learn  to  recognize  the  feebleness
of  man.

*  (p-deipiaai^^ i. e.,  the  morbus  pedicularis, or the louse disease; see
Josephus,  Antiquities,  XIX,  8,  2,  who  relates  of  Herod  Agrippa  that  his


240  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

But  we  venerate  and  cherish  the  sacraments  as  signs  and
symbols  of  sacred  things,  not  as  if  they  were  themselves  the
things  of  which  they  are  signs.  For  who  can  be  so  ignorant  as
to  say  that  a  sign  is  the  thing  it  signifies?  In  that  case  the  word
"ape,"  which  I  write  here  would  place  before  the  eyes  of  Your
Majesty  a  real  live  ape.  But  because  the  sacraments  signify  real
things,  which  really  and  naturally  happened  at  some  time,  I
say  they  represent  these  things,  call  them  to  mind  and,  as  it
were,  set  them  before  our  eyes.  Understand  me  correctly,  I  beg,
O  King !  Christ  by  His  death  atoned  for  our  sins.  The  Eucharist
is  a  commemoration  of  this  thing,  as  He  Himself  said — "This
do  in  remembrance  of  me."  By  this  commemoration  all  the
benefits  are  presented  which  God  has  vouchsafed  unto  us  through
His  Son.  Furthermore,  by  the  symbols  themselves,  namely  the
bread  and  wine,  Christ  Himself  is,  as  it  were,  presented  to  our
eyes,  so  that  not  only  the  ears  but  the  eyes  and  the  mouth  see
and  perceive  the  Christ  whom  the  soul  has  present  within  and
rejoices  in.  This,  therefore,  we  say  and  teach  is  the  legitimate
worship  of  the  saints  and  the  sacraments,  which  Christ  Himself
transmitted  and  taught  us.  "If  ye  are  the  children  of  Abra-
ham," He  said  [John  8 :  37],  "do  the  works  of  Abraham."  This
is,  therefore,  the  example  that  we  ought  to  follow  in  the  case  of
all  saints  and  holy  men.  Thus,  if  any  of  the  prophets  or  holy
men  gave  us  divine  warnings  to  drink,  as  it  were,  we  should
receive  what  has  been  given  and  set  forth  to  us  by  the  divine
Spirit  with  the  same  religious  devotion  with  which  they  received
and  imparted  it.  If  they  adorned  religious  devotion  by  sanctity
of  life,  we  should  follow  in  their  footsteps  and  be  pious,  holy,
and  innocent  as  they  were.

In  regard  to  baptism  He  says,  "Baptize  them  in  the  name
of  the  Father  and  of  the  Son  and  of  the  Holy  Ghost"  [Matth.
28:  19]  ;  in  regard  to  the  Eucharist,  "This  do  in  remembrance
of  me"  [Luke  22 :  17]  ;  and  by  the  mouth  of  Paul,  "We  are  all
one  bread  and  one  body  of  the  faithful"  [I  Cor.  10:  17].  It  is
not  hinted  here,  either  in  regard  to  the  worship  of  the  saints  or

flatterers  called  him  a  god,  and,  not  rebuking  them,  was  struck  by  a  disease
which  ended  his  life  after  five  days'  sufifering.  See  also  Acts  12:  23.  Only
tyrants  and  great  persecutors  are  reported  as  having  been  struck  by  this
loathsome,  but  fabulous,  disease,  so  e.  g.,  Antiochus  Epiphanes,  see  I  Mace.
6:9;  and  Herod  the  Great,  see  Josephus,  1.  c,  XVII,  6,  5,  and  Farrar,
Life  of  Christ,  New  York,  1894,  p.  34.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  241

in  regard  to  the  institution  of  the  sacraments,  that  they  have
the  power  and  grace  which  belongs  to  God  alone.  Since,  then,
the  Deity  has  never  conferred  on  created  things  the  power  which
we  attribute  to  them,  it  is  clearly  frivolous  for  us  to  teach  that
either  the  saints  or  the  sacraments  remove  sins  and  bestow  grace
upon  us.  For  who  remitteth  sins  save  God  alone?  Or  from
whom  is  every  perfect  gift,  as  St.  James  puts  it  [James  1: 17],
save  from  the  Father  of  lights  and  of  all  good?  We  teach,
therefore,  that  the  sacraments  should  be  cherished  as  sacred
things  signifying  the  most  holy  things,  both  such  as  have  been
done  and  such  as  we  ought  to  do  and  show  forth.  Thus  baptism
signifies  both  that  Christ  has  washed  us  by  His  blood,  and  that
we  ought  to  put  Him  on,  as  Paul  teaches  [Gal.  3:  27],  that  is,
live  according  to  His  example.  In  like  manner  the  Eucharist
signifies  both  all  that  has  been  given  to  us  by  divine  bounty
through  Christ,  and  that  we  ought  in  gratitude  to  embrace  our
brethren  with  that  Christian  love  with  which  Christ  has  taken
us  to  Himself,  cared  for  us,  and  secured  salvation  for  us.  But
whether  the  natural  body  of  Christ  is  eaten  in  the  Eucharist
will  be  discussed  at  length  later.

To  sum  up : — This  is  the  f ountainhead  of  my  religion,  to
recognize  God  as  the  uncreated  Creator  of  all  things,  who  solely
and  alone  has  all  things  in  His  power  and  freely  giveth  us  all
things.  They,  therefore,  overthrow  this  first  foundation  of
faith,  who  attribute  to  the  creature  what  is  the  Creator's  alone.
For  we  confess  in  the  creed  that  it  is  the  Creator  in  whom  we
believe.  It  cannot,  therefore,  be  the  creature  in  whom  we  should
put  our  trust.

III.  I  hold  further  in  regard  to  God  this  view : — Since  we
know  that  God  is  the  Source  and  Creator  of  all  things,  it  cannot
be  that  we  should  understand  that  there  is  anything  either
before  Him  or  along  with  Him  that  is  not  from  Him.  For  if
there  could  be  anything  which  was  not  from  Him,  He  would
not  be  infinite,  for  He  would  not  extend  to  where  that  other  was
that  was  outside  of  Him.  Hence,  though  we  see  that  in  the^
Scriptures  God  is  called  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  these  are
not  different  creatures  or  gods,  but  these  three  are  one,  one
essence,  one  existence,*  one  force  and  power,  one  knowledge
and  providence,  one  goodness  and  kindness, — the  names  or


242  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

persons  are  three,  but  they  are  all  and  each  one  and  the  same
^od.  This  God  we  know  is  by  nature  good,  for  whatever  He  is,
He  is  by  nature.  Moreover  that  is  good,  which  is  gentle  and
righteous.  Gentleness  without  righteousness  would  be  no  longer
gentleness,  but  carelessness  or  fear.  On  the  other  hand,  if  you
do  not  temper  righteousness  with  goodness  or  equity,  it  becomes
the  utmost  injustice  and  violence.  Since,  therefore,  we  recognize
that  God  is  by  nature  good,  we  confess  at  the  same  time  that  He
is  mild,  gentle  and  bountiful,  as  well  as  holy,  righteous,  and
inviolable.  Since,  then.  He  is  righteous.  He  must  abhor  con-
tact with  evil.  Hence  we  may  argue  that  inasmuch  as  we  poor
mortals  are  not  only  defiled  with  sin  but  saturated  with  evil,  we
can  have  no  hope  of  fellowship  and  friendship  with  Him.

Again,  since  He  is  good.  He  must  just  as  much  temper  all
His  thoughts  and  acts  with  equity  and  goodness.  This  was  the
cause  of  His  clothing  His  only  begotten  Son  with  flesh,  that  He
might  not  only  show  to,  but  bestow  upon,  the  whole  world
these  two  tMngs,  redemption  and  renewal.  For,  since  His  good-
ness, that  is,  justice  and  mercy,  is  inviolable,  that  is,  firm  and
immutable.  His  justice  required  atonement,  His  mercy  pardon,
and  pardon  a  new  life.  Therefore  the  Son  of  the  most  high
King  put  on  the  cloak  of  the  flesh  and  came  forth  to  be  made  a
victim  (for  in  His  divine  nature  He  could  not  die)  to  placate
unchangeable  justice  and  reconcile  it  with  those  who  even  in
their  own  innocence  did  not  dare  to  come  into  the  presence  of
God,  because  of  their  consciousness  of  guilt.  And  this  He  did
because  He  is  gentle  and  merciful,  and  these  virtues  could  just
as  little  suffer  rejection  of  His  creation  as  justice  could  permit
freedom  from  punishment.  Righteousness  and  mercy  were
mingled  together,  therefore,  that  the  one  should  furnish  the
victim  and  the  other  accept  it  for  the  atonement  of  all  sins.
From  what  class  of  beings,  then,  was  this  victim  to  be  chosen?
From  the  angels?  But  what  did  the  transgression  of  man
concern  them?  From  men?  But  they  were  all  guilty  before
God,  so  that  whichever  one  of  them  had  been  marked  out  for
the  sacrifice  would  have  been  unable  to  accomplish  it  on  account
of  his  defilement.  For  the  lamb,  which  typically  represented*
this  victim,  had  to  be  altogether  soundf,  pure  and  clean.  The
divine  goodness,  therefore,  took  from  itself  that  which  it  would

*  TvntKog  promittehat  t  afiu/noc.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  243

give  to  us.  It  clothed  its  own  Son  with  the  weakness  of  our
flesh,  that  we  might  see  that  its  bounty  and  mercy  were  equally
supreme  with  its  holiness  or  righteousness.  For  what  has  He
left  ungiven  who  giveth  us  Himself,  as  the  divine  Paul  has  said
[Rom.  8 :  32]  ?  If  He  had  made  an  angel  or  a  man  the  victim,
what  He  gave  would  have  been  outside  of  Himself.  There  would,
therefore,  have  been  something  greater  left,  which  He  might
have  given,  namely,  Himself,  but  which  He  had  not  given.

When,  therefore,  supreme  goodness  intended  to  bestow  the
supreme  gift,  it  gave  the  most  precious  thing  it  could  bring  out
of  its  treasure  chest,  namely,  itself,  that  the  heart  of  man,  ever
eager  for  something  greater,  should  not  even  have  a  way  left
to  wonder  how  this  angelic  or  human  victim  could  be  so  great  as
to  be  sufficient  for  all,  or  how  one  could  put  unshaken  trust  in  a
creature.  The  Son  of  God  has,  therefore,  been  given  to  us  as  a
confirmation  of  His  mercy,  as  a  pledge  of  pardon,  as  the  price
of  righteousness,  and  as  a  rule  of  life,  to  make  us  sure  of  the
grace  of  God,  and  to  teach  us  the  law  of  living.  Who  could
worthily  extol  the  greatness  of  this  divine  goodness  and  gen-
erosity? We  had  deserved  to  be  disowned,  and  He  honors  us
with  being  chosen.  We  had  destroyed  the  way  of  life,  and  He
has  restored  it.  Thus,  then,  we  have  been  redeemed  and  re-
newed by  divine  goodness  so  completely  as  to  be  acceptable
through  His  mercy,  and  to  be  justified  and  blameless  through
His  atoning  sacrifice.


[CHAPTER  II]

REGARDING  CHRIST  THE  LORD

IV.  I  believe  and  teach  that  this  Son  of  God  Himself  took
on  human  nature  in  such  manner  that  His  divine  nature  was
not  lost  or  changed  into  human  nature,  but  each  nature  is  in
Him  so  truly,  properly  and  naturally,  that  nothing  has  been
diminished  of  His  divine  nature,  so  that  He  should  not  be  truly,
properly  and  naturally  God.  Moreover,  His  human  nature  has
not  passed  over  into  divine  nature  so  that  He  should  not  be
truly,  properly  and  naturally  man,  save  only  as  far  as  inclina-
tion to  sin  is  concerned. Thus,  in  general,  in  so  far  as  He  is


244  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

God,  He  is  God  with  the  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit  in  such
manner  that  none  of  His  divine  attributes  has  suffered  because
of  the  assumption  of  human  feebleness,  and,  in  so  far  as  He  is
man,  He  is  thus  man  that  He  has  whatever  belongs  to  true  and
literal  human  nature,  so  that  nothing  has  been  taken  from  it
on  account  of  the  union  with  the  divine  nature,  save  the  dis-
position to  sin.  Hence  it  is  that  both  natures  so  reflect  their
own  character  in  all  their  words  and  deeds  that  the  religious
mind  sees  without  trouble  what  is  to  be  credited  to  either  nature,
however  rightly  the  whole  is  said  to  belong  to  the  one  Christ.
"Christ  hungered,"  is  said  rightly  [Matth.  4:1],  since  He  is
God  and  man;  yet  He  did  not  suffer  hunger  according  to  His
divine  nature.  "Christ  cured  diseases  and  ailments"  [Matth.
4:  23],  is  said  rightly;  yet  these  things  belong  to  divine  power,
not  to  human,  if  you  weigh  them  properly.  And  yet  no  division
of  person  follows  on  account  of  the  difference  of  natures,  any
more  than  when  we  say  a  man  thinks  and  sleeps.  Here,  though
the  power  to  Chink  belongs  to  the  mind  only,  and  the  necessity
of  sleeping  to  the  body,  yet  the  man  is  not  on  that  account  two
persons,  but  one.  For  unity  of  person  is  brought  about  even
from  very  different  natures.  In  general,  I  confess  that  God  and
man  are  one  Christ,  just  as  one  man  consists  of  a  soul  endowed
with  reason  and  a  dull  body,  as  Saint  Athanasius  has  taught.
He  took  up  human  nature  into  the  unity  of  the  hypostasis  or
person  of  the  Son  of  God,  not  as  if  the  humanity  taken  on  were
a  separate  person,  and  the  eternal  divinity  were  also  a  separate
person.  The  person  of  the  eternal  Son  of  God  assumed
humanity  into  and  by  virtue  of  its  own  power,  as  holy  mxen  of
God  have  truly  and  clearly  shown.

V.  And  I  believe  that  this  humanity  was  conceived  of
the  virgin,  made  pregnant  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  was  brought
forth  by  preserving  her  perpetual  virginity,*  that  He,  who  from

*Zwingli  still  believed,  with  the  Catholic  Church,  in  the  perpetual
virginity  of  Mary.  Birth  from  a  virgin  was  necessary,  according  to  him,
(see  De  vera  et  falsa  religione,  Werke,  III,  686-7),  because  (1)  the  divinity
does  not  tolerate  any  taint.  But,  if  a  virgin  had  conceived  through  human
agency,  would  not  the  birth  have  been  tainted?  (2)  The  sacrifice  had  to  be
without  a  taint,  but  natural  birth  is  tainted.  The  perpetual  virginity  of
Mary  was  necessary  to  remove  even  the  suspicion  of  taint.  He  tries  to
prove  the  latter  from  Isa.  7:  14  and  Ez.  44:  2,  by  a  very  artificial  exegesis.
See  also  his  sermon  "Von  der  ewig  reinen  Magd  Maria,"  Werke,  I,  391-428.


N


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  245

eternity  was  born  Lord  and  God  from  a  father  without  mother,
might  be  born  into  the  world  as  deliverer  and  healer  of  souls
from  a  virgin  mother,  in  order  that  a  holy  and  spotless  offering
might  be  made  to  Him  unto  whom  all  altars,  loaded  with
animals,  smoked  to  no  purpose,  and  men  might  repent  of  sacri-
ficing beasts  and  turn  to  the  offering  of  their  hearts,  when  they
would  see  that  God  had  prepared  and  offered  to  Himself  a
victim  in  the  form  of  His  own  Son.

VI.  I  believe  that  Christ  suffered,  being  nailed  to  the
cross  under  Pilate,  the  governor,  but  that  the  man  only  felt  the
pangs  of  the  suffering,  not  the  God,  who,  as  He  is  invisible*,  so
is  also  subject  to  no  suffering!  or  sensation.  "My  God,  why  hast
thou  forsaken  me?"  [Matth.  27:46],  is  the  cry  of  pain,  but
"forgive  them ;  for  they  know  not  what  they  do"  [Luke  23 :  34] ,
is  the  voice  of  the  unimpaired  divinity.  And  He  suffered  for
the  expiation  of  our  sins  by  the  most  ignoble  sort  of  punish-
ment, that  He  might  leave  no  depth  of  humiliation  untried  and
unsounded.

VII.  If  He  had  not  "died  and  been  buried,"  who  would
believe  that  He  was  a  real  man?  Therefore  the  apostolic  Fathers
added  in  the  creed,  "descendit  ad  inferos,"  i.  e.,  He  descended  to
those  below,  using  the  expression  as  a  circumlocution  to  signify
real  death.  For  to  be  reckoned  with  those  below  is  to  have  gone
from  the  land  of  the  living,  and  shows  that  the  efficacy  of  His
redemption  extended  even  to  those  below.  And  this  St.  Peter
hints  at  when  he  says  [I  Pet.  3:  19  f.]  that  the  Gospel  was
preached  also  to  them  that  are  dead,  that  is,  to  those  below  who
following  the  example  of  Noah  from  the  foundation  of  the
world,  believed  the  warnings  of  God,  when  the  wicked  were
scornful.

VIII.  On  the  other  hand,  if  He  had  not  risen  again  from
death  to  life,  who  would  believe  that  one  who  had  been  put  to
death,  so  that  there  was  no  life  or  force  left  in  Him,  was  a  real
God?  I  believe,  therefore,  that  the  real  Son  of  God  really  died
as  far  as  His  human  nature  was  concerned,  that  we  might  be
made  sure  of  the  expiation  of  our  sins.  I  believe,  that  He  also
really  rose  again  from  the  dead,  that  we  might  be  sure  of  ever-
lasting life.  For  in  all  that  Christ  is.  He  is  ours ;  all  that  He
accomplished  is  ours. For  God  so  loved  the  world  that  He  gave

*  aoparog.  ■{■  avaXyr/roc.


246  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

His  only  begotten  Son  to  quicken  us  into  life  [John  3 :  16] .
When,  therefore,  He  rose  again.  He  rose  again  for  us,  beginning
by  it  our  own  resurrection.  Hence  also  Paul  calls  Him  ''the
first  fruits  of  them  that  sleep"  [I  Cor.  15 :  20] ,  that  is,  of  the
dead,  for  when  He  lives,  being  dead,  He  shows  that  we  also  live
when  we  die,  for  this  is  the  signification  of  the  word  "to  rise
again"  in  Hebrew — to  remain,  persist,  endure.  Hence  Paul
reasons  as  to  both  alternatives  thus:  If  Christ  rose  again,  that
is,  lived  when  He  was  believed  to  be  dead,  and  took  up  His  body
again,  there  is  for  us  a  resurrection  of  the  dead.  Behold,  most
learned  King,  the  strength  of  the  reasoning  lies  in  this,  that
Christ  is  ours,  and  that  every  activity  of  His  is  ours.  Other-
wise, "Christ  rose  again;  therefore  we  also  rise  again,"  would
not  follow  any  more  than  if  one  argued,  "The  king  has  power
to  free  from  punishment  him  whom  the  judge  has  sentenced;
therefore  every  one  has  this  power."  Hence  this  would  not
follow  either,  "Since  Christ  did  not  rise  again,  neither  shall  we
rise  again,"  for  Christ  can  live  and  rise  again  by  His  own  power,
which  we  cannot  do  by  ours.  But,  [since  Paul  argues]  if  Christ
had  not  risen  again,  there  would  be  no  resurrection  for  us,  it  is
clear  that  He  made  the  power  of  His  resurrection  ours  and  all
men's.  This  is  what  holy  men  had  in  view  when  they  said*
that  Christ's  body  nourishes  us  unto  the  resurrection,  by  which
they  simply  wished  to  show  that  when  Christ,  who  is  wholly
ours,  rose  again,  we  were  thereby  made  sure  that  we  also  live  in
the  spirit  when  dead  in  the  body,  and  shall  some  day  live  again
with  the  same  body.

IX.  Furthermore,  in  that  this  same  Christ  of  ours  has
ascended  into  heaven  and  taken  His  seat  at  the  right  hand  of
the  Father,  as  I  believe  unhesitatingly.  He  promises  that  we  also
who  hasten  thither  as  soon  as  we  die,  shall  one  day  enjoy  ever-
lasting bliss  there  also  in  the  body.  And  as  He  sitteth  there  until
He  shall  come  for  the  general  judgment  of  the  whole  world,  so
our  souls  and  those  of  all  the  blessed  are  with  Him  without
bodies  until  the  aforesaid  judgment,  at  the  beginning  of  which
we  shall  all  put  on  again  the  garment  of  the  body  that  we  have
laid  aside,  and  with  it  depart  either  to  the  everlasting  marriage
of  our  bridegroom  or  to  the  everlasting  torments  of  the  enemy,
the  Devil. Here  I  will  set  forth  two  things  to  you,  as  I  think

*e.  g.,  Irenaeus,  see  p.  53,  note  t-


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  247

about  them,  most  gentle  King.

[CHAPTER  III]

PURGATORY

The  one  is,  that,  since  Christ  did  not  experience  the  tor-
ments of  the  regions  below,  as  St.  Peter  teaches.  Acts.  2 :  27,  but
having  gone  through  death  ascended  to  heaven,  we  also,  when
freed  from  the  bonds  of  the  body,  shall  go  thither  without  delay,
hindrance,  or  new  torment,  if  only  we  have  had  sincere  faith;
and  that  those  who  hold  the  threat  of  the  torments  of  the  fire
of  purgatory  over  mankind,  already  miserable  enough  without
that,  have  dared  to  feed  their  own  greed  rather  than  the  souls  of
the  faithful.  For,  in  the  first  place,  they  utterly  make  void  and
destroy  Christ's  mission.  For  if  Christ  died  for  our  sins,  as  He
Himself  and  the  apostles  imbued  with  His  spirit  taught,  and  as
the  nature  of  our  religion  compels  us  to  confess,  according  to
which  mankind  is  saved  by  the  grace  and  goodness  of  God,  how
could  it  be  admitted  that  we  should  be  compelled  to  make  atone-
ment ourselves?  For  if  those  are  at  variance  with  Christ  who
put  their  trust  in  works,  as  St.  Paul  tells  us,  how  much  more  do
those  cast  off  and  bring  to  naught  Christ  who  teach  that  men's
sins  are  to  be  atoned  for  by  their  own  torment?  For  if  good
deeds  cannot  win  blessedness,  but  torment  wins  it,  the  goodness
of  the  Deity  is  called  in  question  as  if  He  delighted  in  afflictions
and  tribulations,  and  were  averse  to  gentleness  and  kindness.
Secondly,  if  Christ  does  not  take  away  the  penalty  and  punish-
ment due  to  sin,  why  was  He  made  man?  Why  did  He  suffer?
The  distinction  some  theologians  make,  that  we  have  been  re-
deemed from  guilt  but  not  also  from  punishment,  is  a  frivolous
invention,  indeed,  one  insulting  to  God.  For  not  even  a  human
judge  inflicts  punishment  where  there  is  no  guilt.  As  soon,
therefore,  as  guilt  is  remitted  by  God,  punishment  is  done  away
with.  Third,  since  Christ  himself  taught  that  those  who  believe
have  eternal  life  and  those  that  trust  in  Him  who  sent  Christ
to  us  come  not  into  judgment  but  have  already  passed  from
death  into  life,  it  becomes  evident  that  this  delay  in  torment,
which  the  Papists  put  upon  souls  departing  hence,  is  a  baseless
invention.


248  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

[CHAPTER  IV]

THE  PRESENCE  OF  CHRIST'S  BODY
IN  THE  SUPPER*

The  other  thing  which  I  have  undertaken  to  set  forth  here
is  this, — that  that  natural,  material  body  of  Christ's,  in  which
He  sufifered  here  and  now  sitteth  in  heaven  at  the  right  hand  of
the  Father,  is  not  eaten  literally  and  in  its  essence,  but  only
spiritually,  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  and  that  the  teaching  of  the
Papists,  that  Christ's  body  is  eaten  by  us  having  the  size  and  the
exact  qualities  and  nature  it  had  when  He  was  bom,  suffered,
and  died,  is  not  only  frivolous  and  stupid  but  impious  and
blasphemous.  For,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  certain  that  Christ
took  on,  excepting  always  the  inclination  to  sin,  a  real  humanity
consisting  of  body  and  soul,  just  as  we  do.  From  this  it  follows
that  all  the  characteristics  and  endowments  that  belong  to  the
nature  of  the  human  body  were  most  truly  present  in  His  body.
For  what  He  took  on  for  our  sake  was  derived  from  us,  so  that
He  is  wholly  ours,  as  I  have  said  before.  From  this  two  incon-
trovertible corollaries  follow,  one,  that  the  characteristics  which
are  present  in  our  body  are  also  present  in  Christ's  body,  the
other,  that  whatever  there  is  in  Christ's  body,  that  was  corporeal,
belongs  also  to  our  bodies.  For  if  anything  which  has  to  do
with  the  nature  and  character  of  the  body  were  in  His  body  but
lacking  to  ours.  He  would  seem  to  have  assumed  that  not  for  our
sake.  For  what  reason  ?  Because  there  is  nothing  in  the  realm
of  body  except  man  that  is  capable  of  everlasting  blessedness.
Hence  that  point  which  I  touched  upon  before,  that  Paul  proves
our  resurrection  from  Christ's  and  Christ's  from  ours.  For
when  he  says,  '*If  the  dead  rise  not,  then  is  not  Christ  raised"
[I  Cor.  15:  16],  how  can  this  reasoning  be  sound?  For,  since
Christ  is  God  and  man,  who  would  not  at  once  make  answer  to

•Zwingli  seems  not  to  have  intended  to  put  into  this  defense  of  his
position  this  section  upon  the  presence  of  Christ's  body  in  the  Supper  and
upon  the  power  of  the  sacraments,  in  its  entirety,  for  he  added  in  the
margin  the  note,  "You  are  not  to  go  on  with  the  account  here,  but  to  put  in
something  else  that  seems  appropriate  in  place  of  this."  But  this  is  what
Bullinger  attached  to  this  Defense  by  way  of  appendix  along  with  the
statement  on  the  Eucharist.  The  credit  of  this  observation  belongs  to
J.  J.  Breitinger.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  249

Paul,  "Your  reasoning  is  crooked,*  theologian?  For  Christ's
body  can  and  should  rise  again,  being  united  with  divinity,  but
ours,  being  without  divinity,  have  not  the  same  power,"  But
Paul's  reasoning  has  its  strength  in  this  that  whatever  Christ's
body  has,  as  far  as  nature,  endowment  and  characteristics  of
body  are  concerned,  it  has  for  us,  as  our  archetype  as  it  were,
and  it  is  ours.  Hence,  ''Christ's  body  rose  again ;  therefore  our
bodies  will  also  rise  again,"  and  "We  rise  again;  therefore
Christ  also  rose,"  follow  logically.  From  these  sources  drew
Augustine,  that  pillar  of  theologians,  when  he  said  that  Christ's
body  must  be  in  some  particular  place  in  heaven  in  virtue  of  its
character  as  real  body.f  And  again,  "Christ's  body  which  rose  -
from  the  dead  must  be  in  one  place. "t  Christ's  body,  therefore,
is  not  in  several  places  any  more  than  our  bodies  are.  And  this
view  is  not  mine,  but  the  apostle's  and  Augustine's  and  that  of
faith  in  general,  which,  though  we  had  not  witnesses  to  the  fact,
would  suggest  that  Christ  became  in  all  things  like  ourselves.
For  He  took  on  human  weakness  for  our  sake,  and  was  found
as  man  in  character,  that  is,  in  endowments,  characteristics  and
qualities.  By  all  this,  most  glorious  King,  it  is  made  clear  to
you  incidentally,  I  think,  how  unfairly  they  brand  me  as  a
heretic  in  respect  to  the  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist,  when  I
have  never  taught  a  single  word  that  I  have  not  drawn  from  the
divine  Scriptures  or  the  holy  theologians.

But  I  return  to  the  subject,  since  from  that  reasoning  which
rests  upon  the  holy  Scriptures  it  is  established  that  Christ's
body  must  in  a  natural,  literal  and  true  sense  be  in  one  place,
unless  we  venture  foolishly  and  impiously  to  assert  that  our
bodies  also  are  in  many  places,  we  have  wrung  from  our  oppo-
nents the  admission  that  Christ's  body,  according  to  its  essence,
in  itself,  naturally  and  truly  sits  at  the  right  hand  of  the  Father,

*  napaXoyil^ri.

tSee  Augustine,  Letters  187,  c.  13,  §41:  "Doubt  not  that  Christ  is
wholly  present  everywhere  as  God,  and  is  in  the  same  temple  of  God  as
indwelling  God,  and  in  some  one  place  in  heaven  on  account  of  the  measure
[or  limit]  of  a  true  body." Migne,  Pair.  Lat.,  XXXIII,  848.

$The  whole  sentence  reads:  "For  the  body  of  the  Lord  in  which  He
rose  can  be  contained  in  one  place  [or  rather,  according  to  the  reading  of
Gratian,  Peter  Lombard,  and  Thomas  Aquinas,  when  quoting  the  passage,
must  be  in  one  place] ;  his  truth  is  spread  abroad  everywhere."  See  Com.
on  John,  tract,  30,  §1.


250  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

and  it  is  not  in  this  way  in  the  Supper,  so  that  those  who  teach
the  contrary  drag  Christ  down  from  heaven  and  the  Father's
throne.  For  all  the  learned  have  condemned  as  exploded  and
impious  the  opinion  which  some*  have  ventured  to  maintain,
that  Christ's  body  is  just  as  much  everywhere  as  His  divinity.
For  it  cannot  be  everywhere  unless  in  virtue  of  being  infinite  in
nature,  and  what  is  infinite  is  also  eternal.  Christ's  humanity
is  not  eternal;  therefore  it  is  not  infinite.  If  it  is  not  in-
finite, it  must  be  finite.  If  it  is  finite,  it  is  not  everywhere.
But  putting  aside  these  things,  which  I  have  introduced  in
order  not  to  fail  to  meet  the  demands  of  philosophical  argu-
mentation, if  you  should  happen  to  come  upon  such,  0  King,
let  me  come  to  the  impregnable  testimonies  of  Scripture.

I  have  made  it  plain  enough  before  that  whatever  is  said
in  the  sacred  Scriptures  of  Christ  is  said  in  such  way  of  the  whole
and  entire  Christ  that  even  if  it  may  be  easily  detected  to  which
of  His  natures^  the  thing  said  applies,  yet  Christ  is  not  divided
into  two  persons,  however  much  each  nature  possesses  its  own
peculiarity.  For  having  two  natures  does  not  sever  unity  of
person,  as  is  clear  in  the  case  of  man.  And  again,  even  if  the
things  that  belong  to  Christ's  divinity  are  attributed  to  His
humanity,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  things  that  belong  to
His  humanity  to  His  divinity,  yet  the  natures  are  not  confused,
as  if  the  divinity  had  degenerated  and  been  weakened  to
humanity,  or  the  humanity  changed  into  divinity.  This  will
be  made  more  transparently  clear  by  the  testimonies  of
Scripture :

"And  she  brought  forth  her  first  born  son  .  .  .  and  laid
him  in  a  manger"  [Luke  2:7].  That  Christ  who  is  God  and
man  was  born  of  a  virgin,  no  one  denies  on  account  of  the  unity
of  person.  And  therefore  I  hold  that  she  is  properly  called
^eoTOKov,  i.  e.,  the  mother  of  God.  Yet  His  divine  nature  none
but  the  Father  begot,  as  in  the  case  of  man,  also,  the  mother
brings  forth  the  body,  God  alone  the  soul.  Nevertheless,  the
man  is  said  to  be  generated  by  his  parents.  Furthermore,  that
He  who  occupies  and  fills  the  heavens  and  the  realms  below  was
laid  in  a  manger  applies  to  the  human  nature  in  like  manner.
But  when  these  things  are  attributed  to  the  whole  Christ, — His
being  born  and  laid  in  the  manger — no  difficulty  arises,  and  that
*Namely  the  Lutherans,  who  teach  the  ubiquity  of  Christ's  body.


S


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  251

because  of  the  conjunction  and  union  of  the  two  natures  in  one
person.

''He  ascended  into  heaven"  [Mark  16: 19].  This  equally
applies  to  the  humanity,  in  the  main,  though  the  humanity  was
not  carried  there  without  the  divinity ;  indeed  the  latter  carried
and  the  former  was  carried.  This  humanity,  as  has  been  said,
remains  circumscribed  forever;  otherwise  it  would  cease  to  be
true  humanity.  But  the  divinity  is  unlimited  and  uncircum-
scribed  forever ;  hence  it  does  not  move  from  place  to  place,  but
is  everywhere  and  remains  the  same  forever.

"Behold,  I  am  with  you  even  unto  the  end  of  time"  [Matth.
28 :  20] ,  applies  in  the  main  to  His  divinity,  for  His  humanity
has  been  borne  to  heaven.

"Again,  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father"  [John
16 :  28] .  Truth  itself  compels  us  to  take  this  of  Christ's  human- -
ity,  in  the  main,  and  indeed  literally.  For  it  is  God  who  is
speaking,  and  what  He  says  must  be  true.  Which  nature  in
Him,  then,  leaves  the  world?  Not  the  divine,  for  that  moveth
not  from  its  place,  not  being  contained  in  a  place.  Therefore,
the  human  leaves  it,  and  since  it  has  left  the  world,  you  will
understand,  0  King,  as  regards  natural,  substantial,  local  pres-
ence, it  is  not  here.  The  body  of  Christ  is,  therefore,  not  eaten
by  us,  literally  or  in  substance,  and  all  the  more  not  quantita-
tively, but  only  sacramentally  and  spiritually. -

"I  shall  not  be  in  the  world  hereafter,"  for  that  is  the
equivalent  of:  koI  ovk  en  «V  ku  tw  K6an*o,  "and  now  I  am  no
more  in  the  world"  [John  17:11],  an  expression  which
absolutely  dispels  any  cloud  of  uncertainty,  so  that  He  is  not  to
be  looked  for  in  the  world  according  to  His  humanity  in  literal,
substantial,  bodily  presence,  but  only  in  a  spiritual  and  sacra-
mental sense.

"Ye  men  of  Galilee,  why  stand  ye  gazing  up  into  heaven?
This  same  Jesus,  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven,  shall
so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  him  go  into  heaven"
[Acts  1:  11].  In  this  passage  we  have  Him  plainly  taken  up
from  the  disciples  into  heaven.  He  has  gone  away,  therefore,
and  is  not  here.  But  how  has  He  gone  away?  In  a  bodily  and
literal  sense,  and  as  He  really  is  by  the  essence  of  His  humanity.
When,  therefore,  they  say,  "shall  so  come,"  He  means  in  bodily
and  literal  sense  and  in  substance. But  when  shall  He  so  come?


252  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Not  when  the  Church  celebrates  the  Supper,  but  when  she  is  to
be  judged  by  Him  at  the  end  of  the  world.  Therefore  the  view
is  irreligious  that  maintains  that  Christ's  body  is  eaten  in  the
Supper  in  a  bodily,  literal,  substantial  and  even  quantitative
sense,  because  such  view  is  opposed  to  the  truth,  and  what  is
opposed  to  the  truth  is  impious  and  irreligious.  These  few  brief
remarks  will  be  enough,  I  think,  to  enable  your  wisdom,  which
in  its  ready  skill  can  estimate  the  whole  from  one  of  its  parts,
to  see  that  out  of  the  mouth  of  the  Lord  we  are  forced  to  con-
sider how  Christ's  body  is  present  in  the  Supper.  Oecolamp-
adius  and  I  have  treated  the  matter  at  length  elsewhere  and  in
many  writings  to  various  people,  indeed,  have  waged  long  war,
but  it  would  be  distasteful  to  repeat  all  this.  But  truth  is  carry-
ing off  the  victory  and  breaking  through  daily  more  and  more.
Now  that  I  may  set  forth  what  it  is  to  eat  spiritually  and  sacra-
mentally,  I  shall  make  a  digression.

To  eat  the  body  of  Christ  spiritually  is  nothing  else  than
to  trust  in  spirit  and  heart  upon  the  mercy  and  goodness  of
God  through  Christ,  that  is,  to  be  sure  with  unshaken  faith  that
God  is  going  to  give  us  pardon  for  our  sins  and  the  joy  of
everlasting  blessedness  on  account  of  His  Son,  who  was  made
wholly  ours,  was  offered  for  us,  and  reconciled  the  divine
righteousness  to  us.  For  what  can  He  refuse  who  gave  His  only
begotten  Son  ?

To  eat  the  body  of  Christ  sacramentally,  if  we  wish  to  speak
accurately,  is  to  eat  the  body  of  Christ  in  heart  and  spirit  with
the  accompaniment  of  the  sacrament.  I  wish  to  set  the  whole
matter,  before  the  eyes  of  Your  Highness,  O  King.  You  eat
the  body  of  Christ  spiritually,  though  not  sacramentally,  every
time  you  comfort  your  heart  in  its  anxious  query: — "How  will
you  be  saved?  You  sin  daily,  and  yet  are  daily  hastening
towards  death.  After  this  life  there  is  another,  for  how  could
this  soul  be  destroyed  with  which  we  are  endowed  here  and
which  is  so  solicitous  about  the  hereafter?  How  could  all  this
light  and  knowledge  be  turned  into  darkness  and  f  orgetf  ulness  ?
Since,  then,  the  life  of  the  soul  is  everlasting,  what  sort  of  life  is
coming  to  my  dear  soul?  A  happy  or  a  miserable  life?  I  will
examine  my  life  and  search  out  what  it  deserves,  to  be  happy
or  miserable."  Then  when  you  see  such  a  host  of  things  that
we  men  are  in  the  habit  of  doing  from  passion  and  desire,  you


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  253

shudder  and  as  far  as  your  own  righteousness  and  integrity-
are  concerned  declare  yourself  in  your  own  opinion  unworthy
of  everlasting  happiness,  and  straightway  despair  of  it.  When,  I
say,  you  comfort  your  troubled  heart  thus : — "God  is  good ;  he
that  is  good  must  be  righteous  and  merciful  and  equitable,  for
righteousness  without  equity  or  mercy  is  the  height  of  injustice
mercy  without  righteousness  is  indifference,  wantonness  and
the  destruction  of  all  discipline.  Since,  therefore,  God  is
righteous.  His  righteousness  must  receive  satisfaction  for  my
sins.  Since  He  is  merciful,  I  must  not  despair  of  forgiveness.
I  have  an  infallible  pledge  of  both  of  these  in  His  only  begotten
Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  whom  He  has  given  to  us  out  of
His  mercy  to  be  ours.  And  He  has  sacrificed  himself  to  the
Father  for  us,  to  appease  His  eternal  righteousness.  Thus  we
are  sure  of  His  mercy  and  of  the  atonement  for  our  sins  made  to
His  righteousness  by  none  other  than  His  own  Son  whom  He
has  given  to  us  out  of  love."  When  with  this  confidence  you
cheer  up  your  soul,  tossed  on  the  floods  of  fear  and  despair,
saying,  "Why  art  thou  sad,  my  soul?  God,  who  alone  bestows
blessedness,  is  thine,  and  thou  art  His.  For  when  thou  wast
His  work  and  creation,  and  yet  hadst  perished  by  thy  sin,  He
sent  His  Son  to  thee,  and  made  Him  like  thee,  sin  excepted,  that,
relying  upon  the  rights  and  privileges  of  this  great  brother  and
companion,  thou  mightest  dare  even  to  demand  everlasting  sal-
vation as  thy  right.  What  devil  can  frighten  me  so  that  I
shall  fear  him,  when  He  is  at  hand  to  help  me?  Who  shall
take  from  me  what  God  Himself  has  bestowed,  in  giving  His
Son  as  pledge  and  surety?" — When  you  comfort  yourself  thus,
I  say,  you  eat  His  body  spiritually,  that  is,  you  stand  unterrified-
in  God  against  all  the  attacks  of  despair,  through  confidence  in
the  humanity  He  took  upon  Himself  for  you.

But  when  you  come  to  the  Lord's  Supper  with  this  spiritual
participation  and  give  thanks  unto  the  Lord  for  His  great  kind-
ness, for  the  deliverance  of  your  soul,  through  which  you  have
been  delivered  from  the  destruction  of  despair,  and  for  the
pledge  by  which  you  have  been  made  sure  of  everlasting  blessed-
ness, and  along  with  the  brethren  partake  of  the  bread  and  wine
which  are  the  symbols  of  the  body  of  Christ,  then  you  eat  Him
sacramentally,  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  term,  when  you  do-
internally  what  you  represent  externally,  when  your  heart  is


254  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

refreshed  by  this  faith  to  which  you  bear  witness  by  these
symbols.

But  those  are  improperly  said  to  eat  sacramentally  who  eat
the  visible  sacrament  or  symbol  in  public  assembly  to  be  sure,
but  have  not  faith  in  their  hearts.  These,  therefore,  call  down
judgment,  that  is,  the  vengeance  of  God,  upon  themselves  by
eating,  because  they  hold  not  in  the  same  high  esteem,  in  which
it  is  rightly  held  by  the  pious,  the  body  of  Christ,  that  is,  the
whole  mystery  of  the  incarnation  and  passion,  and  even  the
Church  itself  of  Christ.  For  a  man  ought  to  test  himself  before
he  partakes  of  the  Supper,  that  is,  examine  himself  and  ask
both  whether  he  so  recognizes  and  has  received  Christ  as  the  Son
of  God  and  his  own  Deliverer  and  Saviour  that  he  trusts  Him  as
the  infallible  author  and  giver  of  salvation,  and  whether  he  re-
joices that  he  is  a  member  of  the  Church  of  which  Christ  is
the  head.  If  as  an  unbeliever  he  unites  with  the  Church  in  the
Supper,  as  if  he  had  faith  in  these  things,  is  he  not  guilty  of
the  body  and  blood  of  the  Lord?  Not  because  he  has  eaten  them
in  the  literal,  material  sense,  but  because  he  has  borne  false
witness  to  the  Church  that  he  has  eaten  them  spiritually  when
he  has  never  tasted  them  spiritually.  Those,  therefore,  are  said
to  eat  merely  sacramentally,  who  use  the  symbols  of  thanksgiv-
ing, to  be  sure,  in  the  Supper,  but  have  not  faith.  For  this  they
are  in  more  terrible  condemnation  than  the  rest  of  the  un-
believers, because  those  simply  do  not  acknowledge  Christ's
Supper,  while  these  pretend  to  acknowledge  it.  He  sins  doubly
who  without  faith  celebrates  the  Supper.  He  is  faithless  and
presumptuous,  while  the  mere  unbeliever  is  destroyed  through
his  unbelief  like  the  fool  through  his  folly.

Furthermore,  there  has  for  some  time  been  a  sharp  con-
troversy among  us  as  to  what  the  sacraments  or  symbols  do  or
can  do  in  the  Supper;  our  opponents  contending  that
the  sacraments  give  faith,  and  bring  to  us  the  natural  body
of  Christ,  causing  it  to  be  eaten  in  real  presence.  We
hold  a  different  view  not  without  authoritative  support.  First,
because  none  but  the  Holy  Spirit  giveth  faith,  which  is
confidence  in  God,  and  no  external  thing  giveth  it.  Yet  the
sacraments  do  work  faith,  historical  faith ;  for  all  festivals,  tro-
phies, nay,  monuments  and  statues,  work  historical  faith:  that
is,  call  to  mind  that  a  certain  thing  once  took  place,  the  memory


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  255

of  which  is  thus  refreshed,  as  was  the  case  with  the  festival  of
the  Passover,  among  the  Hebrews  and  of  the  seisachtheia,  i.  e.,
removal  of  debts,*  among  the  Athenians,  or  that  a  victory  was
won  at  a  given  place,  as  was  the  case  at  Ebenezer  [I  Sam.  7 :  12] .
In  this  way,  then,  the  Lord's  Supper  worketh  faith,  that  is,
signifies  as  certain  that  Christ  was  born  and  suffered.  But  to
whom  does  it  signify  this?  To  the  believer  and  the  unbeliever
alike.  For  it  signifies  to  all  that  which  belongs  to  the  meaning
of  the  sacrament,  namely,  that  Christ  suffered,  whether  they
receive  it  or  not,  but  that  He  suffered  for  us,  it  signifies  to  the^
pious  believer  only.  For  no  one  knows  or  believes  that  Christ
suffered  for  us,  save  those  whom  the  Spirit  within  has  taught  to
recognize  the  mystery  of  divine  goodness.  For  such  alone  re-
ceive Christ.  Hence  nothing  gives  confidence  in  God  except
the  Spirit.  No  one  cometh  to  Christ  except  the  Father  draweth^.
him.  Furthermore,  Paul  also  decides  this  whole  quarrel  by  one
sentence  when  he  says,  "But  let  a  man  examine  himself,  and  so
let  him  eat  of  that  bread,  and  drink  of  that  cup"  [I  Cor.  11 :  28] .
Since,  then,  a  man  ought  to  examine  his  faith  before  he
approaches  the  table,  it  cannot  be  that  faith  is  given  in  the  -
Supper,  for  it  must  be  there  before  you  draw  near.

I  have  opposed  a  second  error  on  the  part  of  our  adversaries.
They  say  that  by  the  symbols  of  bread  and  wine  the  natural
body  of  Christ  is  brought  before  us  because  this  is  the  force  and
meaning  of  the  words,  "This  is  my  body."  But  what  I  have
said  above  about  the  words  of  Christ  that  showed  that  His  body
was  to  be  no  longer  in  the  world,  contradicts  this  view.  More-
over, if  the  words  could  do  that,  they  would  bring  before  us
Christ's  body  that  was  capable  of  suffering.  For  when  He  spoke
these  words,  He  still  had  a  mortal  body.  Therefore,  the  apostles  —
would  have  eaten  His  mortal  body,  for  He  did  not  have  two
bodies  of  which  one  was  immortal  and  exempt  from  physical
sensation,  the  other  mortal.  If,  then,  the  apostles  had  eaten
His  mortal  body,  what  would  we  be  eating  now?  Of  course.
His  mortal  body.  But  that  body  is  now  immortal  and  incor-
ruptible which  before  was  mortal.  If,  then,  we  would  now  be
eating  His  mortal  body.  He  would,  again,  have  a  mortal  and
at  the  same  time  immortal  body,  and  since  this  is  impossible

*One  of  Solon's measures  to relieve the  situation at Athens. See
p.  53,  note  *.


256  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

(for  it  cannot  be  mortal  and  immortal  at  the  same  time),  it
would  follow  that  He  had  two  bodies,  one  mortal,  which  we
would  eat  as  well  as  the  apostles,  the  other  immortal,  which
would  sit  on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  not  to  move  thence.
Otherwise  we  would  have  to  say  that  the  apostles,  indeed,  ate  His
mortal  but  we  eat  His  immortal  body.  Anyone  can  see  how
absurd  that  is.

Finally,  I  opposed  our  adversaries  in  their  assertion  that
the  natural,  substantial  body  of  Christ  is  eaten  in  real  presence,
because  piety  denies  that  also.  When  Peter  perceived  that
there  was  divine  power  in  Christ  in  the  marvelous  catch  of  fishes,
he  said,  "Depart  from  me ;  for  I  am  a  sinful  man,  0  Lord.  For
he  was  amazed"  [Luke  5:8].  Now,  do  we  long  to  eat  Him
physically,  like  cannibals?  As  if  anyone's  love  for  his  children
were  such  that  he  wished  to  devour  and  eat  them!  Or,  as  if
among  all  men  those  were  not  adjudged  the  most  savage  who
feed  upon  human  flesh !  The  centurion  said,  "I  am  not  worthy
that  thou  shouldest  come  under  my  roof"  [Matth.  8:8].  But
Christ  Himself  bore  witness  of  him  that  He  had  not  found  such
faith  in  all  Israel.  Therefore,  the  greater  and  holier  faith  is,
the  more  is  it  content  with  spiritual  participation,  and  the  more
thoroughly  that  satisfies  it,  the  more  does  a  religious  heart
shrink  from  bodily  manducation.  Ministering  women  were
wont  to  show  their  adoration  by  bathing  and  anointing  Christ's
body,  not  by  eating  it.  The  noble  counsellor  Joseph  and  the
pious,  secret  disciple,  Nicodemus,  wrapped  it  in  linen  and  spices
and  laid  it  in  a  sepulchre,  but  did  not  eat  it  physically.


[CHAPTER  V]
THE  VIRTUE  OF  THE  SACRAMENTS

These  difficulties,  therefore,  O  King,  plainly  show  that  we
ought  not,  under  the  guise  of  piety,  to  assign  to  the  Eucharist
or  to  Baptism  qualities  that  bring  faith  and  truth  into  danger.
What  then  ? Have  the  sacraments  no  virtue  ?

First  virtue : — They  are  sacred  and  venerable  rites,  having
been  instituted  and  employed  by  Christ,  the  Great  High  Priest.
For  He  not  only  instituted  Baptism,  but  Himself  received  it.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  257

and  He  not  only  bade  us  celebrate  the  Eucharist,  but  celebrated
it  Himself  first  of  all.

Second  virtue: — They  bear  witness  to  an  accomplished
fact,  for  all  laws,  customs,  and  institutions  proclaim  their
authors  and  beginnings.  Since,  then,  Baptism  proclaims  by
representation  Christ's  death  and  resurrection,  these  events  must
indeed  have  taken  place.

Third  virtue: — They  take  the  place  of  the  things  they
signify,  whence  also  they  get  their  names.  The  passover  or
passing  by,  through  which  God  spared  the  children  of  Israel,
cannot  be  placed  before  the  eye,  but  a  lamb  is  placed  before  the
eye  instead  of  this  event  as  a  symbol  of  it.  Neither  can  the
body  of  Christ  and  all  that  was  accomplished  in  it  be  put  before
our  eyes;  the  bread  and  wine  are  set  before  us  to  be  eaten  in
place  of  it.

Fourth : — They  signify  sublime  things.  Now  the  value  of
every  sign  increases  with  the  worth  of  the  thing  of  which  it  is
the  sign,  so  that  if  the  thing  be  great,  precious,  and  sublime,  its
sign  is,  therefore,  accounted  the  greater.  The  ring  of  the  queen,
your  consort,  with  which  Your  Majesty  was  betrothed  to  her,  is
not  valued  by  her  at  the  price  of  the  gold,  but  is  beyond  all  price,
however  much  it  is  gold,  if  you  regard  its  material — for  it  is
the  symbol  of  her  royal  husband.  Hence,  it  is  even  the  king  of
all  rings  to  her,  so  that  if  she  should  ever  name  her  ornament
separately  and  appraise  it,  she  would  doubtless  say,  "This  is
my  king,"  that  is,  ''this  is  the  ring  of  my  royal  husband  with
which  he  engaged  himself  to  me,  this  is  the  symbol  of  our  in-
separable alliance  and  trust."  So  the  bread  and  wine  are  the
symbols  of  that  friendship  by  which  God  has  been  reconciled  to
the  human  race  through  His  Son,  and  we  value  them  not  accord-
ing to  the  price  of  the  material  but  according  to  the  greatness  of
the  thing  signified,  so  that  the  bread  is  no  longer  common,  but
sacred,  and  has  not  only  the  name  of  bread  but  of  the  body  of
Christ  also,  nay,  is  the  body  of  Christ,  but  in  name  and  signi-
ficance, or,  as  the  more  recent  theologians  say,  sacramentally.

The  fifth  virtue  is  the  analogy  between  the  symbols  and
the  thing  signified.  The  Eucharist  has  a  two-fold  analogy,  first
as  applying  to  Christ,  for  as  bread  sustains  and  supports  human
life,  as  wine  cheers  man,  so  Christ  alone  restores,  sustains  and
makes  glad  the  heart  bereft  of  all  hope. For  who  can  piub


258  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

away  in  despair  any  longer  when  he  sees  the  Son  of  God  made
his  own,  and  holds  Him  in  his  soul  like  a  treasure  which  cannot
be  torn  from  him  and  through  which  he  can  obtain  all  things
from  the  Father?  It  has  a  second  analogy  as  applying  to  us,
for  as  bread  is  made  of  many  grains,  and  wine  is  made  of  many
grapes,  so  the  body  of  the  Church  is  cemented  together  and
grows  into  one  body  from  countless  members,  through  common
trust  in  Christ,  proceeding  from  one  Spirit,  so  that  a  true  temple
and  body  of  the  indwelling  Holy  Spirit  comes  into  existence.

Sixth,  the  sacraments  bring  increase  and  support  to  faith,
and  this  the  Eucharist  does  above  all  others.  You  know,  0
King,  that  our  faith  is  constantly  tried  and  tempted,  for  Satan
sifts  us  like  wheat,  as  he  did  the  apostles.  But  how  does  he
attack  us?  Through  treachery  in  the  camp,  for  he  busies  him-
self with  trying  to  overwhelm  us  through  the  body  as  through
an  old  wall  of  our  defense  ready  to  tumble  down,  setting  up  the
scaling-ladders  of  the  desires  against  our  senses.  When,  there-
fore, the  senses  are  diverted  elsewhere,  so  as  not  to  give  ear  to
him,  his  schemes  are  less  successful.  Now  in  the  sacraments
the  senses  are  not  only  made  deaf  to  the  wiles  of  Satan  but  bound
over  to  faith,  so  that  like  handmaidens  they  do  nothing  but  what
their  mistress,  faith,  does  and  directs.  Hence  they  aid  faith.
I  will  speak  plainly.  In  the  Eucharist  the  four  most  powerful
senses,  nay,  all  the  senses,  are  as  it  were,  reclaimed  and  redeemed
from  fleshly  desires,  and  drawn  into  obedience  to  faith.  The
hearing  no  longer  hears  the  melodious  harmony  of  varied  strings
and  voices,  but  the  heavenly  words,  "God  so  loved  the  world
that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  for  its  life."  We  are  present,
therefore,  as  brethren,  to  give  thanks  for  this  bounty  to  us.  For
we  do  this  rightly  at  the  command  of  the  Son  Himself,  who  on
the  eve  of  His  death  instituted  this  thanksgiving,  that  He  might
leave  us  a  lasting  memorial  and  pledge  of  His  love  towards  us.
"And  He  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake  it,  and  gave
unto  the  disciples,"  uttering  from  His  most  holy  lips  these  holy
words,  "This  is  my  body"  [Luke  22 :  19] .  "Likewise  also  He
took  the  cup,"  etc. — when,  I  say,  the  hearing  takes  in  these
words,  is  it  not  struck  and  does  it  not  give  itself  up  wholly  in
admiring  wonder  to  this  one  thing  that  is  proclaimed?  It  hears
of  God,  and  His  love,  and  the  Son  delivered  up  to  death  for  us.
And  when  it  gives  itself  up  to  this,  does  it  not  do  what  faith


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  259

does?  For  faith  is  that  which  leans  on  God  through  Christ.
When,  therefore,  the  hearing  looks  to  the  same  thing,  it  becomes
the  handmaiden  of  faith,  and  troubles  faith  no  more  with  its
own  frivolous  imaginings  and  interests.  When  the  sight  sees
the  bread  and  the  cup  which  in  place  of  Christ  signify  His
goodness  and  inherent  character,  does  it  not  also  aid  faith  ?  For
it  sees  Christ,  as  it  were,  before  the  eyes,  as  the  heart,  kindled  by
His  beauty,  languishes  for  Him.  The  touch  takes  the  bread
into  its  hands — the  bread  which  is  no  longer  bread  but  Christ
by  representation.  The  taste  and  smell  are  brought  in  to  scent
the  sweetness  of  the  Lord  and  the  happiness  of  him  that  trusteth
in  Him.  For  as  they  rejoice  in  food  and  are  quickened,  so  the
heart,  having  tasted  the  sweetness  of  the  heavenly  hope,  leaps
and  exults.  The  sacraments,  then,  aid  the  contemplation  of
faith,  and  harmonize  it  with  the  longings  of  the  heart,  as  without
the  use  of  the  sacraments  could  not  be  done  at  all  so  completely.

In  Baptism,  sight,  hearing,  and  touch,  are  summoned  to
the  aid  of  faith.  For  faith,  whether  that  of  the  Church  or  that  of
him  who  is  baptized,  recognizes  that  Christ  endured  death  for
His  Church,  rose  again,  and  triumphed.  The  same  thing  is
heard,  seen,  and  touched  in  Baptism.  The  sacraments,  then,
are  a  sort  of  bridles  by  which  the  senses,  when  on  the  point  of
dashing  away  to  their  own  desires,  are  checked  and  brought
back  to  the  service  of  the  heart  and  of  faith.

The  seventh  power  of  the  sacraments  is  that  they  fill  the
office  of  an  oath  of  allegiance.  For  ''sacramentum"  is  used  by
the  Latin  writers  instead  of  ''ius  iurandum,"  i.  e.,  *'oath."*  For
those  who  use  one  and  the  same  oath,  become  one  and  the  same
race  and  sacred  alliance,  unite  into  one  body  and  one  people,
and  he  who  betrays  it  is  false  to  his  oath.  When,  therefore,  the
people  of  Christ  by  eating  His  body  sacramentally  become  united
into  one  body,  he  who  without  faith  ventures  to  obtrude  him-
self upon  this  company  betrays  the  body  of  Christ,  as  well  in  its
head  as  in  its  members,  because  he  does  not  "discern,"  that  is,

*The  following  may  be  quoted  as  examples:  "We  are  called  to  the
service  (militiam)  of  the  living  God  then,  when  we  respond  to  the  words
of  the  oath  ( sacramenti ) ,"  see  Tertullian,  Ad  Martyres,  Bk.  I,  chap.  3,  in
Migne,  Patrologia  Latina,  I,  697;  also  "If  thou  keep  thy  allegiance
( sacramenta )  in  the  heavenly  warfare,  doubt  not  that  thou  wilt  be  crowned
in  the  triumphal  camp  of  the  eternal  king,"  see  Leo  the  Great,  Sermon
XXII,  5,  in  Schaff,  Nicene  Fathers,  2nd  Series,  XII,  131.


260  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

does  not  properly  value  the  body  of  the  Lord,  either  as  having
been  delivered  up  by  Him  for  us,  or  as  having  been  made  free
by  His  death. For  we  are  one  body  with  Him.

We  are  forced,  then,  whether  we  will  or  no,  to  acknowledge
that  the  words,  "This  is  my  body,"  etc.,  are  not  to  be  understood
literally  and  according  to  the  primary  meaning  of  the  words,
but  symbolically,  sacramentally,  metaphorically,  or,  as  a
metonymy,*  thus: — "This  is  my  body,"  that  is,  "this  is  the
sacrament  of  my  body,"  or,  "this  is  my  sacramental  or  mystical
body,  that  is,  the  sacramental  and  vicarious  symbol  of  that  body
which  I  really  took  and  exposed  to  death."

But  it  is  now  time  to  pass  to  other  things,  lest  I  offend  Your
Majesty  forgetting  to  be  brief.  What  I  have  said,  however,  is
so  certain,  most  brave  King,  that  no  one,  however  many  have
tried  to  rebut  it,  has  thus  far  been  able  to  affect  it  one  jot.  There-
fore, be  not  troubled  if  they  that  are  more  ready  with  their
tongues  than, with  substantial  Scripture,  cry  out  that  the  view
is  irreligious.  This  they  boast,  indeed,  in  bold  but  empty
words,  though  when  they  come  to  facts  they  are  more  empty
than  a  cast-off  serpent's  skin.f

[CHAPTER  VI]

THE  CHURCH

I  believe  also  that  there  is  one  holy  Catholic,  that  is,  uni-
versal Church,  and  that  this  is  either  visible  or  invisible.  The
invisible,  as  Paul  teaches,  t  is  that  which  comes  down  from
heaven,  that  is,  which  recognizes  and  embraces  God  through
the  enlightenment  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  this  Church  belong
all  those  that  believe  throughout  the  whole  world.  And  it  is
called  invisible  not  as  if  they  that  believe  were  invisible,  but
because  it  is  not  evident  to  human  eyes  who  do  believe.  The
faithful  are  known  to  God  and  themselves  alone.  And  the
visible  Church  is  not  the  Roman  pontiff  and  the  rest  of  them

f  flETUVVfilKd^.

tFor  the  Latin  proverb,  leheride  sunt  inaniores,  i.  e.,  "they  are  more
empty  than  a  cast-off  serpent's  skin,"  see  Erasmus,  Adagia,  chil.  I,  cent.  I,
prov.  26;  also  chil.  I,  cent.  Ill,  prov.  134.

+Phil.  3:  20;  but  perhaps  a  slip  for  Rev.  21:  2.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  261

that  wear  the  tiara,  but  all  throughout  the  whole  world  who
have  enrolled  themselves  under  Christ  [through  baptism].
Among  these  are  all  who  are  called  Christians,  even  though
falsely,  seeing  that  they  have  no  faith  within.  There  are,  there-
fore, in  the  visible  Church  some  who  are  not  members  of  the
elect  and  invisible  Church.  For  some  men  eat  and  drink
judgment  unto  themselves  in  the  Supper,  yet  all  the  brethren
know  them  not.  Since,  therefore,  this  Church  which  is  visible
contains  many  rebellious  and  traitorous  members  who  having
no  faith  care  nothing  if  they  be  a  hundred  times  cast  out  of
the  Church,  there  is  need  of  a  government,  whether  of  princes
or  of  nobles,  to  restrain  shameless  sinners.  For  the  magistrate
carries  the  sword  not  in  vain  [Rom.  13 :  4] .  Since,  then,  there
are  shepherds  in  the  Church,  who,  as  may  be  seen  in  Jeremiah
[23:  4ff.],  have  also  the  rank  of  princes  it  is  clear  that  without
a  temporal  government  the  Church  is  crippled  and  incomplete.
So  far  are  we,  most  pious  King,  from  rejecting  government  and
thinking  it  should  be  done  away  with,  as  some  men  charge  us
with  doing,  that  we  even  teach  that  it  is  necessary  to  the  com-
pleteness of  the  ecclesiastical  body.  But  hear  our  teaching
about  this  briefly.


[CHAPTER  VII]

GOVERNMENTS

The  Greeks  recognize  these  three  kinds  of  governments
with  their  three  degenerate  forms :  Monarchy,  which  the  Latins
call  "regnum,  kingdom,"  where  one  man  stands  alone  as  the
head  of  the  state  under  the  guidance  of  piety  and  justice.  The
opposite  and  degenerate  form  is  a  tyranny,  which  the  Latins
less  fittingly  call  "vis"  or  "violentia,"  "force"  or  "violence,"  or
rather,  not  having  quite  the  proper  word  themselves,  they  gen-
erally use  "tyrannis,"  borrowing  the  word  from  the  Greeks.
This  exists  when  piety  is  scorned,  justice  is  trodden  under  foot,
and  all  things  are  done  by  force,  while  the  ruler  holds  that  any-
thing he  pleases  is  lawful  for  him.  Secondly,  they  recognize  an
aristocracy,  which  the  Latins  call  "optimatium  potentia,  the
power  of  the  best  people,"  where  the  best  men  are  at  the  head


262  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

of  things,  observing  justice  and  piety  towards  the  people.  When
this  form  degenerates  it  passes  into  an  oligarchy,  which  the
Latins  call  literally  "paucorum  potentia,  the  power  of  the  few."
Here  a  few  of  the  nobles  rise  up  and  gain  influence  who,  caring
not  for  the  general  good  but  for  private  advantage,  trample  upon
the  public  weal  and  serve  their  own  ends.  Finally  they  recog-
nize a  democracy,  which  the  Latins  render  by  "res  publica,
republic,"  a  word  of  broader  meaning  than  democracy,  where
affairs,  that  is,  the  supreme  power,  are  in  the  hands  of  the  people
in  general,  the  entire  people;  and  all  the  civil  offices,  honors,
and  public  functions  are  in  the  hands  of  the  whole  people.
When  this  form  degenerates,  the  Greeks  call  it  amrpuxna  17
avcrTaais,  that  is,  a  state  of  sedition,  conspiracy,  and  disturbance,
where  no  man  suffers  himself  to  be  held  in  check,  and  instead
each  one,  asserting  that  he  is  a  part  and  a  member  of  the  people,
claims  the  power  of  the  state  as  his  own,  and  each  one  follows
his  own  reckless  desires.  Hence  there  arise  unrestrained  con-
spiracies and  factions,  followed  by  bloodshed,  plundering,
injustice  and  all  the  other  evils  of  treason  and  sedition.

These  distinct  forms  of  government  of  the  Greeks  I  recog-
nize with  the  following  corrections :  If  a  king  or  prince  rules,  I
teach  that  he  is  to  be  honored  and  obeyed,  according  to  Christ's
command,  ''Render  unto  Caesar  the  things  that  are  Caesar's
and  unto  God  the  things  that  are  God's"  [Luke  20:  25].  For
by  "Caesar"  I  understand  every  ruler  upon  whom  power  has
been  conferred  or  bestowed,  either  by  hereditary  right  and  cus-
tom or  by  election.  But  if  the  king  or  prince  becomes  a  tyrant,
I  correct  his  recklessness  and  inveigh  against  it  in  season  and
out  of  season.  For  thus  saith  the  Lord  to  Jeremiah,  "See,  I
have  ...  set  thee  over  the  nations  and  over  the  kingdoms,"
etc.  [ Jer.  1 :  10] .  If  he  listens  to  the  warning,  I  have  gained  a
father  for  the  whole  kingdom  and  fatherland,  but  if  he  becomes
more  rebelliously  violent,  I  teach  that  even  a  wicked  ruler  is  to
be  obeyed  until  the  Lord  shall  remove  him  from  his  office  and
power  or  a  means  be  found  to  enable  those  whose  duty  it  is  to
deprive  him  of  his  functions  and  restore  order.  In  the  same
way  we  are  watchful  and  on  the  alert,  if  an  aristocracy  begins
to  degenerate  into  an  oligarchy  or  a  democracy  into  a  cvarpeiiiia,
mob.  We  have  examples  in  Scripture,  from  which  we  learn
what  we  teach  and  demand, — Samuel  endured  Saul  until  the


Exposition  of  the  Cliristian  Faith  263

Lord  deprived  him  of  his  kingdom  along  with  his  Ufe.  David
returned  to  his  senses  at  the  rebuke  of  Nathan,  and  remained
on  the  throne  under  much  trial  and  temptation.  Ahab  lost  his
life  because  he  would  not  turn  from  wickedness  when  Elijah
reproved  him.  John  dauntlessly  unbraided  Herod  when  he
felt  no  shame  at  his  incestuous  conduct.  But  it  would  be  a  long
task  to  bring  forward  all  the  examples  in  Scripture.  The  learned
and  pious  know  from  what  source  we  draw  what  we  say.

To  sum  up,  in  the  Church  of  Christ  government  is  just  as
necessary  as  preaching,  although  this  latter  occupies  the  first
place.  For  as  a  man  cannot  exist  except  as  composed  of  both
body  and  soul,  however  much  the  body  is  the  humbler  and  lower
part,  so  the  Church  cannot  exist  without  the  civil  government,
though  the  government  attends  to  and  looks  after  the  more
material  things  that  have  not  to  do  with  the  spirit.  Since,  then
two  particularly  bright  lights  of  our  faith,  Jeremiah  and  Paul,*
bid  us  pray  to  the  Lord  for  our  rulers  that  they  may  permit  us
to  lead  a  life  worthy  of  God,  how  much  more  ought  all  in  what-
ever kingdom  or  people  to  bear  and  to  do  all  things  to  guard  the
Christian  peace!  Hence  we  teach  that  tribute,  taxes,  dues,
tithes,  debts,  loans,  and  all  promises  to  pay  of  every  kind  should
be  paid  and  the  laws  of  the  state  in  general  be  obeyed  in  these
things.


[CHAPTER  Vni]

REMISSION  OF  SINS

XI.  I  believe  that  remission  of  sins  is  surely  granted  to
man  through  faith  every  time  he  prays  for  it  to  God  through
Christ.  For  since  Christ  said  unto  Peter  that  forgiveness  was
to  be  given  seventy  times  seven  times  [Matth.  18 :  22] ,  that  is,
an  indefinite  number  of  times,  it  cannot  but  be  that  He  Himself
always  pardons  our  faults.  And  I  have  said  that  sins  are  re-
mitted through  faith,  by  which  I  simply  mean  to  say  that  faith
alone  makes  a  man  sure  of  the  remission  of  his  wrongdoings.

•Zwingli  was  probably  thinking  of  Jer.  29:  7  and  I  Tim.  2:2.  He
discusses  the  latter  passage  in  his  treatise,  "De  vera  et  falsa  religione,"
see  Zwingli's  Werke,  Vol.  Ill,  1914,  p.  873f.


264  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

For  though  the  Roman  pontiff  even  should  say  hundreds  of
times,  "Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,"  yet  the  heart  will  never  be
at  rest  and  sure  of  its  reconciliation  with  God  unless  it  sees  and
believes  beyond  all  doubt,  nay  feels,  that  it  has  been  absolved
and  redeemed.  For  as  none  but  the  Holy  Spirit  can  give  faith,
so  also  none  other  can  give  remission  of  sins.

The  restoration,  satisfaction,  and  expiation  necessary  to  our
guilt  has  been  obtained  in  God's  sight  through  Christ  alone
having  suffered  for  us.  For  "he  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins :
and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world,"
as  the  apostle  and  evangelist  related  to  him  says  [I  John  2:2;
John  3 :  36] .  Since,  then,  He  has  given  satisfaction  for  sin,  who,
pray,  become  partakers  of  that  satisfaction  and  redemption?
Let  us  hear  His  own  words:  "He  that  believeth  on  me,"  that  is,
"that  trusteth  in  me,  that  leaneth  on  me,  hath  everlasting  life"
[John  6:47].  But  no  one  obtains  everlasting  life,  unless  his
sins  be  taken-away.  He,  therefore,  that  trusteth  in  Christ,  hath
his  sins  remitted.  As,  therefore,  no  one  knows  about  anybody
whether  he  believes,  so  no  one  knows  whether  any  one's  sins
have  been  remitted,  save  only  the  one  who  through  the  light
and  confidence  of  faith  is  sure  of  pardon,  because  he  knows  that
God  has  forgiven  him  through  Christ  and  is  sure  of  this  remis-
sion so  that  he  has  not  the  slightest  doubt  about  the  pardoning
of  his  sins,  because  he  knows  that  God  cannot  deceive  or  lie.
Since,  therefore.  He  has  said  from  on  high,  "This  is  my  beloved
Son  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased,"  [Matth.  3:  17],  or  "through
whom  I  am  reconciled,"  it  cannot  but  be  that  all  who  trust  in
God  through  Christ,  His  Son  and  our  Lord  and  brother,  know
that  pardon  for  their  wrong  doings  has  been  given  them.  Hence
all  such  words  as  the  following  are  frivolous : — "I  absolve  you,"
and,  "I  assure  you  of  the  pardoning  of  your  sins."  For  though
the  apostles  preach  the  remission  of  sins,  yet  none  obtains  this
remission  except  the  believer  and  the  elect.  Since,  therefore,
the  election  and  the  faith  of  other  men  are  hidden  from  us,
however  much  the  spirit  of  the  Lord  makes  us  sure  of  our  own
faith  and  election,  it  is  also  hidden  from  us  whether  another's
sins  have  been  remitted.  How,  therefore,  can  a  man  assure
another  man  of  the  remission  of  his  sins?  All  that  the  Roman
Pontiffs  have  invented  in  this  matter  is  fraud  and  fables.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  265

[CHAPTER  IX]

FAITH  AND  WORKS

But  since  I  have  come  to  touch  upon  the  subject  of  faith,  I
should  Uke  to  explain  briefly  to  Your  Majesty  what  my  teaching
is  about  faith  and  works.  For  there  are  people  who  slander  me
rather  unjustly  as  forbidding  good  works,  though  I  really  teach
upon  this  subject  as  upon  all  others  nothing  but  what  the  divine
Scriptures  indicate  and  what  common  intelligence  suggests.  For
who  is  so  inexperienced  as  not  to  say  that  works  should  proceed
from  intention,  or  that  works  without  intention  are  not  works
but  accidents?  Faith  is  in  the  human  heart  what  intention  is
in  action.  Unless  intention  precedes  the  deed,  whatever  results
is  thoughtless  and  aimless.  Unless  faith  occupies  the  stronghold
and  commands  the  whole  action,  whatever  we  do  is  without
merit  and  vain.  For  even  we  human  beings  look  more  at  the
faithful  purpose  in  any  work  than  at  the  work  itself.  If  faith-
ful purpose  is  not  there,  the  value  of  the  work  is  naught.  If
anyone  perform  some  great  work  for  Your  Majesty,  but  not
from  faithful  purpose,  do  you  not  straightway  say  that  you  owe
no  thanks  to  the  doer  because  he  did  not  act  from  his  heart?
Or  rather  you  straightway  feel  that  in  whatever  anyone  does  for
you  without  faithful  purpose  some  perfidy  lies  hidden,  so  that
he  who  does  a  service  without  faithful  purpose  is  always  sus-
pected of  some  perfidy  and  seems  to  you  to  have  acted  for  his
own  interests  and  not  for  yours.  So  also  in  regard  to  our  works
this  is  the  rule  and  order.  Faith  must  be  the  fountain  head  of
works.  If  faith  is  there,  the  work  itself  is  acceptable  to  God,  if
it  is  not  there,  the  whole  result  is  unbelief  and  in  consequence,
not  only  unacceptable  but  an  abomination  to  God.  Hence  St.
Paul  says,  Rom.  14 :  23,  ''Whatever  is  not  of  faith  is  sin,"  and
some  of  our  own  people  have  declared,  in  paradoxical  fashion,*
that  all  our  works  are  an  abomination.  By  this  they  have  meant
to  say  nothing  else  than  what  I  have  already  said,  ''If  the  work
is  ours  and  not  faith's,  it  is  unbelief,  which  God  abominates."
Now  faith,  as  I  have  indicated  above,  is  from  the  Spirit  of  God
alone.  They,  therefore,  that  have  faith,  look  in  all  their  works
to  the  will  of  God  as  to  a  model  to  follow. Hence,  not  only  are


266  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

those  works  rejected  which  are  done  contrary  to  the  law  of  God,
but  also  those  which  are  done  without  the  law  of  God.  For  the
law  is  the  permanent  will  of  God.  What  is  done,  then,  without
the  law,  that  is,  without  the  word  and  will  of  God,  is  not  of  faith.
What  is  not  of  faith  is  sin.  If  it  is  sin,  God  abhors  it.  Hence  it
appears  that  if  anyone  does  without  faith  a  work  that  God  has
commanded,  e.  g.,  alms,  that  work  is  not  acceptable  to  God.  For
when  we  inquire  as  to  the  source  of  alms  which  do  not  result
from  faith,  we  find  that  they  are  begotten  of  vain  glory  or  the
desire  to  receive  more  in  return  or  some  other  evil  passion.  And
who  would  not  believe  that  such  a  work  is  displeasing  to  God?

It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  those  works  which  are  done  with-
out the  will  of  God  are  also  done  without  faith,  and  since  they
are  done  apart  from  faith,  are  sins  in  Paul's  judgment,  and  since
they  are  sin,  God  abominates  them.  Whatever,  therefore,  has
been  given  out  by  the  Romanists,  without  the  authority  and
testimony  of  the  divine  Word,  as  pious,  holy,  and  acceptable  to
God,  like  fictitious  indulgences,  the  extinguishing  of  the  fires
of  purgatory,  forced  chastity,  a  variety  of  orders  and  supersti-
tious customs,  which  it  would  be  tiresome  to  enumerate :  all  this
is  sin  and  an  abomination  in  the  sight  of  God.

Furthermore,  as  to  those  works  which  are  done  according
to  the  law  of  God,  as  when  we  feed  the  hungry,  clothe  the  naked,
comfort  the  captive,  it  is  a  difficult  question  to  decide  whether
they  have  merit.  Our  opponents  quote  Scripture  to  prove  that
they  have  merit: — "If  any  one  shall  give  another  a  cup  of  cold
water  in  my  name,  he  shall  not  lose  his  reward"  [Mark  9 :  41] .
But  the  word  of  the  Lord  bears  witness  just  as  much  that  there
is  no  merit : — "When  ye  have  done  all  these  things  say,  'We  are
unprofitable  servants'  "  [Lk.  17 :  10].  For  if  our  works  merited
blessedness,  there  would  have  been  no  need  of  the  death  of  Christ
to  satisfy  the  divine  righteousness.  It  would  not  be  grace  when
sins  are  pardoned,  for  every  one  could  win  merit.  Paul  dis-
courses upon  this  irrefutably  in  Romans  and  Galatians.  For  it
must  flk  true  that  "no  man  cometh  unto  the  Father  but  through
Christ"  [John  14:6].  Therefore,  only  by  the  grace  and  bounty
of  God,  which  He  pours  out  upon  us  abundantly  through
Christ,  does  everlasting  happiness  come.

What,  then,  shall  we  say  to  the  above  passage  of  Scripture
about  the  reward  promised  for  a  draught  of  cold  water  and  to


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  267

like  passages  ?  The  following :  The  election  of  God  is  free  and
by  grace.  For  He  elected  us  before  the  creation  of  the  world,
before  we  were  born.  Therefore  God  does  not  elect  us  because  of
works,  but  elected  us  before  the  foundation  of  the  world.  Hence
works  have  no  merit,  and  when  He  promises  a  reward  to  works
He  is  speaking  after  the  manner  of  men.  "For  what  dost  Thou
reward,  0  good  God,"  says  Augustine,  "save  thine  own  work?
For  inasmuch  as  Thou  makest  us  to  will  and  to  do,  what  is  there
left  for  us  to  claim  for  ourselves?"  But  since  men  are,  on  the
one  hand,  incited  to  good  works  by  promises,  and,  on  the  other,
are  so  kind  and  noble  that  they  say  to  those  to  whom  they  have
done  a  kindness,  "I  owed  you  that;  you  have  deserved  well,"  or
some  other  like  phrase,  so  that  the  man  who  receives  the  kind-
ness may  not  be  relegated  in  his  own  eyes  to  the  ranks  of
beggars  (for  one  who  loves  another  desires  to  guard  against  his
feelings  being  humiliated),  so  God  also  raises  up  all  the  more
by  His  bounty  those  whom  He  loves  that  they  may  not  despise
Him,  but  cherish  and  honor  Him,  and  He  attributes  to  us  what
He  Himself  does  through  us,  rewarding  it  as  ours,  though  not
only  all  our  works  but  all  our  life  and  being  are  of  Him.  From
this  it  follows  that  God  is  in  the  habit  of  speaking  to  man  in  the
language  and  fashion  of  men.  As  men  give  something  to  those
who  have  deserved  well  and  call  their  gift  a  reward,  so  God  also
calls  His  gifts  a  reward  and  recompense.  It  is  manifest,  then,
that  the  terms  "merit"  and  "reward"  are  found  in  the  divine
Scriptures,  but  in  the  sense  of  "bountiful  gift."  For  what  can
he  merit  as  a  reward  who  by  grace  exists  and  by  grace  receives
all  that  he  has?

At  the  same  time  this  must  be  noted,  that  works  are  by  no
means  omitted  by  pious  men  because,  properly  speaking,  we  do
not  gain  merit  by  works.  On  the  contrary,  the  greater  our
faith,  the  more  and  greater  are  the  works  that  we  do,  as  Christ
himself  testifies,  John  14:  12,  "Verily,  verily,  I  say  unto  you,
He  that  believeth  on  me,  the  works  that  I  do  shall  he  do  also ;
and  greater  works  than  these  shall  he  do,"  and  "If  ye  havfe  faith
like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed,  and  shall  say  to  this  mountain,
Move  hence,  and  take  up  thy  abode  in  the  sea,  it  will  obey"
[Matth.  17:20;  Mk.  11:23].  Hence  they  are  unfair  to  me
who,  because  I  take  great  pains  to  preach  faith,  say  that  I  teach
that  no  good  works  are  to  be  done. Indeed,  making  truth  a


268  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

laughing  stock,  they  slander  me  thus: — "This  is  the  teaching
for  us,  my  friends.  We  are  saved  by  faith  alone.  Hence  we
shall  not  fast,  nor  pray,  nor  help  the  needy."  By  such  slanders
they  simply  betray  their  own  unbelief.  For  if  they  knew  what
a  gift  of  God  faith  is,  how  effective  its  power  and  unwearied  its
activity,  they  would  not  scorn  that  which  they  have  not.  For
that  trust  with  which  a  man  depends  on  God  with  all  the  powers
of  his  soul,  can  think  and  do  naught  but  what  is  divine,  or
rather,  cannot  help  doing  what  is  pleasing  to  God.  For  since
faith  is  an  inspiration  of  the  divine  Spirit,  how  can  it  rest  idle
or  sit  down  in  slothful  ease  when  that  Spirit  is  perennial  activity
and  work?  Wherever,  then,  there  is  true  faith,  there  are  works
also,  just  as  where  there  is  fire  there  is  also  heat.  But  where  there
is  no  faith,  works  are  not  works  but  an  empty  imitation  of
works.

Hence  we  may  infer  that  those  who  so  persistently  demand
a  reward  for  our  works,  and  say  that  they  will  cease  working  the
works  of  God'if  no  reward  awaits  the  works,  have  the  souls  of
slaves.  For  slaves  work  for  reward  only,  and  lazy  persons  like-
wise. But  they  that  have  faith  are  untiring  in  the  work  of
God,  like  the  son  of  the  house.  He  has  not  merited  by  works
his  being  the  heir  of  the  estate,  nor  does  he  toil  and  labor  for
this,  that  he  shall  become  the  heir,  but  when  he  was  born,  he
was  the  heir  of  his  father's  possessions  through  birth,  not
through  merit.  And  when  he  is  untiring  in  work,  he  does  not
demand  a  reward,  for  he  knows  that  all  things  are  his.  So  the
sons  of  God  who  have  faith  know  that  by  divine  birth,  that  is,
the  birth  of  the  Spirit,  and  by  free  election  they  are  sons  of  God,
not  slaves.  Since,  then,  they  are  sons  of  the  house,  they  ask  not
what  reward  awaits  them,  for  all  things  are  ours,  who  are  the
heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ.  Freely,  therefore,
gladly,  and  without  weariness  they  labor,  indeed  there  is  no
work  so  great  that  they  do  not  believe  it  is  accomplished  by  His
power  in  whom  we  trust,  not  by  our  own.

And,  since  there  are  in  the  Church  these  two  diseases,  un-
belief and  weakness  of  faith  (for  there  are  some  who  absolutely
do  not  believe,  those,  namely,  who  in  the  Supper  eat  and  drink
judgment  unto  themselves,  like  Judas  and  Simon  Magus;  and
there  are  those  who  have  a  languid  faith,  those,  namely,  who
thoughtlessly  waver  when  any  danger  threatens,  whose  faith  is


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  269

choked  by  the  thorns,  that  is,  the  cares  and  interests  of  this
world,  and  put  forth  no  fruit  or  holy  work) ,  I  urge  the  believers,
as  Christ,  Paul  and  James,  did,  if  they  are  really  believers,  to
show  by  their  works  that  they  are  such,  for  we  say  that  faith
without  works  is  dead,  a  good  tree  bringeth  forth  good  fruit,  the
children  of  Abraham  do  the  works  of  Abraham,  nothing  avails
with  Christ  save  the  faith  which  worketh  by  love  [Gal.  5:6].

Thus  I  preach  the  law  as  well  as  grace.  For  in  the  law  the
elect  and  the  believers  learn  the  will  of  God,  the  wicked  are
terrified  by  it,  that  either  through  fear  they  do  something  for  the
good  of  their  neighbor,  or  betray  their  own  hopelessness  and
faithlessness.  But  at  the  same  time  I  admonish  men  that  those
works  count  for  nothing  which  we  perform  with  human  skill
under  the  idea  of  serving  God,  for  they  certainly  are  no  more
pleasing  to  Him  than  it  would  be  to  you  if  anyone  wished  to
serve  you,  O  King,  in  some  way  that  you  did  not  like.  If,  then,
you  must  be  served  according  to  your  own  will,  how  much  are
we  not  to  bring  before  the  face  of  God  works  which  He  has  not
commanded  and  does  not  like !  We  open  up  the  source,  there-
fore, from  which  good  works  flow  when  we  teach  faith.  On  the
other  hand,  when  we  urge  works,  we  are  as  it  were  demanding
the  payment  of  a  debt  which  would  not  be  paid  without
compulsion.


[CHAPTER  X]

EVERLASTING  LIFE

XII.  Finally  I  believe  that  after  this  life,  which  is  rather
captivity  and  death  than  life,  a  glad  and  happy  life  will  come  to
the  saints  or  believers,  and  a  gloomy  and  wretched  one  to  the
wicked  or  unbelievers,  and  that  both  will  be  unending.  And  in
regard  to  this  matter  I  maintain  against  the  Catabaptists,  who
contend  that  the  soul  sleeps  with  the  body  until  the  day  of
judgment,  that  the  soul  whether  of  angel  or  of  man  cannot
sleep  or  be  at  rest.  For  such  an  idea  contradicts  all  reason.  The
soul  is  a  substance  so  instinct  with  life  that  it  not  only  lives
itself,  but  also  quickens  whatever  habitation  it  dwells  in.  When
an  angel  takes  on  a  body,  either  one  of  air  or  one  specially


270  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

created,  he  presently  gives  it  Hfe  so  that  it  moves,  works,  acts
and  is  acted  upon.  As  soon  as  the  human  soul  enters  a  body,
this  straightway  lives,  grows,  moves,  and  performs  all  the  other
functions  of  life.  How  could  it  be,  therefore,  that  the  soul  when
released  from  the  body  should  lie  torpid  or  sleep  ?  Philosophers
give  the  name  "activity"  or  ''action"  to  the  soul,  from  the  live
and  wide-awake,  that  is,  unceasing  character  of  its  power  of
action.  This  force  the  Greeks*  express  by  a  more  significant
word,  calling  it  «vTeX«x«t,a  that  is,  perennial  power,  operation,
effective  and  prolonged  action.  The  visible  things  in  the  world
are  constituted  by  Divine  Providence  in  such  order  that  the
human  mind  can  rise  from  them  to  the  knowledge  of  the  in-
visible. Fire  and  air  occupy  the  place  among  the  elements  that
the  soul  occupies  among  bodies.  As  air  is  everywhere  present
throughout  the  body  of  the  universe,  so  the  soul  permeates  the
whole  human  body.  As  fire  is  nowhere  present  without  actual
operation,  so  the  soul  is  everywhere  in  operation.  This  is  also
seen  in  sleep,  -for  we  dream  and  remember  our  dreams.  Sleep,
therefore,  is  a  function  of  the  body,  not  of  the  soul.  For  the
soul  meanwhile  invigorates  the  body,  renews  it,  and  restores  the
waste,  so  that  it  never  ceases  working,  acting,  and  moving,  as
long  as  it  is  in  the  body.  As,  therefore,  the  fire  is  never  without
light,  so  the  soul  never  grows  old  nor  becomes  inactive,  nor
dies,  nor  sleeps. It  is  ever  alive,  awake,  and  active.

So  far  we  have  been  philosophizing  about  the  soul.  Now
we  must  come  to  the  testimony  of  Scripture  by  which  we  prove
that  the  soul  never  sleeps.  "He  that  believeth  on  me  cometh  not
into  judgment  but  passeth  from  death  into  life"  [John  5:  24].
He,  therefore,  that  believes  in  this  life,  already  perceives  how
sweet  is  the  Lord,  and  obtains  a  beginning  of  the  heavenly  life
and  a  certain  taste  thereof.  If,  then,  that  soul  which  lives  in
God  here  presently  slept  when  it  had  gone  out  of  the  body,  the
life  of  a  Christian  man  would  be  more  desirable  in  this  world
than  when  he  had  left  this  world;  for  he  would  be  asleep  then,
while  here  he  is  awake  and  in  conscious  enjoyment  of  God.

"He  that  believeth  in  me  hath  everlasting  life"  [John
3 :  36].  But  life  would  not  be  unceasing  ("everlasting"  is  used
here  for  "unceasing")  if  this  life  of  the  soul  which  it  leads
here  be  interrupted  by  sleep  hereafter.

•Especially  Aristotle,  who  coined  the  word.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  271

"Father,  I  will  that  where  I  am  there  also  shall  be
they  that  attend  upon  me"  [John  17 :  24] .  If  then  the  Holy
Virgin,  Abraham,  and  Paul  are  with  God,  what  kind  of  a  life
is  it  in  heaven  or  what  is  the  nature  of  the  Deity  if  there  be
sleep  there?  Does  the  Deity  also  sleep?  If  He  sleeps  He  is  no
Deity,  for  whatever  sleeps  is  exposd  to  change,  and  sleeps  in
order  to  refresh  its  weariness.  If  the  Deity  becomes  weary,  He
is  no  Deity,  for  the  Deity  is  unconquerable  by  any  toil  or  labor.
If  the  Deity  does  not  sleep,  it  is  just  as  inevitable  that  the  soul
also  should  not  sleep  as  it  is  that  the  air  should  be  clear  and
transparent  when  the  sun  shines  on  the  earth.  Foolish,  there-
fore, and  vain  is  this  notion  of  the  Catabaptists,  who  are  not
satisfied  to  have  deluded  men,  but  must  defile  the  sure  and  in-
fallible utterances  of  the  living  God.  I  could  add  many  more
proofs: — ''This  is  life  everlasting,  to  know  thee,"  etc.  [John
17:  3],  and  "I  will  receive  you  unto  myself;  that  where  I  am,
there  ye  may  be  also"  [John  14:  3],  and  similar  passages,  but
brevity  forbids.

I  believe,  then,  that  the  souls  of  the  faithful  fly  to  heaven
as  soon  as  they  leave  the  body,  come  into  the  presence  of  God,
and  rejoice  forever.  Here,  most  pious  King,  if  you  govern  the
state  entrusted  to  you  by  God  as  David,  Hezekiah,  and  Josiah
did,  you  may  hope  to  see  first  God  Himself  in  His  very  sub-
stance, in  His  nature  and  with  all  His  endowments  and  powers,
and  to  enjoy  all  these,  not  sparingly  but  in  full  measure,  not
with  the  cloying  effect  that  generally  accompanies  satiety,  but
with  that  agreeable  completeness  which  involves  no  surfeiting,
just  as  the  rivers,  that  flow  unceasingly  into  the  sea  and  flow  back
through  the  depths  of  the  earth,  bring  no  loathing  to  mankind,
but  rather  gain  and  joy,  ever  watering,  gladdening  and  foster-
ing new  germs  of  life.  The  good  which  we  shall  enjoy  is  in-
finite and  the  infinite  cannot  be  exhausted ;  therefore  no  one  can
become  surfeited  with  it,  for  it  is  ever  new  and  yet  the  same.
Then  you  may  hope  to  see  the  whole  company  and  assemblage
of  all  the  saints,  the  wise,  the  faithful,  brave,  and  good  who  have
lived  since  the  world  began.  Here  you  will  see  the  two  Adams,
the  redeemed  and  the  redeemer,  Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,
Isaac,  Jacob,  Judah,  Moses,  Joshua,  Gideon,  Samuel,  Phineas,
Elijah,  Elisha,  Isaiah,  and  the  Virgin  Mother  of  God  of  whom
he  prophesied,  David,  Hezekiah,  Josiah,  the  Baptist,  Peter,  Paul ;


272  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

here  too,  Hercules,  Theseus,  Socrates,  Aristides,  Antigonus,
Numa,  Camillus,  the  Catos  and  Scipios;  here  Louis*  the  Pious,
and  your  predecessors,  the  Louis,  PhiHps,  Pepins,  and  all  your
ancestors  who  have  gone  hence  in  faith,  t  In  short  there  has
not  been  a  good  man  and  will  not  be  a  holy  heart  or  faithful  soul
from  the  beginning  of  the  world  to  the  end  thereof  that  you  will
not  see  in  heaven  with  God.  And  what  can  be  imagined  more
glad,  what  more  delightful,  what,  finally,  more  honorable  than
such  a  sight?  To  what  can  all  our  souls  more  justly  bend  all
their  strength  than  to  the  attainment  of  such  a  life?  And  may
meantime  the  dreaming  Catabaptists  deservedly  sleep  in  the
regions  below  a  sleep  from  which  they  will  never  wake.  Their
error  comes  from  the  fact  that  they  do  not  know  that  with  the
Hebrews  the  word  for  sleeping  is  used  for  the  word  for  dying,
as  is  more  frequently  the  case  with  Paul  than  there  is  any  need
of  demonstrating  at  present.


[CHAPTER  XI]
ON  THE  CATABAPTISTS

And  since  I  have  come  to  speak  of  the  Catabaptists,  I
should  like,  O  King,  to  sketch  for  you  in  a  few  words  the  doc-
trines of  that  sect.  They  are  mostly  a  class  of  rabble,  homeless
from  the  want  of  means,  who  make  it  their  business  to  win  old
women  by  pompous  discourses  upon  divine  things  to  extract
from  them  the  wherewithal  to  support  themselves,  or  to  gather
in  considerable  alms. In  general,  they  make  pretense  of  the

*These  words,  ''Hie  Ludovicum  Pium"  and  "Ludovicos,  Philippos,
Pipinos,"  are  omitted  by  Bullinger;  they  have  been  added  from  Zwingli's
autograph  manuscript.

tit  was  especially  this  passage  that  called  forth  Luther's  wrath
against  Zwingli,  which  he  poured  out  in  unrestrained  abuse  in  his  book:
Kurz  Bekenntnias  D.  Martin  Luthers  vom  heiligen  Sakrament,  ^MDXLIV.
In  it  he  declared  that  Zwingli  had  altogether  become  a  heathen,  though
Luther  had  previously  expressed  a  similar  opinion  in  his  sermon  on  Genesis
XX,  in  which  he  said:  "That  cannot  be  denied  that  there  are  very  pious
Christians  among  the  heathen,"  and  again,  "I  would  rather  hold  to  this
opinion,  in  order  to  allow  God's  grace  to  enter  among  the  heathen."  See
Luther's  Werke,  Weimar  edition,  Vol.  XXIV,  p.  364f.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  273

same  holiness  of  which  Irenaeus,  Bishop  of  Lyons  writes  in  con-
nection with  the  Valentinians  and  Nazianzenus  [Gregory  of
Nazianzus]  in  connection  with  the  Eunomians.*  Then,  in  re-
liance upon  this,  they  teach  that  a  Christian  cannot  be  a  magis-
trate ;  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  Christian  to  put  even  a  guilty
man  to  death  even  by  process  of  law;  that  we  must  not  go  to
war  even  if  tyrants  or  godless  persons  and  robbers  resort  to  force
and  plunder,  slay,  and  destroy  every  day ;  that  an  oath  must  not
be  taken ;  that  a  Christian  should  not  exact  duties  or  taxes ;  that
all  things  should  be  held  in  common ;  that  the  souls  sleep  with
the  bodies;  that  a  man  can  have  several  wives  "in  the  spirit"
(having,  however,  carnal  intercourse  with  them)  ;  that  tithes
and  revenues  should  not  be  paid,  and  hundreds  of  other  things.
Nay,  they  daily  scatter  new  errors  like  tares  amid  the  righteous
seed  of  God.

Although  they  have  left  us,  because  they  were  not  of  us,
there  are  yet  people  who  impute  all  their  errors  to  us,  though
we  fight  against  them  more  fiercely  than  any  one,  and  teach
the  opposite  of  their  teaching  in  all  the  above  named  matters.
Therefore,  most  excellent  King,  if  I  am  reported  to  Your
Majesty  from  any  quarter  as  wishing  to  abolish  magistrates,
saying  that  an  oath  ought  not  to  be  taken,  and  teaching  the  rest
that  the  Catabaptist  scum  spits  out  upon  the  world,  I  beg  and
pray,  by  the  truth  to  which  men  say  you  are  so  devoted,  that
you  will  believe  nothing  of  the  sort  of  us,  that  is,  of  those  who
are  proclaiming  the  Gospel  in  the  cities  of  the  Christian
alliance,  t  For  we  do  not  rouse  tumult  nor  weaken  the  author-
ity of  magistrates  or  laws,  nor  do  we  advocate  any  man's  not
keeping  his  faith  and  paying  his  debts,  however  much  certain
people  accuse  us  of  these  things  not  merely  by  secret  denuncia-
tion but  in  public  writings.  We  do  not  reply  to  them  for  this
reason  particularly,  that  the  world  is  already  full  of  fiercely  con-
troversial books,  and  facts  themselves  are  every  day  making
plain  what  lies  those  people  write  who  are  scattering  such
reports  about  us  among  the  people,  not  caring  for  the  glory  of

*See  Irenaeus,  "Against  Heresies,"  Bk.  I,  chap.  VI,  §3,  in  Migne,
Patrologia  Graeca,  XL VIII,  642,  Bk.  Ill,  §4;  tr.  Schaflf,  ^Nicene  Fathers,
I,  324;  and  Gregory  of  Nazianzus,  "Orations,"  XXVII,  §9,  in  Migne,  1.  c,
XXXVI,  22.

tTlie  Swiss  and  German  cities  of  the  Burgher  Rights  are  meant.


274  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Christ  but  for  their  own  glory  and  for  their  bellies.

Now  this  Catabaptist  pest  has  crept  in  principally  at  those
places  where  the  true  teachings  of  Christ  have  begun  to  take
root,  so  that  you  can  more  easily  see,  O  King,  that  it  has  been
brought  in  by  the  evil  spirit,  in  order  to  choke  the  wholesome
seed  at  the  start.  We  see  cities  and  towns  that  had  made  a
fine  beginning  in  receiving  the  Gospel,  after  being  infected  and
hindered  by  this  pest,  come  as  it  were  to  a  standstill,  so  that,
because  of  their  confusion,  they  were  unable  to  attend  to  sacred
or  civil  affairs.  Therefore,  I  warn  Your  Majesty  (begging  your
pardon,  for  I  know  how  you  are  surrounded  by  excellent  coun-
sels, but  counsel  does  not  provide  against  what  is  not  foreseen.
If  this  evil  occurred  to  the  minds  of  your  advisers,  they  would
easily  make  provision  against  it,  I  know,  but  since  they  are
doubtless  unaware  of  the  danger,  I  think  you  will  not  take  my
warning  amiss) , — since  it  cannot  but  be  that  also  in  your  king-
dom some  sparks  of  the  reviving  Gospel  are  flashing  forth,  I
warn  you  not  to  suffer  the  good  seed  to  be  choked  by  the  Papists
whose  influence  has  grown  unduly,  for  then  instead  of  this  good
seed  you  would  find  the  Catabaptists'  tares  growing  up  where
you  least  suspected  it,  and  such  disorder  in  all  things  appearing
throughout  your  kingdom  that  it  would  be  very  hard  to  discover
a  remedy.

This  is  a  summary  of  my  faith  and  preaching  which  I  hold
by  the  grace  of  God,  and  I  stand  ready  to  give  an  account  of  it
to  any  man,  for  there  is  not  one  jot  of  my  teaching  that  I  have
not  learned  from  the  divine  Scriptures,  and  I  advance  no  doc-
trine for  which  I  have  not  the  authority  of  the  leading  doctors
of  the  Church,  the  prophets,  apostles,  bishops,  evangelists,  and
translators — those  of  old,  who  drank  from  the  fountain-head
in  its  purity.  This  will  be  admitted  by  those  who  have  seen
and  examined  my  writings.

Accordingly,  most  holy  King*  (for  what  hinders  me  to
call  "most  holy"  him  who  is  the  most  Christian  King?),  gird
yourself  to  receive  with  due  honor  the  Christ  who  is  to  be  born
anew  for  us  and  brought  back  to  us.  For  I  see  that  by  the  provi-
dence of  God  it  has  come  to  pass  that  the  kings  of  France  are
called  "most  Christian,"  since  the  restoration  of  the  Gospel  of

•Whatever in this peroration differs from BuUinger's edition haa
been  restored  according  to  the  autograph  manuscript  of  Zwingli.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  275

the  Son  of  God  was  to  take  place  in  your  reign — a  king  whom
friends  and  enemies  aUke  all  proclaim  to  be  gracious  by  nature.
For  a  Christian  prince  must  be  of  gracious  and  affable  nature,  of
just  and  intelligent  judgment,  of  most  wise  and  brave  mind.
God  has  made  you  very  rich  in  these  endowments,  that  you
might  shine  upon  this  age,  and  yourself  rekindle  the  torch  of
the  knowledge  of  God.  Go  on,  then,  with  these  heroic  virtues,
seize  shield  and  spear,  and  attack  unbelief  with  dauntless  and
intrepid  courage  and  with  that  body  of  yours  conspicuous  for
all  grace.  Thus  when  the  other  kings  shall  see  you,  the  most
Christian  king,  championing  the  glory  of  Christ,  they  will
follow  you  and  turn  out  Antichrist.  Permit  the  doctrine  of
salvation  to  be  preached  in  purity  in  your  realm.  You  are
strong  in  men  of  wisdom  and  learning,  in  resources,  and  in  a
people  inclined  to  religion ;  you  will  not,  therefore,  suffer  their
hearts  which  are  so  devoted  to  God  and  yourself  to  be  led  astray
into  superstition.  There  is  no  reason  to  fear  here  that  the
slanderers  will  cry  out  their  falsehoods  to  oppose  truth.  Not
only  your  subjects  but  the  outside  allied  nations  will  wage  holy
and  righteous  wars.  Not  only  the  people  but  preachers  also  will
take  the  oath  of  allegiance  without  hesitation,  though  the  Papists
have  thus  far  refused  to  do  so.  Even  the  preachers  will  pay
their  dues  and  taxes,  so  far  are  they  from  being  inclined  to
teach  that  they  should  not  be  paid.  They  will  leave  every  man
his  own  rights  and  privileges.  If  mistakes  are  made,  they  will
censure  them,  but  they  will  not  create  any  disturbance  because
of  temporal  things,  for  they  recognize  the  ordinary  judge  in
these  things,  however  much  they  may  criticise  and  censure  him
when  he  does  wrong.

Believe  me,  indeed,  believe  me,  magnanimous  Hero,  none
of  those  evils  will  come  to  pass  which  the  Papists  threaten.  For
the  Lord  protects  His  Church.  Oh  that  you  might  see  with
your  own  eyes  the  States  of  certain  princes  who  have  received
the  Gospel  in  Germany,  and  the  security,  happiness,  and  faith-
fulness of  their  cities.  Then  you  would  say  because  of  the  re-
sults: "I  doubt  not  that  what  has  come  to  pass  is  from  God."
Examine  the  whole  matter  in  the  light  of  your  faith  and  wis-
dom, and  pardon  the  daring  with  which  I  have  disturbed  Your


276  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

Majesty in boorish fashion. The situation demanded it.
Zurich.*

Your  Majesty's  most  devoted,

H.  Zwingli.


APPENDIX  ON  THE  EUCHAEIST  AND  MASSf

There  are  some  things  which  in  the  above  exposition  I
touched  upon  lightly;  these  I  will  now  treat  of  in  a  fuller  ex-
position. And  I  shall  especially  prove  that  the  Papists  depart
from  truth  when  they  proclaim  that  they  offer  Christ  for  sin  in
the  Mass.  For  as  He  offered  Himself  once  on  the  cross  and  again
to  the  Father  in  heaven,  so  He  won  and  obtained  remission  of
sins  and  the  joy  of  everlasting  happiness,  and  he  who  boasts  that
he  offers  Him  to  the  Father  can  in  no  way  more  completely
reject  or  deny  Christ. This  I  shall  try  to  make  clear  as  follows :

First,  I  ask  the  opponent,  who  among  men  offered  up
Christ  when  He  was  hung  upon  the  cross?  They  can  only
answer  that  no  man  offered  Him  up ;  He  was  offered  up  by  Him-
self. To  this  the  prophets,  Christ  Himself,  and  His  apostles  bare
witness.  He  was  offered  up,  because  He  Himself  willed  it.  "No
man  taketh  my  life  from  me,"  and  "I  have  power  to  lay  it  down,
and  I  have  power  to  take  it  again"  [John  10:  18].  "I  lay
down  my  life  for  my  sheep"  [John  10:  15],  and  "The  bread
that  I  will  give  is  my  flesh,  which  I  will  give  for  the  life  of  the
world"  [John  6:  51].  Through  the  eternal  Spirit  He  offered
Himself  up  unspotted  unto  God.

If,  therefore,  Christ  was  then  offered  up  by  none  other  than
Himself,  I  ask  secondly,  w^hether  there  is  any  difference  between
that  real  offering  of  Himself  to  death  and  the  offering  by  which
the  Papists  offer  Him  up.  If  they  say  there  is  no  difference,  it
will  follow  that  Christ  must  endure  suffering  and  pain,  nay,
must  die  today  also  when  He  is  offered  up.  For  so  it  is  written
in  Hebr.  2:  14,  "that  through  death  he  might  destroy  him
that  had  the  power  of  death,  that  is,  the  devil ;"  in  Rom.  5 :  10,
"we  were  reconciled  to  God  by  the  death  of  his  Son." "Where

*The  month  and  year  are  lacking  in  the  autograph  manuscript.
fThis  is  what  Bullinger  added  as  an  appendix  to  Zwingli's  confession.
See  the  note  on  p.  248.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  277

there  is  a  testament,  there  must  also  of  necessity  be  the  death  of
the  testator"  [Hebr.  9:  16],  that  is,  if  one  is  to  hand  over  a
legacy  by  testament  to  anyone,  the  testator  must  die.  And  our
testament  or  legacy  is  the  free  remission  of  sins,  as  we  see  in  Jer.
31 :  35,  and  Hebr.  8 :  12.  When  the  divine  goodness  bequeathed
this  to  us,  it  was  necessary  that  He  should  die  through  whom  the
pardon  of  our  sins  had  been  bequeathed  to  us.  It  follows,  there-
fore, that  if  the  Papists  now  offer  Him  up,  Christ  dies  even  now.
For  if  they  offer  Him  up,  sins  are  taken  away  by  the  offering ;
if  sins  are  taken  away,  death  must  intervene,  for  "without  shed-
ding of  blood  is  no  remission,"  Hebr.  9:  22,  and  Rom.  6:  10,
''for  in  that  he  died,  he  died  unto  sin."  It  is,  therefore,  alto-
gether apparent  that  if  the  Papists  offer  up  Christ  for  the  remis-
sion of  sins,  as  He  offered  Himself  up,  they  also  slay  Him,  for
without  death  sins  are  not  abolished.

But  if  between  their  offering  and  that  by  which  Christ
offered  Himself  up  there  is  some  difference,  I  ask  what  it  can
be?  They  will  answer,  no  doubt,  in  the  old  way,  that  there  is
this  difference,  that  He  actually  offered  Himself  up,  while  they
now  offer  Him  up  spiritually.  Therefore  it  was  necessary  then
for  Him  to  die,  but  now,  since  their  offering  is  a  spiritual  one,
death  is  not  required.  I  reply  that  in  so  difficult  a  matter  no
ambiguous  nor  obscure  form  of  expression  must  be  allowed  to
pass  unchallenged,  lest  forsooth  we  be  led  away  from  the  truth
through  not  understanding  the  force  of  the  expression.  I  ask,
therefore,  when  they  say  that  they  offer  Him  spiritually,  what
they  understand  by  this  word  "spiritually," — whether  they
mean  their  own  spirit,  so  that  the  meaning  is,  "We  offer  up
Christ  spiritually,  that  is,  we  consider  in  our  hearts  and  recall
the  memory  of  Christ's  having  offered  Himself  up  for  us,  and
we  give  thanks  for  it."  If  this  is  the  way  they  understand  "to
offer  up  spiritually,"  meaning  to  offer  up  Christ  in  their  hearts,
they  do  not  differ  at  all  from  us,  but  they  differ  from  themselves
by  more  than  rpU  dia  iraaCiv,  i.  e.,  "three  times  the  octave"
So  far  are  they  from  offering  up  Christ  in  this  way  that  it  is
they  themselves  who,  already  offered  up  to  Him  in  faith,  now
offer  Him  up  visibly  in  the  Supper  also.

If  by  "spiritually"  they  understand  the  spirit  of  Christ,  in
the  meaning,  "We  offer  up  Christ  spiritually,  that  is,  we  offer  up
the  spirit  of  Christ,"  this  is  contradicted  by  the  words  of  Christ


278  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

that  I  quoted  above,  "No  man  taketh  my  Hfe,"  etc.,  for  no  man
has  power  over  Him.  For  He  offered  Himself  up  through  the
everlasting  Spirit,  that  is,  He  delivered  His  life  and  body  over
to  death,  by  the  will  and  order  of  the  eternal  Spirit  or  counsel.
No  one  but  Himself,  therefore,  can  offer  up  Christ  in  this  way.

But  if  they  understand  "spiritually"  as  follows:  "We  offer
up  the  real  body  of  Christ  spiritually,  that  is,  in  some  inexplic-
able manner,  so  that  while  it  is  real  body  it  is  not  the  actual,
natural  body,  but  according  to  a  fashion  of  its  own  a  spiritual
one,  which  fashion  is  unknown  to  us"  (for  that  is  about*  the
way  they  speak),  I  will  show  that  they  simply  string  together
words  which  cannot  be  consistent.  For  since  it  is  evident  that
Christ's  body  is  a  real  body,  so  that  it  remains  one  and  the  same
body  in  fact  and  in  number  before  it  died  and  after  it  rose  again,
although  from  being  mortal  it  became  immortal  and  from  being
animal  it  became  spiritual,  that  is,  divine,  pure,  incapable  of
suffering,  and  in  all  things  obedient  to  the  Spirit,  it  yet  never  so
changes  and  passes  over  into  spirit  as  not  to  be  really  natural
and  actual  body,  corruptible  and  frail  to  be  sure  before  death,
but  after  the  resurrection  incorruptible,  strong  and  everlasting,
yet  always  one  and  the  same  body.  I  am  speaking  of  real  body,
then,  and  ask  whether  they  say  that  real  body  is  offered  up,  but
in  an  inexplicable  way.  They  answer,  "Yes,  certainly."  I  ask
further  why  they  venture  to  say  that  the  manner  is  inexplicable
when  the  first  line  of  division  between  all  things  and  all  sub-
stances is  that  they  are  either  body  or  spirit.  This  division  is
so  far  reaching  that  it  even  includes  God,  and  the  angels  and  all
spirits.  For  "God  is  spirit,"  John  4:24.  Though,  therefore,
my  question  is  about  what  is,  not  about  how  it  is,  as  they  them-
selves say  with  the  philosophers,  that  is,  though  I  first  ask  what
is  offered  up,  and  only  afterwards  ask  how  it  is  offered  up,  not
with  the  desire  as  it  were  to  demand  the  reason  of  the  doings  of
God,  but  because  they  do  not  make  proper  answer  as  to  the  thing
or  substance,  I  will  now  show  that  they  do  not  any  more  make
proper  answer  as  to  how  it  is.  But  that  the  cloudy  mists  of
sophistry  may  not  be  displeasing  to  Your  Majesty,  I  will  explain
very  clearly  and  plainly  what  I  have  said  because  of  contentious
persons.

I  ask  of  the  Papists  first  in  regard  to  the  thing,  "What  do

•"Ferre"  in  the  text  must  be  a  misprint  for  "fere."


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  279

you  offer  up  for  sin  in  the  Mass?"  They  answer,  "The  body  of
Christ."  1  say,  "Is  it  the  true  and  real  body?"  They  answer,
"Yes."  I  say,  "If  you  offer  up  the  true  and  real  body,  two  utter
absurdities  follow.  First,  you  take  upon  yourselves  a  work
which  belongs  to  the  Son  of  God  alone.  For  He  offered  Himself
up,  as  has  been  said  before.  For  no  one  can  offer  up  anything
greater  than  himself.  The  priests  of  the  Old  Testament  used
to  offer  up  animal  sacrifices,  and  these  were  as  much  below  the
priests  themselves  as  a  brute  is  lower  than  a  man.  But  each  one
offered  up  the  highest  sacrifice  he  could  when  he  dedicated  and
bound  himself  over  to  the  Lord,  that  is,  when  he  devoted  his
whole  heart  to  God,  and  surrendered  his  whole  life  and  all  his
actions  to  His  service.  Hence  also  the  apostles  nowhere  teach
us  to  offer  up  anything  else  than  ourselves.  Christ,  therefore,  is
offered  up  by  Himself  alone.  For  on  this  account  did  the  chief
high  priest  alone  enter  the  holy  of  holies  and  once  only  in  the
year,  as  a  figurative  representation,  that  Christ  alone  was  to  make
expiation  for  sin.

The  other  absurdity  is  that  if  you  offer  up  Christ  for  sin,
you  slay  Christ,  for  sin  is  not  abolished  save  by  death.  For  a
seed  of  corn,  unless  it  die,  bringeth  forth  no  fruit  [John  12 :  24] .
If,  therefore,  you  slay  not,  you  produce  no  fruit;  if  you  slay,
you  crucify  Christ  again,  when  He  died  once  for  all  and  cannot
die  any  more,  as  the  apostle  teaches  truly  and  undeniably  in
the  epistles  to  the  Romans  and  the  Hebrews.  See,  most  wise
King,  into  what  straits,  into  what  difficulties  and  quicksands
the  Papists  suffer  themselves  to  be  drawn  through  their  greed.
Christ  alone  can  offer  Himself  up.  The  offering  takes  place  only
at  the  time  the  victim  is  slain.  Sin  is  abolished  only  at  the  time
the  expiation  is  made,  that  is,  at  the  time  the  victim  that  haa
been  sacrificed  is  accepted  by  God  with  smiling  approval.  It
follows,  therefore,  that  no  man  can  offer  up  Christ,  much  less
can  the  Papists.  This  also  follows,  that  if  they  offered  up  Christ
they  would  be  slaying  Him.  But  since  Christ  cannot  die  any
more,  it  follows  that  even  if  the  Papists  would  like  to  slay  Christ,
in  order  that  they  might  receive  money  for  His  blood,  yet  they
cannot  slay  Him.  For  death  can  have  no  more  dominion  over
Him.  But  all  this  will  become  clearer  to  Your  Majesty  when  I
have  adduced  the  testimony  of  the  apostle.

Hebr.  1 :  3,  "Who  being  the  brightness  of  his  glory,  and


280  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

the  express  image  of  his  person,  and  upholding  all  things  by
the  word  of  his  power,  when  he  had  by  himself  purged  our
sins,"  etc.  Behold,  most  excellent  King,  who  He  had  to  be
who  purged  our  sins.  The  brightness  of  the  everlasting  sun,
that  is,  the  supreme  light,  the  image,  that  is,  the  likeness  and
antitype  of  the  everlasting  Deity,  that  is,  of  His  substance,
which  has  its  being  through  itself  and  gives  being  unto  all
things.  He  is  almighty,  as  one  whose  commands  all  things
obey.  What  impudence  is  it,  then,  for  us  to  maintain  that  men
offer  Him  up  for  sin,  when  He  has  purged  away  sin  by  offering
up  Himself !

In  the  same  epistle,  Hebr.  5 :  5,  "So  Christ  also  glorified  not
himself  to  be  made  a  high  priest,  but  he  that  spake  unto  him.
Thou  art  My  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  Thee."  What  an
irreverence,  then,  and  insult  to  God  is  this  that  a  man  should
make  himself  high  priest,  when  not  even  the  Son  of  God  took
this  honor  upon  Himself  but  received  it  from  His  Father !

In  the  same  epistle,  Hebr.  7 :  26,  "For  such  a  high  priest
became  us,  holy,  guileless,  undefiled,  separated  from  sinners,
and  made  higher  than  the  heavens,"  etc.  What  created  being
now  will  dare  to  take  upon  himself  to  boast  that  he  is  high  priest,
when  that  high  priest  who  is  to  abolish  sin  must  be  holy  and
free  from  all  blemish?

In  the  same  chapter  [v.  24],  "But  he,  because  he  abideth
for  ever,  hath  his  priesthood  unchangeable."  Hence  He  can
always  save  and  deliver  them  that  come  through  Him  to  make
supplication  to  God,  living  ever  as  He  does  to  intercede  for
them.  What  folly  is  it  to  choose  substitute  priests  for  Him  who
gives  up  neither  His  office  nor  His  life !  Christ  is  the  everlasting
priest,  our  everlasting  advocate  before  God.  Why,  then,  do  we
make  other  advocates  for  ourselves?  Is  Christ  dead?  Has  He
abandoned  our  cause  ?  Behold,  most  brave  King,  how  they  deny
Christ  and  insult  God  who  thus*  make  themselves  priests.

In  the  same  chapter  [v.  27],  "Who  needeth  not  daily,  like
those  high  priests,  to  offer  up  sacrifices,  first  for  his  own  sins,
and  then  for  the  sins  of  the  people ;  for  this"  (sacrificing  for
the  people),  "he  did  once  for  all,  when  he  offered  up  himself."
We  see  here  that  Christ  was  offered  up  once  for  all.  What  vile-
ness,  then,  to  do  what  has  already  been  done  and  finished !  Since
He,  in  that  He  was  offered  up  once  for  all,  perfected  the  atone-


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  281

ment  for  sin,  and  this  endureth  for  ever  through  Him,  he  who
boasts  that  he  offers  Him  up  does  the  same  thing  as  if  he  boasted
that  he  created  the  world.  For  that,  when  once  created
endureth  forever;  so  also  redemption,  once  obtained  through
Christ,  equally  endureth  forever.  For  the  works  of  God  are  not
like  the  works  of  men  to  fall  to  the  ground  unless  they  happen
to  be  renewed  and  made  over.

In  the  same  epistle,  8 :  1,  "Now  in  the  things  which  we  are
saying  the  chief  point  is  this :  We  have  such  a  high  priest,  who
sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  the
heavens,"  etc,  What  presumption  is  it,  therefore,  to  make  one's
self  a  high  priest  or  minister,  when  He  alone  is  our  high  priest
who  sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  God !

In  the  same  epistle,  9: 11  and  12,  "But  Christ  having  come
a  high  priest  of  the  good  things  to  come,  through  the  greater
and  more  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands,  that  is  to
say,  not  of  this  creation ;  nor  yet  through  the  blood  of  goats  and
calves,  but  through  His  own  blood,  entered  in  once  for  all  into
the  holy  place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption."  What
arrogance,  therefore,  to  take  upon  one's  self  the  work  of  the
Son  of  God,  when  He  offered  up  His  own  blood,  and  alone  did  it,
and  thus  to  boast,  being  a  man  subject  to  sin,  that  one  is  offer-
ing up  the  same  blood  which  He  offered  up  once  for  all,  but  so
abundantly  and  generously  that  the  redemption  won  endureth
forever!  For  God  is  everlasting.  He  who  redeemed  also
created.  I  will  quote  from  this  epistle  one  more  proof  in  which
all  that  I  have  said  is  seen  as  on  a  tablet.

In  the  same  epistle,  9 :  24,  "For  Christ  entered  not  into  a
holy  place  made  with  hands,  like  in  pattern  to  the  true;  but
into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  before  the  face  of  God  for  us :
Nor  yet  that  he  should  offer  himself  often,  as  the  [Levitical]
high  priest  entereth  into  the  holy  place  year  by  year  with  blood
not  his  own ;  else  must  he  often  have  suffered  since  the  founda-
tion of  the  world ;  but  now  once  at  the  end  of  the  ages  hath  he
been  manifested  to  put  away  sin  by  the  sacrifice  of  himself."
See  how  being  offered  up  involves  suffering!  What  dullness,
then,  not  to  see  that  when  Christ  is  offered  up  He  also  dies!
And  since  He  can  have  died  only  once.  He  can  have  been  offered
up  only  once.  But,  once  offered  up,  He  purifies  forever  the
sanctified,  that  is,  those  destined  for  everlasting  life. He  who


282  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

reconciles  the  Father  to  us  must  sit  in  heaven.  Hence  also  the
Church  that  through  Christ  possesses  and  obtains  all  things  is
called  the  true  Church  of  Christ.

But  why  should  I  trouble  Your  Majesty  with  more  words,
since  it  is  clearer  than  the  sun  that  no  one  can  offer  up  Christ
but  Himself,  and,  secondly,  that  He  can  be  offered  up  once
only?  For  if  the  offering  up  of  Him  were  repeated,  it  would
show  that  His  own  doing  it  was  not  sufficient.  Thirdly,  if  He
were  offered  up,  He  would  suffer  again.  It  is,  therefore,  estab-
lished that  the  Papists  deny  Christ  and  make  void  His  work.

But  since  the  ancient  theologians,  who  drank  in  and
treated  of  the  Christian  religion  in  greater  purity  and  simplicity,
very  often  call  the  Eucharist  an  offering  (for  the  word  "Mass"
was  not  heard  until  after  the  time  of  Augustine),*  some  one
might  raise  the  objection,  "Why,  then,  did  they  call  it  an  offer-
ing if  it  is  not  really  an  offering?"  especially  since  in  the  judg-
ment of  all  they  spoke  more  learnedly  and  to  the  point  than
later  writers.  T  answer,  "The  more  learned  and  religious  any-
one is,  the  less  he  wanders  from  the  truth  whatever  words  he
uses."  For  learning,  like  a  lamp,  lights  up  and  makes  clear  to
the  sight  whatever  is  said,  but  religion  forbids  that  anything  at
variance  with  the  truth  should  be  accepted  on  account  of  the
apparent  meaning  of  the  words.  It  takes  to  heart  the  warning
in  Saint  Augustine's  rule,  and  says,  "Even  though  you  do  not
grasp  the  words,  and  do  not  know  the  real  meaning  of  the  divine
utterance,  yet  it  is  certain  that  God's  utterances  are  every  way
consistent,  and  however  much  they  seem  to  have  a  different
meaning  in  different  passages,  yet  they  never  do  contradict
themselves."  When  they  seem  to  us  at  first  sight  to  contradict
themselves,  this  is  due  to  our  being  deceived  by  our  ignorance  of
language  or  feebleness  of  religious  feeling.  When,  therefore,
they  call  an  offering  what  cannot  really  and  literally  be  an
offering,  we  must  first  appeal  to  our  religious  consciousness.
Religion  denies,  as  I  think  has  been  said  strongly  enough,  that

•What  is  regarded  as  the  earliest  instance  of  the  use  of  the  word
"mass,"  in  Latin  missa,  is  found  in  the  letters  of  Ambrose,  who,  referring
to  events  of  the  year  385  A.  D.,  writes:  "The  day  after,  which  was  Sun-
day, after  the  lessons  and  the  sermon,  when  the  catechumens  were  dismissed.
I  was  teaching  the  creed  to  certain  candidates  ...  I  however,  remained
at  my  ministrations  and  began  to  celebrate  the  mass."  See  Letter  20,  §4,  in
Schaff,  liiceTie  Fathers,  2nd  Series,  X,  423.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  283

there  can  be  any  other  high  priest  than  Christ.  Therefore,  not
even  the  Pope,  however  great  he  is,  if  we  are  to  estimate  him  at
his  own  valuation,  can  offer  up  Christ.  While  this  is  firmly
established  by  religion,  she  is  seconded  by  her  handmaid,  learn-
ing. "Go  to,"  she  says  to  righteousness,  ''It  is  nothing  new  for
things  to  get  names  from  their  inventors,  or  authors,  or  from
what  they  represent."  This  useful  quality  in  words  the  learned
call  "metonymy,"  that  is,  "the  substitution  of  the  name  of  one
object  for  that  of  another."  For  instance,  when  Paul  says,
"When  Moses  is  read,  the  veil  is  upon  their  eyes,"*  where
"Moses"  signifies  the  law  that  is,  the  entire  Old  Testament,
simply  because  Moses  brought  out  the  law  according  to  God's
will  and  command.  Also  when  the  lamb  which  was  eaten  at
the  Supper  is  called  the  Passover,  though  it  only  signifies  the
passover.  So  also  the  Eucharist  was  learnedly  and  religiously
called  an  offering  by  the  ancients,  not  because  it  was  one,  but
because  it  signified  that  offering  in  which  Christ,  by  offering
Himself  up  in  that  one  offering,  made  perfect  and  redeemed
forever  those  who  have  been  sanctified,  that  is,  have  been  elected
of  God.  But  you  might  call  this  that  I  say  a  thing  made  up  by
me  if  you  did  not  find  that  Augustine  expresses  the  same  view
in  the  letter  to  Boniface  which  is  numbered  23.
Augustine.
"We  often  say  in  ordinary  parlance  when  Easter  is
approaching,  'tomorrow  or  the  day  after  is  the  Lord's  Passion,'
although  He  suffered  so  many  years  ago,  and,  in  general,  that
Passion  took  place  once  for  all  time.  On  Easter  Sunday  itself
we  say,  'This  day  the  Lord  rose  from  the  dead,'  although  so
many  years  have  passed  since  His  resurrection.  But  no  one  is
so  foolish  as  to  accuse  us  of  falsehood  when  we  use  these
phrases,  for  the  reason,  that  we  give  such  names  to  these  days  on
the  ground  of  a  likeness  between  them  and  the  days  on  which
the  events  referred  to  actually  occurred,  the  day  being  called  the
day  of  that  event,  although  it  is  not  the  same,  but  one  corre-
sponding to  it  by  the  revolution  of  the  same  time  of  the  year,
and  it  being  said,  on  account  of  the  celebration  of  the  sacrament,
that  a  thing  is  done  on  that  day  which  was  done  not  on  that  day
but  long  ago. Was  not  Christ  offered  once  for  all  in  His  own

*II  Cor.  3:  15. The  Vulgate  as  well  as  the  "Textus  Receptus"  to-
gether with  the  modern  English  versions  have  "heart"  instead  of  "eyes."


284  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

person  as  a  sacrifice,  and  yet  in  the  sacrament  He  is  offered  to
the  nations  not  only  all  through  the  solemnities  of  the  Easter
day,  but  also  daily  among  our  congregations,  so  that  the  man
who,  being  questioned,  answers  that  He  is  offered  as  a  sacrifice
in  that  ordinance  is  strictly  true.  For  if  sacraments  had  not
some  likeness  to  the  things  of  which  they  are  the  sacraments,
they  would  not  be  sacraments  at  all.  In  most  cases,  moreover,
they  do  in  virtue  of  this  likeness  bear  the  names  of  the  realities
which  they  resemble.  As,  therefore,  in  a  sense  the  sacrament  of
the  body  of  Christ  is  the  body  of  Christ,  and  the  sacrament  of
the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  blood  of  Christ,  so  the  sacrament  of
faith  is  faith,"  etc.*

From  these  words  of  Augustine  Your  Highness  easily  dis-
cerns that  the  Eucharist  is  called  a  sacrifice  or  offering  exactly
as  the  Resurrection  and  Passion  of  the  Lord  are  so  called,  which
days,  inasmuch  as  they  signify  and  call  to  mind  real  things
which  took  place  once,  receive  the  names  of  those  things.  It  is
established,  therefore,  that  the  Papists  are  entirely  mistaken
when  they  make  the  Mass  or  Eucharist  a  real  offering,  seeing
that  it  is  only  the  likeness  and  commemoration  of  an  offering.
This  also  is  established,  that  they  are  foolish  and  ignorant  w^ho
think  that  sacraments  and  festivals  of  praise  are  not  properly
called  by  the  names  of  the  things  which  they  signify,  however
much  they  are  not  these  things.  When,  therefore,  the  Papists
strive  to  make  the  thing  itself  out  of  the  symbol,  they  only  suc-
ceed in  showing  all  men  that  they  are  themselves  uneducated
and  ignorant.

I  pass  over  in  silence  the  other  errors  into  which  they  fall
in  regard  to  the  Mass,  or  rather  which  they  invent  and  devise
with  perverted  ingenuity : — the  way  they  traffic  in  it  and  make
it  a  matter  of  revenue,  which  is  not  only  an  attack  upon  the
holiness  of  our  religion  but  upon  common  honesty.  (For  who
among  the  heathen  have  ever  pursued  filthy  lucre  so  sordidly  as
openly  to  defile  religion?)  I  also  pass  over  that  they  promise
the  redemption  of  the  soul  from  purgatory  through  it,  when
neither  any  fire  of  purgatory  exists  as  they  think,  nor  any  offer-
ing which  can  reach  God  save  that  through  which  Christ  sacri-
ficed and  ofifered  Himself  up  upon  the  altar  of  the  cross. I  pass

*Letter  98,  in  Migne, Patrologia  Latina,  XXX, 363f, §9; translated
in  Schaff,  Nicene  Fathers,  1st  Series,  I,  409f.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  285

over  their  saying  that  Christ's  body  is  eaten  by  an  unbeliever
just  as  much  as  by  a  believer;  that  the  Mass  is  equally  effective
whether  performed  by  a  reprobate  or  by  a  pious  and  holy  man ;
their  speaking  so  ignorantly  of  the  body  of  Christ  as  to  say  that
it  is  eaten  in  the  Supper  in  the  proportions  in  which  it  hung
upon  the  cross  and  lay  in  the  manger,  and  hundreds  of  other
declarations  as  foolish  as  they  are  impudent.  Meanwhile  they
say  that  I  am  a  heretic  if  I  do  not  assent  to  all  their  madness,
and  they  weave  together  extraordinary  lies  to  bring  my  teaching
under  suspicion  in  the  eyes  of  those  to  whom  a  report  of  them
may  come.  As  if  I  denied  that  Christ  was  in  the  Supper,  denied
His  omnipotence,  denied  His  words,  and  other  things  of  that
kind.  But  do  you,  most  gracious  King,  hear  a  brief  statement  of
my  opinion  as  to  how  the  body  of  Christ  is  in  the  Supper.

I  believe  that  Christ  is  truly  in  the  Supper,  nay,  I  do  not
believe  it  is  the  Lord's  Supper  unless  Christ  is  there.  Proof : —
''Where  two  or  three  are  gathered  together  in  my  name,  there
will  I  be  in  the  midst  of  them"  [Matth.  18 :  20] .  How  much
more  is  He  there  where  the  whole  Church  is  gathered  together
for  Him!  But  that  His  body  is  eaten  in  the  dimensions  that
they  say  is  absolutely  at  variance  with  the  truth  and  with  the
spirit  of  faith.  With  the  truth,  because  He  said,  "I  shall  be  no
more  in  the  world"  [John  17 :  11] ,  and,  "the  flesh  profiteth
nothing"  [John  6:  63],  as  far  as  eating  is  concerned,  that  is,  in
the  way  the  Jews  then  thought  and  the  Papists  now  think  he
must  be  eaten.  And  it  is  inconsistent  with  the  spirit  of  faith,
because  faith  (I  speak  of  grand  and  true  faith)  embraces  in
itself  love  and  religious  feeling  or  reverence  and  fear  of  God.
And  this  religious  feeling  shrinks  from  that  carnal  and  crude
manducation  just  as  much  as  any  one  would  shrink  from  eating
a  dearly  beloved  son.  Proof: — The  centurion,  whose  faith
Christ  proclaimed  as  greater  than  any  in  Israel,  out  of  the
reverence  of  faith  said  to  Him,  ''Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that
thou  shouldest  enter  under  my  roof"  [Matth.  8:8],  and  Peter,
when  at  the  draught  of  fish  he  bids  Jesus  to  depart  from  him
[Luke  5:8],  on  account  of  the  fear  that  had  taken  possession
of  him,  shrinks  in  consequence  of  this  same  reverence  from  His
bodily  and  visible  presence.

It  is  clear,  then,  that  the  heart  and  faith,  that  is,  the  truth,
which  is  the  one  light  of  the  mind,  and  religious  feeling,  by


286  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

which  we  seize  hold  of,  revere,  and  worship  God,  shrink  from
such  crude  manducation  as  that  in  which  the  men  of  Capernaum
and  the  Papists  say  that  they  eat  the  body  of  Christ.  For,  as
Augustine  holds,  when  the  men  of  Capernaum  said  "How  can
this  man  give  us  his  flesh  to  eat?"  and  "Is  not  this  the  son  of
Joseph?"  [John  6 :  52] ,  they  thought  that  His  body  was  offered
them  to  eat  as  meat  from  the  market  is  eaten,  as,  namely,  it  stood
before  them  as  perceived  by  the  senses,  in  its  special  form  and
height.*  And  what  else  do  the  Papists  maintain  when  they  say
that  Jesus  is  eaten  in  the  proportions  in  which  He  hung  upon
the  cross  and  lay  in  the  tomb?  For  truth  and  the  heart  shrink
from  such  manducation,  and  religious  feeling  and  faith  have
too  holy  a  regard  and  love  for  Christ  to  desire  to  eat  Him  in
this  way.

I  maintain,  therefore,  that  the  body  of  Christ  is  not  eaten
in  the  Supper  in  the  carnal  and  crude  fashion  they  say,  but  I
believe  that  the  real  body  of  Christ  is  eaten  in  the  Supper  sacra-
mentally  and  spiritually  by  the  religious,  faithful,  and  pure
mind,  as  also  Saint  Chrysostomf  holds.  And  this  is  a  brief
resume  of  my  view,  or,  rather  not  mine  but  the  truth's  own,  in
this  controversy.

I  want,  however,  to  subjoin  the  order  of  service  which  we
use  in  celebrating  the  Supper,  that  Your  Majesty  may  see
that  I  do  not  alter  or  make  void  the  words  of  Christ,  or  distort
them  into  a  perverted  meaning,  and  that  I  preserve  entire  in

*Augustine,  Homilies  on  the  Gospel  of  John,  Tract  XXVII,  5:  "They
indeed  understood  the  flesh  just  as  when  cut  to  pieces  in  a  carcass,  or  sold
in  the  market,  not  as  when  it  is  quickened  by  the  Spirit."  (Schaff,  Nicene
Fathers,  1st  Series,  Vol.  VII,  p.  175.)

fZwingli  may  have  been  thinking  of  the  following  passage  in  Chry-
sostom's  De  Sacerdotio  Libri  VI:  "When  you  see  the  Lord  sacrificed  and
lying  [on  the  table]  and  the  priest  standing  by  the  sacrifice,  and  praying;
and  all  [the  communicants]  red  with  that  precious  blood;  do  you  think
yourself  to  be  still  among  men,  and  to  stand  upon  the  earth?  and  not
rather  to  be  translated  direct  to  heaven?  And  casting  out  of  your  soul
all  fleshly  thoughts,  you  look  around  upon  the  things  in  heaven  with  a
clear  soul  and  a  pure  mind.  Oh!  wonderful!  Oh!  the  loving  kindness  of
God!  He  who  sits  above  with  the  Father  is  at  that  time  held  in  the  hands
of  all,  and  gives  Himself  to  those  that  desire  the  gift,  that  they  may  em-
brace and  lay  hold  of  Him.  But  all  do  this  by  the  eyes  of  faith."  See  Migne,
Patrologia  Graeca,  XL VIII,  642,  Bk.  Ill,  §4;  tr.  Schaff,  Xicene  Fathers,
1st  Series,  IX,  46f.


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  J^87

the  Supper  the  things  that  ought  to  have  been  preserved  in  the
Mass,  namely,  prayers,  praise,  confession  of  faith,  communion  of
the  Church  or  the  believers,  and  the  spiritual  and  sacramental
eating  of  the  body  of  Christ,  while,  on  the  other  hand  we  omit
all  those  things  which  are  not  of  Christ's  institution,  to  wit,
"We  offer  efficaciously  for  the  living  and  the  dead:"  "We  offer
for  the  remission  of  sins,"  and  the  other  things  that  the  Papists
assert  not  less  impiously  than  ignorantly.


HERE  FOLLOWS  SUBSTANTIALLY  THE  ORDER  OF
SERVICE  WE  USE  AT  ZURICH,  BERNE,  BASEL,
AND  THE  OTHER  CITIES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN
ALLIANCE:

First,  in  a  sermon  of  appropriate  length  is  preached  the
goodness  of  God  which  He  has  shown  us  through  His  Son,  and
the  people  are  directed  to  the  knowledge  of  this  and  thanksgiv-
ing for  it.  When  this  is  finished  a  table  is  placed  in  front  of  the
choir,  so-called,  before  the  steps ;  this  is  covered  with  a  cloth,  the
unleavened  bread  is  placed  upon  it,  and  the  wine  poured  into
cups.  Then  the  pastor  comes  forward  with  two  assistants,  and
they  all  turn  towards  the  people,  so  that  the  pastor  or  bishop
stands  between  the  others,  having  on  only  the  usual  garb  worn
by  men  of  standing  and  ministers  of  the  Church.  Then  the
pastor  begins  in  a  loud  voice,  not  in  the  Latin  tongue,  but  in
the  vernacular,  so  that  all  shall  understand  what  is  going  on,
"In  the  name  of  the  Father,  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy
Ghost."  The  assistants  respond  in  the  name  of  the  whole
Church,  "Amen."  The  Pastor: — "Let  us  pray."  Now  the
church  kneels.

"Almighty  and  everlasting  God,  whom  all  creatures  rightly
worship,  adore,  and  praise,  as  their  Maker,  Creator,  and  Father,
grant  unto  us  miserable  sinners  that  we  may  in  sincere  faith
render  that  praise  and  thanksgiving  which  Thy  only  begotten
Son,  our  Lord,  Jesus  Christ  instructed  us  to  do,  through  that
same  Jesus  Christ,  Thy  Son,  our  Lord,  who  liveth  and  reigneth
with  Thee,  God,  in  the  unity  of  the  Holy  Spirit  world  without
end. Amen."

Then  the  assistant  who  stands  on  the  left  reads,  "What  is


288  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

now  read  is  written  in  the  first  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians,
eleventh  chapter, — 'When  ye  come  together  therefore  into  one
place,  this  is  not  to  eat  the  Lord's  supper,'  "  [v.  20],  and  the
rest  as  far  as,  ''not  discerning  the  Lord's  body"  [v.  29] .

Then  the  assistants  and  the  Church  respond,  "Praise  be  to
God."  The  Pastor,  "Glory  to  God  in  the  highest."  The
Deacon,  "And  on  earth  peace."  The  Sub-deacon,  "To  men  a
sound  and  tranquil  mind."  The  Deacon,  "We  praise  Thee,  we
bless  Thee,"  and  the  rest  to  the  end  of  this  hymn,  the  assistants
reciting  it  alternately,  verse  by  verse,  the  Church  understanding
the  whole  and  admonished  at  the  beginning  that  each  man  is  to
say  over  in  his  heart  and  consider  in  the  sight  of  God  and  the
Church  the  things  that  are  said.  The  Deacon  says,  "The  Lord
be  with  you."  The  assistants  respond,  "And  with  Thy  spirit."
The  Deacon,  "What  is  now  read  is  written  in  the  Gospel  of  John,
the  sixth  chapter."  The  Church  responds,  "Glory  be  to  Thee,  0
Lord."  The  Deacon,  "Thus  spake  Jesus,  "Verily,  verily,  I  say
unto  you,  he  that  believeth  on  me  hath  everlasting  life.  I  am
that  bread  of  life.  Your  fathers  did  eat  manna,"  etc.,  to  the
words,  "the  words  that  I  speak  unto  you,  they  are  spirit,  and
they  are  life."  After  these  words  the  Pastor  says,  "Glory  to
God  who  deigns  to  forgive  all  our  sins  according  to  His  word."
The  assistants  respond,  "Amen."  The  Pastor,  "I  believe  in  one
God."  The  Deacon,  "the  Father  Almighty,  Creator  of  heaven
and  earth."  The  Sub-deacon,  "And  in  Jesus  Christ,  His  only
begotten  Son,  our  Lord,"  and  the  rest  to  the  end  of  the  Apostles'
Creed,  so-called,  the  ministers  repeating  it  alternately  in  loud
voice  just  as  they  did  before  the  hymn,  "Glory  in  the  highest."

Invitation  of  the  pastor  to  the  worthy  celebration  of  the
Supper: — "We  now  desire,  dear  brethren,  in  accordance  with
the  custom  instituted  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  to  eat  this  bread
and  drink  this  cup,  as  He  commanded  should  be  done  in  com-
memoration, praise,  and  thanksgiving,  because  He  suffered
death  for  us,  and  poured  out  His  blood  to  wash  away  our  sins.
Therefore,  let  every  man  examine  and  question  himself,  as
Paul  suggests,  as  to  how  sure  a  trust  he  puts  in  our  Lord  Jesus
Christ,  that  no  one  may  behave  like  a  believer  who  yet  hath  not
faith,  and  so  become  guilty  of  the  Lord's  death,  and  sin  against
the  whole  Church  (which  is  His  body)  by  thus  showing  con-
tempt for  it. Accordingly  fall  upon  your  knees  and  pray,  'Our


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  289

Father  which  art  in  heaven/  "  etc.,  to  the  end.  And  when  the
ministers  have  responded  "Amen,"  let  the  pastor  again  pray.

Prayer:  "Lord,  God  Almighty,  who  by  Thy  spirit  hast
united  us  into  Thy  one  body  in  the  unity  of  the  faith,  and  hast
commanded  Thy  body  to  give  praise  and  thanks  unto  Thee  for
that  bounty  and  kindness  with  which  Thou  hast  delivered  Thy
only  begotten  Son,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  unto  death  for  our
sins,  grant  that  we  may  fulfil  this  Thy  command  in  such  faith
that  we  may  not  by  any  false  pretenses  offend  or  provoke  Thee
who  art  the  infallible  truth.  Grant  also  that  we  may  live  purely,
as  becometh  Thy  body,  Thy  sons  and  Thy  family,  that  even  the
unbelieving  may  learn  to  recognize  Thy  name  and  Thy  glory.
Keep  us.  Lord,  lest  Thy  name  and  glory  come  into  ill  repute
through  the  depravity  of  our  lives.  We  always  pray,  'Lord,  in-
crease our  faith,  that  is,  our  trust  in  Thee,  who  livest  and
reignest  God  world  without  end.' "  The  church  responds,
"Amen."  Then  the  pastor  speaks  the  sacred  words  with  the
following  actions: —

"The  Lord  Jesus  the  same  night  in  which  He  was  betrayed
to  death  took  bread"  (here  the  pastor  takes  the  unleavened  bread
into  his  hands)  ;  "and  when  he  had  given  thanks,  he  brake  it,
and  said.  Take,  eat:  this  is  my  body,  which  is  broken  for  you;
this  do  in  remembrance  of  me."  (Here  the  pastor  hands  the
bread  to  the  ministers  who  are  standing  about  the  table,  and
they  immediately  take  it  with  reverence,  divide  it  between  them,
and  eat.  Meanwhile  the  pastor  continues)  :  "After  the  same
manner  also  he  took  the  cup,  when  he  had  supped,"  (here  the
pastor  takes  the  cup  into  his  hands),  "gave  thanks  and  said.
Drink  ye  all  of  it.  This  cup  is  the  new  testament  in  my  blood ;
this  do  ye,  as  oft  as  ye  drink  it,  in  remembrance  of  me.  For  as
often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink  this  cup,  ye  do  shew  the
Lord's  death,"  (ye  praise  Him  and  thank  Him)  "till  he  come."

After  this  the  assistants  carry  round  the  unleavened  bread,
and  each  person  takes  a  piece  of  the  bread  with  his  own  hand,
and  then  passes  the  rest  to  his  neighbor.  If  any  one  does  not
wish  to  handle  the  bread  with  his  own  hand,  the  minister  carry-
ing it  round  hands  it  to  him.  Then  the  assistants  follow  with
the  cups  and  hand  one  another  the  Lord's  cup.  Let  not  Your
Majesty  shrink  from  this  custom  of  offering  and  receiving  the
elements,  for  it  has  often  been  found  that  men  who  had  acci-


290  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

dentally  taken  seats  next  each  other  when  they  yet  felt  enmity
and  hatred  towards  each  other,  have  laid  aside  their  angry  feel-
ings through  this  participation  in  the  bread  or  wine.

Another  assistant  reads  again  from  the  pulpit  out  of  the
Gospel  of  John,  while  the  congregation  is  eating  and  drinking
the  sacrament  of  the  Lord's  body  and  blood ;  beginning  at  the
thirteenth  chapter.  When  all  the  cups  have  been  brought  back,
the  pastor  begins,  "Fall  upon  your  knees,"  for  we  eat  and  drink
the  sacrament  of  the  Supper  sitting  and  silently  listening  to  the
word  of  the  Lord,  and  when  all  kneel,  the  pastor  begins,  I  say:

' 'Praise,  O  ye  servants,  the  Lord,*  praise  the  name  of  the
Lord."  The  Deacon:  "Blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  from
this  time  forth  and  for  evermore"  [Ps.  113:  2ff.].  The  Sub-
deacon  :  "From  the  rising  of  the  sun  unto  the  going  down,  etc.,"
and  so  again  the  assistants  go  through  alternately  this  psalm
which  the  Hebrews  say  used  to  be  said  by  their  ancestors  after
eating. After  this  the  pastor  exhorts  the  Church  in  these  words :

"Be  mindful,  dearly  beloved  brethren,  of  what  we  have  now
done  together  by  Christ's  command.  We  have  borne  witness  by
this  giving  of  thanks,  which  we  have  done  in  faith,  that  we  are
indeed  miserable  sinners,  but  have  been  purified  by  the  body
end  blood  of  Christ  which  He  delivered  up  and  poured  out  for
us,  and  have  been  redeemed  from  everlasting  death.  We  have
borne  witness  that  we  are  brethren.  Let  us,  therefore,  confirm
this  by  love,  faith,  and  mutual  service.  Let  us,  therefore,  pray
the  Lord  that  we  may  keep  His  bitter  death  deep  in  our  hearts  so
that  though  we  daily  die  to  our  sins  we  may  be  so  sustained  and
increased  in  all  virtues  by  the  grace  and  bounty  of  His  Spirit
that  the  name  of  the  Lord  shall  be  sanctified  in  us,  and  our
neighbor  be  loved  and  helped.  The  Lord  have  mercy  upon  us
and  bless  us !  The  Lord  cause  His  face  to  shine  upon  us  and  be
gracious  unto  us! Amen."

The  pastor  again  prays: — "We  give  thanks  unto  Thee,  O
Lord,  for  all  Thy  gifts  and  benefits,  who  livest  and  reignest  God
world  without  end.  Amen."  The  pastor:  "Go  in  peace.
Amen." Then  the  Church  separates.

Here  you  see,  most  wise  King,  how  nothing  is  lacking  which
is  required  for  the  proper,  apostolic  celebration  of  the  Eucharist,

*Zwingli  has  "domimim" — "praise  the  Lord," — where  the  King  Jamea
version  translates  "domini,"  i.  e.,  "of  the  Lord."


Exposition  of  the  Christian  Faith  291

as  far  as  the  substance  of  things  is  concerned,  but  that  the  things
which  are  suspected  of  having  been  introduced  from  greed  of
gain  are  omitted.

But  if  any  one  complain,  that  we  have  no  right  to  use  a  new
form  of  celebration  even  if  some  errors  have  crept  into  the  Mass,
for  when  we  venture  to  do  this,  it  is  just  as  if  any  one  in  a
kingdom  or  city,  disregarding  the  laws  of  the  state,  should  enact
special  laws  for  himself,  living  according  to  which  he  would
throw  the  rest  into  uproar  and  sedition,  and  therefore  we  should
rightly  be  called  heretics,  for  errors  can  be  tolerated  for  a  time
even  according  to  the  example  of  the  apostles  until  the  general
council  of  the  Church  decrees  something  else,  let  him,  I  pray,
consider  that  this  case  of  kingdoms  and  cities  and  laws  is  by  no
means  parallel  with  the  case  of  the  divine  laws  and  the  liberty  of
truth  and  faith  and  the  rights  of  the  Church.  For  whatever
human  laws  command  applies  to  the  arrangement  and  regula-
tion of  external  affairs,  but  what  the  divine  law  enjoins  strikes
the  conscience  so  that  as  soon  as  it  understands  the  divine  will  it
condemns  itself  unless  it  acquiesces  and  obeys.  For  by  the  law
Cometh  knowledge  of  sin,  and  the  more  we  detect  that  we  are
sinning  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  the  less  can  the  conscience
assent  to  and  tolerate  insult  to  the  Creator.

Since,  therefore,  we  have  learned  under  the  tuition  of  the
Holy  Spirit  that  there  is  but  one  offering  and  that  made  by  the
Son  of  God,  and  have  pointed  that  out  to  the  great  men  in  the
Church,  that  whatever  was  wrong  might  be  corrected,  and  yet
they  have  more  and  more  not  only  contended  but  raged  against
the  truth,  the  power  of  the  pontiff,  that  had  been  seized  by
violence  ought  not  to  stand  in  the  way  of  anyone's  defending
the  truth  and  clearing  away  the  disgraceful  dishonor  to  the  Son
of  God.  For  what  reason  w^ould  there  be,  alas,  to  have  regard
for  a  pontiff  of  the  Church  who  did  not  reverence  that  on  which
the  Church  is  based  and  built?  The  Church  is  based  upon  faith
in  God  which  lays  hold  of  His  word.  When  the  pontiff  does  not
believe  God's  Word,  how  can  he  rule  the  Church?  Can  faith  be
increased  or  retarded  according  to  the  notions  of  men?  Or,
when  the  Lord  said,  "Do  unto  others  as  ye  would  that  they
should  do  to  you,"  is  one  to  postpone  accepting  this  law  until
the  heads  of  the  Church  decree  its  acceptance?  This  law  has
certainly  to  do  with  human  affairs  merely,  though  to  offer  up


292  The  Works  of  Huldreich  Zwingli

the  Son  of  God  is  an  insult  to  God  Himself.

Finally  it  is  the  right  of  the  Church  to  believe  and  live
according  to  the  inspiration  of  the  divine  Spirit,  as  Paul  com-
mands, "Quench  not  the  Spirit"  [I  Thess.  5:19].  For  who
does  not  immediately  reject  the  nonsense  of  indulgences  when
he  understands  that  they  are  a  lying  invention?  Faith  waiteth
not  for  the  judgment  of  another,  but  rests  upon  her  own.  When,
therefore,  she  sees  these  terrible  blasphemies  against  the  Son  of
God,  she  feels  that  they  are  not  to  be  tolerated  but  to  be  abolished
or  abandoned  at  the  very  first  possible  moment.  Thus,  then,
the  Mass  of  the  Papists  has  been  abolished  among  us  by  deser-
tion and  defection.  For  when  the  people  fled  from  it,  having
recognized  its  error,  and  some  of  the  officiating  priests  shrank
away,  while  some  feared  an  attack  from  the  crowd,  the  Mass
was  so  thoroughly  deserted  that  we  found  it  necessary  to  cast
about  for  a  simple  and  Christian  form  of  celebration.  When
this  had  been  perfected,  the  Council  of  our  city  appointed  a
conference  between  us  and  the  Roman  bishops.  Learned  men
among  them  came,  but  declared  that  they  could  not  confer  upon
so  difficult  a  matter  without  a  council  (though  three  years  later
they  themselves  appointed  a  conference  at  Baden  with  much
corruption).

Our  Council,  therefore,  having  heard  what  was  brought
before  them  pro  and  con  from  the  divine  Scriptures  and  other
writers,  voted  that  no  man  should  be  compelled  to  perform  or
to  hear  the  Mass.  Then  the  Roman  party  attempted  bribery,
and  violence  began  to  be  resorted  to,  and  forced  by  this,  our
illustrious  Council  passed  this  decree,  "No  one  shall  celebrate
the  Mass  in  our  city  after  the  Popish  fashion  henceforth  forever,
unless  he  maintains  from  the  Holy  Scriptures  that  it  has  a
right  to  be  preserved."  Thus,  I  say,  the  Popish  Mass  was
abolished,  and  the  Lord's  Supper  instituted.  Our  example  has
been  followed  by  many  princes,  nobles,  peoples,  and  cities  in
Germany,  and  by  countless  individual  priests,  monks,  magis-
trates and  private  persons  throughout  the  world.  Nothing,
therefore,  has  been  done  among  us  at  variance  with  reason,
nothing  at  variance  with  the  authority  of  the  divine  oracles,
upon  which  we  rely  and  stand  dauntless  in  the  face  of  all
assaults,  sure  that  He  who  is  on  our  side  is  stronger  than  any


Exposition of  the  Christian Faith  293

opposing  power  whatever. But  we  have  dismissed  the  Mass,*
and  pray  that  Your  Majesty  be  strong  mightily  in  God.

*It  is  a  pity  tliat  the  play  upon  words  involved  in  "missam  missam
facimus,"  though  of  doubtful  taste,  seems  incapable  of  reproduction  in
English. The  nearest  approach  seems  to  be  that  given  above.


ADDITIONAL  NOTES


p.  4,  1.  30.

The  passage  in  Gellius,  Noctium  Atticarum  Libri  XX,  is  as  follows:
"It  must  not  be  omitted,  that  in  the  books  of  the  old  lawyers  morbus  is
distinguished  from  vitium:  vitium  is  perpetual,  whilst  morbus  is  subject
to  variations."  See  The  Attic  Nights  of  Aulus  Gellius,  translated  into  Eng-
lish by  the  Rev.  W.  Beloe,  London  1795,  Vol.  I,  p.  241.

p.  71,  1.  11.

Zwingli  said  at  Berne  (Werke,  (Schuler  and  Schulthess  ed.)  II,  1,  146)  :
"We  know  from  Luke  2:  52,  that  Christ  grew  according  to  his  humanity.
From  this  we  learfl  that  his  humanity  was  not  like  his  divinity  infinite
and  immeasurable,  but  according  to  his  human  nature  he  was  finite  and
subject  to  limitation."

p.  76,  1.  7.

For  Zwingli's  explanation  of  Ephes. 5:  27  see  his  De  Canone  missae
epicheiresis,  in  his  Werke,  ed.  Egli  and  Finsler,  II,  571.
p.  78,  1.  18.

The  book  referred  to  is  Luther's  De  votis  monasticis,  1521,  (see  Werke,
Weimar  ed.  Vol.  VIII,  pp.  577-669),  and  the  sermon  from  John  3:  16,  Sic
deus  dilexit,  held  on  June  9,  1522  (Werke,  Weimar  ed.,  Vol.  X,  pt.  3,  No.
29,  pp.  160-169.)

p.  81,  1.  6.

Eck  was  probably  thinking  of  §15  of  the  Bull  "Exsurge  Domine,"
which  condemned  the  following  statement  of  Luther:  "If  they  believe
and  trust  that  they  will  receive  grace,  this  faith  alone  makes  them  pure
and  worthy  [to  come  to  the  sacrament  of  the  Eucharist]."  See  Jacobs,
Martin.  Luther,  1898,  p.  419,  who  gives  the  full  text  of  this  bull  in  an
English  translation.

p.  82,  1.  26.

The  sacraments  are  visible  signs  of  invisible  grace.  This  definition
goes  back  to  Peter  Lombard,  who  defined  a  sacrament  as  "a  visible  form  or
sign  of  an  invisible  grace,"  see  his  Sentences,  Bk.  IV.  It  is  based  in  turn  on
Augustine,  who  defined  a  sacrament  as  "visible  signs  of  divine  things,  in
which  the  invisible  things  themselves  are  honored,"  De  Cat.  Rud.
XXVI,  §50.


ADDITIONAL NOTES  295

p.  85, 1.  13.

The  reference  here  is  to  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis  of  Justinian,  more
definitely  the  Codex  Justinianus,  Book  I,  chap.  1,  which  is  entitled:  De
summa  trinitate  et  de  fide  catholica  et  ut  nemo  de  ea  puhUce  contendere
audeat.  In  §4  of  this  chapter  occurs  the  sentence  quoted  by  Eck:  Nam
vnjuriam  facit  iudicio  reverentissimae  synodi,  si  quis  semel  iudicata  ao
recte  disposita  revolvere  et  publice  disputare  contendit.  See  Corpus  Juris
Civilis,  ed.  Mommsen,  Vol.  II,  p.  6.

p.  98, 1.  18.

De  saeculari  potestate  is  Luther's  tract,  "Von  weltUeher  Oberkeit,"
see  his  Werke,  Weimar  edition,  XI,  245-281.  In  it  he  wrote:  "They  do
nothing  but  skin  and  scrape.  They  pile  one  duty  upon  the  other,  one  tax
upon  the  other;  here  they  let  go  a  bear,  there  a  wolf,  so  that  there  is  no
right,  faithfulness  or  truth  found  among  them,  and  they  act  worse  than
robbers  and  rascals.  Their  secular  government  lies  prostrate  as  deeply
as  the  government  of  the  spiritual  tyrants."

p.  98,  1.  27.

Augustine  speaks  only  of  the  possibility  of  punishments  in  the  life
beyond  (Enchiridion  ad  Laur.  67;  De  Civ.  Dei.  20,  18),  and  believes  that
these  are  referred  to  in  Matth.  12:  32,  and  perhaps  also  in  I  Cor.  3:  llf.,
hence  purgatorial  fire  is  not  incredible.

p. 102,  1.  19.

Zwingli  himself  gives  as  his  reason  for  declining  this  safe  conduct:
"I  know  that  all  who  adhere  to  the  Popish  Church  cry  out,  that  I  am  a
heretic,  therefore,  no  safe-conduct  should  be  given  to  me,  but,  if  it  were
given,  it  should  be  done  that  it  might  be  broken,  and  they  might  get  me
into  their  power,"  Werke,  ed.  Schuler  and  Schulthess,  II,  2,  463.
