Source note (Tower of Babel staging): Babur, The Babur-nama in English (Memoirs of Babur), translated by Annette Susannah Beveridge (London: Luzac & Co., 1922), Vol. I. Text from Internet Archive item baburnamainengli01babuuoft (OCR).
Public domain work. This file was produced from a public scan; OCR imperfections may remain.

THE BABUR-NAMA IN


OTHER ORIENTAL WORKS


HENRY BEVERIDGE* (primus), Advocate —


A Comprehensive History of India 3 vol. London and
Glasgow, 1862. 5


HENRY BEVERIDGE* (secundus), Indian Civil Service,


retired —


Akbar-nama trs. (Persian), Calcutta, 1894-1921.


ANNETTE SUSANNAH BEVERIDGE —


Kaiser Akbar trs. (German), Calcutta, 1890.


Humayun-nama Pers. text ed. and trs. RAS. 1902.
(Out of print.)


Bibi Brooke’s Key of the Hearts of Beginners trs. (Persian),
London, 1908.


Notes on the MSS. of the Babur-nama (Turki), JRAS.
1900—2-5-6-7-8-9.


The Babur-nama Facsimile edited and indexed for the
Gibb Trust, London, 1905.


* See Bibliography of Dunfermline (Erskine Beveridge (secundus), LL. D.).


= Wied


“ 2
sate Tee 3


etn TEE Bele"


Pere


Br bow Em per oY ot Lind STO


The Babur-nama in English
(Memoirs of Babur)


Translated from the original Turki Text
OF


Zahiru'd-din Muhammad Babur Padshah Ghazi


By


ANNETTE SUSANNAH BEVERIDGE


Issued in Four Fascicali:—Farghana 1912—Kabul
1914—Hindustan 1917—Preface, Indices, etc.


1921.
IV: 5-23.
Vol. I
SOLD BY


LUZAC & CO., 46, Great Russell Street, London.
1922


Chis work


4


is dedicate to


Babur’s


fame.


STEPHEN AUSTIN AND


“ye


ws


TABLE OF CONTENTS


PREFACE : Introductory.—Cap. I. Babur’s exemplars in the


Arts of peace, p. xxvii.—Cap. II. Problems of the mutilated
Babur-nama, p. xxxii—Cap. III. The Turki MSS. and
work connecting with them, p. xxxviii.— Cap. IV.
The Leyden and Erskine “Memoirs of Baber”, p. lvii—
Postscript of Thanks, p. Ix.


SECTION I—FARGHANA


899 AH.—Oct. 12th 1493 to Oct. 2nd 1494 Ap.—Babur’s age at


the date of his accession—Description of Farghana
(pp. 1 to 12)—Death and biography of ‘Umar Shaikh
(13 to 19 and 24 to 28)—Biography of Yinas Chaghatai
(18 to 24) — Babur’s uncles Ahmad Mivdn-shahi and
Mahmiid Chaghataz (The Khan) invade Farghana—Death
and biography of - Sige sean of his successor, his
brother Mahmid . ; ; . 1-42


900 AH.—Oct. 2nd 1494 to Sep. 24st 1495 AD.—Invasion_ of


Farghana continued — Babur’s adoption of orthodox
observance— Death and biography of Mahmiid Wiran-shahi
—Samarkand affairs—revolt of Ibrahim Sarai defeated—
Babur visits The Khan in Tashkint—tribute collected from
the Jigrak tribe—expedition into Atratipa . . 43-56


901 AH.—Sep. 21st 1495 to Sep. 9th 1496 ap.—Husain Bai-


gara’s campaign against Khusrau Shah—Babur receives
Aizbeg sultans—Revolt of the Tarkhans in Samarkand—
Babur’s first move for Samarkand , . 3/-64


902 AH.—Sep. 9th 1496 to Aug. 30th 1497 AD.—Babur’s second


903


move for Samarkand—Dissensions of Husain Bai-gara and
his sons—Dissensions between Khusrau Shah and Mas‘id
Mivan-shiht 3 : : . 65-71


AH.—Aug. 30th 1497 to Aug. 19th 1498 AD.—Babur’s
second attempt on Samarkand is successful—Description
of Samarkand (pp. 74 to 86)—his action there—Mughils
demand and besiege Andijan for Babur’s half-brother
Jahangir—his mother and friends entreat his help—he
leaves Samarkand in his cousin ‘Ali’s hands—has a relapse
of illness on the road and is believed dying—on the news
Andijan is surrendered by a Mughil to the Mughil faction
— Having lost Samarkand and Andijan, Babur is hospitably
entertained by the Khujandis—he is forced to dismiss
Khalifa—The Khan (his uncle) moves to help him but is


Vili


CONTENTS


persuaded to retire—many followers go to Andijan where
were their families—he is left with 200-300 men—his
mother and grandmother and the families of his men sent
to him in Khujand—he is distressed to tears—The Khan
gives help against Samarkand but his troops turn back on
news of Shaibani—Babur returns to Khujand—speaks of
his ambition to rule—goes in person to ask The Khan’s
help to regain Andijan—his force being insufficient, he
goes back to Khujand—Affairs of Khusrau Shah and the
Timirid Mirzas—Affairs of Husain Bai-gara and his sons
—Khusrau Shah blinds Babur’s cousin Mas‘id—Babur
curses the criminal : . 72-96


904 AH.—Aug. 19th 1498 to Aug. 8th 1499 Ap.—Babur borrows


Pashaghar for the winter and leaves Khujand—rides 70-80
miles with fever—a winter’s tug-of-war with Samarkand—
his force insufficient, he goes back to Khujand—unwilling
to burthen it longer, goes into the summer-pastures of
Aiuratipa—invited to Marghinan by his mother’s uncle
‘Ali-dost—a joyful rush over some 145 miles — near
Marghinan prudent anxieties arise and are stilled—he is
admitted to Marghinan on terms—is attacked vainly by
the Mughil faction—accretions to his force—helped by
The Khan—the Mughils defeated near Akhsi—Andijan
recovered—Mughiills renew revolt—Babur’s troops beaten
by Mughils—Tambal attempts Andijan. . 97-107


905 AH.—Aug. 8th 1499 to July 28th 1500 AbD.—Babur’s cam-


paign against Ahmad Zamdéal and the Mughil faction—he
takes Mazi—Khusrau Shah murders Bai-sunghar Wirvan-
shahi—Biography of the Mirza—Babur wins his first ranged
battle, from Tambal supporting Jahangir, at Khiban—
winter-quarters—minor successes—the winter-camp broken
up by Qambar-i-‘ali’s taking leave— Babur returns to
Andijan—The Khan persuaded by Tambal’s kinsmen in
his service.to support Jahangir—his troops retire before
Babur—Babur and Tambal again opposed—Qambar-i-‘ali
again gives trouble—minor action and an accommodation
made without Babur’s wish—terms of the accommodation—
The self-aggrandizement of ‘Ali-dost Wughui/—Babur’s first
marriage—a personal episode—Samarkand affairs—‘Ali
quarrels with the Tarkhans—The Khan sends troops against
Samarkand—Mirza Khan invited there by a Tarkhan—‘Ali
defeats The Khan’s Mughiils—Babur invited to Samarkand
—prepares to start and gives Jahangir rendezvous for the


906


CONTENTS ix


_attempt—Tambal’s brother takes Aish—Babur henves this


lesser matter aside and marches for Samarkand—Qambar-
i-‘ali punishes himself—Shaibani reported to be moving on
Bukhara—Samarkand begs wait on Babur—the end of
‘Ali-dost — Babur has news of Shaibani’s approach to
Samarkand and goes to Kesh—hears there that ‘Ali’s
Aizbeg mother had given Samarkand to Shaibani on
condition of his marriage with herself . . 108-126


AH.—July 28th 1500 to July 17th 1501 Ap.—Shaibani
murders ‘Ali — a son and two grandsons of Ahrari’s
murdered — Babur leaves Kesh with a number of the
Samarkand begs—is landless and isolated—takes a perilous
mountain journey back into Airatipa—comments on the
stinginess shewn to himself by Khusrau Shah and another
—consultation and resolve to attempt Samarkand—Babur’s
dream-vision of success—he takes the town by a surprise
attack—compares this capture with Husain Baz-gara’s of
Heri—his affairs in good position—birth of his first child—
his summons for help to keep the Atizbeg down—literary
matters — his force of 240 grows to allow him to face
Shaibani at Sar-i-pul—the battle and his defeat—Mughils
help his losses—he is besieged in Samarkand—a long
blockade—great privation—no help from any quarter—
Futile proceedings of Tambal and The Khan . 127-145


907 AH.—July 17th1501 to July 7th 1502 AD.—Babur surrenders


Samarkand—his sister Khan-zada is married by Shaibani—
incidents of his escape to Dizak—his 4 or 5 escapes from
peril to safety and ease—goes to Dikh-kat in Auratipa—
incidents of his stay there—his wanderings bare-head, bare-
foot—sends gifts to Jahangir, and to Tambal a sword which
later wounds himself—arrival from Samarkand of the
families and a few hungry followers—Shaibani Khan raids
in The Khan’s country—Babur rides after him fruitlessly—
Death of Nuyan Kikildash—Babur’s grief for his friend—
he retires to the Zar-afshan valley before Shaibani—reflects
on the futility of his wanderings and goes to The Khan in
Tashkint—Mughil conspiracy against Tambal Mughul—
Babur submits verses to The Khan and comments on his
uncle’s scant study of poetic idiom—The Khan rides out
against Tambal—his standards acclaimed and his army
numbered—of the Chingiz-tuird—quarrel of Chiras and
Begchik chiefs for the ea of Ce Ne ee
river reached . ; . 146-156


x


908 AH.—July 7th 1502 to June 26th 1503 AD.—Babur com-


CONTENTS


ments on The Khan’s unprofitable move—his poverty and
despair in Tashkint—his resolve to go to Khitai and ruse
for getting away—his thought for his mother—his plan not
accepted by The Khan and Shah Begim—The Younger
Khan (Ahmad) arrives from Kashghar—is met by Babur—
a half-night’s family talk—gifts to Babur—the meeting of
the two Khans—Ahmad’s characteristics and his opinion
of various weapons— The Khans march into Farghana
against Jahangir’s supporter Tambal—they number their
force—Babur detached against Aish, takes it and has great
accretions of following — An attempt to take Andijan
frustrated by mistake in a pass-word—Author’s Note on
pass-words—a second attempt foiled by the over-caution
of experienced begs—is surprised in his bivouac by Tambal
—face to face with Tambal—his new gosha-gir — his
dwindling company—wounded—left alone, is struck by his
gift-sword — escapes to Atish—The Khan moves from
Kasan against Andijan—his disposition of Babur’s 4ands—
Oambar-i-‘ali’s counsel to Babur rejected—Babur is treated
by the Younger Khan’s surgeon—tales of Mughil surgery
— Qambar -i- ‘ali flees to Tambal in fear through his
unacceptable counsel — Babur moves for Akhsi—a lost
chance—minor actions—an episode of Pap—The Khan’s
do not take Andijan—Babur invited into Akhsi—Tambal’s
brother Bayazid joins him with Nasir 1/zran-shahi—Tambal
asks help from Shaibani—On news of Shaibani’s consent
the Khans retire from Andijan—Babur’s affairs in Akhsi—
he attempts to defend it—incidents of the defence—Babur
wounded—unequal strength of the opponents—he flees with
20-30 men—incidents of the flight—Babur left alone—is
overtaken by two foes—his perilous position—a messenger
arrives from Tambal’s brother Bayazid—Babur expecting
death, quotes Nizami—(the narrative breaks off in the
middle of the verse) . : . 157-182


Trauslator’s Note.—908to909 AH.—1503 to 1504 Ap.
—Babur will have been rescued—is with The Khans in
the battle and defeat by Shaibani at Archian—takes refuge
in the Asfara hills—there spends a year in misery and
poverty — events in Farghana and Tashkint — Shaibani
sends the Mughil horde back to Kashgar—his disposition
of the women of The Khan’s family—Babur plans to go to
Husain Béi-gara in Khurasan—changes his aim for Kabil


182-185
[End of Translator’s Note.]


CONTENTS xi


SECTION II.—KABUL


910 AH.—June 14th 1504 to June 4th 1505 Ap.—Babur halts
on an alp of Hisar—enters his 22nd (lunar) year—delays
his march in hope of adherents—writes a second time of
the stinginess of Khusrau Shah to himself—recalls Sherim
Taghai Mughil’s earlier waverings in support—is joined by
Khusrau Shah’s brother Baqi Beg—they start for Kabul—
Accretions of force — their families left in Fort Ajar
(Kahmard)—Jahangir marries a cousin—Baqi advises his
dismissal to Khurasan—Babur is loyal to his half-brother—
Jahangir is seduced, later, by disloyal Begchik chiefs—
Husain Bai-gara summons help against Shaibani— Despair
in Babur’s party at Husain’s plan of “defence, not attack”
—Qambar-i-‘ali dismissed to please Baqi—Khusrau makes
abject submission to Babur—Mirza Khan demands venge-
ance on him—kKhusrau’s submission having been on terms,
he is let go free—Babur resumes his march—first sees
Canopus—is joined by tribesmen—Khusrau’s brother Wali
flees to the Atizbegs and is executed—Risks run by the
families now fetched from Kahmard—Kabul surrendered
to Babur by Mugim Arghin—Mugqim’s family protected—
Description of Kabul (pp. 199 to 277)—Mugqim leaves
for Qandahar—Allotment of fiefs—Excess levy in grain—
Foray on the Sultan Mas‘tidi Hazara—Babur’s first move
for Hindistan—Khaibar traversed—Bigram visited— Baqi
Beg prevents crossing the Sind—and persuades for Kohat
—A plan for Bangash, Banni and thence return to Kabul—
Yar-i-husain Darya-khani asks for permission to raise a
force for Babur, east of the Sind—Move to Thal, Banni,
and the Dasht—return route varied without consulting
Babur—Pir Kanii’s tomb visited—through the Pawat-pass
into Diki—horse-food fails—baggage left behind—men
of all conditions walk to Ghazni — spectacle of the
Ab-istada—mirage and birds — Jahangir is Babur’s host in
Ghazni—heavy floods—Kabul reached after a disastrous
expedition of four months—NaAsir’s misconduct abetted by
two Begchik chiefs—he and they flee into Badakhshan—
Khusrau Shah’s schemes fail in Herat—imbroglio between
him and Nasir—Shaibani attempts Hisar but abandons the
siege on his brother’s death—Khusrau attempts Hisar and
is there killed—his followers revolt against Babur—his
death quenches the fire of sedition. . 188-245


Xil


CONTENTS


911 AH.—June 4th 1505 to May 24th 1506 ap.—Death of


Babur’s mother-—Babur’s illness stops a move for Qandahar
—an earth-quake — campaign against and capture of Qalat-
i-ghilzai — Baqi Beg dismissed towards Hindiistan —
murdered in the Khaibar—Turkman Hazara raided—
Nijr-aii tribute collected—Jahangir misbehaves and runs
away — Babur summoned by Husain #az-gard against
Shaibani—Shaibani takes Khwarizm and Chin Sifi is
killed—Death and biography of Husain Baz-gara (256 to
292)—his burial and joint-successors . ; . 246-293


912 AH.—May 24th 1506 to May 13th 1507 Ap.—Babur, without


news of Husain Bai-gara’s death, obeys his summons and
leaves Kabul—Jahangir flees from Babur’s route—Nasir
defeats Shaibani’s men in Badakhshan—Babur, while in
Kahmard, hears of Husain’s death—continues his march
with anxious thought for the Timirid dynasty—J ahangir
waits on him and accompanies him to Herat—Co-alition
of Khurasan Mirzas against Shaibani—their meeting with
Babur—etiquette of Babur’s reception—an entertainment
to him—of the Chingiz-tira—Babur claims the ceremonial
observance due to his military achievements—entertain-
ments and Babur’s obedience to Muhammadan Law against
wine —his reflections on the Mirzas—difficulties of winter-
plans (300, 307)—he sees the sights of Heri—visits the
Begims—the ceremonies observed—tells of his hitherto
abstention from wine and of his present inclination to drink
it—Qasim Beg’s interference with those pressing Babur to
break the Law—Babur’s poor carving—engages Ma‘siima
in marriage —leaves for Kabul—certain retainers stay
behind—-a perilous journey through snow to a wrong pass
out of the Herirud valley—arrival of the party in Yaka-
aulang—joy in their safety and comfort—Shibr-tii traversed
into Ghir-bund—Turkman Hazara raided—News reaches
Babur of conspiracy in Kabul to put Mirza Khan in his
place—Babur concerts plans with the loyal Kabul garrison
—moves on through snow and in terrible cold—attacks and
defeats the rebels—narrowly escaped death—attributes his
safety to prayer—deals mercifully, from family considera-
tions, with the rebel chiefs—reflects on their behaviour to
him who has protected them—asserts that his only aim is
to write the truth — letters-of-victory sent out — Muh.
Husain Dighlat and Mirza Khan banished—Spring excur-
sion to Koh-daman — Nasir, driven from Badakhshan, takes
refuge with Babur ; . 294-322


CONTENTS xiii


913 AH. = Nay 13th 1507 to May 2nd 1508 ap.—Raid on the
Ghilji Afghans—separation of the Fifth (KZams)—wild-ass
hunting—Shaibani moves against Khurasan—Irresolution
of the Timirid Mirzas—lInfatuation of Zi’n-niin Arghin—
Shaibani takes Heri—his doings there—Defeat and death
of two Bai-gards—The Arghins in Qandahar make over-
tures to Babur—he starts to join them against Shaibani—
meets Ma‘stima in Ghazni on her way to Kabul—spares
Hindiistan traders—meets Jahangir’s widow and infant-son
coming from Herat— The Arghiin chiefs provoke attack on
Qandahar—Babur’s army—organization and terminology
—wins the battle of Qandahar and enters the fort—its
spoils—Nasir put in command—Babur returns to Kabul
rich in goods and fame—marries Ma‘stima—Shaibani lays
siege to Qandahar—Alarm in Kabul at his approach—
Mirza Khan and Shah Begim betake themselves to Badakh-
shan—Babur sets out for Hindiistan leaving ‘Abdu’r-razzaq
in Kabul—Afghan highwaymen—A raid for food—Mah-
chuchak’s marriage—Hindistan plan abandoned—Nir-gal
and Kinar visited—News of Shaibani’s withdrawal from
QOandahar—Babur returns to Kabul—gives Ghazni to Nasir
—assumes the title of Padshah—Birth of Humayin, feast
and chronogram ; . 323-344


914 aH.—May 2nd 1508 to April ast 1509 AD.—Raid on the
Mahmand Afghans — Seditious offenders reprieved —
Khusrau Shah’s former retainers march off from Kabul—
‘Abdu’r-razzaq comes from his district to near Kabul—not
known to have joined the rebels—earlier hints to Babur of
this “incredible” rebellion—later warnings of an immediate
rising . 345-346

Translator’s Mots: 9140925 AH. —1 508t0 1519p.
—Date of composition of preceding narrative—Loss of
matter here seems partly or wholly due to Babur’s death—
Sources helping to fill the Gap—Events of the remainder
of 914 AH.—The mutiny swiftly quelled—Babur’s five-fold
victory over hostile champions—Sa‘id Chaghatai takes
refuge with him in a quiet Kabul—Shaibani’s murders of
Chaghatai and Dighlat chiefs. ; . 347-366


915 AH.—April 21st 1509 to April 11th 1510 Ap.—Beginning
of hostilities between Isma‘il Sa/awiz and Shaibani— Haidar
Dighiat takes refuge with Babur.

916 AH—April 11th 1510 to March 31st 1511 Ap.—Isma‘ll
defeats the Atizbegs near Merv—Shaibani is killed—20,000


XiV


CONTENTS


Mughils he had migrated to Khurasan, return to near
Qindiiz—Mirza Khan invites Babur to join him against
the Aizbegs—Babur goes to Qiindiiz—The 20,000 Mughils
proffer allegiance to their hereditary Khan Sa‘id—they
propose to set Babur aside—Sa‘id’s worthy rejection of the
proposal—Babur makes Sa‘id The Khan of the Mughils
and sends him and his Mughils into Farghana—significance
of Babur’s words, “I made him Khan”—Babur’s first attempt
on Hisar where were Hamza and Mahdi Ad#zbeg—beginning
of his disastrous intercourse with Isma‘il Safazwz—Isma‘il
sends Khan-zada Begim back to him—with thanks for the
courtesy, Babur asks help against the Aizbeg—it is promised
under dangerous conditions.


917 AH.—March 31st 1511 to March 19th 1512 ap.—Babur’s


second attempt on Hisar—wins the Battle of Pul-i-sangin—
puts Hamza and Mahdi to death—his Persian reinforcement
and its perilous cost—The Aiizbegs are swept across the
Zar-afshan—The Persians are dismissed from Bukhara—
Babur occupies Samarkand after a nine-year’s absence—he
gives Kabul to Nasir—his difficult position in relation to
the Shi‘a Isma‘il—Isma‘il sends Najm Sani to bring him
to order.


918 AH.—March 19th 1512 to March 9th1513 aD.—The Aiizbegs


return to the attack—‘Ubaid’s vow—his defeat of Babur at
Kial-i-malik—Babur flees from Samarkand to Hisar—his
pursuers retire—Najm Sani from Balkh gives him rendez-
vous at Tirmiz—the two move for Bukhara—Najm perpe-
trates the massacre of Qarshi—Babur is helpless to prevent
it—Najm crosses the Zar-afshan to a disadvantageous
position—is defeated and slain—Babur, his reserve, does
not fight—his abstention made a reproach at the Persian
Court against his son Humayiin (1544 AD. ?)—his arrow-
sped message to the Aiizbeg camp—in Hisar, he is attacked
suddenly by Mughiils—he escapes to Qiindiiz—the retri-
butive misfortunes of Hisar—Haidar on Mughtls—Ayib
Begchik’s death-bed repentance for his treachery to Babur
—Haidar returns to his kinsfolk in Kashghar.


919 AH.—March 9th 1513 to Feb. 26th 1514 AD.—Babur may


920


- have spent the year in Khishm—Isma‘il takes Balkh from


the Atizbegs—surmised bearing of the capture on his later
action.


AH.—Feb. 26th 1514 to Feb. 15th 1515 ap. — Haidar’s
account of Babur’s misery, patience and courtesy this year


seit Soon Tare ats NC ia See a oe es or IS MEd oa
; Ray tin it ee Th al Later o, at nN ghee z
Ba retcenad aoe :


CONTENTS XV


in Qundtiz—Babur returns to Kabul—his daughter Gul-
rang is born in Khwast—he is welcomed by Nasir who
goes back to Ghazni.


921 AH.—Feb. 15th 1515 to Feb. 5th 1516 AD.—Death of
Nasir—Riot in Ghazni led by Sherim Taghai MWughul—
quiet restored — many rebels flee. to Kashghar—Sherim
refused harbourage by Sa‘id Khan and seeks Babur’s pro-
tection—Haidar’s comment on Babur’s benevolence.


922 AH.—Feb. 5th 1516 to Jan. 24th 1517 AD.—A quiet year _
in Kabul apparently—Birth of ‘Askari.


923 AH.—Jan. 24th 1517 to Jan. 13th 1518 Ap.—Babur visits
Balkh—Khwand-amir’s account of the affairs of Muhammad
-i-zaman Mirza 4az-gara—Babur pursues the Mirza—has
him brought to Kabul—gives him his daughter Ma‘siima in
marriage—An expedition to Qandahar returns fruitless, on
account of his illness—Shah Beg’s views on Babur’s per-
sistent attempts on Qandahar—Shah Beg’s imprisonment
and release by his slave Sambal’s means.


924 AH.—Jan. 13th 1518 to Jan. 3rd 1519 AD.—Shah Beg’s son
Hasan flees to Babur—stays two years—date of his return
to his father—Babur begins a campaign in Bajaur against
Haidar-i-‘ali Bayauri—takes two forts.


[End of Translator’s Note. |


925 AH.—Jan. 3rd to Dec. 23rd 1519 AD.—Babur takes the Fort
of Bajaur—massacres its people as false to Iskam—Khwaja
Kalan made its Commandant—an excessive impost in
grain —a raid for corn— Mahim’s adoption of Dil-dar’s
unborn child—Babur marries Bibi Mubarika—Repopula-
tion of the Fort of Bajaur—Expedition against Afghan

- tribesmen—Destruction of the tomb of a heretic qalandar
—Babur first crosses the Sind—his long-cherished desire
for Hindistan—the ford of the Sind—the Koh-i-jiid (Salt-
range) — his regard for Bhira, Khish-ab, Chin-ab and
Chinitit as earlier possessions of the Turk, now therefore
his own—the Kalda-kahar lake and subsequent location on
it of the Bagh-i-safa—Assurance of safety sent to Bhira as
a Turk possession—History of Bhira efc. as Turk posses-
sions—Author’s Note on Tatar Khan Yasuf-khatl—envoys
sent to Balichis in Bhira—heavy floods in camp—Offenders
against Bhira people punished—Agreed tribute collected
—Envoy sent to ask from Ibrahim La#dz the lands once
dependent on the Turk—Daulat Khan arrests and keeps


XVi


CONTENTS


the envoy who goes back later to Babur re zufecté—news
of Hind-al’s birth and cause of his name—description of
a drinking-party—Tatar Khan Kakar compels Minichihr
Khan Zurk, going to wait on Babur, to become his son-in-
law—Account of the Kakars—excursions and drinking-
parties—Bhira appointments—action taken against Hati
Khan Kakar—Description and capture of Parhala—Babur
sees the sambal plant—a tiger killed—-Gir-khattri visited
—Loss of a clever hawk—Khaibar traversed—mid-day
halt in the Bagh-i-wafa—Qara-tii garden visited—News of
Shah Beg’s capture of Kahan—Babur’s boys carried out in
haste to meet him—wine-parties—Death and biography
of Dost Beg—Arrival of Sultanim Baz-gara and ceremonies
observed on meeting her — A long-imprisoned traitor
released—Excursion to Koh-daman—Hindi Beg abandons
Bhira — Babur has (intermittent) fever — Visitors from
Khwast—Yisuf-zai chiefs wait on Babur—Khalifa’s son
sends a wedding-gift —— Babur’s amusement when illness
keeps him from an entertainment—treatment of his illness
—A Thursday reading of theology (see Add. Note p. 401)
—Swimming—Envoy from Mirza Khan—Tribesmenallowed
to leave Kabul for wider grazing-grounds—Babur sends his
first Diwan to Pilad Adzbeg in Samarkand—Arrivals and
departures—Punitive expedition against the‘Abdu’r-rahman
Afghans—punishment threatened and inflicted (p. 405) on
defaulters in help to an out-matched man—Description of
the Rustam-maidan—return to Kabul—Excursion to Koh-
daman— snake incident — Tramontane begs warned for
service—fish-drugging—Babur’s non-pressure to drink, on
an abstainer—wine-party—misadventure on a raft—tooth-
picks gathered—A new retainer—Babur shaves his head—
Hind-al’s guardian appointed—Aiizbeg raiders defeated in
Badakhshan — Various arrivals — Yisuf-zai campaign —
Babur dislocates his wrist—Varza—Dilah-zak chiefs wait
on him—Plan to store corn in Hash-nagar—Incidents of
the road—Khaibar traversed—Bara urged on Babur as a
place for corn—Kabul river forded at Bara—little corn found
and the Hash-nagar plan foiled—Plan to store Pashawar
Fort — return to ‘Ali-masjid — News of an invasion of
Badakhshan hurries Babur back through the Khaibar—The
Khizr-khail Afghans punished — Babur first writes since
dislocating his wrist—The beauty and fruits of the Bagh-i-
wafa—incidents of the return march to Kabul—Excursion
to the Koh-daman—beauty of its harvest crops and autumnal


CONTENTS XVil


trees—a line offensive to Khalifa (see Add. Note p. 416)—
Humayin makes a good shot—Beauty of the harvest near
Istalif and in the Bagh-i-padshahi— Return to Kabul —
Babur receives a white falcon in gift — pays a visit of
consolation to an ashamed drinker—Arrivals various—he
finishes copying ‘Ali-sher’s four Dzwans— An order to
exclude from future parties those who become drunk—
Babur starts for Lamghan . : . 367-419


926 AH.—Dec. 23rd 1519 to Dec. 12th 1520 ap.—Excursion to


926


Koh-daman and Kohistan—incidents of the road—Babur
shoots with an easy bow, for the first time after the disloca-
tion of his wrist — Nijr-aii tribute fixed — Excursions in
Lamghan—Kafir head-men bring goat-skins of wine—
Halt in the Bagh-i-wafa—its oranges, beauty and charm—
Babur records his wish and intention to return to obedience
in his 40th year and his consequent excess in wine as the
end approached—composes an air—visits Nir-valley—
relieves Kwaja Kalan in Bajaur—teaches a talisman to stop
rain—his opinion of the ill-taste and disgusting intoxication
of beer—his reason for summoning Khwaja Kalan, and
trenchant words to Shah Hasan relieving him—an old
beggar loaded with gifts—the raft strikes a rock—Descrip-
tion of the Kindir spring—Fish taken from fish-ponds—
Hunting—Accident to a tooth—Fishing with a net—A
murderer made over to the avengers of blood—A Qoran
chapter read and start made for Kabul—(here the diary
breaks off). ‘ : . 420-425


Translator’s Note.—926to932 AH.—1520to1525 AD.
—Babur’s activities in the Gap—missing matter less
interesting than that lost in the previous one—its distinctive
mark is biographical— Dramatis persone— Sources of
information : : . 426-444


AH.—Dec. 23rd 1519 to Dec. 12th 1520 AD.—Babur’s five
expeditions into Hindiistan—this year’s cut short by menace
from Qandahar—Shah Beg’s position—particulars of his
menace not ascertained— Description of Qandahar-fort
—Babur’s various sieges—this year’s raised because of pesti-
lence within the walls—Shah Beg pushes out into Sind.


927 AH.—Dec. 12th 1520 to Dec. 1st 1521 AD—Two accounts


of this year’s siege of Qandahar—(i) that of the Hadbibu’'s-
styar—(ii) that of the 7arikh-z-sind—concerning the dates
involved—Mirza Khan’s death.


b


XVili


CONTENTS


928 AH.—Dec. 1st 1521 to Nov. 20th 1522 ap.—Babur and


929


Mahim visit Humayiin in Badakhshan— Expedition to
Qandahar—of the duel between Babur and Shah Beg—
the Chihil-zina monument of victory—Death of Shah Beg
and its date—Babur’s literary work down to this year.


AH.—Nov. 20th 1522 to Nov. 10th 1523 ap.—Hindistan
affairs— Daulat Khan Ladi, Ibrahim Ladz and Babur—
Dilawar (son of Daulat Khan) goes to Kabul and asks
help against [brahim—Babur prays for a sign of victory—
prepares for the expedition—‘Alam Khan Lad (apparently
in this year) goes to Kabul and asks Babur’s help against
his nephew Ibrahim—Birth of Gul-badan.


930 AH.—Nov. 10th 1523 to Oct. 27th 1524 Ap.—Babur’s fourth


expedition into Hindistan—differs from earlier ones by its
concert with malcontents in the country—Babur defeats
Bihar Khan Ladi near Lahor—Lahor occupied—Dibalpir
stormed, plundered and its people massacred—Babur moves
onward from Sihrind but returns on news of Daulat Khan’s
doings—there may have been also news of Aizbeg threat
to Balkh—The Panj-ab garrison—Death of Isma‘l Safawi
and of Shah Beg—Babur turns for Kabul—plants bananas
in the Bagh-i-wafa. |


931 AH.—Oct. 29th 1524 to Oct. 18th 1525 Ap.—Daulat Khan’s


932


large resources—he defeats ‘Alam Khan at Dibalpir—
‘Alam Khan flees to Kabul and again asks help—Babur’s
conditions of reinforcement — ‘Alam Khan’s subsequent
proceedings detailed s.¢. 932 AH.—Babur promises to follow
him speedily—is summoned to Balkh by its Aizbeg menace
—his arrival raises the siege—he returns to Kabul in time
for his start to Hindiistan in 932 ; ; . 426-444


[End of Translator’s Note. ]


SECTION III—HINDUSTAN


AH.—Oct. 18th 1525 to Oct. 8th 1526 Ap.—Babur starts on
his fifth expedition into Hindiistan—is attacked by illness
at Gandamak—Humayiin is late in coming in from Badakh-
shan—Verse-making on the Kabul-river—Babur makes a
satirical verse such as he had forsworn when writing the
Mubin—attributes a relapse of illness to his breach of vow
—renews his oath—Fine spectacle of the lighted camp at
Ali-masjid—Hunting near Bigram—Preparations for ferry-
ing the Sind—Order to make a list of all with the army,


~ CONTENTS Xix


and to count them up—continuation of illness—Orders sent
to the Lahor begs to delay engagement till Babur arrived
—The Sind ferried (for the first time) and the army tale
declared as 12,000 good and bad—The eastward march—
unexpected ice—Rendezvous made with the Lahor begs—
Jat and Gijiir thieves—a courier sent again to the begs—
News that ‘Alam Khan had let Ibrahim Ladz defeat him
near Dihli—particulars of the engagement—he takes refuge
with Babur—The Lahor begs announce their arrival close
at hand—Ibrahim’s troops retire before Babur’s march—
Daulat Khan Za#dz surrenders Milwat (Malot)—waits on
Babur and is reproached—Ghazi Khan’s abandonment of
his family censured—Jaswan-valley—Ghazi Khan pursued
—Babur advances against Ibrahim La#di—his estimate of
his adversary’s strength—‘Alam Khan’s return destitute to
Babur—Babur’s march leads towards Panipat—Humiayin’s
first affair succeeds—reiterated news of Ibrahim’s approach
—Babur’s success in a minor encounter—he arrays and
counts his effective force—finds it under the estimate—
orders that every man in the army shall collect carts
towards Rimi defence—700 carts brought in—account of
the defences of the camp close to the village of Panipat—
Babur on the futility of fear; his excuses for the fearful in
his army—his estimate of Ibrahim’s army and of its higher
possible numbers—Author’s Note on the Aizbeg chiefs in
Hisar (918 AH. 1512 AD.)—Preliminary encounters—Battle
and victory of Panipat—Ibrahim’s body found—Dihli and
Agra occupied by Babur—he makes the circuit of a
Farghana-born ruler in Dihli—visits other tombs and sees
sights—halts opposite Tighliiqabad—the #utba read for
him in Dihli—he goes to Agra—Author’s Note on rulers in
Gualiar—The ‘(Koh-i-nir) diamond given by the Gialiar
family to Humaytin— Babur’s dealings with Ibrahim’s
mother and her entourage—Description of Hindustan
(pp. 478 to 521)—Revenues of Hind (p. 521)—Agra treasure
distributed—local disaffection to Babur—discontent in his
army at remaining in Hindtistan—he sets the position forth
to his Council—Khwaja Kalan decides to leave—his and
Babur’s verses on his desertion—Babur’s force grows locally
—action begun against rebels to Ibrahim in the East—
Gifts made to officers, and postings various—Biban /a/wani
revolts and is beaten—The Mir of Biana warned—Mention
of Rana Sanga’s failure in his promise to act with Babur—
Sanga’s present action—Decision in Council to leave Sanga


CONTENTS


aside and to march to the East—Humayiin leads out the
army—Babur makes garden, well and mosque near Agra—
Progress of Humaytin’s campaign—News of the Atizbegs
in Balkh and Khurasan—A ffairs of Gujrat . . 445-535


933 AH.—Oct. 8th 1526 to Sep. 27th 1527 AaD.—Birth announced


of Babur’s son Fariq—incomplete success in casting a large
mortar— Varza—Humayiin summoned from the East to act
against Sanga—Plundering expedition towards Biana—
Tahangar, Gialiar and Dilpir obtained—Hamid Khan
Sarang-khani defeated—Arrival of a Persian embassy—
Ibrahim’s mother tries to poison Babur—Copy of Babur’s
letter detailing the affair — his dealings with the
poisoner and her agents—Humayiin’s return to Agra—
Khw. Dost-i-khawand’s arrival from Kabul — Reiterated
news of the approach of Rana Sanga—Babur sends an
advance force to Biana—Hasan Khan Mzwatt—Tramontane
matters disloyal to Babur—Trial-test of the large mortar
(p. 536)—Babur leaves Agra to oppose Sanga—adverse
encounter with Sanga by Biana garrison—Alarming reports
of Rajpiit prowess—Spadesmen sent ahead to dig wells in
Madhakir pargana—Babur halts there—arrays and moves
to Sikri—various joinings and scoutings—discomfiture of
a party reconnoitring from Sikri—the reinforcement also
overcome—The enemy retires at sight of a larger troop
from Babur—defence of the Sikri camp Rimi fashion, with
ditch besides—Continued praiseof Rajpitit prowess—Further
defence of the camp made to hearten Babur’s men—20—25
days spent in the above preparations—arrival of 500 men
from Kabul—also of Muh. Sharif an astrologer who augurs
ill for Babur’s success—Archers collected and Miwat over-
run—Babur reflects that he had always wished to cease
from the sin of wine—verses about his then position —
resolves to renounce wine—details of the destruction of
wine and precious vessels, and of the building of a com-
memorative well and alms-house—his oath to remit a tax
if victorious is recalled to him—he remits the zamgha—
Shaikh Zain writes the farman announcing the two acts—
Copy of the farman — Great fear in Babur’s army — he
adjures the Ghazi spirit in his men who vow to stand fast—
his perilous position—he moves forward in considerable
array—his camp is laid out and protected by ditch and
carts—An omen is taken and gives hope—Khalifa advising,
the camp is moved—While tents were being set up, the


CONTENTS >


enemy appears—The battle and victory of Kanwa—described
in a copy of the Letter-of-victory—Babur inserts this because
of its full particulars (pp. 559 to 574)—assumes the title of
Ghazi—Chronograms of the victory and also of that in
Dibalpir (930 AH.)—pursuit of the fugitive foe—escape of
Sanga—the falsely-auguring astrologer banished with a gift
—a small revolt crushed—a pillar of heads set up—Babur
visits Biana—Little water and much heat set aside plan to
invade Sanga’s territory—Babur visits Miwat—give some
historical account of it—-Commanders rewarded — Alwar
visited—Humayin and others allowed to leave Hindistan
—Despatch of the Letter-of-victory—Various excursions—
Humayin bidden farewell—Chandwar and Rapri recovered
—Apportionment of fiefs—Biban flees before Babur’s men—
Dispersion of troops for the Rains—Misconductof Humayin
and Babur’s grief—Embassy to ‘Iraq—Tardi Beg khaksar
allowed to return to the darwesh-life— Babur’s lines to
departing friends—The Ramzan-feast — Playing-cards—
Babur ill (seemingly with fever)—visits Dilpir and orders
a house excavated—visits Bari and sees the ebony-tree—
has doubt of Bayazid Harmili’s loyalty—his remedial and
metrical exercises—his Treatise on Prosody composed—
a relapse of illness—starts on an excursion to Kil and
Sambal . é , ; . 536-586


934 AH.—Sep. 27th 1527 to Sep. 15th 1528 ap.—Babur visits


Kil and Sambal and returns to Agra—has fever and ague
intermittently for 20-25 days—goes out to welcome kins-
women—a large mortar bursts with fatal result—he visits
Sikri—starts for Holy War against Chandiri—sends troops
against Bayazid Farmali— incidents of the march to
Chandiri—account of Kachwa—account of Chandiri—its
siege—Meantime bad news arrives from the East—Babur
keeping this quiet, accomplishes the work in hand—Chandiri
taken—change of plans enforced by defeat in the East—
return northwards—Further losses in the East—Rebels take
post to dispute Babur’s passage of the Ganges—he orders
a pontoon-bridge—his artillery is used with effect, the bridge
finished and crossed and the Afghans worsted—Tukhta-
bigha Chaghatdi arrives from Kashgar — Babur visits
Lakhnau — suffers from ear-ache — reinforces Chin-timir
against the rebels—Chin-timiir gets the better of Bayazid
Farmuli—Babur settles the affairs of Aid (Oude) and plans
to hunt near. : ; ; . 587-602


XXii CONTENTS


Translator’s Note (part of 934 AH.)—On the cir.
half-year’s missing matter—-known events of the Gap :—
Continued campaign against Biban and Bayazid-——Babur at
Jiinpir, Chausa and Baksara—swims the Ganges—bestows
Sarin on a Farmili—orders a Char-bagh made—is ill for
40 days—is inferred to have visited Dilpir, recalled ‘Askari
from Multan, sent Khw. Dost-i-khawand to Kabul on family
affairs which were causing him much concern—Remarks on
the Gap and, incidentally, on the Rampitr Diwan and verses
in it suiting Babur’s illnesses of 934 AH.


[End of Translator’s Note. ]


935 AH. Sep. 15th 1528 to Sep. 5th 1529 ap.—‘Askari reaches
Agra from Multan—Khwand-amir and others arrive from
Khurasan—Babur prepares to visit Gialiar—bids farewell
to kinswomen who are returning to Kabul—marches out—
is given an unsavoury medicament—inspects construction-
work in Dilptiir—reaches Gualiar—Description of Gualiar
(p. 607 to p. 614)—returns to Dilpir—suffers from ear-ache
— inspects work in Sikri and reaches Agra—visit and
welcomes to kinswomen—sends an envoy to take charge of
Rantanbhtir—makes a levy on stipendiaries—sends letters
to kinsfolk in Khurasan—News arrives of Kamran and |
Dost-i-khawand in Kabul—of Tahmasp Sa/fawi’s defeat at
Jam of ‘Ubaidu’l-lah Aazbeg—of the birth of a son to
Humayin, and of a marriage by Kamran—he rewards an
artificer—is strongly attacked by fever—for his healing
translates Ahrari’s Walidiyyah-risala—account of the task
—Troops warned for service—A long-detained messenger
returns from Humayin—Accredited messengers-of-good-
tidings bring the news of Humayiin’s son’s birth—an instance
of rapid travel—Further particulars of the Battle of Jam—
Letters written and summarized — Copy of one to
Humayun inserted here—Plans for an eastern cam-
paign under ‘Askari—royal insignia given to him—Orders
for the measurement, stations and up-keep of the Agra-
Kabul road—the M/udin quoted—A feast describes—‘Askari
bids his Father farewell—Babur visits Dilpir and inspects
his constructions—Persian account of the Battle of Jam—
Babur decides contingently to go to the East—Balichi
incursions—News reaches Dilpir of the loss of Bihar (town)
and decides Babur to go East—News of Humayitin’s action
in Badakhshan—Babur starts from Agra—honoured arrivals
in the assembly-camp—incidents of the march—congratula-


CONTENTS XXiii


tions and gifts sent to Kamran, Humayin and others—also
specimens of the Baburi-script, and copies of the translation
of the Walidiyyah-risala and the Hindistan Poems—.
commends his building-work to his workmen—makes a new
ruler for the better copying of the Waldiyyah-risa/a transla-
tion—letters written—Copy of one to Khwaja Kalan
inserted here—Complaints from Kitin-qara Azzbeg of
Babur’s begs on the Balkh frontier—Babur shaves his head
—Mahim using his style, orders her own escort from Kabul
to Agra— Babur watches wrestling —leaves the Jumna,
disembarks his guns, and goes across country to Dugdugi
on the Ganges—travels by litter—‘Askari and other Com-
manders meet him—News of Biban, Bayazid and other
Afghans—Letters despatched to meet Mahim on her ro


surmised survival of record displaced from 934 AH.)—fall
of a river-bank under his horse—swims the Ganges—crosses
the Jumna at Allahabad (Piag) and re-embarks his guns—
wrestling watched—the evil Tonshe is attacked by boils
—a Rimi remedy applied—a futile attempt to hunt—he
sends money-drafts to the travellers from Kabul—visits
places on the Ganges he had seen last year—receives various
letters below Ghazipir—has news that the Ladies are
actually on their way from Kabul—last year’s eclipse
recalled—Hindu dread of the Karma-nasa river—wrestling
watched—Rimi remedy for boils used again with much
discomfort—fall of last year’s landing-steps at Baksara—
wrestling—Negociations with an envoy of Nasrat Shah of
Bengal—Examinationinto Muhammad-i-zaman’s objections
to a Bihar appointment—despatch of troops to Bihar (town)
—Muhammad-i-zaman submits requests which are granted
—a small success against Afghans—Royal insignia given to
Muhammad-i-zaman, with leave to start for Bihar—Babur’s
boats—News of the Bengal army—Muhammad-i-zaman
recalled because fighting was probable—Didi Bibi and her
son Jalal escape from Bengal to come to Babur—Further
discussions with the Bengal envoy—Favourable news from
Bihar—Babur in Arrah—Position of the Bengal army near
the confluence of Gang and Sari’ (Ganges and Gogra)—
Babur making further effort for peace, sends an envoy to
Nasrat Shah—gives Nasrat’s envoy leave to go conveying
an ultimatum—Arrival of a servant from Mahim west of
the Bagh-i-safa—Babur visits lotus-beds near Arrah—also


xxiv CONTENTS


Munir and the Son—Distance measured by counting a
horse’s paces—care for tired horses—Babur angered by
Junaid Barlas belated arrival — Consultation and plans
made for the coming battle—the Ganges crossed (by the
Burh-ganga channel) and move made to near the confluence
— Babur watches ‘Ali-quli’s stone-discharge — his boat
entered by night—Battle and victory of the Gogra—Babur
praises and thanks his Chaghatai cousins for their great
services—crosses into the Nirhun pargana—his favours to
a Farmili—News of Biban and Bayazid—and of the strange
deaths in Sambal—Chin-timir sends news from the west of
inconveniences caused by the Ladies’ delay to leave Kabul
—and of success against the Baltichi—he is ordered to
Agra—Settlement made with the Nuhani Afghans—Peace
made with Nasrat Shah—Submissions and various guerdon
—Biban and Bayazid pursued—Babur's papers damaged in
a storm—News of the rebel pair as taking Luknir (?)—
Disposition of Babur’s boats—move along the Sari—(a
surmised survival of the record of 934 AH.)—Account of
the capture of Luknir (?)—Dispositions against the rebel
pair—fish caught by help of a lamp—incidents of the march
to Adampir on the Jumna—Biban and Bayazid flee to
Mahiiba—Eastern Campaign wound up—Babur’s rapid ride 4
to Agra (p. 686)—visits kinswomen—is pleased with Indian- |
grown fruits—Mahim arrives—her gifts and Humayiin’s set |
before Babur—porters sent off for Kabul to fetch fruits—

Account of the deaths in Sambal brought in—sedition in

Lahor — wrestling watched —sedition of Rahim-dad in

Gialiar—-Mahdi Khwaja comes to Agra. . 605-689


936 AH.—Sep. 5th 1529 to Aug. 25th 1530 AD.—Shaikh Ghaus
comes from Gialiar to intercede for Rahim-dad—Gialiar
taken over ‘ , ; ; ‘ : . 690


Translator’s Note.—936 and 937 AH.— 1529 and
1530 AD.—Sources from which to fill the Gap down to
Babur’s death (December 26th 1530)-— Humayin’s pro- |
ceedings in Badakhshan — Haidar Dagh/a?’s narrative of ae
them — Huma§ayiin deserts his post, goes to Kabul, and,
arranging with Kamran, sends Hind-al to Badakhshan—
goes on to Agra and there arrives unexpected by his
Father—as he is unwilling to return, Sulaiman J/zran-
shahi is appointed under Babur’s suzerainty—Sa‘id Khan
is warned to leave Sulaiman in possession—Babur moves
westward to support him and visits Lahor—waited on in


NROWOZS HAGA TODO


CONTENTS XXV


Sihrind by the Raja of Kahliir— received in Lahor by
Kamran and there visited from Kabul by Hind-al —
leaves Lahor (March 4th 1530 ap.)—from Sihrind sends
a punitive force against Mundahir Rajpits—hunts near
Dihli — appears to have started off an expedition to
Kashmir — family matters fill the rest of the year —
Humayin falls ill in Sambal and is brought to Agra—
his disease not yielding to treatment, Babur resolves to
practise the rite of intercession and self-surrender to save
his life—is urged rather to devote the great diamond
(Koh-i-niir) to pious uses—refuses the substitution of the
jewel for his own life—performs the rite—Humayin recovers
—Babur falls ill and is bedridden till death—his faith in
the rite unquestionable, belief-in its efficacy general in the
East—Plan to set Babur’s sons aside from the succession—
The Zabagat-t-akbari story discussed (p. 702 to 708)—
suggested basis of the story (p. 705) — Babur’s death
(Jimada I. 5th 937 AH.—Dec. 26th 1530 AD.) and burial
first, near Agra, later near Kabul—Shah-jahan’s epitaph
inscribed on a tablet near the grave—Babur’s wives and
children—Mr. Erskine’s estimate of his character 691-716.


[End of Translator’s Note. |


APPENDICES


Site and disappearance of old Akhsi.
_ The birds Qil-qiyirigh and Baghri-gara.
On the gosha-gir.
The Rescue-passage.
Nagarahar and Ning-nahar.
The name Dara-i-nir.
On the names of two Dara-i-nir wines.
On the counter-mark Bih-bid of coins.
The weeping-willows of f. 190d.
Babur’s excavated chamber at Qandahar.
An Afghan Legend.
Mahim’s adoption of Hind-al.
On the term Bahri-qutas.
Notes on a few birds.
Notes by Humayiin on some Hindistan fruits.
Remarks on Babur’s Revenue List.
On the Rampir Diwan.
Plans of Chandiri and Giualiar.
The Babur-nama dating of 935 AH.


XXVi


T. On L:kni (Lakhnau) and L: kniir -(Lakhnur é

in Rampir). 3
U. The Inscriptions in Babur’s Mosque’ at Ajodhya (Oude),
V. Babur’s Gardens in and near Kabul. ~ |


Indices :—I. Personal, II. OE Ill. Gencae p. 7 172 #,
et seq. a
Omissions, Corrigenda, Additional Notes. ; a


-


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.


Plane-tree Avenue in Babur’s (later) Burial- oh
garden! ; ; . facing p. — ee

View from above his grave and 4 Shah-jahan! s | =
Mosque? . oe ; facing p. sor

His Grave? . : cae facing p. 445

Babur in Prayer 3. . | facing p. 102

His Signature. : A App. Q, Txi.*553@

Plans of Chandiri and Gualiar ; App. R, lxvit 223


t From Atkinson’s Sketches in Afghanistan (1.0. Lib. & B.M.).
2 See p. 710 (where for ‘‘ Daniels” read Atkinson) .
3 See Gul-badan Begim’s Humayun-nama Index III, zx loco.


H
Nine : ; | . |
a 2
;
: .
; *
~
-
i
= |
; *
:
re E |
“eg |
.
|
¢ |
»
.
ea
a
2
| ‘
a
:
“ae ’ |
2 | :
2
7 ‘ :
4
*
. ie
. f
. a
, *.
£
jain


[*2eaxx *¢ aavf OF


‘uUopies-jeling (419}8[) SAnqeg UI OsnUsAY 991}-9Ue[Y


PREFACE.


O Spring of work! O Source of power to Be!

Each line, each thought I dedicate to Thee ;

Each time I fail, the failure is my own,

But each success, a jewel in Thy Throne.
JESSIE E. CADELL.


INTRODUCTORY.


THIs book is a translation of Babur Padshah’s Autobiography, made
from the original Turki text. It was undertaken after a purely-
Turki manuscript had become accessible in England, the Haidarabad
Codex (1995) which, being in Babur’s zps¢sstma verba, left to him
the control of his translator’s diction —a control that had been
impracticable from the time when, under Akbar (1589), his book was
translated into Persian. What has come down to us of pure text is,


‘in its shrunken amount, what was translated in 1589. It is difficult,


here and there, to interpret owing to its numerous and in some places
extensive /acunae, and presents more problems than one the solution
of which has real importance because they have favoured suggestions
of malfeasance by Babur.

My translation has been produced under considerable drawback,
having been issued in four /fasczculz, at long intervals, respectively in
June 1912, May 1914, October 1917, and September 1921. I have put
with it of supplementary matter what may be of service to those
readers whom Babur’s personality attracts and to those who study
Turki as a linguistic entertainment, but owing to delays in production
am unable to include the deszderata of maps.


CHAPTER I.
BABUR’S EXEMPLARS IN THE ARTS OF PEACE.

Babur’s civilian aptitudes, whether of the author and penman, the
maker of gardens, the artist, craftsman or sportsman, were nourished
in a fertile soil of family tradition and example. Little about his
teaching and training is now with his mutilated book, little indeed of


is


XXViii PREFACE


any kind about his pre-accession years, not the date of his birth
even, having escaped destruction.* Happily Haidar Mirza (g.v.)
possessed a more complete Codex than has come down to us through
the Timurid libraries, and from it he translated many episodes of
Baburiana that help to bridge gaps and are of special service here
where the personalities of Babur’s early environment are being
named.

Babur’s home-milieu favoured excellence in the quiet Arts and
set before its children high standard and example of proficiency.
Moreover, by schooling him in obedience to the Law, it planted
in him some of Art’s essentials, self-restraint and close attention.
Amongst primal influences on him, his mother Qut-luq-nigar’s ranked
high ; she, well-born and a scholar’s daughter, would certainly be
educated in Turki and Persian and in the home-accomplishments
her governess possessed (@édim q.v.). From her and her mother
Aisan-daulat, the child would learn respect for the attainments of his
wise old grandfather Yunas Khan. Aisan-daulat herself brought to
her grandson much that goes to the making of a man; nomad-born
and sternly-bred, she was brave to obey her opinion of right, and was _
practically the boy’s ruling counsellor through his early struggle to
hold Farghana. With these two in fine influence must be counted
Khan-zada, his five-years elder sister who from his birth to his death
proved her devotion to him. Her life-story tempts, but is too long to
tell; her girlish promise is seen fulfilled in Gul-badan’s pages. ‘Umar
Shaikh’s own mother Shah Sultan Begim brought in a type of merit
widely differing from that of Aisan-daulat Begim ; as a town-lady of
high Tarkhan birth, used to the amenities of life in a wealthy house
of Samarkand, she was, doubtless, an accomplished and cultured
woman.

‘Umar Shaikh’s environment was dominated for many years by
two great men, the scholar and lover of town-life Yunas Khan and
the saintly Ahrari (ze. Khwaja ‘Ubaidu’l-lah) who were frequently
with him in company, came at Babur’s birth and assisted at his


* Cf. Cap. II, PROBLEMS OF THE MUTILATED BABUR-NAMA and TZarikh-t-rashidt,
trs. p. 174.


PREFACE Xxix


naming. Ahrari died in 895-1491 when the child was about seven
years old but his influence was life-long ; in 935-1529 he was invoked
as a spiritual helper by the fever-stricken Babur and his mediation
believed efficacious for recovery (pp. 619, 648). For the babe or boy
to be where the three friends held social session in high converse,
would be thought to draw blessing on him; his hushed silence in
the presence would sow the seed of reverence for wisdom and virtue,
such, for example, as he felt for Jami(g.v.). It is worth while to tell
some part at least of Yunas’ attainments in the gentler Arts, because
the biography from which they are quoted may well have been written
on the information of his wife Aisan-daulat, and it indicates the
breadth of his exemplary influence. Yunas was many things—
penman, painter, singer, instrumentalist, and a past master in the
crafts. He was an expert in good companionship, having even
temper and perfect manners, quick perception and conversational
charm. His intellectual distinction was attributed to his twelve
years of wardship under the learned and highly honoured Yazdi
(Sharafu’d-din ’Ali), the author of the Zafar-nama [Timur’s Book
of Victory]. That book was in hand during four years of Yunas’
education ; he will thus have known it and its main basis Timur’s
Turki Walfizat (annals). What he learned of either book he would


_carry with him into ‘Umar Shaikh’s environment, thus magnifying


the family stock of Timuriya influence. He lived to be some 74 years
old, a length of days which fairly bridged the gap between Timur’s
death [807-1404] and Babur’s birth (888-1483), It is said that no
previous Khan of his (Chaghatai) line had survived his 40th year ;


his exceptional age earned him great respect and would deepen his


influence on his restless young son-in-law ‘Umar Shaikh. It appears
to have been in ‘Umar’s 20th year (czr.) that Yunas Khan began the
friendly association with him that lasted till Yunas’ death (892-1483),
a friendship which, as disparate ages would dictate, was rather that
of father and son than of equal companionship. One matter
mentioned in the Khan’s biography would come to Babur’s
remembrance in the future days when he, like Yunas, broke the Law
against intoxicants and, like him, repented and returned.


Xxx PREFACE


That two men of the calibre and high repute of Ahrari and Yunas ws


maintained friendly guidance so long over ‘Umar cannot but be held
an accreditment and give fragrance of goodness to hisname. Apart
from the high justice and generosity his son ascribes to him, he could
set other example, for he was a reader of great books, the Qoran and
the Masnawi being amongst his favourites. This choice, it may be,
led Abu’l-fazl to say he had the darwesh-mind. Babur was old
enough before ‘Umar’s death to profit by the sight of his father
enjoying the perusal of such books. As with other parents and other
children, there would follow the happy stilling to a quiet mood, the
piquing of curiosity as to what was in the book, the sight of refuge
taken as in a haven from self and care, and perhaps, Babur being
intelligent and of inquiring mind and ‘Umar a skilled reciter, the
boy would marvel at the perennial miracle that a lifeless page can
become eloquent—gentle hints all, pointers of the way to literary
creation. | ;
Few who are at home in Baburiana but will take Timur as Babur’s
sreat exemplar not only as a soldier but as a chronicler. Timur
cannot have seemed remote from that group of people so well-informed
about him and his civilian doings; his Shahrukhi grandchildren in
Samarkand had carried on his author-tradition; the 74 years of
Yunas Khan’s life had bridged the gap between Timur’s death in
807-1405 and Babur’s birth in 888-1483. To Babur Timur will
have been exemplary through his grandson Aulugh Beg who-has
two productions to his credit, the Char-udus (Four Hordes) and the
Kurkani Astronomical Tables. His sons, again, Babur (ga/andar)
and Ibrahim carried on the family torch of letters, the first in verse
and the second by initiating and fostering Yazdi’s labours on the
Zafar-nama. Wide-radiating and potent influence for the Arts of
Peace came forth from Herat during the reign of that Sultan Husain —
Mirza whose Court Babur describes in one of the best supplements
to his autobiography. Husain was a Timurid of the elder branch of
Bai-qara, an author himself but far more effective as a Macznas ;
one man of the shining galaxy of competence that gave him fame,
set pertinent example for Babur the author, namely, the Andijani


PREFACE z XXXi


of noble Chaghatai family, ’Ali-sher Wawa’? who, in classic Turki
verse was the master Babur was to become in its prose. That the
standard of effort was high in Herat is clear from Babur’s dictum
(p. 233) that whatever work a man took up, he aspired to bring it to
perfection. Elphinstone varies the same theme to the tune of
equality of exceilence apart from social status, writing to Erskine
(August, 1826), that “it gives a high notion of the time to find” (in
Babur’s account of Husain’s Court) “artists, musicians and others,
described along with the learned and great of the Age”.

My meagre summary of Babur’s exemplars would-be noticeably
incomplete if it omitted mention of two of his life-long helpers in
the gentler Arts, his love of Nature and his admiration for great
architectural creations. The first makes joyous accompanimeut
throughout his book; the second is specially called forth by Timur’s
ennoblement of Samarkand. Timur had built magnificently and laid
out stately gardens; Babur made many a fruitful pleasaunce and
gladdened many an arid halting-place; he built a little, but had
small chance to test his capacity for building greatly; never rich,
he was poor in Kabul and several times destitute in his home-lands.
But his sword won what gave wealth to his Indian Dynasty, and he
passed on to it the builder’s unused dower, so that Samarkand was
surpassed in Hindustan and the spiritual conception Timur’s creations
embodied took perfect form at Sikandra where Akbar lies entombed.


CHAPTER II.
PROBLEMS OF THE MUTILATED BABUR-NAMA.


Losses from the text of Babur’s book are the more disastrous
because it truly embodies his career. For it has the rare distinction
of being contemporary with the events it describes, is boyish in his
boyhood, grows with his growth, matures as he matured. Undulled
by retrospect, it isa fresh and spontaneous recital of things just seen,
heard or done. It has the further rare distinction of shewing a boy
who, setting a future task before him — in his case the revival of
Timurid power, — began to chronicle his adventure in the book which


XXXli PREFACE


through some 37 years was his twinned comrade, which by its special __


distinctions has attracted readers for nearly a half-millennium, still
attracts and still is a thing apart from autobiographies which look
back to recal dead years.

Much circumstance makes for the opinion that Babur left his
life-record complete, perhaps repaired in places and recently supple-
‘mented, but continuous, orderly and lucid; this it is not now, nor
has been since it was translated into Persian in 1589, for it is fissured
by /acune, has neither Preface nor Epilogue,’ opens in an-oddly
abrupt and incongruous fashion, and consists of a series of fragments
so disconnected as to demand considerable preliminary explanation.
Needless to say, its dwindled condition notwithstanding, it has place
amongst great autobiographies, still revealing its author playing a
man’s part in a drama of much historic and personal interest. Its
revelation is however now like a portrait out of drawing, because it
has not kept the record of certain years of his manhood in which he
took momentous decisions, (1) those of 1511-12 [918] in which he
accepted reinforcement —at a great price — from Isma‘il the Shi‘a
Shah of Persia, and in which, if my reading be correct, he first
(1512) broke the Law against the use of wine,? (2) those of 1519-1525
[926-932], in which his literary occupations with orthodox Law (see
Mubin) associated with cognate matters of 932 AH. indicate that his
return to obedience had begun, in which too was taken the decision
that worked out for his fifth expedition across the Indus with its
sequel of the conquest of Hind.—The loss of matter so weighty
cannot but destroy the balance of his record and falsify the drawing
of his portrait.


a. Problem of Titles.
As nothing survives to decide what was Babur’s chosen title for
his autobiography, a modern assignment of names to distinguish it


* The suggestion, implied by my use of this word, that Babur may have definitely closed
his autobiography (as Timur did under other circumstances) is due to the existence of
a compelling cause vz. that he would be expectant of death as the price of Humayun’s
restored life (p. 701).

? Cf. p. 83 and n. and Add. Note, P. 83 for further emendation of a contradiction effected
by some malign influence in the note (p. 83) between parts of that note, and between it and
Babur’s account of his not-drinking in Herat.


PREFACE XXXili


from its various descendants is desirable, particularly so since the
revival of interest in it towards which the Facsimile of its Haidarabad
Codex has contributed."

Babur-nama (History of Babur) is a well-warranted name by which
to distinguish the original Turki text, because long associated with
this and rarely if ever applied to its Persian translation.? It is
not comprehensive because not covering supplementary matter of
biography and description but it has use for modern readers of
classing Babur’s with other Timuriya and Timurid histories such as
the Zafar—Humayun-A kbar-namas. ,

Wagt‘at-t-baburt (Babur’s Acts), being descriptive of the book and
in common use for naming both the Turki and Persian texts, might
usefully be reserved as a title for the latter alone.

Amongst European versions of the book MWemotrs of Baber is
Erskine’s peculium for the Leyden and Erskine Perso-English trans-
lation — Mémotres de Baber is Pavet de Courteille’s title for his
French version of the Bukhara [ Persified- Turki] compilation—Badur-
nama in English links the translation these volumes contain with its


purely-Turki source.


b. Problems of the Constituents of the Books.


Intact or mutilated, Babur'’s material falls naturally into three
territorial divisions, those of the lands of his successive rule, Farghana
(with Samarkand), Kabul and Hindustan. With these are distinct
sub-sections of description of places and of obituaries of kinsmen.
The book might be described as consisting of annals and diary,
which once met within what is now the gap of 1508-19 (914-925).
Round this gap, amongst others, bristle problems of which this
change of literary style is one; some are small and concern the
mutilation alone, others are larger, but all are too intricate for terse
Teufel held its title to be wagz‘ (this I adopted in 1908), but it has no definite support


and in numerous instances of its occurrence to describe the acts or doings of Babur, it could
be read as a common noun.

? It stands on the reverse of the frontal page of the Haidarabad Codex; it is Timur-
pulad’s name for the Codex he purchased in Bukhara, and it is thence brought on by Kehr
(with Ilminski), and Klaproth (Cap. III); it is used by Khwafi Khan (d. cz. 1732), etc.

¢


XXXiV PREFACE


statement and all might be resolved by the help of a ‘Secbnd MS.
é.g. one of the same strain as Haidar’s. |

Without fantasy another constituent might be counted in with the
three territorial divisions, namely, the grouped /acune which by their
engulfment of text are an untoward factor in an estimate either of
Babur or of his book. They are actually the cardinal difficulty of
the book as it now is; they foreshorten purview of his career and
character and detract from its merits; they lose it perspective and
distort its proportions. That this must be so is clear both from the
value and the preponderating amount of the lost text. It is no
exaggeration to say that while working on what survives, what is
lost becomes like a haunting presence warning that it must be
remembered always as an integral and the dominant part of the book.

The relative proportions of saved and lost text are highly
significant :—Babur’s commemorable years are about 47 and 10
months, z.e. from his birth on Feb. 14th 1483 to near his death on
Dec. 26th 1530; but the aggregate of surviving text records some
18 years only, and this not continuously but broken through by
numerous gaps. That these gaps result from loss of pages is fre-
quently shewn by a broken sentence, an unfinished episode. The
fragments—as they truly may be called—are divided by gaps some-
times seeming to remove a few pages only (cf. s.2.935 AH.), sometimes
losing the record of 6 and czr. 18 months, sometimes of 6 and 11
years ; besides these actual clefts in the narrative there are losses of
some 12 years from its beginning and some 16 months from its end.
Briefly put we now have the record of cév. 18 years where that of over
47 could have been.?


e


c. Causes of the gaps.


Various causes have been surmised to explain the /acune ; on the
plea of long intimacy with Babur’s and Haidar’s writings, I venture
to say that one and all appear to me the result of accident. This
opinion rests on observed correlations between the surviving and the


* That Babur left a complete record much indicates beyond his own persistence and
literary bias, ¢.2. cross-reference with and needed complements from what is lost ; mention
by other writers of Babur’s information, notably by Haidar. ~


PREFACE XXXV


lost record, which demand complement—on the testimony of Haidar’s
extracts, and firmly on Babur’s orderly and persistent bias of mind
and on the prideful character of much of the lost record. Moreover
occasions of risk to Babur’s papers are known.

Of these occasions the first was the destruction of his camp near
Hisar in 1512 (918; p. 357) but no information about his papers
survives ; they may not have been in his tent but in the fort. The
second was a case of recorded damage to “ book and sections” (p. 679)
occurring in 1529 (935). From signs of work done to the Farghana
section in Hindustan, the damage may be understood made good at
the later date. To the third exposure to damage, namely, the attrition
of hard travel and unsettled life during Humayun’s 14 years of exile
from rule in Hindustan (1441-1555) it is reasonable to attribute even
the whole loss of text. For, assuming — as may well be done — that
Babur left (1530) a complete autobiography, its volume would be safe
so long as Humayun was in power but after the Timurid exodus
(1441) his library would be exposed to the risks detailed in the
admirable chronicles of Gul-badan, Jauhar and Bayazid (¢.v.). He
is known to have annotated his father’s book in 1555 (p. 466 n. 1)
just before marching from Kabul to attempt the re-conquest of
Hindustan. His Codex would return to Dihli which he entered in
July 1555, and there would be safe from risk of further mutilation.
Its condition in 1555 is likely to have remained what it was found
when ‘Abdu’r-rahim translated it into Persian by Akbar’s orders
(1589) for Abu’l-fazl’s use in the Akéar-nama. ‘That Persian trans-
lation with its descendant the Memozrs of Baber, and the purely-
Turki Haidarabad Codex with its descendant the Babur-nama in
English, contain identical contents and, so doing, carry the date of
the mutilation of Babur’s Turki text back through its years of safety,
1589 to 1555, to the period of Humayun’s exile and its dangers for
camel-borne or deserted libraries.


d. Two mtsinterpretations of lacune.


Not unnaturally the frequent interruptions of narrative caused
by lacune have been misinterpreted occasionally, and sometimes


XXXVi PREFACE


detractory comment has followed on Babur, ranking him below the | q


accomplished and lettered, steadfast and honest man he was. I select
two examples of this comment neither of which has a casual origin.
The first is from the B.M. Cat. of Coins of the Shahs of Persia
p. xxiv, where after identifying a certain gold coin as shewing
vassalage by Babur to Isma‘il Safawz, the compiler of the Catalogue
notes, “We can now understand the omission from Babar’s ‘Memoirs’
of the occurrences between 914 H. and 925 H.” Can these words »
imply other than that Babur suppressed mention of minting of the
coins shewing acknowledgment of Shi‘a suzerainty? Leaving aside
the delicate topic of the detraction the quoted words imply, much
negatives the surmise that the gap is a deliberate “omission” of
text :—(1) the duration of the Shi‘a alliance was 19-20 months of
917-918 AH. (p. 355), why omit the peaceful or prideful and victorious
record of some 9-10 years on its either verge? (2) Babur’s Transoxus
campaign was an episode in the struggle between Shaibaq Khan
(Shaibani) Auzbeg and Shah Isma‘il— between Sunni and Shia;
how could “omission” from his book, always a rare one, hide what
multitudes knew already? “ Omission” would have proved a fiasco
in another region than Central Asia, because the Babur—Haidar story
of the campaign, vassal-coinage included,” has been brought into
English literature by the English translation of the Zar¢kh-¢ rashidt.
Babur’s frank and self-judging habit of mind would, I think, lead
him to write fully of the difficulties which compelled the hated alliance
and certainly he would tell of his own anger at the conduct of the
campaign by Isma‘il’s Commanders. The alliance was a tactical
mistake ; it would have served Babur better to narrate its failure.
The second misinterpretation, perhaps a mere surmising gloss, is
Erskine’s (Zemotrs Supp. p. 289) who, in connection with “Alam
Khan’s request to Babur for reinforcement in order to oust his nephew
Ibrahim, observes that “ Babur probably flattered ‘Alam Khan with
the hope of succession to the empire of Hindustan.” This idea does
not fit the record of either man. Elphinstone was angered by
Erskine’s remark which, he wrote (Aug. 26th 1826) “had a bad


* App. H, xxx.


PREFACE XXXVIi


effect on the narrative by weakening the implicit confidence in
Babur’s candour and veracity which his frank way of writing is so
well-calculated to command.” Elphinstone’s opinion of Babur is not
that of a reader but of a student of his book; he was also one of
Erskine’s staunchest helpers in its production. From Erskine’s
surmise others have advanced on the detractor’s path saying that
Babur used and threw over ‘Alam Khan (¢.v.).


e. Reconstruction.


Amongst the problems mutilation has created an important one is
that of the condition of, the beginning of the book (p. 1 to p. 30) with
its plunge into Babur’s doings in his 12th year without previous
mention of even his day and place of birth, the names and status
of his parents, or any occurrences of his pre-accession years. Within
those years should be entered the death of Yunas Khan (1487) with
its sequent obituary notice, and the death of [Khwaja ‘Ubaidu’l-lah]
Ahrari (1491). Not only are these customary entries absent but the
very introductions of the two great men are wanting, probably with
the also missing account of their naming of the babe Babur. That
these routine matters are a part of an autobiography planned as
Babur’s was, makes for assured opinion that the record of more than
his first decade of life has been lost, perhaps by the attrition to which
its position in the volume exposed it.

Useful reconstruction if merely in tabulated form, might be effected
in a future edition. It would save at least two surprises for readers,
one the oddly abrupt first sentence telling of Babur’s age when he
became ruler in Farghana (p. 1), which is a misfit in time and order,
another that of the sudden interruption of ‘Umar Shaikh’s obituary
by a fragment of Yunas Khan’s (p. 19) which there hangs on a mere
name-peg, whereas its place according to Babur’s elsewhere unbroken
practice is directly following the death. The record of the missing
prze-accession years will have included at the least as follows :—Day
of birth and its place—names and status of parents—naming and
the ceremonial observances proper for Muhammadan children—visits
to kinsfolk in Tashkint, and to Samarkand (at. 5, p. 35) where he


XXXVIii PREFACE


was betrothed—his initiation in school subjects, in sport, the use 0
arms—names of teachers—education in the rules of his Faith (p. 44),
appointment to the Andijan Command efc., e¢c.

- There is now no fit beginning to the book; the present first
sentence and its pendent description of Farghana should be removed
to the position Babur’s practice dictates of entering the description —
of a territory at once on obtaining it (cf. Samarkand, Kabul, Hindu-

stan). It might come in on p. 30 at the end of the topic (partly

omitted on p. 29 where no ground is given for the manifest anxiety

about Babur’s safety) of the disputed succession (Haidar, trs. p. 135)

Babur’s partisan begs having the better of Jahangir’s (¢.v.), and having

testified obeisance, he became ruler in Farghana; his statement of
age (12 years), comes in naturally and the description of his newly

acquired territory follows according to rule. This removal of text

to a later position has the advantage of allowing the accession to

follow and not precede Babur’s father’s death.

By the removal there is left to consider the historical matter of
pp. 12-13. The first paragraph concerns matter of much earlier date
than ‘Umar’s death in 1494 (p. 13); it may be part of an obituary
notice, perhaps that of Yunas Khan. What follows of the advance
of displeased kinsmen against ‘Umar Shaikh would fall into place as
part of Babur’s record of his boyhood, and lead on to that of his
father’s death.

The above is a bald sketch of what might be effected in the
interests of the book and to facilitate its pleasant perusal.


CHAPTER III.
THE TURKI MSS. AND WORK CONNECTING WITH THEM.

This chapter is a literary counterpart of ‘‘ Babur Padshah’s Stone-
heap,” the roadside cairn tradition says was piled by his army, each
man laying his stone when passing down from Kabul for Hindustan
in the year of victory 1525 (932).?


* p. 446, n. 6. Babur’s order for the cairn would fit into the lost record of the first month
of the year (p. 445).


PREFACE XXXix


For a title suiting its contents is ‘‘ Babur Padshah’s Book-pile,’’
because it is fashioned of item after item of pen-work done by
many men in obedience to the dictates given by his book. Unlike
the cairn, however, the pile of books is not of a single occasion
but of many, not of a single year but of many, irregularly spacing
the 500 years through which he and his autobiography have had
Earth’s immortality.


Part I. The MSS. themselves.

Preliminary.—Much of the information given below was published
in the Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society from 1900 onwards, as
it came into my possession during a search for reliable Turki text
of the Babur-nama. My notes were progressive ; some MSS. were
in distant places, some not traceable, but in the end I was able to
examine in England all of whose continued existence I had become
aware. It was inevitable that some of my earlier statements should
be superseded later; my Notes (see s.x. JRAS.) need clearing of
transitory matter and summarizing, in particular those on the
Elphinstone Codex and Klaproth’s articles. Neither they nor what
is placed here makes claim to be complete. Other workers will
supplement them when the World has renewed opportunity to
‘ stroll in the bye-paths of literature.

Few copies of the Babur-nama seem to bace been made; of the
few I have traced as existing, not one contains the complete
autobiography, and one alone has the maximum of dwindled text
shewn in the Persian translation (1589). Two books have been
reputed to contain Babur’s authentic text, one preserved in
Hindustan by his descendants, the other issuing from Bukhara.
They differ in total contents, arrangement and textual worth;
moreover the Bukhara book compiles items of divers diction and
origin and date, manifestly not from one pen.

The Hindustan book is a record—now mutilated—of the Acts of
Babur alone; the Bukhara book as exhibited in its fullest accessible
example, Kehr’s Codex, is in two parts, each having its preface, the
first reciting Babur’s Acts, the second Humayun’s.


xl PREFACE


The Bukhara book is a compilation of oddments, mostly translated ma 7
from compositions written after Babur’s death. Textual and
circumstantial grounds warrant the opinion that it is a distinct
work mistakenly believed to be Babur’s own; to these grounds was
added in 1903 the authoritative verdict of collation with the
Haidarabad Codex, and in 1921 of the colophon of its original MS.
in which its author gives his name, with the title and date of his
compilation (JRAS. 1900, p. 474). What it is and what are its
contents and history are told in Part III of this chapter.


Part II. Work on the Hindustan MSS.
BABUR’S ORIGINAL CODEX.


My latest definite information about Babur’s autograph MS.
comes from the Padshah-nama (Bib. Ind. ed. ii, 4), whose author
saw it in Shah-i-jahan’s private library between 1628 and 1638.
Inference is justified, however, that it was the archetype of the
Haidarabad Codex which has been estimated from the quality
of its paper as dating cir. 1700 (JRAS. 1906, p. 97). But two
subsequent historic disasters complicate all questions of MSS.
missing from Indian libraries, namely, Nadir Shah’s vengeance on
Dihli in 1739 and the dispersions and fires of the Mutiny. Faint
hope is kept alive that the original Codex may have drifted into
private hands, by what has occurred with the Rampur MS. of
Babur’s Hindustan verses (App. J), which also appears once to
have belonged to Shah-i-jahan.


I
Amongst items of work done during Babur’s life are copies of
his book (or of the Hindustan section of it) he mentions sending to
sons and friends. |
II
The Tabagat-t-baburi was written during Babur’s life by his
Persian secretary Shaikh Zainu’d-din of Khawaf; it paraphrases
in rhetorical Persian the record of a few months of Hindustan
campaigning, including the battle of Panipat.


‘


‘(erp “4 ‘oo6t “Svul pue cog ‘d sowie) petdoo avy 0} undeUNT] poojsiopunsiw suTyYsIG IU YIM pasnyuod oq 0} JOU SI “SW SIYT, ¢
*XOpOd) pequieplefy ay} Jo “sjoj Zge ay} SI uostreduIOD Jo prepuL}s OUT, -
‘9194 PIPNIOU! JOU av SUOS S.INqeg 0} JUS eUIeU-INGeg aq] Jo sjieg ,


“SO6} ‘oyruts


*Areiqry sSuel


“pore “OOLT °477
~ovy Ul paydnjzuayg | -r1eTeS IIS 9}e] OUT, ‘uoydojoo on | -Qnu (fT ‘ON) ‘TSE | seyeorpursodeg | *xapod peqeieprezy ‘g
“(1223
*AreiqrT —_| -1.Nqy, Jo Moydou) ‘Sz9t_ | [Spue|Ay uyof Mou]
- spuelAy uyof pewureynw-in yy “uUMOUU() *(jowr}x9 Ue) TY | Ul SuTAT] aqlog | ‘Sy vULIsepury ‘qig “7
_ ‘unesny Ysng | ‘ze2mysvy-| NV, ‘UMOUYU *(sjusUIseIJ) 16 "6Z9T | “SIN Unosny ysqug “9
“OFST, TeMeYSoT ‘(TZ6F 3 OT8T) ‘H 982 “LOSE pue
ul 3ysnog | Arerqry soyeooapy ‘umMouyU "€ “ON | ‘Z06} PUe OTST UI Ogg] usemjog | ‘xapod suojsurydyy *¢
“reysyse yy ‘(¢) Ob pue ‘X9pod 5 .707ysnq
ur mou AlqIssog | *Zb-OPS} AMYseY (¢)2epreH | = “Z ON 10 ‘ON |'(paqepnUruN) 7 “oN OES} Usemjog | xepleyy] peuwmeynyy “p
¢*(2 9]eJouue pues
*"¢ “ON Jo ad4} | *yoCT-9¢gT U90M} *(poyeynuun) pepuruiuo0s) =
_- -ayorvayysuaasg | -aq Areiqry jesoy *(¢) QDeY-[. ITY, ‘TON | J ‘ON = A]yeutsuo *(e) Test xopod sunkeunyzy *¢
wy i “Ayrurey
 Suepey elemyy ‘62ST ‘zg9 vd "XOpOD S24n4y F
Ur THs ATqIssog | pueyreures 0} yUeG MORASS ‘TON | “(¢) 9g peuyspuy “6cST urey elem *Z
es "8E-8Z9} U29MI0q “ZBE 19A0
__ *pareaddesip svyy Areiqry] [eo yy -inqeg — yonur ATjeulsuO “OSST *xOpod snqeg *}
: *UOT}BIO] : , WAS ‘uolje[duo0a :
SyIVUIdyy uMouy 48917] aquog adAjayory prepueys—sorjo.g jo a1eq Soule Ny


1’ VNVN-UNdAVG AHL AO “SSW NVLSOGNIPT AHL AO ATAVY


xlii . PREFACE


Ii


During the first decade of Humayun’s reign (1530-40) at least =


two important codices seem to have been copied.

The earlier (see Table, No. 2) has varied circumstantial warrant.
It meets the need of an archetype, one marginally annotated by
Humayun, for the Elphinstone Codex in which a few notes are
marginal and signed, others are pell-mell, interpolated in the text
but attested by a scrutineer as having been marginal in its arche-
type and mistakenly copied into its text. This second set has been
ineffectually sponged over. Thus double collation is indicated
(i) with Babur’s autograph MS. to clear out extra Babur matter,
and (ii) with its archetype, to justify the statement that in this
the interpolations were marginal.—No colophon survives with the
much dwindled Elph. Codex, but one, suiting the situation, has been
observed, where it is a complete misfit, appended to the Alwar Codex
of the second Persian translation, (estimated as copied in 1589). Into
the incongruities of that colophon it is not necessary to examine
here, they are too obvious to aim at deceit; it appears fitly to be an
imperfect translation from a Turki original, this especially through
its odd fashion of entitling ‘‘ Humayun Padshah.” It can be
explained as translating the colophon of the Codex (No. 2) which,
as his possession, Humayun allowably annotated and which makes
it known that he had ordered ‘Ali’u-’l-katib to copy his father’s
Turki book, and that it was finished in February, 1531, some six
weeks after Babur’s death."

The later copy made in Humayun’s first decade is Haidar
Mirza’s (2zfra).

IV

Muhammad Haidar Mirza Dughlat’s possession of a copy of the
Autobiography is known both from his mention of it and through
numerous extracts translated from it in his Tartkh-t-rashidi. Asa
good boy-penman (p. 22) he may have copied down to 1512 (918)
while with Babur (p. 350), but for obtaining a transcript of it his


* For precise limits of the original annotation see p. 446 n.—For details about the
E. Codex see JRAS. 1907, art. Zhe Hlph. Codex, and for the colophon AQR. 1900, July,
Oct. and JRAS. 1905, pp. 752, 761.


PREFACE | lid


opportunity was while with Humayun before the Timurid exodus
of 1541. He died in 1551; his Codex is likely to have found its
way back from Kashmir to his ancestral home in the Kashghar
region and there it maystill be. (See T.R. trs. Ney Elias’ biography
of him).

V


The Elphinstone Codex! has had an adventurous career. The
enigma of its archetype is posed above; it may have been copied
during Akbar’s first decade (1556-67); its, perhaps first, owner
was a Bai-qara rebel (d. 1567) from amongst whose possessions it
passed into the Royal Library, where it was cleared of foreign matter
by the expunction of Humayun’s marginal notes which its scribe
had interpolated into its text. At a date I do not know, it must
have left the Royal Library for its fly-leaves bear entries of prices
and in 1810 it was found and purchased in Peshawar by Elphinstone.
It went with him to Calcutta, and there may have been seen by
Leyden during the short time between its arrival and the autumn
month of the same year (1810) when he sailed for Java. In 1813
Elphinstone in Poona sent it to Erskine in Bombay, saying that he
had fancied it gone to Java and had been writing to ‘Izzatu’l-lah
_ to procure another MS. for Erskine in Bukhara, but that all the -
time it was on his own shelves. Received after Erskine had dolefully
compared his finished work with Leyden’s (tentative) translation,
Erskine sadly recommenced the review of his own work. The Codex
had suffered much defacement down to 908 (1502) at the hands of
4 Persian Turk of Ganj ”’ who had interlined it with explanations.
It came to Scotland (with Erskine ?) who in 1826 sent it with a
covering letter (Dec. 12th, 1826), at its owner’s desire, to the
Advocates’ Library where it nowis. In 1907 it was fully described
by me in the JRAS.

VI


Of two Wagi’at-i-baburi (Pers. trs.) made in Akbar’s reign, the
earlier was begun in 1583, at private instance, by two Mughuls
© See Index s.7. and III ante and JRAS. 1900-3-5-6-7.


xliv PREFACE


Payanda-hasan of Ghazni and Muhammad-quli of Hisar. The
Bodleian and British Museum Libraries have copies of it, very
fragmentary unfortunately, for it is careful, likeable, and helpful -
by its small explanatory glosses. It has the great defect of not
preserving autobiographic quality in its diction.


VII


The later Waqi’at-i-baburi translated by ‘Abdu’r-rahim Mirza is
one of the most important items in Baburiana, both by its special
characteristics as the work of a Turkman and not of a Persian,
and by the great service it has done. Its origin is well-known;
it was made at Akbar’s order to help Abu’]-fazl in the Akbar-nama
account of Babur and also to facilitate perusal of the Babur-nama
in Hindustan. It was presented to Akbar, by its translator who
had come up from Gujrat, in the last week of November, 1589, on
an occasion and at a place of admirable fitness. For Akbar had
gone to Kabul to visit Babur’s tomb, and was halting on his return
journey at Barik-ab where Babur had halted on his march down
to Hindustan in the year of victory 1525, at no great distance
from ‘“‘ Babur Padshah’s Stone-heap’’. Abu’l-fazl’s account of
the presentation will rest on ‘Abdu’r-rahim’s information (A.N.
trs. cap. ci). The diction of this translation is noticeable ; it gave
much trouble to Erskine who thus writes of it (Memoirs Preface,
Ix), “‘ Though simple and precise, a close adherence to the idioms
and forms of expression of the Turki original joined to a want of
distinctness in the use of the relatives, often renders the meaning
extremely obscure, and makes it difficult to discover the connexion
of the different members of the sentence.t The style is frequently
not Persian. .. . Many of the Turki words are untranslated.”

Difficult as these characteristics made Erskine’s interpretation,
it appears to me likely that they'indirectly were useful to him by
restraining his diction to some extent in their Turki fettering —This
Turki fettering has another aspect, apart from Erskine’s difficulties,


* Here speaks the man reared in touch with European classics; (pure) Turki i
it uses no relatives (Radloff) is lucid. Cf. Cap. IV The Memoirs of Babur.


PREFACE xlv


viz. it would greatly facilitate re-translation into Turki, such as has
been effected, I think, in the Farghana section of the Bukhara
compilation.


VIII


This item of work, a harmless attempt of Salim (i.e. Jahangir
Padshah ; 1605-28) to provide the ancestral autobiography with
certain stop-gaps, has caused much needless trouble and discussion
without effecting any useful result. It is this:—In his own auto-
biography, the Tuzuk-i-jahangiri s.a. 1607, he writes of a Babur-nama
Codex he examined, that it was all in Babur’s “‘ blessed handwriting ’”’
except four portions which were in his own and each of which he
attested in Turki as so being. Unfortunately he did not specify his
topics ; unfortunately also no attestation has been found to passages
reasonably enough attributable to his activities. His portions may
consist of the ‘‘ Rescue-passage ’’ (App. D) and a length of trans-
lation from the Akbarnama, a continuous part of its Babur chapter
but broken up where only I have seen it, 7.¢. the Bukhara compila-
tion, into (I) a plain tale of Kanwa (1527), (2) episodes of Babur’s
latter months (1529)—both transferred to the first person—and
(3) an account of Babur’s death (December 26th, 1530) and Court.

_ Jahangir’s occupation, harmless in itself, led to an imbroglio of
Langlés with Erskine, for the former stating in the Biographie
Universelle art. Babour, that Babour’s Commentaries ‘
par Jahangir’’ were translated into Persian by ‘Abdu’r-rahim.
Erskine made answer, ‘“‘I know not on what authority the learned
Langlés hazarded this assertion, which is certainly incorrect ”’
(Memoirs, Preface, p. ix). Had Langlés somewhere met with
Jahangir’s attestations? He had authority if he had seen merely the
statement of 1607, but Erskine was right also, because the Persian
translation contains no more than the unaugmented Turki text.
The royal stop-gaps are in Kehr’s MS. and through Ilminski reached
De Courteille, whence the biting and thorough analysis of the
three “‘Fragments’’ by Teufel. Both episodes—the Langlés and the


‘ augmentés


- * For analysis of a retranslated passage see JRAS. 1908, p. 85.


elie : PREFACE


Teufel ones—are time-wasters but they are comprehensible in the
circumstances that Jahangir could not foresee the consequences
of his doubtless good intentions.

If the question arise of how writings that had had place in’
Jahangir’s library reached Bukhara, their open road is through the
Padshah’s correspondence (App. Q and references), with a descendant
of Ahrari in whose hands they were close to Bukhara.?

It groups scattered information to recal that Salim (Jahangir) was
‘Abdu’r-rahim’s ward, that then, as now, Babur’s Autobiography
was the best example of classic Turki, and that it would appeal on
grounds of piety—as it did appeal on some sufficient ground—to
have its broken story made good. Also that for three of the four
‘‘portions’’ Abu’l-fazl’s concise matter was to hand.


IX


My information concerning Baburiana under Shah-i-jahan Padshah
(1628-58) is very meagre. It consists of (1) his attestation of a
signature of Babur (App. Q and photo), (2) his possession of Babur’s
autograph Codex (Padshah-nama, Bib. Ind. ed., ii, 4), and (3)
his acceptance, and that by his literary entourage, of Mir Abu-talib
Husaini’s Persian translation of Timur’s Annals, the Malfuzat
whose preparation the Zafar-nama describes and whose link with
Babur’s writings is that of the exemplar to the emulator.?


xX


The Haidarabad Codex may have been inscribed under Aurang-
zib Padshah (1655-1707). So many particulars about it have been
given already that little needs saying here.3 It was the grande
trouvaille of my search for Turki text wherewith to revive Babur’s
autobiography both in Turki and English. My husband in 1900
saw it in Haidarabad ; through the kind offices of the late Sayyid


* Tusuk-i-jahangiri, Rogers & Beveridge’s trs. i, 110; JRAS. 1900, p. 756, for the
Persian passage, 1908, p. 76 for the ‘*‘ Fragments”, 1900, p. 476 for Ilminski’s Preface
(a second translation is accessible at the B.M. and I.O. Library and R.A.S.), AZemoirs
Preface, p. ix, Index s.#s. de Courteille, Teufel, Bukhara MSS. and Part iii eo cap.

? For Shah-i-jahan’s interest in Timur see sign given in a copy of his note published in
my translation volume of Gul-badan Begim’s Humayun-nama, p. xiii.

3 JRAS. 1900 p. 466, 1902 p. 655, 1905 art. s.2., 1908 pp. 78, 98; Index zz Joco s.n.


es


PREFACE. ease


Ali Bilgrami it was lent to me; it proved to surpass, both in volume
and quality, all other Babur-nama MSS. I had traced; I made its
merits known to Professor Edward Granville Browne, just when the
E. J. Wilkinson Gibb Trust was in formation, with the happy and
accordant result that the best prose book in classic Turki became
the first item in the Memorial— matris ad filuvaum— of literary work
done in the name of the Turkish scholar, and Babur’s very words
were safeguarded in hundred-fold facsimile. An event so important
for autobiography and for Turki literature may claim more than
the bald mention of its occurrence, because sincere autobiography,
however ancient, is human and social and undying, so that this
was no mere case of multiplying copies of a book, but was one of
preserving a man’s life in his words. There were, therefore, joyful
red-letter days in the English story of the Codex — outstanding from
others being those on which its merits revealed themselves (on
Surrey uplands)— the. one which brought Professor Browne’s
acceptance of it for reproduction by the Trust—and the day of
pause from work marked by the accomplished fact of the safety of
the Babur-nama.
XI


The period from civ. 1700, the date of the Haidarabad Codex,


-and 1810, when the Elphinstone Codex was purchased by its sponsor


at Peshawar, appears to have been unfruitful in work on the
Hindustan MSS. Causes for this may connect with historic events,
e.g. Nadir Shah’s desolation of Dihli and the rise of the East India
Company, and, in Baburiana, with the disappearance of Babur’s
autograph Codex (it was unknown to the Scots of 1800-26), and the


transfer of the Elphinstone Codex from royal possession — this,


possibly however, an accident of royal travel to and from Kabul at
earlier dates.

The first quarter of the nineteenth century was, on the contrary,
most fruitful in valuable work, useful impulse to which was given
by Dr. John Leyden who in about 1805 began to look into Turki.
Like his contemporary Julius Klaproth (q.v.), he was avid of
tongues and attracted by Turki and by Babur’s writings of which he


xIviii , PREFACE


had some knowledge through the ‘Abdu’r-rahim (Persian) trans-
lation. His Turki text-book would be the MS. of the Asiatic Society
of Bengal,! a part-copy of the Bukhara compilation, from which he
had the India Office MS. copied. He took up Turki again in 1810,
after his return from Malay and whilst awaiting orders in Calcutta
for departure to Java. He sailed in the autumn of the year and died
in August 181. Much can be learned about him and his Turki
occupations from letters (imfra xiii) written to Erskine by him and
by others of the Scottish band which now achieved such fine results
for Babur’s Autobiography.

It is necessary to say something of Leyden’s part in producing the
Memoirs, because Erskine, desiring to “lose nothing that might
add to Leyden’s reputation ”’, has assigned to him an undue position
of collaboration in it both by giving him premier place on its title-
page and by attributing to him the beginning the translation.
What one gleans of Leyden’s character makes an impression of
unassumption that would forbid his acceptance of the posthumous
position given to him, and, as his translation shews the tyro in
Turki, there can be no ground for supposing he would wish his
competence in it over-estimated. He had, as dates show, nothing
to do with the actual work of the Memoirs which was finished
before Erskine had seen in 1813 what Leyden had set down before
he died in 1811. As the Memoirs is now a rare book, I quote
from it what Erskine says (Preface, p. ix) of Leyden’s rough
translation :—‘‘ This acquisition (7.e. of Leyden’s -trs.) reduced me
to rather an awkward dilemma. The two translations (his own
and Leyden’s) differed in many important particulars; but as
Dr. Leyden had the advantage of translating from the original,
I resolved to adopt his translation as far as it went, changing
only such expressions in it as seemed evidently to be incon-
sistent with the context, or with other parts of the Memoirs, or
such as seemed evidently to originate in the oversights that are
unavoidable in an unfinished work.? This labour I had completed


t Cf. JRAS. 1900, Nos. VI, VII, VIII.
2 Ilminski’s difficulties are foreshadowed here by the same confusion of identity
between the Babur-nama proper and the Bukhara compilation (Preface, Part iii, p. li).


aay
LO Aa ee


PREFACE Winx


with some difficulty, when Mr. Elphinstone sent me the copy of the
Memoirs of Baber in the original Tirki (¢.e. The Elphinstone Codex)
which he had procured when he went to Peshawar on his embassy
to Kabul. This copy, which he had supposed to have been sent
with Dr. Leyden’s manuscripts from Calcutta, he was now fortunate
enough to recover (in his own library at Poona). ‘‘ The discovery
of this valuable manuscript reduced me, though heartily sick of the
task, to the necessity of commencing my work once more.”

Erskine’s Preface (pp. x, xi) contains various other references to
Leyden’s work which indicate its quality as tentative and unrevised.
It is now in the British Museum Library.


AIT


Little need be said here about the Memoirs of Babery.t Erskine
worked on a basis of considerable earlier acquaintance with his
Persian original, for, as his Preface tells, he had (after Leyden’s
death) begun to translate this some years before he definitely
accepted the counsel of Elphinstone and Malcolm to undertake
the Memoirs. He finished his translation in 1813, and by 1816
was able to dedicate his complete volume to Elphinstone, but
publication was delayed till 1826. His was difficult pioneer-work,
and carried through with the drawback of working on a secondary
source. It has done yeoman service, of which the crowning merit
is its introduction of Babur’s autobiography to the Western world.


XITI


Amongst Erskine’s literary remains are several bound volumes of —
letters from Elphinstone, Malcolm, Leyden, and others of that
distinguished group of Scots who promoted the revival of Babur’s
writings. Erskine’s grandson, the late Mr. Lestocq Erskine, placed
these, with other papers, at our disposal, and they are now located
where they have been welcomed as appropriate additions :—Elphin-
stone’s are in the Advocates’ Library, where already (1826) he,
through Erskine, had deposited his own Codex—and with his


* Cf. Erskine’s Preface fassim, and zx /oco item XI, cap. iv. The Memoirs of Baber,


and Index s.z.
ad


1 PREFACE


an


letters are those of Malcolm and more occasional corresponden
Leyden’s letters (and various papers) are in the Memorial Cottage
maintained in his birthplace Denholm (Hawick) by the Edinburgh
Border Counties Association ; something fitting went to the Bombay
Asiatic Society and a volume of diary to the British Museum.
Leyden’s papers will help his fuller biography ; Elphinstone’s letters
have special value as recording his co-operation with Erskine by
~ much friendly criticism, remonstrance against delay, counsels and
encouragement. They, moreover, shew the estimate an accom-
plished man of modern affairs formed of Babur Padshah’s character
and conduct; some have been quoted in Colebrooke’s Life of
Elphinstone, but there they suffer by detachment from the rest of
his Baburiana letters ; bound together as they now are, and with
brief explanatory interpolations, they would make a welcome item
for ‘‘ Babur Padshah’s Book-pile ’’.


XIV


In May 1921 the contents of these volumes were completed, namely,
the Babur-nama in English and its supplements, the aims of which |
are to make Babur known in English diction answering to his
ipsissima verba, and to be serviceable to readers and students of
his book and of classic Turki.


XV


Of writings based upon or relating to Babur’s the following
have appeared :—

Denkwurdigkeiten des Zahir-uddin Muhammad Babar — A. Kaiser
(Leipzig, 1828). This consists of extracts translated from the
Memoirs. |

An abridgement of the Memoirs— R. M. Caldecott (London, 1844).

History of India— Baber and Humayun — W. Erskine (Longmans,
1854).

Babar — Rulers of India series — Stanley Lane-Poole (Oxford, 1899).

Tuzuk-i-babari or Wagi‘at-i-babari (7.e.. the Persian trs.) — Elliot
and Dowson’s History of India, 1872, vol. iv.


PREFACE li


Babur Padshah Ghazi — H. Beveridge (Calcutta Review, 1899).
Babur’s diamond, was it the Koh-i-nur ? — H. Beveridge, Asiatic
Quarterly Review, April, 1899.
Was ‘Abdu’r-rahim the translator of Babur’s Memoirs ? (t.e. the
Babur-nama) — H. Beveridge, AQR., July and October, 1900.
An Empire-builder of the 16th century, Babur—Laurence F. L.
Williams (Allahabad, 1918).
Notes on the MSS. of the Turki text (Badur-ndma) — A. S. Beveridge,
p. 52 and p. 828, 1909 p. 452 (see Index, s.n. A. S. B. for topics).
[For other articles and notes by H. B. see Index S.N.|


Part III. The “Bukhara Babur-nama”.

This is a singular book and has had a career as singular as its
characteristics, a very comedy of (blameless) errors and mischance.
For it is a compilation of items diverse in origin, diction, and age,
_ ‘planned to be a record of the Acts of Babur and Humayun, dependent

through its Babur portion on the ‘Abdu ’r-rahim Persian translation
for re-translation, or verbatim quotation, or dove-tailing effected on
the tattered fragments of what had once been Kamran’s Codex of
the Babur-nama proper, the whole interspersed bystop-gaps attribut-
‘able to Jahangir. These and other specialities notwithstanding, it
ranked for nearly 200 years as a reproduction of Babur’s authentic
text, as such was sent abroad, as such was reconstructed and
printed in Kasan (1857), translated in Paris (1871), catalogued for
the Petrograd Oriental School (1894), and for the India Office (1903).
Manifest causes for the confusion of identity are, (1) lack of the
guidance in Bukhara and Petrograd of collation with the true text,
(2) want of information, in the Petrograd of 1700-25, about Babur’s
career, coupled with the difficulties of communication with Bukhara,
(3) the misleading feature in the compiled book of its author’s
retention of the autobiographic form of his sources, without ex-
planation as to whether he entered surviving fragments of Kamran’s


* The last blow was given to the phantasmal reputation of the book by the authoritative
Haidarabad Codex which now can be seen in facsimile in many Libraries.


lii PREFACE


Codex, patchings or extracts from ‘Abdu’r-rahim’s Persian transla~- _
tion, or quotations of Jahangir’s stop-gaps. Of these three causes
for error the first is dominant, entailing as it does the drawbacks
besetting work on an inadequate basis.

It is necessary to enumerate the items of the Compilation here
as they are arranged in Kehr’s autograph Codex, because that codex
(still in London) may not always be accessible, and because the
imprint does not obey its model, but aims at closer agreement of the
Bukhara Compilation with Ilminski’s gratefully acknowledged
guide — The Memoirs of Baber. Distinction in commenting on the
Bukhara and the Kasan versions is necessary; their discrepancy
is a scene in the comedy of errors.


* But for present difficulties of intercourse with Petrograd, I would have re-examined
with Kehr’s the collateral Codex of 1742 (copied in 1839 and now owned by the Petrograd
University). It might be useful, as Kehr’s volume has lost pages and may be disarranged
here and there.


The list of Kehr’s items is as follows :—

1 (not in the Imprint). A letter from Babur to Kamran the date of which is
fixed as 1527 by its committing Ibrahim Zzd2’s son to Kamran’s charge (p. 544). It
is heard of again in the Bukhara Compilation, is lost from Kehr’s Codex, and preserved
from his archetype by Klaproth who translated it. ' Being thus found in Bukhara in the
first decade of the eighteenth century (our earliest knowledge of the Compilation is
1709), the inference is allowed that it went to Bukhara as loot from the defeated
Kamran’s camp and that an endorsement its companion Babur-nama (proper) bears was
made by the Auzbeg of two victors over Kamran, both of 1550, both in Tramontana.?

2 (not in Imp.). Timur-pulad’s memo. about the purchase of his Codex in cér.
1521 ( €0 cap. post).

3 (/mp. 1). Compiler’s Preface of Praise (JRAS. 1900, p. 474).

4 (/mp. 2). Babur’s Acts in Farghana, in diction such as to seem a re-translation
of the Persian translation of 1589. How much of Kamran’s MS. was serviceable is
not easy to decide, because the Turki fettering of ’Abdu’r-rahim’s Persian lends itself
admirably to re-translation.?

5 (Jmp. 3). The ‘* Rescue-passage” (App. D) attributable to Jahangir.

6 (mp. #). Babur’s Acts in Kabul, seeming (like No. 4) a re-translation or
patching of tattered pages. There are also passages taken verbatim from the Persian.

Imp. omits), A short length of Babur’s Hindustan Section, carefully shewn
damaged by dots and dashes.

8 (/mp. 5). Within 7, the spurious passage of App. L and also scattered passages
about a feast, perhaps part of 7.

9 (Imp. separates off at end of vol.). Translated passage from the Afbar-nama,
attributable to Jahangir, briefly telling of Kanwa (1527), Babur’s latter years (both
changed to first person), death and court.3

} That Babur-nama of the ‘ Kamran-docket”’ is the mutilated and tattered basis, allowed by
circumstance, of the compiled history of Babur, filled out and mended by the help of the Persian
translation of 1589. Cf. Kehr’s Latin Trs. fly-leaf entry; Klaproth s.n.; A.N. trs. H.B., p. 260;
esr 1908, 1909, on the ‘‘ Kamran-docket’’ (where are defects needing Klaproth’s second article

; 2 For an analysis of an illustrative passage see JRAS. 1906; for facilities of re-translation see
eo cap. p. xviii, where Erskine is quoted.
JRAS. ve: Sigg . trans., p. 260; Prefaces of Ilminski and de Courteille ; ZDMG. xxxvii, Teufel’s art. 3


PREFACE liii


[Babur’s history has been thus brought to an end, incomplete in the balance needed
of 7. In Kehr’s volume a few pages are left blank except for what shews a Russian
librarian’s opinion of the plan of the book, ‘‘ Here end the writings of Shah Babur.”]

10 (Jmp. omits). Preface to the history of Humayun, beginning at the Creation
and descending by giant strides through notices of Khans and Sultans to ‘* Babur
Mirza who was the father of Humayun Padshah”. Of Babur what further is said
connects with the battle of Ghaj-davan (918-1512 g.v.). It is ill-informed, laying
blame on him as if he and not Najm Sani had commanded—speaks of his preference
for the counsel of young men and of the numbers of combatants. It is noticeable for
more than its inadequacy however ; its selection of the Ghaj-davan episode from all
others in Babur’s career supports circumstantially what is dealt with later, the Ghaj-
davani authorship of the Compilation.

11 (Jmp. omits). Under a heading ‘‘ Humayun Padshah” is a fragment about
(his? Accession) Feast, whether broken off by loss of his pages or of those of his arche-
type examination of the P. Univ. Codex may show.

12 (Jmp. 6). An excellent copy of Babur’s Hindustan Section, perhaps obtained
from the Ahrari house. [This Ilminski places (I think) where Kehr has No. 7.]
From its position and from its bearing a scribe’s date of completion (which Kehr brings
over), viz. TZamt shud 1126 (Finished 1714), the compiler may have taken it for
Humayun’s, perhaps for the account of his reconquest of Hind in 1555.

[The remaining entries in Kehr’s volume are a quatrain which may make jesting
reference to his finished task, a librarian’s Russian entry of the number of pages (831),
and the words Zvablissement Orientale, Fr. v. Adelung, 1825 (the Director of the
School from 1793).*

1 For particulars about Kehr’s Codex see Smirnov’s Catalogue of the School Library and JRAS.


1900, 1906. Like others who have made statements resting on the mistaken identity of the Bukhara
Compilation, many of mine are now given to the winds.


OUTLINE OF THE HISTORY OF THE COMPILATION.


An impelling cause for the production of the Bukhara compilation
is suggested by the date 1709 at which was finished the earliest
example known to me. For in the first decade of the eighteenth
century Peter the Great gave attention to Russian relations with
‘foreign states of Central Asia and negociated with the Khan of
Bukhara for the reception of a Russian mission. Political aims
would be forwarded if envoys were familiar with Turki; books
in that tongue for use in the School of Oriental Languages would
be desired ; thus the Compilation may have been prompted and,
as will be shown later, it appears to have been produced, and not
merely copied, in 1709. The Mission’s despatch was delayed till
1719; it arrived in Bukhara in 1721 ; during its stay a member of
its secretariat bought a Compilation MS. noted as finished in 1714
and on a fly-leaf of it made the following note :—


* See Gregorief’s ‘‘Russian policy regarding Central Asia”, quoted in Schuyler’s


Turkistan, App. IV.
4 The Mission was well received, started to return to Petrograd, was attacked by


Turkmans, went back to Bukhara, and there stayed until it could attempt the devious route
which brought it to the capita] in 1725.


liv : PREFACE


“TI, Timur-pulad son of Mirza Rajab son of Pay-chin, bought this
book Babur-nama after coming to Bukhara wrth |the| Russian Florio


Beg Benevent, envoy of the Padshah .. . whose army ts numerous as
the stars ... May tt be well received! Amen! O Lord of both
Worlds !”


Timur-pulad’s hope for a good reception indicates a definite
recipient, perhaps a commissioned purchase. The vendor may have
been asked for a history of Babur; he sold one, but “ Babur-
nama’”’ is not necessarily a title, and is not suitable for the
Compilation ; by conversational mischance it may have seemed so
to the purchaser and thus have initiated the mistake of confusing
the ‘‘ Bukhara Babur-nama ”’ with the true one.

Thus endorsed, the book in 1725 reached the Foreign Office ;
there in 1737 it was obtained by George Jacob Kehr, a teacher of
Turki, amongst other languages, in the Oriental School, who copied
it with meticulous care, understanding its meaning imperfectly,
in order to produce a Latin version of it. His Latin rendering was
a fiasco, but his reproduction of the Arabic forms of his archetype
was so obedient that on its sole basis Ilminski edited the Kasan
Imprint (1857). A collateral copy of the Timur-pulad Codex was
made in 1742 (as has been said).

In 1824 Klaproth (who in 1810 had made a less valuable extract
perhaps from Kehr’s Codex) copied from the Timur-pulad MS.
its purchaser’s note, the Auzbeg ?(?) endorsement as to the transfer
of the ‘‘ Kamran-docket ’’ and Babur’s letter to Kamran (J/émoires
relatifs & Lf Aste (Paris).

In 1857 Ilminski, working in Kasan, produced his imprint, which
became de Courteille’s source for Les Mémoires de Baber in 1871.
No worker in the above series shews doubt about accepting the
Compilation. as containing Babur’s authentic text. Ilminski was
in the difficult position of not having entire reliance on Kehr’s
transcription, a natural apprehension in face of the quality of the
Latin version, his doubts sum up into his words that a reliable
text could not be made from his source (Kehr’s MS.), but that a
Turki reading-book could — and was. As has been said, he did not


PREFACE ; Iv |


obey the dual plan of the Compilation Kehr’s transcript reveals,
this, perhaps, because of the misnomer Babur-nama under which
Timur-pulad’s Codex had come to Petrograd; this, certainly,
because he thought a better history of Babur could be produced
by following Erskine than by obeying Kehr—a series of errors
following the verbal mischance of 1725. Ilminski’s transformation
of the items of his source had the ill result of misleading Pavet de
Courteille to over-estimate his Turki source at the expense of
Erskine’s Persian one which, as has been said, was Ilminski’s guide —
another scene in the comedy. A mischance hampering the French
work was its falling to be done at a time when, in Paris 1871, there
can have been no opportunity available for learning the contents of
Ilminski’s Russian Preface or for quiet research and the examination
of collateral aids from abroad.


THE AUTHOR OF THE COMPILATION.


The Haidarabad Codex having destroyed acquiescence in the
phantasmal view of the Bukhara book, the question may be con-
sidered, who was its author ?

This question a convergence of details about the Turki MSS.
reputed to contain the Babur-nama, now allows me to answer with
- some semblance of truth. Those details have thrown new light
upon a colophon which I received in 1900 from Mr. C. Salemann
with other particulars concerning the ‘‘ Senkovski Babur-nama,”
this being an extract from the Compilation ; its archetype reached
Petrograd from Bukhara a century after Kehr’s [viz. the Timur-
pulad Codex]; it can be taken as a direct copy of the Mulla’s
Original because it bears his colophon.? In 1900 I accepted it as
merely that of a scribe who had copied Senkovski’s archetype, but
in I92I reviewing the colophon for this Preface, it seems to me to
be that of the original autograph MS. of the Compilation and to
tell its author’s name, his title for his book, and the year (1709) in
which he completed it.


* One might say jestingly that the spirit in the book had rebelled since 1725 against
enforced and changing masquerade as a phantasm of two other books !
? Neither Ilminski nor Smirnov mentions another ‘‘ Babur-nama”’ Codex than Kehr’s.


PREFACE


*(2) $ “ON


“Areiqry “alug “eg


gAouRyszIEy PNY


C6E8F | “xepod Aysieatuy aq “6
*} ‘ON Jo uoqdojoo ‘0061 “eureu
ey3 jo Adod e sivag ‘% ON | ‘umesnyy oneisy ‘jog ,  ‘Pysaoyxues -[ "PZSt | -Inqegrysaoyuas ogy,, “gs
*(euerusphoT
‘uapAer] 103 pardod ‘9 ‘ON “TZ6} “OWO eIpuy "UMOUAU/) ‘OTST “ND | “) X9po-d e430 eIpuy +f
“THA paw
‘Tesueg HA “SON ‘Q06}
_ ‘umouyuy) | jo AjyaI0g =o onuIsy ‘umouyay) | ‘Syuf ‘umouqug | -xepod-g’s*y(ar0s4jq) 9
"6 Jo addjayory "€ ‘ON “umouzU() Masha nl ‘ChLI-SSTF “pouiva] jou oureny *¢
“V6E ‘OL wopuo'y
‘Ill Weg 925 ‘€ "ON | “PO8F TOOYIS “19 “Jeg | ‘Yay GQooef{a3I0a5) “LELY |*Xepod ydeiSoyny s.rqey “p
"STL Oa 07343n01q "TE ‘ON Jo Adoo ‘CLF Ut pardos ‘CSW s.petnd
‘vey yn Ul 4YySnog | yompur ue ‘pazejs jon | aroym “peiSonsg ‘O' 7 ‘UMOUAU() “pELI-OZEE | anu) xepop ‘O “a ‘¢
‘uoydojoo (perray
~suvd}) Sjt pordoo oym *saonpoidar #1 yoy bes} ‘peasonog ‘SW
adéjayore s.1ysaoxueg | Jo uoydojoo ay} ‘y ‘on | ur aSzey9 S.J9UMO UT ‘UMOUYU) ‘UMOUYUL) | SIUEISIYINT reg swzeN *Z
*ojdurexa
*10YINe 34} UMOUY 4saryrva
"uoneiduroo yeursi10 OS|® 3q 0} udye], jo uoydojoo jo ‘euleu-Inqeg svz7p
‘Il yweg aay | ay3 2q 0% paaatag “ereyyng j-e-sqeyyem-[apqy, | 32d “6OLI-TZtF | teysped-1-eureu, bey “yf
*SyIeUD yy rad Ajaqory ‘UOT}VIO] UMOUY jse’T "aqlIaS ‘uotjaTduioo jo a3eq *"SoUIEN


lvi


‘(é 2y0yspog-2-vupu,2b94y) "SSW VWVN-UNdVg-aaLAday VYVHAAgG AO AAV]


PREFACE Ivii


Senkovski brought it over from his archetype; Mr. Salemann
sent it to me in its original Turki form. (JRAS. 1900, p. 474).
Senkovski’s own colophon is as follows :—

“Pai achevé cette copie le # Mat, 1824, & St. Petersburg; elle a éte
faite @apres un exemplatre appartenant a Nazar Bai Turkistani,
négociant Boukhart, qui etait venu cette année a& St. Petersburg.
J. Senkovskt.”

The colophon Senkovski copied from his archetype is to the
following purport :—


“Known and entitled Wagt'nama-t-padshahi (Record of Royal
Acts), [this] autograph and composition (bayad u navisht) of Mulla
‘Abdu'l-wahhab the Teacher, of Ghaj-davan in Bukhara—God pardon
his mistakes and the weakness of his endeavour !—was finished on
Monday, Rajab 5, 1121 (Aug. 31st, 1709).— Thank God!”

It will be observed that the title Waqi‘nama-i-padshahi suits the
plan of dual histories (of Babur and Humayun) better than does the
“Babur-nama’”’ of Timur-pulad’s note, that the colophon does
not claim for the Mulla to have copied the elder book (1494-1530)
but to have written down and composed one under a differing title
suiting its varied contents ; that the Mulla’s deprecation and thanks
tone better with perplexing work, such as his was, than with the
steadfast patience of a good scribe; and that it exonerates the
Mulla from suspicion of having caused his compilation to be accepted
as Babur’s authentic text. Taken with its circumstanding matters,
it may be the dénoument of the play.


CHAPTER IV,
THE LEYDEN AND ERSKINE MEMOIRS OF BABER.


The fame and long literary services of the Memoirs of Baber
compel me to explain why these volumes of mine contain a verbally
new English translation of the Babur-nama instead of a second
edition of the Memoirs. My explanation is the simple one of textual
values, of the advantage a primary source has over its derivative,


Iviii PREFACE


Babur’s original text over its Persian translation which alone was —
accessible to Erskine. :

If the Babur-nama owed its perennial interest to its valuable
multifarious matter, the JZemozrs could suffice to represent it, but
this it does not; what has kept interest in it alive through some
four centuries is the autobiographic presentment of an arresting
personality its whole manner, style and diction produce. It is
characteristic throughout, from first to last making known the
personal quality of its author. Obviously that quality has the better
chance of surviving a transfer of Babur’s words to a foreign tongue
when this can be effected by imitation of them. To effect this was
impracticable to Erskine who did not see any example of the Turki
text during the progress of his translation work and had little
acquaintance with Turki. No blame attaches to his results; they
have been the one introduction of Babur's writings to English readers
for almost a century ; but it would be as sensible to expect a potter
to shape a vessel for a specific purpose without a model as a trans-
lator of autobiography to shape the new verbal container for Babur’s
quality without seeing his own. Erskine was the pioneer amongst
European workers on Baburiana—Leydens’s fragment of unrevised
attempt to translate the Bukhara Compilation being a negligible
matter, notwithstanding friendship’s deference to it; he had ready
to his hand no such valuable collateral help as he bequeathed to his
successors in the Memoirs volume. To have been able to help in
the renewal of his book by preparing a second edition of it, revised
under the authority of the Haidarabad Codex, would have been to
me an act of literary piety to an old book-friend; I experimented
and failed in the attempt; the wording of the Memoirs would not
press back into the Turki mould. Being what it is, sound in its
matter and partly representative of Babur himself, the all-round
safer plan, one doing it the greater honour, was to leave it unshorn
of its redundance and unchanged in its wording, in the place of
worth and dignity it has held so long.

Brought to this point by experiment and failure, the way lay open
to make bee-line over intermediaries back to the fountain-head of


/ PREFACE lix


_ | have enjoyed an advantage no translator has had since ‘Abdu’r-
rahim in 1589.

Concerning matters of style and diction, I may mention that three
distinct impressions of Babur’s personality are set by his own,
Erskine’s and de Courteille’s words and manner. These divergencies,
while partly due to differing textual bases, may result mainly from
the use by the two Europeans of unsifted, current English and
French. Their portrayal might have been truer, there can be no
doubt, if each had restricted himself to such under-lying component
of his mother-tongue as approximates. in linguistic stature to classic
Turki. This probability Erskine could not foresee for, having no
access during his work to a Turki source and no familiarity with
Turki, he missed their lessoning.

Turki, as Babur writes it—terse, word-thrifty, restrained and lucid,
—comes over neatly into Anglo-Saxon English, perhaps through
primal affinities. Studying Babur’s writings in verbal detail taught

me that its structure, idiom and vocabulary dictate a certain
mechanism for a translator’s imitation. Such are the simple sentence,
devoid of relative phrasing, copied in the form found, whether abrupt
and brief or, ranging higher with the topic, gracious and dignified—
the retention of Babur’s use of “we” and “I” and of his frequent
_ impersonal statement—the matching of words by their root-notion—
the strict observance of Babur’s limits of vocabulary, effected by
allotting to one Turki word one English equivalent, thus excluding
synonyms for which Turki has little use because not shrinking from
the repeated word; lastly, as- preserving relations of diction, the
__teplacing of Babur’s Arabic and Persian aliens by Greek and Latin
s ones naturalized in English. Some of these aids towards shaping a
counterpart of Turki may be thought small, but they obey a model
and their aggregate has power to make or mara portrait.

(1) Of the uses of pronouns it may be said that Babur’s “we” is
neither regal nor self-magnifying but is co-operative, as beseems the
chief whose volunteer and nomad following makes or unmakes his
power, and who can lead and command only by remittent consent


Ix PREFACE ae


accorded to him. His “I” is individual. The JMJemozrs varie
much from these uses. ?

(2) The value of reproducing impersonal statements is seen by
the following example, one of many similar :—When Babur and a
body of men, making a long saddle-journey, halted for rest and
refreshment by the road-side ; “ There was drinking,” he writes, but
Erskine, “I drank” ; what is likely being that all or all but a few
shared the local vzz du pays.

(3) The importance of observing Babur’s limits of vocabulary
needs no stress, since any man of few words differs from any man of
many. Measured by the Babur-nama standard, the diction of the
Memoirs is redundant throughout, and frequently over-coloured. Of
this a pertinent example is provided by a statement of which a
minimum of seven occurrences forms my example, namely, that such
or such a man whose life Babur sketches was vicious or a vicious
person (jisg, fastg). Erskine once renders the word by “vicious”
but elsewhere enlarges to “ debauched, excess of sensual enjoyment,
lascivious, libidinous, profligate, voluptuous”. The instances are
scattered and certainly Erskine could not feel their collective effect,
but even scattered, each does its ill-part in distorting the Memoirs
portraiture of the man of the one word.’


POSTCRIPT OF THANKS.


I take with gratitude the long-delayed opportunity of finishing my
book to express the obligation I feel to the Council of the Royal
Asiatic Society for allowing me to record in the Journal my Notes on
the Turki Codices of the Babur-nama begun in 1900 and occasionally
appearing till 1921. In minor convenience of work, to be able to
gather those progressive notes together and review them, has been of


* A Correspondent combatting my objection to publishing a second edition of the
Memoirs, backed his favouring opinion by reference to ‘Umar Khayyam and Fitzgerald.
Obviously no analogy exists; Erskine’s redundance is not the flower of a deft alchemy, but
is the prosaic consequence of a secondary source.


Vahies fe me in notices Be! eters, two of which are the finding and
multiplying of the Haidarabad Codex, and the definite clearance of the
confusion which had made the Bukhara (reputed) Babur-nama be
mistaken for a reproduction of Babur’s true text.


Immeasurable indeed is the obligation laid on me by the happy
community of interests which brought under our roof the translation
of the biographies of Babur, Humayun, and Akbar. What this has
meant to my own work may be surmised by those who know my
husband’s wide reading in many tongues of East and West, his
retentive memory and his generous communism in knowledge. One
signal cause for gratitude to him from those caring for Baburiana, is
that it was he made known the presence of the Haidarabad Codex
in its home library (1899) and thus led to its preservation in facsimile.

It would be.impracticable to enumerate all whose help I keep in
grateful memory and realize as the fruit of the genial camaraderie of


letters.
ANNETTE S. BEVERIDGE.


PITFOLD, SHOTTERMILL, HASLEMERE.
Auene 1921.


ABU


HAN
Rit


Nay
Hight oi
ey AGIA
HAG :
Lia is


UNE


OY 8 cst
iN tar? F yt
AE a ee ' Wik
RL TAP AIA K


SHE MEMOIRS OF BABUR


SECTION I. FARGHANA.


In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate.


In! the month of Ramzan of the year 899 (June 1494) and Haidara-
in the twelfth year of my age,” I became ruler? in the country of id Sp


Farghana.


(a. Description of Farghana.)


Farghana is situated in the fifth climate* and at the limit of
settled habitation. On the east it has Kashghar; on the
west, Samarkand; on the south, the mountains of the
Badakhshan border; on the north, though in former times
there must have been towns such as Almaligh, Almatai and


1 The manuscripts relied on for revising the first section of the Memoirs,
(i.e. 899 to 908 AH.—1494 to 1502 AD.) are the Elphinstone and the Haidarabad
‘Codices. To variants from them occurring in Dr. Kehr’s own transcript no
authority can be allowed because throughout this section, his text appears to
be a compilation and in parts a retranslation from one or other of the two
Persian translations (Wdqi‘at-i-bdburi) of the Babur-ndma. Moreover Dr.
Ulminsky’s imprint of Kehr’s text has the further defect in authority that it
was helped out from the Memoirs, itself not a direct issue from the Turki
original.

Information about the manuscripts of the Babur-ndma can be found in the

The foliation marked in the margin of this book is that of the Haidarabad
Codex and of its facsimile, published in 1905 by the Gibb Memorial ‘Trust.

2 Babur, born on Friday, Feb. 14th. 1483 (Muharram 6, 888 AH.), succeeded
his father, ‘Umar Shaikh who died on June 8th. 1494 (Ramzan 4, 899 AH.).

% pdd-shah, protecting lord, supreme. It would be an anachronism to
translate padshah by King or Emperor, previous to 913 AH. (1507 AD.) because
until that date it was not part of the style of any Timitrid, even ruling members
of the house being styled Mirza. Up to 1507 therefore Babur’s correct style
is Babur Mirza. (Cf. f. 215 and note.)

4 See Ayin-i-akbari, Jarrett, p. 44.


Fol. 2.


2 FARGHANA


Yangi which in books they write Taraz,) at the present time ~
all is desolate, no settled population whatever remaining,
because of the Mughils and the Aizbegs.?

Farghana is a small country, abounding in grain and fruits.
It is girt round by mountains except on the west, 7.c. towards
Khujand and Samarkand, and in winter* an enemy can enter
only on that side. bape

The Saihiin River (darya@) commonly known as the Water
of Khujand, comes into the country from the north-east, flows
westward through it and after passing along the north of
Khujand and the south of Fanakat,° now known as Shahrukh-
iya, turns directly north and goes to Turkistan. It does not


1 The Hai, MS. and a good many of the W.-i-B. MSS. here write Aiitrar.
[Adatrar like Taraz was at some time of its existence known as Yangi (New).]
Taraz seems to have stood near the modern Auliya-ata ; Almaligh,—a Metro-
politan see of the Nestorian Church in the 14th. century,—to have been the
old capital of Kuldja, and Almati (var. Almati) to have been where Vernoe
(Vierny) now is. Almaligh and Almati owed their names to the apple
(alma). Cf. Bretschneider’s Medieval Geography p. 140 and T.R. (Elias and
Ross) s.nn.

2 Mughil u Auzbeg jihatdin. I take this, the first offered opportunity of
mentioning (1) that in transliterating Turki words I follow Turki lettering
because I am not competent to choose amongst systems which e.g. here, repro-
duce Aiizbeg as Uzbeg, Ozbeg and Euzbeg ; and (2) that style being part of an
autobiography, I am compelled, in pressing back the Memoirs on Babur’s
Turki mould, to retract from the wording of the western scholars, Erskine and
de Courteille. Of this compulsion Babur‘s bald phrase Mughul u Atizbeg
jithatdin provides an illustration. Each earlier translator has expressed his
meaning with more finish than he himself; ‘Abdu’r-rahim, by az jthat ‘ubur-t
(Mughil u) Atizbeg, improves on Babur, since the three towns lay in the tide-
way of nomad passage (‘wbiér) east and west ; Erskine writes “‘ in consequence
of the incursions ’’ etc. and de C. “‘ grace aux ravages commis ”’ etc.

3 Schuyler (ii, 54) gives the extreme length of the valley as about 160 miles
and its width, at its widest, as 65 miles.

4 Following a manifestly clerical error in the Second W.-i-B. the Akbar-
nama and the Mems,. are without the seasonal limitation, ‘‘in winter.”
Babir here excludes from winter routes one he knew well, the Kindirlik Pass ;
on the other hand Kostenko says that this is open all the year round. Does
this contradiction indicate climatic change? (Cf. f. 546 and note ; A.N. Bib.
Ind. ed. i, 85 (H. Beveridge i, 221) and, for an account of the passes round
Farghana, Kostenko’s Turkistan Region, Tables of Contents.)

5 Var. Banakat, Banakas, Fiakat, Fanakand. Of this place Dr. Rieu
writes (Pers. cat. i, 79) that it was also called Shash and, in modern times,
Tashkint. Babur does not identify Fanakat with the Tashkint of his day
but he identifies it with Shahrukhiya (cf. Index s.nn.) and distinguishes
between Tashkint-Shash and Fanakat-Shahrukhiya. It may be therefore
that Dr. Rieu’s Tashkint-Fandkat was Old Tashkint,—(Does Fana-kint mean
Old Village ?) some 14 miles nearer to the Saihiin than the Tashkint of Babur’s
day or our own.


i 2 oo eel] eee ae |
.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2Nnp. 1494 3


join any sea! but sinks into the sands, a considerable distance
below [the town of] Turkistan.

Farghana has seven separate townships,? five on the south
and two on the north of the Saihin.

Of those on the south, one is Andijan. It has a central
position and is the capital of the Farghana country. It pro-
duces much grain, fruits in abundance, excellent grapes and
melons. In the melon season, it is not customary to sell them
out at the beds. Better than the Andijan ndshpati,‘ there is
none. After Samarkand and Kesh, the fort® of Andijan is the
largest in Mawara’u’n-nahr (Transoxiana). It has three gates.
Its citadel (ark) is on its south side. Into it water goes by
nine channels ; out of it, it is strange that none comes at even
a single place.© Round the outer edge of the ditch? runs a
gravelled highway; the width of this highway divides the fort
from the suburbs surrounding it.

Andijan has good hunting and fowling; its pheasants grow


1 hech darya qatilmads. A gloss of digay (other) in the Second W.-i-B. has
Jed Mr. Erskine to understand ‘‘ meeting with no other river in its course.”’
I understand Babur to contrast the destination of the Saihiin which he
{erroneously] says sinks into the sands, with the outfall of e.g. the Ami into
the Sea of Aral.

Cf. First W.-i-B. 1.0. MS. 215 f. 2 ; Second W.-i-B. I.O. MS. 217 f. 16 and
Ouseley’s Ibn Haukal p. 232-244 ; also Schuyler and Kostenko /.c.

2 Babur’s geographical unit in Central Asia is the township or, with more
verbal accuracy, the village 7.e. the fortified, inhabited and cultivated oasis.
Of frontiers he says nothing.

3 i.e. they are given away or taken. Babur’s interest in fruits was not a
‘matter of taste or amusement but of food. Melons, for instance, fresh or
stored, form during some months the staple food of Turkistanis. Cf. T.R.
p. 303 and (in Kashmir) 425 ; Timkowski’s Travels of the Russian Mission
i, 419 and Th. Radloff’s Réceuils d’Itinévaives p. 343.

N.B. At this point two folios of the Flphinstone Codex are missing.

4 Either a kind of melon or the pear. For local abundance of pears see
Ayin-i-akbavi, Blochmann p. 6 ; Kostenko and Von Schwarz.

5 girghan, t.e. the walled town within which was the citadel (ark).

6 Tuquz tarnau si kivar, bi ‘ajab tur kim bir yirdin ham chigmads. Second
W.-i-B. 1.0. 217 f. 2, nuh 7% Gb dar qila' dav mi adyid u in ‘ajab ast kah
hama az yak 7a ham na mi bar dyid. (Cf. Mems. p. 2 and Méms.i, 2.) I
understand Babur to mean that all the water entering was consumed in the
town. The supply of Andijan, in the present day, is taken both from the
Aq Bara (i.e. the Aish Water) and, by canal, from the Qara Darya.

7 khandaqning tash yani. Second W.-i-B. 1.0. 217 f. 2 dar kindy sang bast
khandag. Here as in several other places, this Persian translation has rendered
Turki tash, outside, as if it were Turki td@sh, stone. Babur’s adjective stone is
sangin (f. 4501.8). His point here is the unusual circumstance of a high-road
‘running round the outer edge of the ditch. Moreover Andijan is built on and


Fol. 26.


4 FARGHANA


so surprisingly fat that rumour has it four people could not —
finish one they were eating with its stew.” |

Andijanis are all Turks, not a man in town or bazar but
knows Turki. The speech of the people is correct for the pen;
hence the writings of Mir ‘Ali-shir Nawda’7,? though he was bred
and grew up in Hiri (Harat), are one with their dialect. Good
looks are common amongst them. The famous musician,
Khwaja Yisuf, was an Andijani® The climate is malarious;
in autumn people generally get fever.*

Again, there is Atsh (Ush), to the south-east, inclining to
east, of Andijan and distant from it four yighdch by road.> It
has a fine climate, an abundance of running waters® and a
most beautiful spring season. Many traditions have their rise


of loess. Here, obeying his Persian source, Mr. Erskine writes ‘‘ stone-faced
ditch ”’ ; M. de C. obeying his Turki one, “ bord extérieur.’’

1 girghawal ash-kinasi bila. Ash-kina, a diminutive of ash, food, is the rice
and vegetables commonly served with the bird. Kostenko i, 287 gives a
recipe for what seems dsh-kina.

2 b. 1440 ; d. 1500 AD.

3 Yiisuf was in the service of Bai-sunghar Mirza Shdhrukhi (d. 837 au.-
1434 AD.). Cf. Daulat Shah’s Memoirs of the Poets (Browne) pp. 340 and
350-1. (H.B.)

4 guzlar ail bizkak kub bilair. Second W.-i-B. (1.0. 217 f. 2) here and on
f. 4 has read Turki giz, eye, for Turki gu#z or goz, autumn. It has here a gloss
not in the Haidarabad or Kehr’s MSS. (Cf. Mems. p. 4 note.) This gloss
may be one of Humayiin’s numerous notes and may have been preserved in
the Elphinstone Codex, but the fact cannot now be known because of the loss
of the two folios already noted. (See Von Schwarz and Kostenko concerning
the autumn fever of Transoxiana.)

5 The Pers, trss. render yighdch by farsang ; Ujfalvy also takes the yighdch
and the farsang as having a common equivalent of about 6 kilométres. Babur’s
statements in yighdch however, when tested by ascertained distances, do not
work out into the farsang of four miles or the kiloméire of 8 hil. to 5
miles. The yighich appears to be a variable estimate of distance, sometimes
indicating the time occupied on a given journey, at others the distance to
which a man’s voice will carry. (Cf. Ujfalvy Expédition scientifique ii, 179 ;
Von Schwarz p. 124 and deC.,’s Dict. s.n. yighdch. In the present instance, if
Babur’s 4 y. equalled 4 f. the distance from Aish to Andijan should be about
16 m.; but it is 33 m. 1# fur. z.e. 50 versts. (Kostenko ii, 33.) I find Babur’s
yighach to vary from about 4 m. to nearly 8 m.

6 Gqay su, the irrigation channels on which in Turkistan all cultivation
depends. Major-General Gérard writes, (Report of the Pamir Boundary Com-
mission, p. 6,) ‘‘Osh is a charming little town, resembling Islamabad in Kashmir,
—everywhere the same mass of running water, in small canals, bordered with
willow, poplar and mulberry.”’ He saw the Aq Bird, the White wolf, mother
of all these running waters, as a “‘ bright, stony, trout-stream ;’’ Dr. Stein saw
it as a “‘ broad, tossing river.” (Buried Cities of Khotan, p.45.) Cf. Réclus
vi, cap. Farghana ; Kostenko i, 104 ; Von Schwarz s.nn.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 14938 To OCT. 2np. 1494 5


in its excellencies.! To the south-east of the walled town
(giirgha@n) lies a symmetrical mountain, known as the Bara
Koh;? on the top of this, Sl. Mahmiid Khan built a retreat
{hajra) and lower down, on its shoulder, I, in go2AH. (1496AD.)
built another, having a porch. Though his lies the higher,
mine is the better placed, the whole of the town and the suburbs
being at its foot.

The Andijan torrent® goes to Andijan after having traversed
the suburbs of Aish. Orchards (bdghat)* lie along both its
banks; all the Aish gardens (ba@ghlar) overlook it; their
violets are very fine; they have running waters and in spring
are most beautiful with the blossoming of many tulips and roses.

On the skirt of the Bara-koh is a mosque called the Jauza


1 Atishning fazilatida khaili ahddis wavid diy. Second W.-i-B. (1.0. 217
f. 2) Fazilat-i-Atish ahadig warid ast. Mems. (p. 3) ‘‘ The excellencies of Ush
are celebrated even in the sacred traditions.’’ Méms. (i, 2) ‘‘ On cite beaucoup
de traditions qui célébrent V’excellence de ce climat.’’ Aish may be mentioned
in the traditions on account of places of pilgrimage near it ; Babur’s meaning
may be merely that its excellencies are traditional. Cf. Ujfalvy ii, 172.

2 Most travellers into Farghana comment on Babur’s account of it. One
much discussed point is the position of the Bara Koh. The personal observa-
tions of Ujfalvy and Schuyler led them to accept its identification with the
rocky ridge known as the Takht-i-sulaiman. I venture to supplement this
by the suggestion that Babur, by Bara Koh, did not mean the whole of the
rocky ridge, the name of which, Takht-i-sulaiman, an ancient name, must
have been known to him, but one only of its four marked summits. Writing
of the ridge Madame Ujfalvy says, “‘ I] v a quatre sommets dont le plus élevé
est le troisiéme comptant par le nord.’’ Which summit in her sketch (p. 327)
is the third and highest is not certain, but one is so shewn that it may be
the third, may be the highest and, as being a peak, can be described as sym-
metrical i.e. Babur’s mauziin. For this peak an appropriate name would be
Bara Koh.

If the name Bara Koh could be restricted to a single peak of the
Takht-i-sulaiman ridge, a good deal of earlier confusion would be cleared
away, concerning which have written, amongst others, Ritter (v, 432 and
732) ; Réclus (vi. 54) ; Schuyler (ii, 43) and those to whom these three refer.
For an excellent account, graphic with pen and pencil, of Farghana and of
Aiish see Madame Ujfalvy’s De Paris 4 Samarcande cap. Vv.

3 vid. This is a precise word since the Aq Bira (the White Wolf), in a rela-
tively short distance, falls from the Kirdiin Pass, 13,400 ft. to Aish, 3040 ft.
and thence to Andijain, 1380 ft. Cf. Kostenko i, 104; Huntingdon in
Pumpelly’s Explorations in Turkistan p. 179 and the French military map
of 1904.

4 Whether Babur’s words, baghat, baghlay and baghcha had separate sig-
nifications, such as orchard, vineyard and ordinary garden 7.e. garden-plots
of small size, I am not able to say but what appears fairly clear is that when
he writes baghdt u baghiay he means all sorts of gardens, just as when writes
begat u beglar, he means begs of all ranks.


Fol. 3.


Fol. 3é.


6 FARGHANA


Masjid (Twin Mosque).! Between this mosque and the town, 7


a great main canal flows from the direction of the hill. Below
the outer court of the mosque lies a shady and delightful clover-
meadow where every passing traveller takes a rest. It is the
joke of the ragamuffins of Aish to let out water from the
canal? on anyone happening to fall asleep in the meadow. A
very beautiful stone, waved red and white® was found in the
Bara Koh in ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s latter days; of it are made
knife handles, and clasps for belts and many other things.
For climate and for pleasantness, no township in all Farghana
equals Aish.

Again there is Marghinan ; seven yighach* by road to the west
of Andijan,—a fine township full of good things. Its apricots
(ativik) and pomegranates are most excellent. One sort of
pomegranate, they call the Great Seed (Déna-t-kaldn); its
sweetness has a little of the pleasant flavour of the small apricot
(zard-ali) and it may be thought better than the Semnan pome-
granate. Another kind of apricot (airik) they dry after stoning
it and putting back the kernel ;° they then call it subhdnt; it is
very palatable. The hunting and fowling of Marghinan are
good; dq kiyik® are had close by. Its people are Sarts,’ boxers,


1 Madame Ujfalvy has sketched a possible successor. Schuyler found two
mosques at the foot of Takht-i-sulaiman, perhaps Babur’s Jauza Masjid.

2 aul shah-jwidin sit quyarlar.

3 Ribbon Jasper, presumably.

* Kostenko (ii, 30), 71$ versts z.e. 47 m. 44 fur. by the Postal Road.

5 instead of their own kernels, the Second W.-i-B. stuffs the apricots, in 2
fashion well known in India by khaibdni, with almonds (maghz-t badam). The
Turki wording however allows the return to the apricots of their own kernels
and Mr. Rickmers tells me that apricots so stuffed were often seen by him in
the Zar-afshan Valley. My husband has shewn me that Nizami in his Haft
Paikar appears to refer to the other fashion, that of inserting almonds :—


“TI gave thee fruits from the garden of my heart,
Plump and sweet as honey in milk ;
Their substance gave the lusciousness of figs,
In their hearts were the kernels of almonds.”


6 What this name represents is one of a considerable number of points in.
the Bdbur-néma I am unable to decide. Kiyik is a comprehensive name
(cf. Shaw’s Vocabulary) ; dq kiyik might mean white sheep or white deer. It is
rendered in the Second W..-i-B., here, by ahi-i-warig and on f. 4, by ahi-i-safed.
Both these names Mr. Erskine has translated by ‘‘ white deer,’’ but he
mentions that the first is said to mean argdli i.e. ovis poli, and refers to
Voyages de Pallas iv, 325.

7 Concerning this much discussed word, Babur’s testimony is of service.
It seems to me that he uses it merely of those settled in towns (villages) and


ir ih) Pare
¥ ; .
_ oe


di


He


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2Np. 1494 a


noisy and turbulent. Most of the noted bullies (jangralar) of
Samarkand and Bukhara are Marghinanis. The author of the
Hidayat1 was from Rashdan, one of the villages of Marghinan.

Again there is Asfara, in the hill-country and nine yighdch?
by road south-west of Marghinan. It has running waters,
beautiful little gardens (b@ghcha) and many fruit-trees but
almonds for the most part in its orchards. Its people are all
Persian-speaking*® Sarts. In the hills some two miles (bzr shar‘2)
to the south of the town, is a piece of rock, known as the Mirror
Stone.* It is some 10 arm-lengths (gat) long, as high as a man
in parts, up to his waist in others. Everything is reflected by it
as by a mirror. The Asfara district (wildyat) is in four sub-
divisions (balik) in the hill-country, one Asfara, one Warikh,
one Sukh and one Hushyar. When Muhammad Shabani
Khan defeated Sl. Mahmiid Khan and Alacha Khan and took
Tashkint and Shahrukhiya,® I went into the Sikh and Hushyar
hill-country and from there, after about a year spent in great
misery, I set out (‘azzmat) for Kabul.®

Again there is Khujand,’ twenty-five yighdch by road to the


without any reference to tribe or nationality. Iam not sure that he uses it
always as a noun ; he writes of a Sart kishi, a Sart person. His Asfara Sarts
may have been Turki-speaking settled Turks and his Marghinani ones Persian-
speaking Tajiks. Cf. Shaw’s Vocabulary; s.v. Sart; Schuyler i, 104 and
note ; Nalivkine’s Histotve du Khanat de Khokand p. 45 n. Von Schwarz s.n. ;
Kostenko i, 287 ; Petzhold’s Turkistan p. 32.

' Shaikh Burhanu’d-din ‘Ali Qilich ; b. civca 530 AH. (1135 AD.) d. 593 AH.
(1197 AD.). See Hamilton’s Hiddyat.

2 The direct distance, measured on the map, appears to be about 65 m.
but the road makes déioury round mountain spurs. Mr. Erskine appended
here, to the “‘ farsang’’ of his Persian source, a note concerning the reduction
of Tatar and Indian measures to English ones. It is rendered the less
applicable by the variability of the yighdch, the equivalent for a farsang
presumed by the Persian translator.

3 Hai. MS. Farsi-gi#’i. The Elph. MS. and all those examined of the
W..-i-B. omit the word Farsi; some writing kohi (mountaineer) for g#’z, I judge
that Babur at first omitted the word Farsi, since it is entered in the Hai. MS.
above the word gi#’i. It would have been useful to Ritter (vii, 733) and to
Ujfalvy (ii, 176). Cf. Kostenko i, 287 on the variety of languages spoken by
Sarts.

# Of the Mirror Stone neither Fedtschenko nor Ujfalvy could get news.

5 Babur distinguishes here between Tashkint and Shahrukhiya. Cf. f. 2
and note to Fandkat.

6 He left the hill-country above Sikh in Muharram gio Au. (mid-June
1504 AD.).

7 For a good account of Khujand see Kostenko i, 346.


Fol. 4.


8 FARGHANA Ne ean


west of Andijan and twenty-five yighdch east of Samarkand.!
Khujand is one of the ancient towns; of it were Shaikh Maslahat —


and Khwaja Kamal.2 Fruit grows well there; its pomegranates
are renowned for their excellence; people talk of a Khujand
pomegranate as they do of a Samarkand apple; just now how-
ever, Marghinan pomegranates are much met with. The
walled town (girghdn) of Khujand stands on high ground; the
Saihiin River flows past it on the north at the distance, may
be, of an arrow’s flight.4 To the north of both the town and
the river lies a mountain range called Munighul;® people say
there are turquoise and other mines in it and there are many
snakes. The hunting and fowling-grounds of Khujand are
first-rate ; dg kwik,® bighi-mardl,’ pheasant and hare are all
had in great plenty. The climate is very malarious ; in autumn
there is much fever;® people rumour it about that the very
sparrows get fever and say that the cause of the malaria is the
mountain range on the north (7.e. Munighul).

Kand-i-badam (Village of the Almond) is a dependency of
Khujand; though it is not a township (gasba) it is rather a good


1 Khujand to Andijan 187 m. 2 fur. (Kostenko ii, 29-31) and, helped out by
the time-table of the Transcaspian Railway, from Khujand to Samarkand
appears to be some 154 m. 5} fur. .

2 Both men are still honoured in Khujand (Kostenko i, 348). For Khwaja
Kamal’s Life and Diwan, see Riev ii, 632 and Ouseley’s Persian Poets p. 192.
Cf. f. 83b and note.

3 kib artiq day, perhaps brought to Hindiistan where Babur wrote the
statement.

4 Turkish arrow-flight, London, 1791, 482 yards.

5 I have found the following forms of this name,—Hai. MS., M:nighil ;
Pers. trans. and Mems., Myoghil; Ilminsky, M:tugh:1; Méms. Mtoughuil ;
Réclus, Schuyler and Kostenko, Mogul Tau; Nalivkine, ‘‘d’apres Fed-
tschenko,’’ Mont Mogol ; Fr. Map of 1904, M. Muzbek. It is the western end
of the Kurama Range (Kindir Tau), which comes out to the bed of the Sir, is
26% miles long and rises to 4000 ft. (Kostenko, i, 101). Von Schwarz describes
it as being quite bare ; various writers ascribe climatic evil to it.

6 Pers. trans. ahi-i-safed. Cf.f. 3b note.

7 These words translate into Cervus mardl, the Asiatic Wapiti, and to this
Babur may apply them. Dictionaries explain mardl as meaning hind or doe
but numerous books of travel and Natural History show that it has wider
application as a generic name, 7.e.deer. The two words bight and maral
appear to me to be used as e.g. drake and duck are used. Mardi and duck can
both imply the female sex, but also both are generic, perhaps primarily so.
Cf. for further mention of bighii-mardl f.219 and f.276. For uses of the word
maral, see the writings e.g. of Atkinson, Kostenko (iii, 69), Lyddeker, Littledale,
Selous, Ronaldshay, Church (Chinese Turkistan), Biddulph (Forsyth’s Mission).

8 Cf. f. 2. and note.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2NpD. 1494 9


approach to one (gasbacha). Its almonds are excellent, hence
its name; they all go to Hormuz or to Hindistan. It is five or
six yighdch' east of Khujand.

Between Kand-i-badim and Khujand lies the waste known as
Ha Darwesh. In this there is always (hamesha) wind; from it
wind goes always (hameshd) to Marghinan on its east; from it
wind comes continually (d@’im) to Khujand on its west.” It has
violent, whirling winds. People say that some darweshes, en-
countering a whirlwind in this desert,*? lost one another and
kept crying, “Hay Darwesh! Hay Darwesh!” till all had perished,
and that the waste has been called Ha Darwesh ever since.

Of the townships on the north of the Saihiin River one is
Akhsi. In books they write it Akhsikit* and for this reason the


1 Schuyler (ii, 3), 18 m.

2 Hai. MS. Hamesha bi deshita yil bay dir. Marghinangha kim shargi dur,
hamesha mindin yil bariv ; Khujandgha kim gharibi div, da@’im mindin yil
kilur.

This is a puzzling passage. It seems to say that wind always goes east and
west from the steppe as from a generating centre. E.and de C. have given it
alternative directions, east or west, but there is little point in saying this of
wind in a valley hemmed in on the north and the south. Babur limits his
statement to the steppe lying in the contracted mouth of the Farghana valley
(pace Schuyler ii, 51) where special climatic conditions exist such as (a) differ-
ence in temperature on the two sides of the Khujand narrows and currents
resulting from this difference,—(b) the heating of the narrows by sun-heat
reflected from the Mogol-tau,—and (c) the inrush of westerly wind over
Mirza Rabat. Local knowledge only can guide a translator safely but Babur’s
directness of speech compels belief in the significance of his words and this
particularly when what he says is unexpected. He calls the Ha Darwesh a
whirling wind and this it stillis. Thinkableatleast it is that a strong westerly
current (the prevailing wind of Farghana) entering over Mirza Rabat and
becoming, as it does become, the whirlwind of Ha Darwesh on the hemmed-in
steppe,—becoming so perhaps by conflict with the hotter indraught through
the Gates of Khujand—might force that indraught back into the Khujand
Narrows (in the way e.g. that one Nile in flood forces back the other), and at
Khujand create an easterly current. All the manuscripts agree in writing
to (gha) Marghinan and to (ghd) Khujand. It may be observed that, looking
at the map, it appears somewhat strange that Babur should take, for his
wind objective, a place so distant from his (defined) Ha Darwesh and seem-
ingly so screened by its near hills asis Marghinan. But that westerly winds are
prevalent in Marghin4n is seen e.g. in Middendorff’s Einblikke in den Farghana
Thal (p. 112). Cf. Réclus vi, 547; Schuyler ii, 51; Cahun’s Histoive du
Khanat de Khokand p. 28 and Sven Hedin’s Durch Asien’s Wiisten s.n. birdn.

3 badiya ; a word perhaps selected as punning on bad, wind.

4 i.e. Akhsi Village. This word is sometimes spelled Akhsikis but as the
old name of the place was Akhsi-kint, it may be conjectured at least that the
s@'% masallasa of Akhsikis represents the three points due for the n#m and
#@ of Rint. Of those writing Akhsikit may be mentioned the Hai. and Kehr’s


Fol. 44.


Fol. 5.


10 FARGHANA


poet Asiru-d-din is known as Akhstkitt. After Andijan no town-
ship in Farghana is larger than Akhsi. It is nine yighdch* by
road to the west of Andijan. ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza made it his
capital.2 The Saihin River flows below its walled town
(qurghan). This stands above a great ravine (buland jar) and it
has deep ravines (‘wmzq jarlar) in place of amoat. When ‘Umar
Shaikh Mirza made it his capital, he once or twice cut other
ravines from the outer ones. In all Farghana no fort is so
strong as Akhsi. *Its suburbs extend some two miles further
than the walled town.* People seem to have made of Akhsi the
saying (s7sal), “ Where is the village? Where are the trees?”
(Dih kuji? Dirakhtan kuja?) Its melons are excellent ; they
call one kind Mir Timiri; whether in the world there is another
to equal it is not known. The melons of Bukhara are famous;
when I took Samarkand, I had some brought from there and
some from Akhsi; they were cut up at an entertainment and
nothing from Bukhara compared with those from Akhsi. The
fowling and hunting of Akhsi are very good indeed; dg kiyik
abound in the waste on the Akhsi side of the Saihiin; in the
jungle on the Andijan side baghi-mardal,? pheasant and hare are
had, all in very good condition.

Again there is Kasan, rather a small township to the north
of Akhsi. From Kasdan the Akhsi water comes in the same way
as the Andijan water comes from Aish. Kasdan has excellent
air and beautiful little gardens (bdghcha). As these gardens all
lie along the bed of the torrent (sa@’%) people call them the “ fine
front of thecoat.”* Between Kasanis and Aishis there is rivalry
about the beauty and climate of their townships.


MSS. (the Elph. MS. here has a lacuna) the Za/ar-ndma (Bib. Ind. i, 44) and
Ibn Haukal (Ouseley p. 270); and of those writing the word with the sa@’%
musallasa (t.e. as Akhsikis), Yaqiit’s Dict. i, 162, Reinaud’s Abi’l-feda I. ii,
225-6, Ilminsky (p. 5) departing from his source, and I.O. Cat. (Ethé) No. 1029.
It may be observed that Ibn Haukal (Ouseley p. 280) writes Banakas for
Banakat. For Asiru’d-din Akhstkiti, see Rieu ii, 563 ; Daulat Shah (Browne)
p- 121 and Ethé I.O. Cat. No. 1029.

1 Measured on the French military map of 1904, this may be 8o kil. 7.e.
50 miles.

2 Concerning several difficult passages in the rest of Babur’s account of
Akhsi, see Appendix A.

3 The W.-i-B. here translates bighii-maral by gazawn and the same word is
entered, under-line, in the Hai. MS. Cf. f. 3b and note and f. 4 and note.

4 postin pesh b:r:h, This obscure Persian phrase has been taken in the
following ways :—


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2NpD. 1494 II


In the mountains round Farghana are excellent summer-
pastures (yil/aq). There, and nowhere else, the tabalghii! grows,
a tree (yighach) with red bark; they make staves of it; they
make bird-cages of it; they scrape it into arrows;? it is an
excellent wood (yighdach) and is carried as a rarity® to distant
places. Some books write that the mandrake? is found in these
mountains but for this long time past nothing has been heard
of it. A plant called Ayig aatz® and having the qualities of the
mandrake (mthr-giyah), is heard of in Yiti-kint ;° it seems to be


(a) W.-i-B. I.O. 215 and 217 (7.e. both versions) reproduce the phrase.

(b) W.-i-B. MS., quoted by Erskine, p. 6 note, postin-i mish burra.

{c) Leyden’s MS. Trs., a sheepskin mantle of five lambskins.

(d@) Mems., Erskine, p. 6, a mantle of five lambskins.

(e) The Persian annotator of the Elph. MS., underlining pesh, writes, pany,
five.

(f) Klaproth (Archives, p. 109), pustini pisch breh, d.h. gieb den vorderen
Pelz.

(g) Kehr, p. 12 (Ilminsky p. 6) postin bish b:r:h.

(h) De. C., i, 9, fourrure d’agneau de la premiére qualité.

The ‘“‘ lambskins ’’ of L. and E. carry on a notion of comfort started by
their having read saydh, shelter, for Turki sa@’z, torrent-bed ; de C. also lays
stress on fur and warmth, but would not the flowery border of a mountain
stream prompt rather a phrase bespeaking ornament and beauty than one
expressing warmth and textile softness? If the phrase might be read as
postin pesh pera, what adorns the front of a coat, or as postin pesh bar rah, the
fine front of the coat, the phrase would recall the gay embroidered front of
some leathern postins.

1 Var. tabarkhin. The explanation best suiting its uses, enumerated here,
is Redhouse’s second, the Red Willow. My husband thinks it may be the
Hyrcanian Willow.

2 Steingass describes this as “‘an arrow without wing or point” (barb ?)
and tapering at both ends ; it may be the practising arrow, ¢‘alim aiqi, often
headless. z

3 tabarrakiug. Cf. f. 48b foot, for the same use of the word.

4 yabriju’s-sannam. The books referred to by Babur may well be the
Rauzatu’s-safa and the Habibu’s-siyadr, as both mention the plant.

5 The Turki word d@yiq is explained by Redhouse as awake and alert ; and
by Meninski and de Meynard as sobered and as a return to right senses. It may
be used here as a equivalent of mihr in mthr-giyah, the plant of love.

6 Mr. Ney Elias has discussed the position of this group of seven villages.
(Cf.T. R.p.180n.) Arrowsmith’s map places it (as Iti-kint) approximately
where Mr. Th. Radloff describes seeing it 7.e. on the Farghana slope of the
Kuraéma range. (Cf. Réceuil d’Itinéraires p. 188.) Mr. Th. Radloff came
into Yiti-kint after crossing the Kindirlik Pass from Tashkint and he enumer-
ates the seven villages as traversed by him before reaching the Sir. It is
hardly necessary to say that the actual villages he names may not be those of
Babur’s Yiti-kint. Wherever the word is used in the Babur-ndma and the
Tarikh-i-vashidi, it appears from the context allowable to accept Mr. Radloff’s
location but it should be borne in mind that the name Yiti-kint (Seven


Fol. 54.


I2 FARGHANA


the mandrake (mihr-giyah) the people there call by this name _ .
(i.e. dyiq aati). There are turquoise and iron mines in these
mountains.

If people do justly, three or four thousand men! may be main-
tained by the revenues of Farghana.


(b. Historical narrative resumed.)


As ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza was a ruler of high ambition and great
pretension, he was always bent on conquest. On several
occasions he led an army against Samarkand ; sometimes he
was beaten, sometimes retired against his will. More than
once he asked his father-in-law into the country, that is to say,
my grandfather, Yinas Khan, the then Khan of the Mughils
in the camping ground (yért) of his ancestor, Chaghatai Khan,
the second son of Chingiz Khan. Each time the Mirza brought
The Khan into the Farghana country he gave him lands, but,
partly owing to his misconduct, partly to the thwarting of the

Fol. 6. Mughils,‘ things did not go as he wished and Yinas Khan, not
being able to remain, went out again into Mughilistan. When
the Mirza last brought The Khan in, he was in possession of


villages or towns) might be found as an occasional name of Alti-shahr (Six
towns). See T.R. s.n. Alti-shahr.

1 kisht, person, here manifestly fighting men.

2 Elph. MS. f. 2b; First W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 4b ; Second W.-i-B. 1.0. 217
f.4 ; Mems. p. 6 ; Ilminsky p. 7 ; Méms.i. Io.

The rulers whose affairs are chronicled at length in the Farghana Section
of the B.N. are, (I) of Timirid Turks, (always styled Mirza), (a) the three
Miran-shahi brothers, Ahmad, Mahmid and ‘Umar Shaikh with their suc-
cessors, Bai-sunghar, ‘Ali and Babur; (b) the Bai-qara, Husain of Hardt:
(II) of Chingiz Khanids, (always styled Khan,) (a) the two Chaghatai Mughil
brothers, Mahmiid and Ahmad; (b) the Shaibanid Atzbeg, Muhammad
Shaibini (Shah-i-bakht or Shaibaq or Shahi Beg).

In electing to use the name Shaibéni, I follow not only the Iai. Codex but
also Shaibani’s Boswell, Muhammad Salih Mirza. The Elph. MS. frequently
uses Shaibag but its authority down to f. 198 (Hai. MS. f. 2430) is not so great
as it is after that folio, because not till f. 198 is it a direct copy of Babur’s own.
It may be more correct to write ‘‘ the Shaibani Khan ”’ and perhaps even ‘‘ the
Shaibani.”’

3 bi murdd, so translated because retirement was caused once by the over-
ruling of Khwaja ‘Ubaidu’l-lah Ahvari. (T.R. p. 113.)

> * Once the Mirza did not wish Yiinas to winter in Akhsi ; once did not expect

' him to yield to the demand of his Mughils to be led out of the cultivated
country (wildyat). His own misconduct included his attack in Yinas on
account of Akhsi and much falling-out with kinsmen. (T.R. s.nn.)


A i


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2NpD. 1494 13


Tashkint, which in books they write Shash, and sometimes
Chach, whence the term, a Chachi, bow.! He gave it to The
Khan, and from that date (890AH.-1485AD.) down to go8AH.
(1503AD.) it and the Shahrukhiya country were held by the
Chaghatai Khans.

At this date (7.c., 8q9AH.-1494AD.) the Mughil Khanship
was in Sl. Mahmiid Khan, Yinas Khan’s younger son and a
half-brother of my mother. As he and ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s
elder brother, the then ruler of Samarkand, Sl. Ahmad Mirza
were offended by the Mirza’s behaviour, they came to an agree-
ment together ; Sl. Ahmad Mirza had already given a daughter
to Sl. Mahmid Khan ;? both now led their armies against
‘Umar Shaikh Mirza, the first advancing along the south of
the Khujand Water, the second along its north.

Meantime a strange event occurred. It has been mentioned
that the fort of Akhsi is situated above a deep ravine;? along
this ravine stand the palace buildings, and from it, on Monday,
Ramzan 4, (June 8th.) ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza flew, with his
pigeons and their house, and became a falcon.

He was 39 (lunar) years old, having been born in Samarkand,
in 860AH. (1456AD.) He was Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza’s fourth
son,> being younger than Sl. Ahmad M. and Sl. Muhammad


Fol. 64.


1 7.e. one made of non-warping wood (Steingass), perhaps that of the White
Poplar. The Shah-ndma (Turner, Macon ed. i, 71) writes of a Chachi bow and
arrows of khadang, i.e. white poplar. (H.B.)

2 i.e. Rabi‘a-sultan, married circa 893 AH.-1488 aD. For particulars
about her and all women mentioned in the B.N. and the T.R. see Gulbadan
Begim’s Humayitin-nadma, Or. Trs. Series.

3 jar, either that of the Kasin Water or of a deeply-excavated canal.
The palace buildings are mentioned again onf.110b. Cf. Appendix A.

# z.e. soared from earth, died. For some details of the accident see A.N.
(H. Beveridge, i, 220.)

5 H.S. ii, 192, Firishta, lith. ed. p. 191 and D’Herbélot, sixth.

It would have accorded with Babur’s custom if here he had mentioned the
parentage of his father’s mother. Three times (fs. 17b, 70b, 96b) he writes
of “ Shah Sultan Begim ”’ in a way allowing her to be taken as ‘Umar Shaikh’s
own mother. Nowhere, however, does he mention her parentage. One
even cognate statement only have we discovered, viz. Khwand-amir’s (HS. ii,
192) that ‘Umar Shaikh was the own younger brother (barddar khurdtar khiid)
of Ahmad and Mahmid. If his words mean that the three were full-brothers,
‘Umar Shaikh’s own mother was Abii-sa‘id’s Tarkhan wife. Babur’s omission j
(f. 216) to mention his father with A. and M. as a nephew of Darwesh Muh. or
Tarkhan would be negative testimony against taking Khwand-amir’s statement
to mean “ full-brother,’’ if clerical slips were not easy and if Khwand-amir’s


14 FARGHANA


M. and Sl. Mahmud Mirza. His father, Sl. Abu-sa‘id Mined i
was the son of Sl. Muhammad Mirza, son of Timur Beg’s third s
son, Miran-shah M. and was younger than ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza,
(the elder) and Jahangir M. but older than Shahrukh Mirza.


c. ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s country.


His father first gave him Kabul and, with Baba-i-Kabuli! for
his guardian, had allowed him to set out, but recalled him from
the Tamarisk Valley? to Samarkand, on account of the Mirzas’
Circumcision Feast. When the Feast was over, he gave him
Andijan with the appropriateness that Timir Beg had given
Farghana (Andijan) to his son, the elder ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza.
This done, he sent him off with Khudai-birdi Tighchi Timir-
tash® for his guardian.


d. His appearance and characteristics.


He was a short and stout, round-bearded and fleshy-faced

Fol. 7. person.* He used to wear his tunic so very tight that to fasten
the strings he had to draw his belly in and, if he let himself

out after tying them, they often tore away. He was not choice

in dress or food. He wound his turban in a fold (dastar-pech) ;

all turbans were in four folds (char-pech) in those days; people


means of information were less good. He however both was the son of
Mahmid’s wazir (II.S. ii, 194) and supplemented his book in Babur’s presence.

To a statement made by the writer of the biographies included in Kehr’s
B.N. volume, that ‘U.S.’s family (aumdgh) is not known, no weight can be
attached, spite of the co-incidence that the Mongol form of aimdgh, i.e. aimak
means Mutter-leib. The biographies contain too many known mistakes for
their compiler to outweigh Khwand-amir in authority.

1 Cf. Rauzatu’s-safa vi, 266. (H.B.)

2 Dara-i-gaz, south of Balkh. This historic feast took place at Merv in
870 AH. (1465 AD.). As ‘Umar Shaikh was then under ten, he may have been
one of the Mirzas concerned.

3 Khudai-birdi is a Pers.-Turki hybrid equivalent of Theodore ; tiughchi
implies the right to use or (as hereditary standard-bearer,) to guard the tigh ;
Timitr-tash may mean 7.a. Friend of Timi (a title not excluded here as borne
by inheritance. Cf. f. 12b and note), Sword-friend (i.e. Companion-in-arms),
and Iron-friend (i.e. stanch). Cf. Dict. s.n. Timir-bash, a sobriquet of
Charles XII.

4 Elph. and Hai. MSS, guba yizliq ; this is under-lined in the Elph. MS. by
ya‘ni pur ghosht. Cf. f. 686 for the same phrase. The four earlier trss. viz.
the two W.-i-B., the English and the French, have variants in this passage.


fe’ g St Oe BE Ree
uy te ha
hat bic Pan
As Gea
it:

ane)

f

‘


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2Np. 1494 15


wore them without twisting and let the ends hang down.2 In
the heats and except in his Court, he generally wore the
Mughil cap.


é. His qualities and habits.


He was a true believer (Hanafi mazhablik) and pure in the
Faith, not neglecting the Five Prayers and, his life through,
making up his Omissions.2 He read the Qur’an very
frequently and was a disciple of his Highness Khwaja
‘Ubaidu’l-lah (Ahrari) who honoured him by visits and
even called him son. His current readings* were the two
Quintets and the Masnawi;* of histories he read chiefly
the Shah-nama. He had a poetic nature, but no taste for
composing verses. He was so just that when he heard of a
caravan returning from Khitai as overwhelmed by snow in
the mountains of Eastern Andijan,® and that of its thousand
heads of houses (awiliiqg) two only had escaped, he sent his
overseers to take charge of all goods and, though no heirs were ,,) ns
near and though he was in want himself, summoned the heirs
from Khurasén and Samarkand, and in the course of a year
or two had made over to them all their property safe and
sound.

He was very generous; in truth, his character rose altogether
to the height of generosity. He was affable, eloquent and

_Sweet-spoken, daring and bold. Twice out-distancing all his


1 The apposition may be between placing the turban-sash round the
turban-cap in a single flat fold and winding it four times round after twisting
it on itself. Cf. f. 18 and Hughes Dict. of Islam s.n. turban.

2 gazalay, the prayers and fasts omitted when due, through war, travel
sickness, etc.

3 vawan sawddi bar idi ; perhaps, wrote a running hand. De C. i, 13, ses
lectures couvantes étaient .. . 2

# The dates of ‘Umar Shaikh’s limits of perusal allow the Quintets
{Khamsatin) here referred to to be those of Nizami and Amir Khusrau of Dihli.
The Masnawi must be that of Jalalu’d-din Rami. (H.B.)

5 Probably below the Tirak (Poplar) Pass, the caravan route much exposed
to avalanches.

Mr. Erskine notes that this anecdote is erroneously told as of Babur by
Firishta and others. Perhaps it has been confused with the episode on
f. 2076. Firishta makes another mistaken attribution to Babur, that of
Hasan of Yaq‘ib’s couplet. (H.B.) Cf. f. 13b and Dow’s Hindustan ii, 218.


Fol. 8.


16 FARGHANA


braves,! he got to work with his own sword, once at the Gate | 2


of Akhsi, once at the Gate of Shahrukhiya. Amiddlingarcher,


he was strong in the fist,—not a man but fell to his blow.
Through his ambition, peace was exchanged often for war,
friendliness for hostility.

In his early days he was a great drinker, later on used to have
a party once or twice a week. He was good company, on
occasions reciting verses admirably. Towards the last he
rather preferred intoxicating confects® and, under their sway,
used to lose his head. His disposition® was amorous, and he
bore many a lover’s mark.* He played draughts a good deal,
sometimes even threw the dice.


f. His battles and encounters.


He fought three ranged battles, the first with Yiinas Khan,
on the Saihiin, north of Andijan, at the Goat-leap,°® a village
so-called because near it the foot-hills so narrow the flow of
the water that people say goats leap across. There he was
beaten and made prisoner. Yitinas Khan for his part did well
by him and gave him leave to go to his own district (Andijan).
This fight having been at that place, the Battle of the Goat-leap
became a date in those parts.

His second battle was fought on the Uris,’ in Turkistan, with
Atizbegs returning from a raid near Samarkand. He crossed
the river on the ice, gave them a good beating, separated off all
their prisoners and booty and, without coveting a single thing
for himself, gave everything back to its owners.


1 yigitlay, young men, the modern jighit. Babur uses the word for men
on the effective fighting strength. It answers to the “‘ brave’’ of North
American Indian story ; here de C. translates it by braves.

2 ma‘juin. Cf. Von Schwarz p. 286 for a recipe.

3 mutaiyam. ‘This word, not clearly written in all MSS., has been mistaken
for yitim. Cf. JRAS tgto p. 882 for a note upon it by my husband to whom
I owe the emendation.

4 na’l u daghi bisyar idi, that is, he had inflicted on himself many of the
brands made by lovers and enthusiasts. Cf. Chardin’s Voyages ii, 253 and
Lady M. Montague’s Letters p. 200.

5 tika sikvitku, lit. likely to make goats leap, from sikvimak to jump close-
footed (Shaw).

8 sikvikdn dir. Both sikvitku and sikrikadn dur, appear to dictate translation
in general terms and not by reference to a single traditional leap by one goat.

7 i.e. Russian ; it is the Arys tributary of the Sir.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2Np. 1494 17


His third battle he fought with (his brother) Sl. Ahmad


_ Mirza at a place between Shahrukhiya and Aitira-tipa, named


Khwas.t. Here he was beaten.


g. His country.


The Farghana country his father had given him; Tashkint
and Sairam, his elder brother, Sl. Ahmad Mirza gave, and
they were in his possession for a time; Shahrukhiya he took
by aruse and held awhile. Later on, Tashkint and Shahrukhiya
passed out of his hands; there then remained the Farghana
country and Khujand,—some do not include Khujand in
Farghana,—and Aira-tipa, of which the original name was
Aiirishna and which some call Airish. In Aira-tipa, at the
time Sl. Ahmad Mirza went to Tashkint against the Mughils,
and was beaten on the Chir? (893AH.-1488AD.) was Hafiz Beg
Diilda ; he made it over to ‘Umar Shaikh M. and the Mirza
held it from that time forth.


h. His children.


Three of his sons and five of his daughters grew up. I,
Zahiru’d-din Muhammad Babur,®? was his eldest son; my
mother was QOitltiq-nigar Khanim. Jahangir Mirza was his
second son, two years younger than 1; his mother, Fatima-
sultan by name, was of the Mughul t#mdn-begs.* Nasir Mirza
was his third son; his mother was an Andijani, a mistress,°®
named Umid. He was four years younger than I.

‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s eldest daughter was Khan-zada
Begim,® my full sister, five years older than I. The second


1 The Fr. map of 1904 shows Kas, in the elbow of the Sir, which seems to
represent KhwaAs.

2 i.e. the Chir-chik tributary of the Sir.

3 Concerning his name, see T.R. p. 173.

* i.e. he was a head-man of a horde sub-division, nominally numbering
10,000, and paying their dues direct to the supreme Khan. (T.R. p. 301.)

5 ghiinchachi 7.e. one ranking next to the four legal wives, in Turki aadaliq,
whence odalisque. Babur and Gul-badan mention the promotion of several to
Begim’s rank by virtue of their motherhood.

6 One of Babur’s quatrains, quoted in the Abishgd, is almost certainly
addressed to Khan-zada. Cf. A.Q. Review, Jan. 1911, p. 4; H. Beveridge’s
Some verses of Babury. For an account of her marriage see Shaibani-nadma
(Vambéry) cap. xxxix.


2


Fol. 8d.


Fol. 9.


Fol. 9d.


18 FARGHANA


time I took Samarkand (g05AH.-I500AD.), spite of defeat at
Sar-i-pul,! I went back and held it through a five months’ siege, —
but as no sort of help or reinforcement came from any beg or
ruler thereabouts, I left it in despair and got away; in that
throneless time (/fatrat) Khan-zada Begim fell? to Muhammad
Shaibant Khan. She had one child by him, a pleasant boy,®
named Khurram Shah. The Balkh country was given to
him ; he went to God’s mercy a few years after the death of
his father (gI6AH.-I5IOAD.). Khan-zida Begim was in Merv
when Shah Isma‘il (Safawt) defeated the Aiizbegs near that
town (QI6AH.-I510AD.); for my sake he treated her well, giving
her a sufficient escort to Qiindiz where she rejoined me. We
had been apart for some ten years; when Muhammadi
kiikildadsh and I went to see her, neither she nor those about
her knew us, although I spoke. They recognized us after
a time.

Mihr-banii Begim was another daughter, Nasir Mirza’s full-
sister, two years younger than I. Shahr-bani Begim was
another, also Nasir Mirza’s full-sister, eight years younger
than I. Yadgar-sultin Begim was another, her mother
was a mistress, called Agha-sultan. Ruqaiya-sultan Begim
was another; her mother, Makhdiim-sultan Begim, people
used to call the Dark-eyed Begim. The last-named two
were born after the Mirza’s death. Ydadgar-sultan Begim was
brought up by my grandmother, Aisan-daulat Begim; she fell
to ‘Abdu’l-latif Sl., a son of Hamza Sl. when Shaibani Khan
took Andijan and Akhsi (go8AH.-1503AD.). She rejoined me
when (9I7AH.-I51IAD.) in Khutlan I defeated Hamza Sl. and
other sultans and took Hisar. Ruqaiya-sultan Begim fell in that
same throneless time (fatrat) to Jani Beg Sl. (Adzbeg). By him
she had one or two children who did not live. In these days


1 Kehr’s MS. has a passage here not found elsewhere and seeming to be an
adaptation of what is at the top of Hai. MS.f. 88. (Ilminsky, p. 10, ba wujuid
. . . tapib.) |

2 tushti, which here seems to mean that she fell to his share on division ot
captives. Mu . Salih makes it a love-match and places the marriage before
Babur’s departure. Cf. f.95 and notes.

3 aiighlan. Khurram would be about Ave when given Balkh in circa
QII AH. (1505 AD.). Hedied when about 12. Cf. H.S. ii, 364.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2Np. 1494 19


of our leisure (fursatlar)} has come news that she has gone to
‘God’s mercy.


2. His ladies and mistresses.


Oitliq-nigar Khanim was the second daughter of Yinas
Khan and the eldest (half-) sister of Sl. Mahmid Khan and
Sl. Ahmad Khan.


(j. Interpolated account of Babur’s mother’s family.)


Yiinas Khan descended from Chaghatai Khan, the second
‘son of Chingiz Khan (as follows,) Yainas Khan, son of Wais
Khan, son of Sher-‘ali Atighlan, son of Muhammad Kh§an, son
of Khizr Khwaja Khan, son of Tighliq-timir Khan, son of
Aisan-bigha Khan, son of Dawa Khan, son of Baraq Khan,
son of Yistintawa Khan, son of Miatikan, son of Chaghatai
Khan, son of Chingiz Khan.

Since such a chance has come, set thou down? now a
summary of the history of the Khans.

Yinas Khan (d. 892 Au.-1487 AD.) and Aisan-bigha Khan
(d. 866 AH.-1462 AD.) were sons of Wais Khan (d. 832 AH.-
1428 ApD.).2 Yiinas Khan’s mother was either a daughter or a
grand-daughter of Shaikh Niru’d-din Beg, a Turkistani
QOipchaq favoured by Timir Beg. When Wais Khan died, the
Mughil horde split in two, one portion being for Yinas Khan,
the greater for Aisan-bigha Khan. For help in getting the
upper hand in the horde, Airzin (var. Airaézin) one of the
Barin tumdn-begs and Beg Mirik Turkmdn, one of the Chiras
tuman-begs, took Yinas Khan (aet. 13) and with him
three or four thousand Mughil heads of houses (awiltq), to
Ailigh Beg Mirza (Shahrukhi) with the fittingness that Ailigh
Beg M. had taken Yiinas Khan’s elder sister for his son, ‘Abdu’l-


1 This fatvat (interregnum) was between Babur’s loss of Farghana and his
gain of Kabul; the fursatlaéy were his days of ease following success in
Hindistan and allowing his book to be written.

2 qildling, lit. do thou be (setting down), a verbal form recurring on f. 2276
1.2, With the same form (ait)dling, lit. do thou be saying, the compiler of
the Abushga introduces his quotations. Shaw’s paradigm, giling only. Cf.
A.Q.R. Jan. 1911, p. 2.

% Kehr’s MS. (Ilminsky p. 12) and its derivatives here interpolate the
erroneous statement that the sons of Yiinas were Afaq and Baba Khans.


Fel. Io.


Fol. 102.


20 FARGHANA


‘aziz Mirza. Ailiigh Beg Mirza did not do well by them;
some he imprisoned, some scattered over the country one by
one. The Dispersion of Airzin became a date in the Mughil
horde.

Yinas Khan himself was made to go towards ‘Iraq; one
year he spent in Tabriz where Jahan Shah Bardni of the Black
Sheep Turkmans was ruling. From Tabriz he went to Shiraz
where was. Shahrukh Mirza’s second son, Ibrahim Sultan
Mirza.2, He having died five or six months later (Shawwal 4,
838 AH.-May 3rd, 1435 AD.), his son, ‘Abdu’l-lah Mirza sat in
his place. Of this ‘Abdu’l-lah Mirza Yinas Khan became a
retainer and to him used to pay his respects. The Khan was
in those parts for 17 or 18 years.

In the disturbances between Ailigh Beg Mirza and his sons,
Aisan-bigha Khan found a chance to invade Farghana; he
plundered as far as Kand-i-badaém, came on and, having
plundered Andijan, led all its people into captivity. Sl. Abu-
sa‘id Mirza, after seizing the throne of Samarkand, led an
army out to beyond Yangi (Taraz) to Aspara in Mughilistan,
there gave Aisan-bigha a good beating and then, to
spare himself further trouble from him and with the fitting-
ness that he had just taken to wife* Yiinas Khan’s elder
sister, the former wife of ‘Abdu'l-‘aziz Mirza (Shahrukhi), he
invited Yinas Khan from Khurdsan and ‘Iraq, made a feast,
became friends and proclaimed him Khan of the Mughils.
Just when he was speeding him forth, the Sagharichi tamdn-
begs had all come into Mughiilistan, in anger with Aisan-
bigha Khain® Yinas Khan went amongst them and took to
wife Aisan-daulat Begim, the daughter of their chief, ‘Ali-shir


1 i.e, broke up the horde. Cf. T.R. p. 74.

2 See f. 50b for his descent.

3 Descendants of these captives were in Kashghar when Haidar was
writing the T.R. It was completed in 953 AH. (1547 AD.). Cf. T.R. pp. 81
and 149.

4 An omission from his Persian source misled Mr. Erskine here into making
Abii-sa‘id celebrate the Khanim’s marriage, not with himself but with his
defeated foe, ‘Abdu’l-‘aziz who had married her 28 years earlier.

5 Aisin-bigha was at Aq Si in Eastern Turkistan ; Yinas Khan’s head-
quarters were in Yiti-kint. The Sagharichi #mdn was a subdivision of the
Kinchi Mughils.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2Np. 1494 21


Beg. They then seated him and her on one and the same
white felt and raised him to the Khanship.’

By this Aisan-daulat Begim, Yinas Khan had three
daughters. Mihr-nigar Khanim was the eldest; Sl. Abii-sa‘id
Mirza set her aside? for his eldest son, Sl. Anmad Mirza; she
had no child. In a throneless time (905 AH.) she fell to
Shaibani Khan; she left Samarkand® with Shah Begim for
Khurdsan (907 AH.) and both came on to me in Kabul (giI AH.).
At the time Shaibani Khan was besieging Nasir Mirza in
Oandahar and I set out for Lamghan* (913 AH.) they went to
Badakhshan with Khan Mirza (Wais).2 When Mubarak
Shah invited Khan Mirza into Fort Victory,® they were
captured, together with the wives and families of all their
people, by marauders of Aba-bikr Kdshghari and, as captives to
that ill-doing miscreant, bade farewell to this transitory world
(ctyca 913 AH.-1507 AD.).

QOutliq-nigar Khanim, my mother, was Yiinas Khan’s
second daughter. She was with me in most of my guerilla
expeditions and throneless times. She went to God’s mercy in
Muharram g1I AH. (June 1505 AD.) five or six months after the
capture of Kabul.

Khib-nigar Khanim was his third daughter. Her they gave
to Muhammad Husain Kirkaén Dighlat (899 Au.). She had
one son and one daughter by him. ‘Ubaid Khan (Adzbeg) took
the daughter (Habiba).? When I captured Samarkand and

1 Khan kitavdilar. The primitive custom was to lift the Khan-designate
off the ground ; the phrase became metaphorical and would seem to be so
here, since there were two upon the felt. C/., however, Th. Radloff’s Réceuil
a’ Itinévaives p. 326.

2 giuyib idi, probably in childhood.

% She was divorced by Shaibani Khan in 907 Au. in order to allow him to
make lawful marriage with her niece, Khan-zada.
* This was a prudential retreat before Shaibani Khan: Cf. f. 213.

5 The “Khan” of his title bespeaks his Chaghatai-Mughil descent

through his mother, the ‘‘ Mirza,’ his Timirid-Turki, through his father.


The capture of the women was facilitated by the weakening of their travelling
escort through his departure. Cf. T.R. p. 203.

6 Qila‘-i-zafar. Its ruins are still to. be seen on the left bank of the
Kukcha. Cf.T.R.p.220 and Kostenkoi, 140. For Mubarak Shah Muzaffari
see f. 213 and T.R. s.n.

7 Habiba, a child when captured, was reared by Shaibani and by him given
in marriage to his nephew. Cf. T.R. p. 207 for an account of this marriage
as saving Haidar’s life.


Fol. 11.


Fol. 112.


22 FARGHANA


Bukhara (917 AH.-I511 AD.), she stayed behind,? and when her


paternal uncle, Sayyid Muhammad Dighlat came as Sl. Sa‘id ©


Khan’s envoy to me in Samarkand, she joined him and with
him went to Kashghar where (her cousin), Sl. Sa’id Khan took.
her. Khib-nigaér’s son was Haidar Mirza.2 He was in my
service for three or four years after the Atzbegs slew his
father, then (g18 AH.-1512 AD.) asked leave to go to Kashghar to:
the presence of Sl. Sa‘id Khan.
‘* Everything goes back to its source,
Pure gold, or silver or tin.’’ 4

People say he now lives lawfully (¢@’7b) and has found the
right way (fariga).4 He has a hand deft in every thing,
penmanship and painting, and in making arrows and arrow,
barbs and string-grips; moreover he is a born poet and in a
petition written to me, even his style is not bad.°

Shah Begim was another of Yinas Khan’s ladies. Though
he had more, she and Aisan-daulat Begim were the mothers of
his children. She was one of the (six) daughters of Shah
Sultan Muhammad, Shah of Badakhshan.® His line, they say,
runs back to Iskandar Filkiis.? Sl]. Abii-sa‘id Mirza took
another daughter and by her had Aba-bikr Mirza. By this

1 #.e. she did not take to flight with her husband’s defeated force, but,.
relying on the victor, her cousin Babur, remained in the town. Cf. T.R.
p. 268. Her case receives light from Shahr-banii’s (f. 160).


2 Muhammad Haidar Mirza Kiurkdn Dighlat Chaghatat Miaghil, the
author of the Tavikh-i-rashidi ; b. 905 AH. d. 958 AH. (b. 1499 d. 1551 AD.).


¢
vais
ii


Of his clan, the ‘“‘ Oghlat ’ (Dighlat) Muh. Salih says that it was called |


“ Oghlat ” by Mughils but Qingir-at (Brown Horse) by Aiizbegs.
3 Baz gavadad ba asl-i-khiid hama chiz,
Zayr-i-safi u nagra u airzin,

These lines are in Arabic in the introduction to the Anwé@r-t-suhaitli. (H.B.)
The first is quoted by Haidar (T.R. p. 354) and in Field’s Dict. of Oriental
Quotations (p. 160). I understand them to refer here to Haidar’s return to his
ancestral home and nearest kin as being a natural act.

* ta’ib and fariga suggest that Haidar had become an orthodox Musalman
in or about 933 AH. (1527 AD.).

5 Abii’l-fazl adds music to Haidar’s accomplishments and Haidar’s own
Prologue mentions yet others.

6 Cf. T.R. s.n. and Gul-badan’s H.N. s.n. Haram Begim.

7 ge. Alexander of Macedon. For modern mention of Central Asian
claims to Greek descent see t.a. Kostenko, Von Schwarz, Holdich and
A. Durand. Cf. Burnes’ Kabul p. 203 for an illustration of a silver patera


(now in the V. and A. Museum), once owned by ancestors of this Shah Sultan
Muhammad.


8 Cf. f. 6b note


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2Np. 1494 . 23


Shah Begim Yiinas Khan had two sons and two daughters.
Her first-born but younger than all Aisin-daulat Begim’s
daughters, was Sl. Mahmiid Khan, called Khanika Khan! by
many in and about Samarkand. Next younger than he was
Sl. Ahmad Khan, known as Alacha Khan. People say he was
called this because he killed many Qalmaqs on the several
occasions he beat them. In the Mughil and Qalmaq tongues,
one who will kill (aéltirgtch?) is called Glacht; Alachi they
called him therefore and this by repetition, became Alacha.”
As occasion arises, the acts and circumstances of these two
Khans will find mention in this history (tarikh).

Sultan-nigar Khanim was the youngest but one of Yiinas
Khan's children. Her they made go forth (chigdrtb idilér)
to Sl. Mahmiid Mirza; by him she had one child, Sl.
Wais (Khan Mirza), mention of whom will come into this
history. When Sl. Mahmid Mirza died (900 AH.-1495 AD.),
she took her son off to her brothers in Tashkint without a
word to any single person. They, a few years later, gave her
to Adik (Aiing) Sultan,® a Qazaq sultan of the line of Jaji Khan,
Chingiz Khan’s eldest son. When Shaibaini Khan defeated
the Khans (her brothers), and took Tashkint and Shahrukhiya
(908 AH.), she got away with to or 12 of her Mughil servants,
to (her husband), Adik Sultan. She had two daughters by
Adik Sultan; one she gave to a Shaiban sultan, the other to
Rashid Sultan, the son of (her cousin) Sl. Sa‘id Khan. After
Adik Sultaén’s death, (his brother), Qasim Khan , Khan of the
OQazaq horde, took her. Of all the Qazaq khans and sultans,
no one, they say, ever kept the horde in such good order as he;

1 i.e. Khan’s child.

2 The careful pointing of the Hai. MS. clears up earlier confusion by
showing the narrowing of the vowels from Glachi to alacha.

3 The Elph. MS. (f. 7) writes Aiing, Khan’s son, Prester John’s title, where
other MSS. have Adik. Babur’s brevity has confused his account of Sultan-
nigar. Widowed of Mahmid in 900 AH. she married Adik; Adik, later,
joined Shaibani Khan but left him in 908 au. perhaps secretly, to join his own
Qazaq horde. He was followed by his wife, apparently also making a private
departure. As Adik died shortly after 908 An. his daughters were born before
that date and not after it as has been understood. Cf. T.R. and G.B.’s H.N.
s.nn. ; also Mems. p. 14 and Méms. i, 24.

4 Presumably by tribal custom, yinkdlik, marriage with a brother’s widow.


Such marriages seem to have been made frequently for the protection of
women left defenceless.


Fol. 12.


24 FARGHANA


his army was reckoned at 300,000 men. On his death ihe i ™
Khanim went to Sl. Sa‘id Khan’s presence in Kashghar. "
Daulat-sultén Khanim was Yinas Khan’s youngest child.

Fol. 12. In the Tashkint disaster (go8 AH.) she fell to Timur
Sultan, the son of Shaibani Khan. By him she had one
daughter; they got out of Samarkand with me (918 AH.-
1512 AD.), spent three or four years in the Badakhshan country,
then went (923 AH.-1420 AD.) to Sl. Sa‘id Khan’s presence in
Kashghar.*


(k. Account resumed of Babur’s father’s family.)


In ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s haram was also Ailis Agha, a
daughter of Khwaja Husain Beg; her one daughter died in
infancy and they sent her out of the havam a year or eighteen
months later. Fatima-sultam Agha was another; she was of
the Mughil tuimdan-begs and the first taken of his wives. Qara-
giz (Makhdim sultan) Begim was another; the Mirza took her
towards the end of his life; she was much beloved, so to please
him, they made her out descended from (his uncle) Minichihr
Mirza, the elder brother of Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza. He had many
mistresses and concubines; one, Umid Aghacha died before
him. Latterly there were also Tin-sultaén (var. Yun) of the
Mughils and Agha Sultan.


lL. ‘Umar Shatkh Mirza’s Amirs.


There was Khudai-birdi Tighcht Timir-tash, a descendant of

the brother of Aq-bagha Beg, the Governor of Hiri (Herat, for

Timur Beg.) When Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza, after besieging Jaki

Mirza (Shdhrukhi) in Shahrukhiya (868AuH.-1464AD.) gave the
Farghana country to ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza, he put this Khudai-

Fol. 13. birdi Beg at the head of the Mirza’s Gate. Khudai-birdi was


1 Sa‘id’s power to protect made him the refuge of several kinswomen
mentioned in the B.N.and the T.R. This mother and child reached Kashghar
in 932 AH. (1526 AD.). .

Here Babur ends his [interpolated] account of his mother’s family and
resumes that of his father’s,

? Babur uses a variety of phrases to express Lordship in the Gate. Here
he writes aishikni bashlatib ; elsewhere, aishik ikhtiyadri gilmaq and mining
aishikimda sahib ikhtiyari gilmaq. Von Schwarz (p. 159) throws light on the
duties of the Lord of the Gate (Aishik Aghdsi). ‘‘ Das Thir... fihrt in eine


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2NpD. 1494 25


then 25 but youth notwithstanding, his rules and management
were very good indeed. A few years later when Ibrahim
Begchtk was plundering near Aish, he followed him up, fought
him, was beaten and became a martyr. At the time, S]. Ahmad
Mirza was in the summer pastures of Aq Qachghai, in Atra-
tipa, 18 yighdch east of Samarkand, and Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza
was at Baba Khaki, 12 yighdch east of Hiri. People sent the
news post-haste to the Mirza(s),1 having humbly represented it
through ‘Abdu’l-wahhab Shaghadwal. In four days it was carried
those 120 yighdch of road.”

Hafiz Muhammad Beg Dildai was another, Sl. Malik Kash-
ghari’s son and a younger brother of Ahmad Haji Beg. After
the death of Khudai-birdi Beg, they sent him to control ‘Umar
Shaikh Mirza’s Gate, but he did not get on well with the
Andijan begs and therefore, when Sl]. Abi-sa‘id Mirza died,
went to Samarkand and took service with Sl. Ahmad Mirza.
At the time of the disaster on the Chir, he was in Aira-tipa
and made it over to ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza when the Mirza
passed through on his way to Samarkand, himself taking
service with him. The Mirza, for his part, gave him the
Andijan Command. Later on he went to Sl. Mahmud Khan


grosse, vier-eckige, hGhe Halle, deren Boden etwa 2 m. tiber den Weg erhoben
ist. In dieser Halle, welche alle passiren muss, der durch das Thor eingeht,
reitet oder fahrt, ist die Thorwache placiert. Tagsiiber sind die Thore
bestandig dffen, nach Eintritt der Dunkelheit aber werden dieselben geschlos-
' sen und die Schltissel dem zustandigen Polizeichef abgeliefert. ... In den
erwahnten Thorhallen nehmen in den hoch unabhangigen Gebieten an Bazar-
tagen haufig die Richter Platz, um jedem der irgend ein Anliegen hat, so fort
Recht zu sprechen. Die zudiktierten Strafen werden auch gleich in diesem
selben locale vollzogen und eventuell die zum Hangen verurteilten Verbrecher
an den Deckbalken aufgehangt, so dass die Besucher des Bazars unter den
gehenkten durchpassieren miissen.”’

1 bu khabarni ‘Abdu’l-wahhadb shaghadwaldin ‘arza-dasht qilib Mirzagha
chaptirdilay. This passage has been taken to mean that the shaghdwal, 7.e.
chief scribe, was the courier, but I think Babur’s words shew that the shagha-
wal’s act preceded the despatch of the news. Moreover the only accusative
of the participle and of the verb is khabarni. ‘Abdu‘l-wahhab had been ‘Umar
Shaikh’s and was now Ahmad’s officer in Khujand, on the main road for Aira-
tipa whence the courier started on the rapid ride. The news may have gone
verbally to ‘Abdu‘l-wahhab and he have written it on to Ahmad and
Abi-sa‘id.

2 Measured from point to point even, the distance appears to be over
500 miles. Concerning Baba Khaki see H.S. ii. 224; for rapid riding 7.a.
Kostenko iii, cap. Studs.


Fol. 13d.


Fol. 14.


26 FARGHANA


in Tashkint and was there entrusted with the guardianship of
Khan Mirza (Wais) and given Dizak. He had started for Makka
by way of Hind before I took Kabul (groan. Oct. 1504AD.), but
he went to God’s mercy on the road. He was a simple person,
of few words and not clever.

Khwaja Husain Beg was another, a good-natured and simple
person. It is said that, after the fashion of those days, he used
to improvise very well at drinking parties.*

Shaikh Mazid Beg was another, my first guardian, excellent
in rule and method. He must have served (khidmat gqilghan
div) under Babur Mirza (Shahrukht). There was no greater beg
in ‘Umar Shaikh Mirz&’s presence. He was a vicious person
and kept catamites.

‘Ali-mazid Qichin was another ;* he rebelled twice, once at
Akhsi, once at Tashkint. He was disloyal, untrue to his salt,
vicious and good-for-nothing.

Hasan (son of) Yaq‘iib was another, a small-minded, good-
tempered, smart and active man. This verse is his :—


“ Return, O Huma, for without the parrot-down of thy lip,
The crow will assuredly soon carry off my bones.’ 3


He was brave, a good archer, played polo (chaughdn) well and
leapt well at leap-frog.*| He had the control of my Gate after
‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s accident. He had not much sense, was
narrow-minded and somewhat of a strife-stirrer.

Qasim Beg Qichin, of the ancient army-begs of Andijan, was
another. He had the control of my Gate after Hasan Yaq‘ib
Beg. His life through, his authority and consequence waxed
without decline. He was a brave man; once he gave some
Atizbegs a good beating when he overtook them raiding near
Kasan; his sword hewed away in ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s

1 gishiiqlarni yakhshi aitiva than dir. Elph. MS. for qushag, tiiyiik.
Qushiq is allowed, both by its root and by usage, to describe improvisations
of combined dance and song. I understand from Babur’s tense, that his
information was hearsay only.

? i.e. of the military class. Cf. Vullers s.n. and T.R. p. 301.

3 The Hiima is a fabulous bird, overshadowing by whose wings brings
good-fortune. The couplet appears to be addressed to some man, under the
name Hiima, from whom Hasan of Yaq’tb hoped for benefit.


4 khak-bila ; the Sanglakh, (quoting this passage) gives khak-p:l:k as the
correct form of the word.


Pen!
a


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2NpD, 1494 27


presence ; and in the fight at the Broad Ford (Yasi-kijit circa
904AH.-July, I499AD.) he hewed away with the rest. In the
guerilla days he went to Khusrau Shah (907Au.) at the time I
was planning to go from the Macha hill-country? to Sl. Mahmud
Khan, but he came back to me in gIOAH. (1504AD.) and I shewed
him all my old favour and affection. When I attacked the
Turkman Hazara raiders in Dara-i-khwush (g1t1AH.) he made
better advance, spite of his age, than the younger men; I gave
him Bangash as a reward and later on, after returning to Kabul,
made him Humayiin’s guardian. He went to God’s mercy
about the time Zamin-dawar was taken (ciyca g28AH.-1522AD.).
He was a pious, God-fearing Musalman, an abstainer from
doubtful aliments; excellent in judgment and counsel, very
facetious and, though he could neither read nor write (wmmzy),
used to make entertaining jokes.

Baba Beg’s Baba Quli (‘Ali) was another, a descendant of
Shaikh ‘Ali Bahddur.2) They made him my guardian when
Shaikh Mazid Beg died. He went over to Sl. Ahmad Mirza
when the Mirza led his army against Andijan (899AH.), and
gave him Aira-tipa. After Sl. Mahmid Mirza’s death, he left
Samarkand and was on his way to join me (gooAH.) when Sl.
‘Ali Mirza, issuing out of Atiraé-tipa, fought, defeated and slew
him. His management and equipment were excellent and he
took good care of his men. He prayed not; he kept no fasts;
he was like a heathen and he was a tyrant.

‘Ali-dost Taghai® was another, one of the Sagharichi twmdan-
begs and a relation of my mother’s mother, Aisan-daulat Begim.
I favoured him more than he had been favoured in ‘Umar
Shaikh Mirza’s time. People said, “ Work will come from his
hand.” But in the many years he was in my presence, no
work to speak of* came to sight. He must have served Sl.
Abu-sa‘id Mirza. He claimed to have power to bring on rain
with the jade-stone. He was the Falconer (gishchi), worthless

1 Cf. f. 99d.

2 One of Timir’s begs.

3 ¢.e. uncle on the mother’s side, of any degree, here a grandmother’s
brother. The title appears to have been given for life to men related to the


ruling House. Parallel with it are Madame Mére, Royal Uncle, Sultan W4lida.
* kim disa biilghdi, perhaps meaning, ‘‘ Nothing of service to me.”


Fol. 146.


Fol. 15-


Fol. 154.


28 FARGHANA


by nature and habit, astingy, severe, strife-stirring person, false, _
self-pleasing, rough of tongue and cold-of-face.

Wais Laghari,. one of the Samarkand Tighcht people, was
another. Latterly he was much in ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s con-
fidence; in the guerilla times he was with me. Though some-
what factious, he was a man of good judgment and counsel.

Mir Ghiyas Taghai was another, a younger brother of ‘Ali-dost
Taghai. No man amongst the leaders in Sl. Abu-sa‘id Mirza’s
Gate was more to the front than he; he had charge of the
Mirza’s square seal? and was much in his confidence latterly.
He was a friend of Wais Laghart. When Kasdan had been given
to Sl. Mahmiid Khan (899AH.-1494AD.), he was continuously in
The Khan’s service and was in high favour. He was a laugher>
a joker and fearless in vice. ;

‘Ali-darwesh Khurdsdnt was another. He had served in the
Khurasan Cadet Corps, one of two special corps of serviceable
young men formed by Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza when he first began
to arrange the government of KhuraSan and Samarkand, and,
presumably, called by him the Khuraésan Corps and the Samar-
kand Corps. ‘Ali-darwesh was a brave man; he did well in my
presence at the Gate of Bishkaran.* He wrote the naskh ta‘leq
hand clearly. His was the flatterer’s tongue and in his
character avarice was supreme.

Qambar-‘ali Mughil of the Equerries (akhtacht) was another.
People called him The Skinner because his father, on first
coming into the (Farghana) country, worked as a skinner.
Qambar-‘ali had been Yunas Khan’s water-bottle bearer,® later
on he became a beg. Till he was a made man, his conduct
was excellent; once arrived, he was slack. He was full of
talk and of foolish talk,—a great talker is sure to be a foolish
one,—his capacity was limited and his brain muddy.


1 Wais the Thin.

2 Cf. Chardin ed. Langlés v, 461 and ed. 1723 AD. v, 183.

3 ne. of Kasan. Cf. f. 74. Hai MS., erroneously, Samarkand.

* An occasional doubt arises as to whether a fauvi of the text is Arabic
and dispraises or Turki and laudatory. Cf. Mems. p. 17 and Méms. i, 3.

5 Elph. and Hai. MSS. aftabachi, water-bottle bearer on journeys; Kehr
(p. 82) aftdbchi, ewer-bearer ; Ilminsky (p. 19) akhtachi, squire or groom.
Circumstances support aftdbachi. Yinas was town-bred, his ewer-bearer
would hardly be the rough Mughil, Qambar-‘ali, useful as an aftabachi.


we od): SGN lead


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2NnpD. 1494 29


(1. Historical narrative.)


At the time of ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s accident, I was in the
Four Gardens (Char-bégh) of Andijan.1 The news reached
Andijan on Tuesday, Ramzan 5 (June gth); I mounted at once,
with my followers and retainers, intending to go into the fort
but, on our getting near the Mirza’s Gate, Shirim Taghai? took
hold of my bridle and moved off towards the Praying Place.®
It had crossed his mind that if a great ruler like Sl. Ahmad
Mirza came in force, the Andijan begs would make over to him
me and the country,? but that if he took me to Aizkint and the
foothills thereabouts, I, at any rate, should not be made over
and could go to one of my mother’s (half-) brothers, Sl. Mahmitd
Khan or Sl. Ahmad Khan. When Khwaja Maulana-i-qazi®

(Author’s note on Khwaja Mauland-i-qazi.) He was the son of Sl.


Ahmad Qazi, of the line of Burhanu’d-din ‘Ali Qilich” and through
his mother, traced back to Sl. Ailik M4azi.8 By hereditary right


1 Babur was Governor of Andijan and the month being June, would be
living out-of-doors. Cf. H.S. ii. 272 and Schuyler ii, 37.

2 To the word Sherim applies Abi’l-ghazi’s explanation of Nurim and
Hajim, namely, that they are abbreviations of Nir and Haji Muhammad.
It explains Sultanim also when used (f. 72) of Sl. Muhammad Khanika but of
Sultanim as the name is common with Babur, Haidar and Gul-badan, 7.e. as
a woman’s, Busbecq’ s explanation is the better, namely, that it means My
Sultan and is applied to a person of rank and means. This explains other
women’s titles ¢.g. Khanim, my Khan and Akam (Akim), My Lady. A
third group of names formed like the last by enclitic ’m (my), may be called
names of affection, e.g. Mahim, My Moon, Janim, My Life. (Cf. Persian
equivalents.) Cf. Abii’l-ghazi’s Shajarat-i-Turki (Désmaisons p. 272); and
Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq’s Life and Letters (Forster and Daniel i, 38.)

3 Nam4z-gah ; generally an open terrace, with a wall towards the Qibla and
outside the town, whither on festival days the people go out in crowds to
pray. (Erskine.)

4 Béglar (ning) mini u wiladyatni tapshirghulari dur ; a noticeably idiom-
atic sentence. Cf. f. 1601.6 and 1. 7 for a repetition.

5 Mahmiid was in Tashkint, Ahmad in Kashghar or on the Aq-si.

6 The B.N. contains a considerable number of what are virtually foot-
notes. They are sometimes, as here, entered in the middle of a sentence and
confuse the narrative ; they are introduced by kim, a mere sign of parenthetical
matter to follow, and some certainly, known not to be Babur’s own, must have
stood first on the margin of his text. It seems best to enter them as Author’s
notes.

7 ¢.e. the author of the Hidayat. Cf. f. 3b and note ; Blochmann Ayin-i-
akbari s.n. qulij and note ; Bellew’s Afghan Tribes p. 100, Khilich.

8 Ar. dead, gone. The precision of Babur’s words khanwddalar and
yustnlag is illustrated by the existence in the days of Timir, in Marghinan,
(Burhanu’d-din’s township) of a ruler named Ailik Khan, apparently a


Fol. 16.


Fol. 164.


30 FARGHANA
(yiisiinliig) his high family (khdnwddalar) must have come to be the
Refuge (marji‘) and Pontiffs (Shaikhu’l-islam) of the (Farghana)
country. Pi,

and the begs in the fort heard of (the intended departure), they

sent after us Khwaja Muhammad, the tailor,* an old servant

(bayri) of my father and the foster-father of one of his daughters.

He dispelled our fears and, turning back from near the Praying

Place, took me with him into the citadel (avk) where I dis-

mounted. Khwaja Maulana-i-qazi and the begs came to my

presence there and after bringing their counsels to a head,’
busied themselves in making good the towers and ramparts of
the fort.2 A few days later, Hasan, son of Yaq‘ib, and Qasim

Qichin, arrived, together with other begs who had been sent to

reconnoitre in Marghinan and those parts.* They also, after

waiting on me, set themselves with one heart and mind and with
zeal and energy, to hold the fort.

Meantime Sl. Ahmad Mirza took Aira-tipa, Khujand and
Marghinan, came on to Qaba,° 4 yighdch from Andijan and
there made halt. At this crisis, Darwesh Gau, one of the
Andijan notables, was put to death on account of his improper
proposals ; his punishment crushed the rest.

Khwaja Qazi and Aiziin (Long) Hasan,® (brother) of Khwaja
Husain, were then sent to Sl. Ahmad Mirza to say in effect
that, as he himself would place one of his servants in the
country and as I was myself both a servant and (as) a son, he
would attain his end most readily and easily if he entrusted the
service to me. He was a mild, weak man, of few words who,
without his begs, decided no opinion or compact (aun), action


descendant of Satiiq-bighra Khan (b. 384 AH.-994 AD.) so that in Khwaja
Qazi were united two dynasties, (khdnwddaldr), one priestly, perhaps also
regal, the other of bye-gone ruling Khans. Cf. D’Herbélot p. 433; Yarkand
Mission, Bellew p. 121 ; Tazkivat-i Sultan Satuq-bighra Khan Ghazi Padshah
and Tarikh-i-ndsivi (Raverty s.n.)

1 darzi ; U.S. khaiyat.

2 bir yirgad (quyub), lit. to one place.

3 i.e. reconstructed the earthern defences. Cf. Von Schwarz s.n. loess.

4 They had been sent, presumably, before ‘Umar Shaikh’s death, to observe
Sl. Ahmad M.’s advance. Cf. f. 6.

5 The time-table of the Andijan Railway has a station, Kouwa (Qaba).

® Babur, always I think, calls this man Long Hasan ; Khwand-amir styles
him Khwaja Hasan ; he seems to be the brother of one of ‘Umar Shaikh’s
iathers-in-law, KhwAja Husain.


Vege” ae


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 tro OCT. 2np. 1494 31


or move; they paid attention to our proposal, gave it a harsh
answer and moved forward.

But the Almighty God, who, of His perfect power and with-
out mortal aid, has ever brought my affairs to their right issue,
made such things happen here that they became disgusted at
having advanced (i.e. from Qaba), repented indeed that they
had ever set out on this expedition and turned back with
nothing done.

One of those things was this: Qaba has a stagnant, morass-
like Water,’ passable only by the bridge. As they were many,
there was crowding on the bridge and numbers of horses and
camels were pushed off to perish in the water. This disaster
recalling the one they had had three or four years earlier when
they were badly beaten at the passage of the Chir, they gave
way to fear. Another thing was that such a murrain broke
out amongst their horses that, massed together, they began to
die off in bands.2. Another was that they found in our soldiers
and peasants a resolution and single-mindedness such as would
not let them flinch from making offering of their lives* so long
as there was breath and power in their bodies. Need being
therefore, when one yighdch from Andijan, they sent Darwesh
Muhammad Tarkhan* to us; Hasan of Yaq’ib went out from
those in the fort ; the two had an interview near the Praying
Place and a sort of peace was made. This done, Sl. Ahmad
Mirza’s force retired.

Meantime Sl. Mahmiid Khan had come along the north of
the Khujand Water and laid siege to Akhsi.6 In Akhsi was

1 batqagq. This word is underlined in the Elph. MS. by dil-dil and in the
Hai. MS. by jam-jama. It is translated in the W.-i-B. by ab pur hila, water
full of deceit ; it is our Slough of Despond. It may be remarked that neither
Zenker nor Steingass gives to dil-dil or jam-jama the meaning of morass ; the
Akbar-nama does so. (H.B. ii, 112.) ,

2 tawila tawila Gtlar yighilib aula kivishti. I understand the word yighilib
to convey that the massing led to the spread of the murrian.

3 jan tavatmaqlar i.e. as a gift to their over-lord.

* Perhaps, Babur’s maternal great-uncle. It would suit the privileges
bestowed on Tarkhans if their title meant Khan of the Gifts (Turki tar, gift).
In the Baburnaéma, it excludes all others. Most of Ahmad’s begs were
Tarkhans, Arghiins and Chingiz Khanids, some of them ancestors of later
rulers in Tatta and Sind. Concerning the Tarkhans see T.R. p. 55 and note ;


A.N. (H.B. s.n.) Elliot and Dowson’s History of India , 408.
5 Cf. £. 6.


Fol. 17.


32 FARGHANA rm

Jahangir Mirza (aet. 9) and of begs, ‘Ali-darwesh Beg, Mirza 7
Ouli Kakalddsh, Muh. Bagir Beg and Shaikh ‘Abdu’l-lah, Lord __
of the Gate. Wais Ldghart and Mir Ghiyads Taghai had been
there too, but being afraid of the (Akhsi) begs had gone off to
Kasan, Wais Ldaghari’s district, where, he being Nasir Mirza’s
guardian, the Mirz& was.1 They went over to Sl. Mahmid

Fol. 174. Khan when he got near Akhsi; Mir Ghiyds entered his service;
Wais Laghari took Nasir Mirza to Sl. Ahmad Mirza, who
entrusted him to Muh. Mazid Tarkhan’s charge. The Khan,
though he fought several times near Akhsi, could not effect any-
thing because the Akhsi begs and braves made such splendid
offering of their lives. Falling sick, being tired of fighting too,
he returned to his own country (7.c. Tashkint).

For some years, Aba-bikr Kdshghait Diaghlat,? bowing the
head to none, had been supreme in Kashgar and Khutan. He
now, moved like the rest by desire for my country, came to the
neighbourhood of Aizkint, built a fort and began to lay the
land waste. Khwaja Q€azi and several begs were appointed to
drive him out. When they came near, he saw himself no match
for such a force, made the Khwaja his mediator and, by a
hundred wiles and tricks, got himself safely free.

Throughout these great events, ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s former
begs and braves had held resolutely together and made daring
offer of their lives. The Mirza’s mother, Shah Sultan Begim,*
and Jahangir Mirza and the havam household and the begs came
from Akhsi to Andijan; the customary mourning was fulfilled
and food and victuals spread for the poor and destitute.‘

Fol. 18 In the leisure from these important matters, attention was
given to the administration of the country and the ordering of
the army. The Andijan Government and control of my Gate
were settled (mukarrar) for Hasan (son) oi Yaq’ib; Aish was
decided on (garar) for Qasim Qichin; Akhsi and Marghinan
assigned (¢a’in) to Aizun Hasan and ‘Ali-dost Taghai. For the
rest of ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s begs and braves, to each accord-

1 beg Gtakd, lit. beg for father.

2 T.R. s.n. Aba-bikr.

3 Cf. f. 6b and note.


4 faqra u masdkin, i.e. those who have food for one day and those who
have none in hand. (Steingass.)


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2np. 1494 33


ing to his circumstances, were settled and assigned district
(wilayat) or land (ytr) or office (mauja) or charge (jirga) or
stipend (wajh).

When SI. Ahmad Mirza had gone two or three stages on his
return-march, his health changed for the worse and high fever
appeared. On his reaching the Aq Si near Aiira-tipa, he bade
farewell to this transitory world, in the middle of Shawwal of
the date 899 (mid July 1494 AD.) being then 44 (lunar) years old.


m. Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s birth and descent.


He was born in 855 AH. (1451 AD.) the year in which his father
took the throne (i.e. Samarkand). He was Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza’s
eldest son; his mother was a daughter of Airdi-bigha Tarkhan
(A rghin), the elder sister of Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhan, and
the most honoured of the Mirza’s wives.


n. His appearance and habits.


He was a tall, stout, brown-bearded and red-faced man. He
had beard on his chin but none on his cheeks. He had very
pleasing manners. As was the fashion in those days, he wound
his turban in four folds and brought the end forward over his
brows.


0. His characteristics and manners.


He was a True Believer, pure in the Faith; five times daily,
without fail, he recited the Prayers, not omitting them even on
drinking-days. He was a disciple of his Highness Khwaja
‘Ubaidu’l-lah (Afhr@ri), his instructor in religion and the
strengthener of his Faith. He was very ceremonious, particu-
larly when sitting with the Khwaja. People say he never drew
one knee over the other! at any entertainment of the Khwaja.
On one occasion contrary to his custom, he sat with his feet
together. When he had risen, the Khwaja ordered the place
he had sat in to be searched ; there they found, it may have been,
a bone.” He had read nothing whatever and was ignorant


1 For fashions of sitting, see Tawdrikh-i-guzida Nasvat-nama B.M. Or. 3222.
Ahmad would appear to have maintained the deferential attitude by kneeling
and sitting back upon his heels.

2 bir stinkak bay ikan day. I understand that something defiling must have
been there, perhaps a bone.


3


Fol. 188.


Fol. 19.


Fol. 194.


34 FARGHANA


(‘ami), and though town-bred, unmannered and homely. Of —
genius he had no share. He was just and as his Highness the
Khwaja was there, accompanying him step by step,’ most of his
affairs found lawful settlement. He was true and faithful to
his vow and word; nothing was ever seen to the contrary. He
had courage, and though he never happened to get in his own
hand to work, gave sign of it, they say, in some of his en-
counters. He drew a good bow, generally hitting the duck?
both with his arrows (aiq) and his forked-arrows (tir-giz), and,
as a rule, hit the gourd® in riding across the lists (maiddan).
Latterly, when he had grown stout, he used to take quail and
pheasant with the goshawks,* rarely failing. A sportsman he
was, hawking mostly and hawking well; since Ailigh Beg
Mirza, such a sporting padshah had not been seen. He was
extremely decorous; people say he used to hide his feet even in
the privacy of his family and amongst his intimates. Once
settled down to drink, he would drink for 20 or 30 days at a
stretch ; once risen, would not drink again for another 20 or
30 days. He was a good drinker ;° on non-drinking days he ate
without conviviality (basi#). Avarice was dominant in his
character. He was kindly, a man of few words whose will was
in the hands of his begs.


p. His battles.


He fought four battles. The first was with Ni’mat Arghin,
Shaikh Jamal Arghin’s younger brother, at Aqar-tizi, near
Zamin. This he won. The second was with ‘Umar Shaikh
Mirza at Khwas; this also he won. The third affair was when
he encountered Sl. Mahmiid Khan on the Chir, near Tashkint
(895 AH.-1469 AD.). There was no real fighting, but some Mughal
plunderers coming up, by ones and twos, in his rear and laying
hands on his baggage, his great army, spite of its numbers,


2 ilbadsiin, a kind of mallard (A biishqa), here perhaps a popinjay. Cf. H.S.
ii, 9 3 for Ahmad ’s skill as an archer, and Payne-Gallwey’s Cross-bow p. 225.
3 gabaq, an archer’s mark. Abii’l-ghazi (Kasdan ed. p. 181.5) mentions a
nee (tuquq) asamark. Cf. Payne-Gallwey /.c. p. 231.
4 girghicha, astar palumbarius. (Shaw’s Voc. Scully.)
5 Perhaps, not quarrelsome.


meee ere |!
Bue

sg

é


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1493 To OCT. 2Np. 1494 35


broke up without a blow struck, without an effort made, without
a coming face to face, and its main body was drowned in the
Chir. His fourth affair was with Haidar Kikiildadsh (Mughil),
near Yar-yilaq ; here he won.


q. Hts country.


Samarkand and Bukhara his father gave him; Tashkint and
Sairam he took and held for a time but gave them to his
younger brother, ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza, after ‘Abdu’l-qadiis
(Dighlat) slew Shaikh Jamal (Arghain); Khujand and Aira-
tipa were also for a time in his possession.


vy. His children.


His two sons did not live beyond infancy. He had five
daughters, four by Qataq Begim.”

Rabi‘a-sultén Begim, known as the Dark-eyed Begim, was
his eldest. The Mirza himself made her go forth to Sl. Mah-
mid Khan; she had one child, a nice little boy, called Baba
Khan. The Aizbegs killed him and several others of age as
unripe as his when they martyred (his father) The Khan, in
Khujand, (914 AH.-1508 ap.). At that time she fell to Jani
Beg Sultan (A azbeg).

Saliha-sultan (Saliqa) Begim was his second daughter;
people called her the Fair Begim. Sl. Mahmid Mirza, after
_her father’s death, took her for his eldest son, Sl. Mas‘id
Mirza and made the wedding feast (goo AH.). Later on she
fell to the Kashghari with Shah Begim and Mihr-nigar Khanim.

‘Ayisha-sultan Begim was the third. When I was five and
went to Samarkand, they set her aside for me; in the guerilla
times‘ she came to Khujand and I took her (905 AH.); her one
little daughter, born after the second taking of Samarkand,


1 The T.R. (p. 116) attributes the rout to Shaibani’s defection. The H.S.
(ii, 192) has a varied and confused account. An error in the T.R. trs. making
Shaibani plunder the Mughils, is manifestly clerical.

2 de. condiment, ce qu'on ajoute au pain.

*. Of. §..6.

4 gazdqlay ; here, if Babur’s, meaning his conflicts with Tambal, but as
the Begim may have been some time in Khujand, the gdzdglar may be of
Samarkand.


Fol. 20.


Fol. 202.


36 FARGHANA


went in a few days to God’s mercy and she herself left me at i
the instigation of an older sister.

Sultanim Begim was the fourth daughter; Sl. ‘Ali Mirza
took her; then Timir Sultan (A @zbeg) took her and after him,
Mahdi Sultan (A wzbeg).

Ma‘sima-sultén Begim was the youngest of Sl. Ahmad
Mirza’s daughters. Her mother, Habiba-sultan Begim, was of
the Arghins, a daughter of Sl. Husain Arghin’s brother. I
saw her when I went to Khuras&n (g12 AH.-1506 AD.), liked her,
asked for her, had her brought to Kabul and took her (913 AH.-
1507 AD.). She had one daughter and there and then, went to
God’s mercy, through the pains of the birth. Her name was at
once given to her child.


s. His ladies and mistresses.


Mihr-nigar Khanim was his first wife, set aside for him by
his father, Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza. She was Yinas Khan’ s eldest
daughter and my mother’s full-sister.

Tarkhan Begim of the Tarkhans was another of his wives.

QOataq Begim was another, the foster-sister of the Tarkhan
Begim just mentioned. Sl. Ahmad Mirza took her par amours
(‘ashiglay bila) : she was loved with passion and was very
dominant. She drank wine. During the days of her ascendancy
(tiviklik), he went to no other of his harvam; at last he took up a
proper position (auélnirdi) and freed himself from his reproach.t


1 All the (Turki) Babur-nama MSS. and those examined of the W.-i-B. by
writing ailtirdi (killed) where I suggest to read aulnirdi (devenir comme 1b faut)
state that Ahmad killed Qataq. I hesitate to accept this (1) because the only
evidence of the murder is one diacritical point, the removal of which liits
Ahmad’s reproach from him by his return to the accepted rules of a poly-
gamous household ; (2) because no murder of Qataq is chronicled by Khwand-
amir or other writers ; and (3) because it is incredible that a mild, weak man
living in a family atmosphere such as Babur, Haidar and Gul-badan reproduce
for us, should, while possessing facility for divorce, kill the mother of four
out of his five children.

Reprieve must wait however until the word firiklik is considered. This
Erskine and de C. have read, with consistency, to mean Mife-time, but if
atlnivdi be read in place of ailtirdi (killed), tiviklik may be read, especially
in conjunction with Babur’s ‘dshiqliklar, as meaning living power or ascendancy.
Again, if read as from ¢irik, a small arrow and a consuming pain, tiviklik may
represent Cupid’s darts and wounds. Again it might be taken as from tivamak,
to hinder, or forbid.

Under these considerations, it is legitimate to reserve judgment on Ahmad.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2ND. 1494 37


Khan-zada Begim, of the Tirmiz Khans, was another. He
had just taken her when I went, at five years old, to Samar-
kand; her face was still veiled and, as is the Turki custom,
they told me to uncover it.

Latif Begim was another, a daughter’s child of Ahmad Haji
Beg Dildai (Barlas). After the Mirza’s death, Hamza Sl. took
her and she had three sons by him. They with other sultans’
children, fell into my hands when I took Hisar (916 AH.-1510 AD.)
after defeating Hamza Sultan and Timir Sultan. I set all free.

Habiba-sultan Begim was another, a daughter of the brother
of Sl. Husain Arghin.


t. His amirs.


Jani Beg Dilddai (Barlas) was a younger brother of Sl. Malik
Kashghari. Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza gave him the Government of
Samarkand and Sl]. Ahmad Mirz& gave him the control of
his own Gate.2, He must have had singular habits and
manners ;? many strange stories are told about him. One is
this:—While he was Governor in Samarkand, an envoy came
to him from the Aizbegs renowned, as it would seem, for his
strength. An Aizbeg, is said to call a strong mana bull (ba@kuh).
“Are you a bikuh ?” said Jani Beg to the envoy, “If you are,
come, let’s have a friendly wrestle together (kirdshdling).”
Whatever objections the envoy raised, he refused to accept.
They wrestled and Jani Beg gave the fall. He was a brave


oman.


Ahmad Haji (Duldai Barlas) was another, a son of Sl. Malik
Kashghart. Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirzi gave him the Government of
Hiri (Harat) for a time but sent him when his uncle, Jani Beg


1 It is customary amongst Turks for a bride, even amongst her own family,
to remain veiled for some time after marriage ; a child is then told to pluck
off the veil and run away, this tending, it is fancied, to the child’s own success
in marriage. (Erskine.)

2 Babur’s anecdote about Jani Beg well illustrates his caution as a narrator.
He appears to tell it as one who knowing the point of a story, leads up to it.
He does not affirm that Jani Beg’s habits were strange or that the envoy was
an athlete but that both things must have been (ikdn dir) from what he
had heard or to suit the point of the anecdote. Nor does he affirm as of his
own knowledge that Aiizbegs calls a strong man (his zor kishi) a bikuh (bull)
but says it is so understood (dir imish).

Gf 4.170.


Fol. 21.


Fol. 214.


38 FARGHANA


died, to Samarkand with his uncle’s appointments. He was st
pleasant-natured and brave. Wafa’i was his pen-name and he
put together a diw4n in verse not bad. This couplet is his:


‘‘T am drunk, Inspector, to-day keep your hand off me,
“Inspect me on the day you catch me sober.”


Mir ‘Ali-sher Nawa’i when he went from Hiri to Samarkand,
was with Ahmad Haji Beg but he went back to Hiri when
S]. Husain Mirza (Bai-qara) became supreme (873 AH.-1460 AD. )
and he there received exceeding favour,

Ahmad Haji Beg kept and rode excellent tipichdgs,’ mostly
of his own breeding. Brave he was but his power to com-
mand did not match his courage; he was careless and what
was necessary in his affairs, his retainers and followers put
through. He fell into Sl. ‘Ali Mirza’s hands when the Mirza
defeated Bai-sunghar Mirza in Bukhara (gor AH.),and was then
put to a dishonourable death on the charge of the blood of
Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhan.?

Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhan (Arghtin) was another, the
son of Airdi-bigha Tarkhan and full-brother of the mother of
Sl. Ahmad Mirz& and Sl]. Mahmid Mirza.2 Of all begs in
Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s presence, he was the greatest and most
honoured. He was an orthodox Believer, kindly and darwesh-
like, and was aconstant transcriber of the Qu’ran.* He played
chess often and well, thoroughly understood the science of
fowling and flew his birds admirably. He died in the height of
his greatness, with a bad name, during the troubles between
Sl. ‘Ali Mirz& and Bai-sunghar Mirza.°

‘Abdu’l-‘ali Tarkhan was another, a near relation of Darwesh
Muhammad Tarkhan, possessor also of his younger sister,®
that is to say, Baqi Tarkhan’s mother. Though both by the
Mughal rule (t#rd) and by his rank, Darwesh Muhammad


1 The points of a tipichdq are variously stated. If the root notion of the
name be movement (ip), Erskine’s observation, that these horses are taught
special paces, is to the point. To the verb tiprdmdq dictionaries assign the
meaning of movement with agitation of mind, an explanation fully illustrated
in the B.N. The verb describes fittingly the dainty, nervous action of some
trained horses. Other meanings assigned to t#pichdg are roadster, round-
bodied and swift.

2 Cf. f. 370. 3 Cf. {. 6b and note. 4 mashaf kitabat qiliy idi.

5 Cf.{. 36 and HS. ii, 271. 8 sinkilist ham miunda idi.


899 AH.—OCT. 121TH. 1493 To OCT. 2Nnp. 1494 39


Tarkhan was the superior of ‘Abdu’l-‘ali Tarkhan, this Pharoah
regarded him not at all. For some years he had the
Government of Bukharaé. His retainers were reckoned at
3,000 and he kept them well and handsomely. His gifts
(bakhshish), his visits of enquiry (purshish), his public audience
(diwdan), his work-shops (dast-gah), his open-table (shildn) and
his assemblies (majlis) were all like a king’s. He was a strict
disciplinarian, a tyrannical, vicious, self-infatuated person.
Shaibini Khan, though not his retainer, was with him for a
time; most of the lesser (Shaiban) sultans did themselves take
service with him. This same ‘Abdu’l-‘ali Tarkhaén was the
cause of Shaibani Khan’s rise to such a height and of the down-
fall of such ancient dynasties.1

Sayyid Yusuf, the Grey Wolfer? was another ; his grandfather
will have come from the Mughil horde; his father was favoured
by Ailigh Beg Mirza (Shahrukht). His judgment and counsel
were excellent ; he had courage too. He played well on the
guitar (qa#buz). He was with me when I first went to Kabul; I
shewed him great favour and in truth he was worthy of favour.
I left him in Kabul the first year the army rode out for Hin-
diistan; at that time he went to God’s mercy.*®

Darwesh Beg was another; he was of the line of Aiku-timir
Beg,* a favourite of Timir Beg. He was a disciple of his
Highness Khwaja ‘Ubaidu’l-lah (A hrart), had knowledge of the
science of music, played several instruments and was naturally
disposed to poetry. He was drowned in the Chir at the time of
S]. Ahmad Mirza’s discomfiture.

Muhammad Mazid Tarkhan was another, a younger full-
brother of Darwesh Muh. Tarkhan. He was Governor in
Turkistan for some years till Shaibani Khan took it from him.
His judgment and counsel were excellent; he was an
unscrupulous and vicious person. The second and third times

1 khana-wadalar, viz. the Chaghatai, the Timtrid in two Miran-shahi
branches, ‘Ali’s and Babur’s and the Bai-qara in Harat.

2 atighlagchi i.e. player at kik-biva. Concerning the game, see Shaw’s
Vocabulary ; Schuyler i, 268 ; Kostenko iii, 82 ; Von Schwarz s.n. baiga.

3 Zi’l-hijja 910 AH.-May 1505 ap. Cf. f. 154. This statement helps to
define what Babur reckoned his expeditions into Hindistan,.


4 Aiki (Ayagi)-timir Tarkhin Arghin d. circa 793 AH.-1391 AD. He
was a friend of Timir. See Z.N.i, 525 etc.


Fol. 22.


Fol. 22d,


40 FARGHANA


4 «
ao oe


BS

I took Samarkand, he came to my presence and each time Le
shewed him very great favour. He died in the fight at Kal-i-
malik (918 AH.-I512 AD.).

Baqi Tarkhan was another, the son of ‘Abdu’l-‘ali Tarkhan
and Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s aunt. When his father died, they gave
him Bukhara. He grew in greatness under Sl. ‘Ali Mirza, his
retainers numbering 5 or 6,000. He was neither obedient nor
very submissive to Sl. ‘Ali Mirza. He fought Shaibani Khan at
Dabiisi (g05AH.) and was crushed; by the help of this defeat,
Shaibani Khan went and took Bukhara. He was very fond of
hawking ; they say he kept 700 birds. His manners and habits
were not such as may be told ;! he grew up with a Mirza’s
state and splendour. Because his father had shewn favour
to Shaibini Khan, he went to the Khan’s presence, but that
inhuman ingrate made him no sort of return in favour and kind-

Fol. 23. ness. He left the world at Akhsi, in misery and wretchedness.

Sl. Husain Arghiin was another. He was known as Qara-
kuli because he had held the Qara-kul government for a time.
His judgment and counsel were excellent; he was long in my
presence also.

Quli Muhammad Baghdad? was another, a géchin; he must
have been a brave man.

‘Abdu’l-karim Ishrit®? was another; he was an Atighir, SI.
Ahmad Mirza’s Lord of the Gate, a brave and generous man.


(u. Historical narrative resumed.)


After Sl. Ahmad Mirz&’s death, his begs in agreement, sent a
courier by the mountain-road to invite Sl. Mahmad Mirza.*
Malik-i-Muhammad Mirza, the son of Mintchihr Mirza, Sl.


1 Gndaq ikhlaq u atawdri yiiq idi kim disaé bilghai. The Shah-nama
cap. xviii, describes him as a spoiled child and man of pleasure, caring only
for eating, drinking and hunting. The Shaibadni-ndma narrates his various
affairs.

2 i.e., cutlass, a parallel sobriquet to gilich, sword. If it be correct to
translate by “‘cutlass,’’ the nickname may have prompted Babur’s brief
following comment, marddna ikan dir, i.e. Quli Muh. must have been brave
because known as the Cutlass. A common variant in MSS. from Bighda is
Baghdad ; Baghdad was first written in the Hai. MS. but is corrected by the
scribe to bighda.

3 So pointed in the Hai. MS. I surmise it a clan-name.

* i.e. to offer him the succession. The mountain road taken from Aiira-tipa
would be by Ab-burdan, Sara-taq and the Kam Rid defile.


899 AH.—OCT. 12TH. 1498 To OCT. 2Nnp. 1494 41


Abii-sa‘id Mirza’s eldest brother, aspired for his own part to
rule. Having drawn a few adventurers and desperadoes to
himself, they dribbled away! from (Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s) camp
and went to Samarkand. He was not able to effect anything,
but he brought about his own death and that of several innocent
persons of the ruling House.

At once on hearing of his brother’s death, Sl. Mahmid Mirza
went off to Samarkand and there seated himself on the throne,
without difficulty. Some of his doings soon disgusted and
alienated high and low, soldier and peasant. ‘The first of these
was that he sent the above-named Malik-i-Muhammad to the
Kiik-sarai,? although he was his father’s brother’s son and his
own son-in-law.’ With him he sent others, four Mirzas in all.
Two of these he set aside ; Malik-i-Muhammad and one other
he martyred. Some of the four were not even of ruling rank
and had not the smallest aspiration to rule; though Malik-i-
Muhammad Mirza was a little in fault, in the rest there was no
blame whatever. A second thing was that though his methods
and regulations were excellent, and though he was expert in
revenue matters and in the art of administration, his nature
inclined to tyranny and vice. Directly he reached Samarkand,
he began to make new regulations and arrangements and to
rate and tax on a new basis. Moreover the dependants of his
(late) Highness Khwaja ‘Ubaid’l-lah, under whose protection
formerly many poor and destitute persons had lived free from
the burden of dues and imposts, were now themselves treated
with harshness and oppression. On what ground should hard-
ship have touched them? Nevertheless oppressive exactions
were made from them, indeed from the Khwaja’s very children.
Yet another thing was that just as he was vicious and tyrannical,
so were his begs, small and great, and his retainers and followers.
The Hisaris and in particular the followers of Khusrau Shah


1 ivildi, The departure can hardly have been open because Ahmad’s begs
favoured Mahmiid ; Malik-i-Muhammad’s party would be likely to slip away
in small companies.

2 This well-known Green, Grey or Blue palace or halting-place was within
the citadel of Samarkand. Cf.f.37. Itserved asa prison from which return
was not expected.

3 Cf.f.27. He married a full-sister of Bai-sunghar.


Fol. 230.


Fol. 24.


42 FARGHANA


engaged themselves unceasingly with wine and fornication.
Once one of them enticed and took away a certain man’s wife. _
When her husband went to Khusrau Shah and asked for justice,
he received for answer: ‘‘ She has been with you for several
years; let her be a few days with him.” Another thing was
that the young sons of the townsmen and shopkeepers, nay!
even of Turks and soldiers could not go out from their houses
from fear of being taken for catamites. The Samarakandis,
having passed 20 or 25 years under Sl. Ahmad Mirza in ease
and tranquillity, most matters carried through lawfully and with
justice by his Highness the Khwaja, were wounded and
troubled in heart and soul, by this oppression and this vice.
Low and high, the poor, the destitute, all opened the mouth to
curse, all lifted the hand for redress.
“‘ Beware the steaming up of inward wounds,
For an inward wound at the last makes head ;.


Avoid while thou canst, distress to one heart,
For a single sigh will convulse a world.’’4


By reason of his infamous violence and vice Sl. Mahmud
Mirza did not rule in Samarkand more than five or six
months.


1 Gulistan Part I. Story 27. For “‘ steaming up,” see Tennyson’s Lotus-
eaters Choric song, canto 8 (H.B.).


900 AH.—OCT. 2np. 1494 To SEP. 21st. 1495 AD.!


Tuts year Sl. Mahmiid Mirza sent an envoy, named ‘ Abdu’l-
qadiis Beg,’ to bring me a gift from the wedding he had
made with splendid festivity for his eldest son, Mas‘tid Mirza
with (Saliha-sultaén), the Fair Begim, the second daughter of
his elder brother, Sl. Ahmad Mirza. They had sent gold and
silver almonds and pistachios.

There must have been relationship between this envoy and
Hasan-i-yaq‘ab, and on its account he will have been the man
sent to make Hasan-i-yaq‘ib, by fair promises, look towards
Sl. Mahmiid Mirza. Hasan-i-yaq’iib returned him a smooth
answer, made indeed as though won over to his side, and gave
him leave to go. Five or six months later, his manners
changed entirely; he began to behave ill to those about me
and to others, and he carried matters so far that he would
have dismissed me in order to put Jahangir Mirza in my place.
Moreover his conversation with the whole body of begs and
soldiers was not what should be; every-one came to know what
was in his mind. Khwaja-i-Qazi and (Sayyid) Qasim Qéachin
and ‘Ali-dost Taghai met other well-wishers of mine in the
presence of my grandmother, Aisan-daulat Begim and decided
to give quietus to Hasan-i-yaq'iib’s disloyalty by his deposition.

Few amongst women will have been my grandmother’s
equals for judgment and counsel; she was very wise and far-
sighted and most affairs of mine were carried through under
her advice. She and my mother were (living) in the Gate-
house of the outer fort; Hasan-i-yaq‘tib was in the citadel.

1 Elph. MS. f. 165 ; First W.-i-B. I.0. 215 f. 19; Second W.-i-B. I.0, 217
f. 156 ; Memoirs p. 27.

' 2 He was a Dighlat, uncle by marriage of Haidar Mirza and now holding
Khost for Mahmiid. See T.R.s.n. for his claim on Aisan-daulat’s gratitude.


3 tash qtvghan da chiqay da. Here (as e.g. f. 1100 1. 9) the Second W.-i-B.
translates fash as though it meant stone instead of outer. Cf. f. 47 for an


43


Fol. 25.


Fol, 254.


44 FARGHANA


When I went to the citadel, in pursuance of our decision, he had —
ridden out, presumably for hawking, and as soon as he had
our news, went off from where he was towards Samarkand.
The begs and others in sympathy with him,! were arrested;
one was Muhammad Baqir Beg; Sl. Mahmud Dé#lddai, Sl.
Muhammad Dilddi’s father, was another; there were several
more; to some leave was given to go for Samarkand. The
Andijan Government and control of my Gate were settled on
(Sayyid) Qasim Qichin.

A few days after Hasan-i-yaq‘ib reached Kand-i-badam on
the Samarkand road, he went to near the Khiiqan sub-division
(aurchin) with ill-intent on Akhsi. Hearing of it, we sent
several begs and braves to oppose him; they, as they went,
detached a scouting party ahead; he, hearing this, moved
against the detachment, surrounded it in its night-quarters?
and poured flights of arrows (shiba) in on it. In the dark-
ness of the night an arrow (aq), shot by one of his own men,
hit him just (ad#q) in the vent (gachadr) and before he could take
vent (qachar),* he became the captive of his own act.


“Tf you have done ill, keep not an easy mind,
For retribution is Nature’s law.’’*


This year I began to abstain from all doubtful food, my
obedience extended even to the knife, the spoon and the


table-cloth ;° also the after-midnight Prayer (tahajjud) was
less neglected.


adjectival use of ‘ash, stone, with the preposition (¢ash) din. The places
contrasted here are the citadel (avk) and the walled-town (girghan). The
chigar (exit) is the fortified Gate-house of the mud circumvallation. Cf. f. 46
for another example of chigdr.

1 Elph. Hai. Kehr’s MSS., dning bila bar kishi bar beglarni titirildi. This
idiom recurs on f. 7651, 8. A palimpsest entry in the Elph. MS. produces the
statement that when Hasan fled, his begs returned to Andijan.

2 Hai. MS. awit minkizi, underlined by sdagh-i-gai, cows’ thatched house.
[T. minkiz, lit. horn, means also cattle.] Elph. MS., awi miinkish, under-
lined by dar 7@’i khwab alfakhta, sleeping place. [T. minkish, retired.]

3 The first gachay of this pun has been explained as gurez-gah, sharm-gah,
hinder parts, fuite and vertébre inférieur, The H.S. (ii, 273 1. 3 fr. ft.) says the
wound was in a vital (magqattal) part.

* From Nizami’s Khusrau « Shirin, Lahore lith. ed. p. 1371.8. It is quoted
also in the A.N. Bib. Ind. ed. ii, 207 (H.B. ii, 321). (H.B.).

5 See Hughes Dictionary of Islam s.nn, Eating and Food.


900 AH.—OCT. 2np. 1494 To SEP. 2isT. 1495 a.p. 45


(a. Death of Sl. Mahmiid Mirza.)

In the month of the latter Rabi‘ (January 1495 AD.), Sl. Mah-
mud Mirza was confronted by violent illness and in six days,
passed from the world. He was 43 (lunar) years old.


b. His birth and lineage.


He was born in 857 AH. (1453 AD.), was Sl. Abi-sa‘id
Mirza’s third son and the full-brother of Sl. Ahmad Mirza.!


c. His appearance and characteristics.


He was a short, stout, sparse-bearded and somewhat ill-
shaped person. His manners and his qualities were good, his
rules and methods of business excellent ; he was well-versed in
accounts, not a dinar or a dirham? of revenue was spent without
his knowledge. The pay of his servants was never disallowed.
His assemblies, his gifts, his open table, were all good. LEvery-
thing of his was orderly and well-arranged ;? no soldier or
peasant could deviate in the slightest from any plan of his.
Formerly he must have been hard set (qativdr) on hawking but
latterly he very frequently hunted driven game.* He carried
violence and vice to frantic excess, was a constant wine-bibber
and kept many catamites. If anywhere in his territory, there
was a handsome boy, he used, by whatever means, to have him
brought for a catamite; of his begs’ sons and of his sons’ begs’
sons he made catamites; and laid command for this service on
his very foster brothers and on their own brothers. So
common in his day was that vile practice, that no person was
without his catamite; to keep one was thought a merit, not to
keep one, a defect. Through his infamous violence and vice,
his sons died in the day of their strength (tamam juwan).


1 Cf. f. 6b and note. If ‘Umar Shaikh were Mahmid’s full-brother, his
name might well appear here. .

2 i.e. “‘ Nota farthing, not a half-penny.”’

3 Here the Mems. enters a statement, not found in the Turki text, that
Mahmiid’s dress was elegant and fashionable.

£ n:h:l:m. My husband has cleared up a mistake (Mems. p. 28 and Méms.
i, 54) of supposing this to be the name of an animal. It is explained in the
A.N. (i, 255. H.B. i, 496) as a Badakhshi equivalent of tasqawal ; tasqawal
var. tashqawal, is explained by the Farhang-t-azfavi, a Turki-Persian Dict.
seen in the Mulla Firoz Library of Bombay, to mean rah band kunanda, the
stopping of the road. Cf. J.R.A.S. 1900 p. 137.


Fol. 26.


Fol. 26d.


46 FARGHANA


He had a taste for poetry and put a diwdan' together but his
verse is flat and insipid,—not to compose is better than to —
compose verse such as his. He was not firm in the Faith and
held his Highness Khwaja ‘Ubaidu’l-lah (Afvdri) in slight
esteem. He had no heart (y#ruk) and was somewhat scant in
modesty,—several of his impudent buffoons used to do their
filthy and abominable acts in his full Court, in all men’s sight.
He spoke badly, there was no understanding him at first.


d. Hts battles.

He fought two battles, both with Sl. Husain Mirza (Bai-
garda). The first was in Astarabad; here he was defeated.
The second was at Chikman (Sarai),” near Andikhtid; here
also he was defeated. He went twice to Kafiristan, on the
south of Badakhshan, and made Holy War; for this reason
they wrote him Sl. Mahmtd Ghdzi in the headings of his
public papers.
e. His countries.


Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza gave him Astarabad.* After the ‘Iraq
disaster (z.¢e., his father’s death,) he went into Khurdsan. At
that time, Qambar-‘ali Beg, the governor of Hisar, by Sl. Abi-
sa‘id Mirza’s orders, had mobilized the Hindtistan* army and
was following him into ‘Iraq; he joined Sl. Mahmiid Mirza in
Khurasan but the Khurdsanis, hearing of Sl. Husain Mirza’s,
approach, rose suddenly and drove them out of the country.
On this Sl. Mahmid Mirza went to his elder brother, Sl..
Ahmad Mirza in Samarkand. A few months later Sayyid
Badr and Khusrau Shah and some braves under Ahmad


1 7.e. ‘a collection of poems in the alphabetical order of the various end
rhymes.’”’ (Steingass.)

2 At this battle Daulat-shah was present. Cf. Browne’s D.S. for Astarabad
p. 523 and for Andikhtd p. 532. For this and all other references to D.S.
and H.S. I am indebted to my husband.

3 The following dates will help out Babur’s brief narrative. Mahmid
@t. 7, was given Astarabad in 864 AH. (1459-60 AD.) ; it was lost to Ilusain at
Jauz-wilayat and Mahmiid went into Khurasan in 865 AH. ; he was restored
by his father in 866 au. ; on his father’s death (873 AH.-1469 AD.) he fled to.
Harat, thence to Samarkand and from there was taken to Hisar et. 16. Cf.
D’Herbélot s.n, Abii-sa‘ad ; H.S. i, 209 ; Browne’s D.S. p. 522.

4 Presumably the ‘‘ Hindtistan the Less ”’ of Clavijo (Markham p. 3 and
p. 113), approx. Qambar—<ali’s districts. Clavijo includes Tirmiz under the-
name.


900 AH.—OCT. 2np. 1494 To SEP. 2ist. 1495 a.p. 47


Mushtaq: took him and fled to Qambar-‘ali in Hisar. From
that time forth, Sl. Mahmiid Mirza possessed the countries
lying south of Quhqa (Quhlugha) and the Kohtin Range as far
as the Hindi-kush Mountains, such as Tirmiz, Chaghanian,
Hisar, Khutlan, Qundiiz and Badakhshan. He also held
Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s lands, after his brother’s death.


f. His children,


He had five sons and eleven daughters.

Sl. Mas‘tiid Mirza was his eldest son; his mother was Khan-
zada Begim, a daughter of the Great Mir of Tirmiz. Bai-
sunghar Mirza was another; his mother was Pasha (or Pasha)
Begim. Sl. ‘Ali Mirza was another; his mother was an
Aiuzbeg, a concubine called Zuhra Begi Agha. Sl. Husain
Mirza was another; his mother was Khan-zida Begim, a
grand-daughter of the Great Mir of Tirmiz; he went to God’s
mercy in his father’s life-time, at the age of 13. Sl. Wais
Mirza (Mirza Khan) was another; his mother, Sultan-nigar
Khanim was a daughter of Yanas Khan and was a younger


(half-) sister of my mother. The affairs of these four Mirzas_


will be written of in this history under the years of their
occurrence.

Of Sl. Mahmiid Mirza’s daughters, three were by the same
mother as Bai-sunghar Mirza. .One of these, Bai-sunghar
Mirza’s senior, Sl. Mahmiid Mirza made to go out to Malik-i-
‘muhammad Mirza, the son of his paternal uncle, Mintchihr
Mirza.”


* * * * * %


Five other daughters were by Khan-zada Begim, the grand-
daughter of the Great Mir of Tirmiz. The oldest of these,


1 Perhaps a Sufi term,—longing for the absent friend. For particulars
about this man see H.S. ii, 235 and Browne’s D.S. p. 533.

2 Here in the Hai. MS. is one of several blank spaces, waiting for information
presumably not known to Babur when writing. The space will have been in
the archetype of the Hai. MS. and it makes for the opinion that the Hai. MS.
is a direct copy of Babur’s own. This space is not left in the Elph. MS. but
that MS. is known from its scribe’s note (f. 198) down to f. 198 (Hai. MS.
f. 2430) to have been copied from ‘‘ other writings ”’ and only subsequent to
its f. 198 from Babur’s own. Cf. JRAS 1906 p. 88 and 1907 p. 143.


Fol. 27.


Fol. 272.


Fol. 28,


48 FARGHANA


(Khan-zada Begim)! was given, after her father’s death, to Aba i
bikr (Dighlat) Kashghari. The second was Bega Begim. When
Sl. Husain Mirza besieged Hisar (gor AH.), he took her for
Haidar Mirza, his son by Payanda Begim, Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza's
daughter, and having done so, rose from before the place.”
The third daughter was Aq (Fair) Begim; the fourth?—,was
betrothed to Jahangir Mirza (aet. 5, circa 895 AH.) at the time
his father, ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza sent him to help Sl. Mahmid
Mirza with the Andijan army, against Sl. Husain Mirza, then
attacking Qindiz.‘ In gIo AH. (1504 AD.) when Baqi Chaghan-
7ani® waited on me on the bank of the Amt (Oxus), these
(last-named two) Begims were with their mothers in Tirmiz
and joined me then with Baqi’s family. When we reached
Kahmard, Jahangir Mirza took Begim; one little
daughter was born; she now® is in the Badakhshan country
with her grandmother. The fifth daughter was Zainab-sultan
Begim; under my mother’s insistance, I took her at the time
of the capture of Kabul (gto AH.—Oct. 1504 AD.). She did not
become very congenial; two or three years later, she left the
world, through small-pox. Another daughter was Makhdim-
sultan Begim, Sl. ‘Ali Mirza’s full-sister; she is now in the
Badakhshan country. Two others of his daughters, Rajab-
sultan and Muhibb-sultan, were by mistresses (ghtinchachi).


g. His ladies (khwatinlar) and concubines (sarari).


His chief wife, Khan-zida Begim, was a daughter of the
Great Mir of Tirmiz; he had great affection for her and must
have mourned her bitterly; she was the mother of Sl. Mas‘ad
Mirza. Later on, he took her brother’s daughter, also called
Khan-zada Begim, a grand-daughter of the Great Mir of Tirmiz.


1 The T.R. (p. 330) supplies this name.

2 Cf. f. (350. This was a betrothal only, the marriage being made in 903 AH.
Cf. H.S. ii, 260 and Gul-badan’s H.N. f. 240.

3 Kehr’s MS. supplies Ai (Moon) as her name but it has no authority.
The Elph. MS. has what may be /@ naém, no name, on its margin and over
tuvutunchi (4th.) its usual sign of what is problematical.

* See H.S. ii, 250. Here Pir-i-Muhammad Ailchi-bigha was drowned.
Cf. £.:29.

5 Chaghanian is marked in Erskine’s (Mems.) map as somewhere about the
head of (Fr. map 1904) the Ilyak Water, a tributary of the Kafir-nighan.

6 i.e. when Babur was writing in Hindistan,


900 AH.—OCT. 2np. 1494 To SEP. 21st. 1495 AD. 49


She became the mother of five of his daughters and one of his
sons. Pasha (or Pasha) Begim was another wife, a daughter of
‘Ali-shukr Beg, a Turkman Beg of the Black Sheep Baharlt
Aimaq.t She had been the wife of Jahan-shah (Bardnz) of the
Black Sheep Turkmans. After Atziin (Long) Hasan Beg of
the White Sheep had taken Azar-baijan and ‘Iraq from the
sons of this Jahan-shah Mirza (872 Au.-1467 AD.), ‘Ali-shukr
Beg’s sons went with four or five thousand heads-of-houses
of the Black Sheep Turkmans to serve Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza and
after the Mirza’s defeat (873 AH. by Atiztin Hasan), came down
to these countries and took service with Sl. Mahmitid Mirza.
This happened after Sl. Mahmiid Mirza came to Hisar from
Samarkand, and then it was he took Pasha Begim. She
became the mother of one of his sons and three of his daughters.
Sultan-nigar Khanim was another of his ladies; her descent
has been mentioned already in the account of the (Chaghatai)
Khans. Fol. 286.

He had many concubines and mistresses. His most honoured
concubine (mu‘atabar ghiima) was Zuhra Begi Agha; she was
taken in his father’s life-time and became the mother of one son
and one daughter. He had many mistresses and, as has been
said, two of his daughters were by two of them.


h. His amirs.


Khusrau Shah was of the Turkistani Qipchaqgs. He had

- been in the intimate service of the Tarkhan begs, indeed had
been a catamite. Later on he became a retainer of Mazid Beg
(Tarkhan) Arghiin who favoured him in all things. He was
favoured by Sl. Mahmiid Mirza on account of services done by
him when, after the ‘Iraq disaster, he joined the Mirza on his
way to Khurasan. THe waxed very great in his latter days;
his retainers, under Sl. Mahmiid Mirza, were a clear five or six
thousand. Not only Badakhshan but the whole country from
the Ami to the Hindi-kush Mountains depended on him and
he devoured its whole revenue (darobast yir idi). His open table
-was good, so too his open hand; though he was a rough getter,”


1 For his family see f. 55d note to Yar-‘ali Balai.
2 ba wujud turkluik muhkam paidad kunanda idi.


Fol. 29.


50 FARGHANA


what he got, he spent liberally. He waxed exceeding great —
after Sl. Mahmid Mirza’s death, in whose sons’ time his re- —
tainers approached 20,000. Although he prayed and abstained
from forbidden aliments, yet was he black-souled and vicious,
dunder-headed and senseless, disloyal and a traitor to his salt.
For the sake of this fleeting, five-days world, he blinded one of
his benefactor’s sons and murdered another. A sinner before
God, reprobate to His creatures, he has earned curse and
execration till the very verge of Resurrection. For this world’s
sake he did his evil deeds and yet, with lands so broad and
with such hosts of armed retainers, he had not pluck to
stand up to a hen._) An account of him will come into this
history.

Pir-i-muhammad Ailchi-bighad? Qichin was another. In
Hazaraspi’s fight® he got in on challenge with his fists in Sl.
Abi-sa‘id Mirza’s presence at the Gate of Balkh. He was a
brave man, continuously serving the Mirza (Mahmid) and
guiding him by his counsel. Out of rivalry to Khusrau Shah,
he made a night-attack when the Mirza was besieging Oindiz,
on Sl. Husain Mirza, with few men, without arming‘ and
without plan; he could do nothing; what was there he could
do against such and so large a force? He was pursued, threw
himself into the river and was drowned.

Ayub (Begchik Mughil)® was another. He had served in Sl.
Abi-sa‘id Mirza’s Khurasan Cadet Corps, a brave man, Bai-
sunghar Mirza’s guardian. He was choice in dress and food;

1 Roebuck’s Oriental Proverbs (p. 232) explains the five of this phrase
where seven might be expected, by saying that of this Seven days’ world (qy.
days of Creation) one is for birth, another for death, and. that thus five only
are left for man’s brief life.

2 The cognomen Ailchi-bagha, taken with the bearer’s recorded strength ot
fist, may mean Strong man of Ailchi (the capital of Khutan). One of Timiir’s
commanders bore the name. Cf. f. 21b for bight as athlete.

3 Hazaraspi seems to be Mir Pir Darwesh Hazaraspi. With his brother,
Mir ‘Ali, he had charge of Balkh. See Rauzatu’s-safa B.M. Add. 23506, f. 2426 ;
Browne’s D.S. p. 432. It may be right to understand a hand-to-hand fight
between Hazardspi and Ailchi-bigha. The affair was in 857 AH. (1453 AD.).

4 ydvdq siz, perhaps trusting to fisticuffs, perhaps without mail. Babur’s
summary has confused the facts. Muh. Ailchi-biigha was sent by Sl. Mal.mid
Mirza from Hisar with 1,000 men and did not issue out of Qindiiz. (H.-S. ui,


251.) His death occurred not before 895 AH.
5 See T.R. s.nn. Mir Ayib and Ayib.


900 AH.—OCT. 2np. 1494 To SEP. 21st. 1495 AD. 51


a jester and talkative, nicknamed Impudence, perhaps because
the Mirza called him so.

Wali was another, the younger, full-brother of Khusrau Shah.
He kept his retainers well. He it was brought about the
blinding of Sl. Mas‘aid Mirza and the murder of Bai-sunghar
Mirza. He had an ill-word for every-one and was an evil-
tongued, foul-mouthed, self-pleasing and dull-witted mannikin.
He approved of no-one but himself. When I went from the
Qundiz country to near Diishi (g10 AH.-1503 AD.), separated
Khusrau Shah from his following and dismissed him, this
person (i.c., Wali) had come to Andar-ab and Sir-db, also in
fear of the Atzbegs. The Aimaqs of those parts beat and
robbed him! then, having let me know, came on to Kabul.
Wali went to Shaibani Khan who had his head struck off in
the town of Samarkand.

Shaikh ‘Abdu’l-lah Barlds? was another; he had to wife one
of the daughters of Shah Sultan Muhammad (Badakhshi) 1.c.,
the maternal aunt of Aba-bikr Mirza (Mirdn-shahi) and of Sl.
Mahmiid Khan. He wore his tunic narrow and pur shagg*; he
was a kindly well-bred man.

Mahmiid Barlds of the Barladses of Nundak (Badakhshan)
was another. He had been a beg also of Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza
and had surrendered Karman to him when the Mirza took the
‘Iraq countries. When Aba-bikr Mirza (Mirdn-shahi) came
against Hisar with Mazid Beg Tarkhan and the Black Sheep
‘Turkmans, and Sl. Mahmid Mirza went off to his elder brother,
Sl. Ahmad Mirza in Samarkand, Mahmitd Barlas did not
surrender Hisar but held out manfully.4 He was a poet and
put a diwdan together.


(i. Historical narrative resumed).


When Sl. Mahmiid Mirza died, Khusrau Shah kept the
event concealed and laid a long hand on the treasure. But


1 This passage is made more clear by f. 120) and f. 1250.

2 He is mentioned in ‘Ali-sher Nawd@’i’s Majdlis-i-nafa’is ; see B.M. Add.
7875, 4.278 and Rieu’s Turkish Catalogue.

8 ? full of splits or full handsome.

# This may have occurred after Abii-sa‘id Mirza’s death whose son Aba-bikr
was. Cf.f.28. Ifso, over-brevity has obscured the statement.


Fol. 294.


Fol. 30.


52 FARGHANA


how could such news be hidden? It spread through thie Lowi 4
at once. That was a festive day for the Samarkand families;
soldier and peasant, they uprose in tumult against Khusrau
Shah. Ahmad Haji Beg and the Tarkhani begs put the rising
down and turned Khusrau Shah out of the town with an escort
for Hisar.

As Sl. Mahmid Mirza himself after giving Hisar to Sl.
Mas‘id Mirza and Bukhara to Bai-sunghar Mirza, had dis-
missed both to their governments, neither was present when he
died. The Hisar and Samarkand begs, after turning Khusrau
Shah out, agreed to send for Bai-sunghar Mirza from Bukhara,
brought him to Samarkand and seated him on the throne.
When he thus became supreme (fddshah), he was 18 (lunar),
years old.

: At this crisis, Sl. Mahmtid Khan (Chaghatdi), acting on the

Fol. 303. word of Junaid Barlds and of some of the notables of
Samarkand, led his army out to near Kan-bai with desire to
take that town. Bdai-sunghar Mirza, on his side, marched out
in force. They fought near Kan-bai. Haidar Kakulddsh, the
main pillar of the Mughtl army, led the Mughil van. He and
all his men dismounted and were pouring in flights of arrows
(shiba) when a large body of the mailed braves of Hisar and
Samarkand made an impetuous charge and straightway laid
them under their horses’ feet. Their leader taken, the Mughil
army was put to rout without more fighting. Masses (ga@lin) of
Mughils were wiped out; so many were beheaded in Bai-
sunghar Mirza’s presence that his tent was three times shifted
because of the number of the dead.

At this same crisis, Ibrahim Sdr# entered the fort of Asfara,
there read Bai-sunghar Mirza’s name in the Khutba and took
up a position of hostility to me.

(Author's note.) Ibrahim Sdré is of the Mingligh people ;1 he had
served my father in various ways from his childhood but later on had
been dismissed for some fault.

Fol. 31. | The army rode out to crush this rebellion in the month of
Sha’ban (May) and by the end of it, had dismounted round


1 mingligh aildin dir, perhaps of those whose hereditary Command was a
Thousand, the head of a Ming (Pers. Hazara), t.e. of the tenth of a tuman.


900 AH.—OCT. 2np. 1494 To SEP. 21st. 1495 AD. 53


Asfara. Our braves in the wantonness of enterprise, on the very
day of arrival, took the new wall? that was in building outside
the fort. That day Sayyid Qasim, Lord of my Gate, out-
stripped the rest and got in with his sword; Sl. Ahmad Tambal
and Muhammad-dost Taghai got theirs in also but Sayyid
Odasim won the Champion’s Portion. He took it in Shahrukh-
iya when I went to see my mother’s brother, Sl. Mahmid
Khan.


(Author’s note.) The Championship Portion? is an ancient usage of
the Mughil horde. Whoever outdistanced his tribe and got in with
his own sword, took the portion at every feast and entertainment.

My guardian, Khudai-birdi Beg died in that first day’s fight-
ing, struck by a cross-bow arrow. As the assault was made
without armour, several bare braves (yikit yilang)® perished and
many were wounded. One of Ibrahim Sdari’s cross-bowmen
was an excellent shot; his equal had never been seen; he it
was hit most of those wounded. When Asfara had been
taken, he entered my service.

As the siege drew on, orders were given to construct head-
strikes* in two or three places, to run mines and to make every
effort to prepare appliances for taking the fort. The siege
lasted 40 days; at last Ibrahim Sdr# had no resource but,
through the mediation of Khwaja Moulan4-i-qazi, to elect to
serve me. In the month of Shawwdl (June 1495 ap.) he came
out, with his sword and quiver hanging from his neck, waited

on me and surrendered the fort.

Khujand for a considerable time had been dependent on


‘Umar Shaikh Mirza’s Court (diwan) but of late had looked
owards Sl. Ahmad Mirza on account of the disturbance in
Y the Farghana government during the interregnum.® As the

1 gurghan-ning tashida yangi tam quparib sala dur. I understand, that
what was taken was a new circumvallation in whole or in part. Such double
walls are on record. Cf. Appendix A.

2 bahadurlig atilish, an actual portion of food.

3 7.e, either unmailed or actually naked.

4 The old English noun strike expresses-the purpose of the say-kob. It is
“an instrument for scraping off what rises above the top ”’ (Webster, whose
example is grain ina measure). The sar-kob is an erection of earth or wood,
as high as the attacked walls, and it enabled besiegers to strike off heads


appearing above the ramparts.
5 i.e. the dislocation due to ‘Umar Shaikh’s death.


Fol. 316.


54 FARGHANA


opportunity offered, a move against it also was now y made, a ‘
Mir Mughiil’s father, ‘Abdu’l-wahhab Shaghdwal* was in it; he "
surrendered without making any difficulty at once on our
arrival.

Just then Sl. Mahmitid Khan was in Shahrukhiya. It has
been said already that when Sl. Ahmad Mirza came into
Andijan (899 AH.), he also came and that he laid siege to Akhsi.
It occurred to me that if since I was so close, I went and
waited on him, he being, as it were, my father and my elder
brother, and if bye-gone resentments were laid aside, it would
be good hearing and seeing for far and near. So said, I
went.

I waited on The Khan in the garden Haidar Kikuldash had
made outside Shahrukhiya. He was seated in a large four-

Fol. 32. doored tent set up in the middle of it. Having entered the
tent, I knelt three times,? he for his part, rising to do me
honour. We looked one another in the eyes;? and he re-
turned to his seat. After I had kneeled, he called me to his
side and shewed me much affection and friendliness. Two
or three days later, I set off for Akhsi and Andijan by the
Kindirlik Pass.4 At Akhsi I made the circuit of my Father’s


1 Cf. f. 13. The H.S. (ii, 274) places his son, Mir Mughil, in charge, but
otherwise agrees with the B.N.

2 Cf. Clavijo, Markham p. 132. Sir Charles Grandison bent the knee on
occasions but illustrated MSS. e.g. the B.M. Tawdvikh-i-guzida Nasvat-nama
show that Babur would kneel down on both knees. Cf. f. 1230 for the fatigue
of the genuflection.

3 I have translated hkiriishib thus because it appears to me that here and
in other places, stress is laid by Babur upon the mutual gaze as an episode of
a ceremonious interview. The verb kiviishmak is often rendered by the
Persian translators as daryaftan and by the L. and E. Memoirs as to embrace.
I have not found in the B.N. warrant for translating it as to embrace ;
quchishmdg is Babur’s word for this (f. 103). Darydftan, taken as to grasp or
see with the mind, to understand, well expresses mutual gaze and its sequel
of mutual understanding. Sometimes of course, kivish, the interview does
not imply kiurish, the silent looking in the eyes with mutual understanding ;
it simply means se voyer e.g. f. 17. The point is thus dwelt upon because the
frequent mention of an embrace gives a different impression of manners from
that made by “‘ interview ”’ or words expressing mutual gaze.

4 dabin. This word Réclus (vi, 171) quoting from Fedschenko, explains
as a difficult rocky defile ; avt, again, as a dangerous gap at a high elevation ;
bel, as an easy low pass; and ital, as a broad opening between low hills.
The explanation of kiital does not hold good for Babur’s application of the
word (f. 81) to the Sara-taq.


900 AH.—OCT. 2np. 1494 To SEP. 21st. 1495 AD. 55


tomb. I left at the hour of the Friday Prayer (.e., about mid-
day) and reached Andijan, by the Band-i-salar Road between
the Evening and Bedtime Prayers. This road 7.e. the Band-i-
salar, people call a nine yighdch road.*

One of the tribes of the wilds of Andijan is the Jigrak? a
numerous people of five or six thousand households, dwelling
in the mountains between Kashghar and Farghana. They have
many horses and sheep and also numbers of yaks (qitds), these
hill-people keeping yaks instead of common cattle. As their
mountains are border-fastnesses, they have a fashion of not
paying tribute. An army was now sent against them under
(Sayyid) Qasim Beg in order that out of the tribute taken from
them something might reach the soldiers. He took about
20,000 of their sheep and between 1000 and 1500 of their
horses and shared all out to the men.

After its return from the Jigrak, the army set out for Aura-
tipa. Formerly this was held by ‘Umar Shaikh Mirza but it
had gone out of hand in the year of his death and Sl. ‘Ali
Mirza was now in it on behalf of his elder brother, Bai-
sunghar Mirza. When Sl. ‘Ali Mirza heard of our coming, he
went off himself to the Macha hill-country, leaving his guardian,
Shaikh Zi’n-nin Avghiin behind. From half-way between
Khujand and Atra-tipa, Khalifa? was sent as envoy to Shaikh
Zu'n-nin but that senseless mannikin, instead of giving him a
plain answer, laid hands on him and ordered him to death.
For Khalifa to die cannot have been the Divine will; he
escaped and came to me two or three days later, stripped bare
and having suffered a hundred t#mdus (1,000,000) of hardships
and fatigues. We went almost to Aira-tipa but as, winter
being near, people had carried away their corn and forage, after
a few days we turned back for Andijan. After our retirement,
The Khan’s men moved on the place when the Aira-tipa


* Cf. f. 4b and note. From Babur’s special mention of it, it would seem
not to be the usual road.


2 The spelling of this name is uncertain. Variants are many. Concerning
the tribe see T.R. p. 165 n.


3 Nizamu’d-din ‘Ali Barlds : see Gul-badan’s H.N.s.m. Heserved Babur till
the latter’s death.


Fol. 34.


The Khan then gave it to Muhammad’ Husain
and in his hands it remained till go8 AH. (1503).2. 2
1 ¢.e, Zi’n-niin or perhaps the garrison.


2 ¢.e. down to Shaib&ni’s destruction of Chaghatai rule in Tashkint 7.
1503 AD. RS 2


901 AH.—SEP. 21st. 1495 to SEP. 9ru. 1496 AD.!


(a. Sultan Husain Mirza’s campaign against Khusrau Shah).


In the winter of this year, Sl. Husain Mirza led his army out
of Khuradsan against Hisar and went to opposite Tirmiz. SI.
Mas‘iid Mirza, for his part, brought an army (from Hisar) and
sat down over against him in Tirmiz. Khusrau Shah
strengthened himself in Qindiiz and to help Sl. Mas‘ad Mirza
sent his younger brother, Wali. They (7.c., the opposed forces)
spent most of that winter on the river’s banks, no crossing
being effected. Sl. Husain Mirza was a shrewd and experienced
commander; he marched up the river,” his face set for Qindiiz
and by this having put Sl. Mas‘id Mirza off his guard, sent
‘Abdu’l-latif Bakhshi (pay-master) with 5 or 600 serviceable
men, down the river to the Kilif ferry. These crossed and had
entrenched themselves on the other bank before Sl. Mas‘id
Mirza had heard of their movement. When he did hear of it,
whether because of pressure put upon him by Baqi Chaghaniani
to spite (his half-brother) Wali, or whether from his own want
of heart, he did not march against those who had crossed but
disregarding Wali’s urgency, at once broke up his camp and
turned for Hisar.®

Sl. Husain Mirza crossed the river and then sent, (1) against
Khusrau Shah, Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza and Ibrahim Husain
Mirza with Muhammad Wali Beg and Zi’n-niin Arghiin, and

1 Elph. MS. f. 23 ; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 26 and 217 f. 21 ;-Mems. p. 35.

Babur’s own affairs form a small part of this year’s record ; the rest is drawn
from the H.S. which in its turn, uses Babur’s f. 34 and f. 37). Each author
words the shared material in his own style ; one adding magniloquence, the
other retracting to plain statement, indeed summarizing at times to obscurity.
Each passes his own judgment on events, e.g. here Khwand-amir’s is more
favourable to Husain Bai-qara’s conduct of the Hisar campaign than Babur’s.
Cf. HS. ii, 256-60 and 274.


2 This feint would take him from the Oxus.
3 Tirmiz to Iisar, 96m. (Réclus vi, 255).


57


Fol. 33é.


58 FARGHANA


(2) against Khutlan, Muzgaffar Husain Mirza with Muhammad —
Barandiiqg Barlas. He himself moved for Hisar. i,

When those in Hisar heard of his approach, they took their
precautions; Sl. Mas‘td Mirza did not judge it well to stay in
the fort but went off up the Kam Rid valley’ and by way of
Sara-taq to his younger brother, Bai-sunghar Mirza in Samar-
kand. Wali, for his part drew off to (his own district) Khutlan.
Baqi Chaghaniani, Mahmid Barlas and Qich Beg’s father, Sl.
Ahmad strengthened the fort of Hisar. Hamza Sl. and Mahdi
Sl. (Aaizbeg) who some years earlier had left Shaibani Khan for
(the late) Sl. Mahmiid Mirza’s service, now, in this dispersion,
drew off with all their Atizbegs, for Qara-tigin. With them
went Muhammad Dighlat* and Sl. Husain Dighlat and all the
Mughils located in the Hisar country.

Upon this Sl. Husain Mirza sent Abi’l-muhsin Mirza after
Sl. Mas‘id Mirza up the Kam Rid valley. They were not
strong enough for such work when they reached the defile.*
There Mirza Beg Firingi-baz* got in his sword. In pursuit of
Hamza Sl. into Qara-tigin, Sl. Husain Mirza sent Ibrahim
Tarkhan and Yaq‘ib-i-aytb. They overtook the sultans and

Fol. 33. fought. The Mirza’s detachment was defeated; most of his
begs were unhorsed but all were allowed to go free.


(b. Babur’s reception of the Atizbeg sultans.)


As a result of this exodus, Hamza Sl. with his son, Mamaq
Sl., and Mahdi Sl. and Muhammad Dighldat, later known as
Hisdvi and his brother, Sl. Husain Dighlat with the Atizbegs
dependent on the sultans and the Mughiils who had been
located in Hisar as (the late) Sl. Mahmiid Mirza’s retainers,
came, after letting me know (their intention), and waited upon
me in Ramzain (May-June) at Andijan. According to the


1 H.S. Wazr-ab valley. The usual route is up the Kam Rid and over the
Mira pass to Sara-taq. Cf. f. 810.

2 i.e. the Hisaéri mentioned a few lines lower and on f. 99b. Nothing on
f. 99b explains his cognomen.

3 The road is difficult.. Cf. f. 810.

4 Khwiand-amir also singles out one man for praise, Sl. Mahmtd Mir-1-
akhwur ; the two names probably represent one person. The sobriquet may
refer to skill with a matchlock, to top-spinning (fivnagi-baz) or to some lost
joke. (HLS. ii, 257.)


901 AH.—SEP. 21st. 1495 To SEP. 9TH. 1496 AD. 59


custom of Timiriya sultans on such occasions, I had seated
myself on a raised seat (t#shak); when Hamza SI. and Mamaq
Sl. and Mahdi SI. entered, I rose and went down to do them
honour ; we looked one another in the eyes and I placed them
on my right, baéghish da". A number of Mughils also came,
under Muhammad Hisd@r7; all elected for my service.


(c. Sl. Husain Mirza’s affairs resumed).


Sl. Husain Mirza, on reaching Hisar; settled down at once to
besiege it. There was no rest, day nor night, from the labours
of mining and attack, of working catapults and mortars. Mines
were run in four or five places. When one had, gone well
forward towards the Gate, the townsmen, countermining, struck
it and forced smoke down on the Mirza’s men; they, in turn,
closed the hole, thus sent the smoke straight back and made the
townsmen flee as from the very maw of death. In the end, the
townsmen drove the besiegers out by pouring jar after jar of
water in on them. Another day, a party dashed out from the
town and drove off the Mirza’s men from their own mine’s
mouth. Once the discharges from catapults and mortars in the
Mirza’s quarters on the north cracked a tower of the fort; it
fell at the Bed-time Prayer ; some of the Mirza’s braves begged
to assault at once but he refused, saying, ‘‘It is night.” Before
the shoot of the next day’s dawn, the besieged had rebuilt the
whole tower. That day too there was no assault; in fact, for
the two to two and a half months of the siege, no attack was
made except by keeping up the blockade,? by mining, rearing
head-strikes,? and discharging stones.


1 This pregnant phrase has been found difficult. It may express that
Babur assigned the sultans places in their due precedence ; that he seated
them in a row ; and that they sat cross-legged, as men of rank, and were not
made, as inferiors, to kneel and sit back on their heels. Out of this last
meaning, I infer comes the one given by dictionaries, ‘‘ to sit at ease,’’ since
the cross-legged posture is less irksome than the genuflection, not to speak of
the ease of mind produced by honour received. Cf. f. 18band note on Ahmad’s
posture ; Redhouse s.nn. baghish and baghdash ; and B.M. Tawarikh-i-guzida
nastat-nama, in the illustrations of which the chief personage, only, sits
cross-legged.

2 siydsat. My translation is conjectural only.

3 sar-kob. The old English noun sérike, ‘‘an instrument for scraping off
what appears above the top,’’ expresses the purpose of the wall-high erections
bet or earth (L. agger) raised to reach what shewed above ramparts. Cf.

ebster.


Fol. 346.


Fol. 35.


Fol. 352.


60 FARGHANA


When Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza and whatever (ni kim) troops 1
had been sent with him against Khusrau Shah, dismounted —


some 16 m. (3 to 4 yighadch) below Oundiz,! Khusrau Shah
arrayed whatever men (77 kim) he had, marched out, halted one
night on the way, formed up to fight and came down upon the
Mirza and his men. The Khurasanis may not have been twice
as many as his men but what question is there they were half


'
%


as many more? None the less did such Mirzas and such


Commander-begs elect for prudence and remain in their en-
trenchments! Good and bad, small and great, Khusrau Shah’s
force may have been of 4 or 5,000 men!

This was the one exploit of his life,—of this man who for the
sake of this fleeting and unstable world and for the sake of
shifting and faithless followers, chose such evil and such ill-
repute, practised such tyranny and injustice, seized such wide
lands, kept such hosts of retainers and followers,—latterly he led
out between 20 and 30,000 and his countries and his districts
(parganat) exceeded those of his own ruler and that ruler’s sons,”
—for an exploit such as this his name and the names of his
adherents were noised abroad for generalship and for this they
were counted brave, while those timorous laggards, in the
trenches, won the resounding fame of cowards.

Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza marched out from that camp and after
a few stages reached the Alghi Mountain of Taliqan® and there
made halt. Khusrau Shah, in Oiindiz, sent his brother, Wali,
with serviceable men, to Ishkimish, Fulil and the hill-skirts
thereabouts to annoy and harass the Mirza from outside also.
Muhibb-‘ali, the armourer, (ga#rchi) for his part, came down
(from Wali’s Khutlin) to the bank of the Khutlin Water, met
in with some of the Mirza’s men there, unhorsed some, cut off
a few heads and got away. In emulation of this, Sayyidim
‘Ali* the door-keeper, and his younger brother, Quli Beg and


1 Presumably lower down the Qindiiz Water.


Garden.’”’ Gul-badan mentions a Taliqan Garden. Perhaps the Mirzé went
so far east because, Zii’n-niin being with him, he had Qandahar in mind.
Cf. f. 42b.

4 te. Sayyid Muhammad ‘Ali. See f. 15 n. to Sherim. Khwaja Changal
lies 14 m. below TAliqdn on the Taliqan Water. (Erskine.)


901 AH.—SEP. 21st. 1495 To SEP. 9TH. 1496 AD. 61


Bihlal-i-ayib and a body of their men got to grips with the
Khurdsanis on the skirt of ‘Ambar Koh, near Khwaja Changal
but, many Khurdsanis coming up, Sayyidim ‘Ali and Baba
Beg’s (son) Quli Beg and others were unhorsed.

At the time these various news reached Sl]. Husain Mirza,
his army was not without distress through the spring rains of
Hisar; he therefore brought about a peace; Mahmid Barlds
came out from those in the fort; Haji Pir the Taster went from
those outside; the great commanders and what there was (17
kim) of musicians and singers assembled and the Mirza took
(Bega Begim), the eldest? daughter of Sl. Mahmiid Mirza by
Khan-zada Begim, for Haidar Mirza, his son by Payanda Begim
and through her the grandson of Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza. This
done, he rose from before Hisar and set his face for Qundiiz.

At QOiindiz also Sl. Husain Mirza made a few trenches and
took up the besieger’s position but by Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s
intervention peace at length was made, prisoners were ex-
changed and the Khurdsanis retired. The twice-repeated?
attacks made by Sl. Husain Mirza on Khusrau Shah and kis
unsuccessful retirements were the cause of Khusrau Shah's
great rise and of action of his so much beyond his province.

When the Mirza reached Balkh, he, in the interests of Ma
wara’u’n-nahr gave it to Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza, gave Badi‘u’z.
zaman Mirza’s district of Astarabad to (a younger son), Muzaffar
Husain Mirza and made both kneel at the same assembly, one
for Balkh, the other for Astarabad. ‘This offended Badi‘u’z-
zaman Mirza and led to years of rebellion and disturbance.®


(d. Revolt of the Tarkhanis in Samarkand).


In Ramzan of this same year, the Tarkhdnis revolted in
Samarkand. Here is the story :—Bdai-sunghar Mirz4 was not so
friendly and familiar with the begs and soldiers of Samarkand
as he was with those of Hisar. His favourite beg was Shaikh


1 f, 27b, second.

* The first was civca 895 AH.-1490 AD. Cf. f. 27b.

3 Babur’s wording suggests that their common homage was the cause of
Badi‘u’z-zaman’s displeasure but see f. 41.

4 The Mirza had grown up with Hisaris. Cf. U.S. ii, 270.


Fol. 36.


Fol. 364.


Fol. 37.


Mirza that it made a velenon as of Lover and Beloved. vThea
things displeased the Tarkhans and the Samarkandi begs;
Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhan went from Bukhara to Qarshi,
brought Sl. ‘Ali Mirza to Samarkand and raised him to be
supreme. People then went to the New Garden where Bai-
sunghar Mirza was, treated him like a prisoner, parted him
from his following and took him to the citadel. There they
seated both mirzds in one place, thinking to send Bai-sunghar
Mirza to the Gik Sarai close to the Other Prayer. The Mirza,
however, on plea of necessity, went into one of the palace-
buildings on the east side of the Bi-stan Sarai. Tarkhanis
stood outside the door and with him went in Muhammad Quli
Qiichin and Hasan, the sherbet-server. To be brief:—A gateway,
leading out to the back, must have been bricked up for they
broke down the obstacle at once. The Mirza got out of the
citadel on the Kafshir side, through the water-conduit (@b-mir1),
dropped himself from the rampart of the water-way (di-tahi),
and went to Khwajaki Khwaja’s? house in Khwaja Kafshir.
When the Tarkhanis, in waiting at the door, took the precau-
tion of looking in, they found him gone. Next day the Tar-
khanis went in a large body to Khwajaki Khwaja’s gate but the
Khwaja said, “ No!’’? and did not give him up. Even they could
not take him by force, the KhwAja’s dignity was too great for
them to be able to use force. A few days later, Khwaja Abu’l-
makaram* and Ahmad Haji Beg and other begs, great and
small, and soldiers and townsmen rose in a mass, fetched
the Mirza away from the Khwaja’s house and _ besieged
Sl. ‘Ali Mirza and the Tarkhans in the citadel. They
could not hold out for even a day; Muh. Mazid Tarkhan
went off through the Gate of the Four Roads for Bukhara ;

1 As the husband of one of the six Badakhshi Begims, he was closely con-
nected with local ruling houses. See T.R. p. 107.

2 i.e. Muhammad ‘Ubaidu’l-lah the elder of Ahradvi’s two sons, d. QII AH.
See Rashahat-i-‘ain-alhayat (I.O. 633) £. 269-75 ; and Khizinatu’l-asfiya lith.
cs "Bit yitg tur, 1.e. This is not to be.

4 d.908 AH. He was not, it would seem, of the Akrdvi family. His own


had provided Pontifis (Shaikhu’l-islam) for Samarkand through 400 years.
Cf. Shaibani-ndma, Vambéry, p. 106 ; also, for his character, p. 96.


901 AH.—SEP. 21st. 1495 To OCT. 9TH. 1496 AD. 63


Sl. ‘Ali Mirza and Darwesh Muh. Tarkhan were made
prisoner.

Bai-sunghar Mirza was in Ahmad Haji Beg’s house when
people brought Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhan in. He put him
a few questions but got no good answer. In truth Darwesh
Muhammad’s was a deed for which good answer could not be
made. He was ordered to death. In his helplessness he clung
to a pillar! of the house; would they let him go because he
clung to a pillar? They made him reach his doom (stydsat)
and ordered Sl. ‘Ali Mirza to the Gik Sarai there to have the
fire-pencil drawn across his eyes.

(Author’s note.) The Gik Saradiis one of Timir Beg’s great buildings
in the citadel of Samarkand. It has this singular and special charac-
terstic, if a Timirid is to be seated on the throne, here he takes his
seat ; if one lose his head, coveting the throne, here he loses it ; therefore
the name Gik Sardi has a metaphorical sense (kin@yat) and to say of


any ruler’s son, ‘‘ They have taken him to the Gik Sardi,’’ means, to
death.?


To the Gik Sarai accordingly Sl. ‘Ali Mirza was taken but
when the fire-pencil was drawn across his eyes, whether by the
surgeon’s choice or by his inadvertence, no harm was done.
This the Mirza did not reveal at once but went to Khwaja
Yahya’s house and a few days later, to the Tarkhans in
Bukhara.

Through these occurrences, the sons of his Highness Khwaja
‘Ubaidu’l-lah became settled partisans, the elder (Muhammad
‘Ubaidu’l-lah, Khwajaki Khwaja) becoming the spiritual guide
of the elder prince, the younger (Yahya) of the younger. Ina
few days, Khwaja Yahya followed Sl. ‘Ali Mirza to Bukhara.

Bai-sunghar Mirza led out his army against Bukhara. On
his approach, Sl. ‘Ali Mirza came out of the town, arrayed for
battle. There was little fighting; Victory being on the side of
Sl. ‘Ali Mirza, Bai-sunghar Mirza sustained defeat. Ahmad
Maji Beg and a number of good soldiers were taken; most of
the men were put to death. Ahmad Haji Beg himself the slaves
and slave-women of Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhin, issuing out

1 7.e. he claimed sanctuary,


2 Cf.f. 45b and Pétis de la Croix’s Histoive de Chingiz Khan pp. 171 and 227.
What Timir’s work on the Giik Sardi was is a question for archzologists.


Fol. 374. *


Fol. 38.


Fol.


28.


~


64 FARGHANA


of Bukhara, put to a dishonourable death on the charge of their
master’s blood.


(e. Babur moves against Samarkand).


These news reached us in Andijan in the month of Shawwal
(mid-June to mid-July) and as we (act. 14) coveted Samarkand,
we got our men to horse. Moved by a like desire, Sl. Mas’ad
Mirza, his mind and Khusrau Shah’s mind set at ease by Sl.
Husain Mirza’s retirement, came over by way of Shahr-i-sabz.‘
To reinforce him, Khusrau Shah laid hands. (gapti) on his
younger brother, Wali. We (three mirzas) beleaguered the
town from three sides during three or four months; then
Khwaja Yahya came to me from Sl. ‘Ali Mirza to mediate an
agreement with a common aim. The matter was left at an
interview arranged (kurushmak) ; I moved my force from Soghd
to some 8m. below the town; Sl. ‘Ali Mirza from his side,
brought his own; from one bank, he, from the other, I crossed
to the middle of? the Kohik water, each with four or five men;
we just saw one another (ku#ruishib), asked each the other’s
welfare and went, he his way, I mine.

I there saw, in Khwaja Yahya’s service, Mulla Bina@’i and
Muhammad Salih ;? the latter I saw this once, the former was
long in my service later on. After the interview (ku@riushkdan)
with Sl]. ‘Ali Mirza, as winter was near and as there was no
great scarcity amongst the Samarkandis, we retired, he to
Bukhara, I to Andijan.

Sl. Mas‘id Mirza had a penchant for a daughter of Shaikh
‘Abdu’l-lah Barlds, she indeed was his object in coming to
Samarkand. He took her, laid world-gripping ambition aside
and went back to Hisar.

When I was near Shiraz and Kan-bai, Mahdi Sl. deserted to
Samarkand; Hamza Sl. went also from near Zamin but with
leave granted.

1 7.¢. over the Aitmak Pass. Cf. f. 49.


2 Hai. MS. dvdlighigha. Elph. MS. @rdil, island.
3 See f. 179b for Bina’i. Muhammad Salih Mirza Khwdarizmi is the author


of the Shatbani-nadma.


Tr, aes


902 AH.—SEP. 9ru. 1496 To AUG. 30TH. 1497 AD.*


{a. Babur’s second attempt on Samarkand.)


This winter, Bai-sunghar Mirza’s affairs were altogether in a
good way. When ‘Abdu’l-karim Ushrit came on Sl. ‘Ali Mirza’s
part to near Kiifin, Mahdi Sl. led out a body of Bai-sunghar
Mirza’s troops against him. The two commanders meeting
exactly face to face, Mahdi Sl. pricked ‘Abdu’l-karim’s horse
with his Chirkas? sword so that it fell, and as ‘Abdu’l-karim
was getting to his feet, struck off his hand at the wrist. Having
taken him, they gave his men a good beating.

These (Aiizbeg) sultans, seeing the affairs of Samarkand and
the Gates of the (Timtrid) Mirzas tottering to their fall, went off
in good time (dirtd) into the open country (?)? for Shaibani.

Pleased* with their small success (over ‘Abdu’l-karim), the
Samarkandis drew an army out against Sl. ‘Ali Mirza; Bai-
sunghar Mirza went to Sar-i-pul (Bridge-head), Sl. ‘Ali Mirza
to Khwaja Karzin. Meantime, Khwaja Abi’l-makaram, at
the instigation of Khwaja Munir of Aish, rode light against

Bukhara with Wais Laghari and Muhammad Baqir of the
Andijan begs, and Qasim Dilddi and some of the Mirza’s
household. As the Bukh@ariots took precautions when the


invaders got near the town, they could make no progress.
They therefore retired.


1 Elph. MS. f. 27 ; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 30d and 217 f. 25 ; Mems. p. 42.

2 i.e. Circassian. Muhammad Salih (Sh.N. Vambéry p.-276 1. 58) speaks of
other Atizbegs using Chirkas swords.
3 aivta yazighd. My translation is conjectural. Airia@ implies 7.a. fore-
sight. Ydzighd allows a pun at the expense of the sultans ; since it can be
read both as to the open country and as for their (next, airta) misdeeds. My
impression is that they took the opportunity of being outside Samarkand
with their men, to leave Bai-sunghar and make for Shaibani, then in
Turkistan. Muhammad Salih also marking the tottering Gate of Sl. ‘Ali
Mirza, left him now, also for Shaibani. (Vambéry cap. xv.)

* aiimaq, to amuse a child in order to keep it from crying.


65 5


Fol. 39.


Fol. 394.


66 FARGHANA


At the time when (last year) Sl. ‘Ali Mirza and I had our "
interview, it had been settled! that this summer he should ~
come from Bukhara and I from Andijan to beleaguer Samar-
kand. To keep this tryst, I rode out in Ramzan (May) from
Andijan. Hearing when close to Yar Yilaq, that the (two)
Mirzads were lying front to front, we sent Tilin Khwaja
Mighul? ahead, with 2 or 300 scouting braves (gazdq yikitlar).
Their approach giving Bai-sunghar Mirza news of our advance,
he at once broke up and retired in confusion. That same
night our detachment overtook his rear, shot a mass (gdlin) of
his men and brought in masses of spoil. —

Two days later we reached Shiraz. It belonged to Qasim
Beg Dildai; his darogha (Sub-governor) could not hold it and
surrendered. It was given into Ibrahim Sara's charge. After
making there, next day, the Prayer of the Breaking of the
Fast (‘Idw’l-fitr), we moved for Samarkand and dismounted
in the reserve (gariigh) of Ab-i-yar (Water of Might). That
day waited on me with 3 or 400 men, Qasim Daulddi,
Wais Laghari, Muhammad Sighal’s grandson, Hasan,‘ and Sl.
Muhammad Wais. What,they said was this: ‘ Bai-sunghar
Mirza came out and has gone back; we have left him there-
fore and are here for the pddshah’s service,’ but it was known
later that they must have left the Mirza at his request to
defend Shiraz, and that the Shiraz affair having become what
it was, they had nothing for it but to come to us.

When we dismounted at Qara-bulaq, they brought in several
Mughils arrested because of senseless conduct to humble
village elders coming in to us.” Qasim Beg Qachin for discipline’s


1 4.e. with Khwaja Yahya presumably. See f. 38.

2 This man is mentioned also in the Tawdrikh-i-guzida Nasratnama B.M.
Or. 3222 f. 1245.

3 H.S., on the last day of Ramzdn (June 28th. 1497 AD.).

* Muhammad Sighal appears to have been a marked man. I quote from
the T.G.N.N, (see supra), f. 1236 foot, the information that he was the grandson
of Ya‘qiib Beg. Zenker explains Sighali as the name of a Chaghatai family.
An Ayub-i-Ya‘qub Begchik Mughil may be an uncle. See f. 43 for another
grandson.

5 baz’ kirkdn-kint-kisakka bash-siz-qilghian Mughillarni tatab. I take the
word kisdk in this highly idiomatic sentence to be a diminutive of kis, old
person, on the analogy of mir, mivak, mard, mardak. [The H.S. uses Kisak
(ii, 261) as a proper noun.] The alliteration in k@f and the mighty adjective
here are noticeable.


902 AH.—SEP. 9TH. 1496 To AUG. 30TH. 1497 AD. 67


sake (siydsat) had two or three of them cut to pieces. It was
on this account he left me and went to Hisar four or five years
later, in the guerilla times, (907 AH.) when I was going from
the Macha country to The Khan."

Marching from Qara-bilaq, we crossed the river (i.e. the
Zar-afshan) and dismounted near Yam.? On that same day,
our men got to grips with Bai-sunghar Mirza’s at the head of
the Avenue. Sl. Ahmad Tambal was struck in the neck by
a spear but not unhorsed. Khwajaki Mulla-i-sadr, Khwaja-i-
kalan’s eldest brother, was pierced in the nape of the neck® by
an arrow and went straightway to God’s mercy. An excellent
soldier, my father before me had favoured him, making him
Keeper of the Seal; he was a student of theology, had great
acquaintance with words and a good style; moreover he under-
stook hawking and rain-making with the jade-stone.

While we were at Yam, people, dealers and other, came out
in crowds so that the camp became a bazar for buying and
selling. One day, at the Other Prayer, suddenly, a general
hubbub arose and all those Musalm4n (traders) were plundered.
Such however was the discipline of our army that an order to
restore everything having been given, the first watch (pahdr) of
the next day had not passed before nothing, not a tag of
cotton, not a broken needle’s point, remained in the possession
of any man of the force, all was back with its owners.

Marching from Yam, it was dismounted in Khan Yirti (The
Khan’s Camping Ground),* some 6 m. (3 kuroh) east of Samar-
kand. We lay there for 40 or 50 days. During the time, men
from their side and from ours chopped at one another (chapqi-
lashtilar) several times in the Avenue. One day when Ibrahim
Begchik was chopping away there, he was cut on the face;


* Qasim feared to go amongst the Mughils lest he should meet retaliatory
death. Cf. f. 99d.

2 This appears from the context to be Yam (Jam) -bdiand not the Djouma

(Jam) of the Fr. map of 1904, lying farther south. The Avenue named
seems likely to be Timiir’s of f. 45d and to be on the direct road for Khujand.
See Schuyler i, 232.
3 bighan buyini, W.-i-B. 215, yan, thigh, and 217 gardan, throat. I am
in doubt as to the meaning of bighdn ; perhaps the two words stand for joint
at the nape of the neck. Khwédja-i-kaldn was one of seven brothers, six died
in Babur’s service, he himself served till Babur’s death.

* Cf. f. 48.


Fol. 40.


Fol. 408.


Fol. 41.


68 FARGHANA :


=
ay
jot 7
ia)


thereafter people called him Chapuk (Balafré). Another time, —
this also in the Avenue, at the Maghak (Fosse) Bridge’ Abw’l-
qasim (Kohbur Chaghatdi) got in with his mace. Once, again
in the Avenue, near the Mill-sluice, when Mir Shah Qichin also
got in with his mace, they cut his neck almost half-through;
most fortunately the great artery was not severed.

While we were in Khan Yirti, some in the fort sent the
deceiving message,* ‘Come you to-night to the Lovers’ Cave
side and we will give you the fort.’ Under this idea, we went
that night to the Maghak Bridge and from there sent a party
of good horse and foot to the rendezvous. Four or five of the
household foot-soldiers had gone forward when the matter got
wind. They were very active men; one, known as Haji, had
served me from my childhood; another people called Mahmiid
Kiindir-sangak.? ‘They were all killed.

While we lay in Khan Yurti, so many Samarkandis came
out that the camp became a town where everything looked for
in a town was to be had. Meantime all the forts, Samarkand
excepted, and the Highlands and the Lowlands were coming in
to us. As in Atirgiit, however, a fort on the skirt of the
Shavdar (var. Shadw4ar) range, a party of men held fast+, of
necessity we moved out from Khan Yirti against them. They
could not maintain themselves, and surrendered, making
KhwaAaja-i-qazi their mediator. Having pardoned their offences
against ourselves, we went back to beleaguer Samarkand.


(b. Affairs of Sl. Husain Mirza and lus son, Badi‘wz-zaman
Mirza.)®

This year the mutual recriminations of Sl. Husain Mirza and

Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza led on to fighting; here are the par-


1 Khorochkine (Radlov’s Réceuil d’Itinévaives p. 241) mentions Pul-i-
mougak, a great stone bridge thrown across a deep ravine, east of Samarkand.
For Kil-i-maghak, deep pool, or pool of the fosse, see f. 48d.

2 From Khwand-amir’s differing account of this affair, it may be surmised
that those sending the message were not treacherous ; but the message itself
was deceiving inasmuch as it did not lead Babur to expect opposition. Cf.
f. 43 and note.

3 Of this nick-name several interpretations are allowed by the dictionaries.

* See Schuyler i, 268 for an account of this beautiful Highland village.

5 Here Babur takes up the thread, dropped on f. 36, of the affairs of the
Khurasani mirzis, He draws on other sources than the H.S.; perhaps on


f


902 AH.—SEP. 9TH. 1496 To AUG. 30TH. 1497 AD. 69


ticulars:—Last year, as has been mentioned, Badi‘u’z-zaman
Mirza and Muzaffar Husain Mirza had been made to kneel for
Balkh and Astarabad. From that time till this, many envoys
had come and gone, at last even ‘Ali-sher Beg had gone but
urge it as all did, Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza would not consent to
give up Astarabad. ‘The Mirza,’ he said, ‘assigned’ it to my
son, Muhammad Mi‘min Mirza at the time of his circumcision.’
A conversation had one day between him and ‘Ali-sher Beg
testifies to his acuteness and to the sensibility of ‘Ali-sher Beg’s
feelings. After saying many things of a private nature in the
Mirza’s ear, ‘Ali-sher Beg added, ‘Forget these matters.’”
‘What matters?’ rejoined the Mirza instantly. ‘Ali-sher Beg
was much affected and cried a good deal.

At length the jarring words of this fatherly and filial dis-
cussion went so far that /is father against his father, and jis son
against his son drew armies out for Balkh and Astarabad.?

Up (from Harat) to the Pul-i-chiragh meadow, below
Garzaw4n,* went Sl. Husain Mirza; down (from Balkh) came
Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza. On the first day of Ramzan (May 2nd.)
Abw’l-muhsin Mirza advanced, leading some of his father’s
light troops. There was nothing to call a battle; Badi‘u’z-
zaman Mirza was routed and of his braves masses were made
prisoner. Sl. Husain Mirza ordered that all prisoners should


his own memory, perhaps on information given by Khurdsanis with him in
Hindistan e.g. Husain’s grandson. See f.167b. Cf. U.S. ii, 261.

1 baghishlab tur. Cf. f. 34 note to baghish da.

2 Bu sozlar atniling. Some W.-i-B. MSS., Fardmosh bakunid for nakunid,
thus making the Mirza not acute but rude, and destroying the point of the
story z.e. that the Mirza pretended so to have forgotten as to have an empty
mind. Khwand-amir states that ‘Ali-sher prevailed at first; his tears
therefore may have been of joy at the success of his pacifying mission.

% i.e. B.Z.’s father, Husain, against Mii‘min’s father, B.Z. and Husain’s son,
Muzaffar Husain against B. Z.’s son Mi‘min ;—a veritable conundrum.

* Garzawan lies west of Balkh. Concerning Pul-i-chiragh Col. Grodekoff’s
Ride to Havat (Marvin p. 103 ff.) gives pertinent information. It has also a
map showing the Pul-i-chiragh meadow. The place stands at the mouth of
a triply-bridged defile, but the name appears to mean Gate of the Lamp
(cf. Gate of Timiir), and not Bridge of the Lamp, because the H.S. and also
modern maps write bil (bel), pass, where the Turki text writes pul, bridge,
narrows, pass.

The lamp of the name is one at the shrine of a saint, just at the mouth of
the defile. It was alight when Col. Grodekoff passed in 1879 and to it, he
Says, the name is due now—as it presumably was 400 years ago and earlier.


Fol. 416.


a
pV AS |e
»


70 FARGHANA


be beheaded; this not here only but wherever he defeated a
rebel son, he ordered the heads of all prisoners to be struck off.
And why not? Right was with him. The (rebel) Mirzas
were so given over to vice and social pleasure that even when a
general so skilful and experienced as their father was within
half-a-day’s journey of them, and when before the blessed
month of Ramzan, one night only remained, they busied them-
selves with wine and pleasure, without fear of their father,
without dread of God. Certain it is that those so lost (y#tkan)
will perish and that any hand can deal a blow at those thus
going to perdition (a#tkdn). During the several years of
Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s rule in Astarabad, his coterie and his
following, his bare (yaldng) braves even, were in full splendour*
and adornment. He had many gold and silver drinking cups

Fol. 42. and utensils, much silken plenishing and countless tipichaq
horses. He now lost everything. He hurled himself in his
flight down a mountain track, leading to a precipitous fall.
He himself got down the fall, with great difficulty, oat many
of his men perished there.*

After defeating Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza, Sl. Husain Mirza
moved on to Balkh. It was in charge of Shaikh ‘Ali Taghai;
he, not able to defend it, surrendered and made his submission.
The Mirza gave Balkh to Ibrahim Husain Mirza, left
Muhammad Wali Beg and Shah Husain, the page, with him
and went back to Khurasan.

Defeated and destitute, with his braves bare and his bare ~
foot-soldiers*, Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza drew off to Khusrau Shah
in Qindiz. Khusrau Shah, for his part, did him good service,
such service indeed, such kindness with horses and camels,
tents and pavilions and warlike equipment of all sorts, both for
himself and those with him, that eye-witnesses said between
this and his former equipment the only difference might bein
the gold and silver vessels.


= epee ie pall pe ele mili te


NT tl ee


1 Khwand-amir heard from the Mirza on the spot, when later in his service,
that he was let down the precipice by help of turban-sashes tied together.

2 yikit yilang u yayaq ydling ; a jingle made by due phonetic change of
vowels ; a play too on yalaéng, which first means stripped 7.e. robbed and next
unmailed, perhaps sometimes bare-bodied in fight.


902 AH.—SEP. 9TH. 1496 TO AUG. 30TH. 1497 AD. 71


(c. Dissension between Sl. Mas‘id Mirza and Khusrau Shah.)


Ill-feeling and squabbles had arisen between Sl. Mas‘id
Mirza and Khusrau Shah because of the injustices of the one
and the self-magnifyings of the other. Nowtherefore Khusrau
Shah joined his brothers, Wali and Baqi to Badi‘u’z-zaman
Mirza and sent the three against Hisar. They could not even
get near the fort, in the outskirts swords were crossed once or
twice; one. day at the Bird-house? on the north of Hisar,
Muhibb-‘ali, the armourer (garchi), outstripped his people and
struck in well; he fell from his horse but at the moment of his
capture, his men attacked and freed him. A few days later a
somewhat compulsory peace was made and Khusrau Shah’s
army retired.

Shortly after this, Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza drew off by the
mountain-road to Zii’n-niin Arghin and his son, Shuja‘ Arghun
in Qandahaér and Zamin-dawar. Stingy and miserly as Zu’n-
nun was, he served the Mirza well, in one single present
offering 40,000 sheep. :

Amongst curious happenings of the time one was this:
Wednesday was the day SI. Husain Mirza beat Badi‘u’z-zaman
Mirza; Wednesday was the day Muzaffar Husain Mirza beat
Muhammad Mi‘min Mirza; Wednesday, more curious still,
was the name of the man who unhorsed and took prisoner,
Muhammad Mi‘min Mirza.2


1 gish-khana. As the place was outside the walls, it may be a good hawking
ground and not a falconry.

2 The H.S., mentions (ii, 222) a Sl. Ahmad of Char-shamba, a town
mentioned e.g. by Grodekoff p. 123. It also spoils Babur’s coincidence by
fixing Tuesday, Shab‘an 29th. for the battle. Perhaps the commencement
of the Muhammadan day at sunset, allows of both statements.


Fol. 420.


Fol. 43.


903 AH.—AUG. 80TH. 1497 tro AUG. 19TH.
1498 AD.*


(a. Resumed account of Babur’s second attempt on Samarkand.)


When we had dismounted in the Qulba (Plough) meadow,”
behind the Bagh-i-maidan (Garden of the plain), the Samar-
kandis came out in great numbers to near Muhammad Chap’s
Bridge. Our men were unprepared; and before they were ready,
Baba ‘Ali’s (son) Baba Quli had been unhorsed and taken into
the fort. A few days later we moved to the top of Qulba, at
the back of Kohik.*? That day Sayyid Yusuf,* having been
sent out of the town, came to our camp and did me obeisance.

The Samarkandis, fancying that our move from the one
ground to the other meant, ‘He has given it up,’ came out,
soldiers and townsmen in alliance (through the Turquoise
Gate), as far as the Mirza’s Bridge and, through the Shaikh-
zada’s Gate, as far as Muhammad Chap’s. We ordered our
braves to arm and ride out; they were strongly attacked from
both sides, from Muhammad Chap’s Bridge and from the
Mirza’s, but God brought it right! our foes were beaten.
Begs of the best and the boldest of braves our men unhorsed
and brought in. Amongst them Hafiz Ddldai’s (son) Mu-
hammad Miskin® was taken, after his index-finger had been
struck off; Muhammad Qasim Nabira also was unhorsed and
brought in by his own younger brother, Hasan Nabiva.© There
were many other such soldiers and known men. Of the town-

1 Elph. MS. f. 30b ; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 34 and 217 f. 26b ; Mems. p. 46.

The abruptness of this opening is due to the interposition of Sl. Husain M.’s.
affairs between Babur’s statement on f. 41 that he returned from Airgit and
this first of 903 AH. that on return he encamped in Qulba.

2 See f. 48b.

3 ¢.e. Chipan-ata ; see f. 45 and note.

4 Aughlaqchi, the Grey Wolfer of f. 22.

5 A sobriquet, the suppliant or perhaps something having connection with


musk. H.S. ii, 278, son of H.D.
6 i.e. grandson (of Muhammad Sighal). Cf. f. 39.


72


908 AH.—AUG. 80TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 73


rabble, were brought in Diwana, the tunic-weaver and Kadl-
gashiig,1 headlong leaders both, in brawl and tumult; they
were ordered to death with torture in blood-retaliation for our
foot-soldiers, killed at the Lovers’ Cave.2 This was a com-
plete reverse for the Samarkandis; they came out no more
even when our men used to go to the very edge of the ditch
and bring back their slaves and slave-women.

The Sun entered the Balance and cold descended on us.?_ I
therefore summoned the begs admitted to counsel and it was
decided, after discussion, that although the towns-people were
so enfeebled that, by God’s grace, we should take Samarkand,
it might be to-day, it might be to-morrow, still, rather than
suffer from cold in the open, we ought to rise from near it and
go for winter-quarters into some fort, and that, even if we had
to leave those quarters later on, this would be done without
further trouble. As Khwaja Didar seemed a suitable fort, we
marched there and having dismounted in the meadow lying
before it, went in, fixed on sites for the winter-houses and
covered shelters,* left overseers and inspectors of the work and
returned to our camp in the meadow. There we lay during
the few days before the winter-houses were finished.

Meantime Bai-sunghar Mirza had sent again and again to
ask help from Shaibani Khan. On the morning of the very
day on which, our quarters being ready, we had moved into
Khwaja Didar, the Khan, having ridden light from Turkistan,
stood over against our camping-ground. Our men were not
all at hand; some, for winter-quarters, had gone to Khwaja
Rabati, some to Kabud, some to Shiraz. None-the-less, we
formed up those there were and rode out. Shaibani Khan
made no stand but drew off towards Samarkand. He
went right up to the fort but because the affair had not gone as

1 This seeming sobriquet may show the man’s trade. Kal is a sort of
biscuit ; gashiiqg may mean a spoon.

* The H.S. does not ascribe treachery to those inviting Babur into Samar-
kand but attributes the murder of his men to others who fell on them when
the plan of his admission became known. The choice here of ‘‘ town-rabble ”’
for retaliatory death supports the account of H.S. ii.

3 “It was the end of September or beginning of October ” (Erskine).


* awi u kipa ywidr. Avwi is likely to represent kibitkas. For hipa yir,
see Zenker p. 782.


Fol. 436.


Fol. 44.


Fol. 440.


74 FARGHANA


Bai-sunghar Mirza wished, did not get a good reception.


therefore turned back for Turkistén a few days later, in dis- .


appointment, with nothing done.
Bai-sunghar Mirza had sustained a seven months’ siege; his


one hope had been in Shaibani Khan; this he had lost and he ©


now with 2 or 300 of his hungry suite, drew off from Samar-
kand, for Khusrau Shah in Qindiiz.

When he was near Tirmiz, at the Amt ferry, the Governor
of Tirmiz, Sayyid Husain Akbar, kinsman and confidant both
of Sl. Mas‘iid Mirza, heard of him and went out against him.
The Mirza himself got across the river but Mirim Tarkhan was
drowned and all the rest of his people were captured, together
with his baggage and the camels loaded with his personal
effects; even his page, Muhammad Tahir, falling into Sayyid
Husain Akbar’s hands. Khusrau Shah, for his part, looked
kindly on the Mirza.

When the news of his departure reached us, we got to horse
and started from Khwaja Didar for Samarkand. To give us
honourable meeting on the road, were nobles and braves, one
after another. It was on one of the last ten days of the first
Rabi‘ (end of November 1497 AD.), that we entered the citadel
and dismounted at the Bi-stan Sarai. Thus, by God’s favour,
were the town and the country of Samarkand taken and
occupied.


(b. Description of Samarkand.)*


Few towns in the whole habitable world are so pleasant as
Samarkand. It is of the Fifth Climate and situated in
lat. 40° 6’ and long. 99°. The name of the town is Samarkand;
its country people used to call Ma wara’u’n-nahr (Transoxania).


1 Interesting reference may be made, amongst the many books on
Samarkand, to Sharafu’d-din ‘Ali Yazdi’s Zafar-ndma Bib. Ind. ed. i, 300,
781, 799, 800 and ii, 6, 194, 596 etc. ; to Ruy Gonzalves di Clavijo’ s Embassy
to Timi (Markham) cap. vi and vii ; ; to Ujfalvy’s Turkistan ii, 79 and Madame
Ujfalvy’s De Paris 4 Samarcande D. 161,—these two containing a plan of
the town ; to Schuyler’s Turkistan ; to Kostenko’s Turkistan Gazetteer i, 345 ;
to Réclus, vi, 270 and plan ; and to a beautiful work of the St. Petersburg
Archeological Society, Les Mosquées de Samarcande; of which the B.M. has a
copy.

2 This statement is confused in the Elp. and Hai. MSS. The second
appears to give, by abjad, lat. 40’ 6” and long. 99’. Mr. Erskine (p. 48) gives


903 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 75


They used to call it Baldat-i-mahfiza because no foe laid hands
on it with storm and sack. It must have become * Musalman
in the time of the Commander of the jFaithful, his Highness
‘Usman. Qusam ibn ‘Abbas, one of the Companions® must
have gone there; his burial-place, known as the Tomb of
Shah-i-zinda (The Living Shah, z.e., Faqir) is;outside the Iron
Gate. Iskandar must have founded Samarsand. The Turk
and Mughil hordes call it Simiz-kint.4 Timir Beg made it
his capital; no ruler so great will ever have made it a
capital before (gilghan aimds dir). I ordered people to pace
round the ramparts of the walled-town; it came out at 10,000
steps.© Samarkandis are all orthodox (sunni), pure-in-the
Faith, law-abiding and religious) The number of Leaders
of Islam said to have arisen in M4 wara’u’n-nahr, since the
days of his Highness the Prophet, are not known to have
arisen in any other country. From the MAatarid suburb of
Samarkand came Shaikh Abw’l-mansir, one of the Expositors
of the Word.” Of the two sects of Expositors, the Mataridiyah


lat. 39’ 57” and long. 99’ 16”, noting that this is according to Uligh Beg’s
Tables and that the long. is calculated from Ferro. The Ency. Br. of 1910-11
gives lat. 39 39” and long. 66’ 45”.

1 The enigmatical cognomen, Protected Town, is of early date ; it is used
i.a. by Ibn Batiita in the 14th. century. Bdabur’s tense refers it to the past.
The town had frequently changed hands in historic times before he wrote.
The name may be due to immunity from damage to the buildings in the town.
Even Chingiz Khan’s capture (1222 ap.) left the place well-preserved and its
lands cultivated, but it inflicted great loss of men. Cf. Schuyler i, 236 and
his authorities, especially Bretschneider. |

2 Here is a good example of Babur’s caution in narrative. He does not
affirm that Samarkand became MusalmAn, or (infra) that Qusam ibn ‘Abbas
went, or that Alexander founded but in each case uses the presumptive past
tense, tesp. bilghan dir, barghan dir, bina qilghan dir, thus showing that he
repeats what may be inferred or presumed and not what he himself asserts.

3 i.e. of Muhammad. See Z.N. ii, 193.

* i.e. Fat Village. His text misleading him, Mr. Erskine makes here the
useful irrelevant note that Persians and Arabs call the place Samar-qand and
Turks, Samar-kand, the former using gaf (q), the latter haf (k). Both the
Elph. and the Hai. MSS. write Samarqand.

For use of the name Fat Village, see Clavijo (Markham p. 170), Simes-
quinte, and Bretschneider’s Medieval Geography pp. 61, 64, 66 and 163,

5 gadam. Kostenko (i, 344) gives 9 m. as the circumference of the old
walls and 1% m. as that of the citadel. See Mde. Ujfalvy p. 175 for a picture
of the walls.

8 Ma'‘lim aimas kim miincha paida bilmish bilghdi ; an idiomatic phrase.

7 d. 333 AH. (944 AD.). See D’Herbélot art. Matridi p. 572.


Fol. 45.


76 FARGHANA


and the Ash‘ariyah,! the first is named from this Shaikiy’ 4


Abi’l-manstr. Of Ma wara’u’n-nahr also was Khwaja Isma‘il
Khartank, the author of the Sahth-1-bukhari.2, From the Fargh-
ana district, Marghindn—Farghana, though at the limit of
settled habitation, is included in Ma wara’u’n-nahr,—came the
author of the Hiddyat,3a book than which few on Jurisprudence
are more honoured in the sect of Abi Hanifa.

On the east of Samarkand are Farghana and Kashghar; on
the west, Bukhara and Khwarizm ; on the north, Tashkint and
Shahrukhiya,—in books written Shash and Banakat; and on
the south, Balkh and Tirmiz.

The Kohik Water flows along the north of Samarkand, at
the distance of some 4 miles (2 kuroh); it is so-called because
it comes out from under the upland of the Little Hill (Kohtk)*
lying between itandthe town. The Dar-i-gham Water (canal)
flows along the south, at the distance of some two miles
(1 shari‘). This is a large and swift torrent,® indeed it is like a
large river, cut off from the Kohik Water. All the gardens and
suburbs and some of the t&#mdans of Samarkand are cultivated
byit. Bythe Kohik Water a stretch of from 30 to 40 yighdach,®
by road, is made habitable and cultivated, as far as Bukhara


1 See D’Herbélot art. Aschair p. 124.

2 Abii ‘Abdu’l-lah bin Isma‘ilu’l-jausi b. 194 AH. d. 256 AH. (810-870 AD.).
See D’Herbélot art. Bokhari p. 191, art. Giorag p. 373, and art. Sahihu’l-
bokhari p. 722. He passed a short period, only, of his life in Khartank, a
suburb of Samarkand.

3 Cf. f. 3b and n. 1.

4 This though 2475 ft. above the sea is only some 300 ft. above Samarkand.
It is the Chipan-ata (Father of Shepherds) of maps and on it Timir built a
shrine to the local patron of shepherds. The Zar-afshan, or rather, its
Qara-si arm, flows from the east of the Little Hill and turns round it to
flow west. Babur uses the name Kohik Waiter loosely ; e.g. for the whole
Zar-afshan when he speaks (infra) of cutting off the Dar-i-gham canal but for
its southern arm only, the Qar4-sii in several places, and once, for the Dar-i-
gham canal. See f. 49b and Kostenko i. 192.

5 vid. The Zar-afshan has a very rapid current. See Kostenko i, 196,
and for the canal, i, 174. The name Dar-i-gham is used also for a musical
note having charm to witch away grief ; and also for a town noted for its
wines.

6 What this represents can only be guessed ; perhaps 150 to 200 miles.
Abii’l-fida (Reinaud ii, 213) quotes Ibn Haukal as saying that from Bukhara
up to ‘“‘ Bottam ”’ (this seems to be where the Zar-afshan emerges into the
open land) is eight days’ journey through an unbroken tangle of verdure and
gardens.


;
y
\
é
b
\
\
n,


903 AH.—AUG. 80TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 77


and Qara-kil. Large as the river is, it is not too large for its
dwellings and its culture; during three or four months of the
year, indeed, its waters do not reach Bukhara.’ Grapes,
melons, apples and pomegranates, all fruits indeed, are good
in Samarkand; two are famous, its apple and its sabi (grape).”
Its winter is mightily cold; snow falls but not so much as in
Kabul; in the heats its climate is good but not so good as
Kabul’s.

In the town and suburbs of Samarkand are many fine build-
ings and gardens of Timur Beg and Atlugh Beg Mirza.*

In the citadel,* Timtr Beg erected a very fine building, the
great four-storeyed kiosque, known as the Gtk Sarai.® In the
walled-town, again, near the Iron Gate, he built a Friday
Mosque’ of stone (sangin) ; on this worked many stone-cutters,
brought from Hinditstan. Round its frontal arch is inscribed
in letters large enough to be read two miles away, the Qu’ran
verse, Wa az yerfa‘ Ibrahim al Qawa‘id ali akhara." This also
is a very fine building. Again, he laid out two gardens, on the


1 See Schuyler i; 286 on the apportionment of water to Samarkand and
Bukhara.

2 It is still grown in the Samarkand region, and in Mr. Erskine’s time a
grape of the same name was cultivated in Aurangabad of the Deccan.

3 i.e. Shahrukhi, Timir’s grandson, through Shahrukh. It may be noted
here that Babur never gives Timtr any other title than Beg and that he
styles all Timirids, Mirza (Mir-born).

# Mr. Erskine here points out the contradiction between the statements
(i) of Ibn Haukal, writing, in 367 AH. (977 AD.), of Samarkand as having a
citadel (avk), an outer-fort (gurghdn) and Gates in both circumvallations ;
and (2) of Sharafu’d-din Yazdi (Z.N.) who mentions that when, in Timir’s
day, the Getes besieged Samarkand, it had neither walls nor gates. See
Ouseley’s Ibn Haukal p. 253 ; Z.N. Bib. Ind. ed. i, 109 and Pétis de la Croix’s
Z.N. (Histoire de Timi Beg) i, 91.

5 Here still lies the Ascension Stone, the Gik-itdsh, a block of greyish white
marble. Concerning the date of the erection of the building and meaning
of its name, see e.g. Pétis de la Croix’s Histoive de Chingiz Khan p. 171 ; Mems.
p- 40 note ; and Schuyler s.n.

6 This seems to be the Bibi Khanim Mosque. The author of Les Mosquées
de Samarcande states that Timir built Bibi Khanim and the Gir-i-amir
(Amir’s tomb) ; decorated Shah-i-zinda and set up the Chipan-ata shrine.
Cf.£ 46 and note to Jahangir Mirza, as to the Gir-i-amir.

? Cap. II. Quoting from Sale’s Quy’dn (i, 24) the verse is, ‘‘ And Ibrahim
and Isma‘il raised the foundations of the house, saying, ‘Lord! accept it
from us, for Thou art he who hearest and knowest ; Lord! make us also
resigned to Thee, and show us Thy holy ceremonies, and be turned to us, for
Thou art easy to be reconciled, and merciful.’ ”


Fol. 456.


Fol. 46,


we’ ee eoe te CP re SO ~ ere
y ‘\ ee Wad
3 Pe Tee Bi hee


78 FARGHANA
east of the town, one, the more distant, the Bagh-i-bulandi,? —
the other and nearer, the Bagh-i-dilkusha.2 From Dilkusha to —
the Turquoise Gate, he planted an Avenue of White Poplar,’
and in the garden itself erected a great kiosque, painted inside
with pictures of his battles in Hindtistan. He made another
garden, known as the Naqsh-i-jahan (World’s Picture), on the
skirt of Kohik, above the Qara-su or, as people also call it, the |
Ab-i-rahmat (Water-of-mercy) of K4n-i-gil.4 It had gone to
ruin when I saw it, nothing remaining of it except its name.
His also are the Bagh-i-chanar,® near the walls and below the
town on the south,® also the Bagh-i-shamal (North Garden)
and the Bagh-i-bihisht (Garden of Paradise). His owntomb
and those of his descendants who have ruled in Samarkand, _
are in a College, built at the exit (chdgdr) of the walled-town, by '
Muhammad Sultan Mirza, the son of Timir Beg’s son, ~
Jahangir Mirza.’ ¥

Amongst Ailigh Beg Mirza’s buildings inside the town are
a College and a monastery (Khadngadh). The dome of the
monastery is very large, few so large are shown in the world.
Near these two buildings, he constructed an excellent Hot
Bath (hammdam) known as the Mirza’s Bath; he had the pave-
ments in this made of all sorts of stone (? mosaic); such a


1 or, buland, Garden of the Height or High Garden. The Turkitexts have —
what can be read as buldi but the Z.N. both when describing it (ii, 194) ¢
and elsewhere (e.g. ii, 596) writes buland. Buldi may be a clerical error for
bulandi, the height, a name agreeing with the position of the garden.

2 In the Heart-expanding Garden, the Spanish Ambassadors had their first
interview with Timur. See Clavijo (Markham p,. 130). Also the Z.N. ii, 6
for an account of its construction.

3 Judging from the location of the gardens and of Babur’s camps, this
appears to be the Avenue mentioned on f. 39) and f. 4o.

4 See infra f. 48 and note.

5 The Plane-tree Garden. This seems to be Clavijo’s Bayginar, laid out:
shortly before he saw it (Markham p. 136).

6 The citadel of Samarkand stands high ; from it the ground slopes west
and south; on these sides therefore gardens outside the walls would lie
markedly below the outer-fort (tash-qirghdn). Here as elsewhere the second
W.-i-B. reads stone for outer (Cf. index s.n, tash). For the making of the
North garden see Z.N. i, 799.

7 Timiir’s eldest son, d. 805 AH. (1402 AD.), before his father, therefore.
Babur’s wording suggests that in his day, the Giir-i-amir was known as the-
Madrasa. See as to the buildings Z.N. i, 713 and ii, 492, 595, 597, 705 :
Clavijo (Markham p. 164 and p. 166) ; and Les Mosquées de Samarcande.


903 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 79


another bath is not known in Khurdsan or in Samarkand.!
Again ;—to the south of the College is his mosque, known as the
Masjid-i-maqata‘ (Carved Mosque) because its ceiling and its
walls are all covered with zs/imi? and Chinese pictures formed
of segments of wood.’ There is great discrepancy between the
gibla of this mosque and that of the College; that of the
mosque seems to have been fixed by astronomical observation.
Another of Atligh Beg Mirza’s fine buildings is an observa-
tory, that is, an instrument for writing Astronomical Tables.*
This stands three storeys high, on the skirt of the Kohik
upland. By its means the Mirza worked out the Kurkani
Tables, now used all over the world. Less work is done with
any others. Before these were made, people used the Ail-
khani Tables, put together at Maragha, by Khwaja Nasir T7%s7,°
in the time of Hulaki Khan. Hulakii Khan it is, people call
Ail-khani®
(Author's note.) Not more than seven or eight observatories seem to
have been constructed in the world. Mamim Khalifa’? (Caliph) made
one with which the Mamiimi Tables were written. Batalmiis (Ptolemy)
constructed another. Another was made, in Hindiistan, in the time of
Raja Vikramaditya Hindu, in Ujjain and Dhar, that is, the Malwa
country, now known as Mandi. The Hindis of Hindiistan use the


Tables of this Observatory. They were put together 1,584 years ago.§
Compared with others, they are somewhat defective.


1 Hindistan would make a better climax here than Samarkand does.

2 These appear to be pictures or ornamentations of carved wood. Red-
house describes islimi as a special kind of ornamentation in curved lines,
similar to Chinese methods.

3 i.e. the Black Stone (ka’ba) at Makkah to which Musalmans turn in
prayer.

* As ancient observatories were themselves the instruments of astronomical
observation, Babur’s wording is correct. Ailiigh Beg’s great quadrant was
180 ft. high; Abi-muhammad Khujandi’s sextant had a radius of 58 ft.
Jai Singh made similar great instruments in Ja’ipir, Dihli has others. Cf.
Greaves Misc. Works i, 50 ; Mems. p. 51 note ; Aiyin-i-akbari (Jarrett) ii, 5
and note ; Murray’s Hand-book to Bengal p. 331 ; Indian Gazetteer xiii, 400.

5 b. 597 AH. d. 672 AH. (1201-1274 AD.). See D’Herbélot’s art. Nasir-i-din
aba ; Abii’l-fida (Reinaud, Introduction i, cxxxviii) and Beale’s Biographical

ict. s.n.

6 a grandson of Chingiz Khan, d. 663 an. (1265 AD.). The cognomen
Ail-khani (Ii-khani) may mean Khan of the Tribe.

7 Hartinu’r-rashid’s second son ; d. 218 AH. (833 AD.).

8 Mr, Erskine notes that this remark would seem to fix the date at which
Babur wrote it as 934 AH. (1527 AD.), that being the 1584th. year of the era
of Vikramaditya, and therefore at three years before Babur’s death. (The
Vikramaditya era begun 57 Bc.)


Fol. 460.


Fol. 47.


Fol. 474.


80 FARGHANA a


hi fy


Ailigh Beg Mirzd again, made the garden known as the —
Bagh-i-maidan (Garden of the Plain), on the skirt of the
Kohik upland. In the middle of it he erected a fine building —
they call Chihil Sittin (Forty Pillars). On both storeys are


pillars, all of stone (¢dshdin).' Four turrets, like minarets,
stand on its four corner-towers, the way up into them being
through the towers. Everywhere there are stone pillars, some
fluted, some twisted, some many-sided. On the four sides of
the upper storey are open galleries enclosing a four-doored
hall (chadr-dara); their pillars also are all of stone. The raised
floor of the building is all paved with stone.

He made a smaller garden, out beyond Chihil Sittin and
towards Kohik, also having a building in it. In the open
gallery of this building he placed a great stone throne, some
14 or 15 yards (gart) long, some 8 yards wide and perhaps
1 yard high. They brought a stone so large by a very long
road.2 There is a crack in the middle of it which people say
must have come after it was brought here. In the same
garden he also built a four-doored hall, know as the Chini-
khana (Porcelain House) because its iza@ra® are all of porcelain ;
he sent to China for the porcelain used in it. Inside the walls
again, is an old building of his, known as the Masjid-i-laqlaqa
(Mosque of the Echo). If anyone stamps on the ground under
the middle of the dome of this mosque, the sound echoes back
from the whole dome; it is a curious matter of which none
know the secret.

In the time also of Sl. Ahmad Mirza the great and lesser
begs laid out many gardens, large and small.* For beauty, and
air, and view, few will have equalled Darwesh Muhammad
Tarkhan’s Char-bagh (Four Gardens).° It lies overlooking


the whole of Qulba Meadow, on the slope below the Bagh-i-


1 Cf. index s.n. tash.
2 This remark may refer to the 34 miles between the town and the quarries


of its building stone. See f. 49 and note to Aitmak Pass.

2 Steingass, any support for the back in sitting, a low wall in front of a
house. See Vullers p. 148 and Burhdn-i-qati‘; p. 119. Perhaps a dado.

4 beg u begat, bagh u baghcha,


See TSE ge ee | ee ee


ee a eee


5 Four Gardens, a quadrilateral garden, laid out in four plots, The use ~


of the name has now been extended for any well-arranged, large garden,
especially one belonging to a ruler (Erskine).


9038 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 81


maidan. Moreover it is arranged symmetrically, terrace above
terrace, and is planted with beautiful ndrwan* and cypresses
and white poplar. A most agreeable sojourning place, its one
defect is the want of a large stream.

Samarkand is a wonderfully beautified town. One of its
specialities, perhaps found in few other places,” is that the
different trades are not mixed up together in it but each has its
own bazar, a good sort of plan. Its bakers and its cooks are
good. The best paper in the world is made there; the water
for the paper-mortars® all comes from K4n-i-gil,* a meadow on
the banks of the Qara-si (Blackwater) or Ab-i-rahmat (Water
of Mercy). Another article of Samarkand trade, carried to all
sides and quarters, is cramoisy velvet.

Excellent meadows lie round Samarkand. One is the
famous K4n-i-gil, some 2 miles east and a little north of the
town. The Qar4-si or Ab-i-rahmat flows through it, a stream
(with driving power) for perhaps seven or eight mills. Some
say the original name of the meadow must have been
Kan-i-abgir (Mine of Quagmire) because the river is bordered
by quagmire, but the histories all write Kan-i-gil (Mine of clay).
It is an excellent meadow. The Samarkand sultans always


made it their reserve, going out to camp in it each year for a
month or two.


1 As two of the trees mentioned here are large, it may be right to translate
ndarwan, not by pomegranate, but as the hard-wood elm, Madame Ujfalvy’s
‘ kavagatche’ (p. 168 and p. 222). The name gard-yighadch (kavragatch),
dark tree, is given to trees other than this elm on account of their deep
shadow.

2 Now a common plan indeed! See Schuyler i, 173.

3 juwdaz-1-kaghazlar (ning) si’i,7.e. the water of the paper-(pulping)-mortars,
Owing to the omission from some MSS. of the word s#, water, juwdz has been
mistaken for a kind of paper. See Mems. p. 52 and Méms. i, 102 ; A.Q.R.
July 1910, p. 2, art. Paper-mills of Samarkand (H.B.) ; and Madame Ujfalvy
p. 188. Kostenko, it is to be noted, does not include paper in his list (i, 346)
of modern manufactures of Samarkand.

# Mine of mud or clay. My husband has given me support for reading gil,
and not gul, rose;—(1) In two good MSS. of the W.-i-B. the word is pointed
with kasva, t.e. as for gil, clay ; and (2) when describing a feast held in the
garden by Timir, the Z.N. says the mud-mine became a rose-mine, shuda
Kan-i-gil Kdn-i-gul. [Mr. Erskine refers here to Pétis de la Croix’s Histoire
de Timi Beg (i.e. Z.N.) i, 96 and ii, 133 and 421.]

5 quviigh. Vullers, classing the word as Arabic, Zenker, classing it as
Eastern Turki, and Erskine (p. 42 n.) explain this as land reserved for the


6


Fol. 48.


Fol. 482.


Fol. 49.


82 FARGHANA


Higher up (on the river) than K4n-i-gil and to the s.e. —
of it is a meadow some 4 miles east of the town, known as
Khan Yurti (Khan’s Camping-ground). The Qara-sii flows
through this meadow before entering Kan-i-gil, When it
comes to Khan Yirti it curves back so far that it encloses,
with a very narrow outlet, enough ground fora camp. Having
noticed these advantages, we camped there for a time during _
the siege of Samarkand." :

Another meadow is the Bidana Qiiriigh (Quail Reserve), 7
lying between Dil-kusha and the town. Another is the Kiél-i-
maghak (Meadow of the deep pool) at some 4 miles from the
town. This also is a round? meadow. People call it Kul-i-
maghak meadow because there is a large pool on one side of it.
Sl. ‘Ali Mirza lay here during the siege, when I was in Khan


ee itp


Yurti. Another and smaller meadow is Qulba (Plough); it —
has Qulba Village and the Kohik Water on the north, the F
Bagh-i-maidan and Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhan’s Char-bagh
on the south, and the Kohik upland on the west. i


Samarkand has good districts and tumdns. Its largest
district, and one that is its equal, is Bukhara, 25 yighdch*® to
the west. Bukhara in its turn, has several t#mans ; it is a fine -
town; its fruits are many and good, its melons excellent;
none in Ma wara’u’n-nahr matching them for quality and
quantity. Although the Mir Timuri melon of Akhsi* is sweeter
and more delicate than any Bukhara melon, still in Bukhara
many kinds of melon are good and plentiful. The Bukhara
plum is famous; no other equals it. They skin it,° dry it and
carry it from land to land with rarities (tabarriklar bila) ; it is
an excellent laxative medicine. Fowls and geese are much


f


summer encampment of princes. Shaw (Voc. p. 155), deriving it from
qurumaq, to frighten, explains it as a fenced field of growing grain. i

1 Cf.f.40. There it is located at one yighdch and here at 3 kurohs from the
town.

2 ftaur. Cf. Zenker s.n. I understand it to lie, as Khan Yirti did, in a curve
of the river.

3 162 m. by rail.

* Cf. f. 3.

5 tivisini suiub. The verb siimak, to despoil, seems to exclude the common
plan of stoning the fruit. Cf. f. 3b, danasini alip, taking out the stones,


908 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 83


looked after (parwdri) in Bukhara. Bukhara wine is the strongest
made in Ma wara’u’n-nahr; it was what I drank when drink-
ing in those countries at Samarkand.

Kesh is another district of Samarkand, 9 yighdch? by road
to the south of the town. A range called the Aitmak Pass
(Dabdn)® lies between Samarkand and Kesh; from this are
taken all the stones for building. Kesh is called also Shahr-
i-sabz (Green-town) because its barren waste (sahr) and roofs
and walls become beautifully green in spring. As it was Timtr
Beg’s birth-place, he tried hard to make it his capital. He
erected noble buildings in it. To seat his own Court, he built
a great arched hall and in this seated his Commander-begs and
his Diwan-begs, on his right and on his left. For those
attending the Court, he built two smaller halls, and to seat
petitioners to his Court, built quite small recesses on the four
sides of the Court-house.* Fewarches so fine can be shown in
the world. It is said to be higher than the Kisri Arch.°
Timtr Beg also built in Kesh a college and a mausoleum,
in which are the tombs of Jahangir Mirza and others of his
descendants. As Kesh did not offer the same facilities as


1 Min Samarkandta aul (or auwal) aichkandaé Bukhara chaghirlay ni aichar
aidim. These words have been understood to refer to Babur’s initial drinking
of wine but this reading is negatived by his statement (f. 189) that he first
drank wine in Harat in 912 au. I understand his meaning to be that the
wine he drank in Samarkand was Bukhara wine. The time cannot have been
earlier than 917 AH. The two words ail aichkanda@, I read as parallel to aul
(baghvi garda) (f. 280) ‘ that drinking,’ ‘ that bird,’ 7.e. of those other countries,
not of Hindistan where he wrote.

It may be noted that Babur’s word for wine, chdghir, may not always
represent wine of the grape but may include wine of the apple and pear (cider
and perry), and other fruits. Cider, its name seeming to be a descendant of
chaghiy, was introduced into England by Crusaders, its manufacture having
been learned from Turks in Palestine.

2 48 m. 3 fur. by way of the Aitmak Pass (mod. Takhta Qarachi), and,
_ Réclus (vi, 256) Buz-gala-khana, Goat-house.

* The name Aitmak, to build, appears to be due to the stone quarries on
the range. The pass-head is 34 m. from Samarkand and 3000 ft. above it.
See Kostenko ii, 115 and Schuyler ii, 61 for details of the route.

4 The description of this hall is difficult to translate. Clavijo (Markham
“oy hati light on the small recesses. Cf. Z.N.i, 781 and 300 and Schuyler
ii, 68.

5 The Taq-i-kisri, below Baghdad, is 105 ft. high, 84 ft. span and 150 ft.
in depth (Erskine).

6 Cf. f. 46. Babur does not mention that Timir’s father was buried at


Kesh, Clavijo (Markham p. 123) says it was Timir’s first intention to be
buried near his father, in Kesh.


Fol. 493.


Fol. 50.


34 ; FARGHANA


Samarkand for becoming a town and a capital, he at last made ©
clear choice of Samarkand. |

Another district is OQarshi, known also as Nashaf and Nakh- |
shab.! Qarshi is a Mughil name. In the Mughul tongue they
call a kiuir-khana Qarshi.2 The name must have come in after —
the rule of Chingiz Khan. Qarshi is somewhat scantily sup-
plied with water; in spring it is very beautiful and its grain
and melons are good. It lies 18 yighach*® by road south anda ~
little inclined to west of Samarkand. In the district a small ~
bird, known as the qil-qiiyivugh and resembling the baghri gard, —
is found in such countless numbers that it goes by the name of ~
the Qarshi birdie (murghak).* 5

Khozar is another district; Karmina another, lying between 4
Samarkand and Bukhara; Qara-kiil another, 7 yighdch® nw. —
of Bukhara and at the furthest limit of the water.

Samarkand has good témdans. One is Soghd with its de- —
pendencies. Its head Yar-yilaq, its foot Bukhara, there may ~
be not one single yighadch of earth without its village and its *
cultivated lands. So famous is it that the saying attributed to
Timur Beg, ‘I have a garden 30 yighach long,® must have been
spoken of Soghd. Another t#mdan is Shavdar (var. Shadwar),
an excellent one adjoining the town-suburbs. On one side it
has the range (Aitmak Daban), lying between Samarkand and _
Shahr-i-sabz, on the skirts of which are many of its villages. —
On the other side is the Kohik Water (7.e. the Dar-i-gham ~
canal). There it lies! an excellent t#man, with fine air, full —
of beauty, abounding in waters, its good things cheap. —
Observers of Egypt and Syria have not pointed out its match. —


ey
‘
ii
1 Abi’l-fida (Reinaud II, ii, 21) says that Nasaf is the Arabic and Nakhshab if
the local name for Qarshi. Ibn Haukal (Ouseley p. 260) writes Nakhshab.
2 This word has been translated burial-place and cimetiéve but Qarshi means ‘ ;
castle, or royal-residence. The Z.N. (i, 111) says that Qarshi is an equivalent
for Ar. gasy, palace, and was so called, from one built there by Qublai Khan i
(d. 1294 AD.), Perhaps Babur’s word is connected with Girkhan, the title —
of sovereigns in Khutan, and means great or royal-house, i.e. palace. . 4
3 94 m. 64 fur. via Jam (Kostenko i, 115.) ;
# See Appendix B. ‘
5 some 34 m. (Kostenko i, 196). Schuyler mentions that he heard in —
Qara-kill a tradition that the district, in bye-gone days, was fertilized from —
the Sir. vt
© Cf. f. 45.


908 AH.—AUG. 80TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 85


Though Samarkand has other t#mdns, none rank with those
enumerated ; with so much, enough has been said.

Timi Beg gave the government of Samarkand to his eldest
son, Jahangir Mirza (in 776 AH.-1375 AD.); when Jahangir
Mirza died (805 AH.-1403 AD.), he gave it to the Mirza’s eldest
son, Muhammad Sultan-i-jahangir; when Muhammad Sultan
Mirza died, it went to Shah-rukh Mirza, Timtr Beg’s youngest
son. Shah-rukh Mirza gave the whole of Ma wara’u’n-nahr
(in 872 AH.-1467 AD.) to his eldest son, Atiligh Beg Mirza.
From him his own son, ‘Abdu’l-latif Mirza took it, (853 AH.-
1449 AD.), for the sake of this five days’ fleeting world martyr-
ing a father so full of years and knowledge.

The following chronogram gives the date of Atligh Beg
Mirza’s death :-—

Ailigh Beg, an ocean of wisdom and science,

The pillar of realm and religion,

Sipped from the hand of ‘Abbas, the mead of martyrdom,

And the date of the death is ‘Abbas kasht (‘Abbas slew).!

Though ‘Abdu’l-latif Mirza did not rule more than five or six

months, the following couplet was current about him :—

Ill does sovereignty befit the parricide ;

Should he rule, be it for no more than six months.?

This chronogram of the death of ‘Abdu’l-latif Mirza is also
well done :—


‘Abdu’l-latif, in glory a Khusrau and Jamshid,

In his train a Faridin and Zardusht,

Baba Husain slew on the Friday Eve,

With an arrow. Write as its date, Baba Husain kasht (Baba
Husain slew) 3


After ‘Abdu’l-latif Mirza’s death, (Jumada I, 22, 855 au.-
June 22nd. 1450 AD.), (his cousin) ‘Abdu’l-lah Mirza, the grand-
son of Shah-rukh Mirza through Ibrahim Mirza, seated him-


1 By abjad the words ‘Abbds kasht yield 853. The date of the murder was
Ramzan 9, 853 AH. (Oct. 27th. 1449 AD.).

2 This couplet is quoted in the Rauzatu’s-safa (lith. ed. vi, f. 234 foot) and
in the I.S. ii, 44. It is said, in the R.S. to be by Nizdmi and to refer to the
killing by Shiriiya of his father, Khusrau Parwiz in 7 AH. (628 AD.). The
H.S. says that ‘Abdu’l-latif constantly repeated the couplet, after he had
murdered his father. [See also Daulat Shah (Browne p. 356 and p. 366.) H.B.

3 By abjad, Baba Husain kasht yields 854. The death was on Rabi’ I, 26,
854 AH. (May oth. 1450 ap.). See R.S. vi, 235 for an account of this death.


Fol. 504.


Fol. 51.


86 FARGHANA


self on the throne and ruled for 18 months to two years.)
From him Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza took it (855 AH.-1451 AD.). He
in his life-time gave it to his eldest son, Sl. Ahmad Mirza; _
Sl. Ahmad Mirza continued to rule it after his father’s death —
(873 AH.-1469 AD.). On his death (899 AH.-1494 AD.) Sl. Mahmiid
Mirza was seated on the throne and on his death (goo AuH.-
1495 AD.) Bai-sunghar Mirza. Bdai-sunghar Mirza was made —
prisoner for a few days, during the Tarkhan rebellion (gor AH.- _
1496 AD.), and his younger brother, S]. ‘Ali Mirza was seated on —
the throne, but Bai-sunghar Mirza, as has been related in this
history, took it again directly. From Bai-sunghar Mirza I —
took it (903 AH.-1497 AD.). Further details will be learned —
from the ensuing history.


(c. Babur’s rule in Samarkand.)


When I was seated on the throne, I shewed the Samarkand
begs precisely the same favour and kindness they had had
before. I bestowed rank and favour also on the begs with me,
to each according to his circumstances, the largest share falling _
to Sl. Ahmad Tambal; he had been in the household begs’ ~
circle; I now raised him to that of the great begs, B

We had taken the town after a seven months’ hard siege.
Things of one sort or other fell to our men when we got in. —
The whole country, with exception of Samarkand itself, had
come in earlier either to me or to Sl. ‘Ali Mirza and conse- —
quently had not been over-run. In any case however, what ~
could have been taken from districts so long subjected to raid
and rapine? The booty our men had taken, such as it was, —
came to an end. When we entered the town, it was in such ~
distress that it needed seed-corn and money-advances; what
place was this to take anything from? On these accounts our
men suffered great privation. We ourselves could give them
nothing. Moreover they yearned for their homes and, by ones
and twos, set their faces for flight. The first to go was Bayan
Ouli’s (son) Khan Quli; Ibrahim Begchik was another; all the
Mughils went off and, a little later, S]. Ahmad Tambal. 7

Aiiziin Hasan counted himself a very sincere and faithful ~


1 This overstates the time ; dates shew I yr. 1 mth, and a few days.


908 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 87


friend of Khwaja-i-qazi; we therefore, to put a stop to these
desertions, sent the Khwaja to him (in Andijan) so that they,
in agreement, might punish some of the deserters and send
others back to us. But that very Aiizin Hasan, that traitor to
his salt, may have been the stirrer-up of the whole trouble and
the spur-to-evil of the deserters from Samarkand. Directly Sl.
Ahmad Tambal had gone, all the rest took up a wrong position.


(d. Andijan demanded of Babur by The Khan, and also for Jahangir
Mirz@.)

Although, during the years in which, coveting Samarkand, I
had persistently led my army out, Sl. Mahmiid Khan* had
provided me with no help whatever, yet, now it had been taken,
he wanted Andijan. Moreover, Aiziin Hasan and Sl. Ahmad
Tambal, just when soldiers of ours and all the Mughuls had
deserted to Andijan and Akhsi, wanted those two districts for
Jahangir Mirza. For several reasons, those districts could not
be given to them. One was, that though not promised to The
Khan, yet he had asked for them and, as he persisted in asking,
an agreement with him was necessary, if they were to be given
to Jahangir Mirza. A further reason was that to ask for them
just when deserters from us had fled to them, was very like a
command. If the matter had been brought forward earlier,
some way of tolerating a command might have been found. At
the moment, as the Mughiils and the Andijan army and several
even of my household had gone to Andijan, I had with me in
Samarkand, beg for beg, good and bad, somewhere about 1000
men.

When Aiziin Hasan and SI. Ahmad Tambal did not get what
they wanted, they invited all those timid fugitives to join them.
Just such a happening, those timid people, for their own sakes,
had been asking of God in their terror. Hereupon, Aiziin
Hasan and Sl. Ahmad Tambal, becoming openly hostile and
rebellious, led their army from Akhsi against Andijan.

Tultin Khwaja was a bold, dashing, eager brave of the Barin
(Mughiils). My father had favoured him and he was still in
favour, I myself having raised him to the rank of beg. In

1 7.e, The Khan of the Mughils, Babur’s uncle.


Fol. 512.


Fol. 52.


Fol. 520.


Fol. 53.


88 FARGHANA 0


truth he deserved favour, a wonderfully bold and dashing brave!
He, as being the man I favoured amongst the Mughiils, was


sent (after them) when they began to desert from Samarkand, to
counsel the clans and to chase fear from their hearts so that
they might not turn their heads to the wind.t Those two
traitors however, those false guides, had so wrought on the
clans that nothing availed, promise or entreaty, counsel or
threat. Tulin Khwaja’s march lay through Aiki-si-arasi,”
known also as Rabatik-atrchini. Atiztin Hasan sent a
skirmishing party against him; it found him off his guard,
seized and killed him. This done, they took Jahangir Mirza
and went to besiege Andijan.


(ec. Babur loses Andyan.)


In Andijan when my army rode out for Samarkand, I had
left Atiziin Hasan and ‘Ali-dost Taghai (Ramzan 902AH.-May
1497 AD.). Khwéaja-i-qazi had gone there later on, and there
too were many of my men from Samarkand. During the siege,
the Khwaja, out of good-will to me, apportioned 18,000 of his
own sheep to the garrison and to the families of the men still
with me. While the siege was going on, letters kept coming to
me from my mothers’ and from the Khwaja, saying in effect,
‘ They are besieging us in this way ; if at our cry of distress you
do not come, things will go all to ruin. Samarkand was taken
by the strength of Andijan; if Andijan is in your hands, God
willing, Samarkand can be had again.’ One after another
came letters to this purport. Just then I was recovering from
illness but, not having been able to take due care in the days of
convalescence, I went all to pieces again and this time, became
so very ill that for four days my speech was impeded and they


1 Elph. MS. aurmaghdilay, might not turn ; Hai. and Kehr’s MSS, (sar ba@
bad) birmaghdilaw, might not give. Both metaphors seem drawn from the
protective habit of man and beast of turning the back to a storm-wind.

2 i.e. betwixt two waters, the Miyan-i-dii-ab of India. Here, it is the most
fertile triangle of land in Turkistan (Réclus, vi, 199), enclosed by the eastern
mountains, the Narin and the Qara-sii; Rabatik-airchini, its alternative
name, means Small Station sub-district. From the uses of atrchin I infer
that it describes a district in which there is no considerable head-quarters
fort.

3 i.e. his own, Qithiq-nigar Khanim and hers, Aisan-daulat Begim, with
perhaps other widows of his father, probably Shah Sultan Begim,


Sie M


903 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 89


ised to drop water into my mouth with cotton. Those with
ne, begs and bare braves alike, despairing of my life, began
xach to take thought for himself. While I was in this condition,
che begs, by an error of judgment, shewed me to a servant of
Atiziin Hasan’s, a messenger come with wild proposals, and
then dismissed him. In four or five days, I became somewhat
better but still could not speak, in another few days, was
myself again.

Such letters! so anxious, so beseeching, coming from my
mothers, that is from my own and hers, Aisan-daulat Begim,
and from my teacher and spiritual guide, that is, Khwaja-i-
maulana-i-qazi, with what heart would a man not move? We
left Samarkand for Andijan on a Saturday in Rajab (Feb.-
March), when I had ruled roo days in the town. It was
Saturday again when we reached Khujand and on that day a
person brought news from Andijan, that seven days before, that
is on the very day we had left Samarkand, ‘Ali-dost Taghai had
surrendered Andijan.

These are the particulars ;—The servant of Aiziin Hasan who,
after seeing me, was allowed to leave, had gone to Andijan and
there said, ‘The padshah cannot speak and they are dropping
water into his mouth with cotton.’ Having gone and made
these assertions in the ordinary way, he took oath in ‘Ali-dost
Taghdai’s presence. ‘Ali-dost Taghai was in the Khakan Gate.
Becoming without footing through this matter, he invited the
opposite party into the fort, made covenant and treaty with
them, and surrendered Andijan. Of provisions and of fighting
men, there was no lack whatever; the starting point of the
surrender was the cowardice of that false and faithless
manikin; what was told him, he made a pretext to put him-
self in the right.

When the enemy, after taking possession of Andijan, heard
of my arrival in Khujand, they martyred Khwdaja-i-maulana-i-
qazi by hanging him, with dishonour, in the Gate of the citadel.
He had come to be known as Khwaja-maulan4-i-qazi but his
own name was ‘Abdu’l-lah. On his father’s side, his line went
back to Shaikh Burhanu’d-din ‘Ali Qilich, on his mother’s to
Sl. Ailik Mazi. This family had come to be the Religious


Fol. 534.


Fol. 54.


Fol. 544.


ee


90 FARGHANA


Guides (muqtadda) and pontiff (Shaikhw’l-islam) and Judge (q@z1)
in the Farghana country.1. He was a disciple of his Highness
‘Ubaidu’l-lah (Ahkrari) and from him had his upbringing. I ©
have no doubt he was a saint (wali); what better witnesses to ©
his sanctity than the fact that within a short time, no sign or —
trace remained of those active for his death? He was a
wonderful man; it was not in him to be afraid; in no other —
man was seen such courage as his. This quality is a further
witness to his sanctity. Other men, however bold, have ~
anxieties and tremours; he had none. When they had killed —
him, they seized and plundered those connected with him, —
retainers and servants, tribesmen and followers.
In anxiety for Andijan, we had given Samarkand out of our
hands; then heard we had lost Andijan. It was like the saying, —
‘In ignorance, made to leave this place, shut out from that’ —
(Ghafil az in ja vanda, az Gn ja manda). It was very hard and ~
vexing to me; for why? never since I had ruled, had I been cut —
off like this from my retainers and my country; never since I
had known myself, had I known such annoyance and such
hardship.


(f. Babur’s action from Khujand as his base.)


On our arrival in Khujand, certain hypocrites, not enduring
to see Khalifa in my Gate, had so wrought on Muhammad ~
Husain Mirza Déighlat and others that he was dismissed
towards Tashkint. To Tashkint also Qasim Beg Quchin had ~
been sent earlier, in order to ask The Khan’s help for a move
on Andijan. The Khan consented to give it and came himself _
by way of the Ahangaran Dale,? to the foot of the Kindirlik
Pass. There I went also, from Khujand, and saw my Khan ~
dada. We then crossed the pass and halted on the Akhsi side. ©
The enemy for their part, gathered their men and went to
Akhsi. ) |


! Cf. {. 16 for almost verbatim statements.

2 Blacksmith’s Dale. Ahangavan appears corrupted in modern maps to
Angren. See U.S. ii, 293 for Khwand-amir’s wording of this episode.

3 Cf. f. 1b and Kostenko i, tor.

* i.e. Khan Uncle (Mother’s brother).


903 AH.—AUG, 80TH. 1497 To AUG, 19TH. 1498 AD. gl


Just at that time, the people in Pap! sent me word they had
made fast the fort but, owing to something misleading in The
Khan’s advance, the enemy stormed and took it. Though
The Khan had other good qualities and was in other ways
businesslike, he was much without merit as a soldier and
commander. Just when matters were at the point that if he
made one more march, it was most probable the country would
be had without fighting, at such a time! he gave ear to what
the enemy said with alloy of deceit, spoke of peace and, as his
messengers, sent them Khwaja Abi’l-makaram and his own
Lord of the Gate, Beg Tilba (Fool), Tambal’s elder brother.
To save themselves those others (7.c. Hasan and Tambal) mixed
something true with what they fabled and agreed to give gifts
and bribes either to The Khan or to his intermediaries. With
this, The Khan retired.

As the families of most of my begs and household and braves
were in Andijan, 7 or 800 of the great and lesser begs and bare
braves, left us in despair of our taking the place. Of the begs
were ‘Ali-darwesh Beg, ‘Ali-mazid Qiéchin, Muhammad Baqgir
Beg, Shaikh ‘Abdu’l-lah, Lord of the Gate and Mirim Laghart.
Of men choosing exile and hardship with me, there may have
been, of good and bad, between 200 and 300. Of begs there
were Oasim Qichin Beg, Wais Laghari Beg, Ibrahim Sara
Mingligh Beg, Shirim Taghai, Sayyidi Qara Beg; and of my
household, Mir Shah Qachin, Sayyid Qasim Jaldir, Lord of the
Gate, Qdasim-‘ajab, ‘Ali-dost Taghdi's (son) Muhammad-dost,
Muhammad-‘ali Mubashir,? Khudai-birdi Tighcht Mughal, Yarik
Taghai, Baba ‘Ali’s (son) Baba Quli, Pir Wais, Shaikh Wais,
Yar-‘ali Balal,? Qasim Mir Akhwir (Chief Equerry) and Haidar
Rikabdar (stirrup-holder).

It came very hard on me; I could not help crying a good
deal. Back I went to Khujand and thither they sent me my


1 n.w. of the Sang ferry over the Sir.

2 perhaps, messenger of good tidings.

8 This man’s family connections are interesting. He was ‘Ali-shukr Beg
Baharla’s grandson, nephew therefore of Pasha Begim ; through his son,
Saif-‘ali Beg, he was the grandfather of Bairam Khan-i-khanan and thus the
g.g.f. of ‘Abdu’r-rahim Mirza, the translator of the Second Waqi‘at-1-baburi.
See Firishta lith. ed. p. 250.


Fol. 55e


Fol. 554.


Fol. 56.


92 FARGHANA


mother and my grandmother and the families of some of the ~
men with me. Bai

That Ramzan (April-May) we spent in Khujand, then
mounted for Samarkand. We had already sent to ask The
Khan’s help; he assigned, to act with us against Samarkand,
his son, Sl. Muhammad (Sultanim) Khanika and (his son’s
guardian) Ahmad Beg with 4 or 5000 men and rode himself as
far as Aiird-tipa. There I saw him and from there went on
by way of Y4r-yilaég, past the Birka-yilaq Fort, the head- -
quarters of the sub-governor (ddrogha) of the district. Sl.
Muhammad Sultén and Ahmad Beg, riding light and by
another road, got to Yar-yilaq first but on their hearing that
Shaibani Khan was raiding Shiraz and thereabouts, turned
back. There was no help for it! Back I too had to go. Again
I went to Khujand!

As there was in me ambition for rule and desire of conquest,
I did not sit at gaze when once or twice an affair had made no
progress. Now I myself, thinking to make another move for
Andijan, went to ask The Khan’s help. Over and above this,
it was seven or eight years since I had seen Shah Begim! and
other relations; they also were seen under the same pretext,
After a few days, The Khan appointed Sayyid Muhammad
Husain (Dighlat) and Ayub Begchik and Jan-hasan Barin with
7 or 8000 men to help us. With this help we started, rode
light, through Khujand without a halt, left Kand-i-badam on
the left and so to Nasukh, 9 or 10 yighdch of road beyond
Khujand and 3 yighdch (12-18 m.) from Kand-i-badam, there
set our ladders up and took the fort. It was the melon season;
one kind grown here, known as Isma‘il Shaikhi, has a yellow
rind, feels like shagreen leather, has seeds like an apple’s and
flesh four fingers thick. It isa wonderfully delicate melon; no
other such grows thereabout. Next day the Mughil begs
represented to me, ‘Our fighting men are few; to what would
holding this one fort lead on?’ In truth they were right; of
what use was it to make that fort fast and stay there? Back
once more to Khujand! |


* Babur’s (step-)grandmother, co-widow with Aisan-daulat of Yinas Khan
and mother of Ahmad and Mahmud Chaghatai.


903 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 19TH. 1498 AD. 93


(f. Affairs of Khusrau Shah and the Timurid Mirzas).*
This year Khusrau Shah, taking Bai-sunghar Mirza with


him, led his army (from Qindiz) to Chaghanian and with false
and treacherous intent, sent this message to Hisar for Sl.
Mas‘id Mirza, ‘Come, betake yourself to Samarkand; if Fol. 560.
Samarkand is taken, one Mirza may seat himself there, the
other in Hisar.’ Just at the time, the Mirza’s begs and house-
hold were displeased with him, because he had shewn excessive
favour to his father-in-law, Shaikh ‘Abdu’l-lah Barlds who from
Bai-sunghar Mirza had gone to him. Small district though
Hisar is, the Mirza had made the Shaikh’s allowance 1,000
tumans of fulas* and had given him the whole of Khutlan in
which were the holdings of many of the Mirza’s begs and
household. All this Shaikh ‘Abdu’l-lih had; he and his sons
took also in whole and in part, the control of the Mirza’s gate.
Those angered began, one after the other, to desert to Bai-
sunghar Mirza.

By those words of false alloy, having put Sl. Mas‘iid Mirza
off his guard, Khusrau Shah and Bai-sunghar Mirza moved
light out of Chaghanian, surrounded Hisar and, at beat of
morning-drum, took possession of it. Sl. Mas‘iid Mirza was in
Daulat Sarai, a house his father had built in the suburbs. Not
being able to get into the fort, he drew off towards Khutlan
with Shaikh ‘Abu’l-lah Barlds, parted from him half-way,
crossed the river at the Atlbaj ferry and betook himself to Sl.
Husain Mirza. Khusrau Shah, having taken Hisar, set Bai- Fol. 57.
sunghar Mirza on the throne, gave Khutlan to his own younger
brother, Wali and rode a few days later, to lay siege to Balkh
where, with many of his father’s begs, was Ibrahim Husain
Mirza (Bdai-qgara). He sent Nagar Bahddur, his chief retainer,
on in advance with 3 or 400 men to near Balkh, and himself
taking Bai-sunghar Mirza with him, followed and laid the siege.


- Here the narrative picks up the thread of Khusrau Shah’s affairs, dropped
on f. 44.


3 ming tuman fulis, t.e. a thousand sets-of-ten-thousand small copper coins.
Mr. Erskine (Mems. p. 61) here has a note on coins. As here the tu#mdn does


not seem to be a coin but a number, I do not reproduce it, valuable as it is
per se.


Fol. 574.


94 FARGHANA


Wali he sent off with a large force to besiege Shabarghan an¢ em
raid and ravage thereabouts. Wali, for his part, not being


able to lay close siege, sent his men off to plunder the clans
and hordes of the Zardak Chil, and they took him back
over 100,000 sheep and some 3000 camels. He then came,
plundering the San-chirik country on his way, and raiding and
making captive the clans fortified in the hills, to join Khusrau
Shah before Balkh.

One day during the siege, Khusrau Shah sent the Nazar
Bahadur already mentioned, to destroy the water-channels* of
Balkh. Out on him sallied Tingri-birdi Samdanchi,? Sl. Husain
Mirza’s favourite beg, with 70 or 80 men, struck him down, cut
off his head, carried it off, and went back into the fort. A very
bold sally, and he did a striking deed.


(g. Affairs of Sl. Husain Mirza and Badi‘u’z-zamdan Mirza.)


This same year, Sl. Husain Mirza led his army out to Bast
and there encamped,’ for the purpose of putting down Zi’n-
niin Arghiin and his son, Shah Shuja‘, because they had become
Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s retainers, had given him a daughter of
Zii’n-niin in marriage and taken up a position hostile to himself.
No corn for his army coming in from any quarter, it had begun
to be distressed with hunger when the sub-governor of Bast.
surrendered. By help of the stores of Bast, the Mirza got back.
to Khurdsan.

Since such a great ruler as Sl. Husain Mirza had twice led a.
splendid and well-appointed army out and twice retired, with-.
out taking Oiindiiz, or Hisar or Qandahar, his sons and his
begs waxed bold in revolt and rebellion. In the spring of this.
year, he sent a large army under Muhammad Wali Beg to put.
down (his son) Muhammad Husain Mirza who, supreme in
Astarabad, had taken up a position hostile to himself. While.
Sl. Husain Mirza was still lying in the Nishin meadow (near


+ dviglay ; this the annotator of the Elph. MS. has changed to dshliq,.
provisions, corn,

2 Samdn-chi may mean Keeper of the Goods. Tingri-birdi, Theodore, is the-
puny Turki form of the Khud§i-birdi, already met with several times in the-


3 Bast (Bost) is on the left bank of the Halmand.


908 AH.—AUG. 30TH. 1497 To AUG. 12TH. 1498 AD. 95


 Harat), he was surprised by Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza and Shah
Shuja‘ Beg (Arghiin). By unexpected good-fortune, he had been
joined that very day by Sl. Mas‘td Mirza, a refugee after
bringing about the loss of Hisar,1 and also rejoined by a force
of his own returning from Astarabad. There was no question
of fighting. Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza and Shah Beg, brought
face to face with these armies, took to flight.

Sl]. Husain Mirza looked kindly on SI]. Mas‘id Mirza, made
him kneel as a son-in-law and gave him a place in his favour
and affection. None-the-less Sl. Mas‘tid Mirza, at the instiga-
tion of Baqi Chaghdniani, who had come earlier,into Sl]. Husain
Mirza’s service, started off on some pretext, without asking
leave, and went from the presence of Sl. Husain Mirza to that
of Khusrau Shah!

Khusrau Shah had already invited and brought from Hisar,
Bai-sunghar Mirza; to him had gone Aiiliigh Beg Mirza’s son,”
Miran-shah Mirza who, having gone amongst the Hazara in
rebellion against his father, had been unable to remain amongst
them because of his own immoderate acts. Some short-sighted
persons were themselves ready to kill these three (Timirid)
Mirzas and to read Khusrau Shah’s name in the khutba but he
_ himself did not think this combination desirable. The ungrate-
ful manikin however, for the sake of gain in this five days’
fleeting world,—it was not true to him nor will it be true to any
man soever,—seized that Sl. Mas‘tid Mirza whom he had seen
grow up in his charge from childhood, whose guardian he had
been, and blinded him with the lancet.

Some of the Mirza’s foster-brethren and friends of affection
and old servants took him to Kesh intending to convey him to
his (half)-brother Sl. ‘Ali Mirza in Samarkand but as that
party also (7.e. ‘Ali’s) became threatening, they: fled with him,
crossed the river at the Aubaj ferry and went to Sl. Husain
Mirza.

1 Cf. £. 6b. |

2 known as Ka@buli. He wasason of Abi-sa‘id and thus an uncle of Babur.
He ruled Kabul and Ghazni from a date previous to his father’s death in
873 AH. (perhaps from the time ‘Umar Shaikh was of sent there, in 870 AH.


See f. 6b) to his death in 907 AH. Babur was his virtual successor in Kabul,
in gIO AH,


Fol, 58.


Fol. 584.


let him who hears of this act of Rhuees Shah, curse a hie
may he who hearing, curses not, know cursing equally desery
This horrid deed done, Khusrau Shah made Bai-sunghar
Mirza ruler in Hisar and dismissed him; Miran-shah Mirza he
despatched for Bamian with Sayyid Qasim to help him.


904 AH.—AUG. 197TH. 1498 ro AUG. 8TH. 1499 AD!


(a. Babur borrows Pashaghar and leaves Khujand.)


Twice we had moved out of Khujand, once for Andijan, once
for Samarkand, and twice we had gone back to it because our
work was not opened out.” Khujand is a poor place; a man
with 2 or 300 followers would have a hard time there; with
what outlook would an ambitious man set himself down in it?

As it was our wish to return to Samarkand, we sent people to
confer with Muhammad Husain Kirkan Dighlat in Aura-tipa
and to ask of him the loan for the winter of Pashaghar where
we might sit till it was practicable to make a move on
Samarkand. He consenting, I rode out from Khujand for
Pashaghar.

(Author’s note on Pashadghar.) Pashaghar is one of the villages of
Y4r-yilagq ; it had belonged to his Highness the KhwaAja,? but during
recent interregna,‘ it had become dependent on Muhammad Husain
Mirza.

I had fever when we reached Zamin, but spite of my
fever we hurried off by the mountain road till we came
over against Rabat-i-khwaja, the head-quarters of the sub-
governor of the Shavdar ¢u#mdn, where we hoped to take the
garrison at unawares, set our ladders up and so get into the


1 Elph. MS. f. 42; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 47b. and 217 f. 38; Mems. p. 63.
Babur here resumes his own story, interrupted on f. 56.

2 aish achilmddi, a phrase recurring on f. 59) foot. It appears to imply,
of trust in Providence, what the English ‘‘ The way was not opened,”’ does.
Cf. f. 606 for another example of trust, Sere clinching discussion whether to
go or not to go to Marghinan.

3 t.e. Ahrari. He had been dead some Io years. The despoilment of his
family is mentioned on f. 230.

4 fatratlar, here those due to the deaths of Ahmad and Mahmid with their
sequel of unstable government in Samarkand.


97 7


Fol. 59.


Fol. 594.


Fol. 60.


98 FARGHANA i


fort. We reached it at dawn, found its men on guard, turned — “a


back and rode without halt to Pashaghar. The pains and
misery of fever notwithstanding, I had ridden 14 or 15 yighach
(70 to 80 miles).

After a few days in Pashaghar, we appointed Ibrahim Sara,
Wais Laghari, Sherim Taghai and some of the household and
braves to make an expedition amongst the Yar-yilaq forts and
get them into our hands. Y4r-yilaq, at that time was Sayyid
Yisuf Beg’s,1 he having remained in Samarkand at the exodus
and been much favoured by Sl. ‘Ali Mirza. To manage the
forts, Sayyid Yisuf had sent his younger brother’s son, Ahmad-
i-yusuf, now® Governor of Sialkot, and Ahmad-i-yiisuf was then
in occupation. In the course of that winter, our begs and
braves made the round, got possession of some of the forts
peacefully, fought and took others, gained some by ruse and
craft. In the whole of that district there is perhaps not a
single village without its defences because of the Mughils and
the Aizbegs. Meantime Sl. ‘Ali Mirza became suspicious of
Sayyid Yusuf and his nephew on my account and dismissed
both towards Khurasan.

The winter passed in this sort of tug-of-war; with the on-
coming heats,’ they sent Khwaja Yahya to treat with me, while
they, urged on by the (Samarkand) army, marched out to near
Shiraz and Kabud. I may have had 200 or 300 soldiers
(sipahi) ; powerful foes were on my every side; Fortune had
not favoured me when I turned to Andijan; when I put a hand
out for Samarkand, no work was opened out. Of necessity,
some sort of terms were made and I went back from Pashaghar.

Khujand is a poor place; one beg would have a hard time in
it; there we and our families and following had been for half a

1 Atighlagchi, the player of the kid-game, the gray-wolfer. Yar-yilaq will
have gone with the rest of Samarkand into ‘Ali’s hands in Rajab 903 AH.
(March 1498). Contingent terms between him and Babur will have been


made; Ytsuf may have recognized some show of right under them, for
allowing Babur to occupy Y4r-yilaq.

? i.e. after 933 AH. Cf. f. 46b and note concerning the Bikramaditya era.
See index s.n. Ahmad-i-yisuf and HS. ii, 293.

3 This plural, unless ironical, cannot be read as honouring ‘Ali; Babur
uses the honorific plural most rarely and specially, e.g. for saintly persons,
for The Khan and for elder women-kinsfolk.


-


904 AH.—AUG. 19TH. 1498 To AUG. 8TH. 1499 AD. 99


year! and during the time the Musalmans of the place had
not been backward in bearing our charges and serving us to the
best of their power. With what face could we go there again ?
and what, for his own part, could a man do there? ‘To what
home to go? For what gain to stay ?”

In the end and with the same anxieties and uncertainty, we
went to the summer-pastures in the south of Auira-tipa. There
we spent some days in amazement at our position, not knowing
where to go or where to stay, our heads in a whirl. On one of
those days, Khwaja Abwt’l-makaram came to see me, he like
me, a wanderer, driven from his home.* He questioned us
about our goings and stayings, about what had or had not been
done and about our whole position. He was touched with
compassion for our state and recited the fatiha for me before he
left. I also was much touched; I pitied him.


(b. Babur recovers Marghinan.)


Near the Afternoon Prayer of that same day, a horseman
appeared at the foot of the valley. He was a man named
Yul-chiiq, presumably ‘Ali-dost Taghai’s own servant, and had
been sent with this written message, ‘Although many great
misdeeds have had their rise in me, yet, if you will do me the
favour and kindness of coming to me, I hope to purge my
offences and remove my reproach, by giving you Marghinan
_and by my future submission and single-minded service.’

Such news! coming on such despair and whirl-of-mind!
Off we hurried, that very hour,—it was sun-set,—without
teflecting, without a moment’s delay, just as if for a sudden
raid, straight for Marghinadn. From where we were to Mar-
ghindén may have been 24 or 25 yighdch of road. Through


that night it was rushed without delaying anywhere, and on


1 biy ydvim yil. Dates shew this to mean six months. It appears a
parallel expression to Pers. hasht-yak, one-eighth.

2 HS. ii, 293, in place of these two quotations, has a misva‘,—Na vay safar
kardan u na ruy igamai, (Nor resolve to march, nor face to stay).

3 7.e.in Samarkand.

4 Point to point, some 145 m. but much further by the road. Tang-ab seems
likely to be one of the head-waters of Khwaja Bikargan-water. Thence the
route would be by unfrequented hill-tracks, each man leading his second horse.


Fol. 604,


Fol. 61.


100 FARGHANA


next day till at the Mid-day Prayer, halt was made at Tang-ab
(Narrow-water), one of the villages of Khujand. There we
cooled down our horses and gave them corn. We rode out
again at beat of (twilight-) drum’ and on through that night
till shoot of dawn, and through the next day till sunset, and on
through that night till, just before dawn, we were one yighach
from Marghinaén. Here Wais Beg and others represented to
me with some anxiety what sort of an evil-doer ‘Ali-dost was.
‘No-one,’ they said, ‘has come and gone, time and again,
between him and us; no terms and compact have been made;
trusting to what are we going?’ In truth their fears were
just! After waiting awhile to consult, we at last agreed that
reasonable as anxiety was, it ought to have been earlier; that
there we were after coming three nights and two days without
rest or halt; in what horse or in what man was any strength
left ?—from where we were, how could return be made? and,
if made, where were we to go?—that, having come so far, on
we must, and that nothing happens without God’s will. At
this we left the matter and moved on, our trust set on Him.

At the Sunnat Prayer? we reached Fort Marghinan. ‘Ali-
dost Taghai kept himself behind (avga) the closed gate and
asked for terms; these granted, he opened it. He did me
obeisance between the (two) gates.* After seeing him,. we
dismounted at a suitable house in the walled-town. With me,
great and small, were 240 men.

As Aiziin Hasan and Tambal had been tyrannical and
oppressive, all the clans of the country were asking for me.
We therefore, after two or three days spent in Marghinan,
joined to Qasim Beg over a hundred men of the Pashagharis,
the new retainers of Marghinan and of ‘Ali-dost’s following,
and sent them to bring over to me, by force or fair words, such


1 tin ydrimi naqdva wagtidd. Ttn ydrimi seems to mean _half-dark,
twilight. Here it cannot mean mid-night since this would imply a halt of
twelve hours and Babur says no halt was made. The drum next following
mid-day is the one beaten at sunset.

2 The voluntary prayer, offered when the sun has well risen, fits the
context.

3 I understand that the obeisamce was made in the Gate-house, between
the inner and outer doors.


904 AH.—AUG. 19TH. 1498 To AUG. 8TH. 1499 AD. IOI


hill-people of the south of Andijan as the Ashpari, Turtiqshar,
Chikrak and others roundabout. Ibrahim Sari and Wais


Fol. 610.


Laghart and Sayyidi Qara were also sent out, to cross the .


Khujand-water and, by whatever means, to induce the people
on that side to turn their eyes to me.

Aiiztin Hasan and Tambal, for their parts, gathered together
what soldiers and Mughils they had and called up the men
accustomed to serve in the Andijan and Akhsi armies. Then,
bringing Jahangir Mirza with them, they came to Sap4an, a
village 2m. east of Marghinan, a few days after our arrival, and
dismounted there with the intention of besieging Marghinan.
They advanced a day or two later, formed up to fight, as far as
the suburbs. Though after the departure of the Commanders,
Oadsim Beg, Ibrahim Sarva and Wais Laghari, few men were
left with me, those there were formed up, sallied out and pre-
vented the enemy from advancing beyond the suburbs. On
that day, Page Khalil, the turban-twister, went well forward
and got his hand into the work. They had come; they could
do nothing; on two other days they failed to get near the fort.

When Qasim Beg went into the hills on the south of Andijan,
all the Ashpari, Tiriiqshar, Chikrak, and the peasants and
highland and lowland clans came in for us. When the Com-
manders, Ibrahim Sér# and Wais Laghari, crossed the river to
the Akhsi side, Pap and several other forts came in.

Auzun Hasan and Tambal being the heathenish and vicious
tyrants they were, had inflicted great misery on the peasantry
and clansmen. One of the chief men of Akhsi, Hasan-dikcha
by name,} gathered together his own following and a body of
the Akhsi mob and rabble, black-bludgeoned? Atztin Hasan’s
and Tambal’s men in the outer fort and drubbed them into the
citadel. They then invited the Commanders, Ibrahim Sdru,
Wais Laghari and Sayyidi Qara and admitted them into the fort.

Sl. Mahmitid Khan had appointed to help us, Haidar
Kikiildash’s (son) Banda-‘ali and Haji Ghazi Manghit; the latter

1 This seeming sobriquet may be due to eloquence or to good looks.

2 gava tiyag. Cf. {.63 where black bludgeons are used by a red rabble.

3 He was head-man of his clan and again with Shaibani in 909 an. (Sh. N.


Vambéry, p. 272). Erskine (p. 67) notes that the Manghits are the modern
Nogais.


Fol. 62.


Fol. 62é.


Fol. 63.


102 FARGHANA ONC? aa


rey


just then a fugitive from Shaibani Khan, and also the Barin
tiiman with its begs. They arrived precisely at this time.

These news were altogether upsetting to Atzin Hasan;
he at once started off his most favoured retainers and most
serviceable braves to help his men in the citadel of Akhsi. His
force reached the brow of the river at dawn. Our Commanders
and the (Tashkint) Mughils had heard of its approach and had
made some of their men strip their horses and cross the river
(to the Andijan side). Atziin Hasan’s men, in their haste, did
not draw the ferry-boat up-stream ;! they consequently went
right away from the landing-place, could not cross for the fort
and went down stream.2 MHere-upon, our men and the
(Tashkint) Mughils began to ride bare-back into the water
from both banks. Those in the boat could make no fight at
all. Q€arlighach (var. Qarbiighach) Bakhshi (Pay-master)
called one of Mughiil Beg’s sons to him, took him by the
hand, chopped at him and killed him. Of what use was it?
The affair was past that! His act was the cause why most of
those in the boat went to their death. Instantly our men
seized them all (arig) and killed all (but a few).* Of Atzin
Hasan’s confidants escaped Qéarlighach Bakhshi and Khalil
Diwan and Qazi Ghulam, the last getting off by pretending to
be a slave (ghulam); and of his trusted braves, Sayyid ‘Ali,
now in trust in my own service,* and Haidar-i-quli and Qilka
Kdashghari escaped. Of his 70 or 80 men, no more than this
same poor five or six got free. ;

On hearing of this affair, Aiztin Hasan and Tambal, not
being able to remain near Marghinan, marched in haste and
disorder for Andijin. There they had left Nasir Beg, the
husband of Aitiziin Hasan’s sister. He, if not Auzin Hasan’s
second, what question is there he was his third? He was an


* i.e. in order to allow for the here very swift current. The H.S. varying a
good deal in details from the B.N. gives the useful information that Aizin
Hasan’s men knew nothing of the coming of the Tashkint Mughils.

? Cf. f.46 and App. A. as to the position of Akhsi.

3 barini qirdilar. After this statement the five exceptions are unexpected ;
Babur’s wording is somewhat confused here.

* i.e. in Hindistan.

5 Tambal would be the competitor for the second place.


iy


of
+ a


904 AH.—AUG. 19TH. 1498 To AUG. 8TH. 1499 AD. 103


experienced man, brave too; when he heard particulars, he
knew their ground was lost, made Andijan fast and sent a man
to me. They broke up in disaccord when they found the fort
made fast against them; Atiziin Hasan drew off to his wife in
Akhsi, Tambal to his district of Atish. A few of Jahangir
Mirza’s household and braves fled with him from Atiziin Hasan
and joined Tambal before he had reached Aish.


(c. Babur recovers Andiyan.)

Directly we heard that Andijan had been made fast against
them, I rode out, at sun-rise, from Marghinan and by mid-day
was in Andijan.1 There I saw Nasir Beg and his two sons,
tha: is to say, Dost Beg and Mirim Beg, questioned them and
uplifted their heads with hope of favour and kindness. In this
way, by God’s grace, my father’s country, lost to me for two
years, was regained and re-possessed, in the month Zii’l-qa‘da of
the date 904 (June 1498).

Sl. Ahmad Tambal, after being joined by Jahangir Mirza,
drew away for Aiish. On his entering the town, the red rabble
(42211 ay aq) there, as in Akhsi, black-bludgeoned (gard tiydq qilib)
and drubbed his men out, blow upon blow, then kept the fort
for me and sent me a man. Jahangir and Tambal went off
confounded, with a few followers only, and entered Aizkint
Fort.

Of Auziin Hasan news came that after failing to get into
-Andijan, he had gone to Akhsi and, it was understood, had
entered the citadel. He had been head and chief in the re-
bellion ; we therefore, on getting this news, without more than
four or five days’ delay in Andijan, set out for Akhsi. On our
arrival, there was nothing for him to do but ask for peace and
terms, and surrender the fort.

We stayed in Akhsi* a few days in order to settle its affairs


1 47 m. 4$ fur.
2 Babur had been about two lunar years absent from Andijan but his


loss of rule was of under 16 months.

3 A scribe’s note entered here on the margin of the Hai. MS. is to the
effect that certain words are not in the noble archetype (nashka sharif) ; this
supports other circumstances which make for the opinion that this Codex is
a direct copy of Babur’s own MS. See Index s.n. Iai. MS. and JRAS 1906,


p. 87.


Fol. 636.


Fol. 64.


Vol. 646.


104 FARGHANA |


and those of Kasdan and that country-side. We gave the
Mughiils who had come in to help us, leave for return (to
Tashkint), then went back to Andijan, taking with us Aiiziin
Hasan and his family and dependants. In Akhsi was left,
for a time, Qasim-i-‘ajab (Wonderful Qasim), formerly one of
the household circle, now arrived at beg’s rank.


(d. Renewed rebellion of the Mughils.)

As terms had been made, Aiiziin Hasan, without hurt to life
or goods, was allowed to go by the Qar4-tigin road for Hisar.
A few of his retainers went with him, the rest parted from him
and stayed behind. These were the men who in the throne-
less times had captured and plundered various Musalman
dependants of my own and of the Khwaja. In agreement
with several begs, their affair was left at this;—‘ This yery
band have been the cayiots and plunderers of our faithful
Musalman dependants ;! what loyalty have they shown to
their own (Mughil) begs that they should be loyal to us? If
we had them seized and stripped bare, where would be the
wrong? and this especially because they might be going about,
before our very eyes, riding our horses, wearing our coats,
eating our sheep. Who could put up with that? If, out of
humanity, they are not imprisoned and not plundered, they R
certainly ought to take it as a favour if they get off withthe |_
order to give back to our companions of the hard guerilla y
times, whatever goods of theirs are known to be here.’ ’

In truth this seemed reasonable; our men were ordered to
take what they knewto be theirs. Reasonable and just though
the order was, (I now) understand that it was a little hasty. %
With a worry like Jahangir seated at my side, there was no
sense in frightening people in this way. . In conquest and
government, though many things may have an outside appear-
ance of reason and justice, yet 100,000 reflections are right and i
necessary as to the bearings of each one of them. From this
single incautious order of ours,? what troubles! what rebellions 4

1 Musalman here seems to indicate mental contrast with Pagan REnceee


or neglect of Musalman observances amongst Mughils.
? i.e, of his advisors and himself,


904 AH.—AUG. 19TH. 1498 To AUG. 8TH. 1499 AD. 105


arose! Inthe end this same ill-considered order was the cause
of our second exile from Andijan. Now, through it, the
Mughiils gave way to anxiety and fear, marched through
Rabatik-atirchini, that is, Aiki-su-arasi, for Auzkint and sent a
man to Tambal.

In my mother’s service were 1500 to 2000 Mughils from the
horde; as many more had come from Hisar with Hamza
Sl. and Mahdi Sl. and Muhammad Dighlat Hisdéri.1_ Mischief
and devastation must always be expected from the Mughil
horde. Up to now? they have rebelled five times against me.
It must not be understood that they rebelled through not
getting on with me; they have done the same thing with their
own Khans, again and again. Sl. Quli Chundq* brought me
the news. His late father, Khudai-birdi Bigdq* I had favoured
amongst the Mughils; he was himself with the (rebel) Mughiils
and he did well in thus leaving the horde and his own family
to bring me the news. Well as he did then however, he, as will
be told,° did a thing so shameful later on that it would hide
a hundred such good deeds as this, if he had done them. His
later action was the clear product of his Mughiil nature. When
this news came, the begs, gathered for counsel, represented to
me, ‘ This is a trifling matter; what need for the padshah to
ride out? Let Odsim Beg go with the begs and men assembled
here.’ So it was settled; they took it lightly; to do so must
have been an error of judgment. Qdasim Beg led his force out
that same day; Tambal meantime must have joined the
Mughils. Our men crossed the Ailaish river® early next morn-
ing by the YAsi-kijit (Broad-crossing) and at once came face to

1 CH. f. 34.

2 civca 933 AH. Allthe revolts chronicled by Babur as made against himself
were under Mughil leadership. Long Hasan, Tambal and ‘Ali-dost were all
Mughils. The worst was that of 914 AH. (1518 AD.) in which Quli Chindg
disgraced himself (T.R. p. 357).

3 Chiindg may indicate the loss of one ear.

4 Bugqaq, amongst other meanings, has that of one who lies in ambush.

5 This remark has interest because it shews that (as Babur planned to write
more than is now with the B.N. MSS.) the first gap in the book (914 an. to
925 AH.) is accidental. His own last illness is the probable cause of this gap.
Cf. JRAS 1905, p. 744. Two other passages referring to unchronicled matters


are one about the Bagh-i-safa (f. 224, and one about Sl. ‘Ali Taghdai (f. 242).
6 I surmise Ailaish to be a local name of the Qara-dary4 affluent of the Sir.


Fol. 6 5e


Fol. 652.


Fol. 66.


106 FARGHANA


face with the rebels. Well did they chop at one another EF ;


(chapgilashirlar)! Qasim Beg himself came face to face with
Muhammad Arghin and did not desist from chopping at him
in order to cut off his head.t Most of our braves exchanged
good blows but in the end were beaten. Qasim Beg, ‘Ali-dost
Taghai, Ibrahim Sari, Wais Laghari, Sayyidi Qara and three
or four more of our begs and household got away but most of
the rest fell into the hands of the rebels. Amongst them were
‘Ali-darwesh Beg and Mirim Ldaghari and (Sherim ?) Taghai
Beg’s (son) Tiga” and ‘Ali-dost’s son, Muhammad-doss and
Mir Shah Qachin and Mirim Diwan.

Two braves chopped very well at one another; on our side,
Samad, Ibrahim Sdri’s younger brother, and on their side,
Shah-suwar, one of the Hisari Mughiils. Shah-suwdar struck
so that his sword drove through Samad’s helm and seated
itself well in his head; Samad, spite of his wound, struck so
that his sword cut off Shah-suwar’s head a piece of bone as.
large as the palm of a hand. Shah-suwar must have worn no
helm; they trepanned his head and it healed; there was no
one to trepan Samad’s and in a few days, he departed simply
through the wound.®

Amazingly unseasonable was this defeat, coming as it did
just in the respite from guerilla fighting and just when we had
regained the country. One of our great props, Qambar-‘ali
Mughil (the Skinner) had gone to his district when Andijan
was occupied and therefore was not with us.


(e. Tambal attempts to take Andyan.)


Having effected so much, Tambal, bringing Jahangir Mirza
with him, came to the east of Andijan and dismounted 2 miles
off, in the meadow lying in front of the Hill of Pleasure (‘Aish).+


1 aiki aiich naubat chapqulab bash chigarghals quimds. I cannot feel so sure
as Mr. E. and M. de C. were that the man’s head held fast, especially as for
it to fall would make the better story.

2 Tiiqd appears to have been the son of a Taghai, perhaps ‘of Sherim ; his
name may imply blood-relationship.

3 For the verb awimdg, to trepan, see f. 67 note 5.
de The Fr, map of 1904 shews a hill suiting Babur’s location of this Hill of

easure.


904 AH.—AUG. 19TH. 1498 To AUG. 8TH, 1499 AD. 107


Once or twice he advanced in battle-array, past Chihil-
dukhteran! to the town side of the hill but, as our braves went
out arrayed to fight, beyond the gardens and suburbs, he could
not advance further and returned to the other side of the hill.
On his first coming to those parts, he killed two of the begs he
had captured, Mirim Ldadgharvi and Tuqa Beg. For nearly a
month he lay round-about without effecting anything; after
that he retired, his face set for Aish. Aish had been given to
Ibrahim Sari and his man in it now made it fast.


1 A place near Kabul bears the same name ; in both the name is explained
by a legend that there Earth opened a refuge for forty menaced daughters.


Fol. 664.


905 AH. AUG. 8ru. 1499 tro JULY 28TH. 1500 AD.”


(a. Babur’s campaign against Ahmad Tambal Mughil.)


Commissaries were sent gallopping off at once, some to call
up the horse and foot of the district-armies, others to urge
return on Qambar-‘ali and whoever else was away in his own
district, while energetic people were told off to get together
mantelets (t#rva), shovels, axes and the what-not of war-material
and stores for the men already with us.

As soon as the horse and foot, called up from the various
districts to join the army, and the soldiers and retainers who
had been scattered to this and that side on their own affairs,
were gathered together, I went out, on Muharram 18th.
(August 25th.), putting my trust in God, to Hafiz Beg’s Four-
gardens and there stayed a few days in order to complete our
equipment. This done, we formed up in array of right and
left, centre and van, horse and foot, and started direct for Atish
against our foe.

On approaching Aiish, news was had that Tambal, unable to
make stand in that neighbourhood, had drawn off to the north,
to the Rabat-i-sarhang sub-district, it was understood. That
night we dismounted in Lat-kint. Next day as we were passing
through Aush, news came that Tambal was understood to have
gone to Andijan. We, for our part, marched on as for Atizkint,
detaching raiders ahead to over-run those parts.” Our opponents
went to Andijain and at night got into the ditch but being dis-
covered by the garrison when they set their ladders up against
the ramparts, could effect no more and retired. Our raiders

1 Elph. MS. f. 47b ; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 53 and 217 f. 43 ; Mems. p. 70.

2 From Andijan to Aish is a little over 33 miles. Tambal’s road was east


of Babur’s and placed him between Andijan and Aiizkint where was the force
protecting his family.


108


ee


905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. 109


retired also after over-running round about Awtzkint without
getting into their hands anything worth their trouble.

Tambal had stationed his younger brother, Khalil, with 200
or 300 men, in Madu,! one of the forts of Atish, renowned in
that centre (ard) for its strength. We turned back (on the Fol. 67.
Auzkint road) to assault it. It is exceedingly strong. Its
northern face stands very high above the bed of a torrent;
arrows shot from the bed might perhaps reach the ramparts.
On this side is the water-thief,? made like a lane, with ramparts
on both sides carried from the fort to the water. Towards the
rising ground, on the other sides of the fort, there is a ditch.
The torrent being so near, those occupying the fort had carried
stones in from it as large as those for large mortars.* From no
fort of its class we have ever attacked, have stones been thrown
so large as those taken into Madi. They dropped such a large
one on ‘Abdu’l-qasim Kohbur, Kitta (Little) Beg’s elder brother,‘
when he went up under the ramparts, that he spun head over
heels and came rolling and rolling, without once getting to his
feet, from that great height down to the foot of the glacis
(khak-vez). He did not trouble himself about it at all but just
got on his horse and rode off. Again, a stone flung from the
double water-way, hit Yar-‘ali Balai so hard on the head that
in the end it had to be trepanned.® Many of our men perished
by their stones.. The assault began at dawn; the water-thief Fol. 670.
had been taken before breakfast-time ;° fighting went on till
evening ; next morning, as they could not hold out after losing
the water-thief, they asked for terms and came out. We took
60 or 70 or 80 men of Khalil’s command and sent them to
Andijan for safe-keeping; as some of our begs and household
were prisoners in their hands, the Madi affair fell out very well.


1 mod. Mazy, on the main Aiish-Kashghar road.
2 Gb-duzd ; de C. i, 144, prise d’eau.
3 This simile seems the fruit of experience in Hindistan. See f. 333,
concerning Chanderi.
* These two Mughils rebelled in 914 au. with Sl. Quli Chiindg (T.R. ten
5 awidi. The head of Captain Dow, fractured at Chunar by a stone flung
at it, was trepanned (Saiydr-i-muta‘akhirin, p. 577 and Irvine l.c. p. 283).
Yar-‘ali was alive in 910 AH. He seems to be the father of the great Bairam
Loprakergers of Akbar’s reign.
8 chasht-gah ; midway between sunrise and noon.
7 tauri ; because providing prisoners for exchange.


Fol. 68.


<


110 FARGHANA


From there we went to Unji-tipa, one of the villages of hs
Aish, and there dismounted. When Tambal retired from
Andijan and went into the Rabat-i-sarhang sub-district, he
dismounted in a village called Ab-i-khan. Between him and
me may have been one yighdch (5 m.?). At such a time as this,
Oambar-‘ali (the Skinner) on account of some sickness, went
into Aish. |

It was lain in Unji-tipa a month or forty days without a
battle, but day after day our foragers and theirs got to grips.
All through the time our camp was mightily well watched at
night ; a ditch was dug; where no ditch was, branches were set
close together ;1 we also made our soldiers go out in their mail
along the ditch. Spite of such watchfulness, a night-alarm was
given every two or three days, and the cry to arms went up.
One day when Sayyidi Beg Taghai had gone out with the
foragers, the enemy came up suddenly in greater strength and
took him prisoner right out of the middle of the fight.


(b. Bai-sunghar Mirza murdered by Khusrau Shah.)


Khusrau Shah, having planned to lead an army against Balkh,
in this same year invited Bai-sunghar Mirza to go with him,
brought him? to Qiindiiz and rode out with him for Balkh.
But when they reached the Aubaj ferry, that ungrateful infidel,
Khusrau Shah, in his aspiration to sovereignty,—and to what
sort of sovereignty, pray, could such a no-body attain ? a person
of no merit, no birth, no lineage, no judgment, no magnanimity,
no justice, no legal-mindedness,—laid hands on Bai-sunghar
Mirza with his begs, and bowstrung the Mirza. It was upon
the roth. of the month of Muharram (August 17th.) that he
martyred that scion of sovereignty, so accomplished, so sweet-
natured and so adorned by birth and lineage. He killed also a
few of the Mirza's begs and household.


(c. Bai-sunghar Mirza’s birth and descent.)
He was born in 882 (1477 AD.), in the Hisar district. He
was Sl. Mahmiid Mirza’s second son, younger than S]. Mas‘ud


3 4. e. from Hisar where he had ana him in 903 AH.


905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. Il


‘ M. and older than Sl. ‘Ali M. and SI. Husain M. and SI. Wais


M. known as Khan Mirza. His mother was Pasha Begim.


(d. His appearance and characteristics.)


He had large eyes, a fleshy face! and Turkm4n features, was
of middle height and altogether an elegant young man (aet. 22).


(e. Hts qualities and manners.)


He was just, humane, pleasant-natured and a most accom-
plished scion of sovreignty. His tutor, Sayyid Mahmid,? pre-
sumably was a Shi‘a; through this he himself became infected
by that heresy. People said that latterly, in Samarkand, he
reverted from that evil belief to the pure Faith. He was much
addicted to wine but on his non-drinking days, used to go
through the Prayers.* He was moderate in gifts and liberality.
He wrote the naskh-ta‘liqg character very well; in painting also
his hand was not bad. He made ‘Adili his pen-name and
composed good verses but not sufficient to form a diwadn. Here


is the opening couplet (mafla‘) of one of them*;—


Lapping ¢ Sie ea


~


SL RELL LE RG ANE


Like a wavering shadow I fall here and there ;
If not propped by a wall, I drop flat on the ground.
In such repute are his odes held in Samarkand, that they are
to be found in most houses.


(f. His battles.)


He fought two ranged battles. One, fought when he was
first seated on the throne (g00 AH.-I495 AD.), was with Sl.
Mahmid Khan® who, incited and stirred up by SI. Junaid
Barlds and others to desire Samarkand, drew an army out,
crossed the Aq-kutal and went to Rabat-i-soghd and Kan-bai.
Bai-sunghar Mirza went out from Samarkand, fought him near

1 guba yuzlig (f. 6b and note 4). The Turkm4n features would be a maternal
inheritance.


2 Heis “ Saifi Maulana ‘Arizi’’ of Rieu’s Pers. Cat.p. 525. Cf. H.S. ii, 341.
His book, ‘Ariéz-i-satfi has been translated by Blochmann and by Ranking.


3 namdaz aitdy idi. I understand some irony from this (de Meynard’s Dict.


S.n. attmaq).
* The matla‘ of poems serve as an index of first lines.
5 Cf. f. 30.


Fol. 684.


Fol. 69.


112 FARGHANA | Be ry.


te gehe


Kan-bai, beat him and beheaded 3 or 4000 Mughiils. In this
fight died Haidar Kakaldash, the Khan’s looser and binder
(hall u‘agdi). His second battle was fought near Bukhara with

Sl. ‘Ali Mirza (gor AH.-1496 AD.) ; in this he was beaten.


(g. His countries.)


His father, Sl. Mahmiid Mirza, gave him Bukhara; when
Sl. Mahmiid M. died, his begs assembled and in agreement
made Bai-sunghar M. ruler in Samarkand. Foratime, Bukhara
was included with Samarkand in his jurisdiction but it went
out of his hands after the Tarkhan rebellion (g01 AH.-1496 AD.).
When he left Samarkand to go to Khusrau Shah and I got
possession of it (903 AH.-1497 AD.), Khusrau Shah took Hisar and
gave it to him.


(h. Other details concerning him.)


He left no child. He took a daughter of his paternal uncle,
Sl. Khalil Mirza, when he went to Khusrau Shah; he had no
other wife or concubine.
He never ruled with authority so independent that any beg
was heard of as promoted by him to be his confidant; his begs
Fol. 696. were just those of his father and his paternal uncle (Ahmad).


(1. Resumed account of Babur’s campaign against Tambal.)


After Bai-sunghar Mirza’s death, Sl. Ahmad Qardwal,? the
father of Qich (Qiij) Beg, sent us word (of his intention) and
came to us from Hisar through the Qar4-tigin country, together
with his brethren, elder and younger, and their families and
dependants. From Atsh too came Qambar-‘ali, risen from his.
sickness. Arriving, as it did, at such a moment, we took the
providential help of Sl. Ahmad and his party for a happy omen.
Next day we formed up at dawn and moved direct upon our
foe. He made no stand at Ab-i-khan but marched from his.

1 C}. f. 376.

2 i.e. scout and in times of peace, huntsman. On the margin of the Elph.

% Codex here stands a note, mutilated in rebinding ;—S/. Ahmad pidr-i-Qich


Beg ast * * * pidr-i-Sher-afgan u Sher-afgan * * * u Sl. Husain Khan * * *
Quch Beg ast. Hamesha * * * dar khana Shaham Khan * * * ,


905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 287TH. 1500 AD. 113


ground, leaving many tents and blankets and things of the
baggage for our men. We dismounted in his camp.

That evening Tambal, having Jahangir with him, turned our
left and went to a village called Khiban (var. Khiinan), some
3 yighach from us (15 m.?) and between us and Andijan.
Next day we moved out against him, formed up with right and
left, centre and van, our horses in their mail, our men in theirs,
and with foot-soldiers, bearing mantelets, flung to the front.
Our right was ‘Ali-dost and his dependants, our left Ibrahim
Saru, Wais Laghari, Sayyidi Qara, Muhammad-‘ali Mubashir,
and Khwaja-i-kalan’s elder brother, Kichik Beg, with several of
the household. In the left were inscribed! also Sl. Ahmad
Qaraéwal and Qich Beg with their brethren. With me in the
centre was Qasim Beg Qachin; in the van were Qambar-‘ali
(the Skinner) and some of the household. When we reached
Saq4, a village two miles east of Khiibain, the enemy came out
of Khiban, arrayed to fight. We, for our part, moved on the
faster. At the time of engaging, our foot-soldiers, provided
how laboriously with the mantelets! were quite in the rear!


_ By God’s grace, there was no need of them; our left had got


IEEE ES


hands in with their right before they came up. Kichik Beg
chopped away very well; next to him ranked Muhammad ‘Ali
Mubashir. Not being able to bring equal zeal to oppose us, the
enemy took to flight. The fighting did not reach the front of
our van or right. Our men brought in many of their braves ;
we ordered the heads of all to be struck off. Favouring caution
and good generalship, our begs, Qasim Beg and, especially,
‘Ali-dost did not think it advisable to send far in pursuit; for
this reason, many of their men did not fall into our hands. We
dismounted right in Khiban village. This was my first ranged
battle; the Most High God, of His own favour and mercy,
made it a day of victory and triumph. We accepted the omen.

On the next following day, my father’s mother, my grand-
mother, Shah Sultan Begim? arrived from Andijan, thinking to


_beg off Jahangir Mirza if he had been taken.


1 pitildi ; W.-i-B. navishta shud, words indicating the use by Babur of a
written record.
2 Cf. f£.6b and note and f. 17 and note.


Fol. 70.


Fol. 706.


Fol. 71.


114 FARGHANA.


(j. Babur goes into winter-quarters in Between-the-two-rivers.)


As it was now almost winter and no grain or fruits remained
in the open country, it was not thought desirable to move
against (Tambal in) Atizkint but return was made to Andijan.
A few days later, it was settled after consultation, that for us
to winter in the town would in no way hurt or hamper the
enemy, rather that he would wax the stronger by it through
raids and guerilla fighting; moreover on our own account, it,
was necessary that we should winter where our men would not
become enfeebled through want of grain and where we could
straiten the enemy by some sort of blockade. For these de-
sirable ends we marched out of Andijan, meaning to winter
near Armiyan and Nish-ab in the Rabdatik-airchini, known
also as Between-the-two-rivers. On arriving in the two villages
above-mentioned, we prepared winter-quarters.

The hunting-grounds are good in that neighbourhood; in the
jungle near the Ailaish river is much baghii-mardl? and pig; the
small scattered clumps of jungle are thick with hare and
pheasant; and on the near rising-ground, are many foxes® of
fine colour and swifter than those of any other place. While
we were in those quarters, I used to ride hunting every two or
three days; we would beat through the great jungle and hunt
bighi-maral, or we would wander about, making a circle round
scattered clumps and flying our hawks at the pheasants. The
pheasants are unlimited‘ there; pheasant-meat was abundant
as long as we were in those quarters,

While we were there, Khudai-birdi Taghchi, then newly-
favoured with beg’s rank, fell on some of Tambal’s raiders and
brought in a few heads. Our braves went out also from Aish
and Andijan and raided untiringly on the enemy, driving in his


1 ~ilak ; i.e. other food than grain. Fruit, fresh or preserved, being a
principal constituent of food in Central Asia, ¢#lak will include several, but
chiefly melons. ‘‘ Les melons constituent presque seuls vers le fin d’été, la
nourriture des classes pauvres (Th. Radloff. l.c. p. 343).

2 Cf. f. 6b and note.

3 talki var. tulku, the yellow fox. Following this word the Hai. MS. has
u day kamin dur instead of u vangin dir. ’

4 bi hadd ; with which I.O. 215 agrees but I.0. 217 adds farbih, fat, which
is right in fact (f. 2b) but less pertinent here than an unlimited quantity.


905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. II5


herds of horses and much enfeebling him. If the whole winter
had been passed in those quarters, the more probable thing is
that he would have broken up simply without a fight.


{k. Qambar-‘ali again asks leave.)


It was at such a time, just when our foe was growing weak
and helpless, that Qambar-‘ali asked leave to go to his district.
The more he was dissuaded by reminder of the probabilities of
the position, the more stupidity he shewed. An amazingly
fickle and veering manikin he was! It had to be! Leave for
his district was given him. That district had been Khujand
formerly but when Andijan was taken this last time, Asfara
and Kand-i-badaém were given him in addition. Amongst our
begs, he was the one with large districts and many followers;
no-one’s land or following equalled his. We had been 40 or 50
days in those winter-quarters. At his recommendation, leave
was given also to some of the clans in the army. We, for our
part, went into Andijan.


(l. Sl. Mahmiid Khan sends Mughils to help Tambal.)


Both while we were in our winter-quarters and later on in
Andijan, Tambal’s people came and went unceasingly between
him and The Khan in Tashkint. His paternal uncle of the full-
blood, Ahmad Beg, was guardian of The Khan’s son, Sl.
- Muhammad SI. and high in favour; his elder brother of the
full-blood, Beg Tilba (Fool), was The Khan’s Lord of the Gate.
After all the comings and goings, these two brought The Khan
to the point of reinforcing Tambal. Beg Tilba, leaving his wife
and domestics and family in Tashkint, came on ahead of the
reinforcement and joined his younger brother, Tambal,—Beg
Tilba! who from his birth up had been in Mughilistan, had
grown up amongst Mughiils, had never entered a cultivated
country or served the rulers of one, but from first to last had
served The Khans!

Just then a wonderful (‘ajab) thing happened ;} Qasim-i-‘ajab
{wonderful Qasim) when he had been left for a time in Akhsi,


1 Here a pun on ‘ajab may be read.


Fol. 714.


Fol. 72.


Fol. 726.


116 FARGHANA


went out one day after a few marauders, crossed the Khujand-
water by Bachrata, met in with a few of Tambal’s men and
was made prisoner.

When Tambal heard that our army was disbanded and was
assured of The Khan’s help by the arrival of his brother, Beg
Tilba, who had talked with The Khan, he rode from Aizkint
into Between-the-two-rivers. Meantime safe news had come
to us from Kasdan that The Khan had appointed his son, Sl.
Muh. Khanika, commonly known as Sultanim,’ and Ahmad
Beg, with 5 or 6000 men, to help Tambal, that they had crossed
by the Archa-kint road* and were laying siege to Kasan. Here-
upon we, without delay, without a glance at our absent men,
just with those there were, in the hard cold of winter, put our
trust in God and rode off by the Band-i-salar road to oppose
them. That night we stopped no-where; on we went through
the darkness till, at dawn, we dismounted in Akhsi.2 So
mightily bitter was the cold that night that it bit the hands
and feet of several men and swelled up the ears of many, each
ear like an apple. We made no stay in Akhsi but leaving there
Yarak Taghai, temporarily also, in Qasim-i-‘ajab’s place, passed
on for Kasan. Two miles from Kasdan news came that on
hearing of our approach, Ahmad Beg and Sultaénim had hurried
off in disorder.


(m. Babur and Tambal again opposed.)

Tambal must have had news of our getting to horse for he
had hurried to:help his elder brother. Somewhere between
the two Prayers of the day,° his blackness® became visible
towards Ni-kint. Astonished and perplexed by his elder
brother’s light departure and by our quick arrival, he stopped
short. Said we, ‘It is God has brought them in this fashion!
here they have come with their horses’ necks at full stretch ;?

1 Cf. f. 15, note to Taghai.

2 Apparently not the usual Kindir-lik pass but one n.w. of Kasdan.

3 A ride of at least 40 miles, followed by one of 20 to Kasdan.

* Cf. f. 72 and f. 726. Tilba would seem to have left Tambal.

5 Tambalning qarasi.

6 ¢.e. the Other (Mid-afternoon) Prayer.

7 dtining biinini qatib. Qatmdaq has also the here-appropriate meaning of
to stiffen.


905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. 117


if we join hands? and go out, and if God bring it right, not a
man of them will get off.’ But Wais Laghari and some others
said, ‘It is late in the day; even if we do not go out today,
where can they go tomorrow? Wherever it is, we will meet
them at dawn.’ So they said, not thinking it well to make the
joint effort there and then; so too the enemy, come so oppor-
tunely, broke up and got away without any hurt whatever.
The (Turki) proverb is, ‘Who does not snatch at a chance,
will worry himself about. it till old age.’


(Persian) couplet. Work must be snatched at betimes,
Vain is the slacker’s mistimed work.


Seizing the advantage of a respite till the morrow, the enemy
slipped away in the night, and without dismounting on the road,
went into Fort Archian. When a morrow’s move against a foe
was made, we found no foe; after him we went and, not think-
ing it well to lay close siege to Archian, dismounted two miles
off (one shar‘) in Ghazna-namangan.?_ We were in camp there
for 30 or 40 days, Tambal being in Fort Archian. Every now
and then a very few would go from our side and come from
theirs, fling themselves on one another midway and return.
They made one night-attack, rained arrows in on us and retired.
As the camp was encircled by a ditch or by branches close-set,
and as watch was kept, they could effect no more.


(n. Qambar-‘ali, the Skinner, again gives trouble.)


Two or three times while we lay in that camp, Qambar-‘ali,
in ill-temper, was for going to his district; once he even had
got to horse and started in a fume, but we sent several begs
after him who, with much trouble, got him to turn back.


1 ailik qishmaq, i.e. Babur’s men with the Kasan garrison. But the two
W.-i-B. write merely dast burd and dast kardan.

2 The meaning of Ghazna here is uncertain. The Second W.-i-B. renders it
by ar. garyat but up to this point Babur has not used garyat for village.
Ghazna-namangan cannot be modern Namangan. It was 2 m. from Archian
where Tambal was, and Babur went to Bishkharan to be between Tambal and
Machami, coming from the south. Archian and Ghazna-namangan seem
both to have been n. or n.w. of Bishkaran (see maps).

It may be mentioned that at Archian, in 909 AH. the two Chaghatai Khans
and Babur were defeated by Shaibani.


Fol. 73.


Fol. 734.


Fol. 74.


118 FARGHANA


(0. Further action against Tambal and an accommodation made.)


Meantime Sayyid Yisuf of Macham had sent a man to
Tambal and was looking towards him. He was the head-man
of one of the two foot-hills of Andijan, Macham and Awighir.
Latterly he had become known in my Gate, having outgrown
the head-man and put on the beg, though no-one ever had
made him a beg. He was a singularly hypocritical manikin,
of no standing whatever. From our last taking of Andijan
(June 1499) till then (Feb. 1500), he had revolted two or three
times from Tambal and come to me, and two or three times
had revolted from me and gone to Tambal. This was his last
change of side. With him were many from the (Mughil) horde
and tribesmen and clansmen. ‘Don’t let him join Tambal,’
we said and rode in between them. We got to Bishkharan with
one night’s halt. Tambal’s men must have come earlier and
entered the fort. A party of our begs, ‘Ali-darwesh Beg and
Oich Beg, with his brothers, went close up to the Gate of
Bishkharan and exchanged good blows with the enemy. Qich
Beg and his brothers did very well there, their hands getting in
for most of the work. We dismounted on a height some two
miles from Bishkharan; Tambal, having Jahangir with him,
dismounted with the fort behind him.

Three or four days later, begs unfriendly to us, that is to say,
‘Ali-dost and Qambar-‘ali, the Skinner, with their followers and
dependants, began to interpose with talk of peace. I and my
well-wishers had no knowledge of a peace and we all? were
utterly averse from the project. Those two manikins however
were our two great begs; if we gave no ear to their words and
if we did not make peace, other things from them were probable!
It had to be! Peace was made in this fashion ;—the districts
on the Akhsi side of the Khujand-water were to depend on
Jahangir, those on the Andijan side, on me; Aiizkint was to
be left in my jurisdiction after they had removed their families
from it; when the districts were settled and I and Jahangir had


1 bizlady. The double plural is rare with Babur ; he writes biz, we, when
action is taken in common ; he rarely uses min, I, with autocratic force ; his
phrasing is largely impersonal, e.g. with rare exceptions, he writes the
impersonal passive verb.


905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. 119


made our agreement, we (biz) should march together against
Samarkand; and when I was in possession of Samarkand,
Andijan was to be given to Jahangir. So the affair was settled.
Next day,—it was one of the last of Rajab, (end of Feb. 1500)
Jahangir Mirza and Tambal came and did me obeisance; the
terms and conditions were ratified as stated above; leave for
Akhsi was given to Jahangir and I betook myself to Andijan.

On our arrival, Khalil-of-Tambal and our whole band of
prisoners were released ; robes of honour were put on them and
leave to go was given. They, in their turn, set free our begs
and household, viz. the commanders! (Sherim ?) Taghai Beg,
Muhammad-dost, Mir Shah Qiichin, Sayyidi Qara Beg, Qasim-
i-‘ajab, Mir Wais, Mirim Diwdn, and those under them.


(p. The self-aggrandizement of ‘Ali-dost Taghdai.)


After our return to Andijan, ‘Ali-dost’s manners and _ be-
haviour changed entirely. He began to live ill with my com-
panions of the guerilla days and times of hardship. First, he
dismissed Khalifa; next seized and plundered Ibrahim Sdaru
and Wais Laghari, and for no fault or cause deprived them of
their districts and dismissed them. He entangled himself with
Oasim Beg and he was made to go; he openly declared, ‘ Khalifa
and Ibrahim are in sympathy about Khwaja-i-qazi; they will


avenge him on me.’? His son, Muhammad-dost set himself up


on a regal footing, starting receptions and a public table and a
Court and workshops, after the fashion of sultans. Like father,
like son, they set themselves up in this improper way because
they had Tambal at their backs. No authority to restrain their
unreasonable misdeeds was left to me; for why? Whatever
their hearts desired, that they did because such a foe of mine
as Tambal was their backer. The position was singularly
delicate; not a word was said but many humiliations were
endured from that father and that son alike.


1 bashlighlar. Teufel was of opinion that this word is not used as a noun
in the B.N. In this he is mistaken ; it is so used frequently, as here, in
apposition. See ZDMG, xxxvii, art. Babur und Abi‘l-fazl.

2 Cf. f. 54 foot.


Fol. 745.


Fol. 75.


Fol. 752.


Fol. 76.


Ea ea FARGHANA


(gq. Babur’s first marriage.) |

‘Ayisha-sultan Begim whom my father and hers, 7.e. my uncle,
Sl. Ahmad Mirza had betrothed to me, came (this year) to
Khujand! and I took her in the month of Sha‘ban. Though I
was not ill-disposed towards her, yet, this being my first
marriage, out of modesty and bashfulness, I used to see her
once in 10, 15 or 20 days. Later on when even my first
inclination did not last, my bashfulness increased. Then my
mother Khanim used to send me, once a month or every 40
days, with driving and driving, dunnings and worryings.


(vy. A personal episode and some verses by Babur.)


In those leisurely days I discovered in myself a strange
inclination, nay! as the verse says, ‘I maddened and afflicted
myself’ for a boy in the camp-bazar, his very name, Baburi,
fitting in. Up till then I had had no inclination for any-one,
indeed of love and desire, either by hear-say or experience, I had
not heard, I had not talked. At that time I composed Persian
couplets, one or two at a time; this is one of the them :—


May none be as I, humbled and wretched and love-sick ;
No beloved as thou. art to me, cruel and careless.
From time to time Baburi used to come to my presence but
out of modesty and bashfulness, I could never look straight at
him ; how then could I make conversation (ikhtildt) and recital
(hikdyat)? In my joy and agitation I could not thank him (for
coming); how was it possible for me to reproach him with
going away? What power had I to command the duty of
service to myself?? One day, during that time of desire and
passion when I was going with companions along a lane and
suddenly met him face to face, I got into such a state of con-
fusion that I almost went right off. To look straight at him
or to put words together was impossible. With a hundred
torments and shames, I went on. A (Persian) couplet of
Muhammad Salih’s* came into my mind :—
1 Cf. f. 20. She may have come from Samarkand and ‘Ali’s household or
from Kesh and the Tarkhan households.


2 Cf. f. 261. 2 for the same phrase.
* He is the author of the Shaibani-nama.


905 AH.—AUG. 8ruH. 1499 TO JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. 121


I am abashed with shame when I see my friend ;
My companions look at me, I look the other way.


That couplet suited the case wonderfully well. In that frothing-
up of desire and passion, and under that stress of youthful folly,
I used to wander, bare-head, bare-foot, through street and lane,
orchard and vineyard. I shewed civility neither to friend nor
stranger, took no care for myself or others.


(Turki) Out of myself desire rushed me, unknowing
That this is so with the lover of a fairy-face.


Sometimes like the madmen, I used to wander alone over hill
and plain; sometimes I betook myself to gardens and the
suburbs, lane by lane. My wandering was not of my choice,
not I decided whether to go or stay.


(Turki) Nor power to go was mine, nor power to stay ;
I was just what you made me, o thief of my heart.


(s. Sl. ‘Alt Mirza’s quarrels with the Tarkhans.)


In this same year, Sl]. ‘Ali Mirza fell out with Muhammad
Mazid Tarkhan for the following reasons ;—The Tarkhans had
risen to over-much predominance and honour; Baqi had taken
the whole revenue of the Bukhara Government and gave not a
half-penny (dang)! to any-one else; Muhammad Mazid, for his
part, had control in Samarkand and took all its districts for his
sons and dependants; a small sum only excepted, fixed by them,
not a farthing (fils) from the town reached the Mirza by any
channel. Sl]. ‘Ali Mirza was a grown man; how was he to
tolerate such conduct as theirs? He and some of his household
formed a design against Muh. Mazid Tarkhan; the latter came
to know of it and left the town with all his following and with
whatever begs and other persons were in sympathy with him,?
such as Sl. Husain Arghin, Pir Ahmad, Aizin Hasan’s younger
brother, Khwaja Husain, Qara Barlas, Salih Muhammad? and
some other begs and braves.


1 dang and fils (infra) are small copper coins.

2 Cf.f.25 1. 1. and note 1.

3 Probably the poet again ; he had left Hardt and was in Samarkand (Sh,
N. Vambéry, p. 34 1. 14). .


Fol. 764,


Fol. 77.


Fol. 776,


122 FARGHANA


At the time The Khan had joined to Khan Mirza a number
of Mughil begs with Muh. Husain Dighlat and Ahmad Beg,
and had appointed them to act against Samarkand.* Khan
Mirza’s guardians were Hafiz Beg Dalddi and his son, Tahir
Beg ; because of relationship to them, (Muh. Sighal’s) grandson,
Hasan and Hindi Beg fled with several braves from Sl. ‘Ali
Mirza’s presence to Khan Mirza’s

Muhammad Mazid Tarkhan invited Khan Mirza and the
Mughil army, moved to near Shavdar, there saw the Mirza
and met the begs of the Mughiils. No small useful friendli-
nesses however, came out of the meeting between his begs and
the Mughils; the latter indeed seem to have thought of making
him a prisoner. Of this he and his begs coming to know,
separated themselves from the Mughil army. As without him
the Mughils could make no stand, they retired. Here-upon,
Sl. ‘Ali Mirza hurried light out of Samarkand with a few men
and caught them up where they had dismounted in Yar-yilaq.
They could not even fight but were routed and put to flight.
This deed, done in his last days, was Sl. ‘Ali Mirza’s one good
little affair.

Muh. Mazid Tarkhan and his people, despairing both of the
Mughils and of these Mirzds, sent Mir Mughil, son of ‘Abdu’l-
wahhab Shaghdwal? to invite me (to Samarkand). Mir Mughtl
had already been in my service; he had risked his life in good
accord with Khwaja-i-qazi during the siege of Andijan (903 AH.-
1498 AD.).

This business hurt us also? and, as it was for that purpose
we had made peace (with Jahangir), we resolved to move on
Samarkand. Wesent Mir Mughil offat once to give rendezvous*
to Jahangir Mirza and prepared to get to horse. We rode out


1 From what follows, this Mughil advance seems a sequel to a Tarkhan
invitation.

2 By omitting the word Mir the Turki text has caused confusion between
this father and son (Index s.nn.).

3 biz khiid khavab bi mu‘dmla aidik. These words have been understood
earlier, as referring to the abnormal state of Babur’s mind described under
Sec. 7. They better suit the affairs of Samarkand because Babur is able to
Pvc on action and also because he here writes biz, we, and not min, I as in

ec. 7.
4 For bilghdr, rendezvous, see also f. 78 1. 2 fr. ft.


A 905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. 123


_in the month of Zi’l-qa‘da (June) and with two halts on the
way, came to Qaba and there dismounted.! At the mid-after-
noon Prayer of that day, news came that Tambal’s brother,
Khalil had taken Aish by surprise.

The particulars are as follows;—As has been mentioned,
Khalil and those under him were set free when peace was made.
Tambal then sent Khalil to fetch away their wives and families
from Aiizkint. He had gone and he went into the fort on this
pretext. He kept saying untruthfully, ‘ We will go out today,’
or ‘We will go out tomorrow,’ but he did not go. When we
got to horse, he seized the chance of the emptiness of Aish to
go by night and surprise it. For several reasons it was of no
advantage for us to stay and entangle ourselves with him; we
went straight on therefore. One reason was that as, for the
purpose of making ready military equipment, all my men of
name had scattered, heads of houses to their homes, we had no
news of them because we had relied on the peace and were by
this off our guard against the treachery and falsity of the other
party. Another reason was that for some time, as has been Fo 75.

- said, the misconduct of our great begs, ‘Ali-dost and Qambar-
‘ali had been such that no confidence in them was left. A
further reason was that the Samarkand begs, under Muh. Mazid
Tarkhan had sent Mir Mughil to invite us and, so long as a
capital such as Samarkand stood there, what would incline a
man to waste his days for a place like Andijan ?

From Qaba we moved on to Marghinan (20 m.). Marghinan
had been given to Qiich Beg’s father, Sl. Ahmad Qardwal, and
he was then in it. As he, owing to various ties and attach-
ments, could not attach himself to me,? he stayed behind while
his son, Qiich Beg and one or two of his brethren, older and
younger, went with me. :

Taking the road for Asfara, we dismounted in one of its
villages, called Mahan. That night there came and joined us
in Mahan, by splendid chance, just as if to a rendezvous, Qasim
Beg Qichin with his company, ‘Ali-dost with his, and Sayyid

+ 25 m. only ; the halts were due probably to belated arrivals.


2 Some of his ties would be those of old acquaintance in Hisar with ‘Ali’s
father’s begs, now with him in Samarkand.


Fol. 78).


Fol. 79,


124 FARGHANA ?


Odsim with a large body of braves. We rode from Mahan ee 4
the Khasban (var. Yasan) plain, crossed the Chipan (Shepherd
bridge and so to Aura-tipa.*


(¢. Qambar-‘alt punishes himself.)

Trusting to Tambal, Qambar-‘ali went from his own district
(Khujand) to Akhsi in order to discuss army-matters with him. __
Such an event happening,? Tambal laid hands on Qambar-‘ali, i
marched against his district and carried him along. Here the
(Turki) proverb fits, ‘ Distrust your friend! he’ll stuff your hide
with straw.’ While Qambar-‘ali was being made to go to
Khujand, he escaped on foot and after a hundred difficulties
reached Aura-tipa.

News came to us there that Shaibani Khan had beaten Baqi
Tarkhan in Dabisi and was moving on Bukhara. We went
on from Alira-tipa, by way of Burka-yilaq, to Sangzar* which
the sub-governor surrendered. There we placed Qambar-‘ali,
as, after effecting his own capture and betrayal, he had come
tous. We then preted on.


(u. Affairs of Samarkand and the end of ‘Ali-dost.)


On our arrival in Khan-yirti, the Samarkand begs under
Muh. Mazid Tarkhan came and did me obeisance. Conference
was held with them as to details for taking the town ; they said,
‘Khwaja Yahya also is wishing for the pddshah;* with his
consent the town may be had easily without fighting or dis-
turbance. The Khwaja did not say decidedly to our ~
messengers that he had resolved to admit us to the town but at
the same time, he said nothing likely to lead us to despair. 5

Leaving Khan-yirti, we moved to the bank of the Dar-i-gham
(canal) and from there sent our librarian, Khwaja Muhammad
‘Ali to Khwaja Yahya. He brought word back, ‘Let them
come; we will give them the town.’ Accordingly we rode
from the Dar-i-gham straight for the town, at night-fall, but


1 Point to point, some 90 m. but further by road.

2 Bu wagi' bilghach, manifestly ironical.

3 Sangzir to Aiirad-tipa, by way of the hills, some 50 miles,
* The Sh. N, Vambéry, p. 60, confirms this.


905 AH.—AUG. 8TH. 1499 To JULY 28TH. 1500 AD. 125


our plan came to nothing because Sl. Muhammad D4éldai’s
father, Sl. Mahmiid had fled from our camp and given such
information to (Sl ‘Ali's party) as put them on their guard.
Back we went to the Dar-i-gham bank.

While I had been in Y4ar-yilaq, one of my favoured begs,
Ibrahim Sa@r% who had been plundered and driven off by ‘Ali-
dost, came and did me obeisance, together with Muh. Yisuf,
the elder son of Sayyid Yusuf (Aughlaqchi). Coming in by
ones and twos, old family servants and begs and some of the
household gathered back to me there. All were enemies of
‘Ali-dost ; some he had driven away; others he had plundered ;
others again he had imprisoned. He became afraid. For why?
Because with Tambal’s backing, he had harassed and perse-
cuted me and my well-wishers. As for me, my very nature
sorted ill with the manikin’s! From shame and fear, he could
stay no longer with us; he asked leave; I took it as a personal
favour; I gave it. On this leave, he and his son, Muhammad-
dost went to Tambal’s presence. They became his intimates,
and from father and son alike, much evil and sedition issued.
‘Ali-dost died a few years later from ulceration of the hand.
Muhammad-dost went amongst the Auzbegs; that was not
altogether bad but, after some treachery to his salt, he fled
from them and went into the Andijan foot-hills.2 There he
stirred up much revolt and trouble. In the end he fell into the
hands of Auizbeg people and they blinded him. The meaning
of ‘ The salt took his eyes,’ is clear in his case.®

After giving this pair their leave, we sent Ghiri Larlas toward
Bukhara for news. He brought word that Shaibani Khan had
taken Bukhara and was on his way to Samarkand. Here-upon,
seeing no advantage in staying in that neighbourhood, we set
out for Kesh where, moreover, were the families of most of the
Samarkand begs.

When we had been a few weeks there, news came that Sl.
‘Ali Mirza had given Samarkand to Shaibani Khan. The
particulars are these ;—The Mirza’s mother, Zuhra Begi Agha

1 Cf. £. 74b.


2 Macham and Awighir, presumably.
3 guzlay tuz titi, i.e. he was blinded for some treachery to his hosts.


Fol. 794.


Fol, 80.


126 FARGHANA |


Shaibani Khan that if he would ‘ae “at (to. ip 1er

should give him Samarkand and that when Shaibani had taken —
(her son’s) father’s country, he should give her son a pa %
Sayyid Yusuf Arghiin must have known of this plan, indeed —
will have been the traitor inventing it.


1 Muh. Salih’s well-informed account of this sane has much interest,
filling out and, as by Shaibani’s Boswell, balancing Babur’s. Babur is
obscure about what country was to be given to ‘Ali. Payanda-hasan a
phrases his brief words ;—Shaibani was to be as a father to ‘Ali and when he ~
had taken ‘Ali’s father’s wildydt, he was to give a country to ‘Ali. It has —
been thought that the gift to ‘Ali was to follow Shaibani’s recovery of hisown —
ancestral camping-ground (yart) but this is facia. I think, by the word, |
wilayat, cultivated land.


906 AH.—JULY 28TH. 1500 tro JULY 17TH.
1501 AD.


(a. Samarkand in the hands of the A uzbegs.)


When, acting on that woman’s promise, Shaibani Khan
went to Samarkand, he dismounted in the Garden of the Plain-
About mid-day Sl. ‘Ali Mirza went out to him through the
Four-roads Gate, without a word to any of his begs or un-
mailed braves, without taking counsel with any-one soever and
accompanied only by a few men of little consideration from his
own close circle. The Khan, for his part, did not receive him
very favourably; when they had seen one another, he seated
him on his less honourable hand.? Khwaja Yahya, on hearing
of the Mirza’s departure, became very anxious but as he could
find no remedy,’ went out also. The Khan looked at him with-
out rising and said a few words in which blame had part, but
when the Khwaja rose to leave, showed him the respect
of rising.

As soon as Khwaja ‘ Ali* Bay’s® son, Jan-‘ali heard in Rabat-


1 Elp. MS. f. 576; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 636 and I.O. 217 f. 52 ; Mems. p. 82.

Two contemporary works here supplement the B.N.; (1) the (Tawdrikh-i-
guzida) Nasvat-nadma, dated 908 au. (B.M. Turki Or. 3222) of which Berezin’s
Shaibani-ndma is an abridgment; (2) Muh. Salih Mirza’s Shaibani-nama
(Vambéry trs. cap. xix et seq.). The H.S. (Bomb. ed. p. 302, and Tehran ed.
p- 384) is also useful.

2 i.e. on his right. The H.S. ii, 302 represents that ‘Ali was well-received.
After Shaibaq had had Zuhra’s overtures, he sent an envoy to ‘Aliand Yahya ;
the first was not won over but the second fell in with his mother’s scheme.
This difference of view explains why ‘Ali slipped away while Yahya was
engaged in the Friday Mosque. It seems likely that mother and son alike
iy esa their Aiizbeg blood to stand them in good stead with Shaibaq.

3 He tried vainly to get the town defended. ‘‘ Would to God Babur Mirza
were here !’”’ he is reported as saying, by Muh. Salih.

4 Perhaps it is for the play of words on ‘Ali and ‘Ali’s life (jan) that this
man makes his sole appearance here.

5 7.e. rich man or merchant, but Bi (infra) is an equivalent of Beg.


127


Fol. 800,


Fol. 81.


128 FARGHANA a)


i-khwaja of the Mirza’s going to Shaibani Khan, he also went.
As for that calamitous woman who, in her folly, gave her son’s
house and possessions to the winds in order to get herself a
husband, Shaibani Khan cared not one atom for her, indeed
did not regard her as the equal of a mistress or a concubine.!

Confounded by his own act, Sl. ‘Ali Mirza’s repentance was
extreme. Some of his close circle, after hearing particulars,
planned for him to escape with them but to this he would
not agree; his hour had come; he was not to be freed. He
had dismounted in Timir Sultan’s quarters; three or four days
later they killed him in Plough-meadow.2 For a matter of this
five-days’ mortal life, he died with a bad name; having entered
into a woman’s affairs, he withdrew himself from the circle of
men of good repute. Of such people’s doings no more should
be written ; of acts so shameful, no more should be heard.

The Mirza having been killed, Shaibani Khan sent Jan-‘ali
after his Mirza. He had apprehensions also about Khwaja
Yahya and therefore dismissed him, with his two sons, Khwaja
Muh. Zakariya and Khwaja Baqi, towards Khurasan.2 A few
Aiizbegs followed them and near Khwaja Kardzan martyred.
both the Khwaja and his two young sons. Though Shaibani’s
words were, ‘ Not through me the KhwéAja’s affair! Qambar Bi
and Kipuk Bi did it,’ this is worse than that! There is a
proverb,* ‘ His excuse is worse than his fault,’ for if begs, out.
of their own heads, start such deeds, unknown to their Khians.
or Padshahs, what becomes of the authority of khanship and
and sovereignty ?


(b. Babur leaves Kesh and crosses the Mura pass.)


Since the Atizbegs were in possession of Samarkand, we left
Kesh and went in the direction of Hisar. With us started off


1 Muh. Salih, invoking curses on such a mother, mentions that Zuhra was.
given to a person of her own sort.

2 The Sh. N. and Nasvat-ndma attempt to lift the blame of ‘Ali’s death.
from Shaibaq ; the second saying that he fell into the Kohik-water when
drunk,

3 Harat might be his destination but the H.S. names Makka. Some
dismissals towards Khurasan may imply pilgrimage to Meshhed.

* Used also by Babur’s daughter, Gul-badan (l.c. f. 31).


906 AH.—JULY 28TH. 1500 ro JULY 17TH. 1501 AD. —129


Muh. Mazid Tarkhan and the Samarkand begs under his
command, together with their wives and families and people,
but when we dismounted in the Chulttii meadow of Chagh4nian,
they parted from us, went to Khusrau Shah and became his
retainers.

Cut off from our own abiding-town and country, not know-
ing where (else) to go or where to stay, we were obliged to
traverse the very heart of Khusrau Shah’s districts, spite of
what measure of misery he had inflicted on the men of our
dynasty!

One of our plans had been to go to my younger Khan dada,
z.¢. Alacha Khan, by way of Qara-tigin and the Alai,? but this
was not managed. Next we were for going up the valley of
the Kam torrent and over the Sara-taéq pass (dabdn). When
we were near Nindak, a servant of Khusrau Shah brought
me one set of nine horses? and one of nine pieces of cloth.
When we dismounted at the mouth of the Kam valley, Sher-
‘ali, the page, deserted to Khusrau Shah’s brother, Wali and,
next day, Qich Beg parted from us and went to Hisar.

We entered the valley and made our way up it. On its
steep and narrow roads and at its sharp and precipitous
saddles® many horses and camels were left. Before we reached
the Sara-taq pass we had (in 25 m.) to make three or four
night-halts. A pass! and what a pass! Never was such a
steep and narrow pass seen; never were traversed such ravines
and precipices. Those dangerous narrows and sudden falls,
those perilous heights and knife-edge saddles, we got through
with much difficulty and suffering, with countless hardships
and miseries. Amongst the Fan mountains is a large lake
(Iskandar) ; it is 2 miles in circumference, a beautiful lake and
not devoid of marvels.® :

_ 1 Cut off by alien lands and weary travel.

4 The Pers. annotator of the Elph. Codex has changed Alai to wildyat, and
daban (pass) toydn,side. For the difficult route see Schuyler, i, 275, Kostenko,
i, 129 and Rickmers, JRGS. 1907, art. Fan Valley.

3 Amongst Turks and Mughils, gifts were made by nines.

4 Hisar was his earlier home.

5 Many of these will have been climbed i in order to get over places impassable.


&at the river’s level.
§ Schuyler quotes a legend of the lake. He and Kostenko make it larger.


9


Fol. 814.


Fol. 82.


Fol. 82d.


130 FARGHANA


News came that Ibrahim Tarkhan had: strengthened Fort
Shiraz and was seated in it; also that Qambar-‘ali (the Skinner)
and Abi’l-qasim. Kohbur, the latter not being able to stay in
Khwaja Didar with the Atizbegs in Samarkand,—had both
come into Yar-yilaq, strengthened its lower forts and occupied
them.

Leaving Fan on our right, we moved on for Keshtiid. The
head-man of Fan had a reputation for hospitality, generosity,
serviceableness. and kindness. He had given tribute of 70 or
80 horses to Sl. Mas‘aid Mirza at the time the Mirza, when
Sl. Husain Mirza made attack on Hisar, went through Fan on
his way to his younger brother, Bai-sunghar Mirza in Samar-
kand. He did like service to others. To me he sent one
second-rate horse; moreover he did not wait on me himself,
So it was! Those renowned for liberality became misers when
they had to do with me, and the politeness of the polite was
forgotten, Khusrau. Shah was celebrated for liberality and
kindness ; what service he did Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza has been
mentioned; to Baqi Tarkhan and other begs he shewed great
generosity also. Twice I happened to pass through his
country ;+ not to speak of courtesy shewn to my peers, what he
shewed to my lowest servants he did not shew to me, indeed
he shewed less regard for us than for them.


(Turki) Who, o my heart! has seen goodness from worldlings ?.
Look not for goodness from him who has none.


Under the impression that the Aiizbegs were in Keshtid, we
made an excursion to it, after passing Fan. Of itself it seemed
to have gone to ruin; no-one seemed to be occupying it. We
went on to the bank of the Kohik-water (Zar-afshan) and there
dismounted. From that place we sent a few begs under
Qasim Qéchin to surprise Rabat-i-khwaja; that done, we
crossed the river by a bridge from opposite Yari, went through
Yari and over the Shungar-khana (Falcons’-home) range into
Yar-yilaq. Our begs went to Rabat-i-khwaja and had set, up
ladders when the men within came to know about them and


* The second occasion was when he crossed from Sikh for Kabul in 910 AH,
(fol. 120).


906 AH.—JULY 28TH. 1500 To JULY 17TH. 1501 AD. 131


forced them to retire. As they could not take the fort, they
rejoined us.


(c. Babur renews attack on Samarkand.)

Qambar-‘ali (the Skinner) was (still) holding Sangzar; he
came and saw us; Abi’l-qasim. Kohbur and Ibrahim Tarkhan
showed loyalty and attachment by sending efficient men for
our service. We went into Asfidik (var. Asfindik), one of the
Yar-yilaq villages. At that time Shaib&aq Khan lay near
Khwaja Didar with 3 or 4000 Aiizbegs and’ as many more
soldiers gathered in locally. He had given the Government of
Samarkand to Jan-wafa, and Jan-wafa was then in the fort
with 500 or 600 men. Hamza Sl. and Mahdi SI: were lying
near the fort, in the Quail-reserve. Our men, good and bad
were 240.

Having discussed the position with all my begs and unmailed
braves, we left it at this ;—that as Shaibani’ Khan had taken
possession of Samarkand so recently, the Samarkandis would
not be attached to him nor he to them; that if we made an
effort at once, we might do the thing; that if we set ladders up
and took the fort by surprise, the Samarkandis would’ be for
us; how should they not be? even if they gave us: no help,
they would not fight us for the Aizbegs;. and that Samarkand
once In our hands, whatever was.God’s. will, would happen.

Acting on this decision, we rode out of Yar-yiliq: after the


_Mid-day Prayer, and on through the dark. till'midénight- when


‘we reached Khan-yirti. Here we had word that the Samar-
kandis knew of our coming; for this reason we went no nearer
to the town but made straight back from. Khan-yirti. It was
dawn when, after crossing the Kohik-water below Rabat-i-
khwaja, we were once more in: Yar-yilaq.

One day in Fort Asfidik a household party was sitting in my
presence; Dost-i-nasir and Nuyan! Ki#kildash and Khan-quli-
i-Karim-dad and Shaikh Darwesh and: Mirim-i-nasir_ were all
there. Words: were crossing from. all. sides. when (I said),
‘Come now! say when, if God bring it right, we shall take


1 This name appears to indicate.a Command of 10,000 (Bretschneider’s
-Medieval Researches, i, 112).


Fol. 83.


Fol, 836.


a7 7 ee ae
a On oe


132 : FARGHANA


Samarkand.’ Some said, ‘We shall take it in the heats.’ It
was then late in autumn. Others said, ‘In a month,’ ‘ Forty
days,’ ‘Twenty days.’ Nuyaén Kakuldadsh said, ‘We shall
take it in 14.’ God shewed him right! we did take it in
exactly 14 days.

Just at that time I had a wonderful dream ;—His Highness
Khwaja ‘Ubaid’l-lah (Ahrari) seemed to come; I seemed to
go out to give him honourable meeting; he came in and seated
himself; people seemed to lay a table-cloth before him,
apparently without sufficient care and, on account of this,
something seemed to come into his Highness Khwaja’s mind.
Mulla Baba (? Pashdghart) made mea sign; I signed back,
‘Not through me! the table-layer is in fault!’ The Khwaja
understood and accepted the excuse.1 When he rose, I
escorted him out. In the hall of that house he took hold of
either my right or left arm and lifted me up till one of my feet
was off the ground, saying, in Turki, ‘Shaikh Maslahat has
given (Samarkand.)’ I really took Samarkand a few days
later.


(d. Babur takes Samarkand by surprise.)


In two or three days move was made from Fort Asfidik to
Fort Wasmand. Although by our first approach, we had let
Fol. 84, Our plan be known, we put our trust in God and made another
expedition to Samarkand. It was after the Mid-day Prayer
that we rode out of Fort Wasmand, Khwaja Abi’l-makaéram
accompanying us. By mid-night we reached the Deep-fosse-
bridge in the Avenue. From there we sent forward a detach-
ment of 70 or 80 good men who were to set up ladders opposite
the Lovers’-cave, mount them and get inside, stand up to those
in the Turquoise Gate, get possession of it and send a man
1 It seems likely that the cloth was soiled. C/. f. 25 and Hughes Dict. of
Islam s.n, Eating.

2 As, of the quoted speech, one word only, of three, is Turki, others may have
beendreamed. Shaikh Maslahat’s tomb is in Khujand where Babur had found
refuge in 903 AH. ; it had been circumambulated by Timiirin 790 AH. (1390 AD.) x
and is still honoured. a

This account of a dream compares well for naturalness with that in the ¢


seemingly-spurious passage, entered with the Hai. MS. on f.-118. For
examination of the passage see JRAS, Jan. 1911, and App. D.


906 AH.—JULY 28TH. 1500 To JULY 17TH, 1501 AD. 133


to me. Those braves went, set their ladders up opposite the
Lovers’-cave, got in without making anyone aware, went to the
Gate, attacked Fazil Tarkhan, chopped at him and his few
retainers, killed them, broke the lock with an axe and opened
the Gate. At that moment I came up and went in.


' (Author's note on Fazil Tarkhan.) He was not one of those (Samar-
kand) Tarkhans ; he was a merchant-tarkhan of Turkistan. He had
served Shaibani Khan in Turkistan and had found favour with him.1.

Abi’l-qasim Kohbur himself had not come with us but had
sent 30 or 40 of his retainers under his younger brother, Ahmad-
i-qasim. No man of Ibrahim Tarkhan’s was with us; his


younger brother, Ahmad Tarkhaén came with a few retainers


after I had entered the town and taken post in the Monastery.

The towns-people were still slumbering; a few traders
peeped out of their shops, recognized me and put up prayers.
When, a little later, the news spread through the town, there
was rare delight and satisfaction for our men and the towns-
folk. They killed the Atizbegs in the lanes and gullies with
clubs and stones like mad dogs; four or five hundred were
killed in this fashion. Jan-wafa, the then governor, was living
in Khwaja Yahya’s house; he fled and got away to Shaibaq
Khan.?


Fol. 844.


On entering the Turquoise Gate I went straight to the


College and took post over the arch of the Monastery. There
was a hubbub and shouting of ‘Down! down!’ till day-break.
Some of the notables and traders, hearing what was happening,
came joyfully to see me, bringing what food was ready and
putting up prayers forme. At day-light we had news that the
Aiizbegs were fighting in the Iron Gate where they had made
themselves fast between the (outer and inner) doors. With
I0, 15 or 20 men, I at once set off for the Gate but before I
came up, the town-rabble, busy ransacking every corner of the
newly-taken town for loot, had driven the Aizbegs out through


1 He was made a Tarkhan by diploma of Shaibani (H.S. ii, 306, 1. 2).

2 Here the Hai. MS. begins to use the word Shaibdq in place of its previously
uniform Shaibéni. As has been noted (f. 55 n. 2), the Elph. MS. writes
Shatbaq. It may be therefore that a scribe has changed the earlier part
of the Hai. MS. and that Babur wrote Shaibdqg. From this point my text
will follow the double authority of the Elph. and Hai. MSS.


Fol. 85.


Fol. 854.


a man out from amongst Sl. Husain Mirza’s opponents to bring


134 ; FARGHANA


it. Shaibiq Khan, on hearing what was happening, hurried at ~
sun-rise to the Iron Gate with 100 or 140 men. His coming
was a wonderful chance but, as has been said, my men were
very few. Seeing that he could do nothing, he rode off at once.
From the Iron Gate I went to the citadel and there dismounted,
at the Bii-stan palace. Men of rank and consequence and
various head-men came to me there, saw me and invoked
blessings on me.

Samarkand for nearly 140 years had been the capital of
our dynasty. -An alien, and of what stamp! an Aitizbeg foe,
had taken possession of it! It had slipped from our hands;
God gave it again! plundered and ravaged, our own returned
to us. |

Sl. Husain Mirza took Harat! as we took Samarkand, by
surprise, but to the experienced, and discerning, and just, it
will be clear that between his affair and mine there are dis-
tinctions and differences, and that his capture and mine are
things apart.

Firstly there is this;—He had ruled many ‘years, passed
through much experience and seen many affairs.

Secondly ;—He had for opponent, Yadgar Muh. Nasir Mirza,
an inexperienced boy of 17 or 18.

Thirdly ;—(Yadgar Mirza’s) Head-equerry, Mir ‘Ali, a person
well-acquainted with the particulars of the whole position, sent


him to surprise them.

Fourthly ;—His opponent was not in the fort but was in the
Ravens’-garden. Moreover Yadgar Muh. Nasir Mirza and his
followers are said to have been so prostrate with drink that
three men only were in the Gate, they also drunk.

Fifthly ;—he surprised and captured Harat the first time he
approached it.

On the other hand: firstly ;—I was 19 when I took Samarkand.

Secondly ;—I had as my opponent, such a man as Shaibaq
Khan, of mature age and an eye-witness of many affairs.


1 In 875 AH. (1470 AD.). Husain was then 32 years old. Babur might
have compared his taking of Samarkand with Timir‘s capture of Qarshi,
also with 240 followers (Z.N.i, 127). Firishta (lith. ed. p. 196) ascribes his
omission to do so to reluctance to rank himself with his great ancestor.


906 AH.—JULY 28ru. 1500 To JULY 17TH. 1501 AD. — ‘135


Thirdly ;—No-one came out of Samarkand to me; though
the heart of its people was towards me, no-one could dream of
‘coming, from dread of Shaibaq Khan.

Fourthly ;—My foe was in the fort; not only was the fort
taken but he was driven off.

Fifthly ;—I had come once already ; my opponent was on his
guard about me. The second time we came, God brought it
right! Samarkand was won.

In saying these things there is no desire to be- little the
reputation of any man; the facts were as here stated. In
writing these things, there is no desire to magnify myself; the
truth is set down.

The poets composed chronograms on the victory; this one
remains in my memory ;—Wisdom answered, ‘ Know that its
‘date is the Victory (Fath) of Babur Bahdduy.’

Samarkand being taken, Shavdar and Soghd and the témdns
and nearer forts began, one after another, to return to us.
From some their Atizbeg commandants fled in fear and
‘escaped; from others the inhabitants drove them and came in
‘to us; in some they made them prisoner, and held the forts
for us.

Just then the wives and families of Shaibaq Khan and his
Auzbegs arrived from Turkistan ;' he was lying near Khwaja
Didar and ‘Ali-abad but when he saw the forts and people
returning to me, marched off towards Bukhara. By God's
grace, all the forts of Soghd and Miydn-kal returned to me
within three or four months. Over and above this, Baqi
Tarkhan seized this opportunity to occupy Qarshi; Khuzar

and Qarshi (? Kesh) both went out of Aizbeg hands; Qara-kil
‘also was taken from them by people of Abi’l-muhsin Mirza
(Sai-garad), coming up from Merv. My affairs were in a very
good way.


(e. Birth of Babur’s first child.)


After our departure (last year) from Andijan, my mothers
and my wife and relations came, with a hundred difficulties and


1 This arrival shews that Shaibani expected to stay in Samarkand. He
had been occupying Turkistan under The Chaghatai Khan,


Fol. 86.


Fol. 868


Fol. 87.


136 FARGHANA ei


hardships, to Airatipaé. We now sent for them to Samarkand.
Within a few days after their arrival, a daughter was born to
me by ‘Ayisha-sultan Begim, my first wife, the daughter of
Sl. Ahmad Mirza. They named the child Fakhru’n-nisa’
(Ornament of women); she was my first-born, I was 1g. Ina
month or 40 days, she went to God’s mercy,


(f. Babur in Samarkand.)


On taking Samarkand, envoys and summoners were sent off
at once, and sent again and again, with reiterated request for
aid and reinforcement, to the khans and sultans and begs and
marchers on every side. Some, though experienced men, made
foolish refusal; others whose relations towards our family had
been discourteous and unpleasant, were afraid for themselves
and took no notice; others again, though they sent help, sent
it insufficient. Each such case will be duly mentioned.

When Samarkand was taken the second time, ‘Ali-sher Beg
was alive. We exchanged letters once; on the back of mine
to him I wrote one of my Turki couplets. Before his reply
reached me, separations (tafarga) and disturbances (ghiighd)
had happened. Mulla Bina’i had been taken iuto Shaibagq
Khan’s service when the latter took possession of Samarkand;
he stayed with him until a few days after I took the place,
when he came into the town to me. Qasim Beg had his
suspicions about him and consequently dismissed him towards
Shahr-i-sabz but, as he was a man of parts, and as no fault of
his came to light, I had him fetched back. He constantly
presented me with odes (gasida u ghazal). He brought me a
song in the Nawa& mode composed to my name and at the
same time the following quatrain ;—*


1 ‘Ali-sher died Jan. 3rd. 1501. It is not clear to what disturbances Babur
refers. He himself was at ease till after April 20th. 1502 and his defeat at
Sar-i-pul. Possibly the reference is to the quarrels between Bina’i and
Beira Cf. Sam Mirza’s Anthology, trs. S. de Sagy, Notices et Extraits iv,
257 et seq.

? I surmise a double play-of-words in this verse. One is on two rhyming
words, ghala and mallah and is illustrated by rendering them as oat and coat.
The other is on pointed and unpointed letters, i.e. ghala and ‘ala. We cannot
find however a Persian word ‘ala, meaning garment.


906 AH.—JULY 28ru. 1500 To JULY 17TH. 1501 AD. 137


No grain (ghala) have I by which I can be fed (noshid) ; i
No rhyme of grain (mallah, nankeen) wherewith I can be clad (poshid) ;
The man who lacks both food and clothes,
In art or science where can he compete (hoshid) ?
In those days of respite, I had written one or two couplets
but had not completed an ode. As an answer to Mulla Bina’


I made up and set this poor little Turki quatrain ;—*


As is the wish of your heart, so shall it be (bulghusidir) ;
For gift and stipend both an order shall be made (buyurtlghusidiir) ;
I know the grain and its rhyme you write of ;
The garments, you, your house, the corn shall fill (talghusidur).
The Mulla in return wrote and presented a quatrain to me in
which for his refrain, he took a rhyme to (the talghusidur of)


my last line and chose another rhyme ;—


Mirz4-of-mine, the Lord of sea and land shall be (yir biilghisidtr) ;
His art and skill, world o’er, the evening tale shall be (samar bilghisidiy) ;
If gifts like these reward one rhyming (or pointless) word ;
For words of sense, what guerdon will there be (nildr bilghtsidir) ?
Abi’l-barka, known as Fardq: (Parted), who just then had
come to Samarkand from Shahr-i-sabz, said Bina’i ought to
have rhymed. He made this verse ;—


Into Time’s wrong to you quest shall be made (siévilghisidtir) ;
Your wish the Sultan’s grace from Time shall ask (qulghusidiyr) ;
O Ganymede! our cups, ne’er filled as yet,

In this new Age, brimmed-up, filled full shall be (télghisidiir).

Though this winter our affairs were in a very good way and
Shaibagq Khan’s were on the wane, one or two occurrences were
somewhat of a disservice; (1) the Merv men who had taken
Qara-ktil, could not be persuaded to stay there and it went
back into the hands of the Atizbegs; (2) Shaibaq Khan besieged
Ibrahim Tarkhan’s younger brother, Ahmad in Dabisi, stormed
the place and made a general massacre of its inhabitants before
the army we were collecting was ready to march.

With 240 proved men I had taken Samarkand; in the next
five or six months, things so fell out by the favour of the Most


High God, that, as will be told, we fought the arrayed battle of
‘Sar-i-pul with a man like Shaibaq Khan. The help those


1 Babur’s refrain is ghtisiduy, his rhymes bal, (buyuyv)ul and tal. Bina’i
makes bulghtsiduy his refrain but his rhymes are not true viz. yir, (sa)may
and Jar. ;


Fol. 874,


Fol. 88.


Fol. 882.


138 FARGHANA


round-about gave us was as follows;—From The Khan had —
come, with 4 or 5000 Barins, Ayib Begchik and Qashka —
Mahmiid; from Jahangir Mirza had come Khalil, Tambal’s.
younger brother, with 100 or 200 men; not a man had come
from Sl. Husain Mirza, that experienced ruler, than whom
none knew better the deeds and dealings of Shaibag Khan; none
came from Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza; none from Khusrau Shah
because he, the author of what evil done,—as has been told,—
to our dynasty! feared us more than he feared Shaibaq Khan.


(g. Babur defeated at Sar-t-pul.)


I marched out of Samarkand, with the wish of fighting
Shaibéq Khan, in the month of Shawwdl! and went to the
New-garden where we lay four or five days for the convenience
of gathering our men and completing our equipment. We
took the precaution of fortifying our camp with ditch and


‘branch. From the New-garden we advanced, march by march,


to beyond Sar-i-pul (Bridge-head) and there dismounted.
Shaibaq Khan came from the opposite direction and dis-
mounted at Khwaja Kardzan, perhaps one yighdch away
(? 5 m.). We lay there for four or five days. Every day our
people went from our side and his came from theirs and fell on _
one another. One day when they were in unusual force, there —
was much fighting but neither side had the advantage. Out of —
that engagement one of our men went rather hastily back into
the entrenchments; he was using a standard; some said it
was Sayyidi Qara Beg’s standard who really was a man of
strong words but weak sword. Shaibiq Khan made one
night-attack on us but could do nothing because the camp was
protected by ditch and close-set branches. His men raised —
their war-cry, rained in arrows from outside the ditch and then
retired.

In the work for the coming battle I exerted myself greatly
and took all precautions; Qambar-‘ali also did much. In
Kesh lay Baqi Tarkhan with 1000 to 2000 men, in a position
to join us after a couple of days. In Diyil, 4 yighach off


1 Shaww4l 906 aH. began April 2oth. 15or.


906 AH.—JULY 28TH. 1500 TO JULY 177TH. 1501 AD. —_—_139


(? 20 m.), lay Sayyid Muh. Mirza Daghlat, bringing me 1000 to
2000 men from my Khan dada; he would have joined me at
dawn. With matters in this position, we hurried on the fight !


Who lays with haste his hand on the sword,
Shall lift to his teeth the back-hand of regret.1


Fol. 89.


The reason I was so eager to engage was that on the day of °


battle, the Eight stars? were between the two armies; they
would have been in the enemy’s rear for 13 or 14 days if the
fight had been deferred. I now understand that these consider-
ations are worth nothing and that our haste was without reason.

As we wished to fight, we marched from our camp at dawn,
we in our mail, our horses in theirs, formed up in array of right
and left, centre and van. Our right was Ibrahim Sari, Ibrahim
Jani, Abi’l-qasim Kohbur and other begs. Our left was Muh.


Mazid Tarkhan, Ibrahim Tarkhan and other Samarkandi begs,


also Sl. Husain Arghiin, Qara (Black) Barlds, Pir Ahmad and
Khwaja Husain. Qasim Beg was (with me) in the centre and
also several of my close circle and household. In the van were
inscribed Qambar-‘ali the Skinner, Banda-‘ali, Khwaja ‘Ali,
Mir Shah Qachin, Sayyid Qasim, Lord of the Gate,—Banda-
‘ali’s younger brother Khaldar (mole-marked) and Haidar-i-
qasim’s son Qiich, together with all the good braves there
were, and the rest of the household.

Thus arrayed, we marched from our camp; the enemy, also


in array, marched out from his. His right was Mahmiid and


Jani and Timir Sultans; his left, Hamza and Mahdi and some
other sultans. When our two armies approached one another,
he wheeled his right towards our rear. To meet this, I
turned; this left our van,—in which had been inscribed what
not of our best braves and tried swordsmen !—to our right and
bared our front (z.c. the front of the centre). None-the-less we
fought those who made the front-attack on us, turned them
and forced them back on their own centre. So far did we
Carry it that some of Shaibaq Khan’s old chiefs said to him,
‘We must move off! It is past a stand.’ He however held
fast. His right beat our left, then wheeled (again) to our rear.
1 From the Bi-stan, Graf ed. p. 55, 1. 246.


2 Sikiz Yildiz. See Chardin’s Voyages, v, 136 and Table; also Stanley
Lane Poole’s Babur, p. 56.


Fol. 896.


Fol. 90.


Fol. 904.


140 FARGHANA


(As has been said), the front of our centre was bare shrouetll
our van’s being left to the right. The enemy attacked us front ~


and rear, raining in arrows on us. (Ayub Begchik’s) Mughil ~
army, come for our help! was of no use in fighting; it set to
work forthwith to unhorse and plunder our men. Not this
once only! This is always the way with those ill-omened
Mughils! If they win, they grab at booty; if they lose, they
unhorse and pilfer their own side! We drove back the
Auzbegs who attacked our front by several vigorous assaults,
but those who had wheeled to our rear came up and rained
arrows on our standard. Falling on us in this way, from the
front and from the rear, they made our men hurry off.

This same turning-movement is one of the great merits of
Aiizbeg fighting; no battle of theirs is ever without it. Another
merit of theirs is that they all, begs and retainers, from their
front to their rear, ride, loose-rein at the gallop, shouting as they
come and, in retiring, do not scatter but ride off, at the gallop,
in a body.

Ten or fifteen men were left with me. The Kohik-water
was close by,—the point of our right had rested on it. We
made straight for it. It was the season when it comes down in
flood. We rode right into it, man and horse in mail. It was
just fordable for half-way over; after that it had to be swum.
For more than an arrow’s flight! we, man and mount in mail!
made our horses swim and so got across. Once out of the
water, we cut off the horse-armour and let it lie. By thus
passing to the north bank of the river, we were free of our foes,
but at once Mughil wretches were the captors and pillagers of
one after another of my friends. Ibrahim Tarkhan and some
others, excellent braves all, were unhorsed and killed by
Mughils.? We moved along the north bank of the Kohik-river,


1 In 1791 AD. Muh. Effendi shot 482 yards from a Turkish bow, before
the R. Tox. S.; not a good shot, he declared. Longer ones are on record.


See Payne-Gallwey’s Cross-bow and AQR. 1911, H. Beveridge’s Oriental —


Cross-bows.
2 In the margin of the Elph. Codex, here, stands a Persian verse which
appears more likely to be Humayiin’s than Babur’s. It is as follows:


Were the Mughil race angels, they would be bad ;
Written in gold, the name Mughil would be bad ;


906 AH.—JULY 28TH. 1500 To JULY 17TH. 1501 AD. —14!


recrossed it near Qulba, entered the town by the Shaikh-zada’s
Gate and reached the citadel in the middle of the afternoon.
Begs of our greatest, braves of our best and many men
perished in that fight. There died Ibrahim Tarkhan, Ibrahim
Sar# and Ibrahim Jani; oddly enough three great begs named
Ibrahim perished. There died also Haidar-i-qasim’s eldest
son, Abi’l-qasim Kohbur,and Khudai-birdi Téghchi and Khalil,
Tambal’s younger brother, spoken of already several times.
Many of our men fled in different directions; Muh. Mazid
Tarkhan went towards Qindiiz and Hisar for Khusrau Shah.
Some of the household and of the braves, such as Karim-dad-i-
Khudai-birdi Turkman and Janaka K#kuldadsh and Mulla Baba
of Pashaghar got away to Alira-tipa. Mulla Baba at that time
was not in my service but had gone out with me in a guest’s
fashion. Others again, did what Sherim Taghdai and his band
did ;—though he had come back with me into the town and
though when consultation was had, he had agreed with the
rest to make the fort fast, looking for life or death within it,
yet spite of this, and although my mothers and sisters, elder
and younger, stayed on in Samarkand, he sent off their wives
and families to Aira-tipa and remained himself with just a few


Fol. 91.


men, all unencumbered. Not this once only! Whenever hard -


work had to be done, low and double-minded action was the
thing to expect from him!


(h. Babur besieged in Samarkand.)


Next day, I summoned Khwaja Abi’l-makadram, Qasim and
the other begs, the household and such of the braves as were
admitted to our counsels, when after consultation, we resolved
to make the fort fast and to look for life or death within it.
I and Oasim Beg with my close circle and household were the


Pluck not an ear from the Mughil’s corn-land,
What is sown with Mughil seed will be bad.


This verse is written into the text of the First W.-i-B. (I.0. 215 f. 72) and
is introduced by a scribe’s statement that it is by dn Hazrat, much as notes
known to be Humayiin’s are elsewhere attested in the Elph. Codex. Itis not


in the Hai. and Kehr’s MSS. nor with, at least many, good copies of the
Second W..-i-B.


Fol. 914.


Fol. 92.


©
142 FARGHANA


reserve. For convenience in this I took up quarters in.


middle of the town, in tents pitched on the roof of Atligh Be 5
Mirza’s College. ‘To other begs and braves posts were — a


in the Gates or on the ramparts of the walled-town.


Two or three days later, Shaibaq Khan dismounted at some


distance from. the fort. On this, the town-rabble came out of.
lanes and wards, in crowds, to the College gate, shouted good
wishes for me and went out to fight in mob-fashion. Shaibaq
Khan had got to horse but could not so much as approach the
town. Several days went by in this fashion. The mob and
rabble, knowing nothing of sword and arrow-wounds, never
witnesses of the press and carnage of a stricken field; through
these incidents, became bold and began to sally further and
further out. If warned by the braves against going out so
incautiously, they broke into reproach.


One day when Shaibaq Khan had directed his attack towards.


the Iron Gate, the mob, grown. bold, went out, as usual;
daringly and far. To cover their retreat, we sent several braves.
towards the Camel’s-neck,! foster-brethren and some of the
close household-circle, such as Nuyan Kiukildadsh, Qul-nazar
(son of Sherim ?) Taghai Beg, and Mazid. An Aiizbeg or two
put their horses at them and with Qul-nazar swords. were
crossed. The rest of the Aiizbegs dismounted and’ brought
their strength to bear on the rabble, hustled them. off and
rammed them in through the Iron Gate. Qiich Beg and Mir
Shah Qéichin had dismounted at the side of Khwaja Khizr’s
Mosque and were making a stand there. While the townsmen
were being moved off by those on foot, a party of mounted
Auzbegs rode towards the Mosque. Qiich Beg came out when
they drew near and exchanged good blows with them. He did
distinguished work; all stood to watch. Our fugitives below.
were occupied only with their own escape; for them the time


to shoot arrows and make a stand had gone by. I was shoot- —


ing with a slur-bow? from above the Gate and'some of my circle


1 This subterranean water-course, issuing in a flowing well (Erskine) gave
its name to a bastion (H1.S. ii, 300).

2 nawak, a diminutive of ndo,a tube. Itis described, in. a.MS. of Babur’s
time, by Muh. Budha’i, and, in a second of later date, by Aminu’d-din (AQR.
1911, H.B.’s Oriental Cross-bows).


906 AH.—JULY 28TuH. 1500 To JULY 17TH. 1501 AD. 143,


were shooting arrows (a#q). Our attack from above kept the
enemy from advancing beyond the Mosque; from there he
retired.

During the siege, the round of the ramparts was made each
night; sometimes I went, sometimes Qasim Beg, sometimes
one of the household Begs. Though from the Turquoise to the
Shaikh-zada’s Gate may be ridden, the rest of the way must be
walked. When some men went the whole round on foot, it
‘was dawn before they had finished.

One day Shaibaq Khan attacked between the Iron Gate and
the Shaikh-zada’s. I, as the reserve, went to the spot, without
anxiety about the Bleaching-ground and Needle-makers’ Gates.
That day, (?) in a shooting wager (aig aiichida), I made a good
shot with a slur-bow, at a Centurion’s horse.” It died at once
(atiq bardi) with the arrow (auéq bila). They made such a
vigorous attack this time that they got close under the
ramparts. Busy with the fighting and the stress near the
Iron Gate, we were entirely off our guard about the other side
of the town. There, opposite the space between the Needle-
makers’ and Bleaching-ground Gates, the enemy had posted
7 or 800 good men in ambush, having with them 24 or 25
ladders so wide that two or three could mount abreast. These
men came from their ambush when the attack near the Iron
Gate, by occupying all our men, had left those other posts
empty, and quickly set up their ladders between the two Gates,
just where a road leads from the ramparts to Muh. Mazid
Tarkhan’s houses. That post was Qiich Beg’s and Muhammad-
quli Qichin’s, with their detachment of braves, and they had
their quarters in Muh. Mazid’s houses. In the Needle-makers’
Gate was posted Qara (Black) Barlds, in the Bleaching-ground
Gate, Outliq Khwaja Ku#kildadsh with Sherim Taghai and his
brethren, older and younger. As attack was being made on
the other side of the town, the men attached to these posts
were not on guard but had scattered to their quarters or to the


1 Kostenko, i, 344, would make the rounds 9 m.

2 bir yuz atliqning Gtini ndwak aigi bila yakhshi atim. This has been read
by Erskine as though buz 4t, pale horse, and not yz dilig, Centurion, were
written. De. C. translates by Centurion and a marginal note of the Elph.
Codex explains yuz dilig by sad aspagi.


Fol. 92.


Fol.


93-


Fol. 93é.


Fol. 944


144 | FARGHANA


bazar for necessary matters of service and servants’ work. |
Only the begs were at their posts, with one or two of the


populace. Qich Beg and Mihammad-quli and Shah Sufi and
one other brave did very well and boldly. Some Atizbegs were
on the ramparts, some were coming up, when these four men
arrived at a run, dealt them blow upon blow, and, by energetic
drubbing, forced them all down and put them to flight. QOich


Beg did best; this was his out-standing and, approved good
deed; twice during this siege, he got his hand into the work.


Oara Barlds had been left alone in the Needle-makers’ Gate;


he also held out well to the end. Qitliiq Khwaja and Qul-
nazar Mirza were also at their posts in the Bleaching-ground —


Gate; they held out well too, and charged the foe in his rear.
Another time Qasim Beg led his braves out through the
Needle-makers’ Gate, pursued the Atizbegs as far as Khwaja
Kafsher, unhorsed some and returned with a few heads.
It was now the time of ripening rain but no-one’ brought
new corn into the town. The long siege caused great privation
to the towns-people ;? it went so far that the poor and destitute


began to eat the flesh of dogs and asses and, as there was little


grain for the horses, people fed them on leaves. Experience:
shewed that the leaves best suiting were those of the mulberry
and elm (gard-yighadch). Some people scraped dry wood and
gave the shavings, damped, to their horses.

For three or four months Shaibaq Khan did not come near
the fort but had it invested at some distance and himself moved
round it from post to post. Once when our men were off their
guard, at mid-night, the enemy came near to the Turquoise
Gate, beat his drums and flung his war-cry out. I was in the
College, undressed. There was great trepidation and anxiety.
After that they came night after night, disturbing us by drum-
ming and shouting their war-cry.

Although envoys and messengers had been sent repeatedly:
to all sides and quarters, no help and reinforcement arrived.
from any-one. No-one had helped or reinforced me when I
was in strength and power and had suffered no sort of defeat.


! The Sh. N. gives the reverse side of the picture, the plenty enjoyed by-
the besiegers. .


906 AH.—JULY 28TH. 1500 To JULY 17TH. 1501 AD. 145


or loss; on what score would any-one help me now? No hope
in any-one whatever recommended us to prolong the siege.
The old saying was that to hold a fort there must be a head,
two hands and two legs, that is to say, the Commandant is the
head; help and reinforcement coming from two quarters are
the two arms and the food and water in the fort are the two
legs. While we looked for help from those round about, their
thoughts were elsewhere. That brave and experienced ruler,
Sl. Husain Mirza, gave us not even the help of an encouraging
message, but none-the-less he sent Kamalu’d-din Husain Gdazur-
gahi' as an envoy to Shaibagq Khan.


(1. Tambal’s proceedings in Farghdana.)?


(This year) Tambal marched from Andijan to near Bish-
kint. Ahmad Beg and his party, thereupon, made The Khan
move out against him. The two armies came face to face near
Lak-lakan and the Turak Four-gardens but separated without
engaging. Sl. Mahmiid was not a fighting man; now when
opposed to Tambal, he shewed want of courage in word and
deed. Ahmad Beg was unpolished‘ but brave and well-meaning.
In his very rough way, he said, ‘ What’s the measure of this
person, Tambal? that you are so tormented with fear and
fright about him. If you are afraid to look at him, bandage
your eyes before you go out to face him.’


1 He may have been attached to the tomb of KhwAja ‘Abdu’l-lah Ansayi
-in Harat.

2 The brusque entry here and elsewhere of e.g. Tambal’s affairs, allows the
inference that Babur was quoting from perhaps a news-writer’s, contemporary
records. Fora different view of Tambal, the Sh. N. cap. xxxiii should be read.

3 Five-villages, on the main Khujand-Tashkint road.

* turk, as on f. 28 of Khusrau Shah.


Io


Fol. 944.


Fol. 95.


907 AH._JULY 1778. 1501 to JULY 77x. 1502 AD.


(a. Surrender of Samarkand to Shatbani.)


The siege drew on to great length; no provisions and supplies
came in from any quarter, no succour and reinforcement from
any side. The soldiers and peasantry became hopeless and, by
ones and twos, began to let themselves down outside? the walls
and flee. On Shaibaq Khan’s hearing of the distress in the
town, he came and dismounted near the Lovers’-cave. I, in
turn, went to Malikemuhammad Mirza’s dwellings in Low-
lane, over against him. On one of those days, Khwaja Husain’s
brother, Aizin Hasan® came into the town with Io or 15 of his
men,— he who, as has been told, had been the cause of Jahangir
Mirza’s rebellion, of my exodus from Samarkand (903 AH.—
March 1498 aD.) and, again! of what an amount of sedition and
disloyalty! That entry of his was a very bold act.*

The soldiery and townspeople became more and more dis-
tressed. Trusted men of my close circle began to let them-


selves down from the ramparts and get away; begs of known


name and old family servants were amongst them, such as Pir


Wais, Shaikh Wais and Wais Laghari.> Of help from any side


we utterly despaired; no hope was left in any quarter; our
1 Elph. MS. f. 680 ; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 78 and 217 f. 616 ; Mems,. p. 97.


en a al oe


Seti net aati 5


"pills ia Pie Ses eh ira


=
——


The Kehr-Ilminsky text shews, in this year, a good example of its Persifi- 4


cation and of Dr. Ilminsky’s dealings with his difficult archetype by the help
of the Memoirs.

2 tashlab. The Sh. N. places these desertions as after four months of
siege.

3 It strikes one as strange to find Long Hasan described, as here, in terms
of his younger brother. The singularity may be due to the fact that Husain
was with Babur and may have invited Hasan. It may be noted here that
Husain seems likely to be that father-in-law of ‘Umar Shaikh mentioned on
f. 12b and 130.

4 This laudatory comment I find nowhere but in the Hai. Codex.

5 There is some uncertainty about the names of those who left.


146


iy


907 AH.—JULY 17TH. 1501 To JULY 7TH. 1502 AD. —_‘'147


supplies and provisions were wretched, what there was was


coming to an end; no more came in. Meantime Shaibaq Khan


interjected talk of peace.! Little ear would have been given to
his talk of peace, if there had been hope or food from any side.
It had to be! a sort of peace was made and we took our
departure from the town, by the Shaikh-zada’s Gate, some-
where about midnight.


(6. Babur leaves Samarkand.)


I took my mother Khanim out with me; two other women-
folk went too, one was Bishka (var. Peshka)-i- Khalifa, the other,
Minglik Kakuldash.2 At this exodus, my elder sister, Khan-zada
Begim fell into Shaibaq Khan’s hands.* In the darkness of
that night we lost our way* and wandered about amongst the
main irrigation channels of Soghd. At shoot of dawn, after a
hundred difficulties, we got past Khwaja Didar. At the Sunnat
Prayer we scrambled up the rising-ground of Qara-bigh.
From the north slope of Qara-bigh we hurried on past the foot
of Juduk village and dropped down into Yilan-aiiti. On the
road I raced with Qasim Beg and Qambar-‘ali (the Skinner) ;
my horse was leading when I, thinking to look at theirs behind,
twisted myself round; the girth may have slackened, for my
saddle turned and I was thrown on my head to the ground.
Although I at once got up and remounted, my brain did not
steady till the evening; till then this world and what went on
appeared to me like things felt and seen in a dream or fancy.
Towards afternoon we dismounted in Yilan-aiti, there killed a

1 The Sh. N. is interesting here as giving an eye-witness’ account of the
surrender of the town and of the part played in the surrender by Khian-zada’s
matriage (cap. xxxix).

2 The first seems likely to be a relation of NizAmu’d-din ‘Ali Khalifa ; the
second was Mole-marked, a foster-sister. The party numbered some 100
persons of whom Abi’l-makaram was one (HS. ii, 310).

3 Babur’s brevity is misleading ; his sister was not captured but married
with her own and her mother’s consent before attempt to leave the town was
made. Cf. Gul-badan’s H.N. f. 3b and Sh. N. Vambéry, p. 145.

* The route taken avoided the main road for Dizak ; it can be traced by
the physical features, mentioned by Babur, on the Fr. map of 1904. The
Sh. N. says the night was extraordinarily dark. Departure in blinding dark-


ness and by unusual ways shews distrust of Shaibaiq’s safe-conduct suggesting
that Yahya’s fate was in the minds of the fugitives, —


Fol. 955.


Fol. 96.


148 FARGHANA


horse, spitted and roasted its flesh, rested our horses awhile and ©
rode on. Very weary, we reached Khalila-village before the
dawn and dismounted. From there it was gone on to Dizak.

In Dizak just then was Hafiz Muh. Déulda?s son, Tahir.
There, in Dizak, were fat meats, loaves of fine flour, plenty of
sweet melons and abundance of excellent grapes. From what
privation we came to such plenty! From what stress to what
repose !


From fear and hunger rest we won (amdni taptiug) ;
A fresh world’s new-born life we won (jahdni taptiq).
From out our minds, death’s dread was chased (rafa‘ biuldi) ;
From our men the hunger-pang kept back (dafa‘ bildi).*


Never in all our lives had we felt such relief! never in the
whole course of them have we appreciated security and plenty
so highly. Joy is best and more delightful when it follows
sorrow, ease after toil. I have been transported four or five
times from toil to rest and from hardship to ease.2_ This was
the first. We were set free from the affliction of such a foe
and from the pangs of hunger and had reached the repose of
security and the relief of abundance. |


(c. Badbur in Dtkh-kat.)


After three or four days of rest in Dizak, we set out for Aiira-
tipa. Pashaghar is a little* off the road but, as we had occupied
it for some time (g04 AH.), we made an excursion to it in pass-
ing by. In Pashaghar we chanced on.one of Khanim’s old
servants, a teacher* who had been left behind in Samarkand
from want of amount. We saw one another and on questioning
her, I found she had come there on foot.

Khib-nigar Khanim, my mother Khanim’s younger sister®


1 The texts differ as to whether the last two lines are prose or verse. All
four are in Turki, but I surmise a clerical error in the refrain of the third, where
bulub is written for buldi.

? The second was in 908 AH. (f. 185) ; the third in 914 an. (f. 216 5) ; the
fourth is not described in the B.N. ; it followed Babur’s defeat at Ghaj-diwan
in 918 AH. (Erskine’s History of India,i, 325). Hehada fifth, but of a different
kind, when he survived poison in 933 AH. (f. 305).

3 Tlai. MS. gaqasraq ; Elph. MS. ydnasvaq.

* atin, one who instructs in reading, writing and embroidery. Cf. Gul-
badan’s H.N.f.26. The distance walked may have been 70 or 80 m.

5 She was the wife of the then Governor of Aiiré-tipa, Muh. Husain Dighlat


1


907 AH.—JULY 17TH. 1501 To: JULY 7TH. 1502 AD. 149


already must have bidden this transitory world farewell; for
they let Khanim and me know of it in Aira-tipa. My father’s
mother also must have died in Andijin; this too they let us
know in Air4-tipa.1 Since the death of my grandfather, Yunas
Khan (892 Au.), Khanim had not seen her (step-)mother or her
younger brother and sisters, that is to say, Shah Begim, Sl.
Mahmid Khan, Sultdn-nigar Khanim and Daulat-sultan
Khanim. The separation had lasted 13 or 14 years. To see
these relations she now started for Tashkint.

After consulting with Muh. Husain Mirza, it was settled for
us to winter in a place called Dikh-kat” one of the Atra-tipa
villages. There I deposited my impedimenta (auruq) ; then set
out myself in order to visit Shah Begim and my Khan dada
and various relatives. I spent a few days in Tashkint and
waited on Shah Begim and my Khan dada. My mother’s
elder full-sister, Mihr-nigar Khanim*® had come from. Samar-
kand and was in Tashkint. There my mother Kkanim fell very
ill; it was a very bad illness; she passed through mighty risks,

His Highness Khwajaka Khwaja, having managed to get
out of Samarkand, had settled down in Far-kat; there I visited
him. I had hoped my Khan dada would shew me affection
and kindness and would give me a country or a district
(pargana). He did promise me Aira-tipa but Muh. Husain


Mirza did not make it over, whether acting on his own account
_or whether upon a hint from above, is not known. After


spending a few days with him (in Aira-tipa), I went on to
Dikh-kat. |
Dikh-kat is in the Aira-tipa hill-tracts, below the range on
the other side of which is the Macha* country. Its people,
though Sart, settled in a village, are, like Turks, herdsmen and


1 It may be noted here that in speaking of these elder women Babur uses
the honorific plural, a form of rare occurrence except for such women, for
Saintly persons and exceptionally for The supreme Khan. For his father he
has never used it.

2 This name has several variants. The village lies, in a valley-bottom,
on the Aq-si and onaroad. See Kostenko, i, 119.

3 She had been divorced from Shaibani in order to allow him to make legal
marriage with her niece, Khan-zada.

* Amongst the variants of this name, I select the modern one Macha is
the upper valley of the Zar-afshan.


Fol. 964.


Fol. 97.


Fol. 972.


150 FARGHANA


shepherds. Their sheep are reckoned at 40,000. We dis-—
mounted at the houses of the peasants in the village; I stayed
in a head-man’s house. He was old, 70 or 80, but his mother
was still alive. She was a woman on whom much life had been
bestowed for she was 111 years old. Some relation of hers
may have gone, (as was said), with Timtr Beg’s army to
Hindistan ;1 she had this in her mind and used to tell the tale.
In Dikh-kat alone were 96 of her descendants, hers and her
grandchildren, great-grandchildren and grandchildren’s grand-
children. Counting in the dead, 200 of her descendants were
reckoned up. Her grandchild’s grandson was a strong young
man of 25 or 26, with full black beard. While in Dikh-kat,I] —
constantly made excursions amongst the mountains round ~
about. Generally I went bare-foot and, from doing this so
much, my feet became so that rock and stone made no
difference to them.” Once in one of these wanderings, a cow
was seen, between the Afternoon and Evening prayers, going
down by a narrow, ill-defined road. Said I, ‘I wonder which
way that road will be going; keep your eye on that cow; don’t
lose the cow till you know where the road comes out.’ Khwaja
Asadu’l-lah made his joke, ‘ If the cow loses her way,’ he said,
‘what becomes of us ?’

In the winter several of our soldiers asked for leave to
Andijan because they could make no raids with us. Qasim
Beg said, with much insistance, ‘As these men are going, send
something special of your own wear by them to Jahangir
Mirza.’ I sent my ermine cap. Again he urged, ‘ What harm
would there be if you sent something for Tambal also?’
Though I was very unwilling, yet as he urged it, I sent Tambal
a large broad-sword which Nuyan Kikilddsh had had made for
himself in Samarkand. This very sword it was which, as will


Sa


1 Timir took Dihli in 801 an. (Dec. 1398), i.e. 103 solar and 106 lunar
years earlier. The ancient dame would then have been under 5 years old.
It is not surprising therefore that in repeating her story Babur should use a
tense betokening hear-say matter (bavib ikdn dir).

2 The anecdote here following, has been analysed in JRAS 1908, p. 87, in
order to show warrant for the opinion that parts of the Kehr-I]minsky text
are retranslations from the Persian W.-i-B.

3 Amongst those thus leaving seem to have been Qambar-‘ali (f. 995).


907 AH.—JULY 17ru. 1501 To JULY 71TH. 1502 AD. 15!


be told with the events of next year, came down on my own
head !1

A few days later, my grandmother, Aisan-daulat Begim, who,
when I left Samarkand, had stayed behind, arrived in Dikh-kat
with our families and baggage (aé#riiq) and a few lean and
hungry followers.


(d. Shatbag Khan raids in The Khan’s country.)


That winter Shaibaq Khan crossed the Khujand river on the
ice and plundered near Shahrukhiya and Bish-kint. On hear-
ing news of this, we gallopped off, not regarding the smallness
of our numbers, and made for the villages below Khujand,
opposite Hasht-yak (One-eighth). The cold was mightily
bitter,? a wind not less than the Ha-darwesh® raging violently
the whole time. So cold it was that during the two or three
days we were in those parts, several men died of it. When,
needing to make ablution, I went into an irrigation-channel,
frozen along both banks but because of its swift current, not
ice-bound in the middle, and bathed, dipping under 16 times,
the cold of the water went quite through me. Next day we
crossed the river on the ice from opposite Khaslar and went on
through the dark to Bish-kint.4 Shaibaq Khan, however, must
have gone straight back after plundering the neighbourhood of
Shahrukhiya.


- (e. Death of Nuyan Kikildash.)


Bish-kint, at that time, was held by Mulla Haidar’s son,
‘Abdu’l-minan. A younger son, named Mimin, a worthless
and dissipated person, had come to my presence in Samarkand
and had received all kindness from me. This sodomite, Mimin,
for what sort of quarrel between them is not known, cherished
rancour against Nuydn Kwkilddsh. At the time when we,
having heard of the retirement of the Aiizbegs, sent a man to

1 Cf. £. 107 foot.

2 The Sh. N. speaks of the cold in that winter (Vambéry, p. 160). It was
unusual for the Sir to freeze in this part of its course (Sh. N. p. 172) where it
is extremely rapid (Kostenko, i, 213).

3 Cf. £. 4b.

4 Point to point, some 50 miles.


Fol. 98.


Fol. 985.


Fol. 99.


152 FARGHANA


The Khan and marched from Bish-kint to spend two or three —
days amongst the villages in the Blacksmith’s-dale,t Mulla ~
Haidar’s son, Mimin invited Nuyan Kukildash and Ahmad-i-
qasim and some others in order to return them hospitality
received in Samarkand. When I left Bish-kint, therefore they
stayed behind. Miimin’s entertainment to this party was given
on the edge of a ravine (jar).. Next day news was brought to
us in Sam-sirak, a village in the Blacksmith’s-dale, that Nuyan
was dead through falling when drunk into the ravine. We
sent his own mother’s brother, Haq-nazar and others, who
searched out where he had fallen. They committed Nuydn to
the earth in Bish-kint, and came back to me. They had found
the body at the bottom of the ravine an arrow’s flight from the
place of the entertainment. Some suspected that Mimin,
nursing his trumpery rancour, had taken Nuydn’s life. None
knew the truth. His death made me strangely sad; for few
men have I felt such grief; I wept unceasingly for a week or
ten days. The chronogram of his death was found in Nuydn ts
dead.”

With the heats came the news that Shaibaq Khan was
coming up into Aura-tipa. Hereupon, as the land is level
about Dikh-kat, we crossed the Ab-burdan pass into the Macha
hill-country.2 Ab-burdan is the last village of Macha; just
below it a spring sends its water down (to the Zar-afshan) ;
above the stream is included in Macha, below it depends on
Palghar. There is a tomb at the spring-head. I had a rock
at the side of the spring-head shaped (qatirib) and these three
couplets inscribed on it ;—


I have heard that Jamshid, the magnificent,
Inscribed on a rock at a fountain-head 4


1 Ahangaran-julgasi, a name narrowed on maps to Angren (valley).

2 Faut shid Nuyadn. The numerical value of these words is 907. Babur
when writing, looks back 26 years to the death of this friend.

3 Ab-burdan village is on the Zar-afshan ; the pass is 11,200 ft. above the
sea. Babur’s boundaries still hold good and the spring still flows. See
Ujfalvy /.c. i. 14 ; Kostenko, i, 119 and 193 ; Rickmers, JRGS 1907, p. 358.

4 From the Bi-stan (Graf’s ed. Vienna 1858, p. 561). The last couplet is
also in the Gulistdn (Platts’ ed. p. 72). The Bombay lith. ed. of the Bia-stan
explains (p. 39) that the ‘“‘ We ” of the third couplet means Jamshid and his
predecessors who have rested by his fountain.


907 AH.—JULY 17ru. 1501 ro JULY 7TH. 1502 AD. 153


‘ Many men like us have taken breath at this fountain,
And have passed away in the twinkling of an eye ;

We took the world by courage and might,

But we took it not with us to the tomb.’


There is a custom in that hill-country of cutting verses and
things! on the rocks.

While we were in Macha, Mulla Hijri,” the poet came from
Hisar and waited on me. At that time I composed the
following opening lines ;—


Let your portrait flatter you never so much, than it you are more (dndin
artugsin) ;

Men call you their Life (Jam), than Life, without doubt, you are more
(jandin artiqsin) .3


After plundering round about in Aura-tipa, Shaibaq Khan
retired. While he was up there, we, disregarding the fewness
of our men and their lack of arms, left our impedimenta (aériiq)
in Macha, crossed the Ab-burdan pass and went to Dikh-kat so
that, gathered together close at hand, we might miss no chance
on one of the next nights. He, however, retired straightway;
we went back to Macha.

It passed through my mind that to wander from mountain to
mountain, homeless and houseless, without country or abiding-
place, had nothing to recommend it. ‘Go you right off to The
Khan,’ I said to myself. Qasim Beg was not willing for this
move, apparently being uneasy because, as has been told, he
had put Mughils to death at Qara-bilag, by way of example.
However much we urged it, it was not to be! He drew off for
Hisar with all his brothers and his whole following. We for
our part, crossed the Ab-burdan pass and set forward for The
Khan’s presence in Tashkint. |


1 nima. The First W.-i-B. (1.0. 215 f. 81 1. 8) writes tawdavikh, annals.

? This may be the KhwAja Hijri of the A.N. (index s.n.) ; and Badayini’s
ge Hijri, Bib. Ind. iii, 385 ; and Ethé’s Pers. Cat. No. 793 ; and Bod. Cat.

o. 189.

3 The Hai. MS. points in the last line as though punning on Khan and Jan,
but appears to be wrong.

* For an account of the waste of crops, the Sh. N. should be seen (p. 162
and 180).


Fol. 996.


Fol, 100,


154 FARGHANA


(f. Babur with The Khan.)


In the days when Tambal had drawn his army out and gone
into the Blacksmith’s-dale,) men at the top of his army, such
as Muh. Daghlat, known as Hiséri, and his younger brother
Husain, and also Qambar-‘ali, the Skinner conspired to attempt
his life. When he discovered this weighty matter, they, unable
to remain with him, had gone to The Khan.

The Feast of Sacrifices (‘Id-i-qurban) fell for us in Shah-
rukhiya (Zit’l-hijja roth.— June 16th. 1502). ©

I had written a quatrain in an ordinary measure but was in
some doubt about it, because at that time I had not studied
poetic idiom so much as I have now done. The Khan was
good-natured and also he wrote verses, though ones somewhat
deficient in the requisites for odes. I presented my quatrain
and I laid my doubts before him but got no reply so clear as to
remove them. His study of poetic idiom appeared to have
been somewhat scant. Here is the verse ;—

One hears no man recall another in trouble (mihnat-ta kishi) ;
None speak of a man as glad in his exile (ghurbat-ta kishi) ;


My own heart has no joy in this exile ;
Called glad is no exile, man though he be (albatia kishi).


Later on I came to know that in Turki verse, for the purpose


of rhyme, fa and da are interchangeable and also ghain, gaf and
haf? |


(g. The acclaiming of the standards.)


When, a few days later, The Khan heard that Tambal had
gone up into Aura-tipa, he got his army to horse and rode out
from Tashkint. Between Bish-kint and Sam-sirak he formed
up into array of right and left and saw the count® of his men.


1 | think this refers to last year’s move (f. 94 foot).

2 In other words, the T. preposition, meaning E. in, at, etc. may be written
with t or d, as ta(#d) or as da(da@). Also the one meaning E. towards, may be
gha, ga, or ka (with long or short vowel).

3 dim, a word found difficult. It may be a derivative of root de, tell, and
a noun with the meaning of English tale (number). The First W.-i-B. renders
it by san, and by san, Abi’l-ghazi expresses what Babur’s dim expresses, the
numbering of troops. It occurs thrice in the B.N. (here, on f. 1836 and on
f. 264b). In the Elphinstone Codex it has been written-over into Ivim, once
resembles vim more than dim and once is omitted. The L. and E. Memoirs


907 AH.—JULY 17TH. 1501 To JULY 7TH. 1502 AD. 155


This done, the standards were acclaimed in Mughiil fashion.
The Khan dismounted and nine standards were set up in front
of him. A Mughil tied a long strip of white cloth to the thigh-
bone (aiirta ailik) of a cow and took the other end in his hand.
Three other long strips of white cloth were tied to the staves of
three of the (nine) standards, just below the yak-tails, and their
other ends were brought for The Khan to stand on one and for
me and Sl. Muh. Khanika to stand each on one of the two
others. The Mughil who had hold of the strip of cloth
fastened to the cow’s leg, then said something in Mughiil while
he looked at the standards and made signs towards them. The
Khan and those present sprinkled qumiz? in the direction of
the standards; hautbois and drums were sounded towards
them ;* the army flung the war-cry out three times towards
them, mounted, cried it again and rode at the gallop round
them. |

Precisely as Chingiz Khan laid down his rules, so the
Mughils still observe them. Each man has his place, just
where his ancestors had it; right, right,—left, left,—-centre,
centre. The most reliable men go to the extreme points of the
right and left. The Chiras and Begchik clans always demand
to go to the point in the right. At that time the Beg of the
Chiraés tuman was a very bold brave, Qashka (Mole-marked)
Mahmud and the beg of the renowned Begchik timan was
Ayub Begchik. These two, disputing which should go out to
the point, drew swords on one another. At last it seems to
have been settled that one should take the highest place in the
hunting-circle, the other, in the battle-array.

Next day after making the circle, it was hunted near Sam-


(p. 303) inserts what seems a gloss, saying that a whip or bow is used in the
count, presumably held by the teller to ‘ keep his place ’ in the march past.
The Siydsat-ndma (Schefer, trs. p. 22) names the whip as used in numbering
an army.

1 The acclamation of the standards is depicted in B.M. W.-i-B. Or. 3714
f. 1285. One cloth is shewn tied to the off fore-leg of a live cow, above the
knee, Babur’s word being airtd ailik (middle-hand).

2 The libation was of fermented mares’-milk.

3 lit. their one way.

4 Cf. T.R. p. 308.


Fol. 1000.


Fol. ror.


156 | FARCHANA


sirak ; thence move was made to the Tirak Four-gardens. Or
that day and in that camp, I finished the first ode I ever —
finished. Its opening couplet is as follows ;— a


Except my soul, no friend worth trust found I (wafadar tapmdadim) ; —
Except my heart, no confidant found I (asvav tapmdadim).


There were six couplets; every ode I finished later was
written just on this plan.

The Khan moved, march by march, from Sam-sirak to the
bank of the Khujand-river. One day we crossed the water by ~
way of an excursion, cooked food and made merry with the —
braves and pages. That day some-one stole the gold clasp of —
my girdle. Next day Baydan-quli’s Khan-quli and Sl. Muh. —
Wais fled to Tambal. Every-one suspected them of that bad
deed. Though this was not ascertained, Ahmad-i-qasim Kohbur
asked leave and went away to Aira-tipa. From that leave he
did not return; he too went to Tambal.


908 AH.— JULY 7ru. 1502 tro JUNE 26ru. 1503 AD.?


(a. Babur’s poverty in Tashkint.)


This move of The Khan’s was rather unprofitable; to take
no fort, to beat no foe, he went out and went back.

During my stay in Tashkint, I endured much poverty and
humiliation. No country or hope of one! Most of my re-
tainers dispersed, those left, unable to move about with me
because of their destitution! If I went to my Khan dada’s
Gate,? I went sometimes with one man, sometimes with two.
It was well he was no stranger but one of my own blood.
After showing myself® in his presence, I used to go to Shah
Begim’s, entering her house, bareheaded and barefoot, just
as if it were my own.

This uncertainty and want of house and home drove me
at last to despair. Said I, ‘It would be better to take my head?*
and go off than live in such misery; better to go as far as my
feet can carry me than be seen of men in such poverty and
humiliation. Having settled on China to go to, I resolved
to take my head and get away. From my childhood up I
had wished to visit China but had not been able to manage
it because of ruling and attachments. Now sovereignty itself
was gone! and my mother, for her part, was re-united to her
(step)-mother and her younger brother. The hindrances to my
journey had been removed; my anxiety for my mother was
dispelled. I represented (to Shah Begim and The Khan)
through Khwaja Abi’l-makaram that now such a foe as


1 Elph. MS. f. 74; W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 83 and 217 f. 66 ; Mems. p. 104.


2 It may be noted that Babur calls his mother’s brothers, not taghai but.


dada father. I have not met with an instance of his saying ‘ My taghai’
as he says ‘ My dada.’ Cf. index s.n. taghdi.
3 kurunish qilib, reflective from ktirmak, to see.
* A rider’s metaphor.
157


Fol. rod.


Fol. 102.


158 FARGHANA


Shaibaq Khan had made his appearance, Mughil and Turk!
alike must guard against him; that thought about him must —
be taken while he had not well-mastered the (Aiizbeg) horde
or grown very strong, for as they have said ;— y


To-day, while thou canst, quench the fire,
Once ablaze it will burn up the world ;
Let thy foe not fix string to his bow,
While an arrow of thine can pierce him ;


that it was 20 or 25 years® since they had seen the Younger
Khan (Ahmad Alacha) and that I had never seen him; should
I be able, if I went to him, not only to see him myself, but to
bring about the meeting between him and them ?

Under this pretext I proposed to get out of those surround-
ings;* once in Mughilistan and Turfan, my reins would be in
my own hands, without check or anxiety. I put no-one in
possession of my scheme. Why not? Because it was im- —
possible for me to mention such a scheme to my mother, and
also because it was with other expectations that the few of
all ranks who had been my companions in exile and privation, __
had cut themselves off with me and with me suffered change of
fortune. To speak to them also of such a scheme would be no
pleasure.

The Khwaja, having laid my plan before Shah Begim and
The Khan, understood them to consent to it but, later, it
occurred to them that I might be asking leave a second time,°®
because of not receiving kindness. That touching their reputa-
tion, they delayed a little to give the leave.


(6. The Younger Khan comes to Tashkint.)


At this crisis a man came from the Younger Khan to say
that he was actually on his way. This brought my scheme to


1 As touching the misnomer, if Mughil dynasty ° for the Timirid rulers
in Hindistan, it may be noted that here, as Babur is speaking to a Chaghatai
Mughil, his ‘ Turk’ is left to apply to himself.

2 Gulistan, cap. viii, Maxim 12 (Platts’ ed. p. 147).

3 This backward count is to 890 AH. when Ahmad fled from cultivated
lands (T.R. p. 113).

* It becomes clear that Ahmad had already been asked to come va Tashkint.

5 Cf. f. 96b for his first departure without help.


908 AH.—JULY 7rH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1508 AD. 159


aa


mf naught. When a second man announced his near approach,
_ we all went out to give him honourable meeting, Shah Begim
and his younger sisters, Sultan-nigar Khanim and Daulat-
sultin Khanim, and I and Sl. Muh. Khanika and Khan
Mirza ( Wais).

Between Tashkint and Sairém is a village called Yagha
(var. Yaghma), with some smaller ones, where are the tombs
of Father Abraham and Father Isaac. So far we went out.
Knowing nothing exact about his coming,! I rode out for an
excursion, with an easy mind. All at once, he descended on
me, face to face. I went forward; when I stopped, he stopped.
He was a good deal perturbed; perhaps he was thinking of
dismounting in some fixed spot and there seated, of receiving
me ceremoniously. There was no time for this; when we were
near each other, I dismounted. He had not time even to
dismount ;2 I bent the knee, went forward and saw him.
Hurriedly and with agitation, he told Sl. Sa‘id Khan and Baba
Khan Sl. to dismount, bend the knee with (d7/a) me and make
my acquaintance.’ Just these two of his sons had come with
him; they may have been 13 or 14 years old. When I had
seen them, we all mounted and went to Shah Begim’s presence.
After he had seen her and his sisters, and had renewed ac-
quaintance, they all sat down and for half the night told
one another particulars of their past and gone affairs.

Next day, my Younger Khan dada bestowed on me arms
of his own and one of his own special horses saddled, and a
Mughil head-to-foot dress,—a Mughil cap,‘ a long coat of
Chinese satin, with broidering of stitchery,5 and Chinese

1 Yagha (Yaghma) is not on the Fr. map of 1904, but suitably located is
Turbat (Tomb) to which roads converge.

2 Elph. MS. tuéshkiicha ; Hai. MS. yikinchd. The importance Ahmad


attached to ceremony can be inferred by the details given (f. 103) of his
meeting with Mahmid.

3 kiiviishkdilar. Cf. Redhouse who gives no support for reading the verb
kiivmak as meaning’ to embrace.

* birk, a tall felt cap (Redhouse). In the adjective applied to the cap there
are several variants. The Hai. MS. writes muftil, solid or twisted. The Elph.
MS. has muftiin-ligq which has been understood by Mr. Erskine to mean, gold-
embroidered.

5 The wording suggests that the decoration is in chain-stitch, pricked up and
down through the stuff.


Fol. 1026,


Fol. 103.


160 FARGHANA


armour; in the old fashion, they had hung, on the left side a


haversack (chanta@i) and an outer bag, and three or four things
such as women usually hang on their collars, perfume-holders —
and various receptacles ;* in the same way, three or four things
hung on the right side also.

From there we went to Tashkint. My Elder Khan dada
also had come out for the meeting, some 3 or 4 yighdach (12 to
15 m.) along the road. He had had an awning set up in
a chosen spot and was seated there. The Younger Khan went
up directly in front of him; on getting near, fetched a circle,
from right to left, round him; then dismounted before him.
After advancing to the place of interview (ka@riushir yir), he nine
times bent the knee; that done, went close and saw (his
brother). The Elder Khan, in his turn, had risen when the
Younger Khan drew near. They looked long at one another
(kuvushtilar) and long stood in close embrace (qiichiishiib). The
Younger Khan again bent the knee nine times when retiring,
many times also on offering his gift; after that, he went and sat
down.

All his men had adorned themselves in Mughil fashion.
There they were in Mughil caps (bark); long coats of Chinese
satin, broidered with stitchery, Mughtl quivers and saddles of
green shagreen-leather, and Mughil horses adorned in a unique
fashion. He had brought rather few men, over 1000 and under
2000 may-be. He was a man of singular manners, a mighty
master of the sword, and brave. Amongst arms he preferred
to trust to the sword. He used to say that of arms there are,
the shash-par® (six-flanged mace), the pzydzi (rugged mace), the
kistin,* the tabar-zin (saddle-hatchet) and the alia (battle-axe),


1 tash chantai. These words have been taken to mean whet-stone (bilgi-
tdsh). I have found no authority for reading ash as whet-stone. Moreover
to allow ‘ bag of the stone’ to be read would require tash (ning) chantdi-si in
the text.

? lit. bag-like things. Some will have held spare bow-strings and archers’
rings, and other articles of ‘ repairing kit.’ With the gifts, it seems probable
that the gosha-gir (f. 107) was given.

3 Vullers, clava sex foliis.

* Zenker, casse-téte. Kistin would seem to be formed from the root, kis,
cutting, but M. de C. describes it as a ball attached by a strap or chain toa
handle. Sanglakh, a sort of mace (gura).


—


é
t
‘ 4


908 AH.—JULY 71TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. — 161


all, if they strike, work only with what of them first touches,
but the sword, if it touch, works from point to hilt. He
never parted with his keen-edged sword; it was either at his
waist or to his hand. He was a little rustic and rough-of-
speech, through having grown up in an out-of-the-way place.
When, adorned in the way described, I went with him to
The Khan, Khwaja Abi’l-makadram asked, ‘Who is this
honoured sultan ?’ and till I spoke, did not recognize me.


(c. The Khans march into Farghana against Tambal.)


Soon after returning to Tashkint, The Khan led out an army
for Andikan (Andijan) direct against Sl. Ahmad Tambal.1| He
took the road over the Kindirlik-pass and from Blacksmiths’-
dale (Ahangaran-julgasi) sent the Younger Khan and me on in
advance. After the pass had been crossed, we all met again
near Zarqan (var. Zabarqan) of Karnan.

One day, near Karnan, they numbered their men? and
reckoned them up to be 30,000. From ahead news began
to come that Tambal also was collecting a force and going to
Akhsi. After having consulted together, The Khans decided
to join some of their men to me, in order that I might cross
the Khujand-water, and, marching by way of Aish and
Auzkint, turn Tambal’s rear. Having so settled, they joined
to me Ayub Begchik with his ta#mdn, Jan-hasan Barin (var.
Narin) with his Barins, Muh. Hisadri Diaghlat, Sl. Husain
Dighlat and Sl. Ahmad Mirza Dighlat, not in command of
the Dighlat témdan,—and Qambar-‘ali Beg (the Skinner). The
commandant (darogha) of their force was Sarigh-bash (Yellow-
head) Mirza Itarchi.*

Leaving The Khans in Karnan, we crossed the river on rafts
near Sakan, traversed the Khtiqan sub-district (aurchin), crushed

1 The Rauzatu’s-safa states that The Khans left Tashkint on Muharram 15th
(July 21st. 1502), in order to restore Babur and expel Tambal (Erskine).

2 lit. saw the count (dim). Cf. f. too and note concerning the count.
Using a Persian substitute, the Kehr-Ilminsky text writes san (kirdilar).

3 Elph. MS. ambdrchi, steward, for Itarchi, a tribal-name. The ‘ Mirza’
and the rank of the army-begs are against supposing a steward in command.
Here and just above, the texts write Mirza-i-Itarchi and Mirza-i-Dighlat,


thus suggesting that in names not ending with a vowel, the izdfat is required
for exact transliteration, e.g. Muhammad-i-dighlat.


II


Fol. 1034.


Fol. 104.


Fol. 1040.


162 FARGHANA


Oaba and by way of the Alai sub-districts? descendeam suddenly
on Aish. We reached it at dawn, unexpected; those in i
could but surrender. Naturally the country-folk were wishing
much for us, but they had not been able to find their means
both through dread of Tambal and through our remoteness
After we entered Atish, the hordes and the highland and low.
land tribes of southern and eastern Andijan.came in to us
The Atzkint people also, willing to serve us, sent me a mar
and came in.

(Author’s note on Awuzkint.) Aiizkint formerly must have been


capital of Farghana ;? it has an excellent fort and is situated on th
boundary (of Farghana).


The Marghinanis also came in after two or three days
having beaten and chased their commandant (darogha). Except
Andijan, every fort south of the Khujand-water had now come
in to us. Spite of the return in those days of so many forts
and spite of risings and revolt against him, Tambal did not ye
come to his senses but sat down with an army of horse and foot
fortified with ditch and branch, to face The Khans, betweer
Karnan and Akhsi. Several times over there was a little fight
ing and pell-mell but without decided success to either side.

In the Andijén country (wildyat), most of the tribes anc
hordes and the forts and all the districts had come in to me.
naturally the Andijanis also were wishing for me. They how
ever could not find their means.


(d. Babur’s attempt to enter Andian frustrated by a mistake.)


It occurred to me that if we went one night close to the
town and sent a man in to discuss with the Khwaja® anc
notables, they might perhaps let us in somewhere. With thi:
idea we rode out from Atsh. By midnight we were opposite
Forty-daughters (Chihil-dukhteran) 2 miles (one kuroh) from
Andijan. From that place we sent Qambar-‘ali Beg forward

1 Aldi-lig aiivchini. I understand the march to have been along th
northern slope of the Little Alai, south of Aish.

2 As of Almaligh and Almati (fol. 2b) Babur reports a tradition witl
caution. The name Aiiz-kint may be read to mean ‘ Own village,’ inde


pendent, as Auz-beg, Own-beg.
3 He would be one of the hereditary Khwajas of Andijan (f. 16).


908 AH.—JULY 71TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 163


with some other begs, who were to discuss matters with the
Khwaja after by some means or other getting a man into the
fort. While waiting for their return, we sat on our horses,
some of us patiently humped up, some wrapt away in dream,
when suddenly, at about the third watch, there rose a war-
cry! and a sound of drums. Sleepy and startled, ignorant
whether the foe was many or few, my men, without looking to
one another, took each his own road and turned for flight.
There was no time for me to get at them; I went straight for
the enemy. Only Mir Shah Qachin and Baba Sher-zad (Tiger-
whelp) and NAsir’s Dost sprang forward; we four excepted,
every man set his face for flight. I had gone a little way
forward, when the enemy rode rapidly up, flung out his war-
cry and poured arrows on us. One man, on a horse with
a starred forehead,? came close to me; I shot at it; it rolled
over and died. They made a little as if to retire. The three
with me said, ‘In this darkness it is not certain whether they
are many or few; all our men have gone off; what harm could
we four do them? Fighting must be when we have overtaken
our run-aways and rallied them.’ Off we hurried, got up with
our men and beat and horse-whipped some of them, but, do
what we would, they would not make a stand. Back the four
of us went to shoot arrows at the foe. They drew a little back
but when, after a discharge or two, they saw we were not more
than three or four, they busied themselves in chasing and un-
horsing my men. I went three or four times to try to rally my
men but all in vain! They were not to be brought to order.
Back I went with my three and kept the foe in check with our
arrows. They pursued us two or three kuroh (4-6 m.), as far as
the rising ground opposite Kharabik and Pashamiin. There
we met Muh. ‘Ali Mubashir. Said I, ‘They are only few; let
us stop and put our horses at them.’ So we did. When we
got up to them, they stood still.® |

Our scattered braves gathered in from this side and that, but


? For several battle-cries see Th. Radloff’s Réceuils etc. p. 322.

2? gashqa Gtliq kishi. For a parallel phrase see f. 92b.

% Babur does not explain how the imbroglio was cleared up ; there must
have been a dramatic moment when this happened.


Fol. 105.


Fol. 1057.


164 FARGHANA


several very serviceable men, scattering in this attack, °
right away to Aish.
-The explanation of the affair seemed to be that some of
Ayub Begchik's Mughils had slipped away from Aish to raid
near Andijan: and, hearing the noise of our troop, came some-
what stealthily towards us; then there seems to have been con-
fusion about the pass-word. The pass-words settled on for use
during this movement of ours were Tashkint and Sairam. If
(Author's note on pass-words.) Pass-words are of two kinds ;—in

each tribe there is one for use in the tribe, such as Darwdadua or Tiqqai

or Lila ;1 and there is one for the use of the wholearmy. Fora battle,

two words are settled on as pass-words so that of two men meeting


in the fight, one may give the one, the other give back the second,
in order to distinguish friends from foes, own men from strangers.


Tashkint were said, Sairam would be answered; if Sairam,
Tashkint. In this muddled affair, Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali seems to
have been somewhat in advance of our party and to have got
bewildered,—he was a Sart person,2—when the Mughils came
up saying, ‘ Tashkint, Tashkint,’ for he gave them ‘ Tashkint,
Tashkint,’ as the counter-sign. Through this they took him
for an enemy, raised their war-cry, beat their saddle-drums and
poured arrows on us. It was through this we gave way, and
through this false’alarm were scattered! We went back to
Aish.


(ce. Babur again attempts Andijan.)


Through the return to me of the forts and the highland and
lowland clans, Tambal and his adherents lost heart and footing.
His army and people in the next five or six days began to
desert him and to flee to retired places and the open country.’
Of his household some came and said, ‘ His affairs are nearly
ruined ; he will break up in three or four days, utterly ruined.
On hearing this, we rode for Andijan.

1 Darwana (a trap-door in a roof) has the variant dur-dana, a single pearl
éuqqai perhaps implies relationship ; /i#lu is a pearl, a wild cow etc.

2 Hai. MS. sdivt kishi. Muh. ‘Ali is likely to be the librarian (cf. index s.n.)

3 Elph. MS. vamaqgha u tir-ga ; Hai. MS. tartatgha u tirv-ga. Tlminsky give:


no help, varying much here from the true text. The archetype of both MSS
must have been difficult to read.


208 AH.—JULY 7ru. 1502 ro JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. | 165


Sl. Muh. Galpuk' was in Andijan,—the younger of Tambal’s
cadet brothers. We took the Mulberry-road and at the Mid-
day Prayer came to the Khakan (canal), south of the town. A
foraging-party was arranged; I followed it along Khakan to
the skirt of ‘Aish-hill, When our scouts brought word that
Sl. Muh Galpuk had come out, with what men he had, beyond
the suburbs and gardens to the skirt of ‘Aish, I hurried to
meet him, although our foragers were still scattered. He may
have had over 500 men; we had more but many had scattered
to forage. When we were face to face, his men and ours may
have been in equal number. Without caring about order or
array, down we rode on them, loose rein, at the gallop. When
we got near, they could not stand; there was not so much
fighting as the crossing of a few swords. My men followed


Fol. 106,


them almost to the Khakan Gate, unhorsing one after another. .


It was at the Evening Prayer that, our foe outmastered, we
reached Khwaja Kitta, on the outskirts of the suburbs. My
idea was to go quickly right up to the Gate but Dost Beg’s
father, Nasir Beg and Qambar-‘ali Beg, old and experienced
begs both, represented to me, ‘It is almost night; it would be
ill-judged to go in a body into the fort in the dark; let us with-
draw a little and dismount. What can they do to-morrow but
surrender the place?’ Yielding at once to the opinion of these
experienced persons, we forthwith retired to the outskirts of the
suburbs. If we had gone to the Gate, undoubtedly, Andijan
would have come into our hands,


(f. Babur surprised by Tambal.)


After crossing the Khakan-canal, we dismounted, near the
Bed-time prayer, at the side of the village of Rabat-i-zauraq
(var. riizaq). Although we knew that Tambal had broken
camp and was on his way to Andijan, yet, with the negligence of
inexperience, we dismounted on level ground close to the village,
instead of where the defensive canal would have protected us.?
There we lay down carelessly, without scouts or rear-ward.


1 The Hai. MS.’s pointing allows the sobriquet to mean ‘ Butterfly.’ His
family lent itself to nick-names ; in it three brothers were known respectively
as Fat or Lubberly, Fool and, perhaps, Butterfly.

2 birk dvigh, doubly strong by its trench and its current.


Fol. 1064,


Fol. 107.


166 FARGHANA


At the top (bash) of the morning, just when men are in sweet
sleep, Qambar-' ali Beg hurried past, shouting, ‘ Up with you. _
the enemy is here!’ So much he said and went off without a —
moment’s stay. It was my habit to lie down, even in times of —


peace, in my tunic; up I got instanter, put on sword and
quiver and mounted. My standard-bearer had no time to
adjust my standard,’ he just mounted with it in his hand.
There were ten or fifteen men with me when we started
toward the enemy; after riding an arrow’s flight, when we
came up with his scouts, there may have been ten. Going
rapidly forward, we overtook him, poured in arrows on him,


over-mastered his foremost men and hurried them off. We


followed them for another arrow’s flight and came up with his
centre where Sl. Ahmad Tambal himself was, with as many as
100 mem. He and another were standing in front of his array,
as if keeping a Gate,” and were shouting, ‘ Strike, strike!’ but
his men, mostly, were sidling, as if asking themselves, ‘ Shall


we run away? Shall we not?’ By this time three were left


with me; one was Nasir’s Dost, another, Mirza Ouli Kukildash,
the third, Khudai-birdi Turkmdan’s Karim-dad.? I shot off the
arrow on my thumb,‘ aiming at Tambal’s helm. When I put
my hand into my quiver, there came out a quite new gosha-gir®


1 [T understand that time failed to set the standard in its usual rest. E.
and de C. have understood that the yak-tail (quids tughi f. 100) was apart
from the staff and that time failed to adjust the two parts. The t#gh however
is the whole standard ; moreover if the tail were ever taken off at night from
the staff, it would hardly be so treated in a mere bivouac.

2 aishiklik turliq, as on f. 113. I understand this to mean that the two


men were as far from their followers as sentries at a Gate are posted outside |


the Gate.
3 So too ‘ Piero of Cosimo’ and ‘ Lorenzo of Piero of the Medici.’ Cf.
the names of five men on f. 114.
4 shashtim. ‘The shasht (thumb) in archery is the thumb-shield used on the


left hand, as the zih-gir (string-grip), the archer’s ring, is on the right-hand ©


thumb.


te


It is useful to remember, when reading accounts of shooting with the —


Turki (Turkish) bow, that the arrows (at#q) had notches so gripping the string
that they kept in place until released with the string.

5 say-i-sabz gosha gir. The gosha-giy is an implement for remedying the
warp of a bow-tip and string-notch. For further particulars see Appendix C.

The term say-i-sabz, lit. green-head, occurs in the sense of ‘ quite young’
or ‘ new,’ in the proverb, ‘ The red tongue loses the green head,’ quoted in
the ZJabaqat-i-akbari account of Babur’s death. Applied here, it points to
the gosha-gir as part of the recent gift made by Ahmad to Babur.


7


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 167


given me by my Younger Khan dada. It would have been
vexing to throwit away but before I got it back into the quiver,
there had been time to shoot, maybe, two or three arrows.
When once more I had an arrow on the string, I went forward,
my three men even holding back. One of those two in advance,
Tambal seemingly, moved forward also. The high-road was
between us; I from my side, he, from his, got upon it and came
face to face, in such a way that his right hand was towards
me, mine towards him. His horse’s mail excepted, he was
fully accoutred; but for sword and quiver, I was unprotected.
I shot off the arrow in my hand, adjusting for the attachment
of his shield. With matters in this position, they shot my right
leg through. I had on the cap of my helm;? Tambal chopped
so violently at my head that it lost all feeling under the blow.
A large wound was made on my head, though not a thread of
the cap was cut.? I had not bared* my sword; it was in the
scabbard and I had no chance to draw it. Single-handed, I
was alone amongst many foes. It was not a time to stand
still; I turned rein. Down came a sword again; this time
on my arrows. When I had gone 7 or 8 paces, those same
three men rejoined me.° After using his sword on me, Tambal
seems to have used it on N§@sir’s Dost. As far as an arrrow
flies to the butt, the enemy followed us.

The Khakan-canal is a great main-channel, flowing in a
deep cutting, not everywhere to be crossed. God brought it
right! we came exactly opposite a low place where there was a
passage over. Directly we had crossed, the horse NAsir’s Dost
was on, being somewhat weakly, fell down. We stopped and re-
mounted him, then drew off for Aish, over the rising-ground

1 Tambal aikandiiy. By this tense I understand that Babur was not at first
sure of the identity of the pseudo-sentries, partly because of their distance,
partly, it may be presumed, because of concealment of identity by armour.

2 diwulgha birki ; i.e. the soft cap worn under the iron helm.


3 Niiyan’s sword dealt the blow (f. 97b). Gul-badan also tells the story
(f. 77) a propos of a similar incident in Humdyiin’s career. Babur repeats
the story on f. 234.

4 yaldaghlamai diy aidim. The Second W.-i-B. has taken this as from
yalttirmagq, to cause to glisten, and adds the gloss that the sword was rusty
(I.O. 217 f. 70b).


5 The text here seems to say that the three men were on foot, but this is
negatived by the context.


ot


Fol.. 107b


Fol. 108.


168 FARGHANA


between Faraghina and Khirabik. Out on the rise, Mazid
Taghai came up and joined us. An arrow had pierced his
right leg also and though it had not gone through and come
out again, he got to Aiish with difficulty. The enemy un-
horsed (tushiirdilar) good men of mine; Nasir Beg, Muh. ‘Ali
Mubashir, Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali, Khusrau Kakiilddsh, Na‘man the
page, all fell (to them, /éshtilar), and also many unmailed braves.!


(g. The Khans move from Kasdan to Andijan.)


The Khans, closely following on Tambal, dismounted near
Andijan,—the Elder at the side of the Reserve (qaruq) in the
garden, known as Birds’-mill (Qiush-tigirmdan), belonging to my
grandmother, Aisdn-daulat Begim,—the Younger, near Baba
Tawakkul’s Alms-house. Two days later I went from Aish
and saw the Elder Khan in Birds’-mill. At that interview, he
simply gave over to the Younger Khan the places which had
come in to me. He made some such excuse as that for our ad-
Vantage, he had brought the Younger Khan, how far! because
such a foe as Shaibaq Khan had taken Samarkand and was
waxing greater; that the Younger Khan had there no lands
whatever, his own being far away; and that the country under
Andijan, on the south of the Khujand-water, must be given
him to encamp in. He promised me the country under Akhsi,
on the north of the Khujand-water. He said that after taking
a firm grip of that country (Farghana), they would move, take
Samarkand, give it to me and then the whole of the Farghana
country was to be the Younger Khan’s. These words seem to
have been meant to deceive me, since there is no knowing
what they would have done when they had attained their
object. It had to be however! willy-nilly, I agreed.

When, leaving him, I was on my way to the Younger
Khan’s presence, Qambar-‘ali, known as the Skinner, joined me
in a friendly way and said, ‘Do you see? They have taken the
whole of the country just become yours, There is no opening


1 Amongst the various uses of the verb téshmak, to descend in any way,
the B.N. does not allow of ‘ falling (death) in battle.’ When I made the
iudex of the Hai. MS. facsimile, this was not known to me; I therefore
erroneously entered the men enumerated here as killed at this time.


ie ?


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 169


for you through them. You have in your hands Aish, Mar-


ghinan, Aiizkint and the cultivated land and the tribes and the
hordes; go you to Aish; make that fort fast; send a man to
Tambal, make peace with him, then strike at the Mughil and
drive him out. After that, divide the districts into an elder and
a younger brother’s shares.’ ‘Would that be right?’ said I.
‘The Khans are my blood relations; better serve them than rule
for Tambal.’ He saw that his words had made no impression,
so turned back, sorry he had spoken. I went on to see my
Younger Khan Dada. At our first interview, I had come upon
him without announcement and he had no time to dismount,
so it was all rather unceremonious. This time I got even
nearer perhaps, and he ran out as far as the end of the tent-
ropes. I was walking with some difficulty because of the
wound’in my leg. We met and renewed acquaintance; then
he said, ‘You are talked about asa hero, my young brother!’
took my arm and led me into his tent. The tents pitched were
rather small and through his having grown up in an out-of-the-
way place, he let the one he sat in be neglected; it was like a
raider’s, melons, grapes, saddlery, every sort of thing, in his
sitting-tent. I went from his presence straight back to my
own camp and there he sent his Mughil surgeon to examine
my wound. Mughils call a surgeon also a bakhshi ; this one
was called Atakaé Bakhshi.t

He was a very skilful surgeon; if a man’s brains had come
out, he would cure it, and any sort of wound in an artery
he easily healed. For some wounds his remedy was in form of
a plaister, for some medicines had to be taken. He ordered a
bandage tied on? the wound in my leg and put no seton in;
once he made me eat something like a fibrous root (yi/diz).
He told me himself, ‘A certain man had his leg broken in the
slender part and the bone was shattered for the breadth of the
hand. I cut the flesh open and took the bits of bone out
Where they had been, I put a remedy in powder-form. That


1 Elph. MS. yakhshi. Zenker explains bakhshi (pay-maste i
also a Court-physician. 3 LR reat nae pe

be The Hai. Elph. and Kehr’s MS. all have pichqaq tagmaq or it may be
puhgag taqmagq. T. bakhdq means bandage, pichdq, rind of fruit, but the
word clear in the three Turki MSS. means, skin of a fox’s leg.


Fol. 108:


Fol. 109


Fol. 1094.


170 FARGHANA a


remedy simply became bone where there had been bone before.” |
He told many strange and marvellous things such as surgeons —


in cultivated lands cannot match.

Three or four days later, Qambar-‘ali, afraid on account of
what he had said to me, fled (to Tambal) in Andijan. A few
days later, The Khans joined to me Ayttb Begchik with his
timan, and Jan-hasan Bdarin with the Barin taiman and, as
their army-beg, Sarigh-bash Mirza,—x1o000 to 2000 men in all,
and sent us towards Akhsi.


(h. Babur’s expedition to Akhsi.)


Shaikh Bayazid, a younger brother of Tambal, was in Akhsi;
Shahbaz Qdarliiq was in Kasan. At the time, Shahbaz was


ah
,,


lying before Ni-kint fort; crossing the Khujand-water opposite _


Bikhrata, we hurried to fall upon him there. When, a little
before dawn, we were nearing the place, the begs represented
to me that as the man would have had news of us, it was
advisable not to go on in broken array. We moved on there-
fore with less speed. Shahbaz may have been really unaware
of us until we were quite close; then getting to know of it, he
fled into the fort. It often happens so! Once having said,
‘The enemy is on guard!’ it is easily fancied true and the
chance of action is lost. In short, the experience of such
things is that no effort or exertion must be omitted, once the
chance for action comes. After-repentance is useless. There
was a little fighting round the fort at dawn but we delivered
no serious attack.

For the convenience of foraging, we moved from Ni-kint
towards the hills in the direction of Bishkharan. Seizing his
opportunity, Shahbaz Qarlaq abandoned Ni-kint and returned
to Kasain. We went back and occupied Nii-kint. During those
days, the army several times went out and over-ran all sides and
quarters. Once they over-ran the villages of Akhsi, once
those of Kasan. Shahbaz and Long Hasan’s adopted son,
Mirim came out of Kasdan to fight; they fought, were beaten,
and there Mirim died.


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 171


(i. The affairs of Pap.)

Pap is a strong fort belonging to Akhsi. The Papis made it
fast and sent a man to me. We accordingly sent Sayyid
Odsim with a few braves to occupy it. They crossed the river
(darya) opposite the upper villages of Akhsi and went into Pap."
A few days later, Sayyid Qasim did an astonishing thing.
There were at the time with Shaikh Bayazid in Akhsi,
Ibrahim Chapik (Slash-face) Taghai,? Ahmad-of-qasim Kohbur,
and Qasim Khitika (?) Arghiin. To these Shaikh Bayazid
joins 200 serviceable braves and one night sends them to
surprise Pap. Sayyid Qasim must have lain down carelessly
to sleep, without setting a watch. They reach the fort, set
ladders up, get up on the Gate, let the drawbridge down and,
when 7o or 80 good men in mail are inside, goes the news to
Sayyid Qasim! Drowsy with sleep, he gets into his vest
(kiinglak), goes out, with five or six of his men, charges the enemy
and drives them out with blow upon blow. He cut off a few
heads and sent tome. Though sucha careless lying down was
bad leadership, yet, with so few, just by force of drubbing,
to chase off such a mass of men in mail was very brave
indeed.

Meantime The Khans were busy with the siege of Andijan
but the garrison would not let them get near it. The Andijan
braves used to make sallies and blows would be exchanged.


(j. Babur invited into Akhsi.)


Shaikh Bayazid now began to send persons to us from
Akhsi to testify to well-wishing and pressingly invite us to
Akhsi. His object was to separate me from The Khans, by
any artifice, because without me, they had no standing-ground.
His invitation may have been given after agreeing with his elder
brother, Tambal that if I were separated from The Kh§ns, it
might be possible, in my presence, to come to some arrange-


1 The daryd here mentioned seems to be the Kasan-water ; the route taken
from Bishkharan to Pap is shewn on the Fr. map to lead past modern Tipa-
qirghan. Pap is not marked, but was, I think, at the cross-roads east of Touss
(Karnan).

2 Presumably Jahangir’s.


Fol. 110.


Fol. 110


172 FARGHANA ie


ment with them. We gave The Khans a hint of the invitation. —
They said, ‘Go! and by whatever means, lay hands on Shaikh
Bayazid.’ It was not my habit to cheat and play false; here —
above all places, when promises would have been made, how
was I to break them? It occurred to me however, that if we
could get into Akhsi, we might be able, by using all available
means, to detach Shaikh Bayazid from Tambal, when he might
take my side or something might turn up to favour my fortunes.
We, in our turn, sent a man to him; compact was made, he
invited us into Akhsi and when we went, came out to meet us,
bringing my younger brother, Nasir Mirza with him. Then he
took us into the town, gave us ground to camp in (y#rt) and to
me one of my father’s houses in the outer fort! where I
dismounted.


(k. Tambal asks help of Shaibag Khan.)


Tambal had sent his elder brother, Beg Tilba, to Shaibaq
Khan with proffer of service and invitation to enter Farghana.
At this very time Shaibaéq Khan’s answer arrived; ‘I will
come,’ he wrote. On hearing this, The Khans were all upset ;
they could sit no longer before Andijan and rose from before it.

The Younger Khan himself had a reputation for justice and
orthodoxy, but his Mughils, stationed, contrary to the expecta-
tions of the towns-people, in Atish, Marghinan and other
places,—places that had come in to me,—began to behave ill

Fol. 111. and oppressively. When The Khans had broken up from before
Andijan, the Atshis and Marghinanis, rising in tumult, seized
the Mughils in their forts, plundered and beat them, drove
them out and pursued them.

The Khans did not cross the Khujand-water (for the
Kindirlik-pass) but left the country by way of Marghinan and
Kand-i-badam and crossed it at Khujand, Tambal pursuing
them as far as Marghinan. We had had much uncertainty;
we had not had much confidence in their making any stand,
yet for us to go away, without clear reason, and leave them,
would not have looked well.


1 Here his father was killed (f. 6b). Cf. App. A.


908 AH.—JULY 7ru. 1502 ro JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. —173


(l. Babur attempts to defend Akhst.)


Early one morning, when I was in the Hot-bath, Jahangir
Mirza came into Akhsi, from Marghinan, a fugitive from
Tambal. We saw one another, Shaikh Bayazid also being
present, agitated and afraid. The Mirza and Ibrahim Beg
said, ‘Shaikh Bayazid must be made prisoner and we must
get the citadel into our hands.’ In good sooth, the proposal
was wise. Said I, ‘Promise has been made; how can we
break it?’ Shaikh Bayazid went into the citadel. Men ought
to have been posted on the bridge; not even there did we post
any-one! These blunders were the fruit of inexperience. At
the top of the morning came Tambal himself with 2 or 3000
men in mail, crossed the bridge and went into the citadel. To
begin with I had had rather few men; when I first went into
Akhsi some had been sent to other forts and some had been
made commandants and summoners all round. Left with
me in Akhsi may have been something over 100 men. We
had got to horse with these and were posting braves at the top
of one lane after another and making ready for the fight, when
Shaikh Bayazid and Qambar-‘ali (the Skinner), and Muhammad-
dost! came gallopping from Tambal with talk of peace.

After posting those told off for the fight, each in his appointed
place, I dismounted at my father’s tomb for a conference,
in which I invited Jahangir Mirza to join. Muhammad-dost
went back to Tambal but Qambar-‘ali and Shaikh Bayazid
were present. We sat in the south porch of the tomb and
were in consultation when the Mirza, who must have settled
beforehand with Ibrahim Chdpuk to lay hands on those other
two, said in my ear, ‘They must be made prisoner.’ Said I,
‘Don’t hurry! matters are past making prisoners. See here!
with terms made, the affair might be coaxed into something.
For why? Not only are they many and we few, but they with
their strength are in the citadel, we with our weakness, in the
outer fort.’ Shaikh Bayazid and Qambar-‘ali both being
present, Jahangir Mirza looked at Ibrahim Beg and made him
a sign to refrain. Whether he misunderstood to the contrary


1 ‘Ali-dost’s son (f. 796).


Fol. 111¢


Fol. 112.


Fol. 1122.


174 FARGHANA


or whether he pretended to misunderstand, is not known;
suddenly he did the ill-deed of seizing Shaikh Bayazid. Braves
closing in from all sides, flung those two to the ‘ground.
Through this the affair was taken past adjustment; we gave
them into charge and got to horse for the coming fight.

One side of the town was put into Jahangir Mirza’s charge;
as his men were few, I told off some of mine to reinforce him.
I went first to his side and posted men for the fight, then to
other parts of the town. There is a somewhat level, open
space in the middle of Akhsi; I had posted a party of braves
there and gone on when a large body of the enemy, mounted
and on foot, bore down upon them, drove them from their post
and forced them into a narrow lane. Just then I came up (the
lane), gallopped my horse at them, and scattered them in flight.
While I was thus driving them out from the lane into the flat,
and had got my sword to work, they shot my horse in the leg;
it stumbled and threw me there amongst them. I got up
quickly and shot one arrow off. My squire, Kahil (lazy) had a
weakly pony; he got off and led it to me. Mounting this, I
started for another lane-head. Sl. Muh. Wais noticed the
weakness of my mount, dismounted and led me his own. I
mounted that horse. Just then, Qasim Beg’s son, Qambar-‘ali
came, wounded, from Jahangir Mirza and said the Mirza had
been attacked some time before, driven off in panic, and had
gone right away. We were thunderstruck! At the same
moment arrived Sayyid Qasim, the commandant of Pap! His
was a most unseasonable visit, since at such a crisis it was well
to have such a strong fort in our hands. Said I to Ibrahim
Beg, ‘ What’s to be done now?’ He was slightly wounded;
whether because of this or because of stupefaction, he could
give no useful answer. My idea was to get across the bridge,
destroy it and make for Andijan. Baba Sher-zad did very well
here. ‘We will storm out at the gate and get away at once,’
he said. At his word, we set off for the Gate. Khwaja Mir
Miran also spoke boldly at that crisis. In one of the lanes,
Sayyid Qasim and NAsir’s Dost chopped away at Baqi Khiz,) I
being in front with Ibrahim Beg and Mirza Quli Kakuldash.


1 The sobriquet Khiz may mean Leaper, or Impetuous.


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 175


As we came opposite the Gate, we saw Shaikh Bayazid, wear-
ing his pull-over shirt? above his vest, coming in with three or
four horsemen. He must have been put into the charge of
Jahangir’s men in the morning when, against my will, he was
made prisoner, and they must have carried him off when they
got away. They had thought it would be well to kill him;
they set him free alive. He had been released just when I
chanced upon him in the Gate. I drew and shot off the arrow
on my thumb; it grazed his neck,a good shot! He came con-
fusedly in at the Gate, turned to the right and fled down a lane.
We followed him instantly. Mirza Quli Kikaldash got at one
man with his rugged-mace and went on. Another man took
aim at Ibrahim Beg, but when the Beg shouted ‘ Hai! Hai!’ let
him pass and shot me in the arm-pit, from as near as a man on
guard at a Gate. Two plates of my Qalma&q mail were cut;
he took to flight and I shot after him. Next I shot at a man
running away along the ramparts, adjusting for his cap against
the battlements; he left his cap nailed on the wall and went off,
gathering his turban-sash together in his hand. Then again,—
a man was in flight alongside me in the lane down which
Shaikh Bayazid had gone. I pricked the back of his head
with my sword; he bent over from his horse till he leaned
against the wall of the lane, but he kept his seat and with
some trouble, made good his flight. When we had driven all
the enemy’s men from the Gate, we took possession of it but
the affair was past discussion because they, in the citadel, were
2000 or 3000, we, in the outer fort, 100 or 200. Moreover they
had chased off Jahangir Mirza, as long before as it takes milk
to boil, and with him had gone half my men. This notwith-
standing, we sent a man, while we were in the Gate, to say to
him, ‘If you are near at hand, come, let us attack again.’
But the matter had gone past that! Ibrahim Beg, either
because his horse was really weak or because of his wound,
said, ‘My horse is done.’ On this, Sulaiman, one of Muh.
‘Alis Mubashir's servants, did a plucky thing, for with matters
as they were and none constraining him, while we were wait-


1 kuilak, syn. kiinglak, a shirt not opening at the breast. It will have been
a short garment since the under-vest was visible.


Fol, 113.


Fol. 1134,


Fol. 114.


176 FARGHANA


ing in the Gate, he dismounted and gave his horse to Ib:
Beg. Kichik (little) ‘Ali, now the Governor of Koel,? al:
shewed courage while we were in the Gate; he was a retainer
of Sl. Muh. Wais and twice did well, here and in Aish. We
delayed in the Gate till those sent to Jahangir Mirza came back —
and said he had gone off long before. It was too late to stay
there; off we flung; it was ill-judged to have stayed as long as
we did. Twenty or thirty men were with me. Just as we
hustled out of the Gate, a number of armed men? came right
down upon us, reaching the town-side of the drawbridge just as
we had crossed. Banda-‘ali, the maternal grandfather of
Oadsim Beg’s son, Hamza, called out to Ibrahim Beg, ‘ You are
always boasting of your zeal! Let’s take to our swords!’
‘ What hinders? Come along!’ said Ibrahim Beg, from beside
me. The senseless fellows were for displaying their zeal at a
time of such disaster! Ill-timed zeal! That was no time to
make stand or delay! We went off quickly, the enemy follow-
ing and unhorsing our men.


(m. Babur a fugitive before Tanbal’s men.)
When we were passing Meadow-dome (Gumbaz-i-chaman),


two miles out of Akhsi, Ibrahim Beg called out to me. Looking


back, I saw a page of Shaikh Bayazid’s striking at him and
turned rein, but Bayan-quli’s Khan-quli, said at my side, ‘ This
is a bad time for going back,’ seized my rein and pushed ahead.


- Many of our men had been unhorsed before we reached Sang, ©


4 miles (2 shar‘?) out of Akhsi.? Seeing no pursuers at Sang, we


1 j.e. when Babur was writing in Hindistan. Exactly at what date he
made this entry isnotsure. ‘Ali was in Koel in 933 An. (f. 315) and then taken
prisoner, but Babur does not say he was killed,—as he well might say of a
marked man, and, as the captor was himself taken shortly after, ‘Ali may
have been released, and may have been in Koel again. So that the statement
‘now in Koel’ may refer to a time later than his capture. The interest of
the point is in its relation to the date of composition of the Babur-ndma.

No record of ‘Ali’s bravery in Aish has been preserved. The reference
here made to it may indicate something attempted in 908 an. after Babur’s
adventure in Karnan (f. 118b) or in 909 AH. from Sikh. Cf. Translator’s note
f, 1180.

2 aipchinlik. Vambéry, gepanzert ; Shaw, four horse-shoes and their nails ; |
Steingass, atipcha-khana, a guard-house.

3 Sang is a ferry-station (Kostenko, i, 213). Pap may well have been
regretted (f. 1o9b and f. 112b) !_ The well-marked features of the French map
of 1904 allows Babur’s flight to be followed.


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 177


passed it by and turned straight up its water. In this position
of our affairs there were eight men of us;—NaAsir’s Dost,
Qasim Beg’s Qambar-‘ali, Bayan-quli’s Khan-quli, Mirza Quli
Kikildash, Nasir’s Shaham, Sayyidi Qara’s ‘Abdu'l-qadus,
Khwaja Husaini and myself, the eighth. Turning up the
stream, we found, in the broad valley, a good little road, far
from the beaten track. We made straight up the valley,
leaving the stream on the right, reached its waterless part and,
near the Afternoon Prayer, got up out of it to level land.
When we looked across the plain, we saw a blackness on it,
far away. I made my party take cover and myself had gone
to look out from higher ground, when a number of men came
at a gallop up the hill behind us. Without waiting to know
whether they were many or few, we mounted and rode off.
There were 20 or 25; we, as has been said, were eight.
If we had known their number at first, we should have
made a good stand against them but we thought they would
not be pursuing us, unless they had good support behind. A
fleeing foe, even if he be many, cannot face a few pursuers, for
as the saying is, ‘Hadi is enough for the beaten ranks.’}
Khan-quli said, ‘This will never do! They will take us all.
From amongst the horses there are, you take two good ones
_and go quickly on with Mirza Quli Ka#kilddsh, each with a led
horse. May-be you will get away.’ He did not speak ill; as
there was no fighting to hand, there was a chance of safety in
doing as he said, but it really would not have looked well to
leave any man alone, without a horse, amongst his foes. In
the end they all dropped off, one by one, of themselves. My
horse was a little tired; Khan-quli dismounted and gave me
his; I jumped off at once and mounted his, he mine. Just
then they unhorsed Sayyidi Qara’s ‘Abdu’l-qadtis and Nasir’s
Shaham who had fallen behind. Khan-quli also was left. It
was no time to profer help or defence; on it was gone, at the
full speed of our mounts. The horses began to flag; Dost Beg’s
failed and stopped. Mine began to tire; Qambar-‘ali got off
1 In the Turki text this saying is in Persian; in the Kehr-Ilminsky, in


Turki, as though it had gone over with its Persian context of the W.-i-B. from
which the K.-I. text here is believed to be a translation.


12


Fol. 1144.


Fol. 115.


Fol. 1158.


Fol


116,


178 FARGHANA


. 2 . ; Rees)
and gave me his; I mounted his, he mine. He was left.


Khwaja Husaini was a lame man; he turned aside to the 4
higher ground. I was left with Mirza Quli Kikilddsh. Our —
horses could not possibly gallop, they trotted. His began to


flag. Said I, ‘What will become of me, if you fall behind?
Come along! let’s live or die together.’ Several times I
looked back at him; at last he said, ‘My horse is done! It
can’t go on. Never mind me! You go on, perhaps you will
get away.’ It was a miserable position for me; he remained
behind, I was alone.

Two of the enemy were in sight, one Baba of Sairam, the
other Banda-‘ali. They gained on me; my horse was done;
the mountains were still 2 miles (x kuroh) off. A pile of rock
was in my path. Thought I to myself, ‘My horse is worn out
and the hills are still somewhat far away; which way should I
go? In my quiver are at least 20 arrows; should I dismount and
shoot them off from this pile of rock?’ Then again, I thought
I might reach the hills and once there, stick a few arrows in
my belt and scramble up. I had a good deal of confidence in
my feet and went on, with this plan in mind. My horse could
not possibly trot; the two men came within arrow’s reach.


For my own sake sparing my arrows, I did not shoot; they, — |


out of caution, came no nearer. By sunset I was near the
hills. Suddenly they called out, ‘Where are you going in this


fashion? Jahangir Mirza has been brought in a prisoner; ¥


Nasir Mirza also is in their hands.’ I made no reply and went
on towards the hills. When a good distance further had been
gone, they spoke again, this time more respectfully, dismount-
ing to speak. I gave no ear to them but went on up a glen
till, at the Bed-time prayer, I reached a rock as big as a house.
Going behind it, I saw there were places to be jumped, where


no horse could go. They dismounted again and began to ~ |


speak like servants and courteously. Said they, ‘Where are
you going in this fashion, without a road and in the dark?
Sl. Ahmad Tambal will make you pddshah.’ They swore this.
Said I, ‘My mind is not easy as to that. I cannot go to him.
[f you think to do me timely service, years may pass before
you have such another chance. Guide me to a road by which


a
w


atk
»
i


4


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 TO JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 179


I can go to The Khan’s presence. If you will do this, I will
shew you favour and kindness greater than your heart’s-desire,
If you will not do it, go back the way you came; that also
would be to serve me well.’ Said they, ‘ Would to God we had
never come! But since we are here, after following you in the
way we have done, how can we go back from you? If you
will not go with us, we are at your service, wherever you go.’
Said I, ‘Swear that you speak the truth.’ They, for their part,
made solemn oath upon the Holy Book.

I at once confided in them and said, ‘ People have shewn me
a road through a broad valley, somewhere near this glen; take
me toit.’ Spite of their oath, my trust in them was not so
complete but that I gave them the lead and followed. After 2
to 4 miles (1-2 kwroh), we came to the bed of atorrent. ‘ This
will not be the road for the broad valley,’ I said. They drew
back, saying, ‘ That road is a long way ahead,’ but it really must
have been the one we were on and they have been concealing
the fact, in order to deceive me. About half through the night,
we reached another stream. ‘This time they said, ‘We have
been negligent; it now seems to us that the road through the
broad valley is behind.’ Said I, ‘What is to be done?’ Said
they, ‘ The Ghawa road is certainly in front; by it people cross
for Far-kat.1 They guided me for that and we went on till in
the third watch of the night we reached the Karnan gully
which comes down from Ghawa. Here Baba Sairadmi said,
‘Stay here a little while I look along the Ghawa road. He
came back after a time and said, ‘Some men have gone along
that road, led by one wearing a Mughil cap; there is no going
that way.’ I took alarm at these words. There I was, at
dawn, in the middle of the cultivated land, far from the road I
wanted to take. Said I, ‘Guide me to where I can hide to-
day, and tonight when you will have laid hands on something
for the horses, lead me to cross the Khujand-water and along
its further bank.’ Said they, ‘ Over there, on the upland, there
might be hiding.’

Banda-‘aliwas Commandant in Karnan. ‘There is no doing
without food for ourselves or our horses;’ he said, ‘let me go


1 Cf. f. 96b and Fr. Map for route over the Kindir-tau.


Fol. 1164.


180 FARGHANA "sh me


into Karnan and bring what I can find.’ We stopped 2 miles
(1 kuroh) out of Karnan; he went on. He was a long time —
away; near dawn there was no sign of him. The dayhad shot _
when he hurried up, bringing three loaves of bread but nocorn
for the horses. Each of us putting a loaf into the breast of his
tunic, we went quickly up the rise, tethered our horses there in
the open valley and went to higher ground, each to keep watch.
Fol. 117. Near mid-day, Ahmad the Falconer went along the Ghawa
road for Akhsi. I thought of calling to him and of saying,
with promise and fair word, ‘ You take those horses,’ for they
had had a day and a night’s strain and struggle, without corn, —
and were utterly done. But then again, we were a little un-
easy as we did not entirely trust him. We decided that, as the
men Baba Sairami had seen on the road would be in Karnan
that night, the two with me should fetch one of their horses
for each of us, and that then we should go each his own way.

At mid-day, a something glittering was seen on a horse, as
far away as eye can reach. We were not able to make out at
all what it was. It must have been Muh. Baqir Beg himself;
he had been with us in Akhsi and when we got out and
scattered, he must have come this way and have been moving
then to a hiding-place.*

Banda-‘ali and Baba Sairami said, ‘ The horses have had no
corn for two days and two nights; let us go down into the dale
and put them there to graze.’ Accordingly we rode down and
put them to the grass. At the Afternoon Prayer, a horseman
passed along the rising-ground where we had been. We
recognized him for Qadir-birdi, the head-man of Ghawa. ‘Call
him,’ I said. They called; he came. After questioning him,
and speaking to him of favour and kindness, and giving him
promise and fair word, I sent him to bring rope, and a grass- —
hook, and an axe, and material for crossing water,” and corn

‘ol. 1174. for the horses, and food and, if it were possible, other horses. —
We made tryst with him for that same spot at the Bed-time
Prayer.

1 This account of Muh. Baqir reads like one given later to Babur ; he may

have had some part in Babur’s rescue (cf. Translator’s Note to f. 1180).


2 Perhaps reeds for araft. Sh. N. p. 258, Sal auchiin bar qamish, reeds are
there also for rafts.


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1508 AD. —181


Near the Evening Prayer, a horseman passed from the
direction of Karnan for Ghawa. ‘Who are you?’ we asked.
He made some reply. He must have been Muh. Baqir Beg
himself, on his way from where we had seen him earlier, going
at night-fall to some other hiding-place, but he so changed his
voice that, though he had been years with me, I did not know
it. It would have been well if I had recognized him and he
had joined me. His passing caused much anxiety and alarm;
tryst could not be kept with Qdadir-birdi of Ghawa. Banda-
‘ali said, ‘There are retired gardens in the suburbs of Karnan
where no one will suspect us of being; let us go there and
send to Qadir-birdi and have him brought there.’ With this
idea, we mounted and went to the Karnan suburbs. It was
winter and very cold. They found a worn, coarse sheepskin
coat and brought it to me; I put it on. They brought mea
bowl of millet-porridge; I ate it and was wonderfully re-
freshed. ‘Have you sent off the man to Qadir-birdi?’ said I
to Banda-‘ali. ‘I have sent,’ he said. But those luckless,
clownish mannikins seem to have agreed together to send the
man to Tambal in Akhsi!

We went into a house and for awhile my eyes closed in
sleep. Those mannikins artfully said to me, ‘You must not
bestir yourself to leave Karnan till there is news of Qadir-
birdi but this house is right amongst the suburbs; on the out-
skirts the orchards are empty; no-one will suspect if we go
there.’ Accordingly we mounted at mid-night and went toa
distant orchard. Baba Sairami kept watch from the roof of a
house. Near mid-day he came down and said, ‘Commandant
Yusuf is coming.’ Great fear fell upon me! ‘Find out,’ I
said, ‘whether he comes because he knows about me.’ He
went and after some exchange of words, came back and said,
* He says he met a foot-soldier in the Gate of Akhsi who said to
him, ‘‘ The padshah is in such a place,’ that he told no-one,
put the man with Wali the Treasurer whom he had made
prisoner in the fight, and then gallopped off here.’ Said I,
“How does it strike you?’ ‘They are all your servants,’ he
said, ‘you must go. What else can you do? They will make
you their ruler.’ Said I, ‘After such rebellion and fighting,


Fol. 118.


Fol. 1184.


182 FARGHANA


with what confidence could I go?’ We were sine is,

when Yisuf knelt before me, saying, ‘ Why should it be hidden! ? ;
Sl. Ahmad Tambal has no news of you, but Shaikh Bayazid
has and he sent me here.’ On hearing this, my state of mind ~
was miserable indeed, for well is it understood that nothing in
the world is worse than fear for one’s life. ‘Tell the truth!’ I
said, ‘if the affair is likely to go on to worse, I will make
ablution.’ Yiisuf swore oaths, but who would trust them? I
knew the helplessness of my position. I rose and went to ©
a corner of the garden, saying to myself, ‘If a man live a
hundred years or a thousand years, at the last nothing. .


TRANSLATOR’S NOTE,


Friends are likely to have rescued Babur from his dangerous ~
isolation. His presence in Karnan was known both in Ghawa ~
and in Akhsi; Muh. Baqir Beg was at hand (f. 117); some of ©
those he had dropped in his flight would follow him when their —
horses had had rest; Jahangir was somewhere north of the
river with the half of Babur’s former force (f. 112); The Khans,
with their long-extended line of march, may have been on the
main road through or near Karnan. If Yiisuf took Babur asa |
prisoner along the Akhsi road, there were these various chances
of his meeting friends.

His danger was evaded; he joined his uncles and was with ~
them, leading 1000 men (Sh. N. p. 268), when they were —
defeated at Archian just before or in the season of Cancer, i.e. —
circa June (T. R. p. 164). What he was doing between the —
winter cold of Karnan (f. 117)) and June might have been ©


1 Here the Turki text breaks off, as it might through loss of pages, causing |
a blank of narrative extending over some 16 months. Cf. App. D. fora —
passage, supposedly spurious, found with the Haidarabad Codex and the ~
Kehr-{lminsky text, purporting to tell how Babur was rescued from the risk — |
in which the lacuna here leaves him.


h 908 AH.—JULY Tru. 1502 ro JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 183
known from his lost pages. Muh. Salih writes at length of one
affair falling within the time,—Jahangir’s occupation of Khu-
jand, its siege and its capture by Shaibani. This capture will
have occurred considerably more than a month before the
defeat of The Khans (Sh. N. p. 230).

It is not easy to decide in what month of go8 Au. they went
into Farghana or how long their campaign lasted. Babur
chronicles a series of occurrences, previous to the march of the
army, which must have filled some time. The road over the
Kindirlik-pass was taken, one closed in Babur’s time (f. 10)
though now open through the winter. Looking at the rapidity
of his own moyements in Farghana, it seems likely that the pass
was crossed after and not before its closed time. If so, the
campaign may have covered 4 or 5 months. Muh. Salih’s
account of Shaibaq’s operations strengthens this view. News
that Ahmad had joined Mahmiid in Tashkint (f. 102) went to
Shaibani in Khusrau Shah's territories; he saw his interests in
Samarkand threatened by this combination of the Chaghatai
brothers to restore Babur in Farghana, came north therefore in
order to help Tambal. He then waited a month in Samarkand


(Sh. N. p. 230), besieged Jahangir, went back and stayed in


Samarkand long enough to give his retainers time to equip for
a year’s campaigning (I. c. p. 244) then went to Akhsi and so
to Archian.

Babur's statement (f. 1100) that The Khans went from Andi-
jan to the Khujand-crossing over the Sir attracts attention
because this they might have done if they had meant to leave
Farghana by Mirza-rabat but they are next heard of as at Akhsi.
Why did they make that great détour? Why not have crossed
opposite Akhsi or at Sang? Or if they had thought of retiring,
what turned them east again? Did they place Jahangir in
Khujand? Bdabur’s missing pages would have answered these
questions no doubt. It was useful for them to encamp where
they did, east of Akhsi, because they there had near them a road
by which reinforcement could come from Kashghar or retreat
be made. The Akhsi people told Shaibani that he could easily
overcome The Khans if he went without warning, and if they
had not withdrawn by the Kulja road (Sh. N. p. 262). By that


184 FARGHANA


road the few men who went with Ahmad to Tashkint (f. 103
may have been augmented to the force, enumerated as his in
the battle by Muh. Salih (Sh. N. cap. Lil).

When The Khans were captured, Babur escaped and made a
‘for Mughilistan,’ a vague direction seeming here to mean —
Tashkint, but, finding his road blocked, in obedience to orders
from Shaibaq that he and Abi’l-makaram were to be captured,
he turned back and, by unfrequented ways, went into the hill-
country of Sikh and Hushiar. There he spent about a year
in great misery (f. 14 and H., S. ii, 318). Of the wretchedness ~
of the time Haidar also writes. If anything was attempted in —
Farghana in the course of those months, record of it has been
lost with Babur’s missing pages. He was not only homeless
and poor, but shut in by enemies. Only the loyalty or kindness
of the hill-tribes can have saved him and his few followers.
His mother was with him; so also were the families of his men. —
How Qiutliq-nigar contrived to join him from Tashkint, though
historically a small matter, is one he would chronicle. What
had happened there after the Mughiil defeat, was that the
horde had marched away for Kashghar while Shah Begim —
remained in charge of her daughters with whom the Aizbeg
chiefs intended to contract alliance. Shaib&ni’s orders for her
stay and for the general exodus were communicated to her by
her son, The Khan, in what Muh. Salih, quoting its purport,
describes as a right beautiful letter (p. 296). &

By some means Qitliiq-nigadr joined Babur, perhaps helped —__
by the circumstance that her daughter, Khan-zada was
Shaibaq’s wife. She spent at least some part of those hard
months with him, when his fortunes were at their lowest ebb.
A move becoming imperative, the ragged and destitute company
started in mid-June 1504 (Muh. gio AH.) on that perilous
mountain journey to which Haidar applies the Prophet’s
dictum, ‘ Travel is a foretaste of Hell,’ but of which the end
was the establishment of a Timirid dynasty in Hindistan,
To look down the years from the destitute Babur to Akbar,
Shah-jahdn and Aurangzib is to see a great stream of human
life flow from its source in his resolve to win upward, his
quenchless courage and his abounding vitality. Not yet 22,


908 AH.—JULY 7TH. 1502 To JUNE 26TH. 1503 AD. 185


th sport of older men’s intrigues, he had been tempered by

- failure, privation and dangers.

He left Sukh intending to go to Sl. Husain Mirza in
Khurasaén but he changed this plan for one taking him to
Kabul where a Timirid might claim to dispossess the Arghiins,
then holding it since the death, in 907 aH. of his uncle,
Atligh Beg Mirza Kabuli.


ee a oe - i ae


[-L9€ -¢ anf oF


‘onbsopy sueyel-qyeys pue SARIT) Ss anqegd evAoge wmor1y MoIA


THE MEMOIRS OF (BABU


SECTION II. KABUL!


910 AH.— JUNE 1417w 1504 ro JUNE 41x 1505 AD.?


(a. Babur leaves Farghina.)


In the month of Muharram, after leaving the Farghana country
intending to go to Khurasan, I dismounted at Ailak-yilaq,3 one
of the summer pastures of Hisar. In this camp I entered my
23rd year, and applied the razor to my face Those who,
hoping in me, went with me into exile, were, small and great,
between 2 and 300; they were almost all on foot, had walking-
staves in their hands, brogues 5 on their feet, and long coats © on

t As in the Farghana Section, so here, reliance is on the Elphinstone and
Haidarabad MSS. The Kehr-I|minsky text still appears to be a retranslation from
the Wagd‘at-c-baburt and verbally departs much from the true text; moreover, in
this Section it has been helped out, where its archetype was illegible or has lost


fragmentary passages, from the Leyden and Erskine J/emozrs. It may be
mentioned, as between the First and the Second Wag7‘at-z-bdburi, that several


‘ obscure passages in this Section are more explicit in the First (Payanda-hasan’s) than


in its successor (‘Abdu-r-rahim’s).

2 Elph. MS. f. 90b; W.-i-B. I.O. 215, f. 966 and 217, f. 79; Mems. p. 127.
** In 1504 AD. Ferdinand the Catholic drove the French out of Naples” (Erskine). In
England, Henry VII was pushing forward a commercial treaty, the /rtercursus malus,
with the Flemings and growing in wealth by the exactions of Empson and Dudley.

3 presumably the pastures of the “‘Ilak” Valley. The route_from Sikh would
be over the ‘Ala‘u’d-din-pass, into the Qizil-sii valley, down to Ab-i-garm and on
to the Ailaq-valley, Khwaja ‘Imad, the Kafirnigan, Qabadian, and Aibaj on the Ami.
See T.R. p. 175 and Farghana Section, p. 184, as to the character of the journey.

4 Amongst the Turki tribes, the time of first applying the razor to the face is
celebrated by a great entertainment. Babur’s miserable circumstances would not
admit of this (Erskine).

The text is ambiguous here, reading either that Sikh was left or that Ailaq-yilaq
was reached in Muharram. As the birthday was on the 8th, the journey very
arduous and, for a party mostly on foot, slow, it seems safest to suppose that the start
was made from Sikh at the end of 909 AH. and not in Muharram, 910 AH.


5 chariig, rough boots of untanned leather, formed like a moccasin with the lower ©


leather drawn up round the foot; they are worn by Khirghiz mountaineers and
caravan-men on journeys (Shaw).
© chaipan, the ordinary garment of Central Asia (Shaw).


14


Haidara-
bad MS.
Fol. 120,


ol. 1208.


188 KABUL Be een : sic se


their shoulders. So destitute were we that we had 1 out t two ten
(chadar) amongst us ; my own used to be pitched for my mott ther
and they set an Slachde at each stage for me to sit in.? Ss
Though we had started with the intention of going into |
Khurasan, yet with things as they were? something was hoped
for from the Hisar country and Khusrau Shah's retainers.
Every few days some-one would come in from the country ¢ cs
a tribe or the (Mughil) horde, whose words made it probable —
that we had growing ground for hope. Just then Mulla Baba >
of Pashaghar came back, who had been our envoy to Khusrau 4
Shah ; from Khusrau Shah he brought nothing likely to please 4
but he did from the tribes and the horde. 4
Three or four marches beyond Ailak, when halt was made ata —
place near Hisar called Khwaja ‘Imad, Muhibb-‘ali, the Armourer, q
came to me from Khusrau Shah. Through Khusrau Shah’s ©
territories I have twice happened to pass ;3 renowned though he
was for kindness and liberality, he neither time showed me the —
humanity he had shown to the meanest of men. 5 i
As we were hoping something from the country and the
tribes, we made delay at every stage. At this critical point —
Sherim Taghai, than whom no man of mine was greater, —
thought of leaving me because he was not keen to go into —
Khurasan. He had sent all his family off and stayed himself
unencumbered, when after the defeat at Sar-i-pul (906 AH.) I went —
back to defend Samarkand ; he was a bit of a coward and hedid
this sort of thing several times over.


(6. Babur joined by one of Khusrau Shah's kinsmen.)

After we reached Qabadian, a younger brother of Khusrau
Shah, Baqi Chaghaniani, whose holdings were Chaghanian,* ~
Shahr-i-safa and Tirmiz, sent the 4hatih5 of Qarshi to me to ©


* The alachiig, a tent of flexible poles, covered with felt, may be the 4hargahk :
(kibitka) ; Persian chddar seems to represent Turki 4g awi, white. house. 4
742: with Khusrau’s power shaken by Aizbeg attack, made in the winter of 9099AH.
( Shathani-nadma Iviii). e-
3 Cf. ff. 81 and 814. The armourer’s station was low for an envoy to Babur, the
superior in birth of the armourer’s master. a
* var. Chaqanian and Saghanian. The name formerly described the whole of the —
Hisar territory (Erskine). f
5 the preacher by whom the Xuféa is read (Erskine).


.


910 AH.—JUNE 147 1504 to JUNE 47H 1505 AD. 189


express his good wishes and his desire for alliance, and, after we
had crossed the Ami at the Aibaj-ferry, he came himself to
wait on me._ By his wish we moved down the river- to opposite
Tirmiz, where, without fear [or, without going over himself],* he
had their families? and their goods brought across to join us.
This done, we set out together for Kahmard and Bamian, then
held by his son3 Ahmad-i-qasim, the son of Khusrau Shah’s
sister. Our plan was to leave the households (aw7-az/) safe in
Fort Ajar of the Kahmard-valley and to take action wherever
action might seem well. At Aibak, Yar-‘ali Balal,4 who had
fled from Khusrau Shah, joined us with several braves ; he had
been with me before, and had made good use of his sword
several times in my presence, but was parted from me in the
recent throneless times5 and had gone to Khusrau Shah. He
represented to me that the Mughils in Khusrau Shah’s service
wished me well. Moreover, Qambar-‘ali Beg, known also as
Qambar-‘ali Sz/akh (Skinner), fled to me after we reached
the Zindan-valley.®


(c. Occurrences in Kahmard.)


We reached Kahmard with three or four marches and
deposited our households and families in Ajar. While we
stayed there, Jahangir Mirza married (Ai Begim) the daughter
of Sl. Mahmid Mirza and Khan-zada Begim, who had_been
set aside for him during the lifetime of the Mirzas.7

Meantime Baqi Beg urged it upon me, again and again, that
two rulers in one country, or two chiefs in one army are a source
of faction and disorder—a foundation of dissension and ruin.


* bi bagi or bi Bagi; perhaps a play of words with the double meaning expressed
in the above translation.

? Amongst these were widows and children of Babur’s uncle, Mahmid (f. 274).

3 aughil. As being the son of Khusrau’s sister, Ahmad was nephew to Baqi;
there may be in the text a scribe’s slip from one a#gha/ to another, and the real
statement be that Ahmad was the son of Bagqi’s son, Muh. Qasim, which would account
for his name Ahmad-i-qasim.

4 Cf. f. 67. ‘

5 Babur’s loss of rule in Farghana and Samarkand.

° about 7 miles south of Aibak, on the road to Sar-i-tagh (mountain-head, Erskine).

? wiz. the respective fathers, Mahmiid and ‘Umar Shaikh. The arrangement was
made in 895 AH. (1490 AD.).


Fol, 121.


. 1218,


NO


190 KABUL Re


“For they have said, ‘Ten darwishes can sleep ade one blanket, "
but two kings cannot find room in one clime.’ |


If a man of God eat half a loaf,
He gives the other to a darwish ;
Let a king grip the rule of a clime,
He dreams of another to grip.” *

Baqi Beg urged further that Khusrau Shah's retainers and
followers would be coming in that day or the next to take
service with the Padshah (ze. Babur); that there were such
sedition-mongers with them as the sons of Ayitb Begchik,
besides other who had been the stirrers and spurs to disloyalty
amongst their Mirzas,? and that if, at this point, Jahangir Mirza
were dismissed, on good and friendly terms, for Khurasan, it
would remove a source of later repentance. Urge it as he would,
however, I did not accept his suggestion, because it is against
my nature to do an injury to my brethren, older or younger,3
or to any kinsman soever, even when something untoward has
happened. Though formerly between Jahangir Mirza and me,
resentments and recriminations had occurred about our rule
and retainers, yet there was nothing whatever then to arouse
anger against him; he had come out of that country
(ze. Farghana) with me and was behaving like a blood-relation
and a servant. But in the end it was just as Baqi Beg
predicted ;—those tempters to disloyalty, that is to say, Ayiib’s
Yusuf and Ayib’s Bihlil, left me for Jahangir Mirza, took up
a hostile and mutinous position, parted him from me, and
conveyed him into Khurasan.


(a. Co-operation invited against Shaibig Khan.)


In those days came letters from Sl. Husain Mirza, long and
far-fetched letters which are still in my possession and in that
of others, written to Badi‘w’z-zaman Mirza, myself, Khusrau
Shah and Zi’n-niin Beg, all to the same purport, as follows :—
“When the three brothers, Sl. Mahmiid Mirza, Sl. Ahmad
Mirza, and Ailigh Beg Mirza, joined together and advanced


* Gulistan cap. i, story 3. Part of this quotation is used again on f. 183.

* Mahmiid’s sons under whom Baqi had served.

3 Uncles of all degrees are included as elder brethren, cousins of all degrees, as
younger ones.


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 To JUNE 41x 1505 AD. 191


against me, I defended the bank of the Murgh-ab* in such
a way that they retired without being able to effect anything.
Now if the Aiizbegs advance, I might myself guard the bank of
the Murgh-ab again ; let Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza leave men to
defend the forts of Balkh, Shibarghan, and Andikhiid while he
himself guards Girzawan, the Zang-valley, and the hill-country
thereabouts.” As he had heard of my being in those parts, he
wrote to me also, “Do you make fast Kahmard, Ajar, and that
hill-tract ; let Khusrau Shah place trusty men in Hisar and
Oindiz; let his younger brother Wali make fast Badakhshan
and the Khutlan hills; then the Atizbeg will retire, able to do
nothing.”

These letters threw us into despair ;—for why? Because at
that time there was in Timi Beg’s territory (yar?) no ruler so
great as Sl. Husain Mirza, whether by his years, armed strength,
or dominions; it was to be expected, therefore, that envoys
would go, treading on each other’s heels, with clear and sharp
orders, such as, “ Arrange for so many boats at the Tirmiz,
Kilif, and Kirki ferries,” “Get any quantity of bridge material
together,” and “Well watch the ferries above Tiqiz-aitlim,” ?
so that men whose spirit years of Aiizbeg oppression had
broken, might be cheered to hope again.3 But how could hope
live in tribe or horde when a great ruler like Sl. Husain Mirza,
sitting in the place of Timir Beg, spoke, not of marching forth
to meet the enemy, but only of defence against his attack ?

When we had deposited in Ajar what had come with us of
hungry train (@ airiqg) and household (avwé-az/), together with
the families of Bagi Beg, his son, Muh. Qasim, his soldiers
and his tribesmen, with all their goods, we moved out with
our men.


* presumably the ferries ; perhaps the one on the main road from the north-east
which crosses the river at Fort Murgh-ab.

* Nine deaths, perhaps where the Ami is split into nine channels at the place where
Mirza Khan’s son Sulaiman later met his rebel grandson Shah-rukh ( Zabag@t-i-akbari,
Elliot & Dowson, v, 392, and A.N. Bib. Ind., 3rd ed., 441). Tiiqiiz-aiilim is too
far up the river to be Arnold’s ‘‘ shorn and parcelled Oxus”.

3 Shaibaq himself had gone down from Samarkand in 908 AH. and in 909 AH. and
so permanently located his troops as to have sent their families to them. In 909 AH.
he drove Khusrau into the mountains of Badakhshan, but did not occupy Qindiz ;
thither Khusrau returned and there stayed till now, when Shaibagq again came south
(fol. 123). See Sh. N. cap. lviii e¢ seg.


Fol. 122


123.


192 KABUL ee i


(e. Increase of Babur’s following.) ee i a

One man after another came in from Khusae Shah’s —
Mughils and said, “We of the Mughil horde, desiring the
royal welfare, have drawn off from Taikhan (Talikan) towards
Ishkimish and Filial. Let the Padshah advance as fast as
possible, for the greater part of Khusrau Shah’s force has
broken up and is ready to take service with him.” Just then
news arrived that Shaibaq Khan, after taking Andijan,’ was
getting to horse again against Hisar and Qiindiiz. On hearing
this, Khusrau Shah, unable to stay in Qinditz, marched out
with all the men he had, and took the road for Kabul. No
sooner had he left than his old servant, the able and trusted
Mulla Muhammad 7zrkzstant made Qindiz fast for Sieiaiit -
Khan.

Three or four thousand heads-of-houses in the Mughil horde, _
former dependants of Khusrau Shah, brought their families and


we
joined us when, going by way of Sham-ti, we were near the 4 ;


Oizil-si.?


(f. Qambar-‘ali, the Skinner, dismissed.)

Qambar-‘ali Beg’s foolish talk has been mentioned several
times already ; his manners were displeasing to Baqi Beg ; to
gratify Baqi Beg, he was dismissed. Thereafter his son,
‘Abdu’l-shukir, was in Jahangir Mirza’s service.


(g. Khusrau Shih waits on Babur.)


Khusrau Shah was much upset when he heard that the ©
Mughil horde had joined me; seeing nothing better to do
for himself, he sent his son-in-law, Aytib’s Yaq‘tb, to make
profession of well-wishing and submission to me, and respect-
fully to represent that he would enter my service if I would
make terms and compact with him. His offer was accepted,
because Baqi Chaghanidnt was a man of weight, and, however
steady in his favourable disposition to me, did not overlook his
brother’s side in this matter. Compact was made that Khusrau


: phi Tambal, to put down whom he had quitted his army near Balkh (Sh. N.
cap. lix


* This, one of the many Red-rivers, flows from near Kahmard and joins the Andar-ab
water near Dishi.


910 AH.—JUNE 14rx 1504 to JUNE 41TH 1505 AD. 193


Shah’s life should be safe, and that whatever amount of his
goods he selected, should not be refused him. After giving
Yaq‘tib leave to go, we marched down the Qizil-si and dis-
mounted near to where it joins the water of Andar-ab.


Fol. 123


Next day, one in the middle of the First Rabi‘ (end of |


August, 1504 AD.), riding light, I crossed the Andar-ab water and
took my seat under a large plane-tree near Dishi, and thither
came Khusrau Shah, in pomp and splendour, with a great
company of men. According to rule and custom, he dismounted
some way off and then made his approach. Three times he
knelt when we saw one another, three times also on taking
leave ; he knelt once when asking after my welfare, once again
when he offered his tribute, and he did the same with Jahangir
Mirza and with Mirza Khan (Wais). That sluggish old
mannikin who through so many years had just pleased himself,
lacking of sovereignty one thing only, namely, to read the
Khutba in his own name, now knelt 25 or 26 times in
succession, and came and went till he was so wearied out that
he tottered forward. His many years of begship and authority
vanished from his view. When we had seen one another and
he had offered his gift, I desired him to be seated. We stayed
in that place for one or two gavis,' exchanging tale and talk.
His conversation was vapid and empty, presumably because he
was a coward and false to his salt. Two things he said were
extraordinary for the time when, under his eyes, his trusty and
trusted retainers were becoming mine, and when his affairs had
reached the point that he, the sovereign-aping mannikin, had
had to come, willy-nilly, abased and unhonoured, to what sort
of an interview! One of the things he said was this :—When
condoled with for the desertion of his men, he replied, “ Those
very servants have four times left me and returned.” The
other was said when I had asked him where his brother Wali
would cross the Ami and when he would arrive. “If he find
a ford, he will soon be here, but when waters rise, fords change ;
the (Persian) proverb has it, ‘The waters have carried down
the fords.’” These words God brought to his tongue in that
hour of the flowing away of his own authority and following !


* A gari is twenty-four minutes.


Fol. 124


. 1246.


194 KABUL


After sitting a gavi or two, I mounted and rode back eo camp, —
he for his part returning to his halting-place. On that aay his


begs, with their servants, great and small, good and bad, and


tribe after tribe began to desert him and come, with their
families, to me. Between the two Prayers of the next aiternccs
not a man remained in his presence,

“ Say,—O God ! who possessest the kingdom! Thou givest it~
to whom Thou wilt and Thou takest it from whom Thou wilt!
In Thy hand is good, for Thou art almighty.” *

Wonderful is His power! This man, once master of 20 or
30,000 retainers, once owning Sl. Mahmiid’s dominions from
Qahligha,—known also as the Iron-gate,—to the range of
Hindii-kush, whose old mannikin of a tax-gatherer, Hasan
Barlas by name, had made us march, had made us halt, with
all the tax-gatherer’s roughness, from Ailak to Awtbaj,? that
man He so abased and so bereft of power that, with no blow —
struck, no sound made, he stood, without command over
servants, goods, or life, in the presence of a band of 200 or
300 men, defeated and destitute as we were.

In the evening of the day on which we had seen Khusrau
Shah and gone back to camp, Mirza Khan came to my presence
and demanded vengeance on him for the blood of his brothers.3
Many of us were at one with him, for truly it is right, both by
Law and common justice, that such men should get their deserts,
but, as terms had been made, Khusrau Shah was let go free.
An order was given that he should be allowed to take whatever
of his goods he could convey ; accordingly he loaded up, on
three or four strings of mules and camels, all jewels, gold, silver,
and precious things he had, and took them with him. Sherim
Taghai was told off to escort him, who after setting Khusrau
Shah on his road for Khurasan, by way of Ghiri and Dahanah,
was to go to Kahmard and bring the families after us to Kabul.

: Qoran, Surat iii, verse 25; Sale’s Qoran, ed. 1825, i, 56.

3 a ye sanghar, bowstrung, and Mas‘“id, blinded.

4 Muh. Salih is florid over the rubies of Badakhshan he says Babur took from
Khusrau, but Haidar says Babur not only had Khusrau’s property, treasure, and
horses returned to him, but refused all gifts Khusrau offered. ‘* This is one trait out


of a thousand in the Emperor’s character.” Haidar mentions, too, the then lack of
necessaries under which Babur suffered (Sh. N., cap. Ixiii, and T.R. p. 176).


910 AH.—JUNE 141TH 1504 ro JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 195


(h. Babur marches for Kabul.)

Marching from that camp for Kabul, we dismounted in
Khwaja Zaid.

On that day, Hamza Bi Wang/it,. at the head of Aiizbeg
raiders, was over-running round about Dishi. Sayyid Qasim,
the Lord of the Gate, and Ahmad-i-qasim Kohdur were sent
with several braves against him ; they got up with him, beat
his Atizbegs well, cut off and brought in a few heads.

In this camp all the armour (ida) of Khusrau Shah’s
armoury was shared out. There may have been as many as
7 or 800 coats-of-mail (joshan) and horse accoutrements
(kithah);? these were the one thing he left behind; many
pieces of porcelain also fell into our hands, but, these excepted,
there was nothing worth looking at.

With four or five marches we reached Ghir-bund, and there
dismounted in Ushtur-shahr. We got news there that Muqim’s
chief beg, Sherak (var. Sherka) Avghiin,was lying along the Baran,
having led an army out, not through hearing of me, but to hinder
‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza from passing along the Panjhir-road, he
having fled from Kabul3 and being then amongst the Tarkalani
Afghans towards Lamghan. On hearing this we marched forward,
starting in the afternoon and pressing on through the dark till,
with the dawn, we surmounted the Hipian-pass.*

I had never seen Suhail ;5 when I came out of the pass I saw
a star, brightandlow. “ May notthat be Suhail?” said I. Said
they, “It is Suhail.” Baqi Chaghdaniani recited this couplet ;—®


** How far dost thou shine, O Suhail, and where dost thou rise ?
A sign of good luck is thine eye to the man on whom it may light.”


* Cf. T.R. p. 134 n. and 374 n.

* Jiba, so often used to describe the quilted corselet, seems to have here a wider
meaning, since the 7#ba-khana contained both joshan and kithah, 7.e. coats-of-mail
and horse-mail with accoutrements. It can have been only from this source that
Babur’s men obtained the horse-mail of f. 127. I

8 He succeeded his father, Atligh Beg Xa@su/z, in 907 AH. ; his youth led to the
usurpation of his authority by Sherim Zikr, one of his begs; but the other begs put
Sherim to death. During the subsequent confusions Muh. Mugim Arghan, in 908 AH.,
got possession of Kabul and married a sister of ‘Abdu’r-razzaq. Things were in this
state when Babur entered the country in 910 AH. (Erskine).

4 var. Upian, a few miles north of Charikar.

> Suhail (Canopus) is a most conspicuous star in Afghanistan ; it gives its name to
the south, which is never called Janib but Suhail ; the rising of Suhail marks one of
their seasons (Erskine). The honour attaching to this star is due to its seeming to
rise out of Arabia Felix.

© The lines are in the Preface to the Anwar-¢-suhatli (Lights of Canopus).


Fol, 125.


, 1250.


1, 126.


~ ASS eT “ re Ok


196 KABUL | 402


The Sun was a spear’s-length hight when we reatied the foo
of the Sanjid (Jujube)-valley and dismounted. Our scouting


braves fell in with Sherak below the Qara-bagh,? near Aikari. f
yar, and straightway got to grips with him. After a little of


some sort of fighting, our men took the upper hand, hurried their


adversaries off, unhorsed 70-80 serviceable braves and brought — a
them in. We gave Sherak his life and he took service with us,


(7. Death of Walt of Khusrau.)


The various clans and tribes whom Khusrau Shah, without
troubling himself about them, had left in Qindiiz, and also the
Mughil horde, were in five or six bodies (6#/a@k). One of those
belonging to Badakhshan,—it was the Rista-hazara,—came, with
Sayyidim ‘Ali darbdn,3 across the Panjhir-pass to this camp,


did me obeisance and took service with me. Another body

came under Ayib’s Yiisuf and Ayib’s Bihlil; it also took -
service with me. Another came from Khutlan, under Khusrau

Shah’s younger brother, Wali; another, consisting of the F P

(Mughil) tribesmen (azdq) who had been located in Yilanchag,
Nikdiri (?), and the Qiindiiz country, came also. The last- a
named two came by Andar-ab and Sar-i-ab,4 meaning to cross
by the Panjhir-pass; at Sar-i-ab the tribesmen were ahead;
Wali came up behind ; they held the road, fought and beat 4
him. He himself fled to the Atizbegs,3 and Shaibaq Khan had


his head struck off in the Square (Ché@r-si#) of Samarkand ; his
followers, beaten and plundered, came on with the tribesmen,


and like these, took service with me. With them came Sayyid a


Yisuf Beg (the Grey-wolfer).
(7. Kabul gained.)


From that camp we marched to the Aq-sarai meadow of the & 2


Qara-bagh and there dismounted. Khusrau Shah’s people were


« “Die Kirghis-qazzaq driicken die Sonnen-héhe in Pikenaus” (von Schwarz, p. 124).
2 presumably, dark with shade, as in gard-yighdch, the hard-wood elm (f. 476 and

note to zarwdan).

3 z.e. Sayyid Muhammad ‘Ali, the door-ward. These d#/aks seem likely to have
been groups of 1,000 fighting-men (Turki JZ77).

4 In-the-water and Water-head.

5 Wali went from his defeat to Khwast ; wrote to Mahmiid Adzbeg in Qiindiz to
ask protection; was fetched to Qiindiz by Muh Salih, the author of the Shazbani-
nama, and forwarded from Qiindiiz to Samarkand (Sh. N. cap. Ixiii). Cf. f. 294.


ee


910 AH.—JUNE 14TuH 1504 to JUNE 41TH 1505 AD. 197


well practised in oppression and violence ; they tyrannized over
one after another till at last I had up one of Sayyidim ‘Ali’s
good braves to my Gate’ and there beaten for forcibly taking
a jar of oil, There and then he just died under the blows ; his
example kept the rest down.

We took counsel in that camp whether or not to go at once
against Kabul. Sayyid Yusuf and some others thought that,
as winter was near, our first move should be into Lamghan,
from which place action could be taken as advantage offered.
Baqi Beg and some others saw it good to move on Kabul at
once; this plan was adopted; we marched forward and dis-
mounted in Aba-qiiriiq.

My mother and the belongings left behind in Kahmard
rejoined us at Aba-qiriig. They had been in great danger,
the particulars of which are these :—Sherim Taghai had gone
to set Khusrau Shah on his way for Khurasan, and this done,
was to fetch the families from Kahmard. When he reached
Dahanah, he found he was not his own master ; Khusrau Shah
went on with him into Kahmard, where was his sister’s son,
Ahmad-i-qasim. These two took up an altogether wrong
position towards the families in Kahmard. Hereupon a number
of Bagi Beg’s Mughils, who were with the families, arranged
secretly with Sherim Taghai to lay hands on Khusrau Shah
and Ahmad-i-qasim. The two heard of it, fled along the
Kahmard-valley on the Ajar side? and made for Khurasan.
To bring this about was really what Sherim Taghai and the
Mughils wanted. Set free from their fear of Khusrau Shah by
his flight, those in charge of the families got them out of Ajar,
but when they reached Kahmard, the Saqanchi (var. Asiqanchi)
tribe blocked the road, like an enemy, and plundered the
families of most of Bagi Beg’s mens They made prisoner
Qul-i-bayazid’s little son, Tizak ; he came into Kabul three or
four years later. The plundered and unhappy families crossed
by the Qibchaq-pass, as we snes done, and they rejoined.us in
Aba-qirig.


* z.e. where justice was administered, at this time, outside Babur’s tent.
? They would pass Ajar and make for the main road over the Dandan-shikan Pass.
3 The clansmen may have obeyed Ahmad’s orders in thus holding up the families.


Fol. 1264.


l. 127.


l. 1276.


198 KABUL = Wee


Leaving that camp we went, with one night’s ‘hae ae the
Chalak-meadow, and there dismounted. After counsel taken,
it was decided to lay siege to Kabul, and we marched forward. —
With what men of the centre there were, I dismounted between ~
Haidar 7agzs* garden and the tomb of Qul-i-bayazid, the


Taster (6akawal) ;? Jahangir Mirza, with the men of the right, Re
dismounted in my great Four-gardens (Char-bagh), Nasir


Mirza, with the left, in the meadow of Qitliq-qadam’s tomb.
People of ours went repeatedly to confer with Muqim ; they
sometimes brought excuses back, sometimes words making for
agreement. His tactics were the sequel of his dispatch, directly
after Sherak’s defeat, of a courier to his father and elder brother
(in Qandahar); he made delays because he was hoping in them.

One day our centre, right, and left were ordered to put on
their mail and their horses’ mail, to go close to the town, and
to display their equipment so as to strike terror on those within. __
Jahangir Mirza and the right went straight forward by the
Kicha-bagh ;3 I, with the centre, because there was water,
went along the side of Qitliq-qadam’s tomb to a mound
facing the rising-ground;+ the van collected above Qiutliq-
qadam’s bridge,—at that time, however, there was no bridge.
When the braves, showing themselves off, galloped close up
to the Curriers’-gate,5 a few who had come out through it fled
in again without making any stand. A crowd of Kabulis who
had come out to see the sight raised a great dust when they
ran away from the high slope of the glacis of the citadel
(ze. Bala-hisar). A number of pits had been dug up the rise
between the bridge and the gate, and hidden under sticks and
rubbish ; Sl. Quli Chandg and several others were thrown as
they galloped over them. A few braves of the right exchanged
sword-cuts with those who came out of the town, in amongst

* The name may be from Turki /ag, a horse-shoe, but I.O. 215 f. 102 writes Persian
nagib, the servant who announces arriving guests.

Here, as immediately below, when mentioning the Char-bagh and the tomb of
Qitlig-qadam, Babur uses names acquired by the places at a subsequent date. In
910 AH. the Taster was alive ; the Char-bagh was bought by Babur in 911 AH., and
Qitliq-qadam fought at Kanwaha i in 933 AH.

3 The Kicha-bagh is still a garden about 4 miles from Kabul on the north-west and
divided from it by a low hill-pass. There is still a bridge on the way (Erskine).


4 hope ap ryotid that on which the Bala-hisr stood, the glacis of a few lines further.
5 Cf. f. 130.


910 AH.—_JUNE 14rx 1504 ro JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 199


the lanes and gardens, but as there was no order to engage,
having done so much, they retired.

Those in the fort becoming much perturbed, Muqim made
offer through the begs, to submit and surrender the town. Baqi
Beg his mediator, he came and waited on me, when all fear was
chased from his mind by our entire kindness and favour. It was
settled that next day he should march out with retainers and
following, goods and effects, and should make the town over to
us. Havingin mind the good practice Khusrau Shah’s retainers
had had in indiscipline and longhandedness, we appointed
Jahangir Mirza and Nasir Mirza with the great and household
begs, to escort Muqim’s family out of Kabul? and to bring out
Mugim himself with his various dependants, goods and effects.
Camping-ground was assigned to him at Tipa.2 When the
Mirzas and the Begs went at dawn to the Gate, they saw much
mobbing and tumult of the common people, so they sent me a
man to say, “ Unless you come yourself, there will be no holding
these people in.” In the end I got to horse, had two or three
persons shot, two or three cut in pieces, and so stamped the rising
down. Mugim and his belongings then got out, safe and sound,
and they betook themselves to Tipa.

It was in the last ten days of the Second Rabi‘ (Oct. 1504 AD.) 3
that without a fight, without an effort, by Almighty God’s bounty
and mercy, I obtained and made subject to me Kabul and Ghazni
and their dependent districts.


DESCRIPTION OF KABUL4


The Kabul country is situated in the Fourth climate and
in the midst of cultivated lands5 On the east it has the


* One of Mugqim’s wives was a Timirid, Babur’s first-cousin, the daughter of
Aitligh Beg Xa@su/z; another was Bibi Zarif Khatin, the mother of that Mah-chichiiq,
whose anger at her marriage to Babur’s faithful Qasim Kikiildash has filled some
pages of history (Gulbadan’s H.N. s.. Mah-chiichiiq and Erskine’s B. and FI. i, 348).

2 Some 9m. north of Kabul on the road to Aq-sarai.

3 The Hai. MS. (only) writes First Rabi but the Second better suits the near
approach of winter.

4 Elph. MS. fol. 97; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 1024 and 217 f. 85; Mems. p. 136.
Useful books of the early 19th century, many of them referring to the Babur-ndma,
are Conolly’s Zyravels, Wood’s journey, Elphinstone’s Cazbul, Burnes’ Cadool,
Masson’s Warrative, Lord’s and Leech’s articles in JASB 1838 and in Burnes’ Reports
(India Office Library), Broadfoot’s Refort in RGS Supp. Papers vol. I.

5 f. 16 where Farghana is said to be on the limit of cultivation.


Fol. 128.


200 KABUL ad: ahd "


Lamghanat,' Parashawar (Pashawar), Hash(t)-nagar and. so
of the countries of Hindiistan, On the west it has the
mountain region in which are Karnid(?) and Ghir, now the
refuge and dwelling-places of the Hazara and Nikdiri (var.
Nikudari) tribes. On the north, separated from it by the range __
of Hindii-kush, it has the Qiindiiz and Andar-ab countries.
On the south, it has Farmil, Naghr (var. Naghz), Banni 7 ae
Afghanistan.? 4


(a. Town and environs of Kabul.)


The Kabul district itself is of small extent, has its greatest
length from east to west, and is girt round by mountains. Its
walled-town connects with one of these, rather a low one known
as Shah-of-Kabul because at some time a (Hindi) Shah of
Kabul built a residence on its summit.3 Shah-of-Kabul begins
at the Dirrin narrows and ends at those of Dih-i-yaq‘tb*;
it may be 4 miles (2 sharZ) round ; its skirt is covered with
gardens fertilized from a canal which was brought along the
hill-slope in the time of my paternal uncle, Atligh Beg Mirza
by his guardian, Wais Ataka.5 The water of this canal comes
to an end in a retired corner, a quarter known as Kul-kina®


« f, 1316. To find these ¢i#mdus here classed with what was not part of Kabul
suggest a clerical omission of ‘‘ beyond” or ‘‘east of” (Lamghanat). It may be
more correct to write Lamghanat, since the first syllable may be /am, fort. The
modern form Laghman. is not used in the Aabur-ndma, nor, it may be added is
Paghman for Pamghan.

2 It will be observed that Babur limits the name Afghanistan to the countries
inhabited by Afghan tribesmen ; they are chiefly those south of the road from Kabul
to Pashawar (Erskine). See Vigne, p. 102, for a boundary between the Afghans and
Khurasan.

3 Al-birini’s Zzdika writes of both Turk and Hindi-shahi Kings of Kabul. See
Raverty’s Votes p. 62 and Stein’s Shahi Kings of Kabul. The mountain is 7592 ft.
above the sea, some 1800 ft. therefore above the town.

4 The Kabul-river enters the Char-dih plain by the Dih-i-yaq‘ib narrows, and
leaves it by those of Dirrin. Cf. S.A. War, Plan p. 288 and Plan of action at
Char-asiya (Four-mills), the second shewing an off-take which may be Wais Ataka’s
canal. See Vigne, p. 163 and Raverty’s Votes pp. 69 and 689.

5 This, the Bala-jiii (upper-canal) was a four-mill stream and in Masson’s time, as
now, supplied water to the gardens round Babur’s tomb. Masson found in Kabul
honoured descendants of Wais Ataka (ii, 240).

© But for a, perhaps negligible, shortening of its first vowel, this form of the name
would describe the normal end of an irrigation canal, a little pool, but other forms
with other meanings are open to choice, e.g. small hamlet (Pers. 2z/), or some
compound containing Pers. gw/, a rose, in its plain or metaphorical senses. Jarrett’s:
Ayin-i-akbari writes Gul-kinah, little rose (?). Masson (ii, 236) mentions a similar
pleasure-resort, Sanji-taq.


}
:
4


%
:
4
}
;
4


910 AH.—_JUNE 14TH 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 201


where much debauchery has gone on. About this place it
sometimes used to be said, in jesting parody of Khwaja Hafiz’,
—“Ah! the happy, thoughtless time when, with our names in
ill-repute, we lived days of days at Kul-kina!”

East of Shah-of-Kabil and south of the walled-town lies
a large pool? about a 2 miles [sarvz| round. From the town
side of the mountain three smallish springs issue, two near Kul-
kina ; Khwaja Shami’s3 tomb is at the head of one; Khwaja
Khizr’s Qadam-gah* at the head of another, and the third is at
a place known as Khwaja Raushanai, over against Khwaja
‘Abdu’s-samad. Ona detached rock of a spur of Shah-of-Kabul,
known as ‘Uqabain,5 stands the citadel of Kabul with the great
walled-town at its north end, lying high in excellent air, and
overlooking the large pool already mentioned, and also three
meadows, namely, Siyah-sang (Black-rock), Siing-qitrghan
(Fort-back), and Chalak (Highwayman ?),—a most beautiful
outlook when the meadows are green. The north-wind does
not fail Kabul in the heats; people call it the Parwan-wind © ;
it makes a delightful temperature in the windowed houses on
the northern part of the citadel. In praise of the citadel of
Kabul, Mulla Muhammad 7alzb Mu‘ammai (the Riddler)?


* The original ode, with which the parody agrees in rhyme and refrain, is in the
Diwan, s.l. Dal (Brockhaus ed. 1854, i, 62 and lith. ed. p. 96). See Wilberforce
Clarke’s literal translation i, 286 (H.B.). A marginal note to the Haidarabad Codex
gives what appears to be a variant of one of the rhymes of the parody.

? auligh kul; some 3m. round in Erskine’s time ; mapped as a swamp in S.A.
War p. 288.

3 A marginal note to the Hai. Codex explains this name to be an abbreviation of
Khwaja Shamsi’d-din /az-daz (or Jahan-baz; Masson, ii, 279 and iii, 93).

4 z.e. the place made holy by an impress of saintly foot-steps.

> Two eagles or, Two poles, used for punishment. Vigne’s illustration (p. 161)
clearly shows the spur and the detached rock. _ Erskine (p. 137 n.) says that ‘Uqabain
seems to be the hill, known in his day as ‘Ashiqan-i-‘arifan, which connects with
Babur Badshah. See Raverty’s Notes p. 68. :

® During most of the year this wind rushes through the Hindi-kush (Parwan)-pass ;
it checks the migration of the birds (f. 142), and it may be the cause of the deposit
of the Running-sands (Burnes, p. 158). Cf. Wood, p. 124.

7 He was Badi‘wz-zaman’s Sadr before serving Babur; he died in 918 au.
(1512 AD.), in the battle of Kil-i-malik where ‘Ubaidu’l-lah <Aaszbeg defeated
Babur. He may be identical with Mir Husain the Riddler of f. 181, but seems not
to be Mulla Muh. Badakhshi, also a Riddler, because the Habibu’s-siyar (ii, 343
and 344) gives this man a separate notice. Those interested in enigmas can find
one made by Talib on the name Yahya (HLS. ii, 344). Sharafu’d-din ‘Ali Vazdi,


the author of the Zafar-nama, wrote a book about a novel kind of these puzzles
(T.R. p. 84).


Fol. 1284.


. 129.


|. 1298.


202 KABUL


. . vas 5 , 5 ven
used to recite this couplet, composed on Badi‘u’z-zaman M
name -—
Drink wine in the castle of Kabul and send the cup round without pause ;
For Kabul is mountain, is river, is city, is lowland in one.*


(6. Kabul as a trading-town.)


Just as ‘Arabs call every place outside ‘Arab (Arabia), ‘Ajam, _
so Hindistanis call every place outside Hindiistan, Khurasan. —
There are two trade-marts on the land-route between Hindistar
and Khurasan ; one is Kabul, the other, Qandahar. To Kabul
caravans come from Kashghar,? Farghana, Turkistan,Samarkand,
Bukhara, Balkh, Hisar and Badakhshan. To Qandahar they
come from Khurasan. Kabul is an excellent trading-centre;
if merchants went to Khita or to Riim,3 they might make no
higher profit. Down to Kabul every year come 7, 8, or 10,000
horses and up to it, from Hindistan, come every year caravans
of 10, 15 or 20,000 heads-of-houses, bringing slaves (4arda), white
cloth, sugar-candy, refined and common sugars, and aromatic
roots. Many a trader is not content with a profit of 30 or 40
on 10.4 In Kabul can be had the products of Khurasan, Rim,
‘Iraq and Chin (China) ; while it is Hindiistan’s own market.


(c. Products and climate of Kabul.)


In the country of Kabul, there are hot and cold districts close
to one another. In one day, a man may go out of the town of _
Kabul to where snow never falls, or he may go, in two sidereal
hours, to where it never thaws, unless when the heats are such
that it cannot possibly lie. | |

Fruits of hot and cold climates are to be had in the districts
near the town. Amongst those of the cold climate, there are
had in the town the grape, pomegranate, apricot, apple, quince,


* The original couplet is as follows :—


Bakhir dar arg-t Kabul mai, bagardin kisa piy dar piy,
Kah ham koh ast, u ham darya, u ham shahr ast, u ham sahr@.


What Talib’s words may be inferred to conceal is the opinion that like Badi‘u’z-zaman
and like the meaning of his name, Kabul is the Wonder-of-the-world. (Cf. M. Gargin
de Tassy’s Rhétorigue [p. 165], for ces combinaisons énigmatiques.)

* All MSS. do not mention Kashghar.

3 Khita (Cathay) is Northern China ; Chin (zzfra) is China; Riim is Turkey and
particularly the provinces near Trebizond (Erskine).

4 300% to 400% (Erskine).


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 10 JUNE 41x 1505 AD. 203


pear, peach, plum, szzzd, almond and walnut.* I had cuttings
of the a/a-bala ? brought there and planted ; they grew and have
done well. Of fruits of the hot climate people bring into the
town ;—from the Lamghanat, the orange, citron, amlik (diospyrus
lotus), and sugar-cane ; this last I had had brought and planted
there ;3—from Nijr-au (Nijr-water), they bring the 77/-ghiza,*
and, from the hill-tracts, much honey. Bee-hives are in use; it
is only from towards Ghazni, that no honey comes.

The rhubarb5 of the Kabul district is good, its quinces and
plums very good, so too its dadrang ;° it grows an excellent
grape, known as the water-grape” Kabul wines are heady,
those of the Khwaja Khawand Sa‘id hill-skirt being famous for
their strength ; at this time however I can only repeat the praise
of others about them :—®


The flavour of the wine a drinker knows ;
What chance have sober men to know it?


Kabul is not fertile in grain, a four or five-fold return is
reckoned good there ; nor are its melons first-rate, but they are
not altogether bad when grown from Khurasan seed.

It has a very pleasant climate; if the world has another so
pleasant, it is not known. Even in the heats, one cannot sleep


* Persian sézjid, Brandis, eleagnus hortensis; Erskine (Mems. p. 138) jujube,
presumably the sézyphus ujuba of Speede, Supplement p. 86. Turki ydngag, walnut,
has several variants, of which the most marked is yanghkag. For a good account of
Kabul fruits see Masson, ii, 230.

2 a kind of plum(?). It seems unlikely to be a cherry since Babur does not mention
cherries as good in his old dominions, and Firminger (p. 244) makes against it as
introduced from India. Steingass explains a/#-ba/a by ‘‘ sour-cherry, an armarylla” ;
if sour, is it the Morello cherry ?

3 The sugar-cane was seen in abundance in Lan-po (Lamghan) by a Chinese pilgrim
(Beale, p. 90); Babur’s introduction of it may have been into his own garden only in
Ningnahar (f. 1326).

4 z.e. the seeds of Pinus Gerardiana.

5 yawashlir. The green leaf-stalks (chakri) of rébes rheum are taken into Kabul
in mid-April from the Pamghan-hills ; a week later they are followed by the blanched
and tended vawdash (Masson, ii, 7). See Gul-badan’s H.N. trs. p. 188, Vigne, p. 100
and 107, Masson, ii, 230, Conolly, i, 213.

© a large green fruit, shaped something like a citron ; also a large sort of cucumber
(Erskine).

7 The s&fibi, a grape praised by Babur amongst Samarkandi fruits, grows in Koh-
daman ; another well-known grape of Kabul is the long stoneless Ausazni, brought by
Afghan traders into Hindistan in round, flat boxes of poplar wood (Vigne, p. 172).

® An allusion, presumably, to the renouncement of wine made by Babur and some
of his followers in 933 AH. (1527 AD. f. 312). He may have had ‘Umar AKhayyam’s
quatrain in mind, ‘* Wine’s power is known to wine-bibbers alone” (Whinfield’s
2nd ed. 1901, No. 164).


15


ol. 130.


204 KABUL |


climate, the cold is SSSR


(da. Meadows of Kabul.)


There are good meadows on the four sides of Kabul.
excellent one, Sing-qirghan, is some 4 miles (2 kuroh) to 1 :
north-east ; it has grass fit for horses and few mosquitos, To 4
the north-west is the Chalak meadow, some 2 miles (1 shar't)
away, a large one but in it mosquitos greatly trouble the horses. —
On the west is the Dirrin, in fact there are two, Tipa and onc a
nadir (var. nawar),—if two are counted here, there would be five —
in all. Each of these is about 2 miles from the town ; both arc
small, have grass good for horses, and no mosquitos ; Kabul has ©
no others so good. On the east is the Siyah-sang meadow with | ‘
Qitliq-qadam’s tomb? between it and the Currier’s-gate ; it is q
not worth much because, in the heats, it swarms with mosquitos. — Br.
Kamari3 meadow adjoins it ; counting this in, the meadows of _
Kabul would be six, but they are always spoken of as four. q


(e. Mountain-passes into Kabul.)


_ The country of Kabul is a fastness hard for a foreign ton to 4
make his way into. B
The Hindii-kush mountains, which separate Kabul from Balkh, ;
Qiindiz and Badakhshan, are crossed by seven roads.4 Three


1 pistin, usually of sheep-skin. For the wide range of temperature at Kabul in
24 hours, see Ency. Brtt. art. Afghanistan. The winters also vary much in severity
(Burnes, p. 273). oi

? Index s.2. As he fought at Kanwaha, he will have been buried after March
1527 AD. ; this entry therefore will have been made later. The Curriers’-gate is the
later Lahor-gate (Masson, ii, 259).

3 Index s.z.

4 For lists of the Hindii-kush passes see Leech’s Report VII; Yule’s Intvodactarst
Essay to Wood’s Journey 2nd ed. ; PRGS 1879, Markham’s art. p. 121.

The highest co/s on the passes here enumerated by Babur are,—Khawak 11,640 ft.—
Tal, height not known,—Parandi 15,984 ft.—Baj-gah (Toll-place) 12,000 ft. —Walian
(Saints) 15,100 ft.—Chahar-dar (Four-doors) 18,900 ft. and Shibr-tii 9800 ft. In
considering the labour of their ascent and descent, the general high level, north and
south of them, should be borne in mind ; e.g. Charikar (Char-yak-kar) stands 5200 ft.
and Kabul itself at 5780 ft. above the sea.


Y


= a ti se i ha” 2 ig


910 AH.—JUNE 14rx 1504 To JUNE 41H 1505 AD. 205


of these lead out of Panjhir (Panj-sher), vzz. Khawak, the upper-
most, Til, the next lower, and Bazarak.* Of the passes on them,
the one on the Til road is the best, but the road itself is rather
the longest whence, seemingly, it is called Tal. Bazarak is the
most direct ; like Tul, it leads over into Sar-i-ab ; as it passes
through Parandi, local people call its main pass, the Parandi.
Another road leads up through Parwan; it has seven minor
passes, known as Haft-bacha (Seven-younglings), between
Parwan and its main pass (Baj-gah). It’is joined at its main
pass by two roads from Andar-ab, which go on to Parwan by
it. This is a road full of difficulties. Out of Ghir-bund, again,
three roads lead over. The one next to Parwan, known as the
Yangi-yil pass (New-road), goes through Walian to Khinjan ;
next above this is the Qipchaq road, crossing to where the water
of Andar-ab meets the Sirkh-ab (Qizil-sii); this also is an
excellent road; and the third leads over the Shibr-tii pass ;?
those crossing by this in the heats take their way by Bamian
and Saighan, but those crossing by it in winter, go on by Ab-dara
(Water-valley).3 Shibr-tii excepted, all the Hindii-kush roads
are closed for three or four months in winter,4 because no road
through a valley-bottom is passable when the waters are high.
If any-one thinks to cross the Hindi-kush at that time, over the
mountains instead of through a valley-bottom, his journey is
hard indeed. The time to cross is during the three or four
‘autumn months when the snow is less and the waters are low.
Whether on the mountains or in the valley-bottoms, Kafir high-
waymen are not few.
The road from Kabul into Khurasan passes through Qandahar ;
it is quite level, without a pass.


 7.e. the hollow, long, and small-bazar roads respectively.  Panjhir is explained
by Hindiis to be Panj-sher, the five lion-sons of Pandu (Masson, iii, 168).

2 Shibr is a Hazara district between the head of the Ghiir-bund valley and Bamian.
It does not seem to be correct to omit the /# from the name of the pass. Persian 7a,
turn, twist (syn. Zick) occurs in other names of local passes ; to read it here as a turn
agrees with what is said of Shibr-tii pass as not crossing but turning the Hindii-kush
(Cunningham). Lord uses the same wording about the Haji-ghat (var. -kak etc.)
traverse of the same spnr, which ‘‘turns the extremity of the Hindii-kush”. See
Cunningham’s Ancient Geography, i, 25; Lord’s Ghir-bund (JASB 1838 p. 528),
Masson, iii, 169 and Leech’s Report VII.

3 Perhaps through Jalmish into Saighan.

4 z.e, they are closed.


Fol. 1308.


Fol. 131.


206 KABUL


rather a low pass through the Khaibar mountains, ae
way of Bangash, another by way of Naghr (var. Naghz),? and
another through Farmil ;? the passes being low also in the thee’
last-named. These isos are all reached from three ferries over — ’
the Sind. Those who take the Nil-ab3 ferry, come on through __
the Lamghanat.4 In winter, however, people ford the Sind- —
water (at Haru) above its junction with the Kabul-water,5
ford this also. In most of my expeditions into Hindistat


when I came, defeated SI. Ibrahim and conquered the country,
I crossed by boat at Nil-ab. Except at the one place mentioned —
above, the Sind-water can be crossed only by boat. Those again,
who cross at Din-kot ® go on through Bangash. Those crossing” : |
at Chaupara, if they take the Farmil road, go on to Ghazni, —
or, if they go by the Dasht, go on to Qandahar.7


%
ae


* It was unknown in Mr. Erskine’s day (Mems. p. 140). _ Several of the routes in —
Raverty’s Wotes (p. 92 etc.) allow it to be located as on the Iri-ab, near to or identical —
with Baghzan, 35 4urohs (70 m.) s.s.e. of Kabul.

? Farmil, about the situation of which Mr. Erskine was in doubt, is now markeden
in maps, Urghin being its principal village. a

3 15 miles below Atak (Erskine). Mr. Erskine notes that he found no eo
previous to Abi’1]-fazl’s, for calling the Indus the Nil-ab, and that to find one wo
solve an ancient geographical difficulty. This difficulty, m my husband suggests, was bs
Alexander’s supposition that the Indus was the Nile. In books grouping round the —
Babur-nama, the name Nil-ab is not applied to the Indus, but to the ferry-station _ i
on that river, said to owe its name to a spring of azure water on its eastern side.
(Cf. Afzal Khan Xhattak, R.’s Notes p. 447.) ie

I find the name Nil-ab applied to the Kabul-river :—1. to its Arghandi affluent —
(Cunningham, p. 17, Map); 2. through its boatman class, the Nil-abis of alps
Jalalabad and Kinar (G. of I. 1907, art. Kabul) ; 3. inferentially to it as a tributary —
of the Indus (D’Herbélot); 4. to it near its confluence with the grey, silt-laden :
Indus, as blue by contrast (Sayyid Ghulam-i-muhammad, R.’s Motes p. 34). (For
Nil-ab (Naulibis ?) in Ghir-bund see Cunningham, p. 32 and Masson, iii, 169.) OM

* By one of two routes perhaps,—either by the Khaibar-Ningnahar—Jagdalik road,
or along the north bank of the Kabul-river, through Goshta to the crossing where, -
in 1879, the roth Hussars met with disaster. See S.A. War, Map 2 and p. 63; 4
Leech’s Reports II and IV (Fords of the Indus) ; and R.’s WVo#es p. 44.

* Haru, Leech’s Harroon, apparently, 10m. above Atak. The text might be read —
to mean that both rivers were forded near their confluence, but, finding no warrant . ;
for supposing the Kabul-river fordable below Jalalabad, I have guided the translation
accordingly ; ; this may be wrong and may conceal a change in the river. e

° known also as Dhan-kot and as Mu‘aggam-nagar (M/a‘asirw’l-‘umra i, 249 and
A.N. trs. H.B. index s.2. Dhan-kot). It was on the east bank of the Indus,
probably near modern Kala-bagh, and was washed away not before 956 AH. (1549 AD.
H. Beveridge).

7 Chaupara seems, from f. 1484, to be the Chapari of Survey Map 1889. Babur’s
Dasht is modern Daman.


r
fos


wary
Ai
oe. ¢
aa


“é
|


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 207


(f. Inhabitants of Kabul.)


There are many differing tribes in the Kabul country ; in its
dales and plains are Turks and clansmen’ and ‘Arabs; in its
town and in many villages, Sarts; out in the districts and also Fol. 1314.
in villages are the Pashai, Paraji, Tajik, Birki and Afghan tribes.
In the western mountains are the Hazara and Nikdiri tribes,
some of whom speak the Mughili tongue. In the north-eastern
mountains are the places of the K€afirs, such as Kitiir (Gawar ?)
and Gibrik. To the south are the places of the Afghan tribes.

Eleven or twelve tongues are spoken in Kabul,—‘Arabi,
Persian, Turki, Mughili, Hindi, Afghani, Pashai, Paraji, Gibri,
Birki and Lamghani. If there be another country with so many
differing tribes and such a diversity of tongues, it is not known.


(e. Sub-divistons of the Kabul country.)


The [Kabul] country has fourteen ¢iémdans.?

Bajaur, Sawad and Hash-nagar may at one time have been
dependencies of Kabul, but they now have no resemblance to
cultivated countries (wz/@yat), some lying desolate because of
the Afghans, others being now subject to them.

In the east of the country of Kabul is the Lamghanat, 5 ¢amans
and 2 dbuliks of cultivated lands3 The largest of these is
Ningnahar, sometimes written Nagarahar in the histories.4 Its

_darogha’s residence is in Adinapir,5 some 13 yighach east of
Kabul by a very bad and tiresome road, going in three or four
places over small hill-passes, and in three or four others, through Fol. 132.


* aimag, used usually of Mughils, I think. It may be noted that Lieutenant
Leech compiled a vocabulary of the tongue of the Mughil Aimaq in Qandahar and
Harat (JASB 1838, p. 785).

2 The Ayin-z-akbari account of Kabul both uses and supplements the Babur-ndma.

3 wiz. ‘Ali-shang, Alangar and Mandrawar (the Lamghanat proper), Ningnahar
(with its d%/a#k, Kama), Kinar-with-Nir-gal, (and the two dudaks of Nir-valley and
Chaghan-sarai).

4 See Appendix E, Ox Nagarahara.

5 The name Adinapir is held to be descended from ancient Udyanapira (Garden-
town) ; its ancestral form however was applied to Nagarahara, apparently, in the
Baran-Sirkh-rid d#-a4, and not to Babur’s darogha’s seat. The Sirkh-rid’s deltaic
mouth was a land of gardens; when Masson visited Adinapir he went from Bala-bagh
(High-garden) ; this appears to stand where Babur locates his Bagh-i-wafa, but he
was shown a garden he took to be this one of Babur’s, a mile higher up the Siarkh-
rid. A later ruler made the Char-bagh of maps. It may be mentioned that Bala-
bagh has become in some maps Rozabad (Garden-town). See Masson, i, 182 and
iii, 186; R.’s Wortes ; and Wilson’s Ariana Antigua, Masson’s art.


. 1320,


208 KABUL ess.


narrows.t So long as there was no cultivation alors! it, the


Khirilchi and other Afghan thieves used to make it their beat, — |


but it has become safe? since I had it peopled at Qara-ti,3 below —


Qiiriiq-sai. The hot and cold climates are separated on this


road by the pass of Badam-chashma (Almond-spring) ; on its
Kabul side snow falls, none at Qiirtiq-sai, towards the Lamghanat.4


After descending this pass, another world comes into view, other
trees, other plants (or grasses), other animals, and other manners”
and customs of men. Ningnahar is nine torrents (tdigusz-raid).5


It grows good crops of rice and corn, excellent and abundant
oranges, citrons and pomegranates. In 914 AH. (1508-9 AD.)


I laid out the Four-gardens, known as the Bagh-i-wafa (Garden- a


of-fidelity), on a rising-ground, facing south and having the
Sirkh-riid between it and Fort Adinapir.® There oranges, citrons
and pomegranates grow in abundance. The year I defeated


Pahar Khan and took Lahor and Dipalpiir,7 I had plantains — ; :
(bananas) brought and planted there ; they did very well. The q


year before I had had sugar-cane planted there ; it also did well ;
some of it was sent to Bukhara and Badakhshan.° The garden
lies high, has running-water close at hand, and a mild winter
climate. In the middle of it, a one-mill stream flows constantly
past the little hill on which are the four garden-plots. In the


south-west part of it there is a reservoir, 10 by 10,9 round which a


* One of these ¢amgi is now a literary asset in Mr. Kipling’s JZy Lord the Elephant.
Babur’s 13 y. represent some 82 miles; on f. 1374 the Kabul-Ghazni road of 14 y.
represents some 85; in each case the yaghach works out at over six miles (Index
s.n. yighich and Vigne, p. 454). Sayyid Ghulam-i-muhammad traces this route
minutely (R.’s Motes pp. 57, 59).

2 Masson was shewn ‘‘ Chaghatai castles”, attributed to Babur (iii, 174).

3 Dark-turn, perhaps, as in Shibr-ti, Jal-tii, e¢e. (f. 1304 and note to Shibr-ti).

4 f. 145 where the change is described in identical words, as seen south of the
Jagdalik-pass. The Badam-chashma pass appears to be a traverse of the eastern
rampart of the Tizin-valley.

5 Appendix E, On Nagarahara.

© No record exists of the actual laying-out of the garden ; the work may have been
put in hand during the Mahmand expedition of 914 AH. (f. 216); the name given to
it suggests a gathering there of loyalists when the stress was over of the bad Mughil
rebellion of that year (f. 2164 where the narrative breaks off abruptly in 914 AH. and
is followed by a gap down to 925 AH.—I519 AD.).

7 No annals of 930 AH. are known to exist; from Safar 926 AH. to 932 AH.
(Jan. 1520—-Nov. 1525 AD.) there is a lacuna, Accounts of the expedition are given
by Khafi Khan, i, 47 and Firishta, lith. ed. p. 202.

8 Presumably to his son, Humayin, then’ governor in Badakhshan ; Bukhara also
was under Babur’s rule.

9 here, gaz, yards. Thedimensions 10 by 10, are those enjoined for places of ablution.


4


ra,


910 AH.—_JUNE 14TH 1504 ro JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 209


are orange-trees and a few pomegranates, the whole encircled by
a trefoil-meadow. This is the best part of the garden, a most
beautiful sight when the oranges take colour. Truly that garden
is admirably situated !

The Safed-koh runs along the south of Ningnahar, dividing it
from Bangash ; no riding-road crosses it ; nine torrents (¢#giz-
rid) issue from it.* It is called Safed-koh? because its snow
never lessens ; none falls in the lower parts of its valleys, a half-
day’s journey from the snow-line. Many places along it have
an excellent climate ; its waters are cold and need no ice.

The Sirkh-rid flows along the south of Adinapiir. The fort
stands on a height having a straight fall to the river of some
130 ft. (40-50 garz) and isolated from the mountain behind it on
the north; it is very strongly placed. That mountain runs between
Ningnahar and Lamghan 3; on its head snow falls when it snows
in Kabul, so Lamghanis know when it has snowed in the town.

In going from Kabul into the Lamghanat,s—if people come
by Qiriiq-sai, one road goes on through the Diri-pass, crosses
the Baran-water at Bulan, and so on into the Lamghanat,—
another goes through Qara-ti, below Qiiriiq-sai, crosses the
Baran-water at Ailigh-nir(Great-rock?),and goes into Lamghan
by the pass of Bad-i-pich.5 If however people come by Nijr-ai,
they traverse Badr-ati (Tag-aii), and Qara-nakarigq (?), and go on
through the pass of Bad-i-pich.

t Presumably those of the ¢agisz-rid, supra. Cf. Appendix E, Ox Nagarahara.

2 White-mountain; Pushti, Spin-ghur (or ghar).

3 ze. the Lamghanat proper. The range is variously named ; in (Persian) Siyah-
koh (Black-mountain), which like Turki Qara-tagh may mean non-snowy ; by Tajiks,
Bagh-i-ataka (Foster-father’s garden) ; by Afghans, Kanda-ghur, and by Lamghanis
Koh-i-balan,—Kanda and Bilan both being ferry-stations below it (Masson, iii, 189 ;
also the Times Nov. 20th 1912 for a cognate illustration of diverse naming).

4 A comment made here by Mr. Erskine on changes of name is still appropriate,
but some seeming changes may well be due to varied selection of land-marks. Of the
three routes next described in the text, one crosses as for Mandrawar ; the second, as
for ‘Ali-shang, a little below the outfall of the Tizin-water; the third may take off
from the route, between Kabul and Tag-aii, marked in Col. Tanner’s map (PRGS 1881
p. 180). Cf. R’s Route 11 ; and for Ailigh-nir, Appendix F, Ox the name Nur.

5 The name of this pass has several variants. Its second component, whatever its
form, is usually taken to mean Zass, but to read it here as pass would be redundant,
since Babur writes ‘‘ pass (4é#¢a/) of Bad-i-pich”. Pich occurs as a place name both
east (Pich) and west (Pichghan) of the £#a/, but what would suit the bitter and even
fatal winds of the pass would be to read the name as Whirling-wind (4ad-z-pich).
Another explanation suggests itself from finding a considerable number of pass-names


such as Shibr-ti, Jal-ti, Qara-ti, in which ¢# is a synonym of Zich, turn, twist ; thus
Bad-i-pich may be the local form of Bad-ti, Windy-turn.


Fol. 133.


1330.


210 KABUL Bee


Although Ningnahir is one of the five ¢ésmans of the La:
timan the name Lamghanat applies strictly only to the th
(mentioned below).

One of the three is the ‘Ali-shang ¢#man, to the north off
which are fastness-mountains, connecting with Hindi-kush and
inhabited by Kafirs only. What of Kafiristan lies nearest to
‘Ali-shang, is Mil out of which its torrent issues. The tombof
Lord Lam, father of his Reverence the prophet Nuh (Noa "
is in this ¢émdan. In some histories he is called Lamak
Lamakan. Some people are observed often to change kaf for
chain (k for gh) ; it would seem to be on this account that the
country is called Lamghan.

The second is Alangar. The part of Kafiristan nearest to it
is Gawar (Kawar), out of which its torrent issues (the Gau or
Kau). This torrent joins that of ‘Ali-shang and flows with it
into the Baran-water, below Mandrawar, which is the third ¢aman
of the Lamghanat. Be

Of the two dudiks of Lamghan one is the Nir-valley.27 This —
is a place (yir) without a second 3; its fort ison a beak (démshiiq)
of rock in the mouth of the valley, and has a torrent on each —
side ; its rice is grown on steep terraces, and it can be traversed
by one road only.4 — It has the orange, citron and other fruits of
hot climates in abundance, a few dates even. Trees cover the
banks of both the torrents below the fort ; many are am/ik, the
fruit of which some Turks call gara-yimish;5 here they are
many, but none have been seen elsewhere. The valley grows
grapes also, all trained on trees.° Its wines are those of
Lamghan that have reputation. Two sorts of grapes are grown,


* See Masson, iii, 197 and 289. Both in Pashai and Lamghani, /aém means fort.

2 See Appendix F, On the name Dara-i-niir. ,

3 ghair mukarrar. Babur may allude to the remarkable change men have wrought
in ue valley-bottom (Appendix F, for Col. Tanner’s account of the valley).

* f. 154.

5 diospyrus lotus, the European date-plum, supposed to be one of the fruits eaten
by the Lotophagi. It is purple, has bloom and is of the size of a pigeon’s egg or a
cherry. See Watts’ Economic Products of India ; Brandis’ Forest Trees, Illustrations ;
and Speede’s /ndian Hand-book.

® As in Lombardy, perhaps ; in Luhigur vines are clipped into standards ; in most
other places in Afghanistan they are planted in deep trenches and allowed to run over
the intervening ridges or over wooden framework. In the narrow Khilm-valley they
are trained up poplars so as to secure them the maximum of sun. See Wood’s Report
VI p. 27; Bellew’s Afghanistan p. 175 and A/ems. p. 142 note.


910 AH.—JUNE 14rH 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 211


the arah-tashi and the sihdn-tashi ;* the first are yellowish, the
second, full-red of fine colour. The first make the more cheering
wine, but it must be said that neither wine equals its reputation
for cheer. High up in one of its glens, apes (sazmiiz) are found,
none below. Those people (ze. Niris) used to keep swine but
they have given it up in our time.?

Another ¢éman of Lamghan is Kinar-with-Nir-gal. It lies
somewhat out-of-the-way, remote from the Lamghanat, with its
borders in amongst the Kafir lands ; on these accounts its people
give in tribute rather little of what they have. The Chaghan-
sarai water enters it from the north-east, passes on into the duduk
of Kama, there joins the Baran-water and with that flows east.

Mir Sayyid ‘Ali Hamadani3—God’s mercy on him !—coming
here as he journeyed, died 2 miles (1 shar‘Z) above Kiinar. His
disciples carried his body to Khutlan. A shrine was erected at
the honoured place of his death, of which I made the circuit
when I came and took Chaghan-sarai in 920 AH.4

The orange, citron and coriander abound in this caiman.
Strong wines are brought down into it from Kafiristan.

A strange thing is told there, one seeming impossible, but
one told to us again and again. All through the hill-country
above Multa-kundi, vz. in Kiinar, Nir-gal, Bajaur, Sawad and


(Author's note to Multa-kundi.) As Multa-kundi is known the lower part
of the ¢é#mdan of Kinar-with-Nir-gal; what is below (ze. on the river)
belongs to the valley of Nir and to Atar.®


* Appendix G, On the names of two Niri wines.

* This practice Babur viewed with disgust, the hog being an impure animal according
to Muhammadan Law (Erskine).

3 The Khazinatw l-asfiya (ii, 293) explains how it came about that this saint, one
honoured in Kashmir, was buried in Khutlan. He died in Hazara (Pakli) and there
the Pakli Sultan wished to have him buried, but his disciples, for some unspecified
reason, wished to bury him in Khutlan. In order to decide the matter they invited
the Sultan to remove the bier with the corpse upon it. It could not be stirred from
its place. When, however a single one of the disciples tried to move it, he alone was
able to lift it, and to bear it away on his head. Hence the burial in Khutlan. The
death occurred in 786 AH. (1384 AD.). A point of interest in this legend is that, like the
one to follow, concerning dead women, it shews belief in the living activities of the dead.

4 The MSS. vary between 920 and 925 AH.—neither date seems correct. As the
annals of 925 AH. begin in Muharram, with Babur to the east of Bajaur, we surmise
that the Chaghan-sarai affair may have occurred on his way thither, and at the end
of 924 AH.

5 karan}, coriandrum sativum.

® some 20-24m. north of Jalalabad. The name Multa-kundi may refer to the
Ram-kundi range, or mean Lower district, or mean Below Kundi. See Biddulph’s
Khowdri Dialect s.n under; R.’s Notes p. 108 and Dict. s.n. kund ; Masson, i, 209.


Fol. 134.


1340.


212 KABUL OS ae ap i sy


thereabouts, it is commonly said that when a woman dies and!
been laid on a bier, she, if she has not been an ill-doer, gives t
bearers such a shake when they lift the bier by its four sides, —
that against their will and hindrance, her corpse falls to the —
ground ; but, if she has done ill, no movement occurs. This :
was heard not only from Kinaris but, again and again, in Bajaur,
Sawad and the whole hill-tract. Haidar-‘ali Bayauré,—a sultan
who governed Bajaur well,—when his mother died, did not weey
or betake himself to lamentation, or put on black, but said, “ Go!
lay her on the bier! if she move not, I will have her burned.” #
They laid her on the bier; the desired movement followed ; —
when he heard that this was so, he put on black and betook ~
himself to lamentation. a

Another dulik is Chaghan-sarai,? a single village with little —
land, in the mouth of Kafiristan ; its people, though Musalman,
mix with the Kafirs and, consequently, follow their customs.3
A great torrent (the Kinar) comes down to it from the north-
east from behind Bajaur, and a smaller one, called Pich, a
comes down out of Kafiristan. Strong yellowish wines are had q
there, not in any way resembling those of the Nir-valley, —
however. The village has no grapes or vineyards of its own; _
its wines are all brought from up the Kafiristan-water and from
Pich-i-kafiristani. a

The Pich Kafirs came to help the villagers when I took the
place. Wine is so commonly used there that every Kafir has 4
his leathern wine-bag (#47¢) at his neck, and drinks wine instead
of water.4


t z7.e. treat her corpse as that of an infidel (Erskine).

* It would suit the position of this village if its name were found to link to the
Turki verb chagmdag, to go out, because it lies in the mouth of a defile (Dahanah-i-koh,
Mountain-mouth) through which the road for KAafiristan goes out past the village.
A not-infrequent explanation of the name to mean White-house, Aq-sarai, may well __
be questioned. Chaghdn, white, is Mughili and it would be less probable for a —
Mughili than for a Turki name to establish itself. Another explanation may lie in
the tribe name Chugani. The two forms chaghan and chaghar may well be due to
the common local interchange in speech of # with 7. (For Dahanah-i-koh see [some]
maps and Raverty’s Bajaur routes. )

3 Nimchas, presumably,—half-bred in custom, perhaps in blood—j; and not
improbably, converted Kafirs. It is useful to remember that Kafiristan was once
bounded, west and south, by the Baran-water. a

4 Kafr wine is mostly poor, thin and, even so, usually diluted with water. When —
kept two or three years, however, it becomes clear and sometimes strong. Sir G. S.
Robertson never saw a KAafir drunk (K@jirs of the Hindii-kush, p. 591).


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 To JUNE 4ruH 1505 AD. 213


Kama, again, though not a separate district but dependent on
Ningnahar, is also called a dulik.* Fol. 135.

Nijr-ai? is another ¢aéman. It lies north of Kabul, in the
Kohistan, with mountains behind it inhabited solely by Kafirs ;
it is a quite sequestered place. It grows grapes and fruits in
abundance. Its people make much wine but, they boil it.
They fatten many fowls in winter, are wine-bibbers, do not pray,
have no scruples and are Kafir-like.3

In the Nijr-ai mountains is an abundance of archa, jilghiza,
bilut and khanjak.4 The first-named three do not. grow above
Nigr-aii but they grow lower, and are amongst the trees of
Hindustan. /t/ghiza-wood is all the lamp the people have; it
burns like a candle and is very remarkable. The flying-squirrel 5
is found in these mountains, an animal larger than a bat and
having a curtain (farda), like a bat’s wing, between its arms and
legs. People often brought one in; it is said to fly, downward
from one tree to another, as far as a giz flies;° I myself have
never seen one fly. Once we put one to a tree; it clambered
up directly and got away, but, when people went after it, it
spread its wings and came down, without hurt, as if it had flown.
Another of the curiosities of the Nijr-ai mountains is the Zikha
(var. “ija) bird, called also b%-galamiin (chameleon) because,
between head and tail, it has four or five changing colours,
resplendent like a pigeon’s throat.7_ It is about as large as the


* Kama might have classed better under Ningnahar of which it was a dependency.

2 z.e. water-of-Nijr; so too, Badr-atii and Tag-ai. Nijr-aii has seven-valleys
(JASB 1838 p. 329 and Burnes’ Report X). Sayyid Ghulam-i-muhammad mentions
that Babur established a frontier-post between Nijr-ai and Kafiristan which in his
own day was still maintained. He was an envoy of Warren Hastings to Timir Shah
Sadozi (R.’s Notes p. 36 and p. 142).

3 Kafirwash ; they were Kafirs converted to Muhammadanism.

4 Archa, if not inclusive, meaning conifer, may represent juz7zperus excelsa, this being
the common local conifer. The other trees of the list are Aemus Gerardiana (Brandis,
p.690), guercus bilat,the holm-oak,and féstacia mutica or khanjak,a tree yielding mastic.

5 riiba-i-parwan, pteromys inornatus, the large, red flying-squirrel (Blandford’s
Fauna of British India, Mammalia, p. 363).

© The gzz is a short-flight arrow used for shooting small birds etc. Descending
flights of squirrels have been ascertained as 60 yards, one, a record, of 80 (Blandford).

7 Apparently ¢etrogallus himalayensis, the Himalayan snow-cock (Blandford, iv,
143). Burnes (Caédoo/ p. 163) describes the kabg-2-dari as the rara avis of the Kabul
Kohistan, somewhat less than a turkey, and of the chzkor (partridge) species. It was
procured for him first in Ghir-bund, but, when snow has fallen, it could be had
nearer Kabul. Babur’s 4%-galamiin may have come into his vocabulary, either as
a survival direct from Greek occupation of Kabul and Panj-ab, or through Arabic
writings. PRGS 1879 p. 251, Kaye’s art. and JASB 1838 p. 863, Hodgson’s art.


. 1354.


214 KABUL Batik) a


kabg-i-dari and seems to be the habg-i-dari of Hindistan.t
People tell this wonderful thing about it :—When the birds, at
the on-set of winter, descend to the hill-skirts, if they come over —
a vineyard, they can fly no further and are taken.? There is —
a kind of rat in Nijr-ai, known as the musk-rat, which smells of


musk ; I however have never seen it.3 | .

Panjhir (Panj-sher) is another zaman; it lies close to Kafiristan,
along the Panjhir road, and is the thoroughfare of Kafir highway-
men who also, being so near, take tax of it. They have gone ~
through it, killing a mass of persons, and doing very evil deeds,
since I came this last time and conquered Hindiistan (932 AH.-
1526 AD.).4 3

Another is the ¢#mdn of Ghir-bund. In those countries they _
call a kital (koh?) a bund ;5 they go towards Ghir by this pass
(kital) ; apparently it is for this reason that they have called (the
timan?)Ghir-bund. The Hazara hold the heads of its valleys.® —
It has few villages and little revenue can be raised from it. There
are said to be mines of silver and lapis lazuli in its mountains.

Again, there are the villages on the skirts of the (Hinditi-kush)
mountains,? with Mita-kacha and Parwan at their head, and


* Bartavelle’s Greek-partridge, tetrao- or perdrix-rufus [f. 279 and Mems. p. 320n.].

? A similar story is told of some fields near Whitby :—‘‘ These wild geese, which __
in winter fly in great flocks to the lakes and rivers unfrozen in the southern parts, to
the great amazement of every-one, fall suddenly down upon the ground when they
are in flight over certain neighbouring fields thereabouts; a relation I should not
have made, if I had not received it from several credible men.” See Notes to Marmion
p-. xlvi (Erskine) ; Scott’s Poems, Black’s ed. 1880, vii, 104.

3 Are we to infer from this that the musk-rat (Crocidura cerulea, Lydekker,
p. 626) was not so common in Hindiistan in the age of Babur as it has now become?
He was not a careless observer (Erskine).

4 Index s.%. Bdbur-nama, date of composition ; also f. 131.

5 In the absence of examples of dud to mean Aéital, and the presence ‘‘in those
countries” of many in which é¢nd means oh, it looks as though a clerical error had
here written £z/a/ for koh, But on the other hand, the wording of the next passage
shows just the confusion an author’s unrevised draft might shew if a place were, as
this is, both a ¢émdan and a kétal (i.e. a steady rise to a traverse). My impression
is that the name Ghir-bund applies to the embanking spur at the head of the valley-
ttiman, across which roads lead to Ghiri and Ghir (PRGS 1879, Maps; Leech’s
Report VII ; and Wood’s VI). ‘

° So too when, because of them, Leech and Lord turned back, ve zzfectd.

7 It will be noticed that these villages are not classed in any ‘aman ; they include
places ‘“‘rich without parallel” in agricultural products, and level lands on which
towns have risen and fallen, one being Alexandria ad Caucasum. They cannot have
been part of the unremunerative Ghir-bund ¢#man; from their place of mention in
Babur’s list of ¢#mans, they may have been part of the Kabul ¢#mdan (f. 178), as was
Koh-daman (Burnes’ Cadool p. 154 ; Haughton’s Charikar p. 73 ; and Cunningham’s
Ancient History, i, 18).


910 AH._JUNE 141TH 1504 To JUNE 41H 1505 AD. 215


Dir-nama? at their foot, 12 or 13 in all. They are fruit-bearing
villages, and they grow cheering wines, those of Khwaja Khawand
Sa‘id being reputed the strongest roundabouts. The villages all
lie on the foot-hills; some pay taxes but not all are taxable
because they lie so far back in the mountains.

Between the foot-hills and the Baran-water are two detached
stretches of level land, one known as Kurrat-tazzyan,? the other
as Dasht-t-shaikh (Shaikh’s-plain). As the green grass of the
millet 3 grows well there, they are the resort of Turks and
(Mughil) clans (azmaq).

Tulips of many colours cover these foot-hills ; I once counted
them up; it came out at 32 or 33 different sorts. We named
one the Rose-scented, because its perfume was a little like that
of the red rose; it grows by itself on Shaikh’s-plain, here and
nowhere else. The Hundred-leaved tulip is another ; this grows,
also by itself, at the outlet of the Ghir-bund narrows, on the
hill-skirt below Parwan. A low hill known as Khwaja-i-reg-
rawan (Khwaja-of-the-running-sand), divides the afore-named
two pieces of level land ; it has, from top to foot, a strip of sand
from which people say the sound of nagarets and tambours
issues in the heats.4

Again, there are the villages depending on Kabul itself.
South-west from the town are great snow mountains5 where snow
falls on snow, and where few may be the years when, falling, it
‘does not light on last year’s snow. It is fetched, 12 miles
may-be, from these mountains, to cool the drinking water when
ice-houses in Kabul are empty. Like the Bamian mountains,

* Diir-namai, seen from afar (Masson, iii, 152) is not marked on the Survey Maps ;
Masson, Vigne and Haughton locate it. Babur’s ‘‘ head” and ‘“‘ foot” here indicate
status and not location.

2 Mems. p. 146 and J/éms. i, 297, Arabs’ encampment and Ced/ule des Arabes.
Perhaps the name may refer to uses of the level land and good pasture by horse
gajfilas, since Kurra is written with ¢ashdid in the Haidarabad Codex, as in kurra-tdz,
a horse-breaker. Or the /@2zyaé2 may be the fruit of a legend, commonly told, that
the saint of the neighbouring Running-sands was an Arabian.

3 Presumably this is the grass of the millet, the growth before the ear, on which
grazing is allowed (Elphinstone, i, 400 ; Burnes, p. 237).

4 Wood, p. 115; Masson, iii, 167; Burnes, p. 157 and JASB 1838 p. 324 with
illustration ; Vigne, pp. 219, 223; Lord, JASB 1838 p. 537; Cathay and the


way thither, Hakluyt Society vol. I. p. xx, para. 49; History of Musical Sands,
C. Carus-Wilson.


5 West might be more exact, since some of the group are a little north, others a little
south of the latitude of Kabul.


Fol. 136.


Fol. 138.


Fol. 1384.


218


whereas the 13 yighach between Adee and Kabul can.
be done in one day, because of the difficulties of the road.
Ghazni has little cultivated land. Its torrent, a four-mill or —
five-mill stream may-be, makes the town habitable and fertilizes q
four or five villages; three or four others are cultivated from
under-ground water-courses (Aarez). Ghazni grapes are better
than those of Kabul; its melons are more abundant ; its apples
are very good, and are carried to Hindistan. Agriculture
very laborious in Ghazni because, whatever the quality of the soi
it must be newly top-dressed every year ; it gives a better return, _
however, than Kabul. Ghazni grows madder; the entire crop
goes to Hindiistan and yields excellent profit to the growers. —
In the open-country of Ghazni dwell Hazara and Afghans. —
Compared with Kabul, it is always a cheap place. Its people ©
hold to the Hanafi faith, are good, orthodox Musalmans, many
keep a three months’ fast, and their wives and children live’™G
modestly secluded. 4
One of the eminent men of Ghazni was Mulla ‘Abdu’r- -rahmans q
a learned man and always a learner (dars), a most orthodox, ~
pious and virtuous person ; he left this world the same year as —
Nasir Mirza (921 AH.-1515 AD.). Sl. Mahmid’s tomb is in the .
suburb called Rauza,? from which the best grapes come; there also
are the tombs of his descendants, Sl. Mas‘tid and SL Ibrahim. a
Ghazni has many blessed tombs. The year3 I took Kabul and
Ghazni, over-ran Kohat, the plain of Banni and lands of the —
Afghans, and went on to Ghazni by way of Daki (Digi) and —
Ab-istada, people told me there was a tomb, in a village “1
Ghazni, which moved when a benediction on the Prophet was
pronounced over it. We went toseeit. Inthe end I discoverea a a
that the movement was a trick, presumably of the servants at a
the tomb, who had put a sort of platform above it which moved a
when pushed, so that, to those on it, the tomb seemed to move, |
just as the shore does to those passing in a boat. I ordered the


* Some Musalmans fast through the months of Rajab, Sha‘ban and Ramzan;
Muhammadans fast only by day ; the night is often given to feasting (Erskine). — ,

2 The Garden; the tombs of more eminent Musalmans are generally in gardens ~
(Erskine). See Vigne’ s illustrations, pp. 133, 266. |

3 z.e, the year now in writing. The account of the expedition, Babur’s first into
Hindistan, begins on f. 145. ‘


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 to JUNE 41TH 1505 AD. 219


scaffold destroyed and a dome built over the tomb ; also I forbad
the servants, with threats, ever to bring about the movement again.

Ghazni is a very humble place ; strange indeed it is that rulers
in whose hands were Hindistan and Khurdasanat,' should have
chosen it for their capital. In the Sultan’s (Mahmid’s) time
there may have been three or four dams in the country ; one he
made, some three yighach (18 m.?) up the Ghazni-water to the
north ; it was about 40—50 ga@vz (yards) high and some 300 long ;
through it the stored waters were let out as required.” It was
destroyed by ‘Alau’u’d-din /ahan-soz Ghirit when he conquered
the country (550 AH.-I152 AD.), burned and ruined the tombs
of several descendants of Sl. Mahmid, sacked and burned the
town, in short, left undone no tittle of murder and rapine. Since Fol. 139.
that time, the Sultan’s dam has lain in ruins, but, through God’s
favour, there is hope that it may become of use again, by means
of the money which was sent, in Khwaja Kalan’s hand, in the year
Hindistan was conquered (932 AH.-1526 AD.).3. The Sakhan-
dam is another, 2 or 3 yighach (12-18 m.), may-be, on the east
of the town; it has long been in ruins, indeed is past repair.
There is a dam in working order at Sar-i-dih (Village-head).

In books it is written that there is in Ghazni a spring such
that, if dirt and foul matter be thrown into it, a tempest gets up
instantly, with a blizzard of rain and wind. It has been seen said
also in one of the histories that Sabuk-tigin, when besieged by
the Rai (Jai-pal) of Hind, ordered dirt and foulness to be thrown
into the spring, by this aroused, in an instant, a tempest with
blizzard of rain and snow, and, by this device, drove off his foe.4
Though we made many enquiries, no intimation of the spring’s
existence was given us.

In these countries Ghazni and Khwarizm are noted for cold,
in the same way that Sultania and Tabriz are in the two ‘Iraqs
and Azarbaijan.


* z.é. the countries groupable as Khurasan.

? For picture and account of the dam, see Vigne, pp. 138, 202.

3 f, 2954.

4 The legend is told in numerous books with varying location of the spring. One
narrator, Zakariya Qazwinz, reverses the parts, making Jai-pal employ the ruse;
hence Leyden’s note (Mems. p. 150; E. and D.’s History of Jndia ii, 20, 182 and
iv, 162; for historical information, R.’s Wotes p. 320). The date of the events is
shortly after 378 AH.-988 AD.


16


Fol. 1394.


Fol. 140,


-~ KABUL Be


Zurmut is another ¢amdan, some 12-13 yighach south of Kabul — "
and 7-8 south-east of Ghazni.t Its dérogha’s head-quarters are
in Girdiz ; there most houses are three or four storeys high. It
does not want for strength, and gave Nasir Mirza trouble when
it went into hostility to him. Its people are Aighan-shal ; they
grow corn but have neither vineyards nor orchards. The tomb
of Shaikh Muhammad J/usalman is at a spring, high on the
skirt of a mountain, known as Barakistan, in the south of the
tauman.

Farmil is another ¢aman,? a humble place, growing not bad
apples which are carried into Hindistan. Of Farmul were the
Shaikh-zadas, descendants of Shaikh Muhammad J/usalman, who
were so much in favour during the Afghan period in Hindistan,

Bangash is another ¢#mdn3 All round about it are Afghan
highwaymen, such as the Khigiani, Khirilchi, Tari and Landar,
Lying out-of-the-way, as it does, its people do not pay taxes
willingly. There has been no time to bring it to obedience ;
greater tasks have fallen to me,—the conquests of Qandahar,
Balkh, Badakhshan and Hindistan! But, God willing! when
I get the chance, I most assuredly will take order with those
Bangash thieves.

One of the duldiks of Kabul is Ala-sai,4 4 to 6 miles
(2-3 shart) east of Nijr-ati. The direct road into it from
Nijr-aii leads, at a place called Kira, through the quite small
pass which in that locality separates the hot and cold climates,
Through this pass the birds migrate at the change of the seasons,
and at those times many are taken by the people of Pichghan,
one of the dependencies of Nijr-aii, in the following manner :—
From distance to distance near the mouth of the pass, they make
hiding-places for the bird-catchers. They fasten one corner of
a net five or six yards away, and weight the lower side to the


* R.’s Notes s.m. Zurmut.

* The question of the origin of the Farmili has been written of by several writers ;
perhaps they were Turks of Persia, Turks and Tajiks.

’ This completes the list of the 14 ¢a#mans of Kabul, véz. Ningnahar, ‘Ali-shang,
Alangar, Mandrawar, Kinar-with-Nir-gal, Nijr-ai, Panjhir, Ghar-bund, Koh-daman
with Ae ?), Luhigur (of the Kabul ¢#mdm), Ghazni, Zurmut, Farmil and

ngash.

4 Between Nijr-aii and Tag-aii (Masson, iii, 165). Mr. Erskine notes that Babur
reckoned it in the hot climate but that the change of climate takes place further east,
between ‘Ali-shang and Aizbin (2.e. the valley next eastwards from Tag-ail).


. thee il ee i ees
~


910 AH.—JUNE 14ru 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 221


ground with stones. Along the other side of the net, for half its
width, they fasten a stick some 3 to 4 yards long. The hidden
bird-catcher holds this stick and by it, when the birds approach,
lifts up the net to its full height. The birds then go into the net of
themselves. Sometimes so many are taken by this contrivance
that there is not time to cut their throats.* y

Though the Ala-sai pomegranates are not first-rate, they have
local reputation because none are better there-abouts ; they are
carried into Hindistan. Grapes also do not grow badly, and
the wines of Ala-sai are better and stronger than those of
Nijr-ai.

Badr-aii (Tag-aii) is another du/#k ; it runs with Ala-sai, grows
no fruit, and for cultivators has corn-growing Kafirs.?


(f. Tribesmen of Kabul.)

Just as Turks and (Mughil) clans (azmdq) dwell in the open
country of Khurasan and Samarkand, so in Kabul do the
Hazara and Afghans. Of the Hazara, the most widely-scattered
are the Sultan-mas‘idi Hazara, of Afghans, the Mahmand.


(g. Revenue of Kabul.)


The revenues of Kabul, whether from the cultivated lands
or from tolls (¢amgha) or from dwellers in the open country,
amount to 8 Zaks of shahrukhis3 Fol. 140


(h. The mountain-tracts of Kabul.)


Where the mountains of Andar-ab, KhwaAst,+ and the Badakh-
shanat have conifers (avcha), many springs and gentle slopes,
those of eastern Kabul have grass (a), grass like a beautiful
floor, on hill, slope and dale. For the most part it is duta-kah
grass (azz), very suitable for horses. In the Andijan country
they talk of d#ta-kah, but why they do so was not known (to
me ?); in Kabul it was heard-say to be because the grass comes

* biughislarigha fursat bilmas; i.e. to- kill them in the lawful manner, while
pronouncing the Bz’smz* lah.

2 This completes the du/#ks of Kabul vzz. Badr-aii (Tag-aii), Nir-valley, Chaghan-
sarai, Kama and Ala-sai.

3 The ra#fi being equal to 24 shahrukhis, the shahrukhi may be taken at 10d. thus
making the total revenue only £33,333 6s. 8a. See Ayin-i-akbari ii, 169 (Erskine).


4 sic in all B.N. MSS. Most maps print Khost. Muh. Salih says of Khwast,
** Who sees it, would call it a Hell” (Vambéry, p. 361).


Fol. 141.


ms KABUL": [@ ie os.


up in tufts (data, dita)! The alps of these mountains are like
those of Hisar, Khutlan, Farghana, Samarkand and Mughili-
stan,—all these being alike in mountain and alp, though the
alps of Farghana and Mughilistan are beyond comparison with
the rest. Bare

From all these the mountains of Nijr-at, the Lamghanat and
Sawad differ in having masses of cypresses,? holm-oak, olive and
mastic (khanjak) ; their grass also is different,—it is dense, it is
tall, it is good neither for horse nor sheep. Although these
mountains are not so high as those already described, indeed
they look to be low, none-the-less, they are strongholds ; what
to the eye is even slope, really is hard rock on which it is
impossible to ride. Many of the beasts and birds of Hindistan
are found amongst them, such as the parrot, mina, peacock and
lija (likha), the ape, nil-gau and hog-deer (kita-paz) ;3 some
found there are not found even in Hindistan.

The mountains to the west of Kabul are also all of one sort,
those of the Zindan-valley, the Sif-valley, Garzawan and Ghar-
jistan (Gharchastan).4 Their meadows are mostly in the dales ;
they have not the same sweep of grass on slope and top as some
of those described have; nor have they masses of trees; they
have, however, grass suiting horses. On their flat tops, where
all the crops are grown, there is ground where a horse can gallop.
They have masses of £zyzk.5 Their valley-bottoms are strong-
holds, mostly precipitous and inaccessible from above. It is
remarkable that, whereas other mountains have their fastnesses
in their high places, these have theirs below.

Of one sort again are the mountains of Ghir, Karniid (var.
Kuziid) and Hazara; their meadows are in their dales; their
trees are few, not even the archa being there ;° their grass is fit


* Babur’s statement about this fodder is not easy to translate ; he must have seen
grass grow in tufts, and must have known the Persian word é#/a (bush). Perhaps
kah should be read to mean plant, not grass.. Would Wood’s dcotr fit in, a small
furze bush, very plentiful near Bamian? (Wood’s Report VI, p. 23; and for regional
grasses, Aitchison’s Botany of the Afghan Delimitation Commission, p. 122.)

; ee perhaps cupressus torulosa (Brandis, p. 693).

. 276,

* A laborious geographical note of Mr. Erskine’s is here regretfully left behind, as
now needless (Mems. p. 152).

5 Here, mainly wild-sheep and wild-goats, including mar-khwar.

° Perhaps, no conifers ; perhaps none of those of the contrasted hill-tract.


910 AH._JUNE 14TH 1504 ro JUNE 41TH 1505 AD. — 223


for horses and for the masses of sheep they keep. They differ
from those last described in this, their strong places are not below.

The mountains (south-east of Kabul) of Khwaja Isma‘l, Dasht,
Digi (Diki)* and Afghanistan are all alike ; all low, scant of
vegetation, short of water, treeless, ugly and good-for-nothing.
Their people take after them, just as has been said, 7img bu/ma-
ghincha tish biilmas? Likely enough the world has few moun-
tains so useless and disgusting.


(h. Fire-wood of Kabul.)


The snow-fall being so heavy in Kabul, it is fortunate that
excellent fire-wood is had near by. Given one day to fetch it,
wood can be had of the khanjak (mastic), d2ut (holm-oak),
badamcha (small-almond) and gargand3 Of these khanjak wood
is the best ; it burns with flame and nice smell, makes plenty of
hot ashes and does well even if sappy. Holm-oak is also first-
rate fire-wood, blazing less than mastic but, like it, making
a hot fire with plenty of hot ashes, and nice smell. It has the
peculiarity in burning that when its leafy branches are set alight,
they fire up with amazing sound, blazing and crackling from
bottom to top. It is good fun to burn it. The wood of the
small-almond is the most plentiful and commonly-used, but it
does not make a lasting fire. The gargand is quite a low shrub,
thorny, and burning sappy or dry ; it is the fuel of the Ghazni
people.


(2. Fauna of Kabul.)


The cultivated lands of Kabul lie between mountains which
are like great dams‘ to the flat valley-bottoms in which most
villages and peopled places are. On these mountains £zyzk and


* While here dasht (plain) represents the eastern skirt of the Mehtar Sulaiman
range, diuki or digi (desert) seems to stand for the hill tracts on the west of it, and
not, as on f. 152, for the place there specified.

2 Mems. p. 152, ‘‘A narrow place is large to the narrow-minded” ; A/éms. i, 311,
**Ce qui n’est pas trop large, ne reste pas vide.” Literally, ‘‘ So long as heights are
not equal, there is no vis-a-vis,” or, if ¢@ng be read for ting, ‘‘ No dawn, no noon,”
z.é. no effect without a cause.

3 I have not lighted on this name in botanical books or explained by dictionaries.
Perhaps it is a Cis-oxanian name for the sax-ao/ of Transoxania. As its uses are
enumerated by some travellers, it might be Haloxylon ammodendron, ta-ghaz etc. and
sax-aol (Aitchison, p. 102),

4 f. 1356 note to Ghir-bund.


Fol. 141¢


Fol. 142.


224


5 “DCS
ahi* are scarce. Across them, between its summer and winter —


quarters, the dun sheep,? the argarghalcha, have their regular


track,3 to which braves go out with dogs and birds ¢ to take them.
Towards Khird-kabul and the Sirkh-riid there is wild-ass, but
there are no white #zyzk at all; Ghazni has both and in few
other places are white £zyzk found in such good condition.5

In the heats the fowling-grounds of Kabul are crowded. The
birds take their way along the Baran-water. For why? It is
because the river has mountains along it, east and west, and a
great Hindi-kush pass in a line with it, by which the birds must
cross since there is no other near. They cannot cross when the
north wind blows, or if there is even a little cloud on Hindi-kush ;
at such times they alight on the level lands of the Baran-water
and are taken in great numbers by the local people. Towards the
end of winter, dense flocks of mallards (a#rdiq) reach the banks
of the Baran in very good condition. Follow these the cranes and
herons,’ great birds, in large flocks and countless numbers.


(y. Bird-catching.)
Along the Baran people take masses of cranes (¢#rnua) with
the cord; masses of aigar, gargara and gitan also This


* I understand that wild-goats, wild-sheep and deer (@/#) were not localized, but-
that the dun-sheep migrated through. Antelope (a4#) was scarce in Elphinstone’s time.

* gizil kiytk which, taken with its alternative name, argarghalcha, allows it to be
the dun-sheep of Wood’s Journey p. 241. From its second name it may be Ovss
amnon (Raos), or O. argali.

3 tusgawal, var. tutgawal, tusagawal and tashgawal, a word which has given
trouble to scribes and translators. As a sporting-term it is equivalent to shékar-d-
nihilam ; in one or other of its forms I find it explained as Weg-hiiter, Fahnen-hiiter,
Zahl-meister, Schlucht, Gefahrlicher-weg and Schmaler-weg. It recurs in the B.N.
on f. 1974 1. 5 and 1. 6 and there might mean either a narrow road or a Weg-hiiter.
If its Turki root be /é#s, the act of stopping, all the above meanings can follow, but
there may be two separate roots, the second, /ash, the act of descent (JRAS 1900
p. 137, H. Beveridge’s art. On the word nihilam).

* gushltk, aitlik. Elphinstone writes (i, 191) of the excellent greyhounds and
hawking birds of the region ; here the bird may be the charkh, which works with the
dogs, fastening on the head of the game (Von Schwarz, p. 117, for the same use of eagles).

* An antelope resembling the usual one of Hindiistan is common south of Ghazni
(Vigne, p. 110); what is not found may be some classes of wild-sheep, frequent
further north, at higher elevation, and in places more familiar to Babur.

° The Parwan or Hindii-kush pass, concerning the winds of which see f. 128.

’ tirnad u gargara; the second of which is the Hindi bagla, heron, egret ardea
gasetta, the furnisher of the aigrette of commerce.

The aigar 1s ardea cinerea, the grey heron; the gargara is ardea gazetta, the
egret. Qé/dn is explained in the Elph. Codex (f. 110) by Ahawasi/, goldfinch, but
= one concerns large birds ; Scully (Shaw’s Voc.) has godam, water-hen, which
suits better.


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 225


method of bird-catching is unique. They twist a cord as long
as the arrow’s* flight, tie the arrow at one end and a déldirga?
at the other, and wind it up, from the arrow-end, on a piece of
wood, span-long and wrist-thick, right up to the dz/durga. They
then pull out the piece of wood, leaving just the hole it was in.
The dt/dirga being held fast in the hand, the arrow is shot off 3
towards the coming flock. If the cord twist round a neck or
wing, it brings the bird down. On the Baran everyone takes
birds in this way ; it is difficult ; it must be done on rainy nights,
because on such nights the birds do not alight, but fly continually
and fly low till dawn, in fear of ravening beasts of prey. Through
the night the flowing river is their road, its moving water showing
through the dark; then it is, while they come and go, up and down
the river, that the cord is shot. One night I shot it; it broke in
drawing in; both bird and cord were brought in to me next day.
By thisdevice Baran people catch the many herons from which they
take the turban-aigrettes sent from Kabul for sale in Khurasan.
Of bird-catchers there is also the band of slave-fowlers, two or
three hundred households, whom some descendant of Timir Beg
made migrate from near Multan to the Baran.4 Bird-catching
is their trade; they dig tanks, set decoy-birds 5 on them, put a net
over the middle, and in this way take all sorts of birds. Not fowlers
only catch birds, but every dweller on the Baran does it, whether
by shooting the cord, setting the springe, or in various other ways.


(k. Fishing.)


The fish of the Baran migrate at the same seasons as birds.
At those times many are netted, and many are taken on wattles


* giz, the short-flight arrow.

2 a small, round-headed nail with which a whip-handle is decorated (Vambéry).
Such a stud would keep the cord from slipping through the fingers and would not
check the arrow-release.

3 It has been understood (Mems. p. 158 and A/éms. i, 313) that the arrow was flung
by hand but if this were so, something heavier than the gzz would carry the cord
better, since it certainly would be difficult to direct a missile so light as an arrow
without the added energy of the bow. The arrow itself will often have found its billet
in the closely-flying flock ; the cord would retrieve the bird. The verb used in the
text is aitmag, the one common to express the discharge of arrows efc.

4 For Timirids who may have immigrated the fowlers see Raverty’s Motes p. 579
and his Appendix p. 22.

5 milwah ; this has been read by all earlier translators, and also by the Persian
annotator of the Elph. Codex, to mean sha@kh, bough. For decoy-ducks see Bellew’s
Notes on Afghanistan p. 404.


Fol. 14:


Fol. 14:


226 KABUL


(chigh) fixed in the water. In autumn when the plant known —
as we/d-ass-tail* has come to maturity, flowered and seeded, —
people take 10-20 loads (of seed?) and 20-30 of green branches
(gik-shibak) to some head of water, break it up small and
cast it in. Then going into the water, they can at once pick up
drugged fish. At some convenient place lower down, in a hole
below a fall, they will have fixed before-hand a wattle of
finger-thick willow-withes, making it firm by piling stones on its
sides. The water goes rushing and dashing through the wattle,
but leaves on it any fish that may have come floating down.
This way of catching fish is practised in Gul-bahar, Parwan and
Istalif.

‘ol. 1434. Fish are had in winter in the Lamghanat by this curious
device :—People dig a pit to the depth of a house, in the bed of
a stream, below a fall, line it with stones like a cooking-place,
and build up stones round it above, leaving one opening only,
under water. Except by this one opening, the fish have no
inlet or outlet, but the water finds its way through the stones.
This makes a sort of fish-pond from which, when wanted in
winter, fish can be taken, 30-40 together. Except at the opening,
left where convenient, the sides of the fish-pond are made fast
with rice-straw, kept in place by stones. A piece of wicker-work
is pulled into the said opening by its edges, gathered together,
and into this a second piece, (a tube,) is inserted, fitting it at the
mouth but reaching half-way into it only.? The fish go through
the smaller piece into the larger one, out from which they cannot
get. The second narrows towards its inner mouth, its pointed
ends being drawn so close that the fish, once entered, cannot

‘ol. 144. turn, but must go on, one by one, into the larger piece. Out of
that they cannot return because of the pointed ends of the inner, 7
narrow mouth. The wicker-work fixed and the rice-straw making
the pond fast, whatever fish are inside can be taken out ;3 any ;
also which, trying to escape may have gone into the wicker-work,


* gilin giyirighi, Amongst the many plants used to drug fish I have not found
this one mentioned. hdr-zahra and khar-fag approach it in verbal meaning; the
first describes colocynth, the second, wild rue. See Watts’ Zconomic Products of India
lil, 366 and Bellew’s No/es pp. 182, 471 and 478.

* Much trouble would have been spared to himself and his translators, if Babur
had known a lobster-pot.

3 The fish, it is to be inferred, came down the fall into the pond.


910 AH.—JUNE 141TH 1504 ro JUNE 41TH 1505AD. —.227


are taken in it, because they have no way out. This method
of catching fish we have seen nowhere else.*


HISTORICAL NARRATIVE RESUMED?


(a. Departure of Mugim and allotment of lands.)

A few days after the taking of Kabul, Muqim asked leave to
set off for Qandahar. As he had come out of the town on
terms and conditions, he was allowed to go to his father (Zu’n-
nin) and his elder brother (Shah Beg), with all his various
people, his goods and his valuables, safe and sound.

Directly he had gone, the Kabul-country was shared out to
the Mirzas and the guest-begs.3 To Jahangir Mirza was given
Ghazni with its dependencies and appurtenancies; to Nasir
Mirza, the Ningnahar z#man, Mandrawar, Nir-valley, Kinar,
Nir-gal (Rock-village?) and Chighan-sarai. To some of the
begs who had been with us in the guerilla-times and had come


to Kabul with us, were given villages, fief-fashion.4 Welayat Fol. 144


itself was not given at all.5 It was not only then that I looked
with more favour on guest-begs and stranger-begs than I did
on old servants and Andijanis ; this I have always done when-
ever the Most High God has shown me His favour ; yet it is
remarkable that, spite of this, people have blamed me constantly
as though I had favoured none but old servants and Andijanis.
There is a proverb, (Turki) “ What will a foe not say ? what
enters not into dream?” and (Persian) “A town-gate can be
shut, a foe’s mouth never.”


* Burnes and Vigne describe a fall 20 miles from Kabul, at ‘‘ Tangi Gharoi”,
[below where the Tag-aii joins the Baran-water,] to which in their day, Kabulis went
out for the amusement of catching fish as they try to leap up the fall. Were these
migrants seeking upper waters or were they captives in a fish-pond ?

2 Elph. MS. f. 111; W.-i-B. LO. 215 f. 1166 and 217°f. 974; Mems. p. 155;
Méms. i, 318.

3 mthmdan-beglar, an expression first used by Babur here, and due, presumably, to
accessions from Khusrau Shah’s following. A parallel case is given in Max Miiller’s
Science of Language i, 348 ed. 1871, ‘* Turkman tribes . . . call themselves, not
subjects, but guests of the Uzbeg Khans.” _

4 tiyiél-dtk in all the Turki MSS. Ilminsky, de Courteille and Zenker, ytil-dik,
Turki, a fief.

5 Wilayat khid hech birilmadi ; W.-i-B. 215 f. 1166, Wilayat dada na shuda and
217 f. 976, Wilayat khid hech dada na shud. By this I understand that he kept the
lands of Kabul itself in his own hands. He mentions (f. 350) and Gul-badan mentions
(H.N. f. 40d) his resolve so to keep Kabul. I think he kept not only the fort but
all lands constituting the Kabul ¢é#mdan (f. 1354 and note).


Fol. 145.


228


(6. A levy in grain.)


Many clans and hordes had come from Samarkand, Hisar


and Qiindiz into the Kabul-country. Kabul is a small country ;
it is also of the sword, not of the pen;* to take in money from
it for all these tribesmen was impossible. It therefore seemed
advisable to take in grain, provision for the families of these
clans so that their men could ride on forays with the army.
Accordingly it was decided to levy 30,000 ass-loads? of grain
on Kabul, Ghazni and their dependencies ; we knew nothing
at that time about the harvests and incomings ; the impost was
excessive, and under it the country suffered very grievously.
In those days I devised the Baburi script.3


(c. Foray on the Hazara.)


A large tribute in horses and sheep had been laid on the
Sultan Mas‘tidi Hazaras ;+ word came a few days after collectors
had gone to receive it, that the Hazaras were refractory and
would not give their goods. As these same tribesmen had
before that come down on the Ghazni and Girdiz roads, we got
to horse, meaning to take them by surprise. Riding by the
Maidan-road, we crossed the Nirkh-pass5 by night and at the
Morning-prayer fell upon them near Jal-ti (var. Cha-tii). The
incursion was not what was wished. We came back by the
Tunnel-rock (Sang-i-sirakh); Jahangir Mirza (there?) took
leave for Ghazni. On our reaching Kabul, Yar-i-husain, son of
Darya Khan, coming in from Bhira, waited on me.7


* Saift dir, galami aimds, t.e. tax is taken by force, not paid on a written
assessment. e

* khar-war, about 700 lbs Averdupois (Erskine). Cf. Ayin-2-akbari (Jarrett, ii, 394).

3 Nigamu’d-din Ahmad and Badayiini both mention this script and say that in it
Babur transcribed a copy of the Qoran for presentation to Makka. Badayiini says
it was unknown in his day, the reign of Akbar (Zadbagat-c-akbari, lith. ed. p. 193,
and Muntakhabw t-tawarikh Bib. Ind. ed. iii, 273).

* Babur’s route, taken with one given by Raverty (Votes p. 691), allows these
Hazaras, about whose.location Mr. Erskine was uncertain, to be located between the
ee (Arghandi-Maidan-Unai road), on their east, and the Sang-lakh mountains,
on their west.


i The Takht-pass, one on which from times immemorial, toll (#272h) has been
taken.

© khatir-khwah chapilmadi, which perhaps implies mutual discontent, Babur’s with
his gains, the Hazaras’ with their losses. As the second Persian translation omits
the negative, the Memoirs does the same.

7 Bhira being in Shahpiir, this Khan’s davyd will be the Jehlam.


910 AH.—JUNE 14ru 1504 ro JUNE 41TH 1505 AD. 229


(ad. Babur’s first start for Hindistan.)

When, a few days later, the army had been mustered, persons
acquainted with the country were summoned and questioned
about its every side and quarter. Some advised a march to the
Plain (Dasht) ;* some approved of Bangash; some wished to
go into Hindistan. The discussion found settlement in a move
on Hindistan.

It was in the month of Sha‘ban (910 AH.—Jan. 1505 AD.), the
Sun being in Aquarius, that we rode out of Kabul for Hindistan.
We took the road by Badam-chashma and Jagdalik and reached
Adinapir in six marches. Till that time I had never seen
a hot country or the Hindistan border-land. In Ningnahar?
another world came to view,—other grasses, other trees, other
animals, other birds, and other manners and customs of clan and
horde. We were amazed, and truly there was ground for amaze.

Nasir Mirza, who had gone earlier to his district, waited on
me in Adinapir. We made some delay in Adinapir in order
to let the men from behind join us, also a contingent from the
clans which had come with us into Kabul and were wintering
in the Lamghanat.3 All having joined us, we marched to below
Jii-shahi and dismounted at Qiish-gumbaz.4 There Nasir Mirza
asked for leave to stay behind, saying he would follow in a few
days after making some sort of provision for his dependants
and followers. Marching on from Qish-gumbaz, when we dis-
mounted at Hot-spring (Garm-chashma), a head-man of the
Gagiani was brought in, a Fazz,5 presumably with his caravan.
We took him with us to point out the roads. Crossing Khaibar
in a march or two, we dismounted at Jam.°


* Babur uses Persian dasht and Hindi d#i, plain and hill, for the tracts east and
west of Mehtar Sulaiman. The first, dasht, stands for Daman (skirt) and Dara-i-jat,
the second, d#hi, indefinitely for the broken lands west of the main range, but also,
in one instance for the Diki [Digi] district of Qandahar, as will be noted.

2 f. 132. The Jagdalik-pass for centuries has separated the districts of Kabul and
Ningnahar. Forster (Z7yavels ii, 68), making the journey the reverse way, was
sensible of the climatic change some 3m. east of Gandamak. Cf. Wood’s Refort I. p. 6.
: 3 riya are they whose families Nasir Mirza shepherded out of Kabul later (f. 154,
. 155).

4 Bird’s-dome, opposite the mouth of the Kiinar-water (6.4. War, Map p. 64).

5 This word is variously pointed and is uncertain. Mr. Erskine adopted ‘‘Pekhi”,
but, on the whole, it may be best to read, here and on f. 146, Ar. fag7 or pers. fay,
mountain or pass. To do so shews the guide to be one located in the Khaibar-pass,
a Fazji or Paji.

© mod. Jam-rid (Jam-torrent), presumably.


Fol. 14:


230 KABUL


Tales had been told us about Gir-khattri ;* it was said to be “
a holy place of the Jogis and Hindis who come from long __
distances to shave their heads and beards there. I rode out at
once from Jam to visit Bigram,? saw its great tree,3 and all the
country round, but, much as we enquired about Gir-khattri,
our guide, one Malik Bi-sa‘id Kamari,4 would say nothing

fol. 146. about it. When we were almost back in camp, however, he told
Khwaja Muhammad-amin that it was in Bigram and that he
had said nothing about it because of its confined cells and
narrow passages. The Khwaja, having there and then abused
him, repeated to us what he had said, but we could not go back
because the road was long and the day far spent.


(e. Move against Kohat.)

Whether to cross the water of Sind, or where else to go, was
discussed in that camp.5 Baqi Chaghaniani represented that it
seemed we might go, without crossing the river and with one
night’s halt, to a place called Kohat where were many rich
tribesmen ; moreover he brought Kabulis forward who repre-
sented the matter just as he had done. We had never heard of
the place, but, as he, my man in great authority, saw it good to
go to Kohat and had brought forward support of his recom-
mendation,—this being so! we broke up our plan of crossing
the Sind-water into Hindiistaén, marched from Jam, forded the
Bara-water, and dismounted not far from the pass (daban)
through the Muhammad-mountain (fa). At the time the
Gagiani Afghans were located in Parashawar but, in dread of
our army, had drawn off to the skirt-hills. One of their head-
men, coming into this camp, did me obeisance ; we took him, as


* G. of I. xx, 125 and Cunningham’s Ancient History i, 80. Babur saw the place
in 925 AH. (f. 2328). :

* Cunningham, p. 29. Four ancient sites, not far removed from one another, bear
this name, Bigrim, vz. those near Hipian, Kabul, Jalalabad and Pashawar.

3 Cunningham, i, 79.

* Perhaps a native of Kamari on the Indus, but damari is a word of diverse
application (index s.#. ).

5 The annals of this campaign to the eastward shew that Babur was little of a free
agent ; that many acts of his own were merciful ; that he sets down the barbarity of
others as it was, according to his plan of writing (f. 86); and that he had with him
undisciplined robbers of Khusrau Shah’s former following. He cannot be taken as
having power to command or control the acts of those, his guest-begs and their
following, who dictated his movements in this disastrous journey, one worse than
a defeat, says Haidar Mirza.


910 AH.—JUNE 141TH 1504 To JUNE 41H 1505 AD. 231


well as the Fajji, with us, so that, between them, they might Fol. 146
point out the roads. We left that camp at midnight, crossed
Muhammad-fajj at day-rise* and by breakfast-time descended

on Kohat. Much cattle and buffalo fell to our men; many
Afghans were taken but I had them all collected and set them

free. In the Kohat houses corn was found without limit. Our
foragers raided as far as the Sind-river (darya), rejoining us after

one night’s halt. As what Baqi Chaghdanianz had led us to expect

did not come to hand, he grew rather ashamed of his scheme.

When our foragers were back and after two nights in Kohat,
we took counsel together as to what would be our next good move,
and we decided to over-run the Afghans of Bangash and the
Banni neighbourhood, then to go back to Kabul, either through
Naghr (Baghzan ?), or by the Farmil-road (Tochi-valley ?).

In Kohat, Darya Khan’s son, Yar-i-husain, who had waited
on me in Kabul made petition, saying, “If royal orders were
given me for the Dilazak,? the Yisuf-zai, and the Gagiani, these
would not go far from my orders if I called up the Padshah’s
swords on the other side of the water of Sind.”3 The farman
he petitioned for being given, he was allowed to go from Kohat.


(f. March to Thal.)


Marching out of Kohat, we took the Hangii-road for Bangash. Fol. 147
Between Kohat and Hangii that road runs through a valley shut
in on either hand by the mountains. When we entered this
valley, the Afghans of Kohat and thereabouts who were gathered
on both hill-skirts, raised their war-cry with great clamour. Our
then guide, Malik Bi-sa‘id Kamari was well-acquainted with
the Afghan locations ; he represented that further on there was
a detached hill on our right, where, if the Afghans came down
to it from the hill-skirt, we might surround and take them. God
brought it right! The Afghans, on reaching the place, did come
down. We ordered one party of braves to seize the neck of
land between that hill and the mountains, others to move along


* For the route here see Masson, i, 117 and Colquhoun’s With the Kuram Field-
force p. 48.

? The Hai. MS. writes this Dilah-zak.

3 z.e. raised a force in Babur’sname. He took advantage of this farmdan in QII AH.
to kill Bagi Chaghaniani (f. 1596-160).


232 KABUL


its sides, so that under attack made from all sides at once, the
Afghans might be made to reach their doom. Against the all-
round assault, they could not even fight ; a hundred or two were
taken, some were brought in alive but of most, the heads only
were brought. We had been told that when Afghans are power-
less to resist, they go before their foe with grass between their
teeth, this being as much as to say, “I am your cow.”! Here

Fol. 1474. we saw this custom ; Afghans unable to make resistance, came
before us with grass between their teeth. Those our men had
brought in as prisoners were ordered to be beheaded and a pillar
of their heads was set up in our camp.?

Next day we marched forward and dismounted at Hangi,
where local Afghans had made a sangur on ahill. I first heard
the word sangur after coming to Kabul where people describe
fortifying themselves on a hill as making a samgur. Our men
went straight up, broke into it and cut off a hundred or two of
insolent Afghan heads. There also a pillar of heads was set up.

From Hangiti wemarched, with one night’s halt, to Til (Thal),
below Bangash; there also our men went out and raided the
Afghans near-by ; some of them however turned back rather
lightly from a sangur.4


(g. Across country into Banni..)

On leaving Til (Thal) we went, without a road, right down
a steep descent, on through out-of-the-way narrows, halted one
night, and next day came down into Banni,5 man, horse and
camel all worn out with fatigue and with most of the booty in
cattle left on the way. The frequented road must have been
a few miles to our right ; the one we came by did not seem


* Of the Yiisuf-zai and Ranjit-singh, Masson says, (i, 141) ‘‘The miserable, hunted
wretches threw themselves on the ground, and placing a blade or tuft of grass in their
mouths, cried out, ‘‘I am your cow.” This act and explanation, which would have
saved them from an orthodox Hindi, had no effect with the infuriated Sikhs.” This
form of supplication is at least as old as the days of Firdausi (Erskine, p. 159 n.).
The Bahar-i-‘ajam is quoted by Vullers as saying that in India, suppliants take straw
in the mouth to indicate that they are blanched and yellow from fear.

* This barbarous custom has always prevailed amongst the Tartar conquerors of
Asia (Erskine). For examples under Timir see Raverty’s Motes p. 137.

3 For a good description of the road from Kohat to Thal see Bellew’s Mission p. 104.

* F. 884 has the same phrase about the doubtful courage of one Sayyidi Qara.

5 Not to the mod. town of Banni, [that having been begun only in 1848 Ap.] but
wherever their wrong road brought them out into the Bannii amphitheatre. The
Survey Map of 1868, No. 15, shews the physical features of the wrong route.


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 To JUNE 4ruH 1505 AD. 233


a riding-road at all-; it was understood to be called the Gosfand-
liyar (Sheep-road),—/zydr being Afghani for a road,—because
sometimes shepherds and herdsmen take their flocks and herds
by it through those narrows. Most of our men regarded our
being brought down by that left-hand road as an ill-design of
Malik Bi-sa‘id Kamari.*


(hk. Bannit and the ‘Isa-khail country.)


The Banna lands lie, a dead level, immediately outside the
Bangash and Naghr hills, these being to their north. The
Bangash torrent (the Kiram) comes down into Banni and
fertilizes its lands. South(-east) of them are Chaupara and the
water of Sind ; to their east is Din-kot ; (south-)west is the Plain
(Dasht), known also as Bazar and Taq.2_ The Bannii lands are
cultivated by the Kurani, Kiwi, Sir, Tsa-khail and Nia-zai of
the Afghan tribesmen.

After dismounting in Banni, we heard that the tribesmen in
the Plain (Dasht) were for resisting and were entrenching
themselves on a hill to the north. A force headed by Jahangir
Mirza, went against what seemed to be the Kiwi sangur, took it
at once, made general slaughter, cut off and brought in many
heads. Much white cloth fell into (their) hands. In Banni
also a pillar of heads was set up. After the sangur had been
taken, the Kiwi head-man, Shadi Khan, came to my presence,
with grass between his teeth, and did me obeisance. I pardoned
all the prisoners.

After we had over-run Kohat, it had been decided that
Bangash and Banni should be over-run, and return to Kabul
made through Naghr or through Farmil. But when Banni had
been over-run, persons knowing the country represented that the
Plain was close by, with its good roads and many people; so it
was settled to over-run the Plain and to return to Kabul
afterwards by way of Farmil.3

* Perhaps he connived at recovery of cattle by those raided already.

? Taq is*the Tank of Maps; Bazar was s.w. of it. Tank for Taq looks to be
a variant due to nasal utterance (Vigne, p. 77, p. 203 and Map; and, as bearing on
the nasal, 2 /oco, Appendix E).

3 If return had been made after over-running Banni, it would have been made by


the Tochi-valley and so through Farmiil; if after over-running the Plain, Babur’s
details shew that the westward turn was meant to be by the Gimial-valley and one of


Fol. 148.


Fol. 148


my KABUL eat.


Marching next day, we dismounted at an ‘Isa-khail village on Bi
that same water (the Kiam) but, as the villagers had goneinto
the Chaupara hills on hearing of us, we left it and dismounted
on the skirt of Chaupara. Our foragers went from there into
the hills, destroyed the ‘Isa-khail sangur and came back with
sheep, herds and cloth. That night the ‘Isa-khail made an
attack on us but, as good watch was kept all through these
operations, they could do nothing. So cautious were we that at
night our right and left, centre and van were just in the way
they had dismounted, each according to its place in battle, each
prepared for its own post, with men on foot all round the camp, at
an arrow’s distance from the tents. Every night the army was
posted in this way and every night three or four of my household

Fol. 149. made the rounds with torches, each in his turn. I for my part
made the round once each night. Those not at their posts had
their noses slit and were led round through the army. Jahangir
Mirza was the right wing, with Bagi Chaghaniani, Sherim Taghai,
Sayyid Husain Akbar, and other begs. Mirza Khan was the
left wing, with ‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza, Qasim Beg and other begs.
In the centre there were no great begs, all were household-begs.
Sayyid Qasim Lord-of-the-gate, was the van, with Baba Aiighili,
Allah-birdi (var. Allah-quli Puran), and some other begs. The
army was in six divisions, each of which had its day and night
on guard.

Marching from that hill-skirt, our faces set west, we dismounted
on a waterless plain (gi#/) between Bannii and the Plain. The
soldiers got water here for themselves, their herds and so on, by
digging down, from one to one-and-a-half yards, into the dry
water-course, when water came. Not here only did this happen
for all the rivers of Hindiistan have the peculiarity that water is
safe to be found by digging down from one to one-and-a-half
yards in their beds. It is a wonderful provision of God that where,
except for the great rivers, there are no running-waters,' water
should be so placed within reach in dry water-courses.
two routes out of it, still to Farmil; but the extended march southward to near
see betang Khan made the westward turn be taken through the valley opening at


* This will mean, none of the artificial runlets familiar where Babur had lived
before getting to know Hindistan.


REM yay 4 Wie eons oan ey
iaal » y ;
oi


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 235


We left that dry channel next morning. Some of our men,
riding light, reached villages of the Plain in the afternoon, raided
a few, and brought back flocks, cloth and horses bred for trade.’
Pack-animals and camels and also the braves we had outdistanced,
kept coming into camp all through that night till dawn and on
till that morrow’s noon. During our stay there, the foragers Fol. 1494
brought in from villages in the Plain, masses of sheep and cattle,
and, from Afghan traders met on the roads, white cloths, aromatic
roots, sugars, ¢ipichaqs, and horses bred for trade. Hindi (var.
Mindi) Mughal unhorsed Khwaja Khizr Lihani, a well-known
and respected Afghan merchant, cutting off and bringing in his
head. Once when Sherim Taghai went in the rear of the foragers,
an Afghan faced him on the road and struck off his index-finger.


(2. Return made for Kabul.)

Two roads were heard of as leading from where we were to
Ghazni; one was the Tunnel-rock (Sang-i-sirakh) road, passing
Birk (Barak) and going on to Farmil; the other was one along
the Gimal, which also comes out at Farmil but without touching
Birk (Barak).? As during our stay in the Plain rain had fallen
incessantly, the Gimal was so swollen that it would have been
difficult to cross at the ford we came to ; moreover persons well-
acquainted with the roads, represented that going by the Gimal
road, this torrent must be crossed several times, that this was
always difficult when the waters were so high and that there was
always uncertainty on the Gimal road. Nothing was settled
then as to which of these two roads to take; I expected it to be
settled next day when, after the drum of departure had sounded, Fol. 150.
we talked it over as we went.3 It was the ‘Id-i-fitr (March 7th
1505 AD.); while I was engaged in the ablutions due for the
breaking of the fast, Jahangir Mirza and the begs discussed the


* sauda-at, perhaps, pack-ponies, perhaps, bred for sale and not for own use.
Burnes observes that in 1837 Lihani merchants carried precisely the same articles of
trade as in Babur’s day, 332 years earlier (Report IX p. 99).

? Mr. Erskine thought it probable that-the first of these routes went through
Kanigiram, and the second through the Ghwaliri-pass and along the Gimal. Azrf,
fastness, would seem an appropriate name for Kanigiiram, but, if Babur meant to go
to Ghazni, he would be off the ordinary Gimal-Ghazni route in going through Farmil
(Airgiin). Raverty’s Wofes give much useful detail about these routes, drawn from
native sources. For Barak (Birk) see Notes pp. 88, 89; Vigne, p. 102.

3 From this it would seem that the alternative roads were approached by one in
common.


17


Fol. 1502.


236


question of the roads. Some-one said that if we were to turn .


the billé of the Mehtar Sulaiman range, this lying between


the Plain and the Hill-country (desht u diki),? we should get
a level road though it might make the difference of a few marches.
For this they decided and moved off; before my ablutions were
finished the whole army had taken the road and most of it was
across the Gimal. Nota man of us had ever seen the road ;
no-one knew whether it was long or short; we started off just
on a rumoured word !

The Prayer of the ‘Id was made on the bank of the Gamal.
That year New-year’s Day3 fell close to the ‘Id-i-fitr, there being
only a few days between ; on their approximation I composed
the following (Turki) ode :—


Glad is the Bairam-moon for him who sees both the face of the Moon and the
Moon-face of his friend ;
Sad is the Bairam-moon for me, far away from thy face and from thee.+


O Babur ! dream of your luck when your Feast is the meeting, your New-year

the face ;

For better than that could not be with a hundred New-years and Bairams.

After crossing the Giimal torrent, we took our way along the
skirt of the hills, our faces set south. A mile or two further on,
some death-devoted Afghans shewed themselves on the lower
edge of the hill-slope. Loose rein, off we went for them ; most
of them fled but some made foolish stand on rocky-piles5 of the
foot-hills. One took post on a single rock seeming to have
a precipice on the further side of it, so that he had not even a way
of escape. Sl. Quli Chiinadg (One-eared), all in his mail as he was,
got up, slashed at, and took him. This was one of Sl. Quli’s
deeds done under my own eyes, which led to his favour and

romotion.© At another pile of rock, when Qitliigq-qadam
p q-q
exchanged blows with an Afghan, they grappled and came down

* tumshig, a bird’s bill, used here, as in Selsey-bill, for the naze (nose), or snout,
the last spur, of a range.

* Here these words may be common nouns.

° Nii-roz, the feast of the old Persian New-year (Erskine) ; it is the day on which
the Sun enters Aries.

* In the [Turki] Elph. and Hai. MSS. and in some Persian ones, there is a space
left here as though to indicate a known omission.

° kamari, sometimes a cattle-enclosure, which may serve as a sangur. The word
mA rhe in one place of its Babur-ndma uses for Gum-rahi (R.’s Votes s.n. Gum-
ranan).

© Index 5..


910 AH._JUNE 141TH 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 237


together, a straight fall of 10 to 12 yards; in the end Qitliiq-
qadam cut off and brought in his man’s head. Kipitk Beg got
hand-on-collar with an Afghan at another hill; both rolled down
to the bottom ; that head also was brought in. All Afghans
taken prisoner were set free.

Marching south through the Plain, and closely skirting Mehtar
Sulaiman, we came, with three nights’ halt, to a small township,
called Bilah, on the Sind-water and dependent on Multan.t | The
villagers crossed the water, mostly taking to their boats, but
some flung themselves in to cross. Some were seen standing on
an island in front of Bilah. Most of our men, man and horsein Fol. 151
mail, plunged in and crossed to the island ; some were carried
down, one being Qul-i-ariik (thin slave), one of my servants,
another the head tent-pitcher, another Jahangir Mirza’s servant,
Qaitmas Turkman.? Cloth and things of the baggage (partaldik
nima) fellto our men. The villagers all crossed by boat to the
further side of the river ; once there, some of them, trusting to
the broad water, began to make play with their swords. Qul-i-
bayazid, the taster, one of our men who had crossed to the island,
stripped himself and his horse and, right in front of them,
plunged by himself into the river. The water on that side of
the island may have been twice or thrice as wide as on ours.
He swum his horse straight for them till, an arrow’s-flight away,
he came to a shallow where his weight must have been up-borne,
the water being as high as the saddle-flap. There he stayed for
as long as milk takes to boil; no-one supported him from
behind ; he had not a chance of support. He made a dash at
them ; they shot a few arrows at him but, this not checking him,
they took to flight. To swim such a river as the Sind, alone,
bare on a bare-backed horse, no-one behind-him, and to chase
off a foe and occupy his ground, was a mightily bold deed! He
having driven the enemy off, other soldiers went over who Fol. 151
returned with cloth and droves of various sorts. Qul-i-bayazid
had already his place in my favour and kindness on account of
his good service, and of courage several times shewn ; from the
cook’s office I had raised him to the royal taster’s ; this time, as


* Vigne, p. 241.
? This name can be translated ‘‘ He turns not back” or “‘ He stops not ”.


Fol. 152.


238 KABUL Bea.
will be told, I took up a position full of bounty, favour and —
promotion,—in truth he was worthy of honour and advancement. _

Two other marches were made down the Sind-water. Our
men, by perpetually gallopping off on raids, had knocked up
their horses; usually what they took, cattle mostly, was not
worth the gallop ; sometimes indeed in the Plain there had been
sheep, sometimes one sort of cloth or other, but, the Plain left
behind, nothing was had but cattle. A mere servant would
bring in 3 or 400 head during our marches along the Sind-water,
but every march many more would be left on the road than
they brought in.


(7. The westward march.)


Having made three more marches’ close along the Sind, we
left it when we came opposite Pir Kanii’s tomb.? Going to the
tomb, we there dismounted. Some of our soldiers having injured
several of those in attendance on it, I had them cut to pieces.
It is a tomb on the skirt of one of the Mehtar Sulaiman
mountains and held in much honour in Hindustan.

Marching on from Pir Kani, we dismounted in the (Pawat)
pass ; next again in the bed of a torrent in Daki3 After we
left this camp there were brought in as many as 20 to 30
followers of a retainer of Shah Beg, Fazil Kakildash, the
darogha of Siwi. They had been sent to reconnoitre us but, as
at that time, we were not on bad terms with Shah Beg, we let
them go, with horse and arms. After one night’s halt, we
reached Chitiali, a village of Diki.

Although our men had constantly gallopped off to raid, both
before we reached the Sind-water and all along its bank, they
had not left horses behind, because there had been plenty of green
food and corn. When, however, we left the river and set our
faces for Pir Kani, not even green food was to be had; a little
land under green crop might be found every two or three

* 2.é. five from Bilah.

* Raverty gives the saint’s name as Pir Kaniin (Ar. Laman, listened to). It is the
well-known Sakhi-sarwar, honoured by Hindis and Muhammadans. (G. of L., xxi,
390; R.’s Notes p. 11 and p. 12 and JASB 1855; Calcutta Review 1875, Macauliffe’s
art. On the fair at Sakhi-sarwar; Leech’s Report VII, for the route; Khazinatu


*L-asfiyad iv, 245.)
3 This seems to be the sub-district of Qandahar, Diki or Digi.


910 AH.—_JUNE 141TH 1504 To JUNE 4TH 1505 AD. 239


marches, but of horse-corn, none. So, beyond the camps
mentioned, there began the leaving of horses behind. After
passing Chitiali, my own felt-tent' had to be left from want of
baggage-beasts. One night at that time, it rained so much, that
water stood knee-deep in my tent (chadar) ; I watched the night
out till dawn, uncomfortably sitting on a pile of blankets.


(k. Bagi Chaghaniani s treachery.)

A few marches further on came Jahangir Mirza, saying, “I
have a private word for you.” When we were in private, he
said, “ Bagi Chaghaniani came and said to me, ‘You make the
Padshah cross the water of Sind with 7, 8, 10 persons, then
make yourself Padshah.’” Said I, “ What others are heard of as
consulting with him?” Said he, “It was but a moment ago
Baqi Beg spoke to me; I know no more.” Said I, “Find out
who the others are; likely enough Sayyid Husain Akbar and
Sl. ‘Ali the page are in it, as well as Khusrau Shah’s begs and
braves.” Here the Mirza really behaved very well and like
a blood-relation ; what he now did was the counterpart of what
I had done in Kahmard,? in this same ill-fated mannikin’s other
scheme of treachery.

On dismounting after the next march, I made Jahangir Mirza
lead a body of well-mounted men to raid the Aighans (Afghans)
of that neighbourhood.

Many men’s horses were now left behind in each camping-
ground, the day coming when as many as 2 or 300 were left.
Braves of the first rank went on foot; Sayyid Mahmid
Aughlagchi, one of the best of the household-braves, left his
horses behind and walked. In this state as to horses we went
all the rest of the way to Ghazni.

Three or four marches further on, Jahangir Mirza plundered
some Afghans and brought in a few sheep.


(2. The Ab-t-tstada.)
When, with a few more marches, we reached the Standing-
water (Ad-z-zsta@da) a wonderfully large sheet of water presented


* khar-gih, a folding tent on lattice frame-work, perhaps a khzbitka.

2 It may be more correct to write Kah-mard, as the Hai. MS. does and to under-
stand in the name a reference to the grass(£a)-yielding capacity of the place.

3 f, 121.


Fol. 152


Fol. 153.


240 KABUL


itself to view; the level lands on its further side could not be —
seen at all; its water seemed to join the sky ; the higher land __
and the mountains of that further side looked to hang between
Heaven and Earth, as in a mirage. The waters there gathered —
are said to be those of the spring-rain floods of the Kattawaz-
plain, the Zurmut-valley, and the Qara-bagh meadow of the
Ghazni-torrent,—floods of the spring-rains, and the over-plus* of
the summer-rise of streams. |

When within two miles of the Ab-i-istada, we saw a wonderful
thing,—something as red as the rose of the dawn kept shewing
and vanishing between the sky and the water. It kept coming
and going. When we got quite close we learned that what
seemed the cause were flocks of geese,” not 10,000, not 20,000
in a flock, but geese innumerable which, when the mass of birds
flapped their wings in flight, sometimes shewed red feathers,
sometimes not. Not only was this bird there in countless
numbers, but birds of every sort. Eggs lay in masses on the
shore. When two Afghans, come there to collect eggs, saw us,

Fol. 1536. they went into the water half a kuroh (a mile). Some of our
men following, brought them back. As far as they went the
water was of one depth, up to a horse’s belly ; it seemed not to
lie in a hollow, the country being flat.

We dismounted at the torrent coming down to the Ab-i-istada
from the plain of Kattawaz. The several other times we have
passed it, we have found a dry channel with no water whatever,3
but this time, there was so much water, from the spring-rains,
that no ford could be found. The water was not very broad
but very deep. Horses and camels were made to swim it ; some
of the baggage was hauled over with ropes. Having got across,
we went on through Old Nani and Sar-i-dih to Ghazni where
for a few days Jahangir Mirza was our host, setting food before
us and offering his tribute. ’


* This may mean, what irrigation has not used.

* Mr. Erskine notes that the description would lead us to imagine a flock of
flamingoes. Masson found the lake filled with red-legged, white fowl (i, 262); these
and also what Babur saw, may have been the China-goose which has body and neck
white, head and tail russet (Bellew’s J/zssion p. 402). Broadfoot seems to have visited
the lake when migrants were few, and through this to have been led to adverse
comment on Babur’s accuracy (p. 350). ,

3 The usual dryness of the bed may have resulted from the irrigation of much land
some 12 miles from Ghazni.


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 ro JUNE 4ru 1505 AD. 241


(m. Return to Kabul.)

That year most waters came down in flood. No ford was
found through the water of Dih-i-yaq‘tb.t For this reason we
went straight on to Kamari, through the Sajawand-pass. At
Kamari I had a boat fashioned in a pool, brought and set on the
Dih-i-yaq‘ib-water in front of Kamari. In this all our people
were put over.

We reached Kabul in the month of Zi’l-hijja (May 1505 AD.).?
A few days earlier Sayyid Yusuf Aaghlagchi had gone to God’s Fol. 154.
mercy through the pains of colic.


(x. Misconduct of Nasir Mirza.)

It has been mentioned that at Qish-gumbaz, Nasir Mirza
asked leave to stay behind, saying that he would follow in a few
days after taking something from his district for his retainers
and followers.3 But having left us, he sent a force against the
people of Nir-valley, they having done something a little
refractory. The difficulty of moving in that valley owing to the
strong position of its fort and the rice-cultivation of its lands,
has already been described. The Mirza’s commander, Fazli, in
ground so impracticable and in that one-road tract, instead of
safe-guarding his men, scattered them to forage. Out came the
valesmen, drove the foragers off, made it impossible to the rest
to keep their ground, killed some, captured a mass of others
and of horses,—precisely what would happen to any army
chancing to be under such a person as Fazli! Whether because
of this affair, or whether from want of heart, the Mirza did not
follow us at all; he stayed behind.

Moreover Ayitb’s sons, Yisuf and Bahlil (Begchik), more
seditious, silly and arrogant persons than whom there may not
exist,—to whom I had given, to Yisuf Alangar, to Bahlal ‘Ali-
shang, they like Nasir Mirza, were to have taken something from Fol. 154/
their districts and to have come on with him, but, he not coming,


* This is the Luhigur (Logar) water, knee-deep in winter at the ford but spreading
in flood with the spring-rains. Babur, not being able to cross it for the direct roads
into Kabul, kept on along its left bank, crossing it eventually at the Kamari of maps,
s.e. of Kabul.

? This disastrous expedition, full of privation and loss, had occupied some four
months (T.R. p. 201).

3 f, 145. 4 f. 1336 and Appendix F.


fol. 155.


242 KABUL


neither did they. All that winter they were the companions o! 7
his cups and social pleasures. They also over-ran the Tarkalani
Afghans in it.. With the on-coming heats, the Mirza made -
march off the families of the clans, outside-tribes and hordes who |


had wintered in Ningnahar and the Lamghanat, driving them like
sheep before him, with all their goods, as far as the Baran-water.?


(0. Affairs of Badakhshan.)


While Nasir Mirza was in camp on the Baran-water, he heard
that the Badakhshis were united against the Aiizbegs and had
killed some of them.

Here are the particulars:—When Shaibaq Khan had given
QOiindiiz to Qambar Bi and gone himself to Khwarizm$3 ; Qambar
Bi, in order to conciliate the Badakhshis, sent them a son of
Muhammad-i-makhdimi, Mahmid by name, but Mubarak Shah,
—whose ancestors are heard of as begs of the Badakhshan
Shahs,—having uplifted his own head, and cut off Mahmid’s and
those of some Aiizbegs, made himself fast in the fort once known
as Shaf-tiwar but re-named by him Qila‘i-zafar. Moreover, in
Rustaq Muhammad g#rchz, an armourer of Khusrau Shah, then
occupying Khamalangan, slew Shaibaq Khan’s sadr and some
Aiizbegs and made that place fast. Zubair of Ragh, again,
whose forefathers also will have been begs of the Badakhshan
Shahs, uprose in Ragh+ Jahangir 7urkman, again, a servant
of Khusrau Shah’s Wali, collected some of the fugitive soldiers
and tribesmen Wali had left behind, and with them withdrew
into a fastness.5

Nasir Mirza, hearing these various items of news and spurred
on by the instigation of a few silly, short-sighted persons to
covet Badakhshan, marched along the Shibr-tii and Ab-dara
road, driving like sheep before him the families of the men who
had come into Kabul from the other side of the Ami.®


* They were located in Mandrawar in 926 AH. (f. 251).

* This was done, manifestly, with the design of drawing after the families their
fighting men, then away with Babur.

3 f, 163. Shaibaq Khan besieged Chin Sufi, Sl. Husain Mirza’s man in Khwarizm
(T.R. p. 204; Shaibani-nama, Vambéry, Table of Contents and note 89).

4 Survey Map 1889, Sadda. The Ragh-water flows n.w. into the Oxus (Ami).

5 dirk, a mountain stronghold ; cf. f. 1494 note to Birk (Barak).

° They were thus driven on from the Baran-water (f. 1544).


.


Sos
ya


eI ee Gere TS Cotes Co ay
pe
is =?


910 AH.—JUNE 14TH 1504 to JUNE 41TH 1505 AD. 243


(p. Affairs of Khusrau Shah.)

At the time Khusrau Shah and Ahmad-i-qasim were in flight
from Ajar for Khurasan,' they meeting in with Badi‘w’z-zaman
Mirza and Zi’n-nin Beg, all went on together to the presence of
Sl. Husain Mirza in Heri. All had long been foes of his; all
had behaved unmannerly to him ; what brands had they not set
on his heart! Yet all now went to him in their distress, and all
went through me. For it is not likely they would have seen
him if I had not made Khusrau Shah helpless by parting him
from his following, and if I had not taken Kabul from Zi’n’niin’s
son, Mugim. Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza himself was as dough in the Fol. 155%
hands of the rest ; beyond their word he could not go. Sl. Husain
Mirza took up a gracious attitude towards one and all, mentioned
no-one’s misdeeds, even made them gifts.

Shortly after their arrival Khusrau Shah asked for leave to go
to his own country, saying, “If I go, I shall get it all into my
hands.” As he had reached Heri without equipment and without
resources, they finessed a little about his leave. He became
importunate. Muhammad Barandiq retorted roundly on him
with, “When you had 30,000 men behind you and the whole
country in your hands, what did you effect against the Aiizbeg ?
What will you do now with your 500 men and the Aizbegs’ in
possession?” He added a little good advice in a few sensible
words, but all was in vain because the fated hour of Khusrau
Shah’s death was near. Leave was at last given because of his
importunity ; Khusrau Shah with his 3 or 400 followers, went
straight into the borders of Dahanah. There as Nasir Mirza
had just gone across, these two met.

Now the Badakhshi chiefs had invited only the Mirza; they
had not invited Khusrau Shah. Try asthe Mirza did to persuade
Khusrau Shah to go into the hill-country,? the latter, quite
understanding the whole time, would not consent to go, his own
idea being that if he marched under the Mirza, he would get the Fol. 156.
country into his own hands. In the end, unable to agree, each
of them, near Ishkimish, arrayed his following, put on mail, drew
out to fight,and—departed. Nasir Mirza went on for Badakhshan ;
Khusrau Shah after collecting a disorderly rabble, good and bad


t f, 1266. ? Hisar, presumably.


ol. 156d.


244 KABUL


f $e.
,
- *
rol

~~


of some 1,000 persons, went, with the intention of laying siege
to Qindiiz, to Khwaja Char-taq, one or two yighdch outside it.


(g. Death of Khusrau Shah.)

At the time Shaibaq Khan, after overcoming Sultan Ahmad
Tambal and Andijan, made a move on Hisar, his Honour
Khusrau Shah? flung away his country (Qindiz and Hisar)
without a blow struck, and saved himself. Thereupon Shaibaq
Khan went to Hisar in which were Sherim the page and a few
good braves. They did not surrender Hisar, though their
honourable beg had flung 4zs country away and gone off ; they
made Hisar fast. The siege of Hisar Shaibaq Khan entrusted to
Hamza SI. and Mahdi Sultan,? went to Qindiz, gave Oiindiiz to
his younger brother, Mahmiid Sultan and betook himself without _
delay to Khwarizm against Chin Sifi. But as, before he reached
Samarkand on his way to Khwarizm, he heard of the death in
Qindiz of his brother, Mahmid Sultan, he gave that place to
QOambar Bi of Marv.3

Qambar Bi was in Qindiiz when Khusrau Shah went against
it; he at once sent off galloppers to summon Hamza Sl. and the
others Shaibaq Khan had left behind. Hamza Sl. came himself
as far as the savaz on the Ami bank where he put his sons and
begs in command of a force which went direct against Khusrau
Shah. There was neither fight nor flight for that fat, little man;
Hamza Sultan’s men unhorsed him, killed his sister’s son,
Ahmad-i-qasim, Sherim the page and several good braves. Him
they took into Qiundiiz, there struck his head off and from there
sent it to Shaibaq Khan in Khwarizm.4


(x. Conduct in Kabul of Khusrau Shah's retainers.)
Just as Khusrau Shah had said they would do, his former
retainers and followers, no sooner than he marched against


* Here ‘* His Honour” translates Babur’s clearly ironical honorific plural.

* These two sultans, almost always mentioned in alliance, may be Timirids by
maternal descent (Index s.2.). So far I have found no direct statement of their
parentage. My husband has shewn me what may be one indication of it, w2z. that
two of the uncles of Shaibaq Khan (whose kinsmen the sultans seem to be), Qij-kiinji
and Siiinjak, were sons of a daughter of the Timirid Ailigh Beg Samarkanai
(HLS. ii, 318). See Vambéry’s Bukhara p. 248 note.

3 For the deaths of Tambal and Mahmid, mentioned in the above summary of
Shaibaq Khan’s actions, see the Shatbani-ndma, Vambéry, p. 323.

4 HS. ii, 323, for Khusrau Shah’s character and death.


t
910 AH.—_JUNE 14ru 1504 to JUNE 41TH 1505 AD. 245


Oindiiz, changed in their demeanour to me,’ most of them
marching off to near Khwaja-i-riwaj.2 The greater number of
the men in my service had been in his. The Mughils behaved
well, taking up a position of adherence to me.3 On all this the
news of Khusrau Shah’s death fell like water on fire; it put
his men out.


Xf 424.

? Khwaja-of-the-rhubarb, presumably a shrine near rhubarb-grounds (i. 1298).

3 yakshi bardilar, lit. went well, a common expression in the Babur-ndma, of which
the reverse statement is yamdnlik bila bardi (f. 163). Some Persian MSS. make the
Mughils disloyal but this is not only in opposition to the Turki text, it is a redundant
statement since if disloyal, they are included in Babur’s previous statement, as being
Khusrau Shah’s retainers. What might call for comment in Mughils would be loyalty
to Babur.


tol. 157.


911 AH.— JUNE 47H 1505 tro MAY 247xH 1506 AD."


(a. Death of Qutligq-nigar Khanim.)

In the month of Muharram my mother had fever. Blood
was let without effect and a Khurasani doctor, known as Sayyid
Tabib, in accordance with the Khurasan practice, gave her
water-melon, but her time to die must have come, for on the
Saturday after six days of illness, she went to God’s mercy.

On Sunday I and Qasim Kikildash conveyed her to the
New-year’s Garden on the mountain-skirt? where Ailigh Beg
Mirza had built a house, and there, with the permission of his
heirs,3 we committed her to the earth. While we were mourning
for her, people let me know about (the death of) my younger
Khan dada Alacha Khan, and my grandmother Aisan-daulat
Begim.4 Close upon Khanim’s FortiethS arrived from Khurasan
Shah Begim the mother of the Khans, together with my maternal-
aunt Mihr-nigar Khanim, formerly of Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s Zaram,
and Muhammad Husain Kurkan Dighlat® Lament broke out
afresh ; the bitterness of these partings was extreme. When
the mourning-rites had been observed, food and victuals set out
for the poor and destitute, the Qoran recited, and prayers offered
for the departed souls, we steadied ourselves and all took heart
again.

(6. A futile start for Qandahar.)

When set free from these momentous duties, we got an army

to horse for Qandahar under the strong insistance of Baqi


* Elph. MS. f. 1214: W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 126 and 217 f. 1066; Mems. p. 169.
a kyr Pagncssaee presumably the Koh-daman, and the garden will thus be the one
of f. 136d.

3 If these heirs were descendants of Aiiligh Beg M. one would be at hand in
‘Abdu’r-razzaq, then a boy, and another, a daughter, was the wife of Muqim Arghin.
As Mr. Erskine notes, Musalmans are most scrupulous not to bury their dead in
ground gained by violence or wrong.

4 The news of Ahmad’s death was belated ; he died some 13 months earlier, in the
end of 909 AH. and in Eastern Turkistan. Perhaps details now arrived.

5 7.e. the fortieth day of mourning, when alms are given.

° Of those arriving, the first would find her step-daughter dead, the second her
sister, the third, his late wife’s sister (T.R. p, 196).


246


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 to MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 247


Chaghaniani. At the start I went to Qish-nadir (var. nawar)
where on dismounting I got fever. It was a strange sort of
illness for whenever with much trouble I had been awakened,
my eyes closed again in sleep. In four or five days I got
quite well.


(c. An earthquake.)


At that time there was a great earthquake such that most of
the ramparts of forts and the walls of gardens fell down ; houses
were levelled to the ground in towns and villages and many
persons lay dead beneath them. Every house fell in Paghman-
village, and 70 to 80 strong heads-of-houses lay dead under
their walls. Between Pagh-man and Beg-tit? a piece of ground,
a good stone-throw3 wide may-be, slid down as far as an
arrow’s-flight ; where it had slid springs appeared. On the
road between Istarghach and Maidan the ground was so broken
_ up for 6 to 8 yighach (36-48 m.) that in some places it rose as
high as an elephant, in others sank as deep; here and there
people were sucked in. When the Earth quaked, dust rose from
the tops of the mountains. Niru’l-lah the Zambourchi* had
been playing before me ; he had two instruments with him and
at the moment of the quake had both in his hands; so out of
his own control was he that the two knocked against each other.
Jahangir Mirza was in the porch of an upper-room at a house
built by Ailigh Beg Mirza in Tipa; when the Earth quaked,
he let himself down and was not hurt, but the roof fell on
some-one with him in that upper-room, presumably one of his
own circle ; that this person was not hurt in the least must have
been solely through God’s mercy. In Tipa most of the houses
were levelled to the ground. The Earth quaked 33 times on
the first day, and for a month afterwards used to quake two or
three times in the 24 hours. The begs and soldiers having been

* This will be the earthquake felt in Agra on Safar 3rd 911 AH. (July 5th 1505 aD.
Erskine’s History of India i, 229 note). Cf, Elliot and Dowson, iv, 465 and vy, 99.

? Raverty’s Votes p. 690.

3 bir kitta tash atimi; var. bash Gtimi. If tash be right, the reference will
probably be to the throw of a catapult.

4 Here almost certainly, a drummer, because there were two tambours and because
also Babur uses ‘aa#di & ghachaki for the other meanings of famdbourcht, lutanist and


guitarist. The word has found its way, as faméourgi, into Childe Harold’s Pilgrimage
(Canto ii, Ixxii. H.B.).


Fol. 1570.


Fol. 158.


Fol. 1582.


248 KABUL


ordered to repair the breaches made in the towers and rampa is
of the fort (Kabul), everything was made good again in 20days —
or a month by their industry and energy.


(ad. Campaign against Qalat-t-ghilzai.)

Owing to my illness and to the earthquake, our plan of going
to Oandahar had fallen somewhat into the background. The
illness left behind and the fort repaired, it was taken up again.
We were undecided at the time we dismounted below Shniz*
whether to go to Qandahar, or to over-run the hills and plains.
Jahangir Mirza and the begs having assembled, counsel was
taken and the matter found settlement in a move on Qalat. On
this move Jahangir Mirza and Baqi Chaghaniani insisted strongly.

At Tazi? there was word that Sher-i-‘ali the page with Kichik
Baqi Dzwana and others had thoughts of desertion ; all were
arrested ; Sher-i-‘ali was put to death because he had given clear
signs of disloyalty and misdoing both while in my service and
not in mine, in this country and in that country. The others
were let go with loss of horse and arms.

On arriving at Qalat we attacked at once and from all sides,
without our mail and without siege-appliances. As has been
mentioned in this History, Kichik Khwaja, the elder brother of
Khwaja Kalan, was a most daring brave ; he had used his sword
in my presence several times ; he now clambered up the south-
west tower of Qalat, was pricked in the eye with a spear when
almost up, and died of the wound two or three days after the
place was taken. Here that Kichik Baqi Dzzwana who had been
arrested when about to desert with Sher-i-‘ali the page, expiated
his baseness by being killed with a stone when he went under
the ramparts. One or two other men died also. Fighting of
this sort went on till the Afternoon Prayer when, just as our
men were worn-out with the struggle and labour, those in the
fort asked for peace and made surrender. Qalat had been given
by Zi’n-nin Arghin to Mugim, and in it now were Muqim’s
retainers, Farrukh Arvghin and Qara Bilat (Afghan). When
they came out with their swords and quivers hanging round


* Kabul-Ghazni road (R.’s Votes index s.2.).
* var. Vari. Taziis on the Ghazni-Qalat-i-ghilzai road (R.’s Votes, Appendix p. 46).
3 ze. in Kabul and in the Trans-Himalayan country.


911 AH.—JUNE 4ru 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 249


their necks, we forgave their offences." It was not my wish to
reduce this high family? to great straits; for why? Because if
we did so when such a foe as the Aiizbeg was at our side, what
would be said by those of far and near, who saw and heard ?

As the move on Qalat had been made under the insistance of
Jahangir Mirza and Baqi Chaghaniani, it was now made over to
the Mirza’s charge. He would not accept it; Baqi also could
give no good answer in the matter. So, after such a storming
and assaulting of Qalat, its capture was useless.

We went back to Kabul after over-running the Afghans of
Sawa-sang and Ala-tagh on the south of Qalat.

The night we dismounted at Kabul I went into the fort ;
my tent and stable being in the Char-bagh, a Khirilchi thief
going into the garden, fetched out and took away a bay horse
of mine with its accoutrements, and my khachar.3


(e. Death of Bagi Chaghaniini.)

From the time Baqi Chaghanianz joined me on the Ami-bank,
no man of mine had had more trust and authority.4 If a word
were said, if an act were done, that word was his word, that act,
his act. Spite of this, he had not done me fitting service, nor
had he shewn me due civility. Quite the contrary! he had
done things bad and unmannerly. Mean he was, miserly and
malicious, ill-tongued, envious and cross-natured. So miserly
was he that although when he left Tirmiz, with his family and
possessions, he may have owned 30 to 40,000 sheep, and
although those masses of sheep used to pass in front of us at
every camping-ground, he did not give a single one to our bare


* These will be those against Babur’s suzerainty done by their defence of Qalat
for Mugim.

2 tabaga, dynasty. By using this word Babur shews recognition of high birth. It is
noticeable that he usually writes of an Arghiin chief either simply as ‘‘ Beg” or
without a title. This does not appear to imply admission of equality, since he styles
even his brothers and sisters Mirza and Begim ; nor does it shew familiarity of inter-
course, since none seems to have existed between him and Zi’n-nin or Mugim. That
he did not admit equality is shewn on f. 208. The T.R. styles Zi’n-niin ‘‘ Mirza’”’,
a title by which, as also by Shah, his descendants are found styled (A.-i-a.
Blochmann, s. 72. ).

3 Turki £hachar is a camel or mule used for carrying personal effects. The word
has been read by some scribes as khanjar, dagger.

4 In 910 AH. he had induced Babur to come to Kabul instead of going into Khurasan
(H.S. iii, 319) ; in the same year he dictated the march to Kohat, and the rest of that
disastrous travel. His real name was not Baqi but Muhammad Bagir (H.S. iii, 311).


Fol. 159.


Fol. 1594.


250 KABUL


braves, tortured as they were by the pangs of hunger; at last in


Kah-mard, he gave 50!

Spite of acknowledging me for his chief (padshah), he had
nagarets beaten at his own Gate. He was sincere to none, had
regard for none. What revenue there is from Kabul (town)
comes from the zamgha'; the whole of this he had, together
with the d@rogha-ship in Kabul and Panjhir, the Gadai (var. Kidi)
Hazara, and kash/ik? and control of the Gate.3 With all this
favour and finding, he was not in the least content ; quite the
reverse! What medley of mischief he planned has been told ;
we had taken not the smallest notice of any of it, nor had we
cast it in his face. He was always asking for leave, affecting
scruple at making the request. We used to acknowledge the
scruple and excuse ourselves from giving the leave. This
would put him down for a few days; then he would ask again.
He went too far with his affected scruple and his takings of
leave! Sick were we too of his conduct and his character. We
gave the leave ; he repented asking for it and began to agitate
against it, but all in vain! He got written down and sent to
me, “ His Highness made compact not to call me to account till
nine* misdeeds had issued from me.” I answered with a reminder
of eleven successive faults and sent this to him through Mulla
Baba of Pashaghar. He submitted and was allowed to go
towards Hindistan, taking his family and possessions. A few
of his retainers escorted him through Khaibar and returned ; he
joined Baqi Gagianz’s caravan and crossed at Nil-ab.

Darya Khan’s son, Y4ar-i-husain was then in Kacha-kot,5
having drawn into his service, on the warrant of the farman
taken from me in Kohat, a few Afghans of the Dilazak (var.
Dilah-zak) and Yisuf-zai and also a few Jats and Gujirs.®
With these he beat the roads, taking toll with might and main.


* These transit or custom duties are so called because the dutiable articles are
stamped with a /amghda, a wooden stamp.

* Perhaps this word is an equivalent of Persian goshi, a tax on cattle and beasts
of burden.

3 Baqi was one only and not the head of the Lords of the Gate.

4 The choice of the number nine, links on presumably to the mystic value attached
to it e.g. Tarkhans had nine privileges ; gifts were made by nines.

5 It is near Hasan-abdal (A. i-A. Jarrett, ii, 324).

© For the farman, f. 1464 ; for Gujirs, G. of I.


911 AH._JUNE 47H 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 251


Hearing about Baqi, he blocked the road, made the whole party
prisoner, killed Baqi and took his wife.

We ourselves had let Baqi go without injuring him, but his
own misdeeds rose up against him; his own acts defeated him.


Leave thou to Fate the man who does thee wrong ;
For Fate is an avenging servitor.


(f. Attack on the Turkman Hazaras.)

That winter we just sat in the Char-bagh till snow had fallen
once or twice.

The Turkman Hazaras, since we came into Kabul, had done
a variety of insolent things and had robbed on the roads. We
thought therefore of over-running them, went into the town to
Ailigh Beg Mirza’s house at the Bistan-sarai, and thence rode
out in the month of Sha‘ban (Feb. 1506 AD.).

We raided a few Hazaras at Janglik, at the mouth of the
Dara-i-khish (Happy-valley).* Some were in a cave near the
valley-mouth, hiding perhaps. Shaikh Darwish Kikildash went


(Author's note on Shaikh Darwish.) He had been with me in the guerilla-

times, was Master-armourer (g#r-4egz), drew a strong bow and shot a good shaft.

incautiously right (avg) up to the cave-mouth, was shot (ai#g/ad)
in the nipple by a Hazara inside and died there and then (aaq).?

As most of the Turkman Hazaras seemed to be wintering
inside the Dara-i-khiish, we marched against them.

The valley is shut in,3 by a mile-long gully stretching inwards
from its mouth. The road engirdles the mountain, having
a straight fall of some 50 to 60 yards below it and above it
a precipice. Horsemen go along it in single-file. We passed
the gully and went on through the day till between the Two
Prayers (3 p.m.) without meeting a single person. Having spent
the night somewhere, we found a fat camel* belonging to the
Hazaras, had it killed, made part of its flesh into kaéabs5 and


* var. Khwesh. Its water flows into the Ghir-bund stream; it seems to be the
Dara-i-Turkman of Stanford and the Survey Maps both of which mark Janglik. For
Hazara turbulence, f. I 356 and note.

? The repetition of a#g in this sentence can hardly be accidental.

3 aur [dara], which I take to be Turki, round, complete.

4 Three MSS. of the Turki text write dir simisliig tiwah ; but the two Persian
translations have yak shuturlig farbih, a shuturlig being a baggage- camel with little
hair (Erskine).

5 brochettes, meat cut into large mouthfuls, spitted and roasted.


18


Fol. 160,


Fol. 1606.


Fol. 161.


Fol. 1614,


252 KABUL


cooked part in a ewer (a/tab). Such good camel-flesh had ne
been tasted ; some could not tell it from mutton. Bi.

Next day we marched on for the Hazara winter-camp. At —
the first watch (9 a.m.) a man came from ahead, saying that the
Hazaras had blocked a ford in front with branches, checked our
men and were fighting. That winter the snow lay very deep;
to move was difficult except on the road. The swampy meadows
(tuk-ab) along the stream were all frozen ; the stream could only
be crossed from the road because of snow and ice. The Hazaras
had cut many branches, put them at the exit from the water and
were fighting in the valley-bottom with horse and foot or raining
arrows down from either side.

Muhammad ‘Ali MWubashshir* Beg one of our most daring
braves, newly promoted to the rank of beg and well worthy of
favour, went along the branch-blocked road without his mail,
was shot in the belly and instantly surrendered his life. As
we had gone forward in haste, most of us were not in mail.
Shaft after shaft flew by and fell; with each one Yisuf’s Ahmad
said anxiously, “ Bare? like this you go into it! I have seen
two arrows go close to your head!” Said I, “Don’t fear!
Many as good arrows as these have flown past my head!” So
much said, Qasim Beg, his men in full accoutrement,3 found
a ford on our right and crossed. Before their charge the Hazaras
could make no stand ; they fled, swiftly pursued and unhorsed
one after the other by those just up with them.

In guerdon for this feat Bangash was given to Qasim Beg.
Hatim the armourer having been not bad in the affair, was
promoted to Shaikh Darwish’s office of gur-degi. Baba Quli’s
Kipik (szc) also went well forward in it, so we entrusted Muh.
‘Ali Mubashshir’s office to him.

Sl. Quli Chindg (one-eared) started in pursuit of the Hazaras
but there was no getting out of the hollow because of the snow.
For my own part I just went with these braves.

Near the Hazara winter-camp we found many sheep and
herds of horses. I myself collected as many as 4 to 500 sheep


* Perhaps he was officially an announcer ; the word means also bearer of good news.
2 yilang, without mail, as in the common phrase yigit yilang, a bare brave.
3 aiipchin, of horse and man (f. 1134 and note).


911 AH.—JUNE 41x 1505 to MAY 24rH 1506 AD. 253


and from 20 to 25 horses. SI. Quli Chindag and two or three of
my personal servants were with me. I have ridden in a raid
twice’; this was the first time ; the other was when, coming in
from Khurasan (912 AH.), we raided these same Turkman
Hazaras. Our foragers brought in masses of sheep and horses.
The Hazara wives and their little children had gone off up the
snowy slopes and stayed there ; we were rather idle and it was
- getting late in the day ; so we turned back and dismounted in
their very dwellings. Deep indeed was the snow that winter!
Off the road it was up to a horse’s gapta/,? so deep that the
night-watch was in the saddle all through till shoot of dawn.

Going out of the valley, we spent the next night just inside
the mouth, in the Hazara winter-quarters. Marching from there,
we dismounted at Janglik. At Janglik Yarak Taghai and other
late-comers were ordered to take the Hazaras who had killed
Shaikh Darwish and who, luckless and death-doomed, seemed
still to be in the cave. Yarak Taghai and his band by sending
smoke into the cave, took 70 to 80 Hazaras who mostly died by
the sword.


(g. Collection of the Nijr-aii tribute.)

On the way back from the Hazara expedition we went to
the Ai-tighdi neighbourhood below Baran 3 in order to collect
the revenue of Nijr-at. Jahangir Mirza, come up from Ghazni,
waited on me there. At that time, on Ramzan 13th (Feb. 7th)
such sciatic-pain attacked me that for 40 days some-one had
to turn me over from one side to the other.

Of the (seven) valleys of the Nijr-water the Pichkan-valley,—
and of the villages in the Pichkan-valley Ghain,—and of Ghain
its head-man Husain Ghaznz in particular, together with his elder
and younger brethren, were known and notorious for obstinacy
and daring. On this account a force was sent under Jahangir
Mirza, Qasim Beg going too, which went to Sar-i-tip (Hill-top),
stormed and took a sawgur and made a few meet their doom.

* Manifestly Babur means that he twice actually helped to collect the booty.

2 This is that part of a horse covered by the two side-pieces of a Turki saddle, from
which the side-arch springs on either side (Shaw).

3 Barin-ning ayaght. Except the river I have found nothing called Baran; the


village marked Baian on the French Map would suit the position ; it is n.e. of Char-
yak-kar (f. 1844 note).


Fol. 162.


Fol. 1624.


254 KABUL


Because of the sciatic pain, people made a sort of litt


for me in which they carried me along the bank of the Baran ie


and into the town to the Bistan-sarai. There I stayed for
a few days; before that trouble was over a boil came out on
my left cheek ; this was lanced and for it I also took a purge.
When relieved, I went out into the Char-bagh.


(h. Misconduct of Jahangir Mirza.)

At the time Jahangir Mirza waited on me, Ayib’s sons
Yisuf and Buhlil, who were in his service, had taken up a
strifeful and seditious attitude towards me; so the Mirza was
not found to be what he had been earlier. In a few days
he marched out of Tipa in his mail,t hurried back to Ghazni,
there took Nani, killed some of its people and plundered all.
After that he marched off with whatever men he had, through
the Hazaras,? his face set for Bamian. God knows that nothing
had been done by me or my dependants to give him ground
for anger or reproach! What was heard of later on as perhaps
explaining his going off in the way he did, was this ;—When
Qasim Beg went with other begs, to give him honouring
meeting as he came up from Ghazni, the Mirza threw a falcon
off at a quail. Just as the falcon, getting close, put out its
pounce to seize the quail, the quail dropped to the ground.
Hereupon shouts and cries, “Taken! is it taken?” Said
Oasim Beg, “Who looses the foe in his grip?” Their
misunderstanding of this was their sole reason for going off, but
they backed themselves on one or two other worse and weaker
old cronish matters.3 After doing in Ghazni what has been
mentioned, they drew off through the Hazaras to the Mughiul

* z.e. prepared to fight.

* For the Hazara (Turki, Ming) on the Mirza’s road see Raverty’s routes from
Ghazni to the north. An account given by the 7a7ikh-z-rashidi (p. 196) of Jahangir’s
doings is confused; its parenthetical ‘‘(at the same time)” can hardly be correct.
Jahangir left Ghazni now, (9II AH.), as Babur left Kabul in 912 AH. without know-
ledge of Husain’s death (911 AH.). Babur had heard it (f. 1834) before Jahangir
joined him (912 AH.); after their meeting they went on together to Heri. The
petition of which the T.R. speaks as made by Jahangir to Babur, that he might go
into Khurasan and help the Bai-qara Mirzis must have been made after the meeting
of the two at Saf-hill (f 1844).

3 The plurals ¢hey and ¢hezr of the preceding sentence stand no doubt for the Mirza,


Yusuf and Buhliil who all had such punishment due as would lead them to hear threat
in Qasim’s words now when all were within Babur’s pounce.


“A
rt
aaa
4


i 7 eye ay ‘Sere ziti


}


911 AH.—_JUNE 41H 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 255


clans.1 These clans at that time had left Nasir Mirza but had
not joined the Atzbeg, and were in Yai, Astar-ab and the
summer-pastures thereabouts.


(2. SZ. Husain Mirza calls up help against Shaibag Khan.)


Sl. Husain Mirza, having resolved to repel Shaibaq Khan,
summoned all his sons ; me too he summoned, sending to me
Sayyid Afzal, son of Sayyid ‘Ali Khwab-bin (Seer-of-dreams).
It was right on several grounds for us to start for Khurasan.
One ground was that when a great ruler, sitting, as Sl. Husain
Mirza sat, in Timir Beg’s place, had resolved to act against
such a foe as Shaibaq Khan and had called up many men and
had summoned his sons and his begs, if there were some who
went on foot it was for us to go if on our heads! if some took
the bludgeon, we would take the stone! A second ground was
that, since Jahangir Mirza had gone to such lengths and had
behaved so badly,? we had either to dispel his resentment or to
repel his attack.


(7. Chin Sifi’s death.)


This year Shaibaq Khan took Khwarizm after besieging Chin
Sifi in it for ten months. There had been a mass of fighting
during the siege; many were the bold deeds done by the
Khwarizmi braves ; nothing soever did they leave undone. Again
and again their shooting was such that their arrows pierced
shield and cuirass, sometimes the two cuirasses.3 For ten
months they sustained that siege without hope in any quarter.
A few bare braves then lost heart, entered into talk with the
Aitizbeg and were in the act of letting him up into the fort
when Chin Sifi had the news and went to the spot. Just as
he was beating and forcing down the Aizbegs, his own page,
in a discharge of arrows, shot him from behind. No man was
left to fight ; the Atizbegs took Khwarizm. God’s mercy on


* These are the aimdags from which the fighting-men went east with Babur in
910 AH. and the families in which Nasir shepherded across Hindu-kush (f. 154 and
f. 155).

° yamanith bila bardt; cf. f. 1566 and n. for its opposite, yakhshi bardilar ; and
T.R. p. 196.

3 One might be of mail, the other of wadded cloth.


Fol, 163.


Fol, 1636.


ue So
256 KABUL


Chin Sifi, who never for one moment ceased to stake his
for his chief !* =
Shaibaq Khan entrusted Khwarizm to Kipuk (sc) Bi and 7
went back to Samarkand.


(k. Death of Sultan Husain Mirza.)

Sl. Husain Mirza having led his army out spate Shaibaq
Khan as far as Baba [lahi? went to God’s mercy, in the month
of Zi’l-hijja (Zi’l-hijja 11th 911 AH.—May 5th 1506 AD.).


SULTAN HUSAIN MIRZA AND HIS COURTS


(a.) Hes birth and descent.

He was born in Heri (Harat), in (Muharram) 842 (AH—
June-July, 1438 AD.) in Shahrukh Mirza’s time*+ and was the
son of Mansir Mirza, son of Bai-qara Mirza, son of ‘Umar
Shaikh Mirza, son of Amir Timir. Manstr Mirza and Bai-
qara Mirza never reigned.

His mother was Firiiza Begim, a (great-)grandchild (zabira)
of Timir Beg; through her he became a grandchild of Miran-
shah also.5 He was of high birth on both sides, a ruler of royal


* Chin Safi was Husain Adai-gara@s man (T.R. p. 204). His arduous defence,
faithfulness and abandonment recall the instance of a later time when also a long road
stretched between the man and the help that failed him. But the Mirza was old, his
military strength was, admittedly, sapped by ease; hence his elder Khartum, his
neglect of his Gordon.

It should be noted that no mention of the page’s fatal arrow is made by the
Shaibani-nima (Vambéry, p. 442), or by the 7arzkh-t-rashidi (p. 204). Chin Siifi’s
death was on the 21st of the Second Rabi 911 AH. (Aug. 22nd 1505 AD.).

? This may be the ‘‘ Baboulei” of the French Map of 1904, on the Heri-Kushk-
Mariichag road.

3 Elph. MS. f. 127; W.-i-B. LO. 215 f. 132 and 217 f. 1115; Mems. p. 175;
Méms. i, 364.

That Babur should have given his laborious account of the Court of Heri seems due
both to loyalty to a great Timirid, seated in Timiir Beg’s place (f. 1224), and to his
own interest, as a man-of-letters and connoisseur in excellence, in that ruler’s galaxy
of talent. His account here opening is not complete ; its sources are various; they
include the Hadibu’s-styar and what he will have learned himself in Heri or from
members of the Bai-qara family, knowledgeable women some of them, who were with
him in Flindiistan. The narrow scope of my notes shews that they attempt no more
than to indicate further sources of information and to clear up a few obscurities.

4 Timiir’s youngest son, d. 850 AH. (1446 ApD.). Cf. HLS. iii, 203. The use in
this sentence of Amir and not Beg as Timit’s title is, up to this point, unique in the
Babur-nima ; it may be a scribe’s error.

5 Firiiza’s paternal line of descent was as follows :—Firiiza, daughter of Sl. Husain
Qanjat, son of Aka Begim, daughter of Timir. Her maternal descent was :—Firiza,
d. of Qiitliq-sultan Begim, d. of Miran-shah, s. of Timiir. She died Muh. 24th 874 an.
(July 25th 1489 ap. HLS. iii, 218).


911 AH.—JUNE 47H 1505 ro MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 257
ao


lineage.t Of the marriage (of Mansi with Firiiza) were born
two sons and two daughters, namely, Bai-qara Mirza and Sl.
Husain Mirza, Aka Begim and another daughter, Badka Begim
whom Ahmad Khan took.?

Bai-qara Mirza was older than Sl. Husain Mirza; he was
his younger brother’s retainer but used not to be present as
head of the Court ;3 except in Court, he used to share his
brother’s divan (¢ishak). He was given Balkh by his younger
brother and was its Commandant for several years. He had three
sons, Sl. Muhammad Mirza, Sl. Wais Mirza and Sl. Iskandar
Mirza.4

Aka Begim was older than the Mirza; she was taken by
Sl. Ahmad Mirza,5 a grandson (zadira) of Miran-shah ; by him
‘she had a son (Muhammad Sultan Mirza), known as Kichik
(Little) Mirza, who at first was in his maternal-uncle’s service,
but later on gave up soldiering to occupy himself with letters.
He is said to have become very learned and also to have taste
in verse.© Here is a Persian quatrain of his :—


For long on a life of devotion I plumed me,

As one of the band of the abstinent ranged me ;
Where when Love came was devotion? denial ?
By the mercy of God it is I have proved me!


t ** No-one in the world had such parentage”, writes Khwand-amir, after detailing
the Timirid, Chingiz-khanid, and other noted strains meeting in Husain Adi-gara
(H.S. iii, 204).

2 The Elph. MS. gives the Begim no name; Badi‘u’l-jamal is correct (H.S. iii,
242). The curious ‘* Badka” needs explanation. It seems probable that Babur left
one of his blanks for later filling-in ; the natural run of his sentence here is ‘* Aka B.


Fol. 164.


and Badi‘u’l-jamal B.” and not the detail, which follows in its due place, about the -


marriage with Ahmad.

3 Diwin bashida hazir bilmas aidi ; the sense of which may be that Bai-qara did
not sit where the premier retainer usually sat at the head of the Court (Pers. trs.
sar-t-diwan).

4 From this Wais and Sl. Husain M.’s daughter Sultanim (f. 1674) were descended
the Bai-qara Mirzas who gave Akbar so much trouble.

5 As this man might be mistaken for Babur’s uncle (g.v.) of the same name, it may
be well to set down his parentage. He was a s. of Mirza Sayyidi Ahmad, s. of
Miran-shah, s. of Timir (H.S. iii, 217, 241). I have not found mention elsewhere
of ‘‘ Ahmad s. of Miran-shah” ; the sayyzdi in his style points to a sayyida mother.
He was Governor of Heri for a time, for SI. H.M. ; ‘Ali-sher has notices of him and
of his son, Kichik Mirza ( Journal Asiatique xvii, 293, M. Belin’s art. where may be
seen notices of many other men mentioned by Babur).

© He collected and thus preserved ‘Ali-sher’s earlier poems (Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 294).
Mw’inu’d-din al Zamji writes respectfully of his being worthy of credence in some
Egyptian matters with which he became acquainted in twice passing through that
country on his Pilgrimage (/ournal Asiatique xvi, 476, de Meynard’s article).


ol. 1645.


-accordance with orthodox law. He could not perform the


258 KABUL


This quatrain recalls one by the Mulla.t Kichik Mirza mad
the circuit of the £a‘ba towards the end of his life. .

Badka (Badi‘u’l-jamal) Begim also was older? than the Mirza. He
She was given in the guerilla times to Ahmad Khan of Haji- —
tarkhan ;3 by him she had two sons (S]. Mahmiid Khan and
Bahadur Sl.) who went to Heri and were in the Mirza’s service.


(0.) His appearance and habits.


He was slant-eyed (giyzk guzliq) and_lion- -bodied, _ being
slender from the waist downwards. Even when ¢ old a and white-
bearded, he wore silken garments of fine red and_ d green. . He
used to wear either the black lambskin cap (dark) or the
galpag,* but on a Feast-day would sometimes set up a little
three-fold turban, wound broad and badly,5 stick a heron’s
plume in it and so go to Prayers.

When he first took Heri, he thought of reciting the names of
the Twelve Imams in the khutba,° but ‘Ali-sher Beg and others
prevented it; thereafter all his important acts were done in


Prayers on account of a trouble in the joints? and he kept n no
fasts. He was lively and pleasant, rather immoderate i in temper,
and with words that matched his “temper. , ‘He shewed great
respect for the “law” in ~Séveral weighty. ‘matters; he once
surrendered to the “Avengers of blood a son of his own who had


* Kichik M.’s quatrain is a mere plagiarism of Jami’s which I am indebted to my
husband for locating as in the Diwau 1.0. MS. 47 p. 47; B.M. Add. 7774 p. 290 ;
and Add. 7775 p. 285. M. Belin interprets the verse as an expression of the rise
of the average good man to mystical rapture, not as his lapse from abstinence to
indulgence (l.c. xvii, 296 and notes).

2 Elph. MS. younger but Hai. MS. older in which it is supported by the ‘‘also”
(ham) of the sentence.

3 modern Astrakhan. Husain’s guerilla wars were those through which he cut his
way to the throne of Heri. This begim was married first to Pir Budagh SI. (H.S. iii,
242); he dying, she was married by Ahmad, presumably by levirate custom
(yinkalik; f. 12 and note). By Ahmad she had a ‘daughter, styled Khan-zada Begim
whose affairs find comment on f. 206 and H.S. iii, 359. (The details of this note
negative a suggestion of mine that Badka was the Rabi‘a-sultan of f. 168 (Gul-badan,
App. s. 7.).)

4 This is a felt wide-awake worn by travellers in hot weather (Shaw) ; the Turkman
bonnet (Erskine).

5 Hai. MS. yamdniék, badly, but Elph. MS. xamdadyan, whence Erskine’s showy.

6 This was a proof that he was then a Shi‘a (Erskine).

7 The word Zerform may be excused in speaking of Musalman prayers because they
involve ceremonial bendings and prostrations (Erskine).


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 241TH 1506 AD. 259


killed a man, and had him taken to the Judgment-gate (Daru’l-
gaza). He was abstinent for six or seven years after he took
the throne ; later on he degraded himself to drink. During the
almost 40 years.of his rule‘ in Khurasan, there may not have
been one single day on which he did not drink after the Mid- day
prayer ; earlier than that however he did not drink. What
every-one pursued vice sai pleasure to excess. Bold and daring
he was! Time and again he got to work with his own sword,
getting his own hand in wherever he arrayed to fight ; no man
of Timir Beg’s line has been known to match him in the slashing
of swords. He had a leaning to poetry and even put a diwan
together, writing in Turki with Husaini for his pen-name.?
Many couplets in his diwan are not bad; it is however in one
and the same metre throughout. Great_ ules though he was, Fol. 165.
both by the length of his reign ( yash) and the breadth of his
dominions, he yet, like little people _kept.fighting-rams, flew
pigeons and fought cocks.


(c.) His wars and encounters3

He swam the Gurgan-water4 in his guerilla days and gave
a party of Auzbegs a good beating.

Again,—with 60 men he fell on 3000 under Pay-master
Muhammad ‘Ali, sent ahead by Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza, and: gave
them a downright good beating (868 AH.). This was his one
fine, out-standing feat-of-arms.5


Again,—he fought and beat S]. Mahmid Mirza near Astarabad
(865 AH.).°


* If Babur’s 40 include rule in Heri only, it over-states, since Yadgar died in
$75 AH. and Husain in 911 AH. while the intervening 36 years include the 5 or 6
temperate ones. If the 40 count from 861 AH. when Husain began to rule in Merv,
it under-states. It is a round number, apparently.

? Relying on the Ilminsky text, Dr. Rieu was led into the mistake of writing that
nage! er Husain the wrong pen-name, z.e. Husain, and not Husaini (Turk. Cat.
p- 250).

3 Daulat-shah says that as he is not able to enumerate all Husain’s feats-of-arms, he,
Turkman fashion, offers a gift of Nine. The Nine differ from those of Babur’s list in
some dates ; they are also records of victory only (Browne, p. 521 ; Wot. et Extr. iv,
262, de Sacy’s article).

4 Wolves’-water, a river and its town at the s.e. corner of the Caspian, the ancient
boundary between Russia and Persia. The name varies a good deal in MSS.

5 The battle was at Tarshiz ; Abii-sa‘id was ruling in Heri; Daulat-shah (l.c. p. 523)
gives 90 and 10,000 as the numbers of the opposed forces !

® f, 266 and note; H.S. iii, 209; Daulat-shah p. 523.


Fol. 1658.


(var. Himar), taken Kabul, left it because of turmoil in ‘Iraq,


260 KABUL


Again,—this also in Astarabad, he fought and beat Sa‘idliq.
Sa‘id, son of Husain 7urkman (873 AH. ?). at
Again,—after taking the throne (of Heri in Ramzan 873 AH.— a eS
March 1469 AD.), he fought and beat Yadgar-i-muhammad Mirza
at Chanaran (874 AH.)."

Again,—coming swiftly? from the Murgh-ab bridge-head (Sar-
i-pul), he fell suddenly on Yadgar-i-muhammad Mirza where
he lay drunk in the Ravens’-garden (875 AH.), a victory which
kept all Khurasan quiet.

Again,—he fought and beat Sl. Mahmiid Mirza at Chikman-
sarai in the neighbourhood of Andikhid and Shibrghan(876 AH.).3

Again,—he fell suddenly on Aba-bikr Mirza 4 after that Mirza,
joined by the Black-sheep Turkmans, had come out of ‘Iraq,
beaten Ailigh Beg Mirza (Kadulz) in Takana and Khimar


crossed Khaibar, gone on to Khiish-ab and Multan, on again to
Siwi,5 thence to Karman and, unable to stay there, had entered
the Khurasan country (884 AH.).®

Again,—he defeated his son Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza at Pul-i-
chiragh (902 AH.); he also defeated his sons Abi’l-muhsin
Mirza and Kitpuk (Round-shouldered) Mirza at Halwa-spring
(904 AH.).7

Again,—he went to Qindiz, laid siege to it, could not take
it, and retired ; he laid siege to Hisar, could not take that
either, and rose from before it (901 AH.) ; he went into Zi'n-niin’s
country, was given Bast by its d@rogha, did no more and retired
(903 AH.).® A ruler so great and so brave, after resolving royally
on these three movements, just retired with nothing done !


* The loser was the last Shahrukhi ruler. Chanaran (variants) is near Abiward,
Anwari’s birth-place (H.S. iii, 218; D.S. p. 527).
2 f. 85. D.S. (p. 540) and the H. S; (id, 223) dwell on Husain’s speed through
three continuous days and nights.

3 f. 26; HLS. iii, 2273 °D.S. p. §32.

4 Abi- sa ‘id’s son by a Badalhshi Begim (T.R. p. 108) ; ; he became his father’s
Governor in Badakhshan and married Husain Adai-garas daughter Begim Sultan at
a a“ after 873 An. (f. 168 and note ; H. S. iii, 196, 229, 234-37; D.S. p. 535).

152.

® Aba-bikr was defeated and put to death at the end of Rajab 884 AH. -Oct. 1479 AD.

ri flight before Husain across the Gurgan-water (H.S. iii, 196 and 237 but D.S.
. 539, Safar 885 An.).
7 f. 41, Pul-i-chiragh ; for Halwa-spring, H.S. iii, 283 and Rieu’s Pers. Cat. Pp. 443:
* f. 33 (p. 57) and f. 576.


911 AH.—_JUNE 4ru 1505 ro MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 261


Again,—he fought his son Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza in the
Nishin-meadow, who had come there with Zi’n-niin’s son, Shah
Beg (903 AH.). In that affair were these curious coincidences :—
The Mirza’s force will have been small, most of his men being
in Astarabad ; on the very day of the fight, one force rejoined
him coming back from Astarabad, and Sl. Mas‘id Mirza arrived
to join Sl. Husain Mirza after letting Bai-sunghar Mirza take
Hisar, and Haidar Mirza came back from reconnoitring Badi‘u’z-
zaman Mirza at Sabzawar.


(d.) His countries.


His country was Khurasan, with Balkh to the east, Bistam
and Damghan to the west, Khwarizm to the north, Qandahar
and Sistan to the south. When he once had in his hands such
a town as Heri, his only affair, by day and by night, was with
comfort and pleasure ; nor was there a man of his either who
did not take his ease. It followed of course that, as he no
longer tolerated the hardships and fatigue of conquest and
soldiering, his retainers and his territories dwindled instead of
increasing right down to the time of his departure."


(e.) His children.


Fourteen sons and eleven daughters were born to him.? The
oldest of all his children was Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza; (Bega
Begim) a daughter of Sl. Sanjar of Marv, was his mother.

Shah-i-gharib Mirza was another ; he had a stoop (dair7) ;
though ill to the eye, he was of good character ; though weak
of body, he was powerful of pen. He even put a diwan together,
using Gharbati (Lowliness) for his pen-name and writing both
Turki and Persian verse. Here is a couplet of his :—


Seeing a peri-face as I passed, I became its fool ;
Not knowing what was its name, where was its home.


For a time he was his father’s Governor in Heri. He died
before his father, leaving no child.


* In commenting thus Babur will have had in mind what he best knew, Husain’s
futile movements at Qiindiiz and Hisar.

2 galib aidi ; if galib be taken as Turki, survived or remained, it would not apply
here since many of Flusain’s children predeceased him ; Ar. g@/ab would suit, meaning
begotten, born.

There are discrepancies between Babur’s details here and Khwand-amir’s scattered
through the Hadbibu’s-stydr, concerning Husain’s family.


Fol. 166.


‘ol. 1662,


262


Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza was another; he was his father’s %
favourite son, but though this favourite, had neither accomplish- i %
ments nor character. It was Sl. Husain Mirza’s over-fondness
for this son that led his other sons into rebellion. The mother
of Shah-i-gharib Mirza and of Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza was
Khadija Begim, a former mistress of Sl. Abii-sa‘iid Mirza by
whom she had had a daughter also, known as Aq (Fair)
Begim.

Two other sons were Abi’l-husain Mirza and Kipuk (var.
Kipik) Mirza whose name was Muhammad Muhsin Mirza ;
their mother was Latif-sultan Aghiacha.

Abi-turab Mirza was another. From his early years he
had an excellent reputation. When the news of his father’s
increased illness* reached him and other news of other kinds
also, he fled with his younger brother Muhammad-i-husain
Mirza into ‘Iraq,? and there abandoned soldiering to lead the
darwish-life ; nothing further has been heard about him.3 His
son Sohrab was in my service when I took Hisar after having
beaten the sultans led by Hamza SI. and Mahdi SI. (917 AH.—
1511 AD.); he was blind of one eye and of wretchedly bad
aspect ; his disposition matched even his ill-looks. Owing to
some immoderate act (07 z‘tzda/), he could not stay with me, so
went off. For some of his immoderate doings, Nijm Sani put
him to death near Astarabad.4

Muhammad-i-husain Mirza was another. He must have been
shut up (duzd) with Shah Isma‘il at some place in ‘Iraq and
have become his disciple ;5 he became a rank heretic later on
and became this although his father and brethren, older and
younger, were all orthodox. He died in Astarabad, still on the
same wrong road, still with the same absurd opinions. A good
deal is heard about his courage and heroism, but no deed of his


" bt hugiiri, which may mean aversion due to Khadija Begim’s malevolence.

2 Some of the several goings into ‘Iraq chronicled by Babur point to refuge taken
with Timirids, descendants of Khalil and ‘Umar, sons of Miran-shah (Lane-Poole’s
Muhammadan Dynasties, Table of the Timirids).

3 He died before his father (HLS. iii, 327).

4 He will have been killed previous to Ramzan 3rd 918 An. (Nov. 12th, 1512 AD.),
the date of the battle of Ghaj-dawan when Nijm Sani died.

5 The bund here may not imply that both were in prison, but that they were bound
in close company, allowing Isma‘il, a fervent Shi‘a, to convert the Mirza.


911 AH.—JUNE 41x 1505 ro MAY 241H 1506 AD. 263


stands out as worthy of record. He may have been poetically-
disposed ; here is a couplet of his :-—


Grimed with dust, from tracking what game dost thou come?
Steeped in sweat, from whose heart of flame dost thou come ?


Faridiin-i-husain Mirza was another. He drew a very strong Fol. 167.
bow and shot a first-rate shaft; people say his cross-bow
(kaman-t-guroha) may have been 40 datmans.* He himself was
very brave but he had no luck in war ; he was beaten wherever
he fought. He and his younger brother Ibn-i-husain Mirza
were defeated at Rabat-i-diizd (var. Dudir) by Timir Sl. and
‘Ubaid Sl. leading Shaibaq Khan’s advance (913 AH. ?), but he
had done good things there? In Damghan he and Muhammad-
i-zaman Mirza3 fell into the hands of Shaibaq Khan who, killing
neither, let both go free. Faridiin-i-husain Mirza went later on
to Qalat + where Shah Muhammad Dzwana had made himself
fast ; there when the Aiizbegs took the place, he was captured
and killed. The three sons last-named were by Mingli Bibi
Aghacha, SI. Husain Mirza’s Aiizbeg mistress.

Haidar Mirza was another ; his mother Payanda-sultan Begim
was a daughter of Sl. Abit-sa‘id Mirza. Haidar Mirza was
Governor of Balkh and Mashhad for some time during his father’s
life. For him his father, when besieging Hisar (901 AH.) took
(Bega Begim) a daughter of Sl. Mahmid Mirza and Khan-zada
Begim ; this done, he rose from before Hisar. One daughter
only 5 was born of that marriage; she was named Shad (Joy)


t The da¢mdan is a Turkish weight of 13lbs (Meninsky) or 15lbs (Wollaston). The
weight seems likely to refer to the strength demanded for rounding the bow (Laman
guroha-si) z.e. as much strength as to lift 40 da¢mans. Rounding or bending might
stand for stringing or drawing. The meaning can hardly be one of the weight of the
cross-bow itself. Erskine read gérdehieh for guroha (p. 180) and translated by
** double-stringed bow ” ; de Courteille (i, 373) read guzrdhiyeh, arrondi, circulaire,
in this following Ilminsky who may have followed Erskine. The Elph. and Hai.
MSS. and the first W.-i-B. (I.O. 215 f. 1136) have hamdn guroha-si; the second
W.-i-B. omits the passage, in the MSS. I have seen.

2 yakhshilar bérib tir ; lit. good things went (on) ; cf. f. 1564 and note.

3 weap yang son, drowned at Chausa in 946AH. (1539AD.) A.N. (H. Beveridge,
i, 344).

4 Qalat-i-nadiri, in Khurasan, the birth-place of Nadir Shah (T.R. p. 209).

5 bir gina giz, which on f. 864 can fitly be read to mean daughterling, 7dchterchen,
fillette, but here and z.a. f. 168, must have another meaning than diminutive and may
be an equivalent of German Stick and mean one only. Gul-badan gives an account
of Shad’s manly pursuits (H.N. f. 254).


Fol. 1676.


264


ee


Begim and given to ‘Adil Sl. when she came to Kabul ate
on. Haidar Mirza departed from the world in his father's §


life-time.
Muhammad Ma‘siim Mirza was another. He had Qandahayl 4


given to him and, as was fitting with this, a daughter of
Ailiigh Beg Mirza, (Bega Begim), was set aside for him ; when
she went to Heri (902 AH.), Sl. Husain Mirza made a splendid
feast, setting up a great char-tag for it.2 Though Qandahar
was given to Muh. Ma‘siim Mirza, he had neither power nor
influence there, since, if black were done, or if white were done,
the act was Shah Beg Arghiin’s. On this account the Mirza
left Qandahar and went into Khurasan. He died before his


father.

Farrukh-i-husain Mirza was another. Brief life was granted
to him ; he bade farewell to the world before his younger brother
Ibrahim-i-husain Mirza.


* He was the son of Mahdi SI. (f. 3204) and the father of ‘Aqil SI. Aitizbeg (A.N.
index s.z.). Several matters suggest that these men were of the Shaban Aizbegs
who intermarried with Husain Bai-gare 5 family and some of whom went to Babur in
Hindistan. One such matter is that Kabul was the refuge of dispossessed_Haratis,
after the Aiizbeg conquest ; that there ‘Aqil married Shad Baz-gara and that ‘Adil went
on to Babur. Moreover Khafi Khan makes a statement which (if correct) would
allow ‘Adil’s father Mahdi to be a grandson of Husain Bai-gard ; this statement is
that when Babur defeated the Atizbegs in 916 AH. (1510 AD.), he freed from their
captivity two sons (descendants) of his paternal uncle, named Mahdi Sl. and Sultan
Mirza. [Leaving the authenticity of the statement aside for a moment, it will be
observed that this incident is of the same date and place as another well-vouched for,
namely that Babur then and there killed Mahdi Sl. Awabeg and Hamza Sl. Adazbeg
after defeating them.] What makes in favour of Khafi Khan’s correctness is, not
only that Babur’s foe Mahdi is not known to have had a son ‘Adil, but also that his
‘* Sultan Mirza” is not a style so certainly suiting Hamza as it does a Shaban sultan,
one whose father was a Shaban sultan, and whose mother was a Mirza’s daughter.
Moreover this point of identification is pressed by the correctness, according to
oriental statement of relationship, of Khafi Khan’s ‘‘ paternal uncle” (of Babur),
because this precisely suits Sl. Husain Mirza with whose family these Shaban sultans
allied themselves. On the other hand it must be said that Khafi Khan’s statement
is not inthe English text of the 7arikh-z-rashidi, the book on which he mostly relies
at this period, nor is it in my husband’s MS. [a copy from the Rampir Codex]; and
to this must be added the verbal objection that a modicum of rhetoric allows a death
to be described both in Turkiand Persian, as a release from the captivity of a sinner’s
own acts (f. 160). Still Khafi Khan may be right; his statement may yet be found
in some other MS. of the T.R. or some different source ; it is one a scribe copying
the T.R. might be led to omit by reason of its coincidences. The killing and the release
may both be right; ‘Adil’s Mahdi may be the Shaban sultan inference makes him
seem. This little c~wx presses home the need of much attention to the /acunae in the
Bibur-nama, since in them are lost some exits and some entries of Babur’s dramatis
personae, pertinently, mention of the death of Mahdi with Hamza in 916 Au., and
possibly also that of ‘Adil’s Mahdi’s release.

2 A char-tag may be a large tent rising into four domes or having four porches.


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 265


Ibrahim-i-husain Mirza was another. They say his disposition
was not bad ; he died before his father from bibbing and bibbing
Heri wines. |

Ibn-i-husain Mirza and Muh. Qasim Mirza were others ;*
their story will follow. Papa Aghacha was the mother of the
five sons last-named: ;

Of all the Mirza’s daughters, Sultanim Begim was the oldest.
She had no brother or sister of the full-blood. Her mother,
known as Chili (Desert) Begim, was a daughter of one of the
Azaq begs. Sultanim Begim had great acquaintance with words
(soz bilir atdz) ; she was never at fault fora word. Her father
sent her out? to Sl]. Wais Mirza, the middle son of his own elder
brother Bai-qara Mirza ; she had a son and a daughter by him;
the daughter was sent out to Aisan-quli Sl. younger brother of
Yili-bars of the Shaban sultans ;3 the son is that Muhammad
Sl. Mirza to whom I have given the Qanauj district.4 At that
same date Sultanim Begim, when on her way with her grandson
from Kabul to Hindistan, went to God’s mercy at Nil-ab. Her
various people turned back, taking her bones; her grandson
came on.5

Four daughters were by Payanda-sultan Begim. Aq Begim,
the oldest, was sent out to Muhammad Qasim Av/dz, a grandson
of Bega Begim the younger sister of Babur Mirza ;° there was one
daughter (dir gina giz), known as Qara-giiz (Dark-eyed) Begim,
whom Nasir Mirza (Mirdu-shahi) took. Kichik Begim was the
second ; for her Sl. Mas‘td Mirza had great desire but, try as he
would, Payanda-sultan Begim, having an aversion for him, would
not give her to him;7 she sent Kichik Begim out afterwards


* HLS. iii, 367. ;

? This phrase, common but not always selected, suggests unwillingness to leave the
paternal roof.

3 Abi’l-ghazi’s History of the Mughals, Désmaisons, p. 207.

4 The appointment was made in 933 AH. (1527 AD.) and seems to have been held
still in 934 AH. (ff. 329, 332). ;

5 This grandson may have been a child travelling with his father’s household,
perhaps Atligh Mirza, the oldest son of Muhammad Sultan Mirza (A. A. Blochmann,
p. 461). No mention is made here of Sultanim Begim’s marriage with ‘Abdu’l-baqi
Mirza (f. 175).

© Abi’l-qasim Babur Shahrukhi presumably.

7 The time may have been 902 AH. when Mas‘iid took his sister Bega Begim to
Heri for her marriage with Haidar (H.S. iii, 260).


Fol. 168.


Fol. 1684,


266 KABUL


to Mulla Khwaja of the line of Sayyid Ata." Her third and”


fourth daughters Bega Begim and Agha Begim, she gave to


Babur Mirza and Murad Mirza the sons of her younger sister,
Rabi‘a-sultan Begim.?

Two other daughters of the Mirza were by Mingli Bibi
Aghacha. They gave the elder one, Bairam-sultan Begim to
Sayyid ‘Abdu’l-lah, one of the sayyids of Andikhiid who was
a grandson of Bai-qara Mirza 3 through a daughter. A son of
this marriage, Sayyid Barka* was in my service when Samarkand
was taken (917 AH.-I51I AD.); he went to Airganj later and
there made claim to rule; the Red-heads5 killed him in Astarabad.
Mingli Bibi’s second daughter was Fatima-sultan Begim ; her
they gave to Yadgar(-i-farrukh) Mirza of Timir Beg’s line.®

Three daughters? were by Papa Aghacha. Of these the
oldest, Sultan-nizhad Begim was made to go out to Iskandar
Mirza, youngest son of Sl. Husain Mirza’s elder brother Bai-qara
Mirza. The second, (Sa‘adat-bakht, known as) Begim Sultan,
was given to SI]. Mas‘tid Mirza after his blinding.? By SI. Mas‘tid


* Khwaja Ahmad Yasawi, known as Khwaja Ata, founder of the Yasawi religious
order.

2 Not finding mention of a daughter of Abi-sa‘id named Rabi‘a-sultan, I think she
may be the daughter styled Aq Begim who is No. 3 in Gul-badan’s guest-list for the
Mystic Feast.

3 This man I take to be Husain’s grandfather and not brother, both because ‘Abdu’l-
lah was of Husain’s and his brother’s generation, and also because of the absence here
of Babur’s usual defining words ‘‘ elder brother” (of Sl. Husain Mirza). In this I have
to differ from Dr. Rieu (Pers. Cat. p. 152).

4 So-named after his ancestor Sayyid Barka whose body was exhumed from Andi-
khiid for reburial in Samarkand, by Timir’s wish and there laid in such a position that
Timir’s body was at its feet (Zafar- -nama ii, 719; H.S. iit, 82). (For the above
interesting detail I am indebted to my husband.)

5 Qizil-bash, Persians wearing red badges or caps to distinguish them as Persians.

$ Yadgar-i-farrukh Miran-shahi (U.S. iii, 327). He may have been one of those
Miran-shahis of ‘Iraq from whom came Aka’s and Sultanim’s husbands, Ahmad and
‘Abdu’l-baqi (ff. 164, 1754).

7 This should be four (f. 1694). The HS. (iii, 327) also names three only when
giving Papa Aghacha’s daughters (the omission linking it with the B. N.), but elsewhere
(iii, 229) it gives an account of a fourth girl’s marriage ; this fourth is needed to make
up the total of 11 daughters. Babur’s and Khwand-amir’ s details of Papa Aghacha’s
quartette are defective ; the following may be a more correct list :—(1) Begim Sultan
(a frequent title), married to Aba-bikr A/zran-shahi (who died 884 AH.) and seeming
too old to be the one [No. 3] who married Mas‘id (H.S. iii, 229) ; (2) Sultan-nizhad,
married to Iskandar Bai-gara ; (3) Sa ‘adat-bakht also known as Begim Sultan, married
to Mas‘id Miran-shahi (HH. S. iii, 327); (4) Manauwar-sultan, married to a son of
Ailigh Beg Aadébuéi (I1.S. iii, 327).

8 This “after”? seems to contradict the statement (f. 58) that Mas‘ad was made to
kneel as a son-in-law (kuydadlik-ka yukiindurib) at a date previous to his blinding,
but the seeming contradiction may be explained by considering the following details ;


911 AH.—JUNE 4TuH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 267


Mirza she had one daughter and one son. The daughter was
brought up by Apaq Begim of Sl. Husain Mirza’s aram ; from
Heri she came to Kabul'and was there given to Sayyid Mirza
Apaq.' (Sa‘adat-bakht) Begim Sultan after the Aiizbeg killed
her husband, set out for the £a‘ba with her son.2 News has just
come (ctrca 934 AH.) that they have been heard of as in Makka
and that the boy is becoming a bit of a great personage.3 Papa
Aghacha’s third daughter was given to a sayyid of Andikhid,
generally known as Sayyid Mirza.4

Another of the Mirza’s daughters, ‘Ayisha-sultan Begim was
by a mistress, Zubaida Aghacha the grand-daughter of Husain-i-
Shaikh Timir.s They gave her to Qasim Sl. of the Shaban
sultans ; she had by him a son, named Qasim-i-husain Sl. who
came to serve me in Hindistan, was in the Holy Battle with
Rana Sanga, and was given Badayiin.® When Qasim SI. died,
(his widow) ‘Ayisha-sultan Begim was taken by Biran SI. one
of his relations,?7 by whom she had a son, named ‘Abdu’l-lah Sl.
now serving me and though young, not doing badly.


(f. His wives and concubines.)


The wife he first took was Bega Sultan Begim, a daughter of
Sl. Sanjar of Marv. She was the mother of Badi‘u’z-zaman
Mirza. She was very cross-tempered and made the Mirza endure


he left Heri hastily (f. 58), went to Khusrau Shah and was blinded by him,—all in
the last two months of 903 AH. (1498 AD.), after the kneeling on Zi’l-qa‘da 3rd,
(June 23rd) in the Ravens’-garden. Here what Babur says is that the Begim was
given (i776) after the blinding, the inference allowed being that though Mas‘iid had
kneeled before the blinding, she had remained in her father’s house till his return
after the blinding.

* The first W.-i-B. writes ‘‘ Apaq Begim” (I.O. 215 f. 136) which would allow
Sayyid Mirza to be a kinsman of Apaq Begim, wife of Husain Bai-gara.

? This brief summary conveys the impression that the Begim went on her pilgrimage
shortly after Mas‘iid’s death (913 AH. ?), but may be wrong :—After Mas‘iid’s murder,
by one Bimash Mirza, d@rogha of Sarakhs, at Shaibaq Khan’s order, she was married
by Bimash M. (H.S. iii, 278). How long after this she went to Makka is not said ;
it was about 934 AH. when Babur heard of her as there.

3 This clause is in the Hai. MS. but not in the Elph. MS. (f. 131), or Kehr’s
(Ilminsky, p. 21c), or in either Persian translation. The boy may have been 17 or 18.

4 This appears a mistake (f. 168 foot, and note on Papa’s daughters).

5 f, 1710.

© 933 AH.-1527 AD. (f. 329).

7 Presumably this was a yiwkalik marriage; it differs from some of those chronicled
and also from a levirate marriage in not being made with a childless wife. (Cf. index
5.2. yinkalthk.)


19


Fol. 169.


Fol. 1694,


268 KABUL


much wretchedness, until driven at last to despair, he set himse ‘ |
free-by divorcing her. What was he todo? Right was with him.t —


A bad wife in a good man’s house
Makes this world already his hell.?


God preserve every Musalman from this misfortune! Would
that not a single cross or ill-tempered wife were left in the world!

Chili Begim was another; she was a daughter of the Azaq
begs and was the mother of Sultanim Begim.

Shahr-bani Begim was another; she was SI. Abi-sa‘id Mirza’s
daughter, taken after Sl. Husain Mirza took the throne (873 AH.).
When the Mirza’s other ladies got out of their litters and mounted
horses, at the battle of Chikman, Shahr-bani Begim, putting her
trust in her younger brother (SI. Mahmid M.), did not leave her
litter, did not mount a horse ;3 people told the Mirza of this, so
he divorced her and took her younger sister Payanda-sultan
Begim. When the Aiizbegs took Khurasan (913 AH.), Payanda-
sultan Begim went into ‘Iraq, and in ‘Iraq she died in great
misery.

Khadija Begim was another.t She had been a mistress of
Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza and by him had had a daughter, Aq Begim;
after his defeat (873 AH.—1468 AD.) she betook herself to Heri
where Sl]. Husain Mirza took her, made her a great favourite,
and promoted her to the rank of Begim. Very dominant indeed
she became later on; she it was wrought Muh. Mimin Mirza’s
death ;5 she in chief it was caused Sl. Husain Mirza’s sons to
rebel against him. She took herself for a sensible woman but
was a silly chatterer, may also have been a heretic. Of her were
born Shah-i-gharib Mirza and Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza.

Apaq Begim was another ;° she had no children; that Papa
Aghacha the Mirza made such a favourite of was her foster-sister.


* Khwand-amir says that Bega Begim was jealous, died of grief at her divorce, and
was buried in a College, of her own erection, in 893 AH. (1488 AD. H. S. iii, 245).

? Gulistin Cap. II, Story 31 (Platts, p. 114).

3 z.e. did not get ready to ride off if her husband were beaten by et brother (f. 11
and note to Habiba).

4 Khadija Begi Agha (H.S. ii, 230 and iii, 327); she would be promoted probably
after Shah-i-gharib’s birth.

5 He was a son of Badi‘u’z-zaman.

° It is singular that this honoured woman’s parentage is not mentioned ; if it be right
3 : ‘ 684 (¢.v. with note) to read Sayyid Mirza of Apaq Begim, she may be a sayyida
of Andikhid.


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 269


Being childless, Apaq Begim brought up as her own the
children of Papa Aghacha. She nursed the Mirza admirably
when he was ill; none of his other wives could nurse as she did.
The year I came into Hindistan (932 AH.)* she came into Kabul
from Heri and I shewed her all the honour and respect I could.
While I was besieging Chandiri (934 AH.) news came that in
Kabul she had fulfilled God’s will.?

One of the Mirza’s mistresses was Latif-sultan Aghacha of the
Char-shamba people; she became the mother of Abi’l-muhsin
Mirza and Kipuk (or Kipik) Mirza (ze. Muhammad Muhsin).

Another mistress was Mingli Bibi Aghacha,t an Aiizbeg and
one of Shahr-bani Begim’s various people. She became the
mother of Abi-turab Mirza, Muhammad-i-husain Mirza, Faridiin-
i-husain Mirza and of two daughters.

Papa Aghacha, the foster-sister of Apaq Begim was another
mistress. The Mirza saw her, looked on her with favour, took
her and, as has been mentioned, she became the mother of five
of his sons and four of his daughters.5

Begi Sultan Aghacha was another mistress ; she had no child.
There were also many concubines and mistresses held in little
respect; those enumerated were the respected wives and
mistresses of SI. Husain Mirza.

Strange indeed it is that of the 14 sons born to a ruler so

_great as Sl]. Husain Mirza, one governing too in such a town as

Heri, three only were born in legal marriage.© In him, in his

sons, and in his tribes and hordes vice and debauchery were Fol. 170.
extremely prevalent. What shews this point precisely is that of

the many sons born to his dynasty not a sign or trace was left


* As Babur left Kabul on Safar Ist (Nov. 17th 1525 AD.), the Begim must have
arrived in Muharram 932 AH. (Oct. 18th to Nov. 17th). ;

2 f. 333. As Chandiri was besieged in Rabi‘u’l-akhar 934 AH. this passage shews
that, as a minimum estimate, what remains of Babur’s composed narrative (z.e. down
to f. 2164) was written after that date (Jan. 1528).

3 Char-shambalar. Mention of another inhabitant of this place with the odd name,
Wednesday (Char-shamba), is made on f. 426. .

4 Mole-marked Lady; most MSS. style her Bi but H.S. iii, 327, writes Bibi;
it varies also by calling her a Turk. She was a purchased slave of Shahr-bani’s
and was given to the Mirza by Shahr-bani at the time of her own marriage
with him.

5 As noted already, f. 1686 enumerates three only.

© The three were almost certainly Badi‘u’z-zaman, Haidar, son of a Timirid mother,
and Muzaffar-i-husain, born after his mother had been legally married.


Fol. 1706.


270 KABUL


in seven or eight years, excepting only Muhammad-i-zaman

Mirza."
(g. His amirs.) ‘
There was Muhammad Barandiiq Barlas, descending from
Chakii Barlas as follows,—Muhammad Barandig, son of ‘Ali, —
son of Barandiiq, son of Jahan-shah, son of Chakii Barlas.2 He
had been a beg of Babur Mirza’s presence ; later on SI. Abii-safd
Mirza favoured him, gave him Kabul conjointly with Jahangir
Barlas, and made him Ailigh Beg Mirza’s guardian. After the
death of Sl. Abii-sa‘id Mirza, Atligh Beg Mirza formed designs
against the two Barlas; they got to know this, kept tight hold
of him, made the tribes and hordes march,3 moved as for Oiindiz,
and when up on Hindi-kush, courteously compelled Ailiigh Beg
Mirza to start back for Kabul, they themselves going on to
Sl. Husain Mirza in Khurasan, who, in his turn, shewed them
great favour. Muhammad Barandigq was remarkably intelligent,
a very leaderlike man indeed! He was extravagantly fond of
a hawk ; so much so, they say, that if a hawk of his had strayed
or had died, he would ask, taking the names of his sons on his
lips, what it would have mattered if such or such a son had died
or had broken his neck, rather than this or that bird had died
or had strayed.
Muzaffar Barlds was another.4 He had been with the Mirza
in the guerilla fighting and, for some cause unknown, had received
extreme favour. In such honour was he in those guerilla days
that the compact was for the Mirza to take four d@mg (sixths)
of any country conquered, and for him to take two dang.
A strange compact indeed! How could it be right to make
even a faithful servant a co-partner in rule? Not even a younger
™ Seven sons predeceased him :—Farrukh, Shah-i-gharib, Muh. Ma‘siim, Haidar,
Ibrahim-i-husain, Muh. Husain and Abi-turab. So too five daughters :—Aq, Bega,
Agha, Kichik and Fatima-sultan Begims. So too four wives :—Bega-sultan and
Chili Begims, Zubaida and Latif-sultan Aghachas (H.S. iii, 327).
? Chaki, a Barlas, as was Timir, was one of Timir’s noted men.
At this point some hand not the scribe’s has entered on the margin of the Hai. MS.
the descendants of Muh. Barandiiq down into Akbar’s reign :—Muh. Faridiin, bin
Muh. Quli Khan, bin Mirza ‘Ali, bin Muh. Barandiiq Bar/as. Of these Faridiin and
Muh. Quli are amirs of the Ayin-z-akbari list (Blochmann, pp. 341, 342; H.S. iii, 233).
3 Enforced marches of Mughils and other nomads are mentioned also on f. 1544


and f. 155.
4 HLS. iii, 228, 233, 235.


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 to MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 271


brother or a son obtains such a pact ; how then should a beg?”
When the Mirza had possession of the throne, he repented the
compact, but his repentance was of no avail ; that muddy-minded
mannikin, favoured so much already, made growing assumption
to rule. The Mirza acted without judgment; people say
Muzaffar Barlg@s was poisoned in the end.2 God knows the
truth !

‘Ali-sher Vawa@’z was another, the Mirza’s friend rather than
his beg. They had been learners together in childhood and even
then are said to have been close friends. It is not known for
what offence S]. Abu-sa‘id Mirza drove ‘Ali-sher Beg from Heri ;
he then went to Samarkand where he was protected and
supported by Ahmad Haji Beg during the several years of his
stay.3 He was noted for refinement of manner ; people fancied
this due to the pride of high fortune but it may not have been
so, it may have been innate, since it was equally noticeable also
in Samarkand.4 ‘Ali-sher Beg had no match. For as long as
verse has been written in the Turki tongue, no-one has written
so much or so well as he. He wrote six books of poems
(masnawi), five of them answering to the Quintet (Khamsah),5
the sixth, entitled the Lzsa@nu’t-tatr (Tongue of the birds), was
in the same metre as the Mantiqu’t-tair (Speech of the birds).®
He put together four dzzwdans (collections) of odes, bearing the

. names, Curiosztzes of Childhood, Marvels of Youth, Wonders of
Manhood and Advantages of Age”? There are good quatrains
of his also. Some others of his compositions rank below those Fol. 171.
mentioned ; amongst them is a collection of his letters, imitating
that of Maulana ‘Abdu’r-rahman /amz and aiming at gathering
together every letter on any topic he had ever written to any
person. He wrote also the MMJizdnw’l-atizan (Measure of
measures) on prosody; it is very worthless; he has made
mistake in it about the metres of four out of twenty-four


* beg kishi, beg-person.

? Khwand-amir says he died a natural death (H.S. iii, 235).

3 f. 21. Fora fuller account of Nawa’i, 7. Aszatigue xvii, 175, M. Belin’s article.

4 z.e. when he was poor and a beg’s dependant. He went back to Heri at
Sl. Husain M.’s request in 873 AH.

5 Nizami’s (Rieu’s Pers. Cat. s.n.).

© Faridu’d-din-‘attar’s (Rieu l.c. and Ency. Br.).

? Ghar@ tbw s-sighar, Nawadirw sh-shahab, Bada@ i‘ l-wasat and Fawa idu’ l-kibr.


Fol. 1718.


Tam N insta ti
: \ \ eal! em,


272 KABUL


quatrains, while about other measures he has made mistake such —
as any-one who has given attention to prosody, will understand.
He put a Persian diwan together also, Fani (transitory) being

his pen-name for Persian verse. Some couplets in it are not —
bad but for the most part it is flat and poor. In music also he
composed good things (ma), some excellent airs and preludes
(nakhsh u peshrau). No such patron and protector of men of
parts and accomplishments is known, nor has one such been
heard of as ever appearing. It was through his instruction and
support that Master (Ustad) Qul-i-muhammad the lutanist,
Shaikhi the flautist, and Husain the lutanist, famous performers
all, rose to eminence and renown. It was through his effort and
supervision that Master Bih-zad and Shah Muzaffar became so
distinguished in painting. Few are heard of as having helped
to lay the good foundation for future excellence he helped to lay.
He had neither son ‘nor daughter, wife or family ; he let the
world pass by, alone and unencumbered. At first he was Keeper
of the Seal; in middle-life he became a beg and for a time was
Commandant in Astarabad ; later on he forsook soldiering. He
took nothing from the Mirza, on the contrary, he each year
offered considerable gifts. When the Mirza was returning from
the Astarabad campaign, ‘Ali-sher Beg went out to give him
meeting ; they saw one another but before ‘Ali-sher Beg should
have risen to leave, his condition became such that he could not
rise. He was lifted up and carried away ; the doctors could not
tell what was wrong ; he went to God’s mercy next day,? one of
his own couplets suiting his case :—


I was felled by a stroke out of their ken and mine ;
What, in such evils, can doctors avail ?


Ahmad the son of Tawakkal Barlas was another ;3 for atime
he held Qandahar.
Wali Beg was another; he was of Haji Saifu’d-din Beg’s
line,t and had been one of the Mirza’s father’s (Mansiir’s) great


* Every Persian poet has a ¢akhallus (pen-name) which he introduces into the last
couplet of each ode (Erskine).

? The death occurred in the First Jumada 906 AH. (Dec. 1500 AD.).

3 Nizamu’d-din Ahmad bin Tawakkal Bar/as (H.S. iii, 229).

4 This may be that uncle of Timiir who made the Beate (T.R. p. 48, quoting the
Zafar-nama).


apes ids


911 AH.—_JUNE 41H 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 273


begs. Short life was granted to him after the Mirza took the
throne (973 AH.) ; he died directly afterwards. He was orthodox
and made the Prayers, was rough (¢urh) and sincere.

Husainof Shaikh Timir was another; he had been favoured and
raised to the rank of beg? by Babur Mirza.

Nuyan Beg was another. He was a Sayyid of Tirmiz on his
father’s side ; on his mother’s he was related both to SI. Abii-sa‘id
Mirza and to Sl. Husain Mirza.3 Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza had
favoured him; he was the beg honoured in Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s
presence and he met with very great favour when he went to
Sl. Husain Mirza’s. He was a bragging, easy-going, wine-bibbing,
jolly person. Through being in his father’s service,t Hasan of
Ya‘qib used to be called also Nuyan’s Hasan.

Jahangir Barlas was anothers For a time he shared the
Kabul command with Muhammad Barandiq #Zear/ds, later on
went to Sl. Husain Mirza’s presence and received very great
favour. His movements and poses (harakat u sakanat) were
graceful and charming ; he was also a man of pleasant temper.
As he knew the rules of hunting and hawking, in those matters
the Mirza gave him chief charge. He was a favourite of
Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza and, bearing that Mirza’s friendliness in
mind, used to praise him.

Mirza Ahmad of ‘Ali Farsi Barlas was another. Though he
wrote no verse, he knew what was poetry. He wasa gay-hearted,


elegant person, one by himself.
‘Abdu’l-khaliq Beg was another. Firiz Shah, Shahrukh Mirza’s


* Some MSS. omit the word ‘‘ father” here but to read it obviates the difficulty of
calling Wali a great beg of Sl. Husain Mirza although he died when that mirza took
the throne (973 AH.) and although no leading place is allotted to him in Babur’s list
of Heri begs. Here as in other parts of Babur’s account of Heri, the texts vary
much whether Turki or Persian, ¢.g. the Elph. MS. appears to call Walia blockhead
(dunkiz dir), the Hai. MS. writing 2:2 dir (?).

2 He had been Babur Shahrukhi’s yasawal (Court-attendant), had fought against
Husain for Yadgar-i-muhammad and had given a daughter to Husain (H.S. iii, 206,
228, 230-32; D.S. in Wot. et Hx. de Sacy p. 265).

3 f, 298. ;

4 Sic, Elph. MS. and both Pers. trss. but the Hai. MS. omits ‘‘ father”. To read
it, however, suits the circumstance that Hasan of Ya‘qiib was not with Husain and
in Harat but was connected with Mahmiid A/iranshahi and Tirmiz (f. 24). Nuyan is
not a personal name but is a title ; it implies good-birth ; all uses of it I have seen are
for members of the religious family of Tirmiz.

5 He was the son of [brahim Bar/ads and a Badakhshi begim (T.R. p. 108).


Fol. 172.


274 KABUL 3


greatly favoured beg, was his grandfather ;* hence people called _
him Firiiz Shah’s ‘Abdu’l-khaliq. He held Khwarizm foratime. ~~

Ibrahim Da/dai was another. He had good knowledge of —
revenue matters and the conduct of public business; his work _
was that of a second Muh. Barandiq.

Zi’n-niin Avghin was another. He was a brave man, using
his sword well in Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza’s presence and later on
getting his hand into the work whatever the fight. As to his
courage there was no question at all, but he was a bit of a fool.
After he left our (Wiran-shahi) Mirzas to go to Sl. Husain
Mirza, the Mirza gave him Ghir and the Nikdiris. He did

‘ol. 1724. excellent work in those parts with 70 to 80 men, with so few

beating masses and masses of Hazaras and Nikdiris ; he had
not his match for keeping those tribes in order. After a while
Zamin-dawar was given to him. His son Shah-i-shuja‘ Arghin
used to move about with him and even in childhood used to
chop away with his sword. The Mirza favoured Shah-i-shuja‘
and, somewhat against Zi’n-niin Beg’s wishes, joined him with
his father in the government of Qandahar. Later on this father
and son made dissension between that father and that son,3 and
stirred up much commotion. After I had overcome Khusrau
Shah and parted his retainers from him, and after I had taken
Kabul from Zi’n-nin Arghin’s son Mugim, Zi’n-niin Beg and
Khusrau Shah both went, in their helplessness, to see Sl. Husain
Mirza. Zi’n-nin Arghin grew greater after the Mirza’s death
when they gave him the districts of the Heri Koh-daman, such
as Atiba (Ubeh) and Chachcharan.4 He was made Lord of
Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s Gate 5 and Muhammad Barandiiq Barlas
Lord of Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza’s, when the two Mirzas became

* He will have been therefore a collateral of Daulat-shah whose relation to
Firiiz-shah is thus expressed by Nawa’i:—MJir Daulat-shah Firtiz-shah Beg-ning
‘amm-zada-si Amir ‘Al@wd-daula Isfarayini-ning aughili dur, t.e. Mir Daulat-shah
was the son of Firiiz-shah Beg’s paternal uncle’s son, Amir ‘Ala’u’d-daula /sfarayini.
Thus, Firiiz-shah and Isfarayini were first cousins ; Daulat-shah and ‘Abdu’l-khaliq’s
father were second cousins; while Daulat-shah and Firiiz-shah were first cousins,
once removed (Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 534; Browne’s D.S. English preface p. 14 and its
reference to the Pers. preface).

* Tarkhan-nama, E. & D.’s History of India i, 303; H.S. iii, 227.

3 f. 41 and note,

4 Both places are in the valley of the Heri-rid.


5 Badi‘u’z-zaman married a daughter of Zi’n-niin; she died in 911 AH. (E. & D. i,
305; H.S. iii, 324).


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 275


joint-rulers in Heri. Brave though he was, he was a little crazed
and shallow-pated ; if he had not been so, would he have accepted
flattery as he did? would he have made himself so contemptible?
Here are the details of the matter :—While he was so dominant
and so trusted in Heri, a few shaikhs and mullas went to him
and said, “The Spheres are holding commerce with us; you are
to be styled Azzabrwl-lah (Lion of God); you will overcome
the Aizbeg.” Fully accepting this flattery, he put his /#za
(bathing-cloth) round his neck * and gave thanks. Then, after
Shaibag Khan, coming against the Mirzas, had beaten them one Fol. 173.
by one near Badghis, Zi’n-nin Arghiin met him face to face
near Qara-rabat and, relying on that promise, stood up against
him with 100 to 150 men. A mass of Aiizbegs came up, over-
came them and hustled them off; he himself was taken and put
to death.2, He was orthodox and no neglecter of the Prayers,
indeed made the extra ones. He was mad for chess; he played
it according to his own fancy and, if others play with one hand,
he played with both3 Avarice and stinginess ruled in his
character.

Darwish-i-‘ali Beg was another, the younger full-brother of
‘Ali-sher Beg. He had the Balkh Command for a time and
there did good beg-like things, but he was a muddle-head and
somewhat wanting in merit. He was dismissed from the Balkh
Command because his muddle-headedness had hampered the
Mirza in his first campaign against Qundiiz and Hisar. He came
to my presence when I went to Qiindiiz in 916 AH. (1510 AD.),
brutalized and stupefied, far from capable begship and out-side
peaceful home-life. Such favour as he had had, he appears to
have had for ‘Ali-sher Beg’s sake.

Mughil Beg was another. He was Governor of Heri for
a time, later on was given Astarabad, and from there fled to
Ya‘qib Beg in ‘Iraq. He was of amorous disposition5 and an
incessant dicer.


* This indicates, both amongst Musalmans and Hindi, obedience and submission.
Several instances occur in Macculloch’s Bengali Household Stories.

2? T.R. p. 205.

3 This is an idiom expressive of great keenness (Erskine).

4 H.S. iii, 250, &¢¢abdar, librarian ; so too Hai. MS. f. 1748.

5 mutaiyam (f. 76 and note). Mir Mughil Beg was put to death for treachery in
‘Iraq (H.S. iii, 227, 248).


‘ol. 1730.


276 KABUL


Sayyid Badr (Full-moon) was another, a very strong man, —
graceful in his movements and singularly well-mannered. He —
danced wonderfully well, doing one dance quite unique and
seeming to be his own invention.’ His whole service was with
the Mirza whose comrade he was in wine and social pleasure.

Islim Barlds was another, a plain (¢ark) person who understood
hawking well and did some things to perfection. Drawing a bow
of 30 to 40 datmans strength,? he would make his shaft pass right
through the target (¢akhta). In the gallop from the head of the
gabag-maidan,3 he would loosen his bow, string it again, and
then hit the gourd (gaéaqg). He would tie his string-grip (2zh-gir)
to the one end of a string from 1 to 14 yards long, fasten the
other end to a tree, let his shaft fly, and shoot through the string-
grip while it revolved.4 Many such remarkable feats he did. He
served the Mirza continuously and was at every social gathering.

Sl. Junaid Barlas was another ;5 in his latter days he went to
Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s presence.® He is the father of the Sl. Junaid
Barlas on whom at the present time7 the joint-government of
Jaunpir depends.

Shaikh Abi-sa‘iid Khan Dar-mzyan (In-between) was another.
It is not known whether he got the name of Dar-miyan because
he took a horse to the Mirza zz the middle of a fight, or whether
because he put himself zz between the Mirza and some-one
designing on his life.®


* Babur speaks as an eye-witness (f. 1874). Fora single combat of Sayyid Badr,
H.S. ili, 233.

2 f, 157 and note to batman.

3 A level field in which a gourd (gadaq) is set on a pole for an archer’s mark to be
hit in passing at the gallop (f. 184 and note).

4 Or possibly during the gallop the archer turned in the saddle and shot backwards.

5 Junaid was the father of Nizamu’d-din ‘Ali, Babur’s Khalifa (Vice-gerent).
That Khalifa was of a religious house on his mother’s side may be inferred from his
being styled both Sayyid and Khwaja neither of which titles could have come from
his Turki father. His mother may have been a sayyida of one of the religious families
of Marghinan (f. 18 and note), since Khalifa’s son Muhibb-i-‘ali writes his father’s
name ‘‘ Nizamu’d-din ‘Ali Marghilani” (Marghinani) in the Preface of his Book on
Sport (Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 485).

° This northward migration would take the family into touch with Babur’s in
Samarkand and Farghana.

7 He was left in charge of Jaunpir in Rabi‘ I, 933 AH. (Jan. 1527 ap.) but
exchanged for Chunar in Ramzan 935 AH. (June 1529 AD.); so that for the writing of
this part of the Babur-nadma we have the major and minor limits of Jan. 1527 and
June 1529,

* ES. iil, ‘aay;


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 tro MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 277


Bih-biid Beg was another. He had served in the pages’ circle
(chuhra jirgast) during the guerilla times and gave such
satisfaction by his service that the Mirza did him the favour of
' putting his name on the stamp (¢amghd) and the coin (stkka).*

Shaikhim Beg was another? People used to call him
Shaikhim Szazli because Suhaili was his pen-name. He wrote
_all sorts of verse, bringing in terrifying words and mental images.
Here is a couplet of his :—


In the anguish of my nights, the whirlpool of my sighs engulphs the firmament ;
Like a dragon, the torrent of my tears swallows the quarters of the world.


Well-known it is that when he once recited that couplet in
Maulana ‘Abdu’r-rahman /amz’s presence, the honoured Mulla
asked him whether he was reciting verse or frightening people.
He put a diwan together; masnawis of his are also in
existence.

Muhammad-i-wali Beg was another, the son of the Wali Beg
already mentioned. Latterly he became one of the Mirza’s
great begs but, great beg though he was, he never neglected his
service and used to recline (yd@stanib) day and night in the Gate.
Through doing this, his free meals and open table were always
set just outside the Gate. Quite certainly a man who was so
constantly in waiting, would receive the favour he received! It
is an evil noticeable today that effort must be made before the
. man, dubbed Beg because he has five or six of the bald and blind
at his back, can be got into the Gate at all! Where this sort
of service is, it must be to their own misfortune! Muhammad-
i-wali Beg’s public table and free meals were good ; he kept his
servants neat and well-dressed and with his own hands gave
ample portion to the poor and destitute, but he was foul-mouthed
and evil-spoken. He and also Darwish-i-‘ali the librarian were
in my service when I took Samarkand in 917 AH. (Oct. 1511 AD.) ;
he was palsied then ; his talk lacked salt; his former claim to
favour was gone. His assiduous waiting appears to have been
the cause of his promotion.

* See Appendix H, Ox the counter-mark Bih-biid on coins.

? Nigamu’d-din Amir Shaikh Ahmadu’s-suhaili was surnamed Suhaili through a /a/
(augury) taken by his spiritual guide, Kamalu’d-din Husain Gazur-gahi ; it was he


induced Husain Kashift to produce his Anwdr-z-suhaili (Lights of Canopus) (f. 125
and note; Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 756; and for a couplet of his, H.S. iii, 242 1. 10).


Fol. 174.


Fol, 1745.


‘ol. 175.


278 KABUL 5S a


Baba ‘Ali the Lord of the Gate was another. First, ‘Ali-sher
Beg showed him favour ; next, because of his courage, the Mirza
took him into service, made him Lord of the Gate, and promoted
him to bea beg. One of his sons is serving me now (circa 934. AH.),
that Yinas of ‘Ali who is a beg, a confidant, and of my household.
He will often be mentioned.”

Badru’d-din (Full-moon of the Faith) was another. He had
been in the service of S]. Abi-sa‘id Mirza’s Chief Justice Mirak
‘Abdu’r-rahim ; it is said he was very nimble and sure-footed,
a man who could leap over seven horses at once. He and Baba
‘Ali were close companions.

Hasan of ‘Ali /alaty was another. His original name was
Husain /a/air but he came to be called ‘Ali’s Hasan.? His father
‘Ali /alaiy must have been favoured and made a beg by Babur
Mirza ; no man was greater later on when Yadgar-i-muhammad
M. took Heri. Hasan-i-‘ali was Sl. Husain Mirza’s Qash-beg?.3 He
made Tufaili (Uninvited-guest) his pen-name ; wrote good odes
and was the Master of this art in his day. He wrote odes on
my name when he came to my presence at the time I took
Samarkand in 917 AH. (1511 AD.). Impudent (47 4é@%) and
prodigal he was, a keeper of catamites, a constant dicer and
draught-player.

Khwaja ‘Abdu’l-lah Warwarid (Pearl) + was another; he was
at first Chief Justice but later on became one of the Mirza’s
favourite household-begs. He was full of accomplishments ; on
the dulcimer he had no equal, and he invented the shake on
the dulcimer ; he wrote in several scripts, most beautifully in the
ta‘lig; he composed admirable letters, wrote good verse, with
Bayani for his pen-name, and was a pleasant companion.
Compared with his other accomplishments, his verse ranks low,
but he knew what was poetry. Vicious and shameless, he became


* Index s.7.

2 Did the change complete an analogy between ‘Ali Ja/air and his (perhaps) elder
son with ‘Ali Khalifa and his elder son Hasan?

3 The Qiish-begi is, in Central Asia, a high official who acts for an absent ruler
(Shaw) ; he does not appear to be the Falconer, for whom Babur’s name is Qiishchi
(f..15a 4:

4 He received this sobriquet because when he returned from an embassy to the
Persian Gulf, he brought, from Bahrein, to his Timirid master a gift of royal pearls
(Sam Mirza). For an account of Marwarid see Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 1094 and (ve
portrait) p. 787.


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 279


the captive of a sinful disease through his vicious excesses, out-
lived his hands and feet, tasted the agonies of varied torture for
several years, and departed from the world under that affliction.*

Sayyid Muhammad-i-airiis was another; he was the son of
that Airiis (Russian?) Arghin who, when Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza
took the throne, was his beg in chief authority. At that time
there were excellent archer-braves ; one of the most distinguished
was Sayyid Muhammad-i-aiiriis. His bow strong, his shaft long,
he must have been a bold ( ya#rak) shot and a good one. He was
Commandant in Andikhid for some time. ;

Mir (Qambar-i-)‘ali the Master of the Horse was another. He
it was who, by sending a man to SI. Husain Mirza, brought him
down on the defenceless Yadgar-i-muhammad Mirza.

Sayyid Hasan Aaghlaigcht was another, a son of Sayyid
Aighlagchit and a younger brother of Sayyid Yusuf Beg? He
was the father of a capable and accomplished son, named Mirza
Farrukh. He had come to my presence before I took Samar- Fol. 1756.
kand in 917 AH. (1511 AD.). Though he had written little verse,
he wrote fairly ; he understood the astrolabe and astronomy well,
was excellent company, his talk good too, but he was rather
a bad drinker (dad shrab). He died in the fight at Ghaj-dawan.3

Tingri-birdi the storekeeper (s@manchi) was another ; he was
a plain (turk), bold, sword-slashing brave. As has been said,
he charged out of the Gate of Balkh on Khusrau Shah’s great
retainer Nazar Bahadur and overcame him (903 AH.).

There were a few Turkman braves also who were received
with great favour when they came to the Mirza’s presence. One
of the first to come was ‘Ali Khan Bayandar* Asad Beg and
Taham-tan (Strong-bodied) Beg were others, an elder and
younger brother these ; Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza took Taham-tan
Beg’s daughter and by her had Muhammad-i-zaman Mirza.
Mir ‘Umar Beg was another ; later on he was in Badi‘u’z-zaman
Mirza’s service ; he was a brave, plain, excellent person. His


* Sam Mirza specifies this affliction as a/a-z-farang, thus making what may be one
of the earliest Oriental references to morbus gallicus [as de Sacy here translates the
name], the foreign or European pox, the ‘‘ French disease of Shakespeare ” (H.B.).

? Index s.z. Yisuf.

3 Ramzan 3rd 918 AH.—Nov. 12th 1512.

4 z.e. of the. White-sheep Turkmans.


‘ol. 176.


280 KABUL he oe a
son, Abi’l-fath by name, came from ‘Iraq to my presen ce,
a very soft, unsteady and feeble person ; such a son from such —
a father ! i
Of those who came into Khurasan after Shah Isma‘l took
‘Iraq and Azarbaijan (cérca 906 AH.-1500 AD.), one was ‘Abdu’l-
baqi Mirza of Timiir Beg’s line. He was a Miran-shahi' whose _
ancestors will have gone long before into those parts, put thought
of sovereignty out of their heads, served those ruling there, and
from them have received favour. That Timir ‘Usman who was
the great, trusted beg of Ya‘qib Beg (White-sheep Turkman)
and who had once even thought of sending against Khurasan
the mass of men he had gathered to himself; must have been
this ‘Abdu’l-baqi Mirza’s paternal-uncle. Sl. Husain Mirza took
‘Abdu’l-baqi Mirza at once into favour, making him a son-in-law
by giving him Sultanim Begim, the mother of Muhammad Sl.
Mirza.?,_ Another late-comer was Murad Beg Bayandari.


(h. His Chief Justices (sadir).) |

One was Mir Sar-i-barahna (Bare-head)3; he was from
a village in Andijan and appears to have made claim to be
a sayyid (mutasayyid). He was a very agreeable companion,
pleasant of temper and speech. His were the judgment and
rulings that carried weight amongst men of letters and poets of
Khurasan. He wasted his time by composing, in imitation of
the story of Amir Hamza,+ a work which is one long, far-
fetched lie, opposed to sense and nature.

Kamalu’d-din Husain Gdsur-gahi5 was another. Though
not a Sifi, he was mystical.© Such mystics as he will have


* His paternal line was, ‘Abdu’l-baqi, son of ‘Usman, son of Sayyidi Ahmad, son
of Miran-shah. His mother’s people were begs of the White-sheep (H.S. iii, 290).

2 Sultanim had married Wais (f. 157) not later than 895 or 896 AH. (HLS. iii, 253);
she married ‘Abdu’l-baqi in 908 AH. (1502-3 AD.).

3 Sayyid Shamsu’d-din Muhammad, Mir Sayyid Sar-z-barahna owed his sobriquet
of Bare-head to love-sick wanderings of his youth (H.S. iii, 328). -The H.S. it is
clear, recognizes him as a sayyid.

4 Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 760; it is immensely long and “‘ filled with tales that shock
all probability ” (Erskine).

5 f. 94 and note. Sl. Husain M. made him curator of Ansari’s shrine, an officer
represented, presumably, by Col. Yate’s ‘‘ Mir of Gazur-gah ”, and he became Chief
Justice in 904 AH. (1498-99 AD.). See H.S. iii, 330 and 340; JASB 1887, art. Ox
the city of Harat (C. E. Yate) p. 85.

° mutasauwif, perhaps meaning not a professed Sifi.


=
soy


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 tro MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 281


gathered in ‘Ali-sher Beg’s presence and there have gone into
their raptures and ecstacies. Kamalu’d-din will have been
better-born than most of them; his promotion will have been
due to his good birth, since he had no other merit to speak of.*
A production of his exists, under the name MWajalisu’l-‘ushshaq
(Assemblies of lovers), the authorship of which he ascribes (in
its preface) to S]. Husain Mirza.? It is mostly a lie and a taste-
less lie. He has written such irreverent things in it that some
of them cast doubt upon his orthodoxy ; for example, he
represents the Prophets,—Peace be on them,—and Saints as
subject to earthly passion, and gives to each a minion and
a mistress. Another and singularly absurd thing is that, although
in his preface he says, “ This is Sl. Husain Mirza’s own written
word and literary. composition,” he, never-the-less, enters, in the
body of the book, “ All by the sub-signed author”, at the head
of odes and verses well-known to be his own. It was his flattery
gave Zi’n-nin Arghin the title Lion of God.


(2. His wazirs.)


One was Majdu’d-din Muhammad, son of Khwaja Pir Ahmad
of Khwaf, the one man (yak-galam) of Shahrukh Mirza’s
Finance-office.3 In Sl. Husain Mirza’s Finance-office there was
not at first proper order or method; waste and extravagance
resulted ; the peasant did not prosper, and the soldier was not
satisfied. Once while Majdu’d-din Muhammad was still sar-
wanchi* and styled Mirak (Little Mir), it became a matter of
importance to the Mirza to have some money ; when he asked
the Finance-officials for it, they said none had been collected and
that there was none. Majdu’d-din Muhammad must have heard
this and have smiled, for the Mirza asked him why he smiled ;
privacy was made and he told Mirza what was in his mind.


* He was of high birth on both sides, of religious houses of Tabas and Nishapir
(D.S. pp. 161, 163).

2 In agreement with its preface, Dr. Rieu entered the book as written by S]. Husain
Mirza ; in his Addenda, however, he quotes Babur as the authority for its being by
Gazur-gahi ; Khwand-amir’s authority can be added to Babur’s (H.S. 340; Pers. Cat.
pp. 351, 1085).

3 Diwan. The Wazir is a sort of Minister of Finance ; the Diwan is the office of
revenue receipts and issues (Erskine).

4 a secretary who writes out royal orders (H.S. iii, 244).


Fol. 1768.


Fol, 177.


282 KABUL


Said he, “If the honoured Mirza will pledge himself to streng nen
my hands by not opposing my orders, it shall so be before long
that the country shall prosper, the peasant be content, the soldier _
well-off, and the Treasury full.” The Mirza for his part gave q
the pledge desired, put Majdu’d-din Muhammad in authority —
throughout Khurasan, and entrusted all public business to him.
He in his turn by using all possible diligence and effort, before
long had made soldier and peasant grateful and content, filled
the Treasury to abundance, and made the districts habitable
and cultivated. He did all this however in face of opposition
from the begs and men high in place, all being led by ‘Ali-sher
Beg, all out of temper with what Majdu’d-din Muhammad had
effected. By their effort and evil suggestion he was arrested
and dismissed.t In succession to him Nizamu’l-mulk of Khwaf
was made Diwan but in a short time they got him arrested also,
and him they got put to death.2 They then brought Khwaja
Afzal out of ‘Iraq and made him Diwan; he had just been
made a beg when I came to Kabul (910 AH.), and he also
impressed the Seal in Diwan.

Khwaja ‘Ata3 was another ; although, unlike those already
mentioned, he was not in high office or Finance-minister (dzzwan),
nothing was settled without his concurrence the whole Khura-
sanat over. He was a pious, praying, upright (sutadazyin)
person ; he must have been diligent in business also.


* Count von Noer’s words about a cognate reform of later date suit this man’s work,
it also was ‘‘a bar to the defraudment of the Crown, a stumbling-block in the path of
avaricious chiefs” (Amjeror Akbar trs. i, 11). The opposition made by ‘Ali-sher to
reform so clearly to Husain’s gain and to Husain’s begs’ loss, stirs the question,
‘* What was the source of his own income?” Up to 873 AH. he was for some years
the dependant of Ahmad Haji Beg; he took nothing from the Mirza, but gave to
him ; he must have spent much in benefactions. The question may have presented
itself to M. Belin for he observes, ‘‘ ‘Ali-sher qui sans doute, 4 son retour de l’exil,
recouvra Vhéritage de ses péres, et depuis occupa de hautes positions dans le gouverne-
ment de son pays, avait acquis une grande fortune” (/. Aszatigue xvii, 227). While
not contradicting M. Belin’s view that vested property such as can be described as
** paternal inheritance ”, may have passed from father to son, even in those days of
fugitive prosperity and changing appointments, one cannot but infer, from Nawa’i’s
opposition to Majdu’d-din, that he, like the rest, took a partial view of the ‘‘ rights”
of the cultivator.

? This was in 903 AH. after some 20 years of service (H.S. iii, 231 ; Ethé I.O.
Cat. p. 252).

3 Amir Jamalu’d-din ‘Ata’u’l-lah, known also as Jamalu’d-din Husain, wrote a
eae of Muhammad (U.S. iii, 345; Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 147 & (a correction)
p. 1081).


oe


911 AH._JUNE 41H 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 283


(7. Others of the Court.)


Those enumerated were Sl. Husain Mirza’s retainers and
followers.. His was a wonderful Age; in it Khurasan, and Fol. 1776.
Heri above all, was full of learned and matchless men. What-
ever the work a man took up, he aimed and aspired at bringing
that work to perfection. One such man was Maulana ‘Abdu’r-
rahman /ami, who was unrivalled in his day for esoteric and
exoteric knowledge. Famous indeed are his poems! The
Mulla’s dignity it is out of my power to describe; it has occurred
to me merely to mention his honoured name and one atom of
his excellence, as a benediction and good omen for this part of
my humble book.

Shaikhu’l-islam Saifu’d-din Ahmad was another. He was of
the line of that Mulla Sa‘du’d-din (Mas‘td) Zaftazanz? whose
descendants from his time downwards have given the Shaikhu'l-
islam to Khurasan. He was a very learned man, admirably
versed in the Arabian sciences 3 and the Traditions, most God-
fearing and orthodox. Himself a Shafii,4 he was tolerant of all
the sects. People say he never once in 70 years omitted the
Congregational Prayer. He was martyred when Shah Isma‘l
took Heri (916 AH.); there now remains no man of his
honoured line.5

Maulana Shaikh Husain was another ; he is mentioned here,
although his first appearance and his promotion were under
Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza, because he was living still under Sl. Husain Fol. 178.
Mirza. Being well-versed in the sciences of philosophy, logic
and rhetoric, he was able to find much meaning in a few words
and to bring it out opportunely in conversation. Being very
intimate and influential with Sl. Abi-sa‘id Mirza, he took part
in all momentous affairs of the Mirza’s dominions ; there was


* Amongst noticeable omissions from Babur’s list of Heri celebrities are Mir
Khwand Shah (“‘ Mirkhond”’), his grandson Khwand-amir, Husain Xashzfz and
satelite al Zamji, author of a Aizstory of Harat which was finished in

Q7 AH.

2 Sa’du‘d-din Mas‘id, son of ‘Umar, was a native of Taft in Yazd, whence his
cognomen (Bahar-i-‘ajam) ; he died in 792 AH.—1390 AD. (HLS. iii, 59, 343; T.R.
p. 236; Rieu’s Pers. Cat. pp. 352, 453).

3 These are those connected with grammar and rhetoric (Erskine).

4 This is one of the four principal sects of Muhammadanism (Erskine).

5 T.R. p. 235, for Shah Isma‘tl’s murders in Heri.


20


Fol. 1783.


284 KABUL


no better muhtastb*; this will have been why he was so much a
trusted. Because be had been an intimate of that Mirza, the
incomparable man was treated with insult in Sl. Huss 7
Mirza’s time. a
Mulla-zada Mulla ‘Usman was another. He was a native of
Chirkh, in the Luhigur sadn of the timan of Kabul? and was
called the Born Mulla (/ulla-zada) because in Ailigh Beg
Mirza’s time he used to give lessons when 14 years old. He went
to Heri on his way from Samarkand to make the circuit of the
ka‘ba, was there stopped, and made to remain by Sl. Husain
Mirza. He was very learned, the most so of his time. People
say he was nearing the rank of Ijtihad 3 but he did not reach it.
It is said of him that he once asked, “How should a person
forget a thing heard?” A strong memory he must have had!
Mir Jamalu’d-din the Traditionalist* was another. He had no
equal in Khurasan for knowledge of the Muhammadan Traditions.
He was advanced in years and is still alive (934 to 937 AH.).
Mir Murtaz was another. He was well-versed in the sciences
of philosophy and metaphysics ; he was called murtaz (ascetic)
because he fasted a great deal. He was madly fond of chess,
so much so that if he had met two players, he would hold one
by the skirt while he played his game out with the other, as
much as to say, “ Don’t go!”
Mir Mas‘ud of Sherwan was another.5
Mir ‘Abdu’l-ghafir of Lar was another. Disciple and pupil
both of Maulana ‘Abdu’r-rahman /a@mz, he had read aloud most
of the Mulla’s poems (smasnawz) in his presence, and wrote
a plain exposition of the Wafakat.® He had good acquaintance


* Superintendent of Police, who examines weights, measures and provisions, also
prevents gambling, drinking and so on.

#125757.

3 The rank of Mujtahid, which is not bestowed by any individual or class of men
but which is the result of slow and imperceptible opinion, finally prevailing and
universally acknowledged, is one of the greatest peculiarities of the religion of Persia.
The Mujtahid is supposed to be elevated above human fears and human enjoyments,
and to have a certain degree of infallibility and inspiration. He is consulted with
reverence and awe. There is not always a Mujtahid necessarily existing. See
Kaempfer, Amoenttates Exoticae (Erskine).

4 muhaddas, one versed in the traditional sayings and actions of Muhammad.

5 H.S. iii, 340.

6 B.M. Or. 218 (Riew’s Pers. Cat. p. 350). The Commentary was made in order
to explain the Vafahdat to Jami’s son.


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 285


with the exoteric sciences, and in the esoteric ones also was very
successful. He was a curiously casual and unceremonious
person; no person styled Mulla by any-one soever was debarred
from submitting a (Qoran) chapter to him for exposition; more-
over whatever the place in which he heard there was a darwish,
he had no rest till he had reached that darwish’s presence. He
was ill when I was in Khurasan (912 AH.); I went to enquire
for him where he lay in the Mulla’s College,’ after I had made
the circuit of the Mulla’s tomb. He died a few days later, of
that same illness. |

Mir ‘Ata’u’l-lah of Mashhad was another.2 He knew the
Arabian sciences well and also wrote a Persian treatise on rhyme.
That treatise is well-done but it has the defect that he brings
into it, as his examples, couplets of his own and, assuming them
to be correct, prefixes to each, “As must be observed in the
following couplet by your slave” (4anda). Several rivals of his
find deserved comment in this treatise. He wrote another on
the curiosities of verse, entitled Badaz‘u’s-sanai; a very well-
written treatise. He may have swerved from the Faith.

Qazi Ikhtiyar was another. He was an excellent Qazi and
wrote a treatise in Persian on Jurisprudence, an admirable
treatise ; he also, in order to give elucidation (zgtzbds), made
a collection of homonymous verses from the Qoran. He came
with Muhammad-i-yisuf to see me at the time I met the Mirzas
on the Murgh-ab (912 AH.). Talk turning on the Baburi script,3
he asked me about it, letter by letter; I wrote it out, letter by
letter ; he went through it, letter by letter, and having learned
its plan, wrote something in it there and then.

Mir Muhammad-i-yiisuf was another; he was a pupil of the
Shaikhu’l-islam‘+ and afterwards was advanced to his place.
In some assemblies he, in others, Qazi Ikhtiyar took the
higher place. Towards the end of his life he was so infatuated


* He was buried by the Mulla’s side.

2 Amir Burhanu’d-din ‘Ata’u’l-lah bin Mahmiidw’ I-husaini was born in Nishapir
but known as Mashhadi because he retired to that holy spot after becoming blind.

3 f. 1446 and note. Qazi Ikhtiyaru’d-din Hasan (H.S. iii, 347) appears to be the
Khwaja Ikhtiyar of the Ayin-2-akébari, and, if so, will have taken professional interest
in the script, since Abi’l-fazl describes him as a distinguished caliernpise in Sl.
Husain M.’s presence (Blochmann, p. 101).

4 Saifu’d-din (Sword of the Faith) Ahmad, presumably.


Fol. 179.


‘ol. 1796.


with soldiering and military command, that except of hoa Oo
tasks, what could be learned from his conversation ? what known —
from his pen? Though he failed in both, those two ambitions —
ended by giving to the winds his goods and his life, his house _
and his home. He may have been a Shi'a.


(k. The Poets.)


The all-surpassing head of the poet-band was Maulana
‘Abdu’r-rahman /amz. Others were Shaikhim Suhaili and Hasan
of ‘Ali /alatr* whose names have been mentioned already as in
the circle of the Mirza’s begs and household.

Asafi was another,? he taking Asafi for his pen-name because
he was a wazir’s son. His verse does not want for grace or
sentiment, but has no merit through passion and ecstacy. He
himself made the claim, “I have never packed up (d#/madz) my |
odes to make the oasis (wa@dz) of a collection.”3 This was
affectation, his younger brothers and his intimates having
collected his odes. He wrote little else but odes. He waited
on me when I went into Khurasan (912 AH.).

Bana’i was another ; he was a native of Heri and took such
a pen-name (Bana’i) on account of his father Ustad Muhammad
Sabz-bana.4 His odes have grace and ecstacy. One poem
(masnawi) of his on the topic of fruits, is in the mutagarib
measure ;5 it is random and not worked up. Another short
poem is in the £/afzf measure, so also is a longer one finished
towards the end of his life. He will have known nothing of
music in his young days and ‘Ali-sher Beg seems to have taunted
him about it, so one winter when the Mirza, taking ‘Ali-sher Beg


* A sister of his, Apaq Bega, the wife of ‘Ali-sher’s brother Darwish-i-‘ali £2#addar,
is included as a poet in the Bzography of Ladies (Sprenger’s Cat. p. 11). Amongst
the 20 women named one is a wife of Shaibaq Khan, another a daughter of Hilali.

? He was the son of Khw. Ni‘amatu’l-lah, one of Sl. Abi-sa‘id M.’s wazirs.
When dying aet¢, 70 (923 AH.), he made this chronogram on his own death, ‘* With
70 steps he measured the road to eternity.” The name Asaf, so frequent amongst
wazirs, is that of Solomon’s wazir.

3 Other interpretations are open; wddi, taken as »7ver, might refer to the going on
from one poem to another, the stream of verse ; or it might be taken as desert, with
disparagement of collections.

‘ 4 Maulana Jamalu’d-din Bana’? was the son of a sabz-band, an architect, a good
uilder.

5 Steingass’s Dictionary allows convenient reference for examples of metres.


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 287


with him, went to winter in Merv, Bana’i stayed behind in Heri
and so applied himself to study music that before the heats he
had composed several works. These he played and sang, airs
with variations, when the Mirza came back to Heri in the heats.
All amazed, ‘Ali-sher Beg praised him. His musical compositions
are perfect ; one was an air known as WVuh-rang (Nine modula-
tions), and having both the theme (¢#anash) and the variation
(vila) on the note called vadst(?). Bana’i was ‘Ali-sher Beg’s
rival ; it will have been on this account he was so much ill-treated.


Fol. 180,


When at last he could bear it no longer, he went into Azarbaijan _


and ‘Iraq to the presence of Ya‘qib Beg ; he did not remain how-
ever in those parts after Ya‘qiib Beg’s death (896 AH.-1491 AD.)
but went back to Heri, just the same with his jokes and retorts.
Here is one of them :—‘Ali-sher at a chess-party in stretching
his leg touched Bana’i on the hinder-parts and said jestingly,
“Tt is the sad nuisance of Heri that a man can’t stretch his leg
without its touching a poet’s backside.” “ Nor draw it up again,”
retorted Bana’i.t In the end the upshot of his jesting was that
he had to leave Heri again; he went then to Samarkand.?
A great many good new things used to be made for ‘Ali-sher
Beg, so whenever any-one produced a novelty, he called it ‘Ali-
sher’s in order to give it credit and vogue.3 Some things were
called after him in compliment e.g. because when he had ear-ache,
he wrapped his head up in one of the blue triangular kerchiefs
women tie over their heads in winter, that kerchief was called
‘Ali-sher’s comforter. Then again, Bana’i when he had decided


to leave Heri, ordered a quite new kind of pad for his ass and
dubbed it ‘Ali-sher’s.


* Other jokes made by Band’z at the expense of Nawa’i are recorded in the various
sources. :

2 Babur saw Bana’i in Samarkand at the end of 901 AH. (1496 AD. f. 38).

Here Dr. Leyden’s translation ends ; one other fragment which he translated will
be found under the year 925 AH. (Erskine). This statement allows attention to be
drawn to the inequality of the shares of the work done for the Memoirs of 1826 by
Leyden and by Erskine. It is just to Mr. Erskine, but a justice he did not claim,
to point out that Dr. Leyden’s share is slight both in amount and in quality; his
essential contribution was the initial stimulus he gave to the great labours of his
collaborator.

3 So of Lope de Vega (b. 1562; d. 1635 Ap.), ‘‘ It became a common proverb to
praise a good thing by calling it a Zofe, so that jewels, diamonds, pictures, efc. were
raised into esteem by calling them his” (Montalvan in Ticknor’s Spanish Literature
li, 270).


Fol. 1808.


ol. 181.


288 KABUL b

Maulana Saifi of Bukhara was another ;' he was a Mulla a
complete? who in proof of his mulla-ship used to give a list of
the books he had read. He put two dzwans together, one being q ;
for the use of tradesmen (Zarfa-kar), and he also wrote many ;
fables. That he wrote no masnawi is shewn by the following


quatrain :—
Though the masnawi be the orthodox verse,


J know the ode has Divine command ;
Five couplets that charm the heart

Z know to outmatch the Two Quintets.3
A Persian prosody he wrote is at once brief and prolix, brief in
the sense of omitting things that should be included, and prolix in
the sense that plain and simple matters are detailed down to the
diacritical points, down even to their Arabic points.4 He is said
to have been a great drinker, a bad drinker, and a mightily strong-
fisted man.

‘Abdu’l-lah the masnawi-writer was another.5 He was from
Jam and was the Mulla’s sister’s son. Hatifi was his pen-name.
He wrote poems (masnawz) in emulation of the Two Quintets,°®
and called them Haft-manzar (Seven-faces) in imitation of the
Haft-patkar (Seven-faces). In emulation of the Szkandar-nama
he composed the 7imér-nama. His most renowned masnawi is
Laila and Majnin, but its reputation is greater than its charm.

Mir Husain the Enigmatist7 was another. He seems to have
had no equal in making riddles, to have given his whole time to
it, and to have been a curiously humble, disconsolate (~a@-murad)
and harmless (07-bad) person.

- Mir Muhammad Badakhshi of Ishkimish was another. As
Ishkimish is not in Badakhshan, it is odd he should have made it


* Maulana Saifi, known as ‘Ariizi from his mastery in prosody (Rieu’s Pers. Cat.
p. 525).

? Here pedantry will be implied in the mullahood.

3 Khamsatin (infra f. 1806 and note).

4 This appears to mean that not only the sparse diacritical pointing common in
writing Persian was dealt with but also the fuller Arabic.

5 He is best known by his pen-name Hatifi. The B.M. and I.O. have several of
his books.

© Khamsatin. UHatifi regarded himself as the successor of Nizami and Khusrau ;
this, taken with Babur’s use of the word AXhamsatin on f. 7 and here, and Saifi’s
just above, leads to the opinion that the Ahamsatin of the Bdbur-ndma are always
those of Nizami and Khusrau, ¢4e Two Quintets (Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 653).

7 Maulana Mir Kamalu’d-din Husain of Nishapir (Rieu Lc. index s.n. ; Ethé’s
I.O. Cat. pp. 433 and 1134).


pa!) 2 =i ee EL, «| Ss . ~/ ete, <P F » a
+ ‘yore , t Ml \ . j fre tant *
pe Sh * ; = ' ’ ry
s
ve i f
°


911 AH.—_JUNE 41ru 1505 to MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 289


his pen-name. His verse does not rank with that of the poets
previously mentioned,’ and though he wrote a treatise on riddles,
his riddles are not first-rate. He was a very pleasant companion ;
he waited on me in Samarkand (917 AH.).

Yisuf the wonderful (dadz‘)? was another. He was from the
Farghana country ; his odes are said not to be bad.

Ahi was another, a good ode-writer, latterly in Ibn-i-husain
Mirza’s service, and sa@hzb-2-diwan3

Muhammad S@/zk was another.4 His odes are tasty but better-
flavoured than correct. There is Turki verse of his also, not
badly written. He went to Shaibaq Khan later on and found
complete favour. He wrote a Turki poem (sasnawz), named
from Shaibag Khan, in the raml masaddas majniin measure, that is
to say the metre of the Subhazt.5 It is feeble and flat; Muhammad
Salih’s reader soon ceases to believe in him.® Here is one of his
good couplets :—


A fat man (Tambal) has gained the land of Farghana,
Making Farghana the house of the fat-man (Tambal-khana).


Farghana is known also as Tambal-khana.7 I do not know
whether the above couplet is found in the masnawz mentioned.


* One of his couplets on good and bad fortune is striking ; ‘* The fortune of men is
like a sand-glass; one hour up, the next down.” See D’Herbélot in his article
(Erskine).

2 H.S. iii, 336; Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 1089.

3 Ahi (sighing) was with Shah-i-gharib before Ibn-i-husain and to him dedicated
his diwan. The words sahzb-2-diwan seem likely to be used here with double
meaning 2z.¢. to express authorship and finance office. Though Babur has made
frequent mention of authorship of a azwdan and of office in the Diwan, he has not used
these words hitherto in either sense ; there may be a play of words here.

4 Muhammad Sah Mirza Khwdrizmi, author of the Shazbani-niéma which
manifestly is the poem (#asmawz) mentioned below. This has been published with
a German translation by Professor Vambéry and has been edited with Russian notes
by Mr. Platon Melioransky (Rieu’s Turkish Cat. p. 74; H.S. iii, 301).

5 Jami’s Subhatu’l-abrar (Rosary of the righteous).

© The reference may be to things said by Muh. Sa/zh the untruth of which was
known to Babur through his own part in the events. A crying instance of mis-
representation is Salih’s assertion, in rhetorical phrase, that Babur took booty in
jewels from Khusrau Shah ; other instances concern the affairs of The Khans and of
Babur in Transoxiana (f. 1244 and index s.22. Ahmad and Mahmid Chaghatai etc. ;
T.R. index s.22.).

7 The name Fat-land (Tambal-khana) has its parallel in Fat-village (Simiz-kint)
a name of Samarkand ; in both cases the nick-name is accounted for by the fertility
of irrigated lands. We have not been able to find the above-quoted couplet in the
Shatbani-nama (Vambéry) ; needless to say, the pun is on the nick-name [¢ambal, fat]
of Sl. Ahmad Zambéal.


Fol. 181d,


290 KABUL


Muhammad Sa/zh was a very wicked, tyrannical and heartless —
person."

Maulana Shah Husain Ka@mz? was another. There are not- ~
bad verses of his ; he wrote odes, and also seems to have put —
a diwan together.

Hilali (New-moon) was another ; he is still alive.3 Correct and
graceful though his odes are, they make little impression. There
is a diwan of his ;+ and there is also the poem (sasnawz) in the
khafif measure, entitled Shah and Darwish of which, fair though
many couplets are, the basis and purport are hollow and bad.
Ancient poets when writing of love and the lover, have represented
the lover as a man and the beloved as a woman ; but Hilali has
made the lover a darwish, the beloved a king, with the result
that the couplets containing the king’s acts and words set him
forth as shameless and abominable. It is an extreme effrontery
in Hilali that for a poem’s sake he should describe a young man
and that young man a king, as resembling the shameless and
immoral.5 It is heard-said that Hilali had a very retentive
memory, and that he had by heart 30 or 40,000 couplets, and the
greater part of the Two Quintets,—all most useful for the minutiae
of prosody and the art of verse.

Ahli® was another; he was of the common people (‘am2),
wrote verse not bad, even produced a diwan.

* Muh. Salih does not show well in his book ; he is sometimes coarse, gloats over
spoil whether in human captives or goods, and, his good-birth not-forbidding, is
a servile flatterer. Babur’s word ‘“‘ heartless” is just; it must have had sharp
prompting from Salih’s rejoicing in the downfall of The Khans, Babur’s uncles.

2 the Longer (H.S. iii, 349).

3 Maulana Badru’d-din (Full-moon of the Faith) whose pen-name was Hilali, was
of Astarabad. It may be noted that two dates of his death are found, 936 and
939 AH. the first given by de Sacy, the second by Rieu, and that the second seems to


be correct ({Vot. e¢ Extr. p. 285; Pers. Cat. p. 656; Hammer’s Geschichte p. 368).

4 B.M. Add. 7783.

5 Opinions differ as to the character of this work :—Babur’s is uncompromising ;
von Hammer (p. 369) describes it as ‘‘ ein vromantisches Gedicht, welches eine
sentimentale Mannerliebe behandelt” ; Sprenger (p. 427), as a mystical masnawi
(poem); Rieu finds no spiritual symbolism in it and condemns it (Pers. Cat. p. 656
and, quoting the above passage of Babur, p. 1090); Ethé, who has translated it, takes
it to be mystical and symbolic (I.O. Cat. p. 783).

° Of four writers using the pen-name Ahli (Of-the-people), vz. those of Turan,
Shiraz, Tarshiz (in Khurasan), and ‘Iraq, the one noticed here seems to be he of
Tarshiz. Ahli of Tarshiz was the son of a locally-known pious father and became
a Superintendent of the Mint ; Babur’s ‘ami may refer to Ahli’s first patrons, tanners
and shoe-makers by writing for whom he earned his living (Sprenger, p. 319).
Erskine read ‘wmmi, meaning that Ahli could neither read nor write; de Courteille
that he was uz homme du commun.


a


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 291


(2. Artists.)


Of fine pen-men there were many ; the one standing-out in
nakhsh ta‘lig was Si. ‘Ali of Mashhad* who copied many books for
the Mirza and for ‘Ali-sher Beg, writing daily 30 couplets for
the first, 20 for the second.

Of the painters, one was Bih-zad.?_ His work was very dainty
but he did not draw beardless faces well ; he used greatly to
lengthen the double chin (ghab-ghab); bearded faces he drew
admirably.

Shah Muzaffar was another; he painted dainty portraits,
representing the hair very daintily.3 Short life was granted
him ; he left the world when on his upward way to fame.

Of musicians, as has been said, no-one played the dulcimer
so well as Khwaja ‘Abdu’l-lah Warwarid.

Qul-i-muhammad the lutanist (‘a#dz) was another ; he also
played the guitar (ghzchak) beautifully and added three strings
to it. For many and good preludes (peshrau) he had not his
equal amongst composers or performers, but this is only true of
his preludes.

Shaikhi the flautist (v@yz) was another ; it is said he played
also the lute and the guitar, and that he had played the flute
from his 12th or 13th year. He once produced a wonderful air
on the flute, at one of Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s assemblies ; Qul-i-
muhammad could not reproduce it on the guitar, so declared
this a worthless instrument ; Shaikhi Mayz at once took the
guitar from Qul-i-muhammad’s hands and played the air on it,
well and in perfect tune. They say he was so expert in music
that having once heard an air, he was able to say, “This or that
is the tune of so-and-so’s or so-and-so’s flute.”4 He composed
few works; one or two airs are heard of.

Shah Quli the guitar-player was another; he was of ‘Iraq, came
into Khurasan, practised playing, and succeeded. He composed
many airs, preludes and works (xakhsh, peshrau u aishlar).


* He was an occasional poet (H.S. iii, 350 and iv, 118; Rieu’s Pers. Cat. p. 531;
Ethé’s I.O. Cat. p. 428).

? Ustad Kamalu’d-din Bih-zad (well-born; H.S. iii, 350). Work of his is
reproduced in Dr. Martin’s Painting and Painters of Persia of 1913 AD.

3 This sentence is not in the Elph. MS.

4 Perhaps he could reproduce tunes heard and say where heard.


Fol. 182.


Tol. 1826.


292 KABUL


Husain the lutanist was another; he composed and played
with taste; he would twist the strings of his lute into one and —
play on that. His fault was affectation about playing. He ~


made a fuss once when Shaibaq Khan ordered him to play, and


not only played badly but on a worthless instrument he had
brought in place of his own. The Khan saw through him at


once and ordered him to be well beaten on the neck, there and


then. This was the one good action Shaibaq Khan did in the
world ; it was well-done truly! a worse chastisement is the due
of such affected mannikins !

Ghulam-i-shadi (Slave of Festivity), the son of Shadi the
reciter, was another of the musicians. Though he performed,
he did it less well than those of the circle just described. There
are excellent themes (s#¢) and beautiful airs (zakhsh) of his;
no-one in his day composed such airs and themes. In the end
Shaibaq Khan sent him to the Qazan Khan, Muhammad Amin;
no further news has been heard of him.

Mir Azii was another composer, not a performer; he produced
few works but those few were in good taste.

Bana’i was also a musical composer ; there are excellent airs
and themes of his.

An unrivalled man was the wrestler Muhammad Bi-sa‘d ;
he was foremost amongst the wrestlers, wrote verse too, com-
posed themes and airs, one excellent air of his being in char-gah
(four-time),—and he was pleasant company. It is extraordinary
that such accomplishments as his should be combined with
wrestling."


HISTORICAL NARRATIVE RESUMED.


(a. Burtal of Sl. Husain Mirza.)
At the time Sl. Husain Mirza took his departure from the


world, there were present of the Mirzas only Badi‘u’z-zaman
Mirza and Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza. The latter had been his
father’s favourite son; his leading beg was Muhammad Barandiiq


Larlas ; his mother Khadija Begim had been the Mirza’s most


* M. Belin quotes quatrains exchanged by ‘Ali-sher and this man (/. Astatigue
XVii, 199).


|e Ave vie _


911 AH.—JUNE 4TH 1505 To MAY 24TH 1506 AD. 293


influential wife; and to him the Mirza’s people had gathered. Fol. 183.
For these reasons Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza had anxieties and
thought of not coming,’ but Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza and Mu-
hammad Barandiiq Beg themselves rode out, dispelled his fears
and brought him in.

Sl. Husain Mirza was carried into Heri and there buried in
his own College with royal rites and ceremonies.


(6. A dual succession.)


At this crisis Zi’n-niin Beg was also present. He, Muh.
Barandiq Beg, the late Mirza’s begs and those of the two (young)
Mirzas having assembled, decided to make the two Mirzas
joint-rulers in Heri. Zi’n-nin Beg was to have control in
Badi‘w’z-zaman Mirza’s Gate, Muh. Barandiiq Beg, in Muzaffar-
i-husain Mirza’s. Shaikh ‘Ali Taghai was to be darogha in Heri
for the first, Yisuf-i-‘ali for the second. Theirs was a strange
plan! Partnership in rule is a thing unheard of; against it
stand Shaikh Sa’di’s words in the Gulistan :—“ Ten darwishes
sleep under a blanket (gz/#m); two kings find no room in
a clime” (aglim).?


* z.e. from his own camp to Baba [lahi.
? f. 121 has a fuller quotation. On the dual succession, see T.R. p. 196.


‘ol. 183.


912 AH.—MAY 241TH 1506 Tro MAY 181xH 1507 AD.


(a. Babur starts to join Sl. Husain Mirza.)


In the month of Muharram we set out by way of Ghir-bund
and Shibr-tii to oppose the Aiizbeg.

As Jahangir Mirza had gone out of the country in some sort
of displeasure, we said, “ There might come much mischief and
trouble if he drew the clans (azmdaq) to himself;” and “ What


trouble might come of it!” and, “First let’s get the clans in | 4


hand!” So said, we hurried forward, riding light and leaving
the baggage (ai#ri#q) at Ushtur-shahr in charge of Wali the


treasurer and Daulat-qadam of the scouts. That day we reached Se


Fort Zahaq ; from there we crossed the pass of the Little-dome
(Gumbazak-kital), trampled through Saighan, went over the
Dandan-shikan pass and dismounted in the meadow of Kahmard.
From Kahmard we sent Sayyid Afzal the Seer-of-dreams
(Khwab-bin) and Sl. Muhammad Da/dai to Sl. Husain Mirza
with a letter giving the particulars of our start from Kabul.”
Jahangir Mirza must have lagged on the road, for when he
got opposite Bamian and went with 20 or 30 persons to visit it,
he saw near it the tents of our people left with the baggage.
Thinking we were there, he and his party hurried back to their
camp and, without an eye to anything, without regard for their
own people marching in the rear, made off for Yaka-ailang.3


(6. Action of Shaibig Khéan.)


When Shaibaq Khan had laid siege to Balkh, in which was
Sl. Qul-i-nachaq,+ he sent two or three sultans with 3 or 4000
men to overrun Badakhshan. At the time Mubarak Shah and


* Elph. MS. f. 144; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 1484 and 217 f. 1256; Mems. p. 199.
é “3 Eptigy of Husain’s death in 911 AH. (f. 1636) did not reach Babur till 912 AH.
. 1840).
3 Lone-meadow (f. 1954). Jahangir will have come over the ‘Iraq-pass, Babur’s
baggage-convoy, by Shibr-ti. Cf. T.R. p. 199 for Babur and Jahangir at this time.
4 Servant-of-the-mace ; but perhaps, Qilinj-chaq, swords-man.


294


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 ro MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 295


Zubair had again joined Nasir Mirza, spite of former resentments
and bickerings, and they all were lying at Shakdan, below Kishm Fol. 184.
and east of the Kishm-water. Moving through the night, one
body of Aiizbegs crossed that water at the top of the morning
and advanced on the Mirza ; he at once drew off to rising-ground,
mustered his force, sounded trumpets, met and overcame them.
Behind the Aiizbegs was the Kishm-water in flood, many were
drowned in it, a mass of them died by arrow and sword, more
were made prisoner. Another body of Aiizbegs, sent against
Mubarak Shah and Zubair where they lay, higher up the water
and nearer Kishm, made them retire to the rising-ground. Of this
the Mirza heard ; when he had beaten off his own assailants, he
moved against theirs. So did the Kohistan begs, gathered with
horse and foot, still higher up the river. Unable to make stand
against this attack, the Aiizbegs fled, but of this body also a mass
died by sword, arrow, and water. Inall some 1000 to 1500 may
have died. This was Nasir Mirza’s one good success ; a man of
his brought us news about it while we were in the dale of Kahmard.


(c. Babur moves on into Khurasan.)


While we were in Kahmard, our army fetched corn from
Ghiri and Dahana. There too we had letters from Sayyid Fol. 1846.
Afzal and Sl. Muhammad D¢/daz whom we had sent into
Khurasan ; their news was of Sl. Husain Mirza’s death.

This news notwithstanding, we set forward for Khurasan ;
though there were other grounds for doing this, what decided
us was anxious thought for the reputation of this (Timirid)
dynasty. We went up the trough (aichz) of the Ajar-valley, on
over Tup and Mandaghan, crossed the Balkh-water and came
out on Saf-hill. Hearing there that Aiizbegs were overrunning
San and Char-yak,* we sent a force under Qasim Beg against
them ; he got up with them, beat them well, cut many heads
off, and returned.

We lay a few days in the meadow of Saf-hill, waiting for
news of Jahangir Mirza and the clans (azmaq) to whom persons

* One of four, a fourth. Char-yak may be a component of the name of the well-
known place, n. of Kabul, ‘* Charikar” ; but also the C/@r in it may be Hindistani


and refer to the permits-to-pass after tolls paid, given to caravans halted there for
taxation. Raverty writes it Chariakar.


Fol. 185.


: ee


had been sent. We hunted once, those hills being very full ;
wild sheep and goats (Azyzk). All the clans came in and waited
on me within a few days; it was to me they came; they had
not gone to Jahangir Mirza though he had sent men often
enough to them, once sending even ‘Imadu’d-din Mas‘td. He
himself was forced to come at last; he saw me at the foot of
the valley when I came down off Saf-hill. Being anxious about
Khurasan, we neither paid him attention nor took thought for
the clans, but went right on through Gurzwan, Almar, Qaisar,
Chichik-ti, and Fakhru’d-din’s-death (a#/im) into the Bam-
valley, one of the dependencies of Badghis.

The world being full of divisions,‘ things were being taken
from country and people with the long arm; we ourselves began
to take something, by laying an impost on the Turks and clans
of those parts, in two or three months taking perhaps 300 za#mans
of kiphi.?


(ad. Coalition of the Khurasin Mirzas.)

A few days before our arrival (in Bam-valley?) some of the
Khurasan light troops and of Zi’n-niin Beg’s men had well
beaten Aiizbeg raiders in Pand-dih (Panj-dih?) and Marichaq,
killing a mass of men.3

Badi‘wz-zaman Mirza and Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza with
Muhammad Barandiiq Barlas, Zi’n-nin Arxghin and his son
Shah Beg resolved to move on Shaibaq Khan, then besieging
Sl. Qul-i-nachaq (?) in Balkh. Accordingly they summoned all
Sl. Husain Mirza’s sons, and got out of Heri to effect their
purpose. At Chihil-dukhtaran Abi’l-muhsin M. joined them
from Marv; Ibn-i-husain M. followed, coming up from Tin and
Qain. Kiipuk (Kipik) M. was in Mashhad ; often though they
sent to him, he behaved unmanly, spoke senseless words, and did
not come. Between him and Mugaffar Mirza, there was jealousy;
when Muzaffar M. was made (joint-)ruler, he said, “ How should
I go to his presence?” Through this disgusting jealousy he did

* Amongst the disruptions of the time was that of the Khanate of Qibchaq (Erskine).

* The nearest approach to 4épki we have found in Dictionaries is Aupaki, which
comes close to the Russian cofeck. Erskine notes that the casbehé is an oval copper
coin (Tavernier, p. 121); and that a ¢#man is a myriad (10,000), Cf Manucci


(Irvine), i, 78 and iv, 417 note; Chardin iv, 278.
3 Muharram 912 AH.—June 1506 ap. (H.S. iii, 353).


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 TO MAY 138TH 1507 AD. 297


not come now, even at this crisis when all his brethren, older and
younger, were assembling in concord, resolute against sucha foe
as Shaibaq Khan. Kipuk M. laid his own absence to rivalry,
but everybody else laid it to his cowardice. One word! In this
world acts such as his outlive the man ; if a man have any share
of intelligence, why try to be ill-spoken of after death? if he
be ambitious, why not try so to act that, he gone, men will praise
him? In the honourable mention of their names, wise men find
a second life!

Envoys from the Mirzas came to me also, Mth. Barandiiq
Barlas himself following them. As for me, what was to hinder
my going? It was for that very purpose I had travelled one or
two hundred yighdch (500-600 miles)! I at once started with
Muh. Barandiiq Beg for Murgh-ab* where the Mirzas were lying.


(e. Babur meets the Mirzas.)

The meeting with the Mirzas was on Monday the 8th of the
latter Jumada (Oct. 26th 1506 AH.). Abi’l-muhsin Mirza came
out a mile to meet me ; we approached one another ; on my side,
I dismounted, on his side, he ; we advanced, saw one another
and remounted. Near the camp Muzaffar Mirza and Ibn-i-husain
Mirza met us; they, being younger than Abi’l-muhsin Mirza
ought to have come out further than he to meet me.? Their
dilatoriness may not have been due to pride, but to heaviness
after wine ; their negligence may have been no slight on me,
but due to their own social pleasures. On this Muzaffar Mirza
laid stress ;3 we two saw one another without dismounting, so
did Ibn-i-husain Mirza and I. We rode on together and, in an
amazing crowd and press, dismounted at Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s
Gate. Such was the throng that some were lifted off the ground
for three or four steps together, while others, wishing for some
reason to get out, were carried, willy-nilly, four or five steps the
other way.


* I take Murgh-ab here to be the fortified place at the crossing of the river by the
main n.e. road; Babur when in Dara-i-bam was on a tributary of the Murgh-ab.
Khwand-amir records that the information of his approach was hailed in the Mirzas’
camp as good news (H.S. iii, 354).

? Babur gives the Mirzas precedence by age, ignoring Muzaffar’s position as
joint-ruler.

3 mubdlgha gildi ; perhaps he laid stress on their excuse ; perhaps did more than
was ceremonially incumbent on him.


Fol. 1850.


Fol. 186.


Fol. 1868.


298 KABUL


been agreed that I, on entering, should bend the knee (yakinghaz)
once, that the Mirza should rise and advance to the edge of the ©
estrade," and that we should see one another there. I went in, —
bent the knee once, and was going right forward; the Mirza
rose rather languidly and advanced rather slowly ; Qasim Beg,
as he was my well-wisher and held my reputation as his own,
gave my girdle a tug; I understood, moved more slowly, and
so the meeting was on the appointed spot.

Four divans (téshuk) had been placed in the tent. Always
in the Mirza’s tents one side was like a gate-way? and at the
edge of this gate-way he always sat. A divan was set there now
on which he and Muzaffar Mirza sat together. Abi’l-muhsin,
Mirza and I sat on another, set in the right-hand place of
honour (¢#r). On another, to Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s left, sat
Ibn-i-husain Mirza with Qasim Sl. Adzbeg, a son-in-law of the
late Mirza and father of Qasim-i-husain Sultan. To my right
and below my divan was one on which sat Jahangir Mirza and
‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza. To the left of Qasim Sl. and Ibn-i-husain
Mirza, but a good deal lower, were Muh. Barandiiq Beg, Zi’n-
nin Beg and Qasim Beg.

Although this was not a social gathering, cooked viands were
brought in, drinkables3 were set with the food, and near them
gold and silver cups. Our forefathers through a long space of
time, had respected the Chingiz-tiira (ordinance), doing nothing
opposed to it, whether in assembly or Court, in sittings-down


* “irq, to which estrade answers in its sense of a carpet on which stands a raised seat.

* Perhaps it was a recess, resembling a gate-way (W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 151 and 217
f. 1276). The impression conveyed by Babur’s words here to the artist who in B.M.
Or. 3714, has depicted the scene, is that there was a vestibule opening into the tent by
a door and that the Mirz& sat near that door. It must be said however that the
illustration does not closely follow the text, in some known details.

3 shira, fruit-syrups, sherbets. Babur’s word for wine is chdghir (g.v. index) and
this reception being public, wine could hardly have been offered in Sunni Heri.
Babur’s strictures can apply to the vessels of precious metal he mentions, these being
forbidden to Musalmans ; from his reference to the Tiira it would appear to repeat
the same injunctions. Babur broke up such vessels before the battle of Kanwaha
(f. 315). Shah-i-jahan did the same; when sent by his father Jahangir to reconquer
the Deccan (1030 AH.-162I AD.) he asked permission to follow the example of his
ancestor Babur, renounced wine, poured his stock into the Chambal, broke up his
cups and gave the fragments to the poor (‘4ma/l-i-salih, ; Hughes’ Dict. of [slam
quoting the Hidayah and Mishkat, s.nn. Drinkables, Drinking-vessels, and Gold ;
Lane’s Modern Egyptians p. 125 n.).


912 AH.—MAY 241TH 1506 To MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 299; ¥


or risings-up. Though it has not Divine authority so that
a man obeys it of necessity, still good rules of conduct must be
obeyed by whom-soever they are left; just in the same way
that, if a forefather have done ill, his ill must be changed
for good.

After the meal I rode from the Mirza’s camp some 2 miles to
our own dismounting-place.


(f. Babur claims due respect.)

At my second visit Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza shewed me less
respect than at my first. I therefore had it said to Muh.
Barandiq Beg and to Zi’n-nin Beg that, small though my age
was (aet. 24), my place of honour was large ; that I had seated
myself twice on the throne of our forefathers in Samarkand by
blow straight-dealt ; and that to be laggard in shewing me
respect was unreasonable, since it was for this (Timirid) dynasty’s
sake I had thus fought and striven with that alien foe. This
said, and as it was reasonable, they admitted their mistake at
once and shewed the respect claimed.


(g. Babur’s temperance.)

There was a wine-party (chaghir-majlist) once when I went
after the Mid-day Prayer to Badi‘w’z-zaman Mirza’s presence.
At that time I drank no wine. The party was altogether
elegant ; every sort of relish to wine (gazak) was set out on the
napery, with brochettes of fowl and goose, and all sorts of
viands. The Mirza’s entertainments were much renowned ;
truly was this one free from the pang of thirst (47 ghad/), reposeful
and tranquil. I was at two or three of his wine-parties while
we were on the bank of the Murgh-ab; once it was known I did
not drink, no pressure to do so was put on me.

I went to one wine-party of Muzaffar Mirza’s. Husain of
‘Ali /alatr and Mir Badr were both there, they being in his
service. When Mir Badr had had enough (azfzyat), he danced,
and danced well what seemed to be his own invention.


(h. Comments on the Mirzas.)
Three months it took the Mirzas to get out of Heri,
agree amongst themselves, collect troops, and reach Murgh-ab.


21


Fol. 187.


Fol. 1876.


Fol, 188,


300 KABUL | Ce
Se
Meantime Sl. Qul-i-nachaq (?), reduced to extremity, had
surrendered Balkh to the Aiizbeg but that Aiizbeg, hearing of
our alliance against him, had hurried back to Samarkand. The —
Mirzis were good enough as company and in social matters,
in conversation and parties, but they were strangers to war,


strategy, equipment, bold fight and encounter.


(7. Winter plans.)


While we were on the Murgh-ab, news came that Haq-nazir
Chapa (var, Hian) was over-running the neighbourhood of
Chichik-ti with 4 or 500 men. All the Mirzas there present,
do what they would, could not manage to send a light troop
against those raiders! It is 10 yighdch (50-55 m.) from
Murgh-ab to Chichik-ti, I asked the work; they, with a thought
for their own reputation, would not give it to me.

The year being almost at an end when Shaibaq Khan retired,
the Mirzas decided to winter where it was convenient and to
reassemble next summer in order to repel their foe.

They pressed me to winter in Khurasan, but this not one of
my well-wishers saw it good for me to do because, while Kabul
and Ghazni were full of a turbulent and ill-conducted medley of
people and hordes, Turks, Mughiils, clans and nomads (aimdag u
ahsham), Afghans and Hazara, the roads between us and that
not yet desirably subjected country of Kabul were, one, the
mountain-road, a month’s journey even without delay through
snow or other cause,—the other, the low-country road, a journey
of 40 or 50 days,

Consequently we excused ourselves to the Mirzas, but they
would accept no excuse and, for all our pleas, only urged
the more. In the end Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza, Abi’l-muhsin
Mirza and Mugaffar Mirzi themselves rode to my tent and 4
urged me to stay the winter, It was impossible to refuse men ,
of such ruling position, come in person to press us to stay on, |
Besides this, the whole habitable world has not such a town as
Heri had become under Sl. Husain Mirza, whose orders and
efforts had increased its splendour and beauty as ten to one, .
rather, as twenty to one, As I greatly wished to stay, I con-
sented to do so,


é


bal
Al NE


Z 1
i we


2


jetta ver eres ern | so ime.


912 AH.—MAY 247TH 1506 To MAY 137TH 1507 AD. 301


Abi’l-muhsin M. went to Marv, his own district ; Ibn-i-husain
M. went to his, Tin and Qain; Badi‘w’z-zaman M. and
Muzaffar M. set off for Heri; I followed them a few days later,
taking the road by Chihil-dukhtaran and Tash-rabat.*


(7. Babur visits the Begims in Heri.)


All the Begims, ze. my paternal-aunt Payanda-sultan Begim,
Khadija Begim, Apaq Begim, and my other paternal-aunt Begims,
daughters of S|. Abi-sa‘id Mirza,? were gathered together, at the
time I went to see them, in Sl. Husain Mirza’s College at his
Mausoleum. Having bent the knee with (yakinud bila) Payanda-
sultan Begim first of all, I had an interview with her; next, not
bending the knee,3 I had an interview with Apaq Begim ; next,
having bent the knee with Khadija Begim, I had an interview
with her. After sitting there for some time during recitation of
the Qoran,* we went to the South College where Khadija Begim’s
tents had been set up and where food was placed before us.
After partaking of this, we went to Payanda-sultan Begim’s
tents and there spent the night.

The New-year’s Garden was given us first for a camping-
ground ; there our camp was arranged ; and there I spent the
night of the day following my visit to the Begims, but as I did
not find it a convenient place, ‘Ali-sher Beg’s residence was


* This may be the Rabat-i-sanghi of some maps, on a near road between the
‘* Forty-daughters” and Harat ; or Babur may have gone out of his direct way to
visit Rabat-i-sang-bast, a renowned halting place at the Carfax of the Heri-Tiis and
Nishapir—-Mashhad roads, built by one Arslan /azd@/a who lies buried near, and rebuilt
with great magnificence by “‘Ali-sher awd’? (Daulat-shah, Browne, p. 176),

2 The wording here is confusing to those lacking family details. The paternal-aunt
begims can be Payanda-sultan (named), Khadija-sultan, Apaq-sultan, and Fakhr-jahan
Begims, all daughters of Abii-sa‘id. The Apaq Begim named above (also on f. 1686
ee.) does not now seem to me to be Abii-sa‘id’s daughter (Gul-badan, trs. Bio. App. ).

3 yiikiinmai. Unless all copies I have seen reproduce a. primary clerical mistake
of Babur’s, the change of salutation indicated by there being no kneeling with Apaq
Begim, points to a xwance of etiquette. Of the verb y#inmak it may be noted that
it both describes the ceremonious attitude of intercourse, z.e. kneeling and sitting back
on both heels (Shaw), and also the kneeling on meeting. From Babur’s phrase
Begim bila yiikiinid (having kneeled with], it appears that each of those meeting
made the genuflection ; I have not found the phrase used of other meetings ; it is not
the one used when a junior or a man of less degree meets a senior or superior in rank
(e.g. Khusrau and Babur f. 123, or Babur and Badi‘u’z-zaman f. 186).

4 Musalmans employ a set of readers who succeed one another in reading (reciting)
the Qoran at the tombs of their men of eminence. This reading is sometimes continued
day and night. The readers are paid by the rent of lands or other funds assigned for
the purpose (Erskine).


Fol. 188;


‘ol. 189,


302 _ KABUL


assigned to me, where I was as long as I stayed in Heri, every ‘
few days shewing myself in Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s presence in —
the World-adorning Garden.


(k. The Mirzas entertain Babur in Feri.)


A few days after Muzaffar Mirza had settled down in the
White-garden, he invited me to his quarters; Khadija Begim
was also there, and with me went Jahangir Mirza. When we
had eaten a meal in the Begim’s presence,’ Muzaffar Mirza took
me to where there was a wine-party, in the Tarab-khana (Joy-
house) built by Babur Mirza, a sweet little abode, a smallish,
two-storeyed house in the middle of a smallish garden. Great
pains have been taken with its upper storey ; this has a retreat
(Aujra) in each of its four corners, the space between each two
retreats being like a shah-nishin? ; in between these retreats and
shah-nishins is one large room on all sides of which are pictures
which, although Babur Mirza built the house, were commanded
by Abi-sa‘id Mirza and depict his own wars and encounters.

Two divans had been set in the north shah-nishin, facing each
other, and with their sides turned to the north. Onone Muzaffar
Mirza and I sat, on the other Sl. Mas‘tid Mirza3 and Jahangir
Mirza. We being guests, Muzaffar Mirza gave me place above
himself. The social cups were filled, the cup-bearers ordered to
carry them to the guests ; the guests drank down the mere wine
as if it were water-of-life ; when it mounted to their heads, the
party waxed warm.

They thought to make me also drink and to draw me into
their own circle. Though up till then I had not committed the
sin of wine-drinking+ and known the cheering sensation of
comfortable drunkenness, I was inclined to drink wine and my Et
heart was drawn to cross that stream (wa@da). I had had no
inclination for wine in my childhood; I knew nothing of its
cheer and pleasure. If, as sometimes, my father pressed wine a

* A suspicion that Khadija put poison in Jahangir’s wine may refer to this occasion
(T.R. p. 199). q

? These are jharokha-i-darsin, windows or balconies from which a ruler shews
himself to the people.


3 Mas‘iid was then blind. ‘


‘ Babur first drank wine not earlier than 917 AH. (f. 49 and note), therefore when
nearing 30.


— > 2 >


Ae ee ee
lea) ties
She rey
,.? ;
ery
wee? :


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 TO MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 303


on me, I excused myself; I did not commit the sin. After he Fol. 189¢.
died, Khwaja Qazi’s right guidance kept me guiltless ; as at that
time I abstained from forbidden viands, what room was there
for the sin of wine? Later on when, with the young man’s
lusts and at the prompting of sensual passion, desire for wine
arose, there was no-one to press it on me, no-one indeed aware
of my leaning towards it; so that, inclined for it though my
heart was, it was difficult of myself to do such a thing, one
thitherto undone. . It crossed my mind now, when the Mirzas
were so pressing and when too we were in a town so refined as
Heri, “ Where should I drink if not here? here where all the
chattels and utensils of luxury and comfort are gathered
and in use.” So saying to myself, I resolved to drink wine ;
I determined to cross that stream ; but it occurred to me that as
I had not taken wine in Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s house or from
his hand, who was to me as an elder brother, things might find
way into his mind if I took wine in his younger brother’s house
and from his hand. Having so said to myself, I mentioned my
doubt and difficulty. Said they, “ Both the excuse and the
obstacle are reasonable,” pressed me no more to drink then but
settled that when I was in company with both Mirzas, I should
drink under the insistance of both.

Amongst the musicians present at this party were Hafiz Haji, Fol. 190.
Jalalu’d-din Mahmid the flautist, and Ghulam shadi’s younger
brother, Ghulam dacha the Jews’-harpist. Hafiz Haji sang well,
as Heri people sing, quietly, delicately, and in tune. With
Jahangir Mirza was a Samarkandi singer Mir Jan whose
singing was always loud, harsh and out-of-tune. The Mirza,
having had enough, ordered him to sing; he did so, loudly,
harshly and without taste. Khurasanis have quite refined
manners ; if, under this singing, one did stop his ears, the face
of another put question, not one could stop the singer, out of
consideration for the Mirza.

After the Evening Prayer we left the Tarab-khana for a new
house in Muzaffar Mirza’s winter-quarters. There Yisuf-i-‘ali
danced in the drunken time, and being, as he was,amasterin music,
danced well. The party waxed very warm there. Muzaffar Mirza
gave me a sword-belt, a lambskin surtout, and a grey tipiachagq


Fol. 1908.


Fol. 191.


304 KABUL


tricks in the drunken time. The party was warm till night when
those assembled scattered, I, however, staying the night in that
house. 7

Oasim Beg getting to hear that I had been pressed to drink
wine, sent some-one to Zii’n-niin Beg with advice for him and
for Muzaffar Mirza, given in very plain words ; the result was
that the Mirzas entirely ceased to press wine upon me.

Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza, hearing that Muzaffar M.had entertained
me, asked me to a party arranged in the Maqauwi-khana of the
World-adorning Garden. He asked also some of my close
circle and some of our braves. Those about me could never
drink (openly) on my own account; if they ever did drink,
they did it perhaps once in 40 days, with doorstrap fast and
under a hundred fears. Such as these were now invited ; here
too they drank with a hundred precautions, sometimes calling
off my attention, sometimes making a screen of their hands,
notwithstanding that I had given them permission to follow
common custom, because this party was given by one standing
to me as a father or elder brother. People brought in weeping-
willows... ?


At this party they set a roast goose before me but as I was
no carver or disjointer of birds, I left it alone. “Do you not
like it?” inquired the Mirza. Said I, “I am a poor carver.”
On this he at once disjointed the bird and set it again before
me. In such matters he had no match. At the end of the
party he gave me an enamelled waist-dagger, a char-gab,3 and
a tipichag.


(2. Babur sees the sights of Heri.)

Every day of the time I was in Heri I rode out to see a new
sight; my guide in these excursions was Yisuf-i-‘ali Kikildash ;
wherever we dismounted, he set food before me. Except Sl.

* aichkilar, French, zntérieur.

* The obscure passage following here is discussed in Appendix I, Om the weeping-


willows of f. 1900.
3 Here this may well be a gold-embroidered garment.


a
(horse). Janak recited in Turki. Two slaves of the Mirza’s, —
known as Big-moon and Little-moon, did offensive, drunken —


Pane ms a


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 to MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 305


Husain Mirza’s Almshouse, not one famous spot, maybe, was
left unseen in those 40 days.

I saw the Gazur-gah,' ‘Ali-sher’s Baghcha (Little-garden),
the Paper-mortars,? Takht-astana (Royal-residence), Pul-i-gah,
Kahad-stan,3 Nazar-gah-garden, Ni‘matabad (Pleasure-place),
Gazur-gah Avenue, SI. Ahmad Mirza’s Hazirat,4 Takht-i-safar,5
Takht-i-nawa’, Takht-i-barkar, Takht-i- Haji Beg, Takht-i-Baha’-
wd-din ‘Umar, Takht-i-Shaikh Zainu’d-din, Maulana ‘Abdu’r-
rahman /a@mi’s honoured shrine and tomb,° Namaz-gah-i-
mukhtar,? the Fish-pond,® Saq-i-sulaiman,9 Buliri (Crystal)
which originally may have been Abi’l-walid,*° Imam Fakhr,"™
Avenue-garden, Mirza’s Colleges and tomb, Guhar-shad Begim’s
College, tomb,’? and Congregational Mosque, the Ravens’-garden,


* This, the tomb of Khwaja ‘Abdu’l-lah Ansari (d. 481 AH.) stands some 2m.
north of Heri. Babur mentions one of its numerous attendants of his day, Kamalu’d-
din Husain Gazur-gaht. Mohan Lall describes it as he saw it in 1831; says the
original name of the locality was Kar-zar-gah, place-of-battle ; and, as perhaps his
most interesting detail, mentions that Jalalu’d-din Rami’s Masnawi was recited every
morning near the tomb and that people fainted during the invocation (7vavels in the
Panj-ab etc. p. 252). Colonel Yate has described the tomb as he saw it some 50 years
later (JASB 1887); and explains the name Gazur-gah (lit. bleaching-place) by the
following words of an inscription there found; ‘* His tomb (Ansari’s) is a washing-
place (g@zur-gah) wherein the cloud of the Divine forgiveness washes white the black
records of men” (p. 88 and p. 102).

2 juaz-t-kaghazlar (f. 476 and note).

3 The Habibw’s-stydr and Hai. MS. write this name with medial ‘‘ round 2a” ; this
allows it to be Kahad-stan, a running-place, race-course. Khwand-amir and Daulat-
shah call it a meadow (aé#/dng) ; the latter speaks of a feast as held there; it was
Shaibani’s head-quarters when he took Harat.

4 var. Khatira; either an enclosure (g#réig ?) or a fine and lofty building.

5 This may have been a usual halting-place on a journey (safar) north. It was
built by Husain Aai-gara, overlooked hills and fields covered with arghwan (f. 1374)
and seems once to have been a_Paradise (Mohan Lall, p. 256).

© Jami’s tomb was in the ‘Id-gah of Heri (H.S. ii, 337), which appears to be the
Musalla (Praying-place) demolished by Amir ‘Abdu’r-rahman in the 19th century.
Col. Yate was shewn a tomb in the Musalla said to be Jami’s and agreeing in the
age, 81, given on it, with Jami’s at death, but he found a crux in the inscription
(pp. 99, 106). ;

7 This may be the Musalla (Yate, p. 98).

® This place is located by the H.S. at 5 farsakh from Heri (de Meynard at 25 £z/o-
metres). It appears to be rather an abyss or fissure than a pond, a crack from the
sides of which water trickles into a small bason in which dwells a mysterious fish, the
beholding of which allows the attainment of desires. The story recalls Wordsworth’s
undying fish of Bow-scale Tarn. (Cf. H.S. Bomb. ed. ii, Ahatmat p. 20 and de
Meynard, Journal Asiatiqgue xvi, 480 and note.)

9 This is on maps to the north of Heri.

70 qd. 232 AH. (847 AD.). See Yate, p. 93.

™ Imam Fakhru’d-din Raz (de Meynard, Journal Asiatigue xvi, 481).

72 qd. 861 AH.-1457 AD. Guhar-shad was the wife of Timir’s son Shahrukh. See
Mohan Lall, p. 257 and Yate, p. 98.


Fol. 1918.


‘ol. 192.


306 KABUL


New-garden, Zubaida-garden,! SI]. Abi-sa‘id Mirza’s White-house —
outside the ‘Iraq-gate, Piiran,? the Archer’s-seat, Chargh (hawk)-
meadow, Amir Wahid,3 Malan-bridge,t Khwaja-taq,5 White-
garden, Tarab-khana, Bagh-i-jahan-ara, Kiishk,° Maqauwi-khana,
Lily-house, Twelve-towers, the great tank to the north of Jahan-
ara and the four dwellings on its four sides, the five Fort-gates,
viz. the Malik, ‘Iraq, Firtizabad, Khiish7 and Qibchaq Gates, Char-
si, Shaikhu’l-islam’s College, Maliks’ Congregational Mosque,
Town-garden, Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s College on the bank of
the Anjil-canal, ‘Ali-sher Beg’s dwellings where we resided and
which people call Unsiya (Ease), his tomb and mosque which
they call Qudsiya (Holy), his College and Almshouse which
they call Khalasiya and Akhlasiya (Freedom and Sincerity),
his Hot-bath and Hospital which they call Safa’iya and
Shafa’iya. All these I visited in that space of time.


(m. Babur engages Ma‘siima-sultan in marriage.)

It must have been before those throneless times ® that Habiba-
sultan Begim, the mother of Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s youngest
daughter Ma‘siima-sultan Begim, brought her daughter into Heri.
One day when I was visiting my Aka, Ma‘siima-sultan Begim
came there with her mother and at once felt arise in her a great
inclination towards me. Private messengers having been sent,
my Aka and my Yinka, as I used to call Payanda-sultan Begim
and Habiba-sultan Begim, settled between them that the latter
should bring her daughter after me to Kabul.?


* This Marigold-garden may be named after Hariinu’r-rashid’s wife Zubaida.

* This will be the place n. of Heri from which Maulana Jalalu’d-din Parani 4
(d. 862 AH.) took his cognomen, as also Shaikh Jamalu’d-din Abii-sa‘id Puran (f. 206) :
who was visited there by Sl. Husain Mirza, ill-treated by Shaibani (f. 206), left Heri 2
for Qandahar, and there died, through the fall of a roof, in 921 AH. (HLS. ili, 345 ; 2
Khazinatw l-asfiya ii, 321). 4

3 His tomb is dated 35 or 37 AH. (656 or 658 Ap. ; Yate, p. 94).

4 Malan was a name of the Heri-rid (Journal Asiatigue xvi, 476, 511; Mohan
Lall, p. 279; Ferrier, p. 261; efc.).

5 Yate, p. 94. :

© The position of this building between the Khish and Qibchaq Gates (de Meynard,

l.c. p. 475) is the probable explanation of the variant, noted just below, of Kushk :
for Khiish as the name of the Gate. The 7arikh-i-rashidi (p. 429), mentions this
kiosk in its list of the noted ones of the world.

7 var. Kushk (de Meynard, l.c. p. 472).

® The reference here is, presumably, to Babur’s own losses of Samarkand and Andijan.

®° Aka or Aga is used of elder relations ; a yinka or yinga is the wife of an uncle
or elder brother ; here it represents the widow of Babur’s uncle Ahmad M/iran-shahi.

From it is formed the word yinkailzk, levirate.


912 AH.—MAY 247TH 1506 To MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 307


(n. Babur leaves Khurdsan.)

Very pressingly had Muh. Barandiiq Beg and Zi’n-niin Arghin
said, “ Winter here!” but they had given me no winter-quarters
nor had they made any winter-arrangements for me. Winter
came on; snow fell on the mountains between us and Kabul ;
anxiety grew about Kabul ; no winter-quarters were offered, no
arrangements made! As we could not speak out, of necessity
we left Heri!

On the pretext of finding winter-quarters, we got out of the
town on the 7th day of the month of Sha‘ban (Dec. 24th 1506 AD.),
and went to near Badghis. Such were our slowness and our
tarryings that the Ramzan-moon was seen a few marches only
beyond the Langar of Mir Ghiyas.t| Of our braves who were
absent on various affairs, some joined us, some followed us into
Kabul 20 days or a month later, some stayed in Heri and took
service with the Mirzas. One of these last was Sayyidim ‘Ali
the gate-ward, who became Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s retainer. To
no servant of Khusrau Shah had I shewn so much favour as to
him ; he had been given Ghazni when Jahangir Mirza abandoned
it, and in it when he came away with the army, had left his
younger brother Dost-i-anjii (?) Shaikh. There were in truth
no better men amongst Khusrau Shah’s retainers than this man
Sayyidim ‘Ali the gate-ward and Muhibb-i-‘ali the armourer.
Sayyidim was of excellent nature and manners, a bold swordsman,
a singularly competent and methodical man. His house was
never without company and assembly ; he was greatly generous,
had wit and charm, a variety of talk and story, and was a sweet-
natured, good-humoured, ingenious, fun-loving person. His
fault was that he practised vice and pederasty. He may have
swerved from the Faith; may also have been a hypocrite in his
dealings ; some of what seemed double-dealing people attributed
to his jokes, but, still, there must have been a something! ?
When Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza had let Shaibaq Khan take Heri
and had gone to Shah Beg (Avghin), he had Sayyidim ‘Ali
thrown into the Harmand because of his double-dealing words


* The almshouse or convent was founded here in Timiir’s reign (de Meynard,
l.c. p. 500).
2 2.e. No smoke without fire.


Fol. 1928.


Fol. 193.


Fol. 1936.


308 KABUL


spoken between the Mirza and Shah Beg. Muhibb-i-‘ali’s story


will come into the narrative of events hereafter to be written.


(0. A perilous mountain-journey.)


From the Langar of Mir Ghiyags we had ourselves guided past
the border-villages of Gharjistan to Chach-charan.t From the
almshouse to Gharjistan was an unbroken sheet of snow ; it was
deeper further on ; near Chach-charan itself it was above the
horses’ knees. Chach-charan depended on Zi’n-nin Arghan;
his retainer Mir Jan-airdi was in it now ; from him we took, on
payment, the whole of Zi’n-niin Beg’s store of provisions.
A march or two further on, the snow was very deep, being above
the stirrup, indeed in many places the horses’ feet did not touch
the ground.

We had consulted at the Langar of Mir Ghiyas which road to
take for return to Kabul; most of us agreed in saying, “It is
winter, the mountain-road is difficult and dangerous; the
Qandahar road, though a little longer, is safe and easy.” Qasim
Beg said, “ That road is long; you will go by this one.” Ashe
made much dispute, we took the mountain-road.

Our guide was a Pashai named Pir Sultan (Old sultan ?).
Whether it was through old age, whether from want of heart,
whether because of the deep snow, he lost the road and could
not guide us. As we were on this route under the insistance of
Qasim Beg, he and his sons, for his name’s sake, dismounted,
trampled the snow down, found the road again and took the
lead. One day the snow was so deep and the way so uncertain
that we could not go on; there being no help for it, back we
turned, dismounted where there was fuel, picked out 60 or 70
good men and sent them down the valley in our tracks to fetch
any one soever of the Hazara, wintering in the valley-bottom,
who might shew us the road. That place could not be left till
our men returned three or four days later. They brought no
guide ; once more we sent Sultan Pashdi ahead and, putting our


* This name may be due to the splashing of water. A Langar which may be that
of Mir Ghiyas, is shewn in maps in the Bam valley; from it into the Heri-rid valley
Babur’s route may well have been the track from that Langar which, passing the
villages on the southern border of Gharjistan, goes to Ahangaran.


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 To MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 309


trust in God, again took the road by which we had come back
from where it was lost. Much misery and hardship were
endured in those few days, more than at any time of my life.
In that stress I composed the following opening couplet :—


Is there one cruel turn of Fortune’s wheel unseen of me ?
Is there a pang, a grief my wounded heart has missed ?


We went on for nearly a week, trampling down the snow and
not getting forward more than two or three miles a day. I was
one of the snow-stampers, with 10 or 15 of my household, Oasim
Beg, his sons Tingri-birdi and Qambar-i-‘ali and two or three of
their retainers. These mentioned used to go forward for 7 or $
yards, stamping the snow down and at each step sinking to the
waist or the breast. After a few steps the leading man would
stand still, exhausted by the labour, and another would go
forward. By the time 10, 15, 20, men on foot had stamped the
snow down, it became so that a horse might be led over it.
A horse would be led, would sink to the stirrups, could do no
more than 10 or 12 steps, and would be drawn aside to let another
goon. After we, 10, 15, 20, men had stamped down the snow
and had led horses forward in this fashion, very serviceable
braves and men of renowned name would enter the beaten track,
hanging their heads. It was not a time to urge or compel! the
man with will and hardihood for such tasks does them by his
own request! Stamping the snow down in this way, we got
out of that afflicting place (aujzkan yir) in three or four days to
a cave known as the Khawal-i-qiti (Blessed-cave), below the
Zirrin-pass.

That night the snow fell in such an amazing blizzard of cutting
wind that every man feared for his life. The storm had become
extremely violent by the time we reached the £hawal, as people
in those parts call a mountain-cave (ghar) or hollow (khawéh).
We dismounted at its mouth. Deep snow! a one-man road !
and even on that stamped-down and trampled road, pitfalls for
horses! the days at their shortest! The first arrivals reached
the cave by daylight ; others kept coming in from the Evening
Prayer till the Bed-time one ; later than that people dismounted
wherever they happened to be; dawn shot with many still in
the saddle.


Fol. 194.


Fol. 1944.


Fol. 195.


310


The cave seeming to be rather small, I took a shovel and
shovelled out a place near its mouth, the size of a sitting-mat
(takiya-namad), digging it out breast-high but even then not —
reaching the ground. This made me a little shelter from the
wind when I sat right down in it. I did not go into the cave
though people kept saying, “ Come inside,” because this was in
my mind, “Some of my men in snow and storm, I in the
comfort of a warm house! the whole horde (a#/is) outside in
misery and pain, I inside sleeping at ease! That would be far
from a man’s act, quite another matter than comradeship !
Whatever hardship and wretchedness there is, I will face ; what
strong men stand, I will stand ; for, as the Persian proverb says,
to die with friends is a nuptial.” Till the Bed-time Prayer
I sat through that blizzard of snow and wind in the dug-out,
the snow-fall being such that my head, back, and ears were —
overlaid four hands thick. The cold of that night affected my
ears. At the Bed-time Prayer some-one, looking more carefully
at the cave, shouted out, “It is a very roomy cave with place for
every-body.” On hearing this I shook off my roofing of snow
and, asking the braves near to come also, went inside. There
was room for 50 or 60! People brought out their rations, cold
meat, parched grain, whatever they had. From such cold and
tumult to a place so warm, cosy and quiet !*

Next day the snow and wind having ceased, we made an
early start and we got to the pass by again stamping down
a road in the snow. The proper road seems to make a détour
up the flank of the mountain and to go over higher up, by what
is understood to be called the Zirrin-pass. Instead of taking
that road, we went straight up the valley-bottom (g#/).? It was
night before we reached the further side of the (Bakkak-)pass ;
we spent the night there in the mouth of the valley, a night of


* This escape ought to have been included in the list of Babur’s transportations
from risk to safety given in my note to f. 96.

? The right and wrong roads are shewn by the Indian Survey and French Military
maps. The right road turns off from the wrong one, at Daulat-yar, to the right, and
mounts diagonally along the south rampart of the Heri-rid valley, to the Zirrin-pass,
which lies. above the Bakkak-pass and carries the regular road for Yaka-aiilang.
It must be said, however, that we are not told whether Yaka-aiilang was Qasim Beg’s
objective ; the direct road for Kabul from the Heri-rid valley is not over the Zirrin-
pass but goes from Daulat-yar by ‘‘ Aq-zarat”’, and the southern flank of Koh-i-baba
(babar) to the Unai-pass (Holdich’s Gates of India p. 262).


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 tro MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 311


mighty cold, got through with great distress and suffering.
Many a man had his hands and feet frost-bitten ; that night’s
cold took both Kipa’s feet, both Sitndik Zurkman’s hands,
both Ahi’s feet. Early next morning we moved down the
valley; putting our trust in God, we went straight down, by bad
slopes and sudden falls, knowing and seeing it could not be the
right way. It was the Evening Prayer when we got out of
that valley. No long-memoried old man knew that any-one
had been heard of as crossing that pass with the snow so deep,
or indeed that it had ever entered the heart of man to cross it
at that time of year. Though for a few days we had suffered
greatly through the depth of the snow, yet its depth, in the end,
enabled us to reach our destination. For why? How otherwise
should we have traversed those pathless slopes and sudden falls?
All ill, all good in the count, is gain if looked at aright !


The Yaka-atlang people at once heard of our arrival and our
dismounting; followed, warm houses, fat sheep, grass and horse-
corn, water without stint, ample wood and dried dung for fires !
To escape from such snow and cold to such a village, to such
warm dwellings, was comfort those will understand who have
had our trials, relief known to those who have felt our hardships.
We tarried one day in Yaka-aiilang, happy-of-heart and easy-
of-mind ; marched 2 yighach (10-12m.) next day and dis-
mounted. The day following was the Ramzan Feast’; we
went on through Bamian, crossed by Shibr-tii and dismounted
before reaching Janglik.


(~. Second raid on the Turkman Hazaras.)

The Turkman Hazaras with their wives and little children
must have made their winter-quarters just upon our road? ; they
had no word about us; when we got in amongst their cattle-
pens and tents (a/a@chiiqg) two or three groups of these went to
ruin and plunder, the people themselves drawing off with their
little children and abandoning houses and goods. News was
brought from ahead that, at a place where there were narrows,


* circa Feb. 14th 1507, Babur’s 24th birthday.

* The Hazaras appear to have been wintering outside their own valley, on the
Ghir-bund road, in wait for travellers [o£ T.R. p. 197]. They have been perennial
highwaymen on the only pass to the north not closed entirely in winter.


Fol. 1954


Fol. 196.


Fol. 1966.


a body of Hazaras was shooting arrows, holding up part of the
army, and letting no-one pass. We, hurrying on, arrived to
find no narrows at all; a few Hazaras were shooting from —
a naze, standing in a body on the hill" like very good soldiers.2


They saw the blackness of the foe ;
Stood idle-handed and amazed ;
I arriving, went swift that way,
Pressed on with shout, ‘‘ Move on! move on!”
I wanted to hurry my men on,
To make them stand up to the foe.
With a ‘‘ Hurry up!” to my men,
I went on to the front.
Not a man gave ear to my words.
I had no armour nor horse-mail nor arms
I had but my arrows and quiver.
I went, the rest, maybe all of them, stood,
Stood still as if slain by the foe!
Your servant you take that you may have use
Of his arms, of his life, the whole time ;
Not that the servant stand still
While the beg makes advance to the front ;
Not that the servant take rest
While his beg is making the rounds.
From no such a servant will come
Speed, or use in your Gate, or zest for your food.
At last I charged forward myself,
Herding the foe up the hill ;
Seeing ne go, my men also moved,
Leaving their terrors behind.
With me they swift spread over the slope,
Moving on without heed to the shaft ;
Sometimes on foot, mounted sometimes,
Boldly we ever moved on,
Still from the hill poured the shafts.
Our strength seen, the foe took to flight.
We got out on the hill; we drove the Hazaras,
Drove them like deer by valley and ridge ;
We shot those wretches like deer ;
We shared out the booty in goods and in sheep ;
The Turkman Hazaras’ kinsfolk we took ;
We made captive their people of sorts (gara) ;
We laid hands on their men of renown;
Their wives and their children we took.


Oe See ee


* The Ghir-bund vailey is open in this part ; the Hazaras may have been posted
on the naze near the narrows leading into the Janglik and their own side valleys.

2 Although the verses following here in the text are with the Turki Codices, doubt
cannot but be felt as to their authenticity. They do not fit verbally to the sentence
they follow ; they are a unique departure from Babur’s plain prose narrative and
nothing in the small Hazara affair shews cause for such departure; they differ from
his usual topics in their bombast and comment on his men (c f. 194 for comment on
shirking begs). They appear in the 2nd Persian translation (217 f. 134) in Turki
followed by a prose Persian rendering (4ha/asa). They are not with the Ist Pers. trs.
(215 f. 159), the text of which runs on with a plain prose account suiting the size of
the affair, as follows :—‘‘ The braves, seeing their (the Hazaras) good soldiering, had |
stopped surprised ; wishing to hurry them I went swiftly past them, shouting ‘Move on!


a |e


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 TO MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 313


I myself collected a few of the Hazaras’ sheep, gave them
into Yarak Taghai’s charge, and went to the front. By ridge
and valley, driving horses and sheep before us, we went to
Timir Beg’s Langar and there dismounted. Fourteen or fifteen


Hazara thieves had fallen into our hands; I had thought of


having them put to death when we next dismounted, with
various torture, as a warning to all highwaymen and robbers,
but Qasim Beg came across them on the road and, with mis-
timed compassion, set them free.


To do good to the bad is one and the same
As the doing of ill to the good ;

On brackish soil no spikenard grows,
Waste no seed of toil upon it."


Out of compassion the rest of the prisoners were released also.


(7. Disloyalty in Kabul.)


News came while we were raiding the Turkman Hazaras,
that Muhammad Husain Mirza Déaghlat and Sl. Sanjar Barlas
had drawn over to themselves the Mughils left in Kabul,
declared Mirza Khan (Wais) supreme (padshah), laid siege to
the fort and spread a report that Badi‘wz-zaman Mirza and
Muzaffar Mirza had sent me, a prisoner, to Fort Ikhtiyaru’d-din,
now known as Ala-qirghan.

In command of the Kabul-fort there had been left Mulla
Baba of Pashaghar, Khalifa, Muhibb-i-‘ali the armourer, Ahmad-
i-yusuf and Ahmad-i-qasim. They did well, made the fort fast,
strengthened it, and kept watch.


(k. Baburs advance to Kabul.)


From Timir Beg’s Langar we sent Qasim Beg’s servant, Muh.
of Andijan, a 7u%gbai, to the Kabul begs, with written details
of our arrival and of the following arrangements :—“ When we


move on!’ They paid me no attention. When, in order to help, I myself attacked,
dismounting and going up the hill, they shewed courage and emulation in following.
Getting to the top of the pass, we drove that band off, killing many, capturing others,
making their families prisoner and plundering their goods.” This is followed by
“*T myself collected ” efc. as in the Turki text after the verse. It will be seen that
the above extract is not a translation of the verse; no translator or even summariser
would be likely to omit so much of his original. It is just a suitably plain account of
a trivial matter.
* Gulistan Cap. I. Story 4.


Fol. 197.


Fol. 1976.


Fol. 198.


314


are out of the Ghiir-bund narrows,‘ we will fall on them sudden v3
let our signal to you be the fire we will light directly we have
passed Minar-hill ; do you in reply light one in the citadel, on —


the old Kishk (kiosk),” now the Treasury, “so that we may be
sure you know of our coming. We will come up from our side;
you come out from yours ; neglect nothing your hands can find
to do!” This having been put into writing, Muhammad
Andijani was sent off.

Riding next dawn from the Langar, we disihounted over against
Ushtur-shahr. Early next morning we passed the Ghir-bund
narrows, dismounted at Bridge-head, there watered and rested our
horses, and at the Mid-day Prayer set forward again. Till we
reached the ¢#gawal,? there was no snow, beyond that, the
further we went the deeper the snow. The cold between Zamma-
yakhshi and Minar was such as we had rarely felt in our lives.

We sent on Ahmad the messenger ( y@sd@wa/) and Qara Ahmad
yurinchi 3 to say to the begs, “ Here we are at the time promised ;
be ready! be bold!” After crossing Minar-hill* and dismounting
on its skirt, helpless with cold, we lit fires to warm ourselves.
It was not time to light the signal-fire ; we just lit these because
we were helpless in that mighty cold. Near shoot of dawn we
rode on from Minar-hill ; between it and Kabul the snow was up
to the horses’ knees and had hardened, so off the road to move
was difficult. Riding single-file the whole way, we got to Kabul
in good time undiscovered.5 Before we were at Bibi Mah-rii
(Lady Moon-face), the blaze of fire on the citadel let us know
that the begs were looking out.


(2. Attack made on the rebels.)
On reaching Sayyid Qasim’s bridge, Sherim Taghai and the
men of the right were sent towards Mulla Baba’s bridge, while


* Babur seems to have left the Ghiir-bund valley, perhaps pursuing the Hazaras
towards Janglik, and to have come “‘ by ridge and valley” back into it for Ushtur-
shahr. I have not located Timir Beg’s Langar. As has been noted already
(g.v. index) the Ghir-bund narrows are at the lower end of the valley ; they have
been surmised to be the fissured rampart of an ancient lake.

? Here this may represent a guard- or toll-house (Index s.7.).

3 As yiriin is a patch, the bearer of the sobriquet might be Black Ahmad the
repairing-tailor.

+ Second Afghin War, Map of Kabul and its environs.

5 I understand that the arrival undiscovered was a result of riding in single-file and
thus shewing no black mass.


oe Saas


912 AH.—MAY 241 1506 To MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 315


we of the left and centre took the Baba Lili road. Where Khalifa’s
garden now is, there was then a smallish garden made by Ailigh
Beg Mirza for a Langar (almshouse) ; none of its trees or shrubs
were left but its enclosing wall was there. In this garden Mirza
Khan was seated, Muh. Husain Mirza being in Aiiligh Beg Mirza’s
great Bagh-i-bihisht. I had gone as far along the lane of Mulla
Baba’s garden as the burial-ground when four men met us who
had hurried forward into Mirza Khan’s quarters, been beaten,
and forced to turn back. One of the four was Sayyid Qasim
Lord of the Gate, another was Qasim Beg’s son Qambar-i-‘ali,
another was Sher-quli the scout, another was SI. Ahmad Mughal
one of Sher-quli’s band. These four, without a “God forbid!”
(tahashi) had gone right into Mirza Khan’s quarters ; thereupon
he, hearing an uproar, had mounted and gotaway. Abi’l-hasan
the armourer’s younger brother even, Muh. Husain by name,
had taken service with Mirza Khan ; he had slashed at Sher-quli,
one of those four, thrown him down, and was just striking his
head off, when Sher-quli freed himself. Those four, tasters of
the sword, tasters of the arrow, wounded one and all, came
pelting back on us to the place mentioned.

Our horsemen, jammed in the narrow lane, were standing
still, unable to move forward or back. Said I to the braves
near, “Get off and force a road”. Off got Nasir’s Dost, Khwaja
Muhammad ‘Ali the librarian, Baba Sher-zad (Tiger-whelp),
Shah Mahmid and others, pushed forward and at once cleared
the way. The enemy took to flight.

We had looked for the begs to come out from the Fort but
they could not come in time for the work ; they only dropped
in, by ones and twos, after we had made the enemy scurry off.
Ahmad-i-yiisuf had come from them before I went into the
Char-bagh where Mirza Khan had been ; he went in with me,
but we both turned back when we saw the Mirza had gone off.
Coming in at the garden-gate was Dost of Sar-i-pul, a foot-soldier
I had promoted for his boldness to be Kotwal and had left in
Kabul ; he made straight for me, sword in hand. I had my
cuirass on but had not fastened the gharicha*™ nor had I put on


* or gharbicha, which Mr. Erskine explains to be the four plates of mail, made to
cover the back, front and sides; the 7#5a would thus be the wadded under-coat to which
they are attached.


22


Fol. 1984.


Fol, 199.


Fol. 1996.


316 KABUL


my helm. Whether he did not recognize me because of chat ge.
wrought by cold and snow, or whether because of the flurry of
the fight, though I shouted “ Hai Dost! hai Dost!” and though ~
Ahmad-i-yiisuf also shouted, he, without a “God forbid!”
brought down his sword on my unprotected arm. Only by
God’s grace can it have been that not a hairbreadth of harm
was done to me.


If a sword shook the Earth from her place,
Not a vein would it cut till God wills.


It was through the virtue of a prayer I had repeated that the
Great God averted this danger and turned this evil aside. That
prayer was as follows :-— |


“OQ my God! Thou art my Creator; except Thee there isno God. On
Thee do I repose my trust ; Thou art the Lord of the mighty throne. What
God wills comes to pass; and what he does not will comes not to pass; and
there is no power or strength but through the high and exalted God ; and, of
a truth, in all things God is almighty ; and verily He comprehends all things
by his knowledge, and has taken account of everything. O my Creator! as
I sincerely trust in Thee, do Thou seize by the forelock all evil proceeding
from within myself, and all evil coming from without, and all evil proceeding
from every man who can be the occasion of evil, and all such evil as can proceed
from any living thing, and remove them far from me 3; since, of a truth, Thou
art the Lord of the exalted throne !” *

On leaving that garden we went to Muh. Husain Mirza’s ©
quarters in the Bagh-i-bihisht, but he had fled and gone off to
hide himself. Seven or eight men stood in a breach of the
garden-wall ; I spurred at them; they could not stand ; they
fled ; I got up with them and cut at one with my sword; he
rolled over in such a way that I fancied his head was off, passed
on and went away ; it seems he was Mirza Khan’s foster-brother,
Tilik Ktikildash and that my sword fell on his shoulder.

At the gate of Muh. Husain Mirza’s quarters, a Mughil
I recognized for one of my own servants, drew his bow and aimed
at my face from a place on the roof as near me as a gate-ward
stands to a Gate. People on all sides shouted, “ Hai! hai! it is
the Padshah.” He changed his aim, shot off his arrow and ran
away. The affair was beyond the shooting of arrows! His
Mirza, his leaders, had run away or been taken; why was he


shooting ?


* This prayer is composed of extracts from the Qoran (A/éms. i, 454 note); it is
reproduced as it stands in Mr. Erskine’s wording (p. 216).


Ca/ (io Me PAAR a ee A eee
he ie ae


912 AH.—MAY 247TH 1506 TO MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 317


There they brought Sl. Sanjar Barlas, led in by a rope round
his neck ; he even, to whom I had given the Ningnahar cman,
had had his part in the mutiny! Greatly agitated, he kept
crying out, “Hai! what fault is in me?” Said I, “Can there
be one clearer than that you are higher than the purpose and
counsels of this crew?” * But as he was the sister’s son of my
Khan dada’s mother, Shah Begim, I gave the order, “ Do not
lead him with such dishonour ; it is not death.”

On leaving that place, I sent Ahmad-i-qasim Kohdur, one
of the begs of the Fort, with a few braves, in pursuit of Fol. 200.
Mirza Khan.


(m. Babur’s dealings with disloyal women.)


When I left the Bagh-i-bihisht, I went to visit Shah Begim
and (Mihr-nigar) Khanim who had settled themselves in tents
by the side of the garden.

As townspeople and black-bludgeoners had raised a riot, and
were putting hands out to pillage property and to catch persons
in corners and outside places, I sent men, to beat the rabble off,
and had it herded right away.”

Shah Begim and Khanim were seated in one tent. I dis-
mounted at the usual distance, approached with my former
deference and courtesy, and had an interview with them. They
were extremely agitated, upset, and ashamed; could neither
excuse themselves reasonably 3 nor make the enquiries of affection.
I had not expected this (disloyalty) of them; it was not as
though that party, evil as was the position it had taken up,
consisted of persons who would not give ear to the words of
Shah Begim and Khanim ; Mirza Khan was the begim’s grand-
son, in her presence night and day ; if she had not fallen in with
the affair, she could have kept him with her.


* Babur’s reference may well be to Sanjar’s birth as well as to his being the holder
of Ningnahar. Sanjar’s father had been thought worthy to mate with one of the six
Badakhshi begims whose line traced back to Alexander (T.R. p. 107); and his father
was a Barlas, seemingly of high family.

2 It may be inferred that what was done was for the protection of the two women.

3 Not a bad case could have been made out for now putting a Timirid in Babur’s
place in Kabul ; wzsz. that he was believed captive in Heri and that Mirza Khan was
an effective locum tenens against the Arghins. Haidar sets down what in his eyes
pleaded excuse for his father Muh. Husain (T.R. p. 198).


Fol. 2004,


Fol. 201.


318


Twice over when fickle Fortune and discordant Fate had parte .
me from throne and country, retainer and following, I, and my — 4
mother with me, had taken refuge with them and had had nom


kindness soever from them. At that time my younger brother
(z.e. cousin) Mirza Khan and his mother Sultan-nigar Khanim
held valuable cultivated districts; yet my mother and I,—to
leave all question of a district aside,—were not made possessors
of a single village or a few yoke of plough-oxen.t Was my
mother not Yinas Khan’s daughter? was I not his grandson?

In my days of plenty I have given from my hand what matched
the blood-relationship and the position of whatsoever member
of that (Chaghatai) dynasty chanced down upon me. For
example, when the honoured Shah Begim came to me, I gave
her Pamghan, one of the best places in Kabul, and failed in no
sort of filial duty and service towards her. Again, when Sl. Sa‘id
Khan, Khan in Kashghar, came [914 AH.] with five or six naked
followers on foot, I looked upon him as an honoured guest and
gave him Mandrawar of the Lamghan ¢imans. Beyond this
also, when Shah Isma‘il had killed Shaibaq Khan in Marv and
I crossed over to Qiindiz (916 AH.—1511 AD.), the Andijanis,
some driving their (Aizbeg) daroghas out, some making their
places fast, turned their eyes to me and sent me a man; at that
time I trusted those old family servants to that same Sl. Sa‘id
Khan, gave him a force, made him Khan and sped him forth.
Again, down to the present time (c¢vca 934 AH.) I have not
looked upon any member of that family who has come to me,
in any other light than as a blood-relation. For example, there
are now in my service Chin-timir Sultan; Aisan-timtr Sultan,
Tuikhta-bigha Sultan, and Baba Sultan;? on one and all of
these I have looked with more favour than on blood-relations
of my own.

I do not write this in order to make complaint; I have
written the plain truth. I do not set these matters down in
order to make known my own deserts ; I have set down exactly
what has happened. In this History I have held firmly to it
that the truth should be reached in every matter, and that every


* gush, not even a little plough-land being given (chand gulba dihya, 215 f. 162).
* They were sons of Sl. Ahmad Khan Chaghatai.


; i


i
a


912 AH.—MAY 24rH 1506 To MAY 18TH 1507 AD. 319


act should be recorded precisely as it occurred. From this it
follows of necessity that, I have set down of good and bad
whatever is known, concerning father and elder brother, kinsman
and stranger ; of them all I have set down carefully the known
virtues and defects. Let the reader accept my excuse ; let the
reader pass on from the place of severity !


(x. Letters of victory.)


Rising from that place and going to the Char-bagh where
Mirza Khan had been, we sent letters of victory to all the
countries, clans, and retainers. This done, I rode to the
citadel.


(0. Arrest of rebel leaders.)


Muhammad Husain Mirza in his terror having run away into
Khanim’s bedding-room and got himself fastened up in a bundle
of bedding, we appointed Mirim Dzwax with other begs of the
fort, to take control in those dwellings, capture, and bring him
in. Mirim Déwan said some plain rough words at Khanim’s
gate, by some means or other found the Mirza, and brought
him before me in the citadel. I rose at once to receive the
Mirza with my usual deference, not even shewing too harsh
a face.. If I had had that Muh. Husain M. cut in pieces, there
was the ground for it that he had had part in base and shameful
action, started and spurred on mutiny and treason. Death he
deserved with one after another of varied pain and torture, but
because there had come to be various connexion between us, his
very sons and daughters being by my own mother’s sister Khib-
nigar Khanim, I kept this just claim in mind, let him go free,
and permitted him to set out towards Khurasan. The cowardly
ingrate then forgot altogether the good I did him by the gift of
his life ; he blamed and slandered me to Shaibaq Khan. Little
time passed, however, before the Khan gave him his deserts by
death.


Leave thou to Fate the man who does thee wrong,
For Fate is an avenging servitor.*


t f. 160,


Fol. 2010.


320


ae

Ahmad-i-qasim Kohdur and the party of braves sent in pursuit —
of Mirza Khan, overtook him in the low hills of Qargha-yilaq,
not able even to run away, without heart or force to stir a finger!

Fol. 202. They took him, and brought him to where I sat in the north-
east porch of the old Court-house. Said I to him, “Come! let’s
have a look at one another” (Airdishaling), but twice before he
could bend the knee and come forward, he fell down through
agitation. When we had looked at one another, I placed him
by my side to give him heart, and I drank first of the sherbet
brought in, in order to remove his fears.*

As those who had joined him, soldiers, peasants, Mughiils and
Chaghatais,? were in suspense, we simply ordered him to remain
for a few days in his elder sister’s house; but a few days later
he was allowed to set out for Khurasan 3 because those mentioned
above were somewhat uncertain and it did not seem well for
him to stay in Kabul.


.

a We
MN ea

bh >


(p. Excursion to Koh-daman.)


After letting those two go, we made an excursion to Baran,
Chash-tiipa, and the skirt of Gul-i-bahar.4 More beautiful in


* Haidar’s opinion of Babur at this crisis is of the more account that his own father
was one of the rebels let go to the mercy of the ‘‘avenging servitor”. When he
writes of Babur, as being, at a time so provoking, gay, generous, affectionate, simple
and gentle, he sets before us insight and temper in tune with Kipling’s ‘If . . .”

* Babur’s distinction, made here and elsewhere, between Chaghatai and Mughil
touches the old topic of the right or wrong of the term ‘‘ Mughiil dynasty”. What
he, as also Haidar, allows said is that if Babur were to describe his mother in tribal
terms, he would say she was half-Chaghatai, half-Mughil ; and that if he so described
himself, he would say he was half-Timirid-Turk, half-Chaghatai. He might have
called the dynasty he founded in India Turki, might have called it Timiiriya; he would
never have called it Mughil, after his maternal grandmother.

Haidar, with imperfect classification, divides Chingiz Khan’s ‘* Mughil horde”
into Mughiils and Chaghatais and of this Chaghatai offtake says that none remained
in 953 AH. (1547 AD.) except the rulers, ze. sons of Sl. Ahmad Khan (T.R. 148).
Manifestly there was a body of Chaghatais with Babur and there appear to have been
many near his day in the Heri region, —‘Ali-sher Vawda‘i the best known.

Babur supplies directions for naming his dynasty when, as several times, he claims
to rule in Hindistan where the ‘‘ Turk” had ruled (f. 2334, f. 2244, f. 225). To call
his dynasty Mughiil seems to blot out the centuries, something as we should do by
calling the English Teutons. If there is to be such blotting-out, Abi’l-ghazi would
allow us, by his tables of Turk descent, to go further, to the primal source of all the
tribes concerned, to Turk, son of Japhet. This traditional descent is another argument
against ‘‘ Mughiil dynasty.”

3. They went to Qandahar and there suffered great privation.

* Baran seems likely to be the Baian of some maps. Gul-i-bahar is higher up on
the Panjhir road. Chiash-tiipa will have been near-by ; its name might mean Az// of
the heap of winnowed-corn.


912 AH.—MAY 24TH 1506 tro MAY 13TH 1507 AD. 321


Spring than any part even of Kabul are the open-lands of Baran,
the plain of Chash-tiipa, and the skirt of Gul-i-bahar. Many
sorts of tulip bloom there; when I had them counted once, it
came out at 34 different kinds as [has been said].* This couplet
has been written in praise of these places,—


Kabul in Spring is an Eden of verdure and blossom ;
Matchless in Kabul the Spring of Gul-i-bahar and Baran.


On this excursion I finished the ode,—


My heart, like the bud of the red, red rose,
Lies fold within fold aflame ; Fol. 2024,
Would the breath of even a myriad Springs
Blow my heart’s bud to a rose?
In truth, few places are quite equal to these for spring-excursions,
for hawking (gash salmaq) or bird-shooting (gash atmaq), as has
been briefly mentioned in the praise and description of the


Kabul and Ghazni country.


(g. Nasir Mirza expelled from Badakhshan.)


This year the begs of Badakhshan z.e. Muhammad the
armourer, Mubarak Shah, Zubair and Jahangir, grew angry and
mutinous because of the misconduct of Nasir Mirza and some
of those he cherished. Coming to an agreement together, they
drew out an army of horse and foot, arrayed it on the level lands
by the Kikcha-water, and moved towards Yaftal and Ragh, to
near Khamchan, by way of the lower hills. The Mirza and his
inexperienced begs, in their thoughtless and unobservant fashion,
came out to fight them just in those lower hills. The battle-field
was uneven ground ; the Badakhshis had a dense mass of men
on foot who stood firm under repeated charges by the Mirza’s
horse, and returned such attack that the horsemen fled, unable
to keep their ground. Having beaten the Mirza, the Badakhshis
plundered his dependants and connexions.

Beaten and stripped bare, he and his close circle took the road
through Ishkimish and Narin to Kila-gahi, from there followed
the Qizil-si up, got out on the Ab-dara road, crossed at Shibr-ti,
and so came to Kabul, he with 70 or 80 followers, worn-out,


naked and famished.
gn bP


Fol. 203.


322


That was a marvellous sign of the Divine cut eek
three years earlier the Mirza had left the Kabul country li
foe, driving tribes and hordes like sheep before him, reached
Badakhshan and made fast its forts and valley-strongholds. —
With what fancy in his mind had he marched out?* Now he ©
was back, hanging the head of shame for those earlier ne a
humbled and distraught about that breach with me! a

My face shewed him no sort of displeasure; I made kind
enquiry about himself, and brought him out of his confusion.


1 Answer; Visions of his father’s sway.


913 AH.— MAY 1387rH 1507 tro MAY 2np 1508 AD.’


(a. Raid on the Ghiljt Afghans.)

We had ridden out of Kabul with the intention of over-running
the Ghilji ;?, when we dismounted at Sar-i-dih news was brought
that a mass of Mahmands (Afghans) was lying in Masht and
Sih-kana one yighach (circa 5 m.) away from us.3 Our begs and
braves agreed in saying, “The Mahmands must be over-run ”,
but I said, “ Would it be right to turn aside and raid our own
peasants instead of doing what we set out to do? It cannot be.”

Riding at night from Sar-i-dih, we crossed the plainof Kattawaz
in the dark, a quite black night, one level stretch of land, no
mountain or rising-ground in sight, no known road or track, not
a man able to lead us! In the end I took the lead. I had been
in those parts several times before ; drawing inferences from
those times, I took the Pole-star on my right shoulder-blade 4
and, with some anxiety, moved on. God brought it right! We
went straight to the Qiaq-ti and the Aulaba-ti torrent, that is
to say, straight for Khwaja Isma‘l Szrz¢z where the Ghiljis were
lying, the road to which crosses the torrent named. Dismounting
near the torrent, we let ourselves and our horses sleep a little,
took breath, and bestirred ourselves at shoot of dawn. The Sun
was up before we got out of those low hills and valley-bottoms
to the plain on which the Ghilji lay with a good yighach5 of

* Elph. MS. f. 161; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 164 and 217 f. 1394; Mems. p. 220.

2 The narrative indicates the location of the tribe, the modern Ghilzai or Ghilzi.

3 Sih-kana lies s.e. of Shorkach, and near Kharbin. Sar-i-dih is about 25 or 30
miles s. of Ghazni (Erskine). A name suiting the pastoral wealth of the tribe vz.
Mesh-khail, Sheep-tribe, is shewn on maps somewhat s. from Kharbin. Cf. Steingass
s.2. Masht.

4 yaghrin, whence yaghrinchi, a diviner by help of the shoulder-blades of sheep.
The defacer of the Elphinstone Codex has changed yaghrin to yan, side, thus making
Babur turn his side and not his half-back to the north, altering his direction, and
missing what looks like a jesting reference to his own divination of the road. The
Pole Star was seen, presumably, before the night became quite black.

5 From the subsequent details of distance done, this must have been one of those


good yighach of perhaps 5-6 miles, that are estimated by the ease of travel on level
lands (Index s.v. yighdach).


323


Fol. 2036.


Fol. 204.


324 KABUL


road between them and us; once out on the plain we could
see their blackness, either their own or from the smoke of
their fires. q

Whether bitten by their own whim,' or whether wanting to —
hurry, the whole army streamed off at the gallop (chapgin
guidilar) ; off galloped I after them and, by shooting an arrow
now at a man, now at a horse, checked them after a kuroh or
two (3 m.?). Itis very difficult indeed to check 5 or 6000 braves
galloping loose-rein! God brought it right! They were checked!
When we had gone about one shar‘z (2 m.) further, always with
the Afghan blackness in sight, the raid? was allowed. Masses
of sheep fell to us, more than in any other raid.

After we had dismounted and made the spoils turn back,3 one
body of Afghansafter anothercame down into the plain, provoking
a fight. Some of the begs and of the household went against
one body and killed every man; Nasir Mirza did the same with
another, and a pillar of Afghan heads was set up. An arrow
pierced the foot of that foot-soldier Dost the Kotwal who has
been mentioned already ;+ when we reached Kabul, he died.

Marching from Khwaja Isma‘il, we dismounted once more at
Aiulaba-ti. Some of the begs and of my own household were
ordered to go forward and carefully separate off the Fifth
(Khums) of the enemy’s spoils. By way of favour, we did not
take the Fifth from Qasim Beg and some others.5 From what


« T am uncertain about the form of the word translated by “‘ whim”. The Elph.
and Hai. Codices read £had d:/ma (altered in the first to y:/ma); Ilminsky (p. 257)
reads khiid 1:ma (de C. ii, 2 and note); Erskine has been misled by the Persian
translation (215 f. 1644 and 217 f. 1394). Whether 44ad-di/ma should be read, with
the sense of ‘‘ out of their own hearts” (spontaneously), or whether £2ad-yalma, own
pace (Turki, ya/ma, pace) the contrast made by Babur appears to be between an
unpremeditated gallop and one premeditated for haste. Persian da/ama, tarantula,
also suggests itself.

? chaipgin, which is the word translated by gallop throughout the previous passage.
The Turki verb chépmdg is one of those words-of-all-work for which it is difficult to
find a single English equivalent. The verb g#imdg is another ; in its two occurrences
here the first may be a metaphor from the pouring of molten metal; the second
expresses that permission to gallop off for the raid without which to raid was forbidden.
The root-notion of ga#imdg seems to be letting-go, that of ch@pmag, rapid motion.

3 ze. on the raiders’ own road for Kabul. 4 f, 1986.

5 The Fifth taken was manifestly at the ruler’s disposition. In at least two places
when dependants send gifts to Babur the word [¢assadug] used might be rendered
as ‘‘ gifts for the poor”. Does this mean that the Addshah in receiving this stands in
the place of the Imam of the Qoran injunction which orders one-fifth of spoil to be
given to the Imam for the poor, orphans, and travellers, —four-fifths being reserved for
the troops? (Qoran, Sale’s ed. 1825, i, 212 and Hidayat, Book ix).


913 AH.—MAY 131TH 1507 TO MAY 2ND 1508 AD. 325


was written down,! the Fifth came out at 16,000, that is to say,
this 16,000 was the fifth of 80,000 sheep ; no question however
but that with those lost and those not asked for, a Zak (100,000)
of sheep had been taken.


(6. A hunting-circle.)

Next day when we had ridden from that camp, a hunting-circle
was formed on the plain of Kattawaz where deer (4zyik)? and
wild-ass are always plentiful and always fat. Masses went into
the ring ; masses were killed. During the hunt I galloped after
a wild-ass, on getting near shot one arrow, shot another, but did
not bring it down, it only running more slowly for the two
wounds. Spurring forwards and getting into position$ quite
close to it, I chopped at the nape of its neck behind the ears, and
cut through the wind-pipe ; it stopped, turned over and died.
My sword cut well! The wild-ass was surprisingly fat. Its
rib may have been a little under one yard in length. Sherim
Taghai and other observers of #zyzk in Mughilistan said with
surprise, “Even in Mughilistan we have seen few £zyzk so fat!”
I shot another wild-ass ; most of the wild-asses and deer brought
down in that hunt were fat, but not one of them was so fat as
the one [ first killed.

Turning back from that raid, we went to Kabul and there
dismounted.


(c. Shatbig Khan moves against Khurdsan.)

Shaibag Khan had got an army to horse at the end of last
year, meaning to go from Samarkand against Khurasan, his
march out being somewhat hastened by the coming to him of
a servant of that vile traitor to his salt, Shah Mansir the Pay-
master, then in Andikhid. When the Khan was approaching
Andikhid, that vile wretch said, “I have sent a man to the
Aizbeg,” relied on this, adorned himself, stuck up an aigrette on
his head, and went out, bearing gift and tribute. On this the
leaderless + Aiizbegs poured down on him from all sides, and


* This may be the sum of the separate items of sheep entered in account-books by
the commissaries.

* Here this comprehensive word will stand for deer, these being plentiful in the region.

3 Three Turki MSS. write stghinib, but the Elph. MS. has had this changed to
yittb, having reached.

4 bash-siz, lit. without head, doubtless a pun on Aiiz-beg (own beg, leaderless).
B.M. Or. 3714 shows an artist’s conception of this ¢ar¢-part.


Fol. 2046.


Fol. 205.


326 KABUL


turned upside down (¢art-part) the blockhead, his offering anc
his people of all sorts. 4


(ad. Lrresolution of the Khurasan Mirzés.) 4

Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza, Muzaffar Mirza, Muh. Barandiiq Barlés ~
and Zi’n-nin Arghin were all lying with their army in Baba
Khaki,’ not decided to fight, not settled to make (Heri) fort
fast, there they sat, confounded, vague, uncertain what to do.
Muhammad Barandiq Barlas was a knowledgeable man; he ~
kept saying, “You let Muzaffar Mirza and me make the fort
fast ; let Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza and Zi’n-niin Beg go into the
mountains near Heri and gather in Sl. ‘Ali Axghiin from Sistan
and Zamin-dawar, Shah Beg and Mugim from Qandahar with
all their armies, and let them collect also what there is of Nikdiri
and Hazara force ; this done, let them make a swift and telling
move. The enemy would find it difficult to go into the
mountains, and could not come against the (Heri) fort because
he would be afraid of the army outside.” He said well, his
plan was practical.

Brave though Zi’n-ntin Avghin was, he was mean, a lover-of-
goods, far from businesslike or judicious, rather shallow-pated,
and a bit of a fool. As has been mentioned,? when that elder
and that younger brother became joint-rulers in Heri, he had
chief authority in Badi‘u’z-zaman Mirza’s presence. He was not
willing now for Muh. Barandiiq Beg to remain inside Heri town;
being the lover-of-goods he was, he wanted to be there himself.
But he could not make this seem one and the same thing!3_ Is
there a better sign of his shallow-pate and craze than that he
degraded himself and became contemptible by accepting the
lies and flattery of rogues and sycophants? Here are the
particulars 4 :—-While he was so dominant and trusted in Hert,
certain Shaikhs and Mullas went to him and said, “ The Spheres
are holding commerce with us; you are styled Azzabru’l-lah
(Lion of God); you will overcome the Atizbeg.” Believing


‘
J


-L=- Wi-i1.- °


3 aukhshata almadi. This is one of many passages which Ilminsky indicates he
has made good by help of the Memoirs (p. 261; A/émodres ii, 6).
4 They are given also on f. 172.


LOR ar Dire ie SPC) eran Um es AiR er ep Pm Ye
t wr ay Be Mi “mt Na MAD Be 5 # oe al yt fy


913 AH.—MAY 138TH 1507 To MAY 2np 1508 AD. 327


these words, he put his bathing-cloth round his neck and gave
thanks. It was through, this he did not accept Muhammad
Barandiiq Beg’s sensible counsel, did not strengthen the works
(aish) of the fort, get ready fighting equipment, set scout or
rearward to warn of the foe’s approach, or plan out such method
of array that, should the foe appear, his men would fight with
ready heart.


(e. Shatbig Khan takes Heri.)

Shaibag Khan passed through Murgh-ab to near Sir-kai? in
the month of Muharram (913 AH. May—June 1507 AD.). When
the Mirzads heard of it, they were altogether upset, could not
act, collect troops, array those they had. Dreamers, they
moved through a dream!? Zi’n-nin Arvghiin, made glorious
by that flattery, went out to Qard-rabat, with 100 to 150 men,
to face 40,000 to 50,000 Alizbegs: a mass of these coming up,
hustled his off, took him, killed him and cut off his head.3

In Fort Ikhtiyaru’d-din, it is known as Ala-qirghan,+ were
the Mirzas’ mothers, elder and younger sisters, wives and
treasure. The Mirzads reached the town at night, let their
horses rest till midnight, slept, and at dawn flung forth again.
They could not think about strengthening the fort; in the
respite and crack of time there was, they just ran away,5 leaving
mother, sister, wife and little child to Atizbeg captivity.

What there was of Sl. Husain Mirza’s aram, Payanda-sultan
Begim and Khadija Begim at the head of it, was inside
Ala-qirghan ; there too were the Zarams of Badi‘u’z-zaman

t This may be Sirakhs or Sirakhsh (Erskine).

2 Tiushlig tushdin yurdi birurlar. At least two meanings can be given to these
words. Circumstances seem to exclude the one in which the Memoirs (p. 222) and
Mémoires (ii, 7) have taken them here, vzz. ‘‘each man went off to shift for himself”,
and ‘‘chacun s’en alla de son cété et s’enfuit comme il put”, because Zi’n-niin did
not go off, and the Mirzas broke up after his defeat. I therefore suggest another


reading, one prompted by the Mirzas’ vague fancies and dreams of what they might
do, but did not.

3 The encounter was between “‘ Belagq-i-maral and Rabat-i-‘ali-sher, near Badghis ”
(Raverty’s Votes p. 580). For particulars of the taking of Heri see H.S. iii, 353.

4 One may be the book-name, the second the name in common use, and due to the
colour of the buildings. But Babur may be making an ironical jest, and nickname the
fort by a word referring to the defilement (@/a) of Atizbeg possession. (Cf. H.S. iii, 359.)

5 Mr. Erskine notes that Badi‘u’z-zaman took refuge with Shah Isma‘il Safawz
who gave him Tabriz. When the Turkish Emperor Salim took Tabriz in 920 AH.
(1514 AD.), he was taken prisoner and carried to Constantinople, where he died in
923 AH. (1517 AD.).


Fol. 2056.


Fol. 206.


Fol. 2068.


KABUL


328


Mirza? and Mugaffar Mirza with their little children, treasure, and
households (dzyu¢at). What was desirable for making the fort
fast had not been done; even braves to reinforce it had not
arrived. ‘Ashiq-i-muhammad Arghan, the younger brother of
Mazid Beg, had fled from the army on foot and gone into it ;
in it was also Amir ‘Umar Beg’s son ‘Ali Khan (7urkman);
Shaikh ‘Abdu’l-lah the taster was there; Mirza Beg Kai —
khusraii was there; and Mirak Gar (or Kar) the Diwan was there. _
When Shaibaq Khan arrived two or three days later; the
Shaikhu’l-islam and notables went out to him with the keys of
the outer-fort. That same ‘Ashiq-i-muhammad held Ala-
qirghan for 16 or 17 days; then a mine, run from the horse-
market outside, was fired and brought a tower down; the garrison
lost heart, could hold out no longer, so let the fort be taken.


(f. Shaibag Khan in Heri.)

Shaibaq Khan, after taking Heri,? behaved badly not only to
the wives and children of its rulers but to every person soever.
For the sake of this five-days’ fleeting world, he earned himself
a bad name. His first improper act and deed in Heri was that,
for the sake of this rotten world (chirk dunya), he caused
Khadija Begim various miseries, through letting the vile wretch
Pay-master Shah Mansir get hold of her to loot. Then he let
‘Abdu’l-wahhab MWughil take to loot a person so saintly and so
revered as Shaikh Piran, and each one of Shaikh Piran’s children
be taken by a separate person. He let the band of poets be
seized by Mulla Bana’i, a matter about which this verse is well-
known in Khurasan :—


Except ‘Abdu’l-lah the stupid fool (4ir-£ar),
Not a poet to-day sees the colour of gold;

From the poets’ band Bana’i would get gold,
All he will get is 2iv-khar.3


* In the fort were his wife Kabuli Begim, d. of Aitligh Beg M. A@du/z and
Rugqaiya Agha, known as the Nightingale. A young daughter of the Mirza, named
the Rose-bud (Chiichak), had died just before the siege. After the surrender of the
fort, Kabuli Begim was married by Mirza Kukuldash (perhaps ‘Ashiq-i-muhammad
Arghiin) ; ; Ruqaiya by Timir Sl. Ad#zdeg (H.S. iii, 359).

2 The Ahufba was first read for Shaibaq Khan in Heri on Friday Muharram 15th
913 AH. (May 27th 1507 AD.).

3 There is a Persian phrase used when a man engages in an unprofitable undertaking
Kir-i-khar gerift, t.e. Asini nervum deprehendet (Erskine). The H.S. does not


913 AH.—MAY 13TH 1507 To MAY 2NnpD 1508 AD. 329


Directly he had possession of Heri, Shaibaq Khan married and
took Muzaffar Mirza’s wife, Khan-zada Khanim, without regard
to the running-out of the legal term." His own illiteracy not
forbidding, he instructed in the exposition of the Qoran, Qazi
Ikhtiyar and Muhammad Mir Yisuf, two of the celebrated and
highly-skilled mullas of Heri; he took a pen and corrected the
hand-writing of Mulla Sl. ‘Ali of Mashhad and the drawing of
Bih-zad ; and every few days, when he had composed some
tasteless couplet, he would have it read from the pulpit, hung in
the Char-sti [Square], and for it accept the offerings of the
towns-people!? Spite of his early-rising, his not neglecting
the Five Prayers, and his fair knowledge of the art of reciting the
Qoran, there issued from him many an act and deed as absurd,
as impudent, and as heathenish as those just named.


(¢. Death of two Mirzas.)


Ten or fifteen days after he had possession of Heri, Shaibaq
Khan came from Kahd-stan 3 to Pul-i-salar. From that place
he sent Timir Sl. and ‘Ubaid Sl. with the army there present,
against Abi’l-muhsin Mirza and Kipuk (Kipik) Mirza then
seated carelessly in Mashhad. The two Mirzas had thought at
one time of making Qalat 4 fast; at another, this after they had
had news of the approach of the Atizbeg, they were for moving
on Shaibag Khan himself, by forced marches and along a different


mention Bana’i as fleecing the poets but has much to say about one Maulana ‘Abdu’r-
rahim a Turkistani favoured by Shaibani, whose victim Khwand-amir was, amongst
many others. Not infrequently where Babur and Khwand-amir state the same fact,
they accompany it by varied details, as here (H.S. iii, 358, 360).

* ‘Sadat. Muhammadan Law fixes a term after widowhood or divorce within which
re-marriage is unlawful. Light is thrown upon this re-marriage by H.S. iii, 359.
The passage, a somewhat rhetorical one, gives the following details :—‘‘ On coming
into Heri on Muharram 11th, Shaibani at once set about gathering in the property
of the Timirids. He had the wives and daughters of the former rulers brought before
him. The great lady Khan-zada Begim (f. 1634) who was daughter of Ahmad Khan,
niece of Sl. Husain Mirza, and wife of Muzaffar Mirza, shewed herself pleased in his
presence. Desiring to marry him, she said Muzaffar M. had divorced her two years
before. Trustworthy persons gave evidence to the same effect, so she was united to
Shaibani in accordance with the glorious Law. Mihr-angez Begim, Muzaffar M.’s
daughter, was married to ‘Ubaidu’llah Sl. (Aazbeg); the rest of the chaste ladies
having been sent back into the city, Shaibani resumed his search for property.”
Manifestly Babur did not believe in the divorce Khwand-amir thus records.

2 A sarcasm this on the acceptance of literary honour from the illiterate.

3 f. 191 and note; Pul-i-salar may be an irrigation-dam.

4 Qalat-i-nadiri, the birth-place of Nadir Shah, n. of Mashhad and standing on
very strong ground (Erskine).


Fol. 207.


Fol. 2074.


33°


road,t'—which might have turned out an amazingly good idea!
But while they sit still there in Mashhad with nothing decided, —
the Sultans arrive by forced marches. The Mirzas for their part —


array and go out; Abi’l-muhsin Mirza is quickly overcome and
routed ; Kipuk Mirza charges his brother’s assailants with
somewhat few men ; him too they carry off; both brothers are
dismounted and seated in one place; after an embrace (gichiish),
they kiss farewell; Abi’l-muhsin shews some want of courage ;
in Kipuk Mirza it all makes no change at all. The heads of
both are sent to Shaibagq Khan in Pul-i-salar.


(h. Babur marches for Qandahéar.)


In those days Shah Beg and his younger brother Muhammad
Mugqim, being afraid of Shaibaq Khan, sent one envoy after
another to me with dutiful letters (‘arz-dasht), giving sign of
amity and good-wishes. Mugim, ina letter of his own, explicitly
invited me. For us to look on at the Atizbeg over-running the
whole country, was not seemly ; and as by letters and envoys,
Shah Beg and Mugqim had given me invitation, there remained
little doubt they would wait upon me.? When all begs and
counsellors had been consulted, the matter was left at this:—We
were to get an army to horse, join the Arghiin begs and decide
in accord and agreement with them, whether to move into
Khurasan or elsewhere as might seem good.


(2. In Ghazni and Qalat-t-ghilzai.)


Habiba-sultan Begim, my aunt ( yzwkd@) as I used to call her,
met us in Ghazni, having come from Heri, according to arrange-
ment, in order to bring her daughter Mas‘ima-sultan Begim.
With the honoured Begim came Khusrau Kikildash, Sl. Quli


Chiinag (One-eared) and Gadai Balal who had returned to me


* This is likely to be the road passing through the Carfax of Rabat-i-sangbast,
described by Daulat-shah (Browne, p. 176).

? This will mean that the Arghiins would acknowledge his suzerainty; Haidar
Mirza however says that Shah Beg had higher views (T.R. p. 202). There had been
earlier negociations between Zi’n-niin with Badi‘u’z-zaman and Babur which may
have led to the abandonment of Babur’s expedition in 911 AD. (f. 158; HLS. iii, 323 ;
Raverty’s account (Wo/es p. 581-2) of Babur’s dealings with the Arghiin chiefs needs


revision).


913 AH.—MAY 131TH 1507 To MAY 2np 1508 AD. 331


«


after flight from Heri, first to [bn-i-husain Mirza then to Abi’l-
muhsin Mirza,‘ with neither of whom they could remain.

In Qalat the army came upon a mass of Hindistan traders,
come there to traffic and, as it seemed, unable to go on. The
general opinion about them was that people who, at a time of
such hostilities, are coming into an enemy’s country ? must be
plundered. With this however I did not agree; said I, “ What
is the traders’ offence? If we, looking to God’s pleasure, leave
such scrapings of gain aside, the Most High God will apportion
our reward. It is now just as it was a short time back when we
rode out to raid the Ghilji; many of you then were of one mind
to raid the Mahmand Afghans, their sheep and goods, their
wives and families, just because they were within five miles of
you! Then as now I did not agree with you. On the very
next day the Most High God apportioned you more sheep
belonging to Afghan enemies, than had ever before fallen to the


share of the army.” Something by way of peshkash (offering) ©


was taken from each trader when we dismounted on the other
side of Qalat.


(j. Further march south.)


Beyond Qalat two Mirzas joined us, fleeing from Qandahar.
One was Mirza Khan (Wais) who had been allowed to go into
Khurasan after his defeat at Kabul. The other was ‘Abdu’r-
razzaq Mirza who had stayed on in Khurasan when I left.
With them came and waited on me the mother of Jahangir
Mirza’s son Pir-i-muhammad, a grandson of Pahar Mirza.3


(k. Behaviour of the Arghiin chiefs.)
When we sent persons and letters to Shah Beg and Mugim,
saying, “ Here we are at your word; a stranger-foe like the


* They will have gone first to Tin or Qain, thence to Mashhad, and seem likely
to have joined the Begim after cross-cutting to avoid Heri.

2 yaght wildyati-gha kiladirghan. There may have been an accumulation of
caravans on their way to Herat, checked in Qalat by news of the Aizbeg conquest.

3 Jahangir’s son, thus brought by his mother, will have been an infant ; his father
had gone back last year with Babur by the mountain road and had been left, sick and
travelling in a litter, with the baggage when Babur hurried on to Kabul at the news
of the mutiny against him (f. 197); he must have died shortly afterwards, seemingly
between the departure of the two rebels from Kabul (f. 2014-202) and the march out
for Qandahar. Doubtless his widow now brought her child to claim his uncle Babur’s
protection.


23


Fol. 208.


Fol. 2084.


332 KABUL


Aiizbeg has taken Khurasan ; come! let us settle, in concert
and amity, what will be for the general good,” they returned ~


a rude and ill-mannered answer, going back from the dutiful
letters they had written and from the invitations they had given.
One of their incivilities was that Shah Beg stamped his letter to
me in the middle of its reverse, where begs seal if writing to begs,
where indeed a great beg seals if writing to one of the lower
circle! But for such ill-manners and his rude answers, his affair
would never have gone so far as it did, for, as they say,—


A strife-stirring word will accomplish the downfall of an ancient line.


By these their headstrong acts they gave to the winds house,
family, and the hoards of 30 to 40 years.

One day while we were near Shahr-i-safa ? a false alarm being
given in the very heart of the camp, the whole army was made
to arm and mount. At the time I was occupied with a bath
and purification; the begs were much flurried; I mounted when
I was ready ; as the alarm was false, it died away after a time.

March by march we moved on to Guzar.3 There we tried
again to discuss with the Arghins but, paying no attention to
us, they maintained the same obstinate and perverse attitude.
Certain well-wishers who knew the local land and water, repre-
sented to me, that the head of the torrents (v#d/ar) which come
down to Qandahar, being towards Baba Hasan Abdal and
Khalishak,+ a move ought to be made in that direction, in order


* Persians pay great attention in their correspondence not only to the style but to
the kind of paper on which a letter is written, the place of signature, the place of the
seal, and the situation of the address. Chardin gives some curious information on
the subject (Erskine). Babur marks the distinction of rank he drew between the
Arghin chiefs and himself when he calls their letter to him, ‘arz-dasht, his to them
khatt. is claim to suzerainty over those chiefs is shewn by Haidar Mirza to be
based on his accession to Timirid headship through the downfall of the Bai-qaras,
who had been the acknowledged suzerains of the Arghiins now repudiating Babur’s
claim. Cf. Erskine’s History of India i, cap. 3.

? on the main road, some 40 miles east of Qandahar.

3 var. Kir or Kawar. If the word mean ford, this might well be the one across
the Tarnak carrying the road to Qara (maps). Here Babur seems to have left the
main road along the Tarnak, by which the British approach was made in 1880 AD.,
for one crossing west into the valley of the Argand-ab,

4 Baba Hasan Aéda/ is the Baba Wali of maps. The same saint has given his
name here, and also to his shrine east of Atak where he is known as Baba Wali of
Qandahar. The torrents mentioned are irrigation off-takes from the Argand-ab,
which river flows between Baba Wali and Khalishak. Shah Beg’s force was south
of the torrents (cf. Murghan-koh on S.A.W. map).


onthe


i i a


aha isnie.


913 AH.—MAY 18TH 1507 TO MAY 2np 1508 AD. 333


to cut off (yigmdq) all those torrents.. Leaving the matter
there, we next day made our men put on their mail, arrayed in
right and left, and marched for Qandahar.


(2. Battle of Qandahar.)


Shah Beg and Muqim had seated themselves under an awning
which was set in front of the naze of the Qandahar-hill where
I am now having a rock-residence cut out.2, Mugim’s men
pushed forward amongst the trees to rather near us. Tufan
Arghin had fled to us when we were near Shahr-i-safa ; he now
betook himself alone close up to the Arghitn array to where
one named ‘Ashaqu’l-lah was advancing rather fast leading 7 or
8men. Alone, Tifan Avghin faced him, slashed swords with him,
unhorsed him, cut off his head and brought it to me as we were
passing Sang-i-lakhshak ;3 an omen we accepted! Not thinking
it well to fight where we were, amongst suburbs and trees, we
went on along the skirt of the hill. Just as we had settled on
ground for the camp, in a meadow on the Qandahar side of the
torrent,t opposite Khalishak, and were dismounting, Sher Quli
the scout hurried up and represented that the enemy was
arrayed to fight and on the move towards us.

As on our march from Qalat the army had suffered much
from hunger and thirst, most of the soldiers on getting near
Khalishak scattered up and down for sheep and cattle, grain


* The narrative and plans of Second Afghan War (Murray 1908) illustrate Babur’s
movements and show most of the places he names. The end of the 280 mile march,
from Kabul to within sight of Qandahar, will have stirred in the General of 1507
what it stirred in the General of 1880. Lord Roberts speaking in May 1913 in
Glasgow on the rapid progress of the movement for National Service thus spoke :—
** A memory comes over me which turns misgiving into hope and apprehension into
confidence. It is the memory of the morning when, accompanied by two of Scotland’s
most famous regiments, the Seaforths and the Gordons, at the end of a long and
arduous march, / saw zx the distance the walls and minarets of Qandahar, and knew
that the end of a great resolve and a great task was near.”

2 min tash ‘imarat gazdirghan timshighi-ning alida ; 215 f. 1686, ‘imarati kah
az sang yak Pete Sarmida bidim; 217 f. 1436, jay kah man ‘imarati sakhtam ;
Mems. p. 226, where I have built a palace; MWéms. ii, 15, l’endrott méme ow 7’ at bate
un palais. All the above translations lose the sense of gazdirghdn, am causing to
dig out, to quarry stone. Perhaps for coolness’ sake the dwelling was cut out in the
living rock. That the place is south-west of the main avigs, near Murghan-koh or on
it, Babur’s narrative allows. Cf. Appendix J.

3 sic, Hai. MS. There are two Lakhshas, Little Lakhsha, a mile west of Qandahar,
and Great Lakhsha, about a mile s.w. of Old Qandahar, 5 or 6 m. from the modern
one (Erskine).

4 This will be the main irrigation channel taken off from the Argand-ab (Maps).


Fol. 209.


Fol. 2096.


334 KABUL


and eatables. Without looking to collect them, we gallop ed
off. Our force may have been 2000 in all, but perhaps not
over 1000 were in the battle because those mentioned as scat- —
tering up and down could not rejoin in time to fight. | :

Though our men were few I had them organized and posted
on a first-rate plan and method; I had never arrayed them ~
before by such a good one. For my immediate command ~
(khasa:tabin) 1 had selected braves from whose hands comes
work ' and had inscribed them by tens and fifties, each ten and
each fifty under a leader who knew the post in the right or left
of the centre for his ten or his fifty, knew the work of each in ~
the battle, and was there on the observant watch ; so that, after
mounting, the right and left, right and left hands, right and
left sides, charged right and left without the trouble of arraying
them or the need of a ¢awachi?


(Author's note on his terminology.) Although daranghar, aing gil, ating
yan and ating (right wing, right hand, right side and right) all have the same
meaning, I have applied them in different senses in order to vary terms and
mark distinctions. As, in the battle-array, the (Ar.) mazmana and mazsara
z.€. what people call (Turki) daranghar and jawdanghar (r. and 1. wings) are
not included in the (Ar.) ga/é, z.e. what people call (T.) ghé/ (centre), so it is
in arraying the centre itself. Taking the array of the centre only, its (Ar.)
yamin and yasar (r. and 1.) are called (by me) a#ug gal and sal gu (r. and 1.
hands). Again,—the (Ar.) £hasa ¢abin (royal troop) in the centre has its
yamin and yasaér which are called (by me) aéing yan and sul yan (rx. and 1.
sides, T. vax). Again,—in the #hdsa tabin there is the (T.) baz (ning) tikint
(close circle); its yamin and yasar are called sé#mg and s#/. In the Turki
tongue they call one single thing a 42,3 but that is not the 4# meant here ;
what is meant here is close (yagiz).


The right wing (daranghar) was Mirza Khan (Wais), Sherim
Taghai, Yarak Taghai with his elder and younger brethren,
Chilma Mughil, Ayib Beg, Muhammad Beg, Ibrahim Beg,
‘Ali Sayyid Mughil with his Mughils, Sl. Quli chuhra,
Khuda-bakhsh and Abi’l-hasan with his elder and younger
brethren. |

The left (jawanghar) was ‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza, Qasim Beg,
Tingri-birdi, Qambar-i-‘ali, Ahmad Adchi-bigha, Ghiri Barlas,
Sayyid Husain Akbar, and Mir Shah Qachzn.

* tamam ailikidin—aish-kilur yikitlar, an idiomatic phrase used of ‘Ali-dost
(f 144 and n.), not easy to express by a single English adjective.

® The ¢awdchi was a sort of adjutant who attended to the order of the troops and
carried orders from the general (Erskine). The difficult passage following gives the
Turki terms Babur selected to represent Arabic military ones.


3 Ar. ahad (Ayin-t-akbari, Blochmann, index s.z.). The word d# recurs in the
text on f, 210,- -


RAM, errr RTA, Yt ELA A Wh By eet
Ce erat a i, Bai Oo rd ise’ a
mt Fi eta Uk ME ts ey


913 AH.—MAY 18TH 1507 To MAY 2np 1508 AD. 335


The advance (azva@wal) was Nasir Mirza, Sayyid Qasim Lord
of the Gate, Muhibb-i-‘ali the armourer, Papa Atghuli (Papa’s


son?), Allah-wairan Zurkman, Sher Quli MWughil the scout


with his elder and younger brethren, and Muhammad ‘Ali.

In the centre (g/z/), on my right hand, were Qasim Kiikildash,
Khusrau Kikildash, Sl. Muhammad D¢a/daz, Shah Mahmid
the secretary, Qil-i-bayazid the taster, and Kamal the sherbet-
server ; on my left were Khwaja Muhammad ‘Ali, Nasir’s Dost,
Nasir’s Mirim, Baba Sher-zad, Khan-quli, Wali the treasurer,
Qitliiq-qadam the scout, Magqsiid the water-bearer (s#-chz), and
Baba Shaikh. Those in the centre were all of my household ;
there were no great begs; not one of those enumerated had
reached the rank of beg. Those inscribed in this d#z* were
Sher Beg, Hatim the Armoury-master, Kipuk, Quli Baba,
Abi’l-hasan the armourer ;—of the Mughils, Airis (Russian)
‘Ali Sayyid,? Darwish-i-‘ali Sayyid, Khiish-kildi, Chilma, Dost-
kildi, Chilma Taghchi, Damachi, Mindi ;—of the Turkmans,
Mansi, Rustam-i-‘ali with his elder and younger brother, and
Shah Nazir and Sitndik.

The enemy was in two divisions, one under Shah Shuja‘
Arghin, known as Shah Beg and hereafter to be written of
simply as Shah Beg, the other under his younger brother
Muqim.

Some estimated the dark mass of Arghiins3 at 6 or 7000
men; no question whatever but that Shah Beg’s own men in
mail were 4 or 5000. He faced our right, Mugqim with a force
smaller may-be than his brother’s, faced our left. Muqim made
a mightily strong attack on our left, that is on Qasim Beg from
whom two or three persons came before fighting began, to ask
for reinforcement ; we however could not detach a man because
in front of us also the enemy was very strong. We made our
onset without any delay ; the enemy fell suddenly on our van,
turned it back and rammed it on our centre. When we, after
a discharge of arrows, advanced, they, who also had been

t ze. the biz tikini of f. 2094, the khasa tabin, close circle.
2 As Mughils seem unlikely to be descendants of Muhammad, perhaps the title
Sayyid in some Mughil names here, may be a translation of a Mughiil one meaning


Chief.


3 Arghin-ning garasi, a frequent phrase.


Fol. 210.


Fol. 2108.


Fol. 211,


| Pes ky \


336 KABUL


shooting for a time, seemed likely to make a stand (takhtaghan-
dik). Some-one, shouting to his men, came forward towa ds
me, dismounted and was for adjusting his arrow, but he could do ©
nothing because we moved on without stay. He remounted —
and rode off; it may have been Shah Beg himself. During the
fight Piri Beg 7urkman and 4 or 5 of his brethren turned their
faces from the foe and, turban in hand,t came over to us. ae


(Author's note on Piri Beg.) This Piri Beg was one of those Turkmans
who came [into Heri] with the Turkman Begs led by ‘Abdu’l-bagqi Mirza and
Murad Beg, after Shah Isma‘il vanquished the Bayandar sultans and seized
the ‘Iraq countries.” .

Our right was the first to overcome the foe; it made him
hurry off. Its extreme point had gone pricking (sdz/ib) 3 as
far as where I have now laid out a garden. Our left extended
as far as the great tree-tangled 4 irrigation-channels, a good way
below Baba Hasan Abdal. Mugim was opposite it, its numbers
very small compared with his. God brought it right! Between it
and Muqim were three or four of the tree-tangled water-channels

oing on to Qandahar ; 5 it held the crossing-place and allowed
going §-P
no passage ; small body though it was, it made splendid stand
and kept its ground. Halwachi Tarkhan® slashed away in the
water with Tingri-birdi and Qambar-i-‘ali. Qambar-i-‘ali was
wounded ; an arrow stuck in Qasim Beg’s forehead ; another
struck Ghiri Barlas above the eyebrow and came out above his
cheek.7

We meantime, after putting our adversary to flight, had
crossed those same channels towards the naze of Murghan-koh
(Birds’-hill). Some-one on a grey ¢ipichag was going back-
wards and forwards irresolutely along the hill-skirt, while we

* in sign of submission.

2 f. 176. It was in 908 AH. [1502 AD. ].

3 This word seems to be from sdéujmdg, to prick or stab; and here to-have the
military sense of Arzck, vz. riding forth. The Second Pers. trs. (217 f. 1440) translates
it by ghauta khiirda raft, went tasting a plunge under water (215 f. 170; Muh.
Shirdazi’s lith. ed. p. 133). Erskine (p. 228), as his Persian source dictates, makes
the men sink into the soft ground ; de Courteille varies much (ii, 21).

4 Ar. akhmazl, so translated under the known presence of trees ; it may also imply
soft ground (Lane p. 813 col. b) but soft ground does not suit the purpose of avigs
(channels), the carrying on of water to the town.

5 The S.A.W. map is useful here.

° That he had a following may be inferred.


7 Hai. MS. gachér; Ilminsky, p. 268; and both Pers. trss. rukhsdr or rukhsara
(f. 25 and note to gachar).


913 AH.—MAY 13TH 1507 TO MAY 2np 1508 AD. 337


were getting across; I likened him to Shah Beg; seemingly it
was he.

Our men having beaten their opponents, all went off to
pursue and unhorse them. Remained with me eleven to count,
‘Abdu’l-lah the librarian being one. Mugim was still keeping
his ground and fighting. Without a glance at the fewness of
our men, we had the nagarets sounded and, putting our trust in
God, moved with face set for Muqim.


(Turki) For few or for many God is full strength ;
No man has might in His Court.


(Arabic) How often, God willing it, a small force has vanquished a large one !
Learning from the nagarets that we were approaching, Muqim
forgot his fixed plan and took the road of flight. God. brought
it right !

After putting our foe to flight, we moved for Qandahar and
dismounted in Farrukh-zad Beg’s Char-bagh, of which at this
time not a trace remains !


(m. Babur enters Qandahar.)

Shah Beg and Muqim could not get into Qandahar when
they took to flight ; Shah Beg went towards Shal and Mastiing
(Quetta), Mugim towards Zamin-dawar. They left no-one able
to make the fort fast. Ahmad ‘Ali Tarkhan was in it together
with other elder and younger brethren of Quli Beg Arghin
whose attachment and good-feeling for me were known. After
parley they asked protection for the families of their elder and
younger brethren ; their request was granted and all mentioned
were encompassed with favour. They then opened the Mashir-
gate of the town; with leaderless men in mind, no other was
opened. At that gate were posted Sherim Taghai and Yarim Beg.
I went in with a few of the household, charged the leaderless
men and had two or three put to death by way of example.’


(n. The spoils of Qandahar.)
I got to Muqim’s treasury first, that being in the outer-fort ;
‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza must have been quicker than I, for he was


= So in the Turki MSS. and the first Pers. trs. (215 f. 1704). The second Pers.
trs. (217 f. 1454) has a gloss of agua u tiéka; this consequently Erskine follows (p. 229)
and adds a note explaining the punishment. IIminsky has the gloss also (p. 269),
thus indicating Persian and English influence.


Fol. 2114.


Fol. 212.


338


just dismounting there when I arrived ; I gave him a few thir gs IS


from it. I put Dost-i-nasir Beg, Qul-i-bayazid the taster and, ~
of pay-masters, Muhammad éakhshi in charge of it, then passed
on into the citadel and posted Khwaja Muhammad ‘Ali, Shah _


Mahmid and, of the pay-masters, Taghai Shah dakhshi in
charge of Shah Beg’s treasury.

Nasir’s Mirim and Magsiid the sherbet-server were sent to
keep the house of Zi’n-niin’s Diwan Mir Jan for Nasir Mirza ;
for Mirza Khan was kept Shaikh Abi-sa‘id Zarkhani’s ; for
‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza ...... st

Such masses of white money had never been seen in those
countries ; no-one indeed was to be heard of who had seen so
much. That night, when we ourselves stayed in the citadel,
Shah Beg’s slave Sambhal was captured and brought in.
Though he was then Shah Beg’s intimate, he had not yet
received his later favour.2 I had him given into some-one’s
charge but as good watch was not kept, he was allowed to
escape. Next day I went back to my camp in Farrukh-zad
Beg’s Char-bagh.

I gave the Qandahar country ts Nasir Mirza. After the
treasure had been got into order, loaded up and started off, he
took the loads of white zazkas off a string of camels (z.e. 7 beasts)
at the citadel-treasury, and kept them. I did not demand them
back ; I just gave them to him.

On leaving Qandahar, we dismounted in the Qish-khana
meadow. After setting the army forward, I had gone for an
excursion, so I got into camp rather late. It was another camp!
not to be recognized! Excellent ¢ipichags, strings and strings
of he-camels, she-camels, and mules, bearing saddle-bags (Ahur-
sin) of silken stuffs and cloth,—tents of scarlet (cloth) and
velvet, all sorts of awnings, every kind of work-shop, ass-load
after ass-load of chests! The goods of the elder and younger
(Arghiin) brethren had been kept in separate treasuries ; out of
each had come chest upon chest, bale upon bale of stuffs and


* No MS. gives the missing name.

2 The later favour mentioned was due to Sambhal’s laborious release of his master
from Aiizbeg captivity in 917 AH. (I5II AD.) of which Erskine quotes a full account
from the 7arikh-i-sind (History of India i, 345).


ee. ee ee ee ee ee ee


i


913 AH.—MAY 18TH 1507 TO MAY 2np 1508 AD. 339


clothes-in-wear (artmag artmaq), sack upon sack of white tankas.
In autagh and chadar (lattice-tent and pole-tent) was much
spoil for every man soever; many sheep also had been taken
but sheep were less cared about !

I made over to Qasim Beg Mugqim’s retainers in Qalat, under
Qij Arghin and Taju’d-din Mahmid, with their goods and
effects. Qasim Beg was a knowing person ; he saw it unad-
visable for us to stay long near Qandahar, so, by talking and
talking, worrying and worrying, he got us to march off. As has
been said, I had bestowed Qandahar on Nasir Mirza ; he was
given leave to go there; we started for Kabul.

There had been no chance of portioning out the spoils while
we were near Qandahar; it was done at Qara-bagh where we
delayed two or three days. To count the coins being difficult,
they were apportioned by weighing them in scales. Begs of all
ranks, retainers and household (¢@dzz) loaded up ass-load after
ass-load of sacks full of white zazkas, and took them away for
their own subsistence and the pay of their soldiers.

We went back to Kabul with masses of goods and treasure,
great honour and reputation.


(0. Babur's marriage with Ma‘siima-sultan.)

After this return to Kabul I concluded alliance (‘agd gildim)
with Sl. Ahmad Mirza’s daughter Ma‘stima-sultan Begim whom
I had asked in marriage at Khurasan, and had had brought
from there.


(p. Shaibag Khan before Qandahar.)


A few days later a servant of Nasir Mirza brought the news
that Shaibaq Khan had come and laid siege to Qandahar.
That Muqim had fled to Zamin-dawar has been said already ;
from there he went on and saw Shaibaq Khan. From Shah
Beg also one person after another had gone to Shaibaq Khan.
At the instigation and petition of these two, the Khan came
swiftly down on Qandahar by the mountain road,‘ thinking to
find me there. This was the very thing that experienced person


_ * Presumably he went by Sabzar, Daulatabad, and Washir.


Fol. 2126


Fol. 213.


Fol. 2130,


349 - wy a


Qasim Beg had in his mind when he worried us into marching
off from near Qandahar. q


(Persian) What a mirror shews to the young man,
A baked brick shews to the old one !


Shaibaq Khan arriving, besieged Nasir Mirza in Qandahar.


(g. Alarm in Kabul.)


When this news came, the begs were summoned for counsel.
The matters for discussion were these :—Strangers and ancient
foes, such as are Shaibaq Khan and the Aiizbegs, are in posses-
sion of all the countries once held by Timir Beg’s descendants ;
even where Turks and Chaghatais* survive in corners and
border-lands, they have all joined the Aiizbeg, willingly or with
aversion; one remains, I myself, in Kabul, the foe mightily
strong, I very weak, with no means of making terms, no strength
to oppose ; that, in the presence of such power and potency, we
had to think of some -place for ourselves and, at this crisis and
in the crack of time there was, to put a wider space between us
and the strong foeman; that choice lay between Badakhshan
and Hindistan and that decision must now be made. é

Oasim Beg and Sherim Taghai were agreed for Badakhshan ;


(Authors note on Badakhshin.) Those holding their heads up in
Badakhshan at this crisis were, of Badakhshis, Mubarak Shah and Zubair,
Jahangir 7urkman and Muhammad the armourer. They had driven Nasir
Mirza out but had not joined the Aiizbeg.


I and several household-begs preferred going towards Hindistan
and were for making a start to Lamghan.?


(rv. Movements of some Mirzas.)


After taking Qandahar, I had bestowed Qalat and the Turnik
(Tarnak) country on ‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza and had left him in
Qalat, but with the Aizbeg besieging Qandahar, he could not
stay in Qalat, so left it and came to Kabul. He arriving just
as we were marching out, was there left in charge.3

There being in Badakhshan no ruler or ruler’s son, Mirza Khan
inclined to go in that direction, both because of his relationship

* f. 202 and note to Chaghatai.


? This will be for the Ningnahar ¢#mdan of Lamghan.
3 He was thus dangerously raised in his father’s place of rule.


ee re ee, epee ve
i


913 AH.—MAY 138TH 1507 TO MAY 2np 1508 AD. 341


to Shah Begim’ and with her approval. He was allowed to go and
the honoured Begim herself started off with him. My honoured
maternal-aunt Mihr-nigar Khanim also wished to go to Badakh-
shan, notwithstanding that it was more seemly for her to be with
me, a blood-relation ; but whatever objection was made, she was
not to be dissuaded; she also betook ? herself to Badakhshan.


(s. Babur’s second start for Hindustan.)

Under our plan of going to Hindistan, we marched out of
Kabul in the month of the first Jumada (September 1507 AD.),
taking the road through Little Kabul and going down by
Sirkh-rabat to Quriiq-sai.

The Afghans belonging between Kabul and Lamghan (Ning-
nahar) are thieves and abettors of thieves even in quiet times ;
for just such a happening as this they had prayed in vain.
Said they, “He has abandoned Kabul”, and multiplied their
misdeeds by ten, changing their very merits for faults. To such Fol. 214.
lengths did things go that on the morning we marched from
Jagdalik, the Afghans located between it and Lamghan, such as
the Khizr-khail, Shimi-khail, Khirilchi and Khigiani, thought
of blocking the pass, arrayed on the mountain to the north, and
advancing with sound of tambour and flourish of sword, began
to shew themselves off. On our mounting I ordered our men
to move along the mountain-side, each man from where he had
dismounted ;3 off they set at the gallop up every ridge and
every valley of the saddle+ The Afghans stood awhile, but
could not let even one arrow fly,5 and betook themselves to
flight. While I was on the mountain during the pursuit, I shot
one in the hand as he was running back below me. That
arrow-stricken man and a few others were brought in; some
were put to death by impalement, as an example.


* ff. 104, 116. Haidar M. writes, ‘‘Shah Begim laid claim to Badakhshan, saying,
**Tt has been our hereditary kingdom for 3000 years; though I, being a woman,
ee attain sovereignty, yet my grandson Mirza Khan can hold it” (T.R.
p. 203).

? tibradilar. The agitation of mind connoted, with movement, by this verb may
well have been, here, doubt of Babur’s power to protect.

3 tushlig tushdin taghgha yurikdilar. Cf. 205d for the same phrase, with
supposedly different meaning.

4 gangshar \it. ridge of the nose.


5 bir atig ham guia-almadilar (f. 2036 note to chipgiin).


Fol. 2148.


342


We dismounted over against the Adinapir-fort in the N ing-
nahar ¢iman. ; -


(t. A ratd for winter stores.)


Up till then we had taken no thought where to camp, where q


to go, where to stay; we had just marched up and down,


camping in fresh places, while waiting for news.’ It was late
in the autumn; most lowlanders had carried in their rice.
People knowing the local land and water represented that
the Mil Kafirs up the water of the “Alishang ¢aman grow great
quantities of rice, so that we might be able to collect winter
supplies from them for the army. Accordingly we rode out of
the Ningnahar dale (u/ga), crossed (the Baran-water) at Sai-
kal, and went swiftly as far as the Pir-amin (easeful) valley.
There the soldiers took a mass of rice. The rice-fields were all
at the bottom of the hills. The people fled but some Kafirs
went to their death, A few of our braves had been sent to
a look-out (sar-kib)? on a naze of the Pir-anim valley ; when
they were returning to us, the Kafirs rushed from the hill above,
shooting at them. They overtook Qasim Beg’s son-in-law
Piran, chopped at him with an axe, and were just taking him
when some of the braves went back, brought strength to bear,
drove them off and got Piran away. After one night spent in
the Kafirs’ rice-fields, we returned to camp with a mass of pro-
visions collected. |


(u. Marriage of Mugim’s daughter.)


While we were near Mandrawar in those days, an alliance
was concluded between Mugqim’s daughter Mah-chichik, now
married to Shah Hasan Arghan, and Qasim Kitkildash.3


* This will have been news both of Shaibaq Khan and of Mirzi Khan. The Pers.
trss. vary here (215 f. 173 and 217 f. 148).

? Index s.72.

3 Mah-chiichik can hardly have been married against her will to Qasim. Her
mother regarded the alliance as a family indignity ; appealed to Shah Beg and com-
passed a rescue from Kabul while Babur and Qasim were north of the Oxus [czrca
916 AH.]. Mah-chiichiik quitted Kabul after much hesitation, due partly to reluctance
to leave her husband and her infant of 18 months, [Nahid Begim,] partly to dread
less family honour might require her death (Erskine’s History, i, 348 and Gul-badan’s
Humiayiin-nama). ;


913 AH.—MAY 138TH 1507 TO MAY 2NnpD 1508 AD. 343


(v. Abandonment of the Hindistan project.)

As it was not found desirable to go on into Hindiistan, I sent
Mulla Baba of Pashaghar back to Kabul with a few braves.
Meantime I marched from near Mandrawar to Atar and Shiwa
and lay there for a few days. From Atar I visited Kinar and
Nir-gal; from Kinar I went back to camp on a raft ; it was
the first time I had sat on one; it pleased me much, and the
raft came into common use thereafter.


(w. Shatbag Khan retires from Qandahar.)

In those same days Mulla Baba of Farkat came from Nasir
Mirza with news in detail that Shaibaq Khan, after taking the
outer-fort of Qandahar, had not been able to take the citadel
but had retired ; also that the Mirza, on various accounts, had
left Qandahar and gone to Ghazni.

Shaibagq Khan’s arrival before Qandahar, within a few days
of our own departure, had taken the garrison by surprise, and
they had not been able to make fast the outer-fort. He ran
mines several times round about the citadel and made several
assaults. The place was about to be lost. At that anxious
time Khwaja Muh. Amin, Khwaja Dost Khawand, Muh. ‘Ali,
a foot-soldier, and Shami (Syrian ?) let themselves down from the
walls and got away. Just as those in the citadel were about to
surrender in despair, Shaibaq Khan interposed words of peace
and uprose from before the place. Why he rose was this :—
It appears that before he went there, he had sent his Zaram to
Nirah-ti,! and that in Nirah-tti some-one lifted up his head and
got command in the fort; the Khan therefore made a sort of
peace and retired from Qandahar.


(x. Babur returns to Kabul.)

Mid-winter though it was we went bak to Kabul by the
Bad-i-pich road. I ordered the date of that transit and that
crossing of the pass to be cut on a stone above Bad-i-pich ; ?
Hafiz Mirak wrote the inscription, Ustad Shah Muhammad did
the cutting, not well though, through haste.


* Erskine gives the fort the alternative name “‘ Kaliiin”, locates it in the Badghis
district east of Heri, and quotes from Abw’l-ghazi in describing its strong position
(History i, 282). H.S. Tirah-ti.

2 f, 133 and note. Abiu’l-fazl mentions that the inscription was to be seen in his time.


Fol. 215.


Fol. 2154.


344 KABUL | i


I. bestowed Ghazni on Nasir Mirza and gave ‘Abdu'r-razzaq__
Mirza the Ningnahar ¢#man with Mandrawar, Nir-valley, Kinar


and Nir-gal.*


(y. Babur styles himself Padshah.)

Up to that date people had styled Timiir Beg’s descendants
Mirza, even when they were ruling ; now I ordered that people
should style me Padshah?


z. Birth of Babur’s first son.)

At the end of this year,on Tuesday the 4th day of the month
of Zi’l-qa‘da (March 6th 1506 AD.), the Sun being in Pisces
(Hat), Humayin was born in the citadel of Kabul. The date
of his birth was found by the poet Maulana Masnadi in the
words Sultan Humayun Khan3 and a minor poet of Kabul
found it in Shah-t-ftriiz-gadr (Shah of victorious might). A few
days later he received the name Humayiin; when he was five
or six days old, I went out to the Char-bagh where was had
the feast of his nativity. All the begs, small and great, brought
gifts ; such a mass of white zankas was heaped up as had never
been seen before. It was a first-rate feast !


* This fief ranks in value next to the Kabul ¢a#maz.

2 Various gleanings suggest motives for Babur’s assertion of supremacy at this
particular time. He was the only Timirid ruler and man of achievement ; he filled
Husain Bai-gara’s place of Timirid headship; his actions through a long period
show that he aimed at filling Timir Beg’s. There were those who did not admit his
suzerainty,—Timirids who had rebelled, Mughils who had helped them, and who
would also have helped Sa ‘id Khan Chaghatai, if he had not refused to be treacherous
to a benefactor ; there were also the Arghiins, Chingiz-khanids of high pretensions.
In old times the Mughill Khagans were fpaddshah (supreme); Padshah is recorded
in history as the style of at least Satiiq-bighra- Khan Padshah Ghazi; no Timirid
had been lifted by his style above all Mirzis. When however Timirids had the
upper hand, Babur’s Timirid grandfather Abi-sa‘id asserted his de facto supremacy
over Babur’s Chaghatai grandfather Yiinas (T.R. p. 83). For Babur to re-assert that
supremacy by assuming the Khaqan’s style was highly opportune at this moment.
To be Babur Supreme was to declare over-lordship above Chaghatai and Mughil, as
well as over all Mirzas. It was done when his sky had cleared; Mirza Khan’s
rebellion was scotched ; the Arghiins were defeated ; he was the stronger for their
lost possessions ; his Atizbeg foe had removed to a less ominous distance ; and Kabul
was once more his own.

Gul-badan writes as if the birth of his first-born son Humayiin were a part of the
uplift in her father’s style, but his narrative does not support her in this, since the
order of events forbids.

3 The ‘‘ Khan” in Humayin’s title may be drawn from his mother’s family, since
it does not come from Babur. To whose family Mahim belonged we have not been
able to discover. It is one of the remarkable omissions of Babur, Gul-badan and
Abi’l-fazl that they do not give her father’s name. The topic of her family is
discussed in my Biographical Appendix to Gul-badan’s Wumdayiin-nama and will be
taken up again, here, in a final Appendix on Babur’s family.


2


914 AH.—M AY 2np 1508 to APRIL 21st 1509 AD.


This spring a body of Mahmand Afghans was over-run near
Muqutr.?


(a. A Mughiil rebellion.)


A few days after our return from that raid, Quj Beg, Faqir-
i-‘ali, Karim-dad and Baba chuhra were thinking about
deserting, but their design becoming known, people were sent
who took them below Astarghach. As good-for-nothing words
of theirs had been reported te me, even during Jahangir M.’s
life-time,3 I ordered that they should be put to death at the top
of the azar. They had been taken to the place ; the ropes had
been fixed; and they were about to be hanged when Qasim
Beg sent Khalifa to me with an urgent entreaty that I would
pardon their offences. To please him I gave them their lives,
but I ordered them kept in custody.

What there was of Khusrau Shah’s retainers from Hisar and
QOiindiz, together with the head-men of the Mughils, Chilma,
‘Ali Sayyid,t Sakma (?), Sher-quli and Aiki-salam (?), and also
Khusrau Shah’s favourite Chaghatai retainers under Sl. ‘Ali
chuhra and Khudabakhsh, with also 2 or 3000 serviceable
Turkman braves led by Sitndtk and Shah Nazar,5 the whole of
these, after consultation, took up a bad position towards me.
They were all seated in front of Khwaja Riwaj, from the Siing-
qurghan meadow to the Chalak ; ‘Abdu’r-razzaq Mirza, come
in from Ning-nahar, being in Dih-i-afghan.°

* Elph. MS. f. 1726; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 1746 and 217 f. 1486; Mems. p. 234.

2 on the head-waters of the Tarnak (R.’s Motes App. p. 34).

3 Babur has made no direct mention of his half-brother’s death (f. 208 and n. to
wee may be Darwesh-i-‘ali of f. 210; the Sayyid in his title may merely mean
chief, since he was a Mughil.

5 Several of these mutineers had fought for Babur at Qandahar.

© It may be useful to recapitulate this Mirza’s position :—In the previous year he


had been left in charge of Kabul when Babur went eastward in dread of Shaibani,
and, so left, occupied his hereditary place. He cannot have hoped to hold Kabul


Fol. 216.


Fol. 2168.


7) ote
ee hs ae


346 KABUL


Earlier on Muhibb-i-‘ali the armourer had told Khalifa an
Mulla Baba once or twice of their assemblies, and both had
given me a hint, but the thing seeming incredible, it had had no io
attention. One night, towards the Bed-time Prayer, when I was
sitting in the Audience-hall of the Char-bagh, Misa Khwaja,
coming swiftly up with another man, said in my ear, “The
Mughils are really rebelling! We do not know for certain
whether they have got ‘Abdu’r-razzaq M. to join them. They
have not settled to rise to-night.” I feigned disregard and a
little later went towards the Zarams which at the time were in
the Yurainchqa-garden * and the Bagh-i-khilwat, but after page,
servitor and messenger (yasd@wal) had turned back on getting
near them, I went with the chief-slave towards the town, and
on along the ditch. I had gone as far as the lron-gate when
Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali? met me, he coming by the daza@r road from
the opposite direction. He joined me...... of the porch
of the Hot-bath (Lammam)...... 3


if the Aizbeg attacked it; for its safety and his own he may have relied, and Babur
also in appointing him, upon influence his Arghiin connections could use. For these,
one was Mugqim his brother-in-law, had accepted Shaibani’s suzerainty after being
defeated in Qandahar by Babur. It suited them better no doubt to have the younger
Mirza rather than Babur in Kabul ; the latter’s return thither will have disappointed
them and the Mirza ; they, as will be instanced later, stood ready to invade his lands
when he moved East ; they seem likely to have promoted the present Mughil uprising.
In the battle which put this down, the Mirza was captured ; Babur pardoned him ;
but he having rebelled again, was then put to death.

* Bagh-i-yirinchgqa may be an equivalent of Bagh-i-safar, and the place be one
of waiting “‘up to” (éuchga) the journey (yur). Yurinchgd also means clover
(De Courteille).

2 He seems to have been a brother or uncle of Humayiin’s mother Mahim (Index ;
A.N. trs. i, 492 and note).

3 In all MSS. the text breaks off abruptly here, as it does on f. 1184 as though
through loss of pages, and a blank of narrative follows. Before the later gap of f. 2510
however the last sentence is complete.


a i a ae


TRANSLATOR’S NOTE ON 914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD.


From several references made in the Babur-nama and from
a passage in Gul-badan’s Humayin-nama (f. 15), it is inferrible
that Babur was composing the annals of 914 AH. not long
before his last illness and death."

Before the diary of 925 AH. (1519 AD.) takes up the broken
thread of his autobiography, there is a /acuna of narrative
extending over nearly eleven years. The break was not
intended, several references in the Aadbur-nama shewing
Babur’s purpose to describe events of the unchronicled years.”
Mr. Erskine, in the Leyden and Erskine Jemozrs, carried
Babur’s biography through the major /acune, but without first-
hand help from the best sources, the Hadibu’s-styar and Tarikh-
t-rashidi. He had not the help of the first even in his Hzstory
of India. M. de Courteille working as a translator only, made
no attempt to fill the gaps.

Babur’s biography has yet to be completed; much time is
demanded by the task, not only in order to exhaust known
sources and seek others further afield, but to weigh and balance
the contradictory statements of writers deep-sundered in
sympathy and outlook. To strike such a balance is essential
when dealing with the events of 914 to 920 AH. because in those
years Babur had part in an embittered conflict between Sunni
and Shi‘a. What I offer below, as a stop-gap, is a mere
summary of events, mainly based on material not used by
Mr. Erskine, with a few comments prompted by acquaintance
with Baburiana.


USEFUL SOURCES
Compared with what Babur could have told of this most


interesting period of his life, the yield of the sources is scant,


t Index s.n. Babur-naima, date of composition and gaps.
2 zed.
24


348 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


a natural sequel from the fact that no one of them haan is
biography for its main theme, still less had his own action in
crises of enforced ambiguity. q

Of all known sources the best are Khwand-amir’s Hadibu's- _
siyar and Haidar Mirza Daghlat’s Tarikh-t-rashidi. The first
was finished nominally in 930 AH. (1524-5 AD.), seven years
therefore before Babur’s death, but it received much addition of
matter concerning Babur after its author went to Hindistan in
934 AH. (f. 339). Its fourth part, a life of Shah Isma‘l Safawz
is especially valuable for the years of this dacuna. Haidar’s
book was finished under Humayiin in 953 AH. (1547 AD.), when
its author had reigned five years in Kashmir. It is the most
valuable of all the sources for those interested in Babur himself,
both because of Haidar’s excellence as a biographer, and through
his close acquaintance with Babur’s family. From his eleventh
to his thirteenth year he lived under Babur’s protection, followed
this by 19 years service under Sa‘id Khan, the cousin of both,
in Kashghar, and after that Khan’s death, went to Babur’s sons
Kamran and Humayin in Hindistan.

A work issuing from a Sunni Aizbeg centre, Fazl bin
Ruzbahan Jsfahani’s Silikwl-mulik, has a Preface of special
value, as shewing one view of what it writes of as the spread of
heresy in Mawara’u’n-nahr through Babur’s invasions. The
book itself is a Treatise on Musalman Law, and was prepared
by order of ‘Ubaidu’l-lah Khan Adzdeg for his help in fulfilling
a vow he had made, before attacking Babur in 918 AH., at the
shrine of Khwaja Ahmad Yasawz [in Hazrat Turkistan], that,
if he were victorious, he would conform exactly with the divine
Law and uphold it in Mawara’u’n-nahr (Rieu’s Pers. Cat. ii, 448).

The Zarikh-i Haji Muhammad ‘Arif Qandahari appears,
from the frequent use Firishta made of it, to be a useful source,
both because its author was a native of Qandahar, a place much
occupying Babur’s activities, and because he was a servant of
Bairam Khan-i-khanan, whose assassination under Akbar he
witnessed.t Unfortunately, though his life of Akbar survives


* Jumada I, 14th 968 aH.—Jan. 3Ist 1561 AD. Concerning the book see Elliot
and Dowson’s History of India vi, 572 and JRAS 1901 p. 76, H. Beveridge’s art.
On Persian MSS. in Indian Libraries.


914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 349


no copy is now known of the section of his General History
which deals with Babur’s.

An early source is Yahya Kazwini’s Lubbu’t-tawarikh, written
in 948 AH. (1541 AD.), but brief only in the Babur period. It
issued from a Shi‘a source, being commanded by Shah Isma‘il
Safaw?’s son Bahram.

Another work issuing also from a Safawi centre is Mir
Sikandar’s Tarikh-z-‘alam-ardi, a history of Shah ‘Abbas I, with
an introduction treating of his predecessors which was completed
in 1025. AH. (1616 AD.). Its interest lies in its outlook on
Babur’s dealings with Shah Isma‘l.

A later source, brief only, is Firishta’s Tarikh-z-firishia,
finished under Jahangir in the first quarter of the 17th century.

Mr. Erskine makes frequent reference to Kh(w)afi Khan’s
Tarikh, a secondary authority however, written under Aurang-
zib, mainly based on Firishta’s work, and merely summarizing
Babur’s period. References to detached incidents of the period
are found in Shaikh ‘Abdu’l-qadir’s Zarikh-c-badayuni and Mir
Ma‘siim’s 7arikh-t-sind.


EVENTS OF THE UNCHRONICLED YEARS
914 AH.—MAY 2np 1508 To APRIL 2Isr 1509 AD.


The mutiny, of which an account begins in the text, was
crushed by the victory of 500 loyalists over 3,000 rebels, one
factor of success being Babur’s defeat in single combat of five
champions of his adversaries.‘ The disturbance was not of long
duration ; Kabul was tranquil in Sha‘ban (November) when
Sl. Said Khan Chaghatai, then 21, arrived there seeking his
cousin’s protection, after defeat by his brother Mansir at Almati,
escape from death, commanded by Shaibani, in Farghana,
a winter journey through Qara-tigin to Mirza Khan in Qila’-i-
zafar, refusal of an offer to put him in that feeble Mirza’s place,
and so on to Kabul, where he came a destitute fugitive and

* The T.R. gives the names of two only of the champions but Firishta, writing
much later gives all five ; we surmise that he found his five in the book of which
copies are not now known, the 7arikh-2 Muh. ‘Arif Qandahari. Firishta’s five are
' ‘Ali shab-kar (night-blind), ‘Ali Sis¢anz, Nazar Bahadur Adzbeg, Ya‘qub ées-7ang


(swift in fight), and Aizbeg Bahadur. Hlaidar’s two names vary in the MSS. of the
T.R. but represent the first two of Firishta’s list.


gied'y\


350 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


enjoyed a freedom from care never known by hia before
(f. 2006; T.R. p. 226). The year was fatal to his family and
to Haidar’s; in it Shaibani murdered Sl. Mahmiid Khan and
his six sons, Muhammad Husain Mirza and other Dughlat —
sultans.


q


915 AH.—APRIL 21st 1509 To APRIL 11TH 1510 AD.


In this year hostilities began between Shah Isma‘il Safawi
and Muh. Shaibani Khan Adzbeg, news of which must have
excited keen interest in Kabul.

In it occurred also what was in itself a minor matter of
a child’s safety, but became of historical importance, namely,
the beginning of personal acquaintance between Babur and his
sympathetic biographer Haidar Mirza Dagh/at. Haidar, like
Sa‘id, came a fugitive to the protection of a kinsman; he was
then eleven, had been saved by servants from the death com-
manded by Shaibani, conveyed to Mirza Khan in Badakhshan,
thence sent for by Babur to the greater security of Kabul (f. 11;
Index s.z.; T.R. p. 227).


916 AH.—APRIL lituH 1510 To MARCH 38lst 1510 AD.
a. News of the battle of Merv.


Over half of this year passed quietly in Kabul; Ramzan
(December) brought from Mirza Khan (Wais) the stirring
news that Isma‘il had defeated Shaibani near Merv." “It
is not known,” wrote the Mirza, “whether Shahi Beg Khan has
been killed or not. All the Aiizbegs have crossed the Ami.
Amir Aidrtis, who was in Qindiz, has fled. About 20,000
Mughils, who left the Atizbeg at Merv, have come to Qindiz.
I have come there.” He then invited Babur to join him and
with him to try for the recovery of their ancestral territories


(TR... 239)


* There are curious differences of statement about the date of Shaibani’s death,
possibly through confusion between this and the day on which preliminary fighting
began near Merv. Haidar’s way of expressing the date carries weight by its precision,
he giving voz-z-shakk of Ramzan, z.e. a day of which there was doubt whether it was
the last of Sha‘ban or the first of Ramzan (Lane, yauma’u’l-shakk). As the sources
support Friday for the day of the week and on a Friday in the year 915 AH. fell the
29th of Sha‘ban, the date of Shaibani’s death seems to be Friday Sha‘ban 29th
915 AH. (Friday December 2nd 1510 AD.).


— 914 TO 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. eget


b. Baburs campaign in Transoxiana begun.


The Mirza’s letter was brought over passes blocked by snow ;
Babur, with all possible speed, took the one winter-route through
Ab-dara, kept the Ramzan Feast in Bamian,, and reached
Oindiz in Shawwal (Jan. 1511 AD.). Haidar’s detail about the
Feast seems likely to have been recorded because he had read
Babur’s own remark, made in Ramzan 933 AH. (June 1527) that
up to that date, when he kept it in Sikri, he had not since his
eleventh year kept it twice in the same place (f. 330).


c. Mughil affazrs.

Outside Qindiiz lay the Mughils mentioned by Mirza Khan
as come from Merv and so mentioned, presumably, as a possible
reinforcement. They had been servants of Babur’s uncles
Mahmiid and Ahmad, and when Shaibani defeated those Khans
at Akhsi in 908 AH., had been compelled by him to migrate
into Khurasan to places remote from Mughilistan. Many of
them had served in Kashghar; none had served a Timirid
Mirza. Set free by Shaibani’s death, they had come east,
a Khan-less 20,000 of armed and fully equipped men and they
were there, as Haidar says, in their strength while of Chaghatais
there were not more than 5,000. They now, and with them the
Mughils from Kabul, used the opportunity offering for return

_ to a more congenial location and leadership, by the presence in
Qindiz of a legitimate Khaqan and the clearance in Andijan,
a threshold of Mughilistan, of its Atizbeg governors (f. 2006).
The chiefs of both bodies of Mughils, Sherim Taghai at the
head of one, Aytb Begchik of the other, proffered the Mughil
Khanship to Sa‘id with offer to set Babur aside, perhaps to kill
him. It is improbable that in making their offer they con-
templated locating themselves in the confined country of Kabul;
what they seem to have wished was what Babur gave, Sa‘td for
their Khaqan and permission to go north with him.

Sa‘id, in words worth reading, rejected their offer to injure
Babur, doing so on the grounds of right and gratitude, but, the
two men agreeing that it was now expedient for them to part,
asked to be sent to act for Babur where their friendship could
be maintained for their common welfare. The matter was


352 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE + ie i


mt).
bh


iy


settled by Babur’s sending him into Andijan in response to ¢
urgent petition for help there just arrived from Haidar’s nel :
He “was made Khan” and started forth in the following year,
on Safar 14th 917 AH. (May 13th I511 AD.); with him went %
most of the Mughils but not all, since even of those from Merv, a
Ayiib Begchik and others are found mentioned on several later
occasions as being with Babur. te

Babur’s phrase “I made him Khan” (f. 2000) recalls his
earlier mention of what seems to be the same appointment
(f. 106), made by Abi-sa‘id of Yiinas as Khan of the Mughils ;
in each case the meaning seems to be that the Timirid Mirza
made the Chaghatai Khan Khaqan of the Mughils.


ad. First attempt on Hyrsar.


After spending a short time in Qindiiz, Babur moved for
Hisar in which were the Aiizbeg sultans Mahdi and Hamza.
They came out into Wakhsh to meet him but, owing to an
imbroglio, there was no encounter and each side retired (T.R.


p. 238).


e. Intercourse between Babur and Ismail Safawi.


While Babur was now in Qindiiz his sister Khan-zada
arrived there, safe-returned under escort of the Shah’s troops,
after the death in the battle of Merv of her successive husbands
Shaibani and Sayyid Hadi, and with her came an envoy from
Isma‘ll proffering friendship, civilities calculated to arouse a
hope of Persian help in Babur. To acknowledge his courtesies,
Babur sent Mirza Khan with thanks and gifts; Haidar says
that the Mirza also conveyed protestations of good faith and
a request for military assistance. He was well received and his
request for help was granted ; that it was granted under hard
conditions then stated later occurrences shew.


917 AH.—MARCH 3lst 1511 To MARCH 19TH 1512 AD.
a. Second attempt on Hisar.


In this year Babur moved again on Hisar. He took post,
where once his forbear Timir had wrought out success against
great odds, at the Pul-i-sangin (Stone-bridge) on the Sirkh-ab,


914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 353


and lay there a month awaiting reinforcement. The Aitzbeg
sultans faced him on the other side of the river, they too,
presumably, awaiting reinforcement. They moved when they
felt themselves strong enough to attack, whether by addition to
their own numbers, whether by learning that Babur had not
largely increased his own. Concerning the second alternative
it is open to surmise that he hoped for larger reinforcement
than he obtained ; he appears to have left Qindiiz before the
return of Mirza Khan from his embassy to Isma‘il, to have
expected Persian reinforcement with the Mirza, and at Pul-i-
sangin, where the Mirza joined him in time to fight, to have
been strengthened by the Mirza’s own following, and few, if
any, foreign auxiliaries. These surmises are supported by what
Khwand-amir relates of the conditions [specified later] on which
the Shah’s main contingent was despatched and by his shewing
that it did not start until after the Shah had had news of the
battle at Pul-i-sangin.

At the end of the month of waiting, the Aizbegs one morning
swam the Sirkh-ab below the bridge; in the afternoon of the
same day, Babur retired to better ground amongst the mountain
fastnesses of a local Ab-dara. In the desperate encounter which
followed the Aiizbegs were utterly routed with great loss in
men; they were pursued to Darband-i-ahanin (Iron-gate) on
the Hisar border, on their way to join a great force assembled
at Oarshi under Kiichim Khan, Shaibani’s successor as Atizbeg
Khagan. The battle is admirably described by Haidar, who
was then a boy of 12 with keen eye watching his own first fight,
and that fight with foes who had made him the last male
survivor of his line. In the evening of the victory Mahdi,
Hamza and Hamza’s son Mamak were brought before Babur
who, says Haidar, did to them what they had done to the
Mughil Khaqans and Chaghatai Sultans, that is, he retaliated
in blood for the blood of many kinsmen.


b. Persian reinforcement.


After the battle Babur went to near Hisar, was there joined
by many local tribesmen, and, some time later, by a large body
of Isma‘il’s troops under Ahmad Beg Safawiz, ‘Ali Khan Jstelji


ae
‘ PON A a ee
ie an


354 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE Aen 7


iS


and Shahrukh Sl. Afshar, Isma‘il’s seal-keeper. The following
particulars, given by Khwand-amir, about the despatch of this
contingent help to fix the order of occurrences, and throw light
on the price paid by Babur for his auxiliaries. He announced
his victory over Mahdi and Hamza to the Shah, and at the
same time promised that if he reconquered the rest of Trans- _ i
oxiana by the Shah’s help, he would read his name in the
khutba, stamp it on coins together with those of the Twelve __
Imams, and work to destroy the power of the Aizbegs. These
undertakings look like a response to a demand; such conditions
cannot have been proffered ; their acceptance must have been
compelled. Khwand-amir says that when Isma‘ll fully under-
stood the purport of Babur’s letter, [by which would seem to be ©
meant, when he knew that his conditions of help were accepted, |
he despatched the troops under the three Commanders named
above.

The Persian chiefs advised a move direct on Bukhara and
Samarkand ; and with this Babur’s councillors concurred, they
saying, according to Haidar, that Bukhara was then empty of
troops and full of fools. ‘Ubaid Khan had thrown himself into
Qarshi ; it was settled not to attack him but to pass on and
encamp a stage beyond the town. This was done; then scout
followed scout, bringing news that he had come out of Qarshi
and was hurrying to Bukhara, his own fief. Instant and swift
pursuit followed him up the 100 miles of caravan-road, into
Bukhara, and on beyond, sweeping him and _ his garrison,
plundered as they fled, into the open land of Turkistan. Many
sultans had collected in Samarkand, some no doubt being, like
Timir its governor, fugitives escaped from Pul-i-sangin. Dis-
mayed by Babur’s second success, Hey. scattered into Turkistan,
thus leaving him an open road.


c. Samarkand re-occupted and relations with Ismail Safawi.


He must now have hoped to be able to dispense with his
dangerous colleagues, for he dismissed them when he reached
Bukhara, with gifts and thanks for their services. It is Haidar,
himself present, who fixes Bukhara as the place of the dismissal
(T.R. p. 246).


ny eee ee eee YF
y, Lis - ey
rine. ‘
Ly | byl Ak


— 914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 355


From Bukhara Babur went to Samarkand. It was mid-Rajab
917 AH. (October I51I AD.), some ten months after leaving
Kabul, and after 9 years of absence, that he re-entered the town,
itself gay with decoration for his welcome, amidst the acclaim of
its people.*

Eight months were to prove his impotence to keep it against
the forces ranged against him,—Aitzbeg strength in arms com-
pacted by Sunni zeal, Sunni hatred of a Shi‘a’s suzerainty
intensified by dread lest that potent Shi‘a should resolve to
perpetuate his dominance. Both as a Sunni and as one who
had not owned a suzerain, the position was unpleasant for Babur.
That his alliance with Isma‘l was dangerous he will have known,
as also that his risks grew as Transoxiana was over-spread by
news of Isma‘il’s fanatical barbarism to pious and learned Sunnis, _
notably in Heri. He manifested desire for release both now
and later,—now when he not only dismissed his Persian helpers
but so behaved to the Shah’s envoy Muhammad Jan,—he was
Najm Sani’s Lord of the Gate,—that the envoy felt neglect and
made report of Babur as arrogant, in opposition, and unwilling
to fulfil his compact,—later when he eagerly attempted success
unaided against ‘Ubaid Khan, and was then worsted. It illustrates
the Shah’s view of his suzerain relation to Babur that on hearing
Muhammad Jan’s report, he ordered Najm Sani to bring the

_ offender to order.

Meantime the Shah’s conditions seem to have been carried
out in Samarkand and Babur’s subservience clearly shewn.? Of
this there are the indications,—that Babur had promised and
was a man of his word ; that Sunni irritation against him waxed
and did not wane as it might have done without food to nourish
it; that Babur knew himself impotent against the Aizbegs
unless he had foreign aid, expected attack, knew it was preparing ;
that he would hear of Muhammad Jan’s report and of Najm
Sani’s commission against himself. Honesty, policy and necessity


« If my reading be correct of the Turki passage concerning wines drunk by Babur
which I have noted on f. 49 (zx loco p. 83 n. 1), it was during this occupation of Kabul
that Babur first broke the Law against stimulants.

2 Mr. R. S. Poole found a coin which he took to be one struck in obedience to
Babur’s compact with the Shah (B.M.Cat. of the coins of Persian Shahs 1887,
pp. xxiv ef seg.; T.R. p. 246 n.).


356 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


combined to enforce the fulfilment of his agreement. W
were the precise terms of that agreement beyond the two as to
the khutba and the coins, it needs close study of the worn
of the sources to decide, lest metaphor be taken for fact. Great
passions,—ambition, religious fervour, sectarian bigotry and fear
confronted him. His problem was greater than that of Henry —
of Navarre and of Napoleon in Egypt; they had but to ae fa
what secured their acceptance; he had to put on a guise that
brought him hate. Fe

Khan-zada was not the only member of Babur’s family whi a
now rejoined him after marriage with an Aiizbeg. His half- —
sister Yadgar-sultan had fallen to the share of Hamza Sultan’s —
son ‘Abdu’l-latif in 908 AH. when Shaibani defeated the Khans
near Akhsi. Now that her half-brother had defeated her
husband’s family, she returned to her own people (f. 9). a


918 AH.—MARCH 19ru 1512 ro MARCH 9ru 1513 AD.
a. Return of the Aizbegs.


Emboldened by the departure of the Persian troops, the
Aizbegs, in the spring of the year, came out of Turkistan, their
main attack being directed on Tashkint, then held for Babur.* —
‘Ubaid Khan moved for Bukhara. He had prefaced his march
by vowing that, if successful, he would thenceforth strictly
observe Musalman Law. The vow was made in Hazrat Turkistan
at the shrine of Khwaja Ahmad Yasawz, a saint revered in
Central Asia through many centuries; he had died about
1120 AD.; Timir had made pilgrimage to his tomb, in 1397 AD.,
and then had founded the mosque still dominating the town, 2
still the pilgrim’s land-mark.? ‘Ubaid’s vow, like Babur’s of —
933 AH., was one of return to obedience. Both men took oathin —
the Ghazi’s mood, Babur's set against the Hindi whom: he saw
as a heathen, ‘Ubaid’s set against Babur whom he saw as a heretic.


* It was held by Ahmad-i-qasim Kohbur and is referred to on f. 234, as one
occasion of those in which Dost Beg distinguished himself.

* Schuyler’s 7urkistan has a good account and picture of the mosque. ‘“Ubaid’s
vow is referred to in my earlier mention of the Saakwl-muluk. It may be noted
here that this MS. supports the spelling Baéur by making the second syllable rhyme
to Jur, as against the form Basar.


914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 357


b. Babur’s defeat at Kul-t-maltk.

In Safar (April-May) ‘Ubaid moved swiftly down and attacked
the Bukhara neighbourhood. Babur went from Samarkand to
meet him. Several details of what followed, not given by
Haidar and, in one particular, contradicting him, are given by
Khwand-amir. The statement in which the two historians
contradict one another is Haidar’s that ‘Ubaid had 3000 men
only, Babur 40,000. Several considerations give to Khwand-
amir’s opposed statement that Babur’s force was small, the
semblance of being nearer the fact. Haidar, it may be said, did
not go out on this campaign; he was ill in Samarkand and
continued ill there for some time ; Khwand-amir’s details have
the well-informed air of things learned at first-hand, perhaps
from some-one in Hindistan after 934 AH.

Matters which make against Babur’s having a large effective
force at Kul-i-malik, and favour Khwand-amir’s statement about
the affair are these :—‘Ubaid must have formed some estimate
of what he had to meet, and he brought 3000 men. Where
could Babur have obtained 40,000 men worth reckoning in
a fight? In several times of crisis his own immediate and ever-
faithful troop is put at 500; as his cause was now unpopular,
local accretions may have been few. Some Mughils from Merv
and from Kabul were near Samarkand (T.R. pp. 263, 265);
- most were with Sa‘id in Andijan ; but however many Mughils
may have been in his neighbourhood, none could be counted on
as resolute for his success. If too, he had had more than a
small effective force, would he not have tried to hold Samarkand
with the remnant of defeat until Persian help arrived? All
things considered, there is ground for accepting Khwand-amir’s
statement that Babur met ‘Ubaid with a small force.

Following his account therefore :—Babur in his excess of
daring, marched to put the Aizbeg down with a small force
only, against the advice of the prudent, of whom Muhammad
Mazid Tarkhan was one, who all said it was wrong to go out
unprepared and without reinforcement. Paying them no atten-
tion, Babur marched for Bukhara, was rendered still more daring
by news had when he neared it, that the enemy had retired
some stages, and followed him up almost to his camp. ‘Ubaid was


358 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE " ae
in great force; many Aizbegs perished but, in the end, they
were victors and Babur was compelled to take refuge in Bukhara. —
The encounter took place near Kul-i-malik (King’s-lake) in
Safar 918 AH. (April-May 1512 AD.). ‘


c. Babur leaves Samarkand.


It was not possible to maintain a footing in Samarkand ;
Babur therefore collected his family and train' and betook him-
self to Hisar. There went with him on this expedition Mahim
and her children Humayiin, Mihr-jahan and Barbil,—the
motherless Ma‘stima,—Gul-rukh with her son Kamran (Gul-
badan f. 7). I have not found any account of his route ; Haidar
gives no details about the journey ; he did not travel with
Babur, being still invalided in Samarkand. Perhaps the absence
of information is a sign that the Aiizbegs had not yet appeared
on the direct road for Hisar. A local tradition however would
make Babur go round through Farghana. He certainly might
have gone into Farghana hoping to co-operate with Sa‘id Khan;
Tashkint was still holding out under Ahmad-i-qasim Kohdur
and it is clear that all activity in Babur’s force had not been
quenched because during the Tashkint siege, Dost Beg broke
through the enemy’s ranks and made his way into the town.
Sairam held out longer than Tashkint. Of any such move by
Babur into Andijan the only hint received is given by what may
be a mere legend.?

* aivig. Babur refers to this exodus on f. 126 when writing of Daulat-sultan
Khanim.

? It is one recorded with some variation, in Niyaz Muhammad AKhukandt’s Tarikh-t-
shihrukhi (Kazan, 1885) and Nalivkine’s Khdnate of Khokand (p. 63). It says that
when Babur in 918 AH. (1512 AD.) left Samarkand after defeat by the Aiizbegs, one
of his wives, Sayyida Afaq who accompanied him in his flight, gave birth to a son in
the desert which lies between Khujand and Kand-i-badam ; that Babur, not daring
to tarry and the infant being too young to make the impending journey, left it under
some bushes with his own girdle round it in which were things of price ; that the
child was found by local people and in allusion to the valuables amongst which it lay,
called Altiin bishik (golden cradle) ; that it received other names and was best known
in later life as Khudayan Sultan. He is said to have spent most of his life in Akhsi;
to have had a son Tingri-yar ; and to have died in 952 AH. (1545 AD.). His grandson
Yar-i-muhammad is said to have gone to India to relations who was descendants of
Babur (JASB 1905 p. 137 H. Beveridge’s art. 7he Emperor Babur). What is against
the truth of this tradition is that Gul-badan mentions no such wife as Sayyida Afaq.
Mahim however seems to have belonged to a religious family, might therefore be
styled Sayyida, and, as Babur mentions (f. 220), had several children who did not live


(a child left as this infant was, might if not heard of, be supposed dead). There is
this opening allowed for considering the tradition.


mee
ak ea


- 914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 359
a. Babur in Hisar.


After experiencing such gains and such losses, Babur was
still under 30 years of age.

The Atizbegs, after his departure, re-occupied Bukhara and
Samarkand without harm done to the towns-people, and a few
weeks later, in Jumada I (July-August) followed him to Hisar.
Meantime he with Mirza Khan’s help, had so closed the streets
of the town by massive earth-works that the sultans were con-
vinced its defenders were ready to spend the last drop of their
blood in holding it, and therefore retired without attack.t Some
sources give as their reason for retirement that Babur had been
reinforced from Balkh ; Bairam Beg, it is true, had sent a force
but one of 300 men only ; so few cannot have alarmed except
as the harbinger of more. Greater precision as to dates would
shew whether they can have heard of Najm Sdani’s army
advancing by way of Balkh.


e. Qarshi and Ghaj-davan.


Meantime Najm Sani, having with him some 11,000 men,
had started on his corrective mission against Babur. When he
reached the Khurdasan frontier, he heard of the defeat at Kul-i-
malik and the flight to Hisar, gathered other troops from Harat
and elsewhere, and advanced to Balkh. He stayed there for
20 days with Bairam Beg, perhaps occupied, in part, by com-
munications with the Shah and Babur. From the latter repeated
request for help is said to have come; help was given, some
sources say without the Shah’s permission. A rendezvous was
fixed, Najm Sani marched to Tirmiz, there crossed the Ami
and in Rajab (Sep.—Oct.) encamped near the Darband-i-ahanin.
On Babur’s approach through the Chak-chaq pass, he paid him
the civility of going several siti out from his camp to give him
honouring reception.

Advancing thence for Bukhara, the combined armies took
Khuzar and moved on to Qarshi. This town Babur wished to
pass by, as it had been passed by on his previous march for
Bukhara ; each time perhaps he wished to spare its people,


* Babur refers to this on f. 265.


360 -TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


formerly his subjects, whom he desired to rule again, an
are reputed to have been mostly his fellow Turks. Najm Sani
refused to pass on; he said Qarshi must be taken because it
was ‘Ubaidu’l-lah Khan’ s nest; in it was “‘Ubaid’s uncle Shaikhim q
Mirza ; it was captured ; the Aiizbeg garrison was put to the —
sword ang spite of Babur’s earnest entreaties, all the towns-
people, 15,000 persons it is said, down to the “suckling anc
decrepit”, were massacred. Amongst the victims was Banat
who happened to be within it. This action roused the utmost
anger against Najm Sani; it disgusted Babur, not only through ~
its merciless slaughter but because it made clear the disregard _
in which he was held by his magnificent fellow-general. 4

From murdered Qarshi Najm Sani advanced for Bukhara.
On getting within a few miles of it, he heard that an Atizbeg
force was approaching under Timi and Abi-sa‘d, presumably
from Samarkand therefore. He sent Bairam Beg to attack them; __
they drew off to the north and threw themselves into Ghaj-davan,
the combined armies following them. This move placed Najm
Sani across the Zar-afshan, on the border of the desert with
which the Aiizbegs were familiar, and with ‘Ubaid on his flank
in Bukhara.

As to what followed the sources vary ; they are brief; they
differ less in statement of the same occurrence than in their —
choice of details to record ; as Mr. Erskine observes their varying
stories are not incompatible. Their widest difference is a state-
ment of time but the two periods named, one a few days, the
other four months, may not be meant to apply to the same
event. Four months the siege is said to have lasted ; this could
not have been said if it had been a few days only. The siege
seems to have been of some duration.

At first there were minor engagements, ending with varying
success ; provisions and provender became scarce ; Najm Sani’s
officers urged retirement, so too did Babur. He would listen to
none of them. At length ‘Ubaid Khan rode out from Bukhara
at the head of excellent troops; he joined the Ghaj-davan
garrison and the united Aizbegs posted themselves in the
suburbs where walled lanes and gardens narrowed the field and
lessened Najm Sani’s advantage in numbers. On Tuesday


es Ta sh ey ee ee aT
See Th OSS Se eh, Seer Me APR Se Be rete Sey


914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 361


Ramzan 3rd (Nov. 12th)‘ a battle was fought in which his army
was routed and he himself slain.


J. Babur and Var-t-ahmad Najm Sani.

Some writers say that Najm Sani’s men did not fight well ;
it must be remembered that they may have been weakened by
privation and that they had wished to retire. Of Babur it is
said that he, who was the reserve, did not fight at all; it is
difficult to see good cause why, under all the circumstances, he
should risk the loss of his men. It seems likely that Haidar’s
strong language about this defeat would suit Babur’s temper
also. “The victorious breezes of Islam overturned the banners
of the schismatics. . . . Most of them perished on the field ;
the rents made by the sword at Qarshi were sewn up at Ghaj-
davan by the arrow-stitches of vengeance. Najm Sani and all
the Turkman amirs were sent to hell.”

The belief that Babur had failed Najm Sani persisted at the
Persian Court, for his inaction was made a reproach to his son
Huméayin in 951 AH. (1544 AD.), when Humayin was a refugee
with Isma‘il’s son Tahmasp. Badayini tells a story which, with
great inaccuracy of name and place, represents the view taken
at that time. The part of the anecdote pertinent here is that
Babur on the eve of the battle at Ghaj-davan, shot an arrow
into the Aiizbeg camp which carried the following couplet,
‘expressive of: his ill-will to the Shah and perhaps also of his
rejection of the Shi‘a guise he himself had worn.


I made the Shah’s Najm road-stuff for the Aiizbegs ;
If fault has been mine, I have now cleansed the road.?


g. The Mughiils attack Babur.

On his second return to Hisar Babur was subjected to great
danger by a sudden attack made upon him by the Mughils where
he lay at night in his camp outside the town. Firishta says, but
without particulars of their offence, that Babur had reproached


* The Lubbwt-tawarikh would fix Ramzan 7th.

2 Mr. Erskine’s quotation of the Persian original of the couplet differs from that
which I have translated (History of India ii, 326; Tarikh-i-badayuni Bib. Ind. ed.
f. 444). Perhaps in the latter a pun is made on Najm as the leader’s name and as
meaning fortune ; if so it points the more directly at the Shah. The second line is
quoted by Badayiini on his f. 362 also.


362 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


‘
them for their misconduct ; the absence of detail connecting the
affair with the defeat just sustained, leads to the supposition
that their misdeeds were a part of the tyranny over the country-
people punished later by ‘Ubaidu’l-lah Khan. Roused from his ~
sleep by the noise of his guards’ resistance to the Mughil attack, _
Babur escaped with difficulty and without a single attendant!
into the fort. The conspirators plundered his camp and with-
drew to Qara-tigin. He was in no position to oppose them, left
a few men in Hisar and went to Mirza Khan in Qindiz. a

After he left, Hisar endured a desolating famine, a phenomenal
snowfall and the ravages of the Mughils. “‘Ubaid Khan avenged ~
Babur on the horde; hearing of their excesses, he encamped -
outside the position they had taken up in Wakhsh defended by _
river, hills and snow, waited till a road thawed, then fell upon
them and avenged the year’s misery they had inflicted on the —
Hisaris. Haidar says of them that it was their villainy lost q
Hisar to Babur and gained it for the Aiizbeg.? |

These Mughils had for chiefs men who when Sa‘id went to
Andijan, elected to stay with Babur. One of the three named
by Haidar was Ayib Begchik. He repented his disloyalty;
when he lay dying some two years later (920 AH.) in Yangi- ~
hisar, he told Sa‘id Khan who visited him, that what was —
“lacerating his bowels and killing him with remorse”, was his
faithlessness to Babur in Hisar, the oath he had broken at the q
instigation of those “hogs and bears”, the Mughil chiefs —
CTR. p..31'5). ;

In this year but before the Mughil treachery to Babur, Haidar
left him, starting in Rajab (Sep.—Oct.) to Sa‘td in Andijan and
thus making a beginning of his 19 years spell of service.


919 AH.—MARCH 91TH 1513 To FEB. 26TH 1514 AD.


Babur may have spent this year in Khishm (HLS. iii, 372).
During two or three months of it, he had one of the Shah’s


* Some translators make Babur go ‘‘ naked” into the fort but, on his own authority
(f. 1065), it seems safer to understand what others say, that he went stripped of
attendance, because it was always his habit even in times of peace to lie down in his
tunic ; much more would he have done so at such a crisis of his affairs as this of his
flight to Hisar.

2 Haidar gives a graphic account of the misconduct of the horde and of their
punishment (T.R. p. 261-3).


- 914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 363


retainers in his service, Khwaja Kamalu’d-din Mahmid, who
had fled from Ghaj-davan to Balkh, heard there that the Balkhis
favoured an Aizbeg chief whose coming was announced, and
therefore went to Babur. In Jumada II (August), hearing that
the Aiizbeg sultan had left Balkh, he returned there but was
not admitted because the Balkhis feared reprisals for their
welcome to the Aizbeg, a fear which may indicate that he had
taken some considerable reinforcement to Babur. He went on
into Khurasan and was there killed ; Balkh was recaptured for
the Shah by Deo Sultan, a removal from Aizbeg possession
which helps to explain how Babur came to be there in 923 AH.


920 AH.—FEB. 26TH 1514 To FEB. 15TH 1515 AD.


Haidar writes of Babur as though he were in Qindiz this
year (TR. p. 263), says that he suffered the greatest misery and
want, bore it with his accustomed courtesy and patience but, at
last, despairing of success in recovering Hisar, went back to
Kabul. Now it seems to be that he made the stay in Khwast to
which he refers later (f. 2416) and during which his daughter
Gul-rang was born, as Gul-badan’s chronicle allows known.

It was at the end of the year, after the privation of winter
therefore, that he reached Kabul. When he re-occupied Samar-
kand in 917 AH., he had given Kabul to his half-brother Nasir
Mirza; the Mirza received him now with warm welcome and
_ protestations of devotion and respect, spoke of having guarded
Kabul for him and asked permission to return to his own old fief
Ghazni. His behaviour made a deep impression on Babur ; it
would be felt as a humane touch on the sore of failure.


921 AH.—FEB. 15TH 1515 To FEB. 5TH 1516 AD.
a. Rebellion of chiefs tn Ghazni.


Nasir Mirza died shortly after (dar haman ayyam) his return
to Ghazni. Disputes then arose amongst the various com-
manders who were in Ghazni; Sherim Taghai was one of them
and the main strength of the tumult was given by the Mughils.
Many others were however involved in it, even such an old
servant as Baba of Pashaghar taking part (f. 2340; T.R. p. 356).
Haidar did not know precisely the cause of the dispute, or shew


25


364 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


why it should have turned against Babur, since he attribute
it to possession taken by Satan of the brains of the chiefs a dy
a consequent access of vain-glory and wickedness. Possibly —
some question of succession to Nasir arose. Dost Beg dis-
tinguished himself in the regular battle which ensued; Qasim
Beg’s son Qambar-i-‘ali hurried down from Qindiz and also did ’
his good part to win it for Babur. Many of the rioters were
killed, others fled to Kashghar. Sherim Taghai was one of the
latter; as Sa‘id Khan gave him no welcome, he could not stay
there; he fell back on the much injured Babur who, says
Haidar, showed him his usual benevolence, turned his eyes from
his offences and looked only at his past services until he died
shortly afterwards (T.R. p. 357)."


' 922 AH.—FEB. 5TH 1516 To JAN. 24TH 1517 AD.


This year may have been spent in and near Kabul in the
quiet promoted by the dispersion of the Mughils.

In this year was born Babur’s son Muhammad known as
‘Askari from his being born in camp. He was the son of
Gulrukh Begchik and full-brother of Kamran.


923 AH.—JAN. 24TH 1517 To JAN. 13TH 1518 AD.


a. Babur visits Balkh.


Khwand-amir is the authority for the little that is known of
Babur’s action in this year (HLS. iii, 367 e¢ seg.). It is connected
with the doings of Badi‘u’z-zaman Bai-gara’s son Muhammad-i-
zaman. This Mirza had had great wanderings, during a part
of which Khwand-amir was with him. In 920 AH. he was in
Shah Isma‘ll’s service and in Balkh, but was not able to keep it.
Babur invited him to Kabul,—the date of invitation will have
been later therefore than Babur’s return there at the end of
920 AH. The Mirza was on his way but was dissuaded from
going into Kabul by Mahdi Khwaja and went instead into


* One of the mutineers named as in this affair (T.R. p. 257) was Sl. Quli chanag,
a circumstance attracting attention by its bearing on the cause of the /acunae in the
Babur-nama, inasmuch as Babur, writing at the end of his life, expresses (f. 65) his.
intention to tell of this man’s future misdeeds. These misdeeds may have been also
at Hisar and in the attack there made on Babur; they are known from Haidar to
have been done at Ghazni; both times fall within this present gap. Hence it is clear
that Babur meant to write of the events falling in the gap of 914 AH. onwards.


914 To 925 AH.—1508 To 1519 AD. 365


Ghurjistan. Babur was angered by his non-arrival and pursued
him in order to punish him but did not succeed in reaching
Ghurjistan and went back to Kabul by way of Firiiz-koh and
Ghir. The Mirza was captured eventually and sent to Kabul.
Babur treated him with kindness, after a few months gave him
his daughter Ma‘siima in marriage, and sent him to Balkh. He
appears to have been still in Balkh when Khwand-amir was
writing of the above occurrences in 929 AH. The marriage took
place either at the end of 923 or beginning of 924 AH. The
Mirza was then 21, Ma‘simag; she almost certainly did not then
go to Balkh. At some time in 923 AH. Babur is said by Khwand-
amir to have visited that town."


b, Attempt on Qandahar.


In this year Babur marched for Qandahar but the move
~ ended peacefully, because a way was opened for gifts and terms
by an illness which befell him when he was near the town.

The TZarikh-i-sind gives what purports to be Shah Beg’s
explanation of Babur’s repeated attempts on Qandahar. He
said these had been made and would be made because Babur
had not forgiven Mugim for taking Kabul 14 years earlier from
the Timirid ‘Abdu’r-razzaq ; that this had brought him to
Qandahar in 913 AH., this had made him then take away Mah-
chuchak, Mugim’s daughter; that there were now (923 AH.)
many unemployed Mirzas in Kabul for whom posts could not
be found in regions where the Persians and Aiuzbegs were
dominant; that an outlet for their ambitions and for Babur’s
own would be sought against the weaker opponent he himself was.

Babur’s decision to attack in this year is said to have been
taken while Shah Beg was still a prisoner of Shah Isma‘ll in the
Harat country; he must have been released meantime by the
admirable patience of his slave Sambhal.


924 AH.—JAN. 13TH 1518 To JAN. 3RD 1519 AD.
In this year Shah Beg’s son Shah Hasan came to Babur after
quarrel with his father. He stayed some two years, and during


= In 925 AH. (ff. 227 and 238) mention is made of courtesies exchanged between
Babur and Muhammad-i-zaman in Balkh. The Mirza was with Babur later on in
Hindistan.


which resulted in possession on Shawwal 13th 928 AH. (Sep. oul
1522 AD.).2 a

In this year began the campaign in the north-east territorie ne
of Kabul, an account of which is carried on in the diary of
925 AH. It would seem that in the present year Chaghan-sarai _
was captured, and also the fortress at the head of the valley of —
Baba-qara, belonging to Haidar-i-‘ali Bajauri (f. 2166). q

™ Mir Ma‘siim’s Zarikh-2-sind is the chief authority for Babur’s action afters 5
913 AH. against Shah Beg in Qandahar; its translation, made in 1846 by Major Malet,


shews some manifestly wrong dates ; ney appear also in the B.M. MS. of the work
 f, 2164 and note to ‘‘ Monday’


925 AH.—JAN. 3rp to DEC. 28rd 1519 AD.!


(a. Babur takes the fort of Bajaur.)


(Jan. 3rd) On Monday? the first day of the month of
Muharram, there was a violent earthquake in the lower part of
the dale (julga) of Chandawal,3 which lasted nearly half an
astronomical hour.

(Jan. 4th) Marching at dawn from that camp with the
intention of attacking the fort of Bajaur,s we dismounted near
it and sent a trusty man of the Dilazak 5 Afghans to advise its


* Elph. MS. f. 1734; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 178 and 217 f. 149; Mems, p. 246. The
whole of the Hijra year is included in 1519 Ap. (Erskine). What follows here and
completes the Kabul section of the Babur-nama is a diary of a little over 13 months’
length, supplemented by matter of later entry. The product has the character of
a draft, awaiting revision to harmonize it in style and, partly, in topic with the com-
posed narrative that breaks off under 914 AH.; for the diary, written some II years
earlier than that composed narrative, varies, as it would be expected @ friord to vary,
in style and topic from the terse, lucid and idiomatic output of Babur’s literary
maturity. A good many obscure words and phrases in it, several new from Babur’s
pen, have opposed difficulty to scribes and translators. Interesting as such minutiae
are to a close observer of Turki and of Babur’s diction, comment on all would be
tedious ; a few will be found noted, as also will such details as fix the date of entry
for supplementary matter.

? Here Mr. Erskine notes that Dr. Leyden’s translation begins again ; it broke off
on f. 180, and finally ends on f. 2236.

3 This name is often found transliterated as Chandul or [mod.] Jandul but the
Hai. MS. supports Raverty’s opinion that Chandawal is correct.

The year 925 AH. opens with Babur far from Kabul and east of the Khahr (fort)
he is about to attack. Afghan and other sources allow surmise of his route to that
position; he may have come down into the Chandawal-valley, first, from taking
Chaghan-sarai (f. 124, f. 134 and n.), and, secondly, from taking the Gibri stronghold
of Haidar-i-‘ali Bayauri which stood at the head of the Baba Qara-valley. The latter
surmise is supported by the romantic tales of Afghan chroniclers which at this date
bring into history Babur’s Afghan wife, Bibi Mubaraka (f. 220d and note ; Mems.
p- 250n.; and Appendix K, Az Afghan legend). (It must be observed here that
R.’s Notes (pp. 117, 128) confuse the two sieges, vzz. of the Gibri fort in 924 AH. and
of the Khahr of Bajaur in 925 AH.)

4 Raverty lays stress on the circumstance that the fort Babur now attacks has never
been known as Bajaur, but always simply as Khahr, the fort (the Arabic name for the
place being, he says, plain Shahr); just as the main stream is called simply Rid
(the torrent). The name Khahr is still used, as modern maps shew. There are
indeed two neighbouring places known simply as Khahr (Fort), z.e. one at the mouth
of the ‘* Mahmand-valley” of modern campaigns, the other near the Malakand
(Fincastle’s map).

5 This word the Hai. MS. writes, Jasszm, Dilah-zak.


‘ol. 217.


368 KABUL


sultan ' and people to take up a position of service (qullagy 2 and
surrender the fort. Not accepting this counsel, that stupid and —
ill-fated band sent back a wild answer, where-upon the army —
was ordered to make ready mantelets, ladders and other a
appliances for taking a fort. For this purpose a day’s (Jan. 5th)
halt was made on that same ground. |

( Jan. 6th) On Thursday the 4th of Muharram, orders were _
given that the army should put on mail, arm and get to horse ;?
that the left wing should move swiftly to the upper side of the
fort, cross the water at the water-entry,3 and dismount on the
north side of the fort; that the centre, not taking the way
across the water, should dismount in the rough, up-and-down
land to the north-west of the fort; and that the right should
dismount to the west of the lower gate. While the begs of the
left under Dost Beg were dismounting, after crossing the water,
a hundred to a hundred and fifty men on foot came out of the __
fort, shooting arrows. The begs, shooting in their turn,
advanced till they had forced those men back to the foot of the
ramparts, Mulla ‘Abdu’l-malik of Khwast, like a madman,‘ going
up right under them on his horse. There and then the fort
would have been taken if the ladders and mantelets had been
ready, and if it had not been so late in the day. Mulla Tirik-
i-‘ali5 and a servant of Tingri-birdi crossed swords with the
enemy; each overcame his man, cut off and brought in his
head ; for this each was promised a reward.

As the Bajauris had never before seen matchlocks (tufang)
they at first took no care about them, indeed they made fun
when they heard the report and answered it by unseemly


* Either Haidar-i-‘ali himself or his nephew, the latter more probably, since no
name is mentioned.

* Looking at the position assigned by maps to Khahr, in the @#-ad of the Charmanga-
water and the Rid of Bajaur, it may be that Babur’s left moved along the east bank
of the first-named stream and crossed it into the d#-a5, while his centre went direct
to its post, along the west side of the fort.

3 si-kirishi ; to interpret which needs local knowledge ; it might mean where water
entered the fort, or where water disembogued from narrows, or, perhaps, where
water is entered for a ford. (The verb 4ivmak occurs on f. 1546 and f. 227 to describe
water coming down in spate. )

4 diwainawar, perhaps a jest on a sobriquet earned before this exploit, perhaps the
cause of the man’s later sobriquet diwamna (f. 2458).

5 Text, t:r:k, read by Erskine and de Courteille as Turk; it might however be
a Turki component in Jan-i-‘ali or Muhibb-i-‘ali. (Cf. Zenker 5.2. ¢2rzh.)


Ree


925 AH.—JAN. 3rD TO DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 369


gestures. On that day* Ustad ‘Ali-quli shot at and brought
down five men with his matchlock; Wali the Treasurer, for
his part, brought down two; other matchlockmen were also
very active in firing and did well, shooting through shield,
through cuirass, through kusari,? and bringing down one man
after another. Perhaps 7, 8, or 10 Bajauris had fallen to the
matchlock-fire (garb) before night. After that it so became
that not a head could be put out because of the fire. The order
was given, “It is night ; let the army retire, and at dawn, if the
appliances are ready, let them swarm up into the fort.”

(Jan. 7th) At the first dawn of light (/arz wag?) on Friday
the 5th of Muharram, orders were given that, when the battle-
nagarets had sounded, the army should advance, each man from
his place to his appointed post ( yér/tk yirdin) and should swarm
up. The left and centre advanced from their ground with
mantelets in place all along their lines, fixed their ladders, and
swarmed up them. The whole left hand of the centre, under
Khalifa, Shah Hasan Arghin and Yisuf’s Ahmad, was ordered
to reinforce the left wing. Dost Beg’s men went forward to the
foot of the north-eastern tower of the fort, and busied themselves
in undermining and bringing it down. Ustad ‘Ali-quli was
there also; he shot very well on that day with his matchlock, and
he twice fired off the fivzmgi.3_ Wali the Treasurer also brought
down a man with his matchlock. Malik ‘Ali gutnz4 was first
up a ladder of all the men from the left hand of the centre,


* aushil gini, which contrasts with the frequent au#shba gini (this same day,
today) of manifestly diary entries ; it may indicate that the full account of the siege
is a later supplement.

? This puzzling word might mean cow-horn (fau-sara#) and stand for the common
horn trumpet. Erskine and de Courteille have read it as gau-sar, the first explaining
it as cow-head, surmised to be a protection for matchlockmen when loading; the
second, as justaucorps de cuzy, That the word is baffling is shewn by its omission in
IO. 215 (f. 1784), in 217 (f. 1494) and in Muh. Shirdazi’s lith, ed. (p. 137).

3 or farangi. Much has been written concerning the early use of gun-powder in the
East. There is, however, no well-authenticated fact to prove the existence of anything
like artillery there, till it was introduced from Europe. Babur here, and in other
places (f. 267) calls his larger ordnance Firingi, a proof that they were then regarded
as owing their origin to Europe. The Turks, in consequence of their constant inter-
course with the nations of the West, have always excelled all the other Orientals in
the use of artillery ; and, when heavy cannon were first used in India, Europeans or
Turks were engaged to serve them (Erskine). It is owing no doubt to the preceding
gap in his writings that we are deprived of Babur’s account of his own introduction
to fire-arms. See E. & D.’s History of India, vi, Appendix Ox the early use of gun-
powder in India.

4 var. gutbi, guchini.


Fol. 2174.


ol, 218.


1. 2184,


370 KABUL od


and there was busy with fight and blow. At the post of the
centre, Muh. ‘Ali Jang-jang* and his younger brother Nau-roz —
got up, each by a different ladder, and made lance and sword to —
touch. Baba the waiting man (yasdwa/), getting up by another
ladder, occupied himself in breaking down the fort-wall with his
axe. Most of our braves went well forward, shooting off dense
flights of arrows and not letting the enemy put out a head;
others made themselves desperately busy in breaching and
pulling down the fort, caring naught for the enemy’s fight and
blow, giving no eye to his arrows and stones. By breakfast-time
Dost Beg’s men had undermined and breached the north-eastern
tower, got in and put the foe to flight. The men of the centre
got in up the ladders by the same time, but those (a@z/) others
were first (awwal?) in. By the favour. and pleasure of the
High God, this strong and mighty fort was taken in two or
three astronomical hours! Matching the fort were the utter
struggle and effort of our braves; distinguish themselves they _
did, and won the name and fame of heroes.

As the Bajauris were rebels and at enmity with the people
of Islam, and as, by reason of the heathenish and hostile customs
prevailing in their midst, the very name of Islam was rooted out
from their tribe, they were put to general massacre and their
wives and children were made captive. At a guess more than
3000 men went to their death; as the fight did not reach to the
eastern side of the fort, a few got away there.

The fort taken, we entered and inspected it. On the walls,
in houses, streets and alleys, the dead lay, in what numbers!
Comers and goers to and fro were passing over the bodies.
Returning from our inspection, we sat down in the Bajaur
sultan’s residence. The country of Bajaur we bestowed on
Khwaja Kalan,3 assigning a large number of braves to reinforce
him. At the Evening Prayer we went back to camp.


* This sobriquet might mean ‘‘ ever a fighter”, or an “‘argle-bargler ”, or a brass
shilling (Zenker), or (if written jzmg-jimg) that the man was visaged like the bearded
reeding (Scully in Shaw’s Vocabulary). The Zadsagat-c-akbari includes a Mirak Khan
Jang-jang in its list of Akbar’s Commanders.

2 ghil-din (awwal) ail girghan-gha chigti. I suggest to supply awwal, first, on
the warrant of Babur’s later statement (f. 2346) that Dost was first in.

3 He was a son of Maulana Muh. Sadr, one of the chief men of ‘Umar-shaikh M.’s
Court ; he had six brothers, all of whom spent their lives in Babur’s service, to whom,
if we may believe Abi’l-fazl, they were distantly related (Erskine).


(2. Movements in Bajaur.)


(Jan. 8th) Marching at dawn (Muh. 6th), we dismounted by
the spring* of Baba Qara in the dale of Bajaur. At Khwaja
Kalan’s request the prisoners remaining were pardoned their
offences, reunited to their wives and children, and given leave to
go, but several sultans and of the most stubborn were made to
reach their doom of death. Some heads of sultans and of others
were sent to Kabul with the news of success; some also to
Badakhshan, Qindiz and Balkh with the letters-of-victory.

Shah Mansir Yisuf-za@z,—he was with us as an envoy from
his tribe,—* was an eye-witness of the victory and general
massacre. We allowed him to leave after putting a coat (¢éz)
on him and after writing orders with threats to the Yisuf-zai.

(Jan. rrth) With mind easy about the important affairs of
the Bajaur fort, we marched, on Tuesday the 9th of Muharram,
one kuroh (2m.) down the dale of Bajaur and ordered that a
tower of heads should be set up on the rising-ground.

( Jan. 12th) On Wednesday the 10th of Muharram, we rode
out to visit the Bajaur fort. There was a wine-party in Khwaja
Kalan’s house,3 several goat-skins of wine having been brought


925 AH.—JAN. 38RD TO DEC, 23RD 1519 AD. © 371


* Babur now returns towards the east, down the Rid. The chashma by which he
encamped, would seem to be near the mouth of the valley of Baba Qara, one 30 miles
long ; it may have been, anglicé, a spring [not that of the main stream of the long
valley], but the word may be used as it seems to be of the water supplying the
Bagh-i-safa (f. 224), z.e. to denote the first considerable gathering-place of small
head-waters. It will be observed a few lines further on that this same valley seems
to be meant by ‘‘ Khwaja Khizr ”.

? He will have joined Babur previous to Muharram 925 AH.

3 This statement, the first we have, that Babur has broken Musalman Law against
stimulants (f. 49 and n.), is followed by many others more explicit, jotting down
where and what and sometimes why he drank, in a way which arrests attention and
asks some other explanation than that it is an unabashed record of conviviality such
conceivably as a non-Musalman might write. Babur is now 37 years old ; he had
obeyed the Law till past early manhood ; he wished to return to obedience at 40;
he frequently mentions his lapses by a word which can be translated as ‘‘ commitment
of sin” (zv¢#ga@b) ; one gathers that he did not at any time disobey with easy conscience.
Does it explain his singular record,—one made in what amongst ourselves would be
regarded as a private diary,—that his sins were created by Law? Had hea balance
of reparation in his thoughts ? :

Detaching into their separate class as excesses, all his instances of confessed
drunkenness, there remains much in his record which, seen from a non-Musalman
point of view, is venial ; ¢.g. his swb#hi appears to be the ‘‘ morning” of the Scot,
the Morgen-trank of the Teuton; his afternoon cup, in the open air usually, may
have been no worse than the sober glass of beer or local wine of modern Continental
Europe. Many of these legal sins of his record were interludes in the day’s long ride,
stirrup-cups some of them, all in a period of strenuous physical activity. Many of his


‘ol. 219.


372 KABUL


down by KaAfirs neighbouring on Bajaur. All wine and f
had in Bajaur comes from adjacent parts of Kafiristan. a a

(Jan. 13th) We spent the night there and after inspecting the
towers and ramparts of the fort early in the morning (Muh. 11th),
I mounted and went back to camp. Bs

(Jan. 14th) Marching at dawn (Muh. 12th), we dismounted ony
the bank of the Khwaja Khizr torrent."

(Jan. 15th) Marching thence, we dismounted (Muh. 13th) ont
the bank of the Chandawal torrent. Here all those inscribed in
the Bajaur reinforcement, were ordered to leave.

(Jan. 16th) On Sunday the 14th of Muharram,a standard was
bestowed on Khwaja Kalan and leave given him for Bajaur. —
A few days after I had let him go, the following little verse
having come into my head, it was written down and sent to
him :—?


Not such the pact and bargain betwixt my friend and me,
At length the tooth of parting, unpacted grief for me !
Against caprice of Fortune, what weapons (chara) arm the man?
At length by force of arms (4a aur) my friend is snatched from me !


(Jan. roth) On Wednesday the 17th of Muharram, Sl. ‘Ala’u’d-
din of Sawad, the rival (su‘ar¢z) of Sl. Wais of Sawad,3 came
and waited on me.


records are collective and are phrased impersonally ; they mention that there was
drinking, drunkenness even, but they give details sometimes such as only a sober
observer could include.

Babur names a few men as drunkards, a few as entirely obedient ; most of his men
seem not to have obeyed the Law and may have been “‘ temperate drinkers”; they
effected work, Babur amongst them, which habitual drunkards could not have com-
passed. Spite of all he writes of his worst excesses, it must be just to remember his
Musalman conscience, and also the distorting power of a fictitious sin. Though he
broke the law binding all men against excess, and this on several confessed occasions,
his rule may have been no worse than that of the ordinarily temperate Western. It
cannot but lighten judgment that his recorded lapses from Law were often prompted
by the bounty and splendour of Nature ; were committed amidst the falling petals of
fruit-blossom, the flaming fire of autumn leaves, where the eye rested on the arghwan
or the orange grove, the coloured harvest of corn or vine.

* As Mr. Erskine observes, there seems to be no valley except that of Baba Qara,
between the Khahr and the Chandawal-valley ; ‘‘ Khwaja Khizr” and “‘ Baba Qara”
may be one and the same valley.

* Time and ingenuity would be needed to bring over into English all the quips of
this verse. The most obvious pun is, of course, that on Bajaur as the compelling
cause (a jaur) of the parting; others may be meant on gusid and gasid, on sasid
and chara. The verse would provide the holiday amusement of extracting from it
two justifiable translations. a

3 His possessions extended from the river of Sawad to Baramiila; he was expelled
from them by the Yisuf-zai (Erskine).


925 AH.—JAN. 3rD To DEC, 23RD 1519 AD. 373


(Jan. 20th) On Thursday the 18th of the month, we hunted
the hill between Bajaur and Chandawal.t There the daghi-
maral? have become quite black, except for the tail which is of
another colour; lower down, in Hindistan, they seem to become
black all over.3 Today a s@rig-qiish + was taken ; that was black
all over, its very eyes being black! Today an eagle (durkit) 5
took a deer (7h).

Corn being somewhat scarce in the army, we went into the
Kahraj-valley, and took some. Fol. 2190.

(Jan. 21st) On Friday (Muh. roth) we marched for Sawad,
with the intention of attacking the Yiisuf-zai Afghans, and
dismounted in between © the water of Panj-kiira and the united
waters of Chandawal and Bajaur. Shah Manstr Yasuf-zai had
brought a few well-flavoured and quite intoxicating confections
(kamali); making one of them into three, I ate one portion,
Gadai Taghai another, ‘Abdu’l-lah the librarian another. It
produced remarkable intoxication; so much so that at the
Evening Prayer when the begs gathered for counsel, I was not
able to go out. A strange thing it was! If in these days7
I ate the whole of such a confection, I doubt if it would produce
half as much intoxication.


(c. An impost laid on Kahraj.)


(Jan. 22nd) Marching from that ground, (Muh. 20th), we
dismounted over against Kahraj, at the mouth of the valleys of
Kahraj and Peshgram.’ Snow fell ankle-deep while we were on
that ground ; it would seem to be rare for snow to fall there-
abouts, for people were much surprised. In agreement with


* This will be the naze of the n.e. rampart of the Baba Qara valley.

® f. 4 and note; f. 276. Babur seems to use the name for several varieties of deer.

3 There is here, perhaps, a jesting allusion to the darkening of complexion amongst
the inhabitants of countries from west to east, from Highlands to Indian plains.

4 In Dr. E. D. Ross’ Polyglot list of birds the sdrigh(sariq)-gish is said to frequent
fields of ripening grain ; this suggests to translate its name as Thief-bird.

5 Aguila chrysaetus, the hunting eagle.

© This Graligh might be identified with the ‘‘ Miankalai” of maps (since Soghd,
lying between two arms of the Zar-afshan is known also as Miankal), but Raverty
explains the Bajaur Miankalai to mean Village of the holy men (az).

7 After 933 AH. presumably, when final work on the B.N. was in progress.

8 Mr. Erskine notes that Pesh-gram lies north of Mahyar (on the Chandawal-
water), and that he has not found Kahraj (or Kohraj). Judging from Babur’s next
movements, the two valleys he names may be those in succession east of Chandawal.


1, 220.


374


Sl. Wais of Sawad there was laid on the Kahraj people
impost of 4000 ass-loads of rice for the use of the army, and
himself was sent to collect it. Never before had those rude —
mountaineers borne such a burden; they could not give (all)
the grain and were brought to ruin. |


(cc. Raid on Panj-kira.) i e:

(Jan. 25th) On Tuesday the 23rd of Muharram an army was
sent under Hindi Beg to raid Panj-kiira. Panj-kiira lies more —
than half-way up the mountain ;* to reach its villages a person
must go for nearly a kuroh (2m.) through a pass. The people
had fled and got away ; our men brought a few beasts of sorts,
and masses of corn from their houses. i

(Jan. 26th) Next day (Muh. 24th) Qaj Beg was put at the
head of a force and sent out to raid. a

(Jan. 27th) On Thursday the 25th of the month, we dismounted
at the village of Mandish, in the trough of the Kahraj-valley, for __
the purpose of getting corn for the army.


(da. Mahim’s adoption of Dil-dars unborn child.) |


(Jan. 28th) Several children born of Humayiin’s mother had
not lived. Hind-al was not yet born.2, While we were in those
parts, came a letter from Mahim in which she wrote, “Whether
it be a boy, whether it be a girl, is my luck and chance; give
it to me; I will declare it my child and will take charge of it.”
On Friday the 26th of the month, we being still on that ground,
Yisuf-i-‘ali the stirrup-holder was sent off to Kabul with letters3
bestowing Hind-al, not yet born, on Mahim.


* There is hardly any level ground in the cleft of the Panj-kiira (R.’s Votes p. 193);
the villages are perched high on the sides of the valley. The pass leading to them
may be Katgola (Fincastle’s Map). .

? This account of Hind-al’s adoption is sufficiently confused to explain why a note,
made apparently by Humayiin, should have been appended to it (Appendix L, Ox
Hind-al’s adoption). The confusion reminds the reader that he has before him a sort
of memorandum only, diary jottings, apt to be allusive and abbreviated. The expected
child was Dil-dar’s ; Mahim, using her right as principal wife, asked for it to be given
to her. That the babe in question is here called Hind-al shews that at least part of
this account of his adoption was added after the birth and naming (f. 227).

3 One would be, no doubt, for Dil-dar’s own information. She then had no son
but had two daughters, Gul-rang and Gul-chihra. News of Hind-al’s birth reached
Babur in Bhira, some six weeks later (f. 227).


925 AH.—JAN. 8rD TO DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 375


(dd. Construction of a stone platform.)


While we were still on that same ground in the Mandish-
country, I had a platform made with stones (¢ash bila) on
a height in the middle of the valley, so large that it held the
tents of the advance-camp. All the household and soldiers
carried the stones for it, one by one like ants.


(e. Babur’s marriage with his Afghan wife, Bibi Mubaraka.)

In order to conciliate the Yiisuf-zai horde, I had asked for
a daughter of one of my well-wishers, Malik Sulaiman Shah’s
son Malik Shah Mansir, at the time he came to me as envoy
from the Yisuf-zai Afghans."

While we were on this ground news came that his daughter ”
was on her way with the Yisuf-zai tribute. At the Evening
Prayer there was a wine-party to which Sl. ‘Ala’u’d-din (of
Sawad) was invited and at which he was given a seat and
special dress of honour (Ahzlcat-¢-khasa).

(Jan. 30th) On Sunday the 28th, we marched from that
valley. Shah Mansir’s younger brother Taiis (Handsome)
Khan brought the above-mentioned daughter of his brother to
our ground after we had dismounted.


(f. Repopulation of the fort of Bajaur.)


For the convenience of having the Bi-siit people in Bajaur-
- fort,3 Yisuf’i-‘ali the taster was sent from this camp to get them
on the march and take them to that fort. Also, written orders
were despatched to Kabul that the army there left should
join us.

(Feb. 4th) On Friday the 3rd of the month of Safar, we dis-
mounted at the confluence of the waters of Bajaur and Panj-kira.

(Feb. 6th) On Sunday the 5th of the month, we went from
that ground to Bajaur where there was a drinking-party in
Khwaja Kalan’s house.


* f, 2186.

2 Bibi Mubaraka, the Afghani Aghacha of Gul-badan. An attractive picture of her
is drawn by the 7awdrikh-c-hafi,-t-rahmat-khani. As this gives not only one of
Babur’s romantic adventures but historical matter, I append it in my husband’s
translation [(A.Q.R. April 1901)] as Appendix K, 4x2 Afghan Legend.

3 Bi-sut aili-ning Bajaur-gurghani-da mandsabati-bar jihati ; a characteristic
phrase.


Fol. 2208.


‘ol, 221.


376 KABUL


(g. Expedition against the Afghan clans.)


(Feb. 8th) On Tuesday the 7th of the month the begs ; and
the Dilazak Afghan headmen were summoned, and, after
consultation, matters were left at this:—“The year is at its end, ny
only a few days of the Fish are left; the plainsmen have carried _
in all their corn ; if we went now into Sawad, the army woul
dwindle through getting no corn. The thing to do is to mare
along the Ambahar and Pani-mani road, cross the Sawad-wate
above Hash-nagar, and surprise the Yusuf-zai and Muhammadi ~
Afghans who are located in the plain over against the ee d
zai sangur of Mahira. Another year, coming earlier in the
harvest-time, the Afghans of this place must be our first
thought.” So the matter was left. 4

(Feb. 9th) Next day, Wednesday, we bestowed horses and a
robes on S]. Wais and Sl. ‘Ala’w’u-din of Sawad, gave them leave
to go, marched off ourselves and dismounted over against Bajaur. |

(Feb. roth) We marched next day, leaving Shah Mansir’s _ 3
daughter in Bajaur-fort until the return of the army. We dis- B "
mounted after passing Khwaja Khizr, and from that camp leave ©
was given to Khwaja Kalan; and the heavy baggage, the worn- _
out horses and superfluous effects of the army were started off |
into Lamghan by the Kinar road.

(Feb. 11th) Next morning Khwaja Mir-i-miran was put in ~
charge of the camel baggage-train and started off by the
Qirgha-tti and Darwaza road, through the Qara-kiipa-pass. a :
Riding light for the raid, we ourselves crossed the Ambahar-
pass, and yet another great pass, and dismounted at Pani-mali 4
nearer ? the Afternoon Prayer. Awtghan-birdi was sent forward
with a few others to learn 3 how things were.

(Feb, 12th) The distance between us and the Afghans being
short, we did not make an early start. Autghan-birdi came q |


back at breakfast-time.4 He had got the better of an Afghan 7


a


‘a


1


a


* Perhaps the end of the early spring-harvest and the spring harvesting-year. It
is not the end of the campaigning year, manifestly ; and it is at the beginning of
the solar and lunar years. ay
Perhaps, more than half-way between the Mid-day and Afternoon Prayers. So (2
too in the annals of Feb. 12th.
3 til alghali (Pers. 2abdn-giri), a new phrase in the B.N. 4
4 chasht, which, being half-way between sunrise and the meridian, is a variable hour. __


oe
et


925 AH.—JAN. 3rD To DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 377


and had cut his head off, but had dropped it on the road. He Fo! 7214
brought no news so sure as the heart asks (Ainkul-tiladik). Mid-

day come, we marched on, crossed the Sawad-water, and dis-
mounted nearer‘ the Afternoon Prayer. At the Bed-time Prayer,

we remounted and rode swiftly on.

(Feb. 13th) Rustam Turkman had been sent scouting ; when
the Sun was spear-high he brought word that the Afghans had
heard about us and were shifting about, one body of them
making off by the mountain-road. On this we moved the faster,
sending raiders on ahead who killed a few, cut off their heads
and brought a band of prisoners, some cattle and flocks. The
Dilazak Afghans also cut off and brought in a few heads.
Turning back, we dismounted near Katlang and from there
sent a guide to meet the baggage-train under Khwaja Mir-i-
miran and bring it to join us in Magam.?

(Feb. r4th) Marching on next day, we dismounted between
Katlang and Maqam. A man of Shah Mansir’s arrived.
Khusrau Kikildash and Ahmadi the secretary were sent with
a few more to meet the baggage-train.

(Feb. 15th) On Wednesday the 14th of the month, the
baggage-train rejoined us while we were dismounting at Maqam.

It will have been within the previous 30 or 40 years that
a heretic qalandar named Shahbaz perverted a body of Yisuf-

zai and another of Dilazak. His tomb was on a free and
dominating height of the lower hill at the bill (¢#mshig) of the Fol. 222.
Maqam mountain. Thought I, “What is there to recommend
the tomb of a heretic qalandar for a place in air so free?” and
ordered the tomb destroyed and levelled with the ground. The
place was so charming and open that we elected to sit there
some time and to eat a confection (a’7iz).


(h. Babur crosses the Indus for the first time.)


We had turned off from Bajaur with Bhira in our thoughts.
Ever since we came into Kabul it had been in my mind to
move on Hindistan, but this had not been done for a variety of

t See n. 2, f. 221.


? Perhaps Maqam is the Mardan of maps.
3 Bhira, on the Jehlam, is now in the Shahpir district of the Panj-ab.


Fol. 2226.


378 KABUL


reasons. Nothing to count had fallen into the soldiers’ hands
during the three or four months we had been leading this army. —
Now that Bhira, the borderland of Hindistan, was so near,
I thought a something might fall into our men’s hands if, 7%
riding light, we went suddenly into it. To this thought I clung,
but some of my well-wishers, after we had raided the Afghans — 3
and dismounted at Maqam, set the matter in this way before
me :—“If we are to go into Hindistan, it should be on a proper ~ ,
basis ; one part of the army stayed behind in Kabul; a body of ~
effective braves was left behind in Bajaur; a good part of this —
army has gone into Lamghan because its horses were worn-out; __
and the horses of those who have come this far, are so poor that
they have not a day’s hard riding in them.” Reasonable as —
these considerations were, yet, having made the start, we paid no
attention to them but set off next day for the ford through the
water of Sind Mir Muhammad the raftsman and his elder
and younger brethren were sent with a few braves to examine
the Sind-river (darya), above and below the ford.

(Feb. 16th) After starting off the camp for the river, I went
to hunt rhinoceros on the Sawati side which place people call
also Karg-khana (Rhino-home).?, A few were discovered but
the jungle was dense and they did not come out of it. When
one with a calf came into the open and betook itself to flight,
many arrows were shot at it and it rushed into the near jungle ;
the jungle was fired but that same rhino was not had. Another
calf was killed as it lay, scorched by the fire, writhing and
palpitating. Each person took a share of the spoil. After
leaving Sawati, we wandered about a good deal; it was the
Bed-time Prayer when we got to camp.

Those sent to examine the ford came back after doing it. r

(Feb. 17th) Next day, Thursday the 16th,3 the horses and —
baggage-camels crossed through the ford and the camp-bazar —


t This will be the ford on the direct road from Mardan for the eastward (Elphin-
stone’s Caubul ii, 416).

2 The position of Sawati is represented by the Suabi of the G. of I. map (1909 AD.).
Writing in about 1813 Ap. Mr. Erskine notes as worthy of record that the rhinoceros
was at that date no longer found west of the Indus.

3 Elph. MS. ghura, the Ist, but this is corrected to 16th by a marginal note. The
Hai. MS. here, as in some other places, has the context for a number, but omits the
figures. So does also the Elph. MS. in a good many places.


925 AH.—JAN. 3xp To DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 379


and foot-soldiers were put over on rafts. Some Nil-abis came
and saw me at the ford-head (guzar-bashz), bringing a horse
in mail and 300 shahrukhis as an offering. At the Mid-day
Prayer of this same day, when every-one had crossed the river,
we marched on; we went on until one watch of the night had
passed (czrca 9 p.m.) when we dismounted near the water of
Kacha-kot.*

(Feb. 18th) Marching on next day, we crossed the Kacha-
kot-water; noon returning, went through the Sangdaki-pass
and dismounted. While Sayyid Qasim Lord of the Gate was
in charge of the rear (chaghdawal) he overcame a few Gujiirs
who had got up with the rear march, cut off and brought in 4 or
5 of their heads.

(Feb. 19th) Marching thence at dawn and crossing the Sihan-
water, we dismounted at the Mid-day Prayer. Those behind
kept coming in till midnight; the march had been mightily
long, and, as many horses were weak and _ out-of-condition,
a great number were left on the road.


(2. The Salt-range.)


Fourteen miles (7 os) north of Bhira lies the mountain-range
written of in the Zafar-nama and other books as the Koh-i-jiid.?
I had not known why it was called this; I now knew. On it
_ dwell two tribes, descendants from one parent-source, one is
called Jad, the other Janjuha. These two from of old have
been the rulers and lawful commanders of the peoples and
hordes (ad/is) of the range and of the country between Bhira
and Nil-ab. Their rule is friendly and brotherly however; they
cannot take what their hearts might desire; the portion ancient
custom has fixed is given and taken, no less and no more. The
agreement is to give one shahrukhi3 for each yoke of oxen and
seven for headship in a household ; there is also service in the
army. The Jiid and Janjiha both are divided into several


= This is the Harru. Mr. Erskine observes that Babur appears to have turned
sharp south after crossing it, since he ascended a pass so soon after leaving the Indus
and reached the Sihan so soon.

2 z.e. the Salt-range.

3 Mr. Erskine notes that (in his day) a shahrukhi may be taken at a shilling or
eleven pence sterling.


. 26


Fol. 223.


Vol. 2236.


‘ol. 224.


Pere G | at t¥P


380 KABUL


clans. The Koh-i-jid runs for 14 miles along the Bhira count
taking off from those Kashmir mountains that are one with
Hindi-kish, and it draws out to the south-west as far as the —
foot of Din-kot on the Sind-river.. On one half of it are the
Jud, the Janjtha on the other. People call it Koh-i-jid through
connecting it with the Jid tribe? The principal headman gets
the title of Rai; others, his younger brothers and sons, are — 4
styled Malik. The Janjiha headmen are maternal uncles of
Langar Khan. The ruler of the people and horde near the
Sihan-water was named Malik Hast. The name originally
was Asad but as Hindistanis sometimes drop a vowel eg. they
say khabr for khabar (news), they had said Asd for Asad, and
this went on to Hast.

Langar Khan was sent off to Malik Hast at once when we
dismounted. He galloped off, made Malik Hast hopeful of our
favour and kindness, and at the Bed-time Prayer, returned with
him. Malik Hast brought an offering of a horse in mail and
waited on me. He may have been 22 or 23 years old.3

The various flocks and herds belonging to the country-people
were close round our camp. As it was always in my heart to
possess Hindiistan, and as these several countries, Bhira,
Khish-ab, Chin-ab and Chiniit* had once been held by the
Turk, I pictured them as my own and was resolved to get them
into my hands, whether peacefully or by force. For these reasons
it being imperative to treat these hillmen well, this following
order was given :—“ Do no hurt or harm to the flocks and herds
of these people, nor even to their cotton-ends and broken


{”


needles !


* It is somewhat difficult not to forget that a man who, like Babur, records so many
observations of geographical position, had no guidance from Surveys, Gazetteers and
Books of Travel. Most of his records are those of personal observation.

? In this sentence Mr. Erskine read a reference to the Musalman Ararat, the Koh-i-
jad on the left bank of the Tigris. What I have set down translates the Turki words
but, taking account of Babur’s eye for the double use of a word, and Erskine’s careful
work, done too in India, the Turki may imply reference to the Ararat-like summit of
Sakeswar.

3 Here Dr. Leyden’s version finally ends (Erskine).

4 Bhira, as has been noted, is on the Jehlam; Khiish-ab is 40 m. lower down the
same river ; Chiniiit (Chini-wat ?) is 50 miles south of Bhira ; Chin-ab (China-water ?).
seems the name of a tract only and not of a residential centre ; 3; it will be in the Bar
of Kipling’s border-thief. Concerning Chiniit see D. G. Barkley’s letter, JRAS 1899
Pp. 132.


925 AH.—JAN. 38RD TO DEC. 28RD 1519 AD. 381


(7. The Kalda-kahar lake.)


(Feb. 20th) Marching thence next day, we dismounted at the
Mid-day Prayer amongst fields of densely-growing corn in
Kalda-kahar.

Kalda-kahar is some 20 miles north of Bhira, a level land shut
in* amongst the Jid mountains. In the middle of it is a lake
some six miles round, the in-gatherings of rain from all sides.
On the north of this lake lies an excellent meadow ; on the hill-
skirt to the west of it there is a spring? having its source in the
heights overlooking the lake. The place being suitable I have
made a garden there, called the Bagh-i-safa,3 as will be told later;
it is a very charming place with good air.

(Feb. 21st) We rode from Kalda-kahar at dawn next day.
When we reached the top of the Hamtatii-pass a few local people
waited on me, bringing a humble gift. They were joined with
‘Abdu’r-rahim the chief-scribe (shaghawa/) and sent with him to
speak the Bhira people fair and say, “The possession of this
country by a Turk has come down from of old; beware not to
bring ruin on its people by giving way to fear and anxiety ; our
eye is on this land and on this people; raid and rapine shall
not be.”

We dismounted near the foot of the pass at breakfast-time,
and thence sent seven or eight men ahead, under Qurban of
- Chirkh and ‘Abdu’l-malik of Khwast. Of those sent one Mir
Muhammad (a servant?) of Mahdi Khwaja+ brought in a man.
A few Afghan headmen, who had come meantime with offerings
and done obeisance, were joined with Langar Khan to go and
speak the Bhira people fair.

After crossing the pass and getting out of the jungle, we arrayed
in right and left and centre, and moved forward for Bhira. As

* aur yiri wagi‘ bulib tar. As on f. 160 of the valley of Khwesh, I have taken
zaur to be Turki, complete, shut in.

2 chashma (f. 2186 and note).

3 The promised description is not found ; there follows a mere mention only of the
garden [f. 369]. This entry can be taken therefore as shewing an intention to write
what is still wanting from Safar 926 AH. to Safar 932 AH.

4 Mir Muh. may have been a kinsman or follower of Mahdi Khwaja. The entry
on the scene, unannounced by introduction as to parentage, of the Khwaja who
played a part later in Babur’s family affairs is due, no doubt, to the last gap of annals.


He is mentioned in the Translator’s Note, s.@. 923 AH. (See Gul-badan’s H.N. Bio-
graphical Appendix s. 7.)


Fol. 2246,


Fol. 225.


Tol. 2250.


382 KABUL


we got near it there came in, of the servants of Daulat x an
Vusuf-khail’s son ‘Ali Khan, Siktii’s son Diwa Hznvda; with them
came several of the notables of Bhira who brought a horse and | 4
camel as an offering and did me obeisance. At the Midday ‘
Prayer we dismounted on the east of Bhira, on the bank of the
Bahat (Jehlam), in a sown-field, without hurt or harm being
allowed to touch the people of Bhira.


(k. Hestory of Bhira.)


Timir Beg had gone into Hindustan ; from the time he went
out again these several countries vzz. Bhira, Khiish-ab, Chin-ab
and Chiniit, had been held by his descendants and the dependants
and adherents of those descendants. After the death of Sl. Mas‘tid
Mirza and his son ‘Ali Asghar Mirza, the sons of Mir ‘Ali Beg


(Authors note on Sl. Mas‘id Mirza.) We was the son of Siyurghatmish

Mirza, son of Shahrukh Mirza, (son of Timiir), and was known as Sl. Mas‘ad
Kabuli because the government and administration of Kabul and Zabul were

then dependent on him (deposed 843 AH.-1440 AD.)

viz. Baba-i-kabuli, Darya Khan and Apaq Khan, known later as
Ghazi Khan, all of whom SI. Mas‘tid M. had cherished, through
their dominant position, got possession of Kabul, Zabul and the
afore-named countries and parganas of Hindistan. In SI. Abi-
sa‘id Mirza’s time, Kabul and Zabul went from their hands, the
Hindistan countries remaining. In 910 AH. (1504 AD.) the year
(Author's note to 910 AH.) That year, with the wish to enter Hindiistan,

Khaibar had been crossed and Parashawiir (s¢-) had been reached, when Baqi
Chaghaniani insisted on a move against Lower Bangash z.e. Kohat, a mass

of Afghans were raided and scraped clean (gz7z6), the Bannii plain was raided

and plundered, and return was made through Diki (Digi).

I first came into Kabul, the government of Bhira, Khish-ab and
Chin-ab depended on Sayyid ‘Ali Khan, son of Ghazi Khan and
grandson of Mir ‘Ali Beg, who read the £Autba for Sikandar son
of Buhlil (Laadz Afghan) and was subject to him. When I led
that army out (910 AH.) Sayyid ‘Ali Khan left Bhira in terror,
crossed the Bahat-water, and seated himself in Sher-kot, one of
the villages of Bhira. A few years later the Afghans became
suspicious about him on my account; he, giving way to his own
fears and anxieties, made these countries over to the then governor
in Lahitr, Daulat Khan, son of Tatar Khan Yasuf-khaz/, who


925 AH.—JAN. 3RD TO DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 383


gave them to his own eldest son ‘Ali Khan, and in ‘Ali Khan’s
possession they now were.


(Authors note on Daulat Khan Visuf-khail.) This Tatar Khan, the father
of Daulat Khan, was one of six or seven sardars who, sallying out and
becoming dominant in Hindistan, made Buhlal Padshah. He held the
country north of the Satluj (szc) and Sahrind,* the revenues of which exceeded
3 krurs.?, On Tatar Khan’s death, Sl. Sikandar (Zd@dz), as over-lord, took
those countries from Tatar Khan’s sons and gave Lahir only to Daulat Khan.
That happened a year or two before I came into the country of Kabul (910 AH. ).


(2. Baburs journey resumed.)


(Feb. 22nd) Next morning foragers were sent to several
convenient places ; on the same day I visited Bhira ; and on the
same day Sangur Khan /azjiha came, made offering of a horse,
and did me obeisance.

(Feb. 23rd) On Wednesday the 22nd of the month, the
headmen and chauderis3 of Bhira were summoned, a sum of
400,000 shahrukhis + was agreed on as the price of peace (sa/-2-
aman), and collectors were appointed. We also made an
excursion, going in a boat and there eating a confection.

(Feb. 24th) Haidar the standard-bearer had been sent to the
Biltichis located in Bhira and Khish-ab; on Thursday morning
they made an offering of an almond-coloured 7ipichaéq [horse],
and did obeisance. As it was represented to me that some of
the soldiery were behaving without sense and were laying-hands
on Bhira people, persons were sent who caused some of those
senseless people to meet their death-doom, of others slit the
noses and so led them round the camp.

(Feb. 25th) On Friday came a dutiful letter from the Khish-
abis; on this Shah Shuja‘ Avghiun's son Shah Hasan was
appointed to go to Khish-ab.


* or Sihrind, mod. Sirhind or Sar-i-hind (Head of Hind). It may be noted here,
for what it may be found worth, that Kh(w)afi Khan [i, 402] calls Sar-i-hind the old
name, says that the place was once held by the Ghazni dynasty and was its Indian
frontier, and that Shah-jahan changed it to Sahrind. The W.-i-B. I.O. 217 f. 155
writes Shahrind. :

2 Three krores or crores of dims, at 40 to the rupee, would make this 750,000
rupees, or about £75,000 sterling (Erskine) ; a statement from the ancient history of
the rupi !

3 This Hindustani word in some districts signifies the head man of a trade, in others
a landholder (Erskine).

4 In Mr. Erskine’s time this sum was reckoned to be nearly £20,000,


Fol. 226.


Fol. 2266.


384 KABUL


(Feb. 26th) On Saturday the 25th of the month,’ Shah Has
was started for Khiish-ab.

(Feb. 27th) On Sunday so much rain fell? that water coverea
all the plain. A small brackish stream 3 flowing between Bhira
and the gardens in which the army lay, had become like a great
river before the Mid-day Prayer; while at the ford near Bhira
there was no footing for more than an arrow’s flight ; people
crossing had to swim. In the afternoon I rode out to watch the
water coming down (kirkan s#); the rain and storm were such
that on the way back there was some fear about getting in to
camp. I crossed that same water (kirkdn si) with my horse
swimming. The army-people were much alarmed; most of them
abandoned tents and heavy baggage, shouldered armour, horse-
mail and arms, made their horses swim and crossed bareback.
Most streams flooded the plain.

(Feb. 28th) Next day boats were brought from the river
(Jehlam), and in these most of the army brought their tents and
baggage over. Towards mid-day, Qij Beg’s men went 2 miles
up the water and there found a ford by which the rest crossed.

(March rst) After a night spent in Bhira-fort, Jahan-nima
they call it, we marched early on the Tuesday morning out of
the worry of the rain-flood to the higher ground north of Bhira.

As there was some delay about the moneys asked for and
agreed to (tagabbul), the country was divided into four districts
and the begs were ordered to try to make an end of the matter.
Khalifa was appointed to one district, Quj Beg to another,
Nasir’s Dost to another, Sayyid Qasim and Muhibb-i-‘ali to
another. Picturing as our own the countries once occupied by
the Turk, there was to be no over-running or plundering.


(m. Envoys sent to the court in Dihii.)


(March 3rd) People were always saying, “It could do no harm
to send an envoy, for peace’ sake, to countries that once depended


* Here originally neither the Elph. MS. nor the Hai. MS. had a date; it has been
added to the former.

? This rain is too early for the s.w. monsoon ; it was probably a severe fall of spring
rain, which prevails at this season or rather earlier, and extends over all the west of
Asia (Erskine).

3 az ghina shor si. Streams rising in the Salt-range become brackish on reaching
its skirts (G. of I.).


Gr-


925 AH.—JAN. 3rD TO DEC. 28RpD 1519 AD. 385


on the Turk.” Accordingly on Thursday the ist of Rabi‘u’l-
awwal, Mulla Murshid was appointed to go to Sl, Ibrahim who
through the death of his father Sl. Iskandar had attained to rule
in Hindiistan some § or 6 months earlier(?). I sent him a goshawk
(garchigha) and asked for the countries which from of old had
depended on the Turk. Mulla Murshid was given charge of
writings (AAatilar) for Daulat Khan ( Visuf-khail) and writings
for Sl. Ibrahim ; matters were sent also by word-of-mouth ; and
he was given leave to go. Far from sense and wisdom, shut off
from judgment and counsel must people in Hindiistan be, the
Afghans above all; for they could not move and make stand
like a foe, nor did they know ways and rules of friendliness.
Daulat Khan kept my man several days in Lahir without seeing
him himself or speeding him on to Sl. Ibrahim ; and he came
back to Kabul a few months later without bringing a reply.


(n. Birth of Hina-al.)

(March gth) On Friday the 2nd of the month, the foot-soldiers
Shaibak and Darwesh-i-‘ali— he is now a matchlockman,—
bringing dutiful letters from Kabul, brought news also of
Hind-al’s birth. As the news came during the expedition into
Hindistan, I took it as an omen, and gave the name Hind-al
(Taking of Hind). Dutiful letters came also from Muhammad-
i-zaman M. in Balkh, by the hand of Qambar Beg.

(March 5th) Next morning when the Court rose, we rode out
for an excursion, entered a boat and there drank ‘avag.* The
people of the party were Khwaja Dost-khawand, Khusrau, Mirim,
Mirza Quli, Muhammadi, Ahmadi, Gadai, Na‘man, Langar Khan,
Rauh-dam,? Qasim-i-‘ali the opium-eater (¢arzyakz), Yisuf-i-‘ali
and Tingri-quli. Towards the head of the boat there was a Zalar3
on the flat top of which I sat with a few people, a few others
sitting below. There was a sitting-place also at the tail of the
boat ; there Muhammadi, Gadai and Na‘man sat. ‘Avrag was
drunk till the Other Prayer when, disgusted by its bad flavour,
by consent of those at the head of the boat, #za’7zin was preferred.

t Here this will be the fermented juice of rice or of the date-palm.


2 Rauh is sometimes the name of a musical note.
3 a platform, with or without a chamber above it, and supported on four posts.


Fol. 227.


ol. 2270.


ol. 228,


386 KABUL


Those at the other end, knowing nothing about our ma’jan drank oe :
‘arag right through. At the Bed-time Prayer we rode from the
boat and got into camp late. Thinking I had been drinking
‘arag Muhammadi and Gadai had said to one another, “Let’sdo
befitting service,” lifted a pitcher of ‘“avag up to one another in
turn on their horses, and came in saying with wonderful joviality
and heartiness and speaking together, “ Through this dark night
have we come carrying this pitcher in turns!” Later on when
they knew that the party was (now) meant to be otherwise and the
hilarity to differ, that is to say, that [there would be that] of the
ma jun band and that of the drinkers, they were much disturbed
because never does a ma’juin party go well with a drinking-party.
Said I, “Don’t upset the party! Let those who wish to drink
‘araq, drink ‘arag ; let those who wish to eat main, eat majun.
Let no-one on either side make talk or allusion to the other.”
Some drank ‘avag, some ate ma’juin, and for a time the party
went on quite politely. Baba Jan the gadiéz-player had not been
of our party (in the boat) ; we invited him when we reached the
tents. He asked to drink ‘avag. We invited Tardi Muhammad
Qibchag also and made him a comrade of the drinkers. A ma‘jin
party never goes well with an ‘avaqg or a wine-party ; the drinkers
began to make wild talk and chatter from all sides, mostly in
allusion to ma’jzin and ma’junis. Baba Jan even, when drunk, said
many wild things. The drinkers soon made Tardi Khan mad-
drunk, by giving him one full bowl after another. Try as we did
to keep things straight, nothing went well ; there was much dis-
gusting uproar; the party became intolerable and was broken up.

(March 7th) On Monday the 5th of the month, the country
of Bhira was given to Hindi Beg.

(March 8th) On Tuesday the Chin-ab country was bestowed
on Husain Azkrak(?) and leave was given to him and the Chin-ab
people to set out. At this time Sayyid ‘Ali Khan’s son Minichihr
Khan, having let us know (his intention), came and waited on me.
He had started from Hindistan by the upper road, had met in
with Tatar Khan Kakar ;* Tatar Khan had not let him pass on,
but had kept him, made him a son-in-law by giving him his own


daughter, and had detained him for some time.
* so-written in the MSS. Cf. Raverty’s Votes and G. of I.


925 AH.—JAN. 3rRD To DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 387
(0. The Kakars.)


In amongst the mountains of Nil-ab and Bhira which connect
with those of Kashmir, there are, besides the Jiid and Janjiha
tribes, many Jats, Gujiirs, and others akin to them, seated in
villages everywhere on every rising-ground. These are governed
by headmen of the Kakar tribes, a headship like that over the
Jud and Janjiha. At this time (925 AH.) the headmen of the
people of those hill-skirts were Tatar Kakar and Hati Kakar,
two descendants of one forefather ; being paternal-uncles’ sons."
Torrent-beds and ravines are their strongholds. Tatar’s place,
named Parhala,? is a good deal below the snow-mountains ;
Hati’s country connects with the mountains and also he had
made Babi Khan’s fief Kalanjar,3 look towards himself. Tatar
Kakar had seen Daulat Khan ( Vasuf-khazl) and looked to him
with complete obedience. Hati had not seen Daulat Khan; his
attitude towards him was bad and turbulent. At the word of
the Hindistan begs and in agreement with them, Tatar had so
posted himself as to blockade Hati from a distance. Just when
we were in Bhira, Hati moved on pretext of hunting, fell un-
expectedly on Tatar, killed him, and took his country, his wives
and his having (d#/ghanz).4


(p. Babur’s journey resumed.)


Having ridden out at the Mid-day Prayer for an excursion,
we got ona boat and ‘avag was drunk. The people of the party
were Dost Beg, Mirza Quli, Ahmadi, Gadai, Muhammad ‘Ali
Jang-jang, ‘Asas,5 and Aughan-birdi W/ughil. The musicians
were Rauh-dam, Baba Jan, Oasim-i-‘ali, Yisuf-i-‘ali, Tingri-quli,
Abi’l-qasim, Ramzan Z#/z. We drank in the boat till the Bed-
time Prayer; then getting off it, full of drink, we mounted, took
torches in our hands, and went to camp from the river’s bank,


* Anglicé, cousins on the father’s side.

2 The G. of I. describes it.

3 Elph. MS. f. 1836, mansab; Hai. MS. and 2nd W.-i-B. dzsaé¢. The holder
might be Baba-i-kabuli of f. 225.

4 The Ist Pers. trs. (I.O. 215 f. 1884) and Kehr’s MS. [Ilminsky p. 293] attribute
HAati’s last-recorded acts to Babur himself. The two mistaken sources err together
elsewhere. M. de Courteille corrects the defect (ii, 67).

5 night-guard. He is the old servant to whom Babur sent a giant ashrafi of the
spoils of India (Gul-badan’s H.N. s.z.).


Fol. 2284.


388 KABUL my
leaning over from our horses on this side, leaning over from that,
at one loose-rein gallop! Very drunk I must have been for,
when they told me next day that we had galloped loose-rein
into camp, carrying torches, I could not recal it in the very least.
After reaching my quarters, I vomited a good deal.

(March 11th) On Friday we rode out on an excursion, crossed
the water (Jehlam) by boat and went about amongst the orchards
(daghat) of blossoming trees and the lands of the sugar-cultivation. __
We saw the wheel with buckets, had water drawn, and asked

Fol. 229. particulars about getting it out ; indeed we made them draw it
again and again. During this excursion a confection was pre-
ferred. In returning we went on board a boat. A confection
(majiun) was given also to Minichihr Khan, such a one that, to
keep him standing, two people had to give him their arms. For
a time the boat remained at anchor in mid-stream ; we then went
down-stream ; after a while had it drawn up-stream again, slept
in it that night and went back to camp near dawn.

(March t2th) On Saturday the toth of the first Rabi‘, the
Sun entered the Ram. Today we rode out before mid-day and
got into a boat where ‘avag was drunk. The people of the party
were Khwaja Dost-khawand, Dost Beg, Mirim, Mirza Quli,
Muhammadi, Ahmadi, Yinas-i-‘ali, Muh. ‘Ali /ang-7ang, Gadai
Taghai, Mir Khurd (and ?) ‘Asas. The musicians were Rauh-
dam, Baba Jan, Qasim, Yisuf-i-‘ali, Tingri-quli and Ramzan.
We got into a branch-water (shakh-z-ab), for some time went
down-stream, landed a good deal below Bhira and on its opposite
bank, and went late into camp.

This same day Shah Hasan returned from Khish-ab whither
he had been sent as envoy to demand the countries which from
of old had depended on the Turk ; he had settled peaceably with
them and had in his hands a part of the money assessed on them.

The heats were near at hand. To reinforce Hindi Beg (in
Bhira) were appointed Shah Muhammad Keeper of the Seal
and his younger brother Dost Beg Keeper of the Seal, together
with several suitable braves; an accepted (yarasha) stipend

Fol. 229. was fixed and settled in accordance with each man’s position.
Khiish-ab was bestowed, with a standard, on Langar Khan, the
prime cause and mover of this expedition ; we settled also that


925 AH._JAN. 8rD To DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 389


he was to help Hindi Beg. We appointed also to help Hindi
Beg, the Turk and local soldiery of Bhira, increasing the allow-
ances and pay of both. Amongst them was the afore-named
Minichihr Khan whose name has been mentioned ; there was
also Nazar-i-‘ali Turk, one of Miniichihr Khan’s relations ; there
were also Sangar Khan /anjuha and Malik Hast Janjiha.


(pp. Return for Kabul.)


(March 13th) Having settled the country in every way making
for hope of peace, we marched for Kabul from Bhira on Sunday
the 11th of the first Rabi“. We dismounted in Kaldah-kahar.
That day too it rained amazingly ; people with rain-cloaks’ were
in the same case as those who had none! Therear of the camp
kept coming in till the Bed-time Prayer.


(g. Action taken against Hati Kakar.)


(March 14th) People acquainted with the honour and glory
(ab u tab) of this land and government, especially the Janjihas,
old foes of these Kakars, represented, “ Hati is the bad man
round-about ; he it is robs on the roads ; he it is brings men to
ruin; he ought either to be driven out from these parts, or to be
severely punished.” Agreeing with this, we left Khwaja Mir-i-
miran and Nasir’s Mirim next day with the camp, parting from
them at big breakfast,? and moved on Hati Kakar. As has been
said, he had killed Tatar a few days earlier, and having taken
possession of Parhala, was in it now. Dismounting at the Other
Prayer, we gave the horses corn; at the Bed-time Prayer we
rode on again, our guide being a Gujiir servant of Malik Hast,
named Sar-u-pa. We rode the night through and dismounted
at dawn, when Beg Muhammad Mughiil was sent back to the

* The Aiping or kipik is a kind of mantle covered with wool (Erskine) ; the root
of the word is 4i, dry.

2 anlagh chasht, a term suggesting that Babur knew the chofa hdzi77, little break-
fast, of Anglo-India. It may be inferred, from several passages, that the big breakfast
was taken after 9 a.m. and before 12 p.m. Just below men are said to put on their
mail at chdsh¢ in the same way as, fass¢m, things other than prayer are said to be
done at this or that Prayer; this, I think, always implies that they are done after the
Prayer mentioned; a thing done shortly before a Prayer is done “‘close to” or


‘*near” or when done over half-way to the following Prayer, the act is said to be
done ‘‘ nearer” to the second (as was noted on f. 221).


Fol. 230.


Fol. 2306.


390 KABUL ot Se a


The blackness of Parhala shewed itself from 2 miles off; the
gallop was then allowed (chapgiin quiildz) ; the right went east
of Parhala, Quj Beg, who was also of the right, following as its
reserve ; the men of the left and centre went straight for the
fort, Dost Beg being their rear-reserve.

Parhala stands amongst ravines. It has two roads ; one, by
which we came, leads to it from the south-east, goes along the
top of ravines and on either hand has hollows worn out by the
torrents. A mile from Parhala this road, in four or five places
before it reaches the Gate, becomes a one-man road with a
ravine falling from its either side; there for more than an
arrow’s flight men must ride in single file. The other road
comes from the north-west ; it gets up to Parhala by the trough
of a valley and it also is a one-man road. There is no other
road on any side. Parhala though without breast-work or
battlement, has no assailable place, its sides shooting perpendicu-
larly down for 7, 8, 10 yards.

When the van of our left, having passed the narrow place,
went in a body to the Gate, Hati, with whom were 30 to 40 men
in armour, their horses in mail, and a mass of foot-soldiers,
forced his assailants to retire. Dost Beg led his reserve forward,
made a strong attack, dismounted a number of Hati’s men, and
beat him. All the country-round, Hati was celebrated for his
daring, but try as he did, he could effect nothing ; he took to
flight ; he could not make a stand in those narrow places; he
could not make the fort fast when he got back into it. His
assailants went in just behind him and ran on through the
ravine and narrows of the north-west side of the fort, but he
rode light and made his flight good. Here again, Dost Beg did
very well and recompense was added to renown."

Meantime I had gone into the fort and dismounted at Tatar
Kakars dwelling. Several men had joined in the attack for
whom to stay with me had been arranged ; amongst them were
Amin-i-muhammad Tarkhan Arghiin and Qaracha.? For this


* Juldi Dost Beg-ning ati-gha bildi.
? The disarray of these names in the MSS. reveals confusion in their source.
Similar verbal disarray occurs in the latter part of f. 229.


i hi |
camp, and we remounted when it was growing light. At break- —


fast-time (9 a.m.) we put our mail on and moved forward faster. —


Ma M
,


925 AH.—JAN. 3RD To DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 391


fault they were sent to meet the camp, without sar-u-pd, into
the wilds and open country with Sar-u-pa' for their guide, the
Gujir mentioned already.

(March 16th) Next day we went out by the north-west ravine
and dismounted in a sown field. A few serviceable braves under
Wali the treasurer were sent out to meet the camp.?

(March 17th) Marching on Thursday the 15th, we dismounted
at Andaraba on the Suhan, a fort said to have depended from
of old on ancestors of Malik Hast. Hati Kakar had killed
Malik Hast’s father and destroyed the fort ; there it now lay in
ruins.

At the Bed-time Prayer of this same day, those left at Kalda-
kahar with the camp rejoined us.


(rv. Submissions to Babur.)


It must have been after Hati overcame Tatar that he started
his kinsman Parbat to me with tribute and an accoutred horse.
Parbat did not light upon us but, meeting in with the camp we
had left behind, came on in the company of the train. With it
came also Langar Khan up from Bhira on matters of business.
His affairs were put right and he, together with several local
people, was allowed to leave.

(March 18th) Marching on and crossing the Sihan-water, we
dismounted on the rising-ground. Here Hati’s kinsman (Parbat)
was robed in an honorary dress (#hzl‘at), given letters of
encouragement for Hati, and despatched with a servant of
Muhammad ‘Ali Jang-jang. Nil-ab and the Qarliiq (Himalayan?)
Hazara had been given to Humayiin (ae. 12); some of his
servants under Baba Dost and Halahil came now for their
darogha-ship.3 ;

(March roth) Marching early next morning, we dismounted
after riding 2 miles, went to view the camp from a height and
ordered that the camp-camels should be counted ; it came out


at 570.


* Manifestly a pun is made on the guide’s name and on the cap-d-f7zé robe of honour
the offenders did not receive.

2 aurdi-ning aldi-gha, a novel phrase.

3 I understand that the servants had come to do their equivalent for ‘‘ kissing


hands” on an appointment vzz. to kneel.


Fol. 231.


Fol. 2314.


Fol. 232.


392 KABUL


We had heard of the qualities of the sambhal plant’; we: Aw
it on this ground; along this hill-skirt it grows sparsely, a plant —
here, a plant there ; it grows abundantly and to a large size a
further along the skirt-hills of Hindiistan. It will be described
when an account is given of the animals and plants of
Hindistan.?

(March 20th) Marching from that camp at beat of drum (Ze.
one hour before day), we dismounted at breakfast-time (9 a.m.)
below the Sangdaki-pass, at mid-day marched on, crossed the
pass, crossed the torrent, and dismounted on the rising-ground.

(March 21st) Marching thence at midnight, we made an
excursion to the ford3 we had crossed when on our way to Bhira.
A great raft of grain had stuck in the mud of that same ford
and, do what its owners would, could not be made to move.
The corn was seized and shared out to those with us. Timely
indeed was that corn !

Near noon we were a little below the meeting of the waters
of Kabul and Sind, rather above old Nil-ab; we dismounted
there between two waters. From Nil-ab six boats were brought,
and were apportioned to the right, left and centre, who busied
themselves energetically in crossing the river (Indus). We got
there on a Monday ; they kept on crossing the water through
the night preceding Tuesday (March 22nd), through Tuesday
and up to Wednesday (larch 23rd) and on Thursday (24¢h)
also a few crossed. .

Hati’s kinsman Parbat, he who from Andaraba was sent to
Hati with a servant of Muh. ‘Ali /ang-jang, came to the bank
of the river with Hati’s offering of an accoutred horse. Nil-
abis also came, brought an accoutred horse and did obeisance.


(s. Various postings.)
Muhammad ‘Ali /ang-jang had wished to stay in Bhira but
Bhira being bestowed on Hindi Beg, he was given the countries


* spikenard. Speede’s /udian Handbook on Gardening identifies sambhal with
Valeriana jatmansi (Sir W. Jones & Roxburgh); ‘‘it is the real spikenard of the
ancients, highly esteemed alike as a perfume and as a stimulant medicine; native
practitioners esteeming it valuable in hysteria and epilepsy.” Babur’s word adzvakht
is somewhat large for the plant.

? It is not given, however. 3 z.e. through the Indus.


~ eel eo says
in » eT aes Tobe
Pine Ayo Yeo ty yo r


925 AH.—JAN. 38rD To DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 393


between it and the Sind-river, such as the Oarliq Hazara, Hati,
Ghiyas-wal and Kib (Kitib) :—

Where one is who submits like a va‘zyaz, so treat him ;

But him who submits not, strike, strip, crush and force to obey.
He also received a special head-wear in black velvet, a special
Oilmaq corselet, and a standard. When Hati’s kinsman was
given leave to go he took for Hati a sword and head-to-foot
(dash-ayaq) with a royal letter of encouragement.

(March 24th) On Thursday at sunrise we marched from the
river's bank. That day confection was eaten. While under its
influence * wonderful fields of flowers were enjoyed. In some
places sheets of yellow flowers bloomed in plots; in others sheets
of red (arghwanz) flowers in plots, in some red and yellow
bloomed together. We sat on a mound near the camp to enjoy
the sight. There were flowers on all sides of the mound, yellow
here, red there, as if arranged regularly to form a sextuple. On
two sides there were fewer flowers but as far as the eye reached,
flowers were in bloom. In spring near Parashawar the fields of
flowers are very beautiful indeed.

(March 25th) \NWe marched from that ground at dawn. At
one place on the road a tiger came out and roared. On hearing
it, the horses, willy-nilly, flung off in terror, carrying their riders
in all directions, and dashing into ravines and hollows. The
’ tiger went again into the jungle. To bring it out, we ordered
a buffalo brought and put on the edge of the jungle. The tiger
again came out roaring. Arrows were shot at it from all sides ?;
I shot with the rest. Khalwi (var. Khalwa) a foot-soldier,
pricked it with a spear ; it bit the spear and broke off the spear-
head. After tasting of those arrows, it went into the bushes
(data) and stayed there. Baba the waiting-man [ yasa@wa/] went
with drawn sword close up to it ; it sprang ; he chopped at its
head ; ‘Ali Szstanz3 chopped at its loins; it plunged into the
river and was killed right in the water. It was got out and
ordered to be skinned. ;


* ma jini nakliki, presumably under the tranquillity induced by the drug.

2 massadus, the six sides of the world, z.e¢. all sides.

3 This is the name of one of the five champions defeated by Babur in single combat
in 914 AH. (Translator’s Note s.a. 914 AH.).


Fol. 2326.


Fol. 233.


394 KABUL


(March 26th) Marching on next day, we reached Bigram z nd }
went to see Gir-khattri. This is a smallish abode, after the —
fashion of a hermitage (sawma‘at), rather confined and dark. —
After entering at the door and going down a few steps, one must A
lie full length to get beyond. There is no getting in without
alamp. Allround near the building there is let lie an enormous
quantity of hair of the head and beard which men have shaved
off there. There are a great many retreats (Zujra) near Gir-
khattri like those of a rest-house or a college. In the year we
came into Kabul (910 AH.) and over-ran Kohat, Banni and the
plain, we made an excursion to Bigram, saw its great tree and
were consumed with regret at not seeing Gir-khattri, but it does
not seem a place to regret not-seeing."

On this same day an excellent hawk of mine went astray out
of Shaikhim the head-falconer’s charge; it had taken many
cranes and storks and had moulted (¢#/ab) two or three times.
So many things did it take that it made a fowler of a person so
little keen as I!

At this place were bestowed 100 misqals of silver, clothing
(tinlig), three bullocks and one buffalo, out of the offerings of
Hindustan, on each of six persons, the chiefs of the Dilazak
Afghans under Malik Bi Khan and Malik Misa ; to others, in
their degree, were given money, pieces of cloth, a bullock and
a buffalo.

(March 27th) When we dismounted at ‘Ali-masjid, a Dilazak
Afghan of the Yaq‘ib-khail, named Ma‘raf, brought an offering
of 10 sheep, two ass-loads of rice and eight large cheeses.

(March 28th) Marching on from ‘Ali-masjid, we dismounted
at Yada-bir; from Yada-bir Jii-shahi was reached by the Mid-
day Prayer and we there dismounted. Today Dost Beg was
attacked by burning fever.

(March 29th) Marching from Jii-shahi at dawn, we ate our
mid-day meal in the Bagh-i-wafa. At the Mid-day Prayer we
betook ourselves out of the garden, close to the Evening Prayer
forded the Siyah-ab at Gandamak, satisfied our horses’ hunger
in a field of green corn, and rode on in a gari or two (24-48 min.).


™ f. 1456.


925 AH.—JAN. 3rp To DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 395


After crossing the Sirkh-ab, we dismounted at Kark and took
a sleep.

(March 30th) Riding before shoot of day from Kark, I went
with 5 or 6 others by the road taking off for Qara-tii in order to
enjoy the sight of a garden there made. Khalifa and Shah
Hasan Beg and the rest went by the other road to await me at
Oidriiq-sai.

When we reached Qara-tii, Shah Beg Arvghin’s commissary
(¢awachi) Qizil (Rufus) brought word that Shah Beg had taken
Kahan, plundered it and retired.

An order had been given that no-one soever should take news
of us ahead. We reached Kabul at the Mid-day Prayer, no
person in it knowing about us till we got to Qitliiq-qadam’s
bridge. As Humayiin and Kamran heard about us only after
that, there was not time to put them on horseback; they made
their pages carry them, came, and did obeisance between the
gates of the town and the citadel.t At the Other Prayer there
waited on me Qasim Beg, the town Qazi, the retainers left in
Kabul and the notables of the place.

(April 2nd) At the Other Prayer of Friday the Ist of the
second Rabi‘ there was a wine-party at which a special head-to-
foot (dash-ayag) was bestowed on Shah Hasan.

(April 3rd) At dawn on Saturday we went on board a boat
and took our morning.2 Nir Beg, then not obedient (7a’26),
played the lute at this gathering. At the Mid-day Prayer we
left the boat to visit the garden made between Kul-kina3 and
the mountain (Shah-i-kabul). At the Evening Prayer we went
to the Violet-garden where there was drinking again. From
Kul-kina I got in by the rampart and went into the citadel.


(u. Dost Beg’s death.)


(April 6th) On the night of Tuesday the 5th of the month,‘
Dost Beg, who on the road had had fever, went to God’s mercy.


* Humayin was 12, Kamran younger ; one surmises that Babur would have walked
under the same circumstances.

2 sabuhi, the morning-draught. In 1623 ap. Pietro della Vallé took a sabuhi with
Mr. Thomas Rastel, the head of the merchants of Surat, which was of hot spiced wine
and sipped in the mornings to comfort the stomach (Hakluyt ed. p. 20).

3 f, 128 and note.

4 Anglicé, in the night preceding Tuesday.


27


Fol. 2336.


Fol. 234.


Fol. 2348.


396 KABUL


Sad and grieved enough we were! His bier and corpse were —
carried to Ghazni where they laid him in front of the gate of the
Sultan’s garden (vauza). a

Dost Beg had been a very good brave ( yzki#) and he was still
rising in rank as a beg. Before he was made a beg, he did
excellent things several times as one of the household. One
time was at Rabat-i-zaurag,' one yighach from Andijan when
Sl. Ahmad Zambal attacked me at night (908 AH.).. I, with 10
to 15 men, by making a stand, had forced his gallopers back ;
when we reached his centre, he made a stand with as many as
100 men; there were then three men with me, ze. there were
four counting myself. Nasir’s Dost (ze. Dost Beg) was one of
the three; another was Mirza Quli Kakildash; Karim-dad
Turkman was the other. I was just in my jza?; Tambal and
another were standing like gate-wards in front of his array ;
I came face to face with Tambal, shot an arrow striking his
helm; shot another aiming at the attachment of his shield; 3
they shot one through my leg (dz¢iim); Tambal chopped at my
head. It was wonderful! The (under)-cap of my helm was on
my head ; not a thread of it was cut, but on the head itself was
a very bad wound. Of other help came none; no-one was left
with me ; of necessity I brought myself to gallop back. Dost
Beg had been a little in my rear ; (Tambal) on leaving me alone,
chopped at him.*

Again, when we were antiing es of Akhsi [908 AH.],5 Dost
Beg chopped away at Baqi Hzz® who, although people called
him //zz, was a mighty master of the sword. Dost Beg was one
of the eight left with me after we were out of Akhsi ; he was the
third they unhorsed.

Again, after he had become a beg, when Sitinjuk Khan
(Aazbeg), arriving with the (Aizbeg) sultans before Tashkint,
besieged Ahmad-i-qasim [Kohdur] in it [918 AH.],7 Dost Beg


t f. 1060.

? This would be the under-corselet to which the four plates of mail were attached
when mail was worn. Babur in this adventure wore no mail, not even his helm; on
his head was the under cap of the metal helm.

3 Index s.n. gharicha.

4 The earlier account helps to make this one clearer (f. 1068).

5 f. 112 ef seq.

© Catamite, mistakenly read as 2hzz on f. 1126 (Mémoires ii, 82).

7 He was acting for Babur (Translator’s Note s.a. ; H.S. iii, 318; T.R. pp. 260, 270).


VENER U ES es Oye sy eR my,
z oy 7 a Fi ee ‘ rk Oe


925 AH.—JAN. 3rD To DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 397


passed through them and entered the town. During the siege
he risked his honoured life splendidly, but Ahmad-i-qasim,
without a word to this honoured man,’ flung out of the town and
got away. Dost Beg for his own part got the better of the Khan
and sultans and made his way well out of Tashkint.

Later on when Sherim Taghai, Mazid and their adherents
were in rebellion,? he came swiftly up from Ghazni with two or
three hundred men, met three or four hundred effective braves
sent out by those same Mughils to meet him, unhorsed a mass
of them near Shertikan (?), cut off and brought in a number of
heads.

Again, his men were first over the ramparts at the fort of
Bajaur (925 AH.). At Parhala, again, he advanced, beat Hati,
put him to flight, and won Parhala.

After Dost Beg’s death, I bestowed his district on his younger
brother Nasir’s Mirim.3


(v. Various incidents.)


(April 9th) On Friday the 8th of the second Rabi‘, the walled-
town was left for the Char-bagh.

(April 13th) On Tuesday the 12th there arrived in Kabul the
honoured Sultanim Begim, Sl. Husain Mirza’s eldest daughter,
the mother of Muhammad Sultan Mirza. During those throneless
times,t she had settled down in Khwarizm where Yili-pars
Sultan’s younger brother Aisan-quli Sl. took her daughter.
The Bagh-i-khilwat was assigned her for her seat. When she
had settled down and I went to see her in that garden, out of
respect and courtesy to her, she being as my honoured elder
sister, I bent the knee. She also bent the knee. We both
advancing, saw one another mid-way. We always observed
the same ceremony afterwards.

(April 8th) On Sunday the 17th, that traitor to his salt,
Baba Shaikh 5 was released from his long imprisonment, forgiven
his offences and given an honorary dress.


« ‘¢ Honoured,” in this sentence, represents Babur’s honorific plural.

2 in 921 AH. (Translator’s Note s.a.; T.R. p. 356).

3 ze. Mir Muhammad son of Nasir.

4 z.e. after the dethronement of the Bai-qara family by Shaibani.

5 He had been one of rebels of 921 AH. (Translator’s Note s.a.; T.R. p. 356).


Fol. 235.


ol, 2350.


398 KABUL


(w. Vistt to the Koh-daiman.) ae

(April 20th) On Tuesday the 19th of the month, we rode out
at the return of noon for Khwaja Sih-yaran. This day I was
fasting. All astonished, Yiinas-i-‘ali and the rest said, “A
Tuesday! a journey! and a fast! This is amazing!” At Bih-
zadi we dismounted at the Qazi’s house. In the evening when
a stir was made for a social gathering, the Qazi set this before
me, “In my house such things never are; it is for the honoured
Padshah to command!” For his heart’s content, drink was left
out, though all the material for a party was ready.

(April 21st) On Wednesday we went to Khwaja Sih-yaran.

(April 22nd) On Thursday the 22nd of the month, we had
a large round seat made in the garden under construction on the
mountain-naze.*

(April 23rd) On Friday we got on a raft from the bridge.
On our coming opposite the fowlers’ houses, they brought a dang
(or ding)? they had caught. I had never seen one before ; it is
an odd-looking bird. It will come into the account of the birds
of Hindustan.3

(April 24th) On Saturday the 23rd of the month cuttings
were planted, partly of plane, partly of za/4 above the round
seat. At the Mid-day Prayer there was a wine-party at the place.

(April 25th) At dawn we took our morning on the new
seat. At noon we mounted and started for Kabul, reached
Khwaja Hasan quite drunk and slept awhile, rode on and by
midnight got to the Char-bagh. At Khwaja Hasan, “Abdu’l-lah,
in his drunkenness, threw himself into water just as he was in his
tun aufraght5 He was frozen with cold and could not go on
with us when we mounted after a little of the night had passed.
He stayed on Qitliiq Khwaja’s estate that night. Next day,
awakened to his past intemperance, he cameon repentant. Said
I, “At once! will this sort of repentance answer or not? Would —
to God you would repent now at once in such a way that you


ate ee A

? This is the Adjutant-bird, Pir-i-dang and Hargila (Bone-swallower) of Hindistan,
a migrant through Kabul. The fowlers who brought it would be the Multanis of
f. 1420,

3 f, 280,

4 Memoirs, p. 267, sycamore ; AZémoires ii, 84, saules; f. 137.

5 Perhaps with his long coat out-spread.


925 AH.—JAN. 38RD To DEC. 23rD 1519 AD. 399


would drink nowhere except at my parties 1”. He agreed to
this and kept the rule for a few months, but could not keep it
longer.


(x. Hindi Beg abandons Bhira.)


(April 26th) On Monday the 25th came Hindi Beg. There
having been hope of peace, he had been left in those countries
with somewhat scant support. No sooner was our back turned
than a mass of Hindistanis and Afghans gathered, disregarded
us and, not listening to our words, moved against Hindi Beg in
Bhira. The local peoples also went over to the Afghans, Hindi
Beg could make no stand in Bhira, came to Khiish-ab, came
through the Din-kot country, came to Nil-ab, came on to Kabul.
Sikti’s son Diwa A/zwdaz and another Hindi had been brought
prisoner from Bhira. Each now giving a considerable ransom,
they were released. Horses and head-to-foot dresses having
been given them, leave to go was granted.

(April 30th) On Friday the 29th of the month, burning fever
appeared in my body. I got myself let blood. I had fever with
sometimes two, sometimes three days between the attacks. In
no attack did it cease till there had been sweat after sweat.
After 10 or 12 days of illness, Mulla Khwaja gave me narcissus
mixed with wine; I drank it once or twice; even that did
no good.

(May 15th) On Sunday the 15th of the first Jumada * Khwaja
Muhammad ‘Ali came from Khwast, bringing a saddled horse
as an offering and also tasaddug money.? Muh. Sharif the
astrologer and the Mir-zadas of Khwast came with him and
waited on me.

(May 16th) Next day, Monday, Mulla Kabir came from
Kashghar ; he had gone round by Kashghar on his way from
Andijan to Kabul.

(May 23rd) On Monday the 23rd of the month, Malik Shah
Mansir Y#suf-saz arrived from Sawad with 6 or 7 Yisuf-zai
chiefs, and did obeisance.


* The fortnight’s gap of record, here ended, will be due to illness.

2 f, 2036 and n. to Khams, the Fifth. Zasaddug occurs also on f. 238 denoting
money sent to Babur. Was it sent to him as Padshah, as the Qoran commands the
Khamis to be sent to the Imam, for the poor, the traveller and the orphan ?


Fol. 236.


1. 2360.


400 KABUL


(May 31st) On Monday the ist of the second Jumada, th e
chiefs of the Yisuf-zai Afghans led by Malik Shah Mansiir were —
dressed in robes of honour (44z/‘at). To Malik Shah Mansir
was given a long silk coat and an under-coat (?7#6a) with its
buttons ; to one of the other chiefs was given a coat with silk
sleeves, and to six others silk coats. To all leave to go was 7
granted. Agreement was made with them that they were not 4 a E
to reckon as in the country of Sawad what was above Abuha(?),
that they should make all the peasants belonging to it go out
from amongst themselves, and also that the Afghan cultivators
of Bajaur and Sawad should cast into the revenue 6000 ass-loads
of rice.

(June 2nd) On Wednesday the 3rd, I drank ju/-ab.t

(June 5th) On Saturday the 6th, I drank a working-draught
(dari-t-kar).

(June 7th) On Monday the 8th, arrived the wedding-gift for
the marriage of Qasim Beg’s youngest son Hamza with Khalifa’s
eldest daughter. It was of 1000 shahrukhi; they offered also
a saddled horse.

(June 8th) On Tuesday Shah Beg’s Shah Hasan asked for
permission to go away for a wine-party. He carried off to his
house Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali and some of the household-begs. In
my presence were Yinas-i-‘ali and Gadai Taghai. I was still
abstaining from wine. Said ‘I, “Not at all in this way is it
(hech andag bilmai dir) that I will sit sober and the party drink
wine, I stay sane, full of water, and that set (47/ak) of people get
drunk ; come you and drink in my presence! I will amuse
myself a little by watching what intercourse between the sober
and the drunk is like.” The party was held in a smallish tent
in which I sometimes sat, in the Plane-tree garden south-east
of the Picture-hall. Later on Ghiyas the house-buffoon (4id@z)
arrived ; several times for fun he was ordered kept out, but at
last he made a great disturbance and his buffooneries found him
a way in. We invited Tardi Muhammad Qidchdg also and

* Rose-water, sherbet, a purgative ; English, jalap, julep.

* Mr. Erskine understood Babur to say that he never had sat sober while others
drank ; but this does not agree with the account of Harat entertainments [912 AH. ],


or with the tenses of the passage here. My impression is that he said in effect
** Every-one here shall not be deprived of their wine ”.


Peye peor
|S ela ;
Pi fe ee f
Wee


925 AH.—JAN. 3rp To DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 401


Mulla &ztab-dar (librarian). The following quatrain, written
impromptu, was sent to Shah Hasan and those gathered in his


house :— Fol. 237.


In your beautiful flower-bed of banquetting friends,
Our fashion it is not to be ;

If there be ease (Auzé#r) in that gathering of yours,

Thank God ! there is here no un-ease [47 huzér].*


It was sent by Ibrahim chuhra. Between the two Prayers (ze.
afternoon) the party broke up drunk.

I used to go about in a litter while I was ill. The wine-mixture
was drunk on several of the earlier days, then, as it did no good
I left it off, but I drank it again at the end of my convalescence,
at a party had under an apple-tree on the south-west side of the
Talar-garden.

(June rith) On Friday the 12th came Ahmad Beg and Sl.
Muhammad Dz/daz who had been left to help in Bajaur.

(June 16th) On Wednesday the 17th of the month, Tingri-
birdi and other braves gave a party in Haidar 7@gz’s garden ;
I also went and there drank. We rose from it at the Bed-time
Prayer when a move was made to the great tent where again
there was drinking.

(June 23rd) On Thursday the 25th of the month, Mulla
Mahmid was appointed to read extracts from the Qoran? in
my presence.

(June 28th) On Tuesday the last day of the month, Abi’l-
muslim Kikildash arrived as envoy from Shah Shuja‘ Arghin
bringing a ¢ipichag. After bargain made about swimming
the reservoir in the Plane-tree garden, Yisuf-i-‘ali the stirrup-
holder swam round it today 100 times and received a gift of
a head-to-foot (dress), a saddled horse and some money.

( July 6th) On Wednesday the 8th of Rajab, I went to Shah
Hasan’s house and drank there ; most of the household and of Fol. 2374
the begs were present.

( July 9th) On Saturday the 11th, there was drinking on the
terrace-roof of the pigeon-house between the Afternoon and
Evening Prayers. Rather late a few horsemen were observed,


* This verse, a difficult one to translate, may refer to the unease removed from his
attendants by Babur’s permission to drink ; the pun in it might also refer to we// and
not well,

? Presumably to aid his recovery.


402 KABUL 0)


going from Dih-i-afghan towards the town. It was made out |
to be Darwish-i-muhammad Sarban, on his way to me as the
envoy of Mirza Khan (Wais). We shouted to him from the roof,
“Drop the envoy’s forms and ceremonies! Come! come without
formality!” He came and sat down in the company. He was
then obedient and did not drink. Drinking went on till the end
of the evening. Next day he cameinto the Court Session with
due form and ceremony, and presented Mirza Khan’s gifts.


(y. Various incidents.)

Last year * with 100 efforts, much promise and threats, we had
got the clans to march into Kabul from the other side (of Hindi-
kush). Kabul is a confined country, not easily giving summer
and winter quarters to the various flocks and herds of the Turks
and (Mughil ?) clans. If the dwellers in the wilds follow their
own hearts, they do not wish for Kabul! They now waited
(khidmat gilib) on Qasim Beg and made him their mediator
with me for permission to re-cross to that other side. He tried
very hard, so in the end, they were allowed to cross over to the
Qindiz and Baghlan side.

Hafiz the news-writer’s elder brother had come from Samar-
kand ; when I now gave him leave to return, I sent my Diwan
by him to Pilad Sultan.? On the back of it I wrote the following

ol. 238. Verse :-— O breeze ! if thou enter that cypress’ chamber (Aavim)
Remind her of me, my heart reft by absence ;


She yearns not for Babur ; he fosters a hope
That her heart of steel God one day may melt.3


( July 15th) On Friday the 17th of the month, Shaikh Mazid
Kiukildash waited on me from Muhammad-i-zaman Mirza,
bringing tasaddug tribute and a horse4 Today Shah Beg’s
envoy Abi’l-muslim Kikildash was robed in an honorary dress


* autkan yil, perhaps in the last and unchronicled year ; perhaps in earlier ones.
There are several references in the B.N. to the enforced migrations and emigrations
of tribes into Kabul.

? Pulad (Steel) was a son of Kiichiim, the then Khaqan of the Aiizbegs, and Mihr-
bani who may be Babur’s half-sister. [Index s.7.]

3 This may be written for Mihr-bani, Pilad’s mother and Babur’s half-sister (?)
and a jest made on her heart as Pilad’s and as steel to her brother. She had not left
husband and son when Babur got the upper hand, as his half-sister Yadgar-sultan did
and other wives of capture ¢.g. Haidar’s sister Hadiba. Babur’s rhymes in this verse
are not of his later standard, az subah, kunkaulika, kinkili-ka.

‘ Tasaddug sent to Babur would seem an acknowledgment of his suzerainty in
Balkh [Index s..].


925 AH.—JAN. 3RD TO DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 403


and given leave to go. Today also leave was given for their
own districts of Khwast and Andar-ab to Khwaja Muhammad
‘Alt and Tingri-birdi.

(July 21st) On Thursday the 23rd came Muh. ‘Ali Jang-jang
who had been left in charge of the countries near Kacha-kot
and the Qarliiq. With him came one of Hati’s people and
Mirza-i-mali-i-qarliiq’s son Shah Hasan. Today Mulla ‘Ali-jan
waited on me, returned from fetching his wife from Samarkand.


(s. The ‘Abdu’'r-rahman Afghans and Rustam-maidin.)


( July 27th) The ‘Abdu’r-rahman Afghans on the Girdiz border
were satisfactory neither in their tribute nor their behaviour ;
they were hurtful also to the caravans which came and went.
On Wednesday the 29th of Rajab we rode out to over-run them.
We dismounted and ate food near Tang-i-waghchan,' and rode
on again at the Mid-day Prayer. In the night we lost the road
and got much bewildered in the ups and downs of the land to
the south-east of Patakh-i-ab-i-shakna.?__ After a time we lit on
a road and by it crossed the Chashma-i-tira 3 pass.

(July 28th) At the first prayer (farz-wag?t) we got out from
the valley-bottom adjacent 4 to the level land, and the raid was
allowed. One detachment galloped towards the Kar-mash 5
mountain, south-east of Girdiz, the left-hand of the centre led
by Khusrau, Mirza Quli and Sayyid ‘Ali in their rear. Most of
the army galloped up the dale to the east of Girdiz, having in
their rear men under Sayyid Qasim Lord of the Gate, Mir Shah
Quchin, Qayyam (Airdi-shah Beg ?), Hindi Beg, Qutliiq-qadam
and Husain [Hasan?]. Most of the army having gone up the
dale, I followed at some distance. The dalesmen must have
been a good way up; those who went after them wore their
horses out and nothing to make up for this fell into their hands.

Some Afghans on foot, some 40 or 50 of them, having appeared
on the plain, the rear-reserve went towards them. A courier
was sent to me and I hastened on at once. Before I got up


! This is the Girdiz-pass [Raverty’s Votes, Route ror].

2 Raverty (p. 677) suggests that Patakh stands for da¢gag, a quagmire (f. 16 and n.).

3 the dark, or cloudy spring.

4 yagish-lig gual, an unusual phrase.

5 var. Karman, Kurmah, Karmas. M. de C. read Kir-mas, the impenetrable. The
forms would give Garm-ds, hot embers.


Fol. 2384.


Fol. 239.


ol. 2390.


404 KABUL


with them, Husain Hasan, all alone, foolishly and thoughtless ly,
put his horse at those Afghans, got in amongst them and began
to lay on with his sword. They shot his horse, thus made him ~
fall, slashed at him as he was getting up, flung him down, knifed —
him from all sides and cut him to pieces, while the other braves
looked on, standing still and reaching him no helping hand!
On hearing news of it, I hurried still faster forward, and sent a
some of the household and braves galloping loose-rein ahead _
under Gadai Taghai, Payanda-i-muhammad Q7/an, Abi’l-hasan
the armourer and Mimin Ataka. Mimin Ataka was the first
of them to bring an Afghan down ; he speared one, cut off his
head and brought it in. Abia’l-hasan the armourer, without
mail as he was, went admirably forward, stopped in front of the
Afghans, laid his horse at them, chopped at one, got him down,
cut off and brought in his head. Known though both were for
bravelike deeds done earlier, their action in this affair added to
their fame. Every one of those 40 or 50 Afghans, falling to’
the arrow, falling to the sword, was cut in pieces. After making
a clean sweep of them, we dismounted in a field of growing corn
and ordered a tower of their heads to be set up. As we went
along the road I said, with anger and scorn, to the begs who
had been with Husain, “ You! what men! there you stood on
quite flat ground, and looked on while a few Afghans on foot ~
overcame such a brave in the way they did! Your rank and. —
station must be taken from you; you must lose pargana and
country ; your beards must be shaved off and you must be
exhibited in towns; for there shall be punishment assuredly for
him who looks on while such a brave is beaten by such a foe
on dead-level land, and reaches out no hand to help!” The
troop which went to Kar-mash brought back sheep and other
spoil. One of them was Baba Qashqa' Mughal; an Afghan
had made at him with a sword; he had stood still to adjust an
arrow, shot it off and brought his man down.

(July 29th) Next day at dawn we marched for Kabul. Pay-
master Muhammad, ‘Abdu’l-‘aziz Master of the Horse, and Mir
Khird the taster were ordered to stop at Chashma-tira, and
get pheasants from the people there.

* balafré; marked on the face ; of a horse, starred.


925 AH.—JAN. 38RD TO DEC. 23rpD 1519 AD. 405


As I had never been along the Rustam-maidan road," I went
with a few men to see it. Rustam-plain (smazdan) lies amongst
mountains and towards their head is not a very charming place.
The dale spreads rather broad between its two ranges. To the
south, on the skirt of the rising-ground is a smallish spring,
having very large poplars near it. There are many trees also,
but not so large, at the source on the way out of Rustam-maidan
for Girdiz. This is a narrower dale, but still there is a plot of
green meadow below the smaller trees mentioned, and the little
dale is charming. From the summit of the range, looking south,
the Karmash and Bangash mountains are seen at one’s feet ; and
beyond the Karmash show pile upon pile of the rain-clouds of
Hindistan. Towards those other lands where no rain falls, not
a cloud is seen.

We reached Hini at the Mid-day Prayer and there dismounted.

(July 30th) Dismounting next day at Muhammad Agha’s
village,? we perpetrated (z7tgab) a ma’juin. There we had a drug
thrown into water for the fish; a few were taken.3

( July 31st) On Sunday the 3rd of Sha‘ban, we reached Kabul.

(August 2nd) On Tuesday the 5th of the month, Darwish-i-
muhammad Fag/z and Khusrau’s servants were summoned and,
after enquiry made into what short-comings of theirs there may
have been when Husain was overcome, they were deprived of
place and rank. At the Mid-day Prayer there was a wine-party
under a plane-tree, at which an honorary dress was given to
Baba Qashga Mughil.

(August 5th) On Friday the 8th Kipa returned from the
presence of Mirza Khan.


(aa. E-xcurston to the Koh-daman.)

(August 11th) On Thursday at the Other Prayer, I mounted for
an excursion to the Koh-daman, Baran and Khwaja Sih-yaran.*
At the Bed-time Prayer, we dismounted at Mama Khatin.5


= Raverty’s Motes (p. 457) give a full account of this valley; in it are the head-waters
of the Tochi and the Zurmut stream ; and in it R. locates Rustam’s ancient Zabul.

2 It is on the Kabul side of the Girdiz-pass and stands on the Luhugir-water (Logar).

3 f. 143.

4 At this point of the text there occurs in the Elph. MS. (f. 1954) a note, manifestly
copied from one marginal in an archetype, which states that what follows is copied
from Babur’s own MS. The note (and others) can be seen in JRAS 1905 p. 754 é¢ seg.

5 Masson, iii, 145.


Fol. 240.


‘ol. 2406.


406


(August 12th) Next day we dismounted at Istalif ; a confec ion
was eaten on that day. l

(August 13th) On Saturday there was a wine-party i
Istalif. a

(August 14th) Riding at dawn from Istalif, we crossed the a
space between it and the Sinjid-valley. Near Khwaja Sih-yaran ‘
a great snake was killed as thick, it may be, as the fore-arm and
as long asa guélach.* From its inside came out a slenderer snake, i
that seemed to have been just swallowed, every part of it being
whole ; it may have been a little shorter than the larger one.
From inside this slenderer snake came out a little mouse ; it too
was whole, broken nowhere.?

On reaching Khwaja Sih-yaran there was a wine-party. To-
day orders were written and despatched by Kich-kina the
night-watch (¢déngfar) to the begs on that side (ze. north of
Hindi-kush), giving them a rendezvous and saying, “An army _
is being got to horse, take thought, and come to the rendezvous
fixed.”

(August 15th) We rode out at dawn and ate a confection. At
the infall of the Parwan-water many fish were taken in the
local way of casting a fish-drug into the water.3 Mir Shah Beg
set food and water (@shk u ab) before us; we then rode on to
Gul-bahar. At a wine-party held after the Evening Prayer,
Darwish-i-muhammad (Sdérban) was present. Though a young
man and a soldier, he had not yet committed the sin (zrtga) of
wine, but was in obedience (2@’zb). Qitliq Khwaja Kakildash
had long before abandoned soldiering to become a darwish ;
moreover he was very old, his very beard was quite white;
nevertheless he took his share of wine at these parties. Said
I to Darwish-i-muhammad, “Qitliiq Khwaja’s beard shames
you! He, a darwish and an old man, always drinks wine ;
you, a soldier, a young man, your beard quite black, never
drink! What does it mean?” My custom being not to press
wine on a non-drinker, with so much said, it all passed off as
a joke ; he was not pressed to drink.


* A gilach is from finger-tip to finger-tip of the outstretched arms (Zenker p. 720
and A/éms. ii, 98).
? Neither zuterne is said to have died ! 3 f, 143.


925 AH.—JAN. 3rRD TO DEC. 23rpD 1519 AD. 407


(August 16th) At dawn we made our morning (subahi subihi
gildik). 3

(August 17th) Riding on Wednesday from Gul-i-bahar, we
dismounted in Abiin-village'’ ate food, remounted, went to
a summer-house in the orchards (daéghat-¢-kham) and there dis-
mounted. There was a wine-party after the Mid-day Prayer.

(August 18th) Riding on next day, we made the circuit of
Khwaja Khawand Sa‘id’s tomb, went to China-fort and there
got on araft. Just where the Panjhir-water comes in, the raft
struck the naze of a hill and began to sink. Rauh-dam, Tingri-
quli and Mir Muhammad the raftsman were thrown into the
water by the shock ; Rauh-dam and Tingri-quli were got on
the raft again ; a China cup and a spoon and a tambour went
into the water. Lower down, the raft struck again opposite the
Sang-i-barida (the cut-stone), either on a branch in mid-stream
or on a stake stuck in as a stop-water (gaqgghan qgaztiqg). Right
over on his back went Shah Beg’s Shah Hasan, clutching at
Mirza Quli Kikildash and making him fall too. Darwish-i-
muhammad Sdrédu was also thrown into the water. Mirza
Quli went over in his own fashion! Just when he fell, he was
cutting a melon which he had in his hand; as he went over, he
stuck his knife into the mat of the raft. He swam in his tax
aifraghi? and got out of the water without coming on the raft
again. Leaving it that night, we slept at raftsmen’s houses.
Darwish-i-muhammad Sdréan presented me with a seven-
coloured cup exactly like the one lost in the water.

(August 19th) On Friday we rode away from the river’s
bank and dismounted below Aindiki on the skirt of Koh-i-bacha
where, with our own hands, we gathered plenty of tooth-picks.3
Passing on, food was eaten at the houses of the Khwaja Khizr
people. We rode on and at the Mid-day Prayer dismounted
in a village of Qitliq Khwaja’s fief in Lamghan where he made
ready a hasty meal (ma haziri); after partaking of this, we
mounted and went to Kabul. .

or Atiin’s-village, one granted to Babur’s mother’s old governess (f. 96); Gul-
badan’s guest-list has also an Attin Mama.


2 f. 2354 and note.
3 miswak ; On les tire principalement de l’arbuste épineux appelé capparis-sodata


(de C. ii, 101 n.).


Fol. 241.


Fol. 2414.


‘ol. 242.


408


(66. Various incidents.) a
(August 22nd) On Monday the 25th, a special honorary
dress and a saddled horse were bestowed on Darwish-i-
muhammad Sdréén and he was made to kneel as a retainer —
(naukar). os
(August 24th) For 4 or 5 months I had not baa my head
shaved ; on Wednesday the 27th, I had it done. — i ‘
was a wine-party. .
(August 26th) On Friday the 29th, Mir Khird was made és «
kneel as Hind-al’s guardian.. He made an offering of 1000 a
shihrukhis (circa 450). : p
(August 31st) On Wednesday the 5th of Ramzan, a dutiful
letter was brought by Tiilik Kiikiildash’s servant Barlas Jiki(?).
Aiizbeg raiders had gone into those parts (Badakhshan) ; Tilik _
had gone out, fought and beaten them. Barlas Jiki bron os
one live Aiizbeg and one head. -
(Sep. 2nd) In the night of Saturday the 8th, we broke our
fast ? in Qasim Beg’s house; he led out a saddled horse for me. __
(Sep. 3rd) On Sunday night the fast was broken in Khalifa’s
house ; he offered me a saddled horse. a
(Sep. gth) Next day came Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali and Janta
who had been summoned from their districts for the good of —
the army.3 q
(Sep. 7th) On Wednesday the 12th, Kamran’s maternal uncle
Sl. ‘Ali Mirza arrived. As has been mentioned,S he had gone __
to Kashghar in the year I came from Khwast into Kabul. a
(cc. A Visuf-2ai campaign.) :
(Sep. 8th) We rode out on Thursday the 13thof the month
of Ramzan, resolved and determined to check and ward off the


* Gul-badan’s H.N. Index s.n. i
? This being Ramzan, Babur did not break his fast till sun-set. In like manner,
during Ramzan they eat in the morning before sun-rise (Erskine). -
3 A result, doubtless, of the order mentioned on f. 2406. .
4 Babur’s wife Gul-rukh appears to have been his sister or niece; he was a Begchik. A.
Cf. Gul-badan’s H.N. trs. p. 233, p. 234; T.R. p. 264-5. te
5 This remark bears on the question of whether we now have all Babur wrote of
Autobiography. It refers to a date falling within the previous gap, because the man
went to Kashghar while Babur was ruling in Samarkand (T.R. p. 265). Thelast
time Babur came from Khwast to Kabul was probably in 920 AH. ; if later, it was a
still in the gap. But an alternative explanation is that looking over and annotating
the diary section, Babur made this reference to what he fully meant to write but died ,
before being able to do so. J


925 AH.—JAN. 3rD To DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 409


Yiusuf-zai, and we dismounted in the meadow on the Dih-i-
yaq‘b side of Kabul. When we were mounting, the equerry
Baba Jan led forward a rather good-for-nothing horse ; in my
anger I struck him in the face a blow which dislocated my fist
below the ring-finger.. The pain was not much at the time,
but was rather bad when we reached our encampment-ground.
For some time I suffered a good deal and could not write. It
got well at last.

To this same assembly-ground were brought letters and
presents (4/dk) from my maternal-aunt Daulat-sultan Khanim ?
in Kashghar, by her foster-brother Daulat-i-muhammad. On the
same day Bai Khan and Misa, chiefs of the Dilazak, came,
bringing tribute, and did obeisance.

(Sep. rrth) On Sunday the 16th Qij Beg came.

(Sep. rgth) Marching on Wednesday the 19th we passed
through But-khak and, as usual, dismounted on the Bit-khak
water.

As Qij Beg’s districts, Bamian, Kah-mard and Ghiri, are
close to the Aiizbeg, he was excused from going with this army
and given leave to return to them from this ground. I bestowed
on him a turban twisted for myself, and also a head-to-foot
(bash-ayaq).

(Sep. 16th) On Friday the 21st, we dismounted at Badam-
chashma.

(Sep.17th) Next day we dismounted on the Barik-ab, I reaching
the camp after a visit to Qara-ti. On this ground honey was
obtained from a tree.

(Sep. 20th) We went on march by march till Wednesday
the 26th, and dismounted in the Bagh-i-wafa.

(Sep. 2zst) Thursday we just stayed in the garden.

(Sep. 22nd) On Friday we marched out and dismounted
beyond Sultanpir. Today Shah Mir Husain came from his
country. Today came also Dilazak chiefs under Bi Khan and

* Anglicé, the right thumb, on which the archer’s ring (s¢4-gir) is worn.

2 a daughter of Yiinas Khan, Haidar’s account of whom is worth seeing.

3 ze. the water of Luhugir (Logar). Tradition says that Bit-khak (Idol-dust)
was so named because there Sl. Mahmiid of Ghazni had idols, brought by him out


of Hindiistan, pounded to dust. Raverty says the place is probably the site of an
ancient temple (vahdra).


Fol. 2426.


410 KABUL


/ 4 M
he


Misa. My plan had been to put down the Yiisuf-zai in Sawad, ~
but these chiefs set forth to me that there was a large horde —
(aulis) in Hash-naghar and that much corn was to be had there. 4
They were very urgent for us to go to Hash-naghar. After
consultation the matter was left in this way :—Asitissaidthere
is much corn in Hash-naghar, the Afghans there shall be over- — 5 a
run ; the forts of Hash-naghar and Parashawar shall be put into
order ; part of the corn shall be stored in them and they be left
in charge of Shah Mir Husain and a body of braves. To suit
Shah Mir Husain’s convenience in this, he was given 15 days
leave, with a rendezvous named for him to come to after going
to his country and preparing his equipment.

(Sep. 23rd) Marching on next day, we reached Jii-shahi
and there dismounted. On this ground Tingri-birdi and
Sl. Muhammad Di/daz overtook us. Today came also Hamza
from Qindiz.*

(Sep. 25th) On Sunday the last day of the month (Ramzan),
we marched from Jii-shahi and dismounted at Qiriq-ariq (forty-

ol. 243. conduits), I going by raft, with a special few. The new
moon of the Feast was seen at that station.2 People had
brought a few beast-loads of wine from Nir-valley ;3 after the
Evening Prayer there was a wine-party, those present being

_ Muhibb-i-‘ali the armourer, Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali the librarian,
Shah Beg’s Shah Hasan, SI. Muh. Da/dat and Darwish-i-muh.
Sarban, then obedient (¢@’zb). From my childhood up it had
been my rule not to press wine on a non-drinker ; Darwish-i-
muhammad was at every party and no pressure was put on him
(by me), but Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali left him no choice; he pressed
him and pressed him till he made him drink.

(Sep. 26th) On Monday we marched with the dawn of the
Feast-day,* eating a confection on the road to dispel crop-sickness.
While under its composing influence (xa@klik), we were brought
a colocynth-apple (Aumntul). Darwish-i-muhammad had never


* Qasim _Beg’s son, come, no doubt, in obedience to the order of f. 2400.

2 The ‘Id-i-fitr is the festival at the conclusion of the feast of Ramzan, colebenee
on seeing the new moon of Shawwal (Erskine).

3 f, 1336 and Appendix G, On the names of the wines of Nir-valley.

+ i.e. of the new moon of Shawwal. The new moon having been seen the evening
before, which to Musalmans was Monday evening, they had celebrated the ‘Id-i-fitr
on Monday eve (Erskine).


925 AH.—JAN. 3rD To DEC. 23RD 1519 AD. 4it


seen one ; said I, “It is a melon of Hindistan,” sliced it and
gave hima piece. He bit into it at once; it was night before
the bitter taste went out of his mouth. At Garm-chashma we
dismounted on rising-ground where cold meat was being set
out for us when Langar Khan arrived to wait on me after being
for a time at his own place (Koh-i-jiid). He brought an offering
of a horse and a few confections. Passing on, we dismounted
at Yada-bir, at the Other Prayer got on a raft there, went for
as much as two miles on it, then left it.

(Sep. 27th) Riding on next morning, we dismounted below
the Khaibar-pass. Today arrived Sl. Bayazid, come up by the
Bara-road after hearing of us; he set forth that the Afridi
Afghans were seated in Bara with their goods and families and
that they had grown a mass of corn which was still standing
(lit. on foot). Our plan being for the Yisuf-zai Afghans of
Hash-naghar, we paid him no attention. At the Mid-day Prayer
there was a wine-party in Khwaja Muhammad ‘Ali’s tent.
During the party details about our coming in this direction were
written and sent off by the hand of a sultan of Tirah to Khwaja
Kalan in Bajaur. I wrote this couplet on the margin of the
letter (farman) :—


Say sweetly o breeze, to that beautiful fawn,
Thou hast given my head to the hills and the wild.*


(Sep. 28th) Marching on at dawn across the pass, we got
through the Khaibar-narrows and dismounted at ‘Ali-masjid.
At the Mid-day Prayer we rode on, leaving the baggage behind,
reached the Kabul-water at the second watch (midnight) and
there slept awhile.

(Sep. 29th) A ford? was found at daylight; we had forded
the water (si#-din kichildz), when news came from our scout that
the Afghans had heard of us and were in flight. We went on,
passed through the Sawad-water and dismounted amongst the
Afghan corn-fields. Not a half, not a fourth indeed of the
promised corn was had. The plan of fitting-up Hash-naghar,
made under the hope of getting corn here, came to nothing.

* Diwan of Hafiz lith. ed. p. 22. The couplet seems to be another message to
a woman (f. 238); here it might be to Bibi Mubaraka, still under Khwaja Kalan’s


charge in Bajaur (f. 221).
2 Here and under date Sep. 30th the wording allows a ford.


28


Fol. 2434.


Fol. 244.


ol. 2444,


412 : KABUL


The Dilazak Afghans, who had urged it on us, were . ashen
We next dismounted after fording the water of Sawad to its q
Kabul side. be.

(Sep. 30th) Marching next morning from the Sawad-water, we
crossed the Kabul-water and dismounted. The Begs admitted
to counsel were summoned and a consultation having been had,
the matter was left at this :—that the Afridi Afghans spoken of
by Sl. Bayazid should be over-run, Pirshawir-fort be fitted up
on the strength of their goods and corn, and some-one left there
in charge.

At this station Hindi’ Beg Qachim and the Mir-zadas of
Khwast overtook us. Today ma’zi#in was eaten, the party being
Darwesh-i-muhammad Sé@réan, Muhammad Kikildash, Gadai
Taghai and ‘Asas ; later on we invited Shah Hasan also. After
food had been placed before us, we went on a raft, at the Other
Prayer. We called Langar Khan JVia-za@z on also. At the
Evening Prayer we got off the raft and went to camp.

(Oct. rst) Marching at dawn, in accordance with the arrange-
ment made on the Kabul-water, we passed Jam and dismounted
at the outfall of the ‘Ali-masjid water.*


(dd. Badakhshan affairs.)


Sl. ‘Ali (Taghai’s servant ?) Abi’l-hashim overtaking us, said,
“On the night of ‘Arafa,? I was in Jii-shahi with a person from
Badakhshan ; he told me that Sl. Said Khan had come with
designs on Badakhshan, so I came on from Jii-shahi along the
Jam-riid, to give the news to the Padshah.” On this the begs
were summoned and advice was taken. In consequence of this
news, it seemed inadvisable to victual the fort (Pirshawir), and
we started back intending to go to Badakhshan.3 Langar Khan
was appointed to help Muh. ‘Ali /ang-jang; he was given an
honorary dress and allowed to go.

* This may be what Masson writes of (i, 149) ‘*‘ We reached a spot where the
water supplying the rivulet (of ‘Ali-masjid) gushes in a large volume from the rocks
to the left. I slaked my thirst in the diving spring and drank to repletion of the
delightfully cool and transparent water.”

? Mr. Erskine here notes, ‘‘ This appears to be a mistake or oversight of Babur.
The eve of ‘Arafa” (9th of Zi’l- -hijja) ** was not till the evening of Dec. 2nd 1519.
He probably meant to say the ‘Id-i-fitr which had occurred only five days before,


on Sep. 26th.”
3 This was an affair of frontiers (T.R. p. 354).


ae i
ry ;
bd


925 AH.—_JAN. 3rD To DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 413


That night a wine-party was held in Khwaja Muh. ‘Ali’s tent.
We marched on next day, crossed Khaibar and dismounted
below the pass.


(ee. The Khizr-khail Afghans.)

(Oct. 3rd) Many improper things the Khizr-khail had done!
When the army went to and fro, they used to shoot at the
laggards and at those dismounted apart, in order to get their
horses. It seemed lawful therefore and right to punish them.
With this plan we marched from below the pass at daybreak,
ate our mid-day meal in Dih-i-ghulaman (Basaul),' and after
feeding our horses, rode on again at the Mid-day Prayer.

Muh. Husain the armourer was made to gallop off to Kabul
with orders to keep prisoner all Khizr-khailis there, and to
submit to me an account of their possessions ; also, to write
a detailed account of whatever news there was from Badakhshan
and to send a man off with it quickly from Kabul to me.

That night we moved on till the second watch (midnight),
got a little beyond Sultanpir, there slept awhile, then rode on
again. The Khizr-khail were understood to have their seat
from Bahar (Vihara ?) and Mich-gram to Kara-sii (szc). Arriving
before dawn, (Oct. 4th) the raid was allowed. Most of the goods
of the Khizr-khailis and their small children fell into the army’s
hands ; a few tribesmen, being near the mountains, drew off to Fol. 245.
them and were left.

(Oct. sth) We dismounted next day at Qilaght’ where
pheasants were taken on our ground. Today the baggage came
up from the rear and was unloaded here. Owing to this punitive
raid, the Waziri Afghans who never had given in their tribute
well, brought 300 sheep.

(Oct. 9th) I had written nothing since my hand was dislocated ;
here I wrote a little, on Sunday the 14th of the month.?

(Oct. roth) Next day came Afghan chiefs leading the Khirilchi
[and] Sami-khail. The Dilazak Afghans entreated pardon for
them ; we gave it and set the captured free, fixed their tribute
at 4000 sheep, gave coats (¢#m) to their chiefs, appointed and
sent out collectors.


t Manucci gives an account of the place (Irvine iv, 439 and ii, 447).
2 Sep. 8th to Oct. 9th.


il. 2454.


414 KABUL aa ae hs
(Oct. 13th) These matters settled, we marched on Thursday ~
the 18th, and dismounted at Bahar (Vihara?) and Mich-gram.
(Oct. 14th) Next day I went to the Bagh-i-wafa. Those were


the days of the garden’s beauty; its lawns were one sheet of ©


trefoil ; its pomegranate-trees yellowed to autumn splendour,’


their fruit full red; fruit on the orange-trees green and glad a
(khurram), countless oranges but not yet as yellow as our hearts


desired! The pomegranates were excellent, not equal, however,
to the best ones of Wilayat.2 The one excellent and blessed
content we have had from the Bagh-i-wafa was had at this time.
We were there three or four days; during the time the whole
camp had pomegranates in abundance.

(Oct. 17th) We marched from the garden on Monday. I stayed
in it till the first watch (9 a.m.) and gave away oranges; I bestowed
the fruit of two trees on Shah Hasan ; to several begs I gave the


fruit of one tree each; to some gave one tree for two persons.


As we were thinking of visiting Lamghan in the winter, I ordered
that they should reserve (gurighlailar) at least 20 of the trees
growing round the reservoir. That day we dismounted at
Gandamak.

(Oct. 18th) Next day we dismounted at Jagdalik. Near the
Evening Prayer there was a wine-party at which most of the
household were present. After a time Qasim Beg’s sister’s son
Gadai dz4jat3 used very disturbing words and, being drunk, slid
down on the cushion by my side, so Gadai Taghai picked him
up and carried him out from the party.

(Oct. 19th) Marching next day from that ground, I made an
excursion up the valley-bottom of the Barik-ab towards Qiriq-
sai. A few purslain trees were in the utmost autumn beauty.
On dismounting, seasonable+ food was set out. The vintage


* khush rang-t khizin. Sometimes Babur’s praise of autumn allows the word
khizan to mean the harvest-crops themselves, sometimes the autumnal colouring.

? This I have taken to mean the Kabul z#man. The Hai. MS. writes wz/ayatlar
(plural) thus suggesting that a#/ (those) may be omitted, and those countries (Trans-
oxiana) be meant ; but the second Pers. trs. (1.0. 217 f. 169) supports wz/ayaz, Kabul,

3 joyous, happy.

+ y:lk:ran, This word has proved a difficulty to all translators. I suggest that
it stands for atlikaran, what came to hand (ai/ik see de C.’s Dict.); also that it
contains puns referring to the sheep taken from the road (ya#/karan) and to the wine ~
of the year’s yield (yi/karan), The way-side meal was of what came to hand, mutton
and wine, probably local.


925 AH.—JAN. 38RD To DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 415


was the cause! wine was drunk! A sheep was ordered brought
from the road and made into kababs (brochettes). We amused
ourselves by setting fire to branches of holm-oak."

Mulla ‘Abdu’l-malik dizvana? having begged to take the news
of our coming into Kabul, was sent ahead. To this place came
Hasan Nabira from Mirza Khan’s presence ; he must have come
after letting me know [his intention of coming].3 There was
drinking till the Sun’s decline ; we then rode off. People in our
party had become very drunk, Sayyid Qasim so much so, that
two of his servants mounted him and got him into camp with
difficulty. Muh. Baqir’s Dost was so drunk that people, headed
by Amin-i-muhammad Tarkhan and Masti chuhra, could not get
him on his horse ; even when they poured water on his head,
nothing was effected. At that moment a body of Afghans
appeared. Amin-i-muhammad, who had had enough himself,
had this idea, “ Rather than leave him here, as he is, to be taken,
let us cut his head off and carry it with us.” At last after 100
efforts, they mounted -him and brought him with them. We
reached Kabul at midnight.


(ff Incidents in Kabul.)

In Court next morning Quli Beg waited on me. He had
been to SI. Sa‘id Khan’s presence in Kashghar as my envoy.
To him as envoy to me had been added Bishka Mirza /tarchi +
who brought me gifts of the goods of that country.

(Oct. 25th) On Wednesday the Ist of Zi’l-qa‘da, I went by
myself to Qabil’s tomb5 and there took my morning. The
people of the party came later by ones and twos. When the
Sun waxed hot, we went to the Violet-garden and drank there,
by the side of the reservoir. Mid-day coming on, we slept. At
the Mid-day Prayer we drank again. At this mid-day party
I gave wine to Tingri-quli Beg and to Mahndi(?) to whom at
any earlier party, wine had not been given. At the Bed-time
Prayer, I went to the Hot-bath where I stayed the night.


t f, 1410. 2 f, 217 and n.

3 I think Babur means that the customary announcement of an envoy or guest must
have reached Kabul in his absence.

4 He is in the T.R. list of the tribe (p. 307); to it belonged Sl. Ahmad Zamdbal
(zd. p. 316).

5 abel nene hiiri-ning qashi-ka, lit. to the presence of the tomb of Qabil, z.e. Cain
the eponymous hero of Kabul. The Elph. MS. has been altered to “‘Qabil Beg”!


Fol. 246.


Fol. 2462


l. 247.


forgot Mulla Mahmid and recited this line :-—


416 KABUL


(Oct. 26th) On Thursday honorary dresses were bestowed on
the Hindiistani traders, headed by Yahya Mahan, and they —
were allowed to go. tl

(Oct. 28th) On Saturday the 4th, a dress and gifts were
bestowed on Bishka Mirza, who had come from Kashghar, and
he was given leave to go. a

(Oct. 29th) On Sunday there was a party in the little Picture-
hall over the (Char-bagh) gate; small retreat though it , ie
16 persons were present. :


(gg. Excursion to the Koh-daman.)


(Oct. 30th) Today we went to Istalif to see the harvest (AAzza7).
Today was done the sin (? zrtékab giltb aid) of ma’ jin. Much
rain fell ; most of the begs and the household came into my tent,
outside the Bagh-i-kalan.

(Oct. 31st) Next day there was a wine-party in the same
garden, lasting till night.

(November rst) At dawn we took our morning (subahi subihi
gilduk) and got drunk, took a sleep, and at the Mid-day Prayer
rode from Istalif. On the road a confection was eaten. We
reached Bih-zadi at the Other Prayer. The harvest-crops were
very beautiful; while we were viewing them those disposed
for wine began to agitate about it. The harvest-colour was
extremely beautiful ; wine was drunk, though ma’7zin had been
eaten, sitting under autumnal trees. The party lasted till the
Bed-time Prayer. Khalifa’s Mulla Mahmid arriving, we had
him summoned to join the party. ‘Abdu’l-lah was very drunk
indeed ; a word affecting Khalifa (tarfidin) being said, ‘Abdu’l-lah


Regard whom thou wilt, he suffers from the same wound.*


Mulla Mahmid was sober; he blamed ‘Abdu’l-lah for repeating
that line in jest ; ‘Abdu’l-lah came to his senses, was troubled in
mind, and after this talked and chatted very sweetly.

Our excursion to view the harvest was over ; we dismounted,
close to the Evening Prayer, in the Char-bagh.

(Nov. rath) On Friday the 16th, after eating a confection


* Mr. Erskine surmised that the line was from some religious poem of mystical
meaning and that its profane application gave offence.


925 AH.—JAN. 38RD TO DEC. 23rp 1519 AD. 417


with a few special people in the Violet-garden, we went on
a boat. Humayiin and Kamran were with us later; Humayiin
made a very good shot at a duck. :


(hh. A Bohemian episode.)


(Wov. r4th) On Saturday the 18th, I rode out of the Char-bagh
at midnight, sent night-watch and groom back, crossed Mulla
Baba’s bridge, got out by the Ditirin-narrows, round by the
bazars and #érez of Qiish-nadur (var.), along the back of the
Bear-house (khzrs-khana), and near sunrise reached Tardi Beg
Khak-sar's* kaérez. Heran out quickly on hearing of me. His
shortness (galashlighi) was known ; I had taken 100 shahrukhis
(45) with me; I gave him these and told him to get wine and
other things ready as I had a fancy for a private and unrestrained
party. He went for wine towards Bih-zadi?; I sent my horse
by his slave to the valley-bottom and sat down on the slope
behind the arez. At the first watch (9 a.m.) Tardi Beg brought
a pitcher of wine which we drank by turns. After him came
Muhammad-i-qasim Barlas and Shah-zada who had got to know
of his fetching the wine, and had followed him, their minds
quite empty of any thought about me. We invited them to the
party. Said Tardi Beg, “ Hul-hul Aniga wishes to drink wine
with you.” Said I, “For my part, I never saw a woman drink
wine ; invite her.” We also invited Shahi a galandar, and one
of the £@rez-men who played the rebeck. There was drinking
till the Evening Prayer on the rising-ground behind the arez ;
we then went into Tardi Beg’s house and drank by lamp-light
almost till the Bed-time Prayer. The party was quite free and.
unpretending. I lay down, the others went to another house
and drank there till beat of drum (midnight). Hul-hul Aniga
came in and made me much disturbance; I got rid of her at last
by flinging myself down as if drunk. It was in my mind to put
people off their guard, and ride off alone to Astar-ghach, but it
did not come off because they got to know. In the end, I rode


* His sobriquet £aksar, one who sits in the dust, suits the excavator of a Aarez.
Babur’s route can be followed in Masson’s (iii, 110), apparently to the very dares.

2 In Masson’s time this place was celebrated for vinegar. To reach it and return
must have occupied several hours.


Fol. 2474.


ol. 248.


‘ol. 2484.


418 KABUL


away at beat of drum, after letting Tardi Beg and Shah-2ada a
know. We three mounted and made for Astar-ghach. “

(Nov. 15th) We reached Khwaja Hasan below Istalif by the
first prayer (farz wagt); dismounted for a while, ate a confection, _
and went to view the harvest. When the Sun was up, we
dismounted at a garden in Istalif and ate grapes. We slept
at Khwaja Shahab, a dependency of Astar-ghach. Ata, the
Master of the Horse, must have had a house somewhere near,
for before we were awake he had brought food and a pitcher of
wine. The vintage was very fine. After drinking a few cups,
we rode on. We next dismounted in a garden beautiful with
autumn ; there a party was held at which Khwaja Muhammad
Amin joined us. Drinking went on till the Bed-time Prayer.
During that day and night ‘Abdu’l-lah, ‘Asas, Nir Beg and
Yisuf-i-‘ali all arrived from Kabul.

(ov. r6th).After food at dawn, we rode out and visited the
Bagh-i-padshahi below Astar-ghach. One young apple-tree in
it had turned an admirable autumn-colour ; on each branch were
left 5 or 6 leaves in regular array ; it was such that no painter
trying to depict it could have equalled. After riding from
Astar-ghach we ate at Khwaja Hasan, and reached Bih-zadi at
the Evening Prayer. There we drank in the house of Khwaja
Muh. Amin’s servant Imam-i-muhammad.

(Nov. 17th) Next day, Tuesday, we went into the Char-bagh
of Kabul.

(Nov. 18th) On Thursday the 23rd, having marched (kichid),
the fort was entered.

(Nov. roth) On Friday Muhammad ‘Ali (son of ?) Haidar
the stirrup-holder brought, as an offering, a ¢dézgtin* he had
caught.

(Nov. 20th) On Saturday the 25th, there was a party in the
Plane-tree garden from which I rose and mounted at the Bed-
time Prayer. Sayyid Qasim being in shame at past occurrences,”
we dismounted at his house and drank a few cups.

(Nov. 24th) On Thursday the 1st of Zi’l-hijja, Taju’d-din
Mahmid, come from Qandahar, waited on me.


* Kunos, a9 ¢éigiin, white falcon; ‘Amal-i-salih (1.0. MS. No. 857, f. 45), aus
tiighin,
ST, mae


925 AH.—JAN. 3RD TO DEC. 23rpD 1519 AD. 419


(Dec. 12th) On Monday the toth, Muh. ‘Ali Jang-jang came
from Nil-ab.

(Dec. 13th) On Tuesday the . . . of the month, Sangar Khan
Janjuha, come from Bhira, waited on me.

(Dec. 16th) On Friday the 23rd, I finished (copying ?) the odes
and couplets selected according to their measure from ‘Ali-sher
Beg’s four Diwans.*

(Dec. 20th) On Tuesday the 27th there was a social-gathering
in the citadel, at which it was ordered that if any-one went out
from it drunk, that person should not be invited toa party again.

(Dec. 23rd) On Friday the 30th of Zi’l-hijja it was ridden
out with the intention of making an excursion to Lamghan.


* Nawa’i himself arranged them according to the periods of his life (Rieu’s Pers
Cat. p. 294).


ol. 249.


926 AH.—DEC. 23rp 1519 to DEC. 127H 1520 AD.*


(a. Excursion to the Koh-diman and Kohistan.)


(Dec. 23rd) On Saturday Muharram ist Khwaja Sih-yaran
was reached. A wine-party was had on the bank of the conduit,
where this comes out on the hill.?

(Dec. 24th) Riding on next morning (2nd), we visited the
moving sands (reg-2-rawan). A party was held in Sayyid
Oasim’s Bulbul’s house.3

(Dec. 25th) Riding on from there, we ate a confection Nip
went further and dismounted at Bilkir (?).

(Dec. 26th) At dawn (4th) we made our morning [sudahe
subuhi gildik), although there might be drinking at night. We
rode on at the Mid-day Prayer, dismounted at Dir-nama‘ and
there had a wine party.

(Dec. 27th) We took our morning early. Haq-dad, the
headman of Dir-nama made me an offering (pesh-kash) of his
garden.

(Dec. 28th). Riding thence on Thursday (6th), we dismounted
at the villages of the Tajiks in Nijr-ai.

(Dec. 29th) On Friday (7th) we hunted the hill between Forty-
ploughs (Chzhzl-gulba) and the water of Baran; many deer fell.
I had not shot an arrow since my hand was hurt ; now, with an
easy 5 bow, I shot a deer in the shoulder, the arrow going in to
half up the feather. Returning from hunting, we went on at
the Other Prayer in Nijr-ai.

* Elph. MS. f. 2026; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 175 (misplaced) and 217 f. 172; Mems.

arpa austida; the Jii-khwish of f. 137.

3 The Hai. MS. omits a passage here ; the Elph. MS. reads Qasim Bulbuli ning
awi, thus making ° ‘nightingale ” a sobriquet of Qasim’s own. Erskine (p. 281) has
“*Bulbuli-hall”; Ilminsky’s words translate as, the house of Sayyid Qasim’s nightingale
=; Oe -nama’i, seen from afar.


5 narm-dik, the opposite of a gatig yai, a stiff bow. Some MSS. write /azim-dik
which might be read to mean such a bow as his disablement allowed to be used.


420


926 AH.—DEC., 28RD 1519 To DEC. 12TH 1520 AD. 421


(Dec. 30th) Next day (Saturday 8th) the tribute of the
Nijr-aii people was fixed at 60 gold misqals.*

( Jan. 1st) On Monday (1oth) we rode on intending to visit
Lamghan.? I had expected Humayin to go with us, but as he
inclined to stay behind, leave was given him from Kira-pass.
We went on and dismounted in Badr-aii (Tag-aii).


(6. Excursions in Lamghan.)

(Jan. . .) Riding on, we dismounted at Ailigh-nir3 The
fishermen there took fish at one draught+ from the water of
Baran. At the Other Prayer (afternoon) there was drinking on
the raft ; and there was drinking in a tent after we left the raft
at the Evening Prayer.

Haidar the standard-bearer had been sent from Dawar5 to
the Kafirs; several Kafir headmen came now to the foot of
Bad-i-pich (pass), brought a few goat-skins of wine, and did
obeisance. In descending that pass a surprising number of

.© was seen.

(Jan...) Next day getting on a raft, we ate a confection,
got off below Bilan and went to camp. There were two rafts.

( Jan. 5th) Marching on Friday (14th), we dismounted below
Mandrawar on the hill-skirt. There was a late wine-party.

( Jan. 6th) On Saturday (15th), we passed through the Darita
narrows by raft, got off a little above Jahan-nama’i (Jalalabad)
and went to the Bagh-i-wafa in front of Adinapir. When we
were leaving the raft the governor of Ningnahar Qayyam Airdi
Shah came and did obeisance. Langar Khan JVia-zaz,— he had


* Mr. Erskine, writing early in the 19th century, notes that this seems an easy
tribute, about 400 rufis z.e. £40.

2 This is one of the three routes into Lamghan of f. 133.

3 f. 2516 and Appendix F, Ox the name Dara-t-nir.

4 This passage will be the basis of the account on f. 1434 of the winter-supply of
fish in Lamghan.

5 This word or name is puzzling. Avoiding extreme detail as to variants, I suggest
that it is Dair-bin for Dir-nama’i if a place-name; or, if not, d#r-din, foresight (in
either case the preposition requires to be supplied), and it may refer to foreseen need
of and curiosity about Kafir wines.


© chiurtika or chitr-i-tika, whether Stasferelle as M. de Courteille understood, or .


janwiar-i-ranga and chikir, partridge as the Ist Persian trs. and as Mr. Erskine (ex-
plaining chir-z-tika) thought, must be left open. Two points arise however, (1) the
time is January, the place the deadly Bad-i-pich pass; would these suit locusts ?
(2) If Babur’s account of a splendid bird (f. 135) were based on this experience, this
would be one of several occurrences in which what is entered in the Description of
Kabul of 910 AH. is found as an experience in the diary of 925-6 AH.


Fol. 249.


Fol. 250.


422 KABUL Cais ae a


been in Nil-ab for a time,— waited upon me on the road. We 5
dismounted in the Bagh-i-wafa; its oranges had yellowed —


beautifully ; its spring-bloom was well-advanced, and it was very _


charming. We stayed in it five or six days.

As it was my wish and inclination (j# dagh-dagha) to return
to obedience (Za’zb) in my 40th year, I was drinking to excess
now that less than a year was left.

(Jan. 7th) On Sunday the 16th, having made my morning
(subuhi) and became sober. Mulla Yarak played an air he had
composed in five-time and in the five-line measure (s#zakhammas),
while I chose to eat a confection (ma’ju#in). He had composed
an excellent air. I had not occupied myself with such things
for some time; a wish to compose came over me now, so
I composed an air in four-time, as will be mentioned in time.'

(Jan. roth) On Wednesday (19th) it was said for fun, while
we were making our morning (sudihz), “ Let whoever speaks
like a Sart (ze. in Persian) drink a cup.” Through this many


drank. At sunnat-wagt? again, when we were sitting under the


willows in the middle of the meadow, it was said, “ Let whoever
speaks like a Turk, drink a cup!” Through this also numbers
drank. After the sun got up, we drank under the orange-trees
on the reservoir-bank.

(Jan. 11th) Next day (20th) we got on a raft from Darita ;
got off again below Jii-shahi and went to Atar.

(Jan. . .) We rode from there to visit Nir-valley, went as
far as Siisan (lily)-village, then turned back and dismounted
in Amla. ;

(Jan. 14th) As Khwaja Kalan had brought Bajaur into good
order, and as he was a friend of mine, I had sent for him and
had made Bajaur over to Shah Mir Husain’s charge. On
Saturday the 22nd of the month (Muharram), Shah Mir Husain
was given leave to go. That day in Amla we drank.

(Jan. 15th) It rained (yamghir yaghdirib) next day (23rd).

* Hai. MS. mahali-da maskir balghisidir, but W.-i-B. 1.0. 215 f. 176 for mahali-
da, in its place, has dar majilzs [in the collection], which may point to an intended
collection of Babur’s musical compositions. Either reading indicates intention to
write what we now have not.


? Perhaps an equivalent for farz-wag?, the time of the first obligatory prayer. Much
seems to happen before the sun got up high !


926 AH.—DEC, 23xp 1519 To DEC. 121TH 1520 AD. 423


When we reached Kula-gram in Kitinar* where Malik ‘Ali’s
house is, we dismounted at his middle son’s house, overlooking
an orange-orchard. We did not go into the orchard because of
the rain but just drank where we were. The rain was very
heavy. I taught Mulla ‘Ali Khan a talisman I knew; he wrote
it on four pieces of paper and hung them on four sides ; as he
did it, the rain stopped and the air began to clear.

(Jan. 16th) At dawn (24th) we got on a raft; on another
several braves went. People in Bajaur, Sawad, Kiinar and
thereabouts make a beer (d7r duza)? the ferment of which is
a thing they call 4im3 This kim they make of the roots of
herbs and several simples, shaped like a loaf, dried and kept by
them. Some sorts of beer are surprisingly exhilarating, but
bitter and distasteful. We had thought of drinking beer but,
because of its bitter taste, preferred a confection. ‘Asas, Hasan
Aikirik,s and Masti, on the other raft, were ordered to drink
some; they did so and became quite drunk. Hasan AZzkzrzk
set up a disgusting disturbance; ‘Asas, very drunk, did such
unpleasant things that we were most uncomfortable (da tang).
I thought of having them put off on the far side of the water,
but some of the others begged them off.

I had sent for Khwaja Kalan at this time and had bestowed
Bajaur on Shah Mir Husain. For why? Khwaja Kalan was
a friend ; his stay in Bajaur had been long ; moreover the Bajaur
appointment appeared an easy one.

At the ford of the Kiinar-water Shah Mir Husain met me on
his way to Bajaur. I sent for him and said a few trenchant
words, gave him some special armour, and let him go.

Opposite Nir-gal (Rock-village) an old man begged from
those on the rafts ; every-one gave him something, coat (i),
turban, bathing-cloth and so on, so he took a good deal away.

At a bad place in mid-stream the raft struck with a great
shock; there was much alarm; it did not sink but Mir Muhammad
the raftsman was thrown into the water. We were near Atar
that night.


* Koh-i-nir, Rocky-mountains(?). See Appendix F, On the name Dara-t-nir.
2 Steingass gives da%za as made of rice, millet, or barley.

3 Is this connected with Arabic imzya’, alchemy, chemistry ?

4 Turki, a whirlpool ; but perhaps the name of an office from agar, a adie


Fol. 250


Fol. 251.


424 KABUL


(Jan. 17th) On Tuesday (25th) we reached Mandrawar!
Qitliq-qadam and his father had arranged a party inside the
fort ; though the place had no charm, a few cups were drunk
there to please them. We went to camp at the Other Prayer.

(Jan. 18th) On Wednesday (26th) an excursion was made to
Kind-kir? spring. Kind-kir is a dependent village of the
Mandrawar ¢éiman, the one and only village of the Lamghanat
where dates are grown. It lies rather high on the mountain-
skirt, its date lands on its east side. At one edge of the date
lands is the spring, in a place aside (yan yir). Six or seven
yards below the spring-head people have heaped up stones to
make a shelter3 for bathing and by so-doing have raised the
water in the reservoir high enough for it to pour over the heads
of the bathers. The water is very soft; it is felt a little cold in
wintry days but is pleasant if one stays in it.

(Jan. 19th) On Thursday (27th) Sher Khan 7arkalani got us
to dismount at his house and there gave us a feast (2zy@fat). 4
Having ridden on at the Mid-day Prayer, fish were taken out of
the fish-ponds of which particulars have been given.4

(Jan. 20th) On Friday (28th) we dismounted near Khwaja
Mir-i-miran’s village. A party was held there at the Evening
Prayer. :
_ (Jan, 21st) On Saturday (29th) we hunted the hill between
‘Ali-shang and Alangar. One hunting-circle having been made .
on the ‘Ali-shang side, another on the Alangar, the deer were :
driven down off the hill and many were killed. Returning from
hunting, we dismounted in a garden belonging to the Maliks of
Alangar and there had a party. i

Half of one of my front-teeth had broken off, the other half ,
remaining ; this half broke off today while I was eating food.

( Jan. 22nd) At dawn (Safar Ist) we rode out and had a fishing- |
net cast, at mid-day went into ‘Ali-shang and drank in a garden. a


* The river on which the rafts were used was the Kiinar, from Chitral.

? An uncertain name. I have an impression that these waters are medicinal, but
I cannot trace where I found the information. The visit paid to them, and the
arrangement made for bathing set them apart. The name of the place may convey
this speciality.

3 panahi, the word used for the hiding-places of bird-catchers on f. 140.

4 This will be the basis of the details about fishing given on f. 143 and f. 143é.
The statement that particulars have been given allows the inference that the diary was
annotated after the Description of Kabul, in which the particulars are, was written.


{


a


,


“a
j


926 AH.—DEC. 23RD 1519 To DEC. 12TH 1520 AD. 425


( Jan. 23rd) Next day (Safar 2nd) Hamza Khan, Malik of
‘Ali-shang was made over to the avengers-of-blood * for his evil
deeds in shedding innocent blood, and retaliation was made.

(Jan. 24th) On Tuesday, after reading a chapter of the Qoran
(wird), we turned for Kabul by the Yan-bilagh road. At the
Other Prayer, we passed the [Baran]|-water from Atligh-nitr
(Great-rock); reached Qara-ttii by the Evening Prayer, there
gave our horses corn and had a hasty meal prepared, rode on
again as soon as they had finished their barley.”


* ganliglar. This right of private revenge which forms part of the law of most
rude nations, exists in a mitigated form under the Muhammadan law. The criminal
is condemned by the judge, but is delivered up to the relations of the person murdered,
to be ransomed or put to death as they think fit (Erskine).

2 Here the text breaks off and a /acuna separates the diary of 11 months length
which ends the Kabul section of the Badur-nama writings, from the annals of 932 AH.
which begin the Hindiistan section. There seems no reason why the diary should
have been discontinued.


Fol. 2510


a ee er fg
a Oh
Wome?


TRANSLATOR’S NOTE ON 926 to 982 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD.


Babur’s diary breaks off here for five years and ten months.?
His activities during the unrecorded period may well have left
no time in which to keep one up, for in it he went thrice to
Qandahar, thrice into India, once to Badakhshan, once to Balkh ;
twice at least he punished refractory tribesmen; he received
embassies from Hindistan, and must have had much to oversee
in muster and equipment for his numerous expeditions. Over
and above this, he produced the J/udin, a Turki poem of 2000
lines.

That the gap in his autobiography is not intentional several
passages in his writings show ;? he meant to fill it ; there is no
evidence that he ever did so; the reasonable explanation of his
failure is that he died before he had reached this part of his book.

The events of these unrecorded years are less interesting than
those of the preceding gap, inasmuch as their drama of human
passion is simpler ; it is one mainly of cross-currents of ambition,
nothing in it matching the maelstrom of sectarian hate, tribal
antipathy, and racial struggle which engulphed Babur’s fortunes
beyond the Oxus.

None-the-less the period has its distinctive mark, the bio-
graphical one set by his personality as his long-sustained effort
works out towards rule in Hindistan. He becomes felt ; his
surroundings bend to his purpose; his composite following
accepts his goal; he gains the southern key of Kabul and
Hindistan and presses the Arghiins out from his rear; in the
Panj-ab he becomes a power ; the Rajput Rana of Chitor proffers
him alliance against Ibrahim ; and his intervention is sought in
those warrings of the Afghans which were the matrix of his own
success,


* Jan. 2 th 1520 to Nov. 17th 1525 ap. (Safar 926 to Safar Ist 932 AH.).
? Index s.am. Bagh-i-safa and B.N. /acunae.


926 To 982 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. 427


a. Dramatis personae.


The following men played principal parts in the events of the
unchronicled years :—

Babur in Kabul, Badakhshan and Balkh,* his earlier following
purged of Mughil rebellion, and augmented by the various
Mirzas-in-exile in whose need of employment Shah Beg saw
Babur’s need of wider territory.”

Sultan Ibrahim Lzdz who had succeeded after his father
Sikandar’s death (Sunday Zi’l-qa‘da 7th 923 AH.—Nov. 2!Ist
1517 AD.)3, was now embroiled in civil war, and hated for his
tyranny and cruelty.

Shah: Isma‘il Safaw7, ruling down to Rajab 19th 930 AH.
(May 24th 1524 AD.) and then succeeded by his son Tahmasp
aet. 10. |

Kichim (Kichkinji) Khan, Khagan of the Aizbegs, Shai-
bani’s successor, now in possession of Transoxiana.

Sultan Sa‘id Khan Chaghatdi, with head-quarters in Kashghar,
a ruler amongst the Mughils but not their Khaqan, the supreme
Khanship being his elder brother Mansir’s.

Shah Shuja‘ Beg Arghan, who, during the period, at various
times held Qandahar, Shal, Mustang, Siwistan, and part of
Sind. He died in 930 AH. (1524 AD.) and was succeeded by his
son Hasan who read the #utba for Babur.

Khan Mirza Miranshahi, who held Badakhshan from Babur,
with head-quarters in Qiindiiz; he died in 927 AH. (1520 AD.)
and was succeeded in his appointment by Humayiin aezv. 13.

* Nominally Balkh seems to have been a Safawi possession ; but it is made to
seem closely dependent on Babur by his receipt from Muhammad-i-zaman in it of
tasaddug (money for alms), and by his action connected with it (g.v.).

2 Tarikh-i-sind, Malet’s trs. p. 77 and zx loco, p. 365.

3 A chronogram given by Badayiini decides the vexed question. of the date of
Sikandar Ladi’s death—/annatw lfirdus nazla = 923 (Bib. Ind. ed. i, 322, Ranking
trs. p. 425 n. 6). Erskine supported 924 AH. (i, 407), partly relying on an entry
in Babur’s diary (f. 2264) s.d. Rabi‘u’l-awwal Ist 925 AH. (March 3rd 1519 AD.)


which states that on that day Mulla Murshid was sent to Ibrahim whose father
Sikandar had died five or six months before.

Against this is the circumstance that the entry about Mulla Murshid is, perhaps
entirely, certainly partly, of later entry than what precedes and what follows it in the
diary. This can be seen on examination ; it is a passage such as the diary section
shews in other places, added to the daily record and giving this the character of a
draft waiting for revision and rewriting (fol. 2164 n.).

(To save difficulty to those who may refer to the L. & E. A/Zemozrs on the point,
I mention that the whole passage about Mulla Murshid is displaced in that book and
that the date March 3rd is omitted.)


29


428 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


| 7
Muhammad-i-zaman Bai-gara who held Balkh perhaps direct —
from Babur, perhaps from Isma‘il through Babur. “i


‘Alv’u'd-din ‘Alam Khan Lad@, brother of the late Sultan


Sikandar Ladi and now desiring to supersede his nephew
Ibrahim.

Daulat Khan Yisuf-khail (as Babur uniformly describes him),
or Ludi (as other writers do), holding Lahor for Ibrahim Ladz
at the beginning of the period.


SOURCES FOR THE EVENTS OF THIS GAP


A complete history of the events the Babur-nama leaves
unrecorded has yet to be written. The best existing one,
whether Oriental or European, is Erskine’s Azstory of India,
but this does not exhaust the sources—notably not using the
Hlabibu’s-styar—and could be revised here and there with
advantage.

Most of the sources enumerated as useful for filling the
previous gap are so here; to them must be added, for the
affairs of Qandahar, Khwand-amir’s Hadibu's-siyar. This Mir
Ma‘siim’s 7arikh-z-sind supplements usefully, but its brevity and
its discrepant dates make it demand adjustment ; in some details
it is expanded by Sayyid Jamal’s Zarkhan- or Arghiin-nama.

For the affairs of Hindistan the main sources are enumerated
in Elliot and Dowson’s History of India and in Nassau Lees’
Materials for the history of India. Doubtless all will be
exhausted for the coming Cambridge History of India.


EVENTS OF THE UNCHRONICLED YEARS
926 AH.—DEC. 23rp 1519 To DEC. 12TH 1520 AD.


The question of which were Babur’s “ Five expeditions” into
Hindiistan has been often discussed ; it is useful therefore to
establish the dates of those known as made. I have entered
one as made in this year for the following reasons ;— it broke
short because Shah Beg made incursion into Babur’s territories,
and that incursion was followed by a siege of Qandahar which
several matters mentioned below show to have taken place in
926 AH.


926 To 932 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. 429


a. Expedition into Hindustan.

The march out from Kabul may have been as soon as muster
and equipment allowed after the return from Lamghan chronicled
in the diary. It was made through Bajaur where refractory
tribesmen were brought to order. The Indus will have been
forded at the usual place where, until the last one of 932 AH.
(1525 AD.), all expeditions crossed on the outward march. Bhira
was traversed in which were Babur’s own Commanders, and
advance was made, beyond lands yet occupied, to Sialkot,
72 miles north of Lahor and in the Rechna d#-ad. It was
occupied without resistance; and a further move made to what the
MSS. call Sayyidpir; this attempted defence, was taken by
assault and put to the sword. No place named Sayyidpir is
given in the Gazetteer of India, but the Ayin-z-akbari mentions
a Sidhpir which from its neighbourhood to Sialkot may be what
Babur took.

Nothing indicates an intention in Babur to join battle with
Ibrahim at this time ; Lahor may have been his objective, after
he had made a demonstration in force to strengthen his footing
in Bhira. Whatever he may have planned to do beyond
Sidhpir (?) was frustrated by the news which took him back to
Kabul and thence to Qandahar, that an incursion into his
territory had been made by Shah Beg.


b. Shah Shuja‘ Beg’s posttion.

Shah Beg was now holding Qandahar, Shal, Mustang and
Siwistan.' He knew that he held Qandahar by uncertain
tenure, in face of its desirability for Babur and his own lesser
power. His ground was further weakened by its usefulness for
operations on Harat and the presence with Babur of Bai-qara
refugees, ready to seize a chance, if offered by Isma‘il’s waning
fortunes, for recovery of their former seat. Knowing his weak-
ness, he for several years had been pushing his way out into
Sind by way of the Bolan-pass.

His relations with Babur were ostensibly good ; he had sent
him envoys twice last year, the first time to announce a success

* Shal (the local name of English Quetta) was taken by Zi’l-niin in 884 an.


(1479 AD.) ; Siwistan Shah Beg took, in second capture, about 917 AH. (1511 AD.),
from a colony of Barlas Turks under Pir Wali Bar/as.


430 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


at Kahan had in the end of 924 AH. (Nov. 1519 AD.). His son


Hasan however, with whom he was unreconciled, had been for q


more than a year in Babur’s company,—a matter not unlikely to.
stir under-currents of unfriendliness on either side.

His relations with Shah Isma‘l were deferential, in appearance
even vassal-like, as is shewn by Khwand-amir’s account of his
appeal for intervention against Babur to the Shah’s officers —
in Harat. Whether he read the #hutba for any suzerain is
doubtful ; his son Hasan, it may be said, read it later on for
Babur.


c. The impelling cause of this siege of Qandahar. |
Precisely what Shah Beg did to bring Babur back from the
Panj-ab and down upon Qandahar is not found mentioned by
any source. It seems likely to have been an affair of subordinates
instigated by or for him. Its immediate agents may have been
the Nikdiri (Nikdiri) and Hazara tribes Babur punished on his
way south. Their location was the western border-land ; they
may have descended on the Great North Road or have raided
for food in that famine year. It seems certain that Shah Beg
made no serious attempt on Kabul; he was too much occupied
in Sind to allow him to do so. Some unused source may throw
light on the matter incidentally ; the offence may have been
small in itself and yet sufficient to determine Babur to remove

risk from his rear."


a. Qandahar.

The Qandahar of Babur’s sieges was difficult of capture; he
had not taken it in 913 AH. (f. 2084) by siege or assault, but by
default after one day’s fight in the open. The strength of its
position can be judged from the following account of its ruins
as they were seen in 1879 AD., the military details of which
supplement Bellew’s description quoted in Appendix J.

The fortifications are of great extent with a treble line of
bastioned walls and a high citadel in the centre. The place is
in complete ruin and its locality now useful only as a grazing
ground. ... “The town is in three parts, each on a separate


* Was the attack made in reprisal for Shah Beg’s further aggression on the Barlas
lands and Babur’s hereditary subjects? Had these appealed to the head of their tribe?


:
:


926 To 932 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. 431


eminence, and capable of mutual defence. The mountain had
been covered with towers united by curtains, and the one on the
culminating point may be called impregnable. It commanded
the citadel which stood lower down on the second eminence, and
this in turn commanded the town which was on a table-land
elevated above the plain. The triple walls surrounding the city
were at a considerable distance from it. After exploring the
citadel and ruins, we mounted by the gorge to the summit of
the hill with the impregnable fort. In this gorge are the ruins
of two tanks, some 80 feet square, all destroyed, with the pillars
fallen ; the work is pukka in brick and chunam (cement) and
each tank had been domed in; they would have held about
400,000 gallons each.” (Le Messurier’s Kandahar in 1879 AD.


pp. 223, 245.)
e. Labur's steges of Qandahar.

The term of five years is found associated with Babur’s sieges
of Qandahar, sometimes suggesting a single attempt of five years’
duration. This it is easy to show incorrect ; its root may be
Mir Ma‘siim’s erroneous chronology.

The day on which the keys of Qandahar were made over to
Babur is known, from the famous inscription which commemo-
rates the event (Appendix J), as Shawwal 13th 928 AH.
Working backwards from this, it is known that in 927 AH. terms
of surrender were made and that Babur went back to Kabul ;
he is besieging it in y26 AH.—the year under description ; his
annals of 925 AH. are complete and contain no siege; the year
924 AH. appears to have had no siege, Shah Beg was on the
Indus and his son was for at least part of it with Babur ; 923 AH.
was a year of intended siege, frustrated by Babur’s own illness ;
of any siege in 922 AH. there is as yet no record known. So
that it is certain there was no unremitted beleaguerment through
five years.


Ff. The siege of 926 Av. (1520 AD.).


When Babur sat down to lay regular siege to Qandahar, with
mining and battering of the walls,’ famine was desolating the


* Le Messurier writes (/.c. p. 224) that at Old Qandahar ‘‘ many stone balls lay
about, some with a diameter of 18 inches, others of 4 or 5, chiselled out of limestone.


‘Met >
Ly ee
dt ©) ,
a + ae ‘
fr ie
me E et) |
a“ aN o
Va


432 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


As


country round. The garrison was reduced to great distress :
“pestilence,” ever an ally of Qandahar, broke out within the
walls, spread to Babur’s camp, and in the month of Tir (June)
led him to return to Kabul. : ,

In the succeeding months of respite, Shah Beg pushed on in
Sind and his former slave, now commander, Mehtar Sambhal
revictualled the town.


927 AH.—DEC. 12TH 1520 to DEC. Ist 1521 AD.


a. The manuscript sources.


Two accounts of the sieges of Qandahar in this and next year
are available, one in Khwand-amir’s Hadibu’s-styar, the other in
Ma‘sim Lhakkari’s Tarikh-t-sind. As they have important
differences, it is necessary to consider the opportunities of their
authors for information.

Khwand-amir finished his history in 1524-29 AD. His account
of these affairs of Qandahar is contemporary ; he was in close
touch with several of the actors in them and may have been in
Harat through their course ; one of his patrons, Amir Ghiyasu’d-
din, was put to death in this year in Harat because of suspicion
that he was an ally of Babur; his nephew, another Ghiyasu’d-
din was in Qandahar, the bearer next year of its keys to Babur ;
moreover he was with Babur himself a few years later in
Hindistan.

Mir Ma‘siim wrote in 1600 AD. 70 to 75 years after _Khwand-
amir. Of these sieges he tells what may have been traditional
and mentions no manuscript authorities. Blochmann’s biography
of him (Ayin-c-akbari p. 514) shews his ample opportunity of
learning orally what had happened in the Arghiin invasion of
Sind, but does not mention the opportunity for hearing traditions
about Qandahar which his term of office there allowed him.
During that term it was that he added an inscription, com-
memorative of Akbar’s dominion, to Babur’s own at Chihil-zina,
which records the date of the capture of Qandahar (928 AH.—
1522 AD.).


These were said to have been used in sieges in the times of the Arabs and propelled
from a machine called manjanic a sort of balista or catapult.” Meantime perhaps
they served Babur !


926 To 932 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. 433


6. The Habibu's-styar account (lith. ed. iii, part 4, p. 97).


Khwand-amir’s contemporary narrative allows Ma‘siim’s to
dovetail into it as to some matters, but contradicts it in the
important ones of date, and mode of surrender by Shah Beg to
Babur. It states that Babur was resolved in 926 AH. (1520 AD.)
to uproot Shah Shuja‘ Beg from Qandahar, led an army against
the place, and “ opened the Gates of war”. It gives no account
of the siege of 926 AH. but passes on to the occurrences of
927 AH. (1521 AD.) when Shah Beg, unable to meet Babur in
the field, shut himself up in the town and strengthened the
defences. Babur put his utmost pressure on the besieged, “ often
riding his piebald horse close to the moat and urging his men
to fiery onset.” The garrison resisted manfully, breaching the
“life-fortresses” of the Kabulis with sword, arrow, spear and
death-dealing stone, but Babur’s heroes were most often victorious,
and drove their assailants back through the Gates.


c. Death of Khan Mirza reported to Babur.


Meantime, continues Khwand-amir, Khan Mirza had died in
Badakhshan ; the news was brought to Babur and caused him
great grief; he appointed Humayin to succeed the Mirza while
he himself prosecuted the siege of Qandahar and the conquest
of the Garm-sir.*


a. Negoctations with Babur.


The Governor of Harat at this time was Shah Isma‘il’s son
Tahmasp, between six and seven years old. His guardian Amir
Khan took chief part in the diplomatic intervention with Babur,
but associated with him was Amir Ghiyasu’d-din—the patron of
Khwand-amir already mentioned—until put to death as an ally
of Babur. The discussion had with Babur reveals a complexity
of motives demanding attention. Nominally undertaken though
intervention was on behalf of Shah Beg, and certainly so at his
request, the Persian officers seem to have been less anxious on


* ** Just then came a letter from Badakhshan saying, ‘ Mirza Khan is dead ; Mirza
Sulaiman (his son) is young ; the Aiizbegs are near ; take thought for this kingdom
lest (which God forbid) Badakhshan should be lost.’ Mirza Sulaiman’s mother
(Sultan-nigar Khanim) had brought him to Kabul” (Gul-badan’s H. N. f. 8).


434 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE ai


his account than for their own position in Khurasan, their master’s a .
position at the time being weakened by ill-success against the


Sultan of Rim. To Babur, Shah Beg is written of as though he
were an insubordinate vassal whom Babur was reducing to order
for the Shah, but when Amir Khan heard that Shah Beg was
hard pressed, he was much distressed because he feared a victorious
Babur might move on Khurasan. Nothing indicates however
that Babur had-Khurasan in his thoughts ; Hindtistan was his
objective, and Qandahar a help on the way ; but as Amir Khan
had this fear about him, a probable ground for it is provided by
the presence with Babur of Bai-qara exiles whose ambition it
must have been to recover their former seat. Whether for Harat,
Kabul, or Hindiistan, Qandahar was strength. Another matter
not fitting the avowed purpose of the diplomatic intervention is
the death of Ghiyasu’d-din because an ally of Babur; this makes
Amir Khan seem to count Babur as Isma‘l’s enemy.

Shah Beg’s requests for intervention began in926AH.(1520AD.),
as also did the remonstrance of the Persian officers with Babur ;


his couriers followed one another with entreaty that the Amirs .


would contrive for Babur to retire, with promise of obeisance
and of yearly tribute. The Amirs set forth to Babur that though
Shah Shuja‘ Beg had offended and had been deserving of wrath
and chastisement, yet, as he was penitent and had promised
loyalty and tribute, it was now proper for Babur to raise the siege
(of 926 AH.) and go back to Kabul. To this Babur answered
that Shah Beg’s promise was a vain thing, on which no reliance
could be placed ; please God!, said he, he himself would take
Qandahar and send Shah Beg a prisoner to Harat ; and that
he should be ready then to give the keys of the town and the
possession of the Garm-sir to any-one appointed to receive them.

This correspondence suits an assumption that Babur acted for
Shah Isma‘l, a diplomatic assumption merely, the verbal veil,
on one side, for anxiety lest Babur or those with him should
attack Harat,—on the other, for Babur’s resolve to hold Qandahar
himself.

Amir Khan was not satisfied with Babur’s answer, but had his
attention distracted by another matter, presumably ‘Ubaidu’l-lah
Khan’s attack on Harat in the spring of the year (March-April


926 To 932 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. | 435


1521 AD.). Negociations appear to have been resumed later,
since Khwand-amir claims it as their result that Babur left
QOandahar this year.


e. The Tarikh-t-sind account.

Mir Ma‘siim is very brief; he says that in this year (his
922 AH.), Babur went down to Qandahar before the year’s tribute
in grain had been collected, destroyed the standing crops, encom-
passed the town, and reduced it to extremity ; that Shah Beg,
wearied under reiterated attack and pre-occupied by operations
in Sind, proposed terms, and that these were made with stipulation
for the town to be his during one year more and then to be given
over to Babur. These terms settled, Babur went to Kabul, Shah
Beg to Siwi.

The Arghin families were removed to Shal and Siwi, so that
the year’s delay may have been an accommodation allowed for
this purpose.


J. Concerning dates.


There is much discrepancy between the dates of the two
historians. Khwand-amir’s agree with the few fixed ones of the
period and with the course of events ; several of Ma‘siim’s, on
the contrary, are serza¢im five (lunar) years earlier. For instance,
events Khwand-amir places under 927 AH. Ma‘siim places under
922 AH. Again, while Ma‘sum correctly gives 913 AH. (1507 AD.)
as the year of Babur’s first capture of Qandahar, he sets up a
discrepant series later, from the success Shah Beg had at Kahan ;
this he allots to 921 AH. (1515 AD.) whereas Babur received news
of it (f. 2334) in the beginning of 925 AH. (1519 AD.). Again,
Ma‘sim makes Shah Hasan go to Babur in 921 AH. and stay
two years; but Hasan spent the whole of 925 AH. with Babur
and is not mentioned as having left before the second month of
92" AH. Again, Ma‘sim makes Shah Beg surrender the keys
of Qandahar in 923 AH. (1517 AD.), but 928 AH. (1522 AD.) is
shewn by Khwand-amir’s dates and narrative, and is inscribed
at Chihil-zina.*


' infra and Appendix J.


436 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


928 AH.--DEC. Ist 1521 To NOV. 20TH 1522 AD.
a. Babur vistts Badakhshan.


Either early in this year or late in the previous one, Babur and —
Mahim went to visit Humayin in his government, probably __
to Faizabad, and stayed with him what Gul-badan calls
a few days. ee


b. Expedition to Qandahar.


This year saw the end of the duel for possession of Qandahar.
Khwand-amir’s account of its surrender differs widely from
Ma‘stim’s. It claims that Babur’s retirement in 927 AH. was due
to the remonstrances from Harat, and that Shah Beg, worn out
by the siege, relied on the arrangement the Amirs had made
with Babir and went to Siwi, leaving one ‘Abdu’l-baqi in charge
of the place. This man, says Khwand-amir, drew the line of
obliteration over his duty to his master, sent to Babur, brought
him down to Qandahar, and gave him the keys of the town—
by the hand of Khwand-amir’s nephew Ghiyasu’d-din, specifies
the Zarkhan-nama. In this year messengers had come and
gone between Babur and Harat ; two men employed by Amir
Khan are mentioned by name ; of them the last had not returned
to Harat when a courier of Babur’s, bringing a tributary gift,
announced there that the town was in his master’s hands.
Khwand-amir thus fixes the year 928 AH. as that in which the
town passed into Babur’s hands ; this date is confirmed by the
one inscribed in the monument of victory at Chihil-zina which
Babur ordered excavated on the naze of the limestone ridge
behind the town. The date there given is Shawwal 13th 928 AH.
(Sep. 6th 1522 AD.).

Ma‘siim’s account, dated 923 AH. (1517 AD.), is of the briefest :—
Shah Beg fulfilled his promise, much to Babur’s approval, by
sending him the keys of the town and royal residence.

Although Khwand-amir’s account has good claim to be
accepted, it must be admitted that several circumstances can be
taken to show that Shah Beg had abandoned Qandahar, 2g. the —
removal of the families after Babur’s retirement last year, and
his own absence in a remote part of Sind this year.


926 To 932 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. 437


c. The year of Shah Beg’s death.


Of several variant years assigned for the death of Shah Beg
in the sources, two only need consideration.‘ There is consensus
of opinion about the month and close agreement about the day,
Sha‘ban 22nd or 23rd. Ma‘sum gives a chronogram, Shahr-
Sha‘ban, (month of Sha‘ban) which yields 928, but he does not
mention where he obtained it, nor does anything in his narrative
shew what has fixed the day of the month.

Two objections to 928 are patent: (1) the doubt engendered
by Ma‘siim’s earlier ante-dating ; (2) that if 928 be right, Shah
Beg was already dead over two months when Qandahar was
surrendered. This he might have been according to Khwand-
amir’s narrative, but if he died on Sha‘ban 22nd 928 (July 26th
1522), there was time for the news to have reached Qandahar,
and to have gone on to Harat before the surrender. Shah Beg’s
death at that time could not have failed to be associated in
Khwand-amir’s narrative with the fate of Qandahar ; it might
have pleaded some excuse with him for ‘Abdu’l-baqi, who might
even have had orders from Shah Hasan to make the town over
to Babur whose suzerainty he had acknowledged at once on
succession by reading the #hutba in his name. Khwand-amir
however does not mention what would have been a salient point
in the events of the siege ; his silence cannot but weigh against
the 928 AH.

The year 936 AH. is given by Nizamu’d-din Ahmad’s 7 abagat-
2-akbari (lith. ed. p. 637), and this year has been adopted by
Erskine, Beale, and Ney Elias, perhaps by others. Some light
on the matter may be obtained incidentally as the sources are
examined for a complete history of India, perhaps coming from
the affairs of Multan, which was attacked by Shah Hasan after
communication with Babur.


a. Babur’s literary work in 928 AH. and earlier.


1. The M/udim. This year, as is known from a chronogram
within the work, Babur wrote the Turki poem of 2000 lines: to
which Abia’l-fazl and Badayini give the name J/udin (The


t E. & D.’s History of India, i. 312.


438 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


Exposition), but of which the true title is said by the Vaf@’.
ma‘asir to be Dar figa mubaiyan(The Law expounded). Sprenger —
found it called also /ga-t-baburi (Babur’s Law). It is aversified
and highly orthodox treatise on Muhammadan Law, written for
the instruction of Kamran. A Commentary on it, called also
Mubin, was written by Shaikh Zain. Babur quotes from it
(f. 3514) when writing of linear measures. Berézine found and
published a large portion of it as part of his Chrestomathie Turque
(Kazan 1857); the same fragment may be what was published
by Ilminsky. Teufel remarks that the MS. used by Berézine may
have descended direct from one sent by Babur to a distinguished
legist of Transoxiana, because the last words of Berézine’s imprint
are Babur’s Beglectschreiben (envot) ; he adds the expectation
that the legist’s name might be learned. Perhaps this recipient
was the Khwaja Kalan, son of Khwaja Yahya, a Samarkandi to
whom Babur sent a copy of his Memoirs on March 7th 1520
(935 AH. f. 363).”

2. The Babur-nama diary of 925-6 AH. (1519-20 AD.), This
is almost contemporary with the J/udzz and is the earliest part
of the Babur-nama writings now known. It was written about
a decade earlier than the narrative of 899 to 914 AH. (1494 to
1507 AD.), carries later annotations, and has now the character
of a draft awaiting revision.

3. A Diwdn (Collection of poems). By dovetailing a few
fragments of information, it becomes clear that by 925 AH.
(1919 AD.) Babur had made a Collection of poetical compositions
distinct from the Rampir Diwaz ; it is what he sent to Pilad
Sultan in 925 AH. (f. 235). Its date excludes the greater part
of the Rampir one. It may have contained those verses to
which my husband drew attention in the Asiatic Quarterly
Review of 1911, as quoted in the Adu#shga; and it may have
contained, in agreement with its earlier date, the verses Babur
quotes as written in his earlier years. None of the quatrains
found in the Adashga and there attributed to “ Babur Mirza”,


-
Ji
.


* For accounts of the Mubin, Akbar-nama Bib. Ind. ed. i. 118, trs. H. Beveridge
i. 278 note, Badayini 2d. i, 343, trs. Ranking p. 450, Sprenger ZDMG. 1862, F
Teufel 26. 1883. The Akébar-nama account appears in Turki in the ‘‘ Fragments” ,
associated with Kehr’s transcript of the B.N. (JRAS. 1908, p. 70, A. S. B.’s art.
Babur-nima. Babur mentions the Afudin (f. 2524, f. 3514).


926 TO 982 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. 439


are in the Rampiir Diwan ; nor are several of those early ones
of the Babur-nama. So that the Diwan sent to Pilad Sultan
may be the source from which the Adashga drew its examples.

On first examining these verses, doubt arose as to whether
they were really by Babur Wiranshahi; or whether they were
by “ Babur Mirza” Shahrukhi. Fortunately my husband lighted
on one of them quoted in the Sanglakh and there attributed to
Babur Padshah. The Adzshga quatrains are used as examples
in de Courteille’s Dictionary, but without an author’s name; they
can be traced there through my husband’s articles."


929 AH.—NOV. 20TH 1522 To NOV. 10TH 1523 AD.
a. Affairs of Hindustan.


The centre of interest in Babur’s affairs now moves from
QOandahar to a Hindistan torn by faction, of which faction one
result was an appeal made at this time to Babur by Daulat Khan
Lidi ( Viisuf-khail) and ‘Alau’d-din ‘Alam Khan Ladi for help
against [brahim.?

The following details are taken mostly from Ahmad Yadgar’s
Tarikh-t-salatin-t-afaghana3 :—Daulat Khan had beensummoned
to Ibrahim’s presence ; he had been afraid to go and had sent
his son Dilawar in his place ; his disobedience angering Ibrahim,
Dilawar had a bad reception and was shewn a ghastly exhibit
of disobedient commanders. Fearing a like fate for himself, he
made escape and hastened to report matters to his father in
Lahor. His information strengthening Daulat Khan’s previous
apprehensions, decided the latter to proffer allegiance to Babur
and to ask his help against Ibrahim. Apparently ‘Alam Khan’s
interests were a part of this request. Accordingly Dilawar
(or Apaq) Khan went to Kabul, charged with his father’s
message, and with intent to make known to Babur Ibrahim’s


* JRAS. 1901, Persian MSS. in Indian Libraries (description of the Rampir
Diwan); AQR. 1911, Babur’s Diwan (t.e. the Rampir Diwan) ; and Some verses
of the Emperor Babur (the Abashga quotations).

For Dr. E. D. Ross’ Reproduction and account of the Rampir Diwan, JASB. 1910.

2 ** After him (Ibrahim) was Babur King of Dihli, who owed his place to the
Pathans,” writes the Afghan poet Khish-hal Aat‘ak (Afghan Poets of the XVII
century, C. E. Biddulph, p. 55).

3 The translation only has been available (E. & D.’s H. of I., vol. 1).


440 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


evil disposition, his cruelty and tyranny, with their fruit of
discontent amongst his Commanders and soldiery.


b. Reception of Dilawar Khan in Kabul.


Wedding festivities were in progress*’ when Dilawar Khan
reached Kabul. He presented himself, at the Char-bagh may —
be inferred, and had word taken to Babur that an Afghan was
at his Gate with a petition. When admitted, he demeaned
himself as a suppliant and proceeded to set forth the distress of ;
Hindistan. Babur asked why he, whose family had so long
eaten the salt of the Liidis, had so suddenly deserted them for
himself. Dilawar answered that his family through 40 years had
upheld the Lidi throne, but that Ibrahim maltreated Sikandar’s
amirs, had killed 25 of them without cause, some by hanging,
some burned alive, and that there was no hope of safety in him.
Therefore, he said, he had been sent by many amirs to Babur
whom they were ready to obey and for whose coming they were
on the anxious watch.


c. Babur asks a sign.


At the dawn of the day following the feast, Babur prayed in
the garden for a sign of victory in Hindistan, asking that it
should be a gift to himself of mango or betel, fruits of that land.
It so happened that Daulat Khan had sent him, as a present,
half-ripened mangoes preserved in honey ; when these were set
before him, he accepted them as the sign, and from that time
forth, says the chronicler, made preparation for a move on
Hindustan.


d. ‘Alam Khan.


Although ‘Alam Khan seems to have had some amount of
support for his attempt against his nephew, events show he had
none valid for his purpose. That he had not Daulat Khan’s,
later occurrences make clear. Moreover he seems not to have
been a man to win adherence or to be accepted as a trustworthy
and sensible leader.2 Dates are uncertain in the absence of

* The marriage is said to have been Kamran’s (E. & D.’s trs.).


? Erskine calculated that ‘Alam Khan was now well over 70 years of age (H. of ;
I. i, 421 n.).


926 To 932 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. arr gan


Babur’s narrative, but it may have been in this year that ‘Alam
Khan went in person to Kabul and there was promised help
against Ibrahim. :


e. Birth of Gul-badan.


Either in this year or the next was born Dil-dar’s third
daughter Gul-badan, the later author of an Humayun-nama
written at her nephew Akbar’s command in order to provide
information for the Akbar-nama.


930 AH.—NOV. 10TH 1523 To OCT. 29TH 1524 AD.


a. Babur’s fourth expedition to Hindustan.


This expedition differs from all earlier ones by its co-operation
with Afghan malcontents against [brahim Ladz, and by having
for its declared purpose direct attack on him through reinforce-
ment of ‘Alam Khan.

Exactly when the start from Kabul was made is not found
stated ; the route taken after fording the Indus, was by the
sub-montane road through the Kakar country ; the Jihlam and
Chin-ab were crossed and a move was made to within 10 miles
of Lahor.

Lahor was Daulat Khan’s head-quarters but he was not in it
now ; he had fled for refuge to a colony of Biliichis, perhaps
towards Multan, on the approach against him of an army of
Ibrahim’s under Bihar Khan Lidz. A battle ensued between
Babur and Bihar Khan; the latter was defeated with great
slaughter ; Babur’s troops followed his fugitive men into Lahor,
plundered the town and burned some of the dazars.

Four days were spent near Lahor, then move south was made
to Dibalptir which was stormed, plundered and put to the sword.
The date of this capture is known from an incidental remark of
Babur about chronograms (f. 325), to be mid-Rabi‘u’l-awwal
930 AH. (cerca Jan. 22nd 1524 AD.).' From Dibalpir a start was
made for Sihrind but before this could be reached news arrived
which dictated return to Lahor.


t A. N. trs. H. Beveridge, i, 239.


442 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE


b. The cause sf return.


at Dibalpir; he was not restored to his former place in charcole 7
of the important Lahor, but was given Jalandhar and Sultanpir,
a town of his own foundation. This angered him extremely
but he seems to have concealed his feelings for the time and to
have given Babur counsel as if he were content. His son Dilawar,
however, represented to Babur that his father’s advice was
treacherous ; it concerned a move to Multan, from which place
Daulat Khan may have come up to Dibalpir and connected

with which at this time, something is recorded of co-operation :
by Babur and Shah Hasan Arvghin. But the incident is not
yet found clearly described by a source. Dilawar Khan told
Babur that his father’s object was to divide and thus weaken
the invading force, and as this would have been the result of
taking Daulat Khan’s advice, Babur arrested him and Apaq on
suspicion of treacherous intent. They were soon released, and
Sultanpir was given them, but they fled to the hills, there to
await a chance to swoop on the Panj-ab. Daulat Khan’s
hostility and his non-fulfilment of his engagement with Babur
placing danger in the rear of an eastward advance, the Panj-ab
was garrisoned by Babur’s own followers and he himself went
back to Kabul.

It is evident from what followed that Daulat Khan commanded
much strength in the Panj-ab; evident also that something
counselled delay in the attack on Ibrahim, perhaps closer cohesion
in favour of ‘Alam Khan, certainly removal of the menace of
Daulat Khan in the rear; there may have been news already
of the approach of the Atizbegs on Balkh which took Babur
next year across Hindii-kush.


c. The Panj-ab garrison.


SS ne ee ea ee ee 4


The expedition had extended Babur’s command considerably,
notably by obtaining possession of Lahor. He now posted in
it Mir ‘Abdu’l-‘aziz his Master of the Horse; in Dibalpir he .
posted, with ‘Alam Khan, Baba Qashqa Mughdl; in Sialkot,
Khusrau Kikildash, in Kalanir, Muhammad ‘Ali 7@7z&.


es


926 To 932 AH.—1520 To 1525 AD. 443


d. Two deaths.


This year, on Rajab roth (May 23rd) died Isma‘ll Safawi at
the age of 38, broken by defeat from Sultan Salim of Rim."
He was succeeded by his son Tahmasp, a child of ten.

This year may be that of the death of Shah Shuja‘ Arghin,?
on Sha‘ban 22nd (July 18th), the last grief of his burden being
the death of his foster-brother Fazil concerning which, as well
as Shah Beg’s own death, Mir Ma‘sum’s account is worthy of
full reproduction. Shah Beg was succeeded in Sind by his son
Hasan, who read the kutba for Babur and drew closer links
with Babur’s circle by marrying, either this year or the next,
Khalifa’s daughter Gul-barg, with whom betrothal had been
made during Hasan’s visit to Babur in Kabul. Moreover
Khalifa’s son Muhibb-i-‘ali married Nahid the daughter of Qasim
Kikildash and Mah-chichik Avghan (f. 2140). These alliances
were made, says Ma‘siim, to strengthen Hasan’s position at
Babur’s Court.


e. A garden detail.


In this year and presumably on his return from the Panj-ab,
Babur, as he himself chronicles (f. 132), had plantains (bananas)
brought from Hindistan for the Bagh-i-wafa at Adinapir.


931 AH.—OCT. 29TH 1524 To OCT. 18TH 1525 AD.
a. Daulat Khan.


Daulat Khan’s power in the Panj-ab is shewn by what he
effected after dispossessed of Lahor. On Babur’s return to Kabul,
he came down from the hills with a small body of his immediate
followers, seized his son Dilawar, took Sultanpir, gathered a large.
force and defeated ‘Alam Khan in Dibalptr. He detached 5000
men against Sialkot but Babur’s begs of Lahor attacked and
overcame them. Ibrahim sent an army to reconquer the Panj-ab ;

* The following old English reference to Isma‘il’s appearance may be quoted as
found in a corner somewhat out-of-the-way from Oriental matters. In his essay on
beauty Lord Bacon writes when arguing against the theory that beauty is usually not
associated with highmindedness, ‘* But this holds not always ; for Augustus Cesar,
Titus Vespasianus, Philip le Bel of France, Edward the Fourth of England, Alcibiades
of Athens, Isma‘il the Sophy (Safawi) of Persia, were all high and great spirits, and


yet the most beautiful men of their times.”
2 Cf. s.a. 928 AH. for discussion of the year of death.


30


444 TRANSLATOR’S NOTE 926 To 932 AH.—1520


Daulat Khan, profiting by its dissensions and discontents, wé
‘over a part to himself and saw the rest break up.


b. ‘Alam Khan.


of Dihli, Babur in full suzerainty should hold Lahor and all to
the west of it. This arranged, ‘Alam Khan was furnished with —
a body of troops, given a royal letter to the Lahor begs ordering
them to assist him, and started off, Babur promising to follow,
swiftly. "a
‘Alam Khan’s suhsenpent proceedings are told by Babur in oe
the annals of 932 AH. (1525 AD.) at the time he received detailey q
about them (f. 2550). Ri


c. Babur called to Balkh.


All we have yet found about this affair is what Babur saysin
explanation of his failure to follow ‘Alam Khan as promised
(f. 256), namely, that he had to go to Balkh because all the
Aizbeg Sultans and Khans had laid siege to it. Light on the
affair may come from some Persian or Aiizbeg chronicle; Babur’s
arrival raised the siege ; and risk must have been removed, for __
Babur returned to Kabul in time to set out for his fifth and last
expedition to Hindistan on the first day of the second month
of next year (932 AH. 1525). A considerable body of troops
was in Badakhshan with Humayin ; their non-arrival next year
delaying his father’s progress, brought blame on himself.
