The Babylonian Talmud (Rodkinson), Vol. 4: Tracts Shekalim and Rosh Hashana
Michael L. Rodkinson, trans. (1918)
Source: Internet Archive
Public Domain. Staged for the Tower of Babel digital library.

========================================================================

fcibrarp of Che theological ^eroinavy

PRINCETON • NEW JERSEY


PRESENTED BY

John Stuart Conning, D.D.

BM 500 . R6 1918 "v .*3-4
Talmud .

New edition of the
Babylonian Talmud


NEW EDITION


OF THE

BABYLONIAN TALMUD


Original tejt, Edited, Corrected, formulated, and
translated into English


BY

MICHAEL L. RODKINSON

SECOND EDITION— REVISED AND ENLARGED

SECTION MOED (FESTIVALS)

TRACTS SHEKALIM AND ROSH HASHANA

HEBREW AND ENGLISH


Volume IV.


Boston

THE TALMUD SOCIETY
1918


EXPLANATORY REMARKS.


In our translation we adopted these principles :

1. Tenan of the original — We have learned in a Mishna ; Tania — We have
learned in a Boraitha ; Ite??iar — It was taught.

2. Questions are indicated by the interrogation point, and are immediately
followed by the answers, without being so marked.

3. When in the original there occur two statements separated by the phrase,
Lishna achrena or Waibayith Aetna (literally, “otherwise interpreted”), we translate
only the second.

4. As the pages of the original are indicated in our new Hebrew edition, it is not
deemed necessary to mark them in the English edition, this being only a translation
from the latter.


MICHAEL L. RODKINSON.



NEW TALMUD PUBLISHING SOCIETY


TO

ERASMES GEST, ESQ.

OF CINCINNATI, OHIO
MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED BY THE


EDITOR


CONTENTS OF VOLUME IV.

HEBREW AND ENGLISH


ENGLISH.

TRACT SHEKALIM.

PAGE

Preface, ... ...... xi-xii

Synopsis of Subjects, xiii-xviii


CHAPTER I.

Of the Duties of Court in the Month of Adar —
Payment of Poll Duties in the Whole Region of
Israel, . 1-6


CHAPTER II.

The Exchange of Coins for Shekalim — The Provisions
for the Saving of Money for Different Offerings
and the Use of the Remainders, . . . .7-11

CHAPTER III.

Periods at which Moneys were Drawn from the

Treasury, and the Ceremonies Thereat, . . 12-15

CHAPTER IV.

Purposes for which Moneys were Drawn, and Wiiat
was Done with their Remainders and That of
Other Offerings, ..... 16-19


CHAPTER V.

The Main Offices, their Officers, their Duties, Seals,

and Chambers, ....... 20-24

vii


CONTENTS.


viii


CHAPTER VI.

PAGE

The Thirteen Covered Chests and Other Parapher-
nalia, and Religious Ceremonies adopted with
the Number Thirteen, 25-28

CHAPTER VII.

Moneys found between the Chests, and Cattle for
Offerings found in the Vicinity of the City of
Jerusalem, 29-32


CHAPTER VIII.

Spittle, Utensils, and Submerging of the Defiled

Sacrifices, 33-36


TRACT ROSH HASHANA.


Opinions of Scholars of this Entire Work, . . v-xi

Partial List of Subscribers, xi-xii

A Few Words to the English Reader, . . xiii-xviii

Introduction to this Tract, .... xix-xxii

Synopsis of Subjects of this Tract, . . . xxiii-xxviii


CHAPTER I.

Of the Four New Year’s Days as kept during the

Period of the Second Temple, .... 1-36

CHAPTER II.

The Observers of the New Moon before the High

Court in the City of Jerusalem, .... 37-44


CHAPTER III.

Observing the Moon by the High Court Itself — The
Blowing of the Cornet on the New Year’s and
Jubilee Days, 45-52


CHAPTER IV.

When New Year’s Day Fell on Sabbath — The Order

of Benediction and Prayers on the Same, . . 53-66


CONTENTS.


IX


THE HEBREW PART.

(Order of pages , frotti right to /eft.)

TRACT SHEKALIM.

jVtf*n pis ,nso dikd — The First of Adar, Chap-
ter I., 1-3

pID ,D^pP J’SIXD — The Coins of Shekalim
may be Exchanged for Darkons, Chapter II., . 4-5

pis rD^pID — At Three Periods,

. Chapter III., 6- 7

' V ' Y ) pie ,?ra }to r»n no nonnn — the

Severed (Shekalim) : What was Done with It?,

Chapter IV., 8-10

■won pis ,piDsn ]i )bx — The Following are

the Names of the Officers, Chapter V., . . n-13

pIC ,ni 1 Slty IC^J? tiwbu —' Thirteen Chests,
Chapter VI., 14-16

Moneys found Be-
tween, Chapter VII., 17-18

p *")0 ,ppnn — All the Spittle, Chapter

VIII., 19-20


TRACT ROSH HASHANA.


(□Tins ‘J 131) pbpicob srn 1 ? mins-A c 0R -

ridor Leading to the Palace (containing Three


Entrances).*

nnC- FlRST Entrance,


i-vii


* By these three entrances the editor illustrates his reasons for this enterprise
and his method of correcting and translating the original. This has not been trans-
lated into English, for the reason that it would be of but little interest to the English
reader who does not understand the Hebrew ; it is, however, hoped that the reader
of Hebrew will find great interest in the matter.


X


CONTENTS.


^52/ nn©““ SECOND Entrance, ... vii-xiv

nnD — T hird Entrance, .... xiv-xix

n*?nn ^2rOD —LETTERS 0F Approval, . . . xix-xxii

— Brief Introduction, .... xxiii-xxvi

|HP*n pis /DP! D’JP W1 nj?D1N- FouR New

Year’s Days, Chapter I., 4-24


•up pi© ,iniN pTOD jr# dn- If They did not

Know Him, Chapter II., 24-28

pis p ivd mm — If the Beth Din Saw
It, Chapter III., 28-32

■>jrai pis ,njDPi »ri did dp— th* festival

of the New Year, Chapter IV., .... 33-39


PREFACE TO TRACT SHEKALIM.


AMONG the treatises contained in the Section Moed of the
Babylonian Talmud is to be found that of Shekalim, which con-
sists, however, only of Mishnas, the Babylonian Talmud having
no Gemara. The Palestinian Talmud contains aGemara for this
tract also, and there is an additional commentary by Maimonides.
While we are translating only the Babylonian Talmud, we
would not care to omit Shekalim, which is of peculiar histori-
cal value and may prove quite interesting to the reader. But
the Mishna, without any explanation whatever, would naturally
seem obscure, and in some instances would be absolutely incom-
prehensible; and, the Gemara of the Palestinian Talmud, as
well as the commentary of Maimonides, consisting of very com-
plicated and intricate series of arguments, inferences, and expla-
nations, which would be not only difficult of translation but also
immaterial to the subject, the insertion of which would be a
deviation from our method, and unnecessary, as would explana-
tions of Barthanora, Tosphath-yomtabh, etc., we were forced
to provide the text with a commentary of our own, drawn from
the most authentic sources. This, we trust, will serve to eluci-
date any obscure passages not quite comprehensible to the gen-
eral reader. Accordingly, every sentence or word in the Mishna
requiring an explanation is distinguished by a number or an
asterisk, and has a corresponding reference in the commentary
printed below the text. We may add that, for our personal
satisfaction and to guard against any possible errors, we have
given this tract for revision to some noted Russian scholars who
are competent to judge upon it, and they find it very intelligible.

As stated above, we have taken our commentary from the
most authentic sources we could find. We do not, therefore,
solicit leniency on the part of worthy critics, but ask them to
restrain their criticisms until they shall have carefully studied the
commentaries mentioned, as well as our commentary, with proper
consideration; for ours is derived from the Palestinian Talmud,
Maimonides, etc. Conscientious critics will do so without our

xi


XII


PREFACE TO TRACT SHEKALIM.


solicitation ; and as for others, who are ready to criticise every-
thing impromptu as soon as it leaves our pen, such a request
would be of no avail. We nevertheless will be grateful to any
one who will call our attention to things which are not compre-
hensible in the commentary, this being our first venture of the
kind, more especially as we think we shall be compelled to do the
same with other Mishnayoths to which the Babylonian Talmud
has no Gemara. A separate introduction to Tract Shekalim we
think unnecessary, as the contents of this speaks for itself. We
nevertheless will return to this when we come to Tract Midoth
(Measures).

In compliance with our promise in our prospectus, we add to
this volume the Hebrew text of the Tracts Shekalim and Rosh
Hashana of our new edition, for the benefit of students and
scholars who may desire to compare the translation with it.

M. L. Rodkinson.


New York, May, 1897.


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

OF

VOLUME IV.— TRACT SHEKALIM.*


CHAPTER I.

Mishna a treats of: What were the duties of the Beth Din in the month
of Adar in the time of the second Temple. When the Megillah (Book of
Esther) was to be read in the fortified cities. For what purpose messengers
were sent out, and what were the things to be heralded.

Mishna b treats of : What was the punishment for not obeying the com-
mandments of Kelayim in the former times and later.

Mishna c deals with : When the money-changers, with their tables,
began their work in the countries of Judea and in Jerusalem. The time for
pledges which were taken for not paying the Shekalim. From what persons
the pledges were to be taken. If a father might pay the Shekalim for his
children.

Mishna d treats of : What ordinance Ben Buchri proclaimed in Jamnia
in behalf of the priests, and what R. Johanan b. Zakkai rejoined. The
defence of the priests, with their interpretation of biblical passages, which
was accepted only for the sake of peace.

Mishna e treats of : The voluntary payment of Shekalim from women,
slaves, and minors being accepted, but not from the heathens or Samaritans.
Bird-offerings not accepted from persons affected with venereal diseases or
from women after confinement. Sin and vow offerings, however, were
accepted from the Samaritans. The vow-offerings were also accepted from
heathens. The general rule concerning this.

Mishna f deals with : The premium one had to pay in addition to the
half-shekel. Who was obliged to do so?*The different opinions of the
sages and R. Meir. How much one had to pay if given one Selah and taking
a shekel in exchange.


* See introduction to synopsis in Tract Sabbath, Vol. I., p. xxix. This tract has
no Gemara. The synopsis contains the Mishnas, with their commentaries.

xiii


XIV


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.


MlSHNA g treats of: The law concerning one who -pays for a poor man,
for a neighbor, and for a countryman. Law concerning brothers and part-
ners paying together ; also, law regarding cattle-tithe. How much was the
premium.

CHAPTER II.

Mishna a. One may put together the Shekalim and exchange them for
a gold coin called Darkon. Concerning the chests which were given to the
collectors in the country and at Jerusalem. What is the law if money were
stolen or lost by the messengers of a city, when a portion of the Shekalim
was already expended ; what is the law if not expended.

Mishna b. Concerning the law when one gives his shekels to another to
pay his head-taxes for him ; if he pays his shekels from the money of the
second tithes or from the money of the fruit of the Sabbatical year. Con-
cerning how he shall replace it and use it for the same purpose.

Mishna c. The law concerning one who gathered single coins little by
little and said : “With this money I shall pay my shekels.” The different
opinions of the schools of Hillel and Shamai in this matter. Concerning the
same case when one gathers money for sin-offerings. What shall be done
with the eventual remains of such money.

Mishna d. Concerning the explanation of R. Simeon of the teachings
of the school of Hillel. The discussion of the former with R. Jehudah. The
claims of the latter that the coins of the Shekalim were also changed in times
and places. The rejoinder of R. Simeon to this.

Mishna <r. The law concerning the remainder of money intended for
Shekalim when considered to be ordinary. Regarding the remainder of the
tenth part of an ephah, bird-offerings, and guilt-offerings : what shall be done
with it. A rule concerning this matter. Also, regulations concerning the
remainder of Passover sacrifices, Nazarite offerings, the remainder of moneys
for the poor in general and individuals, of money for prisoners, for burial of
the dead, and R. Meir and R. Nathan's opinions regarding this matter.

CHAPTER III.

Mishna a . Regarding the appointed periods of the year when the money
was drawn from the treasury. The different opinions, concerning this
matter, of R. Aqiba b. Asai, R. Eliezer, and R. Simeon. The same time
appointed for cattle-tithes.

Mishna b. Concerning the ceremony of drawing the money at all
periods of the year. The law regarding measures of the boxes in which the
coins of the Shekalim were filled, and the numbers of the chests in which
the money was drawn from the boxes for the expenses of the Temple.
Which box must be opened first, and which last. What garments the person
drawing the money must wear. How a man must stand unblemished before
his fellow-man and before his God.

Mishna c. Concerning the custom of the house of Rabban Gamaliel,
when the members of the house had paid their Shekalim. The law regarding


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.


xv


one who drew money did not commence until he had said to the bystanders,
" I will now draw," and they answered, “ Draw, draw, draw,” three times.

Mishna d. Concerning the covering of the boxes after drawing the
money. For which countries the drawings were performed in the first
period, the second, and the third.

CHAPTER IV.

Mishna a. What was done with the money drawn ? Concerning the
watchmen that were sent out to guard the after-growth of the Sabbatical
year, of which the Omer and two loaves were taken for sacrifice. The
opinion of R. Jose in this matter, and what the rabbis answered.

Mishna b. Concerning the red heifer, the goat that was to be sent away,
the strip of scarlet, the bridge for the cow, the bridge for the goat, the canal,
the city wall, the towers, and other necessities of the city : all were paid for
out of the Shekalim money. What Abba Saul said.

Mishna c . What was done with the balance of the money left over in
the treasury. The discussion of R. Ishmael and R. Aqiba in this matter.
Some of the many things which are enumerated in the Palestinian Talmud
and which were done with this money. Among them was the hiring of
teachers for priests to teach them the laws of the sacrifices.

Mishna d . What was done with the remainder of the moneys of the
chest. The different opinions of R. Ishmael, R. Aqiba, and R. Hanina, the
assistant chief of the priests, concerning profit : if it might be raised from
the remaining money or not, and of what money the gold plates for the
decorations of the Holy of Holies were made. Also, concerning the benefit
of the altar.

MiSHNA e. What was done with the remainder of the incense (as the
incense of the New Year must be bought with the new Shekalim money).
The sanctification of the incense on hand then transferred to that money,
and then redeemed with the money of the new revenue.

Mishna /. Concerning the law when one devoted his entire possessions
in honor of the Lord : what should be done with them. The discussions of
R. Aqiba and Ben Asai regarding this matter.

Mishna^. Concerning the law when one devoted his possessions, and
among them were cattle, male and female, fit for the altar. The discussions
of this matter between R. Eliezer and R. Jehoshua. R. Aqiba is inclined
to the opinion of R. Eliezer, which seems to him to be more proper, but adds
that he had heard that both opinions were right according to circumstances.

Mishna h. If one devote his possessions, and among them are things
fit for the altar, such as wines, oils,' and birds, what should be done with
them. R. Eliezer decreed it, and no one opposed him.

Mishna i. Contractors, for the delivery of all things for the altar and
♦he improvements of the Temple, were appointed every month ; but if the


XVI


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.


prices changed during the thirty days, the Sanctuary must not suffer any
injury. Such was the agreement made between them. The illustration
of this.

CHAPTER V.

Mishna a. Concerning some names of the offices and the heads of them
in the Sanctuary during the entire period when the second Temple was in
existence. What were the officers’ duties, and how they officiated.

Mishna b. Concerning the order of the head officers ; namely, the king,
the high priest, his assistant, two catholicoses, and seven chamberlains, not
less than two officers being put in charge of public moneys.

MISHNA c. Regarding the seals that were in the Sanctuary, serving for
the beverages and meat-offerings which must be brought, according to the
Bible, with every sacrifice. Concerning the inscription on the seals and
their usage. Ben Azai added one seal for the poor sinner. The names of
the officers, of the seal-keeper and the officer who sells the above offerings.

Mishna d . The date must be put on every seal. The law regarding
surplus money being found in the treasury of the seal-keeper : to whom it
belongs ; and if a deficit, who must supply it.

Mishna e . The law concerning one who lost his seal ; what must be
done.

Mishna J \ Concerning the two chambers in the Sanctuary, of which
one was called “Chamber of Silence” and the other “ Chamber of Utensils.”
What was done there, during what time they were investigated, and what
was done with the presented utensils which were useless for the Temple.

CHAPTER VI.

MISHNA a . Concerning the thirteen covered chests and thirteen tables
which were in the Sanctuary. How many prostrations took place in the
Sanctuary. How R. Gamaliel and R. Hanina, assistant chief of the high
priest, added one in the place where the ark was hidden.

Mishna b . Relates how a blemished priest who was engaged .in select-
ing and peeling wood had noticed the place where the ark was hidden, but
before he had time to tell it to the others he expired.

Mishna c. Concerning the directions where the prostrations were
made. How many gates were in the Temple : their names, and why they
were so named ; also, different opinions of the sages concerning this.
There were two gates which were nameless.

Mishna d . Of what material the thirteen tables were made, where they
stood, for what purpose they were used. Concerning the golden table in
the Temple itself, upon which the showbreads were constantly lying.

Mishna e. Concerning the inscriptions on the thirteen covered chests
in the Sanctuary, and what was done with them. The different opinions of
R. Jehudah and the sages as to using certain money put in some chests.


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS. xvii

MlSHNA /. Concerning the amount of articles to be furnished in pay-
ment of a vow one made, who did not explain how much he intended to
give ; for instance, wood, incense, gold coins, etc. A rule that was made
concerning this. The hides of all sacrifices belong to the priest.


CHAPTER VII.

MlSHNA a . If money was found in between the differently marked
chests, to which chest the money belonged. Concerning this the rule was:
One must be guided by the proximity, even in the case of the less impor-
tant, etc.

MlSHNA b. Concerning money found in Jerusalem, in the court of the
Temple, in the times of the Festivals and in the ordinary times.

MlSHNA c . Concerning meat found in the court of the Temple, in the
city, and any place where Israelites resided and where Gentiles and Israel-
ites together resided.

Mishna d . Concerning cattle found between Jerusalem and Migdal
Eder, and in the vicinity of the city in all directions : what the law pre-
scribes. The different opinions of some sages.

MlSHNA e. Relates how, in former days, the finder of such cattle was
pledged to bring drink-offerings, and how afterwards the high court decreed
to furnish them from the public moneys.

Mishnas /and g. R. Simeon named seven decrees which were promul-
gated by the high court, and the above decree was one of them. R. Jehudah,
however, does not agree on some points with him. R. Jose has also some-
thing to say about this.


CHAPTER VIII.

MlSHNA a. Concerning streets in which people must walk during the
time of the Festival in Jerusalem, for the sake of cleanness. The different
opinions, in this matter, of R. Meir and the sages.

MlSHNA b. Regarding utensils found on the way towards the plunge-
baths : if they are clean or not, and the different opinions of R. Meir and
R. Jose.

Mishna c . Regarding the butcher-knife, if it was found in the street on
the 14th of Nissan ; and what is the case if the 14th falls on a Sabbath.

Mishna d . Concerning where the curtain of the Sanctuary must be
submerged if it become defiled. The first time it was submerged it was
spread out for the people to admire the beauty of the work.

Mishna e. What Rabban Simeon b. Gamaliel had to tell in the name of
Simeon, the son of the assistant high priest. How the curtain was made :
the great amount of the cost and how many hundred priests were required
to submerge it.


xviii' SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.

MlSHNA /. If meat of the Holy of Holies became defiled, where it must
be burned. The different opinions of the schools of Shamai and Hillel on
this point.

MlSHNA £*. The different opinions of R. Eliezer and R. Aqiba concern-
ing anything that had become defiled through a principal uncleanness.

MlSHNA h . The joints of the daily sacrifices, where they were laid down ;
the sacrifices of the new moon, where they were placed. The payment of
Shekalim, if it was obligatory after the destruction of the Temple. The same
law regarding cattle-tithe, tithes of grain, and deliverance of the firstlings.
The law if one sanctified Shekalim or firstlings after the destruction of the
Temple.


TRACT SHEKALIM.


UNDER this heading the payment of a head-tax is treated of,
which amounted to one-half of a shekel (in the Mishna always
referred to as a shekel) and which had to be paid by every Israel-
ite (see Exodus xxx. 12) upon the completion of his twentieth
year. In the times of the existence of the Temple, the proceeds
of this tax were applied for communal sacrifices and for the needs
of the capital. The manner of collection, investment, and ap-
plication of this money forms the subject of this treatise. It
contains, in addition, many other historical regulations, most
of which, however, only held good during the existence of the
second Temple.

CHAPTER I.

MISHNA: (a) On the first day of the month of Adar, warn-
ings are heralded (from Jerusalem) concerning Shekalim 1 and
Kelayim 2 (the prohibition concerning the use, for ploughing to-


EDITOR’S COMMENTARY.

CHAPTER I.

Mishna a . 1 Warnings were heralded from Jerusalem concerning
Shekalim on and after the first of Adar, in order to prepare for the
first of Nissan, before which day the final settlement of Shekalim had
to be made. This was inferred by the Palestinian Talmud from the
following passage [Exodus xl. 17]: “ And it came to pass in the first
month in the second year, on the first of the month, that the taber-
nacle was reared up.” This was commented upon by a Boraitha,
which stated, that on the day on which the tabernacle was reared
up, the entire sum of the Shekalim collected was ready for disburse-
ment.

3 Warnings were also heralded concerning Kelayim, because that
month was the time when ploughing and sowing commenced in
Palestine


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


gether, of an ox with an ass, and the sowing together of differ-
ent kinds of seeds). On the fifteenth day of that month the
Megillah Esther * * 3 is read in the fortified cities; and the same day
the improvement of country roads, 4 market-places, and legal
plunge-baths is proceeded with. Public affairs are again taken
up 5 ; at the same time, graves are marked with lime, 6 and messen-
gers are sent out on account of possible Kelayim. 7


8 The Megillah (Book of Esther) was read on the fifteenth day of
this month only in such cities as were fortified since the time of Joshua
the son of Nun; but in such as were fortified after his day, and in
the open cities, it was read on the fourteenth of the month. No
mention is made in the Mishna concerning the reading on the four-
teenth, because, the majority of the cities being open, or fortified since
the time of Joshua ben Nun, it was generally known, and there was
no fear of it being forgotten. In the few fortified cities, however, it
was necessary to remind the inhabitants that the day on which they
were to read the Megillah was the fifteenth. The Palestinian Talmud
(Chapter I., Halakha 2) states, that we are taught by this Mishna
that all commandments which are to be fulfilled on a leap year in
the second Adar should not be fulfilled in the first Adar; but we can-

not see how that can be inferred from this Mishna, although some

commentators have tried to explain it.

4 The rainy season ended by the first of Adar, and in consequence
of the heavy rains the country roads and market-places were in bad
condition. In the month of Nissan, travel towards Jerusalem was
very heavy; hence the warning to improve the roads, etc., was her-
alded. The public plunge-baths were also injured by the rains and

had to be repaired, for the sake of the public, to whom the law pre-
scribes the taking of a legal bath on or before the holidays.

6 The Palestinian Talmud states, that at that time the courts of law
(Beth-din) would meet in session for the trial of civil suits, criminal
cases, and crimes involving the punishment of stripes; for the redemp-
tion of such as had devoted all their possessions in honor of the Lord,
and such as had given the estimated value of their person, etc. ; also
for the performance of the rite of the bitter water (see Numbers v.
12-31), and for the performance of the rite of breaking the calf’s
neck (see Deut. xxi.), and for the rite of the red heifer (see Numbers
xix.), and for the ceremony of piercing a serf’s ear (see Exodus
xxi.). For all this, and any other matters that came up before them,
*,he courts of law assembled in that month.

6 Such graves as had been injured during the rainy season, and


TRACT SHEKALIM.


3


(b) R. Jehudah says: At one time the messengers used to
pull out the Kelayim (illegally mixed seeds) and throw them at
the feet of the owners ! The number of the transgressors, how-
ever, being constantly on the increase, the Kelayim were pulled
out and thrown into the roads. Finally, it was determined that
the entire fields of such law-breakers were to be confiscated.*

( c ) On the fifteenth of this month (Adar) the money-changers
outside of Jerusalem seated themselves at their tables . 1 In the
city of Jerusalem, however, they did not do this until the
twenty-fifth of the month . 2 As soon as the money-changers
seated themselves also in the city, the taking of pledges from


were not marked, had to be restored and marked, in order that a
man be saved the annoyance of becoming unclean by stepping on a
grave. The Palestinian Talmud infers this from the passage [Le-
viticus xiii. 46]: “Unclean, unclean, shall he call out,” and inter-
prets it to signify that the uncleanness itself should call out “unclean ”
and keep men away from its vicinity. For this reason it was her-
alded, that the graves were to be marked in order to be a warning to
passers-by that such places were unclean.

7 On account of the severity of the law concerning Kelayim and
the frequency with which that law was infracted, it was deemed
insufficient merely to herald the prohibition, and messengers were
sent out to see the law enforced (Maimonides).

Mishna b . * R. Jehudah’s dictum does not intend to dispute the
foregoing, but merely supplements it with the statement that the mes-
sengers sent out were for the purpose of punishing the infractors of
the law of Kelayim. The Palestinian Talmud adduces the right of
the Beth-din to confiscate property from the passage [Ezra x. 8]:
“ And that whosoever should not come within three days, etc., all
his substance should be devoted.” Whence it may be seen, that a
Beth-din has such power.

Mishna c. 1 It was the custom for money-changers in those days
to carry their tables with them, and hence they were called “ the
men of the tables.” The Mishna relates, that on the fifteenth of
the month the money-changers were ordered to go out into the
rural districts with their tables, in order to provide the people with
the necessary half-shekels; for the tax had to be paid in half-shekels
only.

2 On the twenty-fifth, when it was high time for payment and the
people commenced flocking into the city of Jerusalem, the money-
changers returned and sat in the court of the Temple.


4


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


the tardy ones commenced. 3 But from whom were pledges
taken ? From Levites, Israelites, proselytes, and freedmen; but
not from women, slaves, and minors. If a father, however,
commenced to give a pledge for a minor, he was not allowed to
stop. From priests no pledges were taken, for the sake of peace
(and the dignity of the priests themselves). 4

(d) Said R. Jehudah: Ben Buchri proclaimed the following
ordinance in Yavne (Jamnia): “ Any priest paying his shekel
commits no wrong. ” R. Johanan ben Zakai, however, rejoined :
“ Not so! (The ordinance should read:) * Any priest not paying
his shekel, commits a sin/ ” 1 But the priests used to interpret
the following passage to their advantage : It is written [Leviticus
vi. 16] : “ And every meat-offering of a priest shall be wholly
burnt, it shall not be eaten/' (They said therefore:) Were we
obliged to contribute (our shekels) how could we eat our 2 Omer

3 The taking of pledges commenced immediately upon the depar-
ture of the money-changers from the rural districts, because, if a
man had not paid his half-shekel while the money-changers were still
within his reach, it was obvious that he either would not or could not
pay it, and in consequence a pledge was taken.

4 According to law, the priests were also in duty bound to pay the
half-shekels, the collection of which was mainly intended for the pur-
chase of communal sacrifices, and the priests were naturally included
in the community. They, however, found a defect in the law, and
held themselves exempt. In consequence of their being in authority
during the existence of the second Temple, they were not forced to
pay or give pledges, for the sake of harmony.

Mishna d. 1 The difference of opinion between Ben Buchri (who
was a priest himself) and R. Johan ben Zakai is, as can be plainly
seen, that Ben Buchri holds, that according to law the priests are not
in duty bound to pay the half-shekel; but if they do it, they may
nevertheless partake of their Omer, two loaves, and showbread,
while R. Johan ben Zakai says, that they are in duty bound to pay
the half-shekel.

3 The priests claim, that if they were to pay the half-shekel with
which the Omer, etc., is bought, they would naturally have a share
in it, and they would eat their share, which, as a priest’s offering,
must not be eaten by any one. This is, however, an unjust claim;
for the majority is considered, and the priests were by far in the
minority. As the priests, however, were in charge of the affairs of
state, they interpreted the law to suit themselves, and for the sake of
peace they were not disturbed.


TRACT SHEKALIM.


5

(first sheaves harvested) and the two loaves and the showbread
(which were procured with the shekels of the head-tax) ?

(e) Although it was ordained that no pledges were to betaken
from women, slaves, and minors, if they offered to contribute,
their money was accepted. From heathens and Samaritans it
was not accepted. Nor were bird-offerings, for men or women
afflicted with venereal disease and for women who had recently
been confined, accepted ; nor sin and guilt offerings. 1 Vowed
and voluntary offerings, however, were accepted. 2 The follow-
ing is the rule: Everything which was vowed as an offering and
all voluntary offerings were accepted. Anything not vowed for
offering or given voluntarily was not accepted from them (heath-
ens and Samaritans). So it is explicitly declared in Ezra, for it
is written [Ezra iv. 3] : “ It is not for you and us (both) to build
a house unto our God.”

(/) The following are obliged to pay a premium 1 (in addi-

Mishna e. 1 This clause of the Mishna refers, according to the
Palestinian Talmud and Maimonides, to Samaritans only and not to
heathens, while the sin and guilt offerings were accepted from
Samaritans but not from heathens, because the latter had not the
same laws as the Israelites as regards sin-offerings. The Samaritans,
however, claiming to be Israelites, were allowed to bring their sin
and guilt offerings. The reason, however, that bird-offerings were
not accepted from the Samaritans was because, in the first place, an
offering for a person afflicted with venereal disease had to be brought
in the form of a sheep; but if the person could not afford a sheep,
birds answered the purpose. The Samaritans, however, were not
considered trustworthy, and it was feared that they might bring a
wrong offering (i.e., an offering of less value than they could afford).

2 These were accepted from heathens also, because such offerings
were for forgiveness of sins in general, and in that respect all men
are equal.

Mishna /. 1 The shekel mentioned in the Bible is equivalent to
the Sela mentioned in the Mishna, and is worth two shekels of the
Mishna. The half-shekel of the Bible was worth (according to
Maimonides) the weight of 192 grains of barley in silver, and, for
fear that the shekel of the Mishna of that time was perhaps a trifle
less than the above weight, a small coin was prescribed to be paid in
addition to the above shekel, and which was named from the Greek
Colobbus (jo'AA vfios). He who gave the half-shekel voluntarily,
and not because he was obliged to pay it, was exempt from paying
the above “ Colobbus/' Those of the priests who, regardless of the


6


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


tion to the half-shekel) : Levites, Israelites, proselytes, and freed-
men ; but not (priests,) women, slaves, and minors. If one pay
(the half-shekel) for a priest, woman, slave, or a minor, he is
exempt (from paying the premium); if he pay for himself and
another, however, he must pay a premium for one. R. Meir
says: “ (He must pay) two premiums. One who pays a Sela
(whole Bible shekel) and receives in return a half (Bible) shekel
must pay two premiums /’ 2

(£*) If one pay for a poor man, for a neighbor, or for a coun-
tryman, he is exempt from a premium (because it is charity); if
he only advances them the money, he is not exempt. Brothers
who (after dividing their inheritance) have their business in com-
mon, or partners, when they become obliged to pay a premium,
are exempt from cattle-tithe.* As long, however, as they must
pay cattle-tithe, they are exempt from a premium. How much
does the premium amount to ? According to R. Meir, to one
silver Meah (one twenty-fourth of a shekel); but the sages say,
to one-half of a Meah.


claim that they were not obliged to pay the half-shekel, paid it
nevertheless, were exempt from the above premium for the sake of
peace.

a One in addition to the half-shekel and one for the exchange.

Mishna^*. * Cattle-tithe must be paid by a man only from such
young as his own cattle calve, but not from the calves which he pur-
chases elsewhere. If two brothers inherit cattle or calves from their
father, they must pay cattle-tithe, because the cattle are regarded
as still their father’s. If they have divided their inheritance, even
though they shared alike, they are both exempt from payment, because
it is regarded as if one brother had bought the cattle from the other.
(The same refers to partners. As long as they are in partnership they
are liable for cattle-tithe from such young as is calved by their own
cattle, but if the partners dissolve even after the cattle had calved,
they are exempt, because it is regarded as if one partner had pur-
chased his share from the other.) Now, it is obvious that when the
two brothers are still partners and liable for cattle-tithe they are
regarded as one, and by paying one Sela for both are exempt from
premiums, because the money is still considered as their father’s.
(This explanation is taken from Rashi in Tract Chulin.) As soon,
however, as they are exempt from cattle-tithe, they have nothing
more in common, hence must pay a half-shekel each, and thus must
also pay the premium.


CHAPTER II.


MISHNA: (a) One may put together the Shekalim and
exchange them for Darkons 1 (Greek coins of permanent value),
in order to be able to carry them more readily. Just as the
money-chests were on the order of horns in the city of Jerusa-
lem, so were they also in the country . 2 If the inhabitants of a
town sent their Shekalim (to the city of Jerusalem) by messen-
gers, and the money was stolen from them or was lost by acci-
dent, if the treasurers had already drawn their share (from the
communal Shekalim), the messengers of the city must swear to
the fact before the treasurers. If the share had not yet been
drawn, they (the messengers) must swear to the facts before
the inhabitants of the town, and the latter must make the
amount good . 3 If the money was recovered or returned by the


CHAPTER II.

Mishna a. 1 The Darkon (Greek Aapeiuos ; or drachm , biblical
term, Ezra viii. 27) was a Persian gold coin worth two Selas, or four
half-shekels.

3 The money-chests were narrow on one side and broad at the
bottom, and had a slot through which a Darkon on edge only could
be passed, and were given to the messenger locked.

8 If a portion of the amount of Shekalim collected had already
been spent for sacrifices or for the improvement of the Temple, all
the Israelites who were bound to pay their Shekalim had a share in
such disbursement, and the amount sent by the town, although lost
or stolen, was counted as if it had been included in the amount
spent, because it was the express understanding that in every shekel
spent for sacrifices, etc., all Israelites had a share, in order that they
might have a share in the sacrifices. Therefore, the messengers of
the city had simply to swear that they had taken the money, and it
was considered received by the treasurers. If, however, no portion
of the Shekalim had yet been expended, the share of the inhabitants
of the town, whose money had been stolen or lost, was not included
in the amount on hand, and hence the representatives of the city were
obliged to make it good (Maimonides).


8


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


thieves, both amounts are considered as Shekalim, and nothing
is credited to next year’s account.

(&) If one give his shekel to another to pay (his head-tax)
for him, and the man appropriates it to pay his own tax, he
(the latter) commits embezzlement if the share had already been
drawn ; the same is the case with one who pays his shekel with
sanctified money, after his share had been drawn and an animal
was sacrificed for it . 1 If he took the money from the second
tithes or from the Sabbatical year fruit, he must eat the full
value of same in the city of Jerusalem . 2

(c) If one gather together single coins and say: “ These
shall serve for my Shekalim,” the eventual remainder is, accord-
ing to the school of Shamai, a voluntary gift; according to the
school of Hillel, it is not sanctified. If the man say, however:
44 Out of these I shall pay my Shekalim,” the eventual remain-
der is, according to both schools, not sanctified. If he say:
44 These shall serve me for a sin-offering,” the eventual remain-
der is, according to both schools, a voluntary offering. If he
say: ” Out of these will I bring a sin-offering,” the eventual
remainder is, according to both schools, not sanctified.*


Mishna b. 1 The same reason as stated in note 3 of the preced-
ing Mishna applies also to this clause; and, besides, everybody had
a share in the sacrifice of the animal, even if the sacrifice were made
on the strength of future receipts, for pledges were on hand insuring
the payment by the delinquents.

3 If the money was taken from the second tithes, the value of
which had to be consumed in the city of Jerusalem, he must replace
it by an equal amount and proclaim that this money is in exchange
for the money taken from the second tithe, and then consume it
accordingly. If the money was taken from the Sabbatical year fruit,
he must replace it and proclaim the same as above and make it
public property, as is the law of Sabbatical years.

Mishna c, * The meaning of this Mishna is as follows: If a man
gathered money little by little, with the express intention of paying
his shekalim tax out of such money, and separated it from other
moneys, any remainder which he may have left over after such pay-
ment is, according to the school of Shamai, to be devoted for a vol-
untary offering, because it was separated; and according to the
school of Hillel, it is ordinary money, that may be used at will,
because it was gathered only for the purpose of paying the amount
due, which was already paid. If a man, however, had a sum of


TRACT SHEKALIM.


9


(d) R. Simeon says: ” What difference is there here between
the Shekalim and the sin-offerings ? Shekalim have their fixed
value, but sin-offerings have not.” 1 R. Jehudah says: “ Even
Shekalim have no fixed value; for when Israel returned from
captivity, (half-) Darkons were paid; later (half-) Selas were
paid ; again, Tabas (half-shekels) were current (but not accepted),
and finally people would only pay with Dinars.” 2 Rejoined R.
Simeon: ” Nevertheless, the Shekalim were all of like value at
one and the same time, while as for sin-offerings, one brings one
Sela’s worth, another two, and a third three Selas' worth.” 3

(e) The remainder of moneys intended for Shekalim is not


money, and declared that he would use this sum for the payment of
his shekalim tax, the remainder which he may have after such pay-
ment is, even according to the school of Hillel, to be devoted for a
voluntary offering. With money devoted for a voluntary offering,
whole-offerings only were to be bought.

Mishna d . 1 By his teaching in this Mishna, R. Simeon wishes to
explain the reason of the decree of the school of Hillel concerning
the remainder of money which had been gathered little by little for
the purpose of paying the Shekalim, or for the bringing of a sin-
offering, and says: “ Because it is written [Exodus xxx. 15], 4 The
rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less, than the
half of a shekel,’ a man when gathering money for the payment of
Shekalim knows exactly how much he will need; hence, although he
separated the amount gathered, the remainder is ordinary money;
but if he gathered money for a sin-offering, which has no fixed value,
and for which he did not know exactly how much he would have to
pay, his intention in separating the money was evidently to use the
entire amount for such purpose, and hence the eventual remainder,
which cannot be used for a sin-offering, as it is already sacrificed,
should be used for a voluntary offering.”

3 R. Jehudah differs with R. Simeon, and states, that the reason
given by the latter for the decree of the school of Hillel cannot be
correct, for even Shekalim had not always a fixed value, and when
a man commenced to gather money for the payment of his Shekalim
he also may not have known how much he would have to pay when
the time came, because the value of the coin might be changed in
the meantime.

3 R. Simeon answered R. Jehudah very properly: “Even if the
value of the coin was changed, the man knew well that he would pay
a certain sum equal to that paid by all others, and the entire amount


IO


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


sanctified . 1 The remainder of moneys intended for the offering
of the tenth part of an ephah [Lev. v. xi.] (sin-offering of the
poor), for bird-offerings of men or women afflicted with venereal
disease and of women that had been recently confined, and for
sin and guilt offerings, are considered voluntary offerings. Fol-
lowing is the rule: The remainder of everything designated for
sin and guilt offerings is considered as a voluntary offering . 2 The
remainder of whole-offerings is applied to whole-offerings , 3 of
food-offerings to food-offerings, of peace-offerings to peace-offer-
ings; that of the Passover-offerings to peace-offerings, and that
of Nazarite-offerings to Nazarite-offerings. The remainder of
such (offering) as is designated for a certain Nazarite is a vol-
untary offering. The remainder of moneys for the poor in gen-
eral, belongs to the poor; of money collected for a certain poor
man belongs to that same poor man. The remainder of ransom
moneys for prisoners is applied to (the ransom of) other prisoners ;
of moneys collected for a certain prisoner belongs to that prisoner.
The remainder of burial moneys is applied to (the burial of) other
dead; of money collected for a particular dead (man) belongs to

that he had gathered would not be consumed; as for a sin-offering,
however, he never knew exactly just what amount he would need
for its purchase, because it had no fixed value; therefore, when he
separated the money from other moneys his intention was to use the
entire amount.”

Mishna <?. 1 After explaining the opinions of both schools (Shamai
and Hillel) in the preceding Mishna, and the Halakha, as usual, pre-
vailing according to the school of Hillel, this Mishna states the final
Halakha anonymously, and then cites the subsequent ordinances,
concerning which there is no difference of opinion.

* The reason for this rule is: A sin or guilt offering must be
brought for each sin separately. If money was designated for one
sin-offering, the remainder cannot be applied to another offering
for the same sin, nor for another sin which one might commit in the
future, hence the remainder must be a voluntary offering.

8 The remainder of whole-offerings may be used for more whole-
offerings, because the quantity of whole-offerings, which are volun-
tary, is not limited. The same applies to food and peace offerings.
The remainder of Passover-offerings, however, which cannot be used
for the same purpose again, and should, however, be used for an eat-
able sacrifice, cannot be used for a voluntary offering, which is a
whole-offering, but for a peace-offering, which is eatable.


TRACT SHEKALIM.


1 1

the legal heirs. R. Meirsays: 44 The remainder remains intact
until Elijah comes again ” (as the herald of the resurrection ). 4
R. Nathan says: “ It should be applied to the building of a
gravestone for the departed/’

4 The reason for R. Meir’s dictum is: He holds, that if money is
collected for a certain dead man, the remainder belongs virtually to
him, /.<?., should be applied only for the use of the corpse; hence the
heirs have no share in it. R. Nathan, however, says, that the set-
ting up of a gravestone is for the use of the corpse, it being in his
honor and not of any benefit to the heirs.


CHAPTER III.


MISHNA: ( a ) At three periods of the year money is drawn
from the treasury (of the Shekalim); viz. : Half a month before
Passover, half a month before Pentecost, and half a month be-
fore the Feast of Booths. The same dates are also the terms
for the obligation of cattle-tithing, so says R. Aqiba. Ben
Azai says: “ The dates for the latter terms are the twenty-ninth
of Adar, the first of Sivan, and the twenty-ninth of Abh.'* R.
Eliezer and R. Simeon both say: “ The first of Nissan, the first
of Sivan, and the twenty-ninth of Elul.” But why do they say
the twenty-ninth of Elul, why not the first of Tishri ? Because
that is a feast-day, and it is not allowed to tithe on a feast-day;
therefore they ordained it for the preceding day, the twenty-
ninth of Elul.*

(b) The money drawn from the treasury was brought in three
chests, each of three Saahs’ capacity. On these chests was
written: Aleph, Beth, Gimmel. R. Ishmael says: “ They were
marked in Greek: Alpha, Beta, Gamma.” — The one that drew
the money was not allowed to enter (the treasury) with a
turned-up garment, nor with shoes nor sandals, nor with Tephil-
lin, nor with an amulet, in order that, in the event of his becom-
ing impoverished, it should not be said that he was thus pun-
ished on account of transgression against the treasury; or if he
became rich, that he enriched himself by means of money drawn
from the treasury. For a man must stand as unblemished before
his fellowman as before his God, as it is written [Numbers


CHAPTER III.

Mishna a . * The dates of the time for cattle-tithing have nothing
to do with the time for drawing the money; for as to that time, all
agree upon the dates stated in the Mishna, and the difference of
opinion concerning the time of cattle-tithing is explained in the
Palestinian Talmud and in Tract Rosh Hashana of the Babylonian
Talmud.


TRACT SHEKALIM. 13

xxxii. 22] : ” And ye be thus guiltless before the Lord and before
Israel”; and [Proverbs iii. 4]: “ So shalt thou find grace and
good favor in the eyes "of God and man.” *

(c) The members of the family of R. Gamaliel used to enter,
each one with his shekel between his fingers, and throw it before
the one who drew the money from the treasury, and the latter
immediately placed it into the chest (which he took out).— The
one who came in to draw the money did not proceed before he
had said to the bystanders: ” I will now proceed to draw,” and
they had answered: “ Draw, draw, draw,” three times.*


Mishna b. * In this Mishna the manner of drawing the money
from the treasury is described: how it was accomplished, that the
Shekalim for which communal sacrifices were bought should be taken
from the treasury in such a manner that all the contributors should
have a share in them. The mode of procedure was as follows: About
the middle of the month of Nissan, when the money from all Israel
had been collected, the treasurers, amid great ceremony, would open
the rooms where the boxes in which the money had been deposited by
the collectors were situated, and bring out all the boxes contained in
the rooms. These boxes were in turn opened, and their contents
thrown into three cases, each of which had nine Saahs’ capacity, and
were covered with a cover. The remainder, after filling the three
cases, was called the remainder of the room (and what was done
with this will be told later). After the performance of this ceremony
one man was selected, while the others withdrew, and he was to
transfer the money to be expended, from the cases into three small
chests, each having three Saahs’ capacity and marked with three
letters: Aleph, Beth, Gimmel; or, Alpha, Beta, Gamma.

Mishna c. * After this ceremony, the man, being almost nude —
for he had no garments on in which he could conceal a coin, no shoes,
no sandals, no hat, no hose; in fact, nothing that would afford a
hiding-place for money — would take the chest marked Aleph and
bring it up to the first case, and fill it up, after which he would
cover the case. Then he would take the chest marked Beth, fill it
from the second case, cover the case, and proceed in the same man-
ner with the chest marked Gimmel, from the third box, which con-
tained nine Saahs’ capacity; but in the last instance he would leave
the case uncovered, as a sign whence to commence filling the chests
at the second drawing of money in the same order as before, using
the third case first, then the second, and lastly the first. This was
done in order that the money should be thoroughly intermingled


14


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


( d ) After the man had completed the first drawing, he cov-
ered the balance with a cover (of fur) ; the same was done after
the second drawing; after the third drawing the balance remained
uncovered; for (the covering in the first two instances) was done
only in order not to draw by mistake again what had already
been drawn from. The first drawing was performed in the name
of the whole land of Israel, the second in the name of the cities
near the boundaries, and the third in the name of the inhabi-
tants of Babylon, Media, and all distant lands in general.


and everybody have a share in the sacrifices bought with it. The
first drawing took place on the fifteenth of Nissan, and sacrifices
were purchased for the Passover. The next drawing was held fifteen
days before Pentecost; and Pentecost only lasting one day, not so
many sacrifices were needed, and the money lasted until fifteen days
before the Feast of Booths, when the last lot of money was with-
drawn from the cases and placed in the chests. The expenditure of
the money was also made in the order of chests, chest Aleph being
emptied first, etc. ; and the intention was to place Jerusalem first,
the surrounding territory next, and all the other places where Israel-
ites dwelt last.


CHAPTER IV.


MISHNA: (a) What was done with this money drawn?
The daily sacrifices, the additional sacrifices, and the drink-
offerings belonging to them were bought therewith; also the
Omers 1 (sheaves), the two loaves, the showbreads, and communal
sacrifices in general. The watchmen who had to guard the after-
growth on the Sabbatical year were paid out of this money.
R. Jose says: “ One who so desired could undertake the guard-
ing (of the after-growth on Sabbatical years) without pay .” 2
The sages answered him: ‘‘Thou wilt admit thyself, that the
sacrifices (from the after-growth on Sabbatical years) must be
brought only from communal property .” 3


CHAPTER IV.

Mishna a . 1 The Omers and the two loaves, which had to be made
of Palestinian grain and of the new crop only, were bought out of
the Shekalim during the six ordinary years, but in the Sabbatical
year, where neither sowing nor reaping was done, where were they
obtained ? Men were sent out to discover where grain was growing
as an after-growth, that had not been sown, and then watchmen
were placed there to see that no one disturbed the crop; for it being
public property, the possessor of the soil where the grain grew could
not prevent its being taken. The men who discovered the grain and
the watchmen were paid for their services out of the Shekalim, and
such payment was regarded as the price of the grain, so that the
grain again became communal property.

2 R. Jose, in making this statement, holds, that one may present
the community with a thing intended for a voluntary offering, and
thus the man who guards the after-growth gratuitously, thereby
acquiring a right to it, may donate it to the community for a com-
munal sacrifice.

3 The sages mean to say that the Omer, the two loaves, the show-
breads, and the communal sacrifices must be taken from articles
that were communal property from the beginning, while other sacri-
fices may be offered from things donated by a man who does so with
a good will. (See Rosh Hashana.)


6


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


( b ) The red heifer, the goat that was to be sent away (on the
Day of Atonement), the strip of scarlet, were paid for out of
this money. The bridge for the cow, the bridge for the goat
that was to be sent away, and the scarlet strip tied between the
latter's horns, the canal (at the Temple), the city wall, the tow-
ers and other necessities of the city, are paid for out of the re-
mainder of the treasury-money.* Abba Saul says: “ The costs
of the building of the bridge for the red heifer were defrayed by
the high priests themselves.’ ’

(c) What was done with the balance left over in the treasury
(after all the things in the preceding Mishna had been procured) ?
Wines, oils, and fine meal were bought with it to the profit of
the sanctuary (for the purpose of selling it again to those who
brought sacrifices).* So said R. Ishmael. R. Aqiba, however,
says: ” Sanctified moneys or contributions for the poor are not
dealt with for profit.”

(( d ) What was done with the remainder of the money (taken
from the chests) ? It is used for gold plate for the decoration
of the Holy of Holies. R. Ishmael says: " The mentioned
fruit (profit of the wines, oils, and fine meal sold in the Temple)
was for the benefit of the altar, and the remainder of the money
drawn was for service-utensils.” R. Aqiba says: ” The remain-
der of the money drawn was for the benefit of the altar and
that of the drink-offerings was for service-utensils.” R. Hanina,
the assistant chief of priests, says: ” The remainder of the drink-

Mishna b . * The remainder of the Shekalim, left over after the
three cases had been filled, which was called “ remainder of the
room,” was stored in a high place, access to which was very diffi-
cult, no ladder being permitted to be used. Out of this money all
the accessories for the sacrifices, as enumerated in the Mishna, were
procured. The details of these accessories are explained in Tracts
Para and Yuma.

Mishna c. * It is known that all those who brought sacrifices were
obliged to purchase wine, oil, and fine meal for meal-offerings, and
all this was purchased in the court of the Temple. In the Palestinian
Talmud many things are enumerated, for which purposes the balance
of the money was used; for instance, the hiring of teachers to
instruct the priests in the art of slaughtering, in the halakhas per-
taining to such matters, etc., also for the payment of those who in-
vestigated blemishes in the sacrifices, and a great many other things
to be found in that chapter (Halakha 4).


TRACT SHEKALIM.


*7


offerings was for the benefit of the altar and that of the money
drawn was for service-utensils. ” The two latter would not
admit of the alleged gain from fruit* * (profit).

(e) What was done with the remainder of the incense P 1 At
first the remuneration of the preparers of the incense was set
aside from the treasury; the sanctification of the incense on hand
was then transferred to that money, and the former was then
given to the preparers in lieu of compensation 2 ; it is then bought
back from them with the money of the new revenue : providing the
new revenue was on hand in time, it was bought back with such
money; otherwise, the old revenue was used for that purpose.

(/) If one devote his entire possessions in honor of the Lord,
and among them are things which are fit for communal sac-
rifices (e.g. , incense), the preparers of the incense should be
paid therewith. So teaches R. Aqiba. Ben Azai answered
him * : “ Such is not the right mode of procedure. The compen-


Mjshna d. * In the preceding Mishna, R. Ishmael declares, that
the balance of the money in the treasury is used to purchase wines,
oils, and fine meal, to be resold to those bringing sacrifices, and in
this Mishna he relates what is done with the profits accruing from
such sales. R. Aqiba, however, who would not permit of selling the
things mentioned for profit, declares that the money for the altar is
taken directly from the ‘balance left over in the treasury; and R.
Hanina holds, that the balance of the money drawn is used for the
service-utensils.

Mishna e. 1 The remainder of the incense refers to the amount of
incense left over at the end of the year. A quantity of incense was
prepared for the whole year, and every priest would use a handful at
a time; but, as handfuls are not all alike, no fixed amount could be
prepared: hence the remainder.

* Compensation for labor must not be made with sacrificed articles,
for the sanctification cannot be transferred to labor that had already
been performed; it can be transferred, however, to actual money,
and in consequence the subterfuge for the payment of the preparers
of the incense was resorted to as stated in the Mishna.

Mishna /. * R. Aqiba and Ben Azai differ in this Mishna as to
whether sanctification can be transferred to labor or not. R. Aqiba
holds, that labor can be compensated with sanctified articles; but
Ben Azai holds, that it cannot. According to Maimonides the
Halakha prevails according to Ben Azai, because in the previous
Mishna there is a concurrent opinion.


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


18

sation of the preparers must first be separated from such pos-
sessions, then the sanctification of those possessions transferred
to money ; then give the separated things to the preparers for
compensation ; and, finally, buy them back from them with
money of the new revenue.* *

(g) If one devote his possessions, and there are among them
cattle fit for the altar, male or female, the male, according to R.
Eliezer, shall be sold for whole-offerings and the female for
peace-offerings to such as are in need of them; and the pro-
ceeds of such sale, together with the other possessions, shall be
devoted to the treasury for the maintenance of the Temple. R.
Jehoshua says: ” The male are sacrificed as whole-offerings, the
female are sold to such as are in need of peace-offerings, and the
proceeds used for the sacrifice of whole-offerings. The balance
of the possessions is devoted to the maintenance of the Tem-
ple .” 1 Said R. Aqiba: “ The opinion of R. Eliezer seems to
me to be more proper than that of R, Jehoshua; for R. Eliezer
has an even procedure, whereas R. Jehoshua divides it .” 2 R.
Papeos says: “I have heard that it is done according to
both teachers; viz.: According to R. Eliezer if the owner who
devotes his possessions explicitly mentions his cattle, and
according to R. Jehoshua if he silently includes his cattle in
his possessions .** 3

Mishna g. 1 The point of difference between R. Eliezer and R.
Jehoshua is this: The former holds, that if a man devoted all his
possessions, his intention was to devote them for the maintenance of
the Temple only; while the latter holds, that the intention was to
devote the possessions according to their adaptability. Hence if,
among the possessions, there were objects adapted for the altar, they
should be devoted to the altar; if, however, these were female cattle,
which could not be brought as a whole-offering, nor, by reason of
the absence of the owner, even as a peace-offering, such cattle should
be sold and the proceeds applied to the purchase of whole-offerings.

3 R. Aqiba holds with R. Eliezer, because, in his opinion, a man
who devotes all his possessions does so with but a single intention;
and this is what he terms an even procedure.

3 R. Papeos said, that if the man devoted all his possessions to
the honor of the Lord, R. Jehoshua would be correct, for his posses-
sions can be used in honor of the Lord in various ways; but if he
explicitly stated that he devoted his possessions for the maintenance
of the Temple, R. Eliezer’s opinion is proper.


TRACT SHEKALIM.


l 9


(Ji) If one devote his possessions, and there are among
them things fit for the altar, such as wines, oils, and birds, says
R. Eliezer, the latter things should be sold to such as need
offerings, of these kinds, and the proceeds used for the sacrific-
ing of whole-offerings; the balance of the possessions goes toward
the maintenance of the Temple.*

(0 Every thirty days the prices paid by the treasury are
determined. If one contract to furnish flour at the rate of four
Saah (for one Sela), and the price is raised to three, he must
nevertheless furnish the same at four Saah (for one Sela). 1 If he
contract at the rate of three and the price fall to four, he must
in that case furnish four, for the Sanctuary always has that pre-
rogative. If the flour become wormy, it is the loss of the con-
tractor; and if the wine become sour it is also his loss, and he
does not receive the money for his wares until the purchased
wares have been favorably accepted as sacrifices at the altar. 2

Mishna h . * The reason that R. Eliezer decrees that wines, oils,
and birds should be sold, and whole-offerings brought in their stead,
is because the articles mentioned cannot be redeemed with money.

Mishna i. 1 Every month, bids were received from contractors
for the furnishing of the necessaries for the Temple and altar for one
month. The lowest bidder received the contract, and it was dis-
tinctly understood that, even if prices were raised during the month,
his prices were to remain as originally contracted for.

2 The Palestinian Talmud states, that the money due the contrac-
tors was paid them by the priests immediately upon the latter receiv*
ing the wares, for the priests were very careful, and never allowed
flour to become wormy or wine to spoil.


CHAPTER V.


MISHNA: (a) The following were the heads of offices 1 in the
Sanctuary: Johanan, son of Pinchas, keeper of the seals 2 ; A’hia,
(superintendent) of drink-offerings; Mathia, son of Samuel,
(superintendent) of the casting of lots 3 ; Petha’hia, (superinten-
dent) of bird-offerings . 4 Petha’hia is Mordecai, but why do
they call him Petha’hia ? Because he used to expound and
interpret scriptures, and was master of seventy languages.
Ben A’hia was (superintendent) of the cures of priests suffering
with abdominal diseases . 5 Ne’huniah was master of the well . 6


CHAPTER V.

Mishna a . 1 The list of officers enumerated by the Mishna were
not all officers at the same time, but served at different periods, and
the Mishna merely names the most important and pious among them.

2 See Mishna d, same chapter.

3 Lots were cast for the* determination of the turn of the priests
for each particular service. The superintendent would keep a record
of such as were eligible for duty, and then cast lots for the priest
who was to serve.

4 Petha’hia was superintendent-in-chief of all those who had
charge of the bird-offerings; these bird-offerings were brought by
women who had recently been confined; and there were so many of
them that a record had to be kept, who came first, whose time was
nearly expired, and how much was to be charged for the offerings.

Besides this, it often happened that the birds became mixed and
required great wisdom to separate them and recognize to whom
every bird belonged, as the changing of the birds would make the
offering invalid. (See commentary of Israel Lipshuetz.)

6 Such diseases among priests were of very frequent occurrence and
inevitable; for they were dressed during services very lightly, being
allowed to wear only four articles of apparel; viz., a linen shirt, linen
pantaloons, a linen cap, and a girdle. Besides, they had to walk
barefoot on the marble floor, and were constantly eating meat of
the sacrifices, which had to be eaten during a specified time. Hence

ao


TRACT SHEKALIM.


21


Gebini was herald . 7 Ben Gabhar was turnkey of the gates . 8 Ben
Bebai was master of the temple-guard . 9 Ben Arzah was mas-
ter of the kettledrums (which were beaten as a signal for the
Levites to commence their chant). Higros, son of Levi, was
(leader) of the singing. The family of Garmo (superintended)
the making of the showbreads . 10 The family of Abtinos (super-
intended) the preparing of the incense . 11 Elazar (superintended)
the making of the curtains . 12 Pinchas superintended the vest-
ments . 13

they needed many attendants, in order that, as soon as one priest took
sick, a substitute was brought in his place and he was removed to the
sick ward. Ben A’hia was the superintendent-in-chief of these matters.

6 On account of the immense influx of people into Jerusalem
three times a year, the wells for the supply of water, both on the
roads and in the city, had to be looked after, and Ne’huniah had
charge of this.

7 The commencement of all services had to be heralded, and many
heralds were employed. Gebini was herald-in-chief, and his duty
was mainly to call out in the morning: “ Priests, to your duties!
Levites, to your chants! Israelites, to your places! ” He had so
powerful a voice that it could be heard eight miles.

8 He had charge of the keys of the gates and of the men who
stood at the gates.

9 The gates of the Temple had to be guarded day and night, even
in times of peace. To properly care for the guard and to punish all
negligence in guarding the gates was the duty of Ben Babai.

10 For showbreads, twelve loaves had to be made every week, and
had to be made so that they would keep fresh the entire week. For
further details, see Tract Tamid. The family of Garmo had charge
of this work for generations.

"The incense, which was used twice a day, had to be prepared
with especial skill from many different spices, and in proper propor-
tions. Further details are also to be found in Tract Tamid. The
family Abtinos had charge of this branch for many generations.

13 The curtains, which were frequently changed, had to be inspected
as to workmanship, cleanliness, etc., and this duty devolved upon
Elazar.

19 The vestments of the priests had to be carefully examined as to
cleanliness, and had to be sent out to be laundered regularly. Many
rooms in the Temple were devoted to those vestments, and Pinchas
had charge of them all.

Much has been said as to the character of the men enumerated in


22


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


(i b ) No less than three treasurers and seven chamberlains
must be appointed,* and no less than two officers were put in
charge of public moneys. Exceptions were made in the cases
of Ben A’hia, superintendent of the cures of the sick, and Elazar,
superintendent of the preparation of curtains, because they were
unanimously elected by the community.

(c) There were four seals in the Sanctuary, inscribed with
the words Egel (calf), Sachar (ram), Gdi (kid), and ’Houte
(sinner, meaning here one covered with sores). Ben Azai says,
that there were five (seals), and the inscriptions were in Aramaic,
meaning: calf, ram, kid, poor sinner (one afflicted with sores),
and rich sinner (one afflicted with sores). The one inscribed
with 44 calf ” was used for drink-offerings brought with offerings
of the herds, large or small, male or female; the one inscribed
with 44 kid ” was used for drink-offerings brought with offerings
of the flocks, large or small, male or female, with the exception
of rams; the one inscribed with 44 ram ” served for drink-offer-
ings brought only with rams; the seal inscribed with 44 sinner'*
served for drink-offerings brought with the three cattle-offerings
of those afflicted with sores.*


the Mishna, whether they were priests themselves, Levites, or ordi-
nary Israelites. For particularized information regarding this subject,
we would refer to 4< Die Priester und der Cultus,” by Dr. Adolf Biich-
ler, Vienna, 1895. It is estimated that the priests in Jerusalem
approached the enormous number of twenty thousand. Besides,
there were numbers of Levites.

Mishna b. * The officers of the Temple ranked as follows: The
king, the high priest, the assistant high priest (Sagan), two catho-
licoses,f seven chamberlains (Amarkolins), three treasurers (Gisbars),
and, finally, many smaller officials; e.g. y inspectors, officers of the
guard, etc. (See 44 Die Priester und der Cultus,” pp. 90-117.) The
duties of each officer are described in Tamid and Yuma.

Mishna c. * AVith every sacrifice that was offered, wine and meal


\ “ Catholicos” is here used in the sense of patriarch or head, which term still
retains a similar meaning in the “ Ecclesiastical History of the Armenian Church,”
deriving its original meaning from the Greek KaQoXiKoS — general or universal. In
the latter sense it was adopted at a very early period by the Christian church.
In the exclusive sense of denoting the church as the “ depository of universally
received doctrine in contrast with heretical sects ” it is still improperly retained by the
Roman Catholic Church. I am surprised to find no mention of the officers of this
name and function under the appropriate title anywhere in the “ Encyc. Brit.”


TRACT SHEKALIM.


2 3


( d ) One who desired to bring drink-offerings, for instance,
went to Johanan, who was keeper of the seals, paid his money,
and received a seal; he then went to A’hia, who had charge of
the drink-offerings, gave him the seal, and received the drink-
offering. In the evening the two officers came together, when
A’hia turned over the seal and received instead the money. If
there was too much money, it belonged to the Sanctuary; if too
little, Johanan had to supply the deficit: for the sanctuary had
that prerogative.

(e) One who lost his seal had to wait until evening. If there
was a surplus sufficient to cover the seal,* he was given the
drink-offering for that amount; otherwise, he did not receive it.
The date of the day was on the seal to prevent fraud.

(/) There were two chambers in the sanctuary. One was


were brought in accordance with the biblical commandment to that
effect, and in quantities prescribed by the ordinances. As the drink
and meal offerings were bought in the Temple, the person bringing
the sacrifice would receive a seal from the priest which he would
exchange for the necessary quantity of wine and meal. The drink-
offerings with goats and sheep were the same, hence the seal
inscribed ‘‘kid” served for both. One who brought a ram, how-
ever, which required a larger quantity of wine and meal, would
receive a separate seal, inscribed “ram.” As for offerings of the
herds, they were all equal, small or large, male or female; hence the
seal inscribed “calf” sufficed for all. Those who were afflicted with
sores, and had to bring two rams and one sheep, received a seal
inscribed “sin” (which had the hidden purpose of signifying that
sores were the consequence of sin). The poor sinners, who had only
to bring one sheep, two doves, and one-tenth of an ephah of meal
and one lug of oil, without any wine, were, according to the opinion
of the sages, not in need of a seal, because the seal inscribed “ kid,”
which they received when bringing the sheep, was sufficient for the
other purpose. Ben Azai, however, says, that another seal was
necessary, and that an extra seal marked “ poor sinner ” was given,
which was intended as a sign that no wine was necessary. The tra-
dition of Ben Azai, that the seals were inscribed in Aramaic charac-
ters, is also true, because, prior to the introduction of the Greek
language, all the writing in the Temple was done in Aramaic. (See
the mentioned work of Biichler.)

Mishna e. * Providing only the surplus amounted to exactly the
amount paid for the seal.


24


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


called chamber of the silent, the other chamber of utensils. In
the former, devout men secretly gave charitable gifts, and the
poor of good family received there secretly their sustenance. In
the other chamber, every one who desired to offer a utensil vol-
untarily, laid it down. Every thirty days the treasurers opened
the chamber, and every utensil found to be fit for the mainte-
nance of the Temple was preserved, while the others were sold
and the proceeds went to the treasury for the maintenance of
the Temple.*


Mishna /. * In the Palestinian Talmud in this chapter (Halakha
15), many legends are related illustrating this Mishna.


CHAPTER VI.


MISHNA: {a) There were thirteen curved chests 1 and thir-
teen tables in the Sanctuary, and thirteen prostrations took
place in the Sanctuary. The family of R. Gamaliel and of R.
Hananiah, chief of the priests, made fourteen prostrations; this
extra prostration was made towards the wood-chamber , 2 because,
according to an ancestral tradition, the ark was hidden there.

(i b ) Once a priest 1 was engaged there, and he noticed that
one of the paving-stones on one place appeared different from
the others. He went out to tell others of it; but he had not
yet finished speaking, when he gave up the ghost ; thereby it was
known to a certainty that the ark of the covenant 2 was hidden
there.

(c) In what direction were the prostrations made ? Four to-
wards the north, four towards the south, three towards the east,


CHAPTER VI.

Mishna a . 1 The thirteen chests were used as explained in Mishna
e, and they were shaped like horns, so that a hand could not be
inserted from the top. This Mishna places the number of everything
at thirteen (on account of the thirteen kinds of mercy attributed to
God). R. Ishmael composed the thirteen rules with which the Law
is expounded.

’The location of the wood-chamber can be determined in Tract
Midoth.

Mishna b. 1 The priest was a man of blemish (deformed), and
could not take part in the sacrifices, but was allowed to select and
peel the wood used at the altar.

’The ark was hidden during the existence of the first Temple in
order to save it from the Babylonians, after all hope had been aban-
doned, and its hiding-place was underground. The priests who subse-
quently took charge probably noticed some sign made by the former
generation when the ark was hidden, and this particular priest died
as a consequence of his attempt to reveal the secret.

25 .


2 6


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


and two towards the Occident; i.e. t towards the thirteen gates . 1
The southern gates were near a corner of the western. These
were: The upper gate, the fire gate, the firstling gate, and the
water gate. Why is it called water gate ? Because a glass of
water was carried through it for the sprinkling of the altar on the
Feast of Booths. R. Eliezer son of Jacob says: At that gate
the waters (flowing from the Holy of Holies) commence to flow
rapidly downwards, until they again flow out under the thres-
hold of the Temple. Opposite there were the northern gates,
near the other corner of the western. These were: The door of
Jekhaniah, the gate of sacrifice, the women's gate, and the music-
gate; and why is the first one called the gate of Jekhaniah?
Because Jekhaniah went through it, when he went into exile.
In the east was the gate Nikanur, which also had two small
doors , 2 one to the right and the other to the left ; lastly, there
were two in the west, which were nameless.

( d ) Thirteen tables were in the Sanctuary: Eight marble
ones in the slaughter-house, on which the entrails were washed.
Two to the west of the altar-sheep, one marble and one silver:
on the marble one the sacrificial pieces were placed, and on the
silver table the utensils were placed. Two in the corridor on
the inside of the Temple entrance, a marble table and a golden
one: on the marble one the showbreads were placed at the time
they were brought in, and on the golden one when they were
taken out ; because the principle is, that the veneration of the


Mishna c. 1 That there were thirteen gates in the Temple is
vouched for by Abba Jose ben Johanan; but the sages declare, that
there were only seven gates and that the thirteen prostrations were
made in the direction of the twelve breaches made by the Greeks in
the walls of the Temple at the time of the Maccabees, and towards
the altar; the twelve breaches had been repaired, and each prostra-
tion was a mark of gratitude for the good fortune. From the fact,
however, that the Mishna cites nine of the gates by their names and
describes their location, it seems that Abba Jose ben Johanan was
correct, and had his knowledge of the matter from tradition.

Concerning the gate Nikanur, it is said that the two doors were
made in the gate proper, because the gates were very heavy and it
required a number of priests and Levites to open them (as explained
in Tract Tamid). Hence, in order to facilitate entrance and egress,
the two doors were added.


TRACT SHEKALIM.


27


sacred must be heightened and not lessened.* Lastly, there
was one golden table in the Temple itself, upon which the show-
breads were constantly lying.

( V ) Thirteen curved chests were in the Sanctuary . 1 On them
was written: Old shekalim, new shekalim, bird-offerings, doves
for whole-offerings, wood, incense, gold for the cover of the
Holy of Holies. Six were for donations in general . 2 The term
new shekalim is used for those paid annually. Old shekalim
were those which were paid by men who had failed to pay
them in the year when they were due, and paid them in the
following year. ” In those marked * bird-offerings/ the money
for turtle-doves was deposited; in those marked ‘ doves,’ money
for young doves was deposited: but they were all whole-offer-
ings.” So says R. Jehudah. The sages say: “ In the former,
money for both sin-offerings and whole-offerings was placed, and
in the latter only for whole-offerings.” 3


Mishna d . * Because the showbreads were lying on a golden table
in the Temple, they were not to be placed on marble tables when
taken out.

Mishna^. 1 When a man paid his half-shekel in Jerusalem, he
would go to the Temple and throw his half-shekel into the chest
marked new shekalim. Into the chest marked old shekalim, such as
had not given pledges for the payment of the Shekalim, and came
voluntarily to pay same, would throw their half-shekel. One who
wished to donate money for specific purposes, e,g. f for bird-offerings,
etc., would deposit the money in the respectively marked chests.

9 Only one of these chests was for donations in general. The
other five were marked as follows: One, “ For the remainder of a
sin-offering,” /.<?., money left over from a sum originally intended for
the purchase of a sin-offering, was thrown into this chest and was
used only for sin-offerings; the second, “ for the remainder of guilt-
offerings”; the third, “ for the remainder of bird-offerings of women
who had been confined and of persons suffering from venereal dis-
eases”; the fourth, “ for the remainder of Nazarite-offerings ” ; and
the fifth, ” for the remainder of offerings of those afflicted with
sores.” If any one had money left over from such offerings, he
deposited it in the respectively marked cases. The contents of the
chest marked ” for donations in general ” were used for the mainte-
nance of the Temple. (Maimonides.)

3 R. Jehudah means to say, that a man who throws money into
the chest marked ‘‘for bird-offerings” intends that his offerings


28


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


(/) If one vow, ” I will furnish wood for the altar,” he must
not furnish less than two cords. If one vow (to furnish) in-
cense, he must not furnish less than a handful. If one vow (to
furnish) gold coin, he must not furnish less than a Dinar. 1 Six
(chests) were for voluntary offerings. What was done with these?
Whole-offerings were bought for these, the meat of which was
sacrificed to God, but the hides belonged to the priests. 2 The
following explanation was made by Jehoiada the high priest, of
the. expression [Lev. v. 19] : 4< It is a trespass-offering; he hath,
in trespassing, trespassed against the Lord ” : The rule is: With
everything coming in under the name of sin or guilt offering,
whole-offerings are bought, the meat of which is offered up to
God and the hides of which belong to the priests; hence the
two expressions: A guilt-offering for God and a guilt-offering
for the priests, as it is written [II Kings xii. 16] : 41 The money
for trespass-offerings and the money for sin-offerings was not
brought into the house of the Lord : it belonged to the priests.”


should be for the altar only, and not for the benefit of those who eat
sacrifices, while the sages differ with him, as stated in the Mishna.

Mishna f. 1 In the preceding Mishna the remainder of offerings
is treated of, and it made no difference how little the remainder was,
it could be thrown into the chest. In this Mishna, the case of a man
who vows to bring an offering is spoken of, and a minimum value is
placed.

* Incidentally we are told that the meat of the sacrifices belonged
to the Divinity, while the hides belonged to the priests; and what
immense sums were realized from the sale of such hides may be
gleaned from the mentioned “ Priester und Cultu* *,” by Biichler.


CHAPTER VII.


MISHNA: (a) If money is found between the chest marked
" Shekalim ” and that marked “ voluntary offerings/ ' it belongs
to the chest marked “ Shekalim ” if it lies nearer to the same,
and to the one marked 4 4 voluntary offerings” if it be nearer
that. So also does it belong to the voluntary offerings if it be
found midway between the two chests. Money found lying be-
tween the chests marked ” wood ” and “ incense' ’ belongs, if it
be nearer the former, to the former; if nearer the latter to the
latter, and also to the latter if found midway between the two.
Money found lying between the chest marked “ bird-offerings ”
and the one marked “ doves ” for whole-offerings belongs to the
former if it be nearer the former; and if nearer the latter to the
latter, and also to the latter if midway between the two. Money
found between ordinary moneys and the moneys of the second
tithes belongs, if nearer the former to the former; if nearer the
latter to the latter, and also to the latter if found midway be-
tween the two.* The rule is: One must be guided by the prox-
imity, even in the case of the less important; but in the event
of equidistance, (one must be guided) by the greater impor-
tance (of the moneys).

(b) Money found (in Jerusalem) on the place of the cattle-
dealers is regarded as second tithe . 1 Money found on the Tem-


CHAPTER VII.

Mishna a. * There are different degrees of sanctification attached
to the several kinds of offerings, some greater and some lesser. In
order not to appropriate money belonging to an offering of a greater
degree of sanctification to one of a lesser degree, it was decided
that proximity of the stray coins should govern the disposition of
such money. Where, however, the money was equidistant, it was
appropriated to the offerings of a greater degree of sanctification,
and the degree may be determined from the Mishna itself.

Mishna £. 1 Because it was rare for priests to visit the cattle-
market, but the Israelites who at any time came to buy cattle for

29


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


3 °

pie-mount is ordinary . 2 Other money found in Jerusalem gen-
erally, during the festivals, is regarded as second tithe; at other
times of the year as ordinary . 3

(^) Meat found in the outer court (of the Temple) is consid-
ered whole-offering if in complete joints; if cut in pieces it is
sin-offering . 1 Meat found in the city is considered peace-offer-
ing . 2 All such meat must be laid aside for putrefaction, and
then be burned in the crematory. Meat found anywhere else in
the land is prohibited (to be used) as carrion, if found in whole
joints; if found cut in pieces, it maybe eaten; and during the
festivals, when a great deal of meat is on hand, even whole joints
may be eaten . 3

(d) Cattle found all the way from Jerusalem to Migdal Eder,
and in the same vicinity in all directions, are considered, if male,
as whole-offerings, and if female as peace-offerings. R. Jehudah

sacrifices generally bought the same with the money exchanged for
their second tithes.

3 Money found on the Temple-mount was presumably dropped
there by priests. It never occurred that a priest should carry money
belonging to the treasury about with him; for even if he drew some
money for the purpose of purchasing necessaries, he immediately
turned it over to the vender. Hence, any money which a priest may
have lost was his own, and ordinary.

3 During the festivals, when all the Israelites congregated in Jeru-
salem, they brought money only to expend for their second tithes,
hence money found in any place is considered as second tithes.

Mishna c. 1 Because whole-offerings were sacrificed in complete
joints, but sin-offerings, which were eaten by the priests, were usu-
ally cut in pieces. Neither must be eaten, because it might be that
the latter had been left over from the preceding day and should be
burned; but the distinction is made simply in case one had eaten of
the meat that was cut up. If he had eaten of the complete joint, he
was certainly guilty, but if he had eaten of the cut meat, it could not
be said positively that he was guilty.

3 This must also not be eaten, because it may have lain more than
two days and a night; but if it is eaten, no one is guilty.

3 Incidentally the rule is laid down as to meat found anywhere in
Palestine. If the meat is found in whole joints, it is presumed to be
carrion left for dogs, and must not be eaten. During the festivals,
when meat is plentiful, it is presumed to be slaughtered meat, and
may be eaten.


TRACT SHEKALIM.


3i


says: 11 If they are fit for Passover-offerings they may be used
for such purpose, providing Passover is not more than thirty
days off.” *

( e ) In former days, the finder of such cattle was pledged
until he brought the drink-offerings belonging to such sacrifices;
every finder, however, letting such cattle stand and going on his
way, the high court decreed, that the costs of the drink-offer-
ings belonging thereto be defrayed out of the public money.

(/) R. Simeon says: Seven decrees were promulgated by
that court, and the latter was one of them. Further: If a non-
Israelite send whole-offerings with the necessary drink-offerings
from over the sea, they are offered up; but if sent without the
necessary drink-offerings, the costs of the latter are defrayed
from public money. If, again, a proselyte died and left offer-
ings, the drink-offerings, if also left by him, are offered up with
the others; if not left, the costs of same are defrayed out of
public money. It was also a decree of the court, that in the
event of a high priest dying, the necessary meat-offering [Levit-
icus vi. 13] should be paid for out of the public treasury. R.
Jehudah, however, declared, that this should be done at the ex-
pense of the heirs. In both cases a tenth of an ephah should
be offered.

(g) Further, that the priests may (at the sacrificial meals)
make use of the salt and the wood (from the sanctuary); that
the priests do not commit a breach of trust when misusing the
ashes of the red heifer 1 ; lastly, that the public treasury reimburse


Mishna d. *R. Jehudah states, that if the animal found was a
yearling and a male, it is considered a Passover-offering, but may be
sacrificed only as a peace-offering, because a Passover-offering must
be intended for a stipulated number of persons. (See Exod. xii. 4.)
The sages, however, say, that on account of the number of whole-
offerings which were brought at the time, the animal found must not
be eaten, for fear lest it be intended for a whole-offering and a grave
offence be committed. Hence it should be sacrificed as a whole-
offering only.

Mishna g. 1 It was not allowed to appropriate any part of a sac-
rifice designated for some special use for any other purpose. If this
was done, however, (unintentionally,) it was considered a trespass,
and a trespass-offering had to be sacrificed as expiation for the sin.
The ashes of the red heifer did not come under the above ruling


32


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


for paid bird-offerings that had become unfit . * 2 R. Jose, how-
ever, says: “ He who contracts for the furnishing of the bird-
offerings must reimburse for the spoilt. ,,

previously (for reason, see Siphri), but on account of the frequent
misuse of those ashes a decree was promulgated placing them under
the same ruling as other parts of sacrifices, which were not to be mis-
appropriated. Subsequently, this Mishna teaches that, there being
no further necessity for the precautionary measure, the decree was
reversed and the ashes restored to their former insignificance. This
was included among the seven decrees.

2 A special decree had to be promulgated to cover this case. Had
this not been done, contractors would have refused to furnish birds
for offerings, because there were very many birds used, and it was
burdensome to properly care for them. Still, R. Jose does not agree
to this, claiming that the contractor might use it for other purposes
and thus save the Sanctuary the loss. According to Maimonides, the
Haiakha prevails according to R. Jose.


CHAPTER VIII.


MISHNA: (a) All spittle 1 to be found in Jerusalem is con-
sidered clean, except such as is found at the upper market (for
this place was secluded and those afflicted with venereal diseases
were in the habit of going there). Such is the teaching of R.
Meir. The sages say: In the middle of the street it is at ordi-
nary times unclean, and at the sides of the streets, clean. Dur-
ing the festivals, spittle found in the middle of the street is
clean; at the sides it is unclean, because such as are unclean
on account of their minority usually walk at the sides of the
street.

(b) All utensils found on the way towards the plunge-bath,
in Jerusalem, are unclean; those found on the way from the
plunge-bath are clean : for they were not carried down to the
plunge-bath the same way that these were carried up from the
plunge-bath. So teaches R. Meir. R. Jose says: 4 * All are
clean, with the exception of such baskets, spades, and pickaxes
as are used for the bones of the dead/’ *


CHAPTER VIII.

Mishna a. 1 Concerning this spittle, see Leviticus xv. 8. It being
impossible that, of all the people congregated in Jerusalem at the
times of the festivals, there should not be some who had running
issues and whose spittle was unclean, regulations were made where
such men were to walk and where not. These regulations are cited
by the Mishna. R. Meir said, that the upper market was the place
designated for them, but the sages differ with him, and say, that the
regulation was for the healthy men to walk in the middle of the
street and the unclean at the sides during the festivals; but the
whole year, the order was reversed. It is therefore self-evident, that,
wherever the unclean walk, one is liable to contract uncleanness.

Mishna b. * This Mishna is explained by Maimonides and
translated by Yost in a different manner than we have rendered it;
namely: “ All utensils found wrong side up on the way to the plunge-
bath are unclean, and those found right side up are clean.” This
3 33


34


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


(c) If a butchering-knife be found on the fourteenth day of
Nissan, a Passover-offering may be slaughtered with it forthwith.
If it be found on the thirteenth, it must be again submerged.*
A severing-knife must be submerged both if found on the thir-
teenth or fourteenth. If the fourteenth, however, fall on a
Sabbath, it may be used for slaughtering forthwith ; so also if
it be found on the fifteenth : if it be found together with a
butchering-knife, it is treated just like the latter.

(d) If a curtain in the Sanctuary become defiled through some
minor uncleanness , 1 it is submerged on the inside of the outer
court, and may be put back in its place; if it become defiled
through a principal uncleanness, it must be submerged on the
outside and then stretched on the rampart, because sunset must
be awaited. At the time it is submerged for the first time (when
new), it should be spread out on the roof of the gallery, in order
that the people may see the beauty of the work.

(e) R. Simeon, son of Gamaliel, says in the name of R. Sim-
eon, son of the assistant high priest, that the curtain was one

explanation is very complicated, and not in accordance with the
literal text and other sources of explanation. Hence we simply
translated the literal text and deem it correct. As for the last three
articles, they are always unclean, on account of being used for bones
of the dead; hence, in our opinion, they were never submerged.
(See also commentary of Israel Lipshuetz, who also interprets it
according to our explanation.)

Mishna c. * A butchering-knife, being in constant use, is always
considered clean, and hence there is no necessity of submerging it.
If, however, it be found on the thirteenth, when there is still one
day’s time, it should be submerged for the sake of precaution. A
severing-knife, however, is considered the same as any other vessel,
and is treated accordingly.

Mishna d. 1 For the explanation of the term “ minor uncleanness,”
as used in this Mishna, it is necessary to state the different degrees
of uncleanness, which are as follows: A corpse is called “ the grand-
parent of uncleanness.” One who touches a corpse becomes “a
father of uncleanness”; anything touching the latter is, in turn, “a
child of (or first of) uncleanness”; anything touched by this latter
is a “second of uncleanness”; and so forth, “a third” and “a
fourth.” (See Tract Taharoth.) In this Mishna a minor uncleanness
refers to a first of uncleanness, and a principal uncleanness to a
father of uncleanness.


TRACT SHEKALIM.


35


span thick, woven on seventy-two warp-cords, each cord twisted
out of twenty threads; it was forty ells long and twenty ells
wide, and made (worth) of eighty-two myriads (Dinars).* Two
such curtains were made yearly: three hundred priests were re-
quired to submerge it.

(f) If meat of the Holy of Holies* became defiled, be it
through a minor or a principal uncleanness, in the corridor or on
the outside, according to the school of Shamai it must all be
burnt in the court (in a place appointed for that purpose), except
such as had been defiled by a principal uncleanness on the out-
side (of the court); according to the school of Hillel, every-
thing is burnt on the outside except such as had been defiled by
a minor uncleanness on the inside.

{g) R. Eliezer says: Anything that has become defiled
through a principal uncleanness, on the outside or on the in-
side, is burnt on the outside; anything that has become defiled
through a minor uncleanness, either on the inside or the outside,
must be burnt on the inside/ ' R. Aqiba says: “ In the place
where a thing became defiled, there must it also be burnt/ ’

(/*) The joints of the daily sacrifice were laid down under-
neath the half of the altar-stairs on the westerly (according to
others on the easterly) side ; those of the additional offerings on
the easterly (others say on the westerly) side. The sacrifices of
the new moon were placed above the railing (others say beneath)
on the altar . 1 The payment of Shekalim was only obligatory
during the time that the Temple stood; the tithes from grain,
cattle, and the deliverance of the firstlings were in force during
the existence of the Temple and even after the Temple. 2 — If


Mishna e . *The Palestinian Talmud asserts, that the amount of
the cost of and the number of priests required to submerge the cur-
tain is somewhat exaggerated; but, according to Dr. Biichler’s
“ Priester und Cultus,” the number of priests is not an exaggeration ;
and as for the cost, if the smallest existing coin be used for calcula-
tion (as in former times the sou in France, so also was the myriad
mentioned in the Mishna), not even the sum will be exaggerated.

Mishna /. * For instance, the meat of the sacrifice mentioned in
Leviticus vii. 6.

Mishna k. 1 This will be explained in Tract Midoth.

3 Because the Levites received their sustenance from this source,
and having inherited no land from their ancestors, they were sup-


36


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


one sanctify Shekalim or firstlings, they are considered sanctified.
R. Simeon says: “ If one say, firstlings shall be holy, they are
not sanctified (because no Temple exists)/'


ported even after the destruction of the Temple by the same means.
The details will be found in Tracts Becharath, Maasroth, etc.


APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VI., MISHNA a.

From the teaching of this Mishna, we may conclude that the
number system of Pythagoras was known and prevailed in the
times of the Sages of the Mishna, and accordingly the number
13 was deemed inauspicious even in the earliest days.

Therefore many religious ceremonies were established with
the express view of convincing the people of the absurdity of
their belief.

It also seems probable that the Sages themselves entertained
the superstition, and that they adopted the number 13 in the
religious ceremonies as a cure for the mischief believed to have
been produced by the inauspicious number.


INTRODUCTION TO TRACT ROSH HA-
SHANA (NEW YEAR'S DAY).


Notwithstanding the fact that in the history of every
nation, especially such as has ever attained to an established
form of government, the calendar is a matter of great impor-
tance, the Scriptures do not in any manner treat of the Jewish
calendar. There cannot even be found a fixed time whence the
commencement of the year should be reckoned, although there
is this passage in Exodus (xii. 2): 44 This month shall be unto
you the chief of months: the first shall it be unto you of the
months of the year.” Doubtless this may be assumed to point
to the month of Nissan (about April), as not only the most
important month, but also as the beginning of the year.

In another passage (Exod. xxiii. 16), however, we find it
written: 44 And the feast of ingathering (Tabernacles), at the
conclusion of the year.” This would be a palpable contradic-
tion to the previous passage, were it not for the fact that the
words 44 Betze' th Hashcina ” (rendered as 44 at the conclusion of
the year”) in the quoted passage can be, with perfect accuracy,
translated 44 during the year.” While such a translation would
clear away all doubt as to Nissan being the beginning of the
year, it could under no circumstances be applied to the Feast
of Tabernacles, which is neither 44 at the conclusion” of the
year nor 44 during the year ” (in the sense 44 when the year has
advanced ”), if the beginning of the year be Tishri (about Sep-
tember). Hence the passage should be translated : 4 4 And the
feast of the ingathering, which had been completed at the con-
clusion of the year ” ; z . e. , in the months preceding the month
of Tishri.

In the face of these contradictory terms, we must revert to
historical facts which would support one or the other of the
above assertions, and we find, that not only the Egyptian rulers,
but also the Jewish kings since the time of Solomon, counted
the beginning of the year of their accession from the month of

xix


XX INTRODUCTION TO TRACT ROSH HASHANA.


Nissan, while other Eastern potentates, such as the Armenian
and Chaldean kings, counted the commencement of their year
of accession from Tishri.

It is not certain whether the Israelites, after their conquest
of Canaan, computed their calendar in conformity with that of
the country whence they came or with that of the country they
had conquered ; but it is plain that in the Mishnaic period, or
after the erection of the second Temple, they counted the
beginning of the year from Tishri. It may be, however, that
their kings, following the example of their predecessors, com-
menced counting the year of their accession from Nissan, and
in all civil contracts and state documents, according to the exist-
ing custom, used dates to agree with Nissan as the first month
of the year.

On the other hand, the priestly tithes, during the days of
the erection of the second Temple, were payable in Elul (about
August), which was considered the expiring season of the year,
in order to prevent the confusion which might arise from mix-
ing one year’s tithes with those of the other. The priestly
tithing of fruits was, however, delayed until Shebhat (about Feb-
ruary), the time when the fruits had already matured on the
trees, in order that the various tithes should not be confused and
to prevent the priests and Levites from unduly interfering with
the affairs of the people.

The prehistoric Mishna, which always formed the law, in con-
formity with the existing custom, and not vice versa* found
four different New Year’s days in four different months, and,
with the object in view of making the custom uniform in all
Jewish communities, taught its adherents to observe four dis-
tinct New Year’s days, at the beginning of the four respec-
tive months in which certain duties were accomplished. Thus
the text of the opening Mishna of this tract, prior to its
revision by Rabbi Jehudah Hanassi, read as follows: “ There
are four different New Year’s days; viz., the first day of Nis-
san, the first of Elul, the first of Tishri, and the first of She-
bhat. ” The different purposes for which these days were estab-
lished as New Year’s days were well known at that time, and it
was therefore deemed unnecessary to specify them. At the time

* Facts corroborating this statement will be found in our periodical Bakay ,
Vol. II., p. 20 et seq.


INTRODUCTION TO TRACT ROSH HASHANA. xxi


of the new edition of the Mishna, by Rabbi Jehudah Hanassi
(the Prince), when the Temple was out of existence, and conse-
quently tithes were no more biblically obligatory (the authority
of the priests having been abrogated and reverted to the house
of David, the great-grandfather of the editor), the latter refer-
ring to the first day of Nissan and the first day of Elul as New
Year's days, added, by way of commentary, the words, " for
kings and cattle-tithe."

He also cited the opinions of R. Eliezer and R. Simeon, that
the New Year's Day for cattle-tithe should not be celebrated
separately, but on the general New Year's Day; viz., on the
first day of Tishri, as under the then existing circumstances
there was no necessity to guard against the confusion of tithes
accruing from one year to the other. From this it may be con-
cluded that R. Jehudah Hanassi, in citing the above opinions,
alluded to them as being in conformity with his own opinion.
To that end he also cites the opinions of the schools of Shamai
and Hillel respectively.

From the statement in the Mishna to the effect that " there
are four periods in each year on which the world is judged," it
appears that in the Mishnaic period the New Year's day was
considered a day of repentance ; and since the principal features
of repentance are devotion to God and prayers for forgiveness of
sin, Rabbi states, in the Mishna, that devotion is the only require-
ment during the days of penitence, i.e., the days between New
Year's Day and the Day of Atonement. The legend relating
that on the New Year’s day books (recording the future of each
person) were opened was yet unknown in Rabbi's time.

The story told by R. Kruspedai in the name of R. Johanan,
that "on New Year’s Daybooks are opened," etc., is taken from
the Boraitha which teaches: "Three books are opened on the
day of judgment." This Boraitha, however, does not refer to
the New Year's day, but to the day of final resurrection, as
explained by Rashi, and that R. Kruspedai quotes his story in
the name of R. Johanan proves nothing; for in many instances
where teachers were desirous of adding weight to their opin-
ions, they would quote some great teacher as their authority.
R. Johanan himself permitted this method.

After Rabbi Jehudah Hanassi had completed the proper
Mishnaic arrangement regarding the number of New Year's days,


xxii INTRODUCTION TO TRACT ROSH HASHANA.


making the principal one 11 the Day of Memorial ” (the first of
Tishri); after treating upon the laws governing the sounding of
the cornet in an exceedingly brief manner — he dwells upon the
custom in vogue at the Temple of covering the mouth of the
cornet or horn with gold, and declares the duty of sounding the
cornet properly discharged if a person passing by the house of
worship can hear it.

He arranges the prayers accompanying this ceremony in a
few words, and then dilates at great length upon the Mishnayoth
treating of the lunar movements by which alone the Jews were
guided in the arrangement of their calendar, upon the manner
of receiving the testimony of witnesses, concerning the lunar
movements, and upon the phases of the moon as used by Rabban
Gamaliel. He then elaborates upon the tradition handed down
to him from his ancestors (meaning thereby the undisputably
correct regulations), and also upon the statutes ordained by R.
Johanan ben Zakkai, enacting that the sages of each generation
are the sole arbiters of all regulations and ordinances, and may
themselves promulgate decrees even though the bases for such
be not found in the Mosaic code.

He also confirms the right of the chief Beth Din (supreme
court of law), but not of a lower Beth Din, of each respective
period, alone to arrange the order of the holidays, on account of
the already apparent discontent of the masses, who were bent
upon taking the management of these subjects into their own
hands.

Thus he dilates upon this feature with the minutest exactness
and supports his assertions with the decision of his grandfather
Rabban Gamaliel, as well as with the decisions of Rabbi Dosa
ben Harkhinas and Rabbi Jehoshua, to the effect that each
generation has only to look for guidance to the Beth Din exist-
ing in its own time, and that the opinion rendered by such a
Beth Din is as binding and decisive as that of Moses, even
though it appear to be erroneous.

Such are the contents of this tract, certainly most important
from an historical and archaeological point of view. Proceed,
then, and study!


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS

OF

TRACT ROSH HASHANA*


CHAPTER I.

Mishna I. The first Mishna ordains New Year’s Days, viz.: For kings,
for the cattle-tithe, for ordinary years, and for the planting of trees. A king
who ascends the throne on the 29th of Adar must be considered to have
reigned one year as soon as the first of Nissan comes. The Exodus from
Egypt is reckoned from Nissan. When Aaron died Sihon was still living.
He heard that Aaron was dead and that the clouds of glory had departed.
The rule about Nissan only concerned the kings of Israel ; but for the kings
of other nations, they reckoned from Tishri. Cyrus was a most upright
king, and the Hebrews reckoned his years as they did those of the kings
of Israel. One is guilty of procrastination. Charity, tithes, the glean-
ings of the field, that which is forgotten to be gathered in the field, the
produce of corners of the field.

One is culpable if he does not give forthwith that which he has vowed for
charity. In the case of charity it must be given immediately, for the poor
are always to be found. The Feast of Weeks falls on the fifth, sixth, or
seventh of Sivan.

How the law against delay affects a woman. In which month is grain in
the early stage of ripening? Only in the month of Nissan. It is also the
New Year for leap-year and for giving the half-shekels. Congregational sac-
rifices brought on the first of Nissan should be purchased with the shekels
raised for the New Year. He who lets a house to another for a year must
count (the year) as twelve months from day to day ; but if the lessee says (I
rent this house) ** for this year,” even if the transaction takes place on the
first of Adar, as soon as the first of Nissan arrives the year (of rental) has
expired. The first of Tishri is the New Year for divine judgment. At the
beginning of the year it is determined what shall be at the end of the year.
The Supreme Court in Heaven does not enter into judgment until the Beth

* See introduction to synopsis of Tract Sabbath, Vol. I., p. xxix.

xxiii


xxiv


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.


Din on earth proclaims the new moon. Israel enters for judgment first. If
a king and a congregation have a lawsuit, the king enters first. From New
Year’s Day until the Day of Atonement, slaves used not to return to their
(own) homes ; neither did they serve their masters, but they ate and drank
and rejoiced, with the crown of freedom on their heads. R. Eliezer says,
that the world was created in Tishri. R. Joshua says, that the world was
created in Nissan. Says R. Joshua, God grants the righteous the fulfilment
of the years of their life to the very month and day. Sarah, Rachel, and
Hannah were visited on New Year's Day. Joseph was released from prison
on New Year’s Day. On New Year’s Day the bondage of our fathers in
Egypt ceased. The Jewish sages fix the time of the flood according to R.
Eliezer, and the solstices according to R. Joshua ; but the sages of other
nations fix the time of the flood also as R. Joshua does. Whoso vows to
derive no benefit from his neighbor for a year must reckon (for the year)
twelve months, from day to day ; but if he said “for this year,” if he made
the vow even on the twenty-ninth of Elul, as soon as the first of Tishri
comes that year is complete. The New Year for giving tithes is for a tree
from the time the fruits form ; for grain and olives, when they are one-third
ripe ; and for herbs, when they are gathered. R. Aqiba picked the fruit of
a citron-tree on the first of Shebhat and gave two tithes of them, . 1-20

Mishna II. At four periods in each year the world is judged. All are
judged on New Year’s Day and the sentence is fixed on the Day of Atone-
ment. R. Nathan holds man is judged at all times. God said: “Offer before
Me the first sheaf of produce on Passover, so that the standing grain may be
blessed unto you. Recite before Me on New Year's Day the Malkhioth,
that you proclaim Me King ; the Zikhronoth, that your remembrance may
come before Me, for good, and how (shall this be done) ?” By the sounding
of the cornet. Three circumstances cause a man to remember his sins.
Four things avert the evil decree passed (by God) on man ; viz., charity,
prayer, change of name, and improvement. Some add to these four a fifth
— change of location. Three books are opened on New Year’s Day : one
for the entirely wicked, one for the wholly good, and one for the average
class of people. The school of Hillel says : The most compassionate
inclines (the scale of justice) to the side of mercy. Who are those who
inspire their fellowmen with dread of them ? A leader of a community
who causes the people to fear him over-much, without furthering thereby a
high purpose. The legend how R. Joshua fell sick and R. Papa went to
visit him. The Holy One, blessed be He, wrapped Himself, as does one
who recites the prayers for a congregation, and pointing out to Moses the
regular order of prayer, said to him: “Whenever Israel sins, let him pray to
Me after this order, and I shall pardon him.” Prayer is helpful for man
before or after the decree has been pronounced. The legend of a certain
family in Jerusalem whose members died at eighteen years of age. They
came and informed R. Johanan ben Zakkai. The Creator sees all their
hearts (at a glance) and (at once) understands all their works, . 20-28

Mishna III. Messengers were sent out in the following six months : in
Nissan, Abb, Elul, Tishri, Kislev, and in Adar. The legend of the king


XXV


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.

(of Syria who had earlier) issued a decree forbidding the study of the Torah
among the Israelites, or to circumcise their sons, and compelling them to
desecrate their Sabbath. Judah b. Shamua and his friends cried aloud : “ O
heavens ! Are we not all brethren ? Are we not all the children of one
Father ? ” etc. Samuel said : “ I can arrange the calendar for the whole cap-
tivity.” Rabha used to fast two days for the Day of Atonement. Once it
happened that he was right, 29-34

Mishnas IV. to VII. For the sake of (the new moon), of the two months
Nissan and Tishri, witnesses may profane the Sabbath. Formerly they pro-
faned the Sabbath for all (new moons), but since the destruction of the
Temple they instituted that (witnesses) might profane the Sabbath only on
account of Nissan and Tishri. It once happened that more than forty pair
(of witnesses) were on the highway (to Jerusalem) on the Sabbath. Shagbar,
the superintendent of Gader, detained them, and (when) R. Gamaliel (heard
of it, he) sent and dismissed him. It once happened, that Tobias the physi-
cian, his son, and his freed slave saw the new moon in Jerusalem. The
explanation of the passage Exodus xii. 1, by R. Simeon and the rabbis.
Who are incompetent witnesses ? Gamblers with dice, etc., . . 34-36

CHAPTER II.

Mishnas I. to IV. If the Beth Din did not know (the witness), another
was sent with him to testify in his behalf. It once happened that R. Nehorai
went to Usha on the Sabbath to testify (to the character) of one witness.
The legend how the BoSthusians appointed false witnesses. Formerly bon-
fires were lighted (to announce the appearance of the new moon) ; but when
the Cutheans practised their deceit it was ordained that messengers should
be sent out. There are four kinds of cedars. The whole country looked
like a blazing fire. Each Israelite took a torch in his hand and ascended to
the roof of his house. Great feasts were made for (the witnesses) in order
to induce them to come frequently. How were the witnesses examined ?
The sun never faces the concave of the crescent or the concave of a rain-
bow. (If the witnesses say) “We have seen the reflection (of the moon) in
the water, or through a metal mirror, or in the clouds,” “their testimony is
not to be accepted.” The chief of the Beth Din says : “ It (the new moon)
is consecrated,” and all the people repeated after Him : “ It is consecrated,
it is consecrated.” Pelimo teaches : “ When the new moon appeared at its
proper time, they used not to consecrate it,” 37-42

Mishnas V. and VI. R. Gamaliel had on a tablet, and on the wall of his
upper room, illustrations of the various phases of the moon. Is this per-
mitted ? Yea, he had them made to teach by means of them. It happened
once, that two witnesses came and said : “We saw the moon in the east-
ern part in the morning and in the western part in the evening.” R. Johanan
b. Nuri declared them to be false witnesses. Two other witnesses came and
said: “We saw the moon on its proper day, but could not see it on the
next evening.” R. Gamaliel received them ; but R. Dosa b. Harkhinas said :
eJ They are false witnesses.” R. Joshua approved his opinion. Upon this,


XXVI


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.


Gamaliel ordered the former to appear before him on the Day of Atonement,
according to his computation, with his staff and with money. What R.
Joshua did, and what R. Aqiba and R. Dosa b. Harkhinas said about it.
What R. Hiyya said when he saw the old moon yet on the morning of the
twenty-ninth day. Rabbi said to R. Hiyya : “Go to Entob and consecrate
the month, and send back to me as a password, 4 David the King of Israel
still lives.’” The consecration of the moon cannot take place at a period less
than twenty-nine and a half days, two-thirds and .0052 (/.<?., seventy-three
Halaqim) of an hour. Even if the commonest of the common is appointed
leader by a community, he must be considered as the noblest of the nobility.
A judge is to be held, “in his days,” equal in authority with the greatest of
his antecedents. Gamaliel said to R. Joshua : “ Happy is the generation
in which the leaders listen to their followers, and through this the followers
consider it so much the more their duty (to heed the teachings of the
leaders),” 4 2 ~44


CHAPTER III.

Mishna I. If the Beth Din and all Israel saw (the moon on the night
of the thirtieth day), but there was no time to proclaim, “It is consecrated,”
before it has become dark, the month is intercalary. When three who
formed a Beth Din saw it, two should stand up as witnesses and substitute
two of their learned friends with the remaining one (to form a Beth Din).
No greater authority than Moses, our master, yet God said to him that Aaron
should act with him. No witness of a crime may act as judge, but in civil
cases he may, 45*46

Mishnas II. to IV. Concerning what kind of cornets may be used on
New Year's and Jubilee days. Some words in the Scripture which the
rabbis could not explain, until they heard the people speak among them-
selves. The cornet used on the New Year was a straight horn of a wild
goat, the mouthpiece covered with gold. The Jubilee and the New Year’s
Day were alike in respect to the sounding (of the cornet) and the benedic-
tions, but R. Jehudah’s opinion was different. R. Jehudah holds that on
New Year’s Day the more bent in spirit a man is, and on the Day of Atone-
ment the more upright he is (in his confessions), the better; but R. Levi
holds the contrary. “ On the fast days two crooked ram’s-horns were used,
their mouthpieces being covered with silver.” According to whom do we
nowadays pray : 44 This day celebrates the beginning of thy work, a memo-
rial of the first day ” ? It is unlawful to use a cornet that has been split and
afterwards joined together. If one should happen to pass by a synagogue,
or live close by it and should hear the cornet, he will have complied with
the requirements of the law. If one covered a cornet on the inside with
gold it might not be used. If one heard a part of (the required number of)
the sounds of the cornet in the pit, and the rest at the pit's mouth, he has
done his duty. If one blew the first sound (Teqia), and prolonged the
second (Teqia) as long as two, it is only reckoned as one. If one who
listened (to the sounds of the cornet) paid the proper attention, but he that


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS. xxvii

blew the cornet did not, or vice versa, they have not done their duty until
both blower and listener pay proper attention. If special attention in fulfil-
ling a commandment or doing a transgression is necessary or not. As long
as Israel looked to Heaven for aid, and directed their hearts devoutly to
their Father in Heaven, they prevailed ; but when they ceased to do so, they
failed. All are obliged to hear the sounding of the cornet, priests, Levites,
and Israelites, proselytes, freed slaves, a monstrosity, a hermaphrodite, and
one who is half-slave and half-free. One may not say the benediction over
bread for guests unless he eats with them, but he may for the members of
the family, to initiate them into their religious duties, . . . 46-52


CHAPTER IV.

Mishnas I. to IV. Regarding if the New Year fall on Sabbath. Where
the shofer (cornet) should be blown after the Temple was destroyed. What
was the difference between Jamnia and Jerusalem ? Once it happened that
New Year’s Day fell on the Sabbath, and all the cities gathered together.
Said R. Johanan b. Zakkai to the Benai Betherah : “ Let us sound (the
cornet)!” 14 First,” said they, “let us discuss!” R. Johanan b. Zakkai
ordained that the palm-branch should everywhere be taken seven days, in
commemoration of the Temple. Since the destruction of the Temple, R.
Johanan b. Zakkai ordained that it should be prohibited (to eat of the new
produce) the whole of the day of waving (the sheaf-offering). Once the wit-
nesses were delayed in coming, and they disturbed the song of the Levites.
They then ordained that evidence should only be received until (the time
of) the afternoon service. Concerning what songs the Levites had to sing
every day from the Psalms. What did the Levites sing when the additional
sacrifices were being offered on the Sabbath ? What did they sing at the
Sabbath afternoon service ? According to tradition, a corresponding
number of times was the Sanhedrin exiled. The witnesses need only go to
the meeting place (of the Beth Din). Priests may not ascend the platform in
sandals, to bless the people ; and this is one of the nine ordinances instituted
by R. Johanan b. Zakkai, . . . . . . . 53-57

Mishna V. Regarding the order of the benedictions on New Year’s
Day at the morning prayer, additional prayers, and at what time the cornet
must be blown, etc. What passages from the Scriptures are selected for
additional prayers on New Year’s Day. To what do the ten scriptural pas-
sages used for the Malkhioth correspond ? How many passages must be
recited from Pentateuch, Prophets, and Hagiographa? We must not men-
tion the remembrance of the individual (in the Zikhronoth), even if the
passage speaks of pleasant things. What are the passages which must be
said in the benediction of Malkhioth, Zikhronoth, and the Shophroth ? R.
Elazar b. R. Jose says : “The Vathiqin used to conclude with a passage
from the Pentateuch.” “ Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is our Lord,”
may be used in the Malkhioth. The second of those who act as ministers of
the congregation on the Feast of New Year shall cause another to sound the
cornet on days when the Hallel (Service of Praise, Ps. cxiii.-cxviii.) is read.


xxviii


SYNOPSIS OF SUBJECTS.


We are permitted to occupy ourselves with teaching (children) until they
learn (to sound the cornet), even on the Sabbath. The order, and how
many times it must be blown ; also, the different sounds and the names of
them. How all this is deduced from the Bible, and the difference of opinions
between the sages. Generally the soundings of the cornet do not interfere
with each other, nor do the benedictions, but on New Year’s Day and the Day
of Atonement they do. R. Papa b. Samuel rose to recite his prayers. Said he
to his attendant, “When I nod to you, sound (the cornet) for me.” Rabha
said to him, that this may only be done in the congregation. A man should
always first prepare himself for prayer, and then pray. R. Jehudah prayed
only once in thirty days, , 57-66


“NEW YEAR.”


CHAPTER I.

THE ORDINANCES ABOUT THE NEW YEARS OF THE JEWISH CALENDAR
— THE MESSENGERS THAT WERE SENT OUT FROM JERUSALEM —
AND AT WHICH PERIOD OF THE YEAR THE WORLD IS DIVINELY
JUDGED.

MISHNA /. : There are four New Year days, viz. : The first
of Nissan is New Year for (the ascension of) Kings and for (the
regular rotation of) festivals;* * * § the first of EluJ. is New Year for
the cattle-tithe, f but according to R. Eliezer and R. Simeon, it
is on the first of Tishri. The first of Tishri is New Year’s day,
for ordinary years, and for sabbatic years £ and jubilees; and
also for the planting of trees § and for herbs, f On the first day
of Shebhat is the New Year for trees, Tf according to the school
of Shammai; but the school of Hillel says it is on the fifteenth
of the same month.**

GEMARA: 14 For kings." Why is it necessary to appoint
such a day ? (Let every king count the day of his ascension to
the throne as the beginning of his year.) Said R. Hisda: “ On
account of documents.” So that in the case of mortgages, one
may know which is the first and which is the second by means of


* This refers to the law concerning vows. If one made a vow it had to be ful-
filled before the three festivals elapsed in the order of Passover, Pentecost, and Taber-
nacles, as will be explained further on.

f A date had to be appointed in order to keep the tithes of animals bom and
products of the earth, distinct from year to year.

X Vide Lev. xxv. and Deut. xv.

§ With regard to the prohibition of eating fruit of newly planted trees [Lev. xix.
23-25].

J So as not to mix the tithe of herbs from year to year.

U With regard to the tithe due on fruit trees.

** The Gemara fully discusses the reasons for these institutions, but we deem it
wise to anticipate, for the sake of clearness.


2


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


the year of the king's reign mentioned in the documents. The
rabbis taught: A king who ascends the throne on the 29th of
Adarmust be considered to have reigned one year as soon as the
first of Nissan comes, but if he ascends the throne on the first
of Nissan he is not considered to have reigned one year until the
first of Nissan of the following year. From this we infer, that
only Nissan is the commencement of years for kings (or the civil
New Year); that even a fraction of a year is considered a year;
and that if a king ascends the throne on the first of Nissan, he
is not considered to have reigned one year until the next first of
Nissan, although he may have been elected in Adar. The Bo-
raitha teaches this lest one say that the year should be reckoned
from the day of election, and therefore the king would begin his
second year (on the first of Nissan following).

The rabbis taught: If a king die in Adar, and his successor
ascend the throne in Adar, (documents may be dated either) the
(last) year of the (dead) king or the (first) year of the new king.
If a king die in Nissan, and his successor ascend the throne in
Nissan, the same is the case. But if a king die in Adar, and
his successor does not ascend the throne until Nissan, then the
year ending with Adar should be referred to as the year of the
dead king, and from Nissan it should be referred to as that of
his successor.* Is this not self-evident ? The case here men-
tioned refers to an instance where the new king was a son of the
deceased, and, while ascending the throne in Nissan, had been
elected in the month of Adar, and being the king's son, it might
be assumed that he was king immediately after his election, and
thus the following first of Nissan would inaugurate the second
year of his reign. He comes to teach us that such is not the
case.

R. Johanan says: Whence do we deduce that we reckon the
commencement of years (for the reign) of kings, only from Nis-
san ? Because it is written [I Kings, vi. 1]: 41 And it came to
pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the going forth
of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth
year of the month Ziv, which is the second month of the reign
of Solomon over Israel." Thus the Scriptures establish an anal-
ogy between 41 the reign of Solomon " and 44 the Exodus from
Egypt." As the Exodus from Egypt is reckoned from Nissan,

* No reference should be made after the first of Nissan to the reign of the king
just deceased. For instance : it was not permitted to speak of the year beginning
with Nissan, as the second year after the death of the king.


“NEW YEAR.”


3


so also is the reign of Solomon reckoned from Nissan. But
how do we know that the Exodus even should be reckoned
from Nissan ? Perhaps we should reckon it from Tishri.
This would be improper, for it is written [Numb, xxxiii. 38]:
“And Aaron, the Priest, went up into Mount Hor at the
commandment of the Lord, and died there, in the fortieth
year after the children of Israel were come out of the land
of Egypt, on the first day of the fifth month/’ And it is
written [Deut. i. 3]: “And it came to pass in the fortieth
year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month,
Moses spake,” etc. Since he mentions the fifth month, which
is certainly Abh, and he speaks of (Aaron’s death as happening
in) the fortieth year (and not the forty-first year), it is clear that
Tishri is not the beginning of years (for kings). This argument
would be correct as far as the former (Aaron’s) case is con-
cerned, for the text specifically mentions (forty years after) the
Exodus; but in the latter (Moses’) case, how can we tell that
(the fortieth year) means from the Exodus ? Perhaps it means
(the fortieth year) from the raising of the Tabernacle in the
wilderness. From the fact that R. Papa stated further on, that
the twentieth year is mentioned twice for the sake of a compari-
son by analogy, we must assume that the analogy of expres-
sion “ the fortieth year” (mentioned in connection with both
Aaron and Moses) signifies also;* as in the former case it means
forty years from the time of the Exodus, so also in the latter
case. But whence do we know that the incident that took place
in Abh (the death of Aaron) happened before (the speech of
Moses) which is related as happening in Shebhat ? Perhaps the
Shebhat incident happened first. It is not reasonable to sup-
pose this, for it is written [Deut. i. 4]: “After he had slain
Sihon the king of the Amorites,” and when Aaron died Sihon
was still living. Thus it is written [Numb. xxi. 1] : “ And the
Canaanite, the king of Arad, heard.” What did he hear ? He
heard that Aaron was dead, and that the clouds of glory had
departed (and he thought that a sign that permission was given
from heaven to fight against Israel).f How can we make any
such comparison ? In the one place it speaks of the Canaanite,


* The statement of R. Papa is quoted here, because it is a rule of the Talmud
that no comparisons by analogy may be cited unless they emanate from a tradition or
teaching known to the master making such a comparison, and this rule applies
throughout the Talmud.

f Because the life of the righteous is a protection for the whole people.


4


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


and in the other of Sihon. We have learned in a Boraitha that
Sihon, Arad, and the Canaanite are identical. This opinion of
R. Johanan is quite correct, for we find that a Boraitha quotes
all the verses that he quotes here, and arrives at the same
conclusion.

R. Hisda says: The rule of the Mishna — that the year of the
kings begins with Nissan — refers to the kings of Israel only, but
for the kings of other nations it commences from Tishri. As it
is said [Neh. i. i] : “ The words of Nehemiah, the son of Hak-
haliah. And it came to pass in the month of Kislev, in the
twentieth year, ” etc. And it is written [ibid. ii. i]: “ And it
came to pass in the month Nissan, in the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes the king, ” etc. Since Hanani stood before Nehe-
miah in Kislev, and the Bible speaks of it as the twentieth year,
and since Nehemiah stood before the king in Nissan, and the
Text calls it also the twentieth year, it is clear that the New
Year (for the non-Jewish king, Artaxerxes) is not Nissan (or in
the latter case he would have spoken of the twenty-first year).
This would be correct as far as the latter quotation is concerned,
for iu specifically mentions Artaxerxes, but in the former verse
how do we know that it refers to Artaxerxes ? Perhaps it refers
to another event altogether. Says R. Papa: Since in the first
passage we read ” the twentieth year” and in the second we
read ” the twentieth year,” we may deduce by analogy that as
in the one case Artaxerxes is meant, so is he meant also in the
other. But how do we know that the event, recorded as having
occurred in Kislev, and not the Nissan incident, happened first ?
This we know from a Boraitha, where it reads: The same words
which Hanani said to Nehemiah in Kislev, the latter repeated
to the king in Nissan, as it is said [Neh. i. i, 2]: ” The words
of Nehemiah, son of Hakhaliah. And it came to pass in the
month of Kislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the
capital, that Hanani, one of my brethren came, and certain men
of Judah . . . and the gates thereof are burned with fire.”
And it also said [Neh. ii. 1-6]: ” And it came to pass in the
month of Nissan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king,
that wine was before him ... so it pleased the king to send
me; and I set him a time.”

R. Joseph raised an objection. It is written [Haggai, ii.
10]: “ In the twenty-fourth day of the sixth month, in the sec-
ond year of Darius.” And it is also written [ibid. 1] : “ In the
second year, in the seventh month, in the one-and-twentieth


“NEW YEAR,”


5


day of ihe month/’* If the rule is that Tishri (the seventh
month) is the beginning of years for non- Jewish kings, should
not the Text read “ in the third year of Darius ” instead of the
second year ? R. Abbahu answered : Cyrus was a most upright
king, and the Hebrews reckoned his years as they did those of
the kings of Israel (beginning with Nissan). R. Joseph opposed
this. First: If that were so, there are texts that would contra-
dict each other, for it is written [Ezra, vi. 15] : “ And this house
was finished on the third day of the month Adar, which was in
the sixth year of the reign of Darius the King/’ And we have
learned in a Boraitha : At the same time in the following year
Ezra and the children of the captivity went up from Babylon,
and the Bible says about this [Ezra, vii. 8]: 44 And he came to
Jerusalem in the fifth month in the seventh year of the king.”
But if the rule is (that for Cyrus the year began with Nissan and
not Tishri) should not the Text say 41 the eighth year” (since
the first day of Nissan, the beginning of another year, inter-
venes between the third of Adar and the month of Abh) ? Sec-
ondly: How can these texts be compared ? In the one place it
speaks of Cyrus, and in the other of Darius. We have learned
in a Boraitha that Darius, Cyrus, and Artaxerxes are all one
and the same person.

44 And for festivals .” Do then the festivals commence on
the first of Nissan ? Do they not begin on the fifteenth of that
month ? R. Hisda answered : (The Mishna means that Nissan
is) the month that contains that festival which is called the New
Year for festivals (viz., Passover).

What difference does it make (in practice) ? It makes a dif-
ference to one who has made a vow, because through this festi-
val he becomes culpable of breaking the law, 44 Thou shalt not
slack to pay/’t And this is according to the opinion of R.
Simeon, who says: That (before one is guilty of delay) the three
festivals must have passed by in their regular order, with Pass-
over as the first (of the three). Thus was also the dictum of R.
Simeon ben Jochai, who stated that the law against procrastina-


* The Rabbis of the Talmud must have had a different version of the book of
Haggai from that existing at present. In the second passage quoted, namely Hag-
gai ii. i, the words “in the second year” cannot be found. There is, therefore, a
great difficulty in understanding the discussion. Even Rashi is unable to enlighten
us on this point.

f This law of “ Thou shalt not slack to pay,” is known as “ Bal Te’aher” ;
i.e., the law against procrastination or delay.


6


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


tion may be violated at times only when five festivals had passed
by in their regular order; at other times when four, and again
when three festivals had passed; i.e. t if the vow was made
before the feast of Pentecost he becomes guilty of procrastina-
tion only when Pentecost, Tabernacles, Passover, and again
Pentecost and Tabernacles had passed by; if the vow was made
before Tabernacles then he becomes guilty.

The rabbis taught : As soon as three festivals have passed
by and the following duties (or vows) have not been fulfilled
one is guilty of procrastination; and these are: The vow of one
who says, ” I will give the worth of myself (to the sanctuary);”
or, “ I will give what I am estimated to be worth (in accordance
with Lev. xxvii.);” or the vow concerning objects, the use of
which one has forsworn, or which one has consecrated (to
the sanctuary), or sin-offerings, guilt-offerings, burnt-offerings,
peace-offerings, charity, tithes, the firstlings, the paschal offer-
ings, the gleanings of the field, that which is forgotten to be
gathered in the field, the produce of the corner of the field.*
R. Simeon says: The festivals must pass by in their regular
order, with Passover as the first. And R. Meir says: As soon
as even one festival has elapsed and the vow has not been kept
the law is infringed. R. Eliezer ben Jacob says: As soon as
two festivals have elapsed the law is infringed, but R. Elazar
ben Simeon says: Only the passing of the Feast of Tabernacles
causes the infringement of the law (whether or not any other
festivals have passed by between the making and the fulfilling
of the vow). What is the reason of the first Tana ? Since in
[Deut. xvi.] the Text has been speaking of the three festivals,
why does it repeat, ” On the Feast of Unleavened Bread, on the
Feast of Weeks, and on the Feast of Tabernacles ? ” This signi-
fies that when Tabernacles, Passover, Pentecost, and again Tab-
ernacles had passed, but if the vow was made before Passover,
then the man becomes guilty if he allows the three festivals to
pass by in their regular order. Infer from this that the festivals
must pass in the order just mentioned before one is guilty of
procrastination. R. Simeon says: It was not necessary to re-
peat ” on the Feast of Tabernacles,” because the Text was
speaking of that festival (when it mentioned the names of the
three festivals). Why, then, does it repeat it ? To teach us that
Tabernacles shall be the last of the three festivals. R. Meir


* Lev. xxiii. 22.


“NEW YEAR.”


7


arrives at his opinion because it is mentioned of each festival
" Thou shalt come there (to Jerusalem), and ye shall bring
there" (your vows; and this being said of each festival, if one
elapses and the vow is not brought, then the law against delay
is infringed. The reason of R. Eliezer ben Jacob is, that the
passage [Numtj. xxix. 39] runs: " These shall ye offer to the
Lord on your appointed feasts," and the minimum of the plural
word " feasts " is tzvo. On what does R. Elazar b. Simeon base
his opinion ? We have learned in the following Boraitha:
" The Feast of Tabernacles" should not have been mentioned
in [Deut. xvi. 16], since the preceding passages (of that chap-
ter) were treating of that feast. Why, then, was it mentioned ?
To indicate that that particular feast (Tabernacles) is the one
that causes the infringement of the law.

What do R. Meir and R. Eliezer ben Jacob deduce from the
superfluous passage " on the Feast of Unleavened Bread, on the
Feast of Weeks, and on the Feast of Tabernacles " ? They use
this verse, according to R. Elazar, who says in the name of R.
Oshiya, who said : Whence do we know that the law of com-
pensation* applies to the Feast of Weeks (although the feast is
only one day) ? For this very reason the Bible repeats the three
festivals, and he institutes a comparison between Pentecost and
Passover; and as the law of compensation applies to Passover for
seven days, so also does it apply to Pentecost for seven days.
Why, then, do the Scriptures find it necessary to repeat the
words, " In the Feast of Tabernacles" ? To compare it with
the Feast of Passover, as during Passover it was obligatory to
stay over night (in Jerusalem), so was it also necessary during
the Feast of Tabernacles. But how do we know that it was
obligatory during the Feast of Unleavened Bread ? It is writ-
ten [Deut. xvi. 7]: "Thou shalt turn in the morning (after
staying over night), and go unto thy tents." Whence do we
deduce this? The rabbis taught: It is written [Deut. xxiii.
22]: "When thou shalt vow a vow unto the Lord thy God,
thou shalt not delay to pay it." Perhaps these words only
apply to a vow. How do we know that they may also be ap-
plied to a voluntary offering ? In the passage just quoted we
read " vow," and in another place [Lev. vii. 16] we find " but
if the sacrifice of his offering be a vow or a voluntary offering " ;


* The privilege of bringing on one of the later days of a festival a sacrifice that
should have been offered on the first day.


8


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


as in the latter instance the " voluntary offering" is included,
so is also the former; " unto the Lord thy God," i.e., offer-
ings expressed by " I will give the value of myself," etc., and
other objects mentioned above; " thou shalt not slack to pay
it M ; i. e. , the object promised must be given and not anything in
exchange for it;* " for he will surely require it," i.e. t the sin,
guilt, burnt, and peace-offerings; "the Lord thy God," these
words refer to offerings of charity, tithes, and firstlings; "of
thee," this refers to the gleanings, that which is forgotten in
the field and the produce of the corner of the field; " and it
would be sin in thee," t.e., in thee and not in thy sacrifice
(which is not thereby invalidated).

The rabbis taught: It is written [Deut. xxiii. 24]: " What
is gone out of thy lips," this refers to the positive command-
ments (of the Law); " thou shalt keep," refers to the negative
commandments; " and perform," is a warning to the Beth Din
(that they should enforce the laws); "according as thou hast
vowed," refers to vows; " to the Lord thy God," refers to sin,
guilt, burnt, and peace-offerings; "voluntarily," means just
what it is; " which thou hast spoken," refers to the sanctified
objects devoted to the Temple for repairs, etc.; "with thy
mouth," refers to charity. Says Rabha: One is culpable if he
does not give forthwith that which he has vowed for charity.
Why so ? Because there are always poor people (needing im-
mediate help). Is this not self-evident ? One might suppose
that, since the law prohibiting delay is found in connection with
the duty of giving charity and also of bringing the various volun-
tary offerings, it would apply to both, and it would not be in-
fringed until the three festivals had elapsed, he comes to teach us
(that charity and sacrifices are different) ; in the latter case the in-
fringement of the law depends on the festivals, but in the case
of charity it must be given immediately, for the poor are always
to be found. And Rabha said again : As soon as three festivals
have passed (and one has not brought his offering), he daily
transgresses the law against delay. An objection was raised.
As soon as a year, containing three festivals or not, has passed
(he that does not bring his offering), be it a firstling or any of
the holy offerings, transgresses daily the law against delay. It
is quite possible that the three festivals may elapse and yet a
year may not go by (t.e., from Passover till Tabernacles is only


* Lev. xxvii. 32.


“NEW YEAR.”


9


seven months), but how can it happen that a year may pass and
the three festivals should not occur (in that time) ? It may
happen according to those who say (that the three festivals
must elapse) in their regular order, but according to those who
do not say (that the three festivals must go by) in their regular
order, how can such a case occur ? This would be correct
according to Rabbi (who holds that the intercalary month * is
not a part of the year), and it occurs in a leap year, when one
consecrates anything (to the Temple) after the Feast of Pass-
over; for when the end of the second Adar has arrived, a year
(of twelve months) has elapsed, yet the three festivals have not
passed by in their regular order. But how can such a case
occur according to the rabbis ? It can happen as R. Shemaiah
teaches: Pentecost falls on the fifth, sixth, or seventh of Sivan.
How is this possible ? In a year when the months of Nissan
and Iyar have thirty days each, Pentecost falls on the fifth of
Sivan ; when they each have twenty-nine days, Pentecost falls on
the seventh of Sivan ; but when the one has twenty-nine days and
the other has thirty days, Pentecost falls on the sixth of Sivan.

R. Zera asked: How does the law against delay affect an
heir ? Shall we argue that the Law says [Deut. xxiii. 22] :
“When thou shalt vow” (i.e., the testator has vowed), but the
heir has not vowed (consequently the law does not apply to
him), or shall we infer from the passage [Deut. xii. 5, 6] : “ And
thither shalt thou come . . . and ye shall bring,” that the heir
(who is obliged to come) is also in duty bound to bring with
him (the objects vowed by the testator) ? Come and hear. R.
Hyya taught: It is written in this connection [Deut. xxiii. 22]:
“ Of thee” (i.e., from the one who vowed) and this excludes
the heir. But did we not say above that these words refer to
the gleanings, etc.? The Text uses the word Me’immokh
(“ of thee”), which we can explain to mean both the successor
and the gleanings, etc. (i.e., all that comes “ of thee ”).

R. Zera also asked : How does the law against delay affect
a woman ? Shall I say that since she is not obligated to appear
(in Jerusalem) the law does not apply to her ? or perhaps it is
her duty to go there because she is included in the law “ to
rejoice”? “Certainly,” answered Abayi, “she is bound by
this law because it is her duty to rejoice.”


* Leap year occurs seven times in a cycle of nineteen years. On such occasions
one month, the second Adar, is added to the twelve lunar months.


10


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


The schoolmen asked: From when do we count the begin-
ning of the year for a firstling? Answered Abayi: From the
moment it is born ; but R. Aha b. Jacob said : From the moment
it is acceptable as an offering (z . e . , when it is eight days old,
Lev. xxii. 2 7). They do not differ, for the former Rabbi refers
to an unblemished animal and the latter to one with a blemish.
May, then, a blemished animal be eaten (on the day of its
birth) ? Yes, if we are sure it was born after the full period of
gestation.

The rabbis taught: The first of Nissan is the new year for
(arranging the) months, for (appointing) leap years, for giving
the half shekels, and, some say, also for the rental of houses.
Whence do we know (that it is the new year) for months ?
From the passage [Ex. xii. 2] where it is written: ” This month
shall be unto you the beginning of months; it shall be the first
month of the year to you.” It is also written [Deut. xvi. 1] :
” Observe the month of Abib ” (early stage of ripening). In
which month is grain in the early stage of ripening ? I can say
only Nissan, and the Law calls it the first. Could I not say
Adar (when the grain begins to shoot up) ? Nay, for the grain
must be ripening during the major portion of the month (and in
Adar it is not). Is it then written that the grain must be ripen-
ing the major portion of the month ? Therefore, says Rabhina,
the sages do not find (the rule of calling Nissan the first month)
in the Pentateuch, but in the Book of Esther, where it is clearly
stated [Esther, iii. 7], ” In the first month, that is, the month
Nissan.”

” For leap years." Do we, then, count leap years from Nis-
san ? Does not a Boraitha teach us that Adar only is the inter-
calary month ? Answered R. Na’hman b. Itz’hak: The words
” FOR LEAP YEARS ” mean here the termination of leap years,*
and our Tana speaks of the beginning of the leap year and not
the end.

” For giving the half shekels." Whence do we deduce this ?
Said R. Yoshiah: In Numb, xxviii. 14: “This is the burnt-
offering of the new moon throughout the months of the year.”
The Scriptures say "proclaim it a new month," and also bring a
sacrifice from the new products. We make a comparison be-
tween the words “-year” used in this passage and in Ex. xii. 2,

* As soon as Nissan had been consecrated, there could be no further debate about
making the past year intercalary, for once the new month had been called Nissan, it
was forbidden to call it by any other name.


“NEW YEAR.”


1 1


* it shall be the first month of the year to you,” and deduce
that they both refer to Nissan.

R. Jehudah says in the name of Samuel: It is required that
the congregational sacrifices* brought on the first of Nissan
should be purchased with the shekels collected for the new year;
but if the sacrifice was bought with the funds obtained from the
former year's funds, it is acceptable, yet the law was but im-
perfectly complied with. We have also learned the same in a
Boraitha with the addition that, if an individual offers from his
own property (proper objects for the congregational sacrifices),
they are acceptable, but he must first present them to the con-
gregation. Is this not self-evident ? Nay, it may be feared
that one will not give them to the congregation with a free will,
and this, he teaches us, is not worthy of consideration. And
the reason that our Tana does not mention that Nissan is a new
year for the giving of shekels also, is because it is said above
that if one has brought an offering (from the old funds) he has
done his duty, therefore he could not make Nissan absolutely
binding as a new year for the sacrifices.

It is said above: ” And some say also for the rental of
houses.” The rabbis taught: He who lets a house to another
for a year, should count (the year) as twelve months from day to
day; but if the lessee says (I rent this house) “ for this year,”
even if the transaction takes place on the first of Adar, as soon
as the first of Nissan arrives, the year (of rental) has expired.
Can you not say Tishri (is the beginning of the year for such
transactions) ? Nay, it is generally understood that if a man
rents a house in the autumn he rents it for the whole of the
rainy season (winter). And the Tana of the first part of the
above Boraitha (who does not fix Nissan as the month for ren-
tals), and also our Tana both are of the opinion that in Nissan,
too, bad weather sometimes prevails (and therefore Nissan and
Tishri are alike in this respect).

‘ 4 On the first of Elul is the new year for the cattle-tithes . ’ ’ Ac-
cording to whose opinion is this ? Says R. Joseph: It is accord-
ing to Rabbi’s own opinion which he formed in accordance with
the opinions of different Tanaim. With regard to the festivals
he holds with R. Simeon and with regard to the cattle-tithe he
holds to the opinion of R. Meir. If that is so, are there not


* The Tamid or daily offering could not be presented to the Temple by an
individual.


12


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


five beginnings of years instead of four ? Rabha answered that
the Mishna mentioned only the four, which are not disputed by
any one. According to R. Meir there are four, if that “ for the
festivals’' be excluded, and according to R. Simeon there are
four, if that “ for the cattle-tithes” be excluded. R. Na’hman
bar Itz’hak, however, says: (No such explanation is needed) ; the
Mishna means that there are four (months) in which there are (or
may be) many beginnings of years.

“ According to R. Eliezer and R. Simeon it is on the first of
Tishri '.” R. Johanan says: Both of them deduce their opinion
by (various interpretations of) the same scriptural passage. It
is written [Psalms, lxv. 14]: ” The meadows are clothed with
flocks; the valleys also are covered with corn; men shout for
joy, they also sing.” R. Meir thinks (this is the interpretation)
of these words : When are the meadows clothed with flocks ?
At the season when the valleys are covered with corn. And
when are the valleys covered with corn ? About (the time of)
Adar. The flocks conceive in Adar and produce their young in
Abh; consequently the beginning of the year (for the cattle-
tithe) is Elul. R. Eliezer and R. Simeon, however, say: When
are the meadows clothed with flocks ? At the season when they
shout and sing. When do the ears of corn (seem to) send up
a hymn of praise ? In Nissan. Now, the sheep conceive in
Nissan and produce in Elul, consequently the beginning of the
year (for their tithe) is Tishri. But Rabha says: All agree that
only Adar is the time when the meadows are clothed with flocks,
and the valleys are covered with corn. But they differ about
this passage [Deut. xiv. 22]: ” Thou shalt truly tithe” ( liter-
ally, *' Thou shalt tithe in tithing”), and we see that the text
here speaks of two tithes — viz., of cattle and of grain. R. Meir
thinks that the following comparison may be instituted between
the two: just as the tithe of grain must be given in the month
nearest to the time it is reaped, so that of cattle must be given
in the month nearest to the one in which they are born (Elul).
R. Eliezer and R. Simeon, however, are of the opinion that
another comparison may be instituted between these tithes —
viz., just as the beginning of the year for giving the tithe of
grain is Tishri, so also is Tishri for that of cattle.

” The first of Tishri is the Neiv Year's Day for ordinary
years .” For what purpose is this rule ? Answers R. Zera, to
determine the equinoxes (and solstices); and this agrees with
the opinion of R. Eliezer, who says that the world was created


“NEW YEAR.”


1 3


in Tishri; but R. Na’hman says (it is the new year) for divine
judgment, as it is written [Deut. xi. 12]: “ From the beginning
of the year till the end of the year,” i.e., at the beginning of
the year it is determined what shall be at the end of the year.
But whence do we know that this means Tishri ? It is written
[Psalms, lxxxi. 3]: “ Blow on the new moon the cornet at
the time when it (the new moon) is hidden * on our solemn
feast day.” What feast is it on which the moon is hidden ?
We can only say Rosh Hashana (New Year’s Day), and of this
day it is written [ibid. v. 4]: " For it is a statute unto Israel,
a judgment (day) for the God of Jacob.”

The rabbis taught: “ It is a statute unto Israel,” whence we
infer that the Heavenly Court of Judgment does not enter into
judgment until the Beth Din on earth proclaims the new moon.
Another Boraitha states: It is written: “ It is a statute unto
Israel.” From this it appears that (New Year’s Day is a day
of judgment) only for Israel. Whence do we know it is so also
for other nations ? Therefore it is written: “ It is the day of
judgment of the God of Jacob” (the Universal God). Why,
then, is ” Israel ” mentioned ? To inform us that Israel comes
in for judgment first. This is in accordance with the saying of
R. Hisda: If a king and a congregation have a law suit, the
king enters first, as it is said [I Kings, viii. 59] : “ The cause of
his servant (King Solomon) and the cause of his people.” Why
so ? Because it is not customary to let a king wait outside.

“ For the computation of sabbatic years." On what scriptural
passage is this based ? On Lev. xxv. 4, which reads: “ But in
the seventh year there shall be a sabbath of rest unto the land,”
and he deduces (that it means Tishri) by analogy from the word
“ year ” in this passage and in the following: “ From the begin-
ning of the year” [Deut. xi. 12], which surely refers to Tishri.

“ And jubilees .” Do, then, jubilees begin on the first of
Tishri ? Do they not begin on the tenth, as it is written [Lev.
xxv. 9] : ” On the Day of Atonement shall ye make the cornet
sound throughout all your land” ? Our Mishna is in accord-
ance with R. Ishmael the son of R. Johanan ben Berokah of
the following Boraitha: It is written [Lev. xxv. 10]: “ Ye shall
sanctify the year, the fiftieth year." Why was it necessary to
repeat the word ‘ 4 year” ? Because in the same connection it


* This is the literal translation of the verse in Psalms ; the free translation is “at
the appointed time,” according to Isaac Leeser.


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


14

is said [ibid. 9]: “On the Day of Atonement shall ye make the
cornet sound/' and one might suppose that the jubilee is sanc-
tified only from the Day of Atonement (and not before). There-
fore the word “ year " is repeated to teach us that by the words
“ye shall sanctify the fiftieth year” is meant, that from the
.very beginning of the year the jubilee commences to be conse-
crated. From this R. Ishmael the son of R. Johanan b. Bero-
kahsays: From New Year's Day until the Day of Atonement
slaves were not wont to return to their (own) homes, neither
did they serve their masters, but they ate and drank and re-
joiced with the crown of freedom on their heads. As soon as
the Day of Atonement arrived the Beth Din ordered the cornet
to be blown and the slaves returned to their own homes, and
estates reverted to their (original) owners.

We have learned in another Boraitha: “It is a jubilee"
(Jobhel hi). What is meant by (these superfluous words) ?
Since it is said [Lev. xxv. 10]: “And ye shall sanctify the
fiftieth year," one might think that, as at the beginning of the
year the jubilee commences to be sanctified, the sanctification
should be extended to the (Day of. Atonement) after the end of
the year; and be not surprised at such a teaching, since it is cus-
tomary to add from the non-sanctified to the sanctified. Hence
the necessity of the words in the passage (next to that quoted
above) [Lev. xxv. 1 1] : “A jubilee shall that fiftieth year be
unto you "; i,e., the fiftieth year shall be hallowed, and not the
fifty-first. But the rabbis, whence do they derive the regulation
that the fifty-first year is not sanctified ? Because it is plainly
written the fiftieth year and not the fifty-first. This excludes
the opinion of R. Jehudah who holds that the jubilee year is
added at the beginning and end.* The rabbis taught “ Jobhel
hi (it is a jubilee)," even if the people have not relinquished
(their debts), even if the cornet is not sounded; shall we also
say even if slaves are not released ? Hence the word “ hi " is
used (to indicate that only when the slaves are released it is a
jubilee), so says R. Jehudah. R. Jose says: “ It is a jubilee,"
even if debts are not relinquished and slaves are not released;
shall we also say even if the cornet is not sounded ? Hence the
word “hi" is used (and means the sounding of the cornet).
Since one passage includes (all that is prescribed) and the other


* I.e . , the Jubilee year is, at the same time, the fiftieth year of the last and the
first of the coming series.


“NEW YEAR.”


*5


passage exempts (certain regulations), why should we say it is
a jubilee even if they have not released slaves, but that it is not
a jubilee if they failed to sound the cornet ? Because it is pos-
sible that sometimes (a jubilee may occur) and yet there are no
(Hebrew) slaves to release, but a jubilee can never occur with-
out the sounding of the cornet (for a cornet can always be
found). Another explanation is, that (the sounding of the cor-
net) is the duty of the Beth Din (and it will never fail to per-
form it), while (the releasing of slaves) is the duty of the indi-
vidual, and we cannot be sure that he will perform it. (Is not
the first explanation satisfactory) that he gives this additional
explanation ? (It may not be satisfactory to some who might
say) that it is impossible that not one (Hebrew) slave should be
found somewhere to be released. Therefore (the Boraitha adds)
that the blowing of the cornet is the duty of the Beth Din (and
they will not fail to perform it).

R. Hyya b. Abba, however, said in the name of R. Johanan:
The foregoing are the words of R. Jehudah and R. Jose; but
the masters hold that all three conditions may prevent the fulfil-
ment (of the law), because they hold that the word “ hi ” [Lev.
xxv. io] should be explained as to the subjects mentioned in the
passage in which it occurs, and in the preceding and the follow-
ing passages also, (and in the passage immediately following the
“ hi ” is said, ” fields reverted to their original owners.” This,
then, also constitutes one of the three conditions). But is it not
written, “ a jubilee,” which certainly means to add something
not mentioned previously? This additional word refers to the
lands outside of Palestine, where the jubilee must also be
enforced. If so, what then is the intent of the words “ through-
out the land ” ? (They lead us to infer) that at the time when
(under a Jewish government) liberty is proclaimed throughout
the land (Palestine) it should be proclaimed outside the land ;
but if it is not proclaimed in the land, it need not be proclaimed
outside the land.

“ And also for the planting of trees.” Whence do we deduce
this? From Lev. xix. 23, where it is written: ” Three years
shall it be as uncircumcised,” and also [ibid. 24]: ” But in the
fourth year.” We compare the term “year” used here with
that of Deut. xi. 12, “ from the beginning of the 4 year/ ” and
deduce by analogy that they both mean Tishri.

The rabbis taught : For one who plants, slips or grafts (trees)
in the sixth year (the year before the sabbatic year), thirty days


1 6


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


before the New Year's day (as soon as the first of Tishri arrives),
a year is considered to have passed, and he is permitted to use,
during the sabbatic year (the fruits they may produce), but less
than thirty days are not to be considered a year, and the fruits
may not be used, but are prohibited until the fifteenth of Sheb-
hat, whether it be because they come under the category of
44 uncircumcised ” or under the category of 44 fourth year plant-
ing ” [Lev. xix. 23, 24]. Whence do we deduce this? R.
Hyya bar Abba said in the name of R. Johanan or R. Janai:
The verse says [Lev. xix. 24, 25] : 44 And in the fourth year. . . .
And in the fifth year," i.e., it may happen that in the fourth
year (from the planting, the fruit) is prohibited because it is still
44 uncircumcised,” and in the fifth year (from the planting)
because it is still the product of the fourth year.

We have learned R. Eliezer says: In Tishri the wo/ld was
created, the patriarchs Abraham and Jacob were born and died;
Isaac was born on the Passover; on New Year’s Day Sarah,
Rachel, and Hannah were visited with the blessing of children,
Joseph was released from prison, and the bondage of our fathers
in Egypt ceased; in Nissan our ancestors were redeemed from
Egypt, and in Tishri we shall again be redeemed. R. Jehoshua
says: In Nissan the world was created, and in the same month
the patriarchs were born, and in Nissan they also died; Isaac
was born on the Passover; on New Year’s Day Sarah, Rachel,
and Hannah were visited, Joseph was released from prison, and
the bondage of our fathers in Egypt ceased. In Nissan our
ancestors were redeemed from Egypt, and in the same month
we shall again be redeemed.

We have learned in a Boraitha R. Eliezer says: Whence do
we know that the world was created in Tishri ? From the scrip-
tural verse, in which it is written [Gen. i. it] : 44 And God said,

4 Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the
fruit tree,’ ’’ etc. In what month does the earth bring forth
grass, and at the same time the trees are full of fruit ? Let us
say Tishri, and that time of the year (mentioned in Genesis) was
the autumn; the rain descended and the fruits flourished, as it
is written [Gen. ii. 6]: 44 But there went up a mist from the
earth,” etc. R. Jehoshua says: Whence do we know that the
world was created in Nissan ? From the scriptural verse, in
which it is written [Gen. i. 12]: 44 And the earth brought forth
grass, and herb yielding seed, and the tree yielding fruit,” etc.
In which month is the earth covered with grass (and at the same


“NEW YEAR.”


17


time) the trees bring forth fruit ? Let us say Nissan, and at
that time animals, domestic and wild, and birds mate, as it is
said [Psalms, lxv. 14] : “ The meadows are clothed with flocks/’
etc. Further says R. Eliezer: Whence do we know that the
patriarchs were born in Tishri ? From the passage [I Kings,
viii. 2]: “ And all the men of Israel assembled themselves unto
King Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim ” (strong),
which is the seventh month; i.e., the month in which Ethanim,
the strong ones of the earth (the patriarchs), were born. How
do we know that the expression ethan means strength ? It is
written [Numb. xxiv. 21] ethan moshabhekha, ” strong is thy
dwelling-place,” and it is also written [Micah, vi. 2]: “Hear
ye, O mountains, the Lord’s controversy, and ( vc-hacthanim ) ye
strong foundations,” etc.

R. Jehoshua, however, says: Whence do we know that the
patriarchs were born in Nissan ? From I Kings vi. 1, where it
says: ” In the fourth year, in the month Ziv (glory), which is
the second month,” etc., which means in that month in which
the ” glorious ones” of the earth (the patriarchs) were already
born. Whether the patriarchs were born in Nissan or Tishri,
the day of their death occurred in the same month as that in
which they were born; as it is written [Deut. xxxi. 2]: ” Moses
said, ‘ I am one hundred and twenty years old to-day.’ ” The
word ” to-day” implies ” just this day my days and years are
complete,” for the Holy One, blessed be He, grants the right-
eous the fulfilment of the years of their life to the very month
and day, as it is said: ” The number of thy days will I make
full ” [Ex. xxiii. 26].

Isaac was born in Nissan. Whence do we know this ? It is
written [Gen. xviii. 14]: ” At the next festival I will return to
thee, and Sarah will have a son.” What festival was it when
he said this ? Shall I say it was Passover, and he referred to
Pentecost ? That cannot be, for what woman bears children
after fifty days’ gestation ? If I say it was Pentecost, and he
referred to Tishri, a similar objection might be raised, for who
bears children after five months’ gestation ? If I say it was
Tabernacles, and he referred to Passover, a similar objection
may be made, for who bears children in the sixth month of
gestation ? This last objection could be answered according to
the following Boraitha: We have learnt that that year was a
leap year, and Mar Zutra says that although a child born after
nine months’ gestation is never born during the month (but
2


i8


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


only at the end of the required time), still a seven months’ child
can be born before the seventh month is complete, as it is said
[I Sam. i. 20]: 44 And it came to pass, li-tequphath ha-yamim
(when the time was come about) ” ; the minimum of tequphoth *
is two and of yamim is also two after six months and two
days’ gestation, childbirth is possible).

Whence do we know that Sarah, Rachel, and Hannah were
visited on New Year’s Day? Says R. Elazar: By comparing
the expression 44 visit” that occurs in one passage with the
word 44 visit ” that occurs in another passage, and also by treat-
ing the expression 44 remember” in the same way. It is writ-
ten concerning Rachel [Gen. xxx. 32]: 44 And God remembered
Rachel,” and of Hannah it is written [I Sam. i. 19]: 44 And
God remembered her.” He institutes an analogy between the
word 44 remember” used in these passages and in connection
with New Year’s Day, which is called [Lev. xxiii. 24] 44 a Sab-
bath, a memorial (literally , a remembrance) of blowing of cor-
nets.” It is also written concerning Hannah [I Sam. ii. 21]:
44 And the Lord visited Hannah,” and of Sarah it is written
[Gen. xxi. 1] : 44 And the Lord visited Sarah,” and by analogy
all these events took place on the same day (New Year’s Day).

Whence do we know that Joseph was released from prison
on New Year's Day ? From Psalm lxxxi., in verses 4, 5, it is
written: 44 Blow on the new moon the cornet at the appointed
time on the day of our feast, for this is a statute for Israel.”
In verse 5 of the same Psalm it is written : 44 As a testimony in
Joseph did he ordain it, when he went out over the land of
Egypt.” On New Year’s Day the bondage of our fathers in
Egypt ceased. (Whence do we know this ?) It is written [Ex.
vi. 6] : 44 I will bring you out from under the burdens of the
Egyptians,” and it is written in Psalms, lxxxi. 6: 44 I removed
his shoulder from the burden” (i.e., I relieved Israel from the
burden of Egypt on the day spoken of in the Psalm; viz., New
Year’s Day). In Nissan they were redeemed, as previously
proven. In Tishri we shall again be redeemed. This he de-
duces by analogy from the word 44 cornet ” found in the follow-
ing passages. In Psalm lxxxi. 4, it is stated: 44 Blow the cornet
on the new moon ” (*>., on New Year’s Day), and in Isa. xxvii.
13, it is written: 44 And on that day the great cornet shall be

* Tequpha — Solstice or equinox ; hence, the period of three months, which
elapses between a solstice and the next equinox, is also called tequpha. Mar Zutra
reads the biblical term Tequphoit in the plural.


“NEW YEAR.”


i9


blown " (and as it means New Year's Day in the one place, so
does it also in the other). R. Jehoshua says: 14 In Nissan they
were redeemed, and in that month we shall be redeemed again."
Whence do we know this ? From Ex. xii. 42, which says: " It
is a night of special observance;" t.e., a night specially ap-
pointed since the earliest times for the final redemption of
Israel.

The rabbis taught: The Jewish sages calculate the time of
the flood according to R. Eliezer, and the solstices according to
R. Jehoshua, but the sages of other nations calculate the time
of the flood also as R. Jehoshua does.

11 And for herbs." To this a Boraitha adds "tithes and
vows." Let us see. What does he mean by " herbs " ? The
tithe of herbs. But are not these included with other " tithes " ?
(Nay, for the tithe of herbs) is a rabbinical institution, while the
others are biblical. If so, should he not teach the biblical com-
mandment first ? (This is no question), because it was pleasing
to him (to have discovered that, although the tithe of herbs is
only a rabbinical institution, yet it should have a special New
Year to prevent the confusion of tithes from year to year) he,
therefore, gives it precedence. And the Tana of our Mishna
teaches us the rabbinical institution (viz., the New Year for
herbs), leaving us to infer that if that must be observed, so much
the more must the biblical law be followed.

The rabbis taught: If one gathers herbs on the eve of New
Year's Day before sunset, and gathers others after sunset, he
must not give the heave-offering or the tithe from the one for
the other, for it is prohibited to give the heave-offering or tithe
from the product of the past year for that of the present, or vice
versa . If the second year from the last sabbatic year was just
ending and the third year was just beginning, then for the sec-
ond year he must give the first and second tithes,* and for the
third year he must give the first and the poor tithes. Whence
do we deduce that (in the third year no second tithe was to be


* Tithes must be given even to-day, according to the Rabbinical law, through-
out Palestine and Syria.

It was the duty of the Israelite to give of his produce the following offerings and
tithes : (1) Theruma, a heave*offering, to be given to the priest every year ; the
measure was not fixed by the Bible ; (2) MaAser Rishon, or first tithe, to be given
every year to the Levite ; (3) MaAser Sheni, or second tithe, was to be taken in the
second year to Jerusalem and eaten there, or to be converted into money, which was
to be spent there ; (4) MaAser Ani, or the poor tithe, to be given in the third year.


20


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


given)? R. Jehoshua ben Levi says: In Deut. xxvi. 12, it is
written: “ When thou hast made an end of the tithe of produce
in the third year, which is the year of the tithing” i. e . , the year
in which only one tithe is to be given/’ What is to be under-
stood (by 07 ie tithe) ? The first and poor tithes, and the second
tithe shall be omitted. But perhaps it is not so (that the first
and poor Tithe are one tithe), but that the first tithe shall be
also omitted. This cannot be so, for we read [Numb, xviii. 26]:
“ The tithe which I have given you from them, for your inher-
itance/’ etc. (From this we see that) the Scripture compares
this tithe to an inheritance, and as an inheritance is the per-
petual property of the heir, so also is the first tithe an uninter-
rupted gift for the Levite.

” And for vows . 91 The rabbis taught: Whoso vows to de-
rive no benefit from his neighbor for a year, must reckon (for
the year) twelve months, from day to day; but if he said “ for
this year,” if he made the vow even on the 29th of Elul, as soon
as the first of Tishri comes, that year is complete, for he vowed
to afflict himself and that purpose (even in so brief a period) has
been fulfilled. But perhaps we should say Nissan (should be
regarded as the new year in such a case) ? Nay, in the matter
of vows we follow the common practice among men (who gen-
erally regard Tishri as the New Year).

We have learned (Maasroth I., 3): We reckon the year for
giving the tithe : * * for carob as soon as it begins to grow ; for grain
and olives as soon as they are one-third ripe.” What is meant by
” as soon as it begins to grow ” ? When it blossoms. Whence
do we know that we reckon the tithe on grain and olives when
they are one-third ripe ? Said R. Assi in the name of R. Jo-
hanan, and the same was said in the name of R. Jose of Galilee:
It is written [Deut. xxxi. 10]: ” At the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the Feast of
Tabernacles.” What has the year of release to do with Taber-
nacles; it is already the eighth year (because the Bible says ” at
the end of every seven years ”) ? It is only to tell us that all
grain which was one-third ripe before New Year’s Day must be
regarded even in the eighth year as the product of the sabbatic
year. And for this we find support in the following Boraitha:
R. Jonathan b. Joseph says: It is written [Lev. xxv. 21]: ” And
it shall bring forth fruit for three ( lishlosh ) years.” Do not read
lisklosh ” for three,” but in this case read lishlish '* for a third ”
it is considered produce when it is a third ripe). But this


“NEW YEAR.”


2 I


verse is required for its own particular purpose. There is an-
other verse [ibid. ibid. 22]: " And when ye sow in the eighth
year, then shall ye eat of the old harvest; until the ninth year,
until its harvest come in, shall ye eat of the old store/’

We have learned in a Mishna (Shebeith, II., 7): Rice, millet,
poppies, and lentils which have taken root before New Year's
Day come under the category of tithes for the past year, and
therefore one is permitted to use them during the sabbatic year ;
but if they have not (taken root), one is forbidden to use them
during the sabbatic year, and they come under the category of
tithes of the following year. Says Rabha: Let us see. The
rabbis say that the year (for giving tithes) begins as follows:
" For a tree from the time they blossom, for grain and olives
when they are one-third ripe, and for herbs when they are gath-
ered. ’ ' Now under which head are the above (rice, etc.) classed ?
After consideration Rabha remarked: Since these do not all
ripen simultaneously, but are gathered little by little, the rabbis
are right when they say they are tithable from the time they
take root.

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jose of Galilee says: It
is written [Deut. xvi. 13]: “ When thou hast gathered in thy
corn and thy wine." We infer that as corn and wine, now
being gathered, grow by means of the past year's rains, and are
tithed as last year's (before New Year's Day) products, so every
fruit that grows by the rain of last year is tithable as the last
year’s produce; but herbs do not come under this category, for
they grow by means of the rains of the new year, and they are
tithable in the coming year. R. Aqiba, however, says that the
words " when thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine"
lead us to infer that as corn and grapes grow chiefly by means
of rain, and are tithed as last year's products, so all things that
grow chiefly by rain are tithed as belonging to the past year;
but as herbs grow even by watering, they are tithed as the next
year's products. In what case is this difference of opinion ap-
plicable? Said R. Abbuha: In the cases of onions and Egyptian
beans; for a Mishna says: Onions and Egyptian beans which
have not been watered for thirty days before New Year’s Day
are tithed as last year’s products, and are allowed to be used
during the sabbatic year, but if they have been watered, then
they are prohibited during the sabbatic year and are tithed as
next year’s products.

“ On the first of Skebhat is the New Year for trees." Why


22


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


so ? Said R. Elazar, in the name of R. Oshyia, because at that
date the greater part of the early rains have fallen, although the
greater part of the Tequpha is yet to come. The rabbis taught:
It once happened that R. Aqiba picked the fruit of a citron tree
on the first of Shebhat, and gave two tithes of them, one accord-
ing to the school of Shammai and one in accordance with the
school of Hillel. Says R. Jose b. Jehudah: Nay, Aqiba did
not do this because of the school of Shammai or the school of
Hillel, but because R. Gamaliel* and R. Eliezer were accus-
tomed to do so. Did he not follow the practice of Beth Sham-
mai because it was the first of Shebhat ? Said R. Hanina, and
some say R. Hanania : The case here cited was one of a citron
tree, the fruit of which was formed before the fifteenth of last
Shebhat, and he should have given the tithe of it even before
the present first of Shebhat, but the case happened to be as
cited. But Rabhina said : Put the foregoing together and read
the (words of R. Jose) as follows: It did not happen on the first
of Shebhat, but on the fifteenth, and he did not follow the regu-
lations of the school of Hillel or the school of Shammai, but the
custom of R. Gamaliel and R. Eliezer. Rabba bar Huna said:
Although R. Gamaliel holds that a citron tree is tithable from
the time it is picked, as is the case with 44 herbs/' nevertheless
the new year for tithing it is in Shebhat. R. Johanan asked R.
Janai: 44 When is the beginning of a year for (the tithe on)
citrons ? " And he said , 11 Shebhat." 44 Dost thou mean," said
he, 44 the month Shebhat as fixed by the lunar year or by the
solar year (from the winter solstice) ?" 41 By the lunar year,"

he replied. Rabha asked R. Na’hman, according to another
version R. Johanan asked R. Janai: 44 How is it in leap years
(when there are thirteen lunar months)?" And he said:
44 Shebhat, as in the majority of years." It was taught: R.
Johanan and Resh Lakish both say that a citron that has grown
in the sixth year and is unpicked at the entrance of the sabbatic
year is always considered the product of the sixth year. When
Rabhin came (from Palestine) he said, in the name of R. Jo-
hanan : A citron that was as small as an olive in the sixth year,
but grew to the size of a (small) loaf of bread during the sab-
batic year, if one used it without separating the tithe he is cul-
pable because of Tebhel.\

* The opinion of R. Gamaliel is stated a little further on.

f Produce of which the levitical and priestly tithe has not been yet separated,
and which must not be used.


“NEW YEAR.”


2 3


The rabbis taught: A tree whose fruits formed before the
fifteenth of Shebhat must be tithed as the product of the past
year, but if they formed after that, they are tithed during the
coming year. Said R. Nehemiah: This applies to a tree that
looks as if it bore two crops; *>., whose fruits do not ripen all
at once, but at two times. But in the case of a tree that
produces but one crop, as, for example, the palm, olive, or
carob, although their fruits may have formed before the fifteenth
of Shebhat, they are tithed as the products of the coming year.
R. Johanan remarked that in the case of the carob people follow
the opinion of R. Nehemiah. Resh Lakish objected to R. Jo-
hanan : Since white figs take three years to grow fully ripe,
must not the second year after the sabbatic year be regarded as
the sabbatic year for them ? R. Johanan was silent. R. Abba
the priest said to R. Jose the priest: I am surprised that R.
Johanan should have accepted this query of Resh Lakish with-
out comment.

MISHNA : At four periods in each year the world is judged :
on Passover, in respect to the growth of grain; on Pentecost, in
respect to the fruit of trees; on New Year’s Day all human
beings pass before Him (God) as sheep before a shepherd, as it
is written [Psalms, xxx. 9]: “ He who hath fashioned all their
hearts understandeth all their works”;* and on Tabernacles
judgment is given in regard to water (rain).

GEMARA: What grain (does the divine judgment affect on
the Passover) ? Does it mean the grain now standing in the
field (about to be reaped) ? At what time, then, were all the
accidents that have happened to it until that time destined (by
divine will) ? It does not mean standing grain, but that just
sown. Shall we say that only one judgment is passed upon it ?
Have we learned in a Boraitha: If an accident or injury befall
grain before Passover it was decreed on the last Passover, but if
it happen (to the same grain) after Passover, it was. decreed on
the immediately preceding Passover; if an accident or misfor-
tune befall a man before the Day of Atonement, it was decreed
on the previous Day of Atonement, but if it happened after the
Day of Atonement it was decreed on the preceding Day of
Atonement? Answered Rabha: Learn from this that judgment
is passed twice (in one year, before the sowing and before the
reaping). Therefore said Abayi: When a man sees that the


* Vide Introduction.


24


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


grain which ripens slowly is thriving, he should as soon as possi-
ble sow such grain as ripens quickly, in order that before the
time of the next judgment it may already have begun to grow.

With whose opinion does our Mishna agree ? Not with that of
R. Meir, nor with that of R. jehudah, nor with that of R. Jose, nor
with that of R. Nathann, nor with the teaching of the following
Boraitha: All are judged on New Year’s Day, and the sentence
is fixed on the Day of Atonement. So says R. Meir. R. Jehu-
dah says all are judged on New Year’s Day, but the sentence of
each is confirmed each at its special time — at Passover for grain,
at Pentecost for the fruit of trees, at Tabernacles for rain, and
man is judged on New Year’s Day, and his sentence is con-
firmed on the Day of Atonement. R. Jose says man is judged
every day, as it is written [Job, vii. 1 8 j : “ Thou rememberest
him every morning ” ; and R. Nathan holds man is judged at
all times, as it is written [ibid.]: “ Thou triest him every mo-
ment.” And if you should say that the Mishna agrees with
the opinion of R. Jehudah, and that by the expression “ judg-
ment ” it means the “ confirmation of the decree,” then there
would be a difficulty about man. Said Rabha: The Tana of
our Mishna is in accordance with the school of R. Ishmael of
the following Boraitha: At four periods is the world judged: at
Passover, in respect to grain ; on Pentecost, in regard to the
fruit of trees; on Tabernacles, in respect to rain, and on New
Year’s Day man is judged, but the sentence passed upon him is
confirmed on the Day of Atonement, and our Mishna speaks of
the opening of judgment only (and not the final verdict).

R. Hisda asked: ” Why does not R. Jose quote the same
passage as R. Nathan in support of his opinion?” Because
” trying” is not judging. But does not ” remembering” also
convey the same idea ? Therefore said R. Hisda: R. Jose bases
his opinion on another passage; viz. [I Kings viii. 59]: ” That
God may maintain the cause of His servant and the cause of
His people Israel every day . Said R. Joseph: According to
whom do we pray nowadays for the sick and for faint (scholars)
every day ? According to R. Jose (who maintains that man is
judged every day).

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jehudah taught in the
name of R. Aqiba: Why does the Torah command [Lev. xxiii.
10] a sheaf of the first fruits to be brought on the Passover ?
Because Passover is the period of judgment in respect to grain,
and the Holy One, blessed be He, said: ” Offer before Me the


“ NEW YEAR.”


25


first sheaf of produce on Passover, so that the standing grain
may be blessed unto you.” And why the two loaves [Lev.
xxiii. 17] on the Pentecost ? Because that is the time when
judgment is passed on the fruit of trees, and the Holy One, blessed
be He, said: “ Bring before Me two loaves on the Pentecost, so
that I may bless the fruits of the tree.” Why was the cere-
mony of ** the outpouring of water” (on the altar) performed
on the Feast of Tabernacles ? Because He said : ” Perform the
rite of ‘ the outpouring of waters,' that the rains shall fall in due
season.” And He also said : ” Recite before Me on New Year’s
Day the Malkhioth, Zikhronoth, and Shophroth ; * the Mal-
khioth, that you proclaim Me King; the Zikhronoth, that your
remembrance for good may come before Me.” And how (shall
this be done) ? By the sounding of the cornet.

R. Abbahu said: ” Why is the cornet made a ram’s horn ? ”
The Holy One, blessed be He, said: ” Sound before Me on a
cornet made of a ram's horn, that I may remember, for your
sake, the offering of Isaac, the son of Abraham [vide Gen. xxii.
13], and I shall consider even you as worthy, as if ye had shown
an equal readiness to sacrifice yourselves to Me.”

R. Itz'hak said: A man is judged only according to his deeds
at the time of sentence, as it is written [Gen. xxi. 17]: ” God
heard the voice of the lad, as he then was,” and the same rabbi
also remarked : Three circumstances cause a man to remember
his sins; viz., when he passes by an insecure wall, when he
thinks deeply of the significance of his prayer, and when he
invokes divine judgment on his neighbor, for R. Abhin says:
Whoso calls down divine judgment on his neighbor is punished
first, as we find in the case of Sarah, who said [Gen. xvi. 5] to
Abraham: “ I suffer wrong through thee, may the Lord judge
between me and thee.” And shortly after we read (that she
died): ” And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah and to weep
for her” [Gen. xxiii. 2]. (Naturally this only applies to cases
where appeal could have been made to a civil court, and the
invocation of divine judgment was not necessary. f) R. Itz’hak

* These are the divisions of the Additional Service for the New Year’s Day.
The Malkhioth consist of ten scriptural passages in which God is proclaimed King.
The Zikhronoth consist of an equal number of scriptural passages in which Divine
remembrance is alluded to. The Shophroth are a similar series of selections in which
the Shophar (cornet) is referred to. In Chapter IV. of this tract there is a discussion
as to the composition of these selections. We retain the Hebrew names, because we
feel that no translation or paraphrase will adequately express what they mean.

f This is taken from Tract Baba Kama.


26


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


preached: Four things avert the evil decree passed (by God) on
man — viz. : charity, prayer, change of name, and improvement.
“ Charity,” as it is written [Prov. x. 2]: 4 1 Charity delivereth
from death.” 44 Prayer,” in accordance with [Psalms, evii.
19]: 44 They cry unto the Lord when they are in distress, and
He saveth them out of their afflictions.” ” Change of name,”
as it is written [Gen. xvii. 15]: “ As for Sarai, thy wife, thou
shalt not call her name Sarai, but Sarah shall her name be,”
and the text continues by saying [ibid. 16]: 44 Then will I bless
her, and give thee a son also of her.” 44 Improvement,” we
deduce from Jonah, iii. 10: 44 And God saw their works that
they had turned from their evil ways,” and immediately adds:
44 And God bethought Himself of the evil He had said He would
do unto them, and He did it not.” Some add to these four
a fifth, change of location, as it is written [Gen. xii. 1 and 2]:
44 And God said to Abraham, get thee out from thy land ” (and
afterwards), 44 I will make of thee a great nation.”

R. Kruspedai said in the name of R. Johanan: Three books
are opened on New Year's Day: one for the utterly wicked, one
for the wholly good, and one for the average class of people.
The wholly righteous are at once inscribed, and life is* decreed
for them; the entirely wicked are at once inscribed, and destruc-
tion destined for them ; the average class are held in the balance
from New Year’s Day till the Day of Atonement; if they prove
themselves worthy they are inscribed for life, if not they are
inscribed for destruction. Said R. Abhin : Whence this teach-
ing ? From the passage [Psalms, lxix. 29]: 44 Let them be
blotted out of the book of the living, and they shall not be writ-
ten down with the righteous.”

We have learned in a Boraitha: The school of Shammai said:
There are three divisions of mankind at the Resurrection: the
wholly righteous, the utterly wicked, and the average class.
The wholly righteous are at once inscribed, and life is decreed
for them ; the utterly wicked are at once inscribed, and destined
for Gehenna, as we read [Dan. xii. 2]: 44 And many of them
that sleep in the dust shall awake, some to everlasting life, and
some to shame and everlasting contempt.” The third class, the
men between the former two, descend to Gehenna, but they
weep and come up again, in accordance with the passage [Zech.
xiii. 9]: 44 And I will bring the third part through the fire, and
I will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold
is tried; and he shall call on My name, and I will answer him.”


“NEW YEAR.”


27


Concerning this last class of men Hannah says [I Sam. ii. 6] :
“ The Lord causeth to die and maketh alive, He bringeth down
to the grave and bringeth up again.’ 1 The school of Hillel
says: The Merciful One inclines (the scale of justice) to the side
of mercy, and of this third class of men David says [Psalms,
cxvi. 1]: 44 It is lovely to me that the Lord heareth my voice ” ;
in fact, David applies to them the Psalm mentioned down to
the words, 44 Thou hast delivered my soul from death ” [ibid. 8].

Transgressors of Jewish birth and also of non-Jewish birth,
who sin with their body descend to Gehenna, and are judged
there for twelve months; after that time their bodies are de-
stroyed and burnt, and the winds scatter their ashes under the
soles of the feet of the righteous, as we read [Mai. iii. 23] :
44 And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be as ashes
under the soles of your feet ” ; but as for Minim, informers and
disbelievers, who deny the Torah, or Resurrection, or separate
themselves from the congregation, or who inspire their fellow-
men with dread of them, or who sin and cause others to sin, as
did Jeroboam the son of Nebat and his followers, they all de-
scend to Gehenna, and are judged there from generation to gen-
eration, as it is said [Isa. lxvi. 24]: 44 And they shall go forth
and look upon the carcases of the men who have transgressed
against Me; for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire
be quenched.” Even when Gehenna will be destroyed, they
will not be consumed, as it is written [Psalms, xlix. 15]: 44 And
their forms wasteth away in the nether world,” which the sages
comment upon to mean that their forms shall endure even when
the grave is no more. Concerning them Hannah says [I Sam.
ii. 10] : 44 The adversaries of the Lord shall be broken to pieces.”
R. Itz’hac b. Abhin says: 44 Their faces are black like the sides of
a caldron ” ; while Rabha remarked: 44 Those who are now the
handsomest of the people of Me’huzza will yet be called the
children of Gehenna.”

What is meant by Jews who transgress with their body?
Says Rabh : The Qarqaphtlia (frontal bone) on which the phylac-
teries are not placed.* And who are meant by non-Jews who


* There were sects at that time who did not wear the phylacteries on the frontal
bone, but on other places. The people here referred to are those mentioned in
Mishna Megillah III. 5. Those who do not wear phylacteries at all are, under no
circumstances, included under the head of these transgressors. ( Vide Tosaphoth, ad
loc.) For fuller information the reader is referred to our “ The History of Amulets,
Charms, and Talismans ” (New York, 1S93).


28


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


transgress with the body ? Those guilty of the sin (of adultery).
Who are those who inspire their fellowmen with dread of them ?
A leader of a community who causes the people to fear him
overmuch without furthering thereby a high purpose. R. Jehu-
dah said in the name of Rabh: No such leader will ever have
a learned son, as it is said [Job, xxxvii. 24]: “ Men do there-
fore fear him: he will never see (in his family) any wise of
heart/’

The school of Hillel said above: He who is full of compas-
sion will incline the scale of justice to the side of mercy. How
does He do it ? Answered R. Eliezer: He presses on (the side
containing our virtues), as it is said [Micah, vii. 19]: ” He will
turn again, he will have compassion upon us, he will suppress
our iniquities.” R. Jose says: He lifts off (the sins), as it is
said [ibid. 18]: “ He pardoneth iniquity and forgiveth trans-
gression.” And it was taught in the school of R. Ishmael that
this means that He removes each first sin (so that there is no
second), and this is the correct interpretation. ” But,” Rabha
remarked, ” the sin itself is not blotted out, so that if one be
found in later times with more sins (than virtues), the sin not
blotted out will be added to the later ones; whoso treats with
indulgence one who has wronged him (forms an exception to
this rule), for he will have all his sins forgiven, as it is said
[Micah, vii. 18]: ” He pardoneth iniquity and forgiveth trans-
gression.” From whom does He remove iniquity ? From him
who forgiveth transgression (committed against him by his
neighbor).

R. Huna ben R. Jehoshua fell sick, and R. Papa went to
visit him. The latter saw that the end was near, and said to
those present : ” Make ready his provisions (shrouds).” Finally
he recovered, and R. Papa was ashamed to see him. ” Why
did you think him so sick ? ” said they. “ He was so, indeed,”
he replied, ” but the Holy One, blessed be He, said that since
he was always indulgent (with every one), he shall be forgiven,”
as it is written : He pardoneth iniquity and forgiveth trans-
gression.” From whom does He remove iniquity ? From him
who forgiveth transgression.

R. A’h the son of Hanina said : The phrase ” of the remnant
of his inheritance ” [Micah, vii. 18] is like unto a fat tail (of an
Arabian sheep) with a thorn through it (that will stick those
that lay hold of it); (for He forgives) the remnant of His inher-
itance, and not all His inheritance. What is meant by rem-


“NEW YEAR. “


2 9


nant ? Only those who deport themselves like a remnant (i.e.,
modestly). R. Huna points out a contradiction in these pas-
sages. It is written [Psalms, cxlv. 17]: “ The Lord is just in
all his ways,” and in the same passage, “ and pious in all his
works.” It means, in the beginning He is only just, but in the
end He is pious (when He finds that strict justice is too severe
on mankind He tempers justice with piety or mercy). R. Elazar
also points out a contradiction. It is written [Psalms, lxii. 12]:
“Unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy;" and again, “thou
renderest to every man according to his work" This can be ex-
plained as the above: In the beginning He rewards every man
according to his works, but in the end He is merciful. Uphi or
Ilpha points out a similar contradiction in [Ex. xxxiv. 6], where
it is written “ abundant in goodness and truth" and gives a sim-
ilar explanation.

It is written [Ex. xxxiv. 6]: “And the Lord passed by
before him and proclaimed.” R. Johanan said: Had this pas-
sage not been written, it would have been impossible to have
said it, for it teaches us that the Holy One, blessed be He,
wrapped Himself, as does a minister who recites the prayers for
a congregation, and pointing out to Moses the regular order of
prayer, said to him: Whenever Israel sins, let him pray to Me,
after this manner, and I shall pardon him.

“ The Lord, the Lord,” (these words mean) I am the same
God before a man sins as I am after he sins and does repent-
ance. “ God, merciful and gracious.” R. Jehudah said (con-
cerning these words): The covenant made through the thirteen
attributes [Ex. xxxiv.] will never be made void, as it is said
[ibid. 10]: “ Behold I make a covenant.”

R. Johanan said: Great is repentance, for it averts the (evil)
decreed against a man, as it is written [Isa. vi. 10]: “ Obdurate
will remain the heart of this people, . . . nor hear with their
ears, nor understand with their hearts, so that they repent and
be healed" R. Papa asked Abayi: Do not these last words,
perhaps, mean before the (evil) decree has been pronounced ?
It is written, he replied, “be healed.” What is that which
requires healing ? I can only say that against which judgment
has been pronounced. An objection was raised from the fol-
lowing Boraitha: He who repents between (New Year’s Day
and the Day of Atonement) is forgiven, but if he does not
repent, even though he offered the choicest sacrifice, he is not
pardoned. This presents no difficulty ; in the one case it refers to


30


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


^the sins of) an individual, and in the other to (those of) a com-
munity. Another objection was raised. Come and hear. It
is written [Psalms, cvii. 23-28]: “They that go down to the
sea in ships, that do business in great waters ; these see the works
of the Lord ... for he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy
wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof, they reel to and fro,
and stagger like a drunken man, . . . then they cry unto the
Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their afflic-
tions; oh, that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, ”
etc. Signs are given, such as the words “ but ” and “ only ” in
the Scriptures (which intimate limiting qualifications), to indicate
that if they cried before the decree was pronounced, only then
would they be answered; but if after, they are not answered.
(Would not this be a contradiction to the words “ to those of
a community ” ?) Nay, for those on a ship are not a community
(but are considered as individuals).

Come and hear. The proselyte Beluria (a woman) asked
R. Gamaliel (concerning the following apparent contradiction) :
It is written in your Law [Deut. 17]: “ The Lord who regard-
eth not persons” ( literally , who lifteth not up countenances);
and it is also written [Numb. vi. 26]: “ May the Lord lift up
his countenance.” R. Jose, the priest, joined her, and said to
her: “ I will tell thee a parable. To what may this be com-
pared ? To one who lent money to his neighbor, and set a time
for its repayment before the king, and (the borrower) swore by
the king's life (to repay it on time). The time arrived, and he
did not pay, and he came to appease the king. Said the king
to him, 4 I can forgive you only your offence against me, but
I cannot forgive you your offence against your neighbor; go
and ask him to forgive you/ ” So also here; in the one place
it means sins committed by a man against Himself (the Lord), but
in the other it means sins committed by one man against an-
other. As to the decree pronounced against an individual, the
I anaim differ, however, as we may see from the following Bo-
raitha: R. Meir used to say, of two who fall sick with the same
sickness, and of two who enter a tribunal (for judgment) on sim-
ilar charges, one may recover and one not, one may be acquitted
and one condemned. Why should one recover and one not,
and one be acquitted and one condemned ? Because the one
prayed and was answered, and one prayed and was not an-
swered. Why should one be answered and the other not ? The
one prayed devoutly and was answered, the other did not pray


“NEW YEAR.”


3i


devoutly and therefore was not answered ; but R. Elazar said it
was not because of prayer, but because the one prayed before ,
and the other after the decree was pronounced. R. Itz’hak
said : Prayer is helpful for man before or after the decree has
been pronounced. Is it then so that the (evil) decree pro-
nounced against a congregation is averted (through the influence
of prayer)? Does not one scriptural verse [Jer. iv. 14] say:
“ Wash thine heart from wickedness,” and another states [ibid,
ii. 22]: 44 For though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee
much soap, yet would the stain of thine iniquity remain before
me.” Shall we not say in the one case it means before , and in
the other after the sentence has been pronounced ? Nay, both
refer (to a time) after the decree has been pronounced and there
is no contradiction, for in one case it refers to a decree issued
with an oath, and in the other to a decree pronounced without
an oath, as R. Samuel b. Ami said in the name of R. Jonathan :
Whence do we know that a decree, pronounced with an oath,
cannot be averted ? From the passage [I Sam. iii. 14]: “ There-
fore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the iniquity of
Eli’s house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor meat-offering
forever.” Rabha, however, said: Even in such a case it is only
through sacrifices that sin cannot be purged, but by (the study
of) the Law it may be; and Abayi said: With sacrifice and offer-
ing it cannot be purged, but by (the study of) the Law, and by
active benevolence it can. (Abayi based this opinion on his
own experience, for) he and (his master) Rabba were both de-
scendants of the house of Eli; Rabba, who only studied the
Law, lived forty years, but Abayi, who both studied the Torah
and performed acts of benevolence, lived sixty years. The
rabbis tell us also: There was a certain family in Jerusalem
whose members died at eighteen years of age. They came and
informed R. Johanan ben Zakkai of their trouble. Said he:
“ Perhaps you are descendants of Eli, of whom it is said, 4 all
the increase of thy house shall die in the flower of their age
[I Sam. ii. 33]; 41 Go, then, study the Law, and live.” They
went and studied, and they lived, and they called that family
R. Johanan's after his name. R. Samuel ben Inya says in the
name of Rabh: Whence do we know that if the decree against
a community is even confirmed, it may nevertheless be averted ?
From [Deut. iv. 7] where it is written: 44 As the Lord, our God,
in all things that we call upon him for; ” (but how can you har-
monize that with the passage) [Isa. Iv. 6]: 44 Seek ye the Lord


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


32

while he may be found ” ? The latter passage refers to an indi-
vidual, the former to a community. When is that time that
He will be found even by an individual ? Answered Rabba bar
Abbahu: “ During the ten days, from New Year’s Day till the
Day of Atonement.”

‘ ‘ On New Years Day all the inhabitants of the world pass
before him , Kibhne Maron (like sheep)." What does the Mishna
mean by these last two words? “ Like sheep,” as they are
translated in Aramaic, but Resh Lakish says they mean “ as the
steps of the Temple” (i.e., narrow, so that people ascended
them one by one). R. Jehudah, however, said in the name of
Samuel: (They mean) ” like the armies of the house of David ”
(which were numbered one by one). Said Rabba bar Bar Hana
in the name of R. Johanan: ” Under any circumstances they
are mustered at a glance. And R. Na’hman bar Itz’hak said:
Thus also we understand the words of our Mishna: “ He that
fashioned all their hearts alike” [Psalms, xxxiii. 15], i.e., the
Creator, sees all their hearts (at a glance) and (at once) under-
stands all their works.

MISHNA: Messengers were sent out* for the following six
months: for Nissan, on account of the Passover; for Abh, on
account of the fast; for Elul, on account of the New Year; for
Tishri, on account of appointing the order of the (remaining)
festivals;! f° r Kislev, on account of the Feast of Dedication ;
for Adar, on account of the Feast of Passover; also for Iyar,
when the Temple was in existence, on account of the minor (or
second) Passover. J

GEMARA: Why were they not also sent out for Tamuz
and Tebheth (in which months there are also fasts) ? Did not
R. Hana bar Bizna say in the name of R. Simeon the pious:
What is the meaning of the passage [Zach. viii. 19]: “ Thus
saith the Lord of hosts; the fast of the fourth, and the fast of
the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth
shall become in the house of Judah joy and gladness,” etc.,
that they are called fasts, and also days of joy and gladness ?
Are we not to understand that only in the time of peace (cessa-
tion of persecution) they shall be for joy and gladness, but in
the time when there was not peace they shall be fasts ? Said


* Sec Slekalim I. 1.

f c.g. Tabernacles. This was necessary since the Beth Din might have made
the month intercalary.

t Vide, Numb. ix. io, 11.


“NEW YEAR.”


33


R. Papa: It means this: When there was peace, these days should
be for joy and gladness; in the time of persecution they shall
be fasts ; in times when there are neither persecution nor peace
people may fast or not, as they see fit. If that is so, why then
(should messengers have been sent out) on account of the fast
of Abh ? Said R. Papa: The fast (ninth day) of Abh is differ-
ent, since many misfortunes occurred on that day, as the master
said: “ On the ninth of Abh, the first and second Temples were
destroyed, Bether was captured, and the city of Jerusalem was
razed to the ground/’

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Simeon said: There are
four matters that R. Aqiba expounded, but which I interpret
differently; ” the fast of the fourth ” means the ninth of Tamuz,
on which the city was broken in, as it is written [Jer. lii. 6, 7] :
“ In the fourth, in the ninth day of the month . . . the city
was broken in.” What does he mean by fourth ? The fourth
of the months. “ The fast of the fifth,” means the ninth of
Abh, on which the Temple of our Lord was burnt; and what
does he mean by calling it fifth ? The fifth of the months.
“ The fast of the seventh ” means the third of Tishri, the day
on which Gedaliah, the son of Ahikam, was slain (and we fast),
because the death of the righteous is equal to the loss of the
house of our Lord. And what does he mean by calling it the
seventh ? The seventh of the months. ” The fast of the
tenth,” means the tenth of Tebheth, the day on which the king
of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem, as it is written [Ezek.
xxiv. 1, 2]: ” Again in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in
the tenth day of the month the word of the Lord came unto me
saying, Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this
same day; the king of Babylon set himself against Jerusalem.”
And what does he mean by calling it the tenth ? The tenth of
the months, and actually this last event should have been placed
first (since it occurred first). And why is it placed here last in
order ? To mention the months in their regular order. Said
R. Simeon: I, however, do not think so, but thus: ” The fast
of the tenth” means the fifth of Tebheth, on which day the
news came to the exiles that the city was smitten, as it is writ-
ten [Ezek. xxxiii. 21]: “ And it came to pass in the twelfth
year of our captivity, in the tenth (month), in the fifth day of
the month, that one that had escaped out of Jerusalem came to
me, saying, The city is smitten,” and they held the day on
which they received the news equal to the day (on which the
3


34


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


Temple) was burnt. And it seems to me that my opinion is
more satisfactory, for I speak of the first, first, and of the last,
last; while he speaks of the last, first, and of the first, last; he
mentions them in the order of the months, while I mention
them in the order in which the calamities occurred.

It was taught: Rabh and R. Hanina say: The Rolls of
Fasts (which contained the names of minor holidays on which
it was prohibited to fast) is annulled, but R. Johanan and R.
Jehoshua ben Levi say: 44 It is not.” When Rabh and R.
Hanina say that it is annulled they mean : In the time of peace
the (fast) days are days of joy and gladness, but in the time of
persecution they are fast days, and so also with other (days men-
tioned in the Rolls of Fasts); and when R. Johanan and R.
Jehoshua ben Levi say it is not annulled (they mean) that those
(four fasts mentioned in Zachariah) the Bible makes dependent
on the rebuilding of the Temple; but those (mentioned in the
Rolls of Fasts) remain as they are appointed.

R. Tobi b. Matana objected: In the Rolls of Fasts it is said
that on the twenty-eighth of (Adar), the good news came to the
Jews that they need no longer abstain from studying the Law,
for the king (of Syria had earlier) issued a decree, forbidding
them to study the Law, or to circumcise their sons, and com-
pelling them to desecrate their Sabbath. What did Jehudah
b. Shamua and his friends do ? They went and took counsel of
a certain matron, whose house the celebrated people of the city
frequented. Said she to them, “ Go and cry aloud at night.”
They did as she advised and cried aloud, 44 Oh, heavens! Are
we not all brethren ? Are we not all the children of one Father ?
Are we not all the children of one mother ? Why should we be
treated differently from other nations, and from all people who
speak other languages inasmuch as ye issue such cruel edicts
against us?” The decrees were annulled, and the day (on
which this happened) they appointed a holiday. Now if it be
true that the Rolls of Fasts has been annulled (t. e . , the former
[feasts] have been all abrogated), may then new ones be added ?
There is a difference of opinion among Tanaim on this question,
as we have learned in the following Boraitha: The days recorded
in the Rolls of Fasts, whether during or after the existence of
the Temple, are not permitted (to be kept as fasts), so said R.
Meir; R. Jose, however, said, so long as the Temple stood it
was not permissible (to fast on them) because they were days of
joy, but since the Temple fell it is allowed because they are


“ NEW YEAR.”


35


days of mourning. One rule says that they are abrogated, but
another rule says they are not abrogated. There is a question
here caused by one rule contradicting the othei. In the latter
case it refers to the Feasts of Dedication and Esther (which are
never to be abrogated), and in the former case to all other
(minor feast) days.

For Elul on account of New Years Day , and for Tishri on
account of appointing the order of the ( remaining ) festivals . ”
Since (the messengers) were sent out on account of Elul, why
need they go again on account of Tishri ? Shall we say because
(the Beth Din) desired to proclaim Elul an intercalary month ?
(That cannot be) for did not R. Hanina bar Kahana say in the
name of Rabh: Since the time of Ezra we have not discovered
that Elul was an intercalary month ? We have not discovered
it, because it was not necessary (to make it so). But if it should
be necessary, shall we make it an intercalary month? This would
disturb the position of New Year’s Day. It is better that the
position of New Year's Day alone should be disturbed than that
all the holidays should be disarranged. And it seems to be so,
for the Mishna says that the messengers were sent for Tishri on
account of appointing the order of the festivals.

“And for Kislev on account of Manuka, and for Adar on
account of the Feast of Esther .” But the Mishna does not say
if it be a leap year, that the messengers were sent out in the
second Adar on account of Purim. From this we learn that the
Mishna is not in accordance with Rabbi of the following Bo-
raitha: Rabbi says: “ In a leap year messengers are sent out
also in the second Adar on account of the Feast of Esther.”

When Ula came (from Palestine) he said : They have made
Elul an intercalary month, and he also said: ” Do my Babylo-
nian comrades know the benefit we have gained through it?”
Because of what is this a benefit ? ” Because of herbs,” * said

Ula. R. A’ha bar Hanina, however, said: ” Because of dead
bodies. What difference is there between them? They

* By adding an intercalary day to Elul, the holiday (New Year or Atonement
Day) was prevented from falling on Friday or Sunday, the intention being to separate
the holiday by an intervening day from the Sabbath. Thus, herbs that were to be
eaten fresh, and other foods, would not spoil, as they might, if kept from Thursday
till after the Sabbath.

f A similar practice was followed with regard to the keeping of a dead body over
the Day of Atonement and a Sabbath. Since it was impossible to keep the dead
body two days, the Sabbath and the Atonement Day were separated by the means of
the intercalated day.


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


36

differ concerning a holiday that falls immediately before or after
the Sabbath (on the sixth or first day of the week). According
to the one who says " because of herbs " wemay add an inter-
calary day, but (it is not necessary) according to him who says
“ because of dead bodies/' for we can employ non-Jews (to bury
the dead for us on the holidays). If this is the case, why is this
a benefit only for us (in Babylon); is it not also to the advan-
tage of them (in Palestine) ? Our climate is very hot, but theirs
is not.

Is this really so ? Did not Rabba bar Samuel teach: One
might suppose that as we intercalate the year when necessary, so
we intercalate the month when necessary ? Therefore it is writ-
ten [Ex. xii. 2] : " This month shall be unto you the first of the
months," which means as soon as you see (the new moon) as on
this occasion, you must consecrate the month (whether or not it
is necessary to intercalate it). (How, then, could they inter-
calate Elul, which had always only twenty-nine days ?) To
intercalate it (when necessary) was permitted, but to consecrate
it was not permitted, and Rabba's words should read : One
might suppose that as it is permitted to intercalate the year and
the month when necessary, so we may consecrate the month when
necessary. Therefore it is written [Ex. xii. 2]: "This month
shall be unto you," etc., which means only when the moon is
seen as on this occasion, may you consecrate it.

Samuel said: " I can arrange the calendar for the whole cap-
tivity." Abba, the father of R. Simlai, said to him: "Does
the master know that which a certain Boraitha teaches concern-
ing the secret of the intercalary day; viz., whether the new
moon appears before or after midday ?" Answered he, " No."
" Then, master," said he, " if thou dost not know this, there
may be other things which thou dost not know." When R.
Zera went (to Palestine) he sent back word to his comrade (say-
ing): The evening and the morning (following) must both be-
long to the month (t.e., when the old moon has still been seen
after dark on the twenty-ninth day of the month, the thirtieth
evening and following day belong to the closing month). And
this is what Abba, the father of R. Simlai, meant : We calculate
only the beginning of the new moon; if it began before midday,
it is certain that it was seen close upon the setting of the sun,
but if it did not begin before midday, it is certain that it did not
appear close upon the setting of the sun. What difference does
it make (in practice)? Answered R. Ashi, to refute witnesses."


“NEW YEAR.”


37


R. Zera said in the name of R. Na’hman, in every case of
doubt (about the holidays), we post-date, but never ante-date.*
Does this mean to say that (in a case of doubt concerning the
exact day on which Tabernacles begins) we observe the fifteenth
and sixteenth, but not the fourteenth. Let us keep the four-
teenth also. Perhaps Abh and Elul have each only twenty-nine
days ? Nay, if two consecutive months should each have
twenty-nine days, this would be announced.

Levi went to Babylon on the eleventh of Tishri. Said he:
“ Sweet is the food of Babylon on the great Day (of Atonement
now being held) in Palestine.” They said to him, 44 Go and
testify.” Answered he, 44 I have not heard from the Beth Din
the words, 4 It is consecrated * (and therefore I cannot testify).”

R. Johanan proclaimed: In everyplace that the messengers
sent in Nissan reached, but that the messengers sent in Tishri
cannot reach, they must observe two days for the holidays; and
they make this restriction for Nissan lest people would do in
Tishri as in Nissan. f Rabha used to fast two days for the Day
of Atonement.^: Once it happened that he was right (because
the Day of Atonement fell one day later in Palestine than in
Babylon). R. Na’hman was once fasting on the Day of Atone-
ment, and in the evening a certain man came and said to him,
44 To-morrow will be the Day of Atonement in Palestine.” He
angrily quoted, 44 Swift were our persecutors ” [Lam. iv. 19].

R. Na’hman said to certain sailors, 44 Ye who do not know
the calendar take notice that when the moon still shines at dawn
(it is full moon, and if it happens to be Nissan) destroy your
leaven bread (for it is then the fourteenth day).”


* i.e. if there be a doubt about which day is the Passover or the feast of Taber-
nacles, the festival should be kept for two days ; not, however, by ante-dating and
keeping the fourteenth and fifteenth (of Nissan or Tishri) but by post-dating and
keeping the fifteenth and sixteenth of either month.

f In Tishri, messengers might be delayed reaching distant places, to which they
were sent to announce the date of the festival (Tabernacles), on account of New
Year’s Day and the Day of Atonement, on which they could not travel more than a
short distance. In Nissan, however, they could, without delay, reach those places,
and having announced the date of the festival, only one day was hallowed. Fearing
that people might do, in regard to the Feast of Tabernacles, what they did with
regard to Passover {i.e . , keep one day, even when in doubt about the date), the Rab-
bis instituted that both Tabernacles and Passover should have two days hallowed
instead of one.

% Pie was in doubt whether the Beth Din in Palestine had made Elul intercalary
or not, and as the messengers did not arrive until after the Day of Atonement, he
fasted two days.


38


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


MISHNA: For the sake of (the new moon) of the two
months, Nissan and Tishri, witnesses may profane* the Sab-
bath, because in these months the messengers went to Syria,
and the order of the festivals was arranged ; when, however, the
Templef was in existence, they might profane the Sabbath in
any month, in order to offer the (new moon) sacrifice in its
proper time.

GEMARA: For the sake of these two months and not
more ? This would be a contradiction to the Mishna above,
which states: “For the sake of six months messengers were
sent out " ? Said Abayi: “ This is to be explained thus: For
all new moons the messengers were sent out while it was still
evening, but for Nissan and Tishri they were not sent out until
they heard from the lips of the Beth Din the words, * It (the
new moon or month) is consecrated.'

The rabbis taught : Whence do we know that for them we
may profane the Sabbath ? From [Lev. xxiii. 4], which reads:
“ These are the feasts of the Lord, which ye shall proclaim in
their seasons." Might not one suppose that as (witnesses) were
permitted to profane the Sabbath until the new moons had been
consecrated, so were messengers permitted to profane the Sab-
bath until (the festivals) were introduced ? This the Law says:
Therefore it is written: “ Which ye shall proclaim," i.e., you
may profane the Sabbath in order to proclaim them, but not to
introduce them.

When , hozvever , the Temple was in existence , ’ ' etc. The rabbis
taught: Formerly they profaned the Sabbath for all (new
moons), but after the destruction of the Temple, R. Johanan b.
Zakkai said to them: “ Have we any (new moon) sacrifice to
offer ? They then instituted that (witnesses) might profane the
Sabbath only on account of Nissan and Tishri.

MISHNA: Whether the new moon had appeared clear to
all or not (the witnesses) were permitted to profane the Sabbath
on its account. R. Jose says: If it appeared clear to every
one,^; the Sabbath should not be profaned (by witnesses). It
once happened that more than forty pair (of witnesses) were on
the highway (to the Beth Din) on the Sabbath, when R. Aqiba


* ^ 0 travel to Palestine in order to inform the Beth Din might have necessitated
walking more than the distance permitted on the Sabbath,
t The Temple in Jerusalem.

\ It might then be presumed that every one had seen it, and it was therefore
unnecessary for any one to go to Palestine to announce it to the Beth Din.


“NEW YEAR.”


39


detained them at Lydda. R. Gamaliel then sent word saying,
44 If thou thus detainest the people, thou wilt be the cause of
their erring in the future” (i. e. , they may refuse to come and
testify).

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: It is written [Eccles. xii.
io] : Koheleth sought to find out acceptable words,” which sig-
nifies that Koheleth sought to enforce decrees without the aid
of witnesses or warning. A heavenly voice was heard saying
[Eccles. xii. io] : 44 And that which was written uprightly, even
words of truth” (which meant that) as it is written [Deut. xx.
15]: 44 Upon the evidence of two witnesses, etc., must a case
be established,” so should words of truth also be established by
two witnesses.

44 It ^ once happened that more than forty pair (of witnesses)
were on the highway (to ferusalem) and R. Aqiba detained them ,”
etc. We have learned in a Boraitha : R. Jehudah said : It would
be a sin to say that R. Aqiba should have detained them. It
was Shazpar, the superintendent of Gadar, who detained them,
and (and when) R. Gamaliel (heard of it, he) sent and dismissed
him.

MISHNA: When a father and son have seen the new moon,
they must both go to the Beth Din, not that they may act
together as witnesses, but in order that, should the evidence of
either of them be invalidated, the other may join to give evi-
dence with another witness. R. Simeon says: Father and son,
and relatives in any degree may be accepted as competent wit-
nesses to give evidence as to the appearance of the new moon.
R. Jose says: It once happened that Tobias, the physician, his
son, and his freed slave saw the new moon in Jerusalem (and
when they tendered their evidence), the priests accepted his
evidence and that of his son, but invalidated that of his freed
slave; but when they appeared before the (Beth Din) they re-
ceived his evidence, and that of his freed slave, but invalidated
that of his son.

GEMARA: Said R. Levi: What is the reason for R. Sim-
eon’s decree ? It is written [Ex. xii. 1] : And the Lord spake
unto Moses and Aaron saying, This month shall be unto you,”
which means, this evidence shall be acceptable from you (although
you are brothers). And how do the rabbis interpret it ? They
explain it as follows: This testimony shall be placed at your
disposal (i.e. f the Beth Din’s). Says Mar Uqba in the name of
Samuel, the Halakha prevails according to R. Simeon.


40


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


MISHNA: The following are considered incompetent to be
witnesses: gamblers with dice, usurers, pigeon breeders,* those
who deal with the produce of the sabbatic year, and slaves.
This is the rule: All evidence that cannot be received from a
woman cannot be received from any of the above. One who
has seen the new moon, but is unable to go (to give evidence),
must be brought (if unable to walk) mounted on an ass, or even
in a bed.f Persons afraid of an attack by robbers may take
sticks with them;f and if they have a long way to go, it will be
lawful for them to provide themselves with and carry their food.f
Whenever (witnesses) must be on the road a day and a night, it
will be lawful to violate the Sabbath to travel thereon, to give
their evidence as to the appearance of the moon. For thus it
is written [Lev. xxiii. 4] : “ These are the feasts of the Lord,
the holy convocations, which ye shall proclaim in their appointed
seasons.


* Those who breed and train pigeons for racing.

j Even on the Sabbath, when under ordinary circumstances this might not be
done.


CHAPTER II.


ORDINANCES ABOUT THE WITNESSES CONCERNING THE NEW MOON
THE HOISTING OF THE FLAGS AN1) HOW IT WAS CONSECRATED
BY THE BETH DIN.

MISHNA: If the witness was unknown another was sent
with him to testify to his character. In former- times they
would receive evidence (about the appearance of the moon) from
any one; but when the Boethusians commenced to corrupt the
witnesses the rule was made, that evidence would only be re-
ceived from those who were known (to be reputable).

GEMARA: What is meant by “another” (in the above
Mishna) ? Another pair (of witnesses). It seems also to be so
from the statement of the Mishna. “ If the witness was un-
known? Shall we assume that it means one (witness) ? Surely
the evidence of one was not received, for this transaction was
called “judgment” [Psalms, lxxxi.] (and two witnesses are
necessary)? What, then, does “the witness ” mean ? That
pair; so also here, “another” means another pair. Is, then,
the evidence of one not accepted ? Have we not learned in a
Boraitha: It once happened that R. Neherai went to Usha on
the Sabbath to testify (to the character) of one witness ? He
knew that there was one witness in Usha, and he went to add
his evidence (and thus make two witnesses). If that is so,
what does it tell us ? One might suppose that, as there was
a doubt (that he might not meet the other witness), he ought
not to have profaned the Sabbath (by travelling to Usha as a
single witness); therefore he comes to teach us (that even in
such a case of doubt the Sabbath might be violated).

When Ula came (to Babylon, from Palestine), he said: They
have already consecrated the new moon in Palestine. Said R.
Kahana: (In such a case) not only Ula, who is a great man, is
to be believed, but even an ordinary man. Why so ? Because
men will not lie about a matter that will become known to every
one.

* ‘ hi former times they would receive evidence from any one y y
etc. The rabbis taught: How did the Boethusians corrupt the

41


42


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


witnesses ? They once sought to deceive the sages, and they
bribed, with four hundred zuz (silver coins), two men, one
belonging to their party and one to ours. The former gave his
evidence and went out, to the latter they (the Beth Din) said,
“ Tell us what was the appearance of the moon ?” “ I went

up/' replied he, “ to Maale Adumim,* and I saw it crouching
between two rocks. Its head was like a calf, its ears like a
goat, its horns like a stag, and its tail was lying across its thigh.
I gazed upon it and shuddered, and fell backwards; and if you
do not believe me, behold, here I have two hundred zuz bound
up in my cloth. ” “ Who induced you to do this ? ” they asked.

" I heard,” he replied, ” that the Boethusians wished to deceive
the sages; so I said to myself, I will go and inform them, lest
some unworthy person may (accept their bribe), and come and
deceive the sages.” Then said the sages: ” The two hundred
zuz may be retained by you as a reward, and he who bribed you
shall be taken to the whipping-post (and be punished).” Then
and there they ordained that testimony should be received only
from those who were known (to be of good character).

MISHNA: Formerly bonfires were lighted (to announce the
appearance of the new moon); but when the Cutheans f prac-
tised their deceit, it was ordained that messengers should be
sent out. How were these bonfires lighted ? They brought
long staves of cedar wood, canes, and branches of the olive tree,
and bundles of tow which were tied on top of them with twine;
with these they went to the top of a mountain, and lighted
them, and kept waving them to and fro, upward and downward,
till they could perceive the same repeated by another person on
the next mountain, and thus, on the third mountain, etc.
Whence did these bonfires commence ? From the Mount of
Olives to Sartabha, from Sartabha to Grophinah, from Grophi-
nah to Hoveran, from Hoveran to Beth Baltin; they did not
cease waving the burning torches at Beth Baltin, to and fro,
upward and downward, until the whole country of the captivity
appeared like a blazing fire.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: Bonfires were only lighted
to announce the new moon that appeared and was consecrated
at the proper time (after twenty-nine days). And when were
they lighted ? On the evening of the thirtieth day. Does this


* The name of a place between Jerusalem and Jericho,
t Samaritans.


"NEW YEAR.”


43


mean to say that for a month of twenty-nine days the bonfires
were lighted, but not for a month of thirty days ? It should
have been done for a month of thirty days, and not at all for
a month of twenty-nine days. Said Abayi: That would cause
the people a loss of work for two days (because they would wait
to see if the bonfires would be lit or not and thus lose a second
day).*

44 How were these bon fires lighted? They brought long staves
of cedar wood ,” etc. R. Jehudah says: There are four kinds of
cedars: the common cedar, the Qetros, the olive tree, and the
cypress. Qetros says Rabh is (in Aramaic) Adara or a species
of cedar. Every cedar, said R. Johanan, that was carried away
from Jerusalem, God will in future times restore, as it is written
[Isa. xli. 19]: 44 I will plant in the wilderness the cedar tree,”
and by 44 wilderness ” He means Jerusalem, as it is written [Isa.
lxiv. 10]: 44 Zion is (become) a wilderness/ 1 R. Johanan says
again: Who studies the law, and teaches it in a place where
there is no other scholar, is equal to a myrtle in the desert,
which is very dear. The same says again : 44 Woe to the

Romans, for whom there will be no substitution, ,, as it is writ-
ten [Isa. lx. 17]: 44 Instead of the copper, I will bring gold, and
for iron I will bring silver, and for wood, copper, and for stones,
iron.” But what can He bring for R Aqiba and his comrades
(who were destroyed by Rome) ? Of them it is written [Joel,
iv. 21]: 44 I will avenge (but for) their (Aqiba’s and his com-
rades’) blood I have not yet avenged.”

44 And whence did these bonfires commence?" From Beth
Baltin. What is Beth Baltin ? 4 4 Biram,” answered Rabh.

What (does the Mishna) mean by the captivity ? Said R.
Joseph, 44 Pumbeditha.” And how was it that the whole coun-
try looked like a blazing fire ? We learn that each Israelite took
a torch in his hand and ascended to the roof of his house.

MISHNA: There was a large court in Jerusalem called Beth


* The thirtieth day from the last New Moon was always New Moon, but in
intercalary months the thirty-first day was also New Moon (second day). In the latter
case the thirtieth day (first day of New Moon) belonged to the passing month, and
the second day of New Moon was the first day of the new month. Bonfires were
always lighted on the night of the thirtieth day, , on the night after New Moon ;
and if no bonfires were lighted then there were two days New Moon. In the case of
the month of Elul they would, after twenty-nine days, observe New Year’s Day.
Now, if that month happened to be intercalary (i.t have thirty days) and bonfires
would have been lighted, the next day would have had to be observed as New Year’s
Day again, and the people would consequently have lost a second day. — Rasht .


44


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


Ya’azeq, where all the witnesses met, and where they were ex-
amined by the Beth Din. Great feasts were made there for (the
witnesses) in order to induce them to come frequently. At first
they did not stir from there all day (on the Sabbath), 4 *’ till R.
Gamaliel, the elder, ordained that they might go two thousand
ells on every side; and not only these (witnesses) but also a
midwife, going to perform her professional duties, and those
who go to assist others in case of conflagration, or against an
attack of robbers, or in case of flood, or (of rescuing people)
from the ruins (of a fallen building) are considered (for the time
being) as inhabitants of that place, and may go (thence on the
Sabbath) two thousand ells on every side. How were the wit-
nesses examined ? The first pair were examined first. The
elder was introduced first, and they said to him : Tell us in what
form thou sawest the moon ; was it before or behind the sun ?
Was it to the north or the south (of the sun) ? What was its
elevation on the horizon ? Towards which side was its inclina-
tion ? What was the width of its disk ? If he answered before
the sun, his evidence was worthless. After this they introduced
the younger (witness) and he was examined; if their testimony
was found to agree, it was accepted as valid; the remaining
pairs (of witnesses) were asked leading questions, not because
their testimony was necessary, but only to prevent them depart-
ing, disappointed, and to induce them to come again often.

GEMARA: Do not the questions (asked by the Mishna),
“ was it before or behind the sun ?’* and 11 was it to the north
or to the south ?’* mean the same thing? Answered Abayi :
(The Mishna asks) whether the concave of the crescent was
before or behind the sun, and if (the witness said) it was before
the sun, his evidence was worthless, for R. Johanan says: What
is the meaning of the passage [Job, xxv. 2] : " Dominion and fear
are with him; he maketh peace in his high places ?** It means
that the sun never faces the concave of the crescent or the con-
cave of a rainbow.

What w as its elevation on the horizon? Towards which
side was its inclination ? ** In one Boraitha we have learned : If
(the witness) said “ towards the north ,* 9 his evidence was valid,
but if he said, “ towards the south,** it was worthless ; in another
Boraitha we have learned the reverse. It presents no difficulty;


* For if they had already traveled two thousand ells, they were prohibited from

journeying more than four cubits more.


“NEW YEAR.”


45


in the latter case it speaks of the summer, while in the former
it refers to the winter.

The rabbis taught: If one (witness) said its elevation ap-
peared about as high as two ox-goads and another said about as
high as three, their testimony was invalid, but either might be
taken in conjunction with a subsequent witness (who offered
similar testimony). The rabbis taught (If the witnesses say):
” We have seen the reflection (of the moon) in the water, or
through a metal mirror, or in the clouds/' their testimony is
not to be accepted; or (if they say we have seen) ” half of it in
the water, and half of it in the heavens, or half of it in the
clouds,” their evidence carries no weight. Must they then see
the new moon again (before their testimony can be accepted) ?
Said Abayi: ” By this is meant that if the witnesses testify that
they saw the moon accidentally, and they then returned pur-
posely and looked for it, but they saw it not, their evidence is
worthless.” Why so ? Because one might say they saw a
patch of white clouds (and they thought it was the moon).

MISHNA: The chief of the Beth Din then said: " It (the
new moon) is consecrated,” and all the people repeated after
him: ” It is consecrated; it is consecrated.” Whether the new
moon was seen at its proper time (after twenty-nine days) or
not, they used to consecrate it. R. Elazar b. Zadok said: If it
had not been seen at its proper time it was not consecrated,
because it had already been consecrated in heaven (t\ e ., of
itself).

GEMARA: Whence do we deduce this ? Said R. Hyya b.
Gamda quoting Rabbi, in the name of R. Jose b. Saul: It is
written [Lev. xxiii. 44] : ” Moses declared unto the children of
Israel the feasts of the Lord,” from which we deduce that (as
Moses, who was the chief in Israel, declared the feasts to
Israel, so also) the chief of the Beth Din should announce the
words, ” It is consecrated.”

“ All the people repeated after him: It is consecrated ; it is conse-
crated Whence do we deduce this? Said R. Papa: It is
written [Lev. xxiii. 2]: ” Shall proclaim.” ” Othom ” (them).
Do not read “ Othom,” but Athem (ye) — i. e., which ye, all the
people, shall proclaim. R. Na’hman b. Itz’hak, however, said:
We know it from the words [ibid.]: ” These are my feasts,”
i. e. y ( these people ) shall announce my feasts. Why are the
words ” It is consecrated” repeated? Because in the scrip-
tural verse just quoted we find it written ” holy convocations”


46


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


( literally , announcements, and the minimum of the plural
expression is two).

4< R. Elazcir b . Zadok said: If it had not been seen at its
proper time it was not consecrated >" etc. We have learned in
a Boraitha, Pelimo* said: If the new moon appear at its
proper time it was not customary to consecrate it, but if it
appeared out of its proper time they used to consecrate it. R.
Eliezer, however, said: In neither case would they consecrate
it, for it is written [Lev. xxv. 10] : "And ye shall consecrate
the fiftieth year;” years should be consecrated, but not months .
Said R. Jehudah in the name of Samuel: " The halakha prevails
according to R. Elazer b. Zadok. Said Abayi: There can be a
support to this from the following Mishna, viz.: " If the Beth
Din and all Israel saw the new moon (on the thirtieth day) and
if the examination of the witnesses had already taken place, and
it had become dark before they had time to announce 4 It is
consecrated,' the month (just passing) is intercalary.” That
(the month) is intercalary is mentioned (by the Mishna), but not
that they said " It is consecrated.” It is not clear that this is
a support for Abayi’s argument, for it was necessary to say that
it was intercalary, or we would not have known that the next
day was the intercalary day. One might have thought that,
since the Beth Din and all Israel saw the new moon, it was
apparent to all, and that the month does not become inter-
calary; therefore he teaches us that (nevertheless the month
becomes intercalary).

MISHNA: R. Gamaliel had on a tablet, and on a wall of
his upper room, illustrations of the various phases of the moon,
which he used to show to the common people, saying: " Did
you see the moon like this figure or like this ? ”

GEMARA: Is this permitted? Have we not learned in a
Boraitha that the words " Ye shall not make anything with me ”
[Ex. xx. 20] mean, ye shall not make pictures of my ministers
that minister before me, such as the sun, moon, stars or plan-
ets ? It was different with R. Gamaliel, for others made it for
him. But others made one for R. Jehudah, yet Samuel said to
him: "Thou, sagacious one, destroy that figure !”f In the
latter case the figure was embossed, and he was afraid that one
might suspect the owner (of using it as an idol). Need one be


* 1 he name of a Tana, a contemporary of Rabbi,
t Literally “ put out the eyes of that figure ! '*


“NEW YEAR.”


47


afraid of such suspicion ? Did not that synagogue in Shep-
hithibh of Neherdai have a statue (of the king), yet Rabh,
Samuel and Samuers father and Levi went there to pray and
were not afraid of being suspected (of idolatry) ? It is a differ-
ent case where there are many. Yet R. Gamaliel was only one.
Yea, but he was a prince, and there were always many with him ;
and if you wish you may say that he had them made for the
purpose of instruction, and that which is written [Deut. xviii. 9],
“ thou shalt not learn to do,” means but thou mayest learn, in
order to understand and to teach.

MISHNA: It happened once that two witnesses came and
said: We saw the moon in the eastern part of the heavens
in the morning, and in the western part in the evening. R.
Jo’hanan b. Nouri declared them to be false witnesses; but
when they came to Yamnia, Rabbon Gamaliel received their
evidence as valid. (On another occasion) two other wit-
nesses came and said: We saw the moon on its proper day,
but could not see it on the next evening of the intercalary
day. R. Gamaliel accepted their testimony, but R. Dosa b.
Harkhenas said: They are false witnesses; for how can they
testify of a woman being delivered (on a certain day) when
on the next day she appears to be pregnant ? Then R. Je-
hoshua said unto him: I approve your opinion. Upon this R.
Gamaliel sent him (R. Jehoshua) word, saying: “ I order thee
to appear before me on the Day of Atonement, according to
your computation, with your staff and with money.” R. Aqiba
went to him (R. Jehoshua) and found him grieving. He then
said to him : I can prove that all which R. Gamaliel has done is
proper, for it is said: ” These are the feasts of the Lord, holy
convocations which ye shall proclaim,” either at their proper
time, or not at their proper time, only their convocations are to
be considered as holy festivals. When he (R. Jehoshua) came
to R. Dosa b. Harkhinas, the latter told him: ” If we are to
reinvestigate the decisions of the Beth Din of R. Gamaliel, we must
also reinvestigate the decisions of all th'e tribunals of justice which
have existed from the time of Moses till the present day; for it
is said [Ex. xxiv. 9] Moses, Aaron, Nadab, Abihu, and seventy
elders went up (to the Mount).” Why were not the names of
the elders also specified ? To teach us that every three men in
Israel that form a Beth Din are to be respected in an equal
degree with the Beth Din of Moses. Then did R. Jehoshua
take his staff and money in his hand, and went to Yamnia, to


4 3


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


R. Gamaliel, on the very day on which the Day of Atonement
would have been according to his computation, when R. Gam-
aliel arose and kissed him on the forehead, saying: 11 Enter in
peace, my master and disciple! My master — in knowledge; my
disciple — since thou didst obey my injunction.”

GEMARA: We have learned in a Boraitha that R. Gam-
aliel said to the sages: “ Thus it has been handed down to me
from the house of my grandfather (Zamalill the elder) that some-
times the new moon appears elongated and sometimes dimin-
ished. R. Hyya saw the old moon yet on the morning of the
twenty-ninth day, and threw clods of earth at it, saying: ‘ We
should consecrate thee in the evening, and thou art seen now ?
Go, hide thyself ! ’ “

Said Rabbi to R. Hyya: “Go to Entob and consecrate the
month and send back to me as a password* * David, the King
of Israel, still lives.’ ”

The rabbis taught: Once it happened that the heavens were
thick with clouds and the form of the moon was seen on the
twenty-ninth of the month (of Elul), so that the people thought
that New Year’s Day should be then proclaimed, and they (the
Beth Din) were about to consecrate it. Said R. Gamaliel to
them: Thus it has been handed down to me by tradition, from
the house of my grandfather, the consecration of the moon can-
not take place at a period less than twenty-nine and a half days,
two-thirds and .0052 (/. seventy-three ’Halaqim) of an hour.
On that self-same day the mother of Ben Zaza died and R.
Gamaliel delivered a great funeral oration, f not because she
specially deserved it, but in order that the people might know
that the new moon had not yet been consecrated by the Beth
Din.

! R- Aqiba went to him , and found him grieving.” The
schoolmen propounded a question: “Who found whom griev-
ing ? ” Come and hear. We have learned in a Boraitha: “ R.
Aqiba went to R. Jehoshua and found him grieving, so he asked
him: ‘Rabbi, why art thou grieving?* And he answered:

‘ Aqiba, I would rather lie sick for twelve months than to have
this order issued for my appearance.’ Rejoined R. Aqiba:

Rabbi, permit me to say one thing in thy presence which thou
thyself hast taught me.’ R. Jehoshua granted him permis-

f his device was resorted to, because in the days of Rabbi, the Romans had
prohibited the Jews, under penalty of death, to consecrate the moon.

f Xo funerals or funeral orations were or are permitted on the holidays


“NEW YEAR.”


49


sion, and R. Aqiba proceeded: ‘ It is written [Lev. xxiii. 2,
4 and 37] : Three times ‘ shall proclaim Othom (them), which
should, however, not be read Othom (them), but Athem (ye),
which would make the verse read, “ Ye shall proclaim. ” Now
the threefold “ye" signifies that even if ye were deceived by
false pretences and changed the day of the festivals, or even if
ye did it purposely, or even if ye were held to be in error by
others — once the dates had been established they must so remain. *
With the following words R. Jehoshua answered R. Aqiba:
Aqiba, thou hast comforted me; Aqiba, thou hast comforted
me/ ”

When he ( Rabbi Jehoshua) came to R. Dosa b. Harkhenas"
etc. The rabbis taught: The reason that the names of those
elders are not mentioned, is, in order that one should not say:
Is So-and-so like Moses and Aaron ? Is So-and-so like Nadabh
and Abihu ? Is So-and-so like Eldad and Medad ? (And how
do we know that one should not ask thus ?) Because, it is
written [1 Sam. xii. 6]: ” And Samuel said unto the people the
Lord that appointed Moses and Aaron ” and in the same con-
nection it is written [ibid. 11]: ” And the Lord sent Jerubaal
and Bedan and Jephtha and Samuel/’ [Jerubaal is Gideon;
and why is he named Jerubaal ? Because he strove against
Baal. Bedan is Sampson ; and why is he named Bedan ? Be-
cause he came from Dan. Jephtha means just what it is (/. e .,
he had no surname or attribute).] And it is also written [Ps.
xcix. 6]: Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel
among those who called upon his name.” The sacred text
regards the three common people equal with the three noblest,
to teach us that Jerubaal was in his generation like Moses in
his; Bedan in his generation was like Aaron in his; Jephtha in
his generation was like Samuel in his generation. From all this
one must learn that if even the commonest of the commoners is
appointed leader by a community, he must be considered as the
noblest of the nobility, for it is said [Deut. xvii. 9] : ” And thou
shalt come unto the priests, the Levites, and unto the judge that
shall be in his days.” (Why does the passage say” in those
days ”?) Can you imagine that one could go to a judge who was
not in his days? (Surely not! But by these words Scripture
teaches us that a judge is to be held ” in his days ” equal in au-
thority with the greatest of his predecessors.) We find a similar
teaching in Eccles. vii. 10: ” Say not thou that the former days
were better than these! ”


4


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


50

“ He took his staff" etc. The rabbis taught: (R. Gamaliel
said to R. Jehoshua): Happy is the generation in which the
leaders listen to their followers, and through this the followers
consider it so much the more their duty (to heed the teachings
of the leaders).


CHAPTER III.


REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE INTERCALATING OF THE MONTH —
THE CORNET, AND OF WHAT IT IS TO BE MADE — AND THE
PRAYERS OF THE NEW YEAR’S DAY.

MISHNA: If the Beth Din and all Israel saw (the moon on
the night of the thirtieth day), or if the witness had been exam-
ined, but there was no time to proclaim “ It is consecrated “
before it had become dark, the month is intercalary. If the
Beth Din alone saw it, two of its members should stand up and
give testimony before the others, who shall then say “ It is con-
secrated; it is consecrated/ ’ When three who formed a Beth
Din saw it, two should stand up and conjoining some of their
learned friends with the remaining one, give their testimony
before these, who are then to proclaim “It is consecrated; it is
consecrated/ ’ for one (member of a Beth Din) has not this right
by himself alone.

GEMARA: “If the Beth Din alone saw it,” etc. Why so ?
Surely hearsay evidence is not better than the testimony of an
eye-witness! Said R. Zera: “ It refers to a case where they
saw it at night (and on the next day they could not consecrate
the new moon until they had heard the evidence of two
witnesses)/'

4 ‘ When three zvho formed a Beth Din, saw it, two should stand
up and conjoining some of their learned friends with the remain-
ing one ,” etc. Why so ? Here also we may say, surely hearsay
evidence is not better than the testimony of an eye-witness!
And if you would say that this also means where they saw it at
night, is this not, then, the same case ? The case is the same,
but the above statement is required because of the concluding
words, “ one (member of a Beth Din) has not the right by him-
self alone; “ for it might be assumed, since in civil cases three
(are required to constitute a Beth Din), but where he is well
known (as a learned authority) one judge may act alone, so here
we may consecrate (the new moon) on the authority of one
judge; therefore, he teaches us (that three are required). Per-
haps I should, nevertheless, say here (that one learned authority

51


5 2


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


is sufficient) ? Nay, for there is no greater authority than
Moses, our master, yet God said to him that Aaron should act
with him, as it is written [Ex. xii. i, 2]: " And the Lord spake
unto Moses and Aaron, in the land of Egypt, saying: This
month shall be unto you the beginning of months/'

Does this mean to say that a witness may act as judge ?
And shall we assume that the above Mishna is not according to
R. Aqiba, as on following Boraitha: If the members of the
Sanhedrin saw a man commit murder, part of them may act as
witnesses and part as judges, according to R. Tarphon; but
according to R. Aqiba all of them are witnesses, and no witness
(of a crime) may act as judge. It may be said that the Mishna
is even according to R. Aqiba. In the latter instance R. Aqiba
only refers to capital cases, for it is written [Numb. xxxv. 24,
25]: “ Then the congregation shall judge . . . and the congre-
gation shall deliver," and since they saw him commit murder,
they will not be able to urge any plea in his favor; but here
(concerning the new moon) even R. Aqiba assents (that a wit-
ness may act as judge).

MISHNA: Every kind of cornet may be used (on New
Year's Day) except those made of cow-horn, because they are
called " horn " ( qeren ), and not " cornet " (shop Aar). R. Jose
said: Are not all cornets called " horn ?" for it is said [Josh,
vi. S] : “ And it came to pass that when they made a long blast
with the horn of the Jobhel."

GEMARA: How comes it that the word Jobhel means
ram? A Boraitha teaches: R. Aqiba says: When I went to
Arabia I found they called a ram " Yubla. "

The rabbis did not know the meaning of the word Sal -
seleho in the passage [Prov. iv. 8]: “ Salseleho and she shall
exalt thee." One day they heard Rabbi's maidservant say to
a certain man who was (conceitedly) playing with his hair,
"How long wilt thou mesalsel (hold up) thy hair?" The
rabbis did not know the meaning of the word yehabhekha in the
passage [Ps. lv. 23]: " Cast yehabhekha (thy burden) upon the
Lord." Said Rabba bar Bar Hana: " One day I went with a
certain Arabian caravan merchant, and I was carrying a burden.
Said he to me : 1 Take down yehabhekha (thy burden) and put it
on my camel/ "

MISHNA: The cornet used on the New Year was a straight
horn of a wild goat; the mouth-piece was covered with gold.
The two trumpets were stationed one on each side. The sound


“NEW YEAR/’


53


of the cornet was prolonged, while that of the trumpet was
short, because the special duty of the day was the sounding of
the cornet. On the fast days two crooked ram’s horns were used,
their mouth-pieces being covered with silver, and the two trum-
pets were stationed in the middle between them. The sound
of the cornet was shortened, while that of the trumpet was pro-
longed, because the special duty of the day was the sounding of
the trumpets. The Jubilee and New Year’s Day were alike in
respect to the sounding (of the cornet) and the benedictions,
but R. Jehudah says: “On the New Year we blow (a cornet)
made of ram’s horn, and on the Jubilee one made of the horn of
a wild goat.”

GEMARA: R. Levi said: It is a duty on New Year’s Day
and the Day of Atonement to use a bent cornet, but during the
rest of the year a straight one. But have we not learned that
the cornet used on the New Year must be the ” straight horn
of a wild goat ?” He (R. Levi) said as R. Jehudah of the fol-
lowing Boraitha: On New Year’s Day they used to blow (a
cornet) made of a straight ram’s horn, and on the Jubilees one
made of wild goat’s horn. What is their point of variance ? R.
Jehudah holds that on New Year’s the more bent in spirit a man
is, and on the Day of Atonement the more upright he is (in his
confessions) the better; but R. Levi holds the more upright a
man is on New Year’s Day and the more bowed in spirit on the
Fast Days, the better.

” The month-piece was covered wit Ji gold," Does not a Bor-
aitha teach, however, that if one covers the place to which the
mouth was put the cornet may not be used; but if (he covers)
another place it may be used ? Answered Abayi: ” Our Mishna
also means a place to which the mouth was not put.”

” The two trumpets were stationed one on each side .” Could
the two sounds be easily distinguished ? Nay; and therefore
the sound of the cornet was prolonged, to indicate that the
special duty of the day was the sounding of the cornet.

On the Fast -Days two crooked ram's horns were used , their
mouthpieces being covered zvith silver .” Why was the cornet
used in the one case covered with gold and in the other with
silver ? All (signals for) assemblies were blown on horns made
with silver, as it is written [Numb. x. 2]: ” Make unto thee two
trumpets of silver . . . that thou mayest use them for the call-
ing of the assembly, ” etc. R. Papa bar Samuel was about to
follow the practice prescribed by the Mishna. Said Rabha to


54


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


him: 41 That was only customary so long as the Temple was in
existence.” A Boraitha also teaches that this applies only to
the Temple; but in the country (outside of Jerusalem) in a place
where they use the trumpet, they do not use the cornet, and
vice versa . Such was the wont of R. Halaphta in Sepphoris
and also of R. Hanina b. Teradion in Si'hni. When the matter
was brought to the attention of the sages they said: “ That was
the custom only at the eastern gates or the Temple Mount.”
Rabha, according to others R. Jehoshua ben Levi, asked : “ From
which passage is this deduced?” From the passage [Psalms
xcviii. 6]: “ With trumpets and sound of cornet, make a joyful
noise before the Lord, the King;” i. e. } before the Lord, the
King (in the Temple) we need both the trumpets and the
cornet, but not elsewhere.

“ The Jubilee , and the New Year were alike in respect to the
sounding (of the cornet ), and the benediction." R. Samuel bar
Itz’hak said: According to whom do we nowadays pray: ” This
day celebrates the beginning of thy work, a memorial of the
first day ?” According to R. Eliezer, who says: The world was
created at Tishri. R. Ina objected. Did we not learn in our
Mishna that the Jubilee and New Year are alike in respect to
the sounding (of the cornet), and the benedictions, and now how
can that be so if we say “ This day celebrates the beginning of
thy work, a memorial of the first day,” which is said on New
Y^ear, but not on the Jubilee ? (That which we have learned in
our Mishna that they are alike means) in every other respect but
this.

MISHNA: It is unlawful to use a cornet that has been split
and afterwards joined together; or one made of several pieces
joined together. If a cornet had a hole that had been stopped
up, and prevented (the production) of the proper sound, it must
not be used ; but if it does not affect the proper sound it may
be used. If one should blow the cornet inside a pit, a cistern
or a vat, and the sound of the cornet was (plainly) heard (by one
listening to it) he will have done his duty (to hear the cornet on
the New Year), but not if he heard only an indistinct sound.
Thus also, if one should happen to pass by a synagogue, or live
close by it, and should hear the cornet (on the New Year) or the
reading of the Book of Esther (on the Feast of Esther), he will
have complied with the requirements of the law, if he listened
with proper attention, but not otherwise; and although the one
heard it as well as the other, yet the difference (on which every-


“NEW YEAR.”


55


thing depends) is that the one listened with proper attention
and the other did not.

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: If a cornet was long and
was shortened, it is valid; if one scraped it and reduced it to its
due size it is valid; if one covered it on the inside with gold it
is invalid ; if on the outside and it changed the tone from what it
originally was, it is invalid, but if not it is. If a cornet had
a hole in it and it was closed up, and thereby prevented (the
production) of the proper sound, it is invalid, but if not it is
valid; if one placed one cornet inside another and the sound
heard (by a listener) was produced from the inner one, he has
fulfilled his duty, but if from the outer one, he has not.

4 ‘ Or one made of several pieces joined together” The rabbis
taught: If one added to a cornet ever so small a piece, whether
it be of the same kind of horn or not, it is invalid. If a cornet
had a hole, whether one stopped it up with a piece of the same
kind (of horn) or not, it is invalid. R. Nathan, however, said
(only when repaired with material) not of the same kind it is
invalid, but otherwise if of the same kind it is valid. (To which)
R. Jehudah added : 44 That is, if the greater part of a cornet was
broken/’ From this we can infer that if repaired with material
of the same kind, although the greater part was broken, it is,
nevertheless, valid.

44 If one covered a cornet on the inside with gold it is invalid;
if on the outside, and it changed the tone from what it originally
was, it is not valid, but if not it is.” If a cornet had been split
lengthwise it is invalid, but if crosswise, yet enough remained
with which to produce the sound, it is valid, but if not it is
invalid. (And how much is that ? R. Simeon b. Gamaliel
explains it to be as much as we may hold in our closed hand,
and yet on either side a portion is visible).* If its tone was thin,
or heavy, or harsh, it is valid, for all tones were considered
proper in a cornet. The schoolmen sent a message to the father
of Samuel: ( 44 One has fulfilled his duty if he bored a hole in a
horn and blew it. That is self-evident ! for in every cornet a
hole must surely be bored.” Said R. Ashi: 44 If one bored a
hole through the bony substance inside the horn (which ought
to be removed), are we to suppose that one substance causes an


* The opinion of the editor is that this parenthesis is a fair illustration of the
interpolations in the Talmud. The term Piresh is not Talmudical and was only
used in later times. It has only been left here because the explanation happens to be
correct.


5<5


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


interposition with another of the same nature (and that there-
fore it must not be used)?” Therefore they sent to say that
this is no objection.

“ If one should blozv the cornet inside a pit or a cistern etc.
R. Huna said: They taught this only in the case of those who
stood at the pit’s mouth, but those who were in the pit itself
fulfill their duty. If one heard a part of (the required number
of) the sounds of the cornet in the pit, and the rest at the pit’s
mouth, he has done his duty; but if he heard a part before the
dawn of day, and the rest after the dawn, he has not. Said Abayi
to him: Why in the latter case (should he not have done his
duty, because he did not hear the whole of the sounds at the
time when the duty should be performed), yet in the former
case (he is considered to have done his duty) under similar cir-
cumstances ? How can these cases be compared ? In the latter
case, the night is ?iot the time of performing the obligation at all,
while in the former case, a pit is a place where the duty may be
performed for those who are in it ! Shall we say that Rabba
held: If one heard the end of the sounding (of the cornet) with-
out having heard the beginning he did his duty, and from these
words we must understand that if he heard the beginning with-
out the end he has also done his duty ? Come and hear. If
one blew the first sound (Tekia) and prolonged the second
(Tekia) as long as two, it is only reckoned as one; and (if
Rabba’s opinion is correct) why should he reckon it as two ?
(This is no question)! If he heard half the sounds he has done
his duty, but when one blows one sound on the cornet we can-
not consider it two halves.

Rabha says: One who vows to receive no benefit from his
neighbor may nevertheless blow for him the obligatory sounds
(of the cornet); one who vows refusal of any benefit from a
cornet may blow on it the obligatory sounds. Furthermore,
said Rabha: ” One who vows to refuse any benefit from his
neighbor may sprinkle on him the waters of a sin-offering in the
winter, but not in the summer. One who vows to receive no
benefit from a spring may take in it a legal bath in the winter,
but not in the summer.

The schoolmen sent a message to the father of Samuel: 11 If
one had been compelled to eat unleavened bread (on the first
night of Passover, i. e. y he had not done so of his own accord)
he has also done his duty.” Who compelled him ? Said R.
Ashi: “ Persians.” Rabha remarked: From this statement we


“ NEW YEAR.”


57


can prove that if one plays a song on a cornet he does his duty.
Is this not self-evident ? The cases are similar. One might
suppose that in the former case the law commanded him to eat
(unleavened bread) and he ate it, but in the latter case the Torah
speaks of 44 a remembrance of blowing the cornet” [Lev. xxiii.
24], and (when he plays a song he does not remember his duty
for) he is engaged in a worldly occupation. Therefore he teaches
us that even under such circumstances he does his duty.

To this an objection was raised. We have learned: If one
who listened (to the sounds of the cornet) paid the proper atten-
tion, but he that blew the cornet did not, or vice versa , they
have not done their duty until both blower and listener pay
proper attention. This would be correct in the case where the
blower, but not the listener, pays the proper attention, for it is
possible that the listener imagines he hears the noise of an
animal ; but how can it happen that the listener should pay due
attention, and the one who blows (the cornet) should not, ex-
cept he was only playing a song (by which he does not do his
duty) ? (It is possible) if he only produced a dull sound (/. e. y
and not, for example, a Tekia).

Said Abayi to him: 44 But now, according to thy conclusion
(that a duty performed without due attention is the same as if
performed with due attention) wilt thou say that he who sleeps
in a tabernacle on the eighth day of the Feast of the Tabernacles
shall receive stripes (because he had no right to observe the law
for more than seven days) ?” Answered Rabha: “ I say that
one cannot infringe a command except at the time when it
should be performed.” R. Shamen b. Abba raised an objec-
tion: Whence do we know that a priest who ascended the plat-
form (to pronounce the priestly benediction) must not say:
Since the Torah has given me the right to bless Israel, I will
supplement (the benedictions, Numb. vi. 24-26) by one of my
own, as, for example [Deut. i. 1 1] : 44 May the Lord God of
your fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye
are?” From the Torah which says [Deut. iv. 2]: 44 Ye shall
not add unto the word.” And in this case as soon as he has
finished the benedictions the time for performing that duty has
gone by; still if he add a blessing of his own he is guilty of
infringing the law, which says, 44 Ye shall not add.” This refers
to a case of where the priest had not yet finished the scriptural
benediction. We have learned, however, that he had finished
the scriptural benediction. The Boraitha means to say that he


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


58

had finished only one of the (three) benedictions. We have
learned in another Boraitha, however, that even if he had com-
pleted all three benedictions, and then supplemented one of his
own, he is also guilty of a transgression. In this case it is differ-
ent, for it might be that the priest would come to another
assembly where prayer was held and be called upon to again
pronounce the benedictions. Hence it must be assumed that
there is no specified time for the priest to pronounce his bene-
dictions, but all day can be considered as the proper time, and
thus the priest, by supplementing a benediction of his own,
becomes guilty.

R. Shamen bar Abha, however, does not admit that the
whole day is the proper time, because the priest is not in duty
bound to pronounce the benediction in another assembly.
Nevertheless he is guilty if he should supplement an additional
benediction of his own; whence we see that even if the proper
time has passed, guilt is nevertheless incurred, and this is con-
tradictory to Rabha's dictum. Therefore, said Rabha: (I
mean), To fulfill the requirements of the law one need not pay
attention; to transgress the law against supplementing, at the
time prescribed for performing it, also does not require one's
special attention; but to transgress the law against supplement-
ing, at the time not prescribed for performance, needs one's
special attention. Hence the priest, after completing the scrip-
tural benediction, who says: “ Because the law gives me author-
ity I shall supplement a benediction of my own, demonstrates
thereby that he does this with special attention, and conse-
quently incurs guilt, even if the prescribed time had passed.

R. Zera said to his attendant: “ Pay attention, and sound
(the cornet) for me. Do we not thus see that he holds that to
fulfill the requirements of the law the act is not enough, and
one must pay attention ? This is a disputed question among
the Tanaim, for we have learned in a Boraitha: One who hears
(the blowing of the cornet) must himself listen in order to per-
form his duty, and he who blows (the cornet) blows after his
usual manner. R. Jose said: " These words are said only in
the case of the minister for a congregation ; but an individual
does not do his duty unless both he that hears and he that
blows pay proper attention."

MISHNA: (It is written in Ex. xvii. 11 that) "When
Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed," etc. Could then the
hands of Moses cause war to be waged or to cease ? (Nay) ; but


“NEW YEAR.”


59


it means that as long as Israel looked to heaven for aid, and
directed their hearts devoutly to their Father in heaven, they
prevailed; but when they ceased to do so they failed. We find
a similar instance also in [Numb. xxi. 8]: “ Make unto thee a
fiery serpent and set it on a pole, and every one that is bitten,
when he looketh upon it shall live/’ Could, then, the serpent
kill or bring to life ? (Surely not.) But it means when the
Israelites looked (upward) to heaven for aid and subjected their
will to that of their Father in heaven they were healed, but
when they did not they perished. A deaf mute, an idiot, or a
child cannot act in behalf of the assembled congregation. This
is the general rule: " Whosoever is not obliged to perform a
duty cannot act in behalf of the assembled congregation " (for
that duty).

GEMARA: The rabbis taught: All are obliged to hear the
sounding of the cornet, priests, Levites and Israelites, prose-
lytes, freed slaves, a hermaphrodite, and one who is half slave
and half free. A sexless person cannot act in behalf of those
like or unlike itself, but a hermaphrodite can act in behalf of
those of the same class, but not of any other.

The Master said: It is said, All are obliged to hear the
sounding of the cornet, priests, Levites and Israelites. This is
self-evident, for if these are not obliged, who are ? It was
necessary to mention priests here, for one might have supposed
that since we have learnt " the Jubilee and New Year's Day are
alike with regard to the sounding of the cornet and the benedic-
tions," that only those who are included under the rule of
Jubilee are included in the duties of New Year's Day; and as
the priests are not included in the rule of Jubilee (for they have
no lands to lie fallow, etc.), might we not, therefore, say that
they are not bound by the duties of New Year's Day ? Therefore
he comes to teach us (that they must hear the sounding of the
cornet).

A'hbha, the son of R. Zera, teaches: “ With regard to all
the benedictions, although one has already done his duty he
may nevertheless act for others, with the exception of the bless-
ings over bread and wine; concerning which, if he has not yet
done his duty, he may act for others, but if he has done his
duty he must not act for others."

Rabha asked: What is the rule in the case of the benediction
of the unleavened bread, and the wine used at the sanctification
of a festival ? Since these are special duties, may one act for


6o


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


others, or perhaps the (duty is only the eating of the unleav-
ened bread and the drinking of the sanctification wine) ; but
the benediction is not a duty, and therefore he cannot act for
others ? Come and hear. R. Ashi says: When we were at the
home of R. Papa, he said the blessing of sanctification for us,
and when his field laborer came from work later he said the
blessing for him also.

The rabbis taught: One must not say the benediction over
bread for guests, unless he eats with them, but he may do so
for the members of the family, to initiate them into their relig-
ious duties. With regard to the Service of Praise [Hallel Ps.
cxiii.-cxviii.] and the reading of the Book of Esther, although
one had already done his duty, he may, nevertheless, act for
others.


CHAPTER IV.


REGULATIONS CONCERNING THE NEW YEAR*S DAY WHEN IT FALLS

ON SABBATH, AND THE PRAYERS THEREON THE ORDINANCES OF

THE BENEDICTIONS, ETC.

MISHNA: When the feast of New Year happened to fall
on the Sabbath, they used to sound (the cornet) in the Temple,
but not outside of it. After the destruction of the Temple R.
Jo’hanan b. Zakkai ordained that they should sound (the
cornet) in every place in which there was a Beth Din. R.
Elazar says that R. Jo’hanan b. Zakkai instituted that for
Yamnia alone; but they (the sages) say the rule applied both to
Yamnia and every place in which there was a Beth Din. And
in this respect also was Jerusalem privileged more than Yamnia,
that every city from which Jerusalem could be seen, or the
sounding (of the cornet) could be heard, which was near enough,
and to which it was allowed to go on the Sabbath, might sound
the (cornet) on the Sabbath; but in Yamnia they sounded (the
cornet) before the Beth Din only.

GEMARA: Whence do we deduce all this ? Said Rabha:
The rabbis took a precautionary measure concerning them, as
said: Although the duty of sounding (the cornet) is obligatory
upon all, yet all are not skilled in sounding (it) ; therefore they
feared lest one might take (the cornet) in his hand, and go to an
expert and carry it more than four ells in public ground. The
same rule applies to the palm branch ( lulabh ) and also to the
scroll (on which is written the) Book of Esther.

44 After the destruction of the Temple , R. Jo hanan b. Zakkai
ordained," etc. The rabbis taught: Once it happened that New
Year’s Day fell on the Sabbath, and all the cities gathered
together. Said R. Jo’hanan b. Zakkai to the Bne Bathera:*
44 Let us sound (the cornet).” 44 First,” said they, 44 let us
discuss.” 44 Let us sound it,” replied he, 44 and then we will
discuss.” After they had sounded (the cornet) they said to
him: 44 Now let us discuss.” He answered: 44 The cornet


* A scholarly family of Babylonian descent, much favored by Herod.

6i


6 2


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


has now been heard in Yamnia, and we cannot retract after the
act has been performed/'

“ But they ( the sages ) say the rule applied both to Yamnia and
every place in which there is a Beth Din.” Said R. Huna; That
means in the presence of the Beth Din. Does this preclude
people from sounding (the cornet) out of the presence of the
Beth Din ? And, when R. Itzhak bar Joseph came (from
Yamnia) did he not say: When the officiant ministers appointed
by the congregation in Yamnia had finished sounding (the cornet)
one could not hear his own voice on account of the sounds (of
the cornets) used by individuals ? (Even individuals) used to
sound (the cornet) in the presence of the Beth Din. It was also
taught: Rabbi said, "We may only sound (the cornet) during
the time that the Beth Din is accustomed to sit.”

" Jerusalem was privileged more than Yamnia” etc. (When
the Mishna speaks of) " Every city from which Jerusalem could
be seen,” it means with the exception of a city located in the
valley (from which it could be seen only by ascending to an
elevated spot); by " the sounding (of the cornet) could be
heard,” it means to except a city located on the top of a moun-
tain; by " which was near enough,” it means to exclude a city
outside the prescribed limit (of a Sabbath journey); and by
" and to which it was allowed to go,” it means to exclude a city
(even near by) but divided (from Jerusalem) by a river.

MISHNA: Formerly the palm branch (lulabh) was taken to
the Temple seven days, but in cities outside (of Jerusalem) it
was taken (to the synagogue) one day. Since the destruction of
the Temple, R. Jo’hanan b. Zakkai ordained that the palm
branch should everywhere be taken seven days, in commemora-
tion of the Temple, and also it should be prohibited (to eat the
new produce) the whole day of waving (the sheaf-offering; vide
Lev. xxiii. 1 1- 1 5).

GEMARA : Whence do we know that we do things in com-
memoration of the Temple ? It is written [Jer. xxx. 17] : " For I
will restore health unto thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds,
saitli the Lord, because they called thee an outcast, saying, This
is Zion whom no man seeketh after.” By implication (we see)
that it (Zion or the Temple) needs being sought after (or com-
memorated).

And that it should be prohibited to eat ... on the ivhole day
of waving {the sheaf -offering),” etc. R. Na’hman b. Itzhak
remarked: R. Jo'hanan b. Zakkai says this according to the


“NEW YEAR.”


6 3


system of R. Jehudah, for it is written [Lev. xxiii. 14]: “ And
ye shall eat neither parched corn . . . until the self-same
day,” i.e., until the very day itself, and he holds that when-
ever the expression “until” (ad) occurs it is inclusive. How
can you say the above according to (R. Jehudah); surely he
differs from R. Jo’hanan ber Zakkai ? As we have learnt in a
Mishna: Since the destruction of the Temple R. Jo’hanan b.
Zakkai ordained that it should be prohibited (to eat of the new
produce) the whole of the day of waving (the sheaf-offering).
Said R. Jehudah: Is this not prohibited by the passage which
says: “ Until the self-same day” ? R. Jehudah was mistaken;
he thought that R. Jo’hanan b. Zakkai taught that (the prohib-
ition) was rabbinical, and it was not so, for R. Jo’hanan also
said it was biblical. But does the Mishna not say “ he or-
dained ” ? Yes; but what does it mean by “ he ordained”?
(It means) he explained the ordinance.

MISHNA: Formerly they received evidence as to the
appearance of the new moon the whole (of the thirtieth) day.
Once the witnesses were delayed in coming, and they disturbed
the songs of the Levites. They then ordained that evidence
should only be received until (the time of) the afternoon service,
and if witnesses came after that time both that and the following
day were consecrated. After the destruction of the Temple,
R. Jo’hanan b. Zakkai ordained that evidence (as to the appear-
ance) of the new moon should be received all day.

GEMARA: What disturbance did they cause to the songs
of the Levites? Said R. Zera to A’hbha, his son: Go and
teach to them (the Mishna) thus: “ They ordained that evidence
as to the appearance of the new moon should not be received,
only that there might be time during the day to offer the contin-
ual and the additional sacrifices and their drink offerings, and to
chant the (daily) song without disturbing the order.”

We have learned in a Boraitha: R. Jehudah said in the name
of R. Aqiba, What (song) did (the Levites) chant on the first day
of the week ? 44 The earth is the Lord’s and the fulness

thereof” [Ps. xxiv.], because He is the Creator, the Providence
and the Ruler of the Universe. What did they sing on the
second day ? “ Great is the Lord and greatly to be praised ”
[Ps. xlviii.], because He distributed His works and reigned
over them. On the third day they sang, “ God standeth in the
congregation of the mighty” [Ps. lxxxii.], because He, in His
wisdom, made the earth appear and prepared the world for its


<4


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


occupants. On the fourth day they sang, “ 0 Lord, to whom
retribution belongeth ” [Ps. xciv.], because (on that day) He
created the sun and moon, and (determined) to punish in the
future those who would worship them. On the fifth day they
sang, ” Sing aloud unto God our strength ” [Ps. lxxxi.], because
(on that day) He created birds and fish to praise Him. On the
sixth day they sang, ” The Lord reigneth, He is clothed with
majesty” [Ps. xciii.], because (on that day) He finished His
works and reigned over them. On the seventh day they sang,
“ A Psalm or Song for the Sabbath Day” [Ps. xcii.], for the
day that is a perfect rest.

Said R. Nehemiah: " Why did the sages make a distinction
between these sections (for the last refers to a future event,
while all the others refer to the past) ? It should have been said
that they sang that Psalm on the Sabbath day because He
rested ! ”

What did the Levites sing when the additional sacrifices
were being offered on the Sabbath? R. Hanan bar Rabha said in
the name of Rabh : Six sections of Deut. xxxii.* R. Hanan
bar Rabha also said in the name of Rabh: “ As these sections
were divided (by the Levites), so they are divided for the read-
ing of the law (on the Sabbath on which they are read).” What
did they sing at the Sabbath afternoon service ? Said R.
Jo’hanan: A portion of the Song of Moses [Ex. xv. i-io]; the
conclusion of that song [ibid. 11-19], and the Song of Israel
[Numb. xxi. 17].

The schoolmen asked: Did they sing all these on one Sab-
bath, or did they, perhaps, sing one section on each Sabbath ?
Come and hear! A Boraitha teaches: During the time that the
first choir of (Levites who sang at the time of the additional
sacrifice) sang their sections once, the second choir (that sang at
that time of the afternoon sacrifice) had sung theirs twice; from
this we may deduce that they sang but one section on each
Sabbath.

R. Jehudah b. Idi said in the name of R. Jo’hanan: Accord-
ing to the rabbinical explanation of certain scriptural passages
the Shekhinah made ten journeys, and according to tradition a
corresponding number of times was the Sanhedrin exiled, viz. :
from the cell of Gazith (in the Temple) to the market-place,


*i-“vii.; viii.-xiii. ; xiv.-xix. ; xx.-xxvii.; xxviii.-xxxvi.; xxxvii.-xliv. These
passages are called Ilazyv Lakh because the initial letters are II, Z, Y, V, L, KH.


“NEW YEAR/'


65


from the market-place to Jerusalem, from Jerusalem to Yamnia,
from Yamnia to Usha, from Usha (back again) to Yamnia, from
Yamnia (back again) to Usha, from Usha to Shapram, from
Shapram to Beth Shearim, from Beth Shearim to Sepphoris,
from Sepphoris to Tiberias, and Tiberias was the saddest of
them all, as it is written [Is. xxix.] : 44 And thou shalt be low,
and shalt speak out of the earth.* *

R. Elazar says they were exiled six times, as it is written [Is.
xxvi. 5]: 44 For he bringeth down them that dwell on high; the
lofty city he layeth low; he layeth it low even to the ground;
he bringeth it even to the dust.** Says R. Jo*hanan: And
thence (from the dust) they will in future be redeemed, as it is
written [Is. lii. 2] : Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit
down,** etc.

MISHNA: R. Joshua b. Kar’ha said: This also did R.
Jo’hanan b. Zakkai ordain: That it mattered not where the chief
of the Beth Din might be, the witnesses need only go to the
meeting-place (of the Beth Din).

GEMARA: A certain woman was summoned for judgment
before Ameimar in Neherdai. Ameimar went away to Me’huzza,
but she did not follow him, and he wrote a letter to put her in
the ban. Said R. Ashi to Ameimar : 44 Have we not learned that
it mattered not where the chief of the Beth Din might be, the
witnesses need only go to the meeting place (of the Beth Din) ? ”
Answered Ameimar: 44 That is true in respect to evidence for
the new moon; but with regard to my action, in which case she
has been summoned for debt, 4 The borrower is servant to the
lender,*. and she must come to the place where the chief court
is** [Prov. xxii. 7].

The rabbis taught: Priests may not ascend the platform in
sandals to bless the people; and this is one of the nine ordi-
nances instituted by R. Jo*hanan b. Zakkai; six are to be found
in this chapter, one in the first chapter; another one is, if one
become a proselyte nowadays, he must pay a quarter of a shekel
for a sacrifice of a bird (so that if the Temple should be rebuilt
the authorities would have a contribution from him towards the
daily sacrifices). R. Simon b. Elazar, however, said that R.
Jo'hanan had already withdrawn this regulation and annulled
it, because it easily led to the sin (of using the money for
different purposes). And what is the ninth (ordinance of R.
Jo*hanan) ? R. Papa and R. Na’hman b. Itz*hak dispute about
this. R. Papa says it was with regard to a vineyard of the
5


66


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


fourth year’s crop; but R. Na’hman b. Itz’hak says it was
with regard to the crimson-colored strap (displayed on the Day
of Atonement (on the scapegoat).

MISHNA: The order of the benedictions (to be said on New
Year is as follows): The blessings referring to the patriarchs
(Abhoth), to the mighty power of God (Gebhuroth), and the
sanctification of the Holy name; to these he adds the selection
in which God is proclaimed King (Malkhioth), after which he
does not sound the cornet; then the blessing referring to the
sanctification of the day, after which the cornet is sounded;
then the biblical selections referring to God’s remembrance of
His creatures (Zikhronoth), after which the cornet is again
sounded; then the biblical selections referring to the sounding
of the cornet (Shophroth), after which the cornet is again
sounded ; he then recites the blessings referring to the restora-
tion of the Temple, the adoration of God, and the benediction
of the priests. So is the decree of R. Jo’hanan b. Nouri. Said
R. Aqiba to him: If the cornet is not to be sounded after the
Malkhioth, why are they mentioned ? But the proper order is
the following: The blessings referring to the patriarchs (Abhoth),
to the mighty power of God (Gebhuroth), and the sanctification
of the Holy name; to this last the biblical selections referring
to the proclamation of God as King (Malkhioth) are joined, and
then he sounds the cornet; then the biblical selections referring
to God’s remembrance of His creatures (Zikhronoth), and he
then sounds the cornet; then the biblical selections referring to
the sounding of the cornet (Shophroth), and he again sounds the
cornet ; then he says the blessings referring to the restoration of
the Temple, the adoration of God, and the priestly benedictions.

GEMARA : The rabbis taught : Whence do we know that
we should recite the Malkhioth, Zikhronoth, and Shophroth?
Said R. Eliezer: From the passage [Lev. xxiii. 24] in which it is
written: “Ye shall have a Sabbathon, a memorial of blowing
cornets, a holy convocation,” the word “ Sabbathon ” refers to
the consecration of the day; “ a memorial ” refers to the Zikhro-
noth; “ blowing of cornets” refers to the Shophroth; “a holy
convocation ” means the hallowing of the day in order to pro-
hibit servile work. Said R. Aqiba to him : Why is not the word
“ Sabbathon ” construed to mean the prohibition of servile work,
since the passage (quoted above) begins with that ? Therefore,
let the passage be interpreted thus: “Sabbathon” means the
hallowing of the day and the prohibition of servile work; “me-


“ NEW YEAR.”


67


morial ” refers to the Zikhronoth ; “ blowing of the cornets ” re-
fers to the Shophroth ; “ a holy convocation ” means the conse-
cration of the day.

Whence do we know that we should recite the Malkhioth ?
From the following Boraitha : Rabbi said : The words, “ I am the
Lord your God”; and “in the seven month” (stand together)
[Lev. xxiii. 22, 24], which may be interpreted to refer to the pro-
clamation of God as King. R. Jose b. R. Jehudah says it is not
necessary to cite this passage ; for it is written [Numb. x. 10]
“ that they may be to you for a memorial before your God : I
am the Lord your God.” These concluding words “ I am the
Lord your God ” are entirely superfluous, but since they are
used, of what import are they? They form a general rule, that
in every selection in which (God’s) remembrance of His creatures
is mentioned there should also be found the thought that He is
the King of the Universe.

MISHNA: Not less than ten scriptural passages should be
used for the Malkhioth, ten for the Zikhronoth, and ten for the
Shophroth. R. Jo’hanan b. Nouri says: If by three of each
class, one will have done his duty.

GEMARA: To what do the ten scriptural passages used for
the Malkhioth correspond? Answered Rabbi: To the ten ex-
pressions of praise used by David in the Psalms. But there are
more expressions of praise found? Only those are meant, in
conjunction with which it is written “ praise him with the sound
of the cornet ” [Psalm ci. 3]. R. Joseph says : “ They correspond
to the ten commandments that were proclaimed to Moses on
Sinai.” R. Jo’hanan said, they correspond to the ten words with
which the universe was created.

“ By three of each class , one will have done his duty.” The
schoolmen asked : “ Does he mean three from the Pentateuch,
three from the Prophets, and three from the Hagiographa, which
would make nine, and they differ about one (passage) ? or per-
haps one from the Pentateuch and one from the Prophets and
one from the Hagiographa, which would make three, and they
differ about many passages ? ” Come and hear ! We have learned
in a Boraitha: Not less than ten scriptural passages should be
used for the Malkhioth, ten for the Zikhronoth, and ten for the
Shophroth ; but if seven of them all were recited, corresponding
to the seven heavens, the duty has been fulfilled. R. Johanan
ben Nouri remarked : He that recites less (than ten of each) should
not, however, recite less than seven ; but if he recited but three,


68


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


corresponding to the Pentateuch, Prophets, and Hagiographa*
according to others corresponding to the Priests, Levites, and
Israelites, it is sufficient. Said R. Huna in the name of Samuel :
The Halakha prevails according to R. Jo’hanan b. Nouri.

MISHNA: We do not cite scriptural passages for the above
three series that contain predictions of punishment. The pas-
sages from the Pentateuch are to be recited first, and those from
the Prophets last. R. Jose, however, says “if the concluding
passage is from the Pentateuch one has also done his duty.”

GEMARA : Passages, proclaiming the kingdom of God that
should not be used (because of the above), are such as the fol-
lowing [Ezekiel, xx. 33] : “ As I live, saith the Lord God, surely
with a mighty hand, and with a stretched out arm, and with fury
poured out, I will rule over you," and although as R. Na’hman
says (of this passage) : Let Him be angry with us, but let Him
take us out of captivity, still, since it refers to anger, we should
not mention “anger” at the beginning of the year. An example
of the same idea being found in conjunction with the Zikhronoth
is to be read in [Ps. lxxviii. 39], “ For he remembered they were
but flesh;” in conjunction with the Shophroth an example is
found in Hosea, v. 8 : “ Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah,” etc.

We must not mention the remembrance of the individual (in
the Zikhronoth) even if the passage speaks of pleasant things, as,
for example [Ps. cvi. 4], “ Remember me, O Lord, with the favor
that thou bearest unto thy people.” However, passages that
contain the expression of “visiting” may be used in the
Zikhronoth, eg., “And the Lord visited Sarah” [Gen. xxi. 1]
or “I have surely visited you” [Ex. iii. 16], so says R. Jose;
but R. Jehudah says, they may not. But even if we agree to
what R. Jose says (shall we say that) the passage “and the Lord
visited Sarah ” speaks of an individual (and therefore it should
not be used)? Nay; since many descended from her, she is re-
garded as many and therefore that passage, though speaking of
one only, is regarded as though it spoke of many.

(In the Malkhioth, they used Ps. xxiv. 7-10, which is divided
into two parts.) The first part can be used as two of the re-
quired passages, and the second as three, so said R. Jose ; but R.
Jehudah said: The first part can be used only for one, and the
second for two.* So too [Ps. xlvii. 7, 8], “ Sing praises to God,
sing praises, sing praises to our king, sing praises ; for God is the


* He excludes the two interrogative sentences, “ Who is the king of glory ?


“NEW YEAR,”


69


King of all the earth. M R. Jose said : This may be used for two
of the Malkhioth ; but R. Jehudah said: “It is to be reckoned
as one only.” (He rejects one, because the words “our king,”
referring to one people only, was not a sufficiently broad
expression of praise for Him who is the King of the uni-
verse.) Both, however, agree that the next verse of the same
Psalm, “ God is King over the nations ; God sitteth upon
the throne of his holiness,” is to be used for one only. A
passage containing a reference to God’s remembrance of His
creatures and also to the cornet, as for instance [Lev. xxiii. 24],
“Ye shall have a Sabbath, a memorial of blowing of cornets,”
may be used in the Zikhronoth and the Shophroth ; so said R.
Jose; but R. Jehudah said: It can only be used in the Zikhro-
noth. A passage in which God is proclaimed King, contain-
ing also a reference to the cornet, as for instance [Numb, xxiii.
21], “The Lord his God is with him, and the shout ( Teruath ) of
a king is among them,” may be used in the Malkhioth and in
the Shophroth, said R. Jose; but R. Jehudah said : It may only
be used in the Malkhioth. A passage containing a reference to
the cornet, and nothing else, as for instance [Numb. xxix. 1], “ It
is a day of blowing the cornet,” may be used for the Shophroth,
so said R. Jose; R. Jehudah, however, said: Must not be used
at all.

“ The passages from the Pentateuch are to be recited first a?id
those from the Prophets last .” R. Jose said: “We should con-
clude with a passage from the Pentateuch, but if one con-
cluded with a passage from the Prophets, one has done his duty.”
We have also learned: R. Elazar bar R. Jose says: “The Va-
thiqin * used to conclude with a passage from the Pentateuch. It
is correct as far as Zikhronoth and Shophroth are concerned, for
there are many such passages ; but as for the Malkhioth there
are but three in the Pentateuch, viz.: “ The Lord his God is with
him, and the shout of a King is among them ” [Numb, xxiii. 21] ;
“And he was king in Yeshurun” [Deut. xxxiii. 5]; and “The
Lord shall reign forever” [Ex. xv. 18], but we require ten and
there are not so many? Said R. Huna : We have learned that,
according to R. Jose, the passage, “ Hear, O Israel, the Lord our
God is one ” [Deut. vi. 4], may be considered as Malkhioth, but
R. Jehudah said, it may not; so also they differ with regard to
the passages, “ Know, therefore, this day, and consider it in thine


* A sect similar to Hasidim.


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


7 °

heart, that the Lord, he is God ; there is none else ” [Deut. iv. 39],
and " Unto thee it was shewed, that thou mightest know that
the Lord, he is God ; there is none else beside him ” [Deut. iv.
35]. According to the one they are considered Malkhioth, but
according to the other not.

MISHNA: The second of those who act as ministers of the
congregation on the feast of New Year shall cause another to
sound the cornet; on days when the Hallel (Service of Praise,
Ps. cxiii.-cxviii.) is read, the first (minister) must read it. In order
to sound the cornet on New Year’s Day it is not permitted to go
beyond the Sabbath limit, to remove a heap of stones, to ascend
a tree, to ride on an animal, to swim over the waters, nor to cut
it (the cornet) with anything prohibited either by the (Rabbinical)
laws against servile work or by a Biblical negative command-
ment; but if one wishes to put water or wine in a cornet (to
cleanse it) he is allowed to. Children must not be prevented from
sounding the cornet, but on the contrary we are permitted to
occupy ourselves with teaching them until they learn to sound
it ; but one who thus teaches, as also others who listen to sounds
thus produced, do not thereby fulfil their duty.

GEMARA: What is the reason of the above prohibitions?
Because the sounding of the cornet is a positive commandment ;
now, the observance of a festival involves both positive and nega-
tive commandments, and the one positive cannot supersede two
(negative and positive.)

“ Children must not be prevented from sounding the cornet,” etc.
But women are to be prevented? Have we not learned in a Bo-
raitha: Neither women nor children may be prevented from sound-
ing the cornet on the New Year’s Day ? Said Abayi : “ It presents
no difficulty, the one is according to R. Jehudah and the other is
according to R. Jose and R. Simeon, who say that as women are
permitted (in the case of sacrifices) to lay their hands on the
animals, so here, if they desire to sound the cornet, they may.

“ Until they learn.” Said R. Elazar: Even on the Sabbath ;
so also we have learned in the following Boraitha : We are per-
mitted to occupy ourselves with teaching (children) until they
learn (to sound the cornet) even on the Sabbath : (and if we do
not prevent them doing this on the Sabbath) how much less do
we, on the feast (of New Year). Our Mishna says, “ We do not
prevent them ” (from this we may infer that we do not start to
tell to a child : Go and sound the cornet) ? It presents no dif-
ficulty : a child already initiated in the performance of religious


“NEW YEAR.”


7i


duties may be told also : Go and sound ! but not a child not yet
initiated ; however, we do not prevent him.

MISHNA: The order of sounding the cornet is three times
three. The length of a TEQIA is equal to that of three TERUOTH,
and that of each Terua as three moans (Yababhoth). If a per-
son sounded a Teqia and prolonged it equal to two, it is only
reckoned as one Teqia.* He who has just finished reading the
benedictions (in the additional service for the New Year) and only
at that time obtained a cornet, should then blow on the cornet
the three sounds three times. As the Reader of the congregation
is in duty bound (to sound the cornet) so too is each individual; R.
Gamaliel, however, said the Reader can act for the congregation.

GEMARA: But have we learned in a Boraitha, that the
length of a Teqia is the same as that of a Terua? Said Abayi :
The Tana of our Mishna speaks of the three series, and means that
the length of all the Teqioth is the same as that of all the Teruoth.
But the Tana of the Boraitha speaks of only one series and says
that one Teqia is equal to one Terua (which is the same thing).

“ Each Terua is (as long as) three moans." But we have
learned in a Boraitha, a Terua is as long as three broken (staccato)
tones (Shebarim). Said Abayi : About this they do indeed
differ, for it is written [Numb. xxix. 1], “ It is a day of blowing
the cornet,” which in the (Aramaic) translation of the Pentateuch
is, “ It is a day of sounding the alarm (Yababa). Now it is writ-
ten concerning the mother of Sisera [Judg. v. 28], “The mother
of Sisera .... moaned ” (Vat’yabeb) ; this word, one explains
to mean a protracted groan, and another to mean a short wail.

The Rabbis taught: Whence do we know (that one must
sound) with a cornet? From the passage [Lev. xxv. 9], “Thou
shalt cause the cornet .... to sound, etc.” Whence do we know
that (after the Terua) there should be one Teqia? Therefore it
is said (later in the same verse), “Ye shall make the cornet
sound.” f But perhaps this only refers to the Jubilee ? Whence
do we know that it refers also to New Year’s Day? Therefore it
is written (in the same verse) “ in the seventh month.” These


* The cornet is sounded three times, corresponding to the Malkhioth, Zikhronoth,
and Shophroth. The order of the sounds is Teqia, Terua, Teqia; Teqia, Terua,
Teqia, etc. The case here supposed is that the one who sounded the cornet sustained
the second Teqia as long as two Teqioth, intending thereby to sound the second and
third Teqioth. This, we see, is not permitted.

f The Hebrew words Utheqatem Terua are interpreted to mean that first a
Teqia should be sounded, and then a Terua.


72


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


words are superfluous; for what purpose then does the Torah use
them ? To teach us that all the sounds of the cornet during the
seventh month should be like each other. Whence do we know
that the sounds are to be three times three? From the three
passages, “ Thou shalt cause the cornet ... to sound ” [Lev.
xxv. 9]; “A Sabbath a memorial of blowing of cornets” [Lev.
xxiii. 24] ; “ It is a day of blowing the cornet ” [Numb. xxix. 1].
But the Tana of the following Boraitha deduces it by analogy of
expression from (the rules given in) the wilderness [Numb, x, 1-10].
As we have learned, the words “ When ye sound an alarm ”
[Numb. x. 5] mean one Teqia and one Terua. Whence do we
know that they shall be separated, perhaps it means that both
together should be sounded ? Since it is written [ibid. 7] : 11 But
when the congregation is to be gathered together, ye shall blow
but ye shall not sound an alarm,” we may infer that they must
be separated, a Teqia by itself, and a Terua by itself. But whence
do we know that there should be one Teqia before the Terua?
From the words [ibid. 5] : “ When ye sound an alarm ” (t.e., first
a “sound,” or Teqia, and then an “alarm,” or Terua). And
whence do we know that there should be one after the Terua?
From the words [ibid. 6] : “ An alarm shall they sound ! ” R.
Ishmael, the son of R. Jo’hanan bar Berokah, however, says : It is
not necessary, as it is written : “ When ye sound an alarm the
second time ” [ibid. 6]. The words “ a second time ” are unneces-
sary, and to what purpose are they used ? To form a general rule
that on every occasion on which “ alarm ” (Terua) is mentioned,
a sound (Teqia) must be used with it as a second (or following)
tone. Possibly all this only refers to the practices followed in
the wilderness, but how do we know that they refer to New Year’s
Day also? Therefore it is written : Terua twice to make us infer
by an analogy of expression, and as concerning the New Year
Terua is written thrice in the three passages, [Lev. xxiii. 24] :
“A sabbath, a memorial of cornets”; [Numb. xxix. 1] : “It is a
day of blowing of cornets ” ; and [Lev. xxv. 9] : “ Thou shalt
cause the cornet ... to sound”; and for each Terua there are
two Teqioth, we therefore learn that on New Year’s Day must
be sounded three Teruoth and six Tekioth.

R. Abbahu enacted in Caesarea that the order should be first
a Teqia* then three single staccato sounds, or Shebharim, then a


* The Teqia is a long tone produced by sounding the cornet. The Terua is a
long tremulous sound. The Shebharim consists of three short staccato sounds.


“ NEW YEAR.”


73


Terua and then again a Teqia. At all events it is not right : If
by Terua is meant “a protracted groan” then he should have
instituted the order to be a Teqia, a Terua, and then a Teqia ; and
if it means “ a short wail,” then he should have instituted the
order to be, a Teqia, then Shebharim (three single broken sounds)*
and then again a Teqia ? He was in doubt whether it meant one
or the other (and therefore he enacted that both should be
sounded).

“ If a person sounded a teqia and prolonged it equal to two "
etc. R. Jo’hanan says: If one heard the nine sounds at nine
different hours during the day, he has fulfilled his duty. The
same we have learned in the following Boraitha : “If one
heard the nine sounds at nine different hours of the day it is
sufficient, and if he heard from nine men at one time, a Teqia
from one and a Terua from another, etc., he has also done his
duty, even if he heard them intermittently, and even during the
whole day or any part of the day.” The rabbis taught : (Gen-
erally) the soundings of the cornet do not prevent each other
(if one can blow a Teqia> but not a Terua y or pronounce one
benediction and not another, it might be said he should not blow
or pronounce any benediction at all. We are taught that the
one does not prevent the other on the fasts of the congregation
and other occasions when these are needed), nor do the bene-
dictions; but on New Year’s Day and the Day of Atonement
they do.

“ He who has just jinished reading {the additional service )
and oiily at that time obtained a cor7iet shall sound on the
cornet the three sounds three times." This means, only when
he did not have a cornet at the beginning (of the service) : but if
he had one at the beginning of the service when the sounds of
the cornet are heard, they must be heard in the order of the
benedictions of the day.

R. Papa bar Samuel rose to recite his prayers. Said he to
his attendant, When I nod to you sound (the cornet) for me.
Rabha said to him : “ This may only be one in the congrega-
tion.” We have learned in a Boraitha in support of this : “ When
one hears these sounds, he should hear them both in their order
and in the order of the benedictions (in the additional service of
the New Year).” This only applies to a congregation, but one
should hear them in the order of the benedictions only, if he is
not in a congregation ; and a private individual who has not
sounded the cornet (or heard it sounded) can have a friend sound


74


THE BABYLONIAN TALMUD.


it for him ; but a private individual who has not recited the bene-
dictions cannot have a friend say them for him ; and the duty to
hear the cornet sounded is greater than that of reciting the bless-
ings. How so ? If there be two cities (to which a person may
go) and in one city they are about to sound the cornet and in
the other to recite the benedictions, he should go to the city in
which they are about to sound the cornet ; and not to that in
which they are about to recite the benedictions. Is this not self-
evident, because the sounding is Biblical and the benedictions
are only Rabbinical? The case is when the reciting of the bene-
dictions in one city was certain ; sounding the cornet in the other
city was doubtful. He must nevertheless go to the city where
they are about to sound the cornet.

“ Just as the reader of the congregation is in duty hound (to
sound the cornet) so too is each individual .” We have learned
in a Boraitha : The schoolmen said to R. Gamaliel, Why accord-
ing to thy opinion should the congregation pray ? Answered he :
In order to enable the Reader of the congregation to arrange his
prayer. Said R. Gamaliel to them : “ But why, according to
your opinion, should the Reader act for the congregation ? ”
Answered they : “ In order to enable those who are not expert
to fulfil their duty.” And he rejoined: “Just as he en-
ables the illiterate, so too he causes the literate to fulfil their
duty.” Rabba bar bar ’Hana said in the name of R. Jo’hanan :
The sages later accepted the opinion of R. Gamaliel ; but Rabh
said there is still a difference between them ; could (the same)
R. Jo’hanan say this? Did not R. ’Hana of Sepphoris say in
the name of R. Jo’hanan: “The Halakha prevails according to
R. Gamaliel ; ” from these words (“ the Halakha prevails accord-
ing to R. Gamaliel ”) we see that there must have been some
that differed from him ! Said R. Na’hman b. Itz’hak : “ By the
words, “ the sages accept the opinion of R. Gamaliel,” R. Meir is
meant, and the rule arrived at through those who differed from
him (was arrived at) through other rabbis ; for we have learned
in the following Boraitha : R. Meir holds that with regard to the
benedictions of New Year’s Day and the Day of Atonement, the
Reader can act for the congregation ; but the sages say: “Just
as the Reader is in duty bound, so too is each individual.” Why
only for these benedictions (and no other) ? Shall we assume
it is because of the many Biblical selections used ? Does not R.
’Hananel say in the name of Rabh : As soon as one has said (the
passages beginning with) the words, “ And in thy law it is writ-


“ NEW YEAR.”


75


ten,” he need say no more? It is because there are many (more
and longer) benedictions (than usual).

It was taught, R. Jehoshua ben Levi said : Both the private
individual and the congregation as soon as they say (the passages
beginning) with the words, “ And in thy law it is written,” need
say no more.

R. Elazar says : A man should always first prepare himself for
prayer and then pray. R. Abba said : “ The remarks of R.
Elazar seem to apply to the benedictions of New Year’s Day
and the Day of Atonement, and to the various holidays, but not
to the whole year.” It is not so ; for did not R. Jehudah pre*
pare himself (even on a week day) before his prayers and then
offer them? R. Jehudah was an exception, for since he prayed
only once in thirty days, it was like a Holiday. When Rabbin
came (from Palestine) he said in the name of R. Jacob bar Idi
quoting R. Simeon the Pious: R. Gamaliel did not excuse from
public service any but field-laborers ! What is the difference
(between them and others) ? They would be forced to lose their
work (if they went to a synagogue), but people in a city must go
(to the House of Prayer).


END OF TRACT “ NEW YEAR*'


rrcnnn nKsnn

ni'nn mspn nmpjn 'jooa jcdji yid: ,vnr\r> jam
notya onnnn

nua

.jKorpun b bam


ninsoo

b‘"a~\ e>n'D oy D^ptP
ns mini '*ns oy rwn


.(ty'SjJNn navino) 'ITm pbft

"tittSnn 'D'sntt rronn n«jnna

54 East 106th Street.


,p “I K " 1 3


•rnn


ynaam ^nyn nanpn


! nm otto

laianni 'baa mebnn py nynnn nxxini nanynn ,m33D 'naxba
nvnb ,x'm ns ny WDa xb nyx ni?in naxbab 'anx'an ,y'baax naya
nonb ’3 ; pb niDn n'baan xnaany ninaDan by ni'ayan nx ynaa oa
jmiD’ ibbn nvayan bay 'aaa ,pn' xb nyia -no p nxtn naDen nx
■pnxn nan ,D’p mny jata ,ia D’anan nmayi ba'nn nimp ,ymp nnna
ni'ayan nx oannb bax .jaianns p 'nayn pipes ids <nx'npi ny-p ,ma'b
D’aiy is ,nyax 'xy nan oyaa xin iDana naay D'yin'an nnx 'a by ippn
D'lxm non D’aia qjdx oxi ,D'babiaai D'anx abiai mo nr D'yin’an non
'biaba nbir ,nns biaba baa 'pan paianna ds yanynb 'nbia' xb oyb
'Dab D'yin'an ba D'apinei D'aia v.t x?y naa ny naxai .naxya xnaan
pajDa p pmxpa iaa b"t '"yn yiva oy onianb jaix oiya baia xb ,nxrn
payb mat my 'baai pnnx biaba my 'bs laipa by nan ba ynean paiyb
naya Dannb jpmai nyaia nta yn'a nxi ; ia pioy xiny payn nbir nnx
xbi Danan nipan nx Diannn b’a'y nxtn nxxma nxa nnta 'axi .rrn
.nta pxy na nta nvi' xbi ,nyaxy Dipaa nyxap ,vby tj’DV xbi iaaa yna*
naya ba nxab ia'\n ,nxp ywaa nxtn naoan nx ynab 'b 'nbay p byy
D’nanb D'yna ba 'baa ; nxtn naoab pn •p'ym pix'ai yiva na'nxn
ix nabna nt biabai n'nnv maa ba 'baai ,nnnx ninaDaa lynanai layay
.paxn 'nxvai 'nya'i ,nxtn nxvinn baa 'ann p nyxa ,xnaoa
nibaa ,naoan Pa nx ynab n'a nnbyy ,xmpn 'nx ,'b namaa
xb ,naiyxnn oyaa ibxn ni'ayan nx xnp'y xmpn Day ny ,niaaiai nnvp
pbi ; n'pna naiay baa aa - n pnn payn naan pi mban mx’a ib non'
’n'yy nai .yivai mx'a Tnsn Dipaa nv bab pnnnn mnaa Dipa i? ’nay
nyiy axy iaa xb .D’avsa naaba yn'an nx ’noann 'baaxn manna oa
'xvn aya D'aea naoa 'aany '"yn yn'a ny nnnx ninaDa by taianna

: xmi ,nxo oiya oyaa ,naab


(III)


•D^pir roDD

waro ,D's?an D'bptrn by pjra^fc -nsa ins^ <*
maimn nsi ,B'annn ns pjpnai panaa nb^an ns pup ,ia n®s
nnapn ns pnicai ,D'ann "anit by> ptrijn ,a'»n n*,sipa nsi

♦D's^an by ns psjtm

fb.TJs 1 ? pa^uroi pnpiy vn rwiwsna ,."ni,T 'an “iafc$ tt
irpnn ,D’mn by panrcai pnpiy vn ,nnay nan? lanraa

.nbia nmn ba p-rpsa l.Ttr
nntrya ; nvnaa paw vn nvnbur ,ia -itry ntran^ o


b " » i v n ' b

ns>nj jot ,jD’ja into onin lDnrw ,D^ptrn by pv'DE^D nsa nnta (k
nSy urn ,('d mot?) jairon npin vnrb nnxa jwjnn hihd ’rvi ,mx:t? ,a3pt?n
nmnS ptnao ,D\sb:>n byi .n onn nonna mu n ptron npin» mu ,0oten'a)
n^DH ns pmp U , i"t32 .xiaS snp nyntn jot rxtn nyat? aitro ,manyno
ja»x nnyn am ubd na^oa nxr mamS "pis .mn kSi ,Y'u jnip mnsa Sax , 0*3133
,nnapS anp* mayo nant? main mepion anya Sax ,nnatrS p»tf»n xSi main mspio
Y'u nmx ixnp aa ax o ,nS>aon nxnp jot nx aunaa lymt? natpiaa nxi *va:n -puS
*niKM UD h max,, iiaScmu npiDB naSnn x>n p mxa a"taa nyen my nnnpS am
naSeniu mraSnn maxia nx encS D'tnnn Denson nosy* iprnty mpimn Sa unx nSisa ,'u
ynv »a’K ,|nwn mxa mama ja»x ,ut? nxa numanmxon Sa:r ,nmaSS nxa naevant?
,3pSpnai outran nnv nayp nnx ,awn ns pjpnai .natriano nxi naua naa»x
iSpSpna maimmr ,mxipoi maimS cyan xim ,*nx iy pn ion D'otra jot Ka>ntr^sai
'31^ pt^yi 3am ud 5 ? oovy nna b 3av jyo 1 ? /impa? junvi ^srcnn Sea mxpoai
,mao un ,m»Ba »an ,maiDO un jnS eio«no n"an K’nn nyatr >a^nu mix ,0'2nn
^mtn nx reman ,nsny nSay jumyi ,naiDn nx vptrm ,nitnpm monn ,j*any jhiqi
ns -x’nn nya unatr nSx ma myi ,ynnon nx jnnam nay nay j’yvm

jyoS nnapn nx ju»*so» naix »aStrnui pua ,D'own mon 3pSpna^ , nnapn
nxoian xnmr #xnp» xiaa xaai (a"' xnpn) xnpo nx» nnioi .onaiyn ana txoqi xS
rpcftDD vn xf? mown noin mrro ,D'sSan by ns psvn -"uoo cni 2 w nnaixi nxmp

.nniwi nx npaS o»nbw vn ax o paSa ntnana

;n>xSaa nma nb u ik^d dx n»nAefn rtriy vn» no nxaS xa sn , in ,> ; n (a^
mrStrS xa» xn mrx ^>ai w (8 '») xmy jo npsn x’n^ n"a nponS j»ao nuia »Dntynui
.ana lBfanwnw /Hn^ay naiy unmo nntrn by ,onuDb ."nnn* a'o’n
imyaaon nx an3y nunb nianSitr anx a»xtna vn auaSnne^ »aso /n’lanbl^ 0
nx iB^mtr ayn by bpnh / na»noa nnxa ant^yi ntran ny man^irn twm vn u ,max>
vn la nntryi tran jo ixi ; nnS nnx Sa aonatr ,nmna ainan Vp»n un Sy ammyo
lav^oi ; ambptr nx Aptr xS mvi p n:iD ’ vnn nx mr xuanS tripoa ju^v

nx ixu* jyoS ,u mSpir lxun xS nt^x nSx nx pxS pna aa ptro 1 ? 3'nnn ,Bfipoa
ou^n aunan aai .nxtn nrnoS nnava* vn nauoa aa u ,pua nnx xu> a -a anonn
vn^ UBOi ,ppSna mia mBnS nWy ixm an Sax ,mau maanpS anpy mrx a>Spc*a vn
.oiSt? u*n ubd ,amx auarna vn xS ua* irnpon jata au'pnn


IV


nb© paa nnnx pnpini nicon nx cnsn xnosnc o“ca Dip© baa
xbi mx’a ins ncimsc oipoa xn©3.m onxia© nioccn run ,mx baa D3i
man Dip© baa oyoac ,ouaa i©ip© by '"cn cimsa wcnsx ,nypa pi'
wav pnb Dosa nonn nx D'bc©a pm "en's, mna xb djh ,i'DV ->cx
cims D’ansn ibbn niocoa nioip© D 3 ci bba xn©3 )'xc ns bax ,Dnnan
pub nab nvnb nx© pnj mx'an pbi poon nx D'bcnb pn xbi mx'ai

.n3C©n ruia pin

by tdi'd ibiai ,non D'oy© /mxma 'be© D'cnn n ,vbx© pi©
by D3i /pa'cs'b bxnc 1 n"m ,x-ii3©nam oiD'on ^©bcnm xn©3n cims
mrnx pabpn py mx'aa i»a) 'baan D"ca oci ns D'xs©3n D'cwsn
Dnioai ,i3»» 103 icx D’cnsn nxc m3 jnnm ib , nn3i pbina ’"cn cna
xb 'a ,Dnpaon nx© non cpab miob aicnx pai (pip© nrxa my
ip'oy’ Dioai bon o'cnan paa aom 1331 am did ©sc© x'sinb nn»'
D'oanni Dniaba Dncm 'a ;ims’p odd nuvann insc ’cimsa a"3
o’Pom ,pxn 'oyi nman ,o'Bisnnbi ,ocpax nyba© nxta icy 1 .oo'aon
by lby xb icx onan /ana 'so ix '©ca nonbi ,nan ay mn xnpb
mans -icx no ba 333 a n p t c seal ; miepa lb’yv xp xbn ,nbiyb myn
p ,n©o xboa ib’sx maxb© maaai maaa lysa xbi P33 xbi ,na ny manyi
xb nny 03 'a mpxi ,nxtn nemn maxb© n333 v'y3'i naia 1 ion3 1 ,mpm
m'ey p nexa ,Dnma3i Dn'nioibn ,Dnnaib ab D'cx xbi ,nyn b ’a iy3B’
D'nax '3pa |n xsob 1 y 1 x xbi y3’x pbx 'Dina ox noxa -a ,na ny
om^a an©3© ba icx ,pxn ’©yi /D’sivn onia opa xb ix d n x 1
xis'x noi ,obiya d i xvd 3 my Dnioa o’xna 'a yiv pob pi ,xm n33

? onbi 'b

jxao'pnxa ’dc© mam 'cxnn x'nc "b"©n cims,, ntn ’cnab mxnp
mnpb ’a oid'cx 1 bab ,cms© nxr ym© warn .b bxa 1 © n xbi .b bxa 1 ©
nmne pm o’x p Dnnx naxboa run© wxc oca 'a /'’an, nxin '©syb
m loba 1 xb 'a mpxi ’©ca ciax xb mb nimn ia ,dc na na maxb©

•cmn ’ens© D3 'amx

’b3y©a i 3n3 i ,bm onrx 1 xin >a ,-max xbi noax na rp’b jnun mai
mebnn nmn bnanb nxtn maani nbimn naxbon nx no;b ontpi pns
.)©x ,icia'i ixm 'xocdi 'X3CD1 ,'by naion *n m noimbi nmxnb

.T"nn ,i»*h nn: ,p i k m ;

.jxorpnx-i .b bsa’P


3


3


pawn D^ptP p"is

k in neai jpabpn jo pmas nans nwyoa pa^ntrai ,nana

(.npo) "xn anoiK D'oam ,tko ’an nan ,p)dd nya ? paSp


b* mi ' fi

wpoa a*n wh matyo nnSm n« Sapi wk ’caaa pSn dn oa in ,mN dikd nvA*
im pn D’cmtyn p) ,vn«D onn* nap ovwnD in* Sa Ana nnSin dn \w\n ia#ty usd
ttik Sa And nnSin iatyn» ipSnna i»»d Sdn ni*mty nonty nya ntana ityjroa o »n”n
dj\x p /ihn mNS latym m»a non n»n«n» nyaty vSno piai (,icn«wa nm# nap
OD*y St^ nSi dhun Sty Kin csoa 'a udd ,nnuty nya ySo Duma dn jiaSpa o»a«n
•IiaSpa nu9B inn t«ty ,Diya Spity on»aN Ana ne atynn tpSn sSty t*a


2


ptwn p-13

'e nx .p®87 ib'nnn wipes lsw’we .wipes law’ nwem
d'iw; x 1 ? bsx ,n'iimwe onsyi nnj /D'bxiw'i D'l 1 ? ? piswee
U'x siw ,ii’ by SipwS vsx ^mnnw pop bs .Diepi D'lsyi
«Dibw 'sn ise D'msn nx piswee px ,poia
bpiww ps bs : ms's nsis p my.i mm' 'si ie$$ d
ij'xw ps “?s xbx ,'D x 1 ? 'xst p jini' 'si i 1 ? nex ,xem irx
•?si» : o x'P’O pity 1 ? nt xipe D’wm D'i.isnw xbx ,xem Spiw
□nSi enSn 'nwi neiyi mxm ,'bsxn x 1 ? nmn mbs jns nnie

? D'bsxi -pm /ubw eian

ex ,D'iepi emsyi n'wi piswee px nexw 'a *?y (•?

pxi ,jne pbspe px ibpww D'msm eisyn ,p*e pbspe i*?pw
,niewxi mxem mnSi' 'rpi mat ’rpi d'st 'rp (p'e) pbspe
stii ii’iw *?s : bbzn nt ,(p'e pbspe msm omi *?sx)
wnae xm pi ,p’e pbspe px stii in pxw “?s ,p'e pbspe
."iimbx 1 ? fi'S mis 1 ? iibi es b xb- : o*t 0 iexiw ,xity 'i' by
D'lsyi D'li /D'bxiw'i u"\b : psbps ps"nw ibx^ o
'i' by bpiwn ,D':epi D'lsyi D'wii D'ms xb bsx ,n'iimwe
ii' ^y *?pw nxi ,nea pp 'i' “?y ,isy 'i' by ,nwx '!' by ,jns
.nuabp 'iw leix i'xe 'si ; inx psbps s"n ,nsn i’ byi
.nusip 'iw 3”n bpv bem ybo pun
□xi ,ntsa ii'y p i' “?yi iisw t ^yi ’iy 'i' by ^piwp o
iwyee pnea ps^ps ps"nw pamwm pnxn ,s"n piSn

D1 BM 1 ' B

nn>n nosai ? onm u«n i«>n ,012 pSn «S info (i

vn non Sax ; oona d:»x xoSya xani aian anx iSm Sant? odd ,xitr nx*n naytan
.nmx won mStr on oedi nosy naitaS itraai D’StriDn
tnc» p) naS (coinot?) o»non Sy aoiSa ,D'3t |TD p!?3pD TM (n
p*nS cj n'n D’Sp^ntr oddi rpn nm*? wbi Dab xb .(c"2Dai »abvno

mD^x^ mxan ix /pnp^ nAiy ,om: Sax ,tripan rvaa pSn cnS n»n» o in xa non
.r»xS tr’x pa Vian px ntatr #dhd o’Sapa ,onS nncaS dSo^z Dnix panpow
D'Spty kv nw n’ni # n:ts^Da aann pSan xm nnma aatj.n Sp^n (l

Sty Sptyn Sptya px xoty ,nji'Syn Sj? i^Dn ttnpn v rrnnt? oedi ,n:troa c^xapin
o'pa 192 p rins xS n"aoan nyaS) nama aioxn Sptr »x^n Sty iSptroS mty natron
noi' jo paSp xapa ntn panm ,Spt? on SaS u»;d ^aan jnnr on^n jaS (naiytr
mix ]no o»x ,pa '"cy a»»n xmtr odd xSi maon nn»oo pa Spurn Sai /oiaxSxp»
i»n xS , Donna vntr cnatr nnonn ,D»Spt?a oo«n ca'xtr cnoix vntr oonani ,jiaSp

.diSb^ oaa odd f maiaSpn nx nno pnpiS
,ai»n xSi nnon nao pa ,iSotra nano ino S"a /jy H' by bpltrn (T
nap ox ix ,iSvx aSono ix ]nv no-.a a^yo pen’itrni pntfn .pa^po aitss pS


3


5


ntrtw pis

D'bprc 1 ? nmx min'' ’an ; naxp nb px nsisnS ,nascp jnb
,m 3 iann ppw vn nnun p bxnun iby^aw ,naicp pb px
; pnrn Sipw 1 ? wpai ,pyata biprc 1 ? nm ,D’yS>D biptrb ntn
x’aa nr ,nxton Sax ,nw jbia t p ’s by F|x ,pyaw 'an nax
.rc*?u>a x’aa nn ,D’nwa x’aa ni ,y*?D 3
nma ,nc’xn mmrcy nma ,pbin D’bpty nmQ (n
.nana pnma ,marcxi mxtoni mnSv ’rpi mat ’rp ,pat 'rp
,m*i 3 jnnma natrx dW?i xan mrb xa ximr aa Anan nt
^^abtra a’anw nma /nma 1 ? nn:a nma fnbiy 1 ? n^iy nma
,na*ub mi: ima fOn’i: 1 ? ann: “ima ,Q'tobwb hdb nma
fDnarc 1 ? anair nma ,’:y mix 1 ? s :y nma ,Q"iyb any nma
♦vwnvb nan nma ,a’nab B’nan nma ,’iaiy mix 1 ? naw nma
j m 'an ; wbx xa'ir ny n:ia x.m non nma naix mxa 'an
.nap by ire: )b pna nan nma naix


b “ o n i?n'i

'tb ^an *a nasp nr\b \'H n'bpvh oacp noiai p^in *nm» 'm /a’na nan* xb mtryni*
aitrn t"y bzx ,d*to mtnn bpv ntn nnn pan VippS onjna nrtnn dki nanon naa
p*i Sip^S owm jaw o^a »a n a s p ur\b V' in cat? ,nniaa nayo ]iyoc> y i
*anp» n*w noa nyai ,yaoo *?a A r»tp n»an a"Ntro ,n oSnintr ysaoa
Kin ym tr"at n*a nyn n» natron ns moon trantr nn« /la 'a'p nniD (n
inn tnooi ; j^in Kin o^ptro nnmtr n"aa nonoir nxrn natron nx xn* ,n"aa natantr
nya itrnpntr no b Um \ ,non nmo by pm ouaoDD oSiatr npn^atr *ian ^a Sy inian p
S'atra ;na kS ntn fjoan 'a >aco # in^» Kmcr ny naiD Kn< >a maxn d"i ,irniapS
ibSn onain Sa dSiki ^non maa a /y a Kin jvvn ]»aa >a ioik a /y m papa naa nom trtnvn
n« nia^S i^av ,niyn ana D'oaisn ,myn myoo n»n dn Sa« ^’n' bv p,can n\n dk non

.-jD^nSi D’oyS c-iatro 10a npnvn qca n«


4


'M p“l 3

pID

vnw awa ,“| "inn 'iwa ':aa nuianb a'bpw panjsj^ («
ns lbpww i'yn '33 .n:'“!»a nnaw vn *p ,wnpaa nnaiw
asi anaub pyaw: nann nanni as ,nasw is naaaai jrvbpw
is /isxaa .p'nnn pbpiw -pyn 'jai ,vyn 'jab pyawj isb
.nsan mwb anb pbiy psi B'bpw lbsi lbs ,D'a:an a*vmnw
■H’ ay ibpwi /it by bipwb n'anb lapw jnuji (a
as ,wnpn myaa lbpw apiwn ; bya nann nanm as /aicy
'anai 'jw nwya 'ana ,bya nanan nanpi nannn nann:

.pjja bas' n'y'aw

'saw n'a /'bpwn lbs 'nn» : naisi niya ajaap o
pa s'asw« ; pain pma a'nais bbn n'ai ,nau pma a'nais
,nana nmanw piw /nsanb ibs» ; pbin nnianw piw /’bpwb
.j’bin nnianw piw /nsanb jna s'asw.
w' D'bpwb ? nsanb D'bpw pa na pyaw 'an na$$ (n

" d ■> c n 1 s

♦'aw pna

mp:i D'y^D w bpvo :ni bv pua svn psnn .nus~f 6 D^ptr |'D 1 VD (K
vntr »:co p:trn iso ami mx ivo m?p nnaitr pya vn maani /oxp*nxi # p’ 'Sa
vm wnia xSi vaya psnn Siua ap: pi na p'Syn *?yai miiao niamn nx onS p:ma
"pinna,, noxi .nnuo vntr nya etro onnpS a»Sia’ vn xS -jx nuiann etr pa'Stro
vn inn ntro »:bd o ; m:iaSpa oo»a cam m:iana amSptr nx ic'Snn Tyn »:a oxtr S"i
ixmm iaa ox S"i ,nnnn noinj DX .tnpnS pt: mo px pSi p mtryS oonna onaun
nSx pa na iSxa a'Sptrn iSx a: utrn: txtr ,non pia ix niaaip by o'Sptrn cpaa pbn
poS o’Sptr |m:n mxi inx Sao pbn tr> bpv Sasc^ 0.7:0 »x:nn n»n ]3 »a)

□»pSnno vntr o^ptrn SSao na ox pSi # (n*an pia ix pipna p^n inx SaS na*
, 11^13 nfiipn onn^ i^ -pnn 121 SaS nnx nsipa o»rDnvo vm mo:p vnvh
nb ax *?ax pi' 5 ? vy'zn xS ax a: anS ao^tr nan na aoptrn >a ,ooanS a»3?aw :x
a: xa ntn ayam ,anar:n vb \vwv iy i>yn >:a Sa» a^ptrn lai^m tx ,nonnn noma
paopo vntr aco ;tnpna Sya iovy n> by Sptri S^ptrS nan jn: oxtr nnnxStr n:traa
.(a"aoi) ,Sxn»»atr a »:yn nx ejx o^ptrn Sy p:atraa vn *3 nn:S i»nyn by □:
itryana no vntr my a maon nx Atr pSinn c|aaa np< V y i ,pj:a ^3N' (3

.main nx ana ntryi ,Sprn nonaS ana mnpStr o^ptrn nbx nnn iSx nn :iax»i
iaixi ,i» by maiiD papS Smnotr *oa : xm nxr n n:tron pm ,131 DJDDH
,pap:n aiaana annan nx Sptr iaatr nnx bhn no nyiStr ^^ptrS npx ntn rpana,,
Sax ,nai: pma ,iaan ixtra n:naS amx in' pi ax tx a: tr"a nyni ;pSm iman
'oStni') ,SSn noS iSox nai: pmo pSptrS 1 S x nn 101x1 ai qaa no tmxtr »oa

.(a"aon

pmo i' Sy paip a: ax nxtana anyiS o:a* n"a naiS ay a pi: ,pyDB> ‘n 10 x (1
natip anS tr* a'Sptr a"xtra , 3 'ySa ^xoa a: m:pS Siai nxum navp pxtr 1:20 ,nai:


1 'V'bw o'bpv pns 7

nanna nax’i /vrcr xarc ix /jpn nairbn ppa nas’i
“I ”nn ,aipan ’T nxx 1 ? -p" 12 * anxu 'ab prwpn nair^n
.^x-wai ‘na D^pD an'vri* : naxair ,mnan , t n xab “jnsw

,(j wo) *d* 1X1 BVDX TI?3 31B 'WWl }fl XXBV : naiXI iaioa)

m-mi ,vnwaxx pa ibptrn ,dd3j bx'baj jan n-a b]y o
,o-vin amnn px ♦naip 1 ? lanni piana a-iinm ,annn ■aeS
!ann ! onn ! nnn : 'b anaix jm ? annx : on 1 ? naxMi? -ip

•D'apD uba?

nanai mw ,ni&6aiopa nanai nawxm nx Dip d
onn’i annn nx naw xair ,nana n-n xb n'nn^w ^mxSaapa
nwm px aarb njwmn nx a-in .annn nan nx
aiwbi ns ai«6i ,?aa aiur? n'snbrc papian a’ana mu6

•nipinnn mna


b"»n eni'S

•p anann n>n vSpr |nu n»w nya nuo nn« Sd *idiSd^D 333 a"n H'3 P5? (a
dj?m naoo S'nnn *n:3tp nawtnn neipn p ,onnn -on nx Drum (T

.rmtrmn


6


abpv pis

SW'bw

nosn onea ,iai»bi nx paiin i 3 an D’pis rnrbar^ («

"an ’121 ,nan2 nawaS nm: jm ,:m ansa ,map ansa
onwpai ,jvd 2 nxi ,nx2 ijirm nnwjD laix ■'xiy p ; xa-pp
inx2 ,p ':2 inx2 onaix pyatr ’211 ipbx '21 ,2x2 iprrn
npwro onwpa nax 12 " 3 B 2 .'nbxa ipirm O’urpa ,p'oa
icy 1 ? ircsx 'xi ,aio or xnrc usa ? nwia nxa nax xbi
.bibxa ipwrn entry? 1 ? manpi “p'sbaie ova
,iawSi nx pann pxo ©bar trbtr bv ,msip a?*?a?^ u
ama mv .iaix bxpar* 'ai jba^ ,rva ,*\bx : pa ainai
,msi H31S2 xb ,d :33 anil px .xbo: ,xrra ^sbx :jia
,':y xatr ,rapa xbi ,p‘? , ana xbi , t ?i 3 aa xbi ,*>p:oa xbi

b" bi eni'D

.'wbv pis

nuanpn by oAptrn nnmn nno Kin nm pnsn py po D'pno npb&Q (k
ns*? ni3’S niaanp3 pSn SKntr’o nns bsb nm’tr nAptem tpo dh sany*? n Annexe vnr
vn po nSmnn oApam Sa n« 12 a naatr nnKt? : pcny vn pi A'jAna njmnt? ’xann
l’D30 vni ,nnx ^3 J’kd nycm -py f nAvu nvan vhv nm ejoano o’kSdo
nisipn nx J’k^od vm I’kd '3 nnn Sa niaop meip cAt? pK’ao vn 3"n»o ,ninBHoa pin
nv3n.no nnm nnn bi ,nova i« nnaya .3 .3 .k nvniK cAtra niaoiDD vnw niaopn
cys »A’om ; ma»v niaanp pa niapS epan n« yireio vn niaopn nieipnoi ,nAnan
3n 'Mb D’O' 1*0 pany vn pi ,nacn omp tron i?n Kina' poa roa nnm naiB'xnn
oyea ik S o new nainn«n nvann p Amnn noa' oniK inno iwk nys ^K ,niyi 3 trn
ikSd «k mK3 naoioon naipn hk nny /3 m«3 naoison nspn n« naurwin
n»ar Di^po nnmr n’c^trn pi .3 niK3 namoon noipS naitnn onip nn»nv n’atrn p
■nan? masnps pSn nn« SsS nm'tr o'sosn 333 ^ hs nst lcyi .3 niK3 naaioon ncipS
Wp n 3 D 0 tr ^p’D 5 ? nm« n mo nm ttb nwbvb 1x133 ays S33 pStr f n*3n p^33 ik
D'3i3n uvb n':rm mv nanpn Sxitr' pn naiB'Kin hk Dim ,rnyS

snpn bsv 'aco mpimn niano bz bwi mr^trm ,b*nv' pwo mpinin noin mspion
nmy vn 1^31 pn3 pSn Skii^d k'P 1 ? nmi ]»3iiyo myon vn t'Py ik ; m ip 3 np
nm natr nsc^S oasan ^3 na ik omnni ,D’«33n Sy di» nm’ nb tyo 5 ? Sna cidids
ninpoTiD ik ^naoi Sy:D3 nb nai a»a rrr’K ona vrv ona:n bz nno vonb j’3’ino vn ,ep3n
notr^ matap nirmi D*3op ons wv y’opsi pS’sna na kSi ^D3.n nmonS d’Sis’v mpo
’aso ,ann onoa mvy onon . # ui D”pa on«m 3 in 3 n S’ 3»3 S 3 m ,c)D 3 n imonS 0 ^ 13 '
*73K ,i”K3 i"Q3 n’atm naipn m mncS amisio vn pS m noon »o* ny3^3 maanpn^
nwn ncipn myo vn pS msvn ^d 30 nwaipn ian kSi inw dv p*i Kincr myisrrn an
idiSo .nona i^yoS mana jni .n’tr’Va-n neipn n« inns tk iKtr b\bx »vn ny nip’Eso
B^.Ein Dio po Sisxbi \vnvb niDKi pias nnoiy 103 on mans nnSmi Wn D’aom
iy3pr ayom .nyyon ntncn Diip oa nSonS vn U'xm \bbn Doom ys Ssk ptryon
oS’srrs lami n'bvwb mSy 1 ? D’Sai ’7iy Ann tkct oeo win ,nntryo c ? Doom Ak nn
odd pn ni3 D’p^in nmi w; p 'KTV p .nopS unb onso monan vn»ty

.tk pn ;na’ nafyon onynStr ,npyon niaia


n T^n D^ptP pis 9

naiab p"p mvsn nma naix bxpaw 'an ; a’unpn ’amp
nannn nnia naix xa’pp 'an ; m® 'baS nannn nmai
D'jnan po xran -an ; m» nab d’Ddj nmai natab p'p
;m® 'bab nannn nniai ,naiab pp anao nnia naix

.niTsa ama vn xb nn nt
naw maa pavnaa ? na pans? vn na nmapn nnift (n
,paa?a p^aixb pjmn ,pjaixn naa? bj? nmx pbbnai ,paaiKrr
pnpib nata a?nnn xa ax ; na?nn nanna nmx pnpibi pnnni
.n:a?\n ja lxb axi ,na?nn nanna nmx
ma'sn nuanpb pnxn anan jna vni naas a?npap| 0
nvx 'xts? p ib nax ; xa’ps? -an nan ,paa?a pjaixb vnv
by nmx pbbnai ,p:aixn naa? pa pannaa xbx ,nnan xn
jmx pnpibi pnnni ,paao psaixb pnx p:mn ,psaixn mya

.nann nanna

natan 'zsb nnxn nana pa nmm naa: a^npap o
,nv?iy ’an^b naa- anal naix mpbx ’an ,mapn nnat


en-pB

Inna inn mb” nny ,niVDn nniD ? no o>tny no mortr natro spo *ikbo ok ,n:itrn
SKyotr* '*i ioiki ,niompn nitrono o'aojno lnmntr mnm vn no ntrnn nSKtr
*ioiKn y"*i Sok p’nvn nua*ip pK3 Son noiy noion n\ntp no mp ok nunp pip vnv
,moyff rotro span *imoo pnpiS vn naion ppS ’3 *ioik &npn niyoo rvnnS tokp
pnpoi nrvu man pnpiS vn o) ,o'3d: St? nnon woo ikbw no S"*i oodj *inioi
mm) nxtn natron p n:m .nto iS mnx njn ounsn po n"*n ,n*w 'So'? frtpino mo
TD 3 mi So o»pnno ouioon ounan vn anpon pta o hk*u (nvatron Sao nS nona
myi jpiinn nns t)3>n nn^o npiSnon nn»n kS nKt kSiS o ,ianann i»k *im jrna kSi
'*i pi npon |oia o’nitrn D’ano vn SK^otrn ytr'SK vniaKi \m n’n Sk^d»» 'itr inv
•nnooz ipSn iki anaon hk i^h» kS on oai poicrnn oonan \o n^n o»anan po Ka'an
.|voan »eo man* po nnK pKi anaon nono mpSintr nvatro nooS ikioo run SSon mo an
vn ntrnnn natroi nnnytr natro natrn c\ido intran S"i ,mitDpn nniD (n
on»n V35n xt?Q x ' n nmtapn mo o p;n ,o’trnnn oiSptro mapan mitapo o^ontro
natr Sao n«tra mn ,vaon hSd p*i Sou o"a n^n naup \bm n’ntr jnsi ,niw pnm ]Sia3

.mopn >aooo nno nvK

oa ok Sp’o pSi n»an pmS Kin *iok» anpn odd ^VDoa tTHpon (1
Sy o'onp nvnS oamn kSi mopn »aooo ioa /H^idS cvkih onon anpnn ^cn pa vn
qSiki ,ppS nvatrono nta mw na»i oa pi naioS onmn o^n onna oSiki f naton
pnp'tr nnv noia 'ktu vooa ampon n;n o ,inpno .mopn ooooa oa mono >Kiy p
vmini paoiKn mvo S^ oSiS’n trpao pS nm ; io^ naion S^ r n3ioS onKnn onm
.t^npon n;*iS »Kma i;io» i /y ’ytr rtrm nonno nniK pnpiSi
Sok ,n'sn pmS Kin tnpn ono *o *1210 k"i oa ,n)hvj noD' Dnai (T
pnaS nSy» onrr Da ok naion to ikt kS mioS ]”iKnn oovy onain o noi» i"oy
noK’ 3 >k»v po miDn ytrm' '*1 -jki .iov;» naton im^S onoioS “jnvo pS» rvsn


8


Tsi D’^pw pis

WY) pIB

psoia ,pTen ns pnpib ? ns puny vn na nannjn (x
.na^n nvaip bai ,D":sn anbi ,nnbn vian ,iaipn ,d,t 3 d:*.
'si ; naa^n nanna paa> pboi: ,n'P 3 C 3 dwsd naiar
nnx *|x ,ib max ; nan naia? anana natnn. p]k ,iaix ’dv

.ns , jc bwa x*?x pxa pxa> naix
nanna pxa nun ba? pa^i nbna?an -vpan nig (3
,vaip paa? purSi ,nbna?an “vpa? a?aai ,ms css .naa^n
n^a pxa *vpn vaiiai bai / n , m I ?naa , i npn naim ,cpan naxi
paip D’bn: D'ana ms a’aa : naix bixa? xax ; naa^n

.jai’p ba?a jmx

jna pnpib ? pa paip vn na naa^n n’a? mi^ (3
’si ; bxpaav ’an nan Aanpnb naani ,ninbDi nnaa? nv"
•d'mp ba?a xba ,anpn btra pianwo px ,iaix xa'pp
rvab vs-ac ant ’pipi ? na panp vn na nannn ini£ <n

b“01 B'lT’B

.'pan pis

pso pn ikisi >s ,can ne*K onSn ’nm noiy.n ,rPIP3P3 D'rPSD nfcis? (N
n'y’sffn rops cm 8 DTipiS vn pko ,njt?n ns nbnv ncnnn nsisn jo Kpm Skip*
nymt? no nKisn tvVu oipo hvks ninnS onn o^nVit? vn ? nsp kSi lym kS tkp
* 1 * ns taiStrn k^p nniK motySi ited (n"s Kipn) mpon p»Ss nKipat? nompn naps
nun ]»ni npsn Kin ^sn n’yistrn mcst? odd /n:oo |s*ipn Nsvtr amp mpyS sn«
vn i^Sn onourni on/in .nxisnm o»nosn nx triSn 1 ? onnx non*? >SsS nwn tysS
nnx SsS tw nxisnn nx is up iSks strna nm tpsi ,nspSn nonno onst? D'Sspo
nvn*? nantro mm pnpt? nsio nan non? nvnS mx snanisrr noiKn >dv ' m .ons pSn
nusnp iKtrs o □« ,onSn »ntn naiys lmos nsbn p« Ssk ini« snao win dk ms’V

.(n"n nK*i) ns' pys nis^S dhik snao Kin dk n»n» Sro nnpS nnio
niSnan nvsn vhvh oasa n\n K^tr ^ssn mio ,mmt W JTiD (1

pKao^K »"y vSy o^iy vnaa* ,msa mpoa iniK pama vm nstrSn *vw Kipa ,nS^)sS lansr^
,noviK n*is natros nKsn» is»tatr ,nanK nnoS pss onrip vn mn ciDsnai ; mSyo kSs
D’ on diskS pi ,kqvs nKan' ds»d^ vanp ps&* ptrSSi StktvS n*?n^Dn n'yirS eras sn pi

.pp'n D’snai vn dk oVcrin’ n^n nainSi

vn no nstr'SS pin ^ds nstra my hSk ^?s nnK dk V ; n /HD^bn nmo (a
l»w nSioi nsron Sy noaS p» mapS vSy ; pnp K*sot? ’0 Ss / rrla' , pnpli) ? is ptsny
qosn mio nys '2 ,nnoiK nKin natroni ,dbd2s nmys D»aip vn nSK Ssi ,nnaoS
f mpnS myo inmi jynS ^D’snponS nmsoS mnSoi duo^ j« paip vn ,nstrSn n’ir bv
'oStnmsi .D^ay Ss* niyos )si t^ipn myos nmno nicy 1 ? most? poiki pSin y /y *i Ssk
nisSn ,nta»nir nisSn mo ,{ ? nstr nss D’Spirn c]ds inios nryir no onn onsn senn
10s myi ; ns c^n n»» myoo pnpiS vn nSK Sstr masnpn »oio hk npsS pi ,niasnp

.(pnon no 'i nsSn db» nsn) / n l ?M

itsb> D'Spi^o ntsnn nonn nssiy pus m» yon dk S"n r nDnnn nn'iD (n


1


"tP'Dn


11


ubpV
.’iron pis

mamnn by on:a p pirp : «npaa rrw piaan p ib$$ («
.p'pn by .Tims ^niD^cn by bxiaw p .Tnna ,D'3D3n by rrnx
anana nms -.tw ? rmns iatr jnp nab ; 'anna m rrnna
nain ,Tim3 ,D’ ,, ya 'bin by rrnx p .jwb D'yarc ynn p-nm
,y'pan ay "aa p ,anyw nb’yj ay ns: p ,?na 'ra: ,pirtr
rwya by ianj ira piwn by ’la p armn ,bjtbxn by xnx p
ronan by uybx ,miBpn na?ya by Draax n n a ,D'jan anb

.wiaban by amai


b " o n ipn'B

.'wan paa

nnn n"2 ,ruroa a spin ninr picon i'n -ns jew jn (X

payi ,nn Saa paioo vnt? DH’Dnm onion pn nnato natron San ,tn’au linen onn
maySnSjn ’0 on’va Sma pS’oo ounanvntr :|n ,rpD"Dn .'n natroa nsam niomnn
D”cS nSy’ ’0 iSsn onn n’.n’tn non pnnnS naiooS pans vm ,it nmay ’Oi it miay
niai vntr usoi anp.nS nans nmn nnSv ntrs Satr nnanpn ;n prp .nnoS »oi ovn
n’noa pa’pn ns nS lan'triomp anpn onip nsan Satr ,nnon pnnnS ita oa paiooS vn pans
un nninb nansa nan noam ps’aon nan use panyno vn cat ,imSy ian’ sSi aispn
,tmpoa nso Sunn nan n>n D^VD ^rt .S«ne^ nnssn trn’sa p’y ,nSsn nmnyn
Sy D»sn< o’aSin vm ,onp onaa nyansn pn nmayn nya omSy o’stria ounan vntr eco
,nnia H'S d ' trip itoa* sSsr nuanpn ntra ns SiasS vn D’nnaio na pai tr’tr Sir nssnn
nsisnn mpoS is'anS nSnatr nns Sa Sy own vn Deiooni ,D”yo ’Sma i»on iSna pSi
naieon pn mannen Sao atrm nci ,ntb non duidd vn pSi ,an»nnn nnns nuoSt
Saa H rt a o’Stnnn t^npaa pn nb ncin .innatrn nnn ntr^a n\n Sant? 'trmn

^vasya tnao nntr naioon sin ,rnD .tnpB 'KaSi SanS »StvS d'B panS ^nioai pan
SiyaS ,nann duid» vn ntS oa ,D nysr nWa »n:ota miajn mtay Sa ,tnanS niso is
nonSo nj?a sStr trnpon ns nuatrS niso.n n^n p n ,Bnpon ns motrSi n^» Sa
nS^cn pr« sStr iDipo by non? Sa dh^d vn ouioom ,n’on 'ooa nsan^ ntrsa r naaDi
ns pDnicn inis ppSo vn ,tc” ono nns ns pssio vn osi oS Saaintr cipoa ano a»ao
.onjnr nVya by nuioon naS c’nns ouioo ntS vnc^ p'po snpa n\n nti imoa
onSn nn’ns ns onSo vn pi ,maanpn nanpn nya v'Btr.nS ona o»ao vnc» D>Dinn non
zbyc np„ on’trn Sy nsaan n«i ,maanpn nanpn nya onsnn onioton ns not iSaa oaaaa
n\nr r rtniDpn nBTO ,B'nSsoni D'Dinn Sy ouioon naS ,nns natoo n\n "nyoa^o
duood noao naanySt na'annS Sma poyi \':y nn^n naip'ni ov Saa ,D’ove 'nv nansa
rp 2 vn nta ounson paoisn pi ,nSijr nmopn py n»n'tr t«i ,nn*i nns Sa mv’on
vnpn* nSp paoisS pans vn yiatr Saa mSn a"» ptri^ vntr nuon Dni> pi /Da'taaK
MtSi ,Ton ^Doa nsiaon ,Dnuani onms oai f wv Sir inSitr by o^naio vntr npa nnno
vnr nanortb na ,onuaS onaois nw pnaio vni? nann nr.m inna n '3 paioon n ’.n
.masSoi mvpai inaots msnSi onnaono inis SapS nnvo naioo n^n nnn inis pa’Sno
•Sin uco o^pa vn'v D'nutroi onnaaa ounan ntraSna D'pioy onn o'tras vn oa
vn man matrSi .onnvo ouioo vn nSia byv ,onaan 'oaiai ,trnpoa nSunn □'’yon

% ounan naaS pn nmnvo vnw tenpoa


10


T:n D 'bpW p">s

n'Dai nsu ay iba’ j.Tam) ,n'abw vnt 'an^ 1 ? nan’ niapn
mapoi ,mSiy ianp’ jaats ana? ,nais j?mT ’an ; (n'an pnab
fnaa isisi ,ni*?is jrrana war ,B'ab^ Tat ■'ana 1 ? naa'
nip'as i a"i nan ns rs nsn rims sa’ps ’an ;n’an pnab iba 1
Strirr ’am ,im» ns nwn ntsrbs 'a-itr ,pmT ’an nana
,tprpaa trnpan : j.-irtr naia , nj?a^ ,n , ’ , aa 'an nas ;pSn
.Strirr ’an na'ia ,nna tanpam 'an nana

t natan ’a: by prsn anan jna rm ,rna: trnpan ( n
,pan inis ’onx 1 ? naa 1 ,-ifcis ntrbs 'an ,maisn nrata ,r\u"
.nan pnab iba' n^naa nstri ; nibis j.Tana san
vby aapan ba ; nation ns pnptra nr o'vbwb nn^ (a
trbtra ;nyansa pan' ftrbtra nay ,nj?a-isa ninSn panS
nsi ; narbjr by «npn "nr ,nya"isa pan’ ,nsansa nasi
bapa irsi ; ib pann jrann nsi ,1b njrbnn ,n*?iD njrbnn

.nma naian sms is ,rniya ns


5>"dt km-pd

nnarn pStr /van pia p diq inv nataS o ,viai cdd oa ox ,xin srnpan nri o
,ai:an otra anpnS pSia* ivxi o^aStrS pi nvixin map: Sax ai:a n ctra nbv;b iaip»
p"ni .ai:an otra mSir iaip> jmaiai mxS ntn -pisS liaa* pS ,naipnn nra i:vx dx
iax> ynaoa D”ce 'iSax,x"i nan nx nxn xin 0 iax» ,x"ia mpn ono pyS inrnt?
mx Sa 'a in:ia tx ,ora oxip xSi nataS niana vn ona»ai odd roa: Sa trnpn oxt?
monam n»Daan* : laxi bh’d ox Sax ,rtnm '1 naia laipn ,iS nxnn oipaS aip»
ntmp rasa Satr inyi nta nSa ,naTaS laipv monan o crnso idx xSi "mpn aSo ’Str
nnx n^D si^mnS iS nm ,ot?a monan xnpir ]va ,p xS ox o ; n^an piaS ,p nnx
iaip» pSi pnD onS px nwi^ o^otr nun? » 3 dd ,«hd odd nnnxtr ruiroai ."nataS„

.'lai mSiy on’Qia

uodup nnaian nx pip vn min Saac^ ,na^?an nxt p3^,DV inx (tD

panw rn n»no tayoan SaSi ,minn Sa by nnn pnaSi naiaS iivan nan Sa Sr i^non nx
^minn Sa Sr vn omx on^ip vncr D’nponi ; nnn pnaSi naiaS |mx n»ar*t? nonpn nx
Sr mpnn n»'#nr^n S’tn ox Sax ,piDn nx onaian onaio vn pnain np»n: cxr pixa
nra onS n»orn onaion ox ,Sitn nr- ! n »sa pi oScrS xSk* o^xa^S n^n mmni ; n^vSrn
invinx nr nn mran nx iSap o; ox S*i pnaiani j»Snn ,r ,c ?nn oxi niaixtr nai .Sit
inun xSi on pint oanam ,i’a mron nx i^Sapa vn nan ’a ,imx 'aStnin Sax ,p»Sr

.piannS pn nxi r’SnnS nSion nx


'Bran


13


T


p“lD


tkxb as ,3-ipn i 1 ? prnaa ,iamn uaa naxrc ^ (n
om bun ,ib ovnv vn xb ,ixT axi , 1 b panu ,iamn na lT

.pann 'jsa pTyaina

nnxi .a^xuin nauiS nnx : unpaa vn mau>T 'nw o
/xtrna nain 1 ? parw xan 'xt> a'wn nau; 1 ? ; a-^an nauib
Ta .B’Tan nau?T ; 'wra naina penana a’aua ija a^jn
paw ,av B’irTuib nnxi ,nainT ip-m ,’Ta anjna xinir ’a
prr:a ,man pnaT “pur la ixjtair ^a Tai ,nmx prime
.man pna ravbb pTaui mana pnaaj -ixurni ,imx


on cn v>D

navSyn *?j? enpn v n’H’tr non xb cmn ia# on oonin 1JDD 'D (n

^ in’ cpon rrn oni mean spana o’oij? vn mp3 n" 3 ,oiSa a'tr’ xb lomn nxnm
pnu vn ,iomn nya naipn pat? myon oy nw \bm oiooni coca pun Tat? niomnn
uw ovn m vby ains n*n o ,nwdS mx pn’cpo vn xb omnn by\ dodj A

.inn nvb

•won o'Ntrn nopV p ow onvar nod »otew moVna VU? 0

*6 now nnnvo pdbo mpoa vn maa notrS nam .nstn npixn no^DD ooi onan

•oopa* Mn not?*? »nts» mawS ini ,ns oatrrv


'Bran


12


D 'hpw pis

puny psi ,pbanas nyauiai pnau nu?bu?a pnma p^ o
"bin byu> ,nms pa pin ,D , :utt nine pass ma^n by n-nu?

.p'by “iia’Jtn an ibap jmxir ,nrnan ?yu> mybxi ,n"ya
#na nat ,b:y : jrrby amai ,unpaa vm manm npan^ 0
nat ,bjy : jrrby aina jv&iki im nirart ,-iais wy ja ; sain
B'bn: ripa 'aoj ay uiaiaa ,b:y .-r»y saim ,bn sain ,nj
,anapi D’bna ,jsic ma: ay uroira ,na ; mapn onat anapi
; naba a’b's ’aai ay u?au?a nat ; a'b'x buia pm ,niapji onai
.D'pmxa bu> mana irbu? 'aaj ay uaira ,xam
naiaa smir ,pnr bxs ib "|bm .B’aaj urpaa smir ^ n
,nms bits ib xa ; amn i:aa bapai ,niya ib jnia ,niamnn by
anybi ,a'aaj i:aa bapai ,anm lb jnu .a'aam by naiaa »in®
,mya paaa bapai ,nianmn ns ioitia nmxi ,n» bax ni pxa
tw ,in’aa priv abun ,inna axi ,unpnb nmin vvnin axi

..-rn'byn by unprt


!i"bi b» n ’ o

,onwa vn D'Shib” aa ix ,onS puns auiaon vn dk ni 3 TD nv« natron nam
,iS«n ouiDDm ounsn naisn nx njnS nmm dSiki nasn nsm nta 1131 1331

Die Priestbr und der Cultus von Prof. Buchler ibD 3 J”yS vSy ,B 11 t 311 B 3 0 y 3 t 31 03 ’®

nirryS nx '3 ,0 'bSxS xSi nixoS xS iSy isS nunsn iddd o nxi' notri Wien, 1895
nvx ?yi ounsno pi auiaon vn onsi nt>x by pi ,1x0 3*1 n'n nnSn isoo pi ,d'bS«
1313 n 3 » ; dd 8 \iD 3 nto ny 12121 i:naxi ,47=67 t*b atr nxn .□'Sx'itr’i dmSd oa ansi

.nonnn Syi o^ansn by o'ODn iimbp nnna n"’n
,pon innxi ,Sna |.-t3n innxi iSon : p vn vipos mx^an mo ^pnrri£ p« (n
cai D’3i vn^ pnaun onnnxi ,nj?np vn» ]^3iDxn annnx ,D'j^ vnr pp^npn innxi
D*iB3i xavi Ton 'DD3 nxi3D or.D inx ^3 mQ3*D nam .0*31 o’aioD vn an^nn

.n^oS 13 tan idd.13

3 isp ira n^n onoan ^,yno vn ivaippip SaS onoan ,nvorvin (a

oa p’cdd n’n *na* onini vn nntr nnzv onstn na duj?i D'^33 ’ 3 sa nam # B»ipD3
n^nr w i 3 t ¥ Dnins ltrDntrn pSi ijdd Sna invo -pa hm d’^x 5 ? Sax ,^33 iasip xnonS
itronirn pSi oiaapm Dalian nnpani on 3 tn pier onpsa ?ax f "S'x„ laaiper ’dS |dd
traiS) "MDin„ amna wanen D^n^an pip Sj?i .ipsn p lasipir 'dS H bw„ anina
n»n pnnoai nnx ,1^231 n’Sx »:tr xnnS n\i nnnrjrn iyir (xtann ^asr: nx 3 nvisn^
xSb^ D'vi^»n □’>aj?n by Ssx ; nnn 3 listing onoan nx nnS nnS pisDD xom orsinn
iidx ,p' per aiSi rsSio inx pn ,Dnin ^neri inx ?r 33 pi xnnS onS n»n
^tr»onn Sytr vn nionin ntran o ,idix mn >xty pi pnvo poS tiv n\n xS o piaann
xSi n»Qix p’Sy 3 in 3 nw laixi pi oa “jnvn na ixcd iSnsnS b i s x a 1 n 3 in 3 ,-vn
naB'an p nxia pi n’oiK vn tnpasw Diaaon S3 >3 ,iv: nSsp nn»n poo *S 3 i n nay
ij? niSia^xn pi n*Dix pi D’ansn 1121 S32Q nmSy nnx 31 pt) cvaoDn S3 3 naijy
*(S*amva 3 n icon nxn pavrin la’vni n’Dix2 annj? iSsp nviys oai /ixotri SSn inx


n


15


w & bpv pas

sir iae? ? Tia 1 aye? iae? sapi nabi ,Te?n aye? ,d’c?j aye?
nns : ib vn pe?ae?a , mr , i ,m:p , 3 aye? : nataa .mibia Tia’
ne?be? ,dc? pb rrn sbc? ,aayaa awi ,nsac?a ansi /ira’a
.cnataan maa e?'c? be? nrae? : c?npaa vn nunbie? ae?y
,e?’e? be? nns ,e?aan anyaa owi ,D"aapn ns pnna jmbye?
,*pa be? by .D’aa’sn ns nanu vn ,e?’c? be? by ; p]Da be? ansi
,e?'e? ae? "ins : man nna by pnaa nbisa D’ic? , i ; nne? ’ba
be? byi /inD’iaa Das n anb pint: ,c?’c? be? by ; an? be? ansi
am be? “rnsi ; pama sbi e?"npa pbyae? /ns-ma ,ant

.Tan D’jsn onb vbyc? .oasaa
pbpn : omby ainai ,e?npaa vn nnaic? ne?y nc?b£? (n
am ,nnabi ,D’ify ,nbiy ’bar ,prp ,pp"ny pbpn ,pmn
'a ,pp’nyi ,n:c?i me? baae? .pnnnpbpn .nanib nc?e?i ,naisab
,nbiy ■'brim ,pnin ;n ,pvp ; nsan mc?b bpie? npnc?’s bpe? sbe*
,pvp : onais D’aam ; nam’ -an nan ,mbiy jbia ,mv va jn
.nibiy jbia ,nbiy ’bvm ,nbiy ansi nsan nns
; par: ’ie?a nina’ sn /D’lfy ’by nn» : naisji o
ne?e? ,an? ma mna’ sb /ant. ; paipa mna’ sb /nnab.


!>' 01 b» n ’ B

nonVtwi payi .ninVin nnx nooS in mno 1 ? poasnD vn non dA ik oonsi
A nnsn ,sm Sir inSm by doss min rvn ooen nnbv odd ,n in "enps pSyo„ :vidni

.tmpn ;d inxss as nts ]nb\w

is V'n "pmn pbpn,, vby sins nvi piwnn nsitrn f rvnDiK> n&yy (n,

: sdn 5 ? "pp'ny pbpn,, vby sins n»n o:?m ,nsnn ods it mtro ctbptrn nx ybvrh psnv
A nnn»p ,nbsp odd ^spo xini nsun oss s"s nnsyn natrs iso xbty nAptsm isSti’v is
.is in so ybu* "]0 *p„ by snA psnn o sdnS ,|o>p vby sins n»n wbvn .mis y nx
nx nSi^ >snA nstoS n:v osi nnin nys D'snaDn is^tr» is Vh "nSiy Atu„ ’y'snn
S'strs /; n:isS /; vby sins ^ssyn 1 ? ooryn by niso Ssip> is "a^yy,, 'irmnn /on^niso
rnp Vstrs isonntp msnsn vn is »s "nn issS snt v >yorrn r n:isSn Sy mso D’sn:Dn
/Hsnj ons^? vntr ntytrm ,aonrxnn nnow nystrn non n^N .air n^ntr* missm owpn
m Vn /'nxnn nniD,, ptyxnn by : om (D"SDsn ny*A) onnvD niotr o’nnn vn nnAy ds
r^Dsn )D^ iynS ntn nsitrs ds»Sd»d n*n onn my A nx»3 inop nnxi nxanS myo tpnpnty
'y»sm /'nnSvi ps? o*p nnio,, »»Arrn /"ditx nniD ;/ ot?n ,nxnn 'snA pn npv xS nm
nnx nsDD 1 ? myn tynsn nx f V^s inttr "ymvD jsnp *iniD„ 'tronni ,"nns nosnp minS,,
f oyoS tDisDn Dipns nnx ^s nnian Vd» insnj nstsD^ d.id x^intr nnx n^s nxtrsi ano
nsisi .nsToS ix enpob Tixsn SsS pnpA vn nios* nns "nsn^,, sins n\n wm by\
op> asDSDty ,x»n pvpS D'siJDn nyms» nnsiD aosnn o xin ’"nS nosnn pss> xnsAsn
.omsns nsSnntt* nnix D /; sDnni ,VSs Ais nsmn Sy nSy^nsn
nisoS a’irDnD'D vmr nourn nnsit^n pay nxsnarr nnx ,'^y 'nn noiNH (l
dScd o’x dx ,xmtr Ss A'sxi pmn^ nns nnsitpnS ^'StrnS nniD tx ps »s ,sxsn noitr


14


W Dv>|W pna

♦W p-©

nnirp irSur nipp nirbir ,nnaw nwp nvbty («

wan "an rra San Ss'Sas pn rra Sir prnpaa vn nvinnirn
?nnw nrrn p\m ; nntrp pans annnira vn D'snan po

.1333 jnXH D1T1T ,D.Tfl13Ktt DT3 miDS plT .D'XP.n TT H333

K\nir nastnn nsm ,papna n'nir ,nns paa nirp£ fa
nann ns niasS p'SD.n «S /n'anS nasi sa ,n'nnana nsira
.1333 pnsn airir nin"a lpnn , inairs nnsrir np
irSir amj pansi , pasta pans ? annnira vn p'ni (3
: anpaS paiao ,D'om .anpir 3 "' nssa ,anpaa D'niri nmaa
snp: naSi ; D'an npir ,nmaan npir ,pSm npir ,p'Spn npir
'an .3na D’a *pD3 Sip n'mSst po’saa lair y D'an npir iair
psstv nvnS pi'npi ,paaa D'an id : nais app' p ntp'Ss

.n'an jnsa nnna

,pnp npir ,n'33' npir : anpaS paiao pasta jnaipp c»

/

OMI'B

pna .

moisn in o'Sptrn ep2 ona vntr nia'nntr i:idn 122 ,nnDU? “it yy ntybty (K
pi ,n2in2 0:2^ i» ^2in nbv nooSo cornu nSyoSo onsp vntr »aeo nncio* o»«ip3
ntry ntr^tr iedod enpD 3 n»n» no Sa nn uson nxtn n 3 o*om ,ni 05*00 o’oipy vn
'1 ppnn 013320*1 ,Hipo 3 o*i 3 T 3 n oinnm nno mtry e^tr 12:2) ,0*1*? twpn isoon
nn®w 3 *\i vn no tricn *n .130*021 ,(niinn n« 0,12 trmS nmo mtry ntrW ^Nyotr*
iyi» '2 ,nNii nxm n 30 *on 52m 10) .nvinntrnn vn pipo nt»N 3 tricn pi ,po*one*o
lyo^i ,o»:ioipn a»o»a 03 nSi^KS 3 trn 3 n»n 13 iBDoni oncoon *iana diikaho'b hio^o
1312 61 « ik f ntn *i£Doa o»trnp cnan wpn ,n«Tn nScon n 3 io«n n» ponn aSo Ton
uioia 03 i ; o»ttmp onanV iniaaiotr nTa 13 neooa wontron bv i^td yn pinonS n:a
ponn 5 ? nixvA 13 iBDoa pi onain bs o'o*ontron "Thirtccn-Club" o»a man mow
.onfyn in n»n kib»k iijam nno 'ooai (.ia naaoi tron bs pscy
poyno n»n pii m:aipn miay 1 ? Sidbi dio Sya n»n |nan ,\rai nt^yo fa
jn»Syw iiyn jo o*syn n« pSxco vn pi ; o^idd vn o»api 3 n ik o^inono* o^yn naS
unponi i»yn Slants* mpn ny pwv iki 10* xa pom o*ipoa ny 1333 pi«ni ; nato^
The Pens i 3 iDDa p»yi ; ntn non nn mW? nsiv » 3 fiO ,no ntn inani ,onts*an n»o

tateuch etc., Chicago^ 1894.

, 13 m' ja »dv xaK xin ,vipoa vn onyo* 3 "* '2 noisn ,Dnnnt^D vn pMI (3
vn onyo* nya» pi o'oann nyiS Saw /:o* tsnpoa vntr o»?n3n oonan id i?a
n ?3 pSo* ; 01113 'N 31 D 0 TI n»ai p"onaa oovn mco* nine 3 "» 1332 vn nvinncnm
ooiri onioo*a nyo*n aio*nn io*k natron onxi # nmn pya n^n nvnen 1332 nvinntrn
pi ipSn o'oanni) n»n 12 nnaia '2 nsi: ,oib 2 vn kie'k niowi invo do* xSa
.fioSin 1 ? no*p vax oo*a ltrn'si ,ni' 3 tron ^y '"xena nxii ,nSapno x^i mytrnno
nincS ptrpi piaa vn ni 5 ?H 3 n »a ^1^113.1 -|ina m:op ninSi o’Nip 3 ,ptT 0^0 (1


17


Q


pis


.^3® pis

iSs' o^p^S amp ,n3i:b D^pirn pa Tttac^au? myft («
crxj? pa ; nan*? iSs' ^xnab nsma ^naub b& nanj£,D , bptfS
nsrna ^-mab 1 ? ibs’ naiabb ,n'xyb ibs' Q'xyb amp niia 1 ?*?
b%' prpb anp ,r6ii? ■'bru 1 ? prp pa ; mia'i'i ibs’ 1 nxneb
bs>' n^nab n^na ; nbiy "bn: 1 ? iba" ,r6w ’bnab ,p’pi
^buib ibs 1 pSinb anp ,'iv i^yab p*?in pa ; nby '^nifc
la'yab 'lbs’ n^nab nsna /w itryab iba' 'iv nyyab
.nannb nana 1 ? nima bpnb anpn mx pabn bbzn nt .w
Ha ; “urya nbij? 1 ? ,nana nmo ’3sP lxit&jtr niyft (3
ma* 1 ia -ixwai ,n»ya ,bnn npun D'btirtTO ; pbm ,rran

.pbin nwn

; mxan mavin ; mbiy pan* ,mij» xsai^ -nr^ 0
,nsnwn lraS xsn imiit laipn nn n: ; n'ftbv na: D’btrrva
Snn riytra ; nnnia rvo’nn jnb'ai pa’K pbiaja sitaj

.pima pia’x *]x ,nana nwarw


b " d n cm ' d

.T3® pIB

nainnai poajai nuaipa npnpS npnp fa ‘nan p»p 'zb OttVDJP myio CK
mix pS ,nSp rump pi nanp ansi nnan npnp 1 ? iairup my a p nupS ib^t kSp
n»Sppn nan 1 ? span p nsmn nopp um ; anain upb nip iiy’Pa span xsa bkp
nom mSiy pi pip anap mu mya nan kbp ppna t« ,imn nip naun nanSi
spaa up^ pS ,paixS pnu dji iai f?a pip amaiap a’fyppn spa p nnan npnp
npnp miaSnp naia^i a^y ay lain pi ,n'bpvn spa ja nnan npnp lap iai nn
rwpan aipnn ipk Saa pnn Kin pi ,pip n’paa pi a>vym pip nn mia^itr usa a’syna
nn .nSpn ]a niiann Tan nan pea nva pSi ,n:i^Kina inv ntrnp nutrnty nxSn
anTay laiai ,muatr i^na nnan ntmp latr iai r^Dana nup 1 ? V ; i /'TannS, main

.’"ncn »ii»Ba nxi anatn nnown bv

tr» puna nan la aoSinn aiia> n>an ma «^aj^ c\aan ^nona nmo '2tb (a
bni annbsa aanan in»» k 5 ? a^ipn r|aa o »3sa nani an«a Sej ^aan >a 1 ^
u^aai ,nairSa m^a nanan by miu \bbn laa psa >Sa ,pipn niaaS na»nn p iniSu:
pED nSa K'n manan nmo >3 bS ihn aipaa ejaan «saj an a"«^a ; pSinS ejoan k^>
nia» Saa ]a airn: pSi r up’ »a» i^ya qaaa -]« oaipn an uru /:» itrya mjua
i^V 1 Sni»» Saa» ny^a nburw ni^ina aipa Saa Kva an ff|Dan nn aj?aai .mtrn
^aK ,B’niixna inua iaK3ty aim m« an^in f w? i»ya riK anx ikom ^iS nap

.pSin sjaan /Hianan pip nSu ,mpn ma’ ‘yaa
aipm amia ipa n^o: bk ]ab # bik bib Tyn bn y^axa auSpn >nai ’a 0
inipun’ pa ,(mN nS’bi a»a’ upb ini» S"i] mu sinp nvnS Sia’ o ;yi pubpS mix
nnn n^iynp nuyai .mu »xua nsnpn n’a 1 ? i«»sinS iSav \ynb mx nh'b ny pDDa


w D^pB» P"IS

na>an ,nibii7 na rnpib ? na rany vn no nan: .nai: 1 ?
sin arcs. : Phj jna jn v i,T ann anno w ; n^nab nmyni
Diaroi son Dia?o xa Kina? ba .bban m O *»•?”) 'nP ca?K na?«
':v ixiioj ; D’jnab nmym , 0 c 1 ? na?an ^ibij? la np'r ,noa'x
ppai aa?K s^aa. noixi /D’ina 1 ? oa?xi ‘rh oars : D’O^p caina

O 'a oo^a) .*r».T D’jna 1 ? 'H fP3 K3V K 1 ? HlNton


b " O ~i toll's

nine' xbv sisp sy» ?x ,nsn nt»K 'by nn nosi ma ox San ,mip yw mpu ma nn
Buchier St? neon ,n’ansS m nnaipn to nmyn 's natron iay’otrn saw ,n to
,nmyno oonsnS nn’ntr nSnan nvvtryni nts o’psyno vn cons nos mipn hvd* ,S"an
'Sys oonsntsn oonsnS ipSnna ’no pi /tripos nt Sntrs l’ntr nnmua nistrS nosi
d’O’ob’o vntr ox ,Sna nnvn pSnn nx yma ootfyS onpSs o«ayn o’anan nx iSta yntn
v"'$) ,1x0 si n\i nmyn disci ,ixd ntrp misy nn’ntr niasipn misyo couy

.(DDintrni


TOP


19


pns


P* 1 D

pair ‘rara pn ,pnana Q’^ri's psataan ppann («
,naarn nia’ nsara anaas D'aana ;n'«a 'an nai ,p ,! ?yn
,pnana yacasaar ^ann nyaraa ,pnan» pmataara ,psaa yacasnar
.pnnarb ppbraaa ,ptayaa par 'asaar ,pxato p-maara
^n^aan rvab m' *pn psasaatr a'San c>

’an 'nan ,ppy ,pn'n' -pna xbar ; pnana ,n'by im ,psaa
,nanaan pa ^an ja pn ,pnana jbaa ,naas 'Dr 'an ; tsb

.nnapb pnnran ,nmana

narbara ,Ta na anaar ,nary nyansa nsataaar paQ o
bn ; b'aaa 1 naaar nta paa nta pa , paapa ; b'aaaa naaar ibd
na tamar nary narana ,Ta na tamar ,naara na'nb nary nyans
.paaa at 'in ,paan nnaarp nsataa ,ma
a'aaa nraas pb'ataa ,nsaaan nbaa nsataaar naan£ d
nnas pb'ataa ,nsaiton asa nsataaar rasa ,t» nmx pa'aaaa
aa by nnax pntaaar narnn nn'n asa ,b'na nnas pntaaara ,pna
♦ns: x'nar pasha ns ayn isn'ar 'na ,satoa£'sn


Ji'bi t? i v> a

.'3'aar pna

>3 ) 5 >n i»db Hint? K>r\ jmt (8 i"ta tnpn) mira ■wun atn pn ,|'pnn ba (K
'pro dmnu iyc> sSt? ntpss m ,dv ov DStmc s ct? nn oyn )'c ]'ct vn xbv ipcs 's
aStyn* nvncuna ncc's ^n:on ns nawcn wywn ,DStPiT nicinnc acSno nyc ctn Sc*
sSi pSyn pice idS lcSn nan 'sate See nos »"n nani ,uic» Sy p"Dnei nniSce
Seen nyce n ,anois a'ocn Ses ,nninian ns isou’ kS picS onns mmmm n'pice
vSsic )znm ,-p’nS Sinei ,ysose lcSn nmntan Sci myth ns ns D'sietan *]SnoS nysp
aipae ssbjh pnntr pso ps pi ,o'dShd □'nintanc' mpoa issoat^ pnnS tnnS psc^

.sota sine* f anSni3 D'SDtan^

mn’S nns nS'ntan n'nS vn com utr '3 moS n:c*Dn nstD ,DPDH i)3 (3
noSin i ddn pSi ,n':tr isaan'i Q'sictan ns )n"Sy nya onintan i^d" sSc> ,n»SyS nnsi
n'fym saa ssa:n ]'soq pSen Sc vne* mnm ^ne seno pnsn Sc niciSc ann nns
,n"S;*n n*nc issq: djj ntJi hsdidS pnnvic^ n'Sen S^ isi ,nmo ssoan ]ninu rnc*
sSc> psipn *]si ,nst nnsSc* n:c*oc pccc ntn ; nnptnrc 'Sc ps'snc pstr »as»
ns »jib»dh »itb >£ Sy onn tacs' n'hn *san» t^ns i:'s >c ,sin n:ic» ic uim?S i^nc
c,i li'sn ns? wane nnsi f nuic*sc nic*Dn ns ubhb jeSi f nso pirn sim nstn natwan

.i:^ivbc pco sin n>v ,Ssn^» nnssn im'sc
esc »o sep' "nsonaS pc*s*i„ S"tc* nsrcitan nSi paj? rone (T

s'n nc yawn /'nsDitan mes ns /f nsnpa s'n "no n'ia„ : s'.n onipSnD noi ^soion
pi ,'c*'S^,/ pi f nsoittS we,, sep' pc*snc yawni /ptrsn,, sin ic yaiani "nsiciian cs„

*nnnta moc nsen' can 'tacei /"'yon,,


18


'T2V D^ptP P ns

nnraai ,ny b-na nyi a-birima nsscosw nan^ ti
,-ibis nnm 'an ; aiaiw *nat map: ,nibiy ansi ,nn bab
,DV B’Wbw b;ib Blip ,D'HD 2 anasb 'ism
,maa: sna smw ay msxio ns paawea vn rowing (n
bwa pxa maa: i.tw ivpnn ,pnnai nmx pmta nvnb ntn

.urns

ins nn ,pn ma irpnn anai nyaw ,pyaw ’an *ia^ 0
pan p ,d-od: nay nbwi ,a\i nriaa inbiy nbww na: : pa
,n’nDT m:m ,naw n: pi ; ma'i: bwa panp ,1s 1 ? axi ,ibwa
; ma':: bwa panp ,ixb axi ,ibwa panp ana: 17 a" as
biya nanp wma xnnw naw bn: pa by sin pi ma 's:ni
.nanp nmn na'bwi punv bwa pais mm 1 m nn’a
byi ; pa pms"a a^nan i,tw ,B'xyn byi ,nban by 0
nisa imw mbiasn prpn byi ,nisxa pbyia in’ saw msn
ns p'SDa pvpn ns p'saan ,iais -av *ai ; na’jc baa

.mbiasn


b " d i e> n ' b

ias s*03 ds pb ,0'o^ir onas^ pi □'nn:'? nms c'nnjo vn sSi naton *?y S'Sa nSiy
ptrain pSi o»nnaS pnnao vn ,pSais ounan vn n:oo:r ,nstann Sax ,nSiy sins* i:yT oStr
■pis nn»n ,inu trtrno nwiDsn ns SSa o’Saix vn xS 020s dxi ,x^n nsnn Nat?
,th xS oStriTa txtr ,iSaxi ins lay os yin yi: ;yoS ,xi*02n Iran pi ns uyiotrnS

na’nn n?»x iya pan ns y'rh D'Sia* u”n sS mrya pi ,s'nn nSoxn Sy oix our a^n

lax Sax ds Sas ,nia'nn n\n xS niSiyno o ,c’jnaS Sax:n lai >xna nn>n xintr 'aso
12*33 yin ns isan aasi .S»Sa nSo nvnS ntaccotr s»n nSiyo «air a^n tk
-ibod sm^ ann inn paSin ,ias sSi s’.n na^nn "]« ostr Ssn^ ny Saa s^o:tr ySin
n’nS mis laryi nSa: ww »:bid iannS iirtrn sS sotr trinS c« oStr nas Sy is ,ntain^
-ins nnasa dj t»aSin ,naino nt^antr p^na is ; na^n niD> Saa nos pSi sin^ i»a .Turn
•non ^tntri *i'yn 'e>2H antr oipoa ^nuimr ntrao sin^ ann
anp is^o:tr onatn mona ^y insptrna pn^ st.t 'i n«VD^ nona (n
o’nosn |ia nns sin >a sin 'sni'? anptr ].TnDD ns panpo Ssntr' ^ac* nyn .nae?
n:B f )o nnv iS tr'tr nsn:tr nona Sy sSi r\:v p na? Sy spn inaia ^as^n’SyaS nasatr

mSiyn \n p ,b'bi r\b ia sw nSiy 5 ? aipv <a cnoisi nta 02 yTono o'oann -]s r nns

.ynnio sSi ttmpa ]’Syoi s\n
.13 ,i snp'ia iias:n s\n ;na nn:a ,nw bnj )na 0
,c>Dann nta nS’yo sSi ntrnp sS na ys minn p o os ,nnD«a j'bv’iD (T
/ni'jiDcn i'2'pn non ,ns nnaio nst^onir lain ip’yi /mesa o'trnntro conan vntr >250
nnvn nya iSde: peo '^ac^ / iaio.no onpSi mya launa* ins niSics is*io: os Sn
i^ ’a p'i ,na^ ^tro .Tnnn iaip< onnsi laion Sy nnvins ps tstr lann v nnn laa
|37 ,ia noyS iSa< s'? onaion anir onain id n\n ntn laim ,n2v'?yn ^y i^on tripnn
D'iHn 'oisi .imoa naSn ps *]s ,nia ca pSin ^dv '11 ,mnvo napna nst pn'? iaiuin

.ooipoa nsan» oopo


O’Otr


20


O'bpV p^s

,pon p ppatp ’an mira nmx bx’ba:i p pymr ’3") (n
xm: ba bjn ,nn« pmo D’jun D’yaa? bjn ,nsra map nans
D’na>y nanm nax c’j?anx, nanx ,ptoin panxi an»j? xmn
wban ,ma? baa pans? D’na?i ,ma?ja sm ’nan maa?m ,nax

.nmx pb’ataa D’sna-mxa

nbia pa nxaiton axa pa ,xaa:a? D’anp ’a?np na?^ o
,m:sa span ban anaix ’xaa? ma ,pna pa ,n’32a pa ,nxa ran
span ban nnaix bbn ma ; pna nxaian axa xaasa? ’a pn
.n^sa nxaian nbia xaasa? ’a pn ,pna
^■osa pa ,nxausn axa xato:a? nx ,naix nisnbx ’ap u
aa? /nxato aipa naix xa’ps? ’an ; a’ssa s]nr ,pna pa

.insna?

ba?i ,nntaa ntaabi a?aa ’sna p:m: rann na^ (n
DTin ’a?xn bn ,ans?aa ntaabi a?aa ’jtna pan’a paoia
px amaam a’bpa?n .ntaana naian aiana nnna psm
mmaani nana na?yai pn na?s?a bax ,man nsa xbx pama
a’npa? ampan .man ’oaa xba? pa ,man ’jaa pa panu
,u?np amaa naixn ,naix pyaa? 'an ;a?np nj nn ,B’naai

.anp p’x

.D’bpc' naDD |nn


is'oi km ’ a

Djn psan \wbs nnan nitron »a ♦obtnn'a nos* * nancn nana ,^ 2^1 (n
nan jo ant bv Diaa n*onn ns tptrntr no oil ntn nitron ns aitrn* (: s ybin) iSaaa
ii’# inis j^ataon oonan nan *a nxy ,b'yb inattr Buchlcr naoa n«nn nb\x) ,>«an
,o i o tr a mnwai mSni cnyS trpinm nisotu naon nitron ns mso xb >2 ,kotu
nmnntr naSna oa ^syotri 'n nos naa o fibs non ii»s nb^pb psn y p a n i b pi
|0 iii»s ant 'bss n»onn ns mptrnb dji ,mtoiyo nsoontr na a"stro ,nns oa \wbs nnan
ctra tr"o ’"sena nsn) ,trnpoa vntr ant >Sai nn’tryn »an >cb ,0’s^con nnan
nt&DinBna nitap poo n'n o nvnb Sia» nanen ns^in'? navptr -jnn nil ,(x&'xm p.xin

*msotii nann nitrontr iit«vo sn SSa nnna o ; nanva nitrna is pSitrn ninoa nny
ji'wn motron »ntr msan» n»on nanoa /iriNDiD D lpD ^an (r ,1

.|OipO Du’ ’3

oa iani nniaat ntryo .mno Poa nsan> n"n >bdio piy 1 ? mntr aianan joy (rt

.□nTiiaso n^ni bD nn b n<n s^tr ,n^bn jion ns bsbsb n^an oaa s^tr


Princeton Theological Seminary Libraries
