================================================================================
Bacchylides: The Poems and Fragments
Bacchylides | Edited with introduction, notes, and prose translation by Sir Richard C. Jebb (Cambridge, 1905)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Bacchylides, the poems and fragments (1905)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/cu31924052998659
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

BACCHYLIDES


THE POEMS AND FRAGMENTS


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS WAREHOUSE,
C. F. CLAY, MANAGER.
London: FETTER LANE, E.C.
Glasgow: so, WELLINGTON STREET.


Deipsig: F. A. BROCKHAUS.
few Bork: THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
Bombay and Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp.


[Ad Rights reserved]


Pasny laf Caer
BACCHYLIDES


THE POEMS AND FRAGMENTS


EDITED


WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND PROSE TRANSLATION


BY


‘Sir RICHARD C. JEBB


REGIUS PROFESSOR OF GREEK AND FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE


CAMBRIDGE :
at the University Press


HOS


NOTE.


The Syracusan coin known as the Damareteion, struck in 479 B.C., is reproduced
on the cover from the example in the British Museum. Damareta, wife of Gelon,
caused this commemorative medal to be issued in silver, defraying the cost from a
large gift of gold made to her by the Carthaginians, whom she had helped to obtain
favourable terms of peace after their defeat at Himera in 480. The Damareteion
weighed ten Attic drachms, or fifty Sicilian litrae (Diod. x1. 26); which is precisely
the weight,—found in no other early Sicilian coin,—of the piece in our Museum.

Obverse. A laurel-wreathed head, probably that of Nike. The dolphins, emblems
of the sea (cp. Bacchylides xvi. 97f.), perhaps suggest the maritime city. Reverse.
A quadriga, crowned by a winged Nike, with allusion to Gelon’s victory at Olympia
in 488 B.c. It recalls the phrase in which Bacchylides addresses Hieron as Συρακοσίων
ἱπποδινάτων στραταγέ (Vv. 1f., 476B.C.). Below, a lion, the symbol of Africa, ἐ.6. of
vanquished Carthage. .


PREFACE.


HE Bacchylides papyrus was brought from Egypt to the

British Museum in the autumn of 1896; and the edztio
princeps, by Dr F. G. Kenyon, appeared in 1897. We have
thus acquired a large body of work by an author previously
known only through scanty fragments; and the value of that
acquisition is enhanced by the class to which it belongs. Of all
the poets who gave lyric expression to Greek feeling and fancy
in the interval between the age of Epos and the age of Drama,
Pindar alone, before this discovery, could be estimated in the
light of considerable remains. The fragments of the rest,
exquisitely beautiful as they sometimes are, afford little more
than glimpses of the genius and the art which produced them.
Now theré is a second representative of Greek song who can be
judged’ by a series of complete compositions. .Bacchylides has,
of course, no pretension to be a poet of the same order as
Pindar ; it might rather be said that part of the interest which
he possesses for us arises from the marked difference of poetical
rank. In reading his odes, so elegant, so transparently clear, so
pleasing in their graceful flow of narrative, often so bright in
their descriptive touches, and at moments so pathetic, we feel
that this is a singer who, moving in a lower sphere than Pindar,
must also have been more immediately intelligible to the
common Hellenic sense. The great Theban master makes no
concealment of a haughty consciousness that his inmost appeal
is to the few. This Ionian, if once he likens himself to an eagle
—using a conventional simile germane to the style of an
epinikion,—is truer to his own spirit when he describes himself
as ‘the nightingale of Ceos.’ He brings home to us the existence
and acceptance in Pindar’s time of a lyric poetry which, without


vi PREFACE.


attaining or attempting the loftier heights, could give a quiet
pleasure to the average Greek hearer or reader. There is reason
to suppose that, if the fame of Bacchylides in his own day was
not conspicuous, at least his popularity was extensive ; and it is
known that he continued to be widely read down to the sixth
century of our era.

He certainly deserves to find readers in the modern world
also. Not only is his work attractive in itself; it is a good
introduction to the study of Greek lyric poetry: in particular, I
believe that students would find it helpful in facilitating the
approach to Pindar. The text of Bacchylides is uniformly easy,
except in those places where the manuscript is defective or
corrupt. The contents abound in matter of poetical and
mythological interest ;—-Croesus, saved from the pyre to which
he had doomed himself, and carried by Apollo to the Hyper-
boreans; Heracles meeting the shade of Meleager in the nether
world, listening to the story of that hero’s fate, and forming the
resolve which is to seal his own ; the daughters of Proetus driven
‘by the Argive Hera from Tiryns, and healed by Artemis at
Lusi; Theseus, diving after the ring of Minos, and welcomed by
Amphitrite in the halls of Poseidon.

It is by considerations such as these that the scope of the
present edition has been determined. I have endeavoured to
combine criticism and interpretation with a treatment of the poems
as literature ; and thus to contribute, though it be only a little,
towards obtaining for them that place in our Greek studies
which they appear well fitted to hold. For such a purpose it
was not enough to explain and illustrate the odes themselves ;
it was necessary also to aim at conveying some idea of the
surroundings amidst which the poet worked, of his relation to
contemporaries, and of his place in the historical development of
the Greek lyric.

Owing to mutilations of the papyrus, gaps of various sizes
are frequent in the text. Sometimes there is no clue to the
sense of the lost words or verses, and conjecture would be vain ;
as in Ode VIII. 56-61, XIV. 7-14, 32-36, and elsewhere. Again,
there are numerous instances in which a small defect can
be supplied with certainty, as in I. 31 ἔπλε[το καρτε]ρόχειρ,


PREFACE. vii


or XIX. 5 θρασυκάρ[διος Ἴδας. But there are also two other
classes of lacuna, intermediate between these. (1) In some
passages, where a few verses have been lost or greatly mutilated,
traces remain, which, with the context, sufficed to indicate the
general sense of the lost portions. See, eg., Ode XII, note on
168-174. There are several cases of this class in which the
evidence is sufficiently clear and precise to justify an attempt at
showing how the defective text could be completed. But it
should be clearly understood that wherever, in this edition,
a supplement is suggested under such conditions, it is offered
only as an zlustration of the sense to which the evidence points,
and not as a restoration of the text! Such a supplement is
merely an adjunct of interpretation, giving a definite and
coherent form to the presumable meaning of the passage as a
whole. The following are examples :—III. 41-43, 72-74; IV. 7--
12; VIII. 89-96; ΙΧ. I-8, 20-26, 54-56. (2) Another class of
lacuna is that in which only a few syllables are wanting, while
the limits within which a supplement can be sought appear to
be narrowly defined alike by the sense and by the metre. A
typical example will be found in Ode xv. I, and another in
vill. 20. See also I. 32, 34; VI. 3; XII. 226f.; XVIII. 33, 35, 36,
38, 50. Small problems of this nature may be said to form a
characteristic feature of the Bacchylidean text as it now exists.
Among those to whom my acknowledgments are due, the
firstis Dr F. G. Kenyon, to whose edztio princeps of Bacchylides
I had the privilege of contributing some suggestions. It would
be difficult for me adequately to express how much I have been
indebted to him for help during the progress of this book.
In places where the papyrus is defective, the lines on which
any tentative restoration can proceed must often depend on
exceedingly minute indications, perhaps on the ambiguous traces
of a single letter. It has frequently happened that, when
working with the autotype facsimile published in 1897, I have
had to consult Dr Kenyon with regard to the possible interpre-
tations of some faint vestige as it appears in the original papyrus,
or to re-examine it in his company at the British Museum.


1 To make this clear, in the few instances where such supplements are suggested
they are printed in a Greek type smaller than that of the text.


vili PREFACE.


For the invariable kindness with which he has given me the
benefit of his acute and skilled judgment, I cannot too cordially
thank him. He has further done me the signal favour of reading
large portions of the proofs; and, more especially in the critical
notes on the text, several corrections or modifications of detail
have been due to him. To Professor Butcher also my warm
thanks are due for his great kindness in reading the proofs of
text, translation, and commentary.

I desire gratefully to acknowledge here the courtesy of
several distinguished scholars, who, at various times from 1897
onwards, have sent me copies of their writings on Bacchylides ;
among whom are Professors U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff,
Otto Crusius, L. A. Michelangeli, E. Piccolomini, and Paul Maas.
References will be found in several places to notes which from
time to time have been communicated to me by Dr Walter
Headlam. To Mr R. C. Bosanquet, Director of the British
School at Athens, I have been indebted for information respect-
ing the agonistic inscription from Iulis in Ceos, now in the
Athenian Museum (p. 182); and to Mr G. F. Hill, of the
British Museum, for advice as to the reproduction of the Sicilian
coin which appears on the cover of the book.

The literature which has grown around the study of Bacchy-
lides since 1896 is of no inconsiderable volume, a good deal of it
being contained in the philological journals of various countries,
or in the transactions of learned societies. A contribution to
the bibliography is subjoined.

The Bacchylides of Professor Blass, a third edition of which
was issued by Teubner in 1904, demands a special notice. It is
a work to which every student of this poet must be a debtor;
and my own debt is not diminished by the fact that, on many
particular points of criticism or interpretation,—as will appear
from the following pages,—I have been unable to accept the
views of the eminent critic. After the first editor, no one has
done so much as Dr Blass towards completing the text by
assigning places to small detached fragments of the papyrus.

There is another tribute which I would render before closing
this preface; it is to the memory of my friend Alexander Stuart
Murray, sometime Keeper of Greek and Roman Antiquities in


PREFACE. ix


the British Museum. He was interested in that passage of
Bacchylides (111. 17-21) which alludes to the offerings of the
Deinomenidae at Delphi (p. 452). In December, 1903, a few
months before his lamented death, he sent me a drawing, in
which, using ancient data, he showed how a high tripod, such as
the poet indicates, might have served as pedestal for a winged
Victory ; the total height of the monument, as he conceived it,
being about 18 feet 3 inches. A paragraph on page 456, relating
ἴο the probable significance of Hieron’s tripod at Delphi,
embodies the view of that question which was held by
Dr Murray.

My best thanks are due to the staff of the Cambridge
University Press.


R, C JEBB.


CAMBRIDGE, May, 1905.


CONTENTS.


PAGE
BIBLIOGRAPHY : : : : : ‘ i ὲ ‘ xili
GENERAL INTRODUCTION

1, THE LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES : . 5 . . Ι

1. THE PLAcE orf BACCHYLIDES IN THE HIsTORY OF GREEK
Lyric PoETRyY. . 5 ᾿ Ἶ . 3 : 27
III. CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES AS A POET - fs 56
IV. DIALEcT AND GRAMMAR ᾿ ᾿ ᾿ Ἶ ἢ 79
V. METRES. : . ; 3 ᾿ are), Δὲ : 92
VI. THE Papyrus. Ἵ ᾿ : ὃ ἢ ὃ ἢ 121
AUTOTYPE PLATES . ᾿ ‘ ‘ F 2 : 143
VII. THe TEXT OF THE PapPyRUS . ; ‘ ᾿ ᾿ 147
INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES 184
Text, NoTEs, AND TRANSLATION . : : : : : 241
FRAGMENTS . ‘ 408
APPENDIX. . : 3 ; . : . . ; 435
VOCABULARY . 497
INDEX 519


BIBLIOGRAPHY".


I. EDITIONS.


Frederic G. Kenyon. The Poems of Bacchylides, from a Papyrus in the
British Museum. Printed by Order of the Trustees of the British Museum.
1897. (Editio princeps.) ;

The Poems of Bacchylides. Facsimile of Papyrus DCCXXXIII in the
British Museum. Printed by Order of the Trustees. 1897.


Friederich Blass. Bacchylidis Carmina cum Fragmentis. Leipzig,
Teubner. 1898. (Second edition, 1899: third, 1904.)


Niccola Festa. Le odi ez frammenti di Bacchilide, testo greco, traduzione
4 note, Firenze, Barbéra, 1898.


Hugo Jurenka. Dze neugefundenen Lieder des Bakchylides. Text,
Ubersetzung und Commentar. [The translation is in verse.] Wien, Holder,
1898.


Editions of Selections.


E. Buchholz. <Axthologie aus den Lyrikern der Griechen. Vol. 11,
4th ed., revised by J. Sitzler. Leipzig, Teubner, 1898. The following
portions of Bacchylides are included (text and commentary, pp. 139—172) :
Odes 2, 5, 17 (18 Ken.), 16 (17): frag. 13 (Bergk,=3 in my ed.), 19 (7),
27 (16).

D. Nessi. Bacchilide: odi scelti [1, vv. 13—46; 2; 3, vv. 23—62; 5; 8
(9), vv. 1--52; 10 (11); 14 (15), vv. 37635 16 (17); 17 (18); 18 (19),
vv. I—25; with commentary]. Milan, Allrighi, 1900.


1 This list does not claim to be complete; and I should be obliged to any reader
who would aid me in supplying omissions. The object is to furnish students with a
clue to the literature of Bacchylides since the discovery of the papyrus in 1896. A
“few books of earlier date are also mentioned. In the course of my work, I have read
or consulted many of the.writings enumerated here, including (I think) most of the
more important; but there are many others which have not been accessible to me.


I-—-2


XIV BIBLIOGRAPHY.


Herbert Weir Smyth. Greek Melic Poets. London, Macmillan, 1900.
The following portions of Bacchylides are included (text, pp. 90—1313
commentary, 381—453) :—Odes 3; 5; 6; 8 (=9 Ken.), vv. 1—52; I0 (11);
12 (13), vv. 104—207 ; 13 (14); 14 (15), vv. 36—end; τό (17); 17 (18): also
frag. 7 (Bergk,=Ode 1. 13f. Blass, see below, p. 437); 11 (=2 in my ed.);
13 (3); 14 (4); 19 (7); 22 (10); 27 (16); 28 (17); 36 (20); 40 (23).


11. TRANSLATIONS.
H. von Arnim. Vier Gedichte des Bakchylides (3, 5, 16 (17), 17 (18), with
introductory article]. Deutsche Rundschau, Apr. 1898, pp. 42—6I.


A. M. Desrousseaux. Les foemes de Bacchylide de Céos, traduits du
Grec. Paris, Hachette, 1898.


Eugéne d’Eichthal et Théodore Reinach. Poémes choisis de Bacchy-
lide, traduits en vers. Texte grec revisé et notices par Th. Reinach. Paris,
Leroux, 1898.


G. Fraccaroli. L’ ode V di Bacchilide. Biblioteca delle scuole italiane,
Feb. 1900.


R. Garnett. Theseus and Minos. Literature, Dec. 25, 1897.


L. Pinelli. Due nuovi innit di Bacchilide [viz. 10 (11) and 12 (13)].
Treviso, Zoppelli, 1898.


E. Poste. Bacchylides: A Prose Translation. [Ten odes are translated,
in this order ;—5, 10 (=11 K.), τό (17), 17 (18), 8 (9), 12 (13), 18 (19), 3, 14
(15), 15 (16); also the fragment on Peace (fr. 13 Bergk,=fr. 3 in this ed.).]
London, Macmillan, 1898.


E. Romagnoli. L’ efinicio X di Bacchilide. Atene e Roma, 1899,
pp. 278—283.

F. Vivona. Due odi di Bacchilide. Palermo, Reber, 1898.

A. Wolff. J/ terzo efinicio di Bacchilide. Padova, Randi, 1901.


III. OTHER WRITINGS, CRITICAL, EXEGETICAL,
AND ILLUSTRATIVE.


L. Ὁ. Barnett. Notes communicated to Blass: 2nd ed., p. LXXII.


H. Bergstedt. Backylides. Svenska Humanistika, Férbundet Skrifter
no. 3. Stockholm, P. A. Nanstedt & Séners, 1900.


F. Blass. Litterarisches Centralblatt, 1897, nr. 51/2: 1898, nr. 3, nr. 5
(p. 175). Rheinisches Museum, 1898, pp. 283-307. Hermes, 1901, pp. 272-286.


K. Brandt. De Horatid studiis Bacchylideis. Festschrift Johannes
Vahlen, 1900, pp. 297—315.


BIBLIOGRAPHY. χν


Ewald Bruhn. Zeitschrift f. das Gymnasialwesen, 1898, pp. 691—698.
[‘Idem antea per litteras mecum sua communicaverat, quibus litteris
inerant etiam Ant. Funck et Caroli Niemeyer quaedam coniecturae’: Blass,
2nd ed., p. LXXIII.]


J.B. Bury. Classical Review, vol. x11, pp. 98 f., March, 1899; p. 272,
June, 1899; XIV, p. 62, Feb. 1900.


W. Christ. Zu den neuaufgefundenen Gedichten des Bakchylides.
Sitzungsberichte ἃ. bayer. Akademie, 1898, I, pp. 3—52; 597—98.


G. M. Columba. Bacchilide. Rassegna di antichitd classica, parte
bibliografica, 1898, pp. 81—103.

D. Comparetti. Les dithyrambes des Bacchylide. Mélanges Weil, pp.
25—28. Paris, A. Fontemoing, 1898.

A. Croiset. Les Podmes de Bacchylide. Revue Bleue, 1898, p. 705 ff.


Maurice Croiset. Szr les origines du récit relatif ἃ Méléagre dans Pode
V. de Bacchylide. Mélanges Weil, pp. 73—80, 1898.


Otto Crusius. Aus den Dichtungen des Bakchylides. Philologus,
v. Lvl (N. F. ΧΙ), pp. 150—183.—Dze Dichtungen des B., Miinch. Allg.
Zeitung, Feb. 7, 1898.


A.M. Desrousseaux. Votes sur Bacchylide, Revue de Philologie 1898,
pp. 184—195. (Also in Revue Universitaire, févr. 1898, p. 179.)


P. Dessoulavy. Bacchylide et la III” ode. Acad. de Neuchatel, 1903.
A. Drachmann, Nordisk Tidskrift f. Filologi, 1898.
5. N. Dragumis. ᾿Αθηνᾶ, X. 4, pp. 413—425, 556f.


V. Dukat. Aakhilid [with Croatian version of odes 5 and 16 (17)].
Nastavni Vyesnik, 1898, pp. 233—255, 356—370.


Mortimer L. Earle. Classical Review, vol. XII, p. 394, Nov. 1898.
Robinson Ellis. Class. Rev. XII, pp. 64—66, Feb. 1898.
L. R. Farnell. Class. Rev. XII, 343—346, Oct. 1898.


C. A. M. Fennell. Athenaeum, Feb. 12, May 21, 1898.—Class. Rev.
XIII, p. 182, Apr. 1899.

Niccola Festa. Per /’ onore del re di Creta. Miscellanea per nozze
Rostagno-Cavazza, pp. 5—11. Firenze, Carnesecchi, 1898.


G. Fraccaroli. Bacchilide. Rivista di Filologia, XxXvI. τ. pp. 1—44;
XXVII. τν., 513—586.
ἍΝ. Α. Goligher. Class. Rev. xu, p. 437, Dec. 1898.


Th. Gomperz. Beitrdge zur Kritik uid Erklarung griechischen Schrift-
steller VI., Sitzungsberichte der Wiener Akad., Bd. CKXXIX, pp. I—4, 1897.
—Also in Wiener Neue Freie Presse, Dec. 24, 1897.


xvi BIBLIOGRAPHY.


F. Groh. Paper in the Hungarian Listy filologické: Blass, 2nd ed.,
p. LXXIII.


C. Haeberlin. Wochenschrift f. klass. Philologie, 1898, nr. 25; 1899, nr. 7.
Jane E. Harrison. Class. Rev. XJ, pp. 85f., Feb. 1898.


Walter Headlam. Class. Rev. ΧΙ], pp. 66—68, Feb. 1898.—Remarks on
metre in Journal of Hellenic Studies, vol. XXII, pp. 214 n. Io, and p. 217.
[Also notes communicated to Blass: 3rd ed., p. LXXv1.]


O. Hense. Rheinisches Museum, 1898, pp. 318 ff.; 1901, pp. 305 ff.


H. van Herwerden. Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 1898, nr. 5.—
‘Class. Rev. XII, pp. 210 f., May, 1898.—Mnemosyne, XXVII, 1, pp. I—46.
—Museum, nr. 12, 1899. [Also notes communicated to Blass: 2nd ed.,
p. LXxt.]


A.E.Housman. Athenaeum, Dec. 25, 1897; Jan. 15, 1898.—Class. Rev.
XU, pp. 68—74, Feb. 1898 ; 134—140 (chiefly on Ode xv), March, 1898; 216—
218, May, 1898.


V.Inama. Rendiconti del R. Instituto Lombard. di scienze e lettere,
serie II., vol. XXXI, 1898.


R. C. Jebb. Class. Rev. XII, pp. 123—133, March, 1898; 152—158,
Apr. 1898.—Bacchylidea, Mélanges Weil, pp. 225—242, 1898.—Bacchylides
in Encyclopaedia Britannica, roth ed., vol. XXVI, 1902.—Bacchylides, a paper
read before the British Academy, June 29, 1904.

H. Stuart Jones. Class. Rev. xu, p. 84, Feb. 1898.


Hugo Jurenka, Zeitschr. f. dsterr. Gymn., 1898, pp. 878 ff., 982—990.—
Die Dithyramben des Bakchylides, Wien. Studien, XX1, pp. 216—224.—
Festschrift fiir Th. Gomperz, pp. 220—224 [on Odes v1, vit].


F.G. Kenyon. Class. Rev. ΧΙ], p. 133, March, 1898.
Lionello Levi. Notes communicated to N. Festa (see above).
J. H. Lipsius. Neue Jahrbiicher f.d. klass. Alterth., 1898, pp. 225—247.


Arthur Ludwich. Verzeichniss der Vorlesungen, Sommer 1898,
Konigsberg, p. 12f., 42.


Paul Maas. Kolometrie in den Daktyloepitriten des Bakchylides.
Philologus, vol. LXIII, pp. 297—309, 1904.


L. Mallinger. Le caractére, la Philosophie et Part de Bacchylide. Ex-
trait du ‘ Musée Belge.’ Louvain, C. Peeters, 1899.


L. A. Michelangeli. Della Vita di Bacchilide, e particolarmente delle
pretese allusioni di Pindaro a lute a Simonide. (48 pp.) Rivista di Storia
antica, Anno 11. 3—4. Messina, 1897. [This work appeared before the
newly-found poems of Bacchylides had been published. After that publica-


BIBLIOGRAPHY. xvii


tion, the same author wrote further in the Rivista di Storia antica, Anno III.
n. I, pp. 5—22.]


J, A, Nairn. Class. Rev. XI, pp. 449—453, Dec. 1897: XIII, pp. 167f.,
Apr. 1899.


P. V. Nikitin. See Blass, 2nd ed., p. LXXv.
τ. Pestalozza. Rassegna Nazionale, 16 Apr. 1898, pp. 697—730.
A.C. Pearson. Class. Rev. X11, pp. 74—76, Feb. 1898.


E. Piccolomini, Atene e Roma, 1, pp. 3—15, 1898.—Le οα di Bacchilide
(23 pp.) Firenze-Roma, Bencini, 1898.—Osservazioni sopra le odi at
Bacchilide, Rendiconti della R. Accad. dei Lincei, vill. fasc. 3—4.

V. Pingel. Notes communicated to Blass: 2nd ed., p. LXXIIL


Arthur Platt. Athenaeum, Dec. 25, 1897; Jan. 15, 1898.—Class. Rev.
XII, pp. 58—64, Feb. 1898; 133f, March; 211—216, May.


A. Poutsma, Mnemosyne, XXVI, p. 339.


W.K. Prentice. De Bacchylide Pindari artis socio et imitatore. Halle,
1900. (Blass, 3rd ed., p. LXXIL)


Alexander Pridik. De Cez Insulae rebus. Berlin, Mayer & Mueller,
1892.


T(héodore) R(einach). Moses sur Bacchylide, Revue des études grecques,
pp. 17—30, 1898.
Beatrice Reynolds. Class. Rev. XI, p. 254, June, 1898.


Herbert Richards. Class. Rev. XII, pp. 76f., Feb. 1898; p. 134,
March.


Carl Robert. Hermes, XXxXIII, 1898, pp. 130—159. [Also Arch.
Anzeiger, 1889, p. 141.]


O. Rossbach (quoted by A. Ludwich, p. 13: see above).


J. E. Sandys. Literature, Dec. 18, 1897; Athenaeum, Dec. 25, 1897:
Class. Rev. XII, pp. 77 f.


J. Schine. De dialecto Bacchylidea. Leipzig, Hirschfeld, 1899.


O. Schréder. Berliner Philologische Wochenschrift, 1898, nr. 11,
nr. 28.


Arthur Hamilton Smith. J//ustrations to Bacchylides, Journ. of
Hellenic Studies, vol. XVIII, pp. 267—280, 1898. [This article brings
together the monuments which illustrate themes treated by Bacchylides in
Odes 111, V, VIIL, XII, XV, XVI, XVII, with full references to the archaeological
literature. Ten vases are figured in the text. At the end of the volume,
Plate xv reproduces the picture of Theseus welcomed by Amphitrite, from
the cup of Euphronius: see below, p. 225.)


XVili BIBLIOGRAPHY.

Herbert Weir Smyth. Transactions of the American Philological
Association, vol. XXIX, pp. 86—96, 1898.

J. M. Stahl. Rheinisches Museum, 1898, pp. 332 ff.

F. W. Thomas. Class. Rev. x11, pp. 78f., Feb. 1898.


V. Tommasini. Jmitazioni e reminiscenze omeriche in Bacchilide.
Studi italiani di Filologia classica, VII, 1899, pp. 415—439.


R. Y. Tyrrell. Class. Rev. x11, pp. 7983, Feb. 1898 ; 412414, Nov. ;
XIII, pp. 44—46, Feb. 1899.


J. Wackernagel. Notes communicated to Blass : 2nd ed., p. LXXVIIL
C. Waldstein. Class. Rev. x11, pp. 473f., Dec. 1900.
H. Weil. Journal des Savants, Mar. 1898, pp. 174—184.


U. von Wilamowitz. Bacchylides. Berlin, Wiedmann, 1898 (33 pp.).—
Gétting. gelehrte Anzeigen, 1898, pp. 125—160.—Gétting. Nachr., 1898,
pp. 228—236.

A. Wolff. Bacchylidea. Patavii, 1901.


A. Zuretti. Spigolature Bacchilidee, Rivista di Filologia, ΧΧΥῚ,
ῬΡ. 134—149.


Before the discovery of the Egyptian papyrus, those fragments of
Bacchylides which are preserved by ancient writers had long been the
subject of critical study. The following editions of them deserve especial
mention :—


C.F. Neue. Bacchylidis Cei Fragmenta. (76 pp.) Berlin, 1822.


F. G. Schneidewin. In Delectus Poesis Graecorum, sect. 111. (Poetae
Melicz). Géttingen, 1839.

J. A. Hartung. Die griechischen Lyriker [with metrical translation and
notes], vol. vi. Leipzig, 1857.


Th, Bergk. Poetae Lyrict Graect, 4th ed., vol. 111, pp. 569—588. Leipzig,
1882.


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.


I. THE LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


BACCHYLIDES was born at Iulis, the chief town of Parentage.


Ceos.


(clearly an error for Meidon), or Meidylus'.


His father’s name is given as Medon, Meilon


His paternal


grandfather Bacchylides had been distinguished as an


athlete?,


His mother was a younger sister® of the poet


Simonides, who, like his nephew, was a native of Lulis.
Simonides was born in 556 B.c.; Pindar, probably in Date of


5184: and ancient tradition


1 (1) Μέδων is the form given by
Suidas s.v. Βακχυλίδης. It is fairly
frequent as a proper name, particularly
in Attica. (2) MetAwy (in two Mss.
Μίλων) appears in an epigram on the
nine lyric poets quoted by Boeckh,
Pindar vol. 11. p. xxxi. The form
Meidwy occurs nowhere else: and in
Μίλων the ε is regularly short (though
long in Axthol. Planud. 24 and ap-
pend. 20). (3) Μειδύλος stands in the
Etym. Magn. 582. 20 (where it is
accented MelévAos). This is the only
example of it given by Pape-Benseler.
Μειδυλίδης, however, occurs as an
Athenian name, and is related to
Μειδύλος as Βακχυλίδης to Βακχύλος
(which is extant as an Athenian
name).

2 Suidass.v.: Βακχυλίδου τοῦ ἀθλη-

. τοῦ.

8. Strabo ro. p. 486: ἐκ δὲ τῆς
᾿Ιουλίδος ὅ τε Σιμωνίδης ἦν ὁ μελοποιὸς
καὶ Βακχυλίδης ἀδελφιδοῦς ἐκείνου.
The word ἀδελφιδοῦς must here mean


said that Bacchylides was


ἀδελφῆς (not ἀδελφοῦ) vids, since Mei-
don (or Medon) was the son of the
athlete Bacchylides, while Simonides
was the son of Leoprepes (Simon. 146,
147: Her. vit. 228, etc.). If Bacchy-
lides was born about 512-505 B.C.,
his mother may have been some 15 or
20 years younger than her brother.
—By Suidas (s.v.), as by Eudocia
(Violar. 93), Bacchylides is merely
termed συγγενής of Simonides.

1 Pindar was born at the time of a
Pythian festival (fr. 193), and there-
fore in the third year of an Olympiad ;
and Suidas places his birth in the
65th Olympiad (520-517). Boeckh,
following Pausanias (10. 7 § 3) in
dating the Pythiads from 586 B.c.,
had to place Pindar’s tenth Pythian
in 502 B.c. (the Pythiad to which it
related being, as the scholiast says,
the 22nd) ; and thus was led to infer
that Pindar was born not later than
522 B.C. Butitisnow established (see
Otto Schréder, Prolegom. to Pindar,


birth.


wtices in

* Chron-
2 of
wsebius.
(1) ἥκμα-


'


2 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


younger than Pindar’, The earliest work of Bacchylides
which can be approximately dated may belong to 481 or
479. The date of his birth cannot be precisely fixed, but
may probably be placed somewhere within the period from
512 to 505 B.C.

According to the Chronicle of Eusebius, he ‘ was in his
prime’ (ἤκμαξεν) in Ol. 78. 2, 467 B.C. The physical
prime denoted by the word ἤκμαξεν was usually placed at
about the fortieth year. If such a reckoning could be
assumed in the present case, we should have 507 B.C. as
the approximate date of birth; and that is probably not
far from the truth. But, seeing how little appears to have
been known as to this poet’s life, it is unlikely that
Eusebius had found a record of the birth-year, from which
he computed the date of the prime. It is more likely that
the choice of the year 467 was an inference from some
other fact or facts. It was known that Bacchylides wrote
odes for Hieron of Syracuse. Now the year 467 was the
date of Hieron’s death. If Eusebius, or his authority,
assumed (or had reason to believe) that Bacchylides was
still young when first introduced, not long after 478, to


pp. 48 ff.) that Bergk was right in
preferring the authority of the Pin-
daric scholia to that of Pausanias,
and in reckoning the Pythiads from
582 B.c. The date of Pyth. xX. is
therefore 498 B.C.

1 Eustathius, Life of Pindar in the
Πρόλογος τῶν Πινδαρικῶν παρεκβολῶν
(printed in Christ’s ed. of Pindar, p.
103): Thomas Magister, Πινδάρου
γένος (16. p. 108). Pindar was
‘younger than Simonides, but older
than Bacchylides.’

2 Apollodorus of Athens (crc.
140 B.C.) was the author of Χρονικά,
or ‘Annals,’ in four books of iambic
trimeters, beginning from the fall of
Troy, and going down to his own
time. (The fragments are collected
by Miiller, Frag. Aist., vol. I. pp.
435 ff.) In this work he gave the
principal events, not only of political,


but also of literary, history; and for
literary history he was the chief
authority of later writers. Eusebius
is not believed to have had any direct
knowledge of that work; he seems
to have based his chronology on later
compendia: but Apollodorus may
have been the principal ultimate
source from which the literary dates
of Eusebius were derived. (See W.
Christ, Gesch. d. Griech. Litt., pp. 608
and 920.)

The Byzantine Chronicon Paschale,
p. 162, places the ἤκμαζεν of Bacchyl-
ides Ol. 74 (484-481 B.C.): astatement
which (if the ἀκμή is to be placed at
about the goth year) puts his birth
back to 524-521 B.c. But this, as
L. A. Michelangeli observes (Della
Vita di Bacchilide, p. 5), is incom-
patible with the tradition that Bac-
chylides was younger than Pindar.


APPROXIMATE LIMITS OF DATE. 3


Hieron, his prime may have been conjecturally placed
about a decade later. The selection of the year 467 was
the more natural, since the end of Hieron’s reign might be
regarded as closing a chapter in the fortunes of the poet.

Eusebius gives also another indication. Under Ol. 87. (2) ἐγνωρί-
2 (431 B.C.) he notes that Bacchylides was then ‘well- ἐτο
known’ or ‘eminent’ (ἐγνωρίζετο). The phrase might be
taken as denoting the full maturity of a long-established
reputation. But, even on that view, it is surprising to
find the epoch placed so late. As early (probably) as 481
or 479°, Bacchylides had written an important ode for
Pytheas, the son of the Aeginetan Lampon, whose victory
was also celebrated by Pindar. Lampon would scarcely
have given a commission to the Cean poet, if the latter had
not already gained some distinction. It is true that, in
youth and in middle life, the name of Bacchylides must
have been overshadowed by those of the two greater lyric
poets. The vigorous old age of Simonides was prolonged
to about 467 ; Pindar survived the year 446, and may have
lived till 438. It is also true that the gifts of Bacchylides
were not such as conquer a swift renown by a few brilliant
strokes; they were better fitted to achieve a gradual
success, as the elegance and the quiet charm of his work
became more widely known among those who could
appreciate them. It is easy to conceive that his modest
fame may have become brighter towards the evening of
life than it had been in the morning or in the meridian.
But it is more difficult to suppose that a chronicler, who
placed the poet’s prime in 467, can have intended to give
the year 431 as marking the period at which his reputation
culminated.

It may be observed, however, that the phrase ἐγνωρίζετο
is susceptible of an interpretation which avoids that
difficulty. Eusebius, or the authority on whom he relied,
may have found some indication that in 431 Bacchylides
was still alive. The indication may have been an ancient


1 L.A. Michelangeli, Della Vita 2 Introd. to Ode ΧΙ, § 2.
di Bacchilide etc. (1897), p. 6.


4 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


mention of him, which the context made it possible to
place at about the beginning of the Peloponnesian War.
Or it may have been some work of his, now lost, containing
bale an allusion which yielded an approximate date. The


taning of
νωρίζετο.


chronicler’s word, ἐγνωρίζετο, would then be a concise


mode of saying that the poet ‘was still alive and in repute’
The Byzantine chronographer Georgius Syncellus uses the
same word éyvwpifero, but varies from Eusebius in giving
Ol. 88 (428-425 B.C.) instead of Ol. 87. 27. We cannot tell
whether he was here following an authority distinct from
that on which Eusebius relied. If the authority followed
by both writers was the same, it is possible that Eusebius,
in giving 431 B.C., meant to indicate ‘the beginning of the
Peloponnesian war’ as an approximate date, while Georgius
Syncellus found it more accurate to say that Bacchylides
was still living in the Olympiad which began in the year
428 B.C. One conclusion, at least, appears warranted.
The statement that the poet survived the beginning of the
Peloponnesian War must have rested on some definite
sult. ground which the chroniclers deemed satisfactory. We
cannot fix the date of the poet’s birth, or of his death.
But it is probable that the period from about 507 to 428


was comprised in his lifetime.


0s. The surroundings and associations amidst which the
boyhood and youth of Bacchylides were passed can in
some measure be inferred from the traces which they have
left in his work, and from what is known of his native
Ceos. The ‘lovely isle’ of which he speaks, the ‘land of
rocky heights,’ ‘nursing vines’ on the sunny slopes of its
hills’, was the outermost of the Cyclades towards the


north-west. East and south


1 Chron. p.257 (ed. Par.). Georgius,
a learned monk, was known as the
Σύγκελλος, because he had been syn-
cellus, or attendant, of Tarrasius
patriarch of Constantinople (on whom
see Finlay, Hist. Gr. τι. 75 ff.). His
᾿Εκλογὴ Xpovoypaglas, beginning from
Adam, extends to the accession of


of it lay the islands which


Diocletian in 284 a.p. He died in
800 A.D., the year to which he had
intended to bring down his work.
It was continued to 813 A.D. in the
chronicle of his friend Theophanes.

2 Ode v. rof. ζαθέας vdoou: 1. 11
πολύκρημνον χθόνα : VI. 5 ἀμπελοτρό-
pov Κέον.


CLUS. IMUINIDES. 5


“ cluster around Delos, the central sanctuary of the Ionian
race, whither (as Bacchylides shows us!) the people of
Ceos were wont to send their tribute of choral paeans for
the festivals of Apollo. A saga, which was narrated by Legends of
Bacchylides in the first ode of our series, made a link of ©
mythical ancestry between Ceos and the greatest of the
Ionian colonies on the coast of Asia Minor. Dexithea,
who in her island-home had entertained gods unawares,
became by Minos the mother of Euxantius, lord of Ceos,
father of Miletus, and progenitor of the Milesian clan of
the Euxantidae?. Like so many other Jonian communities,
Ceos claimed also a tie with the Achaeans of the heroic
age. Nestor had landed in the island on his homeward
voyage from Troy, and had founded a shrine of Athena’.

More important than any such legendary kinships were Ceos and
the affinities and sympathies bred of frequent intercourse 4"
with Attica. Only some thirteen miles of sea lay between
Ceos and Cape Sunium. From the days of the Peisistra-
tidae onwards, the intellectual and artistic progress of
Athens must in some degree have affected the little island,
inhabited by men of the same race, which was so close to


the Attic shores.
existed in Ceos.


A poetical and musical culture had long
Iulis possessed a temple of the Pythian Cean cult


Apollo4. Another Pythion stood at Carthaea, a prosperous
seaport on the south-eastern coast of the island; and near
it was a choregeion, a building in which choruses were


trained for the festivals.
had taught there®.


1 Ode xvi. 130. See Introduction
to that Ode, § 1.

2 Introduction to Ode 1, 8 3.

3 Strabo 10. p. 486. See Appendix
on Ode x. r119f.

4 This appears from an inscription
(of 363 B.C.) found at lulis (KGhler,
C. I. A. i. p. 142), lines 2o—22 τοὺς
στρατηγ] οὑς] τοὺς [᾿Ιου]λιητῶν... .συνεισ-
πράττειν τὰ χρήματα ἐν στήλῃ λιθίνῃ
καὶ στῆσαι ἐν τῷ ἱερῷ ᾿Απόλλωνος τοῦ
Πυθίου.


Simonides, in his earlier years, Zarly life
He must soon have made his mark at


5 Athenaeus Io. p. 4536 F. We
there learn that on a wall of the
temple of Apollo at Carthaea there
was a painting of Epeius, son of
Panopeus, toiling as a drawer of
water for the Atreidae; when Athena
inspired him with skill to make the
wooden horse. The incident occurred
in the cyclic Ἰλίου Πέρσις, and was
treated by Stesichorus (fr. 18).
Simonides wrote these verses (fr.


1738):


tic
Tuence.


'h-love
Ceos.


6 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


the Cean school. It was probably about 523 B.c. that
Hipparchus invited him to Athens, where, at the age of
thirty or a little more, he found himself placed in rivalry,
as a chorus-trainer, with the celebrated Lasus of Hermione’.
It would be unreasonable to take Simonides as a normal
example of Attic influence on Ceos. No poet, perhaps,
not of Attic birth, ever had so much of the Attic genius:
the Danaé fragment is a witness. But his nephew also
occasionally manifests a quality which is rather Attic than
merely Ionian, especially in verses of the lighter and gayer
kind® It may well be supposed that, in the education and
in the social life of Ceos, the characteristics and tendencies
of eastern Jonia were tempered with elements due to
Athens.

We have one specimen of primitive Cean folk-lore
which breathes the old spirit of free Ionian fancy, the
bright, naive, sometimes playful spirit which reveals itself
in the wonderland of the Odyssey. The story relates to
the far-off memory of a great drouth which once parched
the island, blighting the labours of husbandman and vine-
dresser. The Nymphs of Ceos, it was said, had been
scared from their haunts in the valleys and on the hills by
the apparition of a lion’ They fled across the sea to
Carystus in Euboea. An illustration of this story can still
be seen. Not far from Iulis on the east, a colossal lion,
some twenty feet in length, has been rudely carved from a
rock, whose natural shape assisted, or suggested, the
design‘: The Nymphs, frightened into exile by the lion,


φημὶ τὸν οὐκ ἐθέλοντα φέρειν τέττιγος
ἄεθλον
τῷ Πανοπηϊάδῃ δώσειν μέγα δεῖπνον
᾿Επειῷ.
Athenaeus explains them as follows.
At Carthaea, water was carried from
a fountain up to the chorus-school,
over which Simonides presided, by a
donkey who was called Epeius; and,
if a chorister played truant, the fine
was a feed for the donkey. ¢épew
τέττιγος ἄεθλον meant ἄδειν,


1 [Plat.] Aipparch. p. 228c: Aelian
V. H. 8.2: Ar. Vesp. τ4το f.

? As in the fragment (from one of
the παροίνια) beginning γλυκεῖ᾽ ἀνάγκα
(no. τό in this ed.).

3 Heraclides Ponticus Polit. 9:
Apoll. Rhod. 2. 498 ff. (with the
scholia): Hyginus Poet, Astronomica
Il. 4.

4 Brondsted, Reisen und Unter-
suchungen in Griechenland τ. pp. 31 ff.
(Paris, 1826).  Bréndsted’s work,


CEOS.—THE PERSIAN WARS. 7


were, of course, the water-springs dried up by the torrid
heat. Then Aristaeus, the god who prospers all works of
the field’, came from Arcadia to Ceos, where his worship
endured. Taught by him, the people raised an altar to
Zeus Ikmaios, the Sky-father who sends rain and dew.

With its legends, its cult of Apollo, and its folk-lore,
Ceos can have been no uncongenial home for a boy of
quick imagination. Another feature in the life of the Cen
island was the successful practice of athletics. Cean one
athletes were especially strong in boxing and in running’.
The young Bacchylides, whose grandfather and namesake
had been an athlete, might naturally follow with interest
the growing number of Cean victories. Those victories
were recorded at Iulis on slabs of stone, under the festivals
to which they severally pertained’. In commemorating
the success of Argeius, Bacchylides is able to tell us that
precisely seventy wreaths had previously been won by
Ceans at the Isthmian games‘.

As he grew towards early manhood, events were
passing around him which may well have stimulated all
his powers of thought and fancy. The overthrow of the 7% Per-
Persians at Marathon in September, 490 B.C., must have es
brought a thrill of relief to the islanders of the Aegean,
most of whom, in their helplessness, had given earth and
water to the heralds of Dareius®. A few months later the
news would reach the people of Iulis that their townsman
Simonides had gained the prize offered by Athens for an
elegy on those who fell in the great battle’. Eleven years
later, after that repulse of Xerxes in which the mariners of


which was not completed, contains a
most careful and minute description
of Ceos. See also A. Pridik, De
Cet Insulae rebus, p. 20 (Berlin, 1892).
A very valuable feature of this mono-
graph is the Appendix epigraphica,
giving references to inscriptions


1 See note on fragment 44.

2 Ode vi, verse 7.

3 See Introd. to Ode 1, § 2.

4 Ode 11, gf.

5 Herod. VI. 49.

6 Aeschylus is said in the Βίος
Αἰσχύλου to have been an unsuccess-


(1) found in Ceos, or (2) relating to
Ceos, but found at Athens, Delos,
Delphi, or Paros. In some instances
the text of the inscription is added.


ful competitor: ἐν τῷ els τοὺς ἐν
Μαραθῶνι τεθνηκότας ἐλεγείῳ ἡσσηθεὶς
Σιμωνίδῃ.


nhel-
acrepute
Stmon-
Se


eron of
racuse.


oron’s
ronage
etlers.


8 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


Ceos bore their part, it was again the Cean poet who
rendered the most effective tributes to the heroes of
Thermopylae and Artemisium, of Salamis and Plataea*
In those days of patriotic enthusiasm and joy, Ceos, and
more especially Iulis, must have been proud of the man
who had thus become the voice of Hellas. Bacchylides
himself had now entered on his poetical career. He could
have desired no better introduction, at home or abroad,
than the fame of his kinsman.


In 478 B.c. Hieron succeeded his brother Gelon in the
rule of Syracuse. Gelon, a fine soldier, a capable states-
man, and the founder of Syracusan greatness, figured in
tradition as one who cared nothing for letters or art, being,
indeed, almost ostentatiously scornful of the accomplish-
ments which Greeks of his day associated with a liberal
education. Once at a banquet, when the lyre was being
passed round in order that each guest should play and sing
in turn, Gelon ordered his horse to be brought in, and
showed the company how lightly he could vault upon its
back*. Such a story indicates the conception which had
been formed of him. Hieron, it was said, had at first
resembled his brother in this respect; but after an illness,
in which his enforced leisure had been solaced by music
and poetry, he became devoted to the Muses4 It is certain
that, from the outset of his reign, men of letters found a
welcome at his court. The encouragement of literary and
musical culture was, indeed, an historical attribute of the
Greek tyrannis. It was at the Corinth of Periander that
the dithyramb had been invested with a new significance
by Arion. Polycrates had entertained Ibycusand Anacreon
in Samos. Anacreon, Simonides and Lasus had been
honoured sojourners in the Athens of the Peisistratidae.
A power which rested on no constitutional basis could
derive popularity, and therefore strength, from the presence


1 Herod. vil. 1 (Artemisium), (Bergk).
46 (Salamis). 3 Plut. Apophth. Gel. 4.175.
2 Simonides 1—4, 91—101 4 Aelian Var. Hist. 4. 15.


MEN OF LETTERS AT HIERON’S COURT. 9


of men whose gifts and attainments enabled them to increase
the attractions of the festivals. Since, moreover, Greek
lyric poetry, and now drama, stood in close and manifold
relations with Greek religion, the ruler who was visited and
extolled by eminent poets not merely enhanced the respect-
ability of his despotism, but obtained for it, so far, something
akin to a religious sanction. The patronage of renascent
humanism by such men as the Borgias and the Medici was
predominantly a matter of personal inclination or of
personal pride. The patronage of poets by a Hieron
partook, doubtless, of both those motives, but it was also
largely an affair of policy. Despite all that was vicious in
the atmosphere of a tyrant’s court, such patronage was, at
that moment, a gain to letters, in so far as it gave a stimulus
to poetical genius, and afforded splendid opportunities for
its public manifestation. Athens was in process of becoming,
but had not yet become, the intellectual centre of Hellas.
Meanwhile Greek literature would have been poorer had it
not acquired the odes which Pindar and Bacchylides wrote
for Hieron, the odes which Pindar wrote for Theron of
Acragas and for Arcesilas of Cyrene.

Pindar’s first Olympian was composed for the ruler of Pindar
Syracuse in 476, and the poet seems to have been present (Olymp-t).
when it was performed. In the same year Hieron founded
the new city of Aetna on the site of Catana. The first
visit of Aeschylus to Sicily was made at that period. It Aeschylus.
was then that he rendered to Hieron a tribute greater than
any lyric epinikion. In his play, the Women of Aetna, he His

: ᾿ ὃ Γ ᾿ Aetnaeae.
referred to the new city, ‘drawing auguries of happiness for
the founders of the settlement, perhaps in the form of a
prophecy uttered by some god or semi-divine person. One
passage in that drama must have thrilled the Sicilian
audience, Aeschylus spoke of the Palikoi, the dread Twin
Brethren of the old Sikel faith, the dwellers at the boiling
lake*; and, using a myth which the Greek settlers in Sicily


1 Vit. Aeschyl.: Ἱέρωνος τότε τὴν 2 Aesch. fr. 6:
Αἴτνην κτίζοντος ἐπεδείξατο τὰς Airval- τί δῆτ' ἐπ’ αὐτοῖς ὄνομα θήσονται
as, οἰωνιζόμενος ἐντεῦθεν βίον ἀγαθὸν βροτοί;
τοῖς συνοικίζουσι τὴν πόλιν. σεμνοὺς Παλικοὺς Ζεὺς ἐφίεται καλεῖν.
j. 8. 2


His
Persae
t rilogys


Io ‘LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


had woven on to the mysterious name, he described those
deities as sons borne to Zeus by Thaleia, daughter of
Hephaestus. The trilogy to which the Persae belonged,
and which was brought out at Athens in 472, is said to have
been reproduced, by Hieron’s request, in Sicily, and to have
won much applause’, The third piece of that trilogy, the
Glaucus, brought Heracles from the west of Sicily to its
northern coast,—from Mount Eryx to ‘the lofty hill of
Himera®” Hieron had borne arms, under the leadership of
his brother Gelon, when the Syracusans and their allies
repulsed the Carthaginian invaders at Himera; on the
same day, it was said, that Greek defeated Persian at
Salamis. It is easy to imagine the effect that would have
been made in the theatre where Hieron presided if the
Aeschylean Heracles, in prophetic strain, alluded to that


great deliverance.


ἦ καὶ Παλικῶν εὐλόγως μενεῖ φάτις ;
πάλιν γὰρ ἥξουσ᾽ (κουσ᾽ edd.) ἐκ σκό-
του τόδ᾽ εἰς φάος.

This is the earliest extant mention of
the Palikoi. The seat of their cult
was a small lake, usually about 490 ft.
in circumference, still called the Lago
de’ Palici, in the province of Catania,
near Favorotta. Apertures in the
bed of the lake, near its centre, emit
a marsh gas, which forces up the
water (to a height of two feet in
places). The whole surface then
seems to boil. See Baedeker’s S.
Lialy and Sicily, p. 298: and a very
full description in Freeman’s Siczly,
1, 529 ff. The Palikoi were chthonian
and volcanic daemons, and, like Styx,
an inviolable ὅρκος.

' Steph. Byz. p. 496, 9, sv.
Παλική (the town of Ducetius, whose
name survives in Palagonia). In the
Greek story used by Aeschylus, 7haleca
is probably a shortened form of
Αἰθάλεια (=Alrvy). Thaleia, preg-
nant by Zeus, hid herself beneath the
earth, to escape Hera’s wrath; and
there bore two sons (the Palikoi).


The myth was suggested by the
Greek fancy which derived Παλικοί
from πάλιν ἵκουσι (!), ‘they come
back’ to the light of the upper world.
In the fourth verse of the Aeschylean
fragment quoted above, which indi-
cates this derivation, the true reading
(I suspect) is the traditional ἥξουσ᾽,
and not that which modern editors
have preferred, ἵἕκουσ᾽ : for, as θήσον-
Tat in v. 1 shows, it is a prophecy ;
and it was like a poet to suggest txovo’
as the second element in the name,
rather than to give it. The real
etymology is unknown. The Sikels
being of Italic stock, Michaelis pro-
poses fad (πολιός) and the -zc- of am-
zc-us, Labr-ic-us, Mar-ic-a, etc.; the
reference would then be to the dirty
greyish colour of the lake’s water.
See Block’s art. Palikoi in Roscher’s
Lexikon.

2 Vit. Aeschyl. ad fin.: φασὶν ὑπὸ
‘Iépwvos ἀξιωθέντα ἀναδιδάξαι τοὺς
Πέρσας ἐν Σικελίᾳ, καὶ λίαν εὐδοκιμεῖν.

3. Aesch. fr. 32 εἰς ὑψίκρημνον
Ἱμέραν δ᾽ ἀφικόμην. See Freeman,
Sicily vol. 1. p. 414.


MEN OF LETTERS AT HIERON’S COURT.


11


While Tragedy was thus represented at Hieron’s court
by the eldest of the Attic masters, the other but less mature


branch of drama was also welcomed in the person of
One of his comedies, the Jslands (Νᾶσοι),


Epicharmus.


alluded to Hieron having sent his brother-in-law Chromius,
in 477, to Anaxilas of Rhegium ; a mission which secured


the independence of the Epizephyrian Locrians.


It is


noticeable that the stories of Hieron which were current in
later times often imply that he lived on terms of more or
less familiar intercourse with the men of letters who were


admitted to his circle.


Epicharmus, in particular, was


credited with a biting answer to an invitation from the


tyrant’.


Granting that some or most of these stories may


have been late figments, it seems probable that Hieron’s
disposition was of a kind which made such intercourse


possible, even if, as a rule, it was somewhat perilous.


We


should have wished to know whether the Sicilian historian
Timaeus, who ought to have been well-versed in Syracusan
tradition, had any good authority for his statement. that
Xenophanes of Colophon survived to the days of Hieron, Yeno-
There is a certain piquancy in the thought that the veteran
castigator of Homer and Hesiod may have met Pindar and


Aeschylus under the roof of a common host.


Homer is,


indeed, the subject of a remark which, according to
Plutarch, Hieron addressed to Xenophanes’.
Such was the Syracusan court to which Simonides came Hieron


Epichar-


mus.


phanes,


and St-


soon after the beginning of the new reign. He was then τὴ κε.


seventy-eight years of age. It is remarkable that, among


1 Plut. De Adul. et amic., c. 27.
Hieron had put to death some of their
common acquaintances, and a few days
afterwardsasked Epicharmusto dinner.


Epicharmus made this unpunctuated.


reply :---ὀλλὰ πρῴην θύων τοὺς φίλους
οὐκ ἐκάλεσας. [The ambiguity would
be represented by the following sen-
tence, though it is far less neat than
the Greek :—-‘The other day when
you held a sacrifice of your friends I
alone was not asked.’]


2 Timaeus fr. g2 (Miiller 1. p.
215): Revoparys...dv φησι Τίμαιος
κατὰ ἹἹέρωνα τὸν Σικελίας δυνάστην καὶ
Ἐπίχαρμον τὸν ποιητὴν γεγονέναι.
From Xenophanes himself (fr. 7) we
know that he was still writing at the
age of ninety-two.

3 Plut. Apophth. Hieron. 4: πρὸς
δὲ Ξενοφάνην τὸν Ἰολοφώνιον εἰπόντα
μόλις οἰκέτας δύο τρέφειν,᾿ Αλλ᾽“Ομηρος,
εἶπεν, ὃν σὺ διασύρεις, πλείονας ἢ μυρίους
τρέφει τεθνηκώς.


2—2


Their
Sriendship.


The poems
of Bacchy-
lides for
Hieron.


12 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


all the fragments or notices of writings ascribed to Simonides,
the sole trace of Hieron is a mention of his name, along
with those of his brothers, in the epigram on the battle of
Himera!,—an epigram probably written before Hieron had
succeeded Gelon at Syracuse. The qualities by which the
poet won the tyrant’s regard seem to have been personal
rather than professional. The friend of Hipparchus, the
guest of Thessalian Scopadae and Aleuadae, was not with-
out experience in the life of courts. Not long after his
arrival in Sicily,—at some time in the years 478-476,—his
Ionian tact achieved a task which must have demanded
fine diplomacy. He reconciled Hieron to Theron of
Acragas, at a moment when war had almost broken out
between them? From that day until he died, not long
after his patron, in Sicily, the relations of Simonides with
the master of Syracuse appear to have been those of an
intimate and confidential friendship’. At this period
Bacchylides had already gained a certain measure of dis-
tinction. That is sufficiently proved by the epinikion (Ode
XII) which he wrote, probably in 481 or 479, for Pytheas,
son of Lampon, an eminent citizen of Aegina. The same
victory is the subject of Pindar’s fifth Nemean. Simonides
took an early opportunity of presenting his nephew to
Hieron at Syracuse.

The first poem which Bacchylides wrote for Hieron
(Ode νὴ) was sent from Ceos in 476 B.c. But a previous
visit to Syracuse is indicated, since he is already Hieron’s
‘guest-friend’ (ξένος, V. 11). Six years later, when Hieron’s
victory in the chariot-race (470 B.C.) elicited Pindar’s first
Pythian, Bacchylides sent merely a little congratulatory
song of twenty verses (Ode Iv); he may have been pre-
cluded, by some cause unknown to us, from doing more.


1 Simon. 141 (Bergk). friend’s privilege of παρρησία. For
3 Diodorus Siculus ΧΙ. 48. Schol. other illustrations of the almost pro-
Pind. O. 11. 29 (15). verbial intimacy between Simonides


3 Xenophon’s Hzeron, a dialogue and Hieron, see Arist. Ret. τι, 16.
between the tyrant and Simonides, $2: [Plat.] Apist. 11. p. 3114: Cic.
attests the author’s belief that the De Nat. Deor. 1. xxii. 60.
poet enjoyed in the fullest measure a


AIS POEMS FOR HIERON.—PINDAR. 13


In 468 Hieron gained the most important of such succésses
by winning the chariot-race at Olympia.. The poet who
celebrated this event was Bacchylides. Pindar did not
write. A cordial tribute to Hieron occurs in his sixth
Olympian, written in 472 (or, as some think, in 468) for
Agesias of Syracuse (vv. 93 ff.). It would, of course, be
unwarrantable to suppose that, in 468, Pindar had lost
Hieron’s favour. Pindar’s silence may have been due
to some other cause of which we know nothing. But, in
the light of so much as is known, that silence is noteworthy.
These are, briefly, the facts as to the work of Bacchylides
for Hieron. His attitude towards that ruler, as compared
with Pindar’s, is discussed in another place.


In the course of the years 476-468 Pindar and Supposed
Bacchylides must have met at Syracuse, probably on on Pindar
several occasions. A number of passages in Pindar’s odes > ik Cean
are interpreted by the scholiasts as containing hostile?”
allusions to Bacchylides, or Simonides, or both. The
question is sufficiently curious and interesting to merit
some examination.

A preliminary observation should be made.’ Some of
the Pindaric scholia which give these interpretations add
statements to the effect that a jealousy existed between
Pindar and Bacchylides; that Bacchylides disparaged
him to Hieron; and that Hieron preferred the poems of
Bacchylides to those of Pindar*. It has sometimes been
assumed or implied that the Alexandrian commentators
had no warrant for such statements except such as they
discovered in Pindar’s own words. But it is to be remem-
bered that they may have found other evidence in books
which are now lost, or of which only fragments remain.
Among such books were the histories of Sicily by


1 Introd. to Ode v, § 3. αὐτὸν τῷ “Ἱέρωνι διέσυρεν. (3) Schol.
2 (1) Schol. Pind. MV. 111. 143 (82) 46. 11. 166 (90) ἡ ἀναφορὰ πάλιν εἰς
δοκεῖ δὲ ταῦτα τείνειν εἰς Βακχυλίδην᾽" Βακχυλίδην᾽ εἴληπται δὲ οὕτως ἡ διάνοια
ἣν γὰρ αὐτοῖς καὶ ὑφόρασις πρὸς ἀλλή- διὰ τὸ παρὰ Ἱέρωνι τὰ Βακχυλίδου
λους. (2) Schol. 2. 11. 97 (53) ποιήματα προκρίνεσθαι.
αἰνίττεται δὲ εἰς Βακχυλίδην " ἀεὶ γὰρ


14 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.,


Antiochus of Syracuse, Philistus of Syracuse, and Timaeus
of Tauromenion. Those histories included Hieron’s reign,
and may have noticed Syracusan traditions relating to
celebrated visitors at his court. There was also a large
literature of memoirs and anecdotes concerning famous
writers. Some idea of its abundance can be formed from
Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius, and Athenaeus. Almost the
whole of that literature has perished. But at least two
authors can be named, either of whom might well have
touched on Pindar’s relations with the poets whom he met
at Syracuse. One is Chamaeleon of Heracleia in Pontus
(fi. ¢. 310 B.C.), a pupil of Aristotle; the other is Istrus of
Cyrene (77. ¢ 240 B.C.), a pupil of Callimachus. These
were the two oldest sources for the biography of Pindar’.
Timaeus wrote a work on lyric poets (Μελοποιοί). It is
from Chamaeleon that Athenaeus derives certain par-
ticulars respecting the life of Simonides when he was
Hieron’s guest, Chamaeleon and Istrus, however, are but
two out of many writers who preserved reminiscences of
the classical poets. It would be very rash to assume that
the Alexandrians can have had no warrant, beyond Pindar’s
text, for their view of his attitude towards the poets of
Ceos.

Again, moderns naturally approach this question with
some reluctance to believe that a great poet could have
dealt in such innuendo. But it is hardly needful to say
that modern standards of feeling cannot safely be applied
to an age of which the tone in such matters was so different.
It is indisputable that several passages of Pindar express
scorn for some people who are compared to crows or daws,
to apes or foxes*. The only question is, are all such utter-
ances merely general, referring to classes of persons, such,
for instance, as the vulgar herd of inferior poets? Or is
the allusion in such places, or in any of them, to indi-
viduals? Here the probabilities depend in some measure


1 Leutsch, Die Quellen fiir die 2 Athen. 14. p. 656 C, D.
Biographien des Pindar, in Philolog. 8 Pind. O. 11. 96; Δ, 111. 82; P.
xL iff. 11. 72, 77.


PINDAR’S SUPPOSED ALLUSIONS. 15


on the estimate which may be formed of Pindar’s tempera-
ment. It is clear, at least, that he intimates his own
superiority to all contemporary masters of lyric song.
Confidence in his own poetical power is joined to a marked
pride of race, and to that sense of an intimate communion
with Delphi which so often lends the note of authority to
his precepts. The disposition suggested by the general
spirit of his work is ardent, strenuous, impetuous: it is.also.
haughty, and such as would probably have been impatient
of competition.


In considering the passages, then, where the Alex-
andrians saw hostile references by Pindar to the poets of
Ceos, it is well to bring a mind unbiased by either of two
presumptions ; that the Alexandrians can have had nothing
to go upon except Pindar’s words ; or that Pindar cannot
have intended such allusions.


The most important of these passages,—that, indeed, Passage in
on which the issue primarily turns,—occurs in the second a
Olympian ode, composed for Theron of Acragas in 476 B.C.
That was the year in which Bacchylides first wrote for
Hieron, celebrating the same victory which is the subject
of Pindar’s first Olympian. Simonides had then been in
relations with Hieron for more, at least, than a year.
After a magnificent description of the elysium in the Islands
of the Blest, Pindar abruptly turns to speak of his own
art. ‘Many swift arrows are there in the quiver beneath
my arm, shafts with a message for the wise; but for the
crowd they need interpreters’; and then come these words
(vv. 86—88) :—

σοφὸς ὁ πολλὰ FELdas hud *
μαθόντες δὲ λάβροι
παγγλωσσίᾳ, κόρακες ὥς, ἄκραντα γαρύετον
Διὸς πρὸς ὄρνιχα θεῖον.

The σοφός, the man of intellectual attainment, is here,
as the context shows, specially the poet. The true poet is he
who ‘knows much,—whose mind and fancy are fertile,——‘ by
nature's gift’ (ova). ‘But they who have merely /earned;—


16 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


the disciples and imitators of others,—‘ boisterous (λάβροι)
with their torrent of words, vainly chatter (the pair of them)
like crows, against the godlike bird of Zeus.’ To the dual
yapverov we shall return presently: but first let us consider
the general purport of the passage. The ‘bird of Zeus’ is,
of course, Pindar. He again likens himself to an eagle,
and other singers to inferior birds, in the third Nemean
(probably of 469 B.C.), vv. 80 ff. :—


yy 3 > \ a ‘ ? an
ἔστι δ᾽ αἰετὸς ὠκὺς ἐν ποτανοῖς...
κραγέται δὲ κολοιοὶ ταπεινὰ νέμονται.


‘The eagle is swift among the birds of the air,...but the
clamorous daws haunt the lower regions of the sky.’ The
word λάβροι suggests noisy braggarts, as in the /éad
(XXIIL 478 f.),—
ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ μύθοις AaBpevea οὐδέ τί σε χρὴ
λαβραγόρην ἔμεναι.

The term παγγλωσσία occurs nowhere else. It denotes
readiness to utter anything (compare παρρησία and παν-
oupyia)—a loquacity not restrained by discernment or
by taste. These creatures of mere lore are garrulous,
without that discriminating instinct which chastens and
refines the language of the born poet. Their utterances
are also dxpavta: they achieve nothing, they make no
abiding impression. In brief, these ‘taught’ men are
pretentious, noisy, strangers to distinction of style, and
ineffectual. But the fundamental thing is the contrast
between original genius (φυά) and imitative accomplish-
ment (μάθησις). This contrast is habitual with Pindar; we
have it again in the third Nemean (vv. 4o—42):—


συγγενεῖ δέ τις εὐδοξίᾳ μέγα βρίθει"
ὃς δὲ διδάκτ᾽ ἔχει, ψεφηνὸς ἀνὴρ
ἄλλοτ᾽ ἄλλα πνέων οὔποτ᾽ ἀτρεκέϊ
"ὁ 4 n >
κατέβα ποδί, μυριᾶν ὃ
ἀρετᾶν ἀτελεῖ νόῳ γεύεται.


‘Born with him is the power that gives weight to a
man’s fame: but whoso has the fruits of lore alone, he


PINDARS SUPPOSED ALLUSIONS. 17


remains in the shade. His spirit veers with every breeze:
in no field of trial is his foothold sure: he nibbles at
excellence in countless forms, but his mind achieves noth-
ing’ The proximate occasion of this general reflection is
the inspired valour of Heracles, to whom Pindar has just
referred ; but it is obvious that he is thinking also of the
born poet. The same remark applies to some verses in the
ninth Olympian (of 456 B.C.?), where the immediate contest
relates to athletes (vv. 100O—102):—


τὸ δὲ hud κράτιστον ἅπαν" πολλοὶ δὲ διδακταῖς
ἀνθρώπων ἀρεταῖς κλέος
ὦρουσαν ἀρέσθαι.


‘“Nature’s gift is ever best ; but many men have strained to


win renown by feats to which they had been schooled.’
Such, then, is the general scope of the passage in the
second Olympian. Let us next examine a crucial point in


it, the use of the dual yapveror.


Emendations have been


attempted : but there is a strong presumption that the word


is sound!?.


1 Bergk (4th ed.) suggested γαρυέ-
των, which Otto Schréder adopts in
his edition of Pindar (1900); a defiant
imperative, like οἱ δ᾽ οὖν γελώντων in
Soph. Az. 961. Schréder takes it as
plural, not dual. Now such a form as
γαρυέτων, instead of γαρυόντων, is most
rare. The evidence is exhaustively
stated in Kiihner-Blass, Aus/iihrliche
Gr. Gramm., 31d ed., vol. 11. p. 50.
(1) ἔστων is 3rd pers. imperat. plural
in Od.1.273: also in Plato, Xenophon,
Doric and Ionic inscriptions etc.
(2) ἔτων in Aesch. Zum. 32 is 3rd
pers. imperat. plural. (3) ἀνεστακό-
τῶν is cited by Kithner-Blass (/.c.) as
occurring once in Archimedes, who
elsewhere uses forms in -yrwy: ‘ but
that should certainly be corrected,
with Ahrens, to ἀνεστακόντων: cp.
Heiberg, Suppl. Fl. Jahr. xu. 561.’
(4) In ZL 8. 109, τούτω μὲν θεράποντε
κομείτων, that form of the verb was


It will be remembered that the use of the dual


written by Aristarchus (but κομείτην
by Zenodotus: Bergk says, ‘alii
forte κομεύντων ’). κομείτων is usually
and naturally taken as dual. In
Kiihner-Blass (p. 51) it is cited as the
only example of the 3rd pers. of the
imperative dual in -rwy which occurs
in classical literature. Schroder, how-
ever, on Pind. O. 11. 87 (96), suggests
that κομείτων is 3rd pers. plural: I do
not know why. It will be seen that the
probabilities are very strong against a
form of such extreme rarity as-yapvérwr.
Schréder thinks that the imperative
here is a great improvement to the
sense. To me it does not seem so.
The clause σοφὸς «.7.A. is opposed to
the clause μαθόντες δὲ κιτιλ. The
verb to be supplied in the first clause
is ἐστί : the verb of the second clause
would also naturally be in the indica-
tive mood, γαρύετον.

The other proposed emendations


The dual
verb.


The
scholiast’s
view.


Other
explana-
tions.


18 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


verb implies not merely that there are two agents, but
also that they are somehow associated in action. Τί, for
example, it were desired to say in ancient Greek, ‘Adams
and Leverrier independently discovered the planet Neptune,’
the verb would be εὗρον, not εὑρέτην: but in saying,
‘Erckmann and Chatrian wrote the book,’ it would be
ἐγραψάτην. The usage of classical writers frequently
illustrates the fine expressiveness of the dual verb. It
can lightly emphasise a close comradeship, as when
Heracles, in the Sophoclean play, says of Philoctetes
and Neoptolemus,


GAN ὡς λέοντε συννόμω φυλάσσετον
οὗτος σὲ καὶ σὺ κεῖνον.

Or it can convey a shade of mockery, as when the
Platonic Socrates says to Euthydemus and his brother,
the professors of eristic, χαρίσασθον...ἐπιδείξατον. εἴπετον.
In Pindar’s yapverov the tone of the dual is scornful. These
two persons are leagued in a futile competition with their
superior. Can the dual be explained without assuming
that it indicates two definite persons? No, unless by
regarding it as merely incidental to the imagery; ze, as
meaning that an indefinite number of bad poets behave
‘like crows chattering in pairs’: but that would be pointless,
and, indeed, absurd. Who, then, are these two persons?
According to an Alexandrian commentator, they are
Simonides and Bacchylides?

Only two other explanations (so far as I know) have
been offered. One is that Pindar alludes to Capys and
Hippocrates, kinsmen of Theron, who levied war against


of γαρύετον demand less discussion.
(1) Dawes, γαρνέμεν. This is accepted
by Michelangeli (p. 27), who, with
that candour which marks the whole
of his excellent discussion, recognizes
the gravity of yapverov as an obstacle
to his view that Pindar was guiltless
of allusion to the Cean poets. The
construction then is, AdBpot...-yapvé-
μεν (ἐντί), ‘are fierce in chattering.’
I cannot think that this has any proba-


bility. (2) Tycho Mommsen, γαρύεται
(‘schema Pindaricum ’). (3) Herwer-
den, yaptere. (4) Hartung, γαρνέται
(plur. of yapvérys) : when dxpayramust
beeither an ady., oranacc. governed by
the verbal notion (ἄπορα πόριμο:).

1 Schol. Pind. O. 11. 158 (96), on
dxpavra γαρύετον.---εἰ δέ πως πρὸς
Βακχυλίδην καὶ Σιμωνίδην αἰνίττεται,
καλῶς ἄρα ἐξείληπται τὸ γαρύετον
δυικῶς " καὶ οὕτως ὄντως ἔχει ὁ λόγος.


PINDAR’S SUPPOSED ALLUSIONS. 19


him, but were defeated. The ‘bird of Zeus’ will then be
Theron: an eagle appears on coins of Acragas!. But this
hypothesis is clearly incompatible with Pindar’s words, and
with the context: he is speaking of himself as a poet, and
of his art. The other explanation finds in κόρακες an
allusion to Corax, the author of the earliest Greek treatise
on rhetoric, and supposes that his associate is the rhetorician
Teisias. Corax and Teisias (it is suggested) had col-
laborated, shortly before 476B.C., in’ a work which was
known to Pindar, Now Corax, indeed, is said to have had
influence with Hieron, though his activity as a rhetorician
belonged chiefly to the period of democracy which followed
the fall of the Deinomenid house. But Teisias is tradition-
ally represented as a man of a younger generation, a pupil
of Corax, and afterwards the teacher of Lysias and of
Isocrates. The chronological difficulty is not, however,


1 This explanation was suggested
by Freeman, Ast. of Sicily, 11. p. 531.
As to the war made on Theron by his
two kinsmen, see zd. p. 147.

2 This view was first put forward
by Dr A. W. Verrall in an article on
Aesch. Cho. 935—972 (Journ. of Phi-
lology 1x. 114 ff.), and afterwards
developed in his paper on ‘ Korax
and Tisias,’ 74. 197ff. To those
articles the reader is referred for a
full and able statement of all that can
be advanced in favour of the hypo-
thesis. It should be noted that


παγγλωσσία is explained by Verrall-


(p. 129) as ‘the sum of all γλῶσσαι᾽
(obscure words), and then (p. 130)
‘the science of such words and their
interpretations.’ He thinks that,
before 476, the two men, afterwards
famous as rhetoricians, ‘had pub-
lished some work, doubtless fanciful
enough, upon etymology.’ Professor
Gildersleeve, who regards the sugges-
tion as ingenious, adds this comment
(Pindar, p. 153): ‘See P. 1, 943
where the panegyric side of oratory
is recognised. If we must have
rivalry, why not rivalry between the


old art of poetry (φυᾷ) and the new
art of rhetoric (μαθόντες) δ The
work on etymology, however, which
Dr Verrall supposes, would have been
published, as he rightly says (p. 197),
at least ten years before Corax pub-
lished his ‘Art of Rhetoric,’—the
earliest recorded book of its kind.
Pindar, in Dr Verrall’s view, repre-
sents, not poetry versus rhetoric, but
the poet’s insight into words versus
the etymological treatment of words
‘in prose, cold, crude, and quasi-
scientific’ (p. 131). The words in
P. 1.94, to which Prof. Gildersleeve
refers, are καὶ λογίοις καὶ ἀοιδαῖς :
where λογίοις seems to mean *chronj-
clers’ (like the logographers). So in
4. vt. 31 the memorials of fame
are ἀοιδαὶ καὶ λόγοι, ‘poems and
chronicles’ (surely not ‘speeches’).
In M. vi. 52 λογίοισιν seem to be
‘men versed in tradition,’ whether
poets or prose-writers. It is more
than doubtful whether there is any
reference in Pindar to panegyric
oratory; and it seems certain that
there is none to the art of rhetoric.


Pindar’s
relations to
Stmonides
and Bac-
chylides.


20 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


the only one. Pindar, in the second Olympian, seems
clearly to point at other poets, the ‘crows’ of this passage,
the ‘daws’ of another, who vainly compete with the
sovereign eagle. It is hard to see how, in 476, the art of
rhetoric can have been in any such competition with the
art of poetry as would explain Pindar’s words.

On the other hand, a reference to Simonides and Bac-
chylides is perfectly intelligible. Let us briefly recall the
circumstances, Simonides and Pindar, the Ionian and
the Theban, men of contrasted types alike in genius and in
personal character, had now for many years been the two
foremost representatives of lyric poetry. Shortly before
Pindar began to write for Hieron, Simonides came to
Sicily, and soon became established in Hieron’s confidence.
Pindar and Bacchylides had already been brought into a
kind of indirect competition, when Lampon of Aegina
(probably in 481 or 479) commissioned both poets to
write for him on the same occasion. Simonides now
introduces Bacchylides to Hieron, whose Olympian victory
in 476 is celebrated by Bacchylides as well as by Pindar.
When account is taken of the temperament which has left
its impress on Pindar’s work, it seems probable that
(however unjustly) he would have considered Simonides
as his inferior. He might with more justice take that view
of Bacchylides, whose real excellences, besides being of a
wholly different kind from his own, were on a lower plane.
The nephew was probably regarded by Pindar as a feebler
copy of the uncle. This, then, is the first element in the
situation. As formerly at Aegina, so now in a more
conspicuous manner at Syracuse, Pindar’s work has been
set side by side with the work of Bacchylides. The other
element is furnished by the personal relations of Pindar
on the one part, and of the Cean poets on the other, with
Hieron. Pindar, we may be sure, would not have been a
successful courtier. It is hard to conceive of him as
retaining, for any long time, the good graces of an exacting
despot, who must have made continual demands on de-
ference, tact, and pliancy. When asked why, unlike


PINDAR'S SUPPOSED ALLUSIONS. 21


Simonides, he was little disposed to visit the courts of
Sicilian princes, Pindar is said to have replied, ‘Because
I wish to live my own life, and not that of another'.’
Pindar, one may believe, was too proud a man to care if
the poets of Ceos outstripped him in Hieron’s personal
favour. But Pindar had the passionate love and reverence
of a supreme artist for his art. His tribute to Hieron in
the first Olympian is no mere conventional piece, written
to order: it is one of the most splendid of his odes, showing
that his imagination had really been fired by the grandeur
of Hieron’s position; not simply by the power which
clothed the ruler of Syracuse, but also, as is still more
evident from the first and second Pythians, by Hieron’s
place as the champion of Hellene against barbarian in the
West. The third Ode of Bacchylides, linked by its
occasion with the first Olympian, is a poem of great
interest ; but it cannot, of course, for a moment be ranked
in the same class with Pindar’s. Whether Hieron, how-
ever, was a good judge of their relative merits, may be
doubted: and it seems very possible that, as the
Alexandrian scholiast affirms, he preferred the simpler,
clearer verse of Bacchylides to that of Pindar. If Pindar
saw that, and felt that it was largely due to the personal
influence of the Ionians,—an influence won by social gifts
which he himself did not possess, and rather despised,—he
may have resented it as a slight, not to himself, but to the
art for which he lived. Such a feeling would go far to
account for the tone of the utterance in the second
Olympian. The things said there could not fairly be said
either of Simonides or of Bacchylides. But resentment is
not apt to be a fair critic. That yapverov refers to
Simonides and: Bacchylides, seems, then, exceedingly
probable: though I should welcome a proof that this
impression is erroneous. But the reader can now form


1 One of the Πινδάρου ἀποφθέγ. μησεν eis Σικελίαν, αὐτὸς δὲ οὐ θέλει,
ματα (given in W. Christ’s Pindar ὅτι Βούλομαι, εἶπεν, ἐμαυτῷ ζῆν,
p- Ci). ᾿Επερωτηθεὶς πάλιν, διὰ τί οὐκ ἄλλῳ.

Σιμωνίδης πρὸς τοὺς Tupavvous ἀπεδή-


Other


passages of
Pindar.


Result.


LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


22


his own judgment. The aim of these pages has not been
to advocate an opinion, but to exhibit the evidence.

The other passages of Pindar, in which the Alexandrians
traced similar allusions, are of less moment. (1) In the
second, Pythian, written for Hieron after 477 B.C.,—perhaps
in 475,—Pindar refers to the mischief of ‘slander,—to the
slanderer’s disposition as resembling that of ‘the crafty
fox,—and to an ‘ape’ who is admired by ‘children.’ Here
the scholiast finds a reference to Bacchylides; he is the
‘ape, and he disparages Pindar to their common patron
(vv. 52ff.; and 72ff.). This seems at least dubious. If
Bacchylides was the ape, Pindar must have counted on
Hieron failing to identify himself with the child. (2) In
the second Isthmian, for Xenocrates of Acragas (circa
470 B.C.), verse 6, Pindar refers to the olden days when
‘the Muse was not yet covetous, nor a hireling. This is
taken by the Alexandrian commentator as glancing at the
avarice of Simonides; and there is some reason for
supposing that Callimachus thought so. (3) In the fourth
Nemean, for Timasarchus of Aegina (c. 467-463 B.C.),
vv. 37—41, the poet expresses his assurance of triumphing
over certain foes; though ‘there is *a man of envious eye’
(POovepa...Brérrwv), who ‘revolves in darkness a vain
purpose that falls to the ground.’ The scholiast takes this
man to be Simonides: but that seems questionable.

In no one of these three passages can the Alexandrian
interpretation be regarded as more than possible. So far
as these are concerned, the net result of the scholia is
merely to illustrate the firmness of the Alexandrian belief
in Pindar’s propensity to deal thrusts at the Cean poets.


1 Pindar’s words (/. 11. 6) are:  Benseler s.v. ‘Ydexldys supposes


ἁ Μοῖσα yap ov φιλοκερδής πω τότ᾽
ἦν οὐδ᾽ épyarts. The schol. there
says:—évOev καὶ Καλλίμαχος"
οὐ γὰρ ἐργάτιν τρέφω
τὴν Μοῦσαν, ὡς ὁ Κεῖος ᾿Υλλίχον νέ-
πους.
(Callim. fr. 77. Michelangeli p. 4
takes Ὕλλιχος to be the grandfather
of Simonides. But Rost in Pape-


Ὑλλίχου vérovs to mean δημότης
᾿γλιχίδης. It certainly looks as if
the scholiast was right in taking
Pindar’s verse to be the source from
which Callimachus derived his phrase.
That does not prove, but it suggests,
that Callimachus understood Pindar
as alluding to Simonides.


SENTIMENTS IN CONTRAST WITH PINDAR’S. 23


An opinion so fixed tends, however, to strengthen the
probability that the belief rested, not solely on Pindar’s
text, but also on a tradition.

The recently recovered poems of Bacchylides contain Bacchy-
not a word which could be construed as reflecting on tng
Pindar. But among the previously known fragments there a/udes to
are two which deserve notice as presenting a curiously ae
marked contrast with Pindaric utterances. (1) Pindar says But there
(Οἱ τι. 85f.) that his shafts of song are φωνάεντα cvvetoiow: 7 vaste
és δὲ τὸ wav! ἑρμηνέων χατίζει. Bacchylides says (XIV. 30f.): sentiment.

οὐ yap ὑπόκλοπον φορεῖ
βροτοῖσι φωνάεντα λόγον σοφία"

‘There is nothing furtive’—nothing that is not frank and
open—‘in the clear utterance that wisdom brings to
mortals. Here σοφία might well be the poet’s art. The
word φωνάεντα decidedly suggests that the author was
thinking of the Pindaric passage, where σοφός (said of the
poet) occurs just afterwards. Bacchylides would then be
saying, in effect:—‘True art does not speak in forms which
have a voice only for the select few, but require interpreters
for the many: it does not take refuge in riddles: its
utterance has a clear sound for all men.” The pellucid
character of his own work illustrates that sentiment.
(2) Still more remarkable, perhaps, is the other contrast.
We have just seen how Pindar heaps scorn on the
μαθόντες, the men of διδακταὶ ἀρεταί, the poets who are
mere disciples or imitators. Bacchylides mildly observes
(fr. 4) —

ἕτερος ἐξ ἑτέρου σοφὸς τό τε πάλαι Kal TO νῦν"

οὐδὲ γὰρ ῥᾷστον ἀρρήτων ἐπέων πύλας

ἐξευρεῖν"
‘Poet is heir to poet, now as of old; for in sooth ’tis no
light task to find the gates? of virgin song.’ ‘Can any
lyric poet of our day ’—so we might expand his thought—
‘confidently affirm that he owes nothing to the old poets
from Homer onwards, the shapers of heroic myth, the


1 On the shortening of πάν, see 2 The image is Pindar’s: O. ΥἹ. 27
Schréder, Prolegom. to Pindar, p. 34. πύλας ὕμνων ἀναπιτνάμεν.


Banish-
ment of
Bacchyli-
des from
Ceos.


24 LIFE OF BACCHYLIDES.


earliest builders of lyric song, in whose footsteps Pindar
himself has followed?’ The words of Bacchylides are (to
my ear) suggestive of such a reply; and that view of them
is not necessarily invalid merely because Pindar would, in
fact, have had a sound rejoinder ; viz., that in its essence,
in all that constitutes its distinctive character, his own
work is eminently original. But, at any rate,—and this is
the main point,—in all the extant writings of Bacchylides
there is no polemical utterance. If certain asperities of
Pindar were indeed directed against Simonides and Bac-
chylides, the Cean poets may have profited by a quality
which was not rare among men of their race. They were
Ionians, and may have been protected from serious annoy-
ance by a sense of humour.


Apart from the Sicilian chapter, the only recorded
event in the external life of Bacchylides is one which is
noticed by Plutarch in his tract Ox Exile. The authen-
ticity of that piece is not liable to any well-grounded
suspicion. It is a discourse of a consolatory kind
(παραμυθητικός), addressed to a friend who had been
banished from his country. The following passage occurs
in it (§ 14):—

‘In the best and most approved compositions of the
ancients, exile, it would seem, was a fellow-worker with
the Muses. Thucydides of Athens wrote his history of the
Peloponnesian War at Scapte-Hyle in Thrace. Xenophon
wrote at Scillus in Elis; Philistus, in Epeirus ; Timaeus of
Tauromenion, at Athens; the Athenian Androtion, at
Megara; the poet Bacchylides, in Peloponnesus.

‘All these, and several others, were banished from their
respective countries ; but they did not despair, or throw
their lives away. They used their gifts of genius, taking
banishment as a travelling-grant! made to them by Fortune.
Thanks to such exile, their memories survive in all lands;
while of the men who drove them out, the men whose


1 ἐφόδιον παρὰ τῆς τύχης τὴν φυγὴν λαβόντες.


EXILE [N PELOPONNESUS. 25


action triumphed, there is not one who is not utterly
orgotten.’

Two conclusions may with certainty be drawn from
his passage. The first is that, in Plutarch’s belief, the
leparture of Bacchylides from Ceos was not voluntary, but
lue to a sentence of banishment. The second is that
?lutarch supposed him to have resided in Peloponnesus
or a considerable time, and to have composed there some
ippreciable portion of his works. Plutarch had access to
νι large literature containing memoirs or reminiscences of
the older poets, a product characteristic of the whole period
yetween Aristotle and the Augustan age. Somewhere,
loubtless, in that literature he found authority for his
statement concerning Bacchylides. He gives us no clue
Ὁ the cause of the banishment, and conjecture would be
idle. Nor can the date be determined. But facts deducible rod to
from the poet’s odes create certain probabilities respecting τὼ
the period of his life to which the event belonged. Sree
(1) Ode v was sent to Hieron from Ceos in 476. The
poet had not then been banished. (2) Odes vi and VII
are for Lachon of Ceos. The date of these two poems is
fixed by the new fragment of the Olympic register’ to
452 B.C. The last verses of Ode VI rather suggest that
the poet was then in Ceos. At any rate these odes would
not have been written by a man who had been driven out
of Ceos by a sentence of banishment. If that sentence was
passed in the interval between 476 and 452, in.452 it had
been cancelled. But it is perhaps more probable that the
poet’s exile began after 452. As we have seen, there is
reason to think that he survived the beginning of the
Peloponnesian War. In 452 he cannot have been much
more than fifty-five. After 452 there was still room for a
chapter of life fruitful in poetical work, such as Plutarch
indicates.

It is pertinent to inquire whether any traces ofa residence Traces of
in Peloponnesus can be discerned in the poems or fragments 72”on"e-
of Bacchylides. There is much, undoubtedly, that relates wor.

1 Oxyrhynchus Papyri τι. 85.


J. B. 3


26 PELOPONNESUS.—A MAP OF THE ODES.


to Peloponnesus. Ode VIII (the only one for a Peloponnesian
victor) shows his intimate acquaintance with the legends
and cults of Phlius. He knows also the local legends of
the neighbouring Nemea (Odes VIII and x11). In Ode x
we have the Argive story of Proetus and Acrisius, the
offence given by the Proetides to the Argive Hera, and the
cult of Artemis Hemera at Lusi in Arcadia. The poet
‘ knew that the Mantineians bore the trident of Poseidon on
their shields (frag. 6). He told how the centaur Eurytion
was slain by Heracles at the house of Dexamenus in Elis
(frag. 48). His poem on Idas and Marpessa (XIX) was
written for the Spartans. Some of his ‘Dorian partheneia’
(frag. 40) may also have been for Sparta, a place with
which that form of lyric was especially associated.
Limit to When, however, we scrutinise these facts, we can
bie scarcely say that, in themselves, they would afford a pre-
traces. sumption of residence in Peloponnesus. The knowledge
shown in respect to Phlius is noteworthy; yet, after all, it
is not more than might have been acquired in the course of
a short visit. On the whole, there is nothing that could
not be explained by a poet’s study of mythology, sup-
plemented, perhaps, by occasional visits to certain localities.
That, however, is no reason for doubting the tradition pre-
served by Plutarch, that the home of the exiled Bacchylides
was, for some considerable time, in Peloponnesus.
Geogra- The geographical distribution of his extant poems bears
Snel ia Witness to a fairly wide-spread repute. Of his thirteen
the poems. E,pinikia, four (I, I, VI, VII) were for Ceos; two (XI, X11)
for Aegina; one (1X) for Athens; one (XIII) for Thessaly ;
one (X) for Metapontion in Magna Graecia; and three (111,
Iv, V) for Syracuse. Of his six so-called Dithyrambs, the
local destination of one (XIV) is unknown. One (XVI) was
to be performed by a Cean chorus at Delos; one (Xv) was
for Delphi. Two probably (XVII, XVIII) were for Athens ;
and one (XIX) was for Sparta. It is likely that, as at
Syracuse, so also at Athens, in Thessaly, and in Magna
Graecia, the name of Simonides may have helped to
recommend his nephew.


27


II. THE PLACE OF BACCHYLIDES IN THE HIsrory
OF GREEK LYRIC POETRY


The work of Bacchylides, well worthy of study in itself,
erives a further interest from the peculiar place which he
olds in the history of the Greek Lyric. He is the latest
f the nine poets whom the Alexandrians included in their
‘ric canon, the others being Alcman, Alcaeus, Sappho,
tesichorus, Ibycus, Anacreon, Simonides and Pindar. In
is youth, all the types of the lyric had been fully developed ;
nd the life of lyric poetry was still vigorous. Before his
eath, a decline had begun. In the last third of the fifth
sntury, exquisite lyrics continued to adorn the plays of
ophocles, of Euripides, and of Aristophanes; but, after
acchylides, no purely lyric poet attained to a high rank.
rom the commencement of the Peloponnesian War
awards, the only kinds of lyric which remained fertile and
opular were such as attested the degradation alike. of
detical and of musical art, such productions as the dithy-
imbs of Philoxenus and the nomes of Timotheus.

The history of the classical Greek Lyric is comprised Period of
ia period of some two hundred years, from the early or Sal
iddle part ‘of the seventh century B.C. to about the middle 47.
‘the fifth. The rise of a lyric poetry was necessarily
‘eceded by a development of music, which was traditionally
sociated with two principal names. The Phrygian
lympus, a dim figure, represented some marked improve- Ofmpus.
ent in the music of the double flute (αὐλητική), soon
lowed by an advance in the art of singing to that
strument (αὐλῳδική. Terpander of Lesbos, whose Zerpander.
tivity may be placed about 710-670 B.C., improved the
thara, and was regarded as having founded the art of the
‘tharode’ who sings to it. The kind of song which
srpander more particularly cultivated was that called the


3-2


28 BACCHYLEIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


The nome. ‘nome’ (νόμος), a general term for a musical strain‘, but one
which early acquired a technical sense. A ‘nome’ was a
solo, chanted to the cithara in honour of a god, especially
of Apollo, and divided into parts according to a traditional
scheme. Only about a dozen genuine lines of Terpander
are extant?» Some of these are short verses composed
wholly of spondees, which suggest a solemn liturgical
effect. Healso used the hexameter. In Lesbos he founded
a citharodic school which maintained his tradition for

Terpander centuries. He visited Delphi. He established the citharodic

a “parla. 7+ at Sparta, where he is said to have gained a prize at fhe
festival of the Carneia in 676 B.c. The first epoch? in, the
Spartan culture of poetry and music is associated by
Plutarch with Terpander’s name. The second such ¢poch

Thaletas was made by Thaletas, a native of Gortyn in Cretf, who

si flourished about 670-640 B.C. He brought to Sparta
certain kinds of choral song in which the Cretans excelled.
These were the pacan and the hyporcheme, both belonging

The paean. to the Cretan cult of Apollo. The paean was~ usually,
though not always, accompanied by dancing, an art which
had been elaborately developed in Crete. The kindred,

The hypor- but livelier, hyporcheme was, as the term imports, inseparable

cheme. from dancing. The Spartan festival of the Gymnopaediae,
founded (according to Eusebius) in 665 B.C., was that with
which, in early times, the performance of paeans was more
especially associated. I

Thaletas was said to have composed


1 The musical sense of νόμος is ‘the first phase in the establishment a
doubtless derived from that of οὗ musical and poetical art at Sparta.
‘custom,’ ‘law.’ Weir Smyth com- 4 Plut. δ. associates with Thale-


pares τρόπος, οἴμη, Germ. Weise, tas, as founders of the δευτέρα kara-
French and English ἀΐγ. See his στασις at Sparta, Xenodamus of
Greek Melic Poets, p. lix, where other Cythera and Xenocritus of the
explanations are also noticed. Epizephyrian Locri, both writers of
2 Bergk4 111. pp. 8-12... paeans; also Polymnestus of Colo-
3 Plut. De Mus. 9: ἡ μὲν οὖ phon, known especially as a writer of
πρώτη κατάστασις τῶν περὶ τὴν ὄρθιοι νόμοι for flutes; and Sacadas
μουσικὴν ἐν τῇ Σπάρτῃ, Tepravdpov of Argos (72. ε. 580 B.c.?), who is
καταστήσαντος, γεγένηται. Thesense described by Plutarch as a ποιητὴς
of ἡ πρώτη κατάστασις κιτ.Ὰ. is indi- ἐλεγείων.
cated by καταστήσαντος. It means


AEOLIAN MONODY. 29


lutarch observes that the tradition was not undisputed}.
ome verses, at least, of Terpander were still extant in the
cond century A.D.; one of our scanty fragments is due to
‘lement of Alexandria? But the Alexandrians did not
iclude Terpander in their list. He was regarded rather
s an early pioneer of lyric song, a ‘singer’ who was
rimarily a musician, while his poetical work was of a com-
aratively archaic kind. The fame which he enjoyed in Ancient
ntiquity is proudly attested in the verse, written perhaps ee.
rithin a century after his death, by his countrywoman <r.
vappho:—

πέρροχος, ὡς OT dotdos ὁ Λέσβιος ἀλλοδάποισινϑ,

There is a remarkable contrast in respect to their
ustory between the two principal branches of the Greek
yric, the Aeolian song for one voice, and the Dorian choral
ide. The Aeolian song is suddenly revealed, as a mature 7%e
vork of art, in the spirited stanzas of Alcaeus. It is raised Bie
o a supreme excellence by his. younger contemporary ,
sappho, whose melody is unsurpassed, perhaps unequalled,
imong all the relics of Greek verse. With those two lives,
—contained, probably, within some such limits as the years
140 and 550 B.c.,—the Aeolian lyric begins and ends. In
. later generation (ας 550-500 B.C.) Anacreon of Teos
vrote, indeed, lyric monodies on themes of festivity or of
oye: h* “2 Ionian grace was not joined to the Lesbian

a period of ‘netrical forms owed little or nothing to the
sesbiat? tuodels. His contemporary, Ibycus of Rhegium,
n the fragments of love-poems which remain, shows a
yassion which gives him some measure of spiritual kinship
vith Alcaeus and Sappho; but his odes, so far as we can
iow judge, were of a kind wholly distinct from theirs, being
thoral, and composed in the large Dorian strophes. When
\lcaeus and Sappho passed away, the moulds of their song |
vere broken. No third Greek poet, in any age, created
imilar masterpieces of lyric monody.


1 Plut. De Mus. το. 3 Fr. 92.
2 Strom. v1. 784 (Terpander fr. 1).


The
Dorian
choral
lyric.


Aleman.
The par-
theneton.


30 BACCHYLIDES IN. LYRIC HISTORY.


The history of the Dorian choral ode, on the other hand,
is that of a series of lyric types gradually developed by
successive poets in connexion with religious cults and public
festivals. The Dorian state, as represented by Sparta, was
based on the education of a warrior caste, trained to arms
from boyhood, proud of their heroic ancestry, and imbued
with a deep reverence for the institutions and customs of
their race. ‘The Dorian sons of Pamphylus and of the
Heracleidae, says Pindar, ‘dwelling under the cliffs of
Taygetus, are ever content to abide by the ordinances of
Aegimius!’ In a military aristocracy of this compact
kind, the sense of corporate life was peculiarly strong ; and
that was the sense to which the Dorian choral lyric
appealed. It was an act of worship, performed at a
gathering of the citizens. The gods of the city, the heroes
of racial or local legend, the common beliefs and sentiments,
were its normal themes. Choral dancing, in which the
Dorians of Crete were so accomplished, was not less con-
genial to Spartans. The gymnastic training, in which
Spartan maidens participated, would confer ease and
precision in rhythmic movement. It is easy to understand,
then, why the choral lyric, in its earlier phases, was distinc-
tively associated with Dorians. The closeness of that early
tie explains the fixed convention which arose from it. A
Dorian colouring remained obligatory for the dialect of the
choral lyric, even when the composer was Boeoto-Aeolian,
like Pindar, or Ionian, like Simonides and Bacchylides.

Both Pindar and Bacchylides, according to Plutarch,
wrote ‘many Dorian partheneia®’ The ‘virginal song,’ or
partheneion, was first perfected by Alcman (c. 640-600 B.C.),
the earliest choral poet known in Greek literature. His
parents were probably Aeolian Greeks resident in Lydia.


1 Pind. P. 1. 62 ff. Papyri 1. 1904). If the ascription


2 Plut. De Mus. 17.—The frag-
ments of Pindar’s Παρθένεια are very
scanty (fr. 9§-104.c in Schréder’s ed.).
But a new fragment, of some 80
verses, from a partheneion, is ascribed
by Blass to Pindar (Oxyrhynchus


is correct, these verses illustrate the
remark of Dionysius, that Pindar’s
style in his partheneia was simpler
and easier than in other classes of his
poems. No fragment of a partheneion
by Bacchylides is extant.


DORIAN CHORAL LYRIC.—ALCMAN. 31


From Sardis he was brought in boyhood to Sparta, where
he lived and died. He wrote hymns, paeans, hyporchemes,
drinking-songs, love-songs. But his fame rested chiefly on
nis partheneia. Few fragments of Greek poetry are more
interesting than the passage of about ninety verses by
which one of these ‘virginal songs’ is represented. A
chorus of Spartan maidens is offering a robe to Artemis
Orthria, goddess of the dawn, and is competing for the
nusical prize with another Chorus. The time seems to be
light,—perhaps shortly before daybreak. Their song
yegins with the myth of Hippocoon, the wicked king of
Sparta, who drove out his brother Tyndareus, but was
lain, with his sons, by Heracles. Then it glides into a
ighter strain,—praising the beauty of Agido (a prominent
nember of the Chorus), which is as ‘a vision of winged
lreams,’—and the vocal skill of the leader Hagesichora, in
vhom they chiefly trust for victory. The playful grace and
liry charm of these stanzas are inimitable. In another
ragment® of a partheneion, the chorus seems to defend
\lcman against detractors; in a third’, it is he who
ddresses them, ‘the sweet-voiced maidens, who delight
vith song,’ and laments that he is growing too old to take
art in their dance. It is a pity that nothing remains from
he partheneia of Bacchylides, which must have given scope
or his elegance of fancy and lightness of touch. Ionian
nd Athenian manners did not permit such virginal
horuses. The partheneia of Bacchylides may have been
rritten for Sparta, or other Dorian cities, during his
ssidence in Peloponnesus.

Alcman was a fine and versatile artist; but, for the later
istory of Greek lyric poetry, he is less significant than Stesi- svesz-
horus of Himera (c. 610-550 B.C.), the creator of the epic aed
ymn. Terpander, Aleman, Alcaeus and Sappho had written Aymn.
ymns; but only in honour of gods, or of such semi-divine


1 Fr. 23 (Bergk). The papyrus 175 ff.
as found in 1855 by Mariette in a 2 Fr. 24.
mb near the second pyramid. Cp. 3 Fr. 26.
‘eir Smyth, Greek Melic Poets, pp.


Festivals
of the
heroes.


Influence
of Stest-
chorus.


32 BACCHYLIIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


persons as the Dioscuri. Stesichorus, taking the material
furnished by epos, recast it in a lyric form. He drew on all
the great cycles of myth, Trojan, Theban, Argive, Thessa-
lian, Aetolian. The hymn became in his hands mainly a
narrative, epic in general style, yet differing from epos by
a fuller expression of characters and feelings. He boldly
modified the old legends, as in his ‘ Palinode’ concerning
Helen ; and he also added to them. He seems to have
been the first who spoke of Athena as springing full-armed
from the head of Zeus, and the first who sent Aeneas on a
voyage to Italy. The epic hymns of Stesichorus were
intended for choral performance at those festivals of the
heroes which were numerous in the western colonies ; thus
there was a cult of Philoctetes at Sybaris, of Diomedes at
Thurii, of the Atreidae at Tarentum!. Such observances
linked the new homes with the memories of the old: and
at such festivals the hymns of Stesichorus would doubtless
have been popular. In addition to hymns, Stesichorus
wrote paeans, mentioned by Athenaeus as sung at
banquets. He was also the author of lyric romances or
love-stories? drawn from folk-lore, and thus was a far-off
precursor of the Greek novel*. The volume of his writings
was exceptionally large. In the Alexandrian age, Aleman
was represented by six books of poems, Sappho by nine,
Alcaeus by ten, Pindar by seventeen, and Stesichorus by
twenty-six. A ‘book’ was, of course, a variable quantity ;
but at any rate this number indicates a great mass of work.
No other Greek poet had so wide or so varied an influence
as Stesichorus on the poetry which came after him. The
artificial dialect which he employed, Doric in basis but with
a large infusion of epic forms, was the general prototype of
that which prevailed thenceforward in the choral lyric. It
was he, too, who established the norm of choral composition
in strophe, antistrophe, and epode; though whether he was
the inventor of the epode is disputed. His original treat-


1 [Arist.] De mirabil. auscult. 3 Athen. 13. p. 6or A.
106-110. Strabo 6. 262-264. 4 E. Rohde, Der griech. Roman,
2 Athen. 6. p. 2508. Pp. 29.


STESICHORUS. SIMONIDES. 33


ment of the myths furnished a mine of material to Attic
Tragedy. He was also influential in Greek art. The
‘vase-painters of the sixth and fifth centuries were often
indebted to him. His hymn, ‘The Capture of Troy’
(Ἰλίου Πέρσις), provided Polygnotus with subjects for his
‘paintings in the Lesche of Delphi, and can be traced in
those episodes of the Trojan War which some artist in the
first century of our era depicted on the Zabula Lliaca.

Among the poems of Bacchylides, there is one (Ode Stesichorus

XIV, the Aztenoridae) which may well have been influenced ἐν ἃ Ἵ
by the method of Stesichorus in the lyric handling of an
epic theme. The hymn of Stesichorus on the Calydonian
Boar-hunters (Συοθῆραι) may not improbably have been a
source used by Bacchylides for the story of that hunt as
told by Meleager (Ode v). In writing of the Centaur
Eurytion, slain by Heracles in Elis (fr. 48), Bacchylides was
again on ground traversed by Stesichorus, one of whose
hymns (the Γηρνονηΐς) included the adventures of Heracles
in Peloponnesus on his way home from the abode of
_Geryoneus (or Geryon) in the far west. More generally,
a study of Stesichorus may have helped to form that epic
manner of narrating myths which is characteristic of
.Bacchylides, as in the story of the Proetides (Ode x), and
in the episode of Ajax at the ships (Ode XII).

Simonides was the last of the classical poets who Simoniaes.
created new types of choral lyric. Those of which he may
be considered the inventor are the enkomion and the
epinikion. An ‘enkomion,’ or ‘song at a revel’ (ἐν κώμῳ), The _
was, in the technical sense, an ode in praise of a distin- sates
guished man, intended to be sung by a chorus at or after
a banquet. Strictly speaking, then, the enkomion was a
genus of which the epinikion was a species : and sometimes
the line between the two was not clearly drawn. The ode
of Euripides for Alcibiades, properly an epinikion, is also
called an enkomion?. Pindar’s encomion for Aristagoras


1 Bergk* 11. p. 266. By Athen. Ὀλυμπίασι ἱπποδρομίας els ᾿Αλκιβιάδην
1. 3E it is called an ἐπινίκιον: Ὁ ἐγκώμιον. Cp. Plut. Aled. ο. 11.
Plut. Dem. c. 1, τὸ ἐπὶ τῇ νίκῃ τῆς ἷ


*


Hymns to
living men.


The
epinikion.


34 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


of Tenedos, on the occasion of his being installed as
president of the Council, stands appended to the Nemean
epinikia}, although in the Alexandrian collection of Pindar’s
writings the enkomia formed a distinct book. The poem
of Simonides on Scopas is an example of the enkomion


proper. Among the subjects of Pindar’s enkomia were


Alexander the son of Amyntas, king of Macedon, and
Theron of Acragas.

The enkomion and the epinikion represent a further
extension in the province of the hymn. Hymns were
dedicated by the elder poets to gods or demigods alone ;
by Stesichorus, to the heroes also; and now, by Simonides,
to living men. Ibycus might be regarded as having set
the example, though only in a limited sense, when he wrote
choral hymns in praise of youths at the court of Polycrates.
But it was Simonides who first led the Greeks to feel that
such a tribute might properly be paid to any man who was
sufficiently eminent in merit or in station. We must
remember that, in the time of Simonides, the man to whom
a hymn was addressed would feel that he was receiving a
distinction which had hitherto been reserved for gods and
heroes. That chord is touched by Pindar in his enkomion
for Alexander :—

πρέπει δ᾽ ἐσλοῖσιν ὑμνεῖσθαι
εὐ Καλλίσταις ἀοιδαῖς"
τοῦτο γὰρ ἀθανάτοις τιμαῖς ποτιψαύει μόνον".

This is the only tribute to human worth that ‘ verges
on the honours rendered to immortals.’

Simonides is the first recorded author of epinikia. It
may well be that, before his day, the praises of athletes
had been sung to their fellow-townsmen or kinsfolk ; but,
if it was so, the songs have left no trace. An epinikion,
though appealing in the first instance to the victor’s city
and family, was also, like his renown, Panhellenic. It was
an elaborate and stately work of art; and the earliest
artist in that kind was Simonides. The advent of the


1 [Mem. XI.] 3 Pind. fr. 121.


THE ENKOMION. THE EPINIKION. 35


epinikion at that particular period was not an accident,

due to the special bent of one poet’s genius: it was con- Develop-
nected with that new era in the history of the national ΤΕ οἱ υἱὲ
games which dated from the earlier part of the sixth sees.
century.

In 582) B.c. the ancient Pythian festival in honour of 7%
Apollo, which had been held in every ninth year, became 7”
a pentaeteris, to be held in the third year of each Olympiad.
Hitherto the contests had been only in music, instrumental
and vocal. To these were now added the most important
of such athletic and equestrian contests as were then in
use at Olympia. The Pythian festival took place in August.

The agonothetae, or presidents, were the Amphictyons ;
the prize was a wreath of laurel.

Two years later, in 580 B.C., the Isthmian festival of 7%.
Poseidon was reconstituted as a trieteris, to be held in the sane
second and in the fourth year of each Olympiad. The
celebration was in spring. The presidency belonged, in the
fifth century, to the Corinthians. In the earliest times, as
again in the Roman age, the Isthmian prize was a wreath
of pine (πέτυς), symbolising the cult of Poseidon. In the
fifth century it was a wreath of parsley (σέλινον), which
had a funereal significance, referring to the legend that the
Isthmia had been founded in memory of Ino and her son
Melicertes, who, after death in the waves, became re-
spectively the Nereid Leucothea and the sea-deity
Palaemon.

The festival of the Nemean Zeus was remodelled in 7%
573 B.C. Thenceforth it was a trieteris, held at the “”””
beginning of the second and of the fourth year of each


1 This is the date given for the
first Pythiad by the Pindaric scholia,
and accepted by Bergk. Pausanias
(x. 7. §3) gives 586, which was
adopted by Boeckh. The date 582
is confirmed by the fragment of the
Olympic register, which shows that
Hieron had been victorious at Olympia
in 476 and 472. Bacchylides (Ode 1v)


attests that Hieron, when he won his
victory at the Pythian games, had
already won twice at Olympia. Now
the Pythiad in which Hieron won
was the 29th (Schol. Pind. P.1.). If
the Pythiads were reckoned from 582,
the 29th falls in 470. But if they
had been reckoned from 586, it would
fall in 474.


36 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


Olympiad, probably in the month of July. Down
to about 460 B.c. the agonothetae were apparently the
Cleonaeans; but the presidency afterwards passed to the
Argives. The prize was a wreath of parsley, signifying
that the festival had originated from the funeral games
held by Adrastus and his comrades in memory of Arche-
morus.
The The Olympian festival of Zeus—said to have been
Olympia founded by Heraclés, and renewed or enlarged by Oxylus,
Iphitus, and Pheidon—dated its historical era from 776 B.C.
Since then, it had been held in every fourth year. The
time of celebration varied within certain limits, according
to a cycle of lunar months, so as to coincide either with
the second or with the third full moon after the summer ©
solstice. The Eleans were the presidents, and appointed
the judges called Hellanodikai. The prize was a wreath
of wild olive (κότινος).
The games at these four great festivals were distin-
guished as sacred (ἱεροὶ ἀγῶνες). But numerous minor
Epinikia festivals existed in every part of Hellas; and epinikia
ὃ vince were often written for these also. Thus the ode which is
known as Pindar’s ‘second Pythian’ was for a Theban
festival, perhaps the Heracleia or Iolaia. The so-called
‘ninth Nemean’ was for the Pythia at Sicyon; and the
‘tenth Nemean,’ for the Hecatombaia at Argos. The
thirteenth ode of Bacchylides was for the Petraia in
Thessaly. When the custom of writing epinikia had once
been established, the demand for them must have been
considerable.
Records of At Olympia the names of victors had been recorded on
wictortes.
stone from an early date. When the three other great
festivals were reconstituted, a similar practice was doubt-
less observed. Cities, too, kept local registers of the suc-
Tributes to cessful athletes’. Nor had a poetical tribute been wholly
victors. wanting at Olympia. Before the days of the epinikion, an
Olympic victor used to be greeted with that song of
Archilochus which Pindar calls ‘the triumphal hymn, with


1 See Introd. to Ode I.


THE EPINIKION. 37


threefold loud refrain’ (καλλένικος 6 τρυπλόος κεχλαδώς)", The old
The refrain was τήνελλα καλλίνικε, in which the first word καλλίνικος,
represented the sound of the lyre. Two of the verses
remain :—

Xaip’ ἀναξ Ἥραάκλεες,


¥
αὐτός Te καὶ ᾿Ιόλαος, αἰχμητὰ δύο.


This song was still used in Pindar’s age by a comos escort-
ing an athlete on the day when his victory was announced.

The earliest epinikia of Simonides belonged to the ite
latter years of the sixth century. In mentioning Eualcidas % Simonides.
of Eretria, who was killed at Ephesus, fighting against the
Persians, soon after the burning of Sardis in 499, Herodotus
describes him as a famous athlete, whose victories had been
‘much praised’ by. Simonides®. It is clear, then, that the
poet’s epinikia gained a wide repute. Another of his early
odes was for Glaucus of Carystus, a famous boxer, of whom
Simonides said that not even Polydeuces or Heracles could
stand up against him :—


οὐδὲ Πολυδευκέος Bia
χεῖρας ἀντείναιτ᾽ ἂν ἐναντίον αὐτῷ,
οὐδὲ σιδάρεον ᾿Αλκμήνας τέκος“,


Το Alcman that would have sounded very like an impiety ;
but times were changing. Simonides wrote also for Xeno-
crates of Acragas (brother of Theron), a winner at the
Pythian festival of 490 B.c.; for Astylus of Croton; and
for Anaxilas, tyrant of Rhegium*+

At the date when poetry first brought a tribute to Zhe poets
victors in the games, sculpture was already beginning to ideo
honour them. The earliest sculptors who are known to %#ptor’s.
have made statues of athletes, Eutelidas and Chrysothemis
of Argos, were active from about 520 8.6. ; but there were
some archaic statues of victors which claimed a higher age®.


1 Pind. O. Ix. 1f.: Bergk* 11. + Simon. 6, 7, 10. His epinikia
p. 418. were classed by contest, as πένταθλοι
2 Herod. v. 102: στεφανηφόρους (fr. 12), τέθριπποι (fr. 14), etc.
τε ἀγῶνας ἀναραιρηκότα καὶ ὑπὸ 5 Prof. Ernest Gardner, Handbook


Σιμωνίδεω τοῦ Kytov πολλὰ αἰνεθέντα. of Greek Sculpture, pp. tgrf.
3 Simon. fr. 8 (Bergk’).


” Elements
of the
epinikion.


A trait in
the epini-
kia of
Simonides;


and of Bac-
chylides.


Dithy-
vrambs of
Stmonides.


38 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


Among the sculptors who commemorated athletes at
Olympia, or elsewhere, between 520 and 450 B.C., were the
Argive Ageladas, the Sicyonian Canachus, and the greatest
representative of the Attic school in this kind, Myron’. It
is well to remember that, when the epinikion was a new
thing, the artist in verse might naturally compare himself
with the artist in marble or in bronze. His ode was not to
be merely an ephemeral compliment; it was to be an
enduring record for the victor’s city, and an heirloom for his
house2, Pindar, to whom Poetry and Sculpture are sisters
in the bestowal of fame, contrasts the immovable statue
with the poem which travels far and wide*

In all the larger specimens of the epinikion, three
elements are normally present ;—a reference to the victory,
at the beginning and at the end,—a mythical episode,
linked in some way with the occasion,—and a reflective or
gnomic element, leavening the whole. This general pattern
was doubtless set by Simonides. The fragments of his
epinikia, scanty as they are, warrant the belief that he
differed from Pindar in sometimes describing more fully
the circumstances of the particular victory. This verse
belonged to a description of a chariot-race :—

κονία δὲ παρὰ τροχὸν μεταμώνιος ἄρθη""
‘Dust was lifted on the wind beside the chariot-wheel,’—
another chariot being just in front. A second verse seems
to speak of some precaution taken by a charioteer,—perhaps
that of passing the reins round his waist, lest they should
slip from his hands ;—

μὴ βάλῃ φοίνικας ἐκ χειρῶν ἱμάντας.
This Simonidean trait recurs in some epinikia of Bac-
chylides.

The dithyramb, which in the time of Archilochus had
been distinctively a song to Dionysus, was afterwards
applied to themes unconnected with that god. This en-


1 Prof. Ernest Gardner, Handbook θέμεν Taplov λίθον λευκοτέραν.
of Greek Sculpture, p. 192 (Ageladas) : 3 Pind. Δ v. 1 ff.
p- 195 (Canachus) : p. 238 (Myron). 4 Simon. fr. 16.

2 Pindar’s aim (WV. Iv. 81) is ord dav 5 Simon. fr. 17.


THE EPINIKION. THE DITHYVRAMB. 39


largement of its scope must have taken place before the

days of Simonides ; but he is the earliest poet for whom it

is attested. One of his dithyrambs was entitled Memmnon,

and another Europa. The only dithyramb of Pindar from

which a considerable fragment remains (fr. 75) was strictly

Dionysiac: but we do not know whether that was true of

the dithyrambs in which he referred to Orion (fr. 74) and

to Geryon (fr. 81). In the latter part of the fifth century

B.C., dithyrambists of the new school exercised a complete

freedom in their choice of subjects. The Alexandrians 44xan-
: : drian

seem to have applied the name ‘dithyramb’ to any poem sense of

which contained a narrative concerning the heroes. bear

Speaking of Xenocritus, a native of the Epizephyrian Locri

who was contemporary with Thaletas, Plutarch remarks

that it was disputed whether he wrote paeans®. ‘They say

that he was the author of poems on heroic subjects,

containing narratives ; and that therefore his pieces are by

some called dithyrambs. In the phrase used here,

ἡρωϊκῶν ὑποθέσεων πράγματα ἐχουσῶν, the word πράγματα

appears to mean ‘events’ (res gestas) set forth in historical

sequence. It recalls the use by Polybius of the term

πραγματεία to denote his own work (I. 2 ὃ 2); and of the

phrase, ὁ τῆς πραγματικῆς ἱστορίας τρόπος (2b. ὃ 8), to

express ‘the method of systematic history.’ Of the poems

in the Bacchylides papyrus, six (XIV—XIX) were classed The ‘dithy-

by the Alexandrians as ‘dithyrambs.’ One of these (xv) ἐ ΚΣ

was so far ἃ dithyramb in the old sense, that it was “es.

intended for performance at Delphi in connexion with the

winter-cult of Dionysus, though the subject (Heracles) did

not relate to the god himself. Another (XVIII) is also

Dionysiac, the point of it being the god’s descent from Io.

Of the four others, one (XIV, Aztenoridae), which concerns

the embassy of Menelaus and Odysseus to Troy, may have

been produced with a dithyrambic chorus, as is suggested

by the fact that, according to Bacchylides, the sons of


1 Simon. fr. 27 and 28 (Bergk* ὑποθέσεων πράγματα ἐχουσῶν ποιητὴν
Iu. pp. 398f.). γεγονέναι φασὶν αὐτόν" διὸ καί τινας
2 Plut. De Mus. το : ἡρωϊκῶν γὰρ διθυράμβους καλεῖν αὐτοῦ τὰς ὑποθέσεις.


Hypor-
chemes of
Simonides;


and of Bac-
chylides.


Simonides
as a writer
of dirges ;


40 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


Antenor were fifty in number. It would then have been
a dithyramb in the same sense as the Memmnon or the
Europa of Simonides. <A like remark applies to no. XVII,
on the adventures of Theseus between Troezen and Athens,
—the only extant specimen of a dithyramb in dialogue.
But the two remaining poems (XVI and XIX) could be called |
‘dithyrambs’ in no further sense than as ‘containing heroic
narratives. One of them (XVI), on the voyage of Theseus
to Crete, is, in fact, a choral paean for Delos. The other
(xIx, /das), though not technically an epithalamion or a
hymenaeus, is of a hymeneal character. In one of his lost
‘dithyrambs, Bacchylides described the warlike array of
the Mantineans; in another, he told the story of Philoctetes’.

Plutarch notes the excellence of Simonides in treating
the hyporcheme, and quotes examples of his marvellous
skill in writing verses of which the rhythm suits a lively
dance”. His nephew’s poems of this class were also in
repute. One hyporcheme of Bacchylides,—a verse of
which became proverbial,—was for the cult of the Itonian
Athena, perhaps at her chief Boeotian shrine, that temple
on the banks of the Coralius, near Coroneia, which is
mentioned by Alcaeus*.

Lastly, it was Simonides who first established the choral
dirge as a recognised form of lyric art. ‘The tributes of
the Cean dirge’ are, for Horace, typical of their kind; and
Quintilian recognises their author’s pre-eminence in pathetic
power’. The Danae fragment is an example of that


1 See fragment 6 (=41 Bergk) oth ‘Letter of Phalaris,’ we hear of


and fragment 39 (=16 Bergk).

2 Plut. Quaest. conviv. 1X. 15. 2.
Bergk’s fragments 29, 30, 31 of
Simonides are passages quoted by
Plutarch as illustrations.

3 Bacch. fr. τι (=23 Bergk):
Alcaeus fr. 9.

4 The rhetor Aristeides (1. 127)
says:—TIlofos ταῦτα Σιμωνίδης θρηνή-
σει; τίς Πίνδαρος; ποῖον μέλος ἢ λόγον
τοιοῦτον ἐξευρὼν Στησίχορος ἄξιον
φθέγξεται τοιούτου πάθους; In the


Stesichorus being asked to write a
funeral elegy. But, though Stesi-
chorus may have been famed for
pathetic verse, there is no evidence
that he had preceded Simonides in
the artistic development of the lyric
θρῆνος.

5 Hor. C. τι. i. 38. Quint. x. 1.
64: praccipua tamen eius in com-
movenda miseratione virtus, ut quidam
in hac eum parte omnibus eius operis
auctoribus praeferant.


THE HYVPORCHEME. THE DIRGE. 41


power ; though it is uncertain whether the poem to which
those exquisite verses belonged was a ¢hrenus. The dirges
of Simonides appear to have dealt chiefly with such topics
of consolation as could be drawn from the merits and the
fame of the departed. In the fragments of Pindar’s dirges compared
the key-note is rather the survival of the soul!; the ἘΠ
happiness of him who, having seen the Mysteries, ‘ under-
stands the end of mortal life, and the beginning’ of a new
life ‘given by Zeus*’; the bright and tranquil abode of the
blest,
αἰεὶ Ova μειγνύντων πυρὶ τηλεφανεῖ παντοῖα θεῶν ἐπὶ βωμοῖς",

The kinds of choral lyric represented by Pindar’s Pindar.
remains are more numerous than in the case of any other
poet. But he was not the creator of any new kind, as
Simonides of the epinikion; nor, again, was he the first
who gave a new artistic value to any old form of song, as Character
Simonides gave it to the dirge. What Pindar did was to pone
set the stamp of an original and strongly individual genius
on every lyric form in which he composed. He has that
force of imagination which can bring clear-cut and dramatic
figures of gods and heroes into vivid relief, as when Apollo
finds Cyrene ; when Iason suddenly appears in the market-
place of Iolcus ; or when Heracles, in Aegina, prays that
a son may be given to Telamon: he has that peculiar and
inimitable splendour of style, which, though sometimes
aided by magnificent novelties of diction, is not dependent
on them, but can work magical effects with simple words:
he has also, at frequent moments, a marvellous swiftness,
alike in the succession of images, and in transitions from
thought to thought: and his tone is that of a prophet, who
can speak with a voice as of Delphi. But the place to
analyse his qualities is not here, where we are dealing with


1 Pind. fr. 131. Wind, clouded with the grateful in-
2 fr. 137- cense-fume
3 fr. 129, 130. So Tennyson, at Ofthose who mix all odour to the Gods
the end of Zivesias:— On one far height in one far-shining
and every way the vales fire.


7. 5. 4


The
prosodion.


Prosodia
of Pindar ;


andof Bac-
chyhdes.


Love-songs
and drink-
ing-songs.


Pindar’s
Skolia.


42 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


the development of the choral lyric in its several forms:
what concerns us is to note that, in respect to one of those -
forms, the only extant fragments belonging to the fifth
century B.C. are those of Pindar and of Bacchylides..
This form is the prosodion, or ‘song of approach’; a
very old kind of processional hymn, chanted by a chorus
in moving towards the temple or altar of a god, for the
purpose of supplication or of thanksgiving. The earliest
prosodion on record was written by Eumelus of Corinth
(6. 740 B.C.) for a chorus which the Messenians sent to the
Delian temple of Apollo’. Prosodia are ascribed to Clonas
(c. 675 B.C.), variously described as a Boeotian or an
Arcadian, the chief founder of vocal flute-music (atA@dia).
Of Pindar’s prosodia, one was for the Delian, and another
for the Pythian, Apollo; a third, which mentioned Latona,
was for the Aeginetan shrine of Aphaea, a goddess akin to
Artemis. So far, the evidence points to Apollo and his
sister as the deities with whose cults the prosodion was
more especially associated; though doubtless it was not
confined to them. Three fragments from the prosodia of
Bacchylides have been preserved by Stobaeus: but their
contents, which are ethical, afford no clue to the occasion?
Most of the lyric poets wrote love-songs (ἐρωτικά), or
songs meant to be sung over the wine at a banquet (παροίνια
or σκόλια). Some fragments of Alcaeus are classed as
erotica, and others as skolza: these were for a single voice,
as were the songs with which wine or love inspired
Anacreon. But the erotic hymns written by Ibycus at the


-court of Polycrates seem to have been choral. The skolia


of Pindar also were choral. With reference to his writings,
the term ‘skolion’ appears to have been used in a large
sense, so as to include ‘erotica’: the skolion to Theoxenus,
for example, was of the latter kind‘. ΑἹ] those fragments


1 Paus. Iv. 33 82 quotes from this 88 (els Δῆλον) : fr. go (els Δελφούς) :
prosodion two verses, one a hexa- fr. 80 (els’Agalav).
meter, the other a dactylic pentapody 3 Bacch. fr. 7, 8, 9 (=19, 20, 21
(Bergk‘ 111. p. 6). Bergk).

2 Plut. De Mus. 3. Pind. fr. 87, 4 Pind. fr. 123.


THE PROSODION. LIGHTER VERSE. 43


of Pindar, indeed, which are classed as ‘skolia’ are erotic.
But among his fragments of uncertain class there is one
(no. 218), on the fancies inspired by wine, which might
have belonged to a choral drinking-song. The parallelism
with a like fragment of Bacchylides is so close as almost

to suggest that one of the two poets was vying with the
other. In the case of Bacchylides, a class of evotica is Bacchy-
attested by Athenaeus?. To that class three of his”
fragments belong. One of these is curious: it is the refrain

of a love-song, given, probably in chorus, after a single
voice had sung a strophe® It is not on record that
Bacchylides wrote drinking-songs; but two of his frag-
ments seem referable to that class*.

Next to Pindar, Bacchylides is the poet who is known
to have written in the largest variety of lyric forms; but
it is possible or probable that Simonides composed lyrics
of other classes besides those of which, in his case, we have
arecord. Pindar’s remains represent ten species: epinikia ; Classes "
enkomia; hymns for the gods; paeans; hyporchemes 5 277%,
dithyrambs; prosodia; partheneia; skolia; and dirges, 7407;
The ‘erotica’ of Bacchylides, and those of his neawedt and for
which may be ranked under the head of ‘ paroinia,’ corre- ἘΠῚ oii
spond in class with Pindar’s ‘skolia.” Of the other nine
forms in which Pindar wrote, only two are absent from the
record of Bacchylides. These are the enkomion and the
dirge.

The extant works of Pindar and of Bacchylides prove Tie classé-
that, for at least a generation after the Persian Wars, the pool len
choral lyric maintained its prestige, not only in the form of iad
the epinikion, but in several others also. The period from’
about 478 to 446 B.C. was, indeed, that during which Pindar’s
fame was at its zenith. Yet with Bacchylides the series of
classical lyric poets ended.

In the history of Greek poetry from 500 to 450 B.C. the Rise of


central fact is the rise of the Atticdrama. The year 534 B.c. al


1 See u. on Bacch. fr. 16 (=27 8 See nu. on Bacch. fr. 14 (=25
Bergk). Bergk).
2 Athen. 15. p. 667 6. 4 Fr. τό, 17 (=Bergk 27, 28).


4—2


Lyrics in
Tragedy.


The lyrics
of Phrynt-
chus.


44 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


is given by the Parian chronicle as that in which Thespis
first exhibited at Athens. The official recognition of
tragedy as a permanent feature of the Athenian Dionysia,
with a State subsidy in the form of a choregia, dated from
508. Aeschylus, born in 525, first competed for the tragic
prize in the spring of 499, and gained it for the first time
in 484. When, in 456, after writing some ninety plays,
Aeschylus died in Sicily, twelve years had passed since
Sophocles had begun to exhibit. Attic Tragedy had still
another half-century of creative work before it; but it
was already mature: nor did it ever touch a higher point
than that which Aeschylus had reached in the Ovesteia.
In 456, at least ten years of activity remained to Pindar;
and Bacchylides was still in early middle life.

Attic Tragedy, the offspring of the dithyramb, demanded
other gifts beside the lyric; but, in every phase of its
development, some measure of lyric faculty was indispens-
able. In the earlier phase, the lyric element was either
actually predominant, or, at least, very large. In the latest
phase, represented by Euripides, the choral songs were,
indeed, less important; but, on the other hand, they were
now exempt from the necessity of being relevant to the
action, and thus offered a free field to lyric fancy. During
the youth of Bacchylides, an aspirant to purely lyric
distinction might have drawn noble inspirations from the
work of dramatists. The Capture of Miletus and the
Phoenissae of Phrynichus would, as dramas, have been
sufficiently interesting to a young Ionian of Ceos. But
there he would have found also some of those lyrics which,
after the lapse of two generations, still commanded the
admiration of Athens; and of which Aristophanes, himself
a lyric master, says that their pure melodies seemed to have
been caught from the songs of the birds:—


ἔνθεν ὡσπερεὶ μέλιττα
Φρύνιχος ἀμβροσίων ἐπέων ἀπεβόσκετο καρπόν".


Aeschylus, apart from his qualities as a dramatist, was


1 Ar. Av. 749 f.


DRAMA AND THE CHORAL LYRIC. 45


one of the greatest lyric writers, comparable, in mastery of Aeschylus
metre and of rhythm, to Pindar, but with a grandeur and Ce
an intensity altogether his own. When, in the Frogs of
Aristophanes, Euripides undertakes to show that Aeschylus
is ‘a bad lyric composer,’ the Chorus. wonder what fault he
will be able to find with the man whose lyrics (μέλη) are,
as they boldly affirm, unsurpassed. The date of the
Aeschylean Swufplices is uncertain, but may perhaps be
placed ¢c. 491/90. A student of the lyric art could scarcely
find more beautiful examples than are furnished by the five
great choral odes of that play, which interpret successive
and varied emotions. Traces of Aeschylean influence
appear, as will be seen later, in the diction of Bacchylides.

There was no reason, then, why the rise of Attic 4 reason
drama should have been adverse to the continued cultiva- eh tae
tion of the higher lyric poetry. It might rather have been ἄγος “e
expected to favour it. The demand made by Tragedy on jie.
lyric accomplishment tended to maintain those studies of
music, rhythm, and metre by which the older lyric poets
had been formed. A theatre in which choruses sang the
lyrics of Phrynichus and of Aeschylus was a school in
which large audiences might acquire or improve a lyric
taste. On the other hand, the sphere of drama was so
distinct from that of the Dorian choral lyric that the
attractiveness of the one would not suffice to account for
a withdrawal of public favour from the other. We have
seen that, in fact, the choral lyric continued to flourish for
many years after the drama was mature. The national
games still afforded material for epinikia; the worship of
the gods still demanded hymns, paeans, prosodia, hypor-
chemes; the festivals of Dorian cities could still be graced
with partheneia. But, in the latter part of the fifth century,
one form of choral song, the dithyramb, received a new 776 new
development, fraught with far-reaching consequences to the as
whole lyric art. That development was beginning just as
the life of Bacchylides must have been drawing to an end.


1 Ar. Ran. 1249—1256.


46 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


ntey a In the second half of the sixth century, the new im-
es portance given by Peisistratus and his sons to the Athenian


¢ §27B.C. festivals of Dionysus had stimulated the demand for dithy-


Dithy. _rambs. Lasus of Hermione, who worked at Athens between
eed 527 and 514, modified the older style of dithyrambic com-


position. The music which accompanied the choral song
became more elaborate. From his time, apparently, dated
« the tendency to enhance the significance of the musical
accompaniment relatively to that of the poetical text. As


Protest of early as ¢. 500B.C., Pratinas is found vigorously protesting
πε τ against the encroachments of the flute-player. The Muse,
he says, has ordained that the song shall be mistress, and
the flute servant?. Still, even in days when, as Pratinas
complains, the flute was tending to become master, no
serious mischief could be done, so long as the writers of
dithyrambs were men loyal to the best traditions of lyric
Simonides poetry. Down to ¢. 476 B.C. Simonides was a frequent
- δ author of dithyrambs for Athenian festivals; he could
point to no fewer than fifty-six victories won by him with
Bacchy- cyclic choruses’. The seventeenth poem of Bacchylides, a
ae dithyramb in the form of a dialogue, shows no trace. οὗ
those faults which disfigure the diction and style of a later
school. Bacchylides also maintains the tradition that a
dithyramb should be composed in strophes.
The new The innovator with whom a new school began was
Nelenip. Melanippides, a Dorian of Melos*. His life was spent
pides.


1 Pratinas 5f. (Bergk* 111. p. 558):
τὰν ἀοιδὰν κατέστασε Πιερὶς βασίλειαν"

ὁ δ᾽ αὐλὸς
ὕστερον χορευέτω" καὶ γάρ ἐσθ᾽ ὑπηρ-

éras.

2 Simon. 145. As Simon. 147
shows, one of these victories was
gained in the spring of 476 8.6.,
when Adeimantus was archon (Bergk4
Ill. 495 f.).

8 Two dithyrambic poets named
Melanippides are distinguished by
Suidas. (1) The elder, a Melian,
son of Criton, was born about 5208.6.
(2) The younger was a maternal


grandson of the elder: his father also
was named Criton: his native place
is not mentioned. Rohde, in Rhein.
Mus. 33.213, holds that Suidas made
a mistake. There was only one dithy-
rambic poet named Melanippides,
and he was a Dorian of Melos.
Weir Smyth (Greek Melic Poets,
Ῥ. 453) comes to the same conclusion.
It was the tendency of . Suidas to
duplicate personalities, as in the cases
of Sappho, the tragic poets Nico-
machus and Phrynichus, and the
comic poet Crates.


THE NEW DITHYRAMB. 47


partly at Athens, partly at the court of Perdiccas II of
Macedon, who died in 413 B.C. Melanippides wrote his
dithyrambs, not in strophes, but in ‘free verse’ (ἀπολελυ-
μένα). This change was intimately connected with another.
He gave greater prominence to a mimetic or dramatic
element in the performance of the dithyramb, an element
which gained in freedom by the absence of the old strophic
framework. He also introduced musical preludes (dva-
βολαῖ), by which the choral song was broken up into
sections. A passage in the Memorabilia curiously illustrates
his popularity. Xenophon’s Aristodemus names three poets
whom he regards as supreme in their respective kinds.
They are Homer, Sophocles, and Melanippides?.

The next writer after Melanippides who left a mark on Philoxe-
the dithyramb was his pupil Philoxenus, who was born in ”””
435 and died in 380B.c. He was a native of Cythera.
When the Spartans recovered that Dorian island (probably
about 413 B.C.) he was sold as a slave, and bought by the
poet Melanippides?. Philoxenus gave prominence to the
solos (μονῳδίαι) which he interspersed between -the choral
parts. These solos afforded free scope to the florid music
‘which was coming into fashion, full of those affectations
and false ornaments which are ridiculed by Aristophanes.
The dramatic side of the performance was now still further
developed. The dithyramb of Philoxenus, with acting,
dancing, music, and scenery, must have borne some
resemblance to an operetta. Among the recorded titles
of his pieces are the Cyclops and the Reveller (Komastes).
Philoxenus had a great reputation. His contemporary, the
comic poet Antiphanes, who had sometimes made merry
with his phrases, paid a generous tribute to his memory®.
It is instructive to find that, as older and better poets had
been contrasted by Aristophanes with the school to which
Philoxenus belonged, so Philoxenus himself was extolled
by Antiphanes at the expense of worse poets who came
after him.


1 Xen. Mem. 1. iv. 3. 3 Antiphanes fr. 209 (Kock), from
2 Suidas s.v. Φιλόξενος. the Τριταγωνιστής.


Timotheus.


His
* Persae.’


The ‘ di-
thyrambic’
style.


48 BACCHVLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY. °


Timotheus of Miletus, who flourished at the end of the
fifth century and in the earlier part of the fourth, carried
the new tendencies still further. The ancient ‘nome, sung
to the cithara by one voice, had long ceased to enjoy the
vogue given to it by Terpander. Timotheus revived it, but
in a form which was essentially new. To the solo he added
choral singing ; he made the performance in some measure
dramatic, and thus assimilated the nome to the new
dithyramb. Alone among the writers of his class in that
age, Timotheus can now be judged by a large specimen of
his work. In 1902 a fragment containing 253 consecutive
verses was found near Memphis!. It belongs to one of his
most celebrated nomes, the Pervsae. The three principal
parts of a nome were called ‘exordium’ (ἀρχή), ‘omphalos’
(the central portion), and ‘seal’ (σφραγίς). In our frag-
ment, the éxordium is wanting ; the first 214 verses belong
to the ‘omphalos, and describe a naval victory of Greeks
over Persians, probably that at Salamis; the last 39 verses
are the ‘seal,’ in which Timotheus speaks of himself, and,
as it were, sets his signature to his work. The style is that
which, in its general characteristics, was common to the
dithyrambic poets of the new school. One trait was a
love for portentous compound words, especially adjectives’.
Another was the use of grand and round-about phrases for
common things, When Timotheus wishes to say that the
rowers dropped their oars, he expresses it thus :—


1 A photographic facsimile was
published in 1903 by the Deutsche
Orient-Gesellschaft (Leipzig, Hin-
richs), with a preface by Prof. v.
Wilamowitz-Mollendorf, who has also
edited the fragment.

2 Thus in Plato’s Cratylus (p. 409),
when the words σέλας, ἔνον, νέον,
and dei have been rolled into ceda-
evovedera, — denoting the moon’s
‘light - ever - old - and - new,’ — this is
pronounced a truly διθυραμβῶδες
ὄνομα.

3 Dithyrambic periphrasis was a
fertile source of jest to the Middle
Comedy : thus Antiphanes fr. 52:—


πότερ᾽, ὅταν μέλλω λέγειν σοι τὴν
χύτραν, χύτραν λέγω,
ἢ τροχοῦ ῥύμαισι τευκτὸν κοιλοσώματον
κύτος;
This feature of the dithyrambic style
might be illustrated by many of those
examples which Pope culled from his
contemporaries in the discourse of
Martinus Scribblerus on the ‘ Art of
sinking in poetry’; for some resources
of that art are the same in every age.
Thus the following mode of saying,
‘Shut the door,’ is quite-in the
manner of Timotheus:—
‘The wooden guardian of our privacy
Quick on its axle turn.’


THE NOMES OF TIMOTHEUS. 49


μακραυχενόπλους
χειρῶν δ᾽ ἔκβαλλον ὀρείους
πόδας ναός.


But, owing to the length of the new fragment, our know-
ledge of his style is not limited to such details: we can
judge of its general texture. As an example, we may take
the speech in which a drowning Persian upbraids the
sea :—
ἤδη θρασεῖα καὶ πάρος
λάβρον αὐχέν ἔσχες ἐν
πέδᾳ καταξευχθεῖσα λινοδέτῳ τεόν.
νῦν δέ σ᾽ ἀναταράξει
ἐμὸς ἄναξ, ἐμός,
πεύκαισιν ὀρυγόνοισιν, ἐγ-
κλήσει δὲ πεδία πλόϊμα νομάσιν αὐγαῖς,
οἰστρομανὲς παλεομί-
σημ᾽ ἄπιστόν T ἀγκάλι-
σμα κλυσιδρομάδος αὔρας.
gar ἄσθματι στρευγόμενος,
βλοσυρὰν δ᾽ ἐξέβαλλεν
ἄχναν, ἐπανερευγόμενος
στόματι βρύχιον ἅλμαν.

‘Bold as thou art, ere now thou hast had thy boisterous
throat bound fast in hempen bonds ’.[alluding to the bridge over
the Hellespont]. ‘And now my king,—aye, mine,—will plough
thee with hill-born pines, and will encompass thy navigable plains
with his far-roaming rays’ [2.e. the Persian king’s power,*radiant
as the sun, will close round the Aegean on all its coasts]: ‘O thou
frenzied thing, hated from of old, who treacherously embracest
me, while the breeze sweeps over thy surges!’ So spake he,
panting with strangled breath, as he spat forth the grim sea-dew,
belching from his mouth the brine of the deep.


The absurdity, alike of style and of matter, could
scarcely be exceeded: but the poet is serious. In a later
passage, however, he seems to be designedly comic. A
Phrygian prisoner, bewailing himself, speaks fourteen verses
of broken Greek.


Rapid
decline in
lyric taste.


Plato's
account of
that
decline.


50 BACCHYLIIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


In the Chetvon of Pherecrates, the goddess of Poetry
denounces certain poets by whom she has been injured.
Melanippides was the earliest; but the worst, as she
declares, has been Timotheus?. Especial stress is there
laid on his debasement of music. His master in music,
Phrynis, had been trained in the Lesbian school of
citharodes,—a hereditary guild claiming to derive their art
from Terpander,—but had broken with its better traditions;
and the innovations of Timotheus went beyond those of
Phrynis. It is, indeed, hard to conceive how such verses
as those which have just been quoted can have won
applause, unless the music had become so far more im-
portant than the words that a musical display in the
newest fashion could carry off the most grotesque libretto.
Yet the compositions of Philoxenus and Timotheus were
still popular in the days of Polybius*.

It may seem extraordinary that the first Greeks who
admired such writers were men for whose fathers lyric
poetry had been represented by Simonides, Pindar, and
Bacchylides; and that the earliest successes of the new
dithyrambists were gained when Sophocles and Euripides
were still living. The most instructive of all commentaries
on this fact is supplied by Plato. In a striking passage of
the Laws (written probably not long before 350B.C.), the
Athenian says that the limited freedom enjoyed by Athens
at the time of the Persian Wars had been better than the
unlimited freedom of his own day. In that older time the
people were ‘the willing servants of the laws” ‘Of what
laws?’ asks the Lacedaemonian Megillus. An_illustra-


1 Pherecrates fr. 145, verses 3 and
το ff.

2 Polybius (Iv. 20) describes the
education of boys and youths jn
Arcadia, as he remembers it. They
are trained from an early age to sing
hymns and paeans on the gods and
heroes of their native towns. Next
they learn the musical compositions
(νόμου) of Philoxenus and Timotheus,


and dance with spirit to the strains of
‘the Dionysiac flutists.” [The word
νόμους is here used in a large sense
which includes both dithyrambs and
nomes proper.] When Philopoemen
presided at the Nemean festival of
207 (or 205) B.C., the very nome from
which we have quoted, the Persae of
Timotheus, was given in the theatre
(Plut. Pzzlop. 11).


DECLINE OF THE LYRIC. 51


tion is then given from the province of poetry and
music!.

Lyric poetry, says the Athenian, was formerly divided
into several distinct species, such as the hymn, the dirge,
the paean, the citharodic nome. Each species had its own
laws of style and of rhythm. The judges of merit in each
species were experts. But in the course of years a new
race of poets arose, men who had no sense of what is ‘just
and lawful in the work of the Muse.’ They broke down
the old distinctions of style and rhythm, mingling hymns
with dirges, and paeans with dithyrambs, while they forced
the cithara to mimic the notes of the flute. Denying that
there was any such thing as correctness (ὀρθότης) in poetry
or in music, they made the pleasure of the hearer their sole
test, without caring whether he was or was not competent
to judge. ‘Raging like Bacchanals, these new poets
brought in a reign of ‘uncultured lawlessness’ (τῆς ἀμούσου
παρανομίας). The audiences, formerly silent, now began
to indulge in noisy cries and clapping of hands; for the
new poetry had taught the multitude to think themselves
connoisseurs. The old ‘aristocracy’ in music and poetry,
—the rule of experts and good judges,—was at an end.
An evil ‘theatrocracy’ took its place’.

From Alcman to Bacchylides, the distinctive feature in
the evolution of the Greek lyric had been, as Plato indicates,
the adaptation of different species to different themes and
occasions. In each species the poetical and musical tact
of the Greeks had achieved an artistic harmony between
form and matter. That harmony depended on the nice
observance of certain rules appropriate to each kind. The
‘dividing lines between the several kinds were traced with
a light and delicate touch: to the many those lines might
seem faint; but for the artist they were distinct ; and they
were also sacred, because they had the sanction of an
intimate fitness which the Greek mind could apprehend.
But, in the latter part of the fifth century, a new lyric


1 Plat. Legg. 700 Α--701 Β. κρατίας ἐν αὐτῇ [sc. τῇ μουσικῇ]
3 Plat. Lege. yor A ἀντὶ ἀριστος θεατροκρατία τις πονηρὰ γέγονεν.


Signifi-
cance of the
decline in
musical
taste.


A further
question.


52 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


school cast off that loyalty to the best Greek traditions and
instincts. The Attic drama, unrivalled among contemporary
forms of poetry in the splendour and variety of its attrac-
tions, drew vast audiences to the theatre. Next in
popularity, but at an interval, came the agon of cyclic
choruses at the Great Dionysia, and on certain other
occasions. The new dithyrambist felt impelled to bid for
popular applause by sensational novelties. A tasteless
license broke down the discriminating canons of the older
school. Nothing in Plato’s sketch of the process is more
instructive than his reminder that such license meant more
than a new bent of poetical or musical fashion. It was
connected with political and social changes, with the growth
of license in every department of civic life, and with new
manners which were impatient of decorous restraint. For
the Greeks, who, as Plato and Aristotle teach us, were so
keenly sensitive to the moral effects of music, and to its
consequent importance in education, the new corruption
of music was, in a sense which we can hardly realise, a
grave symptom of moral decay. The difference between
Simonides and Timotheus was analogous to the difference
between the Athens of Themistocles and the Athens of
Cleon.

But a further question remains. It must be asked
whether the new development at Athens suffices to account
for the fact that the classical literature of the Greek lyric
ends with Bacchylides. The epinikion, for instance, might
have been expected to remain in demand; but the ode of
Euripides for Alcibiades (420 B.C.)? is the last recorded
example of such a composition by an eminent writer.
The literary influence of Athens reached far. But a poet
who could follow in the steps of the old choral masters
ought still to have been secure of appreciative audiences
at the festivals of Dorian cities, and at the chief centres of
worship, such as Delphi and Delos. Some allowance
should doubtless be made for the effects of the Pelopon-


leg. Plat. Rep. 8 c— Cc: 2 See above, p. 33.
p- 39 399 P- 33
Arist. Pol. v [vit]. 5—7.


TIMOTHEUS AND SPARTA. 53


nesian War; for the drain upon those funds which the
Dorians of Peloponnesus could apply to their festivals ; for
the interruptions of that elaborate training which the choral
performances at those festivals demanded ; and, generally,
for the concentration of thought and interest on the great
struggle. It may be added that the intellectual and the
literary tendencies of the age, its scepticism and its rhetoric,
were unfavourable to ideal art in every kind. But choral
lyric poetry had been zealously cultivated for generations ;
it was highly organised ; it touched Greek religion and
Greek life at many points; it had hitherto given delight to
multitudes. The complete cessation of higher work in that
province is a phenomenon which only one cause seems
adequate to explain. We are forced to the conclusion that
those influences, which at Athens were represented by the
new dithyrambic school, speedily became dominant in
Hellas at large. It is significant in this connexion that
Melanippides and Philoxenus were Dorians, that Phrynis
came from Lesbos, and that Timotheus, the pupil who
outdid him, was an Ionian of Miletus. All these men
enjoyed a wide popularity. As to Philoxenus in particular,
it is known that he was well received in Dorian Syracuse
and Tarentum. But wherever the music and the verse of
that school became established in popular favour, the cause
of classical lyric poetry was lost.

We know, however, that there was at least one Dorian
community which upheld the ancient standards, and met
the new depravations with a strenuous protest. Timotheus
had openly vaunted the superiority of the ‘new songs’ to
the ‘ old’:—

οὐκ ἀείδω τὰ παλαιά,

καὶ τὰ καινὰ γὰρ ἅμα κρείσσω"
νέος ὁ Ζεὺς βασιλεύει,

τὸ πάλαι δ᾽ ἦν Κρόνος ἄρχων"
ἀπίτω Μοῦσα παλαιά.


‘I do not sing the old songs, for the new are also the better.


1 Timotheus fr. 12 (Bergk* 111. 624).


The
inevitable
inference.


Timotheus
and the
‘old Muse.’


The
Spartan


protest.


54 BACCHYLIDES IN LYRIC HISTORY.


Zeus reigns in his young prime: the rule of Cronus is overpast.
Away with the old Muse!’


And now, in the fragment of his Persae (219—225), he
is found invoking Apollo to protect him against the strong
censure of Sparta :—

ὁ yap μ᾽ evyevéras μακραΐί-
ων Σπάρτας μέγας ἁγεμών,
βρύων ἄνθεσιν ἥβας,

δονεῖ λαὸς ἐπιφλέγων
ἐλᾷ τ᾽ αἴθοπι μώμῳ,

ὅτι παλαιοτέραν νέοις
ὕμνοις Μοῦσαν ἀτιμῶ.

‘For that noble and ancient folk, mighty lord of Sparta, rich
in the flower of youth, storms against me in hot anger, and lashes


me with fiery reproach, because in my new songs I dishonour the
elder Muse.’


It has been conjectured’ that Timotheus produced this
poem, about 397 B.C., at the Panionia, the festival of the
Jonian dodecapolis, held on the promontory of Mycale.
Sparta was then dominant in Greece; and it was the
interest of the Ionians to stimulate her warfare against the
Persian satraps. I may observe that, if this hypothetical
date be accepted, the words βρύων ἄνθεσιν ἥβας are
significant. In the Spartan army then on the coasts of
Asia Minor, ‘the flower of youth’ must have included
many who, in choruses at the Gymnopaediae, had sung
the paeans of lyric poets very unlike Timotheus.

Singular indeed is the contrast thus disclosed. The
creative period of Greek poetry is just over, and already
the Athenian public has acquiesced in fashions which
condemn lyric poetry to a swift and irremediable decay.
It is from Sparta that the remonstrance comes. It is at
Sparta that a purer taste survives, guarded by laws
prohibiting licentious change in the old music of Apollo’s
festivals, and animated by a tradition dating from the


1 By Prof. v. Wilamowitz, introd. to the facsimile, p. rr.


HIS RELATION TO HIS PREDECESSORS. 55


‘ar-off days when Spartan youths and maidens danced and
sang under the direction of Aleman. More than a genera-
tion later, Aristotle could say of his Spartan contemporaries
that, if their musical education was defective, at any rate
they had a true perception of the difference between good
music and bad}.

We have now traced in outline the evolution and the Bacchy-
decay of the Greek lyric. In such a development the pean
relation of a poet to his predecessors is of peculiar predeces-
moment for a right estimate of his significance. We have
seen how the paean and the hyporcheme came down to
Bacchylides from Thaletas, how the first models of those
‘Dorian partheneia’ which he is said to have written had
been set by Alcman, and how the influence of Stesichorus
may probably be recognised in his treatment of heroic
legend. We have also seen how Simonides created the
epinikion, and is the first recorded author of dithyrambs
on subjects other than Dionysiac ; being thus the precursor
of Bacchylides in each of the two kinds to which his
extant writings chiefly belong. Lastly, we have sought to
elucidate the principal causes which, immediately after the
time of Bacchylides, led to the rapid and final decay of
Greek lyric art; thus enabling us to understand why his
name is the last in the series of those Greek lyric poets
who attained to classical rank. After this endeavour to
mark his place in lyric history, we may turn to a brief
consideration of the qualities which distinguish his work.


1 Arist. Pol. v [ν 111]. 5. 8 7.


56


III. CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES AS A POET.


Extant The poems, or fragments of poems, in the Bacchylides
eee papyrus are of two general kinds. The first thirteen pieces
des. are epinikia. The remaining six, all relating to episodes


in the story of heroes and heroines, were collectively classed
by the Alexandrians as ‘dithyrambs,’ in that large sense
of the term which was explained above’. The number of
verses represented by the continuous portions of the
papyrus (including verses lost in /acanae of which the length
can be determined) is 1392. If we suppose, with Blass,
that the part lost at the beginning (of which small frag-
ments remain) represents 110 verses’, the total is 1502.
The fragments preserved by ancient writers, and not found
in the papyrus, give about 95 verses more, thus raising the
approximate total to 1597. That number is only about
150 less than half the total in Pindar’s extant odes and
fragments, which is (roughly) about 3500.
His treat- In considering the poetical qualities of Bacchylides, we
init may set out from his treatment of the epinikion. A trait
in which he differs from Pindar, and probably follows
Simonides, is the tendency which he sometimes shows to
Details of Awell on the circumstances of the particular victory. An
the victory iV) ustration is furnished by his fifth ode, as compared with
Pindar’s first Olympian, which was written on the same
occasion. Bacchylides describes the running of the horse
Pherenicus in a passage of thirteen verses (vv. 37--- 40);
while Pindar’s allusion to the race is very slight and brief
(Ο. τ. 20—22). The eighth ode depicts the manner in
which the victor roused the plaudits of the spectators at
Nemea by his performance with the quoit, with the javelin,
and in wrestling (VII. 27—39). The ninth ode celebrates
an athlete who, at the Isthmus, won two consecutive
foot-races. Immediately after his first success, he returns
to the starting-place, ‘still breathing a storm of hot breath’;


1 See p. 39. 2 See Appendix to Ode 1.


CHOICE OF MYTHS. 57


ind when, for the second time, he rushes past the goal
1 winner, the olive-oil from his body sprinkles the clothes
of the spectators who press around him (IX. 2I—26).

Six of the thirteen epinikia are embellished with ages in
nythical narratives: these are odes I, III, V, VIII, X, and XII. ite
There is no myth in ode ΙΧ; and there cannot have been
space for one in the now multilated ode vil. Odes II, Iv,
and VI are merely short songs. In regard to XI and to
XIII, the scanty remains leave it uncertain whether myths
were used,

The choice of the myth for an epinikion was a good
test of poetical tact. In some cases, the task was a simple
one,—namely, when the traditions of the victor’s city or
family supplied a suitable legend. Thus in his first ode, Ode 7.
for the Cean Argeius, Bacchylides related the myth of
Dexithea and Euxantius, which seems to have been
specially connected with the victor’s native town’. The Ode Viz.
zighth ode, for Automedes of Phlius, glances at the story
concerning the origin of the Nemean games ; but the chief
mythical ornament is furnished by the local legends of the
river Asopus. The twelfth ode, for Pytheas of Aegina, Ode X7/.
»pens with a prophecy inspired by the spectacle of Heracles
strangling the Nemean lion ; and the central portion of the
d0em renders a tribute to the glories of the Aeacidae.

But Odes III, V, and X are those by which we can best
neasure the skill of Bacchylides in this department. The
subject of the third ode is Hieron’s victory in the chariot- Ode 7/7.
‘ace at Olympia (468 B.c.). Sacrifice is being offered in
the temples of Syracuse, and its streets are alive with
iospitable festivities. Thence the poet glides to a mention
of the golden tripods which Gelon and Hieron had
Jedicated, several years before, at Delphi. ‘Be generous
Ὁ the god, and he will prosper you. Apollo saved Croesus
of old’;—and then the story is told. The transition from
5yracuse to Delphi is lightly and smoothly made ; but the
ittentive reader experiences a mild surprise at the sudden
ference to the tripods, and is left with a suspicion that
he myth has been dragged in. Pindar, we might con-


1. 8. 5


Ode V.


Ode X.


Treatment
of the
myths by
Bacchyli-
des:


58 CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES.


jecture, would have managed the matter differently.
Possibly he would not have attempted to veil the transition
by a smooth and swift juncture. The festivities at Syracuse
would have led him to speak directly of Hieron’s munifi-
cence in general. Then there would have been some bold
and brilliant utterance of the maxim that the gods reward
munificent votaries, followed by the Croesus-myth,—an
illustration which would thus have come in naturally. At
all events the art of Bacchylides leaves something to be
desired here. In the fifth ode, the meeting of, Heracles
with Meleager in the shades is linked to the poet’s im-
mediate subject,—the greatness of Hieron,—by the reflection
that ‘no man is blest in all things’ (v. 53 ff.). Heracles
and Meleager, like Hieron, were men in whose lot victory
and glory were mingled with suffering. The poet does not
expressly indicate this link: he leaves it to be inferred.
The tenth ode, for Alexidamus of Metapontion, is another
instance in which the link between theme and myth is
somewhat slender. At Metapontion there was a temple of
Artemis; and the poet assumes that it is Artemis who, by
giving the athlete his victory at Delphi, has consoled him
for a former disappointment at Olympia. This gracious
deed of ‘the soothing goddess’ suggests the story of the
Proetides whom she healed in Arcadia. As these examples
indicate, Bacchylides had not all the deftness of Pindar in
weaving a legend into the texture of the poem. It is
sometimes too apparent that the myth is more or less
far-fetched,—an ornamental adjunct, rather than an illus-
tration which seems to spring spontaneously from the
poetical motive.

The simple and direct manner of heroic epos is that
in which Bacchylides treats mythology. He gives a con-
tinuous narrative, sometimes of considerable length There
is often a genuine charm in the pellucid and easy flow of
these passages. At the same time this employment of


1 See Introduction to Ode x, §3. passage on the Aeacidae, 74 (XII.
* The story of the Proetides oc- 100—r174); the legend of Heracles
cupies 72 verses (X. go—112); the and Meleager, 119 (V. 56—1735).


TREATMENT OF MYTHS.KINSHIP WITH ELEGY. 59


»pic style tends to mark off the myth as a distinct section

of the ode. Pindar’s method is wholly different. He compared
selects from the myth a single episode or scene which he ee
lepicts with vivid power, but not, as a rule, at much
ength; as, for instance, the birth of Iamus (OQ. VI. 35—

57); Athena’s gift to Bellerophon (0. Χαμ. 63—92); the

infant Heracles strangling the serpents (WV. I. 35—61);
Heracles praying that a son may be born to Telamon

‘I. V. 35-56); the death of Castor (4. x. 55—-90). Even

the story of the Argonauts, which fills so large a space

Ἢ the fourth Pythian, is told in a few dramatic scenes,—

Iason at Iolcus,—the sailing of the Argo,—the hero
ploughing with the brazen bulls of Aietes:—and then
Pindar breaks off, with a swift glance at the sequel (P. Iv.
70—254). Bacchylides, if he had devoted an equal space

to the same subject, would have told the story straight
through, with an equable flow of quasi-epic verse.

An ode of victory was expected to contain maxims of Zhe _
life and conduct. With Pindar, this ‘ gnomic’ strain is Seah
almost always impressive by sheer force or beauty of
2xpression, even when the thought is merely some common-
place of Greek belief or sentiment.

Take, for example, the opening of the sixth Nemean :—


‘One race is there of men, one race of gods, and from one
nother we both have our being ; but in our power we are wholly
separate: for the race of men is naught; but the brazen heaven
abides, a dwelling-place steadfast for ever. Yet withal we have
some likeness to the Immortals, perchance in lofty mind, per-
chance in form ; though we know not what line Fate hath marked
‘or the goal of our course, whether in the day-time or in the
watches of the night.’


Bacchylides has nothing of this kind. When he
noralises, it is in the quiet and simple manner of [onian
slegy. One such passage, concerning the various pursuits
of men, is, in fact, a paraphrase from Solon’, At other
noments we are reminded of Mimnermus or of Theognis.


1 Ode ΙΧ. 39—45.
5-2


Ode I.
49-. 74:


Traces of
Pindar’s
influence.


60 CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES.


The following extract from the first ode will serve as a
specimen :—


‘If a mortal is blest with health, and can live on his own
substance, he vies with the most fortunate. Joy attends on every
state of life, if only disease and helpless poverty be not there.
The rich man yearns for great things, as the poorer for less ;
mortals find no sweetness in opulence, but are ever pursuing
visions that flee before them.’


If the utterances scattered through the poems warrant
a conjecture, Bacchylides was of a placid temper; amiably
tolerant; satisfied with a modest lot; not free from some
tinge of that pensive melancholy which was peculiarly
Ionian: but with good sense, and resolute in acting on
this precept of his own,—


“One canon is there, one sure way of happiness for mortals,—
if one can keep a cheerful spirit throughout life'.’


He often insists on the duty of giving praise where it
is due. Truth, candour (ἀλάθεια), urges men to do so,
and ‘is wont to prevail’ in the end; though envy may
strive to keep them mute. He has a vivid conception of
φθόνος as a power to be repelled ‘ with might and main®’
Who can tell whether his own career had not given him
some knowledge of that power?

It is remarkable that the first ode ends with twenty-five
verses which are wholly ‘gnomic.’ They contain no refer-
ence to the victor or to his victory, such as Pindar would
have introduced before the close. Such an ending was ill-
suited to an epinikion: it suggests a certain immaturity in
the poet’s art,—so far as this province of the epinikion was
concerned,—at the time when that ode was composed.
On the other hand, the fifth ode (written in 476 8.0.)
approximates to Pindar’s method in its general structure,
and has one especially Pindaric trait,—the abrupt return
from myth to theme*. An imitation of Pindaric style may

1 Fragment 7. is εὐρυβίας (XV. 31).


2 Ode v. 187 ff.: cp. Vil. 42ff.: 3 See on Ode v. 176 ff.
Vill. 85 ff.: XIL 199—207. Φθόνος


EPIC VIGNETTES._BRIGHT DETAIL. 61


also be traced in one passage of the third ode (468 B.c.)}.
Simonides was probably his nephew’s earliest master in
the epinikion. But at any rate Bacchylides, while still


-young, felt also the influence of Pindar.


The six poems in the latter part of the papyrus, 7% <a.


collectively classed as ‘dithyrambs’ in the Alexandrian “/7474»-’


sense, show the art of Bacchylides in another phase. The
ode on the embassy of Menelaus and Odysseus to Troy
(XIV) seems to end abruptly; so also does the ‘ Heracles’ o« ΧΙ.
(Xv). But each, doubtless, is complete as it stands. The Ode xV.
aim of each is to present a critical moment in the story,
a moment fraught with consequences which are hinted, but
left untold. A like purpose appears in the poem (XVII) οὐχ ΡΠ.
on the journey of Theseus to Athens. The finest piece od XV7Z.
in this series is, of course, the choral paean for Delos
(XVI),—‘ Theseus, or the Athenian youths and maidens.’
It is one of the two examples which best illustrate the


poet’s gift for narrative, while they illustrate it in different


aspects. The story of Heracles and Meleager, in the fifth
ode, moves ‘the sense of tears in mortal things’: this
paean excels in spirited and rapid description. The short Speeches of


» speeches of Theseus and Minos are also dramatically effec- [δ 5


tive in a high degree*. Bacchylides, we may note, makes
heroes speak in the epic style; whereas Pindar makes them
speak ina lyric fashion which is often, indeed, dramatic, but


' always his own.


All the work of Bacchylides is marked by a skilful use Pictw-


of picturesque detail: he knows how to apply the small 7,777


. touches which give life and colour. We have already
> referred to some places in the fifth, eighth, and ninth odes,
ἐν where he depicts the circumstances of a victory. Another


᾿ good example is the scene in the palace of Poseidon


“=. beneath the waves, where Theseus is welcomed by Amphi-


trite? The fragment on the blessings of peace is also


' characteristic in this respect : sacrifices blaze ‘in the yellow


1 yt. 85—87. and 74—8o (Minos).
ὦ XVI. 20—46 (Theseus): 52—66, 3 xvi. 96—116.


Imagery.


Ose of
epithets.


62 CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES.


flame on carven altars’; ‘the webs of red-brown spiders
are on the iron-bound handles of shields!’ Imagery is
sparingly employed by Bacchylides; but his images are
often impressive and beautiful. The wavering multitudes
of ghosts on the banks of Cocytus are compared to ‘leaves
quivering in the wind, where flocks graze on the gleaming
headlands of Ida’ There is something of Homeric vivid-
ness and force in the simile of the mariners who, after a
tempestuous night, see the billows subside at dawn, and
are wafted to the haven for which they had ceased to hope:
even so the Trojans, when Achilles retired from the battle-
field, ‘lifted up their hands to the gods; for now they saw
a bright gleam of sunshine from under the shadow of the
storm4’

The use of epithets by Bacchylides is noteworthy in
several respects. His deities and heroes are usually
characterized in epic fashion (Διὸς ἀργικεραύνου, Κουρῆσε
μενεπτολέμοις, etc.); but he is peculiarly prone to bestow
two or more epithets on the same person. In particular,
he loves to associate the word σεμνός with other attributes
of a deity; thus we have σεμνοῦ Διὸς edpuBia (X. 52): ἃ
χρυσάρματος | σεμνὰ μεγάθυμος ᾿Αθάνα (XII. 194 f.): καλυ-
κοστεφάνου | σεμνᾶς χόλον ᾿Αρτέμιδος λευκωλένου (V. 98 f.):
σεμνάν τε πατρὸς ἄλοχον φίλαν | ἴδε βοῶπιν ἐρατοῖσιν
᾿Αμφιτρίταν δόμοις (XVI. 109 ff.). It will be observed that,
in the second of these examples, χρυσάρματος denotes
a conventional attribute, and μεγάθυμος a personal quality.
In the third example, a like remark applies to καλυκοστε-
φάνου and λευκωλένου respectively. The most remarkable
instance of such accumulation occurs in x. 37 ff.:—

νῦν δ᾽ "Άρτεμις ἀγροτέρα
χρυσαλάκατος λιπαρὰν


ἡμέρα τοξόκλυτος νίκαν ἔδωκε.
Here, ἀγροτέρα, ‘the huntress, denotes a general aspect
' Fragment 3. style of the simile is illustrated by


2 v. 63—67. the use of the epic δέ τε in v. 129
3 xl, 124-140. The Homeric (where see note).


IMAGER Y.— EPITHETS. 63


of Artemis: ἡμέρα, ‘the soother,’ is a special title given to
her in the local cult at Lusi in Arcadia; χρυσαλάκατος
means, ‘with golden shaft, and τοξόκλυτος, ‘famed for
archery. Each of the four epithets, then, is significant :
the poet’s intention, too, is manifest; he wishes to em-
phasize the divine attributes of Artemis, for it is this
mention of her which gives him his cue for the story of the
Proetides. But the crowd of adjectives actually impairs
the force of each. In the verse, εὐρυσθενέος φραδαῖσι
φερτάτου Διός (XVIII. 17), the second epithet, φερτάτου, is
analogous to σεμνοῦ in the first example quoted above
(X. 52); but it has a much weaker effect. A similar
instance is παραπλῆγι φρένας | καρτερᾷ ζεύξασ᾽ avayxa
(x. 45 f.). On the other hand, in αἰθέρα ξουθαῖσι τάμνων |
ὑψοῦ πτερύγεσσι ταχείαις αἰετός (V. 17 ff.) neither epithet
is otiose.

Another trait, which sometimes lends an air of con-
ventionality to the poet’s style, is the frequency of non-
distinctive epithets for goddesses and heroines. Thus
βαθύξωνος is applied to Dexithea, Latona, Theano, and
the Graces; ἰοστέφανος, to Persephone, Thetis, and the
Muses ; κυανοπλόκαμος, to Nike, Thebe, and the daughters
of Proetus; λευκώλενος, to Hera, Artemis, Calliope;
Europa, and Iole; χρυσέα, to Aphrodite, Artemis, and
lo.

But it should also be noted that, in many instances, the
“ epithet chosen by Bacchylides is novel, felicitous, and
expressive. The following are examples :---δόξαν...πεισίμ-
_ βροτον (VII. 1 ἢ): θερσιεπὴς φθόνος (XIL. 199 f.): λειρίων...
© ὀμμάτων (XVI. 95): μελαμφαρέϊ...σκότῳ (III. 13 f.): πρῶνας
ἀργηστάς (V. 67): κυανανθέϊ...πόντῳ (XI. 124 f.): πυρι-
ἐθειραν ἀστραπάν (XVI. 56).


The influence of earlier or contemporary poetry has Mufuence


left traces in the work of Bacchylides ; but, so far as. we ine


can judge, his debts to it were neither large nor important. Bacchy-
“15 - - Se
Though he was familiar with the style of Homeric epos, ame ΝΣ


there are some slight indications which might suggest that


Hesiod.


The
eCypria.


Stest-
chorus.


Loycus.


Alcaeus.


Theognis.


Simonides.


64 CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES.


his study of the //ad had not been very close or observant’.
His version of Meleager’s story owes but little to the ninth
book of the //iad*. From Hesiod, the only poet whom he
mentions, he cites a sentiment which cannot be identified
with anything extant under Hesiod’s name, but tallies
with a verse of Theognis*. In a poem of unknown class,
he treated a story told by Hesiod in Kytxos γάμος. The
Cypria was doubtless his source in Ode XIV; where there
is also a small touch which suggests the influence of Stesi-
chorus, and another which may be a reminiscence of
Ibycus®, In the earlier part of Ode xv there is a probable
trace of Alcaeus®; the source of the latter part may be
the epic Capture of Oechalia. Some words in Ode V are
paraphrased from Theognis’. The ἀγλαὰν ἥβαν of Bac-
chylides (Vv. 154, 476 B.C.) may be a reminiscence of ἀγλαὸς
ἥβη in Theognis (985): but not of aydradyv..n@nv in
pseudo-Simonides 105. 1, written in or after 466B.C.
The phrase is not epic; and Pindar has only ayAaoyusov
“Hap (XN. vil. 4: 467 B.Cc.?). The transcript from Solon in
Ode ΙΧ has already been mentioned (p. 59).

Among the poets contemporary with Bacchylides whose
influence we should expect to trace in him, the first is,
of course, Simonides. Unfortunately the fragments of
Simonides are too scanty to afford adequate material
for an estimate of his part in shaping the style of
Bacchylides. As a matter of fact, there are only two or
three words or phrases which the nephew seems to have
borrowed from the uncle. In the Homeric poems ἐραννός
is an epithet of places only: but Simonides has ἐραννὸν
ὕδωρ, and Bacchylides has ἐραννὸν φάος (XVI. 42f.). If in
Ode vitl. 13 R. A. Neil’s ἀωτεύοντα be (as it certainly seems)
a true emendation of ἀσαγεύοντα, then the use of dwrevew, ᾿
without the Homeric addition of ὕπνον, in the sense of
‘sleeping,’ may well have been suggested to the younger


1 See notes on v. 75f. and ΧΙ. 4 Fragment 18.
146. 5 See notes on xIv. 48 and 58.
? See Appendix on v. 56—175. 6 See note on xv. 5.


® See note on v. 101. 7 See note on v. 160.


TRACES OF OTHER POETS IN HIS WORK. 65


poet by the elder’s similar use of ἀωτεῖς (fr. 37.6). Simonides
(fr. 37. 1) has Adpvaxs...dadaréqg : Bacchylides (v. 140 f.),
δαιδαλέας | ἐκ λάρνακος. On the other hand, it may be
noted that, while Simonides (156) has Πίσῃ with 1, Bac-
chylides (V. 182) follows Pindar (0. III. 9, etc.) in shortening
the first syllable. With regard to mythological material,
there are three known instances of themes common to
Simonides and Bacchylides. These are, the death of
Archemorus; the voyage of Theseus to Crete; and the
story of Idas and Marpessa1.

A collation of Bacchylides with Pindar discloses only Pindar.
one passage which proves verbal imitation on the part of
the younger poet. In /stkm. I11. 19 ff. (IV. τ ff), an ode of
which the date may be 478 B.c., Pindar says :—


Ἔστι μοι θεῶν ἕκατι μυρία παντᾷ κέλευθος,
ὦ Μέλισσ᾽, εὐμαχανίαν γὰρ ἔφανας ᾿Ισθμίοις,
ὑμετέρας ἀρετὰς ὕμνῳ διώκειν.


Bacchylides (v. 31, 476 B.C.) has :—


\ ἊΝ \ 2? % # fel ft

τὼς νῦν καὶ ἐμοὶ μυρία παντᾷ κέλευθος
ὑμετέραν ἀρετὰν

ὑμνεῖν.


There is another parallelism which (as it seems to me)
affords a presumption, not indeed of direct imitation, but of
reminiscence. Pindar says in Olymp. x. 78 ff. (484 B.C.) :—


ἀρχαῖς δὲ προτέραις ἑπόμενοι καὶ viv ἐπωνυμίαν χάριν
νίκας ἀγερώχου κελαδησόμεθα βροντὰν
᾿ a * ψ'
καὶ πυρπάλαμον βέλος
ὀρσικτύπου Διός.


‘ Following the beginnings made of yore’  [1.6. the tradition of
hymning Zeus at Olympia], ‘ now also, in a tribute of song (χάριν)
named after proud victory [z.e, in an ἐπινίκιον), will we celebrate
the thunder and the fire-sped bolt of loud-pealing Zeus.’


1 Note on vill. 1£f.: Introduction to ΧΥῚ; §5, τι. 3: Introd. to ΧΙΧ, § 3, ἢ. 2.


66 CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES.


Bacchylides writes thus in xIIL 19 ff. (of unknown
date) :—


i


Κλεοπτολέμῳ δὲ χάριν
νῦν χρὴ ἸΠοσειδᾶνος Πετραί-
ov τέμενος κελαδῆσαι.


‘Now, in tribute to Cleoptolemus, ’tis meet to celebrate the
sacred domain of Poseidon Petraios.’


It will be observed that the points of resemblance
between these passages are three :—(1) the peculiar sense
of χάριν: (2) the construction of χάριν as accusative in
apposition with the sentence: (3) the use of the verb
κελαδεῖν.


Pindar in [γέλ. 11. 55 f. (475 B.C.?) describes Archi-
lochus as βαρυλόγοις ἔχθεσιν  πιαινόμενον. Bacchylides
(αι. 67 f, 468B.C.) has, ed λέγειν πάρεστιν, Soltis μὴ
φθόνῳ πιαίνεται. The stamp of the phrase is Pindaric.
Pindar (fr. 90. 5) calls himself Πιερίδων προφάταν : and
Bacchylides in VIII. 3 is Moveov...mpopdtas. This phrase,
which is not epic, may have been first used by Pindar:
it has a Delphic tone. Pindar, in /sthm. V (VI). 12, has
σύν τέ of δαίμων φυτεύει δόξαν: Bacchylides, in XVI. 68 ἢ
(Ζεὺς) Mivwi φύτευσε τιμάν: but this is less significant.
We should be cautious in assuming a debt on either part,
where the phrase is of a commonplace lyric character. Thus
Bacchylides V. 9 (476 B.C.) has σὺν Χαρίτεσσι βαθυζώνοις :
Pindar γί. 1x. 1 (of 474 Β.0.) has σὺν βαθυζώνοισιν...
Χαρίτεσσι: where, if either was a debtor, the chronology
points to Pindar; but as the epithet is so conventional and
obvious, it is needless to suppose any borrowing. Again,
the phrase of Bacchylides in ν. 196f., εὐκλέα.. γλῶσσαν
εὐπέμπειν ‘lépwv, has boldness of a Pindaric kind: but,
as a matter of fact, the passages of Pindar which show a
like use of γλῶσσα occur in odes probably subsequent in
date to the ode of Bacchylides, namely J. Iv. 86 (456 B.C. ?),
and O. 1X. 44 (464 B.C.).

Apart from any question of verbal imitation, we find
some noteworthy coincidences of thought and sentiment


INFLUENCE OF PINDAR, AND OF AESCHYLUS. 67


between the two poets. Both deprecate scepticism as to
marvels by the remark that ‘nothing is incredible’ when
gods are at work (Pind. Pyth. X. 48 ff.: Bacch. 111. 57 ἢ,
XVL 117f.). Both regard fame and opulence as the two
main factors of ὄλβος, wherewith a mortal should be con-
tent (Pind. /s¢km. IV (Vv). 13 f.: Bacch. v. 50—55). Both,
when celebrating victories in the chariot-race, praise the
man who ‘does not keep his wealth hidden’ (Pind. Mev.
I. 31, /sthm. 1. 67: Bacch. WI. 13 f.). Both speak of just
praise as a benign dew which fosters the tender plant of
ἀρετά (Pind. Mem. vill. 40 ff.: Bacch. v. 197 f.).

The influence of Aeschylus on the diction of Bacchylides
is shown by a number of traces.

Supplices (c. 491-490 B.C.?). 555. βαθύπλουτος. This
word, which first occurs here, is used by Bacchylides (111.
82), but not by Pindar.—104 f. νεάζει πυθμὴν | ...τεθαλώς.
Compare Bacch. v. 198 πυθμένες θάλλουσιν ἐσθλῶν .---
973 f. πᾶς τις ἐπειπεῖν ψόγον ἀλλοτρίοις | εὔτυκος. The
construction of εὔτυκος with an infinitive recurs in Bacch.
Vill. 4 ff.

Persae (472 B.C.). 104. πολέμους πυργοδαΐκτους. Com-
pounds of δαΐζω are Aeschylean: Theb. 735. αὐτοδάϊκτοι:
Cho. 1071 λουτροδάϊκτος. Bacchylides (VIII. 6) has μηλο-
δαΐκταν. [In Pers. 104 should we read πυργοδαΐκτας ?|—
111. πόντιον ἄλσος. The phrase first occurs in this
place: it is not epic or Pindaric. Bacchylides has it in
XVI 84 f.—731. κἀπικουρίας στρατοῦ. This is the first
occurrence of ἐπικουρία: the word is used by Bacchylides
(XVII. 13), but by no other poet of the classical age except
Euripides—1072. ἁβροβάται. The word occurs in Bacch.
1. 78 (468 B.C.), but nowhere else.

Septem contra Thebas (467 B.C.). The rare word apyn-
στής, found in verse 80 (and in Eumenides 181), is used by
Bacchylides in v. 67 (476 B.C.). It occurs nowhere else,
except in Theocritus XXV. 131. If it was from the mint of
Aeschylus, Bacchylides must have found it in some lost
play of which the date was earlier than 476 B.C.—882.
ἐρευψίτοιχοι. This is the only extant compound with


Aeschylus.


Vocabu-
lary of
Bacchyli-
aes.


68 CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES.


ἐρειψι-, except the ἐρευψυπύλαν of Bacchylides in Υ. 56,
and his épes [cAdous Ὁ] in XII. 167.

Prometheus Vinctus (later than 468 B.c.). In 588 Io
has the form of a maiden, with the horns of an ox (βού- τς
κερως παρθένος), This was probably the conception
adopted by Bacchylides (see Introduction to XVII, § 1).
The word οἰστρόπληξ, an epithet of Io which occurs first in
P.V. 681, is restored with certainty in Bacchylides ΧΨΊΠ.
40.—In 724f. Prometheus speaks of the Amazons, ai
Θεμίσκυράν ποτε] κατοικιοῦσιν ἀμφὶ Θερμώδονθ᾽, ἵνα
«.T.X.: compare Bacchylides VII. 42 f. ταί τ᾽ ἐπ᾽ εὐναεῖ
πόρῳ | οἰκεῦσι Θερμώδοντος.

Choephori (458 B.C.). 362. πεισιβρότῳ... βάκτρῳ (πισίμ-
βροτον...βάκτρον cod. Laur.). The only other occurrence
of the adjective is in Bacchylides vill. 1 f. δόξαν... πεισίμ-
βροτον (where see n.).—In 1071 f. Agamemnon is ᾿Αχαιῶν


- [πολέμαρχος ἀνήρ. (In Theb. 828 πολεμάρχους refers to


the sons of Oedipus.) Compare Bacchylides XVI. 39 πολέμ- ©
apxe Κνωσίων. These are our only examples of the |
word πολέμαρχος used in a non-technical sense, with the
exception of the phrase πολέμαρχος...συνεφήβων in an
inscription of the second century (Kaibel, Ep~zgr. Graeca
960. 2).


Upwards of a hundred words otherwise unknown are
found in the poems of Bacchylides. The nouns substantive
are ἄθυρσις (XII. 93), θατήρ (XI. 8), μουνοπάλα (XI. 8). If
in XVI. 112 ἀϊόνα were sound, we should have to assume
ἀϊών as the name for some kind of garment: but the word
is probably corrupt. In Vv. 110 eécavray is a novel substitute
for the Homeric adverb re | The new verbs are
γελανόω (V. 80), εὐμαρέω (I. 65), καταχραίνω (V. 44),
ὀλιγοσθενέω (V. 139), πεδοιχνέω (XV. 9); to which dwredw
(VIII. 13) may safely be added. But the vast majority
of the new words,—more than ninety,—are compound
adjectives. Some of these, doubtless, though previously
strange to us, had been used by poets before Bacchylides ;
but many, if not most, of them may well have been his own


HIS NEW WORDS. 69


nventions. The general character of this considerable
iccession to the lexicons may best, perhaps, be illustrated
oy a selection of groups.

' |. One set of such groups may be arranged according
:o the first element in the compound. 1. Thus we have
the following new compounds beginning with dvagi-:—
ἀναξίαλος (XIX. 8), ἀναξιβρόντας (XVI. 66), ἀναξίμολπος
‘VI. 10). 2. With εὐρυ-:---εὐρυαναξ (Vv. 19), evpvdivas
‘III. 7), εὐρυνεφής (XV. 17). 3. With μεγιστο-:--- μεγιστοπά-
τωρ (V. 199), μεγιστοάνασσα (XVIII. 21),—meaning μέγιστος
πατήρ, μεγίστη ἄνασσα. 4. With ὀρσι-:---ὀρσίαλος (XV. 19),
ὀρσιβάκχας (XVIII. 49), ὀρσίμαχος (XIV. 3). 5. With
byu-:—davyns (ΧΙ. 85), ὑψεάγυια (XI. 71), ὑψιδαίδαλτος
(XIII. 18), ὑψίδειρος (Iv. 4). 6. With χαλκεο- or χαλκο-:1---
χαλκεόκρανος (V. 74), χαλκεόκτυπος (XVII. 59), χαλκόκτυπος
(? XIII. 16), χαλκοκώδων (XVII. 3), χαλκοτευχής (III. 32).
II. Other small groups are indicated by the second
element in the composite word. 1. New compounds with
ἔπος:--θελξιεπής (XIV. 48), θερσιεπής (XII. 199), τερψιεπής
(XII. 230). 2. With ὄνομα:---ἐρατώνυμος (XVI. 31), χαρυτ-
w@vupos (II. 2). III. We note also a group of which the
common characteristic is that the compound adjective is
formed by combining the stems of two substantives:—
apérary pos (XVI. 47), ἀστύθεμις (IV. 3), θερσιεπής (XII. 199),
Kepauveyyns (VII. 48), πολεμαυγίς (XVI. 7), πυργοκέρας
(frag. 31,=51 Bergk), χαριτώνυμος (II. 2).

IV. If the new adjectives of Bacchylides are considered
in regard to their meaning, we observe that the following
are expressive of colour or of splendour :—xvavavOns (XII.
124), μελαμφαρής (XIII. 13), ξανθοδερκής (VIII. 12), πορ-
dupodivas (VIII. 39), πυριέθειρα (XVI. 56), πυρσόχαιτος
(XVII. 51), φοινίκασπις (VIII. 10), φοινικόθριξ (X. 105),
φοινικοκράδεμνος (XII. 97), φοινικόνωτος (V. 102), χρυσεό-
πλοκος (XVI. 106), χρυσεόσκαπτρος (VIII. 100), χρυσόπαχυς
(V. 40).

V. Lastly, from the metrical point of view, it may be
noted how many of the poet’s new words have the form


1 In compounds Pindar uses only χαλκεο- and χρυσεο-.
‘ddkKo-, χρυσο-: Bacchylides, also


Adjectives
common to
Pindar
and Bac-
chylides.


Analogies
in the two
vocabu-
laries.


70 CHARACTERISTICS OF BACCHYLIDES.


vivv-:—dehrodpouas (V. 39), depoiwayos (XII. 100),
ἀμετρόδικος (X. 68), ἀναιδομάχας (ν. 195), ἀναξίαλος (XIX. _
8), ἀριστοπάτρα (x. 196), ἀταρβομάχας (XV. 28), épevpumtnas. |
(V. 56), μεγιστοπάτωρ (V. 199). fe

Besides the adjectives included in the groups just
noted, there are more than forty others, also peculiar to
Bacchylides, which scarcely call for special remark. They
are enumerated below?

It is instructive to compare Bacchylides and Pindar in
respect to their choice of poetical epithets. Many such
words are common to both; as ἀγλαόθρονος: Sapacip-
Bpotos (epithet of sword or spear): διχόμηνις: ἐρισφάραγος
(epithet of Zeus): θεόδματος: θεόδοτος: θεότιμος: θρασυ-
μήδης : ἰοβλέφαρος: ἰόπλοκος : ἰοστέφανος : μεγαλοσθενής:
μελίφρων: ὀρθόδικος (or -δίκας): πλάξυππος: πολυώνυμος:
τηλαυγής: τοξόκλυτος: φαυσίμβροτος: φιλάγλαος: φιλάνωρ:
χάλκασπις : χρυσαλάκατος: χρυσάμπυξ: χρυσάρματος:
χρυσάωρ (-dopos? Bacch. Ill. 28): χρύσασπις : χρυσοκόμας :
χρυσόπεπλος. Further, we note a large number of
instances in which the word of Bacchylides is not used
by Pindar, but finds some analogy of form in the Pindaric
vocabulary. The following are examples :—


BACCHYLIDES. PINDAR.
ἀμετρόδικος. . νον, Gidpodixas.
ἀναξιβρόντας. κου νον, αἰολοβρόντας.
ἀκαμαντορόας. 1. . ἀκαμαντόπους (etc.).


1 ἀκαμαντορόας (V. 183): dpior- (V. 73, XIII. 14): μεγαίνητος (111. 64):
αλκής (VII. 7): ἀριστοπάτρα (111. 1): μεγαλοκλεής (VII. 49): μελαγκευθής
βαθυδείελος (1. 139): βροτωφελής (XI. (P11. 55, fr. 25): μελαμφαρής (III.
191): dgdopdpos (fr. 23): δνόφεος 13): μελανόκολπος (? fr. 23): μηλο-
(xv. 32, otherwise known only from δαΐκτας (VIII. 6): vedxpiros (see Ap-
Hesych.): δυσμάχητος (if fr. 32 be- pendix on VII, 14): vedxporos (Vv. 48):
longs to Bacch.): ἑλικοστέφανος (VIII. ὀβριμοδερκής (XV. 20): ὀβριμόσπορος
62): ἐρειψίλαος (Ὁ XII. 167): ἐρειψι- (XVIII. 32): ὀλυμπιόδρομος (111. 3):
πύλας (V. 56): edalveros (XVIII. 11): οὔλιος as = ofdos (XVII. 53): πάμ-
εὔγυιος (X. 10): εὐεγχής (XII. 147): φθερσις (fr. 20): πανθᾶλής (XII. 229):
εὐναής (VIII. 42): θελημός (XVI. 85): πάννικος (X. 21): πλείσταρχος (111.
θρασύχειρ (11. 4): ἱδρώεις (XII. 57): 12): πολύφαντος (XII. 61): πρώθηβος
ἱμεράμπυξ (XVI. 9): ἱμερόγνιος (XII (XVII. 57): πυργοκέρας (fr. 31):
137): ἱπποδίνητος (Vv. 2): ἱππώκης σεμνοδότειρα (11. 1): ὑμνοάνασσα (ΧΙ.
(Χ. for): καλλιρόας (xX. 26, 96): 1): φερεκυδής (XII. 182): φρενοάρας
λεπτόπρυμνος (KVI. 119): λιγυκλαγγής (XVI. 118).


IS EPITHETS COMPARED WITH PINDAR’S. 71


BACCHYLIDES. PINDAR.
ἀναιδομάχας. ἀπειρομάχας.
ἀριστοπάτρα. ἀριστόγονος.
βαρύβρομος. βαρύκτυπος.
δαμασίχθων (οἵ Βορεϊ δου), ἐλασίχθων (do.).
ἑλικοστέφανος. ἑλικάμπυξ.
εὐρυνεφής (of Zeus). ὀρσινεφής.
θερσιεπής. θρασύμυθος.
θρασυμέμνων. θρασυμάχανος.
θρασύχειρ. θρασύγυιος.
ἱμερόγυιος. ἀγλαόγυιος.
ἱπποδίνητος. ὠκυδίνατος (οἵ chariot-

races).
καρτερόχειρ. καρτεραίχμας.
κεραυνεγχής. ἐγχεικέραυνος.
κυανανθής (‘of dark hue " λευκανθής (of corpses).
λιυιπαρόζωνος. λιπαράμπυξ.
μελίγλωσσος. μελίγαρυς, μελίφθογγος.
νεόκτιτος. . VEOKTLO TOS.
ὀρσίαλος (of Poseidon). . ὀρσοτρίαινα (do.).
παλίντροπος. παλιντράπελος.
πανθαλής. εὐθαλής.
πυργοκέρας. ὑψικέρας.
τανύθριξ. τανυέθειρα.
ὑψίδειρος. ὑψίλοφος.
χαλκεόκρανος (tos). χαλκότοξος.
ὠκύπομπος. ὠκύπορος.


A few notes on special points may be added. (1) Pin-
dar has a remarkable number of adjectives compounded
with wap- or παν-:--παμβίας, παμπειθής, παμποίκιλος,

_ παμπόρφυρος, πάμπρωτος, παμφάρμακος, παμφόρος; πάμ-
᾿ φωνος, πανδαίδαλος, πάνδοκος, πανέτης, πάντολμος. Bac-
chylides has the following (of which those marked with *
are peculiar to him):—*wauOepous, πανδαμάτωρ, παν-
, δερκής, πανθᾶλής and ἔἘπανθᾶλής, *mdvvixos. (2) Very
characteristic of Pindar are the compounds of ἀγλαός ----
ἀγλαόγυιος, ayhaddevdpos, ἀγχλαόθρονος, ἀγλαόκαρπος, ay-


Bacchyli-
des and
Greek art.


72, BACCHYLIDES AND THE VASE-PAINTERS.


λαόκολπος (probable in WV. Il. 56), ἀγλαόκουρος, ἀγλαο-
τρίαινα. Bacchylides has ἀγλαόθρονος, but no other.
(3) Pindar also loves compounds with ποικίλος :--ποικιλ-
ἄνιος, ποικιλόγαρυς, ποικιλόνωτος, ποικιλοφόρμυιγξ. Bac-
chylides has no such compound. (4) The Pindaric φοινικο-
group consists of φοινικάνθεμος, φοινικόκροκος, φοινικόπεζξα,
φοινικόροδος, φοινικοστερόπας. [In LV. IX. 28 it is better
to write Φοινικοστόλων, ‘sent by the Phoenicians, than,
with Mezger, φοινικοστόλων.) Not one of these words
occurs in the gowvxo-group of Bacchylides (see above, p.
69). (5) The word λιπαρός is a favourite with Pindar, who
applies it especially to opulent cities, but never to persons,
Here he follows the Homeric rule. (In Od. 15. 332, where
youths are λυπαροὶ κεφαλάς, the reference is to anointing
with oil.) But Bacchylides in v. 169 has λιπαρὰν... ἄκοιτιν,
where the notion is that of rich adornment and stately
surroundings; it may be expressed by ‘queenly.’ This
un-Homeric use may have been suggested by the Theogony,
v. 901: δεύτερον ἠγάγετο λιπαρὴν Θέμιν.

The general result of the foregoing survey is to show
that the diction of Bacchylides, though influenced in
several particulars by earlier or contemporary poets, has a
well-marked character of its own, which comes out when
we examine his mintage of new words. His work in this
kind often shows the bent of his own fancy. Certain
traits of his style which belong to the province of dialect
and of grammar are reserved for separate treatment.


The relation of Bacchylides to Greek art is a subject
which no student of his poetry canignore. Vase-paintings
illustrate the story of Croesus as told in the third ode;
the struggle of Heracles with the Nemean lion, at the
beginning of the twelfth; the reception of Theseus by
Amphitrite, in the sixteenth ode; and the account of
that hero’s deeds on his way from Troezen to Athens, in
the seventeenth. Details as to these vases will be found in
the Introductions to the several poems, and in the com-
mentary on the text. But a few words must be said here


HIS REPUTE IN ANTIQUITY. 73


on the general import of such coincidences. It is known

that the epic hymns of Stesichorus furnished themes to

Greek painters in the fifth century B.c.; and it might seem
natural to suppose that, in some cases, Bacchylides
exercised a similar influence. But the relation of Bac- Stesichorus
chylides to the vase-painters was, in fact, wholly different ΠΘΣΡ ΙΑ
from that of the older poet. Stesichorus, by an original heir re-
treatment of the myths, popularised versions which became pte to
established in tradition, and which the vase-painters 2.6 vase-
adopted! Bacchylides did not innovate, like Stesichorus, eed
or boldly recast his material, like Pindar. He adhered to

the forms of the myths generally current in his own day.

When he and the vase-painters concur, it certainly is not
because they have followed him. In at least two instances,

his poem is later than the vase which supplies an illustra-

tion of it?, The cause is either that the same poetical
tradition has been their comma source, or that Bacchylides

has followed the vase-painte,;,,who, in the fifth century,

had a large influence in pg,.,,Aising mythical scenes and
situations. A case in Whe eneral latter explanation seems
highly probable is that,, in. qjjof the seventeenth ode

which mentions two he ompanying Theseus on


‘also crit. ἢ
his journey to Athens?, eee


The series of references to Bacchylides in ancient Regute of
writers extends from the Alexandrian age to the sixth se
century of the Christian era. He is not mentioned in any extguity.
extant book of the fifth or fourth century B.c. But it
would be very unwarrantable to infer from such silence
that his work was then held in slight esteem. We know
that a prominent citizen of Aegina, whén he wished his
son’s victory at Nemea to be worthy commemorated,
coupled Bacchylides with Pindar in the commission. We
know also that Bacchylides alone celébrated the latest and


highest distinction won at Olympia by the Syracusan


1 See on this subject C. Robertin ΧΥῚ, §2 (the kylix of Euphronius).
Hermes, vol. XXXIII, p. 130 (1898). 3 Introd. to XVII, §3: also the
2 See Introd. to Ode 111, §2 (the note on XVII. 46.
Croesus amphora): and Introd. to


J. B. 6


74 ANCIENT REPUTE OF BACCHYLIDES.


prince for whom Pindar had previously written. Among
those who, in the fifth century, felt the charm of Bac-
chylides, we may probably count Euripides. The sixteenth
ode would have had some interest for a dramatist whose
Theseus dealt with the adventure in Crete. A lyric
passage in the Bacchae (862 ff.) seems to be reminiscent
of some beautiful verses in the twelfth ode (83—90). But
it is needless to say that in the highest regions of lyric
poetry, and in those lyric qualities which pass triumphantly
through the test of choral performance, Bacchylides could
not vie with Simonides or with Pindar. The distinctive
merits of Bacchylides, his trangparent clefirness, his gift of
narrative, his felicity in detaij, the easy flow of his elegant
verse, rather fitted him to bécome a favourite with readers,
Like Horace, who sometimes imitated him, he was a poet
who gave pleasure without/ demanding effort, a poet with
whom the reader could atfsonce feel at home. This, we
may well believe, was the secret of his popularity; as would
perhaps be still more apparent if time had spared some of
his partheneia, and of tliose lighter compositions, such as
the convivial songs, in which a bright fancy and a delicate
touch peculiarly qualified him to excel. The earliest men-
tions of his name, th¢ earliest quotations from his work,
occur in the Alexandrian scholia. This is precisely what
might have been anticipated ; for the Alexandrian age was
an age of readers,

An idea of the-vogue which Bacchylides enjoyed in the
ancient world may best be formed by considering the
sources to which we were indebted for such knowledge of
his poetry as existed before the discovery of the Egyptian
papyrus. The fragments and notices of Bacchylides
collected at the end of this volume are sixty-one in
number. The first thirty-four items (as arranged in this
edition) are ‘fragments ’ proper, ze. citations of his words.
The remaining items are .notices, which do not cite his
words*, In the following survey of the sources, we indicate
the item or items which each source furnishes.


1 See Nauck, 7rag. Graec. Frag- 2 ieaheut? in this volume, the
menta (and ed.), p. 477. term ‘fragment’ (abbreviated ‘fr.’) is


RANGE OF THE CITATIONS. 75


The oldest sources are the scholia on Homer, Hesiod, Sources of
Pindar, Aristophanes, Apollonius Rhodius, and Callimachus. ae
To these are due fragments 6 and 23; and notices 36, 30, "9#@s-
42, 43, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 53, 54, 56,61. Didymus (3,67. c.
30 B.C.) wrote a special commentary on the Epinikia of
Bacchylides (see fragment 31).

In the Augustan age, Bacchylides is quoted by Diony-
sius of Halicarnassus on a point of rhythm (fragment 11);
and Strabo corrects him on a point of geography (notice
57). Towards the end of the first century we find Plutarch
speaking of his partheneia (n. 40), and quoting him more
than once (fr. 29, and fr. 3, verses 6—10). In the second
century, he is cited by the grammarian Apollonius Dyscolus
(fr. 31), by the paroemiographer Zenobius (fr. 5, 24), and by
the metrist Hephaestion (fr. 12, 14, 15), on matters per-
taining to their respective subjects. Aulus Gellius mentions
him with reference to a detail of mythology (n. 52).
Athenaeus is thoroughly familiar with his poems (fr. 13,
16, 17, 18, 22: n. 60). Clement of Alexandria draws on
him for illustrations of general sentiments (fr. 21, 32),
especially such as concern the divine nature, and human
destiny (fr. 19, 20: see also crit. note on ode XIV. 50). In
the third century, Porphyrion indicates an imitation of
“Bacchylides by Horace (n. 46); and the rhetor Menander
refers to a class of his hymns (n. 37).

The fourth century continues the series of witnesses.
Himerius touches on the love of Bacchylides for his native
1115 (n. 59). The commentary of Didymus on the poet’s
Epinikia is noticed in the lexicon of Ammonius (n. 35).
From Ammianus Marcellinus we learn that Julian read
Bacchylides with pleasure, and quoted from him a passage
‘in which the grace lent by purity to rising manhood
was compared with that which a fine artist can give to a
beautiful countenance (n. 41). Servius, the commentator
on Virgil, was acquainted with the ‘dithyrambs’ of Bac-
chylides (n. 38, 51).
used, for purposes of reference, as fragments in the proper sense from


including the notices. But in this mere notices. By ‘n.’ is here meant
passage it is convenient to distinguish a notice.


6—2


Estimate

of Bacchy-
lides in the
Περὶ ὕψους.


6 THE PSEUDO-LONGINUS ON BACCHYLIDES.


At the close of the fifth century, or early in the sixth,
Stobaeus culled a large number of passages from the Cean
poet, including the well-known fragment of a paean on
the blessings of peace (fr. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 20, 28). Our
debt to Stobaeus in this respect is larger than to any other
single author. Priscian, in the first quarter of the sixth
century, illustrates a point of metre from Bacchylides
(fr. 27). A few additional fragments or notices come to
us from Byzantine or medieval sources, such as the Etymo-
logicum Magnum (fr. 25, 30); Joannes Siceliota (fr. 26);
Tzetzes (n. 55); Natalis Comes (n. 50). An elegiac in-
scription for a tripod (fr. 33), and another for a votive
shrine (fr. 34), are ascribed to Bacchylides in the Palatine
Anthology.

It appears, then, that his writings remained in repute
down to the latest period of the ancient civilisation. He
was not merely a subject of learned study to specialists -
in grammar, metre, or mythology. He continued to find
readers in the cultivated world at large, among men of
letters such as Stobaeus, and among men of affairs such
as Julian.

The only definite estimate of Bacchylides which has
come down from antiquity is contained in the famous
treatise Περὶ ὕψους, ‘On elevation of style) traditionally
ascribed to Cassius Longinus (77. c. 260 A.D.), but more
probably the work of an unknown writer who lived in the
first century of our era? The author’s aesthetic criticism,
often instructive where traits of classical writers are illus-
trated in detail, sometimes enlarges rhetorically on pro-
positions which now seem platitudes. Thus he insists at


1 The traditional rendering, ‘On
the Sublime,’ is altogether misleading.
However ‘sublimity’ be defined, the
subject of the Περὶ ὕψους is something
much wider. It is a discussion of
the qualities which raise style to a
high excellence.

2 From the appearance of the
editio princeps (Robortello’s) in 1554
down to the beginning of the nine-


teenth century, the ascription to Lon-
ginus was practically unchallenged.
The turning-point was Amati’s dis-
covery (in 1808) of the Vatican Ms.
285, with the inscription Διονυσίου 7
Aoyylvov περὶ ὕψους. The question
is reviewed, historically and critically,
by Prof. W. Rhys Roberts, in the
introduction to his excellent edition


(1899).


BACCHYLIDES AND HORACE. 77


some length on the incontrovertible truth that, in literature,
high genius, though attended by some faults or lapses, is
preferable to flawless merit on a lower level. From that
point of view he contrasts Homer with Apollonius Rhodius,
Archilochus with Eratosthenes, Sophocles with Ion of Chios,
and Pindar with Bacchylides. What we learn from the
passage is how this writer defined the most general charac-
teristic, as he deemed it, of Bacchylides. It is, in his
phrase, καλλυγραφία, ‘elegance of style,’ marked by τὸ
γλαφυρόν, ‘polish, and equably maintained’? That does
not tell us much; it is not a help towards appreciating
or analysing the qualities distinctive of the poet. Yet it
has at least the interest of showing the broad impression
which the essayist had received, and which, as he assumes,
would be shared by his contemporaries.

Far more instructive are those traces of Bacchylides Bacchyti-
which remain in the odes of Horace. Paris is carrying pl
Helen across the Aegean; the sea-god Nereus stills the
winds, and, addressing him, prophesies the woes that are
to come,—the ruin of Troy, and the doom which awaits
the false guest of the Spartan king* After the first
stanza, which briefly indicates the occasion, the rest of the
little ode, which contains only thirty-six verses, is the
speech of Nereus. Here, as Porphyrion tells us, Horace
was imitating a poem of Bacchylides in which the fate of
Ilium was predicted by Cassandra*, The type and the
scale of that poem may be inferred from the examples
which we now possess in the fourteenth, fifteenth, and
seventeenth odes of Bacchylides. Horace had seized the
motive and caught the inspiration of such pieces. He had
noted the peculiar kind of poetical effect which Bacchylides
produces by a small picture taken from the heroic myth-
ology,—a short poem which marks a situation, and then
breaks off, after foreshadowing a catastrophe. The prophecy


Hor. Carm, 1. 15.
Bacch. fr. 46. See note on


1 Περὶ ὕψους c. XXXIII. Bacchy- 2
lides and Ion of Chios are described ᾿ς
as ἀδιάπτωτοι (‘flawless’) καὶ ἐν τῷ fr. 6.
γλαφυρῷ πάντῃ κεκαλλιγραφημένοι.


78 BACCHYLIDES AND HORACE.


of Nereus in the ode of Horace may be compared, from
this standpoint, to the warning speech of Menelaus with
which the fourteenth ode of Bacchylides abruptly closes.
The integrity of that ode, and of the fifteenth, as the
papyrus has them, is indirectly confirmed by the imitative
ode of Horace, which ends with a like suddenness. We
can perceive also that Horace felt the curious felicity which
is sometimes seen in the Greek poet’s phrases. The power
of wine in stimulating the fancy is described by Bacchylides
as γλυκεῖ ἀνάγκα (fr. 16). Horace says of Bacchus, 7z
lene tormentum ingenio admoves Plerumque duro (C. Il.
21.13 f.). His choice of tormentum was evidently prompted
by the special associations of the Greek word in such
expressions as ἀνάγκην προστιθέναι or προσάγειν Tas
avayxas: though Bacchylides presumably meant nothing
more specific than ‘a sweet compulsion.’

There are, indeed, several points of analogy between
the genius of Horace and that of Bacchylides. Both poets
could succeed in stately odes, but were perhaps more
thoroughly at home in poems of a lighter strain. Both
excelled in lyric cameo-work. Both were men of a modest
and genial temper, with a homely philosophy which in-
culcated the virtue of contentment. A notable resemblance
to the tone of Horace appears in those verses of Bacchylides
which proffer a hospitality not set off by ‘gold or purple
carpets,’ but commended by ‘a kindly spirit, and good
wine in Boeotian cups?’ Under the Empire, during those
centuries when the faculty of comprehending a Pindar
was becoming rarer, the last representative of the classical
Greek lyric may well have retained a quiet popularity by
qualities like those which have endeared Horace to the
modern world.


1 Verses 16—20 of Horace’s ode
suggest a general reminiscence of


n. there). But the words caliginosa
nocte (referring to the hidden future,


Bacch. fr. 16. 5—8, and perhaps also
of Pindar fr. 218.

It is unnecessary to suppose that
Horace’s apis Matinae (C. τν. 2. 28f.)
was suggested by Bacch, IX. to (see


in C. 111. 29. 30) are curiously parallel
with the νυκτὸς δνόφοισιν of Bac-
chylides in a like context (vi1I. 89f.).

? Bacch. fr. 17. Compare Horace
Carm. 1. 38 and 11. 18,


79


IV. DIALECT AND GRAMMAR.


The dialect prescribed by tradition for choral lyric
poetry was Doric in its general colouring. But the
Doricism could be more or less strongly marked, and more
or less tempered by an admixture of non-Doric forms,
according to the taste of the poet. Indeed, as Pindar
shows, the same poet might vary the complexion of his
dialect from ode to ode. In the dialect of Bacchylides,
the Doricism,—which for him, an Ionian, was purely con-
ventional,—is of the mildest type. It is further distinctive
of him that, in numerous instances, he modifies Doric forms
by compromises which his own sense of euphony dictated,
but which it is difficult to bring under any consistent rules.

He sometimes retains η, instead of the Doric a, in order Doric a.
to avoid the occurrence of the a-sound in two successive
syllables. Thus he writes ἀδμήτα (Vv. 167), but ἄδματοι
(X. 84): λῃσταί (XVII. 8), but λαΐδος (XV. 17): φήμα (11. 1),
but φαμὶ καὶ φάσω (1. 49). It is not easy to see why he
should agree with Pindar in writing προφάτας (VIII. 3,
IX. 28), and yet differ from him in writing κυβερνήτας
(Vv. 47, XI. 11). Pindar has ἕαλωτός: Bacchylides has
émtitnros (V. 52), πολύξηλος (X. 63), πολυζήλωτος (VII. IO,
etc.). His ᾿Αθάνα (XII. 195, etc.) and ᾿Αθᾶναι (XVII. 60)
may be explained by supposing that, in these instances,
the Doric convention of the choral lyric was too strong for
him. A like explanation possibly applies to the case of
cerava (VII. 29); and of ἀλάθεια (once ἀλαθεία), which is
so spelled in five places: in one place (V. 187) the MS. has
ἀληθείας, but manifestly by an error. As to otpatayé
(Vv. 2), used in addressing Hieron, he had no choice; it was
an official title, and he was bound to use the Doric form.
In XVI. 121 we find also orpatayéras. Comparing σκῶπτρον
(III. 70) with ἐπισκήπτων (V. 42, VIL 41), we may perhaps
infer that a after ox displeased the poet’s ear in the middle
of a word, but not in the first syllable. There are some
instances in which the preference of ἡ to Doric a is not


Other
Doricisms.


80 BACCHYLIDES.


peculiar to Bacchylides, but was general in the less strict
type of Doricism; such are εἰρήνα (V. 200, etc.), 48a (IIL. 90),
μῆλον ‘sheep’ (V. 109): στῆθος (V. 15). To these, ᾿Αλκμή-
vios (V. 71) may probably be added: several editors of
Pindar, including Bergk and W. Christ, give ᾿Αλκμήνα, with
some MS. authority, in his text, though Schrdder now prefers
᾿Αλκμάνα.

The variations in the poet’s practice with regard to the
Doric « are warnings that, when the MS. has an exceptional
ἢ, it should not lightly be altered, unless the case is as clear
as it is in V. 187 (ἀληθείας). There are two places in which
Blass alters ἡ to a, but in which it appears to me safer to
retain y. Each of these must be considered in the light of
the euphonic context. (1) X. 45 f. .««παραπλῆγι φρένας |
καρτερᾷ ζεύξασ᾽ dvdyxa. Here Blass, writing παραπλᾶνι,
can appeal to πλάξιππον (V. 97) and πλᾶξεν (X. 86). But,
as is shown by the examples given above, we cannot
assume that, with Bacchylides, the desire of consistency
would have prevailed over considerations of euphony ; and
it seems very probable that the number of a sounds in
Vv. 46, καρτερᾷ ζεύξασ᾽ ἀνάγκᾳ, may have led him to write
παραπλῆγι. (2) Similarly in xX. 92 f., τρισκαίδεκα μὲν
τελέους | μῆνας κατὰ δάσκιον nrvetalov ὕλαν, Blass writes
ἀλύσκαξον : but the vicinity of -as, -α, δασκ-, ταν would, in
the case of this poet, explain the preference of ἡ- to -d.

He uses, as Pindar does, the Doric (and Aeolic) inflexion
ὄρνιχες (V. 22). The Doric αὐ occurs twice (Vv. 5 ai τις,
XVI. 64 ai xe), as against some fourteen instances of εἰ or
εἴπερ. The Doric ore, ‘as,’ used by Pindar, is found once
(XVI. 105). The Doric ending of the 3rd pers. plur. in
-ovr, seems to be preferred by Bacchylides under two con-
ditions: viz, (1) when ¢ or oo precedes, as in καρύξοντι
(XII. 231) and πτάσσοντι (V. 22); though, for metrical
convenience, he can write αὔξουσιν (IX. 45): (2) when the
final « is elided; as in @piOov7’ (fr. 3. 12), and cevovr’
(XVII. 10). Pindar uses either the Doric -ov7(s), or the
Aeolic ending (not used by Bacchylides) in -οισι(ν), pre-
ferring the latter, as a general rule, where the paragogic


DIALECT. 81


v is required. But Bacchylides can also use τ-ουσι, as in
ἴσχουσι (V. 24), or (for verbs in -éw) -εῦσι, as in οἰκεῦσι
(VIII. 43). From verbs in -us we find φασίν (ν. 155), not
Pindar’s φαντί. Pindar uses both εἰσί(ν) and ἐντί: Bacchy-
lides, only the former (VIII. 88, fr. 19. 2).

The Doric infinitive in -e occurs four times; ἐρύκεν

(XVI. 41), θύεν (XV. 18), ἔσχεν (XVI. 88), φυλάσσεν (XVIII. 25).
On the other hand, we find ζώειν (I. 57), λαγχάνειν (IV. 20),
λέγειν (III. 67 and V. 164): and, from verbs in -éw, εὐμαρεῖν
(I. 65), ὑμνεῖν (VII. 6). The infin. of φαμί is φάμεν (III. 65),
as with Pindar (0. I. 36), not φάναι.

The sporadic Aeolicisms are not numerous. κλεεννός Acolic

appears thrice (I. 6, V. 12, 182), as against six instances ger
κλεινός. Pindar, too, supplies only three examples of
κλεεννός (one of these being the superl. κλεεννότατον,
P. IV. 280), as against fourteen of κλεινός. Once only does
Bacchylides use Μοῖσα (Υ. 4, the form always employed by
Pindar), while in ten places he has Μοῦσα. The Aeolic
ἄμμι (XVI. 25) is the only part of the pronoun of the
Ist pers. plur. which occurs in his text.

The Aecolic ending of the first aorist in -a instead of
-ca is used by Bacchylides for some verbs in -afw or -ifw ;
δοίαξε (X. 87): εὐκλέϊξας (VI. 16): παιάνιξαν (XVI. 129). But
we find also ἀγκομίσσαι (111. 89), as in Pindar’s usage
κομίσαι alternates with κομίξαι. When « precedes, euphony
forbids -£a: hence ᾧκισσεν (VIII. 22), a form used also by
Pindar (/sthm. Vil. 20). As to the Aeolic ἔλλαθι, see noté
on xX. 8. The infin. ἔμμεναι (XVII. 14) is Aeolic and
Homeric. Two Aeolic forms of the participle occur;
ἐπαθρήσαις (XII. 227) and λαχοῖσαν (XVIII. 13).

The diction of epic poetry contributes another element. Z: and
Bacchylides (like Pindar) uses the epic genitive in -οιο, ome
‘sometimes called Thessalian, as ἀριγνώτοιο (1X. 37). In
XVI. 20 φερτάτου should perhaps be φερτάτοι᾽: but in
XVI. 42 the ἀμβρότοι᾽ of the MS. should be ἀμβρότου. The
genit. plur. of ἀνήρ is once ἀνέρων (XII. 196), though in six
other places ἀνδρῶν: the dat. ἄνδρεσσι is used (V. 96, X. 114)
as well as ἀνδράσι (fr. 16,6). We find the epic form κλισίῃσιν


Digamma.


82 BACCHYLIDES.


(XII. 135), and the genitive of the epic παιήονες (XV. 8).
The Ionic παρηΐς (whence παρηΐδων, XVI. 13) is not
Homeric, but was probably old in Ionian poetry, for its
use in tragedy dates from Phrynichus (fr. 13) and Aeschylus
(Theb. 534, εἴς.) The Homeric forms, found in the plural
only, are παρειαί (common to the /zad and the Odyssey),
and παρήϊα (peculiar to the latter): the Doric is παρᾷα.
The epic ending -o. for the 3rd pers. sing. of the sub-
junctive is used by Bacchylides in Aayyou (XVIII. 3 f.); and
probably in @aAmnau! (fr. 16. 3).


The digamma, which is not written in the papyrus, is
indicated by hiatus or by metre before certain words. The
use of it by Bacchylides is, like Pindar’s, inconstant ; and
it is also far more limited than Pindar’s.

1. ἄναξ takes - in VUI. 45, πολυξζήλωτε (ε)άναξ : but
not in IL. 76 or V. 84 (δ᾽ ἄναξ).


2. ἕκατι takes ε in 1. 6f.; but not in V. 33, VI. 11, or
Xx. 9 (δ᾽ ἕκατι).

3. The group of compounds with ἴον. κε is assumed
before ἐοβλεφάρων in VIII. 3, ἰοπλόκων in VIII. 72, and
ἰοστέφανον in 111. 2: but not before ἐόπλοκοι in XVI. 37,
loorepavov in XII. 122, or ἰοστεφάνων in V. 3.

In ode xv., where V. 26 ends with ταλαπενθέα, F is
perhaps assumed before the name ᾿Ἰόλαν at the beginning


of the next verse. μιόλα occurs on an early vase from
Caere (Mon. d. Inst. 6, 33).


4. Inv. 75 the r assumed before ἰόν, acc. of ἐός ‘ arrow,’
is an error due to the analogies of ειός ‘ poison,’ and ρίον
‘violet’ (see note). In XVI. 131 ἐανθείς, preceded by
φρένα, is possibly a similar instance ; though φρένας would
be an easy correction?


It is not


1 Jt is doubtful whether, in such
subjunctive forms, the tv adscript is
correct: Blass prefers λάχησι, θάλπησι.
See Kiihner-Blass, Gr. Gramm. τι.
p- 46. θάλπησι in fr. 16. 3 has some-
times been taken as an indicative.

2 In Pind O, 111. 12f. we find


᾿Αλφεοῦ, | ἰανθεὶς ἀοιδαῖς.


necessary to suppose f there. If
Pindar assumed it in that passage,
at any rate he did not do so in O.
VIL. 43 θυμὸν ἰάναιεν, nor in P. 11. go
νόον lative.


DIGAMMA, TREATMENT OF VOWELS. 83


5. ἐσθμός takes ¢ in 11. 7, but not in vir. 40. (Pindar’s
use is similarly inconstant: see ἢ. on II. 7.)


6. The pronoun οἱ (Ξ αὐτῷ) always takes ε, except
in the second of the two elegiac epigrams attributed to
Bacchylides (fr. 34. 3 εὐξαμένῳ yap οἱ ἦλθε).

The following words, which sometimes have f in Pindar,
do not take it in Bacchylides :—eézrov (see II. 48): ἐλπίς
(III. 75): ἔργον (VIII. 82): épdw (XVII. 43): εἴκοσι (X. 104):
ἴδον (XVI. 16): οἶκος (fr. 16. 9).


Hiatus occurs in Ill. 64 ὦ μεγαίνητε ἹἹέρων : 16. 92 τρέφει. Hiatus.
Ἱέρων (where the pause helps): Xv. 5 ἀνθεμόεντι "EBpw
(see n.): 26. 20 ὀβριμοδερκεῖ ἄξυγα.

The final o of the genitive-ending -o1o is elided in Evision.
V. 62, ἀπλάτοι᾽, and X. 120, Πριάμοι᾽. Pindar has this elision
(P. τ 39 Aadov’ ἀνάσσων), which is post-homeric. The
elision of « in the dative case is epic: XVII. 49 ἐν χέρεσσ᾽.
The ὁ of -οντι in the Doric 3rd pers. plur. can also be elided:
XVII. 10 σεύοντ᾽: fr. 3. 12 βρίθοντ᾽. (So Pindar, P. IV. 240,
» ἀγαπάξοντ᾽.)
Synizesis is frequent. 1. -éa or -έᾳ : VII. 2 Νεμέᾳ. In Synizesis.
XV. 26, ταλαπενθέα, synizesis is not certain. 2. -εο: V. 50
θεός (last word of the verse): 26. 95 θεῶν (first word): and
so X. 60 θεοφιλές (first word). ἐόντα is scanned as -- v in
XVIII. 23 f., though as v—v in IV. 19. 3.-ew. The participle
of a verb in -éw suffers synizesis in VII. 46 ὑμνέων : but not
in V. 152 ὀλιγοσθενέων, Or XI. 118 κλονέων. In VII. 46 ἐών
is scanned as a monosyllable. In VIII. 32 the ῥιπτῶν of
the papyrus is perhaps an error for ῥύπτων rather than for
purtéwv. The absence of synizesis in XVII. 12 δοκέω
(scanned v  -- is noteworthy as being rare in the Ist pers.
_ sing.: another example is Aesch. Ag. 147 καλέω. 4. -ἰω.
- XVIL 39 Κνωσίων (scanned —-). 5. Two doubtful cases
should be noted. In XII. 103 βοαθόον, if right, must be
scanned υ —~—: the synizesis is a somewhat harsh one. In
III. 22, where the papyrus has ἀγλαϊξζέθω yap ἄριστον
ὄλβον, the least improbable reading is ἀγλαϊξέτω, ὁ yap
ἄριστος ὄλβων: but the synizesis is very harsh.


Contrac-
tion.


͵ A [pocope.


Quantity.


Vowels
before mute
and liquid.


84 BACCHVYLIDES.


The infinitive-ending of the -éw verbs is contracted :
1. 65 εὐμαρεῖν : VILL. 6 ὑμνεῖν But in I. 34 the -βολοῖ of the
MS. is anomalous: we should expect -βολέοι.

In Xv. 7 it seems almost certain that we must read
ἁδείᾳ: but the diaeresis in that word is unexampled.

Apocope of the simple preposition occurs in XIII. 10
πὰρ χειρός, but elsewhere is confined to compounds; as
Ill. 7 ἀμπαύσας: XII. 58f. (probably) ἀνδεθεῖσιν: X. 100
ἀντείνων (cp. fr. 13. 4): X. 103 πάρφρονος.

It may be useful to add some notes on the practice of
Bacchylides with regard to the shortening or lengthening of
certain vowels and diphthongs. 1. In XII. 206 καλῶς has
a, which is epic and Ionic, but not Pindaric. 2. The
diphthong av is short in ᾿Αθαναίων (XVI. 92) and παιάνιξαν
(δ. 128). 3. The poet has ἴσος in V. 54, but ἶσον in I. 172
and fr.2.2. 4. Inv. 182 thes of Πίσαν is short, as with
Pindar (see note). 5. κυάνεον has v in XII. 64, but all the
poet’s compounds with xvavo have ὕ (V. 33, VIE. 53, X. 83,
XII. 124, 160, XVI. 1). 6. χρύσεος has the lyric (but non-
epic) ὕ in V. 174 and XV. 2.

The frequency with which a naturally short syllable is
lengthened before muta cum liguida varies considerably in
different classes of poets. The Homeric tendency is
strongly towards allowing the mute and liquid to make
position, ze. to lengthen the preceding vowel. The choral
lyric poets lengthen the vowel in such cases more often
than they shorten it, but less often than is the Homeric
rule. In Attic tragedy the shortening of the vowel is, on
the whole, far more frequent than the lengthening’. The
subjoined table gives the statistics for Bacchylides. 1 do
not claim for the figures that they are always exact ; but in
every case they are at least approximately correct, and will
therefore suffice to indicate the general state of the facts.
The column headed S shows the number of instances in
which a naturally short vowel remains short before each
combination of mute and liquid. The column headed Z


1 Kiihner-Blass, Gramm. 1. p. 303.


VOWELS. ACCIDENCE. 85


shows the number of instances in which such a vowel is
lengthened.


Ss L S L Ss L Ss Ζ
Br ο 3 ὃρ 3 6 Ky ο 2 τν ο I
Bp 3 τὸ On ο 6 Κρ 5 18 Tp 10 26
yr ° 9 Ou ° 2 Tr 5 20 or ο
y ο 5 θν 2 I πν Ι 2 gv I 4
ΎΡ 005 θρ 1 5 | πρ 5 15 op I 14
ou ο 5 KN 5. (21 ™ I 2 xy I I
ὃν ο 2 κμ ο Ι τμ ο 2 xp 12 9


Thus Bacchylides lengthens the syllable in about 198
places, and leaves it short in about 57, a ratio of between
4 and 3 to1. It is not surprising to find that an Ionian
poet leans to the Homeric usage. So also, and in a still
more marked degree, does Simonides'. Pindar, on the
other hand, neglects * position’ more often than they do,
coming nearer in this respect to the practice of Attic
tragedy. It will be seen from the table that BA, yA, dy,
ὃν, OA, Op, xu, φὰ are among those combinations before
which no instance of a short syllable occurs in Bacchylides.
Before each of these a short syllable is occasionally found
in Pindar, It is worthy of remark that, despite the general
Attic tendency towards neglecting position, the poets of
the Old Comedy observe it more often than tragedy does:
they do not admit a short syllable before βλ, yA, γν, Sy, ὃν.


A few details of accidence may be noted. Accidence..
Substantives. In IV. 17 ὀλυμπιονίκας is acc. plur. of
the rare fem. form, meaning an ‘Olympian victory’; and
in X. 8 μουνοπάλαν also is fem., meaning ‘the match in
wrestling only, as distinguished from the pancration. In
Il. 3 ἐπινικίοις is the earliest known example of the word
used as a substantive.


1 Schneidewin, preface to the frag- Κάδμου. (4) ὃν: P. x. 72 Kedval.
ments of Simonides, p. xlviii. (5) OA: O. τι. 43 ἀέθλοις. (6) Ou:

2 Examples:—(1) BA: Pindar Δ Ο. X. 45 σταθμᾶτο. (7) Ku: O. νι.
vil. 7 ἔβλαστε. (2) yA: ΔΛ. νι. 52 73 Texmalpe. (8) pr: P. II. 12
παντὶ γλυκεῖα. (3) Ou: P. VII. 57 ἀποφλαυρίξαισα.


. Pronouns.


Verbs.


86 BACCHYLIDES.


Adjectives. The forms τανίσφυρος (III. 60, V. 59) and
τανίφυλλος (X. 55) are given in the papyrus. Euphony
may have been the poet’s reason for preferring them to
the more correct τανύσφυρος and τανύφυλλος. The accu-
satives fem. ὑψικέραν (XV. 22) and καλλικέραν (XVIII. 24)
are formed as if from N. -xépa. An epic freedom is shown
in forming patronymics: I. 14 Εὐρωπιάδας (= Ἐὐρωπίδας,
‘son of Europa’): VII. 19 Ταλαϊονίδαν (‘son of Talaiis’),
where -ἔων is combined with - ds, as in ᾿Ιαπετιονίδης. With
regard to declension, it may be noted that πολέων (Vv. 100)
is gen. plur. fem., as with Callimachus, whereas in Homeric
and Hesiodic usage it is always masc.: the Homeric fem. is
πολλέων Or πολλάων, the Pindaric πολλᾶν. Some compound
adjectives are of three terminations: XII. 178 axapata:
1X. 8 ἀπράκταν: XII. 181 πολυπλάγκταν.

Personal Pronouns as used by Bacchylides. Ist pers.
plur.: Ὁ. ἄμμε (XVI. 25), the only part which occurs. 2nd
pers. sing. N. σύ: Pindar has also the Doric τύ. ἃ. σέο
and σέθεν (old Ionic and Homeric): Pindar has also σεῦ.
D. σοί, and once, before a vowel, τίν (XVII. 14), both
orthotone: the enclitic is always τοι. (Pindar uses these
three forms; but, with him, σοί can be either orthotone or
enclitic.) 2nd pers. plur.: Ὁ. ὕμμιν is conjectured in VIII.
97; no other part occurs. 37d pers. sing. D. of. A. νιν.
The only example of μὲν occurs in X. 111, χραῖνόν τέ μιν
αἵματι μήλων, where, after ypaivov, the poet may have
wished to avoid a third v-sound. (μιν is traditional in
a few passages of Pindar, but the tendency of recent
criticism has been to correct it into wv: see Rumpel,
Lex. Pind. s.v., and Schroder, Proleg. to Pindar, p. 37.)
The acc. of the Ist pers. sing. is once αὐτὸν (XVII. 41).
3rd pers. plur. A. vw (VII. 15, where see n.).

Possessive pronouns. 2nd pers. sing., σός or Doric reds
(both used by Pindar). For the 3rd pers., ogérepos is
either singular, ‘his’ (III. 36), or plural, ‘their’ (x. 50),
as with Pindar and Aeschylus. σφέτερος as = ἕός, ‘his,’
occurs first in Hes. «δορί, go.

The infinitive of εἰμί appears in three forms. 1. ἔμμεν,


ACCIDENCE. 87


V. 144, XVII. 31, 56, in all three places followed by a con-
sonant. This form, which is Thessalian Aeolic, also old
Ionic and epic, occurs in the /éad once (18. 364), anda
few times in the Odyssey (as 14. 332), but only before
a vowel; whence some would write ἔμμεν᾽, as it is now
written in Sappho 2. 2. Pindar uses it both before a vowel
and (like Bacchylides) before a consonant. 2. ἔμμεναυ,
XVII. 14, is Lesbian Aeolic, old Ionic and epic. 3. εἶμεν,
Vill. 48. This is the ‘milder’ Doric form, the ‘stricter’
being ἦμεν. Pindar has only ἔμμεν, ἔμμεναι: for in the
one place of his text where εἶναι is traditional, /sthm. v.
[VI.] 20, ἔμμεν is now restored. The other Homeric forms,
ἔμεν and ἔμεναι, are not used either by him or by Bac-
chylides. The participle is with both poets ἐών: but
Bacchylides once (III. 78) has εὖντα, a Doric form used
by Theocritus (II, 3). It seems possible that ἐόντα (- v)
should be corrected to εὖντα in XVIII. 23 ἢ: but the
synizesis in ἐών (VII. 46) shows that such a change is
not necessary.

Notes on the following verbal forms will be found in
the commentary on the passages where they severally
occur :—dpapteiv=opuaptety (VIII. 103 f. and XVII. 46).
ἀνέπαλτο (X. 65). Sivacev (XVI. 18). δίνηντο (XVI. 107).
ἔλλαθι (X. 8) ἐρχθέντος and épypevoy (XII. 65 f., 207).
ifov (XII. 149). foray (X. 122). ὄρνυο (XVI. 76). πέφαται +
(VIII. 52). προσήνεπεν (XIV. 9).

Examples of rare middle forms are κομπάσομαι (VII. 42):
νωμᾶται (V.26f.): ὑφαιρεῖται (probable in VIII. 18): @pivaro
(XIL 112).

To the epic adverbs εἴσαντα and ἄντην, Bacchylides Adverts.
adds a new form, εἰσάνταν (V. 110). In XVI. ΟἹ the un-
metrical ἐξόπιθεν of the MS. should probably be corrected
to the Aeschylean ἐξόπιν. The Homeric τῶ (‘therefore’)
occurs in XVI. 39. It may be noticed that the enclitic νυν
is found only in xvul. 8. The epic and Aeschylean tos,
not used by Pindar, stands in V. 31.

εἰς occurs once (before a), XIV. 43: elsewhere the form aa
is always és. The poetical form ὑπαί appears in XII. 139f, 6 ὃ


Syntax.


| Noun.


Verb.


88 BACCHYLIDES.


and παραί (MS. mapa) must be restored in X. 103. In X. 21
we have the earliest example of ἦρα used, like χάριν, as
a preposition with the genitive.


In the syntax of Bacchylides there is little which is
distinctive; but a few points are deserving of remark.


I. Noun. 1. Number. A dual substantive with a
plural adjective occurs in XVII. 46 δύο φῶτε μόνους.
2. Case. βρύειν is construed, first with the dative, and
then with the genitive, in two successive clauses, with no
apparent difference of sense (III. 15 f.). After the passive
θαυμάξομαι, the admirers are denoted (as in Thuc. 1. 41 § 4)
by the dative case (I. 42). An accusative of the person is
combined, in epic fashion, with an accusative of ‘the part
affected’: τὸν δ᾽ εἷλεν ἄχος κραδίην (X. 85). 3. Gender.
ν. 77 ψυχὰ προφάνη Μελεάγρου | καί νιν εὖ εἰδὼς
προσεῖπεν. This is in the style of the epic poets, who,
when they describe a person by a periphrasis with @in,
is, or ψυχή, use the masculine participle (see n.).


II. Verb. 1. Zense. In X. 110-112 the imperfects


‘redyov, χραῖνον, foray denote the series of things which


the persons ‘proceeded’ to do. This is worth noticing in
connexion with two other passages where the aorist has
been conjecturally substituted for the imperfect which
stands in the MS. (1) In XIV. 38 Blass alters σάμαινεν to
σάμανεν: but the former is parallel with ὦγον in verse 37,
which means in strictness, ‘they proceeded to lead.’ (2) In
XVI. 51, where the same editor changes ὕφαινε to ὕφανε, the
imperfect (though preceded and followed by aorists) admits
of a similar defence; especially as the reference is to
a process of thought—TZenses of the Infinitive. After
μέλλω we find the present inf. in III. 31 and xv. 18, but
the future inf. in ΧΙ]. 165. In V. 164 τελεῖν is ambiguous,
but probably the future. The aorist inf. is regularly used
where a moment (as distinguished from a continuing action)
is indicated: Vv. 30 (ἰδεῖν), 161 (προσιδεῖν): X. 88 (πᾶξαι):
XII. 43 ἰδεῖν (where see note).


SYNTAX. 89


2. Mood. (i) In 11. 57 ἢ we have an example of the
ndicative used in a relative clause expressing a general
condition: ἄπιστον οὐδέν, 6 τι θεῶν μέριμνα τεύχει (instead
f ὅ τι ἂν...τεύχῃ). The alteration (made by Blass) of
‘evyes into τεύχῃ is unnecessary: see the note ad Joc.
ii) The subjunctive is used with εἰ: VIII. 86 εἴπερ καὶ
lavn tus. Also with ai κε, after a verb of knowing: XVI. 64
ἔσεαι... αἴ xe...cdkvn. Both usages are Homeric. (iii) The
yptative with ef is used to express a general supposition in
ι dependent clause, after a present indicative in the principal
‘lause: XV. 187 f. χρὴ δ'΄.. αἰνεῖν..., εἴ τις εὖ πράσσοι
see n.).—The optative stands in a relative clause after
i hypothetical optative with ἄν in the principal clause:
XVI. 41—44, od γὰρ ἂν θέλοιμ᾽...ἐπεὶ Sapaceras.—The
»ptative of indefinite frequency occurs in 1. 33 Ε ὁπότε...
᾽συμ)βολοῖ. (iv) The infinitive, as a verbal noun, takes the
Jefinite article in 1. 64 f. τὸ... εὐμαρεῖν (nominative case).
The articular infinitive, which is post-homeric, occurs first
n Pindar, and always as a subject nominative, unless an
sxception is to be recognised in QO. Il. 97 (τὸ λαλαγῆσαι
γέλων).

III. The use of prepositions by Bacchylides is, on the
whole, normal; but several points are noteworthy.

I. ἀμφί (i) with the dative has either (4) the local sense,
XVII. 52 f. orépvous...dude: or (0) the figurative, ‘in respect
-0, ‘concerning’; I. 39 ἀμφί τ᾽ ἰατορίᾳ: IX. 44 ἀμφὶ βοῶν
ἀγέλαις. (ii) With the accusative it means either ‘around,’
x. 18f. aud’ ᾿Αλεξίδαμον. ... ἔπεσον (where motion is implied),
or merely describes position in a certain region, IX. 34 ἀμφί
r Εὔβοιαν. Pindar joins ἀμφί with the genitive also (in
che sense, ‘concerning’): but this use does not occur in
Bacchylides.

2. ἀνά with accusative occurs in v. 66 f,, Ἴδας ἀνὰ...
πρῶνας (‘up along’). [In III. 50 ἀνὰ ματρὶ... ἔβαλλον = avé-
3arnov. |

3. διά (i) with genitive denotes that through which
1 passage is being made: VIII. 47 στείχει δι’ εὐρείας κελεύ-
Jov: XII. 52 (of a sword) χωρεῖν διὰ σώματος. (ii) With


Js Bs 7


Prepost-
tions.


90 BACCHYLIDES. ve


accusative, it denotes the range throughout which a motion ἡ
extends: XIv. 40 ἢ, δι’ εὐρεῖαν πόλιν ὀρνύμενοι: VIII. 30 f.
δι ἀπείρονα κύκλον φαῖνε θαυμαστὸν dSéuas,—where the
prep. may be rendered ‘amidst, but properly means that
the sensation made by the sight went right through the
vast crowd. (The athlete is not running, but throwing the
quoit.) The causal διά also occurs: Il. 61 δι’ εὐσέβειαν
(cp. VI. 4 and XII. 156).

4. ἐπί (i) with genitive denotes position ‘on’: XVI. 84f.
ἐπ᾽ ἰκρίων otabeis: fr. 3. 2 ἐπὶ βωμῶν. (ii) With dative:
(4) VII. 9 ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώποισιν, ‘among men’ (where see n.):
(ὁ) VIII. 12 ἄθλησαν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αρχεμόρῳ, ‘in memory of him’:
(ὃ V. 83 ψυχαῖσιν ἔπι φθιμένων, ‘against them’ (and so in
133). (iii) With acc., of movement ‘to’: VIII. 41 ἦλθεν
καὶ én ἔσχατα Νείλου; XII. 88, 149, etc.

5. κατά (i) with genitive occurs once: XVI. 94 ff. κατὰ
λειρίων ὀμμάτων δάκρυ yéov, ‘down from.’ (ii) With the
accusative, this prep. is notably frequent in Bacchylides,
as meaning (4) ‘throughout, X. 93 κατὰ δάσκιον.. ὕλαν :
(4) ‘along down,’ XVI. 87 f. κατ᾽ οὖρον : (c) ‘according to,
IX. 32 κατ᾽ αἶσαν: (4) of time, ‘during, XVIII. 26 f. κατ᾽
εὐφεγγέας ἁμέρας.

6. μετά is found only twice: (i) with genitive, x. 123.
μετ᾽ ᾿Ατῤειδᾶν: (ii) with dative, Vv. 30 μετ᾽ ἀνθρώποις,
‘among’ them.

7. παρά (i) with genitive, of the giver: III 11 παρὰ
Ζηνός: so XV. 35; XVII 3,13. Also in the phrase τὸ πὰρ
χειρός (XIII. 10, where see n.). (ii) With dative, either of.
persons, VIII. 84 παρὰ δαίμοσι: or of river-banks, παρὰ
ῥεέθροις, 111. 20; cp. V. 64, XII. 150. So Pindar, O. 1. 21
map "Added, X. 85 παρὰ....Δίρκᾳ. (iii) With accusative,
denoting (a) motion to a place, especially to the banks of
a river, VIII. 39, XVIII. 39; but also fr. 11. 3 f. mapd...vadv
ἐλθόντας : cp. Pind. VM. v. 10 πὰρ βωμὸν... στάντες.
(0) motion along, 111. 6, V. 38. (c) extension or position along
(without motion), IX. 29 f, X. 119, XII. 58 παρὰ βωμόν,
XV. 12 Tapd...vadv, XVI. 119 νᾶα παρὰ λεπτόπρυμνον φάνη
(unless φάνη be taken as implying motion). (47) of ¢ime, ‘in


SYNTAX. 91


the course of, ‘during’: fr. 7. 4 τό τε παρ᾽ duap καὶ. νύκτα.
(In Pind. P. x1. 68 παρ᾽ ὦμαρ =‘ on alternate days.’)

8. περί (i) with genitive, (4) in a local sense, ‘around,’
XVII. 51 κρατὸς πέρι (κρατὸς ὕπερ MS.): (6) denoting that
‘for’ which one strives, Vv. 124 f. περὶ...δορᾶς μαρνάμεθ᾽.
(ii) With dative, (@) in local sense, VII. 50 περὶ «pari,
XVII. 47 περὶ...ὦμοις : (6) denoting the prize, just like
(i) (ὦ), XI. 55 περὶ στεφάνοισι.

9. πρός (i) with dative, once, X. 23 πρὸς yaia πεσόντα
(like Od. 5. 415 βάλῃ ποτὶ πέτρῃ, etc.) (ii) With accusa-
tive, of motion to or towards, V. 45, 149: X. 100.—The
constr. with the genitive does not occur.

10. σύν is frequent, occurring about 31 times (cp. μετά).
The temporal sense may be noted: X. 23 κείνῳ ye σὺν
ἄματι (see note): 26. 125 σὺν ἅπαντι χρόνῳ.

11. ὑπό (i) with genitive, ‘from under,’ XII. 130 ἔ,
XVI. 17: of the agent, ν. 43f., IX. 48, XII. 154. (ii) With
dative, (4) ‘under, 1X. 4 (Ὁ): XII. 125 f. ὑπὸ κύμασιν, 26. 166
ὑπ᾽ Αἰακίδαις : (4) to denote an attendant circumstance,
where it may be rendered ‘with’: II. 17 λάμπει δ᾽ ὑπὸ
μαρμαρυγαῖς ὁ χρυσός (see note). (iii) With accusative,
once, XVI. 30: λέχει Διὸς ὑπὸ κρόταφον Ἴδας | μιγεῖσα.
‘This is noteworthy, since the sense is simply ‘beneath’
(Ξ ὑπὸ κροτάφῳ). Elsewhere, when ὑπό governs the acc.,.
and motion is not implied, at least the idea of extension
(‘along under’) is present, as it is (¢g.) in Pind. P. x. 15, re-
ferring to a victory in running gained ὑπὸ Κίρρας... πέτραν.
It would perhaps be difficult to find an exact parallel for
the use of ὑπό with acc. which Bacchylides admits here.

12. Anastrophe. In a few passages where the
preposition stands after the substantive, an attributive
genitive follows: Iv. 6 ἀρετᾷ σὺν ἵππων: V. 83 ψυχαῖσιν
ἔπι φθιμένων : 16. 133 ψυχαῖς ἔπι δυσμενέων. The other
instance is XII. 150 ναυσὶ δ᾽ εὐπρύμνοις παραί.

13. Zmesis. (a) The preposition precedes the verb, as
in III. 50 f. ἀνὰ ματρὶ χεῖρας | ἔβαλλον. (0) Or follows it ;
IV. 20 λαγχάνειν ἄπο μοῖραν (see note): XVIII. 7 βάλωσιν
ἄμφι τιμᾶν.

7—2


Particles,


92 BACCHYLIDES.


IV. Particles. 1. 4 is affirmative in XII. 54, XVII. 41:
interrogative in XVII. 5, where three questions are asked by
h...)...H...3 The Homeric interrogative 4 pa (71 5. 421)
stands in v. 165, where Blass writes ἦρα (7+ dpa): see
Kithner-Blass, Gramm.1.217. 2. The intensive particles
ye μέν océur in ΠΙ. 63 ὅσοι ye μέν (where μέν merely
emphasizes the limiting ye): and 24. 90 ἀρετᾶς ye μέν (where
the sense is that of the Attic ye μήν, however’). 3. μέν
is used, without a corresponding 6é, in III. 15 f. (see note),
IX. 47, XVI. 1. 4. The epic combination δέ re is found in
XII. 129 (see note), and fr. 3.1. 5. In xv. 5 f. the dis-
junctive εἴτε is followed by ἤ in the second clause. In
XVII. 209-35 we have εἴτ᾽ οὖν...ἤ pa...9.... 6. ὥστε
occurs only once, viz. in XII. 124, where it means ‘as’ (see
note). In this sense Pindar employs ὦτε (found also in
Bacchylides, XVI. 105), while he uses ὥστε only with the
infinitive.


V. METRES.


With the exception of Odes xv and XVI, the poems of
Bacchylides are seldom difficult from a metrical point of
view. The metres are well-known, and his treatment of
them is simple. Such difficulties as occur (outside of the
two odes named above) are confined, for the most part, to
verses in which the text seems to be corrupt, or at least
doubtful.


I. The metre most largely used by Bacchylides is that
which is generally known as ‘dactylo-epitritic’?: eg.,


Εὔμοιρε Συρακοσίων
ἱπποδινάτων στραταγέ (V. If.).


One of its two elements is dactylic, as seen in the first of these
two verses. The other is the so-called epitritus, — ὦ —-, as


1 The term ‘dactylo-epitritic’ is pp. xxxv ff. (3rd ed.). He observes
modern. Prof. Blass preferstodescribe that in the Pindaric scholia they are
verses of this measure as being κατ called δίμετρα or τρίμετρα προσοδιακά.
ἐνόπλιον εἶδος, for reasons fully given Dr ὟΝ. Headlam would call them
in the Preface to his Bacchylides, simply ‘ Dorian.’


METRES. 93


seen in the second, a trochaic dipody, --ο -v, with the
second —~ slowed down to —--. The name ‘epitritus’
means that the time-value of — τ is to that of —- as 3 to 4.
It is possible that when epitriti were combined with dactyls,
the first syllable of the epitritus had the time-value of -,


so that the measure became J, φ᾽ oe) and the first half
of it was equal in time to a dactyl.

Stesichorus, the founder of the τριὰς ἐπῳδική in the
Dorian choral lyric, is supposed to have been the first
who composed dactylo-epitritic strophes. An epitritic
trimeter, like Pindar’s ἑσπέρας ὀφθαλμὸν ἀντέφλεξε Μήνα
(O. Il. 5), was called Στησιχόρειον. Such verses alternated,
in the composition of Stesichorus, with long dactylic
measures, of which the dominant rhythm was the ἐνόπλιος,
-vv-vv--. It was left for later poets, Simonides,
Pindar, and Bacchylides, to effect a subtler and more
artistic fusion of the two elements, The dactylo-epitritic
metre was well-suited for choral odes on a large scale, and
especially for such as had an epic character. It is used by
Pindar in nineteen of his forty-four extant epinikia. His
first Pythian might be instanced as an ode which exhibits
all the capabilities of this metre in their most splendid
form; and his fourth Pythian, as an unrivalled example
of its adaptation to heroic narrative.

Among the nineteen odes of Bacchylides represented
by the papyrus, no fewer than ten are dactylo-epitritic.
That number includes all his odes of victory, except those
three (II, IV, VI) which are merely short songs; also the
poem (XIV) on the mission of Menelaus and Odysseus to
Troy, which has a kinship in subject and in style with the
epic hymns of Stesichorus. The same metre appears in
the epode of Ode 111; where the strophe, though logaoedic,
prepares for the other measure by verses (1—3) containing
rhythms common to logaoedics and dactylo-epitrites*.

But the use of the dactylo-epitritic strophe was by πὸ
means confined to epinikia or to poems on epic themes.


1 See Dr W. Headlam in Fournal of Hellenic Studies ΧΧΤΙ. p. 214,
n. ro (1902).


94 BACCHYLIDES.


Pindar applies it to the dithyramb (fr. 57) ; Bacchylides, to
the hymn (fr. 2), the paean (fr. 3), the hyporcheme (fr. 10),
the prosodion (fr. 9) What was perhaps less to be
expected, Pindar found it suitable also for choral skolia
(fr. 9g7—101); and Bacchylides for some kindred songs of
love or of festivity (fr. 14, 16). It may be noted that
neither Pindar nor Bacchylides ever uses the combination
—v—v-—xs (the so-called ‘ithyphallicum’) in a dactylo-
epitritic strophe, though it is frequent with Simonides,
Aeschylus, and Euripides. This observation was made
long ago by Westphal (who, for Bacchylides, had only
the old fragments). and is now confirmed (as Blass remarks,
Praef. p. XLV) by the new papyrus.

Pindar’s mode of composition in his dactylo-epitritic
strophes is, on the whole, very different from that of
Bacchylides. Pindar writes in ample periods, which flow
on without marked division into smaller ‘members’ or
‘kola.” The tendency of Bacchylides, on the other hand,
is to divide his periods rhythmically into short kola, usually
of two or three metra each. His ‘technique in this respect
has been carefully analysed by Dr’ Paul Maas. These
kola are so regularly divided that they do not essentially
differ from periods except in being shorter. They are so
compact, and so sharply marked off, that they tend to
obscure the unity of the period. In many cases there is
room for difference of opinion as to the points at which,
within a strophe of Bacchylides, the periods begin and end?.
Briefly, in the dactylo-epitrites of Pindar, the most evident
unit is the period: in those of Bacchylides, it is the kolon.
This characteristic of the Cean’s versification is sometimes,
as Maas remarks, scarcely in accord with the dignity of
his subject-matter. ‘It almost seems, he adds, ‘that in
one place the poet himself became conscious of this. Read


1 Kolometrie in den Daktyloepi- to epode); νι; x (doubtfully). Paul
triten des Bakchylides : In Philologus, Maas (p. 298, n. 1) differs from the
vol. LXIII. pp. 297—309 (1904). division of periods by Blass in v

2 A division of periodsis indicated  (epode), and x (epode), agreeing as
by Blass (3rd ed.) in respect to Ode1; to these with O. Schréder, Hermes,
111 (epode) ; v (strophe, doubtfully as 1903, pp. 240 ff.


METRES. 95


the hexameter which announces the apparition of Meleager,
the only one which Bacchylides allows to run on with
rhythmical division into kola (ν. 68—70), ταῖσιν δὲ peré-
πρεπεν εἴδωλον θρασυμέμνονος ἐγχεσπάλου Πορθανίδα: it
stands out among the short lines of the poem just as
Meleager does among the other shades.’

It has often been held that the verses, mostly very
short, into which the papyrus divides the poems of Bac-
chylides, do not represent the division intended by the
poet himself. Certainly the Alexandrian κωλισταί treated
Pindar’s periods in a similar fashion, though, in his case,
the division into short verses was, as a rule, inadmissible.
But the result of Maas’s investigation is to show that, in
the case of Bacchylides, the manuscript division is largely
‘ confirmed by the internal evidence of the metrical text. It
may be noted that, while the lines in the MS. are usually
short, there are three instances of long verses (tetrameters);
and two of them probably represent the metrical intention
of the poet. These two are:—(1) The second verse of the
epode in Ode VIII, as v. 46, ἐγγόνων γεύσαντο καὶ ὑψιπύλου
Τροίας ἕδος. (2) The tenth verse of the strophe in Ode Ix,
as v. 48, ἄνδρα πολλῶν ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων πολυξήλωτον εἶμεν.
Those verses did not admit οὗ a rhythmical division into
shorter kola. In the third instance, however, the papyrus
gives one verse where (as Maas thinks) the poet made two.
This is the sixth verse of the strophe in Ode XIV: Λαρτιάδᾳ
Μενελάῳ | τ᾽ ᾿Ατρεΐδᾳ βασιλεῖ, -ε ν. 48 Πλεισθενίδας Mevé-
λαος | γάρυϊ θελξιεπεῖ. Here considerations of calligraphy
may have come in; since, if the verse had been divided,
two short lines would have stood between two long ones.
Conversely, the MS. in some places gives two verses, the
second being a monometer, where Bacchylides probably
made only one. Three instances occur in Ode XII.
(1) Strophe, verses 1 and 2, as 46 f., οἵαν τινὰ δύσλοφον ὠ-]
μηστᾷ λέοντι. (2) Strophe, vv. 7 and 8, as 52: χωρεῖν
διὰ σώματος, ἐ-᾿ἰγνάμφθη δ᾽ ὀπίσσω. (3) Epode, wv. 2
and 3, as 92f.: ἀνθέων δόνακός 7 ἐπιχω-]ρίαν ἄθυρσιν.
The same period occurs in nine other places, and in all


96 BACCHYLIDES.


of them is given by the MS. as ove verse: see v. 9 (ἢ σὺν
Χαρίτεσσι βαθυζώνοις bpavas): 10. 31, 33: VII. 3: IX. 1:
X. 9, 12, 30: XIV. 2. Two other examples must be added:
XI. I, 2, ὡσεὶ κυβερνήτας σοφός, ὑμνοάνασ᾽ σ᾽ εὔθυνε Krevot:
ΧΙΠ. 2, 3, εὖ μὲν εἱμάρθαι παρὰ δαίμονος ἀνθρώποις
ἄριστον. In these two cases, the reason of the division is
more obvious. Without it, the first verse would have
consisted of 17 syllables, and the second of 16; whereas’
the normal limit of length for a verse in the papyrus is 15.
There are several instances in which, within the same
poem, the kolometry of the MS. is inconsistent with itself,
verses metrically identical being rightly divided in some
places, and wrongly in others. These anomalies are
indicated in the notes appended to the metrical schemes
of the Odes. See note 4 on I, n. I on V, ἢ. 3 on IX,n.I on
XII, n. 5 on XVI.

The Alexandrian division of verses in the papyrus of
Bacchylides did not rest on metrical principles syste-
matically applied. It was, no doubt, the aim to make
such a division as seemed to suit the rhythm; but formal
considerations, reasons of space and of calligraphy, also
came into account; and in particular there was a wish to
limit as far as possible the number of instances in which a
word was divided between two verses. The result was a
division which, in fact, usually coincided with that which
Bacchylides seems to have intended; but the coincidence
was in some measure accidental.


One of Maas’s remarks on the poet’s versification is especially
deserving of attention in view of its bearing on the criticism of
the text. It concerns a rule which had. been regularly observed
by the lyric poets (with the exception of Pindar), as can be seen
in the verses of Aleman, Anacreon, Simonides, and Aeschylus.
This general rule may be stated as follows. Ina dactylo-epitritic
period, when a verse ends with -Ὁ ὦ ¥, and the syllable defore - ὦ Ξ
is long, that syllable is normally not the last of a word. The
rhythmical principle is the same as in Porson’s law regarding the
final cretic in an iambic trimeter. Thus in the verse, ὦ τρισευ-
δαίμων ἀνήρ (111. 10), the syllable da:- is long: were it the last of a


METRES. 97


word, the rule would be broken. The same general rule applies
to a long syllable after +. — at the beginning of the verse: thus
ὃς παρὰ Ζηνὸς λαχών (111. 11) is normal, but (e.g.) ὃς πάρεδρος Ζηνὸς
ὧν would be abnormal. The exceptions to this rule in Bacchylides
are comparatively rare. In Ode v, for example, there is only one
(v. 12 -πει κλεεννὰν és πόλιν). In Ode 1 alone are such exceptions
frequent: there we have νείμας ἀποπλέων @yer és (v. 12=122
Blass): ποσσίν τ᾽ ἐλαφρός, πατρίων (35): -ξος ᾿Απόλλων ὦπασεν (38):
αἰῶν᾽ ἔλυσεν, πέντε παῖ- (43): πρώτοις épiler- παντί τοι (58). Maas
accounts for this peculiarity in Ode 1 by suggesting that Bac-
chylides was there imitating the ¢echnigue of Pindar; the first poet,
it seems, who broke through the old rule. Even when the
syllable before the final — ὺ is short#, it is not often the last of a
word, as in V. 4 ἄγαλμα, τῶν ye viv: 1b. 19 εὐρυάνακτος ἄγγελος ;
XI. 4 és yap ὀλβίαν: XII. 190 μεγάλαισιν ἐλπίσιν: XIV. 190 μέλπετ᾽,
ὦ νέοι : XIV. 51 ἅπαντα δέρκεται.

As it can be shown that (except in Ode 1) Bacchylides usually
observed this rule, Maas holds that the following conjectures are
inadmissible :—

(1) 111. 26 Ζηνὸς τελε[ίου νεύμασιν.

(2) ν. 8 δεῦρ᾽ ἄθρησον «- σὺν!» vow.

(3) νι. 20 ... Πολυνείκεϊ πλαζ[γκτῷ πρόξενον.

(4) vill. 77 Αὐτόμηδες, νασι]ώταν.

(5) X11. 97 ἔτι[κτεν Πηλέα.

(6) ΧΙ]. 124 θύων ναυβάτας.

With regard to (1), (2), (3), (4), and (6), I may add that the
conjecture in each case introduces an exception to the rule such
as does not occur in any corresponding verse of the same Ode:
see III. 12, 40, 54, 68, 96: VIII. 46, 72, 98: XII. 58, 91, 157, 190,
222. ΑΒ to (5), XII. 97, there is another exception in a corres-
_ ponding verse of the same ode; for v. 64 ends with καλύψῃ,
᾿ λείπεται (where ὅταν in v. 63 excludes κάλυψε).


II. Another class of metres used by Bacchylides is
the ‘logaoedic’ The origin of the name is disputed ; but
perhaps no account of it is more probable than the old
one, given by Aristides Quintilianus (p. 51), that it origi-
nated with the Lesbian poets, and was applied to such a


1 Prof. Blass prefers the term, pp. XLvu1r ff.
κατὰ Baxxetov εἶδος. See his Preface,


98 BACCHYLIDES.


verse as Sappho’s 7paluav μὲν ἐγὼ σέθεν, "Art, πάλαι
moxa. Here a trochee is prefixed to dactyls. The ‘song,’
ἀοιδή, was regarded as beginning with the dactyls: the
trochee, leading up to the song but outside of it, was
considered as ‘prose,’ λόγος. At all events, the essence of
‘logaoedic’ metre lay in combining rhythms of two distinct
kinds, the dactylic, and the trochaic or iambic :—


Βασιλεῦ trav ἱερᾶν ᾿Αθανᾶν,
τῶν ἁβροβίων ἀναξ ᾿Ιώνων (XVI. I f.).


Bacchylides uses logaoedics in his three minor epinikia
(II, IV, VI); in the strophe (though not in the epode) of
ΠΙ; and in a dithyramb (XVII). Pindar’s employment of
the metre was less restricted ; some of his larger odes are
logaoedic: and his verses of this kind are usually more
complex in structure than those of Bacchylides.


III. Four of the odes are neither dactylo-epitritic nor
logaoedic: viz. XV, XVI, XVIII, XIX. As to the metres used
in these, see the notes prefixed and appended to the
metrical schemes.


IV. Viewed with regard to metre, the 32 lyric frag-
ments of Bacchylides may be classed as follows. The
numbering of the fragments is that used in this edition.


1. Dactylo-epitritic. Fragments 1, 2, 3, 6, 9, 10, 14, 16,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 24, 28.

2. Logaoedic. Fragments 4, 7, 8.

3. Other metres. (i) lambic. Fragments 15, 27, 30
(ii) Trochaic. 13, 17, 32. (iii) Paeonic or cretic. 11, 12
23, 25.

4. Doubtful. Fragments 5, 26, 29, 31.


METRES. ODE I. 99


A. ἘΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ.


Ope I.
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (8 verses).
vurmcvonm,
vue τορος εἶ, |
Snares τυρκυβε
pe |
5 mS yer


-πυπη,πυπλ]
πωποη πως A


Epode (7 verses).
mya
π,πυύπίυυ-- |


SN ry πο, τε


x
5 δι ER Sg ee Sap ea ἐπς
πνυπισυπ-ππ-,

Fyre eee, υ--
Notes.


1. The ode, when entire, probably contained 8 ‘systems’ (strophe, anti-
strophe, epode). The part preserved with approximate completeness includes
the last three systems. In this part, the firs¢ and second verses of each
strophe and antistrophe are wrongly divided in the ms. See in this edition
vy. 6f., Διὸς Εὐκλείου δὲ βέκα-]τι, where the Ms. divides thus, A|caze:
similarly in vv. 29f., 37f., 52f., 6of. [The end of v. 14 is mutilated, but the

| position of ...δεκάτωι in 15 shows that the same thing happened there also.]
But it would seem that the earlier part of the ode, fragments of which have
been conjecturally pieced together by Blass, exhibited at least two instances in
which this error was avoided: if, that is, the first verse of one antistrophe
ended with ἀελίου (v. 55 Blass), and of another with . evrepouae (μὲν στέρομαι,
y. 78 Bl.). The point is worthy of notice, since, if this was the case, it is a
somewhat curious example of that inconsistency which occasionally appears
elsewhere also in the kolometry of the papyrus.

2. Inthe second verse of the strophe, the fourth syllable is everywhere long
except in ant. 8 (v. 61), πενίας τ᾽ duaxdvov. In the sixth verse of the strophe,
the fifth syllable is everywhere long except in str. 7 (v. 34), χρεῖός τι συμ]βολοῖ

. μάχας.
8. In epode 7 the third verse (47) has the form, θῆκεν ἀντ᾽ εὐεργεσιᾶν,
_Aurapav τ᾽ ἄλ-. But in epode 8,—the only other which has been preserved, —


100 BACCHYLIDES.


the MS. gives (v. 70), ὅσσον ἂν ζώῃ χρόνον τόνδε λάχεν τι-. Blass retains this,
holding that -~-- could replace -~~-. But that seems, in this place, a
metrical impossibility. It can scarcely be doubted, I think, that the poet
wrote, ὅσσον ἂν ζώῃ, λάχε τόνδε χρόνον τι-. There are some certain instances
in this papyrus of words erroneously transposed (see commentary). Here the
transposition, if not merely inadvertent, may have been prompted by the wish
to bring χρόνον into the relative clause.

4. The seventh verse of epode 5 becomes two in the MS.: vauol πεντή-
κοντα σὺν | Κρητῶν ὁμίλῳ. But this error is not made in either of the two
corresponding verses which remain (51, 70).


Ope II.
Logaoedic.
Strophe (5 verses).
so ue met |
Sow aoe
VEU, ἃ, αἱ
υσσυ,-πύ,υ προ -- τ


5 -υ,πυ,υ π,πλ


Epode (4 verses).
SA Tg NE SG
πο δου"
ὌΧ, ον ES


—-,-v,4-,-A


The first three verses of the strophe, and the first two of the
epode, consist of iambic dipodiae and choriambi. The fourth
verse of the strophe is a glyconic (with Uw as first foot): so also
is the third verse of the epode (but with ὦ -- as first foot). The
fifth verse of the strophe is a pherecratic (with —w as first foot) :
as is also the fourth verse of the epode (with -- -- in that place).


Notes.


1. In verse 2, és Kéov ἱεράν, χαριτώ-, the resolution of the fourth syllable
of the first choriamb (which does not recur in the antistrophe, v. 6) might
suggest that we should read ἱράν. That form, however, is not elsewhere found
in Bacchylides. In 111. 15 βρύει μὲν ἱερά (where Ludwich suggests ἱρά), the
trisyllabic form is confirmed by v. 85, φρονέοντι συνετὰ γαρύω κ.τ.λ.

2. Inv. 4 the θρασύχειρ of the Ms. (= ~~-~ in v. 9) is a mere error for
θρασύχειρος.


METRES. ODES Jf, I. IOI


Ong III.


The strophe is logaoedic in general character, but in verses
1—3 makes a preparation for the rhythm of the epode which is
dactylo-epitritic.

Strophe (4 verses).


ww -- vy

Ὄ-πωυ ΞΞ-.μ  οὐ..ῳὸ» τὸὄ
y
μπωυπωω-πιωππ

yw =
πσπυυ vv voy


ΝΜ vy
Sea era


Epode (6 verses).


—u-, Ξ-υ -
vy =
-ο-ξ,-πὸ -
epee elit
5 Wo ¥, πυ πε HU NT
ya μι αὶ


Verse 1 of the strophe is an iambic trimeter catalectic, ἀριστο-
κάρπου Σικελίας κρέουσαν. Verse 2 consists of a prosodiacus
(υ.πύύπυυ -- and a bacchius (υ -- 5), Δάματρα rioorépavey τε
κούραν. Verse 3 is the same, ὑμνεῖ, γλυκύδωρε Κλειοῖ, θοάς τ᾽ Ὀ-.
Verse 4 is the Sapphic hendecasyllable, -λυμπιοδρόμους Ἱέρωνος
ἵππους.

Notes.

1. The first verse of the strophe always contains a tribrach, except in the
case of ant. 7 (v. 89), γῆρας, θάλειαν abris ἀγκομίσσαι. The place of the
tribrach in the verse is (i) the second in vv. 15 and 85: (ii) the ¢hérd, in vv. 1,
5, 19, 29 (probably), 33, 47, 56, 61, 71, 75. Verse 43 is lost.

2. In the second verse of ant. 5 (v. 62), the ἐπεμψε of the MS. must be
corrected to ἀνέπεμψε (ἀν having been lost after ἀγαθέαν). The second v. of
ant. 7 (v. go) ends with μινύθει, 1.6. ~~— instead of the ~—— found in all the
eleven other places where the end of the corresponding verse remains. See
commentary.

8. The third verse of ant. 5 (v. 63) begins, in the MS., with ὅσοι μέν,
~-~, instead of the ~—~~ found elsewhere. ‘ye must be inserted after ὅσοι.
The last syllable of the third verse is everywhere short, and in str. 1
Οἰλυμπιοδρόμους is divided between v. 3 and v. 4.

4. The fourth verse of the strophe has the fourth syllable long in str. 2
(v. 18), ὑψιδαιδάλτων, and in ant. 5 (v. 64), ὦ μεγαίνητε, but elsewhere short.

5. Hiatus, with lengthening of a short syllable, occurs before ‘Iépwv, after
the fifth syllable of the fourth verse, in ant. 5 (v. 64), ὦ μεγαίνητε Ἱέρων : also
in ant. 7 (v. 92) Μοῦσά νιν τρέφει. ἹἹέρων κ-τ.λ.

6. The thesis is resolved in verse 4 of epode 3 (v. 40), in a proper name:
πίτνουσιν ᾿Αλυάττα δόμοι. It is also resolved at the beginning of verse 5 in
epode 6 (v. 83), ὅσια δρῶν.


102 BACCHYLIDES.


Ope IV.
Logaoedic.—A pair of strophes, without epode.
Strophe (10 verses).


PIG yg hy Ly A
Wy PU, --, v-,—-A
lh 0k deel 0th --
νπ,)πν, My Vo, v—,-yu-A
δσυυπυυπυν


ene Kener ner


vuv,-yu, 4-H AN
wa) σνη rd) v-,v-,-A
GPU TY TY
LQ tig ty ey Oy -A
Notes.


1. The first verse of this strophe is identical in measure with the fourth
verse of Ode II, ὅτι μάχας θρασύχειρος ’Ap-.

2. In verse 4, where the MS. has rpirov -yap...... λον, the faint traces of
the letter which followed yap suit II better than A: hence Blass gives τρίτον
γὰρ παρ᾽ ὀμφαλόν, x.7-A., and in the ant. 14 (where the Ms. has παρ᾽ ἑστίαν),
πάρεστίν νιν. Otherwise we might read in v. 4 τρίτον yap ἀμφ᾽ ὀμφαλόν, and
in v. 14 πάρεστι νῦν.


OpE V
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (15 verses).


SS NA NP ig NL
— Ἐπ στὰ, τα paseo
᾽ Ἢ ᾽
δ ΣΡ Se
ΠΝ ΠΩΣ πὶ --


5 πῶσ τσ


unr, VX |
πωυ-π-π,πωυ---,
v= (4-2 A |
lee κα, ieee 2k deel Ξειξ λας ἐπὶ
Io -—vu, uy |
uy, ve -, (-)
nen x |
vry v
—— — —_ “Οὐσὰ
vv; vu)
_ -- -- 4 uae
vy, vwu-,


METRES. ODES IV, V. 103


Epode (10 verses).


es ΓΞ με, ψῶα ἁμὲ "τς Ἐξ
νυ; vr; vr,
τοί γᾷ, αι Ὁ
i = obey re ἡρδαι
ww ym wey vr,
-“υὑπ,ππωυ-,-
5 πιὰ, πω πὰ
ἜΣ ΡΝ ἜΚ τς es gi
vr, vr, vy
yu
πόκον ἐὰν, HVE,
y vy
σε: ae)
mM rye
vy
Io See | eee SS ee
Notes.


1. (i) In verses 13, 14 of str. 1 the Ms. wrongly divides thus, Οὐρανίας |
κλεινός, instead of Οὐρανίας κλειϊνός, though in the corresponding verses of
ant. 1 the division is correctly made, σὺν ζεφύρου mvo(t)-|atow.

(ii) Verses 5 and 6 of the epode are wrongly divided in 35 f., ἀγέρωχοι |
παῖδες, instead of ἀγέρω-Ιχοι παῖδες: in 75 f., dvamrv-|Eas, instead of
ἀνα-[πτύξας : and in r115f., κατέπεφνε | σῦς, instead of xaréme-|pvev σῦς.
But the division is correct in 155f. and in 195f.

2. Some apparent instances of exceptional shortening in arsis are easily
removed: v. 28, for mvolatow, read mvolaiow: 49, for φιλοξένῳ, read


φιλοξείνῳ : r15f., for κατέπεφνε, read κατέπεφνεν : 137, for κόρα, read
; κούρα.


oe


3. The ms. has lost a syllable in v. 184, where ἐς must be inserted after
Φερένικος : and in 193, where ἂν must be inserted after ὅν.

4. The metre of the first strophe and antistrophe differs in two places
from that of the four other pairs.

(i) Verses r1f. of strophe 1 are :—vdoov ξένος ὑμετέραν méu-|rer κλεεννὰν
és πόλιν, =26f., δυσπαίπαλα κύματα" νωμᾶ-]ταῖι δ᾽ ἐν ἀτρύτῳ χάει. Here v. rr
(=26) is longer by a syllable than the corresponding verses elsewhere.

(ii) Verses 14f. of strophe 1 are: -γὸς θεράπων" ἐθέλει δὲ | γᾶρυν ἐκ


αὶ στηθέων χέων -- 20. -alow ἔθειραν dplyvw-lros μετ᾽ ἀνθρώποις ἰδεῖν. Here,


again, v. 14 (ΞΞ. 29) exceeds the normal length by a syllable. See commentary
and Appendix.

5. Other instances of defective responsion are the following.

(i) In verse 8 of str. 1 the MS. gives δεῦρ᾽ ἄθρησον vbw, ~~—-~-, instead
of the -~---~- found in the nine other places. Blass explains the exception
as —~L-~-. But it seems more probable that the text is corrupt in v. 8
(see commentary).

(ii) In epodes 1, 2, and 3 the first verse has this form: --~~, ~-~v~,
ποτα π, =: eg. v. 31 τὼς νῦν καὶ ἐμοὶ μυρία παντᾷ κέλενθος. (Cp. 71 and 111.)
But in epode 4 the MS. gives (151), Πλευρῶνα" μινυνθα [without accent] δὲ μοι


ἡ puxa γλυκεια, Blass defends μίνυνθα, holding that -~~= (τ-νυνθα δέ μοι) is


here substituted for --~-: see his Preface, pp. xxxIxf. (3rd ed., 1904).
I read μινύνθη (see commentary).


104 BACCHYLIDES.


In epode 5, v. 1 (191), Βοιωτὸς ἀνὴρ τάδε φών[ησεν..., τᾷδε (Wilamowitz)
is a probable correction.

(iii) In epode 3, v.'5 (115), the Ms. has θάπτομεν τοὺς (karérelpvev obs),
z.e. -~— where the four corresponding verses (35, 75, 155, 195) have -~~.
Yet Blass refrains from reading ots, thinking that the poet wrote τούς ‘ne
videretur esse θαπτομένους.᾽

(iv) The tenth verse of the epode begins with —-~— in 40, 80, 200, and
presumably so in 120 (πατρὸ]ς ᾿Αλθ-). But in 160, where the first hand wrote
TOIA’E®A, a corrector (A*) changed 7018’ to τόδ᾽, or, as Blass thinks, to τάδ᾽
ἔφα, which he gives. The true reading is probably rot’ ἔφα, or τοῖα pa.

6. In 189 ἀπωσάμενον, followed in 190 by εἴ | τις, is noteworthy: see
commentary. The sy//aba anceps is perhaps justified by the slight pause ;
though the conjecture ἀπωσαμένους (Housman) is attractive.


Ove VI.
Logaoedic.—A pair of strophes, without epode, as in Iv.


Strophe (8 verses).


ww
Pag, mK
Ξϑύκλεςι mena, gpm li
wwe Osa
ΝΜ
εἰ gay |


ξεν ϑῶς Ur
— Wy ow ery eye


ΝΕ πὴ ς


Notes.


1. Verse 1, Λάχων Διὸς μεγίστου, is an iambic dimeter catalectic.
Verse 2, λάχε φέρτατον πόδεσσι, is an ‘anacreontic’ verse, with anaclasis
(-~-~ instead of --~~). Sappho has the same sequence :


γλύκεια μᾶτερ, οὔτοι
δύναμαι κρέκην τὸν ἴστον.


2. The measures of vv. 4 and 5, δι᾽ ὅσσα πάροιθεν | ἀμπελοτρόφον Κέον,
recur in XVII. 17, where they form a single verse, εὐρυσθενέος φραδαῖσι
φερτάτου Διός.


Ove VII.


(1) In the first eleven verses (ὦ λιπαρὰ... στεφάνοισι Λάχωνα)
the metre is dactylo-epitritic. After these, about 24 verses are
lost. (2) Then come 16 verses (Πυθῶνά τε μηλοθύταν.... κλεινοῖς
ἀέθλοις), in which the metre is again dactylo-epitritic.

Kenyon held that (2), the group of sixteen verses, belonged
to an ode (his vit) distinct from the ode which began with (1)


METRES. ODES VI, V1. 105


the group of eleven verses. Paul Maas also thinks that there
were two odes, each consisting of one pair of strophes. Blass
refers both groups to the same ode (vi!). 1 incline to the latter
opinion ; partly because, if there were two odes, both must have
been very short ; and it seems improbable that the poet’s first and
second tribute to Lachon (vi, vir) should both have been on so
small a scale. (See Introduction to Ode vil., p. 204, n. 1.)

There is a further question. Supposing that groups (1) and
(2) both belonged to ode vu, was that ode composed in strophe,
antistrophe, and epode? Blass formerly thought so, conjecturing
that the epode began with the second group, Πυθῶνά re μηλοθύταν.
In his third edition, however (1904, p. Lv, and p. 5), he holds
that this ode, alone among the poet’s extant pieces, was written
in non-strophic verses (ἀπολελυμένα). That does not seem-very
probable. Maas observes that the division of κέκλη-ἰται between
verses 9 and 10 ‘would be singular, if it could not be explained
by reference to an antistrophe’; and the point deserves considera-
tion, whether we suppose (as he does) that there were two odes,
or that there was only one. That part of the ode which would
have contained the antistrophe has perished with the lost column
x. No endings of antistrophic verses can be traced in the left
margin of col. xiv: but this may be, as Maas suggests, because
the scribe wrote more compactly in that place than he did in the
strophe.

The metrical schemes of the two groups, (1) and (2), are
subjoined ; but, in view of the uncertainty, it is better to refrain
from indicating ‘strophe’ or ‘ epode.’


(1 Group of 11 verses, ὦ Aurapa...crepavoure Δάχωνα.


iis — Ὁ. a, | υσύ-ου,--ὦ [--
ΞΕ αν i
a NON πε [-“ -
Pete κεν κε κε κεες

δι. See
--vf[y, πὸ ]- ἘΠῚ ΣΝ ΤῊΣ
Se eee |
Ἐν a ae ΞΘ
SS A Ng ἐμαῖς, ΘΕ ΔΕ ἘΠΕ


τὸ =v Le], [τυ τῆν:


-Jen-, [bebe ν τ]


106 BACCHYLIDES.


(2) Group of 16 verses, Πυθῶνά re...xewots ἀέθλοις.


oe ee
Se eny


een Ί.


YUU, Uy =
10 --v-, ππυ[ν, - 70 -, -
i ay oe ὦ, [-v]v-, =


-v--, -vul[-, ve] —-,


--υῖ-, aay |
-πυπ-,-
15 muy πο --


Ope VIII. [IX.]
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (9. verses).

UO τὸ Oe, ον
SS eS Δα οΣ |

5 -vn 78 |
mou, mV
-v-¥-uY |


--- - --- ---.. --


Σ ?


Ce eC ene


Epode (8 verses).


(-)-v-, mou, mY,


Sg a Ξὸς een ye τα A
Peet ra, NP aig Bah neg Se
-͵ου-ςπ,- πὸ΄-


Stuur vn
Se aera eee


Oe


? 3


--.. ---Ἔ:ΞἩἯ oH Ue


?


METRES. ODES VIII, IX. 107


Notes.


1. In v. 5, εὐθαλές is best taken as Doric for εὐθηλές, since in the
5th verse of the strophe the 4th syllable is elsewhere always long. In
verse 7 of the strophe, the 4th syllable is once, at least, anceps, if ebvaet be
right in v. 42. In verse g of the strophe, the 4th syllable is normally long,
and κόραι (Ms.) in 44 should be corrected to κοῦραι.

2. In verse 1 of epode 1 (v. 19) where the first hand wrote AHTOT’,
A*s correction AKAI TOT’ is confirmed by σῶν ὦ in v. 1 of epode 2 (45).


The beginning of v. 1 of ep. 3 (71) is lost ; so also is that of ep. 4 (97), where
ὔὕμμιν δέ seems probable.


Ove IX. [X.]
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (10 verses).


Yow τ τὸς Ses, =
SYS, egie™


-υυπί,ιυυ-


ye ey ke
wy
5 -v-(-) Ξε Ξ
πυ-- πυυ-, vu, CU N
ay ee, yl ee ες,
us αν
Se ey ΞΞΞα,
αὐ σαν πὸ eg, ge en
10 πυῖ- πω - -- -v-¥, πὸ ---


Epode (8 verses).


πυ-πι πυυπίυυ- Δ |
=. ἜΝ ΝΕ oe Ὧκς
w=; vr;
π-τυ-ππυπ,ππυ-π-
πυυπυυπππ,πυπ-π-π-π
5 πυυπιυυ- Δ]
-[-v]y,-ve-,-


Notes.


1. In verse 5 of ant. 1 (15), the Ms. has ὅσσα where metre requires —~-.
ὁσσάκις is a probable correction.

2. The ms. misplaces the division between verses 5 and 6 of the strophe.
In ant. 1 (1g f.) it gives...2care ἄνθεσιν tav-|Odv, instead of ἕκατι | ἄνθεσιν
ξανθάν: in str. 2 (33 [.)..-νγέμονται, ἀμφί 7 HvBo.-lay, instead of νέμονται, |
ἀμφί τ’ Εὔβοιαν: in ant. 2 (43f.), reratver- of δ᾽ én’ ἔργοι-]σιν, instead of
τιταίνει, | οἱ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἔργοισιν. In each of these three places, the hiatus bewrays
the error. That the same mistake occurred in the mutilated first strophe, is
certain from the fact that the lost word ending in -ῳ (χώρῳ Ὁ) stood at the end
of verse 5. But, in that place, there was probably no hiatus; and having


8—2


108 BACCHYLIDES.


made the wrong division in the first strophe, the scribe repeated it in the
other three.

3. Verses 9 and τὸ of the strophe are wrongly divided by the Ms. in 37 f.
(revierat being added to v. 37), though the division is correct in gf., 19f.,
and 47 f.

4. In verse τὸ of strophe 1, νασιῶτιν gives -~—~ where we find —-~-—
in the other three places (20, 38, 48). This might suggest νασιώταν (see
comment.), though the arsis correpta is, of course, possible.

5. In the roth verse of ant. 1 (v. 20) the MS. has ταχεῖαν ὁρμάν. This
should be ὁρμὰν ταχεῖαν (cp. 10, 38, 48).


Ove X. [XI.]
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (14 verses).


“πυυ,-τ-υυ-,-


mewn vull-
“we, ΞΞ Vu,
ol κα, he Oy
ππυυ,πυυ-,Ξπυ-ἜΞ
Ιο-ππυυ, που σ-,


== a -,¥-—- Vv

vu, vury, vr; |

ππυυ,πυυ-,-
πυπ,ππυ-,-


Epode (14 verses).


“πνυ,-πυνπ-π,


πὰ πὶ ye
ππῦσεν 4... mY,

5 murray,
πος, Ξε ξε,
Hsu, πε ϑς τ

π-συ,πυυ-,Ξ-υ-,
ary ere ay,

Io mou, mye,

ἘΞΗ͂ΓΕΝ SiGe ae


METRES. ODES X, ΧΑ 109


Notes.


1. It is of some interest to observe in this ode the poet’s preferences with
regard to a long or a short syllable in arsis, where either was admissible.
(i) In v. 4 of str. 1, ἐν πολυχρύσῳ δ᾽ ᾿Ολύμπῳ, the fourth syllable is long, as it
is also in three of the other five places (vv. 46, 88, 102). It is short only in
v. 18 (in a proper name) and v. 60. (ii) Similarly in v. 9, κούρα Στυγὸς
ὀρθοδίκου" σέθεν δ᾽ ἕκατι, the ninth syllable is short only there and in v. 107,
while it is long in the other four places (18, 51, 65, 93). (iii) On the other
hand, in v. 12, κῶμοί re καὶ εὐφροσύναι θεότιμον ἄστυ, the ninth syllable is long
only there (where eo is—, by synizesis) and in 110, while it is short in 26, 54,
68, 96. (iv) Verse 2 of the epode remains integral only in v. 72, κτίζειν, πρὶν
és ἀργαλέαν πεσεῖν ἀνάγκαν, where the ninth syllable is short; and so it must
have been also in 114 (where the Ms. has πόλιν ᾿Αχαιοῖς, instead of ~-~-—-),
and presumably in the mutilated v. 30 (πάτραν θ᾽ ἱκέσθαι). (v) In verse 8 of
epode 1 (v. 36), ἄμερσαν ὑπέρτατον ἐκ χειρῶν γέρας, the ninth syllable is long,
as also in v. 78; while it is short in v. 120.

2. At the end of v. τ of str. 2 (v. 43), » must be added to the ἐφόβησε of
the Ms. (Cp. v. 115 f., where xaremé-|gve should be κατεπέ-[φνεν.)

8. In verse 2 of epode 3 (v. 114) és should be inserted before ἱπποτρόφον.
With regard to πόλιν ᾿Αχαιοῖς, see commentary.

4. Inverse 7 of epode 2 (v. 77) the second syllable of κάμον seems to be
a syllaba anceps: see commentary. Of the two corresponding verses, one (35)
ends with βροτῶν, and the other (119) with the corrupt πρόγο-]νοι.


Ove XI. [XII]


Dactylo-epitritic—Only eight verses remain, of which the
last, τάν τ’ ἐν Νεμέᾳ γνιαλκέα μουνοπάλαν, is metrically identical
with the first, ὡσεὶ κυβερνήτας σοφός, ὑμνοάνασ-, and may possibly,
therefore, mark the beginning of the antistrophe; but this, of
course, is by no means certain.


Strophe.
tte © eet Stein oh 2 eee OA eet τ
ee Ὡς
suru
FN Ng a SP SI arg SSS Sa aly
5 eal CAA Tame dee ee
-v--,-u--
ἘΞ Se ge
(antistr. ?) π-ππυ-, ππυυ,πυυ-π,
* *


*


110 BACCAYLIDES.


Ove XII. [XIII]
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (12 verses).


egy es Mo -- ME
v ‘ v ᾽
yw
fH FOU HVS, =
-“ὠὯπππ,πὸυπ-
So el oA eet ied
ns -..-
™ ὃ
wy
πω ρὼ πὶ ve
2 ᾽
Ιο-υυπίνυ-5Ξ,
lS ππρω-
y
as a eS eon yest


Epode (9 verses).
w
SS TNs. ere σῶν" ne |
TN Ng ΠΣ


VSS, πα


ae Nee ig ἘΣ Err: ἈΚ ὅ.ῳ
5. rene Al
eae τῆς χα
vy
πυ-Σ,-- πε, πὺξ ΛΙ
Κλ ὡς
πῶς πὶ VO
-“ο-πεπυ-π-
Notes.


1. The seventh verse of ant. 3 (v. 85) is wanting in the Ms. Some
remains of it (now represented by the letters ραν) seem to have been pieced
on to the sixth verse (84): see crit. ἢ. there.—The third verse of epode 5
(v. 159) has also been lost. The fourth verse (160) seems to have been added
to it in the same line.

2. The second verse of the strophe is a pherecratic, ---~~-¥, Περσείδας
ἐφίησιν (48). As there, so also in 81, 102, 114, 135, 147, 168, 180, 201, the
second syllable is long; and I cannot think that in 69 πανθαλέων presents, as


Blass suggests, a solitary exception. πανθᾶλής occurs, no doubt, in 229: but

πανθαλής (Doric for πανθηλής) would be parallel with εὐθαλής (see on VIII. 5).
8. In the fourth verse of the strophe the last syllable is short only once

(118, ἄστυ), but long in all the other instances (49, 70, 136, 148, 181, 202).


METRES. ODES XII, ΧΊΩΙ. 11


4. In the third verse of the epode, the first syllable is everywhere short
(93, 126, 192, 225). This fact supports the conjecture ἀνδεθεῖσιν (Housman)
in 59f., as against ἀνθρώποισιν (Blass).

5. At the beginning of verse 7 of epode 2 (v. 64) κυάνεον must be -~-,
though in compounds with xvavo- Bacchylides has ¥. A resolution of the
thesis would be against his rule in this place: see 97, 130, 163, 196, 229.

6. Verse 8 of the epode ends with a long syllable in 65, 164, 197, 230 ;
yet once with a short (131).


7. Inverse 9 of the epode, the fourth syllable is normally long (99, 165,


198, 231); yet once short (66, -χθέντος ἀσφαλεῖ σὺν αἴσᾳ). In 132 ἐξίκοντο
might have either 7 or 7 (cp. XV. 16).


Ove XIII. [XIV.]
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (7 verses).


πο eee Bie ak Ae Ὁ τῷ
= eye
πα Sy
ὩΣ Ἐπ my ou Y;
5 -|j-vy, ποῦν νὰ


i ee ene


oe


Epode (8 verses).
ΞΡ
vl-ve, pe aS Ps
e 3 εν ee
iis, SR
5 ὡὔτυνπυν-
Se τι Soe "3:
SN Hay ΕΞ
ona, -οσυ,υ-


‘


Note.


“In verse 3 of strophe 1 the Ms. seems to have lost 7’ after ἐσθλόν : and in
verse 5 a corruption has occurred. See commentary.


112 ; BACCAYLIDES


B. ΔΙΘΥΡΑΜΒΟΙ.


Ove XIV. [XV.]
Dactylo-epitritic.
Strophe (7 verses).
Sa ke Sa τ’ vv “ἢ


y
-“ᾷ--ου,πυυ-, Ξπυ- |


Seu mou mY)
caine ad Niner
el rime ee ce a Aaa
NP Ng ee | ἡ δ, νὰν" νυ --
-ππιπυ-π,πυ-π-πϑΞ


‘Epode (7 verses).


SSS gg SN
ea Ph va em
ΞΞ Ὼ τοῖς τ τὸ ΨΏΌΤΞ ΝΆ


ππυν,πυυπ,-


5 -ο-,- --τῷο-,1

T TMM; Se SS

ie Sr a wv
Notes.


1. In verse 6 of ant. 1 (v. 13) the MS. has σὺν θεοῖς where —~~- stands in
the corresponding verses (6, 48, 55): a short syllable (ye, δέ, or re) seems to
be lost after σύν.

2. In verse 7 of epode 3 (v. 63) the MS. ὥλεσεν should be ὥλεσσεν, as
v. 42 shows.


OvE XV. [XVI.]


The metres of this ode are complex, and the precise analysis
is in many points doubtful. Dacty/ic measures of various lengths
predominate, both in strophe and in epode. Mingled with these
are paconic rhythms. The pacon primus, -- Ὁ Ὁ, appears certainly
in verse 9 of the strophe; and almost certainly (I think) in
verse 1, where it is followed by the kindred cretic; though the
mutilation of that verse in the strophe, and the ambiguous
quantity of ye before «A in the antistrophe (v. 13), differentiate
the case from that of verse 9. The paeon guartus, ~~~, may
be recognised at the beginning of verses 4 and 11 in the strophe,


METRES. ODES XIV, XV. 113


and probably in the second part οὗ v. 5 of the epode (v. 29).
There are also some anapaests (or apparent anapaests). Dr W.
Headlam, who has given special study to the metres used in
this ode, describes the strophe as composed of three elements,
paconic, dactylic, and logaoedic; the epode being constructed, as
usual, of the same material in a different arrangement. By this
complexity, and by somewhat abrupt transitions from one rhythm
to another, Bacchylides seems here to aim at expressing agitated
feelings, in unison with the tragic pathos of Deianeira’s fate.
Such a metrical character was not ill-suited to a Dionysiac
dithyramb.
Strophe (12 verses).
ve vne=|
EN ly Eee ge ee
Ce alate eek ts Pie oa
oe ene ee
5 ener Tener ae ne Ανξ οι στὸ,
= Se owes eS


eS ee


υνυυππυυ--Ξ | -οωὧϑ
πε τ 5 |
τ -ρ “-ὁ-
vu
-“-“ὠωουἀ-ππ υσυπυυ--


Epode (11 verses).
RES AP EE Re
wa LP as a es αὶ
ὩΣ a πο ῳ»-
vVvvrmreveTeY oO
ξυυπυυπυυυ--ς-
a με τ A RO Ἐκ a Re
ἡ FO PE Ee
vyurvuyvrYeo
EF Le = Se Ὁ
TO «ὦ -ΞΞ υ προ ξα


Ὁ ὼ iene a τὰν τῷ


Notes.


1. The question as to the metre of verse 1 is bound up with the palaeo-
graphical data: see crit. note ad Joc. If the verse did not begin with -~~ as
[Πυθἤου, but with --~, then two. long syllables were formed by 4 letters (for


114 BACCHYLIDES.


which alone there is room before ov); and the fourth of these was either I, or a
letter ending with a vertical stroke, such as N. In verse 1 of the antistr.
(v. 13) γε before xX might, according to B.’s practice, be either short or long:
for the statistics, see above, p. 85.

2. Verse 3 of the strophe is a dactylic pentapody with catalexis, not a
frequent verse, but one which occurs in Aleman, fr. 51, Pindar P. II. 4
(Ovpavida γόνον εὐρυμέδοντα ἸΚρόνον), etc.

8. Verse 5 of the strophe ends with ἀνθεμόεντι “EBpw, answering to
εὐρυνεφεῖ Kyvalw in v. 17. The hiatus before "E8pw recalls that in 111. 64,
ὦ μεγαίνητε ‘lépwy,a passage which also suggests that the ε of ἀνθεμόεντι might
be lengthened before the aspirate. But such a lengthening is easier to under-
stand in thesis (111. 64) than, as here, in arsis; and moreover it is needless to
assume it. Blass surely mars the metre by inserting ποὺ after ἀνθεμόεντι.---
The double spondee of v. 17 occurs in Aesch. Ag. 121 αἴλινον αἴλινον εἰπέ,
τὸ δ᾽ εὖ νικάτω.

4. Verse 6 (=18), composed of four dactyls and a spondee, is the same
as that in Aesch. Zum. 360, σπευδομένα δ᾽ ἀφελεῖν τινα τάσδε μερίμνας.

5. Verse 7 (=19) might be read either as an anapaestic dimeter, or as a
dactylic tetrapody catalectic with anacrusis (~~). The former view is the
simpler.

6. The eighth verse, mutilated in the strophe, is preserved entire in the
antistrophe, -Ae κόρᾳ τ᾽ ὀβριμοδερκεῖ dfvya,—anapaest,, dactyl, trochee, cretic.
In verse 8 the last four syllables are formed by παιηόνων, where the first might
be short, as in παϊάνιξαν (XVI. 129). Blass, to avoid the hiatus and the
shortening of -κει, inserts ye after ὀβριμοδερκεῖ.

7. Verse 9, ἄνθεα πεδοιχνεῖν (=21 παρθένῳ ᾿Αθάνᾳ), consists of a pacon
primus and a spondee. In verse 11, τόσα χοροὶ Δελφῶν (= 23, τότ᾽ ἄμαχος
δαίμων), we have a paeon guartus and «a spondee. Thus the place where the
paeonic element becomes prominent is also that which, in the antistrophe,
marks the turning-point of tragic interest. Verse 23 introduces Deianeira’s
resolve.

8. Verse 12, the last of the strophe, is a choriambus followed by an
enhoplius, σὸν κελάδησαν παρ᾽ ἀγακλέα ναόν. It will be noticed that both here
and in the antistrophic verse (24), Aatavelpg πολύδακρυν ὕφανε, the fifth syllable
coincides with the end of a word.

9. The first verse of the epode (25), a dactylic tripody catalectic, is
metrically the same as the ninth (33).

10. In verse 2 of the epode (26), πύθετ᾽ ἀγγελίαν ταλαπενθέα, it seems
most probable that the final -éa of the last word is to be scanned~-. The
metre will then be the same as that of the 7th verse of the epode (31), φθόνος
evpuBlas νιν ἀπώλεσεν. In 27 ᾿Ιόλαν can take f

11. In verse 5 of the epode (29), ἄλοχον λιπαρὸν ποτὶ δόμον πέμποι, two
anapaests are followed by the combination already found in the strophe
(vv. 11 and 23), a pacon guartus and a spondee.

12. Verse 6 of the epode (30), ἃ δύσμορος, ἃ τάλαιν᾽, οἷον ἐμήσατο is
followed at the beginning of v. 7 by φθόνος, and the last syllable of ἐμήσατο is
therefore long. The first ἃ is anacrusis: then we have a dactyl, and a trochaic
dipody catalectic (twice). The movement is slow, with a slight pause after
τάλαιν᾽, and gives a wailing effect, which is continued in the next verse.

13. The rith and last verse of the epode (35), δέξατο Νέσσου πάρα
δαιμόνιον τέρας, has a general likeness to the last v. of the strophe, but ends


METRES. ODES XV, XVI. 115


with ~~— instead of --. As in the strophic verses (12 and 24), the fifth
syllable coincides with the end of a word.


Ove XVI. [XVII]


In the metre of this ode much is difficult and obscure. One
element, which Wilamowitz regards as predominant (Gé¢t. Gelehr.
Anz. 1898, pp. 137 ff.), is formed by iambic dipodies or
*diiambi.’ Some verses, such as the second of the epode (v. 48),
τάφον δὲ ναυβάται, are simply iambic. There are also trochaic
rhythms (as eg. in v. 9). But there are other elements also.
Bacchylides uses cretics in frag. 11 (=15 Blass), ody ἕδρας ἔργον
οὐδ᾽ ἀμβολᾶς, | ἀλλὰ χρυσαίγιδος Ἰτωνίας etc., where the second
foot of the second verse is a pacon primus: and Blass asks (Praef.
p. Liv, 3rd ed.) whether this ode is to be regarded as cretic or
paeonic. ‘It is clearly,’ he says, ‘a paean; it concerns the Cretan
Minos, and the word Κρητικόν occurs in the fourth verse: but if
cretics and paeons are to be recognised in it, at any rate they
are strangely mingled with trochees, iambics, and even anapaests.’
He further observes that the first three verses of the strophe,
between which synaphea seems to exist, can be more easily reduced
to trochaic dipodies (ditrochaeos), such as Aristoxenus is said to
have called κρητικοὶ κατὰ rpoxatov (Diomedes p. 481), than to
‘cretics’ in the ordinary sense of the word. A complete metrical
analysis of the ode has been essayed by Housman in the C/assical
Review, vol. x1. pp. 134 ff. (March, 1898).

While the technical aspects of the metre present so much that
‘divides the opinions of experts, a reader can feel that its general
character is well adapted to the subject-matter. The verses suit
a rapid and spirited narrative, fraught with excitement, startling
incident, and reversals of fortune.


Strophe (23 verses).


Vuuren

HV ev
a ee

-ωο- πωωυυωυϑξ

5 π-υτΞ’---αοἋοαὺ

Vey SYS ἀκα τ
worervyVe Tee oT

τ ἀὔδΨὁΠᾧ Δ. 2]


Cr er or


116


Io


15


zo


Io


15


20


BACCHYLIDES.


Sth OA ὦ diel Cal
oS ieee Ak ieee OO old
τ ῳὩ -ῷ--


ΓΕ ον ὅσο


ων πο Soe (υ)-
yu
goes


-Ξοῷ OT diel oie
vy
τ (υὐ)--ὐττ ὦ 5 |
ls eal © Aiea © del ieee oe


vy
muy |


Epode (20 verses).
wry Vy ι-υ-, ι-


νπιύπυ-π,


LL LL


Vw, is
Leow, Uru, ---, κου-,
vrvuy, Hue,


ι-.,.-.- Ἐ-υυυ,κπυ-,,


?

{τορι ay ee aan -Ξ
coeur μα τ πα πὴλ δὲ
eth πὸ, απ ae ieee
ἀξ ἃ -Ξ
= ὦ Se

ων πολ ἐπ καὶ ὡς τοι ρον ων

vous

SVS SS
ΣΝ


Cer er ker ner


Notes.


The number of places where apparent breaches of metre suggest some
disturbance of the text is larger in this Ode than in any other.

1. In several instances the metrical fault can be cured by some very
slight correction; as in v. 4, by writing τάμνε for τάμνεν : 42, ἀμβρότον for


METRES. ODE XVI. 117


ἀμβρότοι᾽: 80, ἠὔδενδρον for εὔδενδρον : 88, ἴσχεν for ἴσχειν : gr, ἐξόπιν, or
ἐξόπιθε, for ἐξόπιθεν : 112, ἀμφέβαλεν for ἀμφέβαλλεν : 118, θέωσιν for θέλωσιν.

2. The defect of a syllable sometimes occurs in one of two verses which
ought to correspond metrically. (i) In verse 4 of ant. 2 (v. 93) a long syllable
has been lost after ἠϊθέων. (ii) In verse 8 of str. 1 the MS. has Μίνω where we
expect -~-. (iii) The same v. of str. 2 (74) ends with Θησεῦ, τάδε, instead of
--v~v~. (iv) Inv. r4 of ant. 1 (37), Té(F)ot δόσαν ἰόπλοκοι, a short syllable is
wanting at the end.

8. Conversely, excess of a syllable appears (i) in v. 8 of ant. 2 (97), φέρον
δὲ δελφῖνες ἐναλι-]ναιέται, where metre requires ἁλι-]ναιέται : and (ii) in v. 19 of
ant. 2 (108), -πὸν κέαρ ὑγροῖσιν ἐν ποσίν, where metre requires ὑγροῖσι ποσσίν.

4. There are other and more complex cases of defective responsion where
the most probable remedy is afforded by ¢ransposition. (i) In verses 11 and
12 of ant. 2 (100 f.), where the ms. has ἔμολέν τε θεῶν | μέγαρον, two faults are
removed by writing μέγαρόν re θεῶν | μόλεν. (ii) In wv. 13 f. of ant. 2 (ro2f.),
the ms. has ἔδεισε Nypéos ὀλ-᾿βίου, where we require ~--~-—~-— | ~-: this is
obtained by writing ἔδεισ᾽ ὀλβίοιο Nx-|péos.

These two instances, in which the probability of the transposition ap-
proaches to certainty, should be carefully noted as tending to prove that a
displacement of verses was possible in this papyrus; not necessarily through
an error of the scribe, but perhaps because, in some earlier MS., a verse had
been omitted, and then re-inserted in a wrong place. We should remember
this in considering two other places. (iii) In vv. 2ο ἢ. of ant. 2 (109 f.) the Ms.
has εἶδέν (made from ἴδεν) τε πατρὸς ἄλοχον φίλαν | σεμνὰν βοῶπιν ἐρατοῖ-,
where, instead of σεμνάν, metre requires either ~~ or -. Housman is surely
right in making v. 20 begin with σεμνάν, and v. 21 with te. (iv) In vv. 16f.
of epode x (62f.) the Ms. has δικὼν θράσει σῶμα πατρὸς és δόμους | ἔνεγκε
κόσμον βαθείας ἁλός" where a short syllable is wanting after θράσει. I agree
with Blass in transposing the verses, and adding ἐκ before βαθείας.

For a fuller discussion of all the passages indicated in notes 2—4, the
reader is referred to the commentary.

5. Verses 6 and 7 of the strophe are wrongly divided by the Ms. in ant. 2
(95 f., δάκρυ | χέον instead of dd-|xpu χέον), though rightly in the other three
places (6f., 29f., 72f.).

6. In his third edition (1904) Blass, referring to Hermes XXXvI. 284 f.,
makes a new division of verses 5—6 of the strophe, thus:—(r) str. 1: τηλαυγέϊ
γὰρ ἐν φάρεϊ βορήϊαι | πίτνον αὖραι κλυτᾶς | ἕκατι κιτιλ. (2) ant. 1 (28—30) :
ἔλθῃ" σὺ δὲ βαρεῖαν κάτεχε μῆτιν, εἰ | καί σε κεδνὰ τέκεν | λέχει κιτιλ. Note
here that the new division of εἰ καὶ between two verses is objectionable. This
awkwardness becomes still more marked if (as is desirable) a colon or full stop,
and not merely a comma, is placed after μῆτιν. (3) str. 2 (71—73) : ἄστραψέ θ᾽"
6 δὲ θυμάρμενον ἰδὼν τέρας | χέρας πέτασσε κλυτὰν | és αἰθέρα κιτ.λ. In the Ms.
γ. 72 is ἰδὼν τέρας χεῖρας πέτασσε: where the simple correction, πέτασε χεῖρας
(see comm.), restores the metre. The new division dispenses with the
transposition (though requiring χέρας instead of xeipas): but it introduces
a new discrepancy, viz.~—~— (χέρας πέτασσ-) instead of the -~— found in
all the corresponding places (6, 29, 95). (4) ant. 2 (9496) ἥρως θόρεν πόντονδε,
κατὰ detpl | τ' ὀμμάτων δάκρυ xéov | βαρεῖαν κ-τ.λ.

It seems to me that the division of these verses in the MS. (with the
exception of 95 f., on which see n. 5) is, on the whole, more probable than
the new division now made by Blass. One fact especially should be observed.


118 BACCHYLIDES.


As Maas has noted (see above, p. 96), the general tendency of the Alexandrian
κωλιστής was to avoid, as far as possible, the division of a word between two
verses. Where, therefore, the MS. so divides a word, there is a presumption
that such division is authentic. But the effect of the new arrangement is to
produce κάτεχε where the MS. (28f.) has κάτεϊχε : and κατά where the Ms.
(94 f.) has xalra.


Ove XVII.
Logaoedic.
Strophe (15 verses).


υυνυππυυπυπ,-

yx = = =) ἜΞΕ
gr a μεϑ δ,
Ῥω πὰ πὰ, Sg ΠΣ


you YAY πὰρ Στὸ


5 ΞΟυ,- υνυπιυ-


ΞιΞ ϑϑναν ᾿Ξ ἊΣ Ξ
Speyer nea Om
15 -ππι πο vay) un, be


Notes.


1. The Ms. text shows many corruptions of metre, but they are such as
can easily be removed. In v. 9, δ᾽ ἕκατι has been corrected to ἀέκατι : τό,
ἦλθε to ἦλθεν: 24, Κρεμνῶνος to Κρεμμνῶνος : 28, ἐξέβαλλεν to ἐξέβαλεν :
35, ὅπλοισιν to ὀπάοσιν : 40, καρτερὸν to κρατερόν : 51, κρατὸς ὕπερ to κρατὸς
πέρι.

2. In 52f. the transposition στέρνοις τε...χιτῶνα (instead of the MS. χιτῶνα
..oTépvos 7’) is required, not by metre, but by the place of re: see com-
mentary.


Ope XVIII. [XIX.]


The metre does not conform to any well-known type, but
blends certain rhythms as the poet’s fancy prompts. In the first
fourteen verses of the strophe, iambic dimeters alternate with
short dactylic measures. In verses 15, 16 and 18 the rhythm
becomes trochaic,—v. 18 being of a logaoedic character; while
ν. 17 is an iambic trimeter with an anapaest for the second foot.


METRES. ODES XVII, XVIII. 119


In the epode the ms. has lost the ending of every verse except
“the first (37, ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν). Blass, indeed, thinks that the words
τίκτε Διόνυσον (50), where he writes Δῖον υἱόν, form a complete
verse ; but this seems improbable. The endings of at least four
verses in the epode (46—49) can, however, be restored without
much difficulty. The remains of the epode suffice to show that
there, as in the strophe, iambic rhythms were combined with
trochaic. The tenth verse of the epode (46) was clearly a
prosodiacus, ὅθεν καὶ “AyavopiSas, like the sixth verse of the
strophe, φερεστέφανοι Χάριτες.

In this ode the iambics are pure. The only spondee in an
iambic verse is the proper name ‘Iw in 41.


Strophe (18 verses).
υπυπιυπυπ,ὺ
OTN A gt a ἄς ὅσοι.
vou, my πεν
Speciale |


5 vr, (υ}) --,


Io -v-.u- lL |


15 υ΄“--ουπύυπυπυ
sey AS
=|
a RP Nf ΞΘ PEE Re
ἘΞ os Be ΠΧ“
Epode (15 verses).


vrs


ωυυ--ουοτσ - tte
υὑπύπυςυ πο"
ῳ ω π θα ἃ ἃ ἃ


ares mee


120 BACCHYLIDES.


10 vouun-vel[-


Ve UUme ew


rae yey Pe ne ς ἃ
ΕΠ gees
ae ee
Ip -πυπύν te ee
Notes.


1. In the fifth verse of the ant. (23), ἄκοιτον ἄῦπνον éév-lra (=5 ἰοβλέφαροί
τε καί), there is synizesis of eo, unless evv-|ra should be read.

2. Inv. 15 of the strophe, ἦεν seems a probable correction of the Ms. τί
ἦν: the metre clearly indicates a trochee. Blass keeps τί ἦν, but suggests
“Apyos ἦν ποθ᾽ ὅθ᾽ ἵππιον λιποῦσα : with some sacrifice of euphony.

3. In v. 17 εὐρυσθενέος is scanned --~~-, not --~-, as is indicated by
the antistrophic words ἢ Πιερίδες (v. 35).


Ope XIX. [XX.]


The first eleven verses are partly preserved. All begin with
“—vv, and all are mutilated at the end. The rhythm is the
προσοδιακός, Ξ-ὠοὐ- σὺ -, or the ἐνόπλιος with anacrusis,
Ξ-υὐυ-υυ---- Verse 8, commencing with the words ἀναξίαλος
Ποσει[δάν, differs from the rest in that the initial Y—Uv is
followed, not by ~Uu-, but by —Vv-. This is a form of
prosodiacus used by Aristophanes (Av. 1371 ff.) in the nuptial
strain, Ἥρᾳ ποτ᾽ ᾿Ολυμπίᾳ (see Introd. to Ode xrx).


“τ το -Ξ
“-ππέ τσ τα
Seite Oak Seed OAk ieee
voyuer

δυπυυπυυ--
“πσυυπυνυ--
νπυνυν-ςπωυω--
υπυυ-υ eel νι ωρω
Ἐπ τ τα

TIO --  -ῳὐ Ά έπθιν αὶ ἃ


πο ἔν wes


Notes.

1. Verse 1 may have ended either with -~~— (εὐρυχόρῳ), or with —~~——
(εὐρναγνίᾳ) ; but the former is more probable. Verses 2 and 9. presumably
ended with -~~-. In 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11, the ending seems to have
been -~~--.

2. In verse 8 the words ἀναξίαλος Ποσειδάν may have been followed by
~vi~~vn—— (eg. ὅτε δίφρον ὀπάσσα:). In v. το, Πλευρῶν᾽ és ἐὐκτιμέναν may
have been followed by ~~ —~~~ (e.g. ἐπόρευσε παρα. These, at least, are
possibilities suggested by a consideration of the whole context.


THE PAPYRUS. 121


VI. THE PAPYRUS.


The papyrus of Bacchylides (Brit. Mus, Pap. DCCX XXIII)
was found in Egypt by natives; the place of discovery is
uncertain. It was brought to the British Museum towards
the end of 1896, in the condition which Dr F. G. Kenyon
thus describes? :—


‘When it reached England the manuscript consisted of about
200 torn fragments. The largest of these measured 20 inches in
length, and contained four and a half columns of writing; there
were fourteen pieces of some considerable size, containing one
or more columns; while the rest were small fragments ranging
from pieces measuring a few inches in either direction to scraps
containing barely one or two letters. For the most part the
fractures were recent, and were probably due to the Egyptian
discoverers ; but in a few places the completely different colours
of adjoining fragments show that the fracture must be of old
standing. If the manuscript was deposited in a tomb (as is
a priori probable, though no authentic information on the point
is forthcoming), this might be due to ancient plunderers in search
of treasure; but the matter is not one of great importance, except
as indicating that the modern discoverers are not solely to blame
for the present condition of this precious manuscript.’


That the poems were those of Bacchylides, appeared
from the occurrence in the papyrus of some verses known
to be his?- The patient skill of Dr Kenyon accomplished
the difficult task of arranging the larger part of the frag-
ments in their proper order, and thus reconstructing the
body of the manuscript from its mutilated members.

In this papyrus a column of writing never contains Zhe
more than 36 lines, nor less than 32; the usual number RS:
is 35 or 34. The average length of a column, from the
topmost line of writing to the lowest, is 7 inches, or a
fraction more: the width of a column,—measured from
the beginning of the text on the left to the beginning


1 Introduction to Bacchylides, p. 2 See introduction to the Frag-
xv. ments in this volume.


*


The three


sections of


the MS.


122 BACCHYLIDES.


of the text in the next column on the right,—varies from
about 5 to 54 inches. Only a very few verses reach (or
slightly exceed) the length of 5 inches (see, @g., IX. 48
ἄνδρα... εἶμεν, col. 18, 1. 6 from the foot): the average length
ranges from about 3 to 44 inches.

The reconstructed papyrus is in three parts or sections.

I. The first section (9 feet in length) contains
columns I—xxII. Column I begins in the latter portion
of Ode 1, with the mutilated first verse of a strophe
(πόλιν... βαθυδει-), which was perhaps the seventh strophe
of the poem. Column XXII breaks off after verse 8 of
Ode ΧΙ (τάν τ᾽ ἐν Νεμέᾳ γυιαλκέα μουνοπάλαν). Between
the end of this first section and the beginning of the next,
there has been a loss of at least one column, and probably
of more.

II. The second section (2 feet 3 inches in length)
contains columns XXIV—XXIX, preceded by a few minute
traces of the lost column XxIlI. Column XXIV begins with
the eleventh verse of a strophe of Ode XII (ὕβριος ὑψινόου).
If, as is probable, that strophe was the second, this verse
was the 44th of the poem. Column XXIX breaks off after
v. 23 of Ode XIII (ὃς φιλοξείνου τε καὶ dpOodixov). The
scale of the exordium might suggest that Ode XIII was
on a somewhat large plan; in that case, more than one
other column would have been required to complete it.
Nor is it at all certain that the thirteenth epinikion was
the last poem of that class. It is therefore impossible to
conjecture how much has been lost between the end of
this section and the beginning of the next.

III. The third section (3 feet 6 inches in length)
consists of columns XXX—XXXIX. Column Xxx is repre-
sented only by a fragment of the upper portion, belonging
to the exordium of Ode XIV, the first of the ‘dithyrambs.’
The title ᾿Αντηνορίδαι ἢ ᾿Ελένης ἀπαίτησις is written at
the top of the column, and not (as usual) in the margin:
This circumstance, with the fact that the initial of the
title is A, suggests that a new division of the volume began
here. Column ΧΧΧΙΧ (of which the right-hand part is torn


THE RECONSTRUCTED PAPYRUS. 123


off) ends with v. 11 of Ode ΧΙΧ, Ἴδας. It is fairly certain
that, in the complete papyrus, other dithyrambs followed
the /das.

After the reconstruction of the MS. in these three
principal sections, there remained about 40 fragments,
nearly all minute, for which no place had been found.

All these have now had places assigned to them, chiefly
by Prof. Blass; but with varying degrees of probability.

Prof. Blass supposes that the column numbered by 776 dst
Kenyon as the first was originally the fifth. It was pre- ear
ceded by four columns which contained the beginning
and the middle part of Ode 1. He has arranged a large
number of small fragments in the places which he supposes
them to have held in these four columns, and in many
cases has added conjectural supplements. Even with the
supplements, a continuous sense is seldom effected; but
we obtain what might be called a hypothetical skeleton
of the four lost colurnns. I give this reconstruction in an
Appendix to Odel. It reflects much credit on the eminent
critic’s ingenuity and industry. But the element of con-
jecture involved is so extremely large as to render it
questionable whether the skeleton of these four columns
should be printed as part of the ascertained text.

Column I of Kenyon is designated by Blass thus v (1); Vumber-

5 ᾿ ν ing of the
and so on up to Kenyon’s twenty-ninth column, designated 777 pins.
as XXXIII (XXIX). Atthis point a further difference comes in.

A small fragment, giving morsels of 4 verses (XIII. 40—43),
is regarded by Blass as representing a lost column, XXXIV,
which he inserts between XXXIIJ (Kenyon’s ΧΧΙΧ) and
XXXV (Kenyon’s xxx). Hence, from that point to the end,
the difference between the two numberings is no longer
four, but five; the last column, Kenyon’s ΧΧΧΙΧ, being
Blass’s XLIv. In this edition I retain Kenyon’s numbering
of the columns, which is also that used in the autotype
facsimile of the papyrus (1897).

The thirteen epinikia are not arranged, as those of Arrange-


ᾧ . : . ment oO
Simonides were, according to the class of the contest?; aie


1 See p. 37, 0. 4.
9—2


Ll. Epini-
ἄτα.


Ll. Dithy-
rambs.


124 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


nor, like those of Pindar, according to the festivals. Nor
do they stand in the alphabetical sequence of the victors’
names, or of their cities. Finally, the order is not chrono-
logical: the few dates which can be fixed suffice to prove
that. The first two Odes, for Argeius, may, indeed, have
been among the poet’s earliest compositions (see p. 60).
But Ode II belongs to 468; Iv, to 470; V, to 476; VI and
VII, to 452; XII (probably) to 481 or 479. As to Ode ΧΙ,
its place is doubtless due to the fact that it pertains to a
minor festival. It may have been followed by other poems
relating to local games; but not (we may presume) by
any which concerned Olympia or Delphi, Nemea or the
Isthmus. Perhaps we now possess the greater part of the
epinikia written by Bacchylides. Among the fragments of
his epinikia quoted by ancient writers, there is only one
(fr. 1) which does not occur in the papyrus:—os δ᾽ ἅπαξ
εἰπεῖν, φρένα καὶ πυκινὰν | κέρδος ἀνθρώπων βιᾶται. That
fragment is excluded by metre from every extant strophe
and epode of the recovered epinikia: but it may possibly
have stood (as Blass suggests) in one of the lost epodes of
Ode xI. There is no reason to suppose that in antiquity
this class of the poet’s works formed more than one book.
Stobaeus quotes simply from Βακχυλίδου ᾿Εἰπινίκων.

The six ‘dithyrambs, contained in the third section of
the MS., are arranged in the alphabetical order of initials
(but not of second letters also):—Avrnvopidar ἢ “Ἑλένης
ἀπαίτησις, Ἡρακλῆς, "Hideo. ἢ Θησεύς, Θησεύς, "Ia, ἤΙδας.
In the book of ‘dithyrambs, when entire, some other pieces
must have followed the Ἴδας in alphabetical order. There
was probably a Κασσάνδρα (fr. 46), and a Λαοκόων (fr. 51).
The story of Philoctetes being brought from Lemnos to
Troy was told in a dithyramb of which that hero’s name
was doubtless the title (fr. 39). If the poem which related
Europa’s story (fr. 47) was a dithyramb, Εὐρώπη, it should
have come between Odes XIV and XV: unless, indeed, the
original title of XIV was simply ᾿Ελένης ἀπαίτησις, in which
case Εὐρώπη might have stood before it, as Ἰώ before Ἴδας.
But the fact already noticed, that the title of XIV is written
at the head of col. XXX, makes this improbable.


ORDER OF CONTENTS.—DATE. 125


The character of the handwriting in the papyrus wil] Character
be seen from the specimens reproduced in the plates given se
below. It is a fine uncial, firm, clear, regular, and of a fairly
large size. The size is not, however, quite uniform through-
out. In some places (as eg. in col. ΧΧΧΙ) the writing
becomes slightly smaller, as if the scribe was desirous of
economizing his space. On the whole, the MS. is among
the most beautiful examples of Greek writing on papyrus.

As the calligraphy indicates, it was probably designed for
sale, or for a public library.

The only evidence as to the age of the MS. is that Aye of the
afforded by the handwriting. The term ‘Ptolemaic, as pat
applied to literary papyri written in a formal book-hand, Prolemaic
denotes that the hand is such as prevailed in the Greek 7”
book-world at large during the period when the Ptolemies
ruled in Egypt’; 2.6. from the beginning of the third century
to about the middle of the first century B.c. This style 7%
was modified in the course of the transition to the first Τ᾿ ες ἢ
century of our era, when the ‘Roman’ period in Greek
literary handwriting begins.

Now the Bacchylides papyrus has some forms of letters Craracter-
which are distinctly Ptolemaic: but it also exhibits some Hip ρηθο
traits which indicate that a transition to the Roman style is ae
at hand. The A is Ptolemaic; it is angular, without any
trace of a curve, and is wattle with two strokes of the
pen. The M is broad, with a shallow dip, and is, so far,
Ptolemaic; but the dip is usually curved. The &, the
most characteristic letter of all, is thoroughly Ptolemaic,
being formed with exceptionally long strokes at top and
bottom, and a mere dot in the middle. These are the
three most significant letters. But some others also are
noteworthy. E is thin, the central stroke projecting
slightly beyond the short strokes above and below it.
® is thin. O is very small. IT is remarkably broad.

The curve at the top of T is much shallower than in the
Roman period. All these features occur in papyri of the
Ptolemaic age. On the other hand, the form of <A, in


1 Kenyon, Palacography of Greek Papyri, pp. 72 f.


Probable
date.


.

Other ‘
papyri of
the same
period.


Condition
of the text.


126 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


which the right-hand stroke runs up a little beyond the
other, shows the incipient influence of Roman style. In
the narrow C, the upper part is sometimes separated from
the rest, a peculiarity found also in the Harris MS. of /éad
XVIII (Brit. Mus. Pap. CVII), a papyrus of the first century’.

Guided chiefly by these or like indications, Dr Kenyon
assigns the Bacchylides papyrus to the first century B.C.,
when the Ptolemaic style was beginning to pass into the
Roman. In confirmation of this approximate date, he
refers to some other literary papyri of the same period.
(1) Some of the Herculaneum rolls (all of which must be
earlier than 79 A.D.) contain writings of the Epicurean
Philodemus, a contemporary of Cicero, and may probably
be referred to the middle or latter part of the first century
B.C. These papyri show the Ptolemaic style in some test-
letters, such as A, M, A. (2) Another papyrus -contains
Hypereides /m Philippidem, and also (but in a different
hand) the third Epistle of Demosthenes (Brit. Mus. Papp.
CXXXII, CXXXIV). In the work of both these hands, some
letters, as A, M, and &, have Ptolemaic forms, akin to
those in the MS. of Bacchylides: and both the hands belong
to the period of transition from the Ptolemaic style to the
Roman’.

If the approximate date thus obtained be correct, the
papyrus of Bacchylides was written about four centuries
after the poet’s death. In order to estimate the character


1 Kenyon, of. cit. p. 76: cp.p.85. to the first century. (2) They also


2 Messrs Grenfell and Hunt (Oxy-
rhynchus Papyri 1. 53) would refer
the Bacchylides papyrus to the first
orsecond century of ourera. (1) They
compare a papyrus of Demosthenes,
which they would place in the early
part of the second century. Dr
Kenyon, however, observes (Palae-
ography of Greek Papyrt, p. 76, n. 1)
that the forms of some characteristic
letters in the Bacchylides, such as M,
&, YT, ©, differ from those in the
Demosthenes. He would refer the
Demosthenes not to the second, but


compare the M and ¥ of the Bacchy-
lides with those found in papyrus
fragments of Thucydides and Aris-
toxenus which belong to the Roman
period. But Dr Kenyon observes
that, in these fragments, M is less
broad, and also more deeply indented,
than in the Bacchylides; while in the
case of the resemblance is not close.
‘On the whole,’ he concludes, ‘the
Oxyrhynchus papyri, which are all
of the Roman period, seem to me to
confirm the date here assigned to the
Bacchylides.’


THE FIRST HAND. 127


of the manuscript, the following subjects must be con-
sidered. I. The manner in which the scribe performed
his task of transcription, and the classes of error which
his work exhibits. II. The nature and extent of the
corrections made by later hands. III. The condition in
which the text was left by the latest corrector. IV. The
signs used in the papyrus.


I. The hand of the scribe, A.


The first fact to be noted is the number of the instances
which prove that the scribe habitually worked in a mechani-
cal manner, merely transcribing the letters which he seemed
to see before him, without regard for the sense. Such Zrrors
instances are frequent throughout, and fall under two ed
classes: (4) those in which the right reading is replaced by sense.
a word, or words, plainly unsuitable to the context; and
(4) those in which it is replaced by an unmeaning series of
letters. Some of these errors also violate metre. Thus :—

(4) Ill. 78 A wrote evray for εὖντα. V. 23 φοιβωι for

φόβῳ: 106 és for ὅς: 117 ἄγγελον for ’AyéAaov: 170
τονκε for τὸν δέ. VIII. 6 ὅτι for ὅθι: 36 τάλας for πάλας:
41 μάθε for ἦλθεν. IX. 27 Εὐβοιίϊων for εὐβούϊλων. X. 54
ὄμμα for νόημα: 94 κατακαρδίαν for κατ᾽ ᾿Αρκαδίαν: 120
ἐπὶ for ἐπεί. XVI. 119 λᾶα for vada. XVII. 6 ορει for Spr’.
One instance of this class is so characteristic that it
deserves to be signalised. In ΧΙ. 87 (where a maiden is
compared to ‘a joyous fawn’), instead of νεβρός, A wrote
νεκρός.

(6) Ill. 15 epa for ἱερά: 48 ἁβροβαώταν for ἁβροβάταν.
VIIL 12 παρμεμορωι συν for ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αρχεμόρῳ τόν. IX. 14
pavoov for μανῦον: 47 βρισενομεν for βρίσει. τὸ μέν: 10.
ἐσέλων for ἐσθλὸν (or ἐσθλῶν). XII. 127 avtacavup- for
ἀντάσ(ας) dvat-. XIV. 54 δικαληθηαν for Δίκαν ἰθεῖαν.
XVII. 2 αβροβικων ... ἵερωνων for ἁβροβίων ... Idvev.
XVII. 12 evOeve for ἔνθα νιν. XIX. ὃ πασι- for ποσ(ε)ι-
(Ποσειδάν).


Errors
destructive
of metre.


128 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


Next, A made a number of errors which, though they
do not always mar the sense, prove that the scribe was
either ignorant or regardless of metre. Thus: III. 47
πρόσθεν δ᾽ for πρόσθε δ᾽: 48 ἔπεμψε for ἀνέπεμψε (ἀν- lost
after ἀγαθέαν). V. 15 τοὺς for obs: 31 μοι for ἐμοί: 78
προσέειπεν for προσεῖπεν: 121 ὦλεσεν for ὥλεσε: 154
προλιπὼν for προλείπων: 169 θέλων for ἐθέλων. VI. 3
᾿Αλφειοῦ for ᾿Αλφεοῦ (---. VIL 45 πολυξήλωτ᾽ ἄναξ for
πολυζήλωτε (F)avak. Χ. 24 καὶ ἐπὶ ξαθέοις for καὶ ἐν
ξαθέοις: 54 στήθεσιν for στήθεσσι. XII. 62 παύροισι for
παύροις: 110 ὁπότε for ὁππότε. XIV. 56 σύνδικον for
σύνοικον. XVI. 91 βορεους ἐξόπιθεν for βορεὰς ἐξόπιν (or
ἐξόπιθε): 118 θέλωσιν for θέωσιν (-- -). XVII. 40 καρτερὸν
for κρατερόν: 41 ἔχεν for ἔσχεν.

It appears, then, that the scribe was habitually regard-
less both of sense and of metre. The particular forms
of error found in his work may be classed under the
following heads.


1. (i) Case-endings of nouns. 1. 48 ἐπιμοίρων by error
for τον. V. 23 μεγάλαις for -as. VIII. 46 ἔγγονοι for -ων.
XIL 118 πεδίον for -ῳ. XII. 18 ἔρδοντι for -a, XIV. 12
τυχόντας for -es. XVII. 13 ἀλκίμου for -wv.

(ii) Dialectic or poetical forms. 1. 60 νούσων by error
for νόσων. V. 49 φιλοξένῳ for φιλοξείνῳ: 137 κόρα for
κούρα. XVI. 42 ἀμβρότοι᾽ for ἀμβρότου: 80 εὔδενδρον for
ἠὔδενδρον.


2. (i) Moods and tenses of verbs. 1. 65 εὐμαρεῖ by
error for εὐμαρεῖν. Ν. 16 αἰνεῖ for αἰνεῖν: 35 ὑμνεῖ for ὑμνεῖν.
154 προλιπὼν for προλείπων. XVI.112 ἀμφέβαλλον for ἀμφέ-
βαλον. XVII. 28 ἐξέβαλλεν for ἐξέβαλεν. 41 ἔχεν for ἔσχεν.

(ii) Paragogic ν wrongly added: V. 121 ὥλεσεν. XVI.
3 τάμνεν. 109 ιδ'ν (ἴδεν).


3. Errors in spelling?.
(i) εἰ instead of « occurs in Adyeivas (XI. 6): δεινῆντο


1 From the spelling inthe papyrus ι, or ¢ for et, is comparatively rare in
Prof. Blass has drawn an inference it. Such iotacism became extremely
as to its date. The iotacism of εἰ for common in the first century of our era;


THE FIRST HAND. 129


(XVI. 107, δινῆντο A??): ἐκείνησεν (IX. 10): θεῖνα (XII. 149,
in accordance with the view of Aristarchus, who derived
θείς from θείνω) : νειν (Ξε νιν, XVI. 91): Φερένεικος (V. 184,
though Φερένικος in 37): ὠρείνατο (XIL. 112).

(ii) « instead of a occurs in ἐριψιπύχαν (V. 56, made
by a corrector, from ἐρειψ-: though in XII. 167 we find
ἐρειψ-): ἤριπον (= ἤρειπον, X. 68, unless this was an error of
tense): otiyew (XVII. 36). The « of Ποσειδάν is preserved
in XVI. σοί, and 79; but becomes ι in IX. 19, XIII. 20,
XVI. 36, XIX. 8.

(iii) Other errors in single letters.
VUL 16 Οἴλλειδας for ᾿Οἰκλείδας.
XVI. 16 ἀναξιβρέντας.
for χαλκεοκτύπου.

(iv) Non-assimilation of consonants. ν instead of y:
V. 69 ἐνχεσπάλου, VIII. 2 πεισίνβροτον, 33 μελανφύλλου.
-r instead of θ᾽: VIII. 15 ὅτ᾽ ἵππιον.


V. 164 «pn for χρή.
X. 93 ἠλύκταξον for


ἠλύκταζον. XVII. 59 χαλκενκτύπου


4. Omission of letters.

(i) Single letters omitted. (4) The first letter of
a word. Ill. 68, the w of πιαίνεται: V. 22, the π᾿ of πτάσ-
σοντι: IX. 39, the γ of yap: VIII. 25, the y of ye. (0) A
letter in the middle of a word. X. 66, the first ἐ of ᾿Ακρισίῳ:
XVI. 116, the « of δόλιος: XVI. 35, the « of στρατίαν:
XVII. 26, the first o in Κερκυόνος : XVII. 24, one μὶ in Kpeu-
pu@vos: 70.56 one win ἔμμεν: X. 35 the τ of πολύπλαγκτοι:
XVI. 124, the first « of yuious, and the second a of ἀγλαύ-.

(ii) In some places, a syllable, or a small group of
letters, has been omitted. 1. 73f.: the Nes of λείπει. XII.
176 ἀλαμπέσι, written adaemt. XV. 12 ἀκλέα for ἀγακλέα.


but an improvement began towards
the end of that century, and was
carried still further, under the influence
of Herodian, in the second half of the
second century. Hence Prof. Blass,
in the 1st edition of his Bacchylides
(pp. vir f.), was disposed to place
the papyrus in the latter part of the
first century, after the improvement
had begun. Now, however (3rd ed.
pp- vit f., as already in the 2nd),


he is content to refer the papyrus to
ἃ period defore the tendency to greater
lotacism had set in; and so acquiesces
in Dr Kenyon’s approximate date,
viz. the first century B.c. In the
Palacography of Greek Papyrt (p- 77,
note) Dr Kenyon observes that, in
the absence of fuller manuscript
evidence, orthography cannot safely
be accepted as the main guide to the
date of a Ms.


130 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


5. Words wrongly transposed.

IX. 20 ταχεῖαν ὁρμὰν by error for ὁρμὰν ταχεῖαν : XIV. 47
ἦρχεν λόγων for λόγων ἦρχεν : XVI. 100f. ἔμολέν τε... μέγαρον,
for μέγαρόν τε.. μόλεν : 7b. 102f. ἔδεισε Νηρέος ὀλβίου for
ἔδεισ᾽ ὀλβίοιο Νηρέος : XVII. 52 χιτῶνα... στέρνοις τ᾽ for
στέρνοις τε.. χιτῶνα. (Other probable instances occur in
XVI. 62f. and τος ἢ, where see commentary.)


6. Omission of words.

Ill. 63 ye after ὅσοι. V. 129 od γάρ: 183 ἐς after
Depévixos. XIV. 55 ἀκόλουθον. XVII. 39 (perhaps) τε
after és.


7. Errors due to confusion of similar letters.

(i) Instances of an ordinary kind.—A confused with
A or A: El with H: H with M (the Ptolemaic M having
a shallow curve, while the cross-stroke of H is often placed
high, and slightly curved).

XVII. 35 ΣΥΝΟΌΠΛΟΙΣΙΝ for syNomaozin (A for a: then 1 added
after 0).

V. 117 arreaon for argaaon (, dropped after δ: then a
second r added).

VIII. 41 Mace for HA@E (m for H: a for 4),

X. 54 EMBAAEN oma for ἘΜΒΑΔῈΝ Nona (Η Of Nouma changed
to m: then the second n dropped).

XIV. 54 ΔΙΚΑΛΗΘΗ͂ΑΝ for ΔΙΚΑΝΊΘΕΙΑΝ (nr became ΔΗ, and
EI became n).

(ii) Instances of a rarer kind.

IX. 47 BPIsENOMEN for ΒΡΙΣΕΙ To ΜῈΝ. Here rr became Ν.

XIV. 56 synarkon for zynorxon. Here o is replaced by a.
This was possible, owing to the irregular manner in which
the small Ptolemaic o was sometimes formed.

(iii) Instances which appear probable, but are not
certain.

In VIII. 13 azargvonta seems to have come from
aoreyonta (o passed into ca, and τ into τ).

In XII. 95 ΠΑΙΞΕ ΝΟΥ) may have come from marzzinoy: if
so, r became 1.

[In IX. 23 arze may have been a corruption of arte.


THE FIRST HAND. 131


With the Ptolemaic forms of y and z, this is conceivable:
see p. 125.]


8. Omission of verses or parts of verses.

The instances fall into three classes.

(i) Those in which whole verses, omitted by the
scribe, have been supplied by a later hand.

(@) X. 106 τοῦ δ᾽ éxdv’ ἀριστοπάτρα. Added by the
later corrector A? at the top of col. XXII.

(ὁ) XVII. 55, 56,57 στίλβειν... ἀθυρμάτων. Added by
A’ at the top of col. XxxvilI. See Plate I below.

(c) XVII. 16 νέον ἦλθεν δολιχὰν ἀμείψας. This, the
last line in col. XXXVI, has been added by a later hand
(probably distinct from A*), but with the unmetrical ἦλθε
instead of ἦλθεν.

(4) XVIII. 22 χρυσόπεπλος Ἥρα. Added by 449 at
the foot of col. XXXVIII.

(ii) In one instance the first words of a verse were
written by the scribe, and the rest supplied by a later hand.
This is X. 23, κείνῳ ye σὺν ἄματι πρὸς yaia πεσόντα. Only
the words κείνῳ ye were written by A: the rest were added
by the hand mentioned above as supplying XVII. 16.

(iii) Lastly there are instances in which a verse, or
part of a verse omitted by the scribe, has not been
supplied by any later hand.

(a) After v. 84 of XII (καί τις ὑψαυχὴς κόρα) a verse
has been lost. The letters pav, which appear in the papyrus
at the end of v. 84, being separated from «xo[pa by a space
equivalent to some 7 letters, seem to have been the last
letters of the lost verse.

(6) In xvii. 48 only the first two words, ξίφος ἔχειν,
remain; the rest of the verse (ἦν -ἶῷ΄Ἧ] --ωἨἡ is wanting.
Here there may have been a defect, not only in the
archetype of the MS. from which our papyrus was copied,
but also in that of the copy or copies used by the
correctors,

(A verse, the last in col. 19, has been lost after v. 30 of
Ode x.: but this is due to mutilation of the papyrus.)


132 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


9. Incorrect division of verses. See above, pp. 95 f. It
is doubtful how far the scribe is responsible, if he is
responsible at all, for the errors of this kind which occur
in the papyrus. They may have been due to Alexandrian
κωλισταί of an earlier date.

Corrections made by the scribe himself (A’). The
limits of such corrections are very narrow. 1. The most
frequent case is that in which the scribe corrects an error
of his own in the ending of a word. Thus he deletes the
incorrect final « in 11. 14 Πανθείδαι: v. 46 Bopéas: X. I
Nixac(?): 86 μέριμναι. He corrects I. 51 ἀνθρώποις to -ων:
X. 69 παῖδες to -as, 83 κυανοπλόκαμος to τοι: III. 50
ἔβαλλεν to -ov: XVII. 10 σεύοντι to cevovT, 18 λέγειν to
λέγει.

2. He sometimes adds (either in the text or above the
line) a letter which he had omitted: as I. 39 the initial « of
ἰατορίᾳ: XVI. I the « adscript after ὦ in κυανόπρῳρα:
XVII, 8 the o of λῃσταί. Or he deletes a letter which he
had wrongly added, as Vv. 129 the second a in ᾿Αφαρηατα.

3. Here and there he amends some graver mistake:
thus in I. 56 he corrects Eaaken to BAAXEN: III. 12 ΓΈΝΟΣ to
repay: 20. 13 f. MzAan to MEAAM, and ΦΑΡΕῚΝ tO @aPEI: in
V. 134 A@ANATON tO @ANATON.

The scribe’s corrections of his own errors are merely
sporadic and casual. They seem to have been made znter
scribendum, at the moment when he happened to observe a
mistake. On the other hand, the numerous errors of every
kind, many of them gross, which he left uncorrected show
that he did not attempt a systematic revision of his work
by comparing it with the archetype. There are several
cases in which it is doubtful whether a correction is to be
attributed to the scribe or to a later hand. Two of these
are cases of false correction: V. 56 where the correct
ἐρειψιπύλαν was written at first, but the second ε was
afterwards deleted: xX. 20 where παγξένῳ was first written,
and then altered (against metre) to παγξείνῳ. In XVII. 53,
where στέρνοις had been rightly written, it seems to have
been the scribe himself who incorrectly changed it to
στέρνοισι.


THE CORRECTORS. 133


II. The correctors, A’? and A‘.


The hand of the earlier corrector, denoted by A’, seems
to be contemporary with the papyrus, ze. of the first
century B.c. It might even be asked whether this hand
is not that of the scribe himself: but it is probably distinct
from his. A specimen of it may be seen in col. XXXVIII.
(Plate I below), where this hand has written the title of
Ode XVIII in the’ left-hand margin, Ἰὼ ᾿Αθηναίοις. It will
be noticed that the difference between this hand and the
writing in the text is not merely that the former is smaller.
The writing of the text suggests a professional scribe,
whose calligraphy is of a formal and somewhat mechanical
type. The finer hand of the marginal title is more sug-
gestive of a scholar.

The hand of the later corrector, denoted by A’, is a
Roman cursive, probably not earlier than the second
century. It is by this hand that the three verses, στίλβειν
εὐὐὐἀθυρμάτων, have been written at the top of col. XXXVIII
(see Plate I).

The work of A®.—1. He corrected some small errors
of an obvious kind. Thus he sometimes supplied letters
which the scribe had omitted, as in 1. 55 the first « of
ὑγιείας, in 73 the λει Of λείπει, in V. 22 the π᾿ of πτάσσοντι.
He also corrected a few (but very few) of the scribe’s
grosser errors, as by changing εὐμαρεῖ in I. 65 to εὐμαρεῖν :
ἐπὶ in X. 24 to ἐν: νεκρὸς in XII. 87 to νεβρός : πασι- in
XIX. ὃ to ποσι-.

In one instance, on the other hand, he seems to be
responsible for a false correction,—Ilop@aovida in Vv. 70,
where A had correctly written Top@avida. On the whole,
his work as a corrector seems to have been very limited,
and not of much moment. —

2. He added, in the left-hand margin, the ¢ztles of
Odes Il, XVII, and XIX.

The work of A® was far more considerable than that
of his predecessor. Even he, indeed, did not undertake
a thorough or systematic revision. But he left the text, as


134 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


a whole, in a much better condition than that in which he
found it.

1. He corrected a large number of small and evident
errors in spelling (as when one or more letters of a word
had been omitted),—wrong case-endings, such corruptions
as ἐπι for ἐπεί (X. 120), etc.

2. A more distinctive merit was that he restored the
right word or words in a number of places where the
scribe had written nonsense. Thus he restored in VIII. 2
ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αρχεμόρῳ, τόν : 36 πάλας: 41 ἤλθε[ν : IX. 27 εὐβούϊλων:
38 ἐπιστᾶμαι: 47 βρίσει. τὸ μέν : XII. 127 ἀντάσας ἀνατ-:
ΧΙν. 54 Δίκαν ἰθεῖαν: 56 σύνοικον: XV. 12 ἀγακλέα : XVI.
ΟἹ Bopeds: XVII. 2 ἁβροβίων... Ἰώνων.

3. He added some words which had been omitted; as
V. 129 οὐ yap: Χιν. 6 7 after Μενελάῳ : 55 ἀκόλουθον.

4. He also supplied some missing verses (five in all):
see above, I. 8 (i).

5. But he was as ignorant or regardless of metre as
the scribe himself, and made several false corrections, which
metre refutes. Thus in III. 47, τὰ πρόσθε δ᾽ ἐχθρὰ φίλα,
he wished to insert νῦν after ἐχθρά. In ν. 179 he altered
the correct Ὀλύμπιον to Ὀλυμπίων : in XII. 53 ὀπίσσω to
ὀπίσω: and 20.152 ἔρευθε to ἐρεύθετο.

He wished to double the ν in civeyéws (V. 113): to
alter the Doric θατήρων (IX. 23) to θεατήρων : and to insert
p after the first o of ὀβριμοσπόρου (XVIII. 32).

6. The ¢z¢/es of many Odes were added in the left-hand
margin by.A®. To him are probably due the titles of 111
and Iv: and certainly those of VI, VI, VIII, X, ΧΙ, XIII, XIV
(this at the top of the column), XV, XVI, XVII. He neglected,
however, to supply the title of Ode v. With regard to
Odes I, IX, XII, and Χν, the mutilations of the papyrus leave
it uncertain whether the titles were given.—It may be noted
that, in the title of ΧΙ, A® writes Τισίαι instead of the
correct Τεισίαι.

The fact that A*® could supply words and verses omitted
by A proves that he had access to some copy or copies
other than our papyrus. But there is nothing to show that


THE CORRECTORS. 135


he possessed a MS. of which the text was better than that
of the archetype from which our papyrus was copied,


III. The text as left by the latest corrector.


We have now seen the characteristics of the work done
by the original scribe, and also the limits to the subsequent
work of correction. As left by the latest of the ancient
correctors (perhaps in the second century), the Ms. still
contained (1) many mis-spelt words, (2) many errors
destructive of the sense, and (3) many flagrant breaches
of metre. The following are examples:

1. Muts-spelt forms of words. V. 71 ᾿Αλκμήϊος, 146 f.
ἐξαναρίξων : X. 66 ᾿Ακρσίῳ, 93 ἠλύκταξον: XVI. 66 ἀναξι-
βρέντας, 91 νειν (Ξε νιν), 124 γύοις (Ξε γυίοις): XVII. 36
στίχειν: XVII 3 Πειερίδων.

2. Errors destructive of the sense (with or without
violations of metre also). V. 35 ὑμνεῖ (for ὑμνεῖν), 106 és
(for ὅς), 117 ἄγγελον (for ᾿Αγέλαον): IX. 47 ἐσέλων (for
ἐσθλόν or ἐσθλῶν): X. 54 ἔμβαλεν ὄμμα (for éuBarev νόημα),
94 κατακαρδίαν (for κατ᾽ ᾿Αρκαδίαν), 119 f. πρόγοϊνοι
ἑσσάμενοι.

3. Where violations of metre did not evidently mar
the sense, the correctors passed them over. In a few
instances they happened to heal a breach of metre, as (e.g)
by restoring ἐπ᾿ ᾿Αρχεμόρῳ in VIII. 2: βρίσει τὸ μέν in
IX. 47: ἐν (for ἐπί) in X. 24: σύνοικον in XIV. 56: ἀγακλέα
in XV. 12. But, allowing for such exceptions, it may be
said that nearly all the unmetrical readings contained in
the text, as written by the scribe, remained in it after Δὲ
had done his work. Indeed, as we have seen, some new
breaches of metre were introduced, or suggested, by the
correctors,


IV. The signs used in the papyrus.


I. Accents.—The Bacchylides papyrus is the earliest
extant in which accents are used; and there is no other
papyrus in which the use made of them is so large’. That

1 Kenyon, Palaeography of Greek Papyri, p. 28.


136 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


which comes next to the Bacchylides in this respect is
a papyrus which may probably be referred to the latter
part of the first century, the fragment of Alcman in the
Louvre. On the other hand there are no accents in the
Petrie papyri of the third century B.C., nor in the Louvre
Hypereides of the second century B.c. During the period
of Greek literary writing on papyrus (which goes down to
about A.D. 300), accents, when used at all, were intended
as aids to the reader, especially in those poetical texts
which presented difficulties of dialect, vocabulary, or metre.
Accents in Greek papyri of prose-writers' are very rare.

In the Bacchylides papyrus accents are given to a very
large number of words, but by no means to all. The longer
words, and especially compounds, are usually accented.
A preposition is very seldom accented, unless for some
special reason, as when it follows its case (XVII. 51 «patos
viep): and this is true also of articles, pronouns, and
adverbs’. The following points should be noted.

1. In the Bacchylides papyrus an oxytone word never
has the acute accent on the last syllable, but receives the
grave accent on the preceding syllable or syllables: thus πὰντε
(XII. 231), Oanrov (X. 14), Kepadveyyes (VIL. 48), πολὺκρὰτες
(VIII. 15). The theory was that every syllable has an
accent, but that in each word only one syllable can have
the acute accent; if the word is of more than one syllable,
the other syllable or syllables have the grave accent.
According to this theory, the strictly correct mode of
accenting would be (eg.) wavti, πὸλὺκρὰτές. The practice
which ultimately prevailed was to write the acute accent,
and to omit the grave’.


? As in Oxyrhynch. pap. 25 and
231 (Demosthenes), and 229 (Plato).

2 See the photographs facing pp.
144—146.

3 Dr Kenyon (Palaeography of
Greek Papyri, p. 30) notes that traces
of the practice observed in the
Bacchylides occur in the Harris
papyrus of /ézad xviii (Brit. Mus,
Pap. ΟΥ̓, probably of the first
century), and in the Bankes papyrus
of 77. xxiv (Brit. Mus. Pap. cxIv,


prob. of the second century), e.g. éAwy,
φρὲσιν : also in a proparoxytone word,
ἐπὲσσεύοντο. (The latter may be com-
pared with the peculiar case of ἐνὰ-
Aivacéra: in Bacch. xvI. 97, where a
further has the rough breathing.) In
an oxytone word of more than three
syllables, the Bacchylides papyrus
usually has the grave accent only on
the second and third syllables from
the end.


ACCENTS AND BREATHINGS. 137


2. In the case of a perispomenon word (ze. one which
takes the circumflex on the last syllable), the practice of
the papyrus is inconstant. Sometimes such a word is
treated like an oxytone: thus βλῆχρας (X. 65), ὀβριμὸδὲρκει
(XV. 20): on the other hand, we find πεδοιχνεῖν (XV. 9).
Even a properispomenon word can have grave accents on
syllables preceding that which takes the circumflex ; as in
τελεὺὐταθεῖσα (I. 72 = 182 Blass).

3. The papyrus sometimes adds the acute accent on
the last syllable of a word when an enclitic follows, as
ἀεισάν ποτ᾽ (VI. 6).

4. An acute accent falling on a diphthong is always
placed on the first vowel, and not (as in later usage) on the
second: eg. μάινοιτ᾽ (XII. 119), ὀυλίον (XVII. 53), γέυσαντο
(vill. 46). A circumflex on a diphthong is generally so
written as to cover both vowels, instead of being placed
(as now) on the second.

5. Noteworthy accents on particular words.—doiBav
(XII. 139), 24. φοιβάν, instead of φοίβαν: πολεμαίγιδος
(XVI. 7): τριέτει (VIII. 23). I follow the papyrus in the
accentuation of these three words, though with some doubt
as to φοιβάν. Blass follows it in regard to the first two
words ; but writes τριετεῖ (with the Attic accent).

In VIII. 32 ῥιπτῶν should be either ῥίπτων or ῥιπτέων,
to judge by the practice of the papyrus itself (see above,
p. 83).

6. There are some false accents in the papyrus: ἐπεῖ
(III. 23): μολῶν (III. 30; see Appendix): παράπληγει (X. 45);
δινῆντο (XVI. 107). To these Scyounvidos (VIII. 29) must
surely be added; though Blass retains it in his text.
Editors of Pindar are agreed in giving διχόμηνις (O. 111. 19).

Il, Breathings.—The signs + and 4 (the two halves
of the letter H, originally used as an aspirate) sometimes
occur in the Bacchylides papyrus to denote the rough and
the smooth breathing respectively; as they do sometimes
in the British Museum papyrus of the Odyssey (Pap. CCLXXI,
written early in the first century). But the more usual
signs, both in these two papyri and in others, are L- or -,


1. B. Io


138 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


+ or 4. The rounded comma-like breathings are not
found in papyril.

The breathings are not seldom omitted in our papyrus.
But the rough breathing is added to ὁ, ἃ, etc.; ὅς, ὅν, etc.:
οἱ (Ξ αὐτῷ); ὅτε: ὅτι: ὧδε: ὡς: ἅμα: ἵνα. It is omitted in
Vv. 110 θ᾽ οστις, perhaps because θ᾽ implies it, and (without
that reason) in 111. 87 δ᾽ οχρυσος. It is added to ἁμετέρας
in XI. 3; but not in V. 144, V. 90, or XVII. 5. There is no
breathing on the ambiguous ἡ (probably ἡ) in ν. 9. Among
words to which the smooth breathing is added are, 7 in
XV. 6, ἄμμε, ὄρουσε, ὄφρα. The use of breathings, like that
of accents, is sporadic and inconstant.

Iu. Diaeresis.—The marks of diaeresis (two dots) are
usually placed in the papyrus over initial. or v as ἴσχουσι
(V. 24), ὕδωρ (11. 86): and on t sometimes when it is not
initial, as εσΐδοντες (XII. 139). The proper use of these
marks is to show that the vowel above which they stand
does not form a diphthong with the vowel before it: as in
ταὔσιον (V. 81). Owing, however, to the practice with
regard ἴο ι, that distinction is sometimes effaced. Thus in
XVI. 38 νηρηΐδες, the marks of diaeresis serve their proper
purpose, the scansion being -- -- v ©: but in XII. 123 the dots
appear also over the ε of νηρῆϊδος, though (as the accent
shows) the scansion there is -—» (Νηρῇδος).

Iv. Apostrophe.—The apostrophe (’), marking the
place of an elided vowel, is generally added; but it is
sometimes omitted, as in VIII. 47 διευρέιας (δι᾿ εὐρείας).

The apostrophe is not used where crasis occurs, as in
Kage (XVI. 33), κήυτυκτον (XVII. 50).

Vv. Marks on long and short syllables.—1. The
mark -, indicating a long syllable, is placed in the
papyrus: (i) on long a in the case-endings of nouns
and pronouns: in the last syllable of an adverb such as
παντᾶι, and in the ending of 2nd or 3rd pers. sing. of a
verb (as κυβερνᾶι). (ii) On any long vowel where the
grammarians deemed such guidance needful, however


1 Kenyon, Palacography of Greek Papyri, p. 30.


OTHER SIGNS USED IN IT. 139


superfluous it may seem (as eg. in V. 52 ἐπιξήλωι): so
θωρᾶκα, napvé, κῦδος, vaov, carreras, etc.

Yet there is no mark on the last syllable of ἀληθεία
in XII. 204, nor on the first of καλῶς 724. 206, though in
each case the ἃ is specially noteworthy.

2. (i) The mark v, indicating a short syllable is placed
on a in the ending -a of a nominative plural, in order to
distinguish it from the ending az of the dative singular.
Thus: XVI. 6 βορηΐᾶι, 97 f. ἐναλιναιέται, 107 Taide:
XIX. 2 EavOds (but V. 92 EavOas dative).

(ii) The same mark is very often placed on a short a, ¢,
or v, even where no doubt as to the quantity was possible ;
as eg. on the « of ἁλίου and μυρίας: on the v of the
penultimate in ἐσχύϊ, Δαϊπύλου, εὐφροσύναι.

Conversely, this mark is absent in XVI. 92 from the
penultimate syllable of "A@avaiwy, and 20. 129 from the
first of παιάνιξαν, though the ai is exceptional.

VI. Hyphen.—The ὑφέν, ~, is placed in the papyrus
under a compound adjective, at the point of juncture
between its two elements, to show that these form a single
word. This is not confined to cases where a doubt is
possible, such as that of ἀρηϊφίλου (Vv. 166), which could


be read as two words. The mark is applied to com-
pound adjectives generally, as (e.g.) δαμασίππου (11. 23),


evpudvaxrtos (V. 19), λυγύφθογγοι (20. 23), and passim. But


the practice is inconstant: eg, the hyphen is added to
πολύπλαγκτον (X. 35), but not to πολυζήλωτ᾽ (VI. 45):


to ἀναξιμόλπου (VI. 10), but not to ἀναξιβρόντας (XVI. 66).


Among several compounds which do not receive the
hyphen are evpuBia (XV. 31), διωξίπποι᾽ (VIII. 44), θεό-
πομπον (XVI. 132), θεότιμον (X. 12), Πυθιόνικον (16. 13),
τοξόκλυτος (20. 39).

A peculiar instance occurs in XII. 199 (εἰ μή τινα θερσιε-
ays). A mark resembling a very small circle has been
placed after the letters TIN, perhaps to indicate that the
words should be read as tw’ ἀθερσιεπής.

VII. Diastole.—The διαστολή, a comma, occurs once,


Io—2


140 THE BACCHYLIDES PAPYRUS.


viz. in XVI. 102, ἔδεισε, νηρεος (to guard against v being
joined to ἔδεισε).

vill. Punctuation.—The only point used in the Bac-
chylides papyrus is a single dot, placed level with the
tops of the letters, or slightly above them4. This point
serves to mark pauses of various lengths, doing duty
sometimes for a full stop, sometimes for a colon, a semi-
colon, or a comma. There is no distinctive note of
interrogation (such as the later ;). The punctuation is,
on the whole, fairly full and regular; but it is not complete.
A necessary point is sometimes omitted: as (¢g.) in I. 48
(= 158 Bl.) 58, 61, 67: V. 169, 172: XVI. 129. At the end
of an ode a point was not practically required ; and in that
place it is more often omitted. It stands, however, at the
end of Iv, and of x.

The authority of the punctuation in the papyrus cannot
be deemed great. In I. 70 (=180 BI.), for instance, the
point after λάχεν has little weight as an argument against
reading τιμάν rather than τί μάν;

IX. Paragraphus and Coronis.—In lyric texts the
Alexandrian practice was to place (1) the paragraphus, a
Straight line, below the last verse of a strophe or anti-
strophe; and (2) the coronis with paragraphus, ) , below
the last verse of an epode, to mark the end of a system.
The same symbol could stand at the end of an ode; but
the end of an ode composed in systems was more properly
marked by an asterisk, ἘΞ, with or without the addition
of )-——.

The use of these signs in the Bacchylides papyrus will
appear from the following statement ; in which, for brevity,
the word ‘coronis’ denotes ‘coronis with paragraphus.’

I. (1) Excluding places where mutilation leaves it
doubtful whether the sign stood there, there remain 64
places where the paragraphus ought to appear as marking


1 In one place (xiv. 47, after Ζηπέγοα, p. xxi). In viil. 83 a point
δικαίαν) the point is placed on alevel after τυχὸν is so placed, but that
with the bottom of the letters; per- seems to be an error, as there is no
haps by a slip of the pen (Kenyon, _ break in the sense.


PARAGRAPHUS AND CORONIS. 141:


the end of a strophe or of an antistrophe. The paragraphus
(or its equivalent) is written in only 24 of these places,
while it is omitted in 40. (2) Similarly there are 31 places
in which the coronzs ought to appear. It (or its equivalent)
is present in 30 of these, being absent only after v. 26 of
Ode VIII.

That is, the papyrus seldom fails to mark the end of a
system or of an ode. But, far more often than not, it
neglects to mark the end of a strophe or antistrophe.

u. Errors in the use of the signs. (i) Interchange of
paragraphus and coronis.—A coronis stands for a paragraphus
in V. 175: a paragraphus for a coronis, in 1X. 28 and XII. 99
(but not, I think, in 11. 14). (ii) Misplacement of either
sign.—The paragraphus which ought to follow v. 64 of
Ode 111 is wrongly placed after v.63. In Ode I a coronts
is rightly placed after v. 51 (=161 BI.), but incorrectly
repeated after 52. In Ode 1x the coronis is wrongly placed
after 55, but is repeated after 56.

i. Votes on particular points——1. At the end of Odes
VI and VII, but of no other, the asterisk is added to the
coronis. Ode vi is ‘monostrophic’ (written in strophes
without epode), and therefore, according to Hephaestion
Περὶ ποιήματος c. X, should have been followed by a coronis
only}.

2. The following facts will illustrate the curiously
inconstant practice of the papyrus with regard to the
paragraphus.

In Ode 11 the paragraphus follows vv. 8, 50, 60, 63
(instead of 64), 92: but not 18, 22, 32, 46, 78, 88. (Muti-
lated: the places after vv. 4, 36, 74.) In V it follows 30,
and (in the form of coronis) 175: but not 15, 70, 95, 110,
135,150,190. (Mutilated: the place after 55.) In VII it
follows 44 and 87: but not 9, 18, 35. (Mutilated: the
places after 61, 70, 96.) In Χ it occurs nowhere: in XII,
only as a substitute for the coronis after 99. In XV, XVI’,
XVII it is nowhere omitted.


1 Blass, Praef. p. xiv. XVI. 112; but a trace of it remains
2 Kenyon (p. 171) and Blass? (p. there.
143) do not, indeed, indicate it after


AUTOTYPE PLATES. 143


Three autotype plates are subjoined. Plate I gives the
first 29 verses of Col. XXXVIII of the papyrus (a column
which contains 34 verses in all), besides three verses which
have been added at the top. It is a good page for repro-
duction, as showing additions made both by the earlier
corrector (A’) and by the later (4.5). Plates 11 and UI give
a series of eight shorter passages. I have selected these
partly on palaeographical grounds, as illustrating charac-
teristic traits of the papyrus, but chiefly in view of their
interest for the textual criticism.


1 The choice of this column was British Museum. As the plate given


suggested to me by Dr Kenyon, who
has himself reproduced it in Palaco-
graphy of Greek Papyri (p. 76). His
plate and mine were independently
taken from the original papyrus in the


here is slightly wider than his, it in-


cludes IAACAAKEAAIM in its right


margin, and in its left margin a few
letters from the ends of the longer
verses in Col. XXXVII.


144 AUTOTYPE PLATE I.


PLATE I.
Col. xxxvi1.—Ode xvil. 50—60, and xvi. 1—2I.


55 ἽἼ στιλβειναπολαμνιαν
φοινισσανφλογαπαιδαδ᾽ εμεν
πρωθηβον" αρηΐων δ᾽ αθυρματων

το κήυτυκτονκυνεανλακαι
νανκρὰτοσύπερπυρσοχάιτου"
χιτωναπορῴυρεον
στερνοισιτ᾽ αμφικαιόνλιον

Υ θεσσαλανχλαμυδ᾽- omparwvde
μεμνασθαιπολεμουτεκαι
χαλκεοκτυπουμαχασ


60 διζησθαιδεφιλαγλάουσαθανασ
πεῖσις


Z
lw παρεστιμυρϊακελευθοσ


ABHNAIOIC αμβροσΐωνμελεων


“
ὁσανπαραπειερίδωνλά
χηισιδωραμουσᾶν
saree

5 ἰἴοβλέφαρόιτεκαι
φερεστέφανοιχαριτεσ
βάλωσιναμφιτιμαν
πυμνοισιν" πυφαινενυνεν
ταισπολυηράτοιστικαινον


το ολβιϊαισαθαναισ
4
ευάινετεκηϊαμέριμνα"
πρεπεισεφερτατανΐίμεν
οδονπαρακαλλιοπασλα


χοισανεξοχονγερασ"
15. τιηναργοσοθ᾽ ιππιονλιπουσα [ἢ
ta ac
evyex pvc a Bove
φευγεχρ B AAKEAAIM


ευρυσθενεοσφραδαισιφερτάτουδιοσ
Ἱναχουροδοδάκτυλοσκορα :
ὅτ᾽ αργονομμασιβλεποντα

20 παντοθενακαμάτοισ

Ὗ μεγιστοανασσακελευσεν


Notes.—1. The three verses at the top of the column are vv. 55—57 of
Ode xvit, which had been omitted by the scribe, and were added there by the
second corrector, A*, in a hand of the Roman period, perhaps of the second
century.—2. Below v. 60 is seen the coronis with para! phus, )—, marking
the end of Ode xvi1.—3. The title of Ode xvitl, Ἰὼ ᾿Αθηναίοις, in the left-
hand margin, is in a hand (A?) which was probably contemporary with that of
the scribe. So also is the title of xrx, Ἴδας Aaxedaru[ovlos, written in the left-
hand margin of the next column, and partly seen to the right of xvIII. 16.—4.
In xvuiI. 9 the scribe wrote καινόν : but ε has been added (by A%) above 1,
indicating «Aewdv.—s. In v. 15 oremmeoy has been corrected (probably by A)
to ὅθ᾽ ἵππιον.---ό, After v. 21, μεγιστόανασσα etc., the verse χρυσόπεπλος “ Hpa
was omitted by the scribe, but added by A® in the lower margin, which does
not come into the photograph. The marginal sign opposite v. 21 calls attention
to this.


MEH
ἘΠῚ.


COLUMN XXXVIH.—-ODE XVII. 50-60, AND XVIII. 1-21.


PLate It.


1. COL. 1.—ODE |. 32-36


2. COL. IV.—ODE Ill. 71-77.


AUTIOTYPE PLATE I. 145


PLATE II.


1. Col. 1.—Ode 1. 32—36.


apyelo.... 6, λεοντοσ
θυμο..... οποτε

XP... eee βολοῖμαχασ"
ποσσι..... φρο. . ᾳτριων
TOURS 2846 κῶν ὡς adwv


2. Col. 1v.—Ode πὶ. 71—77.


. “κωντεμερο[.... ...
Ἐπ κι μαλέαιποτί.......


. . γοσεφᾶμερονα
eee Ὁ σκοπεισβραχί
. ἡ εσσαδ᾽ ελπισυπί
. ἐριων᾽ οδ᾽ avaé[
ΑΝ: «(λοσειπεφερη


3. Col. x1v.—Ode vit. 12—109.


αθλησαν. παρχεμορωι" τονξανθοδερκησ
πεφν᾽ ασαγέυονταδρακωνυπέροπλοσ
oapapeAd . ντοσφονου"
ὡμοιραπολὺκρὰτεσ᾽ ὄυνιν

πειθ᾽ οἰκλειδασπαλιν
στειχεινεσευάνδρουσαγί
ελπισανθρωπωνυφαιρ

ακαιτοτ᾽ αδραστονταλί


4. Col. xvit.—Ode 1x. 6—-11.


ξ΄. lov-orexpu[,

9...» lopOadpouour[

π΄... ᾳναπράκταν

α.. ᾳ: ικαινυνκασιγνητασακόιτασ
νασιῶτινεκεινησενλιγύφθογγονμελισσαν
εν εἰρεσϊν᾽ αθανατονμουσᾶναγαλμα


Notes.—1. Col. 1.—Ode 1. 32—36. In v. 34 the letter A has been deleted
before X.—2. Col. 1v.—Ode m1. 71—77. Verse 71 was ἰοπλό]κων τε μέρο[ς
ἔχοντα Movoav. (The letters a Μουσᾶν are supplied by two other fragments.)
In v. 72 a corrector has wished to substitute « for π᾿ (kore for ποτε). A separate
fragment supplies the last letters of this v., which were wv, probably preceded
by #.—8. Col. x1v.—Ode vil. 12—19. In v. 12 A®has written X above M,
and. TO above CY. In the transcript the point after αθλησαν means that a letter
(E) is lost. Inv. 16 A* corrected the first ἃ of οἴλλειδασ to κ. Inv. 19 Ae
has written ἁ καὶ above AH.—4. Col. xvi1.—Ode 1x. 6—11. In the ms.
v. 6 began with ξυνόν, as words which ought to have stood before it (παντὶ
χώρῳ!) had been wrongly added to the end of v. 5. See critical notes and
commentary.


146 AUTOTYPE PLATE 271


PLATE III.

5. Col. xvu1.—Ode 1x. 22—28.
θερμ...... πνεωνάελλαν
εστα...... δ᾽ αυτεθεατήρωνελαιωι
φᾶρε........ νεμπίτνωνομιλον
TETP. see νεπει


Kah. ..... μονϊσθμιονικαν
ducv .... . apvéavevBou
AWV cee ee ὠνπροφαται"


6. Col. xxv.—Ode xu. 84 f.


καιτισυφαυχησκο....... . ρᾶν
ποδεσσιταρφέω[


y. Col. xxvi.—Ode x1. 124—129.


wot’ ενκυανανθέϊθ[
trovt|wiBop|éacvroKy
paouvdlatger
vuxtlolravracacavare|
ληξενδεσυνφαεσιμ


αοἵ" στορεσενδετεποί


8. Col. xxx1—QOde xv. 1—8.


{LOU rata evel
5
. αδ᾽ ἐπεμψενεμοιχρυσεαν
J. a
. be... . poy... vpavial
eine ee ἀτωνγέμουσανυμνων
wee / VET. p. πανθεμοεντιεβρωι
Leese. γαλλεταιήδολιχαυχενικυ


. 2.» Oelad . evareprropevor


oe a. δικηιπαιήονων


Notes.—5. Col. xv111.—Ode 1X. 22—28. Inv. 23 the scribe wrote AIZE.
A? has changed I to Y, transfixed #, and written T above it, thus making αὖτε.
The ¢ above θὰ (indicating θεατήρων) is also from A’. At the end of v. 27 the
scribe wrote (ε)υβοι : the I was corrected to f by A’, who also wrote A above
the line at the beginning of v. 28.—6. Col. xxv.—Ode xu. 84f. Inv. 84
the I of KAI was added by a corrector (A??). Above the second A of vpavxas
A’ wrote H. Between v. 84 and the verse beginning with ποδεσσι a verse has
been lost. The letters pay, seen to the right of 84, were probably the last of the
missing verse, remains of which had been tacked on to v. 84.—7. Col. xxvI.—
Ode ΧΙΙ. 124—129. Inv. 127 the scribe wrote ANTACANTM. 48 has added
as above the line after AC, making ἀντάσας : has changed Y into A (ἀνα--) : and
has written TE above M.—8. Col. xxx1.—Ode xv. 1—8. Inv. 1 the letter
before OT was either 1, N, or (though this is less probable) M. Note that the
A of OAKAA’ (the first word of v. 2), comes beneath I, and extends a little to
the right of it. The number of letters which preceded I in verse 1 was probably
not more than three. (If the letter before OT was not I, but N or M, there
would not have been room before it for more than two letters.)—For the rest
of this passage, see critical notes and commentary.


PLATE III


δ. COL. XVIII—ODE ΙΧ. 22-28.


G. COL. XXV.—ODE ΧΙΙ. 84.


7. COL. XXVI.—ODE XII. 124-129.


8. COL. XXXI.—ODE XV. 1-8


THE TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS. 147


VII. THE TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


The following is the text as it stands when the smaller
fragments, which had become detached from the continuous
portions of the papyrus, have been fitted into their places.
Hence this text contains, in many verses, some letters or
words which appear only in the plates of fragments at the
end of the Autotype Facsimile published in 1897, since, at
that time, those fragments were still unplaced’.

The object is to exhibit the text of the papyrus as it
was left by the ancient correctors, before any modern hand
had touched it.


1. A vertical line, | , denotes that the letters or words fol-
lowing it are supplied by a separate fragment. See, ¢.g., vv. 3—5.-


2. A dot on the line denotes a lost letter.
3. A letter which has a dot under it is doubtful.


4. The sign ] denotes that a lacuna precedes, and the sign [
that a lacuna follows.


5. The marks ——-—-, in a verse of which some part remains,
denote the loss of a considerable but uncertain number of letters
(as in 111. 41). When those marks occupy a whole line, they
denote that a verse is lost (as after x. 30).


6. Asterisks, * * * *, denote a loss of several verses.


4. The metrical divisions (strophe, antistrophe, epode) are
shown in the margin. ‘These indications make it easy to verify
the use or omission in the ms. of paragraphus and coronis.


1 The only fragments which do in Egypt by Mr B. P. Grenfell, and
not appear at all in the Facsimile are were received just after the photo-
parts of 111. 8—r1o and of vill. [1x.] graphs had been taken (Kenyon,
82—84, which wereseparatelyacquired . /utrod. p. xvi).


148 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


8. Verses omitted by the scribe, and added by a corrector at
the head or at the foot of a column, are printed in uncial type.
See x. 106; XVII. 16, 55-57; XVIII. 22. That type is used also
in x. 23, where only the first two words were written by the
scribe.


9. The title printed here at the head of an Ode (as Τωι αὐτῶι
at the head of Ode 11) is that which is given in the papyrus. In
the papyrus, however, such a title is written in the left-hand
margin; except in the case of Ode xiv, where it is written at the
head of the column.


ον CTPITATAIMEL
.. EPAIMINQCAP...IC


οὐ YOENAIOAOTIP .. . INOIC[
5. AYCITTIENTHKONT. |CYN
. PHTQNOMIAQL .


στρ. ς΄. -ἸΟΟΘΕΥΚΛΕΙΟΥΔΕΕ


. ΑΤΙΒΑΘΥΖΩΝΟΝΚΟΡΙΑΝ
. ἘΞΙΘΕΑΝΔΑΛΛΑΟΕΝ


. ΑἸδΙΛΙΤΕΝΗΛΛΙΟΥΛΑΙΩΝ
το. NAPACAPHI@IAOYC
ον CINTTOAYKPHMNON|X@ONA


. EIMACATIOTIAEODNO .. IT EC
KNOCCONIMEPTAN...AIN


ἀντ. ς΄. . ACIAEYCEYPOTTAL


15... AEKATQIA’ ΕΥ̓Ξ...]ΟΝ


JEAN OYTATPEC


στρ. ζ΄. Coll TTIOA.....-. NBAOY
30 AEIEAOI.... CMENTENOC
ETTAB «εν ς ΡΟΧΕΙΡ


APFEIO....... AEONTOC


35


ἀντ. ζ΄.

40
ἐπ. C. 45

50
στρ. η΄.

55
ἀντ. η. 60

Col. 2

65

ἐπ. η΄.


70


ODE J.


@YMO...... OTTOTE
ΧΡΕΙ..... BOAOIMAXAC:
ΠΟΟΟΙ..... ®PO...ATPION
TOV Rees ee ΑΛΩΝ
TOCATIAIN[
TO=OCAITIO......... N


ΑΛΛΦΙΤ᾽ ἸΑΤΙΟΓ

=EINQNTE.. AANOPI... ΑἸ"

- YAEAAXON . APITON
TTOAAOICTE®O . . MACOEICBPOTON
ALON’ EAYCEN. ENTETIAI
AACMETLAINH . OYCAITTION:


. ANENAOIK.. NIAAC

YYIZYFOCIC.. 1ONIKON
@HKENANT... PTECIANAITTAPONT AA
AQNCTE@AN .. ETTIMOIPON
ΦΑΛΛΙΚΑΙΦΑΘΩ .. FICTON
ΚΥΔΟΟΘΕΧΕΙΝΑΡΕΤΑΝΊΠΛΟΥ


LO CAEKATABIAOICINANGPAITDINOMIAE|


EOEAEIA’ AYEEIN®PENAC


ee
ANAPOC‘0A’ EYEPAQNOEOYC


EATTIAIKYAPOTEPAI
CAINEIKEAP’EIA’ YTIEIAC
ONATOCEQNEAAXEN
ZOEINT’? ATTOIKEIONEXEI
TIPQNTOICEPIZEITTANTITOI
TEPYICANOPOTTIONBIO!


ETTETAINOCOINTENOY

ἐς NTTENIACT’ AMAXANOY
ICONOT’ A®NEOCI ©
MEIPEIMETAAQN OTEMEIOL
TTAY POTEPXINTOAETTIAN
TONEYMAPEINOYAENTAY KY
ONATOICIN‘AAN’ AIEITAPEY


FONTAAIZHNTAIKIXEIN


ONTINAKOY®#OTATAI
OYMONAONEOYCIMEPIMNAI
OCCONANZOHIXPONONTONA’EAAXEN'TI


149


150 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


MAN‘APETAA’ ETTIMOXOOC
ἜΝ AEYTAQEICAA’ OPONC


seal τῶν AIEYTEOANHIAEI
arpa ZHAQTONEYKAEIACA... MA


Il.
Τωι αὐυτωι
στρ. Ἄρες: CEMNOAOTEIPA®HMAT
ECK..... EPANXAPITQ


NYM.. ®EPOYC’ ATFEAIAN
OTIM.. ACOPACYXEIPAP


5 TEIO.. PATONIKAN


ἀντ. KAAQNA’ ANEMNACENOC’ ENKA... NO
AYXENIICOMOYZAQEAN
AITTONTECEY=ANTIAANA
CONETTEAEIZEAMENEBAOMH
το KONTA.. NCTE®ANOIC. N°


ἐπ. KAAEIAEMOYC’ AYOITENHC
PAY KEIANAYAQ.NKANAXAN
FEPAIPOYC’ ETTINIKIOIC
TTANOEIAAPIAONYION
»»----


III.
Ιερωνι συρακοσιωι ὑπποις. .. . πια
στρ. α΄. ΑΡΙΓΟΙΤΟΚΑΡΤΤΟΥΟΙΚΕΛΙΑΟΚΡΕΟΥΟΑΝ


A. |MATIPAIOCTEPANONTEKOY PAN
YIMNIEIFAYKYAQPEKAEIOIOOACTO
... TIOAPOMOYCIEPONOCITITT. YC:


ἀντ. α΄. ς .... TOTAPCYNYTTIEPOXQITENIKAI
ieee AAIAITETTAPEYPYAINAN ᾿᾿
pie iel EINOMENEOCEOHKAN
pABION saves wep ees ΝΚΥΡΗΟΑΙ:


ἀνοχάς OPOHCEAEAL
το ATPICEYAAIM[


Col. 3 OCTTAPAZHNOCAAXON
TTAEICTAPXONEAAANQ.NI EPAC


στρ. β΄. 15


avr. β΄.


20


25


στρ. γ΄.
30


2 ,
ἄντ. y.


35


στρ. δ΄.


Col. 4 45


ODES I—TI. I51
OIAETTYPPQOENTATIA . YTONMHMEAAM


SAPEIKPYTITEINCKOTOI:


BPYEIMENIEPABOYOYTOICEOPTAIC:
BPYOYCIPIAOZ=ENIACATYIAI:
ΛΑΛΛΊΤΕΙ Δ᾽ YTTIOMAPMAPYTAICOXPYCOC


ΥΨΙΔΑΙΔΑΛΤΩΝΤΡΙΠΟΔΩΝΟΤΑΘΕΝΤΩΝ


ἸΤΑΡΟΙΘΕΝΑΟΥΤΟΘΙΛΛΕΓΙ .. ONAACOC


Φ.. BOYTTAPAKACTAAIA... EQPOIC
A. APOIAIETTOYCIOEONO.. NTIC
ΑΓΛΑΙΖΕΘΩΓΑΡΑΡΙΟΤΟΟ. ABOLN:


ETTEITIOTEKAIAAMACITI . OY
AYAIACAPXATETAN
EYTETANTIETI
ZHNOCTEAE......... CIN
CAPAIECTIEPCA» .0+.000%0 009s ATO


KPOICONOXPYCA[


ΦΥΛΑΞ᾽ ATIOAAQN...... EATTTONAMAP
M.AQN‘TIOAYA....-- OYKEMEAAE
MIMNEINETIA...... NAN-TT.. ANAE
XAA.. TEIXEOCTI...... OENAY[

NAH . AT’ ENOACY...-.. TEKEA[


CY . EYTTAOKAMOI. ETTEBAIN’ AAA
.Y.. TPACIAYPO. ENAIC’XEPACAL
εὐ TTYNAIOEPAC . ETEPACAEIPA[


.... NEN‘YTTEP .. EAAIMON
οὐ YOEQNECTI . XAPIC

εὐ YAEAATOIA .. ANAZ"

gues INAAYA . TAAOMO!
——-———-—- MY PION
So aah peeks Pe ea gs N°


-- -- --ἔ --- - AINAC


TIAKTQAOC!A . IKEALOCTYNAIKEC
E=EYKTIT. NMEFAPQNATONTAI:


152 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


ἀντ. δ΄. TATTPOCOENA.. OPANYN®IAAOANEINFAYKICTON:
TOC’ EITTEKAIAB.. BATANK... YCEN
ATITEIN=YAINONAOMON ‘EL... ONAE


50 TIAPOENOI'PIAACTANAMATPIXEIPAC


ἐπ. δ΄. ΕΒΑΛΛΟΝ᾿ ΟΓΑΡΙΤΡΟΦΑΝΗΟΘΝΑ
TOICINEXOICTOC®ONDN:
AAN’ ETTEIAEINO.. YPOC
AAMTTPONAIAIL...... NOC
55 ZEYCETTICTACA......... ΘΕΟΝΕΦΟΟ
ΘΡΕΝΝΥΕΝΞΆΝΘΆΙ.


στρ. ε΄. ΑἸΤΙΟΤΟΝΟΥΔΕΝΟΤΙΘ ..... PIMNA
TEYXEI‘TOTEAAAOTENH....AAQ.N


PEPONECYTTEPBOPEO...|EPONITA
60 CYNTANIC®Y POICKAT .. |ACCE|/KOYPAIC


ἀντ. ε΄. AIEYCEBEIAN‘OTIME..... INAITON
ECA. AOEANETTEMYETI .. [20°


OCO . MENEAAAA’ EXOYCIINI. YTIL
OM . FAINHTEIEPQ|NOEA|HCE|I


én. 65 ... EN. EOTTAEIONAIXPYCION
- AITTEMYAIBPOTON
. FEINTTAPECTINOC


οὐ HOOONAITTIAINETAI
. AH@IAITTTTONANAPA| . HIO|N


7o .... lOYCKATITP. NAIO.


στρ. 5’. ..../KONTEMEPO[...... JAMOYICAN™
ἜΝ ΛΛΑΛΕΑΙΠΟΤΙ ...... ἼΩΝ
. NOCE®AMEPONAL


-- ACKOTTEICBPAX[


ἀντ. σ΄. 75 «...’ECCAA’ EATIICYTIL
.ΕΡΙΩΝ ὍΔ᾽ ANAE=[
aie seessts ‘AOCEITTE®EPH[

Col. 5 ONATONEYNTAXPHAIAYMOYCAEEEIN


ἐπ. ς΄. ΓΝΩΛΛΑΟΘΟΤΙΤ᾽ ΑΥΡΙΟΝΟΥΕΑΙ
80 MOYNONAAIOY®AOC
XOTITTENTHKONT’ ETEA


στρ. ζ΄.


ἀντ. (΄.


στρ. α΄.


85


go


95


Io


ODES III, IV.


ZQANBAOYTIAOYTONTEAEIC:
L
OCIAAPONEY?PAINEOYMONTOYTOLFAP


ἈΕΒΔΕΟΝΥΠΕΡΤΆΤΟΝ:


ΦΡΟΝΕΟΝΤ. ΟὙΝΕΤΑΓΑΡΥΩ BAOYCMEN
AIOHPAMIANTOC 'YAQPAETIONTOY


OYCATTETA . ‘EYPPOCY NAA’ OXPYCOC:
ANAPIA’ O.. EMICTIOAIONTTI.. ENTA


THPACOAA ... NAYTICATKOMICAI
HBAN‘APETA.... EBNOYMINYOEI


BPOTONAMAC... TIPELFOC:AAAA
MOYCANINTP.... IEPQNCYA’ OABOY


KAAAICT’ ETTEA... AOONATOIC
ΑΝΘΕΑΊΤΡΑΞΑ... A’ EY


OYMEPEIKOCM....2
TIA‘CYNA’ ΑΛΑΘ..... KAAQ.N


KAIMEAIFAQ.CCOYTICYMNHCEIXAPIN


AUER Oca


IV.
Tw. αντωι πυθια


ΕΤΙΟΥΡΑΚΟΟΙΑΝΦΙΛΕΙ


TIOAINOXPYCOKO . ACATTOAAQN
ACTYOEMING’ IE.. NATEPAIPEI:


TPITONFAPTI..... AONYYIAEIPOYXOONOC
TTY .IONIK.....5. ΤΑΙ

Ge MOM cs panies CYNITITION:

a Sees "ACAAEKTOP

See Se TINOQI

Se eS ee ee YMNOYC

es || - |ICOP

SS Se i|ACTAAAN[
AEINOMENEOCK’ ETEPA.. MENYION
TTAPECTIANAIXIAAOICI .... ACMYXOIC


MOYNONETTIXOONIO. . ΤΑΔΕ
MHCAMENONCTE@ANOICEPETITEIN


II


153


154


στρ. α΄.


> ,
avT.a.


>
eT.


Col. 7


20


Io


15


20


25


30


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


AYOT’ OAYMTTIONIKAC
AEIAEIN'TI®. PTEPONH. EOI. IN
PIAGNEONTATIANTO .. TION


AATXANEINATTOMOIPA... OADQLN*
Nalabids :


V.


EYMOIPE.YPAK...N
ITTTTOAINHTQNCTPATA. E°


-NOCHIMEN . OCTE®AN .N
MOICANTAYK . ADPONAFAAMATONIENYN
AITICETTIXOONION

OPONC’PPENAA’ EYOYAIK.N
ATPEM’ AMTTAYCACMEPIMNAN
AEYP’ AOPHCONNOQ. ]
HCYNXAPITECCIBAOYZQNOICY®ANAC
YMNONATIOZAOEAC
NACOYEENOCYMETEPANTIEM
TIEIKAEENNANECTIOAIN ᾿᾿
XPYCAMTTYKOCOYPANIAC
KAE|INOCOEPATION-EOEAEIAE
rTAPYNEKCTHOEQNXEQN


AINEINIEPOQNA‘BAOYN

A’ AIOEPAZOYOAICITAMNOIN
YYOYTTTEPYTECCITAXE|
AICAIETOCEYPYANAKTOCATTEAOC


ZHNOCEPIC@APATOY
OAPCEIKPATEPAITTICYNOC
ICXYITTTACCONTIA’ OPNI
ΧΕΟΛΙΓΥΦΘΟΓΓΟΙΦΟΙΒΩΙ"


OYNINKOPY®AIMELAAACICXOYCITAIAC
. YA’ AAOCAKAMATAC ‘
AYCTIAITTIAAAKYMATA‘NOMA

TAIA’? ENATPYTOIXAEI
AETITOTPIXACY NZE®Y POYTINO
ΑΙΟΙΝΕΘΕΙΡΑΝΑΡΙΓΝΩ
TOCMETANOPOTIOICIAEIN:


TOCNYNKAIMOIMY PIATTANTAIKEAEYOOC
YMETEPANAPETAN
YMNEIKYANOTTAOKAMOY®O’ EKATINIKAC
XAAKEOCTEPNOYT’ APHOC


35


40


στρ. β΄.


45


50


55


65


70


ODES τν, ¥ 155


AEINOMENEYCATEPOXOI
TIAIAEC EYEPAQNAEMHKAMOIOEOC:
=ANOOTPIXAMEN®EPENIKON


AAPEONTTAPEYPYAINAN
TIQNAONAEAAOAPOMAN
ELAEN IKACANTAXPYCOTTAXYCANC


TTYOO.NIT? ENATAOEAI:

TAIL’ ETMICKHTITONTIIPAYCKO
OYTTQOQNINYTTOTTPOTE..N
ITTTTONENATONIKATEXPANENKONIC
TTPOCTEAOCOPNYMENON-:
PITTAIFAPICOCBOPEA


ONKY BEPNHTAN®YAACCON
IETAINEOKPOTON
NIKANIEPONI@IAOZENQITITYCKON:


OABIOCOITINIGEOC
MOIPANTEKAAQNETIOPEN
CYNT? ETTIZHAQITYXAt
AdNEIONBIOTANAIATEIN ‘OY
TA... ETTIXOONION


ΤΠ... ΑΓ’ EYAAIMONESY:


τὶ OT’ EPIWITTYAAN
easiness ATONAETOYCIN


chy Duka’ APTIKEPAY
NOYAQDMATAPEPCE®ONACTANICSY POY
KAPXAPOAONTAKYN’ A

=ONT’ ECbAOCE=AIAA

YIONATTAATOP EXIANAC:
ἘΝΘΑΔΥΟΤΑΝΩΝΒΡΟΤΩΝ
ὙΥΧΑΟΕΔΑΗΙΤΑΡΑΚΩΚΥΤΟΥΡΕΕΘΡΟΙΟ


OIATE®YAN’ ANEMOCG
IAACANAMHAOBOTOYC

TIPO. NACAPFHCTACAONE!:
TAICINAEMETETIPETTENEIAQ
AONOPACYMEMNONOCELr
XECTTAAOYTIOPOAONIAA’


TONA’ NCIAENAAKMHIOCOAYMACTOCHPOC
.. YXECIAAMTTOMENON

NEY PANETTEBACEAITYKAATTFHKOPONAC:
XAAKEOKPANONAETIEIT’ ΕΞ


11.


156


75


80


85


go


Col. 9


> ,
ἄντ. γ΄.


95


100


105


110


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


EIAETOIONANATITY
ΞΑΟΦΑΡΕΤΡΑΟΤΤΩΛΛΑ ΤΩΙ Δ᾽ ENANTIA
ὙΥΧΑΤΤΙΡ. PANHMEAEATPOY:

KAININEY EIAQCTTPOCEEITIEN:
YIEAIOCMEFAAOY

claeir ENXOPAITEAAND.CACTEOYMON


MHTAYCIONTTPOIE!
TPAXYNEKXEIPONOICTON
YYXAICINETTIPOIMENDN:


OYTOIAEOCOCHATO:OAMBHCENA’ ANAZ
AMP ITPYONIAAAC:

EITTENTE TICAOANATON
HBPOTONTOIOYTONEPNOC
OPEYENENTIOIAIXOONI:

TICA’? EKTANEN‘HTAXAKAAAIZQONOCHPA
KEINONE®AMETEPAI

TTEMYEIKE®AAAI TAAETTIOY
TTAAAAAIZANOAIMEAEI
TONAETTPOCEPAMEAEAT POC
AAKPYOEIC°XAAETION
OEQNTTIAPATPEVAINOON


ANAPECCINETTIXOONIOIC:
KAITAPANTTAAZITTITOCOINEYC
TIAY CENKAAY KOCTE®ANOY


CEMNACXOAONAPTEMIAOCAEY KO. AENOY
AICCOMENOCTTOAEQN

T AIF QNOYCIAICITTATHP
KAIBOON®POINIKONOTOAN:


WS
AAAANIKATONOEA
ECXENXOAON’EYPYBIANA’ ECCEYEKOYPA
KATTPONANAIAOMAXAN*


OCKAAAIXOPONKAAYAQ.

Ν᾽ ENOATTAHMYPONCOENE!
OPXOY CETTEKEIPENOAONTI
CbAZETEMHABPOTON

Θ᾽ OCTICEICANTANMOAOI:


TOIAECTYTEPANAHPINEAAANQ.NAPICTOL
CTACAMEO’ ENAYKENC
EZAMATACYNNEXENC:ETTEIAEAAIMO.N
KAPTOCAITQAOICOPEZEN


στρ. δ΄.


Col. 10


ἀντ, δ΄.


ἐπ. δ΄.


15


120


125


130


135


140


145


150


155


ODE V. 157


OATITOMENTOYCKATETTIE®NE
CYCEPIBPYXACETTAICCONBIAI


A..AIONEMONT’ ATTEAON


® ... ΑΤΟΝΚΕΔΝΩΝΑΔΕΛΦΕΩΝ
..+.+ KENENMETAPOIC
daskseuers CAAOAIATTEPIKAEITOICINOINEOC:


ears AECEMOIP’ OAOA


ΠῚ ΟΟΥΓΑΡΙΤΩΔΑΙΦΡΩΝ
plea τ' XOAONATPOTEPA


AATOYCOYFATHP‘TTEPIA’ AIOQNOCAOPAC
MAPNAMEO’ ENAYKEQC
KOYPHCIMENETITOAEMOIC:

ENO’ EF QTIOAAOICCYNAAAOIC
IbIKAONKATEKTANON


EC@AONT’ APAPHTAQOOYCMATPOAC'OYTAP


KAPTEPO@YMOCAPHC
KPINEI@IAONENTIOAEMQI-
TY@AAA’ EKXEIPONBEAH


YYXAICETT . AYCMENEON®OI


TAIOANATONTE®EPE!
TOICINANAAIMQNOEAHI:


TAYT’? OYKETTIAEZAMENA
OECTIOYKOPAAAI®POAN
MATHPKAKOTIOTMOCEMOI
BOYAEYCENOAE@QPONATAPBAKTOCTYNA’
KAIETEAAIAAAEAC
EKAAPNAKOCQKYMOPON
®ITPONETKAAYCACA‘TONAH

MOIP” ETTEKAQCENTOTE
ZQACOPONAMETEPACEMMEN ‘TYXONMEN
AAITTYAOYKAYMENON

ΤΙΑΙ Δ᾽ AAKIMONE=ANAPI
ΖΩΝΑΛΛΩΛΛΗΤΟΝΔΕΛΛΑΟ

TTY PFONTIPOTTAPOIOEKIXHCAC’
TOIAETTPOCEYKTIMENAN
bEYTONAPXAIANTIOAIN


TTAEY PONA‘MINY NOAAEMOIYYXATAYKEIA*
ΓΝΩΝΔ᾽ OAITOCOENEQN:
AIALTTYMATONAETINEQNAAKPYCATAL
ATAAANHBANTTIPOAITTON:
PACINAAEICIBOAN


158
Col. 11


160


στρ. ε΄.


170


175


> ,
αντ.ε.


180


185


195


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


AM®ITPYONOCTIAIAAMOY NONAHTOTE
TEF=AIBAE®APONTAAATTENOEOC
TIOTMONOIKTEIPONTAPNTOC:
KAININAMEIBOMENOC

TOA’ EPA ‘ONATOICIMH®YNAIPEPICTON
—<—— ΞΟ: :


MHT’ AEAIOYTTPOCIAEIN
ΦΕΓΓΟΟ᾽ΑΛΛΟΥΓΑΡΤΙΟΕΟΤΙΝ
TTPAZ=ICTAAEMY POMENOIC:
XPHKEINOAETEINOTIKAIMEAAEITEAEIN’
HPATICENMETAPOIC

OINHOCAPHI®PIAOY


ECTINAAMHTAOYTATPON
COIPYANAAIFKIA’
TANKENAITTAPANOEAQ.NOEIMANAKOITIN-
TONAEMENETITOAEMOY
YYXATTPOCEPAMEAEA
TPOYAITTONXAQ.PAYXENA
ENAQMACIAAIANEIPAN

NHINETIXPYCEAC
ΦΥΠΡΙΑΘΟΘΕΛΞΙΜΙΒΕΌΤΟΧ;


ΛΕΥΚΩΛΕΝΕΚΑΛΛΙΟΙ͂ΤΑ
ΟΤΑΟΟΝΕΥΠΟΙΗΤΟΝΑΆΑΡΛΛΑ

AYTOY ‘AIATEKPONIAAN
YMNHCONOAYMTTIQNAPXATONOEQN:
TONT’ AKAMANTOPOAN


AAbEONTIEAOTIOCTEBIAN

ΚΑΙΠΙΟΑΝ ἜΝΘ᾽ OKAEENNOC

οὖν ΘΟΙΝΙΚΑΘΑΟΔΡΟΛΛΩΙ

τον ENDEPENEIKOCEYTYPFOYCCYPAKOYC
ΘΑΟΙΕΡΩΝΙΦΕΡΩΝ

... ΑΛΟΝΙΑΟΘΠΕΤΑΛΟΝ:


... A’ AAHOEIACXAPIN
AINEINPOONONAMO[
XEPCINATTOCAMENON
EITICEYTTPACCOIBPOTQO[


BOINTOCANHPTAAE®ON[
HCIOAOCTTPOTTOAOC
MOYCANONAOANATOITIL
KAIBPOTOQN®HMANETIL


TIEIOOMAIEYMAPEQC


στρ. α΄.


στρ. β΄.


Col.


ODES V—VT/.


EYKAEAKEAEYOOYFAQCCANO[L
TTEMTTEINIEPONI‘TOOENTAL
TTYOME NECOAAAOYCINECOAL


TOYCOMEFICTOTIATOP
200, ZEYCAKINHTOYCENEIPHN[


ΝΙ.


Λαχωνι κειωι σταδιει ολυμῖ


ΛΑΧΩΝΔΙΟΟΛΛΕΓΙΟΤΟΥ
ΛΑΧΕΦΕΡΤΑΤΟΝΠΟΔΕΟΟΙ
KYAOCETTAAPEIOYTTPOXOAICL
AIOCCATTAPOIOEN

5 AMTTEAOTPOPONKEON


AEICANTTIOT’ OAYMTTIAI
TTY=TEKAICTAAIONKPATEY[
CTE®ANOICEOEIPAC


NEANIAIBPYONTEC:
10 CEAENYNANA=IMOATIOY
ς-.


OYPANIACYMNOCEKATINIK[
APICTOMENEION
OXQTTOAANEMONTEKOC
CEPAIPEITTPOAOMOICAO!


15 AAICOTICTAAIONKPATHCAC
KEONEYKAEI=AC
4


VII.


Tw. avTa.


OAITTIAPAOY TATEPXPONOYTEK[
NYKTOCCETTENTHKONTAM[
EKKAIAEKATANENOAYMTI[


18. ....AP- I
5». ITOCAIIM
KPINEIN|TA|.....- AAIYHPONTIOAION
/AAACIKIAITY|. ... PICTAAKECCOENIOC:


OIAECYTIPEC|BY| .++» NNEIMHICTEP|AC
NIKACE|TTANIOP .. OICINEYAOZOCK|EKAH


10 TAIKAITIJOAY|ZH ...OC’AP|...


159


160 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


»++’ EKO|CMH]...... PAN|. 0... eee NA


* * * *
Col.14. = TITYOQNATEMHAOOYTAN
40 YMNEQNNEMEANTEKAIICO. ON:
FAIAETTICKHTTTONXEPA
KOMTTACOMAI'‘CY NAAA
(5) OEIAIAETTANAAMTTEIXPEO.:
OYTICANOPOTIONK[
45 NACENAAIKIXPONQO[
TIAICEQNANHPTETIL
NACEAE=ZATONIKAC:


(10) QZEYK.PAYNEPXECKA[.... .. JIPOAINAL
OXOAICINAA®EIOYTEAECC[.....- JAAOKAEAIC
50 OEOAOTO. Ci|EYXAC TIEPIK[....... ITAL. . JIC


FAAY KONAITOAIAOL
ANAHM’ EAAIAC
(15) ENTIEAOTTOC4PYTIOY
KAEINOICAEOAOIC:
ae


VILL. [1Χ.]


Αὐτομηδει φλιασιωι πενταθλωι νεμεα


στρ. α΄. ΔΟΞΑΝΩΧΡΥΟΑΛΑΚΑΤΟΙΧΑΡΙ. EC
ΤΤΕΙΟΙΛΛΒΡΟΤΟΝΔΟΙΗΤΕΤΙΤΕΙ
ΛΛΑΟΥΟΑΝΤΕΙΟΒΛΕΦΑΡΩΝΘΕΙΟΟΤΡΟΦ.. AC
ΕΥ̓ΤΥΚΟΟΦΛΕΙΟΥΝΤΑΤΕΚΑΙΝΕΛΛΕΑΙΟΥ
5 ZHNOCEYOAAECTTEAON ᾿


YMNEIN-‘OTIMHAOAAIKTAN


OPEYENAAEYKQAE..C


HPATIEPI.... TONAEQAQN
TIPQTON... ΚΛΕΙΒΑΡΥΦΘΟΓΓ. NAEONTA:


ἀντ. α΄. το KE...... ΝΙΚΑΟΤΤΙΔΕΟΘΗΛΛΙΘΕΟΙ
wn"
TIP πρῶτο ΝΑΡΓΕΙΩΝΚΡΙΤΟΙ


ΑΘΛΗΟΑΝ. TTAPXEMOP2I-TONZEANOOAEPKHC


15


2 ͵
επ.α.


Col. 15 20


25


στρ. β΄.


30


35


ἀντ. β΄.


40


1 At'the end of v. 20 Blass places fragment 35 (Kenyon, p. 210) IIPOREN


ODES VII, VIII [IX},


TTE®N’ ACATEYONTAAPAKONYTIEPOTTIAOC
CAMAMEAA . NTOC®ONOY:
O.MOIPATTOAYKPATEC: OYNIN

TTEIO” OIKAEIAACTTAAIN
CTEIXEINECEYANAPOYSATT


EATTICANOPOTIONY PAIPL


AKAITOT? AAPACTONTAAL

TTEMTTE NECOHBACTIOAYNEIKEITTAAL ?
KEINQNATTEYAOZQNATONON
ENNEMEAIKAEINO.. POTON


OITPIETEICTESANQI


=ANOANEPEYONTAIKOMAN
AYTOMHAEINYNITENIKA
CANTININAAIMQNE . OKEN:


TTENTAEOAOICINTAPENETTPETTIENODC
ACTPO.NAIAKPINEI®AH


NYKTOCAIXOMHNIAO .. YPETTHCCEAANA:


TOIOCEAAANONAIA ... PONAKYKAON
PAIN. OAYM. CTONAE. AC
AICKONTPOXOEIAEAPITITON


KAIMEAAM®Y AAOY KAAAON
AKTEACECAITTEINANTTPOTTEMTTIOQN
AIOEP’ EKXEIPOCBOAND.TPYNEAAQN


HTE.. ee ene


TOIN...... YMQIC.

ΓΥΙΆ τ snes ss MATA ates amas
IKE T cs es NTTAPATTOP®Y POAINAL
TOYK..... ACANXOONA

HAOE..... ETTECXATANEIAOY*


TAITETIE .. ΑΕΙΠΟΡΩΙ
OIKEYCIOEPMQAON .... ΓΧΕΩΝ


ICTOPECKOPAIAIQE=ZITITI... PHOC


CONDTIOAYZHADNT ANAZTIOTAMON


161


EFTONOITEYCANTOKAIYY . TYAOYTPOIACEAOC:


CTEIXEIAIEYPEIACKEAE . ΘΟΥ
MYPIATTANTAI®ATIC
CACTENEACAITTAPO


162 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.
το ZONONOYFATPON: ACO.. |
CYNTYXAICQKICCANAPXA
ΓΟΥΟΑΤΤΟΡΘΗΤΩΝΑΓΎΙΑΝ᾽
)
στρ. γ. ΤΙΟΓΑΡΟΥΚΟΙ... KYANOTTAOKAMOY
@HBACEYAM........ N
Col. 16 55 — — — — MONAITINIAN: ΛΛΕΓΓ-- ΠΟῪ
— — — — EXEITEKE|NHPO
τ᾿ ΔΕΘΩ͂Ι -- -- ΟΥ}
— ACBACA| -- — AION
-- - -΄κἡἋἂὶ -- --
ὅο: TS -ςι --
ΑΞ πε φυθοὗς YTT . ΤΛΟΝΙ
dvr. γ'. ΗΙ -- — — ANEAIKOCTESAT
ΚΙ — — — CAIT’ AAAAIOEQN[
Cl — — AMIHCANAPIFNOT . |ICITT. AAIL
65 — — — AOIAITIOTAMOYKE|. AAO|NTOC:
— — — ANTIOAIN
— — — CITENIKAL
— — — AQNBOAIL
“τ -- TGR BEL
70 --- — — — ΙΝ:
a INEOC[
οὐ YCEA|-@ENTAIOTTAOKONIEYEITIEIN[
ον ΑΤΙ — NAM. TONEPOTION
=a ee ΝΆΝΒΡΟΤΟΙ
5 -- -- ΛΕΩΝ
-- - —OTAN
— — — NYMNON:
στρ. δ΄. — — — ΚΑΙΑΙΤΟΦΘΙΛΕΝΙΩΙ
80 — — — PYTONXPONOIN
— — — INOMENOICAIEI|TIIAYCKOI
ere |MEANI|KAN: TO... TOIKAAO|NEPTON
TNHCIO|NYMINQNTYXON.
YYOYTTAIPAAAIIMOCIKEITAI:
85 CYNA’ Aj. AQEIAIIBPOTON
KAAAIC\TONEI[
Avs METAIMOY Ce cavnysecpeeeces PMA:
ἀντ. δ΄. EICIA’ ANIOP[


ODES VIII [IX], 1X [X} 163


Col.17 — TIOAAAT “All. KPIN . ||AEOEQN

90. OYAA[— —IMENONNY{KTOC[

— — — — TEKIAITONAPEIOL
eee ΙΠΟΥ:


9" -- -- -- -- -- AYPOIC
.AP| — — — TOMEAAON:


ἐπ. δ΄. .. MIA — -- — AQKEXAPIN
-AIALON| — — OEOTIMATO. ΠΌΛΙΝ
. AIEINATTO| — — EYNTAC
100. PYCEOCKATITP[

. ΤΙΚΑΛΟΝΦΕΙ

ΑἸΝΕΟΙΤΙΛΛΟΞΙ

ΠΑΙΔΙΟΥΝΚΩΙΓ

. OITETTENT[


bo


omp.a. ὀ «ΟἸΛΑΌΥΓΙΡΑΙ -- — OIXNEIC
ΟΛΑΊΚΑΙΠΤΑ — —
ier ἐν EAAMIT — —


5 ow NONTAIAK = 01
Lat
. IOPOAAMOIICINE
οὐ ANATTPAKTAN[


A. » ASIKAINYNKACIFNHTACAKOITAC
Io NACI? TINEKEINHCENAITY®OOrFTONMEAICCAN


SF


ἐπ:


ἂν αἱ . EIPECIN’ ΑΘΑΝΑΤΟΝΛΛΟΥΟΑΝΑΓΑΛΛΛΑ
=YNONANOPATIOICINEIHI
XAPMATEANAPETAN
MANYONETTIXOONIOICIN
15 OCCANIKACEKATIAN@ECIN=AN


Θ].. ANAAHCAMENOCKE®AAAN
K|YAOCEY PEIAICAOANAIC
O|HKACOINEIAAICTEAOZAN
E|NTTIOCIAANOCTTEPIKAEITOICAEOAOIC

Col. 18 20 ........... ACEAAACINTIOAQNTAXEIANOPMAN


164 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


es. | whet POICINETTICTAAIOY
OEPM...... TINEQNAEAAAN
ΕΟΤΑ..-.... NA’ ΑὙΤΕΘΕΑΤΗΡΩΝΕΛΑΙΩΙ
PAPE....... NEMITTITNOQNOMIAON
25 TETP ss seas: NETTE!
KAM...... MONICOMIONIKAN
ΔΙΟΝ ames, APY=ANEYBOY
RON wc νον ONTIPOPATAI-
στριβ. ΔΙΟΔ'Ε...... ΑΙΚΡΟΝΙΔΑΖΗΝΟΟΠΆΡΑΓΝΟΝ
jo BOMO...... NATEQHBA
AEKT...... YPYXOPON
T ΑΡΓΟ ..... NTEKATAICAN:
ΟΙΤΕΤΤ...... ANNEMONTAI‘AM@IT’ ΕΥ̓ΒΟΙ
ANTIO..... N-O1OIEPAN
35 NAO baw AN-MATEYE!
Δ' AKA sen ANKEAEYOON
AN Tliaxecot ONAPIFNOTOIOAOZACTEY=ETAI:


MYPIAIA’ ANAPONETTICTAMAITTEAONTAI::


ἀντ. '. HTAPC . POCHXAPITONTIMANAEAOPXNC

40 EATTIAIXPYCEAITEOAAEN:
HTINAOEYTTPOTTIAN
EIAQCETEPOCAETITTAICI
TIOIKIAONTOZONTITAINE! O14’ ETTEPTOI
CINTEKAIAM®IBOQNA. EAAIC

45 OYMONAY=OYCIN 'TOMEAAON
Δ᾽ AKPITOYCTIKTEITEAEYTAC
TTAITYXABPICEI'TOMENKAAAICTONECEAQN
ANAPATTIOAAQNYTIANOPOTTONTIOAYZHAQTON!

EIMEN:


ἐπ. β'. ΟΙΔΑΚΑΙΤΛΟΥΤΟΥΛΛΕΓΑΛΑΝΔΥΝΑΟΙΝ:
so AKAIT. NAXPEIONTI... |
XPHCTON ‘TIMAKPANT . Ω. CANIOYCACEAAYNQ)!
E. TOCOAOY TIEPATAIONATOICINIKAC
ρὸν PONEY®POCYNA
001.19  AYAQN[
55 MITT
) )
XPHTIN[
—_e—-
1 So A wrote: for A*’s obscure correction, see crit. n., p. 320.


στρ. α΄.


ODES IX [X], X [ΧΠ].


X. [XI1.]
Αλεξιδαμωι μεταποντινων Tad. παλαιστηι πυθια
NIKATL?
COITIATL
YYVIZYL
ENTIOA : «ss¢25+s 050s TOI
ZHNIL


Io


ἀντ. α΄. 15


20


25


30


35


KPINE....A.CAQANATOI
CINTE.... NATOICAPETAC:


EAAAOL.... TAOKAMOY

KOYPA...... OOAIKOY ‘CEOENA EKATI
KAINY .... ATONTIONEY

ΓΥΙΩΝ ..... ΟΥ̓ΟΙΝΕΩΝ


KQMOI|TEKAI| . ΥὙΦΡΟΟΥΝΑΙΘΕΟΤΙΛΛΟΝΑΟΤΥ.


YMNE|YCIAETT|YOIONIKON
TIAIAA|OAHT . INPAICKOY:


IAEQI!. |INOA|.. OTENHCYI
OCBAOY|ZON|... AATOYC

AEKT. |BAE | hy I-TOAEEC

Δ᾽ AM®PAAEE ...« MONANOEQIN
ENTTEAIQNICTE®ANOI!
KIPPACETTECONKPATEPAC
HPATTANNIKOITTAAAC-

OYK.. AENINAEAIOC

KE... OID Ecynamatimpocralaimeconta’
PACOAEKAIENZAOEOIC
APNOYTTEAOTIOCAATIEAOIC
AA®EONTIAPAKAAAIPOANAIKACKEAEYOON
EIMHTICATTETPATTENOPOAC
TTATEEINQIXAITANEAAIAI


TAAY KAICTE®PANQ.CAMENON
TIOPTITPO®O........... PANO’ IKECOAI-


TTAIA’ ENXOONIKAAAIXOPO I
TTOIKIAAICTEXNAICTTEAACCEN:
. AN HOEOCAITIOCH

. NOMAITTOAYTIAATKOIBPOTOIN


. MEPCANYTIEPTATONEKXEIPO.NIFEPAC:
.YNA’ APTEMICAPPOTEPA

. PYCAAAKATOCAI . APAN

.. /PATOZOKAYTOCNIKANEAQ KE:


1 As to the doubtful [, see crit. n. on p. 320.


165


166


στρ. β΄.


Col. 21


ἀντ. β΄.


40


45


50


55


60


65


70


75


8ο


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


.. ΠΟΤ᾽ ABANTIAAAC
- AMONKATENACCETIOAYA
ες CTONEYTTETIAOITEKOYPAI:


TACE=EPATM.NE®OBHCE


TIATKPATHCH PAMEAAOPQN
TITPOITOYTTAPATIAHII@PENAC
KAPTEPAIZEY=AC’ ANATLKAI.
TTAPOENIAITAPETI ,
YYXAIKIONECTEMENOC
TIOP4Y POZO NOIOOEAC:
PACKONAETIOAYC®ETEPON
TIAOYTQITTPOPEPEINTIATEPAZANOACTIAPEAPOY
CEMNOYAIOCEYPYBIAI:
TAICINAEXOAQCAMENA

CTHOECINTTAAINT POTTONEMBAAENOMMA:


SEYTONA’ OPOCECTANI®YAAON
CMEPAAAEAN®ONANIEICAI


TIPYNOIONACTYAITTOYCAI
KAIOEOAMATOYCATYIAC-
HAHTAPETOCAEKATON
OEOPIAECAITTIONTECAPFOC
NAIONAAEICIBOAI

XAAKACTTIAECHMIQEOI
CYNTTOAYZHANIBACIAEI-
NEIKOCTAPAMAIMAKETON
BAHXPACANETTAATOKACIT NHTOICATTAPXAC
TIPOITOITEKAIAKPCIOL:
AAOYCTEAIXOCTACIAIC

HPITTONAMET POAIKOICMAXAICTEAYIPAIC:
AICCONTOAETTAIAACABANTOC

FANTTOAY KPIOONAAXONTAC


TIPYNOATONOTTAOTEPON
KTIZEINTTPINECAPFAAEANTTECEINANAT KAN:
ZEYCT’ EOQEAENKPONIAAC
TIMOX.NAANAOYTENEAN

ΚΑΙΔΙΩΞ /TITOIOAYTKEOC
TIAYCAICTYTEPQNAXEQ.N:

TEIXOCAEKY KAQDTTECKAMON
EAOONTECYTTEP?IAAOIKAEINAITI... El


KAAAICTONIN’ ANTIQEOI
NAIONKAYTONITITTOBOTON


APFOCHPNECTIEPIKAEITOIAITIONT[L
ENOENATTECCYMENAI
TIPOITOYKYANOTTAOKAMOI


στρ. γ΄.


2 ,
avT. y.


Col, 22


ἐπ. γ΄.


85


go


95


106


100


105


10


IIS


120


125


ODE X [X/}. 167


PEYTONAAMATOIOYFATPEC:
_——<$<


TONA’ EIAENAXOCKPAAIAN‘=El
NATENINTTAAZSENMEPIMNA:
AOIAZEAEACTANONAM
bAKECENCTEPNOICITIA=AI-
AAAANINAIXMO®OPO!

MY OOICITEMEIAIXIOIC
KAIBIAIXEIPONKATEXON:
TPICKAIA . KAMENTEA|EOYC


MHNAC . . [TAAACKIONHAYKTA=!ONYAAN
EYTONTE|KATAKAPAIAN
MHAOTPO|PON: AAA’OTEAH
AOYCONTIO|TIKAAAI POANTIATHPIKANEN
ENOENXPOAINIYAMENOC#O! ἡ
NIKOK...2..., OAATOYC


KIKAH.........55 BOQOTTIN
*ToyA’ EKAY’ ἀριοτοττὰτρὰ
XEIPACANTEINOQ.NTTPOCAYFAC

ITTTIOQ.KEOCAEAIOY
TEKNAAYCTANOIOAYCCAC
ΤΑΡΦΡΟΝΟΟΕΞΑΓΑΓΕΙΝ:
OYCOAETOIEIKOCIBOYC
AZYTAC®OINIKOTPIXAC -


*@HPOCKOTTOCEY XOMENOY: TIIQOYCAA’ HPAN


TTAYCENKAAY KOCTE®ANOYC

KOY PACMANIANAQEQN
rAIA’AYTIKAOITEMENOCBOMONTETEYXON
XPAINONTEMINAIMATIMHAQN
KAIXOPOYCICTANIY NAIKON:


ENOENKAIAPHI®IAOIC
ANAPECCINITITIOTPOPONTIOAINAXAIOIC
ECTIEO: CYNAETYXAI
NAIEICMETATIONTIOND?.
XPYCEAAECTIOINAAAQN:
AACOCTETOIIMEPOEN
KACANTIAPEYYAPONTIPOFO
NOIECCAMENOITIPIAMOD ETTEIXPONQI
BOYAAICIOEQNMAKAPON
TTEPCANTIOAINEYKTIMENAN
XAAKOOQPAKONMETATPEIAAN-: AIKAIAC
OCTICEXEIPPENACEY
PHCEICYNATIANTIXPONQI


MY PIACAAKACAXAION’
}——


1 Kenyon now thinks that the apparent & is only an abraded Z.


168 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


xT [XIL]


Τισιαι αἰγινητην παλαιστηι νεμεα


στρ. ὩΟΕΙΚΥΒΕΡΝΗΤΑΟΟΟΦΟΟΥΛΛΝΟΑΝΑΟ

Cc’ EYOYNEKAEIOI
NYN®PENACAMETE PAC
EIAHTTOTEKAITTAPOC: ECFAPOABIAN

5 =EINOICIMETTOTNIANIKA
NACONAITEINACATTAPXEI
EAOONTAKOCMHCAIOEOQAMATONTIOAIN:
TANT’ ENNEMEAITYAAKEAMOY NOTTAAAL


Flere there has been a loss of at least one column, and probably of
more than one.


ΧΙ]. [2ST
στρ. α΄. τ δὰ ὡ *
Col. 23 πε eae
Be ΠῚ
(ie es = eB
ee AAN
στρ. β΄. A lacuna of thirty-one verses.


Col. 24 YBPIOCYYINOOY
45 TIAYCEIAIKACONATOICIKPAIND.N


ἀντ. β΄. ΟΙΑΝΤΙΝΑΔΥΟΛΟΦΟΝΩ
MHCTAIAEONTI
(15) TIEPCEIAACE®IHCI
XEIPATTANTOIAICITEXNAIC:
go... AAMACIMBPOTOCAIONN


.»» KOCATTAATOYOEAEI


... INAIACOMATOC: E
(οὐ .....ὄ OHA’ OTTICA

.. 2. NON: HTTOTEOAMI
ee TIEPICTE®ANOICI

eae ATIOYTTIONONEA

Sanat NIAPQENT’ ECECOAI:


ἐπὶ Be (25) avec eee ABQMONAPICTAPXOYAIOC


ODES XI (XII), XII (XIII), 169


60 ....ICINA.|OEA
nae ANAOZANTIOAYSANTONENAI
.-+. TPE@EITIAYPOICIBPOTON

(30) . IEIKAIOTANOANATOIO
KYANEONNE®OCKAAYYHIAEITIETAI


65 AOANATONKAEOCEYEP
XOENT . CACPAAEICYNAICAI:
—


στρ. γ΄. ΤΩΝΚΑ ... ΥΤΥΧΩΝΝΕΛΛΕΑΙ


(35) ΛΑΛΛΑΤΩΝΟΟΥΙΕ
ΠΑΝΘΑΛΕΩΝΟΤΕΦΑΝΟΙΟΙΝ


γο ......XAITAN.. |E®OEIC
seers TIOAINY|WIATYIAN
το δὴ PYIM.. OTON
30) «ττὐὐνανς A....OON


KQ....TATP..N


75 NACO.YTTEPBI..ICXYN
TTIAMMAXIANANA®AINO.N:


OQTTOTAMOYOYFATEP
(45) AINANTOCAITIN’ HTTIOPPON
Col. 25 avr. γ΄. HTOIMETAAANL


80 EAQKETIMAN[
ENTIANTECCIN[


TTY PCONACEAAL
(so) bAINON:-TOFECOL...--.-- ]NEI
841. KAITICYPAYXHCKOL...--- JPAN
TIOAECCITAPGENC[
HYTENEBPOCATIEN[


(55) ANOEMOENTACETI[
KOY@ACY NATXIAOL
go ΘΡΩΟΚΟΥΟ᾽ AFAKAEITAL....-- jIc-
ἐπ. γ΄. ΤΑΙΔΕΟΤΕΦΑΝΩΟΑΛΛΕ ... .««ὐνννεν JEQN
ANOEQNAONAKOCT’ Εἰ


(60) PIANAOYPCIN
TTAPOENOIMEATIOYCIT ....-- τον ca


95 Δ. CTTOINATTAIZEL
Mas AAIAATEPOAOL
ATO.....- ANETI[

(65) KA. TEAA... AL
AIAKOIMIX|OEIC ENE[


1. B. 12.


170


στρ. δ΄. 100


(70)


105


(75)


Ilo


ἄντ. δ΄.


(80)


Col. 26
116


(85)


120


(90)
ἐπ. δ΄.
125


(95)


130


στρ. ε΄. (100)


135


(105)


140


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


TOANYIEAC|AEPCIMAXL
TAXYNT AX|IAAEA
EYEIAEOCT’| EPIBOIAC
TIAIA’ YTTEPOIYMONBOA[
AIANTACAK|EC@OPONH[


OCT’ ETTITIPYMINAICTAOL
ECXENOPACY|KAPAION[
MAINONTAN[
OECTIECIOITYL
EKTOPAXAAL  6ᾷἸΝ’
OTIOTETI,

TPA. EIAN[ JANIN
ὨΡΕΙΝΑΤΙ

Τ᾽ ΕΛΥΘΕΝΑΙ
OITTPINMENT ἽΝ
.. ἸΟΥΘΑΗΤΟΝΑΟΤῪ
OYAEITION: ΑΤΥΖΟΛΛΕΝΟΙΓ


TT. ACCONOZEIANMAXAL


EYT’ ΕΝΠΕΔΙΩΙ ΚΛΟΝΕΩΙΓ
ΛΛΑΙΝΟΙΤ᾽ AXIAAEYC
ΛΑΟΦΟΝΟΝΔΟΡΥΟΕΙΩΝ


AAN ΟΤΕΔΗΠΟΛΕΛΛΟΙΓ
ΛΗΞΕΝΙΟΟΤΕΦΑΝΟΙ
ΝΗΡΗΙΔΟΟΑΤΡΟΛΛΗΤΟΙ


ACT ΕΝΚΥΑΝΑΝΘΕΙΘΙ
TIONT|O1BOP|EACYTIOKY
MACI|NAJAIZEI
NYKT|O|CANTACACANATIL


AHEENAECYN@AECIM[
AOI: CTOPECENAETETIOL
OYPIAINOTOYAEKOATIL
ICTIONAPTIAAEQCAL
EATITONE=’ . ONTOXE[
QCTPNECETT.. KAYONT
XMATANAXIAAEA
ae . ENKAICIHICIN
«ἘΚ. NEANOACTYNAIKOC
τς CHIAOCIMEPOTFYIOY
@EOICINANTEINANXEPAC
bOIBANECIAONTECYTIAI
XEIMQNOCAITAAN:


ODE XII [Χ777]. 171


TTACCYAIACAEAITTIONTEC
TEIXEAAAOMEAONTOC

(110) . CTEAIONKPATEPAN
AI=ANY . MINAN®EPONTEC:


ἀντ. ε΄. 145 OLPCANT . POBONAANAOIC:
OQTPYNEA’ APHC
- YETXHCAYKIONTE
(115) . O=IACANAZATIOAAQN:
ΙΞΟΝΤ᾽ Ε. 1OEINAOAAACCAC-


Col.27 ὀ ἀΑΥΟΙΙΔ’ EYTIPYMANOICTIAPIA
151 ΛΛΑΡΝΙΑΝΤ᾽ “ΕΝΑΡΙΖ... {ΩΝ
οὖν ΕΥΘΘΕΤΟΦΩΤΩΝ
(120) .... TITAIAMEAAL
ee EACYTIOXEI[
ee Er’ HMIOEOICT
ἜΡΟΝ IC. OEQNA’|—=OPMAN:
a ery O|NEC: HMIET|AAAICINEATTICIN
(125) .-.. |ONTECYTIEP/$] .. AON
160 — — — ΟΙΠΠΕΥΤΑΙΚΥΑΝΩΠΙΔΑΟΕΚ
= so oe NEAC
— — — TIINACT’ EN
eee ΙΡ . ICEZEINO|... MATONTTOAIN:


. JEAAONAPATIPOT]..- NAI
165 .|ANTAPOINI=EI|..- AMANAPL


orp. ς΄.  .|NACKONTECYTI... KIAAIC
| EPEIY[|../ —


(135) | TOANEIKAIL
| HBAOYEYAL
170


Lt
ae
|
|


(140)


175 OYFAPAAA.. E. INY[?
TIACIPANHCAPETL
KPY@OEIC’ AMAYPOL


ἀντ. ς΄. (45) AAAEMTTEAONAKE
BPYOYCAAO=AI
180 CTPOPATAIKATATANL
ΚΑΙΠΟΛΥΠΛΑΓΚΤΟΝΘΙ
ΚΑΙΛΛΑΝΦΕΡΕΚΎΔΕΑΝΙ
(150) AIAKOYTIMAI-CYNEY


1 See crit. n., p. 350.
12—2


172


Col. 28
186


(155)


ἐπ. ς΄. 190


(160)


195


(165)
στρ. C.


200


(170)


205


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


KAEIAIAESIAOCTESL
TIOAINKYBEPNA|I
EYNOMIATECAO$P|ON


᾿ΑΘΑΛΙΑΟΤΕΛΕΛΟΓΧ.ΙΝ


ACTEAT’ EYCEBENIN
ANAPONENEL. HNIAI®YAACC.. |I-
NIKANT? EPIK.... |MEATTIET’ Q|NEOI
. YOEAMEAETA ... ΒΡΟΤΩ

@. AEAMENANAP.. |Y-
TANETTAAPEIOYTEPO... OAMAAH
TIMACENAXPYCAPMATOC
CEMNAMEFAOYMOCAOANA-


MY PIO.NT’ HAHMITPAICINANEPON
ECTE®ANOCENEOEIPAC


ENTTIANEAAANQ.NAEOAIOIC:
Naan


- IMHTINA@GEPCI ὁ TTH|C


. OONOCBIATAI
AINEITQ.COPONA|NAPA

. YNAIKAI BPOTIANAEMQ.MOC
TIANTECCIMENE|CTINETTEPY OIL
. Δ᾽ AAAOEIAPIAEL
NIKANOTETIANA|. ΛΛΑΤΩΓ
ΧΡΟΝΟΟΤΟΚΑΛΩΟ ;


. PPMENONAIENAL


(175) » Y. MENE . NAEMAL


A lacuna of ten verses.


Col.29 avr. ζ΄. EATIIAIOYMONIAI|N[


221


ἐπ. ζ΄. (190)


225


ΤΑΙΚΑΙΕΓΩΤΤΙΟΥΝΙΟΙ
POINIKOKPAAEMNO|IO[
NY ae


YMNONTINATANIAENL
ΦΑΙΝΩΞΕΝΙΑΝΙΤΕΙ |
TAAONTEPAIPQ:
TANEMOIAAMTIOIN[
BAHXPANETTAOPHI|CAIC|TL


(195) TANEIK? ETYMQCA|PAKAIEIOL


230


TIANOAAHCEMAIC|ENEC|TAEL
TEPYIETIEICNIN|.. IAA|I
TIAN TIKAPY=|ONTIAAL


στρ. α΄.


᾿
επ.α.


Κλεοπτολεμί. .] θεσσαλωι ἱπποις πετραι[.]


5


10


15


20


40


ODES XII (XIII), XIII (XIV).


Mill [XIV.]


EYMENEIMAPOJAITTAPAAAIL
OPOTTOICAPICTION:

- YM®OPAA’ ECO|AONAMAAAY
iene APYTA .- (|OCMOAOYCA:


..+-ONKAL...|YYIPANHTEL


ἐν ATOPONOJEICA: TIMAN
εὐ AOCAAAOIA|NEXEI:


εν AIA’? ANAPOINAPE ... |MIAA’ Εἰ
.. NTTPOKEITAI
- TAPXEIPOCKYBEPNIA
εν KAIAICIPPENECCI|N:
εὐ NBAPYTTENOECIN|APMO
- AXAICPOPMITTOCO|MGA
- TYKAATTEICXOPOI:


.» NOAAIAICKANAXA
‘ OKTYTTIOC: ΑΛΛΕΦΕΚΑΟΤΩΙ


eee NAPO.NEPFMATIKAA
AICTOC . YEPAONTAAEKAIOEOCOL


KAEOTTTOAEMMIAEXAPIN
NYNXPHTTOCIAANOCTETIETPL
OYTEMENOCKEAAAHCAI

TTY PPIXOYT’ EYAOEONITITION[


--
ΟΟΦΙΛΟΞΕΙΝΟΥΤΕΚΑΙΟΡΘΟΔΙ


A lacuna of.sixteen verses.


— — YOAEAGECCAL
— — ENTYAAOIC:
— — NTEAHCKL


-- - EA»: ADN
The rest of the ode is lost.


173


174


> ,
avT.a.


στρ. β'.


Col. 31 ἐπ. β΄.


στρ. γ΄.


>? #
ἀντ. γ΄.


10


23


40


45


50


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


XIV. [XV.]
Ἰτηνοριδαι


ΠῚ ATALTHO US
— — — ANTIOEOY
— — QTTICAOANACTTPOCTIOAOC


--, -, - ἸΤΑΛΛΑΔΟΟΟΡΟΙΛΛΑΧΟΥῪ


-- — — PYCEAC
— — — ΝΑΡΓΕΙΩΝΟΔΥΟΟΘΕΙ


— — — AQIT’ ATPEIAAIBACIAEI!
— — — ZONOCOEAND
— — — ON


— — — NTTPOCHNETIEN:
— — — YKTIMENAN


— — — — AQNTYXONTEC
— — — — CYNOEOIC


A lacuna of eight verses.
SS Se | KTIOCKEAP |

A lacuna of thirteen verses.
ATON‘TIATHPA’ EYBOYAOCHP2.C
TTIANTACAMAINENTTPIAMQIBACIAE!
TIAIAECCITEMYOONAXAION:


ENOAKAPYKECAIEY
PEIANTTIOAINOPNYMENOI
ΤΡΩΩΝΑΟΛΛΙΖΟΝΦΑΛΑΓΓΑΟ


ye
AE=ICTPATONEICATOPAN:


TTANTAIAEAIEAPAMENAYAAEICAOr0C
@EOICA’ ANICKONTECXEPACA@ANATOIC
EYXONTOTIAYCACOAIAYAN
MOYCA‘TICTTPOTOCAPXENAOPONAIKAION.
TITAEICOENIAACMENEAAOCTAPY IOEAZIETTE!
ΦΘΕΓΞΑΤ᾽ EYTTETIAOICIKOINQCACXAPICCI|N:
ὩΤΡΩΕΟΑΡΗΙΦΙΛΟΙ:

ΖΕΥΟΥΨ........ C. TIAN . AAEPKETAI
OYKAITIOCONATOICMEFAAQ.NAXEON


AAAEN..... KEITAIKIXEIN


στρ.


Col. 32


55


60


10


15


20


ODES XIV [XV], XV [XV]. 175


TTACINANOPOTTOICAIKANIOEIANATNAC
EY NOMIACAKOAOYOONKAITTINY TACOEMITOC


OABIONTT..A.. NINAIPEYNTAICY NOIKON


AANAIOAO! . KEPAECCIKAIA®POCY NAIC
E=AICIOICOAAAOYC’ AGAMBHC


YBPICATIAOYT . . AYNAMINTEOODC


AAAOTPIONQTIACENAYTIC
Δ᾽ ΕΟΒΑΘΥΝΙΤΕΛΛΙΕΙΦΘΟΡΟΝ:


.ἸΝΑΚΑΙΥΠΕΡΦΙΑΛΟΥΟ
. ΤΑΙΔΑΟΩΛΕΟΘΕΝΓΙΓΑΝΤΑΟ


[XVI]


ον AX’ ETTEMYENEMOIXPYCEAN
sen ROE kone PONOC . YPANIAL
ere ATO.NTEMOYCANYMNON
suse: NEITAPETTANOEMOENTIEBPQI


ees FAAAETAIHAOAIXAYXENI KY[
boowee AEIAN® . ENATEPTTOMENOC


ὌΝ AIKHITIAIHONQN


ANQEATTEAOIXNEI|N

TTYOI’ ATTOAAON
TOCCAXOPOIAEA®ON
CONKEAAAHCANTTAPA|FAKAEANAON


TTPINFEKAEOMENAITIEI|N
OIXAAIANTTY PIAATITOM|ENAN
AM®ITPYQNIAAANOPACYM|. ΔΕΑΦΩ
O- IKETOA’ AM@IKYMON’ AKTIAN:
EN@’ ATTOAAIAOCEY PYNE@EIK|HNAIOL


ZHNIOY ENBAPYAXEACENNEATIAY POYC
AYOT’ OPCIAAQIAAMACIXOONIMEL
AEKOPAIT OBPIMOAEPKEIAZYIAL


ΠΑΡΘΕΝΩΙΑΘΑΝΑΙ
ΥΥΙΚΕΡΑΝΒΟΥΝ:


176


στρ. α΄.


Col. 33


25


30


35


10


15


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


TOT’ AMAXOCAAIMON
AAIANEIPAITTOAYAAKPY NY OAL


MHTINETIIPPON’ ETTEI

TTYOET’ ATTEAIANTAAATTENOEAL
IOAANOTIAEYKXAENON
AIOCYIOCATAPBOMAXAC


~_Y


AAOXONAITTAPO .. IOTIAOMONTIE! . . |OI-


AAYCMOPOCATAA ... N’ OIONEMHCAT
bOONOCEYPYBIA.. INATTOAECEN
ANO®EONTEKAIAY|MMATON
YCTEPONEPXOMIENQN:

OT’ ΕΠΙΠΟΤΑΛΛΩ.. |[POA|OENTIAYKOPMAIL


AE=ATONECCOY|TTA|PAAAIMONIONTEP[
'------


XVI. [XVIL.]
Ἰίθεοι
Ἰθησευς


KYANOTTPQIPAM . |NINAYCMENEKTY[
OHCEAAICETIT . [Τ᾿ |ATAAOYCALOYCA
KOYPOYCIAONDL. J
KPHTIKONTA|MNIENTTEAATOC:


THAAYTEIFAP .. |PAPE]
BOPHIAITTITNO. |A|YPAI
KAYTACEKATITI . |AE|MAITIAOCAOANL


KNICENTEMINQK|EAP
IMEPAMTI . KOCOEAT
KYTTPIAOC .. NAAQ. |A:
XEIPAA’ OY .... TIAP@ . |NIKAC
ATEPOEPA. YEN: OITE|N
AEAEYKANTIAPHI|AQN:
BOA.. [Τ᾿ EP|IBOIAXAAKO
ONPA..... NAIONOC

ΕΚΓ. NON'IAENAEO|HCEYC:


MEAANA’ ΥΠΟΦΡΥΩΙΝ


2 ,
avT. a.


Col. 34


25


30


35


40


45


50


55


ODES XV [XVI], XVI [XVII].


AINA . ENOMMAKA|PAIANTEOI
CXETAIONAMY =ENIAALOC-
EIPENTE‘AIOCYIE®EP|TATOY


OCIONOYKETITEAN
ECO KYBEPNAIC®PEN|ON


- |ICXEMETAAOY XO|NHPOCBIAN


OTIM|. NEKOEQNMOIPA|TTIATKPATHC
AMMIKATENEYCEKAIAI|KACPETTEITA
AAN|TONTTETTPOMEN . |N


AICAN|. KTTAHCOMENOT . IN


EAOH(|.. AEBAPEIANKATE
XEM. |TINEIKAICEKEANA
TEKEN|AEXEIAIOCYTIOKPOTA|PONIAAC


MITEIC|APOINIKOCEPA


TONY|MOCKOPABPOT]IN
ΦΕΡΤΙ.. ON'AAAAKAME
ΠῚΤΘΙ . OCOYTATHPA®NEOY


TTAAO|EICATIONTIQITEKEN
TTOCIAJANI-XPYCEON


TEOIAJOCANIOTIAOKOI
KAAYM|MANHPHIAEC:
TACETTIOAEMAPXEKNOICCION
KEAOMIAITTOAYCTONON
EPYKE|NYBPIN:OYFAPANOEAOI
MW’ AMBPOTOI EPANNONAOL
IAEIN®AOCETTEITIN’ HIOE[
CYAAMACEIACAEKON
TATTPOCOEXEIPONBIAN


- ZOMEN‘TAA’ ETTIONTAAA ... |NKPIN|EI:


aed TTENAPETAIXMOCHPQY. ]


- PONAENAYBATAI
-T..YTTEPAPANON


OA. ΟΟΟ᾽ΑΛΙΟΥΤΕΓΑΛΛΒΡΩΙΧΟΛΩΙΓ
ΥΦΑΙΝΕΤΕΙ͂Τ. ΤΑΙΝΙΑΝ

MHTIN: ΕἸΤΕΝΤΕΛΛΕΓΑΛΟΟΘΙ
ZEYTIATEPAKOYCON’ EITTEPM..... ΙΑ
ΦΟΙΝΙΟΟΑΛΕΥΚΩΛΕΝΟΟΟΟΙΤΕΚΙ
ΝΥΝΤΤΡΟΙΤΕΛΛΙΤ᾽ ΑἸΤΟΥΡΑΝΟΥΘΙ
ΠΥΡΙΕΘΕΙΡΑΝΑΟΤΡΑΙ͂ΤΑΝ

CAM ΑΡΙΓΝΩΤΟΝΈΙ


177


στρ. β΄.


Col. 35


60


65


70


75


80


85


95


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


AEKAICETPOIZHNIACEIC...|ONI
&YTEYCENAIOPATIOCE!
AANITONAEXPYCEON

XEIPOCAFAAON
AIKQNOPACEICOMATIATPOC . |CAOMOYC
ENEFKEKOCMONBAOEIACA|AOC:
EICEAIA’ AIK’ EMACKAYHI
KPONIOCEYXAC


ANAZIBPENTACOTIANTO......| 2. N°
-_—
KAYEA’ AMETITONEYXANMELACOENH. ]
ZEYC‘YTIEPOXONTEMINOQIOYTEYCE
TIMAN®IAQIOEAQN
TTAIAITTANAEPKEAOEMEN °


ACTPAY EO’ ‘OAEOYMAPMENON
IAQNTEPACXEIPACTTETACCE

KAY TANECAIOEPAMENETITOAEMOCHPQLC
EIPENTE:OQHCEYTAAE
MENBAETTEICCA®HAIOC

AQO.PA‘CYA’ OPNY’ ECBA

PYBPOMONTT . ΛΑΓΟΟΙΚΡΟΝΙ


AETOITIATHPANA=TEAEI
TIOCEIAANYTIEPTATON
KAEOCXOONAKATEYAENAPON:
OCEITIE:TOIA’ OYTIAAIN

OY MOCANEKAMTITET’ AAAEY


TIAKTO.NETIIKPION


CTA@QEICOPOYCE:TIONTIONTENIN
AEZ=ATOQEAHMONAACOC:
TAbENAEAIOCYIOCENAOOEN


KEAP:KEAEYCETEKATOY
PONICXEINEYAAIAAAON


NAA‘MOIPA - ETEPANTTOPCYN’ OAON


IETOA’ QKYTTOMTTONAOPY ‘COE!
NEINBOPEACE=OTIIOENTINEOYC’ AHTA:
TPECCANA’ AOANAIO.N
HIOEQNFENOCETIE!
HPO.COOPENTTONTONAE:’KA
ΤΑΛΕΙΡΙΩΝΤ᾽ OMMATO.NAAKPY
XEONBAPEIANETTIAETMENOIANAT KAN:


EPONAEAEA$INECENAAI
NAIETAIMEFANOONC


ἐπ. β'.
Col. 36


100


105


IIo


115


120


125


130


ODE XVI [XVIZ}. 179


ΘΗ. EATTATPOCITITTI
OYAOMON'EMOAENTEOEQ.N
ME .. PON: TOOIKAYTACIAQ.N
EAEICE,NHPEOCOA
BIOYKOPAC-ATTOFAPAFAA
QNAAMTTIETYIQNCEAAC
OQITETTY POC “AMP IXAITAIC


AEXPYCEOTTAOKOI
AINHNTOTAINIAL-XOPQIAETEP
TTONKEAPYTPOICINENTTOCIN:
EIAENTETTAT POCAAOXON@IAAN
CEMNANBOOTTINEPATOI
CINAM@ITPITANAOMOIC:


ANINAM@EBAAAENAIONATIOPOYPEAN:


KOMAICIT’ ETTEOHKENOYAAIC
AMEM@EATTIAOKON:


TONTIOTEOIENFAMO!

AQ KEAOAIOCASPOAITAPOAOICEPEMNON:
ATTIICTONOTIAAIMONEC
OEAQCINOYAEN®PENOAPAICBPOTOIC:
NAATTAPAAETITOTIPYMNON@ANH ΦΕῪ


OIAICINEN®PONTICIKNOCION
ECXACENCTPATAFETANETIEI


MOW AAIANTOCEZAAOC
OAYMATIANTECCI“AAM

TIEA’ AM@ITYOICOEQNANP’ AFAO
@PONOITEKOYPAICY NEY
ΘΥΛΛΙΑΙΝΕΟΚΤΙΤΩΙ

ὩΛΟΛΥΞΑΝῈ
ΚΛΑΓΕΝΔΕΠΟΝΤΟΟΘΉΙΘΕΟΙΔ᾽ ΕΓΓΎΘΕΝ
ΝΕΟΙΠΑΙΑΝΙΞΑΝΕΡΑΤΑΙΟΠΙ
ΔΑΛΙΕΧΟΡΟΙΟΙΚΗΙΩΝ

ΦΡΕΝΑΙΑΝΘΕΙΟ


OTTAZEQEOTIOMTTONECOAQ.NTYXAN
»»-----


180 TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


XVII. [XVIII.]


Θησευς


στρ. α΄. ΒΑΟΙΛΕΥΤΑΝΙΕΡΑΝΑΘΑΝΑΝ

ΤΩΝΑΒΡΟΒΙΩΝΑΝΑΞΙΩΝΩΝ
ΤΙΟΝΕΟΝΕΚΛΑΓΕΧΑΛΚΟΚΩΔΩΝ
ΟΑΛΙΤΙΓΞΤΙΤΟΛΕΛΛΗΙΑΝΑΟΙΔΑΝ:

5 HTICAMETEPACXOONOC
AYCMENHCOPI’ ἈΛΛΦΙΒΑΛΛΕΙ
CTPATATETACANHP-:
HAHCTAIKAKOMAXANOI
TTOIMEND.NA’ EKATIMHAQN

10 CEYONT’ AFEAACBIAI
HTITOIKPAAIANAMYCCEI-
ΦΘΕΓΓΟΥΔΟΚΕΩΓΑΡΕΙΤΙΝΙΒΡΟΤΩΝ
ΑΛΚΙΛΛΩΝΕΤΤΙΚΟΥΡΙΑΝ


wet


KAITINEMMENAINEQON ζ΄
15 ὩΠΑΝΔΙΟΝΟΟΥΙΕΚΑΙΚΡΕΟΥΟΑΟῚ
στρ. β΄. εὐ ΟΝνηλθελολιχὰνδλλειψὰο


Col. 37 KAPY =TIOCINICOMIANKEAEYOON:
A®ATAA’ EPTAAETEIKPATAIOY
ΦΩΤΟΟ ΤΟΝΥΠΕΡΒΙΟΝΤ᾽ ETTE®NEN


290 CININOCICXYI@EPTATOC
ΘΝΑΤΩΝΗΝΚΡΟΝΙΔΑΛΥΤΑΙΟΥ
ΟΕΙΟΙΧΘΟΝΟΟΤΕΚΟΟ:


ΟΥὙΝΤ᾽ ANAPOKTONONENNATIAIC
ΚΡΕΛΛΑΥΩΝΟΟΘΑΤΑΟΘΑΛΟΝΤΕ

25 ΟΚΙΡΩΝΑΚΑΤΕΚΤΑΝΕΝ:
ΤΑΝΤΕΚΕΡΚΥΟΝΟΟΤΤΑΛΑΙΟΤΡΑΝ
ECXEN: TIOAYTTIHMONOCTEKAPTEPAN
C&Y PANEZEBAAAENTTIPOKO
TTTACAPEIONOCTYX2.N

30 POTOC: TAYTAAEAOIX OTTAITEAEITAT:

στρ. γ΄. TINAA’ EMMENTIOOENANAPATOYTON

AEEI: TINATECTOAANEXONTA:
TTIOTEPACY NITOAEMHIOICO
TTAOICICTPATIANATONTATTIOAAAN

35 HMOYNONCYNOTTAOICIN


CTIXEINEMTTOPONO! AAATAN
ETTAAAOAAMIAN


στρ. δ΄.


Col. 38


στρ.


40


45


50


60


5


10


ODES XVII [XVIIT], ΧΡΩ͂ [XX].


ICXY PONTEKAIAAKIMON


QAEKAIOPACYNOCTOYTON
ANAPQNKAPTEPONCOENOC
ECXEN: HOEOCAYTONOPMAI


AIKACAAIKOICINO®PAMHCETAI
OYTAPPAIAIONAIENEP
AONTAMHNTYXEINKAKQI:


TIANT? ENTQIAOAIXOIXPONQITEAEITAI:


AYOOIPOTEMONOYCAMAPTEIN
AETEI* TTEPIPAIAIMOICIA’? OMOIC
=IPOCEXEIN:
ZECTOYCAEAY’ ENXEPECC’ AKONTAC
55 καὶ CTIABEINATTOAAMNIAN
POINICCANAOLATTAIASA® EMEN
TTPWOHBON * APHIWNA’ ABYPMATWN
KHYTYKTONKY NEANAAKAI
NANKPATOCYTTEPTTY PCOXAITOY:
XITONATTIOP?Y PEON
CTEPNOICIT’ AM®@IKAIOYAION
OECCAAANXAAMY A’: OMMATONAE
*MEMNACOAITIOAEMOYTEKAI
XAAKEOKTYTIOYMAXAC
AIZHCOAIAE®IAATAAOY CAOANAC
Ἐ-----


MVIIL [XIX]


Iw αθηναιοις


TTAPECTIMY PIAKEAEYOOC
AMBPOCIQNMEAEQ.N


OCANTIAPATIEIEPIAQNAA
XHICIAQ PAMOYCAN
IOBAEAPOITEKAI
EPECTE®ANOIXAPITEC
BAAQCINAM@ITIMAN
YMNOICIN: YPAINENYNEN


TAICTTIOAYHPATOICTIKAINON?
OABIAICAOANAIC
EYAINETEKHIAMEPIMNA:
TIPETTEICEPEPTATANIMEN
OAONTTAPAKAAAIOTTACAA


1 See crit. n. on p. 398.


181


182


Col. 39


15


20


25


30


35


40


45


50


TEXT OF THE PAPYRUS.


XOICANE=OXONIEPAC:

ΤΙΗΝΑΡΓΟΟΘΟΘ᾽ ITITIIONAITIOYCA
oEYTEXPYCEABOYC

EY PYCOENEOCOPAAAICIGEPTATOYAIOC
INAXOY POAOAAKTYAOCKOPA:


OT’ APTONOMMACIBAETIONTA
TTANTOOENAKAMATOIC
ME FICTOANACCAKEAEYCEN


AKOITONAYTINONEON
TAKAAAIKEPANAAMAAIN
bY AACCEN: OYAEMAIAC
YIOCAY NAT’ OYTEKATEY
ΦΕΓΓΕΑΟΘΑΛΛΕΡΑΟΛΑΘΕΙΝΝΙΝ
22 * XYPYCOTTETTAOCHPA
OYTENYKTACATN[
EIT’ OYNFENET’ E[
TIOAAPKE’ ΑΓΓΕΛΟΙ
KTANEINTOT[
OMBPIMOCTIOPOYAL
APTFON: HPAKAIL
ACTIETOIMEPIMN[
HTITEIEPIAEC®YTEY[
KAAEQ.NANATIAYCL


EMOIMENOYN
AC®AAECTATONATIP[
ETTEITTAPANOEMOQ[


NEIAONA®IKET’ ΟΓ
IOPEPOYCATIAIAL
ETTA®ON: ENOANIL
AINOCTOAQ.NTTPYTL


YTTEPOXNIBPYONTL[
ΛΛΕΓΙΟΤΑΝΤΕΘΝΑΙ


ΟΘΕΝΚΑΙΑΓΑΝΟΡΙΓ
ENETITATTYAOICL


KAAMOCCEMEAL
ATONOPCIBAKXA[
TIKTEAIONYCON[


KAIXOPONCTE®A[L
+


Io


ODES XVIII [XIX], XIX [XX].


XTX. EX]


δας λακεδαιμονιοις


CTTAPTAITIOTENE[


EANOAIAAKEAAL
TOIONAEMEAOCK[
oT ATETOKAAAITTAL


KOPANOPACYKAP[
~~
MAPTIHCCANIOTL
ΦΥΓΩΝΘΑΝΑΤΟΥΤΙ
ANA=IAAOCTIOCI


ITITIOYCTEOIICANT
TIAEY PON’ ECEYKT[
XPYCACTTIAOCYIO[


The rest of the ode is lost.


183


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


A. EPINIKIA.
THE CYCLE OF THE FOUR GREAT FESTIVALS.


The Olympian games were held towards the end of summer, at the
time of a full moon (Pind. O. 111. 19), and lasted five days (O. v. 6).
The incidence of the festival was regulated by a cycle of 99 lunar
months, in such a manner that the interval between two celebrations
was alternately one of 49 lunar months and one of 50. In the former
case the festival seems to have coincided with the second full moon
after the summer solstice, and in the latter with the third (Schroder,
Prolegomena to Pindar, p. 48). According to scholia on Pind. O. 11.
35, the celebration was alternately in the month Apollonius and in the
month Parthenius (2d. p. 46); but it is not known to what Attic months
these corresponded.

The Nemean games were held in summer, probably in July, at the
beginning of the second and fourth years of each Olympiad.

The Isthmian games were held in spring, probably in April (cp.
Thue. vii. 7—10), in the latter half of the second and fourth years of
each Olympiad.

The Pythian games were held in August (the Delphian month
Bucatius, the Attic Metageitnion), early in the third year of each
Olympiad.

To exemplify this cycle, we will take the 74th and 75th Olympiads.


ODE I. 185


Olympiad, B.C.


74.1. 484/3 | 484. Late summer. Olympia | Pind. O. x, xI


74.2. 483/2 τ Summer. Vemea
482. Spring. Jsthmia

74. 3. 482/1 482. August. Pythia

14s 4. 481/o | (481. Summer. Memea Pind. Δὲ v, Bacch, XII?

(480. Spring. Isthmda Pind. 7. v [v1]?

75.1. 480/79 | 480. Late summer. Olympia


75.2 479/8 pe Summer. Memea
478. Spring. Lsthmia Pind. Δ 1v [ν]} 31 [1v]?


75+ 3. 478/7 | 478. August. Pythia


78. 4. 477/6 | (477. Summer. Memea
1476. Spring. Lsthmia


DATES OF SOME EPINIKIA.


Olympiad. 1 B.c. Olympiad. | _ B.c.

70. 3. 498 | Pind. Px 78.1. 468 | Bacch. III

72. 3. 490 | Pind. P. vi, ΧΙ

73-3- | 486 | Pind. 2 vir 78.2. | 467 | Pind. Δ, vir?

75.2 478 | Pind. Z vu [vx]? 79. 4+ 464 | Pind. O. vil, IX, XIII

76.4 476 | Pind. Ο. 1, τι, τι, xv. || 79-3 | 462 | Pind. 2 1v, v
Bacch. V 80. 1. 460 | Pind. O. vir

76. 2. 475 | Pind. [2] 1 80. 4. 456 | Pind. Z. vi [vii]?

76. 3. 474 | Pind. P. m1? ΙΧ, ΧΙ 81.1. 456 | Pind. O.1v,v? M.1v?

76. 4. 473 | Pind. 1? 82.1. 452 | Bacch. VI, VII

77-1. 472 | Pind. O. vi?

77+ 3. 470 | Pind. P.1, Bacch. IV]} 83. 3. 446 | Pind. P. vir


ODE I.


For Argeius of Ceos, victor in the boys boxing-match [or
pancration?| at the Isthmia—Date unknown.


§1. The title is lost, and the occasion of the ode is known
only from internal evidence, which, however, happens to be
confirmed by an inscription found in Ceos. The name of the.
victor was ᾿Αργεῖος (I. 32, 11. 4 f.). His father was Πανθείδης
(Iv. 14: only the letters ΠΑΝ remain in I. 37), a man skilled in
medicine, ‘well-dowered by the Graces, and famed for hospi-
tality (I. 39—41), though, as may be inferred from vv. 49—67,
of modest fortune. Argeius was one of five brothers, all of good
repute (43f.). The family belonged to Ceos (1. 2).

That the festival was the Isthmian appears from I. 46
and 1. 6f. The nature of the contest is indicated only by
καρτερόχειρ, the epithet of Argeius in 1. 31, and p[dyjas Opa-
᾿ σύχειρος in 11. 4. These words suggest the boxing-match,


j. B. 13


186 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


though they would also suit the pancration (boxing and
wrestling).

§ 2. The inscription above-mentioned is on a marble slab
which was found at Iulis in Ceos, and is now in the Museum
at Athens’. It is of interest as a specimen of the form taken by
a local record of victories at the national festivals. The slab
seems originally to have formed the lower left-hand portion of a
large stele: in its present state, it measures about 19 inches in
length and 114 in breadth. It has been broken across, but the
two pieces have been cemented together, so as practically to
restore the unity of the stone, and no writing has been destroyed
in the fracture. The inscription is in 29 lines, 27 of which record
victories2. Each entry of a victory occupies one line. Each
entry, when entire, gave (1) the victor’s name, with his father’s ;
(2) the class, with respect to age, in which he competed,—
ἀνδρῶν, ἀγενείων or παίδων : and (3) the nature of the contest: eg.
Sins ᾿Αξίλεω παίδων παγκράτιον. But the left-hand edge of the
stone has been injured, so that the initial letter of several names
is lost. And the right-hand edge has been cut away, to the
extent of at least four inches, judging by the number of
letters which are certainly missing at the end of some lines.


This was done, no doubt, by


1 Tam indebted to Mr R.C. Bosanquet,
Director of the British School at Athens,
for kindly sending me an impression of
the inscription, with some valuable notes.

2 The names of four of the victors
are illegible. The remaining twenty-three
victories were won by thirteen persons,
one of whom gained 4, another 3, and
five (including Argeius) gained 2 apiece.
Of the seven who gained more than one
victory each, six were victorious both at
the Isthmus and at Nemea ; the seventh,
at the Isthmus only. The rule followed
in the arrangement of the names was
(I conceive) as follows. In each section
(the Isthmian and the Nemean) the
victories were entered in chronological
order. When, in the same year, there
had been Cean victors in more than one
class of age, the order was ‘men,’ ‘youths,’


masons who adapted the slab


“boys.” Where, then, the name of a
youth precedes that of a man (as in lines
9. and 21), this means that the man’s
victory belongs to a later year. In one
instance the record notes that a man and
a youth whose name follows his were
‘brothers who won on the same day’
(line ro), but their relationship was not
the only reason for so placing them.
The same remark applies when the name
of a boy precedes that of a youth (1. 13).
The name of ‘ Leon son of Leomedon,’ a
victor in the κηρύκων ἀγών, stands last
both in the Isthmian and in the Nemean
section, in each case following the name
of a boy. That order would be the
natural one even if they won in the same
year, as the herald’s victory belonged to
a different category, and was not declared
until the end of the games.


ODE I. 187


to serve as a rude capital or impost in a Byzantine church’.
Hence the last word, specifying the contest, is wholly lost in all
the lines except three; viz, lines 13 and 24, where may
and πα respectively remain from παγκράτιον, and line 29,
where κῆρυξ remains. Above the last twelve entries is the
heading or title (forming line 17), οἷδε Νέμεια ἐνίκων. The
Nemean games ranked last among the four great festivals;
hence it may safely be inferred that the immediately preceding
section of the record contained the victories in the Isthmian
games, though the heading of this section has been lost, along
with the earlier entries under it. In the fifteenth extant line
of the Isthmian section we read :—
ΑΡΓΕΙΟΣ TIANOL JAED TIAIAQ[N

This entry presumably refers to the victory commemorated in
the first and second odes of Bacchylides. The word lost after
παίδων may have been either ΠῪΞ or TTATKPATION,

The name of Argeius recurs in the Nemean section (1. 26):

APFEIOS TIANOL JAE ATE[NEION

where again the specification of the contest is lost. Nothing
else is known as to the Nemean victory of Argeius. Nor do we
know precisely at what point the limit of age between παῖδες
and ἀγένειοι was drawn for the purposes of these games. The
term ἀγένειος may have denoted the age from 17 to 10 inclusive,
and παῖς that from 14 to 16% In that case the interval
separating the victory of a παῖς from one gained by the same
person as an ἀγένειος might vary from one year to five. The
name of Argeius stands last but one in the Isthmian section of
the record, and last but three in the Nemean. Neither Argeius
nor any one of five other persons named as victors among the
‘boys’ or the ‘youths’ recurs as a victor among ‘men.’ The
record, as we have it, clearly breaks off at or soon after the date
of the Nemean victory won by Argeius.

The inscription itself is of a date much later than the latest
that could be assigned to any poem of Bacchylides. It has been
referred to the period from czvca 400 to 350 B.C. If that view


1 Mr Bosanquet observes that the 2 See Introd. to Ode xu, § 2.
back and sides of the stone have been 3 This was the opinion of Halbherr,
treated in a manner which suggests such by whom the inscription was first edited
a purpose. (in 1885): and it is shared, as Mr


13—2


188 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


be correct, the list must have been copied from some older
record, such as certainly existed in the poet’s day. The register
of Cean victors had doubtless been continued from the time of
Argeius down to the date of the inscription, and the existing
slab can be but a small fragment of a record which filled
more than one stele.

§ 3. The ode, so far as it is preserved in the MS., practically
begins with the fragment which stands first in the text of this
edition, describing the arrival of Minos in Crete (vv. I—~19).
This is followed by a lacuna of nine verses; and then comes the
last part of the poem, virtually complete, which is concerned
with the victor Argeius and his father Pantheides (vv. 29—74).
There are also, however, several smaller fragments, which
belonged to the earlier portion of the ode. From these it
appears that the poet commenced with a reference to the
Isthmian festival, and proceeded to relate the heroic saga of his
native island. The myth was in outline as follows. Dexithea
(‘she who entertains a god’) was one of several sisters, daughters
of Damon, chief of the Telchines. Those volcanic daemons,
connected with Poseidon and his realm, figured in legend as the
earliest craftsmen in metal, but also as spiteful enchanters
(τελχίν = θελγίν, from θέλγω), who had blighted the fruits of the
earth in Rhodes, their first home. Their malignity provoked
the wrath of Zeus, who slew them with his thunderbolts. But


Bosanquet informs me, by Dr Wilhelm,
who is now Keeper of the Inscriptions in
the Museum at Athens.

Q is used in the inscription, and sigma
has the form %, not the older 6. In
Attica Z had supplanted $ in ordinary
epigraphic use as early as Ol. 83. 3
=446 B.c. (E. S. Roberts, Greek Epi-
graphy, p. 102): the earliest appearance
of Q in an Attic inscription which can be
dated seems to be in CIA 338, which
Kirchhoff has fixed to Ol. 93. r= 408 B.c.
(26. p. 104). But, with regard to the
usage of Ceos, there does not appear to
be any definite evidence as to approxi-
mately the time at which those forms
began to be used; and the presumption
(at least as regards Q) is probably in
favour of a date later than circa 410 B.C.

One point may be noted. If the


Cean stone is merely a copy made
«. 400-350 B.C. from an older document,
one of its characteristics is the more
curious. The size of the letters, and the
spacing, vary much in different lines.
£.g., the first entry of ΛΈΩΝ AEQME-
AONTOZ® in 1. 16 is so spaced out as to
fill the whole width of the existing slab,
and hence KHPYT has been lost after it.
But the second entry of the same name
in 1. 29 is so much more compressed
that KHPY= comes in. Such variations
would be more natural if the successive
entries had been made from time to time,
than if the stone-cutter was simply copying
an older record which stood complete
before him.

1 See Appendix on Ode 11.


ἑβδομήκοντα σὺν στεφάνοισιν.


gf.,


ODES I, 11, I1I—V. 189


he spared Dexithea and her sisters, who had shown hospitality
to him and Apollo. Minos, coming from Crete to Ceos, there
wedded Dexithea. Their son was Euxantius, who became lord
of Ceos, father of the hero Miletus, and ancestor of a Milesian
clan, the Euxantidae.

It is impossible, with our data, to say exactly how much of
the ode has been lost, or how the earlier part of the myth was
told. A discussion of these questions will be found in the
Appendix.

ΟΡΕ II.


For the same.


The title in the MS. (attributable to the hand of the first
corrector) attests that this short song is in honour of the same
person ; and the Isthmian victory to which it refers is doubtless
the same. The last four verses suggest that the ode may have
been sung, to an accompaniment of flutes, as a welcome to
Argeius when he landed in Ceos on his return. Ode I, the
regular epinikion, was presumably written later, for the formal
celebration of the victory at the young athlete’s home.


OpEs III, IV, V.
For Hieron.


Before dealing separately with each of these three poems,
it will be useful to give a synopsis of the chief events in the
history of Hieron and his dynasty, with the chronology of the
odes written for him by Bacchylides and by Pindar.


Deinomenes was a citizen of Gela, hereditary ἱεροφάντης of Demeter
and Persephone. The origin of his sacred office is related by Herodotus
(vit. 153). One of the ancestors of Deinomenes was Τηλίνης, himself
descended from one of the first settlers at Gela, who came with its
founders, Antiphemus of Rhodes and Entimus of Crete [c77c. 690 B.c.:
Thuc. vi. 4 §3]. This Telines possessed, says Herodotus, certain
mysterious ἱρὰ τῶν χθονίων θεῶν : 26. the secret of certain rites (probably
associated with visible symbols) of the two goddesses. Some citizens
of Gela, vanquished in a party struggle, had seceded to a place
called Μακτώριον : Telines undertook to bring them back by means of
his ἱρά, on condition that, if he did so, he and his descendants should
be ἱροφάνται τῶν χθονίων θεῶν. He succeeded,—how, we are not told ;
and the priesthood remained thenceforth in his house.


190


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


Deinomenes had four sons, Gelon, Hieron, Thrasybulus, and


Polyzelus.


Gelon, the eldest, had been commander of cavalry under


Hippocrates, tyrant of Gela. On the death of Hippocrates, the city
of Gela refused to acknowledge his sons. Gelon took up their cause,
reduced Gela, and then seized the supreme power for himself.


OLYMp.


72. 2-73. 4


73-1


73: 4


74. 3


B.C.


491-485


488


485


482


480


Gelon, eldest of the four sons of Deino-
menes, succeeds Hippocrates as tyrant of Gela,
where he reigns for about six years.


Gelon dedicates a bronze chariot at Olympia
as a thank-offering for victory in the chariot-race
(Paus. 6. 9. § 4).


The oligarchic land-owners (yapépor) of
Syracuse, having been banished by the Syra-
cusan democracy and retired to Casmenae,
invoke Gelon’s aid. He leads them against
Syracuse. At his approach the democracy
submits, and he becomes master of the city.
Syracuse is thenceforth the seat of his rule.

Hieron, the second son of Deinomenes,
becomes ruler of Gela, as vice-gerent of Gelon.

Gelon enlarges and strengthens Syracuse by
carrying the wall of Achradina down to the
Great Harbour, thus bringing Achradina and
Ortygia within a single fortified enclosure. The
greatness of Syracuse as a city, and its naval
power, date from his reign.


Hieron wins a victory in the horse-race
(κέλητι) at Delphi, in the 26th Pythiad. ‘This
is the first of the three Pythian victories to which
Bacchylides refers (Iv. 4).


The Carthaginians, under Hamilcar, are
defeated at Himera by the Syracusans and
other Siceliots, στρατηγοῦντος Γέλωνος airo-
κράτορος (Diod. x11. 94). As a thank-offering
for this victory, Gelon dedicated at Delphi a
golden tripod surmounted by a Nike. Hieron
afterwards placed a like offering at the side of
his brother’s. (See Appendix on Ode 111. 17 ff.)


OLymMp.


75: 3


75-76


75-4


76.1


BC.


478


478-476


477


476


ODES ITI—V. TQI


Death of Gelon. Hieron succeeds
him as ruler of Syracuse.

Second Pythian victory of Hieron (cp. 482
B.C.). He wins the horse-race in the 27th
Pythiad. The κέλης on this occasion was
certainly Pherenicus (Pind. P. 11. 73 ἢ), who
possibly was the winner also in 482.


At this period there was war between Hieron
and Theron, the tyrant of Acragas. According
to one account, this war was connected with
the protection afforded by Theron to Polyzelus,
the youngest brother of Hieron, with whom he
was at enmity. Theron had invaded Hieron’s
territories, and advanced as far as the river
Gelas, when the poet Simonides ‘fell in with
them, and reconciled them to each other’
(περιτυχόντα διαλῦσαι). Hieron then took
Polyzelus into favour again. (Diod. x1. 48.)
The words of Bacchylides (v. 35 f.) suggest that
he then (in 476) supposed Hieron to be on
good terms with both his surviving brothers,
Thrasybulus and Polyzelus.


Anaxilas, tyrant of Rhegium, aims at sub-
jugating the Epizephyrian Locri. Hieron sends
his brother-in-law Chromius as an envoy to
Anaxilas, and secures the continued indepen-
dence of the Locrians.


Hieron’s first victory at Olympia, gained with
the κέλης Pherenicus.

First Olympian of Pindar: who seems
to have been at Syracuse when the ode was
written, or at least when it was sung (v. 10).

Fifth ode of Bacchylides: who sends
the poem from Ceos, but may have already
visited Syracuse, as he calls himself Hieron’s
ξένος (το f.).

Hieron transports the citizens of Catana
and Naxos to Leontini. On the vacant site of


OLYMP.


76. 2


76. 3


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


B.C.


475


474


Catana he founds a new city, with 5000 settlers
from Syracuse and as many more from Pelopon-
nesus, and calls it Aetna, placing it under the
protection of Ζεὺς Airvaios.


A great eruption of Mount Aetna, which
Pindar describes in P. 1. 21 ff. (470 B.c.), and
to which Aeschylus alludes (P. V. 367 ff.), is
fixed to this year, if the words πεντηκοστῷ ἔτει
in Thuc. 11. 116 § 2 are to be taken strictly.
But the Parian Chronicle (Miiller 1. 550, 68)
puts the eruption in 479 8.C.: and it is possible
that Thuc. gave merely a ‘round number.’ Or
the volcano may have been active at intervals
for several years.

Second ‘Pythian’ of Pindar. This ode,
incorrectly classed as Pythian, celebrated a vic-
tory of Hieron in the chariot-race at some Theban
festival (perhaps the Ἡράκλεια or Ἰόλαια). The
poet alludes to Hieron’s recent intervention on
behalf of the Italian Locri (vv. 18—20).


The Etruscans, coming by sea, attack
Cumae, the ancient Chalcidic settlement in
᾽Οπικία (Campania). Hieron sends a Syracusan
fleet, which, with the Cumaean, utterly over-
throws the Etruscan armada (Diod. x1. 51).
[There is a trophy of this victory in the British
Museum; viz., an Etruscan helmet which Hieron
dedicated at Olympia, with the inscription HIA-
PONOAEINOMENEOSKAITOISYPAKOSIOI-
TOIAITYPAN[= Tuppava]ATIOKYMAS. ]

The Third Pythian of Pindar may
belong to this year: this is, at any rate, its ap-
proximate date. The poet calls Hieron Airvatov
ξένον (v. 69), showing that the ode is later than
476: and there is no reference to Hieron’s
Pythian victory with the chariot (470). The
poem is not an ἐπινίκιον of the ordinary kind:
Zé., it does not celebrate a victory which had


OLyYmp.


76. 4


77: 3


B.C,


473


472


470


ODES ITV. 193


just been gained. It refers to the former success
of the horse Pherenicus at Delphi (in 478, per-
haps also in 482): vv. 73 f. But it is largely
an ode of comfort and exhortation: Hieron was
suffering from a painful disease (λιθιώνλ).


The probable date of Pindar’s first
Nemean, for Hieron’s brother-in-law Chro-
mius, who was now guardian (or ‘Mayor
of the Palace’) to Hieron’s son, Deinomenes,
who had been appointed to rule the newly-
founded Aetna (Airvas βασιλεῖ, Pind. P. τ. 60).
Chromius was proclaimed at Nemea as Airvaios.
Pindar seems to have been in Sicily then (4. 1.
19 ff.).

[The ninth ‘Nemean’ ode, wrongly so
classed, concerns a victory of Chromius in
the Pythian games at Sicyon, and seems to be
earlier than the first Nemean: it calls Aetna
τὰν νεοκτίσταν (v. 2), and may belong to


472 B.C. |


Hieron’s second victory at Olympia, in the
horse-race. [The fragment of the Olympic
register contained among the Oxyrhynchus
papyri proves that Hieron won with the «éAys
at Olympia both in Ol. 76 and in Ol. 77.]


Hieron’s third Pythian victory. He wins
the four-horse chariot-race, in the 29th Pythiad.

First Pythian of Pindar, Ἱέρωνι Airvaio:
a title indicating that, at this Pythian festival,
he was proclaimed as Airvaios. Pindar alludes
to the victory at Himera in 480 (75 ff.), and to
that at Cumae in 474 (71 f.).

Fourth ode of Bacchylides: which
speaks of Hieron as having now won three
victories at Delphi (¢e., in 482, 478, 470), and
two at Olympia (ze, in 476 and 472): vv. 4
and 17.


194


OLYmpP.


78.1


78. 3


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


B.C.
468


467


466


Hieron’s victory at Olympia with the four-
horse chariot. Third ode of Bacchylides:
who probably was at Syracuse when the ode was
written, or when it was sung (vv. 15 ff.). The
tone of vv. 85—92 indicates that Hieron was not
expected to live long.


Hieron dies at Aetna (Diod. x1. 66).
He receives τιμαὶ ἡρωϊκαί, as κτίστης of that
city. After his death, his son Deinomenes
dedicates thank-offerings in his name at
Olympia, viz. (1) a bronze chariot and charioteer,
(2) two bronze κέλητες, with boy-riders; one
being placed on each side of the chariot (Paus.
6. 12 ὃ 1). The inscription (id. 8. 42 ὃ 9) re-
corded that Hieron had won τεθρίππῳ μὲν ἅπαξ,
μουνοκέλητι δὲ δίς.

Thrasybulus, the younger brother of
Hieron, succeeds him as ruler of Syracuse.


Having reigned about eleven months, Thra-
sybulus, a cruel tyrant, is expelled by the
Syracusans, and withdraws to the Epizephyrian
Locri; after which nothing more is heard of
him. The dynasty of the Deinomenidae then
comes to an end, and the Syracusan democracy
is restored.


ODE III.


For Hieron of Syracuse, victor in the chariot-race at Olympia.


81.


Ol. 78, 468 8.6.


This ode, the latest in date of the three, is placed first,


because the victory which it concerns is the most important.
It falls into three main sections, (4) an exordium, vv. I1—22;
(6) the myth of Croesus, 2362 ; (¢) the conclusion, 63—97.

(a) The Muse is bidden to sing of Demeter and Persephone,
whose priest Hieron is: then comes a reference to the chariot-
race itself, and to the applause which greeted the victory.


ODE Ii. 195


From a notice of the festivities at Syracuse, where he may have
been present (vv. 15 f.), the poet passes to a mention of the
golden tripods dedicated at Delphi by Gelon and Hieron. The
proem concludes with a sentiment which is the key-note of the
ode: Let a man bring choice gifts to the god; that is the
surest pledge of prosperity. To this sentiment he knits on, as
an illustration, the story of Croesus. It is interesting to
remember that in an ode, then recent, for Hieron, Pindar had
pointed to the Lydian king as an example of generosity
rewarded by lasting fame: οὐ φθίνει Κροίσου φιλόφρων ἀρετά
(Pyth τ. 94, 470 B.C.).

§2. (ὁ) The story of Croesus is told in a form which
occurs nowhere else in ancient literature. According to our
other authorities, Cyrus dooms Croesus to the pyre’. Here it
is Croesus who voluntarily resolves to burn himself and his
family, in order to escape enslavement to the Persian conqueror.
The Croesus of Herodotus appeals on the pyre to Apollo
(I. c. 87), though he afterwards taunts the god with ingratitude
(c. 90); the Croesus of Bacchylides seems rather to invoke
Zeus (v. 37). The quenching of the pyre by rain is common
to both versions; but here Zeus is expressly named as the
agent (v. 55). The Croesus of Herodotus, after his deliverance
from the pyre, figures as the friend and counsellor of Cyrus,
and lives to admonish Cambyses (III. 36); when or how he
died, we are not told. Here Apollo transports Croesus, with
his wife and daughters, to the happy land of the Hyperboreans.

Ancient art comes to our aid where literature fails, and
proves that the version of the Croesus-myth followed by
Bacchylides was a current one before his time. An early
red-figured amphora in the Louvre, dating from the close of
the sixth century B.C. or the opening years of the fifth,
shows Croesus enthroned on a great pyre, which is beginning
to burn. He is clad in royal robes, and crowned with laurel ;
his left hand bears a sceptre, while with his right he pours a


1 Herod. 1. 86ff., and 111. 16: Ctesias have been indebted to the Λυδιακά of
ap. Phot. cod. 72: Nicolaus of Damascus Xanthus, εἴγε. 470 B.C. (Miiller 1. 36).
(in the Augustan age), frag. 61 (Miiller, Lucian, Gallus c. 23.

Frag. Hist. 111. p. 406). Nicolaus may


196 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


libation. An attendant, who has the significant name of
ETOTMOS, is bending in front of the pyre, and applying to
it, with both hands, objects which some critics explain as the
‘whisks’ (περιρραντήρια, aspergilla) used in sprinkling lustral
water, while others suppose them to be fans, or torches’. The
act of Croesus is manifestly conceived as voluntary. A majestic
serenity, or even gladness, is the sentiment indicated by the
picture?.

What were the sources of this version? It is one which
dignifies Croesus by an intrepid resolve; and that resolve
is of an oriental cast. These features point to a native
Lydian origin. It is also honourablé to Apollo, who promptly
recompenses his faithful votary with a supreme reward. But
it is improbable that this account of Apollo’s action came
from Delphi. The Delphian legend is rather to be recognised
in the answer of the Pythia to the complaint of Croesus, as
reported by Herodotus (1. 91). At the central shrine of Loxias
it was the interest of the priests to keep up the tradition that a
great Lydian king had been guided from Delphi, even though
they had only a lame defence for the ambiguous responses which
lured him to his ruin. But the Aegean seat of the god had no
such responsibility for oracles given to Croesus. Another trait
of the story should also be noted. Here, and here alone, the
Hyperborean land appears as.a place to which pious mortals are
translated without dying ; and the Hyperborean legends had a
very special place in the Apollo-cult of Delos. It is ‘Delos-born’
Apollo, says Bacchylides (v. 58), who carries Croesus to that
elysium. The Ionian poet of Ceos would know the Delian
temple-legend. He wrote for Delian festivals, and was no
stranger to the sacred lore of the island. I should conjecture,
then, that the form of the Croesus-myth given in his ode
(468 B.C.), and attested by the somewhat earlier vase, was one
which originally came from Lydia, and was worked up at Delos.


1 They are, however, quite unlike
torches as usually represented : see (e.g.)
the torches applied to Alemena’s pyre by
the attendant in Python’s vase-painting
(Journ. Hellen. Stud. X1. pl. 6).

2 The amphora (no. 194 in the Louvre)


has been published in Monumentz dell’
Instituto, 1. pl. Χιιν.. Baumeister,
Denkmaler, p. 796. See also A. H.
Smith in Journ. Hellen. Stud. xvii.
(1898) pp. 267 f.

3 See Introd. to Ode xvi, ad init,


ODES II, IV. 197


Later in the fifth century, this version gave way to that found in
Herodotus, which represented the Asiatic Greek conception of
the manner in which a Persian conqueror would act, while it
also suited the interests of Delphi. Herodotus makes Croesus
survive in Persia during many years after the capture of Sardis.
For that account he presumably had some data furnished by
traditions current in Asia Minor: but such evidence would at
once dissolve the Delian myth, the free creation of Ionian fancy,
as to Apollo’s prompt removal of Croesus to the seats of the
blest.

‘$3. (ὦ From the Croesus-myth the poet returns to the
praises of Hieron—a benefactor of Delphi unsurpassed by any
Greek ; ‘lover of horses,’ warrior, just ruler, and disciple of the
Muses. After some verses in a different, strain, which suggest
that Hieron’s end was believed to be near (75—-92), the ode
closes with a forecast of renown for him,—and for ‘the nightin-
gale of Ceos,’


ΟΡΕ IV.


For Hieron of Syracuse, victor in the chariot-race at Delphi.
Ol. 77. 3, 470 8.6.1


This short song, in two strophes of ten verses each, con-
gratulates Hieron on the growing ‘series of his victories. After
winning the horse-race at Delphi in 482 and in 478 B.c., he
has now won the chariot-race ; a Pythian record which the poet
declares to be unequalled. At Olympia he has also won two
horse-races (viz. in 476 and 472). Hieron’s brilliant fortunes
show the favour of heaven (18 ff.).

Hieron’s new victory (celebrated by Pindar in his first
Pythian) was one of high importance. This song is exceedingly
slight : it resembles the brief greeting to Argeius (Ode 11), and
to.Lachon (Ode VI).


3 According to the Pindaric scholia
(Argum. ad Pyth.) the date of the first
Pythiad was 582 B.C., and this victory
was won in the 29th Pythiad, =470 B.c.
Pausanias (x. 7 § 3) places the first Pythiad
in 586 B.c., so that the date of this victory


would be 474; a view which Boeckh
accepted. Bergk, on the other hand,
prefers the authority of the Pindaric
scholia, and recent criticism has confirmed
his conclusion.


198 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


ODE V.


For Hieron of Syracuse, victor in the horse-race at Olympia.
Ol. 76, 476 B.C.


§ 1. A fragment from a copy of the Olympic register,
written in the second or third century, and found at Oxy-
rhynchus by Messrs Grenfell and Hunt, proves that Hieron
won with the κέλης at Olympia both in Ol. 76 (476 8.0.) and
in Ol. 77 (472); thus confirming the statement in the Pindaric
scholia!. The victory celebrated in this ode is the same which
Pindar commemorates in his first Olympian. As both odes
clearly indicate, this was the first race won at Olympia by


the horse Pherenicus.


Pythian race at least once’, viz. in 478 B.C.


1 Schol. on Olymf. τ, where oy (Ol.
73=488 B.c., obviously too early) was
rightly corrected by Bergk to os’ (76).

2 Whether Pherenicus was the winner
at Delphi in 482 B.c., as well as in 478,
depends on the interpretation of Pind. P.
Il. 73 f., στεφάνοις | τοὺς ἀριστεύων
Φερένικος EX ἐν Κίρρᾳ ποτέ. Does the
plural στεφάνοις denote more than one
victory? If so, the victories are those of
482 and 478: if not, the reference is to
478 only. The plural of στέφανος could,
apparently, be used with reference to a
single victory; see 4.9. Pind. /sthm. III.
11 ἐν βάσσαισιν Ἰσθμοῦ δεξαμένῳ στεφά-
vous, where the reference is to Melissus,
who is not said to have won any Isthmian
victory other than that (in the pancration)
which the ode commemorates. But, ina
general reference, such as we find in
Pyth. 111. 73 f., to the horse’s record,
στεφάνοις would more naturally denote a
plurality of victories. On the other hand
the allusion of Bacchylides to the success
of Pherenicus at Delphi does not imply
more than a single victory (111. 41).

Bacchylides in 111. 39 calls Pherenicus
πῶλον. But if he won his first race,
let us say as a three-year-old, in 478, he
would in 476 have been already five years


But Pherenicus had already won the


These facts make


old, a ἵππος τέλειος, no longer properly
πῶλος. The use of the latter word,
which in poetry is sometimes a mere
synonym for ἵππος, cannot be pressed,
then, as an argument against supposing ~
that Pherenicus won his first race in 482. _

If he did so, he would have been
nine years old (at least) in 476. But
modern horses of that age, or even of
an age considerably higher, have success-
fully borne the severest tests of endurance
and speed. Mr Kenyon quotes the case
of a celebrated steeple-chaser, the Lamb,
who won the Grand National (over a
course of 44 miles) twice, viz. in 1868
and 1871, being six years old on the first
occasion, and nine on the second. The
same race in 1904 furnished some facts
not less noteworthy from this point of
view (see the Ztmes of March 26).
Twenty-six horses started: the age of
four among these was 9; of one, 10; of
one, 13; and of one (Manifesto), not less
than 16. The last-named was one of
nine who alone completed the arduous
course.

Herodotus (vi. 103) mentions that
Cimon, the father of Miltiades, won the
four-horse chariot-race at Olympia with
the same team of mares on three succes-


ODE V. 199


it probable that his Olympian victory belongs to 476 B.C., rather
than to 472: for it is not likely that, while Pherenicus was still
in full vigour, another κέλης of Hieron’s should have been the
winner in 476. The date 476 is confirmed by the circumstance
that neither in Pindar’s first Olympian, nor in this ode of
Bacchylides, is there any reference to Hieron’s foundation of
Aetna in 476, or to his victory at Cumae in 474. Pindar, at
least, would scarcely have omitted some allusion to one or
both of these events. His third Pythian, written for Hieron
in or about 473, refers to Aetna (v. 69), and his first Pythian
(470 B.C.) to Cumae.,

Bacchylides sent this ode from Ceos to Syracuse. From
the tone of the opening verses, we may infer that it was the
first which he had written for Hieron; and πείθομαι in v. 195
seems to imply that it was written by invitation. In verse 11
the poet calls. himself Hieron’s ξένος. Simonides had been in
Sicily during some part at least of the years 478—476, and
Bacchylides may then have been introduced to the ruler of
Syracuse.

§2. Verses 1—55 form the first principal division of the
ode. Addressing Hieron as στραταγός of the Syracusans,
the poet declares that no one can better estimate a gift
of the Muses. The exploits of Hieron and his brothers offer
a wide range to the singer,—wide as the realms of air to
a soaring eagle (16—36). The running of Pherenicus at
Olympia is then described (17—49). Happy indeed is the man
to whom heaven has granted such a fortune as Hieron’s [even
though, like Hieron, he suffers from disease]: for no mortal ἐξ
blest in all things.

This sentiment serves to introduce the beautiful myth which
occupies the largest part of the poem (56—175). Heracles,
going down to Hades for Cerberus, meets the shade of Meleager.


sive occasions (viz., in Ol. 62=532 B.C.,
Ol. 63 = 528, and Ol. 64= 524, as appears
from the context). He adds that the
same feat had been accomplished by a
team belonging to a Spartan named
Evagoras, but that (as we can easily
believe) it had never been surpassed.


Pelagonius (czrc. 410 A.D.) velerin. Ὁ. 32
(quoted by W. Christ and Blass) makes
the following statement:—‘It is main-


. tained (adseverant) that horses are gene-


rally fit for the circus and the contests at
festivals from their fifth to their twentieth
year.’


200 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


Both those heroes, so victorious, and so great, illustrate the truth
that ‘no mortal is blest in all things.’ Just when the name of
Deianeira has been uttered by the spirit of her brother, and the
fatal resolve of Heracles to wed her is being taken, the poet
leaves his myth with a Pindaric abruptness, and returns to his
theme.

The concluding portion of the ode (176—200) touches once
more on the victory, and claims praise for Hieron as a debt
of candour (ἀλάθεια), which only envy could withhold. When
a man’s fortunes have once struck root, just praise is as the dew
which brings leaf and flower. May Zeus grant that Hieron’s
fortunes shall be stedfast and untroubled.


§ 3. It is not without interest to compare the general attitude
of Bacchylides towards Hieron, as seen in these three odes, with
that of Pindar in the four poems which he wrote for the same
ruler (OZ 1, Pyth. 1, τι, 11). From other accounts it would
seem that Hieron, in his government of Syracuse, presented
many of the characteristics of the typical t¥pavvos,—guarded by
foreign mercenaries?; suspicious of the citizens, to the point of
setting spies? on their private conversation ; greedy of money,
which he raised by laying heavy burdens on his people; and
not incapable of cruel acts’. Gelon had been a τύραννος only
in his way of seizing power, not in his way of using it: Hieron
exemplified the usual tendency of the Greek τυραννίς to de-
teriorate in the hands of the inheritor+

Yet it would be unjust to the poets who praise him to regard
them merely as professional flatterers. They saw in him, not
merely the brilliant and munificent victor in the games, but a
man who fostered the cult of the Muses, and made his home a
centre of attraction to the foremost men of letters. A new
age of Greek literature was dawning: and just then there was
no one man in all Hellas who was doing so much as this ruler
of Syracuse to encourage and to honour poets. This was the
aspect of Hieron’s reign which naturally appealed most forcibly-
to his laureates: he was to them, in some measure, what

1 Diod. ΧΙ. 48 (cp. Xen. Azer. VI. 5). 3 Diod. ΧΙ. 67 φιλάργυρος καὶ βίαιος.


2 Arist. Pol. v. g § 3 mentions his 4 See Freeman, Siczly 11. 232 ff.
moraywyldes and ὠτακουσταί.


ODE V. 201


Augustus was to Virgil and Horace, what Lorenzo de’ Medici
was to the members of the Florentine Academy. As guests at
his court, they would not necessarily see much of what was amiss
with his system of government. Pindar and Bacchylides may
reasonably be acquitted, then, of any gross or deliberate per-
version of the truth about Hieron as they knew or felt it.

But let us now observe some points of difference between
them. It may be noted that Pindar speaks more strongly than
Bacchylides of Hieron’s virtues, especially his gentler virtues :
there is nothing in Bacchylides so explicit or so comprehensive
as Pindar’s πραὺς ἀστοῖς, οὐ φθονέων ἀγαθοῖς, ξείνοις δὲ θαυμαστὸς
πατήρ (P. Ill. 71), or as his dpérwv...copupas ἀρετᾶν ἄπο πασᾶν
(Οἱ, 1. 13). Bacchylides is less emphatic; though he describes
Hieron as a just ruler, of fine gifts, who owes his high fortunes
to the favour of heaven (III. 67—71: IV. I—3, 18—20: ν. 1—8,
I9gI—193). But the main difference is of a broader kind. Pindar,
whose range of view is Panhellenic, does ample justice to Hieron
as the champion of Western Hellas against Phoenician and
Etruscan (Pyth. 1. 72—80). Alluding to his intervention (in 477)
on behalf of the Epizephyrian Locrians, Pindar renders this
tribute, honourable and beautiful above any that Hieron is
known to have received :—‘ Son of Deinomenes, the maiden of
Locrit in the West sings of thee before her door; because, after
the bewildering troubles of war, thy power hath taken fear away
from her eyes’ (Pyth, τι. 18—20.) Bacchylides once, indeed,
alludes to the victory of Himera, but only in a vague and
colourless phrase (v. 34, χαλκεοστέρνου 7 "Αρηος). Hieron is,
among his other qualities, a ‘ warrior’ (III. 69): but Bacchylides
has no word of recognition for that aspect of his activity in
which he appears as the defender of Hellene against barbarian.
For Bacchylides he is only the ruler of Syracuse, upright and
wise, bountiful to gods and men, a warrior who is no stranger to
the Muses, a man fortunate in much, though there be one drop
of bitterness in his cup. It is to Pindar alone that Hieron’s
memory is indebted for the larger and more splendid picture of
his place in Hellas.

There is also a marked difference of tone between the two
poets when they address Hieron. Pindar, the descendant of the


j. Β. 14


202 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


Aegeidae, the honoured guest of Delphi, is wont to speak in
lofty accents. Splendid as are his praises of Hieron, they
seldom have the note of deference, while occasionally they imply
something like equality: as at the close of the first Olympian,—
‘Be it chine to walk on high throughout thy mortal life, and mzne
to consort with victors all my days, pre-eminent for my art
among Hellenes in every land” Contrast with this haughty
utterance the gentle fashion in which Bacchylides intimates his
poetical claim at the close of his third ode,—in which, it may be
noted, there is at least one distinct imitation of Pindar (vv.
85—87), so that Pindar’s example may have prompted him
here also:—‘ And along with (Hieron’s) genuine glories, men
will praise also the charm of the melodious nightingale of Ceos.’

But it is in the admonitory passages that this contrast
of tone is most marked. Take, for instance, the last twenty
verses of Pindar’s first Pythian. Their character has been
well described by Mr Freeman*. ‘The whole latter part of the
first Pythian ode is a sermon of advice to a ruler, which might
have been professedly meant rather for the young Deinomenes
than his father, but in which one cannot but feel throughout
that the father is glanced at. Elementary precepts of truth and
justice, warnings not to listen to deceivers, all winding up the
famous exhortation to make Croesus and not Phalaris the
model, certainly suggest that Pindar knew that there was
something not as it should be in Hieron’s rule’ Hieron, who
unless he has been much belied, was far from admiring freedom
of speech, can scarcely have found it agreeable to be the object
of such a discourse. Even in the third Pythian, where Pindar
wishes that he could bring Cheiron to heal his ‘ Aetnaean guest-
friend, the real solicitude which the poet evidently feels, and
which finds such noble expression, lacks the sympathetic note of
tenderness. But that is precisely the note which Bacchylides
touches in the passage of veiled consolation to Hieron which
closes the third ode (vv. 75—end). The tone is quiet, medita-
tive, soothing. Again, the opening of the fifth ode, the first,
probably, which Bacchylides addressed to Hieron, has a felicity
of its own; the homage is simply rendered, and the tone

1 Sicily, τι. p. 540.


ODES V, VI. 203


(marked by the word ξένος) is that of one who trusts that his
great critic will be friendly. An Ionian ease and grace belong to
Bacchylides, as the pride and the fire of an Aeolic temperament
can be recognised in Pindar. The poet of Thebes soars im-
measurably above the poet of Ceos. But, when they are
considered in their relations to the lord of Syracuse, it seems not
inconceivable that there should have been some ground for
the tradition preserved by the Pindaric scholiast!, παρὰ Ἱέρωνι
προκρίνεσθαι τὰ Βακχυλίδου ποιήματα.


ΟΡΕ ΧΙ.


For Lachon of Ceos, victor in the foot-race for boys at Olympia.
Ol. 82, 452 8.6.


The Oxyrhynchus fragment of the Olympic register, already
mentioned (p. 198), contains lists of victors from Ol. 75
(480 B.C.) to Ol. 83 (448 B.C.) inclusive. Under πβ (Ol. 82) is
the entry: Aaxwv Κείιος] παίδων σταδιον. There can be no
doubt that it refers to the victory which is the subject of this
Ode. In the agonistic inscription of Ceos (see Introd. to Ode I;
§ 2), ΔΊαχων Aptotopeveos παίδων occurs in two successive lines
among the Nemean victors,—the mention of the contest in each
case being lost in the fracture of the stone. The name Adyov
(further attested by the play on λάχε in verse 2) occurs nowhere
else, whereas Λάκων as a proper name is frequent. Hence the
mis-spelling in the fragment of the Olympic register is easily
explained.

This short ode was sung before the house of Aristomenes,
Lachon’s father, in Ceos (v. 14). Like the little song to Argeius
(Ode 11),—a similar greeting to the victor on his return,—it
alludes to previous Cean successes at the same festival. That
trait would have a special point if we might suppose that, on
each occasion, former victors in the games were among those
who welcomed the young athlete.


1 On Pyth. τι. 166.


I4—2


204 INTRODUCTIONS: TO THE ODES.


OvE VII.
For the same.


The ode begins with an invocation of ‘Day, daughter of
Time and Night’: but the personified Hemera is identified with
a particular date, viz. the prize-day at Olympia, which has set
the wreath on the brows of Lachon. There is a mention of
‘pre-eminence in speed of foot’; and clearly the victory is that
which was more briefly announced in Ode vi. This is the
regular epinikion, analogous to Ode I in the case of Argeius.

The first three verses are the last in column XII of the
papyrus. Column XIII has perished ; but the final syllables of
some rather long verses in the upper third of it have run on into
the left margin of column xIv. With the help of these, and of
some small fragments, verses 4—11 of the ode have been partly
restored.

Column XIV begins with 16 verses, which formed the end of
Ode vu. The first verse is Πυθῶνά τε μηλοθύταν.. The poet is
enumerating the places where Lachon had been a winner before
his success at Olympia,—viz. Delphi, Nemea, and the Isthmus.
No one, ‘boy or man,’ had won so many victories in an equal
space of time? The poem closes with a reference to his
crowning triumph at Olympia.

The Cean inscription indicates (see Introd. to Ode νι) that
Lachon’s two Nemean victories were gained either at the same
festival or at two successive festivals. 455 and 453 B.C. were
Nemean years. His Pythian victory must have been in 454.
For his Isthmian prize, the choice seems to be between 454 and


1 In the editio princeps Dr Kenyon
supposed that a new ode (his vi11) began
in the lost column x111. Both that ode
and Ode vir must then have been ex-
tremely short. If the verse Πυθώνά re
μηλοθύταν was preceded by (say) ro verses
—and that is a moderate estimate—in the
poem to which it belonged, then only
some 28 verses would be left for Ode vir.
But it is very improbable that both the


odes for Lachon’s victory (vi and vit)
should have been on such a diminutive
scale. In v. 49 (=11 Κι) TEAEES
can be supplied as τέλεσσας not less well
than as τέλεσσον : and there is therefore
no ground for assuming that the athlete
to whom these verses refer had not yet
been victorious at Olympia.

3. See note on verses 46 f.


ODES VII, VIII. 205


452: 456 would probably be too early. Thus his five victories
as a boy would have been gained in the years from 455 (or 454)
to 452.

In respect to metrical composition, Ode VII must have
formed a single system (strophe, antistrophe, and epode). If the
lost column XIII contained 35 verses (the most frequent number),
the ode consisted of 54 verses (3 + 35 +16). If, then, there had
been two systems, part of the second antistrophe must have
come into column XIV; but no metrical correspondence is
traceable between verses in that column and the first eleven
verses of the poem.

As in the case of Ode Ix, the scale of the poem was too
small for the introduction of a myth. The analogy of passages
in Ode VII (27—39) and Ode Ix (19—26) might suggest that
the lost portion in column XIII was occupied, at least in part,
with the circumstances of the victory at Olympia.


ODE VIII. ΠΧ. ed. Kenyon.]


For Automedes of Phlius, victor in the pentathlon at Nemea.—
Date unknown.


§1. Phlius, a Dorian state, was situated in a hill-girt valley,
some nine-hundred feet above sea-level. To the north of it was
Sicyonia; to the south, Argolis: on the west, its territory touched
the Arcadian highlands; to the east lay the vale of Nemea, and
beyond that, the broader vale of Cleonae. Phliasia was a land
of vineyards and cornfields; Dionysus and Demeter held the
foremost place among its deities. At Phlius, as at Sicyon, a
Dionysiac cult with satyr-choruses had existed from olden time.
The poet Pratinas, who won Athenian applause by his satyr-plays
in the earlier years of Aeschylus, was a native of Phlius ; and his
son Aristias, who excelled in the same kind of drama, had
a monument in the agora.

The river Asopus (now the Hagios Georgios), rising in
a mountain-range, the ancient Carneates, S. Ε. 5. of the town,
flows northwards through Phliasia and Sicyonia into the


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


206


Corinthian Gulf?. The lesser streams and springs of that whole
region were regarded by folk-poetry as ‘daughters of Asopus,’
and were personified as nymphs who became the brides of
heroes or gods. Some of these, as Nemea and Cleone, dwelt
near their father. Others were the guardian heroines of cities
far away; as Aegina, carried off from him by Zeus,—Thebe,
Tanagra, Thespia (names transferred from the Boeotian
to the Phliasian Asopus),—Salamis,—Peirene, the fountain-
nymph of Corinth,—Corcyra, Sinope, and many more. The
wide geographical range of the list is partly to be explained by
the fact that Asopus is one of those general river-names, like
Achelous and Alpheus, which occur in various parts of the
Hellenic lands.

The people of Phlius, intent on the vintage and the harvest,
and on the worship of the gods who gave them, found their chief
link with the heroic age of Greece in the renown of the river
whose upper course lay through their secluded valley. Bacchy-
lides has made an artistic use of this motive. Indeed it is the
charm of his ode that it takes us into the heart of these
Peloponnesian uplands.

8.2. Announcing that he will sing of Phlius and of Nemea
(vv. I—Q), the poet tells the story of the Nemean games being
founded by Argive warriors in memory of Archemorus (10—24).
Simonides had already touched upon this theme (fr. 52). Three
feats of Automedes in the pentathlon are next described
(25—39). His return in triumph ‘to the Asopus’ gives the cue
for an elaborate passage on the daughters of the river-god
(40—65)%, This is the chief mythic embellishment of the ode.


1 The character of the flute-music used
at Dionysiac or other festivals in the valley
of the Asopus gave rise to a quaint piece
of folk-lore concerning the river itself.
According to a local myth of Phlius and
Sicyon, the Maeander, passing beneath
the sea from Asia Minor to Peloponnesus,
had ‘generated’ (ποιεῖν) the Asopus (Paus.
11. 5 § 3). The flutes of Marsyas, floating
down the Maeander, were transmitted to
the Asopus, which carried them to Sicyon
(id. 11. 7 § 9).

2 Special reference is made (vv. 42—46)


to those ‘descendants’ of Asopus whose
valour had been felt by the Amazons and
by Troy. The mythical stemma was as
follows:—

Zeus + Aegina (daughter of Asopus)


Aeacus + Endeis


1


f

Telamon Peleus
|

Ajax Achilles


Neoptolemus


ODES VIII, IX,


207


The poet then turns to the rejoicings at Phlius (vv. 68 ff.), with
some mention of the chief deities worshipped there; but the
text is much mutilated. In the closing part, some general
reflections are interwoven with a further reference to the
athlete’s victory.


ODE IX, [X.]


For [Aglaos 7] of Athens, victor in running at the Isthmus.


§ 1. The athlete’s name must have stood at the beginning of
verse 9 or of verse 11, and in both places, unfortunately, the MS.
is defective. In v.9-Blass supplies ᾿Αγλαῴῷ, and nothing more
likely has been suggested. This Athenian belonged to the tribe
Oeneis (v. 18): his father’s name does not occur?

The ode begins with an invocation of Φήμα, who makes
tidings ‘known ‘even in the depths of the nether world’ (v. 4).
The poet then says that he has been moved by the victor’s
brother-in-law to compose this tribute, a memorial of prowess
for ‘all men living’ (ἐπιχθονίοισιν). These traits might suggest
that the athlete was dead. But the words at the end (v. 52f.),
‘ After victory, festal joy is appointed for mortals, seem to cast
some doubt on that view. Do they mean merely that the
friends of the deceased victor held a banquet when this com-
memorative ode was sung? All that appears certain is that
some interval of time had separated the athlete’s victories from
the date of the ode.

According to the most probable interpretation of a passage
in which some words have been lost (vv. 12—26), the athlete


had achieved a signal feat at


1 The mention of the φυλή, without
the father’s name, is regarded by Wilamo-
-witz as indicating that the athlete’s family
was'an obscure one. (From vv. 40 ff. it
may perhaps be inferred, at least, that he
was not wealthy.) Blass further refers
to the rule made by Cleisthenes, when he
introduced many foreigners and resident
aliens into the new Attic tribes, that the
addition to a citizen’s name, used in


the Isthmus by winning two


addressing him, should be the name of
his deme, and not of his father (Arist.
Athen. Polit. c.21 § 4). This athlete, he
suggests, may have been of foreign extrac-
tion. That is possible. But a simpler
possibility also remains open,—viz. that
the father’s name did not suit the metre.
It seems less likely that this name has
been lost after μειγνύμεν in v. 55.


208 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


consecutive foot-races. The first may have been the simple
stadion, or possibly the diaulos. The second was one in which
he traversed the length of the stadion four times,—a race
technically known as the ἵππιος δρόμος (ν. 25, n.). He had also
won two wreaths at Nemea, to say nothing of successes at six
minor festivals (vv. 29—35).

§2. The moderate compass of this ode (56 verses) renders it
instructive in regard to the manner of treatment adopted by
Bacchylides for his minor epinikia,—ze., for those of which the
scale was too small to allow the effective use of a myth. We
find that, after a proem of 18 verses,—somewhat long in pro-
portion to the rest,—he relies on two resources ;—first, an account
of the athlete’s feats (vv. 19—35),—and secondly, a *gnomic’
elerent,—general reflections on life and conduct. Here, a
part of the gnomic passage (vv. 39—45) is abridged from Solon.
The ode ends somewhat abruptly, with an apology for digression,
and a brief reference to the rejoicings which should follow a
victory. It leaves with us a sense that he has executed his
commission with sympathy and good taste, but without much
spirit or zest.


ODE X. [XI]


For Alexidamus of Metapontion, winner of the boys’ wrestling
match at DelphiDate unknown.


§1. With the exception of Pindar’s two odes? for Agesidamus,
the boy pugilist from the Epizephyrian Locri, this is the only
extant epinikion for a native of Magna Graecia; though it is
known that Simonides wrote for Anaxilas of Rhegium and for
Astylus of Croton. Nowhere were the different branches of the
Greek race more conscious of their difference than in the
Italiote colonies; and it is perhaps more than a mere coincidence
that, while the young victor from the Aeolic Locri was celebrated
by Pindar, Ionian poets sang of feats belonging to Rhegium, a
foundation of the Chalcidians, and to the Achaean settlements
of Croton and Metapontion. The Ionian cities of the Aegean


1 Ol. X, XI.


ODES IX, X. 209


in many instances claimed Achaean heroes as their founders! ;
and we can feel that Bacchylides was proud of the legendary tie
which connected his own folk with the home of Alexidamus.

Metapontion (the Latin Metapontum),—best known in Greek
tradition as the place where Pythagoras ended his days,—was
situated on the Tarentine gulf, at a distance (measured by the
coast-line) of some twenty-eight miles south-west of Tarentum.
The period from about 740 to 680 B.C. was roughly that during
which most of the Greek cities in south-eastern Italy originated.
Rhegium, Sybaris, and Croton had already been planted before
Dorian colonists from Laconia, about 708 B.C, arrived at
Tarentum. Not many years later, it would seem, Achaean
settlers from the shores of the Corinthian gulf came to Meta-
pontion. Coins of that city bear the image of the oekist,
Leucippus, and, on the reverse, an ear of corn. For, while
Tarentum was the chief commercial centre in those regions,
Metapontion depended on agriculture, stock-raising, and horse-
breeding. ‘A golden harvest’—perhaps a sheaf of corn wrought
in gold—was, according to Strabo’, the thank-offering which its
Prosperous citizens sent to the Delphian Apollo. Metapontion
was indeed most favourably placed for such pursuits. The
country behind it, sloping up gently from the flat coast to the
Lucanian highlands, is irrigated by two nearly parallel rivers.
That which Bacchylides calls the Casas,—Pliny’s Casuentus,
now the Basiento,—flows into the gulf at a point which was near
the south side of the ancient town. On the banks of this stream
stood a famous temple and grove of Artemis. The other river,
the Bradanus,—still called the Bradano,—enters the sea a few
miles to the north of the site. Well-watered, fertile, and
enjoying a good climate, these lands were suited alike for corn-
growing and for pasturage.

In the true spirit of an Achaean colony, the Metapontines
cherished a legend which carried back the first settlement
on that spot to the heroic age of Greece. Achaeans from
Pylos, it was said, had come thither after the fall of Troy, under
the leadership of Nestor. Had not the citizens, from time


1 See Appendix on Ode x. 119 f. 2 Strabo 6, p. 264.


210 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


immemorial, offered sacrifice to the spirits of the Neleidae?*
Bacchylides does due honour to this venerable tradition, which
was in accord with all the feelings and beliefs of Magna Graecia.
There was no corner of Hellas where the memory of the
Homeric heroes was kept more fully alive. Achaeans, Chal-
cidians and Dorians alike had local cults and festivals of those
heroes. Stesichorus of Himera describes his epic hymns as
‘gifts of the Graces to the people?,’ to be sung ‘as spring comes
on’; and at such festivals he would have found zealous
audiences. Even alleged relics were not wanting. Near Meta-
pontion, for instance, there was a temple of Athena Hellenia,
which boasted possession of the tools with which Epeius had
made the wooden horse’.

§ 2. Our poet begins his ode with an invocation of Victory
(1—14), and then briefly describes the triumph of Alexidamus
in the wrestling-match at the Pythian games (15—23). If there
had not been a miscarriage of justice, he adds, the boy would
have been a victor also at Olympia. (As the Pythian festival
fell in the third year of each Olympiad, it would appear that
Alexidamus had visited Olympia two years before.) But now
his disappointment has been healed, and success has been given
to him, by Artemis, the soothing goddess (Ἡμέρα, v. 39). This is
the link between the immediate subject of the ode and the myth
with which the poet adorns it. He proceeds to relate how the
cult of Artemis Hemera was established at Lusi in Arcadia by
Proetus, king of Argos, when the goddess had cured the dis-
temper of his daughters (vv. 4o—112). From Arcadia (ἔνθεν,
v. 113) Artemis came to Metapontion with the Achaean
warriors, who founded it after the capture of Troy (113—123).
The ode closes with a brief tribute to the old renown of the
Achaeans.

§3. The prominence of Artemis in the religion of Metapontion
would be sufficiently explained by her attributes as a goddess of
rural life, who blesses the produce of the earth and claims
the first-fruits, while she is also a protectress of flocks and


1 Strabo 6, p. 264. 3 See the Aristotelian treatise περὶ
2 Χαρίτων δαμώματα : Stesich. fr. 37. θαυμασίων ἀκουσμάτων, p. 840, § 108.


ODE X. 211


herds’. But it is the specific cult of Artemis Hemera at Lusi
that provides the poet with a cue for the myth. * His words
(in vv. 113 ff.) might naturally imply that this particular cult had
been carried from Arcadia to Metapontion. Whether that was
the case or not, we do not know. If not, then the appro-
priateness of the myth is reduced to this,—that, by consoling
Alexidamus for his mischance at Olympia, Artemis has mani-
fested towards him the same quality which she had shown to
the Proetides at Lusi. The link, if it was only that, would be
rather slight and artificial; but some latitude might be allowed
to the author of an epinikion in search of such embellishment.
As to the treatment of the myth, we note, in the first place,
that it is an example of the leisurely epic manner. After relating
how the Proetides had angered the Argive Hera, and how she
drove them in madness from Tiryns, the poet pauses to explain
why Proetus was living there. Twenty-two verses are then
occupied with the feud between Proetus and Acrisius, and its
results, before the story returns to the frenzied maidens. Another
noteworthy feature is the absence of Melampus. In the best-
known form of the legend, Proetus, when his daughters become
insane, applies for aid to that priest and seer, son of Amythaon,
at Pylos. Melampus bargains for a portion of the king’s realm,
and Proetus refuses: but things grow worse,—other Argive
women go mad,—and the monarch again turns to the priest.
This time Melampus demands a share for his brother Bias
as well as for himself; and Proetus yields. Melampus then
collects a band of youths, and chases the Proetides from the
hills to Lusi, where he propitiates Hera, and heals them by
mystic rites. Whether Bacchylides had or had not mythological
warrant for ignoring Melampus, he certainly had a poetical


1 See ἢ. on verses 1151. The epithet

‘ dyporépa, which Bacchylides gives to
Artemis when he first mentions her in
this poem (v. 37), Seems usually to denote
her as the huntress (as if it were taken
from dypa). But it may well be that in
its original usage it had a larger sense, as
though taken from ἀγρός, denoting the
; goddess of the fields and of rural life. (Cf.


Schreiber on Artemis in Roscher I. p. 566.)
2 This story, which went back in sub-
stance to Hesiod, occurs with variations
of detail in Her. 1x. 34, Apollod. 1. 9. 12,
Diod. Iv. 68, Aelian VA. 3. 42, etc.
Themythographer Pherecydes, with whom
Bacchylides agrees in at least one detail
(see n. on vv. 50—52), brought in
Melampus (schol. Od. 15. 235).


212 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


motive. His aim is to magnify the beneficence of Artemis: No
priest is interposed between the goddess and the afflicted father.
It is directly to her that Proetus makes his prayer; and she
promptly grants it.


OvE XI. [XII]


For Teisias of Aegina, victor in the wrestling-match
at Nemea——Date unknown.


The eight verses which remain from the beginning of this
ode are the last in column xxi. After that, there is a break in
the papyrus. The rest of Ode xI and the beginning of Ode ΧΙ
were contained in that part which has been lost between
column XXII and the column numbered xxIv. It is scarcely
doubtful that the part so lost consisted of more than one column;
but there is no other clue to its extent. The original length of
Ode ΧΙ is therefore wholly uncertain.

As the poet indicates (Ode xu, vv. 75f.), wrestling and
boxing were exercises in which Aegina was pre-eminent. Of
the ten Aeginetans, men or boys, for whom Pindar wrote, no
fewer than eight had won their wreaths either by wrestling alone,
or in the pancration.


ODE XII. [XIII]


For Pytheas of Aegina, victor in the boys’ pancration at Nemea.
Date, perhaps 481 B.Cc.: in any case, probably not later
than 479.


§1. This is the victory commemorated in the fifth Nemean of
Pindar, who has also celebrated, in his fourth and fifth Isthmian
odes, two victories in the pancration won by Phylacidas, a
younger brother of Pytheas. Both Pindar and Bacchylides
signalise the hospitality of Lampon, the father of these youths ;
a man who is described as encouraging his sons, by example and
by precept, to excel in athletics. To this purpose he applied
Hesiod’s maxim, ‘study prospers work?’; and he spared no cost


1 Pind. Z. v. 66 ff. Λάμπων δὲ wedérav| ἔπος, | υἱοῖσί re φράζων παραινεῖ. (Hes.
ἔργοις ὀπάζων ᾿Ησιόδον μάλα τιμᾷ τοῦτ᾽ Of. 410 μελέτη δέ τοι ἔργον ὀφέλλει.)


ODES X— XII. 213


in engaging the best trainers, such as Menander of Athens.
From, the three Pindaric poems we glean some further facts
concerning ‘the family of Cleonicus,—for so Lampon’s father
was named. It belonged to the clan (πάτρα) of the Psalychidae,
—not mentioned elsewhere, but evidently of local distinction.
Lampon’s brother-in-law, Euthymenes, had won the pancration
at the Isthmus. And when Lampon’s sons entered the Aiakeion
in Aegina, they saw in the vestibule a statue of their maternal
grandfather Themistius, still decked with the garlands woven of
grass and flowers which recalled his victories, as boxer and
pancratiast, in the games of Asclepius at Epidaurus}.

§ 2. The chronology of the odes for Pytheas and his brother
cannot be precisely determined; but there are some general data
which assist conjecture. Pindar’s fourth Isthmian refers to the
later of the two victories gained by Phylacidas, and his fifth
Isthmian to the earlier. Both the successes of Phylacidas were
subsequent to that victory of Pytheas which is the theme of
Pindar in his fifth Nemean, and of Bacchylides in this poem.
Now the fourth Isthmian was certainly written not very long
after the battle of Salamis. Having alluded to the ancient
glories of Aegina, Pindar adds (Wem. V. 48 ff.) :—

‘ And now Salamis, city of Ajax, could bear witness that she was saved
from shipwreck in war by Aegina’s seamen,—in that destroying storm of
Zeus when death came thick as hail on hosts unnumbered.’

The words καὶ νῦν, with which the passage begins, could
scarcely have been used, if this addition to the achievements of
Aegina had not then been comparatively recent. The date of
the battle being September, 480, the second victory of Phylacidas,
to which the ode relates, may have been gained at the Isthmia
of 478. In any case, the festival of 476 seems to be the latest
that can be assumed, consistently with the tone of the reference
just cited. The first Isthmian victory of Phylacidas might then
be placed in 480; or, at latest, in 478.

Pytheas, whose victory preceded both those of his brother, is
thus described in the fifth Nemean (vv. 4—6): Λάμπωνος vids...
εὐρυσθενής...οὔπω γένυσι φαίνων τέρειναν ματέρ᾽ οἰνάνθας ὀπώραν,


1 Pind. M. v. 52 ff.


214 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


‘as yet showing no sign on cheek or chin of the down that comes
with the delicate bloom of ripening youth.’ It is clear, then,
that he did not compete among the adults,—a fact which is
confirmed by the mention of his trainer, Menander. But Pindar’s
words, though not incompatible with the supposition that
Pytheas was still a παῖς, distinctly suggest an ἀγένειος. There
was an ἀγενείων as well as a παίδων παγκράτιον at Nemea and
at the Isthmus. Unfortunately we do not know where precisely
the limits between the three ages, παῖς, ἀγένειος and ἀνήρ, were
drawn for the purposes of those games. It would be natural to
suppose that the age of the παῖς was from fourteen to sixteen,—
as the sixteenth year marked the attainment of physical ἥβη
(puberty). It seems improbable that, where these three classes
of competitors were recognised, the ἀνήρ can have been less than
twenty years old. The period from seventeen to nineteen years
of age would then be left for the ἀγένειος. (It is possible that
where, as at Olympia and at Delphi in the fifth century B.c., there
was no separate class of ἀγένειοι, the limit for παῖδες may have
been placed somewhat higher, and that for ἄνδρες somewhat
lower.) The hypothesis that the limit for the ἀγένειος extended
up to nineteen agrees well enough with the passage in Plato’s
Laws (p. 833 6), where he proposes that, in certain foot-races, the
course for the ἀγένειος should be two-thirds of the course for the
ἀνήρ, while that for the παῖς should be only one-third.

In view of all the data, the following chronology seems
possible, though it cannot claim to be anything more :—

Ol. 74. 4. 481 B.C. Victory of Pytheas as an ἀγένειος at
Nemea, at the age (say) of 18. (Pindar, Mem. v.: Bacchylides
XL) See the table on p. 185.


1 This is shown by the agonistic in-.


scription of Ceos, cited in the Introduction
to Ode I; which Dr W. Christ seems to
overlook, when he says (Pindar, p. Ixxv,
1896) that there is no evidence for a
παίδων (or ἀγενείων) παγκράτιον at Nemea
or at the Isthmus.—The title of Vem. v.,
as usually printed by editors, is Πυθέᾳ
Αἰγινήτῃ παιδὶ παγκρατιαστῇ. W. Christ
(p. 270) cites B (Vaticanus) as having
Πυθέᾳ παιδὶ Αἰγινήτῃ gdh εν, where he


suggests that Λάμπωνος may have dropped
out before madi. D (Mediceus) has
Πυθέᾳ vig Λάμπωνος παγκρατιαστῇ.
But the word παιδὶ in the title may have
been merely a grammarian’s inference
from vv. 4—6. W. Christ omits it, in con-
formity with his view stated on p. Ixxv.
Blass does so, because he supposes (rightly,
as I think) that Pytheas was not a παῖς,
but an ἀγένειος.


ODE XII. 215


Ol. 74. 4. 480 B.c. First victory of Phylacidas, the younger
brother of Pytheas, at the Isthmus. (Pindar, /s¢hm. v.[vi].) If
he was then (say) 17, he would compete among the ἀγένειοι.
The traditional title of /sthm. v. is simply Φυλακίδᾳ Αἰγινήτῃ
παγκρατίῳ. But that is not inconsistent with his having been
ἀγένειος. And on the other hand, the words in v. 62, where
Phylacidas and his brother, in contradistinction to their uncle
Euthymenes, are called ἀγλαοὶ παῖδες, indicate that Phylacidas
was not yet ἀνήρ. (παῖδες, used in a general and not a technical
sense, would of course include ἀγένειοι.)

Ol. 75. 2. 478 B.c. Second victory of Phylacidas at the
Isthmus. (Pindar, /sthm. Iv.) He would then be (say) 20,
and would compete among the ἄνδρες.

It remains to consider an objection raised by Professor Blass
to placing the victory of Pytheas as early as 481 ΒΟ. There
had been hostilities between Athens and Aegina, which began
apparently about 488 or 487 B.c., and lasted for some time. It
was only in 481 B.C., on the eve of the Persian invasion, that
the two states were definitely and formally reconciled’. But
Menander, the trainer of Pytheas, was an Athenian. Would an
_ Aeginetan boy have been sent for training to Athens in 482 or
481? Would Pindar and Bacchylides in 481 have praised an
Athenian to Aeginetans? We may reply, in the first place,
that we do not know whether, in 482/1, Athens and Aegina
were still actually at war, though it is probable that a hostile
feeling still existed. But it is not necessary to suppose that the
boy Pytheas was sent to Athens. It is more likely that his
father Lampon, a wealthy man, would engage the Athenian
- trainer to visit Aegina. That this indeed was the case would be
a legitimate inference from Pindar’s phrase,—Xp δ᾽ ἀπ᾽ ᾿Αθανᾶν
| σέκτον ἀεθληταῖσιν ἔμμεν (Nem. V. 49). Even if, in 4821, the
relations between Athens and Aegina were still unfriendly, a
professional trainer, who had his livelihood to make, would
surely not be precluded from accepting such an engagement.
Nor would it be just to the Aeginetans,—so often extolled for
their hospitality and fair-dealing,—to suppose that they would
have felt resentment when the Athenian’s services to the


1 Her. vil. 1453 Grote c. xxxix, vol. v. p. 65.


216 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


Aeginetan youth were commended by the poets of Thebes and
Ceos?.

§ 3. The ode is mutilated at the beginning. The verses with
which column XXIV commences are the last two of a strophe.
In this ode the strophe consists of 12 verses, and the epode of 9;
the system, therefore, of 33. The question is: Was the strophe,
of which the last two verses stand at the top of col. XXIV, the
first strophe of the:poem; or was it preceded by (at least) one
whole system? The answer is clear from the nature of the
subject-matter. At the words ὕβριος ὑψινόου, the first in
col. XXIV, we are already in the middle of a mythical narrative.
More than 10 verses must have preceded; and therefore not less
than 43. It seems unnecessary to suppose the loss of more than
one system before the strophe of which two verses remain; and
the first of those verses may therefore be numbered 44.

In verses 44—57 a speaker, who is watching the struggle of
Heracles with the Nemean lion, predicts his future, and pro-
phesies that in days to come Greeks shall strive on that spot in
the pancration. In a note on these verses I have given reasons
for conjecturing that the prophecy is uttered by Athena, the
guardian goddess of Heracles, in presence of the nymph Nemea.

The poet next describes (vv. 58—76) how Pytheas has
returned in triumph from the Nemean games. He then ad-
dresses the nymph Aegina (77—99). Her praises are chanted
by the maidens of the island, who link them with those of
Endeis, bride of Aeacus, mother of Peleus and of Telamon.
They sing also of Achilles and of Ajax.—It is told how Ajax
bore himself in the fight at the ships,~-when Achilles had
withdrawn from the field, and had fired the Trojans with vain
hopes. The bodies of the Aeacidae have perished, but their
fame lives evermore. (100—174.)

Arete, whose light cannot be hidden, honours Aegina, in
company with Eucleia and Eunomia (175—189).—Let due
praise be given to Pytheas and to his trainer Menander. Truth
upholds genuine merit against envy. (190—209.)—The poet,


1 Blass (Praef. Lx1v) thinks that the Isthmian victory of Phylacidas would
victory of Pytheas at Nemea may have then fall in 478 or 476, and the second
been gained in 479 or 477. The first in 476 or 474.


ODES XII, XIII. 217


trusting in the Muse, offers this song to Lampon, the victor’s
hospitable father. (220—231.)

§ 4. It is interesting to compare Bacchylides with Pindar in
regard to his manner of rendering the indispensable tribute to
the Aeacidae. In each of Pindar’s eleven odes for Aegina
such a reference occurs; and his variety of resource is notable.
As a rule, he takes some one moment or incident in the story of
an Aeacid hero, and, with a few touches, paints a vivid picture,
often instinct with dramatic life: but he seldom insists or
enlarges on the theme. The fifth Nemean, written for this same
victory, supplies an example. Peleus and Telamon, with their
half-brother Phocus,—whom they were destined to slay,—are
standing in Aegina at the altar of their grandsire, Zeus
Hellanios: with hands uplifted to him they pray that the island
may be blest in her sons and famous on the sea. It is all given
in five verses. More than sixty are here devoted by Bacchylides
to an episode, with Achilles and Ajax for its central figures, in
which he is on familiar Homeric ground. It is an epic narrative,
forming, indeed, a distinct section of the poem.


OpE XIII. [XIV.]


For Cleoptolemus of Thessaly, victor in the chariot-race at the
Petraia.—Date unknown.


The position of this ode in the series is presumably due to
the fact that it relates to a minor festival. The only other
reference to the Petraia seems to be that of the scholiast on
Apollonius Rhodius, who mentions ‘the Thessalian Petra’ as a
place ‘where a festival of Poseidon is held’ (see ἢ. on vv. 19—
21). The scene of these games is unknown: it is merely a
conjecture that it may have been somewhere in the region
of Tempe.

The waters of eastern Thessaly, gathered into the Peneius
(now the Salamvrias), flow to the sea through a narrow valley
between lofty peaks of Mount Olympus and Mount Ossa. This
outlet, called Téuan—‘the cutting’—was said in local legend


1M. ν. 9--φ.3.
1. 8. 15


218 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


to have been made by the earth-shaking god. He was called
Petraios as ‘cleaving the rocks!’ The title Λυταῖος, also given
to him in Thessaly, was similarly explained as meaning that
he had opened a way for the river out of its rocky prison*.
Philostratus the Lemnian (¢. 230 4.D.) describes a series of
pictures which he professes to have seen in a portico at Naples.
One of them, he says, showed Poseidon, with the trident in his
uplifted right hand, preparing to strike the hills, and to make a
passage for the Peneius, represented by the reclining figure of a
tiver-god ; while Thessalia, crowned with a wreath of olive-
leaves and corn-ears, was seen rising from the flood under which
her lower valleys had hitherto been submerged’.

The extant portion of the ode consists only of the first
system (23 verses), with a few words from the second strophe
and epode. After 18 verses of gnomic strain, the poet comes
to Cleoptolemus, victor in the chariot-race, who was probably a
rich Thessalian landowner. The large scale of the exordium
might suggest an ode of some length; but the break in the
papyrus after column XXIX leaves that point in doubt.


B. DITHYRAMBS.


OpE XIV. [XV]


The Sons of Antenor: or the Demand for the restitution
of Helen.


§ 1. The subject is an embassy of Menelaus and Odysseus
from the Greek camp at Tenedos to Troy, for the purpose of
demanding that Helen should be restored. This mission is
supposed to take place shortly before the commencement of the
Trojan war.

The primary source used by Bacchylides was presumably
the ‘Cyprian epic’ (Κύπρια), so called because its reputed author,


1 Schol. Pind. 2. 1v. 138. See note 2 See note on ode XVII. 21.
in commentary on XIII. 19g—2I. * Philostr. Zmag. 11. 14.


ODES XII, XIV. 219


Stasinus, was a native of Cyprus; but the ancients knew nothing
definite concerning him, and the authorship must be regarded as
uncertain. The date of the Cypvza cannot well be placed later
than the eighth century B.c. Its contents are known in outline
through the summary given in the Chrestomatheia of Proclus.
From this abstract, and from the fragments of the epic itself
(about fifty verses in all), it is clear that the author of the Cypria
knew the //ad, and composed his work as a kind of introduction
to it,—starting from the first cause of the war, and going down
to that moment in the tenth year at which the //iad opens. It
was told in the Cyprza how, after sailing from Aulis, the Greek
fleet first put in at Tenedos. On landing from their camp in
that island, the Greeks were resisted by the Trojans, and in the
first battle Protesilaus was slain by Hector. Ina second battle,
Achilles routed the enemy, slaying Cycnus son of Poseidon.
Then (says Proclus in his summary) ‘the Greeks sent an
embassy to the Trojans, demanding the restitution of Helen
and of her possessions. The Trojans refused to comply; and
thereupon the siege of Troy began’

The Greek envoys, Menelaus and Odysseus, were hospitably
received at Troy by Antenor?, whose wife, Theano, was priestess
of the city’s guardian goddess, Pallas Athena. He stood their
friend throughout ; and was said to have saved their lives, when
they were endangered by the hostility of certain Trojans’.

§ 2. Bacchylides does not relate the arrival of the envoys, or
their reception by Antenor: that is presupposed. The first verses
describe how Theano, on the acropolis of Troy, opens the temple
of Athena to her guests; perhaps in order that they may bespeak


1 καὶ διαπρεσβεύονται πρὸς τοὺς Τρῶας,
Ἑλένην καὶ τὰ κτήματα ἀπαιτοῦντες" ὡς δὲ
οὐχ ὑπήκουσαν ἐκεῖνοι, ἐνταῦθα δὴ τειχο-
μαχοῦσιν.

2 In Llad 3. 205—224 Antenor him-
self refers to this. He goes on to com-
pare Menelaus and Odysseus as orators
in the Trojan agora.

3 Proclus: ὅτε yap ἐκ Τενέδου ἐπρεσ-
βεύοντο οἱ περὶ Μενέλαον, τότε ᾿Αντήνωρ
ὁ Ἑλικάονος ὑπεδέξατο αὐτούς, καὶ δολοφο-


νεῖσθαι μέλλοντας ~owoev.—From the


words of Agamemnon in /iad 11. 138—
142 it appears that the Trojan Antimachus
had urged in the assembly that the two
Greek envoys should be put to death.
The Ulysses of Ovid (Jet. 13. 196—204)
briefly relates how narrowly he and
Menelaus escaped being murdered by Paris
andhis supporters. His appeal had moved
Priam, Priamogue Antenora iunctum.
Tzetzes (Ante-homerica 158) also relates
how Antenor befriended the envoys.


I5—2


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


220


the favour of the goddess before making their appeal. Here
occurs a lacuna in the papyrus, which contained at least one
speech ; possibly both Theano and Odysseus spoke (vv. 8—36).

Next, we find the sons of Antenor conducting the envoys to
the marketplace of Troy, while Antenor himself proceeds to
inform Priam of their errand. Presently heralds summon the
Trojans to the assembly. ‘Everywhere the loud rumour ran
abroad ; and men lifted up their hands to the gods, praying for
rest from their woes’:—an allusion to those hostilities, noticed
above, which had preceded the embassy. The agora is now
filled, and the debate is about to begin. (37—46.)

The poet proceeds in epic style :—‘ Say, Muse, who was the
first to plead the righteous cause?’ Then comes the speech by
Menelaus. It occupies only 13 verses,—breaking off with a
warning to the Trojans against insolence, which ruined the
Giants. So abrupt is the ending, that it would be. natural to
regard the poem as incomplete. That inference does not,
however, appear certain. It should be observed that the
beginning of the piece is also abrupt. The little poem is, in
fact, a sort of epic vignette, finished in detail, but intended to
suggest a situation rather than to relate a story. In the next
piece (feracles) this intention is still more evident.

§ 3. The double title, written by the second corrector at the
top of column xxx, but now mutilated, was ᾿Αντηνορίδαι ἢ
Ἑλένης ἀπαίτησις. In the text, as we have it, the part of
the Antenoridae is limited to conducting the envoys from the


1 Among the titles of lost plays of
Sophocles are’ Avryvopla: (Nauck?, Zrag.
Frag. p. 160) and “Ἑλένης ἀπαίτησις (2b.
p- 171). The subject of the latter was
undoubtedly this embassy of Menelaus
and Odysseus. As to the ’Avrnvoplia,
Welcker (Gr. 7rag. τ. 466 ff.), with whom
Nauck agrees, recognises its subject in a
passage of Strabo 13. p. 608. After the
capture of Troy, when Antenor’s house
was spared, he and his sons migrated,
with their allies the Paphlagonian ‘Everoi
(27. 2. 852), to the land afterwards known
as Venetia. On the other hand, Blass
and Wilamowitz regard the double title


of the Bacchylidean poem as making it
probable that the ᾿Αντηνορίδαι of Sophocles
was only another name for his ‘Edévys
ἀπαίτησις. Such a second title for the
tragedy is intelligible, however, only if
the sons of Antenor formed the chorus;
but, in the case of such a drama, is that
probable? Welcker held that the chorus
must have been composed of Phrygians,
who could mediate between the views of
Antenor, the friend of the envoys, and
those of their foes, such as Paris (Gr.
Trag. 1. 121). But the question is one
which we must be content to leave doubt~
ful.


ODES XIV, XV. 221


acropolis of Troy to the agora. It is known that Bacchylides
spoke of Theano as having borne fifty sons to Antenor (schol.
7. 24. 496), a mention which doubtless occurred in the lost verses
of this poem (32—36). Fifty was the number of a dithyrambic
chorus; and if, when this dithyramb was produced, the
Antenoridae formed such a chorus, that fact would help to
account for the prominence given to them in the title. It would
also explain the number itself, which the Homeric scholiast
notes as prodigious. The /éad recognises only ten sons of
Antenor!.

In verse 6 Menelaus is Atreides, but in verse 48 Pleisthenides.
The genealogy which made him and his brother sons of Plei-
sthenes, and only grandsons of Atreus, appears first with
Stesichorus (fr. 42), whose influence on Bacchylides is suggested
by this trait. The lyric treatment of epic themes, with occasional
speeches in epic style, is indeed a species of composition in which
Stesichorus was the earliest master.


ODE XV. [XVI]
Heracles,


§ 1. The first eleven verses, which are much mutilated, form
a prelude to the theme of Heracles and Deianeira. The poet
says that he will betake him to the temple of Apollo at Delphi,
as Urania has provided him with songs fitted for the season.
Apollo is away in the north, taking his pleasure on the banks of
the Hebrus, until it shall be time for him to revisit his Pythian
home, and to rejoice once more in the paeans of the Delphian
choruses.

During the winter months, Dionysus was prominent at
Delphi. The paean was mute, since the Healer was absent, and
its place was taken by the dithyramb% A tragic theme of

1 Acamas (//. 2.822), Agenor (11. 59), 2 Plutarch περὶ τοῦ Ex τοῦ ἐν Δελφοῖς,
Archelochus (2. 822), Con (theeldest, 11. c.g : τὸν μὲν ἄλλον ἐνιαυτὸν παιᾶνι χρῶνται
248), Demoleon (20. 295), Helicaon (3. περὶ τὰς θυσίας, ἀρχομένου δὲ χειμῶνος
123), Iphidamas (11. 221), Laodocus (4. ἐπεγείραντες τὸν διθύραμβον, τὸν δὲ παιᾶνα


87), Pedaeus (νόθος, 5. 69), Polybus (11. καταπαύσαντες, τρεῖς μῆνας ἀντ᾽ ἐκείνου
49). τοῦτον κατακαλοῦνται τὸν θεόν.


222 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


passion and anguish, such as that which Bacchylides touches
here, was congenial to the Dionysiac cult, but would have been
wholly alien from a festival of Apollo.

The treatment of the subject is very brief, occupying only
twenty-two verses. Heracles has sacked Oechalia in Euboea,
and has arrived at Cenaeum, the north-western cape of the
island, where he is preparing a sacrifice in thanksgiving to Zeus.
Then it is that destiny impels Deianeira to send him the robe
anointed with the gift of Nessus, on learning that Iole is coming
to her home.

So ends the song,—much as its predecessor broke off with
the hint that impenitent ὕβρις would prove the bane of Troy.
Here, however, the somewhat abrupt close has a clearer warrant
in poetical art, since Deianeira’s resolve is a fateful turning-
point; and the artist’s aim in work on this scale can be more
distinctly seen. It is to mark a moment on the eve of a
catastrophe,—a moment which will be the more impressive
because the sequel is left untold.

§ 2. It is a feature of some interest in this poem that it
suggests certain older poetical sources to which Bacchylides may
have been indebted. The reference to Apollo disporting himself
in the north recalls a hymn of Alcaeus concerning the god’s visit
to the Hyperboreans, some traits of which are preserved in the
prose of Himerius': The Lesbian poet designated the Hebrus
as ‘fairest of rivers?’; and his influence may probably be traced
in those exquisite lyrics of Aristophanes which describe how the
swans on the Hebrus chant their songs to Apollo* <A detail of
language seems to confirm the surmise that the thoughts of
Bacchylides may have been running on Alcaeus. Nowhere else
does he employ πεδά instead of μετά, but here we find
πεδοιχνεῖν.

The passage relating to Heracles at Cenaeum presents a
general parallelism with some verses in the Tvrachiniae of
Sophocles‘. But it affords no ground for supposing that the


1 Or. xiv. 1o=Alcae. frgg. 2, 3, 4, κάλλιστος ποταμῶν.
Bergk* 11. p. 147. 3 Aves 772 ff. : see n. on v. 5.
2 Schol. Theocr. vil. 112 (=Alcae. 4 Trach. 750—762. Seen. on Bacch.


fr. 109, Bergk‘) ; ᾿Αλκαῖός φησιν ὅτι Ἕβρος Xv. 15 f.


ODES XV, XVI. 223


dramatist imitated Bacchylides. Such resemblance as exists is
rather to be explained by a common source. That source was
probably the old epic, entitled the Capture of Oechalia, popularly
ascribed to the Ionian Creophylus of Samos, a poem of which
the repute is attested by an epigram of Callimachus?,


ODE XVI. [XVII]
Theseus, or the Athenian youths and maidens.


§1. Servius (circ. 400 A.D.) found this poem, as we find it,
classed among the ‘dithyrambs’ of Bacchylides, in the later and
larger sense of that term? But it is, in fact, a paean to Apollo,
for a chorus of Ceans at Delos? It seems probable that
Bacchylides wrote for Delian festivals on other occasions also‘.

Minos, king of Crete, after reducing Athens, had imposed
upon it a periodical tribute’ of seven youths and seven maidens,
to be the prey of his wife Pasiphae’s monstrous offspring, the
Minotaur, whom he had immured in the labyrinth built by
Daedalus at Cnosus. On the third occasion when the tribute
fell due, Minos came in person to Athens and selected the


victims’,

1 See the editor's Introduction to the
Trachiniae, p. xviii.

2 Servius on Verg. Aen. VI. 21
(septena guotannis Corpora natorunt).
Quidam septem pueros et septem puellas
accipi volunt, quod et Plato dicit in
Phaedone et Sappho in Lyricis et Bacchy-
lides in Dithyrambis et Euripides in
Hercule, quos liberavit secum Theseus.

3 Cp. 128 ff.: ἠΐθεοι δ᾽ ἐγγύθεν | νέοι
παιάνιξαν ἐρατᾷ fori, | AdAte, χοροῖσι
Κηΐων «.7.A. The subject itself, so closely
connected with the Theseus-legend of the
Delian cult, might well suggest that the
poem was for Delos.

4 See frag. 42 (=57 Bergk); and fr.
12 (=31 Bergk).—Pindar intimates in
Isthm. 1. 6 ff. that he is under a promise
to write an ode for the Ceans, Φοῖβον
χορεύων | ἐν Κέῳ ἀμφιρύτᾳ σὺν ποντίοις |
ἀνδράσιν. The scholiasts there say that
the Ceans had asked him to write a
Δηλιακὸν παιᾶνα or a προσοδιακὸν παιᾶνα.


At any rate Pindar thought of the poem
as one which was to be sung zz Ceos. In
the splendid fr. 87, Xai ὦ θεοδμάτα
x.7.¥., he addresses Delos; and it can
hardly be doubted that the poem which
opened with those verses was to be sung
at a Delian festival. It seems therefore
very questionable whether fr. 87 can be
referred to the poem indicated in Jsthm.
1. 6 ff.

5 The period for the tribute was
variously represented as one year, three,
seven, or nine years: Plutarch 7heseus 15
adopts the last. Preller (11. 295) thinks
that the nine-year cycle points to
expiatory rites, and that the young
Athenians, mythical food forthe Minotaur,
were made hieroduli of a Cretan cult.

6 In the ordinary form of the story,
the victims are chosen by lot. Hellanicus
alone is mentioned by Plutarch (7Ζ λές. 17)
as saying that Minos came to Athens
himself and chose them.


ι


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


224


When our poem begins, he is on board ship with them,
sailing before a north wind to Crete. Besides the seven youths
and seven maidens, there is the young Theseus’, commonly
reputed the son of Aegeus, king of Athens. Minos makes
advances to one of the maidens, Eriboea’, and is rebuked by
Theseus, who threatens to oppose him by force, should he
persist. If Minos is the son of Zeus and Europa, the father to
whom Aethra bore Theseus is Poseidon. Minos, incensed by
the reproof, and still more by the implied doubt of his divine
parentage, prays to Zeus for the sign of the lightning,—which is
granted; and then challenges Theseus, if he be indeed Poseidon’s
son, to bring back a gold ring which he throws into the sea.
Theseus springs overboard: dolphins carry him to Poseidon’s
palace beneath the waves, where the sea-god’s wife, Amphitrite,
gives him a mantle and a wreath. Presently, wearing these
gifts, he reappears, to the dismay of Minos, at the stern of the
ship; and the young Athenians raise a paean.

There the poem ends. But those who heard it sung by the
Cean chorus in Delos would think of the sequel which linked
this story with the local cult. After slaying the Minotaur in
Crete, Theseus sailed with his companions for Athens. On
their way, they landed in Delos,—a scene depicted on the
Francois amphora (now at Florence) by the vase-painters
Clitias and Ergotimus’; the ship which the Athenians have left
is by the shore; Theseus, as a citharist, leads the way, while the
youths and maidens (among whom Eriboea‘ is prominent) follow
him in couples. It was then that they performed, in honour of
Apollo, a dance known in Delian tradition as the geranos
(‘crane-dance’), with movements symbolical of Theseus threading
the mazes of the Cretan labyrinth, That dance was said to


1 The fact that there are fourteen Megara. (Cp. C. Robert in Hermes,


persons besides Theseus might suggest
that Bacchylides followed the tradition
according to which the young hero
volunteered for Crete, while the others
went perforce (Plut. 7%es. 17). Theseus
is usually counted as one of the fourteen.
Hellanicus said that he was the first
choice of Minos.

2 Daughter of Alcathous, king of


vol. XX. p. 355, 1885.)

3 Given from Aon. del? Inst. by A.
H. Smith in Journ. Hellen. Stud. vol.
XVIII. p. 280. Cp. C. Robert in Hermes,
vol. XXXIII. p. 144 (1898).

4 The name on the vase is either
EPIBOIA or ἘΠΊΒΟΙΑ.

5 Plut. Zhes. 21.


ODE XVI.


225


have been held at the ancient altar of the Delian god, the ‘horn
altar, near to the palm-tree where Latona gave him birth, and
to the oval basin on which floated his sacred swans!. The
geranos was still in Plutarch’s time a regular feature of the
Delian festivals.

§ 2. In the episode which Bacchylides relates with so much
beauty and spirit, two mythical elements can be distinguished.
One of these, and doubtless the older, is the welcome which
Amphitrite, the wife of Poseidon, gives to the young Theseus,
her husband’s son by a mortal bride, Aethra. There is an
Ionian graciousness in this conception; it might be contrasted
with the Dorian legend of Hera’s relentless enmity to the son of
Alcmena. This part of the myth was current at least as early
as the beginning of the fifth century B.c. It is the subject of a
painting by Euphronius on a cup (kylix) in the Louvre, a very
fine red-figured vase found at Caere, of which the date is about
500—490 B.C.” This is the earliest known document for any
portion of the story contained in the poem. Amphitrite, seated
in her home beneath the sea,—as is indicated by three swimming
dolphins,—extends her right hand in greeting to the young
Theseus, whose feet are borne up by a Triton. Athena stands
in the centre, a little in the background, wearing helmet and
aegis, holding an owl in her right hand, and a spear in her left;—
her face is turned with a benign expression towards the smiling
sea-goddess. In this picture, however, Amphitrite bestows no
wreath on Theseus. Another and perhaps earlier story made
the wreath a gift to him from Ariadne, daughter of Minos*: the
substitution of Amphitrite as the giver may have been an
Attic touch, presumably somewhat later than the date of the
Euphronius cup.


1 Apollo’s Delian altar, and the palm-
tree beside it, are known to the Odyssey
(6. 162). The altar was called κερατών
(Plut. Zhes. 21), or κεράτινος, because
Apollo in building it was said to have
used the horns of she-goats slain by
Artemis on Mount Cynthus. The famous
τροχοειδὴς λίμνη was in its neighbourhood.
See my article on ‘Delos,’ with reference
to M. Homolle’s explorations, in Journ.


Ffellen. Stud. vol. 1. p. 39 (1880).

? See the article ‘Illustrations to
Bacchylides’ by A. H. Smith in Journ.
ffellen. Stud. vol. XVII. p. 278; with
Plate xIv.

Ὁ Ὁ, Robert in Hermes, vol. XXXII.
(1898), p. 132. He has also traced the
development of the myth in Archaeol,
Anzeiger, 1889, p. 142.


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


226


The other element of the myth is the quarrel between
Theseus and Minos on board ship, and the challenge given
by Minos when he throws his ring into the sea. This looks
like a free invention of poetical fancy, linked on to the older
legend of the welcome ; it is of stirring interest in itself, and also
serves to bring Theseus into the presence of Amphitrite. The
poetical combination had been made, at any rate, before
¢.474—470 B.C.; for the substance of that story was represented
by the painter Micon on a wall of the Theseion at Athens’.
The earliest extant representation in art is supplied by a
red-figured crater of the fifth century B.C., now in the Museo
Civico at Bologna?» There we see Theseus, supported by a
Triton, clasping the knees of Amphitrite in suppliant fashion:
she holds out in both hands the wreath which she is about
to place upon his head. Four Nereids stand or sit behind their
queen,—not dancing, as in the poem of Bacchylides; but one of
them plays a tambourine. In the lower part of the picture
Poseidon reclines on a couch, watching the scene, while a
winged Eros pours out wine for him®. On the left is seen the
stern of the ship from which Theseus has sprung into the deep;
also the Sun-god’s chariot rising from the waves,—for the
painter’s idea was to show in section both the sea-depths and
the upper world. Robert‘ holds that this painting on the Bologna
vase reproduces a part of Micon’s work in the Theseion,—
namely the central and the right-hand portion. In Micon’s


1 Paus. 1. 17. 3.

2 Ghirardini, Museo ltaliano di Ant.
Class. U1. p. 1, Plater. A. H. Smith in
J. A. 5. xvini. p. 277 (fig. 7), where
other references are given on p. 278 (n. 1).

3 This detachment of Poseidon from
the reception of Theseus is in agreement
with the poem, which does not mention
the sea-god as greeting his son (vv. tooff.).
Amphitrite’s welcome of him is the central
incident. There are, however, two vases
on which Poseidon is the chief figure.
(1) A red-figured crater, of the early fifth
century, found at Girgenti, and now in the
Bibliothéque Nationale at Paris: see /.
Hf. 5. Χντ. p. 278, fig. 8. Poseidon, on


a throne, takes the hand of Theseus, who
stands before him. Behind Poseidon
stands Amphitrite (or a Nereid?), hold-
ing up the wreath. (2) A vase of ς. 450
B.C., found at Ruvo, and now in the
possession of the Princess di Tricase:
J. HS. ΧΝΤῚ. p. 279, fig. 9. There are
five persons, all standing. Poseidon, in
the centre, clasps the hand of Theseus,
who is on his left. Behind Theseus is a
figure holding up the wreath. On the
right of Poseidon is Nereus, and next to
Nereus a figure who is about to pour a
libation.
4 Hermes, vol. XXXII. pp. 234 ff.


ODE XVI. 227


picture, he supposes, the whole of the ship, with the company
on board, was shown on the left, but the vase-painter’s limits
precluded him from bringing in more than the stern. This
hypothesis is at least quite consistent with the account given by
Pausanias of Micon’s work. He observes that the story—which
he relates—is not quite clear from the painting, partly through
the ravages of time, and partly because Micon has not painted
the whole. The meaning of that expression is at once intelli-
gible, if Micon’s general scheme was the same as that of the
vase-painter: there is the ship,—here is Theseus received by
Amphitrite; but Micon could not also show Minos throwing the
ring, or Theseus in the act of diving.

§ 3. The incident of the ring, as treated by Bacchylides, raises
a curious question. Pausanias is careful to let us know that
Theseus fulfilled the demand of Minos, and returned to the
surface with the ring as well as the wreath. Hyginus says the
same, adding the pretty touch that the ring was restored to
Theseus by the Nereids. Bacchylides, however, is silent as to
Theseus bringing back the ring. This omission has been re-
garded as deliberate. The poet, it is suggested, felt that it was
beneath the dignity of Theseus to give the proof of his birth
in precisely the form prescribed by the Cretan king? Be that
as it may, the omission renders it unlikely that Bacchylides was
himself the inventor of the ring-motive. Had he been so, he
would presumably have treated it with more care, instead of
simply ignoring it after it had served the purpose of bringing
Theseus to the sea-god’s abode. There must have been some
older source for the story of the challenge given to Theseus by
Minos,—a source common to Bacchylides and Micon. Whether
that source was (as seems most probable) a poet, or a compiler


es heischt, wiirde als des Heroen un-


1 Paus. 1. 17. 2 τοῦ δὲ τρίτου τῶν
wiirdig gelten.” And Weil: ‘II légitime


τοίχων (of the Theseion) ἡ γραφὴ μὴ


πυθομένοις ἃ λέγουσιν οὐ σαφής ἐστι, τὰ
μέν που διὰ τὸν χρόνον, τὰ δὲ Μίκων οὐ
τὸν πάντα ἔγραψε λόγον.

2 Thus Gomperz observes that Theseus,
by bringing back the θεῶν δῶρα, ‘die
einleuchtendsten Beweise seiner gottlichen
Abstammung erbracht hatte: sie gerade
in der Weise zu liefern, wie sein Gegner


sa naissance divine sans se faire le serviteur
du roi de Créte.’. This may be the true
explanation. At the same time it is
difficult to feel quite sure that Bacchylides,
preoccupied with the mantle and the
wreath, may not simply have forgotten
the ring.


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


228


of myths in prose, or merely floating folk-lore, it is impossible
now to say. There is no trace of the ring-motive on the vases,
except in one very doubtful instance. In two other particulars
also the vases differ from the poem. According to the poem,
Ampbhitrite’s gifts are a mantle and a wreath: the vases know
only the wreath. Dolphins, according to the poem, convey
Theseus to his father’s home. This may have been the invention
of Bacchylides himself, suggested by the legends of Arion,
Enalus, and Phalanthus?, On the Euphronius cup and the vase
at Bologna it is a Triton who renders this office to his mortal
step-brother.

§ 4. It would seem that after the fifth century B.C. the story
told in this poem dropped out of sight. There are only two
traces of it in subsequent literature. One is the account, already ©
noticed, given by Pausanias of Micon’s painting. The other is a
passage in the Poetica Astronomica (11. 5) ascribed to C. Julius
Hyginus, a freedman of Augustus, and director of the Palatine
library* (founded in 28 B.c.). Hyginus agrees closely with
Bacchylides, down to the point at which Theseus reaches the
depths: thus he names Eriboea; he mentions the dolphins ; and
he notes that Theseus springs into the sea ‘sine ulla precatione
aut religione parentis’ (1.6. without any prayer, or observance,
addressed to Poseidon)‘. As to the wreath, however,—which
he describes as ‘brilliant with precious stones, —Hyginus says
that it was given to Theseus by Thetis. ‘Others,’ he adds,
say that it was a gift from Amphitrite’. It has been suggested®
that the principal source of Hyginus was an astronomical epic
by Hegesianax of Alexandria Troas (¢. 200 B.c.), and that


1 On the Tricase vase, mentioned * See verses 81—84. It has not been


above (p. 226, n. 3), Theseus seems to hold
in his left hand a small object, which some
take to be a box containing the ring:
others, however, explain it as merely a
fold of drapery brought over the girdle.

* Arion, Her. I. 24: Enalus, Plut.
Mor, p. 163 A: Phalanthus (the legendary
founder of Tarentum), Paus. ro. 13. 10.

8 Suet. De cllust. gramm. 20: Prae-
fuit Palatinae bibliothecae. Cp. Suet.
Aug. 29.


noticed (I think) how strongly this detail
suggests an acquaintance with the text of
Bacchylides,—whether Hyginus knew it
at first hand, or only through some older
source.

5 Ali autem a Neptuni uxore accepisse
dicunt coronant.

8 By Carl Robert, Zratosthenis Cata-
sterismorum relliguiae, pp. 221 ff. (1878):
Arch. Anzeiger, 1889, p. 142.


ODE XVI. 229


Hegesianax had used the poem of Bacchylides. But Hyginus
had also some secondary source, in which Thetis was substituted
for Amphitrite. After the fashion of the later mythographers,
he wove the variant into his story, and mentioned the version
given by his chief source as a variant. There is no doubt
that the Poetica Astronomica was mainly derived from Alex-
andrian sources. If, however, Hyginus had no first-hand
knowledge of Bacchylides, we must infer that, in this story,
the adherence of Hegesianax to Bacchylides had been close.

§ 5. In this poem Theseus is the son of Poseidon. In that
which follows it, he is on his journey to the seat of his putative
father, Aegeus, king of Athens. The mythological significance
of Theseus, as the embodiment of Ionian adventure and achieve-
ment on the sea, is illustrated by the double legend of his
paternity. Poseidon and Aegeus were originally identical,
Aegeus, ‘lord of the waves’ (aiyes)*, from being a title of
Poseidon, became an independent hero, with an Athenian
shrine. Aethra, daughter of Pittheus, king of Troezen,—an
ancient home of Poseidon’s worship,—was the acknowledged
mother of Theseus. But while Athens maintained that his
father was Aegeus, Troezen asserted the claim of Poseidon.
In the first half of the fifth century, under the patriotic impulse
given by the victory at Marathon, followed by the development
of Athenian sea-power, the cult of Theseus became prominent
at Athens. His temple, the Theseion, was built czvc. 474—
470 B.C. His reputed relics were brought from Scyros by
Cimon, and deposited there, in 467. It is not surprising that
Theseus should hold a prominent place in the work of an
Ionian poet who lived at this period®.


1 Cp. Teuffel, Hist. of Roman Lit. 1.
§ 257.

2 See n. on v. 36.

3 Simonides, too, wrote on the voyage
of Theseus to Crete. His narrative must
have been circumstantial, to judge from
the fact that he knew the name of the


Athenian κυβερνήτης (Phereclus), and
varied from the usual story by saying
that the sail given to him by Aegeus, to
be hoisted in the event of success, was.
not white, but red. (Plut. Zhes. 17=
Bergk? fr. 54.)


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


Ove XVII. [XVIII.]


Theseus.


§ 1. The youth, already victorious over foes of superhuman
strength, is journeying as a stranger to Athens, the home of the
father whom he has never seen, the city which is hereafter to
know him as the most glorious of her kings. This situation, so
suggestive for an Ionian poet, is the true subject of Bacchylides.
The brief recital of the young hero’s deeds is merely inci-
dental.

A few words will suffice to recall that earlier part of the story
which is here presupposed. Pandion, son of Cecrops, had been
driven out of Attica by his cousins, the sons of Metion, brother
of Cecrops and son of Erechtheus. He went to Megara, where
he was made king; and there Aegeus and three other sons were
born to him. After Pandion’s death, Aegeus, aided by his three
brothers, reconquered Attica, which the four shared among them ;
he himself became king of Athens. But he lived in fear of the
Pallantidae, the fifty giant sons of his brother Pallas, who had
designs on his throne. He was childless; and on consulting
Apollo at Delphi as to his hope of issue, received an obscure
response, on which he resolved to seek light from the wise
Pittheus, king of Troezen’. Pittheus, who divined the meaning
of the oracle, was led by it to desire that Theseus should be
united with his daughter Aethra ; and he laid his plans accord-
ingly?» But Aethra had already been visited by the sea-god
Poseidon, whom Troezen worshipped; and he (as the Troeze-
nians deemed) was the true father of the son whom she afterwards
bore. Before leaving Troezen, Aegeus left with Aethra his


1 Apollod. 3. 15. 5: Plut. Zhes. 3.
Cp. Eur. Med. 674—686.

2 Apollod. Zc. μεθύσας αὐτὸν τῇ
θυγατρὶ σνγκατέκλινεν : Plut. 2c. ἔπεισεν
αὐτὸν ἢ διηπάτησε τῇ Αἴθρᾳ συγγενέσθαι.
The purport of the oracle (ἀσκοῦ τὸν
προὔχοντα πόδα... μὴ λύσῃς K.T.A.) Was to


enjoin continence on Aegeus until he
should have returned to Athens. Pittheus,
inferring that his guest was not doomed
to be childless, wished that his own house
should furnish the heir to the Athenian
throne.


ODE XVII. ee


sandals, and an ivory-hilted sword', charging her to hide these
under a hollow rock? on a mountain between Troezen and
Hermione. When their son should have grown to such strength
that he could move the rock, she was to give him these tokens of
his birth, and send him to Athens. The day came at last when
Aethra brought Theseus, now sixteen years old, to that place in
the hills: he moved the great stone with ease; she gave him the
sandals and the sword, and told him that he must now seek his
father Aegeus at Athens. She and Pittheus wished him to take
ship across the Saronic gulf. But the youth was bent on going
by land, though the road was beset with perils. The legend of
his journey from Troezen to Athens goes back to a time when
Ionians were dominant on those coasts. Theseus was the hero
who had purged the seaboard of malefactors and monsters,
as the security of the route from eastern Thessaly to Delphi was
associated with like deeds of Heracles.

§ 2. The dithyramb of Bacchylides is in four strophes, each
of fifteen verses, In the first an unnamed person, who must be
conceived as the leader of a chorus of Athenians’, asks Aegeus,
king of Athens, why a call to arms has just been sounded.
The speaker’s anxious surmises reflect a time of unrest in Attica,
when danger from the Pallantidae was impending. Aegeus

“teplies, in the second strophe, that a messenger‘ from the
Isthmus has brought news of wondrous deeds done by an
+ It seems almost certain that in v. 48 which claimed Theseus as founder.

~ ἐλεφαντόκωπον is rightly supplied by 3 Neither of the persons is indicated
᾿᾿ Desrousseaux as an epithet for the sword in the margin of the Ms. The ἀόριστον
carried by Theseus. Ovid (Met. 7. πρόσωπον is an Athenian (v. 5 ἁμετέρας
421 ff.) speaks of the sword’s ‘ ivory hilt’ χθονός), and his tone is much like that
bearing some device which Aegeus recog- Οἱ the elders in a tragic chorus (vv. 12 ff,
nised. Here, then, we should have a 41 ff). He represents the folk who in
slight but sufficient proof that Bacchylides _ time of perplexity have recourse to their
knew the story of the πατρῷα σύμβολα king, as the afflicted Thebans turn to
given by Aethra to her son. A pointed Oedipus.

reference to the youth’s πέδιλα was hardly 4 This messenger is designated as

to be expected. κἂρυξ (v. 17). It does not appear from

2 The πέτρα Θησέως, which, according the text whether he is so called merely as
to Pausanias (2. 32. 7), was formerly being the proclaimer of the tidings, or
called the Bwuds Σθενίου Διός. Near it whether he is supposed to be a pro-
was the source of the river Taurius fessional ‘herald’ who had been sent by


(afterwards known as the Hyllicus), and Aegeus on some mission to the Isthmus.
ashrineof Aphrodite Nympha or Nymphia,


INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


232


unknown youth, who is now approaching Athens; and hints
that these tidings make him uneasy. In a third strophe,. the
Chorus-leader asks for some further particulars. The fourth
strophe is a short description by Aegeus of the youth’s equip-
ment and aspect.

Though the ending might seem somewhat abrupt, the poem
is unquestionably complete. Just as in the Aztenoridae and in
the Heracles, the poet has presented a situation, and his purpose
is fulfilled.

§ 3. Certain points in the mythology are noteworthy. (1) The
wife of Pandion and mother of Aegeus, elsewhere called Pyliat,
is here Creusa, who, in the Attic legend as given by Euripides,
is wife of Xuthus and mother of Ion. Bacchylides, whose poem
was undoubtedly destined for Athens, would scarcely have
made this use of Creusa’s name, if he had been aware of any
positive Attic tradition which was against it: and we may infer
that in his time the tradition had not yet become fixed.

(2) Diodorus and Plutarch name six victims of Theseus on
this journey,—Periphetes, Sinis, Phaia, Sciron, Cercyon, Pro-
crustes*, The ‘club-bearing’ Periphetes, slain at Epidaurus, is
ignored by Bacchylides, who mentions the five others. This
omission might be explained by the fact that the poet’s narrative
starts only from the Isthmus of Corinth. But it is more probable
that, when he wrote, the Epidaurian deed had not yet been
included in the cycle. Periphetes is absent, as Carl Robert
points out, from the earlier illustrations of the journey in works.
of art, and first occurs on a vase of which the date is
c. 450—440 B.C... He may have been added in order to bring
the number of feats up to six, ze half a dodecathlos*.

(3) Theseus is described as having two comrades (verse 46).
It seems probable that the allusion is to Peirithous and
Phorbas, whom some vase-paintings associate with Theseus in:


1 See note on v. 15.

2 Diod. Iv. 59: Plut. 7hes. 8—11.

8 Hermesvol. XXXII. pp. 149 f. The
vase, now at Munich, is given by Gerhard,
Auserl. gr. Vas., 232, 233 nr. 2: Jahn,
nr. 372, p. 119: etc. In his careful
article on Periphetesin Roscher’s Lexikon,


Hofer accepts Robert’s view: see esp.
pp- 1276f.

4 Epidaurus would be a natural choice.
for the scene of the additional feat, as no
other adventure occurs in the compara-.
tively long interval between Troezen and.
the Isthmus.


ODE XVII. “δὰ


the act of carrying off the Amazon Antiope. There is also a
vase which gives him two companions in his encounter with
Sinis and with Procrustes. Now the presence of such supporters
is distinctly alien from the spirit of the original legend. The
very essence of that legend is that the youth is alone on his
perilous journey, as he appears in the sculptures of the Theseion®.
A vase-painter might introduce other figures for the sake of
balance or symmetry in his scheme, and would naturally select
heroes associated with Theseus in his later deeds: but such an
addition betrays the instinct of a painter rather than that of
a poet. The agreement of Bacchylides with the vases in this
detail is all the more significant. He was influenced by those
versions of current myths which the vase-painters popularized,
and which, within certain limits, they could modify by introducing
traits suited to the peculiar requirements of their own art.

§ 4. A special interest belongs to this poem as the only extant
-example of a dithyramb in the form of a dialogue. Aristotle
traces the origin of tragedy to the leader of the dithyramb
(6 ἐξάρχων τὸν διθύραμβον). It cannot be doubted that in the
early dithyramb there was some element of dialogue between
‘leader and chorus, the subject being the fortunes of Dionysus, or
of a hero. Thespis is said to have introduced an actor,—
distinct from the chorus-leader,—who could give a distinctly
dramatic character to the part formerly taken by the leader.
The word for ‘actor, ὑποκριτής, is usually explained as the
‘answerer, because his recitals were elicited by the inquiries of
the chorus,—just as, in mature tragedy, a question by the
chorus often gives the cue for a narrative. In this poem of
Bacchylides, the chorus interrogates Aegeus, and he is the
‘answerer. But the tradition of dialogue is presumably the
only link between the early dithyramb, from which tragedy
originated, and this dithyramb written by Bacchylides in days
when Attic tragedy was mature. The coryphaeus and Aegeus
have alternate strophes of equal length. A result is that, while
the questions of the coryphaeus are somewhat diffuse, the replies


1 Robert in Hermes XXXIIL. p.150: (Jahn). ;
Weizsackeron Peirithous in Roscher’s Lex. 2 Baumeister, Denxkm. vol. 111. pp.


p. 1783: Arch, Zeit. 23 (1865), fig. 195 1779 ff.
7. B, 16


234 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


of Aegeus are closely packed. It is not to be supposed that
the older type of dithyramb was on such a model. This
artificial structure has the stamp of developed lyric art, and, in
the case of dialogue, is suited only to a poem on a small scale.
Bacchylides is seen here, not as the inheritor of the old
dithyramb, but rather as a precursor of the new. He illustrates
a tendency in form which was carried much further by dithy-
rambic poets in the latter part of the fifth century. The most
prominent of these was Philoxenus (¢. 435—380 B.C.), in whose
hands the dithyramb, with florid music and scenic accessories,
approximated to the character of opera. One of his pieces, the
Cyclops, is parodied by Aristophanes in a passage of the Plutus}.

§ 5. The subject, and the reference to Athens at the close,
make it probable that this dithyram bof Bacchylides was performed
by an Athenian chorus at an Athenian festival. Two of the
principal occasions on which dithyrambic contests took place
were the Great Dionysia, towards the end of March, and the.
Thargelia, towards the end of May’. At the Great Dionysia,
there was a competition between five cyclic choruses of boys,
and another between five such choruses of men. Each of these
ten choruses represented one of the ten Attic tribes, which
furnished the choregus, and all the fifty choreutae.

The Thargelia was a festival in honour of Apollo and
Artemis, especially as deities who bless the fruits of the earth
(θαργήλια). The first day was devoted to certain expiatory rites:
on the second, there was a contest of cyclic choruses. Now the
expiatory rites of the Thargelia were said to have been founded
by Theseus, when he visited the temple of Apollo Delphinius


1 Ar. Plut. 290—315. Carion per- 2? The Great Dionysia, Thargelia,


sonates Polyphemus, while the Chorus
are his sheep (a parody, as the scholia
attest, on the Cyclops of Philoxenus, from
which some of the words are taken) : then
he is Circe, and the chorus are swine.
Carion and the Chorus sing alternate
strophes of equal length, as do the persons
in the dithyramb of Bacchylides. But
we cannot be sure that this feature of the
parody was taken from the dithyramb of
Philoxenus.


Prometheia, and Hephaisteia are men-
tioned in Corp. Inser. Gr. no. 213 as
festivals at which dithyrambic contests
took place. From Dem. Jz Mid. § τὸ
it appears that there was then no dithy-
rambic contest at the Lenaea.—At the
Oschophoria in Pyanepsion (October) the
memory of Theseus, the reputed founder,
was honoured: but there scems to be no
evidence for a contest of cyclic choruses
on that occasion.


ODES XVI, XVIII. 235


at Athens before his departure for Crete. A dithyramb relating
to Theseus would therefore have been especially appropriate at
the Thargelia. But, whatever the occasion of performance may
have been, this vivid little poem would doubtless have been
welcome to an Athenian audience.


OpE XVIII. [XIX]


lo. For the Athenians.


§1. The reference at the close to Dionysus and his cyclic
choruses clearly indicates a dithyramb; and the place of per-
formance was Athens (v. 10). Io was the mythical ancestress
of Dionysus, the stemma being as follows :—

Inachus+ Melia (daughter of Oceanus)
To + Zeus


Epaphus + Memphis


Libya + Poseidon
Agenor (Phoenician) + Telephassa Belus (Assyrian) + Anchinoe
|
Cadmus + Harmonia ἱ ]


Semele + Zeus Aegyptus Danaus
|


Dionysus


Aeschylus, in his Supplices (c. 491 —490 B.C. ?) and Prometheus
Vinctus (probably later than 468), is the oldest authority for the
Io-myth. The maiden Io, daughter of the Argive king Inachus,
and priestess of the Argive Hera (Supp/. 291), was urged in
repeated dreams to visit the meadow by the marsh of Lerna,
where she was destined to receive the embraces of Zeus. Her
troubled father consulted the oracles at Delphi and Dodona.
At first the responses were dark: but in the end Apollo clearly
commanded him, on pain of destruction, to turn her out of
house and home. He obeyed; for Zeus was driving him (Prom.
V. 671). Then the god’s wrathful wife, Hera, whom Io had


1 A. Mommsen, Heortol. p. 421: Preller, Gr. Myth. p. 209. Plut. Zhes. 18.


236 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


once served, transformed her into a cow (Sul. 299)’, and sent
the hundred-eyed Argus to watch her. But Zeus sent Hermes ;
and by some sudden doom—the Io of Aeschylus does not define
it (Prom. V. 698 f.)\—Argus perished. Even then Io was not
free: Hera’s malice still pursued her. Vexed by a gad-fly
(οἶστρος), she roamed from land to land. At last Zeus guided
her steps to the Nile. There, by his touch (ἐπαφή), she was
restored to the human form, and bore Epaphus, destined to be
lord of Egypt and founder of a mighty race.

The conception of the transformed Io in mythology and art
exhibits three phases. (1) In the earliest, she is a white cow
or heifer. (2) In the second,—which dates from the early part
of the fifth century,—she is a maiden with the horns of a cow,
the βούκερως παρθένος of Aeschylus (Prom. V. 588). The
dramatist himself may have been responsible, at least in part,
for this compromise ; which was, indeed, inevitable, if Io was to
be brought on the scene as a speaking person. The language of
Bacchylides (verses 16—18) rather suggests that such an image
was in his mind. (3) In the third and latest phase, Io is once
more depicted as a white cow”.

§2. Nothing could be slighter than the treatment of Io’s story
by our poet, who scarcely fulfils the promise of his exordium. It
will be noticed that his hesitation between the different traditions
as to the death of Argus (vv. 29—36) is illustrated by the
mysterious vagueness of Aeschylus on that subject (Pr. V.
698 f.). Evidently Io interests Bacchylides chiefly as the
ancestress of Dionysus; the god’s birth is the climax towards
which he hastens.

Is the poem, as we have it, complete? It ends with the 15th
line of an epode, and with a completed sense. That epode
cannot have been much longer, or its length would be dispro-
portionate to that of the strophe (18 lines). If, then, any
considerable part of the poem has been lost, that part must have.
contained not less than 51 verses; and, since we have now taken
leave of Io, they must have been occupied with Dionysus.


1 According to another version it was (Apollod. 2. 1. 3).
Zeus who transformed Io; then Hera 2 See Appendix on v. 16.
obtained the cow as a gift from him


ODES XVIII, XIX. 237


That is possible ; but it seems hardly probable. Having regard
to the author’s manner of breaking off other poems of this class
(as XV and XVII), we might well suppose that the Jo is
complete as it stands.


ODE XIX, [XX]


For the Lacedaemonians.


Idas.


§ 1. Only the first eleven verses remain. ‘The maidens of
Lacedaemon sang such a song as this, when Idas was bringing
home Marpessa, after escaping death by the help of Poseidon’ ;
such is their purport.

Idas, son of the Messenian Aphareus and Arene, was a
suitor for Marpessa, daughter of Evenus, king of Pleuron in
Aetolia. venus compelled every suitor to contend with him,
and slew those whom he vanquished. Already he had covered
the roof of Poseidon’s temple with the skulls of his victims}.
But Poseidon furnished Idas with a chariot drawn by winged
steeds*; and in this, after defeating Evenus, he carried off
Marpessa. Evenus pursued the fugitives as far as the Aetolian
river Lycormas ; but, finding that he could not overtake them,
slew his horses, and drowned himself in the torrent, which
thenceforth bore his name*®. Idas brought Marpessa to his
home; which the older form of the legend placed in Messenia‘.
Apollo, enamoured of Marpessa, carried her off’ from her
husband; but the undaunted Idas bent his bow against the


1 Bacchylides mentioned that detail,
no doubt in this poem: see ἢ, on v. 7,
and fr. 49 (= 61 Bergk).

2 He gave like aid to Pelops, in
carrying off Hippodameia from Oenomaus
(Pind. O. 1. 86 f.).

3 See n. on XV. 34.

4 At Arene, mentioned along with
Pylos in //. 2. 591- Aphareus came
᾿Αρήνηθεν (Ap. Rhod. 1.152). In Apollod.
1.7. 8 Idas brings Marpessa els Δεσσήνην.
Theocr. XXII. 208 Μεσσάνιος "Ἴδας.

5 Folk-lore connected the name Mdp-
πῆσσα with the words μ᾽ ἅρπασε, ‘he
has carried me off!’ Hence the


legend of the rape by Apollo, and of
her agonized cry,—in memory of which
her daughter Cleopatra had heen called
᾿Αλκυόνη. (There was a belief that the
female halcyon, when separated from the
male, continually utters a plaintive cry.)
Cp. Z. 9. 564 κλαῖ᾽, ὅτε μιν ἑκάεργος
ἀνήρπασε etc.: Paus. 5. 18. 3 (inscription
on Cypselus-chest)“Idas Μάρπησσαν καλ-
λίσφυρον, ἅν οἱ ᾿Απόλλων | ἅρπασε, τὰν ἐκ
ναοῦ ἄγει πάλιν οὐκ ἀέκουσαν. (Apollo is
there supposed to have placed her for
safety in his temple, pending the issue of
his strife with Idas.)


238 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


archer-god. Zeus interfered, and gave Marpessa her choice
between her two lovers. She chose the mortal, fearing lest the
god might forsake her when she grew old’.
§ 2. The nature of this poem, when it was entire, can only
be conjectured from the opening words :—
Σπάρτᾳ ποτ᾽ ἐν ε[ὐρυχόρῳ
ξανθαὶ Λακεδαιμον[ίων
τοιόνδε μέλος κ[όραι ὕμνευν:
the maidens sang ‘ such a song as this’ We are reminded of the
hymenaeus with which, in the Bzrds of Aristophanes (1731 ff.),
the Chorus welcome the newly-married Peithetaerus and Basileia,
where the rhythm is somewhat similar :—
“Hog wor ᾿Ολυμπίᾳ
TOV ἠλιβάτων θρόνων
ἄρχοντα θεοῖς μέγαν
Μοῖραι ξυνεκοίμισαν
τοιῷδ᾽ ὑμεναίῳ.
| Ὑμὴν ὦ Ὑμέναι᾽ ὦ.
There, the words τοιῷδ᾽ ὑμεναίῳ are immediately followed by
the refrain itself. But here Bacchylides proceeds to explain the
occasion of the maidens’ song,—


eo oy


ὅτ᾽ ἄγετο καλλυπάζρᾳον
κόραν θρασυκάρϊ duos *Tdas—


when Idas was bringing Marpessa home, after escaping death at
the hands of Evenus. The poet’s prefatory outline of the story
has not yet been finished when, at the eleventh verse, our
fragment breaks off: how much more space was given to it, we
cannot tell. But, at any rate, when this introductory passage
was complete, the poet much have returned to the theme
announced at the outset,—rovdve μέλος κόραι ὕμνευν. If those
words could mean merely that the sadyect of the maidens’ song
was the exploit of Idas, then, indeed, we might suppose that the
rest of the poem consisted in the poet’s own narrative of the
deed. But manifestly the phrase τοιόνδε μέλος promises that the
poem is to give us some idea of the manner in which they sang.


1 Simonides af. schol. 721, 9. 556 = fr. 216 Bergk: Apollod. 1. 7. § 9.


ODE XIX. 239


A chant of welcome by maidens to a newly-married couple on
their home-coming would necessarily have the character of
a hymeneal strain. The eighteenth Idyll of Theocritus is an
epithalamium for Helen and Menelaus, sung by twelve Spartan
maidens at the doors of the bridal chamber. Its themes are,
praise of the peerless bride, congratulations to the bridegroom,
and good wishes for their future. The song of the maidens for
Idas and Marpessa need not be conceived as an epithalamium
sung outside the thalamos. But at least it must have been
somewhat in the style and tone of a hymenaeus: it must have
had some reference to the nuptials. This would by no means
preclude interwoven allusions to the details of the adventure by
which the bridegroom had won the bride. We might conjecture,
then, that the framework of the piece was of the following kind.
(1) Bacchylides began with a short sketch of the story, sufficient
to orientate his hearers. (2) Then he returned to the song of
the maidens. They greeted Idas and Marpessa with a joyous
nuptial strain, interspersed with references to the hero’s contest
with Evenus, to his escape with his bride in the winged chariot,
and to the fate of the baffled pursuer at the Lycormas. The
poem of Bacchylides could not, of course, be classed as a
ὑμέναιος. It was a free effort of lyric fancy in the treatment of
the myth, so planned as to form a setting for the hymeneal song
of the maidens.

§ 3. One point, which is of some mythological and even
historical interest, comes out clearly. The home to which Lace-
daemonian maidens welcome Idas must be in Lacedaemon. Now
Idas and his brother Lynceus, the Apharetidae, were originally
Messenian heroes. As is indicated by the name Λυγκεύς, they were
primarily Messenian gods of light, as the Dioscuri were at Sparta’.
The best known episode in the story of the Apharetidae is their
deadly feud with the Dioscuri. Pindar is our oldest source for
it (Vem. X. 60—72). The Dioscuri carry off the cattle of the
Apharetidae. Idas slays Castor. Both the Messenian brothers
are then pursued by Polydeuces, who overtakes them at the
tomb of their father Aphareus. He there slays Lynceus, while


1 See the article ‘Idas’ by Weizsicker in Roscher’s Lexzkon 11. 98.


240 INTRODUCTIONS TO THE ODES.


Idas perishes by the thunderbolt of Zeus. Whether that
legend was shaped on the west or on the east of Mount
Taygetus, the sentiment which animates it reflects the history of
Spartan conquest. The cause of the Messenian brethren is
overthrown ‘at the paternal tomb,’—on the sacred soil of their
fatherland; and the Spartan heroes, who have been the aggres-
sors, gain a victory which Zeus confirms. Yet, before the
beginning of the fifth century, the Apharetidae had been
annexed by the mythology of Lacedaemon. Simonides is said
to have described Idas as a Lacedaemonian ; though he mentioned
Arene in Messenia as the place where Apollo sought to deprive
him of Marpessa*, Pausanias saw a tomb of Idas and Lynceus
at Sparta, near the rotunda called the Skias*» He observes
that, according to a more probable account, they were buried in
Messenia; and adds a pertinent remark. The overthrow and
exile of the Messenians had, he says, left their local traditions at
the mercy of any neighbours who wished to appropriate them.
Indeed, during the interval between the Spartan capture of
Eira, about 668 B.c., and the rebuilding of Messene in 369, the
name of Messenia, as a distinct country, was virtually blotted
out. That is the historical significance of the fact that Simonides
and Bacchylides could make Idas a Lacedaemonian.


1 Theocritus (XXII. 137—213) varies
the details. The cause of the quarrel is
that the Dioscuri have carried off the
daughters of Leucippus, to whom the
Apharetidae were betrothed. At the
tomb of Aphareus, Castor slays Lynceus,
while Polydeuces merely looks on. Idas
(as with Pindar) is smitten by Zeus.
Theocritus had to provide an ἀριστεία for
Castor, as the first part of this Idyll had
told how Polydeuces vanquished Amycus.
He makes the Apharetidae first cousins
of the Dioscuri (Aphareus having been
a brother of Tyndareus): v. 170.

2 Simonides fr. 216. The Homeric
scholiast’s summary of that poet’s story
begins thus:—"Idas, ὁ ᾿Αφαρέως μὲν παῖς
κατ’ ἐπίκλησιν, γόνος δὲ Ποσειδῶνος, Λακε-
δαιμόνιος δὲ τὸ γένος. It is remarkable


that, according to the scholiast, Simonides-
named ’Opruylay τὴν ἐν Χαλκίδι, instead
of Pleuron, as the place from which Idas
carried off Marpessa.

3 Paus. 3. 13. 1: cp. E. Curtius,
Pelop. 11. 220.—Lycophron (559) places
the tomb of the Apharetidae at Amyclae,
some three miles s. of Sparta. Ovid
(Fast? 5. 708) mentions the Laconian
Aphidna as the scene of the strife be-
tween the Apharetidae and the Dioscuri.
He follows Theocritus in representing the
Leucippides as the cause of the quarrel ;
and Aphidna was their home. Cp. Steph.
Byz. s.v.:"Aguiva δῆμος ᾿Αττικῆς" ἔστι καὶ
“Λακωνικῆς, ὅθεν ἦσαν αἱ Λευκίππιδες κιτ.λ.
Hyginus (Poet. Astron. 11. 22) also says,
in oppido Aphidnis (so Lemaire, for
Ariadnis).


BAKXYAIAOY


AEIVANA


17


ETINIKOL.


* * *


I.


<APIEIQI
TTAIAI TTYKTHI


KEIQI
IZOMIA >


* * *


ἐπ. ἐ.3 - v Jape -- VOe-UUH He


4 «1 O°


τριτάτᾳ με; - -


s ἁμέρᾳ Μίνως ἀρ[ῃοῆς
6 ἤλυθεν αἰολοπρύμνοις


5 7


στρ. ς΄.


ναυσὶ πεντήκοντα σὺν Κρητῶν ὁμίλῳφ᾽


: Διὸς Εὐκλείου δὲ (ξ)έκα-


2 τι βαθύζωνον κόραν


3Δεξιθέαν δάμασεν"


+ καί (F)ou λίπεν ἥμισυ λαῶν,


Io «ἄνδρας ἀρηϊφίλους,


I. 1.19 This fragment, representing 19 verses, is fr. 1 in Kenyon’s ed. princeps


(p- 194).


6th of an antistrophe.


The column of the papyrus to which it belonged immediately preceded that
with which the continuous text now begins.
according to Blass, the 111th of the Ode:


Verse τ was the 3rd of an epode, and,
see Appendix. Verse 19 was the


After it, 9 verses have been lost from the bottom of the


I. 2 τριτάτᾳ. The passage which im-
mediately preceded these verses probably
described how Zeus and Apollo, coming
to Ceos in human guise, were hospitably
received by Dexithea and her sisters.
(See Appendix.) One of the two gods
may have predicted the high destiny
which was in store for the maiden.
τριτάτᾳ.. «ἁμέρᾳ is presumably the third
day after the divine visit. What letter
followed pe, is wholly uncertain. If it
was τ, μετὰ κείναν would be possible:
if v, pevexdppas.


8 dp..s. If the second letter was p,
the word was probably ἀρήιος, scanned
as ἀρῇος. Such a scansion of ἀρήιος does
not occur elsewhere ; but Theognis (552)
has δηίων (δήων). Dialect forbids dpetos.
The other possibilities are ἄριστος and
dpwyés, but neither is so fitting.

4 αἰολοπρύμνοις (only here), ‘with
glittering sterns’ (cp. the Homeric αἰολο-
uirpns),—referring to the gilding or
painting of the ornamental ἄῴφλαστον,
the high curved stern of the ship (//. 15.
717, = ἄκρα κόρυμβα of 71. 9. 241). Cp.


ODES OF


VICTORY.


Ι,
For Argeius of Ceos, victor in the boys’ boxing-match
at the Isthmus.
* * * * * *


On the third day thereafter came warlike Minos, bringing epode s.


a Cretan host, in fifty ships with gleaming sterns:


and by the favour of Zeus who gives glory, he wedded the str. 6.


deep-girdled maiden Dexithea; and left with her the half of


his folk, warriors


same column; viz., vv. 7


The continuous text then begins in a new column with 7roA.......


of a strophe.
1 αφθε.


2 The faint traces of a letter before τριτάτᾳ suit σ.
3 AP...C. The traces of the letter after A


letter after we may have been 7 or ν.


and 8 of that antistrophe, and the whole of an epode.


y βαθυ-, the first verse


Doubtful: only traces of the lower portions of the letters remain.


It can hardly have been v.—The


suit P best, but would also be consistent with I’ or II (ἀρήιος Blass: dyavés Platt).


8 EEIOEAN. The N was at first A.


Soph. PA. 343 νηὶ ποικιλοστόλῳ, a ship
‘with gaily decked prow.’

5 ναυσὶ...ὁμίλῳ. The Ms. wrongly
divides this verse into two, the first ending
with σύν. It does not, however, so divide
the corresponding verses, 51 and 70.

6 £. Διὸς Εἰὐκλείον. Zeus Εὔκλειος is
here the god by whose grace the union of
Minos with Dexithea is effected. The
epithet suggests the renown which might
commend the warrior to the maiden, and
also the glory which was in store for their
offspring. But some further associations
were probably blended with this thought.
Among the Boeotians and Locrians Ar-
temis Εὔκλεια, the virgin goddess of fair
fame, received offerings from brides and
bridegrooms before marriage (Plutarch
Aristid. 20, βωμὸς yap αὐτῇ καὶ ἄγαλμα
κατὰ πᾶσαν ἀγορὰν ἵδρυται, καὶ προθύουσιν


αὐτῇ αἱ γαμούμεναι καὶ οἱ γαμοῦντε:).
Again, Εὔκλεια is found associated with
Πειθώ (C. /. Gr. 8364). There was a
Corinthian festival called Εὔκλεια (Xen.
“72. IV. 4 § 2), though we do not know to
what deity it pertained.—HdxAevos is not
elsewhere found as a title of Zeus. It
occurs as the name of a month in the
Corcyraean calendar (cp. Boeckh C. Z. 11.


Ρ. (ae ;

Ἐ)έκατι, by grace of: cp. v. 33 f.
The ms. divides the verses wrongly,
giving -κατι to v. 7. It has the same
metrical error in the corresponding places,
és 23 ἴ., 37f., 52f., Oof.: see also n. on
16.

9 Fou, lit. ‘ for her,’ z.¢., to protect her.
This form occurs eight times in the odes,
and always with ΚΑ


17—2


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟῪ [1


* * * *


adda |fav θύγατρες


244
pita , 4
6 τοῖσιν πολύκρημνον χθόνα
γνείμας ἀποπλέων ᾧχετ᾽ ἐς
8 Κνωσὸν ἱμερτὰν πόλιν
ἀντ. ς΄. 1 βασιλεὺς Evpwmddas:
if ta 3 id
15 2 δεκάτῳ δ᾽ Εὐξάντιον
Ν la > 3 ΄
τ μηνὶ τέ κ᾽ εὐπλόκ[αμος
΄ a wee ,
+ νύμφα dep lexvde[t νάσῳ
5s —VYY -Ἰπρύταϊνιν
6 ὃν
ἐπ. ς΄. Ἔ *
7
Coll στρ. ζ΄. 1 πόλιν -- -- --Ἴν βαθυδεί-
30 2 edov’ [ἐκ τᾶς μὲν γένος
3 ἔπλεζτο καρτε]ρόχειρ
+ ᾿Αργεῖος [“ - Ο] λέοντος
s θυμὸϊν ἔχων], ὁπότε
14 Εὐρωπιάδας Β]4552. 17 The Ms. has εκυδέ:


but there is no trace which warrants the assumption of ἢ


Blass? ascribes to it exvddi:
20 AN] The ν


alone is certain. (ay K.: edv Β].2, who suggests κ]εὸν[").


* * *


* * *


28 ἔαν Ovyarpes=fr. 34 K., placed here by Blass, the colour and shape of


11 πολύκρημνον χθόνα. Ceos is a
mountainous island, the highest summit
(now Hagios Elias) being near the site
of Iulis, the birthplace of Bacchylides.
The ridges which traverse it, like those in
some adjacent islands, are a prolongation,
in a 5.8.5. direction, of the range in
which the Attic peninsula terminates at
Sunium.

13 Κνωσόν, with a single o, is the
more correct form. The MS. has κνωσσον
here, but κνωσίον in XVI. 120. In Soph.
Ai, 699 the Laurentian gives κνώσια,
while most of the other Mss. have
κνώσσια.---ἰμερτὰν πόλιν. Greek legend
associated the embellishment of Cnosus
with works wrought by Daedalus for
Minos and his family. The recent ex-
cavations, have shown that Minoan
Cnosus was a seat of rulers, whose
palaces were adorned with works of an
advanced art, at a period which Mr Arthur
Evans would place ¢. 2500—1500 B.C.

14 The Ms. has EYPOQIITA, the final A


having been made from A. We must
therefore read Eipwmasas. The normal
patronymic would be Εὐρωπίδης : but the
irregular formation, prompted by metrical
convenience, is analogous to that of
Χαλκωδοντιάδης (71. 2. 541) for Χαλκω-
δοντίδης, and Τελαμωνιάδης (16. 9. 623)
for Τελαμωνίδης: see u. on Soph. 2.
1333-

15 δεκάτῳ. Before this word, two or
three letters are lost in the Ms. These
may have been the -as or -das of Εὐύρω-
πιάδας, carried over from v. 15. Another
possibility is that τῷ, ἐν, or σὺν had been
interpolated before δεκάτῳ. The division
between the first and second verses of the
strophe and of the antistrophe is wrong
aero in the MS.: see on féxare in
v. 6.

Higavrioy: see Appendix.

17 Kenyon supplies κούρα: Blass,
νύμφα. The fact that κόραν has occurred
in 7 is of no weight; Bacchylides, like
other Greek poets of his age, is not


1] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


to whom he gave the rocky land, ere he sailed away to Cnosus,
lovely city,


245


that king born of Europa. And in the tenth month the maiden
with beautiful locks bore Euxantius, to be lord of the glorious
isle.
* * * * * *
.....the daughters (of Damon) had changed (their old abode)
for the city steeped in sunshine. From that city sprang Argeius,
strong of hand, with the dauntless heart of a lion, whenever


the fragment being suitable. 29 f. The second word of v. 29 ended in N,
and must have been an epithet of πόλιν (such as lueprdv).—AEIEAO] The first ¢ has
been added by a corrector.—Before MEN there is a slight trace which would suit


either C or T.
faint trace points to O.


32 The letter after API'EI is lost in the rent of the ms., but a


careful to avoid repetition of a word.
κόρα or κούρα (usually ‘a maiden,’ Soph.
Tr. 536 n.) is applicable to a young wife
and mother,—though, in such a case, her
father is usually named: δ. V. 137
Θεστίου κούρα (Althaea), XVI. 31 f. Φοίνι-
κος..«κόρα (Europa): //. 6. 247 κουράων,
Priam’s married daughters (Πριάμοιο
standing in v. 246). Bacchylides uses
κόρα or κούρα some 18 times, but νύμφα
(as it happens) nowhere. And once, at
least, he uses κόρα where νύμφα would be
more fitting, viz. in ΧΙΧ. 4f., ὅτ᾽ dyero
καλλιπάρᾳον | κόραν θρασυκάρδιος “Iéas.
Yet there is, I think, one reason for
preferring νύμφα here. A measurement
of the space in the papyrus between
exvdé and the point where the verse
began shows that νυμῴα φερ- suits this
space (N and M being broad letters), while
κουρα φερ- would be somewhat too short.

φερεκυδέϊ νάσῳ (Blass) : as in XII. 183
the poet calls Aegina φερεκυδέα νᾶσον.
The adj. is not found elsewhere. Each
of the corresponding verses (9, 32, 40, 55,
63) ends with a long syllable.

18 πρύτανιν : a term applied in XVIII.
43 to Epaphus, ‘lord’ of the Egyptians.
The lost word may have been an epithet
(as μοιρίδιον).


28 ff. ἄλλαξαν θύγατρες. This is the
point at which the poet linked on his
myth—the story of Dexithea—to his
immediate theme, the victory of Argeius.
The family of Argeius evidently belonged
to the Cean town called Κορησσός or
Κορησία, which was on the coast, near


the port of Iulis (Strabo x. 486: A.
Pridik De (δὲ rebus p.7). Ina fragment
belonging to an earlier part of this ode
(13 K.), one of Dexithea’s sisters proposes
that they shall leave their ἀρχαίαν πόλιν
for a new abode by the sea, open to
the αὐγαῖς ἀελίον (see Appendix). A
local legend doubtless connected the
name Κορησσός with the migration of
the κόραι. It seems almost certain that
in the verses lost between 19 and 28 the
poet mentioned or indicated Κορησσός,
adding that it was so called, ‘decause (or
after) the daughters (of Damon) had
migrated to that sunny town. Thence
sprang Argetus,’ etc.

βαθυδείελον (found only here) probably
means ‘steeped in sunshine.’ eddeledos,
of which the Homeric sense is ‘ far-seen,”
appears to mean ‘sunny’ in Pind. P. Iv.
76 (as an epithet of Iolcus), and may have
that meaning in Ὁ. I. 111 (as an epithet
of the Κρόνιον at Olympia). So the author
of the Hymn to Apollo (438) speaks of
Κρίσην εὐδείελον ἀμπελόεσσαν.

81 καρτερόχειρ, like θρασύχειρος in
II. 4, indicates that the victory of Argeius
was gained in boxing, or perhaps in the
pancration (boxing and wrestling).

32 ’Apyetos ~—~ λέοντος. We might
supply ἐΐν re or ἀεί re, the τε answering
to that after ποσσίν in 35. Or ἀκμᾶτα,
‘stubborn’: Soph. Azz. 352 οὔρειόν τ᾽
ἀκμῆτα ταῦρον (with initial a).—L. Barnett
suggests ὀλοῖο : but odds rests only on the
doubtful ὦ ὀλὲ δαῖμον in Aleman fr. 55 (ὦ
᾽λὲ Bergk. ofde?).


ant. 6.


sir, 7.


246


BAKXYAIAOY [1


6. χρεῖϊός τι συμ Boro μάχας,
35 τἸποσσίϊν 7 ἐλα φρόϊς, π]ατρίων
8 7 οὐκ [ἀπόκλαρος κἸαλῶν,


αντ.


ττόσα Παυ θείδᾳ κλυτό 7το-


2 €0s ᾿Απόϊλλων ὦπασε]ν,


> # 2 3 Ψ'
3 ἀμφί T ἰατορίᾳ
40 4


, ΄" ας
ξείνων τε φιλάνορι τιμᾷ


5 εὖ δὲ λαχὼν Χαρίτων

6 πολλοῖς τε θαυμασθεὶς βροτῶν
γαἰῶν᾽ ἔλυσεν, πέντε παῖ-

8. das μεγαινήτους λιπών.


45 ἐπ. ζ΄.


:τῶν ἕνα (Fou Kpovidas


. ὑψίζυγος ᾿Ισθμιόνικον
3θῆκεν ἀντ᾽ εὐεργεσιᾶν, λιπαρῶν τ᾽ ἀλ-
4 wv στεφάνων ἐπίμοιρον.


84 The letter A has been deleted before XPE. After E there is a trace οἵ an accent,
consistent with either é& (=el, p. 137), or e@—The letters BOAOI are certain.


84 χρεῖός τι... μάχας, some reed of,
occasion for, fight; some call to it. Ar.
Ach. 454 EY. τί δ᾽, ὦ τάλας, σε τοῦδ᾽ ἔχει
πλέκους χρέος; Bion fr. 13. 2 μηδ᾽ ἐπὶ
πάντ᾽ ἄλλω χρέος ἰσχέμεν.

συμβολοῖ (Aesch. 7heb. 352 ξυμβολεῖ
φέρων φέροντι), ‘encountered him’ (Ar-
geius). Cp. Eur. /. 7. 874 τίς τύχα μοι
συγκυρήσει; Soph. Az. 313 πᾶν τὸ
συντυχὸν πάθος. Plut. Sel. 2 συνήν-
τησεν αὐτῷ τὸ Toolrov.—The optative of
indefinite frequency in past time is cor-
rect, since the principal verb ἔπλετο is
in a past tense, and θυμὸν ἔχων = ὃς
θυμὸν εἶχε (not ἔχε). These verses
(30—36) contain a retrospect of the
qualities shown by Argeius from early
boyhood, before his success at the
Isthmus. Next comes the eulogy of his
deceased father (37—44), and then the
reference to the Isthmian victory (45—48).
The Ms. has -βολοῖ: but we should expect
-βολέοι. The contraction may be due to
a transcriber.

Since χρεί- is no less possible than
xpet-, we might also suggest χρείαισι
συμβολοῖ μάχας: ‘when he (Argeius)
encountered the stress of fight’ (Arist.
Pol. Vi. 8. 14 τὰς πολεμικὰς χρείας:
Scph. Az. 963 ἐν χρείᾳ dopés).—See
Appendix.


85-- 88 ἐλαφρός is betterthanéAagpots
here. —warplwy...kadov, ‘his father’s
noble qualities’ (πατρίων = rarpguwv),—
‘all those which Apollo gave to Pan-
theides.’ The meaning is that Argeius,
as a boy, showed the promise of such
mental gifts as made his father an eminent
physician (v. 39), while he also mani-
fested that kindly and generous disposi-
tion which marked his father’s hospitality
(v. 40). For ἀπόκλαρος (Housman), cp.
Pind. Δ v.54. (Blass? reads καταισχυντάς,
a form which does not seem to occur,
though Aesch. Ag. 1363 has καταισχυντήρ.)
Note the following points. (1) The
reference to the origin of Argeius in


‘Vv. 30 (ἐκ τᾶς μὲν γένος etc.) is clearly the


first which occurred in the ode; and the
mention of Pantheides in v. 37 is also
probably the first. Hence there is a
presumption that πατρίων announced his
relationship to Argeius. (2) τόσα as
relative pron. in v. 37 is illustrated by
XV. 11, where τόσα must be the relative
to which ἄνθεα in v. 9 is antecedent.
Cp. 76% in 111. r9 as=‘where.’ [This
use of τόσος is, however, rare, except
where another τόσος precedes, as in Pind.
NV. Iv. 4f. οὐδὲ θερμὸν ὕδωρ τόσον γε μαλ-
θακὰ τεύχει ) γυῖα, τόσσον εὐλογία : Callim.
Abpoll. 93 οὐδὲ πόλει τόσ᾽ ἔνειμεν ὀφέλσιμα,


1]


ETTINIKOI


247


a call to fight came upon him,—swift of foot, and not without a
portion in his father’s noble gifts,—


those which Apollo, glorious archer, bestowed on Pantheides,
in respect to the healers art and the kindly honouring of


strangers.


Favoured by the Graces, and much admired among


men, he passed from life, leaving five sons of high repute.


In requital of his good deeds, the offspring of Cronus throned
on high has made one of those sons a victor at the Isthmus,
and has given him other bright wreaths for his portion.


89 AM@4I Τ᾽ IAT] The second I has been added above the line by the first hand,


48 ἘΠΙΜΟΙΡΩΝ A, corr. A}.


τόσσα Κυρήνῃ.] (3) If a full stop followed
καλῶν, and τόσα meant ‘So many,’ verses
37 ff. would not cohere in sense with
what precedes; since the reference of
τόσα is limited by vv. 39 f. (4) The ms.
does not punctuate after AAQN in 36.
This fact is not, in itself, cogent ; but it
comes into account.— These are the
reasons which decide me against inter-
preting πατρίων.. καλῶν as ‘the exercises
which Ceos holds in honour,’ such as
boxing and wrestling: cp. 11. 6 ff. καλῶν
νοι ὅσ᾽. ἐπεδείξαμεν, and VI. 5 ff. Kéov...
πύξ re καὶ στάδιον κρατεῦσαν : when a
word in the sense of ἀπαίδευτος or ἀγύ-
μναστος would be required.

The genitive Πανθείδα is preserved in
11. 14. In the Cean inscription (Introd.
§ 3), the vowels between 9 and 6 are
lost. For the form Πανθείδης see Fick-
Bechtel, Griech. Per sonennamen, 229.

39 ἀμφί, with dat., ‘in respect to’:
50 IX. 44 ἀμφὶ βοῶν ἀγέλαις. Apollo, as
Tlauésv, can confer the gift of laropia.

40 φιλάνορι, ‘kindly.’ Pindar (fr. 256)
spoke of the φιλάνορα....βιοτάν of dolphins
(‘friendly to man’). In Aesch. Ag. 411
the word refers to a wife (‘loving her
husband’). Cp. //. 6. 15 πάντας γὰρ
φιλέεσκεν, ὁδῷ ἔπι οἰκία ναίων (‘was hos-
pitable to all’). φιλοξενία is a gift of
Apollo, in so far as he bestows the graces
of character which lend charm to it: while
Zeus ξένιος or ἐφέστιος is the protector of
the guest. ᾿

41 εὖ δὲ λαχὼν Χαρίτων : the sense is
strictly, ‘having obtained a good portion
in (or of) the Charites,’—those goddesses
being identified with their gifts: cp.
Bergk fr. adesp. 53 ἐγώ φαμι ἰοπλοκάμων
Μοισᾶν εὖ λαχεῖν. If the literal sense
had been, ‘having received a good


portion from the Charites,? an acc.
would have been added. Cp. vi. 1 f.

Pindar (O. xiv. τ ff.), invoking the
Χάριτες, says, ‘By your help come all
things glad and sweet to mortals, whether
wisdom is given to any man, or come-
liness, or fame.’ In particular, the
Charites give those qualities which win,
and adorn, victory in the games (Pind. O.
1. 55, Vi. 76: M v. 54, X. 38). With
Bacchylides (as with Pindar) they are the
goddesses who lend charm to poetry (v.
9, VUI. 1, XVIII. 6), or to eloquence
(xIv. 49). If Pantheides had been a
successful athlete, that may be implied
here ; but the meaning seems at any rate
to include other things. He had received
‘the gifts of the Charites’ in a large
sense. There is a like generality in
IX. 39, Χαρίτων τιμὰν λελογχώς : where,
however, there is more reason than here
to suppose a reference to the games.

42 πολλοῖς : for the dat., cp. Thuc. 11.
41 ὃ 4 τοῖς τε viv καὶ τοῖς ἔπειτα Oav-
μασθησόμεθα.

44 μεγαινήτους, asin 111. 64 μεγαίνητε:
but in XVIII. τ εὐαίνετε.

45 Fou, ‘for him,’ ‘for his joy.’ (Cp.
Fo above, in v. 9.) The spirit of the
deceased Pantheides will rejoice. So
Pindar more than once speaks of the joy
which a departed kinsman will feel in
the victor’s success: O. XIV. 20 f. pe-
λαντειχέα viv δόμον | Φερσεφόνας ἐλθέ,
Εαχοῖ, πατρὶ κλυτὰν φέροισ' ἀγγελίαν : see
also O. vii. 81 ff,

47 £. εὐεργεσιᾶν : cp. 53 εὖ ἔρδων θεούς:
111. 21 f. θεόν, θεόν τις ἀγλαϊζέτω.

ἄλλων στεφάνων. The Cean inscrip-
tion (Introd. § 3) attests that Argeius
won an Isthmian victory among the
παῖδες, and a Nemean victory among the


ant. 7.


epode 7.


248 BAKXYAIAOY
5 φαμὶ καὶ φάσω μέγιστον
5° 6 κῦδος ἔχειν ἀρετάν, πλοῦ- , ae
7 τος δὲ καὶ δειλοῖσιν ἀνθρώπων ομιλεῖ,
στρ. η΄. : ἐθέλει δ᾽ αὔξειν φρένας ἀν-


2 Spds: ὁ δ᾽ εὖ ἔρδων θεοὺς


3 ἐλπίδι κυδροτέρᾳ
55 4


΄ ΄ Ὲ > 9» ε ΄,
σαίνει κέαρ᾽ εἰ δ᾽ ὑγιείας
Ν ἃ ἃ ¥
s θνατὸς ἐὼν ἔλαχεν,


’ 3 3 3 3 ν »
6 ζώειν T ἀπ᾽ οἰκείων ἔχει,
γ πρώτοις ἐρίζει᾽ παντί τοι
la 3 Ψ Yd
8 τέρψις ἀνθρώπων βίῳ


> ΄ Y
60 ἄντ, η΄. 1 ἔπεται νόσφιν γε νόσων
3
2 πενίας T ἀμαχάνου.


> ye #8 x Ὁ
ἶσον ὃ τ᾽ ἀφνεὸς t-


᾿ ὦ ts id ἡ
4 petper μεγάλων ὁ τε μείων


Col. 2
65 6


, a sgn ,

5 παυροτέρων᾽ τὸ δὲ πάν-
3 A 30." ‘
των εὐμαρεῖν οὐδὲν γλυκὺ


γ θνατοῖσιν, ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ τὰ φεύ-
8 γοντα δίζηνται κιχεῖν.


49—51 The words from φάσω to ὁμιλεῖ are quoted by Plut. de aud. poet. c. 14
(Mor. 36 c), who, instead of φάσω μέγιστον κῦδος, has φάσωμεν πιστὸν κῦδος (the


T of METICTON having become II, when N was added to ME).
Most mss. of Plut. /.c. have the genitive,


corr. by the first hand from ἀνθρώποις.


51 ἀνθρώπων,


ἀγένειοι. If that Isthmian victory was the
same with which this ode is concerned, the
Nemean victory was still to come. These
‘other wreaths’ may have been won in
local games of lesser note. Had Argeius
already been a victor at Olympia or
Delphi, it is improbable that the poet
would have omitted to mention it.

ἔπίμοιρον. The only other place where
the word occurs is in an extract (Sto-
baeus Flor. 103. 27) from the treatise
Περὶ Biov by the Pythagorean Eury-
phamus: Blos ἀνθρώπω... ἀλόγων... ζῴων
καθυπερέχει τῷ ἀρετᾶς καὶ εὐδαιμοσύνας
ἐπίμοιρος ἦμεν. Cp. ἐπήβολος, ἐπίκλη-
ρος.

49- 74. The merits and circum-
stances of the deceased Pantheides sug-
gest reflections which occupy the rest of
the ode. ᾿Αρετή alone gives lasting fame;
any man should be content who has
health and a competence. The Ionian
poet flows on in his quiet moralizing


strain,—a contrast to Pindar’s abrupt
and pointed γνῶμαι. He has a some-
what similar passage in IX. 35—51
(watever δ᾽... χρηστόν). There, how-
ever, he finally returns to his festal theme,
with an apology for the digression. Here
we have a singular instance of an ἐπινίκιον
ending with twenty-five verses which are
wholly ‘gnomic.’ Pindar would have
brought in, before the close, some touch
of allusion to the victory.

51 f. καὶ δειλοῖσιν : and not with the
ἐσθλοί alone.—The best punctuation here
seems to be a comma after ὁμιλεῖ, and a
colon (as in the MS.) after ἀνδρός.

ἐθέλει does not necessarily imply a per-
sonification of πλοῦτος, but merely denotes
(as often) what happens in accordance
with a natural tendency or law: cp. Arist.
περὶ αἰσθήσεως c. 5 (p. 445 ἃ 21), ἔτι δ᾽
οὐδὲ τὸ ὕδωρ ἐθέλει αὐτὸ μόνον ἄμικτον ὃν
tpépew.—The form ἐθέλω occurs also in
v..14, 169; X. 73: and θέλω in five


1] ETTINIKOI 249
The best glory is that of Virtue, so deem I now and ever:


wealth may dwell with men of little worth,


and will exalt the spirit; but he who is bountiful to the gods
can cheer his heart with a loftier hope. If a mortal is blessed
with health, and can live on his own substance, he vies with
the most fortunate. Joy attends on every state of life,


if only disease and helpless poverty be not there. The rich
man yearns for great things, as the poorer for less; mortals find
no sweetness in opulence, but are ever pursuing visions that flee


before them.


but some the dative.
56 ἔλαχεν Al, ἔλακεν A.
and added a comma after εἰ.


(νούσων) MS.: νόσων Housman, Blass, etc.


above the line.


55 ὑγιείας.
57 ἔχει) ἔχειν A: but a corrector has transfixed ν,
58 ΠΡΩΤΟΟ A: corr. Al?


The first « has been added by A’.


60 f£. NOY|..N
65 ETMAPEI A: A? has added N


other places. Pindar always uses ἐθέλω,
except in O. II. 107 (θέλων) and P. 11. 5
(θέλοντε:).

αὔξειν φρένας, to ‘exalt’ or ‘elate’
the mind, making the rich man ambitious,
proud, self-confident. So Pindar (fr. 218)
says of the power of wine, αέξονται
φρένας (‘men are exalted in spirit’) ἀμ-
πελίνοις τόξοις δαμέντες. Cp. IX. 44 f.
ἀμφὶ βοῶν ἀγέλαις θυμὸν αὔξουσιν (they
‘enlarge their spirit,’—7.e. ‘take their
delight,’—in herds of oxen).

53 ff. εὖ ἔρδων: cp. v. 47.--κυδροτέρᾳ:
because imperishable fame (vv. 73 f.) is a
more splendid prospect than the honour
which ends with life.

σαίνει κέαρ, ‘cheers his heart’: a
strange and scarcely felicitous use of the
verb, since the image involved in σαίνει
(‘fawning on,’ ‘caressing’) so distinctly
implies an agency external to the person
soothed. The poet has used σαίνει, in
fact, much as he might have used θέλγει
or εὐφραίνει.

ὑγιείας : cp. scolia fr. 8 (Bergk), ὑγιαί-
νειν μὲν ἄριστον ἀνδρὶ Ovarw. Arist. RA.
11. 21 ὃ 5 ἀνδρὶ δ᾽ ὑγιαίνειν ἄριστόν ἐστιν,
ὥς γ᾽ ἡμῖν δοκεῖ.

57 (ev 7 ἀπ᾽ οἰκείων. We might
compare what Solon, in Her. 1. 31, says
of Cleobis and Biton: τούτοισι... βίος τε
ἀρκέων ὑπῆν καὶ πρὸς τούτῳ ῥώμη σώματος
τοιήδε κ.τ.λ.

58 £. πρώτοις, the foremost in respect
to (real) happiness, the most truly for-
tunate.—avrl...Blw, not ‘every life,’ but
rather ‘all human life,’ 2.6. life in every
grade and phase.


60 f£. νόσφιν, ‘apart’ from them, ὦ. 6.
provided they are absent.—The ms. had
νούσων : but the first syllable answers to
one which is short in the corresponding
verses (6, 14, 29, 37, 52), Showing that
we must read νόσων. The corruption
may have been due to the incorrect di-
vision of these two verses in the Ms. (see
n. on 6f.), leading a transcriber to prefer
νούσων, because it gave a long syllable
for the end of the verse.

πενίας τ᾽ ἀμαχάνου, helpless, desperate,
poverty. Alcaeus fr. 92 πενία.. .ἀμαχανίᾳ
σὺν ἀδελφέᾳ : Her. VIII. 111 πενίην τε καὶ
aunxavinv.—The short initial a of ἀμα-
χάνου answers to a syllable which is long
In wy. 7, 15, 30, 38, 53-

62 ἴσον, as in fr. 2 ἀφθέγκτοισιν ἴσον.
Elsewhere the poet has only ἴσος.

63 f. ὅ τε μείων, the lesser in respect
to wealth; as in Soph. Az. 161 μικροτέρων
are the men of humbler station.—7avpo-
τέρων, though opposed to μεγάλων, means
strictly ‘fewer’ (not ‘smaller’) things.
παῦρος (sing.) can mean ‘small,’ but the
plural seems always to denote ‘few.’ (It
is otherwise with ὀλίζων : Μ΄. 18. 519 λαοὲ
δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ὀλίζονες ἧσαν, ‘of smaller size.’)

65 εὐμαρεῖν, ‘to have ease, abundance’
in all things: cp. Soph. PA. 284 τούτου
δὲ πολλὴν εὐμάρειαν, ‘plenteous store’ of
that. The verb, which occurs only here,
takes a genitive, like πλουτεῖν, etc.—
οὐδὲν (adverb) γλυκύ, is a thing nowise
sweet : opulence, however great, fails to
satisfy human desires.

665. τὰ φεύγοντα : objects which for
ever elude them; 7.6. as one prize after


str. 8.


ant. 8.


BAKXYAIAOY [I, II
1 ὄντινα κουφόταται
2 θυμὸν δονέουσι μέριμναι,
7° τὅσσον ἂν ζώῃ λάχε τόνδε χρόνον τι-
. μάν." ἀρετὰ δ᾽ ἐπίμοχθος
5 μέν, τε]λευταθεῖσα δ᾽ ὀρθῶς
ὁ ἀνδρὶ κ]αὶ εὖτε θάνῃ λεί-
7 πει πο]λυζήλωτον εὐκλείας ἄγαλμα.


II.


ΤΩΙ AYTQI


στρ.


ἔΑζίξεν a] σεμνοδότειρα Φήμα


ἐς Κέον ἱεράν, χαριτώ-
νυμον φέρουσ᾽ ἀγγελίαν,
ὅτι μ[άχ]ας θρασύχειρος ᾽Αρ-
5 γεῖος ἄρατο νίκαν"


73 The traces before ETTE seem to be those of AI: Blass supplies ἀνδρὶ κἸαί.
K. referred them to N.—AEI (of λείπει) om. A, add. 43,


another is gained, and proves unsatisfying,
the vision of happiness continually re-
cedes.

68 f. κουφόταται.. μέριμναι, vain,
empty ambitions, in contrast with the cul-
tivation of ἀσετή. Cp. Soph. O. C. 1230
κούφας adpootvas. For μέριμναι, thoughts
intent on certain objects or pursuits,
cp. fr. 16. 6 ἀνδράσι δ᾽ ὑψοτάτω πέμπει
pepluvas.—Sovéovor, as winds shake the
branches of a tree: //. 17. 55 τὸ δέ τε
πνοιαὶ δονέουσι. So stormy waves are
said δονεῖν θυμόν, to shake the mariner's
soul, Pind. . Iv. 58.

70 2. λάχε τόνδε χρόνον. The normal
metre of the verse is -~--, -~~-,
~~--, as seen in the corresponding v.,
47 (the only one available for comparison),
θῆκεν dvr’ εὐεργεσιᾶν, λιπαρῶν τ᾽ ἄλ.-.
But the ms. has χρόνον τόνδε λάχεν, so
that an epitritus (-7 χρόνον rév-) is here
substituted for the choriambus in v. 47
(-epyeotav). Blass holds this substitution
to be legitimate. In any case, the metri-
cal effect is intolerable, It is far more
probable that the poet wrote λάχε τόνδε
χρόνον, and that the words were wrongly
transposed by a scribe, either through an


oversight, or to obtain what he regarded
as a clearer and better order. Similarly
in IX. 20 ταχεῖαν ὁρμὰν (MS.), in XIV. 47
ἄρχεν λόγων δικαίων (MS.), and in XvI. 72
χεῖρας πέτασσε (MS.), a transposition is
required.

τιμάν. The ms. has a point after
Adxev, and another after μάν. If we
read τί μάν; (guid vero?) the meaning
is, ‘ How could it be otherwise?’ ‘How
else?’ Soph. 42. 668 ἄρχοντές εἶσιν,
ὥσθ᾽ ὑπεικτέον" τί μήν; ‘of course’ (we
must yield). Aesch. Ag. 672 λέγουσιν
ἡμᾶς ws ddwdoras* τί μήν; ‘of course’
(they do). The sense of the whole
passage then is:—The man of frivolous
ambitions has only his life-time for δὲς
portion. τί μάν; How could it be other-
wise? How could he expect a lasting
renown? But τί μάν, in such a context,
is weak: and the sense given to Adxev is
also somewhat forced; since it implies
that the man who leaves an enduring
name could be said λαγχάνειν the space
of time during which his posthumous
renown lasts.

The true reading is clearly (I think)
τιμάν : the man of light ambitions ‘ wns


I, It]


He whose mind is blown about by ambitions light as air, epode 8.
wins honour only for his life-time.


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


251


The task of Virtue is


toilsome; but, when it has been duly wrought to the end, it
leaves the enviable meed of bright renown, outlasting death.


1,


For the same.


Fame, giver of glorious gifts, has sped to sacred Ceos str.


with a message of gracious import, that Argeius has conquered


in the strife of boxers ;


II. τωι αὐτωι] added (by A®?) in the left margin, opposite v. 1.
L. Levi, N. Festa, Blass, etc.: d[ifov ὦ] K.


1 ater a]
2 ἱρὰν conj. Headlam, Blass.


4 μάχας Blass, Festa: πάλας Wil. (but μ is certain).


honour only for his life-time’ (τόνδε χρόνον,
acc. of duration of time),—-as opposed to
the man who wins a fame that survives
his death (73 f.). τιϊμάν gives, too, the
normal long syllable at the end of v. 70
(cp. ἄλίλων in v. 47), so that there is a
metrical reason also for preferring it.
The erroneous punctuation after λάχεν in
the MS. may have arisen from the division
of τιμάν between the two verses, leading
a scribe to read it as τέ μάν;

71 dpera δ᾽ ἐπίμοχθος. Fes. Op. 287
τῆς δ᾽ ἀρετῆς ἱδρῶτα θεοὶ προπάροιθεν
ἔθηκαν | ἀθάνατοι.

72 τελευταθεῖσα. τελευτᾶν ἀρετὰν is
a phrase like τελευτᾶν ἔργον,---ἰο ‘ac-
complish’ ἀρετή, considered as a course
of life-long effort. The epithet ἐπίμοχθος
serves to mark this.

74 πολυζήλωτον : for the ἡ, cp. V. 52
(ἐπιζήλῳ), X. 63 πολυξήλῳ. Pindar has
ἕαλωτόν (O.VI1I.6).—_dyadpo. is something
which confers splendour or delight, as a
gift of honour, or an ornament: in V. 4
the ode is Μοισᾶν γλυκύδωρον ἄγαλμα, as in
IX. 11 ἀθάνατον Μουσᾶν ἄγαλμα.

II. 1 d[itev ἃ] seems the most probable
supplement. The good news has just
come, and this short song welcomes it;
the formal ἐπινίκιον (Ode 1.) was written
afterwards. If difov, ὦ were read, it
would imply that the poet himself was at
the Isthmus. O. Schroeder (Blass? p. Lv)
prefers this, arguing, ‘de projictscendo apte
dict ἀΐσσειν, non de veniendo.’ But, if
one who sees a person start could say


ἤϊξεν ἐκεῖσε, one who sees him arrive
could surely say ἤϊξε δεῦρο. The words in
11 f. καλεῖ δὲ Modo’ αὐθιγενὴς k.7.d. imply
that the poet is in Ceos.

σεμνοδότειρα, ‘giver of stately gifts’;
she announces victory, and so gives
renown. Cp. Aesch. Zh. 975 Μοῖρα
βαρυδότειρα: Eur. Bacch. 419 ὀλβοδό-
repa: Orphic Argon. 354 "Ἐρινύες
αἰνοδότειραι. -- Φήμα : the Doric form
(always φάμα in Pindar) is modified to
avoid twofold a: so ν. 47 κυβερνήταν,
167 ἀδμήτα, 200 εἰρήνᾳ.

2£. χαριτώνυμον.. ἀγγελίαν, a message
‘ of gractous import’; lit., ‘fraught with a
gracious name,’ z.e. speaking of ‘victory’
(v. 5). A thought of personified Νίκη is
implied. [Not, ‘containing the welcome
name of Argeius.’]—Another possible
explanation would be, ‘a message 222
terms of gracious omen’ (χαρίεντα ὀνό-
para), so that the phrase would resemble
ἁδυεπὴς φάτις in Soph. Ο. Z. 151. But
against this is the analogy of εὐώνυμος,
δυσώνυμος, μεγαλώνυμος, etc., which always
refer to a name.

4 μάχας..θρασύχειρος, probably the
contest in boxing: cp. I. 31 καρτερόχειρ.
Pind. P. vit. 37 νίκαν ᾿Ισθμοϊ θρασύγυιον.
—The letters » and -as being certain, the
other possibilities are μέλας (‘ sunburnt,’
like pedayxpoujs in Od. τό. 175), or
μέγας. Then θρασύχειρος would be a
nominative, like ἑκατόγχειρος in 7]. 1.
402. But μάχας seems better.


252


2
αντ.


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


[11,11


aA > 9 + wy 3 ἱρῷ
καλῶν δ᾽ ἀνέμνασεν, ὅσ᾽ ἐν κλεεννῷ


αὐχένι (ξ)ισθμοῦ ζαθέαν
λιπόντες EvEavrida νᾶ-

σον ἐπεδείξαμεν ἑβδομή-

Io κοντα σὺν στεφάνοισιν.


ἐπ. καλεῖ δὲ Μοῦσ᾽ αὐθιγενὴς
γλυκεῖαν αὐλῶν καναχάᾶν,
’ 3 3 ’,
γεραίρουσ᾽ ἐπινικίοις
Πανθείδα φίλον υἱόν.


III.


IEPQNI


ZYPAKOZIQI


ITTTTOIS OAYMITTIA.


4 ? , ΄ ,
στρ. α΄. ᾿Αριστοκάρπου Σικελίας κρέουσαν
Δάματρα (β)ιοστέφανόν τε κούραν
ν # cal [ἡ 3. 5

ὕμνει, γλυκύδωρε Κλειοῖ, θοάς 7 Ὀ-


λυμπιοδρόμους
14 ΠΑΝΘΕΙΔΑῚ A, corr. Al,


€ Γ᾿ ν
Ιέρωνος ἱππους.


ir. The title, written in minuscule (probably by 443), is in the left margin,


opposite to vv. 1—3.


6 ff. καλῶν.. ὅσ᾽... ἐπεδείξαμεν, ‘the
goodly feats which we have displayed’:
cp. III. 96 ἢ.---κλεεννῷ, - Aeolic, as in
v. 12, 182, while κλεινός is used in six
other places.—avdxéve Εἰσθμοῦ, a pleo-
nasm ; like Pindar’sin ἢ 1. 9 τὰν ἁλιερκέα
Εἰσθμοῦ δειράδ᾽, where depds= ‘neck.’
Cp. O. Vill. 52 Κορίνθου δειράδ᾽, where
the schol. rightly explains the word by
τράχηλος. The Isthmus itself is a narrow
plain, with hills N. and s. of it. In
Her. vi. 37 τὸν αὐχένα τῆς Χερσονήσου τε:
τὸν ἰσθμὸν τῆς X. in VI. 36. But the
pleonasm is not felt, Isthmus having
become a proper name.—Pindar pre-
fixes F to ἰσθμὸς not only in 7 1. 9
(just cited, where ἁλιερκέος is unlikely),
but also probably in 7. v. 5 νῦν αὖτε
Ἰσθμοῦ δεσπότᾳ, a reading which one of
the scholia supports, though the Mss.
have air’ ἐν. Elsewhere, however, he
uses ἐἰσθμός without F, as in O. vill. 48
ἐπ᾽ ᾿Ισθμῷ ποντίᾳ.

λιπόντες κιτιλ.: ‘we,’ the subject to


the verb, may include friends of the
competitors who went with them from
Ceos to the Isthmus. —Ettavr(8a νᾶσον:
cp. I. 15, and Appendix II. (Euxantius).
In a fragment belonging to the exordium
of Ode 1., νάσοιό τ᾽ Ev[tavriad]av is
conjecturally read: see Appendix.

ἑβδομήκοντα σὺν στεφάνοισιν, with
the result of winning seventy wreaths.
This can only mean that, before the
victory of Argeius, seventy others had
already been won at the Isthmus by
natives of Ceos. See Appendix.

11 ff. καλεῖ δὲ κιτιλ. The Muse sum-
mons the flutes to accompany her strains ;
much as in Pind. /. vil. τοῦ, the poet him-
self is said χρυσέαν καλέσαι Μοῖσαν. These
verses, written when the news first came,
may have been sung to the flutes as a
welcome to Argeius on his return; his
presence is rather suggested by vv. 13 f.—
αὐθιγενής : cp. Her. Iv. 49 τῷ αὐθιγενεῖ
θεῷ.---ἐπινικίοις, sc. μέλεσι. Note the
substantival use of the plural in this


Il, 111]


and has renewed the memory of all those goodly feats which ant.


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


253


have been shown forth at the famous Isthmus by us who came
from the beautiful isle of Euxantius, winners of seventy wreaths.


The native Muse summons the sweet clear sound of flutes, epode.


honouring with strains of victory the beloved son of Pantheides.


111.


For Hieron of Syracuse, victor in the four-horse


chariot-vace at Olympia.


Cleio, giver of sweet gifts, praise Demeter, queen of fertile str. 1.


(468 B.C.)


Sicily, with her daughter of the violet crown; and sing of
Hiéron’s swift steeds that ran at Olympia.


poetical phrase. (Pindar Δ. Iv. 78 has
ἐπινικίοισιν ἀοιδαῖς.) A substantival use
of the singular, as a name for the ode of


victory, occurs first in scholia of the,


Alexandrian age.

14 IIav0elSa: cp. 1. 37.

11. 1—4 The names of Demeter
and Persephone, the guardian deities
of Sicily, lend majesty to this proem ;
though, considering the peculiar awe
which surrounded them, there is a certain
crudeness in their close conjunction with
the ‘swift mares.’ Hieron was the here-
ditary priest of these goddesses (ἱροφάντης
τῶν χθονίων θεῶν, Her. Vil. 153): indeed,
it has been held that he took his name
from those rites of which the supreme
charge belonged to his house: cp. Pin-
dar’s address to him, fr. 105 {a@éwy
ἱερῶν | ὁμώνυμε πάτερ. So the poet says,
in effect:—‘Sing the dread goddesses,
and the latest victory of their great
Priest.’ Cp. Pind. O. νι. 93 ff.

His brother and predecessor Gelon,
who also was their hierophant, had built
for them at Syracuse twin temples (vaovs,
Diod. XI. 26), in the precinct called by
Plutarch (Dion c. 56) τὸ τῶν Θεσμοφόρων
τέμενος. This was the most famous of
all their Sicilian shrines, next to that at
Enna, the place from which Aidoneus
was said to have carried off the Koré.
It is curious to find that Bacchylides had
somewhere made Crete the scene of that
rape (schol. Hes. Theog. 914),—a ‘heresy,’
as Freeman remarks (Szci/y 11. 266),


ἢ )


‘against all Sikel and Sikeliot belief.’

_ 1 ἀριστοκάρπου: so Pind. WV. 1. 14
describes Sicily as ἀριστεύουσαν εὐκάρπου
χθονός, and in his fr. 106 it is ἀγλαόκαρπος,
as in Aesch. P. V. 369 καλλίκαρπος. It
is still, as in ancient times, a rich grana-
ry, about three-fourths of the cultivated
surface being given to cereals (chiefly
wheat); the yield of fruit (especially
of oranges) is also large.—kpéovoav, the
fem. (not elsewhere found, except as a
proper name) of κρέων (Pind., etc.),=the
Homeric κρείων : xpelovoa occurs only in
Ll, 22. 48.

2 Βιοστέφανον, as in VIII. 3 βιοβλέ-
gapov and 72 Fiérdoxov. But ἰοστεφάνων
(-ov) has no Ff in v. 3 or ΧΙ. 89, nor
ἰόπλοκος in XVI. 37. So Pindar assumes
F in ἰόπλοκον O. VI. 30, but not in lom)o-
κάμων, P.1. τ.

8 :-. Κλειοῖ, with εἴ. The only other
example of this scansion is Pind. ™ 111.
83 Κλεοῦς, as most edd. now write it,
with good Ms. authority, though Κλειοῦς
is av./. It is tempting to write Κλεοῖ
here. But there is no reason to doubt
that Krew? could be ~— (1.6. Κλεγοῖ) :
cp. XVI. 92 n.

θοάς.. ἵππους : mares were most gener-
ally used in racing: see, ¢.g., Pind. 7. 1v.
4f., M. 1x. 52: Soph. ZZ 705. In the
Homeric chariot-race, however (//. 23),
there are three teams of horses, and two
of mares, and the horses win the first and
second places.—’OdvpmvoSpépous only
here.


254


BAKXYAIAOY


[ΠῚ


a , ΄ \ . ε ΄ ,
5 ἀντ. α΄. σεύον]το γὰρ σὺν ὑπερόχῳ τε Nixa
σὺν ᾿Αγ]λαΐᾳ τε παρ᾽ εὐρυδίναν
᾿Αλφεόν, τόθι A ᾿Ἰ]εινομένεος ἔθηκαν


ὄλβιον [γόνον


στεφάνω]ν κυρῆσαι.


ἐπ. α΄ θρόησε δὲ dads ἀπείρων"


10 ἃ τρισευδαίμ[ων ἀνήρ,
Col. 8 ὃς παρὰ Ζηνὸς λαχὼν
πλείσταρχον Ἑλλάνων γέρας
οἶδε πυργωθέντα πλοῦτον μὴ μελαμ-
φαρέϊ κρύπτειν σκότῳ.
15 στρ. β΄. βρύει μὲν ἱερὰ βουθύτοις ἑορταῖς,


βρύουσι φιλοξενίας ἀγυιαί:
λάμπει δ᾽ ὑπὸ μαρμαρυγαῖς ὁ χρυσὸς


ὑψιδαιδάλτων


τριπόδων σταθέντων


δ 1. [σεύον]το K.—Nixg..’Aydaig Weil: νίκᾳ.. ἀγλαΐᾳ Κ.---σὺν (in v. 6) Palmer.


7 τόθι Palmer. 9 ἀπείρων Blass.


12 γέρας] TENOC A, corr. Al.


5 ff. cevovto. 7]. 22. 22 σευάμενος ὥς
θ᾽ ἵππος ἀεθλοφόρος σὺν ὄχεσφιν: Pind. O.
1. 20 (of the horse Pherenicus) παρ᾽
᾿Αλφεῷ σύτο.

Νίκᾳ. .᾿Αγλαΐᾳ: personified attendants
on the rushing steeds. The epithet
ὑπερόχῳ might seem slightly in favour of
writing νίκᾳ etc.. yet it is not unsuitable
to the goddess. ᾿Αγλαΐα is with Pindar
esp. the glory of victory: O/. xul. 14f.
Uupw δέ, παῖδες ᾿Αλάτα, πολλὰ μὲν νικα-
φόρον ἀγλαΐαν ὥὦπασαν | ἄκραις ἀρεταῖς
ὑπερελθόντων ἱεροῖς ἐν ἀέθλοις. 7. 11. 18
ἐν Kpiog & εὐρυσθενὴς εἶδ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων μιν
πόρε τ᾽’ ἀγλαΐαν.

εὐρυδίναν ᾿Αλφεόν: the Alpheus has
this epithet again in v. 38: in v. 181 it
is ἀκαμαντορόας, in VII. 49 ἀργυροδίνας,
in X. 26 καλλιρόας. Pindar in O. v. 18
has ᾿Αλφεὸν εὐρὺ ῥέοντα, but elsewhere
dispenses with an epithet for the famous
river.—E. Curtius (7e/op. 11. 49) describes
the Alpheus, at its entrance into Pisatis,
as being about 180 feet wide. Leake
writes (AZorea 1. 23): ‘It is now [Feb. 25]
full and rapid, but turbid: in summer the
stream, though much clearer, is scanty,
and divided into several torrents, running
over a wide gravelly bed.’

7 1. Aewopéveos. Before a vowel one
would prefer Aewouévevs, the form which
the MS. gives in v. 35 (where ἀγέρωχοι


follows): though the synizesis is natural
before a consonant, as in Pind. P. 1. 179
Δεινομένεος τελέσαις. In Simonides fr.


141. 4 Aewouéveus is read, where τὸν (or
τοὺς) follows.

ἔθηκαν... κυρῆσαι: the acc. and inf.
with τίθημι is not rare in poetry: Pind.
fr. 177 πεπρωμέναν θῆκε μοῖραν μετατρα-
πεῖν: Eur. Her. ggo"Hpa με κάμνειν τήνδ᾽
ἔθηκε τὴν νόσον.

9 ἀπείρων: 7). 24. 776 ἐπὶ δ᾽ ἔστενε
δῆμος ἀπείρων. Cp. VIII. 30 Ἑλλάνων
δι’ ἀπείρονα κύκλον. (Another possibility
would be ἀγασθείς.)

10 The exclamation ἃ is regularly
found in expressions of Zzty or veproof, as
in the Homeric ἃ δεῖλ᾽ (//. 11. 441 ete.) :
Soph. O. 7. 1147 ἃ, μὴ κόλαζε: cp. Ph.
1300 (n.). This seems to be the only
classical example of it in an utterance
of admiration. We should expect ὦ.

12 πλείσταρχον ‘EAAdvev γέρας, ‘the
privilege of ruling over the largest number
of Greeks’: ze. over more than are
subject to any other ruler. πλείσταρ-
Xov=consisting in πλείστη ἀρχή (cp.
αὔχημα... εὔιππον, Soph. O. C. 710 f.):
then Ἑλλάνων further defines the ἀρχή.
Kenyon cp. Her. vil. 157 μοῖρά τοι
(Gelon) τῆς “Ἑλλάδος οὐκ ἐλαχίστη, ἄρχοντί
γε τῆς Σικελίας.

18 £. οἶδε.. μὴ... κρύπτειν, knows how


\


IIT]


Pre-eminent Victory and Glory were with them as they sped ant. 1.


ETTINIKOI


255


by the broad tide of the Alpheus, where they won wreaths for


the blest son of Deinomenes ;


and a cry went up from the vast multitude: ‘O thrice-happy epode :.


man, honoured by Zeus with the widest rule in Hellas, who
knows how to keep the lofty fabric of his fortunes from being


wrapt in a mantle of darkness.’


The temples are rife with festal sacrifice of oxen, the streets str. 2.


with hospitable feasting ; and the gold shines with flashing rays
from high tripods, richly wrought,


13 £ MEAAH A, MEAAM Al—4@APHIN A, corr. A!': μελαμφαρέϊ Palmer.


15 ἱερὰ] EPA A: thas been added above the line (by A®?).


conj. Blass.


18 ὑψιδαιδάλων


not to hide it, =knows how to manifest
it: his instincts tell him what befits a
prince. πυργωθέντα.. πλοῦτον: the image
is that of a lofty and stately edifice (cp.
Ar. Ran. 1004 πυργῶσαι ῥήματα σεμνά),
made strong against assault: Weir Smyth
cp. Solon fr. 13.9 f. πλοῦτον δ᾽ ὃν μὲν δῶσι
Geol, παραγίγνεται ἀνδρὶ | ἔμπεδος ἐκ vedrou
πυθμένος εἰς κορυφήν.---μελαμφαρέϊ.. σκό-
τῳ: cp. Eur. Jom 1150 μελάμπεπλος Νύξ.
Here, however, σκότος is scarcely per-
sonified; the phrase rather means,
‘enshrouding darkness’; 1.6. the σκότος
is itself the μέλαν φάρος.

Pindar’s precepts against πλοῦτος κρυ-
gatos (7. τ. 67, cp. M. τ. 31) occur
especially in odes which, like this,
concern the chariot-race,—one of the
most popular forms in which wealth
could be shown. πλοῦτος ἀρεταῖς δεδαι-
δαλμένος should be an ἀστὴρ ἀρίζηλος (Ο.
11. 58 ff.).

15 f£. These two verses describe the
rejoicings at Syracuse, where Bacchylides
was perhaps Hieron’s guest.—Bpve..
ἑορταῖς: here βρύω takes the dat.,—its
more frequent construction, the primary
sense being to swell or burgeon (ἔρνος
βρύει ἄνθεϊ, 71. 17. 56): in v. τό it takes
the gen., as a verb of ‘fulness’ (cp.
Soph. O. C. 16 f.), with no difference in
sense, unless it be that the dative is more
animated and picturesque. I would not
change φιλοξενίας to -ίαις, t
has that plur. (Legg. 953 A),
ξενίαις (O. 1. 15).---βρύε
Note the absence of 6é“ In such ‘epana-
phora,’ where μένας δέ is normal, the
omission of μέν, ἦβ frequent (Soph. Azz.
606 n.), but that of δέ very rare: Plut.


Mor. 965 C πολλοῖς μὲν ἐνάλου, ὀρείου
πολλοῖς ἄγρας ἀκροθινίοις [where the
ελέαδηεις is against inserting δέ, as edd.
do]. Platt cites Orphic hymn 22. 7
μῆτερ μὲν Kurpidos, μῆτερ νεφέων ἐρε-
βεννῶν.--ἀγνιαί: cp. fr. 3. 12. ,

17 ff. λάμπειν δ᾽ κιτιλ. While Syracuse
rejoices in Hieron’s Olympic victory, his
munificence has a witness at Delphi also;
golden tripods, given by him and _ his
brother Gelon, shine before the temple of
Apollo. ὑπὸ pappapvyats, ‘with flash-
ing rays’ (Od. 8. 265 μαρμαρυγὰς θηεῖτο
ποδῶν): for ὑπὸ, cp. Pind. fr. 48 αἰθομένα
δᾷς ὑπὸ EavOaior πεύκαις : but the gen. is
more frequent in this sense.—It seems
better to join ὁ χρυσὸς with τριπόδων
than to suppose a genitive absolute.

ὑψιδαιδάλτων. This compound adj.
signifies, ‘curiously wrought 20 a (certain)
height’ from the ground. The only
peculiarity is in the shade of méaning
thus given to ὑψι-, rendering the com-
pound equivalent in sense to ὑψηλῶν καὶ
δαιδάλων. In the few other verbal
compounds where it occurs, ὕψι- means
‘on high,’ as in ὑψίβατος, ὑψιτέλεστος,
ὑψιφόρητος. [Weir Smyth renders ὕψι-
δαιδάλτων ‘deep-chased,’ as though ὑψι-
referred to ‘high relief.’ I cannot think
this possible.]—The fourth syllable of
ὑψιδαιδάλτων answers to one which is
short in the corresponding verses, except
64 (ὦ peyalynre—): hence Blass con-
jectures ὑψιδαιδάλων. As, however, the
fourth syllable is azceps when this verse
is used in the Sapphic stanza, so it
doubtless may be here also.

τριπόδων σταθέντων. The French ex-
plorers of Delphi have found the in-


256


ἀντ. β΄.
20
Δελφοὶ διέπουσι.

τ we ,ὕὔ ἥ

ἀγλαϊζέτω, ὁ

ἘΠ


ἐπ. β΄.


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


[ΠῚ


πάροιθε ναοῦ, τόθι μέγιστον ἄλσος
Φοίβου παρὰ Κασταλίας ῥεέθροις


θεόν, θεόν τις


γὰρ ἄριστος ὄλβων.


2 “ \ ΄
E€TEL ΠΟΤΕ Και δαμασίππου


Λυδίας ἀρχαγέταν,


[6 δ᾽ ἐς ἄελπτον ὦμαρ


25. εὖτε τὰν πεπίρωμέναν
Ζηνὸς Tere ἰοῦσαι κρίσιν
Σάρδιες Περσᾶϊν ἐπορθεῦντο op lara,
Κροῖσον ὁ χρυσάϊορος
στρ. γ. φύλαξ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων.
380 μολὼν πολυδ᾽ άκρνον] οὐκ ἔμελλε


22 APICTON OABON A: corrected to ἄριστος ὄλβων by A’, who has written o and


ὦ above, also transfixing'® and the first N.


23 The Ms. seems to have a circum-


flex on éwe?.—A Jater hand has sought to make the II of ποτε into K: so also in v. 72.
25 f. πεπρωμέναν.. τελειοῦσαι K. (τελέσσαντος Wackernagel) : κρίσιν Weil and others


(κτίσιν Kenyon, τίσιν Sandys).—Zqvds τελείου νεύμασιν Blass.


27 ἐπορθεῦντο


scribed bases which supported the tripods
of Gelon and Hieron. These offerings
stood side by side, under the open sky,
before the Ε. front of the temple, a little
N.N.E. of the Great Altar. To a visitor
ascending by the Sacred Way, they were
most conspicuous objects.

Gelon’s golden tripod, surmounted by
a golden Victory, was the work, as the
inscription on the base records, of an
Tonian artist, Bion of Miletus. It was
dedicated, doubtless in 479, to commemo-
rate his victory over the Carthaginians
at Himera in September, 480. Hieron’s
offering was similar. From certain indi-
cations afforded by the bases, M. Homolle
infers that the two dedications were not
separated by any great interval of time.
On the other hand it seems probable that
Hieron’s gift was made after his accession,
on Gelon’s death in 478, to the rule of
Syracuse.-—See Appendix.

The key-note of the ode is θεόν τις
ἀγλαϊζέτω. This links Hieron’s victory
by the Alpheus with his gifts at Pytho.
His piety towards Apollo illustrates the
grace shown him by Olympian Zeus.
Our poet, aiming at the Croesus-myth,
thus brings in Delphi; not, indeed, with
perfect art, yet by a coherent thought.

ἄλσος, a poetical word for- the whole


sacred enclosure (ἱερόν, τέμενος), contain-
ing the various buildings of the sanctuary.
So in Soph. Ant. 844 the city of Thebes
is called ἄλσος, as ground sacred to its
gods.—Kaeradias: fitly named in this
context, since its water was used by the
priests for sacred purposes. Rising in
the high cliffs above Delphi, the stream
descends to the site of the temple, below
which it joins the Pleistus.

21 1. θεόν, θεόν : cp. Diagoras fr. 1
(Bergk) θεός, Oeds πρὸ παντὸς ἔργου
βροτείου | νωμᾷ φρέν' ὑπερτάταν.

The scribe of the Ms. read ἀγλαϊζέθω
γὰρ ἄριστον ὄλβον. The accus. must
have been taken as being in apposition
either with θεόν or with the sentence.
But the correction by a later hand,
ἄριστος ὄλβων, is doubtless right. And
this confirms the view (first propounded
by Otto Crusius in Philolog. τντι. NV. F.
ΧΙ. p. 153) that θω in ἀγλαϊξέθω is a
crasis of -rw with 6. For such a crasis
there is, indeed, no proper parallel; and
here the slight pause in the sense after
ἀγλαϊζέτω is a further objection to it:
but Alexandrian grammarians were some-
times bold in such matters. Crusius
proposed to read, ὡνλαϊξέτω, S[s] γὰρ
ἄριστος ὄλβων, supposiig the w to be
shortened, and -~-—~-~ to Le substituted


IIT]


set in front of the temple, where Delphians minister in the great ant. υ.


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


257


sanctuary of Phoebus by Castalia’s stream. To the god let


men bring their choicest gifts;


welfare.


For Croesus, lord of horse-taming Lydia, was preserved of epode 2.


that is the best pledge of


yore by Apollo of the golden sword, when, in fulfilment of the
doom decreed by Zeus, Sardis was being sacked by the Persian


host.


When he had come to that unlooked-for day, Croesus was str. 3.


not minded


Housman: ἑάλωσαν Palmer, ἁλίσκοντο Wackernagel.
30 The Ms. has μολῶν.


χρυσάρματος conj. K.


28 xpvodopos Palmer:
This mis-accenting of μολών


(as of some other 2nd aor. participles) is very common in Mss.: see Appendix.
There is no point after the N. Blass? says, ‘post quintam nunc punctum agnovi’:
but the trace to which he probably refers seems to belong to the partly effaced right-


hand stroke of N.


for the -~-~ found in the corresponding

verses. It seems better to suppose a

synizesis of -rw and ο (Blass compares Ar.

Th. 269 ᾿Απόλλω οὐκ). But it must be
—


allowed that such a synizesis, harsh at
the best, is made much harsher by the
slight pause before ὁ γάρ. It is, indeed,
difficult to understand how so graceful
and facile a poet could have written such
a verse. For other conjectures see Ap-
pendix.

ἀγλαϊζέτω, honour, glorify (the god)
with gifts: a rare use; but cp. Plut.
Mor. 963 C πολλοῖς... ἀκροθινίοις ἀγλαΐσας
τὴν ᾿Αγροτέραν (Artemis).

ὁ γὰρ ἄριστος ὄλβων : for that (ὄλβος),
—viz. τὸ θεὸν dydatfew,—is the best. [ὁ
should not be taken as=0eds.] The
plural of ὄλβος occurs elsewhere only in
Soph. fr. 297.

23 f. ἐπεί. The story of Croesus is
introduced as an illustration of the general
truth just stated. As to the form of the
myth adopted here, see Introduction to
this Ode, § 3.—S8apaclrrov Λυδίας :
Her. (1. 79) speaks of the Lydian cavalry
in the time of Croesus as unsurpassed in
Asia. Cp. Mimnermus fr. 14. 3 Λυδῶν
ἱππομάχων.

25 Ξ. τὰν πεπρωμέναν.. κρίσιν. The
genitive Ζηνὸς makes it likely that the
last word in v. 26 was a noun agreeing
with τὰν πεπρωμέναν, though the latter
could stand alone. κρίσιν seems slightly


1. B.


preferable to κτίσιν (=a deed ordained
by the god, as in Pind. O. 13. 83), or
τίσιν.

28 χρυσάορος, with golden sword.
The epithet suits Apollo as defender and
rescuer: cp. 71. 15. 254 ff., τοῖόν rot
ἀοσσητῆρα Κρονίων | ἐξ "Ἴδης προέηκε
παρεστάμεναι καὶ ἀμύνειν, | Φοῖβον ᾿Απόλ-
Awva χρυσάορον, ὅς σε πάρος ep | prow.
In the only other Homeric passage where:
Apollo receives this epithet, it is again im
his warlike character (/7. 5. 509). [Om
the other hand in Pind. P. v. 104,
χρυσάορα Φοῖβον, Gildersleeve explains,
‘hung with the golden φόρμιγξ᾽ : and acc.
to schol. //. 15. 256 Pindar called Orpheus
xpvodopa.] Some vase-paintings arm
Apollo with the sword in the Giganto-
machia, and in his fight with Tityos
(Preller I. 232).—xpvodppatros would
also be suitable, since he bears Croesus
away (vv. 59f.). In Pind. P. 1x. 6 Apollo
bears Cyrene to Libya in a golden chariot.
But a regular epithet of the god is more
probable.

29—31 ὁ 8’...80vk0ctvayv. The re-
storation of this passage given above is
mine, and was adopted in the editio
princeps. A different restoration, by
Blass, is discussed in the Appendix. I
read ὁ δ᾽, rather than τὸ δ᾽, because the
subject to ἔμελλε and ναήσατ᾽ is Croesus,
and, after φύλαξ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων, some in-
dication of this is needed. Then ὁ δ᾽ és


18


258


BAKXYAIAOY


[111


μίμνειν ἔτι δ᾽ ουλοσύἾναν' πυρὰν δὲ
χαλκοτειχέος π[ροπάροιἾθεν αὐΪ λᾶς


3 ,
αντ. Ύ .


ναήσατ᾽, ἔνθα σὺϊν ἀλόχῳ] τε κεδνᾷ


σὺν εὐπλοκάμοις τ᾽ ἐπέβαιν᾽ ἄλα[στον
35 θυγατράσι δυρομέναις" χέρας δ᾽ ἐς
αἰπὺν αἰθέρα σφετέρας ἀείρας


γέγω Ἰνεν" ὑπέρβιε δαῖμον,


ποῦ θεῶν ἐστιν χάρις;
ποῦ δὲ Λατοίδας ἀναξ;
Ψ 5 3 4 4
40 πίτνουσ]ν ᾿Αλνάττα δόμοι,
τίς δὲ νῦν δώρων ἀμοιβὰ] μυρίων
φαίνεται Πυθωνόθεϊΐν;


στρ. δ΄.


πέρθουσι Mabou δοριάλωτο]ν ἄστυ,


φοινίσσεται αἵματι xpuao δίνας


Col.4 45 Πακτωλός:


ἐξ ἐὐκτίτων


avr. δ΄.


ἀεικελίως γυναῖκες
μεγάρων ἄγονται"


τὰ πρόσθε δ᾽ ἐχθρὰ φίλα: θανεῖν γλύκιστον.


τόσ᾽ εἶπε, καὶ ἁβροβάταν κέλευσεν


81 δουλοσύναν J.
σύν τ᾽ εὐπλοκάμοις K.
40 πίτνουσι]ν Herwerden.


33 ναήσατ᾽ Blass.


37 ὑπέρβιε Blass.
The letter before N is uncertain:


84 σὺν εὐποκλάμοις τ᾽ (cp. v. 6) Platt:
(There is not room for ὑπέρτατε.)
it may have been I.


is preferable to 6 γάρ, because μολεῖν is
seldom followed by an acc. without a
preposition, except when the acc. denotes
a place (or a folk); eg. γῆν, λαόν (Pind.
Ni. ἃς. 36). In Eur. Med. 920 f., ἥβης
τέλος μολόντες, the τέλος is conceived as a
goal.

μίμνειν : the pres. inf. θύεν follows
μέλλω in XV. 18: the fut. φοινίξειν in
XII. 165: in Vv. 164 τελεῖν is ambiguous.

32 xadkorexéos: plates of bronze
are affixed to the walls; a mode of
ornament which came into Hellas from
Asia. Cp. Od. 7. 86 (in the palace of
Alcinous), χάλκεοι μὲν γὰρ τοῖχοι ἐληλάδατ᾽
ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα. The pyre was built in
front of the αὐλή, the courtyard of the
king’s palace.—Bacchylides, following
epic precedent, forms compounds either
with χαλκεο-, xpvoeo-, or with χαλκο-,
χρυσο- : Pindar, with χαλκο-, xpuco- only.

88 ναήσατ᾽, rogum exstruendum cu-
ravit: Doric for νηήσατο, from vnéw, ‘to
heap up.’ This midd. aor. occurs in


Zl. 9. 137, 279: also in Ap. Rhod. 1. 364,
and later poets.

84 2. σὺν εὐπλοκάμοις Te: Platt seems
right in thus placing τε, on the ground
that there is not room for NT between T
and EY. π- ἄλαστον, ‘ inconsolably’: Od.
14. 174 νῦν αὖ παιδὸς ἄλαστον ὀδύρομαι.

86 σφετέρας, =éds, ‘his,’ as often in
posthomeric poetry. In Homer, and in
classical prose, opérepos is always a plural
possessive. —delpas: cp. the Homeric
χεῖρας ἀνέσχον (f/. 3. 318, etc.). It is
an epic trait in Basehgldes that he loves
to mention this gesture, in connexion
with prayer (XI. 100, XIII. 35, XV. 9), or
with appeal to a heavenly sign (XviI. 72).

37 ff. γέγωνεν, = ἐγέγωνεν, imperf. from

γεγώνω, as in 7]. 14. 469 Alas δ᾽ afr’


éyéywvev. (Not from perf. yéywva, as a
vivid present.)
δαῖμον: the Sky-father; it is Zeus


who sends the rain (v. 55).--- ποῦ θεῶν
Said χάρις; In Her. 1. go Croesus, after
his fall, sends a message to Delphi, asking


IIT] ETTINIKOI


259
to await the further woe of grievous slavery. He caused a pyre
to be built in front of his courtyard with walls of bronze ;


he mounted thereon with his true wife and his daughters with
beauteous locks, who wailed inconsolably ; and, lifting up his
-hands to the high heaven,


he cried aloud:—‘O thou Spirit of surpassing might, where is
the gratitude of the gods? where is the divine son of Leto?
The house of Alyattes is falling; [and what recompense for
countless gifts is shown from Delphi? The Persians are sacking
the city taken by the spear ;]


the gold-fraught tide of Pactolus runs red with blood; women


are ruthlessly led captive from the well-built halls:


what once was hateful is welcome; ’tis sweetest to die,’


So


spake he, and bade a softly-stepping attendant


41 μυρίων) Before the M was C, but a line has been drawn through it.
47 IIPOCOEN A A: πρόσθεν (without 5’)


vlaoerat Blass: αἵματι χρυσο]δίνας K.


44 φοι-


Fraccaroli: πρόσθε δ᾽ K.—éx0pa Palmer.—vuv was inserted above IAA by AS; a


notable instance of inattention to metre.


48 AB..BAQTAN A, but 2 has


been transfixed (by A??).—ApoBdray (as a proper name) Palmer, Jurenka.


el ἀχαρίστοισι νόμος εἶναι τοῖσι Ἑλληνικοῖσι
Oeotor.—Cp. Eur. 770. 428 ποῦ δ᾽ ᾿Απόλ-
λωνος λόγοι;

40 ff. ᾿Αλνυάττα δόμοι, the palace of
the Lydian kings at Sardis,—7ra βασιλήϊα
of Her. τ. 30, comprising the treasure-
houses (θησαυροί) there mentioned. The
prominence given here to the father of
Croesus is historically correct. Gyges,
of whom Croesus was the fourth successor,
established the dynasty of the Mermnadae;
but Alyattes, in his long reign (circ.
617—560 B.C.), became the real founder
of the Lydian empire.

41. The word μυρίων clearly points
to some such context as that which I
restore (exempli gratia) above. The C
cancelled before MYPIOQN in the Ms.
suggests an acc. plural (as doiBas)
written by error instead of a nom.
singular.

44 :. φοινίσσεται: XII. 164 f. μέλλον
dpa πρότερον διϊνᾶντα φοινίξειν Σκάμαν-
δρον.--χρυσοδίνας: the Pactolus (now
Sarabat) was said to carry gold-dust
down from Mt Tmolus: Aen. to. 141
(Lydia) bi pinguia culta | exercentque
utri, Pactolusque irrigat auro. Pliny
H. N. 33. 21 § 1 (gold is found)
fluminum ramentis (in the rubbish
brought down by rivers), wt zm Tago
Hispaniae, Pado [taliae, Hebro Thraciae,


Pactolo Asiae, Gange Indiae. He might
have added the auro turbidus Hermus
(Virg. Geo. 2.137), into which the Pactolus
flows.

45 f. yuvaixes...dyovrar. Cp. 71. 9.
591—4: καί of κατέλεξεν ἅπαντα | κήδε᾽
ὅσ᾽ ἀνθρώποισι πέλει τῶν ἄστυ ἁλῴῃ" |
ἄνδρας μὲν κτείνουσι, πόλιν δέ τε πῦρ
ἀμαθύνει, | τέκνα δέ τ᾽ ἄλλοι ἄγουσι βαθυ-
ζώνους τε γυναῖκας.

47 τὰ πρόσθε δ᾽ ἐχθρὰ φίλα, z.c.,
the pains of death; θανεῖν γλύκιστον .----
The ms. has τὰ πρόσθεν δ᾽, against
metre. It is rather more likely that the
poet wrote πρόσθε (as in XVI. 45, the
only other ae where he has the word),
than that δ᾽ was interpolated. πρόσθεν
being much commoner than πρόσθε, the v
might easily have been added.

Fraccaroli supposes that v. 43 began
with νῦν δ᾽ εὖτε, that ἄγονται should have
only a comma after it, and that τὰ πρόσθε
δ᾽ (etc.) is the last clause of the pro-
tasis, θανεῖν γλύκιστον being apodosis: or
else that τὰ πρόσθεν (without δ᾽) ἐχθρὰ
φίλα is the apodosis. Rather, I think,
we have a series of abrupt utterances,
enumerating the calamities, down to
ἄγονται. Then, at τὰ πρόσθε δ᾽ ἐχθρὰ
φίλα, he turns (as δέ marks) to his
conclusion.


48 ἁβροβάταν, ‘a softly-stepping


18—2


ant. 3.


epode 3.


str. 4.


ant. 4.


[π|


ἔϊ κλαγ Jor δὲ
7 ἀνὰ ματρὶ χεῖρας


κατένασσε κούραις


260 BAKXYAIAOY
ἅπτειν ξύλινον δόμον.
50 παρθένοι, φίλας
ἐπ. δ. ἔβαλλον: ὁ γὰρ προφανὴς θνα-
τοῖσιν ἔχθιστος φόνων'
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ δεινοῦ πυρὸς
λαμπρὸν διάϊσσεν μένος,
85 Ζεὺς ἐπιστάσαἰς μελαγκεὺ Ἰθὲς νέφος
σβέώννυεν ξανθὰϊν φλόγα.
στρ. ε΄. ἄπιστον οὐδέν, ὅ τι θεῶν μέ]ριμνα
τεύχει: τότε Δαλογενὴς ᾿Απόλλων
φέρων ἐς “Ὑπερβορέους γέροντα
όο σὺν τανισφύροις
ἀντ. ε. Ov εὐσέβειαν, ὅτι μέγιστα θνατῶν


ἐς ἀγαθέαν ἀνέπεμψε Πυθώ.


49 ἐἔκλαγ]ον.


The letter before ON was Γ or T.
51 2. θνα- A wrote OIA, but then transfixed I, and wrote N above.
The lower parts of the letters upos are on fragment 26 K.


51 EBAAAEN 4A, corr. A’.
58 πυρὸς]
54 διάϊ[σσεν.


attendant.’ So in Eur. 770. 820 Gany-
mede, the young cupbearer of Zeus,
is described as χρυσέαις ἐν olvoxoats
ἁβρὰ βαίνων, ‘softly moving’ while he
ministers. (ἁβροβάτης occurs elsewhere
only in Aesch. Pers. 1072, where Xerxes
says to the Chorus of Persian elders,
γοᾶσθ᾽ ἁβροβάται, --ἰ.6. ‘treading softly,’
as in a procession of mourners.) The
use of the word here is significant. It
shows that Greeks had noted a daznty
or mincing gait as characterizing the
effeminate palace-slaves of Asiatic princes.
That trait would strike a Greek by its
strong contrast with the manly bearing
and the freedom in movement which
Hellenic youth acquired in gymnasium
and palaestra. Hence it is easy to
understand how ἁβροβάτης could denote,
—with only such aid as the context gives


here,—an Asiatic attendant. See Ap-
pendix.
49 δόμον, ‘structure’; Nairn cp.


Pind. P. 111. 67 ἀλλ᾽ ἐπεὶ τείχει θέσαν ἐν
ξυλινῷ | σύγγονοι κούραν (when they
placed Coronis on the pyre).

50 ff. ἀνὰ, ἔβαλλον (tmesis), a stronger
ἀνεῖχον, lifted in supplication. Cp. 36n.


—mpodavrjs: a violent death is bitterest
when seen beforehand (instead of being
sudden and instantaneous). Cp. Soph.
O. C. 1440 προῦπτον “Acénv: Her. ΙΧ. 17
προόπτῳ θανάτῳ.---φόνων, forms of violent
death (like θανάτων). The plur. φόνοι.
usu. = ‘slaughters’ (O. C. 1235, etc.).

55 Ζεύς, the cloud-gatherer, the giver
of rain or drought (Soph. fr. 481. 4), isa
fitter agent than Apollo here. On a red-
figured crater by Python (late 4th cent.
B.C.) Zeus appears as quencher of a pyre
on which Alcmena is about to be burned:
he has cast his thunderbolts, and the
Hyades are pouring rain on the pile
(Journ. Hellen. Studies, vol. Xi. pl. 6;
see A. 5. Murray 2b. p. 226).—In fr. 25
Bacchylides has μελαγκευθὲς εἴδωλον (the
shade of Odysseus), where the word seems
to mean,.‘ shrouded in gloom’; the spec-
tral form is dimly seen. If μελαγκευθὲς
was the word here, the verbal element
was active rather than passive: ‘a cloud
carrying rain in its dark bosom.’ Our
choice is limited by the virtual certainty -
that the penult. was long (which excludes
eg. μελαμβαθέξς). κελαινανθές, which
Herwerden suggests, had occurred to me


11]


kindle the wooden pile.
their hands to their mother;


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


261


The maidens shrieked, and threw up


for the violent death which is foreseen is to mortals the most


bitter.


But when the bright strength of the dread fire began


to rush abroad, Zeus brought a dark rain-cloud above it, and
began to quench the yellow flame.


Nothing is past belief that is wrought by the care of the


gods.


Then Delos-born Apollo carried the old man to the


Hyperboreans, with his daughters of slender ankle, and there


gave him rest,


in requital of his piety; because of all mortals he had sent up
the largest gifts to divine Pytho.


The scribe erroneously placed marks of diaeresis on the first 1 as well as on the


second. 55 pedayKevdes Κα.
Herwerden, Blass?.


56 φλόγα Palmer.
60 τανισφύροις MS.: τανυσφύροις Weir Smyth.


58 τεύχει] τεύχῃ
62 ἀνέ-


πεμψε Housman and others (ἀν- lost after -av): ἔπεμψε MS.


also: but it is not extant, though μελανθής
is analogous.

57 ἄπιστον κ-.τ.λ. : the γνώμη prefaces
the incident, just as in XvI. 117 ff.: cp.
Pind. P. x. 48 ff.

58 τεύχει need not be changed to
τεύχῃ, though a subjunct. stands in the
similar passage, XVII. 118. ὅστις often
takes the indicative (instead of subjunct.
with dv) in a relative sentence expressing
a general condition: Soph. Av¢. 178 f.
Goris.. | μὴ τῶν ἀρίστων ἅπτεται βουλευ-
μάτων : Thuc. 11. 64 86 οἵτινες... ἥκιστα
λυποῦνται. ‘

Δαλογενής: the Ionian island-poet
might naturally associate Apollo with his
chief Ionian shrine. (In fr. 12 he says,
ὦ περικλειτὲ Aad’, ἀγνοήσειν μὲν οὔ σ᾽
ἔλπομαι.) But the epithet has a special
fitness here. Delian legend connected
Delos with the earliest offerings of the
᾿ὑπερβόρεοι to Apollo (Her. 1v. 32—35).

59 φέρων és “Ὑπερβορέους. A passage
of some mythological interest. The
Hyperborean land is here (as nowhere
else) a paradise to which » pious mortal
is translated, without dying, by Apollo.
It takes the place of the Homeric
Ἠλύσιον πεδίον (Od. 4. 563), and of the
posthomeric μακάρων νῆσοι (Hes. Of.
171, Pind. O. 11. 78), in the Far West.
Pindar describes the Hyperboreans as
δᾶμον ᾿Απόλλωνος θεράποντα (0, III.


13—16), who worship him with sacrifice,


feast, and praise (P. X. 29 ff.). He
clearly thinks of them as dwelling
‘beyond Boreas’ (cp. Z. v. 23). Among


them, Apollo passes his ἀποδημίαι from
his southern shrines. Argive legend sent
Heracles, Perseus, and Io thither,—but
only as visitors.—As to the origin of the
‘Hyperborean’ legend, see Appendix.

60 τανισφύροις, with slender ankles.—
The ms. has the wrong spelling τανι-
(instead of the correct ravv-) again in v. 59
(τανισφύρου) and Χ. 55 (τανίφυλλον). The
poet may have preferred that spelling in
order to avoid the occurrence of v in two
successive syllables, as he avoids such a
recurrence of @ (see Il. 1, n. on Φήμα).
In Od. 13. 102 (etc.) the mss. have
τανύφυλλος, and in Hom. hymn. Cer. 2
τανύσφυρον.

62 ἀγαθέαν, ‘divine’: an epithet ap-
plied only to aces connected with gods,
—as to Pytho in Hes. 7heog. 499, Pind.
P.1x. 77.. It probably comes from ἀγα
(dya-v, cp. ἀγήνωρ) and θεο. ἀνέπεμψε,
as to a sacred metropolis (cp. Polyb.
I. 7 ἀναπεμφθέντων els’ τὴν ‘Paduny).
Herodotus (1. 51 f.), in speaking of the
gifts sent to Delphi by Croesus, says
ἀπέπεμψε (thrice) or dméreure, —the
fitting word from a Lydian point of
view, as ἀνέπεμψε is from that of a
Greek.


epode 4.


str. 5.


ant. 5.


262


BAKXYAIAOY


{I


ὅσοι γε μὲν Ἑλλάδ᾽ ἔχουσιν, οὔτι[ς,


ὦ μεγαίνητε


65 ἐπ. ε΄.


Ἱέρων, θελήσει


gdp lev σέο πλείονα χρυσὸν


Λοξίᾳ πέμψαι βροτῶν.
εὖ λέγ ew πάρεστιν, ὅσ-

τις μὴ φθόνῳ πιαίνεται,
θεοφιλῆ φίλιππον avdp’ ἀρήϊον,


70 tO |iov σκᾶπτρον Διὸς


τὰ
στρ. ς΄.


ἰοπλόἸκων τε μέρο[ς ἔχοντ]α Μουσᾶν 7


ὡς δ᾽ ἐν] Μαλέᾳ ποτέ, ἰχεῖμα δαίμων
ἐπ᾽ €0 |vos ἐφάμερον af iy? ἵησι.
καίρι]α σκοπεῖς: Bpay[ds ἄμμιν αἰών"


75 ἄντ. ς΄.


δολό]εσσα δ᾽ ἐλπὶς bald κέαρ δέδυκεν


ἐφαμ)ερίων: ὁ δ᾽ ἄναξ [Ἀπόλλων
ὁ βουκό]λος εἶπε Φέρητος υἷι:


68 ὅσοι γε μὲν] γε added by Wilamowitz, Blass and others.—The paragraphus, which


should follow 64, is wrongly placed in the MS. after 63.
is a faint trace of E before N.—[{o]éo Palmer.
faint trace after w might belong either to I or to N.
: the trace before BIN suits either Τ' or T.

Palmer.—ialyera: A: added above by A’.


Platt, a.o.


and Blass?. (εὐθαλῆ 8].1)---ἀρήϊον Blass :


65 φάμεν Thomas. There
66 βροτῶν Nairn: βροτῷ K. The

67 1. εὖ | λέγειν Blass,
(εὐλογεῖν Jurenka.)—és | res μὴ
69 θεοφιλῆ Herwerden : so Jurenka,


an ΞΡΘΕΠΟΡΒΟΣ : traceable after ἄνδρ᾽ : one
fragment supplies pyio and another (21 b) the final v.
δαμίου) : ὀλβ])ίον Jurenka, which is too little for the os


.. 1OT] τεθμ]ίου Blass (or
71 The letters -α Mov,


68 ὅσοι ye μὲν Εϊλλάδ᾽ txovow,—as
distinguished from non-Hellenes; the
poet is not prepared to say that Hieron
had surpassed Croesus: hence γε is right.
Remark that μέν, added to ye here, merely
emphasizes the limitation (as in ἐγὼ μέν,
etc.). This is not the Ionic γε μέν in the
sense of γε μήν (‘however,’ //. 2. 703
etc., Her. Ψ11. 152), which occurs below
in v. 99.

64 ὦ μεγαίνητε ‘Iépwv. The hiatus
before Ἱέρων, with lengthening of ε, is
remarkable. A strong aspiration of i
would help to explain it; and there may
be also a metrical reason, viz., a slight
pause after the fifth foot. In 92 (Μοῦσά
νιν τρέφει. “Ἱέρων, σὺ δ᾽ ὄλβου) the hiatus
occurs at the same place; but there the
full stop after τρέφει makes a difference.
That verse may, however, make us more
cautious in assuming that v. 64 is corrupt.
(Wilamowitz suggests ὥ μεγαίνητ᾽ ὥ: A,
Ludwich, ὦ μεγ᾽ alvndels.)\—Tépov (like


ἱερός) never had

65 f. φάμεν (Acolic) =¢ddvai, Pind. O.
I. 35, Il. 38, 4. vill. 19.—Aokla: a title
given to Apollo especially in his oracular
character, owing to the popular derivation
from λοξός (‘ oblique,’ in ref. to indirect,
eae responses): Soph. O. 7. 853
in.).

67 f£. εὖ λέγειν wapeoti..dotis μὴ
x.7.X. The antecedent to ὅστις is τούτῳ
understood (cp. Soph. Anz. 35 f. ὃς ἂν
τούτων τι δρᾷ, | φόνον πρόκεισθαι) : ‘any
man who is not envious may well praise,’
etc.—malverat, battens on envy, feeds
his heart on it: Pind. P. 11. 55 Ψογερὸν
᾿Αρχίλοχον, Bapudbyos ἔχθεσιν | πιαινό-
μενον.

69 θεοφιλῆ suits the space, and is
appropriate: cp. Iv. 1—3, and v. 1
(εὔμοιρε). Pind. Z v. 65 f. πόλιν |
θεοφιλῆ: Plat. Lhileb. 39 E δίκαιος ἀνὴρ
καὶ εὐσεβὴς... ἄρ᾽ οὐ θεοφιλής ἐστιν;

70 τεθμίου, Doric for θεσμίου (Pind.


IIT] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 263


But of all who now live in Hellas there is not one, illustrious
Hieron,


who will say that he has sent more gold to Loxias than thou
hast. Well may any man, who does not batten on envious
thoughts, praise the favourite of the gods, the lover of horses,
the warrior, who bears the sceptre of justice-guarding Zeus,


and has fellowship with the Muses of violet locks. [Ὁ But, as oft
at Malea, the god sends sudden stress of trouble on the children of a day.
Thou lookest to the needs of the time: our life is short ;]


but deceitful Hope has crept into the hearts of men, children
of a day. Yet the lord Apollo [, the shepherd,] said to the
son of Pheres :—


with wy (the last of v. 72) below, are on fr.21@: -σᾶν on fr. 21 ὁ (placed by Blass).
72 ποτί(ε) is certain: as in v. 23 a later hand has indicated a correction of II into Καὶ
(xore).—Before QN (fr. 21 a) theré-are distinct traces of an upright stroke, with a
slight trace of a stroke joining this from the left; M is possible, but doubtful.
73 The trace before OC is merely an upright stroke, | , but such as to suggest N.—
On fr. 21 ὦ, below the final QN of 72, there is a very faint trace (little more
than a dot) of the bottom of a letter which was the last of v. 73. Blass thinks
that it was I: but N is equally possible. 74 After σκοπεῖς something has been
deleted (σ᾽). 75 δολόεσσα.. ὑπὸ κέαρ δέδυκεν J.: δολόεσσα.. ὑποφέρει μερίμνας
Wilamowitz. 77 ..... AOC] The A is not quite certain, but the traces point
to it. ὁ βουκόλος conj. K.: ἐὼν φίλος Blass: ἑκαβόλος 7.---(τοιόν δ᾽ ἔπος Wilamowitz:
τοιοῦτ᾽ ἔπος Jurenka: but even if II could be assumed, the space is too small for this.)


—vit Platt, Wackernagel (vii Wilam.).


NV. ΧΙ. 27 ἑορτὰν Ἡρακλέος τέθμιον) : the
Zeus of law and justice, under whom
Hieron is the guardian of civic order:
cp. Iv. 3 ἀστύθεμίν θ᾽ ᾿Ιέρωνα: Pind. O.
I. 12 (Hieron) θεμιστεῖον ὃς ἀμφέπει
σκᾶπτον. But θέσμιος does not elsewhere
occur as an epithet of Zeus (nor does
δάμιος, the other word suggested by
Blass). ξεινίου (Nairn) seems too special
for the context.

71 μέρος ἔχοντα Μουσᾶν : cp. n. on
1. 41. Hieron was said to have been,
like Gelon, utterly indifferent to μουσική
and literature, until the enforced leisure
of an illness gave him ἃ love for them,
which thenceforth was ardent. (Aelian
V. A. 4. 15: ἐπεὶ δὲ αὐτῷ συνηνέχθη
νοσῆσαι, μουσικώτατος ἀνθρώπων ἐγένετο.)

72—74 All that is certain as to the
sense of these mutilated verses is that
they formed a transition from the theme
of Hieron’s achievements (69—71) to
that of the brevity and insecurity of life
(75—92). It would seem that the letters
MAAKAI must be either (1) Madéq, or
(2) part of δειμαλέᾳ or ῥωμαλέᾳ. (1) Malea
was a proverbial terror to sailors (Strabo
VUI. p. 378). This ode was written after


the Olympian festival of 468 : Hieron died
of his disease in 467. At this time (as
verses 85—g2 hint) it must have been
known that he could not live long.
Verses 72 f., as I tentatively restore them
above, would express a general γνώμη
(‘trouble oft comes suddenly on mortals’),
veiling a reference to the fact that Hieron’s
malady had lately become worse. καί-
pia σκοπεῖς would be a tribute to his
fortitude and resignation: he is calmly
taking such measures as his state requires.
Such a context would certainly agree well
with the tone of 75—92.—(2) If the word
in 72 was (δει)μαλέᾳ (with χειρί), the sense
may have been: ‘formerly thy hand was
terrible in battle; but now thou lookest
for solace from the Muses.’ See Ap-
pendix, where both alternatives are more
fully examined.

75 δολόεσσα δ᾽ ἐλπὶς «.7.d. In the
immediately preceding words the poet
had said, in effect, ‘life is short and
uncertain.’ Θμέ hope beguiles men into
looking for an indefinite term of pros-
perity.

77 Apollo served as BovpopBés to
Admetus, son of Pheres, and king of


epode 5.


str. 6.


ant. 6.


[ΠῚ


πολιὸν πἰ αρ]έντα


Ἱέρων, σὺ δ᾽ ὄλβου


264. BAKXYAIAOY
Col. 5 θνατὸν εὖντα χρὴ διδύμους ἀέξειν
ἐπ. ς΄. γνώμας, ὅτι τ᾽ αὔριον ὄψεαι
8ο μοῦνον ἁλίου φάος,
χὥῶτι πεντήκοντ᾽ ἔτεα
ζωὰν βαθύπλουτον τελεῖς.
Ψ - ¥ , an ae
ὅσια δρῶν εὔφραινε θυμόν: τοῦτο γὰρ
κερδέων ὑπέρτατον.
85 στρ. ζ΄. φρονέοντι συνετὰ γαρύω: βαθὺς μὲν
αἰθὴρ ἀμίαντος: ὕδωρ δὲ πόντου
οὐ σάπεται: εὐφροσύνα δ᾽ ὁ χρυσός:
ἀνδρὶ δ᾽ οὐ θέμις,
ἀντ. ζ. γῆρας, θάλειαν αὖτις ἀγκομίσσαι
90 ἥβαν. ἀρετᾶϊ ς γε μὲν οὐ μινύθει
βροτῶν ἅμα σ[ζώμα ει φέγγος, ἀλλὰ
Μοῦσά νιν τρί der].
ἐπ. ζ. κάλλιστ᾽ ἐπεδῖ εἰξ]αο θνατοῖς


ἄνθεα- πράξαζντι] δ᾽ εὖ


78 ΕΥ̓ΤΑΝ A—a corrector (4.33) added N above the line between YT and T, and


transfixed the final N.
91 σώματι J. K. Ingram.


88 παρέντα J.


89 ATKOMICAI μ8.: corr. K.


Pherae in Thessaly; having been doomed
by Zeus to become a mortal’s thrall,
because he had slain the Cyclopes (Eur.
Ak, 1—8). Kenyon’s supplement, ὁ
βουκόλος, is very attractive.—vit: the
last syllable of this verse must be short.
Cp. XII. 100 υἷας,

78 εὖντα-- ἐόντα: rare, but found in
Theocr, 11. 3. Cp. XVIII. 23 ἢ. ἀέξειν,
make to grow, ‘nourish’: Od. 17. 480 ἐν
μὲν κραδίῃ μέγα “πένθος debe,

79- 82 ὅτι τ᾽ αὔριον κιτ.ιλ. This is a
general precept from ἃ friendly god. (It
was he who, when the time approached
for Admetus to die, persuaded the Moirae
to accept another life in exchange: Eur.
Alc. 9—14.) ‘Be prepared to die to-
morrow :—use your time as if you had
none to spare. But reflect also that you
may live for many years,—and exercise
forethought accordingly.’ πεντήκοντ᾽
ἔτεα, acc. of duration, * for, fifty (ze, an
indefinite number of) years’: there is no
allusion to Hieron’s actual age.


βαθύπλουτον (used by Aesch. and


Eur.) like βαθύδοξος (Pind. P. τ. 66), etc.
Cp. Soph. 47. 130 μακροῦ πλούτου βάθει.
—tedels, accomplish, carry on to its
goal.

88 ὅσια δρῶν εὕφραινε θυμόν : 2.6. so
long as you are doing your duty to gods
and men, keep a cheerful spirit, and enjoy
the present aright, without counting on
the future. This is in a higher strain
than carpe diem.

85—87 φρονέοντι συνετὰ γαρύω.
Veiled counsels of resignation and of
comfort to the moribund Hieron.

These three verses are remarkable for
the open imitation of Pindar. With
φρονέοντι «.7.A. cp. φωνάεντα συνετοῖσιν


(Ο. 11. 93, 476 Β.0.). The short clauses
(from βαθὺς to χρυσὸς) copy Pindar’s
abruptness, and _ his splendour : cp.
O. 1. 1 ff. (also of 476 8.6.), ἄριστον μὲν
ὕδωρ' ὁ δὲ χρυσὸς αἰθόμενον πῦρ ἅτε δια-
πρέπει x.7.A. But the strain hardly suits
Bacchylides : a lapse comes at the tame
word εὐφροσύνα (which has to mean, ‘a
joy for ever’). Blass, indeed, in his


II]


ETTINIKOI


265


‘As a mortal, thou must nourish each of two forebodings ;—


that to-morrow’s sunlight will be the last that thou shalt see; epode 6.


or that for fifty years thou wilt live out thy life in ample wealth.
Act righteously, and be of a cheerful spirit: that is the supreme


gain.’


I speak words of meaning for the wise: the depths of air str. 7.


receive no taint; the waters of the sea are incorrupt; gold is
a joy: but for a man it is not lawful to pass by hoary eld,


and to recover the bloom of youth. Yet the radiance of manly ant. 7.


worth wanes not with the mortal body; it is cherished by the


Muse. O Hieron,


thou hast shown to mankind the fairest flowers of good fortune. epode 7.


ig


Toward one who has so prospered,


and ed., changes it to a word which is
not extant, εὐχροσύνα (as=‘a glory of
colour’); citing Theognis 451 f. τοῦ (gold)
χροιῆς καθύπερθε μέλας οὐχ ἅπτεται ids, |
οὐδ᾽ εὐρώς, αἰεὶ δ᾽ ἄνθος ἔχει καθαρόν.

88 παρέντα: a mortal cannot pass by
old age, and enter (after middle life) on
a second youth. Cp. Plat. Rep. 460 E
ἐπειδὰν τὴν ὀξυτάτην δρόμον ἀκμὴν παρῇ,
‘when a man has passed that moment
in life’s course when the passions are
keenest.’ Soph. O. C. 1229 εὖτ᾽ ἂν τὸ
νέον παρῇ, when he has seen youth go
by.—The initial + being certain, the
only alternative is mpoévra: which would
be required to mean, ‘having let go,’
‘having given up,’ old age; a sense
which, even if it were satisfactory, would
rather demand προέμενον. Further, the
space in the papyrus seems too large for
προέντα : in this MS. the letter O takes up
less room than A.

ΘΟ ἀρετᾶς ye μέν. Here ye μὲν is
equivalent to the Attic ye μήν, ‘however’:
cp. 63 n.

The ms. has μινύθει, ~~- where we
expect ~--. The ode contains seven
strophes and seven antistrophes. There
are therefore thirteen verses which answer
metrically to this. In two of them (72
and 76) the ending is lost. In all the
other eleven, a bacchius (~——) and not
an anapaest, answers to μινύθει. And to
these eleven, verse 76 may be added,
since ᾿Απόλλων is practically certain there.
The probabilities, then, are very strongly
against a solitary exception here; even if
such a variation was admissible. Crusius


and Blass hold that the substitution of
for -~-- in this place of the
verse was legitimate. They refer to
Alcman’s partheneion (Bergk, vol. 111.
30 ff.). There we have remains of seven
strophes. Of these, strophes 1, 3, and
7 end with -~~-, while 4, 5, and 6 end
with -~—-. (The close of strophe 2 is
lost.) Bergk suggests, however, that in
Alcman’s poem these clazesz/ae were not
freely interchangeable; but that he varied
the measure in the last verse of his strophe
by rule, on some plan connected with the
nature of the subject-matter. In any
case, it seems rash to take the Alcman
fragment (in which much is obscure) as a
sufficient warrant for the isolated anomaly
here.

I have little doubt that μινύθει is
corrupt. The poet may have written
μινύνθη or μινύθη (a gnomicaor.). ἐμινύθη
is the vulg. reading, though a doubtful
one, in Hippocr. 3. 63 and 3. 219. Cp.
v. 151. No pres. μινύνω or μινύνθω is
extant.

92 ff. τρέφει. ‘Iépwv. On the hiatus,
see v. 64n.—éABov..dv0ea: cp. Pind. P.
x. 17 f. ἕποιτο poipa.. | ..πλοῦτον ἀνθεῖν
σφίσιν: P. 4. 131 εὐξζῴας ἄωτον.

94 πράξαντι δ᾽ εὖ κιτιλ. Silence is
not meet in the case of (in regard to) one
who has prospered. Cp. v. 187—190,
χρὴ δ᾽ ἀλαθείας χάριν | αἰνεῖν... | εἴ τις εὖ
πράσσοι Bporav.— The dative would more
naturally denote the person who ought
not to be silent (Soph. 4z. 293 γυναιξὶ
κόσμον ἡ σιγὴ φέρει) : but ed πράξαντι
cannot here refer to the poet.


-----


266


BAKXYAIAOY


[10I, IV


95 οὐ φέρει κόσμον σιω-
πά' σὺν δ᾽ ἀλαθείᾳ καλῶν
καὶ μελιγλώσσου τις ὑμνήσει χάριν


Κηΐας ἀηδόνος.


IV.


ΤΩΙ AYTQI
<ITITIOIS> ΠΎΘΙΑ.


΄
στρ.α.


:- Ἔτι Συρακοσίαν φιλεῖ


2 πόλιν ὁ χρυσοκόμας ᾿Απόλλων,


3 ἀστύθεμίν θ᾽


Ἱέρωνα γεραίρει ‘


+Tpirov yap map opudalrdv ὑψιδείρου χθονὸς
5 Πυθιόνικζος ἀείδε]ται

6 ὠκυπόδ ὧν ἀρετᾷ!] σὺν ἵππων.

γ παρὰ δ᾽ ἐὕρροον ᾿Αλφεὸν

8 dis Ἥρας (F)ou εὐρυβζας ἀλέκτωρ

9 γέρας eve’ ἑκόν τι νόῳ,
το πρευμενὴς δ᾽ ἐπάκουεν] ὕμνους


στρ. β΄.


: κελαδέοντας, οἷς ἰσόρ-


2 ροπον ἔχοντα Aik jas τάλαντον


Col. 6


96 καλέων Jurenka.


Ψ. id 2 > γ᾽ Ἐν
3 Δεινομένεός κ᾿ ἐγερα[ίρο]μεν υἱόν.


98 In ἀηδόνος the scribe had written O for A, but corrected it.


Iv. The title, in minuscule letters, has been added (by A*?) in the left margin.


IMMOIC is inserted by K.
στεφάνοις W. Christ.


4 The faint traces after ΓᾺΡ indicate II rather
than A, z.e. map’ (Blass) rather than ἀμφ᾽.


6 ἀρετᾷ Crusius, καμάτῳ K.:


8 AC AAEKTOP] Blass’, who writes ds, finds an


96 σὺν δ᾽ ἀλαθείᾳ καλῶν: ‘and
along with his (Hieron’s) genuine glories’
(lit. ‘reality of glories’) ‘men will praise
also the charm of the melodious nightin-
gale of Ceos.’ For this sense of καλά,
cp. II. 6: for ἀλαθείᾳ, Thue. vi. 33 δι
τοῦ ἐπίπλου τῆς ἀληθείας, the ‘reality’
of it. We have already found in this
poem a trace of Pindar’s first Olympian
(85 ff.,n.). In the last words of that ode,
Pindar links his own fame with Hieron’s:
εἴη σέ τε τοῦτον ὑψοῦ χρόνον πατεῖν, ἐμέ
τε τοσσάδε νικαφόροις | ὁμιλεῖν, πρόφαντον
σοφίᾳ καθ' "EAAnvas ἐόντα παντᾷ. Bac-
chylides does the like here, only in his
gentler Ionian fashion.


If καλῶν were the participle, the sense
would be: ‘and calling (the poet) so
with truth, men will praise the charm of
the..nightingale of Ceos.’ But then we
should expect καλέων : cp. VII. 40 ὑμνέων,


and (without synizesis) v. 152 ὀλιγοσθε-
νέων, X11. 118 κλονέων. In I. 34, certainly,
we find Bodot (=Bodrdor). The presump-
tion, however, is in favour of καλῶν being
the noun.

IV. 8 ἀστύθεμιν, ‘just ruler of cities.’
dorv- here defines the relation of θέμις :
the compound means, ‘concerned with
(upholding) themis in the city’: cp.
Hymn. Hom. 5. 103 θεμιστοπόλων Bact-
Ajwv.—See on III. 70.


III, IV] ETTINIKOI 267
silence is not meet. And along with thy genuine glories men
shall praise also the charm of the sweet singer, the nightingale


of Ceos.


IV.


For Hieron, victor in the four-horse chariot-race at Delphi.


Still is Syracuse dear to Apollo of the golden locks; still
does he honour Hieron, just ruler of cities, who now for the third
time, at earth’s central shrine beneath the lofty cliffs, is hymned
as a Pythian victor, through the prowess of his swift steeds.
[Twice, too, by the fair stream of Alpheus, was the prize given
to him with good will by Hera’s wide-ruling lord; and graciously
did Zeus hearken to those resounding songs


wherewith] we used to honour the son of Deinomenes, who
holds the scales of Justice in even poise.


apostrophe before it: but Kenyon does not think that the faint trace suits an
apostrophe. 11 2. Blass inserts frag. 19 K., which gives parts of the endings
of two verses, viz. ICOP, and below that ACTAAAN. ἰσόρροπον Headlam: Blass.
18 Δεινομένεός κ᾽] The « is clear and certain.—éyepatpouer] The letters E.EPA... MEN


are certain.


After the first Εἰ, the top of Τ' is also traceable.


4 τρίτον. This victory with the
τέθριππον was gained by Hieron at the
Pythia of 470 B.c. He had twice been
victorious there with the κέλης, viz. in
482 and 478. He had also won with the
κέλης at Olympia in 476 and 472.

ὀμφαλόν: Pind. P. ΧΙ. g Πυθῶνά τε
καὶ.. γᾶς ὀμφαλόν: Soph. O. 7. 398 τὸν
ἄθικτον γᾶς ἐπ᾽ ὀμφαλόν. The omphalos
in the Delphian temple (Aesch. Zum. 40)
was a large white stone, supposed to
mark the centre of the earth (Pind. P.
Iv. 74: Livy 38. 48 Delphos, umbilicum
orbis terrarum). ὑψιδείρου, with high
ridges or cliffs (Seipj=depds, Pind. O.
IX. 63 Μαιναλίαισιν ἐν Sepais). Above
Delphi rise the cliffs which were called
Φαιδριάδες, with two peaks (the δίλοφος
πέτρα of Soph. Ant. 1126).

6 dpera suits the space. It is slightly
prosaic here; yet cp. Pind. x. 23 ποδῶν
ἀρετᾷ κρατήσας. Another possible word
is ἀέθλοις: cp. Pind. P. ΙΧ. 125 σὺν δ᾽
ἀέθλοις (-““--).. ποδῶν, and MN. 1x. 9
ἱππίων ἄθλων. We might prefer στεφά-
νοις, but it is too long for the lacuna.
καμάτῳ would be too suggestive of paznful
toil.


For σὺν following its case, cp. Od. 9.
332 ἐμοὶ σὺν μοχλὸν ἀείρας : Pind. WV. x.
48 δρόμῳ σὺν ποδῶν.

7—13 Here there was doubtless a
mention of Hieron’s two victories at
Olympia, parallel with the notice of
them in the seventh verse of the second
strophe (v. 17). In v. 8 ἀλέκτωρ was,
I conjecture, Hera’s spouse; as Apollo
(v. 2) gives the crown at Delphi, so Zeus
at Olympia. Cp. x. 51 ἢ. ξανθᾶς παρέ-
Spov | σεμνοῦ Διὸς εὐρυβία, n. What
Blass takes for a mark of elision before
as may be a trace of the accent on
edpuBias. (For ἀλέκτωρ = maritus cp.
Soph. fr. 767 οὑμὸς δ᾽ ἀλέκτωρ αὐτὸν ἦγε
πρὸς μύλην: Lycophron 1094, where
Tzetzes explains ἀλεκτόρων by ὁμολέκ-
τρων, συζύγων.) I show above, exempli
gratia, how vv. 7—g might be restored.

In vv. 11, 12 Blass places fr. 19 K.,
containing the letters I(?)COP, and below
them ACTAAAN, which he completes
thus :—ioép-|porov ἔχοντα Δίκας τάλαν-
τον. This collocation of the fragment
can scarcely be deemed certain ; but it is
possible. In v. 13 Blass deletes the κ᾿ of
the Ms. after Δεινομένεος, But, even if,


str. 4.


str. 2.


268


BAKXYAIAOY


[νον


4 πάρεστίν νιν ἀγχιάλοισ[ι Kpio jas μυχοῖς
15 5 μοῦνον ἐπιχθονίων τάδε
6 μησάμενον στεφάνοις ἐρέπτειν


Γ᾿ 3 > is
7 δύο τ᾽ ὀλυμπιονίκας
τί φέρτερον ἢ θεοῖσιν


3
8 ἀείδειν.


3


9 φίλον ἐόντα παντο[δα]πῶν
, ¥ nw 9 a
20 10 λαγχάνειν amo poipaly ἐσθλῶν;


«ΤΩ! AYTQI
ΚΕΛΗΤΙ OAYMITTIA. >


στρ. α΄. - Εὔμοιρε Συρακοσίων
2 ἵἱπποδινήτων στραταγάέ,
9γνώσει μὲν ἰοστεφάνων
+ Μοισᾶν γλυκύδωρον ἄγαλμα, τῶν γε νῦν


{
5 αἵ τις ἐπιχθονίων,


14 TIAPECTIAN] πάρεστίν νιν (with τρίτον yap map’ in 4) Blass: or πάρεστι viv
(with...dug in 4): πάρεστι μὰν Wilam.—ATXIAAOIC. Between this word and
ACMYXOIC there is room for at least five letters; probably for six (assuming one or


as Blass thinks, κ᾿ was made from another
letter (€?),—which is doubtful,—we are
not warranted in deleting it; least of all
in a mutilated passage. κ᾿ ἐγεραίρομεν
may mean, ‘we used to honour’; im-
plying that, on each of the two occasions
when Hieron won at Olympia, there were
several songs in his praise. The alter-
native explanation of ke would be to
understand it in the ordinary conditional
sense :—‘ (If we had not been unavoidably
prevented,) we should have been honour-
ing Hieron.’ The poet would then be
excusing himself for absence from the
celebration of Hieron’s Pythian victory;
or, perhaps, for not having sent some
worthier tribute than this short song.
In view of the whole context, however,
this interpretation seems less probable. In
v. 10 ὕμνους are presumably songs sung
at Olympia. With these data, vv. τὸ
and 11 might be tentatively completed
somewhat in the manner suggested above.

For ἰσόρροπον.. Δίκας τάλαντον cp.
XVI. 251. Δίκας ῥέπει τάλαντον (with n.
there). Praise for even-handed justice
was naturally acceptable to a τύραννος,


more especially, perhaps, if his claim to
it was disputable; and in Hieron’s case
that praise is frequently given or implied.
See above, v. 3: III. 70: V. 6 (εὐθύδικον):
Pind. O. 1. 12; VI. 93 ff.: P. 111. 70 ff.—
See Appendix.

14—18 πάρεστίν νιν seems a true
correction of the Ms. παρ᾽ ἑστίαν. (The
form of A in the Ms. would help a change
of N into A.) This assumes τρίτον γὰρ
map in v. 4. If, instead of παρ᾽, ἀμφ᾽
stood there, πάρεστι viv could stand here.
But we note that theeighthv. of the strophe
also begins with ~—— (v. 18, ἀείδειν). The
sense is:—‘We can crown him with
wreaths as one who, alone of men, has
compassed these triumphs in the recesses
of Crisa near the sea (=at Delphi); and
also sing of two Olympian victories.’
tade,— three equestrian victories at
Delphi,—a record which the poet avers
to be unique. The point of νῦν is
exultation in the total of Hieron’s vic-
tories at the two greatest festivals.

παρ᾽ ἑστίαν, if sound, would mean
either ‘Zo’ or ‘ at’ (cp. Ix. 29 f.) Hieron’s
hearth. Intrinsically this is quite possible.


IV, V] ETTINIKOI 269

We can crown him with wreaths as one who, alone of
mortals, has compassed such deeds in the hill-girt vale of Crisa
by the sea, while we can sing also of two Olympian victories.
What is better than to find favour with the gods, and to receive


a full portion of blessings in every kind?


ν.


To Hieron, victor in the horse-race at Olympia. (476 B.C.)


Blest war-lord of Syracuse, city of whirling chariots, thou,
if any mortal, wilt rightly estimate the sweet gift brought in thy
honour by the Muses of violet crown.


more to be thin). The letter next before AC may have been either P or Ὁ : all that
remains of it is a short curving stroke from the ἰορ.---ἀγχιάλοισιν Αἴτνας K.: ἀγχιάλοισι
Kovpas Wilam.: Kploas J.: Κίρρας Blass? (Matas, =Delphi, Bl.1): γαίας Jurenka.


20 ἐσθλῶν Wilam., Blass: ἀέθλων K.


Vv. The MS. omits the title, which is supplied by K.


In the other cases (odes 1,


IX, XII, XV) where the title is wanting the Ms. is mutilated.


But ἐρέπτειν and ἀείδειν cannot tolerably
be made infinitives of purpose (‘2 order
to crown,’ etc.), Given map’ ἑστίαν, they
must be governed by some verb or
participle of ‘wishing’ or ‘ purposing.’
But that must have preceded v. 13. And
on such a hypothesis, the sentence as a
whole becomes extremely complex and
cumbrous, in a manner foreign to this
poet. With πάρεστι, on the other hand,
the construction is clear and simple.
The diction is also characteristic: see
Ill. 68 εὖ λέγειν πάρεστιν (n.).

Koloas μυχοῖς, with μησάμενον. Crisa
was about two miles w.s.w. of Delphi.
Cp. Pind. P. vi. 17 f. εὔδοξον ἅρματι
νίκαν | Κρισαίαις ἐνὶ πτυχαῖς. Soph. 7.
180 (of Orestes at Delphi) ὁ τὰν ἹΚρῖσαν |
βούνομον ἔχων axrdv,—which illustrates
ἀγχιάλοισι.---δεε Appendix.

17 ὀλυμπιονίκας from ὀλυμπιονίκη, a
word used by Antiphon, fr. 131 ὀλυμπιο-
νῖκαι καὶ πυθιονῖκαι καὶ οἱ τοιοῦτοι ἀγῶνες.

18 ff. θεοῖσιν φίλον ἐόντα : such
prosperity is indeed enviable when it is
conferred dy the favour of the gods, and
not gained by unworthy means.—Tavto-
ϑαπῶών.. ἐσθλῶν, ‘good things of every
kind.’ To power, wealth, warlike fame,
Hieron added success in the games.—If
we read ἀέθλων, the range of the thought


would be too narrow, and παντοδαπῶν
(bearing its local sense) too wide. Cp.
v. 50 (of Hieron) ὄλβιος ᾧτινι θεὸς | μοῖράν
τε καλῶν ἔπορεν κ.τ.λ.---λαγχάνειν dro =
ἀπολαγχάνειν (to receive a full portion).
The preposition after the verb in tmesis


is very rare. J/. 2. 699 τότε δ᾽ ἤδη ἔχεν
κάτα γαῖα μέλαινα. Aesch. Pers. 871
(πόλει) ἐληλαμέναι πέρι πύργον (com-
passed with embattled walls): Eur.
Bacch. 554 τινάσσων ἄνα θύρσον (where
ἄνα should not be taken as vocative).
Cp. XVIII. 7.


V. 2 ἱπποδινήτων, whirled in chariots.
(In Aesch. 7heb. 460 f. ἵππους... δινεῖ is
said of the driver.) The reference is to
the distinction of Syracuse in chariot-
races: it seems improbable that there is
any allusion to the Syracusan cavalry
(though in Pind. P. 1. 2, Syracuse is
ἀνδρῶν ἵππων τε odapoxapudy...tpopol).
Syracusan coins of the time of Gelon
bear a guadriga, with a winged Νίκη
above (Gelon was victorious at Olympia).
On those of an earlier date a quadriga
appears without the Νίκη. (P. Gardner,
Types of Greek coins, Pl. 11., and p. 107.)

orparayé. This may be merely a
poetical title, ‘ war-lord’: as orparayéras


_is said of Minos (XVI. 121), or as Creon,


βασιλεὺς of Thebes (Soph. Amt. 185), is
called στρατηγός (2d. 8). It is also pos-
sible, however, that Hieron held the office
of στραταγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ, as Gelon seems
to have done at one time. Whether Gelon
or Hieron was ever formally styled βασι-
λεύς, is uncertain. Pindar calls Hieron
so (0. I. 23, P. 111. 70): Bacchylides does
not; but the silence proves nothing.
See Appendix.

3—6 γνώσει.. ὀρθῶς, wilt rightly re-
cognize it for what it is,—rightly 7udge


str. 1.


BAKXYAIAOY [Vv


270
6 ὀρθῶς. φρένα δ᾽ εὐθύδικον
7 ἀτρέμ᾽ ἀμπαύσας μεριμνᾶν
8 δεῦρ᾽ ἐπάθρησον νόῳ,
9 a σὺν Χαρίτεσσι βαθυζώνοις ὑφάνας
1ο ὕμνον ἀπὸ ζαθέας
τ νάσου ξένος ὑμετέραν πέμ-
1 πεῖ κλεεννὰν ἐς πόλιν,
3 χρυσάμπυκος Οὐρανίας κλει-
4. vos θεράπων: ἐθέλει δὲ
15 γᾶρυν ἐκ στηθέων χέων
ἄντ. α΄. :- αἰνεῖν Ἱέρωνα. βαθὺν


2 δ᾽ αἰθέρα ξουθαῖσι τάμνων
3 ὑψοῦ πτερύγεσσι ταχεί-


8 ἐπάθρησον H. Richards:
εἰ conj. Palmer.


ἄθρησον MS.


9 H Ms.: ἦ Κι: ἢ Platt: ἢ Blass:


18 f. xde-vds] KAINOC A, corr. A’.—The Ms. wrongly


it: cp. Aesch. Ag. 795 προβατογνώ-
μων: 2b. 1099 θεσφάτων γνώμων ἄκρος.
--ἰοστεφάνων: epithet of Persephone in
ui. 2; of Thetis in ΧΙ]. 122.---Μ οισᾶν.
This Aeolic form, always used by Pindar,
occurs only here in Bacchylides, who has
the Ionic and Attic Μοῦσα nine times.
The Doric was Μῶσα (Alcman fr. 3, etc.).
--γλυκύδωρον ἄγαλμα, 1.6. the ode: ‘a
sweet gift brought in thy honour’: for
ἄγαλμα, see on 1. 74.---τῶν γε νῦν κιτ.λ.:
cp. Pind. O. 1. 103 ff. (written for this
same victory), πέποιθα δὲ ξένον | μή τιν᾽
ἀμφότερα καλῶν τε ἐίδριν ἄμμε καὶ
δύναμιν κυριώτερον | τῶν γε νῦν κλυταῖσι
δαιδαλωσέμεν ὕμνων πτυχαῖς. Thus both
poets say that Hieron has no living su-
perior as a judge of poetry. The scholiast
on Pind. P. 11. 166 is the authority for
the statement that Hieron preferred the
odes of Bacchylides to those of Pindar
(παρὰ [Ἱέρωνι τὰ Βακχυλίδου ποιήματα
προκρίνεσθαι).

6 ΞΦ. εὐθύδικον: cp. III. 70, and Iv. 3.
εὐθυδίκαν would be possible, but is not
required by metre. A vowel at the be-
ginning of the seventh verse follows
πίσυνος in 21, Bopéa in 46, ᾿Αἴδα in 61,
and ἀρηϊφίλον in 166.

ἀτρέμ᾽ ἀμπαύσας : the adv. is proleptic,
the phrase being a compressed mode of
saying, dum. ὥστε ἀτρέμα ἔχειν.

8 The Μ8. reading, δεῦρ᾽ ἄθρησον νόῳ,


gives -~——~-, instead οὗ ---“---- - --,
which we find in all the corresponding
verses. Blass defends the text by sup-
posing that the second syllable of ἄθρησον
is prolonged. (He assumes the same
licence in 1X. 15, where see n.) It is
far more probable that a syllable has
dropped out. Kenyon supplies σὺν (easily
lost after -σον). The phrase σὺν νόῳ is
usually found in negative sentences, as=
‘without intelligence’ (Her. νι. 86 οὔτε
σὺν νόῳ ποιεόντων οὐδέν : Plat. Crito 486
τῶν ῥᾳδίως ἀποκτιννύντων... οὐδενὶ ξὺν νῷ).
Here the sense would be, ‘ with earnest
attention.” But there is a metrical ob-
jection, viz. the caesura after ἄθρησον :
see p. 97. I now prefer to read, with
Richards, ἐπάθρησον : cp. XII. 227 ἐπα-
θρήσαις. The sense of νόῳ will then be
adverbial, ‘attentively.’ Another possible
emendation would be δεῦρ᾽ ἄθρησον εὐ-
νοέων. But we should then have to sup-


pose that, after the loss of EY, NOEQN
(written ’NOQN) became ΝΌΏΙ. —Cp.
Pind. P. 11. 69f. τὸ Καστόρειον δ᾽ ἐν
Αἰολίδεσσι χορδαῖς θέλων | dOpyoov. .
9. The Ms. has ἯΣ Should we read
(1) (2) oF 9) ἤ
(1) ἣ is best. We must then suppose,
indeed, that in the Ms. the letter I has
been lost after H: but such a loss would
be very easy. δεῦρο distinctly suggests 7.
‘Look hither, with good heed,—to the


v] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 271
Suffer thy mind, ever upright in judgment, to have repose from
cares; bend thy thoughts hither, and see where a song woven
with the aid of the deep-girdled Graces is sent from a lovely
isle to your famous city by a guest-friend, a servant not in-
glorious of Urania whose locks are bound with gold. Fain is he
to pour forth his voice


in praise of Hieron. The eagle, cleaving the deep ether on
high with his swift tawny wings,
places κλεινὸς wholly in v. 14, though in the antistr. it rightly divides mvo-|atow


between v. 28 and v. 29: corr. K. 16 αἰνεῖν] AINEI A: but the final N
has been added above the line (by ??).


quarter in which (7) a poet is sending
his song.’ The present πέμπει also sup-
ports the picturesque 9: Hieron is invited
to note the advent of the poem, as if he
could see in imagination the ζαθέα νᾶσος
afar, and the ship on its way.

(2) (proposed by Platt) is also
possible. Then there is a full stop (or a
colon at least) after νόῳ. Pindar some-
times begins a sentence with ἦ (O. 1. 28:
P.1.47: WV. vit. 24). The objections to
ἢ are (1) that after verse 8, δεῦρ᾽ ἄθρησον
«.7.A., a stop seems hardly fitting; and
(2) that ἡ itself is here somewhat weak.

(3) ἢ is read by Blass, who ex-
plains it as=‘whether.’ But I can find
no example of ἤ as ‘whether’ (=e) in a
simgle indirect question. In Homer we
find, indeed, (1) #é...4, ‘whether’...‘or’:
Od. τ. 174 ὄφρ᾽ ἐδ εἰδῶ | ἠὲ νέον μεθέπεις,
ἢ καὶ πατρώϊός ἐσσι | Eetvos.—Palmer pro-
posed to read εἰ.

σὺν Χαρίτεσσι βαθυζώνοις: for the
Charites. as inspiring song, cp. VIII. 1,
xvi. 5 f. Pindar has the same phrase
in a like context, P. Ix. τ ff. ἐθέλω... | σὺν
βαθυζώνοισιν ἀγγέλλων | Τελεσικράτη Xa-
ρίτεσσι ‘yeywvelv,—written probably in
474 (see Schréder’s ed., p. 67), 2.6.
about two years after the date of this
ode.—tdhdvas: cp. xvi. 8: Pind. fr.
179 ὑφαίνω δ᾽ ᾿Αμαθυονίδαις ποικίλον |
ἄνδημα (‘a wreath of song’).—taéas :
cp. Il. 7, X. 24: and see n. on ἀγαθέαν,
Ill. 62.

11 ξένος, ‘guest-friend.’ We do not
know when Bacchylides first visited
Syracuse. The date of this ode is 476.
It was in that year, or in 477, that his
uncle Simonides, according to Timaeus
(fr. 90, Miiller vol. 1. p. 214), effected
a reconciliation between Hieron and
Theron of Acragas. It seems probable


that, before this ode was written, Bacchy-
lides had been the guest of Hieron, and
had thus become privileged to claim the
tie of fevia. Pindar alludes to Hieron as
ξένον in O. I. 103.

This verse, and the corresponding v.
of the antistrophe (26), are longer by a
syllable than those which hold the same
places in the other four systems. But
the text is probably sound. See Ap-
pendix.

13 £. χρυσάμπυκος: Pind. 2. 111. 89
χρυσαμπύκων | ...Moocdv. The ἀμπυξ, a
head-band, worn to confine the hair, was
often plated with gold or silver, and
sometimes set with gems. Artemis in
Eur. Hec. 465 has a χρυσέαν ἄμπυκα.
—tAevés, though we have just had
kNeevvdv: a strong example of verbal
repetition, which the change of dialectic
form scarcely palliates. For similar in-
stances in Sophocles, see n. on O. C.
554.---ἐθέλει: see on I. 52.

Verse 14, and the antistrophic v., 29,
are longer by a syllable than the corre-
sponding verses of the other systems.
Here again, as in the similar case of
verses 11 and 26, the text appears sound.
See Appendix.

16 £. βαθὺν δ᾽ αἰθέρα «.7.A. Wide as
air is the path opened by Hieron’s deeds:
strong as an eagle’s is the poet’s soaring
flight. The simile evidently involves
both points. But it is quite unnecessary
to suppose that this is a retort to Pindar,
who in O. 11. 95—97 (written in this same
year, 476) implies that ἀ is an eagle, and
that two other poets unnamed are crows.
The eagle, as an image for the poet,
occurs also in Pind. MW. v. 20f. (481 8.6.9),
and MW. 111. 80 ff. (ctr. 469—459).

ξουθαῖσι... πτερύγεσσι : ‘tawny.’ The
golden or mountain eagle (aguzla chrys-


ant. I.


BAKXYAIAOY [Vv


272
+ als αἰετὸς εὐρνάνακτος ἄγγελος
20 5 Ζηνὸς ἐρισφαράγον
6 θαρσεῖ κρατερᾷ πίσυνος
γ ἰσχύϊ, πτάσσοντι δ᾽ ὄρνι-
ξ χες λιγύφθογγοι φόβῳ
οοὔ νιν κορυφαὶ μεγάλας ἴσχουσι γαίας,
2510 οὐδ᾽ ἁλὸς ἀκαμάτας
Col.7 =: δυσπαίπαλα κύματα: νωμᾶ-
: ται δ᾽ ἐν ἀτρύτῳ χάει
13 λεπτότριχα σὺν ζεφύρου πνοι-
4 ato ἔθειραν ἀρίγνω-
3015 Tos per ἀνθρώποις ἰδεῖν"
ἐπ. a’,


+ τὼς νῦν καὶ ἐμοὶ μυρία πάντᾳ κέλευθος
2 ὑμετέραν ἀρετὰν


ε 5 y Σ
3 ὑμνεῖν, κνανοπλοκάμου θ᾽ ἕκατι Νίκας
¥
«χαλκεοστέρνου τ᾽ “Apyos,


35 5 Δεινομένευς ἀγέρω-


6 χου παῖδες" εὖ ἔρδων δὲ μὴ κάμοι θεός.


22 TACCONTI a:
23 φόβῳ] ΦΟΙΒΩΙ s.


the first T corrected to II, and T added above the line (by A??).
24 METAAAIC A: I transfixed (by A??).


26 N0Q-


MAI A: the I has been transfixed, either by the scribe himself (as seems probable), or


aetus) ‘is of a rich dark brown, with the
elongated feathers of the neck, especially
on the nape, light tawny, in which imagi-
nation sees a golden hue.’ (Prof. Alfred
Newton in Luc, Brit. V1. p. 590.)

20 ἐρισφαράγονυ : epithet of Poseidon
(Γαιηόχου) in Hom. hymn. 3. 187.
Pindar also used the word (Eustath. on
Od. t p. 1636. 7).

22 dpvixes. The forms from the stem
ὀρνιχ-, always used by Pindar, occur
also in Alcman (fr. 54), and Theocritus
(5. 48, 7. 47). The Alexandrians called
this inflexion Aeolic (cp. Meister Gr.
Dialekte, p. 152): it was also Doric.

26 £. δυσπαίπαλα κύματα, waves which
offer a rough and difficult path to the
mariner. (Compare Marlowe's phrase in
Dido wi. 3, ‘Neptune’s hideous hills.’)
δυσπαίπαλος (formed from παιπάλλω,
Hesych., =celw) occurs in Archil. fr. 115
βήσσας ὀρέων δυσπαιπάλους: Nicander
Ther. 145 δυσπαίπαλος "Οθρυς. The Ho-
meric παιπαλόεις is similarly applied to
hills, rocky islands, and steep or rugged
paths.


νωμᾶται.... λεπτότριχα.... ἔθειραν, he
plies his wing of delicate plumage. The
place of the words σὺν fepupov πνοιαῖσιν
shows that ἔθειραν depends on the verb,
and must not be taken as acc. of respect
with dplyywros. The middle of νωμᾶν
occurs elsewhere only in Quint. Smyrn.
3. 439 οὐ γάρ τις πίσυνός γε σάκος μέγα
νωμήσασθαι: but there is no reason for
suspecting it here. It was read by the
schol. on Hes. 7heog. 116 (see cr. n.).
In Soph. fr. 855. 11 I would read νωμᾷ
τ᾽ ἐν οἰωνοῖσί που κείνη πτερόν (vulg.
τοὐκείνης, but one MS. of Stobaeus has
τοῦ κείνη : and Κύπρις is the subject of the
preceding sentences in the frag.). Cp.
also Anth. 9. 339 ἔν ποτε παμφαίνοντι
μέλαν “πτερὸν αἰθέρι νωμῶν.

ἀτρύτῳ, ‘illimitable’; a sense derived
from that of ‘inexhaustible.’ Cp. viii.
80 ἄτρυτον χρόνον (‘ unending’). Arist.
De Caelo 2, Ρ. 284 a 35 ᾿Ιξίονός τινα μοῖραν

εἀΐδιον καὶ ἄτρυτον. Theocr. xv. 7 ἁ δ᾽
ὁδὸς ἄτρυτος. In the citation by schol.
Hes. Zheog. 116 drpuyéry is evidently an.
error, due probably to the second T of


v] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 273
messenger of wide-ruling Zeus the lord of thunder, trusts boldly
to his mighty strength; the shrill-voiced birds crouch in fear
of him; the heights of the wide earth stay him not, nor the
rough, steep waves of the unwearied sea; he plies his wing of
delicate plumage in the illimitable void, sped by the breath


of the west wind, conspicuous in the sight of men.


And so for me a boundless course is open on every side
to hymn your prowess, ye lordly sons of Deinomenes, by grace
of Victory, dark-haired queen, and of Ares with bronze-clad
breast. May Heaven weary not of blessing you!


by A’.


27 ἀτρύτῳ])] Schol. Hes. Theog. 116 Βακχυλίδης δὲ χάος τὸν ἀέρα ὠνόμασε,
λέγων περὶ τοῦ ἀετοῦ" νωμᾶται δ᾽ ἐν ἀτρυγέτῳ χάει.


28 £. ΠΝΟΙΑΙΟΙΝ μ5.:


πνοιϊαῖσιν Weil, a. ο.
Palmer,


31 MOI Ms..
85 £. The Ms. places ἀγέρωχοι wholly in 35: corr. K. Cp. 75f.: 115 f.


ἐμοὶ Blass. 88 YTMNEI μ5.: corr.


ἀτρύτῳ having become I: ἀτρύγῳ would
lead to ἀτρυγέτῳ.

χάει, the ‘void,’ as a poetical term for
‘space,’ or ‘the air’: a usage which
occurs first in Ibycus (flor. cévc. 550 B.C.),
fr. 28 ποτᾶται δ᾽ ἐν ἀλλοτρίῳ χάει. It is
possible, indeed, (though we can scarcely
assume this,) that the schol. on Ar. Av.
192, who quotes the words, confused
Ibycus with Bacchylides, and intended this
passage. Bergk suggests that ἀλλοτρίῳ
may have been a slip of the scholiast’s,
due to the verse on which he comments,
διὰ τῆς πόλεως τῆς ἀλλοτρίας Kai τοῦ χάους.
It might also be a corruption of ἀμέτρῳ
(AA for M).

29 £. dplyvwros per’ ἀνθρώποις. In
v. 14 the δέ after ἐθέλει seems clearly in-
dispensable, and is therefore presumably
genuine. An asyndeton there would be
unendurable. That is the reason against
deleting per’ here. (μέγ᾽ would be weak,
and οἰωνοῖς for ἀνθρώποις is improbable.)
But the phrase ἀρίγνωτος per’ ἀνθρώποις,
as applied to the soaring bird, can be
explained only as a bit of rather careless
writing. The thought in the writer’s mind
is that the eagle’s flight is ‘much noted
among men’; Ζ.6. δι number of men follow
his course with their eyes.—i8etv, not ὁρᾶν,
because the poet thinks of the moment at
which the eagle sails into view.

81 τὼς is used by the epic poets and
by Aesch. (cp. Suppl. 61 τὼς καὶ ἐγὼ),
but not by Pindar. μυρία πάντᾳ
κέλευθος: cp. VIII. 47 f.: XVIII. I
πάρεστι μυρία κέλευθος | ἀμβροσίων μελέων.
In one of his Isthmian odes (111. 19=IV.
1), composed perhaps in 478, and in any


1. 8.


case before this ode of Bacchylides, Pindar
writes: ἔστι μοι θεῶν ἕκατι μυρία παντᾷ
κέλευθος, ὦ Μέλισσ᾽, εὐμαχανίαν γὰρ
ἔφανας ᾿Ισθμίοις | ὑμετέρας ἀρετὰς ὕμνῳ
διώκειν. This is the only instance in which
a verbal parallelism between a passage of
Bacchylides and an earlier passage of
Pindar suffices to prove imitation on the
part of the younger poet (cp. p. 65).
33—36 κνανοπλοκάμον, merely a
general epithet for goddesses or heroines;
as for Thebe in VIII. 53, and the Proe-
tides in xX. 83.--ἔκατι, ‘by grace of’:
cp. 1. 6 f.—Nkas: here, more especially
victory in the games.—xaAkeoo-répvov =
χαλκοθώρακος. As to the form, see om
Ill. 32.—Apyps, alluding chiefly to the
victory over the Carthaginians at Himera
(480 B.c.), in which Gelon’s glory was
shared by his brothers. Simonides fr. 141
φημὶ Τέλων᾽ “Ἱέρωνα ἸΤολύζηλον Θρασύ-
βουλον | παῖδας Δεινομένευς τὸν τρίποδ᾽
ἀνθέμεναι (τοὺς τρίποδας θέμεναι, schol.
Pind. 2. 1. 185). Cp. Pind. 4. 1.
79 (470 B.Cc.), where he speaks of him-
self as having sung of Salamis and
Plataea, παρὰ δ᾽ εὔυδρον ἀκτὰν Ἱμέρα
(the river Himeras) παίδεσσιν ὕμνον Δει-
νομένεος τελέσαις | τὸν ἐδέξαντ᾽ ἀμφ᾽ ἀρετᾷ.
Hieron succeeded Gelon in 478. We do
not hear of any signal military exploits as
having marked the interval between that
year and the date of this ode (476). But
Hieron had intervened as the protector of
Sybaris against Croton (Diod. x1. 48),
and of the Italian Locri against Anaxilas
of Rhegium (477 B.c.: schol. Pind. P.
11.34). See Freeman, Szcily 11. 237—241.
Δεινομένευς... παῖδες. The collective


19


epode 1.


[ν


274 BAKXYAIAOY
7 ξανθότριχα μὲν Φερένικον
8. ᾿Αλφεὸν παρ᾽ εὐρυδίναν
9 πῶλον ἀελλοδρόμαν
401 εἶδε νικάσαντα χρυσόπαχυς ᾿Αώς,
στρ. β΄. - Πυθῶνί τ᾽ ἐν ἀγαθέᾳ᾽


a 9 2 ΄ ΄ .

2 ya δ᾽ ἐπισκήπτων πιφαύσκω

30UTW νιν ὑπὸ προτέρων

+ ἵππων ἐν ἀγώνι κατέχρανεν κόνις
45 - πρὸς. τέλος ὀρνύμενον᾽

6 pura γὰρ ἴσος Βορέα

a , 4
7 Ov κυβερνήταν φυλάσσων


~
8 ἵεται νεόκροτον


ο νίκαν Ἱέρωνι φιλοξείνῳ τιτύσκων.


5O 10


89 ἀελλοδρόμαν] ἀελλοδρόμον schol. Pind. O. 1 argum. (fr. 6 Bergk).
49 ΦΙΛΟΞΕΝΩΙ Ms.: corr. K.


PEAI A, corr. Al.


ὄλβιος ᾧτινι θεὸς


46 BO-
50—55 ὄλβιος... ἔφυ.


address is interesting, because it shows
that, so far as the poet knew,—and he
was doubtless well-informed, — Hieron
was now (in 476) on good terms with
both his surviving brothers, Polyzelus
and Thrasybulus. But shortly before
this date (in 478—477) he appears to
have been at enmity with Polyzelus.
The latter, according to Diodorus (x1. 48),
had sought refuge with Theron of Agrigas,
who, on being reconciled to Hieron (in
477—4), τὸν Πολύζηλον εἰς τὴν προῦπάρ-
χουσαν εὔνοιαν ἀποκατέστησε. Thus Bac-
chylides indirectly confirms Diodorus.—
For the form of the genit. Δεινομένευς,
cp. Ill. 7.

dyépwxot: ‘lordly.’ The word has a
good sense in Homer (where it is an
epithet of the Trojans and other nations,
but only once of a single hero, Pericly-
menus, in Od. 11. 286); also in Pindar
(who applies it to victory, high deeds,
wealth, but not to persons). Archilochus
(fr. 154) and Alcaeus (fr. 120) are said to
have used it in a bad sense (‘overbearing’).
The derivation is uncertain: for the theo-
ries, see Leaf on //. 2. 654.

37 ξανθότριχα, ‘chestnut.’ In Soph.
il, 705 an Aetolian enters for the chariot
race ξανθαῖσι πώλοις. Nestor speaks of
having carried off 150 ἵππους ξανθάς from
Elis (72. 11. 680).

38 ᾿Αλφεὸν.. εὐρυδίναν : cp. 111. 6 f.

89 πῶλον, not properly ‘colt,’ but


merely Ξε ἵππον : cp. Soph. Z/. 705 (n.)—
748, where the word has this general
sense throughout. At Olympia no special
contest for πῶλοι existed before 384 B.C.
--ἀελλοδρόμαν, paraphrased in v. 46.
ἀελλόπος is the Homeric epithet of Iris
(Zl. 8. 409, etc.): then Simonides (fr. 7)
and Pindar (J. 1. 6) spoke of ἀελλοπόδων
ἵππων: cp. 71]. το. 437 θείειν δ᾽ ἀνέμοισιν
ὁμοῖοι.

40 χρυσόπαχυς “Ads, who touches
the earth with gold. (Cp. ῥοδοδάκτυλος.)
Soph. Ant. 103 f. ὦ χρυσέας | ἁμέρας
Brépapov.—In XI. 96 ῥοδό[παχυν is cer-
tain.—The horse-races, like the chariot-
races (Soph. Z/. 699 n.), were held early
in the morning.

41 Ιπυθῶνί τ᾽ ἐν ἀγαθέᾳφ. Hieron had
won with a κέλης at Delphi in 482 and
478 B.C. Pherenicus was certainly the
κέλης in 478; perhaps also in 482; but
the only ground for thinking that this
horse had won twice at Delphi is the
plural στεφάνοις in Pind. P. 11. 73 f.,
στεφάνοις | ods ἀριστεύων Φερένικος ἕλ᾽ ἐν
Κίρρᾳ ποτέ: which could, however, refer
to a single victory. See Introd. to the
ode, 8 1. For ἀγαθέᾳ, cp. 111. 62.

42 γᾷ δ᾽ ἐπισκήπτων, ‘laying (my
hand) on the earth,’ calling it to witness:
the full phrase occurs in VII. 41, γᾷ δ᾽
ἐπισκήπτων χέρα κομπάσομαι. The act of
touching the sacred Earth meant that the
person who did so invoked the χθόνιοι to


ν] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 275
Morning with her golden ray saw Pherenicus, that chestnut


steed swift as the wind, victorious by the wide-eddying Alpheus,


as also at divine Pytho. And I call Earth to witness: never
yet in a race has he been soiled by dust from horses in front of
him, as he sped to his goal. Like the rush of Boreas, he darts
onward, heedful of his pilot, winning for hospitable Hieron a
victory greeted by fresh plaudits.

Happy is he to whom the god


Quoted by Stobaeus Flor. 103. 2 (fr. 1, Bergk): who cites 53 (from οὐ)---- 5.5 also in


Flor. 98. 26. Verses 50—53 (to διάγειν) are quoted by Apostolius ΧΙ]. 65 e.


punish him if he swore falsely. Similarly
persons who invoke the Ae/f of the χθόνιοι
strike the earth: 7. 9. 568 f. (Althaea)
πολλὰ δὲ Kai γαῖαν πολνφόρβην χερσὶν
ἀλοία, | κικλήσκουσ᾽ ᾿Αΐδην καὶ ἐπαινὴν
Περσεφόνειαν : Hom. hymn. Apoll. 2. 162
(Hera, invoking Tata and the Turjves),
ὡς dpa φωνήσασ᾽ ἵμασε χθόνα χειρὶ παχείῃ"
[κινήθη δ᾽ ἄρα Tata φερέσβιος, Pindar,
too, often emphasizes praise by solemn
asseveration: O. 11. 101 αὐδάσομαι ἐνόρκιον
λόγον: VI. 20 καὶ μέγαν ὅρκον ὀμόσσαις
τοῦτό γέ for σαφέως | μαρτυρήσω: N. χι.
24 ναὶ μὰ τὸν ὅρκον.

The poet keeps the ἢ in ἐπισκήπτων,
though he has σκᾶπτρον in 111. 70. Cp.
I. 74 ἢ.

48 προτέρων, ix front of him. This
local sense of πρότερος is very rare, except
when it is figurative (denoting precedence
in rank, etc., as in Dem. or. 3 § 15 τὸ...
πράττειν τοῦ λέγειν.. πρότερον τῇ δυνάμει
καὶ κρεῖττόν ἐστι). But cp. Plat. Rep.
βιός τῷ ὀξύτατα καθορῶντιτὰ παριόντα,
καὶ μνημονεύοντι μάλιστα ὅσα τε πρότερα
αὐτῶν καὶ ὕστερα εἰώθει καὶ ἅμα πο-
ρεύεσθαι. [In Od. 19. 228 προτέροισι
πόδεσσι-- προσθίοις. In 71. 15. 569 (=17-
274) πρότεροι is temporal.]

46 ῥιπᾷ.. Βορέα: //. 15. 171 ὑπὸ ῥιπῆς
αἰθρηγενέος Βορέαο. Soph. Ant. 137 ῥιπαῖς
ἐχθίστων ἀνέμων.

47 ὃν κυβερνήταν φυλάσσων, ‘heedful
of his pilot.’ He rivals the wind in
speed; but his course obeys the hand that
steers him. φυλάσσων means not merely
‘ bearing his rider safe,’ but ‘attending to
shis guidance’: the word κυβερνήταν brings
this out.—The Ionic 7 is retained in
κυβερνήταν (cp. XI. 1), as in φήμα (II. 1)
and ἀδμήτα (Vv. 167). Pindar has κυβερ-
varas (P. τ. 91).

48 ἵεται. The historic present here is
unusual, but intelligible. Verses 37—45
deal with the horse’s record as a whole.


Now the poet comes to his latest victory.
The historic present, combined with
vedxporov, gives a touch of animation
which marks the transition.—Cp. Pind.
O. 1. 20 ff. (of Pherenicus) ὅτε παρ᾽
᾿Αλφεῷ σύτο δέμας | ἀκέντητον ἐν δρόμοισι
παρέχων, κράτει δὲ προσέμιξε δεσπό-
ταν.

νεόκροτον, ‘greeted with fresh plaudits.’
κρότος is the regular word for ‘applause’
(Xen. Am. VI. 1. 13 ἐνταῦθα κρότος ἦν
πολύς). In III. 9 the poet similarly refers
to the shouts which greet Hieron’s victory
(θρόησε δὲ λαὸς ἀπείρων). The only other
extant compounds with κρότος refer to
sound, viz. (1) εὔκροτος : Alciphron Z fist.
3. 43 ἀνάπαιστα εὔκροτα : (2) πολύκροτος :
Hom. hymn. 19. 37, epithet of Pan, as
‘making loud music’ on his pipe: Athen.
Ρ. 527 epithet of the lyre χελωνίς (from
the comic poet Poseidonius). On this
view νεόκροτον is not merely a poetical
equivalent for ‘new,’ but means ‘new
and popular.’

Others take νεόκροτον to mean ‘zewwly-
welded,’ 1.6. ‘newly wrought,’ νεότευκτον,
comparing Pind. fr. 194 κεκρότηται χρυσέα
κρηπίς. The only extant derivative of
κροτεῖν in the sense of ‘hammering or
welding together’ seems to be εὐκρότητος
(though συγκρότητος may also have been
in use). vedkporov in this sense would be
a clumsy epithet,—made still more so by
the neighbourhood of τιτύσκων, which
would serve to emphasize the metaphor
of ‘welding.’ No emendation is probable.
The easiest, vedxpirov, would be unsuitable
to this context: the race is being run.

49 φιλοξείνῳ. Cp. 11. 16: Pind. P.
ΠΙ. 71 (of Hieron) ἕξείνοις δὲ θαυμαστὸς
πατήρ.

50- 55 The γνώμη which leads from
the proem to the myth. A manis happy
if he has (1) μοῖραν... καλῶν, ‘a portion
of honours,’—such as those gained at


10--2


str. 2.


276


BAKXYAIAOY [Vv


x μοῖράν τε καλῶν ἔπορεν

2 σύν τ᾽ ἐπιζήλῳ τύχᾳ

3 ἀφνεὸν βιοτὰν διάγειν" οὐ

4 γάρ τις ἐπιχθονίων
5555 πάντα γ᾽ εὐδαίμων ἔφυ.


dvr. β. -καὶ μάν πΊοτ᾽ ἐρειψιπύλαν
2 παῖδ᾽ ἀνίκ]ατον λέγουσιν
3 δῦναι Διὸς] ἀργικεραύ-


+ vov δώματα Φερσεφόνας τανισφύρον,
»¥


£ Fe
60 - καρχαρόδοντα κύν᾽ a-
3 3 4 3 3 «ἢ
6. ἔοντ᾽ ἐς φάος ἐξ ᾿Αἴδα,
ἘΝ 3 la = 2 ¥
τυϊὸν ἀπλάτοι᾽ ᾿Εχίδνας:"
¥ , a
8 ἔνθα δυστάνων βροτῶν


- > f ἃς lal
οψυχὰς ἐδάη παρὰ Κωκυτοῦ
es 4 > »¥
οἷά Te PUAN ἄνεμος


65 το


ῥεέθροις,


τ Ἴδας ἀνὰ μηλοβότους

1. πρῶνας ἀργηστὰς δονεῖ.
3 ταῖσιν δὲ μετέπρεπεν εἴδω-
«4 λον θρασυμέμνονος ἐγ-


Ἴ0 15


58 ἀφνειὸν Μ8., Stobaeus, Apostolius: corr. K.


Flor. 103. 2, but not in 98. 26.


χεσπάλου TlopGavida:


55 πάντα y] Stob. omits Ὑ in


56 καὶ μάν add. Κ΄; καὶ γάρ Jurenka: δῦναι


Weil, Wilam. (cp. n. on 58).---ἐρειψιπύλαν] In the Ms. the second E has been trans-


fixed, perhaps by the first hand.


58 δῦναι Palmer: πατρὸς Weil: φῆμαι Wilam.


Olympia and Delphi; (2) wealth, ἀφνεὸν
βιοτάν, combined with prosperous fortune.
Hieron had now (in 476) been ruler of
Syracuse since 478; his position was a
splendid one, and he had met with no
reverse: this is ἐπίζαλος τύχα. But no
mortal is πάντα γ᾽ εὐδαίμων : and Hieron
had weak health. The illness mentioned
by Aelian (see u. on ITI, 71) seems to
have occurred early in his life. He
suffered from an internal disease (λιθιῶν,
Plut. Mor. 403 Ο: cp. schol. Pind. O.
1.1, 2 1. 80, 111. 1). A strain of allusion
to his malady appears in Pindar’s third
Pythian (circ. 476—5 B.C.?), vv. 1—8,
and especially 80—92, where the Theban
poet, like the Cean here, dwells on the
blending of glory with suffering in Hieron’s
lot. In Pyth. 1. 52—55 (474 B.C.) a
parallel is implied between Hieron and
Philoctetes, the warrior ἀσθενεῖ σὺν χρωτὶ
βαίνων. See also above, 111. 85 (n.).


The general sentiment of this passage
has a close parallel in Pind. /. Iv. 12 ff.:
δύο δέ τοι ζωᾶς ἄωτον μοῦνα ποιμαίνοντι
τὸν ἄλπνιστον εὐανθεῖ σὺν ὄλβῳ, | εἴ τις εὖ
πάσχων λόγον ἐσλὸν ἀκούσῃ" μὴ μάτευε
Leds γενέσθαι" πάντ᾽ ἔχεις, | εἴ σε τούτων
μοῖρ᾽ ἐφίκοιτο καλῶν.

56 καὶ μάν, ‘and verily’: as in XII.
182. This formula implies that the myth
illustrates and confirms the general truth
just stated. καὶ μήν often introduces
some new consideration, in support of a
view which has already been urged (e.g.
Dem. or. 21 § 56 καὶ μὴν tore γε τοῦτ᾽
ἕτι: cp. Isocr. or. 4 § 185). So, in drama,
καὶ μήν announces a new comer on the
scene (¢.g., Soph. 42. 1168). Pindar has
καὶ μάν in P. Iv. 289, XW. 11. 13, etc.

It is, however, difficult to choose here
between kal μάν and καὶ γάρ. In favour
of the latter, it may be noted that Pindar
has kal ydp ποτε in O. VII. 27, and Δ V1.


v] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 277


has granted a portion of honours, and a life of opulence, with
enviable fortune : for no mortal man is blest in all things.


And verily they tell how he who broke down the gates
of cities, the unconquered son of Zeus, lord of the bright
thunderbolt, descended of old to the house of Persephone with
slender ankles, that he might bring up from Hades to the
sunlight the hound with jagged teeth, offspring of unapproach-
able Echidna.

There, by the waters of Cocytus, he perceived the souls
of hapless mortals, countless as leaves quivering in the wind,
where flocks graze on the gleaming headlands of Ida. And
well seen among them was the shade of the bold-hearted
warrior, the spear-shaker, sprung from Porthaon.


69 ¢y-] EN A: γ written above N by A’. 70 IIOPOANI’AA A: o has
been added above, between the first A and N (by A??).—The short mark above I,
which at first sight seems to denote a long syllable, is like that on the ¢ of ἐϊκτίτων in


111. 46 and on the second ¢ of ἐπιχθονίοις in v. 96.


In all three places it may have


been meant for™: in v. 96, indeed, it shows a slight curve.


35, as a preface to mythical allusions.
The fact that here οὐ γάρ tis comes just
before, is a slight objection, but by no
means decisive: iteration of ydp is
common. kal ydp, as distinguished from
καὶ μάν, would assert more directly the
logical connexion between the maxim
and the myth. On the whole, I prefer
καὶ μάν, because (1) it rather implies than
asserts such connexion ; and (2) is, partly
on that account, more impressive.

The γνώμη links proem to myth by
the thought, ‘even the most famous and
prosperous mortal is not happy in all
things.’ Heracles had won great glory,
but also endured great trials. Meleager
is an example of fame and valour pre-
maturely struck down by fate.

ἐρειψιπύλαν : Heracles took the Troy
of Laomedon; also Oechalia, and Pylus
(Zl. 11. 689 f.). Cp. Aesch. 7%. 880 ἢ.
δωμάτων ἐρειψίτοιχοι.

59 τανισφύρου: cp. III. Gon.

6O—G62 καρχαρόδοντα : a general
epithet for dogs in Homer (//. 13. 198).
Heracles speaks of his descent to Hades
as the crowning ἦθλος laid on him by
Eurystheus (Od. 11. 623—6). 21. 8. 368
ἐξ ἐρέβευς ἄξοντα κύνα στυγεροῦ ᾿Αἴδαο. ---
υἱὸν..᾿Εἰχίδνας, as in Hes. 7h. 310 (the
father being Typhaon), Soph. 77. 1099:
but in O. C. 1574 he is the son of
Tartarus and Earth.

64 ἐδάη here=duade in the sense of
‘perceived.’ Similar, though not identical,


is the use of the word in Pind. fr. 166,
ἀνδροδάμαντα δ᾽ ἐπεὶ Pipes ddev ῥιπὰν
μελιαδέος olvov, ‘perceived’ (2.6. ‘ felt’)
the impulse.

65 old τε: ic. ψυχὰς eddy, (τοιαύτας)
οἷά τε PUAN ἄνεμος δονεῖ, =old τε φύλλα
ἐστὶν ἃ ἄνεμος δονεῖ. The use of οἷά τε
for the simple οἷα suits the epic manner.
Zl. 2. 468 μυρίοι, ὅσσα τε φύλλα Kal ἄνθεα
γίγνεται ὥρῃ. For the simile, cp. also
Ap. Rhod, 1v. 216: Virg. Aez. VI. 309 f.
(of the departed spirits), Quam multa in
stlvis autumn frigore primo Lapsa cadunt
folia. Seneca Ved. 600. Milton P. 2. 1.
301 ff.

67 πρῶνας ἀργηστάς, headlands
‘gleaming’ in the sunlight. ἀργηστής
(from ἀργής, ἀργήεις, ‘shining,’ esp.
‘white’) occurs as an epithet of foam
(Aesch. 7%. 60), of a serpent (2d. 181),
and of swans (Theocr. xxv. 131). The
use of it here may have been suggested
by //. 16. 297 (when ‘Zeus removes a
thick cloud from the summit of a great
mountain’), ἔκ τ᾽ ἔφανεν πᾶσαι σκοπιαὶ
καὶ πρώονες ἄκροι | καὶ νάπαι.

Marlowe, speaking of a great host,
says,—‘ [2 number more than are the
guivering leaves Of Ida’s forest’ (Tam-
burlaine pt 2, Ill. 5. 3, quoted by
Headlam).

69 ξ. θρασυμέμνονος, of a brave spirit:
epithet of Heracles in Z/. 5. 639, Od. 11.
267. The -μέμνων is usu. referred to
μένω (‘bravely steadfast’), but may better


ant. τ.


BAKXYAIAOY [ν


- τὸν δ᾽ ὡς ἴδεν ᾿Αλκμήνιος θαυμαστὸς ἥρως
2 τεύχεσι λαμπόμενον,
3veupav ἐπέβασε λιγυκλαγγῆ κορώνας,
4 χαλκεόκρανον δ᾽ ἔπειτ᾽ ἐξ-
15. 5 εἴλετο (β)ιὸν ἀνα-
ὁ πτύξας φαρέτρας πῶμα' τῷ δ᾽ ἐναντία
7 ψυχὰ προφάνη Μελεάγρου
8 καί νιν εὖ εἰδὼς προσεῖπεν᾽
9 υἱὲ Διὸς μεγάλου,


8ο τὸ


ah h
στρ. γ. τμὴ ταῦὔσιον προΐει


AL 3 ἊΝ ΄ f /
στάθί τ᾽ ἐν χώρᾳ, γελανώσας. τε θυμόν


2 τραχὺν ἐκ χειρῶν ὀϊστὸν
3 puxaiow ἔπι φθιμένων"


. οὗτοι δέος.
85 5 ᾿Αμφιτρυωνιάδας,


as φάτο: θάμβησεν δ᾽ ἀναξ


6 εἶπέν Te: τίς ἀθανάτων
7% βροτῶν τοιοῦτον ἔρνος
΄ > , ,
8 θρέψεν ἐν ποίᾳ χθονί;
otis δ᾽ ἔκτανεν ; ἢ τάχα καλλίζωνος Ἥρα


gO το


71 ΑΛΚΜΗΪΟΟ s.: corr. K.


κεῖνον ἐφ᾽ ἁμετέρᾳ


75 £. The MS. divides the verses wrongly, as in


be connected with μέμαα, μένος (cp.
᾿Αγαμέμνων).---ἐγχεσπάλον : epithet of
warriors in the //zad (2. 131 etc.).

Πορθανίδα. Meleager was the son of
Oeneus, and grandson of Porthaon, king
of Pleuron and Calydon. See the stemma
of the mythical genealogy in the Ap-
pendix. Πορθανίδης is from Πορθάν, a
compressed form of Πορθάων, as ᾿Αλκμάν
(Pind. P. vit. 46) of ’AAkudwy. The cor-
rector of the MS. wished to read Πορθαο-
vi8a, which would be possible, with a
synizesis of ao: but Πορθανίδα i is confirmed
by the analogy of ᾿Αλκμανιδᾶν in Pind.
P. Vil. 2.

71 ᾿Αλκμήνιος, son of Alcmena: cp.
vi. 12 f. ᾿Αριστομένειον. «τέκος  7|,. τι.
56: Τελαμώνιον υἱόν: Aesch. P. V. 705
᾿Ινάχειον σπέρμα : Soph. O. 7: 267 τῷ
AaBdaxely παιδί.

73 νευρὰν. λιγυκλαγγῆ. He drew
the bow-string taut, so that it gave'a
ringing sound at the touch. Cp. Od. 21.
410 f. (Odysseus proving his bow-string,
after stringing his bow): δεξιτερῇ δ᾽ apa


χειρὶ λαβὼν πειρήσατο νευρῆς" | ἡ δ᾽ ὑπὸ
καλὸν ἄεισε, χελιδόνι ξεικέλη αὐδήν.

κορώνας, the tip of the bow. A notch
or hook in this received the loop of the
string when the bow was strung. At the
other end the string must have been
fastened, either in a like way, or by
being passed through a hole in the κέρας,
Only the tip at the upper end of a bow
seems to have been called κορώνη: that
on a bow of Pandarus was gilt (77.
4. 111).

758. ἐξείλετο ἰόν. The hiatus indicates
that the poet attributed F to ἰός, arrow.
This ἰός (the Sanskrit zshas, Curt. Etym.
§ 616) occurs in Jliad, Odyssey, and
Homeric hymns, but never takes £ See
(4...) ZL. 4 116, the source of this
passage: αὐτὰρ ὁ σύλα πῶμα φαρέτρης,
ἐκ δ᾽ Ber’ ἰόν. But ἰός, poison (Skt
visham, Lat. virus, Curt. § 391), had f
So also had tov, viola. The similarity of
form between these words might easily
lead to the false digamma which we find
here; though the mistake shows that the


v] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 279
But when the wondrous hero, Alcmena’s son, beheld him epode 2.
shining in armour, he drew the shrill bow-string to the horn
of his bow; then he raised the lid of his quiver, and took
out a bronze-tipped arrow. But the spirit of Meleager came
and stood before his face, and spake unto him, for he knew
him well: ‘Son of great Zeus, stay where thou art, and calm


thy soul,


and speed not vainly from thy hand a fierce shaft against the
souls of the dead. There is no cause to fear.’

So spake he ; but the princely son of Amphitryon marvelled,
and said: ‘Who among immortals or among men, and in what
land, was the parent of an offspring so glorious? And who
was his slayer? Soon will fair-girdled Hera send that man


str. 3.


epode αἴ (35 f.) and epode γ΄ (115 f.): corr. K. 78 ΠΡΟΟΒΕΙΠΕΝ ms.: corr. K.


80 re] The first hand wrote A instead of T, but corrected it.


poet had not very closely observed his
epic model.—Cp. XvI. 1311.

78 εἰδὼς after ψυχά, constr. κατὰ
σύνεσιν: Od. 11. go ἦλθε δ᾽ ἐπὶ ψυχὴ
Θηβαίου Τειρεσίαο, ] χρύσεον σκῆπτρον
ἔχων: 16. 476 ἱερὴ ts Τηλεμάχοιο | ἐς
πατέρ ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἰδών: Ll. 11. 690
ἐλθὼν γὰρ ἐκάκωσε βίη Ἡρακληείη.

80 ἐν χώρᾳ,-- ΨΠεῖε thou art. Xen.

#7. Iv. 2 8 20 ἐν χώρᾳ ἔπιπτον (at their
post). Thuc. IV. 26 81 τὸ στρατόπεδον...
κατὰ χώραν ἔμενεν.
- γελανώσας. γελανόω occurs nowhere
else: but Pind. O. v. 2 has καρδίᾳ
γελανεῖ (and P. IV. 121 θυμῷ γ.), ‘cheerful.’
γελάω and γαλήνη show respectively the
stronger and the weaker form (yeA-, γαλ-)
of a common root, expressing the idea of
‘clear’: cp. γάλα; and Lat. gelu.
rimary sense of γελᾶν was
not ‘laughing,’—as appears in
the figurdtive uses (e.g. κυμάτων [ἀνήριθ.
μον γέλασμα, Aesch. P. V. go). Thus
yehavéws to make γελανής, might well
mean, ‘th ¢ranguillize’; and it is needless
to conjécture γαλανώσας. [The extant
verbs frpm γαλην- are γαληνίζω (trans. in
Hippogr. and Eur., intrans. in Arist.),
yornvigw, and γαληνιάξω (intrans.)]

81 ἰταὔσιον, ‘vain.’ This Doric form
occurs/also in a corrupt fr. of Alcman,
no. 9 Cp. Od. 3. 316 τηὔσίην ὁδὸν
ἔλθῃς. Theocr. XXv. 230 τηὕσίως. The
comet unknown : but the theory which


‘smiling,


conne¢ts it with raits, ‘big’ (through the
notion| ‘ too big to be practicable’), takes
some colour from Hom. hymn. Apoll.
2. 36 εἴ δέ τι τηὔσιον ἔπος ἔσσεται, ἠέ τι


ἔργον, where the sense is ‘rash’ (as
ὕβρις in the next v. indicates): cp. μέγ᾽...
ἔπος (Soph. 4z. 128).

82 τραχὺν, ‘fierce’; properly, ‘rough,’
‘harsh,’ like war and the warrior’s spirit ;
cp. Pind. 2. 1. 10f. “Apys, τραχεῖαν
ἄνευθε λιπὼν | ἐγχέων ἀκμάν.

8.8 ψυχαῖσιν ἔπι φθιμένων. For this
sense of ἐπί with dat., denoting hostile
movement, cp. go, 133: it is frequent in
poetry, from the Homeric ἐπ᾽ ἀλλήλοισιν
ἰόντες (71. 3. 15 etc.) onwards.

84 Σοὔτοι δέος, as we say, ‘there is no
fear’ (1.6. cause for it). The phrase is
Homeric, 71. 1. 515, ἐπεὶ οὔ τοι ἔπι δέος :
only that there τοι Ξε σοι (Zeus). Cp. 171.
12. 246 σοὶ δ᾽ οὐ δέος ἔστ᾽ drrodécOar,—
Here it seems better to write οὔτοι than
to take of τοι as=ol σοι.

86--88 τίς...ἐν ποίᾳ χθονί; Cp.
XVI. 31: Od. τ. 170 τίς πόθεν els ἀνδρῶν ;
—pvos, like θάλος and ὄζος: Pind. MV.
vi. 64 ἔρνεσι Λατοῦς (Apollo and Ar-
temis): J. 111. 62 f. Medloow.. | ἔρνεϊ
Πελεσιάδᾳ: and so in Tragedy. In
Homer a youth or maiden is sometimes
compared to an ἔρνος (//. 18. 56 etc.), but
is not called so.

89f. τίς δ᾽ ἔκτανεν; Heracles assumes
that the slayer of Meleager was some
great warrior (κεῖνον, v. 90), whom Hera
will next send against himself. He is
presently to learn (136 ff.) that the death
of Meleager was the work of Althaea.
The touch of poetical art given by κεῖνον
is like that of Sophocles in the Antigone
(v. 248), when Creon, never dreaming


‘that the breaker of his edict is a woman,


BAKXYAIAOY [ν


280
u πέμψει κεφαλᾷ: τὰ δέ που
Col.9 τ: Παλλάδι ξανθᾷ μέλει.


3 τὸν δὲ προσέφα Μελέαγρος
4 δακρυόεις" χαλεπὸν


θεῶν παρατρέψαι νόον


ἀντ. γ. :- ἄνδρεσσιν ἐπιχθονίοις.
2 καὶ γὰρ ἂν πλάξιππος Οἰνεὺς
παῦσεν καλυκοστεφάνου
σεμνᾶς χόλον ᾿Αρτέμιδος λευκωλένου


3
4

100 «λισσόμενος πολέων
6


3 > ἊΝ ᾿ ἣν
T αἰγῶν θυσίαισι πατὴρ
A eed -
γ καὶ βοῶν φοινικονώτων᾽
5 3 φ᾿ ἢ x
8 ἀλλ᾽ ἀνίκατον θεὰ
Ε ΄ 2 > , > » ΄
9 ἔσχεν χόλον᾽ εὐρυβίαν δ᾽ ἔσσευε κούρα


κάπρον ἀναιδομάχαν


> lal
1 ἐς καλλίχορον Καλυδώ-
> yx 7 7
τ ν᾽, ἔνθα πλημύρων σθένει
3 ΄ 3 ,
13 Opxous ἐπέκειρεν ὀδόντι,
᾿ a ἐς
u σφάζε τε μῆλα, βροτῶν


106 ἐς Palmer: OC ms. The rough breathing may be due to A?.


MTPON ms.


asks, τί φής; τίς ἀνδρῶν ἦν ὁ τολμήσας
τάδε;

91 κεφαλᾷ, ‘my life’: cp. 74. 17. 242
ἐμῇ κεφαλῇ περιδείδια : Od. 2. 237 παρθέ-
μενοι κεφαλάς (= ψυχὰς παρθέμενοι, 3. 74):
Soph. O. C. 564 ἤθλησα κινδυνεύματ᾽ ἐν
τὠμῷ κάρᾳ (at the risk of my life). In
other places, where the thought of
danger is not present, κεφαλή is merely
an emphatic ‘self,’ as in //. 18. 82 τὸν
ἐγὼ περὶ πάντων riov ἑταίρων, ἶσον ἐμῇ
κεφαλῇ. So Pind. O. νι. 60 αἰτέων...τιμάν
τιν᾽ ἑᾷ κεφαλᾷ (‘to crown him’): O. vir.
67 f. ἐᾷ κεφαλᾷ | ..yépas ἔσσεσθαι.

92 Παλλάδι, the hero’s guardian-
goddess, who in //. 8. 363 says of him,
τειρόμενον σώεσκον ὑπ’ Εὐὐρυσθῆος ἀέθλων.
Speaking in Od. 11. 626 of his descent to
Hades, Heracles says, Ἑρμείας δέ μ᾽
ἔπεμψεν ἰδὲ γλαυκῶπις ᾿Αθήνη. She often
appears as his protrectress on Attic
black-figured vases, and in other works
of ancient art. Cp. Soph. 77. 1031,
where he invokes her in his agony.


94 f. χαλεπὸν κιτ.λ. The inffexibility
of fate is illustrated by that
Heracles which is declared at
the myth (v. 169),—to wed §Deianeira.
Cp. Xv. 23 τότ᾽ ἄμαχος δαίμων bl Δαϊανείρᾳ
πολύδακρυν ὕφανε | wjriv.—Oedvy : for the
synizesis cp. 50. :

97 πλάξιππος: Homeric qspithet of
Pelops (//. 2. 104), and othe: heroes.
Cp. ZZ. a. 581 ἱππηλάτα Olveds.,

98 f. καλυκοστεφάνου, ‘crow ned with
flower-buds’ (epithet in x. τοῦ of the
Proetides). Plutarch Aor. 903 ἢ, 1 quotes
an unnamed poet, who spoke οἱ f “Ἥλιος
as ἐπιστέψας κάλυκος στεφάνοισι
Artemis was a goddess of vegetati¥.
fertility (Callim. hymn. Dean.
Anthol. Pal. 6. 157, 267:


4: 17).

Of the three epithets here gil tyen to
Artemis, καλυκοστεφάνον denotesar ἃ con-
ventional attribute; σεμνᾶς, divine € rank;
and λευκωλένου, a personal qualivey A
parallel series is that in XII. haigg f,


ι


v] ETTINIKOI 281
to take my life; but golden-haired Pallas, 1 ween, is watchful
against that.’

And to him spake Meleager with tears: ‘It is hard for


“mortal men to turn aside the purpose of the gods:


else would my father, horse-smiting Oeneus, have appeased the
wrath of Artemis crowned with flower-buds, the majestic, the
white-armed, when he entreated her with sacrifices of many
goats and red-backed oxen.

‘But the maiden goddess had conceived anger that could
not be overcome; and she sped a wild boar, of vast might, a
ruthless foe, into the fair lawns of Calydon; where, in the flood-
tide of his strength, he ravaged the vine-rows with his tusks,


and slew the sheep, and every mortal


χρυσάρματος | σεμνὰ μεγάθυμος ᾿Αθάνα.
(Cp. also xvi. 109 f. σεμνὰν.. βοῶπιν..
᾿Αμφιτρίταν.)

100 πολέων, fem. The epic πολέες,
πολέων, πολέσι, πολέας are always masc.
‘in Homer and Hesiod (though πουλὺν ἐφ᾽
ὑγρήν occurs in //. το. 27, etc.). But
Callimachus has πολέας δ᾽ ἐπελέξατο
νύμφας (Hymn. Dian. 42), and πολέες σε
περιτροχόωσιν ἀοιδαί (Hymn. Del. 28).

102 φοινικονώτων. Cp. X. 105 (Bois)
φοινικότριχας : Pind. P. iv. 265 φοίνισσα
δὲ Θρηϊκίων ἀγέλα ταύρων (a ‘red’ herd).
In 71. 23. 454 φοῖνιξ (ἵππος9) is chestnut,
or perhaps light bay.

104 ἔσχεν, ‘had conceived’ (aor.).
It is only ‘the context which shows the
sense, as the word could also mean
‘restrained’ (Od. 5. 451 ἔσχε δὲ kOua).—
Oeneus had failed to offer harvest first-
fruits (θαλύσια) to Artemis (77. 9. 534)+

105 ἀναιδομάχαν (only here), ruthless
in fight. Several of B,’s new words have
this scansion, as ἀδεισιβόας (V. 155),
depoluaxos (XII. 100), ἀταρβομάχας (XV.
28).
106 ξ. καλλίχορον, ‘with its fair
lawns,’ or dancing-grounds. It is applied
to Olympia (x. 32); to the Phocian
Panopeus (Od. 11. 581), Athens (Eur.
‘Her. 359), Thebes (Hom. hymn. 15. 2).
It is not merely a topographical epithet,
but one which suggests the civic life and
festivals. Thus Simonides (fr. 164, 2)
calls Apollo Λητοίδην ἀγορῆς καλλιχόρον
πρύτανιν. Here it depicts a city at peace,
with fair lawns around it. There is no
reason to suppose that it is (incorrectly)
used in the sense of καλλίχωρος : see
Appendix.


αλυδῶν᾽. The site of Calydon was


identified by Leake, doubtless rightly,
with a place called Kurt-aga, a little to
the west of the river Evenus (the idharz).
The town stood on the lowest slopes of
Mt Aracynthus (now Zygos), the range
from which the coast plain of Aetolia
stretches to the sea. This accounts for
the Homeric epithets of Calydon (71. 2.
640 πετρήεσσαν, 13. 217 αἰπεινῇ), though
its actual: position was not lofty. The
territory of Calydon, in the plain between
Aracynthus and the marshy seaboard,
was fertile (Strabo p. 450 τῆς μεσογαίας...
εὐκάρπου τε καὶ πεδιάδος). Cp. 71. 9. 577
πιότατον πεδίον Καλυδῶνος ἐραννῆς.

107 πλημύρων. I retain the spelling
of the papyrus: good Mss. have the form
with a single « in Hippocr. De sacro
morb. vol, 1. p. 604 (ed. Kiihn) πλημυρεῖν,
and De Diaet. Acut. 11. p. 60 πλημυρίδα.
The same spelling appears in Archilochus
fr. 97 (as quoted by Eustath. Od. 1597,
28) ἐπλήμυρον. In Od. 9. 486 πλημυρίς
too has the best Ms. authority. If the
word was formed directly, as Buttmann
held, from the root πλε (πίμπλημι), the
single «% would be right: while the old
deriv. from πλήν and μύρω would account
for the doubling of μ.

108 dpxovus, rows (of vines). Od.
7. 127 παρὰ νείατον 8pxov (the furthest
row of vines). Xen. Oecon. 20 ὃ 3 οὐκ
ὀρθῶς τοὺς ὄρχους ἐφύτευσαν.

109 ode τε μῆλα. Wilamowitz
assumes that our poet’s ‘sheep’ were
suggested by a confused reminiscence
of Homer’s ‘apples’: 2. 9. 541 f. (the
boar) χαμαὶ βάλε δένδρεα μακρὰ | αὐτῇσιν
ῥίζησι καὶ αὐτοῖς ἄνθεσι μήλων. A wild boar
(he says) would not attack sheep. Apollo-
dorus (1. 8. 2, § 2) agrees with Bacchylides:


ant. 3.


BAKXYAIAOY [Vv


282
> 9 > rd ἣν
11013 θ᾽ ὅστις εἰσάνταν μόλοι.
ἐπ. γ. ττῷ δὲ στυγερὰν δῆριν Ἑλλάνων ἄριστοι
2 στασάμεθ᾽ ἐνδυκέως
a ¥ 4 3 ‘ A ,
3€€ ἄματα cuvexéws: ἐπεὶ δὲ δαίμων
+ κάρτος Αἰτωλοῖς ὄρεξεν,
115 s θάπτομεν ovs κατέπε-
a 3 ΄ 5 h ig
6 gvev σῦς ἐριβρύχας ἐπαΐσσων Bia,
3 al > ed > 3 » #
7 Aykatov ἐμών τ᾽ ᾿Αγέλαον
8. φ[ζέρτ]ατον κεδνῶν ἀδελφεῶν,
9 οὖς τέϊΪκεν ἐν μεγάροις
Ἂς 3 6 rs I Lal > ͵ ἐ
12010 πατρὸς ᾿Αλθαία περικἰλειτοῖσιν Οἰνέος
στρ. δ΄. 1T@av δ᾽ ὥ]λεσε μοῖρ᾽ ὀλοὰ


2 πλεῦνας: οὐ γάρ πω δαΐφρων


113 ΟΥ̓ΝΕΧΗΩΟΊ A second N has been added above the line by 3.


115 £. τοὺς


MS., Blass?: οὖς K., Blass!.—The ms. divides these two verses wrongly (cp. 35 n.):


μηνίσασα ἡ θεὸς κάπρον ἐφῆκεν ἔξοχον
μεγέθει τε καὶ ῥώμῃ, ὃς τήν τε γῆν
ἄσπορον ἐτίθει καὶ τὰ βοσκήματα καὶ
τοὺς ἐντυγχάνοντας διέφθειρεν. This boar
was ἃ δαιμόνιον τέρας, which destroyed
all living things that came in its way.

110 εἰσάνταν. While εἴσαντα is
Homeric (Z/. 17. 334 etc.), εἰσάντην is
not found. But ἄντην is epic no less
than ἄντα, and εἰσάνταν is certainly the
true reading here.—eloavt’ ἂν μόλοι could
be explained only as an archaizing imita-
tion of the Homeric és xe with optative
in such places as Od. 4. 600, δῶρον δ᾽
ὅττι κέ μοι δοίης, κειμήλιον ἔστω (‘whatever
gift you might give me’); Od. 4. 222
ἐπὴν κρητῆρι μιγείη, ‘whenever it was
mingled.’ In Attic the simple ὅστις μόλοι
would be normal: while ὅστις ἂν μόλοι
would be admissible only if ἄν were joined
with μόλοι as a potential optative.

111 £. Sypw..cracdped’, 7. 18. 533
στησάμενοι δ᾽ ἐμάχοντο μάχην (‘set their
battle zz array, and fought’). Her.
VIL. 175 TH τε στήσονται τὸν πόλεμον. SO
too the active, Od. τι. 314 φυλόπιδα
στήσειν. Cp. also fd. 17. 158 ἀνδράσι
δυσμενέεσσι πόνον καὶ δῆριν ἔθεντο. The
phrase marks the gravity of the task.

ἐνδυκέως (as again in v. 125), ‘strenuous-
ly.” Hes. Scut. 427 (of a lion rending a
carcase), ὅς τε μάλ᾽ ἐνδυκέως ῥινὸν κρατεροῖς
ὀνύχεσσι  σχίσσας κιτιλ. The sense is
similar in Od. 14. 109, ἐνδυκέως κρέα τ᾽


ἤσθιε πῖνέ re οἶνον (‘eagerly’). But in
Od. 7. 256 ἐνδυκέως ἐφίλει τε καὶ ἔτρεφεν,
the meaning is softened into ‘ carefully,’
‘sedulously.’ (The deriv. is uncertain:
one theory connects the word with dox-,
so that the primary sense would be
‘ reputably.’)

118 cuvexéws, with v. So 71. 12. 26
συνεχές, ὄφρα κε θᾶσσον x.7.d.; Od. 9. 74
δύο τ᾿ ἤματα συνεχὲς αἰεί: Hes. Theog. 636
συνεχέως ἐμάχοντο. The v has been ex-
plained by the root σεχ- (guasz συσσεχέΞ):
and this is confirmed by the remarkable
scansion in Od. 19. 113, θάλασσα δὲ
παρέχῃ ἰχθῦς (quasi παρσέχῃ). Cp. also
Zi. τ. 51 βέλος ἐχεπευκές épeln.—The
alternative would be to suppose that the
v is merely a licence excused by the
metrical ictus in arsis: cp. θὕγατέρα
(ZZ. 5. 37), δυναμένοιο (Od. 1. 276),
Πελοπίδης (Her. vil. 159, in a parody of
Zl. 7. 128), etc.

114 Αἰτωλοῖς, instead of a simple
ἡμῖν, is in keeping with the diction of
vy. τα f.; this was the struggle of a
whole people against a supernatural pest.

115 θάπτομεν οὖς «7.4. In his
second edition Blass reads rots (with the
MS.), assuming that ~~ -- is here substi-
tuted for the -- ~~ which stands in all
the corresponding verses (35, 75, 155,
195). ‘This seems metrically impossible.
The Ms. has many small errors like that
of τοὺς for ots.


v] ETTINIKOI 283


that crossed his path.


‘Against him we, the flower of the Greeks, strenuously waged
grim fight for six days together. And when the god gave the
mastery to us Aetolians, we buried those whom the squealing
boar had slain in his violent onset, even Ancaeus, and Agelaus,
that bravest of my trusty brethren, whom Althaea bare in the


far-famed house of my father Oeneus.


‘But deadly fate destroyed more than these; for the fierce


corr. Κ,


117 ᾿Λλγέλαον K.: ATTEAON ms.
@deve].. AECEN ms.; the N transfixed (by A3?).


121 τῶν δ᾽ J.: νῦν δ᾽ Blass?.—
122 πλεῦνας Housman, and


others; (πλέονας Smyth): πάντας Ludwich, Blass®.


116 σῦς épiBpixas, ‘the squealing
boar.’ βρυχᾶσθαι usually means to ‘roar,’
‘bellow’; it is said (e.g.) of a lion, a
bull, ora man in agony. Plutarch applies
it to the ‘trumpeting’ of an elephant
(Pyrrh. 33).

117 ’Ayxatov, son of Lycurgus, a hero
of Tegea; named in the //ad (2. 609) as
father of Agapenor, leader of the Ar-
cadians. He was an Argonaut, and, in
right of his great strength, sat with
Heracles on the middle bench of the
Argo (Apoll. Rh. 1. 531). The temple
of Athena ᾿Αλέα at Tegea displayed on
its pediment the Calydonian boar-hunt,
by Scopas; who had represented’ Ayxaiov,
ἔχοντα ἤδη τραύματα καὶ ἀφέντα τὸν πέ-
λεκυν (his characteristic weapon), sup-
ported in the arms of his brother, the
hero Epochus. (Paus. 8. 45 § 6.)

᾿Αγέλαον: mentioned (as ’AyéAews) by
Antoninus Liberalis (¢. 150 A.D.) in his
Merapopdwcewy συναγωγή, c. 2: who,
however, describes him as slain in the
later fight with the Curetes (125 f.), and
not by the boar. Apollodorus (1. 8 § 1)
does not name him.

118 ἀδελφεῶν : the other sons of
Oeneus and Althaea, acc. to Antoninus
Liberalis (4 c.), were Toxeus, Clymenus,
Phereus, Periphas; while Apollodorus
(Δ ¢.) omits Periphas, and substitutes
Thyreus for Phereus: the last name may,
indeed, have been merely an error or a


variant.
ois τέκεν... ᾿Αλθαία.


119 f. Wila-


~~ mowitz would read ὃν (Gott. gel. Anz.


1898 Nr. 2, p. 130). But ods seems right.
The brothers of Meleager who took part
in the boar-hunt were all, like himself,
sons of Oeneus and Althaea. After her
death, Oeneus married Periboea, daughter


of Hipponoos, who bore Tydeus (Apollod.
1. 8 § 5: Diod. Iv. 35: Hygin. fad. 69).
Thus the plural pronoun has a point.

121 2. τῶν δ᾽... πλεῦνας : Fate slew
others besides Ancaeus and Agelaus; for
the wrath of Artemis was not yet ap-
peased. (πλεῦνας is probably to be read
in vil, 46. For ev from eo, cp. εὖντα in
11, 78.)—This suits the context better
than νῦν δ᾽. «πάντας (cr. n.), 2.6. ‘but, as
it was, Fate slew them all’ (referring to
ἀδελφεῶν).

ὄλεσε.. ὀλοά: the tautology, so in-
elegant in a modern view, was perhaps
hardly felt, since the familiar phrase μοῖρ᾽
ὀλοά was almost equivalent to a single


word. (μοῖρ᾽ ὀλοή Μ. 16. 849, 21. 83,
22. 5: Od. 2 100, 3. 238, 19. 145,


24. 135.) A similar phenomenon occurs
where the stress is on the first element of
a compound adj., while the second is
identical with the verb; e.g. Aesch. 7h.
552 πανώλεις.. ὀλοίατο : and in epithets of
proper names, when the etymology of the
name is not present to the poet’s mind ;
e.g. L1. 2. 758 Πρόθοος 806s: Soph. Az. 607
ἀΐδηλον “Αἰδαν.

122 ϑαΐφρων, bent on strife, ‘fierce,’
as in 137. In this sense the word is
usually referred to dats, ‘strife’ (ἐν dat
λυγρῇ, 71. 13. 286). In the Ziad, where
it is an epithet of heroes, ‘ warlike’ is
everywhere a suitable meaning, except in
il. 24. 325, where, as applied to the
charioteer Idaeus, ‘prudent’ would be
fitter. As used in the Odyssey, where
it seems always to mean ‘prudent’ or
‘skilful,’ it is commonly referred to δαῆναι.
Nitzsch would harmonize the divergent
senses by supposing that the word always
means ‘skiJled’ or ‘wise’ (dafva:),—
whether the ‘skill’ be that of the proved


epode 3.


str. 4.


284


BAKXYAIAOY [Vv


3 παῦσεν] χόλον ἀγροτέρα


Col. 10 4
125


Λατοῦς θυγάτηρ' περὶ δ᾽ αἴθωνος δορᾶς
5 μαρνάμεθ᾽ ἐνδυκέως


6 Κουρῆσι μενεπτολέμοις᾽

γ ἔνθ᾽ ἐγὼ πολλοῖς σὺν ἄλλοις

8 Ἴφικλον κατέκτανον

9ο ἐσθλόν 7° ᾿Αφάρητα, θοοὺς μάτρωας" οὐ γὰρ


130 to


καρτερόθυμος “Apns


τς κρίνει φίλον ἐν πολέμῳ:

τ. τυφλὰ δ᾽ ἐκ χειρῶν βέλη
3 ψυχαῖς ἔπι δυσμενέων φοι-
4 τᾷ θάνατόν τε φέρει


135 15


ἄντ. δ΄.


τοῖσιν ἂν δαίμων θέλῃ"


n°? > 3 st
1TQUT οὐκ ἐπιλεξαμένα


. Θεστίον κούρα δαΐφρων
3μάτηρ κακόποτμος ἐμοὶ
4 βούλευσεν ὄλεθρον ἀτάρβακτος γυνά:


140 ς Kale τε δαιδαλέας


126 KOYPHICI a:
third A transfixed by the first hand.


the first I transfixed (by Αἱ ἢ).
This points to a v./.’A@apfa (Herwerden).—


129 ASAPHATA s.: the


warrior, or another. F.W. Allen (Amer.

Journ. of Phil. 1. 133 ff.) would refer it in
all cases to dats, ‘torch’ (daw, to kindle);
the warrior is ‘fiery’; Penelope is ‘ high-
spirited.’ This last sense, however, does
not suit the ‘skilled’ maker of the σφαῖρα
in Od. 8. 373-

128 ἀγροτέρα (ἄγρα), the huntress:
Zl. 21. 470f. πότνια θηρῶν, | “Apremus
ἀγροτέρη. Under this name she had a
temple at Athens in the suburb” Aypau, on
high ground near the Ilissus. She is also
ἐλαφηβόλος, ἐλλοφόνος, θηροκτόνος, loxé-
αιρα.

Cp. Paus. 4. 31 § 7 Καλυδωνίοις ἡ
"Ἄρτεμις, ταύτην γὰρ θεῶν μάλιστα ἔσεβον,
ἐπίκλησιν εἶχε Λαφρία. This title (con-
nected with λαβ-, λάφυρα) probably de-
signated her as the goddess who gives
the spoils of the chase.

124 al@wvos δορᾶς, Μείναε felis.
αἴθων seems to denote colour (rather than
‘fiery spirit’) in Z/. 2. 838 f. ἵπποι | αἴθωνες
μεγάλοι : 15. 690 αἰετὸς αἴθων: 16. 487
ταῦρον αἴθωνα μεγάθυμον (a more


doubtful case): Pind. O. x1. 20 αἴθων
ἀλώπηξ.---Ορ. Ll. 9. 548 (they fought)
ἀμφὶ σνὸς κεφαλῇ καὶ δέρματι λαχνήεντι.

125 ἐνδυκέως: r12n.

126 Κουρῆσι: schol. 72. 9. 529,
Κουρῆτες τὸ ἐθνικόν, κούρητες δὲ οἱ νεανίαι
[1 το. 123 κούρητας ἀριστῆας ἸΤαναχαιῶν]Ἴ.
But the ethnic was often written Kov-
pntes: the Mss. and edd. vary; see
Roscher My¢h. 11. 1587. These Curetes
(distinct from the hieratic Curetes of the
Cretan Zeus-myth) appear in legend as a
tribe living in Aetolia at Pleuron. ‘That
is what Bacchylides supposes here; for in
149 Tol refers to them, and Pleuron is
their city (131). A scholiast on 77. 9.
529, Κουρῆτές τ΄ ἐμάχοντο καὶ Αἰτωλοὶ
μενεχάρμαι, explains that Αἰτωλοί is there
a more general term for Καλυδώνιοι :
Aetolia, he says, was divided into two
regions,—the Calydonian, ruled by
Oeneus, and the Pleuronian (the seat
of the Curetes), ruled by Thestius. The
Curetes were afterwards driven westward
into Acarnania (Strabo p. 464).


v] ETINIKOI 285
goddess of the chase, Leto’s daughter, had not yet stayed her
wrath; and we fought strenuously for the beast’s tawny hide
with the Curetes steadfast in battle.

‘There slew 1, among many others, Iphiclus and doughty
Aphares, gallant brethren of my mother : for the vehement spirit
of War discerns no kinsman in fight, but missiles go blindly from
our hands against the lives of foemen, fraught with death for


whom the god will.


‘Reflecting not on this, the fierce daughter of Thestius, my
ill-starred mother, a woman without fear, planned my destruc-


tion.


οὐ yap] Omitted by A, added by 45,
187 κούρα] KOPA Ms., corr. K.


She lifted up a voice of wailing, and set about burning


134 θάνατον] AGANATON A, corr. Al.


127 πολλοῖς σὺν ἄλλοις : whom he
slew. The words, by picturing a méée,
add point to vv. 129 ff., οὐ ydp...xpiver
κιτ.λ.

Ἴφικλον : for ἵ before «A, cp. VII. gf.
κἔικληται: XVI. 127 f, ἔκλαγεν with initial
é. Iphiclus was said to have been the
first to hit the boar. On this ground
he and his brothers, the Thestiadae,
claimed the carcase. Hence the war
between the Curetes, to whom the Thes-
tiadae belonged, and the Calydonians
(Apollod. 1. 8. 2, § 2): cp. v. 124 ff.

129 ’Addpyra, from ᾿Αφάρης. Plut.
Mor. 315¥ (Parallela 40) Ἴδας ὁ ᾿Αφά-
pros. Cp. Agpapyrida (Pind. WV. Χ. 65).
᾿Αφαρεύς was the more usual form. No
son of Thestius is elsewhere so called.
The best-known Aphareus is a Messenian
hero, son of Περιήρης and Topyopévn
(daughter of Perseus); Apollod. r. 9. 5.
Pindar’s Apharetidae are his sons, [das
and Lynceus; whom Ovid (Jet. 8. 304)
calls duo Thestiadae, proles Aphareia:
showing that he, at least, supposed their
father to be this son of Thestius. The
sons of Thestius, acc. to Apollod. 1. 7.
to, were Iphiclus, Euippus, Plexippus,
Eurypylus.

Homer (//. 9. 567) says of Althaea,
πόλλ᾽ ἀχέουσ᾽ ἠρᾶτο κασιγνήτοιο φόνοιο,
as if only one of her brothers had been
slain. Since this contradicted the legend,
Aristarchus and others wished to write
κασιγνητοῖο (adj., ‘fraternal’). Apollo-
dorus (1. 8. 2) says merely, ἐξελθόντος δὲ
Μελεάγρου, καί τινας τῶν Θεστίου
παίδων φονεύσαντος, ᾿Αλθαίαν ἀράσασθαι
κατ᾽ αὐτοῦ.

θοούς denotes ‘dash,’ the impetuous


valour of the warrior, rather than the
mere rush of war-chariot or horseman:
Ll. 5. 536, θοὸς ἔσκε μετὰ πρώτοισι μά-
χέσθαι: 2b. 571 θοός περ ἐὼν πολεμιστής:
13- 477 βοῇ θοόν.

131 φίλον, a ‘friend,’ meaning here
akinsman. Meleager’s uncles were now
fighting against him, on the side of the
Curetes (cp. 127 n.), as δυσμενέων (133)
indicates. But τυφλὰ (132) implies that,
even so, he would not wittingly have
slain a Thestiad.

133 ψυχαῖς ἔπι : for the prep. cf. 83 n.

186 ἐπιλεξαμένα = λογισαμένη, an
Ionic phrase; Her. 1. 78, etc.

137 δαΐφρων, ‘fierce,’ as in 122 (n.).
Phrynichus called her aivas, κακομηχάνον
(n. on 142).

189 ἀτάρβακτος : Pind. P. Iv. 84
γνώμας ἀταρβάκτοιο-Ξ- ἁταρβάτου: where
Hermann proposed ἀταρμύκτοιο (Hesych.
ταρμύξασθαι, φοβηθῆναι).

140—142 The construction καῖε
φιτρὸν ἐκ λάρνακος is harshly compressed,
but not impossible. I should not retain
ἀγκλαύσασα (my correction of the Ms.
ἐγκλαύσασα), if any satisfactory emen-
dation could be found which would supply
a participle in the sense of ‘having taken
out.’ The least unsatisfactory would
be ἐκλύσασα (ἐγλύσασα, Wilamowitz) :
‘having released’ the brand from the
chest, by undoing the fastenings of the
latter. But this is not likely to have
become ἐγκλαύσασα. The same may be
said of ἑλκύσασα (Housman), which is
also metrically dubious, since the ὕ
answers to a syllable which is long in
7, 22, 47, 62, 102, 127, 167, 182, and
anceps only in 87 (the τοι- of τοιοῦτον).


ant. 4.


BAKXYAIAOY [ν


τύχον μὲν


286
> , > 4
6 ἐκ λάρνακος ὠκύμορον
Ν 3 x Ν *
7 φιτρὸν ἀγκλαύσασα, τὸν δὴ
8. μοῖρ᾽ ἐπέκλωσεν τότε
9 ζωᾶς ὅρον ἁμετέρας ἔμμεν.
1451 Δαϊπύλον Κλύμενον
AO? κέ > ¥
τ παῖδ᾽ ἄλκιμον ἐξεναρί-
2 Cov ἀμώμητον δέμας,
3 πύργων προπάροιθε κιχήσας᾽
4 τοὶ δὲ πρὸς εὐκτιμέναν
15013 φεῦγον ἀρχαίαν πόλιν
ἐπ. δ΄.


: Πλευρῶνα" μινύνθη δέ μοι ψυχὰ γλυκεῖα,


lal 3 > 4 e
2. γνῶν δ᾽ ὀλιγοσθενέων
5. Ἂς , Ν ΄ ΄ ,
3 αἰαῖ" πύματον δὲ πνέων δάκρυσα τλ[άμων
4 ἀγλαὰν ἤβαν προλείπων.


142 ἘΓΚΛΑΥΟΔΟΑ μ5.: ἀγκλαύσασα J.: ἐκκλάσασα or ἐγλύσασα (-:- ἐκλύσασα)
Wilamowitz: ἐγκλᾷσασα or ἐγκλάξασα Tyrrell: ἑλκύσασα Housman: ἐγκαύσασα Festa


Tyrrell’s ἐγκλάσασα is excellent as an
explanation of the ms. reading, and
gives a possible, though somewhat in-
volved, sense (she burned the brand...
‘which she had formerly locked up’; cp.
λύει πεδήσας in Soph. Az. 676): but it
leaves the construction καῖε ἐκ λάρνακος
unmitigated. ἐκκλάσασα (Wilamowitz)
would mean ‘having shut out’ (not
‘having unlocked’).

Weir Smyth defends ἐγκλαύσασα
(though ἐγκλαίω is otherwise unknown),
as meaning that ‘she shed tears over the
brand’ when she drew it from the chest.
In this sense, however, we should rather
expect ἐπικλαίω (used with a dative by
Nonnus 30. 114). éyxAalew, were it used,
would be rather to weep a¢ something,
2.5. κακοῖς. (In Aesch. Ag. 541 évda-
κρύειν ὄμμασιν is strictly ‘to have tears
in the eyes’.)

δαιδαλέας, curiously carved: Simon.
fr. 37. 1 λάρνακι...ἐν δαιδαλέᾳ.

φιτρόν: Homer does not mention Al-
thaea’s brand, but only the curse which
she invoked on Meleager (//. 9. 567).
But the brand was probably a very old
element in the story,—older, it may be,
than the epic sources used by the Homeric
poet of the IIpecBela. Phrynichus, says
Pausanias (10. 31, § 4), was the first to
mention it ἐν δράματι: the drama was
his Πλευρώνιαι (fr. 6, Nauck?, p. 721):


κρυερὸν yap οὐκ | ἤλυξεν μόρον, ὠκεῖα δέ
νιν φλὸξ κατεδαίσατο | δαλοῦ περθομένου
ματρὸς ὑπ᾽ αἰνᾶς κακομαχάνου. That play
was probably earlier than the date of this
ode (476 B.c.). Cp. Aesch. Ch. 604 ff.—
See Appendix.

148 £. ἐπέκλωσεν, ‘ordained’; here
with acc. and inf., as in Aesch. Zum. 335
τοῦτο γὰρ λάχος διανταία | μοῖρ᾽ ἐπέκλωσεν
ἐμπέδως ἔχειν. ---τότε, of yore. ΑΡο]]οά.
1. 8. 1 τούτου δὲ (Meleager) ὄντος ἡμερῶν
ἑπτὰ παραγενομένας τὰς Μοίρας φασὶν
εἰπεῖν" τότε τελευτήσει Medéaypos, ὅταν
ὁ καιόμενος ἐπὶ τῆς ἐσχάρας δαλὸς κατακαῇ.
τοῦτο ἀκούσασα τὸν δαλὸν ἀνείλετο ᾿Αλθαία
καὶ κατέθετο εἰς λάρνακα.

ζωᾶς ὅρον duerépas: the limit or canon,
the ‘measure’ of his life. Cp. Dion
Chrysost. or. 67 § 7 (Μελεάγρῳ) δαλόν τινα
λέγουσι ταμιεύειν τὸν τῆς ζωῆς χρόνον.
Aesch. Ch, 607 ff. (Althaea) καταίθουσα
παιδὸς Sagowdy | δαλὸν ἥλικ᾽ ἐπεὶ
μολὼν | ματρόθεν κελάδησεν, | ξύμμετρόν
τε διαὶ βίου ] μοιρόκραντον ἐς ἅμαρ.

145 Δαϊπύλου Κλύμενον, one of the
Curetes, otherwise unknown. The name
Κλύμενος, a frequent one, was also borne
by one of Meleager’s brothers (117 n.).

146 ξ. ἐξεναρίζων. The ἐξαναρίζων of
the Ms. is a mere error: in no dialect
would the ev- become αν-.

148 πύργων προπάροιθε, before the
battlemented walls of Pleuron, to which


ν] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 287
the brand of speedy doom, taken from the carven chest,—the
brand which fate had ordained of yore to be the measure of
my life.

‘It so befell that I was in the act of slaying Clymenus, the
valiant son of Dafpylus, a warrior of noble mien, whom I had
overtaken in front of the walls,—for our foes were in flight to
their ancient city of Pleuron ;—


when the sweet life grew faint within me, and I knew that
my strength was ebbing away. Ah me! and as I drew my
latest breath, I wept, hapless one, at passing from my glorious
youth.’


(with daze in 140), Desrousseaux (with εἷλε). 146 f. ἐξεναρίζων) EEANAPIZON ms.
151 MINTNOA μ5.: μινύνθα (Ξε μινύνθη) L. C. Purser: μίνυνθεν or μινύνθει Hous-
man: μένυθεν Wilamowitz. 154 προλείπων K.: ΠΡΟΛΙΠΩΝ ms.


the Curetes were being driven in flight
from Calydon.

149 ff. τοὶ δὲ.. ΤΙλευρῶνα : ἃ paren-
thesis, explanatory of v. 148. Ancient
Pleuron (ἡ παλαιά, Strabo p. 451) stood
in the fertile μεσογαία of Aetolia, some
seven or eight miles N.w.N. of Calydon.
About 230 B.c. that site was deserted,
and a new Pleuron (ἡ νεωτέρα) was
founded more to the s. w., not far from
the modern Mesolonghi. A schol. on
Zt. 9. 529 describes the Κουρῆτες as
οἱ τὴν Πλευρῶνα οἰκοῦντες, and Strabo
(p. 451) speaks of ἡ Κουρητική as ἡ αὐτὴ
τῇ Πλευρωνίᾳ. He also mentions a moun-


tain named Κούριον as πλησίον τῆς πάλαιᾶς


Πλευρῶνος.

151 If μίνυνθα δέ μοι, the reading of
the Ms., be sound, we have here - ~ ~ -
where, in three of the other four epodes,
we find -~~— (vv. 31, 71, 111). But
the fifth epode has the same metrical
peculiarity, if in v. 191 the Ms, τάδε
be sound. Hence the case of μένυνθα is
different from that of an isolated metrical
anomaly like μινύθει in 111. go, or δεῦρ᾽
ἄθρησον νόῳ inv. 8. It is more like the
case of v. 11 and 14, where the metrical
peculiarity occurs also in the antistrophe
(11=26, 14=29). That is, we have to
ask :—Did the poet, in these last two
epodes, deliberately modify the metre of
the first verse? In order to judge of this
question, the sewse yielded by μίνυνθα
must be considered. In //. 1. 416 ἢ,
Thetis says to Achilles: αἴθ᾽ ὄφελες παρὰ
κηυσὶν ἀδάκρυτος καὶ ἀπήμων | ἧσθαι, ἐπεί
νύ τοι αἷσα μίνυνθά περ, οὔ τι μάλα
δήν :---" seeing that thy lot [is] very brief’


(literally ‘is only for α Little while’: cp.
Ll. 4. 466 μίνυνθα δέ of γένεθ᾽ ὁρμή, ‘his
effort lasted only a little while’). In the
Homeric ἐπεί νύ τοι aioa μίνυνθα, the use
of the adverb with ἐστί understood is
most unusual, if not unique: but the
sense, at any rate, is clear. Now, if
μίνυνθα be genuine in this verse of Bac-
chylides, there is the same singularity,
but in a far harsher form, since we have
to supply, not ἐστί, but ἦν. And when
ἣν has been supplied, what is the sense?
‘My life was but for u short while.’
The meaning required, however, is: ‘g7

feeble,,—‘began to ebb away. Ὸ΄

The true reading may be μινύνθη. A
scribe may have changed this to μινύνθα,
wrongly supposing the latter to be the
Doric form; as in Theocr. I. 7 the Mss.
have ποιμάν. A reminiscence of the adv.
μίνυνθα in 71. 1. 417 may have helped.
In v. 191 τάδε is easily corrected to τάδε.
—Cp. III. gon.

152 ὀλιγοσθενέων : the verb is not
found elsewhere (though the adj. occurs
in schol. Oppian Ha/. 1. 623). The poet
may have felt that, in relation to the
sufferer’s consciousness (yvav), this word
was fitter than the Homeric ὀλιγοδρανέων
or ὀλιγηπελέων (72. 15. 24, 246 etc.),
which are more objective.—yvav without
augment: //. 4. 357, Hes. 7A. 551.

Cp. Swinburne, Atalanta in Calydon,
p- 88 (the dying Meleager speaks) :—‘ My
heart is within me As an ash in the fire’...
And the Semichorus, ἐδ. p. 83: ‘He wastes
as the embers quicken; With the brand
he fades as a brand.’


154 ἀγλαὰν ἥβαν. Simon. fr. 105


epode 4.


288


155 s φασὶν ἀδεισιβόαν
Col.ll 6


BAKXYAIAOY [ν


᾿Αμφιτρύωνος παῖδα μοῦνον δὴ τότε


»τέγξαι βλέφαρον, ταλαπενθέος
8 πότμον οἰκτίροντα φωτός."
9 καί νιν ἀμειβόμενος


160 10


στρ. €.


tot eda’ θνατοῖσι μὴ φῦναι φέριστον,


μηδ᾽ ἀελίου προσιδεῖν


2 φέγγος" ἀλλ᾽ οὐ γάρ τίς ἐστιν
3 πρὸ τάδε μυρομένοις,
χρὴ κεῖνο λέγειν ὅ,τι καὶ μέλλει τελεῖν.


τόρ


εἢ ῥα τις ἐν μεγάροις
6 Οἰνῆος ἀρηϊφίλουν


» 3 , ΄
γ ἔστιν ἀδμήτα θυγάτρων,


8. σοὶ φυὰν ἀλιγκία;


οτάν κεν λιπαρὰν ἐθέλων θείμαν ἄκοιτιν.


170 τὸ


Ν Ν Pa
τὸν δὲ μενεπτολέμου


τὸ ψυχὰ προσέφα Μελεά-
τ Ὑγρου' λίπον χλωραύχενα


1. ἐν δώμασι Δαϊάνειραν,


160 τοῖ᾽ Housman, A. Ludwich: ΤΟΙΔ A: but a corrector (A*?) has altered this to
TAA by transfixing T with a sloping line which at the same i converts O into A.—


τάδ᾽ ἔφα Blass: τόδ᾽ ἔφα K.


160--162


The words θνατοῖσι... φέγγος are quoted


by Stobaeus Flor. 98. 27, who, placing a comma after φέγγος, adds in the same line


οἵδε wap Εἰὐρυμέδοντά ποτ΄ ἀγλαὸν ὦλεσαν
ἥβην: Theognis 985 αἷψα γὰρ ὥστε νόημα
παρέρχεται ἀγλαὸς 737.

155 ξ. ἀδεισιβόαν, only here and in x.
61: cp. ἀδεισιδαίμων (Clem. Alex. p. 302)
ἀδεισίθεος orac. ap. Iulian. p. 297 D.—
᾿Αμφιτρύωνος. This lengthening of the z
in Amphitryo is very exceptional : it is
short above in v.85, and in XV. 15. Pindar,
who uses the name in six places (2. Ix.
81; Δ. 1. 52, IV. 20, X. 13: Z. 1. 55, VI.
6) always has t. In the Amphitruo of
Plautus the z is regularly short, and no-
where appears to be necessarily long.
The name does not seem to be extant in
Greek iambic verse ; possibly we might
have found examples of this scansion in
the ᾿Αμφιτρύων of Sophocles, of Aeschylus
Alexandrinus (Nauck? p. 824), or of the
comic poet Archippus. Cp. ’Audirpirn
(Od. 3. οι, etc.)

157 τον, the sing., as in ΧΙ. 17;
twice in Sophocles (4 zz. 104, fr. 645), and
often in Euripides. Homer and Aeschylus


have only the plur. βλέφαρα, Pindar only
γλέφαρα. --- ταλαπενθέος, lit. “ bearing
grief’ (Od. 5. 222): in XV. 26 it means
‘ grievous.’

160 rot’ ἔφα. The first syllable is
long in three at least of the corresponding
verses (40, 80, 200): and presumably
long, though azceps, in the fourth (120,
πατρός). And the first hand wrote TOIA,
which a corrector has changed into TAA’,
Blass (praef. p. x1) defends τάδ᾽,
holding that ~~-— could be substituted
for -~—- at the beginning of the verse.
To the ear at least, such a change in the
rhythm is very unpleasing. It seems much
more probable that the author wrote toi’
ἔφα. It is true, as the same critic ob-
serves, that we do not elsewhere find
τοῖα 85 -- τοιάδε, before a speech: but it is
not doubtful that a poet could have so
used it. The objection would be met by
reading τᾷδ᾽ (cp. 191 n.): but the Ms.
reading points rather to tot’.

θνατοῖσι μὴ φῦναι φέριστον : the first


v)


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


280


‘Tis said that then, and then alone, tears came to the eyes of
Amphitryon’s intrepid son, in pity for the ill-fated hero’s doom ;


and he answered him with such words as these:


‘It were best


for mortals that they had never been born,


and never looked upon the sunlight.


laments avail not, a man should speak of that which he can


hope to accomplish.


I to make her my queenly bride.’


In the halls of the warrior Oeneus is there
a maiden among his daughters like in form to thee?


Fain were


And to him spake the spirit of Meleager steadfast in war:
‘I left Deianeira at home, in the fresh bloom of youth,


ὄλβιος δ᾽ οὐδεὶς βροτῶν πάντα χρόνον, a fragment otherwise unknown (Bergk fr. 2).


161 μηδ᾽ Stobaeus: MHT’ Ms.


(by A*?).


164 χρὴ] KPH ms., but with X written above
169 ΘΕΛΩΝ s., corr. K.—AKOITAN A: corr. A!?
TONKE s., with A written above (by A??).


170 τὸν δὲ]
172 χλωραύχενα] The grave accent


was at first placed on the letter v, but two lines have been drawn through it.


half of the familiar maxim; Theognis
425 ff. πάντων μὲν μὴ φῦναι ἐπιχθονίοισιν
ἄριστον, | μηδ᾽ ἐσιδεῖν αὐγὰς ὀξέος ἠελίου. |
φύντα δ᾽ ὅπως ὠκιστα πύλας ᾿Αἴδαο περῆσαι
«.7.A.; Soph. O. C. 1225 ff., etc. This
passage illustrates the pathetic power of
Bacchylides. It is impressive, indeed,
that this should be said by Heracles,
‘the unconquered’ (v. 57). Yet a subtler
poet would scarcely have made him say
it here, within the gates of Hades, to
Meleager, whose fate he pities. For
the first part of the adage,—‘It is best
not to be born,’—inevitably suggests
that other which is not spoken,— ‘and
next best, to die soon.’ Contrast the
manner in which the whole γνώμη is in-
troduced by Sophocles (Δ ¢.). As uttered
by the men of Colonus, it is not only a
comment on the trials of Oedipus, but
also a thought which turns the mind
towards his approaching release.

161 προσιδεῖν, aorist, like ἐσιδεῖν
αὐγὰς in Theognis 426 (see last n.), be-
cause the moment of birth is meant: cp.
Zl. 16. 187 f. αὐτὰρ ἐπεὶ δὴ τόν γε μογο-
στόκος Ἐϊλείθυια | ἐξάγαγε πρὸ φόωσδε καὶ
ἠελίου ἴδεν αὐγάς.

162 2. ἀλλ᾽ οὐ γὰρ πράξις κιτιλ. :
Od. το. 202 ἀλλ᾽ οὐ γάρ τις πρῆξις ἐγίγνετο
μυρομένοισιν (‘no effect,’ no good). 7. 24.
524 οὐ γάρ τις πρῆξις πέλεται κρυεροῖο
γόοιο. Bacchyl. fr. 12 τί γὰρ ἐλαφρὸν ἔτ᾽
ἐστὶν ἄπρακτ᾽ ὀδυρόμενον δονεῖν | καρδίαν ;

164 μέλλει, sc. τις, easily supplied
from the indefinite plural partic. in 163.
(Not: ‘a word which is likely to have


1. Me


effect.’)—reXetv is here probably the fut.,
though it might be the pres.: cp. II}.
30 n.

165 7 ῥα, interrogative, as in 77. 5.
4213 Pind. P.1x. 40, £ VIL. 3; Soph. dz.
172 (lyric). Some edd. prefer to write
ἤρα (1.6. ἢ -- ἄρα) in this sense.

167 ἀδμήτα: Hom. hymn. Ven, 82
παρθένῳ ἀδμήτῃ : Aesch. Suppl. 149 (the
prayer of the Danaides to Artemis),
ἀδμάτας ἀδμάτα | ῥύσιος γενέσθω. In 7,
and Od. this form of the word is applied
only to cattle; but παρθένος ἀδμής occurs
in Od. 6. 109, etc.—The Ionic ἢ is kept
here to avoid a double a sound; but cp.
X. 84 ἀδματοι.---θυγάτρων, partitive gen.
with τις in 165.


169 λιπαράν. The notion of the


epithet is that of rich adornment,
splendid surroundings. It may perhaps
be rendered by ‘queenly.’ Cp. Hes.


Th. got δεύτερον ἠγάγετο λιπαρὴν Θέμιν.
Except in Od. 15. 332, where λιπαροὶ
κεφαλάς is said of youths whose heads
are anointed with oil, λιπαρός is never in
Homer the epithet of a person, nor is it
ever so used by Pindar.

θείμαν ἄκοιτιν. Od. 21. 72 ἱέμενοι
γῆμαι θέσθαι τε γυναῖκα. Aesch. 7h. 930
πόσιν αὑτᾷ θεμένα.

Pindar represented Meleager as pro-
posing the marriage with Deianeira to
Heracles, in order that he might defend
her from her dread suitor, Achelous
(schol. 71. 21. 194). See Appendix.

172 2. χλωραύχενα, with the freshness
(the fresh bloom) of youth upon her neck.


20


But, seeing that these str. 5.


[Vv


290 BAKXYAIAOY
bay τῷ ,
4 vyty ἔτι χρυσέας
17515 Κύπριδος θελξιμβρότου.
ἀντ. ε΄. ιλευκώλενε Καλλιόπα,
2 στᾶσον εὐποίητον ἅρμα
> las 7 ,ὔ
3avTov' Δία τε Κρονίδαν
4 3 4 > A ~
+ ὕμνησον Ὀλύμπιον dpyayov θεῶν,
180 ςτόν T ἀκαμαντορόαν
6 ᾿Αλφεόν, Πέλοπός τε Biav,
. ca ¥ > ες ἢ
καὶ Πίσαν, ἔνθ᾽ 6 κλεεννὸς
8. ποσσὶ νικάσας δρόμῳ
ο ἤλθ]εν Φερένικος « ἐς εὐπύργους Συρακόσ-
185 1 σας ᾿έρωνι φέρων


τ εὐδαιμονίας πέταλον.


179 ΟΛΥΜΠΙΟΝΊ w has been written by A® above the second O: a notable instance
of a true reading depraved by this corrector, though metre clearly forbade.


Nightingales, when they begin their song
in the early Greek spring, are called
χλωραύχενες by Simonides (fr. 73), who
meant (I think) ‘with fresh throat,’ z.e.
with throat of fresh, youthful vigour,—in
Keats’s phrase, ‘full-throated.’ Thus for
both poets χλωραύχην implies χλωρός as
an epithet, not of colour, but of young
life; though with diverse applications.
See Appendix.

Aaidvepay, see xv. 23 ff. The bare
mention of her name suffices here: enough
has been said to enforce the truth, χαλε-
mov | θεῶν παρατρέψαι νόον (94 f.).

174 f. χρυσέας, with v, as in XV. 2,
Pind. P. 1v. 4 etc. This ὕ was borrowed
from the lyrists by the dramatists. but
only in lyrics (Soph. O. 7. 157, etc.). In
Homer the » is always long, and such
forms as xpvoéns are to be scanned as
two syllables (with synizesis) ; cp. Z/ 1.
15 χρυσέῳ ἀνὰ σκήπτρῳ.---θελξιμβρότου,
the enchantress, who bewitches mortals.
In /2. 14. 214 ff. is described the
embroidered cestus (κεστὸν ἱμάντα) of
Aphrodite, wherein are ‘all her enchant-
ments’ (OeAxrnpia),-—‘love, desire, and
sweet converse, that steals the wits even
of the wise.’

176 ff. Καλλιόπα is now bidden to
turn from the heroic myth to the im-
mediate theme of the epinikion. In xvuII.
13 she is the Muse who inspires a dithy-
ramb concerning Io. Above, in 13 f.,
the poet is Οὐρανίας...θεράπων, as in VI.


11 Urania again prompts his strain;
while in xv. 3 she moves him to sing of
Heracles. In 111. 3, XI. 2, and ΧΙ. 228
it is Κλειώ who presides over the ode of
victory. Bacchylides uses the names of
these Muses interchangeably, without
assigning a special function to each.
Pindar names Καλλιόπα only once (0.
x. 16), Κλειώ once (Δ΄ 111. 83), and
Οὐρανία nowhere: he usually speaks of
Μοῖσα or Μοῖσαι. In later mythology
Calliope was the Muse of heroic song,
Cleio of history, and Urania of astronomy.

177 στᾶσον «.7.A.: cease to pursue
the story of Heracles, and revert to
Hieron’s victory. The example of an
abrupt return from myth to theme was
set by Pindar in the earliest of his
extant odes, written in 498 B.C., when he
was only twenty; P. X. 51 κώπαν σχάσον
κατιλο: cp. VM. V.15 f. στάσομαι : P. Iv.
(462 B.C.) 247 f. μακρά μοι νεῖσθαι κατ᾽
ἀμαξιτόν: ὥρα yap συνάπτει" καί τινα |
οἶμον ἴσαμι βραχύν: where he adds,
πολλοῖσι δ᾽ ἅγημαι σοφίας ἑτέροις, words
which imply that other lyric poets (like
Bacchylides here) had imitated this trait.

εὐποίητον : Hom. Hymn. Apoll. 265
ἅρματά τ᾽ εὐποίητα.---ἅρμα : the ‘chariot?
is Pindaric, but Pindar always gives it
to ‘the Muses’ collectively, and never
materializes it by such an epithet as
‘well-wrought’: he conceives the poet
as borne along in it (O. Ix. 81 ἐν Μοισᾶν
δίφρῳ) : the singers of old are they οἵ


v]


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


291


a stranger still to golden Aphrodite the enchantress.’


White-armed Calliope, stay thy well-wrought chariot there ;
and now sing Zeus, son of Cronus, Olympian ruler of the gods,—
and. Alpheus, of untiring stream, with mighty Pelops, and Pisa,
where the famed Pherenicus prevailed by his speed in the race,
ere he returned to the embattled walls of Syracuse, bringing
Hieron the leaf of good fortune.


184 f. ἤλθ]εν and és are supplied by Housman (κῦρεν.. ἐς Ludwich).—Zupaxovocas


Ms., K., Herwerden: Συρακόσσας Blass.


χρυσαμπύκων | és δίφρον Μοισᾶν ἔβαινον
(4. τι. 2): the patron τόδ᾽ ἔζευξεν ἅρμα
Πιερίδων (δ. Χ. 65): in a poetic effort,
éoourat... | Μοισαῖον ἅρμα (7. ντι. 61). As
the chariot is an image for the poet’s ὁρμή,
and belongs to the Muses only in their
relation to the poet, it is not attributed
to the Muses, or to any of them, in
ancient art.

180 ἀκαμαντορόαν : cp. 11. 6n.

181 Πέλοπός τε βίαν : cp. vil. ad fin.
ἐν Πέλοπος Φρυγίου | κλεινοῖς ἀέθλοις : X.
24 ἴ. ἐν ζαθέοις | ἁγνοῦ Πέλοπος δαπέδοις.
Hero and god are similarly linked in
Pind. O. x. 26 ff.: ‘The ordinances of
Zeus have moved me to sing of the
peerless festival which Heracles founded
by the ancient tomb of Fée/ogs, with altars
six in number’ (the βωμοὺς ἐξ διδύμους
of O. v. 5, which Heracles dedicated to
six pairs of deities). In the altis at
Olympia, west of the great altar of Zeus at
which the Iamidae divined by ἔμπυρα, was
the precinct called the Πελόπιον, enclosing
the hero’s traditional grave,—a low tumu-
lus of elliptic form. A Doric propylaion,
with three doors, gave access from the
S.w. side. Here sacrifices, the αἱμακουρίαι
of Pind. O. 1. 91, had been offered to the
spirit of Pelops from early times: Pau-
sanias (5. 13 ὃ 2) mentions the yearly
offering of a black ram.

182 IIicav, with ¢: so Pindar (0.
Il. 3, etc.), But Simonides fr. 158 has
Ilion: cp. Theocr. Iv. 29 ποτὶ Πῖσαν.
Euripides (7. 7. 1 and Helen. 393) has
Πῖσαν (so edd.), but in the fifth foot: cp.
“. 7. 824 παρθένον Πισάτιδα, where the
quantity of the + is doubtful. The name
is probably connected with πῖσος (πίνω),
* water-meadow.’—Pisa, the old Achaean
capital of Pisatis, the mythical seat of
Oenomaus and Pelops, seems to have
stood about three-quarters of a mile east
of the temple of the Olympian Zeus.


The site has been conjecturally identified
with a hill near the stream Miraka, an
affluent of the Alpheus. (Cp. E. Curtius,
felop. τι. 51.) Pisa was destroyed in
572 B.c. by the Eleans, who then
succeeded to the presidency of the games.
Pindar uses Πίσα as a poetical synonym
for Olympia: O. 1. 18 Πίσας re καὶ
Φερενίκου 'χάρις : VIII. 9 ὦ Πίσας εὔδενδρον
ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αλφεῴ ἄλσος. So Herodotus (11. 7)
measures the distance from Athens ἔς τε
Πῖσαν καὶ ἐπὶ τὸν νηὸν τοῦ Διὸς τοῦ
᾽Ολυμπίον.

184 f. ἦλθεν. . és εὐπύργους κιτ.λ. We
must insert és, lost after -os through the
recurrence of σε (-OCECETIIYPYLOYC).
ἐὐπύργους is inadmissible, because the ὕ of
éi- is always short before a single con-
sonant. There is, indeed, one apparent
exception, Od. 14. 63 κλῆρόν τε ἐϊμορφόν
τε γυναῖκα, but there the v./. πολυμνηστήν
is doubtless right. The ὕ is long only
when the consonant is doubled, as in
cipperlns, ἐΐρροος, ἐὔσσελμος.---Συρακόσ-
σας. The ms. has ΟΥ̓ΡΑΚΟΥΌΟΘΑΟ, but
the double oo indicates that the Doric
form should be restored by deleting v.
The forms were (1) Doric Συράκοσαι
(Pind. P. 11. 1), or metré gratia Συράκοσ-
σαι: (2) Attic Συράκουσαι: (3) Ionic
Συρήκουσαι.

186 εὐδαιμονίας πέταλον : alluding to
the garland of wild olive (κότινος) which
was the prize at Olympia. The singular
πέταλον is poetically substituted for the
plural, as in Soph. O. C. τοι φύλλον
ἐλαίας. It is a phrase resembling that in
Ill. 92 ff. ὄλβου... ἄνθεα. Victory is the
leaf which εὐδαιμονία puts forth. There
is a like metaphor in 198, πυθμένες
θάλλουσιν ἐσθλῶν. The use of πέταλον,
instead of ἄνθος, is fitting, since the word
is intended to suggest the olive-wreath :
cp. Pind. M. 1. 17 ᾿Ολυμπιάδων φύλλοις
ἐλαιᾶν χρυσέοις : O. VIII. 76 στέφανος


20—2


ant. 5.


BAKXYAIAOY [v


292
ep ρὴ δ᾽ ἀλαθείας χάριν
Col. 12 5 αἰνεῖν, φθόνον ἀμφοτέραισιν
4 χερσὶν ἀπωσάμενον,
19015 εἴ τις εὖ πράσσοι βροτῶν.
ἐπ. ε΄


: Βοιωτὸς ἀνὴρ τᾷδε φών[ησεν, γλυκειᾶν


2 Ἡσίοδος πρόπολος


3 Μουσάν, ὃν «ἂν:


΄ A
ἀθάνατοι τι[μῶσι, τούτῳ


. καὶ βροτῶν φήμαν ἔπ[ σθαι.


195 5 πείθομαι εὐμαρέως


187 ἀλαθείας Blass; AAHOKIAC ms.


comment.—After φώνησεν K. supplies παλαιός :
Pingel, Badvppwv.Housman conj. τάνδε φώνησέν ποτ᾽ ὀμφάν.


Blass) :


191 τᾷδε Wilamowitz, for τάδε: see
Wilam., λιγειᾶν : Bruhn, γλυκειᾶν (so
1992. ὃν


φυλλοφόρων ἀπ᾿ ἀγώνων : Δ. νι. 65 ἀνθεὶ
᾽Ολυμπιάδος.

Some take πέταλον as ‘a voling-leaf,’
Pind. Z vu. 42 μηδὲ Νηρέος θυγάτηρ
νεικέων πέταλα δὶς ἐγγυαλιζέτω | ἄμμιν,
‘place leaves of strife in our hands’
(force us to vote on opposite sides): a
passage which shows that the use of
leaves in voting was known long before
the Syracusans employed the πέταλον
ἐλαίας (Diod. ΧΙ. 86) in the form of
ostracism called πεταλισμός. (‘ Petalism’
was instituted probably ¢. 454 B.C., and
abolished after no long interval: Diod.
ΧΙ. 87: Freeman Szcily 11. 332.) Leaves
were used in the Athenian Βουλή when
the senators voted on the question of
expelling one of their own number:
Aeschin. or. 1 § 111 ἡ βουλὴ καταγνοῦσα
τουτονὶ ἀδικεῖν καὶ ἐκφυλλοφορήσασα.
What, then, would be the exact sense of
εὐδαιμονίας πέταλον Ὁ It has beenrendered,
‘a token of heaven’s favour.’ But that
meaning can be reached only through
the literal one, ‘a szffrage for (Hieron’s)
happiness,’—given by the god who de-
creed the victory. That, however, is too


artificial: it seems also too obscure,
without help from the context. There is
a further objection; viz. that, on the


analogy of φέρειν ψῆφον (suffragium
ferre), φέρων πέταλον should refer to the
voter.

187 ἀλαθείας: the Ms. has ἀλη-
here, but the Doric α is found in all the
five other places where the poet uses the
word (It. 96; VII. 42f.; IX. 85; XII.
204; fr. 10).

Bacchylides refers more than once to
the φθόνος which may put constraint on


a man’s inward sense of merit in others,
and keep him silent, while ‘truth,’
candour, makes the poet speak, out: see
Il. 67 ff.; vill. 85 ff. σὺν δ᾽ ἀλαθείᾳ
βροτῶν κτιλος XI. 199 ff. εἰ μή τινα
θερσιεπὴς | φθόνος βιᾶται, | αἰνείτω σοφὸν
ἄνδρα | σὺν δίκᾳ... [ ἃ δ᾽ ἀλαθεία φιλεῖ |
νικᾶν K.7-X. His tone is that of one who
praises because it is the plain duty of a
fair mind.

188 f£. ἀμφοτέραισιν χερσίν, ‘with
might and main.’ Cp. the proverbial
phrase, οὐ τῇ ἑτέρᾳ ληπτέον (Plat. Soph.
226 α).--ἀπωσάμενον. Housman would
write ἀπωσαμένους, as el follows. The
last syllable of the verse is, indeed, long
in all the strictly corresponding verses
(54, 69, 94, 109, 134, 149, 174). Verses
14 and 29, though holding the same
place, are, as we saw, metrically peculiar
in having an additional syllable: still,
ἐθέλει δέ in v. 14 suggests that here also
the final syllable could be azcefs. Asa
matter of idiom, the singular seems here
more natural than the plural.

190 εἴ τις εὖ πράσσοι, after χρὴ
(187). In general statements or maxims
the present indicative is sometimes thus
followed by εἰ with the optative, where
we should rather expect a general
supposition expressed by ef with pres.
indic., or ἐάν with pres. subjunctive.
Od. 14. 56 ξεῖν᾽, οὔ μοι θέμις ἔστ, οὐδ᾽ εἰ
κακίων σέθεν ἔλθοι, | ξεῖνον ἀτιμῆσαι.
Pind. P. ΝΠ. 13 κέρδος δὲ φίλτατον, |
ἑκόντος εἴ τις ἐκ δόμων φέροι. Similarly
when the condition is contained in a
relative clause: Soph. Azt. 666 ἀλλ᾽ ὃν
πόλις στήσειε, τοῦδε χρὴ κλύειν.

191—194 Hieron’s success and glory


Υ]


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


293


We must give praise, for truth’s sake, and thrust envy away
from us with might and main, if any man should prosper.


Thus spake the Boeotian, Hesiod, servant of the sweet
Muses: ‘Whomsoever the immortals honour, the good report


of men goes with him also,’


Readily am I won


“ἂν: «τιμῶσι τούτῳ... ἕπεσθαι Housman: and Wilamowitz (but with κείνῳ instead


of τούτῳ).
χρῆναι).


So also Blass*, but with χρῆμεν after τιμῶσι (Pingel having conjectured
195 πείθομαι] πειθόμεθ᾽ Blass?.


are so manifestly given dy the gods,
that envy is put to silence, and men’s
applause cannot be withheld. The poet
constantly refers Hieron’s victories to the
favour of heaven: cp. above, 36: Iv.
I—3, and more especially 18—z20, τί
φέρτερον ἢ θεοῖσιν | φίλον ἐόντα κ.τ.λ.

Βοιωτὸς ἀνήρ. Virgil’s Ascracus senex
(Zel. 6. 70); so Homer is Χῖος ἀνήρ
(Simonid. fr. 85. 2) ; Simonides, ἀοιδὸς ὁ
Κήϊος (Theocr. Xvi. 44); Pindar, Dircaeus
cygnus (Hor. C. Iv. 2. 25); Alcaeus,
Lesbius civis (id. C. 1. 32. 5); Anacreon,
ὁ pli κύκνος (Antipater Sidon. in Azth.
7. 30).

τᾷδε, ‘on this wise’: cp. Soph. 2.
643 τῇδε yap κἀγὼ φράσω (where, how-
ever, ‘on this wise’ means ‘darkly,’—
not, ‘in these terms’): O. C. 1300 κἀπὸ
μαντέων ταύτῃ κλύω (‘and so 1 hear’...).
The Ms. τάδε cannot be sound, if in 151
μίνυνθα is (as it seems to be) corrupt:
see n. there.

φώνησεν. All Dorian dialects have
-how, -noa in fut. and rst aor. of verbs in
-éw. In Pindar WV. v. 44 Boeckh read
φίλασ᾽ (as also in other places of Pindar) ;
but recent editors agree in giving φίλησ᾽.
In O. xu. 67 W. Christ and others give
φώνασε, though φώνησε in V. x. 76, and
φωνήσαις in 7. ν. 51. The form φωνάω,
of which ἐφώνασα would be the Doric
aorist, does not seem to occur, though
it would be the natural form for the verb
from φωνά.

The word lost after φώνησεν may have
been an epithet of Moved» (such as
λυκειᾶν or λιγειᾶν). Both the poet’s
style and the rhythm of the passage
suggest this as probable.

ὃν ἂν ἀθάνατοι «.7.A. The supple-
ment given in the text seems the best
(see cr. n.). τούτῳ is not grammatically
indispensable, since a dat. could be
understood (cp. Soph. Ant. 35 f., ὃς ἂν
τούτων τι δρᾷ, | φόνον πρόκεισθαι) : but it
makes the sentence clearer; and the
emphasis is fitting here.—In Hesiod’s


extant poems and fragments there is
nothing nearer to this sentiment than the
passage in 7heog. 81 ff., ὅντινα τιμήσωσι
Διὸς κοῦραι μεγάλοιο | ,... | τοῦ μὲν ἐπὶ
γλώσσῃ γλυκερὴν χείουσιν ἐέρσην, | ...οἱ
δέ νυ λαοὶ | πάντες ἐς αὐτὸν ὁρῶσι κ.τ.λ. :
where he says that the Muses give
winning eloquence to kings, and fame to
poets. But Theognis v. 169 is exactly
apposite: ὃν δὲ θεοὶ τιμῶσ᾽, ὃν καὶ
μωμεύμενος αἰνεῖ, 1.6.) a man, though
inclined to blame, is constrained to praise.
I cannot think that Bacchylides was
alluding to Hes. Zheog. 81 ff. Refer-
ences of this kind to other poets are, as
a rule, verbally close: see, ¢.g., Pind. ἢ
v. 67 Λάμπων δὲ μελέταν | ἔργοις
ὀπάζων ᾿Ησιόδον μάλα τιμᾷ τοῦτ᾽ ἔπος
(alluding to Hes. Of. 410 μελέτη δέ τε
ἔργον ὀφέλλει). The saying may have
occurred in some lost passage of Hesiod,
—possibly the source of Theognis 169:
or our poet may have meant the verse
of Theognis, and named Hesiod by mis-
take.

195 f. πείθομαι «.7.A. ‘Readily do
I consent to send’... This is a phrase,
like many in Pindar, intimating that the
epinikion was written by invitation. Cp.
O.X111. 96 Μοίσαις yap ἀγλαοθρόνοις ἑκὼν
᾽Ολιγαιθίδαισίν τ᾽’ ἔβαν ἐπίκουρος : P. V.
43 f. ἑκόντι τοίνυν πρέπει | νόῳ τὸν εὐερ-
γέταν ὑπαντιάσαι.---εὐκλέα, scanned ——:
Soph. O. Z. 161 has (θρόνον) εὐκλέα
(-~~). In Pind. P. ΧΙΙ. 24 εὐκλεᾶ (acc.
sing., for εὐκλεέα) is -~ —. εὐκλέα γλῶσ-
σαν means ‘an utterance fraught with
glory’ (for Hieron): cp. Pind. 1. v1. 29
ἐπέων... οὖρον | εὐκλεῖα {-- εὐκλεέα) : O. 11.
go εὐκλέας ὀϊστούς (‘shafts of song, winged
by fame’).—For γλῶσσαν, cp. Pind. O.
IX. 44 φέροις δὲ Πρωτογενείας | ἄστει
γλῶσσαν (‘lend thy voice’ to Opus): δὴ
IV. 86 xeivos...€uav | γλῶσσαν εὑρέτω
κελαδῆτιν, ‘Let him (in the shades) be-
come aware that my song is resounding.’
So here the γλῶσσα is a song sent from
Ceos.


epode 5.


[v, VI


lod A ΄ὔ
6. εὐκλέα κελεύθου γλῶσσαν οὐκ ἐκτὸς δίκας


OAYMITTIA


204 BAKXYAIAOY
7 πέμπειν ἹἹέρωνι" τόθεν yap
8. πυθμένες θάλλουσιν ἐσθλ[ av,
9 τοὺς ὁ μεγιστοπάτωρ
20010 Ζεὺς ἀκινήτους ἐν εἰρήνᾳ φυλάσσοι.
VI.
AAXQNI KEIQI
<TIAIAI> STAAIEI
στρ. α΄. Λάχων Διὸς μεγίστον


λάχε


΄ ΄
φέρτατον πόδεσσι


κῦδος ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αλφεοῦ προχόαῖς, [κάλ᾽ αὔξων


δι ὅσσα πάροιθεν


5 ἀμπελοτρόφον Kéov
+ a > 3 ,
ἄεισάν ποτ᾽ ᾿Ολυμπίᾳ


196 After γλῶσσαν only the letter o remains, the rest of the verse having been torn
off.—ovx ἐκτὸς δίκας J. (1898), and (independently) A. Drachmann: οὐκ ἐκτὸς θεῶν


Blass: οὐκ ἐκτὸς προεὶς Jurenka: οἰακοστρόφον K. :


Jurenka, Blass: ἐσθλοί K.
supplied by Palmer.


200 φυλάσσοι Wilamowitz, Platt.


οἰωνὸν καλᾶς Platt. 198 ἐσθλῶν


φυλάσσει was


οὐκ ἐκτὸς (κελεύθου) δίκας : the poet’s
strain of praise has not wandered from
the path of justice. Cp. xX. 26 δίκας
κέλευθον: and for ἐκτὸς, 1x. 51 f. τί
μακρὰν γλῶσσαν ἰθύσας ἐλαύνω | ἐκτὸς
ὁδοῦ; Both Bacchylides and Pindar fre-
quently claim that their praise is in
accord with δίκα: XII. 201 f. alveirw
σοφὸν ἀνδρα | σὺν δίκᾳ : X. 123 f. δικαίας
ὅστις ἔχει φρένας εὑρήσει κι-τ.λ. : Pind. P.
VIII. 7of. κώμῳ μὲν ἁδυμελεῖ | Δίκα παρέ-
στακε: MV. II. 29 ἕπεται δὲ λόγῳ δίκας
ἄωτος, ἐσλὸς (acc. pl.) αἰνεῖν.

197 f£. τόθεν, ‘thence,’ referring to
εὐκλέα γλῶσσαν : by means of the just
praise of the poet. Αβθάλλουσιν indicates,
πυθμένες ἐσθλῶν are (literally) ‘the stocks
or stems of happy fortunes’ (ἐσθλά), here
compared to plants or trees. The just
praise of the poet is as the dew which
makes them flourish. The poet confers
a glory which is the flower and crown of
established prosperity. (For the diction,
cp. Aesch. Suppl. 104 f. ved fee πυθμὴν |. .
τεθαλώς, the old stock puts forth new
buds and blossoms.) Pindar has a like
thought in MV. ν ΠΙ. 40 ff., αὔξεται δ᾽ dperd,


XAwpais ἐέρσαις ws ὅτε Sévdpeov dace, | ἐν
σοφοῖς ἀνδρῶν ἀερθεῖσ᾽ ἐν δικαίοις τε
πρὸς ὑγρὸν | αἰθέρα: ‘As, watered by
fresh dews, a tree shoots upward, so
grows the fame of manly worth, when it
is lifted towards the liquid air of heaven
by masters of song who give just praise.’
For ἐσθλῶν, cp. IV. 20 μοῖραν ἐσθλῶν:
XVI. 132 ἐσθλῶν. τύχαν : Hom. hymn.
Cer. 225 θεοὶ δέ τοι ἐσθλὰ πόροιεν.

199 f. μεγιστοπάτωρ = μέγιστος πατήρ:
SO XVIII. 21 μεγιστυάνασσα: Soph. Ph.
1338 Ἕλενος ἀριστόμαντις.--ἀκινήτους :
the πυθμένες of Hieron’s ἐσθλά are
already well-set; the prayer is that they
may never be uprooted.—etprjva : for the
form, see on 11. 1. There is an allusion
to the security gained for Sicily .by the
victory at Himera four years earlier
(480 B.c.). Cp. XII. 188 f. (of Εὐνομία)
ἄστεά T..| ἐν eipiyg φυλάσσει. Here
φυλάσσοι is preferable. Find. O. vit.
ends with a like wish,...dajpavrov ἄγων
βίοτον | αὐτούς τ᾽ ἀέξοι καὶ πόλιν (sc. Ζεύς) :
while O. xu. and M. 1x. end with a
direct prayer to Zeus.


Vv, VI] ETTINIKOI 295
to send Hieron the song that tells forth his fame, without
swerving from the path of justice; for by such praise it is that
happy fortunes, once firmly planted, flourish: and may Zeus, the


supreme father, guard them steadfast in peace.


VI.


For Lachon of Ceos, victor in the foot-race for boys
at Olympia. (452 B.C.)


Lachon has won from great Zeus surpassing glory by his
speed, where the waters of Alpheus seek the sea; enhancing
those goodly deeds for which ere now vine-nurturing Ceos
has been sung at Olympia,


vi. The title has been added by A? in the left margin. ΠΑΙΔῚ is inserted by
Blass, as the Oxyrhynchus fragment of the Olympic register shows that Lachon’s
victory was in the παίδων στάδιον. 3 ΑΛΦΕΙΟΥ͂ A: corr. K.—After προχοαῖσ
K. supplies -ἰ σεμναῖς (and so Jurenka), Housman ἀέθλων, Blass -ἰ νικῶν (with a full


stop): J., κάλ᾽ αὔξων.


VI. 1£. Λάχων. Inthe Oxyrhynchus
fragment of the Olympic register the entry
referring to this victory gives the name as
Λάκων. But Λάχων is confirmed by the
agonistic inscription of Ceos (see Intro-
duction to Ode 1. § 3), where [A]éxwv
᾿Αριστομένεος παίδων occurs (twice) among
the Nemean victors. The origin of such
short names as Adywy and Λάχης is illus-
trated by the Attic Λαχέμοιρος (C. 7. A.
1. No. 1512 ὁ 2add.): cp. Fick-Benseler,
Griech. Personennamen, Ὁ. 184.—The
play on words in Δάχων.. λάχε is not
sportive; it brings out the omen of the
name, in this case a happy one. So
Pindar fr. 105 (of Hieron), ζαθέων ἱερῶν
ὁμώνυμε πάτερ. Cp. Soph. Az. 430f., n.
-Διὸς.. λάχε, 1.6. παρὰ Διός : cp. Soph.
Ο. T. 580 πάντ᾽ ἐμοῦ κομίζεται: 1. 1163
ἐδεξάμην δέ του.

3f. ᾿Αλφεοῦ. The distance of Olym-
pia from the mouth of the Alpheus was
in ancient times about eight miles, and is
now about ten. But the poet’s phrase,
ἐπὶ mpoxoais, is correct in a broad sense.
Olympia is near the point where the
Alpheus, descending from the Arcadian
highlands, enters 6n the last stage of its
course amidst the sandy levels near the
coast, and then passes between lagoons
to the sea.

After TIIPOXOAIC the ms. has lost
three syllables, ~--. Compare 11. 6 ff.,
referring to the Cean victor Argeios :-—
καλῶν δ᾽ ἀνέμνασεν, ὅσ᾽ ἐν κλεεννῷ | αὐχένι


([)ισθμοῦ... ἐπεδείξαμεν : ‘he has renewed
the memory of αὐ those goodly feats which
we (Ceans) have displayed’ at the Isthmus.
So, here also, ὅσσα clearly refers to the
whole series of victories won by Ceans in
the national games. Lachon had now
gained a signal success at the chief festival.
(1) The poet may conceivably have said
that this victory was the most brilliant of
all which had brought fame to Ceos: if
so, we might read προχοαῖς, ἀέθλων
(Housman), or προχοαῖσι, πάντων (the
genitive, with either word, depending on
φέρτατον). (2) Or, as is perhaps more
probable, Lachon may have been de-
scribed as enhancing the previous glories
of Ceos. That sense would be given by
Kad’ αὔξων, where καλά would have the
same meaning as in 11. 6.—See Appendix.

5 ἀμπελοτρόφον. The word πολυάμ-
πελος, traceable in frag. 7 (K.), was also
doubtless applied to Ceos. Coins of that
island sometimes bore a grape (Bréndsted,
Voyages 1. pl. XXVII., quoted by Jurenka
here).

6 ff. Join ᾿Ολυμπίᾳ with ἄεισαν, not
with κρατεῦσαν. These tributes of song
were paid by young men of Ceos at
Olympia; the occasion would be a festal
procession, escorting the Cean victor to
the temple of the Olympian Zeus, where
he would give thanks; or it might be
a banquet. The formal ἐπινίκιον was
more usually sung after the victor’s re-
turn to his home.


str. 2.


296


BAKXYAIAOY


[vI, VII


πύξ τε Kal στάδιον κρατεῦ-
4 9 ΓΔ
σαν] στεφάνοις ἐθείρας


στρ. β΄.


ὦ "ἢ
νεανίαι βρύοντες.


το σὲ δὲ νῦν ἀναξιμόλπον
3 sf A ν ’ὔ
Οὐρανίας ὕμνος ἕκατι νίκ[ ας


᾿Αριστομένειον


ὦ ποδάνεμον τέκος,
γεραίρει προδόμοις ἀοι-
15 αἷς, ὅτι στάδιον κρατή-
σας Κέον εὐκλέϊξας.


ΝΙ].
ΤΩΙ ΑΥ̓ΤΩΙ


Ὦ λιπαρὰ θύγατερ Χρόνου τε «La
Νυκτός, σὲ πεντήκοντα μίῆνες ἄγαγον
ἑκκαιδεκάταν ἐν ᾿Ολυμπί ίᾳ φανεῖσαν,


Col. 13


ᾷ  jap[’ ᾿Αλφειῷ Πέλοπός τε τάφῳ χαίρ-


5 ov |ros αἱμ[ακουρίαυις πέπρωται
κρίνειν τα[χυτᾶτά τε] λαιψηρῶν ποδῶν
Ἕλλασι καὶ γυίων ἀρισταλκὲς σθένος"
ᾧ δὲ σὺ πρεσβύτατον νείμῃς γέρας
νίκας ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώποισιν εὐδοξος κέκλη-


10 ται καὶ πολυζήλωτος.


᾿Αρ[ἱστομένει]ον


18 IIOAANEMON] O has been deleted after A.
VII. The title has been written over an erasure of three lines, by A}, in the left


margin.


1 ΛΙΠΑΡΑ corrected from AITAPO.
(ἁμέραν Blass): μ[ηνῶν φθιμένων Jurenka.


2 μ[ῆνες ἄγαγον J.
4- 11 Column xu. ends with verse 3.


Bpvovres denotes the luxuriance of
leaves or flowers in the wreaths. Cp. XII.
69 f. πανθαλέων στεφάνοισιν | ἀνθέων
χαίταν ἐρεφθείς. Eubulus (a poet of the
middle comedy), in his Κυβενταί fr. 1. 6,
describes a wreathed drinking-cup as
κισσῷ κάρα βρύουσαν.

10£. ἀναξιμόλπου : cp. XVI. 66 ὀναξι-
βρόντας : XIX. 8 dvaélados. So Pindar
O.11. 1 ἀναξιφόρμιγγες ὕμνοι.---Οὐρανίας :
see n. on V. 176.

12 f. A aren ulvadi «τέκος :
on ν. 71.

14 προδόμοις. Aesch. fr. 388 'Βκάτη |
τῶν βασιλείων πρόδομος μελάθρων. The
ode in honour of a victor was sometimes


see 1.


sung before the doors of his house: Pind.
I.VIL. 1—4 Κλεάνδρῳ τις... παρὰ πρόθυρον
ἰὼν | ἀνεγειρέτω κῶμον : Ven. 1. 19 ἔσταν
δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ αὐλείαις θύραις.

16 εὐκλέϊξας. The Doric aor.; so
X. 87 dolage: XVI. 129 παιάνιξαν. Cp.
Tyrtaeus 12. 24 ἄστυ éixdetoas: Simo-
nides 125. 2 πατρίδ᾽ ἐπευκλεΐσας.


VII. 1- 8 λιπαρὰ, ‘resplendent’ (cp.
ν. τόρ n.). The ‘daughter of Time and
Night’ is Day: Hes. Theog. t24 Νυκτὸς
δ᾽ air’ Αἰθήρ τε καὶ Ἡμέρη ἐξεγένοντο.

πεντήκοντα (μῆνες) are the fifty lunar
months which have elapsed since the last
preceding festival at Olympia. There


VI, VII] ETTINIKOI 297
as foremost in boxing or in foot-race, by youths crowned with


luxuriant wreaths.


And to thee now, son of Aristomenes, thou whose feet are
swift as the wind, the hymn of Urania queen of song renders
honour for thy victory, in strains chanted before thy house;
because by thy triumph in the foot-race thou hast brought
renown to Ceos.


VII.


For the same.


Radiant daughter of Time and Night, the fifty months have
brought thee, sixteenth day of the month at Olympia; [thee, to
whom by the Alpheus, near the tomb of Pelops who rejoices in
blood-offerings, it has been allotted] to give judgment for the
Greeks on pre-eminence in speed of foot and strength of limb.
To whomsoever thou awardest the foremost prize of victory, his
name is thenceforth famous and admired among men.

Column ΧΙ]. is lost; but a few syllables, belonging to the ends of verses in the upper


third of it, remain in the left margin of col. x1v. Verses 4-11 have been put together
by Blass from several small fragments; and, of these, verses 6-11 have been com-


bined with the endings of verses left from col. XIII.


Wackernagel.


6 τα[χυτᾶτά re] Platt,


was an Olympic cycle of 99 lunar months,
making up eight years. The interval
between two Olympic festivals was al-
ternately one of 4y lunar months and one
of 50 such months. See schol. Pind. O.
Ill. 5 γίνεται δὲ 6 ἀγὼν ποτὲ μὲν διὰ τεσσα-
ράκοντα ἐννέα μηνῶν, ποτὲ δὲ διὰ πεντή-
κοντα. Flence the festival fell sometimes
in the Olympian (or Elean) month ᾿Α πολ-
λώνιος, sometimes in the month Παρθένιος.

In an old legend of Elis, the 50
lunar months of this cycle appear as fifty
daughters borne by Selene to Endymion
(Paus. 5. 1 ὃ 3).

ἑκκαιδεκάταν. The Olympian festival
began on the r:th day of the month,
and ended on the 16th: schol. Pind. O.
Iv. 14 ἐπὶ πέντε ἡμέρας ἐγένετο τὰ ᾿Ολύμ-
mia, ἀπὸ ἑνδεκάτης μέχρις ἑκκαιδεκάτης.
On the 16th, the last day, the prizes
were given to the victors; processions,
sacrifices and banquets took place.

This exordium suggests that the ode
may (like Pindar’s eighth Olympian) have
been sung at Olympia.

4 f. The letters TOCAIM in v. 5


recall Pind. O. 1. gof. viv δ᾽ ἐν αἱμακου-
plats ἀγλααῖσι “μέμικται | ᾿Αλφεοῦ πόρῳ
κλιθείς, ‘and now (Pelops) hath part in
the honour of blood-offerings at his grave
by Alpheus’ stream.’ Hence the supple-
ment which I suggest above.

6—10 κρίνειν κιτ.λ. There isa general
parallelism between this passage and
Pindar Ὁ. 1. 95 ff., ἵνα ταχυτὰς ποδῶν
ἐρίζεται | ἀκμαΐ τ᾽ ἰσχύος θρασύπονοι' ὁ
νικῶν δὲ λοιπὸν ἀμφὶ βίοτον | ἔχει μελιτόεσ-
σαν εὐδίαν | ἀέθλων γ᾽ ἕνεκεν.

ἀρισταλκὲς σθένος : note the adj. com-
pounded with a noun (ἀλκή) akin in sense
to σθένος: cp. Soph. O.7. 518 βίου...τοῦ
μακραίωνος: 77. 791 δυσπάρευνον λέκτρον.

ἐπ᾿ ἀνθρώποισιν, ‘among men’: cp.
Soph. 77. 356 τἀπὶ Λυδοῖς (λατρεύματα),
his servitude in Lydia (nearly the same as
ἐν Λυδοῖς 76. 248). This use of ἐπί with
dat., though rare, seems tenable. Blass
joins νίκας én’, z.2., ‘on the occasion
of victory’; a phrase which seems some-
what weak here. νίκας would naturally
go with γέρας.

᾿Αριστομένειον : VI. 12 n.


str. 2.


298


BAKXYAIAOY


{VII


νῦν γ] ἐκόσμηϊσας ore|pdr[oror Λάχω να


παῖδα


. . . .


* *


. . . . ομῳ
* *


Πυθῶνά τε μηλοθύταν


Col. 14 40


e < a ἊΨ Fi
ὑμνέων Νεμέαν τε καὶ Ἰσθμόν"


a δ᾽ 3 ΄ ΄
γᾷ επισκήπτων χέρα


κομπάσομαι"


(5)


S >
σὺν aha-

7 Ν nA , »
θείᾳ δὲ πᾶν λάμπει χρέος


οὔτις ἀνθρώπων Kal Ἕλλα-
45 vas ἐν ἄλικι χρόνῳ
en aN > , λεῦ-
παῖς ἐὼν ἀνήρ τε πί.


νας ἐδέξατο νίκας.


ὦ Led κεραυνεγχές, κα[ὶ ἐπ᾽ dpyv |podiva


ὄχθαισιν ᾿Αλφειοῦ τέλεσσ[ας μεγ]αλοκλέας
80 θεοδότους εὐχάς, περὶ κ[ρατί 7 6 παΐ σσας
γλαυκὸν Αἰτωλίδος


avenue ἐλαίας


(15)


ἐν Πέλοπος Φρυγίον
panes
κλεινοῖς ἀέθλοις.


11 νῦν γ᾽] Blass.—éxéoun[oas στε]φάν[οισι Ewald, Bruhn, Housman, Wilamowitz.
14 OMOQI] These letters were the last of the 11th verse in the lost col. ΧΠΙ.


After that v., about 24 more were needed to complete col. x11.


Blass finds vestiges


of 14 of these in some minute fragments which he prints here,—mostly single


words, or parts of two words.
Ἕλλανας Blass.


I give them in the Appendix.
46 πίλεῦνας Blass: ποσσὶ πλεῦνας Sandys, Jurenka.


44. καθ᾽
48 «afi


11 νῦν γ᾽, though only conjectural,
derives support from VIII. 25 Αὐτομήδει
νῦν ye νικάϊσαντί νιν δαίμων ἔδωκεν.

89 ξ. ἸΠυθῶνά te. After the verse (no.
14 of the ode, and no. τι in the lost
column x1II of the papyrus) which ended
with the letters opt, 24 verses (15—38)
have been lost: see cr.n. The poet is
now singing (ὑμνέων) of Delphi, Nemea,
and Isthmus. The reference is doubtless
to successes gained by Lachon before his
victory at Olympia.—pydodray: an epi-
thet of altars in Eur. ἡ. 7. 1116. At
Delphi those who wished to consult the
oracle offered sacrifice before entering
the adyton: id. Jon 229 πάριτ᾽ ἐς θυμέλας"
ἐπὶ δ᾽ ἀσφάκτοις | μήλοισι δόμων μὴ πάριτ᾽
ἐς μυχόν. So Pind. P. ΠΙ. 27 μηλοδόκῳ
Πυθώνι.


418, γᾷ δ᾽ ἐπισκήπτων: see V. 421.
—kopmdcopat. The passive of this verb
occurs in classical poetry; but is there
any other instance of the middle? For
the fut., cp. X. 24 φάσω: Soph. AZ.
422 f. ἔπος | ἐξερῶ μέγα: Pind. O. Iv. 17
οὐ ψεύδεϊ τέγξω λόγον.---σὺν ἀλαθείᾳ (a
phrase which recurs in VIII. 85): it is
only ‘with the aid of truth,’—z.e. by
speaking out frankly,—that any matter
(xpéos) can be set in a clear, full light
(λάμπει). He means that anything short
of the strong statement which follows
would be less than just to this victor’s
merits. Cp. n. on v. 187 f.

44f. It is doubtful how the gap in
the ms. between K at the end of v. 44
and NAC at the beginning of v. 45 should’
be filled. There is no clue to the exact


vit] ETINIKOI


299
And now thou hast given the honours of the wreath to Lachon,
son of Aristomenes...


* * * * * *


...singing of Pytho, where sheep are sacrificed, and of Nemea,
and of the Isthmus. And laying my hand on the earth as a
witness, I will make this vaunt ;—for only by the voice of truth
can anything be set in a full light,—no one among the Greeks,
as boy or as man, has gained more victories in an equal time.

O Zeus, whose spear is the thunder-bolt, on the banks of
silver-eddying Alpheus also hast thou fulfilled his prayers, for
his great fame, by gift divine; and hast set upon his brow the
gray wreath of the Aetolian olive, in the glorious games of
Phrygian Pelops.


ἐπ᾽ ἀργυ])ροδίνα Blass, taking podwa from frag. 17 (K.). 49 After TEAECC
in the. MS. there is a lacuna equal to about 11 or 12 letters, and then C, the
final letter of the last word in the verse. τέλεσσον K.: so Jurenka, adding <és
μέγιστόν οἱ yépa>s, which is too long for the space. τέλεσας Blass, adding μεγΎ]α-
AoxAdas (which fits the gap) from frag. 17 K. 50 περὶ κ[ρατί τ᾽ ὄδ]πα[σσα]ς
Blass, taking πα from frag. 17 K.—zepl κ[ρᾶτά τέ οἱ τίθει] K.: so Jurenka, but with
θές instead of τίθει.


52 dvénu’] ANAH A: μ᾽ added above the line by A’.


number of letters lost after K, nor to
the quantity of NAC. To the obvious
k[Acev]vds it might be objected that its
position in the sentence is awkward. I
prefer Blass’s x[a@’ “EAAa]vas, though
without regarding it as certain. The
sense (‘among the Greeks’) might be
illustrated from Pind. 0.1. 120 πρόφαντον
σοφίᾳ καθ᾽ “Ελλανας.

ἐν ἅλικι χρόνῳ. ἧλιξ = ‘of the same
age’: ἦλιξ χρόνος here is ‘a time of the
same duration,’ ‘an equal space of time.’

46 f. παῖς ἐὼν ἀνήρ τε, ‘whether as
boy ov as man.’ Following οὔτις ἀνθρώ-
πων, this is a short equivalent for οὔτε
mais ἐὼν οὔτ᾽ ἀνήρ. The phrase in Aesch.
Eum. 521 ff. rls... πόλις βροτός τε (“who
—be it city or be it man—?’) is so far
similar that re there marks the second of
two alternative cases included under τίς
(an interrogative implying a negative),
and must therefore, in our idiom, be
rendered by ‘or.’ But the irregular co-
ordination of ἤ and τε is special to that
passage.—Note that the words here
could also mean, ‘as boy azd man.’
This would imply that the subject of
ἐδέξατο was no longer a boy. (See In-

~ troduction to the Ode.)

48- 50 kepavveyxés: a word found
only here: but cp. Pind. 2, Iv. 194
ἐγχεικέραυνον Ziva.— καὶ ἐπ᾽ ἀργυροδίνα.
The fragment (17 K.) which gives the
endings of 48 and 49, and the letters wa


of ὄπασσας in 50, has been rightly
pieced on here by Blass. It cannot be
an accident that it helps three consecutive
verses. And the word μεγ]αλοκλέας,
while suiting the sense, also fits the gap
in 49.

TEAECC in the Ms. was probably
τέλεσσας. Blass writes τέλεσας: but
there is at least a presumption in favour
of the oo, and there is nothing to show
that it is metrically inadmissible. (We
have no strophic test here.)—The alter-
native τέλεσσον would imply that the
athlete concerned had not yet been vic-
torious at Olympia, and therefore that
the ode to which these verses belong was
distinct from Ode vii. (See Introduction.)

τέλεσσας.. εὐχάς : ‘thou hast fulfilled
his prayers, for his great glory (peya-
Aokdéas), by gift divine (θεοδότους).᾽
εὐχάς here are the things prayed for, viz.,
victorious feats in the games. Cp. Pind.
7. τν. 23 θεοδότων ἔργων.

51 γλαυκόν: Pind. O. Ul. 13 ἀμφὶ
κόμαισι βάλῃ γλαυκόχροα κόσμον ἐλαίας.
--ΟΑΟἰτωλίδος. The Actolian Oxylus was
one of the leaders of the Heracleidae at
their return, and received Elis. Hence
the Eleans are poetically called Aetolians.
Her. vill. 73 Δωριέων μὲν πολλαί τε καὶ
δόκιμοι πόλεες, Αἰτωλών δὲ Ἦλις μούνη.
Cp. Pind. O. 111. 12 ἀτρεκὴς ᾿Ελλανοδίκας
.. Αἰτωλὸς ἀνήρ.


300


VIII.


BAKXYAIAOY


[VIII


(IX. ]


AYTOMHAEI ΦΛΕΙΑΣΙΩΙ


TTENTAOAQI


στρ. α΄.


ΝΕΛΛΕΑ


: Δόξαν, ὦ χρυσαλάκατοι Χάριτες,
ΧΡ


2 πεισίμβροτον δοίητ᾽, ἐπεὶ
3 Μουσᾶν ye (F )ιοβλεφάρων θεῖος προφάτας
«εὔτυκος Φλειοῦντά τε καὶ Νεμεαίου
5 Ζηνὸς εὐθαλὲς πέδον
€ - Ψ .-“
6 ὑμνεῖν, ὅθι μηλοδαΐκταν
7 θρέψεν ἃ λευκώλενος
ὃ Ἧρα περικλειτῶν ἀέθλων


9 πρῶτον Ἡρακλεῖ βαρύφθογγον λέοντα.


ἀντ. α΄. 10 κεῖ[θι φοι]νικάσπιδες ἡμίθεοι


VIII. The title written by 448 in the left margin.
wrote N instead of M in πεισίμβροτον:


correct it (by 3)?
Κι: Μουσᾶν ye Blass}, -τοι Β].3


2 The first hand


but the N has been retouched as if to
Cp. v. 33.—ézet Blass and others: ἔπει K.
6 ὅθι K.: ὅτι MS.


3 Μουσᾶν τε MS.,
10 κε[ῖθι φοι]νικάσπιδες


VIII. 1- 8 δόξαν... πεισίμβροτον, the
‘repute’ that is gained by a poet who
‘ persuades’ his hearers, Ζ.6.,) carries them
with him, wins their favour. In Aesch.
Cho. 362 the Laurentian ms. has πισίμ-
βροτον, where the editors rightly give
πεισιβρότῳ (epithet of βάκτρῳ, the sceptre
that wins reverence). If that was our
poet’s source for the rare word, this ode
would be later than 458 B.c.: but we
cannot assume it. For the form with
euphonic p inserted, cp. ἀλεξίμβροτος,
μελησίμβροτος, ὄμβριμος, etc.

χρυσαλάκατοι. The ἠλακάτη, ‘distaff,’
is the attribute of a woman; in the case of
a goddess, it is of gold. The epithet is
general, not distinctive of the Charites
as such. Pindar gives it to Amphitrite
(O. vi. 104 f.), the Nereids (V. v. 36),
Latona (4. vi. 37 f.), etc. In the par-
ticular case of Artemis, however, the
sense is different (cp. X. 38 n.).

ἘΠΕῚ in τ. 2 is probably ἐπεί. If so,
the τέ after Movoav in 3 must be cor-
rected. (1) ἐπεί ye, a strengthened ἐπεί,
is not uncommon: in ἐπεί... γε, however,
rye normally emphasizes the word next
before it, as in //. 1. 352, μῆτερ, ἐπεί μ᾽
érexés γε μινυνθάδιόν περ ἐόντα : Hes.


Theog. 171 ἐπεὶ πατρός γε δυσωνύμονυ
οὐκ ἀλεγίζω. Here, ἃ stress could scarcely
fall on Μουσᾶν. (2) ἐπεί... τοι is also
frequent (Soph. 7%. 320f., etc.), and roe
might become τε through loss of « before
to-: but the sententious ro: (little used by
this poet) is less suitable here than in
1. 58 or VIII. 82.

The alternative for ἐπεί is to write
ἔπει (depending on δοίητ᾽), the poet’s
‘word’ or utterance. Cp. Pind. 7. IL.
66 βουλαὶ δὲ πρεσβύτεραι | ἀκίνδυνον ἐμοὶ
Feros σὲ ποτὶ πάντα λόγον | ἐπαινεῖν
παρέχοντι. Then the τε after Μουσᾶν
in 3 must be changed to τὸ (as Hous-
man proposed, assuming Αοβλεφάρων)ὴ :
or to ὅτ᾽ (as I formerly suggested, as-
suming ἐοβλεφάρων). For ὅτ᾽ it may be
said that, if it had been written as ὅτε
without elision (on an assumption of 47),
that would help to account for the actual
te. (As to the poet’s inconstant use of F
before to-, see p. 82.)

θεῖος, ‘ ‘inspired’ 3 cp. θεῖος ἀοιδός (Od.

4. 17, etc.).—mpopdras, 2.4. the poet.
Cp. Plato Phaedr. p. 262 D (speaking of
the birds) of τῶν Μουσῶν προφῆται οἱ
ὑπὲρ κεφαλῆς ᾧδοί. Pindar fr. go calls
himself ἀοίδιμον Πιερίδων προφάταν.


Vir] ETTINIKOI 301


VIII. [IX.]


For Automedes of Phlius, victor in the pentathlon
at Nemea.


Graces of the golden distaff, may ye grant the charm that
wins mortal ears; for the inspired prophet of the violet-eyed
Muses is ready to sing Phlius and the verdure-clad domain of
Nemean Zeus; where white-armed Hera nourished the deep-
voiced lion, slayer of sheep, first of the foes on whom Heracles


was to win renown.


There the heroes with red shields,


Housman, Wilamowitz, Blass: κεῖθι yap νικάσπιδες K. (κινάσπιδες Richards).


κεῖθι


γὰρ χαλκάσπιδες Nairn: κεῖθι καὶ λευκάσπιδες Jurenka and others: but the letters


NI are certain.


4.£. εὔτυκος (supply ἐστί), 1.6. εὐτρεπής,
ἕτοιμος : with infin., as in Aesch. Supfi.
973 f. πᾶς τις ἐπειπεῖν ψόγον ἀλλοθρόοις |
εὔτυκος.

Φλειοῦντά τε κιτ.λ. The spelling in
the Ms. here (with εἰ) is confirmed by
Φλειάσιος in Corp. Luscr. Att. 1. 45. 15
(421: B.c.), and 1. add. 574 2. 15 (362
B.c.): Meisterhans, Gramm. der Ait.
Inschr. p. 26. As to Phlius, see Introd.
to this Ode.

Νεμεαίον Ζηνός. The vale of Nemea
is next on the east to that of Phlius, from
which it is divided by the ridge of
Trikaranon. Hence Pindar says of a
Nemean victor (JV. vi. 47 ff.), βοτάνα τέ
νίν ποθ᾽ ἁ λέοντος | vixwvO’ pepe δα-
σκίοις | Φλιοῦντος ὑπ᾽ ὠγυγίοις ὄρεσιν, ‘the
lion’s herb (the σέλινον or wreath of
parsley) shadowed his victorious brow
beneath the forest-clad primeval hills of
Phlius.’ The temple of the Nemean Zeus
stood on moist ground in the lower part
of the vale, surrounded by a grove of
cypresses. In the time of Pausanias (2.
15 §2), «. 170 A.D., the roof had fallen
in; though games and sacrifices were
still held in winter, the immemorial Zeus-
cult being maintained, doubtless, at Bw-
pot ὑπαίθριο.. Three columns are still
standing in the lonely valley.

εὐθαλές, Doric for εὐθηλές (θηλέω): the
syllable answering to θα is long in the
corresponding verses. So Pind. P. 1x.
79 εὐθαλεῖ τύχᾳ: Ar. Av. 1062 εὐθαλεῖς͵
καρπούς. Aesch. frag. 300. 5 has εὐθαλής
(θάλλω). Cp. XII. 69 πανθαλέων : but in
XI. 229 mav@ahjs.—Nemea was well-


HF. 359 ff.:


watered (εὔυδρος, Theocr. xxv. 182);
wood throve there (εὐφύλλονυ Νεμέης,
Pind. 7. v. 61), and the vale afforded cool
pastures. (Cp. E. Curtius Pedop. 11. 506.)

6—9 μηλοδαΐκταν. Cp. Aesch. Pers.
104 πολέμους πυργοδαΐκτους (‘destroying
walled cities,’ where we should perhaps
read rupyodaixras): αὐτοδάϊκτος (The.
735) and λουτροδάϊκτος (Cho. 1071) are
passive in sense.

The Nemean lion was ἃ ζῷον ἄτρωτον,
ἐκ Τυφῶνος γεγεννημένον (Apollod. 11. 5.
1): a legend which symbolized the de-
structive force of the winter-torrent
rushing down from the hills. In Zeno-
bius vi. 39 the monster is χαραδραῖος
λέων, from the Νεμεὰς χαράδρα: cp.
Aeschin. or. 2 § 168. He is described
by Hesiod (Zheog. 331) as κοιρανέων
Tpnroto Νεμείης ἠδ᾽ ᾿Απέσαντος. Treton
(‘the cavernous’) was ἃ hill Ε. of Nemea,
in which the lion’s cave was shown
(Paus. 2. 15. 2, Diod. Sic. Iv. ri):
pesas, a rocky height on the N.E. of
the vale. Pindar denotes Nemea by the
phrase χόρτοις ἐν λέοντος (‘pastures of the
lion’), O. XIII. 44.

ἀέθλων πρῶτον. The order of the
twelve ἄθλοι of Heracles was probably
first established in legend by the Dorians
of Argolis. Peisander of Rhodes in his
Ἡράκλεια (6th cent. B.c.?) may have
helped to popularize it. The Nemean
lion always comes first (see, ¢.g., Eur.
Soph. 7¥. 1092 f.).

10 φοινικάσπιδες is the only conjec-
ture which satisfies the data in the papy-
rus, if νικάσπιδες be rejected. In Tragedy


str. 1.


ant. £


302


BAKXYAIAOY


[VIII


“πρώτιστον ᾿Αργείων κριτοὶ
χθ 29 ἃ ΄ x 6 ὃ Ν
Ξαθλησαν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αρχεμόρῳ, τὸν ξανθοδερκὴς
«πέφν᾽ ἀωτεύοντα δράκων ὑπέροπλος,
soapa μέλλοντος φόνου.
15 ὁ ὦ μοῖρα πολυκρατές: ov νιν
γ πεῖθ᾽ ᾿Οἰκλείδας πάλιν
8 στείχειν ἐς εὐάνδρους ἀγυιάς.
> Ν 5» ΄ . Lal 7
9 ἐλπὶς ἀνθρώπων vpatp| εἶται προνοίας


επ.α.


- ἃ καὶ τότ᾽ “Adpacrov Ταλ[ αἰονίδαν


12 ἄθλησαν ἐπ᾽’ ᾿Αρχεμόρῳ, τὸν] The scribe omitted E before II, wrote M instead of


X, and CYN instead of TON.


A? has corrected the last two errors above the line,


the Argive warriors have white shields
(Aesch. Zh. go, Soph. Ant. 106, Eur.
Phoe. 1099). Red shields are nowhere
mentioned in classical Greek literature.
Pindar (22. vii1. 46) describes the Argive
Alcmaeon, son of Amphiaraus, as dpd-
κοντα ποικίλον αἰθᾶς νωμῶντ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἀσπίδος:
and Bacchylides (fr. 3. 6 f.) has αἰθᾶν
ἀραχνᾶν, where the sense seems to
be ‘reddish-brown.’ In the Pindaric
verse, however, αἰθᾶς, as epithet of the
shield, would naturally mean ‘bright,’
‘glittering’ (like αἴθων and αἴθοψ, said of
burnished metal), rather than ‘of a bright
colour. (Quintus Smyrnaeus v. 27,
imagining a scene of slaughter depicted
on the shield of Achilles, says, πέδον δ᾽
ἅπαν αἵματι πολλῷ | δενομένῳ Hikro,—as
if the ground were painted red; but that
scarcely helps us.) On the other hand it
should be noted that Bacchylides has
φοινικόθριξ (X. 105), φοινικοκράδεμνος (X.
97, XII. 222), and φοινικόνωτος (V. 102).
As to νικάσπιδες, it would clearly be
infelicitous: the heroes were not ‘vic-
torious’ at this moment, nor would that
epithet be suitable to ‘shields’: the only
question is whether it is possible. Our
poet has some strange compounds, such
as πολεμαιγίς (XVI. 7), ‘with warlike
aegis’; ἀρέταιχμος (XV. 47), ‘valiant with
the spear.’ But νίκασπις would be stranger
than these. There are such forms as
νικόβουλος and vixoudxas, but no example
in which νίκη is compounded witha word
denoting the instrument of victory.
qplOcor, = ἥρωες, as in X. 62, XII. 155,
Pindar P. Iv. 12: the seven Pelopon-
nesian chiefs (including Adrastus king of
Argos, the leader) who marched against
Thebes to restore Polyneices (Aesch.


Theb. 377 ff., Soph. O.C. 1313 ff.).

11 2. wpdtirrov...d@Anoav: these, ac-
cording to the legend, were the first
contests ever held at Nemea, and gave
origin to the festival.

ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αρχεμόρῳ, in his memory. Apol-
lod. 111. 6. 4 οἱ δὲ ἔθεσαν ἐπ᾽ αὐτῷ τὸν
τῶν Νεμέων ἀγῶνα. Marching from Argos
towards the Isthmus of Corinth, Adrastus
and his comrades made their first halt in
the vale of Nemea. Opheltes, the infant
son of Lycurgus king of Nemea by
Eurydice, was there in charge of his
nurse Hypsipyle (formerly queen of Lem-
nos). She guided the thirsty warriors to
a spring; and meanwhilé the child was
killed by a huge dragon. The heroes
came back in time to slay the monster;
then they buried the child, and changed
his name from Opheltes to Archemorus,
because his death was a beginning of
doom. And in his memory they insti-
tuted the Nemean games. (Apollod. /.c.:
Statius Zhedbazs Vv. 624 ff.: Hyginus Fad.
74, cp. Fad. 273.)—Simonides alludes to
the grief of the warriors, fr. 52 : (Εὐρυδί-
kas) loorepdvov | γλυκεῖαν ἐδάκρυσαν |
ψυχὰν ἀποπνέοντα γαλαθηνὸν téxos.—The
grave of Opheltes was shown at Nemea;
also a mound commemorating his father
Lycurgus; and a πηγὴ ᾿Αδραστεία (Paus.
2. 15. § 3).—Pindar [ΔΛ] x. 28 speaks of
the Nemean festival as held ἐν ’Adpacr-
ely νόμῳ, ‘according to the institution
of Adrastus.’

ξανθοδερκής, with fiery eyes. Cp. m1.
56 ξανθὰν φλόγα. Arist. De Color. p. 7914
4, τὸ δὲ πῦρ καὶ ὁ ἥλιος ξανθά. Statius
v. 508 (with reference to this dragon),
Livida fax oculis.

13 ἀωτεύοντα, ‘sleeping’ (R. A. Neil’s


VII] ETTINIKOI


303
the flower of the Argives, held the earliest games, in memory
of Archemorus, who was slain in his sleep by the huge dragon
with fiery eyes, an omen of slaughter to come. Ah, Fate of
mighty power! The son of Oicles could not persuade them to
return to the streets of the good city. Hope robs men of


prudent thoughts,—


she who then sent Adrastus son of Talaiis


and may have written ε above a, where the papyrus is mutilated.
The letter T is a correction (from P?) by 48,
19 d@ καὶ A®: δὴ (without ἃ) A.


R. A. Neil. ACATEYONTA ms,
16 ᾿Οἰκλείδας] «A from AA by 443.


13 dwrevovra


excellent correction), could have been
corrupted into the ACATETONTA of the
papyrus through w being read as aa.
Such a form of ca, from a papyrus of
162 Β.6., may be seen in Gardthausen’s
Griech. Palaeographie, table 3 (at the end
of the book). The change of T to T
would do the rest. | Hesychius has
ἀωτεύειν" ἀπανθίζεσθαι.
that the word here might mean, ‘while
gathering flowers’: Eur. fr. 754 (from
the Ὑψιπύλη, ap. Plut. Aor. p. 93 Ὁ)
described the child as thus engaged:
ἕτερον ἐφ᾽ ἑτέρῳ αἰρόμενος | ἄγρευμ᾽ ἀνθέων
κιτλο though we do not know how
Euripides told the story of the death.
According to Statius (v. 502—504),
Opheltes was killed while s/eepzng on the
grass (cp. Paus. 2. 15. 2 τεθέντα és τὴν
πόαν). Now Simonides has ἀωτεῖν (with-
out the Homeric addition of ὕπνον) as
meaning ‘to sleep’: fr. 37.6 σὺ δ᾽ ἀωτεῖς
γαλαθηνῷ τ᾽ ἤτορι κνώσσεις. It seems
very probable, then, that his nephew
used dwrevovra in the sense of ἀωτέοντα.
Cp. faredw (Alcman fr. 33. 8), ἀχεύω,
οἰνοχοεύω, at the side of the forms in
τέω.

ὑπέροπλος, of huge size and strength ;
cp. Hes. Zheog. 670 βίην ὑπέροπλον
ἔχοντες.

14 σᾶμα, ‘omen’ (as in Pind. fr. 107) :
φόνου, their overthrow at Thebes.

15f. ov vw πεῖθ᾽ : ‘could not persuade
them’ (impf.). νιν is plural (referring to
the heroes), as in fr. 5 (K.), προσεφώνει
τέ vw (placed by Blass as v. 76 of Odel.,
and ed. p. 25), where Apollonius De
pronom. p. 368 A noticed the use. The
plural vv occurs also in Pindar (fr. 7. 2),
Sophocles (0.7. 868 etc.), and Euripides
(Suppl. 1140).

16᾽ Οἰκλείδας. Amphiaraus, the great


This suggests:


warrior and seer (Soph. O.C. 1313), was
the son of Οἰκλῆς (an Argive hero who
had gone with Heracles against Laome-
don, Apollod. 11. 6. 4).

17 εὐάνδρους, in contrast with the
lonely vale of Nemea.—dyurds, of Argos.
It is noteworthy that Pindar 2. VIII.
52 tf. (where Amphiaraus predicts the
return of Adrastus) denotes Argos by the
phrase” ABavros evpuxdpous ἀγνιάς.

18 ὑφαιρεῖται : tnis rare middle occurs
in Eur. 4 271 σιγῇ τοῦθ᾽ ὑφαιρούμεσθά
νιν. The middle of ἀφαιρεῖν is used by
Pind. P. 1v. 218, and /. 1. 62.—The lost
object of the verb ought to express the
idea of ‘ prudence,’ ‘caution,’ or ‘ fore-
sight.’ W. Christ reads πρόνοιαν (and so
Weir Smyth, Greek Melic Poets p. 104).
A long final would be preferable: for
that reason, and also on poetical grounds,
I suggest the plur. προνοίας, as used by
Aesch. 4g. 684 (‘ Helen’ was so named
by some one) προνοίαισι τοῦ πεπρωμένου,
‘with forebodings of her doom.’ This
ode shows distinct traces of Aeschylean
diction (see on v. 2 πεισίμβροτον, and
ν. 6 pmdodatxrav).—Blass gives νόημα
(referring to x. 54): but its normal sense,
as there, is ‘a thought,’ rather than
‘thought’ or ‘forethought.’ μερίμνας
(Wilamowitz) also seems less suitable (cp.
n. on XVIII. 34).—Jurenka supplies ¢pév’
ὀρθάν, which is possible, if somewhat
too general.—-Kenyon, reading ὑφαιρεῖ,
suggests μῆτιν ἐσθλάν. It is perhaps
worth noting that such a caesura as that
made by ὑφαιρεῖ does not occur in any of
the corresponding verses.

19 Tadaioviday, son of Talaos (a
name ominous of suffering). The double
patronymic (-iwy combined with -6ys) is
sometimes used by poets metri causa:
cp. Ἰαπετιονίδη in Hes. Οὗ. 54.


epode τ.


304
Col. 15


BAKXYAIAOY


[vill


2 πέμπεν ἐς Θήβας Πολυνείκεϊ wal yx | πρόξειον.


3 κείνων ἀπ᾿ εὐδόξων ἀγώνων
“ ἐν Νεμέᾳ κλεινοὶ βροτῶν


5 οἱ τριέτει “στεφάνῳ


6. ξανθὰν ἐρέψωνται κόμαν.
257 Αὐτομήδει νῦν γε νικά-
8. σαντί νιν δαίμων ἔδωκεν.


στρ. β΄.


i; Ἂς » ὦ ε
1 πενταέθλοισιν yop EVET PETTEV ως


" ἄστρων διακρίνει φάη

3 νυκτὸς διχομήνιδος εὐφεγγὴς σελάνα'
30 “τοῖος Ἑλλάνων δι ἀπείρονα κύκλον

5 φαῖνε θαυμαστὸν δέμας,

6 δισκὸν τροχοειδέα ῥίπτων,

7 καὶ μελαμφύλλου κλάδον

8 ἀκτέας ἐς αἰπεινὰν προπέμπων
35 9 αἰθέρ᾽ ἐκ χειρὸς βοὰν ὦτρυνε λαῶν,


25 The final « of Αὐτομήδει and the y of γε have been added by A® above the line.


26 ἔδωκεν] The first hand wrote Εἰ. HKEN: A’ wrote w over H.


29 διχομήνιδος]


20. After Πολυνείκεϊ the letters πλα
alone are certain. πλαγκτῷ πρόξενον
Blass, ‘a patron’ (or ‘protector’) for the
wandering (i.e. exiled) Polyneices. Cp.
Eur. Suppl. 961 where the chorus of
Argive matrons, who have come from
Thebes to Eleusis, say, πλαγκτὰ δ᾽ ὡσεί
τις νεφέλα | πιευμάτων ὑπὸ δυσχίμων
ἀΐσσω. For πρόξενον, cp. Aesch. Suppl.
418f., γενοῦ | πανδίκως εὐσεβὴς | πρόξενος
(‘ protector’). Blass takes the word from
fr. 35 (K.), προξεν : it is only a conjecture,
however, that it belongs here. There is
a metrical objection to this reading, viz.
the caesura after πλαγκτῷῴ, which is
against the poet’s usual practice (see
p- 97). No such caesura at that point
occurs in any one of the corresponding
verses (46, 72, 98). Nevertheless πλαγκτῷ
πρόξενον appears more probable than any-
thing else. The number of other possible
supplements is narrowly limited by wha:
they are such as πλαθέντα ξένῳ, πλαξίππῳ
πέλας (or mapal), πλάξοντα πτόλιν, πλα-
γχθέντι ξένον : and not one is satisfactory.
In this context, σύμμαχον might seem a
fitter word than πρόξενον : but the ally of
an exile, who supports him with armed


forces, could be called his ‘patron.’

22 1. Νεμέᾳ, ~— by synizesis, as in
ΧΙ. 8 (probably), and Pind. MW. Iv. 75.—
tptérer: the fact that the Ms. gives the
older Attic accent here seems a reason
for keeping it: the later τριετεῖ is pre-
ferred by Blass—-The Nemean games
were held in the second and fourth years
of each Olympiad. The older view, sup-
ported by Scaliger, that the season of
the festival was alternately summer and
winter, has been abandoned, since it has
been shown by G. Unger (PAz/ol. xxxIVv.
so ff., XxXXvII. 1 ff.) that in the fifth
century the Nemea always took place at
midsummer, in the Argive month Ilava-
wos (IIdvypos). The στέφανος was of
parsley, a symbol of mourning for the
death of Archemorus.

24 ἐρέψωνται : for the midd., cp. Eur.
Bacch. 323 κισσῷ τ᾽ ἐρεψόμεσθα καὶ
χορεύσομεν.

27 πενταέθλοισιν, the competitors in
the pentathlon: Her. Ix. 75 ἄνδρα πεν-
τάεθλον.

28 διακρίνει. Only two interpreta-
tions are possible. (1) ‘The moon
distinguishes the lights of the stars’ (from


vur] ETTINIKOI 305
to Thebes, as patron of the exile Polyneices.

Illustrious are the mortals who, from those famous contests
at Nemea, crown golden hair with the triennial wreath. To


Automedes the god has now given it for his victory.


For he shone among his rivals in the pentathlon as the
brilliant moon of the mid-month night makes the rays of the
stars seem pale beside her own. Even thus, amidst the vast
concourse of the Greeks, showed he his wondrous form, as he
threw the round quoit, and roused the shouts of the people
when he sped the branch of the dark-leaved elder-tree from his


hand to the high heaven,


διχομηνίδος MS.; a wrong accent, it would seem.
88 μελαμφύλλου] The second M made by A? from N: cp. v. 2.


82 ῥίπτων Blass. : ῥιπτῶν MS.
85 ξ. Housman


conj. βοάν τ᾽ ὥρινε λαῶν | of τελευταίας K.T.D.


her own): z.¢. ‘makes them seem different
from her own,’ and inferior to it. This
is forced; to me it seems barely possible;
yet, if διακρίνει be sound, it is the view
in which I should acquiesce. (2) ‘The
moon farts the stars,’—z.e., ‘moves a-
mong them.’ For this sense of the verb
cp. Plat. Crat. 388 B κερκίζοντες δὲ τί
δρῶμεν; οὐ τὴν κρόκην καὶ τοὺς στήμονας
συγκεχυμένους διακρίνομεν ; But, as there
a movement of the things ‘parted’ is in-
volved, so here the phrase would imply
that the stars yield place to the moon
as she cleaves her path among them.—
Blass writes Svaxptvet (adjective), a form
not extant, but analogous to εὐκρινής, and
alters φάη to φάει. This would mean
(I suppose), ‘as the moon is conspicuous
(ἐμπρέπει, supplied from ἐνέπρεπεν) amidst
the different light of the stars’: or, ‘is


conspicuous with a light different from.


(that of) the stars.’ The syllable answering
to the second of διακρινεῖ is, however,
long in the corresponding vv.; and δια-
κρίνει is so accented in the papyrus. It
must be added that there is no reason to
suspect φάη. The plural φάεα (as ‘ eyes’)
was familiar from the Odyssey (16. 15
etc.), and is not rare in later poetry
(Callimachus Hymn. Dian. 71, Anthol.
8. 77, etc.). Aratus uses it in exactly
the sense which it has here, Phaenom. go
ἀλλ᾽ αἱ μὲν (the constellation called Χηλαί)
φαέων ἐπιδενέες, οὐδὲν ἀγαναί.

I would suggest διωχραίνεν : ‘the moon
spreads paleness over the radiance of the
stars.’ Cp. the Orphic Argonautica 1315
δέος δ᾽ ὥχραινε παρειάς. If διωχραίνει had
been partly mutilated or obscured in the
archetype, a copyist might have written


j. B.


διακρίνει, which occurs in v. 89 of this
ode.—Tyrrell proposed Staxpatver, in the
sense ‘blurs.’

29 νυκτός, gen. of time, rather tham
depending on ceddva.— διχομήνιδος =
Pind. O. 111. 19 διχόμηνις Μήνα : 7. VII.
47 διχομηνίδεσσιν ἑσπέραις.--- σελάνα : the
Doric a in two consecutive syllables is
against the poet’s general rule (see n. on
Φήμα in 11. 1): but cp. ΧΙ]. 195 ᾿Αθάνα.

80 κύκλον : so Pind. O. IX. 93 διήρ-
xeTo κύκλον ὅσσᾳ Bog.

82 δίσκον. The order of the contests
in the pentathlon was probably (1) jump-
ing, (2) quoit, (3) javelin-throwing,
(4) foot-race, (5) wrestling. So Eusta-
thius p. 1320 (7. 23. 621), quoting
ἅλμα ποδῶν δίσκου τε βολὴ καὶ ἄκοντος
ἐρωὴ | καὶ δρόμος ἠδὲ πάλη, μία δ᾽ ἔπλετο
πᾶσι τελευτή (1.6. ‘one result,’ decided by
a majority of feats). Simonides fr. 153,
for metre’s sake, puts no. 4 between 1
and 2: ἅλμα ποδωκείην δίσκον ἄκοντα
πάλην. Here the poet mentions gzo‘t,
javelin, wrestling: probably Automedes
Jost the jump and the foot-race. Three
feats gave the prize: Aristeides Pana-
then. τι1. 339 (ed. Dind.) ἀρκεῖ τοῖς
πεντάθλοις τρία τῶν πέντε πρὸς νίκην.

ῥίπτων. The papyrus gives ῥιπτῶν
with the circumflex: but, on its own
evidence, B. regularly has -éwy in the
participle: see 111. 96 n. (Cp. Soph.
Ai. 239, Ὁ. on ῥιπτεῖ.)

34 f. ἀκτέας, the elder-tree. Theo-
phrastus A/zst. Plant. 11. v. 4 remarks
that its wood has few knots or branches
(doga...7a τῆς dxrfs),—one of the qualities
which fitted it to furnish ἀκόντια.

35 f. βοὰν... πάλας. The Ms. has


21


str. 2.


BAKXYAIAOY


[VIII


x ΄ > 7 ,
τ ἢ τελευταίας ἀμάρυγμα πάλας"


« τοιῷ δ᾽ ὑπερθύμῳ ol θένε]ι
3γυια[ίλκέα σώματα [πρὸς γ]αίᾳ πελάσσας
4 ἵκετ᾽ [᾿Ασωπὸ)ν παρὰ πορφυροδίναν,
40 ςτοῦ κλέος πᾶσαν χθόνα
6 ἤλθεϊν καὶ] ἐπ’ ἔσχατα Νείλου"
γταί tT ἐπ᾽ εἰ ὑν)αεῖ πόρῳ
> an , > 4
8 οἰκεῦσι Θερμώδοντος, ἐγχέων


ν al ὯΝ 4“ x,
οἵστορες κοῦραι διωξίπποι᾽ “Apyos,


ἐπ. β΄. 45x σῶν, ὦ πολυζήλωτε (ξ)άναξ ποταμῶν,
« ἐγγόνων γεύσαντο, καὶ ὑψιπύλου Τροίας ἔδος.
3 στείχει δι εὐρείας κελεύθου
4 μυρία παντᾷ φάτις


5 σᾶς γενεᾶς λιπαρο-
΄ ΄ a Ν
ζώνων θυγάτρων, ἃς θεοὶ


Βο 6


πάλαΞ] II made from T by A’.
Jurenka.


37 Restored by Kk.
meddooas] TEAACCQ[N A: A? drew a stroke through ὦ (also transfixing


88 [πρὸς γ]αίᾳ K.: πέντ΄ aig


the second σ), and seems to have written aa above; but the papyrus is mutilated.


no point either after λαῶν or after πάλας.
(1) With the text as it stands, I should
place only a comma after λαῶν, and
suppose that from προπέμπων we are to
supply some participle of a more general
sense (such as φαίνων or mpodecxvts) to
govern the acc. ἀμάρυγμα. ‘ He roused
the shout of the people as he sped (προ-
πέμπων) the javelin from his hand..., or
as he put forth (sc. φαίνων or the like) his
flashing swiftness in the final wrestling-
match.’ It is then a kind of ‘zeugma,’
like that in Soph. Az. 1035 ἄρ᾽ οὐκ "Ἐρινὺς
τοῦτ᾽ ἐχάλκευσε ξίφος | κἀκεῖνον" Αιδης...;
where for κἀκεῖνον (the girdle) we supply
εἰργάσατο or the like. This view seems
to me, on the whole, the best.

(2) The construction would be clearer,
if we placed a comma after χειρός, and
read Body [τ᾽] wrpuve λαῶν | οἷ τελευταίας
ἀμάρυγμα πάλας' as Prof. Housman pro-
posed (who also changed wrpuve to ὠρινε).
But of as a correction of the Ms. ἢ is not
quite satisfactory: still less so is δή (which
I formerly suggested); though δή can
commence a verse, and even a sentence
(Od. 13. “hes Pind. O. 111. 25).

(3) Blass puts a full stop after λαῶν.
He does not, however, explain how he
takes ἢ.. «πάλας, With that punctuation,
only two resources seem open. (a) To


regard v. 36 as a sort of exclamation: ‘or
think of his flashing movement in the
wrestling-match!’ (4) to read ἦν for 7,
with a stress on ἀμάρυγμα: ‘ Flashing
movement was there in the wrestling-
match ...; with such might did he bear
his men to earth.’

ὦτρυνε, as in Z/. 5. 470 ὥτρυνε μένος
καὶ θυμὸν ἑκάστου, or 12. 277 μάχην
ὥτρυνον : ‘stirred up,’ ‘roused.’

ἀμάρυγμα, the ‘flash’ of quick motion:
Hes. fr. 225 Χαρίτων ἀμαρύγματ᾽ ἔχουσα
(in dancing): Ar. Av. 925 οἷάπερ ἵππων
ἀμαρυγά (with epic v, as in Hom. hymn.
Ill. 45).

88 πρὸς γαίᾳ. The redundant pre-
position, though only a conjecture, is
partly supported by x. 23 πρὸς γαίᾳ
πεσόντα. As Jurenka observes, there is
no other example of a prep. being added
to the dative after πελάζω. The only
objection to his ingenious πέντ᾽ alg is
that afa is not elsewhere found in Bac-
chylides.

89 ᾿Ασωπόν. See Introduction to the
Ode.—The long a in this name (Z/. 4. 383,
Pind. M. 1x. 9, Ovid Amor. 111. 6. 33,
etc.) is against connecting it with docs,
‘mud,’ ‘silt’ (Ztym. .), which has a
(1. 21. 321).

41 καὶ én’ ἔσχατα Νείλου, 1.4. to the


‘VIIt] ETINIKOI 307
or put forth his flashing swiftness of movement in the wrestling-
match at the end. Such was the mighty spirit and strength
with which he brought stalwart forms to earth, ere he returned
to the Asopus with dark-eddying tide; that river whose fame


has gone out into all lands, even to the.uttermost regions of the


Nile.


Yea, the maidens who dwell by the fair-flowing stream of
Thermodon, the skilled spear-women, daughters of horse-urging


Ares,


have tasted the valour of thy descendants, O thrice-glorious lord
of streams: Troy also has known it, city of lofty gates.

The vast fame of thy children goes forth on a wide path in
every land,—those bright-girdled daughters whom the gods


89 [᾿Ασωπὸ]ν Blass, Housman, Richards, Wilamowitz.
43 κοῦραι Κ. : κόραι Ms.


corr. A®, 42 ε[ὐν]αεῖ J.


Housman and others: πολυξήλωτ᾽ ἄναξ Ms.


41 7d6c[y]. MAOH a:
45 πολυζήλωτε (ρ)άναξ
46 ἐγγόνων Jurenka, Weil,


Wilamowitz (σοῖν... ἐγγόνοιν or ἐκγόνοιν Housman): ἔγγονοι MS.


remotest regions ; an image like Pindar’s
in Z. v. [vr-] 22 f. (‘countless roads...are
cleft for the onward course of noble
deeds’) καὶ πέραν Νείλοιο παγᾶν καὶ δι᾽
Ὑπερβορέους-.---ἰ scarcely think that there
is an allusion to Memnon and his Aethio-
pians at Troy, as having carried the fame
of the Aeacidae home with them.

42 ff. εὐναεῖ. εὐναής occurs nowhere
else, nor is εὔναος found : but cp. dewars
in a quotation by Athenaeus (p. 61 A)
from Nicander.

Θερμώδοντος, a river of Pontus, now
the Zermeh. Near its mouth on the coast
of the Euxine was the town of Θεμίσκυρα,
with a fertile plain which fed great herds
of oxen and horses. This was the legend-
ary seat of the Amazons. (Aesch. P. VY.
923 ff.: Verg. Aen. x1. 639: Apoll.
Rhod. 11. 995 Θεμισκύρειαι ᾿Αμαζόνες.)
The Amazon-myth first came into Greek
poetry with the Cyclic epic Αἰθιοπίς (c.
775—700 B.C.?), ascribed to Arctinus.—
éyxéwv toropes, skilled with the spear.
Poetry armed the Amazons, however, not
only with the spear and sword of the
Greek hero, but also with the bow (Pind.
O. XIU. 89 τοξόταν στρατόν), and with
the axe, either single-edged (cdyapis,
Xen. An. Iv. 4. 16), or double (πέλεκυς,
bipennis, Quint. Smyrn. 1. 597). Their
shield was πέλτα or γέρρον (like that of
Thracians or Persians).— kotpa..”’Apyos.
Penthesileia, their queen, is called "Apyjos
θυγάτηρ in the verse which linked the
_Acthiopis to the “πα (schol. 71. 24. 804).


The Amazons figure in legend as wor-
shippers of the war-god, sacrificing to him
at an island-shrine near Themiscyra (Ap.
Rhod. 11. 385 f.), as on the Ἄρειος πάγος
at Athens (Aesch. Zz. 689; cp. schol.
Ar. Lys. 191).

45:1. fis assumed before ἄναξ here,
but not in 11. 76 (ὁ δ᾽ ἄναξ) or Vv. 84
(θάμβησεν δ᾽ ἄναξ). Cp. 1. 2 n.— ov...
ἐγγόνων γεύσαντο : ‘the Amazons tasted
the valour of thy offspring,—and so did
Troy.’ Cp. Z/. 20. 258 γευσόμεθ᾽ ἀλλήλων
χαλκήρεσιν ἐγχείῃσιν. ‘The ‘descendants’
meant are Telamon, Ajax, and Achilles ;
perhaps also Peleus and Neoptolemus.
Telamon (and according to one account,
Peleus) went with Iolaus on an expedition
against the Amazons, and slew Melanippe,
the sister of their queen (schol. Pind. ΔΛ
11. 64=38). Telamon took part with
Heracles in his war on Laomedon. When
the Amazons came to Troy as allies of
the Trojans, Achilles slew Penthesileia
(as told in the Aethzop7s). Ajax fought
against Troy; and Neoptolemus was its
captor. (See Introd. to this Ode, § 2,
note 2.)—The Ms. corruption of ἐγγόνων
into ἔγγονοι may have been prompted by
the desire of a subject for γεύσαντο (κοῦραι
being so far back).—éxyévev (XVI. 16)
might seem preferable, but is not neces-
sary.

47 £. στείχει κιτ.λ.: ‘Everywhere on
a broad path goes forth the vast renown...’
Cp. v. 31 μυρία πάντᾳ κέλευθος, n :

49 2. σᾶς γενεάς... θυγάτρων. Dio-


2I—2


ant. 2.


epode 2.


308


BAKXYAIAOY


[VIII


γσὺν τύχαις ῴκισσαν ἀρχα-
8. γοὺς ἀπορθήτων ἀγυνυιᾶν.


στρ. γ. τίς


γὰρ οὐκ οἶδεν κυανοπλοκάμον


«Θήβας ἐύδμ[ατον πόλι]ν,


Col. 16


3% τὰν μεγαλώνυμον Αἴγιναν, μεγίστου


86, Ζηνὸς a πλαθεῖσα λέΪχει τέκεν ἥρω


5. - δεσῳ -- -- ov:


οὃς γ]ᾶς βασαΐνοισιν ᾿Αχ]αιῶν


VY
g- Ve Yee


60 8- πω ππππῳωκ -π-


οὔ - - — Y εἸἰύπζ εἶπλον [Κλεώναν


3 ,
aQvT. y.


: ἠ δὲ Πειράν)]αν ἑλικοστέφαϊ νον


« κι ούραν, dlaa 7 ἄλλαι θεῶν

3¢ wats ἐδ άμησαν ἀριγνώτοις π| αἸλαι[οῦ
65 «παῖδες αἰ δοῖαι ποταμοῦ κελάδοντος᾽

sTOU νυν ἀρχαίαν πόλιν

6 κώμοι κατέχου Ἰσί τε νίκας

γ καὶ λύραις αὐλῶν Boat

ὃ σύμφωνα πνείο]υσαι' μεγίστου
Ἴο οχρὴ Διὸς πρῶτον σέβας θ᾽ “Ἥραν 7° ἀείδειν"


51 ἀρχα-] ΑΡΧΑΙ A: corr. A’.


55—88 These 34 verses were contained in
column xvI., of which only mutilated fragments remain.


The fragments have


been combined by Kenyon and Blass, on the evidence of metre, contents, colour
of the papyrus, etc.: but the combination is necessarily in some measure conjectural.
55. -MNON A, corrected to -μὸον by A*: this (as K. saw) was from an adj.


ending in -uvuov, taken by the scribe for ὕμνον.


Blass supplies ἢ τὰν μεγαλώνυμον


dorus (Iv. 72) says that Asopus, ‘having
made his home (κατοικήσας) in Phlius,’
married Μετώπη (Pind. O. vi. 84),
daughter of Ladon (the river of Elis), by
whom he had two sons, Pelasgus and
Ismenus, and ¢welve daughters,—Corcyra,
Salamis, Aegina, Peirene, Cleone, Thebe,
Tanagra, Thespia, Asopis, Sinope, Oinia,
and Chalcis. (In c. 73 Diodorus mentions
a thirteenth, Harpina.) Apollodorus (111.
12. 6) raises the number of daughters to
twenty (but does not enumerate them).
At Olympia the Phliasians dedicated a
group representing Asopus and five of
his daughters, viz. Nemea (not mentioned
by Diodorus), Aegina (with Zeus beside
her), Harpina (the mother of Oenomaus
by Ares), Corcyra, and Thebe (Paus. v.
22. 5).—The wide geographical range of


these names (from Corcyra to Sinope)
illustrates the μυρία φάτις of v. 48.

In the mutilated text of this ode the
names of only two daughters remain, —
Thebe and Aegina, who, according to
Pindar, were the youngest,— Acwrldwy
ὁπλόταται (7. Vil. 17 f.): see, however,
n. on 61—65.

51£ σὺν τύχαις. Cp. Χ. 115 σὺν...
τύχᾳ. Here the plur. is used because
several persons and cities are concerned:
it is, in fact, a distributive σὺν τύχᾳ.---
ἀρχαγούς. This term is applied to the
founder of a city, or the eponymous an-
cestor of a family. Plat. 77m. 21 Ε τῆς
πόλεως θεὸς ἀρχηγός τίς ἐστιν. Cp. Soph.
Ο. C. 60 τ.---ἀπορθήτων is proleptic in
sense: the gods decreed that the places
founded by the Asopides should ever be


VII] EMINIKOI


309
established, with happy fortunes, as ancestral heroines of cities
which should defy the spoiler.


Who does not know the well-built town of dark-haired Thebe?
Or Aegina of glorious name, who in wedlock with mighty Zeus
bore the hero (Aeacus)? : ; : : :


ficiosed Cleone,


and Peirene with diadem on her brows, and all those other
gracious daughters of the ancient river-god, lord of sounding
waters, who became the illustrious brides of gods.


[ Verses 66—81, as partially restored. Now is the ancient city of
Asopus filled with revelry for victory, and with the blended strains of
flutes and lyres....It is meet to hymn first the majesty of great Zeus
and Hera;

(ἐρατώνυμον Wilamowitz): Piccolomini and others, καὶ τὰν (ris δ᾽ οὐ Housman)


χαριτώνυμον : Ellis, τίς δ᾽ οὐ δολιχήρετμον (Pind. O. VIII. 20).—peyiorou (μέγιστον
Housman) ἃ Διὸς πλαθεῖσα λέχει Blass, Housman: μεγίστῳ Ζηνὸς ἁ πλαθεῖσα λέχει


Wilam.
᾿Αχ]αιῶν.


63 Blass prints «[--~J]s, air’ ἄλλαι: but the o belonged (I think) to ὅσαι.
65 παῖδες αἰ]δοῖαι 7. : παρθένοι] δοιαὶ Blass: but see comm.


κούραν, ὅσαι τ᾽ ἄλλαι.


517 2. Blass supplies τοῦ]δε σωϊτῆρα πέδ]ου, | ὃς γ]ᾶς βασάϊνοισιν
61 If the letters ὑπ are rightly read, εὔπεπλον (or ἐὔπεπλον) is certain.


Read


virgin cities, unravaged by foes. Cp.
Lysias or. 33 ἃ 7 (of Sparta) μόνοι...
οἰκοῦντες ἀπόρθητοι καὶ ἀτείχιστοι. Eur.
Hec. 906 (of Troy) τῶν ἀπορθήτων πόλις
οὐκέτι λέξει. Below, in v. gg, the word
was probably applied to Phlius.

55. These verses refer to Aegina,
- bride of Zeus, and her son Aeacus (ἥρω).
Verse 55 may have begun with kal τὰν
(Jurenka),—rs 8’ ov (which is rather too
rhetorical),—or ἢ καὶ (Blass, who com-
pares Pind. O. XIII. 20 ff.).

57 £ As to the conjecture τοῦ]δὲ
σωτῆρα πέδ]ου (Blass), all the four letters
Seow (fr. 37 Κι) are uncertain. The
syllable answering to the @ of σωτῆρα
is long in all the corresponding verses
(5, 14, 31, 40, 66, 83). That might be
cured by changing πέδ]ου to στρατ]οῦ
(45-- δήμου). But the restoration seems
doubtful.—In v. 58 Baod(vorriy?) pro-
bably referred to some tests of valour or
wisdom which Aeacus had successfully
borne. He must have been the subject
of v. 59, if not also of 60.

61—65. In these five verses the
mention of the Asopides was continued
and ended. Verses 61 and 62 evidently
contained two proper names. I conjec-
ture with some confidence that v. 61


ended with Καλεώναν, and v. 62 began
with ἠδὲ Πειράναν. For the place in
v. 61, Tavaypay or Σινώπαν is also pos-
sible. But the poet would probably
prefer Peloponnesian names, appealing to
Cleonae and to Corinth. In 62 metre
would not admit Κέρκυρᾶν or (ἢ καὶ)
“Αρπινὰν (Lycophron 167 “Αρπινναν ‘Ap-
πυίαις ἴσην).

68 f. ὅσαι τ᾽... κελάδοντος : 1.6. and
all the other daughters of the ancient
tiver-god Asopus who became the brides
of gods. The conjectures κούραν, ὅσαι
τ᾽, and παῖδες αἰ]δοῖαι, are (I venture to
think) hardly doubtful. Blass’s παρθένοι]
δοιαὶ cannot be right, since, as the con-
text shows, more than two maidens are
in question.

66 ff. Here the poet turned from the
Asopides to speak of the rejoicings at
Phlius for the victory of Automedes.
Sounds of revelry fill the ‘ancient city.’
Praises are due to the gods.

69,70 These and the next five or six
verses doubtless referred to the principal
deities worshipped at Phlius. I suggest
a partial restoration (exempli gratia) a-
bove.—"Hpay τ᾽ ἀείδειν. There was
a temple of Hera at Phlius (Paus. 2.


13. 4).


str. 3.


ant. 3.


310 BAKXYAIAOY [vite
ἐπ. γ. «Ἥβαν τ᾽ ἔπειτα Ζηνὸς ἐρισθε]νέος :
>> Un roa
2 xp Ἰυσέαϊν προσθέντα ([)ιόπλοκον εὖ εὐπειν [κόραν;
3 καὶ μ]ατέρ᾽ ἀγ]νάμπτων ἐρώτων
+- UY - κλε]ινὰν βροτοῖς
75 s- ὦ -- υἹἱλέων
6 S Sa es ον το
ta
γ-- τὰ — νασι]ώταν
8. -ῷὸ - - - |p ὕμνον,
στρ. δ΄. :--ἅ - - -Ἰ᾿ καὶ ἀποφθιμένῳ
80 «τὸν πάντ᾽ ἐς ἀτΊ]ρυτον χρόνον,
8: καὶ τοῖς ἐπιγιγνομένοις αἰεὶ πιφαύσκοι
᾿ ¥
sodv Νε]μέᾳ νίκαν: τό [γέ] τοι καλὸν ἔργον
«γνησίων ὕμνων τυχὸν
εὑψοῦ παρὰ δαίμοσι κεῖται"
85 γσὺν δ᾽ ἀλαθείᾳ βροτῶν
΄ ι 4 ἧς td
8 κάλλιστον, εἴπερ καὶ θάνῃ τις,
, a 5 ye
9 λείπεται Μουσᾶν [ἀγακλειτᾶν ἀθυΐρμα.
ἀντ. ὃ. τεἰσὶ δ᾽ ἀνθρ[ὠπων ἀρεταῖσιν ὁδοὶ
Col.17 . πολλαί: διακρίνει δὲ θεῶν


90 3 βουλὰ [τὸ καλυπτόμενον νυκτὸς [δνόφοισιν'
3, Ν > ie
, τὸν δὲ χείρω, τ᾽ ἄγαγε καὶ τὸν ἀρείω
5 Ζηνὸς ais’ ὀρσικτύ που.
\ \ eo 3 9 \ 4 Ἢ
ὁ κρυπτὸς yap ὅ T ἐσθλὰ φυτ]εύσων
γ ἔργα Yo μὴ πρὶν μολεῖν
? a » N ’,
95 8 ἐς πεῖραν' ὠπασσαν δὲ tr lavpots
΄ a
9 ἀν Spl dow Μοῖραι τεκμαίρεσθαι] τὸ μέλλον᾽


97 νασι]ώταν Herwerden: Αὐτόμηδες, νασιώταν Blass: but see p. 97.
82 τό [γέ τοι] Headlam.
has a point, level with the bottom of the letter; cp. XIV. 47 cr. ue
K.: βαθυζώνων Blass: μελιφθόγγων Piccolomini and Jurenka.


ἐπιγ]νγνομένοις Headlam.


81 [καὶ τοῖς


88 After TYXON the ms.
87 ἀγακλειτᾶν
89- 94 Column


XVII. began with v. 89, but the upper part (containing 89-104 and 1X. 1-5) was torn


71 τ. Hebe, worshipped at Phlius
and Sicyon under the name of Ala
(Strabo 8, p. 382), had an ancient
shrine of peculiar sanctity (ἁγιώτατον
Paus. 11. 13. 3) on the acropolis of
Phlius. Dia-Hebe, then, would fitly be
named here, after her parents (Hes.
Theog. 922) Zeus and Hera. Her
spouse Heracles was also commemorated
at Phlius, along with Cyathus, the cup-
bearer whom he accidentally killed (Paus.
Δ ¢.). The epithet χρυσέα is elsewhere


given by B. not only to Aphrodite (v.
174), but also to Artemis (xX. 117) and
to Io (xvii. 16).

If, on the other hand, Aphrodite was
the subject of these two verses, we could
read in 71 κἄπειτα κούραν Ζηνὸς ἐρισθ..,
and at the end of 72, εὖ εἰπεῖν Kump.
I incline to think, however, that the
first mention of her came in v. 73.

73 καὶ parép ἀγνάμπτων ἐρώτων,
Aphrodite: Pindar fr. 122. 4 calls her
parép ἐρώτων. The καί, for which there


Vur] ETTINIKOI 3511.
then also to praise Hebe, daughter of mighty Zeus, maiden divinely
fair, with violet locks,—and the Mother of the pitiless Loves.......


Automedes, we have brought thee the song of the island Muse,


which shall remain for thee, in thy life and after thy death, for endless
years, to tell all generations of thy victory at Nemea. |


A goodly deed that has won the strains of a true poet is laid
up on high with the gods. When mortal lips give honest praise,
there is a glory that survives death in song, the joy of the
[glorious] Muses. .


[Jn verses 88—-104 the general sense is fairly clear: the details
are partly conjectural.| There are many paths for the excellences
of men: but it is the counsel of the gods that decides what is
veiled in the gloom of night. [The weaker man and the stronger are
alike led on their way by the doom of Zeus the thunderer. Who is to
put forth high deeds, and who is to fail, is a secret, till they come to the
trial;] and to few mortals have the Fates granted the gift of conjecturing
the future.


away. The remains of 89-94 have been put together by Blass from small fragments,
metre giving the clue. 95—99 The endings of these verses are on a fragment
which K. placed here because the metre suits this poem and no other. 96—99 The
earlier parts of these verses, also the remains of 1oo—104 and of IX. 1, 2, are on a


is not room in 73 before .ar, may have
been added to v. 72: something similar
has happened in vy. ror f., and there are
other instances of wrong division (as in
ΙΧ. 15 ἢ, 33 ἢ, 43 [ἡ.--ἀζγνάμπτων,
inflexible, not to be resisted or subdued.
The older Greek poets are apt to speak
of Eros, not in his gentler aspects, but
rather as a stern and terrible power: see
eg. Sappho fr. 40 “Epos...u’ ὁ λυσιμέλης
δόνει: Ibycus fr. 1 Ἔρος... ἐγκρατέως...
τινάσσει : Soph. 77. 441 f.: id. fr. 855.
13 (οἵ Κύπρις) τίν᾽ οὐ παλαίουσ᾽ és τρὶς
ἐκβάλλει θεῶν ;

74 2. In these two verses there may
have been a mention of Demeter and of
Dionysus. Cp. 97 f.

76—87 The fame of the victor will
endure in song. νασιώταν.. ὕμνον, the
Cean poet’s ode: so 1X. 10 νασιῶτιν...
μέλισσαν.

79- 81 πιφαύσκοι in 81 cannot
have expressed a wish (‘may it de-
clare!’). We need, then, κε, κεν, or ἄν.
This probably stood in 79 (¢.g., κῦδος ὅς κ᾽
αὔξων καὶ ἀποφθιμένῳ) : or possibly in 80
(5... τὸν πάντα κ᾽’ ἄτρυτον χρόνον) .---
ἄτρντον, ‘unending’: see n. on V. 27.

82- 84 τό γέ τοι καλὸν ἔργον : cp.
x11. 83 τό γε σὸν κλέος αἰνεῖ.-- γνησίων,


‘of genuine strain,’ 2.6. genuinely in-
spired.—tpov...netrat: ‘is laid up om
high with the gods’; is consigned to
immortality.

85—87 σὺν δ᾽ ἀλαθείᾳ βροτῶν
κιτ.λ.- lit., ‘and, with the help of truth
on the part of men, most glorious (for
the dead man) is that joy of the Muse
(the ode) which is left, even after his
death.’ For σὺν ἀλαθείᾳ, see VII. 41 ff.
n.—eélrep..@dvy: the epic εἰ with
subjunct., found also in tragic lyrics
(Soph. O. Ζ: 198 π.). --ἄθυρμα : cp. the
poet’s first epigramma, ν. 3, ἐν ἀθύρμασι
Μουσᾶν. In Pindar P. Vv. 21 the κῶμος
is ᾿Απολλώνιον ἄθυρμα, his favourite
‘pastime,’ or ‘delight.’ So ἀθύρειν, of
the poet’s efforts, 7. 111. 57: Lat. dusus,
ludere.

As regards the lost epithet of Μουσᾶν
here, ἀγακλειτᾶν or πολυκλειτᾶν would
perhaps best suit the context.

88- 96 εἰσὶ δ᾽... τὸ μέλλον. A
‘gnomic’ passage, consisting of general
reflections suggested by the athlete’s
success in his special line of effort.
The hints in the mutilated text plainly
indicate the general tenor: the supple-
ments which I suggest may serve to
illustrate it. For the Doric ἃ of ἄγαγε in


epode 3.


str. 4.


ant. 4.


312 BAKXYAIAOY (VIII, 1X


ἐπ. 8. εὐμημᾷ{ν δὲ καὶ Δάματρος ἔδωκε χάριν
2 κ]αὶ Διων[ύσον Κρονίδας] θεοτίματον πόλιν
svaiew ἀπο[ρθήτους θαλ]εῦντας"
100 4 χρυσεοσκάπτρ|ου Διὸς

5 ὅς] τι καλὸν φέρεται,

6 πᾶς αἰ]νέοι: Τιμοξ ένου

τπα]ιδὶὲ σὺν κώμοις ἅμαρ-

8. τέϊοιτε πεντὶ άθλου (β)έκατι.

—


IX. [XJ
<ATAAQI (2) AOHNAIQI
ΔΡΟΛΛΕΙ ICOMIA>


στρα. Φή]μα, σὺ ylalp ἀ[γγελίαις θνατῶν ἐπ]οιχνεῖς
 φῦ]λα, καὶ πᾶσιν πιφαύσκεις͵
8 τηλόσ |e Aap ομένα


separate fragment, placed here by Blass (in K.’s edition). 97. The verse began with
τς ΜΙ. The letter before MI was M or 1. The letter after MI had a base like that
of Aor Ptolemaic w. These traces suit YMMI(N)A. For omission of N in the Ms.,
see p. 128, «2. (i).—Blass (1st ed.) wrote ὕμμιν (Jurenka, tupuly δὲ καὶ ταύταν παρέ]δωκε
χάριν). In “πᾶ and 3rd ed. Blass writes τιμίῳ [δ᾽ ᾿Ηρακλέϊ δ]ῶκε χάριν. As the verse
then begins with -~~, he proposes in v. 19 to read δὴ τότ᾽ for ἃ καὶ τότ᾽, and in 45


to omit ὦ. ι
before veo. indicate either N or AI.


99 cuvres A: A® wrote ὦ over the second ε.


102 The traces


Blass (1st ed.) read them as ὦ, and wrote viv]


v. 91, cp. ἄγετο (a) in xIx. 4. In
v. go δνόφοισιν is hardly doubtful: cp.
xv. 32 f. Perhaps Horace, a student
of Bacchylides, had that phrase in mind
when he wrote, Prudens futuri temporis
exttum Caliginosa nocte premit deus (111.
xxix. 29 f.). Theognis, indeed, has ὄρφνη
yap τέταται (1077) in a like context, but
that is not so verbally near.—There is
a close parallelism here with the train of
thought in Ix. 35 ff., ματεύει | δ᾽ ἄλλος
ἀλλοίαν κέλευθον... 45 ff. τὸ μέλλον | δ᾽
ἀκρίτους τίκτει τελευτάς, | πᾷ τύχα βρίσει.

97- 102 The conclusion. Here the
poet seems to address the people of
Phlius. The general sense may have
been somewhat as follows :—‘To you,
for the sake of (Demeter and) Dionysus,
Zeus has given to dwell in a city honoured
of gods and unravaged.’ Then the ode
ends with another reference to the victory
of Automedes.

97 ff. The καὶ Διων- in 98 makes it
‘strongly probable that Demzeter was named


in 97. These two were prominent among
the divinities of Phlius, which depended
on vines and agriculture. On the acro-
polis there was a sacred περίβολος of
Demeter, and within it a ναός containing
images of her and Persephone. A festival
in her honour, with a mystic ritual, was
held every fourth year at Κελεαί, near
Phlius. In the lower town was an
ancient ἱερόν of Dionysus. Cp. Paus. 1.
13. 5—7, and E. Curtius, Pe/op. 11.
471 ff.

Verse 97 must have begun with ~-~,
like vv. 19 and 45, where there is no
reason to doubt the text: and ὕμ[μι]ν
δὲ is most probable. A tentative restora-
tion is shown (exempli gratia) above.

99 ἀπορθήτους : cp. 52. The absence
of an accent on o in the Ms. affords a
presumption in favour of acc. plur. rather
than acc. sing.—@adevvras. θαλέω was
an alternative form for θάλλω: Pindar
has θάλησε (VV. Iv. 88, cp. xX. 42):
Hippocr. 6. 654 (Littré) θαλέοντα (v. 1.


VIII, IX] ETTINIKOI


313

To you (of Phlius), for the sake of Demeter and of Dionysus, the son epode 4.
of Cronus has granted to dwell in a god-honoured city, unravaged and
prosperous. When a man wins a meed of honour from golden-sceptred
Zeus, let all give praise:—attend ye with festal songs on the son of
Timoxenus, for his victory in the pentathlon.


[Ἐν [J


For an Athenian [Aglaos 7], winner of foot-races
at the Isthmus.


Fame! thou roamest with tidings o’er the tribes of men, and str. στ.
declarest them to all, shining afar,


ὦ νέοι, supposing that, as there is not room for νῦν in 102, it had adhered to tou.
He now accepts K.’s αὐ (instead of w), and reads τοῦτ᾽ alvéot. 108 f. Restored
by Blass.

Ix. The title has perished with the lost part of column XVII. (see cr. ἢ. on VIII.
89—94). 14 Cp. cr. n. on vit. 96. Small parts of 1—4 are supplied by a
fragment (23 K.) which Blass has placed here.—dmeplwy νήριθμ᾽ ἐποιχνεῖς | φῦλα
Wilamowitz: ἀθανάτων θνατῶν τ᾽ ἐποιχνεῖς | φῦλα Headlam: ἀγγελέουσ᾽ ἐπὶ χθόν᾽
οἰχνεῖς | καλὰ καὶ πᾶσαν θάλασσαν Jurenka: αἰὲν ἐπ᾽ ἀνθρώπους (or ἐν ἀνθρώποι5)


πεδοιχνεῖς | ἄθλα Nairn.


θαλέθοντα) : Quint. Smyrn. 11. 96 θαλέ-
ουσι: Nonnus 16. 78 θαλέει. (In Mosch.
11. 67 θαλέεσκε is a v. 1. for θαλέθεσκε.)

100—102 Διὸς and φέρεται seem
fairly certain. Before αἰνέοι I supply
πᾶς (-- πᾶς τις, as in Soph. O. 7. 596,
O. C. 597, Zl. 972, and often), because
these words introduce the exhortation,
σὺν κώμοις ἁμαρτέοιτε. The genitive xp.
Διὸς recalls vi. 1 ff., Λάχων Διὸς μεγί-
στου | λάχε φέρτατον πόδεσσι | κῦδος : it
denotes the source from which the honour
comes. καλόν (τι) is the Nemean victory:
cp. 11. 6, Pind. P. vill. 88 ὁ δὲ νέον τι
καλὸν λαχών (‘2 fresh honour’). If ὃς
be read, φέρεται (midd.) is ‘wins.’ I
slightly prefer this to @ (Blass), with
which φέρεται (pass.) =‘ is borne’: though
that is tenable. Blass supplies τοῦτ᾽
before αἰνέοι, z.e. ‘to whomsoever an
honour is borne (from the gods), let him
be thankful for it.’ @ would naturally
mean the victor, who, on this view, is
the subject of αἰνέοι. In this context,
however, the subject of αἱνέοι should be,
not the victor, but one who praises
him.—The long syllable before αἰνέοι,
whatever it was, must have been added
in the MS. to v. Ior: cp. 73 ἢ.

104 f. ἁμαρτέοιτε: a probable sup-
plement. It is in favour of ἁ- rather
than 6-, that the Ms. has ἁμαρτεῖν (= dxo-


λουθεῖν) in xvil. 46. That form is found
also in Herodas Iv. 95 and v. 43: and
is attested by Eustathius (//. p. 592, 21)
as coexisting with ὁμαρτεῖν. The adv.
ἁμαρτῇ occurs in 77. 5. 656, etc.—Cp.
Aesch. fr. 355. 2 μιξοβόαν πρέπει | διθύ-
pauBov ὁμαρτεῖν | σύγκωμον Διονύσῳ. ---
βέκατι (supplied by Blass) as in 1. 6 f.
Cp. ν. 33 vuveiv...éxare νίκας (also VI. ΤΙ,
IX. £5).


IX. 1- 8 Φήμα bears far and wide,
even to the nether world, the tidings of
an athlete’s victory: cp. III. I ff. Φήμα
...pépovo’ ἀγγελίαν. The supplements
suggested above are mine. For the dat.
ἀγγελίαις, cp. Theocrs XXV. 32 (ἀλωαὶ)
ἃς ἡμεῖς ἔργοισιν ἐποιχόμεθα : for πιφαύ-
σκειβ, VIII. 81. Note that the last
syllable of the second verse of the strophe
is long in 12 and 30, though anceps in
40.---πᾶσιν : the papyrus has πᾶ..., as it
has πᾶσιν (πᾶσιν) in XIV. 54.

Blass writes: ἀμφ᾽ ἀρετᾷ (‘in the cause
of prowess’) θνατῶν ἐποιχνεῖς | φῦλα, καὶ
πᾶσιν τίθησθα | τηλόσε λαμπομέναν. He
conceives Φήμα as being here, ‘ov...
nuntius victoriae alicuins,...sed gloria.”
The two notions are closely akin: but
the personified Φήμα is surely, like Fama,
a bearer of tidings.


314


BAKXYAIAOY


[ΙΧ


am ἢ Ν
4 καὶ γᾶς ὑπὸ κεύθεσι’ κλεινοὶ


5. 58 of γέ]νωνται [χάρμ’
ὁ παντὶ χώρῳ €[vv ov,


ἔχουσιν
κα te ἊΣ x
ὅ,τι χρυϊ σέαν ἴδον εὔ-


7 λβον] ὀφθαλμοῖσι Ν[ίκαν
8 π᾿ αῦλ]αν ἀπράκταν [τε μόχθων.
ο᾿Α[γλ]αῷ καὶ νῦν κασυγνήτας ἀκοίτας

το νασιῶτιν ἐκίνησεν λιγύφθογγον μέλισσαν,


2 ,
αντ. a.


: ἀχ]ειρὲς ἵν᾽ ἀθάνατον Μουσᾶν ἄγαλμα


w % 4 »
2 Evvov ἀνθρώποισιν εἴη


3 χάρμα, τεὰν ἀρετὰν


« μανῦον ἐπιχθονίοισιν,
1B εὅσσάκις Νίκας ἕκατι
6 ἄνθεσι ξανθὰν ἀναδησάμενος κεφαλὰν
γ κῦδος εὐρείαις ᾿Αθάναις
wn > ΄ /
8 θῆκας Οἰνείδαις τε δόξαν.


5 The v. ended with “wx (from χώρῳ ?).
7 The first letter of the verse was certainly O.


The word belonged metrically to v. 6.
9 Between A and I there is


space for about four letters, of which the third may have been A; but this is not


4—8 I give above (exempli gratia)
a tentative restoration.—kal yas ὑπὸ
κεύθεσι : cp. Soph. £7. 1066 f. ὦ χθονία
βροτοῖσι φάμα: and Pind. O. vill. 81,
where ’AyyeAla, daughter of Hermes,
brings news of an athlete’s victory to his
father in the shades.—For κλεινοὶ δ᾽ | of
γένωνται, cp. VIII. 22 ff, Krewol...of...
ἐρέψωνται κόμαν.---χάρμ᾽...ξυνόν. ξυνὸν...
χάρμα occurs in 12 f., where the general
sentiment expressed here is applied to
the particular case of Aglaos (if that was
his name). It seems not unlikely that
the phrase in 12 f. was an echo from
5 f.—xépw. The letters ὧν alone remain.
There is no trace whatever of the letter
before them, but only an acute accent,
showing that the word was paroxytone.
δάμῳ (the victor’s people) is possible;
but the context here and in 12 f. rather
favours χώρῳ. Fame creates a wide-
spread sympathy with the victor’striumph:
the tidings come even to the shades.

As to the rest of vv. 6—8, note these
points. (1) Verse 7 began with O. The
N of ΟΦΘΑΛΜΟΙΟΙΝ, in connexion with
XPY in v. 6, suggests Nike. (2) Inv. 8
the first word began with II or I, and
ended with AN. (3) After ἀπράκταν
the first letter was T, I, Π, or I. The
next letter was almost certainly E.—


ἴδον evoABov. I had thought also of
ἴδεν εὔχονται. Another resource would
be worthevoo|ovow : but we rather require
an aorist.—ratiav ἀπράκταν, ‘a restful
pause’ from the toils of the athlete.
Plut. dor. 270 A (nuépas) ἀποφράδας
καὶ ἀπράκτους (dies nefastos et otiosos).
Walz het. vol. IV. p. 15 ἑορτὴν ἄπρακτον,
‘a holiday on which no work is done.’
For the place of τε cp. Soph. 0. 7. 528
ἐξ ὀμμάτων δ᾽ ὀρθῶν τε κἀξ ὀρθῆς φρενός.
For the sentiment, Pind. O. 1. 97 ff. ὁ
νικῶν δὲ λοιπὸν ἀμφὶ βίοτον | ἔχει μελι-
τόεσσαν εὐδίαν | ἀξθλων γ᾽ ἕνεκεν : Οὐ
Vill. 5. ff. μαιομένων μεγάλαν | ἀρετὰν
θυμῷ λαβεῖν, | τῶν δὲ μόχθων ἀμπνοάν,
‘(athletes) whose spirit is eager to attain
great glory, and a respite from their
toils.’—Jurenka gives παῦσαν ἀπράκταν
μέριμναν, Shave made an end of ineffec-
tual anxiety’ (for victory): but the initial
of the third word cannot have been M.
9—14 For Aglaos, his brother-in-
law has commissioned the poet of Ceos
to write an ode, that his prowess (ἀρετή)
may have a lasting record. On the
problem presented by the lacunas in
verses g and 11, see the Appendix. In
v. 9 ᾿Αγλαῷ, supplied by Blass, is very
probable. In v. 11 his ἀχειρὲς seems less
so. The word occurs in Batrachomyo-


Ix] ETTINIKOI 315
even in the depths of the nether world: and those who win
renown have a joy that is shared in every place, because their
eyes have seen golden, blessed Victory, and they have found a
restful pause from their toils.

*Tis on behalf of Aglaos now that his sister's husband has


moved the clear-voiced singer, the island bee,


in order that the immortal tribute of the Muses, a monument
not made with hands, might be a common joy for mankind,—
that it might tell all men, Aglaos, of thy prowess, seen as oft as,
by grace of Victory, thou hast caused thy golden hair to be
crowned with flowers, and hast brought glory to spacious


Athens, with honour for the Oeneidae.


certain. ᾿Αγλαῶι Blass.


made from μανοον by A*,


10 νασιῶτιν MS.
letter was not II: hence Ilacta, τὶν (τὶν δ᾽ Pearson) Wilam. and Platt.
letters expes are certain. The letter before them may have been X or A.

15 f£. The Ms. adds ἄνθεσιν Eav- to ν. 15.


K. doubted whether the first
11 The
14 μανῦον
The final


v of ἄνθεσιν, so ill-sounding here, is doubtless due to error.


machia 300 as =‘ without hands’: here
it is to-mean ‘wot made with hands?
To justify it, we must suppose that it
was meant to distinguish the poet’s
ἄγαλμα from the sculptor’s: that would
be Pindaric (4. v. 1), but is less like
Bacchylides.

9 καὶ viv, ‘e’en now,’ marking the
transition from the proem to the im-
mediate theme, just as in x. gf., σέθεν
δ᾽ ἕκατι | καὶ viv.

10 The νασιώτιν of the ms. shortens
a syllable (-t7) which is long in vv. 20,
38, and 48. The poet perhaps wrote
νασιώταν: cp. Aesch. Ag. rir χερὶ
πράκτορι, 664 τύχη...σωτήρ, Hum. 186
δίκαι καρανιστῆρες, etc. The correction
is such as a grammarian might have
made.—péAtwoav: cp. Pind. P. x. 53 f.
ἐγκωμίων γὰρ ἄωτος ὕμνων | ἐπ᾽ ἄλλοτ᾽
ἄλλον wre μέλισσα θύνει λόγον, ‘ the glory
of songs of praise flits like a bee from
theme to theme.’ The comparison of the
poet to a bee is frequent : Plat. Joz 534 A
λέγουσι γὰρ...οἱ ποιηταὶ ὅτι...ἐκ Μουσῶν
κήπων τινῶν ...τὰ μέλη ἡμῖν φέρουσιν
ὥσπερ αἱ μέλιτται: Ar. Av. 748 f.
ὡσπερεὶ μέλιττα | Φρύνιχος x.7.. : Leoni-
das of Tarentum (Azzhol. 1. 1) describes
Erinna as μέλισσαν... Μουσῶν ἄνθεα δρεπ-
τομέναν : Hor. C. Iv. ii. 28f. ago apis
Matinae | more modoque, etc.

11 Μουσᾶν ἄγαλμα, the ode:
n. on 1. 74.

13 τεὰν ἀρετὰν is better here than
reav ἀρετᾶν (to go with χάρμα). Our


see


poet uses the plur. ἀρεταί only in x11. 8
(and probably viii. 88), and then with
reference to several men.—If ’AyAaw be
right in v. g, there is a transition here
to the second person; cp. XV. 6—10.

151. The ὅσσα of the Ms. should
probably be ὁσσάκις, as several critics
have suggested. The syllable -«s may
have been missed by the scribe through
its likeness to -xas. ὅσσαπερ or ὅσσα δή
would also serve. (Blass defends ὅσσα
by supposing the first syllable of vixas
to be metrically τ: see n. on v. 8.)—
Νίκας ἕκατι: cp. 1. 6n.

The Ms. wrongly joins ἄνθεσιν ξαν- to
v.15; there isa like error in vv. 33 and
43. Here the hiatus after ἕκατι gives
a clue. (I indicated this in Kenyon’s
editio princeps, p. 87.)

16 ἀναδησάμενος Kepaddv: Her. 1.
195 τὰς κεφαλὰς μίτρῃσι ἀναδέονται. The
midd. is normal in this sense; cp. Pind.
ΔΊ ΧΙ. 28, 7.1.28, etc. In P. x. 40, how-
ever, ἀναδήσαντες has the same meaning.

18 Οἰνείδαις. Oeneus, sonof Pandion,
was one of the ten ἐπώνυμοι of the Attic
tribes. Οἰνεῖδαι are the members of the
tribe Οἰνηΐς. Cp. [Dem.] or. 60 ὃ 30
οὐκ ἔλαθεν Olveldas x.r.A. In mythology
Οἰνείδης is a designation of Meleager,
Tydeus, or Diomedes.—The fact that the
victor’s tribe, but not his father, is named,
has been thought to indicate that his
family was an obscure one ; but this can
hardly be inferred: though vv. 47—s1
suggest that he was not rich. The reason


ant. I.


316


BAKXYAIAOY


{Ix


9 €v Ποσειδᾶνος περικλειτοῖς ἀέθλοις
Col.18 20 0 εὐθὺς ἔνδειξ ας Ἕλλασιν ποδῶν ὁρμὰν ταχεῖαν"


2 ,
«7. a.


: δεύτερον δ᾽ οὔ]ροισιν ἔπι σταδίου,


 θερμ[ὰν ἔτι] ἴα ἄελλαν,


3 ἔστα[' βρέχω]ν δ᾽
+ papel’ ἐς evOpoo |v
s τετρ[ αέλικτο]ν ἐπεὶ


6 πὰ δρόμον.


25


ἀξ αὖτε θατήρων ἐλαίῳ
ἐμπίτνων ὅμιλον,


Ἰσθμιονίκαν


is ν{[ιἰν ἀγκ]άρυξαν εὐβού-


8 λων [ἀεθλάρχ]ων


στρ. β΄.


30 « βωμόΪν: a κλει [νά


προφᾶται"


: δὶς δ᾽ ev Νεμέᾳ Κρονίδα Ζηνὸς παρ᾽ ἁγνὸν


τε Θήβα


3 δέκτί[ 6 νιν εἸὐρύχορόν


4 τ΄ "Apyols ΣικυώΪν τε


> 5
ΚΑΤ αἱἰἱσαν"


19 ποσιδανος Μ8.; as XIII. 20 ποσιδᾶνος, XVI. 36 ποσιδᾶνι, XIX. 8 ποσι-: but XVI. 501.


ποσειδᾶνι, 79 ποσειδᾶν.
Th. Reinach: ταχεῖαν ὁρμὰν MS.


20 εὐθὺς ἔνδειξ]ας Blass:
21 οὔροισιν Blass.


ὁρμὰν ταχεῖαν A. Ludwich,
23 βρέχων] δ᾽ dite Blass.


The letter before δ᾽ was probably N, and cannot have been C.—é’ αὖτε] A ΑἾΞΕ A.


for the absence of the father’s name may
be simply metrical. Cp. u. on 54 ff.

There should probably be a full stop
(or at least a colon) after δόξαν. For
verses 15—18 refer, as ὅσσα indicates,
to all the athlete’s victories, and not to
those won at the Isthmus alone. He
had been successful at seven other places
(vv. 29—35

19 Ἰποσειδᾶνος.. «ἀέθλοις, Cp. Pind.
O. xl. 40 ἐν δ᾽ ἀμφιάλοισι Toredavos
τεθμοῖσιν.

Metre requires ὁρμὰν ταχεῖαν (not ταχ.
ὁρμ.) : see vv. 10, 38, 47- Similarly in
XIV. 47 the Ms. has ἦρχεν λόγων instead
of λόγων ἄρχεν: and in XVI. 72 χεῖρας
wéracce instead of mérace χεῖρας. Cp. also
I, 7on.

i926 The restoration of this pas-
sage given above is tentative in some
details, but hardly doubtful as to the
general sense. See the discussion in
the Appendix. Here I note the follow-


ing points. (1) An inscription from
Thera, of the first cent. B.c., quoted
by Blass (=Kaibel Zpigr. Gr. 942),


concerns a boy who won a boxing match,
and then forthwith engaged in the pan-
cration, which he also won :—ére Gep μὸν]
πνεῦμα φέρων σκληρᾶς παῖς ἀπὸ πυγμα-
χίας | ἔστα παγκρατίου βαρὺν ἐς πόνον" &


μία 5° ἀὼς | δὶς Δωροκλείδαν εἶδεν ἀεθλο-
φόρον. This suggests that εστα in 23
is tera. The signal exploit of this
athlete was that he ran in two consecu-
tive races, and won them both. Paus.
VI. 13. 3 mentions an athlete who at
Olympia won the δόλιχος, and then
forthwith (παραυτίκα) the stadion, and
after that the δίαυλος. οὔροισιν ἔπι
σταδίον, ‘at the bounds of the course,’
means, ‘at the starting-line’ (γραμμή),
from which the runners were despatched.
βρέχων δ᾽ .. αὖτε: that is, again he came
in first,—-the sweat and olive-oil from his
naked body sprinkling the clothes of the
spectators who pressed near to him at
the finish. δεύτερον δ᾽ (21), Gé αὖτε (23),
and és εὔθροον (24) are my conjectures:
for the last, cp. 111. 9 θρόησε δὲ λαὸς
ἀπείρων. (2) The use of the second
person is made certain by -ds in 20.
A transition to the third person is
certainly made in v. 23. The pronoun
of the 3rd person occurs in v. 27,
δίς νιν ἀγκάρυξαν, when the poet turns
from the vivid picture of the race to
a list of the victor’s successes. (3) My
tentative explanation of the fact that the
scribe’s dite was corrected by A® to αὖτε
would be that the original reading, βρέχων
᾿ G& αὖτε, generated two others, (a) Bpé-


1X] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 317
In Poseidon’s renowned games thou didst show thy rushing
speed to the Greeks at the outset :-—


then a second time did he take his stand at the bounds of the
course,—still breathing a storm of hot breath,—and again he
darted forward, the olive-oil from his body sprinkling the
garments of the spectators as he rushed into the cheering


crowd, after finishing the fourth round of the course.
Twice have the spokesmen of the prudent judges declared
him a victor at the Isthmus, and twice at Nemea by the holy


altar of Zeus son of Cronus:


illustrious Thebes too has duly welcomed him, and spacious


Argos, and Sicyon ;


A} has changed I to ‘, transfixed %, and written T above it (αὖτε).---ΘΑΤΗΡΩΝ A:


A® has added E above the line between © and A.


EYBOI A (cp. 34): corr. A’
by A is lost. 80 ἁ κλεινά J.


27 ἀγκάρυξαν 1].---εὐβού-


28 λων] A superscript by A*: the letter written


χων δ᾽ dike, and (ὁ) βρέχων δ᾽ aire. See
Appendix, p. 478. ---  θατήρων. θατήρ
(from Doric θαέομαι) is attested by
Hesychius.

25 τετραέλικτον (Jurenka and Platt) :
Anthol. v1. 210. 4 τετραέλικτος ὄφις (with
four-fold coils). The foot-race equal in
length to a double δίαυλος was technically
called ἵππιος. It was in use at the
Isthmian and the Nemean games (perhaps
at others also): in the case of Nemea, at
least, there was a ἵππιος for boys. In
later times it dropped out of both fes-
tivals; but Hadrian restored it to the
winter Nemea (Paus. vi. 16. 4). The
δόλιχος was longer still, but always con-
sisted of an even number of rounds.

27 £. εὐβούλων.. προφᾶται. There is
no metrical test, as only the words χρή rw”
remain in v. 56.

(1) If the metre of v. 28 was -~~—-~—-,
then the lost word was an anapaest.
W. Christ suggests συνέδρων : H. Richards,
βραβέων. Kenyon and Jurenka read
Χαρίτων. The Charites give victory’ in
the games: Pind. O. 11. 50 Χάριτες...
ἄνθεα τεθρίππων ἄγαγον : cp. NV. VII. 54.
They are εὔβουλοι as ‘judging aright,’—
giving the prize to the most deserving.
The προφᾶται would then be the judges
of the games.

(2) If the verse was -~-—~—-, then we
need sucha word as ἀεθλάρχων, proposed
by Platt. It is not extant, but is a
possible word. A careful estimate has
now led me to think that there is just
.room for it in the lacuna, as e, 9 and pare


thin letters in the papyrus. ἀγωναρχᾶν
(Soph. Az. 572) would be slightly too
large. It may fairly be urged that
εὐβούλων is in favour of a word denoting
the actual judges. Then προφᾶται would
be the heralds.

80-- 87 The following were some of
the festivals connected with the places
mentioned. 1. 7hebes : Ἡράκλεια, ᾿Τόλαια.
(Pindar’s so-called ‘second Pythian’ re-
lates to a Theban festival.) 2. Argos:
Ἥραια, for which (according to a probable
view) ᾿Ἑκατόμβαια was another name.
A bronze shield (χαλκός in Pind. O. vit.
83) was the prize. 3. Sicyon: Πύθια.
4. Lellene in Achaia, west of Sicyon:
Θεοξένια (to Apollo). The prize was a


cloak, χλαῖνα (cp. Pind. O. 1X. 97).
5. Luboea: Tepatoria (to Poseidon),
᾿Αμαρύνθια (to Artemis). 6. Aegina:


“Hpaa, Αἰάκεια. --- ΑἸ] these places are in
Pindar’s list (O. ΧΙ]. 107—112), which
includes also Megara, Eleusis, Marathon,
the Arcadian Λύκαια (noticed also in O.
IX. 104), and Aetna. In Boeotia there
were other ἀγῶνες besides the Theban
(cp. O. vil. 84 ff.). These local games
must have done more for the physical
training of Greeks at large than even the
four greater festivals.

81 £. δέκτο, from ἐδέγμην, 2nd aor. of
δέχομαι (7. 2. 420: Pind. O. 2. 49
ἔδεκτο)ῆ. Cp. the Homeric aorists ἄλτο,
λέκτο (‘counted’), ὦρτο, etc. Take δέκτο
with κατ᾽ αἶσαν (71. το. 445), ‘gave him
welcome due’: 2.6. his prowess won its
reward. —evpvxopov : see n. on VIII. 17.—


epode I.


str. 2.


[1x


318 BAKXYAIAOY

sol τε Π[ελλάν]αν νέμονται,

6 ἀμφί τ᾽ EvBouav πολζυλάϊο]ν, οἵ θ᾽ ἱερὰν

35 τνᾶσοϊν Αἴγιν]αν. ματεύει ἡ

8. δ᾽ ἄλλζος ἀλλοί]αν κέλευθον,

ο ἄντι[να στείχων ἀριγνώτοιο δόξας

10 τεύξεται. μυρίαι δ᾽ ἀνδρῶν ἐπιστᾶμαι πέλονται"
ἀντ. β. τἢ γὰρ σοφὸς ἢ Χαρίτων τιμᾶν λελογχὼς


40 «ἐλπίδι χρυσέᾳ τέθαλεν'
—


¥ f'
3 τινα θευπροπίαν


> rod ν > > A #
«εἰδώς: ἕτερος δ᾽ ἐπὶ πάσι
5 ποικίλον τόξον τιταίνει"
"ἢ > * 2 + ’, Ν » Ν “ >
6 οἱ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἔργοισίν τε Kai ἀμφὶ βοῶν ἀγέλαις
Ἂς ἊΨ ‘ ΄
45 τθυμὸν αὔξουσιν: τὸ μέλλον
ε δ᾽ ἀκρίτους τίκτει τελευτάς,


~ a ΄
97a τύχα βρίσει.


τὸ μὲν κάλλιστον, ἐσθλὸν


το ἄνδρα πολλῶν ὑπ᾽ ἀνθρώπων πολυζήλωτον εἶμεν"


83. The Ms. adds the syllables ἀμφί τ᾽ Ἐὔβοι- to v. 33.
38 EIIICTATAI A; corr. A’.
42 πάσι Blass:


τεύξεται to ν. 37.
line by .45.--τιμᾶν Μ5.: τιμὰν K.


87 £ The Ms. adds
39 7 γὰρ] Γ added above the
ΠΑΙΟῚ ms. 48:1. The


Σικυών : Σεκυών in Bekker Anecd.
P- §55, and on coins: as Ὁ. Rossbach
would read here.

84 πολυλάϊον (λήϊον, a crop, or a
corn-field): 1. 5. 613 vate πολυκτήμων,
πολυλήϊος.

86:5. κέλευθον : cp. vill. 88f.: Pind. O.
IX. 104 ff.: ἐντὶ yap ἄλλαι [ὁδῶν ὁδοὶ
mepairepat, | μία δ᾽ οὐχ ἅπαντας ἄμμε
θρέψει | wedéra.—After ἄντι-, various
supplements are possible : ἅντινα στείχων,
Blass, Jurenka: av τις εὖ τάμνων Kenyon :
ay τις ἐμβαίνων Tyrrell, Richards. More
spirit would be given to the phrase by
dvrw’ ὁρμαίνων (intrans.), ‘pressing along’
his chosen path.

39--45 ἢ γὰρ codds...atfovow. If
in 42 we read πάσι (Blass, 1st and 3rd
ed.) instead of the Ms. παισί, the enumera-
tion is as follows.

1. σοφός is the man of intellectual
pursuits, and especially the poet: cp.
Pind. O. 1. 9, 11. 94, P. IV. 295, Z. I. 45,
etc.

2. Χαρίτων τιμᾶν λελογχώς (the gen.
with λαγχάνω as in I. 55 f.). Here, pro-
bably, it is the successful athlete of whom
the author is chiefly thinking: εὐάγων
τιμά (Pind. MV. X. 38) is the gift of the
Charites. But they also give skill in


song, in music (P. 1X. 8g), and in other
arts. More generally, it is due to them
el σοφός, εἰ καλός, ef τις ἀγλαὸς ἀνήρ
(O. χιν. 7).

3- ἤ τινα θευπροπίαν εἰδώς : alluding.
to the μάντις, who divines by augury or by
sacrifice (ἔμπυρα), and to the χρησμολόγος,
learned in old prophecies.—The Homeric
θεοπροπίη is concrete, ‘a prophecy,’ or
‘oracle’ (//. 11. 793 etc.): the neut. sing.
θεοπρόπιον, used by Herodotus, occurs
only in //, 1. 85: but here fhe abstract
sense is fitter.

4. πάσι, the acquisition of wealth:
Hesych, πᾶσις" κτῆσις. The reference is
to the various forms of ἐμπορία and χρη-
ματισμός.---ποικίλον, ‘ wily’ (in pursuit of
κέρδος). (Or, ‘of varied aim,’—the modes
of πᾶσις being diverse: but this is perhaps
too artificial. }

With the Ms. παισὶ the sense would be:
‘Another aims at youths the cunningly-
wrought shaft of song.’ Cp. Pind. Z 11.
1—3 οἱ μὲν πάλαι... ῥίμφα παιδείους ἐτό-
ξευον μελιγάρυας ὕμνους, ‘the men of old
lightly bent at youths their shafts of
honey-voiced song.’ Pindar was think-
ing, as Bacchylides would be here,
of such poets as Ibycus and Anacreon ;
perhaps also of Alcaeus. Examples of.


Ix] ETTINIKOI 319
also the dwellers in Pellene, and in the region of Euboea with
many cornfields, and in the sacred isle of Aegina.

Men seek various paths which they shall tread to the winning
of bright renown. And countless are the kinds of human
knowledge. A man is rich in golden hope


because he has wisdom ; or has been honoured with the gifts of ant. 2.
the Graces, or has skill in some manner of soothsaying ; another
aims his wily shaft at wealth; while some there be who take


delight in the works of husbandry, and in herds of oxen.
The future brings forth issues which cannot be judged before-


hand, so as to tell how Fortune will incline the scale.


The noblest


lot for a man is that his own worth should make him widely


admired among his fellows.


ms. adds the syllables οἱ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἔργοι- to v. 4


47 IIAI. The I seems to


3.
have been added by A*.— pice. τὸ μὲν] BPICENOMEN A ({.6. he read IT as N):


corr. A®.—ECEAQN A (e for 6).


ἐσθλὸν Wilamowitz, Blass.


such songs would be the ode of Ibycus
to Gorgias (fr. 30 Bergk) and those of
Anacreon to Cleobulus and Smerdias
(fr. 3, 5, 47)- Cp. also Alcaeus, fr. 46.
This species of lyric poetry had become
very popular (largely through Anacreon)
before our poet’s time. Bacchylides him-
self, in describing the joys of peace, says
(fr. 3. 12), παιδικοί θ᾽ ὕμνοι φλέγονται.
The epithet ποικίλον would denote poetic
art: Pind. fr. 179 ὑφαίνω δ᾽ ᾿Αμυθαονί-
Sats ποικίλον | dvdnua: fr. 194 τειχίζωμεν
non ποικίλον κόσμον αὐδάεντα λόγων.

- But there are strong objections to παισί.
(1) Poetry should clearly be included
under the phrase in 39, ἢ σοφὸς x.7.A.
(2) It seems almost grotesque that poetry,
as a pursuit, should be represented by
this one species of lyric. (3) The order
of enumeration is perverse ; since poetry,
if not included under the pursuits in-
dicated in v. 39, should at least be
mentioned in close connexion with
them.

5. ἔργοισίν τε καὶ... βοῶν ἀγέλαις.
The conjunction shows that ἔργα are the
works of husbandry. These are the
farmers and the herdsmen. (Otherwise,
the ἔργα might have been those of the
craftsman or artist: cp. Pind. O. vil. 52
ἔργα δὲ ζωοῖσιν ἑρπόντεσσί θ᾽ ὁμοῖα κέ-
λευθοι φέρον.)---βυμὸν αὔξουσιν, ‘enlarge
their spirit,’ ‘take delight,’ therein: see
n. on I. 52.

Headlam has well observed that in
vv. 39—45 Β. concisely paraphrases
Solon fr. 13. 43—54, where we have


(1) the pursudt of wealth, 43—46: (2)
agriculture, 47 f.: (3) artistic handi-
crafts, 49 f..—which would come under
the gifts of the Χάριτες here: (4) poetry,
51 f., and (5) soothsaying, 53 1. This
further confirms πάσι in 42.—See Ap-
pendix.

46:. ἀκρίτους is explained by πᾷ
τύχα βρίσει: the future brings forth
issues which cannot be judged (before-
hand), (so as to decide) in what way
fortune will incline. That is, the future
is to bring forth success or failure ; but
no one can tell sow which it will be.—
βρίσει is a metaphor from the scales of a
balance. Cp. Arist. Problem. 16. 11
(p. 915 ὁ 3) ὅταν βρίσῃ ὁ κύκλος ἐπὶ
θάτερον μέρος.

47—49 τὸ μὲν κάλλιστον κιτιλ. The
MS. supports ἐσθλῶν : but I think that
ἐσθλὸν must be right. ‘The fairest lot is
that one should be admired as a man of
worth by many of his fellows.’ The
antithesis is between personal ἀρετή and
wealth. ‘I know a/so’—the poet con-
tinues—‘ the great power of wealth,’ etc.
The train of thought is parallel with that
in 1. 49—53 φαμὶ καὶ φάσω μέγιστον |
κῦδος ἔχειν ἀρετάν, πλοῦϊτος δὲ καὶ δειλοῖσιν
ἀνθρώπων ὁμιλεῖ. For μέν, cp. XVI. 1.

If ἐσθλῶν were read, it would be
neuter (as the plural is in Iv. rgf.,
v. 198, and XvI. 132), and might best
be joined with πολλῶν : ‘ the fairest lot is
that ὦ man should be admired by his
fellows for many excellent things.’ But
these ἐσθλά would be too vague for the


BAKXYAIAOY [Ix, x


:010a καὶ πλούτου μεγάλαν δύνασιν,

80 εἃ καὶ τὸν ἀχρεῖον Til Ono |e
ϑχρηστόν. τί μακρὰν γλῶσσαν ἰθύσας ἐλαύνω
,« ἐκτὸς ὁδοῦ; πέφαται θνατοῖσι νίκας


. 3 ΄
εὕστε]ρον εὐφροσύνα'


Col.19 αὐλῶν


καναχαῖσι γλυκεῖαν


55 τμειγν ύμεν φόρμιγγος ὀμφὰν
8 χρή TW [εὐμούσους τ᾽ ἀοιδάς.


x [xl
AAEZIAAMQI METATIONTINGI


TTAIAL TTAAAICTHI


στρ. a,


ΠΎΘΙΑ


:- Nixa [γλυκύδωρε, μεγίσταν


2 σοὶ πατὴρ ὦπασσε τιμὰν
3 ὑψίζυγος Οὐρανιδᾶν

3 YA a + ,
+ ἐν πολυχρύσῳ δ᾽ Ὀλύμπῳ


5 Ζηνὶ παρισταμένα


΄ rs > ,
6 Kpwes τέλος ἀθανάτοι-
Fd . Lal > ἴων
7 σίν τε καὶ θνατοῖς ἀρετᾶς.


8 ἔλλαθι, [βαθυπλοκάμου


49 δύνασιν] ATNAMIN A: corr. A’.


A? has written T over I, but what he meant is doubtful.


51 ἰθύσας] LOYCAC (Θ made from 0) A.


K. thinks that a line was


drawn through -AC. This does not seem quite certain: there is a small blot between


A and C, but C is intact.


ΣΚ. The title has been added by A® in the left margin.


1—7 The letter


after NIKA is read by K. as Τ': by Blass, as I with a stroke drawn through it.


context: they would not be specifically
‘worthy gualities or deeds,—marks of
ἀρετή.

εἶμεν is a Doric form (also Boeotian
Aeolic, Meister 1. 279), not found in
Homer: Bacchylides uses it only here,
but ἔμμεν in V. 144, XVII. 31, 56.

51f. μακράν, αἦν.--- γλῶσσαν ἰθύσας.
‘Why have I turned my strain to far-off
things? Why am I driving out of my
course?’ Cp. Pind. 4. vii. 71 f. ἄκονθ᾽
wre χαλκοπάρᾳον ὄρσαι | θοὰν γλῶσσαν :
see also above, v. 1906 η.---ἰθύσας, ἰθύω
is elsewhere intrans. ; hence Robinson
Ellis conj. ἰθύνας. (ἰθείας, Housman. )—
ἐκτὸς ὁδοῦ. So Pindar (P. ΧΙ. 38) says,
after a digression, ἢ ῥ᾽, ὦ φίλοι, xar’
ἀμευσίπορον τρίοδον ἐδινήθην, | ὀρθὰν κέ-


λευθον ἰὼν τὸ mpiv.—The poet apologizes
for the irrelevance of the gnomic passage
beginning with ματεύει in v. 35. The
metaphor in γλῶσσαν ἰθύσας, if it is to
harmonize with ἐλαύνω, should be from
guiding the course of a chariot (cp. //. 11.
828 Keio’ ἵππους τε καὶ ἅρμ᾽ ἰθύνομεν),--
not from launching a missile.

πέφαται-- πέφανται (//. 2. 122 etc.),
‘has been set forth,’ ‘appointed.’ This
form occurs elsewhere only in an Ionic
excerpt from Περικτιόνη (Plato’s mother)
in Stobaeus Flor. 85. 17.

54- 57 The reference in the closing
verses to festal music and song resembles
that in VIII. 102 ff. and x11. 230f. The
context may have been somewhat of the
kind suggested above. For αὐλῶν xava-


ἘΣ


ΙΧ, Χ] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 321

I know also the mighty power of riches, which can clothe even
the useless man with merit—But wherefore have I turned my
strain so far out of its due course? After victory, festal joy is
appointed for mortals: blend ye the shrill sounds of flutes with


the clear voice of the lyre, and with tuneful songs.


x. [XT]


For Alexidamus of Metapontion, winner of the boys wrestling-
match at Delphi.


Victory, giver of sweet gifts, great is the honour assigned to
1866 by the Father of the Heaven-born, throned on high: standing
at the side of Zeus in golden Olympus thou judgest the issue of
prowess for immortals and for men.

Be gracious to us, O daughter of Styx with the flowing tresses,


Fulvius Ursinus (Carmina novem illustrium feminarum et lyricorum, Antwerp 1568,
p- 206) quotes from Stobaeus FYor. 111. (Περὶ φρονήσεως) the following words, which
are not now extant in any MS. or edition of Stobaeus: Βακχυλίδης δὲ τὴν Νίκην γλυκύ-
δωρόν φησι καὶ ἐν πολυχρύσῳ ᾿Ολύμπῳ Ζηνὶ παρισταμένην κρίνειν τέλος ἀθανάτοισί τε καὶ
θνητοῖς ἀρετῆς. Hence Neue (Bacchyl. Fragm. p. 18, 1832) and Bergk (fr. 9) gave Nixa
γλυκύδωρος...ἐν πολυχρύσῳ κ.τ.λ..... κρίνει τέλος ἀθανάτοισί τε κ.τ.λ.--- μεγίσταν Jurenka:


ὥὦπασσε τιμὰν J. (τιμὰν ὄπασσεν Jurenka): Οὐρανιδᾶν J.


8 βαθυπλοκάμου J.


χαῖσι cp. 11. 12 : and for φόρμιγγος ὀμφὰν
XIII. 13.—Blass thinks that the name of
the victor’s father may have stood in 55
(e.g-, Δάμωνος vig): cp. 18 n.


x. 1- 86 The first three verses pro-
bably spoke generally of the high honour
given to Nike by Zeus; then vv. 5—8
define her function. Cp. ZZ 4. 166
Κρονίδης ὑψίζυγος.

4. πολυχρύσῳ, the epithet of rich
cities (Mycenae etc.), fitly applied by
Pindar (2. vi. 8) and Sophocles (0. 7.
151) to Delphi,.is too material for
Olympus: very different is the Homeric
ἀπ᾽ αἰγλήεντος Ὀλύμπου (71. 1. §32).—
Ζηνὶ παρισταμένα: cp. Hes. Theog. 386.
(of Νίκη and the other children of Styx),
τῶν οὐκ ἔστ᾽ ἀπάνευθε Διὸς δόμος οὐδέ τις
ἕδρη, | ἀλλ᾽ αἰεὶ πὰρ Ζηνὶ βαρυκτύπῳ


-ἑδριόωνται.


Gf. κρίνεις τέλος.. ἀρετᾶς, ‘decidest


the zsswe of prowess’ (rather than ‘ad-.


judgest the prize’ for it). Pindar indeed
sometimes uses τέλος in a sense equivalent
to ‘prize’: the clearest case is O. XI. 67
Δόρυκλος δ᾽ ἔφερε πυγμᾶς τέλος, which
may fairly be rendered, he ‘won the
prize for boxing’ (lit-, ‘secured the
result’), Cp. 7. 1 26f. οὐ yap ἦν


1. 8.


πενταέθλιον, ἀλλ’ ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ | ἔργματι
κεῖτο τέλος, ‘a (separate) result was ap-
pointed for each feat’ (where it is usually
rendered ‘prize’; and that is implied).
In P. 1x. 118 the maiden is placed at the
end of the course, τέλος ἔμμεν ἄκρον :
where, as the adj. shows, it means ‘goal’
(rather than ‘prize’;—though she was
that also).

8 dab, ‘be propitious.’ On this
form see H. Weir Smyth, Greek Melic
Poets p. 418; and Meister, Gr. Dial. 1.
413. It is the imperat. of an Aeolic
perfect (cited by Herodian 11. 499. 19
and 605. 8). Two points should be
noted. (1) AA is from oA: the primary
form of the present (not extant) would be
σίσλημι : and of the perf. stem, σέσλᾶ.
Cp. Aeolic χέλλιοι (χίλιοι), from χέσλιοι.
(2) The perfect ought to have a: cp.
Callim. fr. 121 ἔλλᾶτε : Theocr. Xv. 143
tha@. The a here may be due to the
preceding long syllable (by levelling of
quantity): in 71. 1. 583 we have ἵλαος,
though in 9. 639 (etc.) ἵλᾶος. Or it may
be a simple imitation of the epic ἡ in
ὕληθι (Od. 3. 380). In Simonides fr. 49
(vulg. ἴλαθι) ἔλλαθι should perhaps be
read: the quantity is there uncertain.


22


epode 2.


str. τὰ


322


ῃ
1


iy


9 κούρα [Στυγὸ
10 ὶ ᾿


΄ A
11 γυιων [κατέ
ν


an ,
12 Κώμου TE Και


4 παῖδα θαητὸν


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


[Χ


ὀρ]θοδίκου' σέθεν δ᾽ ἕκατι
A /

καὶ νῦν Μεταζόντιον ev-

Kove νέων

3 ΄ 4 ᾿

sie θεότιμον ἄστυ'
Ἅ ΝΣ

3 ὑμνεῦσι δὲ Πυθιόνικον


oh
αἰσκου.
Ἷ


ἵλεῳ νιν ὁ Δαλογενὴς vi-


2 Os βαθυζώνοιο Aarovs
δέκτο βλεφάρῳ: πολέες ~~
δ᾽ ἀμφ᾽ ᾿Αλεξίδαμον ἀνθέων


3
4
s ἐν πεδίῳ στέφανοι
20 6


Κίρρας ἔπεσον κρατερᾶς


7 pa παννίκοιο πάλας"


8 οὐκ εἶδέ νιν ἀέλιος


᾿

ο κείνῳ γε σὺν ἄματι πρὸς γαίᾳ πεσόντα.
, XN Ν > £ .

το φάσω δὲ καὶ ἐν ζαθέοις


25 11


ἁγνοῦ Πέλοπος δαπέδοις


το ᾿Αλφεὸν παρὰ καλλιρόαν, δίκας κέλευθον
gel μή τις ἀπέτραπεν ὀρθᾶς,
4 παγξένῳ χαίταν ἐλαίᾳ


3, ΄
επτ.α.


9 Στυγὸς Fennell, Blass.


10 EY corrected from EI by Al?
Nairn, Bruhn, Blass, κελαδοῦσι K. (cp. however 13 ὑμνεῦσι).


1 γλαυκᾷ στεφανωσάμενον
γ Q μ


11 κατέχουσι
15 [AEO is


due to correction (probably by A!): A seems to be written over C: and ε is added


above the line.


Had the scribe inadvertently repeated -ccxov from the end of 14?
17 βλεφάρῳ] The ending has been corrected (from -wy or -ow ἢ).


21 ΠΑΝΝΙΚΟΙ


9 κούρα Στυγός. Nike is the daughter
of Styx by the Titan Pallas : Bacchylides
epigr. 1. τ κούρα Πάλλαντος πολυώνυμε,
πότνια Nixa. Hes. Theog. 383 ff. Στὺξ
δ᾽ ἔτεκ᾽ ᾽Ωκεανοῦ θυγάτηρ Πάλλαντι μιγεῖσα
Ζῆλον καὶ Νίκην καλλίσφυρον ἐν μεγάροισι,
καὶ Κράτος ἠδὲ Βίην. Styx and these her
children helped Zeus in his war with
their Titan kinsfolk, and were received
by him into Olympus. The mother had
a further reward; αὐτὴν μὲν yap ἔθηκε
θεῶν μέγαν ἔμμεναι ὅρκον ( Theag. 400).

ὀρθοδίκου : Styx is such because the
ὅρκος is a fence against wrong-doing. As
ὅρκος in its primary sense denoted the
witness or sanction of the oath, rather
than the act of taking it, Styx is herself
the ὅρκος θεῶν.


10 Μεταπόντιον is here the name of
the town, not the neut. of Μεταπόντιος
(Thuc. vil. 33 §4): the later form of
the adj. was Meramovrivos (Paus., etc.).
Metapontion (Lat. Metagontum) was on
the west coast of the Gulf of Tarentum,
about 28 miles s.w. of that city. (See
Introduction.)

12 εὐφροσύναι, ‘festivities’ (like 6a-
Ala, XU. 187): cp. Solon 4. 10 εὐφροσύνας
κοσμεῖν δαιτὸς ἐν ἡσυχίᾳ, and Aesch. P.V.
540. The sing. (11. 87, 1Χ. 53), alone
used by Pindar, is more frequent.—Qeé-
τυμον : so he calls Phlius θεοτίματον πόλιν
(VIII. 98).

14 θαητόν : said in ΧΙΙ. 115 of Troy.
Pindar often uses the word, in the sense
of ‘conspicuous’ (P. xX. 58 θαητὸν ἐν


x] ETTINIKOI 323
who guards the right. ’Tis due to thee even now that Meta-
pontion, city honoured by gods, is full of rejoicings, while festal
bands of stalwart youths hymn the Pythian victor, the brilliant


son of Phaiscus.


The Delos-born son of Latona the deep-girdled gave him
welcome with kindly eyes ; and many were the wreaths of flowers
that fell around Alexidamus in Cirrha’s plain, for his triumph in
the strenuous wrestling. Never in the course of that day did
the sun behold him brought to earth.

And I will avouch that in the glorious domain of holy Pelops
also, by the fair stream of Alpheus, if some one had not warped
the course of righteous sentence, he would have crowned his hair


with the gray olive for which all comers strive,


MS.: παννίκοιο K.—IIAAAAC A, but a line has been drawn through the second A.
28 TE made from TE (by A!?).—The words σὺν... πεσόντα have been added by
another hand, the same which supplied xvi. 16. 24 ἘΠῚ a: EN A’.—x«’ ἐπὶ
Housman. 26 δίκαν κελεύθου conj. Herwerden. 28 ΠΑΓΞΕΝΩΙ a:
ΠΑΓΡΞΕΙΝΩΙ A1?—EAAIAT] The final I has been written by a corrector (over Ὁ ἢ).


ἅλιξι), or ‘comely’ (γυῖα, P. Iv. 80; duration. So ΧΙ. 128 σὺν ἅπαντι χρόνῳ,


δέμας, MV. XI, 12).

17—20 δέκτο: cp. VIII. 31 n.—
ἀνθέων... στέφανοι. Pindar P. ΙΧ. 123
describes a victor in olden days as thus
greeted by the spectators,—zoAha μὲν
κεῖνοι Sixov | PUAN ἔπι καὶ στεφάνους: and
doubtless he took this from the usage of
his own time. So in P. vill. 57 he says
(figuratively) ᾿Αλκμᾶνα στεφάνοισι βάλλω.
This custom was called φυλλοβολία.---
Kippas. Cirrha, the harbour-town of
Crisa on the Corinthian Gulf, was de-
stroyed by the Delphians (with aid from
Cleisthenes of Sicyon) about 585 B.c.:
but the name, like that of Crisa, was still
used by the fifth-century poets in con-
nexion with Delphi: Pind. P. ΧΙ. 12
ἀγῶνί τε Kippas: vill. 19 Κίρραθεν
ἐστεφανωμένον.

21 ἦρα... πάλας. ἦρα as=xdpiv, ‘on
account of,’ occurs in Callimachus fr. 41,
ἦρα φιλοξενίης: and in Anthol. Planud.
4. 299 οὐκ ἐρέω. --τίνος ἦρα; (‘why not?’).
In Z7. 1. 572 μητρὶ φίλῃ ἐπὶ ἦρα φέρων,
‘doing kind service’ to her (-- φέρων
χάριν in 71. 9. 613): ‘a very ancient
phrase, appearing in the Vedic wéra bhar,
lit. to bring the wishes’ (Leaf ad Juc.).
Cp. also //, 14. 132 θυμῷ ἦρα φέροντες,
‘indulging their resentment’; which (as
Smyth remarks) illustrates the origin of
the prepositional use.

23 κείνῳ ye σὺν ἄματι : ‘in the course
of that day’: σύν denoting concurrent


‘through all the years’ (‘in the whole
course of history’): Pind. fr. 123 σὺν
ἁλικίᾳ, ‘while we are in our prime.’
Slightly different is the temporal use in
which σύν marks the arrival of a moment:
Pind. P. Iv. 10 σὺν δεκάτᾳ γενέᾳ: P. XI.
10 ἄκρᾳ σὺν ἑσπέρᾳ.---πρὸς yala: cp.
VIII. 38.---πεσόντα: for the aor. (instead
of pres.) part. after εἶδε, cp. ν. 40 εἶδε
νικάσαντα: Her. IX. 22 πεσόντα εἶδε.
24 φάσω, 1.6. ‘I will make bold to
say’: cp. VII. 42 κομπάσομαι.---Τὰ pro-
posing κ᾿ ἐπὶ here, Housman meant ke
to go with ἱκέσθαι in 30 (where see n.):
but the interval would be a long one.
The scribe’s ἐπὶ seems to have been a
mere error: ἐν is the more natural word


here.
25 Πέλοπος: see ἢ. on v. 181.
—BaéSois: cp. Pind. WV. vil. 24 ἐν


Πυθίοισί re δαπέδοις. δάπεδον (ζάπεδον =
διάπεδον) is ἃ level surface or ground: in
the plur., ‘grounds,’ ‘domain.’

26 £. δίκας κέλευθον .... ὀρθᾶς, ‘the
course of righteous judgment.’ As against
reading δίκαν κελεύθου (=‘path’) it may
be noted that hiatus does not occur at
the end of the corresponding verses,
except in v. 12, where it is excused by
the point after dorv.el μή τις: ‘some
one’ (god or man).

28 Φ. παγξένῳ.. ἐλαίᾳ, as a prize open
to all competitors: cp. Soph. fr. 348
πολὺν δ᾽ ἀγῶνα πάγξενον κηρύσσεται:


22—2


ant. I.


epode 1.


ἴκ


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟῪ


324


80 =


, >
πορτιτρόφ[ον ἂν πεδίον πάτ)ραν θ


‘Keo Oar.


I
3 [οὔ τι δόλος κακόφρων


Col. 20


ral 9 ’
, παῖδ᾽ ἐν χθονὶ καλλιχόρῳ
5 ποικίλαις τέχναις πέλασσεν


ὁ ἀλλ᾿ ἢ θεὸς αἴτιος, ἢ 5 de
35 7 γνῶμαι πολύπλαγκτοι βροτῶν


8 ἄμερσαν ὑπέρτατον ἐκ χειρῶν γέρας.
ονῦν δ᾽ Ἄρτεμις ἀγροτέρα
:ο χρυσαλάκατος λιπαρὰν
x ἡμέ]ρα τοξόκλυτος νίκαν ἔδωκε.
4or τᾷ ποτ᾽ ᾿Αβαντιάδας :
3 βωμὸν κατένασσε πολύλ.-
4 λιστον εὔπεπλοί τε κοῦραι"


30
may have been A:


Ne’ IKECOAI is certain: before N is seen the tof a
and before this, again, a trace which is consist


e top of a letter which
ent with P.


Pind. O. vi. 63 πάγκοινον és χώραν
(Olympia): O. 11. 18 (the Olympian
olive) φύτευμα ξυνὸν ἀνθρώποις στέφανόν
τ᾽ ἀρετᾶν.---γλαυκᾷ: VII. 51.--στεφανω-
σάμενον: Pindar has the same use of this
midd. aorist (O. VII. 81, XII. 17).

80 πορτιτρόφον... ἱκέσθαι. The letters
v@’ preceded ἱκέσθαι. In considering
possible supplements, we have to provide
for the κε, κεν, or ἄν which ἱκέσθαι re-
quires. In the whole passage (24—30)
there are only three possible places for it,
one of which is very improbable as being
too remote (viz. 24, if κ΄ ἐπὶ replaced καὶ
év): the other two are v. 28 (if χαίταν
κ᾿ were read), and v. 30. The last is
the most probable. πορτιτρόφον may
have been followed by ἄν: the other
possibility is κ᾿ in one of two places
(6... és χθόνα x’ εὖ πράσσονθ᾽, or ᾿Ιταλίαν
κ᾿ ἕδραν θ᾽). ἄν seems the more likely.
We might have, then, either πεδίον
πάτραν θ᾽ (Blass), or (6...) πατρίδ᾽ ed-
καρπόν θ᾽ (Jurenka): I prefer the former,
as yielding the fitter sense. ‘ Zhe hetfer-
nourishing plain’ denotes the pasture-
lands of Messapia (= Calabria) about
Metapontion; πάτραν is that city itself.
Cp. the Homeric hymn to the Delian
Apollo, v. 21, ἠμὲν dv’ ἤπειρον πορτιτρόφον
ἠδ᾽ ἀνὰ νήσους. In writing πορτιτρόφον,
was Bacchylides thinking of the etymology
which derived Ἰταλία from Αταλός, wtulus,
acalf? That etymology was adopted by


the Sicilian historian Timaeus, and was
therefore older at any rate than ¢. 300 B.C.
See Gellius ΧΙ. 1. Timaeus (and Varro),
he says, ¢evvam Staliam de Graeco vocabulo
appellatam scripserunt, quoniam boves
Graeca vetere lingua ἱταλοὶ vocitati sint,
quorum in Itaha magna copia fuerit,
bucerague (‘horned cattle,’ vulg. dzceta,
‘pastures’ iz ea terra gigni pascique solita
sint complurima.

81- 86 The general sense of the lost
verse would probably be represented by
οὔ τι δόλος κακόφρων or the like. Verses
26 f. might seem to suggest corrupt con-
duct on the part of the judges: so the
poet hastens to guard against such an
inference. Some god may have warped
the minds of the judges; as Athena did
(according to one legend) when the
Greek chiefs preferred Odysseus to Ajax
in awarding the arms of Achilles. Or it
may have been purely an error of human
judgment.

Alexidamus, whose forte was wrestling,
may have gone in for the pentathlon, and
lost the odd event through being just
beaten in the foot-race, according to the
verdict of the judges (or a majority of
them), while he and his friends held that
he had won. Or there may have been
a question as to the fairness of a throw in
the wrestling-match. Pausanias (VI. 3. 7)
tells a story which is in point. Eupolemus,
an Elean, ran in the men’s stadzon at


x] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 325
ere he returned to the horse-feeding plain of his own land. Not
that a malignant fraud made the boy a prey to crafty arts
in the fair precincts of Olympia: no, a god was the cause, or
else the oft-erring judgments of mortals snatched the supreme


prize from his grasp.


But now bright victory has been given to him by the Huntress
with golden shaft and bow of fame, Artemis, the Soother.

To her an altar, goal of many a prayer, was set up of old by
the son of Abas and his well-robed daughters.


-τὰἂν πεδίον πάτραν θ᾽ Blass:


ἂν πατρίδ᾽ εὔκαρπόν θ᾽ Jurenka:
εὐτυχέονθ᾽ K.: ᾿Ιταλίαν νικῶνθ᾽ Platt (with κ᾿ ἐπὶ in 24).


ἐς χθόνα κ᾽
981 The verse


is lost.—ot τι δολοφροσύνα conj. Festa: ἀλλὰ τύχα φθονερὰ Palmer: ἀντιπάλω δύ᾽ ἐπεὶ


Blass, taking παῖδ᾽ (32) as παῖδε.
Palmer.


35 πολύπλαγκοι MS.: corr. K.
39 ἡμέρα Blass: ἁμέρα Palmer.


86 ἄμερσαν


Olympia. Three ᾿Ἑλλανοδίκαι were the
judges. Two of them awarded the victory
to Eupolemus; but the third, to Leon,
an Ambraciot: and ‘it was said’ that
Leon, going before the Olympic Council
(βουλή), had got a fine inflicted (χρημάτων
καταδικάσαιτο) on each of the two judges
who had voted against him. The Eleans,
as presidents at Olympia, were sometimes
charged with favouring their countrymen:
Plut. Quaest. Platon. χ᾽ Ἠλείους τῶν σοφῶν
εἶπέ τις βελτίους ἂν εἶναι τῶν ᾿Ολυμπίων
ἀγωνοθέτας εἰ μηδὲ εἷς ᾿Ηλείων ἦν ἀγω-
vorys. (Cp. also Diodorus 1. 95.) It is
easy, then, to understand why our poet
may have wished to make it clear that he
did not impute fraud.

82 καλλιχόρῳ: v. 106n. Here the
idea of enclosure contained in χορός
serves to suggest the scenes of the
contests at Olympia.

33 ποικίλαις, in a bad sense; cp.
Pind. O. I. 29, NM. v. 28.--πέλασσεν:
cp. Zl. 5. 766 ὀδύνῃσι πελάζειν : Aesch.
P. V. 155 δεσμοῖς.. πελάσας.

85 πολύπλαγκτοι, usu. ‘much wander-
ing’; here ‘often erring,’ as in Epzgr. Gr.
594. 4 (4th cent. a.D.?) βροτῶν πολυ-
πλάγκτοισιν πραπίδεσσιν. Cp. Eur. Hzpp.
240 παρεπλάγχθην γνώμας ἀγαθᾶς.

86 ἄμερσαν, Doric for ἤμερσαν, like
ἄγετο for ἤγετο in XIX. 4: the first syll.
of the verse should be long (cp. 78).
—dpépdw takes a double acc. in Hom.
hymn. V. 312 τιμὴν | ..-«ἤμερσεν ᾽᾿Ολύμπια
δώματ᾽ ἔχοντας: but not elsewhere a
simple acc. (instead of gen.) denoting
that which is taken away.

37—39 viv δ᾽ "Aprepis. So far as
appears, it is simply as the goddess of


Metapontion (116) that she favours him.
—éyporépa: ν. 123 π.---χρυσαλάκατος,
‘with golden shaft’ (Hesych. καλλίτοξος"
ἠλακάτη yap ὁ τοξικὸς κάλαμος) : epithet
of Artemis in 72. 16. 183, Soph. 77. 636.
This sense is not incompatible with the
addition of τοξόκλυτος, which is more
general ; ‘renowned with the bow,’ ‘famed
for archery.”

ἡμέρα, the ‘gentle,’ the ‘assuager of
pain.’ This (or Ἡμερασία, Paus. vitt. 18.
8) was the name under which Artemis was
worshipped at Λουσοί in the north of
Arcadia. She was so called because she
had healed the madness of the Proetides:
ἡμέρῃ, οὕνεκα θυμὸν dm’ ἄγριον εἵλετο
παίδων (Callim. Dian. 237). See Introd.
—Though depos is found in the mss. of
Pindar and the bucolic poets, the ἡ of
ἥμερος seems to have been Panhellenic
(cp. Smyth, Melic Poets p. 420).— The
fem. form is used by Pind. M. 1x. 44 and
Her. v. 82.

40. -42 ᾿Αβαντιάδας: Proetus. Abas,
son of Lynceus and Hypermnestra, figured
in legend as the twelfth king of Argos.
He was the father, by Aglaia, of Acrisius
and Proetus; also of Κάνηθος (eponymus
of a mountain near Chalcis in Euboea),
and of Eidomene. (Apollod. z. 2. 1: cp.
Roscher s.z'.)

βωμόν, at Lusi: cp. τῖο, --- κατέ-
νασσε: aor., with caus. sense (here=
ἱδρύσατο), on the analogy of évacca
(vatw). Only the aor. (active and middle)
of karavalw occurs. Elsewhere it always
denotes ‘settling’ persons in a place.—
πολύλλιστον, ‘of many prayers,’ ‘sought
by many worshippers’; Hom. hymn.
Pyth, Apoll. τόρ ἐν νηοῖσι πολυλλίστοισι.


326


στρ. β΄.


BAKXYAIAOY [x


: τὰς ἐξ ἐρατῶν ἐφόβησεν


2 παγκρατὴς Ἥρα μελάθρων
45 3 Προίτου, παραπλῆγι φρένας
4 καρτερᾷ ζεύξασ᾽ ἀνάγκᾳ"


7 Ν »
5 παρθενίᾳ γὰρ ἔτι


6 ψυχᾷ κίον ἐς τέμενος

7 πορφυροζώνοιο θεᾶς"
50 8 φάσκον δὲ πολὺ σφέτερον

9 πλούτῳ προφέρειν πατέρα ξανθᾶς παρέδρου

το σεμνοῦ Διὸς εὐρυβία. ᾿

x ταῖσιν δὲ χολωσαμένα

x στήθεσσι παλίντροπον ἔμβαλεν νόημα"
5513 φεῦγον δ᾽ ὄρος ἐς τανίφυλλον,

4 σμεέρδαλέαν φωνὰν ἱεῖσαι,


ἀντ. β. -Τιρύνθιον ἄστυ λιποῦσαι
2 καὶ θεοδμάτους ἀγυιάς,
ἤδη γὰρ ἔτος δέκατον


3
60 4
tal /
s ναῖον ἀδεισιβόαι
6


θεοφιλὲς λιπόντες “Apyos


, ε
αλκάσπιδες ἡμίθεοι
γ σὺν πολυζήλῳ βασιλεῖ.
52 εὐρυβία K.: EYPYBIAI Ms. : but the final ει, which is very small, and slightly


above the line, may have been added by another hand.


evpuBlg Nairn, Blass,


45 f. παραπλῆγι.. καρτερᾷ.. ἀνάγκᾳ,
‘a strong overmastering frenzy’: ἀνάγκα
is the resistless power of the divine
plague.—Note the t before φρένας : else-
where in this poet (as Smyth observes)
op makes position.—I hesitate to forsake
the Ms. and write παραπλᾶγι with Blass,
because the 4 may be one of the poet’s
euphonic compromises, like φήμα, ἀδμήτα,
etc.: πλάξιππος (V. 97) is different.—
ζεύξασ᾽ : Pind. Λ΄. vil. 6 πότμῳ ζυγένθ᾽ :
Eur. Helen. 255 τίνι πότμῳ συνεζύγην ;

47- 49 παρθενίᾳ.. ἔτι ψυχᾷ, ‘while
still in virginal life,’ while still young
maidens: cp. Soph. Az 558 f. νέαν |
ψυχὴν ἀτάλλων. The addition of ἔτι
emphasizes their youth as aggravating
their presumption. — κίον ἐς τέμενος ...
θεᾶς: their offence was not the fact of
entering Hera’s precinct, but the spirit
which they showed. There were oc-
casions when maidens took a prominent
part in the worship at the Argive Heraion.
The chorus in Eur. 2/7. 173 invite Electra


to attend a θυσία in honour of that goddess
(πᾶσαι δὲ παρ᾽ “H\pav μέλλουσι παρθενικαὶ
στείχειν). At one such festival Hera was
decked as a bride, her priestess enacting
the νυμφεύτρια (bridesmaid): the maidens
of Argos attended in their best apparel,
wearing wreaths of flowers.

50—52 φάσκον δὲ «.7.A. The my-
thographer Pherecydes (¢. 450 B.C.)
agreed with our poet in assigning such
a boast as the cause of Hera’s anger
against the Proetides: παραγενόμεναι γὰρ
els τὸν τῆς θεοῦ νεὼν ἔσκωπτον αὐτόν
[αὐτήν 2], λέγουσαι πλουσιώτερον μᾶλλον
εἶναι τὸν τοῦ πατρὸς οἶκον (Schol. Od. 15.
225=fr. 24 Miiller 1. p. 74). They dis-
paraged her semple as compared with
their father’s Aouse. (Remark that this
definition of the boast is, so far as it
goes, against reading the dative εὐρυβίᾳ
here. ‘ Wealth of wide dominion’ suggests
a more general vaunt.) The logographer
Acusilaus (c. 500 B.C.) said that the
Proetides had ‘slighted the ancient image


x] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 327
All-powerful Hera had driven those maidens from the fair str. 2.

halls of Proetus, their spirits in bondage to a strong overmastering

frenzy. For while yet in girlhood, they had entered the holy

place of the purple-girdled goddess, and boasted that their sire

far surpassed in wealth the golden-haired consort of Zeus, dread


lord of wide dominion.


But she, in anger, smote their hearts


with a thought that turned them to flight; and with fearful
shrieks they fled to a forest in the hills,


far from the Tirynthian city and its god-built streets,

It was now the tenth year since the dauntless heroes with
shields of bronze had left Argos, dear to the gods, and were
dwelling at Tiryns with their much-envied king.


Jurenka, Herwerden, Festa.
(EMBAAENOMMA ms.)


54 στήθεσσι K. CTHOECIN ms.—éuBarev νόημα K.
55 ravipuddov] τανύφυλλον Jurenka.


of Hera,’ τὸ τῆς Ἥρας ξόανον ἐξηυτέλισαν
Apollod. 2. 2. 2=fr. Acus. 19, Miiller 1.
Ῥ. 102). Hesiod (26.) said that they had
‘refused to accept the rites of Dionysus.’
Rather the myth suggests votaries of some
new cult who show scorn for the older
deities of the land.

πλούτῳ προφέρειν: Her. Vi. 127 πλούτῳ
καὶ εἴδεϊ προφέρων ᾿Αθηναίων .---παρέδρου,
‘consort,’ intended to be statelier than
owetvov.—I would read (as K. does)
εὐρυβία, gen., not εὐρυβίᾳ: the ms. has
the latter, but the t may have been added
by a later hand. evpuBig, following σεμνοῦ
Διός, and referring back to πλούτῳ, is (to
my feeling) intolerable: let any one read
the verses, thinking of the sense, and
judge. Further, a second epithet for
Διός is thoroughly in B.’s manner: see


vas ’Agjvia, the hills of the region in
N.w. Arcadia called ’Afavla (from the
*Ataves, descendants of ’Afdv, son of
Arcas): it was the hill-district about
Cleitor (some 12 miles s. of Lusi) and
Psophis.—tavigpvddov (Theocr. Xxv.
221) is the correct form, but B. may have
written τανίφνυλλον to avoid v in two
consecutive syllables: see n. on III. 60.

56 φωνὰν ἱεῖσαι: Verg. cl. 6. 48
Proetides implerunt falsis mugitibus agros
(they imagined themselves to be cows).

59—81 The Proetides having fled
from 7iryns, the poet pauses to explain
how it had come about that they were
living there.

Nearly the same story is told by Pau-
sanias (11. 25. 7 f.). He describes the
brothers as fighting a drawn battle, after


(2. g:) ν. 99 σεμνᾶς χόλον ᾿Αρτέμιδοε which they were reconciled, ὡς οὐδέτεροι
λευκωλένου: 16. 174 χρυσέας Κύπριδος βεβαίως κρατεῖν ἐδύναντο. Apollodorus


GedétuBpsrov.—OFf course εὐρυβίας is, in
itself, a perfectly suitable epithet for πλοῦτος
(cp. Pind. P. v. 1 ὁ πλοῦτος εὐρυσθενή5):
but that is not the point.—edpuBlas is said
of Poseidon in Pind. P. v1. 58, and often of
heroes. B. has φθόνος εὐρυβίας in XV. 31.
54 παλίντροπον νόημα, ‘an impulse
that turned them to flight,’"—from the
τέμενος. Elsewhere παλίντροπος is found
(1) with ὄμματα, etc., as in Aesch. Ag.
778: or (2) with verbs of moving, as ἕρπειν
(Soph. 22. 1222). The accent here might
be παλιντρόπον, but that is not required :
νόημα παλίντροπον is (strictly) the νόημα
of a wadlyrporos.—Note the error in the
μ8., EMBAAENOMMA (through change
of H into M, and loss of the second N).
55 dpos. Callimachus (Dzan. 236)
describes the Proetides as οὔρεα πλαζομέ-


(2. 2. 1), on the other hand, says that
Acrisius drove Proetus out of Argolis.
Proetus took refuge with Iobates (or
Amphianax) king of Lycia; married his
daughter (the Anteia of the /iad, the
Sthenoboea of Tragedy); and was restored
to Argolis by a Lycian army. Then he
and <Acrisius divided the realm. The
dualism of royal seats is hinted in the
Tliad (2. 550); οἱ δ᾽ “Apyos τ᾽ εἶχον
Τίρυνθά τε τειχιόεσσαν.

61 ξ. ἀδεισιβόαι, not quailing at the
βοὴ ἄσβεστος of battle: anew compound,
suggested by such words as δεισήνωρ,
δεισιδαίμων .---ἡμίθεον (cp. VIII. 10), the
heroes who had fought under Proetus
against Acrisius, the ἀντίθεοι.. ἥρωες of
vv. 79 ff.

63 πολυζήλῳ here seems best taken


ant. 2.


328


BAKXYAIAOY [x


8 νεῖκος γὰρ ἀμαιμάκετον
wn i 3 ww
65 9 B\nxpas ἀνέπαλτο κασιγνητοῖς amr ἀρχᾶς


Col. 21


’ὔ
το Προίτῳ τε καὶ ᾿Ακρισίῳ'


x λαούς τε διχοστασίαις
τὸ ἤρειπον ἀμετροδίκοις μάχαις τε λυγραῖς.
3 λίσσοντο δὲ παῖδας ἼΑβαντος


70 14


ἐπ. β΄.


γᾶν πολύκριθον λαχόντας


’ Ν ε ΄
:- Τίρυνθα τὸν ὁπλότερον
κτίζειν, πρὶν ἐς ἀργαλέαν πεσεῖν ἀνάγκαν᾽


3 Ζεύς τ᾽ ἔθελεν Kpovidas,
«τιμῶν Δαναοῦ γενεὰν
Ν ,ὔ #
75 5 καὶ διωξίπποιο Λυγκέος,
7 “ 4
6 παῦσαι στυγερῶν ἀχέων.
a Ν , ,
γ τεῖχος δὲ Κύκλωπες κάμον
8 ἐλθόντες ὑπερφίαλοι κλεινᾷ πόλει


GS βληχᾶς... ἄκρας (a primo vagitu) conj. Tyrrell.
68 ἤριπον MS.: corr. Κ΄.---ἤρεικον conj. Housman.


the first «.


66 ᾿Ακρισίῳ] The MS. omits
69 IITAIAEC


as ‘much-envied,’ or ‘all-admired’; as
in Soph. 77. 185 πολύζηλος is said of
the victorious Heracles. But it could
also mean ‘greatly prosperous’: as ζῆλος
sometimes =‘ enviable happiness’: Soph.
Ai. 503 οἵας λατρείας ἀνθ᾽ ὅσου ζήλου
τρέφει.

64 f. νεῖκος... ἀμαιμάκετον : a stubborn
feud. As an epithet of fire (Soph. O. 7.
177) or of the sea (Hes. Scut. 207) the
word expresses the notion of irresistible
force, while as applied in Od. 11. 311 to
a mast it is taken by some to mean ‘of
vast length’ (from root μακ-), rather than,
‘proof against any strain’: that passage,
however, stands alone.

BAnxpas...am’ dpxas, ‘from a slight
cause’ (which the poet does not name).
See however Apollod. 2. 4. 1 (speaking
of Danae, daughter of Acrisius): ταύτην
μέν, ὡς ἔνιοι λέγουσιν, ἔφθειρε Προῖτος"
ὅθεν αὐτοῖς καὶ ἡ στάσις. It is not likely
that B. had this story in his mind.—For
βληχρός, cp. XII. 227. Alcaeus fr. 16
applies the word to faint breezes (βλήχρων
ἀνέμων ἀχείμαντοι mvdac), and Pindar
(fr. 129) to sluggish streams.—Some take
the phrase here as=‘from a feeble be-
ginning,’ z.e. ‘from childhood.’ (Apollod.
2.1.1 κατὰ γαστρὸς ἔτι ὄντες ἐστασίαζον
πρὸς ἀλλήλους.) That seems forced.

ἀνέπαλτο, ‘had sprung up,’ 2nd aor.
midd. of ἀναπάλλω : see //. 23. 694 where


ἀνέπαλτο corresponds with ἀναπάλλεται in
692.—Not from ἀνεφάλλομαι, of which the
only part found is ἀνεπάλμενος in Ap.
Rhod. 2. 825.

67 £. διχοστασίαις : used in the sing.
by Solon fr. 4. 37, and Theognis 78, of
civil faction. ἀμετροδίκοις, not observing
the μέτρα δίκης: ‘feuds that broke the
bounds of law.’ The peculiarity consists
in the fact that compounds with ἀμετρο-
usually mean ‘unmeasured’ in respect to
that which is denoted by the subst.; as
ἀμετροεπής (71. 2. 212), ἀμετροβαθής
(Oppian Had, τ. 85, ‘of immense depth’).
---ἤρειπον, ‘they were ruining’ the people:
cp. Soph. Azz. 596 (of the Labdacidae)
ἐρείπει Tecdr τις, some god is ever bringing
them to ruin.

70—72 After λαχόντας, τὸν ὁπλό-
τερον is in partitive apposition: ‘that
(the two brothers) should share the land
between them, and that the younger should
make a new seat at Tiryns’: cp. Soph.
Ant. 21 τὼ κασιγνήτω Κρέων | τὸν μὲν
προτίσας τὸν δ᾽ ἀτιμάσας ἔχει (n.).—
ἀργαλέαν ... ἀνάγκαν, ‘grievous straits,’
the last extremities of famine and misery.

741. Aavaov...Avykéos. Abas, the
father of Acrisius and Proetus, was son
of Lynceus, and maternal grandson of
Danaus. Lynceus succeeded Danaus as
king of Argos; Herodotus (11. 91) names
them together as ancestors of Perseus


x] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 329
For a stubborn strife had sprung up from a slight cause between
the brothers Proetus and Acrisius; and they had been ruining
their people with feuds that broke the bounds of law, and with
dire battles. But the folk besought the sons of Abas that they
would share the fertile land between them,


and that the younger should make a new seat at Tiryns, before
they all fell into grievous straits. Then Zeus the son of Cronus,
honouring the race of Danaus and of Lynceus, urger of steeds,
was willing to give them rest from their cruel woes. So the
mighty Cyclopes came’ and wrought a goodly wall for the


famous city ;


A, corr. Al,
77 κάμοντ᾽ conj. Platt.


70 λαχόντας MS.: λαχόντα Wilamowitz, Herwerden, Blass.


(grandson of Acrisius). Lynceus was
reckoned also among the ancestors of
Heracles and of Iolaus, who are meant
by ΔΛυγκῆος γενεή in Hes. Scut. 327.
A statue of him was dedicated by the
Argives at Delphi along with those of
his wife Hypermnestra and her father
Danaus (Paus. Χ. 10. 5). His grave
was shown at Argos (zd. 11. 21. 2).—
διωξίπποιο: epithet of Ares in VIII. 44:
Pind. P. ΙΧ. 4 διωξίππου.. Κυράνας: cp.
the epic ἱππηλάτα.

77 £. τεῖχος. Tiryns was the most
impressive example of that prehistoric
wall-building which Greeks of a later
age ascribed to giants of superhuman
strength. The walls, which had a maxi-
mum thickness of 25 feet, were built of
limestone blocks, mostly polygonal, and
either unhewn or only roughly shaped,
piled on one another and tonded with
small stones and clay: the larger blocks
were from seven to ten feet long. Similar
remains exist at Mycenae (mixed with
later masonry), and at Argos (north of
the theatre).

Κύκλωπες ... ὑπερφίαλοι, ‘the mighty
Cyclopes.’ The adj. clearly has no bad
sense here: cp. Od. 21. 289 οὐκ ἀγαπᾷς
ὃ ἕκηλος ὑπερφιάλοισι μεθ᾽ ἡμῖν | δαίνυσαι ;
(‘in our high company,’ as Butcher and
Lang render). The derivation is still
doubtful: that from Bia involves an ab-
normal change: while the old explana-
tion, ‘overflowing the φιάλη,᾽ seems too
artificial. Curtius, with Buttmann, refers
it to root pu (‘overgrown,’ ‘luxuriant’),

The /iad (2. 559) knows the walls of
Tiryns; but the legend of the Cyclopes
as buzlders is post-Homeric, though older


than the fifth century. It is found in
Hellanicus (fr. 179) and Pherecydes
(fr. 26b); in Pindar (fr. 169); Sophocles
(fr. 207); Euripides (27. #15 Κυκλωπία
πόλις, of Mycenae; 7. A. 534 τείχη
Κυκλώπια, of Argos; and often else-
where); and in some later writers. For
Tiryns in particular, see Paus. II. 25. 8:
Statius Zhed. 4. 150 Cyclopum aductas
Sudoribus arces.

The poet leaves ἐλθόντες (78) vague.
But the story which made Proetus go to
Lycia for help said that he summoned
the Cyclopes thence after his return to
Argolis (Strabo p. 372 ἥκειν... μεταπέμπ-
τους ἐκ Λυκία5). Another account brought
them from Thrace (schol. Eur. Or. 965).
Here myth was blended with a tradition
of foreign builders.—The home of the
Homeric Cyclopes was popularly iden-
tified with Sicily (Thuc. vi. ὦ δ 1: Eur.
Cycl. 297).

Kdpov. Objection has been taken to
the syllaba anceps here: v. 35 ends with
βροτῶν, and in 119 f. πρόγοϊνοι is
corrupt. But κάμοντ᾽ seems impossible.
The aor. midd. ἐκαμόμην occurs only
twice in pre-Alexandrian Greek: (1) ZZ.
18. 341, Tas αὐτοὶ καμόμεσθα, (the cap-
tives) whom we won by our toil: (2) Od.
9. 130 of κέ σφιν καὶ νῆσον ἐϊκτιμένην
ἐκάμοντο, ‘who dy tor! would have gained
for them a goodly island home.’ In both
these places the middle aor. has its
distinctive sense; it is not a mere sub-
stitute for the active aor. [In post-classical
Greek it may be otherwise: Ap. Rhod.
2. 718 ἱρὸν...ὅ ῥ᾽ ἐκάμοντο | αὐτοί: 4. 1321
ὑπέρβια ἔργ᾽ ἐκάμεσθε.1---Τῇ may be added
that a corruption of κάμοντ᾽ into κάμον is


epode 2.


330


BAKXYAIAOY [x


9 κάλλιστον, ἵν᾿ ἀντίθεοι
8010 ναῖον κλυτὸν ἱππόβοτον
¥ Ψ Ν ,
τ Ἄργος ἥρωες περικλειτοὶ λιπόντες.


¥ > ,
τ ἔνθεν ἀπεσσύμεναι


’,ὔ ᾿ς
3 Προίτου κυανοπλόκαμοι
4. φεῦγον ἄδματοι θύγατρες,


στρ. γ΄. 85: τὸν δ᾽ εἷλεν ἄχος κραδίαν, ξεί-
2 να τέ νιν πλᾶξεν μέριμνα"
΄ \ , ¥
3 δοίαξε δὲ φάσγανον ap-
+ φακες ἐν στέρνοισι πᾶξαι.


95 ἀλλά νιν αἰχμοφόροι


go 6


μύθοισί τε μειλιχίοις


7 καὶ βίᾳ χειρῶν κάτεχον.
8 τρισκαίδεκα μὲν τελέους
- Ν δ = , Ὁ"
ο μῆνας κατὰ δάσκιον ἠλύκταζον ὕλαν
το φεῦγόν τε κατ᾽ ᾿Αρκαδίαν


Q5 1


μηλοτρόφον- ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ


lel Ἂς , κι 4
xx Λοῦσον ποτὶ καλλιρόαν πατὴρ ἵκανεν,
3 ἔνθεν χρόα νιψάμενος φοι-
τ Σ5νικοῖ κραδέμνοι]ο Λατοῦς


83 κυανοπλοκαμος A, corr. Al.


᾿Αρκαδίαν Palmer: κατακαρδίαν MS.


86 MEPIMNAI A, corr. A’.
K. (ἠλύκταξον MS.): ἀλύκταζον Blass (2nd ed.), ἀλύσκαζον (3rd ed.).


93 ἠλύκτα ζον
94 κατ᾽


improbable from a palaeographical point
of view. It could hardly have been
prompted by mpéyo|vo. in 119 f., since
v. 35 would have shown that a long
syllable might stand at the end of the
verse.

80 ἱππόβοτον, as in XVIII. 15 ἵπ-
πίον (n.).

82 ff. The story of the Proetides is
resumed from v. 58.--ἄδματοι: cp. ἢ.
on v. 167.

85 f. τὸν δ᾽ εἷλεν ἄχος κραδίαν: for

-the second acc. cp. //. 1. 362 τί δέ σε
φρένας ἵκετο πένθος; Ar. Lys. 542 οὐδὲ
γόνατ᾽ ἂν κόπος ἕλοι με.---ξείνα, foreign to
his saner moods. Cp. Soph. 4z. 639
οὐκέτι συντρόφοις | ὀργαῖς ἔμπεδος, ἀλλ᾽
ἐκτὸς ὁμιλεῖ (‘he is true no more to the
promptings of his inbred nature, but
dwells with alien thoughts’). Cp.
Aesch. P. V. 689 ξένους... «λόγους (where
fear or horror of them is implied):
Timaeus Locrus p. 104 Ὁ τιμωρίαι ξέναι.


8717 2. δοίαξε... πᾶξαι, “he was minded’
to do so. For the infin., cp. Ap. Rhod.
4. 575 τὰ δ᾽ ἠεροειδέα λεύσσειν | οὔρεα
δοιάζοντο Κεραύνια (‘half thought that
they saw’).—The aor. denotes the szoment
at which the impulse seized him, as the
Homeric διάνδιχα μερμήριξεν (71. τ. 189)
shows the thought flashing on Achilles,—
Shall he draw his sword, or still curb his
anger? It is thus more dramatic than the
imperfect would be.—Remark the de-
signed series of harsh sounds here, felva—
πλᾶξεν---δοίαξε: and contrast v. go.

89 αἰχμοφόροι, his body-guard (dopu-
φόροι) : the sense of the word in Her. 1. 8
and VII. 40.

92. τρισκαίδεκα: this indeclinable
form is read in Z/. 5. 387, Ar. Raz. 50,
Xen. # v. 1 §5, etc. In Thuc. 111. 69 § 1
and vill. 88 81 Hude reads τρεῖς καὶ
δέκα, and in VIII. 22 § 1 τρισὶ καὶ δέκα: in
those places all or most of the good mss.
have τρισκαίδεκα (except that in VIII. 88 81


x] ETTINIKOI 331
where the renowned heroes were dwelling, after leaving glorious
Argos, nurse of steeds.

Thence it was that the dark-haired maidens, the daughters


of Proetus, had rushed in flight.


Grief took hold of their father’s heart; a strange thought smote
him, and he was minded to plunge a two-edged sword in his
breast ; but his spearmen restrained him with words of comfort,


and by force of hand.


For thirteen whole months the maidens roamed wildly
through the dense forest, and went in flight through the pastures


of Arcadia.


But when at length their father came to Lusus


with its fair stream, he washed himself with water taken thence,


the Vaticanus B has τρεῖς καὶ δέκα). In
Ar. Plut. 194 and 846 and Pax ggo
and Andoc. or. 3. 4 τριακαίδεκα is read:
in Isaeus or. 8 § 35 τριῶν καὶ δέκα: in
Dem. or. 9 ὃ 25 τρισὶ καὶ δέκα. The
result seems to be as follows. The in-
declinable form was current from the
earliest times, at least in poetry, and was
probably prevalent in post-classical Greek
generally: but classical Attic writers (of
prose at least) preferred the form in which
τρεῖς was inflected.—The number ¢hzrteen
probably had some mystic or symbolic
meaning here in relation to Artemis as a
lunar goddess. In Soph. 7%. 164f. the
last period in the ordeals of Heracles is
Tplunvos κἀνιαύσιος (xpévos).

ἠλύκταζον : I follow the Ms. in keeping
the 4: the poet may have wished to break
the series of a sounds.—dAvoxafov Blass?:
see Appendix.—tAay: see n. on 55.

94 κατ᾽ ᾿Αρκαδίαν. The wanderings
of the Proetides over the hills of north-
western Arcadia (‘Afavia 55 n.) were
more especially associated by legend
with the Αροάνια ὄρη, now Chelmos. At
the southern foot of this range rises the
Aroanios, the chief tributary of the
Ladon: and in the upper plain of its
valley, in the N.E. corner, is Sudena,
which probably marks the site of Lusi.
In the Aroanian hills, above Nonacris,—
which lay on their N.E. side,—was shown
a cave to which the frenzied Proetides
had fled (Paus. vil. 18. 7). J. G. Frazer
(ad loc.) mentions two caves, very near
each other, ‘on the brow of the mountain,
overlooking the profound glen of the
Styx.’

96 Δοῦσον : this accent, given in the
papyrus, is that which has the older and
better authority: Theophr. Azst. Plant.


9. 15. 8 Λοῦσα : Callim. Dian. 235 Λούσ-
gos (implying Λοῦσσοι or -a): Polyb. Iv.
18 Λούσσων. But later writers make
the word oxytone: Λουσοί Paus., Λουσός
Arcadius 75. 16, Aovocol Steph. Byz.

Λοῦσος is here the name of the famous
κρήνη near the town of Λοῦσοι, at which
the Proetides were said to have been
healed (τὴν ἐν Λούσοις κρήνην, Theo-
pompus fr. 287, Miiller 1. p. 327).
Those who tasted it were said thence-
forth to dislike wine: hence πηγὴ μισ-
άμπελος, epigr. in Vitruvius 8. 3. 21 ; and
Ovid Afet. XV. 322, where it is called
Clitorius fons, as Lusi was in the territory
of Cleitor, being some twelve miles N. of
it. So Phylarchus (Athen. p. 43 F)
spoke of it as κρήνην ἐν Κλείτορι.

A narrow valley opens southward just
to the west of Lusi. Three springs issue
from the western edge of it; and at the
middle one there are traces of ancient
foundations. In winter these springs
form a large pool or small lake: this is
the Clitorzus lacus of Pliny H. NM. 31.
13. (Leake, Morea 11. 110: Curtius,
Pelop. 1. 375.) .

97 2. χρόα νιψάμενος. Folk-lore of
course connected Λοῦσοι with λούεσθαι.
So Paus. viii. 28. 2 mentions an Arcadian
stream ὀνομαζόμενος Λούσιος, ἐπὶ λουτροῖς
δὴ τοῖς Διὸς τεχθέντος : and an Arcadian
epithet of Demeter was Λουσία, ἐπὶ τῷ
λούσασθαι τῷ Λάδωνι (id. VIII. 25. 6).—
φοινικοκραϑέμνοιο, ‘with red kerchief.’
The κρήδεμνον (worn by Hera in //. 14.
184) was a kerchief worn over the back
of the head, and hanging down to the
shoulders, but not veiling the face. (So
Hera’s ‘purple girdle’ is mentioned in
49.)


str. 3.


332


BAKXYAIAOY [x


dvr. γ. τ κίκλίῃσκε θύγατρα) βοῶπιν,


Οο]1,221οο 2
ἱππώκεος ἀελίου,


χεῖρας ἀντείνων πρὸς αὐγὰς


πάρφρονος ἐξαγαγεῖν"


3
ἃ ΄, 4
4 τέκνα δυστάνοιο λύσσας
5
6


vow δέ τοι εἴκοσι βοῦς


105 7


ἄζυγας φοινικότρ iXas.


8 τοῦ δ᾽ ἔκλυ᾽ ἀριστοπάτρα
9 θηροσκόπος εὐχομένου" πιθοῦσα δ᾽ Ἥραν
10 παῦσεν καλυκοστεφάνους
τι κούρας μανιᾶν ἀθέων"
1101 ταὶ δ᾽ αὐτίκα (F)ou τέμενος βωμόν τε τεῦχον,
13 χραϊνόν τέ μιν αἵματι μήλων
XN Ἀ 9
4 «Kab χοροὺς ἵσταν γυναικών.


ἐπ. γ΄. : ἔνθεν καὶ ἀρηϊφίλοις
2 ἄνδρεσσιν « ἐς > ἱπποτρόφον πόλιν « τ᾽; ᾿Αχαιοῖς


99 Before BOQIIIN there is a faint trace of A.
A? wrote rou δ᾽ exdu’ αριστοπατρα at the top of col. XXII.


106 This v. was omitted by A:
110 ΓΑΙ Ms. : ταὶ


99 βοῶπιν: the Homeric epithet of
Hera is nowhere else given to Artemis.

100 ἀντείνων : for the apocope, cp.
fr. 17. 4 ἀντείνασα : 111. 7 ἀμπαύσας.

103 πάρφρονος : apocope as in παρ-
φάμεν (Pind. O. 7. 66), πάρφασις (Λ΄. VIII.
32), πάρφυκτος (P. XII. 30). Cp. XIII.
10 πὰρ χειρός.

ἐξαγαγεῖν depends on κίκλῃσκε (gg). It
is not infin. for imper. in oratio recta.
When, zz α prayer, the infin. stands as
imperative, (1) a vocative, addressed to
the god, normally precedes; ¢.g., //. 7.
179 Ζεῦ πάτερ, ἢ Αἴαντα λαχεῖν ἢ Τυδέος
υἱόν: Aesch. 7h. 253 θεοὶ πολῖται, μή με
δουλείας τυχεῖν. (2) The subject to the
infin. is zof usually the god: e.g., here
we should expect an infin. in the sense
of ἀπαλλαγῆναι, to which the subject
would be τέκνα.

105 φοινικότριχας : cp. V. 102 ἢ.

106 ἀριστοπάτρα. The mother of
Craterus was ’Apiorémarpa (Strabo 15.

. 702): cp. the name Κλεινόπατρος
Paus. VI. 2. 6)

108 καλυκοστεφάνους, crowned with
young flowers, in honour of Artemis ;
who herself, in v. 98, has this epithet.

109 paviav ἀθέων. Pindar uses only
the plural of μανία (O. Ix. 393 NV. 48;
fr. 208 μανίαις. τ᾿ ddadais τ᾽ ὀρινόμενοι).


It suggests the ‘throes’ or ‘outbreaks’
of madness. —d@éwv, god- ee te.
due to the wrath of Hera: Soph. O. 7.
661f. ἄθεος, &dtdos...droluav.—Not, ‘in-
flicted on account of impiety.’

110 ral δ᾽ seems right. For the Ms.
γᾷ it might be said that Proetus could
then be included among the subjects of
τεῦχον : but γᾷ would be weak; and it
is natural that the foundation should be
described as a thank-offering on the part
of the maidens.

τέμενος βωμόν te. The temple of
Artemis ‘Hyépa or Ἡμερασία at Lusi is
mentioned by Polybius as being N. of
Cleitor and s. of Cynaetha: Iv. 18
προῆγον ws ἐπὶ Λούσων" καὶ παραγενόμενοι
πρὸς τὸ τῆς ᾿Αρτέμιδος ἱερόν, ὃ κεῖται μὲν
μεταξὺ Κλείτορος καὶ Κυναίθων κιτιλ. He
notes its inviolable sanctity (ἄσυλον...
νενόμισται mapa τοῖς “Ελλησιν). Leake
(Morea τι. 110) conjectured that the
remains at the spring (mentioned in n. on
96) marked the site of the temple; and
Kiepert accepted this view, which has
been the prevalent one. Curtius, how-
ever (Felop. 1. 397), would identify the
shrine with a temple-cella found by Dod-
well (11. 447) nearer Sudena (the probable
site of Lusi), at the upper end of the plain.

111 μιν (2.2. βωμόν Dane here preferred


x] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 333


and invoked the ox-eyed daughter of Latona with purple
kerchief, stretching hands aloft to the rays of the Sun-god in


swift chariot, to deliver his children from the curse of raging
madness : ‘and I will offer to thee, he cried, ‘twenty red oxen,


strangers to the yoke.’


His prayer was heard by the Huntress, daughter of a peerless
sire ; she prevailed with Hera, and healed the maidens, crowned


with young flowers, of the madness sent by angry heaven.


But


they straightway made for her a precinct and an altar, and shed
the blood of sheep thereon, and set choruses of women around it.


From that place didst thou pass with Achaean warriors to


their city, nurse of steeds,—


Blass and others.—TETETEYTXON A: corr. A!?


114 és add. J.: ἐν (=és)


Jurenka: -σσι πρὸς Housman.—édXwv MS.: πόλιν τ᾿ Blass: πόλιν δ᾽ Ludwich: ποίαν
Housman, Hense: χώραν Wilamowitz.—I had conjectured πόλισμ᾽, but now prefer


πόλιν τ᾽.


by the poet, who elsewhere always uses
νιν, on account of the preceding xpai-
γον.

112 ἵσταν: cp. Pind. P. ul. 65
τίθεν: 7. 1. 25 tev. The imperfects
(redxov — χραῖνον ---ἴσταν) express the
series of acts.

113 ἔνθεν.. ἀρηϊφίλοις. The ἀρηΐ-
φιλοι ἄνδρες are the Achaean warriors
who founded Metapontion (Strabo 6.
p- 264). They brought the cult of
Artemis with them from the old home.
She figures ona Metapontine coin
(British Museum, Italy no. 263 : noticed
by Smyth). See also Hyginus Fad.
186.—The Metapontines dedicated an
ivory Endymion in their θησαυρός at
Olympia (Paus. VI. 19. 11) ; which shows
that the lunar attributes were among
those of their Artemis (cp. 92 f. n.).—
The Achaean settlement of the country
about the Tarentine Gulf is traceable in
the Arcadian name of the river Aovolas
near Thurii (Aelian V. A. x. 38); also
in the Κρᾶθις a little further s., a name-
sake of the river near Aegae in Achaia.—
Arist. Mir. auscult. 106—110 (p. 840)
notices a cult of the Homeric heroes at
Tarentum and Sybaris, and a temple of
᾽Αθηνᾶ ᾿Αχαιΐα in 8. E. Italy.

114 dydpecow... Axatots. The metre
is shown by 72. The -w of πόλιν could
not be lengthened before ᾿Αχαιοῖς.
Housman supports his conjecture ποίαν
by Eur. Andr. 1229 ἱπποβότων πεδίων :
but that surely is very different. A
corruption of χώραν into πόλιν is im-


probable; and in 72 we find πεσεῖν.
(1) The simplest remedy is πόλιν --τ᾽ >,
the τ᾽ answering to tre after ἄλσος in
v. 1ι8:--σπεό τ᾽ ἐς πόλιν .., ἄλσος τέ
τοί (ἐστιν). The sub-clause, σὺν δὲ τύχᾳ
ναίεις. . λαῶν (115—117), then supple-
ments the first principal clause, ἕσπεό 7’
és πόλιν. Or ἕσπεό τ᾽ might be co-ordinate
with σὺν δὲ τύχᾳ ναίεις : for the irregular
sequence, te. . δέ, is not rare, esp. when
the chief stress is on the second clause:
cp. eg. Thuc. I. 25 § 10, Soph. Anz.
1096 f. (with my n.), Kiihner-Gerth
Gramm. ii. vol. 11. p. 244. (2) πόλινδ᾽,
which Blass read in his 2nd ed., would
be satisfactory, if it could stand along
with és: for, except és (ἐν or πρός), the
only supplements possible seem to be
ἅμ᾽ or ποθ᾽, either of which would be
weak. The only parallel is Od. 10. 351,
ποταμῶν οἵ τ’ els ἅλαδε προρέουσι: so
Aristarchus read; but Zenodotus had
wished to eliminate els by reading of τε
ἅλαδε (Ludwich, Aristarch. hom. Text-
krittk, 1. 583). The redundant phrase
might be compared with ἀπὸ Τροίηθεν
(Od. 9. 38). (3) Another resource is
πόλισμ᾽, freely used in poetry as an
equivalent for πόλις. Aesch. Zh. 120
πόλισμα Κάδμου: Euripides applies it
to Athens (Med. 771, £ 7. 1014,
A. F. 1323); Troy (4 A. 777);
Mycenae (2. 1500); Thebes (Bacch.
919). Those places where the word
precedes a vowel are suggestive in con-
nexion with the present passage, as
illustrating the metrical convenience of


ant. 3.


epode 3.


334


BAKXYAIAOY


[Χ, ΧΙ


ν
115 3 ἔσπεο, σὺν δὲ τύχᾳ
΄ , S
4vatets Μετάπόντιον, ὦ
s χρυσέα δέσποινα λαών"
ΕΣ ἃ
6 ἄλσος τέ τοι ἱμερόεν
, 3 4 XX
7 Κάσαν παρ᾽ εὔυδρον πρὸ va-


120 8


aE ΄ , > 9 LY ,
οὗ ἐἑσσαμένων, Πριάμοι ἐπεὶ χρόνῳ


9 βουλαῖσι θεῶν μακάρων
το πέρσαν πόλιν εὐκτιμέναν


x χαλκοθωράκων μετ᾽ ᾿Ατρειδᾶν.


δικαίας


Ψ ¥ ΄ ε
12 ὅστις ἔχει φρένας, εὑ-


125 13


, % ν ra
βήησει συν απαντι χρονῷ


4 puplas ἀλκὰς ᾿Αχαιῶν.


ΧΙ.


[XIL.]


TEICIAL AIFINHTHI


TTAAAICTHI


ε Ν 4 a ε ¥
Ὡσεὶ κυβερνήτας σοφός, ὑμνοάνασ-
σ᾽ εὔθυνε Κλειοῖ


στρ.


ΝΕΛΛΕΑ


νῦν φρένας ἁμετέρας,


118 τε Ms.: ye Herwerden.


προγόϊνων ἑσσαμένων Wilamowitz, Blass: πρόγο]νοι ἕσσαν ἐμοὶ Palmer, K..


119 Σ. ΠΡΟΓΟΪΝΟῚΙ ECCAMENOI μ5.:
πρὸ


γουϊνοῖ᾽ Platt: ἕσσαν ἐμέν Housman.—érei] EIT A: corr. A®


this substitute for médts:—Bacch. 919
πόλισμ᾽ ἑπτάστομον : Heracl. 193 f.’Axai-
κὸν | πόλισμ᾽, ὅθεν k.7.d. : 16. 957 πόλισμ᾽
ἐλεύθερον. On the whole, I prefer πόλιν 7’.

ἱπποτρόφον hints the traditions of
Achaean chivalry, as πορτιτρόφον (30)
suggests the prosperous Metapontine
stock-breeders.

115 ff. σὺν... τύχᾳ: cp. VIII. 51 n.—
χρυσέα: VIII. 72 η.--δέσποινα λαῶν.
Metapontion throve by agriculture (Stra-
bo p. 264), cattle, and horse-breeding.
Artemis was concerned with all these
(cp. V. 98 and τος nn.). As to horses,
at Pheneos in Arcadia she was worshipped
as Εὑρίππα (Paus. VIII. 14. 4): in Pind.
O. 111. 26 she is ἱπποσόα. Artemis was
also in a general sense owretpa (as at
Pellene in Achaia, Paus. 11. 31. 1), σωσί-
mots, etc. In Arcadia she was closely
associated with the cult of the Δέσποινα
(Persephone) and Demeter (Paus. VIII.
37. 1 etc). Cp. Soph. 2). 626 τὴν
δέσποιναν Αρτεμιν. [Preller 11. 243 held


that Δέσποινα was an Arcadian title of
Artemis herself.]

119 £ Kdoav. The Κάσας is not
mentioned elsewhere (unless it is to be
recognized in Suidas, Κῆσος' ὄνομα
ποταμοῦ). But Pliny (27. Δ. ul. 15. 3)
mentions the river Casuentus near Meta-
pontion, and this is doubtless the Kacas,
the modern Bastento. Its course is
nearly parallel with that of the Bradanus—
(Bradano): both flow into the Tarentine
Gulf near the site of Metapontion,—
εὔυδρον. ‘Though here the coast is
everywhere perfectly flat, yet the land
rises gently from the sea, and, being
well-watered, is pre-eminently adapted
for pasture and wheat.’ (Curtius, Ast,
Gr. 1. p. 445 Eng. ed.) :

πρὸ vaot’ ἑσσαμένων is the remedy
which I would suggest for the corrupt
πρόγονοι ἑσσάμενοι of the papyrus.
(The metre is shown by vv. 35 and 77.)
I suppose that in IEPONAOT the letters
NA had been mutilated or partly ob-


X, XI] ETTINIKOI 335


and with happy fortune dost thou dwell in Metapontion, O
glorious mistress of her people—and a lovely grove is thine,
which they dedicated to thee by the fair stream of the Casas,
[in front of thy temple,] when at last, in the counsels of the
blessed gods, they sacked Priam’s stately town with the mail-clad
Atreidae. Whoso has a just spirit will find, through all the course
of time, countless deeds of valour wrought by the Achaeans.


Χι, ΧΙ]


For Teisias of Aegina, victor in the wrestling-match at Nemea.


Like a skilful pilot, guide thou my thoughts, Cleio, queen


of song,


I. Title added by A® in left margin, opposite to vv. 1-4.


TICIAI Ms.


TEICIAI Blass:


literated, so as to leave ΠΡῸΔ ΟἹ or
TIPO OI. This was taken to be some
nominative plural, and was conjecturally
restored as ΠΡΟΓΟΝΟΙ, causing ἑσσα-
μένων to become ἑσσάμενοι. On my
view, ἑσσαμένων is a genit. absolute,
referring to the Achaean warriors who
are mentioned in 113 f. (ἀρηϊφίλοις
ἄνδρεσσιν), and who are the subject of
πέρσαν in 122. ἄλσος is nomin., ἐστί
being understood ;—‘And a lovely grove is
thine, (the Achaeans) having founded it by
the fair stream of the Casas in front of thy
temple.’ For πρὸ vaoz’, compare Alcaeus
fr. 9 (from a hymn to the Athena of
Coroneia): & ποι Κορωνείας ἐπὶ πισέων (so
Bergk) | vatw πάροιθεν ἀμφιβαίνεις |
Κωραλίω ποτάμω παρ᾽ ὄχθαις ; where, as
here, there is a sacred temenos (πίσεα)
on the banks of a river, in front of the
temple. Speaking of the same Athena,
Callimachus says (Hymn v. 63 f.), ἵνα
οἱ τεθνωμένον ἄλσος | καὶ βωμοὶ ποταμῷ
κεῖντ' ἐπὶ Κουραλίῳ. Cp. also Il. 19 f.
πάροιθε ναοῦ, τόθι μέγιστον ἄλσος Φοίβου
παρὰ Κασταλίας ῥεέθροις κ.τ.λ.---σσαμέ-
νον (fw): the midd. is normal in this
sense: Pind. P. Iv. 204 Ποσειδάωνος ἕσ-
σαντ᾽ εἰναλίου τέμενος: Her. 1. 66 ἱρὸν
εἱσάμενοι: Thuc. 111. 58 § 5 (θυσία5) τῶν
ἑσσαμένων καὶ κτισάντων : Eur. “712. 31
ναὸν . . ἐγκαθείσατο.

Whatever the original reading may
have been, πρόγονοι is impossible : mpo-
yovev also seems impossible. A short
syllable in the middle of a word divided
between two verses could not stand as
a syllaba anceps (representing a long
syllable) at the end of the first verse.—


See Appendix.

120f. Πριάμοι᾽ ἐπεὶ πέρσαν πόλιν :
Strabo says οἵ Metapontion (p. 264),
Πυλίων δὲ λέγεται κτίσμα τῶν ἐξ ᾽Ιλίου
πλευσάντων μετὰ Νέστορος. The safe
return of Nestor to Pylus is mentioned in
the Odyssey (3. 182), and was told in the
Cyclic Most?. Among the heroes from
Pylos (Πύλιοι) who afterwards founded
Metapontion, the legend doubtless in-
cluded some of his: sons; possibly even
Nestor himself. Sacrifices (ἐναγισμός)
to the spirits of the Neleidae (so called
from Nestor’s father Ny\evs) were offered
at Metapontion down to Strabo’s time.—
χρόνῳ, after ten years’ war: Aesch, Ag.
126 χρόνῳ μὲν αἱρεῖ Πριάμου πόλιν ἅδε
κέλευθος.

123 δικαίας : see n. on V. 196.

125 σὺν ἅπαντι χρόνῳ: Χ. 23n.
Some of the Achaean legends (such as
those of the Aeacidae) embraced many
successive generations of a family.

126 ἀλκάς, virtudes: Pind. NV. vu.
12 Tal μεγάλαι γὰρ ἀλκαὶ | σκότον πολὺν
ὕμνων ἔχοντι δεόμεναι.---᾿ Ἀχαιῶν. The
Ionian communities of the Aegean islands
and coasts were very proud of their
legendary Achaean founders, especially
of the Neleidae (or Nestoridae). Timo-
theus of Miletus, in the newly-found frag-
ment of his nome, the ersae, vv. 246 ff.,
speaks of the Ionian folk of the dode-
capolis as λαοῦ mpwréos ἐξ ᾿Αχαιῶν, ‘a
foremost scion of the Achaeans’; Miletus
having been founded, according to tra-
dition, by Neleus son of Codrus.


XI. 1—8 κυβερνήτας with 7, as in


str.


336 BAKXYAIAOY [ΧΙ, XII
εἰ δή ποτε καὶ πάρος" és yap ὀλβίαν
5 ξείνοισί με πότνια Nixa
νᾶσον Αἰγίνας ἀπάρχει
ἐλθόντα κοσμῆσαι θεόδματον πόλιν"
ἀντ. ? τάν τ᾽ ἐν Νεμέᾳ γυιαλκέα μουνοπάλαν
[The rest is lost.]
XII. [XIII.]
<ITYOEAI AITINHTHI
TTATKPATIACTHI NEMEA>
στρ. a. [Eight verses lost.]
Col. 23 ee ee


—-UV=-VY dew


’
Io -uyu UV - — Jef


-VVU-VUV -


Seve - Ἐ-ὖᾶ - Bar


στρ. β΄. [avr.


Col.24 τ ὕβριος ὑψινόου


α΄, ἐπ. α΄, and the first ten verses of στρ. β΄, are lost.]


΄ ὃ ΄ὔ θ lal a Re
45 12 παύσει, ὑκας UVATOLOL Κραινωὼν


6 ἀπάρχει] ἀπαίρει conj. Crusius, J. (ἀπαιτεῖ also J.) : ἐπάρκει (= ἐπήρκει, plpf. of ἐπαίρω)
Tyrrell. 8 τάν] τόν conj. Desrousseaux, W. Christ.—After this verse, the last in
col. xx11, the papyrus breaks off. There is no clue to the extent of the lacuna, nor,
therefore, to the original length of the ode.


xi. In column xxl, the
fifth with day: the third, with p..


second verse ended with Aeww,
or β.. (Blass traces “ερ)-


and the
The rest of col.


v. 47(n.)—oodds, a frequent epithet of
this subst. : Archilochus fr. 45 κυβερνήτην
σοφόν: Aesch. Suppl. 770 κυβερνήτῃ
σοφῷ: Phaedrus 4. 17. 8 gubernator
sophus. Cp. Pind. P. iv. 274 εἰ μὴ θεὸς
ἁγεμόνεσσι κυβερνάτηρ γένηται.

ὑμνοάνασσα, like μεγιστοάνασσα(ΧΠΙ.
21), implying βάνασσα (see VIII. 45).
κι vi. rof. ἀναξιμόλπου | Οὐρανία-.--

λειοῖ : see ἢ. on V. 176 ff. In 1. 3 the
name scans as ~-—: here it is —-, as in
XII. 228.

5 ξείνοισι, dat. of interest after κοσ-
μῆσαι, ‘for hospitable friends.” The
poet doubtless had formed ties of ξενία
in Aegina. Cp. ἢ. on ξένος in III. 11.

6 ἀπάρχει, if sound, must mean ‘leads
off,’ ‘shows the way’; this use being
borrowed from that in which the verb is
applied to one who leads a dance or


song: Anthol. g. 189. 3 ἔνθα καλὸν
στήσεσθε θεῇ χορόν: ὕμμι δ᾽ ἀπάρξει |
Σαπφώ, χρυσείην χερσὶν ἔχουσα λύρην.
As pps there shows, we should expect
here the dative μοι... ἐλθόντι, which, how-
ever, is excluded by metre. It seems
scarcely possible that ἀπάρχει should
govern the accus. (45 -- ἀπάγει). Blass
compares ἀφηγεῖσθαι: which, when it
governs a case, takes the genitive. The
construction with the accus. can only be,
‘leads the way, (so that) I should go to
Aegina.’ This is awkward: but the
only alternative is to suppose that ἀπάρχει
governs the acc. κατὰ σύνεσιν, because
felt as equivalent to ἀπάγει or the like.
ἀπαίρει, ‘causes to set forth,’ ‘despatches,’
is possible: cp. Eur. Helen. 1519 τίς δέ
vw ναυκληρία | ἐκ τῆσδ᾽ ἀπῆρε χθονός ; If
the first υ of ἀπαίρει had been lost, leaving


XI, xq] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 337
now if ever before; for divine Victory leads the way, bidding
me go to Aegina’s happy isle, in honour of hospitable friends,


and do grace to that god-built city,


and to the sinewy strife of the wrestler at Nemea....


ΧΤΙ. [ΧΠ|.]


For Pytheas of Aegina, victor in the pancration αἱ Nemea.


* * * * * *


....He shall stay them from their arrogant violence, con-
firming the reign of law for mortals.


Xx11I is lost. If, as Blass thinks, these verses belonged to the first strophe of ode x11,
then at least one whole column (containing the end of ΧΙ and the first 7 verses of XII)
has been lost between columns xx1I and xxut. (See Introd. to Ode, § 3.)—The title
is supplied by Kenyon from the internal evidence: IYTOEAI AITINHTHI παιδὶ


παγκρατιαστῇ Néuea.


Blass omits παιδί, inferring from Pind. 4. v. 6f. that Pytheas


competed, not among the παῖδες, but among the ἀγένειοι : see Introd.


ἀπάρει, this might have been altered by
conjecture to amdpxe. Another possi-
bility is ἀπαιτεῖ, ‘ bids,’ ‘ requires me.’

7 θεόδματον : epithets in θεο- are
especially given by B. to cities: VIII. 98:
X. 12, 58: XII. 163.

8 μουνοπάλαν : the only certain in-
stance of the feminine form; it is, how-
ever, possible in an epigramma found at
Delphi (Bull. de Corr. Hellén. 1898, 593.
3), νικῶν pouvorddy(v), which would be
in harmony, as Blass observes, with
companion inscriptions giving παγκράτιον
νικᾷς and νικῶ δὲ στάδιον. The masc.
occurs in Paus. 6. 4. 4 (an inscription at
Olympia), μουνοπάλης νικῶ δὶς ᾿Οολύμπια
Πύθιά τ᾽ ἄνδρας. The epithet γυιαλκέα
tells neither way; and it seems best to
keep the Ms. τάν.---μουνοπάλη is the
simple wrestling-match as distinguished
from the παγκράτιον, in which wrestling
was combined with boxing. For the
form cp. Paus. 8. 4 ὃ 9 (inscr. recording
Hieron’s victories) τεθρίππῳ μὲν ἅπαξ,
μουνοκέλητι δὲ δίς.


HII. 44—57 After a large lacuna
(see Introd.), in which the first part of
the ode has been lost, column XXIV of
the papyrus begins in the midst of a
prophecy concerning Heracles...‘ e shall
put down violence, and establish the reign
of law. Behold how he grapples with the
Nemean lion! In this place, some day,
Greeks shall strive for the prize of the
pancration.


j. 8.


Who is the speaker, before whose eyes
the struggle is going on? Many vases,
both red- and black-figured, show Hera-
cles subduing the Nemean lion, in the
presence of the hero’s half-sister and
guardian-goddess Athena, who stands on
the right; over against her on the left,
behind Heracles, is another female form,
who (in many instances at least) pre-
sumably represents the nymph MVemea-
(See Roscher, Lex. Myth. s.v.: Bau-
meister, Denkmaler p. 655, fig. 722.) It
is Athena, I conjecture, who speaks here,
addressing Nemea. At this, the first
labour of Heracles (vii. 8f.), she who is
to protect him through all (Z. 8. 363 ff.)
predicts his great destiny,—to be the
purger of Hellas from pests and wicked-
ness. (Prophecy by Athena was not
strange to Greek poetry: cp. Aesch.
Lum. 685 ff.)—Blass and Wilamowitz
think that Nemea speaks: but the tone
seems too lofty and authoritative for the
nymph. Further, it can scarcely be
doubted that the poet would have fol-
lowed the tradition attested by art, in
conceiving Athena as present; but, in
her presence, Nemea could not take such
a part.

44. ὕβριος... παύσει : so Teiresias
predicted of Heracles (Pind. WV. 1. 64f.),
καί τινα σὺν πλαγίῳ | ἀνδρῶν κόρῳ στεί-
χοντα τὸν ἐχθρότατον | φᾶσέ νιν δώσειν
μόρῳ (‘he should give to death those
hatefullest of men who walk in guile and
insolence’). ᾿


23


ant.?


str. 2.


338


ἀντ. β΄.


2 μηστᾷ λέοντι


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


[XII


τ Olay τινὰ δύσλοφον ὠ-


a Περσείδας épinav<v>


4 χεῖρα παντοίαισι τέχναις"
5° ς οὐ γὰρ] δαμασίμβροτος αἴθων
ἃς Ἂν t ¥
6 χαλ]κὸς ἀπλάτου θέλει
7 yopeliv διὰ σώματος, ἐ-


—
N
ο

—
οο


γνάμ ἰφθὴη δ᾽ ὀπίσσω


5 ε ΄
9 φάσγα]νον᾽ ἢ ποτέ φαμι
Coa Ν εἶ
551 τᾷδε] περὶ στεφάνοισι
a , , e
x παγκ)ρατίου πόνον “EX-
m4 ε Fé > »
τ λάνεσσι)]ν ἱδρώεντ᾽ ἔσεσθαι.


ἐπ. β΄.(28) - ὃς νῦν παρ]ὰ βωμὸν ἀριστάρχον Διὸς
2 Νίκας é]p[ux ]vddos ἀν-


δεθε]σιν ἄνθεα,


χρυσέ]αν δόξαν πολύφαντον ἐν αἷ-


(30)


“


3

4

s avi] τρέφει παύροις βροτῶν

6 αἰεί, καὶ ὅταν θανάτοιο

κυάνεον νέφος καλύψῃ, λείπεται
Ξ Ἵ»


65 8 ἀθάνατον κλέος εὖ ἐρ-
΄ 9 A ἊΝ »
9 χθέντος ἀσφαλεῖ σὺν αἴσᾳ.


52 f. χωρεῖν Blass, Ηεγνεγάεη.---ἐγνάμφθη Tyrrell, Blass—OIICCQ A: the


second C deleted (by A®?).


55 τᾷδε] So Blass.


56 £. Ἑλλάνεσσιν Blass,


δίκας ... κραίνων, ‘confirming judg-
ments’; 2.6. securing that justice shall
mot be overridden by violence. Cp.
Solon fr. 4. 37 (of Eunomia), εὐθύνει δὲ
δίκας σκολιὰς ὑπερήφανά T ἔργα | mpaiver:
Pind. P. 1v. 153 εὔθυνε λαοῖς δίκας.

46- 49 οἵαν. This eager exclamation
is illustrated by the vases (e.g. fig. 722 in
Baumeister, p. 655), on which Athena
and the other female figure are holding
up their hands in wonder and delight.—
δύσλοφον, ‘pressing heavily’ (lit. “heavy
on the neck’); Aesch. P.V. 931 δυσλο-
φωτέρους πόνους. The vase just noticed
shows Heracles grappling with the lion,
who is erect on his hind feet; the hero
has his left arm round the monster’s
neck ; his right hand is on the throat.—
Tlepoe(Sas. Perseus was grandfather of
Amphitryon, Alcmena’s husband, and
great-grandfather of Heracles.—réxvats,
‘devices’ in grappling with the monster,
since the sword is useless.


51 ἀπλάτου : Soph. 77. 1092 Νεμέας
ἔνοικον, βουκόλων ἀλάστορα, | λέοντ᾽,
ἄπλατον θρέμμα κἀπροσήγορον (‘that no
man might approach οὐ confront’). The
lion was invulnerable: ἢ. on VIII. 6 ff.

52—54 χωρεῖν : Blass cp. Xen. Ax.
ΙΝ. 2. 28 τὸ τόξευμα ἐχώρει διὰ τῶν
θωράκων. (πείρειν is also possible, but is
usually said of the man, not of his
weapon; as 77. 16. 405 διὰ δ᾽ αὐτοῦ πεῖρεν
ὀδόντων | ἔγχεϊ.)---ἐγνάμφθη : 71. 3. 348
ἀνεγνάμφθη δέ οἱ αἰχμή. This is said by
the spectator of the struggie, which is still
in progress ; it is a parenthesis : ‘ see, his
hands are on the monster (for his sword
is useless,—it was bent back’). Heracles
had thrown his sword aside before closing
with the lion. The aorist is another
indication that the poet had in his mind
some picture of the type found on the
vases. Heracles is there represented as
using his hands alone. In one example
(fig. 733 in Baumeister, p. 666) his sword


XI] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


339
‘See how that scion of Perseus, skilled in every resource, lays
a crushing hand on the savage lion; for the gleaming bronze,
slayer of men, refuses to pierce the dread monster’s body ; the
sword was bent back.
‘Verily I prophesy that here the Greeks shall strive for
wreaths in the strenuous toil of the pancration.’


And now, for those who have been crowned with the flowers
of glorious Victory at the altar of Zeus the peerless king, that
toil nourishes a golden renown, conspicuous in their life-time
evermore; few are they among men. And when the dark cloud
of death enfolds them, there remains the undying fame of a deed


bravely done, with a fortune that can fail no more.


᾿“Ἑλλασίν τιν᾽ Κα.
Platt and others : παύροισι MS.
A, corr. Al.


58—68 For the supplements here see Appendix.
68 OTAOANATOIO A, corr. A’.


62 παύροις
64 καλυψη


is hanging on the branch of a tree in the
background ; his bow and club have also
been discarded.

55—57 τᾷδε is right : ‘ Here ’—in the
vale of Nemea. The strenuous wrestling
of Heracles with the lion fureshadows
the conflicts of wrestlers (and boxers) in
the pancration.

The traces ‘EX......v in the Ms. seem
to leave only three choices: (1) ‘EAAd-
vero. (Blass), which is the simplest.
Cp. Pind. Z 1. 47 Πανελλάνεσσι. (2)
“Ἑϊλλασίν tw’? (Kenyon). The ms. has
no apostrophe after the v before ἱδρώεντ᾽,
and that must be considered: it is not,
however, decisive. τιν᾽ might seem
slightly weak ; but, in a prophecy, might
be intended to add a touch of mystery.
(3) πόνον “Ἑἰλλασιν τὸν ἱδρώεντ᾽ (‘that
arduous toil’) seems improbable here.
On the whole, I incline to (1).

58—63 In the lacuna before παρὰ
(v. 58) I insert ὃς viv. és refers to
παγκρατίου πόνον in 56, and is subject
to τρέφει in 62. The whole passage is
then clear. From Athena’s prophecy
concerning the pancration the poet
passes to the victory of Pytheas, effecting
the transition by means of a relative
word, as Pindar often does (¢.g. in O. 1.
25 the relat. τοῦ links proem to myth; in
95 ἵνα links myth to conclusion). ‘And
now that toil (of the pancration), for men
who have been crowned with the flowers of
victory at the altar of (Nemean) Zeus,
nourishes a golden glory,’ etc.—avdeeiow
(Housman) seems certain: the first syl-
lable of v. 60 must be short, as it is


in all the five corresponding verses, 93,
126, 159, 192, 225. (Blass’s ἀνθρώποισιν
is therefore very improbable.) ἄνθεα,
acc. denoting the ἀνάδημα : cp. C. J. G.
στέμμ᾽ ἀναδησάμενος: Athen. p. 676 D
oréwovrar...pdda. The dat. ἄνθεσι (Ix.
16) would be more usual.—éy αἰῶνι, ‘in
their life-time’; as opposed to καὶ ὅταν
OavarooK.7.A. This reading is confirmed
by the fact that the syllable answering to
the second of αἰῶνι is long in all the
corresponding verses where it remains,
viz. 95, 129, 194, 227; and presumably
was so also in 162.--παύροις βροτῶν,
a sort of afterthought, serves to explain
πολύφαντον : few there be that win such
glory.—For other views of the passage,
see Appendix.

64 κυάνεον : the only example in B.
of κυαν- with v.

65:2, ἐρχθέντος, from ἔρδω : so in 207
ἐργμένον (perf. pass. part.). Both forms
are unique. Of the passive the only other
part extant is the pres. part. ἐρδόμενος
(Pind. O. vu. 78, Her. Iv. 60). In
Ll, 21. 282 ἐρχθέντ᾽ ἐν μεγάλῳ ποταμῷ
(‘pent’), the word is from ἔργω. Hippocr.
5. 384 has ῥεχθείη : LZ. 9. 250 ῥεχθέντος,
and 20. 198 pex@év: from péfw. It may
be noticed, as Headlam remarks, that
some writers of Ionic prefer -épxrys to
-ρέκτης : as Herodas v. 42 παντοερκτέω
(but Anacreontea X. 11 mavropéxr@);
Antipater of Thessalonica in Anh. Ix.
92. 4 εὐέρκταις.

ἀσφαλεῖ σὺν αἴσᾳ. Thenceforth their
fame is beyond the reach of φθόνος
evpuBlas.


23—2


ant. 2z.


epode 2.


340


BAKXYAIAOY


[XII


, fal \ NX Ν /
otp.y. ττῶν Kal ov τυχὼν Νεμέᾳ,


Λάμπωνος vie,


, 4
πανθαλέων στεφάνοισιν


αὔξων] πόλιν ὑψιάγνιαν


3

70 4 ἀνθέων] χαίταν ἐρεφθείς,
5
6


ἤλυθες τερψιμβρότων


ἮΝ ὟΣ
nN
ο
—
ss


ου


~
σι
©


αὐλῶν ὑπό θ᾽ al δυπν Ἰόων
κώμων πατρῴαν
νᾶσον, ὑπέρβιον ἰσχὺν


το παμμαχιᾶν ἀναφαίνων.
1 ὦ ποταμοῦ θύγατερ


(45) τὸ


802 ἔδωκε τιμὰν


a ” > > 4
δινᾶντος Aiyw’ ἠπιόφρον,


1.25 ἄντ. γ. 1 τοι μεγάλαν [Κρονίδας


3 ἐν πάντεσσιν ἴ ἀέθλοις,
XN a εὐ a
+ πυρσὸν as “ENN ace παντᾷ
(50) s φαίνων: τό ye σὸν κλέος ai lve
6 καί Tis ὑψαυχὴς Kd pa,


85 7


[λευκοῖς ἀνὰ γᾶν ἱερὰν


8. πόδεσσι ταρφέαϊς,


71- 74 For the conjectural supplements see Appendix.
letter after A was, Blass thinks, B, P, C, or E. But A is also possible.


73 ἀ[δυπν]όων. The
Kenyon


remarks that the top of Ain this ms. often resembles that of the letter following A


here; see 6. 9. the A of δύσλοφον in ν. 46.
conj. ἁβροπνόων : now, ἀερσινόων.


ἁδυπνόων will then serve.
See Appendix.


Blass formerly
76 παμμαχίαν MS.: Tap-


μαχιᾶν Κ. 78 δινᾶντος] T made from E by Al. 79 Κρονίδας Blass:
ὅδε παῖς K. 81 ἀέθλοις K.: ἀγῶσιν Blass, Jurenka. 82 πάντᾳ 1.:
69 πανθαλέων, ------, being Doric for would be, ‘illustrating thy native isle as


πανθηλ- (Anth. 9. 182. 6 thy πανθηλής) :
see ἢ. on εὐθαλές in VIII. 5.

71—76 In the restoration tenta-
tively given above, these points may be
noted. (1) The vestiges in 73 f. suggest
(eg.) αὐλῶν ὑπό θ᾽ ἁδυπνόων | κώμων.
But, if such words stood there, a verb of
coming or returning stood in 71 or in 72.
(2) Inv. 753 NACO(N) is more probable
than NACO(T), as the space between O
and the T of ὑπέρβιον requires a very
broad letter, and in this Ms. N can be
broader than T. In any case, πατρῴαν
νάσου...ἰσχὺν παμμαχιᾶν would be awk-
ward. νᾶσον probably depended on a
verb such as ἤλυθες (cp. I. 4 ἤλυθεν) in
72. If it depended on ἀναφαίνων, ἰσχὺν
must be acc. of respect, and the sense


of great might in the feats of the pancra-
tion’: but this is improbable; ὑπέρβιον
should be the epithet of ἰσχύν. (3) The
acc. πόλιν ὑψιάγνιαν in 71 can hardly
have been in apposition with νᾶσον : the
interval is too long. It may have been
governed by a participle such as αὔξων :
cp. Pind. O. v. 4 τὰν σὰν πόλιν αὔξων,
P. Vill. 38 αὔξων... πάτραν (said of vic-
tors).—Trappaxiav. παμμαχία occurs
elsewhere only in Eusebius De aud.
Constantini 7 ἐγ... but Photius and
Suidas give παμμάχιον" παγκράτιον. For
πάμμαχος ἀ5Ξεπαγκρατιαστής, cp. Plat.
Euthyd. p. 271 C: Theocr. XXIV. 111 ff.,
where the πάμμαχοι are those who have
learned all the σοφίσματα of wrestling
and of boxing.


ΧΙ] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


341

Such honours thou also, son οὗ Lampon, hast won at Nemea;
wreaths of luxuriant flowers have crowned thy head; for the
glory of the stately city, amidst the gladdening sound of flutes
and the choice strains of festal companies, thou hast returned
to thy native isle, illustrating her pre-eminent strength in the
feats of the pancration.

O daughter of the eddying river, Aegina of gentle soul,


verily the son of Cronus has given thee honour in all contests,
making it to shine everywhere as a beacon-light for the Greeks.
Yea, and thy glory is a theme for the high vaunt of some maiden,


as oft with her white feet she moves o’er thy sacred soil,


ἀλκὰν K., Jurenka: τῆλε Blass.


84f£. καί ris] The I of KAI added by A??—


TVATXAC A: ἡ written above the second A by A*®.—At the extreme right of v. 84


are the letters pay.


(The p seems certain: though Jurenka finds cay.) They are


separated from xo by the space of some seven letters only. But a whole verse (85)


has been lost.
were pieced on to v. 84.


That verse probably ended in -pav, and the mutilated remains of it
86 ταρφέωϊν] K.: but Blass thinks that the final letter


was s, and writes rappéws (with Headlam and Platt).


ἀναφαίνων: Μ. 20. 411 ποδῶν ἀρετὴν
ἀναφαίνων .---Β1455 (3rd ed.) reads παμμα-
χίαν ἄνα φαίνων: but this does not seem


good.
77 1. ποταμοῦ, the Asopus (VIII.
47 ἡ). Zeus, transformed into an eagle


(or according to Ovid AZet. VI. 113 into a
fiery shape, zyzeus), carried off Aegina
from her father to the island formerly
called Οἰνώνη, which thenceforth bore
her name.—yriddpov: Aegina’s isle
was a place ἔνθα Σώτειρα Διὸς Reviov |
πάρεδρος ἀσκεῖται Θέμις | ἔξοχ᾽ ἀνθρώπων
(Pind. O. vill. 27): 1. Iv. 22 εὔνομον
πόλιν : cp. also Pind. fr. r. It was
a centre of commerce at which visitors
from all parts of Hellas found hospitality
and upright dealing.

The passage on the glories of Aegina
which begins here fills the greater part
of the ode. Only at v. 190 does the
poet return to the victory of Pytheas.

81 ἀέθλοις is more euphonious than
ἀγῶσιν here. Blass prefers the latter
because it will include sea-fights as well
as athletic games: but the poetical sense
of ἀέθλοις covers both.

82 πυρσὸν ds x.7.A. The fourth verse
of the strophe ends with a long syllable
in 49, 70, 136, 148, 181 (where θάλασσαν
is certain), 202; z.e. in every place where
it can be ascertained, except v. 115
(ἄστυ). There is therefore ἃ strong
presumption against τῆλε, which Blass


supplies. The word may have been
παντᾷ: cp. V. 31 μυρία παντᾷ κέλευθος.
As τιμὰν has just preceded, this seems
slightly preferable to ἀλκάν: but the
latter is quite possible.

84- 86 καί τις ὑψαυχὴς κόρα:
some daughter of the island, who exults
in its legendary glories; one, perhaps,
whose family claims descent from the
Aeacidae. So Pindar imagines Hieron’s
praises as sung in Magna Graecia by
Locrian maidens: P. 11. 18 σὲ δ᾽, ὦ
Δεινομένειε παῖ, Ζεφυρία πρὸ δόμων | Ao-
κρὶς παρθένος ἀπύει.---ὑψαυχὴς occurs only
here: but Pindar and Aeschylus use
μεγαυχής.

ταρφέως, ‘frequently’; the Homeric
form of the adverb is ταρφέα (//. 12. 47,
etc.). πόδεσσι may have had an epithet
in the lost verse (85), such as λευκοῖς
(cp. Eur. Bacch. 863, fon 221); it could
then go with θρῴσκουσ᾽ (00). The rest
of v. 85 may have been something like
ἀνὰ γᾶν ἱεράν, or πλάκ᾽ ἀνὰ χλοεράν.
[I formerly thought of πολλᾶν προφέρουσα
κορᾶν | πόδεσσι ταρφέων, pedibus frequen-
tium (ταρφὺς iv fem. in Aesch. ΖΔ. 535):
cp. Soph. 0.C. 718f. τῶν ἑκατομπόδων |
Νηρήδων. But it seems more likely that
the companions were first mentioned in
89 f.]—Blass would point after κόρα᾽
(taking her to be Athena;) and then
read, στείχεις δ᾽ ἀνὰ γᾶν ἱεράν, referring
to the nymph Aegina, with ἀγακλειταῖσι


str. 3.


ant. 3.


342 BAKXYAIAOY [XII
9 ἠὕτε νεβρὸς ἀπενθής,
(55) το ἀνθεμόεντας ἐπ᾿ [ὄχθους
τ κοῦφα σὺν πὶ αμπὲ
901. θρῴσκουσ᾽ ἀγακλειταζ[ῖς ἑταίραις"


ἐπ. γ. «Tat δὲ στεφανωσάμεϊναι πλόκοις νέων
2 ἀνθέων δόνακός 7° ἐϊπιχω-
(60) -: ρίαν ἄθυρσιν
4 παρθένοι μέλπουσι πεὸν κράτος), ὦ
95 5 δέσποινα παγξε[ίνον χθονός,
6 Ἔνδαΐδα τε ῥοδόΪ παχυν,
7 ἃ tov ἱππευτὰ]ν ἔτικτε Πηλέα
(65) 5 καὶ Τελαμῶνα [κορυστάν,
9 Αἰακῷ μειχθεῖσ᾽ ἐν εὐναῖς"
στρ.δ΄ τοο 1 τῶν «θ5 υἷας ἀερσιμάχους,
2 ταχύν τ᾽ ᾿Αχιλλέα
3 εὐειδέος T ᾿Εριβοίας
(79) 4 παῖδ᾽ gor πὸ Boal θόον
5s Αἴαντα σακεσφόρον n po,


87 veBpos] NEKPOC A, corr. 45; noteworthy as showing how mechanically A
sometimes worked. 89 ἀγχιδόμοις J. ΘΟ ἀγακλειταῖς ἑταίραις K.: ἀγα-
κλειταῖσι Νύμφαις Blass. 91 After στεφανωσάμεϊναι there is room for about seven
letters before -εων. The traces of sv, which Blass supposes before ewv, seem altogether
doubtful. 92 ξ. ἐπιχωρίαν J. 94 In K.’s editio princeps (p. 118) I suggested
τεὸν κλέος ὦ. For κλέος Blass substitutes κράτος : and this is preferable, as the space
between 7 and w admits about nine letters.—redv γόνον (so also Thomas), or γάμον,


Νύμφαις (the other nymphs of the island)
in go. But the comparison to ‘a joyous
fawn’ suggests a mortal rather than a
semi-divine maiden.

87 For νεβρὸς cp. Eur. Bacch. 862 ff. ;
dp ἐν παννυχίοις χοροῖς | θήσω ποτὲ dev-
κὸν | πόδ᾽ ἀναβακχεύουσα, δέραν | εἰς al-
θέρα δροσερὸν  ῥίπτουσ᾽, ὡς νεβρὸς
χλοεραῖς | ἐμπαίζουσα λείμακος ἡδοναῖς


κιτιλ.--ἀπενθής : fr. 7: 2 θυμὸν... «ἀπενθῆ.
88 ὄχθους, ‘hills’: Eur. Heracl. 781
ἀνθεμόεντι γᾶς ἐπ᾽ ὄχθῳ. The word


could also mean ‘river-banks’ (-Ξ ὄχθας),
as in Aesch. Ag. 1161, ᾿Αχερουσίους
ὄχθους. B. often associates flowers with
rivers (XV. 5, 34; XVIII. 39): δόνακος
also (92) might suggest this. But then
we should expect some distinct mention
of a river, to define ὄχθους.

89:. ἀγχιδόμοις occurs only here:
but cp. Theognis 302 γείτοσί τ’ ἀγχιθύ-
ροις.--αἀγακλειταῖς : the epithet might


mean merely, ‘famed for beauty’: Pindar
P. 1X. 105 calls the daughter of Antaeus
ἀγακλέα xovpay. But the word also
suggests the idea of ‘high-born,’ ‘illus-
trious’ (cp. Od. 17. 370 ἀγακλειτῆς
βασιλείης).

Θ1- 98 πλόκοις νέων (or the like)
is a safer supplement than χρυσανγέων
or φοινικέων. If either of the latter
words were read, the construction of ore-
φανωσάμεναι must be either (1) with acc.
dévpow,—‘crowned with festal wreaths
of flowers and reeds,’ the genitives de-
pending on that noun: or (2) with gen.
ἀνθέων, ἄθυρσιν being the acc. in appo-
sition. A genitive with the simple στε-
φανοῦσθαι or στέφεσθαι is not unexampled
(cp. Nonnus Dzonys. 5. 282); but the
dative is normal. [We cannot properly
compare //. 1. 470 κρητῆρας ἐπεστέψαντο
moroto = ἔπλησαν, nor Aleman fr. 61 ἐπιστέ-
φοισαι dprwr.] The fourth syllable from


ΧΙ] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


343
bounding lightly as a joyous fawn towards the flowery hills,
with her glorious neighbours and companions.


And when they have crowned themselves with wreaths of epode 3.
young flowers and of reeds, in the festive fashion of their isle,
they hymn thy power, O queen of a thrice-hospitable land. ‘They
sing also of Endeis with rosy arms, who in wedlock with Aeacus
bare chariot-driving Peleus, and the warrior Telamon ;


and also of their sons, the kindlers of battle, swift Achilles, and
fair Eriboea’s offspring, the great-hearted helper at need, Ajax,


str. 4.


shield-bearing hero ;


conj. Housman.
παγξείνου χθονός (πέδου Blass) Housman.


97 τὸν ἱππευτὰν Headlam.—érexre Πηλέα J.


95 ITAIZE Μ5.: but the I may have been made from Γ..--


96 'Evéaléa τε ῥοδόπαχυν Palmer and J.
98 κορυστάν J. (κραταιόν conj. K.)


99 After EN Kenyon read A (hence ἐν αἴσᾳ Blass): but the letter seems rather to


have been E.—év εὐναῖς J.: ἐνηεῖ Blass?.
υἱέας MS,
without 6’) Wilamowitz, Housman.


100 θ᾽ add J.—vias W. Christ, Blass :


108 βοαθόον K.: βοατὰν Blass.—fodow (reading τῶν in 100 as relat.,


the end of the verse is long in 58 and
124, but short in 157 and 190.—émuxwplay
ἄθυρσιν, acc. in appos. with sentence,
‘a local sport,’ i.e. ‘in the festal fashion
of the isle’: ἄθυρσις (only here) from
ἀθύρειν, which was said of dancing,
singing, or other pastime: cp. Plat.
Legg. 746 B ἡ..«παρ᾽ ἡμῖν Κόρη καὶ Aé-
σποινα, εὐφρανθεῖσα τῇ τῆς χορείας παι-
διᾷ, κεναῖς χερσὶν οὐκ φήθη δεῖν ἀθύρειν..---
The local trait was the blending of reeds
with flowers in the wreath.

94f. κράτος, ‘majesty’: Aesch. Ag.
258 ἥκω σεβίζων σόν, Κλυταιμνήστρα,
“κράτος.----παγξείνου : see τι. on παγξένῳ
in Χ. 28. Pindar says of Aegina (0. VIII.
25 ff.) τεθμὸς δέ τις ἀθανάτων καὶ τάνδ᾽
ἁλιερκέα χώραν | παντοδαποῖσιν ὑπέστασε
ξένοις | κίονα δαιμονίαν. [I formerly pro-
posed παῖ ξείνου πατρός, supposing B. to
refer to the Phliasian legend that Asopus
was of Phrygian origin, Paus. 2. 5 § 3,
᾿Ασωποῦ τὸ ὕδωρ érndu καὶ οὐκ ἐγχώριον.
But, as it seems that the first hand may
have written IIAI', I now prefer παγ-
ξείνου.

96 Ἔἰνδαΐδα, the daughter of Σκίρων
(a Megarian hero, xvii. 25 n.) and wife
of Aeacus, to whom she bore Peleus and
Telamon. (Apollod. 111. 12. 6: Pindar
NV. v. τ Evdatdos ἀρίγνωτες viol.) See
stemma in Introd.—poSémaxuv: Hes.
Theog. 241 Εὐνείκη ῥοδόπηχυς (cp. 2b. 251):
Hom. hymn. XXX1. 6 °HG τε ῥοδόπηχυν:
Sappho fr. 69 βροδοπάχεες ἄγναι Kapires.—
For τὲ before fodo-, cp. XV. 34 ἐπὶ ῥοδό-
ἐντι.


97 ἱππευτάν, the Homeric ἱππότα
Πηλεύς (71. τό. 33 etc.). Thessalians
were breeders and riders of horses.
Pind. P. τν. 152f. Kpy@etéas (Aeson,
Jason’s [αἰμει).. ἱππόταις εὔθυνε λαοῖς
δίκας.

98 κορυστάν, helmed warrior (//. 4.
457 etc.). I propose this, rather than
a word like κραταιόν, because the last
syllable of this verse is always long
(see 44, 56, 77, 110, 122, 143, 155, 188,
221).

99 ἐν εὐναῖς (or εὐνᾷ) must, I think,
be right here. For the statelier plural
cp. Pind. P. Il. 27, IX. 12.

100 τῶν θ᾽. In adding θ᾽ (which
Kenyon, Blass and Jurenka accept) I was
guided by the fact that vias ought to
be governed by μέλπουσι (94): it is still
the maidens that sing of Achilles and
Ajax. If θ᾽ is absent, then Boa- in 103
must be read as Bodow (cp. Eur. Helen.
1108 f. σὲ... | ...dvaBoacw, ‘loudly hymn
thee’): but this is much less fitting or
probable.—depoipdxous: cp. Hes. Of.
475 ἀερσιπότητος ἀράχνης: Scut. 316
ἀερσιπόται : Ap. Rhod. 2. τού! ἀερσιλό-
gous. On the other hand ἀρσίποδας in
Hom. hymn. Vv. 211 is exceptional. We
might suppose synizesis in υἱέας: but
υἷας is more likely. Cp. 111. 77 where
υἷι, seems certain.

102—104 ’EpiPolas, daughter of
Alcathous, king of Megara; wife of
Telamon (Pind. 7. v. 45: Soph. Az.


69).
tos f£. βοαθόον (βοή and rt ef), hast-


BAKXYAIAOY [ΧΙ


344
105 6 ὅς T ἐπὶ πρύμνᾳ σταθεὶς
7 ἔσχεν θρασυκάρδιον [ὁρ-
8. μαΐνοντα ν] aas
(75) 9 θεσπεσίῳ πυ[ρὶ καῦσαι
το Ἕκτορα χαλ Keouirpa |v,
Ifo ὅππότε Π[ηλεΐδας
- τραχεῖαν [ Αργείοισι μ]ᾶνιν


ἀντ. δ. + ὠρίνατ[ο, Δαρδανίδας
>» »
(80) - τ᾽ ἔλυσεν alras’
a ,Ν * a
3 οἱ πρὶν μὲν [πολύπυργο]ν
Col.26115 4 Ἰλίου θαητὸν ἄστυ
5 οὐ λεῖπον, ἀτυζόμενοι [δὲ
6 πτ]ᾶσσον ὀξεῖαν μάχαν,
(85) , εὖτ᾽ ἐν πεδίῳ κλονέων
’,Ὁ 95.ὕ 3 a
8 patvor ᾿Αχιλλεύς,
, ΄ ΄, 3
120 9 λαοφόνον δόρυ σείων
3 “ὦ Ἂς Fg
το ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ πολέμοιο
~ 3 ’΄
- λῆξεν ἰοστεφάνου
(90) Νηρῇδος ἀτρόμητος υἱός"


ἐπ. δ. ὥστ᾽ ἐν κυανανθέϊ Θ[ρᾳκὶ ναυβάτας


4 [1
125 2 πόντῳ Βορέας ὑπὸ κύ-
“"
3 μασιν δαΐζει


106 ἔσχεν] ἴσχεν Ludwich.—xafoa: Blass (καίειν K.): 109 The final Ν of this v
the ANIN in 111, and the final N of 114, are found in a fragment (18 K.) which w:
placed here by Blass.—ya)xeoulrpay K. (suggesting also χαλκεοχάρμαν) : χαλκοκορυστό
Smyth (conj. Blass). 110 ὁππότε K.: οπότε MS. 111 τραχεῖαν Desrousseau:
Blass: the letters A...A alone are certain.—Apyelowt Blass} (᾿Ατρείδαισι B1.2).— pani:
HNIN A: but H has been changed to A by a corrector. 112 £. Aapdavidas


ing at the war-cry, prompt to aid (77. 13.


νῆα | οὔθ᾽ ὁ τὸν ἂψ ὥσασθαι, ἐπεί 1
477, 17. 481). The synizesis is harsh :


ἐπέλασσέ γε δαίμων. Cp. Soph. 42. 127


but I hesitate to adopt βοατάν, which
would be a strange substitute for βοὴν
ἀγαθόν.---σακεσφόρον, as in Soph. Az.
19. Cp. //. 7. 219 (of Ajax), φέρων σάκος
noire πύργον, | χάλκεον, ἑπταβόειον.

105 The Homeric relative ὅς τε (//.
1. 279 etc.) is freely used by lyric poets
(as Aleman fr. 26. 3, and Pindar fas-
sim).—ém πρύμνᾳ σταθεὶς, at the stern
of his own ship. These services of Ajax
are related in //. 15. 415—743. The
stubborn conflict between Ajax and
Hector is pithily described there in 417 f.:
οὔθ᾽ ὁ τὸν ἐξελάσαι καὶ ἐνιπρῆσαι πυρὶ


—1279.

108 θεσπεσίῳ, ‘terrible,’ cp. Od. :
68 λαίλαπι θεσπεσίῃ: 1. 12. 440
(Hector’s cry to the Trojans) ῥήγνυσθει
τεῖχος [᾿Αργείων καὶ νηυσὶν ἐνίετε Be
πιδαὲς πῦρ (‘fiercely blazing’).

109 χαλκεομίτραν : Pindar Δ. x. ¢
has χαλκομίτρα (gen.). The very fa
that χαλκοκορυστής is a stock Homer
epithet of Hector seems rather again
supplying it here: B. might natural’
wish to vary. χαλκεοχάρμαν (Pind. 4
v. 82 χαλκοχάρμαι) would also serve.-
Cp. f. 4. 187 ζῶμά τε καὶ μίτρη τὶ


XI] ETTINIKOI 345
who stood at his vessel’s stern, and stopped bold Hector, the
bronze-girdled, when he was rushing on to burn the ships with


dread fire ; what time the son of Peleus had set up his fierce


wrath against the Greeks,


and had given the children of Dardanus a respite from doom.
Hitherto they had forborne to leave the goodly town of

many-towered Ilion, and had shrunk in dismay from the keen

fight, so oft as furious Achilles, brandishing his deadly spear,


made turmoil in the plain.


But when at last the intrepid son


of the violet-crowned Nereid had ceased from war,—


as Boreas, on the dark Thracian sea, falls in with mariners by
night and bufféts them with billows,


τ᾽ ἔλυσεν ἄτας Desrousseaux (which had occurred to me also): Δαρδανιδᾶν | τ΄ ἔλυσεν


ἄταν is also possible.—Tpwot δὲ πάν]τ᾽ ἔλυσεν alvd Blass.
116 [οὐ] λεῖπον Blass.
118 ΠΕΔΙΟΝ A: corr. A’.
some correction between A and @: perhaps of IO to O.

Herwerden : θύων ναῦν θοὰν Blass: Θρῆιξ ναυβάτας Crusius.


θεότιμον Jurenka, Smyth.
Platt, Thomas.


114 πολύπυργον Blass:
1197 πτᾶσσον Blass,
120 λαοφόνον] There has been
124 Θ[ρᾳκὶ ναυβάτας
θύων ναυβάτας Smyth.


χαλκῆες κάμον ἄνδρες. The μίτρα was
a metal girdle, protecting a part of the
body to which the θώραξ did not reach
(Helbig, Hom. Epos p. 200).

111-118 ᾿Αργείοισι seems fitter
here than ᾿Ατρείδαισι: the antithesis is
between Greeks and Trojans.—dplvaro:
the aor. midd. is found nowhere else.
The impf. pass. occurs in 72. 9. 595 τοῦ
δ᾽ ὠρίνετο θυμός, and the aor. act. in
Ii. 792 dplvas.—éras, the ‘destruction’
which was impending over them: cp.
Pind. O. XI. 37 ὑπὸ στερεῷ πυρὶ | πλαγαῖς
τε σιδάρον βαθὺν εἰς dxerdv ἄτας ἵζοισαν
ἐὰν πόλιν. (ἄλγους is unsuitable here.)—
Another possible supplement is that of
Blass, Τρωσὶ δὲ wdv|r’ ἔλυσεν alvd: but
such a use of αἰνά seems questionable.

1142. The lost word, ending in ν, was
doubtless an epithet of Ilium. πολύ-
πυργον suits the context, as suggesting
the security of the Trojans within their
walls. The word occurs only in Hom.
hymn. τι. (Apoll. Pyth.) 64. θεότιμον,
however, is also possible: see n. on XI. 7.
--ἄστυ. This is the only instance of
hiatus between verses 4 and 5 of the
strophe (cp. 70, 82, 136, 148, 181, 202):
but ἄστυ <7’>... ἀτυζόμενοί <re> is
improbable.

115 οὐ λεῖπον is certainly right. Cp.
141 f., where their sally in force is de-
scribed by πασσυδίᾳ δὲ λιπόντες τείχεα.

117 πτᾶσσον.... μάχαν: cp. Aesch.
P.V. 174 οὔποτ᾽ ἀπειλὰς πτήξας: Τιγ-


cophron 280 πτήσσων δόρν. So in 71. 20.
426 f. οὐδ᾽ ἂν ἔτι δὴν | ἀλλήλους πτώσσοι-
μεν.

118 κλονέων, absolute, ‘making tur-
moil’: 2. 21. 532f. ἦ γὰρ ᾿Αχιλλεὺς |
ἐγγὺς ὅδε κλονέων.

122 ἰοστεφάνον, here the epithet of
Thetis, is that of Persephone in III. 2.
It might seem to have a special fitness
for these dwellers in dark depths: but
such a theory fails when we find the
word applied also to the Muses (v. 3),
to Aphrodite (H/om. hymn. v1. 18), and,
in a late epigram, to the Charites (Ach.
VII. 127).

124- 126 ὥστ᾽ --ὡς, ‘as,’ an epic
use admitted by Aeschylus and Sophocles
not only in lyrics but also in trimeters :
Pindar, however, uses ὥστε only with
infin., and in this sense employs dre.

κυανανθέϊ (only here), ‘of dark hue’
(cp. μελανθής), under a stormy wind;
little more than κυανέῳ: for -ανθής in this
compound could not refer to the white
crests of waves. Cp. Eur. /. 7. 7 (the
Euripus) πυκναῖς | αὔραις ἑλίσσων κνανέαν
ἅλα στρέφει. (In Helen. 179, xvavoedes
...Udwp, the epithet is a general one.)
Dionysius Periegetes (c. 130 A.D.) 169
has xvavavyyjs of the sea.

Θρᾳκί: 7. 23. 230 Θρηΐκιον.. πόντον:
Boreas blows Θρήκηθεν (zd. 9. 5). For
Opgé=Opaxcos, cp. Simon. 31 Κρῆτα...
τρόπον: Eur. Alc. 346. Λίβυν... αὐλόν.
(θύων Blass: but see p. 97.)—vavBaras


ant. 4.


epode 4.


346


-


ΒΑΚΧΎΛΙΔΟΥ


[x1


Ν 3 ,΄, 3 ΄
νυκτὸς ἀντάσας, ἀνατί ελλομένᾳ
a Ἂ ᾿ ν ,
λῆξεν δὲ σὺν φαεσιμβρότῳ


3 ων τὴ
6 Aot, στορέσεν OE TE TOVTOV


130


on


ovpia’ νότου δὲ Kdédn[woav πνοᾷ
ἱστίον, ἁρπαλέως 7


᾿
α-


9. ελπτον ἐξίκοντο χέρσον'


χματὰν ᾿Αχιλλέα


a nw 5 Ν ΄ 3:
as Τρῶες, ἐπεὶ κλύον αἰ-


’΄ 3 > λ Ψ
μιμνοντ EV κλισιῃσιν


. ΩΝ ΄
4 εἵνεκεν EavOas γυναικός,


5 Βρισηΐδος ἱμερογυίου,


΄
εουσιν αντειναν χέρᾶς,


7 φοιβὰν ἐσιδόντες ὑπαὶ


Ὁ


το τείχεα Λαομέδοντος


χειμῶνος αἴγλαν"
πασσυδίᾳ δὲ λιπόντες


127 ἀντάσας dva-] ANTACANYM A. The corrector (4.3) added ao above the lir
after AC, and altered f into A. Over M he wrote what has hitherto been read as 1
But this (as Blass was the first to observe, and as Kenyon recognizes) looks more lik


T followed by E or O (the rest of the second letter having been torn off).


TE A: corr. A®?—d¢avoiuBpiry Blass.


128 δι
130 ovpia K.: OTPIAT s., made fror


ΟΥ̓ΡΑΝΊΑ (by A!?).—xéArwoay Blass (ἐκόλπωσαν πνοαῖς E. Bruhn, -ev πνοά Luc
wich): πνοᾷ J. (Class. R. X11. p. 152, but with -7), Housman: so Blass? (xvoa


(xv1. 48) is better than ναῦν θοάν.
The reason is not ἐξίκοντο in 132, for
the ‘ship’ would imply the crew (cp.
Soph. O. C. 942 where αὐτούς refers to
πόλιν in 939); it is rather the sense of
δαϊΐζει. If ναῦν were read, that verb
must have its literal meaning, ‘cleaves,’
‘shatters’; but the ship comes safe to
land. With ναυβάτας, it is figurative,
‘afflicts’: cp. Od. 13. 320 ἔχων δεδαϊγμένον
ἦτορ. The notion of rough treatment is
combined with that of harassing anxiety.
-ὑπὸ κύμασιν : the waves rise above the
ship: cp. Soph. «πὲ. 335 ff. (man) καὶ
πολιοῦ πέραν πόντου χειμερίῳ νότῳ | χωρεῖ,
περιβρυχίοισιν | περῶν ὑπ᾽ οἴδμασιν.

127 νυκτός, gen. of time: ἀντάσας,
sc. avrois.—The correction in the Ms.
points to avare- rather than to avan-:


see cr. note. I therefore conjecture
ἀνατελλομένᾳ (cp. Pind. 7. 111. 83 φλὸξ
Larhhaseoa, No exception can be


taken to the place of δὲ as third word.
It often holds a place later than the
second: Aesch. Zum. 530 ἄλλ᾽ ἄλλᾳ δ᾽


épopever: Soph. O. 7. 485 ὅ re λέξω.
ἀπορῶ: Ph. 959 φόνον φόνου δὲ pictor
Ai. ττό τοῦτο σοὶ δ᾽ ἐφίεμαι : Eur. fr. 77
δεινόν γε, τοῖς πλουτοῦσι τοῦτο δ᾽ ἔμφυτο.
[In 1. 6 we find Διὸς Εὐκλείον δέ, and i
XVII. 47 περὶ φαιδίμοισι δ᾽: these in
stances, however, are of the still common
kind in which the words before δέ a
instar unius; as Aesch. Ag. 606 yuvats
πιστὴν δ᾽, P. V. 384 ἐν τῷ προθυμεῖσθ,
δέ.- ΒῸΓ the conjectures which hay
assumed avam-, see Appendix.

128 λῆξεν, like the aorists whic
follow, is gnomic.—dgaeoipBpdre (wil
synizesis) appears more probable in a
Ionic poet than the Pindaric gavoy
βρότῳ (O. VIT. 39). .

129—182 oréperey...odpla: tt
gentle, favouring breeze ‘Jays’ the se
after the storm, Ζ.6. allows it to subside
Verg. den. 6. 763 plactdt straverui
aeguora venti. The MS. has οὐρίᾳ, pri
bably an error due to mvog: thoug
Βορέας could be the subject to στόρεσει
in the sense that, by ceasing to blow, Ε


XII]


ETTINIKOI


347


but ceases with the rise of light-bringing dawn, when a gentle
breeze smooths the deep, and the breath of the south-wind
swells their sail, till they joyfully reach the land for which


they had ceased to hope,—


even so, when the Trojans heard that the warrior Achilles was
tarrying in his tent on account of Briseis, the golden-haired, the
lovely, they lifted up their hands to the gods ; for now they saw
a bright gleam of sunshine from under the shadow of the storm.

Leaving the walls of Laomedon with all their forces,


Bl.).


181 APITAAEQTA A: but T has been altered to C (by A®?).


188 ἐπεὶ


κλύον was K.’s first reading, but in his ed. he gave ἐπέκλυον, with θεοῖσι δ᾽ in 138.
138 θεοῖσιν] OIC is written above an erasure: it is impossible to say what first stood


there. 189 φοιβὰν] φοίβαν K.


141 δὲ λιπόντες] A wrote MEATIONTEC :


A has been written above M, and I has been added above the line between A and II


(by A??).


makes a calm (cp. Soph. Az. 674 f. δεινῶν
T ἄημα πνευμάτων ἐκοίμισε | στένοντα
πόντον).

The epic δέ τε occurs also in fr. 3. 1
τίκτει δέ τε, but (as Smyth notes) not
elsewhere in lyric poetry, except in
Sappho fr. 94. 2. In this formula, te
marks the statement as general; hence it
sometimes stands (as here) after a gnomic
past tense (Od. 6. 185 μάλιστα δέ τ᾽
ἔκλυον αὐτοί). Τί was more especially
used to introduce an additional touch in
a simile: //. 2. 455 f. ἠῦτε πῦρ ἀΐδηλον
ἐπιφλέγει ἄσπετον ὕλην | οὔρεος ἐν Kopu-
φῇς, ἕκαθεν δέ τε φαίνεται αὐγή, | ὥς
x.T.d.: where the clause with δέ re comes
next before the apodosis, just as it does
in v. 463 (ἰὁ.), σμαραγεῖ δέ τε λειμών. In
Sappho fr. 94. 2 also it brings in the
second clause of a simile (οἵαν τὰν
ὑάκινθον... | πόσσι καταστείβουσι, χάμαι
δέ τε πόρφυρον avA0s—but there the
fragment breaks off).

κόλπωσαν: so Meleager (c. 80 8.6.)
in Anthol. 1X. 10 (ναῦται) πνοιῇ ἀπημάντῳ
Ζεφύρου λίνα κολπώσαντες. Lucian Ver.
Hist. 2. 9 ἄνεμος ἐμπεσὼν τοῖς ἱστίοις
ἔφερε, κολπώσας τὴν ὀθόνην. Apart from
our verse, the word is extant in no writer
earlier than Polybius.

ἁρπαλέως properly means ‘eagerly’
(Od. 6. 250 etc.), here ‘joyfully.’ In
Mimnermus 12. 5—8, where the Sun’s
voyage in his cup is described, —(edv7)
φέρει--- εὕδονθ᾽ dpradéws,—Bergk would
take the adv. with φέρει as=‘ rapidly’;
but the context rather indicates that
Mimnermus meant, ‘in welcome sleep,’—
after toil.


188- 188 ἐπεὶ κλύον is confirmed,
as against ἐπέκλυον, by the size of the
space in the papyrus between II and K.
—kdolyow. B. has the epic -yow of
dat. plur. only here; but the Homeric
colouring of the passage sufficiently ac-
counts for it.—@eotoww: cp. θεῶν as first


word of the verse in v. 95 (v. 50 ends
with θεός.)


189 2. I leave φοιβὰν oxytone, since
the papyrus indicates it (φοὶβαν) ; but we
should expect φοίβαν (φοῖβο-).

ὑπαὶ χειμῶνος, lit. ‘from under the
storm’: the bright sunshine flashes out
from beneath the rim of the storm-cloud
that passes away. Cp. //. 17. 645 Ζεῦ
πάτερ, ἀλλὰ σὺ ῥῦσαι ὑπ’ ἠέρος vias
᾿Αχαιῶν, | ποίησον δ᾽ αἴθρην, δὸς δ᾽ ὀφθαλ-
μοῖσιν ἰδέσθαι.

141 πασσυδίᾳ-- πανστρατιᾷ, sallying
forth (σενόμενοι) with all their forces.
This is the regular sense of the word in
Attic writers: Xen. 27. Iv. 4. 9 πασσυδίᾳ
βοηθοῦντες: Eur. 770. 792 πανσυδίᾳ |
χωρεῖν ὀλέθρου διὰ παντός : Thuc. VII. 1
πανσυδὶ διεφθάρθαι (where Hude gives
that form, with the cod. Vaticanus:
πασσυδὶ and πασσυδεὶ are variants).
fl. 2. 11 f., however, θωρῆξαί σ᾽ ἐκέ
κάρη κομόωντας ᾿Αχαιοὺς | πασσ'


σε
m, the
speed.’


vv. 723 f. show).

142 τείχεα Λαομέδοντος : //. 7. 452f.
(Poseidon speaking of the τεῖχος of Troy),
τὸ ἐγὼ καὶ Φοῖβος ᾿Απόλλων | How Λαομέ-
δοντι πολίσσαμεν ἀθλήσαντε. (In 71. “τ.


348


(110) 11


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


[X11


3 , δ
ες. πεδίον κρατεραν


Hen € 7 4
τ a€av ὑσμίναν φέροντες"


ἀντι. 1415. apody τε φόβον Aavaots:


: ὥτρυνε δ᾽ "Apys
εὐεγχής, Λυκίων τε


3
(115) « Λοξίας ἄναξ ᾿Απόλλων "
Bel > : Ἂς ~ hee
1s ἵξόν τ᾽’ ἐπὶ θῖνα θαλάσσας:
Col.27150 ὁ ναυσὶ δ᾽ εὐπρύμνοις παραὶ


ο


μάρναντ᾽, ἐναριζομένων


δ᾽ ἔρ]ευθε φώτων


(120) 9 αἵματι γαῖα μέλαινα
το “Exrop |éas ὑπὸ χειρός,


155 11


πῆμα μέγ᾽ ἡμιθέοις


τ ὀξεῖαν) ἰσοθέων dv ὁρμάν.


΄


4


>
€7. €


(125)


160


is)


nn +> ὦ


(130) 7


ἃ thd loves, 7 μεγάλαισιν ἐλπίσιν
πνεί]οντες ὑπερφίαλον
[φρόνημ᾽ ἐθάρσευν]
Τρῶες ἱππευταὶ κυανώπιδας ἐκ-
πέρσασιν ᾿Αργείων] νέας
παύραις χορὸν εἰλαπίνας T ἐν


ἁμέ]ρ[ α]ις ἕξειν θεόδματον πόλιν.


149 θῖνα Κ. : θεῖνα MS. (the spelling of Aristarchus, who derived it from θείνω) : cp.


however IX. 10 ἐκείνησεν, XVI. 91 νειν (=vev), etc.
152 ἔρευθε Palmer: ...ETOE A: ro added above
155 πῆμα μέγ J.: δεῖμα μέγ᾽ Jurenka.


and Housman: cp. 139 ὑπαί.
the line by A? (ἐρεύθετο).


150 παραὶ Blass, with Platt


156 ὀξεῖαν J.:


τεύχοντος Desrousseaux : βαρεῖαν Blass.—icoéwy] The O is written above an erasure.—
δι’ ὁρμάν]ἡ AI OPMAN A: ΔΈΞΞΟΡΜΑΝ a corrector (the horizontal lines being


446—457, where the king’s fraud is told,
Poseidon alone builds, while Apollo is
serving as herdsman.) A pious gloss
associated Aeacus with Poseidon and
Apollo: the vulnerable point in the
stronghold was the work of man, and
not of gods (Pind. O. ν111. 42). Heracles
“IMou ἐξαλάπαξε πόλιν (Zl. 5. 642); dis
periura capit superatae moenia Troiae
(Ovid 22εἰ. τι. 215): but here, as in
ii. 7 d.¢., it is assumed that ‘Laomedon’s
walls’ survived that capture.

146 “Apys. This is not Homeric;
nay, it is in marked contradiction to the
Iliad. The Homeric Ares takes no part
in the fight at the ships, being under the
general interdict which Zeus had laid on
the gods (//. 8. 10 ff.), But that is not


all. At one moment, stirred by the fall
of his son Ascalaphus, he arms himself
for battle, in defiance of Zeus; but is
detained in Olympus by the remonstrance
of Athena (//. 15. 113—142).

147 2. Λυκίων... ἄναξ. No other
Greek poet places Apollo in a personal
relation with the Lycians quite so definite
as is denoted by this phrase. His titles
Λύκιος (Pind. 40. 1. 39, Eur. fr. 700) and
λυκηγενής (74. 4. 101) were popularly
explained as ‘ Lycia-born’ (Hor. C. 3. 4.
62 gui Lyciae tenet Dumeta natalemgue
silvam). Both epithets, like Avxetos,
originally denoted a god of light (Aux);
the name Λυκία itself may have come
from the cult.—The Lycians are pro-
minent in the’ Homeric fighting at the


XII]


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


349


they rushed into the plain, intent on stubborn strife,


and roused terror in the Danai; while Ares of the mighty spear ant. 5.
urged them on, and the lord of the Lycians, the soothsayer,


Apollo.


So they came to the seashore, and fought at the sterns of the
good ships; and the black earth grew red with the blood of men
slain by Hector’s hand; a grievous woe for the heroes, through
the keen onset of their godlike foes.


Hapless ones!


Uplifted in spirit by great hopes, the chariot-


borne warriors of Troy were sure that they would sack the dark-
-prowed ships of the Greeks, and that in a few days: dancing and
feasting would be the portion of their god-built city.


meant simply to fill the space: cp. XVIII. 48).
157. The letters NEC “ΗΜ in 157 and


supplements see Appendix.


157- 168 For other conjectural


ONTECTYIIEP in 158 are supplied by a fragment placed here by Blass; who in
163—166 also fitted in a fragment giving the earlier portions of those verses; and in
167—169 a third fragment (τῶν εἰ καὶ...ἢ βαθυξύλ)ῳ.


ships (77. 15. 424 f.).—Aoklas, the title of
the oracle-god, is out of place here:
indeed it is seldom joined with ᾿Απόλλων.
(In Aesch. Cho. 549 f., ἣ καὶ Λοξίας
ἐθέσπισεν, | ἄναξ ᾿Απόλλων, the second
title is in apposition with the first.)

149 ifov (//. 5. 773 etc.), a weak (or
‘sigmatic’) aorist, formed with o (and ε in
2nd pers.) instead of a. Cp. the epic
ἐ-βήσε-το (/1. 14. 229), ἐ-δύσε-τὸ (2b. 2.
578), imper. dpce-o (26. 3. 250), infin.
ἀξέ-μεναι (2b. 23. 50), ἔ-πεσο-ν, etc.

152 ἔρευθε: a solitary but certain
instance of the active used intransitively.
For the normal use, see //. 11. 394 f. ὁ δέ
θ᾽ αἵματι γαῖαν ἐρεύθων | πύθεται.

155 πῆμα μέγ᾽, acc. in apposition
with the preceding sentence. ἡμιθέοις,
the Greek heroes (VIII. 10, X. 62).

156 It is possible that there has been
some corruption here. If, however, ioo-
θέων is sound, the sense seems to be,
‘owing to the fierce onset of the Trojan
heroes.’ The first syllable of the verse
is long in all the corresponding places
-where it is preserved (45, 57; 78, 90;
111, 1235 1443 177’ 189). We might
supply ὀξεῖαν (epithet of μάχαν in 117),
or d&rAarov.—rebdxovros, referring κατὰ
σύνεσιν to ‘Exropéas...xepds (cp. Od. 11.
gof.), is also possible; but a recurrence
Ῥ him seems less apt here: these two
erses speak of heroes pitted against
heroes. —iovoOéwy after ἡμιθέοις (both


having the same sense) illustrates the
use of a synonym to avoid repeating a
word: so Soph. O. 7. 54 ἄρξεις...κρατεῖς,
O.C. 1501 σαφὴς...ἐμφανὴς (n.), etc. —
Blass supplies βαρεῖαν (in which, how-
ever, the first @ is a drawback), and
understands, ‘through the resentful im-
pulse of Achilles’ (ἰσοθέων), in refusing to
help the Greeks.

157—163 In the restoration of this
passage given above, the following points
may be noted. (1) 157 ἃ δύσφρονες
(Blass) is quite possible (Aesch. Zhe.
174 ἰὼ δύσφρονες, ‘alas, misguided ones’:
Soph. Anz. 261 φρενῶν δυσφρόνων ἁμαρ-
τήματα): but δύσῴφρων more often means
either ‘melancholy’ or ‘ malevolent’; so
that ἃ tAdpoves (Kenyon) seems slightly
more probable. (2) 158f. Before οντες
there is room for 4 letters, or for 5
if one of them was thin (like I). πνεί-
ovtes (Jurenka, Ludwich) is more likely
than πνέοντες (Blass), because in all the
corresponding verses (59, 92, 125, IQI,
224) the first syllable is long.—dtepol-
λον might be adv., but I rather prefer
ὑπερφίαλον φρόνημ᾽. (3) 160f. ἱππευταὶ,
if it stood alone, would be too vague :
the insertion of Τρῶες before it is a gain.
π-ἐκπέρσασιν : the participle (whatever
it was) should be in the dative, if (as
seems almost certain) πόλιν was the
subject to ἕξειν. A nomin., ἐκπέρσαντες,
would, in that case, imply that they


epode 5.


350 ,


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


[XII


8 μέλλον apa πρότερον δι-


νᾶντα φοινίξειν Σκάμανδρον,


στρ. ς΄. 1 Ovdokovtes ὑπ᾽ Αἰακίδαις


5. ἐρειψ[ιλάοις:


7 τινὰ


(40) 8 -


τῶν εἶ καὶ [διόλωλεν
ἡ βαθυξύλ[ῳ πυρᾷ --
j~ ee UU UU KH
ee ἀμ χ ωὼυ

Ὁ ὦ Ὁ ὼ UYU


-V--—


9». ζίΒκεκσ ψωυ -ῷὸ - =
175: οὐ γὰρ ἀλα[μπέσ]ι νυκτὸς
x πασιφανὴς ᾿Αρετὰ
a? > “ ,
2 κρυφθεῖσ᾽ ἀμαυροζῦται δνόφοισιν,


ἄντ. ς΄. τ ἀλλ᾽ ἔμπεδον ἀκ αμάτᾳ


βρύουσα δόξᾳ


στρωφᾶται κατὰ γᾶν [τε


καὶ πολυπλάγκταν θάλασσαν.


(15°)


3
4
5 καὶ μὰν φερεκυδέα νᾶσον
6 Αἰακοῦ τιμᾷ, σὺν Ev-


7 κλείᾳ δὲ φιλοστεφ[ avy


Col. 288 185 8


᾿ πόλιν κυβερνᾷ,


175 ἀλαμπέσι] ΑΛΑΒΠῚ A: but ἃ corrector has cancelled IT, and written letters (uz ?)


actually destroyed the ships. (4) 162 f.
mavpats...év ἁμέραις (Nairn) seems prob-
able. Blass (whose own restorations are
given in the Appendix) objects that the
Space in 163 before P suggests more than
three letters (AME). But in this hand-
writing A and M are sometimes very
broad. I had thought, indeed, of ἐσθλαῖς
..& συμφοραῖς (Eur. Ac. 1155 χοροὺς
ἐπ’ ἐσθλαῖς συμφοραῖσιν ἱστάναι), but
rather prefer ἁμέραις.

166 f£. ὑπ’ Αἰακίδαις, under their
hands: /7. 10. 452 ἐμῇς ὑπὸ χερσὶ δαμείς :
13. 98 ὑπὸ Τρώεσσι δαμῆναι.- Ἐὸογ ἐρειψι-
λάοις cp. Χ. 67 f. λαϑύς τε διχοστασίαις |
ἤρειπον : V. 56 ἐρειψιπύλαν.---Τὰ Aesch.
Th. 880f. the brothers are δωμάτων
ἐρειψίτοιχοι (they destroy the τοῖχοι of
their house): but I doubt whether that
word could mean ‘destroying τείχη, ᾽


πτολίπορθοι, as an epithet of heroes
generally.

168-- 174 τῶν εἰ καί. The pronoun
refers to the Aeacidae. Though their
bodies have perished, their names hive
evermore. βαθύξυλος is elsewhere said
of deep forest shades: Eur. Bacch. 1138
ὕλης ἐν βαθυξύλῳ φόβῃ. Here (πυρὰ)
βαθύξυλος is a pyre built high with wood
(111. 49 ξύλινον δόμον) ; as in Pind. ΙΧ. 40
βαθύκρημνοι ἀκταί are shores with high,
steep cliffs. For the sentiment, cp. 111.
gof. ἀρετᾶς ye μὲν οὐ μινύθει | βροτῶν
ἅμα σώματι φέγγος (where γε μὲν Ξε ἢ
Attic ye μήν, ‘however’). The ἢ before
βαθυξύλῳ shows that a second clause with
7 followed. The tenor of the passage
may have been somewhat as follows ;—

τῶν εἰ Kal διόλωλεν
ἢ βαθυξύλῳ πυρᾷ καυ-


XII]


ETINIKOI


351


Ah, they were doomed, or ever that should be, to redden the
eddying Scamander with their blood,


as they fell under the hands of the death-dealing Aeacidae.
And if [the bodies] of the Aeacidae [have perished, burnt] on
high-built pyre [or buried in the tomb, yet their names live for


ever...].


For shining Virtue can never be hid from view in the murky


shades of night ;


hers is the unfading flower of a steadfast fame ; she goes abroad
over the earth, and with the wanderers on the sea.

And verily she honours the renowned: isle of Aeacus; with
Eucleia, to whom wreaths are dear, she rules that city ;


above, from which only a few dots remain.
181 TIOATTITAATKTAN A: -ON A’.


μάτᾳ Blass, Platt: ἀκάματος K.


177 δνόφοισιν Tyrrell. 178 ἀκα-


θέντ᾽ ἢ κεκαλυμμένα τύμβοις
σώματ᾽, ἄφθαρτόν γε μὲν
ζώει κλέος ἀθάνατον
Μουσᾶν λιγειᾶν

εὐκελάδοις ἐν ἀοιδαῖς.

175--177 ἀλαμπέσι.... ἀμαυροῦται.
Cp. Plut. Phocion τ (quoted by Kenyon),
τὴν δὲ Φωκίωνος dperHy...ai τύχαι τῆς
Ἑλλάδος ἀμαυρὰν καὶ ἀλαμπῆ πρὸς δόξαν
ἐποίησαν, where the verbal coincidences
with this passage are noteworthy.—
᾿Αρετά is here personified, as by Simo-
nides (fr. 58) and by Aristotle in his hymn
in memory of Hermeias, ’Aperd πολύμοχθε
γένει βροτείῳ (Bergk* 11. 360). An epi-
gram ascribed to Asclepiades of Samos
(c. 300 B.C., Anth. VII. 145) refers to
a work of art in which she was repre-
sented as mourning by the tomb of Ajax :
ds’ ἐγὼ ἁ τλάμων ᾿Αρετὰ παρὰ τῷδε
κάθημαι | Αἴαντος τύμβῳ κειρομένα πλοκά-
μους.-- πασιφανὴς is not found elsewhere
in classical poetry.—8védoirw : for the
plur., cp. Aesch. Cho. 52.

178 dkapdrq, not to be exhausted,
‘unfailing.’ Though ἀκαμάτα might
naturally be the epithet of “Aperd here,
the dative is more probable, as an
epithet for δόξᾳ seems needful. The
fem. form occurs in Soph. Anz. 339,
which also illustrates the sense; (Γ ἂν)
ἄφθιτον, ἀκαμάταν : and in Hes. 7h. 747
ἀκαμάτῃσι χέρεσσιν.

181 Poetical use justifies πολνυπλάγ-
«xray, the form given by the first hand,
as against the correction πολύπλαγκτον.
Cp. n. on 178: IX. 8 ἀπράκταν : Aesch.
Ag. πολυκλαύτην (Porson on Med. 822),


Ar. Pax 978 πολυτιμήτη, Lys. 217
dravpwrn.—The sense of the adj. here is
passive, ‘much-traversed’; in X. 35 it is
active. “Apera, the Virtue that survives
death and is never hid in dark oblivion,
‘roams over land and sea’; z.¢. the fame of
great deeds is spread throughout the world.

182—189 καὶ μάν: ν. 56 n.—depe-
κυδέα : cp. I. 17.

᾿Αρετά “Ὠοπουτβ᾽΄. Aegina as a home of
Themis: see n. on 77 f.: she ‘governs’
the land in company with Εὔκλεια ‘ who
delights in wreaths’ (won by Aeginetan
athletes in the national games). Εὐνομία
also bears sway there, she who keeps
cities ἐν εἰρήνᾳ.

Two points should be noted here.
(1) The association of Εὔκλεια with
Evvouta. In the theatre at Athens there
was in later times a seat for the ἱερεὺς
Εὐκλείας καὶ Ἐὐνομίας (C. 7. A. U1. 277).
(2) Eunomia was one of three Ὧραι
(daughters of Zeus and Themis, and
sisters of the Moirae),—the other two
being Δίκη and Εἰρήνη: Hes. 7%. gor f.:
Pind. O. xur. 6f.: Bergk* adespota 140
(perhaps by Simonides) Εὐνομίαν λιπαρο-
θρόνους 7 ἀδελφάς, Δίκαν | καὶ orepavo-
φόρον Ἑϊράναν. As in the natural sphere
the Horae represent a fixed order, so as
ethical powers they are Loyalty, Justice
and Peace. Cp. Diod. v. 73 Ὡρῶν
ἑκάστῃ δοθῆναι τὴν ἐπώνυμον τάξιν τε Kal
βίου διακόσμησιν.

The same group of ideas is expressed
here, though εἰρήνα, instead of being
personified, appears as a gilt bestowed by
Evvoula. Cp. xiv. 541.


str. 6.


ant. 6.


352 BAKXYAIAOY [XII


3 ca ,
9 Εὐνομία τε σαόφρων,
το ἃ θαλίας τε λέλογχεν
»” , 3 3 ,
(155) qr QOTEaA τ εὐσεβέων
τι ἀνδρῶν ἐν εἰρήνᾳ φυλάσσει"


ἐπ.ς΄.190 1 νίκαν τ᾽ ἐρικυδέα μέλπετ᾽, ὦ νέοι,
2 Πυθέα, μελέταν τε βροτω-

Wee ,
3 φελέα Μενάνδρου,

Ν 2 > a c A ‘ δὴ
“τὰν ἐπ᾽ ᾿Αλφειοῦ τε ῥοαῖς θαμὰ δὴ
5. τίμασεν & χρυσάρματος
6 σεμνὰ μεγάθυμος ᾿Αθάνα,

7 μυρίων 7 ἤδη μίτραισιν ἀνέρων
8 ἐστεφάνωσεν ἐθείρας
ἐν Πανελλάνων ἀέθλοις.


(160)


195


v7 > * θ Ν
στρ. ζ. τεῖ μὴ τινα θερσιεπὴς
’, lal
φθόνος βιᾶται,
3 Ἂ» Ν »”
3 αἰνείτω σοφὸν ἄνδρα
ς«σὺν δίκᾳ. βροτῶν δὲ μῶμος
4 of 7 Pe 3 fb a
(170) 5 πάντεσσι μέν ἐστιν ἐπ᾽ ἔργοις"


186 Εὐνομία σαοσίφρων conj. Housman. 198 θαμὰ J., Nairn. 199 ci] His
lost: the short stroke above I is part of the paragraphus with coronis, ————,
written between 198 and το9 to mark the end of a system—el μή τινα θερσιεπής.
Between the N and the A of τινα there is a mark like a very small and partly broken o,
perhaps intended to indicate that the words should be read as rw’ ἀθερσιεπής.


186 Hivopla τε σαόφρων, sc. κυβερνᾷ.
The construction is harsh: but I follow
the MS., rather than read Evvopula (to
depend on σύν) With the dative, the
position of σαόφρων (referring to ’Aperd)
would be awkward ; though it might be
regarded as practically adverbial (=ow-
φρόνω:). Housman’s Εὐνομία σαοσίφρων
would meet the difficulty; but that
form of the adj. is not found, and can
scarcely be assumed from σαοσίμβροτος in
Hesychius.

187 θαλίας, acc. plur., ‘festivities’;
Her. 11. 27 ἦσαν ἐν θαλίῃσι. Eunomia
has these for her portion, because they
belong to the peace which she maintains.
Cp. fr. 3 (on the blessings of εἰρήνα), 12
συμποσίων δ᾽ ἐρατῶν βρίθοντ᾽ ἀγνιαί.

190 From the praises of Aegina and
the Aeacidae, which began at v. 77, the
poet now returns to his immediate theme.


ὦ νέοι: the youths, wearing wreaths
(νι. 8f.), who form the κῶμος. So
Pindar 7. vit. 2 Κλεάνδρῳ τις... ὦ νέοι...
ἀνεγειρέτω κῶμον : cp. WV. Π1. 4 f. μελι-
γαρύων τέκτονες | κώμων νεανίαι : ib. 63 f.
ὕμνος.. ὀπὶ νέων ἐπιχώριον χάρμα κελαδέων :
P.V. (03 ἐν ἀοιδᾷ νέων. See also VIII.
102 ff.

191 f. μελέταν is the ‘care’ used by
the trainer, who, in preparing a com-
petitor for the great contests, not only
supervised his exercises, but prescribed
his diet (Arist. ΖΦ δά. 11. 5), and regula-
ted his whole life. The scientific trainer
of athletes was, so far, a physician. He
is called γυμνάστής (Xen. Mem. 11. 1. 20),
or ἀλείπτης (Arist. 4.4.) : while παιδοτρίβης
is properly the ordinary teacher of boys in
a palaestra.—Bpotwedéa: not found else-
where; cp. δημωφελής.--- Μενάνδρου, an
Athenian, mentioned by Pindar also in


xu] ETTINIKOI 353


as doth also temperate Eunomia, to whom festivities belong,
and who keeps the towns of pious men in peace.


Sing, O youths, the glorious victory of Pytheas, and the helpful
care of the trainer Menander: oft has that care been honoured
on the banks of Alpheus by Athena of the golden chariot,
majestic queen of lofty soul, when ere now she has set garlands


on the heads of countless men at the great games of Hellas.


Let those who are not thralls of bold-tongued Envy give just


praise to a master of his art.
work of man:


OEPC -. IHC:


Disparagement waits on every


the letter after the first C seems to have been I, but is not certain.


Nairn conj. ἀθερσοεπής, ‘disparaging in speech’ (ἀθερίξειν) : Housman, ἀμερσιεπής {envy


‘bereaves of speech,’ when praise is due).
763 (the domus Invidiae) ignavi plenissima
202 BPTOTON A: corr. Al.


of speech’), comparing Ov. A/et. 11.
Srigoris.


Jurenka reads ἀθερσιεπής (θερ- μός, ‘chill


his ode on this same victory, WV. v. 48:
ἴσθι, γλυκεῖάν τοι Μενάνδρου σὺν τύχᾳ
(‘by Menander’s happy aid’) μόχθων
ἀμοιβὰν | ἐπαύρεο: χρὴ δ᾽ am’ ᾿Αθανᾶν
τέκτον᾽ ἀθληταῖσιν ἔμμεν. Lampon, the
victor’s father, is described by Pindar
(1. ν. 66f.) as μελέταν | ἔργοις ὀπάζων,
‘bestowing care on feats of prowess’
(z.e. on athletics), and recommending it
to his sons,—thus observing Hesiod’s
maxim (Op. 382 μελέτη δέ τοι ἔργον
ὀφέλλει). Pindar’s meaning (or a part of
it) must be that Lampon, a rich man
(cp. 224 f.), procured the best training
for his sons. It was natural, then, that
both poets should pay a tribute to
Menander.

193—198 Athena has ‘honoured’
the skill of the Athenian trainer by
giving several Olympian victories to his
pupils, whose successes in the four ‘ Pan-
hellenic’ festivals, taken all together,
have been ‘countless.’—@apd (the accent
given by Apollonius De adverd. p. 563. 3)
is emphasized by δή, as in Pind. 4.1. 17.
—Of Athena’s three epithets, χρυσάρ-
ματος denotes a conventional attribute;
σεμνά, divine rank; and peyd0upos a
personal quality: cp. v. 98 f.— A@dva:
cp. σελάνα VIII. 29.

196 μίτραισιν. This μίτρα was a
woollen headband to which the sprays
or leaves of the wreath were attached:
Pind. J. Iv. 62 AdpBavé for στέφανον,
φέρε δ᾽ εὔμαλλον μίτραν. Hence the
word is used as an equivalent for στέ-


j. 8.


gavos: O. 1X. 84 Ἰσθμίαισι Λαμπρομάχου
μίτραις.---ἀνέρων : this inflexion of ἀνήρ
is not elsewhere extant in B.: Pindar
uses it freely.

198 IIaveAAdvev: Pind. 7. 111. 47
Πανελλάνεσσι δ᾽ ἐριζόμενοι δαπάνᾳ χαῖρον
ἵππων. Λ' I. 38 ἐν Πανελλάνων νόμῳ.
The four great πανηγύρεις are “ῬΔΏΠΕΙ-
lenic’ as distinguished from minor local
festivals, such as those mentioned in
IX. 30—365 (n.).

199 £. φθόνος can bluster as well as
whisper: θερσιεπής denotes loud, im-
pudent detraction. The Aeolic θέρσος
(θάρσος) is found only in proper names,
such as Θέρσανδρος, Θέρσης, Θέρσιππος,
Θερσίτης. For the connecting vowel νυ im
θερσιεπής cp. Θερσίλοχος. (Θερσολόχειος:
occurs, however, as the patronymic in an
inscription: see Pape-Benseler s.v.) The
sense of the word is illustrated by the


name Qepoaydpas (Dem. or. 23 § 142),
‘bold in debate.’—Pidrar: B. pictures


φθόνος as a malignant force within the
man, against which candour has to
wrestle: v. 187 f. χρὴ δ᾽ ἀλαθείας χάριν |
αἰνεῖν, φθόνον ἀμφοτέραισιν | χερσὶν ἀπω-
σάμενον. Cp. XV. 31 φθόνος εὐρυβίας.
Frag. trag. adesp. 547. 12 ἢ mpos yap τὸ


λαμπρὸν ὁ φθόνος βιάζεται, | σφάλλει δ᾽
ἐκείνους ois ἂν ὑψώσῃ τύχη.
202 £. σὺν δίκᾳ: cp. v. 196 (η.):


X. 123 f.—papos: Smyth. refers to Anth.

Planud. 84 παντὶ δ᾽ ἐπ᾽ ἔργῳ | μῶμος:

and Theogn. 1184 (there is no man) ᾧ μὴ
μῶμος ἐπικρέμαται.


24


epode 6.


str. 7.


.


354 ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


6 ἃ δ᾽ ἀλαθεία φιλεῖ
205 7
8. χρόνος τὸ “καλῶς


[X11


νικᾶν, 6 TE πανδαμάτωρ


9 ἐ]ργμένον αἰὲν ἀ[ζέξει-
(175) το δυσμενέων δὲ pal taia


x γλώσσ᾽ ἀϊδ]ὴς μω[ύθει


[The last v. of orp. &, and the first nine of avr. ζ΄, are lost.]


Col. 29 dvt.f.220 10 ἐλπίδι θυμὸν ἰαίνει:"


τ τᾷ καὶ ἐγὼ πίσυνος
τὸ φοινικοκραδέμνοισ[ι Μούσαις


ἐπ. ζ΄. x ὕμνων τινὰ τάνδε ν[εόπλοκον δόσιν


(191)


225 3


_yhaov γεραίρω,


2 haive, ξενίαν τε [φιλά-


ς τὰν ἐμοὶ Λάμπων [παρέχων χάριν οὐ
5 -βληχρὰν ἐπαθρήσαις τί ίει,
(195) ὁ τὰν εἴ γ᾽ ἐτύμως apa Κλειὼ


207 ἐργμένον] Wackernagel conj. ἀργμένον (cp. ὑπαργμένον Her. vit. II).
faint traces after M would suit either A or I.


208 The
209 An upright can be traced before


CMIN. Blass? supplies γλῶσσ᾽ ἀϊδὴς μινύθει from Cramer Anecd. Oxon. τ. 65. 22


(=fr. 46 Bergk4, 36 BI.%), Bapurévws δὲ τὸ ᾿Αἴδης"


δυσμενέων ὃ ἀϊδὴς λέγει Βακχυλίδης.


τὸ γὰρ ἐπιθετικὸν ὀξύνεται"
220 Ξ. ἰαίν[ εἰ. τᾷ K.: ἰαίν[εἶται " καὶ


Blass. 222 φοινικοκραδέμνοισι Μούσαις Blass (-οις re Μούσαις Nairn): -ovo


Μούσας Housman :


τοιο Κλειοῦς Jurenka.


223 νεοπλόκων δόσιν Blass: who


after TANAE finds a small trace of N written above I (or P), as if ἰοπλόκων) had


204 ἀλαθεία. This may be merely
the Ionic poet’s conventional Doricizing
of ἀληθείη. See however Choeroboscus
(Bekk. Anecd. p. 1314), ἀλήθεια κοινῶς
kal ἀληθεία ᾿Αττικῶς. This was the older
Attic accent (Chandler § 103, 2nd ed.).
Cp. Ar. fr. 29 ὦ mapavola καὶ dvadela
(instead of παράνοια etc.).

205 ff. πανδαμάτωρ : epithet of χρόνος
in Simonides fr. 4, 5.—Kadas with the

epic (and Tonic) a, which is not found in
Pindar. —épypévov : see on ἐρχθέντος in
65 f.—aéfe, ‘exalts,’ strengthens in re-
pute. In Od. 15: 372 ἔργον ἀέξουσιν
μάκαρες θεοί, ᾧ ἐπιμίμνω, the sense is
‘ prospers.’

209 ἀϊδής. In Hes. Scat. 477, ofp’
aides ποίησεν, the word is passive in sense,
as it must be here.

220 ff. ἐλπίδι, as in 1x. 40, the ‘hope’
or ambition of a man who aspires to win


.


fame by the exercise of some gift. The
ten verses lost before v. 220 may have
spoken of various pursuits, ending with
a reference to the poet’s. In 221 the
Ms. has no point after rac: and talve-
τᾷ καὶ gives a far better rhythm than
lal|verat- καὶ etc., though the latter is
otherwise unobjectionable (cp. Archil.
fr. 36 ἄλλος ἄλλῳ καρδίην ἰαίνεται). In
222 a dat. plur. is more probable than a
genit. sing. (which would go with ὕμνων).
The dat. will depend on πίσυνος : ‘In (or
with) which hope, trusting to the Muses,’
etc. (We might read -os re Μούσαις:
but it seems less fitting that the Muses
should he thus subjoined to the ἐλπίς.)
-π-φοινικοκραδέμνοισι : a merely ornamen-
tal epithet, given to Latona in Χ. 97 (n.).

223 The letter after τάνδε may have
been N: but it is very uncertain. As a
conjectural supplement, νεόπλοκον δόσιν


X11] ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ 355

but truth is wont to prevail; and all-subduing time ever

strengthens the repute of fine achievement. The vain speech

of foes covertly detracts [from worth; but fails in the end...]
* * * * * *


[Every one who works aright at his appointed task] has
a hope to cheer his heart. With such hope 1 also, trusting in the
Muses of purple kerchief,


now present a gift of newly-woven song; thus honouring the
splendid hospitality shown to me by Lampon, his tribute to the
Muse’s charm, not slight, which has found favour in his eyes.
And if it be indeed radiant Cleio


been corrected to ν(εοπλόκων). 226 f. οὐ at the end of 226 was first proposed by
Housman : ἐπαθρήσαις (as part.) by Platt (who after it placed τέχνα») : παρέχων and
χάριν by J.: τίει by Blass. 228f. ELK’ Ms.: εἴ γ᾽ J. (in 1897), Blass, Platt: elk as=el
W. Schulze (cp. οὐκ Ξξ οὐ), on analogy of Arcadian εἴκαν : Wilamowitz cp. Ar. Lys. 1099
aix εἶδον, and the Cnidian verse in Her. 1. 174, where he reads aix (vulg. εἴ x’) ἐβούλετο.
--Κλειὼ | ---ἐνέσταξ[εν ppaciv]: so I had conjectured (but with φρεσίν) from KA- and
ENEC, before EIQ and TA® were furnished by a small fragment, containing the ends
of vv. 227—230, which Blass identified as belonging here.—¢paciy Housman and


Blass.


is suitable: Blass gives νεοπλόκων. I
rather prefer the acc. sing., on account
of τινά, which serves to soften the
figurative sense. ὕμνων ἥδε νεόπλοκός τις
δόσις seems better than the same phrase
with νεοπλόκων. Another possibility
would be veddporov. (Or, if the letter
after τάνδε was M, μελίῴφθογγον or μελί-
yAwooov.)—For δόσιν cp. Pind. O. vit. 7
Μοισᾶν δόσιν, and 7.1. 45 κούφα δόσις
ἀνδρὶ σοφῷ κ.τ.λ.

226 f. In the restoration of these
verses two points may, I think, be taken
as certain. (1) χάριν must have stood
in 226, meaning the poet’s ‘charm,’ as
in II. 97 καὶ μελιγλώσσου τις ὑμνήσει
χάριν | ΚΚηΐας ἀηδόνος. There is no other
word to which the τὰν in 228 could so
fitly refer. (2) ἐπαθρήσαις, aor. partic.,
must be read in 227. The Aeolic form
in -ats is not elsewhere used by B.: but
his λαχοῖσαν in XVIII. 13 f., and Μοῖσα
in Vv. 4, are also exceptional Aeolisms.
ἐπαθρήσαι, with or without κε in 226,
would require after it a word beginning
with or: but the possible words (στέφων,
στίχων, στόμα) are all inadmissible. The
remaining question seems to be between
(i) mwapéxov...rie. (Blass), and (ii) eg.
μελέων (XVIII. 2) ...τελεῖ or τίνει. I
prefer (1), because, (4) after ἕενίαν,
παρέχων is fitter than τελεῖ or τίνει : and


(ὁ) τίει, governing χάριν, is better 27
that place than a verb governing ξενίαν
would be, since τὰν in 228 refers to χάριν.
For the tin τίει, cp. Aesch. 4g. 942,
Eur. Heracl. 1013.

The meaning is, then, that Lampon,
in affording (παρέχων) hospitality to the
poet, ‘honours the poetic charm, not
slight, on which he has looked with
favour. οὐ βληχράν (cp. X. 65), as being
the Muse’s gift. The compound ἐπαθρεῖν
recurs only in later verse (Ap. Rhod. 4.
497 ἐπαθρήσαντας, where ἐσ- is a v.é.,
and Quint. Smyrn. 1. 111, where Heyne
reads ἐσάθρησα). Here the word denotes
favourable regard; as ἐπιβλέπειν (τινί)
does in Lucian Astrol.20. Cp. v. 8 δεῦρ᾽
ἄθρησον.

22ef. εἴ γ᾽, stguidem: Plat. Phaedr.
242 Ὁ εἴ ye σὺ ἀληθῆ λέγεις.---τανθαλής,
as giving bloom to the flowers of song;
Pind. O. VI. 105 ὕμνων... εὐτερπὲς ἄνθος.
One of the Muses was Θάλεια (Hes. Zh.
77). Distinguish this form, with a, from
that with a (69 n.).—évéoratev: Od. 2.
271 εἰ δή τοι σοῦ πατρὸς ἐνέστακται μένος
qv: Her. 1x. 3 ἀλλά οἱ δεινὸς ἐνέστακτο
ἵμερος x.7.A.—pacly, Doric. This form
occurs in Pindar, either without a variant
(4. 111. 62), or, as is far more often the
case, with the vw. 1. φρεσίν (Ὁ. VII. 24,
P. τι. 56, Ul. 108, IV. 109, 219). In


24—2


ant. 7.


epode 7.


[ XII, XTII


356 BAKXYAIAOY
7 πανθαλὴς ἐμαῖς ἐνέσταξ[ εν φρασίν,
230 8 τερψιεπεῖς νιν ἀοιδαὶ
9 παντὶ καρύξοντι λαῷ.
XIII. [XIV.]
KAEOTITOAEMQI OECCAAQI
ITMTOIC TTETPAIA
στρια«. + ED μὲν εἱμάρθαι παρὰ δαίμονος ἀν-
2 θρώποις ἄριστον᾽
3 συμφορὰ δ᾽ ἐσθλόν τ᾽ ἀμαλδύ-
+ νει βαρύτλατος μολοῦσα"
5 κἀγατὶ)ὸν ἰδ᾽ ὑψιφανῆ τε[ύ-
6. χει κἸ]ατορθωθεῖσα" τιμὰν
7 δ᾽ ἀλ͵Ίλος ἀλλοίαν ἔχει"
ἄντ. α΄. + μυρί]αι δ᾽ ἀνδρῶν ἀρεταί, pia δ᾽ ex
2 πασᾶν πρόκειται,
XKIII. The title added in the left margin hy 45.


(δαίμοσιν K.).


1 δαίμονος Platt and others


3 ἐσθλόν τ᾽ or ἐσθλοὺς conj. J. (ἐσθλοὺς K.): ἐσθλὸν MS.


Bases ONHAHTVIGANHTE A: A? cancelled HAH and wrote KAI above.—xdyarov
ἰδ’ ὑψιφανῆ conj. J.: ἢ κυδρὸν ἠδ᾽ Blass: see comment.—vevxer Blass and others.


P. Ul. 59. where the MSS. agree in φρεσίν,
Boeckh restored ¢pacty. Pindar also uses
φρένεσσιν (7. 111. 5), as B. does (XIII. 11).
If the Ionian’s conventional Doricism was
consistent, he would have written φρασίν
here; and we are not justified in assuming
the reverse.

230 The stress is on τερψιεπεῖς, If
Cleio has really inspired the poet, this
ode, which honours Lampon (vv), will
please.—For the compound with ἔπος as
epithet of ἀοιδαί cp. VII. 7n.


IIT. 1 εἱμάρθαι, impersonal. παρὰ
δαίμονος : the best thing for men is that a
good destiny should have been assigned
(to them) by the gift of heaven: cp. XvI.
24 ἐκ θεῶν μοῖρα : Aesch. Ag. 1026 μοῖραν
ἐκ θεῶν : Pers. τοῖ θεόθεν μοῖρα : Xen. A.
Vi. 3. 6 ἐκ θεῶν πεπρωμένον ἐστί: Pind.
N. τν. ὅτ τὸ μόρσιμον Διόθεν πεπρωμένον.
P. 11. 50 χρὴ τὰ εοικότα πὰρ δαιμόνων
μαστευέμεν.---παρὰ δαίμοσιν is also pos-
sible (mortal destiny is /azd up with the
gods, is in their keeping): but here the
god is rather the dispenser of fate.


2—6 The Ms. has a point after po-
λοῦσα. Fortune, when it comes in a
grievous shape, crushes (dpad8tve, weak-
ens, brings low) even a brave spirit: but,
when it has ἃ prosperous course (katop-
θωθεῖσα), makes a man admired and
eminent (ὑψιφανή).

After ἐσθλόν in 3 +’ has dropped out:
unless, indeed, the poet wrote ἐσθλοὺς,
but the transition from that plural to the
singular in v. 5 would be very harsh. It
can hardly be doubted that the metre
here was the same as in the antistrophic
verse (το), [Blass, ac-
cepting ἐσθλὸν without τε, supposes that
~~--— here is substituted for the -~--
in verse 10. But this seems very im-
probable, even if it be metrically pos-
sible. ]

51. The first hand wrote ...ov ἤδη
ὑψιφανῆ: where ἤδη was doubtless a
corruption of ἠδ᾽, this, in turn, having
replaced the less common form, t6’. The
metre is shown by v. 12, --~~-~~-—-.
[Blass however reads ἢ κυδρὸν ἠδ᾽ ὑψιφανῆ
τεύ-, assuming that --~— could be sub-


XII, XII]


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


357


who has imbued my spirit with that charm, sweet will be the
strains that tell forth his name to all the folk.


ALL.


[XIV.]


For Cleoptolemus of Thessaly, victor in the chariot-vace at the
Petraia.


A happy destiny is heaven’s best gift to mortals.


Fortune


can crush worth, if she comes fraught with suffering; she can
make a man admired and eminent, if her course be prosperous.
The honour won by men takes various shapes :


the forms of human excellence are countless; but one merit has


the foremost place among all,—


8 £. The end of v. 8 (MIAAE) is contained in a small fragment placed here by K., which
gives also the last letters or syllables of v. ro ἯΙ 11 (N), 12 (APMO), and 13 (ΜΦΑ).


—é€x πασέων conj. Richards (ἐκ πασᾶν Jurenka


: ἐξ ἀλλᾶν Housman: és τιμὰν R. Ellis.


stituted for the --~~ in v. 12: but here
again it seems more than doubtful whether
such a substitution is possible. “lhe me-
trical effect is almost intolerably harsh.]
I regard ἰδ᾽ as well-nigh certain. ἰδέ is
Homeric, but is not used by Pindar: it
is probable in Soph. Az¢. 969, but does
not elsewhere occur in Tragedy. (For
an instance of elided ἐδ᾽, see Od. 3. 10.)
We might, indeed, read (κλεινὸν) δὲ καὶ
ὑψιφανῆ (δέ sometimes follows re: Soph.
O. C. 367 ff.): or κλεινόν τε x.7.A. Then,
however, the scribe’s ἤδη would remain
without satisfactory explanation, since it
is unlikely that it could have arisen from
so familiar a word as δέ.

There is room before ov for four or five
letters. Five is the number required by
Blass’s ἢ xvdp]év: but his ἢ cannot (in
my opinion) be right. We need καί, δέ,
or τε. I would suggest κἀγατ]ὸν (ἀγητός)
or κάγαυόν : for crasis of καί at the be-
ginning of a verse, see III. 81 χώτι, and
XVII. 50 κηὔτυκτον. In Class. R. ΧΙ.
p. 131 (Mar. 1898) I proposed καὶ κλει-
vov, which still seems to me _ not
improbable. In KAIKAEINON the re-
semblance of KA to KA might have led
to the loss of KAI, leaving in our Ms.
only KAEINON. The number of letters
before ov for which this conjecture re-
quires space is. therefore, only the same
as that demanded by the emendations
noticed above,—five. In objecting to it


as requiring too much room (‘nimia pro
spatio,’ and ed. p. 121) Blass evidently
overlooked the fact that, on my hypo-
thesis, καί had dropped out.

τεὐύχει-τετίθησι: Od. 13. 397 ἀλλ᾽ ἄγε
σ᾽ ἄγνωστον revéw: so Pind. WV. Iv. 83 ff.
ὕμνος... ἰσοδαίμονα τεύχει | φῶτα: Aesch.
um. 668 τὸ σὸν πόλισμα καὶ στρατὸν
τεύξω μέγαν.

Sf. μυρίαι δ᾽... ἀρεταί. From the
importance of happy fortune for the
attainment of honour, the poet passes
to the various kinds of honour that men
may win, and the variety of excedlences in
different aspirants. Cp. vu. 88f., and
Ix. 38 ff.

μία...πρόκειται. It seems possible, or
even probable, that πρόκειται here means,
‘is set in front’ (of all others), ‘ holds the
γε: place’; as προτιθέναι τί τινος can
mean ‘to prefer’ (Her. II. 53, etc.).
Cp. Arist. Zop. VI. 5 (p. 1426 24) ἐν οἷς
οὐ πρόκειται τοῦ λόγου τὸ τί ἐστιν (‘where
the nature of the thing is not put first in
the account of it’). We might then read:
(1) ἐκ πασᾶν, ‘ranks first among them
all,’ as suggested by H. Richards (writing
ἐκ πασέων) in Class. R. X11. 76 (ἐξ ἀλλᾶν
Housman, 7. 73). Or: (2) εἰς ὄλβον,
‘in respect to happiness.’ (és τιμὰν
Robinson Ellis, 26. 65: but cp. 6.) I
slightly prefer (1), as better fitted to inter-
pret the sense of πρόκειται. [Blass writes
és ξυνὸν πρόκειται, 1.6. ‘is set before men


str. I.


ant. I.


358


BAKXYAIAOY


(XII


a Ν DY bY a

το 3 ὃς τὸ] πὰρ χειρὸς KuBepva-
4 Tat δι]καίαισι φρένεσσιν.

y ? > ΄ ε 28
sour ély βαρυπενθέσιν appo-


an


ζει μ]άχαις φόρμιγγος ὀμφὰ


7 καὶ λι]γυκλαγγεῖς χοροΐ,


5" ¥y > > ἦν DY
ἐπ. α΄. 15 τοῦτ᾽ ἐ]ν θαλίαις καναχὰ
΄ . DV 2p £7
2 χαλκ͵]όκτυπος᾽ ἀλλ᾽ ἐφ᾽ ἑκάστῳ
καιρὸς] ἀνδρῶν ἔργματι κάλ-
λιστος: εὖ ἔρδοντα δὲ καὶ θεὸς ὀΓ ρθοῖ.


20


3

4

5 Κλεοπτολέμῳ δὲ χάριν

6 vuv χρὴ Ποσειδᾶνός τε Πετραΐί.


ta lad
7 ov τέμενος κελαδῆσαι,
Lae 3 » ε ΄ cs
8 Πυρρίχου τ᾽ εὔδοξον ἱππόνικον υἱόν,


10 f£, ὃς τὸ Headlam, Pearson: ὃς τὰ Wilamowitz: a& τὰ Blass: εἰ τὸ Richards :
és ye K.—KYBEPNAI A: corr. A!.—xvBepyGrac K.: κυβέρνασεν Wilamowitz.


12 οὔτ᾽ ἐν] οὐκ ἐν K.: οὔτοι Ellis: οὐκ ἂν (with ἁρμόζοι) Platt.


18 μάχαις J.


for their common good,’—whatever the
special ἀρετή of each may be.—My former
conjecture, accepted by Kenyon and
Smyth, was εὐδαίμων πρόκειται, ‘is set
before men,’—‘is proposed to their
efforts,’—‘as truly happy,’ 2.4. ‘with a
sure promise of happiness.’]

10f. ὃς.. κυβερνᾶται, a relative clause
serving to define the ἀρετή meant in 8f. ;
equivalent in sense to ef (or ὅτε) τις
κυβερνᾶται. Thuc. 11. 44 ὃ τ τὸ δ᾽
εὐτυχές, ol ἂν τῆς εὐπρεπεστάτης (Evupopas)
λάχωσι : VI. 14 τὸ καλῶς ἄρξαι τοῦτ᾽ εἶναι,
ὃς ἂν τὴν πατρίδα ὠφελήσῃ ὡς πλεῖστα.
Cp. also vil. 68 §1: Od. 24. 286.

τὸ πὰρ χειρός, ‘his immediate task’;
the act which is next to come from his
hand. The phrase resembles τὸ πὰρ
ποδός: Pind. P. 111. 60 (a man should
pray for things which befit men), γνόντα τὸ
map ποδός, οἵας εἰμὲν atoas, ‘aware of what
lies in front of him, and of our mortal
destiny.’ There, τὸ πὰρ ποδός is the
thing to which one will come at the next
step from where his foot now is: 1.6.,
what lies directly in front of him,—
decay and death. Cp. also P. x. 62f.
τυχών κεν ἁρπαλέαν σχέθοι φροντίδα τὰν
πὰρ ποδός" | τὰ δ᾽ εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν ἀτέκμαρτον
προνοῆσαι : ‘if he succeeds, he will seize
with rapture on his zsmedzate desire;
but what a year may bring forth, no sign
can foreshow.’ As τὸ πὰρ ποδός suits


Pindar’s thought of men moving on their
appointed paths, so τὸ πὰρ χειρός suits
our poet’s thought here. Happy is he
who is guided by a just mind in ‘hat
which his hand finds to do at each
successive moment.

12—16 μάχαις is on the whole much
more probable in v. 13 than Aaxats, the
conjecture of Blass (2nd ed.). Hesychius
gives λάχη (εἴ) " λῆξις, ἀποκλήρωσις.
(In Aesch. 72. 914 τάφων πατρῴων λαχαί
are their ‘ portions’ in those graves.) It
may be granted that B. could have used
λαχή as=Adyos. And at first sight
λαχαῖς is distinctly commended by Bapv-
πενθέσιν. Compare, however, x. 68
μάχαις... λυγραῖς. The reasons which
weigh with me in favour of μάχαις are
chiefly these. (1) The antithesis be-
tween joyous music and kavaxd...dxrumos
(15f.). With λαχαῖς, we must there read,
as Blass does, orepvéxruros. But καναχά
denotes some sharp sound, esp. the
clanging of metal: 71. τό. 105 πήληξ
βαλλομένη καναχὴν ἔχε : Soph. Ant. 130
χρυσοῦ καναχῆς. In 11. 12 Β. uses
γλυκεῖαν αὐλῶν καναχάν to describe the
brisk, high-pitched notes of flutes. καναχὰ
στερνόκτυπος could not well denote the
sound made by Jdeating the breast (cp.
Soph. Az. 631 ff. χερόπλακτοι δ᾽ | ἐν
στέρνοισι πεσοῦνται | δοῦποι). It would
have to mean, ‘a shrill sound (of γόοι)


XI]


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ


359


his, who is guided by just thoughts in each thing that his


hand finds to do.


The voice of the lyre, the clear strains of choral song, accord
not with the grievous stress of battle,


as the clash of arms has no place amidst festivity. To every
work of man the fitting season lends the fairest grace; and
heaven prospers him who works aright.

Now, in tribute to Cleoptolemus, ’tis meet to celebrate the
sacred domain of Poseidon Petraios, and the glorious son of
Pyrrhichus, victor in the chariot-race...


(so K., and Blass!) : λαχαῖς Blass*—éuga& J. (a conjecture afterwards confirmed by


the letters MA in the fragment mentioned above in n. on 8 f.).
18 EPAONTI A: corr. 4.5) -ὀρθοῖ J.


στερνόκτυπος Blass. 17 καιρὸς J.


16 χαλκόκτυπος Κ.:


accompanied by beating of the breast’:
this, however, would be a forced sense.
On the other hand καναχὰ χαλκόκτυπος
(the clash of arms) is a natural phrase :
and it is strongly confirmed by XVII. 59
χαλκεοκτύπου μάχας. (2) In 16f. the
poet adds that καιρός should be observed
in every deed or work of man, ἐφ᾽ éxdory...
ἔργματι. This is suitable if the anti-
thesis to festivity is fighting; but less so,
if it is mourning. (3) Music and choral
song are prominently named by B. him-
self (fr. 4. 2) among the gifts of Εἰρήνα.
Cp. 7. 18. 490ff.,—the city at peace,
with its festal music of αὐλοί and φόρμιγ-
yes, contrasted with the city at war.

λιγυκλαγγεῖς (only here): cp. IX. 10
λιγύφθογγον. λιγύς is notably frequent
as an epithet of the Muse, the lyre, or
song (eg. Od. 24. 62, Terpander fr. 6,
Alcman fr. 1, Stesichorus fr. 44, Pind.
O. 1X. 47, etc.).

17 καιρός: from Theognis 401 μηδὲν
ἄγαν σπεύδειν" καιρὸς δ᾽ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ἄριστος |
ἔργμασιν ἀνθρώπων : cp. also Hes. ΟΖ.
694 καιρὸς δ᾽ ἐπὶ πᾶσιν ἄριστος : Pind. Ο.
xi. 471. ἕπεται δ᾽ ἐν ἑκάστῳ | μέτρον"
νοῆσαι δὲ καιρὸς ἄριστος (‘a just measure
goes with every deed; and to discern it
is the highest opportuneness’).

18 εὖ ἔρδοντα : suggested by ἔργματι.
Each deed should be done in season;
and if a man does it aright, the god, too,
prospers him. Cp. Eur. fr. 432. 2 τῷ
γὰρ πονοῦντι Kal θεὸς συλλαμβάνει. There
is an allusion to success in the games (cp.
Ill. 94 πράξαντι δ᾽ εὖ), which smooths
the transition from the prefatory moraliz-
ing to the proper subject of the ode.

19- 21 χάριν: the poetical tribute.


The acc. is in apposition with the-sen-
tence (χρὴ... τέμενος κελαδῆσαι). An
exact parallel is afforded by Pind. O. x1.
78 ff. (484 B.C.) καί νυν ἐπωνυμίαν χάριν]
νίκας ἀγερώχου κελαδησόμεθα | βροντὰν
καὶ πυρπάλαμον βέλος etc.: where χάριν
has a like sense, and is similarly in ap-
position with the sentence.—vév, as so
often, when B. passes from proem to
theme: IX. 9 ἢ.

Tlerpalov: schol. Pind. P. Iv. 138
(where Pelias, king of Iolcus, is addressed
by Jason as παῖ Ποσειδᾶνος Πετραίου),
Tlerpatos τιμᾶται Ποσειδὼν παρὰ Θετταλοῖς,
ὅτι διατεμὼν τὰ ὄρη τὰ Θετταλικά, λέγω
δὴ τὰ Τέμπη, πεποίηκε δι’ αὐτῶν ἐπιτρέχειν
τὸν ποταμὸν Πηνειόν, πρότερον διὰ μέσης
τῆς πόλεως (sic) ῥέοντα καὶ πολλὰ τῶν
χωρίων διαφθείροντα. Her. Vil. 129 gives
the legend, without mentioning the cult.
Cp. schol. Ap. Rhod. 3. 1244 (on πέτρην
θ᾽ Alwovinv): τὴν Θεσσαλίαν Πέτραν"
χωρίον δέ ἐστιν ἐν ᾧ Ποσειδῶνος ἄγεται
ἀγών. It is only a conjecture that the
scene of the Πετραῖα was somewhere
near Tempe.

22. IIvpplxov, probably the victor’s
father. Cleoptolemus has been named
in 19 as the recipient of the poetical
offering. But there is no unfitness in
this second reference to him as victor.
Blass’s supplement ἱππόνικον υἱόν may
therefore be accepted. In v. 23 ὃς refers
to υἱόν, 2.6. Cleoptolemus, and the two
epithets refer to his father Pyrrhichus.
Verse 24 may have been, as Herwerden
suggests, πατρὸς mepuxws.—Jurenka, sup-
posing Pyrrhichus to be the charioteer,
supplies ἱππόν[ωμον dpudv]: but see on


ν. 43.


epode 1.


360


BAKXYAIAOY ETTINIKOI


[XIII


στρ. 8. - ὃς φιλοξείνου τε καὶ ὀρθοδ[ίκου


[The last six verses of στρ. β΄, the whole of ἀντ. β΄, and the first three
verses of ἐπ. β', are lost.]


ἐπ. β. 40. - - εὐἰῤώδεα Θεσσα[λ ἡ - --
ΞὉ πὺῷ υἹ ἐν γυάλοις"


6 --


- Ila ]ντέλης κί - - -


7 πυύσ-υὺ -ἸἼδὼν


[The rest of the ode is lost.]


283 This verse, the first of the second strophe, is the last in column ΧΧΙΧ.


After this


at least one whole column has been lost, as ode XIV begins at the top of the next


column which has been preserved.


indicates, to verses 4—y7 of an epode (probably the second).


40-- 48 These words belonged, as metre


They are supplied by


a small fragment (no. 11) which K. placed here.


40-43 Metre indicates that these
vestiges belonged to verses 4—7 of an
epode. εὐώδεα was probably the epithet
of Poseidon’s temple or altar (cp. Pind.
Ὁ. Vil. 32 εὐώδεος ἐξ ἀδύτοιο : Eur. 77.
1061 f. θυόεντα βωμόν). γνάλοις must
denote the valley in which the chariot-
race was held. ‘Thus (¢.g.): βωμὸν ἀμφ᾽]
εὐώδεα Θεσσαλ[ίας εὐδαίμονος] ἐν γυάλοις,
if in v. 19 there was synizesis in Κλεοπτο-
λέμῳ : if there was not, the epithet of
Ocooadlas might be ἱπποκυδέος, or ἱπ-
“πομήτιδος (Pind. 2. vi. 9).—The letters


ντέλης belonged, as the accent in the Ms.
shows, to a proper name, doubtless Ilav-
τέλη. (The names Παντέλειος and
Παντέλεος are extant.) This was pre-
sumably the charioteer. The κ might
suggest xuBépvalcev or κυβερνήτας : see
Vv. 47.—We might conjecture that the
poet, having no myth available which
would suit his Thessalian theme, had
recourse to description of the chariot-race
itself, such as Simonides is known to
have used in some epinikia.


362 BAKXYAIAOY [Χιν


ΔΙΘΥΡΑΛΛΒΟΙ


XIV. [XV.]
AN]THNOPIAAI
H EAENH]C ATTAITHCIC


Col. 30 στρ. α΄.


"


᾿Αντήνορος] ἀντιθέου

σύξυξ θεμερῶ]πις, ᾿Αθάνας πρόσπολος,
ὥϊξεν ἁγνὸν ΠΊ]αλλάδος ὀρσιμάχονυ

ναὸν θύρας τε χ)ρυσέας

ἀγγέλοις δισσοῖσι ἦν ᾿Αργείων ᾿Οδυσσεῖ
Λαρτιᾷάδᾳ Μενελ]άῳ 7 ᾿Ατρεΐδᾳ βασιλεῖ


v


- w


nw


7-Y—- - — βαθύ]ζωνος Θεανὼ
ara, t- - UU - ὺ υ]ὸν
εὐ -υυ--ὧυ -| προσήνεπεν
to 34% -υ - - πὸ ἐϊὐκτιμέναν
4 π oe vM eH KH KVM -
s5-VY---V - -Ἴδων τυχόντες
ἐπυυ-π-υυν- - -΄σὺ =] σὺν θεοῖς
γπύπππ-που- - -ῷῦ -ἼἸοὺς
[ἐπ. α΄, and the first ν. of στρ. β΄, are lost.]


RIV. ᾿Αν]τηνορίδαι [ἢ ‘Edévy]s ἀπαίτησις. The title was written by A%, not, as
usual, in the left margin, but at the top of the column, since this ode, the first of the
extant Διθύραμβοι, began a new volume or a new section. See Introduction to the
Ode. 1 ᾿Αντήνορος is certain, agreeing with such vestiges as remain before ἀντιθέονυ. ".
2 The letters before C AOANAC were almost certainly III: the epithet must then
have ended in -Gms. Blass further thinks that ENQI (or EPQI?) preceded IT: but
this is wholly uncertain : he supplies δάμαρ τερενῶπις. The first syll. of the v., however,


XIV. 1—9 With regard to the


vv. I—5. Probably she has taken them
, embassy of Odysseus and Menelaus to


thither in order that they may sup-


Troy, and the treatment of the subject
by Bacchylides, see the Introduction to
this Ode. The poem begins somewhat
abruptly. Theano, wife of the Trojan
Antenor and priestess of Athena, is with
the two envoys at the temple of the
goddess on the acropolis of Troy. So
much is clear from the remains of


plicate Athena to prosper their mission.
Their hospitable reception at the house
of Antenor is presupposed. The traces
in verses 2—4 favour some such con-
jecture as that of Crusius (see cr. n.):
she opened the temple of Pallas, with
its golden doors, to the Greek envoys.
No point occurs in the Ms. before that


XIv]


AlOYPAMBOI


363


DITHYRAMBS.


XIV... [XV]


THE SONS OF ANTENOR


OR THE DEMAND FOR THE RESTITUTION OF HELEN.


God-like Antenor's [wife of grave mien], priestess of Athena, str. 1.


deep-girdled Theano, [opened the holy temple] of battle-rousing
Pallas with its golden doors [to the two envoys] of the Greeks,
Odysseus, son of Laertes, and Menelaus, the prince sprung from


Atreus...
* * *


is long in 44 and 51. I suggest σύξυξ θεμερῶπις.


* * *


8 f£. Crusius supplies ditey ἁγνὸν]


Παλλάδος ὀρσιμάχου [ναὸν πύλας τε χ)]ρυσέας : perhaps θύρας would be better; Z/. 6. 297 f.
αἱ δ᾽ ὅτε νηὸν ἵκανον ᾿Αθήνης ἐν πόλει ἄκρῃ, | τῇσι θύρας die Θεανὼ καλλιπάρῃος K.7.r.


5 ἀγγέλοις ἵκουσιν Crusius : —~— πρέσβεσσιν Blass.
_ Nairn, Wilamowitz.—r’ added above line by .48.

letter before QN seems to have been A or A.
13 σὺν θεοῖς] These words answer to -ᾳ βασιλεῖ in 6, θελξιεπεῖ
Probably ye, τε, or δέ has dropped out after σύν.


A: corr. A’.
in 48, and -ἂς Θέμιτος in 55.


14 After this verse all the rest of column xxx is lost.


6 Aapriddg Μενελ]άῳ Crusius,
7 βαθύζωνος K. 12 The
[παρ᾽ ἀλλήλων τυχόντες 2—TYXONTAC


Column ΧΧΧῚ begins with


v. 37 (ἄγον κ. τ. λ.), the second v. of epode 6’. The number of verses lost is


therefore 22 (15—36).


which follows προσήνεπεν in v. 9.
There was certainly no break in the first
sentence before βασιλεῖ in v. 6, and
perhaps none before Θεανώ in v. 7.
But, whether she or Odysseus was subject
to προσήνεπεν, a new sentence or clause
must have begun in the lost part of v. 8
or of v. 9.

2 ᾿Αθάνας πρόσπολος: 7). 6. 297 ff.
αἱ δ᾽ ὅτε νηὸν ἵκανον ᾿Αθήνης ἐν πόλει
ἄκρῃ, | τῇσι θύρας ὥϊξε Θεανὼ καλλιπά-
ρῃος, | Κισσηΐς, ἄλοχος ᾿Αντήνορος ἱπποδά-
poo | τὴν γὰρ Τρῶες ἔθηκαν ᾿᾿Αθηναίης
ἱέρειαν. Her father Κισσῆς, a Thracian
prince,—to be distinguished from He-
cuba’s father Κισσεύς (Eur. Hee. 3),—is
mentioned in //. 11. 223.—The epithet
ended in -@ms (see cr. n.). θεμερώπις,
‘of grave mien’ (epithet of aldws in
Aesch. P.V. 134), would be not unfitting
for the priestess.—Blass (2nd ed.) gives
τερενῶπις (not extant).

5 Possibly ἀγγέλοις δισσοῖσιν : cp. 71.
II. 140 ἀγγελίην (of this embassy).—


[πρέσβεσσιν Blass: there is, however,,no
instance in classical poetry of πρέσβεις
as= ‘ambassadors.’ In Aesch. Suppl,
727, where πρέσβη is commonly read,
πρέσβυς could mean only senex.]

9 προσήνεπεν, impf., a form given by
Mss. in Pind. P. IV. 97 and ΙΧ. 29, where
some edd. read mpooévvere.—Was the
subject to this verb Theano or Odysseus?
It might seem fitting that she, as priestess
of the temple, should speak here. In any
case, a speech by Odysseus presumably
occurred before v. 37. A fragment, not
unsuitable to a speech by him, is con-
jecturally placed in vv. 30 and 31 (n.).
If that conjecture be right, several lines .
before v. 30 must also have been spoken
by him. Supposing, then, that a speech
by Theano began at v. τὸ, it cannot
have been long. τυχόντες in 12 may have
referred (whoever was the speaker) to
the ‘obtaining’ of satisfactory terms by
the Greek envoys.


BAKXYAIAOY [xIVv


στρ. β΄. -“ πω —- WwW --

23... - — YY -- μεσονύΪκτιος κέαρ
[The last five vv. of στρ. β΄, and the first v. of ἄντ. β΄, are lost.]
ἄντ. β΄.

80 ε ποὺ «οὐ γὰρ ὑπόκλοπον φορεῖ

“ 4 ΄ ,
3 βροτοῖσι φωνάεντα λόγον codia.>

[The last four vv. of ἀντ. β΄, and the first v. of ἐπ. β΄, are Ἰοβί.]


— —- WwW —- UY = 7


Ria Ses Aa
Col.31 2 ἄγον, πατὴρ δ᾽ εὔβουλος ἥρως
πάντα σάμαινεν Πριάμῳ βασιλεῖ
παίδεσσί τε μῦθον ᾿Αχαιῶν.
ἔνθα κάρυκες δι᾿ εὐ-

ρεῖαν πόλιν ὀρνύμενοι
γ Τρώων ἀόλλιζον φάλαγγας


40


nau ΔΩ


στρ. γ. : δεξίστρατον εἰς ἀγοράν.

. παντᾷ δὲ διέδραμεν αὐδάεις λόγος:

45 3 θεοῖς δ᾽ ἀνίσχοντες χέρας ἀθανάτοις

4 εὔχοντο παύσασθαι δυᾶν.

5 Μοῦσα, τίς πρῶτος λόγων, ἦρχεν δικαίων;

6 Πλεισθενίδας Μενέλαος γάρυϊ θελξιεπεῖ
28 μεσονύ]κτιος κέαρ is fr. 9 K., conjecturally placed here by Blass; though (as he
says) the colour is darker than that seen in the extant part of col. xxx. A similar
tint is found, however, in parts of col. XxxI. These two words ended v. 2 of
a strophe, as is shown by the large vacant space above them (the last three verses of


an epode, as well as the first of a strophe, being short). 80 f. On the suggestion
of G. F. Hill, Blass places here fr. 35 (Bergk), preserved by Clem. Alex. Paedag. 111.


28 μεσονύκτιος κέαρ. If (which is
doubtful) the words belonged to this
place, Odysseus may have been con-
trasting the bliss of peace with ‘the
midnight fear’ which torments the heart
in war-time. Cp. what the poet says
of peace in fr. 3. 10: οὐδὲ συλᾶται μελί-
ῴρων | ὕπνος ἀπὸ βλεφάρων.

80 f. οὐ γὰρ ὑπόκλοπον. Metre is
the only definite ground for placing these
words here. Clement quotes them in
his Paedagogus, as in his Stromateis he
quotes vv. 50—56 (cr. n.). The fact
that this ode was familiar to him may
be viewed as slightly strengthening the
conjecture based on the metre. On the
other hand, verses of this measure may
have occurred in more than one of the


poet’s odes. It seemed best, on the
whole, to print the words here, with
a due indication of the doubt. If they
were spoken by Odysseus, what was the
context? Possibly he was deprecating
the suspicion that his plea for a peaceful
settlement veiled some insidious design :
σοφία would then be the art of the
orator. That word might, however,
suggest rather the art of the poet, as
though B. were saying that there is
nothing ‘furtive’ in the ‘clear utterance’
of poetry. (Contrast Pind. O. 11. οἱ ff.
φωνάεντα συνετοῖσιν" és δὲ τὸ πὰν ἑρμηνέων
χατίζει.)

875. ἄγον: (the sons of Antenor)
proceeded to conduct Odysseus and
Menelaus to the Trojan agora. Mean-


XIv] AIOYPAMBO}I 365
[ Verses 30f. ?...for no guile lurks in the clear utterance that ant. 2.
wisdom brings to mortals.]
* * * * * *
[The sons of Antenor] then led [the envoys to the market- epode 2.
place of Troy]; while their father, the sage hero, went to declare
all the word of the Achaeans to king Priam and his sons.
Thereupon heralds, hastening through the wide city, began
to gather the array of Trojans


into the marketplace where warriors muster. Everywhere the str. 3.
loud rumour ran abroad; and men lifted up their hands to the


immortal gods, praying for rest from their woes.
Say, Muse, who was the first to plead the righteous cause?
Menelaus son of Pleisthenes spake with winning voice,


310, οὐ yap ὑπόκλοπον φορεῖ | βροτοῖσι φωνάεντα λόγον σοφία : but he writes βροτοῖς δὲ


instead of βροτοῖσι.


As metre shows (cp. 44 f.), these words formed v. 2 (latter part)


and v. 3 of a strophe or antistr.; so, if fr. 9 is rightly referred to str. β΄, they belonged


to antistr. β΄.


88 σάμαινεν] σάμανεν Blass.


Cp. XVI. 51. 47 λόγων ἦρχεν


K., with Purser: APXEN ΛΟΓῺΝ ms.—The ὑποστιγμή after ΔΙΚΑΙΩΝ is abnormally


placed on a level with the bottom of the letters.


(Cp. Vill. 83 cr. ἢ.)


while their father (εὔβουλος ἥρως, as
in 71. 3. 148 πεπνυμένος) ‘went to lay’
(imperf.) ‘all the word of the Achaeans
before Priam,’ and to obtain his sanction
for the calling of the assembly. There-
upon (ἔνθα, v. 40) the heralds went
forth to convoke it. (I can see no need
for changing the σάμαινεν of the MS.
to σάμανεν, with Blass.)

Somewhere, then, in the course of the
lost verses the sons of Antenor came
on the scene. Antenor himself (we may
suppose) had previously learned the wishes
of the envoys: there is nothing to show
that he is imagined as present here.

According to the schol. on // 24.
496, B. represented Theano as having
borne fifty sons to Antenor (only ten are
named in the Ziad). This mention may
have occurred in the verses lost between
31 and 37. Was his choice of that
surprising number connected with the
requirements of a κύκλιος χορός, which
consisted of fifty members (Simon. fr.
147, 476 B.c.)? The Antenoridae, as
such a chorus, may have formed a
spectacular element in the production
of this dithyramb.

42. φάλαγγας: a term applied in
the J/iad only to the ‘ranks’ of men
drawn up in battle array, or engaged
in fighting. But the poet may have had
in mind the phrase describing how the


Achaeans ‘marched forth by companies
to the place of assembly,’ ἐστιχόωντο |
ἰλαδὸν εἰς ἀγορήν (L/. 2. 92).---δεξίστρατον
only here: cp. δεξίδωρος, δεξίθεος, δεξί-
μηλος, δεξίπυρος.---εἰς (instead of és) is
extant in B. only here and in εἰσάνταν
(Vv. 110).

44f. αὐδάεις, ‘loud’: Aesch. Zum.
380 αὐδᾶται φάτις.---ἀνίσχοντες χέρας :
Ill, 36 π.

46 παύσασθαι δυᾶν. Weil observes
that Β. seems here to conceive the
embassy as occurring in the middle
of the war, and not before its com-
mencement. Rather, I think, he is
following the Κύπρια, which must have
been his chief authority. According to
the summary of that epic given by Proclus
in his Χρηστομάθεια, two battles between
Greeks and Trojans occurred soon after
the landing of the invaders, and de/ore
the embassy. In the first encounter the
Trojans were victorious; in the second,
they were defeated.

47 Μοῦσα, τίς mpwros...; in the
epic style (//. t. 8 etc.). Pind. 2. Iv. 70
τίς yap ἀρχὰ δέξατο ναυτιλίας; --λόγων....
δικαίων, ‘righteous pleas’ for the restora-
tion of Helen.—The ms. places dpxev
before λόγων: cp. IX. 191.

48 Πλεισθενίδας. According to a
post-Homeric genealogy of the Pelopidae,
the father of Agamemnon and Menelaus


366 BAKXYAIAOY [XIV


1 φθέγξατ᾽, εὐπέπλοισι κοινώσας Χάρισσιν᾽


ἀντιγ.50 1 ὦ Τρῶες ἀρηΐφιλοι,
2 Ζεὺς ὑψιμέδων, ὃ ὃς ἅπαντα δέρκεται,
3 οὐκ αἴτιος θνατοῖς μεγάλων ἀχέων,
ς« ἀλλ᾽ ἐν μέσῳ κεῖται κιχεῖν
5 πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις Δίκαν ἰθεῖαν, ayvas
3 s Cee de ‘ a ,
6 Evvopias ἀκόλουθον Kat πινυτᾶς Θέμιτος"
7 ὀλβίων παῖδές νιν αἱρεῦνται σύνοικον.


55


"


ἁ δ᾽ αἰόλοις κέρδεσσι καὶ ἀφροσύναις
ἐξαισίοις θάλλουσ᾽ ἀθαμβὴς

9 Ὕβρις, ἃ πλ[οῦτον] δύναμίν τε θοῶς
4 ἀλλότριον ὦπασεν, αὖτις

5 δ᾽ ἐς βαθὺν πέμπει φθόρον,

6 κείνα καὶ ὑπερφιάλους

7 Tas παῖδας ὠλεσσεν Γίγαντας.


2 ,
ἐπ. Ύ.


-


60


50--56 These seven verses are quoted by Clem. Alex. Strom. Vv. 731, without the
poet’s name (ὁ λυρικός φησι). Sylburg and Boeckh rightly gave them to B., though
for a wrong reason, viz. because B. had made Cassandra predict the fall of Troy
(Porphyrion on Hor. C. 1. 15, and schol. Statius 7%. vit. 330): Bergk?* fr. 29.
Clement supplies the defects of our MS. in 51—53. 54 Δίκαν ἰθεῖαν


AIKAAHOHAN (AH instead of NI) A: 4.3 wrote NI above, and altered the second


was not Atreus, but his son Pleisthenes.
This occurs first in Stesichorus fr. 42,
where Agamemnon is βασιλεὺς Πλεισ-
Oevidas. Aesch. Agam. 1602 πᾶν τὸ
Πλεισθένους γένος: 14. 1569 δαίμονι τῷ
Πλεισθενιδᾶν.

In θελξιεπεῖ the second part of the
compound denotes the θέλκτρον (and not,
as in θελξίνοος, the object): cp. Apigr.
Gr. 1053 θελξιμελὴς... φόρμιγξ.

49 κοινώσας Χάρισσιν, having taken
counsel of the Graces, z.e. happily in-
spired by them. The object of κοινώσας
is left to be understood from the context :
itis φθέγματα, λόγον, or the like, suggested
by φθέγξατο. (Jurenka, less well, supplies
yapuv.) In Pind. 20. Iv. 115 the object
is expressed, νυκτὶ κοινάσαντες ὁδόν (‘when
Night alone knew the secret of their
way’). The use of the middle voice,
however, illustrates the ellipse here. The
full phrase is κοινοῦσθαί τινί τι, ‘to con-
sult one about a thing’ (Xen. H. vil. 1.27
τῷ μὲν θεῷ οὐδὲν ἐκοινώσαντο, ... αὐτοὶ δὲ
ἐβουλεύοντο) : but κοινοῦσθαί τινι (without
an acc.) also occurs (Xen. Ax. ν. 6. 27).
—The Charites gave eloquence no less


than song; thus an epigram (47th. VII.
416) describes a poet who was alsq an
orator as τὸν σὺν “Epwrt | καὶ Μούσαις
κεράσαντ᾽ ἡδυλόγους Χάριτας.

50- 566 Clement’s citation of these
verses (cr. n.) is introduced by the words,
κακῶν γὰρ ὁ θεὸς οὔποτε αἴτιος.

52 οὐκ αἴτιος : cp. the words of Zeus
to the gods (Od. 1. 32), ὦ πόποι, οἷον δή
vu θεοὺς βροτοὶ αἰτιόωνται" | ἐξ ἡμέων γάρ
φασι κάκ᾽ ἔμμεναι" οἱ δὲ καὶ αὐτοὶ | σφῇσιν
ἀτασθαλίῃσιν ὑπὲρ μόρον ἄλγε᾽ ἔχουσιν.
Eur. fr. 254 πόλλ᾽, ὦ τέκνον, σφάλλουσιν
ἀνθρώπους θεοί.--τὸ ῥᾷστον εἶπας, αἰτιά-
σασθαι θεούς.

53—55 ἐν μέσῳ κεῖται, it is ‘open to
all men,’—like a prize proposed in a
competition for which all may enter.
Dem. or. 4 ὃ 5 d0Aa τοῦ πολέμου κείμενα
ἐν μέσῳ. Cp. the fragment in Clem.
Alex. Strom. 5. 654 (Bergk* ares. 86 8B),
οὐ γὰρ ἐν μέσοισι κεῖται | δῶρα δυσμάχητα
Μοισᾶν | τὠπιτυχόντι φέρειν. --- κιχεῖν,
‘reach,’ ‘attain to,’ as to ἃ goal. Hesiod
(Op. 289 ff.) and Simonides (fr. 58) place
᾿Αρετή on a height which men must climb
with toil.—Alkav ἰθεῖαν ‘straightforward’


XIV] AIlOYPAMBOI


367
counselled of the fair-robed Graces:


‘Warriors of Troy, Zeus, who rules on high and beholds all
things, is not the author of grievous woes for mortals. No,
open before all men is the path that leads to unswerving Justice,
attendant of holy Eunomia and prudent Themis: happy the
land whose sons take her to dwell with them.


_ ‘But Insolence,—the spirit, void of reverence, who luxuriates
in shifty wiles and illicit follies—who swiftly gives a man his
neighbour’s wealth and power, but anon plunges him into a
gulf of ruin,—she it was who destroyed the Giants, overweening
sons of Earth...’


H to ΕἸ.---Δίκαν ὁσίαν Clem.—da-yvas] ἁγνὰν Clem. : corrected conjecturally by Bergk.
55 ἀκόλουθον omitted by A: added above line by A®.—Oéducros] Θέμιδος Clem. : corr.


Bergk.
σύνοικον] CYNAIKON A: corr. A’.


Palmer.
XII. 131 (Mar. 1808).--- σφ᾽ conj. Platt.


56 vw] ὦ νιν Clem.: ὦ deleted by Neue.—aipeiyra:] εὑρόντες Clem.—
57 κέρδεσσι Blass: ψεύδεσσι K. (Palmer) :
the traces before AECCI seem to suit the former best.


59 aJ.: & Κ-.---πλοῦτον


61 δ᾽] The slight traces before EC suit A’, as I noted in Class. Rev.


63 ὦλεσσεν K.; QAECEN Ms.


Justice (v. 6 εὐθύδικος) : contrast Hes.
Op. 219 σκολιῇσι δίκῃσι. Justice is ‘at-
tendant on holy Eunomia and prudent
Themis’: 2.6. justice as between men is
secured by good laws administered in
a righteous spirit. Δίκη guards the rela-
tive rights derived from a principle of
Right, Θέμις. Hence Themis was called
the mother of Eunomia and Dike: see
n, on XII. 182—186.

56 ὀλβίων παῖδες : //. 6. 127 δυστή-
νων δέ τε παῖδες ἐμῷ μένει ἀντιόωσιν.---
σύνοικον: Soph. Azz. 451 οὐδ᾽ ἡ σύνοικος
τῶν κάτω θεῶν Δίκη. Smyth refers to
Ariphron (of Sicyon, ¢. 410 B.C.?), fr.
of a paean to Ὑγίεια (Bergk# 111. p. 596),
σὺ δέ μοι πρόφρων σύνοικος εἴης.

57--68 In ν. 59 we should read ἃ
πλοῦτον, not d. Two views of the con-
struction are possible: I prefer the first.
(1) Place a comma only after φθόρον,
when kelva will serve merely to resume
the subject Ὕβρις : ‘Insolence,...who
enriches and then ruins men,—she too
it was who destroyed the Giants.’ (2) A
colon or full stop might stand after
φθόρον. The δ᾽ after αὖτις would then
bring in the apodosis. ‘Insolence,...
who enriches men,...then presently (airis
δὲ) ruins them. She too it was,’ etc.
For this use of δέ, cp. Z/. 5. 438 ἀλλ΄
ὅτε δὴ τὸ τέταρτον ἐπέσσυτο δαίμονι ἴσος, |
δεινὰ δ᾽ ὁμοκλήσας προσέφη ἑκάεργος
᾿Απόλλων : and Thuc. I. 11 § 1 ἐπειδὴ
δὲ... ἐκράτησαν, φαίνονται δ᾽ κιτ.λ.


57 £. αἰόλοις, ‘shifty’: Pind. MV. ΝΠ.
25 αἰόλῳ ψεύδει.---κέρδεσσι, ‘wiles’: //.
23. 709 κέρδεα εἰδώς : Pind. P. 1. 92
εὐτραπέλοις κέρδεσι.---ἐξαισίοις, exceed-
ing αἶσα, breaking the bounds set for
mortals : ‘illicit,’ ‘lawless’: Od. 4. 690
ῥέξας ἐξαίσιον. In ἀφροσύναις ἐξαισίοις
there is a reference to Paris, led by his
mad passion to sin against Zeus Xenios.
π-ἀθαμβής, devoid of awe, reverencin:
nothing: cp. ἀναιδής. Ibycus fr. 1 (Ἑρωὴ
ἄσσων παρὰ Κύπριδος ἀζαλέαις μανίαισιν
ἐρεμνὸς ἀθαμβής. Phrynichus fr. 2 σῶμα
δ᾽ ἀθαμβὲς γνιοδόνητον. Plut. Lyc. 16
βρέφη... ἀθαμβῆ σκότον (‘unawed by’).

61 8 és: for δέ as first word of
the verse, cp. XVI. 13, Pind. ? Iv.
180.

62 τ. ὑπερφιάλους : here in the bad
sense, ‘ overweening’: see on X. 78. Tas
παῖδας... Γΐγαντας. The Γίγαντες, who
are unknown to the //zad, appear in the
Odyssey as a ‘haughty’ race (ὑπερθύμοισι),
ruled by Eurymedon (an ancestor of the
Phaeacian king Alcinous): ‘he destroyed


-his infatuate folk (λαὸν ἀτάσθαλον), and


was himself destroyed’ (Od. 7. 60),—
how, we are not told. The Odyssey
says nothing of a Giants’ War with gods.
Neither does the Zheogony, though it
describes the Giants as the fierce sons of
Gaia, τεύχεσι λαμπομένους, δολίχ᾽ ἔγχεα
χερσὶν ἔχοντας (185 f.). Here, however,
B. must be alluding to their war against
the Olympians. Xenophanes refers to


ant. 3.


epode 3.


368


BAKXYAIAON


[xv


κὺ. LVL
[HPAKAHC]


στρ.


1 Πυθίου [en εἶμ᾽. ἐπεὶ


2 OAK jad” ἔπεμψεν ἐμοὶ χρυσέαν
3 Πιερ [(αθεῖ ν ἐὔθ)ρονος “Οὐρανία,
4“ πολυφ άτων γέμουσαν ὕμνων
5. ἐς θεόν,] εἴτ᾽ ap ἐπ᾽ ἀνθεμόεντι Ἕβρῳ


παν. The title [HPAKAHC] is conjecturally supplied by K. The left margin
of the papyrus, in which it may have stood, has been torn off. The rent begins
at XIV. 61, and extends to the bottom of the column (xv. 8), being widest in


Xv. 4—8.
stroke, such as Ν.
even if one of them was thin.


out: the second may have teen II or I:


Kenyon agrees) equally well be E. Hence Πυθίου ἄ dy’ oly’ (Blass), or ἔπ᾽ εἶμ᾽
But Λαός μον ἄκον᾽ (Crusius) requires too much space before ov: while πᾶς


possible.


1 The letter before OY is either I, or a letter ending with an upright

‘The space before OY would not suffice for more than 4 letters,

The space between ov and ἐπεὶ corresponds to 4 letters

(AACQ) in the line above (xiv. 63), and again to 4 (EIIEM) in v. 2:

be room for 5, if one or more were thin (as E, I).

the third, which Blass makes Ὁ, at ht (as
J.


but there would
The first letter after OT is torn


), is


this, fr. 1. 21 μάχας διέπειν Τιτήνων οὐδὲ
Τιγάντων : but the earliest source for a
definite myth is Pindar Δ]. 1. 67 f. érav
θεοὶ ἐν πεδίῳ Φλέγρας Γιγάντεσσιν μάχαν |
ἀντιάζωσιν : Heracles fought on the gods’
side. This Phlegra was identified with
the isthmus of Pallene (Her. vil. 123).
The Γιγαντομαχίάα was a sequel to the
Trravopaxla: Earth brought forth the
Giants to avenge the Titans (Claudian
Gigantom. 2 Titanum...crebros miserata
dolores). Zeus was Γιγαντολέτωρ (Lucian
Timon 4), and Athena Γιγαντολέτειρα
(Suidas s.v.). The Giant-saga was a
product of local folk-lore rather than a
pdetic creation, being associated with
places where volcanic forces were or had
been active: eruptions and earthquakes
were ascribed to δαίμονες imprisoned
under ground. The Γιγαντομαχία often
supplied motives to vase-painting and to
sculpture, as on the pediment of the
Megarian thesaurus at Olympia (Paus. 6.
19. 3), the metopes of Selinus, and the
metopes of the Parthenon.

The ancients took γίγας as = ‘earth-
born’ (Ξένε. M., Eustath. on //. 4. 159,
P+ 1490. 10) ; a derivation which Lobeck
sought to support by assuming is as= γῆ.
G. Curtius (I. p. 204) refers the word to rt
γα (ye-ya-ws), ye-ya(vr)-s: and Schwenck
(ap. Roscher p. 1653) regards yt as a re-


duplication. The primary sense might
then be merely, ‘of mighty growth’; as
Hesych. explains γίγας by μέγας, ἰσχυρός,
ὑπερφυής. At any rate no awkward tau-
tology was felt in such a phrase as Tas
παῖδες Τέγαντες, or γηγενὴς | στρατὸς
Τιγάντων (Soph. Zr. 1058 f.).


XV. 1—12 On the text of this
passage see Appendix.
1—4 [Πυθίου er’ εἶμ᾽. At Delphi


during the three winter months, when
Apollo was supposed to be absent, the
cult of Dionysus was in the foreground,
and dithyrambs took the place of paeans
(Plut. περὶ τοῦ E τοῦ ἐν Δελφοῖς, c. 9).
This ode seems to be ἃ dithyramb written
for performance at Delphi, probably to-
wards the end of winter. The πολύφατοι
ὕμνοι which Urania has sent to the poet
must be such as suited the Pythian cult.
There is perhaps a special reference to
hymns of the kind called κλητικοί, by
which Apollo would be invited to return
from the north to Delphi. Menander
of Laodicea (c. 200 A.D. ὃ), in his Περὶ
ἐπιδεικτικῶν c. 2 (Walz Rhet. 1X. p. 132),
mentions Bacchylides as a writer of the
kindred class called ἀποπεμπτικοί, hymns
by which a god was sped on his journey.
Thus the poet says, in effect :—‘I will
repair to Apollo’s temple, for the Muse


Xv]


AlOYPAMBOI


369


XV. [XVL]


HERACLES.


I will go towards the temple of Pytho’s lord, since fair-
throned Urania has sent me from Pieria a golden argosy
freighted with songs of fame [concerning the god],—whether,
on the flowery banks of Hebrus,


μον τις ἄκον᾽ (Jurenka) inserts too much between ov and ἐπεί.


2 ὁλκάδ᾽ Sandys.


8 Πιερίαθεν Blass: ἐΐθρονος J. (Class. R. X11. 132), and now Blass (who first proposed


ἐπὶ φρένας).
comment.


4 The space before -άτων suffices for 5 letters.
5—8 For the conjectural supplements see Appendix.
a distance of about six letters from the beginning of the verse, Εἰ is clear.


πολυφάτων K.: see
5. At
The letter


before it was probably N. The right-hand vertical stroke is traceable; also a spot of
ink in a position which would correspond with the middle of the cross-stroke. A space


of about 6 letters separates this E from ἀνθεμόεντι "EBpofe.
The next (4?) letters are uncertain.


to have been IT (or IT).


The letters after E seem
Blass gives εἴτ᾽ dp’


ἐπ᾽, and there is nothing in the traces which excludes this.—Between ἀνθεμόεντι and


“EBpwc Blass inserts που,


has given me themes meet for this season
at Delphi.’ Cp. fr. rr (οὐχ ἕδρας κ.τ.λ.),
the beginning of a ὑπόρχημα: ‘’Tis no
time for sitting still or tarrying; we must
go to the rich temple of Itonia with
golden aegis, and show forth some choice
strain.’—LIv@lov, neut.: ἐπί with gen.,
‘towards’ (Her. Iv. 14 ἰόντι ἐπὶ Κυζί-
κου).

_ 2. 6dnd8’. Poets not seldom compare
themselves to voyagers (Pind. P. τι. 62,
Verg. G. Iv. 116ff., etc.); and Pindar says
of an ode, τόδε μὲν κατὰ Φοίνισσαν ἐμπο-
λὰν | μέλος ὑπὲρ πολιᾶς ἁλὸς πέμπεται (P.
1. 67). But the image used here,—that
of an argosy sent by the Muse,—is novel.
The word ὁλκάς is used by Pindar with
reference to his song, but in a wholly
different context: his work is not fixed
in one place, like a statue, but is to
go forth from Aegina ἐπὶ πάσας ὁλκάδος
ἔν 7 ἀκάτῳ, ‘on every ship of burden
and in every boat.’ ὁλκάς there is not
figurative but literal.—xpvoéav with ὕ,
as in Ix. 6.

3 Πιερίαθεν] Pieria, a narrow district
in the s.w. corner of Macedonia on the
w. coast of the Thermaic Gulf, between
the Peneius and the Haliacmon. It was
the cradle of a primitive poetry linked
with a cult of the Muses (‘ Pierides’),
and was the legendary birthplace of
Orpheus.—Ovpavia: see v. 176 n.

4 πολυφάτων seems probable (Pind.
Ο..1. 8 ὁ πολύφατος ὕμνος : Δ. VII. 81


1. B


πολύφατον θρόον ὕμνων). After Οὐρανία,
a word beginning with a consonant is
wanted, since in the corresponding vv.,
15 and 16, the division of φῶθ᾽ between
the two verses shows synaphea.

5 About six letters, of which the last
was probably N, formed the dactyl lost
before εἴτ᾽. I suggest és θεόν, to go with
ὕμνων, hymns ‘relating to the god.’ Such
would be (6...) ὕμνοι κλητικοί, praying
him to return (see on 1—4). A reference
to Apollo is not indispensable here, since
the subject to ἀγάλλεται in v. 6 might be
Πύθιος, supplied from Πυθίου (v. 1); but
it is desirable.

εἴτ᾽, followed by ἢ, as in Eur. 1. 7.
“721, εἴτ᾽ οὖν ἐπ’ ἀκταῖς θάσσετον Διοσ-
κόρω, | ἢ Νηρέως ἀγάλμαθ᾽ : conversely
ἢ... εἴτε in Soph. “42. 177f., Eur. Alc. 114.
—"Efpw: now the Maritza. It rises in
the n.w. of Thrace, 5. of the Haemus
range, and flows into the Aegean: the
broad mountain wilds of Rhodope (Despot
Planina) lie s.w. of its upper course.
ἀνθεμόεντι: a purely conventional epithet
(cp. 34 ῥοδόεντι, and XVIII. 39f.). Classical
poets more often associate the Hebrus
with wintry cold (Theocr. vir. 110, Verg.
Aen, XU. 331, Hor. Zpist. τ. xvi. 13).
Alcaeus was our poet’s authority for
naming the Hebrus in connexion with
Apollo’snorthern ἀποδημία. Schol.Theocr.
1.ε., ᾿Αλκαῖός φησιν ὅτι "EBpos κάλλιστος
ποταμῶν: this occurred no doubt in his
hymn (of which Himerius or. xIV. 10


25


str.


370


BAKXYAIAOY


[Xv


6 θηρσὶν ἀγάλλεται ἢ δολιχαύχενι κύκνῳ,
γ ὀπὶ ἁἸ]δεΐᾳ φρένα τερπόμενος,
8. μέχρι ἸΠυθῶνά]δ᾽ ἵκῃ παιηόνων


Col. 82 ο ἄνθεα πεδοιχνεῖν,
ro Πύθιι ἼΑΛπολλον,


τι τόσα χοροὶ Δελφών


‘ , a 5 - ΄,
τὸ σὸν κελάδησαν παρ᾽ ἀγακλέα ναόν.


Py , NE λ ~
ἀντ. x πρίν γε κλέομεν λιπεῖν
2 Οἰχαλίαν πυρὶ δαπτομέναν


15


᾿Αμφιτρνωνιάδαν θρασυμηδέα φῶ-


» oy 3 ἊΨ ’ > 3 ’
θ᾽, ἵκετο δ᾽ ἀμφικύμον᾽ ἀκτάν.


3
4
5 ἔνθ᾽ ἀπὸ λαΐδος εὐρυνεφεῖ Κηναίῳ
6


Ζηνὶ θύεν βαρυαχέας ἐννέα ταύρους
6 Before ΑἸΛΡΑΛΛΈΤΑΙ there is room for 6 letters, if at least two of them were thin


(as Β, E, 9, I, or C).—The letter after ἀγάλλεται is H (ἢ), not H (ἢ K.).


7 After


AEIA there has been an erasure. Blass thinks that the scribe wrote I, that a corrector
cancelled it, and that finally it was made into N.—What now stands there looks like


N with a line drawn through it. Before [A]AEIA(I) there cannot have been room


for more than four letters, of which one at least must have been thin.


8 παιηόνων


gives a brief abstract in prose) describing
Apollo’s visit to the Hyperboreans. Aris-
tophanes, too, may have had Alcaeus in
mind, Av. 772 ff.: τοιάδε κύκνοι... | Evp-
μιγῆ Body ὁμοῦ | πτεροῖς xpéxovres ἴακχον
᾿Απόλλω,... | ὄχθῳ ἐφεζόμενοι παρ᾽ Ἕβρον
ποταμόν.

In ἀνθεμόεντι “ΕΙβρῳ (4~ ~ 4~—-) the
hiatus is excused by the aspirate. In
εὐρυνεφεῖ Κηναίῳ (v. 17) -4-- -- -- is substi-
tuted for 4~--.

6 I suggest θηρσὶν as a possible
supplement. In the passage of the Aves
just quoted, the φῦλα... ποικίλα θηρῶν are
mentioned (777). Asto Apollo che hunter,
often associated with Artemis Agrotera,
see Aesch. fr. 200 dypevs δ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων
ὀρθὸν ἰθύνοι βέλος: Soph. O. C. τορι
τὸν ἀγρευτὰν ᾿Απόλλω: the Xenophontic
Cynegeticus 1, 81 τὸ μὲν εὕρημα θεῶν,
᾿Απόλλωνος kal’ Αρτέμιδος, ἄγραι καὶ κύνες:
16. 6. 13 (the hunter should pray) τῷ
᾿Απόλλωνι καὶ ᾿Αρτέμιδι τῇ ᾿Αγροτέρᾳ μετα-
δοῦναι τῆς θήρας. At Megara there was
a temple dedicated to “Apreus ’A-yporépa
and ᾿Απόλλων ’Aypatos (Paus. 1. 41. 3).
--κύκνῳ : the swan was sacred to Apollo,
‘being probably a symbol of the spring-god.
A chariot drawn by swans was the gift of
‘Zeus to him (Alcaeus fr. 2).

7 d&ela: there is no other example of


diaeresis in this word; but it is certain
here.

8.1. The lacuna in the Ms. before δ᾽
ἵκῃ could not hold more than six letters.
But the scansion required for the lost
syllables is ~~—-~ (cp. v. 20). To find
six letters which shall give that metre,
and also fit the sense, seems impossible.
The corresponding syllables in v. 20
contain thirteen letters. The hypothesis
that syllables belonging to v. 8 had been
wrongly attached to v. 7 is excluded by
the space in the Ms. after τερπόμενος. It
seems, then, almost certain that the text
of the papyrus was defective here. A
defect may have existed in the ms. which
the scribe copied ; or, as is perhaps more
likely, he inadvertently omitted something.
He did so not infrequently; thus in v. 12
he left out the letters ya of ἀγακλέα, and
in XIV. 55 the word ἀκόλουθον. I suggest
μέχρι Πυθῶνάδ᾽ ty. The last syllable
(-vos) of v. 7 must be long, and therefore,
as there is synaphea (cp. 19 f.), v. 8 must
begin with a consonant. For μέχρι with
a simple subjunctive, cp. Her. Iv. 110,
Thue. I. 137 §2: for the é, Ar. Vesp. 700.
—See Appendix.

TIv0avas’ (Πυθόαδ᾽ Blass, see Ap-
pendix): cp. Pind. O. vi. 37 Πυθῶνάδ᾽....


‘


ᾧχετ᾽ ἰών: IX. 12 ἵει γλυκὺν Πυθῶνάδ'


.


Xv] AlLOYPAMBOI 371
he is taking his joy [in the chase], or in swan with slender
neck, charmed in soul by its sweet voice ;—[until,] O Pythian
Apollo, thou returnest [to Pytho], to seek those flowers of


song, those many paeans, which choruses of Delphians are


wont to uplift at thy glorious shrine.


Meanwhile, we sing how Amphitryon’s son, the adventurous
hero, left Oechalia a prey to fire: then came he to the sea-
washed cape, where he was to offer from his spoil nine bellowing
bulls to Cenaean Zeus, lord of far-spread clouds,


(Wilamowitz, Desrousseaux) is certain: in the MS. the top of the If has been effaced.


The letters before παιηόνων are IKHI (of H only 11 remains).


The letter before


IKHI must have been A or A. The space between A and the beginning of the verse


may just have held 6 letters (if one at least was thin), but not more.
12 ἀγακλέα] AKABA A: ya added above line by A}.


TOCCA Ms.
κλεέμεν (inf.) Blass.


11 τόσα K.:
18 κλέομεν]


ὀϊστόν .--πανηόνων ἄνθεα : Pind. O. 1x. 48
ἄνθεα δ᾽ ὕμνων νεωτέρων. --- πεδοιχνεῖν,
infin. of purpose after ἵκῃ (cp. Thuc. v1.
50 § 4 δέκα τῶν νεῶν προὔπεμψαν... κατα-
σκέψασθαι). The Aeolic πεδ- does not
occur elsewhere in B.: was he influenced


here by a reminiscence of Alcaeus? (See’


on Vv. 5.)

11 2. τόσα, relative; a rare use (1.
37 n.), admitted here, perhaps, to avoid
a syllaba anceps at the end of v. τὸ (cp.
y. 22, ending with βοῦν).--- ὠ κελάδησαν,
gnomic aor.

13 πρίν ye κλέομεν. The meaning of
πρίν is shown by the preceding verses
(8—12), which speak of Apollo’s return
(in spring) to Delphi. πρίν is the adverb.
‘Before (that moment)’—z.e. ‘Ere thou
comest,’—while Delphi yet awaits thee,
and it is still the season of dithyrambs,—
‘we sing how Heracles left Oechalia,’
etc. The emphasis given by ye is thus
appropriate.—For € before kA, cp. 111. 3,
vil. 9 f., XVI. 127 f.

14 Οἰχαλίαν, the city of Eurytus,
father of Iole. The Euboean Oechalia
was placed by legend in the territory
of Eretria (Hecataeus af. Paus. 4. 2. 3:
Strabo το, p. 448). After sacking
Oechalia, Heracles marched some fifty
miles N.w. to Κήναιον, the ἀμφικύμων
ἀκτά of v. 16. This promontory (now
Cape Lithdda) forms the end of a
peninsula which runs out westward, at
the N.w. extremity of Euboea, towards
the mouth of the Malian Gulf. Zeus
Κήναιος was worshipped on the hill-tops
near it: Aesch. fr. 29 EvBoida κάμπτων
ἀμφὶ Κηναίον Διὸς | ἀκτήν : Soph. 77.


238. Αἰ Cenaeum Heracles prepared sacri-
fices to Zeus from the spoils of Oechalia.
But, meanwhile he had sent Iole, in
charge of his herald Lichas, to his home
at Trachis. Deianeira, seeing that she
had a rival, then resolved to use the
‘philtre’ given her by Nessus, The
fatal χιτών, steeped in it, was brought
by Lichas to Heracles at the moment
when he was about to begin the sacrifice;
and he put it on. As soon as the flames
blazed up on the altar at which he stood,
the tunic became glued to his flesh, and
‘the venom began to devour him’ (Soph.
Tr. 771): he was carried across the strait
to Mount Oeta, and there, by his own
command, burned on a pyre.

15 2. ᾿Αμφιτρνωνιάδαν : v. 156 n.—
ἵκετο with ἵ (cp. v. 4), as in 21. 13. 837,
19. 115.---ὠαἀμφικύμον᾽ ἀκτάν : Soph. 77.
752 ἀκτή τις ἀμφίκλυστος : the only point
which distinctly suggests that these verses
were in the mind of Sophocles when he
wrote 77. 750—762. The epithets were,
however, obvious. The epic Olyadlas
ἅλωσις, attributed to Creophylus of Samos,
must have been one of the sources from
which Sophocles derived his material,
and may have been also used by B. This
would suffice to account for a general
resemblance between our passage and
that in the Zrachiniae. As to the details
of the sacrifice, those given in vv. 18—20
differ from Zy. 760—762. It would be
gratuitous to assume that μέλλοντι...
τεύχειν in 77. 756 was imitated from
θύεν...μέλλε here, or λείας ἀπαρχὴν 2b.
761 from ἀπὸ λαΐδος.


17 1. Κηναίῳ: n. on 14. — θύεν,


25—2


ant.


372


BAKXYAIAOY


{xv


7 δύο τ᾽ ὀρσιάλῳ δαμασίχθονι μέλ-


20 8
9 παρθένῳ ᾿Αθάνᾳ
ε ΄ ἴον
x0 ὑψικέραν βοῦν.
τς τότ᾽ ἄμαχος


δαίμων


he κόρᾳ τ᾽ ὀβριμοδερκεῖ ἀζυγα


το Δαϊανείρᾳ πολύδακρυν ὕφανε


- ral Νὰ" τοῦ 3 9 Ν
ἐπ. 25 τ μῆτιν ἐπίφρον᾽, ἐπεὶ


ς πύθετ᾽ ἀγγελίαν ταλαπενθέα,
39 a ῳ Ps
Ἰόλαν ὅτι λευκώλενον
Διὸς υἱὸς ἀταρβομάχας


30


3
4
»* Ν Ἂν , ,
s ἄλοχον λιπαρὸν π͵οτὶ δόμον πέμποι.
6a δύσμορος, ὦ τάλαιν᾽, οἷον ἐμήσατο"


7 φθόνος εὐρυβίας νιν ἀπώλεσεν,
8 δνόφεόν τε κάλυμμα τῶν


ο ὕστερον ἐρχομένων,


yy > ΦΝ ε 4 4
10 ὅτ᾽ ἐπὶ ῥοδόεντι Λυκόρμᾳ
35 δέξατο Νέσσου πάρα δαιμόνιον τέρ[ας.


20 KOPAIA A: T written above A (by A??).


24 AAIANEIPA A: I added by ΑἹ.


22 ὑψικέραν sic MS.
29 λιπαρὸν] λιπαρὰν Platt (cp. v. 169).


Doric inf.; cp. ἐρύκεν XVI. 41, ἴσχεν 88:
φυλάσσεν XVIII. 25.—péAXe with pres.:
Ill. 30n.

19 Neither epithet for Poseidon oc-
curs elsewhere. δαμασίχθονι, ‘earth-
subduing,’ having earth in his power;
as he is able to upheave it with his
τρίαινα: the notion is the same, then,
as in σεισίχθων, ἐννοσίγαιος. From
another point of view he is γαιηόχος,
‘earth-encircling’ (or perhaps ‘earth-
upholding,’ as though it rested on his
waters).

20 ὀβριμοδερκεῖ (only here), ‘of fierce
aspect’ (cp. ὀβριμοεργός, the notion of
‘strong’ passing into that of ‘ violent’).
So it is said of her in 71. 1. 199, δεινὼ
δέ οἱ ὄσσε φάανθεν: Soph. Az. 450 ἡ
Διὸς γοργῶπις ἀδάματος θεά (γοργΎ. also
in fr. 760. 2). The attribute of flashing
eyes suits her as a war-goddess (περσέ-
mods etc.), but really points to her older
meaning as a weather-daimon, the Athena
who springs armed from the head of Zeus


(the lightning that splits the storm-cloud).
—The Azatus is unobjectionable, since
the syllable before ἄζυγα, though corre-
sponding with one which is long in ν. 8,
might equally well be short. (The y’
which Blass adds after ὀβριμοδερκεῖ is
undesirable.)

ἄζυγα: so, in the sacrifice to Athena
prescribed by Helenus (71. 6. 94), the
oxen are to be ἠκέστας, such as ‘have
not felt the goad.’

22 ὑψικέραν (like καλλικέραν in XVIII.
24), as if from a fem. nomin. ὑψικέρα.
If it were contracted from -κεράαν, the
accent should be -κερᾶν. Pindar fr. 325
has ὑψικέρατα πέτραν, as if from a nomin.
ὑψίκερας.

23 τότ᾽ refers to the time denoted by
θύεν ... μέλλε, when Heracles, having
reached Cenaeum, ‘was intending to
sacrifice.” It was from Cenaeum that
he sent Lichas with Iole to Trachis, and
then Deianeira made her plan. Thus
τότε, though not clear, is correct. In


xv] AIOYPAMBOI


373
and twain to the god who rouses the sea and shakes the earth:
also a high-horned ox, untouched by the yoke, to the maiden
with the flashing eyes, the virgin Athena.

Then it was that the God with whom none may strive wove
for Detaneira


a shrewd device, fraught with sorrow; when she learned the
bitter tidings that the dauntless son of Zeus was sending to
his goodly house the white-armed Iole, his bride.

Ill-fated, hapless one, what a plan did she conceive! Potent
jealousy was her bane, and that dark veil which hid the future
when, on the rose-clad banks of Lycormas, she received from


Nessus his fateful gift of wondrous power.


32 ANO®PEON ms.: δνοφερόν K.
corr. Ludwich and Wilamowitz.


34 ἘΠῚ MOTAMQ .POAOENTI ms.:


35 ΠΑΡ A: ὦ added above line by A’.


Tr. 756 μέλλοντι (unlike μέλλε here)
refers to the moment just before the
sacrifice— when Lichas returned with
Deianeira’s gift.

ἄμαχος ϑαίμων, irresistible Destiny.
(Jurenka, less well, I think, understands
the φθόνος εὐρυβίας of v. 31, where he
prints Φθόνος.)

25 μῆτιν émlppov’, the ‘shrewd de-
vice’ that was to work woe. ἐπίφρων Ξε
‘in possession of φρήν᾽ (cp. ἐπίτιμοϑ) :
in Od. 19. 325 f. Penelope says, εἴ τι
γυναικῶν Pieces περίειμι νόον καὶ ἐπί-
φρονα μῆτιν. Cp. 23. 12 (the gods have
power) ἄφρονα ποιῆσαι καὶ ἐπίφρονά περ
μάλ᾽ ἐόντα. In Soph. 77. 554 Deianeira
speaks of her plan as λυτήριον, and the
Chorus say (589) δοκεῖς map’ ἡμῖν οὐ
βεβουλεῦσθαι κακῶς.

26 ταλαπενθέα, here merely = ‘griev-
ous,’ ‘cruel’: but cp. v. 157.

28 f. ἀταρβομάχας, a word peculiar
to B., like ἀδεισιβόας (V. 155 etc.).—
ἄλοχον... πέμποι, was sending her (to be)
his bride. In Soph. 77. 365, where
Lichas speaks with Deianeira, Heracles
is described as sending Iole ‘in no care-
less fashion,’—dduous ws τούσδε πέμπων
οὐκ ἀφροντίστως, γύναι, | 00d’ ὥστε δού-
Anv.—It is safer to keep the λιπαρὸν of
the Ms. as a conventional epithet of
δόμον (‘opulent’ or ‘stately’). It may
serve to suggest a contrast with Iole’s


own home, a prey to sword and fire
(v. 14). λιπαρὰν (cp. ν. 169) would be
unsuitable here.

80 τάλαιν᾽ gives the more probable
metre, and is confirmed by the space
in the Ms. between A and N. (So far
as the form is concerned, τάλαν could
stand: it is fem. in Ar. Zcc/. 124, etc.)

32 δνόφεον is supported by Hesych.
Svodén: σκοτεινῇ. Nicander Alex. 501
ζοφέη νύξ.

34 ὅτ᾽] ὅτε is relative to the moment
implied in κάλυμμα: ‘the veil which
rested on the future’ at the time when
she received the gift: ra ἐρχόμενα ἐκαλύπ-
rero ὅτε ἐδέξατο x.T.A.—Before ῥοδόεντι
the papyrus has ποταμῷ, which mars
the metre, and was evidently a gloss
on Avxépug. For the epithet cp. v. 5
ἀνθεμόεντι.

«Λυκόρμᾳ, the older name of the Evenus
(Fidharz), which rises in the Oeta-range,
and flows through Aetolia tothe Corinthian
Gulf. Strabo 7. 327: 6 Εὔηνος, ὁ Λυκόρμας
πρότερον καλούμενος. Tozer (Geo. of Greece,
p- 96) describes it as ‘one of the fiercest
and most treacherous torrents in Greece.’
Avxépuas expressed the ‘wolf-like rush’
of its waters.

35 répas: a term applied in 71. 5. 742
to the Topyeln κεφαλή of Athena’s aegis,
and in Pind. O. ΧΙ. 73 to the golden
χαλινός given by Athena to Bellerophon.


epode.


374


XVI.


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVI


[XVIL.]


ΗΙΘΕΟΙ
H] OHCEYC


στρ. α΄.
2 Θησέα δὶς ἑπτά τ᾽
3 κούρους Ἰαόνων


1 Κυανόπρῳρα μὲν ναῦς μενέκτυπον


ἀγλαοὺς ἄγουσα


4 Κρητικὸν τάμνε πέλαγος"
5. τηλαυγέϊ γὰρ [ἐν] φάρεϊ
6. βορήϊαι πίτνον αὖραι
7 κλυτᾶς ἕκατι πἰοἸλεμαίγιδος ᾿Αθάνας"


Col. 33


8 κνίσεν τε Μίνωϊ κέαρ


9 ἱμεράμπυκος θεᾶς


10


Κύπριδος αἰνὰ δώρα i


x χεῖρα δ᾽ οὐκέτι παρθενικᾶς
1 ἄτερθ᾽ ἐράτυεν, θίγεν
3 δὲ λευκᾶν παρηΐδων"


4 Σᾷβόασέ 7 Ἐρίβοια χαλκο-


XKVI. The title was added in the left margin, opposite v.


remains, with @HCEYTC below it:
ἢ is supplied by Blass: καὶ by K.
4 τάμνε K.: TAMNEN Ms.


, by a’: ἴΘΕΟΙ


the rest has been torn off Before Θησεύς,

1 KYANOMPOPA A: KYTANOIIPQIPA A},
6 Bopyia] The ~ placed over A in the Ms.
meant that the word was nom. plur., not dat. sing.


7 πολεμαίγιδος]


VI. 1 κνανόπρῳρα, contracted from
κνανοπρώειρα (spelt -πρώϊρα in Eiym. M.
5. v. πρῷρα, where the word is ascribed to
Simonides). A different form is read in
Od. 3. 299, véas κυανοπρῳρείους.--- μὲν
without a following δέ: cp. IX. 47, and
n. on 111. 15 f.—pevéxrumov (only here),
steadfast in the din of battle: cp. Orph.
Argon. 541 μενέδουπος ᾿Αθήνη. So peve-
δήϊος, μενεπτόλεμος, μενεχάρμας.

2 1. ἀγλαούς, of youthful beauty: cp.
103 f. ἀγλαῶν ... γυίων: ν. 154 ἀγλαὰν
ἥβαν.---κούρους, the seven youths and
seven maidens: 70eo is similarly col-
lective in 43, 93, 128.---Ἰαόνων, Athe-
nians, as in XVII. 2.

4 ἸΚρητικὸν.. πέλαγος, the part of the
Aegean south of the Cyclades and north
of Crete, often a stormy sea; Soph. 7%.
117 πολύπονον ὥσπερ πέλαγος Κρήσιον:
Hor. C. 1. 26. 2 f.—The ship is sailing
from Athens to Crete, and has left the


Cyclades behind. It has the north wind
astern, the course being now due south.

5 τηλαυγέ. According to Attic
legend, the ship had a black sail; but
Aegeus, confident that his son would
triumph, gave a white one also to the
κυβερνήτης, telling him to hoist it on his
return, if all had gone well. Simonides
varied the story by describing the sail
of good omen as ved (powlkeov Plut.
Thes. 17}: τηλαυγέϊ here rather suggests
a white sail.—dpet with a, as in Homer
and Aesch. CA. 11 (but @ in Soph. 77.
916: cp. 2b. 662).

7 πολεμαίγιδος, ‘with warlike aegis.’
A cup (now in the Louvre) by Euphro-
nius, a painter of red-figured vases,
shows Theseus received by Amphitrite
beneath the sea (vv. 109 ff.): Athena, ;
who stands in the background, has aegis,
helmet and spear: see Introd., p. 225.
For the compound with πόλεμος, cp.


XVI] AIOYPAMBOI 375


XVI. [XVIE)


THESEUS
OR THE ATHENIAN YOUTHS AND MAIDENS.


A dark-prowed ship was cleaving the Cretan sea, bearing
Theseus, steadfast in the battle din, with seven goodly youths
and seven maidens of Athens; for northern breezes fell on
the far-gleaming sail, by grace of glorious Athena with warlike
aegis.

And the heart of Minos was stung by the baneful gifts of
the Cyprian goddess with lovely diadem; he could no longer
restrain his hand from a maiden, but touched her fair cheeks.
Then Eriboea cried aloud
πελεμαίγιδος conj. Housman, Headlam, Wackernagel: and so Jurenka. 8 Μινωΐ
J. (K.): MING Ms. 10 αἰνὰ K. (Jurenka, Smyth): ἁγνὰ Blass? (ἁβρὰ BL.?).


The faint traces before NA are indecisive: but the letter was either I or a thin I.
14 £. βόασέ τ᾽ Blass (who found the letters T’ EP on a small fragment): βόασε δ᾽ K.—


λινοιθώρακα conj. Wilamowitz.


(1) Batrachm. 475 Παλλάδα πέμψωμεν
πολεμόκλονον : (2) Dionys. De comp. verb.
17 Βρόμιε...πολεμοκέλαδε : (3) schol. Od.
1. 48 πολεμόφρων. For the accent, cp.
μελάναιγις in Etym. Magn. 518, 54
(cited by Headlam). In fr. 23 (Bergk),
where the MSS. give χρυσαιγίδος (Ἰτωνίας),
χρυσαίγιδος should be written.—The in-
genious conjecture πελεμαίγιδος would
mean ‘aegis-shaking’ (πελεμίζω as=
πάλλω). The aegis of Athena, however,
is usually depicted as a short cape or
mantle, with Gorgon’s head and snaky
fringes: she can spread it to the breezes
as a sail (Aesch. Zum. 404), but is
never described as shaking it like a
shield.

ef. κνίσεν (ἢ, ‘stung’: Her. vi. 62
τὸν δὲ ᾿Αρίστωνα ἔκνιζε dpa τῆς γυναικὸς
ταύτης ὁ ἔρως: Pind. P. x. 60 ἔρως
ὑπέκνιξε φρένας.---Μίνωϊ (--~) is required
by metre (cp. 31, 74, 97). That form
of the dative occurs in Diod. 5. 79,
Aelian Wat. An. 5. 2, Nonnus 7. 361,
etc.: but Μίνῳ in [Plat.] AZinos 319 c.—
B. follows the same account as Hellanicus
(Plut. ZZes. 17): Minos came to Athens
and himself chose the fourteen victims,
whom he is now taking to Crete in an
Athenian ship.—ipepdptrucos: cp. v.
13n.: Pind. M. vu. 15 Μναμοσύνας...
λιπαράμπυκος.

10 αἰνὰ δῶρα: she gives desires that


work woe. 7... 24. 30 (Paris) τὴν δ᾽
ἤνησ᾽ (Aphrodite) 7 of πόρε μαχλοσύνην
ἀλεγεινήν. Soph. Ant. 791 (of *Epws),
σὺ καὶ δικαίων ἀδίκους φρένας παρασπᾷς
ἐπὶ λώβᾳ.---Εογ αἰνὰ the only alternative
seems to be ἁγνὰ, which is unsuitable
here. (The traces in the Ms. exclude
ἁβρὰ, which would otherwise be pos-
sible.) In v. 40 the ὕβρις of Minos is
πολύστονος.

11:1. παρθενικᾶς -- παρθένου: as Hes.
Op. 699 παρθενικήν. These are rare
instances of the sing. used as a subst.
(though παρθενικῇ...νεήνιδι occurs in Od.
7. 20): but the plural παρθενικαί is
frequent (71. 18. 567, Od. τι. 39) Alcman
fr. 21, Theocr. XVIII. 2).—épdrvey, epic
(22. 2. 97 épyriiov, but 8. 345 ἐρητύοντο
with Ὁ).

13 For δὲ as first word of the verse,
cp. XIV. 61 η.---λευκᾶν, ‘fair,’ as probably
in Eur. Afed. 923 λευκὴν...... παρηΐδα:
though there it might be ‘pale,’ as it
certainly is in Soph. “πὲ. 1239 λευκῇ
mapeg (of the dead Antigone). The
pallor of he is expressed by χλωρός.

14 £. ᾿Ἐρίβοια: so Hyginus, Astron.
11. 5: the Francois amphora (see p. 224)
has ‘EpiBoa or ᾿Επίβοια. The wife
of Telamon and mother of Ajax is
called Eriboea by Pindar (/. v. 45) and
Sophocles (42. 569); but Periboea by
Apollod. 3. 12. 7 and Paus. 1. 42. I.


str. I.


θώρακα Πανδίονος


εἶρέν τε- Διὸς υἱὲ φ
ὅσιον οὐκέτι τεᾶν


> ὩΣ
ει Και


χε μητιν.
30


> εἶρεν] εἶπεν conj. Wilamowitz.—eprdro.’ Wilamowitz, Platt.


iC Δ: added after A (by A2?). 25:5.


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVI


Exyovov: ἴδεν δὲ Θησεύς,
μέλαν δ᾽ ὑπ᾽ ὀφρύων

δίνασεν ὄμμα, καρδίαν τέ ()οι
σχέτλιον ἄμυξεν ἄλγος,


€pTaTov,


ἔσω κυβερνᾷς φρενῶν
θυμόν: ἴσχε μεγαλοῦχον ἥρως βίαν.
ὅ τι μὲν ἐκ θεῶν μοῖρα παγκρατὴς
ἄμμι κατένευσε καὶ Δίκας ῥέπει τά-
λαντον, πεπρωμέναν
αἶσαν ἐκπλήσομεν, ὅταν
ἔλθῃ: σὺ δὲ βαρεῖαν κάτε-


σε κεδνὰ


»
τέκεν λέχει Διὸς ὑπὸ κρόταφον Ἴδας
μιγεῖσα Φοίνικος ἐρα-
τώνυμος κόρα βροτῶν


22 ΚΥΒΕΡ-
τάϊλαντον. The letters TA were repeated


χαλκοθώρακα : B. thinks of the youth-
. Theseus as hero and warrior, wearing
2 usual armour. (Acc. to Hellanicus,
ut. Zhes. 17, Minos stipulated at
hens that the 7@eo should go on
ard -wnarmed;, but this detail, if it was
own to B., is ἱρπογεά.)-- - Πανδίονος.
ndion, son of Cecrops, was father of
‘geus, the reputed father of Theseus.
e on v. 36.

17—19 μέλαν probably refers simply
colour. Smyth renders it ‘sombre,’
idignant,’ remarking that μέλας is
dom (as in Anacreont. 16. 12) an
ithet of the eye. See, however, Arist.
zim. Gener. 5 a 34 τὰ δὲ τῶν ἀνθρώπων
ματὰ πολύχροα συμβέβηκεν εἶναι" καὶ
p Ὑγλαυκοὶ καὶ χαροποὶ καὶ μελανό-
αλμοί rwés εἰσι. ---ὐπ’ ὀφρύων, lit.,
om under...’; cp. XII. 130 f. ὑπαὶ | χει-
νος.---δίνασεν, if sound, must be from
dw (cp. V. 191 n. on φώνησεν): we
suld have expected δίνησεν, from
éw: cp. 107 δίνηντο, and v. 2 ἱππο-
nrwv.—Eur. Or. 837 δινεύων βλεφάροις,
ildly rolling his eyes’ (in madness),
σχέτλιον, ‘cruel’; the only instance
the word in B.


20 clpev, imperf. of εἴρω, as again
in 74. This part of efpw occurs nowhere
else. B. sought variety, having εἶπε(ν)
in 47, 52, 81.—eprdrov. As v. 21
begins with a vowel, it is tempting to
read geprdro’: cp. 43f., 86f., τοῦ f.
But if there was no synaphea, φερτάτου
could stand.

21 2. ὅσιον... κυβερνᾷς, keepest it
within the moral law.—Cp. Aesch. Pers.
767 φρένες γὰρ αὐτοῦ θυμὸν φακοστρόφουν.

28 μεγαλοῦχον (only here), if sound,
means lit. ‘possessing great things’ (ue-
ado + oxos), as a king of wide dominion
might be so called; hence ‘lordly,’ and
then, in a bad sense, ‘arrogant,’ ‘over-
weening.’—Kenyon suggested μεγάλ-
avxov, which Blass and Jurenka adopt :
cp. Pind. P. VIII. 15 Bia δὲ καὶ μεγάλαυχον
ἔσφαλεν ἐν χρόνῳ. That word would be
fitter if a vaunt had accompanied the
act; but Minos has not yet spoken.
Further, Hesych. has μεγαλουχία"
Meyahauxla: ὑψηλοφροσύνη. Headlam,
indeed, suggests that the true reading
there may be meyadoyxia (a word used
by Democritus, Stob. Flor. 103. 25):
here, he would read μεγάλαυχον or


XVI] AIOYPAMBOI 377
to Pandion’s grandson with breastplate of bronze; Theseus saw,
and wildly rolled his dark eyes beneath his brows, and cruel
pain pricked his heart as he spake :—

‘O son of peerless Zeus, the spirit in thy breast no longer


obeys righteous control ; withhold, hero, thy presumptuous force.


‘Whatever the resistless doom given by the gods has decreed
for us, and the scale of Justice inclines to ordain, that appointed
fate we will fulfil when it comes, But do thou forbear thy
grievous purpose. If the noble daughter of Phoenix, the maiden
of gracious fame, taken to the bed of Zeus beneath the brow


of Ida, bare thee, peerless among men;


by mistake in 26 znit.: corr. Al? Cp. 58.
by K., Jurenka, Smyth; a comma by Blass.


μιγεῖσα and πλαθεῖσα (35).


29 After μῆτιν a full stop is placed
31 Housman would transpose


μεγάλογκον. But the MS. reading here and
the traditional reading in Hesych. must
be considered together. On the whole,
I think it safer to retain μεγαλοῦχον.
24—27 6 τι is governed by ῥέπει
as well as by κατένευσε. Δίκας τάλαντον
ῥέπει τι when one of the two scales, by
sinking, shows that the doom which
it carries is preponderant, and so decides
that it shall be operative. This transitive
sense of ῥέπω is implied in the use of the
passive by Aesch. Suppl. 405 τῶνδ᾽ ἐξ
ἴσου ῥεπομένων, ‘these alternatives being
evenly balanced.’ Otherwise it occurs
only in compounds; as Aesch. Zum.
888 of τἂν δικαίως τῇδ᾽ ἐπιρρέποις
πόλει | μῆνίν τιν᾽ (cause wrath to descend
on the city’): 4g. 250f. Δίκα δὲ τοῖς μὲν
madotlow μαθεῖν ἐπιρρέπει: Soph. Ant.
1158 f. τύχη καταρρέπει | τὸν εὐτυχοῦντα
(‘depresses,’ ‘humbles’).—If ῥέπει were
taken ‘here as intransitive, it would be
necessary (1) to supply ὅποι from 8 τι : or
(2) to take καὶ Alxas ῥέπει τάλαντον as
a parenthesis (the so-called διὰ μέσου
construction): ‘whatever fate has decreed
(the scales of justice inclining thereto’).
But either of these two would be harsh.
—For the image, cp. //. 22. 210 ff.:
Zeus puts δύο κῆρε...θανάτοιο in the
scales, one for Achilles, and one for
Hector; the latter proves the heavier
(ῥέπε δ᾽ “Ἕκτορος αἴσιμον ἦμαρ), and so
Hector is doomed to die.—In Anth. 6.
267. 4 it is said of a just man, ἐθείης
olde τάλαντα δίκης.---ἐκ θεῶν μοῖρα: XIII.
1 η.---ἐκπλήσομεν, a frequent phrase, as
with μοῖραν (Her. 11. 142), μοχθήματα
(Eur. Helen. 741), κίνδυνον (7. 7. go).
29f. βαρεῖαν... μῆτιν, ‘thy grievous


purpose’ (in regard to Eriboea: vv. 8 ff.).
A full stop (or at least a colon) should be
placed after μῆτιν, and only a comma
after φέρτατον in 33. By placing only
a comma after μῆτιν, and a colon after
φέρτατον (as Blass does), the spirit of the
sentence beginning with εἰ kal oe is much
impaired.

80 ὑπὸ κρόταφον, ‘beneath the brow’
of Ida. ὑπό with acc. normally means,
‘along under’: fl. 5. 27 ὅσσοι ἔασιν
ὑπ’ ἠῶ τ’ ἠέλιόν τε: Her. v. 10 τὰ
ὑπὸ τὴν ἀρκτόν: id. VI. 137 τὴν χώρην...
ὑπὸ “Ὑμησσὸν ἐοῦσαν (but presently κατοι-
κημένους.. ὑπὸ τῷ Ὑμησσῷ, with ref. to
the fixed abode). Here the accus. (not
elsewhere used by B. with ὑπό) seems
to have been prompted by metrical
convenience, and hardly differs in sense
from the dative.—xpéragos is the side
of the forehead, in plur. the temples:
said of a hill, it denotes the cliffs just
below the summit (cp. ddpis). Aesch.
P.V. 721 (8pous) κροτάφων. ἀπ’ αὐτῶν:
Anthol, append. 94 ἔναιον ὑπὸ κροτάφοις
Ἑλικῶνος. ᾿

81:5. Φοίνικος. The father of Europa
was Phoenix, acc. to //. 14. 321 (Zeus
speaks), Φοίνικος κούρης τηλεκλειτοῖο, | ἢ
τέκε μοι Μίνω τε καὶ ἀντίθεον ‘Padd-
μανθυν: and Hesiod gave the same
account (schol. //. 12. 292). Apollo-
dorus (3. I. 3) makes Agenor the father
of Europa, Phoenix, and Cadmus; but
recognizes the other version. Sidon or
Tyre was named as the place from
which Europa was carried off by Zeus.
The legend points to the blending of
Phoenician with Hellenic elements in
Crete.


ant. I.


378


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVI


, > ‘ 3 Ἂ.
το φέρτατον, ἀλλὰ κἀμὲ
x Πιτθέος θυγάτηρ ἀφνεοῦ
’, ψ.-


35.


3 Ποσειδᾶνι, χρύσεον


19
20 ἰδεῖν


πλαθεῖσα ποντίῳ τέκεν


τέ (F)ou δόσαν ἰόπλοκοι
, af

κάλυμμα Νηρηΐδες.
τῶ σε, πολέμαρχε Κνωσίων,

κέλομαι πολύστονον
3 ΓΑ 9 > Ἂς Δ
ἐρύκεν ὕβριν: οὐ γὰρ ἂν θελοι-
μ᾽ ἀμβρότου ἐραννὸν ᾿Αοῦς
dos, ἐπεί TW


ἠϊθέων


N , 2+
21 OU δαμάσειας αεκον-


45 22
23


89 τῶ Platt: τῷ Κ.--Κνώσιε Blass.


42 ἀμβρότου Wilamowitz: AMBPOTOI’ ms.


ta: πρόσθε χειρῶν βίαν
δείξομεν: τὰ δ᾽ ἐπιόντα δαίμων κρινεῖ.


40 πολύστονον κέλομαϊ Wilamowitz.
48 ἐπεί] ἔτ᾽, εἰ conj. Herwerden.


ἐρατώνυμος, ‘of gracious fame’: cp.
Hes. Theog. 409 ᾿Αστερίην εὐώνυμον.
This is the sense of the adj. in Stesich.
fr. 44 (in his proem to the love-story
of Rhadina and Leontichos) ἄρξον ἀοιδᾶς
ἐρατωνύμου | Σαμίων περὶ παίδων. (Cp.
11. 2f. χαριτώνυμον, Ὁ.)

33 φέρτατον, ‘peerless’ (epithet of
Zeus himself in v. 20),—here emphasized
by its place.—dAAd introduces the apo-
dosis after εἰ καί (29): Sappho fr. 1. 22
αἱ δὲ δῶρα μὴ δέκετ᾽, ἀλλὰ δώσει: Soph.
fr. 854 εἰ σῶμα δοῦλον, ἀλλ᾽ ὁ νοῦς ἐλεύ-
θερος. This use οἵ ἀλλά after εἰ μή
occurs in the “αι (1. 181 f.), where
αὐτὰρ also is so used (22. 389).

34 Πιτθέος. Pittheus, son of Pelops,
king of Troezen, was the father of
Aethra (v. 59), the mother of Theseus.
He was said to have founded Troezen by
a συνοικισμός : hence his name has been
explained as the ‘Persuader’ (rt πιθ-:
Schneidewin De Pittheo Troezenio). A
monument, near the Troezenian temple
of Artemis Soteira, showed him sitting
in judgment, with two assessors. At the
Μουσεῖον there he ‘taught the art of
words’ (Paus. 2. 30. 9, 31. 3: Plut.
Thes. 3).---αφνεοῦ, ~~—: the same scan-
sion is found in Pind. fr. 218. 4 ὃς μὲν
ἀχρήμων, apveds τότε: Aesch. fr. 96. 3
λιπεῖν ἀφνεοῖσι δόμοισιν. Cp. dpaxvay in
fr. 3. 7.
3s hadetwets the first syllable is short


in all the corresponding places, 12, 78,
101; but as it might be azceps, there is
no reason to suspect the reading. It is
very improbable that this word should
have changed places with μιγεῖσα in
v. 31. (The syllable answering to the
first of μιγεῖσα is long in 74, but short in
8 and 97.)

36 ΙΠΠοσειδᾶνι. Isocr. or. ro § 18
Θησεύς, ὁ λεγόμενος μὲν Αἰγέως (15 f. n.),
γενόμενος δ᾽ ἐκ Ποσειδῶνος. The story
was that Poseidon had been the lover of
Aethra either before or just after her
union with Aegeus (Paus. 2. 33. 13
Apollod. 4. 15. 7, Hyginus Fad. 37).
The key to the confused legend is that
Aegeus and Poseidon were originally
identical. Αἰγ-εύς is connected with aly- .
es, ‘zoaves’ (Artemidorus 2. 12 τὰ μεγάλα
κύματα atyas ἐν τῇ συνηθείᾳ λέγομεν),
αἰγ-ίς ‘storm-wind,’ aiyi-adé-s ‘shore’:
Curt. Etym. §140. Poseidon has his
deep-sea palace at the Euboean Alyat
(1. 13. 20ff.): he is Alyaios, Αἰγαίων.
Then Αἰγεύς, from being a name for the
Sea-god, became an independent hero,
with a ἡρῷον at Athens (Paus. 1. 22. 5),
where he was the eponymus of the Alynis
φυλή. The legends of Aegeus embody
the oldest traditions of an Attic and Ionic
Poseidon-cult. Troezen, where Poseidon
was peculiarly honoured (Plut. 7hes. 6),
claimed Theseus as the son of her own
Sea-god; and Athens did likewise.


Xvi]


AIOYPAMBOI


379


yet I, too, was borne by the daughter of wealthy Pittheus, in
wedlock with the sea-god Poseidon, and the violet-crowned


Nereids gave her a golden veil.


‘Therefore, O war-lord of Cnosus, I bid thee restrain thy
wantonness, fraught with woe; for I should not care to look
on the fair light of divine Eos, after thou hadst done violence
to one of this youthful company: before that, we will come
to a trial of strength, and Destiny shall decide the sequel.’


-- ἠϊθέων (with the Ms.) Crusius, Blass, Jurenka, assuming synizesis of éw: cp. 93,


128. ἠθέων K


Hence the double
myth.

87:1. Verse 37, τέ (F)ot δόσαν ἰόπλο-
kot, lacks a short syllable at the end, as
compared with each of the three corre-
sponding verses, 14, 80, and 103. Verse
38 begins with a short syll. (kad), where
a long is found in 15, 81, 104. (1) These
two facts might suggest ἐόπλοκοι κάϊλυμμ᾽
(2) If κάλυμμα belonged wholly to
38, one short syllable might be supplied
after ἰόπλοκοι. But no satisfactory emen-
dation, on either plan, has yet been
made. See Appendix.

38 Νηρηΐδες here are the same as the
Νηρέος κόραι of 102f. In his commentary
on our poet’s ἐπίνικοι, Didymus mentioned
a distinction drawn by some gramma-
rians:—elol τοίνυν of φασι διαφέρειν τὰς
Νηρεΐδας τῶν τοῦ Νηρέως θυγατέρων, καὶ
τὰς μὲν ἐκ Δωρίδος [the wife of Nereus]
γνησίας αὐτοῦ θυγατέρας νομίζεσθαι, τὰς
δὲ ἐξ ἄλλων ἤδη κοινότερον (as a more
general term) Νηρεΐδας καλεῖσθαι. These
words are quoted in the treatise περὶ
ὁμοίων καὶ διαφόρων λέξεων, p. 79, which
bears the name of the Alexandrian
Ammonius (¢. 390 A.D.) ; Bergk, Bacchyl.
fr. 10, Nairn pointed out the neglect of
the distinction here (Class. R. ΧΙ. 453).

89 τῷ (//. 1. 418 etc.) is the spelling
given by the codex Venetus (roth cent.)
in all Homeric passages where the sense
is ‘therefore.’ This was the Alexandrian
tradition (cp. Lenz on Herodian 1. 492,
to). Leaf regards this epic τῶ as ‘a
genuine relic of the old instrumental.’
The Attic poets probably wrote τῷ
(Soph. O. Z. 511 ῃ.).--πολέμαρχε :
Aesch. Ch. 1071f. ᾿Αχαιῶν | πολέμαρχος
avjip.—Kvectlov, scanned ---- (see vv. 16,
82, 105): for the synizesis, cp. Od. 14.
263 Αἰγυπτίων (also 71. 9. 382 -tas, Od.
4. 83 -lous, etc.): 71. 2. 537 Ἱστίαιαν:
Pind. P. Iv. 225 γενύων (~—-).—For the
spelling of Κνωσός, see 1. 13 n.


paternity in the


---


41:1. ἐρύκεν: xv. 18 θύεν n.—dp-
βρότου. Keeping the ms. ἀμβρότοι᾽,
Blass supposes the last syllable to be short;
he compares 92 and 129 (-αἴ in ᾿Αθαναίων
and παιάνιξαν). But a shortening of οἱ
in the genitive-ending -ovo is unexampled.
Others defend duSpéror’, holding that
-~- could replace the -~~ found in
19, 85, and ιοϑ.---ἐραννὸν (an epic
epithet of places) is used by Simonides
fr. 45 (ἐραννὸν ὕδωρ) : Pindar has only
épards and ἐρατεινός.

48. 45 ἰδεῖν. As the sense is, ‘I
should not wish to Zve longer,’ we should
have expected the present inf. ὁρᾶν. But
the aor. infin. may perhaps be explained
in connexion with the clause ἐπεὶ...
Oaudoeas. ‘After any such deed of
thine, I should not care to look again on
the sunlight,’—-or ‘to live one moment
longer.’ Cp. the Homeric θαῦμα ἰδέσθαι,
expressing the way in which the object
strikes the beholder; as contrasted (e.g.)
with ἐπεὶ οὕπω τλήσομ᾽ ὁρᾶσθαι | μαρνά-
μενον φίλον υἱόν (74. 3. 306).

ἐπεὶ.. δαμάσειας : the optative in the
relative clause corresponds to the hypo-
thetical optative with ἄν in the principal
clause: cp. Soph. O. C. 560 δεινὴν γάρ
Tw’ ἂν πρᾶξιν τύχοις λέξας, ὁποίας
ἐξαφισταίμην éyw: L/. 13. 343 μάλα κεν
θρασυκάρδιος εἴη | ὃς τότε γηθήσειεν..---
ἠϊθέων here, as in 93 and 128, includes
both youths and maidens. The word
usually denotes unmarried youths only:
fl. 18. 593 ἠΐθεοι καὶ παρθένοι: Plut.
Thes. 15 ἠθέους ἑπτὰ καὶ παρθένους
τοσαύτας.---᾽ἀέκοντα : the masc. is used in
the general statement, though the special
reference is to Eriboea and the other
maidens: Soph. Z/. 771 δεινὸν τὸ τίκτειν
ἐστίν: οὐδὲ yap κακῶς | πάσχοντι μῖσος
ὧν τέκῃ προσγίγνεται.---δαμάσειας: 71. 3.
301 ἄλοχοι δ᾽ ἄλλοισι δαμεῖεν: Od, 6.
109 παρθένος ἀδμής.

45:1. χειρῶν βίαν (x. 91) δείξομεν,


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVI


. 5» κ". 8 Ὗν 4 .
: τόσ᾽ εἶ]πεν ἀρέταιχμος ἥρως
᾿


2 τάφον δὲ ναυβάται


3 φωτὸς) ὑπεράφανον

5° 4
Ψ ΄

s ὕφαινέ τε ποταινίαν


θάρσος. “Adiov τε γαμβρῷ χολώϊ car’ ἦτορ,


6 μῆτιν, εἶπέν Te μεγαλοσθενὲς
7 Ζεῦ πάτερ, ἄκουσον" εἴπερ ple κούρ]α
8 Φοίνισσα λευκώλενος σοὶ τέκε,
Fas! ,ὔ 5 3 3 39 ip Ν
55 ονῦν πρόπεμπ᾽ am οὐρανοῦ θ οὰν
το πυριέθειραν ἀστραπὰν
3


x σᾶμ᾽ ἀρίγνωτον' εἰ


δὲ καὶ σὲ Τροιζηνία σεισίχθονι


3. φύτευσεν Αἴθρα Ποσει-


wn 4 la
60% dar, τόνδε χρύσεον
13 χειρὸς ἀγλαὸν
yy
16


¥ 3 , ε ,
ἔνεγκε κόσμον «ἐκ; βαθείας ἁλός,


᾿ς , ~~ Ν 3 ’
1) δικὼν θράσει σῶμα πατρὸς ἐς δόμους.
18 εἴσεαι δ᾽ αἴ κ᾿ ἐμᾶς κλύῃ


49 φωτὸς Blass: ἀνδρὸς K. The only trace of the word in the Ms. is a long stroke
which goes below the line, decidedly suggesting P rather than T: on the other hand


the space before it seems scarcely large enough for ANA—TIIEPA®NON A: after &


the letter a has been written above the line by 448.
χόλῳ [ζέσ᾽ ἦτορ Jurenka: χολώ[θη κέαρ Blass: cp. 116.


50 χολώ[σατ᾽ ἦτορ K.:
51 ὕφαινε] ὕῴφανε Blass. .


2.6. we two will come to a trial of
strength. Od. 20. 180f. πάντως οὐκέτι
νῶι διακρινέεσθαι ὀΐω | πρὶν χειρῶν γεύ-
σασθαι.

47 ἀρέταιχμος : probably a compound
of the same class as πολέμαιγις : 2.6. the
notions of ἀρετή and αἰχμή were present
to the poet’s mind, and he simply con-
joined them, meaning, ‘ valiant with the
spear. [The Homeric verb ἀρετᾶν, ‘to
prosper’ (Od. 8. 329, 19. 114), might
suggest the sense, ‘successful with the
spear’; but this seems too artificial. }—
According to Wackernagel (cited by
Blass) ἀρέταιχμος is=dpécarxmos, 7.¢.,
ἀρεσκόμενος τῇ αἰχμῇ, ‘delighting in the
spear.’ He compares Apécavdpos. [Add
᾿Αρέ[η]σαιχμος, a proper name given by
Pape-Benseler from an inscr. in Keil
Analecta Epigraphica p. 108: also ’A-
ρέσιππος, ‘delighting in horses.’] For
the τ, Wackernagel compares Bwridverpa
(Aleman fr. 40); but ¢ would there be


impossible (cp. Bérys, Bovrys): and it is
not likely that dpéracyuos was B.’s
attempt to Doricize ἀρέσαιχμος.

49:2. φωτὸς is more probable than
ἀνδρὸς, in view of the space (cr. n.): and
a consonant is preferable after vavBarat
(cp. 114f.). φώς is a favourite word
with B., who often uses it of heroes —
(v. 158, Meleager: xv. 15, Heracles:
XVII. rg and 30, Theseus). —vmepddayov;
‘lofty’: Plat. Symp. 217E Σωκράτους
ἔργον ὑπερήφανον : Phaedo 96a (αὕτη
ἡ σοφία) ὑπερήφανος... ἐδόκει εἶναι, γνῶναι
τὰς αἰτίας ἑκάστου. This good sense is
much rarer than the bad; but the primary
meaning of the word was merely =
ὑπερφανής. Curtius Ztym. § 392 explains
the form by supposing that ὑπερη contains
the adj. stem vzepo with epic lengthen-
ing (cp. νεηγενής, ἐλαφηβόλος).

-᾿Αλίον γαμβρῷ : the wife of Minos was
Πασιφάη, daughter of Helios: Apoll.
Rh. 3. 999: Paus. v. 25.9. (The name


XVI] AIOYPAMBO! 381

Thus far the hero valiant with the spear: but the seafarers
were amazed at the youth’s lofty boldness ; and he whose bride
was daughter of the Sun-god felt anger at his heart; he wove
a new device in his mind, and said :—

“Ὁ Zeus, my sire of great might, hear me! If the white-armed
daughter of Phoenix indeed bare me to thee, now send forth from
heaven a swift flash of streaming fire, a sign for all to know.
And thou, if Troezenian Aethra was thy mother by earth-shaking
Poseidon,—cast thyself boldly down to the abode of thy sire,
and bring from the deep this ring of gold that glitters on my
hand.—But thou shalt see whether my prayer is heard


Cp. xIv. 38. 58 εἴπερ [με κούρα] Festa, Blass: [με νύμφα] conj. Jurenka: [μ᾽
ἀλαθέως] Palmer, K. A vestige of the last letter remains in the left margin of
col. XXXV: it cannot have been C, but may have been A. 55 θοὰν Palmer.
58 EI was wrongly repeated ad zzzt.: corr. A'? Cp. ἢ. on 25 f.—Tpofyvia Blass,
62 f. θράσει] θ written (by A*?) over another letter, perhaps I. After θράσει K. inserts
τὸ, Jurenka σὸν (σὺ conj. J., Headlam, R. ἘΠ115).--- δικὼν θράσει σῶμα πατρὸς és δόμους |
ἔνεγκε κόσμον βαθείας ἁλός MS.; Blass transposes 62 and 63, adding ἐκ before βαθείας.


originally denoted a moon-goddess: Paus.
11. 26. 1 Σελήνης ἐπίκλησις...ἐστὶν ἡ
Πασιφάη.)----κολώσατ᾽ ἦτορ is the most
probable supplement, if in 116 épepvdv is
sound: see n. there. (Blass, reading
eippévov there, writes χολώθη κέαρ.) 7).
15. 155 ἐχολώσατο θυμῷ: Od. 9. 480
χολώσατο᾽ κηρόθι μᾶλλον. Hes. Th. 568
ἐχόλωσε δέ μιν φίλον ἦτορ (‘he angered
him at his heart’).

51 Φ. ποταινίαν, ‘of a new kind,’
‘new and strange,’ as in Soph. Azz. 849
τάφου ποταινίον (‘a strange tomb’):
id. fr, 153. 4 ἡδονὰς ποταινίους.--- μῆτιν :
he would invite Theseus to show his
trust in Poseidon (v. 36) by jumping
overboard. If Theseus should decline
the challenge, he would be humiliated ;
if he should accept it, he would be lost.
Cp. 86.

55f, πυριέθειραν : the ἔθειρα is the
shimmer of the lightning.

58 Τροιζηνία. I follow the Ms. in
keeping the usual spelling. Blass writes
Tpofnvia (referring to Kiihner- Blass,
Gramm. 1. 13, 137). Ῥροζήνιοι occurs in
C. 1. G. τ. 106, τι. 5. το. (Pape-Benseler
5. Ὁ. cites no other evidence for that
form.) In 7. 2. 561 Τροιζῆν᾽, and 847
Τροιζήνοιο, are traditional.

. 622. There are several reasons for
transposing vv. 62 and 63, as Blass does,
and adding ἐκ before βαθείας. (1) If
the order of these two verses is correct
in the Ms., then v. 62, δικὼν x.7.A., is


shorter by a syllable than v. 128. It has
been proposed to insert σὺ, τὸ, or σὸν
before σῶμα. Some critics, however,
hold that no such remedy is needed, and
that -~- (-xav θράσει) here answers to
—~-~ (ἐν δὲ πόντος) in 128, (2) A
graver objection to the Ms. order is the
well-nigh intolerable awkwardness of
τόνδε χρύσεον | χειρὸς ἀγλαὸν | separ-
ated by « whole verse (δικὼν... δόμους)
from κόσμον : and this is made still worse
by the fact that ἀγλαὸν (v. 2, n.) might
equally well be the epithet of σῶμα.
(3) ἔνεγκε... βαθείας ἁλός is in itself
admissible: cp. Soph. £7. 324 ff. δόμων...
ἐντάφια.. φέρουσαν : Ph. 613 ἄγοιντο νή-
σου. But the addition of ἐκ is here a
decided gain in clearness. (4) With
the Ms. order, -elas ἁλός in 63 answers
to ἐρατᾷ (f)ort in 129: while, if v. 63
ends with πᾶτρὸς és δόμους, the corre-
spondence is exact. (5) Minos hints a
doubt as to whether Theseus is Poseidon’s
son; that is the sting. The ironical
πατρὸς ἐς δόμους comes most forcibly at
the end.—The MS. order may have arisen
from the verse δικὼν,, «δόμους (which is
not necessary to the sense) having been
accidentally omitted, and then inserted
in the wrong place.

64 εἴσεαι... αἵ κε...κλύῃ: 711. 4. 249
ὄφρα tyr’ αἵ κ᾿’ ὕμμιν ὑπερσχῇ χεῖρα
Κρονίων: 106. 15. 32 ὄφρα ἴδῃς ἤν τοι
χραίσμῃ φιλότης τε καὶ εὐνή.


epode r.


Κρόνιος εὐχᾶς


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVI


3 4 e , δέ
2 ἀναξιβρόντας ὁ πάντων μεδέων.


<*
στρ. β. τ κλύε δ᾽ ἄμετρον εὐχὰν μεγασθενὴς
2 Ζεύς, ὑπέροχόν τε Μίνωϊ φύτευσε


3 τιμὰν φίλῳ θέλων


7° 4 παιδὶ πανδερκέα θέμεν,
3, τὰ 3 *. 4 4
sdotpawée θ᾽. ὁ δὲ θυμάρμενον
6 ἰδὼν τέρας πέτασε χεῖρας
7 κλυτὰν ἐς αἰθέρα μενεπτόλεμος ἥρως,
8 εἶρέν Te’ Θησεῦ, «σὺ: τάδε


159


μὲν βλέπεις σαφῆ Διὸς


το δῶρα" σὺ δ᾽ ὀρνυ᾽ ἐς βα-
τ ρύβρομον πέλαγος: Κρονίδας
Col.35 12 δέ τοι πατὴρ ἄναξ τελεῖ


Ν ε ,
3 Ποσειδὰν ὑπέρτατον
4 4 > 2.
κλέος χθόνα κατ᾽ ἠὔδενδρον.


8ο 14


a > foe 2 3 ,
τς os εἶπε: τῷ δ᾽ οὐ πάλιν
εἶ 3 ἢ 3 3 3 3
16 θυμὸς ἀνεκάμπτετ᾽, ἀλλ᾽ εὐ-


66 ἀναξιβρέντας MS.: corr. K.


stroke has been drawn through the middle of I.


67 The papyrus has AMEITPON, but a short


(The sixth letter is clearly P,


not 1.) So vew for νιν in gt, ἐκείνησεν for ἐκίνησεν in IX. το.--- ἄμετρον K.—Blass,
who thinks that the Ms. has duerrov, writes ἄμεμπτον, with Herwerden; so also


Jurenka.


68 Mivwi K., Wilamowitz, Jurenka: Μίνωι (= Μίνῳ) Blass, Housman.


66 ἀναξιβρόντας (only here): cp. VI.
10 ἀναξίμολπος, XX. 8 dvagiados. B. has
ἵ before Bp only here and in v. 109 μῆλᾶ
βροτῶν.

67 ἄμετρον εὐχάν. To ask Zeus for
the sign of the lightning was to pray
for a very extraordinary mark of favour ;
the εὐχή was ἄμετρος as exceeding the
ordinary limit of a mortal’s prayer.
There is a similar phrase in //. 15. 598,
where the prayer of Thetis, that the
Greeks might suffer defeat until they had
made amends to Achilles (1. 508 ff.), is
called ἐξαίσιον ἀρήν, an ‘exorbitant’ or
‘immoderate’ prayer. The τιμή which
Zeus gave to Minos was, as the poet
says, a ‘surpassing’ one: thus ὑπέροχον
confirms &éwerpovy.—T he conjecture ἄμεμπ-
τὸν is against the MS., and gives a weak
sense; Zeus heard the ‘ddameless’ prayer;
2.6. heard it without disapproval.

68—70 The Μίνωι of the Ms. has
been scanned in three different ways.


(1) As -~-, which corresponds with
vv. 2 (dyhaods), 25 (καὶ δίκας), and gr
(-w πνέουσ᾽). This is supported by Wila-
mowitz, who remarks that the lengthening
of u may be partly compensatory for the
shortening of w. For thet cp. ἢ. 1. 283
λίσσομ᾽ ᾿Αχιλλῆϊ μεθέμεν χόλον (in thesis) :
for ὦ before another vowel, Od. 6. 303
jpwos. (2) As -— (= Μίνῳ) : so Housman,
and (in his 2nd ed.) Blass. The syllables
-dv τε Muv-, -~~, then answer to —~—~
in the other places. (3) As ~-~: so
Blass (rst ed.), assuming that --~~
(Miwi gur-) could answer to -~-~
elsewhere. The first of these three views
seems to me the most probable, though
the ¢ can be justified only by a metrical
stress on that syllable (assisted, perhaps,
by the shortening of w).—A transposition,
φύτευσε Μίνῳ, is unsatisfactory, because
the last syllable is short in 2 and 25, and
probably in gr also (see ἢ. there). It is
possible that Mivw is a gloss; but’ it


XVI]


AIOYPAMBOI


383


by the son of Cronus, the all-ruling lord of thunder.’


Mighty Zeus heard the unmeasured prayer, and ordained a
surpassing honour for Minos, willing to make it seen of all men,


for the sake of his well-loved son.


He sent the lightning. But


the steadfast warrior, when he saw that welcome portent, stretched
his hands towards the glorious ether, and said :—

‘ Theseus, there thou beholdest the clear sign given by Zeus.
And now do thou spring into the deep-sounding sea; and the
son of Cronus, king Poseidon, thy sire, will assure thee supreme
renown throughout the well-wooded earth,

So spake he: and the spirit of Theseus recoiled not;


69 f. φίλῳ... παιδὶ] φίλον...παῖδα Housman, Blass?.


72 πέτασε χεῖρας Wilamowitz,


Christ, Richards (who suggests also χέρα πέτασσε), Ludwich: πέτασσε χεῖρας Blass?:


χεῖρας πέτασσε MS. (χεῖρε πέτασε K.).


742. <ol> τάδε | μὲν βλέπεις J. (K.),


and so Jurenka, Smyth: τάδ᾽ <éua> | μὲν βλέπεις conj. Platt: τάδε μὲν | ἔβλεπες


Richards, Blass?.


80 EYTAENAPON Μ8.: ἠὔδενδρον K., Blass? (εὐρύεδρον


Herwerden formerly, but he now accepts ἠὔδενδρον).


does not seem likely. The obvious fp
γόνῳ would be too near φίλῳ... παιδί:
fo. κλέος would be scarcely compatible
with τιμάν. Verses 39 and 120 might
suggest Kvwolw: but this also is im-
probable.

φύτευσε τιμάν: remark the early re-
currence of the verb used in 59. Pind.
P. ιν. 69 θεόπομποί σφισιν τιμαὶ φύτενθεν :
7. ν. 12 σύν τέ οἱ δαίμων φντεύει δόξαν ..---
φίλῳ... παιδί, ‘for (the sake of) his dear
son,’ to be taken with θέλων... θέμεν. --
πανδερκέα, ‘seen by all.’ Elsewhere,
fall-seeing’ (Anth. 9. 525. 17, Quint.
Smyrn. 2. 443).

72 1. τέρας: the lightning had come
from a clear sky (αἰθέρα, 73). So in
Od. 20. 114, Zeus having thundered, at
the prayer of Odysseus, from a cloudless
sky, the hero says, οὐδέ ποθι νέφος ἐστί"
τέρας νύ τεῳ τόδε φαίνεις.---πέτασε χεῖρας
answers metrically to πίτνον αὖραι in v. 6,
καί σε xedvd in 29, and ὀμμάτων δα- in 95.
The ms. has χεῖρας πέτασσε: cp. 1X. 19n.

74 2. A short syllable is wanting after
Θησεῦ: cp.8, 31, 97- (1), The best remedy
would be to read τάδ᾽ <épd' >, and that
may be what the poet wrote. In our Ms.,
however, nothing has been lost after
TAAE, ‘with which this v. ends. If
TAA'EMA was the original reading, the
letters MA must have dropped out at
some earlier stage in the transmission of
the text. (2) Another resource is to
insert od after Θησεῦ, where it might so
easily have dropped out. The σὺ δ᾽


ὄρνυ᾽ in 76 is not a decisive objection.
When ov δὲ precedes an imperative, the
stress on the verb is much stronger than
that on the pronoun, as is seen when it
follows a protasis with the same person
as subject: eg. Her. vir. 159 εἰ δ᾽ dpa
μὴ δικαιοῖς ἄρχεσθαι, σὺ δὲ μηδὲ βοήθεε
(where σὺ δὲ is merely ‘then’): cp. Her.
11. 68, 72 9. 301f., Aesch. Ag. 1061,
Xen. Cyr. 5. 5. 21. (3) Others read
τάδε μὲν | ἔβλεπες (see cr. n.). An
aorist, referring to the moment just past,
might be substituted for the present: thus
εἴσιδες would be analogous to ἐπήνεσα
(Soph. Az. 536), ἔφριξα (75. 693), etc.
But the imperfect ἔβλεπες is surely im-
possible.

76 £. ὄρνν᾽, ὄρνυο, -- ὄρνυσο, pres. im-
perat. midd. of ὄρνυμι. Neither the act.
nor the midd. present imperat. of that
verb seems to occur elsewhere, though
the aor. imperat. is not rare (ὄρσο, ὄρσεο,
ὄρσευ). For the dropping of o in 2nd
pers. sing. pres. imperat. middle, cp.
fl. 10. 201 παρίσταο, 16. 497 μάρναο,
Od. 18.171 φάο (‘speak’).—Bapup ὁμον :
Eur. Helen. 1305 βαρύβρομον...κῦμ᾽ ἅλιον.
—When Kpovi8as or Κρόνιος is said of
Poseidon, he is always named (as here
and in Corinna fr. τ, Pind. O. vi. 29),
or indicated, as in XVII. 21 by Avratov |
σεισίχθονος.

BO ἠΐδενδρον: Pind. P. Iv. 74 εὐ-
δένδροιο... ματέρος (Earth).

82 ἀνεκάμπτετ᾽, like a bending sword
(XII. 52 ff. ἐγνάμφθη δ᾽ ὀπίσσω φάσγανον).


str. 2.


[XVI


384 BAKXYAIAOY
17. πάκτων ἐπ᾽ ἰκρίων
185 σταθεὶς ὄρουσε, πόντιόν τέ νιν
85:9 δέξατο θελημὸν ἄλσος.


2 τά φ]εν δὲ Διὸς υἱὸς ἔνδοθεν


Ὁ


s ΄ , 3 >
1 κέαρ, κέλευσέ TE κατ᾽ οὖ-


» 3 4
22 ρον ἴσχεν evdaidadov
23 vaa μοῖρα δ᾽ ἑτέραν ἐπόρσυν᾽ ὁδόν.


> / ? δ᾽ 3 δά ΄

ἀντ. β΄.90 - ἵετο δ᾽ ὠκύπομπον δόρυ": ode
“νιν βορεὰς ἐξόπιν πνέουσ᾽ ἀήτα'
3. τρέσσαν δ᾽ ᾿Αθαναίων


z


5 NPws
95 6


4 ἠϊθέων «πᾶν» γένος, ἐπεὶ
θόρεν πόντονδε, κα-
Ἂς ,’ὕ 3 > ὔ 4
τὰ λειρίων τ᾽ ὀμμάτων δά-


7 κρυ χέον, βαρεῖαν ἐπιδέγμενοι ἀνάγκαν᾽


86 τάφεν Pearson, Weil, Blass? (υἱὸς δὲ Διὸς ἔνδοθεν κέαρ τάφε conj. Richards):


τᾶξεν K.: τᾶκεν Β].1


81 Ζ. xaroi[pjov Ms.: κατ᾽ οὖρον K., Jurenka, Smyth:


κάτουρον Housman.—toxev K.: ἴσχειν MS.—éxarovrépov (Pollux 1. 82) σχὲν Blass®


(‘ Remis navis cohibenda erat; hinc epitheton’).


91. νιν Housman and others:


83—85 ἰκρίων, a raised half-deck at
the stern, on which, in the Homeric ship,
the chiefs have their place (Od. 13. 72;
15. 282, 557): beneath it there was room
for storage (26. 15. 206). An equivalent
term was ἐἑδώλια (Soph. Az. 1277n.):
Her. 1. 21 describes Arion as στάντα ἐν
τοῖσι ἑἐδωλίοισι when he sang, before
springing into the sea.—oraQels is here
a poetical substitute for ords, as in Pind.
Iv. 84 ἐστάθηΞτεἔστη. [In Od. 17. 463
ὁ δ᾽ ἐστάθη ἠῦτε πέτρη | ἔμπεδον, the
pass. perhaps emphasizes the idea of
fixity.]}—@cAnpov (the accent prescribed
by the Ms.), from θελημός: Hes. Of. 118
ἐθελημοί: Callim. Diaz. 31 ἐθελημός.
Arcadius 61. 3 τὸ δὲ θελεμὸς ἀπὸ τοῦ
θελημὸς ὀξύνεται. [Aesch. Suppl. 1027
θελεμὸν πῶμα (of the Nile) is usually
explained with Hesych. 65- ἥσυχον. ]---
πόντιον... ἄλσος: the phrase of Aesch.
ers. 111, suggesting the sacredness of
the sea as the domain of Poseidon
(Meptunia prata): it is thus peculiarly
fitting here.

86:5. τάφεν (cp. v. 48).. ἔνδοθεν κέαρ,
‘felt a secret awe in his heart.’ Minos
had expected that Theseus would decline
his challenge. The prompt and dauntless
manner in which Theseus had accepted
it filled him with amazement; though he


seemed to have got rid of his foe, he felt an
inward misgiving. But he did not allow
his feeling to appear.—[ra@kev (or τᾶξεν)
...Kéap would mean, ‘he wasted his heart
within him’; z.e. ‘he felt his soul melt
within him,’—the emotion being one of
surprise and fear. Cp. Od. ΧΙΧ. 263 μηδ᾽
ἔτι θυμὸν | τῆκε πόσιν γοάουσα. But the
word is more suitable there than it would
be here.]

87—89 kar’ οὖρον ἴσχεν...νᾶα, ‘to
keep the ship before the wind.’ When
Theseus sprang overboard, the impulse
of the κυβερνήτης (an Athenian, cp. Plut.
Thes. 17) would naturally be to bring up
the ship, which was running before the
north wind (v. 6): but Minos ordered
him to keep on his course. Secretly
disquieted by the confidence of Theseus,
Minos did not care to wait at that spot.
If he went on, at any rate—so he thought
(v. r21n.)—he should see Theseus no
more. ‘Fate,’ however, ‘ was preparing
a different issue.’ The ship sped on
its way; but Theseus reappeared at a
later moment (119).—For ἔσχεν (Dor.
inf., 41 1.) Ξε ἔχειν, said of steering a ship
on a certain course, cp. Od. το. gt ἔνθ᾽
oly’ εἴσω πάντες ἔχον νέας: Her. vi. 95
ov παρὰ τὴν ἤπειρον εἶχον τὰς νέας.

Reading κάτουρον, Housman under-


XVI] AIOYPAMBOI


385
he took his place on the well-built stern, and sprang thence,
and the domain of the deep received him in kindness.

The son of Zeus felt a secret awe in his heart, and gave
command to keep the cunningly-wrought ship before the wind;
but Fate was preparing a different issue.


So the bark sped fast on its journey, and the northern breeze,
blowing astern, urged it forward. But all the Athenian youths and
maidens shuddered when the hero sprang into the deep; and
tears fell from their bright young eyes, in prospect of their
grievous doom. ὶ

νειν MS.—BOPEOYC A: a written above OT by A#.— ἐξόπιν K.: ἐξόπιθε Wilamowitz,.
Blass: εξοπιθεν Μ5.---ἀήτα] ἄητα Housman, Smyth (ἀῆτα Wilamowitz).
“«-πᾶν:- Κ΄: -« γᾶς -- Weil.
πόντονδε θόρεν ἥρως, κατά ] τε λειρίων ὀμμάτων.
Jurenka, Smyth: δάκρυ | χέον Μ5.---ἐπιδέγμενοι Jurenka, Smyth: ἐπιδεγμένοι Blass.


98 ἠθέων.
94 2. θόρεν] ἔθορε Purser, Christ.—Richards conj..
95 ξ. δάϊκρυ χέον 7., and so Β]455,,


stands, ‘he ordered them to stop the
ship which was running before the wind.’
. But, even with κάτουρον, the sense would
be, ‘to keep the ship before the wind’:
κάτουρον could not stand for τὴν κατ᾽
οὖρον πλέουσαν. Blass, also, supposes
that ἔσχεν means ‘stop’; but of κάτουρον
he says, ‘zon sufficit, and has recourse
to a much bolder emendation ;---κέλευσέ
θ᾽ ἑκατόντορον σχὲν...νᾶα, ‘to stop the
hundred-oared ship.’

90 ὠκύπομπον: Eur. J. 7. 1136 ναὸς
ὠκυπόμπου. --- δόρν, ‘ship’ (like rads,
Hor. C. 1. i. 13 etc.): Aesch. Pers. 417
ἐπ᾽ ἄλλην (sc. ναῦν) δ᾽ ἄλλος ηὔθυνεν δόρυ
(cp. 4g. τ618). Pind. P. τν. 27 εἰνάλιον
δόρυ, and 38 ἐκ dovparos.—The v is
lengthened before ode as v before oo
in δορυσσόος. Cp. also 7]. 17. 463 ὅτε
σεύαιτο διώκειν (and 23. 198). ober is
imperf. of σοέω: with the augment it
would be ἐσσόει (cp. ἔσσευα, ἔσσυμαι,
ἐσσύθην). The only other part of coéw
extant is preserved by Hesych., ἐσσοη-
μένον" τεθορυβημένον, ὡρμημένον.

91 ἐξόπιν occurs only in Aesch. Ag.
11g (though κατόπιν -- κατόπισθεν is fre-
quent): and its rarity would account for
the ἐξόπιθεν of the ms. It is decidedly
preferable on metrical grounds to ἐξόπιθε,
which would weaken the rhythm; nor is
the long syllable answering to -ife re-
solved in 2, 28, or 68.--ἀήτα is the
accent in the Ms., indicating the Doric
form of ἀήτη (Hes. Of. 643, etc.). dara
(with Aeolic accent) would be preferable,
since in all the corresponding verses (2,
25, 68) the last syllable is short. The
Aeolic form is probable (if not certain)


1. 8.


in Simonides fr. 41, οὐδὲ γὰρ ἐννοσίφυλλος.


ἄητα τότ᾽ apr’ ἀνέμων (ἀήτα Βετρὶκ",.
though formerly ἄητα). But ἄητα (or
ἀῆτα) would be masc. (=dyrns): and
the fem. Bopeds (attested by the accents
in the Ms.) is certain. No such form as
βόρεος (for βόρειος) was in use. Cp.
Aesch. frag. 195. 2 Bopeddas ἥξεις πρὸς
mvods. For this reason alone I refrain
from altering the Ms. accent on ἀήτα.

92 *A®avalwy with at: so 128 παιά-
vitav: Ar. Vesp. 282 φιλαθήναιος, ΕΖ. 139
δείλαιος: Eur. A. δ. 115 γεραιέ: Anth.
9. 281. 3 παλαιός: Orph. fr. 2. 2 δικαίων.

93 The corresponding verses (4, 27,
70) begin with -~-. A long syllable is
therefore wanting between ἠϊθέων and
γένος. Kenyon inserts wav, and nothing
better has been proposed.

94—96 The iambus θόρεν answers to
-~~ in 5, 28, 71. This discrepancy would
be removed by the transposition which
Richards suggests, révrovde θόρεν ἥρως,
κατά | Te λειρίων : and the emphatic
place given to πόντονδε would also be
fitting. I hesitate to adopt it only be-
cause it presupposes that te had either
(1) been shifted to its place after λειρίων,
which seems improbable: or (2) lost, and
then wrongly inserted there; which we
are not entitled to assume, since the Ms.
text is metrically possible, ~-- (θόρεν)
being an admissible substitute for ~~~.

λειρίων.... ὀμμάτων, eyes of delicate
beauty,—the bright eyes of youth. Cp.
Shakespeare’s ‘young-eyed cherubins’
(Merchant of Venice, v. i. 62). In 7.
13. 830 χρόα λειριόεντα is ‘delicate’ skin:
and in //, 3. 152 the chirping sound


26


ant. 2.


386


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVI


8 φέρον δὲ δελφῖνες ἁλι-


9. ναιέται μέγαν θοῶς


π ε ’
το Θησέα πατρὸς ιἱππί-
ov δόμον, μέγαρόν τε θεῶν


1 podev τόθι κλυτὰς ἰδὼν


13 ἔδεισ᾽ ὀλβίοιο Νη-


, 4 > Ν Ἃς 3 X
4  péos κόρας: ἀπὸ yap ayha-
13 ὧν λάμπε γυίων σέλας
105 16 ὦτε πυρός, ἀμφὶ χαίταις


170 δὲ χρυσεόπλοκοι


v4 , ry >. »¥
8 δίνηντο ταινίαι" χορῷ δ᾽ ἔτερ-
τ πον κέαρ ὑγροῖσι ποσσίν'
4 a » »
2 σεμνάν τε πατρὸς ἄλοχον φίλαν


11021 ἴδε βοῶπιν ἐρατοῖ-


>
2 σιν ᾿Αμφιτρίταν δόμοις"
97 £. ἁλιναιέται K. (deleting ev before αλι-), Jurenka, Smyth; ἐναλιϊναιέται MS., Blass.
100f. δόμον, μέγαρόν τε...«μόλεν Housman, Wilamowitz, Blass, Richards, Smyth,
and others: δομόνδ᾽ ἔμολέν τε...μέγαρον Jurenka: δόμον" ἔμολέν τε... μέγαρον MS.
102 f. ἔδεισ᾽ ὀλβίοιο Νηϊρέος Richards, Ludwich, Blass?: ἔδεισεν Νηρῆος ὀλ]βίου K.
(ἔδεισε Νηρῆος ὀλ|βίου Bl.1, Smyth): ἔδεισε, Νηρέος ὀλ βίον MS., the diastole marking


the division of the words.


105 Gre] The Ms. seems to have had QITE.—dore K.


107 δίνηντο Blass: δινεῦντο K.: AEINHNTO A, but the E has been cancelled (by


made by the cicada is called ὄπα λειριόεσ-
σαν, a ‘delicate’ voice. Pind. WM. vil.
79 calls the white coral λείριον ἄνθεμον
ποντίας... ἐέρσας (where the notion of
delicate beauty is joined to that of the
colour). —Suidas gives λειρόὀφθαλμος
Γλειρ()ὀφθαλμος"}, ὁ προσηνεῖς ἔχων
τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς, ‘with gentle eyes.’ The
idea of ‘gentle’ may have been first
associated with λειριόεις, λείριος as an
epithet of the vozce: thus Ap. Rh. 4. 903
calls the chant of the Seirens ὄπα λείριον.
Here, in reference to the youths and
maidens collectively, λειρίων can hardly
mean ‘gentle’; a more general sense is
needed.

Sdxpv xéov. The division of the verses
given above (and suggested by me in
Kenyon’s edition, p. 169) is required
by the metre: see 6, 29, 72.— émBéypevon,
“expecting.” In J//. 9. 191 δέγμενος
Αἰακίδην, where the sense is ‘awaiting’
(as in 18. 524), the word is accented as
the partic. of 2nd aor, ἐδέγμην, while its
meaning indicates the perfect partic. (Z/.
4. 107 δεδεγμένος ἐν προδοκῇσιν). B.
would probably have kept the irregular
Homeric accent of déyuevos, and it is
therefore better not to write ἐπιδεγμένοι.----


ἀνάγκαν, the ‘doom’ of becoming victims
to the Minotaur.

97. δελφῖνες, the usual agents in
the miraculous conveyance of mortals
through or beneath the sea: pseudo-
Arion (Bergk 111. p. 80) x11f. of μ᾽ els
Πέλοπος -yav...éropedocare: Plut. Mor.
p- 163A (Enalos of Lesbos and the
maiden whom he rescued from drowning)
ἐπὶ δελφίνων φορητοὶ διὰ θαλάττης. Some
of the vase-painters, however, depicted
Theseus as borne up in the arms of a
Triton. (See Introd.)—dAtwarérar (only
here): pseudo-Arion 9 f. δελφῖνες, ἔναλα
θρέμματα | xovpav Νηρεΐδων θεᾶν.---ΤῊς
MS. lias ἐναλιναιέται, which Blass retains,
comparing ἐμπυριβήτης (71. 23. 702) and
ἐγχειρίθετος (Her. v. 108). But it seems
scarcely doubtful that, as metre indicates
(cp. 8f. and 31f.), ev was written by
error.

99- 101 ἱππίον, Poseidon, as creator
of the horse, and as horse-tamer (δαμαῖος,
tuyros); Soph. O. C. 711 ff. He is ἵππων
πρύτανις (Stesich. fr. 49), ἵππαρχος (Pind.
P. Iv. 45). Poseidon ἵππιος had an
altar at Colonus Hippius near Athens
(O. C. 55). Greek poets use constant
epithets without regard to their fitness in


XVI] AIOYPAMBOI


387

Meanwhile dolphins, dwellers in the sea, were swiftly bearing
mighty Theseus to the abode of his sire, lord of steeds; and he
came unto the hall of the gods. There beheld he the glorious
daughters of blest Nereus, and was awe-struck; for a splendour
as of fire shone from their radiant forms; fillets inwoven with
gold encircled their hair; and they were delighting their hearts


by dancing with lissom feet.


And in that beautiful abode he saw his father’s well-loved
wife, the stately, ox-eyed Amphitrite ;


A??).—Wilamowitz conj. δονεῦντο.
ὑγροῖσιν ἐν ποσίν MS., Blass.


108 ὑγροῖσι ποσσίν K., Jurenka, Smyth:
1096, IA.N a:


εἶδεν .3,.--ΒΟΩΠῚ A;


» written above I (by A*?).—ceuvdy τε πατρὸς ἄλοχον φίλαν | ἴδε conj. Housman:


σεμνὰν τότ᾽ ἄλοχον πατρὸς φίλαν | ἴδε Richards.


σεμνὰν MS.


εἶδέν τε πατρὸς ἄλοχον φίλαν |


the particular context; sleeping birds are
called τανυπτέρυγες by Alcman (fr. 60.
7), and ships drawn up on shore can
still have the epithet @oal (Soph. 42.
710).—S86pov, the palace of Poseidon in
the depths of the sea: //. 13. a1f. ἔνθα
δέ (near Aegae) of κλυτὰ δώματα βένθεσι
λίμνης [ χρύσεα μαρμαίροντα τετεύχαται,
ἄφθιτα αἰεί. The second syllable of
δόμον should be long (see 11, 34, 77).
Two remedies are possible. (1) To
write δομόνδ᾽ with Jurenka, keeping the
MS. ἔμολεν... μέγαρον. (2) Keeping δό-
pov, to write μέγαρον :..μόλεν. This seems
best. Of the three verses corresponding
to ror, two (12 and 78) begin with ~-,
and the third (35) with -—: hence μόλεν
is more probable than μέγαρον as the
first word of 101.—péyapov is the great
hall in Poseidon’s déuos. The plur. θεῶν
refers to Poseidon and Amphitrite: per-
haps it is meant to include the ‘ bright-
throned Nereids’ also. On the cup of
ΗΝ: Athena too is present (see
. 225).

102 f. ὀλβίοιο Nupéos. The trans-
position (see cr. n.) brings the metre into
agreement with that of 13, 36, and 79.
It may be regarded as certain.—képas :
cp. ἢ. on 38 Νηρηΐδες.

105 dre: Awpixds ἀντὶ τοῦ ὥστε, schol.
Pind. 4. vi. 47. Pindar has it frequently
(P. Iv. 64, Χ. 54, ete.): cp. XII. 124 0.
—tvpés: J/, 19. 366 (the eyes of
Achilles) λαμπέσθην ws εἴ τε πυρὸς σέλας.--
ἀμφὶ χαίταις: for the dat., cp. 124,
XVII. 52 : Pind. O. XIII. 39 ἀμφὶ κόμαις.

1O6f£. χρυσ. ταινίαι, ‘fillets inwoven
with gold,’ 2.6. with gold thread. The
ταινία was a ribband worn by maidens
(and matrons) round the head, to confine


the hair (crinales vittas Verg. Aen. 7.
352).--δίνηντο. (1) This must be (I
think) for ἐδεδίνηντο, pluperf. of dwéw,
‘had been twirled’ round the hair,
‘encircled’ it: cp. 721. 23. 562 (a θώρηξ)
@ περὶ χεῦμα φαεινοῦ κασσιτέροιο | ἀμφι-
δεδίνηται, around which a casting of
bright tin has been carried (2.6. which
has been overlaid with tin-plate). (2) If
δίνηντο were taken (with Blass) as imperf.
of an Aeolic δίνημι (= δινέω), the sense
must be, ‘were being twirled.’ But the
close-fitting head-band, ταινία, would not
be shaken by the movements of the
dance. Cp. 18 δίνασεν, n.

108 ὑγροῖσι, supple, ‘lissom.’ ὑγρός
in this sense is opposed to σκληρός (‘stiff’),
Plat. Zheaet. p. 162B. So of horses,
ὑγρὰ ἔχειν τὰ σκέλη (Xen. Eg. τ. 6).
Arist. H. Anim. 6. 35 (6 θὼς) ταχυτῆτι
διαφέρει...διὰ τὸ ὑγρὸς εἶναι. Pollux 4.
96 ὑγρὸς ὀρχηστής.---Τῆε use of the word
in reference to Nymphs of the sea is not
very felicitous.

1092. The scansion of the syllables
before βοῶπιν in 110 ought to be either
~~ (as in 21, 44), or else — (as in 87,
κέαρ with synizesis). The —- given by
σεμνὰν seems metrically impossible.
Sitzler (quoted by Jurenka p. 128) regards
σεμνὰν as a gloss on Boom, and would
substitute τάν. But then the words
ἐρατοῖσιν....δόμοις, which go with the verb,
would be locked into the clause ray...
᾿Αμφιτρίταν. In tog the first hand wrote
IA.N, not εἶδεν. The transposition
σεμνάν.. ἴδε (Housman) is the only satis-
factory remedy. Verse r1og still differs
from 20, 43, and 86 in so far as -~~~
(πατρὸς ἄλοχ-) here replaces ~~-~ in
these verses. This difference would be


26—2


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVI


3a vw ἀμφέβαλεν αἰόλαν πορφύραν,


tut
Ξὴ
Ὁ


ἀμεμφέα πλόκον,


Q ™
Ons
τὰ
oo
oO
Aun ee w ν


x


120


fo)


Ὁ


bag ’ὔ > 5 4 ¥
κόμαισί τ᾽ ἐπέθηκεν ovdats


τόν ποτέ (ξ)οι ἐν γάμῳ

δῶκε δόλιος ᾿Αφροδίτα ῥόδοις ἐρεμνόν.
ἄπιστον ὅ τι δαίμονες

θέωσιν οὐδὲν φρενοάραις βροτοῖς:

νᾶα παρὰ λεπτόπρυμνον φάνη᾽ φεῦ,
οἵαισιν ἐν φροντίσι Κνώσιον

᾿

ἔσχασεν στραταγέταν, ἐπεὶ


10 μόλ᾽ ἀδίαντος ἐξ ἁλὸς
11 θαῦμα πάντεσσι, ,"λάμ-
2 πε δ᾽ ἀμφὶ γυίους θεῶν δῶρ᾽, ἀγλαό-


4 θυμίᾳ νεοκτίτῳ
15 ὠλόλυξαν, 2 €-


112 ἀμφέβαλεν K.:
Appendix. 116 dé6dos] AOAIZ A:
Weil : elpuévov Blass :


ἀμφέβαλλεν MS.—didva πορφυρέαν MS.
o written above I (by A??).—épeuvdv] ἐερμένον
ἐραννόν Piccolomini.


θρονοί τε κοῦραι σὺν εὐ-


For conjectures see


118 θέωσιν Crusius, Richards,


removed by reading, with Richards,
σεμνὰν τότ᾽ ἄλοχον πατρὸς φίλαν (warpos
as in v. 63). τότε is fitting, since the
approach of Theseus to Amphitrite is the
crowning moment of the scene. And the
placing of πατρὸς before ἄλοχον might
easily have caused the shrinkage of τότε
into τε.

Boom. This epithet of Hera is given
to mortal women in //. 3. 144, 7. το, 18.


ο.
: 111 ᾿Αμφιτρίταν. The wife of Posei-
don (Pind. O. vi. 105) is the Sea that
‘moans around the shores of earth’
(rpifw, τρύζω) : cp. Od. 12. 97 ἀγάστονος
᾿Αμφιτρίτη. She is unknown to the //ad,
and in the Odyssey is scarcely more than
a symbol for the sea (as in the phrase
μετὰ κύμασιν ᾿Αμφιτρίτης, 3. 91). Hes.
Th. 243 makes her a daughter of Nereus,
and her connexion with the Nereids was
always close. In art Poseidon and Am-
phitrite were often associated with Hestia,
the goddess of ¢erra firma (cp. Paus. v.
26. 2).

112 didva in the Ms., if sound, is an
otherwise unknown name for some kind
of garment. It is possible that ἠϊών,
ἠών, ‘sea-bank,’ ‘ margin,’ may have been
used to mean the ‘border’ of a robe, and
that ‘purple border’ here may have


meant a robe with such a border. But
there is no evidence for this; and it
seems very improbable. Far the best
emendation is that which Tyrrell was the
first to propose, aléAav πορφύραν, ‘gleam-
ing purple.’ The corruption of αἰόλαν
into diéva can be explained in either of
two ways. (1) In AIOAAN the AA
may have become NA, when the final N
would be deleted. Or (2) the similarity
of A to A may have led to the loss of
A, leaving AIOAN: then N would be
transposed, so as to make AIONA.
Housman illustrates this process from
v. 117, where’ Ayédaov became ἄγγελον :
2.9. A was lost after A, leaving ATEAON,
and then this was made into a Greek
word by adding a second '.—The change
of πορφύραν into πορφυρέαν would follow
the change of αἰόλαν into diéva.—For
other conjectures see Appendix.

113 οὔλαις: Od. 6. 230 (Athena
changing the aspect of Odysseus) κὰδ
dé κάρητος | οὔλας ἧκε κόμας (‘thick, curly
locks’).

114-116 ἀμεμφέα πλόκον, ‘a choice
wreath.’ Pausanias (I. 17. 3) describes
it as στέφανον χρυσοῦν : Hyginus (Astron.
11. 5) as coronam...compluribus lucentem
gemmis, B., too, ‘doubtless conceived it
as a wreath of gold; the word λάμπε in


Xvi]


AlOYPAMBOI


389


who clad him in gleaming purple,


and set on his thick hair a choice wreath, dark with roses, given epode 2.


to her of yore at her marriage by wily Aphrodite.

Nothing that the gods may ordain is past belief to men of a
sound mind. Theseus appeared by the ship with slender stern.
Ah, in what thoughts did he check the war-lord of Cnosus,
when he came unwetted from the sea, a wonder to all, his form


resplendent with the gifts of the gods!


The bright-throned


Nereids cried aloud with new-born gladness;


Weil: θέλωσιν Ms.: AGow Palmer, K.
(by A??),
TYTOIZ...ATAO ms.


120 φροντίσι] φόντισσι A: corr. Al?


119 véa] AAA A: ν written above A
124 γ᾽Συίοις.. ἀγλαό- K. :


123 refers to wreath as well as robe.


ῥόδοις ἐρεμνόν, the reading of the Ms., is-


right: the golden wreath was ‘ dark with
roses,’ z.¢. thickly entwined with dark-
red roses,—the flowers of Aphrodite, —
when she gave it to Poseidon’s bride as a
wedding-gift. When Amphitrite gave it
to Theseus, the roses may still have been
there; but the words do not require us to
assume that.—Modifying Weil’s emenda-
tion éeppévov, Blass reads εἰρμένον, ‘strung
with roses.’ (Cp. Od. 18. 296 (ὅρμον)
χρύσεον,. ἠλέκτροισιν ἐερμένον, ‘strung
with amber beads.’) The phrase πλόκον...
ῥόδοις elpuévov, however, would suggest,
not a golden wreath ‘twined’ with roses,
but simply a chaplet formed by ‘string-
ing’ roses together; and the gift can
scarcely have been such. [έρμένον, it
may be added, would be closer to the
MS. than εἰρμένον. In Her. Iv. 190,
ἐνερμένων has good warrant (ἐνειρμένων
Stein) : cp. id. 1. 154 ἀπεργμένος, 11. 121
ἔργασται.]

δόλιος, fem., as in Eur. dé. 35, 770.
530, Cycl. 449, Helen. 20, 242, 1605.
Sappho addresses Aphrodite as δολόπλοκε


(fr. 1. 2): Simonides fr. 43 δολόμητις
"Adpodira: Eur. 7. A. 1301 δολιόφρων
Κύπρις.

1171. ἄπιστον κιτιλ.: in Ill. 57 ἃ


like phrase comes between two miracles.
After relating the deeds of Perseus,
Pindar’s comment is,—éuol δὲ θαυμάσαι

θεῶν τελεσάντων οὐδέν ποτε φαίνεται

ἔμμεν ἄπιστον (P. Χ. 48 ff.).—Oéwow,
‘ordain’: Od. 8. 465 οὕτω νῦν Ζεὺς θείη.
This is a certain correction of the MS.
θέλωσιν. With regard to Palmer’s λῶσιν,
the verb Aqv was in common use in
Laconian (Ar. Zys. 1162 f.) as in other
* Doric dialects ; and, in the Alexandrian


age at least, it was not confined to Doric
poetry (thus Callim. Diaz. 19 has djs).
But it is not likely to have been used
by an Ionian of the classical period.—
φρενοάραις, ‘of sound mind’: so φρενήρης
is opposed to ἐμμανής (Her. 111.25). For
the form cp. Pind. / Iv. 41 Μέμνονα
χαλκοάραν : P. V. 35 χεριαρᾶν τεκτόνων.

119 λεπτόπρυμνον: the conjecture
λεπτόπρῳρον is improbable. The sterz
is mentioned, because Minos would be
there. (Cp. n. on ἰκρίων in 83.)

120f£. οἵαισιν.. ἔσχασεν «.7.\.: ‘In
what (exultant) thoughts did he check’
Minos. oxdfw, ‘to let loose,’ means
(1) ‘to split open,’ (2) ‘to let drop,’
(3) then ‘to stop’ by relaxing a tension:
Pind. P. X. 51 κώπαν σχάσον, ‘ease the
oar,’ ‘stop rowing’: Eur. Ph. 454 σχάσον
δὲ δεινὸν ὄμμα καὶ θυμοῦ mvods, ‘remit
thy frown and thy blustering wrath.’ In
Pind. 4. Iv. 64 the victory of Heracles
over monsters is described by σχάσαις :
he ‘stayed’ their violence. So here the
apparition of Theseus ‘gave pause’ to
Minos in his secret exultation.

122 ἀδίαντος, ‘unwetted.’ Simonides
fr. 37. 3 οὐκ ἀδιάντοισιν παρειαῖς : Pind.
Δ. vit. 73 σθένος ἀδίαντον (schol. dvev
ἱδρῶτος).

1242. θεῶν δῶρα: the mantle and
wreath bestowed by Amphitrite are re-
garded as coming also from Poseidon.—
According to Pausanias and Hyginus
(n. on 114), Theseus brought back also
the ring of Minos: it was given to him,
says Hyginus, by the Nereids. B. ignores
the ring. The ‘gifts of the gods’ suffice
to prove the origin of Theseus. ‘Il
légitime sa naissance divine sans se faire
le serviteur du roi de Créte’ (Weil).

ἀγλαόθρονοι ... κοῦραι: ‘the bright-


390


ΒΑΚΧΥΛΙΔΟΥ


[XVI, XVII


16 κλαγεν δὲ πόντος: ἠΐθέοι δ᾽ ἐγγύθεν
17 νέοι παιάνιξαν ἐρατᾷ (F)omt.
13018 Δάλιε, χοροῖσι Κηΐων


9 φρένα ἰανθεὶς


2 ὄπαζε θεόπομπον ἐσθλῶν τύχαν.


XVII.


[XVIIL. ]


OHCEYC


στρ. α΄. ΧΟ “


: Βασιλεῦ τᾶν ἱερᾶν ᾿Αθανᾶν,


2 τῶν ἁβροβίων ἀναξ Ἰώνων,
3 τί νέον ἔκλαγε χαλκοκώδων


Ss 4


181 φρένα MS.: φρένας conj. J.
XVII.


The title added in the left margin by 43.


σάλπιγξ πολεμηΐαν ἀοιδάν;


2 ABPOBIKON


. JEPQNON A: corr. A??—The words τῶν ἁβροβίων ᾿Ιώνων ἄναξ are quoted from
Bacchylides in that order (which Wilamowitz had already corrected, /syl/os p. 143) by
(1) Maximus Planudes (14th cent.) in his scholia to Hermogenes περὶ ἰδεῶν a, Walz


throned maidens’ are the Nereids: Pind.
NV. iv. 65 (Peleus) ἔγαμεν ὑψιθρόνων μίαν
Νηρεΐδων. The epithet dyAad@povos is
given by Pindar to the Muses (O. x11.
96), and to the Danaides (4. x. 1). The
Horae, and the semi-divine daughters of
Cadmus, are εὔθρονοι (P. 1X. 60, O. 11. 22).

126—129 νεοκτίτῳ, the form used
by Nonnus 18. 294, while Pindar and
classical prose have νεόκτιστος. Cp. the
Homeric ἐὔΐκτιτος (111. 46). The glorifi-
cation of Theseus gave the Nereids a
sudden emotion of delight.—déAdAvgay :
the word usually denoted a cry of women,
and especially a joyous cry (Od. 22. 408,
Eur. 22. 691).---ἔκλαγεν... πόντος. The
sympathy of the sea with Poseidon is
more than once marked in the Jiad:
as when it joyously makes way for his
chariot (13. 29 γηθοσύνη δὲ θάλασσα
διίστατο), or-is stirred by his champion-
ship of the Greeks (14. 392 ἐκλύσθη δὲ
θάλασσα κ-τ.λ.). For ἕ before «A, cp.
XV. 13 ἢ.

ἠΐθεοι, both youths and maidens, as
in 43, 93. Here νέοι is probably adj.,
not subst.; cp. κοῦροι νέοι (7. 13. 95).
But we find other phrases in which ἤθεος
is clearly adj., as Eupolis fr. incert.


40 κόρη...ἤθεος, Plut. Zhes.-17 ἤθεοι
maides.—éyyv0ev, ‘hard by,’ 1.5. near
Theseus, who was now beside the ship ;
while the cry of the Nereids was heard
from the depths.

129 παιάνιξαν: for the αἵ, see n. on
g2.—éparg (οπί: xv. 7. The hiatus
is excused by the tradition of F (//. 3.
221 ἀλλ᾽ ὅτε δὴ ὄπα τε μεγάλην, Od. 14.
492 ὀλιγῇ ὀπί, etc.).

180 Δάλιε: this paean to the Delian,
Apollo may have been sung in Delos.
χοροῖσι: the reference is peculiarly fitting
here. Theseus, returning with his com-
panions from Crete to Athens, touched
at Delos, and there ἐχόρευσε μετὰ τῶν
ἠθέων χορείαν (Plut. 7.245. 21), — the
dance called yépavos. (See Introd.)

181 φρένα ἰανθείς. There is a strong
case for writing φρένας, since the similar
Homeric phrases are so frequent that
it is difficult to understand how B. could
have assumed f before the verb:—J7. 19.
174 φρεσὶ σῇσιν ἰανθῇς, 23. 600 θυμὸς
ἰάνθη, Od. 4. 840 ἦτορ ἰάνθη, 23. 47
θυμὸν ἰάνθης, etc. [In 24. 382, φρένας
ἔνδον ἐγήθεις, Eustath. read ἰάνθης.] But
on the other hand B. could write εἵλετο
fiéy (Vv. 75), in face of /2 4. 116 ἐκ


\


XVI, XVII]


the deep resounded; while the


ΔΙΘΥΡΑΛΛΒΟΙ


391
youths and maidens hard by


raised a paean with their lovely voices.
God of Delos, may the choruses of the Ceans be pleasing to
thy soul; and mayest thou give us blessings for our portion,


wafted by thy power divine!


XVII.


[XVIII]


THESEUS.


CHorus. King of sacred Athens, lord of the delicately-
living Ionians, why has the trumpet lately sounded a war-note


from its bell of bronze ?


Rhet. Graect V.. 4933 and (2) by an anonymous scholiast on the same work, zd, VII.
982. (3) A third commentator, Joannes Siceliota (gth cent.), 26. VI. 241, quotes from


B. ἁβρότητι ξυνέασιν [Ἴωνες βασιλῆες.


Bergk (fr. 42) took this last to be the original


source of the citation τῶν ἁβροβίων ᾿Ιώνων ἄναξ, but used the latter in changing “Iwves


into ᾿Ιώνων.


above the first A (by A??).


8 τί A: o added above by A?.—XAAKOAQAQN A: « written


δ᾽ eer’ ἰόν, the very passage which was
his model. [In 111. 68, where A wrote
φθόνῳ ἰαίνεται, A®s πιαίνεται is clearly
right.] This warning instance is my
sole reason for leaving φρένα in the
text.

132 ὄπαζε: so the Homeric hymn
to Demeter ends (v. 494) with the prayer
βίον θυμήρε᾽ ὀπάζειν : as does also Hymn
XXX.—Oedroprov, ‘sent to us by divine
power.’ Pindar’s θεόπομποί σφισιν τιμαὶ
φύτευθεν (P. Iv. 69), which perhaps
suggested φύτευσε τιμάν in 68 f., may have
prompted this word also.—éc@Awv τύ-
Xav: cp. Iv. 20 μοῖραν ἐσθλῶν. The
genitive with τύχα in Pindar usually
denotes the giver (as in MV. Iv. 7 σὺν
Χαρίτων τύχᾳ), but can also denote the
gift, O. XIII. 115 τύχαν- τερπνῶν γλυ-
κειαν.

Invocation of a god at the close of the
ode occurs in Pind. O. v1. 176 (Poseidon),
xi. 115 (Zeus), Z. vi. 49 (Apollo).
Sometimes, again, there is a prayer
without invocation (O. vill. 84: P. νι
114).


κντὶ. 1 15 A Chorus of Athe-
nians, addressing Aegeus, ask why a call
to arms has just been sounded. (See
Introd.)

1 iepav, a frequent epithet of Athens:
Soph. 42. 1221 (n.), Ar. Zg. 1319, Pind.
fr. 75. 4, etc.


2 τῶν dBpoBlwy. The epithet means
that from early days the Athenians had
prided themselves on their union of
refinement with valour (cp. v. 13).
Thucydides (1. 6, § 3) speaks of τὸ
ἁβροδίαιτον as a trait of the wealthier
Athenians down to a time not long
before his own; instancing the long
linen tunic, from which Ionians were
called ἑλκεχίτωνες (71. 13. 685 etc.), and
the use by men of golden τέττιγες as
brooches to fasten up the hair. Cratinus
(Xelpwves fr. 239) adds some touches,
such as the wearing of a flower ‘at the
ear,’ and the carrying of an apple in
the hand. Heracleides Ponticus (in
Athenaeus p. 5125) insists that Athens
had been greatest when most luxurious :—
Kai ἡ ᾿Αθηναίων πόλις, ἕως ἐτρύφα, μεγί-
στη τε ἣν καὶ μεγαλοψυχοτάτους ἔτρεφεν
ἄνδρας.--- Ἰώνων, Athenians: cp. XVI. 3. -

3f. νέον, ‘lately,’ as in 16. (Not
‘afresh.’)—xadkokebwy: Soph. Az. 17
χαλκοστόμου κώδωνος ws Τυρσηνικῆς.---
ἀοιδάν: an unexampled use of the
term in reference to such a sound as
that of the trumpet. The meaning of
the verb is wider than that of the
subst., so that dewe σάλπιγξ would seem
less strange. It was perhaps some reason
of euphony that restrained B. from using
the fitter word employed by Aesch., Pers.
395 σάλπιγξ δ᾽ ἀνϊτῇ πάντ᾽ ἐκεῖν᾽ ἐπέ-
φλεγεν.


BAKXYAIAOY {XVII


392
5 ἢ τις ἁμετέρας χθονὸς
6 δυσμενὴς ὅ ope ἀμφιβάλλει
7 στραταγέτας ἀνήρ;
8 ἢ λῃσταὶ κακομάχανοι
9 ποιμένων ἀέκατι μήλων
το σεύοντ' ἀγέλας βίᾳ;
ἢ τί τοι κραδίαν ἀμύσσει;
2 φθέγγευ" δοκέω γὰρ εἴ τινι βροτῶν
13 ἀλκίμων ἐπικουρίαν
4 Σᾷκαὶ τὶν ἔμμεναι νέων,
15 ὦ Πανδίονος υἱὲ καὶ Κρεούσας.


στρ. B. AIT. :
Col. 37 2


™
"


Νέον ἦλθεν δολιχὰν ἀμείψας
κἂρυξ ποσὶν ᾿σθμίαν κέλευθον"
ἄφατα δ᾽ ἔργα λέγει κραταιοῦ
’ ἧς. ε 4 ΄ 3 μ4
φωτός" τὸν ὑπέρβιόν τ᾽ ἔπεφνεν
Σίνιν, ὃς ἰσχύϊ φέρτατος
θνατῶν ἦν, Κρονίδα Λνταίου
γ σεισίχθονος τέκος"
lal 3 > Ld > 4
8 σῦν τ᾽ ἀνδροκτόνον ἐν νάπαις
9 Κρεμμυῶνος, ἀτάσθαλόν τε
2510 Σκίρωνα κατέκτανεν'


6 ὅρι᾽] OPEI A: corr. A3? 8 λῃσταὶ AHTAI A, AHCTAI A!? 9 ἀέκατι]
A’ EKATI ms.: corr. Palmer, van Branteghem. 10 CETONTI A: corr. Al,
12 φθέγγευ Blass, Wackernagel: φθέγγου MS. 18 ἀλκίμων] AAKIMOT A:


20


nan Δ΄ ὦ


5 The interrogative ἢ is followed
by ἢ (8)... (11), as in Pind. Z. vu.
3—12, Soph. Az. 172—182.

6 ἀμφιβάλλει, ‘besets,’ with the
στρατός implied by orparayéras. Eur.
Andr. 706 f. ᾿Ιλιάδα τε wédw...6 Διὸς ἵνις
ἀμφέβαλε φόνῳ (‘encompassed’).

8 λῃσταί, not the Doric λᾳσταί, to
avoid double at; yet in xv. 17 Aatéos:
80 V. 194 φήμα, but VIII. 3 προφάτας:
v. 167 ἀδμήτα, but x. 84 ἄδματοι.

10 σεύοντ᾽, ‘drive off.’ For the
elision of t in Doric 3rd plur., cp. fr. 3. 12:
Pind. O. vil. to κατέχοντ᾽ : P. IV. 241
ἀγαπάζοντ᾽ ---ἀγέλας, distinguished from
ποίμνας in Hes. 7h. 445 f. as ‘herds’ from
“flocks,’ but here a substitute for it.

11 ἀμύσσει, ‘gnaws’: 71. τ. 243 σὺ
δ᾽ ἔνδοθι θυμὸν ἀμύξεις: Aesch. ers.
161 καί με καρδίαν ἀμύσσει φροντίς.

12 δοκέω, ~~- (cp. 27), as καλέω
is scanned in Aesch. 4g. 147. Smyth


observes that disyllabic ew in the rst
pers. sing. of contracted verbs is nowhere
else proved by metre in Ionic verse
(Jonze Dialect, § 638. 2).

13¢. ἐπικουρίαν, ‘aid’: Aesch. Pers.
731 ὦ πόποι κεδνῆς ἀρωγῆς κἀπικουρίας
στρατοῦ.---Τὰ καὶ τὶν, after εἴ τινι, the
καί is normal according to Greek idiom,
though redundant for ours: ‘if any man
has, thou αὐτο hast.’ Antiphon or. 5 § 23
ἐξητεῖτο οὐδέν τι μᾶλλον ὑπὸ τῶν ἄλλων
ἢ καὶ ὑπ᾿ ἐμοῦ. (Cp. Soph. 0.6. 53 n.)
—tppevar is used by B. only here:
ἔμμεν in 31, 56, and Vv. 144: εἶμεν only
in IX. 48.

15 Κρεούσας. It is only here that
Creusa figures as wife of Pandion and
mother of Aegeus. In the ordinary
Attic legend (as old at least as Euripides)
she is daughter of Erechtheus, wife of
Xuthus, and mother by Apollo of Ion,
The mother of Aegeus is elsewhere Πυλία,


XVII] ALOYPAMBOI 393

Is the leader of a hostile army besetting the borders of our
land? Or are robbers, devisers of evil, driving off our flocks of
sheep perforce, in despite of the shepherds? Or what is the
care that gnaws thy heart? Speak; for thou, methinks, if any


mortal, hast the aid of valiant youth at hand, O son of Pandion


and Creusa.


AEGEuS. A herald has lately come, whose feet have traversed
the long road from the Isthmus; and he tells of prodigious deeds


by a man of might.


That man has slain the tremendous Sinis, who was foremost
of mortals in strength, offspring of the Earth-shaker, the Lytaean
son of Cronus. . He has laid low the man-killing sow in Crem-
myon’s woods, and the wicked Sciron.


corr. A}.


16 This verse, the last in col. Xxxvi, has been added by another


hand, the same which supplied the latter part of x. 23.—véov Palmer: ..ON ms.—


ἦλθεν K.: HAGE Ms.


1s AETEIN A: corr. Al.


24 KPEMYQNOS s.: corr. K.


daughter of Πύλας, king of Megara,
Apollod. 3. 15. 5 (where Πελία was a
false reading): Paus. 1. 5. 3, where she is
described as ‘daughter of Pylas,’ but not
named. The mention of Creusa by B.
suggests that there was as yet no fixed
tradition.

16f. ἀμείψας, ‘having traversed’;
Aesch. Pers. 69 πορθμὸν ἀμείψας (having
‘crossed’ the Hellespont): so Eur. Or.
1295 ἀμείβω κέλευθον.--᾿Ἰσθμίαν κέ-
λευθον: the road along the coast from
the Isthmus of Corinth to Athens, a
distance of about 45 miles.

18 ἔργα. The five feats here ascribed
to Theseus on his journey from the
Isthmus to Athens are given in the same
order by Diodorus Iv. 59 and Plutarch
Thes. 8—11. Those writers, however,
relate another ἄθλος, which was the
first, —the slaying of the robber Περιφή-
της, called Κορυνήτης from his club,
at Epidaurus. This feat may have been
a later addition (C. Robert, Hermes 1898,
p-149). At any rate it is only the journey
from the Isthmus (v. 17) that falls within
the scope of the poem.—In enumerating


the feats, re is five times repeated (19, .


23, 24, 26, 27).

20—22 Σίνιν : he dwelt at the Isth-
mus, and was called πιτυοκάμπτης from
the manner in which he rent his victims,
Diod. /. c. ---δύο πίτυς κάμπτων, καὶ πρὸς
ἑκατέραν τὸν ἕνα βραχίονα προσδεσμεύων,
ἄφνω τὰς πίτυς ἠφίει. Ovid Met. vil.
441}. gud poterat curvare trabes, et agebat
ab alto | ad terram late sparsuras corpora


pinus.—Kpovi8a, of Poseidon: Xvi. 77 n.
—Avratov, a Thessalian title of Poseidon,
popularly explained as the ‘looser’ or
‘opener,’ because he had cleft a passage
for the Peneius through the vale of
Tempe: Steph. Byz. s.v. Λυταί (the
name of a place in Thessaly), διὰ τὸ λῦσαι
τὰ Τέμπη Hocedava. See XIII. 20, u. on
Tlerpatov. Avraty is cited as τ name of
Thessaly by Hesychius. —cetoly@ovos
τέκος. Hofer observes in Roscher’s
Lexicon (p. 1973) that all the robbers
slain by Theseus on his way to Athens
are somewhere connected with Poseidon
as father.

23—25 civ τ᾽ ἀνδροκτόνον : Plut.
Thes. 9  Kpoppvwvria σῦς, ἣν Φαιὰν προσ-
ὠνόμαζον. In some vase-paintings which
depict this feat, a woman is seen, horror-
stricken at the creature’s fate: this is
explained by a passage in the Vatican
epitome of Apollod. 11. 54 (published by
R. Wagner, and cited by Hofer s.v.
Krommyon in Roscher 11. p. 1450) σῦν
Thy καλουμένην Φαιὰν ὑπὸ τῆς θρεψάσης
γραὸς αὐτήν.---Κρεμμνῶνος : Crommyon,
on the Saronic gulf, about 12 miles Ἑ. of
Corinth, and about 14 W.s.w. of Megara.
Strabo (p. 380) reckons it to the Corin-
thian territory (as Paus. does, 3. 1. 3),
but says that it formerly belonged to the
Megarid. The form is Κρομμνών in
Thuc., Κρομυών in Paus.; but Steph.
Byz. attests Κρεμμυών : Cremmyon in
Plin. VM. 47. 4. 7. τι, Hyginus Fad. 38.

ἀτάσθαλον denotes reckless evil-doing ;
in 71. 22. 418 it is joined with ὀβριμοεργόν,


str. 2.


394


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVII


τι τάν τε Κερκυόνος παλαίστραν


1. ἔσχεν,
3 σφῦραν
4 πτας,
ed
3015 φωτός.


orp. y. XO. 1: Τίνα δ᾽


Πολυπήμονός Te καρτερὰν
ἐξέβαλεν Προκό-
ἀρείονος τυχὼν
ταῦτα δέδοιχ᾽ ὅπᾳ τελεῖται.


» ΄ 3, a
εμμεν πόθεν ἄνδρα τουτον


Ἶ ’, ΄, x »
2 λέγει, τίνα τε στολὰν ἔχοντα;
πότερα σὺν πολεμηΐοις ὅ-
πλοισι στρατιὰν ἄγοντα πολλάν;


3
4
a a A ΕἸ ΄
358 5 ἢ βΟΥΡΟΥ͂ συν eh af
6 στείχειν ἔμπορον ot


ἀλάταν


7 ἐπ᾽ ἀλλοδαμίαν,
8 ἰσχυρόν τε καὶ ἄλκιμον
9 ὧδε καὶ θρασύν, ὅς τε τούτων


ἀνδρῶν κρατερὸν σθένος


τ ἔσχεν; ἢ θεὸς αὐτὸν ὁρμᾷ,

12 δίκας ἀδίκοισιν. ὄφρα μήσεται"
300 γὰρ ῥᾷδιον αἰὲν ἔρ-

4 ὄδοντα μὴ ντυχεῖν κακῷ.


26 Κερκυόνος] KEPKTNOC A
84 CTPATAN A: corr. 43,


: corr. A,
35 σὺν ὀπάοσιν Weil, Festa, Goligher: so Blass,


28 EZEBAAAEN Ms.: corr. K.


Smyth. CYNOIAOICIN ms.: συνόπλοιό νιν Ludwich: μόνον τ᾽ ἄνοπλόν τέ νιν K. (So


and in Her. Ψ1Π. 109 with ἀνόσιον .--Σικί-
pwva, arobber who used to throw travellers
from the ‘ Scironian rocks’ into the sea.
The coast-road from Megara to Corinth
was called ἡ Σκιρωνικὴ ὁδός (Her. ν ΠΙ. 71),
because, according to a Megarian legend,
Sciron had first made it practicable (Paus.
1. 44. 6). A few miles w. of Megara,
this road passed along the cliffs known as
Σκιρωνίδες (or Σκιράδες) πέτραι, formed
by the end of a rocky spur which runs
down from Mount Geraneia to the coast.
While in Tonic legend Sciron was a
malefactor, in the Megarian he was a
warlike hero, father of Endeis the wife
of Aeacus (Plut. 7hes. 10): cp. XII. 96n.

26 Kepxvivos: Diod. tv. 59 τὸν δια-
παλαίοντα τοῖς παριοῦσι, καὶ τὸν ἡττηθέντα
διαφθείροντα. He dwelt near Eleusis.
Theseus ‘closed his wrestling-school’
(παλαίστραν). Ov. Met. vil. 439 Cer-
cyonts letum vidit Cerealis Eleusin. Pau-
sanias (1. 39. 3), speaking of a place on
the road from Megara to Eleusis, says,


ὁ τόπος οὗτος παλαίστρα καὶ és ἐμὲ
ἐκαλεῖτο Κερκυόνος.

27] 80. ἸΤἸ]ολυπήμονος. Procoptes
(or Procrustes) is here his successor,
perhaps his son. Ovid /bis 409 Ut
Stnis et Sciron et cum Polypemone natus :
where the ‘son’ is almost certainly
Procrustes, whom Ovid associates with
the others in AZe¢. vil. 436 ff. and Heroid,
11. 69 ff. According to Paus. 1. 38. 5
Procrustes was merely a surname of
Polypemon. But there may have been
different versions. B. supposes that Pro-
crustes had received the σφῦρα, and
learned the use of it, from Polypemon.
For other views of the passage, see
Appendix.

ἐξέβαλεν : 7. 14. 419 (Hector falling)
χειρὸς δ᾽ ἔκβαλεν ἔγχος : Eur. Andr. 629
ἐκβαλὼν ξίφος. --Προκόπτας (only here)
is ‘he who cuts short’ (though προ-
κόπτειν regularly means ‘to make pro-
gress’), while Προκρούστης is ‘he who
beats out’ (as on an anvil). This brigand


XVII] AIOYPAMBOI


395
He has closed the wrestling-school of Cercyon. The mighty
hammer of Polypemon has dropped from the hand of the
Maimer, who has met with a stronger than himself. I fear how
these things are to end.


Cu. And who and whence is this man said to be, and how str. 3.
equipped? Is he leading a great host in warlike array? Or
travelling with his servants only, like a wayfarer who wanders
forth to a strange folk,—this man so vigorous, so valiant, and so
bold, who has quelled the stubborn strength of such foes? Verily
a god is speeding him, so that he shall bring a rightful doom on
the unrighteous; for it is not easy to achieve deed after deed
without chancing upon evil.


Jurenka, but with μοῦνον.) 36 CTIXEIN Ms.: corr. K. 89 ὅς τε τούτων
Palmer, K. (6s τὸ τούτων Β]4551): ὃς τοσούτων Platt, Blass? (ὃς τοιούτων conj. K.).


OC TOTTON ms.
EXEN A: corr. A®?


40 κρατερὸν] KAPTEPON Ms.: corr. K.


41 ἔσχεν]


adjusted the length of his victims to his
κλίνη: Diod. IV. 59 τῶν μὲν μακροτέρων
τὰ προέχοντα μέρη τοῦ σώματος ἀπέ-
κοπτε, τῶν δ᾽ ἐλαττόνων τοὺς πόδας
προέκρονεν. Β. may have used the new
word because he did not wish to shorten
the first ο of Προκρούστης.

The scene of this feat, the last on the
hero’s journey, was always placed in
Attica; either at Hermos, an Attic deme
in the part of Aegaleos called Ποικίλον,
now the pass of Daphne (ἐν “Ἕρμει Plut.
Thes. 11); or in Corydallos, the region
of Aegaleos nearest the sea (Diod. Iv.
59); or close to Athens, on the banks
of the Cephisus (Ovid AZez. v11. 438, Paus.
1. 38. 5).

ὃ as τελεῖται, ‘how all this will
end’ (‘where’ would be ὅποι). Aegeus
fears that this hero may reach Athens,
and prove no less invincible there.—For
the fut. midd. of τελέω used as passive,
see //.2. 36, Od. 23. 254. In Aesch.
Ag. 68 τελεῖται is better taken as a
present; cp. 451.

81 τίνα...πόθεν : see on V. 86 ff. ris...
ἐν ποίᾳ χθονί;

88 2, πότερα κιτ.λ.: a question like
that asked in Soph. O. 7. 750f. con-
cerning Laius: πότερον ἐχώρει βαιός (‘in
small force’), ἢ πολλοὺς ἔχων | ἄνδρας
λοχίτας, of” ἀνὴρ ἀρχηγέτης ;-- ὅπλοισι,
the arms borne by the στρατιά, not merely
by the leader. .

85 μοῦνον σὺν ὀπάοσιν, ‘alone with
his attendants’; 2.6. not leading a host,
but merely followed by one or two
servants, such as even « private traveller


might have with him. The relative sense
of μοῦνον is illustrated by Aesch. Pers.
734 μονάδα δὲ Ξέρξην ἔρημόν φασιν ov
πολλῶν μέτα.--- Τα emendation σὺν ὀπά-
οσιν (σὺν ὅπλοισιν MS.) is palaeogra-
phically easy : for others, see Appendix.

. 86 ἔμπορον, valorem (as in Soph.
O. C. 25, 303, gor): not ‘merchant,’—
ἀλάταν = ἀλώμενον : in tragedy often said
of a roaming exile (Aesch. Ag. 1282 φυγὰς
δ᾽ ἀλήτης, τῆσδε γῆς ἀπόξενος).

817 ἀλλοδαμίαν, properly ‘ residence
abroad’: Plat. Legg. 954 Ε ἐν ἀλλοδημίᾳ,
as opposed to living in Attica. Here the
word denotes the foreign place: cp. //.
24. 480 f. ἐνὶ warpy | φῶτα κατακτείνας
ἄλλων ἐξίκετο δῆμον. For ἐπί, cp. Od. τ.
182 πλέων ἐπὶ οἴνοπα πόντον ἐπ᾽ ἀλλο-
θρόους ἀνθρώπους.

89 ὅς τε, as in XII. 1ο5.-τούτων --
τοιούτων : Pind. O. IV. 26 οὗτος ἐγὼ
ταχυτᾶτι: talts ego pernicttate. The
conjecture ὃς τοιούτων (which would be
slightly preferable here to τοσούτων)
deserves to be weighed; but it seems
rather more likely that τε dropped out
between ὃς and τούτων.

42 ὄφρα μήσεται: for the fut. indic.
in the final clause, cp. 7/2 16. 242f.
θάρσυνον δέ οἱ ἦτορ ἐνὶ φρεσίν, ὄφρα καὶ
“Exrwp | εἴσεται. Od. 1. 57 θέλγει, ὅπως
᾽Ιθάκην ἐπιλήσεται.

48 f£. αἰὲν ἔρδοντα: the unbroken
series of his victories argues that Theseus
is under divine protection.—This is better
than to refer épdovra (as =‘ doing evil’) to
each of the vanquished.


396


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVII


4515 πάντ᾽ ἐν τῷ δολιχῷ χρόνῳ τελεῖται.


στρ. δ΄, AIT. 1 Δύο (Ε)οι φῶτε μόνους ἁμαρτεῖν
2 λέγει, περὶ φαιδίμοισι δ᾽ ὦμοις
3 ξίφος ἔχειν «ἐλεφαντόκωπον:"
+ ξεστοὺς δὲ δύ᾽ ἐν χέρεσσ᾽ ἄκοντας


Col. 38 5°


x ΄ ΄
5 Κηυτυκτον κυνεαν Λακαι-


6 vay κρατὸς πέρι πυρσοχαΐίτου"
γ στέρνοις τε πορφύρεον
8 χιτῶν᾽ ἄμφι, καὶ οὔλιον

+ 7995 3 Ld A
9 Θεσσαλὰν yAapvd: ὀμμάτων δὲ


55 10


στίλβειν ἄπο Aapviay


x φοίνισσαν φλόγα" παῖδα δ᾽ ἔμμεν


46 ἁμαρτεῖν] ὁμαρτεῖν Ἰζ.


48 ξίφος ἔχειν] Nothing has been lost in the Ms.: the


rest of the verse was probably wanting in the archetype. ἐλεφαντόκωπον, supplied by
Desrousseaux, is read by Blass, Jurenka, Smyth.—K. conj. κορύναν re πυκνάν.
80 ΣΦ. κηὔτυκτον] κηὔτυκον Ἰζ.---πέρι J. (Class. R. XU. 155, Apr. 1898), Blass, Sitzler:


45 τῷ δολιχῷ χρόνῳ : for the art.,
cp. Her. v. g γένοιτο δ᾽ ἂν πᾶν ἐν τῷ
μακρῷ χρόνῳ : Soph. Az. 646 ὁ μακρὸς...
χρόνος.--τελεῖται (pres.): δὴ inten-
tional echo of τελεῖται (fut.) at the close
of the preceding strophe (30).

46 8vo...pwre. Are these merely
attendants of Theseus; or does the poet
indicate two heroes as his comrades ?
The latter is the view of C. Robert
(Hermes, 1898, p. 150), who thinks that
Peirithous and Phorbas are meant. As
to Phorbas, son of Triopas, a famous
boxer, see Hom. hymn. Ap. Pyth. 33:
Paus, vil. 26. 12: schol. 2), 23. 660.
These two heroes are sometimes associ-
ated with Theseus, as in the carrying off
of the Amazon Antiope (Weizsacker, art.
Peirithoos in Roscher’s Zex., p. 1783).
According to the usual legend, Theseus
journeyed alone from Troezen to Athens:
and in the sculptures of the Theseion,
depicting his feats on the way, he has
no companion (see Baumeister, Denk.
vol. 111. pp. 1779 ff.). But on a vase at
Munich (Arch. Zeit. 23, fig. 195) Theseus
has two comrades with him in his slaying
of Sinis and of Procrustes. Such an
addition is foreign to the spirit of the
original legend, the very point of which
is that Theseus braves the perils of the
road without support. It seems pro-
bable that the innovation may have
been due in the first instance to vase-


painters (p. 233).—As to the word
φῶτε, cp. n. on XVI. 49. μόνους, plur.
adj. with dual subst.: Plat. Luthyd.
Pp. 273 Ὁ ἐγελασάτην... ἄμφω βλέψαντες
εἰς ἀλλήλους.---ἅἁμαρτεῖν = ὁμαρτεῖν : n. on
VIII. 103 f.

48 ἐλεφαντόκωπον is aptly supplied
by Desrousseaux. According to Ovid
(Met. Vil. 421 ff.) Theseus, after reaching
Athens, was about to drink the poisoned
chalice prepared for him by Medea, when
the zvory hilt of his sword revealed him
to Aegeus, who dashed the cup from his
lips:—Cum pater in capulo giadit cognovit
eburno Signa sui generts, factnusque ex-
cusstt ab ore.

49 δύ᾽ ἄκοντας: the δύο δοῦρε of the
Homeric warrior (//. 3. 18 ete.), the
αἰχμαὶ δίδυμαι of Pindar’s Jason (2. Iv.
79).---χέρεσσ᾽ : epic elision of ¢ in the
dative: //. 5. 5 ἀστέρ᾽ ὀπωρινῷ.

50 f. κηὔτυκτον : for the crasis cp. III.
81 χὥτι: also xvi. 33. The syllable
answering to the second of εὔτυκτον is
long in 35 (μοῦνον), though short in 5
and 20. It is unnecessary to write κηῦ-
τυκον. ---κυνέαν Λάκαιναν. The word
κυνέη, κυνῆ (‘dog-skin’) denoted (1) a
helmet, made either wholly of skin
(which might be ox-hide, marten-skin,
goat-skin, etc.), or of skin strengthened
with metal; hence χαλκήρης (//. 3. 316).
In Od. 18. 378 κυνέη πάγχαλκος is one of
which leather forms merely the lining.


xvi] AIOYPAMBOI 397
In the long course of time all things find their end.
AEG. Only two men attend him, says the herald. He


has a sword, with ivory hilt, slung from his bright shoulders: he
carries in his hands a couple of polished javelins; a well-wrought
Laconian bonnet covers his ruddy locks; around his breast he


wears a purple tunic and a thick Thessalian mantle.


A fiery


str. 4.


light, as of the Lemnian flame, flashes from his eyes: a youth .


he is


so Jurenka, Smyth. ὙΠῈΡ ms.


witz and Platt: so also Smyth.—orépvots (rightly) A: στέρνοισι A).
by A, and added by A’ in the upper margin of 00]. XXXVIII.


corr. K.


52 £. στέρνοις τε... χιτῶνα transposed by Wilamo-


55—57 omitted
56 ἔμμεν] EMEN ms.:


(2) But κυνῆ meant also a broad-brimmed
travelling hat (ἡλιοστερής, Soph. Ο. C.
313), such as was called ‘Thessalian’ or
‘Arcadian’ (éd. fr. 251). Here the epithet
Λάκαινα probably denotes some kind of
κυνῇ worn by warriors.

κρατὸς πέρι. The MS. κρατὸς ὕπερ
gives - - - (-ds ὕπερ) where in 6, 21 and
36 we find -~~. Crusius (P#z/ol. LVI.
NV. F. Xi. p. 175) defends the variation
as a case of anaclasis, permissible in
Tonics: but it seems far more probable,
if not certain, that ὕπερ should be cor-
rected to mépt. When περί denotes
‘position around,’ the case is usually the
dative; but the genitive also occurs:
Od. 5. 130 περὶ τρόπιος βεβαῶτα, ‘ be-
striding the keel’ (cp. 7d. 371 ἀμφ᾽ ἑνὶ
δούρατι βαῖνε) : also 5. 68 τετάνυστο περὶ
σπείους γλαφυροῖο | ἡμερίς (‘about the
cave trailed a garden-vine’). — Smyth
suggests that κρατὸς πέρι here= ‘above
the head.’ For this old use of περί
as=vmép, cp. Alcaeus fr. 93 κεῖσθαι περ
κεφάλας...λίθος, Sappho fr. 1. 10 f. περὶ
yas μελαίνας  πύκνα δίννεντες πτέρ᾽ ἀπ᾽
ὠράνω aldelpos διὰ μέσσω, and fr. 92
πέρροχος = ὑπέροχος : also περίειμι, περι-
γίγνομαι 85 τε ‘to excel.’ But, in re-
ference to a helmet, the sense ‘around’
is fitter.—ruproxalrov: of a golden red
tint, which the Greeks admired: the
Daphnis and Menalcas of Theocritus (/d.
VIII. 3) are πυρροτρίχω.

52. In the reading of the MS., χιτῶνα
πορφύρεον | στέρνοις τ᾽ ἄμφι, the place of
re, as 4th instead of 2nd word, is im-
possible. [Jurenka defends it by referring
to Pind. O. 111. 18 (φύτευμα) ξυνὸν ἀνθρώ-
ποις στέφανόν τ᾽ ἀρετᾶν: but ξυνὸν there
belongs to φύτευμα, which he omits to
quote, and not to στέφανον.) The trans-


position στέρνοις re...xitav’ is certain.
The error in the Ms. was due, I suspect,
to some one who had noticed that two of
the three verses corresponding with 52,
viz. 7 and 37, begin with an zamdus,
which he wished to obtain here by
shifting χιτῶν᾽ from 53 to 52: though
the third, verse 22, might have shown
him that a spondee was equally ad-
missible. ΑἹ] the three verses (8, 23, 38)
answering to 53 begin with a spondee;
but there, as at the beginning of v. 52,
an iambus was also correct.

58 ΣΦ. οὔλιον here=ovAdv, ‘woolly,’
‘thick.2 Everywhere else in classical
Greek οὔλιος means ‘destructive.’—@ec-
σαλὰν χλαμύδ᾽. The χλαμύς, a short
mantle, was especially Thessalian (Pollux
VII. 46, X. 124),—a fact connected with
its fitness for riders on horseback. It
was often worn by soldiers: thus, in a
story told by Aelian (VY. A. xIv. το),
Demades asks Phocion for the chlamys
which he was wont to wear παρὰ τὴν
στρατηγίαν. The mention of it is the
more suitable here, in connexion with
πρώθηβον, as it was worn by the


“Athenian ἔφηβοι: cp. Antidotus (of the


Middle Comedy) Ilpwréxopos fr. 1. 2
πρὶν ἐγγραφῆναι καὶ λαβεῖν τὸ χλαμύδιον,
—where the ‘enrolment’ is that of the
ephebus in the register of his deme
(ληξιαρχικὸν γραμματεῖον).

551. Λαμνίαν, zc. fierce. The
volcano Μόσυχλος in Lemnos (Soph.
Phil, 800) gave rise to the proverbial
Λήμνιον πῦρ (Ar. Lys. 299): cp. Hesych.
Λήμνιον βλέπειν. --- φοίνισσαν, fulvan,
the tawny-red hue of fire: Pind. P. 1. 24
(of Aetna) φοίνισσα κυλινδομένα φλόξ:
Eur. 770. 815 πυρὸς φοίνικι mvog. —


ἔμμεν: cp. 141.


398 BAKXYAIAOY [XVI XVIII
2 πρώθηβον, ἀρηΐων δ᾽ ἀθυρμάτων
13 μεμνᾶσθαι πολέμου τε καὶ ͵
4 ;χαλκεοκτύπου μάχας"
6015 δίζησθαι δὲ φιλαγλάους ᾿Αθάνας.
XVIII. [XIX.]
1Q
AOHNAIOIC
στρ. x Πάρεστι μυρία κέλευθος


> ὧν. t
2 ἀμβροσίων μελέων,
a XR ‘ , 7
3 ὃς ἂν παρὰ Πιερίδων λά-
4 χῇσι δῶρα Μουσᾶν,


5 ἰοβλέφαροί τε καὶ


6 φερεστέφανοι Χάριτες


on


ν
υμνοισιν"


a Ψ ~
βάλωσιν ἄμφι τιμὰν
ὕφαινέ νυν ἐν


fal 4 Ἂς
9 ταῖς πολνηράτοις τι κλεινὸν


10 ὀλβίαις ᾿Αθάναις,

evaivere Κηΐα μέριμνα.
πρέπει σε φερτάταν ἴμεν

ε x ‘ 4

ὁδὸν παρὰ Καλλιόπας λα-
χοῖσαν ἔξοχον γέρας.


“Ἄδδπ κ
- Ww iS) -


15 ἦεν “Apyos ὅθ᾽ ἵππιον λιποῦσα


59 χαλκεοκτύπου] ΧΑΛΚΕΝΤΥΠΟΥ͂ A: corr. 43,


60 δίζησθαι δὲ] Blass thinks


that all the letters after A were written by A? in a space left vacant by A. © has been


made from A.
XVIII.


The title added in the left margin by A


—AOHNALOIC] ᾿Αθηναίοισι


K.: but his final I may (as Ludwich and Blass think) have been part of a coronis


57 πρώθηβον: the Homeric form is
πρωθήβης (2. 8. 518 etc.): but a fem.
πρωθήβη occurs once (Od. 1. 431).—
ἀρηΐων ἀθυρμάτων: cp. Hor. C. 1. 2.

37 f. (of Mars) Hee nimis longo satiate
ὌΝ Quem iuvat clamor galeaeque leves.
See n. on VIII. 87 Μουσᾶν.. ἄθυρμα.

58 μεμνᾶσθαι, ᾿ gives heed to,’ ‘is
intent upon’: Pind. fr. 94 μεμναίατ᾽
ἀοιδᾶς, ‘(that they might) be mindful
of song.’ — The use of the perfect μέμνη-
μαι in such phrases is distinct from that
of the aorist in the Homeric μνήσασθε δὲ
θούριδος ἀλκῆς (22.6. 112, ‘dethink you...’).


59 χαλκεοκτύπου : n. on XIII. 15 f.

60 φιλαγλάους, ‘splendour-loving,’
‘brilliant.’ Pindar, who perhaps in-
vented the word, applies it (7. xl. 1)
to the tutelary nymph of Acragas,—xad-
Mora βροτεᾶν πολίων.


VIM. 1f. μυρία κέλευθος: v. gin.
π-ἀμβροσίων : Pind. P. Iv. 299 παγὰν
ἀμβροσίων ἐπέων.

91. ὃς ἄν: the antecedent to be
supplied is τούτῳ, as in Soph. Ant. 35f.
ὃς ἂν τούτων τι δρᾷ, | φόνον προκεῖσθαι. ---
Πιερίδων : cp. 35: XV. 3 Πιερίαθεν.


XVII, XVIII]


AIOYPAMBOI


399


in earliest manhood, intent on the pastimes of Ares,—on warfare
and the clangour of battle; and he seeks brilliant Athens.


XVIII.


[XIX.]


lo.


(FOR THE ATHENIANS.)


A thousand paths of poesy divine are open to him who has str.


received gifts from the Muses of Pieria, and whose songs have
been clothed with worship by the dark-eyed Graces who bring


the wreath.


Weave, then, some glorious lay in Athens, the lovely and the


blest, thou Cean fantasy of fair renown.


A choice strain should


be thine, since Calliope has given thee a meed of signal honour.
There was a time when, by the counsels of wide-ruling Zeus


marking the end of ode xvil.


3 ILEIEPIAQN ms.


9 κλεινὸν K.,


Blass, Jurenka.—KAINON A: but A® bas written ε above AI, though without


changing A into A.
ἵππιον] ITMMEION A: corr. A?


15 TIHN ms.: see Appendix.—ds6’] OT A: corr. A’.—


—Adxyot, epic for λάχῃ: so fr. τό. 3
θάλπῃσι.

5—8 From ὃς ἄν we supply ᾧ ἄν for
this second clause (‘and for whom’).—
ἰοβλέφαροι, epithet of the Muses in
VIII. 3.--φερεστέφανοι, here with re-
ference to victory in poetical contests:
epigr. 1. 2 f. πολέας δ᾽ ἐν ἀθύρμασι
Μουσᾶν ! Κηΐῳ ἀμφιτίθει Βακχυλίδῃ στε-
φάνους.---Χάριτες inspire song; V. 9 n.—
βάλωσιν ἄμφι--ἀμφιβάλωσιν: cp. IV.
20 n.—vuv with v (cp. 21), the only
instance of the enclitic in B.

9 It is not easy to decide between
καινὸν, the scribe’s reading, and κλεινὸν,
the corrector’s. (1) καινόν is illustrated
by Pindar’s frequent claim of ‘newness’
for his song (O. 111. 4, 1x. 48: Λ΄ Iv. 63,
etc.). But the ear of Bacchylides, pe-
culiarly sensitive to recurrent vowel-
sounds, might have disliked καινόν so
soon after ὕφαινε. (2) For κλεινόν it
may be said that it is in good keeping
with the lofty tone of this proem; cp.
ἀμβροσίων μελέων---τιμάν---φερτάταν ὁδόν
—tkoxov γέρας. In v. 13f. the poet is
Οὐρανίας κλεινὸς θεράπων. On the whole,
I accept κλεινόν, though without feeling
certain that it is right.

11 edatvere: cp. III. 64 μεγαίνητε:


Pind. P. 1v. 177 εὐαίνητος ᾿᾽Ορφεύς. But
aiverés was used by Alcaeus and Anti-
machus (Steph. Zhesaur.); as also by
Arist. Rhet. τι. 25. 7. Pindar has ai-
νητός. ---Κηΐα: cp, 11. 98.—pépipva is
the musing, the fantasy, of the poet,—
here half-personified. (This is somewhat
different from Pindar’s use of the word to
denote a ‘pursuit,’ s¢adium,-—e.g. in O.
VIII. 92 κρέσσονα πλούτου μέριμναν, ‘an
ambition above wealth.’)

18 2. ὁδόν, the course, or flight, of
poetry; cp. 1: IX. 51 f. ἐλαύνω | ἐκτὸς
ὁδοῦ. --- ξΚαλλιόπας: v. 176 n.— γέρας,
the ‘meed of honour,’ is the glorious
theme (Io), which the Muse has assigned
to the poet.

15 The ms. TIHN, if sound, must be
τί ἦν...; ‘How was it ?’—‘ What befell?’
—when Io was fleeing from Argos ;—and
must be explained as an old formula for
beginning a story. There is, however,
no other trace of such a formula, though
a question to the Muse is, of course, a
common exordium, as in XIV. 47 Μοῦσα,
τίς πρῶτος λόγων dpxev δικαίων; Neither
the hiatus nor the metre (~- instead of
the —~ found in 33) need in itself cause
doubt. Yet I find it very difficult to
believe that τί ἦν is right. The easiest


400


evye χρυσέα βοῦς,
YE XP


ὅτ᾽ “Apyov ὄμμασιν


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVIII


εὐρυσθενέος φραδαῖσι φερτάτου Διός,
Ἰνάχου ῥοδοδάκτυλος κόρα"


βλέποντα


πάντοθεν ἀκαμάτοις


μεγιστοάνασσα κέλευσε
χρυσόπεπλος Ἥρα
3


3
4
ΕΣ Yee 4
5 QKOLTOV QUTVOV εον-
6


τα καλλικέραν δάμαλιν


25 7


φυλάσσεν᾽ οὐδὲ Μαίας


εν 4 > x 3 >
8 υἱὸς δύνατ᾽ οὔτε κατ᾽ εὐ-
, ς ld nw
9 φεγγέας apépas λαθεῖν νιν
ἮΝ ,, ε


Col. 39


10


11;


21 κέλευσε Platt: κέλευσεν MS.
by A’.


28 οὔτε] ΟΥ̓ΔῈ A: corr. A5?—dyvds J., Sandys.


οὔτε νύκτας ἁγιάς.
εἴτ᾽ οὖν γένετ᾽ ἔΐν μάχας ἀγῶνι
22 Omitted by A, but added in the lower margin


29 εἴτ᾽ οὖν J.


correction τίεν (G. E. Marindin), Doric
inf., would go with γέρας, ‘a choice
theme for thee to celebrate’; but there
is a point after γέρας in the Ms. The
most probable emendation (I think) is
ἦεν (W. Headlam), ‘There was a time
when,’ ‘Once upon atime.’ As Kenyon
observes (p. 187), TI is very like H in the
ms. A mis-reading of Η as TI (τί) would
naturally have led to EN being changed
to HN (ἦν). See Appendix.

ἵππιον : the epic ἱππόβοτον (//. 2. 287
εἴς.) : cp. X. 80 f. κλυτὸν ἱππόβοτον" Apyos.
The ‘hill-girt’ plain (rd κοῖλον “Apyos,
Soph. O.C. 378) afforded excellent pasture.
Strabo 8, p. 388 ἔστι δὲ καὶ τὸ γένος τῶν
ἵππων ἄριστον τὸ ᾿Αρκαδικόν, καθάπερ καὶ
τὸ ᾿Αργολικὸν καὶ τὸ ᾿Επιδαύριον.

16 φεῦγε refers to the moment after
the slaying of Argus by Hermes, when
the gad-fly (oferpos) sent by Hera was
driving Io forth from Argolis on her
wanderings. Aesch. Suppl. 540 ff. λει-
μῶνα βούχιλον (the meadow where the
cow was pastured), ἔνθεν ᾿Ιὼ | οἴστρῳ
ἐρεσσομένα | φεύγει duaprivoos.

χρυσέα, ‘precious’ or ‘peerless’ (in
the sight of Zeus); as the word so often
denotes the beauty and charm of a goddess
(v. 174 Aphrodite; x. 117 Artemis ;
Pindar /. vil. 5f. the Muse). It seems
probable that, like Aeschylus, Bacchylides
imagined Io as a maiden with cow’s horns
(βούκερως παρθένος, Aesch. P. V. 588), and


not as completely transformed into a
heifer. The word δάμαλις (24), like
Bots, could be applied to the horned
maiden. Such a conception gives greater
fitness to χρυσέα. See Appendix.

17 εὐρυσθενέος: his power protects
her in her wanderings far and wide.—
φραδαῖσι, ‘counsels,’ a sense derived
from the active φράζω : the god indicated
the path of her wanderings. Cp. Aesch.
941 (of Orestes) θεόθεν εὖ φραδαῖσιν
ὡρμημένος (as in Eum. 245 φραδαῖς are
the ‘hints’ given to hounds by the
scent): Eur. Phoen. 667 φραδαῖσι Παλ-
Addos. On the other hand in Pind. O.
ΧΙ]. g τῶν.... μελλόντων ... φραδαί (‘per-
ceptions,’ γνώσεις schol.), the sense comes
from the midd. φράζομαι. --- φερτάτου,
though φερτάταν occurs in v. 12: cp.
XVI. 59 and 68, φύτευσεᾳν).

18 Ἰνάχου. The Inachus (now the
Bonitza), rismg in the highlands on the
Arcadian border, flows through the Argive
plain into the Gulf. This river-god, son
of Oceanus, figured as the earliest king
of the land,—péya πρεσβεύων ["Αργους re
yous Ἥρας re πάγοις (Soph. /vachus,
fr. 248).

194. “Apyov, son of Earth; Aesch.
P.V. 678 ff. βουκόλος δὲ γηγενὴς | ἄκρατος
ὀργὴν “Apyos ὡμάρτει, πυκνοῖς | ὄσσοις
δεδορκώς: 2b. 567 {. φοβοῦμαι | τὸν μυ-
ριωπὸν εἰσορῶσα βούταν. The poets and
vase-painters of the fifth century imagined


XVIII]


ASIOYPAMBOI


401


most high, the heifer precious in his sight,—the rosy-fingered
maid born to Inachus,—was flying from Argos nurse of steeds:


when Argus, looking every way with tireless eyes, had been
charged by the great queen, Hera of golden robe, to keep
unresting, sleepless ward o’er that creature with the goodly horns.
Nor could Maia’s son elude him in the sun-lit days or in the holy


nights.
Did it befall then that the


(Class. R. X11. 156), Blass, Jurenka: εἶτ᾽ οὖν K.—The letter of which a vestige remains


after yéver’ is taken by Blass for E, by K. for A.
(BI. supplies εἴτε μῦθος ἄλλως.)


seems slightly more probable.


It might be either; but the former


him as having eyes all over his body:
Eur. Phoen. 1115 στικτοῖς πανόπτην
ὄμμασιν δεδορκότα (schol. κύκλῳ τὸ σῶμα
ὅλον ὠμματῶσθαι) : Ovid Met. 1. 664
stellatus...Argus. It has generally been
assumed that Argus is the starry sky,
as Io is the moon. Cp. Plato ε2297. 14
(Bergk I1. p. 303) εἴθε γενοίμην Fates
νός, ws πολλοῖς ὄμμασιν és σὲ βλέπω.

21 2. μεγιστοάνασσα (like ὑμνοά-
νασσα ΧΙ. 1, n.),=meylorn ἄνασσα: V.
199 μεγιστοπάτωρ, 1. ---χρυσόπεπλος :
here, a general epithet for a goddess.
In Pind. 7. v. 75, χρυσοπέπλου Μναμο-
σύνας, it has a special fitness: Memory is
robed in golden hues.

23 ἄνπνον. In the older and simpler
myth all the eyes of Argus were sleepless:
the notion that they watched by relays
appears first in Euripides (Pfoex. 1116 f.),
who is followed by Ovid (AZet. 1. 686f.),
and by Quintus Smyrnaeus 10. 191:
Apyov, ὃς ὀφθαλμοῖσιν ἀμοιβαδὸν ὑπνώ-
εσκεν.--- Τὰ first two syllables of ἐόντα
must have been scanned as one (cp. V. 8):
unless, indeed, B. wrote evvita, as in
111. 78.

24 καλλικέραν: see u. on XV. 22
ὑψικέραν.

25 φυλάσσεν: cp. XV. 18 θύεν (η.).
Aeschylus imagines Argus as closely
following Io’s steps, wherever she moves
(P.V. 678 ff.). This is the conception
seen in some vase-paintings of Io, Argus,
and Hermes: Roscher’s Lexicon 11. Ὁ. 271:
Baumeister, Denkm. 1. p. 752. The story
that Argus tied her to an olive-tree in a
grove (Apollod. 11. 1. 3, Plin. VW. 27. τό.
239) was suited to Io the complete heifer,
but not to the horned maiden.

Μαίας: Hes. 7heog. 938 Ζηνὶ δ᾽ ἄρ
᾿Ατλαντὶξ Main τέκε κύδιμον Ἑρμῆν.
Ovid Fast. ν. 663 Clare nepos Atlantis,


1. 8.


ades, quem montibus olim Edidit Arcadtis
Pleias una Iovi. Cp. Hor. C.1. 10. 1.

28 dyvds, ‘holy’; the word expresses
a religious feeling for the beauty and
majesty of night, like the Homeric κνέφας.
ἱερόν (ZZ. 11. 194), νὺξ ἀμβροσίη (2. 57
etc.). The epithet ἁγνός is applied by
Aesch. P. V. 28 to αἰθήρ: by Pindar to
the sun (O. vil. 60), to water (Z. v. 74),
and to fire (P. I. 21).

29-- 86 εἴτ᾽ οὖν- ἤ ῥα (33)---ἤ (35).
For εἴτε followed by ἤ (instead of a
second εἴτε), see Eur. £/. 896 f., Plato
Phaedr. 277 Ὁ. Conversely ἤ ῥα.. εἴτε,
Soph. Az. 1771.

Argus was slain by Hermes: about
that there was no doubt. But accounts
varied as to the manner of the slaying.-
Some said that Hermes attacked him
openly: others, that Argus was first sent
to sleep, and then slain. Our poet sub-
divides this second alternative; Argus
may have been sent to sleep (1) by sheer
exhaustion, or (2) by the lulling sounds
of music. The sense of the whole passage
is, in effect, as follows :—‘ Now (οὖν)
whether Hermes slew Argus [in open
fight];—or whether Argus was exhausted
by his anxieties, or lulled to sleep by
music,—for me, at any rate (37 ἐμοὶ μὲν
οὖν), it is safest [to pass on to the end
of the story, ]|—Io’s arrival in Egypt.’

The hesitation of B. between different
forms of the story makes it likely that he
knew some authority, poetical or artistic,
for each. It is noteworthy that Aeschylus
also, while recognizing that Argus was
slain by Hermes (Suppl. 305), avoids
committing himself as to the manner of
the deed. Io says mysteriously (of Argus),
ἀπροσδόκητος δ᾽ αὐτὸν αἰφνίδιος μόρος | τοῦ
ὧῆν ἀπεστέρησεν (P.V. 680f.).

29 γένετ᾽, impers. (like συνέβη), with


27


402


30 12


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVIII


ποδαρκέ᾽ ayyedoly Διὸς


~ 4 ~ ε ¥
13 κτανεῖν τότε [Tas ὑπέροπλον
4 ᾿ὀβριμοσπόρου λόχον
ν Η ΔΝ ἢ ‘ y 3 2 4 a
3 Αργον᾽ 4 pa καὶ [ὄμματ᾽ αἰνὰ λῦσαν
¥


6 ἄσπετοι μέριμνϊ αι"


85:7 ἢ Πιερίδες φύτευϊσαν ἀδύμῳ μέλει
:ι8 καδέων ἀνάπαυσζιν ἐμπέδων"


5 2 \ X Ss
“ἐπ. έἐμου μὲν ουν


ἀσφαλέστατον a mplos ἔσχατ᾽ οἴμα,
ἐπεὶ παρ᾽ ἀνθεμώ[δεα
40 Νεῖλον ἀφίκετ᾽ ο[ἰστροπλὰξ


81 Tas ὑπέροπλον 7.: Tas ἀναφύντ᾽ ἐξ Jurenka.


32 ὀβριμοσπόρου] μ' has been


written above, between ὁ and 8, by A?.—Jurenka finds after this word a trace of A,


and supplies λέχευς : λόχον Blass. (γόνον conj. K. : τέκος formerly J.)
the conjectural supplements in these vv., see Appendix.


88-- 51 For
88 ἢ pa J., Herwerden,


inf. κτανεῖν, ‘it came to pass that...’: a
constr. used by Xen. H. Vv. 3. 10, who,
however, adds ὥστε before the inf. (οὐδ᾽
ἂν γενέσθαι ὥστε ἅμα ἀμφοτέρους... ἔξω
Σπάρτης εἶνα). The Homeric epithet of
Hermes, ἀργεϊφόντης, was traditionally
explained as ‘Argus-slayer,’ though its
real sense may have been ‘swiftly ap-
pearing’ (¢av).—The words lost after
γένετ᾽ probably expressed the idea, ‘dy az
open attack,’ —as distinguished from an
assault on the sleeping Argus. The first
letter after yéver’ seems to have been Εἰ
rather than A. Perhaps, then, ἐν μάχας
ἀγῶνι (or és χέρας μολόντα). If the first
letter were A, ἀμφαδὸν βαλόντα would be
possible.—The oge attack is shown on a
vase figured in Roscher 11. 279: Argus is
prostrate; Hermes slays him with a sword.
According to Apollod. 11. 1, § 4, Hermes
killed him λίθῳ βαλών.

31 Tas: Argus is called ‘the son of
Earth’ by Aesch. P. Κ΄. 678 (n. on το f.);
Suppl. 305; also by Acusilaus (c. 500 B.C.),
fr. 17 (Miiller I. p. 102), whose source may
have been Hesiod. Others made him a
son of Agenor, of Arestor (Ov. AZet. 1.
624), or even of Inachus: Apollod. 11. 1.
§§ 2, 3.---ὑἾπέροπλον: cp. VIII. 13: Argus
is described by Apollodorus /.c. as ὑπερ-
βάλλων... «δυνάμει, and by Quintus Smyrn.
Io. 100 as μέγας.

32 The letter after ὀβριμοσπόρου seems
to have been A; hence Blass supplies
λόχον. That word occurs only in the
sense of ‘parturition’ (Aesch. Sapf/. 676


λόχοι γυναικῶν, Ag. 137 πρὸ λόχου), but
doubtless might be used (like Lat. partus)
in the sense of ‘offspring,’ as λοχεία is in
Anth. Planud. 132. 3, δνοκαιδεκάπαιδα
λοχείην (Niobe’s children). If synaphea
could be assumed, λόχευμ᾽ would also be
possible. .

88.1. i fa: as to the accent of #, see
Appendix.—do-merot μέριμναν are ‘the
immense cares,’ ‘anxieties,’ of Argus.
This is the normal sense of the plural
μέριμναι: cp. V. 7: Theognis 343: Pind.
f. Vil. 13, fr. 218, fr. 248: Aesch. Zhed.
270, 831; Hum. 340: Eur. Heracl. 594,
Bacch, 380: Diphilus izcert. 5 λύπας,
μερίμνας. (In another, but rarer, use.
μέριμναι refers to objects of pursuit or
study: see I. 69: Emped. 113 δολιχό-
φρονες... μέριμναι, ‘penetrating thoughts’;
Ar. ub. 1404.) It seems improbable,
then, that μέριμναι here can mean either
(1) ‘the unceasing efforts,’ or ‘devices,’
used byHermes against Argus—as Kenyon
takes it: or (2) ‘the ineffable counsels’ of
Zeus,as Wilamowitz suggests. Thegeneral
sense of the words which followed ἤ pa
kal in 33 must have been, ‘exhausted
him,’ ‘made him succumb to sleep.” We
might conjecture (¢.g.) ἄνδρ᾽ ὕπνῳ δά-
μασσαν, or ὄμματ᾽ αἰνὰ λῦσαν (‘re-
laxed,’ ‘caused to close,’ Soph. Az/. 1302
λύει κελαινὰ βλέφαρα).

35 2. ἢ Πιερίδες κιτιλ. It seems
hardly doubtful that καδέων are the
troubles of Argus, not those of Io. The
death of Argus brought no ἀνάπαυσις to


XVIII] AIOYPAMBO! 403
swift messenger of Zeus slew huge Argus, Earth’s fierce offspring,
[in combat]? Or did the watcher’s unending cares [close his dread


eyes ;] or was he lulled to rest from weary troubles by the sweet


melody of the Pierian sisters ?


For me, at least, the surest path of song [is that which leads
me to the end]; when Io, driven by the gadfly, reached the flowery


banks of Nile,


Jurenka: ἢ fa K., Blass: H PA Ms.


84 μέριμναι J., and so K., Jurenka, Blass.


{In his rst ed., Bl. with K., read an accent on the I of MEPIM, which would be


against the nomin. ; but he now recognizes that there is no such accent.]
A faint trace after IT points, I think, to P. So Blass also


letters AIT are certain.


38 The


holds; and Kenyon (who formerly suggested E) now inclines to this.


her: then came the οἷστρος.--ἁδύμῳ: a
word used by the poet’s uncle Simonides
(Eustath. 77, p. 163. 28).---ἐμπέδων : cp.
Ll. 8. 521 φυλακὴ... ἔμπεδος: Soph. O. C.
1674 πόνον ἔμπεδον. I had thought also
of tordray (since he was to wake no
more); but a simple epithet for καδέων is
perhaps more in this poet’s manner.

The story was that Hermes disguised
himself as a shepherd, and lulled Argus
to sleep by playing on the σθριγξ. Ac-
cording to Ovid JZe¢. 1. 673—719, while
some of the watcher’s eyes were closed
by the music, others remained open; but
these finally yielded to a discourse by
Hermes on the invention of the instru-
ment :—TZalia dicturus vidit Cyllenius
omnes Succubuisse oculos, adopertaque
lumina somno. Hermes then deepens
the slumber by waving his charmed wand
above the sleeper’s face. Mec mora,
falcato nutantem vulnerat ense Qua collo
confine caput, 1.6. he decapitates Argus
with a sickle (ἅρπη). Valerius Flaccus
Arg. IV. 384—390 tells the tale more
briefly, but with a similar ending ;—
languentia somno Lumina cuncta videe,
dulcesque seguentia somnos, Et celerem
mediis in cantibus exigit harpen. Lucan
also arms Hermes with the harpe (Phars.
9. 663). Until this ode was recovered,
the story was known only from the
Latin sources. It is the subject of a
wall-painting at Herculaneum (Baumeister
I. p. 752, fig. 802), suggested by Ovid
Met. τ. 687 f.: Hermes, who has just
been playing the syrinx, is holding it out
to Argus, who looks at it in wonder.

37 ἐμοὶ μὲν οὖν, ‘for me, at any rate’
(1.6. whatever may be the truth as to
the slaying of Argus). pév emphasizes
ἐμοί: οὖν marks the return to the main


thread of the discourse (after vv. 29—36);
a sense which it often has in the formula
δ᾽ οὖν (Aesch. P.V. 226, Ag. 224, etc.).
—These three words always formed a
complete verse in the Ms.

38 ἀσφαλέστατον. The general
sense is clear from the context. ‘For
me, at any rate, it is safest to pass (from
disputed points) to the end-of the story,
which is certain.’ The first two letters
after ἀσφαλέστατον were a. The third
letter, of which only a slight trace
remains, was, according to Blass, p:
Kenyon read it as e If it was p,
then ἁ was certainly the definite article:
and this affords the easiest line of
restoration. As to metre, verses 15 and
33 might lead us to suppose that the
measure of the lost words was -~--~-=;
and this would at least be metrically
fitting. (It cannot, however, be deemed
certain: -~ -~—~-— is another possibility.)
Such being the data, we might con-
jecture (¢.g.), ἃ πρὸς ἔσχατ᾽ οἴμα, ‘che
strain that brings me to the close.’ Or
ἁ πρόσω κέλευθος ‘the onward course
(of song, v. 1), (telling of the time)
when,’ etc.—For other suggestions, see
Appendix.

89 ἀνθεμώδεα: cp. Xv. 5 (Hebrus),
34 (Lycormas).

40 The letter after ἀφίκετ᾽ was οἱ
οἰστροπλὰξ (Blass) is fairly certain.
Aesch. P.V. 681 οἰστροπλὴξ δ᾽ ἐγὼ | μά-
στιγι θείᾳ γῆν πρὸ γῆς ἐλαύνομαι: cp.
Soph. 252. 5.—A Pompeian wall-painting
(fgured in Roscher’s Lextcon, 11. 275)
depicts Io’s arrival in Egypt. She has
been carried by Nilus to the bank of his
stream. The goddess of the country
(Aegyptus) greets Io with outstretched
right hand, while the left holds the


27—2


epode.


404


BAKXYAIAOY


[XVIII


᾿Ιὼ φέρουσα παῖδα γαστρὶ τὸν Διός,


Ἔπαφον᾽"


ἔνθα νιν τέκ᾽ εὐκλέα


λινοστόλων πρύϊτανιν πολιτᾶν,
ὑπερόχῳ βρύοντα τιμᾷ,


48 μεγίσταν τε


να τῶν ἔφανεν γενέθλαν,


ὅθεν καὶ ᾿Αγανορίϊ δας
ἐν ἑπταπύλοισι Θήβαις
Κάδμος Σεμέλ[αν φύτευσεν,


ἃ τὸν ὀρσιβάκχαν


80 τίκτεν Διόνυσον, [εὐφρόνων τε κώμων
aA of
Kat χορῶν στεφα[νοφόρων ἄνακτα.


42 ἔνθα vw] ENOENI A: corr. A??


46 Ayavopldas Crusius, Wilamowitz.


47 Κάδμος] KAAOC A: ‘corr. 4.3,---Σεμέλαν] Between CE and MEA there is a space


Uraeus snake; beside her is the child
Harpocrates, giving the sign of silence
with finger on lip. In the background
stand two women with rattles (σεῖστρα),
symbolizing the association of Io with
Isis. Io is described by Valerius Flaccus
4. 418 as Aspide cincta comas δὲ ovanti
persona sistro.

41 *Id φέρουσα παῖδα. To complete
the verse I suggest γαστρὶ τὸν Διός,
because: (1) φέρουσα alone could not
well mean ‘carrying in the womb’ ; on
the other hand cp. //. 6. 58f. μηδ᾽ ὅντινα
γαστέρι unrnp...pépo: Plat. Legg. 792 E
τὰς φερούσας ἐν γαστρί. (2) A mention
of Zeus as the father is here indis-
pensable.

42 "Emadov. Aeschylus derives the
name from ἐπαφή. When Jo reached
the Canopic mouth of the Nile (A/%
846), Zeus by the ‘ouch of his hand
restored her natural form and her reason:
ἐνταῦθα δή σε Ζεὺς τίθησιν ἔμφρονα, | ἐπα-
φῶν ἀταρβεῖ χειρὶ καὶ θιγὼν μόνον (zd.
8481). Hence Epaphus is ῥυσίων ἐπώ-
νυμος (Suppl. 314) because the ἐπαφή
was Io’s ‘deliverance.’ Aeschylus further


conceived that the child was engendered
by this touch: Suppl. 312 καὶ Ζεύς γ᾽
ἐφάπτωρ χειρὶ φιτεύει γόνον, and P.V.
850f. ἐπώνυμον δὲ τῶν Διὸς γεννημάτων
(the fatherhood of Zeus) | τέξεις κελαινὸν
“Erragov. Bacchylides, on the other
hand, imagines Io as already great
with child when she reaches Egypt.—
Herodotus (11. 153) says, ὁ δὲ “Ams
κατὰ τὴν Ἑλλήνων γλῶσσαν ἐστὶ *Exagos
(cp. 11- 27, 28). But the Greeks who
thus connected the ames would never
have identified the Epaphus of their
myth with the sacred calf of Egypt.
ἔνθα viv τέκ᾽ : Apollod. 11. 1. 4
(Io) τελευταῖον ἧκεν εἰς Αἴγυπτον" ὅπου
τὴν ἀρχαίαν μορφὴν ἀπολαβοῦσα γεννᾷ
παρὰ τῷ Νείλῳ ποταμῷ "Ἑπαφον παῖδα.
For ték’...mpvravuy, cp. I. 15 ff. δεκάτῳ
δ᾽ Ἐὐξάντιον μηνὶ τέκ᾽ εὐπλόκαμος Ι νύμ-
gpa φερεκυδέϊ νάσῳ | .. -πρύτανιν.---εὐκλέα,


would be scanned -- --, as in v. 196.
48 λινοστόλων, epithet of the
Egyptians: Her. 11. 37 εἵματα δὲ λίνεα


φορέουσι αἰεὶ νεόπλυτα. Kaibel Lpigr.
Gr. τοῦ8 (an Egyptian hymn to Isis,
of ¢. 350A.D.), Αὐγύπτου βασίλεια λινό-


XVII]


AIOYPAMBOI


405


bearing in her womb Epaphus, child of Zeus.
There she brought him forth, to be glorious lord of the linen-
robed folk, a prince flourishing in transcendent honour; and


there she founded the mightiest race among men.


From that


race sprang Cadmus, son of Agenor, who in Thebes of the seven


gates became father of Semele.


And her son was Dionysus,


inspirer of Bacchants, [king of joyous revels] and of choruses


that wear the wreath...


of about half an inch, through which a horizontal line was drawn: cp. XII. 156.


50 2. See Appendix.


στολε.---πολιτᾶν seems a fitting supple-
ment, since Epaphos was the legendary
founder of Memphis: Apollod. 11. 1. 4
Ἔπαφος δὲ βασιλεύων Αἰγυπτίων γαμεῖ
Μέμφιν τὴν Νείλου θυγατέρα, καὶ ἀπὸ
ταύτης κτίζει Μέμφιν πόλιν. (Note that
Aeschylus, though he deemed Canopus
to be the scene of Io’s healing, is careful
to bring in Memphis also: καὶ μὴν Ka-
νωβον κἀπὶ Μέμφιν txero: Suppl. 311.)

44 τιμᾷ is better here than πλούτῳ.---
Aesch. Suppl. 581 f. describes Epaphus
as παῖδ᾽ ἀμεμφῆ, | δι᾽ αἰῶνος μακροῦ πάν-
ολβον.

45 μεγίσταν τε θνατῶν, ‘the mightiest
(race) among men’ (cp. II. 61 μέγιστα
θνατῶν). These two bacchii suggest that
the form of the complete verse may
have been ~--,~--|~--,~-™, like
τίς ἀχώ, τίς ddua προσέπτα p’ ἀφεγγής ;
(Aesch. P. V. 115): see W. Christ,
Metrik p. 415. If so, we might supply
épavey (or κτίσ᾽ αὐτοῦ) -yevéd\av.—
Epaphus was the father of Λιβύη (Aesch.
Suppl. 317), from whose union with
Poseidon sprang Agenor (father of
Cadmus), and Belus (father of Aegyptus
and Danaus): see the stemma in Introd.
to this Ode.

46 ᾿Αγανορίδας: Agenor was king
of Phoenicia. Eur. Phrixus (fr. 819)
Σιδώνιόν wor’ ἄστυ Κάδμος ἐκλιπών, |᾿Αγή-
vopos παῖς, ἦλθε Θηβαίων χθόνα | Φοῖνιξ
πεφυκώς, ἐκ δ᾽ ἀμείβεται γένος | Ἑλληνικόν,


Διρκαῖον οἰκήσας πέδον. Cp. Roscher
Lex. 11. p. 833. Hence to the Euripidean
chorus of Phoenician women Io is προμά-
twp (Phoen. 676), as she is also to the
Argive Danaidae (ἁ πρόγονος βοῦς, Aesch.
Suppl. 43f., παλαιομάτωρ Eur. Suppl.
628). "


48f. Zepédav, daughter of Cadmus
and Harmonia (Hes. Theog. 975 f.).—
τὸν ὀρσιβάκχαν (only here): cp. the poet
cited by Plut. De exsilio p. 607, Eviov
ὀρσιγύναικα Διόνυσον μαινομέναις θύοντα
τιμαῖς: Soph. O. 7. αττῇϊ οἰνῶπα Βάκχον
εὔϊον, | Μαινάδων ὁμόστολον.

50. Διόνυσον in the Ms, is pre-
sumably sound: Blass changes it to Δῖον
υἱὸν, but this seems unwarrantable. The
MS. τίκτε should probably be τίκτεν : no
verse in this ode begins with -~~~.
After τίκτεν Διόνυσον Jurenka supplies
ἀγλαῶν τε κώμων. A possible substitute
for ἀγλαῶν would be εὐφρόνων : cp. X. 12
κῶμοί τε καὶ εὐφροσύναι. In 51 στεφανά-
φόρων ἄνακτα (Wilamowitz) gives a fitting
sense. ΑΒ this is a dithyramb for Athens,
χορῶν probably refers to the contests of
dithyrambic choruses at the Dionysia.
Wreaths of ivy were worn by the mem-
bers of a κύκλιος χορός : cp. Simonides
fr. 148 (which some ascribed to Bacchy-
lides, Bergk? 111. 496), πολλάκι δὴ φυλῆς
” Axapavrldos ἐν χοροῖσιν Ὧραι | ἀνωλόλυξαν
κισσοφόροις ἐπὶ διθυράμβοις.


406


Io


BAKXYAIAOY [XIX


ΧΙ ΣΙ
IAAC
AAKEAAIMONIOIC


, i 3 3 3 4
Σπάρτᾳ ποτ᾽ ἐν εἰ ὐρυχόρῳ
ξανθαὶ Λακεδαιμον ίων

ἣ » 4 Ls
τοιόνδε μέλος κ[ὅραι ὕμνευν,
yo ¥ "
ὅτ᾽ ἄγετο καλλιπά[ρᾳον
κόραν θρασυκάβ] dios Ἴδας
Μάρπησσαν idz| pty’ ἐς οἴκους,
φυγὼν θανάτου ταχὺν οἶτον,
ἀναξίαλος Ποσει[δὰν ὅτε δίφρον ὀπάσσας
ἵππους τέ (F)ou ἰσαν[έμους
Πλευρῶν᾽ ἐς ἐὐκτ[ἱμέναν ἐπόρευσε παραὶ
χρυσάσπιδος υἱὸϊν ΓΑρηος


[The rest is lost.]


mre. The title added in the left margin' by A’.
6 After I are seen the remains of Ὁ, The third


supplements see Appendix.


1—11 For the conjectural


letter must have been T: there are slight traces of the left part of the cross-stroke.—


MIX. 1 = Idas. son of . Aphareus,
carried off Marpessa, daughter of Evenus,
from Pleuron in Aetolia, Poseidon having
given him a chariot with winged horses.
See Introduction to this Ode.—edpuxépa,
epithet of Argos in rx. 31. See Appendix.
evpvayulg is also possible.—Cp. the be-
ginning of the ὑμέναιος for Peithetaerus
and Basileia in Ar. 4v. 1731, Ἥρᾳ ποτ᾽
᾽Ολυμπίᾳ, x.7.A.: also that of Theocr.
XVIII. (the Epithalamion of Helen), ἔν
ποκ᾽ dpa Σπάρτᾳ ξανθότριχι πὰρ Μενελάῳ,
KT

21. Λακεδαιμονίων... .κόραι ὕμνευν, I
prefer ὕμνευν to the ἄδον of Wilamowitz:


B. would have written ἄειδον. The fact
that κόραν occurs in v. 5. is scarcely an
objection to κόραι. But a possible alter-
native is Λακεδαιμόνιαι... κελάδησαν : in
XV. 12 that verb refers to choral singing.

4 dyero: cp. Her. τ. 59 γυναῖκα... ἄγε-
σθαι...ἐς τὰ οἰκία. The home to which
Idas brought Marpessa was, according to
Simonides (schol. 7. 9. 556), ᾿Αρήνη in
Messenia (Z/. 2. 591, 11. 723: Ap. Rhod.
1.152); Apollodorus also (1. 7. 8) says εἰς
Μεσσήνην. But B., as these verses indicate,
must have placed that home at Sparta.

6 ἰότριχ᾽. The letter after to was
certainly τ. ἰόθριξ, though not extant, is


XIX] AIOYPAMBOI 407


XIX. (xx


IDAS.
(FOR THE LACEDAEMONIANS.)


In spacious Sparta of yore the golden-haired maidens of
Lacedaemon chanted such a song as this, when bold-hearted
Idas was bringing home the fair maiden, Marpessa of the violet
locks, after escaping the swift doom of death; when Poseidon,.
lord of the sea, had given him a chariot, with steeds swift as
the wind, and had sped him on his way to well-built Pleuron, to


the son of Ares with golden shield...


ἰότριχ᾽ és οἴκους J.
οἶτον Jurenka.
ὀπάσσας conj. J.


7 The letter after θανάτου seems to have been T.—raxtv
8 Ποσειδὰν] ΠΑΟῚ A: O written above A (by A??).—6ére δίφρον.
10 ἐπόρευσε παραὶ conj. J.


fully warranted by εὔθριξ, λεπτόθριξ (ν. 28),
λευκόθριξ, μελανόθριξ, ξανθόθριξ (V. 37),
τανύθριξ, χρυσόθριξ.

᾿ Η φυγὼν θανάτου... οἶτον. As we learn
from the schol. on Pind. 7. 111. 72 (=1v.
54), Bacchylides said, doubtless in this
poem, that Evenus roofed a temple of
Poseidon with the skulls of competitors
for the hand of Marpessa whom he had
defeated in a contest. (The skulls of
Hippodameia’s vanquished suitors were
put to the same use by her father, ,ac-
cording to Sophocles in his Oenomaus.)
φυγών refers, then, to the escape of Idas
from this doom at Pleuron ; not (as Blass
takes it) to his escape from pursuit after
crossing the river Lycormas. Having once
started from Pleuron with Marpessa in
his magic chariot, Idas had nothing more
to fear.

8 ἀναξίαλος (only here): cp. VI. 1on.—
The ποσι- of the Ms. was doubtless
Ποσ(ε)ιδᾶν : as to the inconstant spelling
of that name, see crit. n. on IX. 19.—The
metre of ἀναξίαλος Ποσειδᾶν, (~) -~~-~--,
was a permissible variation on (~)-~~-—
~~-(=) in the prosodiacus (p. 120). No


supplement is metrically necessary. But, in.
view of the whole context, it seems pro-
bable that some words followed, with the
rhythm, perhaps, of ~~-~~-—(-): e.g.
ὅτε δίφρον ὀπάσσας, or ἐπεὶ ἅρμα πορών.
—Apollod. 1. 7. 8 Μάρπησσαν.. Ἴδας...
ἥρπασε, λαβὼν παρὰ Ποσειδῶνος ἅρμα.
ὑπόπτερον. Poseidon gave like aid to
Pelops, in view of his contest with
Oenomaus, Pind. O. 1. 86f. τὸν per
ἀγάλλων θεὸς | ἔδωκεν δίφρον τε χρύσεον
πτεροῖσίν τ᾽ ἀκάμαντας ἵππους. B. may
similarly have imagined the ἵππους ἰσανέ-
μους (9) as winged.

10 Πλευρών᾽ : see v. 151 n.—The
context indicates that a verb meaning
‘sent,’ to which Poseidon was subject,
stood in this verse (or in 9). ἐπόρευσε
παραὶ would serve. Cp. Pind. O. 1. 77
(Pelops to Poseidon) ἐμὲ δ᾽ ἐπὶ ταχυ-
τάτων πόρευσον ἁρμάτων | ἐς "Ady. Or
πέμψεν παραὶ, which would give a verse
like that in Ar. Raz. 220. For mapat,
cp. XII. 150.

11 viov”Apyos: Evenus, son of Ares
by Demonice, daughter of Agenor of
Pleuron (Apollod. I. 7. 7).


FRAGMENTS OF BACCHYLIDES,
AND NOTICES OF HIS POEMS,
FOUND IN ANCIENT WRITERS.


In Bergk’s Poetae Lyrict Graeci, vol. 111. pp. 569—588 (4th ed. 1882),
69 passages are collected, which contain either fragments of Bacchylides
or references to his works. Of the fragments, the following occur in the
lately-recovered poems :—

Bergk’s fr. 1 =v. 5055, ὄλβιος... ἔφυ.

2 (verses 1 and 2) =v. 160—162, θνατοῖσι... φέγγος.
6--ν. 37—40, ξανθότριχα... νικάσαντα.
8 = Kenyon’s fr. 5, 1. 5, προσφώνει τέ νιν, and certainly belonged
to Oder. (See Blass, 3rd ed., p. 25, v. 76.)
g=x. 1 and 4—7, Nika... ἀρετᾶς.
29 =XIV. 50—56, ὦ Τρῶες... σύνοικον.
30=1. 49---51, φάσω τε... ὁμιλεῖ.
47 =V. 26 f. νωμᾶϊται... χάει.

Further, fr. 41, Ποσειδάνιον... φορεῦντες, is partly preserved on ἃ small
piece of the papyrus, fr. 2 (Kenyon). See below, fr. 6 in my edition.

Fr. 17 (Servius on 4ez, vi. 21) refers to xvi. 2: see Introd. to that
ode.
Fr. 52 (Apollon. De Syzt. 186) refers to ἀριστάρχου Διός in xt. 58.
Fr. 59 (Schol. 72 24. 496) refers to a statement probably contained
in the lost part of xiv (seen. on XIV. wv. 37ff.): and the same may be said
of fr. 61 (Schol. Pind. /. τν. 92) relatively to x1x (see ἢ. on XIX. v. 7).

There are also three of the old fragments which are conjecturally
connected by Blass with the newly-found odes.

These are : (1) fr. 7 (Bergk), ὦ Πέλοπος .. πύλαι, which may well have
belonged to the lost exordium of Ode 1: Blass (2nd ed., p. 21 f.) places
it there as vv. 13 f.

(2) Fr. 35, οὐ γὰρ ὑπόκλοπον... σοφία, which, on the suggestion of
G. F. Hill, Blass (p. 127) refers to xiv, as vv. 30 ἢ,


FRAGMENTS AND NOTICES. 409


(3) Fr. 46, δυσμενέων δ᾽ ἀϊδής, used by Blass (p. 119), with the
support of some slight traces in the papyrus, in supplying x11. 208 f.

Lastly, with regard to Bergk’s fr. 5, Blass (p. 160n.) seems right in
rejecting it*. On the other hand, no. 86 of Bergk’s fragmenta adespota
is assigned by Blass to Bacchylides : see below, no. 32.


The principle adopted in my edition has been that of distinguishing
‘Fragments’ in the proper sense,—z.e. citations giving the actual words
of the poet,—from notices which do not give his words, but merely
report the substance of what he said. There may be instances in which
it is hard to say whether, or how far, a notice embodies a fragment.
But in the case of Bacchylides there is, I think, only one such
instance, viz. Bergk’s no. 15 (my no. 5); and that should probably be
reckoned among the fragments proper. Again, notices (as distinguished
from fragments proper) may conveniently be brought under two distinct
heads, according as they do, or do not, specify the class of the composi-
tion (such as dithyramb, paean, etc.) to which they severally refer.

I have therefore arranged these relics of Bacchylides as follows :—
A. Fragments: B. Notices which specify a class of poem: C. Notices
which do not specify a class. Under C it has been possible to facilitate
reference by recognising two chief groups of subject-matter, the mytho-
logical and the geographical.


The subjoined table shows the correspondence between the num-
bering of the fragments and notices in (1) Bergk’s Poetae Lyrict, 4th ed.:
(2) Blass’s 3rd ed. of Bacchylides: and (3) the present edition, denoted
by ‘J.’ For reasons which will appear from what has been said above, the
following fragments of Bergk are omitted ;—1, 2 (verses 1 and 2), 5, 6,
ἡ, 8, 9, 17, 29, 30, 35, 46, 47, 52: but 41, 59 and 61 are includedf.


* It is Schol. Aristid. 111. p. 317, referring to the origin of the chariot (ἅρμα) :—
ἄλλοι δὲ λέγουσιν ὅτι ἐκ Σικελίας ἐφάνη τὴν ἀρχήν. Βακχυλίδης γὰρ καὶ Πίνδαρος
“Ἱέρωνα καὶ Τέλωνα τοὺς Σικελίας ἄρχοντας ὑμνήσαντες καὶ πλεῖστα θαυμάσαντες ἐν ἱππη-
λασίᾳ πρὸς χάριν αὐτῶν εἶπον ὡς Σικελιῶται πρῶτοι ἅρμα ἐξεῦρον. So C. But the
Ziad alone would have forbidden such a statement. Pindar, in fr. 106, merely praises
the Theban ἅρμα and the Sicilian ὄχημα. And in the text of the schol. given by BD
this passage runs thus:—oi γὰρ περὶ Βακχυλίδην καὶ Πίνδαρον ὑμνήσαντες τοὺς περὶ
Ἱέρωνα καὶ Τέλωνα ἐν ἱππικῇ παρέσχον ὑπόνοιαν Σικελιώτας τὴν ἱππικὴν ἐξευρεῖν.

+ Five of the items in my list of 61 are absent from this table, as they have no
numbered counterparts in Bergk. These are:—(1) No. 32=Blass 374. This is
reckoned by Bergk, not among the fragments of Bacchylides, but among the adesfota.
(2) No. 37; cited by Bergk in a ἢ. on his fr. 11, p. 572, and by Blass in a ἢ. on his
fr. 2, p. 160. (3) No. 40, which I do not find in Bergk: Blass has it on p. 165, but
without a number. (4) No. 46; cited by Bergk in a ἢ. on his fr. 29, p. 580, and
noticed by Blass on p. 159. (5) No. 50, the passage of Natalis Comes, which Bergk
gives at the end (p. 588), but without numbering it: so also Blass, p. 176.


410 BACCHYLIDES.


Bergk, Blass. 1. Bergk. Blass. J.
2, verse 3 37 28 39 30 22
3 25 21 40 81 23

4 T I 41 (Ρ. 159)
Io (Ρ. 137) 35 42 32 26
ΠῚ 2 2 43 33 27
12 3 36 44 34 24
13 4 3 45 35 30
14 5 4 48 Ep. 1, p- 176 33
15 6 5 49 Ep. 2, 5, 34
16 7 39 50 38 41
18 8 38 51 39 31
19 II 7 53 40 60
20 12 8 54 41 45
21 13 9 55 42 54
22 14 Io 56 10 49
23 15 1 57 (p- 166 n.) 42
24 17 13 58 43 59
25 18 14 59 (p. lxvii) 56
26 19 15 60 44 47
27 20 16 61 (p. 158) 48
28 21 17 62 45 44
31 16 12 63 46 52
. 32 9 51 64 47 53
33 22 18 65 48 58
34 23 19 66 49 57
36 24 20 67 50 61
37 27 29 68 51 43
38 29 25 69 52 55


A. FRAGMENTS.


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ.
1. [Bergk 4: Blass 1.]


ν

‘Os δ᾽ ἀπαξ εἰπεῖν, φρένα καὶ πυκινὰν
3 wn

κέρδος ἀνθρώπων βιᾶται.

Stobaeus, Flor. 10. 14: Βακχυλίδου ᾿Επινικῶν (ste A: Βακχυλίδου simply, Trin-
cavellus, ed. 1536).—‘ Be it said once for all, even wise minds are overmastered by
love of gain.’ ὡς δ᾽ ἅπαξ εἰπεῖν, to sum up the matter in a single broad statement
(without taking account of exceptions): a phrase practically equivalent to ὡς ἁπλῶς


(or καθόλου) εἰπεῖν, but more sententious and emphatic.—Cp. XII. 199 f., εἰ μή τινα
θερσιεπὴς | φθόνος βιᾶται.


YMNOI.
2. [B. 11: Bl 2.]
Αἰαΐ τέκος ἁμέτερον,
μεῖζον ἢ πενθεῖν ἐφάνη κακόν, ἀφθέγκτοισιν ἶσον.


Stob. Flor. 122. 1: Βακχυλίδου Ὕμνων .---“ Alas, my child, a sorrow has come, too
reat for tears, one of those that can find no voice.’ Cp. Her. 111. 14 τὰ μὲν οἰκήϊα
ἣν μέζω κακὰ ἢ ὥστε dvaxdalew : Thuc. Vil. 75 § 4 μείζω ἢ κατὰ ddxpua...removOdras.— -

For ἀφθέγκτοισιν cp. Pind. P. Iv. 237 ἀφωνήτῳ... ἄχει.---Μείτε : dactylo-epitrite.


FRAGMENTS. 41ττ


ΠΑΙΑΝΕΣ.
3. [B. 13: Bl. 4.]


Τίκτει δέ τε θνατοῖσιν εἰρήνα μεγάλα
πλοῦτον μελιγλώσσων τ᾽ ἀοιδᾶν ἄνθεα,

ν» 5 3 Κκὶ lal n ¥ A
δαιδαλέων τ᾽ ἐπὶ βωμῶν θεοῖσιν αἴθεσθαι βοῶν
ξανθᾷ φλογὶ μῆρα τανυτρίχων τε μήλων,

5 γυμνασίων τε νέοις αὐλῶν τε καὶ κώμων μέλειν.
ἐν δὲ σιδαροδέτοις πόρπαξιν αἰθᾶὰν
ἀραχνᾶν ἱστοὶ πέλονται"
μ᾿ 4 Ν - > > 4 , 3 ed
Eyxed τε λογχωτὰ ξίφεα 7 ἀμφάκεα δάμναται εὐρώς.
χαλκεᾶν δ᾽ οὐκ ἔστι σαλπίγγων κτύπος,
3 Ν lal , 4 3 ἢ ,
10 οὐδὲ συλᾶται μελίφρων ὕπνος ἀπὸ βλεφάρων,
ἀῷος ὃς θάλπει κέαρ.
’ὔ δ᾽ > i ¥. 3 > rd ra >
συμποσίων δ᾽ ἐρατῶν βρίθοντ᾽ ayuiat, παιδικοί θ᾽ ὕμνοι
φλέγονται. τὰ


Stob. Flor. 55. 3: Βακχυλίδου Παιάνων.---ΤῊΕ paean to which our fragment
belonged was presumably composed in strophe, antistrophe, and epode: but critics
differ as to the place which the extant verses held in the scheme of the triad. (1) M.
Schmidt (Pind. O/. p. Lxx11) thinks that vv. 1—s form a complete antistrophe, the
epode beginning at v. 6. (2) Hartung finds the epode in 1-—5, and the strophe in
6—11. (3) Bergk, Poet. Lyr. Gr.4 111. 573, regards vv. 1—3 as the last part of the
antistrophe, and 6—12 asa complete epode. (4) Blass, in Ahedw. Mus. XXXII. 460,
gives an ingenious reconstruction, according to which v. 1 is the last of an epode;
vv. 2—g (as numbered by him, 7.4. from πλοῦτον down to πέλονται) constitute the
strophe ; and the remaining lines complete the antistrophe. To obtain this corre-
spondence, however, it is necessary to make two assumptions. (i) That in v. 8 (=r1
Blass) a dactyl beginning with a vowel has been lost between δάμναται and εὐρώς.
(Z.g. ἔμπεδον would serve.) (ii) That in v. 11 (=15 Bl.) the MS. ὦμος or ἅμος is
corrupted from a word of which the scansion was ~--~. Blass writes ἀῴος, comparing
Pind. 20. 1x. 23 ff., τὸν δὲ σύγκοιτον γλυκὺν | παῦρον ἐπὶ γλεφάροις | ὕπνον ἀναλίσκοισα
ῥέποντα πρὸς ἀῶ: and [Eur.] Rhes. 554. θέλγει δ᾽ ὄμματος ἕδραν | ὕπνος" ἅδιστος γὰρ
ἔβα βλεφάροις πρὸς ἀοῦς. This may be accepted. © The s of the corrupt ὦμος (or duos)
is a strong point in its favour. We have to suppose a form of ωἱἹ which could be
mistaken for M. (iii) That ἀραχνᾶν (~~~) in v. g (BI.) answers to παιδικοί in the
last verse : Blass holds this to be legitimate (Praef. p. XL).

On the whole, I incline to think (with Weir Smyth, vedic Poets p. 448) that
Blass’s arrangement, though worthy of careful consideration, is somewhat too hazardous.
Our data, in fact, do not suffice to determine the question of structure here. I there-
fore print the verses without any attempt at indicating divisions.—The metre is
dactylo-epitrite. ᾿

“Yea, and Peace, mighty goddess, brings forth wealth for mortals, and the flowers
of honied song; her gift it is that thigh-flesh of oxen and of fleecy sheep is burnt to
the gods in the yellow flame on carven altars ; and that youths disport themselves with
bodily feats, and with flutes and revels.

‘The webs of red-brown spiders are on the iron-bound handles of shields ; sharp-
pointed spears and two-edged swords are a prey to rust. No blast of bronze trumpet
is heard; sleep of gentle spirit, that comforts the heart at dawn, is not stolen from the
eyelids. Joyous feasting abounds in the streets, and songs in praise of youths flame


forth.’
1. δέτε: cp. XII. 129 n.—Stephanus and Ursinus omit re. Bergk would prefer


412 BACCHYLIDES.


τοι.---μεγάλα is, as Smyth remarks, a somewhat rare epithet for a goddess (though it
is given to Demeter and Persephone, to Moira, and to the Erinys): but it seems not
unsuitable here, where the poet insists on the beneficent Jower of Eirene over human
life. In any case it is not endurable to take it as acc. neut. plur., in apposition with
the following accusatives. Bergk would prefer μέγαν : Hartung, μέγαν τε.-ἰ-
2. πλοῦτον μελιγλώσσων τ᾽ Boeckh, Neue, Blass: πλοῦτον καὶ μελιγλώσσων MSS. of
Stobaeus: so Bergk, Smyth.—Cp. Philemon, Πύρρος 7 ff. (of Εἰρήνη), ὦ Ζεῦ φίλτατε, | τῆς
ἐπαφροδίτου καὶ φιλανθρώπου θεοῦ" | γάμους, ἑορτάς, συγγενεῖς, παῖδας, φίλους, | πλοῦτον,
ὑγίειαν, σῖτον, οἶνον, ἡδονὴν | αὕτη δίδωσι. In the marketplace at Athens (Paus. 1. 8
§ 2, 9. 16 § 2) there was a statue by Cephisodotus (c. 370 B.c.) of Peace nursing the
infant Wealth, whom she supports on her left arm,—the original, as Brunn recognised,
of a statue now at Munich (Ernest Gardner, Greek Sculpture, 11. 352 f.).—&. αὔθεσθαι
L. Dindorf and Schneidewin: ἔθεσθε the better mss. of Stobaeus, whence Gesner
τίθενται (correcting it, however, in the margin to τίθεσθαι) : al@erac P. Leopardus
Emend. \V. 21.—The inf. αἴθεσθαι, like μέλειν in 5, depends on τίκτει as=otet,
TlOnot.—4. ξανθᾷ φλογὶ, as in Ode 111. 56.---μῆρα τανυτρίχων. The Mss. of Stobaeus
agree in εὐτρίχων, but before it have μεριταν, μηρίταν, or μηρύταν. These traces clearly
point to μηρία (μῆρα) τανυτρίχων. It is possible that μηρί᾽ evrpixwy was another old
reading ; and Blass prefers this on the metrical ground (‘soluta autem thesis parum
.cum Bacch. convenit’). But it should be remembered that, when τὰν had once been
absorbed into μεριταν (etc.), -υτρίχων would have generated εὐτρίχων. That is, while
the existence of τανυτρίχων prior to the corruption in the Mss. is reasonably certain,
that of εὐτρίχων is not so. Gesner and Grotius wrote μερίδες εὐτρίχων : Leopardus
(and Stephanus), μηρία τῶν εὐτρίχων : Buttmann, μῆρα δασυτρίχων, which was received
by Boeckh, and (in preference to his own μηρί᾽ ἐὔτρίχων) by Neue.—5. γυμνασίων,
athletic exercises : Pind. fr. 129. 4 καὶ τοὶ μὲν ἵπποις γυμνασίοις τε, Tol δὲ πεσσοῖς, | τοὶ
δὲ φορμίγγεσσι τέρπονται. Cp. Ar. Nab. 1002, where the Δίκαιος Λόγος describes the
healthy pleasures in store for the Athenian youth, if he be well advised ;---ἀλλ᾽ οὖν
λιπαρός γε Kal εὐανθὴς ἐν γυμνασίοις διατρίψεις.---αὐλῶν : associated with a κῶμος in
Il. 12 and in νΠ|. 68.

6—10 Plut. Muma 20 quotes these verses, without the poet’s name. The
blessings of Numa’s reign were such, ὥστε καὶ τὰς ποιητικὰς ὑπερβολὰς ἐνδεῖν πρὸς τὴν
τότε κατάστασιν λέγουσιν, ἐν δὲ σιδαροδέτοις πόρπαξιν αἰθᾶν ἀραχνᾶν ἔργα,
καὶ εὐρὼς δάμναται ἔγχεά τε λογχωτὰ (and the rest, down to βλεφάρων). This
inexact quotation, evidently made from memory, suggests how well-known the poem
was in Plutarch’s time. 6 πόρπαξιν. The πόρπαξ was a leathern thong, carried
round the inner edge of the shield, and fixed at intervals by the πόρπαι or pins from
which it took its name, so as to form a succession of loops: hence σιδαρόδετος. A
figure from a Greek vase (Smith, Dict. Ant. 1. 459, clipeus) shows a warrior whose
left arm is passed through a band (8xavov or ὀχάνη) traversing the diameter of the
shield, while his hand grasps the πόρπαξ. Cp. my ed. of Soph. 47., App. on 575 f.
The context here implies that the shield is hung up with the répraé attached; but the
latter could be removed (cp. Ar. Zg. 849). In Ar. Pax 662 Eirene is addressed as
ὦ γυναικῶν μισοπορπακιστάτη.---αἰθάν, of a reddish-brown colour: cp. n. on VIII. 10.
7 ἀρἄχνάᾶν, an unusual scansion, possible also (though not certain) in Eur. fr. 369
κείσθω δόρυ μοι μίτον ἀμφιπλέκειν ἀράχναις. Cp. the din ἄχνη (Eur. Or. 115). Smyth
compares (7#/er alia) Theocr. XV1. 96 ἀράχνια δ᾽ els ὅπλ᾽ ἀράχναι | λεπτὰ διαστήσαιντο :
Nonnus Dzonys. XXXVII. 13 ἔκειτο δὲ τηλόθι χάρμης | Βακχιὰς ἑξαέτηρος ἀραχνιόωσα
βοείη.---πέλονται, a word used in ΙΧ. 38; here somewhat weak, but not doubtful.
(Ursinus conjectured πλέκονται.) 8 ἔγχεα, like ξίφεα, is scanned as—--. λογχωτά:
Eur. Bacch. 761 λογχωτὸν βέλος (the sharp-pointed ἀκόντιον). λόγχη is the spear-head
(ΞΞ αἰχμή), ἔγχος here the shaft (δόρυ. 9 οὐκ ἔστι Plut. Num. 20, Bergk: οὐκέτι
Mss. of Stob., vulg. 11 Most mss. have duos (duos Vindob.): ἀμὸν Heyne, Bergk:
ἁμὸν (-- ἡμέτερον) Smyth. dos Blass (see p. 411). 12 βρίθοντ᾽. When thet of the
3rd plur. is to be elided, B. uses the form in -ovrt: cp. XVII. 10 σεύοντ᾽.---ἀγνιαί:
cp. 11. τό.---παιδικοί θ᾽ ὕμνοι : probably songs addressed to youths, the παίδειοι ὕμνοι
of Pind. /. 11. 3; seen. on IX. 42. The words could, however, mean ‘songs sung by
youths’: cp. παιδικῷ χορῷ in Lys. or. 21 § 4.--φλέγονται : Aesch. 4g. ο1 βωμοὶ
δώροισι φλέγονται. (Bergk conj. φλέγοντι : but B. would probably have written
φλέγουσι, as in v. 24 he has ἴσχουσι) Cp. Pind. O. 1x. 21 f. πόλιν | μαλεραῖς
ἐπιφλέγων ἀοιδαῖς.


FRAGMENTS. 413


4. [B. 14: Bl. 5.]


Ἦν 2 es XN , , ΄ a
Erepos ἐξ ἑτέρου σοφὸς τό τε πάλαι τό τε νῦν.
οὐδὲ γὰρ ῥᾷστον ἀρρήτων ἐπέων πύλας
ἐξευρεῖν.


Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 687: Ἕτερος 6€...76 τε νῦν, φησὶ Βακχυλίδης ἐν τοῖς
Παιᾶσιν, οὐδὲ γὰρ x.7.4.—The metre is logaoedic.

‘Poet is heir to poet, now as of yore; for in sooth ’tis no light task to find the
gates of virgin song.’—dpprjtwv ἐπέων, verses, poetry, ‘ unuttered ’ before, —original :
cp. Soph. Amt. 556 ἀλλ᾽ οὐκ ἐπ’ ἀρρήτοις γε τοῖς ἐμοῖς λόγοις.--πύλας, Pindaric: O. VI.
27 πύλας ὕμνων ἀναπιτνάμεν. Contrast Pind. O. 11. 86 σοφὸς ὁ πολλὰ fetdws pug"
μαθόντες δὲ λάβροι | παγγλωσσίᾳ, κόρακες ὥς, ἄκραντα γαρύετον | Διὸς πρὸς ὄρνιχα θεῖον.
On this and the similar passages in O. Ix. 100 ff. and WV. II. 40 ff., see pp. 15—17.

It seems not improbable that, in writing the words quoted by Clement, Bacchylides
was thinking of such Pindaric utterances, which express scorn for the man who has
learned from others, as distinguished from the man of original genius. If, however,
that be so, the tone of the reply is gentle and modest. See pp. 23 f.


5. [B.15: Bl. 5.]


ἼΑρκτου παρούσης ἴχνη μὴ ζήτει.


Zenobius 111. 36: ᾿Επὶ τῶν δειλῶν κυνηγῶν εἴρηται ἡ παροιμία: μέμνηται δὲ αὐτῆς
Βακχυλίδης ἐν Π αιᾶσιν.--- Do not look for the bear’s tracks when he is close by.’—
As μέμνηται does not necessarily imply more than an a//usion to the proverb, it seems
doubtful whether, or how far, the words quoted can be assumed to be those used by
the poet: but ἄρκτου παρούσης, at least, might well be his.


AIOYPAMBOI.
6. [B. 41: Bl. p. 159.]


Ποσει]δάνιον als

Mart |wées τριόϊδοντα χαλκοδαιδάλοισιν ἐν
ἀσπίσιν φορεῦνζτες...

ad’ ἱπποτρήόφου πόλιος...


Schol. Pind. O. ΧΙ. 83: Ὃ Δίδυμος δὲ οὕτω καθίστησι τὸν λόγον" τὴν Μαντινέαν
φησὶν ἱερὰν τοῦ Ποσειδῶνος καὶ παρατίθεται τὸν Βακχυλίδην λέγοντα οὕτω" Ποσειδάνιον
(Gott. Vrat. D., vulg. -ὠνιον) ὡς Μαντινεῖς τριόδοντα χαλκοδαιδάλοισιν ἐν
ἀσπίσι φορεῦντες.---ΤῊΕ citation is now supplemented by δ fragment of the papyrus,
which gives the letters printed above between ] and [ in each verse. The occurrence
of the words in our MS. makes it certain that they come from a dithyramb,—as
Neue (p. 24) had conjectured, comparing Servius on Aez. ΧΙ. 93. (See below, no. 36.)
Blass supposes that the dithyramb was Κασσάνδρα, containing her prophecy of the
Trojan War, from which Horace (according to Porphyrion) imitated that of Nereus in
C. 1. 15. These words occurred (Blass suggests) in an enumeration of the Greek
forces.—‘(Seest thou) .. how the Mantineans, bearing the trident of Poseidon on their
finely-wrought shields of bronze, .. (come) .. from their horse-nurturing city?’—Metre,
dactylo-epitrite.


414 BACCHYLIDES.


TIPOZOAIA.
7. (B. 19: Bl. 11.]


Eis ὅρος, μία βροτοῖσίν ἐστιν εὐτυχίας ὁδός,
θυμὸν εἴ τις ἔχων ἀπενθῆ διατελεῖν δύναται βίον"
a \ , A > fal ,ὔ
ὃς δὲ μυρία μὲν ἀμφιπολεῖ φρενί,

A ,
τὸ δὲ παρ᾽ dudp τε καὶ νύκτα μελλόντων χάριν
ἐὸν ἰάπτεται κέαρ, ἄκαρπον ἔχει πόνον.


Stob. Flor. 108. 26: Βακχυλίδου Προσωδιῶν (szc A), ἐ.6. ἸΤροσοδίων.---- 6 metre is
logaoedic.

‘One canon is there, one sure way, of happiness for mortals—if one can keep a
cheerful spirit throughout life. But he whose thoughts are busy with countless cares,
and who afflicts his soul day and night about the future, has barren toil.’

1 ὄρος is the canon, the rule or standard, by which true εὐτυχία is to be measured:
ὁδός, the course to be followed. 2 διατελεῖν δύναται Bergk, Smyth: δύναται διατελεῖν
Mss. 8 μυρία μὲν Mss.: μυρίαν μενοινὰν Bergk. 4 τὸ δὲ παρ᾽ ἅμάρ τε] παρόμαρτε
Mss. : corrected by Grotius (who, however, wrote τόδε παρ᾽ ἦμάρ Te): τὸ δὲ πᾶν ἦμάρ
τε Stephanus. 5. ἐὸν ἰάπτεται Grotius: αἰὲν ἰάπτ., Boeckh, Blass?: ἀόνι (αονι
Vindob.) ἅπτεται MSs. For ἅπτεται Stephanus conjectured δάπτεται, and so Ursinus,
Brunck, Ilgen, Jacobs, the two latter changing dé to ἀνία.---ἰάπτεται lit. ‘is hurt’:
cp. Od. 2. 376 ὡς ἂν μὴ κλαίουσα κατὰ χρόα καλὸν larry (‘mar’). Moschus 4. 39
ἰάπτομαι ἄλγεσιν ἦτορ.---ἄκαρπον MSS. ; ἀκάρπωτον Bergk.


8. [B. 20: Bl. 12.]
εἴ Ν. > Ἀ »» 5 = ἃς ᾿Ξ, 3 δῆ. ’ὔὕ lal
τί γὰρ ἐλαφρὸν er ἐστὶν ἀπρακτ' ὀδυρόμενον δονεῖν
καρδίαν ;


Stob. Flor. 108. 49: Βακχυλίδου Προσωδιῶν (sic A). Metre, logaoedic. These
words belong to the same poem as fr. 7, and may, as Neue thought, have immediately


followed it.
‘What ease is left to him who agitates his heart with vain laments ?’—édagpov


here is strictly ‘ease-giving’ :—‘what alleviation (κούφισμα) is there any more (ἔτι) in
lamenting?’ etc.: z.e., no comfort remains to him who indulges in it. Bergk says,
“ἔτ᾽ displicet, fort. ἔμ’ legendum’: 1 cannot_agree.—éoriv Blass: ἔστ᾽ mss.—Bergk,
keeping ἔστ᾽, inserts ὧδ᾽ before ὀδυρόμενον .---δονεῖν : cp. Ode 1. 69.


9. [B. 21: Bl. 13.]


Πάντεσσι θνατοῖσι δαίμων ἐπέταξε πόνους ἄλλοισιν ἄλλους.


Stob. Alor. 118. 25: Βακχυλίδου Προσωδιῶν (sc A).—Metre, dactylo-epitrite.—‘On
all mortals hath the god laid toils; each man bears his own.’


YTTOPXHMATA.
10. [B. 22: Bl. 14.]


Λυδία μὲν yap λίθος μανύει
χρυσόν, ἀνδρῶν δ᾽ ἀρετὰν σοφία τε παγκρατής 7 ἐλέγχει
ἀλάθεια.....


FRAGMENTS. 415


Stob. Flor. 11. 7: Βακχυλίδου Ὑπορχημάτων. The verses are found also on a gem
in Caylus’ Rec. αἱ Antig. vol. v. pl. 50, 4.—Metre, logaoedic.

‘The Lydian stone reveals gold; the worth of men is evinced by the ‘poet’s art
and by all-powerful truth.’ 1 Λυδία... λίθος (/apzs Lydius), the βάσανος or touchstone
(a flinty slate, black, grey, or white), on which pure gold is tested by rubbing:
Theognis 449 εὑρήσεις δέ με πᾶσιν ἐπ᾽ ἔργμασιν ὥσπερ ἄπεῴφθον | χρυσόν, ἐρυθρὸν
ἰδεῖν τριβόμενον βασάνῳ. Pind. P. x. 67 πειρῶντι δὲ καὶ χρυσὸς ἐν βασάνῳ πρέπει |
καὶ νόος ὀρθός. In Soph. fr. 732 Λυδία λίθος = Μαγνῆτις λίθος (Eur. fr. 567. 42).---μανύει
with v, as in Pind. P. I. 93 etc. (in Attic always ὕ). 2 σοφία τε παγκρατής τ΄...
ἀλάθεια. This reading is found in several Mss. of Stobaeus (see Bergk* 111. p. 576),
and on the gem of Caylus. It seems to me clearly the right one. The poet’s faculty
(σοφία) evinces, brings out (ἐλέγχει) the ἀρετή of men (as in the case of victors in the
games), and the poet’s just tribute is confirmed by ἀλάθεια. That is, candid men
recognise that the poet has spoken truly; and, even if there be some detraction at the
moment, the true estimate prevails in the end. The strongest corroboration of this
reading is (to my thinking) afforded by the poet’s own words in Ode vill. 82 ff.: τό
γέ τοι καλὸν ἔργον | γνησίων ὕμνων τυχὸν | ὑψοῦ παρὰ δαίμοσι κεῖται" | σὺν δ᾽ ἀλαθείᾳ
βροτῶν | κάλλιστον, εἴπερ καὶ θάνῃ τις, | λείπεται Μουσᾶν ἀγακλειτᾶν ἄθυρμα. There,
as here, σοφία renders the due praise, and ἀλάθεια ratifies it. See also XII. 202 ff. :
βροτῶν δὲ μῶμος | πάντεσσι μέν ἐστιν ἐπ᾽ ἔργοις" | ἁ δ᾽ ἀλαθεία φιλεῖ | νικᾶν, ὅ τε
πανδαμάτωρ | χρόνος τὸ καλῶς | ἐργμένον αἰὲν ἀέξει. Compare, too, Pind. O. x. 4 ff,
where the agencies of Poetry and of Truth are invoked together: ὦ Moto’, ἀλλὰ σὺ
καὶ θυγάτηρ | ᾿Αλάθεια Διός, ὀρθᾷ χερὶ | ἐρύκετον Wevdéw | ἐνιπὰν ἀλιτόξενον. It is to
the credit of Neue (Bacchyl. Cet Fragmenta, 1822, p. 32) that he supported this
reading at a time when most critics, indeed he says, ‘vecentzores critict...ommes,’—were
againstit. ‘S¢cwtaurum probatur lapide Lydio admoto, tta virorum virtutem arguit poetica
facultas cum veritate.’—Weir Smyth also adopts this view.—The alternative reading is
σοφίαν τε παγκρατὴς ἐλέγχει ἀλάθεια. The acc, σοφίαν is in some Mss. of Stobaeus
(see Bergk 14). So Salmasius read, followed by Grotius, as now by Bergk and Blass.
The sense given by this reading is, in itself, satisfactory enough; whether σοφίαν be
taken as ‘wisdom’ generally, or (as seems better) with reference to the poet’s art.
On the latter view, Bacchylides will say that the man of worth, and the genuine
poet, are ultimately recognised by the voice of truth. There is, however, much less
point in such a sentiment than in that afforded by the other reading. The alliance of
poetry with truth in securing recognition, even though tardy, for ἀρετή is a thought
specially characteristic of Bacchylides.—Cp. frag. 27.

[In Stob. Flor. 11. 2 (=20 Hense) we read: Ὀλυμπιάδος. ᾿Αλάθεια θεῶν
ὁμόπολις, μόνα (-4 MSS.) θεοῖς (βροτῶν conj. Bergk) συνδιαιτωμένα (-7 Mss.). Bergk
conjectures that this fragment belongs to Bacchylides, observing that Damascius
places it immediately after the verses Λυδία μὲν yap λίθος κιτιλ. The lemma
᾿᾽Ολυμπιάδος may, he thinks, be due (as Meineke surmised) to the fact that Stobaeus
here cited Pind. O. x. 63, which occurs in Damascius; he would change θεῶν to


βροτῶν. =
11. [B. 23: Bl. 15.]}


Οὐχ ἕδρας ἔργον οὐδ᾽ ἀμβολᾶς,
ἀλλὰ χρυσαίγιδος Ἰτωνίας

χρὴ παρ᾽ εὐδαίδαλον ναὸν ἐλ-
θόντας ἁβρόν τι δεῖξαι « μέλος».


Dionys. De Compos. Verb. c. 25: παρὰ Βακχυλίδῃ. That the poem was a hypor-
cheme is shown by a grammarian in Keil Anal. Gramm. 7.21: φιλεῖ δὲ τὰ ὑπορχήματα
τούτῳ τῷ ποδὶ καταμετρεῖσθαι, οἷον Οὐχ ἕδρας ἔργον οὐδ᾽ ἀμβολᾶς:; also by Athen.
p. 631€ ἡ δ᾽ ὑπορχηματική (sc. ὄρχησι5) ἐστιν ἐν ἢ ἄδων ὁ χορὸς ὀρχεῖται' φησὶ γοῦν ὁ
Βακχυλίδης Οὐχ ἕδρας... ἀμβολᾶς. The first verse, which had become quasi-prover-
bial, occurs also in Aelian Mat. Anim. vi. 1, Lucian Scyth. 11 οὐχ ἕδρας τοίνυν οὐδ
ἀμβολᾶς ἔργον, ws ὁ ἹΚεῖός φησιν, Achilles Tatius v. 12 οὐχ ἕδρας <épyov> οὐδ
ἀναβολῆς.---ΤῊς rhythm is paeonic, the verses consisting of a series of cretics.


416 BACCHYLIDES.


‘This is no time for sitting still or tarrying: we must go to the richly-wrought
temple of Itonia with golden aegis, and show forth some choice strain of song.’—
2 ‘Irwvlas. The cult of Athena Itonia seems to have had its earliest seat in
Thessaly, where there was a temple of the goddess between Pherae and Larissa, and
another at a town called Ἴτων οΥ Ἴτωνος (Strabo 9. p. 436). Her festival, ᾿Ιτώνια, at
Crannon is noticed by Polyaenus (2. 34). But the cult was ancient in Boeotia also ;
and perhaps the most famous shrine of the Itonia was that in the neighbourhood of
Coroneia. This is the temple to which Alcaeus refers (fr. 9) ina hymn to Athena
where she is called πολεμαδόκος. The Itonia was a war-goddess, the presiding
deity of the Pamboeotic league, whose meetings were held at her sanctuary (Strabo 9.
p. 411: Paus. 9. 34. 1). Hence the epithet χρύσαιγις is appropriate (cp. Ode XvI.
7n.). Her cult was also connected with that of Hades (Strabo /.c.). The title
*Irwvla was derived by some from Itonus son of Amphictyon; by others from the
town Iton. Its meaning is uncertain. Can it have been popularly associated with
ἰέναι (the onset)? According to Paus. 10. 1. 10 ᾿Αθηνᾶ ᾿Ιτωνία was a watchword of
the Thessalians in battle. The head of the goddess is found on silver coins of
Coroneia (Brit. Museum, Catal. of Coins, Central Greece, p. 47, τι. 12). 4 The
iambus lost after δεῖξαν may have been μέλος : though the simple ἁβρόν τι would
be parallel with ὕφαινέ... τι κλεινόν in XVIII. 8f. With the exordium of this hypor-
cheme, cp. that of Ode xv (n. on vv. 1—4).


12. [B. 31: Bl. 16.]
Ὦ περικλειτὲ Aad’, ἀγνοήσειν μὲν ov σ᾽ ἔλπομαι.


Hephaestion p. 76: δεδηλώσθω δὲ ὅτι καὶ ὅλα ἄσματα κρητικὰ συντίθεται, ὥσπερ καὶ
παρὰ Βακχυλίδῃ, ὦ περικλειτὲ δ᾽ ἄλλ᾽ x.7.A.—Neue (p. 35) inferred from the cretic
metre that the verse probably belonged to a hyporcheme. Blass, who shares that
view, has corrected the corrupt δ᾽ ἄλλ᾽ to Δᾶλ᾽.  (Bergk follows Turnebus in reading
τἄλλ᾽, placing the fragment among those ἐξ ἀδήλων εἰδῶν.) The intrinsic probability
of Δᾶλ᾽ is strengthened by the presumption that the poem was a hyporcheme, a fitting
tribute to Apollo. We know at least one other instance (Ode xvi) of a poem written
by Bacchylides for the Delian god. The poet expresses a hope that Delos ‘will not
regard him as a stranger’ (or, perhaps, ‘will not fail to judge kindly of his tribute’).
Cp. γνώσει in the exordium of Ode v, v. 3.—See no. 42.


The fragments of ὑπορχήματα quoted in Plut. Quaest. Conv. IX. 15. 2, and com-
monly ascribed to Simonides (fr. 29, 30, 31, Bergk 111. p. 400), are claimed for
Bacchylides by M. Théodore Reinach in Mélanges Weil p. 420 ff. The discussion is
acute and interesting ; but the style of these verses seems hardly such as to suggest
Bacchylides.


EPOOTIKA.
13. [B. 24: Bl. 17.]


+ €UTE
Ν SS 3 , Ψ
τὴν amr ἀγκύλης ἴησι
τοῖσδε τοῖς νεανίαις
λευκὸν ἀντείνασα πῆχυν.


Athen, 15. Ρ. 667 : Βακχυλίδης ἐν ᾿Ερωτικοῖς" εὖτε x.7.d. (Also ΧΙ. 782 E, Where
τοῖσδε is omitted in v. 2, and ἐντείνουσα stands in v. 3.)—Metre, trochaic.

...‘when, lifting her white arm, with bent elbow she makes the cast, at the bidding
of these youths.’—In the game of cottabos the player sought to throw a little wine
(Adraé) from a cup into a bronze saucer (πλάστιγξ) : if this was done with skill, the wine


FRAGMENTS. 411


struck the saucer smartly, making it descend (in some forms of the game) and ring on
the head of a small bronze figure (udvys) placed beneath it.

An omen of love, prosperous or the reverse, was often drawn from the throw,
according as the sound of the Adraé on the saucer was clear or dull.—riv ἀπ᾽ ἀγκύλης
(sc. βολήν), the throw made with the arm bent; Athen. 15. p. 667 B, ἐκάλουν δ᾽
am’ ἀγκύλης Thy τοῦ κοττάβου πρόεσιν, διὰ τὸ ἀπαγκυλοῦν τὴν δεξιὰν χεῖρα (‘arm’)
ἐν τοῖς ἀποκοτταβισμοῖς. To bend the arm gracefully was a mark of the accom-
plished player: Hesych. s.v. ἀγκύλη"...ἡ καμπὴ τοῦ ἀγκῶνος... οἱ yap τοὺς κοττάβους
προϊέμενοι τὴν δεξιὰν χεῖρα ἠγκύλουν, κυκλοῦντες αὐτὴν ὡς ἐνῆν πρεπωδέστατα, καὶ
σεμνυνόμενοι ὡς ἐφ᾽ ἑνὶ τῶν καλῶν. --- 6 dat. τοῖσδε τοῖς v., ‘for’ them, goes with
ἵησι, not with dvrelvaca: ἐ.6. the girl (perhaps an αὐλήτρια) makes the throw at their
request.


14. [B. 25: Bl. 18.]
Ἦ καλὸς Θεόκριτος: οὐ μόνος ἀνθρώπων ὁρᾷς.


_ Hephaestion p. 130 (as corrected by Westphal): Ἔστι δέ τινα καὶ τὰ καλούμενα
ἐπιφθεγματικά, ἃ διαφέρει ταύτῃ τῶν ἐφυμνίων, ὅτι τὰ μὲν ἐφύμνια ἐκ περιττοῦ ὡς
πρὸς τὸ λεγόμενον τῇ στροφῇ πρόσκειται, τὰ δὲ ἐπιφθεγματικὰ καὶ πρὸς τὸν νοῦν συντελεῖ"
οἷον τὸ Βακχυλίδου, Ἦ καλὸς... ὁρᾷς" καὶ πάλιν παρὰ τῷ αὐτῷ Βακχυλίδῃ" Σὺ δ᾽ ἐν
χιτῶνι. φεύγεις [fr. 15]. Both the ἐπιφθεγματικόν, then, and the ἐφύμνιον are kinds
of refrain, repeated at the end of successive strophes. But the ἐπιφθεγματικόν ‘con-
tributes to the sense’; it isa sentence, as in the two examples cited from our poet. The
ἐφύμνιον, on the other hand, is ‘a superfluous addition, so far as the meaning of the
passage is concerned’; i.e. it may be a mere exclamation, like aldwov αἴλινον εἰπέ, or
inte Tladv.—épq@s Hephaestion : ἐρᾷς Ursinus (p. 342, also suggesting ἐρᾷ), Bergk.—
Metre, dactylo-epitrite.


15. [B. 26: BL. 19.]
Σὺ δ᾽ ἐν χιτῶνι μούνῳ
παρὰ τὴν φίλην γυναῖκα φεύγεις.


Hephaestion p. 130 (see on fr. 14).—Metre, iambic.


[TTAPOINIA.]
16. [B. 27: Bl. 20.]


wee ewer eter tweets esos eee see eee ees στρ. α΄
“> > ad
«γλυκεῖ avayKa
σενομενᾶν κυλίκων θάλπῃσι θυμόν,
Κυπρίδος δ᾽ ἐλπὶς διαιθύσσῃ φρένας,


5 ἀμμειγνυμένα Διονυσίοισι δώροις" στρ. β'
ἀνδράσι δ᾽ ὑψοτάτω πέμπει μερίμνας"
αὐτίκα μὲν πολίων κράδεμνα λύει,
πᾶσι δ᾽. ἀνθρώποις μοναρχήσειν δοκεῖ"


χρυσῷ δ᾽ ἐλέφαντί τε μαρμαίρουσιν οἶκοι" στρ. γ᾽
10 πυροφόροι δὲ κατ᾽ αἰγλάεντα « πόντον >

νᾶες ἄγουσιν ἀπ᾿ Αἰγύπτου μέγιστον

πλοῦτον: ὡς πίνοντος ὁρμαίνει κέαρ.


418 BACCHYLIDES.


Athen. 2. p. 39 E: Διὸ Βακχυλίδης φησί" Τλυκεῖ᾽ κιτιλ. There is no extant
mention of Παροίγια or Σκόλια as forming a separate class among the writings of
Bacchylides: but that may well be an accident. Another possibility is that his
convivial pieces may have been subjoined, without a distinct heading, to the ’Epwruxd.
—Metre: dactylo-epitrite.

© ..[when], as the cups go swiftly round, a sweet subduing power warms the heart,
and, blending with the gifts of Dionysus, a presage of the Cyprian goddess flutters
the mind. That power sends a man’s thoughts soaring ;—straightway he is stripping
cities of their-diadem of towers,—he dreams that he shall be monarch of the world ;—
his halls gleam with gold and ivory ;—over the sunlit sea his wheat-ships bring wealth
untold from Egypt :—such are the raptures of the reveller’s soul.’

2 The missing first verse, or the lost part of the second, probably contained a
temporal conjunction, such as ὅταν, on which θάλπῃσι and διαιθύσσῃ depended.—
γλυκεῖ ἀνάγκα : Hor. C. 11. 21. 13 714 lene tormentum ingenio admoves Plerumgue
duro. 8 cevopevav Blass: cevoudva (vl. γευομένα) Mss., vulg.: σενομένα <'K>
κυλίκων Herwerden: ἐσσυμενᾶν Bergk. The choice seems to lie between (1) σευομενᾶν
κυλίκων as gen. abs., and (2) cevouéva κυλίκων as=‘rushing from the cups,’ which,
though possible, would be harsh: we cannot join ἀνάγκα κυλίκων. I prefer (1). Cp.
Phocyl. rr χρὴ δ᾽ ἐν συμποσίῳ κυλίκων περινισσομενάων ἡδέα κωτίλλοντα καθήμενον
οἰνοποτάζειν.---θάλπῃσι Weir Smyth: θάλπησι Mss. 4 Κυπρίδος δ᾽ ἐλπὶς διαιθύσσει -
Erfurdt (-y Blass): Kumpidos: ἐλπὶς δ᾽ αἰθύσσει Mss.: Κύπρις ὥς- ἐλπὶς γὰρ
αἰθύσσει Bergk.—Smyth takes the δέ after Κυπρίδος as introducing the apodosis
(‘then...?: see my n. on Ode xiv. 61). It may be, however, that the apodosis was
contained in the lost part before γλυκεῖ ἀνάγκα, and that a new sentence begins with
ἀνδράσι δ᾽ inv.6. 6 ἀνδράσι δ᾽ Mss.: ἀνδράσι θ᾽ Bergk.—thpordrw πέμπει μερίμνας,
exalts their thoughts or ambitions [not ‘dissipates their cares’]: cp. Pind. fr. 218. 5
ἀέξονται φρένας ἀμπελίνοις τόξοις δαμέντες. For μερίμνας cp. Odel. 69 π. 7 αὐτίκα
μὲν : αὐτίχ᾽ ὁ μὲν Bergk (αὐτόθι μὲν formerly Meineke): αὐτὸς μὲν or αὐτὴ μὲν Μ85.---
Blass writes εὐκτιμενᾶν.---πολίων conj. Bergk (who, however, keeps the vulg.
πόλεων).---κράδεμνα Aver. //, 16.100 Τροίης ἱερὰ κρήδεμνα λύωμεν (cp. Od. 13. 388).—
The v of the pres. λύω is regularly short in Homer, as it is in Pind. 1 vii. 45 (Avoe)
and probably in fr. 248 (λύοντι, where the text is doubtful). But the Attic v of Avw
(taken from the fut. λύσω) occurs in Od. 7. 74, νείκεα λύει: and it may be supposed
that B. could have used it here. I should not, then, alter λύει to λύσειν, with Blass:
the vivid λύει is intrinsically much better. 8 πᾶσι δ᾽. The dat. with dpyw (rege) is
poetical, and comparatively rare. In the Homeric use it is limited to the sense of
leading in war (71. 2. 805; Od. 14. 230, 471): cp. ἡγεῖσθαί τινι. But later poetry
ignores this limit: Aesch. P.V. 940 δαρὸν γὰρ οὐκ ἄρξει θεοῖς. [In Pind. P. 11. 4
βάσσαισί τ᾽ ἄρχειν the dat. may be local.] 10 Between αἰγλάεντα and ἄγουσιν the
text of Athenaeus has lost a spondee. Erfurdt supplies πόντον, which seems clearly
right. Cp. 7. 14. 273 ἅλα μαρμαρέην. For this votary of Bacchus, everything is
radiant,—his house with. gold,—the sea with sunshine.—Bergk and Blass supply
καρπόν. But is αἰγλάεντα an intelligible epithet for a cargo of wheat?—The fragment
of ἃ skolion by Pindar (fr. 218)-should be compared :—


 “Avix’ ἀνθρώπων καματώδεες οἴχονται μέριμναι
στηθέων ἔξω, πελάγει δ᾽ ἐν πολυχρύσοιο πλούτου
πάντες ἴσᾳ νέομεν ψευδῆ πρὸς ἀκτάν"
ὃς μὲν ἀχρήμων, ἀφνεὸς τότε, τοὶ δ᾽ αὖ πλουτέοντες...
«νἀέξονται φρένας ἀμπελίνοις τόξοις δαμέντες.


‘When the weary cares of men have passed from their bosoms, and on a wide sea
of golden wealth we voyage, all alike, to a visionary shore,—then is the poor man
wealthy, and the rich [dream that they are great]....Men are exalted in spirit by the
piercing power of the grape.’—-Pindar excels in splendour of imaginative diction ;
Bacchylides, in vivid detail and playful fancy.—Cp. also Ar. Zg. go ff.


FRAGMENTS. 419


17. [B. 28: Bl. 21.]


3 A , ΄ 3 ¥ ,
Ov βοῶν πάρεστι σώματ᾽, οὔτε χρυσός,
ΕΣ
οὔτε πορφύρεοι τάπητες,
>
ἀλλὰ θυμὸς εὐμενής,
oe Ψ ox Ν ,
Μοῦσά τε γλυκεῖα, καὶ Βοιωτίοισιν
ἐν σκύφοισιν οἶνος ἡδύς.


Athen. rr. p. 500 B: Μνημονεύει δὲ τῶν Βοιωτικῶν σκύφων Βακχυλίδης ἐν τούτοις,
ποιούμενος τὸν λόγον πρὸς τοὺς Διοσκούρους, καλῶν αὐτοὺς ἐπὶ ξένια.
Was the entertainment (θεοξένια) to which B. thus invited the Dioscuri a public one,
on the occasion of some festival in their honour? That seems the more natural
supposition. On the other hand, the language (recalling Horace’s in C. 1. 20. 1,
Vile potabis modicts Sabinum Cantharis) would perfectly suit a private invitation to a
modest home. From another passage of Athenaeus (4. p. 137 E) we learn a fact
which illustrates this fragment. At Athens, where the Dioscuri were styled “Avaxes,
their festival was the ’Avaxeca: and the meal then set forth for them in the Prytaneion
was of a frugal and old-fashioned kind. The authority of Athenaeus for this state-
ment goes back to the time of Bacchylides. It is a play entitled the Πτωχοί, ascribed
to Chionides, one of the earliest poets of the Old Comedy :—rovs ᾿Αθηναίους φησίν,
ὅταν rots Διοσκούροις ἐν Πρυτανείῳ ἄριστον προτιθῶνται, ἐπὶ τῶν τραπεζῶν τιθέναι τυρὸν
καὶ φυστὴν (barley-cake) δρυπετεῖς τ᾽ ἐλάας καὶ πράσα (leeks), ὑπόμνησιν
ποιουμένους τῆς ἀρχαίας ἀγωγῆς.---Μείτε : trochaic.

‘No flesh of oxen is here, nor gold, nor purple carpets; but a kindly spirit, and
the sweet strains of the Muse, and good wine in Boeotian cups.’—1f. ov..oUre..
οὔτε : see my n. on Soph. 77. 1058 f.—oUre χρυσὸς κιτιλ. Hor. C. 11. 18. 1 Von
ebur neque aureium Mea renidet in domo lacunar. 8. θυμὸς εὐμενής : cp. Minucius
Felix 32 Est litabilis hostia bonus animus et sincera sententia. 4 Βοιωτίοισιν : the
first οἱ is short, as with Corinna’ fr. 2 (ed. Hiller-Crusius, Anth. Lyr. p. 270) τὺ
δέ, μάκαρ Kpovlda, τὺ Ποτειδάωνος, ἄναξ Bowwré: in the //iad it is always long.
5 σκύφοισιν. The oxigos—of which there were Boeotian, Rhodian, Syracusan,
Attic, and other varieties—was a large drinking-cup, generally with two handles
projecting just beneath the brim. It appears in poetry as especially a rustic cup, such
as was used by shepherds and peasants: Alcman fr. 34 μέγαν σκύφον, | οἷά τε ποιμένες
ἄνδρες ἔχουσιν : it is used by Eumaeus (Od. 14. 112): cp. Theocr. 1. 143. Owing
to its large capacity, it was specially the cup of Heracles (Stesich. fr. 7).


ΕΞ AAHAGON εἰδῶν.
18. [B. 33: BI. 22.]
Ἔστα δ᾽ ἐπὶ λάϊνον οὐδόν,
τοὶ δὲ θοίνας ἔντυον, ὧδε δ᾽ ἔφα"
Αὐτόματοι δ᾽ ἀγαθῶν
δαῖτας εὐόχθους ἐπέρχονται δίκαιοι
5 φῶτες.

Athen. 5. p. 178 Β: Βακχυλίδης δὲ περὶ ᾿Ηρακλέους λέγων ὡς ἦλθεν ἐπὶ τὸν τοῦ
Κήϊκος οἴκον, φησίν- "Ἔστη [ἔστα Neue] x.7.A.—K7ué, the powerful and gentle king of
the Malians, dwelt at Trachis: δυνάμει δὲ καὶ αἰδοῖ | Τρηχῖνος προβέβηκε, Hes. Scat.
3584 f. He was a kinsman of Heracles, being the son of a brother of Amphitryon


(schol. Soph. 77. 40). Once, when Ce¥x was celebrating the marriage of one of his
children by a feast (duos), Heracles, being in those parts, presented himself, an


28—2


420 BACCHYLIDES.


uninvited guest. This was told in Hesiod’s Kyiixos γάμος, from which only a few
words remain (Rzach, frgg. Hes. 179 f., p. 199). That poem was doubtless the
original source of the verse, αὐτόματοι δ᾽ ἀγαθοὶ ἀγαθῶν ἐπὶ δαῖτας ἴασιν, quoted in
that form, as a παροιμία, by Athen. 5. p. 1788. Zenobius 11. 19 quotes it with ἵενται
in place of ἴασιν. But see Cratinus Πυλαία fr. 1: οἵδ᾽ αὖθ᾽ ἡμεῖς, ὡς ὁ παλαιὸς | λόγος,
αὐτομάτους ἀγαθοὺς ἰέναι | κομψῶν ἐπὶ δαῖτα θεατῶν. (Cratinus alludes to it again in
fr. incert. 6: ἧκον ἑστιώμενος | ἀγαθὸς πρὸς ἀγαθούς.) Athenaeus (/.c.) says that there
was another form of the proverb,—atréuara δ᾽ ἀγαθοὶ δειλῶν ἐπὶ δαῖτας ἴασιν. Bergk
thinks that this parody was due to Eupolis. The schol. on Plat. Sym. p. 174 8B, at
any rate, cannot be right in supposing it to have been the original form of the verse.—
Metre: dactylo-epitrite.

‘He came and stood on the threshold of stone, while they were preparing their
feast, and spake thus:—‘Just men come unbidden to the plenteous banquets of the

ood.’’

° 8 αὐτόματοι: paraphrased by ἄκλητος in Plat. Symp. p. 174 B, C.—4 εὐόχθους :
Eur. Jon 1169 εὐόχθου βορᾶς. Cp. Hes. Op. 475 εὐοχθέων δ᾽ ἵξεαι πολιὸν ἔαρ (‘with
good store’),—The use of δίκαιοι by B. as a substitute for the original ἀγαθοί
indicates that he took the latter as referring to character, and not (as epic usage would
permit) to birth.


19. [B. 34: Bl. 23.]


Oi μὲν adpares ἀεικελιᾶν
. »¥
νούσων εἰσὶν Kat ἄνατοι,
30 Χ 3 ΄ "
οὐδὲν ἀνθρώποις ἴκελοι.


Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 715: ᾿Ακούσωμεν οὖν πάλιν Βακχυλίδου τοῦ μελοποιοῦ περὶ
τοῦ θείου λέγοντος" Οἱ μὲν ἀδμῆτες ἀεὶ καὶ λίαν νούσων εἰσὶ καὶ ἀναίτιοι
κιτιλ. For the corrupt ἀεὶ καὶ λίαν Euseb. Praep. Ev. xt. 679 gives ἀεικελίων
(whence Neue ἀεικελιᾶν). ἄνατοι Neue.—Bergk reads εἰσὶ vécwv.—Metre: dactylo-
epitrite.

‘Cruel maladies subdue them not, nor harm them; they are in no way like to
men.’


20. [B. 36: Bl. 24.]


aA > > » a
θνατοῖσι δ᾽ οὐκ αὐθαίρετοι
> ” »
οὔτ᾽ ὄλβος οὔτ᾽ ἄγναμπτος “Αρης οὔτε πάμφθερσις στάσις,
3 3 3 ,ὔ ΄ » + 95 5 ᾿Ξ
ἀλλ᾽ ἐπιχρίμπτει νέφος addoT ἐπ᾽ ἄλλαν
γαῖαν a πάνδωρος αἶσα.


Stob. Hel. Phys. 1. 5, 3: Βακχυλίδου.---Μ είτε : dactylo-epitrite.

‘Not by their own choice comes prosperity to mortals, nor stubborn war, nor
civil strife, the all-destroying; but Destiny, who gives all things, brings down a cloud
now on this land, now on that.’

1 θνατοῖσι Neue, for θνατοῖς.---οὐκ αὐθᾳίρετοι. This is the popular view, which
in Ode xIv. 51 f. Menelaus controverts. (Cp. Plat. Rep. 617 E αἰτία ἑλομένου: θεὸς
ἀναίτιος.) 2 ἄγναμπτος Bergk (formerly; but now ἄκαμπτος with the Mss.): cp. VIII.
73 ἀγνάμπτων ἐρώτων.--“Αρης has @ here, as in x11. 146: but ἄ in v. 34, 130, VIII.
44.-πάμφθερσις: cp. Aesch. Zum. 976 τὰν δ᾽ ἄπληστον κακῶν μήποτ᾽ ἐν πόλει
στάσιν | τᾷδ᾽ ἐπεύχομαι βρέμειν.--- πάνδωρος, giver of good, as of evil. But, since
the ering of troubles came next before ἀλλά, the varying incidence of trouble alone
1s noticed.


ὙΌΣ ΤΗΝ ΠΣ


FRAGMENTS. 421


21. [B. 3: Bl. 25.]


£ QA

Παύροισι δὲ θνατῶν τὸν ἅπαντα χρόνον δαίμων ἔδωκεν
a at

πράσσοντας ἐν καιρῷ πολιοκρόταφον


lal


ε
γῆρας ἱκνεῖσθαι, πρὶν ἐγκύρσαι δύᾳ.


Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 745: Βακχυλίδου τε εἰρηκότος. Παύροισι κ.τ.λ.---Μείτε :
dactylo-epitrite.

‘To few mortals is Fate wont to grant that they should have happy fortunes
through all their years, or come to the first grey hairs of age without encountering
woe.’—1 δαίμων ἔδωκεν Neue (ὁ δ. 25. Ursinus): τῷ δαίμονι δῶκεν MSS. 2 πράσ-
σοντας ἐν καιρῷ, lit. ‘faring opportunely,’ i.e. as they would wish at each successive
step in life. For ἐν καιρῷ cp. Aesch. P. V. 379, Plat. Crito 44 A (with τινι added),
εἰς.---πολιοκρόταφον, with gray hair on the emples, where it usually appears first :
Theocr. Χιν. 68 ἀπὸ κροτάφων πελόμεσθα | πάντες γηραλέοι.


22. [B. 39: BI. 30.]


Τὰν ἀχείμαντόν τε Μέμφιν
Ἂ , la
καὶ δονακώδεα Νεῖλον.


Athen. 1. p. 20D: Μέμφιν... περὶ ἧς Βακχυλίδης φησί" τὴν (τὰν Neue) x. τ. \.—
‘Memphis, unvexed by wintry storms, and the reedy Nile.’ Blass observes that, with
τὸν inserted before dovaxwdea, these verses might be the 4th and 5th of a strophe or
antistrophe in Ode x11, where there are several /acuzae in the papyrus. The possible
places are (1) str.a’ 4 f.; (2) ant. a’ 16f.: (3) str. β΄, 371. : (4) ant. ξ΄ 214f. But
no one of these collocations seems really probable.—In xvi1I. 39 Nile has the epithet
ἀνθεμώδεα.---Μείτε : dactylo-epitrite.


23. [B. 40: BI. 31.]


‘Exdta δᾳδοφόρε, Νυκτὸς
μελανοκόλπου θύγατερ.


Schol. Ap. Rhod. 111. 467 (where Hecate is addressed as πότνα θεὰ Iepont), Βακ-
χυλίδης δὲ Νυκτός φησιν αὐτὴν θυγατέρα" ‘Exdra «.7.4.—The metre seems to be
paeonic. Weil, however, who inserts ὦ before μελανοκόλπου, regards it as cretic.

‘Torch-bearing Hecate, daughter of dark-bosomed Night.’—SqSopdpe. As a
moon-goddess (akin to “Exaros, Apollo the sun-god) Hecate carries a torch,—her
regular symbol. δαᾳδοφόρος is actually the title under which she was worshipped, along
with Zeus Πανημέριος, at Stratoniceia in Caria, C. 7. G. 2715, 2. 2720 (see Spending’s
art. in Roscher’s Zex., p. 1885). So also she is φωσφόρος, λάμπτειρα, λαμπαδοῦχος,
etc. : and in the Homeric hymn to Demeter (v. 52) she appears σέλας ἐν χείρεσσιν
ἔχουσα. As the moon was supposed to rise from and descend into the underworld,
Hecate is also the προθυραία or κλειδοῦχος (Orphic hymn 2.5) of Hades: cp. Verg.
Aen. Vi. 255. She is a goddess of darkness (νυκτιπόλος, Ap. Rhod. Iv. 1020:
μουνυχία Orph. Argon. 938). Bacchylides seems, however, to be the only extant
authority for making her the daughter of Night. In the older mythology (followed by
Apollonius Rhodius) she is the daughter of the Titan Perses (or Persaeus) and
Asteria (herself the daughter of the Titan Koios): Hes. Zheog. 409 ff. In a later
genealogy her parents are Zeus and Hera (or Zeus and Demeter).—peAavokdArrov
Ursinus, Bergk, Smyth. The text of the scholiast has μεγαλοκόλπου, a decidedly
inferior reading, due probably to mere error.


422 BACCHYLIDES.


24. [B. 44: Bl. 34-]
Ὀργαὶ μὲν ἀνθρώπων διακεκριμέναι
μυρίαι.

Zenob. 11. 25: Δίχολοι γνῶμαι" παρὰ τὸ διχῇ ἰδιότροποι, κατὰ μετάληψιν.
Χόλος γὰρ ἡ ὀργή, ὀργὴ δὲ τρόπος. Βακχυλίδης: ᾿Οργαὶ κιτιλ. The fragment is
also in Hesych. s.v. d(xodor.—Metre: dactylo-epitrite.

‘There are varied tempers, past numbering, in mankind.’—Nearly the same words
are ascribed to A/eman by schol. Hippocr. v. 484 (ed. Littré): ’Opyas yap τοὺς
τρόπους ἐκάλουν οἱ ἀρχαῖοι, ὡς καὶ ᾿Αλκμάν φησιν" ἐν μὲν ἀνθρώπῳ ὀργαὶ κεκριμέναι.
μυρίαι. Bergk (111. p. 193) supposes that a grammarian had quoted both Bacchylides


and Aleman. After the words of Aleman had dropped out of the text, his name was
erroneously connected with the words of Bacchylides.


25. [B. 38: Bl. 29.]
Μελαγκευθὲς εἴδωλον ἀνδρὸς ᾿Ιθακησίου.


Etym. M. 296. τ: Bachmann Axecd. 1. 208. 13: Cramer Anecd. Par. τν. 168. 30:
Schol. 71. 5. 449: Apostolius 111. 37: Suidas s.v, ef6wov.—Metre: cretic or paeonic.

‘The phantom of the man of Ithaca, shrouded in gloom.’—pedayxevBis Neue:
μελαγκεθὲς Etym. M., etc. But μελαμβαφὲς is read by schol. //., Apostol., and Suid.,
whence Bernhardy conj. μελαμφαρὲς [cp. II. 13 f.], or μελαμφαές. In Ode Il. 55
μελαγκευθὲς is probable.


26. [B. 42: Bl. 32.]
“Αβρότητι ξυνέασιν Ἴωνες βασιλῆες.


Joannes Siceliota in Walz Rhet. Gr. v1. 241: ᾿Αβροὶ τὸ παλαιὸν οἱ “Iwves, ὥς πον
καὶ Βακχυλίδης φησί, τὸν σφῶν αὐτῶν ῥυθμὸν δηλῶν: ᾿Αβρότητι κιτιλ. Comparing
the other citation, τῶν ἁβροβίων ᾿Ιώνων ἄναξ (Walz ν. 493 and vil. 982), now identi-
fied with xvil. 2, Bergk read Ἰώνων here,  Wilamowitz (/sy//. 143) supposes
‘ABpérnrt x.7.d. to be a mere figment of Joannes Siceliota.—‘ The Ionian princes dwell
with luxury.’ Seen. on XVII. 2.


27. [B. 43: BL 33.]
Χρυσὸν βροτῶν γνώμαισι pavier καθαρόν.


Priscian Metr, Terent. (Keil, Grammaticé Latin 111. 428. 21): Similiter Bacchylides :
Χρυσὸν κιτιλ. Hic guogue iambus in fine tribrachium habet.—Bergk formerly con-
jectured that this fragment should be used to complete fr. 10 (his fr. 22), thus: Λυδία
μὲν γὰρ λίθος | χρυσὸν βροτῶν γνώμαισι μανύει καθαρόν" | ἀνδρῶν δ᾽ dperdy x.T.X.
The sense would then be: ‘The Lydian stone reveals pure gold #0 ¢he judgments of
men.’ In his 4th ed., however, he keeps the fragments distinct. The context being
unknown, it must remain doubtful whether the meaning of this fragment was such as
that just noticed (which seems the more probable), or the following :—(‘Truth’ or
‘Time’) ‘reveals the pure gold 2 the minds (or dispositions) of men,’—ypuedv being
metaphorical. υ


28. [8. 2, ν. 3: Bl. 37.]
Ὅλβιος δ᾽ οὐδεὶς βροτῶν πάντα χρόνον.


Stob. Flor. 98. 27, where the words are added to a citation of Ode v. 16ο ff
(@varotot...¢éyyos). The lemma prefixed is ᾿Εν τῷ αὐτῷ, referring to that of the


FRAGMENTS. 423


citation (Ode ν. 53 ff.) which immediately precedes, Τοῦ αὐτοῦ ᾿Επινίκων. If the lemma
meant, ‘in the same dovk,’ it would appear that the words ὄλβιος δ᾽ x.7.A., though
wrongly attached to Ode v. 160 ff., occurred in another of the poet’s epinikia.
But this cannot be deemed certain.


29. [B. 37: Bl. 27.]
Ei δὲ λέγει τις ἄλλως, πλατεῖα κέλευθος.


Plut. Mem. 4: Ἐ δὲ λέγει (λέγοι C) τις ἄλλως, κατὰ Βακχυλίδην, πλατεῖα
κέλευθος. —‘If any man saith otherwise,—the path is broad.’ Sintenis may well be
right in thinking that the words εἰ δὲ... ἄλλως are Plutarch’s own, and that the quota-
tion is confined to πλατεῖα κέλευθος.


30. [B. 45: Bl. 35.]
πλήμμυριν πόντου φυγών.


Etym. M. 676. 25: Πλημμυρὶς...εἰ μέντοι ὄνομά ἐστιν, εὔλογον βαρύνεσθαι αὐτὸ διὰ
τὴν παρὰ Βακχυλίδῃ αἰτιατικήν, οἷον" ἸΠλήμμυριν x.7..—Cp. Od. 9. 485 τὴν δ᾽ ἂψ
ἤπειρόνδε παλιρρόθιον φέρε κῦμα, | πλημμυρὶς ἐκ πόντοιο : the backward rush of the wave,
‘as a flood-tide from the deep,’ bore the ship to land.—For the spelling with wp, or
μ; see Ode ν. 107 ἢ.


31. [B. 51: Bl. 39.]


πυργοκέρατα.


Apollonius De Adverb. (in Bekker Anecd. 11. 596. 12--14): ὃν τρόπον καὶ ἐπ᾽
ὀνομάτων μεταπλασμοὶ γίνονται, καθάπερ... τὸ πυργοκέρατα mapa Βακχυλίδῃ. The
sense may have been, ‘ with towering horns’: cp. the figurative πυργωθέντα (πλοῦτον)
in Ode 111. 13. Bergk suggests that B.’s phrase was πύργον ὑψικέρατα (comparing Pind.
fr. 325, ὑψικ. πέτραν), but this seems very improbable.


32 (0). [B. adesp. 86: Bl. 37 4.]


3 N 2 , iA
Ov yap ἐν μέσοισι κειται
δῶρα δυσμάχητα Μοισᾶν
τὠπιτυχόντι φέρειν.


Clem. Alex. Strom. v. 654 quotes these verses without the poet’s name. Blass
conjectures that they belong to Bacchylides. There is at least one certain instance in
which Clement quotes B. without naming him, viz. in Strom. v. 731, where the
words ὁ λυρικός φησι introduce vv. 50—56 of Ode xiv. Blass also compares XIV. 53 f.
ἐν μέσῳ κεῖται κιχεῖν | πᾶσιν ἀνθρώποις Δίκαν κιτ.λ., and δῶρα Movody in XVIII. 4.
These points are perhaps not very cogent. But the general style of the verses
resembles that of Bacchylides: and we know that his poetry was one of Clement’s
favourite sources of quotation.—Sapa Movody are the gifts of poetical faculty which
the Muses bestow: these are δυσμάχητα, because poets vie keenly with each other,
as in competing at the festivals. (δυσμάχητα should not be taken with οὐ... κεῖται,
as though the sense were, ‘are not proposed as prizes to be keenly fought for.’)—
‘The keenly-contested gifts of the Muses are not prizes open to all, which the first
comer may win.’


424 BACCHYLIDES.


ETE PAMMATA.
1. 33. [B. 48: Bi. p. 176.]


Kovpa Πάλλαντος πολνώνυμε, πότνια Nika,
πρόφρων Καρθαίων ἱμερόεντα χορὸν
αἰὲν ἐποπτεύοις, πολέας δ᾽ ἐν ἀθύρμασι Μουσᾶν
Ah ba Ps e ΄,
Κηΐῳ ἀμφιτίθει Βακχυλίδῃ στεφάνους.


Anthol. Pal. V1. 313: Βακχυλίδον A.

‘Renowned daughter of Pallas, queenly Victory, mayest thou ever look with good
will on the beauteous chorus of the Carthaeans, and crown Bacchylides of Ceos with
many a wreath in the contests of the Muses.’—1 Πάλλαντος, a Titan: the mother of
Nike was Styx: see X. 9 η.---πολυώνυμε, of wide fame: cp. Hes. 7h. 785 πολνώνυμον
ὕδωρ (Styx); Pind. 2. 1. 17 Κιλίκιον.. πολυώνυμον ἄντρον. So Soph. Ant. 148
μεγαλώνυμος .. Νίκα. ---Νοῖ, ‘of many names’ (as e.g. Dionysus is πολυώνυμος, 26.
1115, being variously styled Bakchos, Iacchos, Zagreus, etc.): there was no variety
of cult-names in the case of Νίκη, and the epithets given to her are usually of
a general kind.

2 Kap@atwv, a conjecture of Bergk (received by Blass in his 2nd ed.). The town
of Κάρθαια or Καρθαία, on the s.E. coast of Ceos, had a temple of the Pythian
Apollo, and near it a χορηγεῖον in which Simonides, when living in Ceos, used to
teach choruses (Athen. 10. p. 456 ΒΕ), His nephew, then, might feel some special
‘interest in the place. Ode xvi was a paean written by Bacchylides to be performed
‘by a Cean chorus at Delos. Similarly he may have composed a dithyramb with
which a chorus from Carthaea competed successfully at a Delian festival. The
addition of Κηΐῳ indicates that the contest did not take place in Ceos. This
‘epigramma would have been placed on the ἀνάθημα dedicated as a thank-offering
for the victory. [Bergk and Blass accent thus, Καρθαιῶν (as from Kap@acevs?).
See, however, Pape-Benseler s.v. Κάρθαια, where ἡ Καρθαίων πόλις is cited from an
inscr.]}—The traditional reading here, Kpavvatwyv, is corrupt. The other emendations
which have been proposed are :—(1) προφρονέως Kpavadv, Schneidewin. (2) πρόφρων
ἐν Κραναῶν, Hartung. (3) Κραναιδῶν Meineke (so Bergk*), a form not found,=
the Athenians (παῖδες Kpavaoi, Aesch. Zum. τοι 1]. But could the first syllable
be long? Further, if the chorus was Athenian, we should expect the name of
a tribe, such as (4) Κεκροπιδῶν, suggested by Bergk. (3) Καρνείων, Stadtmiiller.
8 ἐν ἀθύρμασι Movody, 2.6. ἐν μουσικοῖς ἀγῶσιν : cp. XVII. 57 ἀρηΐων .. ἀθυρμάτων.


2. 84. [B. 49: BL p. 176.]


¥ Ν \ > 3 3 cal fad 3 > ᾿,͵
Εὔδημος τὸν νηὸν ἐπ᾽ ἀγροῦ τόνδ᾽ ἀνέθηκεν
τῷ πάντων ἀνέμων πιστοτάτῳ Ζεφύρῳ.

3 a Ca ε δ θ 4 ἡ 3, i ΄
εὐξαμένῳ γάρ οἱ ἦλθε βοηθόος, ὄφρα τάχιστα
ὔ ¥ % > 2 5» »

λικμήσῃ πεπόνων καρπὸν am ἀσταχύων.


Anthol. Pal. v1. 5: Βακχυλίδου. ἀνάθημα τῷ ζεφύρῳ ἀνέμῳ παρὰ Εὐδήμου “γεωργοῦ
A and corrector. Blass observes: ‘Non habet fidem inscriptio, nisi alius est
Bacchylides.’ But at least there is nothing in the verses themselves which could
warrant us in rejecting the traditional ascription.—Suidas s.v. πιότατος quotes the
words from τόνδ᾽ in v. 1 to Ζεφύρῳ without the author’s name (ἐν ἐπιγράμματι).

‘Eudemus has dedicated this shrine on his land to Zephyrus, trustiest of winds,
who hastened to help him at his prayer, so that he might winnow his grain from the
ripe ears of corn.’—2 The Ms. reading πιοτάτῳ is defended by Stadtmiiller, who
quotes Theocr. x. 46f., és βορέην ἄνεμον τᾶς κόρθνος ἁ τομὰ ὕμμιν [ἢ ζέφυρον βλεπέτω-


FRAGMENTS. NOTICES. 425


πιαίνεται ὁ στάχυς οὕτως: z.¢., ‘let the cut end of the stalks in your sheaf be turned
towards the north or west wind; for thus the corn-ear is filled out.’ But is this
relevant? (1) In the first place, it is hard to conceive how πιότατος could be said of
a wind, in the sense of ‘fattening’ or ‘nourishing’: at any rate there is no example
of it. (2) But, granting that πιότατος could be so used, it would be wholly out of
place here. The maturing of the grain is not in question. The matter in hand is
simply the winnowing (see on v. 4). What Eudemus wanted was fine weather, with
a wind which should not bring rain (as the south often did), nor yet be too violent.
Unger and Schneidewin long ago suggested what I hold to be the true reading, viz.
πι(στ)οτάτῳ, which might so easily have been corrupted. There is a touch of playful
fancy in it, alluding to βοηθόος in the next verse: Zephyrus was the trusty ally who
came at need. when he was called.—Other conjectures are rpniirarw (‘Schneider Saxo’
ap. Bergk, also Headlam): λειοτάτῳ (Meineke). 3 In his Dorian lyrics, with their
epic colouring, Bacch. always assumes f before of: but it does not follow that he
would do so in writing Ionic elegiacs. I prefer γάρ of here to Meineke’s γὰρ 8 γ᾽,
which Bergk (though retaining οἱ) thinks right.—Bon®éos Planudes: βοαθόος vulg.
(but cp. Εὔδημος and νηόν). 4 λικμήσῃ, the more vivid subjunct., instead of the
optative, after ἦλθε: cp. Xen. Az. 1. 1. 18 (πλοῖα) κατέκαυσεν, ἵνα μὴ Κῦρος διαβῇ.---
After threshing, the corn was put into a broad basket (λίκνον, vannus): it was then
thrown up into the wind, so that the chaff (ἄχυρα, paleae) might be blown away from
the grain. Verg. G. 111. 123 f., Cum graviter tunsis gemit area frugibus, et cum
Surgentem ad Zephyrum paleae tactantur inanes. Columella also (2. 21) says that
a west wind is best for the operation of winnowing.


B. NOTICES WHICH SPECIFY A CLASS OF POEMS.


ΕΠΙΝΙΚΟΙ.


85. [B. το: Bl. p. 137.]


The commentary of Didymus——-Ammonius p. 79: Νηρεΐδες
τῶν τοῦ Νηρέως θυγατέρων διαφέρει. Δίδυμος ὁμοίως ἐν ὗπο-
μνήματι Βακχυλίδου ἐπινίκων' φησὶ γὰρ κατὰ λέξιν: Εἰσὶ
τοίνυν οἵ φασι διαφέρειν τὰς Νηρεΐδας τῶν τοῦ Νηρέως θυγατέρων,
καὶ τὰς μὲν ἐκ Δωρίδος γνησίας αὐτῶν θυγατέρας νομίζεσθαι,
τὰς δὲ ἐξ ἄλλων ἤδη κοινότερον Νηρεΐδας καλεῖσθαι κ.τ.λ.---
See n. on XVI. 38.


YMNOI.


36. [B. 12: Bl. 3.]


Schol. Ar. Ach. 47: τοῦ δὲ Κελεοῦ μέμνηται Βακχυλίδης
δι τῶν Ὕμνων.--(εἰει5β, the king of Eleusis; whose wife
Metaneira received the disguised Demeter into her house, as a
nurse for her son Demophon: Hom. Hymn to Demeter, vv. 96 ff.
Celeus built the first temple of the goddess at Eleusis (2d. 296 ff.),
and was one of a small group,—including Triptolemus and
Eumolpus,—whom she taught to celebrate her rites (76. 473 ff.).


426 BACCHYLIDES.


37. [B. 11 Ρ. 572, ἢ. on fr. 11: Bl. p. 160, n. on fr. 2.]


The rhetor Menander in Walz Rhet. Gr. 1X. 140: Εἰσὶ τοίνυν
καὶ τῷ Βακχυλίδῃ ὕμνοι ἀποπεμπτικοί.---ΤΠε586 were hymns
addressed to a god who was supposed to be leaving his temple
on an excursion (ἀποδημία) to some other haunt; as the
κλητικοί were hymns which besought him to return. Seen. on
Ode xv. 1—4.


AIOYPAMBOI.
38. [B. 18: Bl. 8.]


Servius on Verg. Aen. XI. 93: Versts Arcades armis.]
Lugentum more mucronem hastae, non cuspidem contra terram
tenentes, quoniam antiqui nostri omnia contraria in funere
faciebant, scuta etiam invertentes propter numina illic depicta,
ne eorum simulacra cadaveris polluerentur aspectu, sicut habuisse
Arcades Bacchylides in dithyrambis dicit—Servius may be
referring to the dithyramb from which fragment 6 comes, and
which Blass supposes to have been entitled Κασσάνδρα.


39. [B. τό: Bl. 7.]


Schol. Pind. P. 1. 100: Ταύτῃ τῇ ἱστορίᾳ καὶ Βακχυλίδης
συμφωνεῖ ἐν τοῖς διθυράμβοις, ὅτι δὴ οἱ “Ἕλληνες ἐκ Λήμνου
μετεστείλαντο τὸν Φιλοκτήτην ᾿“Ελένου μαντευσαμένου" εἵμαρτο
γὰρ ἄνευ τῶν Ἡρακλείων τόξων μὴ πορθηθῆναι τὸ Ἴλιον.--- Τῆς
story of Philoctetes being brought from Lemnos to Troy, at the
bidding of Helenus, was told in two of the Cyclic epics, the
Ἰλιὰς Μικρά and the ᾿Ιλίον Πέρσις. Bacchylides may have
known also the Phzloctetes of Aeschylus. The Pindaric scholiast
does not enable us to decide whether (as seems most probable)
Bacchylides had written a dithyramb called Φιλοκτήτης, or had
merely referred to the story in a dithyramb on some other subject.


TIAPOENEIA.,
40. [Bl. p. 16s.]


Plutarch, De Musica c. 17, after saying that Plato’s prefer-
ence for the Dorian ἁρμονία was due to its fitness for martial or
stately strains, adds that, as Plato knew, it could also be used for
compositions of a lighter kind :—ov« ἠγνόει δὲ ὅτι πολλὰ Δώρια
Παρθένεια ἅμα ᾿Αλκμᾶνι καὶ Πινδάρῳ καὶ Σιμωνίδῃ καὶ
Βακχυλίδῃ πεποίηται κ-τ.λ.


NOTICES. 427


C. NOTICES WHICH DO NOT SPECIFY A CLASS.


41. [B. 50: Bl. 38.]


Ammianus Marcellinus xxv. 4. 3. The Emperor Julian used
to quote with approval the saying of Sophocles in old age (Plat.
Rep. τ. p. 329 0), that he was glad to have escaped from the
tyranny of amorous passion:—Item ut hoc propositum validius
firmaret, recolebat saepe dictumi lyrici Bacchylidis, quem legebat
iucunde id adserentem, quod ut egregius pictor vultum speciosum
effingit, ita pudicitia celsius consurgentem vitam exornat.—The
context here makes it probable that pudicitia was a rendering of
σωφροσύνη.


42. [Β. 57: Bl. p. 166.]


Schol. Callim. Hymn. in Del. 28 εἰ δὲ λίην πολέες σε περιτρο-
χόωσιν ἀοιδαί] Αἱ Πινδάρου καὶ Βακχυλίδου. In Pindar’s case
the reference must include the προσόδιον (called Δηλιακὸν
παιᾶνα by schol. Pind. /. 1. init), fr. 87, 88 (Eis Δῆλον), Xaip’ ὦ
θεοδμάτα κιτλ. Had Bacchylides written some similar poem in
praise of Delos ?—Cp. no. 12.


43. [B. 68: Bl s1.]


Schol. Apoll. Rhod. Iv. 973: ὀρείχαλκος εἶδος χαλκοῦ"
μνημονεύει καὶ Στησίχορος καὶ Baxyvdridys.—The metal or alloy
called ὀρείχαλκος (‘ mountain-copper’) is first mentioned in Greek
poems dating probably from about 600 B.c. The Aphrodite
of the Homeric hymn (VI. 9) wears as ear-rings ἄνθεμ᾽ ὀρει-
χάλκου χρυσοῖό τε τιμήεντος. Heracles, in the Hesiodic ‘Shield’
(122), has greaves ὀρειχάλκοιο φαεινοῦ : and the same words are
applied by Apollonius Rhodius (Iv. 973) to the shepherd’s
crook carried by Lampetia, daughter of the Sun-god. For
Callimachus (Lav. Pallad. 19), orichalcum is a metal which can
serve as a mirror. Plato frankly speaks of it as something which,
in his time, was ‘merely a legend,—vo viv ὀνομαζόμενον μόνον
(Critias p. 1148). It flashed with fiery rays (μαρμαρυγὰς...
πυρώδεις) from the innermost of the walls surrounding the
citadel in the Island of Atlantis (26.p.116c). Spenser is at once
classical and medieval in the vagueness of his reference to ‘ costly
orichalch from strange Phoenice’ (MZucopotmos 81), where it
figures in company with the steel of Bilbo and the brass of
Corinth. But in the orichalc of the Greek classics the most
distinctive quality is brilliant lustre. The mentions of it by
Stesichorus and Bacchylides were probably connected with the


428 BACCHYLIDES.


equipment or adornment of some hero or heroine. [Strabo
(13. p. 610) mentions a blend of ψευδάργυρος (zinc?) with copper,
‘which some call orichalcum’; but the interpretation and the
authority of that passage are doubtful.]


The following notices, relating to points of mythology as
treated by Bacchylides, are arranged in the alphabetical order of
the mythological names.


44. [B. 62: Bl. 45.]
Aristaeus—Schol. Apoll. Rhod. 11. 498: Τινὲς τέσσαρας


᾿Αρισταίους γενεαλογοῦσιν, ὡς καὶ Baxyvaridys: τὸν μὲν Καρύστου,
τὸν δὲ Χείρωνος [Xépwvos Laur.], ἄλλον δὲ Γῆς καὶ Οὐρανοῦ, καὶ
τὸν «τέταρτον Bergk> Κυρήνης.

᾿Αρισταῖος is the name, very ancient in Greece, of a god who
prospers agriculture, cattle-breeding, and hunting: it expresses
the pious faith that he is ἄριστος (cp. Ἄρτεμις ἀρίστη, Ζεὺς ὁ
λῷστος, etc.). Among the earliest seats of his cult were the
Thessalian plains about Iolcus and Pelion; Arcadia; and
Cyrene. In the Cyrenaic legend (Pind. P. Ix. 5 ff, following ~
the Hesiodic "Hofar) he is the son of Cyrene, a great-grand-
daughter of Poseidon and Gaia, by Apollo, who carried her off
to Libya.

The worship of Aristaeus existed in Ceos, the island of
Bacchylides. He was said to have come to the help of the
islanders, bringing with him Parrhasians from Arcadia, at a
time when Ceos was afflicted by the parching summer heat of
Seirius, which had caused a plague in the Cyclades: he taught
the Ceans to erect an altar to Ζεὺς Ἰκμαῖος, and was himself
afterwards worshipped there as Ζεὺς ᾿Αρισταῖος. Two of the
three namesakes whom, according to the scholiast, Bacchylides
distinguished from Aristaeus son of Cyrene, were probably
identical with him. (1) The ‘son of Carystus’ may be this
rural god in his relation to the nymphs of Carystus in Euboea.
(2) The ‘son of Cheiron’ is a designation easily explained by the
fact that Aristaeus, who was a healing god, was said to have
been taken as a child by Apollo to Cheiron, in whose cave he
was brought up. With regard to the third namesake, the ‘son
of Gaia and Uranos,’ this may have been an allegorical de-
scription of the god who blesses the fruits of the earth; that,
however, is more doubtful. Suidas has ᾿Αρισταῖος" εἷς τῶν
Γιγάντων. The bearded head of Aristaeus appears on coins
of Ceos and of the Cean town Carthaia. (See Schirmer’s
article in Roscher’s Lexikon, esp. p. 550.)

Blass suggests that the Bacchylides cited by the scholiast


NOTICES. 429


on Apollonius may be a writer distinct from the poet (3rd εα,,
p. 174, fr. 45: Nese alius hic est Bacchylides). In the Cean poet,
however, we are prepared to find the current popular mythology
of his day faithfully reflected, without any attempts at criticism
or reconciliation. If, then, there were different local cults which
assigned different genealogies to the rural god Aristaeus, it
is quite conceivable that these discrepant accounts should have
appeared in different passages of the poet’s writings.


45. [B. 54: Bl. 41.]


Athena as a giver of immortality—Schol. Ar. Av. 1536:
‘Eddpovos [? the Alexandrian writer of tragedy mentioned by
schol. Hephaest. c. 9, see W. Christ, Gesch. ad. Gr. Litt, Ρ. 539
n. 2], ὅτι Διὸς θυγάτηρ ἡ Βασιλεία, καὶ δοκεῖ τὰ κατὰ τὴν
ἀθανασίαν αὕτη οἰκονομεῖν, ἣν ἔχει καὶ παρὰ Βακχυλίδῃ ἡ
᾿Αθηνᾶ, τῷ Τυδεῖ δώσουσα τὴν ἀθανασίαν.-- -δώσουσα,
because she did not fulfil her intention. Tydeus, son of Oeneus,
was wounded in the war of the Seven against Thebes. Athena
was going to heal him and make him immortal with a φάρμακον
which she had obtained from Zeus. But Amphiaraus, who
hated Tydeus for having persuaded the Argives into the war,
cut off the head of Melanippus, whom Tydeus had slain, and
brought it to him. Tydeus cut it in two, and ate the brains;
when Athena, in disgust, left him to die. (Apollod. 3. 6. 8.)


46. [B. p. 580n.: Bl. p. 159n.]


Cassandra.—Porphyrion on Hor. C. 1. 15: Hac ode Bac-
chylidem imitatur; nam ut ille Cassandram facit vaticinari
futura belli Troiant, ita hic Proteum [written by error for
Nereum].. The same error occurs in the schol. on Stat. Thed. 7.
330: Hic Bacchylides Graecus poeta est, quem imitatus est
Horatius in illa oda in qua Proteus Troiae futurum narrat
excidium.—Cp. fr. 6.


47. [B. 56: Bl. 10.]


Europa. —Schol. fl, 12. 292: Εὐρώπην τὴν Φοίνικος Ζεὺς
θεασάμενος ἔν τινι λειμῶνι μετὰ Νυμφών ἄνθη ἀναλέγουσαν
ἠράσθη, καὶ κατελθὼν ἤλλαξεν ἑαυτὸν εἰς ταῦρον καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ
στόματος κρόκον ἔπνει. οὕτω δὲ τὴν Εὐρώπην a ἀπατήσας ἐβάστασε
καὶ διαπορθμεύσας εἰς Κρήτην ἐμίγη αὐτῇ" εἶθ᾽ οὕτω συνῴκισεν
αὐτὴν ᾿Αστερίωνι τῷ Κρητῶν βασιλεῖ. γενομένη δὲ ἔγκυος
ἐκείνη τρεῖς παῖδας ἐ ἐγέννησε, Μίνωα, Σαρπηδόνα καὶ Ῥαδάμανθυν.
ἡ ἱστορία παρὰ ᾿Ἡσιόδῳ καὶ Baxxvridy.—Bacchylides may have
written a dithyramb Evpory : though the story is one which
might also have occurred in a hymn.


430 BACCHYLIDES.


48. [B. 60: Bl. 44.]


Eurytion.—Schol. Od. 21. 295: Βακχυλίδης δὲ διάφορον
(distinct from the Eurytion in v. 295) οἴεται τὸν Εὐρυτίωνα" φησὶ
yap ἐπιξενωθέντα Δεξαμενῷ ἐν "Ἤλιδι ὑβριστικῶς ἐπιχειρῆσαι
τῇ τοῦ ξενοδοχοῦντος θυγατρί, καὶ διὰ τοῦτο ὑπὸ “Ἡρακλέους
ἀναιρεθῆναι καιρίως τοῖς οἴκοις [τοῖς ἐκεῖ Eustath. 1909. 61]
ἐπιστάντος.

Eurytion figures as an unruly Centaur in two stories. (1) At
the wedding of Peirithous and Hippodameia on Mount Pelion
he tries to carry off the bride, thus provoking the fight between
the Lapithae and the Centaurs: Od. 21. 295 ff. (2) Asa guest
at the house of Dexamenus in Elis [or, acc. to Apollod. 2. 5. 5, at
Olenus in Achaia] he insults his host’s daughter; Heracles
appears opportunely, and slays him. This story is found, with
some variations, in Apollodorus Zc., Diod. Iv. 33, and Hyginus
Fab. 31. 33. The name of Eurytus is substituted for that of
Eurytion in the first story by Ovid (77. 12. 219), and in the
second story by Diodorus (Iv. 33).—The timely appearance of
Heracles at the house of Dexamenus followed his visit to the
Centaur Pholus on mount Pholoe (between Arcadia and Elis).
That visit was told by Stesichorus in his Γηρυονηΐς (fr. 7), which
related the adventures of Heracles on his way back from the far
West. That poem may have been the source, or one of the
sources, from which Bacchylides derived his material for the
story of Eurytion.


49. [B. 61: Bl. p. 158.]


Evenus.—Schol. Pind. /. 11. 72 (=Iv. 54): ἰδίως τὸν ᾿Ανταῖόν
φησι (Πίνδαρος) τῶν ξένων τῶν ἡττωμένων τοῖς κρανίοις ἐρέφειν
τὸν τοῦ ἸΠοσειδῶνος ναόν: τοῦτο γὰρ ἱστοροῦσι τὸν Θρᾷκα
Διομήδην ποιεῖν, Βακχυλίδης δὲ Εὔηνον ἐπὶ τῶν τῆς Μαρ-
πήσσης [Μαρπίσσης Heyne, for Μαρσίππης] μνηστήρων" οἱ
δὲ Οἰνόμαον, ὡς Σοφοκλῆς.--ὅ5εε note on XIX. 7.


50. [B. p. 588: Bl. p. 176.]


Galateia.—Natalis Comes Mythol. 1x. 8, p. 987: Dicitur
Polyphemus non modo amasse Galateam, sed etiam Galatum
ex illa suscepisse, ut testatus est Bacchylides.—Bergk, with
whom Blass concurs, justly remarks that the worth of this
statement is doubtful. Later mythology, however, knew a son
Tanas (Appian 7 νγ. 2) or Γαλάτης borne by Galateia to Polyphe-
mus (see Roscher’s Lex. 5. vv. Galas and Galateia); and it is
possible that such a son may have been mentioned in some
poem of Bacchylides.


NOTICES. 431


51. [B. 32: Bl. 9.]


Laocoon—Servius on Verg. Aen. 11. 201: Sane Bacchylides
de Laocoonte et uxore eius vel de serpentibus a Calydnis insulis
venientibus atque in homines conversis dicit—Laocoon, priest
of Apollo at Troy, had incurred the god’s wrath by marrying
[hence the words ‘et uxore eius’]. Two serpents, sent by Apollo,
swam over from the neighbouring islets of Calydnae,—then changed
into men, and killed the two sons of Laocoon, but not the
father. This was probably the outline of the story as told
by Bacchylides, perhaps in a dithyramb: and Sophocles in his
Aaoxéwy seems to have followed him (so far at least as these
particulars are concerned), See Robert, Bild und Lied, pp. 192 ff.;
who, however, thinks that the two destroyers came over as
men from the islets, and afterwards changed into serpents.
Engelmann, art. Laokoon in Roscher (p. 1840), justly lays
stress on the words in the Apollodorus fragment, Epz¢. Vat. 21.
15, ᾿Απόλλων δὲ αὐτοῖς σημεῖον ἐπιπέμπει" δύο yap δράκοντες
διανηξάμενοι διὰ τῆς θαλάσσης ἐκ τῶν πλησίον νήσων τοὺς
Λαοκόωντος υἱοὺς κατεσθίουσιν.


52. [B. 63: Bl. 46.]


Niobe's children.—Gellius V.A. XX. 7: Nam Homerus pueros
puellasque eius (Niobae) bis senos dicit fuisse, Euripides bis
septenos, Sappho bis novenos, Bacchylides et Pindarus δὲς denos.

In giving the number of the Niobidae as 20, Bacchylides and
Pindar followed Hesiod (Apollod. 3. 5. 6); as Mimnermus also
did (Aelian, Var. Hist. 12. 36). The number 14, given by Eur.,
had been given before him by Lasus of Hermione (2ὖ.). Alcman
went below Homer’s 12, naming only 10 (2b.). The earliest
known authority for the tradition that two of Niobe’s children
escaped is Telesilla (¢. 510 B.C.), fr. § (Bergk III. p. 380). Enmann
(art. Viobe τι. Niobiden in Roscher, p. 373) connects this legend
with the fact that Hesiod’s 20 and Homer’s 12 are numbers
from which the others (18, 14, 10) differ respectively by two.


53. [B. 64: Bl. 47.]


Persephone-—Schol. Hes. Theog. 914: “HprdcOa δὲ τὴν
Περσεφόνην φασὶν οἱ μὲν ἐκ Σικελίας, Βακχυλίδης δὲ ἐκ
Κρήτης, ᾿Ορφεὺς ἐκ τῶν περὶ τὸν ᾿Ωκεανὸν τόπων, Φανόδημος δὲ
ἀπὸ τῆς ᾿Αττικῆς, «.7.A.—See n.on Ode Il. 1—4. Bacchylides
seems to be the only known author of the classical period who
placed the rape of Persephone in Crete. That view is noticed,
but corrected, by the pseudo-Eudocia p. 109 (ed. Villoisin): ἐκ


432 BACCHYLIDES.


Κρήτης ἢ μᾶλλον ἐκ Σικελίας. Writers of the Alexandrian and
of the Roman age usually localise the story at Enna in Sicily.
The Sicilian tradition must have been, in our poet’s time, already
old, but not yet so dominant as to exclude other versions.
In the Homeric hymn to Demeter, the scene is ideal,—the Νύσιον
πεδίον. In the 4th century B.c. it was possible for Phanodemus
(Atthis, fr. 20, Miiller 1. 369) to say that Persephone had been
carried off from Attica. Even in the Roman age Propertius
(IV. 22. 4) can connect the legend with Cyzicus; and Appian
(De Bell. Civ. Iv. 105), with Crenides, the later Philippi.


54, [B. 55: Bl. 42.]
Rhea.—Schol. Pind. O. τ. 37: Ὁ δὲ Βακχυλίδης" τὸν Πέλοπα


τὴν Ῥέαν λέγει ὑγιάσαι καθεῖσαν διὰ τοῦ λέβητος (ἐγκαθεῖσαν
πάλιν τῷ λέβητι coni. Bergk), ἀφ᾽ οὗ καὶ ὑγιὴς ἀνεδόθη.---
Tantalus cut his son Pelops to pieces, and served up the flesh to
the gods; they, however, were not deceived, and shrank from
tasting it,—all of them except Demeter, who consumed a
shoulder. The remains were then boiled in a cauldron, from
which Pelops came forth restored, with an ivory shoulder in place
of the lost one. Pindar (O. I. 26f.) makes Clotho the agent in
this restoration ; Bacchylides assigned the part to Rhea, the wife
of Cronus (and so schol. Aristid. p. 216); a third version named
Hermes (schol. Pind.).


55. [B. 69: Bl. 52.]
Lelchines. ——Tzetzes Τ᾽ heogon. 81 (Matranga An. 580): ἐκ δὲ


τοῦ καταρρέοντος αἵματος τῶν μορίων ἐν μὲν τῇ γῇ γεγόνασι τρεῖς
᾿Ερινύες πρῶτον, ἡ Τεισιφόνη, Μέγαιρα, καὶ ᾿Αληκτὼ σὺν ταύταις,
καὶ σὺν αὐταῖς οἱ τέσσαρες ὀνομαστοὶ Τελχῖνες, ᾿Ακταῖος,
Μεγαλήσιος, "Ορμενός τε καὶ Δύκος, οὺς Βακχυλίδης μέν φησι
Νεμέσεως Ταρτάρου, ἄλλοι τινὲς δὲ λέγουσι τῆς Τῆς τε καὶ τοῦ
Ilovrov.—As to the Telchines, see Introd. to Ode I, p. 188. It is
possible that this reference to them occurred in the lost part of
that Ode (cp. p. 446).


56. [B. 59: BI. p. Ixvii.]


Theano’s sons, —Schol. fl. 24. 496: Πιθανὸν μίαν τεκεῖν
ἐννεακαίδεκα, οὐχ ὡς Βακχυλίδης πεντήκοντα τῆς Θεανοῦς
ὑπογράφει waldas.—See n. on XIV. 37 ff.


The following notices, relating to geographical names, are
arranged in the alphabetical order of those names.


NOTICES. 433


57. [B. 66: Bl. 49.]


The river Cazcus.—Strabo 13. 616: ὁ δὲ Kdixos οὐκ ἀπὸ τῆς
Ἴδης pei, καθάπερ εἴρηκε Baxyvaridns—The sources of the
Caicus, Strabo says, are in a plain, west of the range of Temnus
(Τῆμνον ὄρος). The general line of the river’s course is from
N.E. to S.W., through the plain of Mysia, to the Gulf of Elaea.

The cause of the Cean poet’s error was that the non-
Asiatic Greeks of his time had no clear notions as to the
extent of the Ida range in a S.E. direction. They probably
regarded the mountain system which later geographers called
_ Temnus as an offshoot or continuation of Ida. A much more
striking illustration of the vagueness with which the name Ἴδη
was used is the fact, also noticed by Strabo (Zc.), that Euripides
actually described the town of Κελαιναί in Phrygia, near the
sources of the Maeander, as being situated ἐσχάτοις Ἴδης
τόποις (Eur. fr. 1085 Nauck?).


58. [B. 65: Bl. 48.]


los.— Vit. Homer. V. Ὁ. 28f. Westermann (Cramer, Awecd.
Par, 111. 98. 15): Ομηρος.. κατὰ δὲ Βακχυλίδην καὶ ᾿Αριστο-
τέλην τὸν φιλόσοφον ᾿Ιήτης.

According to the pseudo-Plut. De Vita Hom. 1. 3 (p. 101
Diibner), Aristotle said, in the third book of his Περὶ ΙΠοιητικῆς,
that the mother of Homer was a native of Ios (the small island
s. of Naxos and N. of Thera); but that the poet himself was
born at Smyrna.—Gellius W.A. 3. 11 says of Homer: Avisto-
teles tradit ex insula Io natum. This may be only an inaccurate
version of the other statement. It cannot well be reconciled
with it by supposing that ‘ex’ refers merely to the mother’s
origin.—The claim of Ios to be Homer’s birthplace was never
prominent. More credence was given to the tradition that it
was the scene of his death and burial. Indeed, no rival of Ios
seems to have succeeded in establishing a claim to the possession
of his grave. (See the pseudo-Herodotean Bios ‘Opmpov.)


59. [B. 58: Bl. 43.]


The town /u/zs.—Himerius, Ovat. XX1X. (speaking of Ἰουλίς):
Καὶ Σιμωνίδῃ καὶ Βακχυλίδῃ ἐσπούδασται ἡ πόλις : both poets
‘have made much of the city,—ze. have paid tributes to it in
their verse. It was the native place of both. The town (now
‘ Téa) is still the chief place in Ceos. It stands on the slopes of
Mt. Hagios Elias; as Strabo (10. p. 486) says of the ancient


7. B. 29


434 BACCHYLIDES. NOTICES.


town, κεῖται δ᾽ ἐν ὄρει. It was distant about 3 or 4 miles from the
N.W. coast, where its port was near the town called Κορησσός
or Kopyata. Besides the two poets, Iulis produced Erasistratus
the physician, Ariston the Peripatetic, and Prodicus the sophist.
Plutarch Dem. 1 associates Iulis with Aegina in the repute of
‘ producing good actors and poets.’ (Cp. Pridik, De Cei [nsulae
rebus, pp. Of.)


60. [B. 53: Bl. 40.]


Phoenice.— Athen. 4. p. 174F: Γυγγραΐνοισι (sic A) yap οἱ
Φοίνικες, ὥς φησιν ὁ Ξενοφῶν [Χενοφάνης coni. Bergk] ἐχρῶντο
αὐλοῖς, σπιθαμιαίοις τὸ μέγεθος (about 73 inches long), ὀξὺ καὶ
γοερὸν φθεγγομένοις" τούτοις δὲ καὶ οἱ Κᾶρες χρῶνται ἐν τοῖς ᾿
θρήνοις, εἰ “μὴ ἄρα καὶ ἡ Καρία Φοινίκη ἐκαλεῖτο, ὡς παρὰ ;
Κορίννῃ καὶ Βακχυλέδῃ ἔστιν εὑρεῖν. .—The suggestion here is
that this small flute or fife (the yiyypas or γυγγράϊνος αὐλός) may
have been altogether Carian,—being called ‘ Phoenician’ merely
because the name ‘ Phoenice’ was sometimes applied to Caria.
Apart from this passage, there seems to be no extant evidence
for such a use of Φοινίκη, though the Carians had much inter-
course with Phoenician traders, and seem to have taken part in
Phoenician colonies.


61. [B. 67: Bl. s0.]


The river Rhyndacus.—Schol. Apoll. Rhod. 1.1165: “Pivdaxos
ποταμός ἐστι Φρυγίας, ob μέμνηται Baxyvaidns.—This river of
northern Phrygia, rising in the district called Azanitis (from the
town of Azani, Strabo 10. p. 576), flows in a generally N.w.
direction to the Lake of Apollonia, and thence into the Propontis,
Schneidewin conjectures that the words quoted by schol. // 5.
335, Ῥύνδακον ἀμφὶ βαθύσχοινον, may be those of Bacchylides :
Hecker ascribes them to Callimachus (fr. anon. 335).


APPENDIX.


ON THE PROBABLE COMPASS AND CONTENTS OF
ODE I, WHEN ENTIRE.


That portion of the Ode which has been preserved in a
coherent form begins with the arrival of Minos in Ceos, his
union with Dexithea, and the birth of Euxantius. It is evidently
the last part of a mythical narrative. The probable nature of
the part which preceded it will be discussed presently. One
thing is certain,—that it was of considerable length.

The verse with which my text of Ode I begins is numbered
as verse 111 of that Ode in the edition of Professor Blass.
He supposes that, of the 110 verses which oxiginally came before
it, 64 are wholly lost, while 46 (not all consecutive) can be
partly reconstructed from small separate fragments, with the aid
of conjectural supplements.

This reconstruction is given below. The element of con-
jecture involved in it is so very large that (in my opinion) it is
inexpedient to print it as if it formed part of the ascertained
text. But it is interesting and suggestive. I will endeavour to
state clearly the scope of the reconstruction, and the nature
of the evidence on which it rests.

A metrical ‘system’ in this Ode consists of 23 verses (a strophe
of 8, an antistrophe of 8, and an epode of 7). The number of
lines in a column of the MS. varies from 32 to 36, 35 being the
commonest total, while 34 is also frequent. Thus three systems

' (23 X 3=69) answer roughly to two average columns (34+ 35).
And the first column of the continuous MS., as we have it, begins
with a strophe (the second strophe from the end of the Ode,
TONY). 0000 βαθυ-). These are the data from which Professor


29—2


436 APPENDIX.


Blass sets out in estimating the extent of the lost portion. But
his estimate further assumes that the first strophe of the Ode
began at the top of a column, as would have been the case if
this Ode stood first in the papyrus. This being granted, it
follows that the number of systems which preceded column I
(of Kenyon’s edition) must be either three (=69 verses), or 8
multiple of three. And, from an examination of the fragments
which he refers to this Ode, Prof. Blass infers that the number
of such systems is six (23 x 6=138 verses), equivalent to four
columns of the papyrus.
By combining and supplementing small fragments, he has
conjecturally restored parts of the first four of these systems, as
follows :—
JEAEQN
JTON
JEPIAES[
JENY®AIL
5 JOYS"INAK[
JFAIAZIZOMIL
JAMO|NEYBOYAOY NI
JAM|BPONNHPE[
VINENNAZOIOT’ ΕΥ̓
10 JAN-ENOL


* * *


19 ἸΑΣΙΝΙΠΊΤΟΥΣ
20? JTONTOAL
ἸΕΣΣΙΝΑΝΙ
ἸΤΟΝΑΥΤΙ
ἸΑΛΛΑΙΣΊΝΙ
JNA’ ΕΤΕΙ
25 ἸΓΟΝΩΤΙ
ἹΠΛΙ
* * *


ODE I. 437


oma, “Ὁππ- μ]ελέων
UY - -- ἀμβρό ὕτων
ποὺ Πι]ερίδες
- —lévudailvere δ᾽ ὕμνους ἢ
5 -ὺύὕ]ους, ἵνα κ[υ-
δαίνητε] γαίας ᾿Ισθμίας
ὀφθαλμόν, εὐβούλον νυ[έμου-
σάν τε γ]αμβρὸν Νηρέος
ἀντ. α΄. πόλιν, εἰ νάσοιό τ᾽ Ev ξαν-
το τιαδ]ᾶν, ἔνθ] εν μολὼν
j_ VYUe UY =
[’Apyetos, ἐμεῦ τε pedeo Oe. |*
«ὦ Πέλοπος λιπαρᾶς
νάσον θεόδματοι πύλαι;:-


ἐπ. a. Lost, the last two vu. of ant. «, and the first two of ep. τ.
19 -v— ἔζευξεν ὑφ᾽ ἄρμ]ασιν ἵππους"
20 οἱ δὲ πετοντο Of -- -
πὸ - -Ἰεσσιν ἀν δρῶν Ὁ
- vv - υἹτον αὐτί --
-ὖ -Ἴ ἄλλαισιν [- : πὸ - -
στρ. β΄. YY -ν δ᾽ ετέ --
25 UYU - ἰγονώτ[ “ =
πὶ
‘avr. β΄. Lost, the rest of str. 2, and the first three of ant. 2.


* Verse 12 (’Apyetos x.7.A.) is conjecturally supplied by Blass: verses 13, 14=
frag. 7 (Bergk).


438 APPENDIX.


35 TOIONT ITAI

KAA lvac.
|EM|EINOTAL
ITEIS|YINEY

ΙΑΣΙνδο.


* * *


46 JEOS[
INTTY KL
ἸΓΟΙΚΟΡΙ
ἸΑΓΟΡΑ
50 ἸΛΛΕΛΙΦΡΟΝΟΣΥΓ
ἹΕΡΑΝ
ἸΧΑΙΑΝΊΤΟΛΙΝ
ἸΓΟΙΛΛΕΝΟΙ
ἸΑΝΔΗΡΟΙΣΑΛΟΣΙ
55 IYTAIZAEA..Y
IAL


* * *


JEAFOPAIL
]. EAQAET[
JAAAKATOS[
75 A’ ΕΠΕΥΝΑΗΓ
᾿ς ἸΑΊΤΡΟΣΦΩΝΕΙ. |TEN
ἸΣΑΙΝΟΥΣ᾽ OTTII
1. ΕΝΤΕΡΟΛΛΙΑΙ
ἸΦΑΚΕΙΔΥΙΑΙ
80 ἸΕΝΙΑΙ
ἸΎΓΕΤΙ . ΠΑΛΛΙ͂ΤΑ[
JA
ἸΟΛΛΟΙ


ODE I. 439


35 τοῖον [VY — UYU - |rae
Kad[v VeUUL
- τὺ -- -εμεν, ὅτα[ν
το ee ia A
χήτει συνεύ-
νων “-π-ι-- - Vas
Lost, ep. 2.
46 eos
orp. γ. YY — — --Ἴν πυκιν --


YY ioroup ὃ ]γοὶ κόρ[αι
- vv - σ]αγόρα
50 - — ὐ] μελίφρονος ὕπνου
— YY ἀμετ]έραν
- —Vaplxaiav πόλιν
ἐπ SON -πἼγοιμεν οἵἴ-
κους ἐπ᾽] ἀνδήροις ἁλὸς
85 ἄντ. γ. ὑπό τ᾽ αὐγαῖς ἀελίον


1δΓ


Lost, the last seven vv, of ant. 3, the whole of ep. 3, and the
εὐ (στρ. δ΄.) Sirst two vv. of str. 4.


72 — vv -Ἰσαγόρᾳ
- - Μακ]ελὼ δὲ τυ - -
- v φιλ]αλάκατος,
75 - -] δ᾽ ἐπ’ εὐναῆ [πόρον
- -Ια' προσφώνει τέ v[w
μαλθακᾷ] σαίνουσ᾽ dai’


(ἀντ. δ.) YY -- - μ])ὲν στέρομαι
VV ἀμ]φάκει δύᾳ,
80 -σῦ - rlevia*


- — VY φε]ύγετε πάμπαν
-yvv-vvias


— —v — - -᾿ μοι


440 APPENDIX.


Verse 83 was followed (as Prof. Blass supposes) by 27 verses
of which nothing remains (vv. 84—110). Then comes the frag-
ment which supplies vv. 111—129 (= I—19 in my text); after
which 8 verses, and part of a ninth, are lost. (129+ 9 = 138, or
six systems.) Verse 139 is the first in col. I (Kenyon’s ed.), and
the first of the seventh system.

It may now be convenient to the reader if I show in a tabular
synopsis the whole scheme of the Ode, as conjecturally completed
by the reconstruction given above; indicating (4) the corre-
spondence of the verses with the fragments which have been
combined, and with the several parts of each metrical system ;
(ὦ) the position and extent of the supposed lacunas; (c) the
more salient points in the subject-matter, so far as they can be
made out.


No. of verse in


A No. of fragment] Place in metrical Subject-matter, so far as it can be
(acc, to Blass®) (ed. Kenyon), system. traced or surmised.
Column I. Verse 3. Πι]ερίδες, Exordium: in-
1, 2% 16a strophe 1; vocation of Muses.
3-10 6 antistr. I. 1, 2 6 ff. γαίας ᾿Ισθμίας | ὀφθαλμόν k.7.d.


Corinth: Isthmian festival.
gf. vdood τ᾽ Εὐϊξαντιαδ]ᾶν. Ceos.


11-18 Lost. antistr. I. 3-8
epode I. 1, 2


19 24 epode I. 3 19 ἢ. ἔζευξεν ὑφ᾽ ἄρμ]ασιν ἵππους" |
20-26 15 ep. I. 4-7 of δὲ wé]rovro. Some one starts in a
str. II. 1-3 chariot; perhaps Zeus?
27-34 Lost. str. 11. 4-8
ant. II. 1-3
Column II.
35 166 and 28 | ant. 11. 4 38 ἢ χή]τει συνεύϊνων. Does this
36 165 ΤῊ 15 refer to the forlorn state of the maidens,
37 39, 40, 28 si ae 0 Dexithea and her sisters, after their
38 39, 40, 28 sik ng 7 father Damon and the other Telchines
39 40 ii ἂν 8 had been slain by Zeus ?


40-45 Lost. ep. I. 1-6


ODE I.


441


46-56 13 ep. Il. 7 49-55- One of the maidens, on
str. III. awaking from sleep, speaks to another
ant. III. 1, ~ | about quitting their ἀρχαίαν πόλιν, and

seeking a new abode ‘on the verge of
the sea’ (ἀνδήροις ἁλός), in the full
‘rays of the sun.’

57-71 Lost. ant. III. 3-8 In the next strophe, one of the
Column III ep. 111. maidens accosts certain visitors, —prob-
began about str. IV. I, 2 ably Zeus and Apollo (Nonnus 18. 35).

ν. 70. Their arrival in Ceos may have been

related in the course of these 16 lost
verses.

72-83 5 str. Iv. 3-8 73. From -ἐλω in the ms., Bl. conj.
ant. Iv. 1-6 Μακ]ελώ.

76. Macelo (or some other maiden)
‘ addressed them,’ μαλθακᾷ calvovo’ ὀπί.
The pron. vw here meant αὐτούς (Apol-
lon. de pron. 368 A);—probably (the
disguised) Zeus and Apollo. In 79 f.
she spoke of ἀμφάκει δύᾳ and πενίᾳ,---
presumably in excuse for inability to
provide better entertainment.

84-110 Lost. ant. Iv. 7, 8 This large lacuna of 27 verses must
Column IV ep. Iv. have comprised some further account
began about str. V. of the interview between the maidens

ν. 105. ant. Vv. and their visitors. Zeus or Apollo may
ep. Vv. I, 2 have foretold the high destiny in store

for Dexithea.

111-129 Ι ep. V. 3-7 112 ff. ‘On the third day’ (after

(With which | str. VI. the visit of the gods to the maidens ?)
I begin my | ant. vi. 1-6 Minos arrives. He weds Dexithea.
text.) ‘In the tenth month’ is born Euxantius,
- the future lord of Ceos.
130-137 Lost. ant. VI. 7, 8
ep. VI. 1-6
138 34 ep. VI. 7 ἄλλα]ξαν θύγατρες. Bl. connects this
with the maidens’ change of abode (see
above, 49-55).—If Dexithea and her
sisters are the ‘daughters,’ this implies
a reference to their father Damon.
Column Vj =Col. I str. VII. 139-146. The boy Argeius—his

139-174 (Kenyon) ant. VII. spirit and athletic skill.

Col. VI =Col. II ep. VII. 147-154. His father Pantheides.

175-184 (K.) str. VIII. 155-158. The Isthmian victory of

ant. VIII. Argelus.


ep. VIII.


159-184. Praise of ἀρετή.


442 APPENDIX.


For the purpose of piecing together the small separate
fragments in vv. 1—83, three tests have been available; viz.
(1) metre; (2) sense; (3) the colour of the papyrus.

As to metre, when a single fragment contains even very slight
remains of a series of verses, such traces may suffice to make it
certain that those verses belonged to a strophe, an antistrophe,...
or an epode, as the case may be. A good example is afforded
by verses 47—55 (as now numbered by Prof. Blass), all contained
in fragment 13. We may be certain that there we have the
traces of a whole strophe, and of the first verse of an antistrophe.
Even then, however, we have still to determine where that
strophe (etc.) came in the Ode. In many other cases the
metrical test is ambiguous: eg. fr. 34 (=v. 138 Blass), -ξαν
θύγατρες, might belong either to the 7th verse of an epode, or to
the 5th.

As to the sezse, there is at least one instance in Prof.
Blass’s reconstruction where he has justly deemed this
second test to be conclusive. There can be no doubt that:
fragment 6, containing Πι]ερίδες, γαίας ᾿ἸΙσθμίας | ὀφθα]λμόν, etc.,
belonged to the exordium of the Ode, and presumably to its
first strophe. But, on the whole, there is very little coherent
sense to be extracted from the mutilated words or phrases
in these fragments; as an inspection will show. And where
such sense is traceable (as in verses 19 f., 50—55, and 75—8o),
it does not suffice to exclude doubts as to the order in which
the several groups of verses stood when the Ode was entire.

The third test is that afforded by the colour of the fragment
of papyrus. Colour alone is a very uncertain guide, though
it may be useful in suggesting a juxtaposition, or in confirming
other evidence. There are, however, some instances in which
colour is the principal or only test on which we have to rely
for the position assigned to fragments. It is on this ground
that fragments 24 and 15 (=vv. 19—26) are now referred to the
first of the lost columns. Again, Prof. Blass and Dr Kenyon:
are agreed (and are doubtless right in thinking) that fragments
39, 40, and 28 cohere. But colour is the reason for assigning
them to the second of the lost columns. Then as to fragment 13.
In his first edition, Prof. Blass placed this (=verses 46—55 as


ODE Tf. 443


now numbered) after fragment 5 (= vv. 72—83 as now numbered).
_ But in subsequent editions he gives fragments 13 and 5 their
present respective places, because the colour and condition
(color habitusque Ὁ. 22, Ὁ.) of fragment 13 indicates that it
belonged to one of the first two (lost) columns. And after
all three tests, metre, sense, and colour, have been used, so far
as the data permit, with the utmost sagacity and patience, large
room for doubt remains, as the editor frankly recognises. Take,
for example, three groups of verses, as numbered in his later
editions,—(1) vv. 19g —25: (2) 47—56: (3) 3538. He observes
(p. 23, note on v. 19) that it may be questioned whether, after all,
the order of these groups should not be (3), (2), (1).
What has now been said will serve to make it clear why
I have not printed Prof. Blass’s ingenious reconstruction as part
of the text. It must be- regarded as very largely hypothetical :
that follows from the nature of the case. But his acuteness and
industry have not therefore been expended in vain. Several
fragments have been rightly combined; the context of some
passages has been elucidated. And these fragments afford
interesting glimpses of the matter which they contained, justifying
the belief that the Ode, when entire, contained a large and highly-
wrought mythical story.


The legend of Minos and Dexithea, which Bacchylides
treated in this Ode, is epitomized in the scholia on the /ézs of
Ovid?. It is there said that Macelo and her sisters, the daughters
of Damon, had once been hospitable to Jupiter. On this account
he spared them, when he slew the Telchines, of whom Damon
was chief, for blighting the fruits of the earth by evil arts.
Minos came to the sisters, wedded ‘Dexione’ or ‘ Desithone’
(Dexithea), and begat Euxantius, ancestor of the Euxantidae.
The longer of the two scholia which give this story cites the
poet Nicander (¢c. 150 B.C.) as the source. A verse in the


1 Robinson Ellis in Class. Rev. XII.
p- 66 (Feb., 1898): v. Wilamowitz in
Gott. gel. Anz. 1898, 126 f.

2 See Robinson Ellis’s edition of the
“δὲς (Oxon. 1881), p. 83. (1) The shorter
scholium on ν. 475 runs thus:—Macedo


filia Damonis dicitur cum (here, I may
observe, E. Rohde would insert II or III,
which could easily have dropped out after
ΤᾺ] sovoribus fuisse: harum hospitio usus
Iupiter, cum Zekhinas guorum hic prin-
ceps erat corrumpentes inuidia successus


444


APPENDIX.


Dionysiaca of Nonnus, which unfortunately is followed by a
lacuna, says that ‘ Macello entertained Zeus and Apollo’ at the


same time}.


omnium fructuum fulmine interficeret,
seruauit. ad quas cum nenissel Minos cum
Dextone concubuit : ex qua creauit Euxan-
tium unde Euxantidae fucrunt. (2) The
longer scholium is as follows :—Micander
dicit Macelon fiiam Damonis cum sorort-
bus fuisse. harum hospitio Iupiter sus-
ceptus cum Thelonios [Thelginas=Tel-
chinas?] guorum hic Damo princeps erat
corrumpentes uenenis successus omnium
fructuum fulmine interficeret servauit cos
[sic: leg. eas]. sed Macelo cum uiro
propler uiri nequitiam pertit. ad alias
vero seruatas cum uenisset Minos cum
Desithone (Desitone ed. Paris.] concubuit,
ex gua creauit Eusantium unde Eusantiae
Juerunt.—Cp. Otto Schneider, Micander,
p- 133 f, frag. 116. Nothing is known
about Nicander’s treatment of the subject
beyond what is stated here.

This scholium says that, while the other
sisters were spared, Macelo was killed,
along with her husband, on account of
the latter’s wickedness. The verse of the
Ibis (475), to which these scholia belong,
is—Ut Macelo (ν. 1. Macedo) rapidis icta
est cum coniuge flammis. Two other
scholia on that verse say merely that
Macelo and her husband were struck with
lightning by Jupiter at their marriage-
feast because he (or they) had invited all
the gods except Jupiter. It is surprising
to learn that Macelo, one of the sisters
whose hospitality to the god saved their
lives, perishes for an act of the opposite
kind, albeit the guilt was her husband’s.
The hospitality to Zeus (and Apollo) is
ascribed by Nonnus (XvIII. 35), not to
several sisters, but expressly to Μακελλώ.
There may have been a contamination of
myths here. In one (probably the older)
form of the story, Macelo was simply the
foremost of the sisters in offering hos-
pitality to the god (or gods). Then,
perhaps by some confusion with a similar


The scholia, and this verse of Nonnus, are our
only authorities (other than Bacchylides) for the myth.


It has


name, she became the bride who was in-
volved in the punishment of the bride-
groom for a sin of that type so common
in mythology,—omission to ask a par-
ticular god to a feast. Thus a foreign
and discordant element was interwoven
with the original myth.
1 Nonnus XVIII. 35 th:
Ζῆνα καὶ ᾿Απόλλωνα μιῇ ξείνισσε Ma-
κέλλων [leg. Μακελλώ]


* * * * * * *


kal Φλεγύας ὅτε πάντας aveppliwoe


θαλάσσῃ,

νῆσον ὅλην τριόδοντι διαρρήξας ’ Evo-
σίχθων,

ἀμφοτέρας ἐφύλαξε καὶ οὐ πρήνιξε
τριαίνῃ.


The substantive which went with μιῇ is
lost in the lacuna. A. Ko6chly, in his
edition (Teubner, 1857-8), has altered
Maxé&\\wv (very unwarrantably) into
Tpamréfy,—the conjecture of G. Falken-
burg (ed. princeps, Antwerp, 1569) ; and
has also changed the ἀμφοτέρας of the
MSS. into ἀμφοτέρους. The subject to
ξείνισσε was, he supposes, one of the
Phlegyes, who, with a companion, was
spared by Poseidon, when he destroyed
those savage islanders. E. Rohde (Der
eriech. Roman und seine Vorlaufer, p. 506
and ed.) has judged more soundly of this
passage. The traditional reading Μακέλ-
λων (ie. MaxeAAw) is corroborated by the
Zbis-scholia. Nicander had told her story,
which was connected with the destruction
of the Telchines by Zeus. Euphorion of
Chalcis (c. 220 B.C.) had related the de-
struction of the Phlegyes by Poseidon
(Servius on Aen. VI. 618: Euphor. fr.
CLV. p. 154 Meineke). Nonnus alluded
in this passage to both legends: the
verses lost after v. 35 contained the end
of the first, and the beginning of the
second.


ODE 1. 445


‘three principal features: (1) the hospitality of the sisters to
Zeus (and Apollo); (2) the slaying of the Telchines by Zeus;
(3) the visit of Minos to the sisters, his union with Dexithea,
and the birth of Euxantius.

This last part of the story,—the vital one for the Cean poet,
—is contained in the first large fragment of the Ode. But how
had Bacchylides conducted the mythical narrative up to that
point? The fragments, though too scanty to help us far, afford
some gleams of light which are suggestive. One of the sisters,
on awaking from sleep, proposes (it would seem) that they shall
quit their ἀρχαίαν πόλιν, and seek a new abode—‘on the verge
of the sea’ (<ém’> ἀνδήροις ἁλός), and open to the rays of the
sun («ὑπ᾽ αὐγαῖς ἀελίου). The words (λήξασα Ὁ) μελίφρονος
ὕπνου suggest that the maiden’s projects like Nausicaa’s, had
been prompted by a dream, sent to her in order that she and
her sisters should meet visitants who were on their way to Ceos.
(That all this happens in Ceos, may safely be inferred from the
fact that Ceos is plainly the πολύκρημνος χθών of verse 11, in
which Minos finds Dexithea.) Then in fragment 5 one of the
sisters is found addressing certain persons ‘in a soothing voice’
(...caivouo’ éqi), near some stream which has the epithet εὐναῆ.
This meeting occurred, no doubt, after the migration of the
maidens from their ‘old city’ to the abode near the sea; and
may have been placed by the poet near the mouth of a river.
Are the persons whom this maiden accosts the disguised Zeus
and Apollo? It is possible, or even probable: we can say no
more. But it is interesting to note that the speaker touches on
‘anguish sharp as a two-edged sword’ (ἀμφάκει dda), and on
‘poverty. Probably she is apologizing (as Prof. Blass suggests)
for being unable to provide better entertainment for the strangers,
and φεύγετε (in v. 81) was preceded by a negative: ‘yet do not
altogether decline what we can offer. No stronger proof of
φιλοξενία could be given than to offer hospitality in a season
of private sorrow (cp. Eur. Ad. 512—567). But what was the
cause of this ἀμφάκης δύα to which the speaker refers? The
Sisters are, it is apparent, in affliction and distress. This might
be due to the knowledge that their father Damon, with the other
Telchines, had incurred the wrath of Zeus, and that the divine


446 APPENDIX.


chastisement was about to descend upon him. A warning of
such peril, by dream or oracle, may have been the motive of their
removal from their ἀρχαίαν méduv—which must have been also
their father’s seat—to the new abode by the sea. The scholia
on the /ézs, at any rate, imply that the hospitality of the sisters
to Zeus preceded the slaying of the Telchines, If the ἀμφάκης
éva is grief for Damon’s death, then Bacchylides has followed
a version according to which the danger of destruction menaced
the sisters, not at the moment of their father’s fall, but soon after
it: their hospitality to Zeus and Apollo averted the peril, and
brought, instead of it, a great reward.

With regard to the Telchines, we know that Bacchylides
somewhere named four of them,—’Axtaios, Μεγαλήσιος, "Op-
μενος, Avwos,—and described them as the offspring of Nemesis}.
If this Ode was the place where the mention occurred, we might
conjecture that a good deal was said about the Telchines. That
must remain wholly uncertain: the fragments tell us nothing,
One thing, however, may be said. Rhodes was the primary
seat of the Telchines ; but it was not there (according to legend)
that they perished. They quitted Rhodes (driven out by the
Heliadae’, or, according to another account, foreboding a
deluge*): and then, as legend told, they were scattered (δια-
σπαρῆναι). There was nothing, therefore, to prevent a poet
from supposing that the Telchin Damon had established himself
in Ceos, and was there slain by the bolt of Zeus.

A small town on the coast of Ceos was called . Κορησία
(Strabo 10, p. 486), Κόρησος, or Κορησσός". Near it was the


1 Tzetzes, Theogon. 81: see p. 432
(fr. 55). The words as to the origin
of the Telchines ate,—ods Βακχυλίδης
μέν φησι Νεμέσεως Taprdpov, ἄλλοι τινὲς
δὲ λέγουσι τῆς Τῆς τε καὶ τοῦ Πόντου.
The singularity of the version which
Bacchylides followed is that it does not
connect the Telchines with the sea.
These volcanic daemons were essentially,
as Nonnus calls them (XIV. 42), δαίμονες
ὑγρονόμοι: he makes them children of
Poseidon, whose trident they wrought
(Callim. De. 31). According to Dio-
dorus (Vv. 55) they were υἱοὶ... Θαλάσσης
(no father is named), and were reared by


Poseidon. Are the words Νεμέσεως
Ταρτάρου sound, or should a καὶ come
between them? Nemesis is usually called
a daughter of Night (Hes. Theog. 223: of
Erebus, in Hygin. Fab. praef.): in Attic
mythology the Rhamnusian Nemesis was
a daughter of Oceanus (Paus. 7. 1 § 3).

2 Nonnus XIV. 42 ff.

3 Diod. v. 56 ad init. προαισθομένους
«τὸν μέλλοντα γίνεσθαι κατακλυσμόν.

4.2.

5 The little that has been ascertained
or conjectured about this place is brought
together by A. Pridik, De Cez Insulae
rebus (Berlin, 1892), p. 7 f.


ODE I. 447


port of Iulis,—the latter town itself being about three miles
further inland. It has been ingeniously suggested by N. Festa!
that a local legend, deriving Κορησία from Κόραι, may have
connected it with the migration of Dexithea and her sisters
from their former home (the ἀρχαίαν πόλιν) to the coast; and
that Κορησία is the πόλις βαθυδείελος of vv. 29 ἴ, of which
: Argeius was a native. Some allusion to the foundation of that
town may have occurred in the lacuna which now exists
between v. 18 and v. 23.

To sum up :—the fragments, supplemented by conjecture on
the lines indicated above, might suggest that the argument of
the Ode was somewhat as follows. It began,—so much is
reasonably certainn—with an invocation of the Pierides,—a
reference to Corinth, ‘eye of the Isthmian land, ‘the city which
worships Poseidon, wedded to the daughter of wise Nereus’
(Amphitrite)—and then a mention of Ceos, ‘isle of the
Euxantidae.’ This last served to link the prelude with the myth
of Minos and Dexithea, which occupied the larger part of the
poem. In Ceos was dwelling, with his daughters (Macelo,
Dexithea, and others), the Telchin Damon,—guilty, in the sight
of Zeus, along with his brethren now scattered in many lands, of
practising the malign arts by which they had once blighted the
fruits of the earth in Rhodes? A dream comes to one of the
daughters, warning them of a disaster impending on their house,
and counselling them to leave the city of their father for a place
on the sea-coast. They do so; and there meet two strangers of
noble mien, who have just reached the island. Though in deep
sorrow and distress, Macelo, on behalf of the sisters, offers them
such hospitality as they can give. One of the visitors speaks
words of comfort; and predicts that, though the maiden’s father,
Damon, must presently be smitten by the wrath of Zeus, a great
hero shall come anon to Ceos, who shall wed one of the sisters,
and that the offspring of this union shall in future days.be lord
of that land, and founder of a famous line. The strangers


1 Leodee it frammenti di B.(Florence, χιν, 46 f.:

1898). ᾿ χερσὶ βαρυζήλοισιν ἀρυόμενοι Στυγὸς
2 They drenched the crops with the ὕδωρ

sulphurous waters of the Styx. Nonnus ἄσπορον εὐκάρποιο Ῥόδου ποίησαν ἀλωήν.


448 APPENDIX.


vanish. Storm-clouds gather in the sky; and from their
dwelling by the sea the sisters behold the lightnings which
show where the doom of Zeus has fallen. But, on the third day
thereafter, Minos arrives with his Cretan warriors; he weds
Dexithea ; and, when he departs for Crete, leaves the half of his
host to protect her. In the tenth month her son Euxantius is
born. And in after days he, or a descendant, founds a goodly
city in the place by the sea where of yore Macelo and her
sisters entertained Zeus and Apollo unawares; and calls it, in
memory thereof, Covesus,‘the city of the maidens.’ There was
born the young victor at the Isthmian games, Argeius, son of
the hospitable physician, Pantheides.

Thus, or somewhat in this fashion,—following the hints in
the fragments, and the other evidence,—might we conceive the
outline of the form which Bacchylides gave to the legend of his
island. At any rate, we may be sure that those passages of
which the fragments afford glimpses,—the scenes in which
Dexithea and her sisters bore part,—exhibited to advantage
the poet’s most attractive gifts,—his graceful ease in narrative,
his skill in bright and picturesque detail, his simple pathos.
Few mutilations in the papyrus are more to be regretted than
those which have rent away the earlier portion of this first ode.


Ode 1. 15. EUXANTIUS.


115 According to the scholiast on Apollonius Rhodius (1. 186),
Euxantius was the father of Miletus. The source used by the
scholiast may have been Aristocritus, the author of a work on
Miletus, who mentioned the Evfavrida: (Miiller, Frag. Histor.
IV. p. 331). The renown of the Milesta vellera points to a
connexion between Εὐξαντίδαι and Eavtns, carminator, ‘wool-
carder. Such patronymics were often borne by hereditary
guilds, in which the exercise of some art or craft descended
from father to son. But it is easy to conceive that, when the
Euxantidae of Miletus had become a clan of wealth and dis-
tinction, they should have aspired to the honours of heroic
ancestry. It has been remarked by Prof. v. Wilamowitz-Moel-
lendorff (Gott. gel. Anz., 1898, no. 2, p. 128) that Ev&avtuos is ‘a
strange formation. He suggests that it means, ὁ κατ᾽ εὐχὴν
ἀντίος ἐλθών. He thinks that, in the original form of the


ODE ἢ 449


legend, Δεξιθέα (‘she who receives a god’) became a mother,
not by Minos, but by a god (Zeus or Apollo), whose welcome
epiphany was commemorated by the name Euxantius, given to
the offspring of that union. Forced interpretations of tra-
ditional proper names were frequent enough in popular Greek
mythology. It is not inconceivable that Εὐξάντιος should, at
some time or other, have been explained as meaning, ὁ κατ᾽ εὐχὴν
ἀντίος ἐλθών: but is it at all probable that it should have been
invented to express that idea? I cannot think so. Surely
it is far more likely that Εὐξάντιος was a name suggested
by the patronymic Εὐξαντίδαι, and invented in order to
provide the ‘sons of the good wool-carders’ with a heroic
ancestor. This hypothesis is confirmed by the comparative
obscurity in which the Euxantius-myth remained. That
legend, so far as we know, had only what may be called a
domestic currency,—viz., at Miletus and in Ceos. The learned
Alexandrians, of course, knew it. Herodian has preserved part
of a verse of Callimachus, αἷμα τὸ μὲν γενεῆς Εὐξαντίδος. But
there is no reason to suppose that the Alexandrian knowledge
of the myth was derived from any sources other than those
which Ceos and Miletus themselves had furnished,—the poem of
Bacchylides, and the prose-work of Aristocritus (with possibly
other writers of local mythography). It is significant that
pseudo-Apollodorus, usually so full and precise in regard to
every mythological person of any importance, simply mentions
Euxantius as a son whom Dexithea bore to Minos, and has
not a word more to say about him (3. 1 § 2).

To sum up, the conclusion to which I am led is as follows.
The Euxantidae were a clan at Miletus in whom the craft of
wool-carding was hereditary. Ceos had an ancient local legend
which made that island the place where Dexithea became the
bride of Minos. Minos was associated in legend with Miletus
also. It was an easy combination to call the son of Minos and
Dexithea ‘Euxantius,’ and to represent him as the ancestor of
the Milesian Euxantidae. The myth would be welcome to the
Euxantidae themselves, whom it furnished with a lineage so
illustrious; it would also be gratifying to the Ceans. A further
embellishment of the legend was to make Euxantius the father
of Miletus.


1. Β. 39


32—34


450 APPENDIX.


Ode I. 32—34. *Apyetos...pdxas.


It is certain that verse 34 began with the letters XPE. The scrib
had written the letter A before these, but this has been deleted. A
verse 33 ends with ὁπότε, and its final syllable must be long, vers
34 must have begun with xp, before which ε could be lengthenec
There is no room for ZA before XPE.

The letter after E must have been I, and the only question :
whether this I had the circumflex or the acute accent (the trac
admits of either): 24, whether the word was (1) χρεῖος or χρεῖον: ¢
(2) χρείη, or some part of χρεία. The fact that A was written by errc
before XPE is decidedly in favour of (1); since a transcriber, who ha
χρεῖος (or -ov) before him, might easily, by inadvertence, have writte
the much commoner word ἀχρεῖος (or -ov): whereas such a slip woul
have been less likely, if χρείη or some part of χρεία had stood i
the text.

-Bodot is certain. This must be pres. optat. from a verb in -éw
for no verb ending in -βολόω is discoverable. Dialect would lead us t
expect -éo. in the optat., not the contraction -of It is, of cours
possible that the poet wrote -βολέοι, and that -Bodot is due to transcription

What was the verb of which -βολοῖ formed the latter part? Blas
reads κερβολοῖ (‘irritate, provoke’). ‘KepBodctv zdem est atque kepropeis
(praef. p. xiii). He cites Hom. 72. 16. 261 where αἰεὶ κερτομέοντες :
said of children who are teasing wasps. The form κερβολεῖν occurs i
Hesych. s.v. κερβολοῦσα" λοιδοροῦσα, βλασφημοῦσα. Cp. Ar. Lg. 82
μὴ σκέρβολλε πονηρά (= λοιδόρει). Prof. Blass further supposes that, <
the contraction in -βολοῖ is strange, and as the syllable G6 answers t
one which is long in the corresponding place, the word in the text wa
originally κερβόλλοι. In his first edition, he read χρεῖόν τι κερβολι
μάχας, ‘(whenever) any creature (‘sive canis sive homo’), desirous <
fight, provoked (the lion).’ In his later eds., he reads χρεῖός ἑ [-- κι
κερβολοῖ μάχας, ‘(whenever) any need of fight provoked him’: adding
‘st litt. F positionem. non facit, habemus —vu— [xpeids € Kep-] pr
~—v-. In any case, I should prefer χρεῖός τι to χρεῖός Fe. But
cannot think that κερβολοῖ has any probability. Neither Hesychius nc
Aristophanes warrants the supposition that κερβολεῖν or σκερβόλλε
was used in any sense except that of ‘taunting’ or ‘reviling.’ Pro
Blass assumes that κερβολεῖν = κερτομεῖν, and relies on 71. 16. 261 1
prove that κερτομεῖν could mean to ‘ provoke’ or ‘worry’ otherwise tha
by words. Now, that verse was suspected by Alexandrian critic


ODES J, I. 451


precisely because κερτομεῖν seemed to be used in an unexampled sense.
See the scholium of Aristonicus upon it : ἀθετεῖται, ὅτι τὸ κερτομεῖν οὐ
τίθησιν ἐπὶ τοῦ δι᾿ ἔργου ἐρεθίζειν, ἀλλὰ διὰ λόγων. If indeed, that verse
be genuine, κερτομέοντες may best be referred to the seering cries of the
children, since noise would contribute to the irritation of the wasps.

In -Bodoi, I can find nothing but συμβολοῖ (see commentary).


Ode II. of. ἑβδομήκοντα σὺν στεφάνοισιν.


The context makes it clear that these ‘seventy victories’ had been It. of.
won. by Ceans at the Isthmus alone. The Isthmiads were reckoned
from 5808.c. This Ode is of unknown date, but was probably among
the poet’s earlier works. Suppose, for the sake of illustration, that
Argeius won in 470B.c. The Isthmiad of that year was only the 56th.
If we assumed a date as low as 440 B.c. (the 71st Isthmiad), the record
would still be a distinctly good one for so small an island as Ceos,
competing with all Hellas. Still there is nothing marvellous about it.
In the first place, it would not seldom happen that a victor at one
Isthmian festival would repeat his success at one or more subsequent
festivals. The fragmentary Cean inscription (noticed in the Introduction
to Ode 1) records two men, each of whom had won three Isthmian
victories. Again (though this case would be much rarer) the same
competitor might win more than one wreath at the same festival.
Pausanias (6. 15 § 3) mentions a Theban who, on the same day of
the Isthmia, was victorious in three contests,—boxing, wrestling, and
the pancration. The greater number of the ‘seventy wreaths’ must
have been gained in boxing and running, for which Ceos was especially
noted (vi. 7). Two inferences, at least, may safely be drawn from this
passage. First, that Ceos was exceptionally prolific in athletes of these
classes: secondly, that the Isthmian festival was that which Cean
competitors more especially frequented. It was the most readily
accessible from their island, and traditional associations had doubtless
confirmed the preference.

Pind. O. x11. 98—100, speaking of the clan of the ᾿Ολιγαιθίδαι at.
Corinth, to whom Xenophon (winner of stadion and pentathlon at
Olympia in 464 B.c.) belonged, mentions that they had won thirty
victories at the Isthmus, and thirty at Nemea (ἑξηκοντάκι 8) ἀμφοτέ.
ρωθεν).


30—2


[. 18 ἔ.


452 APPENDIX.


Ode III. 18 f. ὑψιδαιδάλτων τριπόδων σταθέντων


πάροιθε ναοῦ.


The French exploration of Delphi has shown that a tripod dedicate:
by Gelon, and another dedicated by Hieron, stood side by side befor
the east front of the temple. No votive offering in the entire sanctuar
of Apollo held a more conspicuous position. (See the Bulletin a
Correspondance Hellénigue, vol. xxt. 1897, plate xvu1, the spot marke
£x-voto de Gélon.) This fact alone suffices to explain the reference c
Bacchylides.


I. The monumental evidence has been set forth with grea
clearness and precision by M. Théophile Homolle (Budletin de Corn
spondance LHéllenigue, vol. Χχι. pp. 588 ff., 1898: Mfélanges Wei
pp. 207—224, Paris, 1898.) Here I can but briefly indicate the mor
essential facts. The explorers found a large quadrangular base c
limestone, on which was superimposed a high limestone step, carefull
wrought. This in turn carried two stands or pedestals (socles), re
sembling bell-shaped capitals inverted, and placed a meter apart fron
each other. Each of these pedestals once supported a metal tripod, a
is shown by the cavities in which the three feet were once secured
One of the pedestals bears the following inscription :—


TEAONOAEINOMEN
ANE@EKETOTIOAAONI

ΣΥΡΑΦΟΣΙΟΣ
TONTPITIOAAKAITENNIKENEPIASATO
BIONAIOAOPOYIOSMIAEXIOS


So Gelon dedicated a golden Νίκη along with his tripod,—botl
being the work of the same artist, Bion, son of Diodorus, of Miletus [a
to whom see Aull. Corr. Hellin. 1896, pp. 654—6].

The inscription on the other pedestal is mutilated: all that remain
of it is the following :—

NEOSANE@EKE EA
BETITAMNAI


The dedicator was, then, a son of Deinomenes ; certainly not Gelor
who, if both the tripods had been his, would not have placed tw
separate inscriptions on offerings supported by the same base, bt
rather one inscription on the base itself. Further, we know (fror
Athenaeus) that Hieron dedicated a golden tripod at Delphi: and ther
is no record of such a gift by Polyzelus or Thrasybulus. It may b


ODE S11. 453


regarded as certain, then, that this second tripod was Hieron’s. The
inscription is thus restored by M. Homolle:—


[Βιάρων ho Δεινομέ]νεος ἀνέθεκε: [17 ξλ


[κε δὲ τάλαντα δέκα]λεπτὰ μναῖ.


(The nominative μναῖ, instead of the accus. μνᾶς, is strange, as
M. Homolle says, in so short a statement of the weight; though the
Delian inscriptions afford instances of nominatives mixed with accu-
satives in longer statements of the same nature.)

The base on which both the tripod-pedestals stood was probably
designed at first for one pedestal only,—that of Gelon’s tripod; and
was afterwards enlarged to receive Hieron’s (A/élanges Weil, p. 220).


II. The literary evidence may be summed up as follows.

1. Diodorus (ΧΙ. 26), following Timaeus, mentions only one tripod,
—that dedicated by Gelon after the victory at Himera:—xpucoiv δὲ
τρίποδα ποιήσας ἀπὸ ταλάντων ἑκκαίδεκα ἐνέθηκεν εἰς τὸ τέμενος τὸ ἐν
Δελφοῖς, ᾿Απόλλωνι χαριστήριον.

2. Athenaeus (6. pp. 231 Ε---232 6) makes certain statements con-
cerning the votive offerings generally at Delphi. For these statements
he quotes two authorities, viz. (1) Phanias of Eresus, a pupil of Aristotle,
who wrote Περὶ τῶν ἐν Σικελίᾳ τυράννων (see Miiller, Frag. Hist. 11.
Ρ- 297): (2) Theopompus, Φιλιππικά, book 40 (written in the second
half of the fourth century B.c.).

Phanias and Theopompus, says Athenaeus, state that, after Gyges
and Croesus, Gelon and Hieron were the next donors of silver or gold
ἀναθήματα at Delphi :—rod μὲν (Gelon) τρίποδα καὶ νίκην χρυσοῦ πεποιη-
μένα ἀναθέντος, καθ’ οὖς χρόνους Ἐέρξης ἐπεστράτευε τῇ Ἑλλάδι, τοῦ δὲ
Ἱέρωνος τὰ ὅμοια. [Observe that the date is here appended to the
notice of Gelon’s gift, and separates it from the mention of Hieron’s;
whereas, if both gifts had been of the same date, the clause καθ᾽ οὗς..
Ἑλλάδι should have followed ὅμοια.

Then Athenaeus goes on to quote verbatim a passage of Theo-
pompus. After relating that the Lacedaemonians, when they wished to
gild (χρυσῶσαι) the face of the Amyclaean Apollo, were directed by the
Delphic oracle to buy gold of Croesus, the historian proceeds :--- Ἰέρων
δ᾽ ὁ Συρακόσιος, βουλόμενος ἀναθεῖναι τῷ θεῷ τὸν τρίποδα καὶ τὴν Νίκην ἐξ
ἀπέφθου χρυσοῦ, ἐπὶ πολὺν χρόνον ἀπορῶν χρυσίου, ὕστερον ἔπεμψε τοὺς
ἀναζητήσοντας εἰς τὴν Ἑλλάδα. Hieron’s emissaries (Theopompus goes
on to say) finally discovered a man at Corinth, one Architeles, who had
large stores of gold, and who allowed them to buy as much as they


454 APPENDIX.


desired,—adding a onus on the purchase,—a large handful of the
precious metal: ἀνθ᾽ ὧν Ἱέρων πλοῖον σίτου καὶ ἄλλα πολλὰ δῶρα ἔπεμψεν
ἐκ Σικελίας.

This extract from Theopompus is instructive in three respects.
(1) Hieron, like Gelon, dedicated both a tripod and a Victory,—and
Hieron’s were of refined gold. (2) ‘A long time’ elapsed before he could
procure a sufficient quantity of such gold. After search (presumably)
in Sicily and Magna Graecia, he ‘afterwards’ (ὕστερον) sent messengers
to Greece. (3) Hieron rewarded the Corinthian gold-merchant with
princely munificence, sending him ‘a ship-load of corn,’ and ‘many
other. gifts.’

All this clearly suggests that, when he dedicated his offerings at
Delphi, Hieron was already ruler of Syracuse. ‘The details of the story
indicate a prince who wields large resources, whose commands are
executed without stint of cost or trouble, and who royally repays those
who serve him. Hieron became ruler of Syracuse in 478.

According, however, to an ingenious theory propounded by M.
Homolle, Hieron’s offering was placed beside Gelon’s in the latter’s
life-time. The scholiast on Pind. Pyth. τ. 155 records the tradition that
Gelon, from affection towards his brothers (Hieron, Thrasybulus and
Polyzelus), dedicated his thank-offering at’ Delphi in their names as
well as in his own :--φασὶ δὲ τὸν Τέλωνα τοὺς ἀδελφοὺς φιλοφρονούμενον
ἀναθεῖναι τῷ θεῷ χρυσοῦς τρίποδας, ἐπιγράψαντα ταῦτα"

Φημὶ Τέλων᾽, Ἱέρωνα, Πολύζηλον, Θρασύβουλον,
παῖδας Δεινομένευς, τοὺς τρίποδας θέμεναι,

βάρβαρα νικήσαντας ἔθνη" πολλὴν δὲ παρασχεῖν
σύμμαχον Ἕλλησιν χεῖρ᾽ ἐς ἐλευθερίην.

This inscription is ascribed to Simonides in the Palatine Anthology
(σι. 214), where in verse 2 the reading is τὸν τρίποδ᾽ ἀνθέμεναι, as it is
also in Suidas s.v. Aaperiov. [The Axthology and Suidas further insert
the following couplet after verse 2: ἕξ ἑκατὸν λιτρῶν καὶ πεντήκοντα
ταλάγτων | Aaperiov (Δαμαρέτου Bergk) χρυσοῦ, τᾶς δεκάτας δεκάταν.]

M. Homolle holds that the reading of the scholiast, τοὺς τρίποδας
θέμεναι, is the true one. At Delphi, besides the two pedestals, standing
on a common base, which supported the tripods of Gelon and Hieron,
the French explorer found also two smaller pedestals, which bear no
inscriptions. These smaller pedestals (C and D) have the same form
(that of a bell-shaped capital inverted) as the two larger (4 and &); a
form which is exceptional at Delphi, and does not seem to occur
elsewhere. One of them (22) shows the three cavities intended to


ODE 112 455


receive the feet of a tripod; in the case of the other (C), the upper
surface, where such cavities, if they existed, would have appeared, has
been broken away.

The history of the relation between the four tripod-pedestals (4, B,
C, D) is conceived by M. Homolle as follows. (1) Gelon dedicated
A after the battle of Himera. (2) Hieron, ambitious and self-assertive,
afterwards contrived that his offering, 2, also dedicated on account of
Himera, should be set up beside that of his elder brother ; and the base
which supported the pedestal of 4 was enlarged for ‘that purpose.
(3) Then the kindly Gelon caused the two smaller tripods, C and D,
to be erected on the same spot, in order to associate the younger
brothers (Thrasybulus and Polyzelus) with his renown, while at the
same time he thus administered a mild reproof to Hieron. C ‘is
somewhat larger than 1; and M. Homolle suggests that Gelon in-
tended this gradation of size to correspond with the gradation of age
in his younger brethren. The pedestals of C and D may have stood
on a common base, and this base may have borne the inscription by
Simonides, δημὶ Τέλων᾽, Ἱέρωνα «.7.A. It could have been set, facing
westward, at right angles to the larger base which carried the offerings
of Gelon and Hieron.

This theory—that C and D were set up by Gelon in order to give
Thrasybulus and Polyzelus a share in the glory of Himera—presupposes,
as we have seen, that Hieron’s tripod, &, was set up by him, beside
Gelon’s, in Gelon’s lifetime. But the latter hypothesis appears very
improbable. In 480 Hieron was regent of Gela under his elder
brother, then ruler of Syracuse. (Herod. vu. 155: Freeman, Szcz/y τι.
p. 129.) At Himera Gelon commanded in chief against the Cartha-
ginians. Alike in a military and in a political sense, Gelon was
paramount; Hieron’s position was a secondary and a dependent one.
Now, the position of Hieron’s Delphian tripod, at the side of Gelon’s,
and the similarity of scale, imply (as M. Homolle has recognised) a
claim of equality. Such a claim would: be perfectly intelligible. if
Hieron’s gift to Delphi was made after Gelon’s death, when Hieron
had succeeded him as ruler of Syracuse. But in 480/79, and with
reference to the victory at Himera, the regent of Gela would have been
strangely ill-advised, if, at the central sanctuary of Hellas, he had
ostentatiously asserted such equality with his elder brother and over-
lord.

Prof. Blass has quite a different way of explaining the two smaller
pedestals (Preface to the 3rd ed. of his Bacchylides, pp. lix.f.). He


456 APPENDIX.


supposes that Hieron dedicated three tripods at Delphi. The two
smaller ones, C and D, commemorated his Pythian victories with the
κέλης in 482 and 478; the largest, B, his victory at Delphi with the four-
horse chariot in 470. But, as we have seen, the authorities quoted by
Athenaeus speak of Hieron as having dedicated only one tripod (with
a Νίκη). On the view of Prof. Blass, we should have to assume that
his other two tripods were ignored because they were smaller.

There are, however, certain considerations which seem to render it
very improbable that Hieron’s tripod, which stood beside Gelon’s, can
have been a thank-offering for Hieron’s success in the Pythian games.
(1) The conspicuous spot where these two tripods stood, before the
east front of the temple, was peculiarly associated with the great national
victories, those of Salamis, Plataea, and Himera. The bronze mast with
gold stars, which the Aeginetans set up after Salamis, stood close to the
gold crater of Croesus (Her. vill. 122), which itself was on the right
hand of one entering the temple (id. 1. 51), ze. near the N.E. angle.
The Panhellenic thank-offering for Plataea,—the golden tripod on a
three-headed serpent of bronze (Her. 1x. 80),—was in the same
neighbourhood, close to the Great Altar. Gelon’s tripod and Nike, as
we know, commemorated Himera. The memorial of a mere personal
success in the games would have seemed strangely intrusive amidst such
surroundings. (2) Further, the base on which Gelon’s tripod stood
was enlarged to receive Hieron’s. Community of base suggests com-
munity of purpose. Hieron had fought at Himera. When his tripod
and Nike were placed at the side of his brother’s, and on the same
plinth, can we doubt that the meaning was to assert his equality with
Gelon as a champion of western Hellas? That significance would be
enhanced, if we could suppose that the date was subsequent to Hieron’s
naval victory over the Etruscans at Cumae in 474.

Another question remains. If the epigram of Simonides (or at least
the first couplet of it) was really used at Delphi, where was it placed ?

1, We now know that it was πού placed on the pedestal of Gelon’s
tripod. The inscription there names Gelon only. That inscription
also speaks of τὸν τρίποδα καὶ τὴν Νίκην : which clearly suggests that this
pedestal supported both, the tripod being surmounted by the Victory.
This seems almost conclusive against the hypothesis that Gelon’s Nike
stood on a separate pedestal, which bore the epigram of Simonides, the
speaker (φημί) being the Nike herself (as suggested by v. Wilamowitz,
Gotting. Nachr., pp. 313 ff.). Further, it would be strange that an
inscription speaking of the tripod (or tripods) should be placed on a
pedestal which supported only the Nike.


ODE I. 457


2. M. Homolle supposes that the epigram of Simonides was
engraved on a lost base which once supported the two smaller tripod-
pedestals (Cand D), those for Thrasybulus and Polyzelus. In that case,
the epigram referred to four tripods. But, as I have sought to show, it
is not probable that Hieron’s tripod was placed beside Gelon’s till after
the latter’s death. We should have to suppose, then, that Hieron was
originally represented by a tripod which stood on a separate pedestal,
a tripod presumably of smaller size than that which he afterwards
caused to be set up.

It seems to me that, with the existing data for the problem, we must
be content to remain in doubt with regard (1) to the history of pedestals
C and D; and (2) to the place of the Simonidean epigram, if it was really
used at all. But two things appear strongly probable: viz. (1) that the
tripod and Nike of Hieron, which stood beside Gelon’s, commemorated
the victory at Himera; and (2) that they were placed there after he
succeeded Gelon at Syracuse in 478.


Ode IIT. arf. θεόν, θεόν τις
ἀγλαϊζέτω, ὁ γὰρ ἄριστος ὄλβων.


In verse 22 Kenyon reads, ἀγλαϊζέτω γάρ, ἄριστον ὄλβον. (For the IIL. 21f.
position of γάρ, cp. Soph. P%. 1450.) Housman and Richards, ἀγλαϊζέτω
παρ᾽ ἄριστον ὄλβον (‘in the time of greatest properity’). But the change
of τ into θ in the ms, reading ἀγλαϊζέθω is then unexplained.

Others read ἀγλάϊζε. Marindin, ἀγλάϊξε, θεῷ γὰρ ἄριστος ὄλβων (ἰ.6.,
the god has the best happiness in his gift). Tyrrell, ἀγλάϊζ᾽ ἔθ᾽, ᾧ wap’
ἄριστος 6ABwv. Butcher, ἀγλάϊζε, δώτορ᾽ ἄριστον ὄλβων. The use of τις
here with the second person of the imper. is, however, difficult to justify.
πᾶς, indeed, is often so used (eg. Ar. Pax 555 πᾶς χώρει πρὸς ἔργον).
In Ar. Av. 1187 τόξευε, παῖε, a τ. for παῖε is πᾶς τις : and in [Eur.]
Rihes. 687, where Dind. gives ἴσχε πᾶς icy’, some Mss. have ἴσχε πᾶς τις.
But, even if the use of τις with the second pers. imper. could be proved
authentic in some passages of this special kind, where a hurried
command is addressed to several persons, it would not follow that τις
could be so used in a case like the present,—z.¢. in a general moral
precept.


Ode III. 25—31. Blass gives this passage as follows: I print in IM. 25—31
black type the parts of the restoration which are his own :—
25 dre τὰν πεπ[ρωμέναν


Ζηνὸς τελείου νεύμασιν


458 APPENDIX.


Σάρδιες ἸΤερσᾶ[ν im’ ἐκπίμπλαν orp lara,
Κροῖσον 6 χρυσάορος
φύλαξ᾽ ᾿Απόλλων. [τὸ γὰρ ἄελπτον ὦμαρ
30 pdr ὦν' πολυδ[ ἀκρυον] οὐκ ἔμελλε
μίμνειν ἔτι δῥυσφροσύναν], πυρὰν δὲ (κ.τ.λ.)


(2) The sense of the first three verses then is :—‘ When, by decree
of Zeus who brings the end, Sardis was fulfilling its doom ὑπὸ στρατῷ
Περσᾶν, under the hands of the Persian host.’ He compares xvi. 26 ἢ,
πεπρωμέναν αἶσαν ἐκπλήσομεν : and for ὑπό, xil. 166 θνάσκοντες ὑπ᾽
Αἰακίδαις. But verse 27 is not a good one; the position of ὑπό is
awkward. And in verse 26 the plural νεύμασιν (used once by Aesch.,
Suppl. 373 μονοψήφοισι νεύμασιν σέθεν) seems neither quite fitting nor
very probable. The caesura after τελείου is also against the rule usually
observed by Bacchylides: see p. 97. It is surely much more likely
that the government of πεπρωμέναν was provided in v. 26 by τελειοῦσαι
(or τελέσσαντος).

(ὁ) From τὸ yap κιτιλ. in v. 29 onwards, the sense is:—‘ For the
unexpected day had come indeed (dv): he (Croesus) was not minded
to await a further doom of tears and anguish,’ etc. This suggests some
remarks. (1) Blass’s reading μόλ᾽ dv is prompted by the indication in
the MS. of & But poddy for μολών was one of the commonest errors in
accentuation. Headlam has collected the following (among other)
passages where μολῶν is so accented in one or more of the ss.: Eur. AZ.
1153, Hipp. 656, Med. 246, Phoen. 480, 663: Lycophron, 824, 1312,
1370, 1376 (μολῶντες 925, 956). Cp. ἐπεῖ for ἐπεί in v. 23 of this Ode,
In his 2nd and 3rd editions (p. 36) Prof. Blass further observes that, after
the letter N, he has found a point in the ms. Of this I can perceive no
trace. The right-hand stroke of N has been partly effaced, and one of
the vestiges of that stroke might, indeed, be taken for a point; but it is
in the line of the upward’ stroke, and not to the right of it. (2) The
form ὧν occurs nowhere else in Bacchylides ; whereas'in xvi1I. 29 and 37
he uses οὖν. Did he here prefer ὧν as Pindaric? It seems unlikely.
The sezse given to it is such as it would bear if (¢.g.) the sentence had
been, τὸ ἦμαρ ἄελπτον μὲν ἣν, μόλε δ᾽ dv. This is (to my apprehension)
a little forced. (3) The asyndeton after μόλ᾽ ὧν is somewhat harsh, and
certainly is not in this poet’s narrative style. (In his note Prof. Blass
suggests, as an alternative, πολὺ δὲ στύγος... δυσφροσυνᾶν.) (4) The
subject to ἔμελλε is Croesus: but, after two clauses with other subjects
(πόλλων and ἄμαρ), this needs to be indicated. (5) δυσφροσύναν,
‘trouble of mind,’ seems too weak a word here; the epithet πολυδάκρυον ~


ODE 11. 459


prepares us for some word expressing a dire calamity, such as dov-
λοσύναν.


Ode III. 48 dBpoBérav.—There is perhaps only one instance in III. 48
which a classical Greek writer applies the term é@pos to the movement of
men without implying the reproach of effeminacy: viz. Eur. ded. 829f.
(the Athenians) αἰεὶ διὰ λαμπροτάτου | βαίνοντες ἁβρῶς αἰθέρος, where, as
Verrall says, ‘it denotes the soft motion of the body, luxuriating...in the
genial air.’ The normal sense of ἁβρὸν βαίνειν is illustrated by verse
1134 of the same play, where the young bride Glauce, conscious of her
radiant beauty and splendid attire, is described as ἁβρὸν Baivovoa
παλλευκῷ ποδί Cp. Helena 1528, σοφώταθ᾽ ἁβρὸν πόδα τιθεῖσ᾽ ἀνέστενε
(where Helen is moving with the gentle tread of a mourner): and Z. 4.
614 (Iphigeneia) ἁβρὸν τιθεῖσα κῶλον. Jurenka compares Clem. Alex.
Paedag. U1. 294 τὸ ἁβροδίαιτον τῆς περὶ τὸν περίπατον κινήσεως καὶ τὸ
σαῦλα βαίνειν, ὥς φησιν ᾿Ανακρέων, κομιδῇ ἑταιρικά. This is relevant in so
far as it illustrates the display of ἁβρότης in movement. But Clement
there has in view something much coarser than Euripides (e.g.) meant
by ἁβρὸν βαίνουσα : this is shown by τὸ σαῦλα βαίνειν (‘a swaying gait’),
as also by ἑταιρικά, and, indeed, by τὸ ἁβροδίαιτον, which might be
rendered ‘voluptuousness.’ The idea which ἁβρὸν βαίνειν expresses,
and the antithesis which it implies, might be illustrated by the words of
Shakespeare’s Portia, when she is about to enact the part of a man, and
says that she will ‘turn two mincing steps into a manly stride’ (Merchant
of Venice 111. 4. 67 :—which might be rendered in Greek, ἁβρὸν μὲν οὐ
Baivovoa, βῆμα δ᾽ ἄρσενος | τρόποις ἐπεκτείνουσα). Prof. J. B. Bury explains
ἁβροβάταν as ‘a slippered eunuch.’ But, as I understand the word, it
refers to a delicate gait, rather than to soft coverings for the feet (as
though ἁβροβάτης meant ‘walking on éBpa’). It may be added that
the phrase of the oracle given to Croesus (Her. 1. 55),—Avdé ro8aBpé,—
though verbally similar, is not really relevant. The oracle,—very
unjustly,—chose to assume that the Lydians were already what they
became after their subjection, an effeminate race. The ‘Lydian with
delicate feet’ is merely the ‘effeminate’ Lydian,—the epithet being
ironically adapted to the counsel given,—viz., φεύγειν. It was only after
his fall that Croesus advised Cyrus to enervate the Lydians by requiring
them κιθῶνάς τε ὑποδύνειν τοῖς εἵμασι καὶ κοθόρνους ὑποδέεσθαι (Her.
I. 155).

Some critics write ‘ABpoBdray, and take it as a proper name, like
“Αβροκόμας in Her. vit. 224. This is surely improbable.


460 APPENDIX.


II. 59 Ode III. 59 ἐς ‘YsepBopéovs.—Otto Crusius, in Roscher’s Lexikon
der gr. und rim. Mythologie (pp. 2805—2835), exhaustively discusses
the Hyperborean legends. He adopts and enforces the view of H. L.
Ahrens as to the original meaning of the name. That view may be
summed up as follows. (1) In the Apollo-cult of Delos, it was said
that the Hyperboreans had sent two maidens with offerings of first-fruits
to Delos. (2) These maidens were escorted by five men, πομποί,
whom the Hyperboreans sent with them. The Delians called these
men Περφερέες: high honours were paid to them. (See Her. iv. 32—35.)
(3) Ὑπερβέρετος was the name of a month (=July) in the Cretan
‘Calendar: and Ὑπερβερεταῖος (= September) in the Macedonian Calendar.
In these months there were harvest-festivals of Apollo. (4) In some
North-Greek dialects, as in those of Macedonia and of Delphi, ¢ became
8. Thus ὑπερβέρετος leads back to ὑπερφερέτης ; and ὑπερβερεταῖος to
treppepetaios. So ὑπέρφορος would in those dialects become ὑπέρβορος.
Thus would come in a popular (or hieratic) derivation from βορέας.
(5) The dringers of offerings over (land and sea) would originally have
been a designation applicable to pious votaries of Apollo anywhere who
sent offerings to his shrine. These votaries were transformed by the
etymologizing legend into a people dwelling beyond the north wind,—a
separate and blessed folk, devoted to the god’s worship. (6) This
explains how it happens that eg. the Argive Perseus-saga places the
‘Hyperboreans,’ not in the far /Vor¢h, but in the far West, near the
dwelling of the Gorgons. (See Crusius in Roscher, p. 2816, § 22.)

Bacchylides, who was in touch with Delos (cp. Ode xvi) and its
Apollo-cult, treats the land of the Ὑπερβόρεοι as a paradise to which
Apollo can transport pious mortals; a place like the Ἠλύσιον πεδίον or
the μακάρων νῆσοι in the far West. Doubtless he, like Pindar, thought
of the ‘Hyperboreans’ simply as ‘dwellers beyond the North Wind.’
But unconsciously he has introduced a touch which is in perfect
harmony with the derivation from ὑπερφέρω, and with the view that the
name originally denoted pious votaries of Apollo in whatever region
they might dwell. It is very possible that here he may have been
influenced by Delian traditions which he knew. The Hyperborean
legend was a temple-myth, developed at the sanctuaries of Apollo,
and doubtless first of all at Delphi, whence it passed to Delos, and to
other Aegean seats of the cult.


ODE Ill. 461


Ode III. 72 ..... μαλέαι wor... 2.2... "ov
73. + « « vosepapepoval
GAs) «αὐτὰς ασκοπεισβραχί


What was probably the general sense of the three mutilated verses,
72—74? This question must be viewed in the light of the whole
context.

Verses 67—71 are an epitome of Hieron’s glories, as victor in the
games, warrior, just ruler, and votary of the Muses. In verses 73—74
there was clearly some reference to the shortness of life: and that strain
was continued in verses 75-84. The general purport of the whole
passage, from v. 74 to 84, was to this effect :—‘Life is short and un-
certain ; a man must be prepared either to die to-morrow, or to live for
many years: do your duty day by day, and be cheerful’ (83). What
we do not know is the nature of the transition by which, in verses
72—74, the poet passed from the theme of Wieron’s glories to reflections
on the drevity and insecurity of human life.

This ode was written after the Olympic festival of 468 B.c.; and
Hieron died, in 467, of the disease from which he had long suffered.
Pindar’s third Pythian (written in or about 474 Β.6.) shows that even
then Hieron was a sufferer. The whole strain of Pindar’s ode is, indeed,
strikingly similar to that of Bacchylides here: it dwells on the shortness
of life; and consoles the invalid with the thought that the Muse can
give lasting fame. Compare especially verses go f. here, ἀρετᾶς ye μὲν
οὐ μινύθει | βροτῶν ἅμα σώματι φέγγος, with Pind. A ur 114f, ἃ δ᾽
ἀρετὰ κλειναῖς ἀοιδαῖς | χρονία τελέθε. When Bacchylides wrote his
verses, it was perhaps known to him that Hieron had not long to live.

Two lines of restoration are possible, according to the view taken of
MAAEAIL in v. 72.


I. If ϑειμαλέᾳ (or ῥωμαλέᾳ) be assumed, the subst. agreeing with it
must certainly have stood in the same verse ; and nothing seems possible
except χειρί, This suggests that the passage contained a contrast
between Hieron’s former activity in war (cp. v. 34) and his present
state. The word σκοπεῖς in 74 is clearly addressed to him: it could
mean either ‘/ookest for’ solace from the Muses, or ‘ contemplatest’
the approach of the end. Compare 1x. 13, where ready dperdv, ad-
dressed to the victor, rather abruptly follows the mention of him in v. 9.
Similarly in xv. 6 Apollo is the subject of ἀγάλλεται, and then is
suddenly apostrophised in v. το.


ΠῚ, 72—74


462 APPENDIX.


Prof. Blass restores thus :—


72 ὃς δειμαλέᾳ ποτὲ χειρὶ θύνων
73 γαλανὸς ἐφάμερον ἁδονὰν φι-
74 λάνορα σκοπεῖς. βραχύς ἐστιν αἰών,


i.e. ‘who of yore didst rage with terrible hand, (but now) in tranquillity,
lookest for some kindly enjoyment, sufficient unto the day’ (ae. for the
pleasure afforded by the kindly Muses).—The following remarks suggest
themselves. (1) ἐφάμερον is here used as by Pindar in 7 vi. 39 ff,
ὃ δ᾽ ἀθανάτων μὴ θρασσέτω φθόνος | ὅ τι τερπνὸν ἐφάμερον διώκων | ἕκαλος
ἔπειμι γῆρας. That sense of ἐφάμερον is suitable to Pindar’s prayer for
himself. It is also suitable to Hieron’s probable condition in 468 8.6. :
but it may be doubted whether Bacchylides would have so openly
referred to that condition. His allusions to Hieron’s illness are else-
where veiled. Bpax- in v. 74, and ἐφαμερίων in 76, might incline us to
surmise that ἐφάμερον in 73 meant ‘short-lived,’ rather than ‘sufficing
for the day.’ (2) I greatly doubt whether there is room for the letters
TAAAN before OC in 73. A careful measurement of the letters TEAAN
(of γελανώσας) in Ode v. 80 will show that they exceed the space avail-
able before OC here; a fortiori, then, TAAAN is too large, for A in this
Ms. is much broader than E, (3) ἁδονὰν φιλάνορα would more naturally
mean ‘the pleasure of being hospitable’ (cp. 1. 40 ξείνων τε φιλάνορι
τιμᾷ) than ‘the kindly pleasure’ given by the Muses.

The following modifications of Prof. Blass’s reading have occurred
to me as possible :—

(1) ὃς δειμαλέᾳ ποτὲ χειρὶ θύνων
γεραιὸς ἐφάμερον αὖτε τέρψιν
dovxa σκοπεῖς. βραχὺς ἄμμιν αἰών'

With regard to γεραιός, it may be remarked that the word connotes
the reverence due to years; and also that in verses 88—g1 the poet
clearly refers to Hieron’s physical decay. This conjecture implies, like
that of Blass, that ἐφάμερον = ‘ sufficing for the day.’

(2) If, on the other hand, ἐφάμερον meant ‘short-lived,’ we might
conjecture :—

γεραιὸς ἐφάμερον ἀνδρὸς αἶσαν
ἄσυχα σκοπεῖς.


(For the sing. ἀνδρός cp. 88.)


II. Let us now turn to the other line of restoration,—that which
presupposes Μαλέᾳ. If that was the word, the reference was to the


ODE Ill: 463


dangers of that stormy cape for sea-farers, owing to the conflict of
currents and winds. Cp. Strabo (8. 378): the sea off Malea is dreaded
by sailors, διὰ τὰς ἀντιπνοίας. ἀφ᾽ ov καὶ παροιμιάζονται,

Μαλέας δὲ κάμψας ἐπιλάθου τῶν οἴκαδε.

That proverb was doubtless made by Greeks living in the islands or
on the coasts of the Aegean. If you have once got safely round Malea,
be thankful, and do not tempt the gods by returning that way. (Cp.
Curt. Pelop. τι. p. 298 and Ὁ. 330.)

Od. 9. 80 (Odysseus speaks) :---ἀλλά με κῦμα ῥόος τε περιγνάμπτοντα
Μάλειαν | καὶ Βορέης ἀπέωσε, παρέπλαγξέν τε Ἰζυθήρων. Her. 1v. 179 (Jason
and the Argonauts) : καί μιν ὡς πλώοντα γενέσθαι κατὰ Μαλέην, ὑπολαβεῖν
ἄνεμον Βορέην καὶ ἀποφέρειν πρὸς τὴν Λιβύην. Statius Ζ εὖ. 2. 33:
Qua formidatum Maleae spumantis in auras It caput. Virgil (Aen.
v. 191) and Ovid (Am. 11. 16. 24) also allude to Malea’s terrors. The
name of Malea was thus proverbial, and might easily have furnished
a poet with a simile. A simile from the perils of the sea is used by
Bacchylides in Ode x11 (124—132).

There is something to be said, then, in favour of such a restoration
as that which is given, exempii gratia, in my text. ‘But, as erenow at
Malea, the god suddenly brings stress of storm on the children of a day.
Thou lookest to the needs of the time: our life is short.’ The reference
to Malea would be a veiled, not an open, allusion to Hieron’s state. It
would be a general sentiment concerning unforeseen vicissitudes in
human fortunes. The special application of it would be left to the
hearer. This would be quite in the manner of Bacchylides (as of
Pindar), when he glances at the element of adversity in Hieron’s
otherwise brilliant lot (see eg. Ode v. 50—55).

In v. 74 a possible variant for καίρια σκοπεῖς: βραχὺς ἄμμιν αἰών"
would be :—dovxa σκοπεῖς βραχὺ μέτρον aicas. No point after σκοπεῖς
now appears in the ms.: it may, however, have been obliterated in the
correction made after that word (see cr. n., p. 263); or it may have
been omitted by error. ᾿

It is not easy to choose between the two lines of restoration,—that
which assumes δειμαλέᾳ and that which assumes Μαλέᾳ. If any one
contends that the former is the more probable, I shall not gainsay him.
My object has been to state the data of the problem as clearly as I
could, and to indicate such tentative solutions as I have been able to
find.


464 APPENDIX.


Ode IV. 7—13. In his third edition Blass prints this passage as

follows :—

νυυπυυσπῪο

vou, ἃς ἀλέκτωρ

σὺν ὦ -- ἑκόν]τι νόωι

Io - υσ-υυ -- υ] ὕμνους,
σοὺ ὦ ἔκίλυεν, οἷς] ἰσόρ-
porov ἔχοντα Δίκ]ας τάλαντον
Δεινομένεος ἐγερα[ἰροἾμεν υἱόν.
ιν. 1--18 The supplements in verses 9, 11, 12, to the left of the bracket 1, are

his own; except that, in τα f., where in his 2nd ed. he read δὶς ὀρθὸν
ἀνέχοντα, he now receives Headlam’s iodp|porov ἔχοντα. The letters
ICOP.. and ACTAAAN in v. 11 and in v. 12 are found on a small
fragment (no. 19 Kenyon) which Blass refers to this place. He
thinks that the same fragment shows the lower part of the first Y in
ὕμνους (v. 10). This collocation of the fragment is possible, but it
cannot be regarded as certain. Then in verse 8 Prof. Blass finds traces
of an apostrophe in the ms. before AC (I fail to do so), and reads ds.
He thinks that the sense of the whole passage was to the following effect.
Verse 6 contained some reference to Arethusa;—ds ἀλέκτωρ, “ whose
husband (the Alpheus) with willing soul (ἑκόντι vow) was wont to hear
the songs with which we honoured the son of Deinomenes, who holds
the balance of Justice in even poise.”

Now, I agree with Prof. Blass in thinking that the earlier part of
this passage referred to Hieron’s two victories at Olympia. It seems
improbable, however, that the ἀλέκτωρ was the Alpheus. I should
rather surmise that he was the ἐρίγδουπος πόσις Ἥρας. Such a designa-
tion would be the more appropriate, since at Olympia the temple of
Hera was next in importance to the temple of Zeus.

In verse 13 Prof. Blass now deletes the κ΄ which the ms. exhibits
after Δεινομένεος. In his first edition he retained it, explaining it as
iterative (p. 41 " κ᾽ repetitionis est’); te, he took κ᾿ ἐγεραίρομεν as
meaning, ‘we used to honour.’ But in his second edition (p. 44) he
writes: ‘Von est iustum x: sed si omnino est, putandum ex alia littera
(€?) corrigendo factum.’ By the words, ‘non est iustum x,’ Prof. Blass
means that it differs from the regular form of « in this papyrus. That is
true. The « is somewhat narrower, more compressed, than usual; as if
at this point the scribe was doubting whether he would have space
enough in the column for the words ἐγεραίρομεν υἱόν which he had still
to write. There are, however, many similar instances in the ms. of a


ODES IV, V. 465


slight difference between the forms of the same letter in different places.
And on the other hand the κ᾽ here is perfectly distinct. I cannot
perceive any ground for the suggestion that it has been made by
correction out of some other letter. To delete it seems a wholly
unwarrantable proceeding.

It remains to speak of verse 14. In his first edition (1898) Prof.
Blass wrote Tatas μυχοῖς, meaning Delphi, the seat of τὴν πρωτόμαντιν
‘Tatay (Aesch. Zum. 2). In his second edition he gives Κίρρας μυχοῖς.
My own conjecture, Kploas μυχοῖς, was made independently (in 1898),
and before the appearance of his second edition. Cirrha was the
ancient port of Crisa: if ἀγχιάλοισι better suits Cirrha, puxots is more
suggestive of Crisa: cp. Pind. P. vi. 18 Κρισαίαις ἐνὶ πτυχαῖς. Wilamo-
witz proposed Kovpas puxots,—z.e. Syracuse, as the city of Persephone.
But here we clearly need a mention of Delphi, to balance that of
Olympia (ὀλυμπιονίκας) in ν. 17. An indication of the Pythian victories
merely by the word τάδε would be too obscure.


Ode V. 2 otparayé—See Freeman, Sécé/y, vol. 11. Appendix m1. V.2
Pp- 499 —502, on ‘Gelén as General and King’: also pp. 135-137: and
as to the title of βασιλεύς given to Hieron by Pindar, pp. 540—542.
In Class. Rev. x11. p. 98 (March, 1899) Prof. J. B. Bury holds that
στραταγέ is ‘a definite reference to the formal title στραταγὸς avro-
κράτωρ.’

It is well to keep the following points clearly in view.

1. Gelon reigned at Gela from 491 to 485 Bc. In 485 the
Gamoroi (oligarchic land-owners), who had been driven out of Syracuse
by the democrats, and had established themselves at Casmenae, asked
help from Gelon, who undertook to restore them. ‘When he drew
near to the city, the new democracy at once submitted, and Gelén
became lord of Syracuse’ (Freeman, Svc. 1. 127). He reigned at
Syracuse from 485 to his death in 478.

2. That Gelon at some time held the office of στρατηγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ
is a belief which rests on the following authorities. (i) Diodorus
XIII. 94 says that, in 405 B.c., the elder Dionysius was made στρατηγὸς
αὐτοκράτωρ against the Carthaginians. One motive for this measure
was that in 480 the Carthaginians had been defeated at Himera, στρατη-
γοῦντος Γέλωνος αὐτοκράτορος. (ii) Polyaenus 1. 27 §1 says that, for
the war against the Carthaginians in 480, Gelon was elected ‘general
with full powers’ (στρατηγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ χειροτονηθείς). He ‘rendered
his account’ of that office to the people (εὐθύνας δοὺς τῆς αὐτοκράτορος


J. B. 21


466 APPENDIX.


ἀρχῆς), and, having thus laid it down, appeared unarmed before the
armed people in the agora. They re-elected him general; and ‘ so’ he
became τύραννος. (οὕτω δὴ παρακληθεὶς δεύτερον στρατηγῆσαι τύραννος
ἐγένετο Συρακουσίων.) This, as Freeman observes, is ‘evidently the same
scene as that which Diodorus (x1. 26) describes on Gelon’s return from
Himera, which ends with the people saluting Gel6én as ing.’ Polyaenus
has misconceived the circumstances, but must have had some definite
authority for the title στρατηγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ. (11) The Schol. on
Pind. Ο. τι. 29 cites Timaeus of Tauromenium (d. cre. 256 8.0.9), who
wrote a history of Sicily (ΣΞικελικά) down to 264 B.c.: τοῦ δὲ Τέλωνος
τελευτᾶν τὸν βίον μέλλοντος, Πολύζηλος ἀδελφὸς THY στρατηγίαν καὶ THY
γαμετὴν τοῦ ἀδελφοῦ διαδέχεται. (Frag. 90, Miiller, Frag. Fitst. τ,
Ῥ. 214.)

3. It is probable, though it cannot be proved, that Gelon was
made στραταγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ, not for the first time in 480, with a view to
a war against the Carthaginians, but in 485, when he became master of
Syracuse. It may have been the official title under which his virtual
kingship was veiled. (See Freeman, Svc. 11. p. 137.)

4. After his great victory at Himera in 480, Gelon was saluted by
the Syracusans as ‘benefactor, saviour, and king’ (βασιλέα: Diod.
x1. 26). Freeman doubts whether Gelon was ever ‘clothed with any
formal kingship’ (Svc. 11. p. 203). Diodorus, however, in ΧΙ. 38 styles
him 6 βασιλεὺς Τέλων. In Her. vil. 61 the Athenian envoy addresses
him as ὦ βασιλεῦ Συρηκοσίων. (Freeman regards this address as ‘more
or less sarcastic’; which seems to me improbable: though it may
readily be granted that no stress can safely be laid on the use of the
word βασιλεῦ there.)

5. In regard to Hieron, there is no direct evidence that he was
ever styled στραταγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ. The interpretation of στραταγέ in
that sense here rests entirely on the hypothesis that the title was
transmitted from Gelon to Hieron; as Timaeus states that it passed
from Gelon to Polyzelus. Prof. Bury ingeniously observes that Pindar
in P. τι. 58 ‘addresses Hieron as πρύτανι κύριε.. στρατοῦ, an accurate
paraphrase of στραταγὲ avroxpdtwp.’ It is well, however, to consider
the whole of Pindar’s phrase :---πρύτανι κύριε πολλᾶν μὲν εὐστεφάνων
ἀγυιᾶν καὶ στρατοῦ, ‘sovereign prince of many streets encircled with
goodly walls, and of a great host.’ στρατοῦ is used as in verse 87 of the
same ode,—6 λάβρος στρατός, = δᾶμος : cp. Aesch. Zum. 566. Hieron,
in this passage of Pindar, is not specially the ‘ general with full powers,’
but the lord of a strong and fair city, of Syracuse and its people.

6. On the whole, I should be disposed to think that στραταγέ is


ODE V. 467


merely a general designation, ‘ war-lord,’ and does not refer to a special
office. But I do not regard the latter view as inadmissible. My object
has been to define the amount and the limits of the evidence for that
view.

7. I would only add that the fact of Pindar styling Hieron
βασιλεύς, in Odes designed for performance at Syracuse (0. 1. 23,
Pf, 111. 70), proves much more than the poet’s belief that the title was
one which Hieron would like. It shows that Hieron felt no danger in
being publicly so styled. That being so, the motive for vei/ing royal
power under the title of στραταγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ cannot, in Hieron’s case,
have been very strong, whatever it may have been in Gelon’s earlier
years of rule at Syracuse. Whether Hieron ever formally became
βασιλεύς, we cannot say. But, if he was styled στραταγὸς αὐτοκράτωρ,
it would not follow that he was not also styled βασιλεύς. The former
title came down from Gelon: if the latter was also taken by Gelon, or
by Hieron, the military title might well remain associated with it.


Ode V. 11 f. νάσου ξένος ὑμετέραν πέμ-
wet κλεεννὰν ἐς πόλιν


=26f. δυσπαίπαλα κύματα νωμᾶ-
ται δ᾽ ἐν ἀτρύτῳ χάει.

Verses 11 and 26 are longer by a syllable than the corresponding V. 11f.,
verses in the other strophes. It is easy to correct verse 26 by reading ae
νωμᾷ instead of νωμᾶται. (The first hand had originally written NOMAT,
though the 1 has been deleted.) And νωμᾷ would be intrinsically
preferable to νωμᾶται. But verse 11 resists emendation. The following
conjectures may be mentioned. (1) R. J. Walker, πλεῖ for πέμπει.
(2) A. Platt, πλέων for πέμπει (deleting, in 14, δὲ after ἐθέλει). H.


Richards, πέμπει és θείαν πόλιν. The easiest correction would be πέμψε
κλεινὰν és πόλιν, but πέμπει is clearly right. ὔμμι προπέμπει would
depart too far from the ms. The conclusion must be, I think, that
verse 11 is sound. If a corruption exists there, it is deeper than can
now be traced. But if v. τα is sound, verse 26 is so also.
The same phenomenon recurs in verse 14, =v. 29:
13 Χχρυσάμπυκος Οὐρανίας κλει-
νὸς θεράπων" ἐθέλει δέ


28 λεπτότριχα σὺν ζεφύρου πνοι-
αἴσιν ἔθειραν ἀρίγνω-
30 τος μετ᾽ ἀνθρώποις ἰδεῖν.


31—2


468 APPENDIX.


Now in v. 30 μετ᾽ is certainly awkward (though, as I have tried to
show in the commentary, quite intelligible); Weil suggested péy’, or
(keeping per’) οἰωνοῖς instead of ἀνθρώποις. R. J. Walker would delete
per’ (a remedy which Blass approves, p. x11, and p. 49, 3rd ed.). This
would doubtless be preferable to altering ἀρίγνωτος into ἀριγνώς (Pind.
JV. v.12). But here, just as in the former case, it is the verse in the
strophe which resists emendation. ‘There is only one way of shortening

᾿ verse 14, viz., by deleting δέ after ἐθέλε. But an asyndeton there
would be intolerable. If δέ is to be removed, a participle must (as
Platt saw) replace πέμπει in 11f.; but this, again, is an improbable
change.

Thus the first strophe and antistrophe present two instances (v.
11- 26, and v. 14=29) in which the metre varies from that of the
subsequent strophes and antistrophes. In neither case does it seem
possible to find any really probable emendation. And it would be a
very singular coincidence if corruption of the text had produced
precisely this peculiarity in two passages of the first strophe and
antistrophe, but nowhere else in the other 170 verses of the ode.
Again, it is evident that the anomalies cannot be explained by supposing
that, in all the pairs of strophes after the first, the final long syllable of
the verses corresponding with 11 and 14 was protracted, so that e.g. in
V. 51 μοῖράν τε καλῶν ἔπορεν the last syllable was equivalent in time to
—v. ITincline, then, to believe that in v. 11 (= 26) and 14 (=29) the
text is sound; and that for some reason or other the poet varied from
this model in the corresponding verses of the later strophes. It seems
possible that the slight variation was due to mere inadvertence.


Ode V. 56—175. THE MELEAGER-MYTH.


‘y.56—175 The mythical genealogy, so far as it appears in Bacchylides, is as
follows :—


Thestius of Pleuron,
Porthaon (v. 70) king of "8 Curetes


Oeneus of Calydon, king | Ϊ |
of the Aetolians, + Althaea Althaea Iphiclus Aphares
| (v. 128) (v. 119)


Meleager Agelaus Deianeira
(v. 117)
After the narrative in the Homeric Πρεσβεία (72. 9. 529-599), that
of Bacchylides is the oldest complete recital of the story which we
possess. Certain points are deserving of notice.


The Homeric version is in outline as follows. Oceneus, king of
Calydon, had angered Artemis by withholding the harvest first-fruits
(θαλύσια) due to her; and she sent the wild boar to ravage his land.
His Aetolian subjects were aided by their neighbours, the Curetes, in
the boar-hunt. Meleager slew the boar. Then the Aetolians fell to
fighting with the Curetes for the boar’s head and hide. In the fight,
Meleager slew some of Althaea’s brethren, his uncles. Thereupon his
mother cursed him (567 πόλλ᾽ ἀχέουσ᾽ ἠρᾶτο κασιγνήτοιο φόνοιο), calling
on Hades and Persephone to avenge her brothers. Meleager, in wrath
at her curse, withdrew to his house. Meanwhile the Curetes were at
the gates of Calydon, pressing the town hard. The Aetolian elders
sent priests to Meleager, beseeching him to come forth and help them;
his father Oeneus, his sisters, even Althaea herself, implored his aid;
but in vain. The Curetes were already climbing the walls and firing
the city, when Cleopatra, Meleager’s wife, prevailed with him. He
donned his armour, and repelled the foe. But, so tardy had he been,
he won no thanks. That is the point which Phoenix, in telling the
story, wishes to urge :—If Achilles delays too long, then, even if at last
he saves the Greeks, the service will have no grace. The Homeric poet
was not concerned to tell Zow Meleager eventually died. He merely
says that Althaea’s curse was heard by ‘the Erinys who walks in
darkness’ (571). And there is no allusion to the story of Althaea’s
brand.

But we know from Pausanias (10. 31 § 3) that, in two other epics,
the Muvds and the Ἤοϊαι, Meleager was slain by Apollo. The Homeric
poet was probably conscious of that version. Ernst Kuhnert, in his
excellent article ‘Meleagros’ in Roscher’s Lexzkon, supposes, indeed, that
the Homeric poet conceived Meleager as slain by the arrow of Apollo
just when he had repelled the Curetes (597),—so that ‘he bought the
victory of the Aetolians by his death’ (p. 2592). That, however, would
destroy the force of τῷ δ᾽ οὐκέτι δῶρα τέλεσσαν (598). The point is that
he had to yield at last, and then missed the reward which a timely
compliance would have won. But if he died before the reward could
in any case have been given, the moral which Phoenix wishes to draw
is lost. The poet of the Πρεσβεία must have imagined his death as
occurring later.

The version of Meleager’s death which made him fall Ly the shaft
of Apollo was evidently well-suited to any epic poem which aimed at
exalting the Aetolian hero. That was a glorious end for him. To
perish with the wasting of Althaea’s brand was a tragic, but not a


470 APPENDIX.


glorious, death. Such a doom was fitted, by its pathos, for lyric
treatment; while, as illustrating the power of destiny, it was a suitable
motive for drama. And it is in Attic drama that the earliest extant
notice of Althaea’s brand is found. The verses of Phrynichus have
been quoted in the commentary (on φιτρόν in v. 142): they occurred in
his Πλευρώνιαι. Pausanias (το. 31 ὃ 4) prefaces his citation of the
verses with these words :—rodrov τὸν λόγον (the story of the brand)
Φρύνιχος ὁ Πολυφράδμονος πρῶτος ἐν δράματι ἔδειξε Πλευρωνίαις. And
he adds this comment :---οὐ μὴν φαίνεταί γε ὃ Φρύνιχος προαγαγὼν τὸν
λόγον ἐς πλέον, ὡς εὕρημα ἄν τις οἰκεῖον, προσαψάμενος δὲ αὐτοῦ μόνον, ἅτε
ἐς ἅπαν ἤδη διαβεβοημένου τὸ Ἑλληνικόν. ‘It does not appear, however,
that Phrynichus developed the story at greater length, as ἃ man would
naturally do if the invention was his own; e has merely touched upon it,
as if it were already notorious throughout Hellas.’ So, according to
Pausanias, the reference to Althaea’s brand in the lyric passage of the
Pleuroniae was merely a passing allusion,—just like that of Aeschylus to
the same story in the lyrics of the Choephori (604 ff.). Kekulé, indeed
(Fabula Meleagrea, Ὁ. 13, 1862), holds that the word ἔδειξε, used by
Pausanias in reference to Phrynichus, implies that the story of the brand
was a principal incident of the play. But I do not see how that view
can be reconciled with the comment just quoted.

What was the subject of the Pveuroniae? It has been conjectured
that the play dealt with the Calydonian boar-hunt ; that the scene was .
laid at Calydon ; and that the chorus was composed of handmaids whom
Althaea had brought from her paternal home at Pleuron. Carl Robert?,
however, has lately re-affirmed the view of Welcker’, that the scene of
the play was laid at Pleuron, and that its theme was the siege of that
town by the Aetolians.

Bacchylides relates how the Aetolians, among whom Meleager was
foremost, drove the Curetes in flight to Pleuron. It was under the walls
of Pleuron that Meleager expired (ιν. 149—154). The rout of the Curetes
was followed by the siege of their city. In the Pleurontae of Phrynichus,
Carl Robert suggests, the persons may have been Thestius, one or two
of his sons, and two messengers, who narrated the boar-hunt, the fight
for the trophies, the slaying of the Thestiadae by Meleager, and Althaea’s
vengeance on her son. At any rate, Robert thinks it certain that the
outline of the story, so far as Bacchylides gives it, follows substantially the
same version which was used by Phrynichus in the Pleuroniae. That


1 Hermes, vol, XXXUI. (1898), pp. 151 ff.
2 Die griech. Tragidien, τ. 21 ff.


ODE V. 471


seems probable enough: though, in the absence of more data, it seems
difficult to speak with any confidence on the subject. One remark,
however, at once suggests itself. Pausanias says that the lyric reference
in the Plewrontae to Althaea’s brand was merely a passing allusion.
And he may be right, even though, in his day, that play was known
only through fragments or notices. But, if he is right, then the death
of Meleager through the burning of the brand cannot have been narrated
in a messenger’s speech. In any case, it is clear that the story of
Althaea’s brand is older than Phrynichus,—ze. goes back to at least the
sixth century B.c. The common source of Phrynichus and Bacchylides
may have been some epic poem of which no trace remains.

With regard to the significance of the brand, Kuhnert has collected
(Rhein. Mus. 49. pp. 40 ff.) a number of illustrations and analogies. The
essential idea,—that of a link between the ight of Zife within the man, and
some external light on whose existence the other depends,—is frequent
in mythology. A writer on modern Greece notices a belief existing
among the peasants of Zacynthus, that in the other world there are
countless little lights or tapers, each of which controls a human life ;
when the taper goes out, the life is quenched (B, Schmidt, Volksleben d.
Neugr. p. 246). The legend that Meleager perished by the wasting of
the brand may, indeed, be regarded as the element which connects the
Meleager-myth with Aetolian folk-lore.

, One thing must be added. The //ad knows Althaea’s curse only,
not her brand. The curse is, in fact, a delegation of vengeance to the
divine powers invoked. The burning of the brand is a mode of
vengeance which the mortal could wreak without aid. But the curse
and the brand cannot properly be regarded as alternatives, characteristic
respectively of two versions in which the story was current. For the
burning of the brand might naturally be conceived as preceded or
accompanied by some form of imprecation. The chanting of a spell
is a normal adjunct of evil magic. Bacchylides says,


Katé τε δαιδαλέας

> £ ee

ἐκ λάρνακος ὠκύμορον
φιτρὸν ἀγκλαύσασα.


If ἀγκλαύσασα be the right reading (see n. on v. 140 ff.), this con-
sideration may help to explain it. In her passionate anguish for the
deaths of her brothers, she invoked a curse on her son. So the
Antigone of Sophocles (vv. 427 ff.), when she saw the corpse of her
brother denuded of the dust which she had sprinkled on it, γόοισιν


> ra 3 > a. ἃ ἧς ἦν
ἐξῴμωξεν, ἐκ δ᾽ ἀρὰς κακὰς ἠρᾶτο x.7.A.


472 APPENDIX.


Bacchylides, like the Homeric poet, is silent concerning Atalanta.
It is certain that Atalanta had a place in old forms of the Meleager-
myth. Her absence from the //iad (which merely refers generally to
hunters ‘from many cities,’ 9. 544) is certainly not significant in a
contrary sense. She appears on some black-figured vases in the
Calydonian hunt: where, however, she is not especially associated
with Meleager, but with another hero, Melanion. Euripides, in his
Meleager, was the first who made Meleager the lover of Atalanta.
That love was the leading motive of the play. He gave her the
trophies of the boar. His uncles, the Thestiadae, took them away
from her; and he then slew them. The siege of Pleuron did not come
in. (Cp. Ovid, Ze. ντπι. 428—461.)

The scholiast on Jad 21. 194 quotes Pindar for a ἱστορία to
the following effect. Heracles, when he visited Hades to bring up
Cerberus, was besought by the shade of Meleager to wed Deianeira.
Heracles afterwards obtained the consent of her father Oeneus, and
delivered his bride from the pursuit of Achelous. In the version given
by Bacchylides, Heracles first expresses the wish to marry a sister of
Meleager : it is only then that the latter mentions Deianeira. At first
sight a modern reader might be disposed to think that, in telling the
story thus, Bacchylides has the advantage of Pindar. Surely it is fitting
that Heracles should make the proposal, rather than that it should
proceed from Meleager? But further consideration will show that the
version followed by Pindar is in a truer and finer harmony with the
spirit of the myth. The significance of the scene in Hades depends on
the antithesis of the two great heroes,—the living and the departed.
There is no longer a Meleager on the earth; but a Heracles has
succeeded to his renown. Deianeira is beset by a suitor whom she
abhors. Meleager, in the shades, asks protection for his helpless sister
from the only living champion who can worthily fill her brother’s place.
In this conception there is a higher poetry, a deeper pathos, than in
that which Bacchylides adopts. The Heracles of his ode seeks
Deianeira’s hand partly through admiration for Meleager, partly through
pity for him. There is, however, no ground for assuming that Bacchylides
was the first to tell the story in this way. And, given this form of the
story, his manner of telling it has a great charm of its own. It is also
impressive that the fateful marriage should spring from an impulse
originating in the mind of Heracles himself.

There are some traces of Bacchylides in the later literature of the
myth. Apollodorus 1. 8. 2. 82 follows him in the description of the
boar (cp. verses 107-110). ΑΒ the sisters of Meleager, who bewailed


ODE Κ᾿ 473


him, were changed into μελεαγρίδες (guinea-fowls), compilers of meta-
morphoses treated his story. Nicander told it in the third book of his
‘Erepovovpeva. That source was one of those used by Antoninus
Liberalis (¢. A.D. 150) in his μεταμορφώσεων συναγωγή, c. 2; but he drew
also on Homer, Bacchylides, and Euripides (see Carl Robert, Zc. p.
158).


Ode V. 106 f. καλλίχορον Καλυδῶνα.


evpvxopos is sometimes so used in poetry as to confirm the view of V. 106f.

Aristarchus that the old poets made it serve, metro cogente, for εὐρύχωρος :
the strongest instance is //. 9. 478 δι ῬΛλλάδος εὐρυχόροιο. Cp. Pind. 5
vill. 55 and Eur. Bacch. 77 εὐρυχόρους ἀγυιάς. This was an illegitimate
use: χορός is ‘an enclosed place’ (akin to χόρτος, ‘courtyard,’ and
Aortus, but unconnected with χῶρος). But is there any good reason for
supposing that καλλίχορος was ever used in the sense of καλλίχωρος"
This verse is more favourable to such a supposition than perhaps any
other extant passage; yet even here it is quite unnecessary to assume
that sense.


Ode V. 172 f. χλωραύχενα.... Δαϊάνειραν.


The sense of xAwpds, as a word of colour, is that which it derives v. 172 Σ,
from χλόη, young vegetation. It means properly pale green. Then it
is applied to verdure or foliage generally (χλωρὰν dv’ ὕλην, Eur. Hipp. 17).
But pale green may have a yellowish tinge; and χλωρός came to be
used (in poetry at least) to mean simply ‘yellow’: χλωρὰν ψάμαθον in
Soph. 4z. 1064 is the clearest instance: χλωρὸν μέλι (12. 11. 631) is
probably another, though ‘fresh’ is a possible sense there. As an
epithet of the human complexion, the word means ‘pale,’ especially
with the greenish tint of sickness or fear: χλωρὸς ὑπαὶ Selous (71. το. 376).
Evidently, then, χλωραύχην, as an epithet of Deianeira, cannot mean
‘with fair neck.’

Nor can χλωραύχην, as an epithet of the nightingale (Simonides,
fr. 73), refer to colour: that bird’s neck is not pale green or yellow.
The phrase yAwpyis ἀηδών in the Odyssey (19. 518) has, indeed, been
understood by Buchholz (Hom. Real, 1. 2. 123) as denoting plumage of
that tint ; then, however, he is obliged to suppose that ἀηδών is not the
nightingale,—whose hue is a rcddish-brown,—but a bird of some other
species,—perhaps the serin finch, akin to the canary. A more refined
and poetical interpretation of xAwpyis is that propounded by Mr W.
Warde Fowler, writing in the Classical Review (vol. 1v. p. 50) on Verg.


VI. 3f.


474 APPENDIX.


Geo. 1v. 511 f.; viz., that it means ‘green-tinted,’ by the shadows of the
thick foliage falling on the bird. Mr Marindin again (C/ass. Rev. vol. Iv.
p- 231) takes χλωρηΐς as =‘ fresh, living, gushing’: ‘liquid’ nightingale
in the sense of ‘liquid-voiced.’ Yet I cannot help thinking that
there is more probability in the simple explanation of χλωρηΐς given by
the scholiast,—7 ἐν χλωροῖς φαινομένη (or διατρίβουσα), ‘haunting the
green covert. The bird is described just afterwards as


δενδρέων ἐν πετάλοισι καθιζομένη πυκινοῖσιν.


The interpretation of χλωραύχην must be sought through the other
sense which xAwpos takes from xAon,—that of ‘fresh,’ without any direct
reference to colour. That sense appears in such phrases as χλωραῖς
ἐέρσαις (Pind. MW. vill. 40), xAwpov...daxpv (Eur. AZed. 906, ‘the welling
tear’): sometimes connoting vigour, as in Theocr. 14. 70, ἃς γόνυ
χλωρόν, ‘while the knee is nimble’ (dum..virent genua, Hor. Ep. 13. 4).
When Simonides spoke of the vernal nightingale as χλωραύχην, he
meant, I think, ‘ with fresh throat’; 1.6. with a throat of fresh, youthful,
elastic vigour. ‘Thus the sense which I attach to χλωρός in the com-
pound is less special and definite than that which Mr Marindin gives to
it, when he suggests, as one rendering of xAwpavyyv, ‘with supple or
Jeexible neck’ (Class. Rev. x1. 37): but it is equally expressive of that
quality which the Homeric poet describes;—Odpa τρωπῶσα χέει πολυηχέα
φωνήν, ‘with many a trill she pours her full-toned song’ (Od. 19. 521).
An alternative version, which Mr Marindin proposes, is, ‘with Agudd
throat’; but this gives to the throat an epithet which belongs rather to
the voice. The idea of χλωραύχην, as I conceive it, is contained in the
phrase of Keats, when he speaks of the nightingale as singing ‘in full-
throated ease.’ It is in favour of this explanation that, if it be right,
the primary sense of χλωραύχην, as applied to the nightingale by
Simonides, is the same which it bears when applied to Deianeira by
Bacchylides. In both cases it means ‘with fresh young throat (or
neck)’; the reference, in the case of the bird, being to the fresh life
with which the throat pours forth song; and, in the case of the maiden,
to the fresh bloom of youth on the neck.


Ode VI. 3f.— Blass supplies the syllables ὦ — ~, lost after IPOXOAIC,
by reading προχοαῖσ{ι νικῶν], with a full stop. He then takes δι᾽ ὅσσα in
v. 4 as exclamatory: ‘For how many victories’ has the praise of Ceos
been sung! That seems too jerky for our poet’s style; his sentences are
wont to flow on smoothly. I cannot doubt that ὅσσα is here the
relative. Dr Kenyon writes mpoxoate[. σεμναῖς], and takes ὅσσα as


ODES V, VI, VII, VIII. 475


referring to Lachon’s feats: ζ.6.,) ‘L. has won glory, on account of all
which deeds (of his) young men lately sang his praises at Olympia.’
But πάροιθεν, followed by ποτέ, could scarcely denote so recent a

- moment. ὅσσα must (I think) refer to the whole series of victories
gained by Ceans.


Ode VII. 14. Verse 14 (which was the eleventh verse of the lost VII. 14
13th column) ended with the letters ouw. After that verse, from 21 to
24 verses were needed to complete column 13. Two fragments,
a (=Kenyon’s frag. 7, pp. 199f. of his ed.), and ὁ (= Kenyon’s frag. 12,
Ρ. 202), are placed by Blass after v. 14. The appearance of the
papyrus makes it probable that these two fragments belonged to
column 13. They supply minute fragments of 14 verses. (See above,
Ῥ. 298.) Blass edits them, with a few small supplements, thus (3rd ed.,
p. 69) :—

(2) φιλάγλ]αε(9) Χαιρόλαν[
—plevoy εὐσεβ[.
]rot θαν[άτω]ιὉ δ᾽
Je πατρίδος
(5) Ἰνεοκρίτου[


Ἰάτεκνον[
* * * *


(4) Jou aywr[
Jrav Aural pay
Ἰναισεπαί
παῖδας Ἕλλανων ?
(5) πο]λυαμπελίο.
Jarov ὕμν[ον
Ζ]ηνὸς Ρ ἐν κί
Ἴπερ ἄνιπ[πος ἢ
* * * #

The Χαιρόλας of the first verse was (Blass conjectures) some kinsman
of Lachon, after whose death (v. 2) Lachon has brought fresh honour to
the family. At any rate πολυάμπελο- (ὁ 5) was the epithet of Ceos:
cp. VI. 5.


Ode VIII. 997—102.—Given aivéo in v. 102, two views of the context VIII. 99—
are possible. (1) A point may be placed after -evvras in v. 99, so that me
a new clause shall begin with χρυσεοσκάπτρου. That seems the more
probable construction. (2) Or a point may be placed after Διός in
y. 100, when the word ending in evvras must be construed with Διός.


IX. 9—14


476 APPENDIX. ~


Thus Blass writes, a7’ εὖντας | χρυσεοσκάπτρου Διός. | ᾧ τι καλὸν
φέ]ρεται, | τοῦτ᾽] αἰνέοι.

Seeing that ἁμαρτέοιτε follows (103 f.), the most natural reading
in v. 102 would be viv ὦ νέοι, (Cp. x11. 190 νίκαν... μέλπετ᾽, ὦ νέοι:
and Pind. J. vit. 2 ὦ νέοι, addressed to the youths of the comus.) But
the traces in the Ms. seem to prove that the letters ΝΈΟΙ were preceded
either by AI or by N. It is possible, indeed, that the poet wrote viv ὦ
νέοι, and that ὦ afterwards dropped out, leaving NYNNEOI. If that
could be assumed, it would follow that there was a stop after φέρεται,
Verses 99—101 might then have run somewhat as follows: φιλεῦντας
[χρυσεοσκάπτρου Διὸς | εἴ τι καλὸν φέρεται (‘ welcoming, cherishing, any
good gift that is borne to them from Zeus’).


Ode IX. 9—14.


- a ΄᾿
9. α..αἷι καὶ νῦν κασιγνήτας ἀκοίτας
- #
το νασιῶτιν ἐκίνησεν λιγύφθογγον μέλισσαν
a Ld

II .«εἰρες ἵν᾽ ἀθάνατον Μουσᾶν ἄγαλμα

. 3 ΄ "
12 ξυνὸν ἀνθρώποισιν εἴη

2,

13 χάρμα, τεαν ἀρετὰν
14 μανῦον ἐπιχθονίοισιν etc.


From τεὰν in v. 13 it is certain that a mention of the victor’s name
had preceded. That mention must have occurred either in v. 9 or
in v. 10.

(1) If it occurred in v. 9, ᾿Αγλαῷ (Blass) seems to be the only
name which agrees with all the traces in the Ms. ᾿Αγλαός occurs as
a mythological name (a son of Thyestes, schol. Eur. Or. 5, 812: a son
of Hermione, schol. Eur. Avdr. 32), though not otherwise. There are,
of course, several other names, beginning with A, which would scan
here; as Αἰσίῳ, ᾿Ακτίῳ, ᾿Αλκίᾳ, ᾿Αντίᾳ, "Apxia, Adyéa, all of which occur
as Athenian proper names ; but none of them satisfy the indications of a
perispomenon vowel (ὦ or ἃ) before the final ι, and of A (or A, or A) as
the letter before it. If the name stood here, I think that ᾿Αγλαῷ is most
probable.

Assuming ᾿Αγλαῷ in 9, we must infer that the letters -apes in ΤΙ
belonged to an epithet of ἄγαλμα. The first letter of the verse is quite
uncertain, but the slight trace would suit A, A,or A. The second letter
was (as Kenyon thinks) X or A; and so Blass (who had thought of K)
now holds : all that remains is a trace (little more than a dot) of the top.
The space between εἰρες and the beginning of the verse is about the
same as that which is usually filled by the letters AX (eg. in ᾿Αχαιῶν,


ODES VIII, IX. 477


x. 126). But there would be room for three letters, if two of them
were thin.

Blass’s ἀχειρὲς therefore suits the data in the ms. The word occurs
only in Batrachomyomachia 300 as an epithet of crabs (dxetpées): here
Blass takes it as = ἀχειροποίητον.

(2) The other possibility is that the proper name stood in v. 11,
-etpes being the end of a vocative. Evxepes is Jurenka’s conjecture ; and
I can find nothing better. Ev yep and Evyepos occur as names;
Εὐχείρης does not: in view of ἀχειρής, however, that may be waived.
A stronger objection is that the trace of the first letter in the ms. does
not suit E. If the name stood in v. 11, then the word or words before
καὶ viv in v. g must have marked the transition from the poem
concerning Φήμα to the immediate theme.


Ode IX. 19—26.


19 ἐν Ποσειδᾶνος περικλειτοῖς ἀέθλοις

20 εὐθὺς ἔνδειξ]ας “λλασιν ποδῶν ὁρμὰν ταχεῖαν
21 δεύτερον δ᾽ οὔ]ροισιν ἔπι σταδίου,

22 θερμ[ὰν ἔτι] πνέων ἄελλαν,

23 éoral. βρέχω]ν δ᾽ ἀξ᾽ αὖτε θατήρων ἐλαίῳ
24 φάρε[᾽ ἐς εὔθροο]ν ἐμπίτνων ὅμιλον,

25 τετρ[αέλικτον ἐπεὶ

26 κάμψεν δρόμον. ᾿Ισθμιονίκαν etc.


With regard to this passage, the following points seem fairly certain. Ix. 19--26

(1) A sentence begins with v. 19. (2) A sentence ends with δρόμον in
26. Verses 25 and 26 complete the description of the athlete’s running;
they stand in close connexion with wv. 23 and 24. (3) In 21 οὔροισιν..
σταδίου denotes the end of the course from which the runners started.
(4) In v. 24 ὅμιλον is the crowd of spectators, and not (as Blass takes it)
the throng of competitors. ἐμπίτνων expresses how the victor rushed into
the crowd of spectators who pressed around the goal, as he completed
the fourth round of the course. (5) Inv. 22 the supplement θερμ[ ὧν
ἔτι] is scarcely doubtful. That being so, the word ἔτι, and a comparison
with the epigram quoted in the commentary, render it certain that this
athlete ran with success in two consecutive foot-races. In v. 20 the -as
before Ἕλλασιν indicates the second person singular of an aorist.
Blass well supplies εὐθὺς Ww6ektlas. By εὐθύς I understand ‘at she
outset,’—t.e. in the first foot-race in which the athlete was engaged.
Accordingly in verse 21, before οὔ]ροισιν, I supply δεύτερον δ᾽, which
exactly fits the gap in the papyrus.


478 APPENDIX.


The most difficult question is that raised by verse 23. The first
hand wrote ECTA..... NA’AIZE @ATHPON EAAIOI. Of the Ain ECTA
only a small trace remains. The space between that A and N would
admit not more than about five letters. The second corrector (45)
changed AIZE to AYTE. We may be fairly sure that αὖτε was not a
mere guess by A®, The first hand made several gross errors in this
ode, as EiBot.wv for εὐβούλων in 27 f., ἐπίσταται for ἐπιστᾶμαι in 38,
βρισενομεν for βρίσει.τὸ μὲν in 47: the true reading is in each case due
to ΔΑ", (In 51, indeed, A® seems to have tampered with a sound reading;
but what he meant there is doubtful.) (1) Now suppose that the
original reading was Bpéxov δ΄ dif’ afte: our poet has elsewhere, of
ἀΐσσω, only ἄϊξον (11. 1) and digay (x11. 144): but Pindar J. vi. 40
uses ἄσσει : and Bacchylides could certainly have written dé’ (dé’).
The word suits a runner darting forward from the starting-point: cp.
Soph. 47. 711 (of chariots), ὑπαὶ σάλπιγγος ἦἧξαν. From βρέχων δ᾽ dé’
αὖτε may have come two readings, (a) βρέχων δ᾽ dige, and (4) βρέχων δ᾽
aire, The latter violates metre; but A* regarded metre as little as the
scribe did (p. 134). It also mars the sense, a finite verb being wanted ;
but βρέχων may have become Bpéxev. If, then, A® found αὖτε in his
copy, we can understand his substituting it, as he did, for ἀΐξε.
(2) There is another possibility. Suppose that the original reading
was δίανε]ν δ᾽ αὖτε, For movable v before a consonant, cp. v. το, and
xu. 128 λῆξεν δέ, The scribe, heedless as he was of sense (p. 127),
may have misread αὖτε as aife, owing to the Ptolemaic forms of Y and
Ἐ (p. 125), especially if the letters vr had been slightly damaged. But
in this obscure matter I incline at present to the former hypothesis.

It remains to notice the transition, in the course of verses 19—26,
from the second to the third person. The second person is proved by
the ending -ds in v. 20, whether the word was ἔνδειξ]ας or another. But
in v. 23 the verb of the clause introduced by δέ cannot have been in
the 2nd pers., since the traces of the letter before A’ suit only N. Hence
it appears that, in v. 20, the poet continued to apostrophise the victor, as
he had been doing in the immediately preceding verses (13 Teav,
18 θῆκας): but, when he came to narrate the victor’s exploits, glided
into the third person (23 ἔστα κιτιλι, 26 κάμψεν).

Prof. Blass gives vv. 19—28 as follows :—


19 ἐν Ποσειδᾶνος περικλειτοῖς ἀέθλοις

20 εὐθὺς ἔνδειξ]ας Ἕλλασιν ποδῶν ὁρμὰν ταχεῖαν,
21 ἐκφανεὶς οὔ]ροισιν ἔπι σταδίου"

22 θερ[μὰν δ᾽ ἔτι] πνέων ἄελλαν


ODE IX. 479


23 éora[, βρέχων] δ᾽ aise θατήρων ἐλαίωι
24 φάρε [᾿ ἐς ἵππιο]ν ἐμπίτνων ὅμιλον.
25 τετρ[αέλικτον ἐπεὶ

26 κάμψεν δρόμον, ᾿Ισθμιονίκαν

27 δίς v[w ἀγκ]άρυξαν εὐβού-

28 λων[υ -- --ων προφᾶται.


The words printed in thick type are those which he supplies.
As to punctuation, he has a point after σταδίου in 21, and a full stop
after ὅμιλον in 24. The sense (if I understand it aright) is as follows :—


‘In Poseidon’s renowned games thou didst show thy rushing speed to the
Greeks at the outset, when thou camest to the front (ἐκφαν εἰς) at the bounds of
the course (at the goal). Then, still breathing a storm of hot breath, he took
his place [at the starting-line], and darted forward, sprinkling the garments
of the spectators with olive-oil, as he dashed into ¢he throng of runners in the
Sourfold stadion (ἵππιον ὅμιλον).


ἵππιος δρόμος was the technical name for a foot-race in which the
course was four times that of the stadion: Paus. 6. 16. 4: δρόμου δέ εἰσι
τοῦ ἱππίου μῆκος δίαυλοι δύο. But the technical term is scarcely felicitous
here: and ὅμιλον is surely the crowd of spectators.

Then it seems far better to place the full stop after δρόμον than after
ὅμιλον. The mention of the athlete’s two victories at the Isthmus
(26 ff.) is linked with that of his two victories at Nemea (29). The
word Ἰσθμιονίκαν ought therefore to begin a new sentence.


Ode IX. 39—45. ἢ γὰρ σοφὸς... θυμὸν αὔξουσιν.


The parallel passage of Solon (fr. 13. 43—54) is as follows :—


43 σπεύδει δ᾽ ἄλλοθεν addos: ὃ μὲν κατὰ πόντον ἀλᾶται
ἐν νηυσὶν χρήζων οἴκαδε κέρδος ἄγειν
45 ἰχθυόεντ᾽, ἀνέμοισι φορεύμενος ἀργαλέοισιν,
φειδωλὴν ψυχῆς οὐδεμίαν θέμενος"
ἄλλος γῆν τέμνων πολυδένδρεον εἰς ἐνιαυτὸν
λατρεύει, τοῖσιν καμπύλ᾽ ἄροτρα μέλει"
ἄλλος ᾿Αθηναίης τε καὶ Ἡφαίστου πολυτέχνεω
50 ἔργα δαεὶς χειροῖν ξυλλέγεται βίοτον"
ἄλλος Ὀλυμπιάδων Μουσέων πάρα δῶρα διδαχθείς,
ἱμερτῆς σοφίης μέτρον ἐπιστάμενος"


IX. 39-—45


480 APPENDIX.


ἄλλον μάντιν ἔθηκεν ἄναξ ἑκάεργος ᾿Απόλλων,
ἔγνω δ᾽ ἀνδρὶ κακὸν τηλόθεν ἐρχόμενον...


(1) Verses 43—46, on the pursuit of wealth, correspond with
verses 42f. of Bacchylides, ἕτερος δ᾽ ἐπὶ πάσι κιτιλ. (2) Verses 47f.,
on agriculture, = Bacch. v. 44. (3) The artistic handicrafts in verses 49 f.,
are included under Χαρίτων τιμᾶν in Bacch. v. 39. (4) The gift of
poetry (σοφίης) in verses 51f. is represented by σοφός in Bacch. v. 39.
(5) Verses 53 f., on soothsaying, answer to Bacch. v. 4rf.


Ode X. 93. κατὰ δάσκιον ἠλύκταζον ὕλαν.


Χ.98 ΤὧΤτμβ only other passage in which the verb ἀλυκτάζω occurs is Her.
IX. 70: of δὲ βάρβαροι οὐδὲν ἔτι στῖφος ἐποιήσαντο πεσόντος τοῦ τείχεος,
οὐδέ τις αὐτῶν ἀλκῆς ἐμέμνητο, ἀλύκταζόν τε οἷα ἐν ὀλίγῳ χώρῳ πεφοβημένοι
τε καὶ πολλαὶ μυριάδες κατειλημέναι ἀνθρώπων. The sense there is, ‘ they
were distracted.’ ἀλύω, ἀλυκτάζω, ἀλύσσω (71. 22. 70), ἀλυκτέω, ἀλυκταίνω
(Hesych.), are verbs in which the root ἀλ (ἀλάομαι) takes the special
sense of menzal wandering, unrest, distress. ‘This notion is very easily
associated with that of bodily unrest ; as ¢.g.in ZZ. 24. 12 δινεύεσ κ᾽ ἀλύων
παρὰ Oi’ ἁλός. In Lucian, Dial. Mar. 13, περὶ τὰς ὄχθας ἀλύουσα (said
of the lovesick Tyro) means ‘ wandering forlorn.’ Here Bacchylides has
used ἠλύκταζον in a way which blends the notions of mental and
physical unrest: ‘roamed wildly.’

Blass in his rst and 2nd editions read ἀλύκταζον, but now, in the
3rd, he changes it to ἀλύσκαζον. The use of ἀλυσκάζω in the Had may
be seen from //. 5. 253 f., οὐ yap μοι γενναῖον ἀλυσκάξοντι μάχεσθαι]
οὐδὲ καταπτώσσειν, ‘Not in my blood is it to fight a skudking fight, or
cower down’ (so Leaf). Similarly in Z/. 6. 443, αἴ κε κακὸς ὡς νόσφιν
ἀλυσκάζω πολέμοιο. In the Odyssey the verb takes an accus., 17. 581
ὕβριν ἀλυσκάζων ἀνδρῶν ὑπερηνορεόντων, “ avoiding,’ ‘ shunning.’ If, then,
we read here, κατὰ δάσκιον ddvoxalov ὕλαν, the meaning will be, ‘they
went stealthily’ through the forest,—seeking to shun observation. But
that is much less suitable to the case of the frenzied maidens than the
sense given by ἠλύκταζον.

It is not probable that ἀλυσκάζω could mean merely ‘to wander’ ἢ
though Apollonius Rhodius once so uses the form ἀλύσκω (4. 57): οὔτ᾽
ἄρ᾽ ἐγὼ μούνη κατὰ Λάτμιον ἄντρον ἀλύσκω. Elsewhere ἀλύσκω is used
like ἀλυσκάζω,


ODES IX, X. 481


Ode X. 118—120. ddwos.. ἑσσαμένων.


In the three epodes of this ode the ms. gives the 7th and 8th verses
as follows :—


(1) Epode 1, wv. 35 f.
γνῶμαι πολύπλαγκτοι βροτῶν
ἄμερσαν ὑπέρτατον ἐκ χειρῶν γέρας.


(2) Epode 2, wv. 77 f.
τεῖχος δὲ Κύκλωπες κάμον
ἐλθόντες ὑπερφίαλοι κλεινᾷ πόλει.


(3) Epode 3, wv. 119 f.
Κάσαν παρ᾽ εὔυδρον πρόγο-
νοι ἑσσάμενοι, Πριάμοι᾽ ἐπεὶ χρόνῳ...


It is admitted on all hands that πρόγονοι ἑσσάμενοι is corrupt: this is Χ. 118...
proved (a) by the construction, since there is no verb for the nominative ; 12°
and (4) by the hiatus.

Prof. v. Wilamowitz writes προγόνων ἑσσαμένων, which Prof. Blass
adopts. There can be no doubt that ἑσσαμένων is right. The only
question is whether προγόνων also is right.

In support of προγόνων, it has been pointed out by Prof. v. Wila-
mowitz that, if we assume synaphea between the 7th and 8th verses of
the epode, we have --νὐ —w~ in 35 f. (οἱ βροτῶν ἃ) answering to -- σὺ --
in 77 f. (-es κάμον ἐλθ-) and in 119 f. (ον προγόνων). The ‘apparent
choriambus’ in 77 f. and 119 f. can be regarded, Wilamowitz observes,
as a Siperpov δακτυλικὸν καταλῆγον εἰς συλλαβήν, or as anaclasis of the
trochaic metre —U—vw (1.6. of the so-called epitritus). We have before
us, he says, a kind of metrical correspondence which must in any case
be allowed for ionics and dochmiacs, though no exact parallel to this
example in Bacchylides can be produced.

Such an opinion is entitled to careful consideration. It is, however,
difficult to believe that προγόνων is metrically tenable. Ingenious as is
the theory just stated, there is an objection which it does not meet. The
whole metrical structure and rhythm of the epode in this poem render it
natural to think that verse 35, γνῶμαι πολύπλαγκτοι βροτῶν, is to be read
as a verse complete in itself; and that in v. 77, τεῖχος δὲ Κύκλωπες κάμον
(where κάμοντ᾽ is most improbable), the second syllable of κάμον is to
be regarded as a syllaba anceps. Now the defence of προγόνων rests
essentially on the view that, given synaphea, --τ ὦ τ is a permissible


substitute for ~v—v. But this, in turn, implies that the two verses,


1. 8. 32


482 APPENDIX.


between which synaphea exists, form, to the ear, a single verse; since
a division of ‘the apparent choriambus’ — σὺ — which placed — vu (τον
mpoyé-) at the end of the first verse, and -- (-vwv) at the beginning of the
second, would evidently be intolerable. But verses 35 f. certainly (and,
to my feeling, verses 77 f. also) are strongly against the hypothesis of
such absolute rhythmical continuity in vv. 119 f. It is the teaching
of the ear which demurs to acquiescence in the technical apology for
προγόνων.

As to my πρὸ vaot’, it is a tentative suggestion for which, in a difficult
case, one may venture to ask a hearing. It may be observed that
it has, at least, one slight recommendation: that of serving to explain
how ἑσσαμένων came to be corrupted into ἑσσάμενοι. If the true
reading was προγόνων ἑσσαμένων, such a corruption becomes very
difficult to understand. The case is wholly different from that in
για. 46, where ἐγγόνων, immediately preceding yeboavro, was changed
into ἔγγονοι. Here the nearest verb is πέρσαν in 122; and that verb
stands in a new clause introduced by ἐπεί,

Professor A. Platt (Class. Rev. x11. 61, Feb. 1898) proposed πρὸ
youvot’. This would be excellent if only it yielded a satisfactory sense.
γουνός is usually explained as ‘fruitful land’ (from st. γεν) : but Her.
Iv. 99 has τὸν γουνὸν τὸν Σουνιακόν, where it clearly means ‘the hill-
region of Sunium’ (Ztym. MM. λέγεται δὲ γουνὸς ὃ ὑψηλὸς τόπος). So
πρὸ youvo:’ might mean that the ἄλσος by the river had rising ground
behind it. But, while the mention of the river is natural, the other
detail seems rather lacking in point ; there is nothing distinctive about
it. As to the ναός, a mention of it was not, of course, necessary ; but it
would certainly be natural. (See the passages quoted in the com-
mentary. )

Can προγόνων have been a gloss on some other word, scanned υ — --,
meaning ‘ancestors’? Dr W. Headlam thought of πατρώων, referring to
Stesich. fr. 17, watpw’ ἐμὸν ἀντίθεον Μελάμποδα, on which Eustathius says
(316. 16) πάτρωα τὸν κατὰ πατέρα πρόγονον εἶπεν. But that seems hardly
probable. Still less so is προπάππων, though πάπποι can mean ‘ ancestors’
(Arist. Pod, 11. 2, 1): and παλαιῶν would (of course) be too vague.


[The late Prof. Arthur Palmer’s emendation, mpéyo-lyor ἔἕσσαν ἐμοί, was
adopted by Dr Kenyon in the editio princeps. It was supported by Dr Otto
Crusius in PAd/ol. Lv. NF. XI. p. 179. In the Class. Rev, XIL. p. 126
(March, 1898) I endeavoured to show what could be said in favour of it.
Two objections (the hiatus, and ἔσσαν instead of ἔσσαντο) could be removed
by reading θέσσαν. Even with θέσσαν, however, I now regard the emendation


ODES X, XII. 483


as metrically untenable. But, in justice to the memory of a brilliant
scholar, I still desire, in one respect, βοηθεῖν τῷ λόγῳ ὀρφανῷ ὄντι. Some
scorn has been cast on the idea that Bacchylides could have alluded to the
Achaean founders of Metapontion as mpdyovo..épot. 1 still hold that it was
perfectly possible and natural for him to do so. As Crusius said (quoting
Mimnermus fr. 9), ‘Neleus und Nestor sind die wichtigsten κτίσται der
ionischen Inselwelt.’ We have lately acquired a fresh illustration. Timo-
theus (Persae 246 ff.) thus speaks of his native city :—

Μίλητος δὲ πόλις νιν ἃ

θρέψασ᾽ ἁ δυωδεκατει-

χέος λαοῦ, πρωτέος ἐξ ᾿Αχαιῶν.


The people of the Ionian dodecapolis is ‘a noble scion of the Achaean race.’]


Ode XII. 58—63.


I. Prof. Blass restores this passage as follows :—
58 θάλλει παρ]ὰ βωμὸν ἀριστάρχου Διὸς
59 Νίκας ἐ]ρ[ικ]υδέος ἀν-
όο θρώποισιν ἄνθεα,
61 ἃ κλυτ]ὰν δόξαν πολύφαντον ἐν αἱ-
62 θέρι] τρέφει παύροις βροτῶν
63 αἰ]εί- καὶ ὅταν θανάτοιο κ-ιτ.λ.

1. With regard to ἀνθρώποισιν, it should be observed that the
second syllable of the word represents a syllable which is short in all
the corresponding verses, 93, 126, 159, 192,225. This is not a decisive
objection ; a long syllable may have been allowed there: but, so far as
it goes, it is a reason for preferring a word which would give --υὖ-τὦ.

2. Inv. 61, ἃ, after ἄνθεα at the end of 60, is questionable, seeing
that hiatus does not occur at the end of any one of the verses which
correspond with v. 60 :—93, 126, 159, 192. This objection would be
removed by reading τὰ (cp. vill. 42 where ταί serves as relative pron.,
ν. 41 ending with Νείλου). There is room for τὰ κλυτ in the lacuna
before -ἄν. :

3. In ὅτ, αἰθέρι seems very improbable. The sense intended is :—
‘The flowers of victory cherish renown for those few mortals zz heaven
evermore’; 2.6. their fame, exalted by poetry, dwells on high with the
immortals: cp. vill. 82 ff. τό γέ τοι καλὸν ἔργον.. ὑψοῦ παρὰ δαίμοσι
κεῖται. Blass compares also Pind. fr. 227 λάμπει δὲ χρόνῳ | ἔργα μετ᾽
αἰθέρ᾽ ἀερθέντα. Now this sense is intrinsically good enough: but it does
not suit this context. The poet is evidently saying, in effect :—‘The


32—2


XII. 58—-
63


484 APPENDIX.


victors are famous for the rest of their days; and then, ὅταν θανάτοιο
νέφος καλύψῃ, they have κλέος ἀθάνατον. Clearly we need, instead of
αἰθέρι, some word which denotes the mortal life. Further, the second
syllable of αἰθέρι answers to one which is long in all the corresponding
places, 95, 128, 161, 194, 227. It cannot be doubted, I think, that
we should read ἐν αἰῶνι, as I proposed in Kenyon’s edition (p. 115,
note).


11. Prof. v. Wilamowitz would read as follows :—


58 ἐκ τοῦ] παρὰ βωμὸν ἀριστάρχου Διὸς
59 νίκας ἐρικυδέος ἀν-

60 δίδωσιν ἄνθεα,

61 καὶ κλυτ]ὰν δόξαν πολύφαντον ἐν ai-


62 du] τρέφει παύροις βροτῶν...


‘Thence’ [from the pancration?—or ‘From that time onwards’?],
‘by the altar of Zeus, flowers of victory spring up, and nourish fame,’ etc.
The intransitive use of ἀναδιδόναι seems to be somewhat rare in Greek
of the classical age. In both places where Pindar uses it, it is transitive :
fr. 133 (Persephone ἀνδιδοῖ ψυχάς), and / v. 39. But Herod. vi. 26
has ἵνα πηγαὶ ἀναδιδοῦσι Μαιάνδρου. In v. 61 καὶ κλυτ]ὰν is slightly too
large for the space: καὶ καλ]ὰν would suit it better.


III. Prof. Housman proposes :—


58 τᾷ δὴ παρ]ὰ βωμὸν ἀριστάρχου Διὸς
59 νίκας ἐρικυδέος ἀν-

60 δεθεῖσιν ἄνθεα

61 ἀγλαὰν δόξαν πολύφαντον ἐν ai-

62 av τρέφει παύροις βροτῶν...


‘There,...for men who have been crowned with the flowers of
victory, [that wreath, or Zeus] cherishes,’ &c. The drawback here
is that there is no evident subject for τρέφει. (It is hard to supply Ζεύς
from Διὸς, or the nom. ἄνθεα from the accus.) In 6of. the hiatus
between ἄνθεα and ἀγλαάν is undesirable (see above).

Adopting Housman’s ἀνδεθεῖσιν, I read ὃς viv in 58, and χρυσέαν in
61 (see commentary).


ODE XII. 485


Ode XII. 71—76.


Prof. Blass now restores the passage as follows (3rd ed., 1904) :—


71 γεύεις] πόλιν ὑψιάγνιαν
72 Αἰακοῦ] τερψιμβρότων
73 αὐλῶν καὶ] ἀε[ρσινόων
74 κώμων], πατρ[ώια]ν
75 νᾶσο[ν] ὑπέρβιον ἰσχὺν
76 παμμαχίαν ἄνα φαίνων.


‘Through thee, the stately city of Aeacus tastes the delight of flutes XII. 71—
and exhilarating revels, as thou showest thy paternal isle to be of a
exceeding might in the feats of boxer and wrestler’ (ἀνὰ παμμαχίαν).
[I suppose Prof. Blass to intend that ὑπέρβιον should be the predicate
of νᾶσον, and ἰσχύν an acc. of respect: since, if ὑπέρβιον were taken with
παμμαχίαν, φαίνων νᾶσον could not mean ‘glorifying’ it. ]

In v. 73, where the ms. has only......... A....0QN, he thinks that
the traces after A point to B, or P, or C, or E. He supplies ἀερσινόων,
citing οἶνον depoivoov in Ion fr. 9 (= Athen. 2. 35 E), where, however, it
is only Casaubon’s conjecture: most mss. have ἀερσίπνουν, one has
depotrvoov. ‘The word aepaivoos is used by Nonnus: (1) in his para-
phrase of the Gospel of St John, ch. viii. v. 44, where, in rendering ὑμεῖς
ἐκ τοῦ πατρὸς τοῦ διαβόλου ἐστέ, he has the phrase πατρὸς ἀερσινόου.
The word was there translated by saperdi; but might also mean,
‘inciting’ to evil. (2) In Dronystaca xxxill. 68f., ἀερσινόου... Οὐρανίης,
the Muse who inspires and elevates the mind. Here, then, ἀερσινόων,
as an epithet of κώμων, could mean ‘exhilarating’; but I cannot think
that the word is at all probable.

I rather hold, with Kenyon, that the letter which followed A here
may have been A (only a trace of the top remains): and I would read
αὐλῶν ὑπό θ᾽ ἁδυπνόων. (Blass, in his first ed., suggested ἁβροπνόων.)

In his second ed. (1899) he read atges in v. 71,—a far better word
(in my opinion) than yeées. But,—having decided to read depowowy in
73, and having also reverted in 74 to κώμων (which in his second ed. he
had changed to xaépyav),—he desired to find a verb which could govern
a-genitive as well as an accusative; since, with ἀερσινόων, αὐλῶν ὑπό τ᾽
was impossible. For my part, if that adjective was to be used at all,
I should have preferred αὔξεις.. αὐλῶν ὑπό τ᾽ ἀρσινόων.

With regard to 76, παμμαχίαν ἄνα φαίνων, the anastrophe of the


XII. 127


XII. 158—
163


486 APPENDIX.


prep. does not seem quite happy, since, in this context, the hearer
would rather expect ἀναφαίνων (‘illustrating’: see commentary).
Dr Jurenka, in his edition (1898), restores thus :—
αὖξες πόλιν ὑψιάγυιαν-
νῦν δ᾽ δρᾷς τερψιμβρότων
μολπᾶν ὑπό θ᾽ ἁδυπνόων κώμων πατρῴαν
νᾶσον, ὑπέρβιον ἰσχὺν
παμμαχὶ σὰν ἀναφαίνων.


Ode XII. 127. νυκτὸς ἀντάσας κιτιλ.


It seems certain that the letters after ἀντάσας are to be read as ἀνατε-,
and not as dvan-. But it may be of interest to record one or two of
the conjectures made on the latter hypothesis. Crusius proposed
ἀναπεπταμένας (to go with νυκτός as gen. abs.), ‘when night is spread
abroad.’ The phrase is, however, more suitable to the diffusion of light
than to that of darkness: and, in fact, the strictly similar phrases always
refer to light: e.g. 11. 17. 371 πέπτατο δ᾽ αὐγὴ | ἠελίου ὀξεῖα : Od. 6. 44
αἴθρη | πέπταται ἀνέφελος : L/. 23. 227 ὑπεὶρ ἅλα κίδναται qos: Her. vit.
23 ἅμα ἡλίῳ σκιδναμένῳ.

I was more disposed to read ἀναπεπταμένῳ (with πόντῳ), ‘the open
sea,’ which gives just the needful sense. Cp. Her. vill. 60 ἐν πελάγεϊ
dvarertapévy ναυμαχήσεις: Aratus, Phaen. 287 ἔ. μὴ κείνῳ evi μηνὶ
περικλύζοιο θαλάσσῃ, | πεπταμένῳ πελάγει κεχρημένος (‘at the mercy of the
open sea’). The whole phrase from ἐν κυανθέϊ to ἀναπεπταμένῳ would
be one, without a pause. Blass formerly read νυκτὸς ἀντάσασαν ἀπεχθο-
μένας (with ναῦν ody in 124), ‘having fallen in with hateful night.’
(Pind. WV. x. 83 γῆρας ἀπεχθόμενον.) [My earliest suggestion was
ἀναπανομένων : they were resting, on a calm sea, in fancied security,
when the storm burst upon them. ]


Ode XII. 158—163. ἃ τλάμονες.. «πόλιν.


158. Before ὑπέρφιαλον Jurenka and Ludwich propose πνείοντες
(Blass πνέοντες). Kenyon, χαίροντες or κλάζοντες (so also Nairn, Tyrrell).
Platt, OdAAovres. ;

159. Nairn supplies μέγιστ᾽ ἐθάρσεον (Jurenka, pddurr’—). Blass,
δόκεον ᾿Αχαιῶν. Tyrrell, ἔθρεψαν edyav. Platt, φρόνημ᾽ ἔθρεψαν.

160f. Nairn, Jurenka, and Tyrrell supply Τρῶες. Blass, νᾶας.
Nairn and Jurenka, ἐκφλέξασιν εὐσέλμους νέας. Tyrrell, ἐκφλέξαντας
(or -ασαν) “EAAdvwv νέας. (Desrousseaux, ἐκκαύσαντες....) Herwerden,
ἐκπέρσασιν εὐπρύμνους νέας. Blass, ἐκπέρσαντες ἐξ ἀρχᾶς νέας (from νέος).


ODES XII, XV. 487


162f. Nairn, παύραις χορὸν εἰλαπίνας τ᾽ ἐν | ἅἁμέραις (and so
Jurenka). Herwerden, λεύκαις χάριν (‘joy’)—. Tyrrell, λοιπαῖς χάριν---.
Desrousseaux, δαῖτάς τε παρ᾽ εἰλαπίνας τ᾽ ἐν εὐπόροις ἕξειν (1.6. παρέξειν).
Blass’, ἐν νυξὶ μετ᾽ εἰλαπίνας τ᾽ ἔν | θ᾽ ἁμέραις ἕξειν (1. μεθέξειν). Blass’,
πτνὺ per’ εἰλαπίνας τ᾽ ἐν | καὶ χοροῖς ἕξειν. (χοροῖς Headlam: ἐν καὶ =
καὶ ἐν.)
Ode XV. 1—12.


I. Verse 1. Blass writes Πυθίου ἄγ᾽ ofp’, referring to Pind. O. 1x. XV.1—12
47, ἔγειρ᾽ ἐπέων σφιν οἶμον λιγύν. He does not, however, define the
sense which he intends. (1) If Πυθίου (masc.) is construed with οἶμε,
the meaning will be, ‘Lead me onward, thou Pythian strain’ (lit., ‘strain
concerning the Pythian god’). But the construction seems somewhat
harsh. (2) On the other hand, the words could not well mean, ‘Lead
me, my strain, (to the temple) of the Pythian god.’ For that, we should
expect és Πυθίου.

The only letter between -ov and ἐπεὶ which is (approximately) certain
is the third letter after -ov, which must have been either E or O. The
first letter after -ov is torn out. The faint traces of the second letter
after -ov seem to suit Π at least as well as I. At present I can find
nothing more probable than Πυθίου ἔπ᾽ εἶμ᾽.


II. Verse 5. The traces in the papyrus (see crit. n.) exclude such
supplements as οἷσιν ὁ Δάλιος (Crusius), and καὶ yap 6 Δάλιος (Jurenka).
Blass leaves a lacuna, writing -- ὦ ὦ], εἴτ᾽ etc. The only supplement
which he mentions is θεοῦ χάριν (Desrousseaux): but this is of nine
letters, whereas, before E, there is room only for about six.


Ill. Verse 7. ἁδείᾳ may be regarded as certain. The space before
it might have sufficed, at the most, for a word of four letters (if one of
them was thin), but a word of three letters is more probable. Crusius
and Jurenka supply émi,—rightly, as I think.


IV. Verse 8 ended with δ᾽ ἕκῃ παιηόνων. Before these words there
was just room for six letters (if one at least of them was thin). In the
antistrophe (v. 20) the syllables which answer metrically to those lost in
v. 8 are -λε κόραι τ᾽ ὀβριμ-, ὦ ----οαυ, and consist of 13 letters,—z.e. of
more than twice the number for which there was space in v. 8. Now to
obtain UY—-vw with only six letters is extremely difficult, even when
the only condition imposed is that these six letters should form some
Greek word or words,—as, for example, ἀΐω Sia. But in verse 8, besides
the requirements of the sense, this further condition is present, that the
first of the six letters must be either a consonant or a digammated vowel.


488 APPENDIX.


For there is synaphea between verses 7 and 8 of the strophe (as verses
19, 20 prove); and therefore the last syllable of τερπόμενος in v. 7 must
be long. To find six letters giving ὦ -- τὺ, which shall satisfy all these
conditions, is (so far as I can see) impossible. The space after τερπό-
μένος at the end of ν. 7 excludes the possibility that syllables metrically
belonging to v. 8 had been tacked on to v. 7. There is therefore the
strongest probability (to my mind it is a certainty) that verse 8, as
originally written in our papyrus, was defective. The defect may have
existed in the archetype, or the scribe of our papyrus may have
inadvertently omitted something. In verse 12 of this same ode, he
omitted the letters ya of dyaxdéa: in Ode v. 129, οὐ yap: in XII. 55,
ἀκόλουθον. Verse 8, as written by the scribe, may have been Πυθῶνά]δ᾽
ixy παιηόνων. But in the verse as written by the poet, about 5 letters,
forming two short syllables, came before Πυθῶνάδ. All the conditions
of sense of metre are fulfilled, if we suppose that the lost letters formed
the word μέχρι.

That is not, however, the only possible restoration on the lines which
have been indicated. We might also suggest in verse 8 és 8 χ᾽ ἀδείᾳ
(cp. ZZ. 16. 455 εἰς ὅ κε δὴ Λυκίης εὑρείης δῆμον ἵκωνται, ‘ until’): and in
v. 8 (ε)οπὶ Πυθωνάδ᾽ «7.4. But I prefer ὀπὶ ἁδεΐᾳ... μέχρι Πυθῶναδ᾽,
because, in view of the synaphea, a consonant is preferable to (F)o
after τερπόμενος at the end of v. 7.

A minor question remains. Is ἵκῃ to be taken as 2nd pers. sing. of
ἵκωμαι, or as 3rd pers. sing. of ἵκω (subjunct.)?

(1) If it is the 3rd pers., then there should be a stop after πεδοιχνεῖν
in v. 9; for, zmmediately after the 3rd pers. ixy (to which Apollo is
subject), the vocative Iv’ "Απολλον in v. το would be intolerable.
A new sentence will now begin with Iv0¢ “AwoAAov. And therefore
τόσα in v. 11 would mean,—‘ Thus much, Apollo, the Delphian choruses
are wont to sing,’ etc. The reference would be to the passing notice
of Apollo’s ἀποδημία in verses 5, 6. But such an interpretation of τόσα
would be forced and unsatisfactory.

(2) It seems far more probable that, after v. 6, where the absent
god is spoken of in the 3rd pers. (ἀγάλλεται), there is a transition to the
2nd person (ixy), as the thought of his return to Delphi rises in the
poet’s mind. On this view, only a comma will stand after πεδοιχνεῖν,
and τόσα will be the relative, with ἄνθεα for its antecedent. See ἢ. on
Ode 1. 37.

Ι subjoin the text of verses 5—12 as given by Blass (3rd ed., 1904,


pp. 129 [) :-


ODES XV, XVI. 489


5 -οΟὠυὀυ}, εἴτ᾽ dp’ ἐπ᾽ ἀνθεμόεντι «:που;» Ἕβρωι
δαφνᾶι ἀγάλλεται ἢ δολιχαύχενι κύκνωι,
» 7 ἡ « ho ΄ ,
ὄφρ᾽ ἂν ἁ]δείᾶι φρένα τερπόμενος
ὀπὶ Πυθόα]δ᾽ ἵκηι παιηόνων
ἄνθεα πεδοιχνεῖν,
10 Πύθι᾽ "Απολλον,
τόσα χοροὶ Δελφῶν


σὸν κελάδησαν παρ᾽ ἀγακἰλέα ναόν.


A few observations may be offered. (1) The insertion of που in
v. 5 seems undesirable: see above, p. 114. (2) In ν. 6 there is
scarcely room in the papyrus for AA®NAI, as I is the only thin letter.
In @HPCIN [my conjecture], H and N are the only broad letters. (3) In
v. 7 the papyrus certainly has not space for op’ ἂν before ddeia: see
above, under IIT. (4) In v. 8, as Blass himself justly remarks (p. 131),
‘pro spatio etiam οπιπυθοα (sive -Ow fuit) paene nimia sunt. In fact those
words require eight letters, where there is room only for six. Nor does
Πυθόαδ᾽ furnish -- -- ν, which Blass’s own scheme of the metre (p. 13)
requires. Again, as he notes (p. 131), “ὀπὶ (fomi) co laborat, quod
producenda est -vos syll., quam vim fg ap. hos poetas [1.6. the lyric] hadere
non solet.’


Ode XVI. 36—38. χρύσεον
τέ Fou δόσαν ἰόπλοκοι
κάλυμμα Νηρηΐδες.


(1) On the hypothesis that verses 37 f. were divided thus, ἰόπλοκοι XVI. 36—
καά-ἰλυμμ᾽ --ο Νηρηΐδες, the difficulty is to fill the gap. Neither ἁδύ 38
(A. Ludwich) nor cpa (A. Platt) will serve. Slightly better, perhaps,
would be ἔνθα (‘on that occasion’; cp. ποτέ in the similar mention of a
wedding-gift, v. 115 ἢ). But this, too, is unsatisfactory.

(2) The other mode of emendation would be to supply a short
syllable after ἰόπλοκο. As Theseus is vaunting, ἰόπλοκοί ye is not
impossible :—‘ she was the bride of Poseidon, aye, and the Nereids gave
her a golden veil.’ The only alternative which I can think of is ἰόπλοκοί
σφι (Ξ- αὐτῇ), with rot instead of foe after re. But ode is not elsewhere
found in Bacchylides, while fo: is frequent.

Others hold that it is unnecessary to suppose the loss of a short
syllable after ἰόπλοκοι, and that -- ὁ -- can stand here as a substitute for
the --ο --ῳ found in verses 14, 80, and 103. This is the view of Prof.
Housman (CZass. Rev. xu. p. 138). But he suspects κάλυμμα (since
-~—v stands in 15, 81, 104), and suggests κάλλυσμα in the sense, not


XVI. 112


XVII.
27—30


490 APPENDIX.


found elsewhere, of az ornament. [Hesychius has σάρματα" καλλύσματα
(sweepings).]


Ode XVI. 112.


The emendations of ἀϊόνα fall into two classes; (A) those which
substitute for it a word denoting some article of apparel; and (B)
the rest.

(A) 1. dtav is suggested by Robinson Ellis (Class. Rev. x1. 66),
‘a purple hem,’ 2.6. ‘a robe with a purple border.’ [C. 7. G. 2554- 126,
τὴν ἐπάνω ὠΐαν τᾶς πέτρας, its ‘upper edge.’ In Attic da or da meant
the ‘fringe’ of a garment: Ar. frag. 27, etc.] 2. πορφυρέαν σινδόνα,
H. Richards (C. &., XI. p. 134). 3. “Iaovi8a πορφυρᾶν, O. Crusius
(Philol. wu. N. F xt. p. 182. ‘A purple Ionian cloak’?) 4. Ww.
Headlam (C. &. xu. 67) suggests ‘some feminine substantive meaning
“raiment,” formed like ἀμπεχόνη, and from the same root as «dpa,
ἱμάτιον : eg. εἱμόνᾳ, ἱμόνᾳ, εἱόνᾳ, cidva.’ 5. ταινίαν, A. Ludwich and
J. A. Nairn.

(B) τ. ἀγλαΐαν, Sitzler (quoted by Jurenka, p. 129). 2. ἁδονὰν
(in the sense of χάριν, ‘grace,’ or ‘charm’) L. Barnett. 3. ᾿Αιόνα
R. Walker (C. 2. x11. p. 436), Ze. ᾿Αόνα, Doric for Ἠϊόνη, one of the
Nereids (Hes. Zheog. 255). ‘We thus arrive at the reading, ἃ νιν
ἀμφέβαλεν ᾿Αιόνα πορφυρέαν, ‘where Eione threw a purple cloak about
him.’ But the ἄνιν of the papyrus may have been (Walker suggests) a
corruption of ἀλλικ᾽, acc. of ἀἄλλιξ, a word used by Callimachus and
Euphorion, one sense of which (acc. to Etym. Magn.) was πορφύρα.


Ode XVII. 27—30. Πολυπήμονος.. Προκόπτας κιτιλ.


Ι. ‘Procoptes dropped the hammer of Polypemon.’ This, the most
natural interpretation of the words, has been generally accepted. But
is Polypemon here the father of Procoptes? On the strength of Ovid,
Ibis 409, ut Sinis et Sciron et cum Polypemone natus, that view is adopted
by Robinson Ellis (C. &. xu. p. 66), Housman (2. p. 74), Jurenka
(Ρ. 135), and H. Weir Smyth (Greek Melic Poets, p. 443). C. Robert,
however (Hermes XXXIII. p. 149), does not think that such a: paternal
relation is implied. Polypemon, he suggests, may be either (1) the
maker of the hammer, a smith-daimon like Hephaestus and Palamaon ;
or (2) the former possessor of the hammer, which Procoptes has somehow
inherited. Robert does not refer to the passage of the /ézs. In Apol-
lodorus 3. 16. 2 the son of Polypemon is Sinis; but as Sinis is
mentioned in the verse of the /d7s, the matus there can scarcely be


ODES XVI, XVII. 491


other than Procrustes (= Procoptes): cp. Met. vu. 436 ff., and Heroid.
IL. 69 ff.

This is, however, a detail. C. Robert agrees with the other
scholars above-mentioned as to the meaning of the words. ‘ Procoptes
dropped the hammer of Polypemon.’


II. Other explanations have been proposed. (1) Blass places
a point after σφῦραν, making it depend on ἔσχεν, and not on ἐξέβαλεν :—
‘Theseus stayed...Polypemon’s hammer; Procoptes let it fall.’ Poly-
pemon is thus identical with Procoptes (Procrustes). But it is awkward
to denote the same person by different names in two successive clauses.
Festa’s view is similar; only he would read ἐξέβαλ᾽ ἅν. He ingeniously
suggests that a corrector had written E over the second A in EREBAAAN
(Ξ ἐξέβαλ᾽ dy), and that this second A became A, thus generating the
EREBAAAEN of the ms. (2) Herwerden would make Theseus, not
Procoptes, the subject of ἐξέβαλεν, and would change τυχὼν to τύχεν.
‘Theseus struck the hammer from the hand of Polypemon ; Procoptes
met a stronger than himself.’


Ode XVII. 35.


Emendations of the MSs. ἢ μοῦνον σὺν ὅπλοισιν.
In the editio princeps Dr Kenyon read ἢ μόνον τ᾽ ἀνοπλόν | τέ | νιν.
The other conjectures may be classed as follows.


I. Those which retain the letters συνοπλοι-, 1. A. Platt: σὺν
᾿ὅπλοισί νιν. 2. Sitzler: σὺν ὅπλοισιν οἷς (‘with his own weapons’
merely, as distinguished from those of an army). 3. Stahl: ow ὅπλοις
νιν οἷς, 4. A. Ludwich: ἢ μοῦνον συνόπλοιό νιν, ‘without a comrade
in arms.’ A very ingenious emendation. Eur. H. /. 127, has ξύνοπλα
δόρατα, ‘allied spears’: but the adj. is very rare in classical Greek, and,
so far, improbable here.


II. Emendations which suppose that the A came from A. 1. Weil,
Festa, Goligher: σὺν érdoow (accepted by Blass and H. W. Smyth).
The change of A into A led to the insertion of I after the second O,
producing σὺν ὅπλοισι. 2. Housman: ἢ μοῦνον συνοπαόνων (‘without
companions’). This also gives good sense, but does not so well account


for σὺν ὅπλοισιν.


XVII. 35


492 APPENDIX.


Ode XVIII. 15.


XVIII. 15 The ms. has TIHN (Ἄργος ὅθ᾽ ἵππιον λιποῦσα). I. Can τί ἦν be
retained? (i) The hiatus is, of course, quite defensible. (Cp. Aesch.
Theb. 704 τί οὖν: Ar. Mud. 82 τί ἔστιν : Av. 149 τί οὐ: Mud. 80 τί, ὦ,
etc.) (ii) As to metre, a trochee stands in the corresponding place of the
antistrophe (33): but there is no reason to doubt that an iambus was
admissible here (cp. the verse of Catullus in the same metre, meas esse
aliquid putare nugas). (iii) The real question is as to the phrase itself.
(a) It is assumed that τί ἦν... ὅτε was an old formula in beginning a
story ; and that is possible. ‘How was zt, when the heifer fled from
Argos...?’ But there is no other trace of that formula. (6) Jurenka
(p. 142) takes ré as a predicate: ‘what (=how pitiable) was Io, when,
as a heifer, she fled,’ etc. (ze elend war). He compares Plat. Charm.
Pp. 154 D τί σοι φαίνεται ὃ veavioxos; and Plut. Osh. 3 τί γεγόνασιν οἱ
Καίσαρος πολέμιοι; I doubt that interpretation. (¢) W. Christ would
write, τί; ἦν ὅτ᾽ “Apyos «.7.A. ‘How then? There was a time,’ etc.
That would be intolerably jerky.


II. Emendations. (1) τίεν (G. E. Marindin, cp. Nairn in C. 2.
XI. p. 453) is attractively simple. ‘The construction would then be,
λαχοῖσαν ἔξοχον γέρας Tiev, guae rem eximiam celebrandam acceperis.
The point after yépas in the Ms. is not a grave objection; it would have
been added when TIEN became TIHN (τί jv). The difficulty which
I feel as to τίεν arises rather from its relation to the words which follow.
The sentence, ὅτ᾽ "Apyos...@edye...Bots, has now to be taken as defining
either ὁδόν (the strain of song), or (better) γέρας, the choice theme,—
(namely, that) time when Jo was fleeing. This is not impossible ; but it
seems slightly harsh. (2) On the whole, I prefer je (W. Headlam,
C. ΚΑ. xu. p. 68). The form ἦεν (from ἦα, epic form of Ionic ἔα) occurs
in 71. 12. 9, Hes. Seu. 15. Our poet might certainly have used it.
Kenyon’s remark (p. 187, n. on this passage) must be borne in mind:
‘TI is very like H in the Ms.’ If HEN had once been mis-read as TIEN,
TIHN (τί ἦν) would follow.

The formula ἦν ὅτ᾽ is most often used in contrasting the past with
the present: Athol. 8. 178 ἦν ὅτε ἦν drivaxtos...viv δέ με θὴρ ἐτίναξεν
(cp. 2. 12. 44; 14. 52; 9. 344 (ἦν ὁπότε): Pind. fr. 83.) But that
formula could also be used, of course, simply to introduce a story,
when no such contrast was involved, as in Auth. τ. 92 ἦν ὅτε Χριστὸς


"
tavev,


ODE XVII. 493


Ode XVIII. 15—18.


-.."Apyos ὅθ᾽ ἵππιον λιποῦσα

φεῦγε χρυσέα βοῦς,

εὐρυσθενέος φραδαῖσι φερτάτου Διός,
? a ε Le Ψ

Ἰνάχου ῥοδοδάκτυλος κόρα.


(1) According to the oldest version of the story, Io was changed XVII.


into a cow, usually described as white (Apollod. 2. 1. 3; Ovid, fez.
1. 652, etc.). (2) In the fifth century, she was commonly depicted as
a maiden with the horns of a cow. (3) Ata later period, she was once
more represented as a cow. R. Engelmann illustrates this third phase
by a gem from Mon. ἡ. Inst. 2. 59. 9 (Roscher’s Lexikon, τι. p. 275).
He had previously discussed the whole subject in his essay, De Jone
dissertatio archaeologica (Halle, 1868).

It seems probable that Bacchylides was here thinking of Io as the
horned maiden. The epithet χρυσέα is one which he elsewhere gives to
Aphrodite (v. 174), to Artemis (x. 117), and to an uncertain goddess
(Hebe or Aphrodite?) in vu. 72. In such cases the word denotes
a divine beauty or glory,—or the preciousness of the deity in the eyes
of her votaries. Here, whatever image of Io was in the poet’s mind,
χρυσέα means ‘precious’ to Zeus. But, if the poet imagined Io as
transformed into a cow, the word would not be happily used ; we should
have expected rather some epithet, such as λευκή, which should be dis-
tinctive of her new form. Further, χρυσέα βοῦς is in apposition with
Ἰνάχου ῥοδοδάκτυλος xépa,—a fact which seems to strengthen the
probability that Bacchylides was thinking of the horned maiden.

That compromise was inevitable for a dramatist who wished to bring
Io on the stage as a speaking person. Aeschylus adopted it in the
Prometheus Vinctus: 588 κλύεις φθέγμα τᾶς βούκερω παρθένου; the date
of that play is uncertain,—perhaps between 467 and 458,—but indu-
bitably later than the Sxfp/ices, which may be as early as ¢. 491/90.

Engelmann (in Roscher p. 271) assumes that the Aeschylean
conception of Io in the Supplices (where she is only mentioned, not
exhibited) is the same as in the Prometheus,—viz., the horned maiden.
He infers that, if the Swppiices was earlier than the Prometheus, some
dramatist must have preceded Aeschylus in bringing Io on the scene in
that shape. But it can (I think) be shown that the Io imagined in the
Supplices is not the horned maiden of the Prometheus. The decisive
passage on that point is Sugp/. 299—301 :—


5—18


494 APPENDIX.


XO. βοῦν τὴν γυναῖκ᾽ ἔθηκεν ᾿Αργεία θεός.
ΒΑ. οὔκουν πελάζει Ζεὺς ἐπ᾽ εὐκραίρῳ βοΐ;
ΧΟ. φασίν, πρέποντα βουθόρῳ ταύρῳ δέμας.


When he wrote the Swppdices, Aeschylus thought of the transformed
Io as a monstrous form, half cow, half woman; see verses 567—5 70 :—


...oyy ἀήθη
βοτὸν ἐσορῶντες δυσχερὲς μιξόμβροτον,
τὰν μὲν [v. 2 τὰ μὲν] βοός,
τὰν δ᾽ [τὰ δ᾽ αὖ γυναικός" τέρας δ᾽ ἐθάμβουν.


With μιξόμβροτον we may compare the description of the Sphinx in
Eur. Phoen. 1023 f., μιξοπάρθενον | δάϊον répas. The words in the
Supplices manifestly would not apply to a being whose form was wholly
human, save for horns springing from the head. On the other hand,
the βούκερως παρθένος of the Prometheus cannot have been also
βουκέφαλος: that would have been too grotesque for a speaking
person in tragedy.

It is probable, as Engelmann says (4c. p. 271), that the extension of
Io’s wanderings to Egypt dates from the time when the Greeks recog-
nised her in Isis. See Herodotus τι. 41: τὸ yap τῆς Ἴσιος ἄγαλμα ἐὸν
γυναικήϊον βούκερών ἐστι, κατάπερ Ἕλληνες τὴν Ἰοῦν γράφουσι. At the
time, then, when Herodotus visited Egypt (probably between 449 and
445 B.c.), the horned maiden was already the form under which Greek
artists commonly depicted Io. On the older Greek vases, the black-
figured and the earliest red-figured, Io is still the cow. (Engelmann Zc. ;
cp. Preller, Gr. Myth. 12 p. 40, ἢ. 5.)

Engelmann further remarks that, before the Greeks could have
associated Io with Isis, they must already have been familiar with the
representation of Io as the horned maiden. But can we be sure of that?
Might not the horns of Isis have suggested such an association, even at
a time when Greeks were still wont to think of Io as changed into a cow?
Egypt was open to Greeks from about 5508.c.; and they must have
known the Isis of the monuments long before any dramatist (whether
it was Aeschylus or a predecessor) had brought Io into a play. Painters
of red-figured vases in the early part of the fifth century might have
derived the new type of Io directly from Isis. On this hypothesis, that
type need not have originated in the exigencies of drama. The Pvo-
metheus may have been the first play in which the βούκερως παρθένος
figured ; and Aeschylus may have been using a type which had already
appeared in Greek art.


ODE XVIII. 495


Ode XVIII. 33. 4 ῥα.


The ms. has HPA. The cause of this is that some Alexandrian critics XVIII. 33
wrote ἢ or ἦε, instead of ἡ or ἠέ, when that word introduced the second
(or any later) question of a series; as in //. 16. 12 f.:—


δ ,
ἠέ τι Μυρμιδόνεσσι πιφαύσκεαι, ἢ ἐμοὶ αὐτῷ,


ἦε τιν᾽ ἀγγελίην Φθίης ἐξ ἔκλυες οἷος;


Cp. ZZ. 6. 378f. And so also where the question is indirect; Od. 1.
174 ff. :-—
ὄφρ᾽ εὖ εἰδῶ
ἠὲ νέον μεθέπεις ἢ καὶ πατρώϊός ἐσσι
ξεῖνος.

Thus ἢ or fe, after 7 or ηέ in direct or indirect interrogation, was
distinguished from the simply disjunctive 7 (7έ)...ἤ (ἠέ), ecther...or (as in
11 τ΄ 503f., εἴ ποτε δή σε per ἀθανάτοισιν ὄνησα | ἢ ἔπει ἢ ἔργῳ). But
the refinement was an arbitrary one ; and it is discarded in some modern
texts of Homer.

Blass writes 4 fa here, and 4 in 35 (where the ms. has simply H).
I prefer ἤ ῥα.. .ἥ.


Ode XVIII. 33—51.


The following are some of the supplements which have been xvii.
suggested in these verses. 9 ΟΣ,

332. Jurenka: αἰνὰ γυῖΐ ἔλυσαν. (Blass thinks that the general
sense was, guamuis fortem delassaverunt. But he makes no suggestion.)

35 f Wilamowitz: ἢ Πιερίδες φύτευ[σαν ᾿Ινάχου κόρᾳ | καδέων ἀνά-
mavo[tv ἁμέραν. Jurenka adopts ἁμέραν in 36, and my ἀδύμῳ μέλει
in 35.

38. Wilamowitz: ἀσφαλέστατον ᾧπ[ερ ἐκράνθη λέγειν (‘to tell how
the matter was finally ordained’). This assumes that the ms. has lost
the letter I between A and II. Blass: ἀσφαλέστατον ἃ πρ[ίν ἐστ᾽ ἀοιδά.
‘Acquiescit poeta in eo quod extremum proposuerat [¢.e. in vv. 35f.];
ca enim fuit vetus traditio.’ Jurenka, ἀσφαλέστατον éx[Ads (with ἐμοὶ
μὲν οὖν [λέγειν in 37; but the first three words stood alone in that
verse).

4of, Jurenka: οἰστροδίνατος ἐντέροις | Ἰὼ φέρουσα παῖδα peya-
λοκλέα.

42f. Blass suggests ἔνθα νιν τέκ᾽ ἀνδρῶν. Jurenka: ἔνθα νιν πατὴρ
Κρονίδας | λινοστόλων πρύτανίν τ᾽ ἔθηκε λαών.

44. Blass and Jurenka: βρύοντ[α τιμᾷ.


496 APPENDIX.


45. Jurenka: peylorav τε θνατῶν κτίσαι γενεάν (where κτίσαι
depends on ἔθηκε in 43, ‘caused him to found...’).

50. Jurenka: τίκτεν Διόνυσον, [ἀγλαῶν τε κώμων. Blass writes
τίκτε Δῖον υἱὸν (instead of the ms. Διόνυσον) as the complete verse.

51. Wilamowitz: στεφα[ναφόρων ἄνακτα (adopted by Jurenka; and
approved by Blass, who, however, does not place it in his text).


Ode XIX. 1—11.


xIx.1—-11 τ. In support of εὐρυχόρῳ, Headlam refers to Anaxandrides,
Πρωτέἐσίλαος το ff. :—
μέλπειν δ᾽ odds
τοτὲ μὲν Σπάρτην τὴν εὐρύχορον,
τοτὲ δ᾽ αὖ Θήβας τὰς ἑπταπύλους...
Gomperz and Jurenka conj. εὐρναγυίᾳ.
2, Λακεδαιμονίων Wilamowitz: Λακεδαιμόνιαι Headlam: Aaxedat-
povides Jurenka.
4. κελάδησαν Gomperz, and so Jurenka.—xarapyov (or κατᾶρξαν)
Headlam.
4. καλλιπάρᾳον Kenyon: so Platt and Β]455.---καλλίπαχυν also
conj. Kenyon, and so Jurenka: καλλίπαχυν és δόμους Headlam.

Ῥ 6. ἰοτρόφου πὰρ ποταμοῦ Blass (referring to the river Evenus: but
see commentary).—iomwAdxapyov Rossbach: ἰόπλοκον, alcay Sandys:
ioorépavov Platt, Jurenka. But it seems certain that the letter after
IO was T.

7. ταχὺν οἶτον Jurenka: τέλος αἰπύ Pingel (quoted by Blass).—
τελευτάν, ἐπεὶ conj. Blass.

8. (after Ποσειδὰν) ἐπεὶ ἅρμα Jurenka: dpyyev conj. Blass.

9. (after ἰσανέμους) πόρεν Jurenka: πόρεν, ταί νιν conj. Blass.

10, ἐὐκτιμέναν Kenyon, Wilamowitz, Γὰτεηῖκἃ.----ἐὐκτιμέναν πόρευσαν.
ἦ pav—conj. Blass.—és ἐύκτιτον ὦρσεν Sandys.

11. υἱὸϊν "Apyos Reinach and others.—vid[s "Ἄρηος Jurenka :—vf
᾿Αφάρηος Tyrrell.


497


VOCABULARY.


* denotes a word found only in Bacchylides; +, a word which seems corrupt.


A


ὦ, III. το, XV. 30 (dz5)

᾿Αβαντιάδας, X. 40

“ABas: -ντος, X. 69

ἁβροβάτας: aBpoBdray, III. 48

ἁβρόβιος: -ἰων, XVII. 2

ἁβρός: -ov, fr. 11. 4

ἁβρότης : -ἣτι, fr. 26

ἀγάθεος: -day, 111. 62: -έᾳ, ν. 41

ἀγαθός: -ὧν (masc.), fr. 18. 3

ἀγακλεής: -€a, XV. 12

ἀγακλειτός: -αἷς, XII. go

ἀγάλλω : ἀγάλλεται, XV. 7

ἄγαλμα, 1. 74, Ν. 4, IX. τι

᾿Αγανορίδας, XVIII. 46

ἀγγελία: -av, 11. 3, XV. 26

ἄγγελος, V. 19: -ov, XVIII. 30

ἀγέλα: -as (acc.), XVII. 10: -aus, IX. 44

᾿Αγέλαος: -ον, V. 117

ἀγέρωχος : -οι, V. 35

᾿Αγκαῖος : -ον, V. 117

ἀγκύλη: -ης, fr. 18. 13

᾿Αγλαΐα: -ᾳ, III. 6

ἀγλαΐζω: -ἔτω, 111. 22

ἀγλαόθρονος: -o1, XVI. 124

ἀγλαός: -όν, XVI. 61: -άν, V. 154: -ovs,
XVI. 2: -ῶν, 103

᾿Αγλαός (proper name): -ῷ, IX. 9 (?)


ἄγναμπτος, fr. 20. 2 (ἄκαμπτος MSS.):


των, VIII. 73

ἀγνοέω: -hoev, fr. 12

ἁγνός : -dv, IX. 29: -οὔῦ, X. 25: -Gs, XIV.
54: -ds, XVII. 28

ἀγορά: -ἄν, XIV. 43

ἀγρός: -of Epigr. 2. x (fr. 34)

dyporépa, V. 123, X. 37

ἀγνιά: -at, 111. 16, fr. 3.
VIII. 17: -ἂν, 52

ἀγχίαλος : -ἰάλοισι, IV. 14

ἀγχίδομος : -δόμοις, XII. 89

ἄγω: -ovow, fr. 10, 11: τουσα, XVI. 2:
-ovra, XVII. 34: ἄγον (3rd pl.), XIV.


τῶ: «ἄς, Χ. 58,


7. B.


37: ἄξοντα, v. 60: ἄγονται, IIL. 46:
ἄγετο, XIX. 4

ἀγών: -ῶνι, V. 44: τώνων, VIII. 21

᾿ἀδεισιβόας: -αν, V. £55: -at, X. ὅτ

ἀδελφεός: -ῶν, V. 118

ἀδίαντος, XVI. 122

ἄδικος: -οισιν (masc.), XVII. 42

ἀδμάς: -dres, fr. 19.1

Gduaros: -ατοι, X. 84: ἀδμήτα, ν. 167

"Αδραστος: -ov, VIII. 19

ἁδύπνοος: -ων, XII. 73 (?)

adus: adelg, XV. 7

deOdos: -wy, VIID. 8: -o1s, VII. 54, IX. 19,
XII. 198

ἀείδω: -ev, IV. 18: ἄεισαν, VI. 6: ἀείδεται,
Iv. 5

ἀεικέλιος: -ἂν, fr. 19. 1

ἀεικελίως, III. 46

delpw: -pas, 111. 36: dparo, 11. 5

ἀέκατι, XVII. 9

ἀέκων: -οντα, XVI. 44

ἀέλιος, X. 22: -lov, V. 161, X. IOI, Ὁ. 439
(I. 55 Blass).—See ἅλιος

ἄελλα: -av, IX. 22

ἀελλοδρόμας: -αν, V. 39

ἄελπτος: τον, 111. 29, XII. 131

ἀέξω: ἀέξει, XII. 207: -εἰν, III. 78. See
αὔξειν

* ἀερσίμαχος : -μάχους, XII. 100

ἄζυξ: -γα, XV. 20: ~yas, X. 105

ἀηδών : -dvos, 111. 98

ἀήτα, XVI. Qt

ἀθαμβής, XIV. 58

᾿Αθάνα, XII. 195: -as, XIV. 2, XVI. 7: -g,
XV. 21

᾿Αθᾶναι: -as, XVII. 60: -ἂν, XVII. 1:
-dvats, IX. 17, XVIII. 10

᾿Αθαναῖος : -alwv, XVI. 92

ἀθάνατος: -ov, IX. 11, ΧΙ]. 65: τοι, ν.
193: drwy, 86: οισ(ιν), X. 6, XIV. 45

ἄθεος : -έων, X. 109

ἀθλέω: ἄθλησαν, VIII. 12

ἀθρέω: ἄθρησον, V.8 (Μ8. : but cp. ἐπαθρέω)


33


498


ἄθυρμα, VIII. 87: -drwy, XVII. 57: -ασι
Epigr. 1. 3 (fr. 33)

*GOupots: -tv, XII. 93

al (=el): αἴ τις, V. 5: al κε, XVI. 64

αἰαῖ, V. 153, fr. 2. x

Αἰακίδας: Αἰακίδαις, XII. 166

Alaxés: -o6, XII. 183: -@, 99

Alas: -ντα, XII. 104

Alywa, XII. 78: -ay, VIII. 55, ΙΧ. 35:
τίνας, XI. 6

alyha: -αν, XII. 140

αἰγλάεις : -εντα, fr. 16. 10

Αὔγυπτος: «ὕπτου, fr. 16. τι

᾿Αἴδας: -a, V. 61

ἀϊδής, XII. 209

αἰδοῖος : -at, VIII. 65 (?)

αἰεί, 1. 66, VIII. 81, XII. 63

αἰέν, XII. 207, XVII. 43, Epigr. 1. 3 (fr.
33)

alerés, V. τὸ

αἰθήρ, II. 86: -épa, 36, V. 17, VIII. 35,
XVI. 73: αἰθέρι, XII. 61

αἰθός: -θᾶν, fr. 3. 6

Αἴθρα, XVI. 59

αἴθω : -εσθαι, fr. 3. 3

αἴθων, XII. 50: -vos, V. 124

αἷμα: -art, X. 111, XII. 153

αἰνέω: aive?, XII. 83: -éot, VIII. 102 (?):
-eirw, XII. 201: -εἶν, V. τό, 188

αἰνός: -νά (neut.), XVI. 10?

αἴξ: αἰγῶν, V. 101

aloddmpupvos: -ots, 1. 104

αἰόλος: -ots, XIV. 57

αἰπεινός : -dv, VIII. 34

alms: -Wv, III. 36

aipéw: -εῦνται, XIV. 56: εἷλεν, X. 85

αἴρω: see deipw

αἷσα, fy. 20. 4: -αν, IX. 32, XVI. 27: -@,
XII. 66, 99

ἀΐσσω: ἄϊξεν, 11. 1: ditay, XII. 144. See
also IX. 23n.

αἴτιος, X. 34, XIV. 52

Αἰτωλίς: -l6os, VII. 51

Αἰτωλός: -ofs, V. 114

αἰχματάς: αἰχματάν, XII. 133

αἰχμοφόρος: -οι, X. 89

Ἠάϊών : ἀϊόνα, XVI. 112

αἰών : -ὥνι, ΧΙ]. ὅ1 ἢ. (9): -ῶνα, I. 43

"ἀκαμαντορόας: -αν, V. 180

ἀκάματος: -drots, XVIII. 20: -τάτας, V. 25:
-arq, XII. 178

ἄκαρπος: -ov, fr. 7. 5

ἀκίνητος : -ἥτους, V, 200

ἀκοίτας, ΙΧ. 9

ἄκοιτις: -ἰν, V. 169

ἄκοιτος : -ον, XVIII. 23

ἀκόλουθος : -ον, XIV. 55

ἀκούω: ἄκουσον, XVI. 53

᾿Ακρίσιος : -ἰῳ, X. 66

ἄκριτος: -lrovs, 1X. 46

ἀκτά: -dv, XV. τό


Gu


VOCABULARY.


ἀκτέα: -éas, VIII. 34

ἄκων : -ovTas, XVII. 49

ἀλαθεία, XII. 204: ἀλάθεια, fr. 10. 2:
-elas, V. 187 (where see n.): -elg, III.
οὔ, VII. 42, VIII. 85

ἀλαμπής: ἀλαμπέσι, XII. 175

ἄλαστος: -στον, 111. 34

ἀλάτας: -ταν, XVII. 36

ἄλγος, XVI. 19

ἀλέκτωρ, IV. 8

᾿Αλεξίδαμος : -ov, X. 18

*AdOala, V. 120

ἀλίγκιος: -ia, V. 168

*ddwareras: -αἱ, XVI. 97 f.

GME: -tKt, VII. 45

ἅλιος : -lov, 111. 80: ᾿Αλίον, XVI. 50

ἀλκά: -ds, X. 126

ἄλκιμος: -ov, V.
XVII. 13

᾿Αλκμήνιος, V. 71

ἀλλά, I. 66, εἰς.: after εἰ καί, XVI. 33:
ἀλλ’ οὐ γάρ, ν. 162

ἀλλοδαμία: -lav, XVII. 37

ἀλλοῖος : -olav, IX. 36, XIII. 7

ἄλλος, IX. 36, XII. 7: -αν, fr. 20. 3: -αἱ,
VIII. 63: τους, fr. 9: των, 1. 47f.: -o1(w),
v. 127, fr. 9: -auw, p. 437 (1. 23
Blass)

ἄλλοτε, fr. 20. 3

ἀλλότριος: -ov, XIV. 60

ἄλλως, fr. 29

ἄλοχος: -ov, XV. 29, XVI. 109

GAs: ἁλός, V. 25, XVI. 62, 122, p. 439
(1. 54 Blass)

ἄλσος, III. 19, Χ. 118, XVI. 85

᾿Αλνάττας: -TTa, 111. 40

ἀλυκτάζω: ἠλύκταζον, X. 93

᾿Αλφεός or ᾿Αλφειός : -εοῦ, VI. 3: -εόν, IIT.
70), ν. 38, 181, X. 26: -εἰοῦ, VII. 49,
XII. 193

ἅμα, III. gt

ἀμαιμάκετος : -ov, X. 64

ἀμαλδύνω : -dvet, XIII. 3

Gpap, 111. 29, fr. 7. 4: -Tt, X. 33: -Ta, V.


146, XVII. 38: -luwr,


113

ἁμαρτέω (=du.): ἁμαρτέοιτε, VIII. 103 f.
(?): -εὖν, XVII. 46

ἀμάρυγμα, VIII. 36

ἀμαυρόω: -οῦται, XII. 177

ἀμάχανος: -άνου, I. 171

ἄμαχος, XV. 23

ἀμβολά: -ἂς, fr. 11. x

ἀμβρόσιος: -ἰων, XVIII. z

ἄμβροτος: -ότου, XVI. 42

ἀμείβω: «εἰψας, XVII. 16: -ειβόμενος, V.


᾿Π150

ἀμεμφής: -ἔα, XVI. 114

ἁμέρα: -as, XVIII. 27: -@, Ie 3

ἀμέρδω : ἄμερσαν, X. 36

ἁμέτερος: -ον, ἔτ. 2. τ: -as (gen.), V. 144,
XVII. 5: τᾷ, V. 90: -as (acc.), XI. 3


VOCABULARY. 499


*duerpddixos: -οις, X. 68

ἄμετρος: -ov, XVI. 67 (ἢ)

ἀμίαντος, 111. 86

ἀμπελοτρόφος: -ov, VI. 5

ἀμύσσω : -et, XVII. τι: ἄμυξεν, XVI. 19

ἀμφάκης: -es, X. 87: -ea, fr. 3. 8: ἀμφάκει,
P- 439 (I. 79 Blass)

ἀμφί, with acc., IX. 34, X. 18: with dat.,
I. 39, IX. 44, XVI. 105, 124, XVII. 53:
in tmesis, XVIII. 7

ἀμφιβάλλω: -βάλλει, XVII. 6: -έβαλεν,
XVI. 112: βάλωσιν ἄμφι, XVIII. 7

ἀμφικύμων: -ova, XV. τό

ἀμφιπολέω: -λεῖ, fr. 7. 3

ἀμφιτίθημι: -τίθει, Epigr. 1. 4 (fr. 88)

᾿Αμφιτρίτα: -av, XVI. 111

᾿Αμφιτρύων : -ύωνος, V. 156

᾿Αμφιτρυωνιάδας, V. 85: -av, XV. 15

ἀμφότερος: -αισιν, V. 188

ἁμώμητος: -ov, V. 147

ἄν, I. 70, V. 97. 135, 193(?), X- 30(?),
XVI. 41, XVIII. 3

ἀνά, with acc., ν. 66: with dat., 111. 50:
in tmesis, III. 50f.

ἀναβάλλω: ἀνὰ .. ἔβαλλον (tmesis), III.
5of.

ἀναβολά:: see ἀμβολά

ἀνάγκα, fr, 16. 2: -αν, X. 72: -ᾳ, Χ. 46

ἀναδέω: -δησάμενος, IX. 16

ἀνάδημα: see ἄνδημα

* dvadoudxas: -αν, V. 105

ἀνακάμπτω: ἀνεκάμπτετο, XVI. 82

dvaxaptcow: ἀγκάρυξαν, IX. 27

ἀνακλαίω: ἀγκλαύσασα, V. 142 (ἢ)

ἀνακομίζω : ἀγκομίσσαι, 111. 89

ἀναμείγνυμι : ἀμμειγνυμένα, fr. 10. 5

ἀναμιμνάσκω: ἀνέμνασεν, 11. 6

ἄναξ, III. 39, 76, ν. 84, Ν111. 45, XU. 148,
XVI. 78, XVII. 2

Κἀναξίαλος, ΧΙΧ. 8

* ἀναξιβρόντας, XVI. 66

Ἑἀναξίμολπος : -ov, VI. 10

ἀναπάλλω: ἀνέπαλτο, X. 65

ἀνάπαυσις: -w, XVIII. 36

ἀναπαύω: ἀμπαύσας, V. 7

ἀναπέμπω : ἀνέπεμψε, 111. 62

ἀναπτύσσω: -ύξας, V. 75

ἀνατείνω: ἀντείνων, X. 100: ἄντειναν, XII.
138: ἀντείνασα, fr. 13. 4

ἀνατέλλω : -τελλομένᾳ, XII. 127 (?)

ἀνατίθημι: ἀνέθηκε, Epigr. 2. x (fr. 84)

dvaros: -οι, fr. 19. 2

ἀναφαίνω: -wy, XII. 76

ἄνδημα, VII. 52

ἄνδηρον : -ἥροις, p- 439 (I. 54 Blass)

dvdpoxrévos: -ov, XVII. 23

ἄνεμος, V. 65: -μων, Epigr. 2. 2 (fr. 34)

ἀνήρ, ν. 191, VII. 46, XVII. 7: ἄνδρα, III.
69, IX. 48, XII. 20f, XVII. 31: -6s, I.
52f., fr. 25: -ἔ, 1π|. 88: -as, I. 10: -ῶν,
IX. 38, XII. 189, XIII. 8, 17, XVII. 40,


fr. 10. 2: ἀνέρων, X11. 196: ἄνδρεσσιᾳ(ν),
ν. 96, X. 114: -dow, fr. 16. 6

avOeudes: -εντι, XV. 5: -evTas, XII. 88

ἀνθεμώδης : -dea, XVIII. 39

ἄνθος: -ea, 111. Q4, XII. 59, XV. 9, fr. ὃ.
2: -€wy, X. 18, XII. 92: ἄνθεσιν, IX. τό

ἄνθρωπος: -ων, I. 51, 59, VII. 44, VIII. 18,
88, 1x. 48, fr. 1. 2, 14. 24: -o1o(w), V. 30,
VII. 9.9 IX. 12, XII. 59, XIII. 1, XIV. 54,
fr. 16. 8, 19. 3

ἀνίκατος : -ατον, V. 57

ἄνιππος (?), p. 475

ἀνίσχω : -ovres, XIV. 45

ἀντάω: -doas, XII. 127

ἀντί, 1. 147

ἀντίθεος : του, XIV. 1: -οἱ, X. 79

dowd: -dv, XVII. 4: -al, XII. 230: -ἂν,
fr. 3. 2: -ais, VI. 14

ἀολλίζω: ἀόλλιζον, XIV. 42

ἅπαξ, fr. 1. x

dmdpxw: -ει, ΧΙ. 6

ἅπας: -ντι, X. 125: -Ta, XIV. 55, fr. 21.4

ἀπείρων : -ova, VIII. 20

ἀπενθής, X11. 87: -θῆ, fr. 7. 2

ἄπιστος: -ov, 111. 57, XVI. 117

ἄπλατος: -ov, XII. 51: τοῖο, V. 62

ἀπό, 1. 57, V. TO, VILL 21, X. 65, XV. 17,
XVI. 58, 103, fr. 8. το, 13. 2, 16. rz:
ἄπο, XVII. 55: in tmesis, IV. 20, Epigr.
24°.

ἀπολαγχάνειν: λαγχάνειν ἄπο, IV. 20

ἀπόλλυμι: ἀπώλεσεν, XV. 31

᾿Απόλλων, I. 18, HI. 29, 58, IV. 2, XII.
148: "Απολλον, XV. 10

ἀποπλέω: -ων, 1. 12

ἀπόρθητος: -ων, VIIIk 52: τους, 99

ἀποσεύω: ἀπεσσύμεναι, Χ. 82

ἀποτρέπω: ἀπέτραπεν, Χ. 27

ἀποφθίνω: -φθιμένῳ, VIII. 79

ἄπρακτος: -αν, IX. 8: -ακτα, fr. 8. x

ἅπτω: -εἰν, 111. 49

ἀπωθέω: -ωσάμενον, V. 189

ἄρα, XII. 164, 228, XV. 5

ἀράχνα: -ἂν, fr. 3.7

ἀργαλέος: -έαν, X. 72

’Apyeios (Argive): -elwv, VIII. 11, XIV. 5

’ Apyeios (proper name), I. 32, 11. 4f.

ἀργηστής: -ds, ν. 67

ἀργικέραυνος: -ov, V. 58

“"Apyos, 0: τον, XVIII. 19, 33

Ἄργος, τό, IX. 32, Χ. 60, 81, XVIII. 15

dpyupodlvas: ἀργυροδίνα, VII. 48

ἀρείων : -w, VIII. Qf: -ovos, XVII. 29

ἀρετά, 1. 71: τάν, 22, V- 32, IX. 13, fr.
10. 2: -Gs, III. go, X. 7: -al, XIII. 8:
’Aperd, XII. 176

*dpératxpos, XVI. 47

ἀρήϊος : ἀρῇος, τ. 3(?): -ἠϊον, 111. 69: -ηΐων,
XVII. 57

ἀρηΐφιλος: -ov, V. 166: -οἱ, XIV. 50: -ous,
I. 10: -ots, X. 113


33-2᾽


500


“Apns, V. 130, X11. 146, fr. 20. 2:
34 VIII. 44

dplyvwros, V. 29: -ov, XVI. 57:
37: τοι, VIII. 64

Ἑἀρισταλκής: igre VII. 7

dplarapxos: -ov, XII. 58

 ἀριστόκαρπος: τοῦ, III. 1

᾿Αριστομένειον (τέκος), VII. 10

*dpioromdrpa, X. 106

ἄριστος, III, 22: -ov, XIII. 2:

᾿Αρκαδία: ταν, X. 94

ἅρμα, ν. 177: -ασιν, p. 437 (I. 19 Blass?)

ἁρμόζω: -ζει, XII. 12

ἁρπαλέως, XII. 98

ἄρρητος : -ων, fr. 4. 2

Ἄρτεμις, X. 37: τιδος, V. 99

ἀρχά: -ds, X. 65

ἀρχαγέτας: -αν, 111. 24

ἀρχαγός: -ὄν, V. 179: -οὖς, VIII. 51

ἀρχαῖος: ταν, V. 150, p. 439 (I. 52 Blass)

᾿Αρχέμορος: τῷ, VIII. £2

ἄρχω: ἄρχεν, XIV. 47

ἸἨἀσαγεύοντα, VIII. 13

ἄσπετος: -ot, XVIII. 34

ἀσπίς: -low, XX. 3

doraxus: -ύων, Epigr. 2. 4 (fr. 34)

ἀστραπά: -dv, XVI. 56

ἀστράπτω: ἄστραψε, XVI. 71

ἄστρον : -wy, VIII. 28

ἄστυ, 111. 43, X. 12, 57, XII. 115: -ea, 188

*dorvdeus: -, IV. 3

ἀσφαλής: -e7, XII. 66:

᾿Ασωπός: -dy, VIII. 39

ἀτάρβακτος, V. 139

*drapBoudyas, XV. 28

ἀτάσθαλος: -ov, XVII. 24

ἄτεκνος : -ov, Ὁ. 475 (Ὁ)

ἄτερθε, XVI. 12

*Arpeldas: -eldg, XIV. 6:

ἀτρέμα, ν. 7

ἀτρόμητος, XII. 123

ἄτρυτος : -ον, VIII. 80: -ῳ, V. 27

ἀτύζω: -όμενοι, XII. 116

αὐγά: -ds, X. ττο: -αἴς, p. 439 (I. 55


“nos, Ve


τοιο, IX.


τοι, V. 111


-έστατον, XVIII. 38


-ἂν, X. 123


Blass)
avddes, XIV. 44
αὐθαίρετος: -οι, fr. 20. x


avdvyevys, II. 11

αὐλά: αὐλᾶς, 111. 32

αὐλός: -ὧν, 11. 12, VIII. 68, IX. 54, fr. 3. 5
αὔξω: -ovow, IX. 45: -εἰν, 1. 52

ἄνπνος: -ον, XVIII. 23

αὔρα: -αι, XVI. 6

αὔριον, 111. 79

αὖτε, ΙΧ. 23

αὐτίκα, X. ττὸ

αὖτις, 111. 89, XIV. 60

avréuaros:: -οι, fr. 18. 3

Αὐτομήδης : -εἰ, VIII. 25

αὐτός: -όν, XVII. 41: αὐτ-, p. 437 (I. 22


Blass)


VOCABULARY.


αὐτοῦ (adverb), v. 178

αὐχήν : -évt, 11. 7

᾿Αφάρης: -nTa, V. 129

ἄφατος: -a, XVII. 18

apbeyxros: -οισιν, fr. 2. 2

ἀφικνέομαι : ἀφίκετο, XVIII. 40

ἀφνεός, I. 62: -ὄν, V. 53: -οὔ, XVI. 34

"Agpodira, XVI. 116

ἀφροσύνα: ταις, XIV. 57

᾿Αχαιός: τῶν, VIII. 58 (?), X- 126, XIV. 39:
-ots, X. 114

ἀχείμαντος : -ov, fr. 22. .

ἀχειρής: -és, ΧΙ. τι (?)

᾿Αχιλλεύς, ΧΙ]. 119: -ἔα, ΤΟΙ, 134

ἄχος, X. 85: -έων, 76, XIV. 52

ἀχρεῖος : -ον, IX. 50

ἀῷος, fr. 3. 11 (?)


dibs: dots, XVI. 42: "Ads, V. 40: Aol,
ΧΙ. 129
ἀωτεύω : -ovTa, VIII. 13 (?)


B


*Badvéeledos: -ov, 1. 29

βαθύζωνος, XIV. 7 (?):
16: τοις, ν.

βαθύξυλος: -ῳ, XII. 169

βαθυπλοκάμου, Χ. 8

βαθύπλουτος: -ov, III. 82

βαθύς, 111. 85: -ύν, V. 16, XIV. 61:
XVI. 62

Βακχυλίδης : -y, Epigr. 1. 4 (fr. 33)

βάλλω: see under ἀναβάλλω and ἀμφι-
βάλλω


βαρναχής:


-ov, I. 7: τοῖο, X.


τείας,


-éas, XV. 18
βαρύβρομος: -ov, XVI. 76
βαρυπενθής: -éow, XIII. 72
βαρύς: -εἴαν, XVI. 28, 96
βαρύτλατος, XIII. 4
βαρύφθογγος: -ov, VIII. 9
βάσανος : βασάνοισιν, VIII. 58 (?)
βασιλεύς, I. 14: -e0, XVII. 1: -e2, X. 63,
XIV. 6, 38: -fes, fr. 26
βέλος: -7, V. 132
βία: -αν, V. 181, XVI. 23, 45:
X. 91, XVII. 10
Bidw: -Grat, XII. 200, fr. 1. 2
βίος: -ov, fr. 7. 2: -@, 1. 50
Burd: -άν, V. 53
βλέπω: -ets, XVI. 75
βλέφαρον, V. 157: -w, X. 17:
3. 10


βληχρός: -dv, XII. 227:
βλώσκω: see wod-

Bod: Bog, VIII. 68: -άν, 35
βοαθόος Epigr. 2. 3 (fr. 34)
βοαθόος: -ov, XII. 103 (?)
Bodw: βόασε, XVI. 14
Βοιώτιος: -lovow, fr. 17. 4
Βοιωτός, V. 191
Βορέας, XII. 125:
Bopeds, XVI. Qt


-g, V. 116,


-άρων, fr. -


-Gs, X. 65


τα, V. 46


VOCABULARY.


βορήϊος: -a1, XVI. 6

βούθυτος: -ors, 111. 15

βουλά, VIII. 90 (?): -αἶσι, X. 121

Bovhetw: βούλευσεν, V. 139

βοῦς, XVIII. 16: βοῦν, XV. 22: βοῦς (acc.),
X. 104: βοῶν, V. 102, IX. 44, fr. 3. 3,
17.

βοῶπις: -w, X. 99, XVI. 110

βραχύς, 11. 74

βρίθω : -θοντι (3rd plur.), fr. 8. 12: βρίσει,
IX. 47

Βρισηΐς : Βρισηΐδος, X11. 137

βροτός: -ῳ, III. 66: -dv, 1. 42, 111. 66, οἱ,
V. 63, 87, 109, 190, 194, VIII. 22, 85,
X. 35, XII. 62, 202, XVI. 32, XVII. 2,
fr. 26. 28: -οἷσ(ι), VIII. 74(?), XIV. 31,
XVI. 118, fr. 11. x

*Bporwpedijs: βροτωφελέα, XII. 101

βρύω: -εἰ, 111. 13: τουσι, 16: -ουσα, XII.
179: -ovTa, XVIII. 44: -ovTes, VI. 9

βωμός: -dv, IX. 30, X. 41, 110, XII. 58:
τῶν, fr. 3. 3


T


γᾶ: γᾶν, X. 70, XII. 180: γᾶς, XIV. 63:
γᾷ, V- 42, VIT. 41

γαῖα, XII. 153: -av, fr. 20. 4: -as, Vv. 24,
P- 437 (I. 6 Blass): -g, VIII. 38

γαμβρός: -@, XVI. 50: “ὄν, p. 437 (I. 8
Blass)

γάμος: -ῳ, XVI. 115

γάρ, 111. 5, etc.: placed between a prep.
and noun, XI. 4, XVI. 103 f.

γᾶρυς: -w, V. 15: -υἵ, XIV. 48

γαρύω, 111. 85

γε, with μέν, 111. 63 (?), go(?): after εἰ,
XII. 228 (εἴ κε MS.): νῦν, VIII. 25:
πρίν, XV. 13

yéywvev, 111. 37

*yvehavow: -woas, V. 80

γέμω: -ουσαν, XV. 4

γενεά: -dv, X. 74: -ἂς, VIII. 49

γένος, I. 30, XVI. 93

γεραίρω, XII. 225: -et, IV. 3, VI. 14:
τουσα, 11. 13: ἐγεραίρομεν, IV. 13

yépas, 111. 12, VII. 8, X. 36, XVIII. 14

γέρων : -ovra, 111. 59

γεύω: -σαντο, VIII. 46

“γῆρας, 111. 80, fr. 21. 3

Thyas: -αντας, XIV. 63

γίγνομαι: γένετο, XVIII. 29

γιγνώσκω: γνώσει, V. 3: γὙνῶν, 152

γλαυκός : -6v, VIL. 51: -ᾷ, Χ. 29

γλυκύδωρος: -€, III. 3, X. 1: τὸν, V. 4

γλυκύς: οὖ, 1. 65: -εἴα, V. 151, fr. 16. 2,
17. 4: -elav, 11. 12: -torov, 111. 47

γλῶσσα: -αν, V. 195, IX. 51

γνάμπτω: ἐγνάμφθη, XI. 52

γνήσιος : γνησίων, VIII. 83

γνώμα: -α, X. 38: τας (acc.), III. 79:
καισι, fr. 27


501


γύαλον : -dows, XIII. 41

γυιαλκής : -ἐα (sing.), ΧΙ. 8: (plur.), VIII,
38

yulov: -ων, XVI. 104: -ols, 124

γυμνάσιον: -lwy, fr. 3.5

yurd, V. 139: -αἴκα, fr. 15. 2: -acxds, XII.
136: -atkes, 111. 45: -αἰκῶν, X. 112


A


δα-: eddy, ν. 64
Δαϊάνειρα: -αν, V.173: -@, XV. 24
δαιδαλέος: -as (gen.), Vv. 140: -éwy, fr.


3. 3

*Sadopbpos: -dpe, fr. 23. .

δαΐζω: -εἰ, X11. 126

δαιμόνιος : -ov, XV. 35

δαίμων, V. 113, 135, VIII. 26, XV. 23, XVI.
46, fr. 21. τ: -ov, 111. 37: -ovos, XIII.
I: -oves, XVI. 117: -oot, VIII. 84

Δαΐπυλος: -ov, V. 145

Oals: -ras, fr. 18. 4

δαΐῴρων, V. 122, 137

δάκρυ, XVI. 95

δακρυόεις, V. 04

δακρύω: -υσα, V. 153

Δάλιος: -ε, XVI. 130

Δαλογενήξς, 111. 58, X. 15

Δᾶλος: -ε, fr. 1

δαμάζω, δάμναμι: δάμασεν, 1. 118: δαμά-
σειας, XVI. 44: δάμναται (midd.), fr. 3:
ἐδάμησαν, VIII. 64

δάμαλις: -wv, XVIIL 24

δαμασίμβροτος, XII. 50

Saudovmmos: -ov, 111. 23

*SapaclyOwv: -ονι, XV. 19

Δαμάτηρ: Δάματρα, 111. 2

Δαναοί: -ots, XII. 145

Aavaés: -οὔ, X. 74

δάπεδον : -ots, X. 25

δάπτω: -ομέναν, XV. 14

OdoKtos: -ov, X. 93

δέ, passim (occurring about 160 times;
cp. καί and re): as third word of a
sentence, I. 6, XVII. 47, Cp. XII. 127 n.:
δέ re, XII. 129, fr. 3. τ: Te..dé, XII.
r1g5 n. (?)

δὲ (enclit.):; mévrovde, XVI. g4: cp. X.
114}.

δείδω: ἔδεισεν, XVI. 102: δέδοικα, XVII.


30
δείκνυμι : δείξομεν, XVI. 46: δεῖξαι, fr.
11. 4


δειλός : -ofow, I. 51

δειμαλέος : -g? 11. 72 Π.

Δεινομένης : -veos, III. 7. 1V. 13: -veus, V.
35

δεινός: -οὔ, 111. 53

δέκατος: -ov, X. 59: -άτῳ, 1. 15

Δελφοί, 111. 21: -ῶν, XV. τ΄

δέμας, V. 147, VIII. 31


502


Δεξιθέα: -αν, 1.8

᾿δεξίστρατος : -ov, XIV. 43

δέος, V. 84

δέρκομαι: -erat, XIV. 51

δέσποινα, X. 117, XII. 95

δεῦρο, ν. 8

δέχομαι: ἐδέξατο, VII. 47: δέξατο, XV. 35,
XVI. 85: δέκτο, IX. 31, X. 17

δή, ν. 142, 156, Χ. 95, XI. 4, XII. 121,
193

Ofjpis: τιν, V. IIL

διά with gen.: VIII. 47, XII. 52: with
acc.: 11. 61, VI. 4, VIII. 30, XII. 156,
XIV. 40

διάγω: -ew, V. 33

διαιθύσσω: -7, fr. 16. 4

διαΐσσω: -σσεν, 111. 54

διακρίνω: -lver, VIII. 28, 89: -κεκριμέναι,
fr. 24. x

διατελέω: -εῖν, fr. 7. 2

διατρέχω: διέδραμεν, XIV. 44

δίδυμος: -ous, 111. 78

δίδωμι: ἔδωκε(ν), VIII. 26, X. 39, XII. 80,
fr. 21.1: δῶκε(ν), XVI. 116: δόσαν, XVI.
37: Ooinre, VIII. 2

διέπω: -ovet, 111. 21

δίζημαι: -ἡνται, 1.67: -σθαι, XVII. 60

δικ- : δικών, XVI. 63

δίκα: -ας, X. 26, XVI. 25: -g, XII. 202:
-as (acc.), XII. 45, XVII. 42

Δίκα: -as, IV. 12

δίκαιος: -οἱ, fr. 18. 4: -as (acc.), X. 123:
τῶν, XIV. 47: -atot, XII. 11

Owdes: -Gyra, XII. 165: -ἂντος, 78

Swéw (-dw): δίνασεν, XVI. 18: δίνηντο,

. 107

Διονύσιος: -σίοισι, fr. 16. 5

Διόνυσος : -ov, XVIII. 50: Διωνύσου, VIII.
98 (?)

δίς, IX. 27, 29, XVI. 2

δίσκος : -ov, VIII. 32

διχόμηνις : -δος, VIII. 29

διχοστασία: -ἰαις, X. 67

διώξιππος : -οι(ο), VIII. 44, Χ. 75

δνόφεος : -ον, XV. 32

δοιάζω: δοίαξε, Χ. 87

δοκέω, XVII. 12: -e@, fr. 16. 8

δόλιος, XVI. 116

δολιχαύχην : -evt, XV. 6

δολιχός: -dv, XVII. τό: -@, 45

δολόεις : -εσσα, 111. 75

δόμος: -ον, 111. 49, KV. 29, XVI. 100: τοὶ,
III. 40: τους, XVI. 63: -ots, TIT

Sovaxwdns: -dea, fr. 22, 2

δόναξ : -axos, XII. 92

δονέω: -εἶ, V. 67: -éovor, 1. 69: -εῖν, fr.
8. 1

δόξα: -αν, VIII. 1, ΙΧ. 18, XII. 61: -as
(gen.), IX. 37: -@, XII. 120

δορά: -ἂς, V. 124

δόρυ, XII. 120, XVI. go


VOCABULARY.


δράκων, VIII. 13

δράω: δρῶν, 11. 83

δρόμος: -w, V. 183: δρόμον, 1X. 26

da: -ᾳ, p. 439 (I. 79 Blass), fr. 21. 3:
"τἂν, XIV. 4

δύναμαι: -rat, fr. 7. 2: -το, XVIII. 26

δύναμις: -ἰν, XIV. 59

δύνασις: -w, IX. 49

δύο, IV. 17, XV. 19, XVII. 46, 49

δύρομαι: -évats, ITI. 35

δύσλοφος: -ov, XII. 46

Ἐδυσμάχητος: -τα, fr. 32. 2

δυσμενής, XVII. 6: -έων, V. 133, XII. 208

δύσμορος, XV. 30

δυσπαίπαλος: -a, V. 26

δύστανος: -οιο, X. 102: -wy, V. 63

δῶμα: -ατα, V. 59: -ασι, 173

δῶρον: -a, XVI. 10, 76, 124, VIII. 4, fr.
82. 2: τοις, fr. 16. 5


E

ἑβδομήκοντα, τι. 9

"EBpos: τῳ, XV. 5

ἔγγονος : -ων, VIII. 46

ἐγγύθεν, XVI. 128

ἐγκύρω: ἐγκύρσαι, fr. 21. 3

ἐγχέσπαλος: -ου, V. 69

ἔγχος: -εα, fr. 3. 8: -ἔων, VIII. 43

ἐγώ, V. 127, XII. 221: ἐμέ, XVI. 33 (κἀμέ) :
με, ΧΙ. 5, XVI. 53: ἐμοί, V. 31, 138,
XII. 226, XV. 2, XVIII. 37: μοι, 151:
ἄμμι, XVI. 25

ἕδος, VIII. 46

ἕδρα: -as, fr. 11. x

ἔθειρα: -av, V. 29: -as, VI. 8, XII. 197

ἐθέλω: -εἰ, 1. 52, V. 14: ἐθέλων, V. τόρ:
ἔθελεν, X. 73: cp. θέλω

el, with indic., I. 55, X.27, XII. 168, 199,
228, XVI. 28f. (el καί), 57f. (do.), fr.
7. 2, 29, Ρ. 437 (? 1. g Blass): with
optat., v. 190: with ellipse of indic.
verb, XI. 4 (εἴ wore), XVII. 12 (εἴ τινι).
Cp. ai and εἴπερ

εἶδον : εἶδε(ν), V. 40, X. 22, XVI. 109:
ἴδεν, V. 71, XVI. τό: ἰδεῖν, V. 30, XVI.
43: ἰδών, XVI. 72, 101

εἴδωλον, ν. 68, fr. 25

εἴκοσι, X. 104

εἰλαπίνα : -as (acc.), XII. 162

εἶμι: ἴμεν, XVIII. 12

εἰμί: ἐστί(»), 111. 38, V. 162, 167, XII. 203,
fr. 3.9, 7. τ, 12. x: εἰσί, VIII. 88,
fr. 19. 2: εἴη, IX. 12: ἔμμεναι, XVII. 14:
ἔμμεν, V. 144, XVII. 31, 56: εἶμεν, ΙΧ.
48: ἐών, 1. 56, VII. 46: ἐόντα, IV. 19,
XVIII. 23: evra, 111. 78: ἦν, XVII. 21,
XVII. 15: ἔσεσθαι, XII. 57

εἵνεκεν, XII. 136

εἴπερ, VIII. 86, XVI. 53

εἶπον : elwe(v), 111. 48, 77, V. 86, XV1. 47,
Lil. 81: εἰπεῖν, VIII. 72, fr. 1. x


VOCABULARY.


εἰρήνα : -ᾳ, V. 200

Hipiva, fr. 3. τι -g, XII. 189

elpw (dico): εἶρεν, XVI. 20, 74

els, XIV. 43: see és

els, fr. 7. τ: μία, 2b., XII. 8: ἕνα, 1. 45

*elodvrav, V. 110

εἴτε... ἤ, XV. 5 f.: εἴτ᾽ οὖν. «ἤ ῥα..ἢ, XVIII.
29 ff.

ἐκ, V. 15, 82, 132, 141, VIII. 35, X. 36,
XIII. 8, XVI. 24, 62(?): ἐξ, III. 46, ν.
61, X. 43, XVI. 122, fr. 4. x

ἕκαστος : -ῳ, XIII. 16

'Ἑκάτα, fr. 23. 1

ἕκατι, τ. 6f., V. 33, VI. 11, IX. 15, X. 9,
XVI. 7

ἐκβάλλω : ἐξέβαλεν, XVII. 28

ἔκγονον, XVI. τό

ἑκκαιδέκατος : -αν, VII. 3

ἐκπίμπλημι: ἐκπλήσομεν, XVI. 27

Ἑκτόρεος : ‘Exropéas (gen.), XII. 154

ἐκτός, 1Χ. 52

Ἥκτωρ: -opa, XII. 109

ἐλαία: -as, VII. 52: -g, X. 28

ἔλαιον : -ῳ, IX. 23

ἐλαύνω, ΙΧ. 51

ἐλαφρός, I. 35: -dy, fr. 8. τ

ἐλέγχω: -et, fr. 10. 2

ἐλέφας: -αντι, fr. 16. 9

*éXcxoorépavos: -ov, VIII. 62

ἔλλαθι (λημι), X. 8

Ἕλλαν: -άνων, 111. 12, V. 111, VIII. 30:
-agu(v), VII. 7, IX. 20, XII. 82: “HAAd-
vecow, 56 . (Ὁ) : "HAAavas, VII. 44

Ἑλλάς: -δα, 11. 63

ἐλπίς, III. 75, Vill. 18, fr. 16. 4: -ἰδι, 1.
54, 1X. 40, XII. 220: -low, 157

ἔλπομαι, fr. 12

ἐμβάλλω: ἔμβαλεν, X. 54

ἐμός: -Gs, Χνι. 64: -Ov, V. 117: -αἷς,
XII. 229

ἔμπεδον, X11. 178

ἐμπίτνω: -ων, IX. 24

ἔμπορος: -ov, XVII. 36

ἐμπρέπω: ἐνέπρεπεν, VIII. 27

ἐν, 11. 6, V. 27, 41, 44, 80, 88, 119, 131,
165, 1735 200, VII. 3, 45, 53, VIII. 22,
IX. 19, 29, Χ. 4, 19, 24, 32, 88, ΧΙ. 8,
XII. ὅτ, 81, 99, 118, 124, 135, 162,
189, 198, XIII. 15, 41, XIV. 53, XVI. 55
108, 115, 120, XVII. 23, 45, 49, XVIII.
8, 47, XIX. 1, fr. 8.6, 15.1, 17. 5, 21. z,
32. 1, Epigr. 1. 3 (fr. 33)

ἐναντίος : -a, V. 76

ἐναρίζω: -ομένων, XII. 151

*Evéats: "Evdatéa, x11. 96

ἔνδοθεν, XVI. 86

ἐνδυκέως, V. 112, 125

ἔνθα, 111. 33, V. 63, 107, 127, 182, XIV.
40, XV. 17; XVIII. 42

ἔνθεν, X. 82, 97, 113

ἐννέα, XV. 18


593


ἐνστάζω : ἐνέσταξεν, XII. 229

ἐντυγχάνω: ἐντυχεῖν, XVII. 44

ἐντύω : ἔντυον, fr. 18. 2

ἐνυφαίνω : -νετε, p. 437 (I. 4 Blass)?

ἕξ, Vv. 113

ἐξάγω : ἐξαγαγεῖν, X. 103

ἐξαιρέω: -είλετο, V. 74

ἐξαίσιος : -iows, XIV. 58

ἐξεναρίζω : -ων, V. 146

ἐξευρίσκω : -ευρεῖν, fr. 4. 3

ἐξικνέομαι : ἐξίκοντο, XII. 132

ἐξόπιν (or ἐξόπιθε), XVI. Ot

ἔξοχος: -ov, XVIII. 14

ἑορτά: -αἷς, III. 15

ἐπαθρέω: -noov, V. 8(?): -ἥσαις, XII. 227

ἐπαΐσσω: -ων, V. 116

"Ἔπαφος: -ov, XVIII. 42

ἐπεί, 111. 23, 53, 113, VIII. 2, IX. 25, X.
120, XII. 133, XV. I, 25, XVI. 43, 93;
121, XVIII. 39

ἔπειμι: ἐπιόντα, XVI. 46

ἔπειτα, V. 74

ἐπέρχομαι: -ονταῖι, fr. 18. 4

ἐπί, with gen., VII. 9, IX. 21, XV. 1 (9),
XVI. 83, fr. 3.3, Epigr. 2.1 (fr. 34):
with dat., v. 83, 90, 133, VI. 3, VIII. 12,
42, IX. 21, 42, 44, XII. 105, 193, 203,
XIII, 16, XV. 34: with acc., 1. 76, VIII.
41, XII. 88, 149, XVII. 37, fr. 18. τ,
20. 3

ἐπιβαίνω : ἐπέβαινε, 111.
Vv. 73

ἐπιγίγνομαι: -γιγνομένοις, VIII. 81

ἐπιδείκνυμι : ἐπεδείξαμεν, 11. Q: ἐπεδείξαο,
III. 93

ἐπιδέχομαι : -δέγμενοι, XVI. 96

ἐπίζηλος: -ῳ, ν. 52

ἐπικείρω : ἐπέκειρεν, V. 108

ἐπικλώθω: ἐπέκλωσεν, V. 143

ἐπικουρία : -av, XVII. 13

ἐπιλέγω: -λεξαμένα, V. 136

ἐπίμοιρος : -ον, 1. 48

ἐπίμοχθος, 1. 71

ἐπινίκιος : -lots, II. 13

ἐπισκήπτω: -ων, V. 42, VII. 41

ἐπιστάμα: -&yar, 1X. 38

ἐπιτάσσω: ἐπέταξε, fr. 9

ἐπιτίθημι : ἐπέθηκεν, XVI. 113

ἐπιτυγχάνω: -τυχόντι, fr. 32. 3

ἐπίφρων : -ova, XV. 25

ἐπιχθόνιος : -ἰων, IV. 15, V. 5, 54: τίοις,
v.96, IX. 14

ἐπιχρίμπτω: -ει, fr. 20. 3

ἐπιχωρίαν, XII. 92

ἐποιχνέω : -εῖς, 1X. τ (?)

ἕπομαι: ἕπεται, 1. 60: ἕπεσθαι, V. 194:
ἕσπεο, X. 1185

ἐποπτεύω : -εύοις, Epigr. 1. 3 (fr. 33)

ἔπος: -éwv, fr. 4. 2

ἑπτά, XVI. 2

ἑπτάπυλος: -ols, XVIII. 47


34: ἐπέβασε,


504


ἐραννός: -dv, XVI. 42

éparés: -G, XVI. 129: τῶν, X. 43, fr. 3. 12:
-otowv, XVI. 110

ἐρατύω : ἐράτυεν, XVI. 12

*éparmvupos, XVI. 31

ἔργμα: -ατι, XIII. 17

ἔργον, VIII. 82, fr. 11.1: τα, xvil. 18:
-owg (tv), IX. 44, XII. 203

ἔρδω: -ων, 1. 53, V- 36: -ovra, XIII. 18,
XVII. 43: ἐργμένον, XII. 207: ἐρχθέντος,
XI. 65

ἐρείπω: ἤρειπον, X. 68

᾿ἐρειψιλάοις, XII. 167 (?)

*épewpurvndas: -αν, V. 56

ἐρεμνός : -dv, XVI. 116

ἐρέπτω: -ew, 1V. 16: -έψωνται, VIII. 24:
épepOels, XII. 70

ἐρεύθω : ἔρευθε, XII. 152

*EplBowa, XVI. 14: -as, XII. 102

ἐριβρύχας, V. 116

ἐρίζω: -er, I. 58

ἐρικυδής : ἐρικυδέος, XII. 59:
(sing.), Ig0

ἐρισφάραγος: -ov, V. 20

ἔρνος, V. 87

ἐρύκω: -ev (inf.), XVI. 41

ἔρχομαι: ἐρχομένων, XV. 33: ἤλυθεν, I. 4:
ἤλθε(ν), V. 184, VIII. 4I,-XVII. 16,
Epigr. 2. 3 (fr. 34): ἔλθῃ, XvI. 28:
ἐλθόντα, ΧΙ. 7:.-e5, X. 78: -as, fr. 11.
3 f.

ἔρως : ἐρώτων, VIII. 73

és, I. 12, II. 2, III. 59, 62, V. 12, 61, 106,
VIII. 17, 20, 34, X. 48, 55, 72, XI. 4,
XII. 143, XIII. 8, XIV. 61, XVI. 63, 73,
76, XIX. 10: probably to be inserted in
v. 184 and x. 114. See els

ἐσεῖδον : ἐσιδόντες, XII. 139

ἐσθλός : -ὄν, V. 129, IX. 47 (εσέλων A),
XIII. 3: τῶν, IV. 20, V. 198, XVI. 132

ἔσχατος : ἔσχατα, VIII. 41

ἔσω, XVI. 22

ἕτερος, ΙΧ. 42, fr. 4. τ: -ou, fr. 4. τ: -αν,
XVI. 80

ἔτι, 111. 31, IV. 1, V. 174, X. 47, fr. 8.1

ἔτος, X. 59: -ea, 111. 81

ἐτύμως, XI. 228

εὖ, I. 41, 53») II. 94, V. 36, 78, 190,
VIII. 72, XII. 65, XIII. 1, 18

*evalveros: -€, XVIII. I1

eVavdpos: -ous, VIII. 17

EvBo: -av, 1X. 34

εὔβουλος, XIV. 37: του, p. 437 (1. 7 Blass):
των, IX. 27

* edyuios: -ων, X. 10

evdaldados: -ov, XVI. 88, fr. 11. 3

εὐδαιμονία : -as, V. 186

εὐδαίμων, V. 55

εὔδενδρος: see ἠῦ-

Εὔδημος, Epigr. 2. τ, (fr. 34)

ἐὔδματος: -ατον, VIII. 54


ἐρικυδέα


VOCABULARY.


εὔδοξος, VII. 9: -ov, XIII. 22: τῶν, VIII. 21

* εὐεγχής, XII. 147

εὐειδής: -éos, XII. 102

εὐεργεσία: -αν, 1. 47

evOadys: -és, VIII. 5

ἐὔθρονος, XV. 3

εὐθύδικος: -ov, V. 6

εὐθυμία: -ᾳ, XVI. 125

εὐθύνω: εὔθυνε, imper., XI. 2

εὐκλεής: -éa (acc.), V. 196

εὔκλεια : -as, 1. 74: Εἰὐκλείᾳ, XI. 183

εὐκλεΐζω: -Eas, VI. τό

ἙΕὔκλειος: Διὸς Εὐκλείου, 1. 6

εὐκτίμενος : -αν, V. 149, Χ. 122, XIV. Io:
ἐϊκτιμέναν, XIX. το (?)

ἐὔΐκτιτος: -ων, 111. 46

*evpapéw: -εἴν, 1. 65

εὐμαρέως, V. 195

εὐμενής, fr. 17. 3

εὐνά: -ats, VIII. 64 (ἢ), XII. 9g (Ὁ)

*edvas: -εἴ, VIII. 42: -ἢ, De 439 (1. 75
Blass)

ἙΕὐνομία, XII. 186: -as, XIV. 55

Εὐξαντιάδας : -αδᾶν, p. 437 (1. 9 f. Blass)?

Evidvrios: -ov, I. 15

Evgavris: -ida, 11. 8

εὔοχθος : -ous, fr. 18. 4

εὔπακτος: -wv, XVI. 82

εὔπεπλος: -ov, VIII. ὅτ: τοι, X. 42: τοισι;
XIV. 49

εὐπλόκαμος, 1. 16: -ots, III. 34

εὐποίητος: -ov, V. 177

εὔπρυμνος : -ots, XII. 150

ἐὔπυργος: τους, V. 184

εὑρίσκω: εὑρήσει, X. 124

* ὐρνάναξ: -ακτος, V. 19

eUpuBlas, XV. 31: -Bla, X. 52: -βίαν, ν.
104

*evpudlvas: -av, III. 7, V. 38

π εὐρυνεφής : -εἴ, XV. 17

εὐρύς: -εἴαν, XIV. 40: -elas, VIII. 47:
-elats, IX. 17

εὐρυσθενής: -éos, XVIII. 17

εὐρύχορος: -ov, IX. 31

Evpwmiddas, 1. 14

εὐρώς, fr. 3. 8

εὐσέβεια: -av, 111. 61

εὐσεβής: -éwv, XII. 188

εὖτε, 1. 73, 111. 25, ΧΙ]. 118, fr. 18. x

edruxos, VII. 4

εὔτυκτος: -ov, XVII. 50

εὐτυχία: -as, fr. 7. +

εὔυδρος: -ov, X. 119

εὐφεγγής, VIIL. 29: -éas, XVIII. 26

εὐφραίνω: εὔφραινε (imper.), 111. 83

εὐφροσύνα, III. 87, IX. 53: -ύναι, Χ. 12

εὐχά: -dv, XVI. 67: -ἂς, 65: -ds, VII. 50

εὔχομαι : εὔχοντο, XIV. 46: εὐχομένου, x.
107: εὐξαμένῳ, Epigr. 2. 3 (fr. 84)

εὐώδης: -dea, XIII. 40

ἐφαμέριος: -ίων, 111. 76


VOCABULARY.


ἐφάμερος : -ov, 111. 73

ἐφίημε: -σι, X11. 48

ἐφίστημι: ἐπιστάσας, 111. 55

ἐχθρός: -ἀ (neut.), 111. 47: ἔχθιστος, 52
Εχιδνα: -as, v. 62

ἔχω: -εἰ, 1. 57, X. 124, XII. 7, fr. 7. 5


-ovow, II. 63: -ew, 1. 50, XVII. 48:
των, fr. 7. 2: -ovra, XVII. 32: ἔσχεν,
V. 104, XII. 106, XVII. 27, 41: ἕξειν,
XII. 163
Z
ζάθεος: -dav, 11. 7: -éas, V. το: -έοις,
X. 24


ζεύγνυμι: ζεύξασα, x. 46

Ζεύς, 111. 55, ἡ. 200, X. 73, XIV. 51, XVI.
68: Ζεῦ, vir. 48, XVI. 53: Ζηνός, 111.
11, 26, V. 20, VIII. 5, IX. 29: Ζηνί,
X. 5, XV. 18: Διός, I. 6, III. 70, V. 79,
VI. 1, X. 52, XII. 58, XV. 28, XVI. 20,
30, 75, 86, XVII. 17: Ala, v. 178

Ζέφυρος: -ov, V. 28: -w, Epigr. 2. 2
(fr. 34)

fwd: -dv, II. 82: ἃς, Vv. 144

ζώω: τῇ, τ. 70: -ev, 57


H


#, ‘or,’ (1) single, v. 87, VIII. 36, Xu.
169: (2) repeated, ‘either’...‘or,’ x.
34 IX. 39-41: (3) after an interrogative,
ἧ....ἤ..; XVIL 5-11: πότερα... ἤ. 3
XVII. 35: (4) after εἴτε, XV. 6: εἴτ᾽ οὖν

«+4 pa..9.., XVII. 33-35.—#, ‘than,’
iv. 18, fr. 2. 2

ἦ, (1) affirmative, XII. 54, 71, 147, 1575
XVII. 41: (2) interrogative, XVII. 5

ἢ, ‘where,’ Vv. 9

ἦβα: -av, 111. go, V. 154

ἤδη, X. 59, XII. 196

ἡδύς, fr. 17. 5; cp. advs

ἠΐθεος : τοι, XVI. 128: -€wv, 43, 93

ἥμερος: ἡμέρα, X. 39

ἡμίθεος: -ot, VIII. 10, X. 62:

« 155

ἡμισυς: -v, 1. g

ἠπιόφρων: τον (voc.),

ἦρα (Ξε χάριν), Χ. 21

Ἥρα, ν. 89, Vill. 8, X. 44, XVIII. 22:
ταν, X. 107

Ἡρακλῆς: -κλεῖ, VIII. 9

ἥρως, V- 71, XIV. 37, XVI. 47. 73; 94: as
voc., 23: τῷ (acc.), VIII. 56, XII. 104:
-wes, X. 81

Ἡσίοδος, ν. 192

ἠύδενδρος: -ov, XVI. 80

hire, XII. 87


-€ous, XII.


xin 78


Θ
θαητός: -dv, Χ. 14, ΧΙ]. 115
θάλασσα: -as, XII. 149: θάλασσαν, 181


θάλεια : -εἰαν, III. 89


95


θαλία: -las, XII. 187:

θάλλω: -ουσιν, V. 198:
τέθαλεν, ΙΧ, 40

θάλπω: -ει, fr. 8. 11: θάλπῃσι (subjunct.),
fr. 16. 3

θάμα, XII. 193

θαμβέω: θάμβησεν, ν. 84

θάνατος: -ον, V. 134: του, XIX. 7:
XII. 63

θάπτω: -ouev (impf.), V. 115

Oapoéw: -e?, V. 21

θάρσος, XVI. 50 .

*Oarip: -ἤρων, IX. 23

θαῦμα, XVI. 123

θαυμάζω: -ασθείς, τ. 42

θαυμαστός, V. 71: -ὄν, VIII. 31

θεά, V. 103: -Gs, X. 49, XVI. 9

Θεανώ, XIV. 7

θεῖος, VIL. 3

*OeAnuds: -ὄν, XVI. 85

Ἐθελξιεπής: -εἶ, XIV. 48

θελξίμβροτος : -ov, V. 175

θέλω: -εἰ, XII. 51: -ἢ, Ve 135: “Ope
XVI. 41: τῶν, V. 169, XVI. 69: -ήσει,
Ill. 64: cp. ἐθέλω

θέμις, 111. 88: Outros, XIV. 55

θεόδματος : -ov, XI. 7, XII. 163: τοι,
Pp: 437 (1. 14 Blass): τους, x. 58

θεόδοτος : -ous, VII. 50

Θεόκριτος, fr. 14

θεόπομπος: -ov, XVI. 132

θεός, V. 36, 50, X. 34, XIII. 18, XVII. 411
τόν, III, 21 (625) : -ol, VIII. 50: -ovs, 1.
53: τῶν, III. 38, 57, V- 95, 179, VIII.


-laus, XIII. 15
τουσα, XIV. 58:


-0l0,


63, 89, X. 121, XVI. 24, 100, 124:
-οἴσ(ιν), IV. 18, XII. 138, XIV. 14, 45,
fr. 3. 3 ;
θεοτίματος : -ov, VIII. 98
θεότιμος : -ov, X. 12


θεοφιλής: -és, X. 60: -λῆ, π|. 69 (?)
θεράπων, V. 14

θερμός: -μᾶν, IX. 22

Θερμώδων : -ovros, VIII. 43
*Oepoverys, XII. 199

θεσπέσιος : -ἰῳ, XII. 108


Θεσσαλία: -as, XIII. 40 (?)
Θεσσαλός : -dv, XVII. 54
Θέστιος : -lov, ν. 137


θευπροπία: -αν, IX. 41

Θήβα, IX. 30: -as, VIII. 54

Θῆβαι: -as, VIII. 20

θηροσκόπος, X. 107

Θησεύς, XVI. 16: -εῦ, 74:

θιγγάνω: Olyev, XVI. 12

Ols: θῖνα, XII. 149

θνάσκω: θνάσκοντες, XII. 166: θάνῃ, 1. 73:
θανεῖν, 111. 47

θνατός, I. 56: -όν, 111. 78: -ὧν, III. 61,
XVII. 21, fr. 21.1: -ofo(w), 1. 66, III.
51, 93, V- 160, IX. 52, X. 7, XII. 45,
XIV. 52, XVIII. 45, fr. 3. 1, 9. 1, 20, x


-éa, 99


506


θοίνα : -as, fr. 18. 2

606s: Body, XVI. 55: Goods, V. 129: -ds,
III. 3

θοῶς, XIV. 59, XVI. 98

θράσος: -et, XVI. 63; cp. θάρσος

θρασυκάρδιος, XIX. §: -ov, XII. 106

θρασυμέμνων : -ovos, V. 69

θρασυμήδης : -ea, XV. 15

θραύς: -bv, XVII. 39

Ἐθρασύχειρ: θρασύχειρος, 11. 4

θροέω: θρόησε, 111. 9

θρῴσκω: -ουσα, XII. go: θόρεν, XVI. 94

θυγάτηρ, V. 124, XVI. 34: θύγατερ, VII. 1,
XII. 77, fr. 23.2: θύγατρες, I. 28, X.
84: -ῶν, V. 167, VIII. 50: -άσι, 111. 35

θυμάρμενος: -ov, XVI. 71

θυμός, XVI. 82, fr. 17.3: τόν, 1. 33, 69,
111. 83, V. 80, IX. 45, XII. 220, XVI. 23,
fr. 7. 2, 16. 3

θυσία: -αισι, V. ΤΟΙ

θύω: θύεν (inf.), XV. 18: θύσω, X. 104


I


daly: -εἰ, XII. 220: davOels, XVI. 131

ἰάπτω: -erat, fr. 7. 5

daropla: -ᾳ, 1. 39

Ἰάων : -όνων, XVI. 3: cp. Ἴων

Ἴδα: -as, V. 66, XVI. 30

ἰδέ (= ἠδέ), XIII. 5 (?)

*idpwes: -evTa, XII. 57

ἱερόν (subst.) : ἱερά, 111. 15

ἱερός : -dv, Il. 2, IX. 34: -ἂν, XVII. 1

Ἱέρων, 111. 64, 92: -ωνα, IV. 3, V. 16:
-wvos, III. 4: -wvt, V. 49, 185, 197

ifm: ἑσσαμένων, X. 120

ἴημι: ἵησι, fr. 18. 2: ἱεῖσαι, X. 56: ἵεται,
ν. 48: lero, XVI. go

᾿Ιθακήσιος : -ov, fr. 25

ἐθύς: -etay, XIV. 54

ἰθύω: ἰθύσας, IX. 51

ἱκάνω : ἵκανεν, X. 96: Tov, XII. 149

ἔκελοι, fr. 19. 3

ἱκνέομαι: -εἶσθαι, fr. 21. 3: ἵκετο, VIII. 39,
XV. 16: ἵκῃ, XV. 8: ἱκέσθαι, X. 30

Ixpiov: των, XVI. 83

ἵλεως : τῳ, Χ. 15

ὝΣΛιον : τοῦ, ΧΙ]. 115

ἱμείρω: -ει, 1. 62

ἱμεράμπυξ: -πυκος, XVI. 9

*imepbyuios: -ov, XII. 137

ἱμερόεις : -ev, X. 118: -evra, Epigr. 1. 2
(fr. 33)


loBdépapos: -o1, XVIII. 5: τῶν, VIII. 3

᾿Ιόλα: -αν, XV. 27

ἰόπλοκος : -ov, VIII. 72: τοὶ, XVI. 37: τῶν,
III. 71


VOCABULARY.


ἰός (‘arrow’): ἰόν, V. 75

lorrépavos: -ov, 111. 2: του, XII. 1222 των,
v.3

ἱππευτάς: «αἰ, XII. 160

ἵππιος : -ov, XVIII. 15: -ov, KVI. 09

ἱππόβοιος: -ov, X. 80

*immodlynros: -ων, V. 2

ἱππόνικος : -ov, XIII. 22 (?)

ἵππος: τους, 111. 4, XIX. 9, Ρ. 437 (1. 19
Blass): των, Iv. 6, V. 44

ἱπποτρόφος : -ov, X. 114

Ἀππώκης : -e0s, X. 101

ἰσάνεμος : -ous, XIX. 9

᾿Ισθμιονίκας : -av, IX. 26

᾿σθμιόνικος : -ov, 1. 46

Ἴσθμιος: -lav, XVII. 17:
(1. 6 Blass)

Ἴσθμός: -dv, VII. 40: -οὔ, 11. 7

ἰσόθεος : -éwv, XII. 156

ἰσόρροπος : -ov (neut.), IV. τα f. (?)

ἴσος, V. 46: ἴσον, 1. 62, fr. 2. 2

ἵστημι: toray (impf.), X. 112: éora, IX.
23, fr. 18.1: στᾶθι, V. 80: στᾶσον, 177:
στασάμεθα, V. 112: σταθείς, XII. 105,
XVI. 84: σταθέντων, 111. 18

ἱστίον, XII. 131

torés: -ol, fr. 3.7

ἵστωρ: -opes, VIII. 44

ἰσχυρός : -dv, XVII. 38

ἰσχύς: -ὖν, XII. 75: τύι, V. 22, XVII. 20

ἴσχω: -ουσι, V. 24: ἴσχε (imper.), XVI. 23:
ἴσχεν (inf.), 88

Ἰτωνία: -as, fr. 11. 2

Ἴφικλος: -ov, V. 128

Ἰώ, XVIII. 41

Ἴων: -es, fr. 26: -wv, XVII. 23 cp. Ἰάων


-las, P- 437


K


Κάδμος, ΧΥΤΙ. 48

κᾶδος: -έων, XVIII. 36

καθαρός: -ὁν, fr. 27

καί, passim (occurring about 70 times;
cp. δέ and re): in crasis, κἀμέ, XVI. 33:
κηὔτυκτον, XVII. 50: χῶτι, III. 81

καιρός : -@, fr. 21. 2

καίω: καῖε, V. 140

κακομάχανος : -o1, XVII. 8

κακόποτμος, V. 138

κακός: -ὁν (nom. neut.), fr. 2.2: -@ (neut.),
XVII. 44

καλέω: -et, 11. 10: κέκληται, VII. 9

καλλίζωνος, V. 80

καλλικέρα (fem.): -αν, XVIII. 24. Cp.
ὑψικέρα

Καλλιόπα, Vv. 176: -ας, XVIII. 13

καλλιπάρᾳον, XIX. 4

*xaddipbas: -av, X. 26, 96

καλλίχορος : -ov, V. 106: -ῳ, X. 32

καλός, fr. 14: -6y, VIII. 82, ror: -ῶν,
1. 146, 11. 6, UI. 96, V. 51: κἂλ-,


VOCABULARY.


P- 439 (1. 36 Blass): κάλλιστος, XIII,
17: τον, VII. 86, IX. 47, Χ. 79: κάλ-
Xora, III. 93

Καλυδών : -ὥνα, v. 106

καλυκοστέφανος : -ου,
108

κάλυμμα, XVI. 32, XVII. 38

καλύπτω: -ύψῃ, XI. 64

καλῶς, XII. 206

κάμνω: κάμον, X. 77: κάμοι, V. 36

κάμπτω: κάμψεν, IX. 26

καναχά, XIII. 15: -dy, 11. 12

κάπρος: -ov, V. 105

«dpa: κρατός, XVII. 51

καρδία: -av, XVI. 18, fr. 8. 2; cp. Kpadla

Kap@atos: -alwv (Kpavvalwy s.), Epigr.
1, 2 (fr. 33)?

καρπός : -ὁν, Epigr. 2. 4 (fr. 34)

καρτερόθυμος, V. 130

καρτερός: -dv, XVII. 27: -G, X. 46

Kaprepoxetp, 1. 31

κάρτος, V. 114

κἂρυξ, XVII. 17: τὐκες, XIV. 40

καρύσσω: -ὕξοντι (3rd plur.), XI. 231

καρχαρόδους : -οντα, V. 60

Κάσας: -αν, Χ. 119

κασιγνήτα : -ας, IX. 9

κασίγνητος: -οις, X. 65

Κασταλία: -as, 111. 20

κατά, with gen., XVI. 94: with acc., VII.
44 £.(2), IX. 32, Χ. 93, 94, XII. 180,
XVI. 80, 87, XVIII. 26, fr. 16. 10

κατακτείνω : κατέκτανον, V. 128:
XVIL. 28

καταναίω: κατένασσε, II. 60

κατανεύω: κατένευσε, XVI. 25

καταφεν- : κατέπεφνεν, V. 115

*xaTraxpalvw: κατέχρανεν, V. 44

κατέχω: -εχον, Χ. QI: -exe, XVI. 28:
κατέχουσι, X. IL

κατορθόω: κατορθωθεῖσα, XIII. 6

xe(v), IV. 13, V. 169, XVI. 64

κέαρ, I. 55, XIV. 23, XVI. 8, 87, 108, fr.
8. τι, 7. 5, 16. 12

κεδνός : -G, XVI. 29: -@, UI. 33: τῶν, V.
118

κεῖθι, VIII. τὸ

κεῖμαι: κεῖται, VIII. 84, XIV. 53, fr. 32. x

κεῖνος : -d, XIV. 62: -ov, V. 90: -0, 164:
τῷ, X. 23: των, VIII. 21

κελαδέω: -δησαν, XV. 12: -δῆσαι, XIII. 21

κελάδων: -δοντος, VIII. 65

Κελεός, fr. 86

κέλευθος, V. 31, XVIII. 1, fr. 29: τον, IX.
36, X. 26, XVIL. 17: του, V. 196, VIII.


Vv. 98: τους, X.


Ve,


47

κελεύω: κέλευσε(ν), III. 48, XVI. 87, XVIII.
21

κέλομαι, XVI. 40

Kéos: -ov, 11. 2, VI. 5, 16

* cepaweyxys: -és, VII. 48


507


κέρδος, fr. 1. 2: -ἐων, III. 84: -εσσι, XIV.
57

ἹΚερκυών : -dvos, XVII. 26

κεῦθος: κεύθεσι, IX. 4 (?)

κεφαλά: -dv, ΙΧ. 16: -G, V- QI

Kyjtos: -ἴα, XVIII. 11: -tas, 111. 98: -ty,
Epigr. 1. 4 (fr. 33): -ἴων, XVI. 130

Kyvatos: -ῳ, XV. 17

κιγχάνω: κιχεῖν, 1. 67, XIV. 53: κιχήσας,
ν. 148

κικλήσκω: κίκλῃσκε (impf.), X. 99

κινέω: ἐκίνησεν, IX. 10

Kippa: -as, X. 20

κίω: -xlov, X. 48

κλάδος: -ov, VIII. 33

κλάζω: ἔκλαγεν, XVI.
ἔκλαγον, 111. 49

κλεεννός, V. 182: -άν, V. 12: -@, II. 6

κλεινός, V. 13: -&, IX. 30: τόν, XVIII. 9:
-άν, VII. 74(2): -ᾷ, Χ. 78: -ol, VIII.
22: τοῖς, VII. 54

Κλειώ, XII. 228: -οἴ, Il. 3, XI. 2

Κλεοπτόλεμος : -ῳ, XIII. 19

κλέος, VIII. 40, XII. 65, XVI. 80

κλέω: κλέομεν, XV. 13

κλισίη: -now, XII. 135

κλονέω: -wy, XII. 118

Κλύμενος: -ov, V. 145

κλυτός: -6v, X. 80: -dv, XVI. 73: -Gs, XVI.
7: τάς, LOT

κλυτότοξος, 1. 147

κλύω: ἔκλυε, Χ. 106: κλύε (impf.), XVI.
67: κλύον, XII. 133: κλύῃ, XVI. 74

κνίζω: κνίσεν, XVI. 8

Κνώσιος: -ον, XVI. 120: -ῶὧν, 39

Κνωσός: -dv, 1.13

κοινόω: κοινώσας, XIV. 49

κολπόω: κόλπωσαν, XII. 130

κόμα: -αν, VIII. 24: -atot, XVI. 113

κομπάζω: -άσομαι, VII. 42

κόνις, V. 44

κόρα, XVI. 32, XVIII. 18: -αν, 1. 117;
XIX. 5: τᾷ, XV. 20: -αἱ, p. 439 (I. 48
Blass)?: -as (acc.), XVI. 103: cp.
κούρα

κορυφά: -αἰ, V. 24

κορώνα: -ας, V. 73

κοσμέω: κοσμῆσαι, ΧΙ. 7: ἐκόσμησας, VII.
II

κόσμος: -ov, 111. 95, XVI. 62

κούρα, V. 104, 137, Χ. 9, XVI. 53: ταν,
111. 2: -a@t, VIII. 44, Χ. 42, XVI. 125:
-as, X. το: -ats, III. 60

Κουρής: -ἣσι, Vv. 126

κοῦρος : -ous, XVI. 3

κοῦφος: -ἄ, XII. 89: -όταται, 1. 68

κράδεμνον : -a, fr. 16. 7

κραδία: -αν, Χ. 85, XVII. In: cp. καρδία

κραίνω: τῶν, XII. 45

ἘΙρανναίων : see Ἱαρθαῖος

κραταιός : -o0, XVII. 18


128, XVII. 3:


508


κρατερός: -dv, XVII. 40: -dy, XII, 143:

Gis, X, 20: -G, V. 21

Kparéw: -efoay, VI. 7: -Hoas, V1. 15

Κρεμμυών: -Gvos, XVII. 24

Κρέουσα: -as, XVII. 15

κρέων : Kpéovoay, III. 1

Κρής: -τῶν, 1. 5

Κρητικός: -ὄν, XVI. 4

κρίνω: -εις, Χ. 6: -εἰ, Ve 131: -εἰν, VII. 6:
τ-εῖ, XVI. 46

Κρίσα: -as, τν. τ4 (?)

κριτός : -ol, VIII. 11

Κροῖσος: -ov, 111. 28

Kpovidas, 1. 45, X. 73, XVI. 77: -ay, V.
178: -a (gen.), IX. 29, XVII. 21

Kpdvios, Xvi. 65

κρόταφος: -ov, XVI. 30

κρύπτω: -ev, III, 14: κρυφθεῖσα, XII. £77

κτείνω: ἔκτανεν, V. 89: κτανεῖν, XVIII. 31

κτίζω: -εἰν, X. 72

κτύπος, fr. 3. 9

*xvavavOys: -ἔϊ, XII. 124

kudveos: -ov, XII. 64

κυανοπλόκαμος: -ov, V. 33, VIII. 53: τοί,
xX. 83

κυανόπρῳρα, XVI. 1

κυανῶπις: -ἰδας, XII. 160

κυβερνάω: -Gs, XVI. 22: τῷ, XII, 160:
-Grat, XIII. 10

κυβερνήτας, XI. 1: -αν, V. 47

κῦδος, I. 50, VI. 3, IX. 17

κυδρός : -οτέρᾳ, 1. 54

κύκλος : -ov, VIII. 30

Κύκλωψ : -πες, Χ. 77

κύκνος: τῳ, XV. 6

κύλιξ: -ίκων, fr. 16. 3

κῦμα: -ατα, V. 26: -ασιν, XII. 125

κυνέα: -αν, XVII. 50

Κύπρις: -δος, V. 175, XVI. 10, fr. 16. 4

Kupéw: -ρῆσαι, II. 8

tov: κύνα, V. 60

Κωκυτός: -οὔ, v. 64

κῶμος: τοι, X. 12: των, fr. 3. 5: τοῖς, VIII.
103


A


Aayxdvw: -vew, IV. 20: ἔλαχεν, 1. 56:
Adxe(v), 7O, VI. 2: λάχῃσι, XVIII. 3:
λαχών, 1. 41, III. 11: λαχόντας, X. 70:
λαχοῖσαν, XVIII. 13: λέλογχεν, XII.
187: λελογχώς, IX. 39

Adivos: -ov, fr. 18. 1

Rais: -δος, XV. 17

λαιψηρός: -Ov, VIL. 6

Λάκαινα: -av, XVII. 50

Λάμνιος: -lav, XVII. 55

λαμπρός: -dv, 111. 54

λάμπω: -εἰ, 11. 17, VII. 43: λάμπε
(impf.), XVI. 104, 123: λαμπόμενον, V.
ya: -péva, IX. 3 (Ὁ)

Λάμπων, XII. 226: -wvos, 68


VOCABULARY,


λανθάνω: λαθεῖν, XVIII. 27

Aaopédwy: -ovros, XII. 142

λαός: -@, XII. 231: τούς, X. 67: -Gy, 1. 9,
VII. 35, X. 117

λαοφόνος: -ov, XII. 120

λάρναξ: -ακος, V. 141

Aarotéqs, 111. 39

Aard: -οῦς, V. 124, X. 16, 98

Λάχων, VI. 1: Λάχωνα, VII. ΣΙ

λέγω: -εἰ, XVII. 18, 32, 47, fr. 29: τουσι,
V. 57: -εἰν, 111. 67, V. 164

λείπω: -εἰ, 1. 73: λεῖπον (3rd plur.), XII.
116: λίπον, V. 172: λίπεν, I. 9: λιπεῖν,
XV. 13: λιπών, I. 44: λιποῦσα, XVIII.
15: λιπόντες, 11. 8, X. 60, 81, XII. 141:
λιποῦσαι, X. 57: λείπεται, VIII. 87, XII.
64

λείριος : των, XVI. 95

λεπτόθριξ: -ιχα, V. 28

*Nerrémpupvos: -ον, XVI. 119

λευκός: -ὀν, XVII. 3: -ἂν, XVI. 13

λευκώλενος, VIII. 7, XVI. 54: -€, V. 176:
τον, XV. 27: του, V. 99

λέχος: -εἰ, VIII. 56, XVI. 30

λέων: -ovra, VIII. 9: -ovTos, 1. 32: -ovTt,
XII. 47

λήγω: λῆξεν, XII. 122, 128

λῃστάς: -al, XVII. 8

*\eyukhayyys: -ἢ, Ν. 73: τεῖς, XIII. 14

λιγύφθογγος: -ov, IX. 10: τοι, V. 23

λίθος (fem.), fr. 10. x

λικμάω: -μήσῃ, Epigr. 2. 4 (fr. 34)

λινόστολος : -όλων, XVIII. 43

λιπαρόζωνος : -ων, VIII. 49

λιπαρός: -ἄ, VII. 1: -όν, XV. 29: -άν, ν.
169, Χ. 38: -ds, p. 437 (I. 13 Blass):
τῶν, I. 47

λίσσομαι : -duevos, V. 100: λίσσοντο, X. 69

λόγος, XIV. 44: -ov, XIV. 31: τῶν, XIV.


47 ,
λογχωτός: -ἃ, fr. 8. 8
Λοξίας, XII. 148: Λοξίᾳ, III. 66
Λοῦσος: -ον, X. 96
λόχος: -ον, XVIII. 32 (9)
Λυγκεύς: -éos, X. 75
λυγρός: -ais, X. 68
Λυδία: -as, 111. 24
Λύδιος: -ἰα, fr. 10. x
Αὐκιος: -lwv, XII. 147
Avxéppas: -ᾳ, XV. 34
λύσσα: -as, X. 102
* Auratos: -ov, XVII. 21
λύω: -εἰ, fr. 16. 7: ἔλυσεν, 1. 43, XI. 113


M


Μαῖα: -as, XVIII. 25
μαίνομαι: -otro, XII. 119
μάκαρ: -pwv, X, 121
Maxed, p. 439 (1. 73 Blass)


VOCABULARY.


μακράν (adv.), IX. 51
μάν, XII. 182
μανία: -ἂν, x. 109
paves: μᾶνιν, XI. IIT
Μαντινεύς: -ées, fr. 6. 2
μανύω: -ὕει, fr. 10. 1, 33: -Gov, IX. 14
μαρμαίρω : -ουσιν, fr. 16. 9
μαρμαρυγά : -ats, II. 17
μάρναμαι: -άμεθα, V. 125 (impf.): -αντο,
ΧΙ. 151
Μάρπησσα: -av, XIX. 6
ματεύω: -εἰ, IX. 35
μάτηρ, V. 138: parpl, 111. 50
μάτρως: -was, V. 129
μάχα: -av, ΧΙ]. 117: -as (gen.), I. 34, II.
4, XVII. 59: -ats, X. 68, XIII. 13
μεγάθυμος, XII. 195
*weyalynros: -vyre, 111. 64: -ous, I. 44
Ἐμεγαλοκλεής: μεγαλοκλέας, VII. 49
Ἀμεγαλόκολπος : -ou, fr. 31. 2
μεγαλοσθενής : -σθενές (voc.), XVI. 52
Ἐμεγαλοῦχος: -ov, XVI. 23
μέγαρον, XVI. 100: -wy, 111. 46: τοις, V.
11g, 165
μέγας: -a, XII. 155: -αν, XVI. 98: -άλου,
Vv. 79: -dda, fr. 3. τ: τάλαν, IX. 49,
XII. 79: -άλας (gen.), V. 24: -άλων, 1.
63, XIV. 52: -άλαισιν, XII. 157: μεῖζον,
fr. 2. 2: μέγιστον, 1. 49, 111. 19, fr. 16.
112 ταν, XVIII. 45: τοῦ, VI. 1, VIII. 55:
-d, WI. 61
μεγασθενής, XVI. 67
Ἐμεγιστοάνασσα, XVIII. 21
Ἐμεγιστοπάτωρ, V. 199
μείγνυμι: μειγνύμεν, IX. 65: μειχθεῖσα,
XII. 9g: μιγεῖσα, XVI. 31
μειλίχιος : -ots, X. gO
Μείρομαι: εἱμάρθαι, XIII. 1
pels: μηνί, τ. 16: μῆνες, VII. 2 (2): μῆνας,
Χ, 93
pelwv, 1. 63
_ *pedaryxevOns: -és, 111. 55 (?), fr. 25 (?)
μέλαθρον : -ων, X. 44
*uedappapys: -ét, III. 13
μελάμφυλλος : -ou, VIII. 33
μέλας: -αινα, XIL 153: -αν, XVI. 17
Μελέαγρος, V. 93: -0v, 77, 171
μελέτα: -av, XII. 191
μελίγλωσσος: -ov, 111. 97: -wy, fr. 3. 2
μέλισσα: -αν, IX. τὸ
μελίφρων, fr. 8. 10: -ovos, Pp. 439 (I. 50
Blass)
μέλλω: -et, ν. 164: μέλλον (part.), VIII.
οὔ, IX. 45: -ovros, VIII. 14: τόντων, fr.
7. 4: ἔμελλε, IL 30: μέλλε (impf.),
XV. 19: μέλλον (impf.), XII. 164
μέλος, XIX. 3: “ἔων, XVII. 2, Ρ. 437 (1. 1
Blass) .
μέλπω: τουσι, XII. 94: -ere, 190 (imper.)
μέλω: -εἰφ V. 92: -εἰν, fr. 8, 5
Μέμφις: -ἰν, fr. 22...


599


μέν, 1. 30, 111. 15, 63, 85, go, V- 3, 375
144, IX. 47, X. 92, XII. 114, 203, XIII.
I, XVI. I, 24, 75, XVIII. 37, fr. 7. 3,
10. 1, 12, 19. x, 24.5

Μένανδρος: -ov, XII. 192

μενέκτυπος: -ov, XVI. I

Μενέλαος, XIV. 48: -w, 6

ee XVI. 73: του, V. 170: -ots,
12

μένος, III. 54

μέριμνα; 111. 57, X. 86, XVIII. 11: «αι, 1.
69, XVIII. 34: -ας (acc.), fr. 16. 6: -ἂν,
ν


7

μέρος, 111. 71

μέσος: τῳ, Χιν. 53: τοισι, fr. 32. x

μετά, with gen., X. 123: with dat., v. 30

Μεταπόντιον, X. το, 116

μεταπρέπω: μετέπρεπεν, V. 68

μή, IIT. 13, 68, V. 36, 81, 160, X. 27, XII.
199, XVII. 44

μηδέ, ν. 161

μήδομαι: μήσεται, XVII. 42: ἐμήσατο, XV.
30: μησάμενον, IV. 16

μηλόβοτος : -ous, V. 166

Ἐμηλοδαΐκτας: -av, VIII. 6

μηλοθύτας: -av, VII. 39

μῆλον: -a, V. τορ: των, X. 11, XVII. 9

μηλοτρόφος: -ον, X. 95

μήν, see pels

μῆρα, fr. 3. 4

μῆτις: -w, XV. 25, XVI. 29, 52

μιμνάσκω: μεμνᾶσθαι, XVII. 58

μίμνω: -ew, 111. 31: -ovTa, XII. 135

μιν, ΧΟ 111; Cp. vy

μινύθω: -εἰ, III. Qo (? μινύνθη), XII. 209

Ἐμίνυνθα, V. 151 (Ὁ μινύνθη)

Μίνως, 1. 3: -wi, XVI. 8, 68

μίτρα: -αισιν, XII. 196

μοῖρα (fate), V. 121, 143, VIII. 15, XVI.
27, 89: -αν (‘portion’), IV. 20, V. 51

Μοῖσα: -ἂν, ν. 4, fr. 27.A 2; cp. Μοῦσα

μολ-: μόλε(ν), XVI. IOI, 122: μόλοι, V.
T10: μολών, III. 30: μολοῦσα, XIII. 4

povapxéw: -ήσειν, fr. 16. 8

μόνος, fr. 14: -ous, XVII. 46

Ἐμουνοπάλα: -av, XI. 8

μοῦνος : τον, III. 80, IV. 15, V. 156, XVII.
35: τῳ, fr. 15. x

Μοῦσα, 11. 11, 111. 92, XIV. 47, fr. 17. 4:
τἂν, 111. 71, V. 193, VIII. 3, IX. 11,
xvi. 4, Epigr. 1. 3 (fr. 33): cp.
Μοῖσα

μῦθος: -ον, XIV. 39: τοῖσι, X. 00

μύριος: -la, V. 31, VII. 48, XVIII. 1: -ίαι,
Ix. 38, XIII. 8, fr. 24. 2: -ἰὰ, fr. 7. 3:
-las, X. 126: -lwv, II. 41, XII. 196

μύρω: -ομένοις, V. 163

μυχός: -οἷς, τιν. 14

μῶμος, XII. 202


510


N


ναίω: -εἰς, X. 116; -εἰν, VIII. 99: ναῖον
(impf.), Χ. 61, 80

ναός: -ὄν, XV. 12, fr. 11. 3: -οὔ, III. 195
cp. νηός

νάπα: -a1s, XVII. 23

νασιώτας: -av, VIII. 77 (?)

νασιῶτις: -W, IX. τὸ

νᾶσος: -ov, 11. 8, IX. 35, XI. 6, XII. 75 (?);
182: του, V. 11, p. 437 (I. 14 Blass):
τοῖο, 26. (1. 9 Bl.)

ναυβάτας: -at, XVI. 48

ναῦς, XVI. 1: v@a, 89, 119: νᾶες, fr. 16.
11: νᾶας, XII. 74: ναυσί, 1. 5, ΧΙ]. 150

νεανίας: -at, VI. 9: -αις, fr. 13. 3

νεβρός, XII. 87

νεῖκος, X. 64


Νεῖλος: -ov, XVIII. 40, fr. 22. 2: -ov,
VIII. 41

Newéa: -éav, VII. 40: -€g, VIII. 82, XI.
8, XII. 67


Νεμεαῖος: -alov, VIII. 4

νέμω: veluys, VII. 8: νείμας, 1. 12: νέμον-
Tal, IX. 33

Ἐνεόκριτος : -ov, p. 475 (fr. of VII.?)

*vedxporos: -ov, V. 48

νεόκτιτος : -ῳ, XVI. 126

νέος : -ον (neut.), XVII. 3, 16: -οι, XII.
190, XVI. £29: τῶν, Χ. II, 12, QI, XVII.
14: τοις, fr. 3. 5

Νέσσος: -ov, XV. 35

veupd: -dv, ν. 73

νέφος, 111. §5, XII. 64, fr. 20. 3

vnéw: ναήσατο (Dor.), 111. 33

vis: νῆιν, ν. 174

νηός: νηόν, Epigr. 2. x (fr. 84): cp. ναός

Νηρεύς: -€os, XVI. 102: Νηρέος, 1. 8

Νηρηΐς : -qdos, XII. 123: -ἴδες, XVI. 38

vifw: νιψάμενος, X. 97

νίκα! -av, 11. 5, V- 49, VIII. 82, X. 39,
XII. 190: -as (gen.), VI. II, VII. 9,
VIII. 67, IX. 52: -as (acc.), VII. 47:
-ἂν, XII. 205

Nixa, x. I, XI. 5, Epigr. 1. x (fr. 33):
τας, V. 33, IX. 15: τᾷ, HI. 5

νικάω: -Gy, XII. 205: -doas, ν.
-άσαντα, 40: -άσαντι, VIII. 25

vw (sing.), III. 92, IV. 14 (0), V- 24, 435
78, 159, VIII. 26, IX. 27, X. 15, 22, 86,
80, XII. 230, XIV. 56, XV. 31, XVI. 84,
QI, 112, XVIII. 27, 42: (plur.), VIII.
15, Ρ- 439 (I- 76 Blass).—Cp. μιν

νόημα, X. 54

νόος : -ov, V. 95: -y, IV. 9, V. 8

νόσος: -ων, 1. 60: cp. νοῦσος

νόσφιν, 1. 60

νότος : -οὐ, XII. 130

νοῦσος: νούσων, fr. 19. 2

νῦν, V. 4) 31, VI. 10, VIII. 25, ΙΧ. 99) Χ.
10, 37, XI. 3, XIII. 20, XVI. 55, fr. 4. 3,


183:


VOCABULARY.


vwv (enclitic), XVIII. 8

νύξ: νύκτα, fr. 7. 4: -6s, VIII. 29, 90, XII.
127, 175: -as, XVIII. 28

Νύξ: Νυκτός, vit. 2, fr. 23. 1

νωμάω: νωμᾶται, V. 26


ἘΞ


"ξανθοδοδερκής, VIII. 12

ξάνθόθριξ: -rpixa, V- 37

ξανθός: -dv, 111. 56, VIII. 24, IX. 15: -ἂς,
X. 51, XII. 136: -@, V. 92, fr. 3. 4: «αἱ,
XIX. 2

ξεῖνος: -a, X. 85: των, I. 40: -οισι, XI. 5

ξενία : -αν, ΧΙ1. 224

ξένος, V. Τὶ

ξεστός: -οὐς, XVII. 40

ξίφος, XVII. 48: -εα, fr. 8. 8

ξουθός: -αἴσι, V. 17

ξύλινος : τον, III. 49

ξύνειμι: -éaow, fr. 26

ξυνός : -6v, IX. 6, [2


oO


6: (1) As definite article, passim. (2) As
demonstrative pron., always the first
word of the sentence, and (a) often
followed by 6(é): ὁ δέ, XVI. 71: τοῦ δ᾽,
Χ. 106: τῷ δ᾽, ν. 76, 111, XVI. 81:
τὸν δ(έ), V. 71, 93, 170, Χ. 85: οἱ δ᾽,
IX. 44, and τοὶ δέ, v. 149, fr. 18. 2:
ταὶ 6(é), X. 110, XII. 91: τὰ (nom.) δέ,
V. 91: ταῖσιν δέ, ν. 68, X. 53: but also
(ὁ) with asyndeton, τᾷ ποτ᾽, X. 40: τάν, -
V. 169: τάς, X. 42: τῶν, XII. too. (3)
As relative pron., in the oblique cases:
τοῦ, VIII. 40: τόν, V. 142, VIII. 12,
XVI. 115: τάν, XII. 193, 226, 228: τῶν,
XII. 67, 168: τοῖσιν, 1. 11, V. 135

* $Bp.uodepkis: -εἴ, XV. 20

* 6Bpiudomopos: -ov, XVIII. 32

ὅδε: τόνδε, 1. 70, XVI. 60, Ep. 2. x
(fr. 34): τάνδε, XII. 203: τᾷδε, VIII.
89: τάδε, IV. 15, V. 160, 163, ΤΟΙ,
XVI. 74: τοῖσδε, fr. 18.3 |

ὁδός, fr. 7. τι -6v, XVI. 89, XVIII. 13:
τοῦ, IX. 52

ὁδούς: -ὄντι, ν. 108

ὀδύρομαι: -ὀμενον, fr. 8. x

*Odvaceds: -εἴ, XIV. 5

ὅθεν, XVIII. 46

ὅθι, VIII. 6

ol, dat. pron. 3rd pers. (=atrg), 1. 19,
45, X. 110, XVI. 18, 37, 115, XVII. 46,
XIX. 9, Ep. 2. 3 (fr. 34)

οἶδα, IX. 49: olde, III. 13, VIII. 53: εἰδώς,
Vv. 78, IX. 42: εἴσεαι, XVI. 64

οἰκεῖος : -wy, I. 57

οἰκέω: -εῦσι, VIII. 43

οἰκίζω: ᾧκισσαν, VIII. 51


VOCABULARY.


᾿Οἰκλείδας, VIII. τό

οἶκος : -ot, fr. 16. 9

οἰκτίρω: -ovra, V: 158

Olveldas: -ats, 1x. 18

Oiveds, ν. 97: -ἔος, 120: -ῆος, 166

otvos, fr. 17. 5

οἷος : -ον, XV. 30: -av, XII. 46: ofa (adv.),
XVII. 36: old τε, V. 65: -αισιν, XVI.
120

ὀϊστός : -dv, V. 82

Οἰχαλία: -av, XV. 14

οἴχομαι: ᾧχετο, 1. 12

ὄλβιος, V. §0, fr. 28: -ov, III. 8: -αν,
XI. 41: τοῖο, XVI. 102: των, XIV. 56:
ταις, XVIII. 10

ὄλβος, fr. 20. 2: του, III. 021 τῶν, 22

ὄλεθρος: -ον, V. 139

Ἰὀλιγοσθενέω: -ων, V. 139

ὁλκάς: -dda, XV. 2

ὄλλυμι: ὥλεσε, V. 121: ὦλεσσεν, XIV. 63

ὁὀλολύξω: ὠλόλυξαν, XVI. 127

ὁλοός: -od, V. 127

᾿λυμπία: -ᾳ, VI. 6, VII. 3

*'Odupriodpbmos: -ous, II. 3

᾿Ολυμπιονίκα : -as, IV. 17

᾿λύμπιος : -ov, V. 179

Ὄλυμπος: τῳ, Χ. 4

ὁμιλέω: -εἶ, 1. 51

ὅμιλος : -ον, IX. 24: τῷ, 1. 5

ὄμμα, XVI. 18: -άτων, 95, XVII. 54: -ασι,
XVIII. 19

dud, XIII. 13

ὀμφαλός: -dv, IV. 4

ὀξύς : -elay, XII. 117

ὀπάζω: ὄπαζε (imper.), XVI. 132: Gracey,
XIV. 60: ὄπασσας, VII. 50

ὅπᾳ, XVII. 30

ὁπάων : -oow, XVII. 35

ὀπίσσω, XI. 53

ὁπλότερος: -ov, X. 71

ὁπότε, 1. 143: ὅπποτε, XII. 110

ὁράω: ὁρᾷς, fr. 14: ὄψεαι, 111. 79

ὀργά: -αἰ, fr. 24. τ

bpéyw: ὄρεξεν, V. 114

ὀρθόδικος : -ov, X. 9, XIII. 23

ὀρθός : -ἂς, X. 27: ὀρθόν, IV. II

ὀρθῶς, I. 72, IV. 6

éplvw: ὠρίνατο, X11. 112

ὅριον : -a, XVII. 6

ὁρμά : -άν, IX. 20, XII. 156

ὁρμαίνω: -e, fr. 16. 12: -ov7a, XII. 106

ὁρμάω: -G, XVII. 41

ὄρνιξ: -txes, V. 22 Ἢ

ὄρνυμι: ὥρσαν, XII. 145: ὄρνυο, XVI. 76:
ὀρνύμενον, V. 45: τοι, XIV. 41

ὄρος, Χ. 55

ὅρος, fr. 7. τ: ὅρον, V- 144

ὀρούω: ὄρουσε, XVI. 84

*épolados: -ῳ, XV. τὸ

Ἐὀρσιβάκχας: -av, XVIII. 49

*$poluaxos: -ov, XIV. 3


511


ὄρχος : -ους, V. 108

és, relative pron., Ill, 11, XIII. 23, XIV.
51, XVII. 20, XVIII. 3, fr. 4. τι, 7. 3:
ἅ (fem.), VIII. 19, IX. 50, XII. 97, 187,
XVI. 112, XVIIL. 49: ὅν, V. 193: ds, IV.
8: ᾧ, VU. 8: οἵ, VIII. 23, IX. 33, 34, XII-
114: ἅς, VIII. 50. Also ὅς τε (epic),
XII. 105, XVII. 39 (?)

ὅς, possessive pron.: ὅν, V. 47

ὅσιος  -ον, XVI. 21: -ta, III. 83

Boos: -o1, III. 63: -ae, VIII. 63: -d, 11. 6.
Also ὅσσος: -ον, I. 70: -d, VI. 4,
IX. 15

ὅστις, 111. 67f., V. 110, X. 124: ὅτι, IIL
57, V. 164, 1Χ.6 : ὅντινα, I. 68: ἅντινα,
IX. 37: ᾧτινι, V. 50

ὅταν, XII. 63, XVI. 27, p- 439 (I. 37
Blass)

ὅτε, X. Q5, XII. 121, XV. 34, XVIII. 19,
50, XIX. 4

ὅτι, 11. 4, II. 61, 79, 81, VI. 15, ΧΡ. 27

érpbivw: ὥτρυνε, VIII. 35, XU. 146

ov, οὐκ, οὐχ: I. 36, III. 30, 87, 88, go, 95,
V. 24, 53, 84, 122, 129, 136, 162, VIII.
15, 53) Χ. 22, XII. 175, XIV. 30, 52,
XVI. 41, 81, XVII. 43, fr. 3. 9, 11.1, 12,
14, 17. τ, 20, 32.1

οὐδέ, V. 25,.XVIII. 25, fr. 3. 10, 4. 2, 11. τ

οὐδείς, fr. 28: -év, 1. 65, 111. 57, XVI. 118,
fr. 19. 3

οὐδός : -dv, fr. 18. x

οὐκέτι, XVI. 11, 21

*otdtos=ob)os: -ἰον, XVII. 53

οὖλος : -ats, XVI. 113

οὖν, XVIII. 29, 37

οὕπω, V. 43

Οὐρανία, XV. 3: -as, V. 13, VI. II

οὐρανός: -o0, XVI. 55

οὔριος : -ἰα, XII. 130

οὖρος: -ov, XVI. 87

οὔτε.. οὔτε, XVIII. 26 ff.: οὔτε. . otre..
οὔτε, fr. 20. 2: οὐ. . οὔτε... οὔτε (instead
of οὐδέ), fr. 17. xf.

οὔτις, 111. 63, VII. 44

οὔτοι, V. 84

οὗτος: τοῦτο, 111. 83: τοῦτον, XVII. 31:
ταῦτα, V. 136, XVII. 30

ὀφθαλμός: -ὄν, p. 437 (I. 7 Blass): -otow,
IX. 7

ὄφρα, XVII. 42, Ep. 2. 3 (fr. 34)

ὀφρύς: -ύων, XVI. 17

ὄχθα: -αισιν, VII. 49

by: dl, XVI. 129, P- 439 (I- 77 Blass)


II


παγκρατής, Χ. 44, XVI. 24, fr. 10. 2

παγκράτιον : παγκρατίου, XII. 56

πάγνυμι: πᾶξαι, X. 88

πάγξενος or -ξεινος : παγξείνου, XII. 95 (Ὁ) :
-ένῳ, X. 28


512


πᾷ, IX. 47

παιανίζω: παιάνιξαν, XVI. 129

παιδικός : -ol, fr. 3. τῷ

παιήων: -όνων, XV. 8

παῖς, VII. 46: παῖδα, ν. 146, 156, Χ. 14,
32, XII. 103, XVII. 56, XVIII. 41: -δί,
VIII. 103, XVI. 70: -des, V. 36, XIV. 56:
-bas, I. 43, X- 69, XIV. 63: παῖδας,
Ῥ. 475 (fr. of vit.): -δεσσι, XIV. 39

Πακτωλός, 111. 45

mada: -ας, VIII. 36, X. 21

πάλαι, fr. 4. x

παλαιός: -οὔ, VIII. 64

παλαίστρα: -av, XVII. 26

πάλιν, VII. 16, XVI. 81

παλίντροπον, X. 54

Πάλλας : -avros, Ep. 1. x (fr. 33)

Παλλάς: -ddos, XIV. 3: -ddt, V. 02

παμμαχία: -tév, XII. 76

πάμπαν, p. 439 (1. 81 Blass)

*rappdepors, fr. 20. 2

πανδαμάτωρ, ΧΙ]. 205

πανδερκής: -éa, XVI. 70

Πανδίων : -ovos, XVI. 15, XVII. 15

πάνδωρος, fr. 20. 4

Πανέλλανες : -ων, XII. 198

ἐπανθᾶλής, XII. 229

πανθᾶλής (Dor. for πανθηλ-): -ἔων, XII.

Tavdeibas : ταν, 11. 14: Πανθείδᾳ, 1. 37

πάννικος : -οιο, X. 21

παντᾷ, Ν. 31, VIII. 48, XIV. 44

παντοδαπός: -ὥν, IV. 19

πάντοθεν, XVIII. 20

παντοῖος : -atot, XII. 49

παρά, with gen., III. 11, XIII. 1(?), 10
(πάρ), XV. 35, XVIII. 3, 13: with dat.,
IIL. 20, V. 64, VIL. 84, XII. 150 (παρα):
with acc., III. 6, 1V. 4, V. 38, VIII. 39,
IX. 29, Χ. 26, 119, XII. 58, XV. 12,
XVI. I19, XVIII. 39, fr. 7. 4, 11. 3,
15. 2

παραπλήξ: -ἣγι, Χ. 45

παρατρέπω: -τρέψαι, Ν. 95

παράφρων: sce πάρῴρων

πάρεδρος: -ον, Χ. 51

πάρειμι: -εστι(ν), III. 67, Iv.
xvi. 1, fr. 17. x

παρηΐς: -ἰδων, XVI. 13


146),


παρθενικά: -&s, XVI. 11
παρθένιος: -la, Χ. 47
παρθένος : -ῳ, XV. 21: τοί, III. 50, XII. 04


παρίημι: παρέντα, 111. 88

παρίστημι: παρισταμένα, X. 5

πάροιθε(»), 111. 19, VI. 4

πάρος, ΧΙ. 4

πάρφρων: -ονος, X. 103

was: πᾶν, VII. 43: πάντα, V. 55, XIV. 38,
XVII. 45, fr. 28: πᾶσαν, VIII. 40:
παντί, 1. 58, XII. 231: πάντων, 1. 64,
Xvi. 66, Epigr. 2. 2 (fr. 34): πάντεσ-


VOCABULARY.


σι(ν), X11. 81, 203, XVI. 123, fr. 9. τὶ
πᾶσι(ν), XIV. 54, fr. 16. 8

πᾶσις: πάσι, 1X. 42 (?)

πασιφανής, XII. 176

πασσυδίᾳ, XII. 141

πατήρ, Ν. Lol, X. 96, XIV. 37, XVI. 78:
πάτερ, XVI. 53: πατέρα, X. 51: πατρός,
XVI. 63, 99, 109

πάτρα: πάτραν, x. fe (?)

πάτριος: -iwy, 1. 3

πατρίς : -ἰδος, p. br (fr. of viz)

πατρῴαν, XII. 74

παῦλα: -αν, ΙΧ. 8 (?)

παῦρος: -οισ(ι), VIII. 95, XII. 62, fr. 21. τ:
παυροτέρων, 1. 64

παύω: παύσει, XI. 45: παῦσεν, V. 98,
X. 108: παῦσαι, 76: παύσασθαι, XIV.
46

πεδίον, XII. 143: τῷ, X. 19, XII. 118

* πεδοιχνεῖν, XV. 9

πέδον, VIII. 5

πείθω: πεῖθε (impf.), VIII. 16: πιθοῦσα,
X. 107: πειθόμεθ᾽, V. 195

πεισίμβροτον, VIII. 2

πέλαγος, XVI. 4, 77

πελάζξω: πέλασσεν, X. 33: πελάσσας,
VII. 38: πλαθεῖσα, XVI. 35

Πελλάνα: -αν, IX. 33

Πέλοψ: -οπος, V. 181, VII. 53,
Ρ. 437 (1. 13 Blass)

πέλω: πέλονται, ΙΧ. 38, fr. 3. 7: ἔπλετο,
1. 31

πέμπω:
XV. 29: -εἰν,
ἔπεμψεν, χν. 2:
πέμψει, V. ο΄

πενθέω: -etv, fr, 2. ὦ

πενία: -as, I. ὅτ

πεντάεθλος: -οισιν, VIII. 27

πένταθλον : πεντάθλου, VIII. 104

πέντε, 1. 43

πεντήκοντα, I. 5, 111. 81, VII. 2

πεπρωμένα : 566 πορ-

πέπων : -όνων, Ep. 2. 4 (fr. 84)

πέρθω: πέρσαν, Χ. 122

περί, with gen., V. 124, XVII. 51 (ὕπερ
MS.): with dat., VII. 50, XII. 55. XVII.


X. 25,


κει, V. II, XIV. 61, fr. 16. 6: τοι,
V. 197: -εν, VIII. 20:
πέμψαι, Ul. 66:


47

περικλειτός: -é, fr, 12: τοί, x. 81:
-κλειτῶν, VILL. 8: -οἵσι(ν), V. 12, IX. 19

Πέρσας: -ἂν, 111. 27

Περσείδας, X11. 48

πέταλον, V. 186

πετάννυμι: πέτασε, XVI. 72

Πετραῖος : -aiov, XIII. 20

Πηλεΐδας, X11. 110

πῆχυς: -uv, fr. 13. 4

πιαίνω: -erac, 111. 68

Πιερίδες, XVIII. 35, Pp. 437 (I- 3 Blass):
των, XVILI. 3

πινυτός. -ἂς, XIV. 55


VOCABULARY.


πίνω: -ovros, fr. 16. 12

πίπτω: ἔπεσον, X. 20: πεσεῖν, 72: Te-
σόντα, 23. Cp. πίτνω

Πίσα: -αν, ν. 182

πίσυνος: V. 21, XI. 221

Πιτθεύς: -éos, XVI. 34

πίτνω: -vov (impf.), XVI. 6

πιφαύσκω, V. 42: -οἱ, VIII. 81

πίων: tmordry, Epigr. 2. 2 (fr. 34)

πλαγκτός: -ᾧ, VIII. 20 (Ὁ)

πλάξιππος, V. 97

πλάσσω: πλᾶξεν, X. 86

πλατύς: -eia, fr. 29

Πλεισθενίδας, Xiv. 48

Ἐπλείσταρχος : -ov, III. 12

πλείων : -ova, III. 65: πλεῦνας, VII. 46

Ἡλευρών: -Gva, V. 151, XIX. Io

πλήμμυρις : -w, fr. 30

πλημύρω: -ων, V. 107

πλόκος: -ov, XVI. 114

πλοῦτος, 1. 50: τον, III. 13, XIV. 50, fr.
3. 2, 16. 12: τοῦ, IX. 49: τῷ, X. 51

πνέω: -ων, V. 153, IX. 22: τουσα, XVI. ΟἹ

πνοιά: πνοιαῖσιν, V. 28

ποδάνεμος: -ov, VI. 13

ποδάρκης: -εα, XVIII. 30

πόθεν, XVI. 31

ποικίλος : -ov, VII. 43: -ats, X. 33

ποιμήν : -ένων, XVII. 9

ποῖος: -ᾳ, V. 88

*tod€uaryts: -δος, XVI. 7

πολέμαρχος: -€, XVI. 39

πολεμήϊος: -av, XVII. 4: τοις, 33

πόλεμος: τοιο, XII. 121: τοῦ, XVII. 58:
τῷ, V. 131

πολιοκρόταφος: -ον, fr. 21. 2

πολιός : -ὁν, III. 88

πόλις: τιν, I. 13, 29, IV. 2, V. 12, 150,
Vill. 54, 66, 98, X. 114, 122, XI. 7,
XII. 71, 163, 185, XIV. 41, pp. 437-9
(I. 9, 52 Blass): -e, X. 78: τίων,
fr. 16. 7

πολυάμπελος : πολυαμπεὰλ-, p. 475 (fr. of
vil)

πολυδάκρυος : -ov, III. 30

πολύδακρυς: οὖν, XV. 24

πολύζηλος: -ῳ, Χ. 63

πολυζήλωτος, VII. 10: -€, VIII. 45: -ov,
1. 74, IX. 48

πολυήσατος: -ols, XVIII. 9

πολυκρατής: -és (voc.), VIII. 15

πολύκρημνος: -ov, 1. 11

πολύκριθος : -ον, Χ. 70

πολυλάϊον, 1X. 34

πολύλλιστος : -ον, X. 41

Πολυνείκης: -εἴ, VIII. 20

Πολυπήμων: -ovos, XVII. 27

πολύπλαγκτος: -ον, XII. 181: τοί, Χ. 35


πολύς: -¥, X. 50: πολλάν, XVII. 34:
πολέες, X. 17: ToAdal, VIII. 80: -éas,
Epigr. 1. 3 (fr. 33): -éwy, v. 100:


j. B.


513


πολλῶν, IX. 48: -οἷς, I. 42, Ve
Cp. πλείων

πολύστονος: -ov, XVI. 40

Ἐπολύφαντος: -ov, XII. ὅτ

πολύχρυσος: -ῳ, Χ. 4

πολνώνυμος: -ε, Epigr. 1. x (fr. 88)

πόνος: -ov, XII. 54, fr. 7. 5: -ous, fr. 9

mévTtos: -ov, XVI. 84: τῷ, 35

πόντος, XVI. 128: -ov, XII. 129: -ovde,
XVI. 94: του, 111. 86, fr. 80: τῳ, XII. 125

πορ-: ἔπορεν, V. 51: πεπρωμέναν, 111. 25,
XVI. 26

Πορθανίδας: -da, Vv. 70

πόρος: -ῳ, VIII. 42

πόρπαξ: -ξιν, fr. 3. 6

πορσύνω: ἐπόρσυνε, XVI. 89

πορτιτρόφος: -ov, X. 30

πορφύρεος: -εον, XVII. 52: -ἔαν, XVI. 112:
-eot, fr. 20. 2

Ἐπορφυροδίνας: -αν, VIII. 39

πορφυρόζωνος : -οιο, X. 49

Tlocevddv, XVI. 79, XIX. 8: -Gvos, IX. 19,
XIII. 20: -ἂνι, XVI. 36, 59

Ποσειδάνιος : -ov, fr. 6. τ

ποταίνιος : -av, XVI. 51

ποταμός: -o0, VIII. 65, XII. 77: τῶν,
VII. 45

ποτέ, IIl. 23, 72, V. 56, VI. 6, X. 40, ΧΙ,
4, XIL. 54, XVI. 115, XIX. 1

πότερα, XVII. 33

mort, with acc., X. 96, XV. 29: cp. πρός

πότμος: -ov, V. 158

πότνια, ΧΙ. 5, Ep. 1. x (fr. 33)

που, V. QI: ποῦ, 111. 38, 39

πούς: ποδῶν, VII. 6, IX. 20: -εσσι, VI. 2,
XII. 86: ποσσίᾳ(ν), 1. 35, V. 183: ποσίν,
XVI. 108, XVII. 17

πρᾶξις, V. 163

πράσσω: τοι, V. 190: -ovras, fr. 21, 2:
πράξαντι, 111. 04

πρέπω: -εἰ, XVIII, 12

πρεσβύτατος : -ov, VII. 8

Πρίαμος: -οιο, X. 120: -¢y, XIV. 38

πρίν, X. 72, XII. 114, XV. 13, XVII. 38,
fr. 21. 3

πρόγονος: -ol, X. 110

πρόδομος : -ots, VI. 14

προΐημι: -ler, V. 81

IIpotros: -ov, X. 45, 83: τῳ, 66

πρόκειμαι : -TaL, XIII. 9

ἹΠροκόπτας, XVII. 28

προλείπω: -ων, V. 154

πρόξενος : -ov, VIII. 20

προπάροιθε(ν), 111. 32, Ν. 148

προπέμπω: -ε (imperat.), XVI. 55: -πέμ-
πων, VIII. 34

πρόπολος, V. 192

πρός, with dat., X. 23: with acc., Vv. 45,
149, X. 100

προσεῖδον: προσιδεῖν, ν. 161

προσεῖπον: -ev, V. 78


127.


34


514


προσεννέπω: προσήνεπεν, XIV. 9

πρόσθε(ν), 111. 47, XVI. 45

πρόσπολος, XIV. 2

προστίθημι : προσθέντα, VIII. 72 (ἢ)

πρόσφαμι: προσέφα, V. 93, 11

προσφωνέω: -et (impf.), or -εἶ, p. 439
(1. 76 Blass)

πρότερος : -ov, XII. 164: -ρων, V. 43

προφαίνω : προφάνη, ν. 77

προφανής, 111. 51

προφάτας, VIII. 3: -Grat, IX. 28

προφέρω: -ειν, X. 51

πρόφρων, Ep. 1. 2 (fr. 33)

mpoxod: -ais, VI. 3

πρύμνα: -ᾳ, XII. τοῦ

πρύτανις: -ἰν, I. 18, XVIII. 43

*mrpwOnBos: -ov, XVII. 57

πρών: -Gvas, V. 67

πρώτιστος: -ον (adv.), VIII. IT

πρῶτος, XIV. 47% τον, VIII. 9: τοις, 1. 58

πτάσσω: τοντι, V. 22: πτᾶσσον, impf.,
ΧΙΙ. 117

πτέρυξ: -ὕγεσσι, V. 18

Πυθέας : -έα (gen.), XII. 191

Πυθιόνικος, IV. 5: -ον, X. 13

Πύθιος: -ε, XV. το: -ίου (neut.), Xv. 1 (?)

πυθμήν: -éves, V. 198

Πυθώ (acc.), 111. 62

Πυθών: -Gva, VII. 39: -ῶνι, V. 41

muxw6s: -ἄν, fr. 1.x

πύλα: -at, p. 437 (I. 14 Blass): -as (acc.),
fr. 4. 2


πύματος: -ον, V. 153
πυνθάνομαι: πύθετο, XV. 26
πύξ, νι. 7
πῦρ: -ὀς, 111. 53, XVI. 105: -l, XII. 107,
XV. 14
πυρά: πυράν, 111. 31
Ἐπυργοκέρας: -ara, fr. 81
πύργος: των, V. 148
πυργόω: -ωθέντα, 111. 13
Ἐπυριέθειρα: -αν, XVI. 56
πυροφόρος: -οι, fr. 16. 10
Πύρριχος: -ov, XIII. 22
πυρσός: -dv, XII. 82
*aupobxatros: -Tov, XVII. 51
TW, V. 1223 cp. οὔπω
πῶλος: -ov, V. 39
πῶμα, V. 76


P


ῥα, XVIII. 33 (ἤ pa)

ῥᾷδιος: -ov, XVII. 43: ῥᾷστον, fr. 4. 2
ῥέεθρον: -ots, 111. 20, V. 64

ῥέπω: -ει, XVI. 25

ῥιπά: -G, ν. 46

ῥίπτω: -ων, VIII. 32

pod: -αἷς, XII. 103

ῥοδοδάκτυλος, XVIII. 18

ῥοδόεις : -evTt, XV. 34


VOCABULARY.


ῥόδον: -o1s, XVI. 116
ῥοδόπαχυς: -vv, XII. 96


=


calvw: -εἰ, 1. 55: -vovoa, p. 439 (I. 77
Blass)

σακεσφόρος: -ov, XII. 104

σἀλπιγξ, XVII. 4: -ἴγγων, fr. 3. 9

σᾶμα, VIII. 14, XVI. 57

σαμαίνω: σάμαινεν, XIV. 38

σαόφρων, XII. 186


σἄπω: -erat, 111. 87

Σάρδιες, 111. 27

σαφής: -ἢ (acc. pl.), XVI. 75

σβέννυμι: σβένννεν, 111. 56

σεισίχθων : τονος, XVII. 22: -ovt, XVI. 58

σείω: -ων, XII. 120

σελάνα, VIII. 29

σέλας, XVI. 104

Σεμέλα: -av, XVII. 48

*cepvoddretpa, 11. 1

σεμνός: -ἅ, XII. 105: τάν, XVI. 110: τοῦ,

X. 52: -Gs, ν. 90

σεύω: σεύοντι Grd plur.), XVII. 10:
ἔσσενε, V. 104: σευομενᾶν, fr. 16. 3

σθένος, VII. 7, XVII. 40: -€t, V- 107, VIII. 37

σιδαρόδετος: -οις, fr. 3. 6

Σικελία: -as, III. 1

Σικνυών, IX. 32

Σίνις : -w, XVII. 20

σιωπά, III. 95

Σκάμανδρος: -ov, XII. 165

σκᾶπτρον, 111. 70

Σκίρων: -ωνα, XVII. 25

σκοπέω: -εἷς, III. 74

σκότος: -ᾧ, III. 14

σκύφος: -οισιν, fr. 17. 5

σμερδαλέος: -έαν, X. 56

coéw: abe (impf.), XVI. 90

σός: σόν, XII. 83, XV. 12: σᾶς, VIII. 49:
σῶν, 45: Cp. Teds

σοφία, XIV. 31, fr. 10. ἡ

σοφός, IX. 39, XI. 1, fr. 4.1: τόν, XII. 201

Σπάρτα: -ᾳ, XIX. 1

στάδιον, VI. 7, 15: τίου, IX. 21

στάσις, fr. 20. 2 :

στείχω: -εἰ, VIII. 47: τειν, 17, XVII. 36

στέρνον : -οισ(ι), X. 88, XVII. 53

στέφανος: -q, VIII. 23: -οἱ, X. 19: τους,
Ep. 1. q (fr. 33): -ων, 1. 48, 111. 8:
-o.o(iv), 11. 10, IV. 16, VI. 8, VII. 11,
XII. 55, 69

στεφανόω: ἐστεφάνωσεν, XII. 197: στεφα-
νωσάμενον, X. 20: -μεναι, XII. ΟἹ

στεφαναφόρος: -ων, XVIII. 51 (?)

στῆθος: -έων, Ν. 15: -εσσι, X. 54

στίλβω : -εἰιν, XVII. 55

στολά: -ἄν, XVII. 32

στορέννυμι: στόρεσεν, XII. 129

στραταγέτας, XVII. 7: -αν, XVI. 121


VOCABULARY.


otpararyés: -γέ, V. 2

στρατιά: -ἄν, XVII. 34

στρατός: -ᾧ, 111. 27

στρωφάω: -ἅται, XII. 180

στυγερός: -άν, ν. τττ -Ov, X. 76

σύ, III. 92, VII. 8, XII. 67, XVI. 28 (?), 44,
76, fr. 15. τ: σέο, 111. 65: σέθεν, X. ο:
σοί (orthot.), v. 168, X. 2, XVI. 54:
τίν (orthot.), XVII. 14: Tot (enclit.), x.
104, 118, XII. 79, XVI. 78, XVII. τα:
σέ (orthot.), VI. 10, VII. 2, XVI. 58:
δὲ (enclit.), XVI. 29, 39, XVIII. 12, fr.


συλάω: -@rat, fr. 3, 10

συμπόσιον: -ἰων, fr. 3. 12

συμφορά, XIII. 3

σύν, I. 5, 11. 10, 111. 5, 6, 33, 34, 60, 96,
Iv. 6, V. 9, 28, 52, 127, VII. 42, VIII.
51, 85, 103, X. 23, 63, (15, 125, XII.
66, 89, 128, 183, 202, XIV. 13, XVI.
125, XVII. 33, 35

συνετός: «ἅ, ur. 85

σύνευνος: -ων, p. 439 (I. 58 f. Blass)?

συνεχέως, V. 113

σύνοικος: -ον, XIV. 56

Συρακόσιος: -lav, IV. 1: -κοσίων, V. 1

Συράκοσσαι: -όσσας, V. 184

σῦς, V. 116: σῦν, XVII. 23

σφάζω: σφάζε (impf.), Vv. 10

σφέτερος: -ov, X. 50: -as (plur.), III. 36

σφῦρα: -av, XVII. 28

σχάζω: ἔσχασεν, XVI. 121

σχέτλιος : -ov, XVI. 19

σῶμα, XVI. 63: -τος, XII. 52: -Tt, III. QI:
-Ta, VIII. 38, fr. 17. x


T


ταινία : -ᾳ, XVI. 107

Ταλαϊονίδας : -αν, VIII. 19

τάλαντον, IV. 12 (0), XVI. 25

ταλαπενθής: -éa (sing.), XV. 26: -éos, ν.
157

τάλας: -awa, XV. 30

τάμνω: -νων, V. 17: τάμνε (impf.), XVI. 4

τανίσφυρος : -ov, V. 59: τοις, III. 60

τανίφυλλος : τον, X. 55

τανύθριξ: τανυτρίχων, fr. 8. 4

τάπης: -nres, fr. 17. 2

ταρφέως, XII. 86

ταῦρος: -ouvs, XV. 18

ταὔσιος : -ov, V. 81

rap-: τάφεν, XVI. 86: -ον, XVI. 48

τάχα, V. 89 ᾿ ,

ταχύς: -Wv, XII. 201: -elav, IX. 20: -εἰαις,
v. 18: τάχιστα, Epigr. 2. 3 (fr. 34)

ταχύτας: -aTa, VII. .

τε (θ᾽), passim (occurring about 157 times ;
cp. δέ and xal): fivefold, XVII. 19-27:
re... kal, 11. 79 ff., X. gof., fr. 22. x ἐν:
re..7e Kal, VII. 39 f.: δέ Te, XII. 129,


515


fr. 3, x: placed after art. and noun, τὸν
ὑπέρβιόν 7’, XVII. 19; or after prep.
and noun, Ul. 5, σὺν ὑπερόχῳ τε, cp.
26. 6, 34

τέγγω: τέγξαι, V. 157

τέθμιος : -ἴου, 111. 70 (Ὁ)

τεῖχος, Χ. 77: -εα, XII. 142

τέκνον : -α, X. 102

τέκος, VI. 13, XVIII. 22, fr. 2. x

Τελαμών : -μῶνα, XII. 98

τελειόω : τελειοῦσαι, III. 26 (?)

τέλεος : -ἔους, Χ. 92

τελευτά: -ds, IX. 46

τελευταῖος : -ας (gen.), VIII. 36

τελευτάω: τελευταθεῖσα, 1. 72

τελέω: -εῖς (fut.), 111. 82: -εἴ (fut.), XVI.
78: -εῦν (probably fut.), v. 164: τέλεσας,
VII. 49: τελεῖται, XVII. 30 (fut.), 45
(pres.)

τέλος, V. 45, X. 6

τέμενος, X. 48, 110, XIII. 21

Teds: τεάν, IX. 13: τεᾶν, XVI. 21: cp.
σός

τέρας, XV. 35, XVI. 72

τέρπω: -mov (3rd plur.), XVI. 107: -πό-
μενος, XV. 7

*repyremys: -els, XII. 230

TepyluBporos: -ων, XII. 72

τέρψις, I. 59

τετραέλικτος: -ov, IX. 25 (?)

τεῦχος: -εσι, V. 72

τεύχω: -εἰ, 111. 58: τεῦχον (3rd plur.),
X. 110

τέχνα: -ats, X. 33, XII. 49

τηλαυγής: -ét, XVI. 5

τίθημι: τίθησι, IX. 50: θῆκας, 18: θῆκεν,
1. 47: ἔθηκαν, Ill. 7: θέωσιν, XVI. 118:
θέμεν, XVI. 70: θείμαν, ν. 169

τίκτω: -εἰι, IX. 46, fr. 8. 1: ἔτικτε, ΧΙ.
97: τίκτε (impf.), XVIII. 50: τέκε(ν), I.
16, V. I1g, VIII. 56, XVI. 30, 35) 54

τιμά: -G, 1. 40: -dv, 1. 7of., IX. 39, XII.
80, XIII. 6, XVI. 69, XVIII. 7

τιμάω: -G, X11. 183: τῶν, X. 74: -ασεν,
XII. 194

πιμόξενος : -ov, VIII. 102

Τιρύνθιος : -ov, X. 57

Τίρυνς : -θα, X. 71

τίς (interrog.), ν. 86, 89, VIII. 53, XIV.
47: τίνα, XVII. 31, 32: τί, IV. 18, IX.
51, XVII. 3, 14, 15, fr. 8

τις (enclit.), 111. 21, 97, V- 5, 54, 162,
165, 190, X. 27, XII. 84, XVII. 5, fr. 7.
2: τινί, XVIL 2: τινά, IX. 41, 56, XII.
46, 199, 223, XVI. 43: τί, VIII. 101,
XVIII. 9, fr. 11. 4

τιταίνω: -εἰ, IX. 43

τιτύσκω: -ων, V. 49 Σ

τλάμων, V. 153: -ονες, XII. 157 (9)

τόθεν, V. 197

τόθι, III. 7 (?), 19, XVI. TOT


516


rot (particle), 1. 58, VIII. 3 (?), 22: ἢ τοι,
ΧΙ. 79. Cp. ofrot.—For τοι δέ, see
under σύ

τοῖος, VIII. 30: τον, p. 439 (I. 35 Blass)?

τοιόσδε: -dvde, XIX. 3: τοιῷδε, VIII. 37

τοιοῦτος : -ov, V. 87

τοξόκλυτος, Χ. 39

τόξον, IX. 43

τόσος: -d, 111. 48: as relative, 1. 37, XV.
11

τότε, III. 58, V. 143, 156, VIII. 19, XV.
23, XVIII. 31

τραχύς: -Uy, V. 82: -elay, XII. TIT

τρέφω: -ει, 111. 92, XII. 62: θρέψεν, V.
88, VIII. 7

τρέω: τρέσσαν, XVI. 92

τριέτης : -εἰ, VIII. 23

τριόδους : -δοντα, fr. 6 2

τρίπους : -όδων, III. 18

τρισευδαίμων, III. 10

τρισκαίδεκα (acc.), X. 92

tplraros: -q, 1. 2

τρίτος : -ov, IV. 4

Tporgyvios: -la, XVI. 58

Tpola: -as, VIII. 46

τροχοειδής : -€a (sing.), VIII. 32

Tpws: -Ges, XII. 133, XIV. 50: -wy, XIV.
42

τυγχάνω: τεύξεται, IX. 38: τύχόν (Ist
pers.), V. 144: τυχών, XII. 67, XVII.
29: τυχόν, VIII. 83: τ-όντες, XIV. 12

τυφλός: -ἅ, ν. 132

τύχα, IX. 47: -av, XVI, 132: -@,V. 52, X.
115: -ats, VIII. 51

τῷ (‘therefore’), XVI. 39

τώς, ν. 31


Y


UBpis: τιος, XII. 44: τιν, XVI. 41

ὝΡβρις, XIV. 59

ὑγίεια: -elas, 1. 55

ὑγρός: -οἷσιν, XVI. 108

ὕδωρ, 111. 36

vids, X. 15, XII. 123, XV. 28, XVI. 86,
XVIII. 26: -é, ν. 79, XII. 68, XVI. 20,
XVII. 15: τόν, 11. 14, IV. 13, V. 62,
XIX. rr (0): υἷι, I. 77 (Ὁ): vias, XII.
100

tha: -αν, X. 93

ὑμέτερος: -av, V. 11, 32

ὑμνέω: -εῦσι, X. 13: -εῖν, V. 33: τέων,
VII. 40: ὕμνει (imper.), 111. 3: ὑμνή-
oe, 111. 97: ὕμνησον, V. τ70

Ἀὐὑμνοάνασσα, XI. 1

ὕμνος, V1. 11: -ov, V. 10, VIII. 78, p. 475
(fr. of viI)?: -o1, fr. 8. 12: τοὺς, IV. 10:
των, VII]. 83, XII. 223, XV. 4: -olow,
XVIII. 8 ᾿

ὑπαί, with gen., XII. 139

ὑπέρ: see n. on XVII. 51


VOCABULARY.


ὑπεράφανος: -ov, XVI. 49
ὑπέρβιος: -ov, XII. 75, XVII. 10: -€, ITI.


37

'Ὑπερβόρεοι: -ἔους, 111. 59

ὑπέρθυμος : -ον, XII. 103: τῷ, VIII. 37

ὑπέροπλος, VIII. 13

ὑπέροχος : -ον, XVI. 68: -ῷ, III. 5, XVIII.
44

ὑπέρτατος: -ov, 111. 84, Χ. 36, XVI. 79

ὑπερφίαλος: -ον, XII. 158: τοι, X. 78:
τους, XIV. 62

ὕπνος, fr. 3. το, p. 439 (1. 50 Blass)

ὑπό, with gen., V. 43, IX. 48, XII. 154,
XVI. 17: with dat., 111. 17, XII. 125,
166: with acc., XVI. 30. Cp. bat

ὑπόκλοπος: -ov, XIV. 30

toplva: -av, XII. 144

ὕστερον (adv.), IX. 53, ΧΡ. 33

ὑφαίνω: ὕφαινε (impf.), XVI. 51: ὕφαινε
(imper.), XVIII. 8: ὕφανε, XV. 24:
ὑφάνας, V. 9

bpatpéw: -εῖται (midd.), VIII. 18

Ἐὐψαυχής, XII. 85

Ἀὐψιάγνυια: -av, XII. 71

δυψιδαίδαλτος: -wy, 111. 18

Ἐὐψίδειρος: -ου, IV. 4

ὑψίζυγος, 1. 46, Χ. 3

ὑψικέρα (fem.), -αν, XV. 22.
λικέρα

ὑψιμέδων, XIV. 51

ὑψίνοος : -bov, XII. 44

ὑψίπυλος: -ov, VIII. 46

ὑψιφανής : -ἢ, XIII. 5

ὑψοῦ, v. 18, VIII. 84: ὑψοτάτω, fr. 16. 6


Cp. καλ-


Φ


φαεσίμβροτος : -w, XII. 128

φαίδιμος: -ίμοισι, XVII. 47

φαίνω, X11. 224: φαῖνε (impf.), VIII. 31:
φάνη, XVI. 119: ἐφάνη, fr. 2. 2

Paioxos: -ov, X. 14

φάλαγξ: -yyas, XIV. 42

φαμί, I. 49, XII. 54: φασίν, V. 155:
φάμεν (inf.), 111. 65: φάσω, 1. 49, X.
24: ἔφα, fr. 18. 2: φάτο, ν. 84: πέ-
para, IX. 52

φάος, 111. 80, V. 67, XVI. 43: φάη, VIII.
28

φαρέτρα: -as, V. 76

φᾶρος: -εἴ, XVI. 5: -ea, IX. 24

φάσγανον, X. 87, XII. 54

φάσκειν: φάσκον (3rd plur.), Χ. 50

φάτις, VIIT. 48

φέγγος, III. 91, V. 162

gev-: πέφνεν, VIII. 13: ἔπεφνεν, XVII. 17

*pepexvdns: -éa (sing.), XII. 182: -ἐΐ,
I. 17

Φερένικος, V. 184: τον, 37

φερεστέφανος : -οἱ, XVIII. 6

Φέρης : τητος, Ill. 77


ε


VOCABULARY.


φέριστος : -ον (neut.), V. 160

Φερσεφόνα: -as, V. 59

φέρτατος, XVII. 20: -ov (masc.), Vv. 118,
XVI. 33: (neut.), VI. 2: τοῦ, XVI. 20,
XVII. 17

φέρτερος : -ov (neut.), Iv. 18

φέρω : -εἰ, 111. 95, V. 134: -ew, fr. 82, 3:
τῶν, III, 59, V. 185: τουσα, II. 3, XVIII.
41: -ovres, XII. 144: φέρον (impf.),
XVI. 97: ἔνεγκε (imper.), XVI. 62

φεῦ, XVI. 119

φεύγω: -es, fr. 15, 2: φεύγετε, p. 439
(I. 81 Blass): φεύγοντα (neut.), 1. 66:
φεῦγε (impf.), XVIII. 16: φεῦγον (3rd
plur.), Vv. 150, X. 55, 84, 94: φυγών,
XIX. 7, fr. 30

Pha: -av, Vv. 194

Pyua, 11. 1, 1X. 1

φθέγγομαι: -ev, XVII. 12: φθέγξατο, XIV.


49

φθίνω: φθιμένων, V. 83

φθόνος, XII. 200, XV. 31: -ov, V. 188:
τῷ, III. 68

φθόρος: -ov, XIV. 61

φιλάγλαος: -ov, XII. 224: τους, XVII. 60

φιλαλάκατος ὃ p. 439 (I. 74 Blass)

φιλάνωρ: -opt, 1. 40

φιλέω: -εἶ, IV. 1, XII. 204

Φίλιππος: -ov, III. 69

φιλόξεινος: -elvov, XIII. 23: τῷ, Ν. 49

φιλοξενία : -as, III. τό -

φίλος : τον (masc.), 11. 14, IV. 19, V. 131:
ταν, XVI. 10g: -ν, fr. 15. 2: -ῳ, XVI.
6g: -d, II]. 47: -as (acc.), 111. 50

φιλοστέφανος : -ῳ, XII. 184

φιτρός: -dv, V. 142

φλέγω : -ovrat, fr. 3. 12

Φλειοῦς : -vra, VII. 4

φλόξ: -γί, fr. 3. 4: φλόγα, III. 56, XVII.
6


5
φοβέω: ἐφόβησε, Χ. 43
φόβος: -ον, XII. 145: τῷ, V. 23
φοιβός: -άν, XII. 139
Φοῖβος : -ov, 111. 20
Ἐφοινίκασπις: -tes, VIII. τὸ
Ἐφοινικόθριξ : -ότριχας, X. 105
Ἀφοινικοκράδεμνος : -οιο, X. 07 : -οἰσι, XII.
222
“φοινικόνωτος : -ων, V. 102
φοῖνιξ : φοίνισσαν, XVII. 56
Φοῖνιξ : -ἰκος, XVI. 31
Φοίνισσα, XVI. 54
powlcow: φοινίξειν, XII. 165
φοιτάω: -ᾧ, V. 133
φόνος: -ov, VIII. 14: τῶν, III. 52


popéw: -el, XIV. 30: -εῦντες, fr. 6. 3


φόρμιγξ: -vyyos, XIII. 13

φραδά: -aiot, XVIII. 17

* ppevodpas: -ais, XVI. 118

φρήν: φρενί, fr. 7. 3: φρένα, V. 6, XV. 7,
XVI. 131, fr. 1. 1: φρενῶν, XVI. 22:


517


φρένεσσιν, XIII. 11: φρασίν, XII. 229(?):
φρένας, I. 52, X. 45, XI. 3, fr. 16. 4

φρονέω : -ovrt, 111. 85

φροντίς: -ἰσι, XVI. 120

Φρύγιος: -lov, VII. 43

φνά: -άν, ν. 168

φυλάσσω: -ει, XII, 180: -εν (inf.), XVIII.
25: των, V. 47: τ-ξε, III. 29

φύλλον: -a, V. 65

φυτεύω: -ευσε(ν), XVI. 59, 68: -σαν,
XVIII. 38

pow: ἔφυ, V. 55: φῦναι, ν. 160

φωνά: -άν, Χ. 56

φωνάεις: -άεντα, XIV. 31

φωνέω: φώνησεν, V. 101

φώς: φωτός, V. 158, XVII. 19, 30: φῶτα,
XV. 15: φῶτε, XVII. 46: φῶτες, fr. 18.
5: φώτων, XII. 152


Χ


Χαιρόλας: -αν, p. 475 (fr. of ν 1

xalra: -αν, X. 28, XII. 70: -aus, XVI. 105

χαλεπός : -dy (neut.), ν. 95

χάλκασπις : -ἰδες, X. 62

Ἀχαλκεόκρανος : -ov, V. 74

*yadxedxruros: -ον, XVII. 59

χαλκεομίτραν, XII. 109 (?)

χάλκεος : -εᾶν, fr. 8, 9

χαλκεόστερνος: -ov, V. 34

χαλκοδαίδαλος : -οισιν, fr. 6. 2

χαλκοθώραξ: -aka, XVI. 14: -άκων, X.
123

χαλκόκτυπος, XIII. 16 (?)

Ἐχαλκοκώδων, XVII. 3

χαλκός, XII. 51

*yadkorexys: -ἔος, III. 32

χάος: -εἰ, V. 27 :

χάρις, III. 38: χάριν, III. 97, V. 187, VIII.
97, XIII. 19, fr. 7. 4

Χάριτες, VIII. 1, XVI. 6: -ίτων, 1. 41,
IX, 39: -ίτεσσι, V. 9: Χάρισσιν, XIV.
4

She Seren -ov, II. 2

χάρμα, IX. 13

χειμών : -ὥνος, XII. 140

χείρ: χειρός, VIII. 35, XII. 154, XIII. 10,
XVI. 61: χέρα, VII. 41: χεῖρα, XII. 49,
XVI. 11: χειρῶν, V. 82, 132, X. 36, OI,
XVI. 45: χέρεσσι, XVII. 49: χερσίν, V.
189: χέρας, III. 35, XII. 138, XIV. 45:
χεῖρας, III. 50, X. 100, XVI. 72

χέρσος: -ov, XII. 132

χέω: χέων, V. 15: χέον {impf.), XVI. 96

χθών: χθονός, IV. 4, XVII. 5: χθονί, ν,
88, Χ. 32: χθόνα, I. 11, VIII. 40, XVI.
80

χιτών: -Gva, XVII. 52: -ῶνι, fr. 15. x

χλαμύς: -Uda, XVII. 54

χλωραύχην: -eva, V. 172

χόλος: -ον, V. 09, 104, 123


34—3


518


χολόω: χολώσατο, XVI. 50(?):
X. 53

χορός: -ᾧ, XVI. 107: -6v, Epigr. 1. 2 (fr. 33):
τοί, XIII, I4, XV. 11: τῶν, XVIII. 51:
τοῖσι, XVI. 130: -ovs, X. 112

χραίνω: χραῖνον (3rd plur.), X. 111

χρεῖος (‘need’), 1. 34 (?)

χρέος, VII. 43

χρή, 111. 78, V. 164, 187, 1X. 56, XIII. 20,
fr. 11. 3

χρηστός: -dy (masc.), IX. 51

χρόνος, XII. 206: -w, VII. 45, Χ. 120, 125,
XVII. 45: -ov, I. 70, VIII. 80, fr. 21. 1,
28


-woapeva,


Χρόνος: -ov, VII. I

χρύσαιγις: -cdos, fr. 11. 2

χρυσαλάκατος, X. 38: -ot, VIII. I

χρυσάμπυξ: -vKos, V. 13

χρυσάορος, 111. 28 (?)

χρυσάρματος, XII. 194

χρύσασπις: -ἰδος, XIX. II

Ἐχρυσεόπλοκος, XVI. 106

χρύσεος: -éa (nom.), XVIII. 16; (voc.),
X. 117; -éas (gen.), V. 1743 (acc.), XIV.
4: -ἔᾳ, IX. 40: -eov (masc.), XVI. 60;
(neut.), 36: -ἐαν, VIII. 72, XII. 61 (ἢ),
XV. 2 (with v): -έοις, 1X. 6 (with v)

Ἐχρυσεόσκαπτρος: -ov, VIII. 100

χρυσοδίνας, 111. 44

χρυσόθρονος" v. 1 of a small fr. numbered
by Kenyon (p. 206) as 22, and referred
by Blass (p. 126) to XIv.

χρυσοκόμας, 1V. 2


VOCABULARY.


πχρυσόπαχυς, V. 40

χρυσόπεπλος, XVIII. 22 .

χρυσός, 111. 17, 87, fr. 17. 1: τῷ, fr. 16.9
τόν, 111. 65, fr. 10. 2, 27

χρώς: χρόα, X. 97

χώρα: -g, V. 80


Ψ


ψυχά, ν. 77, 151, 171: -G, X. 48: -αἴσ(ιν),
V. 83, 133: -άς, V. 64


0


ὦ, 111. 64, VI. 13, VII. 1, 48, VIII. 1, 15,
45, 102, X. 116, XII. 77, 94, 190, XIV.
50, XVI. 15, p- 437 (1. 13 Blass)

ὧδε, XVII. 39, fr. 18. 2

ὠκύμορος : -ov, V. 141

ὠκύπομπος: -ον, XVI. 900

ὠκύπους: ὠκυπόδων, IV. 6

ὠμηστάς: -ᾧ, XII. 40

ὦμος: ὦμοις, XVII. 47

ὡς, (1) ‘as,’ VIII. 27, XII. 82 (πυρσὸν ws):
(2) ‘when,’ v. 71; (3) ‘how,’ fr. 6. x
(unless there the sense was ‘when’):
(4) with inf., fr. 1. 1 (ὡς... εἰπεῖν)

ws, ‘thus,’ v. 84, XII. 133, XVI. 81, fr. .
16. 12

ὡσεί, XI. 1 .

ὥστε, ‘as’ (ΞΞ ὧδ), XII. 124

Gre, ‘as,’ XVI. 105


519


INDEX.


A


Abas, king of Argos, X. 40

accents, use of, in the Bacchylides papy-
rus, p. 135: noteworthy, in particular
instances, p. 137

accusative, cognate (ἀναδεθεῖσιν ἄνθεα),
XII. 501. : in apposition with sentence,
XI. 93, XIII. 19: double (τὸν δ᾽ εἷλεν
ἄχος κραδίαν), X. 85

Achaean settlements in Italy, p. 209,
X. 113: ancestry claimed by Ionians,
p- 483

Acusilaus, the logographer, x. 50 ff.

adjectives, compound, peculiar to B.,
pp. 68 ff.: verbal in -ros, of 3 termina-
tions, XII. 181: denoting the parent
(ΑλκμήνιοΞ), V. 71: compounded with
a noun akin in sense to the subst.
(ἀρισταλκὲς σθένος), VII. 7

Adrastus, VIII. 19 Ἶ

Aeacidae, Pindar’s tributes to, p. 217

Aegeus and Aethra, legend of, p. 230

Aegina, boxers and wrestlers of, p. 212:
festivals at, Ix. 3: the nymph, daughter
of Asopus, VIII. 55, XII. 77: repute of
the island for just dealing, z+., and
182 ff.

aegis of Athena, XVI. 7

Aeolian lyric poetry, p. 29

Aeolic forms, p. 81

Aeschylus, in Sicily, p. 9; his Actzaeae,
ib.: lyrics of, p. 45: traces of, in the
work of B., p. 67: treatment of Io’s
story, P- 235

© Aetolian’ as=‘Elean,’ VII. 51

Agelaus, brother of Meleager, V. 117 |

Agenor, father of Cadmus, p. 235, XVIII.


4 :
Aglaia, personified, 111. 6
Ajax, p. 206, n. 2: and Hector, X11. 105 ff.
Alcaeus, p. 29: on Apollo’s visit to the
Hyperboreans, p. 222, XV. 5
Alcman, his partheneia, p. 31


Alexandrian scholia, citations of Bacchy-
lides in, pp. 74f.: sense of ‘dithyramb’
in Alexandrian age, p. 39

Althaea’s brand, v. 142 ff., pp. 470f.

Alyattes, father of Croesus, 111. 40

Amazons, the, VIII. 43

Amphiaraus, VIII. 16

Amphitrite, her place in the Theseus-
myth, p. 222: XVI. 111

Amphitryon, ¢ or Vin, v. 156

Anacreon, p. 29

Ancaeus, of Tegea, ν. 117

antecedent, to be supplied in dat. (πάρεστι
[τούτῳ], ὃς κ.τ.λ.), XVIII. 1 ff.

Antenor, the Trojan, and his sons,
pp- 219f.

aorist partic. after εἶδε, X. 23: infin., as
dist. from pres. infin., v. 30, 161, XVI.


43

Aphares, a son of Thestius, v. 129

Apharetidae, the (Idas and Lynceus),
Messenian heroes, p. 239

apocope of prep., p. 84

Apollo, bestows the gift of φιλοξενία, 1.
40: shepherd to Admetus, III. 77:
‘king of the Lycians,’ ΧΙ]. 147f.:
styled Loxias, though he is acting as
a war-god, ἐ6.: the hunter, xv. 6

apposition, partitive, x. 70 ff.

Archemorus, VIII. 12

Archilochus, his καλλίνικος, p. 36

Arete, personified, x1]. 176

Argos, imméBorov, XVIII. 15

Argus, son of Earth, XVIII. 19, 31

Aristaeus, cult of, p. 428

Aroanian hills in Arcadia, Xx. 94

Artemis, as a goddess of vegetation, v.
98f.; of agriculture and cattle-breeding,
X. 115 f.: dyporépa, V. 123, p. 211
μα. I: ἡμέρα (‘the soothing’), x. 39,
p. 210

Asopus, the Phliasian river, p. 205: his
daughters and descendants, p. 206,
VIII. 45 ff.


520


Atalanta, not mentioned in v. 56-175,
P- 472

Athena, protects Heracles, v.92; watches
his struggle with the Nemean lion, x11.
44: present when Amphitrite receives
Theseus, p. 225: meaning of her epithet
ὀβριμοδερκής, XV. 20: Athena Itonia,
fr. II, p. 415

Athenaeus, familiar with the poems of
Bacchylides, p. 75

Athenians, ἁβρόβιοι, XVII. 2:
‘Ionians,’ 16. XVI. 3

augment, temporal, the Doric (a), xiv.
37, XIX. 4: the Ionic (y) probably to
be retained in x. 93, p. 80

Azenia, a district of Arcadia, x. 55


called


Boeotian cups, fr. 17, p- 419

Bologna, vase at, showing Theseus, Am-
phitrite, and Poseidon, p. 226

breathings, signs for in the papyrus,
Pp. 137

bronze, used to adorn the walls of rooms,
111. 32

c


Cadmus, XVIII. 48

Caicus, river, fr. 57, p. 433

Calliope, v. 176

Calydon, v. τού f.

Carthaea, a town in Ceos, p. 5, 424

Casas, river, X. 119

Castalia, stream of, III. 20

Cenaeum, prom. in Euboea, Xv. 14

Ceos, position and associations of the
island, pp. 4ff.: hills of, 1. 11: agonistic
inscription of, p. 186: athletic victories
won by natives of, p. 451

Cerberus, v. 60 ff.

Cercyon, the wrestler slain by Theseus,
XVII. 26

Ceyx and Heracles, fr. 18, p. 419

Charites, the, I. 41: 1V. 91: IX. 39: XVIII.


Cirrha, harbour-town of Crisa, x. 20

Clement of Alexandria, quotes Bacchy-
lides, p. 73

Clitias and Ergotimus, the vase-painters,
Pp» 224

Clymenus, one of the Curetes, v. 145

Cnossus, more correctly spelt Cnosus, I.
13

comus, members of, addressed by the
poet, XII. 100

contraction in verbal forms, practice of
the MS. as to, p. 84

Coressus or Coresia, a town of Ceos, I.
28, p. 446

coronis, use of in the MS., p. 140


INDEX.


cottabos, game of, fr. 13, Ρ. 417

crasis of καί with e, XVI. 33 (κἀμέ), XVII.
50 (κηὔτυκτον); with o, 111. 81 (χώτῃ :
not marked by an apostrophe in the
MS., p. 138

Cretan sea, the, XVI. 4

Creusa, mother of Aegeus, XVII. 15,
Ῥ- 232

Crisa, Iv. 14

Croesus, the story of, as told by Bacchy-
lides, p. 195

Crommyon, XVII. 24

Curetes, the, v. 126

cycle of the four ἱεροὶ ἀγῶνες, p. 184

Cyclopes, the, Χ. 77

Cypria, the epic, used by Bacchylides,
p- 219, XIV. 46


D


dactylo-epitritic metre, p. 92

Damon, chief of the Telchines, p. 443,
446

Danaus, xX. 74: a descendant of Io, p. 235

dative, epic -ῃσιν in plur., XII. 135: of
interest, a peculiar use of the, 111. 94

Day, personified as daughter of Time and
Night, vii. 1

Deinomenes and his family, p. 189

Delos, and the Hyperborean legend,
p. 196: poems of Pindar and Bacchy-
lides for, p. 223

Delphi, omphalos at, Iv. 4: Gelon’s and
Hieron’s tripods at, 111. 18f., pp. 452-
457: winter cult of Dionysus at, p. 221,
xv. iff.: the epithet μηλοθύτας with
reference to, VII. 39

Demeter and Persephone, cult of in
Sicily, 11. 1 ff.: Demeter’and Diony-
sus, cult of at Phlius, vii1. 97 ff.

Dexithea and Minos, legend of, pp. 443 ff.

dialect of Bacchylides, p. 79

digamma, p. 82

Dike and Themis, xiv. 54 f.

Dionysus, cult of at Phlius, viii. 98: at
Delphi, p. 221, Xv. 1 ff.

Dioscuri, the, fr. 17, p. 419

dirge (θρῆνος), as treated by Simonides,


p. 40

dithyramb, of Lasus, p. 46: of Simonides,
pp- 39, 46: ode xvii of Bacchylides, a
dithyramb in the form of a dialogue,
p- 233: dithyrambs at Delphi, p. 221,
n. 2: the new school of dithyramb,
beginning with Melanippides, pp. 46ff.:
a dithyramb of Philoxenus parodied by
Aristophanes, p. 234: sense given to
the term ‘dithyramb’ in the Alexan-
drian age, p. 39: reference of Servius
to the ‘dithyrambs’ of Bacchylides,
p- 223


INDEX.


dithyrambic choruses at Athens, p. 234

division of verses in the MS., p. 95

dolphins carry Theseus to Poseidon’s
peas XVI. 97ff.; cp. pp. 225 and
22

doors of the victor’s house, songs sung at
the, VI. 14

Dorian choral poetry, pp. 30ff.

Doricisms of Bacchylides, pp. 79 ff.

drama, rise of Attic, p. 43

dual subst. with plural adj., xv11. 46


eagle, as an image for the poet, v. 16ff.

Earth, called to witness, v. 40

Echidna, mother of Cerberus, v. 62

Eirene, gifts of the goddess, fr. 3, p. 411

elder-tree, the (ἀκτέα), VIII. 34

Eleans, as judges in the Olympian games,
X. 31ff.

elision of « in the dative, and in the 3rd
plur. ending -ov7:, p. 83

Endeis, wife of Aeacus, XII. 96

enkomion, the, created by Simonides,
P- 33

Eos, χρυσόπαχυς, V. 40

Epaphus, XVIII. 42

epic manner of Bacchylides in narrative,
p- 58; in speeches, p. 61; in apostro-
phizing the Muse, xIv. 47: epic and
-Ionic forms used by him, p. 81

Epicharmus and Hieron, p. 11

epinikion, the, developed by Simonides,


Ρ. 34

epithets, use of by Bacchylides, p. 62;
compared with Pindar’s, pp. 70 ff.

Eriboea, one of the Athenian maidens
with Theseus, XVI. 14, p. 224: wife of
Telamon, XII. 102

Eros, how conceived in the older Greek
poetry, VIII. 73

Erotes, the, offspring of Aphrodite, 7d.

erotica as a lyric class, p. 42

Euboea, festivals at, IX. 34

Eucleia, the goddess, associated with
Arete and Eunomia, x11. 183f. ᾿

Eunomia, σαόφρων, XII. 186; as one οὗ
the three Horae, n. on 182 ff.; asso-
ciated with Dike and Themis, xIv.
54.

Euphronius, the vase-painter; his cup
showing Theseus welcomed by Am-
phitrite, p. 225

Europa, XVI. 3¢f.

Eurytion, the centaur, pp. 48, 430

Eusebius, on the date of Bacchylides, p. 2

Evxantius, son of Minos and Dexithea,
I. 15, Ρ. 448

Evenus, king of Pleuron, p. 237, XIX.


7, Il


521


F


festivals, cycle of the four great, p. 184:
local, 1X. 30 ff.

foot-race, the, called ἵππιος δρόμος, IX.
25.

Frangois amphora, the, p. 224

future tense, as used in κομπάσομαι, φάσω,
etc., VII. 42: after ὄφρα, XVII. 42


G


Gelon, tyrant of Syracuse, pp. 8, 190; his
tripod at Delphi, p. 452

genitive and dative, both used with βρύειν,
I. 15 f.: gen. plur. corrupted into
nomin. plur., VIII. 46, X. 120

Georgius Syncellus, on the date of Bac-
chylides, p. 4

Giants, the, XIV. 63

gnomic style of Bacchylides, p. 59

gods, the, declared blameless for human
woes, XIV. 52


hands, the several in the papyrus, pp.
127 ff.

Hebe, cult of at Phlius, vil. 7rf.

Hebrus, river, Xv. 5

Hecate δᾳδοφόρος, fr. 23, p. 421

Hemera (‘day’), personified, vit. 1

Hemera (‘soothing’), title of Artemis,
p- 210, X. 39

Hera, the Argive, cult of, x. 47 ff.

Heracles, ἐρειψιπύλας, V. 56: twelve
labours of, vill. 8: his career pro-
phesied, during his struggle with the
Nemean lion, ΧΙ]. 44ff.: at the mar-
riage-feast given by Cejyx, fr. 18, p.
41

eed various legends as to the manner
in which he slew Argus, XVIII. 29-36

heroes, festivals of the, in Magna Graecia,
Pp. 32, 210

Hesiod, v. 191

hiatus, p. 83

Hieron, tyrant of Syracuse, his family,
p. 189; annals of his reign, pp. rgo ff. ;
his priesthood, 111. 1-4; styled στρατα-
6s, V. 2, p. 405; as a patron of letters,
pp. 8ff.; his taste in poetry, v. 3-6,
cp. p. 21; his illness, v. 53-55, III. 72-
74; attitude of Pindar and of Bacchy-
lides towards him, pp. 200 ff.

Himera, battle of, p. 10; allusion to,


V. 34
Horace and Bacchylides, pp. 77f.
Horae, the, XII. 182 ff.
Hyginus, C. Julius, reputed author of
the Poetzca Astronomica; the story of


522


Theseus and Minos as told by him,
p- 228

hymeneal song in Ar. Aves, 731ff., p.
238

hymns, ἀποπεμπτικοί and κλητικοί, XV.
1-4

Hyperboreans, the, III. 59, p. 460

hyphen, use of in the papyrus, p. 139

hyporchemes, p. 28: of Simonides, p. 40:
of Bacchylides, 2d., pp. 4151.


Ibycus, p. 29: XIV. 58

Ida, Mount, v. 66, p. 433

Idas and Marpessa, the legend of, pp.
237 ff, XIX. 1 ff.

Jliad, the, points in which Bacchylides
varies from, V. 75f.3 XII. 146: story
of Meleager in, p. 468

imagery of Bacchylides, p. 62

Inachus, XVII. 18, p. 235

infinitive, for imperative, in prayer, X.
103: of purpose, XV. 9: after the im-
personal éyévero, XVIII. 29: Doric form
of, p. 81

inscription, an agonistic, of Ceos, p. 186

interrogative, double (τίς... ἐν ποίᾳ χθονί;),
ν. 866.

Io, the story of, as told by Aeschylus,
p- 235: modes of conceiving the form
into which she was changed, p. 493:
associated with Isis, XVIII. 40, p. 494

Tos, island of, fr. 58, p- 433

Iphiclus, a son of Thestius, v. 127

Isthmian festival, the, pp. 35, 184

Isthmus of Corinth, 11. 7

Italy, Greek settlements in, p. 209: deri-
vation of from fradés may have sug-
gested the epithet πορτιτρόφον in X. 30

Itonia, a cult-name of Athena, p. 416

1.115, the chief town of Ceos, fr. 59,


Ρ: 433
a


Julian, a reader of Bacchylides, p. 73


1,


Laocoon, fr. §1, p. 431

Laomedon, king of ‘Troy, XII. 142

Lemnian fire, XVII. 55

lightning from a clear sky, as a sign,
XVI. 721.

lion, the Nemean, 111. 6 ff.

logaoedic metre, p. 97

Longinus, the pseudo-, on Bacchylides,

. 76

oe town in Arcadia, and the spring
(Λοῦσος) near it, xX. 96

Lycormas, river, XV. 34


INDEX.


Lycurgus, king of Nemea, VIII. 12
Lydian cavalry, 111. 23 f.

‘Lydian stone,’ the, fr. 10, p. 415
Lynceus, king of Argos, X. 75


Macelo, sister of Dexithea, p. 443

Maia, mother of Hermes, XVIII. 25

Malea, Cape, 111. 72, p. 463

mares as racers, III. 3

Marpessa, p. 237, XIX. 6

masculine adj. in a general statement,
though referring to a woman, XVI. 44 f.
(ἀέκοντα): masc. partic. construed κατὰ
σύνεσιν with a fem. subst., v. 77f.
(ψυχὰ. εἰδώς)

Medea, Xvi1. 48.

Melampus, not mentioned by Bacchylides
in the story of the Proetides, p. 211

Melanippides, dithyrambic poet, p. 46

Meleager, legend of, pp. 468ff.: his
brothers, v. 118

Memphis, fr. 22, p. 421: said to have
been founded by Epaphus, XVIII. 43 n.

Menander, trainer of athletes, p. 215,
XII. 192

Messenian legend of Idas, appropriated
by Sparta, p. 240

Metapontion, p. 209, X. 10, 116

Micon, painting by, on a wall of the
Theseion, p. 226

middle forms of verbs, rare examples of,
p- 87

Minos and the Athenian ἠΐθεοι, p. 223


name, omen conveyed by, VI. τ (λάχων)

Nemea, value of, vil. 4f.: lion of, 6ff.,
Xu. 46 ff.

Nemean festival, the, pp. 35, 184

Nike, her parentage and office, x. 1 ff;
cp. Epigr. 1 (fr. 33), Ρ. 424

Niobe, the children of, fr. 52, p. 431


¥ ο


Oechalia in Euboea, xv. 14: the epic
Οἰχαλίας ἅλωσις, 26. 15 f., Ρ. 223

Oeneidae, members of the Athenian tribe
Οἰνηΐς, ΙΧ. 18

Oeneus, king of Calydon, v. 97

Olympia, VI. 3

Olympian festival, the, pp. 36, 184, cp.
vil. 1 ff.; instances of exception being
taken to awards by the judges, x.
31-36

Olympus, the epithet πολύχρυσος as ap-
plied to, X. 4

Olympus the flute-player, p. 27


INDEX.


optative with εἰ, after a present indicative,
V. 190; in a relative clause, after optat.
with ἄν, XVI. 44

orichale, fr. 43, p. 427


P


Pactolus, river, III. 45

paean, p. 28: the paean of Bacchylides
(xv1) for Delos, p. 223

Pallas, the father of Νίκη, Epigr. 1. 1
(fr. 33), Ρ- 424

Pandion, son of Cecrops, XVI. 15

papyrus of Bacchylides, the, pp. 121 ff. :
Ptolemaic traits of, p. 125: approximate
date of, p. 126: the scribe and the
correctors of, pp. 127-135; the signs
used in, pp. 135-141

paragraphus, use of in the MS., p. 140

Pasiphae, wife of Minos, Xv1. 50

patronymic, forms of, in -ίδης and -ιάδης,
I. 14

Pausanias, on the story of Theseus and
Minos as painted by Micon, p. 227:
on the legend of the Apharetidae,


p- 240

Peace, the gifts of, fr. 3, p. 411

Peirithous, associated with Theseus, XVII.
46, Ρ. 232

Pellene in Achaia, festival at, 1X. 33

Peloponnesus, traces of, in the poems of
Bacchylides, p. 25

Pelops, cult of at Olympia, v.
vil. 4f.

pentathlon, order of contests in the,
VIII. 32

Periphetes, not mentioned by Bacchylides
among the victims of Theseus, p. 232

Persae, of Aeschylus, performed in Sicily,
p. 10: of Timotheus, p. 48

Persephone, the rape of, placed by
Bacchylides in Crete, fr. 53, Ρ. 431

Perseus, ancestor of Heracles, XII. 48

person, transition of second to third, Ix.
13, 19-26; XV. 6-10

Pheme, the goddess of rumour, Il. 1,
Ix. 1 ff.

Pherecrates, comic poet,


181,


his Χείρων,


p. 50
Pherecydes, the mythographer, X. 50
Pherenicus, Hieron’s race-horse, p. 198
Philoxenus, dithyrambic poet, pp- 47,


2

Phiius, p- 205: deities worshipped at,
vill. 69 ff., 97 ff.

Phoenice as=Caria, fr. 60, p. 434

Phoenix, father of Europa, XVI. 31

Phorbas, associated with Theseus, XVII.
46, Pp. 232 .

Phrynichus, the lyrics of, p. 443- his
Πλευρώνιαι, p. 470


523


Pieria, Xv. 3

Pindar, his supposed allusions to Bac-
chylides, pp. 13 ff.; his temperament,
p- 15; stamp of his genius, p. 41;
traces of in the work of Bacchylides,
pp. 65 ff.: his attitude towards Hieron,
compared with that of Bacchylides,
p- 200: his verses on the power of
wine (fr. 218), compared with the
similar verses of Bacchylides (fr. 16),
p- 418

Pisa, quantity of the z in, v. 182: the
name used as a synonym for Olympia, 76.

Plato on the decline of lyric poetry, p. 50

Pleisthenes, in post-Homeric genealogy
the father of Agamemnon and Mene-
laus, XIV. 48 ᾿

Pleuron, in Aetolia, v. 151

plural adj. with dual subst., xvir. 46

Plutarch, on the exile of Bacchylides,
p- 24: his other references to the poet,
P: 75

Polyneices, VIII. 20

Polypemon, XVII. 27

Porthaon, father of Oeneus, v. 70

Poseidon Ἵππιος, XVI. 99: Λυταῖος, XVII.
21: Πετραῖος, ΧΙΠΙ. 20f., p. 217

prayer at the end of an ode, ν. 200:
XVI. 132

prepositions, use of by Bacchylides, pp.
80 ff.


Procoptes (Procrustes), XVII. 28, p. 490

Proetides, the, and the Argive Hera,
x. 47 ff.

Proetus, king of Argos, x. 40: his strife
with his brother Acrisius, 24. 59 ff.

pronouns, personal and possessive, forms
of used by Bacchylides, p. 86

Psalychidae, the Aeginetan clan of, p. 213

punctuation in the Bacchylides papyrus,


Ρ. 140
Pythian festival, the, pp. 35, 184


Q


quantity, marks of (- and ~), in the
Bacchylides papyrus, p. 138


refrains, in singing, p. 417

relative clause in definitions, where és=
el τις, or ὅτε τις, XIII. 10f.

repetition of a word, v. 12 (κλεεννάν),
13f. (kAewds): XVI. 59 (φύτευσεν), 68
(φύτευσε): XVIII. 12 (φερτάταν), 17
(φερτάτου)

Rhea, fr. 54, p. 432

Rhyndacus, river, fr. 61, p- 434


524


Sappho, p. 29

Sciron, XVII. 25

sculptors, the earliest who made statues
of athletes, p. 37: Pindar’s sense of the
analogy between their tributes and his
own, p. 38

sea, sympathy of with its king Poseidon,
XVI. 128

Semele, XVIII. 48

Servius, cites the ‘dithyrambs’ of Bac-
chylides, p. 223

shields, red, VIII. to

Sicily, fruitfulness of, 111. 1

Sicyon, festival at, 1x. 32

Simonides, early life of, 5; fame of, in
the period of the Persian wars, p. 8;
with Hieron, p. 11: as a creator of new
forms of lyric poetry, pp. 33f., 4of.:
his epinikia, pp. 34-37: influence of on
the work of Bacchylides, pp. 64f.: his
inscription for Gelon’s tripod, pp. 454 ff.

Sinis, XVII. 20

skolia of Pindar, p. 42

Solon, a paraphrase of, IX. 39-45, P- 479

Sophocles, his Amtenoridae, p. 220N.:
his Zrachiniae (750 ff.), XV. 15 f.

Sparta, poetry and music at, in the
seventh century B.c., pp. 28, 30ff.:
protests against the corruption of lyric
poetry, p. 52: poem of Bacchylides for
(XIX), Ρ. 237

Stesichorus, epic hymns of, pp. 32, 210:
his probable influence on Bacchylides,
p- 33: the relation of the two poets
respectively to the mythography of the
vase-painters, p. 73

Stobaeus, his quotations from Bacchy-
lides, p. 76

Styx, x

subjunctive after ὅς, VIII. 24

swan, the, sacred to Apollo, xv. 6

synizesis, use of by Bacchylides, p. 83

synonym used, instead of repeating a
word, XII. 155f. (ἡμιθέοις . . ἰσοθέων)

Syracuse, distinction of in chariot-racing,
v. 2 (cp. Iv. 1f.): dialectic forms of the
name, 70. 184


T


Telchines, the, pp. 188, 446
Terpander of Lesbos, p. 27


INDEX.


_Thaletas, p. 28


Thargelia, the, at Athens, p. 234

Theano, wife of Antenor, XIV. 2

Thebes, festivals at, Ix. 30

Themis and Dike, xiv. 54f.

Theognis, traces of in the work of Bac-
chylides, v. 160ff. n., 191 ff. n., p. 64

Thermodon, river, VIII. 43

Theseion, painting by Micon in the,
p- 226: sculptures of, representing feats
of Theseus, xviI. 46

ἀν τὸν the ambiguous paternity of,

p- 229: prominence of his cult at

Athens in the poet’s day, 2d.: legends
of his earliest deeds, pp. 231f.

Thessalian chlamys, XVII. 54

thrones of Nereids, Muses, etc., XVI.
124 f.

Timotheus, names of, p. 4: his Lersae,
z6.: on Achaean ancestry of Ionians,


Ρ. 483

Tiryns, walls of, x. 77f.

tmesis, p. gI

trainers of athletes, ΧΙ]. rgrf.

transposition of verses, XVI. 62f., toof.,
10g f.: cp. p. 117

tripods of Gelon and Hieron at Delphi,
II. 18 f., pp. 452-457

Troezen, p. 230, XVI. 34: spelling of the
name, 76. 58

Troy, walls of Laomedon’s, x11. 142: the
war of, VIII. 45 f., p. 219


Vv


vase-painters, relation of Bacchylides to
the, p. 72

verses, division of in the MS., p. 95

vowels, long or short, before mute and
liquid, p. 84


=x


Xenophanes, p. 11


zeugma, a species of, VIII. 36 (a word
such as φαίνων to be supplied from
προπέμπων in V. 34)

Zeus, Εὐὔκλειος, 1. 6: quenches the pyre
of Croesus, III. 55: guardian of law,
20. 70: the Nemean, VIII. 4f.
